JOrKNAI,  OV  DISCOURSES
HV
P  RESIDENT JO  1!  \r  TAYLOR,
HIS KU\ \  \  s  f.l.  l.ni;  s.
Til  Y) TWELVE A  POST  LES
AIMJD  OTHERS.
UKVURTKl'  Bl
<.K(>,  K  MfHHS,  J1UIN  IK  VINE  AND
RSS^KiTFl"  LLY i*K  Mir  \  TKll  TO  TH  R  LATTfclt-  1>A  ¥  SAJNTrt  IN All. fHF  WORLD.
VOL,  XXI
i.rvKiirooh :
PRINTED  AND  PUBUaHEP  BY  A  I.HEKT  C  ARLINGTON  4*.  ISLINGTON.
LONw>"  i
IflLTN-iTisS.
1881.
KN-TKKEI>  AT  HTATlfLYhK*  HAM..
-
r  R  KFACK.
\\  [\\v:  i  tiling  tin*  Twenty  -first  \'t>Himft  of  biw  Joi  uk  Discourses
In  our  rrailrrs,  we  pray  t lull  lho>r  who  ivil-l  Mr  i'lHLU^1>  Jliririu  ^iven,
may  tin  so  l\\  tlic  ILjlit  of  tlir  iUly  Spirit  of  Truth,  that  g$M^  benefit
msiy  b«  ol)t:tiinnl  tluTefnmi,  ami  that  by  awusi*  iH'plii'ation  of  tlu1  tradiings
of  God'f  wifants,  from  timo  to  tiuu\  tljo  Saints  nun  finally  l»' <  \atu  d  in
HLs  Ilorn  rnly  Kini^lora,
THK  rUBUsilKR.
I  n  di:\
The  nbjwt.  «f  tin'  '  i  Afhorini^  of  the  8*hi!s  .rmillu^t  between
tho  Powers  of  Unit  ainl  Kv  il. .  .TJks  World  ftfttivg  NVocti.^
Work  of  Uotl  \i  n  *$r**9\ ng , . .  K  xkor  tat  ion  ti  >  <  iff  h  <  e  mis  ties*
anii  tho  spii  il  of  l'niou.  J  nhn  T*yJor. Aug.  31, lSTfl  1
,*yn.itftv  Thti  KrMimvti-.ni  rtini  >J  itil^inrnL^
I  ■  ■  ■. !' Sui'li. [  *r« ;■. 7,  'J
Ue'i.ATks  nt*ui<  at  the  Kituer*!  Service*  of  Joa.  M.  t  ain.
fllfcft  Taylor, Feb. 8, 1S3(1  U
Urst  rijgptfitl  Clinrii^e  ...  Time  on  M&ited Eternity ...  Wonder-
ful uit^liMUMn  of  the  hum  nit  IWy  «..  Integrity  in  the  Face
*-f  M;  |.^,rh..M  tir-asui*  Sm  hv. Off.  ItfTD  2-

All  Tern  porn!  ('nueorn*  Need  the  Attention  of  thr  Stint*  Wp
Shoo'il  rVt'^ar*  fur  ihe'  KviU  l\muug  fij^o  tin*  Earths.
Go-oprrjuion  And  (ho  t h ti ■  >  >  I  Ooler... Function*  »f  rln»  Two

Priesthoods...  Homo  Manufacture*,  Johu  Taylor. V  l- ■  1 '■■>.  29

tfalv&tbn  Dependent  Upon  Kflbrt  and  Prcgfist  .  W#  Should

Nut  lu'  hiJii-om  -.i.iied  by  ]  hrhVuliy.  II.  W,  Niu-dmt, Nov,  23, ,.  3ti

The  Word  of  the  Loro  to  I  ho  Church  (i  iv+  ti  Through  ihu
Aui  h<u  i  tioa . , .  A  ut  hontiei  Should  be  Sustained , . .  \\  >*m  of

thu  Priesthood.,. Sphere  of  Woman,  C.  W-  Penrose. Nov,  P1  ^3

Co  ^writtum  and  tho  United  Order... The  Saints  Shouli  h^
tiuvorned  by  tin?  Law  niu\\\  ill  of  CmL.Thc  A p^rom'tiiiitf
Calamities  Upon  the  Worid...ShouU  bo  ViUn-i:  bVvsnko

Earthly  Interest*  for  the  tiosncl's  Suke John  Tiptoe. Septal. ISIS  53


■


YL  TNI'FW

ComrrelKfipiveness  (he  lord's  Pi -a\  f*r...The  Huh?  and  fioTem*
nivin  of  *iod*«The  KevtOalion  of  the  Fuber  atid  Sim  to
Jo*e|>tt  Kmirb,  and  the  Bestowal  UpdO  Him  of  the  Priest^
huiid..,l*pvelopiitent  of  Trnnoratir  I*aws  and  Principles...
Object  of  liatheririg.  Jleltgioiu  Freedom.  Uur  Relations

the<iciicral  ilovi'-niiiifTit  John  Tartar. J;in,  J, ISM)  01

Spiritual  (iifts  Attainable.  ►.Unt hanpeahlonea*  of  iM . .  I'tiiver-
sality  of  the  Might  of  Revplntif'iin/rhe  Sam  is  Ulorify  the
<  ioife  of  [lev  flat  it  m NeceisiM  uf  CMH'mment.

Geo. i  a  ruiou. Oct.  ,1 WTO  72

I Ufruffi i  ietiey  of  mere  Belief  in  Christ,., Extent  ami  Application
of  the  Atonement,.  .Neeewity  of  hivim-  Authority  (to
c  1 1  a  \  1  le  Man  to  A  J  im  n  i  s  ter  the  I  *  ospel , ,  .  Joseph  S 1  s  i  i  th

rolled  of  God.  C.  W.  Penrose. A*,*l  ISS»  30

Efforts  of  tho  rrcurhitip  of  l he  i  ■  ^pvl.>,0!jfrt  of  th<*  (iatherinj?
., ,  MamLea'ationa  of  th**  A)int-tv&  t»  Joseph  Smith, .♦The
t insoil  ti>  1  Vpai  tvi\  S'  nni ■<*  I>utn*s  of  tl.e  Saitnv  to  each
other.*. Th<  kind  of  Men  Wanted  to  lo  on  Mtxaloa*,

JohnTaylor* Apl  l&  tt

The  Principle  of  KevelatUni  and  its  A<>nlica(40ti  tu  the  Sffteil
iMirisea  *»f  lilt1,  lliiw  tlif  Jtioihri hnod  of  M.lu  vail  be

Evolved,  H*  W,  XaiahiiT. Mm\  7, I  ^MOl

Eternal  Nalure  iif  the  Ginpel  The  Principle  ■ ■'"  Ufe  and
Increase, ..Tin-  Sourer4  of  At!  I titi-ils^mw  Uiu'ht  '  f  iht<
Creator  to  (iovern  the  Treat mc I  hunt*  of  :he  Saint*.

Join*  Taylor. Nov.  28, :s:n  111

No  M  :ti  (\io  Build  I  T  if»-  rjjiirrii  of  Chritf  Without  the
l*i  ivHiLhooti  .  Ki**ponMiV)it  ■  of  t^e  Priesthood.,  Christ
Coming  to  this  (leiierfltiriij.., Great  i  'han^e*  atuJ  Judgment*
Approae n \u$ . .  K\  iii irtat  ii  in  i i>  K  i jh  ■  FOiiwir s*.

Wilful  Wwlruir, June  ^. iv*i  121

Ou  (he  Book  of  Mormon...  I  h^tinv  or  the  Kmph-  f  tied  ami

the  Saint*.  Oraon  I'rittt. Sept.  7,  128

Ihfforetiee  Between  the  Laltri-rfay  Saints  and  all  other  Iyo*

featting  t'liri&Uaiia.  U.  W.  Pture*e. A I  1 1 , KS'i  ;t7

Prosi'is*  nf  the  Saints  to  Union  in  Faith  and  Prartice ...  The

I  [ni:  i  J  OiUer.  U^.  n  I  Viv.  1, :  ^7tt  Hfi

lU'H  K u  w ledge  of  (iod  U  Obtaiiu>l.,  TUv  U^vl  ttMlie
l>tad  ..  Yarn  ns  J h«^t  t» -«t H'ij^  r [  ikif  Mi*st  Hi^b  in  M an-
kifttl  I'oaTi'  of  uk*  rnesthnml  ...  *(i*vtoratioti  "t  t'u-
4io»**ii*l 'J'hiou^h  JoMepli  Smith I^uIim;*  or  the  f^ainis  ..

(WiMptiofia  vt  tin- Wu  k'-il.  John  Taylor. Ucc. 7, 1 S71J  155

The  V.  ..iK  ..t  Mi^-iiioii  an  Atuhetiiu*  lu-iv.nl.  Orson  Pratt S-[it,Jl,  1

SmiUutn  Stale*  Mi uioii.  Jnlm  M.-Wn.  2^ ls«>  17»

I  "uties  finl  i(e*i|>(insibiliiies  of  ilit*  I'rie^iUeml  mnt  Saint*  fJene-
tully /urn  Shall  Ni^  l  i*  Omt*t'ine  ...  The  Wiekt  il  Sluill

Slay  ti.*  WjokeU  .  ..Tin*  End  Neui . WMford  WuuJrutr July  l^M*  189


LXDEX  VlL

Pre -eshtericp.  in  Spiritual  Konnt  of  Man,  th^  L^vcr  AnimaTs
jit ul  the  Ka<xh  ...  The  Temporal  Probationary  Slate-  The

Millennium  ...  The  Finn!  i  haniie.  Otaon  Pratt. Nov,  12, 1871*  197

Sustaining  the  Auflmritios  Paver  of  the  Priest  hood  ...  Faith-
ful nest  Required,  etc,  John  Taylor. Mar,  1, 1  S3i»  2U7

The  Jnsjiirarioii  of  the  Lord's  Servants Revelation  ...  The

Resurrect  ioD,  etc  I  .  W.  Pc-.irose. Aug.  8,  Ji'u

Han  to  l>e  fudged  W  Iah  ...  V  Law  Given  to  AW  Tilings., /The
(jaw  of  CirnviiaTion How  it  Varies  by  l>isinnee  .  .  Law
■ [':■  j  -"i  i Lnv  of  Elliptic  Forms,  having  i he  same
lenpfth  of  year  ...  Law  of  Orbital  Velocity  .,,  Its  Variitious

UtMietnlsiiL;  on  1  >  smjvt Wine  Adaptation  Intelligent

Select s on s  of  Law...  Liws  of  Nature  t-oun terart eel.

Orson  Pratt. Aug.  S, 1880  232

The  G  re  a'  Pr  ion  pies  of  Truth  att  Taught  In*  Revelation  to  the
Ancient*,  and  also  to  the  Saints  in  Our  (>av.

I  •kin  Taylor. M  ir.  '2  I . ISSO  241

'Y'itf  Power  nf  tio,l  U*i  "umrnunicale  I  nielli  retire  .  J >t rt  rrm-e
In  Capacity  h-t  a-.-mii  tlie  M  or  sal  and  the  Immortal  ...  To*

I  /ure  of 'Mast,  etc,  Orson  Pratt. June  13,  256

K  at  oral  Fulfillment  of  Prophecy  .„  The  Israelites m  id  the

Annies.  Geo.  y.  1  .•iiKim, Nov,  2f 187^  "64

The  feathering  of  the  Saints  ...  Th-ir  Ml nVrinijs  ...  Ancient
Pmlicriott:*  FultiileJ  .Crickets  au'l  their  Miraculous
Instruction  Croj-s  Savetl  ,,  Desert  Made  Fruitful.,.
itoiV*  Kingdom  in  ihe  Mountains  ...  Its  Future  1  »tM  inv . . .

Tlie  Coming  of  the  Lint  Orion  Pratt, June  20, 1SS0  272

BcapOiuttbilitifS  of  the  Prtesthocd .,,  Exhortation  to  h'nith

ruliim,  etc.  Wil/ord  Woodruff, July 4, 18*0  281

Visions  of  Muses  „.  Rebellion  in  Heave u  ...  Satan  caat  down  .,
Uur  First  Parents  Fell  ...  Before  the  Kali  they  were  Im-
moral... After  t!ie  Fall,  Mortal.,,  The  (Vim  ma  rid  to
Multiply  was  pven  to  two  Immortal  Heiugs  ...  This
r.  *nmiaiid  mure  lullv  to  he  carried  into  effect,  after  the

LU'Siir recti. in,  etc,  Orson  Pratt. July  JS, 1880  286

Iv  \  ."i:  ii'  i-  P:.-:-]  -.•  v  .!•.-.  I 'r-.-.Ij.-t c-f  clip  Sit  van?* 1  v

etc.  Wilted  Woodruff. Aug.  1, ISSO  206

A  Houble  Birthday. „ The  A  j !horitv  of  the.  Priest h nod,  ere.

Oraoa  Pratt. Sept.  19. 18S0  303

Remarks  following  Elder  Orson  Pratt's Itfilfoid  Woodruff. „ „ ISSO  oH

f  itemization  i  if  the  Kim  IVefcidenE-y  .„  Responsibility  of  tho

faints,  etc,  Wilfort  Woodruff. Oct.  10, ISSO  31&

Introductory  ftemrks,..  Hear  en  and  Earth  to  P«*  Away...
Not  An nibilated  ...  Heaven  and  Earth  not  Creited  from
Nothing  -Materials  Eternal  ...  Materials  antler  the
^ouiiuitin  of  laws  Central  and  Orbital  Fitrcta  ...
i  i impound  and  Elementary  Substances  ...  Eartb  in  the
J i.-LTi tilling  .  No  Mortality,  then  known,  on  this  creation
„.  Tli^  F.ill  The  Earth**  Ei-mUsm  in  Water  ...  Its
baptism  in  fire..  .Its  baptism  by  the  Spirit  ...  I ti  Justili-
caiion  ...  Its  S&u  cti  Beat  ion  ...  Its  Purifica'itu 1;-*  Tti  i-

*a-td  Ifear**  llestt  etc,  Orscm  Pratt. Aug. UK IfrSO  ,11


viii,  in  mix.

The  Jnrri>:iaa  at^l  Future  of  the  Saints  ...  True  Education,  etc*

ft  W,  NauJwtL,  Au-.2<), ISSO  331

The  Eternities  Before  the  Saints  ..  The  Sublimity  or  ihn

tinsel,  eR\ John  Taylor,  Jan. £T 16H1  MO

Thr  ( i ofl pel t — A  Practical  acid  tomprehen.sivo  lldigiou,  and

th«  _\Uans  of  Eternal  Exaltation, C,  W.  tVnroae  Jan. 2, 1881  358

The  Order  and  Duliea  of  the  Priesthood,  da John  Taylor,  Aug,  8, 1SS0  351

The  right  of  the  First- Bo rnt  etc. Krastui  Snow,  „  „

<)ji}!i^LiioN  tu  t lu:  \\  ork  of  lioil.  cle. John  Taylor,  n  „


JOURNAL  OF


ft'


Iiisrnl  lisr;  nv  PRESIDENT  JOHM  TAVI.dk,

DmVKUD  AT  L0OAIF,  <>N  SUNDAY \H'H;Nm.\,  AtffltrST,  SI«T,  187$


( if? parted  by  iiho.  t\  Gibhs*}
tup:  objkct  uF  tub  uathi iuhu  ok  run  waists—  i  dm  i  n  t  hktwkhx

THK FOWS&fi UF tfOti AM)  KVU.a — -TMK  WORU>  CKiWINi;  NVuliNK
WUH  K  Of  QOH  liR<*iH£SS12H; L  XliuKTA  1  LUN TU I!  II :  U  ]  I  "  I  SM  SS  AM)
THE  sriKIT  i IF  IMDN.'

IT  the  eon  i;  legation  ^  ill  try  to  ho  |  Architect  of  thet  'tin ir-h,  ;tinl  William
tpiiet  I  will  endeavor  to  talk  to  ihnn  I  1L  Fotaom  and  Truman  U  An^etl
a  little  in  my  Wiiy.  I  Jr..  a«s  his  Ji>^iM;L!>ts.  :md  were,  there

It  i«  same  time  since  1  inefc  SMflMr-ftire  the  proper  pctvms  to  consult*


the  Saints  iu  this  place,  not  hevau&p
I  was  not  desirous  to  come  but  he-
causf  circuiutiUuctid  have  conlrulle<J
mid  prevented  nit.  We  eomu  I  if  re,
now,  man*  jNUlicuhurly  to  attend  Ui
a  little  nlVair  associated  with  your
Temple, Then*  seems  to  have  IWn


in  ilir  adjustment  of  any  matters
that  illicit  i  In-  in  quest  ton.

1  sjn'uk  tit  I  fiis  a>  oi ie  of  those
tUi  ugi  in  con  i  l  ec t ion  w  1 1 1 1  t !  ve  ho  i  y
pricjithtHxl,  and  with  the  building  of
this  sacred  edifice  ihat  wr  arc  erect-
in?;  to  the  name  of  the  TjOhL  We


construction,  and  jvs  we  have  a
Temple  (  ouimittes  and  architects  for
the  Church,  we  thought  it  best  to
have  tine  brethren  composing  this
committee  and  ihe  Architect  s,
present^  that  we  might  couier  with
the  ui,  so  that  everything  pertaining
to  this  building  iri^ht  be  do  he  pn>


;\  little  misunderstanding  aliout  its l\nmd  that  a  slight  change  bad  heen

made  from  the  original  plan,  which
however  is  not  nuiteml  and  there
will  uo  difficulty  arise  therefrom*
I  thought  I  would  mention  this  l>e-
causo  people  p>  tie  rally  like  to  under
stand  things  as  they  exist.  It  is
much  better  to  tell  things  right  out
as  they  are  than  to  hear  of  whisper-


{Wrly  according  to  order  aud  «Orroct  ings  about  this  and  the  other  thing,

principles.  t  which  in  many  instances  are  incor

FA&r  Truman  0,  AngeR  was  sua-  reck
taincd  at  the  General  Conference  as W4  arc  pleased  to  find  the  pro-

:  N*  L  :Mg  *  Vol  XXL


I


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


gress  you  are  making  in  the  erection
of  this  temple,  the  energy  and  zeal
that  are  being  displayed  and  the
liberality  that  has  been  manifested

t

by  the  people  of  this  temple  district*
We  are  engaged,  as  has  been  men-
tioned by  Brother  Snow,  in  a  great
work  ;  in  the  work  that  prophets
and  seers  have  grazed  upon  and  pro-
phesied of,  namely  the  gathering
together  of  the  Lord's  elect,  the
building  of  temples  for  the  redemp-
tion of  the  living  and  the  dead  ;  in
the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
our  God.  These  things  have  been
more  or  less  understood  according  to
the  power  of  the  spirit  and  the  light
of  revelation  that  has  rested  upon
his  prophets  ever  since  the  world
began.  It  is  difficult,  as  has  been
remarked,  for  us  sometimes  to  real-
ize the  position  we  occupy — the  re-
lation we  sustain  to  our  heavenly
Father — the  responsibility  that  rests
upon  us  and  the  various  duties  we
have  to  perform  in  the  fulfillment  of
the  purposes  of  God  ;  in  the  interest
of  a  world  lying  in  wickedness  ;  in
the  building  up  of  the  Zion  of  our
God,  in  the  establishment  of  rights
eousness  and  in  bringing  to  pass
those  great  and  glorious  principles
which  have  been  contemplated  by
the  Almighty  "  before  the  world
rolled  into  existence  or  the  morning
stars  sang  together  for  joy."  It  is
our  lot  to  be  placed  upon  (the  earth
in  this  time.  It  is  our  lot  to  have
our  minds  enlightened  by  the  Spirit,
intelligence  and  revelation  that  flows
from  God.  It  is  our  lot  to  operate
and  co-operate  with  God  our  heaven-
ly Fatherland  with  his  Son  Jesus
Christ, — and  with  the  ancient  patri-
archs, apostles  and  men  of  God  who
have  lived  before ;  and  while  they
are  operating  behind  the  vail  in  the
interests  of  humanity  in  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  purposes  of  God  and  in
the  establishment  of  righteousness


upon  the  earth,  we  are  here  to  -oper
ate  with  them,  that  we  and  they
may  act  conjointly  under  the  in  flu
ence  and  guidance  of  the  Almighty
and  the  power  and  Spirit  of  the
living  God,  in  carrying  out  the  de-
signs of  the  great  Jehovah.  This  is
what  we  are  here  for.  And  it  is
necessary  that  we  should  compre-
hend our  position  ;  for  in  the  per-
formance of  our  duties  associated
with  this  work  it  is  not  as  some
people  seem  to  suppose.  We  have
got  something  else  to  do  besides  fold-
ing our  arms  and  crying  "Lullaby
baby  on  the  tree  top,  when  the  wind
blows  the  cradle  will  rock."  We
have  something  to  do  besides  "  sit-
ting and  singing  ourselves  away  to
everlasting  bliss/'  It  is  our  duty —
and  God  expects  it  of  us,  that  we
should  seek  unto  him  for  wisdom,
for  guidance,  for  revelation  and  for
a  knowledge  of  his  law,  that  we  may
be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
the  power  of  God  and  that  we  may
be  enabled  to  magnify  our  calling
and  priesthood  and  accomplish  that
work  which  God  has  designed  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.
It  is  in  reality  a  labor.  We  have
gone  forth,  as  many  have  gone  forth
to  preach  the  Gospel  of  life  and  sal-
vation  to  a  fallen  world.  We  have
gathered  in  u  one  of  a  city  and  two
of  a  family;"  we  have  combated
the  errors  of  ages  and  inveighed
against  the  wickedness,  corruptions
and  strategems  of  wicked  and  un-
godly men,  who  have  opposed  us  on
every  hand  ;  and  we  have,  with  the
help  of  the  Lord,  succeeded  in  gather-
ing out  many  of  the  honest  in  heart
from  among  the  different  nations  of
the  earth.  And  we  have  come  here
to  carry  out  the  will,  purposes  and
designs  of  God.  I  never  supposed
that  we  were  to  come  here  to  get
rich,  to  increase  in  worldly  posses-
sions ;  but  we  came  as  I  understand


THE  OBJECT  OF  GATHERING,  ETC.


it  in  accordance  with  an  express
command  of  the  Most  Hight  that  we
may  be  taught  in  the  knowledge  of
God,  that  we  might  come  to  an
understanding  of  his  laws.  We  are
not  here  to  follow  the  devices  and
desires  of  our  own  hearts ;  we  are
not  here  to  carry  out  any  particular
heory  of  our  own  ;  we  are  not  here
vO  buiM  up  any  system  of  man's
creation  ;  but  we  are  here  simply  to
o  the  will  of  God  irt  the  establish-
ment of  his  kingdom  on  th*  earth.
In  many  things  however  we  have
not  lived  up  to  that  high  and  glori-
us  privilege  which  has  been  pre-
en ted  to  us ;  we  hare  been  care-
ess  and  indifferent,  and  it  seems  as
though  Satan  has  been  permitted  to
;ry  and  tempt  us  in  every  possible
way.  For  a  few  years  past  a  spirit
of  greed  and  covctousness  has  run
through  the  land  and  cursed  as  with
a  withering  blight  every  thing  it  has
touched.  It  is  as  bad  in  its  effects
upon  the  mind  of  man  as  any  pestil-
ence or  plague  upon  the  human  body.

e  have  begun  to  run  after  the
things  of  the  world  ;  our  hearts,  feel^
ings  and  affections,  in  many  in-
stances, have  been  estranged  from
God,  It  is  time  that  something
should  transpire  to  wake  us  up  to  a
sense  of  the  position  we  occupy ;  it
is  time  we  realized  h*w  God  and
angels  look  upon  men  who  are  ab-
sorbed in  the  things  of  this  world
nstead  of  living  up  to  their  profes-
ions  and  the  covenants  they  have
ade  with  him.
We  have  many  of  us  however
been  doing  a  good  work  notwith-
standing these  grievous  evils.  It
is  true  it  is  not  always  smooth  sail-
ing. Sometimes  we  seem  when  a
little  difficulty  comes  along  to  be
struck  with  amazement,  as  though
something  very  extraordinary  had
happened.  There  is  nothing  very
strange  about  these  things,  "  What


are  you  doing  ?  What  is  the  posi-
tion of  affairs  ?  What  are  you  going
to  do  1  etc.  *  Those  words  express
the  kind  of  feelings  that  actuate  the
minds  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
There  has  been  a  war  ever  since  the
commencement  of  the  world  to  the
present  time  between  the  powers
of  light  and  the  powers  of
darkness.  Adam,  we  are  told,  had
two  sons.  One  was  a  covetous  man,
a  wicked  man  who  did  not  fear  God;
the  other  was  a  righteous  man  who
feared  God,  The  wicked  son,  who
was  instigated  of  the  devil,  said,  I
will  kill  my  brother  and  then  I  will
have  his  possessions.  He  did  so
and  it  seems  that  this  kind  of  feel-
ing existed  until  in  a  short  time  that
influence  had  so  prevailed  that
wickedness  and  corruption  made
such  rapid  strides  that  the  world
had  to  be  swept  as  with  a  besom  of
destruction,  and  only  a  very  few  men
were  left  And  then  it  seemed  ne-
cessary that  the  same  spirit  and  the
same  power  should  continue  ;  and
hence  a  part  of  this  Canaanish  seed
came  through  the  flood,  Whyl
That  there  might  still  be  the  two
powers — the  power  of  light  and  the
power  of  darkness  ;  the  power  of
God  and  the  power  of  the  devil —
that  the  struggle  and  warfare  among
men  might  still  go  on,  so  that  man
might  be  made  perfect  through
suffering.  Hence  the  servants  of
God  in  the  different  ages  of  the
world  have  had  to  combat  with  the
powers  of  darkness,  John  the  Rey-
elator  speaks  of  a  great  company  of
people  whom  he  saw  arrayed  in
white,  singing  a  new  song.  And  on
his  inquiring  as  to  who  they  weref
he  was  told  that  they  were  they
that  had  washed  their  robes  and
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of
the  Lamb.  They  were  they  that
had  come  up  through  much  tribula-
;  tioii,  therefore  they  were  next  the


4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


throne.  It  is  in  consonance  with
the  fare-ordained  plan  of  the  Al-
mighty that  a  man  should  pass
through  certain  trials  and  difficulties,
and  be  tested  in  every  possible  way,
in  order  to  be  prepared  for  an  exal-
tation in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It
was  so  with  Job,  He  was  peculiarly
situated.  It  seems  that  the  devil
appeared  among  the  sons  of  God  in
heaven,  as  lie  does  on  earth  very
frequently*  When  the  sons  of  God
were  assembled  together,  the  devil
was  among  them,  and  he  went,  us  it
appears,  to  instigate  a  feeling  against
Job,  The  Lord  said  to  him.  tfc  Hast
thou  considered  my  servant  Job  V
**  Yes,"  said  he,  li  1  have  considered
him."  The  Lord  said  that  Job  was
a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  etc*
"  Oh,  yes,"  said  lie,  "I  know  all
about  him.  You  think  that  Job  is
a  very  good  man  ;  but  just  let  me
have  a  rap  at  him,  and  I  will  show
what  Job  will  do."  "  Well,"  says
the  Lord,  "  you  may  try  him."  He
went  to  work  and  concentrated  the
lightning  in  one  focus  and  hurled  a
thunderbolt  against  his  oldest  sou's
house,  where  all  his  children  were
least ing,  and  destroyed  them.  No
sooner  had  the  messenger  reported
the  result  of  this  catastrophe  to  Job
than  the  news  came  that  a  certain
people — I  was  going  to  say  "  Christ-
ians"— had  fallen  upon  his  oxen  and
asses  and  killed  his  servants.  They
called  them  in  those  days  Sabeans

up

and  Chaldeans  and  Hittites,  I  think;
we  call  them  now-a-days  Baptists,
Presby  terian  s,  M  et  h  odists,  etc,  Th  ey
called  things  by  different  names  in
different  ages,  but  they  are  the  same
class  of  people.  They  went  after
his  camels,  his  asses,  his  goats  and
all  his  property  that  they  could  lay
their  hands  on,  leaving  him  helpless
and  destitute — and  he  was,  it  is  said,
the  richest  man  of  the  East.  Job,
in  looking  at  his  changed  situatiou,


summed  the  whole  thing  up  in  these
few  words  :  "  Naked  came  I  out  of
my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall
1  return  thither  :  the  Lord  gave  and
the  Lord  hath  taken  away  :  blessed
be  the  name  of  the  Lord.'1

Well,  the  devil  did  not  succeed
that  time  ;  but  like  the  lawyers  who
are  after  the  executors,  however,  I
suppose  he  thought  he  would  take
another  shoot— serve  some  fresh
papers.  lie  presented  himself  lie-
lore  the  Lord  the  second  time.  And
addressing  him  the  Lord  said,
u  Well,  what  do  you  think  about
Job  now  V He  said  his  efforts  had

not  succeeded  very  well  as  \et  ;  but
"skin  for  *kiu.  all  that  a  man  hath
will  he  give  fur  his  life  :  let  me  lay
my  hand  upon  his  bod}  and  lie  will
curse  thee  to  thy  face."  "  Well,  I
put  him  into  your  hands,  but  e I e >  not
interfere  with  his  life."  The  devil
then  let  loo&e  something  like  small-
pox upon  him — only  it  was  called
by  a  different  name  in  those  days —
covering  him  with  boils  from  the
crown  of  his  head  to  the  soles  of  his
feet,  and  he  scrape*!  himself  with  a
potsherd  wallowing  in  ashes.  And
while  he  was  in  this  condition  some
of  his  friemis  came  along  for  the  pur-
pose of  sympathizing  with  him  ;  and
after  offering  a  great  deal  of  advice,
they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Job
must  have  been  a  very  wicked  man^
or  such  a  calamity  never  could  have
come  upon  him.  And  then,  to  cap
the  climax,  his  wife  came  along,  and
in  her  way  says,  Job,  you  aie  a  fool
for  putting  up  with  all  this  ;  you
have  suffered  enough,  and  were  I
you  I  would  not  stand  it  any  longer.
I  would  curse  God  and  die  like  a
man.  Job  replied,  u  You  talk  like
one  of  the  foolish  women  of  old.
Have  we  not  received  good  at  the
hands  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  we  not
also  receive  evil  I  The  Lord  gave
and  the  Lord  taketh away,  and


w


THE  OBJECT  OF

I  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord**1
And  then  he  looked  around  and  saw
I  his  desolation,  stripped  of  his  child
I  ren  and  possessions,  sick  and  weary,
i  deserted  by  friends,  laughed  at  by
I  enemies  and  upbraided  by  his  wife,
afflicted  with  a  loathsome  disease,
lonely,  deserted  and  desolate,  he
«ried  out,  "  Though  he  slay  me  yet
will  I  trust  in  him.  The  lightning
may  destroy  my  offspring,  the
Sabeans  and  Chaldeans  may  rob  me
of  my  possessions,  and  8a tan  may
I  be  permitted  to  lay  his  hand  upon
!  me  and  smite  with  this  loathsome
disease,  and  although  I  may  be
clothed  in  sackcloth  and  have  to
to  wallow  in  ashes,  and  go  down
into  the  grave,  and  worms  prey  upon
this  body  and  crawl  and  revel  in  my
brain,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God;
I  si i all  see  him  for  myself,  and  not
for  another/1  Inspired  by  the  spirit
of  revelation  and  the  power  and  light
I  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  could  say,  I
know  in  whom  I  have  believed  ;
and  although  I  do  not  know — and
it  matters  not — where  I  may  go,  or
where  my  resting  place  may  be,  yet
I  shall  stand  in  the  latter  day  upon
the  earth,  and  shall  behold  my  Re-
deemer, whom  I  shall  see  for  myself
and  not  for  another.  This  is  the
kind  of  religion  he  had.  But  we
think  it  very  strange  sometimes  that
we  should  have  a  little  bother  ;  we
think  we  ought  to  go  along  peaceably,
having  nothing  to  disturb  our
equanimity,  that  everything  should
move  smoothly  and  pleasantly  along
until  we  reach  the  celestial  abode  of
the  Father,  to  associate  with  the
gods,  Some  of  us  would  make  curi-
ous gods,  if  such  were  to  be  our  lot;
but  we  may  rest  satisfied  that  such
will  not  be  our  lot.  The  Lord  does
not  do  things  in  that  kind  of  a  way*
When  we  were  traveling  abroad
|  preaching  to  the  world,  among  other
ihings  we  predicted  was  that  the


GATHERING,  ETC.  5

world  would  grow  worse  and  worse,
deceiving  and  being  deceived.  Thou-
sands of  our  Elders  have  preached
among  the  nations  to  the  effect  that
God  was  having  a  controversy  with
them  ;  that  he  would  arise  and  shake
terribly  the  earth  and  vex  the  na-
tions sorely.  Many  of  you  Elders
before  me  to-day  have  proclaimed
these  things ;  and  you  have  told  the
people  that  empires  would  be  cast
down  and  the  kingdoms  overthrown
and  the  nations  wasted  a  way,  but
that  the  work  and  purposes  of  God
would  grow  and  increase  until  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  should  be-
come the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and
his  Christ  Are  you  astonished,
then,  that  these  things  should  begin
to  be  fulfilled  !  Quite  a  favorite
theme  has  been  with  many  of  our
elders,  that  the  u  little  stone  "  spo-
ken of  in  the  Scriptures  has  been
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands,  and  it  is  destined  to  strike
the  image  whose  head  was  of  gold,
breast  and  arms  of  silver,  belly  and
thighs  of  brass,  legs  of  iron,  and  feet
part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay,  upon
its  feet,  breaking  it  to  pieces  ;  and
that  the  materials,  which  represent
the  various  nations  of  the  eart  h,  com-
posing the  image  should  become  like
the  chaff  of  a  summer  s  threshing-
floor,  carried  away  by  the  wind  un-
til there  was  no  place  found  tor  it.
This  is  exactly  as  it  has  been  fore-
told many  thousands  of  years  ago,
and  you  brethren  are  perfectly  fami-
liar with  it  from  having  preached  it
both  to  the  world  and  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  When  this  little  stone,
then,  as  it  rolls  forth,  strikes  the
toes  of  the  great  image,  are  you  sur-
prised that  there  should  be  a  little
kicking  1  You  don't  like  to  have
your  toes  trodden  upon  anymore  than
anybody  else.  The  fact  is,  the  same
great  conflict  is  going  on  between
I  the  two  great  powers  j  the  ouly  dif-


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ference  is  that  we  are  in  much  better
circumstances  than  many  wjio  lived
in  earlier  days  who  had  to  wander
about  in  sheep  and  goat  skins,  seek-
ing the  dens  and  caves  of  rocks  as
places  of  retreat  and  safety.  You,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  do  not  look
to-day  as  though  you  were  pushed
to  such  extremes,  do  you  ?  I  think
it  another  kind  of  spectacle.  We
are  an  integral  part  of  this  great
government  of  the  United  States,
not  a  very  large  part,  but  a  very
small  part  ;  and  we  have  assumed  a
species  of  political  importance  ;  and
every  now  and  then  they  get  after
us  without  knowing  hardly  the  why
or  the  wherefore.  They  talk  some*
times  quite  loudly  about  our  corrup-
tions. Why,  as  I  told  them  some
time  ago  in  Salt  Lake  City,  in  talk-
ing about  this  matter,  there  is  more
wickedness  carried  on  in  Washing-
ton, where  they  talk  so  much  about
purity,  in  one  day,  than  there  is  in
these  valleys  of  the  mountains  in  six
months,  the  Gentiles  and  all  thrown
in.  And  yet  it  is  quite  important
that  they  should  call  upon  a  num-
ber of  European  nations  to  help  them
to  correct  the  morals  of  two  hundred
thousand  people  in  these  far  distant
mountains.  What  magnanimity  !
Well,  what  about  it?  Not  much.
But  there  in  this  much  about  it —
that  this  nation,  nor  the  powers  of
Europe,  nor  any  other  power,  can
overturn  the  Church  and  Kingdom
of  God  that  lie  has  established  on
the  earth.  It  will  go  on  in  spite  of
all  the  powers  of  earth  and  hell.
You  have  heard  that  prophesied
over  and  over  again,  and  I  will  pro-
phesy it  again  to  day,  And  every
lower  that  Jilt  its  hand  against  the
ingdom  of  God  will  be  wasted  away:
for  God  will  have  a  controversy  with
the  nations  who  oppose  his  work,
and  lie  will  manage  them  in  his  own
way  ;  he  will  put  a  hook  in  their


jaws  and  will  lead  them  whitherso-
ever he  will  The  wrath  of  man  shall
praise  him,  and  the  remainder  lie
has  said  he  will  restrain.  Hence  I
feel  a  good  deal  like  taking  the  ad-
vice of  Jesus  :  "  Fear  not  them
which  kill  the  body,  but  are  not  able
to  kill  the  soul  :  but  rather  fear
him  who  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul
and  body  in  hell."  '

The  only  fear  I  have  for  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  is  that  they  will  not
live  their  religion.  And  I  call  upon
you  here  to-day  to  lay  aside  your
covetousness,  your  greed  and  your
avarice,  and  act  honorably  and  just
one  with  another  as  your  brethren,
h inn ble  yourselves  before  God  and
suek  unto  him  for  his  guidance,  and
he  will  help  you,  he  will  1)1  ess  and
sustain  yon,  and  he  will  deliver  you.
And  I  say  unto  the  priesthood,  be
one  ;  for  if  you  are  not  one  you  are
not  of  God,  2\o  contention,  no
strife,  no  backbiting,  no  hard  words;
but  let  us  have  the  love  of  God
dwelling  and  welling  up  in  our  hearts,
and  extending  to  all  men.  lint  war
against  evil,  corruption  and  iniquity
of  every  kind,  wherever  found;
stand  firm  in  upholding  and  main-
taining the  principles  of  truth  as
they  have  been  revealed  to  us,  be-
fore high  heaven,  before  all  men.
We  want  to  be  united,  and,  as  Paul
says,  u  Put  on  the  whole  armor  of
God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand
against  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  For
we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and
blood,  but  against  principalities,
against  powers,  against  the  rulers  of
the  darkness  of  this  world,  against
spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.
Paul  had  to  maintain  the  truth  as
he  had  received  it  in  the  midst  of  a
crooked  and  perverse  generation  :
and  we  have  to  do  t lie  same,  and  God
will  sustain  us  in  our  endeavors.
But  if  we  are  trembly  and  shaky,
our  religion  is  not  worth  much  to  us*


THE  OBJECT  0?  GATHERING,  ETC


We  have  a  few  among  us  who  say,
*(  Oh,  don't !  you'd  better  take  it
easy !  Keep  quiet !  You  may
offend  the  devil,  for  what  I  know.
We  have  a  few  dollars  somewhere,
and  we  are  afraid  something  will
disturb  them,  and  the  property  we
have  made  will  go  !"  Well,  let  it  go;
who  cares  about  it  I  "  Love  not  the
world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in
the  world.  If  any  man  love  the
world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not
in  hi  in. 11  We  ought  to  be  governed
by  correct  principles  and  act  wisely
and  consistently,  and  treat  all  men
alike.  There  are  a  great  many  who
have  the  idea  that  there  are  certain
clashes  that  have  rights  which  do
not  belong  to  others.  1  do  not  know
of  any  such  people.  We  are  all  the
free-born  sons  of  Zion  ;  we  all  par-
take of  the  holy  priesthood,  and  we
all  have  our  rights  and  privileges
with  God-  We  want  to  act  accord-
ing to  correct  principle,  and  he  gov-
erned by  the  law  of  God,  not  one
law  fur  one  man  and  another  for  an-
other man.  But  operating  together
and  maintaining  one  another's  rights
upon  the  pure  principles  of  truth
and  equity,  as  they  exist  in  the
bo*om  of  God,  When  the  tilings
spoken  of  referring  to  the  last  days
shall  transpire,  righteousness  shall
be  the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faith-
fulness the  girdle  of  his  reins,  and  it
will  be  as  was  remarked  by  Brother
Kichards,  and  as  the  Prophet  Jen?
miah  foretold  :  "1  will  put  my  law
in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it
in  their  hearts  ;  and  will  be  their
God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people/*
As  we  adhere  to  the  principles  of  law,
equality,  justice  and  right,  and  are
governed  by  those  principles.  The
man  who  is  governed  by  the  Spirit  j
of  God  and  lives  in  the  light  of  re-  j
v elation,  has  the  law  of  God  written
on  his  heart  and  it  is  engraven  in
his  inward  parts, He  feels  as  JesiiS


did  about  these  things.  It  was  said
to  him  on  a  certain  occasion,  "  Be*
hold,  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren
stand  without,  desiring  to  speak
with  thee/'  When  he  said,  referring
to  his  disciples,  "Behold  my  mother
and  my  brethren  ;  For  whosoever
shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,
and  sister  and  mother/'  That  is
the  kind  of  feeling.  We  want  to  be
united  in  our  hearts  and  feelings  :
united  to  each  other;  united  to  the
holy  priesthood,  bound  together  by
those  indissoluble  ties  that  will  unite
us  in  time  and  through  eternity,
according  to  the  principles  of  the
everlasting  covenant  which  we  have
entered  into  which  reaches  beyond
the  vail

We  have  a  struggle.  Some  of  the
"  Amale  kites'*  and  Hittites  are
aluoad.  IJut  who  cares  i  Satan
works  for  a  little  while,  and  he  will
work  and  no  doubt  do  Ids  utmost  as
long  as  he  is  permitted  ;  and  when
the  time  comes  for  him  to  be  re-
moved, God  will  remove  him.  We
may  struggle  as  we  please  and  da  as
we  please  in  regard  to  these  things,
but  we  are  all  in  the  hands  of  God.
As  has  been  remarked,  it  is  quite
easy  for  the  Lord  to  handle  us  in
these  mountains.  He  can  send  grass-
hoppers if  he  wants  to  ;  he  can  with-
hold the  snows  from  coming  on  our
mountains  if  he  wants  to,  and  thus
cause  drouth  in  the  summer  season
and  he  can  send  the  moths  to  des-
troy our  fruit ;  all  of  which  we  have
more  or  less  already  experienced.
In  fact  he  can  do  with  us  just  as  he
pleases  and  we  cannot  help  ourselves.
Our  only  resource  is  in  him.  We
want  to  be  right  ourselves  in  our
families,  every  man  with  himself.
Forsake  your  sins,  and  cleave  unto
God.  Pay  your  tithings  and  your
offerings  and  comply  with  the  laws
of  God  in  every  particular  so  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


you  may  feel  that  you  are  acceptable
before  the  Almighty,  and  then  teach
your  families  the  same  thing.
Humble  yourselves  as  families  before
God.  You  seventies,  high  priests
and  elders.  Do  the  same  thing  as
quorums  and  seek  for  the  guidance
and  blessing  of  the  Lord.  Have
3*uu  cheated  or  defrauded  anybody  I
If  you  have,  then  make  things  right,
and  try  forever  afterwards  to  be
governed  by  correct  principles.  And
then  let  there  be  perfect  union  in  all
the  various  quorums  and  among  all
the  people  ;  and  let  us  all  say  in  our
hearts  and  lives,  whatever  the  Lord
commands  us  to  do  that  w«  will  ob-
serve and  do  ;  and  let  all  Israel  do
the  same,  and  the  devils  then  may
howl  and  all  hell  may  boil  over,  but
God  will  preserve  his  people,  he  will
stand  as  our  shield  and  buckler  and
»ur  strong  defence.

We  have  got  this  kingdom  to
build  up  ;  and  it  is  not  a  phantom,
but  a  reality.  We  have  to  do  it,
God  expects  it  at  our  hands.  We
have  got  to  have — now  do  not  tell
any  body  for  it  is  a  great  secret  ;  we
have  got  to  have  political  power.
What,  will  not  that  be  treason?
Perhaps  so,  but  no  matter  ;  we  have
got  to  go  on  and  progress  in  these
things.  We  have  got  to  establish  a
government  upon  the  principle  of
righteousness,  justice,  truth  and
equality  and  not  according  to  the
manv  false  notions  that  exist  among
men.  And  then  the  day  is  not  far
distant  when  this  nation  will  he
shaken  from  centre  to  circumference.
And  now,  you  may  write  it  down,
any  of  you,  and  I  will  prophesy  it
in  the  name  of  God.  And  then  will
be  fulfilled  that  prediction  to  be  found
in  one  of  the  revelations  given
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.
Those  who  will  not  take  up  their
sword  to  fight  asaiust  their  neighbor


must  needs  flee  to  Zion  for  safety.
And  they  will  come,  saying,  we  do
not  know  anything  of  the  principles
of  your  religion,  but  we  perceive
that  you  are  an  honest  community  ;
you  administer  justice  and  righte-
ousness, and  we  want  to  live  with
you  and  receive  the  protection  of
your  laws,  but  as  for  your  religion
we  will  talk  about  that  some  other
time.  Will  we  protect  such  people!
Yes,  all  honorable  men.  When  the
people  shall  have  torn  to  shreds  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States
the  Elders  of  Israel  will  be  found
holding  it  up  to  the  nations  of  the
earth  ami  proclaiming  liberty  and
equal  rights  to  all  men,  and  extend-
ing the  hand  of  fellowship  tn  the
oppressed  of  all  nations.  Tins  is
part  of  the  programme,  and  as  long
as  we  do  what  is  right  and  frar
God,  he  will  help  us  and  stand  by
us  under  all  circumstances.

Therefore,  Latter-day  Saints,  fear
God  ;  work  the  works  of  righteous-
ness :  live  your  religion  ;  keep  the
commandments  and  humble  your-
selves before  him  ;  be  one,  and  be
united  with  the  holy  priesthood  and
with  each  other,  ami  I  will  tell  you
in  the  name  of  God  that  Zion  will
rise  and  shine  and  the  power  of
God  will  rest  upon  her;  and  her
glory  will  be  made  manifest,  and
we  will  rejoice  in  the  fulness  of  the
blessings  of  the  Gospel  of  peace;  and
the  work  of  God  will  go  on  and  in-
crease until  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,  and  every
creature  in  the  heaven  and  on  the
earth  and  under  the  earth  will  be
heard  to  say,  Blessing,  and  glory,
and  honor  and  praise  and  power,
might  and  majesty  and  dominion  be
ascribed  to  him  that  sits  upon  the
throne  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever
and  ever*  Amen.


LAW  OF  CELESTIAL  MARRIAGE,


9


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOSEPH F.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  Funeral  Services  over  the  Remains  of  Elder
William  Clayton,  Held  in  the  itth  Ward  Meeting  House,  Salt

Lake  City,  Dec.  Tth,  187a


LAW  POF  CELESTIAL  MARllTAOK  —  THE RESURRECTION  AND  JUDGMENT —
EXTENT  OF  THE  MISSION  OF  THK  SAVIOR,


By  request  of  President  John
Taylor,  I  arise  to  make  a  few  re-
marks. I  deeply  and  sincerely  sym-
pathize with  the  family,  the  wives
and  children  of  the  deceased.  Bro.
William  Clayton,  who  remain  to
mourn  the  loss  of  the  society  of  their
husband  and  father  for  a  little  season.
And  yet,  when  we  consider  all  the
circumstances,  we  may  conclude  that
we  have  not  very  great  cause  to
mourn.  For  when  a  man  has  lived
to  a  good  old  age,  worn  out  as  it
were  through  toil,  passes  away,  we
can  realize  at  least  that  he  has  ac-
complished his  mission,  that  lie  has
performed  his  work  on  this  earth,
and  is  ready  to  return  to  the  father
from  whence  he  came  ;  behind  the
vail.

Brother  Clayton  had  reached  a
ripe  age,  after  laboring  unceasingly
among  Ids  brethren  from  Ins  first
connection  with  the  Church.

He  has  had  a  long  and  varied  expe  -
rience among  this  people.  He  was
a  friend  arid  companion  of  the  Pro-
phet  Joseph  Smith,  and  it  was  to
his  pen  to  a  very  great  extent  that
we  are  indebted  for  the  history  of
the  Church — that  is,  the  history  of
the  Prophet  Joseph  more  particu-
larly, during  his  acquaintance  with


him  ami  the  time  he  acted  for  him
as  his  private  secretary,  in  the  days
of  Nauvoo.  We  have  the  journals
which  he  kept  during  that  time,  in
the  Historian's  Office,  from  which —
in  connection  with  those  of  Elders
Willard  Richards  and  Wilford
Woodruff  and  the  Ti 'tnes  and  8emon*\
a  publication  of  the  Church  at  that
time — we  have  obtained  the  history
the  Church  tin  ring  that  period.  It
was  Ins  pen  that  wrote  for  the  first
time  the  revelation  in  relation  to  the
etefnity  of  the  marriage  covenant
and  of  a  plurality  of  wives.  Al-
though that  revelation  had  been
given  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  many
:  years  before,  it  was  not  written  un-
til the  12th  of  July,  1843,  at  which
time  Elder  William  Clayton,  acting
as  a  scribe  for  the  Prophet,  wrote  it
from  his  dictation,

I  am  happy  to  say  that  he  has
left  on  record  a  statement  in  the
shape  of  an  affidavit,  prepared  by
himself,  in  relation  to  this  import-
ant subject,  for  it  is  a  subject  that
is  of  the  most  vital  importance,  not
only  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  but
to  the  whole  world  ;  for  without  the
knowledge  contained  in  that  reve-
lation, we  never  could  consummate
the  object  of  our  mission  to  this


10


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


earth,  we  never  could  fulfill  the
purposes  of  God  in  this  estate.

I  have  this  paper  in  my  posses-
sion, and  have  had  for  a  number  of
months  past.  In  fact,  it  was  writ-
ten at  my  request,  and  then  given
into  my  care,  and  I  have  preserved
it  with  a  view,  when  thought  pro-
per, to  have  it  published.  And  as
it  is  a  sermon  of  itself,  it  would
perhaps  be  more  interesting  than
anything  I  could  say  on  the  pre-
sent occasion,  and  therefore,  with
President  Taylors  permission,  I  will
read  it  to  the  congregation.

[The  affidavit  was  then  read  by
Elder  Smith.]

He  then  continued  :

As  I  before  said,  I  felt  to  read
this  document  because  of  the  in-
struct ion  it  would  afford,  and  for
the  further  object  of  showing  that
although  44  he  is  dead,  he  yet  speak
eth/1  For  this  testimony  of  Bro-
ther Clayton  will  stand  forever,
though  his  body  moulders  into
dust.  And  1  am,  and  so  was  the
deceased  when  living,  at  the  defi-
ance of  the  world  to  dispute  those
statements.  They  are  made  from
personal  knowledge  derived  from
personal  associations  with  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith  himself,  not  with
a  view  to  gain  notoriety,  but  rather
to  leave  behind  him  his  testimony
with  regard  to  this  important  prin-
ciple. He  lias  (tone  so.  And  as
he  has  here  stilted,  as  having  come
from  the  mouth  of  the  Prophet,  this
doctrine  of  eternal  union  of  hus-
band and  wife,  and  of  plural  mar-
riage, is  one  of  the  most  important  j
doctrines  ever  revealed  to  man  in
any  age  of  the  world.  Without  it
man  would  come  to  a  full  stop ;
without  it  we  never  could  be  exalt-'
ed  to  associate  with  and  become !
gods,  neither  could  we  attain  to
the  power  of  eternal  increase,  or
the blessings pronounced  upon


Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  fa-
thers of  the  faithful.

There  are  but  a  few  witnesses
now  living  in  relation  to  the  com-
ing forth  of  this  revelation  ;  there
never  were  many  that  were  inti-
mately acquainted  with  the  pro-
phet and  his  teaching  upon  this
I  subject.  I  look  around  inc  and  see
a  number  of  persons  in  this  assem-
bly whose  hair  lias  grown  grey  m
the  service  of  God,  and  who  had  an
-  intimate  acquaintance  with  our
martyred  prophet ;  but  few,  if  any
of  them,  were  so  closely  identified
with  him  in  this  matter  as  Brother
Clayton.

There  are,  however,  enough  wit-
nesses to  these  principles  to  esta-
blish them  upon  the  earth  in  such
a  manner  that  they  never  can  be
forgotten  or  stamped  out.  For
they  will  live ;  they  are  destined  to
live,  and  also  to  grow  and  spread
abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,
to  be  received  and  accepted  and
adopted  by  all  the  virtuous,  by  all
the  pure  in  heart,  by  all  who  love
the  truth,  and  seek  to  serve  Him
and  ke*p  His  commandments  ;  they
are  bound  to  prevail,  because  they
are  true  principles.

Now  we  are  called  upon  to  pay
our  last  respects  to  Brother  Clayton.
His  spirit  has  taLm  its  flight;  it
has  gone  to  the  Father  from  whence
it  came,  as  is  taught  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  When  the  spirit  leaves
the  body,  it  returns,  says  the  pro-
phet, immediately  to  God,  to  be
assigned  to  its  place,  either  to  asso-
ciate with  the  good  and  the  noble
ones  who  have  lived  in  the  Paradise
of  God,  or  to  be  couiined  in  the
■'prison11  house  to  await  the  resur-
rection of  the  body  from  the  grave.
Therefore  we  know  that  Brother
Clayton  has  gone  to  God,  gone  to
receive  the  partial  judgment  of  the
Almighty,  which  pertains  to  the


LAW  OF  CELESTIAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC


11


period  intervening  between  the
death  of  the  body  and  the  resurrec-
tion of  the  body,  or  the  separation
of  the  spirit  from  the  body,  and
their  muting  together  again.  This
judgment  is  passed  upon  the  spirit
alone.  But  there  will  come  a  time
which  will  be  after  the  resurrec-
tion, when  the  body  and  spirit  shall
be  reunited,  when  the  final  judg-
ment will  be  passed  on  every  man
This  is  in  accordance  with  the  vis-
ion of  the  Apostle  John  the  Keve-
lator.

**  And  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and
great,  stand  before  God,  and  the
books  were  opened,  and  another
book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book
of  life  ;  and  the  dead  were  judged
out  of  those  things  which  were
written  in  the  books,  according  to
their  works.

W  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead
which  were  in  it ;  and  death  and
hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.
That  is  the  second  death,

*'  And  whosoever  was  not  found
written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast
into  the  lake  of  fire,"

That  is  the  final  judgment,  which
we  will  all  receive  after  we  have
performed  this  our  earthly  mission*

The  Savior  did  not  finish  his
work  when  he  expired  on  the  cross,
when  he  cried  out  "It  is  finished,"
He,  in  using  those  words,  had  no
reference  to  his  great  mission  to
the  earth,  but  merely  to  the  agonies
which  he  suffered.  The  Christian
world  I  know  say  he  alluded  to  the
great  work  of  redemption.  This,
however,  is  a  great  mistake,  and  is
indicative  of  the  extent  of  their
knowledge  of  the  plan  of  life  and
salvation,  I  say  lie  referred  merely
to  the  agonies  of  death,  and  the
sufferings  He  felt  for  the  wicked-
ness of  men  who  would  go  so  far
as  to  crucify  their  Redeemer.  It
was  this  feeling,  and  this  alone,  that


prompted  him  to  cry  out  in  the
agony  of  His  soul,  "It  is  finished,"
and  then  He  expired.

But  his  work  was  not  completed ;
it  was  in  fact  only  begun.  If  he
had  stopped  here  instead  of  his
being  the  Savior  of  the  world,  he,
as  well  as  all  mankind,  would  have
perished  irredeemably,  never  to
have  come  forth  out  of  the  grave ;
for  it  was  designed  from  the  begin-
ning that  he  should  be  the  first
fruits  of  them  that  slept;  it  was
part  of  the  great  plan  that  he
should  burst  the  bands  of  death
and  gain  the  victory  over  the  grave.
If  therefore  his  mission  had  ceased
when  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  the
world  would  have  slumbered  in  the
dust  in  interminable  death,  never
to  have  risen  to  live  again.  It  was
but  a  small  part  of  the  mission  of
the  Savior  that  was  performed-.
when  he  suffered  death  ;  it  was  inr
deed  the  lesser  part  ;  the  greate
had  yet  to  be  dune.  It  was  in  his
resurrection  from  the  tomb,  in  his
coming  forth  from  death  unto  life,
in  uniting  again  the  spirit  and  the
body  that  we  might  become  a  liv-
ing soul ;  and  when  this  was  done,
then  he  was  prepared  to  return  to
the  Father.  And  all  this  was  in
strict  accordance  with  the  great
plan  of  salvation.  For  even  Christ
himself,  though  without  sin,  was
required  to  observe  the  outward
ordinance  of  baptism,  in  order  to
fulfill  all  righteousness.  80  after
his  resurrection  from  the  dead
he  could  return  to  the  Father,  there
to  receive  the  welcome  plaudit,
"  Well  done,  you  have  done  your
work,  you  have  accomplished  your
mission  ;  you  have  wrought  out
salvation  tor  all  the  children  of
Adam  ;  you  have  redeemed  all  men
from  the  grave  ;  and  through  their
obedience  to  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel  which  you  have  established,


12  ■ JOURNAL  OF

they  can  also  be  redeemed  from  the
spirit iml  death,  again  to  be  brought
back  into  our  presence,  to  partake  of
glory,  exaltation  and  eternal  life
with  us."  And  so  it  will  be  when
we  come  forth  out  of  the  grave,
when  the  trump  shall  sound,  and
these  our  bodies  shall  rise  and  our
spirits  shall  enter  into  them  again,
and  they  shall  become  a  living  sou)
no  more  to  be  dissolved  or  separated,
but  to  become  inseparable,  immortal,
eternal.

Then  we  shall  stand  before  the
bar  of  God  to  be  judged.  So  says
the  Bible,  so  says  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  so  say  the  revelations
which  have  come  direet  to  us  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  And
then  those  that  have  not  been  sub-
ject and  obedient  to  the  celestial  law
will  not  be  quickened  by  the  cele-
stial glory  And  those  that  have
not  been  subject  and  obedient  to  the
terrestrial  law  will  not  be  quickened
by  the  terres triad  glory.  And  those
that  have  not  been  subject  and  obe-
dient to  the  telestial  law,  will  not  be
quickened  by  a  telestial  glory  ;  but
they  will  have  a  kingdom  without  !
glory.  While  tlie  sons  of  perdition,
men  who  had  once  been  in  posses-
sion of  the  light  ami  truth,  but  who
turned  away  from  it  and  deny  the
Lord,  putting  him  to  an  open  shame,
§B  did  the  Jews  when  they  crucified
him  and  said,  "Let  his  blood  be  upon
us  and  upon  our  children  ;  men  who
consent,  against  light  aad  knewledge,
to  the  shedding  of  innocent  blood,  it
will  be  said  unto  them,  "Depart  ye
cursed,  I  never  knew  you  ;  depart  ;
into  the  second  death,  even  banish-
ment from  the  presence  of  God  for
ever  and  ever,  where  the  wonndieth
not  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,
from  whence  there  is  no  redemption,
neither  in  time  nor  in  eternity. "  1
Herein  is  the  difference  between  the
second  and  the  first  death,  herein '


DISCOURSES.

man  became  spiritually  dead  ;  for
from  the  first  death  he  may  be  re-
deemed by  the  blood  of  Christ
through  obedience  to  the  laws  and
ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  but  from
the  second  there  is  no  redemption
at  alb

We  read  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
;  and Covenants, that the  devil
tempted  Adam  and  he  partook  of
,  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  trangressed
the  commandment,  wherein  lie  be-
came subject  to  the  will  of  the  devil
because  he  yielded  unto  temptation,
!  and  because  of  this  transgression
lie  became  spiritually  dead,  which  is
the  first  death "even  that  same
death  which  is  the  last  death,  winch
is  spiritual, which shall be  pro-
nounced upon  the  wicked  when  I
shall  say,  depart  ye  cursed  !" — Book
of  Doc.  and  Coi\  p.  147.

But  \\  ho  will  receive  such  pun-
ishment? Only  those  that  deserve
it,  those  that  commit  the  unpardon-
able sin.

Then  there  is  the  banishment  of
the  transgressor,  (not  the  sons  of
perdition)  into  the  prison  house,  a
!  place  of  punishment,  with  no  exal-
|  tat  ion,  no  increase,  no  dominion,  no
power  whose  inhabitants  after  their
redemption  may  become  servants  of
theni  that  have  obeyed  the  laws  of
God  and  kept  the  faith.  That  will
be  t lie  punishment  of  such  as  reject
the  truth,  but  sin  not  unto  death.

But  as  touching  the  terrestrial
kingdom,  as  the  stars  differ  from
each  other  in  lustre,  so  those  who
enter  into  the  telestial  kingdom
differ  in  glory.

*£  Well,  now,  how  is  it  with
Brother  Clayton  ]  He  was  not  with-
out faults  in  the  flesh  '?"  lint  what
were  they?  Were  they  such  as  par-
took of  a  deadly  character?  Did  he
ever  deny  the  Lord?  Did  he  ever
deny  the  Prophet  Joseph,  or  did  he
deny  the  truth  or  prove  unfaithful


LAW  OF  CELESTIAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC.


13


to  his  covenants  or  to  his  brethren  %
No,  never.  I  can  in  all  truthfulness
before  God  and  man  bear  that  testi-
mony of  our  departed  brother,  for  I
have  known  him  from  my  youth.
Yet,  he  was  not  without  his  failings  ?
but  then,  they  were  of  that  nature
that  Injured  nobody  perhaps  except
himself  and  his  own  family.  But
notwithstanding  his  unflinching  in-
tegrity, and  his  long  life  of  fidelity
and  usefulness,  let  me  say  to  you,
that  for  his  faults,  however  trivial,
or  important,  he  must  answer.  But
he  will  lie  able  to  pay  his  debt  and
to  answer  for  his  failings,  and  he  will
come  forth  and  all  that  has  been
pronounced  upon  his  head  by
Joseph  Smith  and  by  the  Apostles,
will  be  continued  ,  upon  him
through  all  eternity  ;  and  there  is
no  power  on  the  earth  or  in  hell
that  can  deprive  him  of  them.  For
as  it  is  said — ami,  indeed,  I  need
not  lefer  you  to  the  revelation  on
celestial  marriage;  but  will  quote  j
from  the  words  of  Christ,  as  given
in  the  New  Testament.  "  Where-
fore 1  say  unto  you,  all  manlier  of
sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven
unto  men,  but  the  blasphemy  against
the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven
unto  men,  *  *  *  neither  in
this  world,  neither  in  the  world  to
come."  Our  departed  friend  and
brother  whose  remains  are  now  lie-
fore  us,  lias  not  sinned  unto  death.
I  would  not  have  it  understood  for
a  moment,  that  I  or  any  of  the
Elders  attend  funerals  to  smother
over  the  weaknesses  of  the  departed


dead,  trying  to  make  it  appear  that
they  were  without  faults,  and  there-
fore will  not  have  to  answer  for  any.
We  know  that  every  man  will  be
judged  according  to  the  deeds  done
in  the  body  ;  and  whether  our  sin
be  against  our  own  peace  and  happi-
ness alone  or  whether  it  affects  that
of  others,  as  the  Lord  lives  we  will
have  to  make  satisfaction  or  atone-
ment ;  God  requires  it,  and  it  is  ac-
cording to  his  providences,  and  we
cannot  escape  it.  We  must  comply
with  the  provisions  of  the  law.  which
Brother  (..lay ton  In  my  belief,  is
abundantlv  able  to  do.  And  when
this  shall  have  been  done,  he  will
come  forth  to  receive  his  crown,  his
glory,  dominion  and  kingdom,  and
the  blessings  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob  which  have  been  pronounced
upon  his  head.

Then  let  me  say  to  the  family  of
our  deceased  brother,  Follow  in  the
footsteps  of  your  husband  and  father,
excepting  wherein  he  may  have
manifested  the  weaknesses  of  the
flesh  ;  imitate  his  staunch  integrity
to  the  cause  of  Zion,  and  his  fidelity
to  his  brethren  ;  be  true  as  he  was
true,  be  firm  as  he  was  firm,  never
flinching,  never  swerving  from  the
truth  as  God  has  revealed  it  to  us  ;
and  I  will  promise  you,  in  the  name
of  the  Lord,  that  you  will  rise,  to
meet  your  husband  and  father,  ia
the  morning  ot  the  first  resurrection,
clothed  wiih  glory,  immortality  and
eternal  lives.  Which  may  God
grant  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


A FUNERAL SERMON BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Preached  over  the  Remains  of  Joseph  U  Cain(  Sun  of  Joseph  and
Elizabeth  Cain,  in  the  14th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  >Salt  Lake

City,  Feb.  8,  1880.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibfa..)


We  are  met  here  to  day,  as  we  fre-
quently have  to  do,  to  pay  the  last
tribute  of  respect  to  the  departed
dead.  Time  with  all  its  changes  and
mutations  brings  us  face  to  face  very
frequently  with  the  kind  of  thing
that  is  now  presented  before  us.  We
come  into  the  world,  we  struggle  a
little  while  with  the  affairs  incident
to  human  nature,  and  by  and  by  the
struggles  of  the  present  are  over.
The  weary  wheels  of  life  stand  still
and  we  go  into  another  state  of
existance.  As  wise,  prudent  and  in-
telligent men  it  behooves  us  really
to  comprehend  the  true  position  we
occupy  in  relation  to  the  past,  in  re-
lation to  the  present,  as  well  as  to
the  future*

Speaking  of  the  past,  we  all  of  us
have  had  our  ideas  about  a  pre-ex-
istence.  We  consider  that  God  is
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  not !
only  of  those  that  fear  him,  but  of
those  who  do  not  fear  him,  and  who
disobey  His  laws.  He  is  the  father
of  the  spirits  of  all,  and  as  is  spoken
of  in  the  Scriptures,  "  We  are  His
offspring "  and  emanated  from  him.
We  came  into  this  world  to  attend
to  certain  things  which  are  designed


by  the  Almighty  and  which  in  the
programme  of  the  Lord  it  was  ne-
cessary that  we  should  take  our  part
in.  We  had  very  little  to  do  with
[  our  coming  here  ;  all  things  move
along  naturally  But  we  have  some-
thing to  do,  however,  with  our  af-
fairs while  we  are  here,  in  a  state  of
probation.  But  about  our  leaving,
in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,
or  more  than  that  even,  we  have
little  to  do  with  it.

There  are  certain  inscrutable  pur-
poses associated  with  the  divine  pro-
gramme which  men  generally  do
not  comprehend.  We  know  a  very
little  of  the  world  in  which  we  live,
and  of  its  inhabitants.  But  what
and  how  little  do  we  know  in  rela-
tion to  the  past,  or  in  regard  to  any-
thing pertaining  to  the  future  ?  Who
can  comprehend  the  purposes  of  God
pertaining  to  the  organization  of  the
earth,  say  to  commence  wTith,  and  the
peopling  of  it,  and  the  maintaining
of  it,  or  in  regard  to  the  position  of
the  nations  and  tl^ir  destiny  ;  or  in
regard  to  the  world  itself  and  the  vari-
ous changes  yet  to  transpire  upon  it.
I  And  then,  who  of  us  knows  any-
thing  definite  pertaining  to  ourselves,


A  FUNERAL  SERMON*


15


or  about  the  impulses  by  which  we
are  governed  and  actuated,  or  of  the
powers  of  darkness,  or  the  powers  of
light,  as  the  case  may  be,  with
which  we  are  surrounded  ]  How
many  of  us  comprehend  these  things]
Very  few  indeed.  It  is  the  design
of  God,  as  I  understand  it,  in  our
coming  here,  to  give  unto  us  bodies,
that  the  spirits  that  were  created
before,  might  have  tabernacles  where-
in they  might  live  and  exist,  and
move  and  act,  as  corporeal  substances,
if  you  please  ;  and  that  according  to
certain  inscrutable  laws  of  God  per-
taining to  the  human  family  and  the
future  destiny  of  man,  and  the  world
in  which  we  live  ;  that  through  the
union  of  the  body  and  spirit,  and
their  obedience  to  certain  laws
which  the  great  Eloheim  has  given
for  the  guidance  of  His  people,  that
they  might  be  more  exalted,  more
dignified,  more  glorious  than  it  would
be  possible  for  them  to  be,  had  they
not  come  here  to  sojourn  in  these
tabernacles,  and  combat  with  the
various  evils  to  which  the  flesh  is
heir.  J

Under  these  circumstances,  from
time  to  time,  he  has  made  known
his  will  to  men.  He  has  in  differ-
ent ages  raised  up  men  with  whom
he  communicated,  and  to  whom  he
revealed  his  will,  and  under  certain
circumstances  to  wdiom  he  commit-
ted his  law,  and  he  has  made  them
his  mouthpiece  to  the  human  fami-
ly, and  through  them  has  revealed
life  and  its  principles,  and  has  un-
veiled the  heavens  and  given  man  a
knowledge  of  the  future,  and  has  \
shown  his  condemnation,  or  evinced
his  hatred  to  evil  and  iniquity  of
every  kind,  and  has  shown  through
them  the  evil  effects  of  pursuing  this
course.  These  men,  in  the  different
ages  in  which  they  lived,  warned
the  people  and  the  nations  in  regard
to  evil,  and  have  tried  to  incite  them


I  to  good,  and  held  out  to  them  the
principle  of  lives,  eternal  lives  here-
after to  be  obtained  in  the  celestial,
terrestrial  or  teles  tial  kingdoms.
These  men  and  these  principles,
which  have  been  introduced  by  the
Almighty,  have  had  their  effect
more  or  les3  among  the  human  fa-
mily. But  there  has  been  associated
with  this  a  spirit  of  antagonism  to
God,  to  virtue,  to  truth,  to  purity,  to
holiness,  and  to  those  principles  that
were  calculated  to  elevate  and  exalt
humanity  through  time  and  through
the  eternities  that  are  to  come.
Thus  two  influences  have  been  at
work  among  the  nations  and  among
the  various  peoples  of  the  earth  in
the  different  ages,  Sometimes  it
seems  mysterious  to  the  human
family  that  things  should  be  as  they
have  been.  They  do  not  compre-
hend the  meaning  or  the  purposes
,  or  designs,  or  even  the  law  of  God
in  fact,  some  of  these  laws  have  not
I  been  made  known  generally  to
mankind.  Permit  me  to  say  there
are  eternal  laws  that  exist  with  the
Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  from
which  they  cannot  depart,  and  to
which  they  are  bound  in  all  their
acts,  I  was  going  to  say  as  we  are,
but  I  will  say  not  as  we  are,  but  as
we  ought  to  be,  subject  to  the  law  of
God  in  all  our  acts,  and  that  it  is
absolutely  necessary  that  men  should
be  placed  in  a  state  of  trial,  in  a  state
of  probation.  It  was  just  as  neces-
sary that  Satan,  if  you  please,  should
exercise  his  power  as  that  God  should
|  exercise  his.  This  is  a  thing  that  is
not  always  understood  by  men,  and,
in  fact,  they  understand  very  littl*
about  it  We  are  told,  however,
that  "  It  must  needs  be  that  there  is
an  opposition  in  all  things,"  good
and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  happi
ness  and  misery,  corruption  and  in-
corruption,  life  and  death,  heaven
and  helL


16


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


We  talk  about  a  futurity  and  about
heaven,  of  which  men  have  certain
vague  ideas.  Some  think  heaven  is
beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and
space,  1 1  is  a  kind  of  poetic  thought,
which  sounds  very  well  ;  but  where
is  such  a  place  ?  When  we  reflect
upon  it  in  our  sober  moments,  we
naturally  conclude  that  it  is  no-
where. But  men  have  entertained
singular  notions  and  ideas  pertaining
to  the  future,  many  of  which  have
been  erratic,  foolish  and  ignorant ;
and  the  fact  is,  it  is  impossible  for
man,  unaided  by  the  revelations  of
God,  to  comprehend  anything  about
him.  Job  says  i  11  Canst  thou  by
searching  find  out  God?  Canst  thou
find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfec-
tion? It  is  as  high  as  heaven;  what
canst  thou  do?  deeper  than  hell,
what  canst  thou  know  f

We  are  told  emphatically  that  no
man  knows  the  things  of  God  but  by
the  Spirit  of  God.  And  how  are
they  to  become  acquainted  with
these  things,  unless  they  are  in
possession  of  that  light  and  that
spirit  which  is  capable  of  imparting
to  them  that  intelligence  ?  A  know-
ledge of  God  is  out  of  the  ken  of
uninspired  humanity.  Who  can
draw  aside  the  vail  of  the  in-
visible world  1  Who  can  pene-
trate into  the  future  and  look,
as  some  men  have,  through  the  dark
vista  of  future  ages  and  see  the
purposes  of  God  roll  on  with  all
their  majesty  and  glory  to  consum-
mation ;  of  which,  they  nor  we,  nor
anybody  can  know  anything  about,
except  by  and  under  the  influence  of
that  spirit  1  They  cannot  know  it ;
it  is  out  of  their  reach.

Well,  what  then  in  regard  to  the
things  of  men  1  We  see  men  bick-
ering and  quarreling  over  religious
matters,  over  things  really  that  they
are  just  as  ignorant  of  as  babes  are.


They  contend  about  certain  princi-
ples, dogmas  and  theories,  and  get
up  debates  about  them,  oft  times
causing  troubles  in  families,  and
neighbourhoods;  often  persecuting
one  another  and  even  putting  one
another  to  death  concerning  t  hings
that  they  knew  nothing  about  them-
selves. This  is  all  very  foolish.

How  does  God  feel  towards  the
human  family  ?  He  feels  that  they
are  his  children. What,  all,  ?  Yes  ;
the  white,  the  black,  the  red,  the
Jew,  the  Gentile,  the  heathen,  the
Christian  and  all  classes  and  grades
of  men  ;  he  feels  interested  in  all,  he
has  done  so  from  the  beginning,  and
will  continue  to  do  so  to  the  end.
He  wilido  all  that  lies  in  his  power
for  the  benefit,  blessing,  ank  exalta-
tion  of  the  human  family,  both  in
time  and  eternity,  consonant  with
those  laws  and  those  eternal  princi-
ples that  I  have  referred  to  :  from
which he  himself  cannot  deviate.
We  sometimes  get  up  feelings  about
parties  that  do  not  think  as  we  do,
and  do  not  believe  as  we  do,  and  we
are  apt  to  east  aspersions  upon  them.
Why,  these  are  their  affairs. What !
would  you  allow  everybody  to  wor-
ship  as  they please?  Certainly.
What?  If  you  knew  they  were  in
error? Certainly  ? I  would  not
wish  to  control  the  human  ruiiul ;
I  would  not  control  the  actions  of
men,  God  does  not  do  it,  he  leaves
them  to  their  own  agency  to  combat
with  the  trials,  temptations,  adver-
sities and  evils  of  every  kind  that
are  in  the  world,  to  which  humanity
is,  or  can  be  incident He  put  with-
in their  reach,  however,  certain  prin-
ciples and  would  like  to  lead  them
to  himself  if  they  would  be  led.  If
not,  he  then  does  the  very  best  with
them  that  he  can. In some  in-
stances he  has  had  to  come  out,  as  it
is  said,  "  in  his  fierce  wrath,"  upon


A  FUNERAL  SERMON".


17


the  peoples  and  upon  the  nations  of
the  earth ;  and  many  other  things
have  been  in  his  programme ;  be-
cause this  life,  with  its  tew  years  is
only  comparatively,  as  it  were,  a  few
moments  in  the  estimation  of  Jeho-
vah. It  is  but  a  span,  a  dream,  or  a
tale,  that  is  told  and  passed  away.
But  in  regard  to  the  eternities  that
are  to  come,  and  the  realities  we
have  to  do  with  hereafter,  that  is
another  affair-  I  have  heard  men
talk  about  the  cruelty  of  God,  just
like  some  foalish  people  talk  about
their  fathers*  Who  knows  anything
about  God  "?  Did  you  ever  see  him  ?
Some  think  it  was  very  cruel  in  him
to  destroy  the  world  at  the  flood*
How  do  they  know  but  that  it  was
the  greatest  boon  he  could  confer
upon  that  wicked  people  ?  How  do
they  know  but  that  it  was  one  of  the
richest  blessings  he  could  pour  out
upon  their  heads  in  sweeping  them
off  the  earth  and  sending  them  into  ;
another  existence  and  then  shutting
them  up  in  prison  after  that  How  do
you  know  ?  Certainly  you  do  not
know  that  it  is  not  the  case.

Let  us  reason  for  a  few  moments
and  look  at  things  about  as  they  are ;
I  will  tell  them  as  they  are  and  as
they  were,  Satan  before  the  days  of
the  flood  obtained  the  ascendancy
over  many  men  and  brought  them
under  his  rule  and  dominion.  He
started  in  with  Cain  and  made  a
murderer  of  him  the  very  first  thing
he  did  and  taught  him  many  princi-
ples of  evil,  and  he  was  called  the
great  Master  Mahon.  Under  the 1
influence  and  power  of  Satan  he
operated  to  thwart  the  designs  of
(  rod  and  to  stop  the  purposes  of
Jehovah.  Satan  first  started  in  the  I
heavens,  but  was  cast  out  and  sue  i
ceeded  in  obtaining  a  great  ascend-
ancy over  the  minds  of  the  people,
whom  he  caused  to  corrupt  them-
selves, leading  them  into  evil,  folly,

No.  2.


vanity  and  corruptions  of  every  kind,
so  much  so  we  are  told  that  the  "ima-
ginations and  thoughts  of  their  hearts
were  only  evil  and  that  continually."
What  had  to  be  done  then  ?  There
were  other  parties  interested  besides
those  upon  the  earth.  There  were
innumerable  hosts  of  spirits  in  the
heavens  that  had  to  come  and  take
tabernacles.  Was  it  proper  and
righteous,  was  it  equitable,  was  it
according  to  the  principles  of  justice
that  those  that  were  pure  with  their
Father  in  the  heavens  should  come
and  take  bodies  and  be  forced
to  enter  into  tabernacles,  that  were
the  offspring  of  those  corrupt  beings
who  were  then  peopling  the  earth  ?
If  I  or  you  had  been  there  should  we
not  have  spoken  to  our  Father  and
said,-"  Father,  do  you  see  the  cor-
ruptions that  exist  upon  the  face  of
the  earth?'  Yes,  I  know  it"  "Is  it
just  that  we  should  have  to  go  into
these  corrupt,  contaminated,  evil,
wicked  bodies  to  receive  our  earthly
parentage  from  them  ;  and  be  sub-
ject to  that  power  and  iniquity  in
all  its  phases  for  thousands  or  mil-
lions of  years  to  come  V  "  No,"  says
He,  "  it  is  not,  and  J  will  sweep  them
away,  I  will  destroy  them  ;  they
possess  the  power,  while  living  to
propagate  their  species,  but  I  wiH
deprive  them  of  that  power.  I  will
send  in  the  floods  upon  them,  and
then  [  will  shut  them  up  in  prison.*'
Did  he  do  it?  He  did.  But  before
He  did  it,  he  had  the  Gospel  preached
to  them  as  it  is  now  being  preached,
and  men  clothed  upon  with  ihe
priesthood  w#re  sent  forth  among
the  peoples  to  proclaim  to  them  the
great  principles  of  life,  and
they  had  the  Gospel  and  the
revelations  of  God  and  commu-
nion with  their  heavenly  Father.
Enoch  was  a  preacher  of  right  eous-
■  ness,  and  numerous  Elders  at  that
I  time  were  sent  forth  among  the  peo-

Vol.  XXL


18


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


pie  and  proclaimed  the  principles  of
eternal  truth  and  gathered  the  peo-
ple together.  so  that  every  man  who
would  fear  God  and  obey  his  law
and  be  governed  by  the  principles  of
righteousness,  might  have  the  lull
blessings  of  the  everlasting  Gospel ;
and  He  gathered  them  together  he-
fore  destruction  came.  They  were
gathered  unto  Zion,  and  that  Zion
was  caught  up.  by  the  power  of  God,
away  from  the  earth,  and  then  the
avenging  hand  of  God  came  upon
the  corrupt  inhabitant*  that  were
left  because  of  their  iniquities.
Would  it  be  proper  to  allow  corrup-
tions and  wickedness  to  predominate,
and  the  powers  of  Satan  to  have  the
presiding  influence,  and  God  to  be
left  out  of  the  question  ?  No.
Therefore  He  accomplished  what  lie
did.  Did  He  injure  them  ?  No  ;
they  would  only  have  lived  a  few
years  longer  anyhow;  but  He  did
not  want  them  to  perpetuate  that
kind  of  folly,  wickedness,  and  cor*
E&p&m  that  then  prevailed,  and  said
"  I  will  stop  it/5  and  he  stopped  it.
Now,  what  about  the  future  cf  such
people*  We  may  have  curious  ideas
about  them.  Some  think  that  they
are  going  to  remain  in  hell  for  ever
and  rver.  But  they  were  in  the
hands  of  God,  and  He  did  right  by
them-  By  and  by  when  Jesus  came,
what  did  he  do  ?  As  soon  as  He  got
through  with  His  short  mission  upon
the  earth,  (<  He  was  put  to  death  in
the  flesh,  and  was  quickened  by  the
Spirit,  and  went  and  preached  unto
the  spirits  in  prison,  which  sometime
were  disobedient  when  once  the  long
suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days
of  Noah  that  they  might  be  placed
on  the  same  plane  and  in  the  same
position  that  others  were  j  that  they
might  obtain  their  proper  status  in
the  eternal  worlds,  and  be  rewarded
with  all  that  was  possible  for  them
to  enjoy,  according  to  the  eternal


laws  and  inscrutable  justice  of  Jeho-
vah. Tli  us  justice  was  satisfied,  the
law  vindicated,  the  wicked  punished,
the  unborn  and  pure  protected  and
provided  for,  and  finally,  the  im-
prisoned released  from  their  bondage
and  salvation  extended  to  the  pri-
soners. Was  there  anything  wrong
in  that.  fl  Yes,"  says  the  ignoramus
who  does  not  know  anything  about
it,  "  it  was  very  cruel/1  Well,  the
greatest  cruelty  there  is  about  such
men  is  that  they  are  cruelly  igno-
rant and  do  not  know  what  they

are  talking  about.

Now  in  regard  to  other  things.
The  Gospel  has  been  sent  from  time
to  time  among  the  people.  And
what  does  it  do  ]  It  brings  life  and
immortality  to  light  Has  God  ever
given  up  his  idea  in  relation  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  1  No  ;  but
He  has  in  the  different  ages  given
certain  laws  and  principles  to  certain
classes  of  individuals.  It  is  said
that  God  has  made  of  one  blood  all
nations  of  the  earth,  yet  there  are
certain  classes  of  men  among  the  na-
tions iust  as  much  as  there  are  cer-
tain  classes  of  metals-  Everything
is  not  gold,  everything  is  not  silver,
everything  is  not  brass  ;  everything
is  not  iron  ;  all  hold  their  proper  po-
sition and  have  their  relative  value.
80  in  regard  to  the  heavens.  There
are  bodies  celestial,  there  are  bodies
terrestrial,  there  are  bodies  telestial
We  are  told  there  is  one  glory  of  the
sun,  another  glory  of  the  moon,  an-
other glory  of  the  stars,  and  that  as
one  star  differs  from  another  star  in
glory  so  also  shall  it  be  in  the  resur-
rection. This  distinction  arises  from
the  acts  of  men,  as  it  is  said  "  Ye
are  servants  to  whom  you  yield  your
selves  servants  to  obey.'*

Now  what  are  we  here  for  i  What
are  the  things  we  profess  to  do  1  I
will  ask  what  did  Jesus  seek  to  da
when  h*  was  here  ? Did  he  come  to


curse  mankind  1  No,  but  to  bless
them ;  he  came  to  seek  and  to  save
those  that  were  lost  ;  He  came  to
to  unfold  the  principles  of  eternal
truth,  to  bring  life  and  immortality
to  light  by  the  Gospel  He  came,
according  to  the  eternal  decree  of
the  Almighty,  to  offer  his  life  as  a
sacrifice*  as  an  atonement  for  the
ains  of  the  human  family.  He  came
to  introduce  principles  that  ema-
nated from  God  to  organize  his
church  upon  the  earth,  and  to  en-
dow his  disciples  with  authority  that
they  might  go  forth  as  His
messengers  to  proclaim  the  prin-
ciples of  eternal  truth  to  the
human  family-  Hence  says  he,  "  Go
ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that
belie  vet  h  and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  damned."  This  is  one  of
those  eternal  decrees  that  you  cannot
get  away  from.  And  then  we  talk
about  the  damnation  of  hell ;  and
people  have  as  strange  notions  about
that  as  they  have  about  other  things.
I  have  read  statements  from  men
which  were  really  terrible  when  de-
picting the  state  of  the  damned.  It
is  bad  enough,  but  it  is  not  the  kind
of  thing  they  represent.  1  remember,
too,  reading  a  piece  of  poetry,  which
ran  something  like  this  :

Infinite  years  in  torment  must  I  spend.
And  never,  never,  never  have  an  end.
Ah  !  must  I  lie,  in  ruinous  despair,
Ah  many  years  as  atoms  in  the  air ;
When  those  are  past  as  many  thousand

more,

Ah  grains  ml  sand  upon  the  ocean  shore.
When  all  these  doleful  year;*  are  npent  in
pain,

And  multiplied  by  millions  yet  again,
Til]  numbers  drown  the  thought,  could  I
suppose

That  then  my  dismal  years  would  have  a
close.

This  would  afford  a  hope  ;  hut  ah  !  I  shiver
To  ponder  on  this  dreadful  word,  forever ;
I  in  this  burning  gulf  blaspheming  lie,
Time  is  no  more,  put  vast  eternity."


This  may  be  poetic.  It  is  certainly
grim  and  terrible;  but  it  is  not  true.
Is  there  justice  1  Yes.  Eternal
justice?  Yes.  These  men  that  I
have  referred  to  suffered  eternal
justice;  they  were  destroyed  by  the
Almighty,  and  at  last  were  saved
again  by  the  Almighty.  Have  we
eternal  punishment  ]  Yes.  What
is  it  1  It  is  God's  punishment  Are
there  everlasting  prisons  ?  Yes.
What  are  they  ?  God's  prisons.  Do
people  stay  in  them  forever  ?  No,
Not  in  all  of  t  hem.  We  have  prisons
upon  the  earth,  penitentiaries,  in
which  to  confine  people  for  one,  five,
ten  or  twenty  years,  as  the  case  may
be ;  and  when  their  time  expires
they  come  out ;  but  the  prison  is
there  still.  Is  it  an  everlasting
prison  ?  You  may  call  it  so  if  you
please  ;  but  people  do  not  stay  in  it
always.  Has  God  a  way  to  manage
his  affairs  1  Certainly;  the  Judge
of  all  the  earth  ought  to  be  at  least
as  capable  in  the  management  of  his
affairs,  as  mortal  men  are  in  theirs.

We  have  come  upon  this  stage  of
action,  and  are  called  to  preach.
And  God  has  revealed  his  will,  and
some  people  seem  to  be  very  angry
about  it.  Joseph  Smith  had  revela-
tions from  God,  Do  I  know  it  ]  Yes,
I  do.  Could  he  help  it?  Suppose
the  Lord  were  to  speak  to  any  of
you,  could  you  help  it?  or  if  an
angel  were  to  come  to  you,  could
you  help  it  1  No,  you  could  not.
Now,  you  might  do  what  they  tell
you,  or  not;  that  is  optional  If
you  did  what  they  told  you,  how~
ever,  the  world  and  the  devil  would
say  you  were  a  fool  ;  and  they  have
always  said  so  in  every  age  of  the
world  ;  and  the  devil  and  the  world
have  always  been  opposed  to  God
and  his  law,  and  they  would  perse-
cute you  as  they  persecuted  him.
Yery  well,  do  we  have  need  to  fight?
I  do  not. I  thank  God  for  the  light


and  intelligence  he  lias  revealed  unto
tts,  through  the  medium  of  the  ever*
lasting  Gospel.  Could  we  have  it  if
God  had  not  revealed  it?  No.
Who  knew  that  God  lived  1  Nobody
until  Joseph  Smith  came,  and  the
Lord  spoke  to  him  pointing  out  to
him  his  son,  saying,  "This  is  my
beloved  Son,  hear  him."  Who  knew
any  tiling  about  it  %  Nobody  on  the
wide  earth.  Could  he  have  helped
it  if  he  wanted  tot  I  do  not  think
he  wanted  to  much  ;  I  do  not  think
anybody  need  want  to  much,  if  God
would  condescend  to  reveal  his  will;
I  do  not  think  they  would  be  very
desirous  for  him  to  hold  his  peace.
It  is  true  a  number  of  the  children
of  Israel  did  when  they  heard  the
thunderings  un  Mount  Sinai.  They
said  to  Moses,  speak  to  us ;  but  do
not  let  the  Lord  speak  to  us,  lest
we  die.  The  fact  is,  they  were  not
prepared  for  it.

Now  then,  this  Gospel  is  intro-
duced for  what  ?  To  spread  life
and  salvation  to  the  world.  God
blessed  Abraham  in  the  same  way.
What  for?  In  thee  and  thy  seed
shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be
blessed.  I  will  give  unto  you  my
law,  I  will  reveal  unto  you  the  prin-
ciples of  eternal  truth  ;  I  will  open
the  mysteries  of  heaven  to  your
view,  and  you  shall  gaie  uyon  me
and  upon  my  purposes.  I  will  in*
struct  you  in  the  principles  of  life
and  salvation,  and  I  will  tell  you
what  to  do  with  those  principles
when  I  shall  have  committed  them
to  you.  As  he  spake  unto  Moses,
he  told  him  to  select  a  man  to  be
his  mouth-piece  ;  and  said,  Moses
shall  be  a  God  unto  you,  and  I  will
speak  through  him.  That  is  it.
Now,  he  has  done  the  same  in  this
day,  and  restored  the  same  princi-
ples, and  has  sent  forth  a  message
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
gathered together  men  who  had


the  manhood,  integrity  and  de-
sire to  carry  out  the  purposes  of
God,  and  who  would  be  valiant  for
those  principles  which  he  had  re-
vealed :  and  he  prepared  them  for
his  purpose  ;  and  if  he  had  not  sus-
tained them  they  would  not  be  here
to-day.  Are  these  men  enemies  to>
the  world  !  If  teaching  men  the
truth  is  enmity,  they  have  done-
that ;  if  going  without  purse  or
scrip,  traveling  among  the  nations
to  proclaim  to  them  the  glad  tidings
of  salvation  is  enmity,  they  may
possess  it. But  impelled by  the

.eternal  truth  and  en-
by  the  spirit  of  the
and  comprehending  the
they occupied,  they


spirit  ot
lightened
Almighty
position


have  gone  forth  among  the  people
of  the  earth  and  proclaimed  to  them
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation,  and
God  has  taken  care  of  them.  Very
well.  Anything  great  about  this  ?
No  ;  it  is  simply  performing  a  duty.
I  have  traveled  hundreds  and  thous-
ands of  miles  in  this  way  myself,
trusting  in  God,  Was  I  ever  for-
saken] No,  Did  I  ever  need  any-
thing? No,  not  that  I  did  not  get-
Did  I  ever  have  to  go  hungry,  naked
or  destitute  !  No,  the  Lord  always
provided  and  raised  up  means  in
every  kind  of  way,  and  I  did  not
beg  either.  I  would  like  anybody
to  tell  me  when  I  ever  begged  any-
thing from  them  either  here  or  any-
where else.  But  I  have  begged  of
the  Lord,  for  my  religion  teaches  me
to  go  to  him'

Now  then,  we  have  a  work  to  do.
Do  we  wish  to  villi  fy  anybody  in
ou  r  midst  I  No.  Do  we  see  w  icked,
corrupt  and  abominable  men  among
us?  Yes.  AVhat  will  we  do  with
them  %  Leave  them  in  the  hands  of
God,  he  will  manage  them  ;  it  is  for
us  to  do  right,  to  work  righteous-
ness and  pursue  a  course  right  be-
fore the  I/ord.


I  see  that  time  is  passing.  My
mind  has  been  led  rather  discur-
sively on  some  of  these  matters,
arising  partly  from  circumstances
with  which  we  are  surround  eel.
How  is  it  with  this  young  man  here?
Well,  I  wish  it  were  otherwise ;  I
wish  he  had  lived  a  very  good  Saint,
which,  however,  he  did  not  do.
We  have  not  come  here  to  in-
dulge in  any  kind  of  false  sentimen-
tality. He  was  a  drunkard  ;  that  is
a  truth  and  many  of  you  know  it.
When  you  have  said  that,  can  you
eay  anything  worse  I  That  is  bad
enough,  but  1  do  not  know  any  tiling
evil  about  the  young  man  further
than  that.  I  knew  his  father,  I
baptized  hira  thousands  of  miles
away  from  here,  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  40  years  of  ago,  when  he
was  a  much  younger  man  than  be
{his  son)  is  now.  His  father  lived
up  to  the  Gospel,  and  died  strong  in
the  faith  ;  and  his  mother  lias  been
a  very  good  woman,  so  for  as  I  know ;
I  have  never  known  anvthinsj
against  her.  This  boy  has  caused
her  a  great  deal  of  trouble  ;  and  I
have  been  Bony  for  him.  Well,
should  we  tell  things  1  Yes,  always  ;
that  day  is  not  far  distant  when  the
coverings  will  b<i  taken  fnnn  the
face  of  all  people,  and  we  shall  all
stand  naked,  as  it  were,  before  God
— both  you  and  I  and  tins  young
man.  Well  this  boy, — I  call  him  a
boy,  he  is  a  young  man,  and  is  a
nephew  of  mine  by  marriage  ;  and  I
would  not  want  to  say  any  thing
about  him  on  that  account,  neither
would  I  falsify  the  young  man  on
that  account ;  but  let  us  tell  things
and  understand  them  as  they  are-
Let  me  call  the  attention  of  the
youth  present  Would  you  like  to
be  lying  in  this  position,  under
these  circumstances  1  You  would
not  I  Then  let  us  look  at  things  as
they  are, What  next] We  will


do  the  best  we  can  ;  and  what  is  it?
There  is  a  curious  saying  that  Paul
made  on  a  certain  occasion,  in  speak-
ing about  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles :
u  What  advantage  hath  the  Jews?
or  what  profit  is  there  of  circum-
cision 1

u  Much  every  way  ;  chiefly,  that
unto  them  were  committed  the  ora-
cles of  God.

"Whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of
whom  as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ
came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed
for  ever,"  etc.

Is  it  a  sorrowful  thing  to  see  our
youth  pass  away  as  he  has  donel
Yes.  He  did  not  die  drunk  ?  No,
but  that  was  the  cause  of  it.  We
may  as  well  talk  honestly  about
him.  What  next?  lie  has  gone.
Has  he  hurt  anybody  ?  No,  only  by
his  example*  Has  he  hurt  his
mother  ?  Yes.  I  do  not  think  he
did  sin  while  his  father  was  living  ;
but  since  then  he  has  caused  his
mother  many  a  sorrowful  hour?
Did  I  feel  sorry  when  he  died]  No.
Why  1  Because  I  knew  it  was  much
better  for  him  to  leave  the  earth
than  to  be  in  the  position  he  has
been*

Now,  what  about  the  future  in
in  relation  to  these  things  !  What
advantage  has  the  Jew  over  the
Gentile!  Much  every  way.  Theirs
were  tlje  fathers ;  and  unto  that
people  were  com  mitt  eel  the  oracles
of  God.  Theirs  were  the  fathers—
we  have  fathers  that  are  living  in
the  eternal  worlds  ;  fathers  that  are
interested  in  our  welfare  ;  fathers
that  are  associated  with  the  beings
that  exist  behind  the  vail ;  fathers
who  are  operating  with  us  in  trying
to  bring  about  the  great  purposes  of
God  and  the  salvation  of  the  human
family.  Can  anything  be  donel
Yes,  and  all  that  can  be  done  will
be  done,  but  the  future  has  got  to
be  left  with  the  Almighty  in  regard


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


to  these  matters*  But  we  can  do  a
great  deal  according  to  principles
that  God  has  revealed  to  us,  and
these  things  will  be  done,  as  far  as
they  can  be,

I  would  say,  I  do  not  utter  these
things  to  cause  any  unpleasant  feel-
ing in  the  bosom  of  the  family;  they
cannot  help  it.  If  I  could  have
helped  it,  I  would  ;  if  the  mother
could  have  helped  it,  she  would;  if
the  sister  could  have  helped  it,  she
would ;  if  the  friends  could  have
helped  it,  they  would.  But  we  can-
not control  circumstances, *  I

We  are  now  talking  not  to  the
dead,  but  to  the  living,  I  would
say,  Let  us  avoid  these  evils,  they
lead  down  to  death  ;  let  us  seek  to
live  our  religion,  to  obey  the
laws  of  God  and  keep  his  command-
ments. And  in  regard  to  the  future,
we  leave  that  in  the  hands  of  the


Almighty  who  doeth  all  things  well  ;
and  we  will  do  all  we  can  to  promote
the  comfort  of  the  living  and  the
dead.  We  are  doing  a  great  deal
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  ob-
ject ;  we  are  building  temples  and
administering  in  them,  and  we  are
doing  it  in  obedience  to  the  law  of
God,  and  in  consonance  with  the  feel-
ing of  the  patriarchs  ami  apostles
and  men  of  God  who  have  lived  be-
fore. And  we  will  try  to  go  on  and
live  our  religion  and  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God  that  we  may  re-
joice together  hereafter.  And  I
would  say  to  the  mother,  Let  your
heart  be  comforted  for  you  shall  be
blessed  both  in  time  and  in  eternity.
And  I  say  unto  all  of  you,  Live  your
religion,  keep  the  commandments  of
God,  for  in  that  only  there  is  safety.
God  bless  you  in  time  and  in  eter-
nity. Amen*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ERASTUS  SNOW,

DELIVERED  AT  BRIG  HAM  OITY,  ON  SUNDAY  MORNING,  OCTOBER  1879.

(Reported  by  Geo.  R  Gibbs.)

REST  SIGNIFIES  CHANGE — TIME  AS  RELATED  TO  ETERNITY— WONDERFUL
MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY — INTEGRITY"  IN  THE  FACE  OF
OPPOSITION.

I  feel  somewhat  weary  in  body  my  brethren.  Indeed,  I  may  say  I
from  the  effects  of  labor  and  infirm-  rather  counted  upon  a  rest  in  com*
ities  ;  and  were  I  to  consult  my  own  ing  to  Brigham  City  ;  yet  I  never
feelings  1  would  be  inclined  to  waive  allow  myself  to  shrink  from  bearing
this  privilege,  and  sit  and  listen  to  that  portion  that  properly  attaches


me  in  life  to  the  calling  and  duties
devolving  upon  me.  I  feel  that  we
are  all  here  in  a  shoo!,  that  we  have
a  work  to  perform  ;  ami  if  when  we
shall  have  done  that  work  we  shall
be  satisfied  with  it,  we  will  not  re-
gret having  worn  ourselves  put  in
accomplishing  it.  But  on  the  con-
trary we  shall  rejoice  at  our  success
in  having  got  safely  through  and  en-
tered into  the  **rest"  which  is  pre-
pared for  the  people  of  God  in  the
future  state.  This  is  a  scriptural
phrase,  implying  that  there  is  a  rest
beyond  for  the  people  of  God.  But
I  have  sometimes  thought  that
strictly  speaking  rest  was  only  a
change,  and  that  a  change  was  rest;
because  to  be  absolutely  at  rest,  to
be  entirely  free  from  labor  and  care
would  be  inconsistent  with  our  ex-
istence ;  in  such  a  condition  our
being  would  be  a  blank,  a  nonentity.
The  course  of  God,  we  are  told  by
the  prophet.  Nephi,  is  one  eternal
round  ;  that,  like  eternity,  it  has
neither  begin niuif  nor  end,  and  is
illustrated  in  the  Book  of  Abraham
by  the  hieroglyphic  of  the  circle.
You  may  start  upon  this  ring  at  any
given  point,  and  in  traversing  it  you
will  come  to  thn  same  point — it  is
without  beginning,  without  end.

We  sometimes  speak  of  eternity
in  contradistinction  to  time  ;  and
often  say,  "  through  time  and  into
eternity  anil  again  * fi  from  eternity
to  eternity/'  which  is  simply  an-
other form  of  expressing  the  same
idea,  and  "pass  through  time  into
eternity."  In  other  worths,  time  is
a  short  period  allotted  to  man  in  his
probationary  state — and  we  use  the
word  time  in  contradistinction  to
the  word  eternity,  merely  for  the
accommodation  of  man  in  his  finite
sphere,  that  we  may  comprehend
and  learn  to  measure  periods.  And
for  this  purpose  the  Lord  gave  unto
Adam  his  reckoning  after  the  move-


ments of  the  planets,  which  would
appear  to  hira  stationary,  or  at  least
comparatively  so,  making  a  suitable
standard  by  which  man  in  his  mortal
state  may  nnia<urr  periods  and  count
out  the  days  and  the  months  and
the  years  and  the  cycles.

The  Scriptures  speak  of  a  time
'♦when  time  shall  be  no  more,"  And
the  Apostle  John  in  his  visions,
while  banished  to  the  Isle  of  Patmos,
heard  the  anirel  sav,  **  time  shall  be
no  more,"  We  may  not  fully  com-
prehend the  meaning  ^nd  the  pur-
port of  this  expression.  All  phrases
or  expressions  whether  used  by  men,
angels  or  Uod  have  a  relative  mean-
ing,  as  one  thing  is  compared  with
another  ;  and  to  understand  the  full
force  of  them,  we  must  understand
that  to  which  it  has  reference  by
comparison.  I  simply  understand
by  this,  that  so  far  as  we  are  con-
cerned, time  will  be  no  more  when
we  shall  be  merged  into  eternity,
and  we  cease  to  reckon  our  periods
by  the  diurnal  revolutions  of  the*
earth,  and  the  changes  of  the  moon,
etc,;  when  we  shall  enter  into  a
sphere  where  we  can  mingle  with
the  gods  and  become  acquainted
with  their  reckoning,  and  the  eter-
nal periods  or  cycles  of  revolutions
of  numberless  creations  in  space,
which  to-day  the  most  profound
astronomers  of  the  earth  are  unable
to  fathom  or  mark  their  place  of  be-
ginning. And  this  is  called  eternity
by  man,  and,  as  far  m  man  is  con-
cerned, is  in  contradistinction  to
other  periods  and  modes  of  reckon-
ing known  and  in  use  anions  the
Gods.  For  they  have  their  periods
and  reckoning  as  well  as  we,  only  on
a  vast  and,  to  us,  incomprehensible
scale.  W'r  are  in  a  state  of  progres-
sion, very  small  be iri nnimrs,  but  on-
ward  and  upward  for  a  more  exalted
sphere,  in  which  they  move.  But  I
conceive  of  no  stopping  place  j  I


24


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


conceive  of  no  absolute  resting  place,
but  only,  as  before  remarked,  a
change,  a  change  in  our  circumstan-
ces and  conditions,  and  consequently
a  change  in  our  labors.

I  speak  now  of  man  as  an  immor-
tal being,  having  no  reference  to
this  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacles ;
for  this  mortal  house  which  we  oc-
cupy for  the  period  of  a  few  short
years  upon  the  earth,  will  not  be
associated  with  the  immortal  man—
the  god  in  embryo*  The  clot  lung
we  wear  covers  the  nakedness  of  the
body  ;  it  answers  a  good  purpose  for
a  little  season — until  it  becomes
worn  out,  when  it  is  cast  aside  as  of
no  further  use  for  that  purpose.  So
witli  the  out*1!  house  of  our  taber-
nacles. Tliis  mortality  serves  the
purpose*  intended  for  a  few  short
years  until  it  is  worn  out  with  use,
like  the  farmer's  agricultural  imple-
ments, like  the  machinist's  or  me*
ehanics  tools,  or  any  other  piece  of
machinery — for  the  human  body  is
one  of  the  finest  and  most  perfect
pieces  of  machinery  known  upon  the
earth;  there  is  none  superior.  In-
deed, most  of  the  mechanism  em-
ployed by  men  in  various  branches
of  industry  is  founded  on  the  ana-
tomical  structure  of  the  hit  man  body;
the  angles,  the  joints,  the  tendrils,
the  cords  by  which  they  are  bound
together:  the  wonderful  construction
not  only  of  the  outer  portions  of  the
body,  but  the  very  fine  mechanism
of  tli e  nervous  system,  and  also  that
of  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  of  the  means
of  sensation,  and  that  by  which
k  1  j  o  w  led  ge  is  com  1 1  ui  1 ncated  fro  in
one  part  of  the  body  to  the  other.
If  the  ti  nger  be  abused  or  injured,  a
telegraphic  communication  is  made
to  the  seat  of  knowledge — the
government  of  the  body  ;  conveying
the  information  that  a  finger  is  in
danger  ;  and  wherever  pain  is  felt,
in  whatever  part  of  the  body,  it  is


but  the  ringing  of  the  bell  of  alarm,
giving  notice  of  a  hostile  attack,  and
to  make  preparations  for  defense,
lest  the  enemy  making  the  assault
take  possession  of  the  citadel  and
destroy  it.  The  wonderful  mechan-
ism of  the  nervous  system,  through
which  the  spirit  makes  its  impres-
sions upon  the  body,  is,  as  it  were,  an
intermediate  organism  between  the
fine  spiritual  body  and  the  coarser
elements  of  our  tabernacles.  And
those  who  have  given  the  most  time
and  study  to  this  wonderful  machine

w

are  lead  to  fully  appreciate  and  en-
dorse the  saying  of  the  Psalmist,  '* 1
am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made/*
Its  adaptability  to  the  uses  and  pur-
poses intended,  with  its  remarkable
endurance  when  suitably  guarded
and  protected  against  disease  and
what  we  term  accident,  is  in  itself
sufficient  to  call  forth  the  admiration
of  all  intelligent  beings.  We  look
upon  an  aged  person,  say,  70,  80,  lJ0
or  100  years  old,  and  realize  that
there  is  a  mac! due,  a  mechanical
structure — shall  we  call  it  a  model
representing  perpetual  motion  ?  Not
exactly,  but  a  mac] line  that  has  been
in  motion  say,  1^0  years  ;  a  double
action  pump  that  lias  been  constantly
going,  distributing  the  fluids  of  the
system  by  way  of  keeping  up  a  con-
stant circulation  of  the  blood  ;  some-
times working  very  hard  to  remove
obstructions  arising  from  colds  and
and  other  causes  to  keep  the  chan-
nels from  becoming  stopped  up,  and
at  other  times  working  slowly.  And
the  functions  of  the  body  are  oft-
times  kept  in  such  constant  use  lor
such  a  period  of  time  without  the
touch  of  the  mechanic  to  repair  a
break  unless  it  may,  perchance,  be
the  surgeons  saw  to  remove  a  dis-
abled limb  that  threatens  to  en-
cumber the  whole  body,  or  the  tying
up  of  a  broken  artery  t<>  prevent
the  escape  of  the  vital  fluid.  But


REST  SIGNIFIES  CHANGE,  ETC.


35


otherwise  the  most  skilful  physician
is  unable  to  make  a  single  repair  or
improve  any  part  or  portion  of  it ;
and  the  most  he  can  do  is  to  give
something  to  be  taken  into  the
stomach  to  effect  a  chemical  change
on  the  fluids  of  the  system,  to  neu-
tralize perhaps  an  excess  of  the  acids,
thus  working  a  change  in  the  quality
of  the  blood,  and  consequently  a
change  in  the  deposits  that  are  being
made  in  all  parts  of  the  system  by
the  circulation  of  tins  fluid.  But
this  wonderful  machine  is  kept  in
motion  by  what  power  i  We  say  it
is  the  power  of  God ;  we  say  it  is  in
Him  we  live  and  move  and  have
our  being*  And,  yet,  He  always
works  through  means,  all  His  won-
derful works  being  performed  by
agents  ;  but  He  is  not  confined  to
one  agent  nor  any  special  method  in
performing  His  works,  lint  there
is  a  spirit  in  this  earthly  tabernacle
of  ours  that  is  relative  to  our
father  and  God,  ami  who  is  the
owner  of  this  tabernacle,  and
for  whom  the  tabernacle  is  orga-
nized as  his  dwelling  house.  It  is
this  spirit  that  keeps  the  functions
of  this  tabernacle  in  motion  ;  when
this  spirit  leaves  the  body,  it  is
either  because  the  Father  calls  it
away,  wishing  to  use  it  in  another
sphere,  considering  the  time  it  has
spent  in  this  tabernacle  sufficient  for
the  purposes  required,  and  therefore
takes  it  to  a  higher  school,  through
special  design  to  do  a  special  work  ;
or  it  may  be,  it  has  used  its  taber
nacle  until  it  is  so  worn  out  that  it
has  become  like  a  bow  which  has
been  long  and  constantly  bent,— it
has  lost  its  elasticity  ;  its  bones  im-
paired in  strength,  its  muscles  stif-
fened, and  the  whole  frame  ready,
like  our  old  clothes,  to  be  thrown
aside ;  and  the  spirit  comes  to  the
conclusion  that  it  has  had  its  run
with  this  old  tabernacle  and  that  it


is  time  this  old  garment  were  laid
aside  for  a  new  one.  Our  Father
comes  to  this  conclusion  and  gives
the  spirit  a  ticket  of  leave,  and  re-
moves it  into  another  sphere.  But
this  is  all  necessary  as  a  school  for
us.  The  various  pains  and  sorrows
to  be  endured  in  life  are  all  neces-
sary in  their  time  and  place  ;  the
trials  as  we  term  them,  are  all  ne-
cessary in  their  place,  they  are  all  a
part  of  the  scheme  of  education  or
training  to  prepare  us  for  the  future.
One  of  the  sacred  writers,  in  speak-
ing of  Jesus,  said:  "For  we  have
not  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infir-
mities; but  was  in  all  points  tempted
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."
And  again  :  "  For  God  giveth  not
the  spirit  hy  measure  unto  him/1  It
is  measured  out  to  you  and  me  in
the  providence  of  the  Lord  ;  but  for
him  there  was  a  storehouse  to  draw
upon,  as  it  were,  without  measure-
He  could  continue  to  heal  the  sick
and  raise  the  dead  and  perform  great
and  marvelous  things,  and  yet  the
supply  of  vitality  was  not  in  the
least  abated.  Mortals  less  gifted
and  less  favored  who  should  be  the
means  of  healing  many  sick  by  the
power  of  God,  would  feel  that  in
taking  their  infirmities  upon  them,
they  were  sinking  under  the  weight,
and  would  want  to  hie  themselves
away  to  rest  and  recuperate  their
exhausted  frames*  Jesus  was  an
exception  in  this  respect  ;  he  took
upon  himself  our  infirmities  and  bore
our  sickness,  us  had  been  predicted
by  Isaiah  the  prophet.  He  truly
did  heal  the  sick  wherever  he  went ;
and  some  found  that  if  they  could
even  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment
the  disease  from  which  they  suffered
could  be  rebuked  ;  and  one  instance
is  given  where  this  was  done,  in
which  case  we  are  told,  virtue  went
out  of  him. But  notwithstanding


+


36  JOURNAL  OF

the  great  burden  that  he  bore,  to-
gether with  the  vast  amount  of  vita
lity  that  was  at  various  times  com*
municated  from  him  to  others,  lie
did  not  faint  under  the  load  ;  his
mortality  did  not  give  way.  But  no
man,  unsupported  as  he  was,  could
have  done  it  without  sinking  under
this  weight  ;  none  other  could  have
grappled  with  devils  and  cast  them
out  of  individuals  and  held  them  at
bay,  as  he  di  J,  without  suffering  from
bodily  exhaustion,  and  therefore  had
to  seek  retirement  and  rest.  He,
however,  wasjed  war  constantly,  and
was  well  prepared  for  this  work,
having  an  inexhaustible  source  of
strength  to  draw  from,  the  Spirit
having  been  given  to  him  without
measure.  But  at  length  the  time
came  when  the  Father  said,  You
must  succumb,  you  must  be  made
the  offering.  And  at  this  dark
hour  the  power  of  the  Father  with-
drew itself  measurably  from  him,
and  he  was  left  to  be  taken  by  his
enemies,  and,  like  a  lamb,  was  led
to  the  slaughter,  but  he  opened  not*
his  mouth,  because  his  hour  had
COttie,  And  when  he  was  led  to  ex-
claim in  his  last  agony  upon  the
cross,  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast
thou  forsaken  me?  the  Father  did
not  deign  to  answer ;  the  time  had
not  yet  come  to  explain  it  and  tell
him.  But  after  a  little,  when  he
passed  the  ordeal,  made  the  sacrifice,
and  by  the  power  of  God  was  raised
from  the  dead,  then  all  was  clear,
all  was  explained  and  comprehended
fully.  It  was  necessary  that  the
Father  should  thus  measurably  for-
sake his  Son,  leaving  him  to  his  ene-
mies, otherwise  they  never  could
have  fulfilled  what  had  been  prophe-
sied concerning  him.  So  we  may
say  with  others,  it  is  only  a  sample
for  us  to  reflect  upon,  that  may  be
equally  applicable  to  us  all  in  our
times  and  seasons.


DISCOURSES.

It  is  not  necessary,  in  the  provi-
dence of  God,  that  we  should  all
be  martyrs  ;  it  is  not  necessary
that  all  should  suffer  death  upon  the
cross,  because  it  was  the  will  of  the
Father  that  Jesus  should  so  suffer,
neither  is  it  necessary  that  all  the
Saints  of  this  last  dispensation
should  perish  because  our  prophet
perished,  but  yet  it  may  be  neces-
sary that  some  should,  that  a  suffi-
cient number  of  faithful  witnesses
of  God  and  of  his  Christ  should
suffer,  and  even  perish  by  the  hands
of  their  enemies,  to  prove  ami  show
unto  the  world — the  unbelieving
and  unthinking — that  their  testi-
mony is  true,  and  that  they  are
ready  not  only  to  bear  testimony  in
word,  but  in  deed,  to  sustain  and
honor  their  testimony  through  their
lives  ;  and  also  in  their  death  ;  and
greater  love  than  this  no  man  can
have  for  his  friend  or  for  his  bosom
companion,  not  even  David  and
Jonathan,  whose  love  for  each  other
is  said  to  have  surpassed  the  love  of
woman.  No  one  can  give  a  stronger
assurance  of  his  devotion  to  the
principles  he  has  received  and  which
he  teaches  to  his  tellowman,  than
to  patiently  endure  suffering,  for
their  sake,  and,  if  need  be,  to  con-
tinue that  suffering  and  endurance
even  unto  death.

In  the  economy  of  heaven,  it  has
been  deemed  necessary,  at  various
periods  of  the  world's  history,  that
such  witnesses  of  Christ  should  suf-
fer death  for  their  testimony's  bake,
and  that  others  may  yet  have  to  suf-
fer in  our  own  time  is  probable.
Nay,  the  Scriptures  give  us  clearly
to  understand  that  such  will  be  the
case,  that  more  or  less  will  suffer,
but  to  what  extent  the  servants  of
the  Lord  may  be  called  upon  to  thus
,  suffer  is  not  given  us  to  know,  nor
is  it  necessary  we  should.  For  what
I  difference  does  it  make  when  we


REST  SIGNIFIES  CHANGE,  ETC.


27


Lave  performed  a  good  work  or  so
far  completed  it  that  the  Lord  ac-
cepts of  it  and  is  willing  for  us  to
pass  behind  the  veil,  and  perhaps
gives  his  consent  whether  we  go  by
a  bullet  or  through  violence  at  the
hands  of  our  enemies,  or  whether  it
be  by  a  lingering  sickness  \  In
most  cases  the  former  would  be  pre-
ferahle,  so  far  as  we  are  personally
concerned,  for  in  such  the  pain  and
suffering  would  be  slight,  although
it  would  be  calculated  to  shock  the
sensibilities  of  living  friends  who
would  mourn  over  us.

In  philosophising  upon  these
things,  I  scarcely  have  a  tremor  or
thought  or  care  in  relation  to  the
death  I  may  suffer,  or  when  it  shrill
come,  or  how  it  shall  come.  It  mat-
ters not  when  or  where  or  under
what  circumstances  it  may  be,  my
feeling  is  as  it  always  has  been—
it  will  be  all  right.  I  take  no  more
thought  or  care  of  this  matter  than
the  infant  child  does  about  the  pre-
paration of  its  food.  The  Lord  cares
for  us  and  such  matters,  and  will
order  them  in  their  time  and  season.

But  tliere  i>  a  principle  involved.
When  a  man  is  faced  by  his  enemies,
when  the  wicked  conspire  against
the  righteous,  threatening  death
and  destruction  if  lie  do  not  turn
truant  and  deny  our  God  and  obey
their  behests  ;  all  this  is  calculated
to  try  the  faith  of  the  people  and
put  them  to  the  test ,  as  to  whether
they  have  more  confidence  in  God
and  his  promises,  than  in  his  Satanic
majesty  and  the  host  of  his  servants
upon  the  earth,  who  in  many  in-
stances offer  them  what  they  have
not  power  to  give.  They  remind
me  of  the  devil  when  he  took  the
Savior  into  a  high  mountain  and
showed  him  all  the  riches  of  the
earth,  promising  to  give  him  all  he
could  see  if  he  would  only  fall  down
and  worship  him. The  Savior  re-


plied :  "It  is  written,  Thou  shalt
worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him
only  shalt  thou  serve."  He  did  not
revile  him  by  telling  the  poor  devil
that  he  did  not  own  anything,  that
he  had  not  the  power  to  give  what
he  proposed  to  ;  but  merely  quoted
the  Scripture  referred  to,  which  was
applicable  and  suitable  for  the  occa-
sion. And  I  for  one  propose  to  obey
the  command  ;  and  this  is  all  we
need  say  to  our  enemies  when  they
place  us  in  simihar  circumstances.
They  may  say,  "you  are  a  very
great  people  in  your  way  ;  you  are  a
very  economical  and  frugal  people  in
your  way,  and  are  predisposed  to  be
peaceful.  You  have  redeemed  the
desert  from  sterility,  and  built  up
tine  homes,  and  made  roads,  rail-
roads, and  telegraph  lines,  and  you
posses  all  the  elements  ami  natural
advantages  calculated  to  make  a  peo-
ple prosperous  and  happy,  and  a
nation  great  ;  and  there  are  many
good  things  to  commend  in  you.
But  then,  you  have  one  evil  existing
and  encouraged  among  you  which
we  deplore  and  which  we  are  desir-
ous and  determined  to  eradicate.
Now,  if  you  will  renounce  that  and
cast  it  from  you,  we  will  give  you
the  right  hand  of  fellowship  and  be
friends,  and  all  the  fullness  of  the
earth  is  yours  :  and  we  will  welcome
your  delegate,  your  representatives
and  j  our  senators  to  Congress,  and
we  will  give  them  a  scat  by  our  Mde,
and  we  will  even  call  off'  our  dogs  of
war,  and  withdraw  our  governor,
and  judges  and  marshals  and  attor-
neys whom  we  send  to  harrass  you,
and  also  the  little  cur  dogs  that  fol-
low along  barking  at  your  heels  ;  we
will  call  them  off,  and  let  you  pos-
sess the  earth  in  peace  if  you  will
only  deny  your  principles  and  lay
aside  those  which  we  pronounce  to
be  evil,  and  fall  down  and  worship
God  as  we  do," Whether  we  will


28


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


be  true  in  all  these  things  ;  whether
we  have  the  same  confidence  in  God,
the  God  we  serve,  who  has  led  us  all
our  lives  and  been  true  to  us  in  all
conditions  and  circumstances,  and  to
the  promises  made  to  us  up  to  the
present  time;  whether  we  will  still
trust  in  him,  and  face  the  cannon's
mouth,  if  need  be,  or  face  death  in
any  form  it  may  come,  or  imprison-
ment,  if  that  form  of  treatment  is
preferred,  or  anything  that  they
have  power  to  inflict  upon  us,  rather
than  deny  our  God.  "  How  far
will  they  go,"  says  one  ]  I  answer,
just  as  far  as  our  Father  perrrits
them,  and  no  fart  lien  He  has  set
bounds  to  the  waves  of  the  ocean,
and  he  has  also  set  bounds  to  the
wrath  of  the  wicked.  He  controls
the  elements  that  war  in  the  heavens,
— the  f earf u  1  t  h  u  n derstorm — 1 1  nit
darkens  the  firmament  and  that
shakes  the  earth  with  its  roar,  the
vivid  lightnings  that  add  terror  to
the  scene,  the  tumultuous  waves
that  leap  and  dash  in  the  fury  of
the  gale,  and  the  earthquake  that
bellows  forth  its  lurid  flames,  which
make  men  tremble  at  the  gaze.  But
He  speaks,  and  all  is  still  ;  the
thunders  are  hushed,  the  clouds  dis-
persed, the  lightnings  cea.se  and  the
belching  of  the  earthquake  is  heard
no  more  ;  all  is  peace  and  quiet  So
with  the  wrath  of  man  and  of  nations
that  may  be  heard  raging  in  the
midst  of  the  wicked,  under  the  con
trol  of  the  prince  and  power  of  the
air,  who  works  and  controls  in  the
midst  of  discordant  kings  and  rulers
who  array  themselves  against  each
other.  Nations  are  at  loggerheads,
and  war  is  proclaimed  ;  the  energies
of  war  are  set  in  array,  and  misery
and  death  stalk  in  their  wake.  And
again  by  some  slight  means,  the
Lord  changes  the  fate  of  nations
and  turns  the  fortunes  of  war,  and


changes  the  tide  of  events,  and  all
human  calculations  fail  He  causes
some  angel  of  his  to  put  some  ob-
struction in  the  way  of  the  march
of  some  general  and  his  army  so  that
he  arrives,  perhaps,  at  the  scene  of
battle  five  minutes  too  late  j  he
causes  a  chariot  wheel  to  fall  off  or
some  slight  accident  to  happen  to
an  engine  of  destruction,  and  the
best  calculations  of  the  shrewdest
officer  and  the  proudest  king  fail,
and  their  works  come  to  nought.
He  sets  up  and  pulls  down  men  and
nations  at  his  pleasure.  He  did  this
iu  the  case  of  t  he  fir^t  great  and  proud
monarch  of  the  world — the  King  of
Babylon  who  swayed  universal  scep-
tre upon  the  earth.  He  was  a  strong-
minded,  and  strong-willed  and
haughty  monarch  ;  but  God  taught
him  by  an  extraordinary  and  humili-
ating experience  to  know  that  the
Lord,  the  Most  High  God  rules  in
the  heavens  and  also  controls  the
affairs  of  men  as  it  pleases  him.
And  his  bitter  experience  God
caused  to  be  written  as  a  warning  to
kings  and  rulers  and  the  great  ones
of  the  earth  ;  and  they  are  lessons  of
warning  equally  appropriate  to  every
human  soul.

I  have  occupied  more  time  than
I  intended  or  thought  I  could.  I
pray  God  to  bless  us  in  all  our  labors,
that  union,  peace  and  love  may  abide
in  your  midst  and  in  your  habita-
ti  jus,  and  that  prosperity  may  attend
you  in  your  business,  that  the  diffi-
culties which  annoy  you  and  impede
your  progress  may  be  removed  and
the  dark  clouds  that  to-day  seem  to
hang  over  your  heads,  be  dispersed
and  the  genial  warmth  of  the  sun's
rays  again  be  felt  among  you,  that
the  hearts  of  the  Saints  may  be
cheered,  and  those  who  feel  the
weight  and  responsibility  of  carry-
ing on  the  work  you  have  so  nobly


TEMPORAL  CONCERNS,  ETC,  29


undertaken,  be  encouraged  and  re-
lieved from  any  apprehensions  they
might  have  felt  in  consequence  of
the  misfortunes  and  losses  you  have


recently  sustained,  which  may  God
grant,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Semi -Annual  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle

Salt  Lake  City,  April  9,  1879,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs..)


ALL  TEMPORAL  CONCERNS  NEED  THE  ATTENTION  OF  THE  SAINTS— WE
SHOULD  PREPARE  FOR  THE  EVILS  COMING  UPON  THE  EARTH — CO-
OPERATION AND  THE  UNITED  ORDER — FUNCTIONS  OF  THE  TWO
PRIESTHOODS — HOME  MANUFACTURES,


It  has  been  very  properly  re-
marked that  we  are  becoming  a  great
people,  and  there  are  a  great  many
interests  of  a  temporal,  as  well  as
spiritual  nature,  that  must  necessa-
rily be  attended  to — in  fact  it  has
been  so  contemplated  from  the  be-
ginning. We  talk  sometimes  of
earthly  things :  at  other  times  we
speak  of  heavenly  things.  Some-
times we  speak  of  things  pertaining
to  time,  and  at  other  times  of  things
pertaining  to  eternity.  We  have  to
do  with  both  or  we  could  not  have
been  here.  And  being  here  it  is
proper  we  should  come  to  a  right
understanding  in  regard  to  the  posi-
tion we  occupy  ;  and  especially  that
we  should  comprehend  our  duties
relating  to  our  temporal  affairs  and
by  acting  truthfully,  honorably  and


conscientiously  avoid  so  much  an-
noyance, trouble,  litigation  and  diffi-
culty that  so  frequently  exists.  In  re-
lation to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  it  gives  us  information  per-
taining to  our  existence  and  to  our
general  relationship  to  God  and  to
each  other,  pointing  out  our  various
duties  and  responsibilities.  Associ-
ated with  it  is  a  priesthood  which
among  other  things  is  to  promul-
gate the  will  of  God  to  the  ends  of
the  earth  ;  it  has  taught  us  prin-
ciples pertaining  to  our  future,  both
in  relation  to  the  living  and  the
dead,  relative  to  the  present,  past
and  future.  We  talk  a  great  deal
about  our  Gospel,  about  our  spirit-
ual affairs  ;  we  have  our  church  or-
ganized according  to  certain  prin-
,  ciples  associated  therewith.  We


3U


JOL'KNAL  OF  DISCOUllSKS


have  a  priesthood  organization,  em-
bracing our  Stake  organization  ;  we
have  organizations  pertaining  to
spiritual  things,  if  you  may  so  call
them,  ami  also  for  temporal  things,
for  we  have  to  do  both  with  time
ami  with  eternity,  both  with  earthly
and  with  heavenly  things  ami  con-
sequently it  is  necessary  we  should
be  interested  in  all.  When  we  re-
flect upon  our  position,  there  is  some-
thing peculiar  associated  with  it  At
first  the  Elders  of  this  Church  were
told  Ut  go  forth  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  every  creature;  then  they
were  instructed  to  gather  together
those  who  believed.  According  to
the  Scriptures,  "I  will  take  you  one
of  a  dry,  and  two  of  a  family,  and
I  will  bring  you  to  Zion.  And  I
will  give  you  pastors  according  to
mine  heart,  which  shall  feed  vou
with  knowledge  and  understanding/*
We  are  gathered  together ;  but
beiii£r  gathered  together  there  is
something  more  than  spirituality  as-
sociated with  our  existence.  We
brought  our  bodies  with  us  when
we  came,  and  we  necessarily  have
to  eat  and  drink  and  to  have  houses
to  live  in,  etc.;  in  fact,  we  require
the  common  necessaries  of  life  just
as  much  as  any  other  people*  And
then,  if  we  have  children,  as  Bishop
Hunter  says,  "there  are  none  of
them  born  with  shoes  and  stockings;"
but  these  things  have  to  be  provided.
Furthermore,  being  gathered  to-
gether, we  necessarily  form  a  body
politic,  if  you  please,  and  we  cannot
help  ourselves  if  we  would  ;  but  we
do  not  want  to.  We  frame  laws
according  to  the  usage  of  the  nation
we  are  associated  with  ;  for  being
here  and  finding  ourselves  in  the
territory  of  the  United  States,  we
necessarily  have  had  to  organize  a
government  which  has  assumed  a
territorial  form ;  and  that  means  a
legislature  with  its  enactments  and


all  the  various  adjuncts  of  a  govern-
ment Laws  have  to  be  made,  offi-
cers must  be  created  to  execute  those
laws  ;  and  we  necessarily  become  an
integral  part  of  these  United  States,
and  have  to  perform  all  the  political
functions  associated  therewith.

These  things  naturally  How  unto
us,  and  they  will  continue  to  grow
and  increase,  if  it  be  true  what  the
Scriptures  say,  and  if  it  he  true  what
many  of  our  brethren  have  preached
to  you  since  the  as.* em  1  ding  of  this
Conference.  Then  it  becomes  a  mat-
ter for  us  to  reflect  upon  that  we
understand  our  true  position,  how
we  can  best  sustain  ourselves  reli-
giously, socially,  politically  and
financially,  and  among  other  lessons
learn  to  produce  at  home  those  ar-
ticles we  stand  in  need  of.

We  have  been  brought  up  in  the
world,  and  have  imbibed  many  ideas
in  common  with  mankind  generally
pertaining  to  commerce,  trade  and
manufactures.  But  we  need  the  in-
spiration of  the  Almighty  in  all  of
the  affairs  of  life  ;  for  we  protVss
emphatically  to  be  the  people  of  God,
and  as  it  is  with  us  in  our  religion
so  it  ought  to  be  with  our  politics,
our  trade  and  manufactures.  They
ought,  in  all  things,  to  be  subservient
to  one  grand  principle,  and  that
is  the  acknowledgment  of  God  and
his  laws.  Permit  me  here  to  state
that  before  the  revelations  of  God  to
man  in  these  last  days,  there  were
no  people  that  had  a  correct  know-
ledge of  God,  that  we  have  any
knowledge  of,  anywhere  upon  the
earth.  All  were  without  prophecy,
without  revelation,  without  a  know-
ledge of  the  doctrine  or  ordinances
of  the  Gospel.  And  to  whom  are
we  indebted  for  a  knowledge  of
these  things  1  Certainly  not  to  our-
selves, and  as  assuredly  not  to  any
earthly  body  or  system  in  existence.
We  are  indebted  alone  to  God  for  a


knowledge  of  these  things  ;  through
His  revelations  made  first  by  himself
and  by  his  well  beloved  Son,  and
then  by  the  ministering  of  holy
angels,  by  communication  from  the
heavens  to  the  earth.  We  are  in-
debted to  him  for  all  the  light  and
intelligence  we  possess  in  relation  to
these  things.  What  did  we  know
about  the  first  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel ?  Nothing.  What  did  we  know
about  the  gathering,  or  about  Zion,
or  about  the  ordinances  of  the  Gos-
pel or  about  the  holy  priesthood  1
Nothing  at  all.  Nor  did  we  know
anything  about  the  building  of
Temples,  or  about  the  mode  of  ad*
ministering  in  them  until  directed  by
the  Almighty ;  it  was  He  w  ho  re-
vealed the  necessity  of" the  construc-
tion of  those  sacred  edifices  and  the
mode  of  administering  therein.  What
does  the  outside  world  know  about
these  things!  Nothing,  And  if
they  had  our  Temples  they  could  not
administer  therein.  We  are  in-
debted to  God  alone  for  the  light
and  intelligence  we  have  received.

Again  in  regard  to  political  mat-
ters, where  is  there  a  nation  to-day,
under  the  face  of  the  whole  heavens
that  is  under  the  guidance  and  di-
rection of  the  Lord  in  the  manage*
merit  of  their  public  affairs  ?  You
cannot  find  one.  It  is  tcue  that  the
founders  of  this  nation,  as  a  prelimi-
nary step  tor  the  introduction  of
more  correct  principles  and  that  lib-
erty and  the  rights  of  man  might  be
recognized,  and  that  all  men  might
become  equal  before  the  law  of  the
land,  had  that  great  palladium  of
liberty,  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States,  framed.  This  was
the  entering  wedge  for  the  introduc-
tion of  a  new  era,  and  in  it  were  in-
troduced principles  for  the  birth  and
organization  of  a  new  world.  The
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  said  that


"The  Constitution  of  the  United
States  was  given  by  the  inspiration
of  God."  1  But  good,  virtuous  and
holy  principles  may  be  perverted  by
corrupt  and  wicked  men.  The  Lord
was  opposed  by  Satan,  Jesus  had  his
Judas,  and  this  nation  abounds  with
traitors  who  ignore  that  sacred  pal-
ladium of  liberty  and  seek  to  trample
it  under  foot  Joseph  Smith  said
they  would  do  so,  and  that  when
deserted  by  all,  the  elders  of  Israel
would  rally  around  its  shattered
fragments  and  save  and  preserve  it
in  violate.  But  even  this,  good  as
it  was,  was  not  a  perfect  instrument;
it  was  one  of  those  stepping  stones
to  a  future  development  in  the  pro-
gress of  a  man  to  the  intelligence
and  light,  the  power  and  union  that
God  alone  can  impart  to  the  human
family,  And  while  we  acknowledge,
as  citizens  of  the  United  States,  the
laws  and  institutions  thereof  (which
by  the  w  ay  are  very  easily  complied
with),  we  hare  a  higher  law,  more
noble  principles,  ideas  that  are  more
elevated  and  expansive ;  principles
that  reach  to  the  whole  human
family,  and  which  he  will  continue
to  reveal  to  us.  Does  that  prevent
us  from  obeying  the  laws  of  the  land?
Certainly  not  But  then,  is  that  a
perfect  system?  I  do  not  think
that  many  of  you  will  say  it  is,  nor
do  I  think  that  the  people  of  the
United  States  of  any  political  party
will  tell  you  it  is.  I  do  not  wish  to
cast  any  reflections  or  refer  to  any
events  that  have  taken  place  ;  I  am
merely  speaking  on  religious  prin-
ciples, and  principles  too  in  which
we  as  Latter-day  Saints  are  inter-
ested. We  are  united,  then,  as  a
body  politic,  as  an  integral  part  of
this  Government,  and  it  becomes
our  duty  to  submit  to  the  laws  and
institutions  of  that  Government —
to  all  that  are  constitutional,  framed


32  JOURNAL  UF

and  based  upon  correct  principles,
and  not  in  violation  of  what  the
fathers  of  the  country  instituted.

But  have  we  any  higher  aim  than
this  ?  We  have.  Do  any  object  f
If  so  why  should  they?  Do  we  iu
anywise  interfere  with  any  man's
rights,  Government,  or  make  war
upon  any  parties  ?  No,  but  we  are
interested  in  the  preservation  of  jus-
tice, equality  and  the  rights  of  man
in  the  developement  of  peace,  the
further  establishment  of  correct,
more  elevated,  refined  and  exalted
principles,  in  placing  ourselves  in  a
position  more  in  accordance  with
tilings  as  they  exist  in  the  heavens,
for  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the
human  family.  God  has  given  unto
us  certain  principles  which  we  feel
bound  to  observe  Is  there  anything
wrong  in  this  ?  I  think  not.  We
have  all  kinds  of  institutions  here  in
the  United  States  and  in  other  na-
tions, such  as  Odd  Fellows,  Free
Masons,  and  others  ;  and  they  have
a  right  to  their  ideas  and  manner  of
doing  things  as  long  as  they  observe
the  laws,  and  so  have  we,  and  have  a
right  to  be  protected  also  in  those  ,
rights.  But  to  say  we  must  stand
still  is  a  thing  not  connected  with
our  creed.  If  others  do  not  desire
to  accompany  or  keep  pace  with  us,
we  must  still  go  on  under  the  guid-
ance of  the  Lord.  As  was  said  of
ancient  Israel,  "  The  Lord  is  our ,
God,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  the  Lord
is  our  judge,  and  he  shall  rule  over
us,"  so  we  say.  We  need  informa-
tion and  revelation  in  regard  to  our
religious  matters,  we  also  need  in-
formation, intelligence  and  revelation
in  regard  to  our  political,  social  and
all  temporal  matters.  If  we  humble
ourselves  and  purify  ourselves,  and
magnify  our  callings  as  the  Elders
of  Israel,  according  to  the  Scriptures,
we  will  yet  teach  the  princes  of  this
world  wisdom  and  their  kings  know-


Disco  u  uses,

ledge  and  understanding  ;  for  these
things  that  are  spoken  of  will  as-
suredly come  to  pass  when  "  out  of
Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the
word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem,"
The  purposes  of  God  shall  yet  be  ful-
filled in  relation  to  these  matters  ;
God's  work  will  most  assuredly  pro-
gress, until  u  the  kingdoms  of  tins
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,  and  he  will
rule  for  ever  and  ever/1  not  in  war,
not  in  confusion  and  strife  ami  dis-
cussions, not  in  evil  and  corruption ;
but  in  the  interests  of  humanity,  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  life  and  in  ac-
cordance with  the  intelligence,  that
dwells  in  the  bosoms  of  the  Gods,
and  in  the  interests  of  a  fallen
world.

Now  we  come  to  other  matters
pertaining  to  our  mercantile  associa-
tions, I  might  talk  further  about
our  social  relations,  ete.,  however,
these  are  subjects  we  hear  a  good
deal  about ;  we  are  pretty  well  in-
formed in  relation  to  them.  The  in-
formation we  have  pertaining  to  our
associations  with  our  wives,  and  wives
with  their  husbands  has  been  re-
vealed to  us  by  God,  and  we  are
striving  to  carry  out  those  eternal
principles, — principles  that  will  ex-
alt us,  our  progenitors  and  our  pos-
terity in  the  celestial  kingdom,  where
we  can  enjoy  the  presence  of  God
and  that  of  the  celestial  hosts  who
have  gone  before

We  come  again  to  our  temporal
interests,  Has  the  world  been  our
exemplar  with  regard  to  any  of
these  things  that  I  have  mentioned  1
No,  the  Lord  has  been  our  teacher,
He  has  been  our  guide  and  director;
without  him  we  could  have  accom-
plished nothing,  for  we  knew  no
more  naturally  than  anybody  else
did.

In  relation  to  temporal  things.  Are
we  capable,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  of


*


TEMPORAL  CONCERNS,  ETC.


33


fulfilling  our  destiny  on  the  earth,
and  procuring  a  full  temporal  salva-
tion and  sustaining  ourselves,  on
temporal  principles  without  the  in-
terposition of  the  Almighty1?  I  tell
you  no,  we  are  not,  no  more  than  we
are  in  regard  to  anv  other  things.
We  read  in  the  Scriptures  of  a  time
that  is  coming  when  there  will  be  a
howling  among  the  merchants  in
Babylon,  for  men  will  not  be  found
to  buy  their  merchandise*  This  is
in  accordance  with  the  prediction  of
John  the  Revelator.  And  the  gold
and  the  silver  and  the  fine  linen,  etc.,
in  Babylon  will  be  of  no  avail.  But
before  that  time  comes,  we  as  a
people  must  prepare  for  those  events,
that  we  may  be  able  to  live  and
sustain  ourselves  when  in  the  midst
of  convulsions  that  by  and  by  will
overtake  the  nations  of  the  earth,
and  among  others,  this  nation.  The
time  that  is  spoken  of  is  not  very
far  distant.  "  He  that  will  not  take
up  his  sword  against  his  neighbor,
must  needs  flee  to  Zion  for  safety."
And  Zion  herself  must  flee  to  the
God  of  Israel  and  hide  herself  in
the  shadow  of  his  wing,  seeking  for
his  guidance  and  direction  to  lead
her  in  the  right  path,  both  as  regards
spiritual  and  temporal  affairs;  things
social  and  things  political,  and  every-
thing pertaining  to  human  existence.
We  are  not  prepared  as  a  people  to-
day for  the  accomplishment  of  this
object ;  we  need  the  interposition  I
and  guidance  of  the  Almighty.  It
is  just  as  necessary  that  we  be  under
his  guidance  in  relation  to  these
matters,  as  it  is  in  regard  to  any  j
other  matters.  Who  made  the
earth  1  The  same  being  that  made  I
the  heavens.  Who  made  our
bodies  ?  The  same  being  that  made  ]
our  souls  ;  and  it  takes  the  "  body '
and  the  spirit  to  make  the  soul  of
man."  We  need  not  arrogate  to
ourselves  any  particular  intellig
No.  3.


ice,


whether  of  mercantile,  manufactur-
ing, chemical  or  scientific  nature,  for
if  there  is  anything  good  or  intel-
ligent it  is  the  Lord  who  has  im-
parted it,  whether  man  acknowledge
it  or  not.  We  want  to  acknowledge
the  Lord  in  all  things,  temporal  as
well  as  spiritual.

I  wish  now  more  directly  to  touch
upon  some  other  principles  associ-
ated therewith.  Some  of  us  seem  to
be  very  much  confused  in  our  minds
as  to  how  we  shall  operate  in  regard
to  temporal  affairs.  We  have
brought  with  us  the  feelings,  views
and  ideas  of  the  people  from  whence
we  came,  which  are  conflicting,  and
which  tend  to  disintegration  and  di-
vision, and  lead  to  cove  tou&n  ess  and
fraud,  which  ought  not  to  have  an
existence  among  the  Saints  of  God*
We  have  advertisements  published
in  our  newspapers  by  the  Latter-day
Saints  too,  things  that  are  infamous,
that  are  untrue,  that  are  a  shame
and  a  disgrace  among  honorable
people,  and  stand  as  a  living  Be.
The  community  at  large  should  not
countenance  such,  things  as  we  see
daily  in  our  papers  to  attract  the
attention  of  the  unwary  and  bring
what  they  call  grists  to  their  mill,
in  the  interest  of  the  individual
We  as  a  people  are  not  called  to-
gether to  act  in  individual  interests;
we  are  called  together  as  Saints  of
God  to  operate  in  the  interests  of
the  Zion  of  God,  for  the  welfare  of
Israel,  and  not  let  ourselves  float
along  with  the  balance,  and  all  swim
together,  or  all  sink  together.  We
ought  to  be  governed  by  principles
of  union,  fellowship  and  right  feel-
ing, carrying  out  honorable  and  up-
right principles  that  should  be  ac-
knowledged before  God,  the  holy
angels  and  all  honorable  men.

Now  after  speaking  so  much  upon
general  principles,  let  me  touch  upon/
some  things  referred  to  here  about

Vol  XXL  11


34


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


these  reports,  etc.  We  have  long
talked  about  the  united  order  and
about  co-operation ;  and  we  have
started  in  a  good  deal  like  some  of
our  little  boys  when  they  begin  to
run — we  have  made  a  great  many
stumbles  in  this  matter.  Little
Willie  and  Annie  often  think  they
can  manage  things  better  than
Daddy  and  Mammy  ;  and  we,  like
them,  have  assumed  to  ourselves
strength,  ami  the  first  tiling  we
know  an*  pulling  this  way,  that  way
and  the  other,  Then,  have  the  in-
stitutions been  exactly  right  ?  No,
all  kinds  of  foolishness  and  all  kinds
of  blunderhgs  have  occurred  in  their
administration.  But  shall  we  quit  ?
I  think  not ;  that  is  just  what  the
devil  would  like,  just  what  many  of
our  merchants  want,  and  it  would
l»e  the  very  thin*'  that  would  suit
the  world,  and  the  devil  would  laugh
at  us.  What  we  want  to  do  is  to
purge  out  the  things  that  are  wrong,
and  correct  them  and  place  them
upon  a  correct  basis,  and  then  adhere
to  them  as  we  would  any  othe^  part
of  our  religion.  In  the  Church,  if  a
man  lies  or  swears,  or  commits  adul-
tery, or  does  any  tiling  wrong,  we
deal  with  him  according  to  the  laws
of  the  Church,  But  because  men
do  wrong,  we  do  not  abandon  our
principles,  nor  leave  the  Church,  but
we  turn  such  individuals  out  that
will  not  be  righted,  and  we  aim  to
adjust  all  things  and  place  them  on
a  proper  basis.  Why  not  do  the
same  in  temporal  things?  We  have,
for  instance,  Zions  Co-operative
Mercantile  Institution;  it  is  called
the  Parent  Institution,  and  it  ought
to  be  the  parent  of  all  these  institu-
tions and  act  as  a  father  and  protec-
tor and  benefactor,  doing  all  it  can
to  promote  the  welfare  and  prosperity
of  the  people.  And  then  the  people,
on  the  other  hand,  ought  to  protect
it  and  sustain  it  by  doing  their  busi-


ness through  that  institution  and
act  prudently,  wisely,  orderly  and
unitedly  in  regard  to  these  matters,
that  we  may  be  one  ;  for  our  revela-
tions tell  us,  If  we  are  not  one,  we
are  not  the  Lord's.  And  if  we  are
not  the  Lord's,  whose  are  wel

We  talk  sometimes  about  the
United  Order.  I  do  not  propose  to
read  to  you  on  this  occasion  from
any  of  the  revelations  bearing  on
this  subject,  but  will  quote  to  you
in  substance  from  one  of  them.  The
Lord  has  told  us  that  those  who
would  not  comply  with  the  require-
ments connected  with  this  order
should  have  their  names  erased  from
the  book  of  the  law  of  God,  and
their  genealogies  must  not  be  found
on  any  church  records  or  history,
their  names  shall  not  be  found  nor
the  names  of  the  fathers,  nor  the
names  of  the  children  written  in
the  book  of  the  Law  of  God.  These
words  are  to  us,  Latter-day  Saints;
they  are  true  ami  are  binding  upon

Another  thing  ;  what  did  we  do
when  President  Young  was  among
us,  urging  these  things  upon  us?
Did  we  not  enter  into  covenant  by
re-baptism  to  be  subject  to  the
Priesthood  in  temporal  as  well  as
spiritual  things,  when  we  took  upon
ourselves  the  obligations  of  the
United  Order?  Let  me  ask  yout
what  do  we  mean  by  doing  this?
Is  it  a  mere  form,  a  farce,  or  do  we
intend  to  carry  out  the  covenants
we  made  1  I  tell  you  in  the  name
of  Israel's  God  they  will  be  carried
out,  and  no  man  can  plow  around
these  things,  for  God  has  decreed
that  they  shall  be  accomplished  ;
and  any  man  who  sets  himself  in
opposition  to  these  principles  which
God  has  established,  he  will  root
him  out ;  but  the  principle  itself
will  not  be  rooted  out,  for  God  will
see  that  it  is  accomplished, And  in


TEMPORAL  CONCERNS,  ETC


3j


the  name  of  Israel's  God  we  will
help  him  to  do  it ;  and  all  who  feel
to  do  it,  say  amen.  (The  large  con-
gregation responded  with  a  loud,
"  Amen.")

We  have  started  co-operative  in-
stitutions, and  I  will  touch  on  a
principle  now,  showing  how  they
ought  to  be  governed.  God  has  or-
dained two  priesthoods  upon  the
earth — the  Melchisedee  and  the
Aaronic.  The  Melchisedee  presides
more  especially  over  the  spiritual
affairs  of  the  Churchy  and  has  done
in  all  ages  when  it  has  existed  upon
the  earth.  You  will  find  this  pro-
vided lor  in  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants ;  you  can  hunt  it  up  at  your
leisure,  I  do  not  wish  to  stop  to
make  the  quotation  now.  The
Aaronic  priesthood  is  presided  over
by  the  presiding  bishop*  If  we  had
a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron  he
would  have  a  right  to  preside  over
the  bishopric,  and  to  operate  and
manage  and  direct  these  tilings
without  the  aid  of  counselors.  In
the  absence  of  such  men  the  Lord
has  directed  us  to  take  men  from
the  high  pries theod  and  set  them
apart  to  be  bishops  to  administer  in
temporal  things.  This  Aaronic  priest-
hood is  an  appendage  to  the  Mel-
chisedee priesthood,  and  its  province
is  to  administer  in  temporal  affairs.
One  reason  why  wre  want  men  of
this  class  to  administer  in  temporal
things  is  because  there  is  a  special
provision  made  for  it.  Nevertheless
a  High  Priest  that  is  after  the  order
*>f  Melchisedee  may  be  set  apart  to
administer  in  temporal  things,  hav-
ing a  knowledge  of  lh?m  by  the  Spirit
of  truth.  And  before  a  man  attempts
to  administer  in  Zion  in  temporal
things,  he  ought  to  obtain  a  know-
ledge of  that  spirit  of  truth  to  admi-
nister according  to  the  intelligence
which  that  spirit  of  truth  imparts.
Thus  we  have  the  Aaronic  priest-


hood in  its  place  ;  the  Melchisedee
priesthood  in  its  place.  And  in  all
the  various  functions  it  is  necessary
to  enter  into  all  the  various  organi-
zations. It  is  on  one  or  two  particular
points  that  I  wish  t#  speak  now.

In  the  first  place  the  Lord  re-
quires certain  things  to  be  done  to
meet  his  approbation  ;  and  every-
thing has  to  be  done  under  the  di-
rection of  the  presidency  of  the
Twelve,  both  temporal  things  and
spiritual  things.  The  bishops  and
the  presidents  of  Stakes  and  all  the
officers  in  the  Church  of  God  are
subject  to  this  authority  and  they
cannot  get  around  it.  And  when
any  officer  of  this  Church  who  by
virtue  of  his  calling  does  things
without  counselling  with  the  proper
authorities  of  the  Church,  he  takes
upon  himself  things  that  lie  has  no
right  to  do,  and  such  a  course  can-
not be  acceptable  before  God  and  the
Priesthood.

Now  then,  we  come  to  the  bishop-
ric, Ought  the  bishops  to  be  con-
sulted in  regard  to  temporal  tilings!
Yes,  they  ought.  And  as  an  ex-
ample, let  me  tell  you  that  for  the
last  year  Bishop  Hunter  has  associ-
ated with  the  Council  of  the  Twelve
whenever  they  have  met  to  consider
temporal  matters.  And  I  may  say
we  have  been  pleased  to  have  his
company,  because  it  was  Iris  place  to
understand  the  position  of  temporal
things,  that  we  may  know  his  feel-
ings, and  counsel  with  him  and  he
with  us,  that  everything  may  be
done  according  to  the  order  and
laws  of  God,  that  there  may  be  per-
fect unanimity.  With  this  view  ho
was  placed  as  one  of  the  counselors
to  the  Trustee-iu-Trust— because  the
Trustee-in-Trust  thought  it  belonged
to  him  to  hold  that  position,  and
thinks  so  to-day.  But  then,  does
he  preside  over  the  Melchisedee
Priesthood  ]  No,  he  does  not.  Who


36


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  what  is  he  ?  A  high  priest  or-
dained and  set  apart  to  the  bishop-
ric. By  whom?  The  Presidency.
Does  he  control  the  Presidency  i  No,
he, is  set  apart  by  them  ;  as  bishop  i
he  is  an  appendage  to  the  higher
priesthood,  and  does  not  control  it.
No  man  controls  it  I  remember  a
remark  made  on  one  occasion  by
Joseph  Smith,  in  speaking  with
Bishop  Partridge,  who  was  then  j
Bishop.  He  was  a  splendid  good
man,  as  Bishop  Hunter  is.  But  he
got  some  crooked  ideas  into  his
head  ;  he  thought  he  ought  to  man-
age some  things  irrespective  of
Joseph,  which  caused  Joseph  to
speak  rather  sharply  to  him.  Joseph
said,  I  wish  you  to  understand  that
I  am  President  of  this  Church,  and
I  am  your  president,  and  I  preside
over  you  and  all  your  affairs.  Is
that  correct  doctrine  ?  Yes.  It  was
true  then  and  it  is  true  to-day;

Well,  it  is  necessary  that  we
should  have  an  understanding  of
these  thing*,  that  we  may  make  no
mistakes  in  our  administration.  I
want,  then,  in  all  our  operations  to
confer  with  our  bishops.  And  if
this  institution  of  ours  is  "Zion's
Co-operative/1  then  it  should  be
under  the  direction  of  Zion,  under  ;
the  direction  of  the  Priesthood  j
and  if  it  is  not  "ZionV  Cooperative,
then  it  is  a  living  lie.  '  But  do  we  ,
wish  to  interfere  with  them?  No,
we  do  hot  Do  we  wish  to  inter-
rupt them  in  any  of  their  operations?
No,  we  want  to  help  them;  we  want
to  unite  them  and  all  the  people
into  one,  with  God  at  our  head,
governed  by  the  holy  priesthood.
Have  they  rights?  Yes.  Do  we
respect  them?  Yes.  Have  the
people  rights?  Yes.  Sh*U  the
people  be  respected  in  their  rights  1
Yes,  they  shall,  all  the  people  in  all
the  Stakes ;  and  while  we  sustain
them  they  must  sustain  us  ;  and  if


they  expect  to  have  our  support*
they  must  giv*  us  theirs.

Having  said  so  much,  I  will  tell
you  that  I  believe  sincerely  that
the  men  managing  our  Co-operative
Institution  are  doing  just  as  well  as
they  know  how.  And  1  will  state
further,  that  I  don't  know  of  any
persons  in  this  community  who  know
how  better  than  they  do.  And  I
I  have  been  now  for  some  time  asso-
I  ciated  with  them,  and  am  acquainted
with  their  proceedings.
!  There  are  other  principles  besides
this  ;  we  want  to  learn  to  manufac-
ture our  own  goods.  And  while  on
the  one  hand  we  use  the  best  talent
and  financial  ability  we  can  get  to
attend  to  our  mercantile  institutions  ;
on  the  other  hand,  we  need  to
cherish  a  spirit  to  encourage  home
manufactures  of  every  kind,  and  we
want  to  get  this  institution  to  help
us  do  it.  If  we  manufacture  cloths
and  boots  and  shoes  or  anything  elst*,
we  want  the  institution  to  dispose
of  our  goods.  If  we  need  encourage-
ment in  regard  to  the  introduction
of  any  manufactures  of  any  kind,  we
want  them  to  help  us,  and  we  have
a  right  to  expect  this  of  them  so  far
as  is  wise,  prudent  and  legitimate*
I  will  state  that  the  directors  of  Z.G.
M.  I.  fed  interested  in  the  very
things  that  I  am  talking  about,]  and
I  say  it  to  their  credit  and  for  your
satisfaction.  I  do  not  think  there  is
an  institution  in  the  United  States
in  a  better  condition  than  that  is  to-
day ;  and  it  is  improving  all  [the
time,  not  after  any  fictitious  man-
ner, but  on  a  solid,  firm,  reliable
basis.  Now  then,  I  have  proposed
to  these  brethren,  which  they  quite
coincide  with,  that  when  they  shall
be  able  to  pay  a  certain  amount  as
dividends  on  the  means  invested,
alter  reserving  a  sufficient  amount
to  preserve  the  institution  intact
against  any  sudden  emergency  that


TE3IP0RAL  CONCERNS,  ETC


37


may  arise,  which  is  proper  among
all  wise  and  intelligent  men,  that
then  the  profits  ot  the  institution
outside  of  this,  should  be  appro-
priated for  the  development  of  the
home  manufactures,  the  making  of
machinery,  the  introduction  of  self-
sustaining  principles  and  the  build-
ing up  of  the  Territory  generally,
and  they  acquiesced  in  this  feeling  ;
and  I  say  it  to  their  honor  and  jredit
And  I  will  tell  you  again  that  the
Church  has  got  a  large  interest  in
that  institution,  consequently  we
wish  to  see  everything  go  aright,  not
on  any  wild  erratic  principle,  but  on
a  solid,  firm,  reliable  basis,  that  can
be  carried  out  and  that  will  elicit
the  admiration  and  confidence  of  all
good  and  honorable  men.

Sometimes  little  difficulties  have
arisen  outside  through  interested  in-
dividuals who  have  resorted  to  a
good  deal  of  trickery  ;  other  times
perhaps  from  just  causes.  And  1
will  say  too  that  complaints  have
been  made  that  we  have  not  suffici-
ently sustained  our  home  manufac-
tures. I  will  say  however  that  the
Institution  has  stood  in  a  very  deli-
cate position.  We  have  been  strug-
gling with  the  financial  crisis  that
has  cast  a  gloom  over  all  this  nation
for  the  last  number  of  years — since
1873.  But  we  are  now  getting  into
a  solid  firm  position,  and  when  we
declared  3  per  cent*  for  the  six
months  dividend,  it  was  because  the
Institution  was  able  to  do  so.  And
when  we  are  able  to  extend  this  a
little  farther  we  will  be  quite  willing
to  do  so.

Some  of  the  complaints  that  have
been  made  against  the  institution
we  have  heard  :and  we  have  thought
test  to  have  a  board  and  refer  to
that  board  any  complaints  that
might  be  made  from  any  part  of  the
Territory.  This  board  that  has  been
temporarily  organized  has  given  us


these  various  reports  which  have
been  read  in  your  hearing,  which  in-
dicate their  views  and  feelings  in
regard  to  these  things.  We  wish  a
board  of  that  kind  to  be  organised
upon  a  correct  basis  according  to  the
order  of  this  Church  and  Kingdom
of  God  ;  and  then  as  the  people
throughout  the  Territory  send  to
purchase  their  goods  from  them,  let
the  people  that  make  these  purchases
be  represented  ;  and  if  there  is  any-
thing not  straight  in  their  operations
let  them  be  made  straight.  And
this  is  what  this  committee  is  for,
that  the  people  may  be  protected  as
well  as  the  Institution.

Then  Stake  organizations  are  re-
commended, with  a  representative
from  each  Stake  at  the  general  or
central  board,  and  it  will  make  it
much  more  pleasant  for  the  manage-
ment of  that  Institution  to  have  a
criticism  of  that  kind.  And  it  will
also  tend  to  allay  many  of  these
foolish  things  which  are  frequently
put  in  circulation  in  different  parts
of  the  Territory,  The  object  then,
of  this  Board  is  that  the  people  may
be  represented,  and  that  Zion's  Co*
operative  may  also  be  properly
represented,  that  it  may  serve  as  a
balance  wheel  to  adjust  and  correct
any  matters  of  difficulty  that  may

arise*  , >,;..  '

I  am  happy  to  say  that  in  many
parts  of  the  Territory  they  are  intro-
ducing the  manufacture  of  leather
and  boots  and  shoes  and  a  variety  of
other  articles.  And  suffice  it  to  say
that,  according  to  these  reports,  the
Parent  Institution  has  sustained  the
manufacturers  of  these  home-made
articles  quite  liberally  ;  and  we  want
it  to  be  in  that  position  that  every-
thing we  use  can  be  bought  there.
This  is,  too,  the  feeling  in  relation
to  this  matter.  And  when  we  get
things  into  a  proper  fix  we  will  pull
with  a  long  pull  and  a  strong  pull


3*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  a  pull  altogether.  We  will
strive  to  be  one  ;  and  if  we  cannot
go  so  far  as  to  sustain  co-operation
in  regard  to  these  things,  how  in
the  name  of  common  sense  are  we
ever  going  into  the  United  Order  1  •
But  we  will  begin  with  this,  and
then  co-operate  in  all  the  different  (
Stakes,  not  only  in  your  merchandis-
ing, but  in  your  manufacturing  af-
fairs and  in  your  producing  affairs  ;
and  in  every  thing  it  will  be  the
duty  of  this  general  Board  of  Trade
to  regulate  the  interests  of  the  whole
community,  honestly  and  faithfully,
at  least  we  will  do  it  according  to  1


the  best  ability  we  have;  and  if  there
should  any  mistakes  arise,  we
will  try  to  correct  them  ;  if  they  are
on  the  part  of  the  people,  we  will
talk  to  them  about  it,  if  on  the  part
of  the  institution,  we  will  talk  to
its  management  about  it.  And  we
will  keep  working  and  operating
until  we  succeed  in  introducing  and
establishing  these  things  that  God
has  desired,  and  until  Zion  shall  be
a  united  people  and  tire  glory  oi  all
the  earth*

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the
path  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus*
Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER H. W.  XAISBITT,


Delivered  in  the  13th Ward  Meeting  House,  Salt Lake  City

November  23rd,  1879,


(liejHtfted  hy  Jvkn  I  trine.)


SALVATION  DEPENDENT  Vr«  N  EFFORT  AND  PROGRESS — WE  SHOULD  NOT
BE  DISCOURAGED  BY  DIFFICULTY.


My  brethren  and  sisters :  I  can
say  that  I  have  had  some  very  pleas-
ant and  interesting  reflections  while
listening  to  Brother  Fowler's  re-
marks, and  think  the  purpose  for
which  we  have  met  this  evening  has
been  a  success.  I  have  felt  that  I
have  been  fed,  that  I  have  been
blessed,  and  that  I  shall  carry  with
me  more  or  less  of  the  influence  and
spirit  of  those  remarks,  and  upon  re-


:  flection  we  all  understand  that  this
is  really  the  purpose  for  which  we
come  together.

Mormonism,  in  a  sense,  is  opposed
to  formality.  All  that  there  is  as-
sociated with  it  is  meant  for  use,
and  there  are  results  expected  to  ac-
ciuefrom  all  the  practices  of  the
Church  that  have  been  established
;  by  revelation,  and  everything  is  in-
tended to  aid  in  the  great  work


SALVATION  DEPENDANT  UPON  EFEORT,  ETC.


39


which  we  call  salvation.  To  be  sure,
that  is  a  very  common  word,  it  is  a
word  that  we  are  all  familiar  with,
it  is  something  that  we  have  heard
from  the  time  that  wc  were  children,
from  the  time  that  we  went  to  Sab-
bath school,  and  before  we  went
there,  and  after  we  attained  to  youth
and  manhood.  But  in  the  light  of
the  Gospel  how  narrow  and  con-
tracted and  how  offensive  the  word
in  its  sectarian  sense  becomes  to  us,
so  much  so  that  many  of  us  scarcely
like  to  use  it ;  we  would  prefer  to
use  another  expression  which  more
thoroughly  carries  with  it  all  the
ideas  associated  with  the  reception
and  practice  of  the  Gospel

Our  memory  has  been  cited  to  the
fact  that  during  the  history  of  this
Church,  and  during  the  history  of
the  primitive  church,  there  were
those  who  possessed  the  spirit  of
unbelief,  there  were  those  who  be-
came more  or  less  indifferent  and
negligent  in  re  sard  to  that  which
they  received,  and  we  have  been  re-
ferred to  the  history  of  those  who
have  fallen  from  this  Church — men
who  have  seen  great  thin 53,  men
who  have  had  wonderful  experiences,
men  whom  wemitjht  have  considered
as  stable  as  the  eternal  hills  by  vir-
tue of  that  experience. Now  what


other,  become  cold,  heartless,  indif-
ferent, and  neglectful  of  their  duties.

Salvation,  in  its  largest  aspect,
consists  in  the  proportion  of  truth
received  ;  men  and  women  only  are
saved  in  proportion  to  the  truth
which  they  appropriate.  An  igno-
rant man  will  only  obtain  the  salva-
tion which  belongs  to  the  ignorant.
The  idler  will  only  obtain  that  salva-
tion which  belongs  to  an  idle  man.
Is  it  not  "  the  hand  uf  the  diligent
that  maker h  rich  f  and  there  are
parallels  running  through  all  the
actions  of  the  Saints  in  a  religious
sense  similar  to  those  which  run
through  the  actions  of  men  in  a
social  sense,  even  down  to  the  lowest
details  of  human  life,  into  every
avenue  of  life,  in  every  direction  in
which  human  happiness  is  involved,
constituting  as  they  do  in  their  en-
tirety that  which  is  spoken  by  the
Apostle  Paul,  "  how  shall  we  escape
if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  t*  I
presume,  if  I  atn  to  judge  by  my  ex-
perience, that  every  man  and  every
woman  realizes  that  it  is  just  in  pro-
portion to  our  experience,  our  use  of
the  opportunities  of  life,  our  under-
standing of  the  principles  involved,
that  we  are  successful.  If  you  find
a  man  who  essays  to  be  a  merchant,
who  desires  the accumulation  of


is  the  difficulty  in  such  cases]  What  wealth,  you  will  find  a  man  who
is  the  difficulty  in  any  cases,  in  your  poiuts  his  energies  in  that  direction,
case,  and  in  my  case,  when  we  lote
an  interest  in  the  things  pertaining
to  the  kingdom  of  (jod  I  Is  it  a
healthy  sign  1  or  is  it  not  rather,  if
continued,  a  sign  of  approximating
death  J  Is  the  man  or  the  woman
who  are  alive  to  their  duties — are
they  those  who  apostatize  1  Is  it
the  faithful  man  or  the  active,  stir-
ring woman,  who  are  laboring  ear-
nestly, following  the  practice  and
principles  of  the  Gospel,  that  leave


He  is  a  man  who  not  only  looks  at
things  in  general  but  at  things  in
detail  ;  he  not  only  looks  at  his
business  as  a  whole  but  he  looks  at
it  in  its  parts  ;  and  if  he  were  to
abstain  or  refrain  from  a  considera-
tion of  the  details  which  in  mi  re  suc-
cess the  probability  is  that  hv  would
find  himself  in  the  courts  of  liquida-
tion. Many  a  man,  fortunate  in  a
a  mercantile  sense,  has  gone  to  the


wall  through  care!


in


regard


the  Church  %  No,  it  is  not,  but  it  ,  to  little  things  as  boxes,  paper,  time,
is  those  who,  from  some  cause  or  etc.,  through  trival  waste  that  every


40


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


prudent  Mian  would  be  disposed  to
notice  ;  but  the  successful  merchant
in  almost  any  instance — and  these
instances  are  the  exception  and  not
the  rule,  is  the  man  who  is  economi-
cal, prudent  and  careful  of  the  de-
tails of  his  business.  If  you  <ro  into
our  house*,  and  you  take  our  girls
that  are  grown  up,  and  they  are
unable  to  hake  bread,  unable  to  cook
a  potato,  unable  to  wash  and  attend
to  all  the  duties  which  belong  to
domes  tic  life,  how  much  of  a  domes-
tic salvation  will  they  receive]
What  attraction  will  there  be  (or  the
husband,  working  away  in  tin*  battle
of  life,  when  becomes  home  to  find
that  rest  which  is  so  desirable?  Our
domestic  salvation  depends  upon  at-
tention to  1 1  j t *  details  which  lie  at
the  foundation  of  domestic  happi-
ness, and  there  can  be  no  peace  in
the  domestic  circle  where  then*  is  a
lack  of  intelligence,  there  can  be  no
success  only  where  the  good  house-
wife masters  the  details  of  her  daily

life  ■

As  it  is  in  these  two  every -day
yet  diverse  instances  of  life,  so  aUo
it  is  in  all  other  directions,  and  the
same  principle  is  just  as  prominent
and  just  as  applicable  to  the  details
of  our  most  holy  faith.  You  go  out
into  the  missionary  held  and  preach
the  Gospel  of  our  Loid  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ.  After  you  have
finished  your  discourse  some  one
may  come  up  to  you  and  say,  st  my
friend,  I  believe  the  doctrine  which
you  teach,  I  acknowledge  the  exist-
ence of  the  Deity,  I  believe  in  the
message  of  hit  sun,  I  understand  the
necessity  of  obedience  to  the  firs-t
principles — including  baptism."  But
mark  when  a  man  has  been  baptized
if  he  becomes  careless  and  indifferent
and  says  u  Well,  I  am  a  in  em  her  of
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  to  this  extent."  In  your
estimation  now,  what  would  be  the


amount  of  salvation  that  man  would
receive  1  Why,  he  might  receive  the
remission  of  his  sins  and  that  is  all
he  is  entitled  to,  but  the  salvation
which  belongs  to  the  ordinance  of
the  4<  laying  on  of  hands"  would  form
no  part  of  his  blessings.  But  sup-
posing he  advances  a  step  further
and  says :  *:  Having  done  so  well  I
would  like  to  enjoy  a  little  more  of
the  blessings,"  and  lie  goes  and  re-
ceives the  laying  on  of  hands,  He
feels  the  promptings  of  the  spirit  of
intelligence  from  above,  he  rejoices
in  its  influence;  it  suggests,  persuades
co u n se Is,  and  ai  1  vises.  Jmi  p  posing
that  under  the  operations  of  this
spirit  he  should  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  its
promptings — suppose  that  it  prompts
dm  to  go  in  one  direction  and  he
feels  tu  inn  the  other,  suppose  that
he  should  resist  this  influence,  how
mu el i  of  a  salvation  in  that  respect
would  i  e  receive!  For  instance,  you
are  all  aware  of  the  power  of  the
spirit,  or  rattier  the  impulse  it  gives
to  gatheiing.  We  have  all  felt  this.
It  ha>  be**u  a  part  of  our  experience
win  n  we  have  been  under  the  influ-
ence oi  that  spirit  ;  we  desired  to  as-
sociate with  the  Saints  in  a  local
capacity,  in  their  general  assemblies,
and  in  a  larger  sense  we  have  been
dc&irou>  of  gathering  with  them  to
the  ^reat  gathering  place  wherever
that  inn j  be.  Suppose  that  spirit  of
gathering  is  resisted,  and  a  man  says
fci  Well,  1  have  got  a  good  situation
here,  a  nice  little  home,  1  enjoy  the
society  in  which  I  mingle"— and  he
continues  in  that  course,  how  on
earth  or  heaven  or  any  where  else,
can  that  man  get  the  special  and
particular  salvation  which  belongs
to  gathering  1  It  cannot  be  done;
it  is  Lot  in  the  nature  of  things.  If
he  would  enjoy  that  salvation  he
must  absorb  the  principle  of  gather-
ing until  it  grows  and  blossoms  into
life. And  there  are  those  even  in


SALVATION  DEPENDENT  UPON  EFFORT,  ETC


41


this  Territory  who,  when  they  get
among  the  Saints  believe  that  all  the
purposes  of  their  holy  religion  have
been  served  in  their  experience,  and
they  set  themselves  down  and  say,
"  Well  now,  I  will  endeavor  to  get
for  myself  a  good  home  ;  I  will  try
to  make  myself  comtbrt&ble  ;  I  will
spread  out  on  the  right  hand  and  on
the  left ;  and  as  for  some  duties
which  pertain  to  my  religion — well,
I  have  not  time  to  attend  to  them,
they  absorb  too  much  of  my  atten-
tion, and  I  will  give  my  life  to  mak
ing  myself  and  family  comfortable. "
They  think  that  because  they  have
been  baptized,  because  they  enjoy
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  through  the
laying  on  of  hands,  because  they
have  forsaken  fatherland  and  conre
to  the  mountains,  that,  therefore,
they  are  sure  of  "  the  great  salva-
tion "  which  the  (iospel  brings.
Why,  it  is  all  a  mistake.  They  will
get  the  salvation  which  is  necessary
consequent  upon  the  truth  which
they  have  absorbed  and  put  into
practhv  ;  no  more  and  no  less.

Again,  we  find  that  some  of  our
people  when  Christmas  comes  round
will  begin  to  make  excuses  in  regard
to  their  tithing.  Now,  tithing  is
one  of  the  eternal  principles  which
pertains  to  the  order  of  God.  But
a  man  goes  up  to  his  Bishop  and
says,  "  Well  now,  it's  ail  I  can  do  to
make  both  ends  meet  ;  the  neeessi
ties  of  my  family,  the  responsibilities
and  cares  that  belong  to  the  position
in  which  I  move,  compel  me  to  use
all  the  income  I  receive,  and  it
scarcely  suffices  to  serve  my  wants."
Do  you  believe  that  that  man  will
ever  enjoy  that  particular  portion
of  salvation  which  belongs  to  those
who  promptly  pay  their  tithes  to
the  Lord  ?  Xo,  it  cannot  be  done  ;
that  man  never  can  enjoy  the  special
and  peculiar  blessing  that  belongs  to
all  those  who  pay  their  tithing:.


You  go  into  a  man's  house  and
you  find  there  disorder,  children  dis-
puting, the  wives— two  or  three  as
the  case  may  be — at  loggerheads  (to
use  a  rather  vulgar  expression)  in
fact  the  spirit  of  peace  has  fled  from
the  hearthstone,  what  salvation  in  a
domestic  sense  does  that  man  enjoy!
Is  that  the  outcome  of  the  order  of
family  government,  or  rather  was  it
not  instituted  to  promote  peace  and
harmony,  so  that  we  might  have  a
type  of  the  great  heaven  which  we
desire  to  enjoy  in  the  not  far  distant
future!  The  man  who  would  have
domestic  salvation  has  got  to  work
for  it.  He  must  understand  the
nature  of  the  element  with  which  he
deals,  he  must  so  manipulate  that  it
will  bring  forth  the  domestic  salva-
tion which  he  earnestly  seeks.  But
supposing  a  man  has  got  the  peace
he  desires  in  this  respect,  yet  hi  the
morning  as  in  the  evening  the  song
of  prayer  or  praise  is  never  heard  in
his  house*  Now  there  is  a  certain
position  of  domestic  salvation  which
pertains  to  the  carrying  out  of  these
ideas  and  principles  which  we  have
received  that  cannot  be  secured  by
any  other  process,  and  the  man  who
neglects  to  have  family  prayers,  and
to  induce  and  persuade  his  family  to
join  in,  has  lost  one  of  the  great
elements  which  operate  and  secure
for  him  and  Ins,  (tomes tic  salvation.

W  ell,  now,  there  are  some  who
attend  to  all  these  duties  ;  but  still
there  are  a  great  many  other  prin
ciples  that  require  to  be  observed.  A
man,  for  instance,  has  got  the  wife
of  his  youth  and  a  little  family  grow-
ing up,  yet  there  is  a  principle  in
the  Church  of  Christ  called  patri-
archal marriage,  and  many  a  woman
in  regard  to  this  will  say  to  her  hus-
haud,  **  Now  let  v»  be  satisfied  to
leave  well  enough  alone.  If  your
family  circle  is  enlarged,  you  will
increase  your responsibility,  and


42


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


there  is  great  risk  connected  with
the  introduction  of  a  foreign  element
in  your  family.  It  is  true  there
may  be  peace,  but  it  is  far  more  like-
ly that  there  will  be  contention  or
division."  Now,  is  there  any  ad-
vantage in  the  practice  of  the  patri-
archal order]  That  is  the  question.
If  there  is — ami  I  know  there  is,  in
spite  of  any  difficulty  connected
therewith — how  can  you  expect  to
enjoy  any  benefit  which  accrues  from
the  practice  of  this  eternal  principle
and  yet  remain  in  neglect  or  disobe-  secure  success.


that  we  may  ensure  success?  In
the  common  walks  of  life  we  are
accustomed  to  notice  men  and  women
who  pride  themselves  in  the  assur-
ance that  where  others  have  failed
they  have  brought  forth  success.
The  same  idea  is  applicable  to  many
in  the  direction  of  the  patriarchal
order  Where  a  man  has  failed  in
one  or  some  other  given  direction,
that  failure  should  be  an  impetus  to
his  neighbor,  requiring  and  stirring
him  to  use  all  his  ability  so  as  to


dienee  of  that  principle.  It  cannot
be  done.  A  great  many  think  that
it  can,  and  they  will  employ  all
manner  of  subterfuge  to  back  up
their  position.  They  will  read  the
revelation  on  the  subject,  and  they
will  construe  and  misconstrue  all
that  it  says,  in  order  to  justify  them-
selves in  the  position  which  they
have  assumed  ;  but  every  man  and
every  woman  may  rest  satisfied  that
the  blessings  which  flow  from  this
order  of  the  Church  of  Christ  can-
not be  secured  by  any  other  process
than  the  one  pointed  out  by  Divine
authority.  » But,"  eaya  one,  "I
have  know  n  in  my  experience  where
difficulties  have  originated  through
the  practice  of  this  principle/1  Very
true.  Have  you  never  known  of
difficulties  originating  in  any  ether
direction  or  arising  frtm  the  practice
of  any  other  principle  1  Were  there
no  difficulties  *et  before  you  when


Now  when  I  was  in  the  old  world
I  met  a  great  many  of  the  brethren
there  who  were  engaged  like  myself
in  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and
whenever  I  met  a  man  of  the  charac-
ter I  have  described  1  invariably
found  that  he  was  shorn  of  power,
that  he  did  not  carry  with  hiin  that
full  influence  which  a  missionary  of
the  Gospel  should  carry ;  at  all
events  lie  had  not  that  influence
which  practice  and  experience  gives
in  this  direction  and  1  have  imagined
a  case  to  myself  sometimes.  In  go-
ing into  any  small  town  or  country
village,  into  the  midst  of  those  pe-
culiar influences  which  exist  in  Eng-
land, you  will  find  an  audience  con-
gregated on  the  village  green  or  else-
where listening  to  the  missionary.
After  he  is  through  with  his  dis-
course a  man  steps  up  and  says,  I
have  heard  the  remarks  you  have
made ;  1  believe  in  the  principles


you  were  baptized  ? Were  there  no  j  that  you  advocate  j  but  I  am  at  the-


difficulties  presented  before  you
when  you  thought  of  gathering  ]
Were  there  no  difficulties  in  your
way  when  you  endeavored  to  make
your  feet  fast  in  the  valleys  of  the
mountains?  Is  it  not  difficulties
that  make  the  man  1  Is  it  not  diffi-
culties that  make  the  woman  ?  Is  it
not  those  circumstances  and  changes

of  life  that  call  forth  every  energy  and  I  should  soon  be  all  astray  in  a
and  arouse  us  to  continued  action  To  financial and industrial  sense.1'


mercy  of  the  squire,  or  of  the  -  Lord
of  the  Manor1  here,  or  the  owner  of
this  Qoal  pit,  or  the  one  who  runs
this  factory,  and  if  I  should  embrace
the  doctrine  that  you  preach  I  should
be  turned  out  of  my  cottage  ;  I
should  lose  the  opport unity  of  earn-
ing my  bread,  my  boys  and  girls
would  lie  thrown  out  of  employment,


HALVATMN DKPKSHENT  I  TON  EYYF.iVY*  Kir.


AVI  lilt  does  tin*  elder  say  in  ;t  0:1s*1
of  that  kind  I  He  says,  "My  friend
1  hear  all  your  argument.  It  is  very
good,  Hi  at  is  s<i  far  as  it  goes,  bill
tin*  Lord  lias  promised  to  take  cart?
of  his  Saints  ;  bo  has  promised  that
when  i>nr  door  shul*  another  shrill
open  :  ami  lit1  h;ts  declared  by  re  vela-
lion  that  it  is  his  business  to prn\ ido
for  his  Saints  ;  and  now  if  you  will
pi  th m  n  in  humility  and  bo  l>:L|»t
and associate voni'sobes unit  t ho

■r

chimh  and  kingdom  of  t  rM  upon
tin*  earth  your  way  will  he  opened
before  you/*  I  ho  older  behoves
what  he  is  ndvocat iin*  I  I if  man
goes  iloivti  and  is  baptized*  and  sure
enough  directly  it  comes  to  hiss  em-
ployer's ears,  lie  receives  a  week  s
notice  So  *  jit  it  his  work.  01  quit  his
collage,  as  tin-  case  may  ho.  lb*  pulls

it  inttg  face  when tl  It  lor  Of  linos

round  again, but the  older  says,
"never tniml, all  Mill  coiue  out
ri^ht  ;  exercise  vour  faith  ;  trust  in
Providence*  do  what  is  right  and
lot  tho  consequence  follow."  Soon
aft  or  this  tin  man  gets  a  good  -una
tion  and  an  advance  of  a  fow  shillings
pot  iurk  probably;  iho Lord  lias
blessed him,  ho  has  opened  u[i  his
way  boforo  him,  ami  I  ho  words  of
tho  servant  of  Odd  have  been  fulfilled,
tty  and  by  through  this  increase  ho
gets  to  Xion,  mill  arriving  there  he
goes  to  visit  tl  10 house  of  this  mission-
ary :1ml  br  introduced  to  his  family.
After  awhile  lie  take*  the  elder  to
one  side  and  says,  "  How  lung  have
yott  hot-n  m  lTt:di  ?"  And  tho  ansivei
is  ton,  fifteen,  or  twenty  years,  as
the  ca-so  may  be. "  You  are  pre  in
comfortable, nice  little  house  well
furnished," "Oh  yes,  first  rate,"
Is  tins  all  the  family  you  have  got?"
"  Yes,  this  is  all  I  have  ijofcj  never
had  but  one  wife  j  I  could  not  main-
tain any  more  families." **  liut  says
the  man,  11  did  yon  not  tell  me  when
I gel baptized  to  keep  all  the


commandments  of  C  Sml  ;  did  you  not
toll  mo  il  was  (he  Lord's  hnsin<*s  In

provide  ii  i  1  ho  Saiuti  ;  did  yon  not
make  the  assort ion  fin!  the  path  of
dutv  ^1-  the  oath  of  safety  1*"
Yes"  ^ays  1 1  lo  elder,  li  th at  may  tl©
ion  w I'll  Lof  Ha  by  I  on.  but  it.  won't
do  horn  in  Xion."  Now  there  is
something  not  right  hore  ;  t here  ta
mi  ret  \  a  weak  point  somewhere.  If
the  prmeipEo  is  j;ood  in  the  midst  of

I  ho  natum^  il  i>  i;ond  at  hotno.  and

I I  men  are  honest;  and  honorable
in  the  practice  of  that  which  1  hey
know  to  he  11  Jit  in  tho  valleys  of
the  mountains,  tho  path  of  success
will  as  sorely  ojien  before  them  as  it
did  10  tho  man  who  received  the
Gospel  in  a  foreign  laud,  A  peat
many  of  the  hivihren  think  thev  can-
not  allbrd  to  koop  any  more  families,

i  remomeniber  when  1  a  lad  1
used  to  think  ami  say  I  should  not
lie  able  In  keep  in \  self,  and  on  re*
mnrkiiu;  this  to  mv  landlady  she  re-
plied  :  **  I  have  oitou  found  that  a
man  who  thinks  ho  eaunot  keep  him-
j  self  eau  keep  a  wife  and  five  or  six
children." Why  1 Because  the

w

responsibility  railed  forth  Ins
energies  ;  hit  boo. tine  speenlalive  ami
onorgetie  in  order  to  soon  re  suoeess.
There  is  a  lile-sin^,  there  is  an  ele-
ment of  salvation,  ihero  issomethini:
which  lends  to  pm^ivss  in  the  obedi-
ence to  i*veiy  prtuciplo  that  has
been  received,  so  far,  in  connection

■  with  the  chore h  ami  kingdom  of
God.  and  overy  man  and  every  wo-
man  will  tocozvo  i-r-U  that  amount
of  salvation  for  which  they  work.
1  hir  moaMire  of  salvation,  then,  con-
sists  in  the  absorption  of  the  truth
we  hear.  Truth  neglected,  truth
unemployed,  tnuh  unapnromiated,
is  as  valueless  as  the  snows  of  ten
winters  ago  are  for  the  irrigation  of

1  our  tields  in  the  coming  summer.
But  where  the  spirit  of  life  is,  where
the  spirit  of  vitality  exists,  where


44


JOUUNAL  OF  DISCOUUSHS


throughout  the  whole  organization
•f  a  man  there  burns  the  spirit  of
intelligence,  the  spirit  of  advance-
ment, he  will  lead  out  continually  in
the  right  direction,  and  his  wives
and  children  will  follow  after  him,
they  will  catcli  Iris  spirit,  his  neigh-
bors will  feel  his  influence,  the  ward
to  which  he  belongs  will  feel  after
and  emulate  his  example,  and  society
generally  will  be  the  better  for  his
presence  ;  but  when  this  coldness,
this  indifference,  this  negligence
comes  in,  why,  the  blessings
that  belong  to  obedience  will
not  be  received  any  more  than
the  blessings  that  belong  to
our  attending  meeting  on  a
Sunday  can  be  received  if
we  stay  at  home.  1  recollect
a  person  saying  to  me  once,
**  Well,  who  preached  to-day  V
u  Oh  brother  so  and  so."
KiWell,  I  know  all  he  can  say;
and  besides  when  such  and  such
persons  preach  I  can  ^tay  at  home
and  read  the  Bible"-— and  not  much
of  that  I  think- — 4i  I  can  read  the
Book  of  Mormon,  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  dkskret  kfws,  and  any
of  the  books  published  by  the  Church


and  I  enjoy  myself  better  than  I  do
in  going  to  meeting."  Now  is  that
a  fact  1  A  man  may  think  so  ;  but
is  it  a  fact  that  a  man  can  increase
in  the  knowledge  of  the  things  of
God  if  he  absents  himself  from  the
services  of  the  sanctuary  as  estab-
lished by  divine  appointment  ?  I  say,
no.  The  meeting  house  is  the  place
where  the  table  is  spread,  where  the
food  is  prepared  by  the  eternal  spirit,
and  when  we  go  there  and  hear  men
speak  to  us  under  the  influence  of
that  spirit,  and  we  are  in  possession
of  the  same  spirit— we  are  fed,  we
grow  and  increase,  and  the  roots  and
fibres  of  our  being  run  deeper,  and
so  enable  us  to  "bring  forth  more
fruit'1

I  presume  the  time  is  exhausted.
I  desire  to  continue  fait  hi  ul  to  the
appropriation  of  truth,  wheresoever
it  may  originate  ;  no  matter  where,
for  all  truth  is  divine.  It  is  my
privilege  to  enjoy  the  spirit  of
inspiration,  to  feel  the  flow  of  revela-
tion from  above  ;  and  that  God  may
grant  us  peace  and  wisdom  and  save
us  in  his  kingdom  is  my  prayer,
through  Jesus  Christ.  Amen,


THE  WORD  OF  THE  LORD,  ITC.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER C. W.  PENROSE,


In  the  Tabernacle,  Proyo,  Saturday  Morning,  November

29th,  1879.


(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gihbs..)


THE  WORD  OF  THE  LORD  TO  THE  CHURCH  GIVES  THROUGH  TUB
AUTHORITIES — AUTHORITIES  SHOULD  BE  SUSTAINED  -  POWERS  OF
THE  PRIESTHOOD— SPHERE  OF  WOMAN.


I  feel  thankful  to  meet  with  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  this  house  to
participate  in  the  enjoyment  of  this
Conference  ;  for  it  is  really  enjoy-
ment to  me  to  listen  to  the  instruc-
tions imparted  to  the  Saints  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  through
the  covenants  of  God.  It  is  not
supposed  that  wheu  we  come  toge-
ther as  we  da  this  morning,  that  we
wish  to  be  treated  to  the  views  and
opinions  of  men.  The  Lord  has
instructed  his  servants  to  speak  as
they  are  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  it  has  been  shown  to  us
that  it  is  our  privilege  when  we
assemble  on  such  occasions  to  receive
instructions,  not  in  the  enticing
words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  the
demonstration  and  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  and  this  will  be  the
case  when  we  assemble  in  the  right
way  and  unite  our  faith  and  our
attention  and  our  spiritual  energy
so  as  to  call  down  upon  us  the  bles-
sings of  the  Almighty,  and  to  have
the  presence  of  those  influences,
those  ministering  spirits  who  are
aent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of
salvation.  It  is  our  privilege  in  these
public  gatherings  appointed  for  the
worship  of  God,  to  have  the  presence


of  these  holy  ones  in  our  midst,  and
to  have  the  power  of  the  Almighty
to  rest  upon  both  speaker  and  hear-
er, that  we  may  be  fed  and  nourish-
ed by  the  bread  of  life  that  comes
down  from  heaven,  and  that  when
we  part  and  go  to  our  respective
callings  and  places  of  abode  we  may
each  carry  with  us  "  a  live  coal  from
the  altar/1

We  meet  here  to-day  to  manifest
that  we  are  willing  to  sustain  the
brethren  appointed  of  God  in  their
several  callings  and  offices  of  the
holy  priesthood.  It  may  seem
rather  a  dry  and  formal  matter  to
some  of  the  people  to  come  together
and  lift  up  their  hands  to  sustain
the  authorities  of  the  Church,  but
it  is  a  necessary  duty  and,  if  we
look  at  it  properly,  we  shall  take
pleasure  therein.  It  may  seem  a
little  monotonous,  but,  as  I  have
said,  it  is  necessary,  for  it  was  de-
signed by  the  Almighty  in  the  or-
ganization of  this  Church,  that  the
voice  of  the  people  should  respond
to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  It  is  the
voice  of  the  Lord  and  the  voice  of
the  people  together  in  this  Church
that  sanctions  all  things  therein.
In  the  rise  of  the  Church  the  Lord


46  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


gave  a  revelation  which  said  that
*'  all  things  shall  be  done  by  common
consent"  And  the  Lord  designs
that  every  Individual  member  shall
take  an  interest  therein,  shall  bear  a
part  of  the  responsibility,  and  shall
take  upon  him  or  her  the  spirit  of
the  Church,  and  be  an  active  living
member  of  the  body.  It  is  designed
that  1 1  lis  Church  shall  be  alive  in  its
parts  j  that  every  in  dividual  particle
shall  be  influence;!  by  the  spirit  thereof
When  the  human  body  is  in  a  heab  :
thy  condition,  the  spirit  that  dwells
therein  animates  every  portion  ;  but j
when  the  body  gets  into  an  unheal-
thy condition,  there  are  parts  of  it
through  which  the  spirit  does  not
circulate.  Ho  with  the  Church  that
the  Lord  has  established  upon  the
earth.  There  are  plenty  of  dead  1
forms  in  the  world  ;  religious  insti-
tutions that  are  not  alive,  but  are
forms  without  the  power.  The  Lord
is  building  up  a  society,  a  kingdom,
if  you  will,  which  he  designs  to  ani-
mate by  his  power  in  every  part  of
it.  And  this  is  necessary  for  the
good  of  the  whole  that  every  indivi-
dual member  of  the  Church  may  be
inspired  by  the  spirit  that  dwells  in
the  body,  and  that  the  inspiration
thereof  may  not  only  rest  upon  the
twelve  apostles,  upon  the  various
presidents  of  Stakes  and  the  bishops
who  take  charge  of  the  various  wards,
and  upon  the  teachers  who  minister
among  the  people,  but  that  it  may
go  to  every  individual  member  of
the  Church,  that  the  whole  body
may  be  tilled  with  life,  and  all  be  in
unison  with  the  highest  powers.
Therefore,  we  are  called  together
from  time  to  time  to  manifest  our
willingness  to  sustain  the  men  pre-
siding over  us,  through  whom  comes
the  word  of  the  Lord  to  us  in  an
organized  capacity.  It  is  our  privi-
lege individually  to  receive  the  word
•f  the  Lord  direct. The  twelve


apostles  stand  to  communicate  the
won!  of  the  Lord  to  the  Church  as  a
whole.  The  word  of  the  Lord  to  the
'  liurch  comes  through  its  presidency
j  In  the  various  stakes  it  conies
through  the  authorities  appointed
there,  and  is  given  to  the  wards
through  the  bishops.  But  it  is  our
privilege  also  to  receive  the  word  of
the  Lord  direct  to  ourselves  each  in
our  individual  sphere  and  capacity,
for  we  hold  a  relationship  to  God  as
individuals,  as  well  as  a  community.
It  is  our  privilege  if  we  live  aright,
each  one  for  himself  to  receive  direct
from  the  fountain  of  life,  intelligence,
wisdom  and  knowledge  for  our
!  individual  guidance,  inspiration  to
direct  us  in  all  things  that  we  are
called  upon  to  perform.  The  father
of  a  family  has  a  right  to  receive  the
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to
direct  him  in  all  things  pertaining  to
his  house-hold,  to  give  words  of  wis-
dom and  counsel  to  his  wives  arid
his  children  and  all  within  the  sphere
of  his  authority  and  influence.  It  is
the  privilege  of  every  mother  to  have
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  to  direct  her
in  the  course  she  shall  take  with  her
children.  And  it  is  the  privilege
of  every  boy  and  girl,  who  has  been
baptised  into  the  Church,  to  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  for  their  guidance,
so  that  the  whole  Church  may  be
quickened,  bodily  and  spiritually,
with  that  life  that  comes  from  above  ;
so  that  God  may  be  able  to  impress
us  as  individuals  with  desires  and
intelligence  for  the  accomplishment
of  his  purposes.  And  we  should  so
live  as  to  be  in  harmony  with  the
authorities  of  the  Church  ;  in  har-
mony with  those  who  preside  over
us,  that  we  may  be  able  to  see  as
they  see,  and  act  as  they  desire  us  to
act  when  they  give  us  the  word  of
the  Lord.  But  we  cannot  do  that
unless  we  possess  this  spirit.  And
not  only  should  we  be  in  harmony


THK  Wi>nn  ■ THE  LOlit*.  KIV.


wit.li  ihosi*  men,  but  with  the  powers  t  has  a  word  of  revohtf .ion  to  emumu-
hetlihd  t lii-  vail  ;  and  we  should  ho  nicatn  to  us,  to  receive  it,  no  matter
so  tuned  that  our  whole  natures  will how  it  may  cmno  ;  whether  by  the


be  in  perfect  accord  with  the  iuflu
onws  that  come  from  on  high,  and
Ur>  w  e  :<*  the  impression  <  t  lod
intends  to  luake  upon  Ufl,

We  sustain  our  brelhron  of  the
t  h  i"U  e,  :v*  |>n  ijOiot  s.  seers,  :ivd  re
vetatnrs  ;  and  1  have  heard  it  iv
marked  by  some  brethren,  thai  they
could  not  si'c  auv  need  of  doiu*:  so.
and  that  holding  up  their  hands
does  not  make  those  men  prophets,

(  is  and  n debitors.  That  is  true
enough  a^  far  as  it  goes.  But  bj
sustaining  these  brethren  in  our
rn  statuary  way,  we  manifest  t«(iod
And  the  powers  behind  tht  rtul,  who

work  ttHh  the  luvl hreti  in  the  I*  1  -i  sh,
that  wo  :nv  willing  to  receive  any
revelation  that  the  higher  power,
may  see  lit  to  eommunicatu  thmugh


1 1 1 i  ilton  o''  tlie tjojj Ghost,  Of
otherwise;  hy  moans  nf  the  lliim
and  Thtimmhn.  if  lie  sees  n't.  to  re-
store it  to  1 3 ■  i -  Church,  which  bo  will
tin  as  sure  a*  we  are  gathered  here
to-day,  and  a  man  will  stand  up  Itko
unto  Muse *,  who  will  communicate
the  woid  of  lilts  Lord  uulo  us,  line
upon  line  and  precept  upon  preeopu
urit.]]  Uod  1 1 rings  forth  everything
needed  for  tlie  building  up  c > t"  his
work  ;  and  the  things  kept  hidden
1mm  tin-  fiiuudation  of  the  world
will  he  brought  forth,  ami  ai]  the
aneient .  reeords  t hat  have  been  lost
will  be  brought  to  light}  by  men
through  uhom  (iod  shall  operate  by
means  of  the  Trim  and  ilmmmim
as  well  as  by  the  inspiration  of  tho
\lidv  Ghost. Wo  iLi.iuilrst  tii  him


them  in  that  rapacity. \\  e  have  a  by  our  nplifled  kinds  that  we  wilt


gtrai  de,d  of  principle  ;md  doctrine
given  to  us  through  the  means  of
tlie Ihble. tlm Monk of  .Mormon.

the  Doctrine  and  Co  von  an  etc*  t
with  which  we  ought  to  make  our-

selves  ih  uoLi-hlv  familiar. At  the

same  time  we  have  men  presiding
over  us  in  this  Church  through
whom  the  word  of  the  lz>rd  will
eoine  in  our  present  circumstances
for  our  guidance  and  tor  the  qui 1 1
ance  of  the  whole  Church  in  its  on-
ward march,  as  the  exigencies  of  the
case  may  require. And  when  we


receive  his  word  hy  inspiration,  by
the  Urini  and  Thummiim  or  In  rove
lation,  or  the  ministration  of  angels,
or  in  any  way  he  in.iy  be  ph  ased  to
c*  nil  inimical  c  It  is  lit  ting  then  that
we  should  do  tins.  Wo  do  not  kt\OW
when  the  Lord  may  hate  some  new
won!  for  us,  \  am  sorry  Co  -  a\  we
do  not  all  know  what  »s  placed  on
record,  for  we  do  ttOt  often  read  it.
X  evert  hoi  .*-s  Hie  Lord  may  see  lit  to
imparl  to  us  something  not  plaeed
on  record,  and  we  should  he  ready
and  willing  to  reoem  r\ery  word  of


lift  up  our  hands  to  heaven  to  sus-  counsel,  or  instruction,  or  command,
tain  thotn,  we  manifest  that,  we  hold  *>r  rebuke  that  he  may  see  fit  to  iuv
ourselves  in  readiness  to  receive  the  ,  part. It  is  necessary  also  that  we


word  of  the  Lord  whenever  he  sees
tit  to  impart  it  to  us.  The;  are  the
legal  channels  ;  they  are  the  ap-
pointed receptacles  to  receive  the
words  of  the  Lord  for  us  as  an  onran-


should  show  to  our  brethren  who  are
called  to  these  rations  offices  that
we  are  willing  to  sustain  them.  For
they  hare  not  called  themselves,
neither  do  they  run  for  oJltee  ;  wo


ized  body  ;  and  by  lifting  up  our  are  not  office -seekers  in  this  Church,
hands  to  heaven  in  this  way,  we  j  It  is  very  generally  the  case  that  a
show  to  ({od  ami  to  angels,  that  we  i  man  who  seeks  an  office  is  not  a  lib
are  ready  at  any  time,  if  the  Lord  and  proper  person  to  occupy  it.  But


48


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


we  are  willing  to  receive  any  ap-
pointment or  calling  the  Lord  may
see  fit  to  place  us  in  j  we  are  on
hand,  we  are  ready  ;  but  we  are  not
office  seekers.  As  I  have  said  the
men  whom  we  voted  to  sustain  this
morning,  the  presidency  of  the  stake,
bishops,  home  missionaries,  etc.,  did
not  call  tli  em  selves,  but  have  been
called  to  act  in  those  positions ;  and
they  are  not  paid  tor  it  either,  'that
is  in  worldly  wealth.  Of  course
they  are  blessed  and  paid,  as  every
man  is  paid  when  doing  good,  in  the
blessings  pertaining  to  Ins  calling.
For  every  man  called  to  occupy  any
position  can,  if  he  seeks  aright,  ob-
tain the  spirit  of  that  calling,  and
in  that  there  is  peace  and  joy  and
satisfaction,  so  that  he  is  paid  in  his
labors  in  any  office  which  he  may  be
called  to  fill  But  our  brethren  do
not  thrust  themselves  forward  to
seek  for  position.  Somebody  else
calls  them,  and  we,  to-day,  manifest
our  willingness  to  sustain  them  in
those  callings,  and  to  give  them  the
benefit  of  our  faith  and  prayers,  and
to  assure  them  that  so  far  as  we  are
placed  under  their  counsel  we  will
accept  it  and  act  upon  it.  So  this  is
a  good  work  we  do.  It  does  not
take  a  great  deal  of  time  or  labor  ;
and  it  is  a  fitting  duty  for  Latter-day
Saints  to  perform,  and  I  feel  that  we
are  privileged  in  so  doing.

As  the  children  of  God,  we  need
to  rally  around  our  brethren  who
are  acting  in  the  various  offices  in
this  Church,  and  be  one  with  them ;
and  not  only  manifest  this  by  lifting
up  our  hands,  but  by  really  sustain-
ing them  in  the  positions  they  are
called  to  fill,  so  far  as  lies  within  our
power,  each  one  taking  an  interest
in  these  things,  each  one  feeling
that  he  has  a  part  in  this  matter.
For  this  work  does  not  rest  altogether
upon  those  required  to  act  in  official
positions,  but  upon  every  individual


called  by  the  name  of  Latter-day
Saint  Some  people  think  that  the
sphere  of  labor  they  are  called  to
occupy,  is  not  a  great  one,
that  if  they  were  called  to
occupy  some  office  in  the  Church
they  could  accomplish  more  good
and  have  something  more  to  live  for.
But  I  think  we  shall  discover  that  if
we  are  all  anxious  to  fill  our  sphere
of  action,  we  can  find  ample  oppo-
tunity  fur  the  exercise  of  those
powers  with  which  God  has  endowed
us  ;  every  man  and  woman  can  find
a  sphere  of  usefulness  if  they  are
desirous  :  each  one  can  find  his  or
her  own  place,  and  we  will  all  come
to  it  by  and  by.  I  believe  it  to  be
one  of  the  powers  and  authorities
of  this  priesthood  that  God  has  re-
vealed from  heaven,  to  find  out  the
place  for  which  every  individual  in
the  church  is  adapted,  and  to  get
them  into  place.

**  A  place  for  everything,  and
Everything  in  its  place."

And  the  time  will  come  when  the
Lord  shall  have  established  his
Church  perfectly  upon  the  earth,
and  all  things  move  in  their  proper
course,  that  God  will  find  a  place
adapted  to  every  person,  in  which
each  will  have  more  joy  than  in  any
other  place  and  be  able  to  do
more  good  to  the  community  than
in  any  other.  And  we  can  find
this  measurably  to  day  if  we  are  de-
sireus  to  do  so.  For  there  is  an
ample  sphere  of  labor  for  every
man,  and  also  for  every  woman,
in  tliis  Church.  Every  man  in  this
house,  this  morning,  whether  bishop,
teacher,  or  missionary  to  preach  the
Gospel,  can  find  something  to  do
for  the  exercise  of  the  powers  with
which  he  is  endowed,  magnifying
his  office  or  calling  in  the  priesthood
— for  we  nearly  all  have  some  por-
tion of  the  priesthood.  If  we  seek
for  the  spirit  of  that  calling,  we  shall


THE  WORD  OF  THE  LORD,  BTC,


49


find  plenty  of  opportunity  for  the  j
exercise  of  its  duties.  But  the  great
difficulty  is,  mauy  of  us  am  content
simply  to  be  ordained  to  the  priest-
hood, "  I  am  a  high  priest,  or  sev-
enty, or  an  eider,  as  the  case  may  be,  j
and  am  satisfied  with  my  calling ;  j
and  do  not  seek  for  anything
further/'  Now,  my  brethren,  there
are  privileges  and  powers  pertaining
to  these  callings — and  we  can  read
about  them  here  in  this  book  {Doc-
trine  and  Covenants),  and  what  the  J
various  duties  are  of  these  different  |
callings  in  the  priesthood.  The
powers  of  the  Aaron ic  priesthood
reach  out  a  great  way,  for  we  are
told  that  that  priesthood  holds  the
keys  of  the  ministration  of  angels.  I
wonder  how  many  there  are  who
obtain  such  a  blessing  as  this  1  J  II
do  not  know  whether  we  are  fit  for
communion  with  the  higher  powers,
the  beings  sent  forth  to  "  minister
unto  the  heirs  of  salvation/1  But
we  read  that  the  Melchisedec  priest-
hood contains  greater  powers  than  :
that.  It  nut  only  holds  the  keys  of
the  ministration  of  angels,  but  of j
communion  with  the  heavenly  Jeru-  jl
salem,  the  general  assembly  and
church  of  the  first-born  with  Jesus
Christ  the  Mediator  of  the  new
covenant  and  God  the  highest  and
holiest  of  all.  And  the  time  will
come  when  under  this  priesthood  to
those  who  hold  this  authority  and
calling,  and  have  the  spirit  of  it  and
minister  in  that  spirit  and  obtain
the  power  thereof,  the  Lord  will
unveil  his  face  and  they  shall  gaze
upon  his  glory.  That  time  will  come,
for  there  is  no  word  of  the  Lord .
revealed  but  what  will  come  to  pass.
It  may  not  come  in  the  time  and
season  we  expect  it,  or  when  we  are
looking  for  it;  but  we  may  be
assured  that  everything  that  God
has  promised  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost  through  his  servants  will
No.  4.


come  to  pass  in  his  due  time.  The
time  will  come  when  the  servants
of  the  living  God  will  purify  them-
selves before  him  until  they  will  be
fit  to  receive  these  blessings.  When
that  holy  temple  is  built  in  Zion
God  will  take  away  the  veil  from  the
eyes  of  his  servants  ;  and  the  day  is
yet  to  dawn  when  the  sons  of  Moses
and  Aaron,  having  become  sanctified
to  the  renewing  of  their  bodies,  will
administer  in  that  holy  house,  and
the  veil  will  be  taken  away,  and
they  will  gaze  upon  the  glories  of
that  world  now  unseen,  and  upon
the  faces  of  beings  now  to  them
invisible  ;  but  it  will  be  when  they
have  purified  themselves  from  the
evils  of  this  world,  and  are  really
the  servants  of  the  living  God,  and
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost*

We  can  get  a  measure  of  the  spirit
of  this  calling  to-day,  and  by  the
power  thereof  we  can  have  commu-
nion with  our  Father.  Not  only
through  the  living  oracles  in  a
Church  capacity,  but  as  individual
members  of  the  Church  we  can
come  near  unto  the  Lord,  so  that
there  will  be  no  barrier  between  us
and  him,  and  so  that  his  Spirit  can
come  upon  us  freely,  and  the  light
of  God  can  illuminate  our  souls  and
so  direct  us  that  we  may  have  the
life  and  strength  of  this  eternal
priesthood.  For  this  priesthood  is  a>
reality  and  not  a  mere  name  ;  it  is
not  a  mere  calling  in  word,  but  an
office  which  confers  upon  us  power
and  influence  that  comes  from  the
Almighty.  I  know  that  men  hold-
ing the  priesthood,  and  who  magnify
it  and  receive  the  spirit  and  power
of  it,  are  different  from  other  men,
their  influence  and  motives  aye
different,  their  feelings  are  different
and  the  spirit  and  influence  th^y
carry  with  them  are  different  Such
men  can  go  forth  in  the  midst  of  tht
wicked,  enwrapped  in  the  power  and

Vol  XXL


50  JOURNAL  OK

influence  of  their  priesthood,  like
the  garments  they  wear,  and  be
separate  from  the  world,  and  they
can  carry  an  influence  in  the  world
which  other  men  cannot  carry.
There  is  force  in  it,  there  is  power
and  salvation  in  it ;  and  every  man
called  to  hold  this  priesthood  should
be  a  minister  of  salvation  in  the
midst  of  the  earth.  If  he  is  not
called  to  minister  abroad  in  the
world,  he  can  be  a  minister  of  peace
and  righteousness  at  home  ;  he  can
strengthen  the  weak  hands  and  con-
firm the  feeble  knees,  and  drive
away  doubt  from  the  sceptical  mind  ;
bear  testimony  to  the  truth  which
lie  has  received  and  understands,
and  wherever  lie  goes  he  can  carry
the  Spirit  and  blessing  of  God  that
will  build  the  people  together,  and
thus  help  to  build  up  the  king-
dom of  God.  And  he  will  not  spread
contention  or  encourage  any  spirit
which  would  prompt  men  to  speak
evil  of  each  other  ;  he  will  not  en-
courage anything  that  savors  of  con-
tention and  strife  and  disunion,  but,
on  the  contrary,  will  encourage  all
that  tends  to  unite  the  people  toge-
ther. And  any  man  holding  the
priesthood  has  power  to  do  that
much  in  the  sphere  which  he  is
called  to  occupy.  And  ako  of  speak-
ing a  word  in  due  season,  and  of
standing  in  his  calling  and  of  being
a  representative  of  the  Most  High
God.

And  the  sisters,  too,  have  also  a
good,  wide  sphere.  I  was  pleased  to
see  that  the  presidency  of  the  Relief
Society  was  presented  and  sustained
at  this  Conference.  The  sisters  are
one  with  the  brethren  in  their  labors,
and  have  duties  peculiar  to  them-
selves, in  carrying  on  the  work  which
God  has  given  them  to  do.  It  has
been  well  said,  that  "  Man  is  not
without  the  woman,  nor  the  woman
without  the  man, in  the  Lord."


DISCOURSES.

And  we  shall  find  that  through  all
eternity  the  sexes  go  together,  and
that  the  female  portion  of  God's
children  have  a  part  and  a  lot  in  this
matter  as  well  as  the  male.  These
Relief  Societies  give  opportunity  for
our  sisters  to  do  much  good,  and
even  those  who  do  not  belong  to
the  society  have  frequent  opportu-
nities for  doing  good.  Every
mother  has  a  field  of  usefulness  at
home  among  her  own  children  ;  this
is  her  peculiar  sphere.  Do  not  let
me  be  understood  to  mean  that
woman  should  be  a  fixture  in  the
house,  to  be  tied  up  to  a  table  leg,
or  to  a  wash-tub.  1  think  many  of
our  sisters  stay  at  home  too  much.

j  If  they  would  make  it  their  business
to  take  more  out-door  exercise  they
would  find  it  a  relief  to  the  monoto-
ny of  household  work-  I  do  not  be-
lieve that  women  should  be  tied  up
at  home  ;  but  I  say  that  home  is

|  woman's  peculiar  sphere.  She  reigns

1  there  as  queen  ;  she  can  make  that
home  comfortable, peaceful  and

"  pleasant  for  the  husband,  so  that  he
would  rather  come  there  than  any
other  place  on  eartii  ;  and  that  wo-
man is  foolish,  I  think,  who  does
not  do  this.  Women  should  make
their  homes  as  comfortable  as*  they
can,  with  the  means  at  their  com-
mand,  that  the  husband,  the  children
and  all  that  belong  to  the  family
may  be  glad  to  come  home  to  enjoy
the  society  of  the  family  circle.
Right  there  is  where  a  woman  can
exercise  the  great  power  God  has

,  given  unto  her.  What  a  blessing  it
is  when  the  Lord  gives  to  a  woman
children,  boys  and  girls  born  heirs
to  the  covenant,  heirs  to  the  holy
priesthood,  that  they  may  grow  up
with  natural  rights  to  the  blessings
of  the  priesthood  ;  to  become  ser-
vants of  the  Most  High  ;  to  become
vessels  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell
in  ;  to  become  representatives  of  the


THE  WORD  OF  THE  LORD*  ETC.


n


Lord  upon  the  earth ;  to  become
ministers  of  salvation  for  the  living
and  the  dead  !  What  a  sphere  for
the  labors  of  these  sisters,  to  train
up  the  minds  of  their  children  in  the
fear  of  the  Lord  ;  to  teach  the  boys
good  principles  ;  to  teach  them  as
well  as  the  girls  to  be  virtuous,  pure,
chaste,  and  holy,  for  those  that  are
unholy  cannot  receive  the  fullness  of
the  blessing  and  power  of  God,  that
is,  like  those  who  keep  themselves
pure  before  him.  And  the  brethren
can  plant  these  ideas  in  the  minds  of
their  boys,  and  if  not  fully  at  first,
by  and  by  they  will  be  enabled  to
comprehend  their  full  meaning.
Fathers  should  take  all  the  time
they  can  in  instructing  their  children
but  the  mothers  are  with  them  so
much  more  and  have  so  much  greater
influence  over  them  in  a  certain
direction,  and  therefore  they  should
*eek  to  exercise  their  powers  by
training  up  their  children  in  the
way  they  should  go,  And  we  are
not  required  to  train  them  up  by
word  and  precept  alone,  but  by  ex-
ample. If  we  do  not  want  our
children  to  use  strong  drink,  it  will
not  do  for  us  to  use  it*  Try  there-
fore to  set  our  children  examples
which  we  would  feel  perfectly  will-
ing that  they  should  imitate.  Our
sisters  can  work  in  this  way  both  by
precept  and  example,  and  above  all
things  by  the  spirit  they  carry ;  they
can  impress  the  minds  of  the  young
and  rising  generation  so  that  they
may  grow  up  with  a  natural  tenden-
cy to  that  which  is  holy.  Let  girls
"be  brought  up  by  a  mother  who  is
full  of  kindness  and  love  and  charity
—which  are  much  more  beautiful
adornments  than  the  glittering  show
of  jewelry ;  earthly  jewels  are
nothing  in  comparison  to  those
precious  jewels  of  eternity,  and  all
the  finery  that  woman  could  put  on
is  nothing  to  the  adornment  of  the


mind  which  peculiarly  shines  out  in
the  mothers  and  daughters  of  Israel
— let  a  mother  be  embued  with  this
good,  kind,  teachable  spirit  and  she
can  surround  her  children  with  it,
she  can  have  that  spirit  in  the  home
where  she  resides,  And  although
she  may  have  a  great  many  cares
and  tribulations  and  trials  which
may  tempt  her  to  anger,  yet,  she
can  conquer  all  the  passions  that  will
rise  up  in  her  nature  and  subdue
them,  and  can  train  up  her  children
in  the  midst  of  these  adverse  circum-
stances, in  the  fear  of  God,  and  her
tribulations  will  be  turned  to  her
good,  and  it  will  be  easy  for  her
children  to  walk  in  the  way  of  God,
and  they  will  grow  up  with  a  natu-
ral repugnance  for  the  things  which
are  evil,  and  a  natural  desire  to  re-
ceive in  their  hearts  everything  that
is  good.  The  Lord  is  saying  to  the
north,  "Give  up  ;  and  to  the  south,
keep  not  back  :  bring  my  sons  from
far,  and  my  daughters  from  the  ends
of  the  earth,"  He  has  brought  us
to  this  place  from  the  nations  of  the
earth  that  we  may  become  a  chosen
generation,  a  royal  priest  hood,  a
holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people  zeal-
ous of  good  works.  This  is  why  he
has  given  unto  us  laws  with  regard
to  the  marriage  relations,  that  Israel
shall  not  marry  Gentiles  ;  that  Israel
shall  wed  Israel ;  that  the  daughters
of  God  shall  marry  the  sons  of  God,
etc.,  in  order  that  our  children  may
be  heirs  to  the  blessings  pertaining
to  the  everlasting  covenant,  that  by
and  by  there  may  be  a  race  of  men
and  women  upon  the  earth  who  will
be  holy  unto  the  Lord,  born  with
natural  desires  in  them  to  do  right,
which  they  have  inherited  from
their  parents,  who  shall  train  them
up  in  the  way  they  should  go,  with
that  holy  atmosphere  surrounding
them,  that  they  may  be  thoroughly
under  the  influence  of  the  spirit  that


52  JOURNAL  OF

comes  from  on  high,  that  their  [
whole  natures  may  be  sensitive  to  the
whisperings  uf  Almighty  God,  that
they  may  grow  up,  his  sons  and
daughters,  and  that  it  may  be  a  mark
of  honor  that  such  and  such  men
were  4i  born  in  Zion,"  The  Lord
will  give  honor  unto  such  people.
And  their  sons  will  go  to  nations
afar  off  and  the  earth  will  tremble
under  their  voice,  and  evil  spirits
that  are  deceiving  the  sons  of  men
will  flee  before  them,  for  the  power
of  the  priesthood  will  be  with  them.
And  they  will  search  out  the  seed  of
Israel  wherever  they  preach  to  them
the  Gospel  in  their  own  tongue  by
the  power  of  the  Almighty — for  this
the  gift  of  tongues  was  designed —
and  they  will  gather  in  the  seed  of
Israel  to  the  Zion  of  our  God*  And
he  will  be  their  strength  ;  he  will  go  j
before  them  and  be  round  about
them.  And  our  daughters  will  grow
up  pure  and  virtuous,  and  the  angels
of  Gorl  will  be  round  about  them.
And  the  Lord  will  multiply  his  peo-
ple upon  the  earth  until  all  things
are  fulfilled,  his  kingdom  will  be
built  up,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will
come,  and  all  that  has  been  spoken
by  the  prophets  will  be  brought  to
pass.  |
Now,  these  things  are  right  before  .
us,  God  expects  us  to  be  a  differ-
ent kind  of  people  from  those  in  the
world.  He  does  n*t  expect  us  to
be  of  the  world,  worldly*  We  have
come  here  to  be  separate  from  the  ;
world,  that  we  may  purge  ourselves
from  the  spirit  of  Babylon.  We
must  have  different  motives  from
the  world,  we  must  not  have  the
same  desires  as  the  Gentiles,  for
their  hearts  are  set  upon  the  things
of  this  life.  They  worship  the
wealth  of  the  world.  I  hope  to  see
the  time  when  every  Latter-day
Saint  will  have  plenty,  and  the  time
will  come  when  God  will  give  unto


DISCOURSES.

his  people  all  the  wealth  they  desire,
but  that  will  be  when  they  know
how  to  use  it  aright,  and  when  their
hearts  are  right  and  set  upon  the
law  of  the  Lord  and  upon  the
counsel  of  his  will,  and  when  they
will  be  willing  to  use  it  for  his  glory
and  the  blessing  of  their  race.  We
must  remember  we  are  Latter-day
Saints,  having  come  here  to  serve
|  the  Lord,  to  learn  his  ways  and  walk
in  Ids  paths,  and  to  unite  ourselves
together,  that  we  may  be  a  solid,
compact  body,  a  living  body  filled
with  the  spirit  of  life  and  light  that
comes  from  God,  ready  at  any
moment,  as  individuals  or  as  an
organized  church  community  to
move  forward  in  any  direction
required,  that  the  word  of  God  may
be  proclaimed,  that  Israel  may' be
gathered  and  the  Kingdom  of  God
built  up,  and  the  power  taken  out
of  the  hand*  of  the  wicked  and  vested
in  the  hands  of  the  servants  of  God,
who  will  rule  in  righteousness  in
the  midst  of  the  earth.

I  bear  my  testimony  to  this  con-
gregation, many  of  whom  are
strangers  to  me,  and  some  of  whom
I  have  met,  conversed  with  and
labored  with  in  foreign  lauds  ;  I  can
say  to  you  all  that  I  know  this  work
is  true.  I  know  by  the  revelation
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  the  Lord  has
commenced  the  great  work  of  the
latter  days  spoken  of  by  the
prophets.  I  know  it  will  remain,
and  will  prevail  ;  though  all  the
world  rise  up  against  it — us  they  will
do  some  day,  not  only  this  nation,
but  others — and  will  say,  "Let  her  be
defiled."  But  they  know  not  the
Lord,  neither  do  they  understand
the  counsels  of  his  will  For  he  will
say  unto  Zion,  "  Arise  and  thresh,  O
daughter  of  Zion  :  for  I  will  make
thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will  make
thine  hoofs  brass  ;  and  thou  shalt
beat  in  pieces  many  people  :  and  I


CO-OPERATION  AND  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


will  consecrate  their  gain  unto  the
Lord,  and  their  substance  unto  the
Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  Though
all  nations  oppose,  this  work  will
aft!l  onward  to  completion  ;  for  ths
power  of  God  will  be  in  our  midst
£nd  we  shall  be  able  to  accomplish
with  greater  ease  and  facility  every-
thing we  are  directed  to  do.  This
kingdom  will  prevail,  and  this  work
will  roll  on  and  accomplish  every-
thing predicted.  And  the  time  will
come  when  the  pure  and  good  of
3 very  clime  will  gather  up  to  Zion  j
and  the  Temple  will  be  built  in  the
centre  city  of  Zion,  the  New  Jeru-
salem, and  the  glory  of  God  will


rest  upon  it,  and  the  purposes  of  God
will  be  developed  and  his  kingdom
roll  on,  while  the  kingdoms  of  this
world,  with  all  their  pomp  aad
splendor,  will  be  brought  low ;  artd
God  through  his  priesthood,  will
rule  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends  of
the  earth.  And  Christ  our  Redeemer
will  come  and  bring  his  reward
with  him.

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful  in
this  work,  so  that  when  he  shall
come,  we  may  as  individuals  and  a
church  be  purified  and  prepare d  to
enter  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord  to
receive  the  fullness  of  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel  of  peace.  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Dehvebkd  at  the  Regular  Priesthood  Meeting  of  the  Weber  Stake
of  Zion,  Held  at  Ogden,  on  the  21st  September,  187&


(Reported  hy  Geo,  F*  Qthbc.)

CO-OPERATION  AND  THK  UNITED  ORDER  —  THE  SAINTS  SHOULD  BE
GOVERNED  BY  THE  LAW  AND  WILL  OF  GOD— THE  APPROACHING
CALAMITIES  UPON  THE  WORLD — SHOULD  BE  WILLING  TO  FOILS AKK
EARTHLY  INTERESTS  FOR  THE  GOSPEL* S  SAKE.


I  have  been  desirous  to  meet  with
the  priesthood  of  this  Stake,  and  I
have  invited  a  number  of  the  presi-
dents of  Stakes  within  this  district
of  country  to  be  present  at  this
meeting,  for  the  consideration  of
certain  questions  that  have  been
pressing  themselves  upon  my  mind
for  some  time,  that  I  want  to  lay
before  the  people  here*


We  have  met  here  in  a  capacity  of
the  holy  priesthood,  and  all  of  us
profess  to  be  elders  in  Israel,  and  to
be  disposed  at  least  to  walk  accord-
iug  to  the  order  of  God,  and  to  seek
to  establish  the  principles  of
righteousness  as  far  as  lies  in  our
power,  and  to  try  to  build  up  his
kingdom  on  the  earth.  That,  at
least,  is  oui  profession,  and  I  believe


54  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


is  the  sentiment  of  the  hearts  of  I
most  of  the  brethren  now  assembled.
At  the  same  time  we  have  different
ideas  about  many  things,  particularly
things  of  a  temporal  nature,  so  called ,
We  go  in  a  good  deal  for  what  is
called  "free  trade  and  sailors  rights**
— we  want  to  enjoy  a  large  amount
of  liberty.  All  these  things  are  very
popular  and  very  correct.  But  in
our  acts  and  doings  it  is  necessary
that  we  be  governed  by  certain  laws
and  principles  which  have  been  given
unto  us  by  the  Lord.  We  all  con-
cede to  this.  But  there  are  some
things  we  seem  to  be  very  much  con
fused  about,  in  regard  to  our  tem-
poral matters.  During  the  lifetime
of  President  Young — several  years  I
ago,  it  seemed  as  though  he  was
wrought  upon  to  introduce  co-opera-
tion and  the  United  Order,  to  quite
an  extent  He  told  us  at  the  time
that  it  was  the  word  and  the  will  of
God  to  us,  I  believed  it  then  ;  and
I  believe  it  now.  And  yet,  at  the
same  time,  every  kind  of  idea*  feel-
ing and  spirit  has  been  manifested.
In  many  places  co-operation  and  the
United  Order  have  been  started
under  various  forms  j  in  some  they
have  succeeded  very  well,  and  in
other  places  people  have  acted  fool-
ishly and  covetously,  seeking  their
own  personal,  individual  interests
under  the  pretense  of  serving  God
and  carrying  out  his  designs.  Others
have  been  visionary  and  have  under-
taken things  which  were  impracti-
cable, while  others  have  not  acted
in  good  faith  at  all  There  has  been
every  kind  of  feeling  among  us  as  a
people,  that  is  possible  to  exist
anywhere.  And  I  have  thought
sometimes  in  regard  to  our  co-opera*
tive  institutions,  that  some  of  those
who  are  engaged  in  them  and  sustain-
ed  by  them  are  as  much  opposed  to
co-operation  and  United  Order  as
any  other  class  of  people  we  have.


I  At  least,  I  have  noticed  feelings  of
that  kind,  I  do  not  say  they  are
general.  But  there  are  certain  reflec-
tions in  relation  to  these  matters  that
have  been  pressing  upon  my  mind
for  some  time.  And  let  me  here
ask  myself  a  question — a  question
not  of  a  personal  nature  ;  I  have  not
come  here  to  talk  about  any  personal
matters  at  all,  but  upon  principle
and  upon  some  of  those  principles
that  we  as  Latter-day  Saints,  and  as
elders  in  Israel,  profess  to  believe  in.
The  question  would  be  and  my  text
would  be  to-day,  if  I  wanted  to  take
a  text :  Shall  we  sustain  co-operation
and  the  United  Order,  and  work
with  that  end  in  view  in  all  of  our
operations,  or  shall  we  give  it  up  as
a  bad  thing  unworthy  of  uur  atten-
tion 1  That  is  where  the  thing
comes  to,  in  my  mind.  At  any  rate,
we  wish  to  act  honestly  and  honor-
ably in  this  matter.  If  we  believe
that  these  principles  are  true,  let  us
be  governed  by  them  ;  if  we  do  not,
i  let  us  abandon  them  at  once,  con
elude  that  we  have  made  a  mistake
and  have  no  more  to  do  with  them.
For  we,  all  of  us,  profess  to  be  at
least  honest  men,  and  to  act  con-
scientiously. If  there  is  anything
wrong  in  these  things,  let  us  know
the  wrong ;  and  if  it  is  not  a  com-
mand of  God,  and  not  binding  upon
us,  let  us  quit  it  And  then  the
question  naturally  arises,  Are  we
prepared  to  do  this  1  And,  on  the
other  hand,  if  we  believe  that  these
are  principles  that  are  inculcated  by
the  Lord,  then  let  us  be  governed  by
them.  In  fact,  whichever  way  we
decide  let  us  carry  out  our  decisions
in  good  faith,  and  not  have  our  sign
painted  on  one  side  in  white  aud  on
the  other  black  or  some  other  colon
But  let  us  feel  as  the  prophet  Elijah
did  on  a  certain  occasion,  *  If  the
Lord  be  God,  follow  him  ;  but  if
Baal,  then  follow  him." There  was


CO-OPERATION  AND  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


a  disposition  in  ancient  Israel  to
have  a  part  of  God  and  a  part  of
the  devil  or  Baal  —  an  idola-
trous god  which  was  wor-
shipped by  them,  I  sometimes
think  that  in  some  respects  we  are  a
good  deal  like  them.  Do  we  believe
our  religion  ?  Yes,  Do  we  believe  in
the  holy  priesthood  and  that  God  has
restored  it  to  the  earth  ?  Yes.  Do  we
believe  that  God  has  established  his
kingdom]  Yes,  And  do  we  believe
that  the  holy  priesthood  is  under
the  guidance  of  the  Lord  ]  O,  yes  ;
but  still  we  would  like  a  good  deal
of  our  own  way.  If  we  must  intro-
duce so  me  tiling  that  the  Lord  lias
commanded,  we  would  like  to  put  it
off  just  as  far  as  we  can,  and  if  we
cannot  do  it  any  other  way  we  will
fight  against  it,  according  to  circum-
stances, and  how  tilings  move  and
operate.  We  often  wish  the  Lord
would  not  exact  certain  tilings  of  us;
we  would  rather  have  our  own  way.
But  let  us  look  at  things  calmly  and
dispassionately.  As  I  understand  it,
the  Lord  has  gathered  us  together  to
do  his  will,  to  observe  his  laws  and
keep  his  commandments.  And  we
have  certain  obligations  devolving
upon  us  in  the  holy  priesthood
which  God  requires  at  our  hands.
He  requires,  for  instance,  ol  the
Twelve  to  go,  when  culled  upon,  to
the  nations  of  the  earth  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  those  nations.  If  they
were  not  to  do  it,  would  they  be
justified  1  No,  they  would  not  ;  God
would  require  the  blood  of  the
people  at  their  hands.  That  is  the
way  £  figure  up  these  things.  I  do
not  know  of  any  half-way  house.  As
one  ot  the  Twelve,  I  do  not  want  to
dodge  any  of  these  questions,  but
meet  them  fairly  and  squarely.  And
I  think  I  have  done  it;  aud  I  think
the  Twelve  generally  have.  They
have  always  been  on  hand  to  go
anywhere  when  the  Lord  has  re


quired  them  to  go,  whether  in  sick-
ness or  health,  in  poverty  or  abound-
ing in  means  ;  no  mafter  what  their
circumstances,  or  what  individual-
ism would  have  to  be  sacrificed,  their
object  has  ever  been  to  do  the  will
of  God.  And  so  it  has  been  with  a
great  many  of  the  seventies,  high
priests  and  also  with  a  great  many
of  the  elders.  Their  feelings  have
been  :  Let  the  Lord  speak,  and  here
am  I,  ready  to  do  his  will  and  carry
out  his  designs.  Aud  this  feeling
exists  to  day  in  the  hearts  of  a  great
many  ;  but  there  are  also  a  great
many  who  do  not  feel  so,  who  want
to  dodge  these  questions.  Here  is
Brother  Eklredge,  who  is  one  of  the
presidents  of  the  seventies  ;  he  knows
how  extremely  difficult  it  is  to  get
men,  as  we  used  in  former  years —
"at  the  drop  of  the  hat,"  as  it  was
termed,  to  go  on  missions.  How-
ever, I  do  not  wish  to  dwell  upon
that ;  I  merely  refer  to  it  in  passing
along.

We  are  here,  as  I  understand  it,
as  Jesus  was,  ?  Not  to  do  our  own
will,  but  the  will  of  our  Father  who
sent  us." If  God  had  not  felt  after
you, and  his  spirit  operated  upon  ypu,
you  would  not  be  here  in  these
mou  n  tai  ns  to-day. W  h  at  does  Jesus
say  about  these  things  in  speaking
of  them? **I  pray  for  them:  I
pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them
which  thou  hast  given  me ;  for  they
are  thine." You  have  been  in  the
same  situation  ;  you  have  seen  the
elect  of  God gathered  together
through  the medium  of  the  holy
priesthood,  by  the  opening  of  the
heavens  and  the  revelation  of  the
will  of  d'od  to  man  and  the  restora-
tion of  the  holy  Gospel. You  have
been  gathered  together  in  this  way,
and  we  all  have. What  to  do  1  Is
,  it,  as  they  used  to  say  in  the  Chuich
I  of  England,  to  follow  the  devices
and  desires  of  our  own  hearts  1  Is


56


JOURNAL  OF  PISCOt'RSKS.


it  to  follow  out  some  petty  scheme  |
of  our  own  ?  I  do  not  he  understand
it ;  I  understand  that  it  is  to  build
up  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  I
upon  the  earth,  and  to  prepare  the
earth  and  the  people  of  the  earth  for
the  things  that  are  coming  on  the
earth,  and  to  prepare  ourselves,  as  a
people,  to  receive  further  intelligence,
wisdom  and  knowledge  from  God,
that  he  may  have  a  people  in  whom
he  can  place  confidence,  and  whom
he  can  bless,  and  through  them  con-
fer blessings  on  mankind.  He
expects  us  to  build  up  his  kingdom,
and  that  is  the  first  consideration
with  us.  And  this  is  what  he  told  1
his  disciples  in  former  days  "  Seek  1
ye  first  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  his
righteousness,  and  all  these  things"
— referring  to  our  temporal  con*
tserns,  which  comparatively  are  like
so  many  chips  and  whetstones —
"  shall  be  added  unto  you."  But
these  tilings,  too,  enter  into  our
daily  life  and  our  intercourse  one
with  another,  and  info  the  purposes
of  God  associated  with  the  gathering
of  his  people  together,  that  they
may  be  one,  that  through  them  he
can  cdmmunicate  his  will  fro  the
human  family,  that  there  may  be  a
nucleus  formed  around  which  the
honest  in  heart  from  all  the  world
may  rally ;  and  be  in  possession  of  the
word  and  will  of  the  Lord,  and  the
light,  intelligence  and  revelations  of  [
God  our  Father  ;  that  the  secret  of
the  Lord  might  be  with  those  who
fear  him,  and  that  they  might  fear
him  and  understand  the  things
which  are  approaching,  and  prepare
the  earth  for  those  things  that  are
coming.  We  appear  here,  as  it
were,  in  a  normal  school,  to  prepare
ourselves  to  carry  out  the  purposes
of  God  upon  the  earth.  Can  you
find  a  people  anywhere  on  the  earth
that  will  listen  to  the  word  of  God?
No,  you  cannot ;  neither  can  you  find


anybody  to  whom  God  could  commu-
nicate his  will  We  talk  a  good
deal,  and  often  preach  a  good  deal,
about  the  judgments  which  are  to
come  upon  the  earth  :  wars,  pesti-
lence, famine,  and  distress  of  nations,
and  testify  that  calamity  will  follow
so  continuously  that  by  and  by  it
will  be  a  vexation  to  hear  the  report
thereof.  We  have  talked  about
these  things  for  years,  I  have  my-
self for  upwards  of  forty  years ;  and
as  I  have  said  before,  go  I  repeat,
that  these  things  which  await  the
world,  are  forty  years  nearer  than
they  were  forty  years  ago.  God  did
not  mock  us  when  he  told  us  of  these
things;  but  all  that  he  has  said
concerning  them  through  ancient
prophets  and  through  Joseph  Smith
are  true,  and  as  sure  as  God  lives
they  will  take  place.  I  will  prophecy
that  they  will  take  place  as  sure  as
God  lives,  and  they  are  approaching
very  rapidly  upon  us.  We  are  told
that  the  day  will  come  when  he  that
will  not  take  up  his  sword  against
his  neighbor  must  need?*  flee  toZion
for  safety*  And  is  that  true?  Yes,
it  is.  It  that  should  take  place  to-
day, are  we  prepared  for  it  I  I  think
not  If  we  should  go  on  for  years
as  we  are  now  going  on  shall  we  be
prepared  for  it  ?  U  e  are  not,  to-day,
all  of  us,  preparing  for  these  things.
We  can  hardly  manage  a  few  miser-
abb*  apostates  and  a  few  Gentiles,
and  we  feel  very  creepy  sometimes
about  anything  that  transpires,  not
knowing  how  or  what  may  be  the
result  ;  instead  of  being  clothed  upon
with  the  spirit  of  God  and  being
titled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  light
of  revelation  and  the  power  of  God.
But  we  do  not  have  this  kind  of
feeling,  and  we  are  divided  up  in  our
interest,  one  man  pulling  against
another,  so  much  so,  that  we  have
to  day  all  kinds  of  Gentilism  among
us. Even our  newspapers  give


CO-OPERATION  AND  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC,


circulation  to  certain  classes  of
advertisements  which  are  a  living  He,
and  it  is  a  shame  and  disgrace  that
such  things  should  be  seen  in  Zion.
Some  call  it  Gentile  trickery ,  the
tricks  of  trade  eta,  but  I  call  it
chicanery  and  falsehood,  and  it  is  so
in  regard  to  many  other  things.
Does  this  comport  with  the  position
we  occupy  as  men  holding  the  holy
priesthood?  I  do  not  think  it  does.
I  think  we  ought  to  occupy  a  more
elevated  and  honorable  position  ;  I
think  we  ought  to  be  governed  hy
other  influences,  and  be  actuated  hy
other  motives-  I  think  that  our  lives,
our  desires,  our  feelings?  and  our  acts
ought  to  he  to  try  to  build  up  Zion
and  establish  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth  ;  that  we  should  he
united  in  our  temporal  as  well  as  in
our  spiritual  affairs,  for  God  says  :
"If  you  are  not  one  you  are  not  mine/1
Do  you  believe  itl  You  elders  of
Israel,  do  you  believe  that  saying?
And  if  we  are  not  the  Lord's  then
whose  are  we  1  We  have  our  own
plans,  our  own  notions  and  our  own
theories  ;  and  as  one  of  old  expressed
it,  we  are  seeking  for  gain,  every  one
from  his  own  quarter.  And  we  are
governed  to  a  very  great  extent  by
selfishness,  and  too  much  hy  our  own
personal  feelings,  and  allow  these
things  to  influence  us  instead  of
being  governed  by  those  high,  noble,
dignified  and  glorious  principles  that
dwell  in  the  bosom  of  God,  which
emanated  from  him,  and  which  dwell
also  in  t  he  bosoms  of  those  who  in
sincerity  fear  God  and  keep  his  com-
mandments.

Now,  I  know  what  many  of  you
will  say,  in  speaking  of  co-operation  :
*■  there  has  been  a  great  many
abuses."  Yes,  I  admit  it— numbers
of  them.  "  What  and  under  the
name  of  the  United  Order  also?'
Yes,  any  quantity  of  them.  Joseph
Smith  in  his  day  said  it  was  ex-


tremely difficult  to  introduce  these
things  because  of  the  greed,  covetous-
ness,  selBshness  and  wickedness  of
the  people, I  wish  here  to  refer

to  one  or  tw©  things  connected  with
this  subject.  I  spoke  about  the
Twelve,  the  seventies,  the  elders
and  tin*  high  priests;  and  stated  that
a  great  many  of  them  had  been  out
preaching  the  Gospel,  and  that  some
of  them  felt  as  though  it  is  hard
work.  It  is,  no  doubt,  very  up-hill
business  for  a  man  to  be  a  Saint  if  he
is  not  one  ;  and  if  he  has  not  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  in  his  heart,
it  must  be  very  hard  work,  I  may
say  an  eternal  struggle,  for  him  to
preach.  But  if  a  man  has  got  the
pure  principles  of  the  Gospel  in  his
heart,  it  is  quite  easy  for  him
to  expound  the  truth.  Well,
now,  I  will  take  the  words  of  Jesus:
(v  Except  a  man  can  forsake  father
or  mother,  wife  and  children,  houses
and  lands,  lor  my  sake,  he  cannot  be
my  disciple."  And  let  rae  say  to  you,
my  brethren,  that  that  Gospel  is  just
as  true  to-day  as  it  was  then,  that
except  a  man  is  prepared  to  forsake
his  earthly  interests  for  the  sake
of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  he
is  unworthy  of  it,  and  cannot  be  a
true  Saint.  Now,  this  is  where  the
hardship  comes  in  and  it  also
accounts  for  this  eternal  rubbing  and
bumj  ing.  "How  much  can't  I  do,
and  how  little  can  I  do  to  retain
fellowship  with  the  Church  ;  and
how  much  can  I  act  selfishly  and
yet  be  counted  a  disciple  of  Christ  T
Did  you  never  feel  as  Paul  describes
it — the  spirit  striving  against  the
flesh?  1  guess  you  have,  and  you
doubtless  know  all  about  it  ;  for
these  are  plain  matters  of  fact,
[  This  is  the  position  the  Gospel  has
placed  us  in ;  and  it  is  a  very  difficult
tiling  to  serve  two  masters,  in  fact
it  is  useless  for  any  man  to  attempt
to  do  it,  u  for  (as  the  Savior  says)


58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love
the  other  :  or  else  he  will  hold  to
the  one  and  despise  the  other.  Ye
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."
And  therefore  Jesus  said :  11  Take
my  yoke  upon  yon,  and  learn  of  me;
for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,
and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.
For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  harden
is  light.

But  to  return  to  the  principles  of
eo-operatioii  and*  United  Order.
Supposing  a  man  had  come  to  you
elders,  when  you  were  out  on  mis-
sions, requesting  baptism  at  your
hands,  without  having  repented  of
his  sins,  would  you  have  baptized
him?  No,  you  would  not  But
supposing  he  claimed  to  believe  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  not  in
baptism  ;  would  you  receive  him  into
the  Church?  No,  you  dare  not  do
such  things.  But  supposing  again
that  he  believed  in  baptism  and  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  had
repented  of  his  sins,  but  did  not  be-
lieve in  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;
wo uht  you  bapt  ize  him?  No.  A  rid
further  supposing  he  had  complied
with  all  the^e  requirements,  and  he
had  the  opportunity  to  gat  Iter  to
Zion  but  diit  not  improve  the  oppor-
tunity, would  you  consider  him  a
very  good  Saint]  No.  Now,  be-
side all  these,  the  Lord  has  given
us  a  law  pertaining  to  tithing  ;  and
if  he  did  not  comply  with  that  would
you  consider  him  a  good  Saiut?  No.
And  we  are  told  to  build  temples,
and  the  man  who  would  refuse  to  do
this  work,  you  would  consider  a  very
poor  specimen  of  a  Latter-day  Saint,
Referring  to  the  United  Order,  the
Lord  has  given  us  to  understand
that  whosoever  refuses  to  comply
with  the  requirements  of  that  law,
his  name  shall  not  be  known  in  the
records  of  the  Church,  but  shall  be
blotted  out;  neither  shall  his  children


have  an  inheritance  in  Ziom  Are  thuse
th  e  words  of  the  Lord  to  us  ?  I  sup*
pose  there  are  none  here  to  day  but
would  say,  Yes.  How,  then
can  I  or  you  treat  lightly  that  which
God  has  given  us  ?  It  is  the  word  of
God  to  me ;  it  is  the  word  of  God  to
you.  And  if  we  da  not  fulfil  this
requirement  what  is  the  result !  We
are  told  what  the  result  will  be.
These  things  have  not  taken  place
now  j  but  we  have  been  wandering
about  from  place  to  place,  and  the
Lord  has  blessed  us  in  a  remarkable
degree.  And  we  are  gathered  toge-
ther, as  I  have  said,  for  the  purpose
of  building  up  Zion,  and  we  are  sup-
posed to  be  the  servants  of  God
having  engaged  to  perform  this  work ;
and  individually,  I  would  say,  I  do
not  want  to  profess  to  be  a  Saint,  if
I  am  not  one,  nor  if  the  work  we  are
engaged  in  is  not  of  the  Lord  ;  if  the
principles  we  believe  in  are  false,  I
do  not  want  anything  to  do  with
them  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  they
are  true  then  I  want  to  be  governed
by  them,  and  so  do  you.  We  must
carry  out  the  word  and  will  of  God,
for  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore  it  nor
any  part  of  it  If  faith,  repentance
.and  baptism  and  laying  on  of  hands
is  right  and  true  and  demands  our
obedience,  so  does  co-operation  and
the  United  Order.  Some  may  say,
here  is  such  and  such  a  man  has  been
connected  with  the  United  Older,
and  how  foolishly  he  has  acted,  and
others  have  gone  into  co-operation
and  made  a  failure  of  it.  Yes,  that
may  be  all  very  true,  but  who  is  to
blame  ?  Shall  we  stop  baptizing
people  and  make  no  further  efforts
to  establish  the  kingdom  of  God
Hp -m  the  earth,  because  certain  ones
have  acted  foolishly  and  perhaps
wickedly  1  Do  the  actions  of  such
people  render  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  without  effect  or  the  doc-
trines we  teach  untrue! I  think


CO-OPERATION  AND  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC,


59


y  ou  would  not  say  so.  What  do  we
do  with  such  cases  ?  We  purge  them
out,  we  cut  them  oft*  according  to
the  laws  God  has  laid  down ;  but  we
do  not  stop  the  operations  ot  the
Gospel,  such  a  thought  never  enters
our  minds,  for  we  know  the  work
already  commenced  is  onward  and
upward.  Shall  we  then  think  of
putting  an  end  to  these  other  princi-
ples because  men  have  acted  foolishly
and  selfishly  and  done  wrongl  No,
I  think  not ;  I  do  not  think  we  cau
choose  one  principle  and  reject  ano-
ther to  suit  ourselves,  I  think  that
all  of  thwse  things,  as  we  have
received  them,  one  after  another  are
equally  binding  upon  us,  Jesus  said,
"  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone
but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth
out  from  th«  mouth  of  God."  This
is  as  true  to-day  as  it  was  when
spoken.  1
I  have  seen  a  disposition  among
many  of  the  brethren  to  pull  off  in
every  kind  of  way,  and  this  spirit
and  tendency  is  spreading  and  grow-
ing  in  every  part  of  our  Territory.
We  have  co-operative  stores  started,
and  we  have  the  eye  of  God  painted
over  the  doors,  with  the  words
"  Holiness  to  the  Lord"  written  over-
head. Do  we  act  according  to  that?
In  a  great  many  instances  1  am
afraid  not.  But  what  of  that?
Shall  we  depart  from  these  princi-
ples? I  think  not.  What  was  the
principle  of  co-operation  intended
for?  Simply  as  a  stepping  stone
for  the  United  Order,  that  is  all,
that  we  might  be  united  and  operate
together  in  the  interest  of  building
up  Zion.  Well,  having  started,  what
do  we  see  ?  One  pulling  one  way
another  pulling  another  way  j  every
one  taking  his  own  course.  One
man  says  :  Such  a  one  takes  his  own
course,  and  I  will  take  mine.  Using
the  same  line  of  argument,  because
one  man  commits  a  wrong  unworthy


the  calling  of  a  Latter-day  Saint,  his
doing  so  is  to  be  an  excuse  for  my
doing  the  same  thing.  As  I  under-
stand it,  I  am  called  to  fear  God,
whether  anybody  else  does  it  or  not;
and  this  is  your  calling  just  as  much
as  it  is  mine.  We  may  indeed  shirk
it  and  violate  the  covenants  we  have
made.  The  Lord  has  blessed  us
with  endowments  and  covenants  of
which  the  world  know  nothing,
neither  can  they  know  anything
about  it.  And  he  has  given  unto  us
these  things  that  we  might  be
brought  into  closer  union  with  God,
that  we  might  know  how  to  save  our-
selves, our  wives  and  children,  as
well  as  our  fathers  and  progenitors
who  have  gone  before  us,  Having
done  this,  what  next?  God  has
revealed  certain  things  to  the  children
of  men  now  as  he  formerly  revealed
the  Gospel  to  the  children  of  Israel,
But  could  they  stand  it  1  No,  they
could  not.  Moses  succeeded  in  lead-
ing seventy  of  the  elders  of  Israel  to
the  presence  of  God  ;  he  would  have
lead  all  Israel  into  his  presence,  but
they  would  not  be  led ;  they  turned
to  idolatry,  to  evil  and  corruption,
and  hence  they  became  disobedient
and  unmanageable.  And  when  the
Lord  spake  to  them  they  became
terrified  and  said,  "  Let  not  God
speak  unto  us  lest  we  die."  God
wants  to  brinff  us  near  to  him,  for
this  purpose  he  has  introduced  the
Gospel  with  all  its  ordinances.  Has
he  been  true  to  us?  Yes.  And
when  you  elders  have  been  out
preaching  and  baptizing  people  for
the  remission  of  their  sins,  and  when
confirming  them  members  of  this
Church,  you  have  said,  Receive  ye
the  Holy  Ghost,  have  they  received
it  f  They  have,  God  bearing  witness
of  the  truth  of  your  words  and  of  his
ministry  conferred  upon  you.

Now  then,  he  calls  upon  us  to  be
one. What  for? Because  we  are


60  JOURNAL  OF

associated  with  liis  kingdom*  With
what  1  With  his  kingdom.  What
is  his  kingdom  ?  It  is  his  govern-
ment, rule,  authority,  dominion,
power*  etc.  God  has  introduced  his
kingdom  after  his  order,  and  it  h  for
him  to  guide  that  kingdom  and  direct
it,  and  manage  it,  and  manipulate  it
in  the  interest  of  the  honest  in  heart,
and  of  all  nation*  He  has  com-
menced it  among  us  that  he  might
have  a  little  nucleus  where  he  could
communicate  ami  reveal  his  will,
composed  of  such  as  would  carry
that  will  out,  and  do  his  bidding
and  obey  his  behests.  That  is  what
we  are  here  for,  and  not  to  do  our
own  will,  any  more  than  Jesus  came
to  do  his  will,  but  the  will  of  his
Father.  What  do  we  know  about
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  1
What  do  we  know  about  the  calami-
ties that  are  to  come  1  I  can  tell
you  that  while  we  have  peace  to-day
and  everything  runs  smoothly  and
<piietly  on,  the  day  is  not  far  distant
before  the  Lord  will  arise  to  shake
terribly  the  earth,  and  it  will  be  felt
in  this  nation  more  keenly  and  more
severely  than  any  of  you  have  seen
it  by  a  great  deal,  and  I  know  It,  and
I  bear  testimony  to  it.  We  have  no
time  to  experiment  in  following  our
own  notions  and  ideas  ;  we  have
something  else  to  do,  we  have  got
to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God  ;
and  in  order  to  do  this  we  must  of
necessity  unite  ourselves  together,
and  seek  to  know  the  mind  of  God
to  carry  it  out.  And  all  that  we  do
should  be  done  with  this  object  in
view.  We  have  all  kinds  of  indi-
vidual interests  and  enterprises
among  us  ;  some  men  are  operating
quite  considerably  one  way  and
another,  and  some  are  not.
Brother  Jennings,  for  instance,  who
is  present  with  us  to-day,  besides
owning  stock  to  the  extent  of  $90,000
in  Z.  C.  M.  L,  is,  with  others,


JMSOOUKJSItiS,

engaged  with  other  pursuits  of  a
manufacturing  nature,  which  an
very  laudable,  Such  enterprises
tend  to  give  employment  to  the  peo-
ple, and  this  is  what  we  want,  and
what  we  must  have  sooner  or  later.
There  is  one  thing,  however,  I  would
here  say  about  forming  unions  and
partnerships  in  any  line  of  manu-
facture :  Let  them  be  formed  with
the  understanding  that  when  the
proper  time  shall  arrive  they  can
merge  into  co-operation,  or  the
United  Order.  It  is  very  important
that  in  all  of  our  undertakings  we
should  have  at  heart  this  feeling  and
work  to  this  end,  and  then  we
may  reasonably  expect  that  it  can
be  but  a  question  of  time  to  bring
out  a  grand  consolidation  of  all  indi-
vidual interests.  I  have  been
impressed  in  my  feelings  upon  these
subjects  for  some  time,  therefore  I
speak  about  them  as  I  do.  How
many  years  is  it  since  this  was  started,
and  how  little  we  have  done  !  I
tell  you  if  we  go  a  little  further  in
our  drawing  off,  and  each  taking  his
own  course,  God  will  leave  us  to  our-
selves* But  he  will  not  leave  us  as
long  as  we  manifest  a  desire  to  do
right ;  and  I  am  pleased  to  say  there
is  a  feeling  generally  among  the
brethren  to  listen  to  counsel,  yet  at
the  same  time  we  are  apt  to  get  eon-
fused,  forgetting  the  object  we  have
in  view,  amidst  the  variety  of  things
that  present  themselves.  Shall  we,
my  brethren,  give  up  co-operation  f
or  shall  we  consider  men  in  good
fellowship  who  are  pulling  off  in
either  direction,  or  shall  we  not?
What  shall  we  do  I  Shall  we  be  true
to  our  religion,  true  to  our  faith,  true
to  the  principles  that  God  has  com-
manded ;  or  shall  we  forsake  theml
We  will  not  forsake  them,  and  the
brethren  generally  do  not  feel  like
doing  it ;  but  there  are  a  few  now
and  then  who  get  off  the  track.  We


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  ETC.  61


want  to  get  together  and  unite  our
hearts  and  sympathies  into  one,
placing  ourselves  under  proper  direc-
tion, holding  ourselves  in  readiness
to  perform  any  work  required  by  God
at  our  hands.  I  will  tell  you  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God  that  if  you
keep  his  commandments  you  will  be
the  richest  of  all  people,  for  God
will  pour  wealth  upon  you  ;  but  if
you  do  not,  you  will  have  to  struggle  a
good  deal  more  than  you  have  done
for  the  Spirit  and  blessings  of  God
will  be  withdrawn  from  us,  just  in
proportion  as  we  withdraw  ourselves
from  God.  We  are  living  in  an
eventful  age,  an  age  in  which  many
wonderful  changes  are  to  he
wrought. We  are  told  many  other


j  things  of  a  similar  nature,  that  he
who  will  not  take  up  his  sword
against  his  neighbor,  must  needs  flee
to  Zion  for  safety.  The  Latter-day
Saints  will  see  the  day  when  people
will  flock  to  Zion,  and  many  of  them
will  say,  we  do  not  know  anything
about  your  religion,  but  you  are  an
honorable,  just, industrious  and

I  virtuous  people,  you  administer  jus-
tice and  equity,  and  the  rights  of
man  are  protected  and  maintained.
You  maintain  good  government,
extending  protection  to  everybody,
and  we  want  to  live  with  you  and

1  be  one  with  you.  We  want  to  pre-
pare ourselves  for  these  things,  for
they  are  coming  as  sure  as  God  lives.

I  Amen.


■


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED TS THE SALT LAKE  ASSEMBLY  HALL,  AT  THE  QUARTERLY  CON

FERENCE,  SUNDAY  AFTERNOON,  JANUARY  4TH,  1880.

(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER — THE  RULE  AND  GOVERN-
MENT OF  GOD — THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  FATHER  AND  SON  TO
JOSEPH  SMITH,  AND  THE  BESTOWAL  UPON  HIM  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD
— DEVELOPMENT  OF  THEOCRATIC  LAWS  AND  PRINCIPLES  -  OBJECT  OF
GATHERING— RELIGIOUS  FREEDOM— OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  GENE-
RAL GOVERNMENT,


I  have  been  very  much  pleased
and  interested  in  the  proceedings
of  this  conference  and  in  the  teach-
ings that  we  have  had  from  those


who  have  addressed  us,  and  I  take
very  great  pleasure  in  performing  my
part  in  these  exercises  in  which  we
are  now  engaged. It  would  seem


(i2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSED,


that  this  building  is  rather  too  small
for  us  at  present ;  I  do  not  know
that  we  can  stretch  it  any  ;  conse-
Bequcntly  we  will  put  up  with  things
as  they  are.  However  it  will  only  be
on  extraordinary  occasions  that  we
shall  have  the  amount  of  people  in
it  that  there  is  to-day.  By  and  by
the  storms  will  be  over  and  the
winter  past,  and  we  have  got  a
larger  building  close  by,  that  we  can
go  to,  I  am  very  much  pleased  how*
ever,  with  the  exertions  that  have
been  made  in  preparing  this  building
so  far,  it  is  true  that  it  is  in  an
unfinished  condition  for  the  assem-
bling of  the  Saints  at  this  conference;
but  I  suppose  that  it  will  be  quite
gratifying  to  the  priesthood  ami  to
all  who  have  assembled  together  on
this  occasion,  to  possess  the  privilege
we  now  enjoy.

Tli ere  are  a  few  thoughts  that
have  passed  through  my  mind  in
hearing  the  remarks  of  some  of  my
brethren.  I  was  much  pleased  this
morning  in  listening  to  the  remarks
made  by  Brother  Pratt  and  the
brethren  who  succeeded  him,  particu-
larly in  regard  to  the  subject  that
they  seemed  to  have  their  minds
upon,  that  is  in  relation  to  the  ob-
servance of  the  word  of  wisdom ;  and
although,  like  Brother  Pratt,  1  should
have  t«  make  an  acknowledgement
that  I  have  not  fulfilled  that  always,
yet,  I  heartily  sustain  and  coincide
with  every  principle  that  God  has
revealed  for  the  temporal  or  spiritual
salvation  of  his  people.  There  were
some  remarks  associated  with  those
triad e  by  tome  of  the  brethren  that
also  bore  a  little  on  my  mind,  namely,
that  our  religion  did  not  consist
simply  in  one  principle  but  in  many,
agreeable  to  what  has  been  spoken
in  ancient  days  that  **  man  shall  not
live  by  bread  alone  but  by  every
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the
meuth  of  God/' But  we  are  none


of  us  justified  in  repudiating  or
ignoring  any  one  of  those  principles
which  God  has  given  unto  us,  and
if  we  have  been  negligent  in  these
or  other  matters  the  proper  way  for
us  to  do  is  to  reform,  to  begin  anew,
or,  at  least  if  we  have  let  down
any  stitches,  as  the  sisters  some-
times say  when  they  are  knitting,
gather  them  up  again  and  put  things
in  proper  position  that  we  may  be
able,  not  only  in  that  but  in  every-
thing else,  to  honor  our  God  in  all
sincerity,  fidelity  and  integrity  ;  that
we  may  be  able  to  present  ourselves
before  the  Lord  in  a  manner  which
shall  always  have  his  acceptance.

We  need  teaching  continually,
line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,
here  a  little  and  there  a  little.
Hence  we  have  our  various  organiza-
tions of  the  priesthood,  calculated  to
oversee  to  manipulate,  to  regulate,
to  teach,  to  instruct,  and  to  enter
into  all  the  ramifications  of  life
whether  they  pertain  to  this  world
or  the  world  to  come.  We  need
continually  not  only  the  guidance
and  the  teachings  of  the  apostles,
the  presidents,  the  bishops,  priests,
teachers,  deacons  and  the  various
organizations  of  the  priesthood  ;  but
we  need  individually  to  look  unto
the  Lord  for  wisdom  to  direct  us  in
|  all  the  affairs  of  life,  that  we  may
speak  aright  that  we  may  think
aright,  that  we  may  act  aright,  and
we  may  perform  the  various  duties
devolving  upon  us  to  attend  to  in  all
of  the  avocations  of  life,  and  in  our
prayers,  in  our  various  devotions  in
a  family  capacity,  in  a  church  capa-
city and  in  every  position  that  we
occupy,  we  need  the  guidance  and
direction  of  the  Almighty.  And  it
is  with  individuals  as  it  is  with
families  and  branches  and  portions
of  families,  we  need  to  seek  unto
the  Lord  and  obtain  wisdom  from
him. There  is  one  fact,  and  that  is


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  ETC.


63


a  great  many  people — scarcely  any  of
us — know  what  is  good  for  us.  We
may  have  our  ideas  about  that ;  but
we  need  continually  the  guidance
and  direction  of  the  Almighty*  The
disciples,  that  is  the  apostles  of  old,
understood  this  principle  and  they
asked  the  Lord  to  teach  them  how  to
pray  and  in  a  very  few  words  he
uttere  1  one  of  the  most  compre-
hensive forms  that  has  ever  been
pen  tied  or  spoken.  He  said  when
you  pray  say  "Our  Father,  which  art
in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,
thy  king  lorn  come,  thy  will  be  done
on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven ;  give
us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;  forgive
us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them
that  trespass  against  us,  and  lead  us
not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us
from  evil ;  for  thine  is  the  kingdom,
the  power  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and
wen  amen."  That  is  a  most  com-
prehensive prayer.  In  the  first
jlace  the  God  of  the  universe  is
recognized,  our  Father  who  is  in  the
heavens,  the  God  and  the  Father  of
Jesus  Christ.  And  what  else  ]  The
(Jod  and  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all
flesh.  We  recognize  and  reverence
him  as  uQur  Father,  which  art  in
heaven/'  we  bow  before  him  and
seek  unto  him  for  his  guidance  and
direction.  We  hallow  and  reverence
his  name.  And  then  what  next?
"Thy  kingdom  come."  What  king-
dom 1  All  those  tilings  branch  out
into  great  and  important  principles,
that  can  only  be  understood  by  rev-
alations  from  the  Most  High.  aThy
kingdom  come."  Why?  That  "thy
will  may  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is
done  in  heaven,"

I  wish  to  refer  a  little  to  some  of
these  things,  those  ideas  and  princi-
ples that  are  developed  in  this  say-
ing, in  part,  because  these  things  can
only  be  done  in  part  We  talk  a
good  deal  about  the  church  and
kingdom  of  God. I  sometimes  think


we  understand  very  little  about
either.  The  kingdom  of  God  means
the  government  of  God.  That  means,
power,  authority,  rule,  dominion,
and  a  people  to  rule  over  ;  but  that
principle  will  not  be  fulfilled,  cannot
be  entirely  fulfilled,  until,  as  we  are
told  in  the  Scriptures,  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  are  become  the  king-
doms of  our  Lord  and  his  Christ,  and
he  will  rule  over  them.  And  when
unto  him  every  knee  shall  bow  and
every  tongue  confess  that  lie  is
Christ,  to  the  glory  of  God,  the
Father.  That  time  has  not  yet
come,  but  there  are  certain  princi-
ples associated  therewith  that  have
come,  namely,  the  introduction  of
that  kingdom,  and  the  introduction
of  that  kingdom  could  only  be  made
by  that  being  who  is  the  king  and
ruler,  and  the  head  of  that  govern-
ment, first  communicating  his  ideas,
his  principles,  his  laws,  his  govern-
ment to  the  people  ;  otherwise  we
should  not  know  what  his  laws  were.
The  world  has  been  governed  in
every  kind  of  form ;  we  have  had
every  species  of  government.  Some-
times we  have  had  patriarchal  gov-
ernment, at  other  times  we  have  had
unlimited  monarchies  or  what  may
be  called  despotic  governments,
where  the  power  to  rule  is  in  the
hands  of  one  individual.  At  other
times  we  have  had  limited  monarch-
ies such  as  exist  in  many  places  now
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  In  other
places  and  at  different  ages  we  have  had
what  is  termed  republican  govern-
ments where  the  voice  of  the  people
has  ruled  and  governed  and  managed
the  people's  affairs.  There  have
been  various  forms  independent  of
these,  which  I  do  not  wish  to  enter
into  at  present,  but  nowhere  have
we  had  the  government  of  God.  It
is  true  that  for  a  limited  period
among  a  very  small  people  in  early
days,  among  the  Jews,  they  profese-


ed  to  be  tinder  the  guidance  of  God
for  a  certain  length  of  time*  But
they  were  continually  departing
therefrom.  They  had  their  priest-
hood, they  had  their  prophets,  they
had  their  Urim  and  Thummirn,  and
through  these  mediums  they  sought
the  wisdom  and  guidance  of  God  in
regard  to  many  of  the  prominent
enterprises  in  which  they  engaged.
The  law  given  hy  Moses  was  one  of
those  things  that  emanated  frdftn
God.  Moses  received  from  the  Lord
the  ten  commandments  written  upon
tables  of  stone — written  hv  the  tinker
of  God — and  this  people,  who  wt?re
then  quite  a  small  people  coin  paw
lively  speaking,  received  the  com-
mands of  God  and  professed,  at
least,  to  be  governed  thereby.  The
Lord  gave  them  commands  and  they
were  proclaimed  to  the  people,  and
when  proclaimed  it  was  usual  for  all
the  people  to  say  "Amen.  These
laws  we  will  observe  and  do."  But
this  was  among  a  very  limited  people.
Very  won  they  desired  to  have  a
king  to  rule  over  them,  but  the  idea
that  was  then  considered  proper
among  them  was  :  *'  The  Lord  is  our
king,  the  Lord  is  our  judge,  the
Lord  is  our*  lawgiver,  and  he  shall
rule  over  us."  We  see  the  feeling
which  they  had  and  entertained  as  a
people,  but  they  departed  from  it
and  they  sought  a  king  and  were
led  astray  from  correct  principles —
led  into  folly,  darkness,  ignorance —
until  they  were  scattered  abroad  to
the  four  winds  of  heaven.

There  has  been  a  time  spoken  of
by  all  the  holy  prophets  since  the
world  was,  when  God  should  govern
his  people^  and  the  Jews,  when  the
Messiah  came,  expected  that  he  was
come  to  reign  over  Israel  as  a
temporal  king,  that  he  was  going  to
take  possession  of  his  kingdom  to
overthrow  all  other  kingdoms,
empires,  dynasties  and  powers,  and


declare  himself  the  king  of  I  srael  and
of  the  world.  But  they  did  not
understand  many  things  associated
therewith,  and  they  do  not  now;
and  the  world  does  not,  and  we  our-
selves understand  very  little  about
them.  But  the  Scriptures  say  that
11  till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot
or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass
from  the  law  till  ;dl  be  fulfilled."
Now  then,  if  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  have  never  yet  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his
Christ  they  will  he,  and  it  is  neces-
sary that  there  should  be  a
commencement  to  this  as  well  as  to
every  other  thing.  This  is  a  matter
that  has  been  looked  forward  to  by
prophets  atid  apostles,  patriarchs,
and  meu  of  God  in  the  various
dispensations  of  time.  It  is  called
¥  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times"  when  God  will  gather  together
all  things  in  one  whether  they  be
things  on  the  earth  or  things  in
the  heavens.  Now  there  must  of
necessity  be  a  starting  point  for  this,
and  the  question  is  how  is  it  to  origi-
nate ?  Who  among  the  nations  of
the  earth  knew  or  comprehended
any  tiling  about  the  government  of
God?  None  did;  nowhere;  no  king,
no  emperor,  no  potentate,  no  presi-
dent, no  power  upon  the  face  of  the
earth ;  no  divine  or  theologian,  no
scientist,  no  philosopher,  understood
anything  about  this  matter.  It  is
indeed  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
being  his  kingdom,  it  must  originate
with  him,  it  must  receive  from  him
its  teachings,  its  forms,  its  principles,
its  laws,  its  ordinancas,  its  institu-
tions, and  everything  connected
therewith  must  emanate  from  God,
and  as  it  was  necessary  that  it  should
originate  with  him,  it  is  also  neces-
sary that  it  should  be  upheld  and
sustained  by  him  and  that  those  who
should  operate  in  this  kingdom
should  he  governed  by  the  same


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  ETC.


65


spirit  that  you  heard  Brother  Pratt
talk  about  this  morning.  1 1  became
necessary  also  that  a  medium  should
be  introduced  whereby  man  might
be  placed  in  communion  with  God  ;
that  they  might  comprehend  hi  in,
that  they  might  understand  his  laws
when  he  gave  them,  that  they  might
be  acquainted  with  the  principles
which  he  had  to  develop  ;  for  there
is  one  great  principle  that  men  very
little  understand,  viz :  "The  tilings  of
God  kuoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit
of  God,"  and  if  they  don't  know
only  through  his  wisdom  it  would  be
in  vain  for  God  to  communicate  with
a  people  who  could  not  comprehend
him,  who  had  not  the  capacity  to
receive  thuse  principles  which  he
had  t©  communicate.  The  same
principle  holds  good  everywhere
among  all  the  principles  with  which
we  are  acquainted  or  know  anything
about  You  cannot  teach  a  child
algebra,  nor  arithmetic,  until  it  has
gone  through  a  certain  system  of
training.  You  cannot  teach  the
arts  and  sciences  without  necessary
preparation  for  their  introduction,
nor  can  you  teach  people  in  the
government  of  God  without  they  are
placed  in  communication  with  him,
and  hence  comes  the  Church  of  God,
and  what  is  meant  by  that?  A
school,  if  you  please,  wherein  men
are  taught  certain  principles,
wherein  we  can  receive  a  certain
spirit  through  obedience  to  certain
ordinances.  And  we,  having  received
this  spirit  through  those  ordinances,
were  then  prepared  to  take  the  initi-
atory steps  in  relation  to  other  mat-
ters, and  hence  as  a  commencement
the  Lord  appeared  unto  Joseph
Smith,  both  the  Father  and  the  Son,
the  Father  pointing  to  the  Son  said
44  this  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I
am  m  well  pleased,  hear  ye  him,"
Here,  then,  was  a  communication
from  the  heavens  made  known  unto
No.  5.


man  on  the  earth,  and  he  at  that
time  came  into  possesion  of  a  fact
that  no  man  knew  in  the  world  but
he,  and  that  is  that  God  lived,  for
he  had  seen  him,  and  that  his  Son
Jesus  Christ  lived,  for  he  also  had
seen  him.  What  next?  Now  says
the  Father,  "This  is  my  beloved
Son,  hear  him.5'  The  manner,  the
mode,  the  why,  and  the  wherefore,
he  designed  to  introduce  through
him  were  not  explained  ;  but  he,
the  Son  of  God,  the  Savior  of  the
world,  the  Redeemer  of  man,  he  was
the  one  pointed  out  to  be  the  guide,
the  director,  the  instructor,  and  the
leader  in  the  development  of  the
great  principles  of  that  kingdom  and
that  government  which  he  then  com-
menced to  institute.  What  nextt
The  next  step  was  that  men  having
held  the  priesthood,  that  had
ministered  in  time  and  eternity  and
that  held  the  keys  of  the  priesthood
came  and  conferred  them  upon
Joseph  Smith.  John  the  Baptist
conferred  upon  him  the  Aaronic
priesthood,  and  Peter,  James  and
John  the  Melchisedtc  priesthood ;
and  then  others  who  hail  operated
in  the  various  ages  of  the  world,  such  as
Moses  and  Enoch,  aappeared  and  con-
ferred upon  him  the  authority  that
they  held  pertaining  to  these  matters.
Why  I  Because  it  was  4 'the dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times,11  not  of
one  time  only  but  of  all  the  times  ;
it  was  the  initiatory  step  for  the
development  of  all  the  principles  that
ever  existed,  or  would  exist  pertain-
ing to  this  world,  or  the  world  to
come.  What  next  ?  He  was  com-
manded to  set  apart  other  men,
to  baptize  them  that  believed,  that
had  faith  in  God  and  in  his  kingdom,
and  in  his  revelations  and  in  his
government.  After  they  were  put
in  possession  of  these  principles,  they
were  commanded  to  baptize  those
who  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus

Vol  XXL


66  JOURNAL  OF

Christ,  who  repented  of  their  sins,  I
that  they  were  to  be  baptized  for
a  remission  of  their  sins  and  to  have
hands  laid  upon  them  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost  What  then?
There  was  a  priesthood  organized,  a
First  Presidency,  the  Twelve,  a  High
Council,  Patriarchs,  quorums  of  High
Priests,  Seventies,  Elders,  Bishops,
Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons,  to
carry  on  the  purposes  of  God,  and  to
instruct  men  in  the  laws  pertaining
to  his  kingdom,  even  the  laws  of
life.  Men  were  sent  forth  in  the
name  of  God  to  preach  the  principles
of  truth  which  had  been  revealed,  |
and  a  great  many  believed  and  were
baptized  and  were  initiated  into  the
Church  of  God,  and  we  may  say  into
the  initiatory  or  preparatory  steps
necessary  for  the  establishment  of
the  kingdom  of  God.  They  then  j
received  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is
H  no  cunningly  devised  fable  it  did
not  originate  with  man,  it  was  the
gift  of  God  to  man.  The  Elders,  for
instance,  were  told  to  go  forth  and
call  upon  men  to  repent,  to  be
baptized,  and  they  were  to  lay  their
hands  upon  them  that  they  should
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  And  what
should  that  dot  Take  of  the  things
of  God  and  shew  them  unto  the
people.  This  is  one  of  the  greatest
developments  of  power  that  ever
existed  among  men.  You  Elders,
hundreds  of  you  that  are  now  listen-
ing to  me,  have  gone  forth  to  preach
this  Gospel  You  have  called  upon
men  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  and  they  have  done  it  You
have  called  upon  men  to  repent,
and  they  have  done  it  You
have  told  them  to  be  baptized  and
you  have  baptized  them.  You  have
then  laid  your  hands  upon  their
heads  and  said  "  receive  ye  the  Holy
Ghost,"  and  they  have  received  it
And  you  know,  and  this  congregation
knows,  that  what  I  say  is  true,  and  |


discourses.

by  that  principle,  through  obedience
to  the  law  of  God  that  he  had  intro-
duced in  his  Gospel  What  fori
To  prepare  men  to  be  placed  in  com-
munion with  God.  To  prepare  them
to  be  members  not  only  of  his  Church
but  of  his  Kingdom,  and  to  prepare
them  to  take  part  in  this  great  event
that  had  to  transpire  in  the  last  days.
Now  these  are  facts  that  you  cannot
controvert,  nor  anybody  else.  You
know  that  these  things  are  true.
Wlr*t  does  it  prove  ?  That  it  is
God's  kingdom,  he  has  introduced
it,  and  as  it  was  said  in  former  times,
"  Ye  are  my  witnesses/1  as  well  as
the  Holy  Ghost  thatbeareth  witness
of  us.  Now,  then,  could  you  have
received  this  without  the  interposi-
tion of  the  Almighty  and  his  Son
Jesus  Christ  1  No  you  could  not
Could  you  have  received  it  without
the  keys  of  the  priesthood  being
restorer!  and  which  some  men  affect
to  despise  so  much  1  No  you  could
not  Hence  we  trace  out  the  order
of  these  institutions  as  they  dwelt
in  the  mind  of  God,  and  as  they
were  made  manifest  among  men.
Have  those  elders  that  perforin  these
ceremonies  their  weaknesses?  Yes,
just  as  much  as  Eider  Pratt  and  I
have  eur  weakn esses.  Have  they
their  infirmities  !  Yes,  Was  it  a
rich  treasure  that  was  conferred  upon
us?  Yes,  but  we  received  it
in  earthen  vessels,  surrounded  with
the  infirmities  of  man.  But  God
knew  these  infirmities ;  he  was
acquainted  with  all  our  weaknesses.
Nevertheless,  he  conferred  upon  us
this  pries  theod,  this  power,  and  this
authority,  and  when  we  went  forth
in  his  name  and  by  his  authority,
God  sanctioned  our  acts.  Is  God
with  us  while  these  things  take
place?  I  think  so.  What  do  you
think  about  it?  It  is  a  principle
that  is  clear,  and  plain  and  demon-
strable.


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF


THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  ETC.


67


Well,  what  next  1  Then  we  began
to  gather  together.  And  why  do
we  gather  together  1  Some  of  us
can  hardly  tell  whyt  and  I  am  often
surprised  when  I  read  letters  impor-
tuning us  in  regard  to  this  matter,
I  get  letters  time  and  again  praying
that  some  means  may  be  devised
that  the  Saints  may  be  delivered
and  gathered  to  Zion,  and  be  enabled
to  live  with  the  Saints  of  God*
What  is  the  reason  of  it  %  Why  do
they  want  to  gather  %  Because  there
was  a  spirit  and  influence  associated
with  this  Church  and  this  kingdom
which  led  and  propelled  them  to  this
action,  and  you  who  hear  me  have
felt  this  influence ;  you  felt  a  desire
to  gather,  and  you  came,  and  those
that  are  not  here  now  feel  as  strong
a  desire  to  gather  as  you  did.  And
when  you  have  gathered,  many  of
you  think  it  is  a  curious  kind  of  Zion,
don't  you  %  It  is  ;  for  while  the  net
gathers  in  the  good,  it  brings  in  all
kinds  as  well,  good  and  bad.
We  have  some  very  good  fish,  and
some  very  bad  ones,  and  some  a  kind
of  half  and  half,  and  some  feel  like
saying  *'  Good  Lord  and  good  devil,'1
as  they  do  not  know  into  whose  hands
they  may  fall.  Nevertheless,  this  is
the  order,  and  the  wheat  and  tares,
I  suppose,  have  got  to  grow  together
until  the  harvest  comes,  and  that  is
not  quite  here  yet,  and  hence  we  are
jostling  one  against  another,  and
some  of  us  hardly  know  whether  it
is  us  or  somebody  else,  Difficulties
and  trials  beset  us,  and  we  are
amazed.  But  we  are  here,  and  we
are  here  according  to  the  command
of  God  and  according  to  the  opera-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  rests
upon  us,  and  did  rest  upon  us,  and
led  us  here,  and  I  was  going  to  say,
we  are  here  because  we  could  not
help  it.

Well,  what  next !  Who  are  we,
and  what  are  we  when  we  are  here?


Some  good  Latter-day  Saints,  and
some,  as  I  have  said,  half  and  half,
some  one  thing  and  some  another.
But  how  do  we  stand  in  the  position
we  occupy  as  a  Church  and  as  other
people  standi  We  believe  in  God.
We  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
W e  be  ieve  in  virtue,  purity,  holiness,
integrity,  honesty.  We  believe  in
good  citizens  and  good  Saints.  We
believe  in  keeping  the  command-
ments of  God,  aud  carrying  out  his
purposes.  We  believe  in  spreading
the  Gospel  to  the  ends  of  the  earth*
We  believe  in  gathering  together  the
honest  in  heart  We  believe  in  build-
ing temples  an d adm i  uisteri  ng  therein
for  the  living  and  for  the  dead,  and
we  believe  in  acting  as  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion  according  to  the  word
of  the  Lord.  All  these  things  and
a  great  many  more  are  leading  prin-
ciples which  we  as  Saints  profess  to
believe  in.  Well,  we  have  a  right
to  do  that,  although  there  are  others
who  do  not  believe  in  those  things.
They  have  just  as  much  right  not  to
believe  in  our  principles  as  we  have
to  believe  in  them.  And  we  some-
times feel  angry  and  out  of  sorts
with  others  because  they  do  not
believe  as  we  do.  Well,  we  do  not
believe  as  they  do.  Some  of  them
think  we  are  very  foolish,  very  enthu-
siastic, very  superstitious,  and  very
wickeil.  Those  that  know  us  do  not
think  we  are  so  bad  after  all.  We
have  our  weaknesses  and  imper-
fections, yet  we  are  quite  as  good  as
the  balance  of  them,  and  a  little
better,  and  we  ought  to  be,  for  we
make  great  pretensions.  But  they
think  these  things  about  us.  They
think  we  are  deluded.  Now  the
only  difference  between  us  and  them
is  that  we  know  they  are  supersti-
tious and  corrupt,  and  that  they
violate  those  laws  they  profess  to
believe  in  and  those  principles  which
they  profess  to  ba  governed  and


68


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


guided  by.  But  we  have  no  right
to  expect  everybody  to  submit  to
our. doctrines,  our  views,  our  princi-  j
pies,  it  its  a  matter  of  free-will  with
them,  and  as  I  said  they  have  just  as
imicli  right  to  believe  as  they  think
proper  and  to  worship  as  they  choose
as  we  have,  Tliese  are  some  princi-
ples that  are  really  correct  Well,
they  try  to  prevent  us  from  worship-
ping as  we  believe?  Now  that  is —
what  shall  I  call  it?  a  doctrine  of
devils,  it  does  not  come  from  God,
he  is  more  free  and  generous  in  his
feelings  than  that.  He  does  not
control  the  consciences  of  men  nor
force  them  to  obey  his  behests ;  it  is
a  matter  of  free  grace,  it  is  a  matter
of  free  will.  Well,  though  they  |
think  they  have  a  right  to  interfere
with  us,  we  do  not  think  we  have  a
right  to  interfere  with  them.  And
I  do  not  think  we  do.  There  is  a
number  of  institutions  here  in  this
city,  Catholics,  Episcopalians,  Pres-
byterians, Methodists,  Baptists,  etc.,
and.  I  do  not  know  how  many  more,
quite  a  pile  of  them.  If  they  think
they  are  right  I  am  quite  willing
they  should  think  so.  I  do  not  wish
to  interfere  with  them*  Who  inter*
feres  with  their  building  meeting
houses  1  Who  interferes  with  their
worship  ?  If  there  is  anything  of
this  sort  I  do  not  know  of  it;  I  hope
I  shall  not  know  of  it ;  I  hope  never
to  hear  of  such  things.  I  believe
that  all  men  have  the  privilege  of
worshipping  God  according  to  the
dictates  of  their  own  consciences  and
t  hen  1  tli ink  we  possess  just  the  same
right ;  and  when  they  depart  frcm
this  principle  and  wish  to  curtail  us
of  our  rights  they  are  violating  the
spirit  and  genius  of  the  institutions
of  our  common  country,  and  also
those  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  with
which  we  are  associated.  They  are
al>o  violating  those  good  feelings
t  hat  ought  to  exist  between  man  and


man,  brother  and  brother,  and  they
are  interfering  with  things  that  in  no
wise  belong  to  them.

Now  then,  here  is  the  ground  that
we  stand  on  in  a  religious  capacity.
If  I  can  find  a  way  and  you  can  find
a  way,  whereby  we  can  approach  our
God  and  have  him  for  our  guide,
our  teacher  and  inst  ructor,  if  they
cannot  doit,  it  is  none  of  their  busi-
ness what  we  do.  They  have
nothing  to  do  with  it,  it  is  none  of
their  business  in  any  way  whatever,
and  any  interference  is  an  inter-
lerence  with  the  legitimate  rights
and  inherent  principles  that  belong
to  humanity.

Well,  so  far  as  they  stand  on  their
platform  and  we  on  ours,  they  may
be  Methodists,  they  may  be  Presby-
terians ;  all  right.  They  may  get  up
their  revival  meetings  and  think
they  are  doing  a  great  deal  of  good;
all  right,  and  so  far  as  they  teach
good  moral  principles,  and  do  not
depart  from  truth,  all  right  So  far
as  they  obey  the  laws  of  the  land,
all  right ;  we  have  nothing  to  do
with  them  ?  Have  you  ?  Has  the
city  1 Has  the  Territory  ?  No.

Well  then,  we  will  go  a  little
further.  By  being  here  we  become
an  integral  part  of  the  government
of  the  United  States,  as  a  Territory.
Very  well  Here  is  another  thing
we  are  talkug  about  Is  that  the
government  of  God  ?  Not  quite,  but
it  is  the  government  we  are  living
under,  and  if  they  treat  us  right  and
extend  to  us  any  kindness  we  appre-
ciate that  *  If  they  treat  us  wrong,
we  think  it  is  not  according  to  cor-
rect principles.  We  think  as  Ameri-
can citizens  we  ought  to  receive  all  the
privileges  equally  with  other  people;
we  think  we  ought  to  be  allowed  to
worship  tJod  according  to  the
dictates  of  ourconsciencesand  be  pro-
tected in  our  worship.  So  far,  then,
as  I  have  said  before,  we  are  on  a


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF


THE  LORD'S  THAYER,  FTC


69


level  Now  then,  we  are  on  the  same
ground  in  regard  to  political  circum-

ic  stances.  We  are  under  the  United
States,  but  the  United  States  is  not '
the  kingdom  of  God.  It  does  not
profess  to  be  under  his  rule,
nor  his  government,  nor  his
authority.  Yet  wo  are  expected  as
citizens  of  the  United  States  to  keep
the  laws  of  the  United  States,  and  \
hence  we  are,  as  I  said  before,  an
integral  part  of  the  government,
Very  well,  what  is  expected  of  OS  J
That  we  observe  its  laws,  that  we
conform  to  its  usages,  that  we  are
governed  by  good  and  wholesome
principles,  that  we  maintain  the
laws  in  their  in  levity  and  that  we
sustain  the  government,  and  we
ought  to  do  it  Hut  there  is  a  prin-
ciple here  that  I  wish  to  speak  about.
God  dictates  in  a  great  measure  the
affairs  of  the  nations  of  the  earth*
their  kingdoms  and  governments
and  rulers  and  those  that  hold
dominion. He  sets  up  one  and  pulls

4  down  another,  according  to  his  will.
That  is  an  old  doc  trine,  but  it  is  true
to  day*  Have  we  governors  1  have  !
we  a  president  of  the  United  States  )
have  we  men  in  authority  1  Yes.
Is  it  right  to  traduce  their  charac-
ters? No,  it  is  not  Is  it  right  lor
us  to  oppose  them  ?  No,  it  is  not.  \
Is  it  right  for  them  to  traduce  us  I
No,  it  is  not  Is  it  right  for  them
to  oppress  us  in  any  way  ?  No,  it  is
not.  We  ought  to  pray  for  these
people,  for  those  that  are  in  autho-
rity, tli at  they  may  be  lead  in  the  ,
right  way,  that  they  may  be  pre-
served from  evil,  that  they  may
administer  the  government  in  right-
eousness, and  that  they  may  pursue
a  course  that  will  receive  the  appro-
bation of  heaven.  Well,  what  else  \
Then  we  ought  to  pray  for  ourselves
that  when  any  plans  or  contrivances
or  opposition  to  the  law  of  God,  to
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  or


to  his  people,  are  introduced,  and
w  henever  we  are  sought  to  be  made
the  victims  of  tyranny  and  oppres-
sion, that  the  hand  of  God  may  be
over  us  and  over  them  to  paralyze
their  acts  and  protect  us,  for  as  it  is
written,  the  wrath  of  man  shall
praise  him,  the  remainder  of  wrath
shall  lie  restrain.

Now,  we  in  Utah  here  are  under
the  government  of  the  United  States;
we  are  a  very  little  portion  of  it-
It  is  true  we  have  our  legislators,
we  have  our  probate  judges,  we  have
i  our  marshals,  constables,  etc.,  we
have  our  city  charters  etc.,  eta,  and
certain  immunities  and  privileges  o(
this  kind.  Well,  shall  we  be
governed  by  them  ?  Yes.  Shall  we
obey  the  law  ?  Yes,  Shall  I  as  a
citizen  of  this  city  obey  the  laws  of
tins  city?  Yes.  Shall  1  cause
trouble  or  speak  evil  of  the  mayor
I  or  city  council  or  any  of  the  admin-
istrators of  tlie  law  I  No,  I  ought
to  pray  for  them  that  they  may  lead
aright  and  administer  justice
equitably  and  act  for  the  welfare  and
interest  of  the  community  wherein
t  hey  live  and  for  whom  they  operate.
Am  I  a  citizen  of  the  Uniteu  States?
Yes,  and  I  ought  to  feel  the  same
toward  them.

Well,  now,  there  are  some  import-
ant points  come  in  here.  As  I  have
said,  we  are  a  very  small  portion  of
:  this  government.  Now,  do  we  wish
to  overthrow  the  government  I
think  not  I  think  we  do  not.  Do
we  wish  to  cause  theni  trouble  (  Not
,  that  I  know  of.  I  know  we  are
accused  of  that ;  hut  it  is  not  true.
These  statements  are  not  correct
Our  religion,  however,  differs  from
the  religion  of  many  others,  and  as  I
have  said  before,  while  they  look  for
liberty  to  worship  God  as  they  please,
they  do  not  want  us  to  possess  the
same  privileges.  There  is  nothing
new  in  this  ;  but  because  of  this


70


JOURNAL  01  DISCOURSES


have  they  a  right  to  interfere  with
the  institutions  of  which  we  have
become  a  part  ?  Do  jiot  our  legisla-
tors, our  governors,  and  all  men  here
swear  fealty  not  only  to  the  Territory,
but  to  the  United  States,  and  say
they  will  support  the  Constitution,
laws,  and  institutions  thereof  1
They  do.  This  is  the  position  we
occupy.  But  we  are  placed  in  a
peculiar  position  in  some  things.
They— I  was  going  to  say  in  their
wisdom,  but  I  will  say  in  their  folly,
and  I  hope  they  will  excuse  me,  for
I  look  upon  it  in  that  way — have
passed  certain  laws  trying  to  inter-
fere wiili  us  in  our  operations  in
religious  affairs.  Well,  we  cannot
help  t  i  at.  I  told  you  a  while  ago —
you  believe  me,  this  congregation
believes  me  with  very  few  exceptions
— that  Hod  had  introduced  and
instituted  this  Church,  that  he  was
the  founder  of  it,  that  it  emanated
from  him,  the  doctrines,  ordinances,
principles,  government,  priesthood,
authority,  and  all  that  pertain  to  it
emanated  from  him;  we  had  nothing
to  do  with  it.  Joseph  Smith  had
nothing  to  do  with  it,  only,  as  a
passive  worker  in  the  hands  of  the
Lord.  Hrigham  Young  had  nothing
to  do  with  it  only  acting  in  that
capacity*  I  have  nothing  to  do  with
it,  nor  mv  brethren  of  the  Twelve.
God  revealed  it  I  cannot  help  it.
Can  you  ?  Can  any  one  ?  Now,
then  this  people  have  been
received  into  this  Church  in  the
way  that  I  have  spoken  of,  and  have
actually  received  communication
from  dod  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  have
a  hope  within  them  blooming  with
immortality  and  eternal  lives,  and
are  in  possession  of  a  hope  that
enters  within  the  veil  whither  Christ
has  gone.  Can  you  uproot  that  f  rom
the  minds  of  this  people  I  No,  no
power  on  earth,  no  power  in  heaven,


nor  all  the  combined  nations  of  the
earth  can  do  it;  God  planted  it  there,
man  cannot  take  it  away,  and  men
are  foolish  in  trying  to  attempt  it-
Very  well.  But  they  do  try  to  inter-
fere with  us  under  a  pretence  that
we  are  veiy  wicked  here.  Well,  it
is  enough  to  make  a  person  laugh
sometimes,  when  we  think  about
these  things,  and  enough  to  make  us
sorry  when  we  know  of  the  hypo-
crisy, lasciviousness,  crime,  murder,
bloodshed  that  prevail  in  this  nation
and  other  nations,  to  hear  them  talk
to  us  about  our  morality.  We  know
when  they  talk  in  that  way  that
they  are  hypocrites.  We  know  that
they  know  better  when  they  tell
these  things  to  the  world.

Now,  then,  the  United  States  pass
a  law  that  a  man  shall  not  marry
wives  according  to  the  order  that
God  has  revealed.  Now  it  is  a  fact
that  we  should  like  to  obey  the  laws
of  the  United  States,  if  we  could  do
it.  If  they  could  only  tell  us  how
to  get  out  of  the  dilemma  they  have
placed  us  in  we  should  be  very  mu^i
obliged  to  them,  we  really  should
like  to  get  out  of  it.  But  we  have
had  no  hand  in  either  of  these  things*
We  had  no  hand  in  making  the
commandment  that  God  has  given  to
his  people,  and  we  have  had  no  hand
in  making  the  law  of  the  United
States  pertaining  to  these  things.
We  feel  very  desirous  of  keeping  the
laws  of  the  land  if  they  would  only
let  us ;  but  we  should  pray  our
Father  in  heaven  that  he  might
preserve  them  from  making  laws
that  we  cannot  conscientiously  keep
without  violating  our  consciences
and  transgressing  the  law  of  God.
And  if  they  do  we  shall  be  under  the
necessity  of  leaving  ihem  in  the
hands  of  God  for  him  to  deal  with
them  as  he  may  deem  proper,  and
we  will  put  our  trust  in  the  living
God  and  risk  the  consequences  let


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  ETC


71


them  be  what  they  may.

Now,  these  are  our  feelings  on
this  point.  Is  it  well  to  tell  these
feelings?  Yes*  We  want  to  be
frank  and  open  and  candid  and  free
from  hypocrisy  of  every  kind,  and
feel  as  though  we  were  the  children
of  our  Father  in  heaven  without
guilt,  without  treachery,  without
fraud  of  any  kind.  Let  us  be  sincere
worshippers  of  God  and  believers  in
him  and  in  his  law.  But  do  we  pro-
pose to  govern,  interfere  with,  or  rebel
against  the  Government  of  the
United  States]  No,  we  do  not.
That  is  not  in  the  programme.
Has  God  given  us  a  law  ?  Yes.
All  right  we  will  get  along  an  J  do
the  best  we  can,  but  we  won't  for-
sake our  God.  All  who  are  willing  to
abide  by  the  laws  of  God  signify  it
by  raising  the  right  hand  (unani-
mous vote).  Now  try  and  keep
them.  But  will  we  fight  against
the  United  States  ?  No,  we  will  not*
Well,  how  will  these  tilings  be
brought  about  1  Don't  you  expect
that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God


and  his  Christ  ?  Yes,  I  do,  as  much
as  I  believe  I  am  speaking  to  you
and  you  are  hearing  me,  and  I  not
only  believe  it  but  know  it.  Well,
now,  how  will  that  be  brought  about
if  you  do  not  pitch  in  1  We  need
not  do  this.  There  is  plenty  that
will  pitch  in  j  there  will  be  plenty  of
trouble  by  and  by  without  our  inter-
ference, when  men  begin  to  tear
away  one  plank  after  another  out  of
the  p latform  of  co n sti  l utioual  liberty ;
there  will  not  be  much  to  tie  to.
And  how  will  you  get  along  with
them  1  We  will  leave  them  to  get
alonir  with  themselves.  And  how
will  that  be  1  We  are  told  the
wicked  shall  slay  the  wicked,  but
says  the  Lord  :  fc*  It  is  my  business
to  take  care  of  the  Saints. "  God
will  stand  by  Israel,  and  Zion  shall
triumph  and  this  work  will  go  on
until  the  kingdom  is  established  and
and  all  nations  bow  to  its  standard.

May  God  bless  you,  may  he  lead
you  in  the  path  of  light,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen.


72


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER GEO. Q,  CANNON.


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  October  5th,  187a

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihhs.)

SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  A1TAISABLK— UNCHANOKABLENESS  OF  GOD— UNIVERSA-
LITY OF  THE  RIGHT  TO  REVELATION— THE  SAINTS  GLORIFY  THE  GOD
OF  REVELATION — NECESSITY  OF  SEL* -GOVERNMENT.


In  stan  din  it  up  to  address  this
Congregation  there  is  one  feeling
that  rest**  upon  me,  and  that  is,  my
inability  to  instruct  so  numerous  a
people  unless  God  shall  pour  out
his  Holy  Spirit  upon  me  and  upon
you.  itu  in

v  We  have  come  together  to-day
according  to  our  custom  to  be  instruc-
ted in  those  duties  that  devolve
upon  us  and  also  in  ihe  principles
of  our  holy  religion.  These  meetings
are  to  me  exceedingly  precious  j  they
ar*  seasons  of  great  rejoicing.  And
having  the  opporunity  as  we  have
to-day  of  assembling  in  peace  and
quietness  without  any  to  molest  or
make  afraid,  we  should  feel  thank-
ful, to  that  < » cm  I  who  has  brought  us
here;  who  has  preserved  and  pro-
tected us  since  we  came.

The  instructions  which  we  have
had  to  day  since  we  have  assembled
together,  if  fully  obeyed  by  us  and
carried  out  in  our  lives,  will  make  us
a  people  who  shall  be  worthy  the
name  we  bear,  the  name  of  Latter-
day  Saints*  At  id  as  was  remarked
this  morning  the  great  object  in
teaching  the  people  and  impressing
upon  them  the  counsels  that  are
given  from  time  to  time,  is  to  have
us  carry  out  practically  in  our  lives
the  principles  of  that  religion  which
we  have  espoused. This  is  the  great


labor  devolving  upon  us.  It  is  not
to  be  theoretical  alone  :  it  is  not  to
dwell  with  great  interest  and  with
great  eloquence  upon  those  heavenly
doctrines  that  God  has  revealed  and
to  become  enraptured  over  them
while  listening  to  them,  but  it  is  to
make  a  practical  application  of  them
to  our  thoughts,  to  our  words  and
to  all  the  actions  of  our  lives*  And
in  this  way  alone  can  we  acceptably
serve  the  Lord  our  God,  whose  name
we  bear  and  whose  people  wa  pro-
fess to  be.  There  is  no  reason  why
this  people  called  Latter-day  Saints
should  not  have  all  the  powers  and
all  the  gifts  and  all  the  graces  that
ever  characterized  the  Church  of
God  upon  the  earth  at  any  time;
there  is  no  reason,  I  say,  why  they
should  not  have  all  these  if  they
themselves  are  true  to  the  principles
which  Lave  been  revealed,  and  seek
to  cany  them  out.  Who  is  there
of  this  congregation,  who  is  there
that  belongs  to  this  Church  in  any
part  of  this  Territory,  who  does  not
have  a  desire  in  his  or  her  heart  for
those  blessings  and  those  gifts  and
qualifications  that  were  promised  to
the  ancient  Saints  and  which  have
been  renewed  in  our  day  to  those
who  embrace  the  Gospel  with  all
their  hearts  ?  The  Lord  is  the  same
yesterday,  to-day  and  forever.  This


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS


ATTAINABLE,  ETC.


73


is  the  corner-stone,  it  may  be  said,  of
our  faith.  It  is  upon  this  founda-
tion we  have  built ;  that  he  is  an
unchangeable  God  ;  that  he  does  not

manifest  his  mind  and  his  will  in
plainness  and  simplicity  to  one  people,
and  hide  the  same  from  a  succeed-
ing people  who  are  equally  faithful
But  the  great  truth  has  been  im-
pressed upon  us  j  the  great  truth
that  runs  through  all  the  writings  of
every  man  of  God  concerning  whom
we  have  any  account  from  the  begin-
ning down  to  the  last  revelation  that
has  been  given,  that  God  is  no
respecter  of  persons,  that  he  is  to-day
as  he  was  yesterday  and  as  he  ever
was,  and  that  he  will  continue  to  be
the  same  bein<?  as  long  as  time
endures  or  eternity  continues.  And
we  have  been  impressed  with  this  as
I  have  said,  by  every  man  who  has
spoken  concerning  God  and  spoken
by  authority  from  him.  I  say,  there-
fore, there  is  no  reason  why  the
Latter-day  Saints  taday  should  not
obtain  and  enjoy  the  gifts  and  graces
and  blessings  of  the  Gospel  the  same
as  they  were  enjoyed  in  ancient  days
by  the  ancient  servants  and  people
©f  God,

Has  God  grown  old  ?  Have  God's
ears  become  heavy  1  Has  his  sight
become  dim  ?  Has  his  arm  become
shortened  ?  Has  age  affected  him
or  the  lapse  of  time  detracted  from
his  p<  > w ers  %  H  as  it  had  the  sam e
effect  upon  him  as  upon  mortal
beings  who  are  subject  to  decay  and
death  I  Is  this  the  kind  of  being  we
worship  ?  Is  this  the  kind  of  being
concerning  whom  the  prophets  and
aj*ostles  have  spoken  and  written  1
Certainly  not.  We  worship  him,  we
adore  him,  we  lift  up  our  eyes  to  him,
we  rely  upon  him  as  the  Supreme
Being,  the  Creator  of  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  the  founder  of  the
universe,  the  builder  of  the  planet
which  we  inhabit  aud  which  we


trearl,  the  being  over  whom  cen-
turies have  passed  without  making
any  change  to  his  injury ;  eternity
has  rolled  and  continues  to  roll  and
will  continue  to  roll  without  in  the
least  affecting  his  power  or  his
capacity  for  good,  his  eye  does  not
grow  dim  by  the  lapse  of  ages  ;  his
ear  does  not  become  heavy  by  the
passage  of  time,  neither  does  his  arm
become  short  or  feeble.  He  is  the
God  whom  we  worship.  When  we
call  upon  him,  though  he  may  be
remote  from  us,  dwelling  in  his  holy
habitation  in  the  midst  of  the  eter-
nities, the  very  thoughts  of  our
hearts,  the  very  conceptions  of  our
minds,  the  feeble  whisperings  of  our
voices,  they  ascend  to  him,  are
carried  to  him,  his  ear  comprehends
them  ;  his  bowels  of  compassion  are
moved  towards  us  his  children,  his
all-piercing  eye  penetrates  eternity,
and  the  glance  ©f  his  vision  reaches
us,  >  1191  *t  fd  Xv®  *

There  is  not  a  single  thought  of
our  hearts  which  he  does  not  compre-
hend ;  there  is  nothing  connected
with  us  he  does  not  know.  We  may
hide  ourselves  in  the  bowels  of  the
earth,  but  we  cannot  conceal  our-
selves fiom  his  all-piercing  sight
We  may  climb  the  highest  moun-
tains or  descend  into  the  deepest
valleys  or  we  may  go  to  the  utter-
most jtarts  o  the  earth,  but  where-
ever  we  may  go  ho  is  there,  his
power  is  there,  his  vision  is  there  to
hear  and  to  comprehend  the  desires
and  the  wishes  of  our  hearts.

Tins  being  the  case,  why  should
we  not  approach  him  in  faith  ?  What
reason  is  there  that  men  and  women
living  in  this  the  19th  century
rfbouM  not  approach  him  with  th«
confidence  of  those  who  lived  in  the
15th  century  of  the  world,  or  the
20th  or  the  4,00Uth  year  of  the
world  ?  If  he  could  hear  t  heir  cries,
if  he  could  answer  their  prayers  and


74


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


if  be  could  grant  to  them  the
desires  of  their  hearts  ;  if  he  could
open  the  heavens  to  them  and  reveal
his  mind  and  will  unto  them  when
they  called  upon  him  in  faith,  believ-
ing tli at  he  would  do  so,  is  there
any  reason  why  we  should  not  have
that  same  faith  and  exercise  it  and
obtain  those  same  blessings  and
receive  them  at  his  hands?  Who  is
there  that  can  stand  up  and  say
there  are  reasons  why  this  should
be  the  case  ?  If  we  admit,  as  we
must  do,  that  he  is  this  being  which
I  have  attempted  so  feebly  to
describe  ;  if  we  admit  that  he  is  the
God  of  gods,  the  Loivi  of  lords,  the
creator  of  all,  the  father  of  all,  the
sustainer  of  all ;  if  we  believe  this,
why  cannot  we  believe  that  if  he
bestowed  his  blessings  upon  other
enerations  and  other  people,  he  will
o  so  to  us,  also  that  be  will  hear
our  prayers,  that  he  wi  1 1  grant  unto
us  the  desires  of  our  hearts  ?

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  I
look  upon  these  conferences  and
these  assemblages  as  having  for
their  object  the  enforcement  of
these  great  truths  upon  us  and  upon
our  attention  ;  the  object  of  thgm  as
I  understand  them,  is  to  make  us
Latter-day  Saints  not  in  name  alone
but  in  word  and  in  deed  ;  to  be  men
and  women  of  God  ;  to  place  us  in
communion  with  God  ;  to  receive
communication  from  him;  to  have
our  false  tradition,  our  improper
ideas,  our  unbelief,  our  hardness  of
heart,  and  those  feelings  that
surround  us,  that  grow  up  with  us,
to  have  them  removed  from  us.  Is
there  any  reason  why  this  should
not  be  the  case  I  No  reason  except
that  which  may  be  found  in  our-
selves. There  is  no  reason  outside
of  this.  God  is  willing,  he  lias  made
promises,  and  he  has  fulfilled  his
promises  so  far  as  we  have  placed
ourselves  in  circumstances  to  receive


th  em.  When  we  have  complied
with  the  conditions  he  has  never
from  the  beginning  up  to  the
present  time  failed  in  his  part,  he  is
incapable  of  failing.  If  there  be
failure  it  is  due  to  us,  the  fault  is
our  own,  we  are  the  guilty  ones,
j  Let  me  ask  of  you,  when  did  you
ever,  any  one  of  you,  humble  your-
selves before  God,  when  did  you  in
secret  call  upon  him  in  the  name  of
Jesus  and  ask  him  for  his  Holy
Spirit  and  the  blessings  thereof,  and
fail  to  receive  an  answer  to  your
prayers  ]  If  there  are  any  Latter-
day  Saints  in  this  condition  then
there  is  something  wrong  with  them.
God  has  made  promises  unto  us  that
if  we  will  do  certain  things,  if
we  will  obey  certain  command-
ments and  ordinances,  he  will  bes-
tow his  blessing  and  he  will  answer
the  pray  ere  of  those  who  take  this
course*  But  how  many  are  there  of
us  who  go  on  from  day  to  day  and
from  week  to  week  and  from  month
to  month  careless  upon  these  points,
failing  to  live  so  as  to  receive  the
blessings  that  he  has  promised,  until
it  would  seem  when  they  bow  down
to  call  upon  him  that  their  prayers
scarcely  ascend  higher  than  the  tops
of  their  heads.

As  I  have  said,  God  in  ancient
days  was  a  God  of  revelation  ;  God
in  our  day  is  a  God  of  revelation,
and  he  communicates  his  mind  and
his  will  unto  those  who  seek  after  it,
not  to  the  President  of  the  Church
alone  ;  not  to  the  apostles  of  the
Church  alone ;  not  to  the  high
priests  or  seventies  or  any  of  the
officers  or  all  of  them  alone,  but  he
communicates  his  mind  and  his  will
to  all  who  seek  after  him  in  humility
and  meekness  and  lowliness  of  heart,
obeying  his  commandments.  To  the
Latter-day  Saints  alone?  No,  not
even  to  them  alone  for  there  is  no
human  being  that  is  born  of  woman,


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  ATTAINABLE,  ETC


there  is  no  son  or  daughter  of  Adam
that  has  ever  lived  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  who  has  not  the  right  and
who  has  not  obtained  at  some  time
or  other  in  his  or  her  life,  revelations
from  God,  but  who  may  not  have
understood  what  those  revelations
were.  The  Latter-day  Saints  are
not  so  cramped  in  their  feelings  as
to  imagine  that  they  are  the  only
and  peculiar  people  above  all  others
who  have,  in  this  sense  received
revelation.  They  believe  themselves
to  be  the  people  of  God  and  the
only  people  who  have  obeyed  the
commandments  of  God  ;  but  they  do
not  think  that,  of  all  the  children  of
God.  they  are  the  only  recipients  of
his  blessings.

God  has  revealed  himself  at
various  times  and  in  various  ways  to
many  people.  The  heathen  have
had  communication  from  him.  All
the  light  that  exists  ;  all  the  truths
that  are  taught  and  all  the  correct
principles  and  knowledge  that  have
been  communicated  and  existed
among  the  children  of  men,  have
come  from  God  ;  he  is  theauthorofall.
Socrates,  Plato,  Confucius,  the
heathen  philosophers  who  knew
nothing  about  Jesus  Christ  and  the
plan  of  salvation,  received  important
truths  from  him,  and  so  did  many
other  people  to  a  greater  or  less
extent,  according  to  their  abilites  in
improving  upon  the  knowledge
communicated  to  them.  But  the
difficulty  has  been  concerning  these
matters  tii  at  man  khrf  have  not  recog-
nized God  in  all  this.  A  man  has
a  dream.  It  is  most  wonderfully
fulfilled.  He  has  a  presentiment;
his  presentiment  is  fulfilled,  and  he
relates  it  to  his  friends  as  a  most
remarkable  thing.  A  man  has  a
truth  communicated  to  him  after
study  and  research.  He  communi-
cates it  to  his  friends  as  a  wonderful
discovery. Does  he  acknowledge


| God  in  it?  Sometimes  ;  but  in
many  instances  he  does  not  acknow-
ledge God  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he
thinks  it  is  the  product  of  his  own
thought,  of  his  own  mind.  Jf  it  be
a  dream  or  some  remarkable  mani-
festation that  partakes  of  the  super-
natural, instead  of  giving  God  the
glory  and  praising  God  for  having
made  the  communication,  some  other
principle  is  glorified  or  some  other
thing  is  talked  about,  the  remark-
able character  of  it  is  dwelt  upon
without  the  person  thinking  that
God  has  anything  to  do  with  it.

Well,  there  is,  as  I  have  said,  no
human  being  but  that  has,  at  some
time  or  other,  had  communication
from  the  Almighty  Father.  Some
have  recognized  God  and  have  given
the  glory  to  him  for  it ;  others  have
not  done  so.  The  remarkable  dis-
coveries that  are  being  made  in  the
world  of  science  ;  in  fact,  all  the
remarkable  discoveries  that  have
been  made  from  time  to  time  are
produced  by  the  operations  of  an
unseen  influence  upon  the  mind  of
the  children  of  men.  For  instance,
it  has  frequently  happened  in  astro-
nomy and  other  branches  ot  science

|  that  when  an  important  discovery
has  been  made  two  or  three  mefi
about  the  same  time  widely
separated  from  each  other  have
received  the  communication ;  and
disputes  have  arisen  as  to  which
of  them  was  entitled  to  the  credit.
This  was  the  case  as  to  the  applicar
tion  of  steam  and  the  principles  of
telegraphy  and  also  many  discoveries
in  astronomy  and  other  sciences.
Disputes  have  arisen  in  various
nations  upon  these  points  ;  whereas
the  truth  is  that  God  is  the  Author;
it  is  God  that  moved  upon  the  minds
of  those  individuals.  It  was  God
that  inspired  them  to  do  as  they
did  ;  it  was  he  who  led  on  from  step

'  to  step  until  they achieved  the


76


JOURNAL  OK  DISUOt'ilSKS.


■

results which have made them  1
famous,  and  sometimes  quite  unex-
pectedly to  themselves.

What  is  this  which  has  led  these
famous  men  in  the  path  of  dis-
co wry  t  The  I  ,at ter- 1 lay  Sai n ts  call
it  the  spirit  of  revelation  ;  the  spirit
of  revelation  resting  down  upon  the
children  of  men.  Some  men  possess
it  to  a  greater  extent  than  others.
Some  have  the  gift  in  one  direction
and  they  are  capable  of  receiving
communication  from  God  in  a  direc-
tion that  cit  hers  are  not,  their  minds
are  better  prepared  to  receive  reve-
lation upon  a  given  subject,  than  are
the  mint  Is  of  others.  Some  will
receive  great  moral  truths,  and
these  men  differ  in  their  organisms;
but  the  light  tliey  receive  all  comes
from  our  heavenly  Father;  it  is  he
who  gives  the  inspiration.  And  so
man  has  progressed  from  one  degree
of  knowledge*  to  another,  from  the
rude  canoe  of  the  Indian,  with  which
be  navigates  the  stream,  to  those
mighty  steam  ships  whose  keels
plough  every  sea  and  circumnavigate
the  globe.

Row,  in  what  respect  do  the
Latter- day  Saints  differ  frdm  the
rest  of  mankind  in  relation  to  these
matters  i  In  this  :  We  acknowledge
God  ns  supreme,  the  fountain  of  all
knowledge,  the  fountain  of  all  power,
the  fountain  of  all  intelligence,  the
fountain  of  everything  that  is  good.
Who  are  men  ?  The  creatures  of  his
workmanship,  if  yon  please,  his
descendants,  his  ow  n  children  be^ot-
ten  by  him,  descended  by  lineal
descent  from  the  God  we  worship.
The  same  being  whom  we  worship
is  our  God,  is  our  Creator,  is  our
Father,  When  I  worship  him  1
worship  him  as  my  Father.  That
which  I  possess,  if  there  be  anything
godlike  in  it,  1  attribute  it  to  him,
as  having  come  from  him  by  lineal  !
descent. Every  aspiration,  every


noble  thought,  every  pure  desire,
everything  that  is  good  and  holy
and  pure,  elevating,  ennobling  and
godlike  comes  from  our  Father,  the
God  of  the  universe,  the  Father  of
all  the  children  of  men.  In  him  we
move,  in  him  we  have  our  being.
He  can  extinguish  life; he  can  create
life  ;  he  can  perpetuate  life.  There
is  no  power  that  human  beings  can
conceive  of  which  he  does  not  possess.
The  light  that  now  shines  comes
from  him.  The  revelation  we  may
get,  imperfect  at  times  because  of
our  fallen  condition  and  because  of
our  failure  to  comprehend  the
nature  of  it,  comes  from  t^od.  The
Latter-day  Saints  glorify  him  for
it.  If  there  is  any  tiling  good  or
great  or  noble,  if  there  i»  anything
to  be  a'!  mi  red  it  comes  from  God,
not  man.  Man  is  but  the  medium,
but  the  instrument,  is  but  the  con-
duit through  which  it  flows.  God
is:  to  be  worshipped  ;  God  is  to  be
adored  ;  dod  is  to  be  glorified,  and
he  will  be*  And  when  we  are  saved,
when  we  are  delivered  from  death,
hell  and  the  grave,  we  will  glorify
God,  not  mam  Man  will  receive  no
glory  ;  it  will  be  the  eternal  Father,
tl j rough  Jesus  Christ,  who  will
receive  it  alb

This  is  the  position  occupied  by
the  Latter-day  Saints.  We  believe
in  revel  u ion.  It  may  come  dim  ;
it  may  come  indistinct,  it  may  come
sometimes  with  a  degree  of  vague-
ness which  we  do  not  like.  Why  ¥
Because  of  our  imperfection  :  because
we  are  not  prepared  to  receive  it  as
it  conies  in  its  purity;  in  its  fullness
from  God.  He  is  not  to  blame  for
this.  It  is  our  duty  though  to
contend  for  latere  faith,  for  greater
power,  for  clearer  revelations,  for
better  understanding  concerning  his
great  truths  as  he  communicates
them  to  us,  That  is  our  duty ;  that
is  the  object  of  our  lives  as  Latter-


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  ATTAINABLE,  ETC.


77


day  Saints — to  live  so  near  unto  him
that  nothing  can  happen  to  us  but
that  we  will  be  prepared  for  it  before-
hand. And  I  know  many,  many
Latter-day  Saints  who  are  in  this
condition,  who  do  live  so  that  there
is  nothing  of  any  importance  that
can  occur  for  which  they  are  not
prepared,  and  the  mind  and  will  of
God  is  made  known  to  them,  and
they  walk  according  to  it,  and  seek
earnestly  and  humbly  to  have  it
revealed  to  them  ;  and  in  taking  any
important  step  they  seek  to  know
the  will  of  God  concerning  it.  Are
they  perfect?  Far  from  it  They
are  mortal,  full  uf  weaknesses,  and
nobody  is  better  aware  of  the  char-
acter of  earthly  weaknesses  than  the
man  or  woman  who  thus  lives.

It  is  the  duty  of  all  to  live  in  this
manner,  and  if  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  could  comprehend  it  as
they  should  do  they  would  seek  to
know  the  mind  and  will  of  Uod  con-
cerning themselves.  But  what  is
the  spirit  of  the  world  to-day?  Let
a  preacher  in  the  world  deliver  a
fine  discourse  and  who  thinks  about
giving  God  the  glory  for  it]  Who
thinks  of  the  Holy  Ghost  under  such
circumstances  1  God  is  removed  far
from  them,  he  does  not  exist  in  their
thoughts,  the  preachers  who  attempt
to  preach  Christ  and  him  crucified,
fhey  are  gloriiied.  Who  gives  glory
to  God  for  Henry  W  ard  Beecher's
discourses  ?  Who  gives  glory  for
Dr.fotheringham's  or  Mr,  Talmage  s
or  any  of  the  popular  preachers  of
to-day?  Do  men  glorify  God  for
Spurgeon's  ?  No,  lie  himself  is  glori-
fied, Beecher  himself  is  glorified,
ami  Poiheringham  is  glorified.  Is
God  glorified  ?  No,  he  is  not
thought  about.  Worse  discovered
the  principle  of  telegraphy.  Who
gave  the  glory  to  God  I  X  was  in
the  hall  of  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives when  a  grand  meeting


was  held.  What  fori  To  glorify
Morse,  the  discoverer  of  that  great
principle  and  who  practically  applied
it  and  made  it  useful  Now,  I  do
not  mean  to  say  that  there  are  none
who  have  God  in  their  thoughts.  I
am  speaking  now  of  the  general
feeling  that  prevails,  of  the  general
course  that  is  taken.  Inventions,
no  matter  how  grand  they
may  be,  are  not  attributed  to
the  Father  of  them  all,  the  Creator
and  Fountain  of  all  knowledge.  But
man.  whom  lie  has  chosen  to  be  his
instrument,  he  has  blessed  with
knowledge  concerning  all  these
thin :rs,  as  tin*  result  of  his  earnest
study  and  his  untiring  efforts  to  ob-
tain knowledge.  The  Beiti"  who
does  this  is  very  seldom  thought
about  by  man.

Latter-day  Saints,  is  this  the
course  for  us  to  take?  Shall  we
glorify  the  creature  at  the  expense
of  the  Creator  i  As  a  people,  I  be-
lieve we  are  tolerably  free  from  this.
But  we  have  to  make  a  degree  of
progress  much  greater  than  we  have
in  these  things.  We  have  got  to
seek  after  (jod  with  an  earnestness,
a  fervor  ami  devotion  that  we  at  the
present  time  cannot  comprehend.
It  is  our  duty  as  Latter  day  Saints  to
seek  for  knowledge,  U  ill  God  bestow
it  upon  us  if  we  do  not  seek  for  it  ?
He  may  in  his  condescension  at
times  do  this.  Brother  Rich  said
this  morning  that  he  believed  some
people  were  too  lazy  to  think.  It
is  a  truth  plainly  expressed.  There
are  too  many  too  lazy  or  too  indif-
ferent— it  may  be  indifference  and
not  laziness  in  every  instance,  to
think,  to  feel  after,  to  seek  for  and
receive  the  blessing  of  God,  although
they  make  the  profession  of  being
Latter-day  Saints.

Now,  I  do  not  think  a  man's  re-
ligion amounts  to  anything  if  he
only  makes  a  profession  ot  it  and


78


journXl  of  discourses,


does  not  practise  it.  I  would  rather
have  an  intelligent  heathen,  if  he  is
honest  and  determined  to  do  the
best  he  can,  living  up  to  the  light  lie
has,  than  a  Latter  day  Saint  who  is
careless  and  indifferent,  who  does
not  seek  to  enjoy  the  spirit  of  his
religion.

I  am  in  hopes  that  after  awhile
we  will  begin  to  realize  as  we  never
have  yet,  that  there  are  practical
duties  resting  on  us  Latter-day
Saints  ;  that  there  is  something  more
than  being  members  of  the  Church
required  of  us.  How  is  it  with  a
great  many?  Why,  every  evil
thought,  every  wrong  speech  that
comes  in  their  hearts,  either  to  think
or  to  utter,  they  entertain  and  ex-
press, and  then  take  credit  to  them-
selves for  not  being  hypocrites.  Is
not  this  great  folly  ?  Men  and
women  think  evil  thoughts,  they
give  place  to  angry  feelings  ;  and
they  think  it  a  meritorious  act,  and
pride  themselves  upon  their  conduct
because  they  give  them  utterance
instead  of  quenching  them  !  Is  not
this  extraordinary  ?  Lacerate  the
feelings  of  their  brethren  and  sisters
and  friends,  because  they  think  they
would  be  hypocrites  if  they  did  not
utter  their  evil  thoughts,  however
unfounded  or  repulsive  they  might
be  !  What  right  have  I  to  do  this?
If  my  heart  is  wicked  does  that
justify  me  in  giving  utterances  to  its
foul  conceptions  1  Certainly  not
If  Amy  heart  were  such  that  I  could
not  think  good  thoughts  nor  enter-
tain good  feelings  ;  if  I  were  posses-
sed of  anger  and  could  not  contain
myself,  than  it  were  better  for  me  to
sew  up  my  mouth  and  stop  my
utterance.  It  is  no  merit  in  a  man
or  woman  because  he  or  she  thinks
an  evil  thought  or  indulges  in  an
angry  spirit  to  give  utterance  to  it ;
and  they  are  not  hypocrites  because
they  do  not  do  it  either. It  is  not


hypocrisy  to  quench  the  evil  thoughts
that  arise  in  our  minds.  Our  hearts
are  evil  in  consequence  of  the  fall.
As  the  prophet  Jeremiah  says:  4 'The
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,
and  desperately  wicked :  who  can
know  it  V  There  are  a  great  many
things  that  are  conceived  in  our
hearts  that  it  would  be  well  for  us
to  stifle  before  they  received  shape.
What  is  frequently  the  result  of
these  evil  conceptions  ?  Innocent
people  suffer  wrongfully  ;  injury  is
done;  danders  are  circulated;  while
those  who  start  them  justify  them-
selves, because  forsooth  they  con-
cerned them.  Just  as  well  might
the  counterfeiter,  the  bogus-maker,
say  that  because  he  makes  a  bogus
bill  he  has  the  right  to  circulate  it.
There  is  not  any  of  the  Spirit  of  God
connected  with  such  conduct.

It  is  my  duty  and  your  duty  to
think  pure  thoughts,  to  have  holy
desires,  to  be  charitable,  to  be  kind,
to  be  long  suffering,  to  be  full  of
love,  and  not  any  of  those  evil  influ-
ences. Why,  the  devil  would  have  I
no  power  on  the  earth  if  it  were  not
for  some  people  who  allow  him  to
use  their  tabernacles.  I  have  often
thought  of  this  valley  when  we  first
came  here.  There  were  a  few
Indians ;  but  who  witnessed  the
devil  or  his  power  here  %  If  there
were  no  wicked  men  nor  women  here
how  could  the  devil  manifest  his
power  here  f  Who  heard  tattling  1
Who  heard  backbiting]  Who  heard
of  litigation  ?  Who  heard  of  fight-
ing 1  Such  things  were  never  heard
of.  But  no  sooner  did  men  come
and  the  adversary  obtain  power  over
them,  than  all  the  evils  we  now  wit-
ness throughout  this  land  and  in
this  city,  which  grieves  us  so,  began
to  manifest  themselves.  And  the
more  there  are  who  will  yield  to  the
influences  of  the  evil  one,  the  more
there  are  who  will  be  guided  by


SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  ATTAINABLE,  ETC


him,  and  the  worse  the  conditions
become.  There  are  those  who  would
have  here  gambling  houses  mid
liquor  saloons  and  houses  of  ill-fame
and  other  deplorable  evils  which
abound  in  the  earth*  Why  %
Because  they  are  willing  to  yield
themselves  to  the  devil,  I  speak  it
plainly,  it  is  the  truth.  If  such
people  who  practice  these  and  kin-
dred evils  would  not  lend  themselves
to  the  devil  he  would  have  no  power
here.  What  is  our  duty  1  It  is  not
to  lend  ourselves  in  any  particular
to  the  devil,  but  it  is  to  obey  God  *
to  let  the  fruits  of  righteousness  be
manifested  in  our  lives.  If  we  are
Latter-day  Saints,  let  us  live  up  to
the  profession  and  be  that  in  truth
and  in  deed,  and  not  think  that  we
have  no  labor  to  perform  in  the
oontroling  of  our  thoughts  and  our
evil  desires  ;  neither  to  allow  our-
selves to  imagine  that  because  we
have  become  members  of  the  Church
God  will  do  it  all  without  any  efforts
on  our  part

There  is  a  work  devolving  upon
every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam  ;
there  is  a  fight  that  we  have  to  fight
against — the  evils  of  our  own  natures,
for  the  heart  of  man  is  deceitful  and
desperately  wicked,  The  natural
man  is  at  emnity  with  Christ  and
with  God  ;  and  unless  he  seeks  to
conquer  his  nature  by  bringing  it
into  subjection  to  the  mind  of  God,
he  is  not  a  son,  or  she  is  not  a
daughter  of  God,  This  is  the  labor
that  devolves  upon  us.  This  is  why
we  meet  together  at  conference  ;  it
is  to  impress  upon  the  people  the
character  and  the  magnitude  of  this  ,
work  that  rests  upon  each  indivi-
dual man  and  woman.  As  I  have
said  once  before  in  this  Tabernacle,
we  may  be  heralded  through  the
earth  as  famous  ;  but  unless  we  con-
quer ourselves  it  is  in  vain  that  our
names  are  known  and  that  our  deeds  j


resound  through  the  earth.  I  care
not  how  famous  a  man  in  tins  Church
may  be — he  may  he  an  apostle,  he
may  he  a  high  priest,  a  bishop,  or
hold  any  other  important  office  or
position  ;  but  unless  that  man  con-
quers himself  and  carries  on  the
work  within  himself  of  self-improve-
ment, and  brings  himself  and  all
there  is  within  him  in  subjection
to  the  niiu tJ  and  will  of  God,  I  tell
you  his  fame  is  &s  empty  as  the
sound  of  a  trumpet  when  it  passes
away.  We  hear  it  ;  it  strikes  the
ear,  but  itpr*seitly  dies  away,  and
that  is  the  end  ot  it  So  it  is  with
fame  of  lhi$  character.  Therefore  I
say  to  you  that  that  which  is
applicable  to  the  individual
is  applicable  to  us  as  a
people.  Our  fame  may  go  forth
for  great  \vu:  k  ?  and  mighty  things
that  we  have  dune  j  but  unless  we
ourselves  bring  forth  the  fruits  of
righteousness  in  our  lives  ;  unless
we  conquer  o  it  evil  passions,  our
evil  habits,  our  evil  inclinations,  our
evil  desires,  and  bring  them  under
complete  subjection  to  the  Spirit  of
God  our  lab  v  is  comparatively  pro-
fitless, for  th;«:  is  the  object  of
preaching  the  Gospel  to  us.

I  would  like  to  have  the  power  to
impress  upon  your  minds  the  import-
ance of  this  great  truth.  There  is
nothing  so  important  to  me  as  an
individual,  as  my  own  salvation.
This  is  the  mo  important  thing  to
me  that  can  be— that  1  myself  shall
be  saved  ;  that  T  myself  shall  so
live  as  to  be  counted  worthy  by  the
Almighty  to  receive  an  exaltation  in
his  kingdom.  This  is  of  the  utmost
imports  "ce  to  me  individually.  As
Brother  Kich  ^aid,  if  all  the  r*  st  did
certain  things,  and  he  did  not,  he
could  not  receiv  e  the  blessing,  the
reward  of  sue!*  works  ;  or  if  he  did,
and  all  the  others  did  not,  they
could  not  have  the  blessing,  That


80  JOURNAl  OF

Is  a  great  truth  ;  and  it  should  be
impressed  upon  us.

You  may  think  it  a  grand  thing
for  men  to  go  on  missions.  I  re-
member the  time,  ami  probably  the
feeling  still  exists — I  hope  it  does —
when  it  was  deemed  a  great  honor
for  a  man  to  go  upon  a  mission,
especially  a  foreign  mission.  It  is
right  that  we  should  value  these
labors.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  preside  j
as  a  bishop  or  president  of  a  tfake, !
or  to  act  in  the  calling  of  an  apostle.
All  the.se  things  are  great  in  and  of
themselves,  and  they  reflect  honor  i
upon  those  who  bear  these  offices,
and  especially  when  they  seek  to 1
magnify  thein.  But  after  all,  the
great  labor,  the  most  honorable  labor
that  any  person  can  perform,  is  to
do  that  which  I  have  attempted  to
describe  to  you — to  improve  our-
selves ;  to  be  Latter-day  Saints  in
deed  and  in  truth,  to  live  our  holy
religion,  When  we  arise  in  the
morning,  to  examine  ourselves,  to


DISCOURSES,  1

see  if  there  is  anything  that  is  in
opposition  to  the  mind  and  will  of
God  within  ourselves  ;  and  through
the  day  to  pursue  the  same  course
of  self-examination.  And  at  night
before  we  retire  to  rest,  to  bow  oar-
selves  before  our  Father  and  God  in
secret,  and  pour  out  our  souls  in
prayer  before  him,  supplicating  him
to  show  unto  us  wherein  we  have
done  wrong  during  the  day,  wherein
we  have  come  short  in  thought,
word  and  deed ;  and  then  repent  of
the  same  before  wv  lie  down  to  rest,
and  to  obtain  from  him  a  forgiveness
of  our  sins.  And  then,  going  on
day  after  day,  week  after  week,  and
year  after  year  until  the  end  shall
come.  If  we  do  this,  the  promises
of  God  are  sure,  and  they  cannot
fail.

That  it  may  be  our  happy  lot  to
attain  to  an  exaltation  with  our
Father,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Ameru


DISCOURSE BY ELDER C. W. PENROSE,  4

DELIVERED IN THE SALT LAKE  ASSEMBLY  HALL,  SUNDAY  AFTERNOON,

APRIL  25TH,  1880.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST— EXTENT  AND  APPLICATION
OF  THE  ATONEMENT— NECESSITY  OF  DIVINE  AUTHORITY  TO  ENABLE
MAN  TO  ADMINISTER  THE  GOSPEL — JOSEPH  SMITH  CALLED  OF  GOD.

The  Latter-day  Saints  aie  often  j  deluded.  Our  religion  is  counted  a
accused  by  the  people  in  the  Chris-  delusion  and  a  snare.  I  was  think-
tian  world  of  being very mufch  I  ing,  however,  during  the  meeting


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST,  ETC


81


this  afternoon  about  the  great  num-
ber or  Christian  preachers  who  to-
day are  standing  up  in  various  parts
of  the  world  informing  the  people
who  listen  to  them  that  simple  belief
on  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  died  on
Calvary,  is  all  that  is  necessary  to
save  them  and  exalt  them  in  the
presence  of  (  rod  the  Father.  And
it  seems  to  me  that  if  there  is  one
delusion  more  pernicious  than
another  it  is  that  very  doctrine,
which  seems  to  be  a  fundamental
principle  of  all  the  various  Christian
sects.  You  will  find,  go  where  you
will  iu  the  Christ  bin  world  and  lis-
ten to  any  of  the  great  preachers
of  the  day,  that  this  is  the  common
topic  of  discourse.  Jesus  Christ  is
preached — which  is  quite  right,  I
am  very  glad  that  he  is — as  the
Savior  of  the  world.  So  we  testify
as  Latter day  Saints,  In  connection,
however,  with  this  ureat  truth  which
is  proclaimed  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  by  men  professing  to  be
sent  of  God,  is  preached  the  great
error  that  mere  belief  in  the  work
which  Jesus  Christ  wrought  out  is
sufficient  for  the  salvation  of  the  |
people.  The  inhabitants  of  the
earth  are  informed  that  it  is  not  by
any  works  of  righteousness  which
they  may  perform  that  they  can
gain  any  favor  whatever  in  the  sight
of  God,  but  it  is  the  righteouness
of  Christ  alone  which  is  acceptable
to  the  Father  and  which  they  can
gain  the  benefit  of  if  they  simply
believe  in  him.

When  we  search  the  Scriptures
And  read  the  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  of  his  servants  whom  he  sent
forth  to  preach  the  Gospel,  we  do
not  find  any  such  statement  as  this.
We  find,  it  is  true,  that  the  apostles
of  the  Lord  Jesus  preached  Christ
and  him  crucified  to  the  world
wherever  they  had  an  opportunity ;
they  directed  the  attention  of  the

No.  6.


people,  Jew  and  Gentile,  wherever
they  went,  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth
who  was  slain  on  Calvary  as  the
Redeemer  of  the  world,  and  faith  in
him  was  declared  to  be  absolutely
necessary.  But  we  do  not  find  that
in  proclaiming  faith  in  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  to  that  generation  they
informed  the  people  that  a  mere
belief  in  Christ  was  all  that  was
needful  ;  we  find  that,  in  additiou  to
teaching  the  principle  of  faith  in
God  and  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,
they  taught  the  people  it  was  neces-
sary to  observe  certain  rules,  and
commandments,  to  obey  certain
forms  and  ordinances,  to  comply
with  certain  conditions  that  they
might  obtain  the  benefit  of  the
shedding  of  Christ's  blood.  We  find
by  searching  the  New  Testament,
which  contains  some  of  the  teach-
ings of  the  apostles  and  some  of
their  letters  to  the  churches,  that
the  doctrine  was  held  forth  by  them
that  "  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth
us  from  all  sin."  We  find  that  this
applied,  as  they  taught  it,  not  only
to  what  is  called  original  sin,  but
also  to  actual  sin.  The  sin  which
our  first  parents  committed  in  the
Garden  of  Eden  is  called  original
sin  ;  and  the  sins  committed  indivi-
dually by  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  are  called  actual  sin,  for  "  all
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the
glory  of  God,11  The  apostles  sent
forth  to  preach  the  Gospel  by  our
Savior  himself,  taught  the  people
that  through  the  shedding  of
Christ's  blood  remission  of  sin
might  come  to  all  and  that  mankind
might  be  redeemed  from  sin,  original
and  actual.  But  we  find  this
distinction  in  their  teaching  in
regard  to  original  sin,  and  their
teaching  in  regard  to  individual  sin  ;
that  the  blood  of  Christ  redeems
mankind  from  the  effects  of  the  fall
and  will  eventually  bring  up  all  who

Vol.  XXI.


82


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


died  in  Adam— for  "as  in  Adam  all
die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be
made  alive,1' — hut  that  while  people
had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with
the  sin  which  Adam  committed  and
therefore  have  nothing  whatever  to
do  with  the  work  of  atonement  for
that  sin,  yet  for  their  own  sins  there
is  some  action  required  on  their  part
that  they  may  obtain  redemption
therefrom,  inasmuch  as  the  blood  of
Christ  was  shed  for  original  sin
unconditionally,  but  tor  the  remis-
sion of  actual  sin  conditionally*

find,  when  lie  placed  our  first
parents  in  the  Garden  of  Eden  put
before  them  a  certain  tree,  the  fruit
of  which  he  said  "they  should  not
partake  of,  if  they  did  they  should
surely  die.'*  They  partook  of  that
tree  in  disobedience  to  the  divine
commandment,  and  planted  the
seeds  of  death  in  their  bodies,  and
that  death  has  passed  upon  all  their
posterity.  "  It  is  appointed  unto  men
once  to  die."  This  act  of  our  first
parents  introduced  death  into  the
world.  Death  came  by  sin,  and
death  has  passed  upon  all  the  pos-
terity of  Adam  and  Eve,  Jesus
came  in  the  meridian  of  time  as
"the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh
away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  to  bring
mankind  up  from  the  effects  of  the
transgression  of  our  first  parents,
Hence  he  is  called  "  the  Second
Adam,"  and  we  are  told  that  as  in
the  first  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in
Christ,  the  second  Adam,  shall  all
be  made  alive  again.  And  he  him-
self proclaimed  that  the  time  should
come,  "in  the  which  all  that  are
iti  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice
rif  the  Son  of  God  and  shall  come
forth ;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto
ffte  resurrection  of  life ;  and  they
that  have  done  evil  unto  the  resur-
rection of  damnation/*  or  in  the
words  of  the  inspired  translation,
^'they  that  have  done  good  in  the


resurrection  of  the  just,  and  they
that  have  done  evil  in  the  lesur-
reetion  of  the  uujust"  It  is  through
the  transgression  of  Adam  that  we
have  to  suffer  what  is  called  the
temporal  death.  Through  that
transgression  our  spirits  have  become
separated  from  our  bodies  ;  our
immortal  spirits  held  by  these
mortal  tabernacles  must  be  taken
out  and  our  bodies  must  return  to
the  ground  and  crumble  into  dust  ;
but  by  the  atonement  wrought  out
by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  time
is  to  come  when  all  who  lived  in
the  body  shall  live  in  the  body
again.  Christ  was  raised  from  the
dead  and  became  ik  the  first  fruits
of  them  that  slept  ;*  afterwards  they
that  are  Christ's  at  his  coining  will
be  brought  forth*  This  is  the  first
resurrection.  "  Blessed  and  holy,11
says  the  Apostle  John  in  his  vision,
"  are  they  that  hath  part  in  the
first  resurrection  ;on  such  the  second
death  hath  no  power,  but  they  shall
be  priests  of  God  and  of  his  Christ,
and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thousand
years/'  After  that  John  saw,  that
"  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which
were  in  itj  and  death  and  hell
delivered  up  the  dead  which  were
in  them  •  and  they  were  judged
every  man  according  to  his  works/'
The  atonement  wrought  out  by
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  original
sin  will  apply  just  as  far  as  the
effects  of  the  .sin  are  felt.  As  all
the  posterity  of  Adam  died  through
that  sin,  even  so  all  the  posterity  of
Adam  will  be  raised  up  again
through  the  atonement.  "But
every  man  in  his  own  order,"  says
the  apostle,  "  Christ  the  first  fruits;
afterward  they  that  are  Christ's
at  his  coming and  then  after  the
thousand  years  have  passed  away,
the  rest  of  the  dead,  as  John  said,
will  be  brought  forth  and  judged
each  one  according  to  the  deeds


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST,  ETC.


83


done  in  the  flesh.  All  must  give  an
account  unto  thegreat  eternal  Father,
We  are  responsible  for  the  acts  done
in  the  flesh,  for  like  as  it  was  in  the
case  of  our  first  parents,  good  and
evil,  truth  and  error,  are  placed
before  us,  and  every  individual  is
left  free  to  choose  the  good  and  refuse
the  evil,  or  to  choose  the  evil,  and
refuse  the  good,  as  he  pleases.  Both
are  s^t  before  us  and,  if  we  yield  to
either,  it  will  lead  us  in  either
direction.  There  is,  however,  a  spirit
in  sun,  born  in  him,  which  comes
from  God,  the  fountain  of  light  and
truth.  This  light  is  planted  in  the
breast  of  every  man  and  every
woman  who  breathes  the  breatli  of
life.  It  is  the  true  light  that  Hghteth
every  man  that  comet  h  into  the
world,  and  if  people  would  listen  to
the  whispering  of  that  still  small
voice,  be  led  by  that  natural  light
and  natural  inspiration,  they  would
be  led  up  to  God.  By  this  natural
light,  by  this  general  inspiration,  if
people  would  listen  to  its  whisper-
ings,  and  be  guided  thereby,  they
would  be  led  up  to  the  fountain  of
light.  **  Every  good  gift,"  says  the
Apostle  James,  "and  every  perfect

f;ift  is  from  above,  and  coraeth  down
rom  the  Father  of  lights  in  whom
there  is  no  variableness  neither
shadow  of  turning."  But  on  the
other  hand  there  must  be,  as  the
Book  of  Mormon  says,  11  an  opposi-
tion in  all  things,"  and  there  is  a
spirit  of  evil,  a  spirit  of  darkness,
which  draws  downward  to  death,
and  a  spirit  of  light  which  leads
upward  to  life ;  the  one  leads  to
Satan  and  his  works,  the  other  to
God  and  to  righteousness.  But  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  generally
have  been  more  prone  to  listen  to
the  inspiration  of  the  spirit  of  dark-
ness as  did  our  first  parents,  than  to
listen  to  the  still  small  voice  of  Ught
and  life  in  their  souls.


All  people  must  give  an  account
of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  accord-
ing to  the  measure  of  light  they
have  received,  and  the  opportunities
they  have  had  of  obtaining  that
light,  whde  they  dwelt  in  the  flesh.
Some  people  have  lived  on  the  earth
when  God  has  sent  his  servants
inspired  of  him  to  make  plain  his
ways,  while  others  have  tabernacled
in  the  flesh  when  no  inspired  voice
was  heard,  when  no  communication
I  was  open  between  the  heavens  and
the  earth.  And  he  who  is  just,  who
is  the  embodiment  of  the  eternal
principles  of  justice,  will  deal  out  to
all  according  to  their  light  and
according  to  the  opportunities  they
have  had  of  obtaining  that  light,  but
all  must  be  judged,  all  must  appear
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ
and  give  an  account  for  their  indivi-
dual works.

Now,  we  will  take  the  case  of  an
individual  who  has  broken  all  the
laws  of  God  and  perhaps  all  the
laws  of  man,  and  finally  has  shed
the  blood  of  a  fellow-creature,  and
is  condemned  by  the  laws  of  man
to  die ;  he  is,  in  fact,  unfit  to  live,
unfit  to  associate  with  mortal  beings,
therefore,  they  must  needs  thrust
him  out  of  the  world  that  he  may
mingle  with  immortal  beings.
Where  do  they  send  him  to?  A
minister  will  come  and  preach  to
him,  and  tell  him  that  all  he  has  to
do  is  to  cast  his  soul  on  Jesus  ;  that
he  has  just  to  believe  that  Christ
died  for  him,  and  the  righteousness
of  the  pure,  immaculate,  sinless,
Christ  will  be  crafted  into  that  rot-
ten  branch,  so  that  he  will  have  the
fruits  of  righteousness  and  peace.
That  is  according  to  the  modern
Gospel.  The  man  believes  this,  he
confesses  Christ  with  his  lips  and
acknowledges  him  with  his  tongue,
and  straightway  is  strung  up
between  the  heavens  and  the  earth,


and  choked  to  death  ;  his  spirit  is
forced  out  of  his  body,  and  ushered
into  the  presence  of  the  eternal
Father  to  stand  before  his  spotless
throne,  and  is  deemed  fit  to  dwell
in  the  society  of  the  pure  and  holy
ones  on  high.  That  is  according  to
the  modem  Gospel,  but  not  accord-
ing to  the  ancient  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  the  everlasting  Gospel  which
says  "no  murderer  hath  eternal  life
abiding  in  him,"

But  some  one  may  ask,  u  Is  there
bo  efficacy,  for  actual  sin,  in  the
atonement  wrought  out  by  Jesus
Christ  ?  Is  there  no  method  by
which  people  can  obtain  a  forgive-
ness  of  their  individual  sins  V  Yes,
there  is  a  way,  and  that  is  the  plan
of  the  true  Gospel,  but  it  does  not
consist  in  mere  belief  in  the  right-
eousness of  another  ;  mere  belief  in
the  righteousness  somebody  else  will
not  make  us  any  better  ourselves.
What  is  to  be  done  then  t  Here  the
Gospel  is  very  plain  and  simple,
when  pointed  out  by  one  who
understands  it.  But  '*  how  shall
they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have
not  believed  1  And  how  shall  they
believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have
net  heard,  and  how  shall  they  hear
without  a  preacher,  and  how  shall
they  preach  except  they  be  sent  f
It  is  men  who  are  not  sent  who
preach  the  nonsense  we  hear  in  the
world.  It  is  men  who  are  not  sent
who  deceive  mankind  with  their
strong  delusions,  and  then  turn
round  and  call  the  Latter-day  Saints
deluded,  If  they  were  sent  of  God
they  would  not  preach  such  non-
sense, they  would  not  deceive  man-
kind and  thus  become  the  cause  of
so  much  sin  and  evil  in  the  world.
For  while  people  believe  that  at  the
last  moment,  at  the  last  gasp  of  their
existence,  they  may  cast  their  souls
on  Jesus,  and  by  believing  in  his
virtue  escape  the  penalty  of  their


sins,  they  will  continue  to  sin  onr
like  many  of  these  false  teachers
who  revel  in  sin  up  to  their  very
eyes,  and  will  die  in  their  sins  and
go  down  into  the  pit  where  they
must  wait  until  they  are  released,
in  the  time  and  way  of  tin*  Lord.
The  doctrine  of  belief  without  works
is  a  strong  delusion. There  is  more
to  do,  according  to  the  Gospel,  than
merely  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ. Belief  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  is  necessary. That  is  the
foundation,  it  is  the  root  of  the
matter,  but  it  is  not  all  the  matter.
"Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  Why?
Because  if  you  have  true  faith  in
Christ,  if  you  really  believe  on  him,
you  will  believe  in  his  xayin^s  and
keep his commandments.  Hear
him  :  "  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  com-
mandments." "  Not  every  one  that
saith Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  but  he  that
doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven/1 rt  Therefore,  whoso-
ever heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,
and  doeth  them,  I  will  liken  him
unto  a  wise  man  which  built  his
house  upon  a  rock :  And  the  rain
descended,  and  the  floods  came,  and
the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon  that
house ;  and  it  fell  not ;  for  it  was
founded  upon  a  rock. And  every
one  that  heareth  these  sayings  of
mine,  and  doeth  them  not,  shall  be
likened  unto  a  foolish  man  which
built  his  house  upon  the  sand  :  And
the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods
came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and  beat
upon  that  house  ;  and  it  fell  ;  and
great  was  the  fall  of  it."

When  Jesus  Christ  sent  his
apostles  unto  all  the  world  after  he
had  risen  from  the  dead,  he  com-
manded them  to  l£  teach  all  nations,
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost. Teaching  them  to*


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST,  ETC.


85


observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have
commanded  you/'  They  were  to  go
out  and  preach  to  all  the  world,
baptizing  those  that  believed,  and
then  proceed  to  teach  all  things
whatsoever  he  had  commanded
them,  Christ  taught  his  disciples
many  principles  while  he  tarried
with  them  in  the  flesh,  and  after  he
had  risen  from  the  dead  lie  con*
tinued  his  instructions  from  time  to
time.  He  also  told  them  that  when
he  went  away  the  Comforter  should
come  to  reveal  unto  them  the  things
of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  to
guide  them  unto  all  truth  ;  for  it  is
only  by  receiving  truth  and  living
it  that  people  can  be  saved  and
exalted.  11  Sanctify  them  through
thy  truth/'  prayed  the  Savior,  i;  thy
word  is  truth/*  The  Holy  Ghost
the  Comforter,  was  to  come,  there-
fore, to  make  plain  the  truth,  and
to  reveal  things  past,  present,  and  to
come.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to
have  faith  in  Christ  Why  I
Because  every  blessing  that  Hows
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  from
God  the  eternal  Father  comes
through  Jesus  Christ.  We  must
Erst  of  all  believe  in  God,  then
believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  if  we
really  do  believe  in  God  and  in  Jesus
Christ  we  will  find  out  in  ourselves
that  we  have  broken  the  command
menls  of  God  and  of  his  Son  Jesus
Christ,  and  the  desire  will  enter  our
hearts  to  turn  away  from  sin.  Thus
it  is  said  "  whosoever  heareth  these
sayings,  and  doeth  them,  I  will
liken  unto  a  wise  man,  which  built
his  house  upon  a  rock,"  It  is  taught
by  some  that  repentance  is  the  first
principle  of  religion,  but  if  a  man
does  not  believe  in  God,  will  lie  pray
unto  lumi  What  has  a  man  t.>
repent  of  except  the  breaking  of
the  commandments  of  God  I  And
how  shall  he  feel  anything  to  repent
of  if  he  does  not  believe  in  God  ?


It  is  necessary  therefore  to  have
faith  first,  and  then  comes  repent-
ance, a  determination  to  forsake  evil,
and  this  is  what  the  ancient  apostles
taught

What  next  ?  We  find  that
wherever  the  apostles  went,  when-
ever they  found  a  people  who  be-
lieved in  Jesus  and  repented  of  their
sins  they  baptized  them.  By  sprink-
ling a  little  water  in  their  f;iee?  Or
by  making  the  sign  of  the  cross
upon  their  foreheads]  No.  They
were  taken  down  into  the  water  and
buried  there  in  the  likeness  of
Christ's  death  and  burial  and  raised
up  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection,
that  henceforth,  having  "  put  olf  the
old  man  with  his  deeds1'  they  might
walk  in  newness  of  life,  observe  his
laws  and  keep  his  commandments,
and  follow  his  footsteps,  for  he  "  left
us  an  example,  that  we  should  fol-
low in  his  steps."  Then  the  apostles
laid  their  hands  upon  those  that
were  baptized,  and  we  read  that
they  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
Comforter,  the  spirit  of  truth,  which
opened  up  a  communication  between
each  individual  soul  and  the  fountain
of  light  and  eternal  truth,  which
testified  that  they  had  been  washed
clean  from  their  sins.  How  washed  ?
By  water  ]  Yes,  and  no.  Water
does  not  wash  away  sin,  but  if  peo-
ple desire  remission  of  their  actual
sins  they  must  be  baptized.  Thus
it  must  be,  *\  to  fulfil  all  righteous-
ness "  Even  Christ  himself  had  to
he  baptized  to  fulfil  that  com  in  an  d-
meut,  and  if  he  had  not  obeyed  it
there  would  have  been  no  manifest-
ation of  the  Holy  (  J host  resting  upon
him  in  the  sign  of  a  dove,  and  a
voice  from  heaven  declaring,  "  This
is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am
well  pleased,"  Christ  left  us  this
example,  and  his  apostles  followed
in  his  footsteps,  baptizing  according
to  the  commandment  for  the  remit-


*6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


sion  of  sins.  John  the  Baptist  also
taught  this  same  doctrine  when  he
went  out  to  preach  in  Judea,  and
when  the  people  came  to  him  con-
fessing their  sins  he  haptized
them  in  Jordan  for  the  remission  of
sins.  "  I  indeed  baptize  you/1  says
John,  "  with  water ;  but  one
mightier  than  I  comet  h,  the  latchet
of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to
loose  ;  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the
Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.1'

Baptism  tor  the  remission  of  sins!
"  Why/'  says  one  "  I  thought  the
blood  of  Christ  redeemed  us  from
our  sins/'  And  so  it  does,  Water
itself  will  not  wash  away  guilt  If
a  person  has  no  faith  in  Christ,  and
has  not  repented  of  his  sins,  baptism
will  be  of  no  avail.  But  baptism
properly  administered  by  one  who
has  a  right  to  administer  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  will
avail.  The  person  to  be  baptized
must  go  down  into  the  water  and
therein  be  buried  for  a  remission  of
sins,  having  repented,  and  having
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and
in  his  atoning  blood,  for  the  blood
of  Christ  was  shed  "for  the  tins  of
the  whole  world."  But  the  "  whole
world"  will  not  receive  the  benefit
of  the  atonement  unless  they  comply
with  the  conditions  laid  down,
namely:  faith,  repentance,  and
baptism.  They  who  do  not  receive
this  ordinance  cannot  enter  into  the
presence  of  the  Father,  for  "  except
a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the
spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  God."  So  said  J esus.  This
is  a  little  different  from  the  teach-
ings of  modern  divines,  is  it  not?
Yes,  but  it  is  according  to  the  teach-
ings of  Christ  and  his  apostles.

Now,  then,  in  regard  to  the
administration  of  this  ordinance.
Men  must  have  a  right  to  administer
before  they  do  anything  in  the  name


of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and
of  the  Holy  Ghost  I  ask  who  lias
that  right  I  There  are  a  great  many
ministers  standing  up  in  the  various
chapels  and  churches  to-day  admin-
istering in  the  name  of  this  holy
trinity,  You  can  see  men  in  the
Christian  world  stand'  up  before  a
congregation  and  sprinkle  a  little
water  upon  an  unconscious  babe,  and
call  it  baptism,  and  actually  do  it  in
the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Ghost!  Who  sent  themt
Who  told  them  to  do  this  sprinkling]
Did  God  the  Father,  or  the  Son,  or
the  Holy  Ghost  1  No.  Did  any
person  to  whom  God  has  spoken,
laving  authority  from  God  to  ordain,
appoint  them  to  that  office?  No.
Why  !  Because  for  hundreds  of
years  communication  with  the
eternal  world  has  been  shut  off,
inasmuch  as  the  people  who  profess
the  Christian  religion  have  not  even
believed  in  the  doctrine  of  present
communication  with  God,  They
have  been  contented  with  the  old
revelations  contained  in  the  book  we
call  the  Bible,  which  contains  a  few
of  the  things  that  God  revealed
hundreds  of  years  ago.  They  do
not  believe  in  having  communication
with  the  heavens.  How  did  they
get  this  authority,  thenl  When
did  a  man  ever  get  authority  from
God  to  sprinkle  and  call  it  baptism,
or  to  baptize  an  infant  in  any  form  1
It  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Bible.
"He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized
shall  be  saved,"  so  Christ  said.  And
you  will  find  that  wherever  the
apostles  went,  faith  was  the  first
principle  they  taught.  44  If  thou
belie  vest  with  all  thine  heart  thou
may  est,"  said  Philip  to  the  eunuch
who  sought  to  be  baptized.  Baptism
without  faith  and  repentance  is
valueless,  it  is  void  ;  and  baptism
administered  by  one  why  hits  nut  the
right  to  attend  to  that  ordinance  in


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST,  ETC.


87


the  name  of  the  holy  trinity  is  also
void.  Supposing  men  were  to  come  j
to  us  with  as  groundless  claims  in
temporal  thing*  as  they  do  in
spiritual  Supposing  a  man  came
from  Germany  to  this  country  and
professed  to  be  a  minister  from  the
German  court.  We  would  ask  to
see  his  credentials,  and  if  he  had
been  sent  as  an  ambassador  for  that
pcoph\  he  would  be  able  no  show  his
authority.  Supposing  all  that  he
had  to  prove  liis  right  to  represent
the  German  Empire  was,  he  felt  j
called  in  his  heart  to  do  so.  We
should  consider  him  a  fit  subject  tor
a  lunatic  asylum.  But  there  are
men  administering  in  these  sacred
tilings  (administering  in  the  name
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sou,
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost),  ordinances
to  which  God  never  appointed  them,
for  they  say  there  is  no  communica-
tion between  them  and  God,  nor
has  there  been  among  the  inhab-
itants of  the  earth  for  hundreds  and
hundreds  of  years.  They  say  the
canon  of  scripture  is  full ;  God  talks
no  more  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  Where,  then,  do  they  get
the  right  to  administer  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  i  I  tell  you  as  sure  as
they  do  this  they  will  be  called  to
account  and  held  guilty  of  taking
the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain.  How
did  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  Jesus  1
Christ  get  the  authority  to  baptize  t
Christ  "ave  it  to  them.  How  did
Christ  get  the  authority  ?  Did  he
assume  *t  himself!  No.  Jesus
said,  *■ 1  come  not  to  do  my  own
will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father
which  hath  sent  me."  Jt  was  his
Father  in  heaven  who  called  him  to
be  a  high  priest  after  the  urder  of
Melehisedek,  and  Moses  and  Eli  its
who  had  previously  held  that  priest- 1
hood,  administered  to  him  m  the  !
mount.  Thus  Christ  received  that
holy  priesthood,  after  the  order  of


Melchisedek,  which  embraced  all
the  higher  powers  and  compre-
hended the  lesser  or  Aaron ic  priest-
hood (for  the  greater  includes  the
less),  and  he  ordained  his  apostles  to
that  priesthood.  "As  my  Father  hath
sent  me,"  said  he,  "  even  so  send  I
you."  They  obtained  their  ordina-
tion from  Christ,  and  therefore  had
a  right  to  baptize  and  also  to  call
others  as  the  Holy  Ghost  directed.

j  ■*  But,"  says  one,  "  there  are  many
people  who  have  felt  called  in  their
hearts,  they  have  had  the  spirit  of
the  Gospel.  Have  they  not  a  right,
seeing  they  believe  in  Christ,  to
administer  in  these  ordinances  f
Certainly  not,  not  a  particle  of  right,
Let  us  look  at  Paul  and  his  history,
related  by  himself,  Saul,  of  Tarsus,
who  went  to  persecute  the  Saints
and  was  smitten  to  the  earth  by  the
light  from  the  glorious  presence  of
the  lately  risen  Jesus.  He  was  led
blind  into  the  city  to  which  he  carried
letters  intended  to  be  used  in
the  persecution  and  annoyance  of
the  Saints.  Says  Paul  :  u  And  one
Ananias  came  unto  me  and  said,
Brother  Saul,  receive  thy  sight*
And  the  &ame  hour  I  looked  up
upon  him.  And  he  said  the  God  of
our  fathers  hath  chosen  thee,  that
thou  shouldst  know  his  will,  and  see
that  Just  One,  and  shouldst  hear
the  voice  of  his  mouth.  For  thou
shalt  be  his  witness  unto  all
men  of  what  thou  hast  seen  and
heard.  Ami  now  why  tarriest  thou?
Arise  and  be  baptized  and  wash
away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name
of  the  Lord," Saul  attended  to  the

I  ordinance  and  was  haptized.  "  Well,
now,"  says  one,  "  surely  Saul  had  a
right  to  preach  the  Gospel  He  had
seen  Jesus  ami  heard  his  voice.  A

,  miracle  had  been  wrought  upon  him
ami  he  was  told  that  he  should  be  a
witness  unto  all  men."  No,  he  had
not  yet  the  right. The  hands  of  the


88


JOURNAL  OF  UISUOUKSES.


servants  of  the  Lord  had  not  yet  been  1  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with
laid  upon  hiin.  But  we  read  in  the  I  wine;  they  stagger,  but  not  with
thirteenth chapter  of  Acts,  that  strong  drink. "For  the  Lord  hath


while  certain  prophets  and  teachers
were  waiting  before  the  Lord,  44  the
Holy  Ghost  said,  separate  me  Barna-
bas and  Saul  for  the  work  whereun-
to  I  have  called  them.  And  when
they  had  fasted  and  prayed  and  laid
their  hands  on  them,  they  sent  them
away, "  It  i s  written,""  X o  man
taketh  this  honor  unto  himself,  but
he  that  is  called  of  God  as  was
Aaron.1*  Aaron  was  called  by
Moses,  who  received  divine  autho-
rity by  direct  communication  from
God.  Aaron,  it  appears,  could  talk
better  than  Moses,  but  Moses  v\;t>
the  man  called  to  Isold  the  keys  of
the  ministry.  If  any  man  desires
to  act  in  the  holy  ministry  he  must
first  he  baptized  for  a  remission  of
his  sins  and  receive  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ohost,  otherwise  he  can*
not  be  a  teacher  unto  others.  And
even  then,  although  lie  may  have
had  visions,  although  he  may  have
seen  the  Lord  and  had  the  glories  of
heaven  opened  unto  his  view",  though
the  curtain  that  hides  the  future
may  have  rolled  up  before  him  like
a  scroll,  so  that  he  could  ^aze  into
the  glories  of  the  eternities,  -all
this  won  hi  give  him  no  authority
whatever  to  administer  in  the  name
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  must  he
called,  he  must  he  ordained,  he
must  receive  the  authority  of  the
holy  priesthood.

Meil,  what  condition  lias  the
Christian  world  been  in  tor  eentu-
ries  ?  J  u$t  the  same  in  a  g  real  mai  ly
respects  as  the  heathen  world.  The
people  have  been  in  the  depths  of
error.  Darkness  has  covered  the
earth  and  gross  darkness,  the  people.
"Stay  yourselves  and  wonder,"  says
the  Prophet  Isaiah,  speaking  of  tin-
latter  times,  44  cry  ye  out  and  cry  :


poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of
deep  sleep,  and  bath  closed  your
eyes  :  the  prophets  and  your  rulers
the  seers  hath  he  covered,"  And
the  Lord  said  that  in  that  very  time,
when  the  people  should  be  in  this
condition,  when  they  should  draw
near  unto  him  with  their  mouth,
and  honor  him  with  their  lips,  while
their  hearts  were  far  from  him,  "I
will  proceed  to  do  a  marvelous  work
among  the  people,  even  a  marvelous
work  and  a  wonder ;  for  the  wisdom
of  the  wise  men  shall  perish,  aud  the
understanding  of  their  prudent  men
shall  W  hid/  *  *  *  *
And  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear
the  words  of  the  book,  and  the  eyes
fit  t  he  blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity,
and  out  of  darkness.  The  meek
also  shall  increase  their  joy  in
t  he  Lord,  and  the  poor  among  men
shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of
Israel/*  Just  as  the  prophet  pre-
dicted so  it  has  been  in  the  atje  in
which  we  live.  Out  of  darkness  lias
forth  light. God,  from  his


c


holy  dwelling  place,  looked  down
upon  the  world  and  beheld  that  all
had  iione  astray,  that  none  wi  re
doing  good,  no  not  one.  They  were
divided  and  contentious,  jangling
and  quarrelling  about  creeds*  Men
were  crying  lo  •  here,  and  lo  !  there;


in


the  blind  were


leading  the


blind  and  both  were  falling  into  the
ditch  together.  The  Lord  beheld
this  from  his  holy  habitation  and
again  restored  the  truth  from  the
eternal  world. He  sent  his  holy

angels  and  revealed  anew  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  Truth  came  out  of
the  earth,  and  righteousness  looked
down  from  heaven  and  both  joined
in  one,  gave  joy  to  the  meek,  and
became  a  power  among  men  in  the
earth.


i


INSUFFICIENCY  OF  MERE  BELIEF  IN  CHRIST,  ETC*


God  called  Joseph  Smith  to  the
great  work  of  ushering  in  the  last
dispensation.  He  made  manifest  to
him  the  truth,  sent  angels  to  him,
enlightened  his  mind  and  gave  him
the  gift  and  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  as  Moses  and  Elias  came
to  Christ  in  the  Mount,  so  also  did
Peter,  James  and  John  ordain  Jo-
seph Smith  to  the  Melehisedek
priesthood.  The  authority  of  that
priesthood  is  here  now.  and  the  ser-
vants of  God  who  are  called  hy  that
authority  go  forth  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature,  for  a
witness  uuto  all  nations,  declaring
that  the  end  is  near,  and  that  the
second  advent  of  the  Lord  is  close
at  haml.  People  are  called  upon
everywhere  to  repent  of  their  sins  j
to  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  to  receive  the  mit  of  the
Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  oi
hands,  and  whenever  people  have
received  the  Gospel  and  obeyed  its
ordinances  his  blessings  have  come
to  tin  uk  The  Holy  Ghost,  the
Comforter,  which  speaks  direct  to
their  souls,  has  borne*  witness  that
their  sins  are  remitted,  that  they  are
raised  to  a  newness  of  life,  and  that
if  faithful  unto  the  end  they  will  he
received  back  into  the  presence  of  the
Father,  to  dwell  in  his  society  and
glory.  This  is  ;t  privilege  o  lie  red  to
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  who
will  believe  in  ihU  Gospel  of  the
latter-days.  Yet  it  is  no  new  thing.
It  is  the  old  Gospel  restored.  INot
a  doctrine,  not  a  principle,  not  a
precept  therein,  but  what  may  be
found  in  the  old  Scriptures.  And
this  is  what  people  call  delusion  !
The  Go>pel  came  to  us  in  the  various
nations  yyk  the  earth,  some  belonging
to  the  various  religious  sects,  and
some  belonging  to  no  sect  whatever,
and  when  we  received  and  obeyed  it
a  power  took  hold  of  us  superior  to


anything  we  have  ever  experienced
before,  and  witnessed  to  us  in  an
unmistakeable  manner  the  truth  of
this  work. It  is  not  a  phantom.

It  is  not  something  imaginary,  but
it  is  a  solemn  fact,  as  certain  as  the
fact  of  our  existence.  No  one  can
reason  us  out  of  it,  or  force  us  out
of  it.  Why  ?  Because  it  is  stamped
upon  our  spiritual  nature,  it  is  a
part  of  our  very  being,  God  Al-
mighty has  revealed  tins  truth  to
our  souls,  and  we  know  it  as  we
know  we  live.  That  is  why  we  are
here.  ;a  f

Now,  our  business  is  to  live  this
religion,  to  learn  further  of  the  ways
of  God,  aud  to  do  his  will  in  all
tilings.  The  matters  I  have  heen
speaking  of  are  only  the  A  II  C  of
the  Gospel.  We  must  learn  "  line
upon  line  and  precept  upon  precept,"
and  continue  to  grow  and  increase

Kip

in  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  living
by  4fc  every  word  that  proceedeth  out
of  the  month  of  Gad."  Now  I
would  ask  whether  this  is  the  case?
Having  been  redeemed,  or  having

had  our  individual  transgressions
remitted,  are  we  walking  in  the
straight  and  narrow  way  1  Are  we
Naming  of  God]  Are  we  seeking
to  understand  more  distinctly  and
clearly  the  things  that  pertain  to
our  salvation  1  Are  we  performing
the  ta>k  allot  ted  to  us  f  For  we  are
living  in  an  important  day.  The
day  of  tin*  second  coming  of  the
Savior  is  nLli  at  hand,  an  i  w]  en  lie
comes  shall  we  be  found,  as  in  the
parable,  among  the  wise  or  among
die  foolish  virgins  !  How  is  it  with
us  this  afternoon  ?  Have  we  oil  in
our  lamps  to  guide  us  on  our  path  ?
There  is  no  need  for  us  to  do  any-
thing in  the  dark.  We  should  be
the  children  of  the  light.  We  are
accused  of  following  our  leaders  in
**  blind  obedience.'* There  is  no


no


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


such  thing  in  the  Gospel  We  have
in  our  midst  those  who  give  us  the
word  of  the  Lord  in  a  church  capa-
city, "  for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry
and  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of
Christ,1'  hut  it  is  our  privilege  to
have  the  same  light  "The mani-
festation- of  the  spirit  are  given  to
every  one  to  profit  withal."  The
Holy  Ghost  is  conferred  upon  each
individual  and  it  is  our  privilege  to
see  our  way.  When  the  true  Saints
hear  the  word  of  life,  there  is  an
echo  within  their  hearts  and  a  spirit
which  testifies  to  its  truthfulness
When  the  word  conies  through  our
inspired  leaders  it  proceeds  from  the
spirit  of  light  which  guides  us  unto
all  truth.  It  us  the  privilege  of
every  Saint  to  have  this  light  for
themselves,  the  light  of  God,  the
light  of  truth,  "  the  light  that  is  in
all  things  and  through  all  things
and  round  about  all  things,  ami  is
the  law  by  which  all  tilings  are  gov-
erned." It  is  our  privilege  to  he  in
possession  of  that  faith  that  we  may
ask  and  receive,  that  we  may  seek  and
find,  that  we  may  knock  and  have
the  door  opened  unto  us.  Well,  are
we  doing  this  1  If  so,  then  we  re-
joice in  our  religion.  The  world
compared  therewith  is  a*  nothing  ;
all  things  are  as  dross  compared
with  the  excellency  of  the  know-
ledge of  Christ,  If  we  are  living
our  religion  it  is  everything  with  us
"  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God
and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these
things  shall  be  added  unto  you."
Earthly  things  perish  with  the  using
and  when  we  pass  away  we  must
leave  them  behind  ,  but  we  will  carry
with  us  the  Gospel,  and  every  one
of  its  truths  we  have  made  our  own.
We  will  cany  with  us  the  holy
priesthood  and  its  gifts  and  powers,
if  we  have  been  faithful,  and  will
be  permitted  to  mingle  with  the


spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,
and  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  a  glorious
resurrection.

Now  let  us  strive  to  walk  in  this
path  that  we  may  gain  this  great
glory.  Let  us  attend  to  the  duties
we  are  required  to  perform.  There
is  nothing  in  the  Gospel  that  is  non-
essential. Every  principle  that  has
been  revealed  unto  us  is  necessary
for  the  salvation  of  man,  for  I  tell
you  before  we  are  fit  to  dwell  in  the
presence  of  God  and  enjoy  the  ful-
ness of  his  glory  we  must  become
like  him.  Latter-day  Saints,  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel  will  not
save  you,  they  are  only  aids  to  sal-
vation. What,  then,  will  save  us  1
A  knowledge  of  truth  and  t  he  prac-
tice thereof,  nothing  else,  We  must
learn  the  ways  of  God.  We  must
walk  in  his  paths.  We  must  be
Saints  in  very  deed,  and  walk  in  the
footsteps  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ,  and  then,  by-aud-by,
where  he  is  we  will  he  also.  If  we
turn  our  backs  upon  the  truth  we
will  go  down  to  death  ;  we  will  be
beaten  with  many  stripes,  we  must
suffer  the  consequence  of  our  guilt,
and  after  we  have  gone  through  the
depths  of  suffering  and  sorrow  in
the  due  time  of  tin*  Lord  we  may
get  some  kind  of  a  salvation  and
glory,  but  where  God  and  Christ
are  we  cannot  come,  worlds  without
end,

I  would  say  to  my  friends  who
are  here  this  afternoon,  that  I  know
this  work  is  true,  God  Almighty
has  made  it  known  to  me.  I  hear
this  testimony  to  you,  and  I  am
willing  to  meet  it  before  the  great
judgment  seat.  Go  1  has  spoken
from  the  heavens  in  this  our  day.
He  has  restored  the  Gospei  of  Christ
ami  the  authority  to  preach  it.  It
will  go  forth  to  every  nation,  kin-
dred, tongue  and  people.  The  wise
and  the  prudent  will  not  receive  it,


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC*


but  M  the  poor  among  men  shall  re- 1
joice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel/1  This
work  will  go  on  to  this  end  and  pur-
pose. Zion  will  be  built  up,  Jerusa-
lem will  be  redeemed,  and  the  time
will  come  when  Jesus,  our  Redeemer
shall  descend  in  power  and  great
glory  to  reign  upon  the  earth.  I
bear  my  testimony  that  this  is  the
work  of  God,  that  he  requires  our
whole  heart,  and  that  we  should  |
love  our  neighbors  as  ourselves.  Let
us  put  away  our  follies  and  our
errors.  Let  us  not  drink  into  the
spirit  of  the  world. Let  us  not  pat-


tern after  the  wickedness  that  is
creeping  into  our  midst.  Come  out
from  among  them  and  be  ye  separate,
and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing !
Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of
the  Lord.  It  is  only  by  the  practice
of  righteousness  and  personal  purity,
that  we  will  be  made  tit  to  dwell  in
the  presence  of  the  Lord.  A  doc*
trine  contrary  to  this  is  the  worst
kind  of  delusion.

May  God  help  us  to  live  the  life
of  a  Saint  and  finally  save  us  in  his
kingdom,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  Ephraim, Sanpete  County, on  Scnday  Mobnixc,

April  13th,  1879.


(Report  s  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL—  OFJ EOT  OF  THE  GATHER
ING — MANIFESTATIONS OF THE ANCIENTS TO JOSEPH  SMITH— THE
GOSPEL TO DEPARTED SPIRITS— DUTIES OF THE SAINTS TO  EACH
OTHER — THE  KIND  OF  MEN  WANTED  TO  GO  ON  MISSIONS,


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  the  brethren
and  sisters  of  this  place,  and  of  look-
ing at  your  faces  ;  and  I  would  like
to  hear  more  of  the  brethren  speak
to  you,  but  I  know  you  want  me  to


talk  awhile ;  and  as  I  have  to  leave
this  afternoon  I  will  occupy  the  time
now,  and  we  will  leave  some  of  the
brethren  to  preach  to  you  then.  I
desire  your  faith  and  prayers,  for
we  are  all  dependent  upon  the  Lord  :


92  Jul, KNAL  Ok

none  of  us  can  do  or  say  anything
that  is  good  or  useful  or  beneficial  to
society  unless  we  are  under  the  aid,
guidance  and  control  of  the  Lord,

A  man  cannot  speak  aright  unless
he  speaks  under  the  inspiration  of
the  Almighty  ;  and  then  the  people
cannot  hear  aright,  nor  understand
aright  unless  they  have  a  portion  ol
the  same  Spirit.  And  hence  there
was  ♦something  peculiar  in  the  ex-
pression made  by  Jesus  upon  this
subject.  He  understood  this  princi-
ple very  well,  and  in  speaking  on  it,
says,  4 'My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and
know  me,  and  follow  me  :  but  a
stranger  they  will  not  follow  for
they  know  not  the  voice  of  a  stran
ger."  And  hence  when  the  elders
were  sent  out  to  preach  the  Gospel
at  first,  they  were  told  to  go  forth
and  God  would  go  with  them,  and
his  Spirit  would  accompany  them
and  his  angels  should  go  before
them.  The  Lord  had  his  sheep
scattered  all  over  the  face  of  the
earth ;  and  those  sheep,  when  they
heard  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,
understood  it  ;  there  was  something
that  bore  testimony  to  their  hearts,
which  they  could  not  well  describe,
and  that  something  directed  you,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  to  those
who  brought  the  everlasting  Gospel  ;
and  when  you  heard  it  you  said,
"That  is  true/'  And  people  might
say  what  they  pleased,  still  you
believed  and  felt  that  it  was  true.
You  experienced  this  feeling,  but
you  could  hardly  account  for  it.
This  was  the  spirit  that  Jesus
alluded  to  when  he  said,  **  If  I  be
lifted  up  from  the  earth,  I  will  draw
all  men  unto  me,"  He  has  his  own
way  of  accomplishing  that  object,
and  it  takes  time,  a  great  deal  of
time  to  do  that.  But  he  was  not
going  to  drive  them  nor  force  them,
uor  in  any  way  to  coerce  them  j  but
lie  would  present  to  their  minds


DISUUUKSKS.

such  beautiful  principles,  such  lovely
sentiments  and  develop  such  glorious
things  among  them,  that  they  could
not  but  see  and  appreciate  them,  nor
could  they  find  them  anywhere  else.
And  then  when  those  principles
were  confirmed  by  the  influence  of
the  holy  priesthood through  the

|j  revelations  of  God  to  the  people,  it
]> reduced  the  effect  upon  them  that

\  we  have  seen. And  hence  you  have

I  gathered  here,  left  your  homes  in
the  old  world — the  major  part  uf
you  from  Scandinavia,  1  was  one  of
those  brethren  that  started  out  in
an  early  day  with  this  message  of
glad  tidings  ;  and  Brother  Erastus
Snow  found  his  way  to  you  folks,
while  1  went  to  others  in  a  different
part  of  the  world,  and  si  ill  others  of
the  brethren  hunted  up  other  sheep
in  other  places.  What  was  the
result  of  our  preaching  ?  A  Ye  see  it
here  to-day  ;  the  result  is  that  you
have  been  brought  to  a  knowledge
of  the  truth,  and  through  obedience
to  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord,  you
have  received  the  Holy  Spirit  of
God,  which  has  led  you  into  the
truth,  so  that  you,  as  did  the
ancient  Saints  before  you,  sit  in
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,  You
no  lunger  experience  the  kind  of
uncertainty  you  used  to  be  afflicted
With,  but  you  have  a  certainty,  an
abiding  reality.  You  do  not  eare  to
die  ;  that  is  a  matter  of  very  little

'  importance.  Jesus  said  to  a  woman
on  a  certain  occasion,  whom  lift  had
asked  to  give  him  water  to  drink,
'*  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,
and  who  it  is  that  sayeth  to  tbee  :
Give  me  to  drink  ;  thou  wo u hist
have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would
have  given  thee  living  water.1'  We
have  drunk  of  that  stream  which
makes  glad  the  city  of  our  God.
And  we  want  to  realize  and  appreci-
ate the  position  we  occupy  before

j  God,  and  the  great  blessings  and


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


privileges  that  ;nv  within  our  reach.
We  have  just  commenced,  as  it  were,
in  the  sreat  work.  We  liave  receive
ed  a  great  many  precious  principles,
and  have  seen  and  experienced  a
great  many  things.  But  how  was
it  1  Simply  through  a  glass,  darkly;
and  we  yet,  in  many  instances,  see
them  through  a  glass,  darkly — at
least  very  many  of  them  ;  and  some-
times we  can  scarcely  perceive  the
difference  between  ourselves  and  the
rest  of  mankind,  or  between  the
religion  we  have  embraced  and  that
which  other  people  have.  If  we
could  only  reflect  upon  it,  there  is  as
much  difference  as  there  is  between
light  and  darkness.  But  we  do  not
always  comprehend  these  things,  and
hence  we  labor  under  difficulties  per-
taining to  this  matter  ;  because  we
do  not  see,  we  do  not  comprehend
the  position  and  relationship  that
subsists  between  us  and  our  God.
God  is  our  Father  ;  we  are  his  chil-
dren. He  has  brought  us  into  his
covenant,  and  it  is  our  privilege  to
go  on  from  wisdom  to  wisdom,  from
intelligence  to  intelligence,  from
understanding  of  one  principle  to
that  of  another,  to  go  forward  and
progress  in  the  development  of  truth
until  we  can  comprehend  God.  For
we  are  his  children,  we  are  his  sons
and  daughters,  and  he  is  our  Father.
He  has  organized  this  Church  in
order  that  we  may  be  educated  in
the  principles  of  life,  that  we  may
comprehend  those  principles  that
exist  in  the  bosom  of  God,  that  we
may  be  able  to  teach  our  children
correct  principles,  in  order  that  we
may  be  placed  in  a  position  whereby
we  can  be  assimilated  into  the  like-
ness of  our  heavenly  Father,  and
have  a  communication  opened  be-
tween angels  and  us,  that  we  may
feel  that  we  are  of  the  family  of  God
and  of  the  household  of  faith,  and
that  we  can  operate  with  them ;  and


that  while  part  of  his  family  who
have  lived  upon  the  earth  and  who
live  again  in  another  state  of  exist-
ence behind  the  vail,  are  operating
with  him  and  with  the  angels  of  God
and  with  the  whole  of  the  Holy
Priesthood  in  developing  his  pur-
poses in  the  heavens,  that  we  may
be  prepared  to  operate  with  him  on
the  earth  in  carrying  out  his  pur-
poses here  ;  that  his  people  may  be
preserved  from  the  powers  of  dark-
ness, that  the  light,  intelligence  and
revelations  of  God  may  be  upon  us,
that  w«  may  comprehend  our  true
position  to  him,  to  each  other,  to
lis  Church  and  kingdom,  and  to  the
living  and  the  (lead ;  that  we  may
realize  the  position  we  occupy  in
relation  to  all  the  various  duties  and
the  responsibilities  of  life.  And
then  after  realizing  them,  magnify
our  callings,  unite  ourselves  together
as  the  heart  of  one  man  under  the
influences  of  the  Spirit  of  eternal
truth  as  the  family  of  God  upon  the
earth,  and  purge  out  everything
from  us  that  is  evil,  corrupt,  low
and  degrading,  and  elevate  our
minds  and  feelings  to  a  higher  stan-
dard  of  intelligence,  morality  and
obedience  to  his  laws,  and  thus  pre-
pare ourselves  to  carry  out  the
things  of  God  in  relation  to  the
earth  whereon  we  dwell,  and  each
of  us  take  a  part  in  bringing  to  pass
his  purposes  here  upon  the  earth,
not  by  any  in  telligence  we  may  have ;
but  by  the  wisdom  and  intelligence
that  God  shall  impart  from  time  to
time,  until  we  shall  progress  in  every
principle  that  is  calculated  to  elevate
and  ennoble  mankind,  until  finally
we  shall  see  as  we  are  seen  and  know
as  we  are  known.

We  are  now  gathered  together  to
Zion,  For  what  ?  To  build  up  Zion,
and  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of
the  Lord  pertaining  to  the  human
family  upon  the  earth. And  being


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


gathered  together  we  are  organized
with  apostles  and  prophets,  with
presidents  and  their  counselors,  with
bishops  and  their  counselors,  with
elders,  priests,  teachers  and  deacons.
We  are  organized  according  to  the
order  of  God,  and  these  very  princi-
ples that  look  small  to  us  emanate
from  God.  We  have  seventies  and
high  priests,  and  all  these  men  hold
certain  positions  which  it  is  expected
of  them  that  they  will  fulfill  arid
magnify,  here  in  the  flesh,  in  the
interests  of  truth  and  righteousness;
in  the  inNTosts  of  the  kingdom  of
God  and  in  the  establishment  of
correct  principles  among  the  Saints
of  the  Must  High.  We  are  here  to
co-operate  with  God  in  the  salvation
of  the  living,  in  the  redemption  of
the  *lead,  in  the  blessings  of  our
ancestors,  in  the  pouring  out  bles-
sings upon  our  children  ;  we  are
here  for  the  purpose  of  redeeming
and  regenerating  the  earth  on  which
we  live,  and  God  has  placed  his
authority  and  his  counsels  here  upon
the  earth  for  that  purpose,  that  men
may  learn  to  *l*  the  will  of  God  ou
the  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.
This  is  the  pbject  of  our  existence  ;
and  it  is  for  us  to  comprehend  the
position.

For  instance,  Joseph  Smith  in  the
first  place  was  set  apart  by  the  Al
mighty  according  to  the  counsels  of
the  gods  in  the  eternal  worlds,  to
introd  uce  the  principles  of  life  among
the  people,  of  which  the  Gospel  is
the  gram!  power  and  influence,  and
through  which  salvation  can  extend
to  all  peoples,  all  nations,  all  kin-
dreds, all  tongues  and  all  worlds.  It
is  the  principle  that  brings  life  and
immortality  to  light,  and  places  us
in  communication  with  God,  God
selected  him  for  that  purpose,  and
he  fulfilled  his  mission  and  lived
honorably  and  died  honorably.  I
kuow  of  what  I  speak  for  I  was  very


well  acquainted  with  him  and  was
with  him  a  great  deal  during  his
life,  and  was  with  him  when  he  died.
The  principles  which  he  had,  placed
him  in  communication  with  the
Lord,  and  not  only  with  the  Lord,
but  with  the  ancient  apostles  and
prophets;  such  men,  for  instance,
as  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Noah,
Adam,  Sethf  Enoch,  and  Jesus  and
the  Father,  and  the  apostles  that
lived  ou  this  continent  as  well  as
those  who  lived  on  the  Asiastic  con-
tinent. He  seemed  to  be  as  familiar
with  these  people  as  we  are  with  one
another.  Why?  Because  he  had
to  introduce  a  dispensation  which
was  called  the  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times,  and  it  was  known
as  such  by  the  ancient  servants  of
God.  What  is  meant  by  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fulness  of  times  ?  It  is
a  dispensation  in  which  all  other
dispensations  are  merged  or  concen-
trated. It  embraces  and  embodies
all  the  other  dispensations  that  have
existed  upon  the  earth  wherein  God
communicated  himself  to  the  human
family.  Did  they  have  the  Aaronic
priesthood  in  former  times  1  Yes.
80  have  we.  Did  they  have  the
Melchisedek  priesthood  in  former
times]  Yes*  So  have  we.  Did  they
have  a  gathering  dispensation  in
former  times,  when  Moses  led
the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egpy t  ]
Yes.  So  have  we,  just  as  it  was
predicted  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  :
u  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city  and
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you
to  Zion/1  And  what  will  you  do
with  them  when  you  get  them  there  ?
u  And  I  will  give  you  pastors  accord-
ing to  mine  heart,  which  shall  feed
you  with  knowledge  and  understand-
ing." We  have  that  dispensation.
Moses,  when  he  appeared  to  Joseph
Smith,  committed  to  him  "the  keys
of  the  dispensation  of  the  gathering  of
Israel  from  the  four  quarters  of  the


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


earth  and  the  restitution  of  the  ten
tribes."  Read  it  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants  :  it  is  there  plainly
written,  Why  are  yon  here  to  day,
from  Scandinavia  and  other  parts  of
the  world?  Because  God  has,
among  other  dispensations,  restored
the  dispensation  of  the  gathering.

In  relation  to  other  matters.  Was
there  a  time  to  transpire  that  Elijah
should  come  to  "  turn  the  hearts  of
the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  the
hearts  of  the  children  to  their
fathers  f  That  Elias  has  come,  and
has  introduced  that  dispensation  ;
and  in  that  are  associated  the  very
things  you  are  engaged  in  and
which  we  have  come  to  attend  to,
namely  the  laying  of  the  foundation
stone  of  the  Temple.  Now,  I  will
ask,  whoever  thought  of  building
Temples  until  God  revealed  It  1
Did  you?  If  you  did,  I  wish  you
would  tell  us  of  it.  And  did  you
know  how  to  build  them'!  No.
And  did  you  know  how  to  admini
ster  in  them  after  they  were  built  ?
No,  you  did  not.  We  are  indebted
to  the  Lord  for  these  things.  And
when  Elijah  the  prophet  appeared
to  Joseph  Smith  he  committed  to
him  the  keys  of  this  dispensation  ;
and  hence  we  are  at  work  building
Temples  ;  but  some  of  us  hardly
know  why.  We  go  at  it  the  same
as  we  follow  plowing,  sowing,  plant*
ing,  reaping  and  such  kinds  of  pur*
suits.  There  are  other  things  behind
that.  There  are  ordinances  associated
behind  these  things  that  go  back
into  eternity ;  and  forward  unto
eternity ;  that  are  the  offspring
of  God,  that  are  intended  for  the
welfare,  the  happiness  and  exaltation
of  mankind;  for  those  who  are  living
and  those  that  are  dead  and  for
those  that  will  live  hereafter,  per-
taining both  to  our  progenitors  and
our  posterity.  And  that  is  one  of
those  keys  that  have  been  turned.


Do  you  think  that  the  elders  who
brought  the  Gospel  to  you  in  far  off
lands  could  have  gathered  you  here
if  they  were  not  the  bearers  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and
if  this  had  not  been  a  gathering
dispensation  1  I  think  not.  As  I
have  said,  the  elders  went  to  differ-
ent parts  of  the  earth,  for  we  have
preached  a  great  deal.  I,  myself,
have  traveled  hundreds  of  thousands
of  miles  preaching  the  Gospel  ;  and
without  purse  or  scrip,  trusting  in
the  Lord.  Did  he  ever  forsake  me  1
Never,  no  never,  I  always  was
provided  for,  for  which  I  feel  to
praise  God  my  heavenly  Father.  1
Was  enjmml  in  his  work  and  he  told
me  that  he  would  sustain  me  in  it ;
he  has  been  true  to  his  trust,  and  if
I  have  not  been  true  to  mine  I  hope
he  will  furtive  me  ami  help  me  to
do  better.  But  the  Lord  has  been
true  and  faithful,  and  I  have  never
needed  anything  to  eat  or  drink  or
wear,  and  was  never  prevented  for
want  of  means  of  traveling  where  I
pleased.

Well,  to  return.  After  you
received  the  Gospel  and  the  spirit  of
the  same,  the  great  desire  of  your
hearts  was  to  go  to  Zion,  And  in
order  to  accomplish  this  you  put
away  your  little  savings  and  you
began  to  contrive  how  to  dispose  of
your  little  properties,  and  many  of
you  were  almost  ready  to  sell  your-
selves to  get  to  Zion,  You  could
not  tell  why  you  had  such  feelings,
but  you  did  have  them,  and  you
could  not  get  rid  of  them  until  you
were  brought  here.  You  would  not
have  come  here  had  it  not  been  for
that,  would  you  t  I  have  no  idea
that  you  would.  When  you  were
told  to  build  Temples,  what  made
you  build  them  1  Because  you  had
received  the  Gospel  in  your  hearts,
associated  with  which  was  the  mis-
sion of  Elijah  which  was  to  turn  the


96


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


hearts  of  the  children  to  the  fathers,
and  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the
children.  I  wish  I  could  tell  it  to
you  as  I  Understand  some  of  these
things,  and  I  wish  you  could  under-
stand those  principles,  Suffice  it
to  say  that  Satan  has  tried  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  overturn
the  works  of  God,  and  in  some  in-
stances he  has  apparently  succeeded
admirably.  He  was  the  cause  at  one
time  of  all  the  people  of  the  earth
being  destroyed  except  a  little  seed
which  was  saved  to  propagate  the
human  species.  Prubiildy  the  devil
would  laugh  pretty  heartily  over
that,  thinking  that  he  had  aecoui-  (
plished  his  purposes.  However  that
was  not  the  end.  It  is  true  that
the  judgments  of  God  overtook
them;  it  is  true  they  were  destroyed
by  a  flood  in  the  flesh,  and  were
shut  up  in  prison  in  the  spirit ;  but
it  is  also  true  that  the  same  Savior
who  is  our  Savior,  when  he  was  put
to  death  in  the  flesh,  was  quickened
by  the  spirit,  and  that  he  visited
those  spirits  in  prison,  opening  up
the  door  of  salvation  to  them  that
they  might  be  redeemed  and  come
forth  and  accomplish  certain  pur-
poses which  God  had  designed  ;  and
hence  we  find  the  Savior  operating
among  all  that  body  of  people  that
the  devil  thought  were  destroyed,
but  through  this  visitation  were
placed  within  the  reach  of  deliverance.
But  has  Satan  prevailed  to  a  great
extent  1  He  has.  Has  darkness
spread  itself  over  the  earth  %  Yes,
Have  people  wandered  away  from
God  and  forsaken  him  and  his
laws  ?  They  have.  But  then  the
Lord  will  be  merciful  towards  them,
they  not  having  received  the  light
that  we  have,  hence  he  feels  towards
them  as  a  father  feels  towards  his
children,  being  desirous  to  promote
their  happiness  as  far  as  it  lays  in
his  power  i  and  if  he  could  not  save


them  while  in  the  flesh,  he  imdei
stands  certain  eternal  laws  and  prin-
ciples whereby  they  may  hereafter
be  redeemed.  The  Judge  of  all  the
earth  will  do  right,  And  while  tin*
priesthood  behind  the  vail  are  oper-
ating and  preaching  to  the  spirits
that  are  in  prison  that  have  been
there  from  the  different  ages,  he  calls
upon  us  to  build  temples  that  we
may  administer  for  the  bodies  of
these  people  that  have  died  without
the  Gospel,  that  they  may  bo  judged
according  to  men  in  the  flesh  and
live  after  God  in  the  spirit.  At  the
commencement  of  the  dispensations
he  sends  out  his  elders  generally  to
all  the  world  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature.  In  this  dispensa-
tion he  not  only  does  this  ;  but  as
we  live  in  a  gathering  dispensation,
he  also  gathers  in  the  people,  and
when  they  learn  a  little  of  his  law,
there  are  many  ordained  to  the
priesthood  and  sent  out  as  messen-
gers, and  we  keep  sending  them  out  to
preach  t lie  Gospel  and  to  gather  in  the
elect ;  and  wa  send  them  to  their
own  people  to  tell  them  what  God
has  done  and  is  doing.  And  they
keep  coming  and  going.  And  whom
do  we  send  ?  If  we  send  to  England
we  send  Englishmen,  or  men  who
can  speak  the  English  language  j  if
to  Scandinavia,  we  send  Scandinavi-
ans :  we  send  generally  their  own
people,  accompanied  with  men  of
experience,  after  the  Gospel  has  been
introduced  to  them.  Why?  That
they  may  go  and  teach  their  own
people  the  way  of  life  ami  salvat  ion.
What  then?  They  come  back  again
and  build  Temples.  And  what  then?
They  and  their  people  from  the  vari-
ous nations  of  the  earth  go  into  these
Temples  and  administer  for  their
fathers,  and  grandfathers,  their
uncles  and  aunts,  their  friends  and
relatives,  and  thus  reach  back,  back
into  distant  times  to  redeem  and


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACH  Itfii  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  "ETC.


it  7


save  others.  And  who-  are  .these  [the  Lordls  ji&t  *nan's.  We  do  not
men  ?  Just  such  as  the  ancient  pro-  want  to  Iran  ypon  than  nor  put  .our
phets talked  about 2%ey.  are  jtnisi  ia  mail*  we  jaw

saviors  upon  Mount  Zron,  are  they  obedient  *tq,  eYa^onUnjaqce  of  man


not,  saving  and  redeeming  their*
people — and  those  m^n  who  ai;e,
quarrying  and  hauling  th$  jock,  and
those  who  are  engaged  in  laying  up
these  terrace  and  km  pie  walk,  and
those  who  are  otherwise  engaged  in
making  the  necessary  ^prqparatiott
for  the  buUdi^bf  the  temple  jire  nil


that  is  prflper  and*  rigltf,  .aiid  which
does  i^ot  conflict  with  the  litw.of  God,
while  |\we  are  ,  obedibnt -JU>  (he&e
things #  we '  do  mt  'want  to  •seU  ;bur
selVes '  to  the  wicked  %nd  ungodly.
We  do  not  care  ftucrh  about  their
ways  or  ttyeuP  theories *  ideas.*  '*
"  The  Lord,"  says  one,  ^sfiall  be  our
laboring  in  tfcelsame  di^pction, The  [judge,  the  Lord  shall  .be  our  king,
Lord  r^ante this  work  atipar  hands  ]  the  Lord  shall  lie  our  law  giver  and
in  order  *td  test  us,  Ifsefr whether  |  h^ shsdi  rull  ov^us-v  And  ,we, »
we  wiH  carry  out  hfa  lawsftr'not  (  under; the inspiration of  the*
And  if  hen  we  build  our  temples  apd  j  Almijdity,  will  iukrml^ceabe  laws  of
lie  accepts  of  them,  ire ; will  tjien  God  tli  ii  *\Ut'  in^thfi  heaths  and<r
enter  into  them  and  Administer ufton  the thf  and  form  a  hucleue
in  the  name  ofGod^%id  adrniui-  of  triibh* of; virtue  niid  intelligence,
storing  in  them  we  become  savior*  t  of  la\f  and order, of  principles
upon  Mount  Zion,  as is  written,  j  pertaining  to  morale,  to  philosophy,  „
"  And  saviors  shall  home  Hp  on  to  politics,  to  religion  and  to  every-
Mount  Zion  to  judge  the  Moufit  of  thing  Hhat  ■  is  pur%*  exalting and  >
Esau,  and  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  ennobling;  an" I  tho  kingdom  will  be
Lord's." Don't  your  Bible  ivad  .so  1  ihv  Lord's. And- \m  frill  operate

Tlifl nrtA T  hnvi>  rlnps. Who  shall fnc/#»t,hpr.  tefi  Will*  tfV  I  tit rustratfi  tllA


The  one  I  have  does.  Who  shall  j  together,  ire  will  try  fa  fi  us trate  the
they  save  t These men  become


saviors  of  their  own  nations ;  they
administer  and  operate  in  tlreir
interests  and  in  the  interests  of
their  fathers  and  their  friends  and
associates*  Hence  this  is  one  thing
we  are  engaged  in,  and  is  part  of  the
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times.


works ( of  darkness  and  the  powers  of
the  adversary,  to  save  the  living  and


redeem  the  dead,  have  oiir  hearts
turned  towards  our  fatlfcrs  who
have  •  lived  before  t  m  who
have  been  ignorant  of  tin*  principles
of  life,  and  salvation  which  God  has
been  pleased  to  .confer  upon  us,

m mm  ■  1 ■ ■  1  1 1 * lit  *  1


Then  what  does  one  of  the  proi  while  the  brethren  behind  the  vail


phets  say?  "Behold,  I  will  send
you Elijah  the Prophet*  •  before


are  feeling  after  us  who  an*  their
children. The  Lord  will  turn  the


the coming of  the great and  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  chiklren,


dreadful  day  of  the  Lord."  Ajid
what  shall  he  dol  "And  he  shall
turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to  the
children,  and  the  hearts  of  the
children  to  the  fathers,  lest  I  come
and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse/*
And  what  shall  be  done  I  Saviors
shall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  ;  and
the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's.
It  is  written,  they  shall  all  he  taught
of  God,  but  the  kingdom  shall  be

No.  7.


and  the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the
fathers  through  Klias  who  was  to
come,  which  if  ndt  accomplished,  it
is  written,  "the  earth  would  be
smitten  with  a  ourse.'1

Heuce  we  are  operating  with  the
ancient  patriarchs,  apostles,  prophet*
and  men  of  God  who  lived  on  the
continent  of  Asia  and  America,  and
we  will  gather  together  all  things  in
one  according  to  th0  word  of  God,

1  Vol  XXl


m


08'


t  JOURNAL  OF  MSCOURSEK.


eathe?f]ji^<Ist,ift'l  in  one  from  the
four  <liyir^r?,nt  the»earth  and  also
the  ten  iri\&^bqftgQ  ate  get  through  ;
ajjft  JVitilitl i  Will  figfcen-to  the  words
of  k*fe/  aiid  th*  principles  of  eternal
truth  will  go*  forth  and  spread  and
grow,  *i  Mitfil  the  *  kingdoms  of  this
world  becom'gt  tire  kingdoms  of  our
God  and*  Ids  CHj  ist  ;  and  to  him
every  "Jpiee  -wjll  ^J>w  aifil  every
tongue  £oirfes.r  that  Christ  is  God  to
the  glory  of  GbJ.the  Father."  And
we  are  here  ♦/or  that  purpose.  Do
you  think* ye^are  <oing  to  fail  ?  Do
you  ihiitk,  the  Tot  a  is  going  to  back
down  \  L  think  n8t.  Men  may
combine  aj^iinst*  us  ignorantly,  for
many  ■  y£  thfon  are  very  ignorant
I  do  jidt  cherish  the  least  feeling  of
wrath"  in  my  heart  when  I  see
the  Amrte,  legislators  or  Congress
take»£teps  inimical  to*  us.  They  do
not  knew  what  they  do,  hence  we
should  fe^  charitably  disposed  to
those  *who  seek  our  iiffury*  I^ivid
prayed  that  Gqjl  would  send  "hffe
enemies  to  h<JI  quickly.  Jesus,  w  hen
he  \fas  being  crucified,  suffering  the
pain  ftf  a  crutjJL  deafh,  sgud,  u  Father
forgive '  tljem,  for  they  know  not
what  tfrej?  do,'*  I  like  that  prayer
much  better  than  the  ether  one.
TFather,  forgive  them,  for  they  know
not  what  they  do.  They  are  thy
children,  though  in  the  dark.  Thou
hast*  enlightened  our  minds,  for
which  Ve  feel  thankful;  but,  0  Lord,
fprgive  them  and  lead  them,  if  thou
canst,  in  the  way  of  life.  This  is  the
feeling  we,  ought  to  have.  We
ought  to  have  it  one  towards  another*
and  treat  one  another  with  kindness
and  not  get  yp  hard  feelings.  Talk-
ing about  |feople  giving  away  to
passion  and  giving  expression  to
hard  words ;  such  things  do  not
Jrelong  to  the  Gospel,  to  no  part  of
•it ;  they  come  from  beneath*  This


;  that  tends  to  good  is  of  God  ;  and
1  eveiy  spirit  that  tends  to  evil  is  of
the  wicked  one  and  comes  from
beneath.  I  hear  a  man  say  some-
times "  I  hate  such  a  man,"  Why  I
do  not  know  of  a  person  that  I
hate  in  the  world.  The  command
is  to  love  one  another.  When  Jesus
was  about  to  leave  his  disciples,  the
burden  of  his  prayer  was,  "Father,
I  pray  for  these  whom  thou  hast
riven  me  ;  thine  thev  were,  and

T  J*

thou  gavest  them  me.  I  pray  tor
them.  Father,  that  they  may  be  one,
even  as  I  and  thou  art  one,  that
they  may  be  one  in  us."  What,  a
sister  or  a  brother,  a  citizen  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  a  member  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints,  one  who  has  receiver  perad-
venture  of  the  ordinances  of  the
house  of  God,  and  who  expects  to
associate  with  the  Saints  of  God,
quarrels  with  his  brother  about  pea-
nuts and  baby  toys  and  then  talk
about  your  honor  being  infringed
upon  !  I  tell  you  if  you  take  care  of
yourselves,  your  honor  will  take  care
of  itself  and  you  need  not  be  con-
cerned about  it  Treat  one  another
aright.  Have  you  sinned  one
against  another]  then  go  and  make
restitution.  Have  you  defrauded
one  another?  go  and  make  it  right.
Have  you  spoken  unkindly  to  your
brother  or  sister!  then  go  and
acknowledge  your  wrong  and  ask  to
be  forgiven,  promising  to  do  better  in
the  future.  And  then  he  or  she
might  say,  on  the  other  hand  "  Yes,
and  I  said  so  and  so  the  other  day,
won't  you  please  forgive  me  f  How
much  better  and  how  much  more  in
keeping  with  the  calling  of  a  Saint
of  God  such  a  course  would  be  than
to  harbor  hard  feelings  in  the  heart.
And  ycu  parents,  get  your  families
in  the  morning  and  evening  and  call


has  been  pointed  out  and  made  very  upon  the  Lord,  and  ask  his  blessinj
plain  to  us, livery  spirit,  says  one,  J  upon  your  families,  your  flocks  and


EFFECTS  OF  THE  PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC,


herds,  and  upon  everything  that  you
have,  and  do  not  he  quarreling  one
with  another  because  you  are  scarce
of  water.  I  tell  you  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  God  that  if  you  wdl  do
your  duties,  God  will  do  his,  and
furnish  you  with  what  water  is
necessary.  Try  me  "  and  prove  me
herewith  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  if
I  will  not  open  you  the  windows
of  heaven  and  pool  you  out  a  bles-
sing that  there  shall  not  be  room
enough  to  receive  it."  Husbands,
treat  your  wives  right ;  treat  them
with  kindness  and  with  sympathy ;
try  to  make  them  comfortable,  and
make  their  houses  and  surroundings
comfortable  and  do  all  you  can  to  make
them  happy.  And  you  wives,  treat
your  husbands  right ;  try  to  make
their  homes  a  little  heaven,  and  seek
earnestly  that  the  blessings  of  the
Lord  may  abide  in  your  dwellings.


tians.  In  the  ti thing  o^tiations,  for
instance,  I  tinrtk  ^at  during  the  last
year  there  has  beep"  paid  some  50,000
dollars  more  than  t|ie  year  before.
This  speaks  "well  for  the.  Latter-day
Saints  ;  not  but  what  the  Lord  could
get  along  very  well  without  these
things,  but-he  wajtits  to  test  his  peo-
ple. This,  however,  proves  that
there  is  an  increase  iu  the  right
direction,  and  a  proper  feeling  that
ought  to  exist  amon/f  thq,  joints.
Hence,  says  the  Lord,  "  Bring  ye  all
the  tithes  into  the  storehouse,  that
there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,
and  prove  me  now  herewith,  if  I  will
not  open  the  windows  of  Jieaveq,  and
pour  out  a  blessing,  that  'there
shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive
it."  The  Lord  wants  to  prove  his
people  and  hfe  will  have  a  tried  and
proven  people,  and  this  is  one  of  the
wavs  he  has  chosen  to  do  it  In


And parents,  treat  your  children  !  addition  to  this  tithing  there  has


aright  ;  train  them  up  in  the  fear  of
the  Lord,  they  are  of  more  import-
ance to  you  than  many  things  that
you  give  your  attention  to.  And
you,  children,  obey  your  parents;
respect  your  fathers  and  mothers.
Your  mothers  have  watched  over
you,  and  your  fathers  are  desirous
for  your  welfare,  and  their  hearts
and  feelings  and  affections  are  drawn
out  towards  you. Do  not  give  them


been  expended  on  this  Temple  and
the  Temple  in  Logan  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  2  £0,000  dollars  ;  this  is
very  creditable,  Resides  a  very  iair
tithing  on  the  back  of  that*.  I  think
I  can  speak  good  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  to  a  people  that  will  do  that,
that  is,  if  we  will  lay  aside  all  evil
things.  Let  us  keep  doing  good.
You  have  done  about  as  much  here
as  they  have  done  in  Logan,  and


pain  by  departing  from  correct  they  expect  to  get  their  Tdmple  up
principles ;  but  walk  in  the  paths  of  to  the  square  this  summer.  But


life


paths

And  parents,  and  children,
husbands  and  wives  and  all  people,
fear  (iod  and  put  your  trust  in  him
and  cany  out  the  principles  of  your
holy  religion  which  God  has  revealed
to  us.

I  would  speak  a  few  words  of
praise  of  many  of  our  brethren  j  I
think  it  would  -apply  to  many  of  you
here.  I  have  no  disposition  to  find
fault,  but  I  have  a  disposition  to
apeak  kindly  of  many  of  my  brethren


square

then  they  did  not  have  to  make  the
foundation  you  have  had  to  make
here.  They  made  some  mistake  in
fixing  up  the  mountains  here  ;  they
do  not  seem  to  be  in  a  right  shape  ;
but  then  we  can  put  them  in  a  right
shape,  you  know.  The  scriptures
talk  about  the  mountains  being
thrown  dow  n.  Well,  you  have  done
considerable  towards  levelling  this
down.  God  h  pleased  with  you,
and  everything  is  going  on  right,  and


and  sisters  in  many  of  their  opera- I  speak  this  for  your  encouragement  .


100


JOURNAL  0¥  DISUOUKSKS


1  am  pleaied  to  see  the  sisters  take
the  part  they  da  in  their  Kelief
Societies, They  are  doing  a  good
work  and  their  labors  are  a  credit  to
them. And  then  there  are  our
Young  Men's  and  our  Young  Ladies'
Mutual  Improvement  Associations  ;
they  are  goinj;  on  very  well.  And
then  your  educational  interests  are
doing  pretty  well. Do  I  not  so
understand  you,  Brother  Petersen?
[President  Canute  Petersen  -Yes,
Sir  ;  pretty  well,] We  do  not  want
outside  folks  to  teach  our  children,
do  we  ? 1  think  not We  do  not
want  them  to  teach  us  how  to  g.*t
to  heaven,  do  we? If  we  did,  it
ould  be  of  no  use,  for  they  do  not
now  the  way. Well,  then,  we  do
^not  want  them  to  tamper  with  the
ruttinds  of  our  little  ones. You  will
^see  the  day  that  Zion  will  he  as  far
ahead  of  the  outside  world  in  every*
ling  pertaining  to  learning  of  every
id  as  we  are  to-day  in  regard  to
iuus  matters. You  mark  my
iN,  and  write  them  down,  and
if  they  do  not  come  to  pass,
e  are  not  dependent  upon  them,
ut  we  are  upon  the  Lord, We  did
ot get  our  priesthood  nor  our
formation  in  regard  to  his  law  from
them  ;  it  came  from  God.  The
rid  profess  to  know  a  little  about
wB&t  they  call  science,  literature  and
the  arts* Where  did  they  get  their
knowledge  of  these  things  from  1
And  what  is  it  they  really  do  know]
They  know  something  about  the
laws  of  Nature, Who  made  those
laws'? God  -made  them  ;  and  he
knows  how  to  govern  them ;  and  it  is
by  his  almighty  power  that  they  are
governed.

I  remember  talking  with  some
celebrated  scientists  from  Europe
some  time  ago,  and  I  explained  to
them  some  of  the  principles  relative
to  the  heavenly  bodies  that  were
revealed  through  the  Prophet  Joseph


i.  They  were  astonished  to
know  that  ideas  so  grand  could  be
developed  through  one  that  was  com-
paratively un learn etl,  One  of  them
remarked  that  they  were  the  most
magnificent  principles  lie  had  ever
heard  of ;  another  one  said  that  he
had  read  and  studied  a  grant  deal,
but  he  had  a  good  deal  more  yet  to
learn.  We  are,  as  the  French  would
say,  enraitpotf,  with  God  ;  that  is  in
communication  with  God.  Let  us
live  .so  that  we  can  keep  that  up,  so»
that  angels  can  minister  to  us  and
t  i  le  Holy  Spi  r it  <  1  w  e  11  wits,  i  h  .  We
have  received  his  guidance  and
instruction.  It  is  for  us  now  to  go
on  from  truth  to  truth,  tuna  intelli-
gence to  intelligence  and  from
wisdom  to  wisdom.  And  while
nations  shall  crumble  and  thrones  be
cast  dow*),  and  the  God  of  heaven
arise  and  shake  terribly  the  earth r
while  the  elements  melt  with  fer-
vent heat  in  fulfilment  of  ancient
as  well  as  modern  propln  cy  ;  while
these  things  are  going  on  lie  will
whisper,  peace  to  Zion.  But  the
judgments  will  begin  at  the  house  of
God.  We  have  to  pass  through
some  of  these  things,  but  it  will  only
be  a  very  little  compared  with  the
terrible  destruction,  the  misery  and
suffering  that  will  overtake  the
world  who  are  doomed  to  suffer  the
wrath  of  God.  It  behooves  us,  as
the  Saints  of  God,  to  stand  firm  and
faithful  in  the  observance  of  hia
laws,  that  we  may  be  worthy  of  his
preserving  care  and  blessing.

Now  a  word  about  other  things.
We  want  elders  to  go  and  preach  the
Gospel  But  some  people  will  say,
M  Here  is  such  a  young  man  w  ho  is
a  little  wild  ;  if  he  were  to  go  abroad
perhaps  he  would  reform*"  Brother
Peterson,  wre  do  not  want  such  folks
to  go  as  representatives  of  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  I  say
to  you,  Presidents  of  Stakes,  we


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF


REVELATION,  ETC


101


do  not  want  such  an  order  of  things  ;
we  want  men  that  have  got  within  them
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  men  who
have  the  gift  and  power  of  God  in
them.  We  do  not  want  men  to  go
abroad  to  be  reformed.  They  are
not  fit  to  live  in  Zion  if  they  cannot
reform  themselves  at  home*  We
must  have  men  filled  with  faith  and
the  Holy  Ghost  And  you  seventies
and  high  prirsts,  wake  up  to  a  sense
of  the  responsibility  of  your  callings,
and  purge  away  your  follies  and  non-
sense and  JWd  that  you  are  indeed
the  servants  of  the  living  God  ;  for
God  will  hold  you  responsible  for
the  priesthood  you  bean  Thru
honor  the  Lord  and  magnify  the
priesthood,  and  when  you  go  forth
to  the  nations  bearing  precious  seed,
angels  will  go  with  you  and  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost  will  y company


you  in  your  administrations  and
though  you  may  go  weeping,  bearing
the  precious  seed  of  the  Gospel,  you
will  return  rejoicing  bringing  your
sheaves  with  you.

I  do  not  know  but  what  I  have
talked  enough.  Brethren  and  sisters
God  bless  you,  And  God  bless  the
relief  societies  ami  the  young  men's
and  the  young  ladies'  societies,
and  God  bless  your  president  and
his  counselors,  and  your  bishops  and
their  counselors,  and  all  that  fear
God,  and  work  righteousness.  And
the  Lord  God  put  a  hook  in  t  he  jaws
of  our  enemies  that  seek  our  injury
and  overthrow,  that  they  may  not
have  power  against  the  Israel  of
God.  And  God  bless  all  Israel,  that
Zion  may  arise  and  shine  and  the
glory  of  God  rest  upon  her,  I  ask
it  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


*


*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER H. W.  NAISBITT,

Delivered  in  the  16th  Ward  Meeting  House,  Sunday  Afternoon,

March  7th,  1880.  !  f

(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REVELATION  AND  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  THE  SEVERAL
PHASES OF LIFE — HOW THli BROTHERHOOD OF MAN SHALL  BE

m  evolved. rs^V  -  >.  :  %i  ••••  r,i;"\>h>H  *vvi  <m.  jwWi

1  presume  we  all  understand  that  one  that  does  not  realize  the  necessi-
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  eon  ty  of  enjoying  it,  it  would  be  agood
greg&tion  of  the  Saints.  If  we  do  I  thing  perhaps  for  him  to  get  up  here
not  understand  it  and  if  there  is  any  !  a  while.


102


JOLKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


When  a  person  is  called  upon  to
address  a  congregation  and  notices
the  upturned  faces  before  him,  wait-
ing, wishing,  very  likely  praying,
for  the  blessings  which  they  particu-
larly  desire,  I  think  that  no  man
can  look  upon  such  a  sight  unmoved,
he  must  feel  his  own  ignorance  and
weakness,  and  dependence,  and
when  he  does  this  1  believe  that  all
public  administrations  will  be  an
advantage  and  blessing  both  to
the  speaker  and  hearers,  and  I  am
sure  that  is  my  object  this  afternoon,
I  have  no  personal  ambition  to  serve,
but  I  do  want  to  bless  and  I  do
know  that  I  need  to  be  blessed.  And
this  is  the  place  appointed  (so  far  as
this  ward  is  concerned)  for  the  re-
ception of  those  blessings  which  per-
tain to  the  public  services  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints.  Here  is  the  place  where
there  should  be  intelligence.  Here
is  the  place  where  there  should  be
wisdom.  Here  is  the  place  to  expect
revelation,  and  that  not  in  any
vague,  misty,  half  understood  sense,
— not  lost  or  covered  up  by  a  multi-
tude of  words,  but  divested  of  every-
thing that  will  deprive  us  of  know-
ledge as  to  the  essential  principle
which #  belong  really  to  revelation.
The  world,  however,  holds  very
peculiar  ideas  in  regard  to  this.
Every  elder  in  Israel  who  will  look
back  upon  his  experience,  if  it
reaches  even  to  the  early  history  of
this  Church,  will  comprehend  how
odd  and  mythical  the  ideas  in  regard
to  revelation  were  as  then  held  by
mankind,  It  is  true  that  the  masses
of  the  people  as  well  as  the  teachers
believed  t  lat  in  the  ancient  times
there  had  been  some  communication
with  the  intelligences  who  dwell
behind  the  vail  They  all  agreed —
all  Christians  did  at  all  events—that
the  Spirit  was  made  manifest  ami  its
utterances  recorded  in  a  book.  They


believed  that  without  that  book  the
world  was  in  a  lost  condition,  that
men  w  ere  left  to  grope  in  darkness
and  to  wander  in  ignorance,  but
with  that  book  it  was  believed  that
every  man  and  every  woman  could
understand  themselves  ;  they  could
understand  something  of  their  origin
and  the  purpose  for  which  they  were
dwelling  upon  the  earth,  the  destiny
which  belonged  to  the  human  family,
and  also  the  process  by  which  that
destiny  could  be  best  secured.  But
it  is  astonishing  what  a  little  light
will  do  for  a  man.  It  is  astonishing
how  our  minds  expand  when  we
receive  the  key  to  the  situation.  And
when  we  look  at  the  vast  difference
there  is  between  the  community  who
inhabit  these  mountains  and  the
communities  of  the  nations  from
which  we  have  been  gathered —
probably  most  can  see  and  are  aware
that  between  the  two  there  exists  a
great  and  ever  widening  gulf.  Men
who  reject  the  principle  of  revelation
in  any  direction  must  inevitably
become  stunted,  they  must  inevitably
cease  to  live,  because  revelation  is
the  element  of  life,  it  is  the  secret  of
growth,  it  is  the  power  of  increase,
and  it  is  only  in  proportion  to  the
receptive  ability  of  a  man, or  woman,
or  child,  that  they  can  increase  in
intelligence.  Now,  divested  of  all
extraneous  or  outside  ideas,  divested
of  all  the  mystery  that  has  been
thrown  around  the  idea  of  revela-
tion by  man-made  teachers,  divested
of  all  traditions  and  thoughts  that
have  been  written  in  regard  to  it,
what  is  the  essential  idea  involved
in  revelation  in  its  significant  simpli-
city. What  is  there  that  is  difficult
of  comprehension  ?  What  is  there
that  it  should  need  men  of  classical
education  to  explain  it  ;  what  is
there  that  there  should  be  these
large  colleges  and  this  immense  army
of  ministers  in  order  that  the  world


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REVELATION,  ETC.  1U3


may  bo  enlightened  in  regard  to  the
pri iici^le  of  revelation  1  W hy ,  when
you  ounii;  to  probe  and  to  reach  the
fount  latum  of  the  idea  it  is  nothing
more  nor  less  than  the  communica-
tion of  intelligence  possessed  by  one
to  another  who  in  regard  to  that
subject  remains  in  ignorance*  That
is  all  there  is  involved  in  revelation,
and  whenever  you  find  a  human
being  who  is  ignorant  of  any  subject
pertaining  to  any  direction  of  human
thought,  or  in  regard  to  any  useful
field  of  human  experience,  there
revelation  is  an  absolute  necessity.

Now,  then,  revelation  may  vary  in
degree  ;  it  may  vary  in  character,
according  to  the  necessities  of  the
case,  according  to  the  intelligence  of
individuals,  The  mother  who  miides
the  destiny  of  a  taniily  and  endows
it  with  all  the  comforts  of  domestic
and  social  life  finds  herself  surround-
ed by  a  few  crude  men  and  women,
or,  us  we  rail  them,  boys  or  girls.
You  consider  the  character  of  this
offspring.  When  they  were  horn
they  were  helpless,  arid  in  infancy
they  possessed  no  intelligence  save
those  animal  instincts  which  lend
only  io  the  preservation  of  life.  But
in  a  few  weeks  or  mouths  the  spirit
of  intelligence  begins  to  dawn.  The
mother  watches  the  growing  spark
and  seeks  to  fan  it  to  a  flame  ;  to
point  out  the  remedy  where  difficul-
ty occurs  in  early  experience  j  to
explain  the  educational  process
through  which  the  child  must  pass
from  man  or  womanhood  ;  and  to
show  that  when  the  first  efforts  are
made,  and  even  when  they  art*  cum-
par*itive  failures,  that  these  only
stand  as  sentinels  or  pointsmen  in
the  great  highway  of  success —
prompters  to  ultimate  and  final  suc-
cess. The  probability  is  that  every
young  wumau  who  lias  learned  to
make  bread  has  had  an  experience
of  this  character. And  it  is  true


that  many  of  the  first  trials,  unless
the  mother  watched  very  closely,
would  not  he  successful,  the  bread
might  be  heavy,  or  it  become  sour.
Now  it  is  the  mother's  duty  to
reveal,  to  give  from  her  intelligence
to  one  comparatively  ignorant,  a
solution  or  remedy  for  the  difficulty.
The  young  girl  is  expected  to  listen
to  the  mother.  She  has  the  faculty
to  receive  the  intelligence  that  is
communicated,  and  to  put  that  in-
telligence into  practice.  And  when
the  bread  was  heavy  the  mother
showed  the  cause  which  brought
about  that  condition.  If  the  bread
was  sour,  a  little  neutralizing  ele-
ment had  to  be  put  into  the  dough,
in  order  that  the  acidity  might  be
lemuved,  a  little  soda  or  some-
thing of  that  kind  ;  and  this  is
a  revelatory  process  from  the  mother
to  the  child.  If  you  take  one  of  our
good  mothers  in  Israel  who  has
grown  grey  under  the  weight  of
experience,  you  will  find  that  she
possesses  a  vast  fund  of  information,
and  in  every  direction  in  domestic
or  social  life  she  is  the  great
standard  of  appeal,  and  even  when
the  daughter  has  become  a  married
woman,  when  she  passes  into  the
responsibility  of  motherhood,  when
sickness  takes  hold  of  the  darling
that  God  has  given  her,  she  instant-
ly appeals  to  the  higher  or  wider
intelligence  and  experience  of  the
mother,  and  that  which  the  mother,
by  the  advantage  of  years,  by  the
experience  through  which  slie  has
passed,  has  gained,  she  communi-
cates unto  the  daughter,  and  thus
the  daughter  becomes  the  recipient
of  revelation.  Ami  as  it  is  with  the
mother  and  the  daughter,  so  also  it
is  with  the  father  and  the  son  ;  so
also  it  is  with  those  who  are  learn-
ing a  trade,  so  also  it  is  with  those
who  attend  our  daily  or  our  Sabbath
schools,  and  the  very  fact  that  we


104  JOURNAL  UF  IHSUOUK&EfS,


are  so  constituted  that  we  can  receive
revelation  in  these  channels  is  a
revelation  in  and  of  itself,  written  in
the  fundamental  organization  of  the
human  character,  th  at  revelat  ion  is  not
only  possible  and  desirable,  but  that
it  is  also  a  necessary  and  inevitable
element  pertaining  to  the  highest
welfare  and  the  grand  destiny  and
future  of  those  who  submit  to  its
varied  processes  from  day  to  day  !
Now,  this  character  of  intelligence
may  be  said  to  mark  the  very  lowest
phases  of  human life  :  but  while
man  is  an  animal,  while  he  has  Ins
physical necessities* while he  is
surrounded  with  domestic  life,  while
he  is  subject  to  and  is  a  member  of
the  social  arena  of  life,  there  are  also
attributes  of  character  which  are
beyond  this  physical,  this  animal,
and  this  social  cast There  is  some-
thing in  every  man  and  in  every
woman  which  savors  of  the  divine,
in  all  the  circumstances  of  Hie  there
is  a  reaching  out  after  something
which  is  beyond  the  grasp  ;  there  is
a  soaring  of  the  spirit,  a  seeking  after
something  to  which the  present
surroundings  gave  no  clue.  Man
feels  that  he  is He  not  only  feels
that lie is, but thousands  and
millions  of  the  human  family  have
an  inkling  of  the  great  fact  that  t  hey
have  been,  and  millions  and  millions
more  have  au  inkling  of  the  other
gieat  fact  that  when  they  leave  this
stage  of  existence  they  will  continue
to  be. And  it  is  the  realization  of
such  things  which  establishes  the
idea  outside  of  any  other  special
revelation  that  our  origin  is  divine
well  as  human. When  we  sense
these  ideas,  when  they  become  inter-
woven into  the  fabric  of  our  lives,
when  we  instinctively  feel  that  we
do  possess  this  characteristic,  there
must  be  certain  elements  and  certain
principles  which  will  minister  to  the
growth  of  such  ideas  ;  just  as  there


are  elements  of  and  in  nature  winch
minister  to  the  welfare  of  the  lower,
so  there  are  elements  which  minister
to  the  higher,  and  fitted  for  the
cultivation  of  every  attribute  of  the
human  character,  no  matter  how  low
we  mav  esteem  it  to  be,  or  how
lofty  we  may  conceive  it  to  be,  there
are  resources  in  the  economy  of  God
for  the  development  and  growth
and  glory  of  that  characteristic.
Hence  when  a  man  realizes  that  he
had  a  pre-existence.  when  he  realizes
tbft  the  present  existence  is  but  a
transitory  condition,  when  he  realizes
that  there  is  a  vast  and  il  linn  table
fi it u re  he f o re  him,  he  d esires  to  com-
prehend how  he  shall  best  minister
to  his  individual  welfare  in  that
future.  And  here  steps  in  the
necessity  of  revelation  based  upon
philosophy,  based  upon  human
necessities  and  human  needs.  The
only  wav  that  we  can  be  educated
in  this  direction  is  by  revelation
coming  to  us  from  outside  sources,
from  higher  intelligences Jrorn  those
who  have  passed  through  the  self-
same experience  as  we  ourselves
have  and  will  lor  ever  pass.

Now,  then,  as  a  fundamental  pro-
cess for  our  education  in  this  respect
we  have  given  unto  us  the  Gospel.
That  Gospel  is  just  as  systematic
ami  just  as  orderly  as  are  the  details
of  education  in  a  school.  It  is  just
as  orderly  and  systematic  as  are  the
methods  by  which  out  hoys  are
taught  and  trained  in  the  various
branches  of  education  or  trade.  It
is  just  as  orderly  and  systematic  as
the  education  our  wives  give  to  their
daughters,  or  that  mothers  give  to
their  married  girls.  You  never  find
a  mother,  in  training  her  children
for  domestic  life,  begin  to  tell  them
in  the  first  place  how  to  make  one
of  those  very  rich  cakes  that  we
sometimes  make  ourselves  sick  with
at  Christmas. You  would  scarcely


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REVELATION,  ETC


find  a  man  who  took  an  apprentice,
begin  to  teach  him  in  the  first  place
some  higher  branches  of  his  trade.
You  would  scarcely  find  a  teacher

begin  to  teach  his  pupils  the
advanced  principles  pertaining  to  a
classical  education*  There  is  an
order  ;  there  are  steps  and  processes
in  every  educational  direction,  which
we  take  in  their  order  and  in  their
time  and  place.  Now  one  of  the
most  startling  revelations  that  has
been  given  to  the  human  family  in
the  day  and  age  in  which  we  live,
by  the  elders  of  Israel  to  a  dark  and
benighted  world,  is  the  great  funda-
mental idea  of  •'the  fatherhood  of
God."  Now,  this  may  not  appear
so  startling  to  the  American  citizen
whose  mind  is  impregnated  with  the
idea  that  the  human  family  are
equal, — that  one  man  is  as  good  as
another,  but  in  the  Old  World
there  exists  conditions  of  class
arid  of  caste.  You  who  have
come  from  England  or  from
any  European  nation,  will
realize  what  1  mean  by  class  and
caste  There  is  the  charmed  circle
of  the  royal  blood,  into  which  the
plebeian  never  enters.  There  is  the
larger  circle  of  the  aristocracy,  or,  as
we  call  them,  the  41  upper  ten,"  and
into  the  precincts  of  that  circle,
jealously  guarded  as  they  are.  a
stranger  scarcely  ever  enters.  Then
you  were  surrounded  in  England  by
what  is  called  the  middle  classes,
anil  even  they  look  upon  the  lower
classes  as  heiii"  made  of  some  mate-
rial  distinct  and  different  from  them-
selves; but  when  the  elders  of  Israel
landed  in  Old  England  and  pro-
claimed "the  fatherhood  of  God,'1
and  laid  the  axe  at  the  root  of  caste
and  class,  they  were  preparing  for
the  fom elation  of  a  kingdom  that
should  recognize  the  essential  unity
of  the  human  family  and  of  necessity
the  brotherhood  of  man. It  is  quite


true  that  under  some  social,  religions
or  political  circumstances,  we  hear  of
a  certain  unity  and  equality  among
the  human  family ;  but  if  you
attempt  to  put  that  unity  and
equality  into  practice,  what  are  the
results  that  inevitably  flow  from  such
a  course  !  You  are  surrounded  with
obstacles  on  every  hand,  and  it  is
only  perhaps  after  the  lapse  of  two
or  three  generations  that  a  man  in
Ins  posterity  is  able  to  make  his
way  from  the  ranks  and  associate
with  the  higher  class.  It  is  true
there  are  those  here  and  there  who
do  this,  and  they  do  it  by  virtue  of
inherent  genius  or  sume  chance  lega-
cy, and  when  they  are  accepted  into
this  higher  class,  it  is  by  virtue  of
this  chance,  etc.,  but  a>  a  rule
they  are  looked  upon  as  intruders.
Take  the  Prime  Minister  of  England,
Lord  Reaeonsfield.  There  is  a  man
who  has  made  himself  a  necessity
to  the  government  of  the  country,
to  Her  Majesty,  to  the  higher  classes  ;
he  has  done  this  by  virtue  of  the
inspiration  of  the  Almighty,  and  yet
with  all  his  grand  attainments,  that
man  man  is  looked  upon  more  or  Jess
as  an  intruder  because  he  was  not
nobly  born !  And  so  I  might  multi-
ply illustrations  which  would  be
familiar  to  you  all  But  the  Gospel
sets  out  in  the  first  plaee  with  these
two  ideas,  twin  ideas,  that  never  can
he  put  asunder,  the  fatherhood  of
God  and  the  brotherhood  of  the
human  family.

Now,  then,  if  we  are  >ne  in  our
origin,  if  we  are  really  one  in
destiny,  we  must  all  reach  that
destiny  by  the  sell-same  process,
ami  that  process  is  to  be  found  in
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  in  the
power  of  inspiration  and  revelation
resting  upon  those  who  initiate  men
and  women  into  that  order.  And
in  connection  with  this,  wherever
and  whenever  you  comprehend  this


106


JOURNAL  0¥  DISCOURSES.


higher  intelligence  that  bears  rule  <  prising,  but  suppose  we  reason  upon


it  for  a  moment  or  two*

Here  are  some  of  you  good  breth
ren  ;  you  go  to  work  this  spring  and
you  set  out  an  orchard  of  applr  trees?,
and  by  and  by  the  time  for  fruit
arrives  and  you  go  and  look  for  pears,
or  plums,  or  cherries  upon  the  apple
trees  !  Now,  what  would  be  thought
of  your  intelligence] Why  every-
body would  say  you  have  certainly
made  a  mistake  ;  they  were  apple
trees  that  you  planted,  and  apples
are  the  fruit :  if  you  want  pear?  you
must  plant  pear  trees. Men  don't
gather  grapes  off  thorns  nor  figs  off
thistles. Then, if  we  are  the
children  of  our  Father  you  can  see
at  a  glance  by  that  illustration  that  if
we  submit  to  the  process  of  educa-
tion which  he  had  pointed  out  and
laid  down,  we  must  become  like  hini.
Well,  now,  this  xnav  seem  incredible
to  some  that  a  human  Wing,  defiled
and  deformed  as  lie  is  by  sin  and  tra re-
gression, the  result  of  ages — I  say  it
itray  seem  almost  incredible  that
a  human  being  should  be  abb*  to  rise
to  the  characteristics  and  attributes
and  appearance  of  the  Father  ;  but
it  is  not  only  possible  but  it  is  inevi-
table, and  all  the  ancient  Saints  had
this  idea. Due  of  the  old  prophets,
for  instance,  when  under  the  inspi
ration  of  the  Almighty,  has  Miiu,  "  I
shall  be  satisfied,  when  1  awake,
with  thy  likeness  ;"  and  in  the  New
Testament, one of  the  apostles
said,  looking  forward  to  the  time  of
the  resurrection,  that  "When  he
shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him  ;
for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is/*  We
shall  have  an  opportunity  of  demon-
strating our  likeaess. We  shall  be
able  to  make  the  contrast, We  shall
be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as
he  is," And  of  Jesus  it  was  said
that  u  He  was  tins  brightness  of  hi>
Father  s  nlory  and  the  express  image


in  the  eternities,  controlling  the
destines  of  these  great  orbs  that  we
see  from  time  to  time  in  the  mid-
night heavens — wherever  you  find
those  that  have  graded  from  a
fallen  world  you  will  find  those  who
graded  up  and  through  the
instrumentality  of  the  selfsame
Gospel  that  is  given  to  you  and  nie.
There  is  no  other  Gospel,  There  is
no  other  way  to  that  exaltation
which  pertains  to  the  Gods  only
through  the  revelation  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  Christ.  So  that  there  is
4 'no  royal  road"  to  heaven;  no
matter  what  a  man's  condition,  no
matter  what  the  class  to  which  he
may  have  Wen  known  in  social  life
on  earth  by  virtue  of  birth  or  by
virtue  of  wealth  ;  no  matter  what
position  he  may  occupy  because  of
his  ignorance  or  lack  of  information  ;
no  matter  whether  he  may  live  in  a
hovel  or  dwell  in  a  palace,  or  though
he  may  have  hut  a  crust  to  eat  or  his
table  be  laden  with  all  the  good
things  of  the  earth,  lie  must  submit
to  the  self-same  ordinances,  he  con-
trolled by  the  self-same  spirit  of
revelation,  and  reach  the  final  issue
through  the  selfsame  channel,

I^iow,  then,  what  is  it  that  we
expect  through  the  Gospel  1  Why,
that  it  may  develop  in  you  and  me,
from  our  crude,  ignorant,  unloveable
Condition — the  results  of  many  a
fearful  fall — the  appearance  and  th*
characteristics  of  the  eternal  Father,
This  self-same  idea  animated  the
8aints  in  ancient  times.  They  had
faith  that  by  obedience  to  righteous
laws  there  would  be  evolved  in  and
from  them,  through  the  attributes
Which  they  already  possessed,  measur-
ably dormant  or  measurably  active
as  the  case  maybe — that  they  would
be  able  to  produce  the  likeness  of
God  the  eternal  Father,  Now,
at  first  view  this  may  appear  sur-  I  of  his  person," He  was  like  his


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REVELATION,  ETC.


107


Father,  and  this  likeness  was  in  him
by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  he  lived  in
possession  of  the  inspiration  of  reve-
lation ;  his  course  was  marked  out
by  that  spirit.  It  animated  every
faculty,  controlled  every  action,
prompted  eve  ry  motive,  and  because
that  spirit  wits  poured  upon  him
**  without  measure,"  he  became  the
glory  of  his  Father  and  exhibited  in
himself  the  ^express  image  of  his
person, ?  and  he,  in  speaking  to  his
disciples,  declared  that  they  should
become  "  like  unto  him,  even  as  lie
was  like  his  Father,"  by  the  recep-
tion o  "  line  upon  line  and  precept
upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there
a  little/'  Now,  probably  I  might
illustrate  this  from  the  facts  of  every-
day life,  the  possibility,  I  mean,  of  a
change  in  the  features  of  those  with
whom  we  are  familiar.  Did  you
ever  notice  a  man  and  wife  who  had
lived  happily  together,  whose
thoughts  were  one,  who  had  become
assimilated  to  each  other  in  their
tastes  and  feelings  so  far  and  to  su oh
an  extent  that  when  you  see  them
white  with  the  snow  of  years  you
would  say  of  them.  "  I  never  saw  a
couple  so  much  alike  ;  they  are  posi-
tively like  brother  ami  sister/'  Did
that  ever  come  under  your  observa-
tion ?  It  has  come  under  mine  many
and  many  a  time.  Now,  what  was
the  secret  of  that  I  Why  the  wife
had  become  assimilated  to  the
husband  and  the  husband  to  the  wife  ;
they  were  actuated  upon  in  a  great
measure  by  the  selfsame  impulses,
until  they  had  become  similar  in
their  habits  of  life,  so  thoroughly
one  that  they  were  like  each  other
even  in  their  facial  expression,  and
when  death  claimed  one  or  the  other,
but  a  few  hours  or  days  would  pass
before  they  were  again  and  for  ever-
more united.  And  this  is  a  charac-
teristic in  which  we  glory.  But  to
illustrate  this  in  another  direction.


Here  is  a  mother,  now,  or  a  young
wife.  Her  heart  overflows  with
affection  for  the  husband  of  her
youth*  God  has  blessed  the  union
that  was  made  by  the  authority  of
the  priesthood.  She  passes  along
until  she  attains  to  the  condition  of
motherhood,  and  in  the  fulness  of
her  heart  she  brings  the  babe  to  the
assembly  of  the  Saints  that  by  the
authority  of  the  priesthood  it  may
be  dedicate" I  to  the  service  of  God
and  to  the  building  up  of  this  king-
dom. Tin?  mother's  heart  is  full.
It  bursts  almost  with  gratitude  for
the  great  boon  she  lias  received.
She  breathes  many  a  prayer  for  the
child  that  God  has  given,  and  by
and  by,  even  when  the  cup  seems
full  to  the  very  brim,  some  of  her
sisters  come  along  and  say,  **  what  a
beautiful  baby  you  have  got ;  how
very  like  its  father  and  that  is  the
la>t  drop  needful  to  make  the
mother's  soul  and  ambition  lull  to
overflowing.  To  say  that  the  babe
was  like  hen-elf  wool  i  perhaps  have
been  quite  as  corn  e!  :  but  u  lien  it
was  pronounced  to  be  like  his  father,
more  especially  if  its  father  was  a
good  husband,  if  he  was  everything
that  he  should  be  in  regard  to  char-
acter— there  was  no  limit  to  the  love
and  affection  she  could  b<  ar  for  her
husband  and  their  child.

There  is  an  illustration  we  can
apply  in  another  direction.  We
have  all  come  down  fiom  the  oter-
uities  of  the  past  to  this  period  of
probation,  1  think  the  probabilities
are  that  while  we  dwelt  th**re  we
were  in  possession  of  a  good  deal  of
intelligence.  There  were  many
facilities,  I  expect,  for  the  acquisition
of  such  intelligence  as  was  adapted
to  our  condition.  1  believe  that  we
were  there  taught  the  necessity  and
advantage  of  taking  a  probation
upon  the  earth* I  believe  that  there


108  JOURNAL  ul

we  exhibited  a  great  many  of  tha  i
attributes  of  our  Father,  the  Father
of  our  spirits  ;  but  we  came  down
here  and  we  took  upon  us  taber-
nacles ;  these  tabernacles  are  given
to  us  by  our  earthly  father  and  by  |
our  mother.  And  they  came  to  us
corrupted,  they  came  to  us  contami-
nated by  the  vast  variety  of  evils
with  which  our  fathers  have  afflicted
themselves  during  many  generations.
When  we  consider  the  exalted  char-
acter of  our  first  father,  when  we
consider  the  position  that  he
occupies,  and  when  we  consider  his
offspring  on  the  earth  subject  to  the
infirmities  of  the  flesh,  it  is  not
unlikely  that  many  are  lead  to  say,
"  how  can  we  be  the  children  of  our
father  who  art  in  heaven  1  And  if
we  are  his  children  how  can  we
renew  or  be  restored  to  his  image
and  likeness,  how  can  we  develop
the  attributes  which  he  possesses,
how  can  we  become  like  him  in  our
spirits  and  more  or  less  in  our
tabernacles/1  Why  we  shall  have
to  do  this  by  the  reception  of  his
spirit,  and  by  cultivating  the  princi-
ples of  life  that  come  through  revela-
tion. W  hen  we  come  to  look  at
each  other  as  we  are,  we  see  stamped
in  our  countenances  selfishness,  we
see  exhibitions  of  sensuality,  we  see
the  evidences  of  a  thousand  and  one
conditions  to  which  we  have  been
Subjected  and  our  fathers  before  us.
Now,  the  Gospel  has  been  given  us  '
to  do  a  wav  with  sin  and  death  ;  it
has  been  given  to  develop  in  us  the  1
attributes  and  characteristics  of  our  !
Father  in  heaven  from  faculties  we
already  possess.  Well,  now,  we
will  suppose  that  one  of  those  angels
of  intelligence  surrounding  the
throne  of  Uod  conies  down  to  the
streets  of  Salt  Lake  City.  He  goes
up  one  of  the  principal  thorough- 1
fares  and  peers  into  the  face  of
everyone  that  passes. He  marks


DJSUOCKSKS.

I  our  plainness,  or,  in  some  instances,
ugliness.  He  can  detect  at  a  glance
where  the  faculties  are  perverted,
and  where  they  are  in  their  normal
condition.  He  can  see  in  a  moment
how  we  have  been  beclouded  by  sin,
how  we  have  been  subjected  to  evil
influences,  how  we  have  given  way
to  temptation,  and  how  we  are  the
subjects  of  the  conditions  which  sur-
round us.  But  as  he  passes  along
he  meets  one  of  a  little  different
stamp.  A  man  m;iv  be  dwelling  in
a  hovel  on  the  bench  or  in  the  low
wards  of  the  city,  and  he  steps  up
to  such  a  one  and  says  '"how  do  you
do."  "  Why,"  says  the  person
addressed,  "you  have  the  advantage
of  me,  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever
saw  yon  before.*'  "  Well,  now,
probably  you  never  did,  but,"  say-
he,  "  I  know  you  although  I  never
saw  you."  "  Well,  how  do  you
know'  me"  "  Why,  I  am  from  the
eternities  that  are  beyond  the  vail,
I  am  come  from  where  your  Father
dwells  and  I  can  see  in  the  lustre  of  your
eye,  I  can  feel  by  the  aura  or  influ-
ence which  surrounds  you  as  you
move  from  place  to  place,  that  you
are  animated  by  the  spirit  of  your
Fathers  house,  I  can  discern  in  your
physiognomy  the  lineage  of  your  pro*
genitortf?."  Well,  what  is  the  secret  1
:  Simply  that  there  is  a  man  living  his
religion.  He  is  filler!  with  the  Spirit
and  power  of  God.  It  is  a  lamp  to
his  feet  and  a  light  to  his  path.  It
actuates  him  in  all  the  circumstances
of  life ;  as  a  father,  as  a  member  of
the  Church  to  which  he  belongs  and
as  a  citizen.  It  is  this  which  gives
lustre  to  the  eye  and  elasticity  to  the
step,  even  when  the  body  is  bent
with  weight  of  years,  ami  the  stran-
ger who  has  come  direct  from  the
eternal  worlds  can  see  that  there  is
a  man  who  has  been  with  Jesus  and
has  learned  of  him.  Will  it  glorify
,  a  man  and  woman  in  this  respect


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  REVELATION,  ETC-


10!)


while  they  are  in  the  flesh  ?  Yest  it
will,  and  when  men  and  women  in
general  come  in  contact  with  them,
they  will  be  prepared  to  bear  testi-
inony  that  they  are  in  the  enjoyment
of  a  good,  or  as  we  may  say,  right
spirit.  While  they  are  tabernacling
in  the  flesh  they  are  preparing  for
the  more  exalted  condition  and  state
which  belongs  to  them  in  the  future,
and  many  and  many  a  man  and
woman  have  exhibited  some  of  the
characteristics  winch  were  exhibited
by  the  indivdual  who  came  to  thp
Apostle  John  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos.
John  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him,
^Hee  thou  do  it  nut  {said  lie),  1  am
thy  fellow  servant,  and  of  thy  bre-
thren that  have  the  testimony  of
Jesus.  Worship  God."  John
thought  from  the  "lory  surrounding
him  that  he  must  be  God  himself,
and  he  began  to  bow  the  knee  to
him.  "  See  thou  do  it  not*'  And
when  we  see  a  man  whom  we  recog
nize  as  faithful  in  all  the  conditions
of  life,  as  "a  man  whom  we  can  tie
to  "—to  use  a  common  expression,  a
man  who  is  on  hand  all  the  time,
who  is  living  his  religion,  we  feel
involuntarily  to  lift  our  hats  to  such
a  one,  and  this  intuitive  reverence
which  we  pay  to  human  character,
is  testimony  of  God  within  the  vail
of  flesh,  and  also  an  evidence  of  the
spirit  of  revelation  and  inspiration.

Now,  this  is  the  purpose  of  our
religion,  and  although  our  receptive
faculties  may  be  comparatively  dor
mant,  yet  they  can  become  enlarged,
You  and  I  have  a  right  to  enjoy
revelation  and  inspiration.  It  is  not
confined  to  officials  or  to  the  ordained
elders  of  Israel,  it  is  not  confined  to
the  first  presidency,  to  the  twelve
apostles,  to  the  seventies  or  the  high
priests,  but  it  is  within  the  reach  of
every  man  ami  woman  in  Israel,  and
we  can  bring  that  spirit  of  revelation
to  bear  upon  our  duty,  in  our  social


as  well  as  our  religious  life.  Now,
1  know  there  are  a  great  many  who
think  that  the  spirit  of  revelation
and  inspiration  is  of  no  use  in  the
details  of  every  day  life.  This,
however,  is  a  mistake,  fur  the  self
same  inspiration  and  revelation  can
qualify  a  man  i t i  business,  it  can  help
his  faculties,  enlarge  his  reason,  and
make  him  more  noble  and  godlike
arid  intelligent  in  all  the  directions
he  may  be  called  upon  to  act  in.  To
be  sure  there  are  those  who  say  that
our  religion  has  nothing  to  do  with
our  business,  I  recollect  one  of  our
leading  men  asserting  that  President
Young  might  direct  in  spiritual
things,  he  might  direct  in  matters
pertaining  to  the  <  Jospi-J,  "but,  when
it  came  to  business,  he  knew  what
business  was  f  Now,  that  is  a  mis-
take because  the  object  of  this
Gospel  is  to  minister  to  our  spiritual
and  also  to  our  temporal  wants  and
interests.  Take  our  bishops  as  an
illustration*  Are  they  not  called  to
administer  in  the  temporal  affairs  of
the  kingdom  ]  What  is  their  office  i
They  are  fathers  to  the  people.  They
are  to  see  that  every  man  becomes
sell-sustaining.  They  are  called  upon
to  open  up  indust  ries  for  the  growing
youth  of  our  Territory.  We  sustain
them  in  that  office.  Thus  our  reli-
gion enters  into  temporal  things  and
they  are  ordained  and  set  apart  for
this*  When  Brother  George  Q.
Cannon  goes  to  represent  us  in  Con-
gress he  is  set  apart  for  that  office,
and  the  priesthood  lay  their  hands
upon  him  in  order  that  he  may  be
blessed  in  that  capacity.  When
Brother  Staines  goes  down  to  New
York,  he  goes  there  to  attend  to
those  duties  which  are  temporal,  but
he  is  set  apart  by  the  Authorities  of
this  Church  to  officiate  in  that  char-
acter. The  Gospel  therefore  inter-
feres in  our  temporal  arrangements*
And  this  is  no  new  theory. It  is  as


old  as  the  everlasting  hills  ■  it  per-
tains to  eternity,  it  will  exist
throughput  all  the  eternities  of  the
future.  If  you  turn  back  in  the
old  book  to  the  history  of  the
tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  you
find  that,  under  the  jurisdiction  of
Moses,  there  were  certain  men  who
labored  on  that  buildinif  that  were
inspired  of  t;od.  He  caused  his
Spirit  to  rest  upon  them,  and  you
will  notice  it  in  a  greater  degree
when  you  come  to  the  building  of
the  tetnph*  of  Solomon.  You  will
find  there  were  men  inspired  to  work
in  that  direction.  And  that  which
was  good  in  the  years  of  the  past  is
good  in  the  day  and  age  in  which
we  live,  and  the  day  will  yet  come
iu  Israel  when  men  will  be  set  apart
to  act  iu  more  temporal  capacities
than  many  in  Israel  dare  to  think  of
now.  When  a  man  shows  that  he
has  received  a  gift  from  God,  no
matter  about  its  character,  wliether
it  is  a  gift  of  wisdom,  f>r  whether  it
is  a  gift  leading  into  mechanics,
science  or  literature — whenever  that
man  exhibits  these  attainments,  and
he  is  taken  and  set  apart  by  the
servants  of  God,  yuu  will  see  that
spirit  enlarge  his  faculties,  increase
his  judgment,  and  when  that  day
comes,  you  will  see  a  good  spirit  in
the  midst  of  Israel.  It  will  glow
and  grow  and  increase  in  every
direction  that  will  minister  to  the
welfare  of  the  kingdom  as  a  whole.
Why,  even  now,  in  the  building  of
our  Temples,  Brother  T.  Angell
and  others  are  sustained  as  architects.
Now,  what  has  religion  to  do  with
building  a  house?  Much,  Has  it
to  do  with  teaching  a  school  1  Yes.
Has  it  to  do  with  domestic  economy?
Yes  ;  I  know  it  has  ;  and  wherever
jou  find  men  and  women  who  will
cultivate  that  spirit  and  follow  its
counsel,  you  will  find  that  they  will
become  famous  in  the  direction  in


which  they  act.  They  are  inspired
of  God,  led  by  his  spirit,  and  have
access  to  the  intelligence  that  lies
behind  the  vail,  and  those  who  have
had  experience  there  will  minister  to
<>ur  wants,  so  that  when  /ion  begins
to  grow  she  will  fairly  shine.  She
wilt  support  everything  that  will
contribute  to  the  welfare  and  glory
of  the  greatest  kingdom  that  was
ever  set  up  upon  the  earth,  until
men  shall  say,  "  Come  ye,  and  let
us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the
Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of
Jacob  ;  and  lie  will  teach  us  of  his
ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths/'
Now.  this  is  the  purpose  for  which
you  and  I  have  come  from  the  Old
World,  from  the  different  States  in
the  New  World,  and  from  the  dif-
ferent parts  of  Europe  and  the
islands  of  the  sea,  to  be  taught  of
God,  to  enjoy  his  Spirit,  to  be
educated  in  his  Church,  to  he
subject  to  his  authority,  and
to  grow  and  increase  in  the  know-
ledge of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Now  that  is  something  worth  having,
something  that  is  worth  living  for,
something  that  outshines  and  out-
distances all  the  organizations
and  systems  which  men  may  have
introduced.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  the
living  God.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  the
living  God  burning  in  the  hearts  of
the  Saints.  But  far  too  many  of  us
neglect  this  Spirit,  we  grieve  it,  wo
do  not  listen  to  its  admonitions.
How  many  in  Israel  have  bartered
their  homes  and  sunk  their  means
in  a  hole  in  the  ground,"  because
they  would  not  listen  to  the  counsels
of  God  through  his  servants  1  How
many  failures  in  life,  because  of  our
ignorance,  notwithstanding  the
fountains  of  intelligence  are  open  at
which  we  can  drink  ?  How  many  of
us  lose  our  children  because  we  fail
to  apply  to  these  great  fountains,  so
that  all  could  operate  and  under-


ETERNAL  NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


111


stand  haw  to  resist  adverse  influ-
ences, while  we  are  in  the  flesh.
Now,  if  we  would  cultivate  this
spirit,  if  we  would  listen  to  its  teach-
ings, it  would  come  to  us  in  many
ways,  in  visions,  in  dreams  and
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God.
We  could  have  the  ministration  of
angels,  arid  many  of  us  probably  the
ministration  of  the  Son — as  some
have  done  in  the  history  and  experi-
ence of  this  Church — and  this  is  the
posit i'm  to  which  we  will  all  arrive
if  we  are  faithful  to  the  great  trust
that  is  laid  upon  us  ;  we  shall  not
only  enjoy  the  society  of  <£an
innumerable  company  of  angels/1  not
only  come  uto  the  general  assembly


and  church  of  the  firstborn,"  but  we
shall  also  be  privileged  to  go  to
Jesus,  and  to  God  the  Father  of  us
all  and  there  bask  in  his  presence
and  be  educated  in  his  ways  and  sit
down  to  the  glory  which  awaits  the
just*-*/  > 'f\ •  \>'

ftow,  may  God  bless  us  with  his
Spirit,  may  he  lift  us  from  the
grovelling  condition  in  which  we
iind  ourseves  placed  ;  may  he  infuse
into  and  surround  us  with  the  influ-
ence of  his  Spirit,  that  we  may  live
indeed  a  new  life,  and  so  glorify  God
"in  our  bodies  and  spirits  which  are
his,"  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDE T JOHN  TAYLOS,
Delivered  at  American  Fork,  Friday,  November  28th,  1879

(Reported  ht/  Ceo.  F.  Gihbs.)

ETERNAL  NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL —  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  LIFE  AND
INCREASE— THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  INTELLIGENCE — RIGHT  OF  THB
CREATOR  TO  GOVERN  THE  CREATURE— DUTIES  OF  THE  SAINTS,

i  have  been  much  interested  in  mind*  Jesus  said,  "Whosoever
the  remarks  made  by  Brother  Joseph  heareth  these  sa)dngs  of  mine,  and
F.  Smith  this  morning. They  are  1  doeth  them,  I  will  liken  him  unto  a


ferae  and  are  a  part  of  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation  which  embraces  all
truth. While  he  was  speaking  this


wise  man  which  built  his  house  upon
a  rock  :  And  the  rain  descended  and
the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew


passage  of  Scripture  occurred  to  my  and  beat  upon  that  house;  and  it  fell


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


not;  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock.
And  every  one  that  heareth  these
sayings  of  mine  and  doeth  them  not
shall  be  likened  unto  a  foolish  man,
which  built  his  house  upon  the  sand :
And  the  rain  descended,  and  the
floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,'
and  beat  upon  that  house;  and  it
fell;  and  great  was  the  fall  of  it"

There  is  not  a  principle  associated
with  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God
but  what  is  eternal  in  its  nature  and
consequences,  and  we  cannot  with
impunity  trample  upon  any  princi-
ple that  is  correct  without  having  to
suffer  the  penalty  thereof  before  God
and  the  holy  imgels,  and  in  many
instances  before  men,  The  princi-
ples of  the  Gospel  being  eternal,
they  were  framed  and  originated
with  the  Almighty  in  eternity  before
the  world  was,  according  to  certain
eternal  laws,  and  hence  the  Gospel
is  called  the  everlasting  Gospel.  It
is  like  God,  without  beginning  of
days  or  end  of  years,  and,  as  the
Lord  says,  "I  am  the  Lord  and  J
change  not.*'  The  Gospel  is  eternal
and  does  not  change;  it  is  eternal
in  its  principles  and  consequences.

And  the  angel  who  wras  to  come
in  the  last  days  flying  in  the  midst
of  heaven  was  to  proclaim  the  ever*
lasting  Gospel — the  same  Gospel
that  Adam  had,  the  same  Gospel
that  Noah  had,  the  same  Gospel  that
Abraham  had,  the  same  Gospel  that
the  prophets  had,  the  same  Gospel
that  Jesus  had,  also  the  same  Gospel
that  the  Nephites  had  here  upon
this  continent,  and  winch  Jesus  re-
vealed to  them,  aod  that  they  had
indeed  before  he  was  in  the  flesh.  It
is  the  everlasting  Gospel  which
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,
and  which  enters  into  all  the  ramifi-
cations of  human  existence  and  to
the  existence  of  the  Gods,  and  to  the
existence  of  this  world  and  of  all
other  worlds.


As  Brother  Joseph  F*  Smith  has
justly  said,  the  first  command
given  was,  £<  Be  fruitful  and
multiply  and  replenish  the  earth,
and  subdue  it  ;  and  have  do-
minion over  the  fish  of  the  sea,
and  over  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and
over  every  living  thing  that  moveth
upon  the  earth."

There  is  a  principle  of  life  assor-
ted with  the  Gospel — life  temporal,
life  spiritual  and  life  eternal*  Hencfe
men  are  called  to  be  fathers  of  lives
and  women  are  called  to  be  mothers
of  lives.  We  are  fathers  and  mothers
of  lives*  And  there  is  something
different  associated  with  the  order
of  God  from  any  order  of  men  that
exists  upon  the  earth.

When  God  created  the  earth  and
placed  man  upon  it,  and  the  fishes  of
the  sea  and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and
the  grasses  and  plants  and  trees,  etc.,
he  placed  in  them  the  principle  of
life,  or,  in  other  words,  the  power
of  propagating  their  own  species.
And  if  it  were  not  for  that,  what
would  you  farmers  do?  Men  can
accomplish  a  great  many  things.
They  can  build  houses,  railroads  and
steamboats,  and  can  do  a  great  many
clever  things  whereby  they  can  com-
mand, to  a  certain  extent,  the  forces
of  nature ;  but  they  cannot  give
vitality  to  any  of  them.  They  can-
not even  furnish  material  to  make  a
grain  of  sand,  the  wisest  of  them.
But  God  has  ordained  t  hat  this  prin-
ciple of  vitality  exists  within  them-
selves. You  take  a  single  grain  of
wheat,  for  instance,  and  put  it  into
the  eanh  and  you  will  see  the  prin-
ciple of  life  begin  to  manifest  itself,
it  is  very  small  apparently,  but  con-
tains within  itself  the  power  of  in-
crease. The  same  is  also  true  with
regard  to  the  grasses,  shrubs,  plants
and  flowers,  and  the  various  things
that  exist  in  creation.  They  spread,
they  extend,  and  they  have  spread


ETERNAL  NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


over  the  face  ef  the  earth  as  man  I
has  spread,  and  the  rain  descends  I
and  the  sun  shines  and  nature,  as  •
we  term  it,  operates  ;  hut  I  would
call  it  the  power  of  God  which  oper-
ates according  to  eternal  laws  and
principles  that  he  has  ordained.  He
gives  vitality  to  all  creation  and  sets
life  into  motion  and  controls  it,  in  i
the  heavens  as  well  as  in  the  earth  ;
not  only  among  men,  but  among  the
beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  the
air,  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  all  the
grasses,  plants  and  flowers  and  herbs
etc.,  everything  possessing  the  prin-
ciple of  life  within  itself.  You
farmers  know  that,  and  hence  ym
store  up  your  different  seeds  and  in
the  proper  season  take  them  and
plant  them  and  they  grow  and
increase  and  spread ;  these  things
look  very  small  It  is  very  little  to
look  at  a  grain  of  wheat,  but  then  if
you  don't  have  it  you  never  could
raise  wheat.  Can  you  fanners  make
one  solitary  grain  of  wheat  without
the  seed  ?  It  is  apparently  a  small
thing  but  you  can't  do  it  You  can
try  it  if  you  please,  but  you  will  not
succeed.  You  cannot  make  a
peppergrass  seed;  but  if  you  take
one  of  those  seeds  or  a  grain  of
wheat  and  sow  it  and  water  it  you
may  by  its  increase  spread  it  over  all
the  face  of  the  earth  ;  but  if  you  did
not  have  the  seed  you  could  not 1
accomplish  anything,  I  do  not  care
how  smart  you  are  or  what  rules  of
philosophy  or  science  you  may  have
come  across,  all  I  ask  of  you  is  to
make  a  grain  of  oats  or  wheat  But
then,  we  will  stop  at  the  wheat  If
we  cannot  do  that  we  are  not  so
very  important,  are  wel  There
needs  a  superior  power  to  give  this
vitality.  You  look  at  it  You  see
to-day  the  trees  are  leafless,  there
are  no  flowers  in  bloom,  everything
is  seared  and  withered  and  appar-
ently gone  to  decay.  By  and  by
No.  &


I  according  to  the  principles  of  nature,
j  or  the  laws  of  God,  spring  comes
■  along,  and  the  birds  begin  to  sing
and  feel  happy,  the  grass  begins  to
!  shoot  forth,  the  flowers  begin  to  bud,
the  trees  begin  to  blossom.  And
who  gives  this  vitality  and  main-
|  tains  it  1 God, Could  yon  do  much
I  without  him?  No.  Why,  you  cannot
I  even  make  your  grain  to  grow  after
it  is  provided  for  you  without  water.
You  try  it  sometimes  but  you  make
a  poor  out  of  it,  and  withal  we  need
the  revivifying  heat  of  the  sun.
The  grass  begins  to  shoot  up  and  by
and  by  we  have  the  wheat  and  corn,
first  the  blade  and  ear  and  then  full
corn  in  the  ear. We  have  apple
trees,  plum  trees,  and  the  various
fruit  trees  budding,  blossoming  and
bearing  fruit,  all  these  things  are
provided  by  whom  ? By  the  omni-
potent, omniscient  hand of  the
Almighty  according  to  certain  eter-
nal laws  that  he  has  provided  for
man  and  for  every  creature  that
exists  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.

But  we  will  come  back  to  the
things  spoken  of  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,
This  principle  of  life  is  the  origin  of
our  world,  not  only  of  this  world,
but  of  others ;  and  this  propagating
and  multiplying  is  ordained  of  the
Almighty  for  the  peopling  of  these
worlds.  And  this  production  of
life  that  I  have  briefly  alluded  to  is
another  principle  that  exists  te
supply  the  want  of  another  kind  of
life  that  exists  here  upon  the  earth*
And  without  this  there  could  be  no
world  ;  all  would  be  chaos,  all  would
be  darkness,  all  would  be  death,  and
the  works  of  God  would  amount  to
nothing  if  it  were  not  for  this  life
and  vitality.

Now,  1  want  to  speak  further  on
a  principle  associated  with  this  sub-
ject, that  is,  that  in  the  providence
of  God,  or  according  to  the  eternal
laws  of  God  and  the  eternal  fitness

Vol,  XXL


in


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


of  things  as  they  exist  with  him  in
the  eternal  world*  and  as  they  exist
here  upon  the  earth,  all  of  us  are  or
should  be  as  much  u ruler  the  guid-
ance and  direction  of  God,  and  are
as  much  obligated  to  listen  to  his
law  and  be  governed  by  his  counsels
and  advice — and  I  should  think  a
little  more  so — than  we  would  be  in
making  that  grain  of  wheat  to  grow
or  ten  thousand  million  of  them  to
grow,  for  we  could  not  do  it  without
being  governed  by  those  laws  requi-
site to  produce  the  increase.  Fur-
thermore, we  all  are  the  offspring  of
God,  are  we  not  ? I  think  the  Scrip-
tures read  that  14  We  are  all  his  off-
spring ;  that  he  is  the  God  and
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  "
and  being  the  God  and  Father  of
the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  and  having
made  a  world  for  all  flesh  to  inhabit*
and  having  made  provision  for  the
sustenance  of  that  flesh,  for  their
food,  clothing,  comfort,  convenience
and happiness, and  given  them
intelligence  and  told  them  to  go
forth  and  manipulate  the  abundance
of  nature  to  their  use,  has  he  not
a  right  to  lead  and  direct  us,  to  ask
obedience  to  his  law  ? Would  not
that  be  a  legitimate  right,  when  we
reflect  upon  it? The  world  says,
No,  he  has  no  right ;  I  am  my  own
master,  etc. Some  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  almost  say  the  same
thing ;  not  quite,  but  they  would
like  to  get  near  it. M  I  am  a  free
man  ;  I  will  be  damned  if  I  don't  do
as  I  please,"  etc., Well,  I  will  tell
you  another  part  of  that  story.  You
will  be  damned  if  you  do  act  as  yen
please  unless  you  please  to  do  and  to
keep  the  laws  of  God. We  cannot
violate  his  laws  with  impunity  nor
trample  under  foot  these  eternal
principles  which  exist  in  all  nature.
If  all  nature  is  compelled  to  be  gov-
erned by  law  or  suffer  loss,  why  not
man  ?


Now,  then,  he  has  revealed  unto
us  the  Gospel.  He  has  gathered  us
together  from  among  the  nations  of
the  earth  for  the  accomplish  ment  of
his  purposes,  For  this  he  has  used
higher  measures  and  more  exalted
principles  than  are  associated  with
some  of  the  lower  orders  of  nature,
some  of  these  things  that  exist  in
nature.  But  who  can  comprehend
them  ?  The  world  with  all  its  wis-
dom knows  very  little  about  them.
The  world  with  all  its  wisdom
knows  nothing  about  God.  What
is  the  acme  of  the  perfection  of
knowledge  that  exists  anywhere  to-
day ?  What  is  the  highest  step  of
the  ladder  they  can  reach  !  To  dis-
cover some  principles  or  laws  of
nature  and  become  acquainted  with
them  and  then  they  make  terrible
blunders  at  that  But  this  is  the
acme  of  perfection  that  any  philoso-
pher or  scientist  er  intelligent  man
professes  to  reach — to  understand
some  of  the  laws  of  nature.  But
how  much  of  these  do  they  know.
Why,  in  my  time,  in  order  to  show
how  much  they  know  and  how  little,
I  will  mention  some  things  that  have
not  existed  in  ray  day.  They  did
not  know  of  the  oil  we  burn  in  this
room,  I  can  remember  that  in  some
of  the  large  cities  of  the  earth  all
they  had  to  light  then  was  tallow  or
wax  candles  or  whale  oil,  which  was
just  about  enough  to  make  darkness
visible.  And  after  all  the  thousands
of  years  that  men  have  existed  upon
the  earth  they  cannot  even  make
the  oil  you  burn  to-day,  and  they
did  not  have  it  when  I  was  young.
But  did  that  principle  that  exists  in
the  oil  always  exist  ?  Yes.  Why
did't  they  find  it  out?  Because
they  only  understood  a  few  of  the
principles  of  nature  notwithstand  ing
all  their  philosophy  and  intelligence.
Again,  who  knew  anything  about
gas  in  those  days  ? I  can  remember


ETERNAL  NATURE  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


the  time  when  the  streets  and  shops
were  first  lighted  up  with  gas.
What  did  they  have  before  ?  Tallow
candles  ;  those  in  common  use  we
used  to  call  dips.  You  old  people
know  about  this  and  whale  oil,  bat
you  did  not  know  anything  about
gas  ;  but  did  not  gas  always  exist  ?
Yes.  Why  did  they  not  know  it  ?
Because  they  were  like  us,  didn't
know  much.  Again,  what  did  they
know  about  the  power  of  steam?
I  can  remember  the  time  when  theie
was  no  such  thing  as  steamboats,
when  we  who  lived  in  England  had
to  come  to  America  in  sailing  vessels.
They  had,  it  is  true,  some  small
vessels  that  were  used  on  the  rivers
propelled  by  steam,  which  they
could  not  trust  in  the  ocean,  and  a
little  time  before  that  they  had  no
steamers  of  any  kind.  And  then
what  about  our  railroads!  Did
they  know  how  to  apply  steam  to
locomotives?  No.  I  remember
riding  on  the  first  railroad  that  was
built,  and  here  is  Brother  Robinson,
who  was  one  of  the  conductors  of
that  same  railroad  that  ran  between
Liverpool  and  Manchester,  I  think
he  is  now  nearly  the  first  railroad
conductor,  and  the  oldest  living.
Why  didn't  men  find  out  these
things  ?  We  have  had  intelligent
men  and  philosophers  in  all  ages  to
the  present  time,  but  none  could
understand  these  things.  Yet  the
principles  are  eternal  in  their  nature
and  al  ways  existed,  and  all  it  needed
was  to  bring  them  out  And  when
men  discovered  them  they  thought
they  were  some  great  beings.  And
what  did  they  discover]  Simply
something  that  God  had  already
made  long  age.  only  they  did't  know
it.  In  talking  about  these  things  I
am  reminded  of  a  little  baby.  You
sisters  have  your  babies,  and  you  are
aware  how  little  they  know  at  first,
and  we  ourselves  do  not  know  very


much  ;  we  are  only  babies  of  a  big-
ger growth.  One  of  the  first  things
they  find  out  is  that  they  have  a
foot,  and  they  try  to  put  it  in  their
mouth.  They  look  at  it  in  astonish-
ment Why,  they  always  had  that
foot  since  their  birth.  Why  did'nt
they  know  it  before?  Another
thing  they  find  out  they  have  a  hand
and  they  think  what  a  curious  thing
it  is,  and  they  look  at  it  and  the
motion  of  their  fingers  with  astonish-
ment, and  they  think  they  have
made  a  great  discovery.  But  there
is  not  much  difference  between  the
world  of  mankind  and  the  babies
when  we  come  to  look  at  it.  The
child  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
making  of  its  hands,  neither  have
we  had  anything  to  do  with  origina-
ting any  of  these  principles,  God
made  them,  and  we  have  simply  dis-
covered some  of  the  powers  of  what
is  termed  nature,  and  when  we  have
found  out  a  little  of  these  things  we
take  the  glory  td  ourselves  ;  we  feel
very  much  like  the  king  of  Babylon
when  he  said,  "  Is  not  this  Great
Babylon  that  I  have  built?"  The
Lord,  however,  started  him  off  to
eat  grass  like  an  ox.  He  had  to  live
on  it  until  seven  years  had  passed
over  him,  when  the  Lord  restored
him  to  his  natural  state,  and  he  then
knew  that  there  was  a  God  who
lived  and  ruled  in  the  heavens  and
on  the  earth.  It  is  for  us  to  learn
this  lesson  and  to  find  out  that  there
is  a  God  who  rules  in  heaven,  and
that  lie  manages,  directs  and  con-
trols the  affairs  of  the  human  lamily.
We  are  not  our  own  rulers  ;  we  are
all  the  children  of  God ;  he  is  our
Father  and  has  a  right  to  direct  us,
not  only  us,  but  has  a  perfect  right
to  direct  and  control  the  affairs  of  all
the  human  family  that  exists  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  for  they  are  all
his  offspring.  Now,  he  feels  kindly
towards  them  and  knows  what  kind


11G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


of  people  they  are,  and  also  what  we
are,  and  he  would  do  everything  he
could  for  them  even  if  in  his  al-
mighty wisdom  he  has  to  kill  them
off  in  order  to  save  them.  He
destroyed  the  antediluvian  world  on
that  account,  because  they  were  not
filling  the  measure  of  their  creation.
They  had  corrupted  themselves  to
such  an  extent  that  it  would  have
been  an  injustice  to  the  spirits  hi  the
eternal  worlds  if  they  had  to  come
through  such  a  corrupt  lineage  to  be
subject  to  all  th e  trouble,  incident
thereunto,  and  therefore  God
destroyed  them.  He  cut  off  the
cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in
consequence  of  their  corruptions,
and  by  and  by  he  will  shake  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  he  will
shake  thrones  and  will  overturn
empires  and  desolate  the  land  and
lay  millions  of  the  human  family  in
the  dust  Plagues  and  pestilence
will  stalk  through  the  earth  because
of  the  iniquities  of  men,  because  of
some  of  these  corruptions  that
Brother  Joseph  E  Smith  has  briefly
hinted  at,  namely,  the  perversion  of
the  laws  of  nature  between  the  sexes,
and  the  damnable  murders  that  exist
among  men.

Not  long  ago,  I  was  called  upon
by  some  intelligent,  or  those  who
profess  to  be  intelligent  men,  who
asked  me  something  about  polygamy,
"  How  is  it  with  you,"  said  I ;  11  do  1
you  know  that  in  this  land  of  yours
you  are  murdering  hundreds  of  thou*
eands  of  infants  every  year  ?  Do  yon
know  that  you  have  among  you  peo-
ple who  are  considered  the  most1
fashionable  and  honorable  that  are
murderers,  who  destroy  the  life  that
God  has  given  before  and  afterbirth,
and  interfere  with  the  laws  of  the
Almighty,  Do  you  know  that  they
are  doing  that  ?  "  Yes,  we  believe
they  are  doing  it"  "  Do  you  know
that  you  .are  wallowing  in  corruption  j


and  degradation,  and  that  your
social  evils  and  other  damnable
corruptions  that  exist  are  spreading
and  permeating  through  all  your
society  f  "Yes."  "Well,  you
please  go  and  attend  to  your  own
affairs.  It  certainly  does  not  look
well  for  you  who  hail  from  the3e
sinks  of  infamy  and  degradation  t&
preach  morality  to  us.  Please  attend
to  your  own  affairs  first  and  get
them  straightened  out  before  you
come  to  correct  us."  Yet  these  very
people,  these  lascivious  men  sitting
upon  the  bench  and  pleading  in  the
courts  will  arraign  honorable  men
for  obeying  a  law  of  God.  AY  ill  we
obey  it  ?  In  the  name  of  Israel's
God  we  will.  (The  congregation
said  uAraen.")  We  will  carry  out
his  purposes,  we  will  obey  Ins
behests,  we  will,  with  Ins  help,
abide  his  law,  and  our  persecutors
cannot  help  themselves,  fur  God  will
put  a  hook  into  their  jaws  and  he
will  lead  them  whithersoever  he  will
and  put  a  stop  to  their  career  by
and  bye,  But  he  will  look  in  kind-
ness upon  Zion  and  honor  those  who
honor  and  obey  his  law.
|  Now  these  are  my  feelings  in  rela-
tion to  these  things.  We  ought  to
observe  the  laws  of  God.  The  Lord
has  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  to
hring  us  where  we  are  and  to  give
us  the  information  we  have.  He
came  himself,  accompanied  by  his
Son  Jesus,  to  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith.  He  didn't  send  anybody  but
came  himself,  and  introducing  his
Son,  said  :  This  is  my  beloved  Son,
hear  him."  And  he  permitted  the
ancient  prophets,  apostles  and  men
of  God  that  existed  in  different  ages
to  come  and  confer  the  keys  of  their
several  dispensations  upon  the  pro-
phet of  the  Lord,  in  order  that  he
should  be  endowed  and  imbued  with
the  power  and  Spirit  of  God,  with
the  light  of  revelation  and  the  eter-


ETERNAL  NATURE  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


117


nal  principles  of  the  everlasting  |
Gospel,  and  that  the  keys  committed  II
to  him,  might,  through  him,  be  con*
f erred  upon  others,  and  that  the  j
principles  of  eternal  truth  as  they  !
exist  in  the  heavens,  might  extend
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  that
these  degrading,  loathsome,  damning
principles  might  cease,  that  his  peo-
ple might  be  gathered  to  Zion  from
the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  and
learn  his  laws* Says  Jesus  in  his  1
parable  of  the  good  shepherd,  "and
the  sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  he
calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and
leadeth  them  out And  when  he
putteth  forth  his  own  sheep  he  goeth
before  them  and  the  sheep  follow  1
him ;  for  they know  his  voice."
Now,  he  has  brought  us  together
here. Whose  sheep  are  we  1  Says
Jesus,  •*  1  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not
for  the  world,  but  for  them  which
thou  hast  given  me ;  for  they  are
thine.  *  *  *

Neither  pray  I  for  the.se  alone,  but
for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on
me  through  their  word,  That  they  1
all  may  be  one  ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  i
in  me  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also
may  be  one  in  us :  that  the  world
may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me.11
He  has  gathered  us  together  here
for  what?  To  teach  us  his  law
through  the  medium  of  the  Holy
Priesthood.  Jesus,  in  sending  forth
his  disciples  in  former  times  said
unto  them,  "He  that  receiveth  you
receiveth  me,  and  he  that  receiveth
me  receiveth  him  that  sent  me/'

Now,  God  has  ordained  his  Holy
Priesthood  upon  the  earth  witli
presidents,  apostles,  bishops,  high
councils,  seventies,  high  priests,  and
the  order  and  organization  of  the
Church  and  kiugdom  of  God  in  its
fulness  and  completeness,  more
complete  perhaps,  than  it  ever
was  since  the  world  was
framed. Why  ? Because  it  is  the


dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times*
embracing  all  other  times  that  have
ever  existed  since  the  iVorld  was,
and  he  has  gathered  us  together  for
that  purpose-  Is  it  to  sow  and  plant
and  try  to  make  ourselves  comfort-
able and  to  follow  the  customs  of  the
world  in  their  corruptions  and  to
wallow  in  inforay  and  rob  and  plun-
der one  another,  acting  deceitfully
and  impurely  without  any  regard  to
virtue  or  any  of  the  laws  that  govern
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  I
No.  But  that  we  might  be  a  pecu-
liar people  full  of  the  light  of  truth
and  intelligence  and  revelations  of
God;  that  we  might  be  a  people
having  no  lenger  need  of  the  oral
law  or  the  written  law,  but  a  people
upon  whose  hearts  the  law  of  God
tfhall  be  written  and  engraven  as  in
characters  of  living  fire,  being  under
the  inspiration  and  guidance  of  the
Almighty,  walking  according  to  the
principles  of  eternal  truth,  and  being
led  in  the  paths  of  life;  being  united
with  God  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ
and  with  the  ancient  patriarchs  and
apostles  and  men  of  God,  operating
with  them  in  the  building  up  of
Zion,  in  establishing  the  kiugdom  of
God  upon  the  earth,  and  in  spread-
ing salvation  to  the  ends  of  thi
earth.  This  is  what  he  has  brought
us  here  for.  And  also  that  we
might  build  temples  to  officiate  in
them  lor  the  living  and  the  dead,
and  that  we  might  go  forth  to  the
nations  of  the  earth,  carrying  the
glad  tidings  of  peace ;  and  that  we
might  be  as  a  city  set  upon  a  hill
that  cannot  be  hid ;  and  that  being
in  unison  with  God  and  the  patri-
archs and  apostles,  we  might  draw
down  the  light  and  intelligence  of
heaven  upon  the  earth  to  enable  us
to  operate  with  them  according  to
the  principles  of  justice  and  equity
and  the  laws  of  lite  and  every  princi-
ple connected  with  the  salvation  of


118  JOURNAL  OF

the  human  family,  and  that  we  might
go  on  from  strength  to  strength
from  intelligence  to  intelligence,
until  we  shall  be  capable  of
enjoying  a  celestial  glory  and
shall  be  prepared  to  enter  therein  ;
and  until  all  that  shall  be  prepared
to  have  a  celestial  glory  shall  enjoy
that,  and  t  hose  who  are  prepared  for
the  terrestrial  glory  to  have  that,
and  also  the  telestial  to  enjoy  what
belongs  to  them,  and  that  we  may
co-operate  with  God  in  the  eternal
worlds  and  the  intelligences  of
heaven  for  the  accomplishment  of
this  object  And  that  while  they
operate  in  the  heavens,  we  may
operate  for  them  upon  the  earth.
This  is  what  we  are  here  for  as  I  j
understand  it

What  else  1  Make  settlements  ;
break  loose.  Some  of  you  are  cry-
ing "give  us  room/1  There  is
plenty  of  room,  and  in  making  these
settlements  we  want  to  carry  with
us  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  and
plant  them  in  different  places.  We
are  sending  out  persons  into  the
north  east  of  this  Territory,  and  we
want  them  to  go  filled  with  the
Holy  Ghost  and  the  spirit  of  the
living  God.  And  we  are  sending
some  to  Arizona,  Colorado,  Idaho
and  other  places,  and  we  will  stretch
out  further  and  further.  Zion's
cords  shall  be  lengthened  and  her
stakes  shall  be  strengthened  until
her  armies  shall  become  mighty  and
numerous  and  until  God  shall  say
to  the  Gentiles,  it  is  enough,  and
then  God  will  give  the  government
into  our  hands.

We  have  come  to  set  you  and  to
talk  with  you.  We  want  to  see  you
at  your  own  homes.  These  railroads
whisk  us  by  at  such  a  rapid  rate
that  many  times  we  have  not  time
to  stop  and  visit  with  you*  But  we
thought  this  time  we  would  come
with  our  own  carriages  and  visit  the


DISCOURSES.

people  in  their  own  homes  and  talk
with  them  and  see  how  they  feel
and  that  they  may  judge  of  our  feel-
ings with  regard  to  the  building  up
of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth.  You  elders  of  Israel — and
there  are  many  in  this  congregation
— let  me  ask  you — Do  you  have
prayers  in  your  family  I  (Turning
round  and  addressing  Bishop  Har-
rington, the  speaker  said):  J I  ay  I
act  as  teacher  for  a  little  while  ?

The  Bishop — Yes,  we  will  be  glad
to  have  you.

The  speaker — Well,  then,  I  will
repeat  the  question— Do  you  have
prayers  in  your  family  ?  (A  voice  in
the  congregation.  Yes. )  And  when
you  do,  do  you  go  through  the  opera-
tion like  the  guiding  of  a  piece  of
machinery,  or  do  you  bow  in  meek-
ness aud  with  a  sincere  desire  to
seek  the  blessing  of  God  upon  you
and  your  household  ?  That  is  the
way  that  we  ought  to  do,  and  culti-
j  vate  a  spirit  of  devotion  and  trust  in
God,  dedicating  ourselves  to  him,
and  seeking  his  blessings.

Here  is  one  broth*  r  si\.>  h.*  does.
But  how  is  it  with  the  balance  of  us  ?
J  am  talking  to  all  of  you.  Hus-
bands, do  you  love  your  wives  and
treat  them  right,  or  do  you  think
that  you  yourselves  are  some  great
Moguls  who  have  a  right  to  crowd
upon  them  1  They  are  given  to  you
as  a  part  of  yourself,  and  you  ought
to  treat  them  with  all  kindness,  with
mercy  and  long  suffering,  and  not  be
harsh  and  bitter,  or  in  any  way
desirous  to  display  your  authority.
Then,  you  wives,  treat  your  hus-
bands right,  and  try  to  make  them
happy  and  comfortable.  Endeavor
to  make  your  homes  a  little  heaven,
and  try  to  cherish  the  good  Spirit  of
God.  Then  let  us  as  parents  train
up  our  children  in  the  fear  of  God
and  teach  them  the  laws  of  life.  If
you  do,  we  will  have  peace  in  our


ETERNAL  NATURE  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


119


bosoms,  peace  in  our  families  and
peace  in  our  surroundings.  Have
we  any  difficulty  with  our  neigh-
bors! Why,  Gentiles  strive  to
avoid  that.  Cannot  we  pass  by
some  of  these  hard  words,  as  the  old
man  used  to  say  when  a  child  would
came  to  a  big  word,  u  Pass  it  by,  my
dear,  and  call  it  a  hard  word/1
When  you  come  across  a  hard  word,
pass  it  by  j  don't  utter  it.

Nay,  speak  no  ill ;
A  kindly  word  can  never  leave  a  sting
behind*

Let  us  treat  one  another  with  kind-
ness and  one  another's  reputation
with  respect,  and  feel  after  one
another  s  welfare,  treating  every-
body as  we  would  like  God  to  treat
us.  And  then,  when  we  come  to
the  Lord,  we  can  say,  "  Father,  for-
give us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive
them  that  trespass  against  us  for
if  we  do  uot  forgive  our  brother,  how
can  we  expect  our  heavenly  Father
to  forgive  us  1  If  we  have  had  any
difficulty  with  our  neighbor,  let  us
endeavor  to  make  it  right.  Say,
*'  Brother  or  sister  so  and  so,  my
conscience  rather  troubles  me  about
something  I  said  about  you  or  did
to  you,  or  some  deal  I  had  in  which
I  got  the  advantage  of  you,  and  I
have  come  to  make  it  right,  for  I  am
determined  to  do  right,  no  matter
what  other  people  da  And  let  us
all  seek  after  one  an  other1  s  welfare.
If  we  can  help  one  another,  let  us  do
it — financially  or  socially — and  don't
betray  one  another.  Some  people,
some  poor,  miserable — 1  don't  care  j
to  nay  a  hard  word — I  will  call  them
sneaky  they  will  try,  because  a  man
has  married  a  wife  according  to  the
Laws  of  God,  to  bring  an  accusation
against  him.  Such  men  will  be
damned  and  such  women  will  be
damned.  Do  you  know  that,  when
these  miserable  sneaks  come  into
your  house  on  every  kind  of  pretence,


perhaps  to  sell  wagons  or  machinery
of  some  kind,  in  the  midst  of  their
conversation  they  are  known  to  ask
such  questions  as  u  how  many  wives
has  your  husband  got  P  Poor,  low
miserable  sneaks.  Kick  them  out
of  your  house,  have  nothing  to  do
with  such  low,  infernal  trash.
While  we  treat  good  men  aright,
kick  such  villains  out  of  your  house,
they  have  no  business  among  decent
people.  We  do  not  want  them.
Tell  them  to  attend  to  their  own
affairs  anil  let  our  business  alone.
Tell  them  to  go  back  where  they
came  from,  we  do  not  want  them
among  decent  people.  These  are
my  feelings.  That's  &aying  a  pretty
hard  word.  It  is  such  a  word,
though,  as  suits  such  people,  for  there
is  no  decent  word  that's  appropriate
for  such  contemptible  beings.

Be  true  to  one  another,  respect
another's  reputation.  And  then,
you  elders,  treat  one  another  as
gentlemen  with  courtesy  and  kind-
ness. And  you  ladies  treat  one
another  as  ladies,  and,  old  gentle-
men, treat  ladies  as  ladies,  and  you,
old  ladies,  treat  the  gentlemen  as
gentlemen,

I  feel  t«i  tell  a  little  story  about
Bishop  Hunter.  Most  of  you  know
Dr*  Sprague,  He  was  sent  by
President  Young  to  see  brother
Hunter,  when  on  the  frontier  many
years  ago.  The  doctor  had  a  squeaky
kind  of  a  voice.  He  says  (imitating
the  doctor),  "  Does  Brother  Hunter
live  here  I  Bishop  Hunter  replied
(the  speaker  imitating  the  Bishop's
voice),  "  My  name  is  Hunter."  Doc-
tor Sprague  :  "  President  Young  has
sent  me  to  see  if  you  were  sick,  and
if  so  he  waited  me  to  administer  te
you."  Bishop  Hunter:  "Physician
heal  thyself."  Doctor  Sprague  :
Well,  sir,  I  feel  just  like  two  clap
boards  stuck  together/'  Then  he  says,
41  Is  this  your  old  woman,  Brother


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Hunter."  Bishop  Hunter :  "  This  is
Mrs.  Hunter,  Mrs.  Hunter  is  a
lady,  she  is  not  an  old  woman,  sir.11
When  you  meet  with  women,  treat
them  as  ladies,  and  have  everybody
else  do  the  same.  We  can  afford  to
treat  everybody  right,  that  is,  every
decent  body,  hut  these  sneaks  we  do
not  want  anything  to  do  with— poor
miserable  beings  who  go  around  pre
tending  to  do  business,  but  whose
real  purpose  is  to  obtain  information
that  they  may  inform  upon  you,  to
whom  ?  To  men  who  are  as  wicked,
treacherous,  lascivious  and  degraded
as  the  devil  in  hell.  What  fori
To  destroy  you.  Will  you  receive
such  miserable  sneaks  in  your  midst?
Tell  them  to  go  about  their  business.

Let  us  live  our  religion,  keep  the
command  men  ts  of  God,  pursue  a
right  course,  and  God  will  bless  us.
I  ask  God  the  eternal  Father  to  bless
you  anil  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life.  I  say  to  you,  respect  the  coun-
sels of  those  over  you ;  Brother
Smoofc  as  your  president ;  listen  to
him,  listen  to  the  counsels  of  the
bishop  and  pray  for  him. And  then


your  president  and  bishops  should
pray  for  the  people.  Treat  one  ano-
ther with  kindness  and  courtesy,
and  let  us  all  feel  we  are  the  sons
and  daughters  of  God,  living  our
religion  and  obeying  his  command-
ments, following  the  counsels  of  the
holy  priesthood,  and  seek  for  the
blessings  of  God  upon  us  and  upon
our  posterity.  Never  mind  what
other  people  do.  We  will  go  on
and  take  a  course  in  everything
calculated  to  promote  the  happiness
of  the  human  family,  and  Zion  will
grow  and  spread  until  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  become  the  kingdoms
of  our  Lord  and  his  Christ,  and  the
laws  that  God  has  introduced  will
prevail  and  his  will  be  done  upon
the  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven,
and  every  creature  be  heard  to  say,
M  Blessing  and  honor  and  glory  and
power  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon
the  throne  and  unto  the  Lamb  for
ever  and  ever/*  and  we  will  join  in
the  universal  chorus,  God  help  us
to  be  faithful  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Cli  rist.  Amen.


NO  MAN  CAN  BUILD,  ETC


121


DISCOURSE BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

I

Delivered  In  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

June  6th,  1880.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


NO  MAN  CAN  BUILD  UP  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  WITHOUT  THE  PRIEST-
HOOD—RESPONSIBILITY OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD — CHRIST  COMING  IN  THIS
GENERATION — GREAT  CHANGES  AND  JUDGMENTS  APPROACHING —
EXHORTATION  TO  RIGHTEOUSNESS.


I  have  a  desire  to  be  heard  in
what  I  say  to  this  assembly.  I
know  the  difficulties  there  are  in
speaking  here.  It  requires  not  only
attention,  but  quietude  among  the
people.

I  feel  disposed  to  read  a  few  verses
from  the  good  old  book  the  Bible —
some  of  tiie  sayings  of  Isaiah  and
Ezekiel.  [The  speaker  then  read
from  the  12th  chapter  of  Ezekiel,
from  the  2 1st  to  the  end  of  the  chap-
ter.] I  have  (the  speaker  continued)
a  few  reflections  upon  my  mind  that
I  would  like  to  lay  before  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  especially  those  who
bear  the  holy  priesthood.  Among
the  lessons  which  we  are  learning
in  our  day  and  time  is  this  one  truth  :
that  we  all  of  us  need  the  spirit  of  '
revelation  in  order  that  we  may
teach  mankind  of  the  things  of  God.  1
I  do  not  believe  myself  there  ever
was  a  man  lived  in  the  flesh  on  the
earth,  in  any  day  or  age  of  the
world,  no  matter  what  his  position,
calling,  name,  or  age  might  be — I  do
not  believe  any  man  ever  had  the
power  to  do  the  work  of  God,  to
build  up  his  kingdom  or  to  edify  ■
the  souls  of  men,  without  inspiration  |
and  revelation  ;  for  the  Lord  has
never  called  any  man  in  any  age  of


the  world  to  do  any  of  this  kind  of
work,  whether  to  preach  the  Gospel,
to  prophesy,  or  to  declare  the  word
of  the  Lord  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  or  t<*  administer  in  any  ordi-
nance in  any  temple  or  in  any
tabernacle,  without  the  holy  priest-
hood. There  are  no  ordinances
acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  of
any  force  after  death  or  in  the  eter-
nal worlds  except  those  ordinances
that  are  performed  by  men  bearing
the  holy  priesthood.  Our
heavenly  Father  himself

has  officiated  by  this  principle  in  the
creation  of  all  worlds,  in  the  redemp-
tion of  all  worlds,  and  in  all  the
the  work  which  he  has  performed ;
it  has  all  been  dene  by  the  power  of
the  Godhead  and  the  holy  priest-
hood, which  is  without  beginning  of
'  days  or  end  of  years.  This  priest-
hood has  power  with  the  heavens.
It  has  association  with  the  heavens.
The  heavens  are  connected  with  this
priesthood,  let  it  rest  upon  the
shoulders  or  head  of  any  man,
whether  it  be  Jesus  Christ,  or  those
fishermen,  or  the  ancient  patriarchs
or  prophets  or  Joseph  Smith,  or  any
other  man  who  is  called  of  God  as
was  Aaron,  by  revelation,  and  pro-
phecy to  bear  record  of  the  name  of


122


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


God  in  any  age  of  the  world.  There-
fore, I  occupy  the  same  position  my-
self. I  know  I  need  the  Spirit  of
God.  I  know  you  do,  I  know  any
man  dors  who  rises  on  this  stand,  1
and  attempts  to  teach  the  people.
You  give  a  man  the  inspiration  of
Almighty  God  and  the  eternal
truths  of  heaven  and  he  can  instruct
and  edify  the  children  of  men  upon
the  principles  of  life  and  salvation  ;
without  this  he  cannot  do  it  And
in  order  to  present  to  my  hrethren
and  sisters  and  friends  the  subject
that  I  have  on  my  mind,  I  will  just
refer  a  little  further  to  some  words
of  the  Lord  to  the  Prophet  Ezekiel,

SThe  speaker  again  referred  to  the
3ook  of  Ezekiel,  and  quoted  from
the  9th,  14th  and  33rd  chapters,  all
of  parts  quoted  having  reference  to
the  dealings  of  God  with  the  wicked.]
Continuing,  Elder  Woodruff  said  :
Now,  having  quoted  all  these
passages  of  Scripture,  I  want  to  say
to  my  brethren  the  apostles,  the
high  priests,  the  seventies,  the  elders
of  Israel,  who  bear  the  holy  priest-
hood, upon  whose  shoulders  the  God
©f  heaven,  in  this  day  and  genera-
tion  has  placed  the  responsibility  of
the  Melchesidec  and  Aaronic  priest-
hood ;  lias  placed  the  responsibility
of  this  great  and  last  dispensa-
tion, the  fulness  of  times,  and
the  building  up  of  the  great  kingdom
of  God  which  Daniel  saw  by  revela-
tion, vision  and  inspiration  in  his
day  and  generation  as  proclaimed  by
all  the  prophets  and  apostles  who
have  written  in  this  book,  in  the
stick  of  Judah  as  well  as  in  the
stick  of  Joseph  and  other  revelations
given  to  us  through  the  mouth  of
the  prophets  and  apostles  in  our  day
and  generation—!  want  to  ask  in
the  face  of  all  this — and  1  take  it
home  to  myself — what  position  are
we  in  before  high  heaven,  before
God  the  Father,  before  his  Son  Jesus


Christ,  before  the  heavenly  hosts,
before  all  justified  spirits  n:ade  per-
fect from  the  creation  of  the  world
to  this  day]  What  condition  are
we  in  as  the  servants  of  the  living
God,  men  holding  the  holy  priest-
hood into  whose  hands  the  God  ef
Israel  has  given  this  kingdom.  Are
we  disseminating  the  mighty  flood
of  revelation  and  prophecy  in  these
records  and  these  books  which  are
now  to  rest  upon  the  generation  as
in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  In
this  respect  are  we  justified  in  the
sight  of  God,  in  the  sigh  t  of  heaven,
in  the  sight  of  angels,  and  in  the
sight  of  men?  Can  we  fold  our
arms  in  peace  and  cry  <c  all  is  peace
in  Zion,"  when,  so  far  as  we  have
the  power  of  the  priesthood  resting
upon  us,  we  can  see  the  condition  of
the  world?  Can  we  imagine  that
our  garments  will  be  clean  without
lifting  our  voice  before  our  fellow-
men  and  warning  them  of  the  things
that  are  at  their  doors  ?  No,  we
cannot.  There  never  was  a  set  of
men  since  God  made  the  world
under  a  stronger  responsibility  to
warn  this  generation,  to  lift  up  our
voices  long  and  loud,  day  and  night
so  far  as  we  have  the  opportunity
and  declare  the  words  of  God  unto
this  generation.  We  are  required
to  do  this.  This  is  our  calling.  It
is  our  duty.  It  is  our  business.
We  have  had  to  perform  this  work
for  the  last  50  years  of  our  lives.
When  the  Lord  called  Joseph  Smith
to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  Church
he  called  him  in  fulfilment  of  many
revelations  given  in  other  dispensa-
tions to  men.  He  was  preserved  by
the  hand  of  God  to  come  forth  in
the  last  days,  even  in  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fulness  of  times.  He
was  a  prophet  of  the  living  God.
tie  was  a  prophet,  seer  and  re  vela-
tor.  The  Lord  called  upon  him  to
do  the  work  for  which he  was


NO  MAN  CAN  BUILD,  ETC.


123


ordained  before  the  foundation  of
this  world.  He  did  all  that  was
required  of  him,  and  he  was  sur-
rounded with  thousands  of  men  who
were  acquainted  with  his  life,  and
with  the  Spirit  and  power  of  God
which  rested  upon  him,  and  who
sustained  him  in  life  and  in  death.
We  know  he  was  a  prophet  of  God,
and  we  know  he  brought  forth  the
stick  of  Joseph,  the  Book  of  Mormon,
which  was  given  unto  him  by  the
angel  of  God.  This  Church  and
kingdom  has  been  organized  by  the
command  of  God  and  by  the  revela-
tions  of  heaven,  it  has  continued
to  grow  and  increase,  and  has  been
upheld  by  the  Lord  Almighty,  from
its  organization  until  the  present
hour.  And  when  I  Uok  at  this
Tabernacle  and  think  of  the  words
of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  "that  the
mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall
be  established  in  the  tops  of  the
mountains  ; 1  when  I  look  at  these
everlasting  hills  and  the  land  given
by  promise  to  Father  Jacob  and  his
posterity  ;  when  I  see  this  barren
desert  peopled  by  150,000  Saints  of
the  living  God  who  have  been
gathered  from  nearly  every  nation
under  heaven  through  the  proclam-
ation of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
— what  can  I  say  about  it  1  Can  I
say  it  is  a  dream  1  Can  I  say  that
it  is  all  a  vision?  Can  I  say  that
this  work  is  of  man  and  not  of  God?
Can  I  say  these  are  revelations  and
prophecies  which  belong  to  some
other  generation?  I  tell  you  no.
This  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  Here
are  the  Saints  of  God,  These  moun
tains  are  being  filled  with  the
Latter-day  Saints  from  every  nation
under  heaven,  and  with  these  things
before  me  I  know  that  it  is  my  duty
to  preach  the  Gospel,  to  warn  Saints
and  sinners  wherever  I  have  the
opportunity.  The  Lord  told  Joseph
Smith  that  he  would  prove  as  in  all


things,  whether  we  would  abide  in
his  covenant  even  unto  death,
that  we  might  be  found  worthy.
The  prophet  sealed  his  testimony
with  his  blood.  That  testimony  is
in  force  upon  all  the  world  and  has
been  from  the  day  of  his  death.
Not  one  word  of  the  Lord  shall
pass  away  unfulfilled.  The  unbelief
in  this  generation  will  make  no
difference  with  regard  to  the  build-
ing up  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  As
it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  so  shall
also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man
be.  Therefore,  I  desire  to  ask  my
brethren,  the  elders  of  Israel— and  I
ask  myself  at  the  same  time — do  we
understand  our  position  before  the
Lord?  Ezekiel  has  passed  away,
He  is  in  the  spirit  world.  He  his
received  his  resurrected  body  and
stands  at  the  right  hand  of  God
with  other  prophets  and  apostles
who  lived  in  days  gone  by.  They
had  their  day  and  generation.  All
these  patriarchs  and  prophets  and
apostles  had  a  time  to  prophesy,  to
preach,  to  labor,  and  to  administer
in  the  ordinances  of  life  and  salva-
tion. Now,  in  this  last  dispensation,
ye  elders  of  Israel,  this  work  has
been  put  into  your  hands.  There-
fore what  shall  we  say,  and  what
shall  we  do?  Are  we  acting  as
watchmen  upon  the  walls  of  Zionl
If  we  are,  are  we  justified  in  closing
our  mouths,  in  closing  our  ears,  or
in  setting  our  hearts  upon  anything
else  excepting  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God  1  I  do  not  think
we  are.  In  my  view  our  responsi-
bility is  very  great.  We  should
live  our  religion.  We  should  prac-
tise ourselves  what  we  preach.  We
should  treasure  up  the  words  of  life.
We  should  search  the  records  of
divine  truth.  We  should  seek  to
comprehend  the  day  and  age  in
which  we  live.  This  is  the  way  I
look  upon  our  situation  to-day,  I


DLSCUUKSKN.


do  not  look  upon  the  revelations
recorded  in  these  books,  touching  j
the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of
times,  as  something  that  will  pass
away  unfulfilled*  We  live  in  a
generation  when  great  changes  are
about  to  take  place*  We  live  in  a
time  when  darkness  covers  the  whole
earth  and  gross  darkness  the  people.
The  world  are  a  great  way  from  the
truth.  Infidelity  overwhelms  the
earth,  in  fact  it  is  a  hard  matter  to-
day to  get  either  priest  or  people,
sect  or  party,  of  any  name  or  deno-
mination under  heaven  to  believe  in
the  literal  fulfillment  of  the  Bible,
as  translated  in  the  days  of  King
James,  which  contains  the  revela-
tions given  from  the  days  of  Father
Adam  down  to  our  own  time,  and
which  point  out  to  us  the  signs  of
heaven  and  earth  indicating  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  We  live
in  the  generation  itself  when  Jesus
Christ  will  come  in  the  clouds  of
heaven  with  power  and  great  glory.
We  live  in  the  generation  when  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  been
revealed  in  its  fulaess  to  the  Gentiles,
and  when  the  Gospel  of  Christ  will
go  to  the  House  of  Israel,  to  the
descendants  of  Lehi,  in  fulfilment  of
that  which  is  recorded  in  their
records  in  the  9th,  10th  and  ll  th
chapters  of  the  last  book  of  Nephi.
These  prophets  spake  by  the  power
of  God  and  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  as  the  apostle  says,
u  ho  prophecy  of  the  Scripture  is  of
any  private  interpretation,  For  the
prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by
the  will  of  man ;  but  holy  men  of
God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by
the  Holy  Ghost"  I  feel  therefore
to  say  to  my  brethren  who  bear  the
holy  priesthood,  and  I  say  it  to  my-
self and  to  all — I  do  not  think  we
have  much  time  to  lie  down  and
slumber.  We  have  no  time  to  specu-
late in  trying  to  get  rich  in  try-


ing to  accumulate  gold  and  silver.
What  we  have  g*t  to  do  is  to  build
up  the  kingdom  of  God-  As
apostles,  high  priests,  elders,  seventies
and  the  lesser  priesthood,  we  are
bound  together  by  this  new  and
everlasting  Gospel  and  covenant;  we
are  called  to  perform  the  great  and
mighty  work  of  building  up  Zion,  of
building  temples  wherein  we  may
labor  for  the  living  and  the  dead,
and  we  should  live  in  that  way  and
manner  that  we  may  be  governed
and  controlled  at  all  times  by  the
Holy  Spirit.

I  know  very  well  how  the  world
look  at  these  things.  As  I  said  be-
fore, the  world  is  far  from  the  Lord.
We  ourselves  are  too  far  from  the
Lord  as  a  people.  We  ought  to
draw  near  to  the  Lord,  and  labor  to
obtain  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  when
we  read  the  revelations  of  God  we
may  read  them  by  the  same  Spirit
by  which  they  were  given*  Then
we  can  understand  their  purport
when  given  to  the  children  of  men.

The  Lord  has  said  by  the  mouth
of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  that  he  would
proceed  to  do  a  marvelous  work  and
a  wonder ;  and  when  I  look  at  the
rise  and  progress  of  tins  Church,
when  I  behold  the  great  work  the
Lord  lias  performed,  it  was  a  marvel-
ous work  and  a  wonder  indeed.
There  never  has  been,  in  my  view,
any  generation  in  which  the  same
amount  of  prophecies  and  important
events  have  to  be  fulfilled  aa  in  the
generation  in  which  we  live.  Joseph
Smith,  an  illiterate  boy,  was  raised
up  by  the  power  of  God.  His
teachers  were  the  angels  of  heaven.
He  was  administered  unto  by  the
Son  of  God.  He  received  the
Aaronic  priesthood  of  John  the
Baptist,  who  was  beheaded  for  the
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ  He
received  the  apostleship  and  Melehi-
zedek  Priesthood  under  the  hands  of


Peter,  James  and  John,  who  were
also  put  to  death  for  the  word  and
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ  He  made
use  of  these  ordinances  by  the  com-
mandment of  God.  He  organized
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  ;
he  did  that  which  all  the  wisdom  of
the  sectarian  world  could  never
have  comprehended.  He  established
the  only  church  on  the  face  of  the
earth  according  to  the  ancient  order
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  with
apostles,  prophets,  teachers,  gifts,
helps,  governments,  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins,  the  laying  of  hands
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost
— an  organization  which  has  not
existed  on  the  earth  from  the  day
the  ancient  apostles  were  put  to
death,  and  the  holy  priesthood  taken
from  the  earth,  until  the  present.
This  Church  has  continued  to  rise.
It  is  the  only  true  church  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  Its  history
is  before  the  world  It  has  con-
tinued to  grow  and  increase  from  the
day  it  was  organized  until  the  pres-
ent time.  This  is  the  Zion  of  Cod.
We  eee  an  embryo  of  it  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains,  and  it  is
designed  by  the  Most  High  God  to
stand  on  the  earth  in  power  and
glory  and  dominion,  as  the  prophets
of  God  saw  it  in  their  day  and  genera-
tion. This  is  the  kingdom  that
Daniel  saw,  and  it  will  continue  to
roll  forth  until  it  fills  the  whole
earth.  These  are  eternal  truths,
whether  the  world  believe  or  dis-
believe them,  it  matters  not,  the
truths  cannot  be  made  ef  non-effect.
This  is  certainly  a  strange  work  and
a  wonder.  There  has  been  every
exertion  made  to  stay  it.  Armies
have  been  sent  forth  to  destroy  this
people ;  but  we  have  been  upheld
and  sustained  by  the  hand  of  the
Lord  until  to  day.

And  now  I  desire  to  bear  my  tes-
timony. I  have  no  fears,  my  brethren


and  sisters — and  I  say  the  same  to
our  nation,  to  all  kings,  queens,
emperors,  presidents  and  govern-
ments of  this  world— I  have  no  fears
with  regard  to  "  Mormon  ism,1'  and
and  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the
kingdom  of  God  ;  because  the  Lord
Almighty  has  said  that  the  nation
and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  him
shall  perish  and  be  utterly  wasted
away.  If  this  had  not  been  the
Zion  of  God  it  would  not  have  stood
so  long  as  it  has  done.  This  king-
dom, however,  has  not  been  organ-
ized by  the  power  of  man  but  by  the
power  of  God,  and  whatever  God
undertakes  to  do  he  will  carry  out.
I  have  therefore  no  fear  of  this  king-
dom.  It  was  ordained  to  come  forth
before  the  world  was  made;  and  the
Lord  never  undertook  a  dispensation
of  this  kind  without  due  preparation
before  lie  commenced.  He  had
material  in  the  spirit  world  who
would  in  time  be  raised  up  to  carry
on  this  kingdom.  1  have  no  fears
about  this  work  being  accomplished,
but  I  have  fears  about  many  of  the
Latter-day  Saints ;  because  if  we
have  the  holy  priesthood  upon  our
heads  and  do  not  live  our  religion,
of  all  men  we  are  under  the  greatest
condemnation.  We  have  baptized  a
great  many  into  this  Church  and
kingdom — not  many,  certainly,
when  compared  to  the  twelve  hun-
dred million  inhabitants  of  the  earth
— but  a  great  many  have  apostatized.
What !  Latter-day  Saints  aposta-
tize 1  Yes.  I  tell  you  people  will
apostatize  who  havereceived  the  holy
priesthood  and  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  if  they  do  not  honor  God,  if
they  do  not  keep  his  commandments,
obey  his  laws  and  humble  them-
selves before  the  Lord ;  they  are  in
danger  every  day  of  their  lives.
Look  at  the  number  of  devils  we
have,  round  about  us  !  We  have  I
should  say,  one  hundred  to  every


126


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


man,  woman  and  child.  One  third
part  of  the  heavenly  host  was  cast
down  to  the  earth  with  Lucifer,  sou
of  the  morning,  to  war  against  us —
which  I  suppose  will  number  one
hundred  million  devils — and  they
labor  to  overthrow  all  the  Saints  and
the  kingdom  of  God.  They  even
tried  to  overthrow  Jesus  Christ ;
they  overthrew  Judas,  and  they
have  succeeded  in  overthrowing  a
good  many  Latter  day  Saints,  who
had  a  name  and  standing  among  us,
who  undertook  to  build  themselves
up  instead  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.
and  when  men  having  this  priesthood
— I  do  not  care  whether  it  was  in
the  days  of  Adam,  in  the  days  of
Moses,  in  the  days  of  Joseph  Smith,
or  in  the  days  of  Brigham  Young,  I
care  not  in  what  day  they  lived— if
they  bore  this  priesthood  and  under-
took to  use  it  for  any  other  purpose
than  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  then  amen  to  the  power  and
priesthood  of  such  men.

The  Lord  will  have  a  people  to
carry  on  his  purposes  who  will  obey
and  serve  him.  He  has  a  good  many
people  in  this  day  and  age  of  the
wurld,  who  will  be  faithful  unto
death,  whether  called  to  seal  their
testimony  with  their  blood  or  not.
He  has  a  people  who  will  maintain
his  work  while  they  are  here.  But
here  is  the  danger,  ye  Latter-day
Saints,  and  the  Savior  saw  it  very
plainly,  and  has  left  it  on  record  in  the
earth  :  He  compared  the  kingdom  of
God  unto  ten  virgins,  which  took
their  lamps  and  went  forth  to  meet
the  bridegroom.  "  And  five  of  them
were  wise  and  five  were  foolish.
They  that  were  foolish  took  their
lamps  and  took  no  oil  with  them  ;
But  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels
with  their  lamps.  While  the  bride-
groom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered
and  slept.  And  at  midnight  there
was  a  cry  made,  Behold  the  bride-


groom come  tli ;  go  ye  out  to  meet
him.  Then  all  those  virgins  arose
and  trimmed  their  lamps.  And  the
foolish  said  unto  the  wise,  Give  us
of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps  are  gone
out.  But  the  wise  answered  saying,
Not  so ;  lest  there  be  not  enough  for
us  and  you  ;but  go  ye  rather  to  them
that  sell,  and  buy  for  yourselves.
And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the
bridegroom  came,  and  they  that  were
ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  mar-
riage j  and  the  door  was  shut.
Afterwards  came  also  the  other
virgins,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to
us.  But  he  answered  and  said,
Verily  I  say  unto  jou,  I  know  you
not."  Now,  those  who  have  got  oil
in  their  lamps,  are  men  who  live
their  religion,  pay  their  tithing,  pay
their  debts,  keep  the  commandments
of  God,  and  do  not  blaspheme  his
name;  men  and  women  who  will
not  sell  their  birthright  ior  a  mess
a  pottage  or  for  a  little  gold  or  silver;
these  are  those  that  will  be  valiant
in  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,

This  is  the  way  I  feel  to  day.  I
feel  to  warn  ray  brethren  and  sisters,
the  Latter-day  Saints,  to  live  their
religion,  to  trim  their  lamps,  because
as  the  Lord  lives,  his  word  will  be
fulfilled.  The  coming  of  Jesus  is
nigh  at  the  door.  These  judgments
that  I  have  read  will  come  to  pass,
and  though  Brigham,  Joseph,  Noah,
Daniel  and  Job,  or  anybody  else
were  in  the  land,  they  could  not
do  more  than  deliver  their  own  souls
by  their  righteousness.  The  man
that  is  righteous  cannot  save  the
wicked.  We  have  got  to  live  our  own
righteousness,  that  is  keep  the  com*
mandments  of  God.

We  are  approaching  changes.
There  are  judgments  at  our  door.
There  are  judgments  at  the  door  of
this  nation,  and  at  the  door  of  Great
Babylon.  How  do  the  world  feel
to-day  ? How  does  our  nation  feel  ?


NO  MAN  CAN

Something  similar  to  Belshazzar,  the
king.  On  the  night  that  he  drank
out  of  the  golden  and  silver  vessels,
with  his  princes  and  his  wives,  he
thought,  u  Well,  I  made  this  coun-
try. I  made  this  city.  I  am  the
god  of  this  country  j"  but  when  the
Lord  Almighty  manifested  his  dis-
pleasure by  the  writing  on  the  wall,
the  scene  was  changed.  His  king-
dom was  broken  up  and  given  to  the
Medes  and  Persians.  His  greatness,
his  gold  and  silver  did  not  save  him.
In  the  same  way  the  Lord  in  ancient
days  swept  away  great  cities  when
they  were  [ripened  in  iniquity*
Jerusalem  was  overthrown  in  fulfil-
ment of  the  words  of  the  Lord-
Jeremiah  and  Isaiah  prophesied  what
would  come  to  pass,  and  it  was  ful-
filled to  the  very  letter.  So  I  say
to  the  Gentiles,  so  I  say  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  What  the  Lord
has  spoken  concerning  our  nation,
and  concerning  the  nations  of  the
earth,  notwithstanding  that  the
unbelief  of  the  world  may  be  great,
notwithstanding  that  they  may
reject  the  word  of  God  and  seek  to
put  the  servants  of  God  to  death —
will  all  be  fid  filled.  War,  pestilence,
famine,  earthquakes  and  storms
aw  ait  this  generation.  These  calami-
ties will  overtake  the  world  as  God
lives,  and  no  power  can  prevent
them.  Therefore  I  say  to  the  elders
of  Israel,  be  faithful.  We  have  had
the  priesthood  given  to  us,  and  if  we
fail  to  use  it  right,  we  shall  be
brought  under  condemnation.
Therefore,  let  us  round  up  our
shoulders  and  bear  off  the  kingdom.
Let  us  labor  to  obtain  the  Holy
Spirit — and  power  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  Christ — which  has  been  put
into  our  hands,  and  inasmuch  as  we
do  this,  the  blessing  of  God  will


build,  etc.  127

attend  our  efforts.

We  have  been  here  a  number  of
years.  We  have  preached  the  Gospel
and  labored  to  build  up  this  king-
dom. Many  have  been  associated
with  this  Church  almost  from  the

,  beginning. Many  have  been  taken

|  away.  Joseph  and  Hyrum  sealed
their  testimony  with  their  blood.
Many  have  passed  to  the  other  side
of  the  vail,  and  many  others  of  us
will  soon  follow  them  ;  but  I  do  not
want  when  I  get  there  to  have  it
said,  4i  When  you  were  in  the  flesh
you  had  the  priesthood,  you  had  the
power  to  rebuke  sin,  but  you  were
not  man  enough  to  chastise  the
ungodly."  Neither  do  I  want  my
relatives  to  rise  up  and  say  "  You  had
the  power  to  do  a  work  for  the
redemption  of  the  dead,  but  you
have  neglected  these  things."  1  da
not  want  these  things  to  rise  up

|  against  me.  As  for  gold  and  silver>
they  are  of  very  little  account  com-
pared with  eternal  life.  When  we
die  we  must  leave  the  riches  of  this
world  behind.  We  were  born  naked
and  we  will  go  out  of  the  world  in
the  same  condition.  We  cannot
take  with  us  houses,  gold,  silver,  or
any  of  this  world's  goods.  We  will
even  leave  our  tabernacles  for  some-
body to  bury.  Our  spirits  must
appear  in  the  presence  of  God,  and
there  receive  our  reward  for  the
deeds  done  in  the  body.

Therefore,  I  pray  God  my  heaven-
ly Father  t©  enable  us  to  live  our
religion,  to  labor  for  light  and  truth
that  we  may  not  work  in  the  dark;
to  live  nearer  and  nearer  the  Lord
and  be  prepared  for  that  which  is  to
come*  and  eventually  gain  eternal
life,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  Amen.


128


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  September  7th,  1879.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


ON  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON— DESTINY  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  AND
' THE  SAINTS.  -


It  is  with  feelings  of  thanksgiving
to  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  that
I  stand  before  you  this  afternoon,
after  having  been  absent  from  tliis
place  for  some  nine  months  that  are
past

I  suppose  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  who  are  congregated  here,
understand  the  object  of  the  mission
which  was  given  to  me,  to  go  to
Great  Britain,  and  there  get  the
pages  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
electrotyped,  with  double  sets  of
plates,  for  the  purpose  of  spreading
forth  copies  of  these  works,  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  by  hun-
dreds of  thousands.  I  therefore,
feel  very  much  pleased  to  have  the
privilege  of  bearing  testimony  to  y  ou,
that  I  have,  through  the  blessing  of
the  Lord,  been  enabled  to  finish
or  complete  the  work  that  was  given
me  to  do,  in  relation  to  these  two
standard  works  of  our  ^Church.

Had  it  not  been  for  the  Book  of
Mormon  this  territory  would  not  be
occupied  by  a  people  called  the
Latter-day  Saints*  That  lies  at  the
foundation  of  the  work  of  the  last
days,  in  which  we  are  engaged.  All
of  ycu  are  acquainted,  if  you  have
endeavored  to  exercise  your  judg-
ment and  your  capacities  as  intelli-
gent beings,  with  the  nature  of  that


book  If  you  are  not  acquainted
with  it  you  certainly  ought  to  be.
We  all  ought  to  inform  ourselves
concerning  every  principle  that  is
contained  in  that  record.  We  ought
to  make  ourselves  very  familiar  afso,
with  the  Book  that  is  called  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
given  by  divine  revelation  in  the
generation  in  which  we  are  per-
mitted to  live.  These  two  books,  we
as  a  people,  esteem  to  be  as  sacred
as  any  other  revelations  which  were
ever  given  to  the  human  family.
We  look  upon  the  Book  of  Mormon
as  a  very  precious  record, — a
precious  blessing  to  the  people  who
live  in  this  dispensation,  a  divine
work,— a  divine  revelation*  It  has
now  been  before  the  world  almost
£0  years,  being  published  over  49
years  j  and  the  whole  world,  if  they
had  seen  proper  to  inform  them-
selves, concerning  the  nature  of  the
work,  could  have  been  blessed  with
the  privilege.  It  is  a  work  which
the  Lord  our  God  has  commenced
by  his  own  power.  The  book  was
not  written  by  the  wisdom  of  man,
by  the  inspiration  of  man,  but  it  was
written  by  the  commandment  of  the
Most  High  God.  It  was  written  as
revealed  to  a  young  man,  the
founder  of  this  Church,  under  the
divine  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.


ON  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC. ,


129


This  young  man  being  inspired  of
God,  and  having  revelations
granted  to  him  from  heaven,  had
the  privilege  of  bringing  forth
this  sacred  record  to  this  gene-
ration. The  record  was  trans-
lated, as  the  Latter-day  Saints  under*
stand,  and  as  the  world  generally
have  been  informed,  by  revelation,
by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
through  the  aid  of  an  instrument  that
was  used  anciently  and  called  the
Uriin  and  ThummitiL  The  Lord
did  not,  in  revealing  this  work  to
us,  require  us  to  receive  it  blindly
and  enthusiastically,  but  to  receive
it  on  good,  substantial,  sound  evi-
dence, such  as  we  cannot  controvert,
such  as  we  cannot  contradict — evi-
dence that  no  reasonable  person,
having  the  common  reasoning  facul-
ties of  man,  can  consistently  reject.
The  Lord  did  not  raise  up  this
Church  —  did  not  commence  its
foundation,  until  he  revealed  this
Book  ;  and  in  the  revelation  of  this
Book,  he  fulfilled  many  predictions,
made  in  ancient  days,  by  the  mouth
of  the  Jewish  prophets,  and  also  the
apostles  that  succeeded  the  Jewish
prophets.  They  spake  as  they  were
moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;
and  they  predicted  that  such  a  work
would  come  forth  in  the  latter  times ;
and  if  this  is  not  the  work,  as  the
world  say  it  is  not,  then  we  are  to
look  forward  to  the  day  when  a
similar  work  will  be  brought  forth
by  the  power  of  Almighty  God ;
for  the  events  predicted  by  the  mouth
of  the  prophets,  recorded  in  the
Jewish  Bible,  never  can  be  fulfilled,
never  can  be  brought  to  pass,  unless
a  work  of  a  similar  description,  to
the  one  that  has  been  presented  to
the  people  of  the  nineteenth  century
shall  come  forth.

The  Book  of  Mormon,  we  say,  is
just  as  sacred  as  the  Bible — the  Old
and  New  Testaments. We  cannot
No.  9.


I  see  any  reason  why  we  should  ex-
clude all  other  books  from  the  com*
piled  books  of  the  Jewish  Bible.  We
have  nothing  in  the  compiled  works
of  the  Bible  (King  James'  transla-
tion), we  have  no  declarations  in  this
Book,  that  the  canon  of  Scripture
should  be  full  at  the  close  of  the
fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era.
We  have  no  declarations  in  this
Book,  that  about  400  years  after
Christ  there  should  be  a  church  or
people  on  the  earth  that  should
collect  together  manuscript  books
ami  call  them  the  Bible,  and  that
that  should  be  a  complete  revelation
of  t  tod's  will  ;  or  that  there  wsre  no
other  sacred  books  in  existence,  only
what  the  Catholic  church,  at  the
close  of  the  fourth  century,  happen-
ed to  collect  together.

We  believe  that  God  is  the  God
of  all  nations,  as  well  as  the  God  of
the  Jews,  We  believe  that  he  did
not  confine  his  divine  power  and  the
inspiration  of  his  Spirit  to  one  little
spot  of  our  globe  ;  although  he  did
work  wonderfully,  and  in  a  marvel-
ous manner,  in  the  land  of  Palestine
!  among  the  Jews,  and  did  shew  forth
his  power  by  raising  up  prophets,
and  revelators,  and  apostles.  Yet
we  caunot,  in  our  views,  limit  the
Almighty,  as  the  Christian  nations
do,  and  say  that  he  has  never  spoken
to  any  other  people.  We  cannot,
with  the  intelligence  and  light  that
God  has  given  to  us,  say  that  the
Bible  is  the  only  revelation  of  God
to  man.  We  believe  that  he  made
all  nations,  and  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth.  We  believe  that  he
had  as  much  regard  for  the  ten
tribes,  after  they  revolted  from  the
house  of  Judah  and  separated  them-
selves into  a  distinct  nation — when
they  wrought  righteousness,  as  he
had  for  the  Jews  who  dwelt  in  Jeru-
salem, and  in  the  vicinity  of  that
great  capital  city. Indeed  the  Lord

Vol  XXL


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


has  shown  to  us  that  he  was  no
respecter  of  persons.  So  far  as  the
ten  tribes  were  concerned,  he  had
revealed  himself  to  them.  Some  of
the  greatest  prophets  that  were
raised  up  in  days  of  old,  before  the
coming  of  the  Messiah,  were  pro-
phets that  lived  amjng  the  ten
tribes,  who  were  not  Jews :  not
included  in  the  home  of  Judah,  or
the  two  years  and  a  half.  For
instance,  Elijah,  who  had  such  great
power  given  him  from  Goil,  that  he
could  call  upon  His  name  and  the
heavens  would  be  shut  up  so  that
there  wo  aid  be  no  rain  fall  upon  the
earth,  according  to  his  prayer,  for
three  and  a  half  years.  A  man  with
such  faith,  that  after  three  and  a
half  years  of  great  famine,  he  prayed
for  the  Lord  to  send  rain,  and  rain
was  given  immediately.  A  man
with  such  power  that  when  a  captain
of  fifty  with  his  fifty  came  to  take
him— who  mockingly  called  him  a
man  of  God — he  said  to  the  captain,
"  If  I  be  a  man  of  God,  let  fire  come
down  from  heaven  and  consume  thee
and  thy  fifty,"  and  it  was  done,
according  to  his  word.  He  was  not
a  J  ewish  prophet ;  he  was  a  ^prophet
of  the  ten  tribes.  A  man  also  that
had  such  great  faith  in  God,  that  he
was  taken  away  from  the  earth,  in
a  chariot  of  fire,  and  wafted  to  the
abodes  of  immortality,  among  the
immortal  beings.  Here  then  was  a
prophet  raised  up  among  another
branch  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Here
was  also  Elisha,  another  prophet,  not
•f  the  Jews  but  of  the  ten  tribes.
Were  not  their  revelations  just  as
sacred  as  the  revelations  of  the  pro-
phets of  Judah?  They  certainly
were ;  and  were  incorporated  in  the
Jewish  Bible.  Were  there  any  other
branches  of  Israel  besides  those  ten
tribes,  who  dwelt  in  the  northern
parts  of  the  Land  of  Palestine,  and
the  Jews  1 Yes,  we  read  in  various


parts  of  this  Bible,  that  many  of  the
house  of  Israel  were  taken  away
from  the  main  body  who  dwelt  in
Palestine,  and  scattered  to  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.  Did  God  for-
get them  and  their  generations  after
them,  after  they  were  thus  scattered!
I  think  not  He  did  not  forget
them  ;  and  in  the  days  of  their
righteousness,  he  revealed  him  sell  to
them  and  to  his  prophets.  And  this
great  and  choice  American  continent
was  once  peopled  by  the  seed  of
Israel,  not  the  ten  tribes  or  Jewish
nation  especially,  but  a  small  rem-
nant  of  one  tribe,  namely  the  des~
cendants  of  Joseph  who  was  carried
into  Egypt.  These  American  In*
dians  scattered  over  this  great  conti-
nent of  ours,  are  the  literal  descend-
ants of  the  chosen  seed.  Now,  do
you  suppose  that  the  Almighty,  who
desires  the  salvation  of  the  children
of  men,  would  take  a  company,  how-
ever great  or  small  it  might  be,  and
locate  them  upon  such  a  great  and
vast  continent  as  ours,  and  leave
them  without  any  guidance  by  reve-
lation from  himl — leave  them  from
generation  to  generation  without
prophets  and  without  revelators !
Such  an  event  is  inconsistent  to  my
mind,  God,  who  is  no  respecter  of
persons,  who  loves  all  people  of  all
nations,  of  all  kindreds  and  tongues,
surely  would  not  thus  lead  away  the
chosen  seed,  and  plant  them  upon
such  a  vast  continent  as  ours  and
obscure  or  withdraw  himself,  leaving
them  in  total  ignorance,  without  any
revelation  from  heaven.  What  is
the  Book  of  Mormon  I  It  is  their
record,  their  Bible,  their  revelations,
their  predictions,  their  doctrines*
their  manifestations  and  visions,  and
their  history,  the  same  as  the  Bible
is  the  record  and  history  of  the  Jews.
Why  then  should  it  be  thought
inconsistent  with  the  character  t  of
God  that  he  should  bring  fortk


records,  so  sacred,  so  great,  so
important  to  join  with  the  testimony
of  the  Jewish  record  that  the
nations  of  the  last  days  might  have
the  testimony  of  two  hemispheres
that  God  is  the  same  God,  that  his
doctrines  are  everlasting,  the  same
unchangeable  Gospel  and  plan  of
salvation,  and  that  his  people  Israel
were  as  precious  to  him  on  the
western  hemisphere  as  they  were  on
the  eastern,  and  that  the  great
atonement  which  we  are  now  cele-
brating in  this  house,  should  not  be
shut  out  from  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple in  the  western  hemisphere  ?  Is
it  consistent  that  this  should  be  the
case  1  There  is  not  a  man  living,
who  will  free  himself  from  the  tra-
ditions of  false  doctrines  that  have
prevailed  for  many  generations,  but
what  will  say  it  is  godlike,  it  is  con-
sistent with  the  character  of  the
Almighty  to  reveal  himself  to  the
western  hemisphere  as  well  as  to  the
great  eastern  hemisphere,  and  if  he
did  this  would  there  be  anything
inconsistent  that  these  records  should
be  brought  to  light  in  the  last  days'?
Is  God  limited  in  his  power?  I  ap-
peal to  the  whole  of  Christendom,
do  we  as  Christians  believe  in  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  in  his  Father,
as  being  limited  in  their  power,  and
that  people  should  be  left  without
divine  knowledge,  without  informa-
tion from  heaven,  when  it  is  so
easy  for  them  to  reveal  1  Is  not  the
knowledge  of  God  to  cover  the  earth,
according  to  the  prediction  of  Isaiah
the  prophet,  as  the  waters  cover
the  great  deep,  before  the  end  shall
come  1  Are  not  many,  in  the  last
days,  to  iuu  to  and  fro,  and  know-
ledge be  increased,  and  when  I  speak
of  knowledge  I  mean  that  know-
ledge  which  is  of  God,  the  know-
ledge revealed  from  heaven,  concern-
ing the  great  plan  of  salvation.  It
is  reasonable,  it  is  consistent,  it  is  in


accordance  with  the  Jewish  Bible,
that  God  should  reveal  himself  and
the  plan  of  salvation  to  the  people  of
the  latter  days,  that  the  knowledge
of  God  may  truly  cover  the  earth  as
the  waters  cover  the  great  deep-
In  revealing  this  additional  know-
ledge, will  it  do  any  harm]  Is
there  any  church  on  the  face  of  the
whole  earth  that  is  in  the  least
degree  harmed  by  the  additional
revelations  sent  from  heaven]  I
think  not.  What  harm  h  there  in
the  Lord's  making  manifest  to  the
people  in  this  western  hemisphere,
that  the  same  Gospel  was  preached
to  the  inhabitants  of  this  land  as
was  preached  to  the  Jews  and  the
people  of  the  eastern  continent  in
ancient  days]  Who  is  harmed
among  all  the  religious  denomina-
tions of  Christendom,  the  four  hun-
dred millions  of  Christians,  so  called,
by  the  addition  of  further  revelation !
Did  it  harm  any  of  the  branches  of
the  church  that  were  anciently
Christian,  after  they  had  the  Book
of  Matthew  revealed  to  them,  to  be
permitted  to  have  a  testimony  from
another  inspired  man,  called  the
Book  of  Mark  I  I  think  there  was
no  harm  in  Mark's  writing  his
Gospel,  after  Matthew  had  written
his.  It  did  no  harm  to  the  ancient
Christians  that  Luke  should  write
his  testimony  of  the  Gospel ;  that
John  should  write  his,  that  John
should  be  permitted  to  receive  a
great  prophecy  and  revelation  on  the
isle  of  Patraos.  Did  that  close
revelation  from  God  I  No,  because
we  find  that  the  Lord  inspired  John
to  write  his  testimony  of  the  Gospel,
showing  that  the  canon  of  Scripture
was  not  closed  up  when  John  left  Pat-
mos.  What  harm  is  there  for  another
nation  to  know  about  the  Prophet  Mo-
ses, the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the
atonement  that  he  made  by  his  oira
suffering  and  death  1 Would  it  not


132


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


be  a  privilege  and  blessing  for  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  America  to
be  informed  concerning  the  only
way  by  which  they  could  be  saved
in  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  The  Book
of  Mormon  records  the  fact  that
Jesus  did  appear  on  this  American
continent,  after  his  resurrection
from  the  dead  ;  that  he  did  admini-
ster in  person,  in  his  immortal  body,
after  his  resurrection,  for  several
days,  in  the  midst  of  this  remnant
of  Israel,  the  forefathers  of  these
American  Indiana.  What  Gospel
did  he  teach  ?  Did  he  teach  one
Gospel  in  Asia  and  another  in
ancient  America  ?  No,  If  the  same
Gospel  then  is  taught,  who  is
harmed  among  the  four  hundred
millions  of  Christians,  by  having  the
information  concerning  it  ]  It  seems
to  me  as  if  I  could  imagine  the  feel-
ing of  the  strangers  that  may  be
present  this  afternoon.  I  can
imagine  some  one  saying,  "  Oh,  it
would  be  a  very  beautiful  theory,  if
we  could  only  believe  it ;  if  we  only
had  testimony  sufficient  to  believe
what  you  Latter-day  Saints  declare,
that  the  Book  of  Mormon  is  actually
a  divine  revelation  of  the  Gospel  as
it  was  preached  in  ancient  America ;
if  we  knew  this  fact  we  could  not
denounce  it  as  something  that  was
calculated  in  its  nature  to  destroy
the  peace  and  happiness  ot  Christen-
dom, but  we  should  consider  it  a
great  Wearing  to  the  human  family
if  we  only  had  the  evidence  and  tes-
timony that  the  facts  are  as  you
state  them/1  Now  I  expect  these
thoughts  are  running  through  the
minds  of  some  individuals  here.
Well,  now,  what  must  be  the
evidence?  What  would  you
naturally  suppose  would  be  the  kind
of  evidence  that  the  Lord  Almighty
would  give  to  substantiate  the
divinity  of  a  book  that  is  almost
two-thirds  as  voluminous  as  the


Jewish  Bible?  Can  you  imagine
any  testimony  that  ought  to  be  given
to  convince  the  children  of  men?
"  Well,"  says  one,  "if  we  could  only
have  it  confirmed  by  the  ministration
of  angels,  that  would  be  an  evidence*
a  great  evidence  or  testimony/'
The  inhabitants  of  this  generation,
for  nearly  fifty  years,  have  had  the
testimony  of  three  men,  besides  the
boy  that  translated  the  Bock  of
Mormon — the  testimony  of  three
witnesses.  The  Lord  would  not
suffer  his  Church  to  be  organized,
would  not  suffer  his  sen  ants  to  build
up  this  kingdom  on  the  earth — this
ecclesiastical  kingdom,  until  he  gave
sufficient  evidence  unto  three  chosen
witnesses,  as  well  as  the  boy  that
translated  the  work.  Their  testi-
mony is  given,  in  connection  with
the  book,  and  there  is  no  man  living
that  can  contradict  their  testimony
or  can  prove  it  to  be  untrue.  The
witnesses  themselves  have  never
denied  their  testimony ;  and  not
only  three  other  witnesses  who  saw
the  angel,  heard  the  words  of  his
mouth,  saw  the  glory  of  his  coun-
tenance, and  saw  the  plates — -the
original  plates  from  which  the  Book
of  Mormon  was  translated,  but  also
eight  other  witnesses  who  saw  tht
plates,  but  did  not  see  the  angel ;
they  saw  the  plates  at  an  other  time;
saw  the  engravings  upon  the  plates,
handled  them  with  their  hands,  and
have  recorded  their  testimony.
Hence  we  have  the  testimony  of  the
young  man  that  was  called  by  the
angel  to  translate  and  bring  forth
the  book,  and  then  the  testimony  of
eleven  other  witnesses  besides*  In
the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses,
we  are  told  in  the  Jewish  record,
every  word  shall  be  established.
But  God  saw  fit  to  give  twelve
witnesses  before  the  Church  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  ever  had  an  exist-
ence on  this  earth. That  certainly


ON  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC.


133


ought  to  he  sufficient  to  begin  the
work  with,  to  begin  to  enlighten
the  minds  of  the  children  of  men,
concerning  what  God  was  about  to
do  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  But
are  we  confined  to  these  twelve  men
and  their  testimony  J  Are  there  no
other  means  by  which  we  may  for
ourselves  come  to  a  knowledge  that
this  work  is  divine  1  I  will  tell  you
how  the  Lord  has  provided  in  a  god-
like  manner,  -just  as  we  would
naturally  expect  he  would  do—  that
the  children  of  men,  however  weak,
frail,  and  imperfect  in  their  judg-
ment, if  they  have  the  common
sense  and  corn  man  at  tainments  that
the  children  of  men  generally  have,
may  not  only  have  a  faith  concern-
ing the  truth  of  this  work,  founded
on  the  evidence  of  others,  but  also
a  knowledge  for  themselves.  And
how  is  this  !  How  can  people  get
a  real  knowledge  that  this  Book  is
divine  ]  Hays  one  ;  "  I  should  like
to  embrace  it,  but  then  you  are  so
unpopular.  Btill  if  I  knew  it  to  be
true/*  perhaps  some  stranger  may
say  in  his  heart,  4£  if  I  knew  that
God  was  the  author  of  it,  I  would
not  mind  anything  about  the  con-
tumely, or  anything  about  the
unpopularity  of  the  people  called
Latter-day  Saints."  There  is  a  way
to  know  whether  this  work  be  true,
if  you  will  follow  the  conditions.
And  what  are  the  conditions  that
God  has  pointed  out,  by  which  we
may  receive  a  knowledge  now  as
well  as  they  received  a  knowledge
in  ancient  times,  concerning  similar
doctrines  and  principles  1  It  is  by
obedience  to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  The  Lord,  before  he
suffered  this  Church  to  be  organized
gave  authority  to  his  servants  to
preach  the  Gospel  and  to  organize
his  kingdom  on  the  earth  in  fulfil-
ment ot  the  ancient  prophecies.  In
connection  with  this  authority,  lie


gave  them  authority  to  administer
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  to  those
that  would  repent  of  their  sins  and
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
He  gave  them  not  only  power  and
authority  to  baptize— that  is  divine
authority  to  baptize—for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  but  also  to  lay  their
hands  upon  the  heads  of  baptized
believers  and  pronounce  upon  them
the  blessings  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as
they  did  in  ancient  days.  This  was
placing  the  people  of  this  generation
in  a  condition  to  prove  whether  this
work  was  divine  or  not  The  elders
were  sent  forth  in  the  early  rise  of
this  Church,  saying  unto  the  people,
*'  If  you  will  repent  of  your  sins —
if  you  will  turn  from  every  tiling  that
is  evil,  if  you  will  with  all  your
hearts  enter  into  a  covenant  with
the  Almighty  to  obey  the  Lord  of
righteousness,  to  keep  his  command-
ments, to  do  right  all  your  future
days,  and  will  be  baptized  by  the
authority  that  God  has  given  from
heaven,  and  also  be  confirmed  by
the  laying  on  of  hands,  God  will
give  you  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by
this  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  you
shall  know  that  the  Book  of  Mormon
is  a  divine  revelation,  and  that  this
is  the  Church  and  the  kingdom  of
the  living  God.1'  Very  many  honest
hearted  people  in  the  American
Union,  in  the  nat  ion  of  Great  Britain,
in  the  various  nations  of  Europe,
and  upon  the  islands  of  the  Sea,

,  have  tested  the  truth  of  this  com-
mandment of  God  given  unto
his  servant  in  the  first  rise  and
beginning  of  this  Church.  Did
they  receive the Holy  Ghost?

i  They  testify  that  they  did.  They
say,  that  *  by  obeying  that  message
which  you  brought  to  us,  which  you

i  testified  that  God  had  sent  you  to
preach,  the  promises  you  made  to
us  are  fulfilled.  You  stated  that  we
should receive  the  Holy  Ghost.


134  JOURNAL  OF

We  have  received  it  because  we  have
humbled  ourselves  before  God.  We
have  been  baptized  by  you.  You
stated  you  held  authority.  We
believed  it  from  testimony  that  you
gave  us,  that  such  was  the  case,  but
we  did  not  know  it.  We  went  forth
and  acted  upon  our  faith,  and  now
we  can  testify  we  know  you  are  the
servants  of  God  ;  for  God  has  ful-
filled the  promise  which  he  has  given
to  us  through  your  word "  Thus
scores  of  thousands  have  proved  the
divinity  of  this  work.  You  marvel
that  this  people  are  so  well  united.
You  marvel  that  we  come  out  from
the  nations  of  the  earth  and
assemble  ourselves  in  one.  You
marvel  what  it  is  that  prompts  this
people  called  Latter-day  Saints  to
come  from  the  lands  of  their  fore-
fathers, from  the  islands  of  the  Sea,
from  distant  nations,  and  assemble
themselves  here  in  this  great  basin
of  North  America.  It  is  not  man
that  has  accomplished  this  work.
It  is  because  you  have  received  the
Holy  Ghost  that  you  are  here  in
these  valleys.  It  is  because  God
witnessed  unto  you  in  your  own
lands,  before  you  started  upon*  your
journey  that  he  had  again  spoken  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  as  in
ancient  days.  You  there  learned
that  this  was  his  true  Church,  his
true  kingdom  established  upon  the
earth  as  lie  predicted  by  the  mouth
•f  his  servants,  and  you  felt  anxious
to  be  gathered  with  the  rest  of  the
Saints  that  had  the  same  testimony
with  you.  Hence  you  gather  not  |
only  from  choice,  but  by  actual  com-
mandment  We  do  not  gather  here
merely  for  the  sake  of  being  toge-
ther, but  it  is  because  the  same  God
who  revealed  the  Book  of  Mormon
Vy  his  servant  Joseph,  the  youth  of
whom  I  have  spoken — that  same
boy  received  another  revelations
Which  is  published  in  the  Book  of


DISCOURSES.

Doctrine  and  Covenants,  which  I
now  hold  in  my  hand,  commanding
the  Latter-day  Saints  to  gather  out
of  all  nations  of  the  earth,  to  this
American  continent.  Hence  you
came  here  because  you  had  received
the  Holy  Ghost  You  have  come
here  because  you  knew  this  work
was  true.  You  have  come  here  that
you  might  fulfil  the  commandment
which  God  gave  near  the  time  of  the
rise  of  this  Church  in  relation  to
the  gathering  of  his  Saints  from
among  all  the  nations  and  kingdoms
of  the  earth.  Has  God  fulfilled  that
which  he  spoke  when  we  were  but  a
little  handful  of  people,  not  number-
ing one  hundred  souls  ?  He  told
us  that  his  people  should  be
gathered  from  all  quarters  of  the
earth  into  one  place  upon  the  face
of  this  great  continent.  Has  he  ful-
filled it  J  The  testimony  is  before
the  eyes  not  only  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  but  the  eyes  of  all  people,
nations  and  tongues,  and  among  the
most  distant  nations  of  the  earth
concerning  the  gathering  of  the  peo-
ple called  Latter-day  Saints,  God
has  fulfilled  his  word — this  word,
which  was  given  nearly  fifty  years
ago,  as  to  the  gathering  of  his  people
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.
Now  this  great  work  of  the  last  days
never  could  be  accomplished  with-
out this  gathering  together  of  the
Saints.  There  are  no  other  people
fulfilling  it.  For  instance,  take  the
Iloman  Catholics ;  they  were  not
gathering  from  all  parts  of  the  earth.
Take  the  Greek  Church  ;  they  do
not  come  out  from  the  nations  from
which  they  receive  their  doctrine*
Take  all  the  Protestant  denomina-
tions, and  who  among  them  all  are
assembling  themselves  together  in
one  ]  If  they  should  issue  a  procla-
mation by  human  wisdom  and  by
human  commandment,  requiring
their  members  to  gather  together.


ON  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC


135


they  could  not  accomplish  it.  Why?  I
Because  there  is  not  enough  unity
amongst  them  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  has
not  been  given  to  them  in  its  ful-
ness, as  given  to  the  ancient  Saints ;
hence  t  hey  could  not  gather  the  peo-
ple together.  But  the  Lord  has
done  it  through  this  people.  And
what  will  he  yet  dol  Permit  me  to
prophecy,  not  in  my  own  name  nor
by  my  own  wisdom,  but  on  the
strength  of  that  which  God  has
revealed  to  this  Church  since  the
year  1830,  and  that  also  which  is
given  in  the  Book  of  Mormon — I
prophesy  that  this  is  only  just  the  ;
beginning,  as  it  were  of  the  great
work  of  the  gathering  of  the  Latter-  !
day  Saints.

[t  would  say  that  some  of  our
friends  that  have  called  in  this  after-
noon are  obliged,  in  consequence  of
the  cars  leaving,  to  retire.  May  the
Lord  bless  them,  pour  out  his  Spirit
upon  them,  may  he  manifest  the
truth  unto  them  that  they  may  be
be  blessed  in  common  with  all  those
who  keep  the  commandments  of
God.]  j

The  Lord  our  God  has  therefore
fulfilled  that  which  he  spoke  ;  and
as  1  said  this  work,  instead  of  being
nearly  accomplished,  nearly  fulfilled,
and  all  things  brought  about  accord-
ing to  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,
only  the  foundation,  as  it  were,  is
now  laid,  and  instead  of  being
gathered  in  a  little  company  of
150,000,  by  and  bye  we  shall  be
gathered  in  hundred  of  thousands
and  even  millions.  Now,  do  you
believe  it  t  I  not  only  believe  it
but  know  it  will  come  to  pass  just
as  much  as  a  great  many  other
things  which  have  already  been  ful-
filled since  the  promises  were  uttered
and  published  in  this  book.  I  knew
they  would  come  to  pass,  for  God
has  revealed  these  things  to  me,  and
given  nie  a  knowledge  of  them,  and


I  I  also  know  concerning  the  future  of
this  people,  as  also  do  a  great
many  of  our  brethren  that  have
received  testimonies  concerning
these  matters.  Is  God  limited  t*
this  little  narrow  spot,  called  the
great  basin  of  North  America?
Why,  no.  It  is  only  for  the  present,
for  the  time  being  that  we  dwell
here.  Where  will  we  dwell  in  the
future!  What  is  our  future  destiny  ?
It  is  not  on  the  Sandwich  Islands,  it
'is  not  in  New  Zealand,  it  is  not  in
Australia,  it  is  not  in  any  of  the
islands  of  the  sea,  but  I  will  tell  you
the  future  destiny  of  this  people  in
a  very  few  words.  Not  many  years
hence — 1  do  not  say  the  number  of
years — you  will  look  forth  to  the
western  counties  of  the  State  of
Missouri,  and  to  the  eastern  coun-
ties of  the  State  of  Kansas,  and  in
all  that  region  round  about  you  will
see  a  thickly  populated  country,
inhabited  by  a  peaceful  people,
having  their  orchards,  their  fruit
trees,  their  fields  of  grain,  their
beautiful  houses  and  shade  trees,
their  cities  and  towns  and  villages.
And  you  may  ask — Who  are  all
these  people  1  And  the  answer  will
be — Latter-day  Saints  !  Where  have
they  came  from  ?  They  have  come
from  the  nations  of  the  earth !
They  have  come  from  the  mountains
of  Utah,  from  Arizona,  from  Idaho,
and  from  the  mountainous  territories
of  the  North  American  Continent,
they  have  come  down  here,  and  are
quietly  cultivating  the  lands  of  these
States  !  Now,  this  will  all  come  to
pass,  just  as  sure  to  come  to  pass  as
there  is  a  God  that  reigns  in  yonder
heavens,  and  not  many  years  hence
either.  Thus  you  see  that  for  some
|  time  to  come,  our  future  destiny  is
not  to  build  up  this  kingdom  upon
any  of  the  islands  of  the  sea,  but  to
be  located  where  God  has  decreed,
by  his  own  power  that  his  people


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


shall  dwell  "Oh,  but,"  says  one,
"you  have  to  get  the  laud  first"
But  I  would  ask  is  there  any  break-
ing of  the  Constitution,— is  there
anything  calculated  to  take  away
the  rights  of  American  citizenship
by  emigrants  going  from  one  part  of
this  nation  to  another,  peacefully
and  quietly,  purchasing  the  land  and
locating  upon  it?  I  think  not.
"  But/'  says  one,  "  perhaps  they  will
not  allow  you  to  purchase  the  land/'
The  Lord  will  take  care  of  that;  that
is  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  That
same  being  who  will  assist  in  the
building  of  a  great  city  on  the  west-
ern boundaries  of  the  State  of  Mis-
souri, has  all  power  ;  and  when  we
purchase  the  land,  ami  go  and  take
possession  of  it,  I  do  not  think  we
will  be  driven  from  our  own  lands,  if
we  mind  our  own  business  and  do
not  meddle  with  our  neighbors1  busi- 1
ness,  and  do  not  undertake  to  injure
them  in  their  rights  and  privileges,
guaranteed  to  them  by  the  Constitu-
tion of  our  country.  If  we  conduct
ourselves  in  a  peaceable  manner,  I  do
not  see  why  we  may  not  dwell  there
as  well  as  other  citizens.  We  have
the  strongest  assurance  that  such
will  be  the  case.  These  were  pro-
mises made  to  us,  before  there  were
a  hundred  persons  in  this  Church.
It  was  promised  that  we  should
have  a  land  as  an  inherit  age  ;  but
we  were  commanded  of  God,  to  pur-
chase the  land,  Now,  when  the  !
time  comes  for  purchasing  this  land,
we  will  have  means.  How  this
means  will  be  brought  about  it  is


not  for  me  to  say. Perhaps  the
Lord  will  open  up  mines  containing
gold  and  silver,  or  in  some  other
way  as  seemeth  to  him  best,  wealth
will  be  poured  into  the  laps  of  the
Latter-day Saints till they  will
scarcely  know  what  to  do  with  it.
I  will  here  again  prophesy  on  the
strength  of  former  i evolution  that
there  are  no  people  on  the  face  of
the  whole  globe,  not  even  excepting
London,  Paris,  New  York,  or  any  of
the  great  mercantile  cities  of  the  j
globe  -there are no people  now
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  so  rich  as  I
the  Latter-da v  Saints  will  bo  in  a
few  years  to  come. Having  their
m  i  1 1  i  on  s  ;  therefore  th ey  will  j  n  1  r~
chase  the  land,  build  up  cities,  towns  j
and  villages,  build  a  great  capital
city;  at  headquarters,  in  Jackson
County,  Missouri. Will  we  have  a
temple  there  ? Yes  ;  will  we  have  a  j
beautiful  city? Yes, one of  the  I
most  beautiful  cities  that  will  ever
be  erected  on the  continent  of  j
America  will  be  built  up  by  the  j
Latter-day  Saints  in  Jackson  County,
Missouri. Consequently,  when
congressmen  and  statesmen,  and  the
great  men  of  our  nation,  want  to
know  what  the  future  destiny  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  will  be,  let  them  |
remember  the  words  of  your  humble
servant,  who  has  addressed  you  this  j
afternoon ;  for  they  will  come  to
pass— they  will  be  fulfilled.  We
have  seen  too  many  revelations  ful-
filled, already,  to  be  mistaken  in
regard  to  these  matters. Amen.  1


DIFFERENCES  BETWEEN,  ETC,  137


DISCOURSE BY ELDER C. W.  PENROSE,


Delivered  in  the  Salt  Lake  Assembly  Hall,  Sunday  Afternoon,

April  11th,  1880,


(Jiepminl  h;i  John  Irvine.)


difference  between  the  latter  day  saints  and  all  other

professing  christians.


I  am  thankful  to-day  for  this
opportunity  of  meeting  with  my
brethren  and  sisters  in  this  fine
hall  to  worship  God  ami  spend  a
little  time  in  reflecting  upon  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  I  am  thankful  also  for
this  opportunity  of  bearing  my  testi-
mony to  the  truth  of  the  work  in
which  we  are  engaged,  I  trust  that
during  the  short  time  I  shall  stand
before  you  I  may  be  lead  by  the
Holy  Spirit  to  say  something  which
will  edify  and  instruct  the  people.

It  was  remarked  by  Brother  N,
HL  Felt,  who  has  just  addressed  ust
that  it  would  be  a  difficult  matter  to
answer  the  question — wherein  do
the  Latter-day  Saints, or  "Mormons,"
differ  in  their  views  from  the  rest
of  the  people  who  profess  the  Chris-
tian religion.  True  this  would  be  a
difficult  question  to  answer  in  a  few
minutes  satisfactorily.  There  are  a
great  many  points  of  difference  be-
tween our  doctrines  and  the  doc-
trines of  the  so-called  Christian
world,  but  if  I  were  to  attempt  to
answer  the  question  in  brief  I  would
say  the  chief  difference  consists  in
tins  : — That  the  religion  which  we
have  received  lias  come  down  from
God  out  of  heaven  direct,  by  revela-
tion, in  the  day  and  age  in  which


we  live,  while  the  religions  which
are  believed  in  by  the  various  Chris
tian  denominations  who  meet  to-day
in  different  parts  of  the  world  to
worship  God,  most  of  which  have
been  in  existence  for  a  long  time
have  been  in  every  case  arranged  by
men.  The  people  who  belong  to
the  various  Christian  sects  all  pro-
fess to  believe  in  one  Book — the
Bible,  and  in  one  (Sod  ;  but  their
ideas  in  regard  to  religion  and  in
regard  to  the  manner  in  which  God
shall  be  worshipped  and  served  are
very  different,  and  when  we  trace  up
the  origin  of  their  religion  we  find
that  in  every  case,  with  perhaps  one
exception,  they  have  been  started  by
men  ;  by  individuals  who,  no  doubt,
in  the  first  place,  believed  they  were
enlightened  of  God  and  had  come  to
the  conclusion  that  such  and  such
doctrines  were  the  doctrines  of
Christ,  and  that  it  was  their  duty  to
preach  these  doctrines.  They  con-
vinced others  of  the  truth  of  the
ideas  which  they  had  adopted,  ami
together  they  formed  a  religious
society,  Now,  we  shall  find  that
this  is  the  case  with  all  those  differ-
ent sects  and  parties,  that  compose
modern  Christendom  with  the  ex-
ception perhaps  of  the  Church  which
is  called  the  Church  of  Rome,  the


138


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Roman  Catholic  church.  That
church  professes  to  be  a  continuation
of  the  Church  which  Jesus  Christ
established.  It  professes  to  have
the  same  authority,  handed  down
from  generation  to  generation,  which
was  exercised  by  the  ancient  apos-
tles. It  professes  to  have  the  kevs
that  Peter  held.  The  Pope  of  Home
professes  to  be  the  successor  of  St
Peter,  and  the  priesthood  of  the
church  of  Rome  profess  to  have  the
same  authority,  or  similar  authority,
or  a  succession  of  the  authority,
which  was  held  in  the  primitive
Christian  Church.  They  say  there
has  been  no  interruption  o!  this  line
of  priesthood  in  the  church  which
Jesus  Christ  established,  to  build  up
which  the  ancient  apostles  lost  their
lives — that  this  priesthood  has  been
continued  down  through  the  stream
oi  time  to  our  own  period.  All  the
rest  of  the  denominations  called
Christia?i  have  sprung  from  that
body  directly  or  indirectly,  and
their  organization  was  started  in  the
way  that  I  have  briefly  described.

You  see  then  there  is  a  great  dif-
ference between  our  professions  and
the  professions  of  all  the  rest  of  the
Christian  world  in  this  particular.
We  testify  that  in  the  day  and  age
in  which  we  live,  God,  who  spoke  in
ancient  times  to  the  prophets,  and
in  the  meridian  of  time  by  his  Only
Begotten  Son,  has  uttered  his  voice
again  out  of  heaven ;  that  Jesus
who  died  on  Calvary,  that  we  might
live,  lias  manifested  himself  in  this
day  and  age  of  the  world  ;  that  the
angels  of  God7  who  were  men  that
ministered  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
in  the  flesh,  in  times  of  old,  who
died  in  the  truth  and  live  in  God,
have  come  to  the  earth  in  this  age
of  the  world  and  revealed  the  things
of  God  ;  and  that  this  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints
has  been  organized,  not  by  the  wis-


dom of  man,  not  by  persons  who
have  reflected  and  studied  and  come
to  certain  conclusions  in  their  own
minds  and  then  founded  a  church,
but  that  it  has  been  organized  and
established  and  carried  on  and  direc-
ted under  the  immediate  revelations
of  the  Must  High  God.  You  see
this  is  quite  a  difference.  There  is
quite  a  distinction  between  us  and
all  the  rest  of  the  people  called
Christians.  I  do  not  know,  how-
ever, whether  the  great  body  of  peo-
ple called  Christians  will  allow  us  to
adopt  that  name.  They  dispute  our
right  to  the  title  of  Christians.  They
call  us  "Mormons" — rather  a  foolish
title  to  give  us.  Mormon  is  the
name  of  a  man,  a  servant  of  God,  a
prophet  of  the  Most  High,  who
lived  anciently  on  tins  continent
and  wrote  some  of  the  things  re-
vealed to  him  in  a  book  called  the
Rook  of  Mormon  ;  and  because  we
believe  in  that  book,  our  "  Chris-
tian" friends  call  us  "  Mormons."
We  might  just  as  well  call  them
Peters,  because  they  believe  in
Peter  ;  we  might  just  as  well  call
them  Pauls,  Jeremiahs,  Isaiahs,  or
Lukes,  because  they  believe  in  the
sayings  of  these  men  written  in  the
book  called  the  Bible.

But  the  stranger  might  say,  ^  It
is  very  well  for  you  to  make  such  a
statement  as  you  have  made,  that
your  Church  has  been  organized  by
the  commandment  of  God  and  by
divine  revelation  from  him  in  the
present  day,  but  how  can  you  prove
that  to  the  world  f  There  is  a  very
simple  way  by  which  this  can  be
found  out,  by  which  the  truth  or
falsity  of  what  I  have  said  can  be
established.  The  people  who  live
here  in  Utah,  who  have  been  gather-
ed here  from  a  great  many  different
parts  of  the  earth,  are  here  because
they  know  that  what  I  have  spoken
of  this  afternoon  is  true. This  is


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN,  ETC.


139


what  brought  them  here.  They
have  not  come  up  to  the  heights  of
these  mountains  to  dig  for  gold  or
silver,  to  make  themselves  rich  with
the  fruits  and  products  of  the  earth,
or  to  unite  together  to  establish  some
socialistic  system  for  the  mere  better*
ing  of  their  temporal  circumstances.
They  have  come  here  from  the  east,
from  the  west,  from  the  north  and
from  the  south,  from  the  different
continents  and  from  the  islands  of  the
sea,  because  in  their  own  souls  they
have  received  a  testimony  similar
to  that  which  I  have  borne  this
afternoon.  They  have  investigated
the  subject;  they  took  the  course
pointed  out  to  them  by  which  they
could  find  out  the  truth  or  falsity  of
this  work  for  themselves,  and  having
received  a  testimony  that  it  is  true
they  have  come  up  here  to  these
mountains ;  they  have  left  their
homes  in  various  land?,  they  have
turned  their  backs  on  their  former  >
homes  and  relationships,  broken  up  ■
their  business  affairs,  many  of  them  '
having  left  friends  and  family  and
have  come  up  here  to  these  moun-
tains that  they  may  learn  more  of
this  important  work,  having  first  of
all  received  a  testimony  from  God
that  it  is  tiue.  Well,  some  one  may
say,  "  How  did  they  find  it  out  ?
Did  they  find  it  out  because  some-
body told  them?  Did  they  receive
their  testimony  from  some  other
man  or  woman  1  No ;  they  received
it  direct  from  the  Lord,  direct  from
the  heavens,  for  11  God  is  no
respector  of  persons,  but  in  every
nation  he  thatfeareth  him  and  work-
eth  righteousness  is  accepted  of
him  lie  is  just  as  willing  to  mani-
fest himself  to  an  Englishman,  an
American,  a  Scotchman,  an  Irishman,
a  Dutchman,  a  Scandinavian,  a
South  Sea  Islander  or  anybody  else,
as  to  a  Jew.  How  did  they  obtain
this  testimony  1  The  Apostle  James,


some  of  whose  writings  we  have  in
this  book  called  the  New  Testament,
told  the  people  in  his  day,  fii  If  any
of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of
God  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and
upbraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given
him,  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,
nothing  wavering.  For  he  that
wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea
driven  with  the  wind  arid  tossed.
For  let  not  that  man  think  that  he
shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord."
Now  when  the  elders  of  this  Church
went  out  with  this  testimony  that
God  had  again  spoken  from  the
heavens,  that  communication  be-
tween the  heavens  and  the  earth,
which  was  once  enjoyed  by  men  of  old
had  again  been  opened  up,  they
told  the  people  who  heard  their  words
that  if  they  would  believe  in  the  true
and  living  God,  if  they  would  believe
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Chi  ist,  if  they  would
repent  of  their  sins  and  be  baptized
!  in  water  for  the  remission  of  sins,
they  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
1  and  by  this  Spirit  they  should  ob-
tain a  testimony  direct  from  the
Almighty  to  their  own  souls,  that
God  had  in  very  deed  commenced
the  great  work  of  the  latter  days,
spoken  of  by  all  the  holy  prophets
since  the  world  began.  What  was
the  result  of  this  teaching  ?  Why,
in  every  place,  in  every  part  of  the
world,  among  any  people,  no  matter
what  their  former  customs  or  religion
might  have  been,  no  matter  what
condition  they  might  he  in,  no  matter
how  they  had  been  educated,  no
!  matter  of  what  race  they  might  be,
wherever  they  heard  the  sound  of
this  Gospel  and  obeyed  it,  they  re-
ceived a  testimony  of  the  truth  of
this  work  and  therefore  have  gather-
ed up  to  these  mountains.

This  is  my  testimony  to  this  con-
gregation this  afternoon  :  that,  hav-
ing received  this  Gospel  and  obeyed
it  in  the  way  that  I  have  pointed  out


1*0


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


I  received  a  testimony  to  my  own
soul,  from  the  Almighty,  by  which  I
have  no  longer  any  doubt  as  to  its
truth;  no  longer  to  depend  upon  the
testimony  of  man.  I  can  say  for
myself,  before  God,  before  the  hea-
venly hosts,  before  all  nations  where-
ever  I  may  be  sent,  that  1  know  this
work  is  true,  I  know  that  God
lives.  I  know  that  God  hears  and
answers  prayer.  1  know  that  Jesus
is  the  Christ,  I  know  that  angels
have  come  down  from  the  heavens
in  these  the  last  times  and  restored
the  ancient  Gospel.  I  know  that
the  holy  priesthood,  the  power  of
God,  tlit;  authority  to  administer  in
the  name  of  the  Lord,  held  by  men,
in  ancient  times,  has  been  restored
to  men  in  these  the  latter  days,  and
that  it  is  here  upon  the  earth,  never
to  be  taken  away  again  until  the
work  lias  been  accomplished  for
which  it  was  sent ;  until  every  na-
tion shall  hear  the  sound  of  the
Gospel;  until  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people,  shall  hear  of  the
purposes  of  the  Great  Jehovah  ;  un-
til all  people  shall 'be  warned,  and
the  honest  and  upright,  and  the
truth-loving  in  every  clime  shall  be
gathered  unto  the  fold  of  Christ;
until  the  way  shall  be  prepared  for
the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
— to  reijju  in  Mount  Zion  and  Jeru-


salem, and  before  his  ancients  glori-
ously ;  until  the  earth  is  redeemed
from  the  curse ;  until  Satan  and  his
hosts  are  bound  ;  until  the  great
work  of  God  is  accomplished  and  all
his  children  brought  up  from  death
and  hell  and  the  grave,  and  placed
in  a  position  where  they  can  glorify
God  throughout  the  countless  ages
of  eternity.

It  is  popularly  supposed  that
when  our  elders  go  out  as  mission-
aries to  the  different  countries  of  the
earth,  they  go  for  the  purpose  of  in-
ducing people  to  gather  here  to  these


|  peaceful  valleys,  that  they  might  be
made  subservient  to  our  leaders.
That  is  the  popular  idea.  There
cannot,  however,  be  anything  more
false  and  ridiculous  than  this.  What
object  could  men  have  in  takiug  the
trouble  to  go,  as  our  elders  do,  to
face  the  frowns  ol  the  world,  to  be
scoffed  at  and  despised,  to  travel
"  without  purse  or  scrip,,?  as  did  the
ancient  servants  of  God,  suffering
!  contumely,  persecution,  privation,
I  and  even  hunger  and  thirst,  travel-
ing foot-sore  and  weary,  among  a
people  who,  generally  speaking,  do
not  desire  to  hear  their  testimony  1
Their  object  is  to  preach  the  Gospel
of  Christ,  and  to  bear  witness  of  this
great  work.  It  is  not  merely  to  ga-
ther people  to  these  mountains.
When  peoph4  do  come  here  they
come  just  as  1  have  said,- — because
they  have  received  the  Gospel,  and
know  it  to  be  true.  They  come  up
here  that  they  may  learn  more  of
the  ways  of  the  Lord,  And  this  is
the  testimony  that  our  elders  bear
wherever  they  may  be  sent  :  That
God  has  restored  the  ancient  Gospel
and  that  he  is  building  up  his  Church
on  the  earth  again  for  the  la.st  time;
that  the  hour  of  God's  judgment  is
nigh  ;  that  the  angel,  to  whom  Bro-
ther Felt  referred,  and  about  whom
he  quoted  from  the  revelations  of  St,
John,  has  come  to  the  earth  with
"the  everlasting  Gospel  to  preach  to
every  nation,  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people,  saying,  with  a
loud  voice.  Fear  God  and  give  glory
to  him  for  the  hour  of  1  lis  judgment
is  come."  This  is  our  testimony*  this
is  why  we  go  forth,  and  when  the
people  hear  our  testimony  and  believe
it,  and  call  upon  the  Lord  for  a  wit-
ness, they  receive  it,  and  then  they
are  will  ling  to  forego  everything  for
the  sake  of  the  Gospel.

There  is  another  great  difference
between  our  religion  and  the  reli-


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN,  ETC


141


gions  of  the  world,  and  that  consists
in  the  power  and  authority  of  the
priesthood  to  which  I  have  briefly
referred.  Now,  it  is  true  that  the
church  called  the  Church  of  Koine,
professes  to  have  the  priesthood,
That  church  professes  to  have  the
same  authority  winch  was  in  the
ancient  church,  and  that  it  has  been
handed  down  from  generation  to
generation  to  our  own  times.  The
Church  of  England— hM  the  Episco-
pal Church  as  it  is  called  here — pro-
fesses to  have  a  portion  of  that  same
authority.  The  Greek  Church  also
professes  to  have  a  prut  ion  of  that
authority.  They  are  branches  or  off-
shoots from  this  Roman  Catholic
Church  ;  but  the  rest  of  the  Chris-
tian denominations  repudiate  any
idea  of  a  priesthood.  They  think
there  is  no  need  for  any  priesthood.
They  say  that  Jesus  was  t  he  Great
High  Priest,  and  that  there  is  no
need  for  any  more  priests  ;  that  is
the  prevalent  idea  among  the  rest  of
the  Christian  sects.  But  we  do  be-
lieve in  the  necessity  of  this  priest-
hood, and  say  that  it  has  been  re-
st ored  from  heaven  in  this  our  own
times.  In  what  way  ?  In  the  first
place  John  the  Baptist,  who  went
before  Josus  to  prepare  the  way  for
him  as  the  prophets  predicted,  who
held  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,  or
the  Levitical  priesthood— that  same
person  who  baptized  Jesus  in  the
river  Jordan,  and  who  was  beheaded
for  preaching  the  word  of  the  Lord,
has  come  to  the  earth  in  this  day
and  age  of  the  world,  and  ordained
man  to  the  same  authority  and
priesthood  that  he  held  while  he  was
in  the  flesh.  Now,  I  do  not  know
that  there  is  another  people  on  the
face  of  the  earth  that  possess  any
such  thing  as  that,  so  that  in  that
respect  there  is  a  great  difference  be-
ween  our  religion  and  the  religions
of  the  world. Further,  we  testify


that  not  only  this  lesser  priesthood
which  was  held  by  John  the  Bap-
tist has  been  restored,  but  that
Peter,  James  and  John,  who  held
the  Apostleship,  the  same  priesthood
which  Christ  held,  have  come  in
this  our  own  time  and  restored  the
authority  which  they  held*  "  As
my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so
send  I  you,"  said  Jesus  to  his  dis-
ciples. They  were  ordained  to  the
same  authority  that  He  held.  What
authority  was  that  ?  We  are  told
that  Christ  was  called  to  be  a  priest
forever  after  the  order  of  Melchise-
dek,  an  unchangeable  priesthood,
everlasting,  without  beginning  of
days  or  end  of  years.  He  conferred
the  same  priesthood  upon  His  apos-
tles, and  Peter,  James  and  John
were  left  to  take  charge  of  the
Church  when  He  departed ;  they
had  the  keys  of  the  kingdom ;
whatsoever  they  should  bind  on
'  earth  was  to  be  bound  in  heaven,
and  whatever  they  should  loose  on
earth  was  to  be  loosed  in  heaven.
Now,  we  testify  that  these  three
individuals  holding  the  keys  of  that
apostleship,  the  higher  priesthood,
have  come  down  to  the  earth  as
ministering  beings  in  our  own  times,
and  ordained  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith  to  the  same  apostleship  and
priesthood  and  authority  which
they  held,  and  through  him  it  has
been  conferred  upon  others,  so  that
the  ancient  authority  and  priest-
hood held  by  men  of  God  in  times
of  old,  is  here  on  the  earth  in  this
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints.

Then  there  is  another  difference
between  us  and  the  rest  of  the  peo-
ple called  Christian,  who  profess  to
believe  in  the  Christian  religion.
This  lesser  priesthood  holds  the
power  to  baptize  for  the  remission
of  sins  among  other  things,  but  it
does  not  hold  the  power  to  confer


142  JOURNAL  OF

the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  people.
When  John  the  Baptist  baptized
for  the  remission  of  sins  he  said,
"There  comet  h  al  ter  me  one  mightier
than  I,  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I
am  not  worthy  to  unloose.  I  in-
deed have  baptized  you  with  water;
but  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the
Holy  Ghost/1  And  we  read  in  the
New  Testament,  in  the  Arts  oi  the
Apostles,  that  on  a  certain  occasion
when  the  apb*tles  were  passing
through  the  upper  coasts  of'Ephesus,
they  found  certain  disciples  who  had
simply  been  baptized  with  the  bap-
tism of  John,  who  did  nothing  but
baptize  for  the  remission  of  sins,  he
having  no  authority  to  lay  his  hands
upon  the  people ;  they  had  not  re-
ceived the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the
apostles  had  received  that  power
and  authority  from  Jesus  Christ
which  He  himself  held,  and  they
laid  their  hands  upon  these  people,
and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost*
Here  is  the  difference,  or  one  point
of  difference,  between  those  two
priesthoods.  Now  this  priesthood
has  not  remained  upon  the  earth,
hence  the  necessity  of  restoring  it,  j
The  only  person  in  Christendom
who  professes  to  have  the  keys  of
the  apostolic  priesthood  is  the  Pope
of  Rome.  What  is  the  Pope  of
Home  ?  Is  he  an  apostle  ?  No  ;  he
does  not  profess  to  be  an  apostle.
Tfien  how  came  he  to  be  the  sac-  j
cessor  of  Peter  ?  Peter  was  an
apostle.  He  held  ^lia  keys  that
Christ  gave  to  him.  Christ  or-
dained him.  Does  the  Pope  of
Rome  profess  to  have  the  keys  of
revelation  ]  No,  he  does  not  profess
to  receive  any  new  revelation.  He,
with  others,  sometimes  meet  in  holy  !
Convocation,  as  it  is  called ;  they
meet  in  council,  they  enunciate  cer-
tain dogmas,  but  he  does  not  pro-
fess to  receive  any  revelation  .from
God, What  was  the  great  power  of


DISCOURSES,

the  ancient  apostleshipl  The  power
to  commune  with  the  Highest.  The
form  of  the  apostle  ship  was  no-
thing ;  the  power  was  everything.
That  power  departed  from  the
earth.  The  people  in  ancient  times
were  unworthy  of  it.  They  put  out
the  lights  of  God  which  He  had
placed  in  the  world,  and  left  them-
selves in  darkness.  They  cut  short
the  apostles'  lives,  and  the  world
was  left  in  the  gloom.  They  would
not  have  the  power  and  authority
of  that  apostleship  in  their  midst,
and  instead  of  the  ancient  Church
of  Christ  with  the  power  of  God,
with  the  ministration  of  angels,
with  the  gifts  and  blessings  we  read
about  in  the  New  Testament,  we
find  arising  a  church  of  a  different
form,  a  church  that  has  persecuted
the  Saints,  a  church  that  is  stained
with  the  blood  of  the  innocent,  a
church  that  put  people  to  death  for
their  religious  belief  (which  the
Church  of  Christ  never  did),  and
yet  tli at  church,  including  all  the
various  contending  denominations
and  sects  extant  upon  the  earth,  is
called  "Christian  !"

Now,  our  testimony  to  the  world
is  that  God  has  restored  these  two
ancient  priesthoods — that  is,  the
power  to  administer  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  by  authority,  and  that  the
power  of  God  accompanies  that  au
thority.  Here  are  men  who  profess
to  have  the  right  to  administer  the
ordinance  of  baptism  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  who  profess  to  have  the
authority  to  lay  hands  upon  the  peo-
ple for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Now,  an  impostor  might  profess  to
have  this  power.  Having  read
about  it  in  the  New  Testament,  and
seeing  that  the  ancient  servants  of
God  possessed  such  power,  a  man
might  profess  to  have  authority  to
lay  hands  upon  people  for  the  be-
stowal of  the  Holy  Ghost, But  an


impostor  cannot  really  confer  the
Holy  (J host  That  conies  from  God.
No  man  can  bestow  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  upon  any  one ;  that  is
the  gift  of  God.  We  read  about  a
man  who  thought  he  could  purchase
this  power.  He  offered  the  apostles  |
money  for  it.  But  Peter  said  unto
him,  u  Thy  money  perish  with  thee,
because  thou  hast  thought  that  the  j
gift  of  God  may  be  purchased  with
money/'  |
Now,  here  we  have  in  Utah  about
150,000  people.  A  great  many  of
thein  came  to  these  mountains  under
very  adverse  circumstances.  They
left  their  various  homes  in  different
parts  of  the  world  to  gather  out  here  ]
with  the  Saints.  Why ?  Because
they  knew  that  this  was  the  work  of
God  by  the  gift  and  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  How  did  they  receive
it  %  They  received  it  by  the  laying
on  of  hands  of  men  who  professed  to
have  the  authority  to  do  so.  Now,
the  fact  that  they  received  the  gift  >
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  proof  that  the
power  of  God  accompanies  the  ad-
ministration. The  same  fruits  that
were  made  manifest  in  days  of  old
are  made  manifest  to-day.  We  read
in  the  New  Testament  that  certain
gifts  existed  in  the  ancient  Church.
The  sick  were  healed  and  the  lame
made  to  walk,  Some  had  the  gift
of  tongues,  others  the  interpretation
of  tongues,  others  the  gift  of  pro-
phecy, etc.  What  was  the  effect  of
the  existence  of  these  gifts  1  Union,
concord,  brotherly  love,  all  seeing
eye  to  eye.  Now,  inasmuch  as  we
find  the  same  gifts  among  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints — although  of  different
nationalities,  formerly  of  different
religions,  brought  up  in  different
ways — it  is  evidence  clear  and  plain
that  the  power  of  God  is  in  the  midst
•f  this  people  ;  that  the  Holy  Ghost
Las  been  conferred  upon  them,  and
this  is  their  united  testimony.  This


i  is  clear  to  me,  but  it  may  not  be
clear  to  everybody  else.  I  do  not
believe  it  possible  tor  others  to  see
things  as  1  do,  unless  they  take  the
same  course  as  I  have  done,  and  test
the  matter  for  themselves,

If  a  man  believes  in  God,  and  in
his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the
Scriptures,  he  will  manifest  his  faith
by  receiving  the  doctrines  laid  down
and  the  commandments  given  ;  and
if  he  will  ask  of  God  lie  will  receive
a  testimony,  I  can  make  bold  to
,  promise  this  blessing  to  every  man
and  woman  in  this  house — and  I  do
it  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ — if  they  will  obey  this  Gospel
which  God  has  sent  from  heaven  for
the  salvation  of  mankind.  My
friends,  if  you  will  turn  away  from
your  evil  deeds,  if  you  will  turn  unto
the  Lord  God,  obey  the  ordinances
and  ask  for  a  testimony  of  the  truth
of  this  work  ;  if  you  will  do  this  in
sincerity,  I  promise  you  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  you  shall  receive  the
testimony  you  seek.  Is  there  any
minister  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,  amongst  the  so-called  Chris-
tian sects,  who  can  make  you  a  simi-
lar promise?  No,  Why?  Because
they  have  not  been  called  to  this
work.  This  is  another  point  of
difference  between  our  religion  and
that  of  the  world.  Our  elders  go
forth  with  boldness,  because  they
are  not  sent  by  men.  They  are
not  called  to  preach  for  hire.  They
are  called  of  God  to  bear  the  holy
priesthood  and  carry  forth  this  mes-
sage of  glad  £y3ings  wherever  they
may  be  sent  It  is  their  duty  to
proclaim  this  Gospel  to  the  utter-
most bounds  of  the  earth,  and  their
testimony  is  similar  to  that  I  have
borne  here  to-day,  and  our  witnesses
are  the  Latter-day  Saints — gathered
from  the  nations—who  dwell  in  tht
valleys  of  the  mountains,
, There  are  a  great  many  other


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


poihts  of  difference  between  us  and
the  so  called  Christian  world,  that  1
have  not  time*  to  refer  to.  For  in-
stance, we  believe  in  the  doctrine  of
gathering  to  this  land  from  all  parts
of  the  world.  When  we  go  out  to
preach  this  Gospel*  we  do  not  advise
the  people  to  stay  and  erect  great
churches  in  the  countries  where  they
receive  the  Gospel  We  bear  testi-
mony  to  them  that  this  is  the  time
of  God's  judgments.  We  say,  "Come
out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  he
not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that
ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues,"  We
testify  that  the  time  is  near  at  hand
when  great  Babylon  shall  fall ;  when
God  shall  smite  terribly  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  ;  w  hen  he  will
turn  and  overturn  ;  when  nation
shall  rise  against  nation  and  king-
dom against  kingdom  ;  people
against  people  and  family  against
family  *  when  there  shall  be  wars
and  rumors  of  wars;  plagues, famines
and  pestilence ;  such  a  time  as  has
never  been  known  upon  the  earth
from  the  beginning  even  unto  the
present  day.  Therefore  we  call  upon
the  elect,  of  God  to  come  out  from
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  they
come  fmni  the  east  and  from  the
west,  from  the  north  and  from  the
south,  to  this  chosen  land,  to  serve
the  Lord*  to  learn  of  his  ways  and
to  walk  in  his  paths,  and  prepare
themselves  for  the  great  events  that
lire  about  to  transpire  on  the  earth.

Another  £*reat  point  of  difference
is  the  building  of  Temples,  The
different  Christian  denominations
build  houses  and  call  them  St.
Paul's  church,  St,  Peter's  church,
St  Mark's  church,  etc.  They  build
churches  to  these  various  saints,
but  they  know  nothing  about  build-
ing a  house  to  the  name  of  the  Most
High  God— a  temple  in  which  the
Lord  may  come  and  place  his  feet  j
for  this  is  the  day  spoken  of  by  the


!  prophets,  when  u  the  Lord,  whom
J  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come  to  his
I  temple,  even  the  messenger  of  the
!  covenant  whom  ye  delight  in  ;  be-
hold, he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord
of  Hosts*  But  who  may  abide  the
day  of  his  coming,  and  who  shall
stand  when  he  appeareth,  for  he  is
>  like  a  refiners's  fire,"  'etc.  We  call
upon  the  people  to  come  out  and
help  build  temples  in  which  ordi-
nances can  be  administered  for  the
benefit  of  the  living  and  the  re-
demption of  the  dead.  The  re-
demption of  the  dead  !  Can  the  liv-
ing do  any  thing  for  the  dead?  When
1  people  pass  away  from  the  earth,  is
not  their  condition  settled  %  When
the  tree  falls,  does  it  not  lie  there?
Yes,  it  does,  till  it  is  moved.  In  con-
;  nection  with  the  Gospel  we  have  re-
ceived glad  tiding  of  salvation
which  is  preached  to  the  living  and
to  the  dead.  The  Lord  has  revealed
to  us  the  glorious  doctrine  of  re-
demption for  the  dead — a  plan  by
which  the  living  may  aid  the  dead
Not  by  saying  mass  over  the  soul  of
the  departed,  but  by  attending  to
!  certain  ordinances  for  them  which
belong  to  the  Gospel.  Are  all  the
thousands  and  millions  ot  people  who
have  passed  away  without  a  know-
ledge of  the  Gospel  to  perish  1  No*
There  is  no  name  under  heaven  but
the  name  of  Jesus  whereby  man  shall
be  saved-  Ask  our  Christian  friends
if  the  millions  of  heathens  who  have
passed  away  from  this  world  have
ever  heard  the  name  of  Jesus.  I  f  n  ot,
what  is  to  become  of  them  ]
Millions  of  people  who  dwell
upon  the  earth  even  in  so-
called  Christian  countries  know
nothing  about  the  true  Gospel.
The  so-called  Christian  churches  lack
this  knowledge  and  light.  By  the
confession  of  the  Episcopal  Church,
in  i  ts  homily  of  the  perils  of  idolatry,
the  whole  of  Christendom,  "  clergy


and  laity,  men,  women  and  children
of  all  ages,  sexes  and  degrees,  have
been  at  the  time  the  homily  was
written,  buried  in  the  most  abomi-
nable idolatry  for  the  space  of  800
years  or  mora  According  to  the
testimony  of  the  Apostle  in  the
Apocalypse,  the  whole  world,  Chris-
tian as  well  as  heathen,  has  gone
astrav,  all  nations  have  become
drunk  with  the  wine  of  the  wrath
of  the  fornication  of  Babylon  the
great,  the  mother  of  harlots  ;  and
there  has  been  no  voice  from  heaven,
no  revelation  from  God,  no  commu-
nication with  the  eternal  world  for
many  centuries.  Although  a  great
many  people  have  tried  to  do  the
best  they  could — and  so  far  being
accepteil  of  God — yet  they  have  not
received  the  Gospel  by  which  they
can  enter  into  the  presence  of  the
eternal  Father ;  they  have  not
entered  in  at  the  straight  and  narrow
gate  which  leadeth  to  lives  eternal

By  this  Gospel  which  has  been
revealed  to  us,  the  servants  of  God
who  depart  from  this  mortal  sphere,
take  with  them  the  authority  and
priesthood  they  hold,  as  Christ  did,
when  he  went  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison.  So  the  servants  of
God,  bearing  the  same  priesthood,
go  and  minister  to  the  spirits  behind
the  vail  whether  Christian,  heathen
or  pagan.  No  matter  what  clime  or
race  they  belong  to,  all  must  hear
the  same  Gospel  and  be  judged  by
it  on  the  great  day  of  judgment.
They  have  therefore  an  opportunity
of  repenting  in  the  spirit,  if  they  did
not  hear  the  Gespel  in  the  flesh.
The  Spirit  can  believe,  can  be
informed  and  instructed  in  the  ways
of  God,  but  the  Spirit  beyond  the
vail  cannot  attend  to  ordinances  per*
taining  to  the  flesh.  To  this  end,
therefore,  we  are  building  temples  so
that,  when  they  are  sanctified  and
accepted  of  God,  the  holy  priesthood

No.  10.


may  administer  both  for  the  living
and  the  dead.  For  this  is  the  great
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times
in  which  Christ  will  gather  together
in  one,  all  things  that  are  in  him,
both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which
are  on  earth.  This  is  the  hist  dis-
pensation of  God's  mercy  to  man.
The  work  has  been  commenced  and
it  will  roll  on  until  the  Gospel  has
been  preached  to  every  nation,  kin-
dred, tongue  and  people,  and  the
honest  in  heart  have  been  gathered
out  from  among  the  Gentiles.  Then
the  Lord  will  send  his  servants  unto
the  Jews  and  the  House  of  Israel,
and  thus  fully  accomplish  all  he  has
spoken  by  the  holy  prophets.  We
will  therefore  work  while  we  dwell
in  the  flesh,  and  when  we  have
finished  the  work  we  will  pass  behind
the  vail  to  sweet  rest.  liest  from
our  trials  and  sufferings,  from  our
sorrows  and  tribulations,  from  our
persecutions  and  misrepresentations,
but  not  to  cease  from  our  labors  of
love,  but  to  minister  in  the  power,
in  the  strength,  in  the  might  and
majesty  of  the  eternal  priesthood
among  the  hosts  behind  the  vail,
and  those  that  dwell  upon  the  earth
will  continue  to  build  temples  and
minister  therein,  that  the  dead  may
be  redeemed.

I  have  not  time  to  continue  far-
ther on  this  subject  I  have  briefly
pointed  out  some  of  the  differences
between  us  and  the  "Christian*
world.  And  now  I  will  bear  my
testimony  to  this  congregation  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
that  this  is  not  the  work  of  man ;
tliat  "  Monnonism"  is  the  work  of
the  Great  God,  and  no  power  can
overturn  it  And  I  testify  further,
that  every  nation  and  kingdom  that
shall  rise  against  this  work  shall
perish  and  be  utterly  wasted  away*
The  Lord  will  have  a  reckoning  with
that  nation,  no  matter  where  it  is,

. Vol  XXL


HG


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


for  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  are
in  the  hands  of  Godf  and  every
human  government  that  will  not
serve  him  shall  be  brought  low,
until  his  kingdom  spreads  forth  and
is  established  upon  the  whole  earth
with  Christ  the  Redeemer,  as  King,


whose  right  it  is  to  rule.

May  the  peace  of  God,  which
passe th  all  understanding,  rest  in
the  hearts  of  the  Saints,  and  also
guide  all  people  who  desire  the
truth,  in  the  way  of  life  eternal,
through  Jesus  Christ,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Logan  City,  Saturday  Afternoon,

November  1st,  1879,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)

PROGRESS OF  THE  SAINTS TO UNION IN FAITH AND  PRACTICE — THE

UNITED  ORDER,


I  will  read  a  few  passages  from  I
the  Book  of  Jacob,  one  of  the  sacred  j
compilations  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 1
mem.  j

"  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the
servants  did  go  and  labor  with  their
mights  j  and  the  Lord  of  the  Tine-
yard  labored  also  with  them  and
thqy  did  obey  the  commandments  of
tEe  Lord  of  the  vineyard,  in  all
things.  And  there  began  to  be  the
natural  fruit  again  in  the  vineyard  ■
and  the  natural  branches  began  to
glow  and  thrive  exceedingly ;  and
tfie  wild  branches  began  to  be
plucked  off,  and  to  be  east  away ;
and  they  did  keep  the  root  and  the
top  thereof  equal,  according  to  the ,


strength  thereof.  And  thus  they
labored,  with  all  diligence,  according
to  the  commandments  of  the  Lord
of  the  vineyard,  even  until  the  load
had  been  cast  away  out  of  the  vine-
1  yard,  and  the  Lord  preserved  unto
him  self ,  that  the  trees  had  become
again  the  natural  fruit;  and  they
became  like  unto  one  body  ;  and  the
fruit  were  equal  j  and  the  Lord  of
the  vineyard  had  preserved  unto
himself  the  natural  fruit ;  which  was
most  precious  unto  him  from  the
beginning,*1

These  words  occurred  to  me  this
forenoon,  while  Brother  Snow  was
speaking  upon  the  subject  of  the
Order  laid  down  in  the  Doctrine  and


PROGRESS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


147


Covenants.  We  have  here  a  clear
ami  plain  prediction,  in  the  form  of
a  parable,  that  was  recorded  upon
plates  of  gold,  almost  600  years  be-
fore Christ,  in  relation  to  the  great
work  iu  which  we,  as  the  servants
of  the  Lord,  and  the  Latter  day
Saints,  are  engaged.  Perhaps  there
may  be  some  persons,  numbered
among  this  community,  who  may
have  a  feeling  something  like  this  ;
"  that  we  are  net  living  according  to
the  law  that  is  given  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  in  all  respects."
And  they  have  drawn  the  conclusion,
that  perhaps  the  Lord  would  forsake
us  iu  consequence  of  our  not  carry-
ing  out  the  laws  so  clearly  defined
and  explained  in  that  record.  These
things  were  clearly  set  forth  before
the  people,  this  forenoon,  in  regard
to  wherein  we  have  not  entered  into
all  the  fulness  and  perfection  of  that
order  of  things.  But  the  question
is,  can  we  do  much  better,  under  the
present  circumstances  ?  This  is  a
great  question  to  be  considered.
And  in  the  consideration  of  it,  we
have  to  enquire  into  a  number  of
other  things,  such  as  can  we  lay
aside  the  present  order  of  things
that  is  not  consistent  with  the  Doc-
trine and  Covenants ;  and  can  we
begin  anew  here  in  these  valleys,
and  carry  out  the  law  of  the  Lord
in  all  its  perfection  ]  I  do  not
know  but  what  there  may  be  a  bare
possibility  of  our  doing  it ;  but
whether  the  Lord  requires  this  at
our  hands  under  the  present  circum-
stances is  another  thing.  We  are
very  imperfect,  and  yet  we  try  to  do
right.  We  want  to  keep  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord  ;  we  desire
to  be  members  of  his  Church  ;  we
desire  to  have  his  Holy  Spirit  rest- 1
ing  upon  us,  and  we  desire  to  be
guided  by  it.  We  wish  to  know
what  the  counsel  of  the  servants  of
God  is  concerning  us ;  and  yet,


hardly  know  which  way  to  turn.
We  see  a  united  order  established  in
one  place,  according  to  one  principle;
we  go  to  another  part  of  the  land,
and  we  find  an  order  established  on
a  little  different  principle  ;  and  we
hear  of  another,  all  differing  some-
what And  so  on  until  we  visit
nearly  all  the  settlements  of  these
mountains.  And  as  was  stated  this
forenoon,  they  differ  as  do  the  elders
themselves  in  their  views.

Now  what  has  the  Lord  said  in
this  parable  of  the  vineyard  t  "  And
they  did  keep  the  root  and  the  top
thereof  equal. 99  In  what  respect
were  they  made  equal  ?  The  next
part  of  that  same  sentence  declares
that  they  were  made  equal  "  accord-
ing to  the  strength  thereof"  Now
there  is  a  great  deal  expressed  in
those  few  words.  They  were  not
made  equal  all  at  once,  as  the  inhabi-
tants of  a  celestial  world  are,  with-
out any  improvements  being  intro
duced ;  but  they  were  to  keep  the
root  and  the  top  of  the  great  tree
equal,  according  to  the  strength  thereof;
that  is  according  to  the  condition
and  circumstances  in  which  the  peo-
ple are  placed.  Now  I  consider,
that  notwithstanding  all  our  devia-
tions from  the  perfect  law  that  God
has  given,  notwithstanding  the  con*
dition  of  things  pointed  out  so  clear-
ly in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants  in
regard  to  holding  stewardships  and
inheritances,  and  giving  an  account
of  those  stewardships  and  inherit-
ances, according  to  the  perfect  order,
— I  consider  we  are  doing  pretty
well,  in  a  great  many  respects.  We
have  progressed  ;  we  have  made
improvements  ;  we  are  in  a  mere
united  condition  than  we  were  45
years  ago.  Hence  there  lias  been  an
improvement  among  the  Latter-day
Saints  ;  and  this  improvement  has
been  for  the  better ;  it  has  been
|  pointing  all  the  time  towards  equa-


148


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


lity,  though  we  have  not  succeeded,
according  to  the  perfect  law.  But
we  have  succeeded  according  to  the
strength  of  the  people, — according
to  the  circumstances  with  which
they  are  surrounded  We  have
succeeded  in  a  great  measure  to
instil  into  their  minds  the  great
principle  of  unity  fand  oneness,  not
only  in  spiritual  things,  but  in  tem-
poial  tilings  also.  The  day  will
come  when  this  will  he  fulfilled  to
the  very  letter,  in  accordance  with
words  which  say,  M  they  became  like
unto  one  body  ;  and  the  fruit  were
equal."  That  is  the  destination  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  in  the  future*
The  fruit  is  to  be  equal ;  the  roots
and  the  branches  are  all  to  be  kept
in  their  perfect  order,  and  the  whole
tree  kept  in  a  thriving  condition.
Then  we  shall  have  learned  the
great  principle  of  the  celestial  order,
that  must  be  carried  out  among  the
children  of  men.  During  that  long
period  called  the  Millennium,  this
people  will  see  the  importance  of
attending  to  that  perfect  order  when
our  strength  shall  warrant  At  pre-
sent we  have  no  perfect  example
before  us.  Where  has  there  been
either  in  this  Territory  or  in  Arizona
an  instance  where  the  perfect  law  of
God  has  been  carried  out,  as  laid
down  in  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants 1  I  know  of  no  such  instance,
I  know  of  a  great  many  improve-
ments upon  the  old  condition  of
things  which  has  existed  among  our
fathers — the  Gentile  notion  and  idea
of  each  one  holding  separate  and
individual  interests,  without  being
accountable  to  anyone*  That  is  the
old  system.  We  have  made  many
improvements,  but  we  have  not
carried  out  in  any  one  solitary  in-
stance in  any  settlement  I  am
acquainted  with,  the  order  of  things
laid  down  in  the  revelations,  con-
lained  in  the  Book  of  Covenants,


There  has  been  a  great  deal  said,
at  different  times  upon  the  subject
of  families  being  united  as  one, —
eating  at  the  same  table,  for  instance,
and  having  one  large-  field,  where
their  fanning  operations  might  be
carried  on,  all  who  are  farmers  going
forth  into  the  same  field  to  labor  ;
and  the  same  principle  carried  out
in  regard  to  other  Inane  lies,  all
taking  hold  unitedly,  having  the
common  interest  at  heart,  Is  there
anything  in  the  revelations  given  in
these  Latter-days  requiring  this
order  of  tilings,  or  is  it  something
we  ourselves  have  considered  us  be-
ing a  little  ahead  of  what  our  fathers
have  been  practising  ?  1  do  not
know  anything  laid  down  in  the
revelations,  requiring  us  to  take  this
particular  method.  Vet,  is  it  right?
Yes.  Why  it  is  right  according  to
the  circumstances  with  which  they
ate  surrounded  ;  it  points  forward  to
unity  and  tends  to  instruct  us  in  the
preliminary  ideas  of  being  united
together.  And  hence,  those  that
can  enter  into  this  order,  who  are
willing  to  unite  in  this  way,  are
doing  well  and  will  be  blessed  for  it.
But  let  no  person  set  any  stakes,  in
regard  to  this  matter,  that  because
he  may  have  entered  into  a  special
order,  introduce*!  in  one  settlement,
that  all  others  are  wrong,  because
they  do  not  do  likewise;  they  should
not  find  fault  with  their  brethren,
neither  be  discouraged  in  well-doing-
There  are  a  great  many  different
ideas  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
in  relation  to  these  matters.  But
then,  we  have  a  standard  given  in
the  Book  of  Covenants,  by  which  we
should  be  governed.  By  and  bye,  I
expect  we  will  be  in  different  circum-
stances, in  which  stewardships  or
inheritances  can  be  issued,  for  all
families  of  the  Saints,  some  in  one
kind  or  branch  of  business,  and  some
in another  ; and  the  full  law  of


PROGRESS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


14!)


consecration  will  take  place.

I  am,  and  I  presume  a  great  many
others  who  are  acquainted  with  the
revelations  ot  God,  as  contained  in
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  are
looking  for  the  period  of  time  to
come,  in  the  history  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  when  we  as  a  people
shall  possess  a  very  different  country
fiom  the  one  we  are  now  inhabiting
We  do  not  expect  to  go  to  the  Sand-
wich Islands,  neither  to  the  Society
Island*,  neither  to  any  of  the  islands
of  the  oceans,  nor  into  South  Amer-
ica, nor  Central  America,  to  carry
ont  the  order  of  tilings  which  we
expect  to  enter  into  in  all  its  fulness.
But  we  evpect,  just  as  much  as  we
expect  the  sun  will  shine,  when  it
arises  on  a  clear  morning,  that  the
Lord  will  by  and  bye,  take  us  back
to  the  land  referred  to  by  Brother
Snow,  this  forenoon.  We  do  not
expect  that  when  that  time  shall
come,  that  all  Latter-day  Saints,
who  now  occupy  the  mountain
Valleys,  will  go  in  one  consolidated
body,  leaving  this  land  totally  with-
out inhabitants.  We  do  not  expect
any  such  thin  a.  But  we  do  expect,
that  there  will  be  ;i  period  in  the
future  history  of  the  Church  when
many  hundreds  of  this  people—  our
youth,  for  instance,  who  will  grow
up  in  those  days,  when  they  will  be
consolidated  as  a  body,  ami  will  go
to  the  eastern  portions  of  the  state
of  Kansas,  and  also  to  the  western
portions  of  the  state  of  Missouri  to
settle.  And  when  that  time  shall
come,  if  it  be  needful  to  carry  out
the  command  men  ts  which  Brother
Snow  read  this  morning,  referring  to
the  purchase  of  lands,  we  will  have
property  and  means  sufficient  to
accomplish  this  work  It  was  neces-
sary some  47  years  ago  to  purchase
lands,  and  also  for  several  years
afterwards.  But  we  did  not  do  it
then. It  may  be  necessary  for  us  in


times  to  come,  and  probably  will  be
necessary  for  us  to  purchase  that
whole  region  of  country.  Why  so  %
Because  if  there  be  prior  occupants
to  it,  should  we  not  be  willing  to
give  them  an  equivalent,  such  as
will  satisfy  them,  for  its  possession,
including  the  improvements  attached
thereto  ]  Certainly,  Consequently
it  may  be  necessary  for  us  to  carry
out  the  fulness  of  all  these  revela-
tions, notwithstanding  all  the  abuses
and  persecutions  that  have  been
heaped  upon  the  Latter-day  Saint*.
But  whether  this  be  the  case  or  not
there  is  one  thing  certain — some-
thing that  you  and  I  may  depend
upon,  with  as  much  certainty  as  we
expect  to  get  our  daily  food,  and
that  is,  that  the  Lord  our  God  will
take  this  people  back,  and  will  select
from  among  this  people,  a  sufficient
number j  to  make  the  army  of  Israel
very  great  Ami  when  that  day
comes,  he  will  guide  the  forces  of
those  who  emigrate  to  their  posses-
sions in  those  two  states,  that  I  have
mentioned-  And  the  land  thus  pur-
chased will  be  no  doubt,  as  far  as
jjossible,  located  in  one  district  of
country,  which  will  be  settled  very
differently  from  the  way  we  now
settle  up  these  mountain  regions?.
You  may  ask,  in  what  respect  we
shall  differ  in  settling  up  those  coun-
tries when  we  go  there  to  fulfil  the
commandments  of  the  Lord  !  I  will
tell  you.  No  man  in  those  localities
will  be  permitted  to  receive  a
stewardship  on  those  lands,  unless
he  is  willing  to  consecrate  ail  his
properties  to  the  Lord.  That  will
be  amon^  the  first  teachings  given.
When  this  shall  be  done,  the  people
will  be,  as  the  parable  says,  like  unto
one  body — all  equally  poor,  or  all
equally  rich  ;  in  other  words,  they
will  be  persons  that  can  claim  no
property  as  their  own,  everything
being  consecrated. And  the  land


150  JOURNAL  OF

being  purchased,  will  be  held  on  a  j
different  principle,  from  what  it  is  i
now.  To-day  fifty  thousand  dollars
worth  of  real  estate  property  is  the
most  that  can  be  held  by  a  religious
•rganization ;  but  in  that  day  the
whole  of  our  properties,  amounting
a  very  much  larger  sum,  will  be  held
in  trust  For  whom  ?  For  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
Saints,  and  for  all  this  great  com-
pany that  will  be  gathered  together.
And  there  will  be  such  a  change  in
governmental  affairs,  that  the
trustee,  whoever  he  may  be,  will
only  act  as  such  as  long  as  he  is
y  faithful ;  and  if  he  becomes  unfaith-
ful it  will  be  transferred  to  another.
Neither  in  case  of  death  will  the
heirs  of  such  trustee  have  any  claim
whatever  on  the  property  ;  the
power  regulating  such  matters  will
then  be  vested  in  the  proper  autho-
rity who  will  mete  out  even  justice
to  all  parties.

These  persons,  therefore,  will  be
in  the  same  condition  that  all  the
rest  of  the  people  are  in.  The  pro-
perties they  hold  will  not  be  their
own,  although  it  may  be  called  so,
as  far  as  that  is  concerned.  And
when  it  shall  be  ascertained  that  an
individual  has  consecrated  every-
thing lie  has,  inquiries  will  be  made
as  to  the  size  of  his  family,  and  land
will  be  apportioned  to  him  according-
ly—not to  deed  him  the  property,
according  to  the  Gentile  practice  ;
but  rather  that  the  extent  of  his
stewardship  may  be  determined.
When  this  is  done,  he  takes  his
stewardship,  each  man  having  his
own  table,  without  bring  necessita-
ted at  all  to  eat  at  his  neighbor's.
People  will  build  their  own  houses,
etc.,  when  needful,  provided  they  are  ,
able  to  do  so,  if  not,  what  assistance
they  require  will  be  rendered  them.
And  then  they  and  all  the  others  ,
will  be  required  to  keep  an  account


DISCOURSES.

of  their  proceedings  and  present  the
same  to  the  bishops  at  the  end  of  th&
year,  or  as  often  as  may  be  required.
These  bishops,  if  they  do  their  duty,
will  scan  these  things:  "Brother, you
have  been  unwise  in  such  and  such
things,  but  in  other  particulars  you
have  done  well"  In  this  way  each
man  will  give  an  account  of  his
stewardship,  as  the  revelation  says,
both  in  time  and  eternity.  And  he
that  proves  himself  a  faithful  and
wise  steward  in  time,  will  be  counted
worthy  to  receive  not  only  a  steward-
ship but  an  inheritance  in  eternity.
What  is  the  object  of  the  steward-
ship 1  Is  it  not  to  prepare  us  for
.  that  still  higher  order  of  tilings  that
shall  exist  when  we  shall  receive  an
inheritance?  And  when  that  time
comes,  and  we  shall  still  be  found
faithful  to  our  trust,  the  Lord  will
I  be  pleased  to  say,  "I  can  trust  that
man,  he  has  proved  himself  in  the-
days  of  his  probation  :  he  is  a  wise
man  ;  he  has  done  right  in  all  things
with  which  he  has  been  entrusted.
Now  let  him  have  not  merely  a
stewardship,  but  let  it  be  given  to
him  as  an  everlasting  possession,  for
him  and  his  seed  after  him  for  ever
ami  ever,  both  for  time  and  eternity,"
You  may  perhaps  ask  when  this
time  will  come?  for  the  Saints  to
receive  bona  fide  inheritances.  The
time  will  come  for  the  Saints  to
receive  their  stewardships,  when
they  shall  return  to  the  lands  from*
whence  they  have  been  driven  ;  but
the  inheritances  will  not  be  given,
until  the  Lord  shall  first  appoint  to
the  righteous  dead  their  inheri-
tances, and  afterwards  the  righteous
living  will  receive  theirs.  This  you
will  find  recorded  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants  ;  and  in  the  sama
Book  it  is  predicted  that  there  is  to
be  one  "  mighty  and  strong,"  as  well
as  to  be  an  immortal  personage, —
one  that  is  clothed  upon  with  light


*


PROGRESS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


151


as  with  a  garment  :— one  whose
bowels  are  a  fountain  of  truth.  His
mission  will  be  to  divide  by  lot,  to
the  Saints  their  inheritances,  accord-
ing to  their  faithfulness  in  their
stewardships.  This  too  agrees  with
another  revelation,  given  on  the  27th
Dec,  1832,  which  says,  in  great
plainness,  that  when  the  Saints  are
resurrected  and  caught  up  into
heaven,  and  the  living  Saints  are
also  caught  up,  and  that  when  the
seventh  angel  shall  have  sounded
his  trump,  then  the  Saints  shall
receive  their  inheritances.  The
time  then  is  there  specified,  concern-
ing the  period  that  the  Lord  has  in
his  own  mind,  when  inheritances
shall  be  given.  Finally  after  the
Saints  have  been  resurrected  and
caught  up,  in  connection  with  all
the  then  living  Saints,  into  heaven  ;
and  after  the  seventh  angel  sounds
his  trump,  the  earth  will  be  given
to  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  for
an  inheritance  to  be  divided  out  to
them.  This  land,  about  which  I
have  been  speaking,  is  called  in  some
places  in  the  revelations  of  God  to
the  Prophet  Joseph,  the  land  of  our
inheritance ;  and  in  other  places  it  is
referred  to  in  the  form  of  steward-
ships. In  one  sense  it  may  be  con-
sidered our  inheritance,  because  the
Lord  designs,  in  his  own  wisdom,
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  shall
possess  that  land  as  such,  and  their
dead  with  them.  And  having
decreed  this,  even  before  we  ever
saw  it,  he  will  fulfil  it.  I  will  refer
you  to  a  part  of  the  revelation  given
on  the  2nd  Jan.,  1831,  at  the  house
of  Fa  titer  Whitmer  :  "  And  I  hold
forth  and  deign  tu  give  unto  you
greater  riches,  even  a  land  of  pro-
mise, a  land  flowing  with  milk  and
honey,  upon  which  there  shall  be  no
,  curse  when  the  Lord  cometh  :  And
I  I  will  give  it  unto  you  for  the  land
i of your inheritance,1' — not  only


stewardship,  but  inheritance ;  1
"  And  this  shall  be  my  covenant
with  you,"  says  the  Lord  further,
"  ye  shall  have  it  for  the  land  of
your  inheritance,  and  for  the  inheri-
tance of  your  children,  forever,
while  the  earth  shall  stand,  and  ye
shall  possess  it  again  in  eternity,  no
more  to  pass  away.11  In  this  sense
it  is  called  the  land  of  our  inheri-
tance. But  when  we  come!  to  speak
definitely,  we  will  have  to  be  proven
as  stewards  first.  If  we  shall  be
unwise  in  the  disposition  of  this
trust,  then  it  will  be  very  doubtful,
whether  we  cret  an  inheritance  in
this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come.

What  is  it  then  we  look  fori
We  expect— I  was  about  to  quote
from  the  prediction  of  Isaiah  regard
less  of  consequences  ;  I  trust,  how-
ever,  there  is  no  one  present  who
will  look  upon  that  great  and  good
man  of  God  as  a  traitor  against
the  government  of  the  United  States
— that,  "A  little  one  shall  become
a  thousand,  and  a  small  one  a  strong
nation/  I  expect  that  this  people,
if  they  do  not  heeome  a  u  strong
nation"  in  one  sense  of  the  word,
they  will  be  a  great  and  strong  and
powerful  people  upon  the  face  of
this  land*  This  is  one  of  the  things
your  humble  servant  is  looking  for*
And  I  expect  that  when  we  go  from
these  mountains,  by  hundreds  of
thousands,  down  to  that  land  to  pur-
chase it  and  to  occupy  it,  that  we
will  take  with  us  a  great  deal  of
gold  and  silver — for  the  Lord  will
in  those  days  make  his  people  very
rich,  in  fulfilment  of  another  promise
made  in  the  same  revelation,  in
which  he  says,  that  we  shall  become
the  richest  of  all  people*  If  this  is
to  be  the  case,  the  Lord  will  pro-
bably fulfil  that  prediction  by  Isaiah,
contained  in  the  60th  chapter  of  his
book — -u  for  brass  I  will  bring  gold,
and  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and  i


JOURNAL  Ok  DISCOURSES


%m  wood  brass,  and  fur  stone  iron  i
and  he  will  bestow  upon  his  people
riches  that  they  will  not  know  what
to  do  with  them,  unless  directed  by
the  counsels  of  the  servants  of  the
living  God.  With  this  we  will  pur-
chase  the  land,  and  go  down  and  in-
herit it,  as  a  strong  and  powerful
people,  receiving  our  steward  ships.
And  we  will  not  spread  forth  in  that
land  three  or  four  miles  apart,  and
think  we  are  crowded  when  people
come  and  settle  within  a  mile  of  us  ;
but  we  will  settle*  in  such  a  manner  ,
as  to  make  a  very  dense  population.  ;
It  is  a  country  that  is  susceptible,  !
almost  every  foot  of  it,  to  agricultu-
ral purposes  ;  and  we  can  settle  with
a  very  large  population  upon  every
square  mile  of  country.  Ami  we
will  extend  our  borders  around  about
the  great  central  city,  not  stake,  of
Zion,  You  have  heard  of  the  centre-
stake  of  Zion,  but  did  you  ever  read
in  the  revelations  of  God  that  the
place  where  the  Now  Jerusalem  is  to
ye  built  is  called  a  stake  ?  There
are  other  places,  called  Stakes  of
Zion,  but  they  will  be  round  about
the  city.  And  we  will  be  multiplied
by  hundreds  and  thousands  ;  and  we
will  build,  throughout  the  region
of  country,  our  meeting  houses,
our  school  houses,  oar  acade-
mies and  universities  ;  and  we  will
see  to  it,  that  all  of  our  children
have  equal  advantages,  as  far  as  !
possible,  of  becoming  acquainted
with  all  necessary  and  useful  learn-
ing. Not  as  it  is  now;  some  obtain
great  learning  ;  while  others  are
obliged  from  their  childhood,  from
the  time  they  are  six  or  eight  years
of  age,  to  work  to  that  exteu  t  that
they  cannot  devote  any  time  to  ac-
quire an  education.  This  order  of  i
things  will  be  remedied  ;  and  the  '
youth  of  God's  people  will  have
equal  opportunities,  to  develop  them-
|  selves  ;  not  that  they  will  all  gain


the  same  ideas  exactly  ;  not  that
they  will  all  advance  in  the  same
direction  in  education,  and  to  the
same  extent  One  perhaps  may
follow  a  certain  branch,  calculated  to
prepare  him  to  act  in  a  certain  posi-
tion in  his  future  life  ;  while  another
may  adopt  an  entirely  different
course  of  study,  by  which  he  could
be  of  benefit  to  Zion.  But  there
will  be  equal  privileges  and  bless-
ings bestowed  upon  the  Latter-day
Saints.

Now  about  these  stewards*  They
have  to  be  accountable  ;  and  if  they
gain  anything  in  their  stewardships
over  and  above  that  which  may  be
necessary  to  conduct  the  business
of  stewardships,  and  also  to  support
themselves,  if  there  be  a  surplus  of
means,  what  will  be  said  !  ^VlII  it
be  said  by  bishops,  "  Here,  brother
you  must  give  up  all  this  surplus  to
the  storehouse  of  the  Lord  f  It
might  be  said  to  one  to  unite  him
to  the  stewardship,  without  having
any  greater  means  to  extend  his
operations,  for  the  time  being  ;  and
again,  it  might  be  def  ined  wisdom
to  assist  another  to  the  amount  of
live,  ten,  twenty  thousand  dollars  or
so,  by  way  of  extending  his  branch
of  business,  because  in  doing  so  it
would  be  the  means  of  not  only
benefitting  himself  and  family  but
the  people  of  Zion  generally.

The  revelation  says  ;  They  shall
give  into  the  store- house  all  that  is
not  needed  for  the  support  of  the
needy  families."  In  this  way  the
Lord's  storehouse  will  be  full  and  in
great  abundance  ;  and  these  means
will  he  used  for  public  purposes,
and  also  by  way  of  providing  farm-
ing implements,  books,  etc.,  for  the
remnants  of  Joseph  who  will  come
into  the  covenant  in  those  days,
that  they  may  also  have  their
stewardships  in  the  midst  ot  the
people  of  God* There  will  be  a


PROGRESS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


153


portion  of  the  avails  of  these
stewardships,  that  will  be  consecra-
ted to  the  Lords  storehouse,  and
which  will  be  used  for  the  building
of  Temples,  and  for  beautifying
public  places  in  the  city  of  the  New
Jerusalem,  and  making  that  a  city
of  perfection  as  near  as  we  possibly
can.

Now,  there  will  be  this  difference
between  that  city  and  the  cities  and
Temples  which  are  being  built.
The  cities  and  temples  which  we  are
now  engaged  in  building,  we  expect
to  decay  ;  we  expect  the  rock  and
the  various  building  materials  will
in  time  waste  away,  according  to
natural  laws.  But  when  we  build
that  great  central  city,  the  New
Jerusalem,  there  will  be  no  such
thing  as  the  word  decay  associated
with  it ;  it  will  not  decay  any  more
than  the  pot  of  manna  which  was
gathered  by  the  children  of  Israel
and  put  into  a  sacred  place  in  the
ark  of  the  covenant.  It  was  pre-
served from  year  to  year  by  the
power  of  God ;  so  will  he  preserve
the  city  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  the
dwelling  houses,  the  tabernacles,  the
Temples,  etc*,  from  the  effects  of
storms  and  time.  It  is  intended
that  it  will  be  taken  up  to  heaven,
when  the  earth  passes  away.  It  is
intended  to  be  one  of  those  choice
and  holy  places,  where  the  Lord
will  dwell,  when  he  shall  visit  from
time  to  time,  in  the  midst  of  the
great  latter-day  Zion,  after  it  shall
be  connected  with  the  city  of  Enoch.
That  then  is  the  difference.

The  Lord  our  God  will  command
his  servants  to  build  that  Temple,  in
the  most  perfect  order,  differing  very
much  from  the  Temples  that  are
now  being  built.  You  are  engaged
in  building  Temples  after  a  certain
order,  approximating  only  to  a  celes-
tial order;  you  are  doing  tins  in
Salt  Lake  City. One  already  lias


been  erected  in  St.  George,  after  a
pattern  in  part,  of  a  celestial  order.
But  by  and  bye,  when  we  build  a
Temple  that  is  never  to  be  des-
troyed, it  will  be  constructed,  after
the  most  perfect  order  of  the  celes-
tial worlds.  And  when  God  shall
take  it  up  into  heaven  it  will  be
found  to  be  just  as  perfect  as  the
cities  of  more  ancient,  celestial
worlds  which  have  been  made  pure
and  holy  and  immortal.  So  it  will
be  with  other  Temples.  And  we,  in
order  to  build  a  Temple,  alter  a
celestial  order  in  the  fulness  of  per-
fection, will  need  revelators  and  pro-
phets in  our  midst,  who  will  receive
the  word  of  the  Lord;  who  will  have
the  whole  pattern  thereof  given  by
revelation,  just  as  much  as  every-
thing was  given  by  revelation  per-
taining to  the  tabernacle  erected  in
the  wilderness  by  Moses.  Indeed,
before  we  can  go  back  to  inherit  this
land  in  all  its  fulness  of  perfection,
God  has  promised  that  he  would
raise  up  a  man  like  unto  Moses.
Who  this  man  will  be  I  do  not
know ;  it  may  be  a  person  with
whom  we  are  entirely  unacquainted  ;
it  may  be  one  of  our  infant  children;
it  may  be  some  person  not  yet  born ;
it  may  be  some  one  of  middle  age.
But  suffice  it  to  say,  that  God  will
raise  up  such  a  man,  and  he  will
show  forth  his  power  through  him,
and  through  the  people  that  he  will
lead  forth  to  inherit  that  country,
as  he  did  through  our  fathers  in  the
wilderness.  Did  he  then  display  his
power  by  dividing  the  waters  I  Yes.
Did  the  mountains  and  land  shake
under  his  power?  Yes.  Did  he
speak  to  the  people  by  his  own
voice  I  Yes,  Did  he  converse  with
Moses  face  to  face  ?  Yes.  Did  he
show  him  his  glory  I  Yes.  Did  lie
unfold  to  him  in  onG  moment  more
than  all  our  schools  and  academies,
and  universities  could  give  us  in  ten


154


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


thousand  years  1  Yes-  God  will
assuredly  raise  up  a  man  like  unto
Moses,  and  redeem  hi*  people,  with
an  outstretched  arm,  as  their  fathers
were  redeemed,  at  the  first,  going
before  them  with  his  own  presence,
and  will  also  surround  them  by  his
angels.  I  expect,  when  that  time
comes,  that  man  will  understand  all
the  particulars  in  regard  to  the
Temple  to  be  built  in  Jackson
County.  Indeed,  we  have  already  a
part  of  tlit!  plan  revealed,  and  also
the  plat  explaining  how  the  city  of
Zion  is  to  be  laid  oft"  which  may  he
found  commencing  on  page  438,
Volume  14  of  the  Millennial
Star.  From  what  has  been
revealed  of  this  Temple  to  be  erected
we  can  readily  perceive  that  it  will
differ  from  any  tiling  that  we  have
had.  It  will  differ  in  regard  to  the
number  of  rooms  ;  it  will  differ  very
much  in  its  outward  and  also
its  inward  form ;  and  it  will
differ  in  regard  to  the  duties  to  be
performed  in  each  of  its  rooms  to  be
occupied  by  the  respective  depart-
ments of  priesthood*  This  house
will  l  e  reared,  then  according  to  a
certain  plan,  which  God  is  to  make
known  to  his  servant  whom  he  will,
in  his  own  due  time,  raise  up.  And
he  will  have  to  give  more  revelation
on  other  things  equally  as  important,
for  we  shall  need  instructions  how
to  build  up  Zion  ;  how  to  establish
the  centre  city  ;  how  to  lay  off  the
st  reets  ;  the  kind  of  ornamental  trees
to  adorn  the  sidewalks,  as  well  as
every  thing  else  by  way  of  beautify-
ing it,  and  making  it  a  city  of  per-
fection, as  David  prophetically  calls
it  m;

And  then  God  will  come  and
visit  it ;  it  will  be  a  place  where  he


will  have  his  throne,  where  he  will
sit  occasionally  as  King  of  Kings  and
Lord  of  Lords,  and  reign  over  his
people  who  will  occupy  this  great
western  continent ;  the  same  as  he
will  have  his  throne  at  Jerusalem,
"  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of
the  whole  earth  is  Mount  Zion,  on
the  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of
the  great  King."

And  again  he  says  :

"  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of
beauty,  God  hath  sinned."

Does  the  Psalmist  mean  that  God
will  shine  literally  out  of  Zion?
Yes,  shine  with  light  that  will  be
seen  by  the  righteous  and  the
wicked  also. S&e1&  **  — —

For  fear  of  taking  up  too  much  of
the  time,  I  will  bring  my  remarks  to
a  close.  I  will  say,  however,  I
desire  greatly  that  the  Lord  will
bless  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
bless  his  servants  that  some,  at
least,  may  have  the  pleasure  of
entering  into  all  the  perfection  of
this  glory,  here  in  this  temporal  life1;
while  the  more  aged,  the  grayhairded
and  gray  bearded  like  myself,  will
perhaps  pass  away,  if  the  Lord  re-
quires it,  And  that  our  sons  may
rise  up  after  us,  being  tilled  with  the
power  and  Spirit  of  God,  to  carry
out  his  great  and  righteous  purposes,
even  to  completion.

I  pray  God  to  bless  the  inhabi-
tants of  Logan  and  those  of  the
towns  round  about  in  this  valley,
and  throughout  all  our  mountain
regions  ;  and  that  his  peculiar  bless-
ings and  favor  may  continue  to
attend  us  while  we  so  journ  in  these
mountains,  and  go  with  us  when
Zion  shall  be  redeemed  in  all  its
fulness.  Amen,


HOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAINED,  ETC,  155


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  14th  Ward  Meeting  House,  Sunday  Evening,

December  7th,  1879.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


I rOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAINED — THE  GOSPEL  TO  THE  DEAD
—VARIOUS  DISPENSATIONS  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH  TO  MANKIND — POWER
OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD —  RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  THROUGH  JOSEPH
SMITH — FAILINGS  OF  THE  SAINTS — CORRUPTIONS  OF  THE  WICKED.


We  meet  together  from  time  to
time  to  speak,  to  hear,  to  reflect,  to
converse,  and  to  exchange  views  in
regard  to  the  worship  of  Almighty
God.  There  is  something  associated
with  these  matters  that  has  gene-
rally attracted  the  attention  of  the
human  family  in  all  ages,  among
all  peoples,  and  under  almost  all
circumstances.  There  is  and  always
has  been  a  feeling  of  reverence  exist-
ing among  the  human  family  for  a
Divine  Being  of  some  kind  and  of
some  form,  even  amongst  the  most
low  and  debased  people  of  t  he  earth.
The  position  that  we  occupy  in  the
world,  our  ideas  of  the  mutability
of  affairs  of  time  and  sense,  the
continuous  departure  of  one  after
another  from  this  stage  of  existence
to  another,  leads  us,  as  well  as  other
portions  of  the  human  family  gene-
rally, more  or  less  to  reflect  upon
those  things  pertaining  to  the  future.
Various  ideas  and  theories  have
existed  amongst  different  peoples.
Some  have  worshipped  a  great
variety  of  Gods  of  their  own  making,
while  others  have  followed  the
notions  and  theories  of  men  in
regard  to  certain  doctrines  formulas
theories  and  ideas  that  have  been


promulgated  among  what  would  be
termed  the  wise,  the  prudent,  and
the  intelligent  of  the  earth.  But  in
relation  to  religious  matters  there  is
no  one  can  have  any  true  or  correct
conception  of  a  hereafter  unless  it
has  been  revealed  by  the  Almighty,
who  alone  is  able  to  comprehend  the
end  from  the  beginning  and  is
acquainted  with  the  position  and
destinies  of  men  and  of  the  world.

We  have  had  revealed  to  us
from  time  to  time,  as  manifested  in
the  Scriptures,  developed  therein,
many  ideas  pertaining  to  God  and  to
futurity  ;  but  any  intelligence  in  re-
gard to  these  matters  was  generally
obtained  directly  from  the  Lord,  or
through  the  ministering  of  angels,
or  by  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  and  reve-
lation given  to  them  by  the  Al-
mighty. And  it  is  emphatically
stated  in  the  Scriptures  that  "  the
things  of  God  knoweth  no  man  but
by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  and  hence
when  men  assume  to  comprehend
principles  pertaining  to  futurity,
predicated  upon  the  learning,  the
wisdom,  the  intelligence  or  the
science  of  the  world,  they  are  always
very  much  at  fault  Who  can  com-
prehend the  Almighty or  under-


J u  i:  k  n  A I .  U  K U  IS  t'U  UK* ICS .


stand  his  designs?  As  one  of  old
said,  "  It  is  high  as  heaven."  What
can'st  thou  know?  " Deeper  than
hell"  Who  can  penetrate  its  myste-
ries ?  What  really  do  we  know  ?
To  commence  with,  who  can  under-
stand the  designs  of  God  in  relation
to  the  organization  of  this  world,  or
in  relation  to  the  position  of  man
and  his  destiny  1  His  past  opera-
tion s,  his  present  dealings  with  the
nations  and  his  designs  in  the
future,  to  the  uninspired,  are  all
a  profound  enigma.  Who  knows
anything  about  it]  We  find  all
kinds  of  theories,  notions  and
opinions  in  existence  at  the  present
day,  but  what  do  they  amount  to  ]
"What  would  my  unsupported  opinion
be  worth,  or  what  would  anybody's
opinion  be  in  relation  to  these
matters?  It  would  amount  to
nothing.  In  regard  to  other  princi-
ples, of  a  more  material  nature  that
we  are  intimately  associated  with,
there  are  certain  facts  that  scientists
and  men  of  intelligence  always  wish
to  be  demonstrated,  and  unless  they
are,  they  pay  very  little  attention  to
any  unsupported  hypothesis.  If  this
be  true  in  regard  to  the  known
sciences,  how  much  more  particular
should  we  be  in  regard  to  more
important  matters.  Theories,  hypo-
theses, notions,  dogmas  and  opinions
amount  to  very  little  when  associa-
ted with  the  great  and  eternal  prin-
ciples connected  with  the  welfare  of
mankind,  and  the  salvation  of  a
world.  And  hence  we  need  some-
thing higher,  something  of  more
intelligence  than  anything  that  man
possesses  to  give  unto  us  information
pertaining  to  these  matters.

When  God  created  the  world  and
placed  man  upon  it  he  had  certain
ideas  a:»d  designs  that  were  fixed,
im m u : able,  and  eternal,  they  were
based  or  predicated,  in  the  most  con-
summate wisdom;  the  most  profound


intelligence  ;  the  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence, if  you  please,  that  dwells
with  the  Gods.  The  organization  of
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  crea-
tion of  the  world  as  we  understand
it,  and  also  the  creation  of  man  and
beast,  fowl,  fish  and  insect,  and
everything  that  exists  upon  the  face
of  this  earth.  There  was  an  object
and  design  in  relation  to  all  these
matters*  We  could  know  nothing
about  that,  however,  unless  it  had
been  revealed  unto  us,  unless  it  had
been  communicated  by  the  being
who  knows  the  end  from  the  begin-
ning, and  who  comprehends  all
things  pertaining  to  the  present  con-
dition as  well  as  the  past  and  the
future  destiny  of  the  human  family
and  of  the  world

Certain  men  in  different  ages  have
told  us,  so  it  is  recorded  here  in  the
Bible,  about  certain  communications
which  they  had  from  the  Almighty.
They  seemed  to  have  a  mode -and
manner  *f  approaching  him,  and  he
in  the  various  dispensations  made
choice  of  and  selected  individuals
through  whom  and  to  whom  he
communicated  his  will  to  the  human
family.  There  is  something  very
remarkable  in  regard  to  these  thinus.
There  are  many  remarkable  things
in  the  old  antediluvian  history  of
the  world,  that  we  have  only  very
imperfectly  related  to  us  in  the
Bible.  We  read,  for  instance,  of  a
man  by  the  name  of  Enoch-Hire  are
told  in  the  Bible  that  -'.Enoch  walk-
ed with  God ;  and  he  was  not,  for
God  took  him."  That  is  about  all
that  is  said  about  hirn  except  that
he  was  a  man  that  feared
God.  But  Enoch,  when  we
come  to  know  more  of  his  history
from  the  revelations  that  have  been
given,  we  find,  was  a  man  that  had
communication  with  God  from  time
to  time.  The  Bible  says  he  walked
with  God  and  was  not,  for  God  took


HOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAISTED,  ETC*


157


him,  but  in  other  revelations  which
we  have  received,  we  have  an
account  of  the  kind  of  ministry  that
he  hud,  the  labors  that  he  performed
the  preaching  that  he  did,  the  mani-
festation of  the  power  of  God  on  his
behalf,  and  finally  of  his  gathering
together  a  large  number  of  people.
That  he  built  a  citv  ;  that  in  that
city  they  were  under  the  guidance,
direction  and  control  of  the  Al-
mighty ;  and  that  he  and  his  city  and
people,  or  many  of*  them,  were
translated,  and  hence  as  the  Hi  hie
say.-,  ("  he  was  not  for  God  took
him,1*  and  he  also  took  the  people
that  were  with  him,  those  that
feared  hiux  and  worked  righteous-
ness.

There  are  other  events  associate* I
with  these  matters  which  are  very
interesting  when  we  come  to  examine
them.  The  people  had  corrupted
themselves  very  much,  departed
from  the  law  of  Uod,  violated  his
ordinances,  and  committed  all  kinds
of  iniquity,  so  that,  as  the  Bible
tells  us,  all  the  thoughts  of  their
hearts  were  only  evil  and  that  con
tinually,  and  it  repented  the  Lord
that  he  had  made  man  because  of
the  wickedness  and  corruption  that
then  existed.  We  have  a  very
short  account  of  this  in  the  Scrip-
tures, but  through  other  means  that
have  been  communicated  to  us  we
have  received  a  further  knowledge
of  these  matters  ;  for  other  men  that
embraced  the  Gospel  in  former  ages
became  preachers  of  righteousness  as
well  as  Enoch.  They  had  the  Spirit  of
the  Gospel  as  Moses  had  it,  as  Jesus
had  it,  and  as  we  have  it.  They
held  communion  with  God  and  were
under  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty,  in  their  administration,
and  when  they  carae  together—
those  that  feared  God  and  worked
righteousness — they  had  visions  and
revelations  and  prophesied  of  events


that  should  transpire.  There  were
many  prophets  in  those  days  and
they  prophesied  of  a  prison  house
that  God  had  prepared,  told  the  peo-
ple of  the  destruction  that  was
coming  upon  the  earth  :  that  they
should  be  swept  off  the  face  of  the
earth  by  the  waters  of  the  flood  and
that  none  should  be  spared  except  a
few  to  perpetuate  the  name  and  fame
of  the  Almighty  and  again  propagate
their  species*  This  is  a  thing  that
has  seemed  very  singular  to  some
men  who  do  not  comprehend  the
designs  of  God.  and  they  suppose
that  there  was  a  degree  of  cruelty
attached  to  the  Almighty  in  sweep-
ing off  the  whole  penile  of  the  hind,
with  the  exception  of  a  very  few.
They  assume  to  say  there  was  a
degree  of  injustice,  cruelty  and
tyranny  associated  with  it.  How-
ever, that  is  for  want  of  an  under-
standing of  correct  principle,  and  the
designs  of  the  Almighty,  and  many
conclusions  that  people  arrive  at,
predicated  upon  the  same  ground —
arise  from  a  lack  of  understanding
the  principle  that  they  talk  about

There  are  some  principles  con-
nected with  these  things  which  put
matters  in  a  very  different  light
When  we  understand  the  nature  of
man,  when  we  consider  that  he  is
a  dual  being,  that  he  is  possessed  of
a  body  and  spirit,  that  he  is  associa-
ted with  time  and  with  eternity,
that  according  to  the  Scriptures  the
spirits  of  all  men  were  created  before
this  world  was  made,  and  that  God
is  the  God  and  Father  of  the  spirits
of  all  flesh  ;  and  being  God  and
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  it
was  his  right  and  his  prerogative  to
dictate  what  should  be  done  for  the
benefit  of  those  spirits  and  his
children  that  he  had  created  here
upon  the  earth.  It  was  not  a
matter  of  theory",  according  to  the
opinions  of  niem  but  an  immutable


plan,  according  to  theeternal  wisdom
of  God  as  it  existed  in  his  bosom
before  the  world  was,  or  "  before
the  morning  stars  sang  together  and
all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy/1
These  spirits,  that  he  was  the  father
of  had  their  rights  and  privileges
and  immunities  ;  and  as  he  had
created  man  upon  the  earth  or  pre-
pared a  tabernacle,  or  a  body,  if  you
please,  for  these  spirits  to  inhabit,  it
became  his  interest,  as  the  Father  of
the  human  family,  to  look  after
their  welfare.  They  had  been  led
aside  by  the  influence  of  Satan  and
had  corrupted  themselves  and
departed  from  correct  principles,
and  violated  the  law  of  God,  and
became  degraded  and  sunken  in
iniquity  and  infamy.  Now,  suppose
we  take  ourselves  back  into  the
presence  of  our  Father,  and  looking
down  upon  these  degraded  wretches
that  inhabited  the  earth  at  that
time,  would  we  not  turn  to  our
Father  as  a  just  God  and  say,
"  Father,  do  you  see  the  corruption,
the  degradation,  the  infamy  and  the
evil  that  exists  and  permeates  the
world  of  mankind  f  *'  Yes,  yes,  of
course  I  see  it."  "  Is  it  just  that
our  spirits  should  be  condemned  to
go  and  inhabit  the  bodies  of  these
men,  or  of  their  seed,  that  are  so
fallen,  so  degraded  and  so  corrupt,
and  whose  actions  and  operations  are
so  at  variance  with  thee  and  thy
laws  ?  Is  it  just  and  equitable  that
we  should  go  and  be  mixed  up  with
these  infamies  and  be  led  astray  like
them  into  the  paths  of  vice  and
suffer  for  things  that  we  have  not
done  and  could  not  help  ourselves
iii :  is  it  just  V  "Why,  no  it  is  not,
and  I  will  cut  them  off ;  and  as
they  possess  the  power  of  propa-
gating their  species  upon  the  earth,
I  will  stop  that  power  by  a  flood
and  raise  up  another  people,  that
justice  may  be  done  you,  my  sons


I  and  daughters,  ami  that  the  judge
of  all  the  earth  maj  do  right/'
When  we  look  at  things  in  that
point  of  view,  it  places  them  in  ano-
ther position  from  what  they  would
appear  otherwise,  and  justifies  the
ways  of  God  with  man.

'  Now,  when  this  event  took  place,
people  were  cast  into  the  pit,  into
the  prisons,  as  it  had  before  been
said  that  they  should  be.  Well,
what  about  that  ?  Trace  things  for-
ward to  the  time  that  Jesus  appears
upon  the  earth,  and  we  see  something
then  pertaining  to  these  very  individu-
als, in  the  acts  of  the  Almighty,  as  they
transpired  at  that  time.  When
Jesus  accomplished  his  work,  when
he  had  fulfilled  the  mission  that  lie
had  to  do  here  upon  the  earth,  and
when  he  was  put  to  death  in  the
flesh  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit,
lie  went  and  preached  to  the  spirits
in  prison  11  that  some  time  were  dis
obedient  when  once  the  long  suffer-
ing of  God  waited  in  the  days  of
Noah  and  although  they  had
suffered  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God,
lie  who  had  come  to  proclaim
deliverance  to  the  captive,  to  open
the  prison  doors  to  those  that  were
bound,  to  release  them  and  to  pro-
claim the  acceptable  time  of  the

,  Lord,  he  went  to  them  as  their
Savior,  in  common  with  others,  and
preached  the  Gospel  unto  them.
Hence  we  find  the  acts  of  God  jus-
tified in  relation  to  these  matters,
and  while  he  had  power  to  destroy,
while  he  had  power  to  send  them  to
prison,  he  also  had  power  to  con-
ceive a  plan  for  their  deliverance
therefrom,  when  the  time  should
come  that  they  should  be  delivered
after  they  had  suffered  sufficiently
for  the  crimes,  evils  and  iniquities
that  they  had  committed  upon  the
earth.  There  are  many  singular
tilings  associated  with  these  matters
that  men  do  not  really  comprehend.


HOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAINED,  ETC


159


Wo  come  again  to  another  promi-
nent character,  that  is  Abraham,  a
very  remarkable  man  in  his  day  and
age  ;  although  at  the  present  time
men  look  upon  him  as  a  kind  of  an
old  shepherd,  a  man  that  attended
flocks  and  herds  and  sheep,  a  sort  of
herdsman  and  a  shepherd  ;  and
there  w  as  very  little  of  him  anyhow
except  that  he  lived  in  his  day  al-
most as  a  barbarian.  That  is  the
opinion  that  many  men  have  formed
of  him- — that  he  was  something  like
our  backwoodsmen,  some  of  our
farmers  who  have  not  mixed  up
with  the  61ite  of  society,  or  made
themselves  familiar  with  the  intelli-
gence that  pervades  the  world,  I
look  upon  him  as  another  character
entirely,  and  from  information  that
we  can  gather  from  revelations  that
have  been  referred  to,  we  find  that
there  was  something  very  peculiar
about  him.  We  read  his  history
and  we  find  that  he  was  a  man  that
sought  after  right  ousness,  that  he
desired  to  obtain  more  righteousness,
that  he  examined  the  records  of  his
fathers,  that  he  found  in  examining
the  records,  tracing  them  back
through  the  flood,  clear  away  back
unto  Adam's  day,  he  found  many
circumstances  that  were  connected
with  mankind,  not  only  to  Adam's
day,  but  before  the  world  was.  In
doing  this,  among  other  things,  he
found  he  had  a  right  to  the  priest-
hood.  I  need  not  stop  to  tell  you
what  that  is,  you  Latter-day  Saints*
You  understand  it  is  the  rule  and
government  of  God,  whether  in  the
heavens  or  on  the  earth,  and  when
we  talk  of  the  kingdom  of  God  we  \
talk  of  something  that  pertains  to  !
rule,  government,  authority  and  do
minion ;  and  that  priesthood  is  the
ruling  principle  that  exists  in  the
heavens  or  on  the  earth,  associated
with  the  affairs  of  God.  Hence,  we
are  told  in  the  Scriptures  that  Christ


was  a  priest  forever  after  the  ordeT
of  Melchisedec.  Then  of  what  order
was  Melchisedec  ]  A  priest  for  ever
after  the  order  of  the  Son  of  God,
for  if  Christ  was  after  the  order  of
Melchisedec,  Melchisedec  must  have
been  after  the  order  of  Christ,  a>s  a
necessary  consequence.  Very  well.
Now,  then,  in  relation  to  that  priest-
hood it  wns  something  that  mini-
stered in  time  and  through  eternity  ;
it  was  a  principle  that  held  the  keys  of
the  mysteries  of  the  revelations  of
God,  and  was  intimately  associated
with  the  Gospel,  and  the  Gospel,
wherever  it  existed,  was  in  posses-
sion of  this  priesthood ;  and  it  could
not  exist  without  it.  It  always
"  brought  life  and  immortality  to
light,1'  The  notions  and  opinions
and  religions  of  man  generally  are
altogether  devoid  of  a  principle  of
that  kind,  they  know  nothing  about
it.  Whenever  men  are  placed  in
communication  with  God  and  are  in
possession  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  it  brings  life  and  immortality
to  light,  and  places  them  in  relation-
ship with  God  that  other  men  know
nothing  about.

They  were  spoken  of  in  former
times  as  the  "sons  of  God,"  "  Now
are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but
we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,
we  shall  be  like  him  :  for  we  shall
see  him  as  he  is,"  It  was  this  priest-
hood that  would  be  the  means  of
introducing  him  into  the  presence  of
God  that  Abraham  found  that  he
was  a  rightful  inheritor  of,  according
to  his  lineage  and  descent,  and  he
applied  for  an  ordination,  which  he
received,  according  to  the  revelation
given  unto  us,  and  with  that  ordina-
tion the  powers,  the  blessings,  the
light,  intelligence  and  revelation  as-
sociated with  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  And  what  then  %  The  next
that  we  read  of  is  that  he  had  the


160


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Urim  and  Thummim,  and  thus  lie
sought  unto  God  for  himself,  and
while  searching  unto  him,  God  re*
vealed  himself  unto  Abraham  and
said  :  14  I  will  bless  them  that  bless
thee,  and  curse  them  that  curseth
thee,  and  in  thee  shall  al!  families  of
the  earth  be  blessed.'1  There  is
something  very  remarkable  about
this  when  we  reflect  upon  it,  and
when  we  examine  the  position  that
he  occupied,  and  that  his  seed  occu-
pied, we  can  see  the  fulfillment  of
these  things.  Afterwards,  the  Lord
revealed  himself  to  him  from  time  to
time,  communicated  his  will  to  him,
and  hp  was  made  acquainted  with
the  designs  of  the  Almighty.  The
Lord  showed  unto  him  the  order  of
the  creation  of  this  earth  on  which
we  stand,  and  revealed  unto  him
some  of  the  greatest  and  most  sub-
lime truths  that  ever  were  made
known  to  man.  He  got  these  through
revelation  from  God  and  through  the
medium  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God

Well,  let  us  look  a  little  at  the
fulfillment  of  some  of  these  tilings.
"  1  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee ;
and  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the
earth  be  blessed/1  We  read  some-
time afterwards  of  Isaac  and  Jacob.
Jacob  had  communication  with  God.
The  Lord  appeared  unto  him  from
time  to  time,  and  revealed  his  pur-
poses and  designs  unto  him.  Abra-
ham prophesied  that  the  children  of
Israel  should  be  in  bondage  in  Egypt
for  400  years,  that  after  that  time
they  should  be  delivered ;  and  Moses
was  raised  up  as  a  deliverer  and  he
conversed  with  God.  He  saw  a  bush
that  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush
was  not  consumed.  He  afterwards
conversed  with  the  Lord  upon  mount
Sinai,  and  received  tables  of  stone
written  upon  by  the  finger  of  God,
which  were  the  commandments  of
the  Lord  to  the  children  of  Israel.


And  who  wras  Moses  ?  A  descend-
ant of  Abraham.

We  also  read  of  prophets  who,  by
the  spirit  of  inspiration,  could  draw
aside  the  dark  vail  of  futurity  and
penetrate  into  the  invisible  world,
and  contemplate  the  purposes  of
God  as  they  should  roll  forth  in  after
ages  in  all  their  majesty  and  power
and  glory.  And  who  [were  they?
They  were  the  seed  of  Abraham.
We  read  that  Jesus,  also,  who  was
the  Son  of  God,  was  born  of  the  seed
of  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh.
Who  were  His  apostles  1  The  seed
of  Abraham.  Then  there  were
Nephi,  Lehi,  Ishmael  and  others
who  came  from  the  land  of  Jerusa-
lem to  this  continent  according  to
the  Book  of  Mormon.  Who  were
they  ?  The  seed  of  Abraham.  There
were  also  the  Twelve  Apostles  called
and  set  apart  upon  this  continent,
who  went  forth  by  the  power  and
Spirit  of  God,  aided  by  intelligence
and  revelation  such  as  they  never
had  on  the  other  continent.  Who
w  ere  they  ?  The  seed  of  Abraham.
"  In  thee  shall  all  the  families  of  the
earth  be  blessed  " — not  cursed  ;  that
was  not  what  the  priesthood  of  God
was  introduced  for,  but  to  spread
light,  truth,  and  intelligence,  to  un-
fold unto  mankind  the  ways,  pur-
poses and  designs  of  God,  to  make
man  acquainted  with  his  origin,
his  position  in  life  and  hk  future
destiny ;  and  to  make  him
acquainted,  as  an  eternal,  intelligent
being,  with  things  past,  with  things
present,  and  with  things  to  come.
This  is  what  Jesus  taught  them  on
the  continent  of  America.  "It  is
expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away,
for  if  I  go  not  away  the  comforter
will  not  come  unto  you  f  which  is
the  Spirit  of  God.  And  what  shall
it  do  ?  It  shall  bring  things  past  to
your  remembrance.  You  shall  be
made  acquainted  with  the  actions


HOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAINED,  ETC,


161


of  the  ancient  principles  and
of  God  in  ages  that  have  pre-
ceded you,  It  shall  lead  unto  all
truth.  You  shall  comprehend  all
matters  that  are  necessary  for  you
to  know  by  the  light,  intelligence,
and  revelation  which  flows  from
God.  And  what  else  shall  it  do  I
It  shall  show  you  of  things  to  come.
It  shall  draw  aside  the  vail  of  the
invisible  world.  It  shall  make  you
acquainted  with  the  things  pertain-
ing to  eternity,  and  you  will  be
enabled  to  square  your  lives  accord-
ing to  the  eternal  principles  of
intelligence  as  it  dwells  in  tin*  bosom
of  God,  and  as  the  Holy  Ghost  will
make  known  and  reveal  unto  you.
It  is  this  priceless  treasure  that  is
spoken  of  that  we  possess  in  earthen
vessels  "  that  ye  are  came,"  says
Paul  in  his  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
11  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the
city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly
Jerusalem,  and  to  the  enumerable
company  of  angels.  To  the  gene  ral
assembly  of  the  first  born  which
are  written  in  heaven,  and  10  God
the  judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits
of  just  men  made  perfect  And  to
Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  cove-
nant  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,
that  speaketh  better  things  than
that  of  Abel."  This  is  what  the
Gospel  does  for  you.  it  brings  life
and  immortality  to  light

These  are  some  of  the  leading,
prominent  principles  as  they  have
existed  heretofore,  along  with  thou-
sands of  others  that  we  have  not
time  to  mention  or  touch  upon  this
evening.

Now,  we  will  come  to  other  events,
of  later  date ;  events  with  which  we
are  associated — I  refer  now  to  the
time  that  J oseph  Smith  came  among
men.  What  was  his  position  ]  and
how  was  he  situated?  I  can  tell
you  what  he  told  me  about  it  He
said  that  he  was  very  ignorant  of

No.  11.


the  ways,  designs  and  purposes  of
God,  and  knew  nothing  about  them;
he  was  a  youth  unacquainted  with
religious  matters  or  the  systems  and
theories  of  the  day.  He  went  to
the  Lord,  having  read  James'  state-
ment, that  "  If  any  of  you  lack
wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God  that
giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and
upbraideth  not  ;  and  it  shall  be
given  him."  He  believed  that  state-
ment and  went  to  the  Lord  and  ask-
ed him,  and  the  Lord  revealed  him-
self to  him  together  with  his  Son
Jesus,  and,  pointing  to  the  lattei,
said  :  "This  is  my  beloved  Soi:.  hear
him."  lie  then  asked  in  regard  to
the  various  religious  with  which  he
was  surrounded*  He  enquired
which  of  them  was  right,  for  he
wanted  to  know  the  right  way  and
to  walk  in  it.  He  was  told  that
none  of  them  was  right,  that  they
had  all  departed  from  the  right  way.
that  they  had  forsaken  God  the
fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hew-
ed them  out  cisterns,  broken  cis-
terns, that  could  hold  no  water.
Afterwards  the  Angel  Moroni  cai^e
to  him  and  revealed  to  him  the  Book
of  Mormon,  with  the  history  of  wlucb
you  are  generally  familiar,  and  also
with  the  statements  that  I  am  now
making  pertaining  to  these  things.
And  then  came  Nephi,  one  of  the
ancient  prophets,  that  had  lived
upon  this  continent,  who  had  an
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  people
that  he  had  lived  amongst  in  those

But  how  is  it  in  relation  to  these
people  and  in  regard  to  some  of
these  matters  1  Why  and  how
should  these  men  that  have  lived
here  upon  the  earth  have  anything
to  do  with  the  people  that  now  live
upon  it  ?  You  Latter-day  Saints
ought  to  be  acquainted  with  these
matters,  and  I  suppose  you  are  ;  but
I will show  one  or  two  princi-

Voh  XXL


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


pies  here  in  case,  peradveuturc,  there  1
may  be  those  present  who  have  not
thought  or  reflected  properly  upon
the  subject  The  Melchisedec  Priest-
hood, we  are  told  by  Paul,  is  without
beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years.
He  speaks  of  Melchisedec  as  a  man
"  without  lather,  without  mother,
without  descent."  Now,  he  would
be  a  very  singular  man.  according  to
our  idea  of  tilings,  without  father  or
mother,  without  beginning  of  days
or  end  of  year?,  but  it  was  the  priest-
hood of  which  he  *pake  in  contra-
distinction to  the  J  riesthood  of
Aaron.  He  was  then  among  the
Jews,  The  Jews  believed  in  the
Aarouic  priesthood  ;  but  they  knew
very  little  or  nothing  about  the  j
Melchisedec  priesthood,  and  a  man
to  he  a  priest  of  Aaron  must  be  a
literal  descendant  of  Aaron,  and  of
the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  he  must  be
able  to  prove  his  lineage  from  the
records,  But  in  contra  distinction  to
this  priesthood  there  was  the  priest-
hood of  Melchisertec,  hence  we  come
to  account  for  some  of  these  things
of  winch  I  have  been  speaking.
And  now  1  will  go  a  little  further  in
regard  to  this  matter.  I  fifid,  for
instance,  a  man  by  the  name  of
Moses  who  lived  at  a  certain  time  to
whom  I  have  referred,  I  find  ano-
ther man  by  the  name  of  Elijah,  who
was  a  great  prophet  and  who  had
great  power  with  God,  among  other
things  in  controling  the  elements,  in
shutting  up  the  heavens  and  in
again  opening  them  by  his  prayer  of
faith  under  certain  circumstances,
which  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  now
to  enter  into.  We  find  that  when
Jesus  was  here  upan  the  earth  he
ascended  a  mount  with  his  disciples,
Peter,  James  and  John,  and  there
appeared  unto  them  Moses  and
Elias,  in  great  glory.  Peter,  turning
to  Jesus,  said,  "Lord,  it  is  good  for
us  to  be  here,  if  thou  wilt  let  us  |


make  here  three  tabernacles,  one  for
thee  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for
Elias."  Now  then,  the  question
arises,  What  was  Moses  doing  here  I
What  was  Elias  doing  here  ?  Where
had  they  come  from  I  Why,  they
had  the  Gospel.  The  Gospel  is  an
everlasting  Gospel  as  spoken  of  in
the  Scriptures,  and  associated  with
that  Gospel  is  the  priesthood
that  administers  in  time  and  in
eternity.  And  Moses,  who  had
led  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  and  had  conversed
with  God  and  given  the  law  of  the
Lord  unto  the  people,  with
Elias  the  prophet,  who  was  also  a
man  of  God — the  Melchisedec  priest-
hood, which  held  the  keys  of  the
mysteries  of  God,  and  it  ministers  in
time  and  in  eternity.  Both  of  these
men  had  ministered  on  the  earth,
and,  holding  that  priesthood  in  the
heavens  thev  came  to  minister  to
Jesus,  and  to  Peter,  James  and
John,  upon  the  earth.  There  is
nothing  very  remarkable  about  that.

We  come  again  to  John  on  the
Isle  of  Patmos,  where  he  had  been
banished  because  of  his  religion.  I
du  not  know  whether  he  was  a  prac-
tical polygamist  or  not ;  but  his
religion  was  very  much  opposed  to
the  ideas  and  theories  of  the  people
in  that  day.  He  was  a  Christian
and  he  dared  to  fear  God  and  keep
his  commandments,  and  they  banish-
ed him  to  the  Isle  of  Patnios,  that
he  might  labor  amongst  the  slaves
there  in  the  lead  mines.  But  while
there,  being  in  possession  of  the
light,  the  truth,  the  intelligence  and
revelation  that  proceeeded  from  God,
he  gazed  upon  the  purposes  of  God
as  they  should  roll  forth  in  a  subse-
quent period  of  time,  and  he  con-
templated the  position  of  man  in  the
various  ages  of  the  world  unto  the
time  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth
|  should  pass  away ; when  there


HOW  A  KNOWLEDGE  OF


GOD  IS  OBTAIXTKD,  ETC.


1G3


should  "be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth  whereon  dwelt  righteousness.*'
He  gazed  upon  all  these  things  and
fell  down  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  to
worship  him,  whereupon  the  angel
said,  if  See  thou  do  it  not;  I  am  thy
fellow  servant,  and  of  thy  brethren
that  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  ;
worship  God,  for  the  testimony
of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy/' In  other  words  :  u  I  was
like  you  once,  on  the  earth,  perse-
cuted, cast  out,  condemned,  despised
had  every  kind  o-"  opprobrium  and
approach  cast  upon  me  ;  wandered
about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,
destitute,  afflicted,  tormented  ;
wandered  in  deserts  and  mountains,
and  dwelt  in  dens  and  caves  of  the
earth.  I  am  one  of  thy  fellow
servants  the  prophets,  I  have  fought
the  good  tight,  finished  my  course,  I
have  kept  the  faith,  I  was  true  to
my  covenants,  my  God,  and  my
priesthood,  and  I  come  now  to
minister  to  you."  Again  who  more
likely  than  Mormon  and  Nephi,  and
some  of  those  prophets  who  had
ministered  to  the  people  upon  this
continent,  under  the  influence  of  the
same  Gospel,  to  operate  again  as  its
representatives  ]  Who  more  likely
than  those  who  had  officiated  in  the
holy  Melchisedee  priesthood  to
administer  to  Josep  \  Smith  and
reveal  unto  him  the  great  principles
which  were  developed  I

Now,  then  what  has  he  revealed  1
Anything  new  ?  Why,  yes  ;  a  new
Gospel  ;  but  an  everlasting  Gospel,
What  is  it  that  John  said  he  saw  ?
4€  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the
midst  of  heaven  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  to  them
that  dwell  upon  the  earth,  and  to
every  nation,  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people,  saying  with  a
loud  voice,  fear  Go*:!,  and  give  glory
to  him,  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment


is  come."


Did  John  see  that  among


other  things?  Has  it  come  to  pass?
Yes,  it  has,  **  Anal  in  thee  shall  all
the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.*
Who  was  Joseph  Smith  1  The  Book
of  Mormon  tells  us  he  was  of  the
seed  of  Joseph  that  was  sold  into
Egypt,  and  hence  he  was  selected  as
Abraham  was  to  fulfil  a  work  upon
the  earth.  God  chose  this  young
math  He  was  ignorant  of  letters  as
the  world  has  it,  but  the  most  pro-
foundly learned  and  intelligent  man
that  I  ever  met  in  my  life,  and  I
have  traveled  hundreds  of  thousands
of  miles,  been  on  different  continents
and  mingled  among  all  classes  and
creeds  of  people,  yet  I  have  never
met  a  man  so  intelligent  as  he  was.
And  where  did  he  get  his  intelli-
gence from  1  Not  from  books ;  not
from  the  logic  or  science  or  philo-
sophy of  the  day,  but  he  obtained  it
through  the  revelation  of  God  made
known  to  him  through  the  medium
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  Now,
people  who  are  ignorant  of  these
things  are  ready  to  point  the  finger
of  scorn,  and  heap  contumely  and
reproach  upon  him  and  upon  others
who  dare  have  the  hardihood,  as
they  say,  to  express  the  same  kind
of  sentiments  that  he  did,  I  dare
do  it !  I  have  done  it  among  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  dare  do  it
to-day  before  any  man  or  any  set  of
men  that  the  world  can  produce,  and
[  defy  them  to  successfully  contro-
vert or  overturn  any  principle  that
God  lias  revealed  through  the  Gospel
of  the  Son  of  God  in  these  last  days!

But  could  Joseph  Smith  help
being  selected  of  God  1  There  is,
to  say  the  least  of  it,  an  intelligence
displayed  that  the  world  knows
nothing  of  Is  that  to  be  despised  ?
Is  that  to  be  regretted  1  Was  he  the
enemy  of  man  1  No  ;  no  more  than
Abraham  was  ;  no  more  than  the
prophets  were  ;  no  more  than  Jesus
was ;  but  could  Abraham,  or  the  pro-


phets  know  what  God  was  going  to
demand  of  them  1  No,  they  could
not.  And  if  tliey  could  not,  if  they
were  to  tell  a  truth  that  God  has
revealed  to  them,  would  their  tell-
ing it  make  it  a  falsehood  t  I  think
not.  It  was  an  unpleasant  thing  for
a  man  to  rise  up  and  tell  the  people
they  were  wrong.  To  go  to  our
divines — our  right  reverend  divines
— and  their  followers  and  tell  them
they  were  all  out  of  the  way  :  I
expect  they  would  be  no  more
satisfied  with  such  a  message  than
the  same  class  were  with  the  teach-
ings of  Jesus  when  lie  spoke  of  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees  and  called
them  livi*>erites,  like  unto  whited
sepulchres  which  appeared  fair  on
the  outride  to  men,  but  inwardly
they  were  nothing  but  rottenness
and  dead  men's  bones.  This  was
not  very  palatable  for  some  of  the
wise  of  the  Jews  and  some  of  the
leading  men  of  that  day  who  pro-
fessed such  a  great  amount  of  piety.
But  he  came  to  tell  them  the  truth,
not  to  speak  his  own  words  but  the
words  of  his  Father  who  sent,  him
and  to  communicate  those  great
principles  which  God  had  revealed
to  him.

Well,  now,  do  1  believe  that
Joseph  Smith  saw  the  several  angels
alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  him  as
described,  one  after  another  ?  Yes,
I  do.  Why  do  1  believe  it?  Be-
cause I  obeyed  this  Gospel  And
what  was  there  connected  with  the
obeying  of  it?  What  was  the
Gospel  that  he  taught?  Precisely
the  same  as  that  that  Jesus  and  his
disciples  taught  both  on  the  conti-
nent of  Asia  and  on  this  continent
What  did  he  do  ?  Why,  says  he  to
Ins  disciples:  "Go  ye  into  all  the
world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature."  Was  he  an  enemy
of  mankind?  I  think  not.  Go
unto  all  the  world  and  tell  them  of


the  love  of  God  to  man,  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  ereat ure,  and,  £  he
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall
be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  damned."  What  else?
u  And  these  signs  shall  follow  them
that  believe  ;  in  my  name  they  shall
cast  out  devils  ;  they  shall  speak
with  new  tongues.  They  shall  take
up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink  any
deadly  thing  it  shall  not  hurt  them;
they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sijk  and
they  shall  recover."  Here  was
something  practicable,  something
real,  something  intelligent,  some-
thing that  was  worthy  uf  a  God,
communicated  by  the  Sou  of  God
for  the  welfare  of  the  human  family.

What  have  we  now  ?  Ideas,
notions,  theories,  opinions,  hypo-
theses, and  all  the  various  confusion
of  ideas  and  notions,  but  no  man  to
say  "  thus  saith  the  Lord/*  They
used  to  say  u  thus  saith  the  Lord  ;*
they  had  the  word  of  God  for  the
people,  and  not  the  opinions  and
creeds  and  notions  and  fancies  of
men.

The  Lord  has  restored  the  same
Spirit  by  which  \w  know  of  the
truth  of  the  principles  declared  by
Joseph  Smith  and  by  others.  I
know  it  and  so  do  you,  many  of  you,
who  hear  me.  Was  it  an  injury  to
the  world  in  the  days  of  Jesus  for
his  disciples  to  go  and  proclaim  sal-
vation ?  I  think  not  Is  it  an
injury  to  the  people  to-day  for  us  to
proclaim  the  same  Gospel  to  the
world  1  I  think  not.  You  can  find
very  few  people  who  will  do  what
thousands  of  our  elders  have  done —
go  out  without  purse  or  scrip  to  pro-
claim the  glad  tidings  of  salvation,
things  that  they  not  only  believe  in
but  know  for  themselves  before  God
that  they  are  true-  go  out  the
friends  of  mankind  to  publish  the
same  Gospel  under  the  same
authority  that  others  had  in  former


ages,  Did  they  prosecute  and  per-
secute men  in  former  ages  ?  They
did*  Why  t  Was  it  because  they
were  wicked  and  corrnpt  1  No  ;  it
was  because  they  dared  to  tell  a
corrupt  world  that  God  had  spoken,
that  light  and  truth  had  been
revealed  from  heaven,  that  the  Son
of  God  had  appeared  and  that  if
they  would  repent  of  their  sins  and
be  baptized  tor  the  remission  of  them,
they  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
that  should  take  of  the  things  of
God  and  .show  them  unto  them.
That  was  the  doctrine  they  taught ;
that  is  the  doctrine  that  we  teach.
Is  tli ere  anything  very  remarkable
about  it?  Yes,  very  remarkable.
Is  there  a  people  that  dare  say  what
the  Elders  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
dare  say  to  the  world  ?  I  think  not.
What  have  these  elders  done,  many
of  whom  are  here!  Gone  to  the
ends  of  the  earth  without  purse  or
scrip  proclaiming  the  Gospel  of  the  ;
Son  of  God.  And  what  did  they
tell  the  people  to  dot  To  repent
and  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
their  sins  and  to  have  hands  laid
upon  them  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  and  you  do  the  same  j
you  baptize  them  when  they  believe
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of
the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost
And  what  does  a  name  mean  !
Power  and  authority,  Supposing  a
man  was  to  come  here  as  Governor
or  Secretary  or  holding  any  other
office  under  the  government  of  the
United  States  :  he  comes  in  the
name  of  the  United  States,  or  by  the
power  or  authority  of  the  United
States,  does  he  not?  Yes.  But
supposing  some  of  you  was  to  set
up  here  as  Governor,  they  would
want  to  see  your  credential*  and
know  by  what  authority  you  came
here  ami  whether  you  were  appoints
by  the  legitimate  authorities  of
the  United  States  or  not. If  not,


they  would  pay  no  attention  to  you ;
they  would  look  upon  you  as  a  very
common- place,  foolish  individual,
and  morever,  they  would  also  look
upon  you  as  a  fraud.  Well,  then,  if
'  God  does  not  send  men,  of  course
they  cannot  act  under  the  authority
of  God  ;  if  they  do,  they  act  fraudu-
lently.  Now,  how  can  men  go  in
the  name  of  God  when  they  tell  you
that  God  has  never  spoken  for  the
last  eighteen  hundred  years,  and
that  he  does  not  now  reveal  himself?
That  being  the  case,  how  then  can
they  go  forth  in  the  name  of  God  1
I  do  not  know  ;  it  is  a  mystery  to
me  ;  these  people  possess  some
mysteries  which  I  cannot  fathom,
and  that  is  one  of  them,  I  know  of
only  three  ways  of  obtaining  autho-
rity of  that  kind  one  is  by  lineal
descent,  another  by  writing,  and  a
third  by  speaking.  Now,  then,  if
we  can  find  no  record  among  the
people  who  profess  to  teach  in  the
name  of  God,  and  they  do  not  pro-
fess to  have  a  lineal  descent,  and
they  even  hold  that  God  has  not
spoken  for  eighteen  hundred  years
— they  place  themselves  in  a  very
awkward  position.  But  when  you
come  to  understand,  to  fully  compre-
hend the  priesthood  held  by  our
forefathers,  you  can  see  by  what
authority  the  Holy  priesthood  is
conferred  upon  you.  Well,  then,
where  did  you  get  this  authority
from— from  the  world  1  No,  the
world  did  not  have  it  to  give,  and
consequently  you  could  not  get  it
from  them;  and  if  God  has  not
spoken,  if  the  angel  of  Go  I  has  not
'  appeared  to  Joseph  Smith,  and  if
these  things  are  not  true  of  which
we  speak,  then  the  whole  thing  is  an
imposture  from  beginning  to  end.
There  is  no  half-way  house,  no
middle  path  about  the  matter  ;  it  is
either  one  thing  or  the  other.  Now
you  go  forth  to  the  nations  of  the


ICC


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


earth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  I
appeal  to  you  elders,  you  contradict
me  if  you  can— and  when  people
believe  and  have  been  baptized,  you
lay  your  hands  upon  them  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,  and  you  say  unto
them  "  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"
and  they  receive  it,  do  they  not?
They  do,  and  you  are  my  witnesses
of  that.  And  what  does  the  Holy
Ghost  do  1  It  takes  of  the  things  of
God  and  shews  them  unto  us.  Can
we  conceive  of  a  greater  principle,
of  one  more  majestic,  and  grand,
and  noble,  and  exalted.  What  is
man  ?  A  poor  feeble  worm  of  the
earth,  going  forth  in  the  name  of
God  to  call  upon  the  human  family
to  repent  and  be  baptized  for  a
remission  of  their  .sins,  and  after
the  name  of  God,  he  lays  his  hands
upon  their  head,  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  Who  gives  it?
God,  and  it  is  the  greatest  evidence
that  exists  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  earth  ;  no  men  anywhere  have
an  evidence  like  that  which  is  given
from  the  Almighty.  It  did  not
come  from  us,  it  did  not  come  from
Joseph  Smith,  though  he  was  the
medium  through  which  those  things
were  communicated  ;  it  did  not  come
from  Brighain  Young,  it  did  not
come  from  me  or  any  other  indiv-
idual j  it  comes  as  the  free  gift  of
God  according  to  the  eternal  laws  of
the  everlasting  Gospel.

Now,  then,  here  we  are.  We  find
ourselves  in  this  position,  having
entered  into  these  principles,  wt*
believe  in  them  and  are  willing  to  be
governed  by  them.

The  Lord,  however,  has  revealed
many  other  great  and  important
principles  to  us,  and  among  these
the  eternal  covenant  between  man
and  woman.  Did  Joseph  reveal
that  principle  ?  Yes,  he  did*  Do
you  know  itl  Yes,  I  do  know  it  ;
it  nobody  else  knows  it,  I  do.  Did


!  he  tell  you  of  it  ?  Yes,  he  did  ;  but
I  have  iiad  other  manifestations  be-
sides that,  and  therefore  I  know  of
what  I  speak,  and  I  know  the  prin-
ciple is  of  God.  Now  there  are
some  people  who  tell  us  we  are  very
wicked.  Are  we?  Why,  yes,  in
many  respects  we  are.  Hut  not  in
that !  not  in  that!  not  in  that!
Are  we  careless  i  Are  we  indiffer-
ent? Are  we  covetous  1  Do  we
love  the  world  more  than  we  ought
to  do,  and  allow  our  minds,  our  feel-
ings and  affections  to  be  carried
away  by  the  transitory  things  of
time  and  sense  ?  Yes,  yes,  to  our
sharne,  in  many  instances,  be  it
spoken  j  this  is  true.  Do  we  violate
in  many  instances  the  great  princi-
ples that  God  has  ivy  rah 'd  i  We
do,  to  our  shame  be  it  spoken,  many
of  us  ;  but  we  do  not  violate  the  law
of  God  nor  the  laws  of  chastity  in
that  thing.  Well,  what  are  we  to
do  ?  God  has  revealed  a  principle
to  us  ;  do  we  know  it  1  Yes.  Do  I
know  it  1  Yes.  Do  you  ?  Yes,
yes,  a  very  great  many  of  you  that
are  here  and  hear  me  speak  know  It
But  does  the  Congress  of  the  United
♦States  know  it?  No.  Does  the
Supreme  court  know  it  ?  No  ;  they
cannot  know  of  the  things  of  God
but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Do  they
know  anything  about  eternal  rela^
ti  on  ship  and  perpetuity  in  the  eternal
world  i  No,  they  do  not,  they  are
ignorant  of  the  principle,  they  know
nothing  about  it,  and  we  did  not
until  it  was  revealed  to  us.  Now,
then,  what  is  to  be  done  ?  They
place  us  in  a  position  like  this  ;  Mod
says  this  is  an  eternal  law  associated
With  the  eternal  perpetuity  of  lives
in  time  and  throughout  the  eterni-
ties that  are  to  come  ;  that  a  man
having  a  wife  must  have  her  sealed
to  him  for  time  and  for  all  eternity.
Why,  long  ago  we  have  heard  of  a
religion  to  live  by  but  none  to  die


HOW A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  IS  OBTAINED,  ETC*


107


by  ;  none  that  could  reach  to  the
other  side  of  the  vail  and  prepare  us
for  eternal  associations  and  eternal
lives  in  the  eternal  world,  or  eterni-
ties that  are  to  come.  But  this
principle  involves  that  thing  and
places  us  in  this  position  :  God  says
"  Go  and  obey  my  law."  Congress
say  "No,  you  shall  not  do  it."  Now
the  question  is— who  shall  we  obey]
We  would  like  to  be  in  accord  with
Congress.  We  would  like  to  sub-
mit  ourselves  to  every  ordinance  of
man.  We  would  like  to  be  good
and  peaceable  citizens,  which  we  are.
We  don't  wish,  however,  to  follow
their,  corruptions — don't  we  know
en oud i  of  them  ?  Yes,  we  do.  We
know  a  good  deal  more  about  them
than  they  know  about  us.  We  know
their  crimes,  we  know  their
licentiousness,  we  know  of  the
millions  of  murders  that  are  perpe-
trated by  mothers  and  fathers  of
children  and  they  know  it.  Many
of  these  murders  are  committed
while  the  children  are  pre-natal;
they  kill  them  either  before  or  after
they  are  born,  just  as  it  happens.
We  also  know  ot  this  horrible  social
evil  that  exists  among  them,  and  of
the  corruption,  degradation  and  rot-
tenness that  exist  in  their  midst*
And  as  I  have  said  to  some  of  them
sometimes,  4t  You  come  from  these
dens  of  infamy,  reeking  with  corrup-
tion and  rottenness,  steeped  in  crime
and  bloodshed  and  you  will  come
here,  will  you,  and  teach  morality  to
us  1  (Jo  home,  attend  to  your  own
business,  cleanse  yourselves  from
your  corruptions,  for  they  are  a
stink  in  the  nostrils  of  Jehovah,  and
of  all  honest  men,  and  don't  come  to
set  us  right  in  regard  to  things  that
God  has  given  us  to  do,  and  which


with  the  help  of  the  Lord  we  will
carry  out."

Now,  these  are  our  feelings  in
relation  to  these  matters.  This
Gospel  reveals  to  us,  as  it  did  in
former  days,  the  light  and  intelli-
gence of  God.  It  opens  up  the
visions  of  eternity;  it  places  us  in
communication  with  the  Lord,  It
prepares  us  lor  lite  and  tor  death
and  for  exaltation,  and  we  are  going
to  go  on  with  our  temples1"  anil
at  1  minister  in  them  in  the  name  of
the  LonL  We  shall  enter  therein
and  be  baptized  for  t he  living  and
the  dead  and  statu  I  as  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion,  and  let  the  world  wal-
low in  corruption  and  follow  the
evil  desires  of  their  hearts,  let  them
pursue  their  own  course,  fighting,  if
they  please,  against  the  Zion  of  our
tiod,  but  the  Lord  will  he  after  them
and  they  will  know  before  they  get
through  that  there  is  a  God  that
rules  m  the  heavens  and  lie  will  say
to  them  as  he  did  to  the  waves  of
the  mighty  deep,  u  hitherto  thou
shall  come  but  no  further,  and  here
shall  thy  proud  waves  he  stayed/'

What,  then,  shall  we  do  t  Fear
God,  be  faithful,  be  honest  and  up-
right ami  full  of  integrity  and  truth*
fulness  ;  shun  evil  of  every  kind,
preserve  our  bodies  and  spirits  pure,
maintain  our  covenants  before  God?
ami  he  will  smile  upon  us,  he  will  be
on  the  side  of  right,  and  his  king-
dom will  grow  and  increase  and
spread  until  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of
onr  God  and  his  Christ,  whose  right
it  is  to  rule  tor  ever  and  ever.

May  God  help  us  to  lie  faithful  in
keeping  his  commandments  that  we
may  be  saved  in  his  kingdom,  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


168


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUKSKS


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  In  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

Septembek  ^Iht,  1879,


( ' Ilrjnirfetl  hff  John  Irnne.)


THE  liUOK  OF  MUKMON  AN  AUTHENTIC  ItKt'Uim


If  the  congregation  will  give  their


attention,  I  will  read  a  portion  of
the  won  I  of  God,  given  in  the*e  last
days,  dated  March,  1829 — a  portion
of  revelation — through  the  Prophet,
and  Seer,  and  Revel  at  or,  Joseph
Smith,  in  Harmony,  Susquehanna
County,  Pennsylvania,  a  little  over
one  year  he  fore  the  rise  of  this
Church,  commencing  with  the  I Oth

verse :

"But  tin*  generation  shall  have
my  word  through  you  ;  and  in  addi-
tion to  your  testimony,  the  testimony
of  three  of  mv  servants,  whom  I
shall  call  and  ordain, — unto  whom  1
will  show  these  things  ;  and  they
shall  go  forth  with  my  words  that
are  given  through  you  ;  yea,  they
shall  know  of  a  surety,  that  these
things  are  true,  for  from  heaven  will
I  declare  it  unto  them.  I  will  give
them  power  that  thev  mav  behold
and  view  these  t lungs  as  they  are,
and  to  none  else  will  I  grant  this
power,  to  receive  this  same  testi-
mony, among  this  generation,  in  this
the  beginning  of  the  rising  up  and
the  coming  forth  of  my  Church  out
of  the  wilderness:  clear  as  the  moon,
and  fair  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as
any  army  with  banners.  And  the
testimony  of  three  witnesses  will  I
send  forth  of  my  word  ;  and  behold


whosoever  beUeveth  on  my  word,
them  will  I  visit  with  the  manifest-
ation of  my  Spirit,  and  they  shall  be
born  of  me,  even  of  water  and  of  the
Spirit.  And  you  must  wait  yet  a
little  while,  for  ye  are  not  yet  or-
dained j  and  their  testimony  shall
also  go  forth  unto  the  condemnation
of  this  generation,  it  they  harden
their  hearts  against  tliem ;  for  a
desolating  scourge  shall  go  forth
amom;  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
and  shall  continue  to  be  poured  out
until  the  earth  is  empty,  and  the
inhabitants  thereof  are  consumed
away  and  utterly  destroyed  by  the
brightness  of  my  corning.  Behold,
I  tell  you  these  things,  even  as  I
also  told  the  people  of  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  and  my  word  shall
be  verified  at  this  time  as  it  hath
hitherto  been  verified."

Fifty  two  years  shall  have  passed
to-morrow  since  the  Lord  permitted
his  holy  angel  to  descend  from  heaven
and  commit  into  the  care  and  charge
of  Joseph  Smith,  a  young  man,
plates  which  had  the  appearance  of

He


old,  filled  with  engravings.


obtained  these  plates  on  the  22nd
day  of  September  in  the  year  1827,
being  then  not  quite  twenty-two
years  of  age.  This  young  man  was
not  learned,  like  those  educated  in


THE  BOOK  OF

colleges  and  theological  institutions ; !
indeed,  he  was  a  fanner's  boy,  unac-
quainted with  the  arguments,  and
the  tenets,  and  the  creeds,  and  the
institutions  of  religion  that  existed
around  him,  except  what  he  had
heard  from  time  to  time,  in  the
neighborhood  where  his  father  resid-
ed ;  a  young  man  not  versed  in  the
Scriptures  any  more  than  most  of  the
common  lads  of  that  age.  And  we
all  know  that  there  are  but  a  very
few  anions  farmers  that  have  the
opportunity  of  informing  their  minds
at  so  early  a  period — at  the  age  of
twenty-one — in  regnrd  to  the  doc-
'  trines  and  prophecies  contained  in
the  Scripture.

You  may ?  some  of  you,  wonder,
perhaps,  why  the  Lord  should  select
an  instrument  of  this  kind  ;  why  he
did  not  take  a  person,  more  qualified
by  education,  more  experienced  in
the  doctrines  taught  among  the
human  family,  more  conversant  with
the  Bible.  You  perhaps,  may  think
in  your  own  mind  that  if  you  had
had  the  selection  of  the  individual  to
begin  the  work  of  the  establishment
of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth
in  the  last  days,  and  you  had  follow-
ed the  best  wisdom  you  had  on  the
subject,  that  you  certainly  would
have  selected  a  person  well  trained
and  skilled  in  the  different  doctrines
of  the  day.  But  the  Lord  does  not
see  as  man  sees,  his  thoughts  are  not
like  our  thoughts,  neither  are  his
ways  like  our  ways.  Hence  he  chose
a  man  unconnected  with  any  of  the
religious  societies  ot  the  day — un-
taught in  the  Scriptures  and  doctrines
of  the  different  religious  denomina-
tions— he  selected  a  man  of  his  own
choice,  as  lie  had  frequently  done  in
former  ages  of  the  world*

We  alt  recollect  the  selection  that
the  Lord  made  in  relation  to  David,
when  he  was  called  to  be  king  of  the
House  of  Israel,  and  anointed  for


i

MORMON,  Era  169i

that  purpose.  There  were,  I  think,
seven  brethren  older  than  Davit], —
men  of  fair  appearance,  men  of  ex-
perience,—men  that  probably  their
neighbors,  their  acquaintances,  would
have  selected  either  one  of  them  in
preference  to  the  youth  that  was
tending  the  sheep.  But  Samuel,
being  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  when
these  certain  brethren  came  up  before  *
him,  said  :  i4  The  Lord  hath  not
chosen  him,"  and  continued  to  say
so  until  all  the  seven  had  passed  by,
and  then  the  inquiry  was  made,  "  Is
there  not  another  V  im  Why*  yes,
there  is  a  hoy  ;  but  he  is  keeping  his
fathers  sheep/'  l<  Send  and  fetch
him"  said  the  Prophet  Samuel  He
was  brought  in, — he  was  goodly  to
look  upon,  but  lie  was  simply  a
youth,  untrammelled  with  the  tradi-
tions around  him.  but  yet  an  honest-
hearted  boy.  The  Lord  chose  him,
the  anointing  oil  was  poured  upon
his  head,  and  he  was  appointed  to  be
the  future  king  of  Israel

Now,  the  Lord  did  not  have  any
prophets  in  the  year  1S27  on  all  the
face  of  the  earth*  There  was  no
Samuel  existing,  no  person  who  had
the  spirit  of  prophecy  ;  consequently
the  Lord,  instead  of  sending  a  Sam-
uel sent  an  ansel  to  make  the  sek*c-
tion.  This  angel  committed,  as  I
have  always  said,  the  plates  of  the
Book  of  Mormon,  together  with  the
Urim  and  Thumtnim,  into  the  hands
of  this  youth,  and  also  gave  him  many
instructions  informing  him  that  he
must  be  very  strict  in  keeping  the
commandments  of  (iod,  and  that  he
must  do  with  these  plates  as  he  was
counseled  from  time  to  time,  not  to
shew  them  to  everybody  that  might
wish  to  see  them,  hut  was  strictly
forbidden,  by  the  angel,  to  shew  them
unto  any  person  until  the  Lord
should  give  him  commandment  so  to
do.  He  translated  these  plates  un-
learned as  he  was. And  now  let  me


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ask,  would  you  naturally  expect  that
if  he—  this  unlearned  youth — did  this
by  his  own  wisdom,  that  it  would
agree  with  the  Jewish  record  in  nil  I
the  doctrines  taught,  or  said  to  be
taught  in  tin*  translation  ot  this  re-
cord ?  Would  it  be  reasonable  to
export  that  this  unlearned,  inexperi-
enced youth  could  be  able  to  sit  down
and  in  a  very  short  period  of  time
translate  a  book  two-thirds  as  long  as
the  Old  Testament,  without  contra-
dicting himself  in  some  way  \  Would  it
be  reasonable  to  suppose  or  to  conclude  i
that  he  would  get  all  the  doctrines,
contained  in  that  Hook  of  nearly  (iUO
pages  to  agree  in  every  respect  with  1
the  ancient  Gospel  as  it  was  j
taught  in  the  New  Testament,  especi-
ally when  there  were  several  thou-
sand different  notions  in  regard  to
that  doctrine '?  \\V  could  not  expect
any  such  thing,  The  more  inex-
perienced a  man  is  the  less  qualified
he  is  to  write,  by  his  own  human
wisdom,  and  get  into  proper  shape,
a  history  said  to  extend  over  a  thou-
sand years  or  a  little  more — a
history  commencing  with  the  colony
that  came  from  Jerusalem  to  this
continent,  down  until  the  records
were  sealed  and  hid  in  the  earth — a
thousand  years'  history  of  a  nation,
of  two  nations  that  were  opposed  to
each  other,  of  their  war*  and  their
travels  to  and  fro  upon  a  large  con
tinent,  like  ours— we  would  natu-
rally expect  that  a  young  man,  so
inexperienced,  would,  by  his  own
human  wisdom,  get  that  country
awfully  muddled  up  as  regards  places,
as  regards  the  location  of  cities,  and
location  of  countries.  We  won  hi
naturally  expect,  1  say,  such  contra-
diction to  occur  in  the  writings  of  an
unlearned  youth.

But  what  is  still  more  marvellous,
is  the  piophetic  portions  of  this  re-
cord, called  the  Book  ot  Mormon.
It  is  lull  of  prophecies  from  the  open-


ing of  the  record  unto  the  closing
thereof.  Predictions,  not  only  con-
cerning events  that  took  place  after
this  colony  left  Jerusalem,  during
GOO  years  before  Christ,  predictions
that  were  to  take  place  down  to  the
coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,
but  predictions  that  were  to  be
fulfilled  after  the  first  coming  of
Christ  down  until  the  end  of  time*
The  book  is  full  of  these  predictions.
Would  you  not  naturally  expect
therefore,  could  you  look  for  any
other  thing  than  that  an  inexperi-
e  1 1  eed ,  unlet  te  red  y  o  i  \  ng  m  ai  \ ,  u  n  read
in  prophetic  history,  should  contra-
dict himself  in  different  parts  of  the
record  ;  speak  of  an  event  on  one
occasion  and  forget  and  speak  of
something  quite  different  on  ano-
ther? Then  again,  where  did  you
find  a  young  man,  unacquainted
with  the  Jewish  record,  that  could
make  all  these  predictions  and  pro-
phecies coincide  with  the  ancient
prophecies  of  the  Jews  II  Would  it
be  likely  that  he  could  do  so  by  his
own  wisdom  ?  I  think  not,  All
these  things,  therefore,  so  far  as  the
history  is  concerned  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  so  far  as  the  prophetic
writings  are  concerned  in  this  late
record,  so  far  as  the  -doctrinal  parts
of  that  Book  are  concerned,  it  is  a
marvel  in  the  age  in  which  we  live;
it  is  a  marvel  in  my  eyes  ;  but  per-
haps my  eyes  are  not  constituted  as
the  eyes  of  others.  To  me,  however,
it  is  one  of  the  greatest  marvels  of
the  age,  I  am  familiar  with  this  ;
and  1  have  lead  it,  perhaps,  more
carefully  than  any  other  man  that
has  ever  lived  in  this  generation,
and  probably  ten  or  fifteen  times
more  than  any  other  man  has  done.
Why,  when  1  was  a  boy,  21  years  of
age,  1  had,  for  the  two  years  during
my  first  acquaintance  with  the  book,
read  it  so  much  that  I  could  repeat
over  chapter after chapter,  page


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC,


171


after  page,  of  many  portions  of  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  could  do  it
just  as  well,  with  the  Book  closed  or
laid  to  one  side,  as  I  could  with  the
Book  open  ;  and  T  have  continued  to
read  it  from  that  day  down  to  the
present,  without  finding  one  contra-
diction in  the  book.  I  have  read
the  comments,  I  have  read  the
writings  of  our  greatest  opposers
who  have  undertaken  to  examine  the
book  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,
I  have  tried  to  follow  their  argu-
ments, in  relation  to  the  contents  of
this  book,  but  I  have  never  unto  the
present  day — and  it  is  forty -nine
years  since  I  became  acquainted
therewith — been  able  to  find  one
contradiction  in  the  whole  work

Can  we  say  as  much  concerning
the  Jewish  Bible  in  the  present  state
of  its  existence  1  What  is  the  great
fault  found  by  the  oppose rs  to  the
Jewish  Bible.  The  infidel  says,
*  We  do  not  believe  it,  because  it
apparently  contradicts  itself  in
doctrine,  in  history,  and  in  many
other  portions/'  And  tin*  Christian
undertakes  to  read  it,  he  undertakes
to  show  that  these  are  not  contra-
dictions :  but  with  the  arguments  of
the  Christian  on  the  one  side,  and
the  infidels  on  the  other,  in  relation
to  the  Bible,  it  is  confessed  by  the
generality  of  mankind  that  there
are  many  contradictions,  not  original
contradictions,  but  contradictions
that  have  been  introduced  into  the
record  since  it  was  originally  given,
—  int  roduced  by  the  wisdom  of  man,
or  rather  by  the  wickedness  of  man.
But  does  the  Book  of  Mormon  con-
tradict the  teachings  of  the  present
day  I  Yes.  There  is  a  great  differ-
ence between  the  Book  of  Mormon
and  modern  Christian  religion  ;  but
there  is  no  difference  between  that
book  and  ancient  Christianity.  We
may  hunt  the  wide  world  over,
amongst  some  400  millions  of  Chris-


tians, so  called,  and  search  deeply
for  a  complete,  and  good,  and-
thorough  understanding  of  their  doc-
trines, and  when  we  have  made  our-
selves thoroughly  acquainted  with
them,  take  up  the  Book  of  Mormon,
compare  their  doctrines  with  this
Bible  of  ancient  America,  and  there
is  a  great  difference,  a  fundamental
difference,  not  a  trifling  difference,
but  a  difference  that  lies  at  the
foundation.  It  is  the  same  when  we
come  to  compare  these  modern  doc
trines  of  Christendom  with  the  doc-
trine taught  in  the  New  Testament,
Where  can  w  e  find  a  man  who  can
reconcile  the  two  ?  Or  the  thousand
if  you  please?  Who  is  able  tu  show
that  the  New  Testament  proves  and
sets  forth  clearly  the  ancient  doc-
trine of  the  Gospel  i  There  may  be
now  and  then  an  item  which  each
denomination  has  tu  accordance  with
the  New  Testament  ;  but  where  is
the  authority  which  lies  at  the  foun-
dation of  Christianity?  Where  is
t  lie  man  among  all  the.se  400
millions  of  Christians  t  hat  is  a  reve-
lator,  that  is  a  prophet,  or  is
inspired  of  God?  He  cannot  lie
found  and  yet  the  ancient  Christian-
ity, recorded  in  the  Ihble  advocates
that  great  gift  a.s  one  that  lies  at
the  foundation  of  Christianity.
Christianity  is  built  upon  it,
built  upon  Je*us,  who  was
the  great  revelator  of  the  Church,
and  built  upon  apostles  who  were
also  revelator?,  as  well  as  Jesit£,  and
who  received  their  revelations  by
the  gift  ami  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  by  inspiration  as  men  of  God,
Can  you  find  Mich  an  order  of  things
in  Christendom  'J  Do  any  profess
to  have  thcse^ gifts  ]  They  say  that
they  are  unnecessary  ;  they  say  that
these  gifts  were  intended  for  the
first  age  of  Christianity,  but  when
Christianity  was  orce  established
these  high  gifts  were  no  longer


17^


JUL UN  A  h  OK  mscoUKSKiS.


necessary.  This  is  their  argument
almost  as  one.  They  seemed  to  be
agreed,  however  much  they  may  be
oppose  !  in  other  points  of  doctrine —
they  all,  almost  without  an  exception,
seem  to  be  agreed  that  there  is  no  need
of  these  high  gifts  of  inspiration,  and
prcphecy,  and  new  revelation  that
accompanied  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel  in  ancient  times.  "  The
Gospel  is  established,"  say  they ;
"we  have  no  need  of  it"  As  much
as  to  say  that  these  gifts  are  no  part
of  the  Gospel;  that  the  Gospel  is  one
thing  and  the  gif  ts  are  another  ;  that
the  Gospel  was  established  by  the
evidence  of  the  gifts,  but  the  gifts
are  no  part  of  the  Gospel  They  are
as  much  a  part  ot  it  as  faith  ;  just  as
much  a  part  of  the  Gospel  as  repent-
ance, as  baptism  for  the  remission  of
sins,  or  as  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  j  and  to
undertake  to  separate  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel,  and  then  call  some-
thing else  the  Gospel,  does  seem  very
absurd,  very  inconsistent,  and  is
something  that  cannot  be  proved
from  the  divine  record.  Now,  here
is  soinethini:  that  is  of  minor  import-
ance, something  that  is  not  particu-
larly necessary,  that  might  be  called
non-essential,  but  something  that
lies  at  the  very  foundation  of  Chris-
tianity. These  gifts  are  a  portion  of
Christianity.  Revelation,  inspiration
and  the  gift  of  prophecy,  are  part
and  portion  of  the  Gospel  as  taught
by  the  ancient  apostles  and  men  of
God,  and  by  our  Savior  ;  and  to  do
away  with  these  gifts  destroys
the  fundamental  principles  of  Chris-
tianity.

What  does  the  Book  of  Mormon
advocate  1  It  comes  directly  in  con*
tact  with  all  modem  'Christendom,
and  goes  back  to  the  old  Gospel  as  it
was  taught  nearly  1SQ0  years  ago,  and
maintains  that  there  must  be  in  the
kingdom  and  Church  of  God,  iu


every  age  of  the  world,  these  gifts
as  well  as  outward  forms  and  cere-
monies,— maintains  that  these  gifts
are  a  part  of  the  ancient  Gospel  and
must  exist  wherever  the  Gospel
exists,  —  and  when  they  cease  the
Gospel  ceases  to  be  preached,  and
true  believers,  in  a  Scriptural  sense,
cease  to  exist  with  them,

Now,  it  does  not  seem  likely  to
me,  that  a  young  man  whose  beard
had  scarcely  grown — a  youth  untu-
toivd,  untaught  in  the  sectarian  no-
tions ot  the  day,  brought  up  to  labor
hard  on  his  farmer's  farm,  should  be
able  to  make  these  great  distinctions,
to  come  out  in  opposition  to  all  mo
dern  systems  of  religion,  and  estab-
lish the  very  fundamental  principles
that  are  necessary  to  the  very  exist-
ence of  Christianity  in  the  last  days.
Bat  God  was  with  that  young  man.
He  was  not  his  own  teacher,  lie  was
not  left  to  his  own  judgment  in  re-
gard to  what  Christianity  should  be
and  what  it  should  not  be.  The
angel  that  came  from  heaven  and
revealed  himself  to  the  youth  un-
derstood his  mission.  lie  understood
what  the  Gospel  was  and  should  be;
he  understood  the  revelations  of  St,
John  ;  he  understood  that  these
revelations  never  could  be  fulfilled
unless  an  angel  were  sent  from  hea-
ven in  the  last  days,  with  the  mes-
sage of  the  Gospel  to  be  proclaimed
unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
not  to  a  sectional  portion  of  it,  not
to  some  comer  of  it,  or  to  some  ob-
scure people,  but  to  commit  the
everlasting  Gospel  unto  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth,  to  be  proclaimed
to  every  nation,  kindred,  tongue
and  people.  He  understood  the  dif-
ference between  modern  Christianity
and  ancient  Christianity.  And  when
the  Urim  and  Thu minim  was  light-
ed up  by  the  power  of  God,  and
magnified  before  the  eyes  of  this
youth,  those  ancient  characters  upon


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC


173


the  plates  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,
the  distinction  was  clearly  made,  be-
tween the  purity  of  the  Gospel  as  it
was  taught  in  ancient  days,  and  the
doctrines  and  innovations  of  man  as
have  been  taught  during  many  long
centuries  of  apostasy.

How  I  have  rejoiced,  since  I  was
a  youth  of  nineteen,  in  this  record  !
\\  hy  I  esteem  it, — I  was  going  to
bring  up  some  earthly  comparison,
but  I  will  not  compare  great  and
glorious  and  heavenly  tilings, — so
great,  *o  pare  and  so  important,  as
that  of  the  plan  of  salvation,  with
anything  of  an  earthly  nature,  as
there  can  not  really  b  any  com  parison.
When  1  look  at  all  the  earthly  riches
and  grandeur  of  this  world,  and  then
look  at  the  Book  of  Mormon  and  the
Bible,  with  power  to  select,  which
should  I  choose  ?  Why,  the  grand-
eur of  this  world,  the  riches  of  this
world,  the  glories  of  this  world,
would  be  nothing;  they  would  be
like  the  dream  of  a  night-vision  when
a  person  is  disturbed,  not  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  but  by  his  own  co-
gitations in  the  night.  I  would  look
upon  them  as  nothing,  as  vanity  and
foolishness,  as  unworthy  of  the  love
or  approbation  of  any  man  of  God,
were  they  tQ  be  set  before  me  and
contrasted  with  the  glory  of  this
book.  It  is  a  record  given  to  this
generation  as  one  of  the  choicest
gifts  of  heaven  !  No  other  books
exist  upon  the  face  of  our  globe  so
choice  as  the  books  which  God  has
given  in  different  ages  of  the  world  i
the  Bible  for  one,  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon for  another,  and  the  book  called
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
containing  the  revelations  which  God
gave  through  Ms  servant  the  pro-
phet, during  some  seventeen  of  the
la^t  years  of  his  existence  here  upon
the  earth.  These  revelations,  these
books  are  more  precious  than  the
riches,  and  kingdoms,  and  glories,


and  honors  of  this  present  life,  so  far
as  I  am  concerned.  Do  I  esteem
them  more  than  I  do  my  own  life?
I  would  be  unworthy  of  my  Father
and  my  God  in  the  eternal  worlds  if
I  would  refuse  to  lay  down  my  life,
if  it  were  required  of  me  of  the  Lord.
If  I  should, save  it  for  a  moment,
and  deny  the  Book  of  Mormon  ;  if
1  were  to  deny  the  gifts  of  the  Gos-
pel, or  any  of  the  revelations  that
God  has  given — that  are  published
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants— if  I  were  to  do  such  a  thing,
too  Id  1  look  upon  my  Father's  face
without  blushing  f  could  I  think
upon  God  without  blushing?  could
I  think  upon  anything  that  w;ls  pure
and  holy,  without  being,  in  my  own
mind,  in  perfect  torment  ?  If  I  were
to  be  so  ungrateful  as  to  deny  any-
thing that  God  has  given  me,  I
should  be  unworthy  of  the  kingdom
of  God.  I  do  most  sincerely  and
humbly  hope  and  trust  that  the  Lord
will  not  call  me  and  try  me  in  this
respect,  for  I  know  the  weakness  of
man  ;  I  know  that  man  has  been
weak  in  all  ages,  and  I  do  not  wish
to  be  thus  tried,  1  do  not  covet  this
trial,  I  do  not  pray  for  it  j  but  if
ever  I  should  be  brought  to  this
condition,  with  my  present  feelings,
with  the  feelings  I  have  had  for  a
great  many  years,  I  would  say  :
"Come  martyrdom,  come  burnings
at  the  stake,  come  any  calamity  and
affliction  of  the  body,  that  may  be
devised  by  wicked  and  ungodly  men
— let  me  choose  that,  and  have  eter-
nal life  beyond  the  grave  ;  but  let
me  not  deny  the  work  of  God.11
Why  do  I  thus  feel  1  If  I  had  not  a
knowledge  that  the  Book  of  Mormon
was  true,  I  should  not  have  these
feelings.  Then  I  should  probably
say,  it"  I  only  had  faith  that  the
Book  of  Mormon  is  true,  "  My  life
is  precious,  let  me  save  ray  life,
let  me  deny  something  which  I  do


174


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


not  know  is  true."  But  when  a
person  has  a  knowledge,  as  I  have,
of  the  divinity  of  •  his  work, — having
this  revealed  to  me  when  I  was  but
a  beardless  hoy — 1  hope  never  to  be
brought  in  thai  con  lit  ion,  where  the
trial  will  he  upon  mo,  bat  should  it
come  I  hope  to  be  able  to  lift  up  my
hands  to  high  heaven,  and  say,  "Oh
Lord  enable  me  to  endure  the  trials
and  afflictions  that  may  come,  that  I
may  he  faithful  unto  death."

Am  I  the  only  one  that  feels  in
this  way,  among  the  Latter-day
Saints  1  Are  there  no  other  per-
sons that  have  this  knowledge,
excepting  your  humble  servant  ?
Yes,  there  are  scores  of  thousand,  if
they  testify  the  truth,  and  I  have  no
reason  to  think  that  they  would
falsify  their  word ;  scores  of  thou-
sands who  know  as  well  as  they
know  they  have  an  existence,  that
the  Book  of  Mormon  is  a  divine
record  j  that  the  Bible  is  a  divine
record  ;  that  th<*  revelations  given
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
published  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  are  divine ;  they
know  it.  Would  they  be  willing  to
suffer  martyrdom  f  I  think  they
would.  There  might  be  individual
cases,  as  in  ancient  times,  where
they  might  reject  the  truth,  lose
their  hopes  of  salvation,  to  save
their  temporal  lives  ;  but  take  the
great  mass  of  this  people,  they
would  be  willing  to  lay  down  their
lives,  or  be  burned  at  the  stake  be-
fore they  would  reject  their  religion.

How  kind,  how  good  was  our
Heavenly  Father,  before  the  rise  of
this  Church,  after  he  had  inspired
this  boy  to  translate  these  records  ;
how  good  it  was  to  send  an  angel
from  heaven  to  three  other  persons,
namely :  David  Whitmer,  Martin
Harris  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  Joseph
Smith  beiug  with  them  on  the
occasion. The angel  descended


from  heaven,  clothed  with  light  and
glory,  and,  taking  these  records  in
his  hands,  turned  them  over  leaaf
after  leaf,  showing  to  these  three
other  men,  besides  the  translator,
the  engravings  on  the  plates.  How
kind  this  was.  A  Church  was  to  be
raised  up.  The  Lord  was  willing
that  they  should  have  all  the  evi-
dence that  they  could  reasonably
ask  for,  before  even  the  first  branch
of  the  Church  was  organized.  Did
he  condescend,  in  many  of  the  past
ages  of  the  world,  to  do  so  much  for
the  different  generations  that  have
lived,  as  he  has  done  for  the  present
generation  1  Look  at  the  days  of
Noah.  He  had  a  message  to  deliver
— a  message  that  affected  the  human
family.  He  had  to  tell  the  people
that  were  living  around  him  that
God  had  spoken.  "  And  what  has
God  said  f  He  has  told  me  that
because  of  your  wickedness  he  will
send  the  floods  upon  you.  He  will
break  up  the  foundations  of  the
great  deep,  he  w  ill  open  the  windows
from  on  high  and  he  will  pour  out
the  floods  upon  these  nations  antl
they  will  be  swept  away  root  and
branch,  except  a  few  that  will  believe
in  my  message,  and  come  into  the
ark  that  I  am  building.  How  many
witnesses  did  God  raise  up  then?  I
expect  he  must  have  revealed  him-
self to  the  sons  of  Noah,  as  well  as
to  Noah.  That  would  be  but  four
witnesses  ;  but  we  have  no  account
that  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to
these  three  sons.  They,  however,
believed  the  testimony  of  their
father  ;  whether  they  knew  it  or  not
we  do  not  know.  At  any  rate  their
faith  was  sufficiently  strong  to  cause
them  to  labor  with  the  old  man,  and
they  labored  along  year  after  year,
weary  no  doubt>  in  forming  the  tim-
bers of  this  huge  ark  or  vessel
Finally  they  got  it  fixed  together,
and  the  beasts  of  the  field — that


appeared  to  have  more  inspiration
than  the  men  and  the  women  of
that  age,  began  to  come  from  the
forests  towards  the  ark,  and  finally
the  door  was  closed.  They  must
have  been  prophetic  beasts,  beasts
that  had  revelations,  beasts  that
were  able  to  judge  far  better  than
the  world  of  mankind  in  that
age.  The  rains  descended,  and
the  earth  was  covered  with  the  flood,
and  we  read  that  Noah  by  his  testi-
mony condemned  the  whole  world.
What  I  One  witness  i  One  witness
alone  condemned  t  he  whole  world,
and  they  perished  from  off  the  face
of  the  earth,  because  one  witness
was  sent  unto  them  !  The  Lord  has
done  a  little  better  with  this  genera-
tion. He  sent  four  witnesses  before
he  organized  the  Church,  and  that
was  not  all.  There  were  other  men
that  had  great  testimony  and  evi-
dence given  to  them ;  but  they  did
not  see  the  angel ;  they  did  not  see
the  plates  in  the  hands  of  the  angel ;
but  what  did  they  see?  They  saw
this  boy  have  these  plates.  They
took  the  plates  and  handled  them
themselves.  They  saw  the  engra-
vings upon  these  plates — eight  other
men,  besides  the  four  I  have  men-
tioned— and  they  testify  to  what
they  saw.  They  hear  witness  in
words  of  soberness,  that  they  did
handle  the  plates  with  their  own
hands,  that  they  did  feel  the  weight
of  the  plates,  that  they  did  observe
the  engravings  thereon,  that  they
had  the  appearance  of  ancient  work
and  of  curious  workmanship,  and
they  bear  testimony  to  what  their
eyes  saw  and  to  what  they  handled
with  their  hands.  Their  names,  as
also  the  names  of  the  four  that  saw
the  angel,  were  attached  to  this  re-
cord, when  the  first  edition  of  that
book  was  issued  from  the  press.
Twelve  witnesses  then  did  God  con-
descend to  raise  up  immediately


before  he  organize;!  this  Church,
Are  not  twelve  witnesses  sufficient
to  condemn  the  world  in  this  age,  if
one  witness  condemned  the  world  in
the  days  of  Noah  ?  I  think  that
(}od  has  been  very  lenient,  very  kind
and  very  merciful  in  beginning  the
work  with  so  many  witnesses.

But  there  seem  to  be  other  wit-
nesses and  evidences  concerning  the
correctness  and  divinity  of  this  book
that  are  far  greater  than  those  I
have  named.  There  is  a  promise  to
all  the  human  family,  that  is  far
better  than  the  ministrations  of  an-
gels to  others.  What  knowledge
does  it  give  to  me,  to  yon,  to  any
other  person,  among  all  the  nations
and  kindreds  of  the  earth,  concerning
the  divinity  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,
because  four  witnesses,  that  lived  in
some  portion  of  our  globe,  state  that
an  angel  had  come  from  heaven  ?
Does  that  give  me  a  knowledge?  No.
Did  that  impart  a  knowledge  to  any
other  creature  on  the  face  of  the
globe?  No.  Ditl  we  not  need  a
knowledge  as  well  as  they?  Yes.  1
have  a  soul  as  well  as  these  four  men
that  must  be  saved  or  must  be  tost.
If  that  be  the  ease,  ought  I  not  also
to  have  a  knowledge  concerning  my
safety  as  well  as  they  1  I  think  *o.
Has  the  Lord  made  it  impossible  for
me  to  obtain  this  knowledge  ?  No,
The  very  message  itself  in  the  book,
and  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in
the  modern  revelations  that  are  given
through  the  prophet,  told  me,  told
you,  told  all  the  people  upon  the  face
of  this  earth,  how  they  also  might
obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  of
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  of  this
work.  How  i  By  getting  a  vision
or  manifestation  from  that  same
Ged  1  No.  That  we  should  all
have  the  ministration  of  angels  ?
No.  To  some  is  given  one  gift,  and
to  some  are  given  other  gifts.  To
some  it  is  given  to  know  in  one  way,


I7G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


gels  ?


and  to  some  it  is  given  to  know  in
some  other  way.  The  Lord  has  pro-
mised that  if  I  will  repent,  if  you
will  repent,  if  the  people  of  the
United  States  will  repent,  if  the
people  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth
will  repent,  turn  unto  him  and  obey
his  commandments  that  they  should
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  Will  that
give  us  a  knowledge  as  clear,  as
definite,  as  pointed  as  could  be
revealed  by  the  ministration  of  an
Yes*

Supposing  now  that  I  were  a
natural  man,  never  had  received  the
Holy  Ghost.  Supposing  that  a  per-
son should  come  and  testify  to  me
that  he  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost,
that  ht-  had  received  Heavenly
visions,  that  the  Lord  had  sent
angels  to  him,  what  would  I  know
about  it?  What  would  I  know
about  the  Holy  Spirit,  if  I  never  had
received  it  ?  No  man  can  discern
the  things  of  God,  but  by  the  Spirit
of  God  ;  so  says  the  Apostle  Paul  to
the  Corinthians,  It  is  impossible
for  the  natural  man  to  know  the
things  of  God,  and  if  I  were  a
natural  man,  and  had  never  partaken
of  the  Holy  Ghost  I  might  hear  a
cloud  of  witnesses  testifying  to  what
they  had  received  1  might  say,
"  Well  you  seem  a  sincere  people,
you  seem  to  be  honest  in  your  decla-
rations, you  say  you  have  had  the
visitation  of  angels,  you  say  you  had
heavenly  visions,  you  say  the  Holy
( ! I  host  has  been  poured  out  upon  you,
but  1  have  never  received  these
things  as  a  natural  man/'  Now
what  reason  would  there  be  to  con-
demn me  on  the  great  judgment  day,
if  I  rejected  their  testimony  ?  They
would  tell  me  that  I  might  be  put
in  communication  with  the  heavens
the  same  as  they.  They  might  tell
me  that  on  certain  conditions,  I
might  obtain  the  Holy  Ghost,  as
well  as  thej,  if  I  would  only  exercise


sufficient  faith,  to  repent  of  my  sins
and  to  be  baptized  for  a  remission  of
them,  and  to  have  the  servants  of
God  lay  their  hands  upon  my  head
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost;
that  if  I  would  enter  into  a  covenant
with  the  Most  High  God,  to  obey
his  commandments  and  to  call  upon
his  name  in  faith,  and  to  exercise
faith  before  him — I  expect  if  I  did
not  do  all  these  things,  that  all  this
cloud  of  witnesses  that  I  have
named,  would  stand  upon  the  day  of
judgment  and  would  condemn  me.
But  if  1  would  exercise  faith  though  I
had  no  knowledge,  and  would  obey
the  commandments,  would  be  obedi-
ent to  the  principles,  and  then  I
received  for  myself  the  testimony,
I  should  then  be  dependent  neither
upon  David  Whitmer,  Martin  Harris
nor  Oliver  Cowdery,  Joseph  Smith,
nor  any  of  the  twelve  witnesses  that
saw  the  plates,  nor  ar$-  other  man
living  on  the  whole  earth.  I  could
then  say,  "Oh  Lord,  my  God,  thou
hast  fulfilled  thy  promise  which  thou
hast  made.  Thou  hast  said  if  I
would  repent  and  be  baptized  I
would  receive  such  and  such  bles-
sings. They  have  been  given  unto
me,  and  now  I  know  that  thy  word
is  true."  And  from  that  forth  I
could  be  a  witness  myself,  but  before
that  I  could  not  be  a  witness.

Are  the  ministers  of  the  different
denominations of  this dav,  who

mi  *

have  never  had  the  spirit  of  revela-
tion upon  them — are  they  competent
witnesses  of  God  to  stand  before  this
generation  and  declare  the  things  of
God?  No.  Can  they  stand  up  in  the
great  judgment  day  and  condemn
any  of  this  generation  to  whom  they
have  preached?  No.  Why  not?
From  the  very  fact  that  they  are
not  witnesses.  They  can  tell  what
the  ancients  say,  how  the  ancients
became  witnesses,  but  they  them-
selves have  not  an  experience  in


THE  BOOK  OF

these  things,  and  therefore,  God  has
not  made  them  witnesses.  They
cannot  condemn  any  man  living  on
the  face  of  the  earth,  by  their  preach-
ing and  their  testimony.

We  are  living,  then,  in  the  great
and  last  dispensation,  in  which  God
has  provided  a  way  that  he  might
raise  up  scores  of  thousands  of  wit-
nesses, a  way  that  all  might  knmv
as  Peter  did,  Peter  did  not  get  his
knowledge  from  seeing  miracles
wrought.  He  did  not  obtain  his
knowledge  because  some  other  man
had  received  a  knowledge.  The
Savior  blessed  him  and  said,  A*  Bles-
sed art  thou ,  Simon  Barjoua,  for
flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it
unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is
in  heaven.5'  Tin-  Lord  had  revealed
this  knowledge  unto  Peter,  conse-
quently Peter  was  constituted  a
witness.  And  so  the  Lord,  by
having  given  revelation  from  the
heavens  to  scores  of  thousands  of  t  he
Latter-day  Saints,  has  made  them
witnesses  of  the  divinity  of  this
work.

O,  how  the  Latter-day  Saints
ought  to  rejoice  !  How  faithful  we
all  ought  to  be  !  How  frivolous  are
the  things  of  this  present  life,  com-
pared with  the  knowledge  of  God,
which  you  have  received  !  Do  you
appreciate  this,  Latter-day  Saints?
Do  you  realize  it  as  you  ought  to,  or
are  your  minds  swayed  to  and  fro  by
the  frivolities  and  vanities  of  this
present  life  I  Do  they  absorb  the
greater  portion  of  your  attention  ?
Do  you  forget  your  God,  the  great-
ness of  your  calling,  and  the  know-
ledge which  you  have  received  %  I
have  not.

I  believe  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  the  very  best  people  on
the  face  of  our  globe.  Why  ?  Be-
cause they  have  been  willing  to  en-
dure hardships,  persecutions  all  the
day  long. They  have  been  willing

No.  12.


MORMON,  ETC.  177

to  leave  their  houses,  their  lands,
their  possessions,  have  been  willing
to  see  all  fall  into  the  hands  of  their
enemies  and  flee  to  a  desert  country
for  the  sake  of  their  religion.  Has
God  forgotten  all  these  things  ?  O,
ye  children  of  Zion  !  do  you  suppose
that  the  Lord  has  forgotten,  because
many  years  have  passed  away,  your
tribulation,  your  sacrifices — if  they
can  be  called  such — your  mobbings
and  persecutions  in  times  that  are
past  1  No.  They  are  written  as  it
were  on  the  palms  of  his  hands,  they
are  printed  indelibly  upon  the
thoughts  of  his  heart.  He  lias  all
these  things  in  remembrance  and  a
day  of  controversy  is  coming,  arid  it
is  uot  far  in  the  future — a  contro-
versy for  Zion  ;  a  controversy  with
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  that
fight  against  Mount  Zion— the  Lord
has  all  these  things  in  his  mind,  and
he  will  fulfil  them  in  his  own  duo
time  and  season.  But  now  is  the
day  of  our  tribulation  and  has  been
for  some  forty  years  and  upwards
that  are  past.  Are  there  better
days  to  come  \  Yes.  How  far  in
the  future  I  am  not  prophet  enough
to  know.  All  that  I  do  know  is
that  they  are  nigh,  near  at  the  very
door,  when  the  Lord  will  rise  up
and  come  forth  out  of  his  lading
place  and  fulfil  that  which  he  has
spoken  concerning  Zion  and  the
inhabitants  of  this  land.  Zion  is
•  not  destined  to  be  crushed  down
forever  into  the  dust.  Zion  is  not
destined  to  be  overcome  by  the  king-
doms of  this  world  forever.  The
turning  point  will  come,  and  that  is
nigh  at  hand.  The  days  are  coming
!  — I  know  they  are  close  at  hand —
when  the  young  and  rising  genera-
tion that  are  now  sitting  in  this  con-
gregation, and  who  are  spread  forth
upon  the  face  of  the  laud,  through*
out  these  mountains  and  valleys
will  see  the  turning  point  for  Zion.

Vol  XXL


IT-


JOURNAL  OF  D1SCOUKSKS


What  will  they  see  ?  They  will  see
a  mail  raised  up  like  unto  Moses  in
days  of  old — a  man  to  whom  the
Lord  will  reveal  himself,  as  lie  did
to  his  servant  Moses,  by  angels,  by
visions,  by  revelation  from  the  hea-
vens, and  will  give  unto  him  com-
mandments, and  make  him  an  instru-
ment in  his  hands ?  to  redeem  the  !
people  and  to  establish  them  in
their  everlasting  inheritance  upon
the  face  of  this  American  continent
Will  he  show  forth  his  power  in
that  day  as  he  did  unto  his  servant
Moses  and  to  Israel]  Yes,  only
more  abundantly,  more  extensively
than  in  the  days  of  Moses,  for  there
is  a  larger  continent  than  the  land
of  Egypt,  in  which  the  Lord  will
make  manifest  his  power— a  greater
people  than  the  Egyptians,  among
whom  he  will  work*  Consequently
he  will  show  forth  his  power  unto
all  the  inhabitants  of  this  land.  He
will  fulfil  the  plain  predictions  of
the  Prophet  Isaiah  that  the  Lord
shall  make  bare  his  arm  in  the  eyes
of  all  the  nations,  until  all  the  fends
of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation
of  God.  What  will  be  said  then
concerning  tliis  people  and  Zion?
It  will  then  be  said  by  those  that
are  spared  in  the  midst  of  the  terri-
ble judgments  that  will  fall  upon
these  nations, "  Surely  the  people


called  Latter-day  Saints,  the  people
of  Zion,  are  the  people  of  our  God,
God  is  there,  his  power  is  there,  it
is  his  power  that  delivers  that  people;
it  is  his  power  that  is  over  them  as  a
cloud  by  day  and  the  shining  of  a
flaming  fire  by  night.  It  is  his
power  that  protects  their  congrega-
tions, protects  their  settlements,
protects  their  holy  temple.  Let  us
no  longer  fight  against  Zion  or  the
people  of  God,  let  us  enter  into  the
everlasting  covenant  which  has  been
revealed  anew.  We  will  join  our-
selves with  the  people  of  God,"  In
that  day  will  be  fulfilled  that  which
has  been  spoken  by  Isaiah  in  the
second  chapter,  by  the  prophet
Micah,  in  the  four  chapter,  that  in
the  last  days  many  nations  shall  say:
"  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the
mountain  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house
of  the  God  of  Jacob;  and  he  will
teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will
walk  in  his  paths,  for  out  of  Zion
shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  w&rd
of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.0

May  God  bless— not  the  wicked,
not  the  ungodly,  not  those  that
blaspheme  the  name  of  the  Lord,
not  those  that  fight  against  Zion —
but  all  the  true,  pure  hearted  Latter-
day  Saints,  is  my  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen*


SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION.


179


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN  MORGAN,

Delivered  In  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

May  23rd,  1880,


( Reported  by  John  Irvine. )


SOUTHERN STATES  MISSION.


I  am  pleased  to  have  once  more
the  privilege  of  meeting  with  the
Latter- day  Saints,  and  I  trust  that
while  I  shall  endeavor  to  address
you  1  shall  have  an  interest  in  your
faith  and  prayers,  that  what  I  may
say  may  he  in  accordance  with  the
mind  and  will  of  our  Father  in
heaven  and  for  our  mutual  good  and
benefit.

To  an  elder  returning  home  from
missionary  labors  the  privilege  of
meeting  with  the  assemblies  of  the
Saints  in  their  Sabbath  day  meetings
is  one  that  is  very  highly  prized*
We  feel  to  rejoice  in  the  privilege  of
returning  to  these  peaceful  valleys
of  the  mountains,  and  of  listening
to  the  voice  of  the  servants  of  God
teaching  the  principles  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  and  explaining  the
mind  and  will  of  our  common
Father  and  God  in  the  heavens.  I
have  often  thought  and  meditated  in
regard  to  this  privilege  when  ajvay
from  home  traveling  in  the  midst  of
strangers,  that  when  here  we
scarcely  prize  and  realize  the  value
of  it.  And  doubtless  this  is  true  in
regard  to  very  many  of  the  great
and  glorious  principles  of  the  Gospel.
We  must  see  the  opposite,  come  in
contact  with  the  opposite  ;  we  have


to  taste  the  bitter  before  we  can
appreciate  the  sweet  ■  we  have  to  see
and  experience  the  condition  in
which  the  world  is  to-day  to  appre-
ciate the  situation  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  in.

During  the  past  year,  since  last  I
had  the  privilege  of  meeting  with
you  here,  I  have  been  engaged  in
preaching  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel in  the  United  States,  more
particularly  in  the  Southern  States.
Our  labors  there  have,  to  a  greater
or  less  extent,  been  crowned  with
success.  The  Lord  has  opened  up
our  way.  We  have  been  enabled  to
reach  many  of  the  honest  in  heart,
and  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
have  been  spread  by  the  preaching
of  the  elders,  and  by  the  distribution
of  books  and  pamphlets,  until  many
thousands  of  people  in  that  section
of  the  country  to-day  are  becoming
acquainted  with  the  principles  of
the  Gospel,  who,  twelve  months  ago,
although  possibly  aware  that  there
were  such  a  people  as  the  Latter-
day  Saints  in  the  valleys  of  the
mountains,  were  ignorant  in  regard
to  the  doctrines  that  they  professed
to  believe  in.  I  find  that  within
the  past  twelve-months  quite  a
change  has  taken  place  in  the  senti-


180  JOURNAL  OF

ments  and  minds  of  the  people  in
the  Southern  States  relative  to  the
principles  that  we  promulgate-  1
form  my  judgment  in  regard  to  this
from  their  actions,  and  it  is  said
they  speak  louder  than  words.
Something  like  twelve  months  aeoa
spirit  of  persecution  and  moboeraey
was  prevalent  throughout  a  great
portion  of  the  South,  brought  about,
to  a  great  extent,  by  inflammatory
articles  in  the  newspapers,  misrepre-
senting us  and  our  objects,  and  the
denunciations  hurled  at  us  from  the
pulpit  and  from  almost  all  directions,
which  resulted  in  the  mobbing  of  a
number  of  the  elders  and  the  driving
from  their  homes  of  quite  a  number
of  hi  n  lilies  who  had  embraced  the
Gospel  in  their  native  land.  In
one  particular  instance  an  entire
branch  of  the  Church  was  driven
from  their  homes,  lost  their  pro-
perty and  their  means  and  were
forced  to  rely  upon  the  generosity  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  already  gather-
ed to  the  valleys  of  the  mountains
here  to  enable  them  to  emigrate  to
where  they  could  live  in  peace  and
safety.  This  character  of  opposition
was  very  violent,  very  unpleasant  to
meet  with,  very  unpleasant  to  have
to  deal  with,  but  by  the  blessing  of
God  and  the  perseverance  of  the
elders,  the  obstacles  were  overcome,
our  work  was  pushed  forward,  and
very  many  right-thinking,  honor-
able men  and  women,  while  not  con-
ceding with  us  in  a  religious  sense,
came  out  and  refuse  to  endorse  the
action  of  men  who  were  using  viol-
ence, came  out  in  the  press,  in
private  conversation,  in  public,
speech,  and  stated  that  while  the
Latter-day  Saints  might  be  wrung,
the  course  that  was  being  taken  was
undoubtedly  wrong,  that  whatever
the  nature  and  character  of  their
doctrines  might  be,  mob- violence,
persecution,  and  unauthorized,  ille-


discouhses.

gal  prosecution  was  not  a  proper
means  of  over  coming  the  difficulty.
Even  the  editors  of  many  of  the
Southern  papers  conceded  that  the
course  that  was  being  pursued  was
most  unwise,  and  would  have  a  ten-
dency to  bring  dozens  of  converts  to
the  "Mormon"  doctrines  where
there  had  been  one  before,  which
proved  true,  as  our  labors  have  con-
tinually increased  and  grown,  our
ii umbers  have  beon  a? hied  to,  and
the  spirit  of  emigration  to  gather
out  to  where  they  could  be  protect-
ed in  their  religious  belief  has
grown  stronger  day  by  day,  until  we
scarcely  need  to  preach  in  the
Southern  States  the  principle  of
emigration,  so  anxious  are  the  peo-
ple to  escape  from  their  surround-
ings.

The  elders  who  have  been  engag-
ed in  the  Southern  States  .Mission
have,  almost  without  exception,
proven  themselves  worthy  of  the-
trust  that  was  reposed  in  them.
They  have  endeavored  to  perform
the  duties  devolving  upon  them  as
men  and  as  the  servants  of  God,  not
counting  privation,  slander,  expo-
sure, contumely  as  anything  in  com-
parison to  the  great  work  in  which
they  were  engaged.

The  Southern  people  are  naturally
a  kind-hearted,  hospitable,  noblo
class  of  people,  with  the  finer
instincts  of  nature  more  fully  devel-
oped than  possibly  among  some
other  classes  of  people.  They  recog-
nize the  labors  of  our  elders,  and
while  they  may  not  coincide  with
our  views,  yet  they  give  us  credit
for  the  determination  with  which  w&
press  forward,  anil  the  earnestness
and  zeal  displayed  by  our  young
elders  in  preaching  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  Especially  was  this-
note-worthy  in  connection  with  the
very  many  young  elders  who  had
never  been  upon  missions  before —


SOUTH EKX  STATES  MISSION*  131


young  men  who  had  been  called
from  the  various  mutual  improve-
ment associations,  unlearned  in  re-
gard to  the  condition  of  the  world,
unacquainted  with  its  customs,
manners  and  habits — especially  with
this  class  was  a  deep  impression
made  upon  the  minds  of  the  people.
That  feeling  of  kindness,  which  is
characteristic  of  the  people  there,
seemed  to  feel  after  those  boys,
beardless  boys  as  they  were,  as
they  stood  up  in  their  places,
when1  thev  could  obtain  a  church
or  a  school  house,  to  p reach,  and
where  they  could  not  obtain  a
place,  in  the  open  air,  by  the  road
side,  or  wherever  they  found  a  man
ready  to  stop  and  listen  to  them  in
proclaiming  the  things  they  had
been  sent  to  declare.  It  made  a
deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the
people,  and,  in  a  number  of  instan-
ces, while  the  violent  feelings  of  men
were  raised  against  them,  there
were  those  who  said,  "We  have  boys
of  our  own,  and  if  our  boys  were  in
the  place  of  these,  separated  from
their  homes  and  their  kindred  by
thousands  of  miles,  and  there  were
those  seeking  to  do  them  violence,
we  would  feel  to  bless  the  hand  that
protected  them*"  And,  as  a  general
thing,  there  came  a  division,  and  the
two  contending  parties  were  left  to
get  through  the  struggle  as  best  they
could

The  Southern  States  Mission  at
the  present  time  is  divided  into  con-
ferences, with  a  president  over  eacli
conference,  and  traveling  elders  at
appointed  places  laboring  in  the  dis-
tricts* Yet,  with  all  that  we  can
do,  there  are  localities  in  the  South-
ern States  to-day,  that  have  been
asking  for  elders  for  some  consider-
able length  of  time,  which  we  have
not  yet  been  aide  to  supply,  owing
to  a  deficiency  1  ti  our  numbers.  1
discover,  in  coming  in  contact  with


the  people  of  the  United  States,  that,
notwithstanding  the  nation  numbers
forty  millions  of  people, — a  vast  in-
numerable multitude  almost,  com-
pared to  the  Latter-day  Saints  who
dwell  in  these  distant  valleys  of  the
mountains, — yet,  if  a  company  of
eight,  ten,  twelve  or  fifteen  elders
should  happen  to  pass  through  any
of  the  large  cities,  en  wide  to  their
fields  of  labor,  they  are  visited  by
reporters,  they  are  interviewed,  and
the  interview  is  published  far  and
nriu\  causing  considerable  excitement
in  regard  to  this  small  company  of
elders  going  to  their  fields  of  labor  ;
in  fact  two  elders,  going  into  a  local-
ity where  the  people  an*  un acquain-
ted with  the  teachings  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  announcing  them-
selves as  Monaon  elders,  will  create
a  really  more  genuine  sensation  than
almost  any  other  incident  that  could
happen,  and  it  is,  doubtless,  well  that
some  of  us,  who  are  possibly  a  little
more  zealous  than  wise,  should  be
restrained  in  regard  to  our  anxiety
to  push  the  work  forward.  There  is,
however,  an  abundance  of  room  for
elders  to  labor  throughout  the  entire
Southern  States.  \Ve  scarcely  ever
preached  in  a  place  where  we  could
not  obtain  a  hairing.  We  scarcely
ever  visited  a  neighborhood — I  do
not  recollect  of  any  now — in  the
Southern  States  uhere  I  desired  a
hearing,  but  what  1  could  both  ob-
tain a  place  to  preach  in  and  a  good
sized  audience  to  hear  what  I  had  to
say.

Many  of  the  leading  men  of  the
Southern  States,  having  visited  Salt
Lake  City  and  been  treated  kindly  by
our  pj'nple  —  having  observed  the
thrift,  enterprise  and  peaceftilness  of
our  homes,  extended  to  us  many
kindnesses  and  many  courtesies,  not-
withstanding  that,  with  the  mass  of
the  peopl<%  it  was  quite  unpopular
to  do  so. The  Governor  of  one  of


182  JOURNAL  OF

the  leading  States  of  the  South,
offered  the  use  of  the  Senate  Cham-
ber— the  representative  hall  of  his
State — to  preach  in,  if  I  was  prepar-
ed to  use  it,  extending  any  courtesy
I  desired.  Their  leading  papers  free-
ly noticed  our  meetings  and  publish-
ed thousands  of  handbills  to  be  dis-
tributed among  the  people,  refusing
any  compensation  whatever.  Many
of  these  incidents  that  come  to  my
mind  in  regard  to  the  courtesy  and
kindness  of  the  people  that  we  have
been  preaching  the  Gospel  to,  warms
our  hearts  as  elders  of  Israel,  and
we  feel  to  do  them  good,  to  bless
them,  and  benefit  them  all  that  we
can,  *  f*

Daring  the  past  year,  a  little  over
400  Saints  have  been  gathered  from
the  Southern  States  Mission,  The
principal  part  of  these  have  emigra-
ted to  the  neighboring  State  of  Colo-
rado, in  San  Luis  Valley,  25 0  miles
south  and  a  little  to  the  west  of
Denver,  where  the  Saints  have  found
a  good  valley,  most  excellent  hind
and  timber,  water,  grass,  and  air  that
is  necessary  to  enable  them  to  build
up  a  settlement  and  locate  them-
selves. I  had  the  privilege  of  visit-
ing them  in  their  homes  a  number  of
times,  and  while  they  have  had  the
privations  that  are  incidental  to  the
formation  of  anew  settlement  every-
where, yet  they  have  been  blessed
and  prospered.  The  people  of  the
State  of  Colorado  have,  as  a  rule,
treated  them  kindly,  have  welcomed
them  to  their  borders,  have  endea-
vored to  benefit  them,  and  assisted
them  in  forming  their  settlements  all
they  could.  The  railroad,  that  has
been  in  process  of  construction  for
the  past  two  years,  runs  down  the
centre  ot  the  valley,  within  three  tu
five  miles  of  our  line  of  settlement,
so  that  we  have  easy  railroad  com-
munication. Our  rates  for  emigra-
tion are  exceedingly  low. The  rail-


PISCOURSES.

road  companies  have  extended  to  u&
many  courtesies  and  kindnesses,  and
have  sought  to  do  what  they  could
— apparently  being  moved  upon  by
the  right  Spirit — to  enable  us  to  ga-
ther those  who  were  unable  to  gather
themselves,  and  to  assist  those  wh*
were  but  little  able  to  gather.  In
the  location  of  the  settlement  in  the
State  of  Colorado,  there  are  now,  I
believe,  500  Latter-day  Saints  from
the  Southern  States,  which  will  pos-
sibly be  augmented  by  300  more  this
season,  if  deemed  prudent  to  do  so.
In  the  first  town  that  was  located,
all  the  lots  have  been  taken  up,
Another  location  of  similar  dimen-
sions is  being  occupied,  while  still
another  will  be  ocenpied  some  few
miles  distant  from  the  first  two  in
the  course  of  the  next  two  or  three
months.

The  health  of  the  Saints  has  not
been  as  good  as  could  have  been
desired,  principally  owing  to  the
fact  that  in  emigrating  from  the
Southern  States — a  malarious  dis-
trict to  those  great,  dry  altitudes —
the  changes  thus  brought  to  bear
upon  them  were  calculated  to  pro-
duce sickness  to  a  greater  or  less  ex-
tent The  scourge  of  measles  passed
through  the  settlement  in  the  month
of  April  ;  some  100  cases.  Our
neighbors,  at  a  railroad  town  near
by,  where  there  were  about  an  equal
number  of  inhabitants  that  we  had,
with  all  the  appliances  of  physicians
and  drug  stores,  lost  quite  a  large
percentage  of  their  cases  of  sickness.
In  the  town  of  Alamosa,  some  twen-
ty miles  distant  from  our  settlement,
where  there  were  almost  an  equal
number  of  cases,  there  was  quite  a
large  percentage  of  deaths.  In  about
1 65  to  170  cases  that  occurred  in  our
settlement,  I  think  there  were  but
three  or  four  deatl*  from  measles.
When  I  was  talking  to  the  Mayor  of
Alamosa,  he  called  my  attention  to


the  disparity  of  deaths  in  that  town
in  comparison  with  those  that  had
occurred  in  our  settlement,  and  asked
me  if  I  thought  the  location  of  the
town  of  Alamosa  unhealthy,  I  re-
plied I  thought  not  that  it  was
equally  healthy  with  our  settlement-
He*  asked  me  to  what  I  attributed
the  number  of  deaths.  I  replied  that
I  believed  they  were  attributable  to
the  number  of  drug  stores  and  phy-
sicians they  had  in  it,  that  that  was
the  cause,  as  I  earnestly  believed,  to
a  greater  or  less  extent,  of  the  dis-
parity of  the  number  of  deaths.
With  some  500  inhabitants  in  our
settlement  with  quite  a  number  of
east's,  some  of  them  very  serious,
there  has  never  been  a  physician
called  to  prescribe  one  single  pre-
scription to  any  of  these  people,  and
I  have  an  idea  that  if  we  were  to
look  at  them  to-day  we  would  find
them  equally  healthy  with  those  of
the  adjacent  town  where  there  are
several  physicians  with  two  drug
stores  to  draw  their  supplies  from.

The  people  in  the  settlements  are
satisfied  with  their  location.  I
heard  but  very  little  complaint,  ami
what  complaints  1  did  here  were,  I
thought,  almost  entirely  due  to  the
inconvenience  incident  to  emigration,
to  breaking  up  their  homes,  to  <I  im-
posing of  their  property,  to  riding
distances  upon  railroads,  landing  at
their  destination  wearied,  to  not  be-
ing so  carefully  housed  and  protect-
ed for  a  limited  length  of  time  after
their  arrival,  and  to  their  being
unacquainted  with  the  country.  I
believe,  however,  that  out  of  the  500
souls  emigrated  there  have  been  but
four  turned  back  from  the  work  and
returned  to  their  farmer  homes.  I
heard  no  expression  of  a  desire  to
return  on  the  part  of  any  one  when
I  was  thare.  Wishing  to  test  this
as  1  was  returning  back  to  the
States,  I  publicly  made  the  offer


that  if  there  were  any  persons  who
desired  to  return  back  to  their  old
homes,  to  lay  down  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  and  forego  the  gathering,
I  would  see  and  accompany  them
back,  and  if  there  were  any  unable
to  go  back  with  their  own  means,  a
fund  would  be  raised  for  the  pur-
pose if  desired.  I  received  no  appli-
cations, hence  I  was  led  to  believe
that  the  people  as  a  rule  were  satis-
fied with  their  situation  and  sur-
roundings.

Adjacent  to  our  settlement  there
is  a  large  number  of  Mexicans  who
live  in  piazzas,  as  they  term  them,
which  are  capable  of  accomodating
from  ten  to  fifty  families  in  a  piazza.
These  people  have  had  rather  an
unpleasant  and  chequered  history  in
the  Territory  of  New  Mexico  and
the  State  of  Colorado.  They  have
been  looked  upon  to  a  certain  extent
as  legal  and  lawful  prey  by  the
Christians  surrcunding,  who  have,
to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  taken
advantage  of  their  innocence  and  of
their  ignorance  in  regard  to  the
rules  of  business.  To  illustrate  thi%
one  man,  a  merchant  with  whom  we
deal,  a  man  that  I  have  always  look-
ed upon  as  in  every  sense  trust-
worthy, made  this  statement  to  me.
In  speaking  of  the  Mexican  people,
said  he  :  "  We  cannot  trade  with
them  as  we  do  with  other  people.
They  have  been  deceived  and  cheat-
ed until  they  come  here  and  ask  how
many  pounds  of  sugar  we  give  for  a
dollar.  We  would  not  dare  to  tell
them  the  exact  number  of  pounds.
If  it  is  six,  we  have  to  tell  them
ten."  u  Well,11  I  said  "  do  you
weigh  out  the  ten  pounds  f  (i  Not
much  ;  we  weiyh  them  six  or  five
and  a  half  pounds  as  the  case  might
be."  Such  is  the  character  of  the
dealings  the  Mexican  people  have
had  to  contend  with  until  to  day
they  have  no  confidence  whatever  in


184


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  white  people  by  whom  they
are  surrounded,  and  it  is  something
almost  unknown  in  their  history,  it

is  something  strange  for  them  to  be
placed  in  a  position  whereby  they
would  be  dealt  with  honorably  and
uprightly  by  white  people.  Said
one  of  their  leading  citizens  to  me,
Mr.  Yrddcz,  who  was  formerly  a
Judge  in  Old  5 1  ex  ice,  a  leading  citi-
zen in  the  State  of  Colorado,  a
Representative  in  the  Legislature,
and  a  man  of  considerable  ability  —
said  In*  to  me,  "The  white  people
we  have  come  in  contact  with  here-
tofore, have  endeavored  to  take
every  advantage  of  us,  and  when
your  people  came  here  we  expected
they  would  treat  us  the  same  way.
Last  season  we  could  have  furnished
you  land  to  plow,  teams  and  seed  ;
but  we  were  afraid  that  you  would
repeat  the  history  of  some  other  por-
tions of  our  possessions,  where  we
have  furnished  seed,  land,  teams  and
plows,  and  rented  these  things  upon
shares  to  people  who  came  into  our
midst,  and  wh en  the  fall  season  came
they  not  only  claimed  the  land  and
crops,  but  our  teams  and  plows,  and
we  have  failed  to  obtain  any  redress
whatever ;  consequently  we  were
afraid  of  your  people"  But  after
some  short  acquaintance  with  us,
after  coming  in  contact  with  us  a
limited  length  of  time,  they  learned
to  think  better  of  us,  and  by  their
votes  elected  one  of  our  brethren
magistrate  over  a  considerable  por-
tion of  the  county  of  Conejas,  in
which  they  lived.  This  brother
told  me  he  had  been  magistrate  for
eight  months,  had  gained  the  confi-
dence of  the  people,  until  to  day  peo-
ple outside  of  the  precinct  w  here  he
lives  will  bring  their  cases  to  him  to
arbitrate  and  adjudicate  upon,  and
the  people  almost  universally  are
willing  to  submit  to  his  decisions.
There  is  a  kindly  feeling  between


them  and  the  Latter-day  Saints*
They  are  naturally  a  kind  hearted
people,  I  noticed  when  our  people
were  living  in  their  piazzas,  as  some
of  them  did  for  a  season,  that  when
any  of  them  took  sick,  the  Mexicans
were  on  hand  to  nurse  them  and  to
do  what  they  could  for  their  com-
fort. The  Saints  rejoice  at  the
privilege  of  gathering  where  they
can  live  in  peace  and  quietness,  and
receive  the  instructions  of  the  elders,
and  have  their  children  taught*  I
believe  about  the  first  thing  they
did  in  the  first  town  they  started
was  to  build  a  comfortable  school-
house,  and  during  the  past  winter
I  they  have  had  a  school  in  session
the  entire  winter,  expecting  that  as
soon  as  circumstances  would  permit
a  summer  .school  would  be  com-
menced. A  Sabbath  School  is  in
session  regularly  each  Sabbath,  and
some  six  home  missionaries  visit  the
surrounding  country  where  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  located,  and
instruct  the  Mexicans  who  desire  to
hear  the  principles  of  the  Gospel

In  laboring  in  the  States,  we  can
see  that  there  is  a  rapid  change
taking  place.  It  may  not  be
observable  by  the  masses  of  the  peo-
ple. However,  tins  change  can  be
seen  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left.  We  hear  men  remark  in  regard
to  the  change  that  is  occurring  poli-
tically, religiously  and  socially.  We
cannot  blind  our  eyes  to  the  fact
that  affairs  in  the  United  States  are
traveling  at  a  rapid  rate.  We  some-
times hear  an  elder,  on  returning
home  from  his  mission,  ask  one  of
the  brethren,  -  How  is  everything
moving  P  H  is  reply  is,  u  very  slowly/1
Hi*  does  not  see  with  the  eyes  of
the  elder  who  is  abroad  j "reaching
the  Gospel  To  my  mind,  the  seeds
of  dissolution  have  been  sown  in  the
midst  of  the  people,  and  they  are
springing  up  to  an  abundant  growth.


SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION.


185


Men  are  fulfilling  the  Scriptures —
"  their  hearts  are  failiug  them  for
fear  of  the  things  that  are  coming
upon  them."  The  people  of  the
United  States  are  in  doubt  in  regard
to  what  is  in  store  for  our  govern -
msnt  We  hear  quite  loud  expres-
sions every  hour  of  the  day  by  men
of  all  classes — -governors,  senators,
congressmen  and  clergymen.  I  think
one  of  the  most  eloquent  sermons
— eloquent  for  the  sound  of  its  words,
not  particularly  for  the  principle
it  contained,  but  more  particularly
for  its  sound  of  words — -I  ever
heard,  was  one  in  which  the  mini-
ster portrayed  the  condition  of  the
United  States,  the  fearful  condition
in  which  the  government  was  to-
day, the  condition  in  which  political
art  airs  were,  and  strange  as  it  may
seem,  after  telling  the  people  that
there  was  not  a  political  party  in
the  United  States  that  would  receive
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  After  telling
the  people  of  St-  Louis  (the  city  in
win" eh  this  sermon  was  preached)
that  if  Jesus  were  to  come  to  one  of
their  wards  and  run  for  Alderman,
they  would  outvote  him  by  a  large
majority — after  telling  them  all
these  things,  he  then  commenced
upon  the  other  hand  to  portray  the
glorious  spread  of  Christianity  !  It
sounded  strange  to  my  ears,  for  one
was  a  direct  contradiction  of  the
other;  if  one  was  true  the  other  was
false.  Certainly  Christianity  could
not  grow  and  increase  and  spread
and  be  engrafted  into  the  minds  of
the  people,  and  at  the  same  time  he
who  stood  at  the  head  of  Christian-
ity be  rejected  from  the  head  to  the
foot  of  the  whole  body.

The  situation  to  my  mind  as  I
have  observed  it — and  I  have  tried
to  do  so  calmly  and  deliberately  and
without  prejudice — is  anything  but
agreeable.  Men  have  ceased  to  try
to  hide  this  ;  and  the  present  poli-


tical contest  that  is  waged  so  hotly
even  for  the  nomination  of  the  man
who  shall  fill  the  presidential  chair  is
stirring  up  the  people  as  I  have
never  seen  an  election  stir  them  up
before.  It  seems  as  though  they  are
not  content  with  dividing  into
parties  but.  these  parties  are  divided
into  fragments,  the  one  contending
against  the  other.  A  few  years  ago
it  was  the  Democratic  party  on  the
one  side  and  the  llepuhliean  party
on  the  other.  To-day  it  has  cl  ianged
and  materially  altered  in  the  Repub-
lican party.  It  is  the  anti-third
term  men,  the  Blaine  men,  Sherman
men  etc.,  struggling  one  against  the
other  in  their  own  party  until  it
seems  as  if  the  shadow  is  cast,  of  tfce
time  when  every  man's  hand  shall
be  raised  gainst  his  nriifhbor.  Cer-

#  it  i

tainly  these  are  indications  of  it, —
and  we  see  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy
in  these  things*  It  is  a  most
unpleasant  report  for  a  person  to
make  of  the  situation  of  their  coun-
try. We  are  not  aliens  to  our  land.
We  love  and  revere  ami  respect  the
constitution  of  our  common  country.
We  hav*  a  love  for  the  old  Hag  that
floats  over  it,  and  it  is  with  feelings
of  mortification,  chagrin,  and  pain
that  we  have  to  report  back  to  the
Saints  here  in  the  valleys  of  the
mountains  the  fearful  condition  in
which  matters  are  to-day.  One  in-
stance comes  to  my  mind  in  connec-
tion with  a  matter  in  which  die
Latter-day  Saints  are  interested.
During  the  trial  of  the  men — or  one
of  them  at  least — who  assassinated
Elder  Joseph  Standing,  I  was
astonished  and  surprised  to  listen  to
the  testimony  of  the  witnesses.  The
court  would  commence  its  session  at
eight  o'clock  and  run  till  twelve  and
then  adjourn  for  an  hour  and  run
till  candle  light,  and  when  night
came  we  would  hear  the  bells  ring-
ing across  the  street  calling  the  peo-


186


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


pie  to  a  revival  meeting.  I  notice  J
that  those  men  who  had  been  upon
the  witness  stand  would  pass  over
to  the  meeting,  and  for  two  weeks
the  revival  was  kept  up  calling  men
and  women  to  Jesus  after  dark,  and
in  the  day  time  came  into  that  court
and  testified  to  things  they  knew
were  utterly  false,  and  that  they
knew  the  people  in  the  court  room
were  satisfied  were  false.  The  thing
was  a  talk  and  a  laughing  stock  on
the  streets  of  Dal  ton.  It  seemed
strange  to  me,  and  after  I  had  had
several  days  experience  I  asked  the
attorney  General,  a  man  that  I  look-
ed upon  as  an  honorable  man,  a  man
who  sought  to  do  his  duty  in  that
trial  to  the  best  of  his  ability — I
asked  "  how  many  men  are  there
that  came  upon  this  stand  that  you
can  rely  upon  to  testify  to  the
truth  f  His  reply  was,  "If  I  get
one  in  ten  I  am  doing  very  well/'
I  thought  that  a  strange  comment
indeed  upon  this  boasted  land  of
freedom,  of  free  schools,  churches,
libraries,  lecture  associations  and
yet  hold  ourselves  up  before  the
world  as  a  representative  govern-
ment for  all  other  governments  to
copy  after,  for  all  civilization  to
follow,  and  for  all  Christians  to
model  themselves  from.  It  looks
strange  to  me,  and  I  scarcely  con  hi
have  believed  it  had  not  mine  own
ears  heard  and  mine  own  eyes  be-
held it.

The  sentiment  and  feeling  of  the
better  class  of  people  in  the  South,
and  I  may  say  the  people  of  the
United  States  are  in  favor  of  letting
the  Latter-day  Saints  alone,  ot  let-
ting them  work  out  their  own  pro-
blem, and  but  for  the  religious  influ-
ence that  is  brought  to  bear  there
would  be  but  little  said  in  relation
to  the  work  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  doing.  But  this  religious  influ-
ence has  not  changed  in  the  least.


The  same  influence  that  fought  and
contended  against  the  Latter  day
Saints  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  and
that  drove  them  to  the  valleys  of
the  mountains  ;  the  same  influence
that  cried  out  nearly  2000  years  ago
"  crucify  him,  crucify  him,"  is  still
abroad  in  the  land,  and  I  think  the
worst  treatment  I  have  ever  received
at  the  hands  of  any  class  of  men  has
been  from  men  who  can  pray  the
longest  prayers,  preach  the  loudest
sermons,  and  wear  the  longest  face,
and  who  profess  to  be  going  back  to
Abraham's  bosom*  This  class  of
men  have  always  con  ten  tied  against
the  elders.  They  have  sought  to
bring  persecution  upon  them,  and  to
villify  them  upon  every  ban  el,  and
if  we  have  difficulties  they  are  to  a
greater  or  less  extent  caused  by
those  who  profess  to  believe  in  this
Bible,  and  who  preach  "  glory  to
God  in  the  highest,  ami  on  earth
peace  and  goodwill  towards  men."
But  this  perchance,  is  but  history
repeating  itself.  Notwithstanding
the  difficulties  and  obstacles  the
elders  have  had  to  contend  with  in
this  and  other  directions  they  have
been  blessed  and  prospered.  They
rejoice  in  the  privilege  of  going  forth
to  proclaim  the  principles  of  the
Gospel,  to  bring  Israel  to  a  know-
ledge of  the  truth,  and  to  gather  the
honest  in  heart  home,  that  Zion
may  be  built  up  and  the  kingdom  of
God  established  on  the  earth.  The
elders  rejoice  in  tins  privilege.  Our
1  young  elders  who  go  abroad  with
fear  and  trembling  in  regard  to
their  own  ability  are  willing  to  pass
through  all  kinds  uf  difficulties,  are
willing  to  endure  anything  and
every  tiling  that  they  may  be  instrtt-
1  ments  in  the  hands  of  God  in  pro-
claiming the  principles  of  the  Gospel.
1  heard  but  very  few  complaints
from  the  elders.  It  is  true  that
;  sometimes  they  are  not  situated  as


SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION.


187


pleasantly  as  they  would  desire  to
be,  but  I  heard  very  few  com-
plaints. They  express  very  great
surprise  at  the  situation  of  affairs
abroad.  They  say,  "why.  we  did
not  dream  that  matters  were  as  bad
as  they  are.  We  did  not  dream
that  the  world  was  so  corrupt  as  it
is  both  politically,  religiously,  and
socially."  They  seemed  surprised,
when  walking  through  the  streets
of  the  religious  St.  Louis. — whose
editors,  you  know,  write  long  homi-
lies in  the  shape  of  editorials  in  re-
gard to  the  terrible  situation  of
affairs  in  Utah, — to  see,  on  a  Sun-
day, just  close  by  where  these
articles  are  published,  .saloons  open,
men  and  women  drinking,  and  busi-
ness going  on  just  as  though  it  were
any  other  day  in  the  week,  "  Why,"
say  these  young  elders,  14  in  reading
these  articles  back  in  Utah  we  were
led  to  believe  that  these  places  here
were  really  religious.  But  we  find
that  such  is  not  the  case.  We  find
they  are  allowing  their  charity  to
play  leap  frog  over  their  own  wrong-
doings', and  in  place  of  looking  to
the  affairs  of  Utah  they  had  better
attend  to  their  own."  These  things
look  strange  to  the  young  elders
w  hen  they  first  come  in  contact  with
the  world*  In  speaking  with  one  of
of  the  officers  of  the  State  of  Colo-
rado, said  he  to  me,  "  we  trust  that
you  people  will  assimilate  with  our
people,  that  they  will  adopt  our
habits  and  customs  and  become  one
with  us."  I  told  him  we  did  not
w  ish  to  make  any  rash  promises
about  that,  for,  said  I,  14  we  would
not  Wish  to  have  drinking  saloons
on  the  corner  of  each  block,"  We
would  not  like  to  have  all  kind  of
wrong-doings  in  our  midst,  and  cer-
tainly here  in  this  city  of  Denver,
we  would  not  wish  to  copy  after  the
morals  of  this  or  your  adjoining
city  of  Leadville.


Some  people  seem  to  have  an  idea
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  gathered
here  in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains
are  samples  of  all  that  is  wrong,  all
that  is  iniquitous,  and  I  have  some-
times been  amazed  at  the  situation
we  have  been  placed  in.  In  one
neighbourhood  where  we  stopped
over  night,  and  had  some  talk  with
the  folks  in  regard  to  the  social  con-
ditions with  which  they  were  sur-
rounded, one  sanctimonious  person,
the  next  day,  refused  us  the  privi-
lege of  meeting  in  a  log  cabin  school-
house,  for  fear  we  should  corrupt  the
morals  of  the  people !  In  another
instance,  a  large  number  of  people
had  gathered  together  in  a  meeting
house  to  hear  one  of  the  elders
preach.  When  he  got  through
preaching  he  asked  a  gentleman  w  ho
had  been  induced  to  come  to  the
stand  to  tell  the  people  what  he
thought  of  the  doctrine  that  had
been  advanced.  He  very  reluctantly
did  so  in  about  these  words:  "I
have  listened  with  great  attention  to
my  young  friend,  I  believe  he  is
honest.  I  believe  he  has  tried  to
tell  the  truth,  and  in  fact  he  has
told  you  the  truth.  He  has
read  from  the  Scriptures  f  but  at
this  stage  he  drew  up  (evidently
realizing  that  he  had  gone  too  far
to  please  his  friends)  and  concluded
by  saying  :  •*  but  my  dear,  dying
friends,  1  do  not  believe  one  word  of
it."  Notwithstanding  that  lie  had
just  told  the  people  that  the  young
man  had  told  them  the  truth,  and
that  he  had  preached  according  to
the  Bible,  It  sounded  strange,  even
to  his  own  people.  Yet  there  is  a
class  of  people  who,  when  we  come
down  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case,
will  not,  do  not  believe  in  the  Bible,
however  much  they  pretend  to  do
so.  They  believe  certain  parts  of  it,
and  disbelieve  other  parts.  This
spirit  of  unbelief  is  growing  in  the


188  JOURNAL  UK

minds  of  the  people,  until  in  the
United  States  to-day  there  are  thou-
sands  of  people  who  openly  repudi-
ate their  belief  in  the  Bible.  Inger-
soll,  and  various  men  of  that  stamp
who  are  lecturing  throughout  the
United  States,  take  for  texts  the
mistakes  found  in  the  books  of  Moses,
and  otherwise  ridicule  the  word  of
Scripture.  By  this  means  they  are
undermining  the  faith  and  belief  of
the  people  in  the  Bible,  and  are
creating  infidels  by  thousands*
We  meet  them  on  the"  railroads,  we
hear  them  from  the  lecture  stand,
we  find  t  he  in  among  all  classes  of
people,  lawyers,  doctors,  etc.,  and  as
I  told  one  of  them,  a  leading  citizen


mscouusHR.

of  St  Louis,  with  whom  I  traveled
a  couple  of  days,  I  can  understood
opposition  to  preaching  and  praying
from  those  who  do  not  believe  in
this  book,  but  it  savors  of  hypocrisy
coming  from  those  who  profess  to
believe  in  the  teachings  of  Jesus  and
his  apostles.

Well,  these  are  some  of  the  reflec-
tions that  pass  through  our  minds  as
elders  in  preaching  the  Gospel  We
pray  that  the  blessing  of  Israel's  Cod
may  rest  upon  his  work,  and  upon
the  elders  who  are  abroad  preaching
the  Gospel,  that  they  also  may  be
permitted  to  return  in  peace,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES,  ETC


189


*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  in  the  Salt  Lake  Assembly  Hall,  at  the  Semi-Annual
Conference,  of  the  Salt  Lale  Stake  of  Zion,  Saturday

Afternoon,  July  3rd,  18SQ.


(Reported  by  J  oh


e.)


duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  priesthood  and  saints  gene-
rally—zion  SHALL  NOT  BE  OVERCOME — THE  WICKED  SHALL  SLAY
THE  WICKET) — THE  END  NEA1L


I  have  listened  to  the  instructions
given  here  this  afternoon  by  my
brethren,  as  well  its  the  remarks  of
Brother  Cannon,  this  forenoon,  with
feelings  of  a  great  deal  of  interest
When  we  talk  of  our  duties  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  I  think  many  times  some
of  us,  perhaps  all  of  us,  more  or  less,
fall  short  of  comprehending  and
understanding  the  responsibilities
which  we  are  under  to  God*  I  be-
lieve there  never  was  a  dispensation
or  a  generation  of  men  in  any  age  of
the  world  that  ever  had  a  greater
work  to  perform,  or  ever  were  under
greater  responsibility  to  God,  than
the  Latter-day  Saints.  The  king-
dom of  God  has  been  put  into  our
hands.  We  have  been  raised  up  as
sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  to
take  this  kingdom,  to  lay  the  foun-
dation of  it,  to  build  upon  it,  to
carry  it  out  in  its  various  branches
until  it  becomes  perfected  before  the
heavens  and  before  the  earth  as  God
has  foreordained  it  should  b<\  And
those  principles  which  have  been
referred  to  by  the  brethren  in  regard
to  our  duties  wx  cannot  safely  ignore


them  nor  turn  aside  from  them.  1
will  say  as  one  of  the  quorum  of  the
Twelve  Apostles,  from  the  time  I
was  first  acquainted  with  this  organi-
zation until  to-day  we  have  never
felt  ourselves  at  liberty  to  stay  away
from  our  meetings  unless  we  were
sick  or  circumstances  hindered  us  in
some  way  or  other.  I  can  say  that
for  myself,  and  I  believe  I  can  say
the  same  for  my  brethren.  We  have
always  felt  duty  bound  to  attend  our
meetings,  and  if  we  do  not  attend
the  question  might  arise,  what  has
become  of  the  Twelve  Apostles?
Where  are  they  that  they  do  nob
attend  their  meetings  %  It  would  be
a  very  proper  question  to  ask.  And
if  this  responsibility  rests  upon  us
in  the  capacity  which  we  occupy
does  it  not  rest  upon  other  men?
I  think  it  does.  I  do  not  believe
the  Lord  ever  required  Joseph  Smith
or  Brigham  Young  or  any  of  their
counselors  to  undertake  to  build  up
this  kingdom  alone.  He  never  re-
quired them  to  build  these  Temples
alone.  They  were  required  to  per-
form their  duties, that is  true


190


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUKSES.


Joseph  Smith  was  called  of  God  in-
spired of  God,  rained  up  of  the  Lord,
ordained  of  God  long  before  he  was
born,  to  stand  in  the  flesh,  as  much
as  Jeremiah  or  any  of  the  ancient
prophets,  to  lay  the  foundation  of
this  Church  and  kingdom.  He  per-
formed his  work  faithfullv.  He
labored  faithfully  while  he  taber-
nacled in  the  flesh,  and  sealed  his
testimony  with  his  blood.  Other
men  were  called  also  to  build  upon
the  foundation  which  he  laid.

We  have  in  days  that  are  past
and  gone  been  under  the  necessity
of  going  forth  to  preach  the  Gospel
in  the  world.  We  have  had  this  to
do.  We  have  been  called  to  do  it.
We  have  been  ordained  to  do  it.
We  have  been  commanded  of  God
to  do  it,  and  so  have  hundreds  of
thousands  of  the  elders  of  this
Church  and  kingdom.  We  have  all
some  responsibility,  more  or  less,
resting  upon  us,  whether  as  regards
going  on  missions  or  any  tiling  else.
I  remember  Brother  Joseph  Smith
visited  myself,  Brother  Taylor,  Bro-
ther Brigham  Young  and  several
other  missionaries,  when  we  were
about  to  take  our  mission  to  England.
We  were  sick  and  afflicted  many  of
us.  At  the  same  time  we  felt  to  go.
The  Prophet  blessed  us  as  also  our
wives  and  families  ;  and  I  was  read-
ing a  day  or  two  ago  his  instructions
from  my  journal.  He  taught  us
some  very  important  principles,  some
of  which  I  here  name.  Brother
Taylor,  myself,  George  A.  Smith,
John  E.  Page  and  others  had  been
called  to  fill  the  place  of  those  who
had  fallen  away.  Brother  Joseph
laid  before  us  the  cause  of  those  men's
turning  away  from  the  command*
ments  of  God.  He  hoped  we  would
learn  wisdom  by  what  we  saw  with
the  eye  and  heard  with  the  ear,  and
that  we  would  be  able  to  discern
the  spirits  of  other  men  without


being  compelled  to  learn  by  sad
experience.  He  then  remarked  that
any  man,  any  elder  in  this  Church
and  kingdom — who  pursued  a  course
whereby  he  would  ignore  or  in  other
words  refuse  to  obey  any  known
law  or  commandment  or  duty —
whenever  a  man  did  this,  neglected
any  duty  God  required  at  his  hand
in  attending  meetings,  fillingmissions,
or  obeying  counsel,  lie  laid  a  founda-
tion to  lead  him  to  apostasy  and  this
was  the  reason  those  men  had
fallen.  They  had  misused  the  priest-
hood sealed  upon  their  heads,  They
had  neglected  to  magnify  their  call-
ings as  apostles  as  elders.  They
had  used  that  priesthood  to  attempt
to  build  themselves  up  and  to  perform
some  other  work  besides  the  build-
ing up  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  And
not  only  did  he  give  us  the  counsel,
but  the  same  is  given  in  the  revela-
tion of  G od  to  us,  I  have  ever  read
with  a  great  deal  of  interest  that
revelation  given  to  Joseph  Smith  in
answer  to  his  prayer  in  Liberty  jail.
I  have  ever  looked  upon  that  revela-
tion of  God  to  that  man,  considering
the  few  sentences  it  includes,  as  con-
taining as  much  principle  as  any  rev-
elation God  ever  gave  to  mam  He
gave  Joseph  to  understand  that  he
held  the  priesthood,  which  priest-
hood was  after  the  order  of  Gad,
after  the  order  of  Melchisedec^the
same  priesthood  by  which  God  him-
self performed  all  his  works  in  the
heavens  and  in  the  earth,  and  any
man  who  bore  that  priesthood  had
the  same  power,  That  priesthood
had  communication  with  the  heavens,
power  to  move  the  heavens,  power
to  perform  the  work  of  the  heavens,
and  wherever  any  man  magnified
that  calling,  God  gave  his  angels
charge  concerning  him  and  his
ministrations  were  of  power  and
force  both  in  this  world  and  the
world  to  come ;  but  let  that  man  use


DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES,  ETC


191


that  priesthood  for  any  other  pur-
pose than  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  for  which  purpose
it  was  given,  and  the  heavens  with-
draw themselves,  the  power  of  the
priesthood  departs,  and  he  is  left  to
walk  in  darkness  and  not  in  light,
and  this  is  the  key  to  apostasy  of  all
men  whether  in  this  generation  or
any  other.

Our  responsibilities  before  the
Lord  are  great.  We  have  no  right
to  break  any  law  that  God  has  given
unto  us.  The  more  we  do  so  the
less  power  we  have  before  God,
before  heaven  and  before  the  earth,
and  the  nearer  we  live  to  God,  the
closer  we  obey  his  laws  and  keep
his  commandments,  the  more  power
we  will  have,  and  the  greater  will  be
our  desire  for  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God  while  we  dwell
here  in  the  flesh.

We  have  no  right  to  break  the
Sabbath,  We  have  no  right  to
neglect  our  meetings  to  attend  to  our
labors.  1  do  not  believe  that  any
man,  who  has  ever  belonged  to  this
Church  and  kingdom,  since  its  organi-
zation, has  made  anything  by  attend-
ing to  his  farm  on  the  Sabbath  :  but
if  your  ox  falls  into  a  pit  get  him
out ;  to  work  in  that  way  is  all  just
and  right,  but  for  us  to  go  farming
to  the  neglect  of  our  meetings  and
other  duties  devolving  upon  us,  is
some t lung  we  have  no  right  to  do.
The  Spirit  of  God  does  no  like  it,  it
withdraws  itself  from  us,  and  we
make  no  money  by  it.  We  should
keep  the  Sabbath  holy.  We  should
attend  our  meetings.

This  kingdom  is  advancing.  It
has  got  to  advance,  and  somebody
has  got  to  build  it  up.  Somebody
has  got  to  labor  in  it  The  God  of
heaven  has  had  a  people  prepared
before  the  world  was  made  for  this
dispensation,  He  had  a  people  pre-
pared to  stand  in  the  flesh  to  take


I  this  kingdom  and  bear  it  off;  and  the
very  spirit  of  the  prophets  and  apos-
tles, who  have  gone  before  us,  has
been  manifested  in  the  lives  of  faith-
ful men  and  women  from  the  or&an-
ization  of  this  Church  until  to-day,
and  will  continue  until  the  coming
of  the  Lord,  as  there  are  a  great
many  men  and  women  who  will  live
their  religion  and  carry  out  the  pur-
poses of  God  on  the  earth.

|  It  is  our  duty  as  apostles,  as  elders
and  as  Latter-day  Saints,  to  contem-
plate, to  reflect,  to  read  the  word  of
God,  and  to  try  to  comprehend  our
condition,  our  position,  and  our  re-
sponsibility before  the  Lord.  If  our
eyes  were  opened,  if  the  vail  were
lifted,  and  we  could  see  our  condi-
tion, our  responsibility,  and  could
comprehend  the  feelings  of  God  our
heavenly  Father,  and  the  heavunly
hosts,  and  the  justified  spirits  made
perfect,  in  their  watch-care  over  us,
in  their  anxiety  about  us  in  our
labors  here  in  the  flesh  ;  we  would
all  feel  that  we  have  no  time  to
waste  in  folly  or  anything  else  which
brings  ta  pass  no  good.  All  of  us,
as  elders  of  Israel  and  as  Latter-day
Saints,  bear  some  portion  of  the  holy
priesthood,  either  the  Melchisedek
or  Aarouic.  It  is  a  kingdom  of
priests,  and  there  is  work  enough  for
this  people  to  magnify  their  calling.
The  Lord  has  agreed  to  sustain  us,
and  to  break  every  weapon  that  is
formed  against  us.  He  has  promised
to  sustain  Zion,  and  when  the  Pro-

;  phet  saw  this  Zion  of  God  in  the
mountains,  his  soul  was  filled  with
joy  and  he  cried,  "Sing,  0  heavens,
and  be  joyful,  0  earth  ;  and  break
forth  into  singing,  0  mountains;  for
the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people,
and  will  have  mercy  upon  his  afflicts
ed."  Again  the  prophet  says,  "  Can
a  woman  forget  her  suckling  child,
that  she  should  not  have  compassion
on  the  son  of  her  womb  1—  yea,  they


192


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


may  forget,  yet  will  I  not  forget
thee.1'  Zi  on  has  been  before  the  face
of  the  Lord  since  the  crer>f;on  of  the
world  !  Our  heavenly  father  has
protected  this  people.  We  have  been
favored  from  the  day  we  .set  our  feet
in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains,  not-
withstanding the  tribulation  and  op-
position  we  have  had  to  contend
with.  All  the  designs  of  the  wicked
and  ungodly  to  stop  this  work  have
been  thwarted,  The  hand  of  God  is
over  Zioih  He  is  our  Comforter,
He  sustains  us,  and  we  have  every
encouragement  on  the  race  of  the
earth,  Latter-day  Saints,  to  be
true  and  faithful  unto  him  the  little
time  we  spend  in  the  flesh*

Our  responsibilities  are  great ;  our
work  is  great  We  not  only  have
the  Gospel  to  preach  to  the  nations
of  tin1  earth,  but  we  have  to  fill  these
valleys,  towns,  cities,  etc.,  and  we
have,  among  other  important  things,
to  rear  temples  unto  the  name  of  the
Lord  before  the  coming  of  Christ.
We  have  "ot  to  enter  into  those

o

temples  and  redeem '•our  dead— not
only  the  dead  of  our  own  family,  but
the  dead  of  the  whole  spirit  World.
This  is  part  of  the  great  work  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  )STv  -hall  build
these  temples  and,  i£#ve  do  our  duty,
there  is  no  power tthat  can  hinder
this  work,  becauseT^e  ^ord  is  with
us;  ami  certainly  d\ir  aim  is  high  !
As  a  people  we  aim  at  celestial  glory ;
we  aim  at  the  establishment  of  the
kingdom  of  God  *  We  have  bee  if
raised  up  for  the  purpose  of  w^liijig
the  world ;  to  preach  the  Gospel ;  to
go  to  the  meek  ofr  the  earth  ami
bring  them  to  these  galleys  of  the
mountains,  that  they  may  be  deliv-
ered from  the  power  of  sin  and
Satan.  Our  numbers  are  many
compared  with  former  dispensations,
Nevertheless,  our  numbers  are  few
when  compared  with  the  twelve  or
fourteen  hundred  millions  of  inhab-


itants who  dwell  in  the  flesh.  Still,
with  the  help  of  God,  we  have  power
to  redeem  the  world.  This  is  our
work.  We  are  obliged  to  labor  and
to  continue  to  while  we  are  here,
and  when  we  have  finished  our  work,
our  sons,  the  rising  generation,  have
got  to  take  this  kingdom  and  bear  it

ofr.

Eight  of  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve
Apostles  are  in  the  spirit  world  to-
day  who  were  in  the  flesh  when  we
came  here,  and  so  they  pass  away,
|  one  after  another,  when  they  finish
their  work.  Do  you  suppose  that  in
their  minds  and  feelings  they  rea-
lized they  had  done  too  much  ?  I
think  not.  Just  so  with  those  who
remain  in  the  flesh.  There  is  no
time  to  throw  away,  and  I  would  to
God  that  the  elders  of  Israel  could
fully  realize  and  comprehend  the
great  work  that  God  has  put  upon
their  shouRIerq — the  building  up  of
his  kingdom.

This  kingdom  has  continued  to
increase  and  Spread.  When  we
came  here  thi Ay-three  years  ago  we
found  this  place  a  barren  desert.
There  was  no  nark  of  the  white  man
here.  It  was  I  desert  indeed,  hardly
a  green  thing* meet  the  eye.  You
can  see  to-day  got  yourselves.  The
inhabitants  ofZion  are  a  marvel  and
a  wonder  ft*  the  world.  They
occupy  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains from  ldaho  to  Arizona,  The
valleys,  as  it  were,  arc  filled  with
Latter-day  Saints.  And  who  are
these  Latter-day  Saints  ]  They  are
the  people  whom  the  God  of  heaven
has  raised  up  in  fulfilment  of  pro-
mise and  revelation.  He  has  care-
fully gathered  them  together  by  the
power  of  the  Gospel,  by  the  power
of  revelation,  and  placed  them  here
in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains.
Has  there  ever  been  any  power
formed  against  this  .  people
that  has  been  successful  ? Nay ;


*  .  *


DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES,  ETC,


and  this  people  will  never  see
the  day  when  our  enemies  shall  pre-
vail Tor  the  very  reason  that  God
had  decreed  that  Zion  shall  be  built
up  ;  the  kingdom  that  Daniel  saw
shall  roll  forth,  until  the  little  stone
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands  shall  fill  the  whole  earth.
The  people  of  God  shall  be  prepared
in  the  Latter-days  to  carry  out  the
great  programme  of  the  Almighty,
and  all  the  powers  of  the  earth  and
hell  combined  cannot  prevent  them.
When  I  see  the  view  thai  the  world
take  in  regard  to  this  great  hitter-day
work  ;  when  I  hear  it  questioned  as
to  whether  God  lias  anything  to  do
with  it  ;  when  I  see  the  feeling  of
hatred  that  is  manifested  towards
us,  to  me  ifc  is  the  strongest  evidence
that  this  is  the  work  of  God  Why]
Because  we  have  been  chosen  out  of
the  world  and  therefore  the  world
hate  us.  This  is  a  testimony  that
Jew  and  Gentile  and  the  whole
world  look  at.  Then  if  this  is  the
work  of  God  what  is  the  world  going
to  do  about  it  1  What  can  this
nation  or  the  combined  nations  of
the  earth  do  about  it  1  Can  any
power  beneath  the  heavens  stay  the
progress  of  the  work  of  God  1  I  tell
you  nay,  it  cannot  be  done*  I  do
not  boast  of  these  things  its  the  work
of  man  ;  it  is  the  work  of  the  Al-
mighty ;  it  is  not  the  work  of  man.
The  Lord  has  called  men  to  labor  in
his  kingdom,  and  I  wish  the  elders
would  look  upon  this  subject  as  it  is
and  realize  our  position  before  the
Lord.  Here  we  are  a  handful  of
people  chosen  out  of  some  twelve  or
fourteen  hundred  millions  of  people;
and  my  faith  in  regard  to  this  mat-
ter is  that  before  we  were  born,
before  Joseph  Smith  was  born,
before  Brigham  was  born — my  faith
is  that  we  were  chosen  to  come  forth
in  this  day  and  generation  and  do
the  work  which  God  has  designed
No,  13.


should  be  done.  That  is  my  view
in  regard  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  that  is  the  reason  why  the  apos-
tles and  elders  in  the  earlv  days  of
this  Church  had  power  to  go  forth
without  purse  or  scrip  and  preach
the  Gospel  of  Christ  and  bear  record
of  his  kingdom.  Had  it  not  been
for  that  power  we  could  not  have
performed  the  work.  We  have  had
to  be  sustained  by  the  hand  of  God
until  to-day,  and  we  shall  he  sustain-
ed until  we  get  through,  if  we  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  and,  if
we  do  not,  we  shall  fall,  and  the
Lord  will  raise  up  other  men  to  take
our  place.  Therefore,  1  look  upen
it  that  we  had  a  work  assigned  to  us
before  we  were  born.  With  regard
to  the  faithful  leaders  of  this  Church
and  kingdom,  beginning  with  Joseph
Smith,  how  many  times  have  I  heard
men  say  in  my  travels — Why  did
God  choose  Joseph  Smith,  why  did
he  choose  that  boy  to  open  up  this
dispensation  and  lay  the  foundation
of  this  Church  i  Why  did'nt  he
choose  some  great  man,  such  as
Henry  Ward  Beecher  1  I  have  had
but  one  answer  in  my  life  to  give  to
such  a  question,  namely  *  that  the
Lord  Almighty  could  not  do  any-
thing with  them,  he  could  not
humble  them.  They  were  not  the
class  of  men  that  were  chosen  for  a
work  of  tli is  kind  in  any  age  of  the
world  The  Lord  Almighty  chose
the  weak  things  of  thU  world.  He
could  handle  them.  He  therefore
chose  Joseph  Smith  because  he  was
weak,  and  he  had  sense  enough  to
know  it.  He  had  the  ministration
of  angels  out  of  heaven.  He  had
also  the  ministration  of  the  Father
and  the  Son  and  of  the  holy  men
who  once  dwelt  in  the  flesh.

We  have  been  obliged  to  ^know-
ledge the  hand  of  God.  From  out
of  the  pit  have  we  been  dug.  We
have  been  taken  from  the  plough,

Vol.  XXX


the  bench,  t )  i  *  *  various  occupations
of  life,  having  limited  knowledge  of
what  the  world  call*  learning.  The
Lord  has  called  this  class  of  men  as
elders,  and  inspired  by  the  power  of
God  they  have  gone  forth  and  warn-
ed the  world,  and  those  of  this
generation  who  reject  the  testimony
of  these  elders  will  be  under  con-
demnation, for  the  elders  will  rise
up  in  judgment  and  condemn  them.
The  building  up  of  this  kingdom
rests  upon  our  shoulders — not  upon
the  shoulders  of  Brother  Taylor  and
the  Twelve  Apostle*  alone,  hut  every
man  and  every  woman  who  has
heard  this  Gospel  and  gone  into  the
waters  of  baptism  will  be  held
responsible  for  the  light  and  know-
ledge they  received.

This  U  my  testimony  to  you  to-
day. You  have  got  the  king" lorn  of
God  here.  It  has  grown  and  in-
creased, and  will  continue  to  grow
and  increase.  I  look  at  this  build-
ing ;  I  look  at  the  tabernacle  here ;
I  look  at  the  temples  that  are  being
built  ;  I  see  what  is  going  on  in  the
mountains  of  Israel,  and  I  ask  what
is  it  ?  It  is  the  work  of  God.  I
acknowledge  his  hand  in  it.  This  is
the  reason  why  we  are  inspired  to
build  these  temples.  Why  we  labor
to  build  them  is  because  the  day  has
come  when  they  are  needed*  Joseph
Smith  went  into  the  spirit  world  to
unlock  the  prison  doors  in  this  dis-
pensation or  generation.  He  stayed
her*  long  enough  ta  lay  the  founda-
tion of  this  kingdom  and  obtain  the
keys  belonging  to  it.  The  last  time
t  he  ever  met  with  the  quorum  of  the
Twelve  was  when  he  gave  them
their  endowments,  and  when  they
left  him  he  had  a  presentiment  that
it  was  the  last  time  they  would  ever
meet  He  had  something  to  do  the
other  side  of  the  vail  He  had  a
thousand  to  preach  to  there,  where
you  and  I  have  one  in  the  flesh,  I


And  this  is  the  great  work  of  the
last  dispensation — the  redemption  of
the  living  and  the  dead.

We  ought  not,  as  elders  of  Israel,
to  treat  lightly  the  blessings  we
enjoy.  We  ought  not  to  treat
lightly  the  holy  priesthood,  or
attempt  to  use  it  lor  any  other  pur-
pose under  the  whole  heavens  other
than  to  build  up  the  Zion  of  God.
The  counsel  that  has  been  given  this
forenoon  upon  this  matter  we  should
lay  to  heart.  The  eyes  of  all  the
heavenly  hosts  are  over  this  people.
They  are  watching  us  with  the  deep-
est anxiety.  They  understand  things
better  than  we  do,  for  our  vail  is
our  bodies,  and  when  our  spirits
leave  them  we  will  not  have  a  great
way  to  get  into  the  spirit  world.
They  know  the  warfare  we  have
with  wicked  spirits  and  with  a
wicked  world,  but  what  encourage-
ment we  have  when  we  read  the
revelations  !  We  live  in  a  gent-ra-
tion w  hen  the  Lord  has  decreed  that
his  kingdom  shall  be  preserved.
The  prophets  of  every  other  dispensa-
tion have  been  called  to  seal  their
testimony  with  their  blood.  My
faith  is  that  those  of  this  dispensa-
tion will  not  be  called  to  do  this,
Joseph  and  Hyrum,  it  is  true,  were
called  to  lay  down  their  lives.
Why?  I  believe  myself  it  was
necessary  to  seal  a  dispensation  of
this  almighty  magnitude  with  the
blood  of  the  testator  for  one  thing,
and  for  another  thing  the  people
were  worthy  that  put  him  to  death,
and  will  have  the  bill  to  pay  as  the
J ews  had  to  pay  for  the  blood  of  the
Messiah  ;  but  as  far  as  the  leaders  of
this  people  and  the  people  generally
are  concerned,  I  think  the  Lord  in-
tends we  should  live  at  peace.  With
regard  to  Brigham  Young,  we  all
know  the  disposition  there  was  on
the  part  of  his  enemies  to  take  his
life, I  never  believed,  however,


DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES,  ETC,


that  he  won  Id  die  a  violent  death.
If  either  <lo  I  believe  that  we  shall
be  required  to  go  forth  and  stain
oar  swords  in  the  blood  of  our  fellow
men  in  our  defence.  It  has  been
decreed  that  the  wicked  shall  slay
the  wicked.  Now,  I  give  you  my
views  regarding  these  things,  I
speak  the  sentiments  of  my  own
heart  and  what  I  believe.  Tlie
judgments  of  our  God  will  be  poured
forth,  but  the  elders  of  Israel  will
not  be  called  upon  to  slay  the
wicked.  The  wicked  will  slay  the
wicked.  When  I  read  the  Bible,  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  I  feel  that
it  is  with  us  as  with  the  generation
that  lived  in  the  days  of  EzekieL
In  those  days  the  Lord  told  the  pro-
phet to  tell  the  people  that  what  he
said  he  meant  to  fulfil  And  so  it
is  in  the  day  and  age  in  which  we
live.  All  things  will  be  fulfilled.
The  judgments  of  Almighty  God
will  be  poured  out  upon  the  wicked.
The  harvest  is  ripe,  and  I  know  the
fanner  has  got  to  cut  his  crops  when
they  are  ripe,  otherwise  they  will  go
back  into  the  ground  and  rot

When  I  see  the  wickedness  and
abomination  that  prevail  in  Babylon,
covering  the  earth,  as  it  uvlv,  like  a
mighty  sea — when  I  see  these  things
I  feel  to  ask  myself  the  question,
how  long  can  these  things  rise  up  in
the  sight  of  heaven  and  not  have
their  reward  1  In  my  own  mind  I
can  see  a  change  at  our  door.  In
the  face  of  the  revelations  I  cannot
see  how  it  can  be  otherwise.  The
signs  of  heaven  and  earth  all  indi-
cate the  near  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  You  read  the  9th,  l'>th  and
11th  chapters  of  the  last  Bonk  of
Nephi,  and  see  what  the  Lord  has
said  will  take  place  in  this  genera-
tion, when  the  Gospel  of  Christ  has
again  been  offered  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth. The  Lord  did  not


reveal  the  day  of  the  coming  of  the
Son  of  Man,  but  he  revealed  the
generation.  That  generation  is
upon  us.  The  signs  of  heaven  and
earth  predict  the  fulfillment  of  these
things,  and  they  will  come  to  pass.

Therefore,  let  us  try  to  live  our
religion.  We  haw  tin*  kingdom  of
God.  There  is  no  question  about
this.  There  was  none  with  Joseph
Smith  when  the  angels  of  God
ministered  unto  him,  and  we  had  a
living  testimony  of  this  work  from
that  day  to  this.  What  is  the  great-
est testimony  any  man  or  woman
can  have  as  to  this  being  the  work
of  God  '?  I  will  tell  you  what  is  the
greatest  testimony  I  have  ever  had,
the  most  sure  testimony,  that  is  the
testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
testimony  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,  We  may  have  the  ministration
of  angels  ;  we  may  be  wrapt  in  the
visions  of  heaven — these  things  as
testimonies  are  very  good,  but  when
you  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  when
you  receive  the  testimony  of  the
Father  and  the  Son,  it  is  a  true
principle  to  every  man  on  earth,  it
deceives  no  man,  and  by  that  princi-
ple you  can  learn  and  understand
the  mind  of  God.  Revelation  has
been  looked  upon  by  this  Church,  as
well  as  by  the  world,  as  something
very  marvelous.  What  is  revela-
tion ?  The  testimony  of  the  Father
and  Son.  How  many  of  you  have
had  revelation  ?  How  many  of  you
have  had  the  Spirit  of  God  whisper
unto  you — the  still  small  voice.  I
would  have  been  in  the  spirit  world
a  great  many  years  ago,  if  I  bad  not
followed  the  promptings  of  the  still
small  voice.  These  were  the  revela-
tions of  Jesus  Christ,  the  strongest
testimony  a  man  or  a  woman  can
have,  I  have  had  many  testimonies
since  I  have  been  connected  with
this  Church  and  kingdom.  I  have
been  blessed  at  times  with  certain


gifts  and  graces,  certain  revelations
and  ministrations ;  but  with  them
all  I  have  never  found  anything  that
I  could  place  more  dependence  upon
than  the  still  small  voice  of  the  Holy
Ghost.

I  know  this  is  the  work  of  God.  I
know  God  is  with  this  people.  I  am
anxious  for  them-  I  am  anxious  for
the  rising  generation,  for  the  young
men  and  young  women,  for  I  know
this  kingdom  has  got  to  rest  upon
their  shoulders.  When  I  see  the
evils  that  exist  in  Salt  Lake  City,  I
realize  tliey  are  in  danger  Our
responsibilities  as  parents  are  great.
We  have  not  only  to  set  an  example
ourselves*  but  we  must  pray  for
them,  and  counsel  them,  and  I  am
satisfied  that  the  Lord  will  prepare
our  young  men  and  young  maidens,
the  sons  and  daughters  uf  this  peo-
ple, so  that  they  will  take  this  king-
dom and  bear  it  off.  The  kingdom
will  never  be  thrown  down  or  given
to  another  people,

I  thank  God  I  live  in  this  day  and
age  of  the  world,  I  thank  God  that
I  heard  the  Gospel.  I  thank  the
Lord  I  have  been  made  partaker  of
the  holy  priesthood  in  connection
with  the  Gospel,  and  all  the  fears  I
have  had  have  been  about  myself
and  friends,  I  never  had  any  fears
about  the  kingdom  of  God,  I  do  not
have  any  to-day.  I  realize  and
understand,  as  well  as  I  know  any-


thing, that  this  kingdom  is  ordained
to  stand.  It  will  grow  and  increase.
Zion  will  arise  and  put  on  her  beau-
tiful garments.  The  only  fears  that
I  have  are  with  regard  to  myself,  my
family,  my  wives  and  my  children.
We  are  surrounded  with  temptations
which  have  a  tendency  to  lead  us
away.  We  have  got  to  guard  against
them  ;  we  have  got  to  increase  our
faith  and  live  nearer  and  nearer  to
the  Lord,

I  pray  God  to  bless  you  and  bless
this  people,  and  bless  those  who  are
called  to  watch  over  us,  We  have
to  watch  as  well  as  pray.  We  have
to  guard  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God,  By  and  by  our  mission  will
close.  We  will  soon  pass  away  and
shall  reap  our  reward.  We  are  living
in  the  last  dispensation,  Joseph
Smith,  I  expect,  will  sound  the  sixth
trumpet  He  will  be  at  the  head  of
this  dispensation  ;  or,  if  lie  does  not
blow  the  trumpet  of  this  dispensa-
tion, I  do  not  know  who  will.
Somebody  has  got  to  do  it,  and  it
must  be  somebody  holding  the  keys
of  the  various  dispensations  of  the
world.  No  other  angels  are  coming
from  any  other  world  to  administer
in  this  dispensation ;  those  men
will  minister  who  dwelt  here  in  the
flesh.

May  God  bless  us  and  help  us  to
keep  his  commandments,  for  Jesus'
sake.  Amen.


PRE- EXISTENCE,  ETC.  197


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  at  Mount  Pleasant,  November  12th,  1870.


(Reported  btf  Geo.  F.  Gihhs,)


PRE-EXESTENCE,  INT  SPIRITUAL  FORM,  OF  MAN,  THE  LOWER  ANIMALS
AND  THE  EARTH — THE  TEMPORAL  PROBATIONARY  STATE — THE  MIL-
LENNIUM -THE  FINAL  CHANGE,


Through  the  kind  providence  of
our  heavenly  Father  we  are  permit-
ted, on  this  pleasant  day,  to  assemble
here  in  this  comfortable  house,  for
the  purpose  of  worshiping  God,  and
hearing  instruction  as  the  Lord  may
see  proper,  in  his  kindness  and
wisdom,  to  pour  out  his  spirit,  and
make  manifest  the  truth  to  us.  It
is  a  pleasing  thing  for  the  human
mind,  to  contemplate  that  it  has  j
some  object  to  worship  ;  that  there
is  a  being,  far  exalted  above  us,  who
dwells  in  the  heavens,  who  is  worthy
©fall  adoration  and  praise;  and  that
we  are  his  children,  in  possession  of
a  portion  of  his  attributes.

The  world  which  we  inhabit  is  a
fallen  creation,  a  fallen  world,  shut
out  from  the  presence  of  our  Father,
the  being  whom  we  worship,  so  that
we  cannot  behold  his  lace,  nor  the
glory  of  his  presence.  It  is  for  a
wise  purpose,  that  we  are  placed
here,  in  this  fallen  condition.  It
seems  to  be  so,  as  far  as  we  have
been  made  acquainted  with  the  pur-
poses of  the  great  Jehovah.  It  I
seems  to  be  the  ordeal,  through
which  all  intelligent  beings  must  1
pass,  in  order  to  gain  that  fullness  of
exaltation,  in  the  presence  of  God,
which  is  promised  in  his  word.


We  were  not  always  in  the  condi-
tion we  are  now  in.  We  are  only
placed  here  for  a  few  years,  and  are
adapted  to  our  present  condition.  A
long  time  before  you  and  I  came
here  upon  this  stage  of  action,  we
had  an  intelligent  existence ;  we
dwelt  in  a  better  world  than  this,
and  a  world  that  had  been  redeemed,
a  world  that  had  been  sanctified  and
glorified  ;  in  other  words,  a  world
that  had  been  made  celestial,  just  as
we  are  in  hopes  that  our  present
world  will,  at  some  future  period,  be
exalted  to  the  celestial  glory,  and
become  the  habitation  of  celestial
beings.  That  world  we  occupied,
before  we  came  here,  was  celestial ;
our  Father  had  his  d welling  place
there,  or,  at  least,  one  of  his  dwell-
ing places  ;  and  we  were  surrounded
by  our  Father  s  glory,  we  were  fami-
liar with  his  countenance,  familiar
with  the  beautiful  mansions  that
were  there, — familiar  with  all  the
glory  that  existed  there,  so  far  as
we  were  capable  of  comprehending.
There  was  no  vail  drawn  between
us  and  our  Father,  no  vail  drawn
between  us  and  the  associates  of  our
Father,  who  were  also  celestial
beings,  many  of  them  having  been
redeemed  from  a  world  more  ancient


198


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


than  ours.  We  had  a  long  experi-
ence, I  suppose,  in  that  world  ;  at
least,  we  know  from  that  which  our
Father  has  revealed  to  us,  that  we
were  born  there  ;  that  this  intelli-
gent being  that  has  power  to  dis-
cern, power  to  reflect,  power  to
reason, — that  this  intelligent  being
was  born  in  that  previous  estate.

These  were  some  of  the  first
revelations  given  in  this  last  dispen-
sation. The  Lord  did  not  wait
several  years,  before  he  revealed  unto
us,  in  some  measure,  concerning  our
condition  before  we  came  here.
Hence,  it  was  away  back  in  the  year
1830,  that  this  doctrine  of  the  pre*
existence  of  man  was  revealed,  in
greater  fullness,  than  it  was  given  in
the  Book  of  Mormon.  There  are
two  or  three  places  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  that  reveal  the  pre-exist-
ence  of  man  ;  but  not  in  .such  great
plainness,  as  was  given  soon  after
the  publication  of  that  Book,  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  before
the  Saints  began  to  gather,  informing
us  that  we  were  in  reality  the  child-
ren ofoiirFatherand  God  ;that  we  had
a  pre-existence  in  which  We  had
learned  many  very  important  princi-
ples, connected  with  spiritual  exist-
ence, before  taking  bodies  of  flesh
and  hones,  which  was  also  necessary
to  afford  us  a  still  greater  experience.
Now,  in  this  plan  that  Uod  has
devised  for  the  advancement  of  these
intelligent  beings — by  passing  them
through  various  stages  of  existence,
under  different  circumstances,  and  in
different  conditions, — he  gives  them
experience  that  they  never  could
have  gained,  had  they  remained  in
the  presence  of  the  Father,  in  that
world  which  was  celestial ;  in  other
wfords,  we  were  his  offspring  in  that
world,  our  spiritual  bodies  not
Laving  flesh  and  bones,  but  being  in
the  image  of  the  Father  and  Son, —
his  own  sons  and  daughters.  He


had  a  great  desire  that  we  should  be
educated  and  taught  He  could
teach  us  a  great  many  things  in  that
world  as  we  teach  our  children  ;  he
could  impart  to  us  a  great  many
things — for  there  were  as  many
truths  in  existence  in  that  day  as
are  in  existence  now ;  but  truths
were  taught  to  us,  as  we  were
capable  of  understanding  them.
The  Lord  felt  anxious  that  we  might
come  up  and  eventually  be  made
like  him,  as  it  is  written  in  the  New
Testament,  "  who  shall  change  our
vile  body  that  it  may  be  fashioned
like  unto  his  glorious  body."  I  have
no  doubt  before  we  came  into  this
world,  we  had  a  great  anxiety,  that
we  might  be  brought  up  in  the  same
way  he  was  instructed  and  taught,
and  led  along,  passing  through  differ-
ent conditions  of  existence,  that  we
finally  might  be  counted  worthy  to
be  exalted  at  his  right  hand,  and
receive  the  fullness  of  his  celestial
glory  the  same  that  he  is  in  posses*
sion  of  and  that  we  might  have  all
his  attributes,  dwelling  within  us,
as  separate  individuals  and  person-
ages, that  he  might  exalt  us  like
unto  himself.  Now,  there  is  a  great
deal  to  be  comprehended,  when  we
are  told  that  Ave  are  children  who
will  become  like  our  Father;  that  we
were  like  him  in  our  first  stage  and
condition  of  existence.  W  e  were
there,  as  it  were,  children  without  a
tidiness  of  knowledge ;  many  experi-
ences had  not  yet  been  giveu  to  us;
but  we  were  like  him  in  our  general
outline- — the  outline  of  our  persons  ;
our  general  form  was  like  him,
"after  his  image"  eta,  It  is  thus
written  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  in
that  great  vision  to  the  brother  of
JareJ,  in  which  the  Lord  conde-
scended to  take  the  vail  off  his  eyes.
The  brother  of  Jared  had  gone  up
into  the  mountain,  and  had  meulten
out  of  a  rock  sixteen  small  atones.


which  he  carried  up  Into  the  top  of
the  mount  He  went  there  with  an
object  in  view  ;  the  object  was  to
get  the  Lord  to  touch  the  stones
that  they  might  shine  forth  in  dark-
ness in  the  eight  vessels,  (which  had
been  built  to  convey  him  and  his
brother  across  the  great  waters)  one
to  be  placed  at  each  end  of  each  of
the  vessels.  It  would  naturally  in-
crease the  faith  of  the  brother  of
Jared,  to  believe  it  possible  that  lie
mi^ht  see  the  finder  of  the  L«rd.
He  was  going  to  pray  that  God  would
touch  the  stones,  the  same  as  we
pray  for  the  Lord  to  put  forth  his
finger  and  touch  the  particles  of  oil,
when  we  dedicate  it,  for  sacred  pur-
poses. If  we  pray  in  faith,  we  must
suppose  that  the  finger  touches  the
oil.  And  Jared  prayed  in  faith,
He  did  not  know  but  what  it  might
be  his  privilege  to  see  his  finger.
He  did  see  it  ;  it  appeared  to  him
like  the  finger  of  a  man,  like  unto
flesh  and  blood.  But  his  faith  was
too  great  for  his  nervous  system  ;
for  when  he  saw  the  finger  of  the

Lord,  he  fell  to  the  earth  through
fear.  And  the  Lord  looked  unto  him
ami  asked  him  why  he  had  fallen,
He  answered  and  said,  "  I  saw  the
finger  of  the  Lord  ami  I  feared  lest
he  should  smite  me  ;  for  I  knew  not
that  the  Lord  had  flesh  and  blood/'
He  did  not  know  but  what  his
imperfections  were  so  great,  that  the
Lord  would  smite  him  ;  but  lie  was
commanded  to  arise.  The  Lord
then  asked  him,  u  Sawest  thou  more
than  this  i"  And  he  answered,
44  nay,  Lord,  shew  thyself  unto  nW
Here  was  a  prayer  that  extended  a
little  further.  Tin-  Lord  wanted  to
see  what  amount  of  faith  he  had*
and  lie  put  another  question  to  him,
*;  Bel ievest  thou  the  words  which  I
shall  speak?'1  Ami  he  answered,
"Yea,  Lord,  I  know  that  thou
speakest  the  truth  for  thou  art  a


God  of  truth  and  canst  not  lie."
And  when  the  brother  of  Jared  had
manifested  his  faith,  the  Lord  con-
descended to  show  his  whole  person-
age to  him,  and  said,  "  Seest  thou
that  ye  are  created  after  jnine  own
image.  Behold,  this  body,  which
ye  now  behold  is  the  body  of  my
spirit  and  man  have  I  created  after
the  body  of  my  spirit/'

Here  the  pre-existeuee  of  man  was
taught  in  the  Hook  of  Mormon.
"  All  men  in  the  beginning  were
created  after  the  image  of  this  body
which  he  was  then  shewing.  All
the  human  family  that  then  existed,
and  that  would  exist  in  future  time
upon  the  earth,  were  created  in  the
beginning,  after  the  image  of  that
body  ;  that  is,  that  body  which  he
showed  was  not  a  body  of  flesh  and
bones,  but  a  pure  spiritual  body,
organized  out  of  pure  spiritual  sub-
stance, tilled  with  light  ami  truth,
lie  informed  this  great  man  of  liod,
that  he  was  prepared,  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  world,  to
redeem  his  people.  u  Behold,1*  sajs
he,  "I  am  Jesus  Christ,  I  am  the
Father  and  the  Soil  In  me  shall
all  mankind  have  light,  and  that
eternally,  even  they  who  shall  believe
on  my  name  "

Here,  then,  was  a  great  deal  of
information  given  to  us,  concerning
the  formation  of  the  human  spirit,
ttie  formation  of  men, — the  formation
of  their  persons,  and  their  indivi-
dualities, before  the  foundation  of
this  world.

It  was  after  this  was  given,  and
the  Book  of  Mormon  was  published,
that  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints  arose.  But  the
Lord,  thinking  that  we  had  not
sufficient  understanding  of  this  pre*
existence,  began  to  tell  us  (in  the
month  of  June  1830,  only  a  tew
months  after  the  organization  of  the
Church)  more  about  these  things.


300  JOURNAL  OF

He  told  us  about  the  spiritual  crea-
tion, something  we  did  not  compre-
hend before.  We  used  to  read  the
first  and  second  chapters  of  Genesis
which  give  an  account  of  the  works
of  the  Almighty,  but  did  not  dis-
tinguish between  the  spiritual  work
and  the  temporal  work  of  Christ
Although  there  are  some  things  in
King  James*  translation  that  give
us  a  little  distinction  between  the
two  creations,  yet  we  did  not  com-
prehend it.  The  light  shone,  in
some  measure,  in  darkness,  but  so
dark  were  our  minds,  through  tradi-
tion, that  we  did  not  comprehend
the  light — or  the  few  feeble  glim-
merings of  light,  contained  in  these
first  and  second  e ha] iters  of  the
uninspired  translation.  But  our
heavenly  Father  inspired  his  servant
Joseph  Smith,  to  translate  several
chapters  more  in  the  Book  ot  Gene-
sis, in  December  1830,  which  gave  a
more  lull  account,  down  to  the  days
of  the  Hood,  He  told  u*  a  great
many  important  principles,  princi-
ples that  he  did  not  give,  so  far  as
the  historical  matter  was  concerned,
in  the  Book  of  Mormon.  They  were
an  addition  in  some  respects,  tmd
therefore,  they  were  new  to  us,  who
lived  in  the  early  rise  of  the  Church,
and  calculated  to  give  us  great  joy*

In  these  two  creations  that  took
place  in  the  beginning,  represented
as  the  beginning  of  this  creation—
not  absolutely  the  beginning  of  all
the  creations  of  God  ;  for  his  works
are  without  beginning  and  without,
end,  they  never  cease,  nor  does  his
word  cease  ;  he  speaks  to  us,  so  far
as  this  creation  is  concerned,  accord-
ing to  our  natural  ideas  and  under-
standing. He  says,  "all  things  I
have  created  by  the  word  of  my
power,  which  is  the  power  uf  my
spirit— I  created  them  firstly  spiri-
tual and  secondly  temporal,  which  is
the  beginning  oi  my  work  ;  and


DISCOUBSES.

Again  firstly  temporal,  and  secondly
spiritual,  which  is  the  last  of  my
work,  speaking  unto  you  that  you
may  naturally  understand;  but  unto
myself  my  works  have  no  end
neither  beginning,"

We  learn,  therefore,  when  speak-
ing  of  this  spiritual  creation,  that  not
only  all  the  children  of  men,  of  ;dl
generations,  and  of  all  ages,  were
created  spiritually  in  heaven,  but
that  fish  and  fowls,  and  beast,  and
all  animated  things,  having  life,
were  first  made  spiritual  in  heaven,
on  the  fifth  and  fixth  days,  before
bodies  of  flesh  were  prepared  for
them  on  the  earth;  and  that  there
was  no  flesh  upon  the  earth  until
the  morning  of  the  seventh  day.
On  that  morning  God  made  the
first  fleshly  tabernacle  and  took  man's
spirit  and  put  within  it,  and  man
became  a  living  soul — the  first  flesh
upon  the  earth — the  first  man  also.
Tlx uigh  it  was  the  seventh  day,  no
flesh  but  this  one  tabernacle  was  yet
formed.  No  fish,  fowl  and  beast
was  as  yet  permitted  to  have  a  body
of  flesh.  The  second  chapter  of
Genesis,  (new  translation)  informs
us  that  the  spirits  of  fowls  were
created  in  heaven,  the  spirits  of  fish
and  cattle,  ami  all  things  that  dwell
upon  the  earth,  had  their  p re-exist-
ence. They  were  created  in  heaven,
the  spiritual  part  of  them  ;  not  their
flesh  and  bones.  We  are  also  told
in  this  inspired  translation,  that
these  living  trees  which  we  behold —
for  God  has  given  life  unto  all  things
— had  their  spiritual  existence  in
heaven  before  their  temporal  exist-
ence ;  every  herb  and  every  tree,
before  it  was  planted  out  on  the
earth,  that  is,  the  spiritual  part  of
it,  the  life  of  it,  that  which,  in  other
words,  animates,  that  which  gives
power  to  the  vegetable  to  bring
forth  fruit  after  its  likeness — the
spi ritual  part  existed  in  heaven.  It


was  a  spiritual  creation  first.  We
are  also  told  that  the  earth  was
organized  in  a  spiritual  form,  that
is,  that  portion  that  gives  life
to  the  earth.  We  read  about
the  earth's  dying,  and  that  it
shall  be  quickened  again.  What
is  it  that  will  make  the  earth
die  ?  It  will  be  the  withdrawing  of
the  spiritual  portion  from  it,  that
which  gives  it  life — that  which  ani-
mates it,  and  causes  it  to  bring  forth
fruit  ;  that  which  quickens  the  earth
is  the  Spirit  of  God.  That  spiritual
creation  existed  before  the  temporal
was  formed-  Tins  was  the  beginning
of  the  first  part  of  his  work,  pertain-
ing to  this  creation.  On  the  seventh
day  he  began  the  temporal  portion.
There  was  not  yet  a  man  to  till  the
ground,  "and  the  gods  formed  man
from  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and
took  his  spirit — that  is  the  man's
spirit  —  and  put  it  into  him  and
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath
of  life,  and  man  became  a  living
soul."  This  we  read  in  the  2nd
chapter  of  Genesis,  and  you  will  find
it  recorded  on  the  tith  and  33th
pages  of  the  new  edition  of  the  Pearl
of  Great  Price.

Abraham  also  obtained  a  know-
ledge of  the  spiritual  creation,  as  well
as  the  temporal.  In  giving  a  history
of  the  creation,  he  speaks  of  the
formation  of  man  out  of  the  ground,
how  he  toolf  man's  spirit  that  was
created  in  heaven  and  put  it  within
the  body  of  man,  and  man  became  a
living  soul — the  first  flesh  upon  the
earth,  as  recorded  in  the  second  of
Genesis.  Now,  we  have  been  in  the
habit  of  thinking  that  the  various
kinds  of  animals  that  have  lived,  ac-
cording to  geologists,  were  the  first
flesh  on  the  earth,  and  we  go  away
back  millions  of  ages  to  see  that
these  lower  formations  of  life  existed
before  man.  But  the  Lord  gives  us
different  information  from  this.  He


shows  us  that  among  all  the  anima-
ted creatures  of  flesh,  man  was  the
first  that  was  ever  placed  upon  the
earth  in  this  temporal  condition,
contradicting  the  theories  of  geolo-
gists— that  is,  so  far  as  placing  man
on  the  earth  in  this  present  proba-
tion is  concerned.  What  may  have
taken  place  millions  of  ages  hefore
the  world  was  organized  temporally
for  man  to  inhabit  is  not  revealed  ;
but,  so  far  as  this  present  change  is
concerned,  that  took  place  about  six
thousand  years  ago,  man  was  the
first  being  that  came  upon  the  earth
and  inhabited  a  body  of  flesh  and
bones.  Afterwards,  on  the  seventh
day,  out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God
created  the  beasts  of  the  field.  Go
back  to  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,
and  you  will  find  that  the  beasts,
etc.,  were  formed  on  the  sixth  day
or  period,  and  that  on  the  seventh
there  was  no  flesh  on  the  eatth,  and
having  created  man  as  the  first
fiesh  upon  the  earth,  G»»d  then  crea-
ted, out  of  the  ground,  the  beasts  of

the  field.

Here  is  the  second  part  of  the
beginning  of  his  work  :  firstly,  spiri-
tual,— the  beasts  created  in  heaven  ;
then,  secondly,  temporal,  —  their
bodies  formed  out  of  the  ground,
their  spirits  being  put  wit  Inn  these
bodies,  and  the  beasts  became  living
souls.  As  it  was  with  the  birds  of
the  air,  so  with  the  fish  of  the  sea,
and  so  with  all  animated  creatures
pertaining  to  this  world.  This  is
the  history  of  the  generations  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth,  on  the  day
that  the  Lord  God  created  them ;
and  the  Lord  has  seen  proper  to  re*
veal  this  great  information  in  the
first  of  Genesis,  and  in  the  Book  of
Abraham,

Now,  let  us  consider  the  condition
of  the  temporal  work,  for  it  is  need-
ful fur  us  to  understand  these  things,
that  we  may  advance  in  the  know-


202  JOURNAL  OF

ledge  of  God,  in  the  knowledge  of
truth,  in  this  great  school  of  experi-
ence* Let  us  try  to  understand,
then,  the  nature  of  the  temporal
work;  for  it  was  formed  in  the  man-
ner specified  in  this  revelation.  Was
there  any  death  in  this  creation  after
the  temporal  was  formed,  before  the
fall  ?  No.  Were  any  birds  of  tlie
air  subject  to  death  ?  No.  Were
any  of  the  fishes  of  the  sea  ?  No.
Were  there  any  animals  placed  on

the  earth  in  their  temporal  condition
their  bodies  being  formed  and  adap-
ted to  the  spirit  that  came  from  hea-
ven—were any  subject  to  death?
No.  Were  they  ferocious  ?  No.
To  every  animal  that  God  had  grant-
ed life  he  had  given  every  green
herb  of  the  field  for  meat,  whether  it
was  the  lion,  the  leopard,  the  wolf,
or  whatever  animal  may  have  exist-
ed upon  the  lace  of  the  earth.
There  was  no  such  tiling  as  one
animal  destroying  another— fighting
and  quarrelling  were  unknown
among  the  beasts  of  the  field*  A
little  child,  if  there  had  be  en  any,
could  have  played,  so  far  as  any
danger  was  concerned,  with  these
animals,  and  they  feasted  upon  the
green  herbs  which  were  given  to  the
beasts  for  their  sustenance.  By  and
by,  a  garden  was  made  eastward  in
Eden,  in  which  the  L<vd  planted  a
great  many  beautiful  trees,  This
was  purely  a  temporal  w<*rk,  and
that  Can  Inn  would  have  existed  un-
til to-day  if  death  had  not  come  into
the  world  through  the  fall  of  our
first  parents

How  different  was  the  second  or
temporal  work,  that  existed  in  the
beginning  of  the  great  work  of  crea-
tion, from  the  present  order  of
tilings  !  Now  we  see,  and  according
to  history  we  learn,  that  all  creation
are  at  enmity  one  with  another  in
their  natural  state.  Hence  we  fitid
the  lions  with  teeth,  probably  con-


DISCOURSKS.

structed  since  the  fall,  and  adapted
to  devour  their  prey.  I  do  not
believe  they  had  such  teeth  in  the
beginning.  They  bad  teeth  with
which  they  ate  "  straw  like  the  ox.11
But  everything  was  changed  in  a
great  measure,  in  this  beautiful  tem-
poral creation  ;  and  the  beasts  began
to  fight,  and  quarrel  and  devour
each  other  ;  and  man  began  to  be
ferocious,  like  the  beasts,  desirous
to  kill  his  fellow  mam  We  see  him
at  this  early  stage  in  our  race,  seek-
ing the  blood  of  his  fellows,  and
entering  into  secret  combinations  to
kill,  and  destroy,  and  rob  one  ano-
ther of  their  position  and  property,
and  to  be  at  enmity  one  against  ano-
ther. The  Lord  in  the  midst  of  this
fallen  condition  of  his  temporal  work,
lias  permitted  it  to  continue  for
about  6,00U  years.  But  mankind
have  been  devising  a  multitude  of
measuies,  by  which  they  reform  one
another ;  but  after  they  get  pretty
well  reformed  they  rise  up  again  and
devour  one  an  of  tier  by  wholesale.
While  they  are  engaged  in  reform-
ing each  other,  they  are  making
weapons  of  destruction  to  destroy
one  another.  Enmity  prevails,  and
has  prevailed,  for  tkm  last  6,000
years,  with  the  exception  of  no  wand
then  a  dispensation,  being  intro-
duced, wherein  this  fallen  nature  of
ours  becomes,  in  a  great  measure,
changed  through  obedience  to  the
plan  of*  salvation  which  God  has
revealed  ;  and  then  we  begin  to  love
our  fellow -men,  are  filled  with  love
and  kindness  like,  in  some  measure,
our  heavenly  Father,  going  forth  and
proclaiming  to  them  the  Gospel  of
peace,  and  trying  to  do  them  good,
and  redeem  them,  and  reclaim  them  ;
and  we  succeed,  now  and  then,  in
bringing  some  to  a  higher  state ;
they  are  born  of  God,  and  become
new  creatures  in  Christ,  being  filled
with  that  superior  power,  that  exists


PRE-EXISTENCE,  ETC*


203


in  that  celestial  world,  where  we  ,
formerly  resided.  It  comes  flown
from  the  Father,  and  from  the  Son,
and  enters  into  the  hearts  of  the
sons  and  daughters  of  God,  and  they
are  made  new  creatures  ;  they  begin
to  love  that  which  is  good,  and  hate
that  which  is  evil,  and  begin  to  per-
fect themselves  in  their  various  dis
pen  sat  ions,  according  to  the  light
and  knowledge  sent  down  from  hea-
ven for  their  perfection.

Notwithstanding  so  many  dispen-
sations, and  the  world  has  continued
so  long  under  the  power  of  Satan,
now  is  the  time  when  the  Lord  our
God  has  begun  to  send  forth  a  pro-
clamation of  redemption,  to  lift- us
up  out  of  this  low  fallen  condition
in  which  we  have  been  placed,  and
our  fathers  before  us,  for  so  long  a
time  ;  and  it  so  happens  that  we  are
living  very  near  the  period  when  the
ear tli  will  be  restored  from  its  fallen
condition  to  that  same  temporal  con-
dition in  which  it  existed  before  the
fall,  when  there  was  no  enmity
existing  between  mankind.  I  say,
the  day  is  now  almost  at  hand  when
the  Lord  is  going  to  begin  the  last
of  his  work,  which  will  be  to  make
this  earth  again  temporal — or  in
other  words,  to  remove,  in  some
measure,  the  curse — to  restore  it
back  to  the  temporal  condition  in
which  it  was  when  he  first  organized
it  and  before  sin  contaminated  it.

In  order  to  accomplish  this  work,
he  i<s  working,  according  to  his  own
will  and  pleasure,  among  the  nations,
raising  up  a  kingdom,  a  nucleus,  by
taken  them  i(  one  of  a  city  and  two
of  a  family,"  gathering  them  out
from  every  nation  to  the  land  of
Zion  and  planting  the  truth  in  their
hearts  ;  they  become  more  and  more
instructed  and  learn  more  and  more
of  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  preparatory
to  the  organization  of  this  world
again  in  its  temporal  beauty  and


perfection  as  it  was  when  it  first
issued  forth  in  its  temporal  form
from  the  hands  of  the  Almighty,

There  is  one  thing  connected  with
the  temporal  form  of  the  earth
which  I  did  not  mention  ;  I  will
refer  to  it  now.  While  this  earth
existed  in  its  more  perfect  temporal
form,  Adam  and  Eve  were  placed
upon  it,  and  they  were  immortal,
just  like  all  the  beasts  and  just  like
the  fishes  of  the  sea  ;  death  had  not
yet  come  upon  any  of  them  ;  all
things  were  immortal  so  far  as  this
creation  was  concerned.  The  first
pairs,  the  beginning  of  his  temporal
work,  were  not  subject  to  death.
And  another  thing,  they  were  not
to  be  shut  out  from  the  presence  of
the  Almighty.  They  could  behold
his  countenance,  they  could  hear  his
voice.  Those  who  then  existed —
could  converse  with  him  freely.
There  was  no  veil  between  them
and  the  Lord.  Now,  when  the
more  perfect  temporal  condition
shall  be  restored  again,  in  the  last
of  his  work,  and  the  Lord  shall
begin  to  remodel  this  earth,  to  trans-
figure it,  and  get  it  prepared  for  the
righteous,  the  veil  will  be  taken
away,  in  a  measure  ;  we  shall  bell  old
the  face  of  the  Lord  again  ;  we  shall
be  able  to  associate  with  immortal
beings  again  j  and  we  shall  be  able
to  enjoy  a  great  many  blessings  that
were  introduced  in  the  beginning,
which  were  lost  through  the  fall.
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  be  here,
a  part  of  the  time,  to  instruct  us,
and  those  ancient  patriarchs,  At  lam
included,  will  come  down  out  of
their  ancient  celestial  world,  where
they  were  first  made  spiritual.
They  are  coming  upon  this  creation  ;
and  they  will  have  their  homesteads
here  ;  and  they  will  frequently,  no
doubt,  take  great  joy  in  gathering
together  their  faith  fid  children,
from  the  day  of  their  own  probation


204


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


to  the  one  hundredth  generation.
It  will  be  some  pleasure  for  one  of
our  ancestors  that  was  born  a  hun-
dred generations  ago  to  say,  "Come,
my  children,  you  that  are  here  in
the  flesh  that  have  not  as  yet
become  immortal  you  that  dwell
upon  the  face  of  this  earth,  partially
redeemed — come,  I  have  some  glori-
ous tidings  to  communicate  to  you,
I  have  something  that  you  are  not
in  possession  of,  knowledge  you  have
not  gained,  because  we  have  been
up  in  yonder  celestial  world  ;  we
have  been  dwelling  in  the  presence
of  our  Father  and  God.  We  were
restored  there  in  the  dispensation  in
which  we  died  and  in  which  we  were
translated,  and  we  have  learned  a
great  many  tilings  that  the  children
of  mortality  do  not  know  anything
about  Come,  gather  yourselves
together,  that  you  may  behold  your
former  fathers,  your  lathers*  fathers
and  so  on,  until  you  extend  back
for  a  hundred  generations,  Hear
the  instructions  that  they  shall  im-
part to  you.  They  will  tell  you
about  the  celestial  kingdom,  and  the
higher  glory  thereof,  and  the  bles-
sings that  are  to  be  enjoyed  by  those
that  attain  to  the  fulness  of  that
kingdom/'  Will  not  this  be  encou-
raging to  those  that  are  yet  mortal,
during  the  millennium  1  I  think  it
will.  Then  will  the  knowledge  of
the  fathers,  the  knowledge  of  the
earth,  and  of  the  things  of  God,  and
the  knowledge  of  that  which  is
celestial,  and  great,  and  glorious,
and  far  beyond  the  comprehension
of  imperfect  beings  as  we  now  are
in  our  fallen  state — then  that  know-
ledge will  be  opened  up  to  the
minds  of  the  children  of  men,  during
their  respective  generations  here
upon  the  Girth,  during  the  great
sabbath  of  creation.  What  is  all
this  fori  It  is  to  prepare  their
children,  during  the  millennium  that


they  may  have  this  earth  made
celestial,  like  unto  the  more  ancient
one,  that  they,  with  this  creation,
may  be  crowned  with  the  presence
of  God  the  Father,  and  his  Son
Jesus  Christ.  We  gain  this  know-
ledge and  information  by  degrees.
Our  children  are  educated  and
taught,  until  the  heavens  become
familiar  with  them  ;  the  Lord  be-
comes familiar  with  them  ;  his  coun-
tenance becomes  familiar  to  all  the
righteous  of  the  earth.  Before  we
can  f Lilly  understand  the  nature  of  a
still  greater  change  than  that  which
has  been  wrought  upon  the  temporal
creation,  during  the  millennium,
we  begin  to  expect  it,  and  look  for
it,  and  bye  and  bye,  when  evil  fruit
again  appears  in  the  Lord's  vine-
yard, and  the  earth  is  corrupted  by
the,  sons  of  perdition,  and  some  of
his  people  begin  to  reject  the  hea-
venly light,  and  deny  their  God, —
when  this  period  of  time  shall  come
the  earth  will  be  spared  only  for  a
little  season,  and  the  end  will  come,
and  the  great  white  throne  will
appear,  and  God  will  .sit  upon  the
throne,  and  utter  forth  his  voice  and
our  temporal  heaven  will  flee  away  ;
and  this  earth  although  it  will  be  so
greatly  blessed,  although  it  is  so  far
redeemed,  although  it  is  inhabited
by  the  righteous  for  a  thousand
years,  yet,  because  it  will  become
contaminated,  and  because  it  has
been  so  corrupted  in  the  past,  in
consequence  of  the  fail  of  man,  it
will  have  to  die  and  undergo  a
greater  change,  than  all  those
changes  of  which  I  have  spoken.

But  what  says  the  revelation,
called  the  "Olive  Leaf,"  given  Dec,
27tht  1832,  on  this  subject  1  We
are  told  in  this  that  the  earth  shall
die,  and  pass  away,  but  it  shall  be
quickened  again,  for  God  shall
quicken  the  earth  upon  which  we
live* It  will  become  a  new  earth  ;


but  will  be  prepared  more  perfectly
than  it  was  under  the  three  other
conditions  in  which  it  was  placed  ;
first  its  spiritual  creation,  secondly
its  temporal,  in  which  its  spiritual
and  temporal  were  combined.  The
next  condition  is  that  of  restoring  it
from  the  fall  back  to  a  temporal  con-
dition, and  then  a  still  greater
change,  like  unto  the  death  of  our
bodies,  when  our  bodies  crumble
back  to  mother  earth  and  pass  them-
selves among  the  elements.  So  it
will  be  with  this  earth.  It  will
crumble,  or  in  other  words,  the  ele-
ments will  be  separate* I  asunder,
and  the  world  will  pass  away  from
his  presence.  What  next  1  Ano-
ther great  change  to  be  wrought*
The  same  elements,  constituting  the
earth,  and  the  atmosphere  will  be
brought  together  again,  in  such  a
manner  and  way,  that  the  new  earth
will  look  like  unto  a  sea  of  glass,
and  those  who  ara  worthy  U"  the
celestial  glory  will  inhabit  it  forever,
What  will  be  the  condition  of  the
people  who  dwell  upon  that  glorious
celestial  world  ?  They  will  have  the
presence  of  God  the  Father  with
them.  They  will  be  permitted  to
dwell  where  he  is.  He  will  light
up  that  world  ;  they  will  have  no
need  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  as  we
now  have,  neither  of  the  moon,  nor
stars,  so  far  as  light  is  concerned,  for
the  Lord  God  will  be  their  Ught  and
their  glory  from  that  time  hence-
forth and  forever.  In  this  new  crea-
tion the  tree  of  life  will  flourish  ami
grow.  All  beings  that  partake  of
the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  will  be
constituted,  so  that  they  will  live
for  ever  and  ever.

These  are  the  different  conditions
of  this  creation  given  in  a  general
outline.  We  are  now  living  near
the  close  of  G000  years  during  which
time  evil  and  wickedness  have  pre-
vailed The  devil  has  had  great


power  and  dominion  over  the  genera-
tions of  the  earth  ;  and  the  earth
itself  has  groaned  under  the  load  of
sin  and  corruption  which  has  been
I  upon  its  face.  Enoch  when  envel-
oped in  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,
beli eld  and  heard  the  earth  groan
under  this  load  of  wickedness,  cry-
|  ing  out  to  the  Lord,  saying—4*  When
will  my  creator  sanctify  me,  that
righteousness  may  abide  upon  my
face.  When  shall  I  rest  from  all
the  wickedness  that  has  gone  out  of
me/1  He  was  informed  that  there
was  a  day  of  rest  coming  for  old
mother  earth, — for  he  was  grieved
in  his  heart  for  the  earth  itself,  as
well  as  the  inhabitants  thereof  ;  for
he  saw  how  the  earth  wTas  afflicted,
until  she  groaned  to  be  relieved.
But  the  time  will  come,  when  it
will  be  sanctified.  We  are  living
near  that  period  of  time.  It  is  for
this  purpose  you  have  come  to  these
mountains.  It  is  for  this  purpose
you  have  received  the  spirit  of  truth,
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  comforter,  to
sanctify  you,  and  prepare  you  to
take  part  in  this  great  work  of  the
latter-days,  which  God  has  decreed
from  the  beginning  should  come  to
pass  in  its  time  and  season.

You  have  come  from  the  nations
abroad,  to  be  instructed  in  the  ways
of  the  Lord,  to  be  taught  in  the
ordinances  that  pertain  to  the  great
and  last  dispensation  of  the  tidiness
of  times,— ordinances  that  did  not
pertain  to  any  former  dispensation,
— ordinances  that  were  not  made
known  to  any  former  people,  but
ordinances  and  principles  that  per-
tain to  the  exaltation  and  glory  af
the  world  which  we  inhabit.

This  being  then  the  present  con-
dition of  our  earth,  the  present  con-
dition of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
the  work  that  is  before  them,  to  pre-
pare them  for  the  coming  of  the
Lord,  and  for  the  redemption  of  the


206


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


earth,  what  manner  of  persons
ought  you  and  I  to  be,  to  prepare  :
for  so  great  a  change  which  is  to
come  over  the  face  of  this  creation  ?
Ho iv  ought  we  to  act  and  conduct
ourselves]  How  careful  we  ought
to  he  in  our  doings,  in  all  our  con-
versations, in  all  our  ways,  to  sancti-
fy the  Lord  God  in  our  hearts,  to
have  an  eye  single  to  his  glory,  to
keep  his  commandments  in  all
tilings,  to  obey  him  with  full  purpose  ]
of  heart,  that  we  may  be  visited  j
with  more  and  more  of  that  heaven-
ly divine  spirit,  the  Comforter,  the
Holy  Ghost  which  we  had  confirmed
upon  us,  by  authority,  through  the
laying  on  of  hands.  That  Comforter
should  he  nourished  and  cherished
in  our  hearts.  We  should  not
grieve  it.  We  should  listen  to  its
whisperings,  and  we  should  seek
after  more  light,  and  knowledge,
and  truth.  We  must  not  expect
the  Holy  Spirit  to  impart  the  future
knowledge  that  will  be  necessary  for
the  advancement  of  Latter-day
Saints  without  any  exertion  of  the
mind  on  our  part.  In  all  things  the
Lord  requires  man  as  an  agent  to
exert  his  faculties  in  order  to  obtain
any  blessing,  of  whatever  nature  it
may  be,  whether  it  be  the  spirit  of
vision  or  the  spirit  of  translating,  or
any  other  gift.  We  cannot  let  our
mimis  remain  dormant,  taking  no
thought,  expecting  to  be  filled  with  1
the  spirit  of  translation,  or  the  spirit
of  inspiration,  or  revelation,  or
vision  ;  but  there  must  be  an  exer-
tion ot  the  mind,  there  must  be  an
exercise  of  the  agency  of  man  and
woman,  in  order  that  we  may  reach
out  after  these  great  and  glorious
gifts,  promised  to  us.  And  "by  and
by,  we  will,  after  a  school  of  expe-


rience has  been  given  to  us,  find  our-
selves advanced  to  that  degree,  that
the  Lord  will  condescend  to  visit  us
by  his  angels — visit  us  by  heavenly
communications — visit  us  by  visions
— visit  us  more  fully  by  the  spirit
of  revelation  t  hat  the  words  of  Isaiah
may  be  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.
When  speaking  of  the  latter-day
Zion,  he  says,  "  thy  children  shall  all
be  taught  of  the  Lord" — not  being
under  the  necessity  of  being  taught
by  man,  but  all  shall  know  the  Lord
from  the  least  of  them  unto  the
greatest  of  them.  This  is  the  pro-
mise. All  the  children  will  be
taught  from  on  high,  like  the
Xephite  children  in  ancient  days.
We  know  how  it  was  with  them.
The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  des-
cended upon  them,  filling  them,  and
encircling  them  round  about,  by  a
pillar  of  fire,  and  their  tongues  were
loosed,  even  the  tongues  of  babes
and  sucklings  uttered  forth  great
and  marvelous  things— far  greater
than  that  which  Jesus  had  taught  to
them-  The  Lord  operated  upon
them,  to  utter  forth  his  knowledge,
so  that  their  fathers  marvelled
exceedingly.  So  great  was  the
power  and  intelligence  of  Almighty
(Jod,  manifested  through  these  little
babes,  that  no  man  was  permitted
to  write  the  words  they  spoke,  no
man  was  permitted  to  utter  them,
no  man  was  permitted  to  hand  down
these  things  to  future  generations  ;
they  were  things  too  great,  too  glori-
ous, too  holy,  too  far  advanced  for
the  children  of  this  world.  Hence
they  were  hidden  up  from  thr
world.

May  Gxl  assist  us,  and  pour  out
his  Holy  Spirit  upon  us  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


I  SiSU  THE  AUTHORITIES,  ETC


207


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOII,
Delivered  at  Kaysvixle,  ox  Suxday  Afternoon,  Mahch  1st,  1880.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gibbs.)

SUSTAINING THE AUTHORITIES— POWER OF THE PRIESTHOOD — FAITH-
FULNESS REQUIRED,  ETC.


We  have  been  voting  for  oar  offi-
cers and  for  those  holding  places  in
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  in
this  stake  of  Zion.  Ami  it  is  well
for  us  sometimes  to  understand  what
we  do  in  relation  to  these  matters.
We  hold  up  uur  right  hand  when
voting  in  token  before  God  that  we
will  sustain  those  for  whom  we  vote ;
and  it  we  cannot  feel  to  sustain
them  we  ouuht  not  to  hold  up  our
hands,  because  to  do  this,  would  be
to  act  the  part  of  hypocrites.  And
the  question  naturally  arises,  how
far  shall  we  sustain  them  I  Or  in
other  words,  how  far  are  we  at
at  liberty  to  depart  from  this  cove-
nant which  we  make  before  each
other  and  before  our  God  1  For
when  we  lift  up  our  hands  in  this
way,  it  is  in  token  to  God  that  we
are  sincere  in  what  we  do,  and  that
we  will  sustain  the  parties  we  vote
for.  This  is  the  way  I  look  at  these
things.  How  far  then  should  we
sustain  them,  and  how  far  should
we  not  ]  This  is  a  matter  o!"  serious
importance  to  us  ;  if  we  agree  to  do
a  thing  and  do  not  do  it,  we  become
covenant  breakers  and  violators  of
our  obligations,  which  are,  perhaps,
as  solemn  and  binding  as  anything
we  can  enter  into.


We  frequently  pass  by  many  of
those  important  things  which  we
have  engaged  to  abide  by,  and  some-
times begin  to  whisper  by  way  of
complaining  or  finding  fault  one
with  another  after  we  have  entered
into  solemn  obligations  that  we  will
not  do  it.  What  is  meant  by  sus-
taining a  person  i  Do  we  under-
stand it  1  It  is  a  very  simple  thing
to  me  ;  I  do  not  know  how  it  is  with
I  you.  For  instance,  if  a  man  be  a
teacher,  and  I  vote  that  I  will  sus-
tain him  in  his  position,  when  he
visits  me  in  an  official  capacity  I
will  welcome  him  and  treat  him
with  consideration,  kindness  and
respect  and  if  I  need  counsel  I  will
ask  it  at  his  hand,  and  I  will  do
everything  I  can  to  sustain  him.
That  would  be  proper  and  a  princi-
ple of  righteousness,  and  I  would
not  say  anything  derogatory  to  his
character.  If  that  is  not  correct  I
have  it  yet  to  learn.  And  then  if
anybody  in  my  presence  were  to
whisper  something  about  him  dis-
paraging to  ins  reputation,  I  would
say,  Look  here  !  are  you  a  Saint  %
Yes,  Did  you  not  hold  up  your  hand
to  sustain  him  1  Yes.  Then  why  do
you  not  do  it]  Now,  I  would  call
an  action  of  that  kind  sustaining  him.


208


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


If  any  man  make  an  attack  upon  his
reputation — for  all  men's  reputations
are  of  importance  to  them — I  would
defend  him  in  some  such  way.
When  we  vote  for  men  in  the  solemn
way  in  which  we  do,  shall  we  abide
by  our  covenants  ?  or  shall  we  viol-
ate them  1  If  we  violate  them  we
become  covenant- breakers.  We
break  our  faith  before  God  and  our
brethren,  in  regard  to  the  acts  of
men  whom  we  have  covenanted  to
sustain.  But  supposing  he  should
do  something  wrong,  supposing  he
should  be  found  lying  or  cheating,
or  def  rauding  somebody  ;  or  stealing
or  anything  else,  or  even  become
impure  in  his  habits,  would  you
still  sustain  him  ?  It  would  be  my
duty  then  to  talk  with  him  as  I
would  with  anybody  else,  and  tell
him  that  I  had  understood  that
things  were  thus  and  so,  and  that
under  these  circumstances  I  could
not  sustain  him  ;  and  if  I  found  that
I  had  been  misinformed  I  would
withdraw  the  charge  ;  but  if  not  it
would  then  be  my  duty  to  see  that
justice  was  administered  to  him,
that  he  was  brought  before  the  pro-
per tribunal  to  answer  for  the  things
he  had  dane ;  and  in  the  absence  of
that  I  would  have  no  business  to
talk  about  him.

It  is  well  for  us  to  get  at  some  of
these  little  things  ;  they  are  matters,
however,  of  a  good  deal  of  import-
ance. What  I  have  said  with  regard
to  a  teacher,  would  apply  to  the
priest  and  the  deacon.

Then,  again,  we  have  bishops,
We  vote  for  thera  ;  and  they  hold  a
portion  of  the  priesthood  which
renders  their  duties  many  times
very  unpleasant ;  that  is  naturally
they  would  be  unpleasant ;  but  no
duty  ought  to  be  unpleasant  to  the
servants  of  Ged,  Now,  supposing
the  bishop  should  do  something  that
is  wrong,  what  would  be  our  duty  1


It  would  be  to  go  to  him  and  say,
<£  Bishop,  I  have  reason  to  believe
that  things  are  thus  and  so,  evidence
having  been  presented  to  me,  and  it
is  of  such  a  character  that  I  am  in-
clined to  think  that  you  have  been
taking  a  wrong  course,  and  there-
fore I  have  come  to  talk  to  you,
yourself,  about  the  matter."  Who
ought  to  do  this  ?  Anybody,
What,  would  not  his  position
deprive  us  of  that  right  of  approach-
ing him  t  No.  Supposing  you  had
been  injured  by  him,  or  somebody
else  had  been  injured  by  him,  or
something  had  occurred  that  caused
you  to  entertain  feelings  against  him
it  would  be  much  better  to  probe
the  thing  to  the  bottom  and  have  it
straightened  out  than  to  foster  it
and  allow  it  to  corrode  and  inter-
fere with  your  peace  and  happiness,
because  you  have  covenanted  to  sus-
tain him  ;  on  the  other  hand,  we
cannot  sustain  anything  that  is  un-
righteous, impure  or  unholy.  We
go  to  him  and  say,  Bishop  so  and
so,  I  have  come  to  see  you  on  un-
pleasant business — you  may  be  po-
lite about  it  or  you  may  not — -but
people  can  always  afford  to  be  po-
lite ;  I  have  learned  thus  and  so ;  I
hope  I  am  misinformed,  can  you  ex-
plain that  to  me!  If  the  matter
could  be  explained  to  your  satisfac-
tion you  would  be  glad  of  it  ;  but
whether  it  could  be  or  not  you
would  have  the  satisfaction  of  know-
ing that  you  had  performed  your
duty.  If  not,  however,  and  the
matter  be  of  such  a  character  as  to
call  for  an  investigation,  it  would
be  proper  that  it  be  inquired  into
by  the  proper  authorities.  Then
you  are  free,  and  you  have  not  viol-
ated any  covenant,  If  any  cove-
nants have  been  violated,  it  is  he
that  is  guilty,  and  it  is  for  him  to
account  for  his  acts  to  the  Lord  and
his  brethren  ;  and  if  no  wrong  shall


SUSTAINING  THE  AUTHORITIES,  ETC.  209


he  found  in  him,  there  is  no  good
man  but  what  would  be  pleased  to
see  such  a  man  acquitted.  But
while  we  seek  equity  and  justice  on
the  one  hand,  on  the  other  we  must
not  interfere  with  the  rights  of  any-
body ;  no  matter  who  it  is  that  in-
dulges in  iniquity,  their  iniquity
will  find  them  out  sooner  or  later.
And  it  is  better  for  us  instead  of
talking  to  this  one  and  the  other,  if
wrong  exists,  to  go  direct  to  the
persons  themselves  and  have  it  ad-
justed, then  bring  it  up  according  to
the  rules  laid  down  governing  such
matters.  Then  the  doer  of  the
wrong  is  accountable  for  the  wrong,
not  somebody  else*  Then  when  he
is  dealt  with  by  the  Church,  whe  ;
ther  he  be  a  teacher,  priest,  deacon,
bishop  or  anybody  else,  you  are  free
from  all  responsibility  afterwards  of
sustaining  that  man.  And  until
the  proper  course  has  been  taken
with  such  a  person,  we  should  be
very  careful  what  course  we  pursue
in  relation  to  this  kind  of  thing,  so
that  we  do  not  violate  our  cove-
nants*

There  is  an  uneasy  feeling  existing
among  some  people  :  they  can  see
plenty  of  wrong  all  around  if  they
have  a  mind  to  ;  and  some  will  apos-
tatize because  somebody  else  has
done  wrong.  What  a  foolish  course
that  is  to  pursue  !  If  we  follow  God's
>lan  we  can  bring  the  sin  right
tome  to  the  man  who  has  done  the
wrong ;  and  if  he  did  not  repent  of  it,
he  would  have  to  be  cut  off.  E ut
the  devil  would  say,  "  I  would  not
stop  in  a  church  where  there  were
such  folks/'  He  would  first  influ-
ence a  number  of  the  people  to  do
wrong,  and  then  he  would  try  to  get
the  others  to  leave  the  Church  be-
cause some  of  the  members  were  do-
ing wrong.  That  however  would  be
foolish,  wid  contrary  to  the  order  of
God.

No.  H.


The  Lord  has  placed  in  his  Church
Apostles  and  Prophets,  High  Priests,
Seventies,  Elders,  etc.,  what  for?
For  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints.
Are  we  all  perfect  to  begin  with?
No.  These  various  officers  are  for
perfecting  of  the  Saints,  What
else  1  For  t  he  work  of  the  ministry;
that  men  might  be  qualified  and  in-
formed and  be  full  of  intelligence,
wisdom  and  light,  and  learn  to  pro-
claim the  principles  of  eternal  truth
and  to  bring  out  from  the  treasury
of  God  tilings  new  and  old,  things
calculated  to  promote  the  welfare  of
the  people.  Now,  then,  t  hese  offices
having  been  placed  in  the  Church,
every  man  ought  to  be  respected  in
his  office.  I  know  some  of  you  think
we  can  respect  some,  and  some  we
[  cannot  resrect ;  we  can  respect  some
!  of  the  prominent  authorities — I  do
not  know  who  they  are,  do  you  1  You
remember  when  Jesus  was  upon  the
earth,  some  of  his  followers  were  con-
tending, as  to  who  was  the  greatest:
and  he  took  a  little  child  and  placed
it  in  their  midst,  he  said,  "  he  that
can  be  most  like  this  little  child,  is
the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  hea-
ven.'1  And  I  will  tell  you  more
than  that,  that  the  teacher,  or  dea-
con that  fulfills  his  duties  is  a  great
deal  more  honorable  than  a  presi
dent  or  any  of  the  twelve  that  does
not  And  there  are  duties  and  re-
sponsibilities devolving  on  all  of  us
pertaining  to  these  matters  ;  and  we
ought  to  be  very  careful  in  all  our
acts  that  we  do  riot  transgress  the
laws  of  God,

In  a  few  remarks  yesterday  I
referred  to  the  various  officers  of
the  Church,  and  to  some  of  the  lead-
ing duties  that  devolve  upon  them
to  attend  to.  There  are  duties
devolving  upon  all  of  us  which  we
cannot  ignore.  Duties  as  Apostles,
duties  as  presidents  of  stakes,  duties
as  bishops,  duties  as  high  councilors,

Vol.  XXL


21U


JOURNAL UJ; I>I SCO


duties  pertaining  to  all  the  various
officers  in  tar  Church.  Well,  can
any  man  that  has  received  the  holy  i
priesthood,  and  who  comprehends  !
the  position  he  occupies  before  God  J
—which  very  few  of  us  can  do — can
lie  afford  to  neglect  any  of  those
duties  ?  I  think  not.  We  call  this
organization  that  we  are  associated
with,  the  church  and  kingdom  of
God.  Is  it  the  Church  of  God  ]
Yes.  Then  it  U  God's  church  is  it
not?  Yes.  Who  is  at  the  head  of
it]  The  Lord  ought  to  be.  and  we
ought  to  be  subject  to  him.  Who?
Why  every  one  of  us ;  myself,  say,
and  all  the  Twelve,  the  presidents
of  stakes,  the  bishops,  the  high
priests,  the  elders,  the  seventies,  the
high  councilors,  and  all  men  in  the
Church  ouLrht  to  feel  that  we  are
the  church  of  God,  in  the  Church
of  God  and  subject  to  the  law  of
God  We  talk  about  a  priesthood  ;
who  are  the  Priesthood,  and  what  is
it?  As  1  understand  it,  it  is  the
rule  and  the  government  of  God,
whether  it  exists  in  the  heavens  or
on  the  earth  ;  whether  we  refer  to
the  things  of  time  or  to  the  thitigs
of  eternity;  whether  we  refer  to
spiritual  things  or  to  temporal  things,
they  are,  or  ought  to  be,  under  the
guidance  arid  dominion  of  God.
How  and  from  whom  did  we  receive
our  authority  1  Let  us  go  back  for
a  while,  and  who  could  we  find  any-
where upon  the  earth  that  had
authority  even  to  proclaim  the  Gos
pel,  or  to  administer  in  the  ordinan-
ces of  the  Gospel?  Could  we  find  ,
anybody?  No,  we  could  not  I
xould  not  in  my  younger  days — and
I  sought  diligently  for  it,  but  I  could
not  find  anybody  who  possessed  it.
What,  not  among  the  religious  pro-
fessors of  the  world*  Nowhere
among  the  learned,  the  intelligent,
the  scientific  I  No,  nowhere-  Very
well,  how  did  we  come  at  a  know-


led^  of  this?  God  revealed  it  to
his  servant  Joseph  Smith.  And
when  he  did  *o,  he  did  not  say  much
about  it  himself.  The  first  thing  he
did  when  he  appeared  to  Joseph  was
to  introduce  his  Son  ;  pointing  unto
him,  he  said  :  44  This  is  my  beloved
Sou,  hear  him."  And  what  did  the
Son  say  ?  We  have  his  teachings  in
the  Gospel,  in  his  communications
with  the  Nephites  and  others.  Then
there  were  others  who  held  the
priesthood  with  him  :  who  held  it  on
the  ear tli  and  who  no  w  hold  it  in  eter-
nity, and  who  held  the  keys  of  this
priesthood;  and  those  several  parties
came  and  conferred  the  keys  which
they  held  upon  him,  but  not  until
the  Lord  had  come  and  given  them
permission  to  do  so.  Hence  we  got
our  Aaronic  priesthood  through  that
means,  and  we  got  our  Melchisedec
priesthood  through  that  means,  and
any  office  or  ordinance  that  any
of  you  have  received,  you  received  it
through  that  medium,  or  you  have
received  none  at  all  Very  well,
what  does  it  lead  us  to  ?  To  those
whom  we  call  sons  of  God,  dust
as  it  was  said  on  former  occasions,
u  Now  are  we  sons  of  God,  and  it
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall
be  :  but  we  know  that,  when  he
shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him,
for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Very
well,  wTe  are  the  sons  of  God
then,  the  chosen  of  God,  the  elect  of
God,  called  by  him,  set  apart  by
him,  through  the  medium  of  this
holy  priesthood  of  which  I  have
spoken.  And  if  we  have  received
any  office,  or  calling,  or  authority,
or  any  po  wer  to  administer  in  any  of
the  ordinances,  we  have  received
that  from  the  hand  of  God,  and  we
can  only  perform  these  ordinances
according  to  the  priesthood  we
are  permitted  to  possess.  For
instance,  an  elder  cannot  perform
the  labor  of  an  apostle  ;  a  bishop


SUSTAINING  THE  AUTHORITIES,  ETC*


211


-cannot  perform  the  labor  of  an  apos-
tle ;  and  a  bishop,  as  a  bishop,  out-
side of  other  things,  has  not  author-
ity to  lay  on  hands  to  impart  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  whatever
he  may  do  in  that  capaeity  it  is
through  the  Me[chisedec  priesthood
which  lie  holds,  and  he  could  not  do
it  without.  Can  a  priest  lay  hands
upon  people  and  say  "  Receive  ye
the  Holy  Ghost  f  No,  it  does  not
belong  to  him  to  do  it.  Wei),  then,
men  are  necessarily  routined  to
operate  within  the  limits  and  autho-
rity of  the  various  ofiiees  of  the
priesthood  to  which  they  are  called
and  ordained — an  elder  to  perform
the  office  of  an  elder,  a  priest  to  per-
form the  office  of  a  priest.  In  early
days  it  was  quite  common  for  a  priest
to  go  out  and  preach  the  Gospel  and
baptize  people  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  then  call  upon  an  elder  to
lay  hands  upon  them  to  confirm  them
members  of  the  Church,  for  the
priest  did  not  have  the  power  to  do
it  And  while  the  priest  could  bap-
tize, a  teacher  or  a  deacon  could  not,
not  having  the  authoritv  to  do  it  ;
if  they  were  to  do  it,  it  would  not
amount  to  anything.  There  is  strict
order  about  these  things  associated
with  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God.  Well,  then,  on  the  other
hand,  if  we  perform  our  duties,  each
one  of  us  in  our  proper  position,
God  gives  us  power  to  accomplish
the  object  we  have  in  view,  no  mat*
ter  what  it  is,  or  what  priesthood  we
hold  ;  no  matter  whether  it  is  the
president  of  the  Church,  or  the  pre
sident  of  the  stake,  a  bishop,  a  high
councilor,  a  high  priest,  a  seventy,
or  an  elder,  priest,  teacher  or  deacon;
no  matter  what,  if  they  perform
duties  with  an  eye  single  to  the  glory
of  God,  he  will  sustain  them  in  their
operations  and  administrations.

Now,  I  will  refer  to  a  principle
which  is  perhaps  one  of  the  greatest


manifestations  of  the  power  and
goodness  of  God  that  exists  in  this
Church,  and  at  the  same  time  one
that  is  as  Iktle  noticed  ;  but  one
wherein  God  does  manifest  himself
in  a  most  remarkable  manner  in  the
view  of  all  reflecting,  intelligent  men.
For  instance,  the  elders  go  forth  to
preach  the  Gospel  ;  they  call  upon
people  t>  repent  and  to  be  baptized
in  the  name  of  Jesus  for  the  remis-
sion of  their  sins.  I>id  you  ever
think  what  the  name  meant  !  If  a
man  go  in  the  name  uf  another  per-
son, lie  goes  by  the  authority  of  that
person.  If  an  agent,  say  of  Z,  C.  M,
[,,  or  any  other  firm,  go  in  the  name
of  this  firm,  it  is  expected  that  he
has  credentials  from  the  firm  he
represents.  Or,  if  a  governor  comes
here,  he  is  first  appointed  by  the
proper  authorities  —  nominated  by
the  President  and  continued  by  the
Senate  of  the  United  States,  and  he
comes  with  proper  credentials  to  act
as  governor  of  this  Territory  ;  he
comes  in  the  name  or  by  the  autho-
rity of  the  United  States  ;  and  the
government  of  the  United  States
feels  itself  bound  to  back  up  his  acts,
the  same  as  a  mercantile  firm  would
feel  obligated  to  acknowledge  the
acts  of  its  agents.

Now,  then,  the  Lord  has  com-
menced his  Church  here  upon  the
earth.  He  has  conferred  upon  men
Ins  holy  Melehisedec  priesthood  ;  he
has  told  them  to  go  forth  and  preach
and  call  upon  the  people  to  repent
and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
they  should  receive  the  Hoiy  Ghost
You  all  know  about  these  tilings,  it
is  not  necessary  to  talk  much  about
them.

Very  well ;  now,  then,  this  elder
goes  forth  in  the  name  of  God,  does
he  net  1  That  is  the  way  I  under-
stand it— by  the  authority  of  the
Lord,  and  in  the  name  of  the  Lord


212


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES.


Jesus  Christ;  he  preaches  this  doc-
trine to  the  people.  **  Now/*  says
he,  i%  repent  and  be  baptized,  every
one  of  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  for
the  remission  of  your  sins,  and  you
shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost"  A
priest  could  not  say,  You  shall  re^
ceive  the  Holy  Ghost ;  a  teacher  or
&  deacon  could  not  say  it,  neither
could  a  bishop  say  it  by  virtue  of
his  bishopric,  but  he  could  by  virtue
of  the  high  priesthood  he  holds.
Now,  then,  let  any  of  these  men  go
to  work  and  lay  hands  on  anybody
for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  fchey  might  as  well  do  anything
else,  it  would  not  amount  to  any-
thing. But  an  elder,  or  anyone
holding  the  proper  authority,  comes
along,  and  takes  the  candidate  for
baptism  and,  after  baptizing  him,  he
lays  his  hands  upon  his  head  and
says  :  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  by  virtue  of  the
holy  priesthood  conferred  upon  me,
I  lay  my  hands  upon  your  head  and
con  firm  you  a  member  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints ;
and  I  say  unto  you,  receive  ye  the
Holy  Ghost."  Did  you  ever  think
of  that  1  It  is  quite  a  significant
thing,  is  it  not?  And  you  do  it  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  and  by
authority  which  God  has  given  you.
You  lay  your  hands  upon  the  indi-
vidual who  has  been  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  say,  "  Receive
ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  he  receives
it.  if  that  is  not  so,  tell  me,  will
you,  you  that  have  had  hands  laid
upon  your  heads  by  the  elders  of
this  Church.  You  know  what  I  say
is  true.  Now,  I  propose  to  show  a
certain  principle,  namely,  that  God
is  true  to  the  covenants  which  he
makes  with  us,  and  that  there  is  no
violation  of  the  law  or  promises  on
his  part.  God  will  bless  a  teacher
of  this  Church  when  he  goes  forth
in  the  performance  of  his  duties


among  the  people  ;  lie  will  bless  a
bishop  in  his  administration,  and

j  others  in  the  discharge  of  their  sev-

]  end  duties,  no  matter  what  their

I  priesthood  may  be.  But  here  is  an
important  item  :  there  are  some  of
these  things  which  1  have  referred  to
that  some  cannot  do— they  cannot
not  lay  hands  upon  them  to  impart
unto  them  the  Holy  Ghost If  an

j  elder  can,  he  does  it  by  and  through
the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  through
the  medium  of  the  holy  priest  hood
conferred  upon  him  by  those  holding
authority.  And  when  he  performs
this  act,  the  recipients  having  com-
plied with  the  requirements — faith,
repentance  and  baptism  —  when  he
lays  his  hands  upon  their  heads,  God
sanctions  his  action  by  imparting
the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  proving  that
God  is  true  to  his  agreement  ;  and
through  that  means  we  become  the
sons  of  God  and  belong  to  the  house-
hold of  faith,  and  to  us  properly  be-
long the  covenants  ami  blessings  as-
sociated therewith.  These  are  the
initiatory  steps?.  And  we  have  a
witness  within  ourselves,  each  one
of  us,  in  regard  to  those  great  prin-
ciples that  God  has  revealed  to  the
human  family. Now,  then,  are  we

j  the  sons  of  God  I  Is  he  our  Father?
Yes.  Have  we  received  his  Spirit,
whereby  we  are  enabled  to  cry,  "Ab-
ba Father,"  or  "  my  Father  f  Yes,
What  have  we  done  since  we  re-
ceived it?  We  do  not  like  to  look
at  some  of  our  acts  when  we  think
of  these  things  ;  we  would  rather
we  could  blot  them  out  from  our
memories,  but  we  cannot ;  they  are
there.  And  when  we  reflect  upon
our  follies,  our  imperfections  and

I  our  iniquities  of  various  kinds,  how
do  we  feel  ?  We  do  not  feel  pleasant
about  it. God  has  conferred  upon

j  us  the  greatest  treasure  and  the
greatest  boon  he  could  bestow  upon
the  human  family,  but  we  have


received  the  treasure  in  earthen
vessels.  We  often  do  things  we
ought  not  to  do,  and  leave  undone
things  we  oimht  to  do  ;  and  how
often  have  we  grieved  the  Spirit  of
God  within  us  !  He  lias  done  more
for  us  than  this-  He  has  placed  us
here  in  his  Church  and  kingdom  :
he  has  gathered  us  together  ;  lie  lias  ,
organized  us  according  to  the  laws  ;
and  order  of  the  holy  priesthood-
He  has  united  us  to  our  wives,  and
our  wives  to  their  husbands,  with  an
everlasting  covenant  that  cannot  be
be  broken.  But  we  break  it  some-
times, don't  we?  He  has  shown  us
how  and  in  what  way  our  wives  may
be  united  with  us  in  the  eternities
to  come,  and  how  we  may  have  our
children  sealed  to  us  and  be  one
with  us  in  time  and  in  eternity,  and
has  poured  blessings  upon  many  of
our  heads  that  will  exist  while  time
shall  last  and  eternity  endure*  It
was  said  of  Jesus,  that  to  his  govern-
ment and  dominion  there  should  be
bo  end,  And  the  same  has  been
said  of  a  great' many  more  ;  and  yet
we  will  allow  little  things  to  sepa-
rate us  from  our  God,  and  from  our
brethren,  and  from  our  wives  arid
then  our  wives  from  their  husbands,
and  break  up,  and  rant  and  rear  and
destroy,  until  we  hardly  know
whether  it  is  us  or  somebody  else.
Sometimes  we  hardly  know  whether
we  are  in  the  Church  and  kingdom
of  God  or  not,  until  in  many  instan-
ces the  lisrht  within  us  becomes
darkness,  and  then,  oh,  how  great  is
that  darkness  !  It  is  necessary  that
we  should  study  well  and  watch  well
the  path  of  our  feet,  We  are  here
laying  the  foundation  tor  eternity,
and  for  no  other  purpose.  We  are
here  that  we  may  receive  bodies,
that  in  our  bodies  and  spirits,  and  [
through  them  and  through  the
powers  of  the  priesthood  and  the
everlasting  Gospel,  we  may  gain  a


position  by  and  bye,  among  the  Gods
in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  with  them
possess  a  glory  and  dominion  and
authority,  power  and  exaltation  that
has  hardly  entered  into  our  hearts
to  conceive  of.  And  yet,  we  will
fritter  away  our  privileges,  treat
lightly  the  things  of  God.  disregard
the  counsels  of  God  and  the  priest-
hood of  God,  and  wander  in  by  and
forbidden  paths,  and  lose  sight  of
these  great  and  glorious  principles
th^t  God  has  revealed  for  the  salva-
tion of  the  human  family.

Referring  to  the  principle  of  union,
we  ought  to  be  one.  We  have  things
come  up  quite  frequently,  say,  in  a
legislative  capacity  and  otherwise,
and  our  legislators  and  others  enter
into  certain  measures,  but  the  peo-
ple will  not  be  sufficiently  united  to
carry  them  out.  And  there  seems
to  be  a  spirit,  more  or  less  among
the  people  like  this :  some  will
brusquely  and  thoughtlessly  say,
u  I  will  be  damned  if  I  don't  have
my  own  way,"  All  right  I  will
tell  you  another  thing  :  you  will  be
damned  if  you  do,  unless  your  way
is  the  wav  that  God  will  sanction.

pi

Let  me  speak  of  some  other  things
associated  with  this.  If  we  had  per-
fect union,  what  is  there  we  could
not  accomplish  ]  And  yet  God  has
done  a  great  deal  for  us.  We  have
for  instance,  one  man  in  Congress  to
represent  our  interests  ;  only  one
man,  and  he  has  not  a  vote  at  that
And  in  a  great  many  instances  the
combined  powers  of  the  United
States  have  been  plotting  against  us,
and  it  is  to-day  seeking  our  over-
throw. And  why  1  Because  we
dare  believe  in  God,  and  because  we
dare  keep  his  commandments,  mis-
erably as  we  do  it,  and  the  little  we
do  of  it  We  do  not  do  much,  but
the  little  we  do,  produces  this  kind
of  feeling  ;  because  this  world  is
opposed  to  God  and  to  his  laws  and


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


to  his  church  and  kingdom,  And  j
what  have  they  clone  hitherto  i
You  could  not  get  a  man  anywhere
in  the  United  States  that  knows
anything  of  the  workings  of  govern-
ment or  affairs  brought  in  operation
against  us*  but  what  believed  that
we  wouM  have  been  destroyed  and
swept  off  the  earth  long  ago*  But
we  ate  still  here,  Why  1  Not  be-
cause you  and  I  had  fulfilled  all  our
covenants  and  observed  the  laws  of
God  ;  but  it  is  because  God  knows
and  remembers  that  we  are  but
flesh,  but  weak,  fallen  humanity ;
he  remembers  we  are  but  dust ;  it  is
because  he  feels  kindly  and  gra*
ciously  toward  us,  and  has  said  that
it  is  his  business  to  take  care  of  his
Saints,  and  to  fight  our  battles  lor
us*  It  is  not  because  of  what  we
have  done,  for  we  have  not  duue
ttiuch.  And  if  Hod  had  not  sus-
tained us  and  turned  away  and  re-
strained the  wrath  of  man,  we
would  not  have  been  here  to-day.
Now,  this  is  a  fact.  Well,  God  is
kind  to  us  ;  do  not  let  us  treat  him
so  thoughtlessly  ;  do  not  let  us  treat
his  ordinances  lightly  ;  but  rather
let  us  reverence  and  esteem  those
men  upon  whom  God  has  placed  his
holy  priesthood,  and  let  us  try  by
our  faith  and  prayers  and  by  our
acts,  to  sustain  them  in  all  particu-
lars as  we  agreed  to  do  when  we
held  up  our  hands.  And  then  I
ask  no  odds  of  the  combined  powers
of  the  whole  world,  for  God  is  on
our  side,  and  as  long  as  we  maintain
our  position  before  him,  I  will  risk
the  balance.  Ho  holds  the  nations
in  his  hands,  and  he  will  say  to
them,  as  he  did  to  the  waves  of  the  !
mighty  ocean— Ci  Hitherto  shalt  thou
go  and  no  farther,  and  here  shall
thy  proud  waves  be  stayed.11  And
they  cannot  help  themselves.  We
are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  they
are. And  I  am  afraid  sometimes,


:  when  I  see  the  follies  of  my  breth-
ren ;  I  tremble  for  the  result  ;  but
God  is  gracious  and  kind.  Do  not
let  us  be  ungrateful,  but  let  us  try
to  remember  the  blessing  with
which  we  are  surrounded,  the  bene-
fits he  confers  upon  us — the  light
of  the  holy  Gospel,  our  present  and
eternal  associations  ;  and  remember
that  we  are  placed  here  as  represen
tatives  ot  God  upon  the  earth,  to
operate  with  prophets  and  apostles
and  men  of  God  who  lived  and  died
and  are  now  behind  the  vail,  to
operate  with  them  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  purposes  of  God,  per-
taining to  the  earth  whereon  wt-

stand.  We  are  living  in  an  eventful
time,  in  the  dispensation  of  the  full-
ness of  times,  the  period  in  which
God  has  said  he  would  gather  to-
gether all  tilings  in  one,  whether
they  be  things  in  heaven  or  tilings
on  the  earth  ;  and  therefore,  he  has
organized  us  as  we  are.

When  Jesus  was  here  lie  felt  the
importance  of  the  things  I  am  now
speaking  of  ;  and  when  he  was  about
to  leave  his  disciples  he  knew  what
the  powers  of  darkness  were,  for  he
battled  with  them  ;  and,  indeed  he
was  able  to  do  so,  having  been
anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness
above  his  fellows*  But  notwith-
standing this  and  the  fact  of  Ids  be-
ing the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,
yet,  when  he  came  to  wrestle  with
the  difficulties  he  had  to  cope  with,
he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  and
said  fci  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let
this  cup  pass  from  me  ;  I  shrink  to
encounter  the  things  I  have  to  cope
with,  but  nevertheless,  not  my  will
but  thine  be  done,"  Now,  we  have-
to  pass  through  a  variety  of  things  ;
many  of  us  are  tried  and  tempted,
and  we  get  harsh  and  ban  I  feelings
against  one  another.  And  it  re-
minds me  of  your  teams  when  going
down hill with a#  heavy  load,.


SUSTAINING  THE  AUTHORITIES,  ETC.


2id


When  the  load  begins  to  crowd  on
to  the  horses,  you  will  frequently
see  one  snap  at  his  mate,  and  the
other  will  prick  up  his  ears  and  snap
back  again.  And  why  ?  A  little
while  before,  perhaps,  and  they  were
plajing  with  each  other  Because
the"  load  crowds  on  them.  Well,
when  the  load  begins  to  crowd,  do
not  snap  at  your  brethren,  but  let
them  feel  that  you  are  their  friends,
and  pull  together.  Says  Jesus,  with
reference  to  his  disciples,  "  Father,
I  pray  that  these  may  be  one,  I  in
them  and  thou  in  me  ;  that  that
spirit,  0  God  that  dwells  in  thee
and  that  thou  hast  imparted  unto
me,  might  also  dwell  in  them,  ami
that  their  hearts  may  be  united  to-
gether by  the  bonds  of  eternal  life
and  fellowship  and  priesthood  ;  that
they  may  feel  after  one  another's
welfare  and  seek  to  promote  one
another's  happiness,  we  having  drunk
of  that  river,  the  streamy  whereof
shall  make  glad  the  city  of  our
God that  it  may  arise  and  flow
and  bubble  in  our  hearts,  and  that
its  vivifying  streams  may  be  felt
wherever  we  go,  and  that  the  influ-
ence and  light  and  power  and  spirit
and  intelligence  of  God  may  be  with  us,
that  we  may  be  one,  according  to
the  prayer  of  our  Lord,  *'as  I
Father,  am  in  thee,  and  thou  in  me,
that  the  world  may  know  that  thou
hast  sent  me,"  These  principles  are
as  eternal  as  the  heavens.  Do  they
exist  in  heaven  ]  Yes.  You  read
the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  pertain-
ing to  these  matters  ;  and  how  is  it?

fci  In  the  beginning  God  created
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  And
the  earth  was  without  form  and
void ;  and  darkness  was  upon  the
face  of  the  deep.  And  the  Spirit  of
God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the
waters.

And  God  said,  Let  there  lie  light:
and  there  was  light.11


He  had  nobody  around  him  to
rise  up  and  say,  had  you  nut  better
put  it  off  for  a  little  while,  or  other-
wise change  tilings,  or  to  intimate
that  they  were  not  prepared  lor
what  was  done.  No,  they  knew
better,  I  suppose  it  would  be  more
correct  to  render  it,  "  And  the  Gods
said,  Let  there  be  light,  etc"  But
to  us  you  know  there  is  only  one
God  ;  and  he  said,  let  there  height,
and  there  was  light.  And  God  saw
the  light  that  it  was  goo<L  It  was
made  according  to  eternal  principles,
according  to  the  strictest  principles
of  intelligence  and  philosophy;  and
when  it  was  made,  it  was  declared
good.

In  the  councils  of  the  Gods  in  the
eternal  worlds  there  was  no  confu-
sion—I rather  think  there  were  no
politicians  there,  no  one  to  get  up
any  feelings  of  animosity,  Things
were  agreed  upon,  and  when  this
was  done  they  were  carried  out.
When  agreed  upon  God  would  say,
let  so  and  so  be  done,  and  it  was
done.  Now.  we  see  that  there  was
perfect  unanimity  ;  but  there  was
not  always  unanimity  in  heaven  even.
What,  not  in  heaven  %  No,  not
until  one  thud  part  was  cast  out ;
and  I  do  not  think  that  it  was  for
doing  any  good.  Sometimes  I  think
we  will  have  to  cast  out  quite  a
number  too,  in  order  to  get  things
in  the  right  shape.  £ata:i  was  cast
out,  and  those  that  adhered  to  him
who  rebelled  against  God  in  the
eternal  worlds.  Well,  everything
has  not  been  altogether  pure  in  hea-
ven ;  but  they  straightened  them
out  as  well  as  they  could,  as  we  do
here  sometimes,  and  as  we  do  not  do
here  very  often.

And  when  we  talk  about  the  hea-
vens, there  will  he  a  new  heaven  as
well  as  a  new  fiarth. You  know,  we
|  read  that  there  will  be  a  new  heaven
1  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  righteous


21G  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ness  will  dwell.

Well,  we  are  here  struggling  and
trying  to  introduce  correct  princi-
ples, and  to  advance  not  only  the
interest*  of  tlie  Church  of  God,  but
the  kingdom  of  ( Jod,  for  God  will
have  a  kingdom.  I  hope  you  will
not  tell  it  to  anybody  if  I  tell  you
jptftftthing — t  loil  will  have  a  king-
dom, and  he  will  have  rule  and
dominion,  fur  this  earth  belongs  to
him  and  lie  will  possess  it,  and  his
Saints  will  inherit  it  at  last  We
did  not  use  to  be  afraid  of  talking
about  the*e  things.  In  former  times
they  told  u.s  that  the  Saints  of  the
Most  High  .should  finally  take  the
kingdom  and  the  greatness  of  the
kingdom,  which  should  be  given  to
the  Saints  of  the  Must  High  God.
Do  you  believe  it?  I  happen  to  be
one  who  believes  it.  And  1  pro-
phesy that  it  will  br>  fulfilled.  But
we  are  a  sony  lot  of  people  to  do  a
thing  of  that  kind,  are  we  not?
We  have  not  made  much  progress
yet  in  tlie  race  ;  we  are  only  pre-
paring for  it,  many  of  us  cannot  do
what  Brother  Joseph  F.  Smith  was
talking  about  yesterday,  that  is
making  a  sacrifice  and  feel  that  we
are  for  God  and  his  kingdom.  But
we  can  hardly  get  out  of  it  I  tell
you  how  some  of  us  feel — "God
bless  me  and  my  wife,  my  son  John
and  his  wife  us  four  and  nu  more
Amen."  That  feeling  is  a  long  way
from  the  other  God  feels  interested
in  the  welfare  of  the  whole  human
family.  What,  of  the  Saints  f  Yes,
and  the  others  too.  But  the  others
do  not  have  the  priesthood.  The
others,  if  they  ever  obtain  a  celestial
glory,  will  have  to  obtain  it  through
the  Latter-day  Saints.  What  man-
ner of  people  ought  we  to  be  ?  A
little  different  from  what  we  are.
We  think  it  troublesome  sometimes
to  pay  our  tithing;  we  think  it
troublesome  sometimes  to  pray  in


our  families  ;  we  think  it  trouble-
some sometimes  to  feed  the  poor  and
take  care  of  the  destitute,  Well,
suppose  we  were  to  change  places  a
little  while  with  them,  how  would
you  feel  then  %  You  would  feel  that
it  was  much  better  to  give  than  to
receive.  We  want  our  feelings  and
sympathies  drawn  out.  And  Clod
has  placed  us  where  we  are,  in  order
that  we  may  be  preserved  to  receive
instructions  from  his  hands.  We
have  in  our  school  operations  whut
we  call  our  normal  schools,  to  pre-
pare teachers  to  teach  others.  Now,
the  Lord  has  a  normal  school  in
Utah.  He  is  preparing  us  in  a
variety  of  ways — sometimes  we  have
not  enough  snow  in  the  winter  sea-
son,  and  consequently  a  scarcity  of
water  in  tlie  summer;  sometimes  too
much  rain,  and  at  other  times  not
enough  ;  we  have  some  wise  and  some
unwise,  and  we  have  some  rich  and
some  poor.  Yes,  we  have  some  who
are  poor  among  us,  and  why  ?  We
would  not  know  what  it  was  to  see
persons  in  those  circumstances  it  we
did  not  have  some  among  us,  and
then,  the  opportunity  is  afforded  us
to  show  our  kindness,  and  to  develop
within  us  that  fellow-feeling  we
sometimes  talk  about  But  we  do
not  want  to  call  them  poor,  for  some
of  them  are  just  as  good  as  we  are,
and  some  perhaps  a  little  better
than  many  of  us.  If  good  people
are  suffering  for  the  common  neces-
saries of  life,  the  scriptures  say,  u  If
a  man  having  this  world's  goods  see
his  brother  in  need,  and  shutteth  up
his  bowels  of  compassion,  how  dwell-
eth  the  love  of  God  in  him  T  And
in  regard  to  those  matters,  we  ought
to  look  to  the  wants  of  everybody  ;
that,  however,  more  particularly
devolves  upon  the  bishops  ai.d  the
brethren  of  the  Aaron ic  priesthood.
Do  not  let  us  make  paupers  of  them;
but  let  us  treat  them  as  broth/en


SUSTAINING  THE  AUTHORITIES,  ETC*


and  sisters,  as  good,  honorable  men
and  women  ;  let  us  see  that  they  are
provided  for,  I  hare  seen  some
people  who  would  get  down  upon
their  knees  and  pray  most  heartily
for  God  to  feed  the  poor  and  clothe
the  naked.  Now,  I  would  never  ask
the  Lord  to  do  a  thing  that  I  would
not  do.  If  we  have  them  among  us,
suppose  we  go  at  it  and  relieve
them.  1  do  not  think  we  have
much  of  that  to  do  here ;  but,
enough,  perhaps,  to  draw  forth  your
good  feelings  and  sympathies.  And
if  people  sustain  misfortune  of  any
kind,  look  after  them  and  bestow
upon  them  those  tilings  necessary
for  their  welfare  and  happiness.
And  God  will  bless  us  in  so  doing
1  would  a  great  ileal  rather  that  you
would  take,  say  a  sack  of  flour,
some  beef,  a  hundred  of  sugar,  some
butter  ami  cheese,  and  clothing  and
fuel,  and  such  comforts  and  conve-
niences of  life,  and  thus  try  to  make
people  feel  happy  than  all  the
prayers  you  could  offer  up  to  the
Lord  about  it ;  and  he  would  rather
see  it  too ;  that  is  the  proper  way
to  do  things.  In  receiving  blessings
ourselves,  try  to  distribute  them,
ami  Go  I  will  bless  and  miide  us  in
the  ways  of  peace.

Perhaps  I  am  occupying  too  much
time.  I  do  not  care  much  about
making  a  bi<*  discourse;  I  am  talking
in  a  [►lain,  easy  way,  and  I  think
you  understand  it  And  if  there  is
a  widow,  or  an  orphan,  or  any  desti-
tute persons,  or  any  one  who  has  to
struggle  hard,  look  after  them,  and
do  not  try  to  mike  paupers  of  them;
but  what  you  do  for  them,  do  it  in  a
kind,  i?oc)  l  feeling  making  them  to
feel  and  realize  that  you  are  their
friends.  And  then,  let  us  try  to  do
away  with  all  our  little  difficulties —
husbands  with  their  wives.  Why
will  you  complain  about  your  wives?
Because  they  will  get  cross*  Are


you  not  cross?  i!  Yes  ;  but  my  wife
is  not  as  kind  as  she  used  to  be."
Well,  try  to  get  along  with  her,  and
treat  her  kindly  ;  and  be  kind  to  one
an  other.  If  you  live  in  this  way
while  here  in  the  flesh,  you  will  be
glad  to  meet  one  another  in  the  eter-
nal worlds.  Cultivate  every  good
principle,  an  1  live  in  his  fear  day  by
day,  ami  he  will  take  care  of  us.  and
he  will  bless  and  multiply  our  flocks
and  herds,  onr  lauds  aud  everything
we  have.  '■

I  will  tell  you  a  secret.  If  we
could  only  prepare  ourselves  to  do
the  will  of  God  and  keep  his  com-
mandments and  live  our  religion  so
that  God  could  trust  us  with  more
means  than  we  have,  he  would  so
order  things,  and  that  too  by  natu-
ral  ways,  that  our  desires  in  that
direction  would  be  fully  gratified.
But  we  are  not  prepare-]  for  it  ;  it
would  only  destroy  us,  and  lea  l  us
to  the  devil  ;  and  the  Lord  knows  it.
At  the  same  time  we  cannot  com-
plain in  this  regard  ;  the  Lord  has
treated  u-  very  well.  I  do  not  know
of  a  people  anywhere  that  are  better
off  as  a  whole  than  we  are.  It  is
true  we  do  not  have  the  amount  of
wealth  among  us  that  may  be  found
in  older  countries ;  but  then  we  do
not  have  the  poverty,  the  suffering
and  distress  t  latmay  be  found  else-
where* It  is  for  us  to  introduce
principles  that  will  obviate  all  these
difficulties,  an  I  that  will  prepare  us
to  receive  blessings  from  God,  and
to  ad  mi  uister  the  same  wisely.

Another  thing.  We  are  building
temples  Are  we  doing  pretty  welll
Yen.  Do  you  find  fault?  No,  I
have  nothing  to  say  about  it;  I
think  the  people  are  doing  very  vyell
especially  in  some  districts  in  the
north  and  south,  indeed,  I  think
more  than  they  are  able  to  do.  But
they  could  not  do  what  they  have
already  done  and  what  they  are


218


JOUKNAL  OK  DI SCO URSES.


doing  without  the  assistance  and
blessing  of  the  Almighty,  They  are
building  two  beautiful  edifice?.
What  tor?  Is  it  a  matter  of  specu-
lation ]  Yes,  one  o!"  the  greatest
speculations  ever  conceived  of.  It  is
for  i lie  salvation  of  the  human
family  ;  it  is  for  the  redemption  of
the  living  and  salvation  of  the  dead.
It  is  for  the  accomplishment  of  the
purposes  of  God  pertaining  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  our  fore-
fathers, and  then,  ail  we  can  attain
to  after  that  In  those  things  we
are  doing  very,  very  wt  II  ;  and  I
feel  tn  ble-s  the  people  because  of
their  liberality  in  relation  to  those
matters,  especially  those  of  the  dis-
tricts I  have  referred  to.

Well,  no*,  I  do  not  know  thai"  I
should  detain  you  much  longer.
What  shall  we  do?  Keep  our  cove-
nants, sustain  Brother  Smith  :  and
let  Brother  Smith  act  in  a  way  that
will  be  worthy  of  beins  sustained.
And  then  sustain  your  bishops,  and
let  them  also  so  act  as  to  he  worthy
of  your  esteem.  And  sustain  their
counselors,  and  hearken  to  their
counsels  and  advice*  They  are  seek-
ing to  do  you  good  ;  and  to  build  up
your  interests*  And  then  sustain
your  teachers,  and  your  deacons  and
your  priests,  and  do  all  you  can  to
lift  theiu  up  that  they  may  be
enabled  to  do  a  good  work  in  their
day  and  generation,  and  benefit  you
and  your  generations  after  you.
And  then  there  are  others.  You
have  your  Relief  Societies,  and  I  am
glad  always  to  speak  a  word  in  he-
half  of  them.  Our  sisters  are  one
with  us  ;  and  we  are  operating  to-
gether in  trying  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God.  I  would  say  to
the  sisters  I  would  watch  after  the
youth  and  after  the  interests  of  the
sisters,  and  try  to  introduce  every-
thing good  and  praiseworthy,  and
try  to  do  all  you  can  to  promote  the


f  welfare  of  your  sons  and  daughters ;
and  God  will  bless  you  as  he  has
done,  and  more  abundantly.  1  was
pleased  to  hear  a  compliment  that
was  made  to  our  Young  people's

\  Mutual  Improvement  Associations.
It  is  gratifying  to  parents  and  to  all
who  have  the  interests  of  Ya^a  at
heart,  to  hear  of,  and  to  see  our
young  men  and  women  grow  up  in
the  fear  of  God.  Some,  as  is  the
case  everywhere,  are  inclined  to  be
a  little  rude  and  thoughtless.  It  is
our  privilege,  and  the  privilege  of
the  youth,  to  improve,  and  to,  culti-
vate our  morals  and  manners  so  that
if  it  should  ever  be  our  pleasure  to
mingle  with  the  angels,  we  should
find  the  most  happy  and  enjoyable

:  society.  Let  us  learn  to  treat  one
another  with  kindness  and  courtesy,
and  let  the  young  cultivate  the  fear
of  God.  I  tell  you  what  1  used  to
do  when  quite  a  young  boy,  I
made  it  a  practice  to  go  and  call
upon  the  Lord  ;  it  was  before  there
was  any  "Mormonism."  And  many
scores  times  have  I  gone  into  fields
behind  the  bu&hes,  and  also  into  hay
lofts  to  call  upon  God  to  guide  me
and  keep  me  from  evil  and  to  lead
mc  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.
Did  I  feel  happy  ?  Yes,  for  I  had
a  portion  of  the  Spirit  of  God  with
me. How  much  better  in  this  re-

;  spect  it  is  for  our  youth.  1  had
parents  who  feared  God,  but  they,
any  more  than  any  one  else,  did  not

,  know  anything  at  all  about  the  true
plan  of  salvation,  for  it  bad  not  been
revealed.  I  used  to  go  to  the
Church  of  England  ;  and  many  of
you  present  used  to  go  too  ;  and  we
used  to  say  that  we  were  all  "  tnisera
ble  sinners." We  also  confessed

,  every  Sunday  that  we  had  "  done
the  tilings  we  ought  not  to  have
done,  and  left  undone  the  things
which  we  um;ht  to  have  done/*
Tliis  was  all  very  true. The  teach-


SUSTAINING  THE


AUTHORITIES,  ETC,


219


ers  themselves  did  not  know  any
better,  neither  did  we.  But  I  used
to  take  pleasure  in  calling  upon
the  Lord  to  lead  me  in  the  right
way,  I  did  not  have  the  helps  that
you  have,  You  have  the  benefit  of
your  Mutual  Improvement  Societies,
Attend  them,  and  seek  to  cultivate
intelligence  of  every  kind  ;  and
above  all,  reverence  and  lespect
your  parents,  they  who  have  watched
over  yuii  and  takeu  care  of  you,  they
who  have  educated  you  and  fed  and
clothed  you  and  felt  an  interest  in
your  welfare.

And  in  regard  to  all  of  our  opera-


tions, brethren  and  sisters,  let  us
ever  try  to  do  right,  and  let  us  try
to  invent  something  whereby  we
can  be  self-sustaining  ;  let  us  pur-
chase from  our  own  people,  and
above  all  let  us  try  to  make  our  own
goods  and  supply  our  own  wants
and  necessities.  Let  us  try  and
carry  these  principles  out,  for  they
are  true  and  correct.  And  if  there
is  anything  good  and  prai.se- worthy,
let  us  seek  alter  it ;  and  shun  every-
thing that  tends  to  misery,  degrada-
tion and  death,

God  bless  you,  and  lea<l  you  in  the
paths  of  life.  Amen.


220


journal  *m<  discoursed.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER C. W.  PENROSE,


Delivered  In  Thk  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

August  8th,  1880.


( Beported  by  John  Irvine.)

THK  INSPIRATION  OF  THE  LORD'S  SERVANTS — REVELATION — THE  RESUR-
RECTION, ETC.


Having  been  called  upon  this
afternoon  to  address  this  congrega-
tion, I  rise  before  you  trusting  that
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  makes  plain
to  the  human  mind  the  things  of
God,  may  rest  upon  me  and  upon
you  ;  that  I  may  be  inspired  by  that
Spirit  to  say  something  which  will
be  of  profit  to  those  who  hear,  and
that  those  who  listen  to  what  I  may
say  may  be  able  to  understand  in
the  same  light  and  under  the  same
influence  as  that  by  which  the  words
are  apoken.

The  elders  of  this  Church,  in  min-
istering as  public  speakers,  stand
before  the  people  in  the  name  of  the
Lord.  They  do  not  address  congre-
gations for  the  purpose  of  ventilating
the  opinions  and  ideas  which  they
may  entertain,  but  they  occupy  the
position  of  ministers  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  to  speak  that  which  is
given  to  them  by  the  influence  of
the  Holy  Spirit  Nevertheless,  the
servants  of  God  are  instructed  to
"treasure  up  in  their  hearts  continu-
ally the  words  of  life,"  with  the  pro-
mise that  if  they  do  this  and  are
diligent  in  seeking  for  the  mind  and
will  of  God,  in  the  very  hour  that


they  are  needed  words  shall  be  placed
in  their  mouths,  or  ideas  be  brought
up  in  their  minds,  which  shall  be  for
the  benefit  of  all  who  hear.  It  is  in
this  Spirit  that  I  endeavor  to  address
the  congregation  this  afternoon,  and
I  hope  I  shall  have  not  only  your
attention,  but  the  benefit  of  your
faith  and  prayers,  that  the  Spirit  of
God  may  rest  upon  me  and  the  con-
gregation also.

We  are  living  upon  the  earth  at  a
time  when  there  are  a  great  many
creeds— a  great  many  different  doc-
trines, each  professing  to  be  the  true
faith — the  Christian  religion.  There
is  a  spirit  of  doubt  and  division  in
the  world.  Men  are  ever  learning
but  not  able  to  come  to  a  knowledge
of  the  truth.  They  indulge  in  a
great  many  speculations.  Some
good  people  study  the  Scriptures  and
endeavor  to  find  out  what  is  divine
truth,  but  their  ideas  are  various  ;
they  do  not  come  to  the  unity  of  the
j  faith ;  and  the  great  reason  why  this
is  so  is  because  they  do  not  seek  to
the  fountain  of  light  and  truth  with
\  the  expectation  of  receiving  any  re-
|  ply.  In  olden  times  God  used  to
speak  to  the  people. He  had  ser-


vants  upon  the  earth  who  spoke  as
they  were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost ;  angels  ministered  to  the  sous  j
of  men,  and  truth  was  revealed  in
great  plainness  from  the  Father.  But
in  these  times  people  have  to  put  up
with  the  ideas  and  notions  that  men
hold  in  relation  to  these  truths  which
were  anciently  revealed-  There  is
now  no  voice  from  heaven,  no  pro
phet  among  the  people  ;  there  are
no  inspired  apostles ;  angels  have
ceased  to  minister,  and  to  use  the
Words  of  one  of  the  great  divines  of
the  day,  44  The  awful  voice  of  pro-
phecy is  silenced  forever*"

Of  course  in  making  use  of  these
remarks  I  am  speaking  in  relation  to
what  is  called  the  Christian  world.
The  Latter-day  Saints  believe  that  '
God  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day
and  forever,  and  that  if  he  is  sought
after  to-day  in  the  same  way  that  lie
was  sought  after  yesterday,  he  will
answer  in  the  same  maimer.  We
believe  that  it  is  just  as  possible  ibr
angels  to  come  to  earth  in  these
times  as  in  any  former  age  of  the
world  ;  we  believe  that  the  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  same  to  day
as  it  was  thousands  of  years  ago ;
that  divine  truth  can  be  made  man-
ifest direct  from  God  to  the  people
now  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Jesus,
or  in  the  days  of  the  prophets  who
preceded  him  on  the  earth.

The  religion  we  Latter-day  Saints
have  received — which  we  hold  to,
w  hich  we  live  for,  and  which  a  great
many  of  us  are  willing  to  die  for,  if
necessary — has  come  to  us  by  reve-  \
latum  from  God  in  the  day  and  age
in  which  we  live. In  taking  up  the
writings  of  the  old  prophets,  in  read-
ing the  letters  written  by  the  ancient
apostles,  we  find  that  the  religion
which  God  has  revealed  to  us,  is  the  j
eame  religion  which  God  revealed  to
them. What  is  contained  in  the  j
Bible  corroborates  that  which  we


!  have  received,  and  the  spirit  which
'  accompanies  the  preaching  of  the
word  to  us,  is  similar  in  its  effects  to
that  spirit  which  accompanied  the
preaching  of  the  ancient  prophets
and  apostles  of  the  Lord*  We  find
this  out  by  reading  that  portion  of
their  records  which  has  been  left.
So  that  the  religion  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  is
not  a  mere  theory  of  men.  The  doc-
trines which  we  have  received  have
come  to  us  direct  from  the  Lord  in
our  own  time.  We  are  nut  left  to
speculation,  we  are  not  left  to  our
own  theories,  but  we  have  defined
principles  given  to  us  of  God  for  our
guidance,  ior  our  comfort  and  for  our
edification.

Now,  there  is  a  disposition  exist-
ing in  the  world  to-day  to  go  away
from  the  Lord,  Men  seem  to  have
a  desire  to  follow  out  their  own  im-
aginations, their  own  ideas  and  no-
tions, and  in  consequence  of  this  a
great  many  wrong  principles  have
been  received  for  truth  in  the  Chris-
tian world,  and  this  disposition  seems
to  increase-  The  Apostle  Paul,  in
writing  to  the  Saints  in  his  day,  ad-
vised them  to  *' beware  lest  any  man
spoil  you  through  philosophy  and
vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  ©f
man,  after  the  rudiments  of  the
world  and  not  after  011081/'  Now,
that  same  advice  is  good  for  the
I  people  in  our  times  ;  good  for  the
Latter-day  Saints ;  good  for  the  peo-
ple who  compose  the  various  sects  of
modern  Christendom.  If  we  have
received  the  doctrines  of  Christ,  if
our  feet  are  planted  firmly  upon  the
rock  which  he  has  laid,  there  is  no
fear  of  our  going  astray  ;  but  if  we
depart  from  that  and  walk  in
the  ways  of  men,  and  are  led  by
their  theories  and  their  speculations
and  their  vain  philosophy,  we  are
very  likely  to  go  astray,

I  notice  in  reading  some  of  the


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


works  of  modern  divines,  ami  noting
the  progress  of  religious  thought
among  the  people,  that  there  is  a
doctrine  which  is  becoming  very
widespread  among  the  people  called

"  Christians,*'  that  is,  a  heresy  in  re-
gard to  the  doctrine  of  our  condition
in  the  future.  It  is  believed  by  a
great  many  people  at  the  present
time,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as
a  literal  resurrection  of  the  body  ;
that  when  this  body  is  laid  away  in
the  ground  and  goes  back  to  the  ele-
ments out  of  which  it  was  organized,
that  is  the  end  of  the  body,  and  that
it  will  never  come  up  again.  They
do  not  see  any  need  of  a  literal  resur-
rection of  the  body ;  they  cannot
perceive  by  what  process  it  can  be
resuscitated  ;  and  not  being  able  to
comprehend  how  this  great  change
can  come,  how  the  scattered  ele-
ments of  the  body  can  be  brought
together  again,  they  reject  the  doc-
trine altogether.  This  is  the  belief
of  the  people  who  are  called  spirit-
ualists or  spiritists.  This  is  one  of
the  doctrines  of  that  great  delusion
of  the  latter  times,  that  " strong
delusion"  that  the  Lord  has  permit
ted  to  come  into  the  world  because
men  would  not  receive  the  truth,
but  turned  away  from  it  and  loved  a
lie.  It  is  taught  by  that  rapping
and  muttering  influence,  that  when
the  spirit  leaves  the  body  and  passes
into  an o tlier  state,  that  is  the  resur-
rection ;  that  the  body  will  be  raised
up  no  more  ;  that  the  spirit,  libera
ted  from  the  body,  will  progress
from  sphere  to  sphere — how  many
spheres  they  do  not  know — but  that
there  is  no  further  need  of  the  body.
This  idea  is  increasing  in  its  hold
upon  the  minds  of  the  people,  among
the  various  "  Christian"  sects,  and
some  of  the  greatest  preachers  and
divines  of  the  day  entertain  this
idea,  philosophize  upon  it  and  teach
it  to  their  congregations. Now  we


have  the  satisfaction  of  definite
knowledge  in  regard  to  t litis  matter,
as  well  as  all  the  articles  of  our
creed— if  we  have  such  a  thing  as  a
formulated  creed.  The  ideas  we
have  in  relation  to  this  doctrine
have  come  from  (iod.  There  is  no
need  of  any  doubt  about  it,  no  need
for  any  speculation*  The  Lord  has
revealed  something  concerning  this.
It  is  true  he  has  not  revealed  the
philosophy  of  it  in  full,  he  has  only
given  us  some  ideas  concerning  it.
But  he  has  made  the  fact  very  plain
that  there  may  be  no  misunderstand
ing  about  it.  In  the  Book  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants — which  con-
tains many  of  the  revelations  that
God  has  given  to  the  Church  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  we  find
this  doctrine  laid  down  in  great
plainness.  It  is  stated  that  the
spirit  and  the  body  make  up  the
out  of  man,  and  that  the  resurrec-
tion from  the  dead  is  the  redemption
of  the  soub  We  are  taught  also
that  there  are  material  elements  and
spiritual  elements;  that  the  spiritual
part  of  our  being  was  in  the  begin-
ning with  God,  and  that  the  spiri-
tual and  material  when  inseparably
connected  receive  a  fulness  of  joy,
otherwise  men  cannot  receive  a  ful-
ness of  joy.  It  takes  the  spiritual
part  of  man  and  the  material  or
physical  part  joined  together  insep-
arably to  obtain  a  fulness  of  joy.
When  the  spirit  is  separated  from
the  body,  a  fulness  of  joy  can  not  be
obtained*  When  the  spirit  is  joined
to  the  body  temporarily  under  a
temporal  law,  under  the  law  of
death,  it  cannot  receive  a  fulness  of
joy.  The  spirit  and  the  body  must
be  so  joined  together  that  both  will
be  immortal,  and  in  that  condition
man  can  receive  a  fulness  of  joy.

The  Book  of  Mormon  is  also  very
plain  upon  this  subject,  I  will  read
one  or  two  texts  from  that  book,  and


THE  INSPIRATION,  ETC.


if  I  have  time  I  mav  refer  to  the

if

Bible,  to  show  that  the  things  con-
tained  in  the  Book  of  Mormon  and
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants are  the  same  as  contained  in
the  old  scriptures,  I  will  read  a
passage  from  the  seventy-ninth  page
(new  edition)  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, namely  :

"And  tliis  death  of  which  I  have
spoken,  which  is  the  spiritual  death,
shall  deliver  up  its  dead ;  which  spiri-
tual death  is  hell  ;  wherefore  death
and  hell  must  deliver  up  its  captive
spirits  and  the  grave  must  deliver
up  its  captive  bodies,  and  the  bodies
and  the  spirits  of  men  will  be  restored

mm

one  to  the  other  ;  and  it  is  by  the
power  of  the  resurrection  ot'  the
Holy  One  of  Israel

u  Oh  how  great  the  plan  of  our
God  !  For  on  the  other  hand,  the
paradise  of  God  must  deliver  up  the
spirits  of  the  righteous,  and  the
grave  deliver  up  the  body  of  the
righteous  ;  and  the  spirit  and  body
is  restored  to  itself  again,  and  all
men  become  incorruptible,  and  im-
mortal, and  they  are  living  souls,
having  a  perfect  knowledge  like
Unto  us  in  the  flesh  ;  save  it  be  that
our  knowledge  shall  be  perfect.

"  Wherefore,  we  shall  have  a  per-
fect knowledge  of  all  our  guilt,  and
our  u  n  cleanliness,  and  our  naked-
ness, and  the  righteous  shall  have  a
perfect  knowledge  of  their  enjoy-
ment and  their  righteousness,  being
clothed  with  purity,  yea,  even  with
the  robe  of  righteousness/*

Now,  according  to  the  Book  of
Mormon,  the  spirits  of  men,  the
righteous  and  the  wicked,  are  to  be
brought  up  from  the  place  to  which
they  shall  go  when  they  depart  from
this  life.  There  is  no  need  for  any
dubiety  about  this,  there  is  no  need
for  any  mistake  ;  it  is  clear  that  the
separation  of  the  spirit  from  the


body  is  not  the  resurrection  spoken
of  in  this  book.

The  Prophet  Alma,  touching  on
this  subject,  explained  to  the  people
in  his  day  what  an  angel  of  God
made  known  to  him.  These  words,
which  I  am  about  to  read  to  you
from  the  Book  of  Alma,  in  the  Book
of  Mormon,  are  not  Alma's  ideas
and  speculations.  He  says  they
were  revealed  to  him  by  an  angel.
I  would  advise  you  to  read  the  40th
chapter,  page, new  edition.

Alma  states  here  that  he  was  very
much  troubled  concerning  the  doc-
trine of  the  condition  of  people  after
they  passed  away  from  this  life.
He  wanted  to  know  something  of
the  condition  of  man  between  death
and  the  resurrection,  and  he  says  an
angel  of  Go  I  made  known  to  him
that  there  is  a  space  between  death
and  the  resurrect io.i,  that  the  spirits
of  the  wicked  are  in  a  state  of  un-
rest, having  a  knowledge  of  all  their
wickedness,  and  a  remembrance  of
all  their  transgressions ;  that  they
are  in  a  state  ot  fear,  looking  for  the
wrath  and  indignaaion  of  God,  not
knowing  what  their  punishment
will  be  ;  while  on  the  other  hand,
the  spirits  of  the  righteous  enter
into  a  state  of  rest  They  have  a
perfect  knowledge  of  all  that  God
has  done  for  them,  and  all  their
acts  of  righteousness,  and  they  await
in  peace  for  the  time  when  their
bodies  shall  be  brought  forth  from
the  dust  to  stand  in  the  presence  of
their  God  to  receive  their  crown.
Alma  then  goes  on  to  say  :

**  But  this  much  I  say,  that  there
is  a  space  between  death  and  the
resurrection  of  the  body,  and  a  state
of  the  soul  in  happiness  or  in
misery,  until  the  time  which  is  ap-
pointed of  God  that  the  dead  shall
come  forth,  and  he  re  united,  both
soul  and  bod)%  and  be  brought  to
stand  before  God,  and  be  judged


224


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


according  to  their  works.

"The  soul  shall  be  restored  to  the
body  and  the  body  to  the  soul  ;  yea,
and  every  lirab  and  joint  shall  be
restored  to  its  body  ;  yea,  even  a
hair  of  the  head  shall  pot  be  lost;
but  a1 1  tilings  shall  be  restored  to
their  proper  and  perfect  frame."

Now,  that  is  clear  and  distinct  on
this  point.  Jn  regard  to  the  times
and  seas* -ns  of  this  resurrection,
about  which  Alma  speaks,  he  ^aid
he  did  not  know,  but  those  things
he  did  know  were  made  known  to
him  by  an  angel,  namely,  that  there
is  a  space  between  death  and  the
resurrection ;  that  at  the  resurrec-
tion the  body  and  the  spirit  shall  be
brought  up  and  restored  to  each
other,  and  not  only  the  body  and
spirit,  but  every  part  and  particle
belonging  to  the  body  ;  not  a  hair  of
the  head  shall  be  lost  ;  eve ry  joint
and  muscle  and  fibre  and  sinew,
and  every  part  and  particle  neces-
sary to  make  up  a  perfect  physical
body  for  the  spirit  to  dwell  in,  shall
be  restored  to  that  spirit  in  the  re-
surrection. That  is  the  doctrine
laid  down  by  the  Prophet  Alma,  as
taught  to  him  by  an  angel

The  very  meaning  of  the  word
"  resurrection'*  ought  to  dispel  the
idea  that  the  separation  of  the  spirit
from  the  body  at  death  is  resurrec-
tion. The  word  itself  means,  "I
stand  np  again*"  The  idea  which
all  the  prophets  and  apostles  of  old
had  was  that  at  some  future  time
the  voice  of  God  should  be  uttered,
and  the  dead  should  stand  up  again,
their  bodies  should  come  from  the
grave;  just  exactly  the  doctrine  laid
down  in  the  Book  of  Mormon  and
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.
Some  have  an  idea  that  the  people
who  lived  upon  the  earth  before
Jesus,  had  no  correct  ideas  in  regard
to  the  future.  I  have  seen  such
statements  published by  popular


divines  of  the  day  ;  but  when  we
come  to  take  up  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures,  we  find  that  the  writers,
holy  men  of  God,  who  wrote  as
they  were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  had  a  distinct  and  unwaver-
ing faith  in  regard  to  this  same  doc-
trine, that  of  the  resurrection  of  the

body.

The  book  of  Job  is  said  to  be  the
most  ancient  book  of  the  Bible.  I
will  read  a  verse  or  two  from  the  7th
chapter.  In  the  Oth  verse  we  read:
"As  the  cloud  is  consumed  and
vanish  eth  away  :  so  he  that  goeth
down  to  the  grave  shall  come  up  no
more/*  Now,  that  is  a  very  plain
statement  of  Job's,  that  when  a  man
goes  down  to  the  grave  he  shall  not
return.  Those  who  believe  in  the
vain  philosophy  that  I  have  re-
ferred to,  take  a  great  deal  of  com-
fort in  quoting  that  passage,  and
also  some  sayings  of  Solomon,  the
wise  man  ;  that  is,  he  was  a  wise
roan  once,  but  he  became  a  foolish
man  before  he  died,  not  because  he
married  more  wives  than  one,  but
because  he  trausgressed  by  marry-
ing strange  wives.  Solomon,  in
some  of  his  writings,  speaks  in  the
same  way  as  Job.  But  I  will  read  a
verjsefrom  the  14th  chapter  of  Job  :

"  As  the  waters  fall  from  the  sea^
and  the  flood  decayeth  and  dry  eth
up ;  so  man  lieth  down  and  riseth
not"

This  also  is  a  very  plain  statement,
is  it  not?  But  Job  did  not  stop
here  as  he  did  in  the  7th  chapter,
for  he  continues,

"Till  the  heavens  be  no  more?
they  shall  not  awake,  nor  be  raised
out  of  their  sleep,  O  that  thou
wouldst  hide  me  in  the  grave,  that
thou  wouldest  keep  me  secret  until
the  wrath  be  passed,  that  thou
wouldest  appoint  a  set  time,  and  re-
member !  If  a  man  die  shall  he  live
again  1  all  the  days  of  my  appointed


time  will  I  wait  ttll  my  change  come.  I
Thou  shalt  call  and  I  will  answer  |
thee  :  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  j
work  of  thine  hands.1' Chapter  xiv,
1245.

Bead  again  in  the  19th  chapter,
where  he  is  a  little  more  explicit,  |
commencing  at  the  23rd  verse;

"Oh  that  my  words  were  nowk
written !  Oh  that  they  were  printed
in  a  book.  That  they  were  graven
with  an  iron  pen  and  lead  in  the
rock  forever !  For  I  know  that  my
redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall
stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the
earth.  ^  And  though  after  my  skin
worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my
flesh  shall  I  see  God,"  |
Now,  in  the  first  place,  Job  is
speaking  in  regard  to  what  we  all
seek  in  this  world,  in  regard  to  the
common  lot  of  mortals.  "Man
lieth  down  and  riseth  not"  In
saying  that  J ob  had  no  reference  to
what  would  take  place  in  the  future.
He  was  speaking  of  the  common
experience  of  mankind.  But  after-
ward, inspired  by  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, he  looked  right  down  to  the
latter  days*  in  the  midst  of  his
afflictions,  his  trouble  and  sorrow,
his  pain  of  body  and  anguish  of
mind,  when  his  friends  were  turned
against  him — he  looked  down  to  the
latter  days  and  wished  that  his
words  were  written  and  printed  in  a
book,  that  the  words  were  graven  in
the  rock  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead
put  into  them,  that  they  might
stand  as  a  witness  to  all  future  gene-
rations, as  a  testimony  to  the  resur-
rection of  the  body  and  a  rebuke  to
to  the  vain  philosophy  of  the  latter
times.

I  will  now  read  a  verse  or  two
from  the  book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,
to  show  that  others  of  the  ancients,
besides  Job,  had  some  idea  of  the
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the
dead,  lathe  19th,  20th  and  21st
No.  16.


verses  of  the  26th  chapter  of  Isaiah
we  read;

'■Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  to-
gether with  my  dead  body  shall  they
arise.  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that
dwell  in  dust :  for  thy  dew  is  as  the
dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall
cast  out  the  dead.

Come,  my  people,  enter  thou  into
thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors
about  thee  ;  hide  thyself  as  it  were
for  a  little  moment,  until  the  indig-
j  nation  be  overpast.

For,  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out
of  his  place  to  punish  the  inhabi-
tants ©f  the  earth  for  their  iniquity :
the  earth  also  shall  disclose  her  bleod
and  shall  no  more  cover  her  slain/*

Isaiah,  you  see,  had  the  same  spirit
as  Job.  He  spoke  about  the  timt
when  the  indignation  or  wrath  of
God  should  pass  over  the  earth,  and
he  wishtd  to  be  hidden  in  the  grave
until  that  time  was  over,  and  then
he  expected  the  earth  to  cast  out
her  dead.

I  have  not  time  to  read  the  37th
chapter  of  Ezekiel — you  can  read  it
at  home — but  in  that  chapter  we
find  that  the  Lord  showed  Ezekiel
a  valley  full  of  dry  bones.  The  Lord
asked  him  whether  these  bones  could
live,  and  he  answered,  "Thou  know-
est"  Then  the  Lord  told  him  to
|  prophesy  upon  these  bones,  and  as
he  prophesied,  there  was  a  noise,
and  behold  a  shaking,  and  the  bones
came  together,  bone  to  km  bone,  the
sinews  and  the  flesh  came  upon  them,
'  and  the  skin  covered  them  above,
:  but  there  was  no  breath  in  them.
Then  the  Lord  again  told  them  to
prophesy,  and  he  prophesied  as  com-
manded, and  the  breath  came  into
them,  and  they  lived  and  stood  upon
I.  their  feet,  an  exceeding  great  army.
Now,  we  have  no  need  to  read  the
writings  of  the  divines  of  the  present
time  to  And  out  what  this  meatig

Vol  XXI.  *


1


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Right  in  the  same  chapter  is  given
the  interpretation.

"  These  bones  are  the  whole  house
of  Israel :  behold,  they  say,  Our
bones  are  dried  and  our  hope  is  lost ;
we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts.  There-
fore prophesy  and  say  unto  them  :
Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  0
my  people,  I  will  open  your  graves,
and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of
your  graves,  and  bring  you  into  the
Land  of  Israel  *  *  And  shall
put  my  spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall
live  ;  and  I  will  place  you  in  your
own  land.  Then  ye  shall  know  that
1  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  per-
formed it,  saith  the  Lord/*

Now,  by  these  testimonies  that  I
have  quoted  from  the  Old  Testament
. script ures.  we  find  that  the  people
who  lived  on  the  earth  before  the
i lays  of  Jesus  had  some  knowledge
in  regard  to  the  future,  in  regard  to
the  condition  of  the  spirit  when  it
left  the  body,  and  also  in  regard  to
the  resurrection  of  the  body*  The
wise  man  Solomon  in  the  Book  of
Ecclesiastes  12th  chapter  and  7th
verse,  speaking  in  regard  to  death,  f
after  giving  a  very  poetical  descrip-
tion of  the  house  we  live  in,  says  :
Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the
earth  as  it  was  :  and  the  spirit  shall
return  unto  God  who  gave  it."  He
had  some  idea  in  regard  to  life  after
death,  although  if  we  read  some  of
his  writings  we  might  gain  the  idea
that  man  ended  when  his  body  was
laid  down  in  the  grave.

Now,  these  doctrines,  which  were
understood  by  the  people  before  the
days  of  Christ  are  the  same  as  be-
lieved in  by  the  disciples  of  Jesus,
the  same  as  Jesus  taught,  We  will
take,  for  instance,  Jesus*  own  decla-
ration in  regard  to  the  resurrection,
in  which  he  says  :  "  Marvel  not  at
this  ;  for  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the
which  all  that  are  in  their  graves,
shall  hear  his  voice. And  shall


come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good
unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and
they  that  have  done  evil  unto  the
resurrection  of  damnation."  Or  as
it  reads  in  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith's  version,  "they  that  have
done  good  in  the  resurrection  of  the
just  and  they  that  have  done  evil
in  the  resurrection  of  the  unjust"
Now,  according  to  Christ's  own
statement  to  his  disciples,  all  that
are  in  their  graves  are  to  come  forth,
both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,
just  as  it  is  taught  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  Th's  is  also  in  accordance
with  what  the  Prophet  Daniel —
another  of  those  ancients  who  under-
stood this  doctrine — says  in  the  12th
chapter  of  his  book.  He  speaks  of
Michael  and  the  great  trouble  that
shall  come  upon  the  earth  in  the
latter  *"iays  and  says  :  "  And  many
of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dnst  of
the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  ever-
lasting life,  and  some  to  shame  and
eve  rlafcti  ng  contempt "  Daniel
understood  that  there  wras  to  be  a
resurrection  both  of  the  just  and  the
unjust  Now  take  the  20th  chapter
of  the  Book  of  Revelations,  read  it,
and  you  will  find  the  resurrection
portrayed  to  John  by  vision  when  he
was  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos.  He  says  :
"  A  nd  I  saw  thrones,  and  t  hey  sat
upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given
unto  them,  and  I  saw  the  souls  of
them  that  were  beheaded  for  the
witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word
•f  God,  and  which  had  not  wor-
shipped the  beast,  neither  his  image,
neither  had  received  his  mark  upon
their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands ;
and  they  lived  and  reigned  with
Christ  a  thousand  years.  But  the
rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  until
the  thousand  years  were  finished.
This  is  the  first  resurrection.  Bias-
sed and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in
the  first  resurrection  :  on  such  the
second  death  hath  no  power,  bmt


THE  INSPIRATION,  ETC


227


•they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of
Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  him  a
thousand  years."

And  after  the  thousand  years  pass-
ed away,  John  saw  in  the  vision  the
rest  of  the  dead  brought  forth,  "The
sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in
it;  and  death  and  hell  delivered  up
the  dead  which  were  in  them :  and
they  were  judged;  every  man  accord-
ing to  their  works,"

Thfi  Apostle  Paul  in  writing  to
the  Philippians,  3d  chap.,  20-21  v.
says:  "Our  conversation  in  his  hea-
ven, from  whence  also  we  look  for
the  Savior,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :
who  shall  ehahge  our  vile  body,  that
it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  this
glorious  body/'  Now,  according  to
this  testimony,  the  righteous,  who
look  for  a  part  in  the  first  resurrec-
tion, expect  to  have  bodies  like  the
glorious  body  of  the  Son  of  God.
What  kind  of  a  body  was  that?  We
read  that  Jesus  Christ  was  put  to
death  upon  the  eross ;  that  when  he
had  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said
"Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend
ray  spirit,"  and  then  gave  up  the
ghost.  The  body  was  placed
in  a  new  tomb  in  which  no  man
had  lain,  and  to  guard  the  body,  lest
somebody  should  come  and  take  it
away,  Roman  soldiers  were  placed
before  the  door  of  the  tomb  or  sepul-
chre. But  we  read  that  two  angels
came,  before  whom  these  Roman
soldiers  fell  as  dead,  and  they  (the
angels)  rolled  away  the  stone  from
the  tomb  and  the  sleeping  body  of
Jesus  awakened  and  came  forth.
When  the  disciples  arrived  the  body
was  gone.  Mary  went  into  the  gar*
den  to  try  and  find  out  something
concerning  the  body,  and  while  she
was  weeping  Jesus  appeared  unto
her.  She  sprang  forward  and  was
about  to  embrace  him  when  he  said,
•Touch  me  not ;  for  I  am  not  yet
ascended  to  my  Father :  but  go  to  my


brethren  and  say  unto  them  I  ascend
;  unto  my  Father  and  your  Father,
and  to  my  God  and  to  your  God.*
i  When  the  disciples  were  informed
of  this  they  could  not  believe  it,  and
they  met  together  on  a  certain  oc-
casion, and  when  the  doors  were
shut,  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  and  they
found  th^y  were  securely  alone,  they
began  to  talk  about  the  wonderful
I  things  that  had  transpired ;  about
the  death  of  Jesus,  the  crucifixion  of
one  whom  they  thought  was  to  take
the  throne  and  sit  upon  it  in  power
forever.  And  we  read  that  while
they  were  talking  Jesus  appeared  in
their  midst  and  said,  1  'peace  be  unto
you,"

<#But  they  were  terrified  and  af-
frighted, and  supposed  that  they
had  seen  a  spirit.  And  he  said  un-
to them,  why  are  ye  troubled?  and
why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  hearts.
Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that
it  is  I  myself:  handle  me  and  see;
for  a  spirit  hat  not  flesh  and  bones
as  ye  see  me  have, * *  *

And  while  they  yet  believed  not
for  joy  and  wondered,  he  said  unto
;  them,  have  ye  here*  any  meat  ?  And
they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  broiled
fish  and  of  an  honevcomb.  And  he
took  it  and  did  eat  before  them,
Luke  xxiv  36-43.

Now,  here  was  a  resurrection  of
the  body.  Not  the  raising  of  Christ's
spirit,  but  his  body  out  of  the  tomb.
In  that  body  he  appeared  before  the
disciples,  and  when  they  thought  it
was  merely  a  spirit,  he  told  them
that  a  spirit  had  not  flesh  and  bones
as  they  saw  him  have.  The  disciples
who  had  this  manifestation  told
some  of  the  rest.  Thomas,  however,
would  not  believe  it  He  said,  "  Ex-
cept I  shall  smj  in  his  hands  the
print  of  the  nails,  and  put  my  finger
into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and
thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will
not  believe/1 After  making  use  mf


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


these  foolish  remarks,  Jesus  appeared
to  Thomas  when  he  was  assem-
bled with  the  other  disciples,  and  he
said  unto  Thomas,  "Reach  hither
thy  finger  and  behold  my  hands;  and
reach  hither  thy  hand  and  thrust  it  '
into  my  side  :  and  he  not  faithless  j
but  believing."  Thomas  could  not
help  believing  then,  but  Jesus  said
unto  him,  ''Thomas,  because  thou
hast  seen  me,  thou  has  believed  :
blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen
and  yet  have  believed/'  Faith  is  a
great  blessing.  Some  people  will  not
believe  anything  they  cannot  grasp
with  their  human  reason  or  cannot
see  with  their  natural  eyes*  But !
blessed  is  the  man  of  faith,  blessed
is  the  woman  of  faith !  For  by  faith
they  can  see  into  things  that  cannot
be  discerned  by  the  natural  eyes.
They  can  reach  out  to  the  regions  of
immortality,  grasp  eternal  realities
and  lay  hold  upon  the  things  of  God!
Now,  Jesus  appeared  in  the  same
body  that  was  placed  in  the  tomb,
and  yet  it  was  not  the  same,  there
was  a  change  in  it  What  change
was  it?  We  read  that  Jesus  Christ
abed  his  blood  "  for  the  remission  of
sins;  not  for  ours  only,  but  for  the
sins  of  the  whole  world."  Jesus  was
raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the
power  of  God,  and  says  Paul,  "If  the
spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus
from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that
raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead
shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies
by  his  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."
Paul  also  says  "Flesh  and  blood  can-
not inherit  the  kingdom  of  God/'
Blood  is  corruptible,  the  blood-
quickened  body  is  subject  to  the  law
of  death.  But  Christ's  body  when
it  was  raised  from  the  dead  was
"quickened  by  the  spirit n  There  was
a  great  deal  of  difference  not  only  in
this  respect  but  in  others.  When
the  disciples  were  shut  up  in  that
loom  Christ  was  able  to  enter  it


without  opening  the  door,  which
could  not  be  dune  by  mortals.  He
had  power  to  manifest  himself  to
his  disciples,  and  he  had  power  to
cover  himself  from  their  gaze.  He
had  power  to  overcome  the  laws  of
gravity,  and  on  a  certain  occasion,
after  he  had  visited  his  disci  pi  es»
had  appeared  to 500 brethren  at  once,
had  given  instructions  to  his  apostles
to  build  up  his  church,  as  he  spoke
to  them  "a  cloud  received  him  out
of  their  sight/'  He  was  able  to  lift
himself  up  from  the  earth  and  de-
part from  this  sphere  to  another;
his  body  was  no  longer  a  mortal
body,  no  longer  governed  by  the
same  laws  as  those  by  which  we  are
governed.  We  are  also  told  that
"While  they  looked  stedfastly  to-
ward heaven  as  he  went  up,  behold,
two  men  stood  by  them  in  white
apparel;  which  also  said,  Ye  men  of
Galilee  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into
heaven  t  this  same  Jesus,  which  is
taken  up  from  jou  into  heaven,
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye
have  seen  him  go  to  heaven — Act
i,  9-11,"  When  he  shall  come  again
he  shall  come  in  the  same  body,  and
we  are  told  in  the  14th  chapter  of
Zachariah  that  his  feet  shall  stand
in  that  day  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives
and  iu  the  13  th  chapter  that
when  the  Jews  behold  him,
the  Messiah,  whom  they  have
expected  so  long,  they  will  say
"What  are  these  wounds  in  thine
hands,"  Then  he  shall  answer,
"Those  with  which  I  was  wounded
in  the  house  of  my  friends,"  And
then  every  family  will  mourn  apart;
the  whole  house  of  Israel  will
mourn  because  of  the  wickedness  of
their  forefathers  in  putting  him  to
death.  In  receiving  him  at  his  sec-
ond coming  they  will  comprehend
the  truth  of  his  first  coming,  and
not  before,  and  thev  will  welcame
him  as  the  resurrected  Christ


THE  INSPIRATION,  ETC.


229


Now,  the  Apostle  Paul  says  that
"He  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that
it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his
glorious  body."  What  kind  of  bodies
will  the  righteous  possess  in  the  re-
surrection?  They  are  to  be  bodies  of
flesh  and  bones  quickened  by  spirit;
not  quickened  by  blood,  no  longer
subject  to  death,  pain,  or  any  of  the
ills  of  mortality.  This  does  not
look  much  as  if  the  separation  of
the  spirit  from  the  body  is  resurrec-
tion, Such  a  doctrine  as  that  is  not
.according  to  the  scriptures,  it  is  only

vain  philosophy/1

Latter-day  Saints,  beware  of  this
vain  philosophy  which  would  rob
you  of  your  faith  in  the  resurrection
that  is  to  come.  O,  what  a  glorious
hope  it  brings !  Husbands  who
mourn  the  loss  of  their  wives,  whom
they  loved  and  whom  they  have
placed  away  in  the  tomb,  shall  re-
•ceive  them  again  in  the  resurrection.
What  a  glorious  meeting,  that  is,  if
they  have  been  sealed  by  the  holy
order  of  God.  Whatever  is  thus
sealed  to  them  on  earth  is  sealed  in
heaven.  Husbands  and  wives,  those
sealed  and  united  according  to  the
holy  order  of  celestial  marriage,  will
be  joined  again  in  the  resurrection.
They  will  come  forth  out  of  the
tomb  and  their  bodies  will  be  quick-
ened by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  made  glorious  like  unto  the  body
of  the  Son  of  God,  They  will  be
re-united  as  man  and  wife  for-
ever, and  of  their  increase  and  of
the  extent  of  their  dominion  and
glory,  power  and  might  and  majesty,
there  shall  be  no  end!  Mothers  who
put  away  the  bodies  of  their  little
ones  in  the  ground  in  deep  sorrow
and  lamentation  shall  receive  their
babes  again  to  their  bosoms.  As
they  were  laid  down  in  the  grave,  so
shall  they  come  forth  a^ain  in  the
same  stature,  the  same  likeness,  no-
thing shall  be  lost,  not  even  a  hair  of


their  heads,  but  they  shall  be  quicken-
ed after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.
The  Apostle  Paul  illustrates  this  in
the  l£th  chapter  of  1st  Corinthians.
He  says :  **It  is  sown  in  corruption ;
it  is  raised  in  incorruption :  it  is  sown
in  dishonor;  it  is  raised  in  glory:  it  is
sown  in  weakness;  io  is  raised  in
power:  It  is  sown  a  natural  body;  it
is  raised  a  spiritual  body.  There  is
a  natural  body ;  and  there  is  a  spir-
itual body/*  When  wheat  is  planted
in  the  ground,  the  seed  seems  to  die*
It  is  said  that  in  the  midst  of  life  we
are  in  death.  But  in  the  midst  of
death  there  is  lite.  There  is  a  nucleus
of  life  that  is  imperishable.  There  is
a  germ  within  that  little  kernel  of
wheat  that  seems  to  perish  and  die,
that  is  also  indestructible,  and  so
with  the  body  planted  in  the
ground.  What  is  raised,  Paul]  Is
it  the  spirit  raised  out  of  the  body?
No;  it  is  the  resurrection  of  the  body.
That  was  the  testimony  the  apos-
tles bore.  Their  chief  testimony
was  that  Jesus  was  crucified  upon
the  cross,  and  that  he  was  raised  up
from  the  dead.

But,  says  one,  I  cannot  see  any
good  of  it.  What  is  the  use  of  this
old  body  after  it  goes  to  the  ground
and  mingles  with  the  dust?
What  is  the  use  of  taking  the
trouble  to  bring  it  up  again?
How  is  it  possible?  In  regard  to  the
possibility,  there  are  a  great  many
things  possible  with  God  that  are
impossible  with  man.  A  few  years
ago  it  was  not  thought  possible  for  a
man  to  stand  in  New  York  and  talk
to  another  in  London,  but  it  is  done,
it  is  possible,  and  many  things  are
done  now  that  were  not  thought  of
years  ago.  Supposing  a  person  who
knows  nothing  about  the  properties
of  the  magnet  were  to  visit  some  of
the  big  factories  in  England,  he
would  see  in  many  of  them  large
quantities  of  brass  and  steel  filings


280


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


all  mixed  together.  I  have  been  in
such  works  and  seen  that  the  pro-
prietors are  very  careful  to  allow
nothing  to  go  to  waste.  They  sweep
np  all  these  filings  and  put  them  in
barrels  or  other  receptacles,  and  by
and  by  some  one  comes  along  with
a  large  magnet  and  digs  it  into  the
mass  of  mixed  filings,  and  when  it  is
withdrawn  it  is  seen  to  be  covered
with  particles  of  steel  or  iron.  This
is  repeated  over  and  over  again  until
all  the  steel  is  separated  from  the
brass.  Bnt  a  person  who  had  no
knowledge  of  the  magnet  would
naturally  think,  on  seeing  these  par-
ticles all  mixed  together,  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  separate
them.  Now,  do  you  not  think  that
God  has  more  power  than  man.
That  he  has  "magnets"  with  pro-
perties beyond  our  present  ken  I  I
think  he  has.  I  think  if  God  desires
to  bring  the  particles  of  the  human
body  together,  he  understanding
their  composition,  can  easily  do  so.
In  the  beginning  he  spake  to  chaos,
and  by  the  power  of  his  faith  the
worlds  were  formed.  Faith  is  a
force.  It  is  as  much  a  force  as  mag-
netism or  electricity.  It  is  *  the
power  by  which  the  universe  was
framed,  God  can  speak  to  the  ele-
ments of  our  bodies  and  bring  them
forth  again  according  to  certain
fixed  laws  known  to  him  if  not  to
us.  Jesus  spoke  to  the  winds  and
they  obeyed  him.  He  walked  upon
the  water.  Out  of  five  loaves  and
two  fishes  he  made  a  great  feast,
"  And  they  took  up  twelve  baskets
full  of  the  fragments,  and  of  the
fishes.  And  they  that  did  eat  of
the  loaves  were  about  five  thousand
men."  All  this  was  done  upon  natu-
ral principles,  and  we  would  be  able
to  comprehend  this  if  we  understood
natural  principles  thoroughly.  And
I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind,
that  when  the  resurrection  shall


come,  when  God  shall  apeak,  and  we
shall  answer,  it  will  be  just  as  natu-
,  ral  to  bring  up  our  bodies  in  tho
j  morning  of  the  resurrection  as  it  was
for  us  to  lay  them  down.  Why,  we
do  not  understand  how  it  is  that
they  crumble  away.  Can  you  ex-
plain the  death  process,  when  an
I  individual  is  taken  hold  of  by  some
mysterious  power,  and  the  life  goes
out  of  him  %  There  is  no  brightness
to  the  eye,  no  beauty  on  the  cheek,
no  motion  to  the  lip,  all  is  quiet,
cold  and  lifeless.  The  body  is
placed  away  in  the  ground  and  the
particles  begin  to  separate,  when,
but  a  little  while  before  there  was
something  that  caused  all  the  par-
ticles of  that  body  to  cling  together,
A  change  has  come,  and  they  all
want  to  get  away  from  each  other*
What  is  the  process  and  who  under-
stands it  I  There  are  a  great  many
things  we  do  not  understand.  This
afternoon  we  are  whirling  in  space
at  an  immense  velocity.  The  earth
is  revolving  upon  its  own  axis  and
traveling  around  the  sun.  How  is
it  done  %  "  By  the  operation  of  cer-
tain forces"  But  how  did  these
forces  come  into  operation,  what  did
they  spring  from,  how  are  they  regu-
lated ?  Who  knows  ?  Who  under-
stands the  process  of  sleeping  and
waking  up  again  i  Here  is  a  thing
that  takes  place  every  night.  We
go  to  sleep.  How  do  we  go  to  sleep?
I  do  not  know.  Sometimes  I  try  to
go  to  sleep  and  cannot,  and  again  I
try  to  keep  awake  and  cannot.
Sleep  is  in  the  likeness  of  death,  and
waking  up  is  in  the  likeness  of
the  resurrection.  I  do  not  know
how  it  is  done,  only  that  it  is  done
by  the  power  of  God.  It  will  be  as
Job  says,  God  will  call  and  we  will
answer.  The  glorious  frame  of  man,
the  most  beautiful  piece  of  God?&
workmanship,  so  "fearfully  and
wonderfully  made,"  will  come  forth


T11E  INSPIRATION,  ETC


ii31


in  its  full  perfection  and  endure
throughout  all  the  ages  of  eternity.

"Well,  what  is  the  good  of  itf  I
think  that  passage  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  covenants  explains  it
clearly.  The  Lord  through  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  said  that  the
spirit  and  the  body  of  man  must  be
inseparably  connected  before  a  full*
ness  of  joy  can  be  obtained,  Man
must  be  raised  up  in  an  immortal
body  which  cannot  be  grasped  by
the  hand  of  death.  The  unembodied
or  disembodied  spirit  cannot  receive
the  joys  that  come  through  the
grosser  elements.  Spirit  mmistereth
to  spirit.  Spiritual  things  have  af-
finity for  that  which  is  spiritual
There  are  pleasures  which  can  only
flow  through  the  medium  of  a  ma-
terial  body,  and  hence  the  necessity
of  the  resurrection.  A  perfect  be-
ing is  an  immortal  spirit  dwelling  in
an  immortal  body,  and  by  affinity
with  all  things,  and  heaven  the  key
to  the  heights  and  depths  and
breadths  of  the  universe,  is  able  to
draw  from  every  source  the  joy  anil
bliss  and  pleasures  and  glories,  that
are  the  heritage  of  the  celestial  ones
who  are  filled  with  the  fullness  of
the  eternal  God.  I  am  afraid  that
those  vain  philosophers  who  do  not
want  any  more  to  do  with  the  body
after  death,  will  find  themselves  in
the  same  condition  as  those  who  are
spoken  of  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel  to
which  I  have  referred*  The  Lord
declared  of  them  "Behold  they  say,
Our  bones  are  dried  our  hope  is  lost,
we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts"

There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  revela-
tions that  tJod  has  given  to  the  pro-
phet Joseph  that  may  not  be  plain
to  our  minds  at  the  first  glance.
Therefore,  I  would  advise  my
brethren  and  sisters  to  read,  mark,
learn,  and  inwardly  digest  the
things  that  God  has  placed  on  re-
cord for  our  guidance,  and  let  us


place  our  trust  in  them  rather  than
upon  the  vain  philosophy  and  fool-
ishness of  men  who  think  they  are
great  scientists,  and  imagine  that  they
can  reason  out  the  things  of  God-
Man,  by  searching,  cannot  find  out
God,  J>ut  He  reveals  them  to  the
faithful  by  his  spirit  which  "search-
eth  all  things,  yea  the  deep  things
of  God."  And  if  we  will  take  for
our  guide  the  laws  an  d  precepts  God
has  given  ;  take  the  Bible,  the  Book
of  Mormon  and  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  which  all  run  to-
gether like  three  globules  of  water,
and  are  like  the  three  measures  of
meal  in  the  parable,  and  seek  to
God  Almighty  for  the  gift  and  pow-
er of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  it  may  be
a  lamp  to  our  feet  ami  a  light  to  our
path,  then  we  will  have  manifested
unto  us  those  things  that  are  neces-
sary for  us  to  understand  God  has
set  in  the  Church  in  these  days,  as
he  did  in  olden  times,  apostles,  pro-
phets, evangelists,  pastors,  teachers,
etc.,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry
and  for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,
and  if  we  are  guided  by  the  living
oracles  of  the  Church,  and  the  pow-
er of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  sacred

!  books,  we  will  not  go  astray,  but  if
we  are  guided  by  the  vain  philosophy
of  uninspired  men  we  are  almost
sure  to  get  upon  the  wrong  path.

i  This  is  the  point  which  I
d$$ired  to  make  plain  this
afternoon — the  glorious  doctrine^
of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  one
of  the  main  doctrines  of  the  Chris-
tian religion.  It  all  hinges  on  that;
for  if  Christ  is  not  risen,  theu  is  our
hope  vain.  Christ  died  and  was
raised  again.  So  shall  we  die — per-
haps not  all  of  us  will  sleep  in  the
earth,  for  some  are  to  remain  and  be

j  alive  at  his  coming — but  we  shall  all
be  raised,  and  those  who  dwell  upon

|  the  earth  when  the  Lord  appears
shall  be  changed  in  the  twinkling  of


232


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


an  eye.  The  trumpet  shall  sound
and  the  dead  shall  awake,  and  with
those  who  are  living  shall  be  caught
up  to  meet  the  Lord.  Perhaps  this  ;l
may  be  the  lot  of  some  in  this  con-
gregation this  afternoon.  The  day
of  the  Lord  is  nigh  at  hand.  Behold
he  cometh,  as  the  prophets  have  de-
clared !  Not  as  the  babe  of  Bethle-
hem, but  as  the  Lord  of  power  and  j

{^lory,  as  the  resurrection  and  the
ife!  Every  word  which  has  been
spoken  concerning  him  will  be  ful-
filled. Christ  will  appear  and  he
will  call  the  righteous  to  himself
They  will  come  forth  in  the  morn-
ing of  that  great  "  day  of  the  Lord,  1


that  bright  and  beautiful  morning
when  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shall
arise  with  healing  in  his  wings,  and
!  the  lambent  rays  ot  his  regal  glory
I  shall  warm  the  righteous  dead  to
life. But  wo  unto  them  that  know
;  not  God  and  obey  not  the  Gospel,
1  for  they  shall  be  banished  from  the
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  until  the
millennial  day  is  over  they  cannot
come  forth  in  their  bodies  to  receive
their  portion.

May  God  help  us  to  walk  in  his
ways  and  keep  his  commandments,
that  we  may  have  a  right  to  a  part
in  the  first  resurrection,  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

August  8th,  1880,


(Ptqmied  hj  John  Irvine.)


MAN  TO  BE  JUDGED  BY  LAW — A  LAW  GIVEN  TO  ALL  THINGS — THE  LAW
OF  GRAVITATION — HOW  IT  VARIES  BY  DISTANCE — LAW  OF  PROJEC-
TION— LAW  OF  ELLIPTIC  FORMS,  HAVING  THE  SAME  LENGTH  OF  YEAR
— LAW  OF  ORBITAL  VELOCITY — ITS  VARIATIONS  DEPENDING  ON  DIS-
TANCE—WISE  ADAPTATION— INTELLIGENT  SELECTIONS  OF  LAW — LAWS
OF  NATURE  COUNTERACTED.


What  we  have  heard  from  this
stand,  this  afternoon,  as  well  as  on
former  occasions,  we  must  meet
again  in  the  great  judgment  day.
We  have  quite  a  number  of  scribes
at  the  table,  who  are  writing  down


j  anything  that  is  said.  These  are
not,  however,  the  only  scribes.
There  are  others  behind  the  vail,  who
take  down  the  discourses  of  the  ser-
vants of  God;  they  are  recorded
there;  and  the  books  will  be  opened


TO  BE  JUDGED  BY  LAW,  ETC.


233


at  some  future  time.  All  the  earn-
ings that  have  been  given  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  to  the  world,
will  again  come  up,  in  the  own  due
time  of  the  Lord,  in  judgment;  and
it  will  be  required  of  us  to  render  an
account,  whether  we  have  been
obedient  to  those  warnings,  or
whether  we  have  been  disobedient
The  Lord  is  a  consistent  Being  in
all  his  doings.  He  will  not  condemn
the  children  of  men,  ior  not  re-
ceiving something  that  they  were
ignorant  of;  but,  if  they  are  con-
demned at  all,  it  will  be  fur  reject-
ing something  that  they  have  un-
derstood, or  something  that  they
might  have  uderstood,  had  they
improved  the  opportunity.  They
will  lie  judged  according  to  law,  ac-
cording to  testimony,  and  according
to  that  which  is  written  in  the
sacred  books.  The  records  of  heaven
will  be  opened.  The  records,  kept
by  divine  authority  on  the  earth,
will  also  be  opened.  The  evidences
and  testimonies  vill  be  set  forth;
and  every  man  and  every  woman,
who  is  condemned,  in  the  great  judg-
ment day,  will  be  condemned  accord-
ing to  law,  according  to  testimony,
according  to  evidence,  according  to
the  light  that  has  been  given,  ac-
cording to  the  deeds  done  in  the
body.

The  Lord  is  a  Being  who  has  given
laws  unto  all  things;  and  he  adapted
these  laws,  according  to  the  condi-
tion and  circumstances  of  all  things.
All  agents,  free  agents,  who
have  light  and  knowledge  to
know  how  to  act,  how  to
discern  good  from  evil,  will  be  judg-
ed according  to  one  law.  They  are
not  compelled  to  obey  the  law  which
they  hear,  but  they  can  act  accord-
ing to  their  agency,  either  in  obey-
ing or  disobeying,  receiving  the
blessings  of  obedience  or  the  fruits
of  disobedience.  The  Lord  has  giv-


en a  great  many  laws,  besides  those
which  he  has  given  to  free  agents,
or  to  intelligent  beings ;  but  they
differ  in  their  nature,  according  to
the  condition  and  circumstances  of
the  materials  to  which  these  laws
are  given.  See  a  revelation  upon  the
subject  of  these  laws,  which  was
given  on  the  27  th  day  of  December,
1832  (Doc,  &.  Gov,  pp.  305  to  310).
This  revelation  was  called,  in  those
days,  the  "olive  leaf."  In  this  reve-
lation, the  Lord  informs  us  that  "he
hath  given  a  law  unto  all  things  by
which  they  move  in  their  times  and
their  seasons."  These  laws  which
are  given  to  the  materials  of  nature,
are  generally  obeyed.  There  does
not  seem  to  be  any  agency  on  the
part  of  these  materials,  so  far  as
we  naturally  comprehend  it ;  at
least,  if  there  is  an  agency,  it  seems
to  be  very  obedient  instead
of  disobedient  Hence,  when
he  issues  forth  a  law  to  govern  the
materials  of  creation  the  law  seems
to  be  obeyed ;  at  least  do  not  know
of  any  disobedience.  It  would  al-
most seem  as  though  these  mater-
ials act  under  compulsion,  and  are
really  obliged  to  act  as  they  do.  Yet
there  are  some  sayings  in  this  same
revelation,  which  seem  to  indicate
that  there  is  a  degree  of  intelligence
even  in  these  materials.  We  read
that  "the  earth  abide th  a  law  of  a
celestial  kingdom,  for  it  filleth  the
measure  of  its  creation,  and  trans-
gresseth  not  the  law."  This  would
seem  to  indicate  that  there  is  some-
thing connected  with  the  earth
itself,  wherein  it  has  an  agency;  and
that  because  of  the  exercise  of  its
agency,  and  keeping  the  law,  it
should  be  crowned  with  celestial
glory.  The  materials  out  of  which
our  earth  is  formed,  are  also  govern-
ed by  law.  Not  only  the  earth
as  an  organized  world,  but
the very materials  themselves,


234


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


are  governed  by  laws.  These
laws  were  given  of  God ;  and  when
we  search  into  the  laws,  not  of  na-
ture merely,  but  the  laws  of  God,
and  the  more  we  comprehend  the
laws  by  which  materials  are  govern-
ed, the  more  we  understand  the
laws  of  God  and  his  operations  in  the
universe.

The  earth  seems  to  take  one  con-
tinued course.  It  has  an  orbit  It
does  not  deviate  from  this  orbit,  un-
less acted  upon  by  some  other
force,  which  may  cause  come  fluc-
tuations or  deviations  irom  its  ap-
parently destined  path.  Some,  in
reflecting  upon  this  might  say,  that
the  earth  is  obliged  to  follow  this
course.  I  do  not  know  about  this,  I
am  not  so  sure.  I  think  if  we  could
see  a  little  further,  we  would  under-
stand that,  connected  with  the  ma-
terials of  the  earth  is  a  living  princi-
ple, a  principle  too,  that  acts  accord-
ing to  certain  laws,  intelligently,  not
blindly ;  and  that  our  earth,  in  per-
forming its  course,  following  the
track  marked  out,  does  so  according
to  law,  as  much  as  we  do  when  we
go  forth  and  are  buried  in  the  wa-
ters of  baptism.  We  go  according  to
law,  and  obtain  a  blessing,  so  does
the  earth,  when  following  the  course
marked  out  for  it  "God  hath  given
a  law*  unto  all  things,  by  which
they  move  in  their  times  and  their
seasons."  We  know  that  all  of  these
great  movements,  which  we  observe
taking  place  in  the  universe  around
us,  are  conducted  according  to  cer-
tain laws,  which  mankind  have,  in
a  few  instances,  been  able  to  search
out  themselves,  through  the  intelli-
gence that  God  has  given  them.  For
instance,  we  see  a  force  in  exercise,
when  we  lift  up  a  stone  from  the
ground,  and  hold  it  in  our  hands;  the
moment  we  let  go  this  stone,  it  falls
to  the  earth.  What  causes  it  to
fall? Philosophers  tell  you  that  "it


falls  according  to  a  law  of  nature,"
But  who  k  this  nature  that  gave
this  law!  Why  do  material  bodies
fall  t  Why  do  they  not  re-
main stationary,  suspended  in
the  air,  or  in  a  vacuum?
Why  do  they  have  a  tendency  to
approach  the  centre  of  the  earth  ?
It  is  beeause  there  is  a  force
which  draws  them  towards  such
centre.  What  is  this  force]  Scien-
tists have  called  it  gravitation ;  but
the  name  does  not  explain  the  force.
We  are  certain  that  a  central  force
exists ;  and  that  such  force  is  some-
thing that  acts  according  to  a  cer-
tain law.  Now,  if  you  were  to  take
a  material  body,  as  for  instance,  a
stone,  4,000  miles  above  the
surface  of  the  earth  and  let  go  of  it;
it  would  only  fall  one-fourth  part  of
the  distance,  in  a  second,  that  it  will
fail  here,  near  the  surface  of  the
earth.  Why  will  it  not  fall  with  the
same  velocity  up  yonder  as  here?
Because  the  law  wThich  God  has
given  in  relation  to  these  materials,
varies  in  its  intensity  of  force,  ac-
cording to  some  law  of  the  distance
from  the  central  force.  A  body  will
fall,  near  the  earths  surface,  about
16  feet  and  one  inch,  in  one  second
of  time.  You  take  it  up  4,000  miles,
and  it  will  fall  only  obout  four  feet
in  one  second  of  time.  This  has
been  demonstrated  by  the  action  of
the  earth  upon  the  moon  which  is
nearly  60  times  further  from  the
earth's  centre  than  we  are.  The  moon
only  falls  toward  the  earth  about
the  eighteenth  part  of  one  inch  in  a
second,  which  is  about  3,600  times
slower  than  a  stone  or  other  bodies
would  fall  at  the  earth's  surface*
Thus,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  this
gravitating  force  diminishes  in  its
intensity  according  to  a  fixed  law,
depending  on  the  distance  from  the
centre  of  the  earth.  This  law  was
discovered  by  Newton,  It  is  known


MAN  TO  BE  JUDGED  BY  LAW,  ETC,


235


beyond  all  controversy  that  if  we  go
twice  the  distance  which  we  are  from
•or  earth's  centre,  bodies  will  weigh
two  times  two  less  than  they  weigh
here.  If  we  recede  ihrke  our  pre-
sent dictance:  bodies  will  weigh
three  times  three,  or  nine  times  less
than  if  weighed  here.  At  kn  times
the  distance,  the  weight  would  be
ten  times  ten  less  than  here*  At
siody  times  oar  distance  from  the
earth's  centre  (which  is  the  distance
of  our  satellite)  bodies  would  weigh
toward  the  earth,  sixty  times  sixty
less  than  they  weigh  here;  but  sixty
times  sixty  are  thirty-six  hundred ;
that  is,  a  pound  would  weigh  thirty-
six  hundred  times  less  if  carried  to
the  moon's  orbit,  than  here*

In  the  language  of  mathematici-
ans, "the  intensity  of  the  gravitat-
ing force  varies  inversely  as  the
square  of  the  distance  between
gravitating  centres/'  This  law  is
undoubtedly  universal  in  its  opera-
tions, extending  to  all  the  visible
universe.

This  law,  combined  with  orbital
movements,  is  necessary  to  the  sta-
bility of  worlds  revolving  in  space.
Without  it,  systems  on  systems
would  soon  rush  to  ruin.  If  any
other  law  of  intensity  than  the  one
which  now  exists  were  assumed,  ir-
retrievable ruin  would  soon  follow.
Out  of  the  infinity  of  laws  of  variable
intensities  depending  on  distances,
the  only  one  has  been  selected  which
alone  can  impart  stability  to  all  sys-
tems in  space.  Who  made  this  all-
wise  selection  T  Did  blind  matter
select  its  own  laws?  Or  did  an  all-
wise  and  an  all-powerful  Being  im
part  these  laws, — selecting  out  of  an
infinity  of  force  intensities,  the  only
law  of  variable  intensity,  which
would  render  stable  the  grand  ma-
chinery of  the  universe  ?

This  curious  law  some  will  tell  us
is  merely  a  law  of  materials,  that


God  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  But
I  dispute  it  I  say  that  God  is  the
Auther  of  this  law ;  and  were  it  not
for  this  infinitely  wise  provision,
there  would  not  be  such  a  thing  as
one  particle  of  matter  being  drawn
to  another;  and  a  stone,  when  loosen-
ed from  the  hand,  would  still  remain
where  it  is  set  tree.

Again  we  see  our  world  here — the
earth  on  which  we  are  permitted  to
live  and  have  our  being, — sweeping
round  the  great  centre  of  the  solar
system,  once  in  365  days  and  a  frac-
tion of  a  day :  it  has  continued  in  this
path,  not  only  through  a  few  centu-
ries, but  for  thousands  of  years  ;  or,
in  other  words,  it  has  followed  this
course  according  to  some  un  leviating
law.  Whatever  this  law  may  be
God  has  ordained  it,  for  he  has  or-
dained the  t£  law  which  is  given
to  all  things,  by  which  they  move  in
their  times  and  their  seasons,"

This  earth  does  not  revolve  around
the  sun,  once  a  year,  in  a  circular
orbit,  but  in  an  oblong,  elliptical
orbit  Kow,  it  is  just  as  easy  to
cause  a  body  to  revolve  around  the
sun,  in  an  ellipse,  as  in  a  circle*
For  instance,  if  our  Earth,  when  at
its  mean  distance  from  the  Sun,
should  be  projected,  with  its  present
mean  velocity,  in  a  line  at  right
angles  to  the  lines  joining  the  Earth
and  Sun — it  would  describe  a  per-
fect circle  around  that  luminary.
But  let  the  projections  deviate  from
a  right  angle,  a  little  less  than  one
degree,  and  it  will  take  the  very
form  of  orbit  it  now  has,  provided
it  is  projected  with  the  same  mean
velocity  that  it  now  has.  Again  let
this  same  earth  be  projected,  at  its
mean  distance  from  the  Sun,  in  a
line  making  an  angle  of  70  degrees,
31  minutes  and  44  seconds  of  an  arc,
instead  of  90  degrees,  as  in  the  in-
stance just  named,  and  the  form  of
the  orbit  would  be  greatly  changed :


236


JOURNAL  QY  DISCOURSED


the  distance  from  the  Sun,  when
nearest,  would  be  only  sixty-one
millions  of  miles  ;  and  in  six  months
after,  the  distance  would  be  doubled,
that  is,  one  hundred  and  twenty-
two  millions  of  miles.  Under  these
circumstances,  the  Sun,  when  near-
est, would  appear  four  times  larger
than  at  its  aphelion  distance.

You  see,  then,  how  easy  the
Lord,  by  deviating  the  angle  of  pro-
jection, could  cause  a  great  differ-
ence, in  the  eccentricity  of  an  elliptic
orbit,  without  altering  the  mean  dis-
tance or  without  shortening  or
lengthening  the  year.  The  year
would  remain  the  same,  without  any
deviation  in  its  length,  if  the  earth
revolved  in  an  ellipse  of  the  kind
that  I  have  just  named.  Again,  if
you  wanted  the  earth  to  go  so  near
the  Sun  that  it  would  almost  graze
its  edge,  and  still  retain  the  length
of  our  year  unchanged,  it  would  not
take  our  advanced  university  students
long  to  determine  the  angle  of  pro-
jection the  earth  should  have,  so  as
to  just  graze  the  edge  of  the  Sun,
at  the  perihelion  distance,  and  come
back  again  in  an  ellipse,  which
would  be  almost  equivalent  to  a
straight  line,  provided  it  was  pro-
jected at  the  mean  distance  that  we
now  have,  with  its  present  mean
velocity ;  and  the  year  would  be
exactly  the  same  as  now,  I  mention
these  things  to  show  you  how  the
Lord,  by  a  little  deviation,  can
design  a  great  variety  of  orbits,  in
which  worlds  may  revolve,  accord-
ing to  law  ;  for  all  these  tilings  are
done  according  to  law  ;and  if  actual-
ly projected,  as  we  would  propel  a
cannon  ball,  then  aU  the  Lord  has
to  do  is  to  decree  the  form  of  the
elliptical  orbit,  having  one  year  for
its  description,  and  the  projecting
angle  will  be,  at  once,  known.

This  is  a  law,  and  the  Lord  is  the
Author  of  it. It  is  not  a  law  of


nature*  It  is  not  a  law  of  blind
materials  which  have  no  knowledge
or  life  connected  with  them,  or  in
them  or  round  about  them.

I  have  been  speaking  of  bodies  pro-
jected at  different  angles,  and  at  the
mean  distance  of  our  earth  from  the
sun.  But  let  us  next  go  stiU  fur-
ther oif  into  space-  We  can  go
away  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  about
four  times  our  distance  from  the
sun.  Is  there  any  law  for  projection
or  a  law  of  velocity  that  would  cause
bodies  to  revolve  in  orbits,  at  four
times  our  distance  from  the  sun?
Yes.  What  is  the  law  !  It  must  not
have  the  same  velocity  that  we  have.
It  must,  at  four  times  that  distance,
have  only  one  one-half  of  the  mean
orbital  velocity  of  our  earth  ;  and,  if
you  gave  it  more  than  one  half  of
such  velocity,  it  would  decrease  the
mean  distance  of  the  orbit  below
four  ;  if  you  gave  it  less,  it  would  in
crease  that  mean  distance  above
four ;  but  if  you  gave  it  exactly  one
half  of  the  velocity  our  earth  has,
then  it  would  preserve  its  orbit  in  a
circle,  or  in  any  kind  of  an  ellipse  at
that  mean  distance.  Is  there  any
law  to  govern  this  velocity  depend-
ing upon  the  distance  from  the  sun?
Yes*  What  is  the  law?  According
to  mathematical  expressions,  "the
velocity  varies  inversely  as  the
square  root  of  the  distance."  Well,
says  one,  that  is  no  information  to
us.  We  don't  know  what  you  mean
by  inversely  and  don't  know  what
you  mean  by  the  square  root ;  for  aU
of  us  have  not  sufficiently  studied
arithmetic  so  as  to  understand  the
roots  and  powers  of  numbers.  In
reply,  I  will  say,  it  is  something  very
|  simple  to  all  advanced  students  of
arithmetic.  Let  me  say  a  few  more
words,  in  regard  to  this  law  ;  for
this  is  also  a  law  of  God,  For  in-
stance, we  will  say,  that  the  earth
[  travels  a  certain  distance  in  one


MAN  TO  BE  JUDGED  BY  LAW,  ETC.


237


second,  which  we  will  call  a  unit
distance  or  18  miles  in  a  second,  in
its  orbit — we  will  call  this  distance
one.  We  go  four  times  further  off
than  our  earth  is  from  the  sun,  and
takes  the  square  root  of  four.  But
inquires  one,  how  do  yon  get  the
square  root  of  four?  A  number
that  will  multiply  into  itself,  say
two  into  two,  makes  four  i  two  then
is  the  square  root  of  four,  that  is,  it
is  the  direct  square  root,  not  the
inrerse.  But  now  you  put  this  fig-
ure 2  underneath  a  line,  and  place
the  figure  1  above  it  (thus  |)  and
such  a  fraction  is  the  inverse  square
root  of  four.  Hence,  one -half  the
velocity  that  our  earth  has,  must  he
given  to  bodies  which  are  four  times
further  from  the  sun  than  we  are.
When  nine  times  further  off  from
the  sun  than  we  are  the  orbital
velocity  will  be  only  one  third  of
ours  ;  because  one  third  is  the  in-
verse square  root  of  nine.  In  like
manner,  when  sixteen  times  further
off,  the  orbitral  velocity  is  ours.
When  twenty-five  times  more  dis-
tant, the  orbital  velocity  will  be  one-
fifth,  and  so  on  to  any  distance.

Here,  then,  is  a  regular  law  of
volocity  :  and  you  may  extend  this
to  any  distance,  in  the  solar  system,
that  you  please.

Now,  who  ordained  this  velocity?
Did  the  unconscious  materials  of
nature  come  together,  and  undertake
to  consider  this  matter  t  Here  are
laws  that  are  conducted  with  great
intelligence, — intelligence  too,  that
was  not  understood  for  several  thou-
sand yaars  preceding  the  period  of
Newton,  We  have  no  account  that
the  most  civilised  nations  of  the
earth  had  any  idea  of  the  law  of
velocity  depending  on  the  inverse
square  root  of  the  distance.  Yet
this  law  existed-  whether  understood
by  man  or  not ;  it  made  no  difference
whether  the  nations  were  ignorant


in  regard  to  this  matter  or  not,  th&
law  existed,  and  operated  for  ages
unperceived  by  mortals.

The  Latter-day  Saints  say,  that
the  Lord  of  Hosts  who  has  given  us
laws,  adapted  to  our  condition  as
free  agents,  has  also  given  laws  to
these  material  worlds,  by  which  they
act  and  by  which  they  are  preserved
for  a  great,  and  wise  and  good  pur-
pose, to  sustain  unnumbered  myriads
of  animated  beings,  who  are  by
numerous  other  laws  adapted  to
these  worlds,  and  enjoy  life  therein*
We  now  have  been  speaking  or'  the
infinitely  wise  law  of  the  velocity  of
planets.  But  this  law  would  not
preserve  our  universe  in  its  present
beautiful  order,  if  the  law  of  gravi-
tation was  not  exactly  what  it  is.
We  say  that  the  law  of  gravitation
acts  inversely  as  the  square  of  the
distance.  Now  ,  why  doesn't  it  vary
as  the  cube  of  the  distance?  Why
doesn't  it  vary  inversely  as  the  fourth
power  of  the  distance,  or  some  other
law  of  distance  ]  Because  all  these
other  laws  would  throw  the  system
into  destruction  at  once  ;  it  could
not  be  sustained-  There  is  only  one
law  among  an  infinite  number  that
might  be  chosen,  that  would  pre-
serve the  system  in  its  present  beau-
tiful order,  and  that  is  the  law  of
the  inverse  square  of  the  distance.
Who  gave  this  law  to  materials  that
they  should  have  this  attractive
force  1  The  Book  of  Covenants  tells
us  that  "  God  hath  given  a  law  unto
all  things  by  which  they  move  in
their  times  and  their  seasons  but
if  he  had  given  a  different  law  than
this  I  have  named,  in  regard  to
gravitation,  the  whole  system,  in  a
very  short  period,  would  be  reduced
to  a  chaotic  mass,  lifeless  and  inani-
mate, existing  for  no  purpose,
accomplishing  no  design  or  end,
All  this  infinite  wreck  of  worlds
would  be  the  necessary  result  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


selecting  an  unwise  law,  varying
from  the  one  which  now  obtains
among  gravitating  materials.

The  law  of  velocity  must  be  exact-
ly adapted  to  the  law  of  the  inverse
square  of  the  attractive  power.
Who  was  it  that  made  this  adapta-
tion i  Did  the  materials  endow  them-
selves with  both  of  these  laws  %
Did  they  perceive  that  no  other  laws
would  render  the  universe  stable  or
lasting?  Or,  otherwise,  is  there  an
all-wise  and  all-powerful  Governor
who  brings  all  things  under  the
dominion  of  laws,  wise  in  their  action,
powerful  in  their  nature,  and.  pre-
serving the  grand  machinery  of  the
universe,  in  the  most  perfect  har-
mony in  the  working  of  all  its
parts  ?

There  must,  then,  have  been  some
great  supreme  intelligence  who  or-
ganized these  worlds  vnd  gave  them
laws  of  attractive  force  and  adjust-
ed velocities  and  thus  produced  the
harmonious  orbits  which  we  liave,
and  which  will  preserve  themselves,
unless  interfered  with  by  some  ex-
traneous force,  for  thousands  of
years  to  come.

We  might  go  on  and  speak  of  a
great  many  other  principles  connect-
ed with  these  laws,  but  let  us  now
come  to  the  laws  given  to  intelligent
beings.  God, has  given  laws  to  what
might  be  termed  intelligent  nature  ;
but  let  me  say,  that  what  is  termed
intelligent  nature  is  sometimes  call-
ed in  this  same  revelation  from
which  I  have  been  reading,  a  spirit,
or  rather,  a  power  that  "  is  in  all
things,  through  all  things,  round
about  all  things,  and  the  law  by
which  all  things  are  governed."  It
is,  then,  an  intelligent  power  that
encircles  itself  through,  or  over,  or
round  about  every  particle  or  every
atom,  and  these  atoms  act  in  accord-
ance with  the  law  that  is  ordained,
and  do  not  deviate  from  it  unless


commanded  by  the  same  authority
that  gave  the  law.  The  same  Being
who  gave  the  law  to  materials  by
which  they  act,  can  counteract  tbe
law.  fie  did  so  in  the  instance
when  Elisha  caused  iron  to  swim.
We  read,  that  as  one  was  felling  a
beam,  the  axe  head  fell  into  the
water.  The  man,  was  much  con-
cerned, because  it  was  a  borrowed
axe.  "  And  the  man  of  God  said,
Where  fell  it  %  And  he  showed  him
the  place.  And  he  cut  down  a  stick
and  cast  it  in  thither;  and  the  iron  did
swim."  Now  what  was  it  that  caused
the  axe  to  rise  in  the  water?  The  same
Being  who  gave  the  law  of  gravita-
tion, which  caused  the  axe  to  sink,
counteracted  that  law,  and  caused
the  axe  to  swim.  The  same  Being
who  gave  the  law  of  universal  gra-
vitation, can  counteract  this  law.
He  did  it,  in  many  instances,  in  an-
cient times.  He  divided  the  Red
Sea  to  allow  the  Israelites  to  pass.
The  water  stood  up  like  walls,  in  a
great  heap,  not  for  a  few  seconds,  or
minutes,  but  stood  there  sufficiently
long  to  allow  the  Israelites  to  get  to
the  other  side  of  the  sea.  Now,
what  was  it  that  counteracted  this
law  of  nature  1  What  was  it  that
caused  this  watery  element^  which
has  a  tendency  to  spread  out  and
sink  to  its  own  level,  to  stand  up  in
a  heap,  almost  like  a  solid  body?
The  same  Being  who  gave  the  law,
which  governs  the  yielding  liquid
properties  of  water,  can  counteract
the  law,  so  as  to  make  the  water
stand  in  heaps,  God  is  the  great
Author  of  all  law,  and  is  just  as
able  to  counteract  a  law,  as  he  is  to
continue  a  law.  Let  him  withdraw
the  command  that  materials  shall
attract  all  other  materials ;  let  him
say  to  matter,  "  I  no  longer  require
you  to  act  according  to  that  law/*
and  you  would  not  find  the  earth
going  in  an  orbit  around  the  sun.


MAN  RO  BE  JUDGED  BY  LAW,  ETC


239


There  would  be  no  bond  of  union  to  j
keep  things  in  their  proper  place;
everything  would  lie  left  to  itself.
Let  God  withdraw  his  law,  or  let
him  command  adversely,  and  he  will
be  obeyed  ;  because  he  has  the
power  thus  to  direct ;  and  the  intel-
ligence which  surrounds  these  mate-
rials, the  spirit  that  is  in  and  through
all  these  things,  would  understand
the  command  and  act  accordingly.
In  the  same  way  the  Lord  heals  the  j
sick.  He  has  made  the  tabernacles
of  the  children  of  men,  and  he  has
organized  them  according  to  a  law,
so  that  every  part  of  the  human  sys-
tem is  adapted  to  every  other  part
The  blood  flows  through  the  arteries,
and  through  the  veins,  and  every
part  performs  its  proper  functions.
When  any  part  or  portion  of  this
wonderfully  constructed  being,  or,  in
other  words,  this  almost  perfect
machine,  becomes  deranged  or  out
of  order,  the  same  Being  who  first
constructed  man,  with  all  the  differ-
ent organs,  muscles,  sinews  and
skin,  can  easily  mend  or  regulate
the  same,  and  cause  every  part  to
work  in  perfect  harmony  with  every
other  part,  so  as  to  impart  health,
and  life,  and  vigor  to  the  whole
machinery.  You  would  certainly
think  that  a  person  was  not  much  of
a  mechanic  if,  after  he  had  construc-
ted a  beautiful  clock,  and  it  had  run
for  several  years,  and  got  out  of  or-
der— if  when  you  applied  to  him  for
repairs  he  replied  that  he  cuuld  not,
you  would  be  apt  to  say,  "You
made  it  in  the  first  place  :  you  cer-
tainly ought  to  know  what  is  the
matter,  and  you  can  repair  and  re-
store it  to  working  order.11  Just  so
with  the  Lord.  When  our  human
machinery  is  out  of  order,  he  under-
stands all  about  it ;  and  he  is
the  best  physician  that  can  be  em-
ployed ;  and  he  also  can  be  employ-
ed without  money  and  without


price.  He  imparts  to  this  machinery
his  Holy  Spirit  which  circulates
through  the  whole  body,  and  pro-
motes health  and  strength  in  the
individual.  But  how  apt  we  are  to
apply  to  inferior  physicians.  As
soon  as  something  ails  this  mortal
tabernacle,  the  cry  is,  (tOh,  mother,
or  husband,  will  you  send  for  the
doctor.  My  son  is  very  sick,  and
we  need  the  doctor.*  Now  this  is
sometimes  the  way  with  those  who
call  themselves  Latter-day  Saints,
but  they  ought  to  be  ashamed  that
they  do  not  honor  the  name  which
they  have  taken  upon  themselves.
The  Lord  has  ordained  that  when
you  are  sick,  you  should  apply  the
simple  ordinance  of  the  laying  on  of
hands,  or  the  anointing  with  oil  by
his  servants  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ.  In  this  ordinance  there  is
more  power  than  in  all  the  medical
ability  in  the  world;  for  there  are
ir any  diseases  which  baffle  the  sldU
of  the  wisest  physicians,  while  by
the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the
servants  of  God — not  in  their  own
name,  but  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ— according  to  the  directions
given  in  the  Scriptures,  we  have  the
promise  that  they  shall  be  healed;
that  is,  if  they  are  not  appointed
unto  death.

Here,  then,  is  another  law  of  God;
and  we  might  go  on  and  touch  upon
instances  of  the  healing  power, — the
healing  of  the  lame  man,  the  blind
man,  the  deaf  man,  or  of  fevers
removed  from  the  body,  and  the
restoration  of  broken  bones.  Now,
we  have  many  testemonies,  especi-
ally among  our  brethren  in  Wales,
where  they  have,  in  the  coal  mines
in  which  they  worked,  been  crushed,
as  it  were,  until  many  bones  in  their
body  were  broken,  so  much  so,  that
it  was  supposed  they  could  only
live  a  very  few  hours,  at  the  long*
est;  yet  by  the  laying  on  of  tha


240


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


hands  of  the  servants  of  God,  we
have  the  testimony  of  many  wit-
nesses that  those  bones  were  brought
together,  making  a  noise  like  the
crushing  of  a  basket  and  were  pkced
in  their  proper  form ;  and  the  indi-
viduals were  restored  to  health  and
soundness.  Could  any  herbs,  or
minerals,  or  physicians  have  ac-
complished this?  No*  Who  did  ac-
complish this?  The  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  through  his  servants,  by  the
laying  on  of  hands,  according  to  his
commandment.  Did  he  do  it  accord-
ing  to  law?  Yes;  for  all  his  works
are  carried  on,  according  to  certain
laws  which  he  has  ordained ;  and
if  we  had  the  same  wisdom  that  he
has,  we  could  see  the  workings  of


the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  bones  that
are  broken;  we  could  see  the  circu-
lation of  that  spirit  in  bringing  those
bones  together;  we  could  see  the  ac-
tion of  that  spirit  in  relieving  the
optic  nerve,  so  as  to  impart  sight  to
the  eye.  If  we  could  see  the  work-
ings of  that  spirit,  and  then  under-
stand by  what  power  it  works,  these
things  would  not  be  a  miracle  to  us,
God  has  no  limit  tho  these  laws  that
are  called  the  laws  of  nature.  He
has  an  infinite  number  of  laws ;  and
he  can  work  according  to  any  of
them,  which  are  suitably  adapted  to
the  circumstances,  so  as  to  bring
about  his  righteous  purposes  and
wise  designs  according  to  his  own
good  will  and  pleasure.  Amen.


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC.


241


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOH^  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  Ogpen  Tabernacle,  ox  Suxday,  4Iabck  21st,  1880.

(Reported  hy  Geo.  P  Oibhs.)

THEL  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH  AS  TAUGHT  BY  REVELATION  TO  THE
ANCIENTS,  AND  ALSO  TO  THE  SAINTS  IN  OUR  DAY.


It  affords  me  pleasure  to  have  the
opportunity  of  being  with  the  Saints
of  this  place  to-day.  I  came  here  to
attend  to  your  Primary  meeting  of
the  juveniles  ;  and  as  I  was  here,  I
thought  I  would  stay  over  Sunday
and  talk  to  the  fathers  and  mothers
a  little.  And  I  would  state,  as  is
generally  understood  by  you  all,  that
we  do  not  have  our  discourses  ar-
ranged for  us,  or  marked  out  par-
ticularly. Our  ideas  are  to  present
ourselves  before  the  people,  and  to
seek  for  the  influence  of  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord,  that  such  things  may
be  communicated  as  may  be  advan-
tageous and  interesting  to  those  who
hear.  And,  therefore,  when  we
meet  together  in  an  assembly  like
this  we  ought  all  of  us,  both  speaker
and  hearer,  to  feel  that  we  are  in
the  hands  of  our  Heavenly  Father,
and  to  -eek  for  the  aid  of  his  Holy
Spirit,  that  the  speaker  may  speak
correctly  and  understanding!)',  and
in  a  manner  that  shall  be  calculated
to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  people,
and  that  the  people  themselves  may
also  be  prepared  to  receive  such  things
as  may  be  communicated.

We  occupy  a  peculiar  position  on
the  earth  at  the  present  time,  per-

No.  16,


haps  a  little  different  from  that  of
any  other  people  that  have  existed
on  the  earth — our  thoughts,  our  ideas
our  principles,  our  organization,  our
doctrines,  our  ordinances,  and  every-
thing connected  with  our  religious
matters  are  different  from  those  of
other  people ;  and  it  is  our  opinion,
and  not  only  our  opinion,  but  a  cer-
tainty— in  fact,  it  amounts  to  know-
ledge among  a  great  many  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  that  the  influences
and  principles  that  we  have  received
have  been  communicated  to  us  by
the  Almighty.  We  were  not  the
originators  of  the  principles  we  be-
lieve in  ;  neither  was  Joseph  nor
Hyrum  Smith,  nor  Prest.  Brigham
Young,  nor  the  Twelve;  neither  was
any  individual  nor  any  people  asso-
ciated with  the  priesthood  or  the  or-
ganization of  the  Church  at  the
present  time.  We  believe  that  these
things  have  been  communicated  to
us  by  the  Lord;  that  they  are  in
strict  harmony  with  principles  that
have  existed  heretofore,  to  a  certain
extent,  with  this  difference  however,
that  in  the  various  dispensations
that  have  existed  upon  the  earth
since  its  formation,  each  one  h;is
had  its  peculiar  role  to  fulfil,  with

Vol  XXL


certain  duties  devolving  upon  those  :
operating  to  attend  to.  We  are  living
111  the  dispensation  which  is  em-
phatically called  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times,  which  we  are  in-
formed from  the  scriptures  has  been
"spoken  of  by  all  the  holy  prophets
since  the  world  was;"  and  this  being
the  case,  the  dispensation  in  which
we  live  embraces  necessarily  all  that
was  contained  in  any  and  all  of  the
other  dispensations  that  have  ex-
isted in  all  the  ages  preceding  ours ;
and  that  consequently  whatever  or-
ganizations, manifestations,  revela-
tions or  communications  that  have
ever  come  from  God  to  the  human
family  in  their  times  and  dispensa-
tions, we  may  consistently  expect
to  be  embodied  in  this  one.  And,
therefore, in  some  respects,  as  I  stated
befon,  i  he  dispensation  or  time  in
which  we  live  differs  in  many  par-
ticulars from  those  in  which  God  has
communicated  to  man.

We  have,  for  instance,  what  is
called  the  patriarchal  dispensation,
which  existed  before  and  after  the
flood.  And  those  patriarchs  and
men  of  God  that  lived  in  those  re-
mote ages  had  communications  with
the  Almighty,  and  they  also  had  the
Gospel.  And  they  not  only  received
revelations  pertaining  to  their  own
day  and  age,  but  also  in  regard  to
the  future.  And  hence  we  are  told
that  Adam,  three  years  before  his
death,  gathered  together  a  great
many  of  his  people  and  the  promi-
nent authorities  of  the  holy  priest-
hood, and  he  blessed  them,  and  be-
ing filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  pre-
dicted whatsoever  should  befall  his
posterity  unto  the  latest  dispensa-
tion, including  all  the  leading  events
that  should  transpire  in  the  different
ages  of  time,  even  uutil  the  winding
up  scene,  associated  with  this  our
earth ;  embracing  those  things  that
have  been  and  are  to  be  brought


forth  in  this  the  present  dispensation*
And,  in  fact,  this  dispensation,  we
are  told,  has  been  "spoken  of  by  all
the  holy  prophets  since  the  world
was/'  And,  therefore,  it  must  of
necessity  have  been  associated  with
the  teachings  of  Adam,  of  Seth,  of
Enoch,  of  Methuselah,  and  of  Noah,
Abraham,  Moses  and  many  other
prominent  characters  that  held  com-
munication with  the  Lord,  and  who
had  revealed  unto  them  his  purposes
and  designs  in  the  days  m  which
they  lived.  Many  people  listened
to  the  principles  of  truth  in  their
day.  Enoch  was  a  remarkable  man
and  had  a  special  mission  to  the  peo-
ple in  his  day,  and  he  ^ as  full  of  the
spirit  of  prophecy  and  revelation  ;  he
also  had  a  Church  organization  as
we  have  to  a  certain  extent,  and  he
preached  to  the  people  and  fore-
warned them  of  certain  events  that
should  transpire  upon  the  earth.
And  the  wicked  were  angry  with
them,  as  they  are  sometimes  with
us ;  they  did  not  like  their  teachings
and  operations,  and  they  conspired
against  them,  and  great  numbers  of
their  enemies  assembled  for  the  pur-
pose of  destroying  them.  And
Enoch  was  clothed  upon  by  the
power  and  spirit  and  revelation  of
God.  And  whilst  under  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Almighty  he  uttered  his
prophecies,  and  his  enemies  and  the
people  generally  trembled  at  the
power  of  his  words  ■  and  the  earth
shook,  and  the  people  fled  from  his
presence  afar  off,  and  were  not  able
to  injure  him,  for  God  was  with  him.
And  Enoch,  with  the  united  labors
of  the  elders  of  his  day,  gathered
the  people  together  who  hearkened
to  his  words  and  believed  the  mes-
sage sent  to  them,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  you  have  been  gathered  to-
gether* They  built  up  a  city  which
was  called  Zion;  and  the  people  who
inhabited  it  were  under  the  inspira-


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC.


243


tion  of  tli e  Lord  for  a  great  number
of  years ;  receiving  instruction,
guidance  and  direction  from  him.
And  finally,  as  wickedness  grew  and
increased,  and  as  the  testimony  went
forth  among  them,  the  good,  the
virtuous,  the  honorable,  the  pure  and
those  who  desired  to  fear  God  and
work  righteousness  assembled  them-
selves  together,  constituting  the  city
of  Zion;  and  the  others  became  more
corrupt.  And  Enoch  and  his  bre-
thren prophesied  unto  the  people
about  the  calamities  that  should
overtake  them,  that  the  world  was  1
to  be  destroyed  by  a  flood;  and  there
were  provisions  made  for  the  conti-
nuance of  the  human  family,  and  it
was  made  known  to  Methuselah
that  his  seed  should  be  the  medium
through  which  should  be  perpetu-
ated the  human  family  upon  the
earth*  And  Methuselah  was  so
very  desirous  to  have  this  thing  ful-
filled that  Xoah,  his  grandson,  who
was  the  son  of  Lamech.  was  ordained
by  Methuselah  when  he  was  ten
years  old.

The  people,  we  learn,  grew  to  be
so  corrupt  that  "the  imaginations  of
the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  were  i
only  evil,  and  that  continually;"  and
we  are  told  that  it  even  repented  ,
the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man.
But  the  servants  of  God  went  forth
preaching  the  Gospel  of  life  and  sal-
vation to  this  wicked  people,  and
warned  them  of  the  destruction  that
was  coming  upon  the  earth.  Before
this  great  calamity  took  place  Enoch
and  his  city  were  translated.

The  power  of  translation  was  a
principle  that  existed  in  the  Church
in  that  dispensation.  There  is  some-
thing very  peculiar  in  these  things.
Some  people,  who  are  not  in  the
Church,  might  ask  me  where  I  got
my  evidence  from.  To  the  Latter-day  ;
Saints  I  would  say,  we  get  it  by
revelation.  We  do  not  believe  that,


r  say  some.  That  we  cannot  help.  I
am  speaking  now  to  those  who  do
believe  so,  to  those  who  are  believers
in  God,  and  who  are  believers  in  the
Bible,  the  Book  of  Mormon,  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and  who
believe  in  the  revelations  which  the
Lord  has  given  and  in  those  he  con-
tinues to  communicate.  It  is  to
those  people  I  am  speaking  to-day
on  these  points.

I  The  Bible  does  not  give  us  a  very
extensive  history  of  these  matters;
in  fact,  it  is  very,  very  brief.  Re-
ferring to  that  great  man,  Enoch,  it
tells  us  that  he  was  not  for  God  took
him ;  and  that  is  all.  This  is  a  ^ery
short  history  for  so  important  a  sub-
ject.

After  that  the  flood  came,  which
was  a  terrible  calamity,  to  overtake
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth;  and
they  were  swept  away  according  to
the  prophecy — cut  off  from  the  earth,
deprived  of  life  and  existence,  and
shut  up  in  prison.

After  some  thousands  of  years  Je-
sus came,  associated  with  another
dispensation.  And  when  he  ap-
peared on  the  earth  and  had  got
through  with  his  ministry,  and  had
suffered  in  the  flesh  and  was  quick-
ened by  the  spirit,  "he  went  and
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison"  who
were,  as  stated,  "sometime  disobe-
dient in  the  days  of  Noah,"  And
hence  thousands  ot  people  that  had
suffered  the  wrath  of  God  for  so  long
a  time  had  the  opportunity  of  listen-
ing to  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  in
another  dispensation  that  Jesus  came
to  proclaim.  And  when  he  had  got
through  with  his  mission  on  the
earth  to  those  who  lived,  he  went
then  to  preach  to  those  who  had
been  dead,  and  I  migh  t  properly  say
were  damned  for  so  many  years.
;  And  what  w^as  the  special  mission
he  had  to  proclaim  1  He  came  "to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor,  to


2U


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


open  the  eyes  of  tlie  blind,  to  set  at
liberty  those  that  were  bound,  and
to  preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the
Lord,  and  the  day  of  vengeance  of
our  God/'  That  was  part  of  his  mis-
sion; the  whole  of  his  mission,  how-
ever, has  not  yet  been  fulfilled.  But
he  came  to  liberate  the  prisoners,
which  he  did  in  the  spirit,  when  he
got  through  with  his  mission  on  the
earth.

On  the  back  of  that  Noah  steps
forward  in  a  prominent  position,  and
he  had  his  work  to  perform,  which
he  did  perform,  and  began  to  raise
up  another  seed;  and  they  lived  also
in  what  may  be  termed  a  patriarchal
dispensation.  And  among  them
were  many  of  Iris  leading  posterity-
There  was  Melchisedec,  for  instance,
who  was  called  the  King  of  Salem
and  the  Prince  of  Peace,  of  whom
Paul  makes  some  curious  remarks,
among  which  was  that  Christ  was  a
priest  forever,  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chisedec. If  he  was,  then  of  course
Welch isedec  was  a  priest  after  the
order  of  Christ  And  as  Christ  in-
troduced the  Gospel,  so  Melchisedec
had  the  Gospel,  and  had  and  held
and  administered  in  the  same  priest-
hood that  Jesus  did.  And  we  read
too,  according  to  some  mens  ideas,
a  very  singular  thing  concerning
him,  that  "he  was  without  father
and  mother,  and  without  beginning
of  days  or  end  of  years,  and  abide th
a  priest  continually/*  He  must  be,
indeed,  a  very  singular  man,  to  be
without  father  and  without  mother
and  without  descent,  and  yet  that
he  should  be  a  priest  forever.  Well,
how  is  it?  You  generally  understand
it;  but  I  will  inform  those  who  do
not  that  the  Apostle  Paul  referred
to  the  priesthood  that  Melchisedec
held,  and  that  they  had  what  was
termed  the  Aaron ic  or  Levitical
priesthood  in  their  day,  that  is,  the
day  in  which  Saul  lived :  and  that  a


man  to  be  a  priest  had  to  be  a  literal
descendant  of  Aaron  and  of  the
tribe  of  Levi;  and  he  had  to  be  able
to  prove  his  lineage,  tracing  his  de-
scent back  to  the  time  when  this
priesthood  was  given  by  Moses  in  tho
wilderness.  But  tin*  Mdchisedec
priesthood  was  different  from  that,
it  had  nothing  to  do  particularly  with
either  father  or  mother,  it  being
without  descent,  and,  therefore,  peo-
ple holding  it  were  not  altogether  de-
pendent upon  their  father  or  mother
or  descent  for  this  authority  ;  but
that  priesthood  is  an  everla-'ing
priesthood,  administering  in  time
and  in  eternity.  And  this  is  what
Paul  referred  to  by  way  of  contra-
distinction to  the  Aaronic  priesthood
which  then  existed.

Associated  with  this  priesthood
there  were  certain  powers  and  priv-
ileges. These  Abraham  possesses  I  and
enjoyed.  *Some  people  think  that  he
was  a  kind  of  a  shepherd  with  very
few  more  ideas  than  a  musliiouui  -
that  he  lived  in  the  dark  ages  mid
did  not  comprehend  much  ;  that  he
was  not  intelligent  and  had  a  species
of  what  we  term  nowa-clajs  "old
fogy  ism."  But  if  we  examine  into
his  character  and  the  position  ha
occupied,  and  if  we  understand
something  about  the  principles  he
promulgated,  we  shall  find  that  he
was  another  character  entire! v.  In
giving  his  history  he  tells  us  that
"He  sought  for  the  blessings  of  the
Father  and  the  right  whereunto  he
should  be  ordained  to  administer  the
same."  He  further  says: — "Having
been  myself  a  follower  of  righteous-
ness, desiring  also  to  be  one  who
possessed  great  knowledge,  and  to  be
a  great  follower  of  righteousness,  and
to  possess  a  greater  knowledge,  and
to  be  a  father  of  many  nations,  a
prince  of  peace;  and  desiring  to  re-
ceive instructions,  and  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God  I  became  a


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC


245


rightful  heir,  a  high  priest,  holding
the  right  belonging  to  the  fathers;  it
was  conferred  upon  me  from  the
fathers;  it  came  down  from  the
fathers,  from  the  beginning  of  time-
Yea,  even  from  the  beginning,  or
before  the  foundations  of  the  earth,
to  the  present  time,  even  the  right
of  the  first-born,  on  the  first  man,
who  was  Adam,  or  first  father,
through  the  fathers  unto  me."
Times7  and  Seasons,  vol  iii,  p.  70*.
His  lather  however  was  an  idolater;
but  had  probably  possessed  a  record
of  ins  genealogy,  for  Abraham  in
his  record  continues  : — "I  shall  en-
deavor hereafter  to  delineate  the
chronology,  running  back  from  my-
self to  the  beginning  of  the  creation,
for  the  records  h a ve  come  into  my
hands,  which  I  hold  until  the  pre-
sent time."  And  having  found  out
that  he  had  a  right  to  the  priesthood,
he,  therefore,  sought  an  ordination,
and  lie  was  ordained  by  Melchisedec
to  the  Melchisedec  pri  not  hood.  And
the  Lord  g&ve  unto  him  certain  priv-
ileges and  powers  that  were  very
great ;  not  only  did  he  have  an  or-
dilation  in  the  way  I  refer  to,  but
he  >ou^ht  more  information  from
the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  com mu id-
eated with  him  and  gave  hi  in  a
Uriin  and  Thunnnim  by  which  he
was  enabled  to  interpret,  to  read  and
comprehend  the  mind  and  will  and
the  uws  and  purposes  of  God.  And,
furthermore,  I  would  state  that  he
went  still  further.  Ho  asked  God
for  certain  blessings  and  privileges
and  powers  which  belonged  to  him
and  which  he  considered  were  with-
in his  reach,  and  which  were  his
privilege  to  obtain.  And  the  Lord
revealed  himself  to  him  and  com-
municated unto  him  certain  eternal
principles* — that  no  man  can  compre-
hend unless  God  does  reveal  them —
and  many  other  things— the  motion
of  the  planets,  and  the  planetary


system  of  the  earth  on  which  we
live,  and  the  sun  and  the  moon  and
the  stars  and  the  various  bodies  that
compose  our  solar  system;  and  then,
of  other  suns,  and  other  heavenly
bodies  and  the  laws  governing  them.
Abraham  wrote  those  things,  and
was  well  versed  in  those  great  prin-
ciples ;  and  some  men  affirm  to-day
1  that  he  was  the  founder  of  certain
abstruse  principles*  which  they  allege
are  discovered  in  what  is  called
the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt, — prin-
ciples that  not  only  pertain  to  the
planetary  systems  but  to  events  yet
to  transpire  on  the  earth.  1  am  not
going  to  say  anything  about  the
truth  or  the  untruth  of  these  latter
statements,  as  I  have  not  investi-
gated them  sufficiently  to  compre-
hend them  ;  but  1  merely  give  the
opinion  of  a  great  many  men  respect-
ing him  and  the  intelligence  he  pos-
sessed. But  suffice  it  to  say,  that  the
Lord  himself  instructed  Abraham
in  things  pertaining  to  this  and
other  worlds,  and  that  he  in  his  day
possessed  more  light  and  intelligence
on  the  principles  alluded  to  than  all
the  combined  wisdom  of  the  world
of  to-day.

Now,  this  was  the  kind  of  a  man
that  Abraham  was.  And  his  heart
and  feelings  and  affections  were
drawn  out  after  God.  And  God
blessed  him  and  said  unto  him,
"That  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,
and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply
thee  and  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the
stars  of  heaven,"  &C.  And  lurther
the  Lord  tol  l  him,  "And  in  thy  seed
shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be
blessed,  because  thou  hast  obeyed
my  worth"  And  hence  he  occupied
a  very  important  position.  And,  as
I  before  stud,  being  a  patriarch  he
had  the  gospel  and  the  priesthood
belonging  to  it,  namely,  the  Melchis-
edec priesthood.

I  do  not  propose  to-day  to  sluw


246


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


how  these  things  have  all  been  liter-
ally fulfilled  that  are  here  spoken  of ;
that  I  will  leave  fur  you  to  hunt  up
far  yourselves.  But  the  promises
made  to  that  man  of  God  have  been
literally  fulfilled,  even  to  the  present
day  to  the  coming  forth  of  this  work
with  which  we  are  associated.

Now,  that  was  a  peculiar  dispen-
sation;  it  was  under  the  dispensation
that  was  introduced,  say  by  Noah,  or
the  one  that  he  was,  I  was  going  to
say,  founder  of ;  he  was  not  the
founder  of  it,  but  he  was  the  one
preserved  by  the  Almighty  from  the
wreck  of  the  world,  in  which  he  had
lived  for  upwards  of  GOO  years  to
introduce  it.  And  Abraham  was
one  of  the  prominent  actors  in  oper-
ating and  carrying  out  the  purposes  of
God  in  that  dispensation,  and  there
were  a  great  many  others  too  that
were  in  possession  of  the  same  kind
of  intelligence;  but  he  was  one  of
the  most  prominent,  therefore  I
have  referred  more  particularly  to
him*

Then,  there  was  another  dispen-
sation followed,  called  the  Mosaic
dispensation.  Moses  was  made  use
of  as  an  instrument  to  deliver  the
children  of  Israel  from  Egyptian
bondage.  It  had  been  predicted
that  the  descendants  of  Israel  should
go  into  bondage  and  be  confined
there  for  IrOO  years,  and  that  they
should  be  delivered  by  the  power  of
God*  And  Moses  was  the  man
chosen  of  the  Lord  to  perform  that
work  :  and  he  was  indebted  to  the
Lord  for  the  instruction  and  the  in-
telligence he  received.  We  read  in
the  Bible  that  on  a  certain  occasion
he  saw  a  burning  bush,  and  the  bush,
we  learn,  was  not  consumed ;  and
on  going  towards  it  lie  heard  the
voice  of  the  Lord  speaking  unto  hi  in,
telling  him  to  take  his  shoes  from
off  his  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  he
stood  was  ho^y  ground. He  did  as


he  was  commanded.  The  Lord  then
told  him  that  he  had  a  work  fur  him
to  perform,  which  was  that  he  should
go  down  to  Egypt  where  he  had  bean
reared  from  his  youth,  and  where  he
had  been  taught  according  to  the
learning  of  the  Egyptians  to  deliver
this  people  Israel  out  of  their  bond-
age. You  that  are  acquainted  with
your  Bible  know  the  history  of  it.
The  account  is  lengthy  and  I  shall
not  attempt  to  enter  into  it.  Suffice
it  to  say,  he  succeeded  in  delivering
the  children  of  Israel  from  Egyptian
bondage.  He  had  the  power,  when
his  people  reached  the  Red  Sen,  to
smite  the  sea  and  cause  the  waters
to  divide,  thereby  making  a  way  of
escape  from  their  pursuers,  the
Egyptians.  He  lead  them  into  the
wilderness  where  they  had  to  depend
entirely  upon  the  mercies  of  God  for
their  sustenance.  But  having  been
in  bondage  for  so  lung  a  time  it  was
difficult  for  them  to  comprehend
many  things  that  were  communi-
cated to  them  ;  and,  we  are  told,
they  began  to  long  for  the  leeks  and
the  onions.  We,  in  our  dav,  would
think  that  their  taste  was  not  so
very  delicate  ;  but  that  was  their
desire,  many  of  them  feeling  that
they  would  rather  go  back  to  Egypt
than  to  suffer  the  trials  that  seemed
to  await  them.  And  the  Lord  mani-
fested himself  to  them  in  many
marvelous  ways,  and  Moses  who  was
their  leafier  and  who  had  been
especially  appointed  by  the  Lord,
went  up  to  the  mount,  and  the  Lord
gave  unto  him  certain  command-
ments which  he  wrote  with  his  own
finger,  upon  tables  of  stone  which
were  prepared  for  that  purpose.
Moses  was  away  from  the  people  for
some  time  conversing  wit  1  and  re-
ceiving communications  from  the
Almighty,  and  when  he  came  down
he  found  that  the  people  whom  he
had  led  out  of  Egypt  and  to  whom


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC


the  manifestations  of  the  Lord  had
been  shown,  had  made  a  golden
calf  and  were  worshipping  it — about
the  same  as  we  do  sometimes,  and
we  profess  to  be  a  much  more
enlightened  people  than  they  were
— and  they  said,  "  These  be  thy
gods,  O  Israel,  which  brought  thee
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt"  On  see-
ing this  wickedness  on  the  part  of
his  people  he  became  angry,  and  he
threw  the  tables  of  stone  to  the
ground  and  broke  them.  After-
wards other  stones  were  prepared
and  the  same  laws  written  on  them,  I
And  the  Lord  was  desirous  that
they  as  a  people  should  be  faithful
in  the  observance  of  his  laws,  that
they  should  be  governed  by  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  which  Moses
taught  them.  This  is  a  singular
idea  to  some  people  ;  they  think
there  was  no  Gospel  until  Jesus
came.  AY  ell,  we  cannot  help  that,  |
but  Paul  understood  it  better  He
tells  us  that  Moses  preached  the  |
Gospel  to  them  in  the  wilderness,
but  the  word  preached  did  not  pro-
fit them,  etc,,  wherefore  the  law  was  i
added  because  of  transgression.
Added  to  what  ]  To  the  Gospel.
Paul  understood  this  if  men  in  this
age  do  not  Ami  Moses  did  himself  get
into  the  presence  of  God,  and  he
also  led  seventy  elders  who  were  so
instructed  and  prepared  that  they
could  go  into  the  presence  of  God  to
communicate  with  him ;  but  the
people  were  afraid  of  God,  and  when
the  Lord  appeared  to  them  on
Mount  Sinai,  when  they  heard  the
thunders  and  saw  the  lightning  and
felt  the  mountain  quake,  they  said
to  Moses,  do  not  let  the  Lord  speak
to  us  any  more  lest  we  his  people
die  ;  but  do  thou  speak  to  us  and  be
mouthpiece.  They  were  not  pre-
pared to  come  into  the  presence  of
the  Lord  ;  they  were  not  sufficiently
pure,  neither  did  they  understand  !


the  laws  and  principles  which  God
had  communicated.  But  they  mur-
mured and  murmured  and  that
continually— the  same  as  we  do,
we  see  something  of  the  same  spirit,
we  are  found  sometimes  murmuring
against  God,  or  at  least  against  some
of  the  revelations  he  has  given  unto
us,  or  against  the  priesthood,  and  in
many  instances  without  cause.  And
what  had  God  done  for  them  '(  He
brought  them  out  from  the  midst  of
Egypt,  from  a  state  of  servitude  and
vassalage,  ami  delivered  them  from
the  hands  of  their  oppressors,  and
when  the  Egyptians  pursued  them,
he  opened  the  waters  of  the  Red
Sea  ami  let  them  pass  through  in
safety  ;  hut  swallowed  up  their
enemies  who  pursued  them.  Then
when  they  were  short  of  food  he
supplied  tli em  with  angel\s  food,
manna.  That  was  all  the  harm  he
had  done  to  them — just  about  as
much  as  many  others  who  murmur.
They  murmured  against  God  for
bringing  them  away,  and  against
Moses  for  being  the  instrument  in
doing  it  Whereas  God  was  trying
to  fulfill  the  promises  he  had  made
with  Abraham,  their  father  ;  and  he
was  making  use  of  Moses  as  his  in*
strument  to  deliver  the  people  from
that  bondage  with  which  they  had
been  oppressed  for  so  long  a  time  ;
but  because  of  their  transgressions,
their  wickedness  and  their  rebellious-
ness, the  law  was  added  or  given
unto  them,  which  was  a  law  of  car-
nal commandments  and  ordinances,
of  which  a  later  writer  in  speaking
of  it  says,  "  neither  we  nor  our
fathers  were  able  to  bean"

Well  he  d  them  in  another
posit  if  m,  and  gave  unto  them  the
Gospel,  but  as  they  could  not  endure
the  greater  light  he  gave  them  a
les.M-r  light  in  the  form  of  a  law  of
carnal  commandments  and  ordi-
nances. Hence  that  dispensation  is


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


therefore  called  the  Mosaic  dispensa-
tion ;  and  Moses  was  the  instrument
made  use  of  by  the  Almighty  to  in-
troduce it,  and  it  was  revealed  to
him  upon  the  mountain.  And  that
law  of  carnal  command  meats  and
ordinances  seemed  to  suit  them  a
little  better  than  the  Gospel  ;  they
loved  these  carnal  commandments
better  than  the  light,  the  truth,  the
revelation  and  spirit  that  was  asso-
ciated with  the  Gospel.  And  they
could  not  come  into  the  presence  of
God.  If  you  remember,  certain
men  at  one  time  went  running  to
Moses  to  complain  of  certain  other
men  whom  they  said  were  prophesy-
ing ;  and  Moses  said  to  them,  would
to  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people
were  prophets  ;  would  to  God  that
all  could  be  inspired  with  that  spirit
of  revelation  that  flows  from  him.
Says  the  Prophet  Joel,  in  speaking
of  the  glory  of  the  latter-day,  11  And
it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that
I  will  pour  out  my  spiiit  upon  all
flesh  ;  and  your  sons  and  your
daughters  shall  prophesy,  your  old
men  shall  dream  dreams  ;  your
young  men  shall  see  visions  ;  and
upon  the  servants  and  the  hand*
maids  in  those  days  will  I  pour  out
my  spirit/'  etc.  Now,  they  had  a
dispensation  then  called  the  Mosaic
dispensation  ;  and  associated  with
that  was  a  sprinkling  of  the  Gospel.
Once  in  a  while  the  light  of  the  day
star  would  dawn  upon  the  people,
foretelling  some  things  in  which
they  and  their  children  were  interest-
ed! ;  and  that  was  manifest  through
certain  men  among  them  who  were
peculiarly  inspired  by  Goth  But
they  did  not  have  then  a  regularly
ordained  organization  of  the  Mel-
chisedee  Priesthood  as  we  have  it
If  a  man  received  these  things  in
those  days  he  received  it  from  God.
A  young  man  came  to  me  to  ask  me
some  questions  on  this  subject,  and


I  will  here  mention  one  thing  I  told
him.  These  prophets  had  the  Mel-
chizedec  Priesthood,  but  they  did
not  have  it  in  the  regular  organized
form  as  we  have  it  Hence  when
Elijah  was  about  to  be  translated —
for  that  spirit  ami  power  was  yet
with  him  :  it  had  not  left  the  earth
after  Enoch's  day,  for  many  were
translated  besides  him  and  his  city
— there  were  certain  prophets  scat-
tered up  and  down  among  Israel,
and  as  Eli j  all  and  El  is  ha  were
travelling  together,  Elijah  said  to
Elisha,  Tarry  here,  I  pray  thee,  for
the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  Bethel.
But  Eli* ha  said  as  the  Lurd  liveth,
and  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not
leave  thee*  And  they  went  on  to-
gether. And  at  Bethel  the  sons  of
the  prophets  at  that  place  came
forth  uuto  Elisha.  and  said  unto  him,
Knowest  thou  that  the  Lord  will
take  away  thy  master  from  thy  head
to-day  ]  And  he  answered,  Yea,  I
know  it ;  hold  ye  your  peace.  At
this  place  Elijah  wanted  Elisha  to
tarry,  saying  that  the  Lord  had  sent
him  to  a  place  called  Jericho  ;  but
Elisha  made  the  same  answer.
Elijah  at  this  place  made  the  same
request  of  his  companion,  saying  the
Lord  had  sent  him  on  to  Jordan;
but  Elisha  would  not  be  separated
from  his  master.  And  they  went
on  to  Jordan  together  ;  and  when
they  came  to  that  stream,  Elijah
took  oft1  his  mantle,  wrapped  it  to-
gether and  smote  the  water  which
divided,  so  that  they  went  over  on
dry  ground.  And  when  they  had
passed  over,  Elijah  asked  Elisha
what  he  con  Id  do  for  him  be  lore  he
should  be  taken  away,  Elisha,
knowing  that  he  had  something  to
do  and  that  he  was  about  to  be  left
alone,  and  that  he  might  be  the
better  prepared  to  perform  the  work
before  him,  requested  Elijah  to
let  a  double  portion  of  his  spirit  rest


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC.


240


upon  him.  But  could  Elijah  grant  f
his  request  1  No,  he  could  nut,  1
What  answer  did  Elijah  make  him?
He  said,  thou  hast  asked  a  hard
thing;  nevertheless,  if  thou  seest  me
when  I  am  taken  from  thee,  it  shall
be  so  unto  thee  ;  but  if  not  it  shall
not  be  so.  How  did  Elijah  know
that  i  Because  he  knew  that  the
JVIelehizedee  Priesthood  holds  the
keys  of  the  mysteries  and  the  reve-
lations of  God  ;  and  that  if  he  could
see  him  iu  he  ascended,  it  would  be
an  evidence  to  him  that  the  Lord
had  granted  his  request,  although
he  himself  had  not  power  to  grant  [
it,  Elisha  would  then  know  that  his
prayer  was  heard.  Those  other  pro-
phets, who  knew  that  Elijah  was  to  ;
be  translated,  went  and  stood  to
view  the  event  afar  offj  I  do  not
suppose  that  they  saw  anything  of
Elijah  as  lie  was  being  taken  up  into
heaven.  But  he  was  taken  up,  and
Elisha  saw  the  manner  in  which  he
Wi*nt  and  cried  out,  1  i  My  father  !
my  father  !  the  chariot  of  Israel  and
the  horsemen  thereof/1  And  how
did  he  siv  them  1  God  had  confer-
red upon  him  that  priesthood  by
which  he  was  enabled  to  see  them.
Elijah  threw  down  his  mantle  as  he
ascended,  which  Elisha  took  up  and
started  off  alone,  his  "head"  having
been  translated.  But  he  had  re- ,
ceived  the  answer  to  his  prayer ;  and
approaching  the  banks  of  the  Jor-
dan, with  tiie  mantle  that  had  been
left  him  he  smote  the  waters  saying,
"  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah?1'  j
And  when  he  did  so  they  parted  as
they  had  done  at  the  command  of
Elijah,  and  Elisha  passed  over.
And  God  was  with  him,  manifesting
his  i*o wer  through  him,  as  he  had
done  through  his  predecessor,  I
speak  of  this  as  a  certain  principle
and  I  speak  of  it  now  for  the  infor-
mation of  you  elders,  that  they  did
not  have  then  an  organized  Mel-
ehi^dec  Priesthood,  but  that  if  it  |


was  conferred  upon  individuals,  they
did  not  have  the  power  to  confer  it
upon  others,  unless  through  special
command  of  the  Lord.  And  Elijah
knew  that  if  Elisha  could  see  him
when  he  was  asceuding,  that  his
prayer  wou  1  d  be  an s were 1 1 .  Why  ?
Because  the  Melchizedec  Priesthood
holds  the  keys  of  the  mysteries  and
the  revelations  of  God.

This  is  a  principle  on  that  point  ;
and  it  may  be  of  use  to  you  elders,
that  you  may  comprehend  the  posi-
tion, that  they  occupied.  That  was
associated  in  part  with  the  Mosaic
dispensation,  but  only  in  part  But
when  Jesus  came  he  introduced  the
Mclchisedec  priesthood  in  an  organ-
ized form,  and  restored  the  Gospel.
But  those  men  did  not  restore  thei
Gospel.  But  let  mo  show  you
that  are  acquainted  with  the  history
of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  they  had  a
grtiat  many  more  revelations  in  re-
gard to  these  things  upon  this  conti-
nent than  they  had  upon  the  conti-
nent of  Asia.  And  they  had  the
Gospel  and  administered  in  the  ordi-
nances and  talked  about  the  coming
of  Christ,  still  they  administered  in
the  laws  of  Moses  until  the  coming
of  Christ ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time
they  did  have  the  Gospel  and  an  or-
ganization of  that  Gospel  in  part
and  ordinances  among  them  differ-
ent  from  what  they  had  on  the  other
continent  before  Christ  came.  You
that  are  acquainted  with  the  Book
of  .Mormon  will  find  these  tilings  in
it;  and  if  you  have  not  found  them,
hunt  them  up,  and  you  will  find
what  I  say  in  relation  to  this  matter
is  true.

Very  well.  When  Jesus  came  he
had  been  looked  forward  to  by  all
the  prophets  since  the  world  was,
and  it  had  been  prophesied  about
him  that  he  wou  hi  come  to  redeem
the  world  and  offer  himself  a^  a  sac-
rifice, as  an  atonement  for  the  sins
of  the  world,  of  which  there  were


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


many  shadows  and  types.  I  will  re-
fer back  again  to  Moses,  and  then  I
will  refer  to  the  sacrament.  Mose$,
as  I  stated,  had  the  Gospel  when  he
went  among  the  children  of  Israel.
There  were  many  signs  and  won-
ders poured  out  among  them  and
many  calamities  overtook  the  |
Egyptians.  And  Moses  went  from
time  to  timo  into  the  presence  of
Pharaoh  telling  him  what  should
take  place,  and  among  the  rest  lie
said  that  if  they  did  not  let  Israel  go
the  first  horn  of  the  Egyptians
should  be  slain.  And  he  told  the
people  that  dwelt  in  the  land  Go-
shen—the  children  of  Israel — that
they  were  to  kill  a  lamb  and  sprinkle  :
the  blood  of  the  lamb  upon  their
door  posts,  and  that  when  the  de-
stroying angels  passed  through,  their
children  should  escape  death.  And
it  happened  precisely  as  had  been
told  them — while  the  first-born  of
the  Egyptians  was  destroyed,  the
children  of  the  Hebrews  were  pre-
served. Now,  that  was  called  the
passover  among  the  children  of
Israel,  and  it  was  continued  among
them  year  after  year,  and  the  day
on  which  it  was  kept  was  called  the
day  of  the  Passover.

When  Jesus  was  upon  the  earth
he  sent  his  disciples  to  go  and  pre-
pare a  place  that  they  might  hold
the  passover  together.  "And  as  they
were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  ,
blessed  it.  and  brake  it,  and  gave  it
to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat;
this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the
cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  to
them,  saying,  Drink  ve  all  of  it;  for
this  is  my  blood  of  tlte  new  testa*
ment,  which  is  shed  for  many  for
the  remission  of  sins/1  What"  was
it  they  were  doing  1  It  was  partak-
ing of  the  passover  of  the  sprinkling
of  that  blood  which  was  typical  of
the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  the
Lamb  of  God  upon  Calvary. And  j


the  breaking  of  that  bread  was  typi-
cal of  his  broken  body.  And  they
offered  in  former  times  the  blood  of
bullocks  and  of  rams,  goats,  etc.,  as
sacrifices.  And  all  this,  as  Paul
says,  had  reference  unto  the  shed-
ding of  the  blood  of  Christ;  and
was  typical  of  that  of  which  he
was  the  great  ante- type  when  he
came  to  fulfil  all  these  things.  Very
well,  what  was  that  ?  Did  thev  have
the  passover  thenl  Yes.  They
looked  forward  from  that  passover
to  the  time  when  Christ  should
come  and  shed  his  blood  to  atone  for
the  sins  of  the  world.  And  we  look
back  to  the  time  when  he  did  it,  and
we  partake  of  this  sacrament — this
bread  and  water,  which  we  use  in-
stead of  wine — in  commemoration,
in  token  of  what  he  has  done  fur  us.
And  we  are  told  by  the  apostles,  that
as  often  as  we  eat  and  drink  of  this,
we  show  forth  the  Lord's  death  until
he  come  again.  And  let  me  nay  to
you  Latter-day  Saints,  while  we  are
doing  this,  there  is  something  very
important  connected  with  it,  and  we
ought  to  be  careful  that  we  do  not
partake  of  these  emblems  to  our
condemnation.  Do  you  ever  quarrel
with  your  brethren,  or  act  in  such  a
way  as  to  get  up  feelings,  and  per-
haps speak  harsh  words  one  about
another,  and  in  other  ways  do  that
which  is  wrong,  and  then  meet  to-
gether in  solemn  mockery  before
God  and  eat  and  drink  condemnation
to  your  souls]  We  want  to  be  careful
about  these  things;  and  hence  we
should  understand  that  when  we
bring  our  gift  to  the  alt  or,  and  there
remember  that  we  have  ouirht
against  our  brother,  we  should
first  go  and  be  reconciled  to  him
and  then  come  and  offer  our  gift.
Not  come  in  any  kind  of  hypocrisy,
but  come  with  clean  hands  and  pure
hearts  and  feel  to  say  "0  God  search
me  and  try  me  and  prove  me,  and  if


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC,


there  is  any  way  of  wickedness  in
me,  let  it  depart,  and  let  me  be  thy
true  representative  upon  the  earth,
and  let  me  partake  of  the  spirit  that
dwelleth  in  Christ,  and  live  in  the
enjoyment  of  that  upon  the  earth;
that  when  he  comes  again  I,  with
my  brethren,  may  meet  him  with
clean  hands  and  pure  hearts,"  And
I  would  say  to  the  teachers  who  go
around  to  visit  their  brethren,  when
you  find  ill  feeling  of  any  kind,  it  is
your  duty  to  root  it  out,  and  to  see
that  there  is  no  hardness  and  no
contention  or  strife  among  the  peo-
ple who  come  to  participate  in  this
sacred  ordi nance.

Well,  so  far  as  the  gospel  is  con-
cern ed,  that  dispensation  was  intro-
duced to  the  world  first  by  John
the  Baptist,  who  was  the  forerunner
of  Jesus.  And  when  the  Savior
came  John  knew  it,  and  on  seeing
him  he  exclaimed,  "Behold  the
Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world/1  And  when  peo-
ple were  flocking  to  John  to  h  bap-
tized  of  him,  Jesus  came  also  as  a
candidate  for  baptism.  But  John
told  him  that  he  (John)  had  need  to
be  baptized  of  him.  But  the  Savior
told  him  to  suffer  it  to  be  so,  then  "to
fulfil  all  righteousness."  And  he  was
baptized  of  him.  Well,  that  dispen-
sation continued  for  a  long  while
after,  and  it  began  to  decline  and
disappear;  but  there  were  a  great
many  men  in  different  parts  who
listened  to  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel of  the  Son  of  God.  But  by  and
by  it  began  to  fade  away,  both  upon
the  Asiatic  continent  and  upon  this
continent.  It  was  prophesied  that
it  would,  and  that  there  should  a
certain  power  arise  who  should  seek
to  make  war  with  the  Saints  of  God
and  that  it  should  overcome  them  ;
and  this  power  should  seek  to  change
times  and  seasons  and  tilings,  and
they  should  be  given  into  his  hands


until  a  time  and  times  and  the  di-
viding of  a  time.  These  things
were  fulfilled — the  Church  of  God
fell  into  darkness  and  the  priesthood
was  taken  from  them,  and  they  had
instead  something  in  the  form  of  a
bogus  priesthood  and  a  bogus
creed  instead  of  the  true  principles
which  Jesus  introduced  among  men.
That  was  on  the  continent  of  Asia*
On  this  continent  they  seemed  the
same  pretty  much ;  but  they  had  an
unparelleled  scene  of  prosperity  and
joy  in  the  Gospel  of  the  Sou  of  God
after  he  came;  and  it  grew  and
spread  and  prevailed  throughout  the
land.  And  as  it  was  in  their  love
for  one  another  that  no  one  said  that
ought  he  possessed  was  his  own  ;  hut
they  had  all  things  common  among
them*  We  are  told  of  time  tilings
more  elaborately  in  some  other  places
which  might  be  introduced,  but
which  I  do  not  wish  to  enter  into
now.  On  this  continent  they  re-
mained in  this  condition  for  two  hun-
dred years;  and  they  dealt  justly  one
with  another,  and  dwellt  ingetln-r  in
peace.  I  wish  we  could  do  that  al-
ways. By  and  by  they  Ml  into
darkness,  and  the  result  was,  as  re-
corded  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  to
which  I  again  refer  you  to  read  and
investigate.

Then  what  next]  Were  things  to
go  on  in  that  way  for  ever!  No;  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times
has  got  to  be  restored  to  introduce
all  that  has  been  spoken  of  by  all
the  holy  prophets  since  the  world  was.
The  Apostle  John,  when  banished  to
the  Isle  of  Patmos  says  that  he  saw
another  angel  flying  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  having  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel to  preach  unto  them  that  dwell
on  the  earth,  and  to  every  nation,
and  kindred,  and  tongue  and  people.
What  do  you  meant  The  same  Gos-
pel that  Adam  had,  the  same  Gospel
that  Seth  had,  the  same  Gospel  that


25  -2


JOUUNAL  uf  DIS


Enoch  had,  the  same  Gospel  that
Noah  had,  the  same  Gospel  that
Abraham  had,  the  same  Gospel  that
Jesus  had;  the  Gospel  that  brings
life  and  immortality  to  light,  and
that  places  men  in  communion  with
their  Heavenly  Father — the  ever-
lasting Gospel.  And  who  introduced
it?  God  himself  came  to  earth  with
hi*  son  Jesus  and  manifested  him-
self to  the  prophet  Joseph,  and,
pointing  to  his  Son,  said,  "This  is
my  beloved  son  in  wfiom  I  am  well
pleased,  hear  him."  Jesus  from  that
hour  was  to  be  his  instructor.  What
then?  Then  came  Moroni,  who  had
charge  of  the  records  of  the  people
on  this  continent,  who  came  and  de-
livered them  to  Joseph  Smith.
What  nextl  Then  came  John  the
Baptist  and  laid  his  hands  upon  his
head  and  upon  the  head  of  Oliver
Cowdery,  and  said,  Upon  you  may
fellow  servants,  1  lay  my  hands  and
confer  upon  you  the  Aaronic  priest-
1xm.h1,  which  shall  never  be  removed
aeaia  from  the  earth  until  the  K)us
of  Levi  shall  offer  acceptable
sacrifices  to  the  Lord.  Why
did  John  come  1  Because  he
hell  the  keys  of  that  priesthood  and
was  the  last  that  held  them  in  that
dispensation.  And  then  Peter,
James  and  John  came  and  hud
their  hands  upon  his  head  and  or-
dained him  to  the  office  of  the  Meh
chisedec  priesthood.  Why  ?  Be-
cause they  had  held  that  priesthood
themselves  and  they  were  the  ones
that  held  the  keys  of  that  priesthood;
and  when  they  left,  the  keys  of  that
priesthood  were  taken  with  them,
ami  they  came  having  it  in  their
charge  to  confer  it  upon  Joseph
Smith.  What  else?  Then  Elijah
appeared  in  the  Temple  at  Kirtland
and  conferred  upon  them  the  bless-
ings that  were  spoken  of  pertaining
to  him,  4 'Behold,  I  will  send  you
Elijah  the  prophet  before  the  com-


ing of  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of
the  Lord :  and  he  shall  turn  the
heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,
and  the  heart  of  the  children  to  the
fathers,  lest  I  come  and  smite  the
earth  with  a  curse/' The  prophet

i  conferred  upon  him  those  keys;  and
hence  we  try  to  do  these  tilings.
And  people  wonder  why  we  are
building  our  temples.  It  is  that  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  may  be  turned
to  the  children,  and  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  Fathers,  And
if  Jesus  saw  it  necessary  after  being
put  to  death  in  the  flesh  to  go  and
preach  to  the  spirits  in  prison  that
they  might  be  judged  according  to
mm  in  the  flesh,  it  was  also  neces-
sary that  provisions  should  be  made
for  men  who  had  died  without
the  Gospel,  without  a  knowledge
of  the  principles  of  eternal  truth,
that  we  might  be  baptized  for
them,  as  the  Scriptures  say,  accord-
ing to  the  flesh,  that  they  may
live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit.
Why  is  it  you  are  so  willing  to  build
temples]  You  would  squeeze  your
dollar  in  many  other  things,  but
when  it  comes  to  that  you  say,  "I
want  to  do  it"  And  it  is  so  through-
out Israel.  I  suppose  we  have  as
many  as  five  hundred  men  engaged
in  this  work.  And  the  brethren  feel
willing  to  do  it.  Why  ?  Because  you
want  to  secure  certain  blessings  for
yourselves;  and,  then,  you  want  to
look  after  your  friends,  that  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  may  be  turned
to  the  children,  etc. We  are  operat-

,  ing  upon  the  earth  because  we  have
the  power  ;  and  they  are  operating  in
the  heavens  because  they  have  the
power;  and  as  the  Scripture  says,
they  without  us  cannot  be  made

I  perfect,  neither  we  without  therm
Ami  neither  they  nor  wre  could  oper-
ate in  these  things  unless  those  keys
had  been  restored  and  things  put  in
the  position  they  are  to-day.  Then


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC.


we  will  build  our  temples,  won't  we?
I  think  we  wilh  and  then  administer
in  them.  Were  we  to  talk  to  the
■world  about  a  great  many  of  the
things  I  have  referred  to  to- day,  we
would  have  to  bring  up  evidence  to
prove  the  truth  of  them.  I  am  talk-
ing to  Latter-day  Saints,  however,
to-day;  and  you  ought  to  know  of
them,  if  you  do  not;  and  if  you  are
not  acquainted  with  them  '  search  the
Scriptures  for  in  them  you  think  you
have  eternal  life,"  and  you  will  Hud
all  these  things  I  have  mentioned.

Xow,  then,  all  of  these  dispensa-
tions had  to  be  restored.  Theft
come*  Moses.  Why?  because  he
held  the  keys  of  the  gathering  dis-
pensation :  And  he  conferred  upon
Joseph  Smith  the  power  to  gather
Israel  from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth,  and  also  the  ten  tribes.  But
the  latter  have  not  come  yet ;  but
people  are  hunting  them  up,  and
they  will  be  found  by  and  by;  when
the  time  comes,  and  the  mountains
will  flow  down  at  their  presence,
and  a  highway  will  be  cast  up,  and
they  will  come  to  a  knowledge  of
the  people.  But  they  could  not
come  without  the  restoration  of  the
keys  I  have  referred  to.

Now,  here  are  all  these  different
dispensations,  and  there  is  one  I
have  not  mentioned.  We  are  told
to  build  up  Zion,  shall  we  do  it?  I
tell  you  in  the  name  of  Israel's  God
we  will  do  it  with  the  help  of  the
Almighty  ;  we  cannot  do  it  without,
but  with  his  help  we  will  do  it.  We
will  build  up  the  Zion  of  our  God,
and  help  to  roll  on  the  work  which
God  has  commenced.  And  those
children  you  saw  here  the  other  day,
[referring  to  a  general  conference
meeting  of  the  children  of  Weber
Stake]  many  of  them  will  live  to  parti-
cipate in  these  things.  And  we  will
endeavor  to  train  them  in  the  fear
of  God  that  their  tender  hearts  may


ne  rooted  in  the  principles  of  truth;
and  they  be  led  to  acknowledge  the
God  of  their  fathers.  Having  said
so  much  I  will  pass  on  to  something
else.

Here  we  are.  We  are  organized
under  the  direction  of  the  Almighty,
and  as  I  before  said,  not  according
to  our  id*as  and  notions,  but  accord-
ing to  the  word  and  will  and  revela-
tions and  law  of  God.  And  none  of
us  can  do  anything  only  as  God  per-
mits us.  What  are  we  going  to  do  ?
We  are  going  to  build  up  Zion.
What  then!  When  Zion  is  built
up — and  it  i*  not  built  up  yet ;  but
it  will  be  built  up  ;  and  when  that
is  done  Jerusalem  that  is  spoken  of
shall  be  built— and  we  are  a  long
way  from  that — but  when  that  is
built  up  and  the  glory  of  God  shall
rest  upon  it,  upon  every  dwelling  of
Mount  Zion  as  it  did  in  former
times — then  we  will  build  up  our
Zion  after  the  pattern  that  God  will
show  us,  and  we  will  be  governed
by  his  law  and  submit  to  his  autho-
rity and  be  governed  by  the  holy
priesthood  and  by  the  word  and  will
of  God.  And  then  when  the  time
comes  that  these  calamities  we  read
of.  shall  overtake  the  earth,  those
that  are  prepared  will  have  the
power  of  translation,  as  they  had  in
former  times,  and  the  city  will  be
translated.  And  Zion  that  is  on  the
earth  M  ill  rise,  and  the  Zion  above
will  descend,  as  we  are  tohi,  and  we
will  meet  and  fall  on  each  other's
necks  and  embrace  aud  kiss  each
other.  And  thus  the  purposes  of
God  to  a  certain  extent  mil  then  be
fulfilled.  But  there  are  a  great
many  things  to  be  brought  about
before  that  time.  And  we  are  here
in  an  organized  capacity  trying  to
prepare  ourselves  for  all  the  provi-
dences of  the  Almighty.  We  are
trying  to  instil  into  the  hearts  of  the
people  the  principles  of  honesty,


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


truth  and  integrity,  and  remove  covc-
tousness  and  iniquity  of  every  kind.
Never  mind  the  world  nor  what  they
can  say  or  do,  for  they  can  only  do
what  the  Lord  permits  them.  We
will  then  continue  to  do  as  we  have
done  only  a  great  deal  more  abun-
dantly. We  will  send  out  the  Gos-
pel to  them,  and  continue  to  advo-
cate the  principles  of  truth,  and  to
organize  ourselves  according  to  the
order  of  God,  and  seek  to  be  one—
for  if  we  are  not  one  we  are  not  the
Lords  and  never  can  be,  worlds
wit] ion t  end.  Hear  it,  you  Latter-
day  Sai  i its  !  And  do  not  be  figuring
for  yourselves  and  for  your  own
aggrandizement ;  but  feel  to  say  in
your  hearts,  "What  can  I  do  to
help  to  build  up  Zion.  I  am  here,
and  everything  that  I  have  got  is
upon  the  altar,  and  I  am  prepared
to  do  the  will  of  God  no  matter
what  it  may  be,  or  where  it  sends
nu\  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  or  not"
But  we  are  not  doing  that  yet ;  we
are  too  much  after  our  own  affairs
and  clriii king  into  the  spirit  of  the
world,  and  yielding  and  catering  to
that  feeling  and  influence.  Now,
while  we  wish  the  world  well  and
would  desire  to  promote  their  happi-
ness, we  cannot  be  governed  by
their  practices  nor  be  under  their
influences.  God  is  the  Lord  our
God  ;  he  is  to  be  our  king  and  law-
giver, and  he  must  rule  over  us.
We  must  not  permit  ourselves  to
conform  to  the  ideas,  notions,  dog-
mas, theories  nor  the  wickedness
that  exists  in  the  world,  and  of
which  tli ere  is  too  much  already
among  us.  But  to  the  contrary,
battle  against  these  evils,  continuing
the  warfare  until  we  purge  them
from  us,  and  call  upon  the  Lord  to
assist  us,  and  to  lead  us  in  the  paths
of  life,  and  to  enable  us  to  compre-
hend to  some  degree  the  position  we
occupy  to  him,  and  the  magnitude


of  that  priesthood  that  has  been  con-
ferred upon  us.

What  will  you  do  with  the  world?
I  was  talking  with  a  gentleman
lately  who  thought  because  of  cer-
tain inimical  legislation  that  had
been  manifested  towards  us,  that  we
should  feel  at  enmity  against  our
government.  I  told  him  that  he
was  laboring  under  a  very  great
mistake  j  that  there  was  not  a  more
loyal,  patriotic  feeling  F people  in  the
United  States  than  the  Latter-day
Saints  are.  But  have  they  not  done
so  and  so  to  you?  Yes,  but  the  Lord
has  guided  us,  and  we  can  put  our
trust  in  him  and  wait  his  time.  We
are  not  in  a  hurry  j  he  will  bring
things  about  in  his  own  way,  and
will  abundantly  fulfil  the  words  of
the  Psalmist — "  Surely  the  wrath  of
man  shall  praise  thee,  the  remainder
of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrai n."  Some
men  seem  to  think  that  we  are  going
to  be  swallowed  up  ;  but  we  are  not
very  much  alarmed  about  it*  We
have  been  "  swallowed  up"  a  great
many  times,  but  they  have  generally
managed  to  vomit  us  up  again.
[Laughter,]  Among  the  legislators
of  our  nation  and  throughout  the
land,  there  are  many  high-minded,
honorable  men,  who  desire  to  see  all
men  protected  in  their  rights,  but
because  there  are  a  great  many  who
are  not  and  who  feel  otherwise,  and
who  do  not  understand  us,  should
we  entertain  feelings  of  enmity?
What  was  the  message  that  Jesus
came  to  perform?  M  Go  ye  into  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature ;  he  that  believeth
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,"  etc.
What  have  we  been  told  to  do?
To  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature  ;  he
that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall
be  saved  he  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned.  We  go  and  offer  the
message  of  life  and  salvation.  How


THE  GREAT  PRINCIPLES  OF  TRUTH,  ETC


many  of  these  grey-headed  men
whom  I  see  around  me  to-day  that
have  travelled  thousands  of  miles  in
order  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the
human  family.  I  have  travelled
hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  my-
self. And  did  he  ever  forsake  me?
Never;  he  was  always  true  to  his
word.  And  when  you  elders  have
gone  forth  he  has  heen  true  to  you.
And  when  people  have  believed,  re-
pented and  obeyed  the  message  you
bore  to  them,  and  you  laid  your
hands  upon  them  to  confirm  them
members  in  this  Church,  and  said,
"  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost ;  they
received  it.  Is  not  that  proof  that
God  has  been  with  youl  Yes,  it
is.  Will  he  not  be  with  us  to  the
end  1  Yes.  What  is  our  message
to  the  people  !  Peace  on  earth  and
good  will  to  man,  and  seek  to  pro-
mote the  welfare  and  happiness  of
the  human  family,  in  every  possible
way  that  we  can.  And  we  ought
to  feel  to  endure  as  Jesus  did  the
contumely  of  sinners  until  the  Lord
shall  say :  "  Stop  it  is  enough."
They  will  have  hard  enough  times
of  it  Do  we  need  to  seek  or  injure
anybody]  No.  Is  that  our  mission  %
No  5  but  to  seek  to  promote  the  wel-
fare of  all  men.

Well,  we  are  here  in  a  political
capacity  as  well.  We  are  an  integral
part  of  the  United  States — a  very
small  part.  What  shall  we  del
Why  live  so  that  no  man  can  bring
any  reproach  against  us  ;  treat  all
men  right,  deal  honestly  with  one
another,  and  with  all  men,  and  be
true  to  God- and  your  religion.  If
we  do  this  then  we  have  a  claim
upon  God  ;  then  we  shall  be  blessed
of  the  Lord  and  our  offspring  with
us ;  then  the  Almighty  will  smile
upon  us,  and  then  we  shall  advance
from  wisdom  to  wisdom,  from  intelli-
gence to  intelligence  and  knowledge  to
knowledge,  until  we  shall  see  as  we


are  seen  and  know  as  we  are  known.
And  we  will  go  on  performing  the
work  God  has  placed  upon  us  ;  and
we  will  continue  to  teach  and  in-
struct and  educate  and  elevate  our
children  ;  and  also  teach  all  men  who
will  be  taught  by  us,  the  principles
of  life  ;  and  by  and  by  God  will  work
with  us  in  a  more  powerful  manner
than  he  has  done  yet ;  and  thousands
upon  thousands  will  fleck  to  the
standard  of  Zion,  and  many  will
come  and  say, "  we  do  not  know  much
about  your  religion,  but  you  are  an
honorable  people  and  exceute  justice
and  we  want  to  be  governed  by
those  principles  and  be  under  their
influence  j  and  if  we  cannot  endorse
your  religious  views,  we  seek  your
protection  and  want  to  be  one  with
you/'  You  will  find  hundreds  and
thousands  of  people  will  yet  come  in
this  way,  and  many  are  pretty  near
it  now.  But  we  are  not  prepared  j
we  sometimes  pull  and  haul,  and
talk  and  get  hard  feelings  and  seek
to  tear  in  pieces  and  destroy,  and
carry  out  our  own  ideas  and  will.  I
have  no  will  of  my  own  ;  I  do  not
want  a  will  of  my  own  ;  I  want  to
know  the  will  of  God,  and  then  do
it.  Don't  you  1  We  ought  to  do  it ;
and  let  our  own  feelings  and  judg-
ment be  emerged  in  the  will  of
God,  and  seek  to  carry  out  his  pur-
poses. As  seventies  go  forth  and  be
ready  to  go  to  the  ends  of  the  earth
at  the  drop  of  the  hat,  when  re-
quired to  fulfil  any  mission  that
may  devolve  upon  you,  or  that  you
may  be  called  to,  and  consider  this
your  mission  of  life,  you  seventies,
do  you  hear  it  ]  I  tell  you  that  this
is  the  will  of  God  concerning  you,
and  not  to  consider  how  you  can  fix
yourselves  and  make  yourselves  com-
fortable ;  but  attend  to  the  other
first,  and  be  on  hand  to  do  that,  and
then  it  will  be  all  right.

May  God  help  us  to  do  right  and


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


keep  his  commandments,  that  we
may  have  his  spirit  to  be  with
us  and  live  in  the  enjoyment  of


the  same,  and  be  saved  in  his
kingdom,  in  the  name  of  Jesua.
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

JUNJ2  13TH,  1880,  0

(Reported  It/  John  Irvine,)

THE  POWER  OF  GOD  TO  COMMUNICATE  INTELLIGENCE — DIFFERENCE  IN
CAPACITY  BETWEEN  THE  MORTAL  AND  THE  IMMORTAL — THE  FUTURE
OF  MAN,  ETC.  '  R


I  shall  endeavor  to  occupy  a  few
moments  of  time,  and  perhaps  I
may  continue  my  remarks  until  it  is
time  to  close  the  meeting.  I  wish  I
enjoyed  better  health;  I  should  then
feel  more  like  speaking.  But  as  it
is,  I  feel  willing  to  exert  myself  as
far  as  possible,  and  also  to  bring  my
mind  to  bear  upon  the  great  subject
of  salvation,  and  the  principles  that
pertain  to  eternal  life  and  happiness
in  the  world  to  come.  It  is  difficult,
sometimes,  for  a  person  who  does
not  feel  well  in  body,  to  concentrate
his  mind  upon  those  subjects  which
will  be  edifying  and  instructive  to
the  people.

It  gives  me  great  joy  and  pleasure,
at  all  times,  when  I  have  the  oppor-
tunity to  express  myself  in  regard
to  the  great  and  important  work,
which  our  Father  in  heaven  has
seen  proper  to  commence  in  our  day.
We  have  been  made  partakers,  in  a
measure,  of  the  spirit  of  the  living


God,  pertaining  to  this  last  dispensa-
tion. This  spirit,  when  received,
and  when  we  give  it  our  attention,
and  bring  our  minds  to  bear  upon
the  object  of  its  operations,  is  calcu-
lated to  instruct  and  impart  much
information  and  knowledge  to  both
male  and  female  who  are  in  the  pos-
session of  it.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  a
spirit  of  revelation.  It  always  was
a  spirit  that  revealed  something  to
the  human  family,  when  mankind
were  in  possession  of  it.  There  have
been,  however,  many  ages  since  the
commencement  of  the  world,  when
the  children  of  men  have  so  far
wandered  from  the  Almighty,  so  far
departed  from  his  ordinances  and
precepts,  that  the  spirit  of  revelation
has  not  had  place  within  them.  The
world  may  be  considered  in  a  woeful
state  of  darkness  and  unbelief,  when-
ever this  great  and  glorious  gift  is
withdrawn  from  the  children  of
men ;  for  without  this  gift,  without


THE  POWER  OP  GOD,  ETC


2ST


this  spirit,  without  revelation  from
the  Most  High,  it  is  utterly  impossi-
ble for  the  human  family  to  be  saved
in  the  celestial  kingdom  of  our  Fa-
ther and  God.  Perhaps  some  may
think  that  this  is  a  very  broad  state-
ment They  will  refer  back  to  the
last  sixteen  or  seventeen  centuries,
and  will  say,  that  our  fathers  have
not  enjoyed  the  spirit  of  revelation,
during  that  time,  and  if  your  state-
ment, Mr.  Pratt,  be  true,  our  fathers
are  not  saved  in  the  celestial  king-
dom of  God,  I  do  not  say  that  our
fathers  will  all  be  sent  to  an  endless
hell  I  have  made  no  such  assertion,
I  do  not  say  that  they  will  receive
no  happiness,  no  glory,  no  reward  in
the  world  to  come;  I  have  made  no
such  assertion ;  but  understand  my
assertion,  that  if  the  world  have  not
been  in  the  possession  of  divine  rev-
elation directly  to  themselves,  dur-
ing  this  long  of  time,  then

there  have  none  of  them  been  saved
in  the  celestial  kingdom  of  our  Fa-
ther and  God.  Now  I  hope  that  you
have  understood  me.  There  is  quite
a  difference  between  being  saved  in
some  kingdom,  where  there  is  some
glory,  some  happiness,  and  being
saved  in  the  kingdom  where  our
Father  resides.  There  is  only  one
way  to  obtain  this  kingdom — the
kingdom  that  is  represented,  in  its
glory,  by  one  of  the  most  brilliant
luminaries  that  shines  in  yonder
heavens,  namely,  the  sun.  We  are
told  by  our  Saviour  that  those  who
obey  his  commandments  shall  shine
forth  as  the  sun  m  the  kingdom  of
our  Father.  The  Apostle  Paul  in-
forms us  that  there  are  in  the  eternal
worlds  many  different  kinds  of  glory.
In  the  15th  chapter  of  his  first  epis-
le  to  the  Corinthians,  he  says,  that
'there  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and
another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  an-
other glory  of  the  stars ;  for  one  star
differeth  from  another  star  in  glory.
No.  17.  '


So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the
dead  ."  They  do  not  all  rise  to  the
same  glory,  nor  to  the  same  happi-
ness, nor  to  the  same  fulness,  nor  to
the  same  kingdom ;  but  they  arise
from  their  graves,  and  come  forth —
those  who  are  counted  worthy  of
any  kind  of  glory— to  receive  that
which  they  are  worthy  of,  all  that
they  have  lived  for,  and  nothing
more*

Our  Father  who  dwells  in  yonder
heavens,  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,
inhabit  the  highest  degree  of  glory
in  eternity.  They  are  possessed  of
all  the  fullness  of  glory.  They  have
a  fullness  of  happiness,  a  fullness  of
power,  a  fullness  of  intelligence,
light  and  truth,  and  they  bear  rule
over  all  other  kingdoms  of  inferior
glory,  of  inferior  happiness,  and  of
inferior  power.  Their  glory  is  like
that  of  the  sun,  or  at  least,  the  sun
being  the  most  conspicuous  body
with  which  we  are  immediately  ac-
qnainted,  in  regard  to  its  glory,  it  is
referred  to  as  being  typical  of  the
highest  degree  of  glory  in  the  heav-
ens. The  Gospel  is  intended  to  exalt
the  children  of  men  to  that  same
degree  of  glory,  where  our  Father
and  where  his  Son  reside.  Hence
it  is  said  by  our  Savior,  just  as  he
was  taking  leave  of  his  apdstles  in
ancient  times,  "Let  not  your  heart
be  troubled :  ye  believe  in  God,  be*
lieve  also  in  me*  In  my  Father's
house  are  many  mansions :  if  it  M  ere
not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go
to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I
go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will
come  again  and  receive  you  unto
myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye
may  be  also,"  There  is  a  mansion
where  he  dwells.  Where  this  man-
sion is  located  in  the  midst  of  the
vast  surrounding  space,  has  not
been  revealed  to  us.  It  may  have
been  revealed  in  former  ages  of  the
world,  but  to  us,  as  Latter-day

Vol  XXI.


\


258


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOtTRSES


Saints,  Ave  have  no  revelation  con-
cerning its  location.  But  there  is  a
location,  where  these  two  glorious
personages  dwelL  It  has  a  location,
just  as  much  as  our  earth  has  a  lo-
cation in  the  solar  systpm.  But
when  I  speak  of  our  Father  and  our
God  being  located  in  a  glorious  man-
sion, or  celestial  world,  I  do  not  wish
to  he  understood  that  he  is  confined
to  that  location.  Do  not  misappre-
hend the  subject  He  is  not  con-
fine'1  to  that  particular  locality,  in
the  midst  of  universal  space.  He
lias  power  which  we  are  not  in  pos-
session of  He  has  power  to  waft
himself  from  that  particular  locality
to  other  dominions,  other  wor  Ids.
other  creations  ;  and  to  do  this  with
an  immence  velocity.  Of  course,  to
accomplish  this  must  occupy  time.
There  are  some,  however,  so  foolish
in  their  ideas  that  they  suppose  that
it  dues  not  require  time  for  the  Al-
mighty to  go  from  world  to  world,
or  for  any  celestial  messenger  to  do
so.  But  this  is  a  grand  mistake.  Time
is  included  in  all  motion.  Time  is
included  between  the  event  of  a
heavenly  being  leaving  the  celestial
abode,  where  he  dwells,  and  going
to  some  other  abode  at  a  distance.
How  great  this  time  may  be  is  not
revealed ;  but  I  have  an  idea  that  it
is  much  swifter  than  any  velocity
with  which  we  are  familiar;  I  mean
the  velocity  with  which  our  Father
and  God  can  convey  himself  from
the  celestial  abode  where  he  dwells
to  some  other  kingdom.  I  believe  it
to  be  much  swifter  than  that  of  the
common  light  which  shines  from
the  heavenly  bodies  of  our  system,
or  from  the  distant  bodies  of  the
stellar  system.  Now,  light  travels
with  immence  velocity — 1 85,000
miles  in  one  beat  of  the  pulse,  or  in
about  one  second  of  time.  We  might
suppose  that  that  is  about  as  swift  as
any  being  would  want  to  be  wafted.


But  suppose  that  our  Father,  in  the
heavenly  world  where  he  dwells,
should  feel  disposed  to  visit  one  of
the  vast  dominions  of  his  "reat  ere-
tion  as  far  distant  as  the  nearest
fixed  star.  If  he  could  go  no  fester
than  light  is  transmitted  through
space,  it  would  take  him  three  and
a  half  years  to  perform  the  journey.
And  to  go  to  one  that  was  situated
some  ten  or  fifteen  times  further  off,
it  would  take,  of  course,  ten  or  fif-
teen times  longer.  And  to  go  to
some  which  are  as  far  oft'  from  him
as  the  distant  creations  that  are  just
visible  through  our  most  powerful
telescopes,  it  would  take  him  six
hundred  thousand  years  to  perform
the  journey,  provided  his  velocity
wras  only  equal  to  that  of  light.  I
draw  the  conclusion,  therefore,  that
God  is  not  confined  to  the  velocity
of  light,  or  to  any  other  velocity
with  which  w*e  are  accuainted — that
he  can  go  with  immence  velocity,
perhaps  thousands  and  hundreds  of
thousands  of  times  swifter  than  that
of  light,  if  he  feels  disposed  so  to  do.
It  is  out  of  the  question  for  us  to
suppose  that  God  does  not  travel  in
going  from  creation  to  creation.  That
he  could  be  momentarily  and  in-
stantaneously in  two  creations  at
the  same  time  is  something  that  I
never  could  comprehend,  although
it  is  believed  in  by  some  of  the  re-
ligious professors  of  the  present  day.
They  believe  that  God,  in  his  per-
j  son,  can  be  in  infinite  space  all  at  the
same  moment.  That  is  not  our  doc
trine.  It  is  not  my  doctrine,  at
least.  He  may  be,  by  his  power,  by
his  intelligence,  by  his  spirit,  in  in-
finite space,  working  throughout  all
the  vast  dominions  of  space,  accord-
ing to  laws  he  has  ordained  and  in-
stituted.

Having  said  so  much,  in  regard  to
the  locality  of  our  Heavenly  Father,
and  of  the  celestial  beings  who  dwell


THE  POWER  OF  GOD,  ETC.


259


in  the  same  abode,  or  in  the  same
mansioLs  where  he  resides,  let  me
now  sav  a  few  words  more  in  regard
to  his  presence  being  everywhere,  I
cannot,  for  a  moment  suppose,  and  I
do  not  believe  that  any  intelligent
being  who  exercises  his  intelligence,
independently  of  the  traditions  of
the  children  of  men,  can  suppose,
that  a  person  can  be  everywhere
present  at  the  same  instant  ;iBut,"
inquires  one,  "when  a  good  man  dies,
passes  out  of  this  body  of  flesh  and
bones,  it  is  said  that  he  is  in  the  pre-
tence of  God,  Does  this  mean  that
he  has  actually  gone  from  his  taber-
nacle, perhaps  millions  and  millions
and  unnumbered  millions  of  miles,
to  the  abode  or  mansion  where  Jesus
is,  because  he  is  in  the  precence  of
God?"  No;  I  do  not  look  at  it  in  this
way,  I  look  at  it  in  this  light  :  if  this
world  in  which  we  dwell  had  the
vail  withdrawn  from  off  its  face,  and
the  vail  taken  away  from  our  faces,  J
consider  that  we  would  see  the  Lord,
however  far  distant  he  might  be;
hence  we  would  be  in  his  presence ;
and  on  the  other  hand,  those  who
dwell  i;i  his  abode,  however  distant,
can  see  us ;  for  there  is  no  vail  over
his  face,  no  vail  over  the  celestial
abode  of  our  Fathtr  and  God,  and
there  being  no  vail  over  him,  nor
over  the  beings  that  dwell  in  his
abode,  they  can  behold  the  most
distant  creations,  which  they  have
made.  Now,  this  is  my  view.  I  do
not  say  this  is  the  view  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  but  my  own  in-
dividual views,  in  regard  to  these
matters.  If  then  we  pass  out  of
these  bodies  of  ours,  and  the  vail  is
taken  away,  we  are  in  his  presence,
just  as  much  as  we  would  be  if  we
were  wafted  to  the  mansion  where
he  dwells:  I  have  no  doubt,  but
what  we  will  be  wafted  (if  we  are
worthy)  to  that  mansion,  in  due
time;  but  I  say,  that  we  are  in  the


presence  of  God,  while  our  spirits  are
yet  here  upon  the  earth;  because  the
vail  is  removed  and  our  eyes  can
pierce  eternity,  and  eternal  things.
Now,  we  have  some  examples  of
this,  Latter-day  Saints:  and  I  some-
times wonder,  when  we  have  such
plain  examples  as  are  to  be  had  in
this  book  which  I  hold  in  my  hand,
(The  Pearl  of  Great  Price)  I  some-
times wonder  that  people  should  be
so  limited  in  their  ideas  and  in  their
views,  concerning  the  future  state  of
man  (I  mean  the  glorified  man),  as
to  suppose  that  lie  will  be  confined
in  his  vision  to  some  particular  lo-
cality, and  that  he  will  be  something
similar  to  what  we  are  here  in  this
mortal  life.  Now,  even  mortal  men,
before  they  obtained  immortality,
have  enjoyed  this  spirit  of  seeing
things  that  were  naturally  supposed
to  be  utterly  impossible.  Who  that
is  acquainted  with  this  book  (the
Pearl  of  Great  Price)  has  not  read
with  great  and  deep  interest,  the
words  of  that  great  man,  Moses,  be-
fore he  was  sent  down  t*  Egypt  to
redeem  the  Israelites  ?  Who  is  there
among  the  readers  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  who  cannot  comprehend,  in
some  measure,  how  the  vision  of
that  man  was  enlarged,  while  he
was  yet  here  in  a  state  of  mortality?
He  went  up  into  the  Mount  to  pray
to  the  Lord.  The  veil  was  removed.
The  glory  of  God  rested  upon  Moses,
and  great  and  important  things  were
made  manifest  to  him.  All  things
were  not  revealed;  for  he  was  inca-
pable of  receiving  all  things  wrhile
yet  a  mortal  being.  Eat  the  Lord
saw  proper  to  reveal  some  tilings;
and  Moses  sought  to  know  some  other
things,  but  the  Lord  would  not  grant  it
and  told  him  that  no  man  could  behold
all  his  works,  except  lie  beheld  all
his  glory;  and  no  man  could  behold
all  his  glory  and  afterwards  remain
in  the  flesh  upon  the  earth;  that  is,


260


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


in  the  state  of  mortality.  But,  said
he,  14 Moses,  iny  son,  I  will  show  un-
to thee  some  of  the*  works  of  mine
hands.  I  will  reveal  unto  you  con*
cerning  the  heaven  that  is  over  your
head,  and  this  earth  upon  which
you  dwell."  And  as  the  Lord  talked
with  Moses,  the  Spirit  of  God  being
upon  him,  his  eyes  were  opened,  the
vail  was  taken  away,  and  he  saw  the
whole  earth,  not  merely  the  surface
of  it,  but  the  interior  of  it  J  every
particle  of  it  was  before  the  eyes  of
Moses.  This,  then,  shows  that  there
is  within  eaai  of  these  mortal  taber-
nacles a  spirit ,  and  this  spirit,  when
lit  up  by  the  Holy  Spirit  from  on
high,  has  certain  faculties  and  pow-
ers, far  beyond  that  which  we  are
able  to  develop  naturally  here  upon
the  earth.  We  cannot,  by  our  own
natural  powers,  discern  one  foot  un-
derneath the  surface  of  the  earth.
We  cannot  discern  through  anything
that  is  opaque  in  its  nature — any-
thing that  will  not  admit  the  natural
light  to  be  transmitted  through  is
substance.  But  still,  we  have  the
faculties  within  us;  we  have  the
power;  there  is  merely  an  obstacle,
or  obstruction,  in  the  way ;  and
when  this  obstruction  is  removed  it
shows  the  godlike  powers  that  are
planted  within  the  tabernacles  of
men,  by  which  they  can  behold  and
pierce  those  portions  of  creation  that
are  not  d'scernable  by  the  natural
man.  This  Moses  obtained  during
the  few  moments  that  he  was  thus
enwrapt  in  vision.  He  obtained
more  information  in  those  few  mo-
ments than  could  be  imparted  in  all
the  universities  and  colleges  that
ever  existed,  since  the  creation  of
the  world  to  the  present  day.  We
may  study  the  ponderous  volumes
that  are  published  by  the  learned,
and  it  takes  a  long  time  to  grasp  the
information  that  some  very  learned
men  have  received. But  oh,  how  I


different  is  the  method  of  receiving
revelation,  when  it  comes  from  the
Most  High  !  In  a  moment,  as  it
\rere,  those  faculties  of  ours  that
have  been  lying  dormant  ever  since
we  were  born  into  this  world — those-
faculties  which  are  enshrouded  with
the  darkness  of  a  fallen  creation —
those  faculties,  when  once  illumi-
nated, when  once  touched  by  the  fin-
ger of  the  Almighty,  can  pierce  the
creations  of  the  Almighty,  so  far  as
he  permits  us  to  behold.

These  tilings  encourage  ire  lam
in  hopes,  when  I  get  to  the  other
side  of  the  vail,  that  it  will  not  be
so  difficult  for  me  to  understand  the
different  laws  of  science,  and  the
different  laws  and  branches  of  edu-
cation, that  are  taught  in  this  little
creation  of  ours.  I  am  in  hope*
that  when  my  spirit  shall  launch
forth  out  of  this  mortal  tabernacle,
and  go  into  the  eternal  world,  that  I
shall  not,  at  that  time,  require  Lord
Ross's  great  six  feet  telescope  ;  I  am
in  hopes  that  I  shall  not  need  any  of
the  telescopes,  or  other  instruments
invented  in  the  nineteenth  century;
but  I  am  in  hopes  there  will  be  a
telescope  prepared  for  me,  by  which
I  can  see  the  vast  creations  of  the
Almighty,  and  comprehend,  in  a
short  period  of  time,  more  than
could  be  unfolded  to  the  children  of
mortality  in  a  thousand  years.

I  mention  this  in  order  to  bring
before  the  Latter-day  Saints  a  prin-
ciple which,  I  think,  we  should  all,
more  or  less,  reflect  upon.  How  en-
couraging it  is  to  think  we  are  nob
always  going  to  be  bound  down  to
this  slow  process  of  gaining  know-
ledge, and  information,  and  wisdom,
pertaining  to  the  works  of  the  Al-
mighty !  How  glorious  it  is  also,  to
reflect  upon  the  celestial  host,  who
dwell  in  the  fulness  of  celestial  glory,
where  there  is  no  vail,  and  where
they  have  their  bodies ;  for  some  of


THE  POWER  OF  GOD,  ETC.


261


them  have  been  raised  from  the
grave  to  immortality,  and  are  clothed
upon  with  all  the  fulness  of  the  at-
tributes of  the  Father.  I  say,  how
glorious  it  is  to  reflect  upon  the
heights  and  depths  and  lengths  and
breadths  of  knowledge  that  will  then
be  unfolded  to  the  children  of  men  !
These  things,  as  I  said  before,  inspire
my  heart  with  joy,  I  do  not  confine
my  hopes  to  the  volumes  of  works
on  science,  with  which  I  may  come
in  contact  here  in  this  world  ;  I  do
not  confine  my  hopes  to  the  slow
process  of  advanciug  in  knowledge
and  intelligence  that  the  children  of
this  wurld  have;  but  I  look  forward
to  that  higher  school — that  great
university  which  will  scope  in  bound-
less and  eternal  space,  that  will  scope
in  th»*  most  distant  creations  that
we  can  imagine  in  the  vast  field  of
eternity,  in  which  we  will  be  able  to
comprehend  those  laws  by  which
the  various  creations  are  governed  ;
not  understand  them  as  we  now
comprehend  some  few  laws,  but  un-
derstand them  in  all  their  perfection
and  fulness,  being  like  unto  our  Fa-
ther and  God,  made  like  unto  him,
fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,
and  become  indeed  ''sons  of  God/'
Shall  I  go  still  further  and  say  Gods?
Are  we  not  the  children  of  our  Fa-
ther? Will  not  the  children  ascend
to  the  same  height,  to  the  same
glory,  to  the  same  celestial  world,
and  to  the  same  fullness  of  the  at-
tributes of  their  Father  ?  Are  not
our  children,  take  them  as  a  body,
qualified  to  come  up  to  all  the  per-
fections and  attributes  of  their  la-
thers, who  came  on  the  earth  before
them  ?  It  seems  to  be  a  general  law
that  children  will  grow  up  and  pos
sess  all  of  the  perfections  of  their
parents,  provided  that  they  take  the
necessary  steps,  and  are  favored  with
long  life,  and  have  the  natural  intel-
ligence that  is  common  to  man.  If,


then,  this  seems  to  bo  a  natural  law
in  regard,  not  only  to  man,  but  also
to  all  animated  creation — that  the
children  come  up  and  possess  the
perfections  of  their  fathers  before
them — may  we  not  reason,  by  analo-
gy, that  our  Father  who  begat  us —
our  Father  who  dwells  in  yonder
celestial  world,  intends  to  make  us
one  with  him,  that  we  shall  receive
the  same  fulness  with  him,  that  we
shall  partake  of  light,  and  truth,
and  knowledge,  and  advance  from
grace  to  grace,  as  the  revelations  in
the  Book  of  Covenants  state,  until
we  shall  receive  a  fulness  of  all
trnth  ?  Then  will  not  this  make  us,
in  one  sense  of  the  word,  sons  of
God?  Will  it  not  make  us  Gods
also,  according  to  the  won!  of  God  ?
u  But,"  inquires  one,  "how  can  two
persons  possess  the  same  attributes
wit  hout  quarreling  with  each  other  T f
That  is  not  the  order  of  heaven.
That  is  not  the  pure  law  that  God
has  ordained,  that  there  should  be
quarrels  with  those  that  have  the
same  degree  of  intelligence  ;  but  the
law  is  that  they  shall  become  one,  as
"I  and  my  Father  are  one,  so  that
these  my  brethren  may  also  become
one  in  us  as  we  are  one.11  That  is
the  law  ;  and  if  they  are  one  there
will  be  as  much  unity  between  his
children  who  are  exalted  to  that  high
condition  in  the  celestial  glory,  as
there  is  a  unity  and  oneness  between
the  Father  and  his  only  begotten
Son.  Have  they  any  quarrel?
Have  they  any  difficulties  ?  Have
they  any  difference  of  views  ?  I)oe3
one  intend  to  carry  on  one  govern-
ment, and  another  a  different  kind
of  government?  No;  whatever  is
the  will  of  the  Father,  is  the  will  of
the  Son ;  whatever  the  Father  is  pre-
pared to  do,  throughout  all  his  vast
dominions,  the  Son  is  in  accord  with
him ;  and  whatever  the  Father  de-
sires to  perform  and  accomplish,  his


262


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


children  who  are  made  like  him  and  r
one  with  them,  will  take  hold  and
perform  the  same  work,  with  all
that  unity  and  oneness  which  exist
between  the  Father  and  the  Soil
In  the  celestial  glory  they  are  made
equal  in  oneness,  in  power,  in  know-
ledge, and  in  all  perfections  ;  and  the
Lord  their  God  is  with  them,  and
they  are  one  with  him,  to  carry  on
all  his  purposes>  and  will  be  one  with
him  throughout  all  the  future  ages
of  eternity,

I  thought  perhaps  the  time  was
expired ;  but  I  will  say  a  few  more
words  in  regard  to  this  great  glory,
this  high  destiny  prepared  for  the
sons  of  God  I  told  you  that  our
process  of  gaining  information  would
be  very  rapid— would  be  immense  in
its  gruwth,  and  that  we  should  have
the  faculties  within  us  developed  to
the  highest  degree.  But  now  let  us
for  a  few  moments,  look  into  this
high  state  of  perfection.  When  our
faculties  are  thus  developed,  and
when  we  have  all  the  wisdom  that  I
have  been  speaking  of,  that  dwells
in  the  bosom  of  celestial  beings,  in
the  eternal  worlds,  what  will  Ave  do
with  this  wisdom  1  Will  we  fold  up
eur  arms,  and  remain  throughout  all
the  future  ages  of  eternity,  in  per-
fect indifference  and  laziness,  with-
out anything  to  accomplish  or  per-
form 1  No  ;  we  will  have  works  as-
signed to  us  to  perform  in  the  eter-
nal worlds,  that  will  be  proportionate
to  all  the  fulness  of  that  glory  and
knowledge  which  we  are  endowed
with.  Did  the  sons  of  God  in  ancient
times,  come  forth  and  assist  in  the
formation  of  this  little  creation  of
ours?  Did  they  all  shout  for  joy
when  the  materials  were  brought  to-
gether, and  when  the  foundations  of
the  earth  were  laid  %  Did  they  all
feel  happy  and  sing  a  song  of  rejoic-
ing, and  with  great  joy  ;  did  they
look  upon  the  works  which  they


w  ere  performing  I  Yes.  Jesus  was
there — the  First  Born  of  this  great
family  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  He
had  the  superintendence  of  tins  crea-
tion. He  had  the  power,  because
the  power  dwelt  within  him,  to  build
this  earth  of  ours,  the  same  as  you
give  to  your  superintendent  power
to  build  your  temples,  about  which:
Brother  Kich  has  been  speaking.  It
is  said  that  the  worlds  were  made
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But
do  you  suppose  that  he  alone  made
them  ?  No  ;  he  had  the  sons  and
daughters  of  God  with  him.  And
there  were  prophets  in  tho&e  days,
before  our  earth  was  made.  They
shouted  for  joy  when  they  *aw  the
neucleus  of  this  creation  formed.
Why  1  Because  they  could  look  into
the  future,  and  by  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, behold  the  designs  and  pur-
poses of  the  great  Jehovah  in  regard
to  the  creation  which  they  were  then
!  in  the  act  of  forming.  Did  they  not
understand  that  they  would  have  the
privilege  of  coming  forth  and  people-
ing  this  earth  ?  Yes.  Did  they  not
understand  that  they  were  to  pass
through  a  probation  on  this  earth,
the  same  as  we  are  now  passing
through,  in  order  to  prepare  them
for  a  still  higher  exaltation  and  glory,
with  immortal  bodies  of  ilesh  and
bones  ?  Yes;  they  understood  these
things,  hence  their  joy,  when  they
saw  the  creation  being  formed  for
them,  I  mention  this,  iu  order  to
show  to  the  Latter-day  Saints  that
the  great  work  that  will  be  entrusted
to  those  who  are  prepared,  will  be
proportionate  to  the  wisdom,  intelli-
gence and  understanding  that  will
be  imparted  to  those  who  enter  into
the  fulness  of  the  glory  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom.  They  will  not  re-
main in  idleness  to  all  eternity.  They
will  have  a  work  to  perform.  They
will  form  worlds  under  the  direction,
no  doubt,  of  those  that  may  be  ap-


THE  POWER  I

pointed  to  superintend  works  of
such  vast  magnitude.  Furthermore,
when  they  have  formed  these  worlds,
they  will  set  them  in  motion  in  the
midst  of  universal  space,  in  some
location,  where  they  can  continue
their  mission,  and  where  all  neces-
sary tilings  shall  be  fulfilled  and
accomplished  during  the  days  of  the
probation  of  these  various  creations.
There  will  be  laws  given  to  govern
these  new  creations,  the  same  as
there  are  laws  given  to  govern
the  creations  with  which  we  j
are  surrounded.  The  inhabitants
upon  these  creations  will  be  visited
front  time  to  time  by  those  that
have  taken  part  in  the  great  work  of
their  formation.  The  inhabitants
thereof  will  be  dealt  with  according
to  law.  They  will  be  intelligent
beings.  They  will  have  their  agen-
cy, and  they  will  pass  through  their
probation  the  same  as  the  people  are
now  passing  through  their  probations
here  in  this  world.  Everything  will
be  accomplished  according  to  laws
that  shall  be  ordained  when  these
creations  are  made. Will  they  visit


OF  GOD,  ETC.  263

these  creations  1  Yes ;  for  they  will
have  the  same  pow  er  of  locomotion,
the  same  power  to  pass  through
space  (almost  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye)  that  our  Father  has — that  his
Son  Jesus  Christ  has — that  all  celes-
\  tial  beings  who  are  exalted  in  his
presence  have,  and  possessing  the
power,  they  will  visit  from  creation
to  creation  ;  they  will  impart  know-
ledge and  under stan ding  to  their
children  in  these  creations.  They
will  visit  them  with  the  light  of
their  countenances,  and  the  children
of  these  creations  will  be  made  plad
in  their  hour,  in  their  tinms  and  in
their  seasons,  by  the  light  and  coun-
tenances of  the  celestial  beings  who,
from  time  to  time,  organized  them.
These  are  the  high  destinies  that
await  the  Latter-day  Saints,  if  they
are  faithful  These  are  the  high
destinies  into  which  many  of  the
Former-day  Saints  have  already
entered.  These  are  the  great,  and
choice,  and  exalted  blessings  in  store
for  all  who  will  keep  the  command-
ments of  our  Father  and  God,
Amen.


204


JOURNAL-  OK  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BI ELDER GEO. Q,  CANNON,
Delivered  at  Hyde  Park,  Sunday  Evening,  November  2nd,  1879

(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

NATURAL  FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY — THE  ISRAELITES  AND  THE

gentiles;  I


^  1  will  read  a  portion  of  a  revela-
tion given  through  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph Smith,  previous  to  the  organi-
zation of  the  Church,  dated  April,
1829 :  "Oliver  Cowder,  verily,  verily,
I  say  unto  you,  that  assuredly  as  the
Lord  liveth,  who  is  your  God  and
your  Redeemer,  even  so  surely  shall
you  receive  a  knowledge  of  whatso-
ever things  you  shall  ask  in  faith
with  an  honest  heart,  believing  that
you  shall  receive  a  knowledge  con-
cerning the  engravings  of  old  re-
cords, which  are  ancient,  which  con-
tain those  parts  of  any  Scripture  of
which  have  been  spoken  by  the  man-
ifestation of  my  Spirit  Yea,  behold
I  w;ll  tell  you  in  your  mind  and  in
your  heart,  by  the  Holy  Ghost*
which  shall  come  upon  you,  and
which  shall  dvell  in  your  heart
Now,  behold  this  k  *he  spirit  of
revelation  ;  behold,  this  is  the  spirit
by  which  Moses  brought  the  children
of  Israel  through  the  Red  Sea  on  dry
ground."

The  point  I  wish  to  call  your  at-
tention to  is  contained  in  the  second
and  third  verses  of  this  revelation.
The  Latter-day  Saints  are  in  many
respects  like  other  people  who  are


not  Latter-day  Saints.  We  are  apt
to  entertain  views  which  are  not  very
correct,  and  which  may  be  the  result
of  our  traditions  and  preconceived
ideas.  This  is  a  peculiarity  that  per-
tains to  mankind  generally,  that
whenever  they  deal  with  the  things
of  God,  or  speak  about  them,  or  con-
template them,  and  especially  when
they  read  the  predictions  made  by
the  servants  of  God  concerning  fu-
ture events,  or  events  that  may
transpire  right  before  their  eyes,
they  are  apt  to  get,  sometimes,  erro-
neous ideas,  or,  at  least,  exaggerated
ideas,  in  relation  to  them.  The  pro-
phets have  foretold  the  events  that
should  take  place  in  connection  with
this  work.  There  is  one  prophecy
that  comes  to  my  mind,  recorded  by
Isaiah  and  Micah,  respecting  the
building  of  the  house  of  God  in  the
top  of  the  mountains  and  the  gather-
ing of  the  people  there,  and  the  ob-
ject for  which  they  should  gather,
that  they  should  come  up  and  be
taught  of  the  Lord,  etc.  Now  it
might  be  supposed  that  when  that
prediction  would  be  fulfilled  it  would
be  so  prominent  and  remarkable  in
the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the  earth,


NATURAL  FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY,  ETC.


265


that  all  the  inhabitants  thereof  who  !
should  witness  it  would  say,  "  This
is  the  fulfillment  of  the  predictions
of  Isaiah  and  Micah."  And  it  might
be  thought  that  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  who  witnessed  it  would
be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  it,  and
would  say,  "We  have  no  further
opposition  to  this  work,  because  we
behold  the  fulfillment  of  the  predic-
tions of  those  holy  prophets  whom
we  have  been  taught  to  regard,  and
whose  writings  we  have  read  as  au-
thority from  God,

And,  doubtless,  there  are  many  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  who  have
thought,  in  the  early  days  of  their
experience  in  this  Church,  when  they
have  heard  the  elders  predict  con*
cerning  the  great  events  that  should
take  place  in  connection  with  this
work — they  have  thought  and  felt
ill  tin  ir  hearts  that  when  the  wicked  |
and  those  who  oppose  this  work
should  see  the  fulfilment  of  these
predictions  they  would  be  com? trained
to  acknowledge  that  this  is  the  work
of  God,  and  would  cease  from  hosti-
lity and  opposition,  and  would  say
they  had  been  mistaken.  For  in-
stance, the  elders  in  the  early  days
of  this  Church,  predicted  concerning
calamities  and  wars  and  troubles  of
various  kinds  that  would  come  upon
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  There
was  a  revelation  given  to  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith,  in  December,
1832,  concerning  the  war  that  should
take  place  between  the  Southern
States  and  the  Northern  States.
This  was  a  definite  prediction,  stat-
ing the  exact  point  where  a  certain
trouble  or  rebellion  or  division  in
the  nation  should  take  place.  Most
of  us  who  have  been  brought  up  in
the  Church  knew  about  this  revela
tion  from  early  days.  It  has  been
published  so  that  all  the  members  of
the  Church,  and  the  world  also,  |
could  have  it,  anti  it  was  but  reason-


able to  expect  that  so  definite  a  pro-
phecy as  this,  which  stated  the  exact
character  of  the  difficulty  that  should
take  place  between  the  south  and
the  north,  and  that  also  stated  with
i  such  definiteness  the  exact  point
where  the  division  should  occur — I
say  it  was  but  reasonable  to  expect
that  when  it  should  be  fulfilled,  it
1  would  have  the  effect  of  convincing
unbelievers  of  the  truth  of  the  mis-
sion of  Joseph  Smith,  and  that  he
really  was  a  man  inspired  of  the
Lord  to  speak  the  word  of  God  to
tlie  people.

In  18 GO,  Brothers  Orson  Pratt,
Erastus  Snow,  myself,  and  others,
were  going  on  missions,  and  we  ar-
rived at  Omaha  in  the  month  of
November  of  that  year.  A  deputa-
tion of  the  leading  citizens  of  that
city  came  Ui  our  camp  and  tendered
to  us  the  use  of  the  Court  House,  as
,  they  wished  to  hear  our  principles.
The  invitation  was  accepted,  and
Elder  Pratt  preached  to  them,  Du-
;  ring  the  service,  there  was  read  the
revelation  to  which  I  have  referred
— the  revelation  concerning  the  divi-
sion between  the  South  and  the
North,  The  reason  probably,  for
reading  it  was  that  when  we  reached
Omaha,  the  news  came  that  trouble
was  alreading  brewing,  and  several
States  were  threatening  to  secede
;  from  the  Union,  Its  reading  made
considerable  impression  upon  the
people.  A  good  many  had  never
heard  of  it  before,  and  quite  a  num-
ber were  struck  with  the  reirarkable
character  of  the  prophecy.  It  might
have  been  expected,  naturally  speak-
ing and  looking  at  it  as  men  natural*
ly  do,  that  the  reading  of  such  a
revelation,  at  such  a  time,  when  the
crisis  was  approaching,  would  have
had  the  effect  to  direct  men's  atten-
tion to  it,  and  they  would  be  led  to
|  investigate  its  truth  and  the  doc-
!  trines  of  the  Church  and  the  found-


266  JOURNAL  OF

ation  we  had  for  our  belief.  But  if
there  were  any  converted  in  that
audience  I  am  not  aware  of  it  Good
seed  was  sown,  but  we  did  not  re*
main  to  see  what  effect  it  produced*
The  revelation  being  so  remarkable,
and  the  events  then  transpiring  being
so  corroborative  of  its  truth,  one
might  naturally  think,  as  there  were
present  on  that  occasion  the  leading
and  thinking  portion  of  that  commu-
nity, that  a  great  number  would
have  been  impressed  with  the  pro-
bability of  its  truth,  and  would  have
investigated  and  joined  the  Church.
You  doubtless  remember  it  was  for
a  good  while  doubtful  whether  the
rebellion  should  commence  at  South
Carolina  or  not.  I  was  in  England
at  the  time,  and  was  engaged  in
publishing  the  MUlennud  Star,  and
took  a  great  deal  of  notice  of  the
American  papers,  and  I  well  remem-
ber that  to  all  human  appearances  it
seemed  for  a  while  as  though  the
trouble  would  break  out  at  Fort
Pickens,  Florida.  But  the  word  of
God  had  been  spoken  concerning  that
event,  and  consequently  it  had  to  be
fulfilled  as  predicted,  and  the  war
did  commence  at  South  Carolina,  It
was  fulfilled,  as  you  all  know,  to  the
very  letter,  Fort  Sumter  being  the
place  where  the  rebellion  broke  out.

Now,  I  allude  to  that,  in  connec-
tion with  this  subject,  to  show  you
that  not  only  is  the  world  mistaken
in  its  views  respecting  the  fulfill-
ment of  the  predictions  of  the  pro-
phets, but  even  Latter-day  Saints
have  doubtless,  in  many  instances,
entertained  erroneous  views  respect-
ing the  fulfillment  of  revelation  and
prophecies  of  the  Bible.  I  have  no
doubt  there  are  many  here  to-night,
who  have  had  some  experience  in
this,  and  can  look  back  at  times  in
their  own  lives,  when  they  have
thought :  "Surely  when  these  things
which  the  prophets  have  foretold


DISCOURSES,

are  brought  to  pass,  the  people  will
be  convinced.  My  friends  who  now
ridicule  me  will  then  be  convinced,
and  they  will  be  forced  to  confess  that
I  did  right  in  embracing  the  Gospel."

No  doubt  there  are  some  in  this
audience  to  night  who  have  had  these
ideas,  and  certainly  there  are  good
reasons  for  entertaining  them.  But
experience  has  taught  us  that,  wliile
there  may  be  a  few  who,  when  they
have  seen  the  predictions  fulfilled,
have  acknowledged  that  our  course
is  right,  in  the  majority  of  cases
throughout  the  earth  where  the  Cos-
pel  has  been  preached,  the  fulfillment
of  the  predictions  of  the  prophets
has  not  had  the  effect  to  convince
the  people  of  the  truth  of  the  mini-
stry God  has  given  unto  us.

Even  with  this  experience  in  the
past,  the  Latter-day  Saints  them-
selves are  not  entirely  divested  of
extravagant  views  respecting  the
effects  which  are  likely  to  follow  the
fulfillment  of  predictions  yet  in  the
future.  Are  we  not  all  inclined  to
look  forward  to  many  events  which
haw  been  predicted  by  the  servants
of  God  as  being  of  so  great  am)  won-
derful, and  I  may  say  so  supernatu-
ral a  character,  that  when  they  .-shall
be  fulfilled  thej  will  even  startle  us,
who  believe  they  are  coming,  and
will  compel  the  unbelieving  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth  to  accept  them  as
evidences  of  the  truth?  In  our
thoughts  this  seems  to  be  the  natu-
ral tendency.  I  notice  it  in  myself;
I  notice  it  in  others;  "When  we
read  respecting  the  great  events
which  are  to  take  place  in  connection
with  this  work,  as  predicted  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove! i ants,
are  we  not  inclined  to  think  that,
surely,  when  these  things  shall  come
to  pass  all  the  earth,  as  well  as  our-
selves, will  be  constrained  to  acknow-
ledge this  to  be  the  work  of  God,
and  these  events  to  be  indeed  those


NATURAL  FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY,  ETC


267


which  have  been  predicted  by  the  ]
prophets  1  [

Now  I  would  not,  for  the  world,  j
say  one  word  to  lessen  in  the  minds
of  my  brethren  snd  sisters  the  irn-
portance  of  these  events  j  I  would
not  say  one  word  to  weaken  your
proper  expectations  ;  but  my  experi-
ence has  taught  me  that  the  Lord
works  in  the  midst  of  this  people  by
natural  means,  and  that  the  greatest
events  that  have  been  spoken  of  by
the  holy  prophets  will  come  along  so
naturally  as  the  consequence  of  cer-
tain causes,  that  unless  our  eyes  are
enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
and  the  spirit  of  revelation  rests
us,  we  will  fail  to  see  that  these  are
the  events  predicted  by  the  holy
prophets.

I  refer  you  again  to  that  prophecy
of  Isaiah  and  Micah,  respecting  the
gathering  together  of  the  Israel  of
God  from  the  various  nations  to
Zion.  As  we  read  of  that  in  the
Bible,  we  might  think  when  that
was  fulfilled  it  would  be  done  with
such  supernatural  manifestations  that
the  people  would  be  constrained  to
acknowledge  it  was  the  work  of  God.  ,
Yet  we  see  it  every  day.  Our  peo-
ple are  gathering,  and  men  and  wo-
men who  emigrate  bear  testimony  to
the  friends  they  leave  behind,  in  al-
most the  exact  language  that  the  ■
prophets  said  they  would,  and  yet  it
is  not  thought  very  extraordinary*
Why  is  this  ]  Because  it  has  come
along  so  naturally.  And  so  with
the  great  events  that  will  take  place
in  the  future  ;  they  will  come  along
in  so  natural  a  manner,  the  Lord  will
bring  them  to  pass  in  such  a  wTay
that  they  will  not  be  accepted  by  the
people,  except  by  those  who  can
comprehend  the  truth,  as  the  fulfill-
ment of  the  predictions  of  the  pro-
phets. It  requires  the  Spirit  of  God
to  enable  men  and  women  to  under-
stand the  things  of  God  ;  it  requires


the  Spirit  of  God  to  enable  the  peo-
ple to  comprehend  the  work  of  God
and  to  perceive  his  movements  and
providences  among  the  children  of
men.  The  man  who  is  destitute  of
the  Spirit  of  God  cannot  comprehend
the  work  of  God.  A  woman  whose
mind  has  not  been  enlightend  by
that  Spirit,  cannot  see  or  compre-
hend any  of  these  events  that  tako
place  in  fulfillment  of  the  prophecies
of  the  holy  prophets,

I  You  take  two  persons,  one  who
has  the  Spirit  of  God,  whose  mind
is  enlightened  by  that  Spirit, — the
spirit  of  revelation,  the  same  .spirit

;  that  rested  upon  the  prophets  who
wrote  the  revelations  and  prophecies
we  have — you  take  a  man  uf  that
kind,  and  then  take  another  who
has  none  of  that  spirit,  and  put  the
two  together,  and  the  one  man's
eyes  will  be  open  to  see  the  hand  of
God  in  all  these  events ;  he  will  no-
tice his  movements  and  his  provi-
dence in  everything  connected  with
his  work  and  they  will  be  testimo-
nies to  him  to  strengthen  ins  faith
and  to  furnish  his  mind  with  conti-
nual reasons  for  giving  thanks  to
and  worshipping  God;  while  the
man,  who  has  not.  the  Spirit  of  God,
will  see  nothing  Godlike  in  the  oc-
currences :  nothing  which  he  will
view  as  supernatural  (as  many  sup-
pose everything  which  exhibits  God's
power  to  be),  or  nothing  which  he
will  accept  as  a  fulfillment  of  prophe-
cies ;  his  eyes  will  be  closed,  his
heart  will  be  hardened,  and  to  all
the  evidences  of  the  divinity  uf  these
things  he  will  be  impenetrable.

To  those  who  have  mingled  with
the  world  the  reasons  for  this  are
very  plain.  Men  do  not  believe  in
these  days  in  the  direct  interposition
of  God  in  the  affairs  of  men.  If
they  even  believe  in  God,  they  be-
lieve that  he  governs  the  universe
by  great  natural  laws.  When,  there-


*


2C^


JOl'KNAL  Or  mscounsKs.


fore,  a  great  and  wonderful  event
occurs,  they  seek  for  its  origin  and
explanation  in  some  natural  law.
They  ignore  the  fact  that  God  works
through  natural  laws  ;  but  seem  to
think  that  if  he  were  to  interpose  at
all,  it  would  be  by  manifesting  his
power  through  the  suspension  of
natural  laws,  by  overriding  and  vio-
lating them,  and  in  such  a  super-
natural manner  that  mankind  would
be  compelled  to  acknowledge  it  was
his  act,  as  they  would  be  utterly  un-
able to  account  for  it  by  any  laws
known  to  them,  or  in  any  other  way
than  as  being  through  his  power.
Wars,  famines,  pestilences,  cyclones,
earthquakes,  and  tl\e  great  variety
of  calamities  which  God  has  said
shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  wicked
nations,  are  therefore  looked  upon
by  men  generally  in  these  days  as
the  results  of  certain  well-defiued
and  easily  explained  causes*  When
any  of  these  calamities  visit  a  city
or  a  nation  they  immediately  com-
mence to  investigate  the  laws  which
govern  them,  and  by  the  violation  of
w  hich  they  assert  they  are  produced ;
and  when  they  discover  what  they
allege  is  the  cause,  they  triumphant
]y  point  to  it,  and  that  is  sufficient
proof  that  the  Lord  has  nothing  spe-
cial to  do  with  it ;  for  if  It  were  a
visitation  from  him,  it  is  supposed  it
would  be  so  supernatural  as  to  be  in-
explicable. And  thus  men  go  on,
hardening  their  hearts  and  denying
God's  power,  until  they  will  be  so
completely  given  over  to  the  evil
one,  that  he  will  lead  them  captive
according  to  his  will.

My  reason  for  calling  your  atten-
tion to  the  word  of  the  Lord  I  have
read  to  you  is,  that  I  have  sometimes
thought  that  our  people  do  not  ap-
preciate as  they  should  do  the  spirit
of  revelation,  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
the  power  of  God,  that  has  been
poured  out  upon  us  as  a  people.


The  fact  seems  to  be  overlooked  that
it  was  in  the  manner  in  which  the
Lord  tells  Oliver  Cowdery  that  Mo-
ses brought  the  children  of  Israel
through  the  Red  Sea  on  dry  ground.
The  Lord  said  to  Oliver  :  "I  will
tell  you  in  your  mind  and  in  your
heart,  by  the  Hcly  Ghost,  which
shall  come  upon  you,  and  which  shall
dwell  in  your  heart.  Now,  behold,
this  is  the  spirit  of  revelation ;  be-
hold, this  is  the  spirit  by  which
Moses  brought  the  children  of  Israel
through  the  Red  Sea  on  dry  ground.1'
How  many  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  there  who  understand  that  this
is  the  way  in  which  Moses  led  the
children  of  Israel  so  miraculously  ?
How  many  are  there  who  think  that
if  we  had  a  man  like  Moses  among
us,  the  people  would  be  led  differently
and  with  greater  manifestations  of
power  than  they  are  J  How  many
are  there  who  are  dissatisfied  with
what  God  is  doing  at  present,  and
are  looking  for  some  one  to  appear
in  the  future  who  shall  exhibit  con-
vincing  and  overwhelming  manifest-
ations of  power?  How  many  are
there  at  the  present  time  who  are
neglecting  the  precious  and  inestima^
ble  gift  of  revelation  which  God  has
bestowed  upon  his  people,  because  it
does  not  come  to  them  in  the  way  to
suit  their  preconceived  notions  and
ideas — or  who  are  not  suited  with
the  way  the  Church  has  been  and  is
led,  because  there  is  not  that  won-
derful degree  of  power  exhibited
which  they  imagine  should  bel

Apostates  have  asserted  that  there
was  not  the  power  in  the  leaders  of
the  Church  which  there  should  be.
They  said  so  during  the  life  of  the
Prop! let  Joseph,  asserting  that  he
was  a  fallen  prophet.  After  his  death
they  made  the  same  statements  re-
specting President  Young,  his  coun-
selors, and  the  Twelve  Apostles.
And,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  there  are


NATURAL  FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY,  ETC*


269


some  members  of  the  Church  who
have  appeared  to  think  that  there
has  been  some  power  lacking,  and
have  manifested  a  feeling  of  restless-
ness, anticipating  the  rising  of  some
one  who  should  have  greater  autho-
rity than  at  present  exists.  While  I
would  not  wish  to  detract  from  the
reasonable  expectations  of  my  bre-
thren and  sisters  upon  this  or  any
otber  point,  my  view  is  that  the
apostles  hip,  now  held  in  this  Church,
embodies  all  the  authority  bestowed
by  the  Lord  upon  man  in  the  ftash.
Yet  I  believe  that  the  power  of  God
will  be  increased  among  us,  that  we
will  have  manifestations  of  his  power
such  as  we  never  have  before  witnes-
sed. For  the  day  of  Gods  power  in
the  redemption  of  Zion  will  come*
But  I  do  not  expect  that  to  come
upon  us  all  of  a  sudden.  I  expect
that  it  will  be  the  natural  result  of
the  natural  growth  of  thepeople  in  the
things  of  God.  I  expect  that  we  will
go  on  step  by  step  from  one  degree
of  knowledge,  and  of  power,  and
of  faith  to  another,  until  we  shall  be
prepared  to  receive  all  the  Lord  has
in  store  for  us  and  be  prepared  to  en-
ter into  that  glory  promised  to  the
faithful  Saints,  The  Lord  has  given
unto  his  people  and  to  his  church
every  gift  and  every  qualification
and  every  key  which  is  necessary  to
lead  this  people  into  the  celestial
kingdom  of  our  father  and  our  God.
There  is  nothing  wanting-  When
the  Lord  restored  the  Apostleship
to  the  earth  he  restored  all  the
power  that  was  possible  for  a  human
being  to  hold  in  the  flesh.  When
he  restored  the  keys  of  the  holy
priesthood  unto  his  servant  Joseph,
when  he  gave  unto  him  the  sealing
powers,  when  he  gave  unto  him  the
endowments  and  the  keys  of  the
holy  priesthood  associated  there  with,
when  the  Prophet  Joseph  received
the  keys  from  Elijah,  and  from  all


I  the  prophets  that  had  existed  upon
the  earth  from  the  beginning  down

I  — each  one,  as  he  says  himself  in
one  of  his  epistles— each  one  in  his

i  dispensation  coming  forward  and
bestowing  upon  him  the  authority
pertaining  thereto,  there  was  em-
bodied in  him  all  the  priesthood  they
held,  and  he  bestowed  upon  his
fellow  Apostles  all  the  priesthood  he
exercised  and  all  the  power  and
authority  bestowed  upon  mortal  man
to  exercise  here  upon  the  earth,  so
far  as  the  present  is  concerned;  that
is,  all  the  keys  of  the  priesthood  and
everything  that  is  necessary  in  this
preparatory  state,  and  to  make  man
a  tit  subject  for  the  celestial  king-
dom  of  God,  By  the  command  of
the  Lord  he  conferred  that  authority
upon  his  fellew  servants  to  bind
upon  earth  and  it  should  be  bound  in
heaven,  to  seal  the  children  to  the
father  and  the  mother,  and  to  seal
the  wife  to  the  husband,  and  to  weld
all  the  links  necessary  in  order  to
complete  the  salvation  of  all  the
children  of  men  from  the  days  of
At! am  down  to  our  day,  and  also  to
prepare  men  and  women  for  the  fu-
ture that  lies  before  us,  the  millen-
nium to  which  we  are  all  hastening.
Who  can  conceive  of  any  power  that
was  lacking  t  Who  had  power  to
promise  unto  man  that  they  should
be  kings  and  priests  unto  God  ¥
And  in  addition  to  that,  who  had  the
power  to  seal  upon  them  the  actual
kingly  and  priestly  dignity  and  con-
firm upon  them  the  fulness  of  it,
and  also  to  give  them  promises  re-
specting the  Godhead  that  should
be  fulfilled  upon  them,  and  if
faithful,  to  come  forth  in  the  morn-
ing of  the  first  resurrection  i  Now,
there  was  nothing  lacking,  and
there  was  no  power,  there  was  no
gift,  there  was  no  authority,  there
were  no  keys  lacking,  and  these  keys
have  been  handed  down  through


JOURNAL  UF


DISCOURSES


him.  Others  may  have  claimed  to
have  I unl  them.  AVe  have  had
Strang,  John  E,  Page,  William
Smith,  Gladden  Bishop,  and  a  host
of  others ;  each  has  claimed  to  have
received  that  authority,  either
through  Joseph  Smith  or  from  some
other  source.  Some  have  claimed
that  Joseph  was  a  fallen  prophet ;
and  some  have  set  up  one  claim  and
some  another.  But  the  fact  remains
that  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter- day  Saints,  as  it  is  organized
in  these  mountains,  has  had  the  j
apostles  hip ;  that  the  men  who  have
stood  at  our  head,  President  Young
and  the  Twelve  Apostles,  whose
President  at  the  death  of  the  Pro-  !
phet  Joseph  he  was,  actually  received
under  the  hands  of  the  Prophet
Joseph,  every  key,  and  power,  and
authority  that  he  himself  possessed,
and  tlsat  they  actually  did  take  hold
and  complete  the  temple  he  started,
and  endowed  their  fellow  servants
therein  with  the  same  authority  and
the  same  priestly  and  kingly  dignity
that  they  had  received  from  under
his  hau  ls.  And  from  that  time  to
the  present  this  work  has  gone  forth  '
with  might  and  power,  and  the
power  of  God  has  attended  the  labors
of  his  servants  who  have  been  sent
forth  by  these  apostles,  chosen  by
revelation  to  take  charge  of  this
work ;  everything  they  have  done
God  has  blessed.  They  have  gath-
ered the  people  together,  they  have
led  the  people,  they  have  been  de-
livered by  the  mighty  power  of  God
when  it  seemed  that  thev  would  be
overwhelmed  by  opposing  influences.
They  have  gathered  the  people  toge-
ther from  the  nations  of  the  earth  in
fulfillment  of  the  predictions  of  the
holy  prophets.  Not  only  that,  but
they  have  laid  the  foundations  of
temples  here  ;  one  temple,  at  least,
has  been  completed,  while  three
others  are  in  process  of  erection,


which  we  hope  will  soon  be  com-
pleted, into  which  buildings  the
Saints  of  God  can  enter  and  receive
their  endowments,  receive  their
washings  and  anointings  and  sealings
and  ordinances,  and  have  the  keys
of  the  holy  priesthood  bestowed  upon
them,  which  they  can  exercise  in  the
right  way  for  the  building  up  of  the
work  of  Cod.  And  this  is  the  work
of  God,  although  men  may  say  there
has  been  no  supernatural  manifesta-
tion of  power,  eucll  as  some  suppose
ought  to  attend  his  work  This
work  has  gone  forth  with  a  rapidity
and  impetus  that  has  been  irresis ta-
ble, and  there  is  no  power  able  to
stand  against  it.  It  has  gone  for-
ward to  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  has
been  spoken  thus  far  concerning  it,
that  is  as  far  as  we  have  gone.  And
the  people  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost,  they  have  been  filled  with
it,  they  have  been  filled  with  the
spirit  of  revelation.  The  same
spirit  of  revelation  that  Moses  had,
concerning  which  God  speaks  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  has  rest-
ed upon  men  that  have  held  the  keys
of  this  kingdom,  whether  it  w  as  du-
ring President  Young  s  life  or  at  the
present  time — that  same  spirit  of
revelation  rests  upon  him  who  holds
the  presidency  as  senior  apostle  in
the  midst  of  the  people  of  God.  The
apostles  of  this  Church  have  all  the
authority,  they  have  all  the  keys,
and  it  is  within  the  purview  of  their
office  and  calling  to  have  all  the  spirit
of  revelation  necessary  to  lead  this
people  into  the  presence  of  the
Lamb  in  the  celestial  kingdom  of
our  God,

I  have  desired  to  say  this  much,
;  because  I  have  felt  at  times  there
was  a  feeling  among  some  people
that  there  was  not  that  manifesta-
tion of  power,  neither  was  there  that
authority  wielded  by  the  men  who
preside  over  this  Church  and  king-


NATURAL  FH  !  M  l.UI  M  ov  V\u>v\m  \\  i:tv.


27


doni  th;it  should  be.

Mil1  ii  is  thr  truth,  that  I  he


anio


received  the  truth — 1  tirviT  knew
one  nl"  tlirm  to  turn  around  and  Injit


spirit  <>f  revelation  tbat  rested  ujMm  !  this  cause  in  the  manner  that  wo
MdNi-.  and  which  enabled  him  to  j  witness  men  doing  among  par  race*
lead  ^1 children  ol  Ntaei  through  How  is  it  vuth  the  (^utiles,  the
the  1 Sim,  rests  upon  :1m orvants i -are  of  whieli  we  jut  si  part  1  \\  hen  a

of  God  in  the  midst  of  thi  people,  man  gets  a  testimony  from  God  and

and  vin;  will  ibid  it  so  to  voir  entire  lall*  inlo  trans- rre  n  lit*  is  almost
Uktbfnction  if  too  will  listen  to thw  immediately  *ris&ed  with  the  -terii
counsels  and  be  guided  by  them,  of  murder. He  wants  to  shed  the


Does  f!od  revftftl  himself  in  ins  ser-
vants iiiiw  f I  know  lie  does.  Tho

same  spirit  that  rate  u1  u]>ou  Joseph
— the  same  spirit  that  rioted  u|khi
Alos<  .  i  know  it  i>  in  the  midst  of
the  L  itter  day  Saints — preeist  Iv  the
flame  spirit.  tint  then  we  are  a
nation  of  (ion tiles.  We  ubohave
come  here,  what  are  we  f  WV  are
called  from  tlio  Gentile  nations.
The  promises  are  tint  made  to  us
tli  at  me  made  to  people  who  are  the
unmiv-il  dtseejM hints  of  Israel  In
n ui t -  ■  peels,  h  hen  the\  e.'iin'  ii.:^
tin*  .  venant  and  ate  baptized,  and
the  power  of  God  rests  upon  them,
yon  will  see  a  different  work  than
yon  <e  at  the  present  time.
It  is  just  as  much  as  we,  with  our
(Jen tih*  traditions — an  inheritance
we  haw  received  from  our  fathers,
which  have  come  down  through
gemmations — it  is  as  much  as  many
of  tia  call  do,  with  all  the  power  we
can  exereiHj  to  remain  in  the
Church,

I  wa  -  speaking  with  Brother
Simpson  Molen  this  evening,  who,
as  you  know  has  latetly  returned
from  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich
Islands,  It  is  now  29  years  since
the  I  tofflpd  was  introduced  to  the


Mm  nl  of  L  III  lore  |  ICC, f  ]  ■  ■ wants  to

kill  the  servants  of  God,  is  full  of
bitterness  and  hatred,  ami  seeks  to
find  vent  for  his  wicked  pnssioua.
We  have  seen  this  spirit  manifested
in  our  history  anions  our  own  race.
I  hit  here  is  a  people  who  receive
strom*  testimonies  eoinariunLr  the
(iospel,  and  froni  all  that  1  can
learn  there  has  not  been  an  instance
of  a  man's  turning  around  and  bit-
terly lighting  this  work.  There
seems  to  be  a  natural  rceeptiveness
abnnt  [Item  to  reeeive  the  truth,
[  tie  Indians  will  he  the  same  in  nry
opinion.  Von  will  iiud  the  same
peculiarity,  you  will  find  them  ready
to  receive  I  he  truth,  and  they  will
cleave  to  the  truth.  It  is  difficult
for  the  Gentiles  to  reciove  the  truth.
It  will  be  easier  for  them,  because
un!n  them  are  the  promise*,  I  look
for  a  very  different  condition  of
tilings  when  these  races  come  into
t ho  ehurch  and  are  brought  into  the
t'oveiiaiit.  1  expect  then  to  see  I. he
work  accomplished  by  a  power  that
we  do  not  witness  just  now.  Hut  it
is  not  because  something  is  lacking
in  the  organisation  or  iu  the  author-
ity of  the  priesthood.  We  have,  as  I
have  said,  all  that  is  necessary,  and
wo  have  this  spirit  of  which  1  have
spoken  and  which  is  alluded  to  in


people  of  that  country.  I  labored
there  for  four  or  five  years,  ami  was

the  itrst  to  preach  the  I  Gospel  to  I  this  revelation — the  same  spirit  of
them  iu  their  language  in  this  £ene-  revelation  whirl]  reveals  to  ns  that
ration.  During  my  experience  among  .  which  we  should  do  and  the  course


that  people,  a  red  skinned  nice,  I
De  v  i  r  knew  a  man ,  be  can  ■  o  l  i  n  l  u  s


we  should  take  in  order  to  please  the
Lord  and  in  order  to  build  up  hte


gre^iim  or  anything  else,  after  he  kingdom,  and  this  Church  will  al


272


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


ways  be  led  by  that  authority  from  1
this  time  henceforth  until  Christ
himself  shall  come  to  preside  over  us
and  be  our  king.

My  brethren  and  sisters,  if  you
want  more  revelation,  here  is  the
principle  upon  which  to  obtain  it.
Are  you  entitled  to  it  ?  Yes,  every
one  of  you — the  same  spirit  of  reve-
lation that  Moses  had,  the  same
spirit  that  all  the  prophets  and
apostles  had,  it  is  your  privilege,  it


is  my  privilege,  it  is  the  privilege  of
every  man  and  woman  who  possesses
the  Gospel  to  receive  the  spirit  of
God,  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  have  that
same  spirit  resting  upon  him  and
upon  her,  and  the  more  we  seek
after  it  and  cherish  it  the  more  we
will  have.

My  time  is  exhausted.  I  pray
God  to  bless  us  and  fill  us  continu-
ally with  the  light  of  that  spirit^  in
the  name  of  Jesus*  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

June  20th,  1880.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS— THEIR  SUFFERINGS— ANCIENT  PREDIC-
TIONS FULFILLED— CRICKETS  AND  THEIR  MIRACULOUS  DESTRUCTION —
CROPS  SAVED — DESERT  MADE  FRUITFUL — GOD'S  KINGDOM  IN  THE
MOUNTAINS — ITS  FUTURE  DESTINY — THE  COMING  OF  THE  LORD.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the
congregation  to  a  few  verses,  con-
tained in  the  60 th  Psalm,  and  the
first  six  verses:  "The  mighty  God,
even  the  Lord,  hath  spoken,  and
called  the  earth  from  the  rising
of  the  sun  unto  the  going  down
thereof, Out  of  Zion,  the  perfec-


tion of  beauty,  God  hath  shined.
Our  God  shall  some,  and  shall  not
keep  silence :  a  fire  shall  devour  be-
fore him,  and  it  shall  be  very  tern-
pestouous  round  about  him.  He
shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above,
and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge
his  people. Gather  my  saints  to*


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


273


gether  unto  me;  those  that  have
made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacri-
fice. And  the  heavens  shall  declare
his  righteousness  :  for  God  is  judge
himself,"  It  is  very  evident  that
the  Psalmist,  when  writing  these
words,  must  have  been  inspired  of
the  living  God  ;  for  the  events,  here
foretold,  are  clearly  set  forth  in  many
other  parts  of  the  sacred  scriptures.
Two  very  important  events  are
announced  here  ;  one  is,  the  gather-
ing of  the  Saints, — those  who  have
made  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  by
sacrifice  ; — and  another  is  the  coming
of  the  Lord,  not  his  first  coming,  but
his  second  advent,  when  a  fire  shall
devour  before  him,  and  it  shall  be
very  tempestuous  round  about  him  ;
when  he  shall,  in  other  words,  come
in  his  majesty,  in  his  power,  in  great
glory,  or,  as  the  apostle  Paul  expres-
ses it  in  one  of  his  epistles  to  the
Thessalonians,  "he  shall  be  revealed
from  heaven,  with  his  mighty  angels,
in  flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on
them  that  know  not  God,  and  that
obey  not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ"  There  seems  to  be  con-
nected with  this  advent  of  the  Lord
from  the  heavens,  great  power  ;  his
arm  is  to  be  made  manifest  before
all  people,  Preparatory  to  this  great
event,  there  will  be  a  universal  gath-
ering of  the  Saints  from  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.  It  is  one  of
t  he  signs  preceding  the  second  ad
vent.  It  is  clearly  foretold  by  many
of  the  prophets.  David  alludes  to
it,  not  only  in  this  Psalm,  but  in
many  parts  of  his  Psalms.  The
Spirit  of  God  seems  to  have  moved
upon  him  to  portray  more  or  less
the  great  work  of  the  gathering  of
the  Saints  in  the  last  days.  Many
suppose  that  he  will  come  and  find
the  Saints  scattered  all  over  the
world,  not  gathered  into  any  special  ,
country;  but  it  is  evident  that  those
who  have  taken  this  view  of  the  ,
No.  18.  1


subject  don't  understand  the  Scrip-
ture writings.  Nothing  is  plainer
in  all  the  sacred  Scriptures  than  the
gathering  of  the  people  of  God.  The
apostle  Paul,  in  the  first  chapter  of
his  epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  prophe-
cies *'  that  in  the  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times,  he  might  gather
together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,
both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which
are  on  earth/'  It  seems  to  be  a  new
dispensation,  a  dispensation  that  is
]  characterized  by  the  words  "  fulness
of  times/1  When  these  times  shall
be  fulfilled  :  when  the  day  shall
come  for  this  great  preparatory
work  to  take  place,  the  Lord  will
signify  it,  by  speaking  from  the  hea-
vens j  or,  as  it  is  here  stated,  in  the
fourth  verse  of  this  Psalm  which  I
have  just  read,  "  he  shall  call  to  the
heavens  from  above,  and  to  the
earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people.
Gather  my  Saints  together  unto  me;
those  that  have  made  a  covenant
with  me  by  sacrifice."  From  tl^is
we  draw  the  conclusion,  that  when
the  dispensation  shall  be  fully  usher-
ed in  :  when  the  time  for  the  great
preparatory  work  shall  take  place,
the  heavens  will  no  longer  be  sealed
up,  but  the  Lord  will  again  speak,
will  call  to  the  heavens,  call  upon
his  angels,  call  upon  the  ancient  pro-
phets who  have  died  and  gone  the
way  of  the  whole  earth,  and  are
dwelling  in  the  heavens,  to  do  the
work  assigned  to  them,  in  the  ^reafc
and  last  dispensation  of  the  fulness
of  times,  in  bringing  about  the  gath-
ering and  restitution  of  his  people
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  David,
in  the  107th  Psalm,  has  very  clearly
portrayed  this  wonderful  ajid  great
event.  Perhaps  it  may  be  well  for
us  to  read  the  exact  wor4^iaJtIe
commences  the  Psalm  thus  :  "  O
give  thanks  unto  the  Lordr  for  lie  is
good ;  for  his  mercy  endure:  a  tor
ever. Let  the  redeemed  of  th<-  Lord

Vol  XXL


271


JOURNAL  OF  DtSCOUKSES,


say  so,  whom  he  hath  redeemed
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy/'  Now
notice  the  gathering — "and  gathered
them  out  of  the  lands,  from  the  east
and  from  the  west,  from  the  north
and  from  the  south.  It  seems  to  be
a  gathering  from  the  four  points  of
the  compass,  out  of  all  lands.  You
migh  t  inquire  if  the  prophets  have
said  anything  special  in  relation  to
the  country  where  these  Saints,  or

Esople  of  God  are  to  be  gathered,
et  us  read  the  next  verse.  After
gathering  them  out  of  the  different
countries  and  lauds,  from  the  east,
west,  north  and  south,  the  Psalmist
says,  ki  They  wandered  in  a  wilder-
ness,  in  a  solitary  way  ;  they  found
no  city  to  dwell  in.  Hungry  and
thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in  them*
Then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in
their  trouble,  and  he  delivered  them

■  out  of  their  distresses.  And  he  led
them  forth  by  the  right  way,"  etc
Now  this  cannot  refer  to  any  former
dispensation  of  gathering.  When
the  children  of  Israel  in  ancient  days
were  collected  together  as  a  body,
they  were  not  taken  from  the  east,

''"west,  north  and  south,  but  they  were

■  taken  from  one  little  country — the
land  of  Goshen  in  Egypt  From  there
this  handful  of  people,  about  twen-
ty-five hundred  thousand  were  taken,
and  in  the  course  of  time  were  per-

a  lnitted  to  inhabit  the  land  of  Canaan,
But  this  gathering  that  is  here  spo-
ken of  informs  us  that  they  are  to
be  gathered  out  of  all  lands.  Who  ?
The  redeemed  of  the  Lord, — people
who  have  heard  the  message  of  re-

'ademption,  obeyed  the  ordinances  of
.redemption,  received  the  Gospel  of
redemption,  and  were  the  people  of

'  <God,  the  people  of  Christ ;  they
.were  the  ones  that  were  to  wander
in  the  wilderness,  after  they  were
thus  gathered,  and  that  wilderness
would  be  a  solitary  way.  Now,  in
gathering  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of


Canaan,  they  wandered,  it  is  true,
in  a  small  wilderness,  on  the  east
side  of  the  Red  Sea,  but  instead  of
bringing  them  forth  where  there
was  no  city  or  habitation,  he  brought
them  forth  to  large  aud  populous
cities.  The  first  city  that  they  came
to,  after  crossing  from  the  east  side
of  Jordan  to  the  land  on  the  west
side,  was  the  great  city  of  Jericho,
which  the  Lord  delivered  into  their
hands  ;  and  then  there  were  numer-
ous other  cities  that  are  mentioned
in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  which  were
delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  peo-
ple. The  children  of  Israel  gathered
out  of  one  land  ;  but  this  latter-day
gathering  was  to  be  a  people  called
"  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  "  they
were  to  go  into  a  wilderness  coun-
try. They  were  called,  in  many
parts  of  the  Scripture  writings,  (tthe
people  of  Zion,"  and  14  the  Zion  of
the  latter-Hays"  The  Lord  calls
them  by  this  special  name  in  the
51st  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  these  are
the  w  or  lis  that  are  used  :  11  For  the
Lord  shall  comfort  Zion  ;  he  will
comfort  all  her  waste  places ;  and  he
will  make  her  wilderness  like  Eden,
and  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the
Lord ;  joy  and  gladness  shall  be
found  therein,  thanksgiving  and  the
voice  of  melody."

When  I  was  a  boy  I  was  inclined
to  attend  very  frequently  the  meet-
ings that  were  held  by  the  different
denominations  in  the  State  of  New
York,  my  native  State.  I  often
heard  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah  sung,
by  those  who  were  singing  anthems
of  praise  to  the  Lord,  "The  Lord
shall  comfort  Zion,"  etc.,  but  little
did  I  know,  in  my  boyhood  or  youth,
what  was  meant  by  these  predictions
of  Isaiah.  It  seems  that  the  people
of  Zion  are  to  be  gathered  out  from
all  lands,  from  every  nation  under
heaven,  from  the  four  points  of  the
compass,  and  are  to  be  brought  into


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


a  solitary  place,  a  ml  derness,  and
when  they  arrive  in  that  solitary
place  or  wilderness,  they  will,  at
first,  be  greatly  afflicted,  sorely  dis-
tressed, so  much  so  that  they  will
be  under  the  necessity  of  crying
unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  deliver
them  from  their  distress.  "  They
found  no  city  to  dwell  in,"  says  Da-
vid, Now,  this  was  the  case  with
the  Latter-day  Saints,  whom  the
Lord  commanded  to  gather  together*
When  we  started  forth  ovtVr  the
great  desert  plain,  where  there  were
no  settlements,  no  cities,  no  towns,
traveling  hundreds  of  miles  without
any  track  to  guide  us,  it  was  a
*s  solitary  way,"  and  rendered  more
terrible  by  the  wild  beasts  that
roamed  over  the  plains.  We  could
hear  the  sound  of  the  wolf  in  his
bowlines  ;  we  could  hear  the  sounds
ef  the  buffalos  in  their  bellowings,
but  the  sound  of  the  human  voice,
from  any  village,  or  town,  or  settle-
ment was  unknown  for  hundreds  of
miles.

We  commenced  this  journey  in
the  year  18 40,  leaving  the  great
Mississippi  river  in  the  cold  month
of  February,  After  a  portion  of  us
had  crossed  the  river  in  boats,  the
river  was  frozen  over,  and  the  rest
of  the  company  crossed  in  wagons
on  the  ice.  We  had  no  crass  to  sus-
tain  our  teams.  Our  teams  depend-
ed upon  the  cottonwoods,  and  barks
of  trees,  and  a  little  corn  that  we
could  occasionally  get  by  sending
down  to  the  settlements,  and  pur-
chasing it  for  that  purpose.  We
wandered  in  the  wilderness  "in  a
solitary  way/'  and  when  we  had
traveled  some  fourteen  hundred
miles,  we  found  no  city  to  dwell  in,
just  precisely  as  the  Psalmist  said
would  be  the  case.  We  entered  this
valley  in  the  month  of  July,  1847,
having  been  detained  during  the
winter,  by  sending  over  500  of  our


people — young  and  middle-aged  men
—to  help  the  United  States  in  their
war  against  Mexico,  That  detained
us  during  the  winter,  so  that  we
could  not  journey  any  further  than
Council  Bluffs,  or  the  regions  a  little
above  Omaha,  where  we  built  up  a
temporary  residence.  The  next
spring  we  started  off,  traveling  over
the  plains  "  in  a  solitary  way,"  and
entered  this  valley  just  about  where
Fort  Douglass  is  now  established  on
the  bench  ;  we  called  it  Emigration
Canon,  We  came  down  here  upon
this  plot  of  ground  in  the  month  of
July,  and  commenced  planting  a  few
potatoes.  It  was  very  late  to  put
in  any  corn,  but  we  wished  to  try
the  soil  to  see  whether  there  was
any  virtue  in  it  We  found  it,  how-
ever, like  an  ash  heap.  It  seemed
as  though  there  had  been  no  rain
upon  the  land  for  years.  We  could
dig  down  a  great  depth  in  many
plaees,  where  this  city  now  stands,
without  finding  scarcely  any  mois-
ture, but  we  succeeded  by  taking  the
water  from  the  creek — City  Creek
we  call  it — in  flooding  a  small  por-
tion of  ground,  and  put  in  our  pota-
toes, and  planted  corn,  a  few  beans,
garden  seeds,  etc.,  to  see  if  there  was
any  virtue  in  the  soil.  What  were
the  results  of  our  first  crop]  We
found  that  there  was  fruitfulness  in
the  soil ;  but  of  course  it  was  too
late  for  anything  to  be  matured.
The  same  fall,  or  autumn  of  184 7§
several  thousand  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  followed  up  our  track.  They
came  upon  the  land  in  the  fall  of  the
year,  bringing  with  them  a  little
breadstuffs  to  sustain  them  during
the  winter,  and  also  our  farm  uten-
sils, and  everything  in  the  shape  of
wearing  apparel  that  could  be
brought  We  had  not  much  to  bring,
for  we  had  already  been  driven  four
or  five  times  in  the  United  States,
from  our  houses  and  from  our  lands  ;


276


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


muck  of  our  bedding  was  burnt ;  our
stores  torn  down,  and  the  goods  car-
ried  into  the  streets  and  destroyed.
Hence,  we  had  not  much  to  bring
with  us:  but  we  came  trusting  in  our
God,  and  we  fuund  that  the  Lord
really  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,
and  made  the  wilderness  to  blossom
as  the  rose,  made  the  desert  to  bloom
like  the  Garden  of  Eden — literally
fulfilling  that  which  our  Gentile  re-
ligious  denominations  had  been  sing-
ing in  my  ears,  when  I  was  a  youth.
Very  pleasant  song  to  those  who  did
not  undent  id  it,  but  much  more
pleasant  to  tlm^e  who  do  understand
and  are  fulfilling  it  We  made  great
calculations  in  laying  off  this  city.
We  did  not  lay  it  off  merely  one
square  mile,  as  if  we  were  doubtful
as  to  whether  there  would  be  any
inhabitants  to  occupy  it,  nor  two
miles  square,  but  we  laid  it  off,  cov-
ering an  area  of  about  five  square
miles.  We  expected  that  there
would  be  a  great  emigration.  Upon
what  did  we  found  our  expectation  ?
Was  it  upon  our  own  natural  judg-
ment? No;  we  founded  our  expecta-
tion upon  that  which  God  had  spo-
ken in  the  modern  revelations  which
he  had  given  to  us  as  a  people.  He
told  us,  by  revelation,  before  our
prophet  was  martyred,  that  we
would  have  to  leave  the  United
States :  go  beyond  the  liocky  Moun-
tains, and  seek  our  home  in  the  wil-
derness, and  that  we  would  have  a
great  people  gather  with  us.  We
believed  his  words  ;  we  laid  out  this
city  accordingly  j  and  now  all  that
remains  for  us  or  strangers  to  do,  in
regard  to  the  fulfillment  of  these
expectations,  is  to  ride  from  one  end
of  tliis  city  to  the  other,  and  see  if
there  is  much  spare  ground  :  see  if
the  lots  are  not  pretty  generally  oc-
cupied, and  the  city  pretty  well  filled
with  inhabitants.  "  And  he  will
make  her  wilderness  like  Eden,  and


her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the
Lord  ;  joy  and  gladness  shall  be
found  therein.*1  At  first,  before  the
joy  and  gladness  earae,  this  other
prophecy  was  fulfilled  :  "  Iluugjy
and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in
them,"  then  they  cried  unto  the
Lord  in  their  afflictions,  and  the
Lord  heard  them,  and  delivered
them  out  of  their  distress.  It  is
not  necessary  for  me  to  enumerate
all  our  privations,  such  as  the  short-
ness of  provisions,  and  how  many
had  to  live  on  the  roots  that  -sprang
out  of  the  ground  ;  how  many  had
to  boil  up  the  hides  of  their  cattle
that  had  transported  them  across
the  plains ;  it  is  not  necessary  to
enter  into  all  these  particulars.  I
do  not  know  that  it  is  necessary  for
us  even  to  speak  of  a  great  trial  of
our  faith,  that  we  had  after  we  had
been  here  many  months.  We  plant-
ed our  crops  in  the  spring,  and  they
came  up,  and  were  looking  nicely,,
and  we  were  cheered  with  the  hopes
of  having  &  very  abundant  harvest.
But  alas  !  it  very  soon  appeared  as
if  our  crops  were  going  to  be  swal*
lowed  up  by  a  vast  horde  of  crickets,
that  came  down  from  these  moun-
tains— crickets  very  different  to  what
I  used  to  be  acquainted  with  in  the
State  of  New  York.  They  were
crickets  nearly  as  large  as  a  man's
thumb.  They  came  in  immense
droves,  so  that  men  and  women  with
brush  could  make  no  headway  against
them  ;  but  we  cried  unto  the  Lord
in  our  afflictions,  and  the  Lord  heard
us,  and  sent  thousands  and  tens  of
thousands  of  a  small  white  bird.  I
have  not  seen  any  of  them  lately.
Many  called  them  gulls,  although
they  were  different  from  the  sear
gulls  that  live  on  the  Atlantic  coast*
And  what  did  they  do  for  us  1  They
went  to  work,  and  by  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands,  began  to  devour
them  up,  and  still  we  thought  that


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


277


even  they  could  not  prevail  against
so  large  and  mighty  an  army.  But
we  noticed,  that  when  they  had  ap-
parently filled  themselves  with  these
crickets,  they  would  go  and  vomit
them  up,  and  again  go  to  work  and
fill  themselves,  and  so  they  continued
to  do,  until  the  laud  was  cleared  of
crickets,  and  our  crops  were  saved*
There  are  those  who  will  say  that
this  was  one  of  the  natural  courses
of  events,  that  there  was  no  miracle
in  it  Let  that  be  as  it  may,  we
esteemed  it  as  a  blessing  from  the
hand  of  God;  miracle  or  no  miracle,
we  believe  that  God  had  a  hand  in
it,  aud  it  does  not  matter  particu-
larly whether  strangers  believe  or
not

We  found  no  city  here  to  dwell  in.
What  did  we  do  1  Went  to  work
and  began  to  build  a  great  city.  This
also  was  foretold  in  this  same  Psalm,
"He  turueth  rivers  into  a  wilder-
ness, and  the  water  springs  into  dry
ground,  A  fruitful  land  into  barren-
ness for  the  wickedness  of  them  that
dwell  therein.  He  turneth  the  wil-
derness  into  a  standing  water,  and
dry  ground  into  water  springs."  We
found  that  when  we  came  and  began
to  irrigate  the  land,  ami  the  rains
began  to  descend  from  the  heavens,
the  earth  began  to  take  on  a  fresh
appearance,  aud  the  dry  ground  be-
came like  water  springs.  "  And
there  he  raaketh  the  hungry  to
dwell,  that  they  may  prepare  a  city
for  habitation. 11  Now  when  the  Is-
raelites went  into  Canaan,  they
found  cities  already  prepared,  but  we
had  to  prepare  our  own  city,  '  and
sow  the  fields,  aud  plant  vineyards,
which  may  yield  fruits  of  increase.
He  blesseth  them  also,  so  that  they
are  multiplied  greatly;  and  sufferetli
not  their  cattle  to  decrease."  Now,
the  Latter-day  Saints  who  have  been
here,  since  the  arrival  of  the  first
companies  in  the  year  1847,  can  rea-


lize how  much  the  Lord  has  multi-
plied this  people.  We  are  as  it  were
overrun  with  children.  If  strangers
will  take  the  opportunity  of  going  to
some  of  our  oldest  towns,  and  through
our  various  settlements,  they  will
Hud  vast  numbers  of  children,  per-
haps more  children  in  our  country
than  in  any  other  country  in  the
United  States  of  the  same  popula-
tion. This  is  very  clearly  spoken  of
here,  "He  blessed  them  also,  so  that
they  are  multiplied  greatly  ;  and
sufFereth  not  their  cattle  to  decrease/'
Again  he  says,  in  the  41st  verse,
"  Yet  setleth  he  the  poor  on  high
from  affliction,  and  maketh  him  fam-
ilies like  a  flock.1'  Those  that  are
acquainted  with  some  of  our  poor
men,  and  when  they  go  and  look  at
one  man's  family  ;  for  this  is  in  the
singular  number — *£  he  maketh  him
families  like  a  flock  " — when  we  see
one  man's  family  like  a  flock,  we
may  know  the  Lord  lias  fulfilled
this  prophecy  in  regard  to  the
gathering  of  the  Saints  in  the
latter-days.  "The  righteous  shall
see  it  and  rejoice;  and  all  iniquity
shall  stop  her  mouth/'  The  latter
part  of  the  sentence  is  not  yet  ful-
filled, but  the  fore  part  is  fulfilled  ;
the  righteous  hath  seen  these  "fami-
lies like  a  flock,"  and  the  people
greatly  multiplied  upon  the  face  of
the  laud.  "  Whoso  is  wise  and  will
observe  these  things,  even  they  shall
understand  the  loving  kindness  of
the  Lord."  That  is,  they  are  the
children  of  the  light.  They  can  see
that  the  Lord  our  God  is  fulfilling
that  which  he  had  purposed  to  fulfil,
when  the  day  for  the  gathering  of
his  Saints  should  commence.  They
can  see  that  that  which  has  occurred
corresponds  with  that  which  was
predicted.  Again,  they  can  see  how
the  righteous  prosper  and  flourish  ;
how  their  cattle  increase,  and  how
the  Lord  has  made  this  wilderness,


278  JOURNAL  OF

this  desert,  this  waste  country,  like
the  garden  of  Eden.

Paul,  I  have  no  doubt,  saw  his
dispensation  of  the  "fullness  of
times,"  or  he  never  would  have  pre-
dicted the  great  gathering  that
should  then  take  place,  namely  14  all
things  in  Christ11 — notice  that  ex-
pression :  nut  those  who  are  out  of
Christ,  not  those  who  have  not  been
baptized  into  Christ ;  but  44  all  things  j
in  Christ ;  both  which  are  in  heaven
and  which  are  on  the  earth  ;  even  in
him."

This  forcibly  puts  me  in  mind  of  |
the  parable  of  our  Savior  concerning
this  great  latter-day  gathering.  In
the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew  he
speaks  of  his  second  coining  44  in  the
clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and
great  glory,"  aud  how  the  Gospel
should  be  preached  in  alj  the  world
for  a  witness  unto  all  nations,  before
he  should  come  in  hisfglory.  In  the
next  chapter,  in  order  that  his
disciples  might  fully  understand  his
sayings,  he  goes  on  to  explain  that
at  that  particular  period  the  king-
dom of  heaven  should  be  likened
unto  ten  virgins  ;  not  the  former
kingdom  that  was  to  be  built  up,
when  he  came  on  the  earth  in  the
flesh  ;  that  was  not  likened  unto  ten
virgins  ;  but  at  the  time  he  should
commence  the  great  work  of  gather-
ing, that  wheresoever  the  main  body
of  the  kingdom  is  gathered  together,
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,
preparatory  to  his  second  coming,
then,  at  that  time,  should  the  king-
dom of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten
virgins,  which  took  their  lamps  and
went  forth — (signifying  that  they
did  not  remain  in  their  native  lands)
to  meet  the  Bridegroom,  It  was  a
literal  gathering  out ;  and  after  they
had  gathered  out,  taking  their  lamps
with  them,  they  began  to  be  sleepy,
and  it  is  written,  "they  all  slumber-
ed and  slept." It  was  a  time  to


DISCOURSES.

j  sleep,  a  time  of  drowsiness  ;  it  is
called  midnight ;  but  when  all  was
silent,  and  when  probably  the  world
outside  was  not  looking  for  auy thing
very  great,  was  careless  and  indiffer-
ent, a  voice  was  heard  in  the  depth
of  this  silence,  sajing,  44  Behold,  the
Bridegroom  cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to
meet  him."  Then  all  those  virgins
awoke,  both  the  wise  and  the  fool-
ish. The  wise  ones  trimmed  their
lamps,  and  had  some  oil  left;  but
the  lamps  of  the  foolish  had  gone
out,  because  there  was  no  oil  in
them.  It  seems  that  they  had  been
so  careless,  that  all  the  Spirit  of
God — which  may  be  compared  to
the  oil  that  gives  brightness  to  the
lamps — had  gone  out  of  them,  and
their  lamps  would  not  burn.  44  Well,"
said  they,  4 4  what  shall  we  doT*
We  have  been  expecting  the  Bride-
groom as  well  as  you  that  are  wise  ;
we  believed  the  Gospel,  but  realiy
we  have  been  too  careless  ;  the  spirit
has  been  withdrawn  from  us  ;  there
is  no  oil  in  our  lamps  ;  cannot  you
give  us  some  1  won't  you  sell  us  a
little?"  44  Oh,  no,"  say  the  wise
ones,  44  we  almost  fear  we  have  not
got  enough  for  ourselves  ;  if  you
want  auy,  you  had  better  go  and  buy
of  those  who  want  to  sell"  Hence,
five  that  had  gathered  were  foolish,
and  five  were  wise.  The  wise  enter-
ed in  with  the  Bridegroom,  and  the
door  was  shut  before  the  foolish  ones
could  get  in.  But  they  afterwards
arrived  and  begged  to  be  admitted  ;
and  the  question  was  asked,  44  Who
are  ye  ?"  44  We  have  been  here
among  your  people  for  a  long  time*
Have  we  «not  cast  out  devils  at  a
certain  time?  Have  we  not  been  on
missions  1  Have  we  not  healed  the
sick  and  done  many  wonderful  works
in  your  name?"  What  is  the  reply  ?
"I  know  you  not"  Why?  Be-
cause they  have  apostatized  j  they
have  lost  the  oil  out  of  their  lamps  ;


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


they  failed  to  be  prepared  for  the
coming  of  the  Savior,  Therefore
they  were  bound,  as  it  were,  hand
and  foot,  and  delivered  over  to  the
wicked  world,  to  suffer  the  same
punishment  as  those  that  would  not
receive  the  truth,  and  perhaps  even
greater.

There  is  auother  parable  concern-
ing this  gathering  dispensation.  You
recollect  the  Savior,  in  speaking  of
the  end  of  the  wicked  world,  in  a
parable,  calls  it  a  time  of  harvest.
Before  the  time  of  harvest,  there
seemed  to  be  a  gathering  together,
and  by  and  by,  after  this  gathering,
the  tares  were  plucked  out  from
aijiong  the  wheat,  and  cast  out  in
bundles,  ready  to  be  burned  ;  but
those  that  were  not  tares,  those  that
were  really  wheat,  were  the  ones
that  were  prepared  to  enter  in  and
partake  of  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,
Tii is  was  spoken,  not  concerning  the
former  dispensation,  but  that  dis-
pensation immediately  preceding  the
end  of  the  world.

In  another  very  plain  parable,  con-
cerning the  gathering  in  the  last
days,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  com-
pared -that  is  the  kingdom  which
should  exist  in  the  last  days — to  a
net  that  should  be  cast  into  the  sea,
and  gather  of  all  kinds,  both  good
and  bad.  They  are  brought  up  to
the  shore,  not  left  in  their  native
ocean  or  native  waters,  but  brought
up  to  the  shore.  The  bad  are  cast
away,  and  the  good  were  cast  into
the  vessels.  Now,  this  had  reference
also  to  the  end  of  the  world.  This
had  reference  to  the  great  and  last
dispensation,  when  the  servants  of
God  will  gotorth,  being  commission-
ed of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  to  gather
out  his  Saints,  those  that  have  made
a  covenant  with  him  by  sacrifice,
and  in  the  gathering  out  of  these
Saints  from  all  the  lands  of  the
earth,  and  from  the  four  quarters


thereof,  they  will  gather  up  a  great
many  that  are  not  good,  that  will
not  stand  the  test ;  but  the  bail  will
be  cast  out,  those  who  have  not  on  ,
the  wedding  garment  they  will  be
cast  away,  and  bound  hand  and  foot,

I  as  it  were,  until  the  end  shall  come,
that  is,  the  final  judgment,  which
will  be  more  than  a  thousand  years
after  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the

;  Savior.

Tli is  same  great  gathering  is  char-
acterized also  by  Daniel,  as  a  stoi  ;e  cut
out  of  the  mountain  without  hands.
This  stone  is  represented  as  a  king-
dom, and  its  location  is  represented
as  a  mountain,  showing  that  there  is
to  be  a  kingdom  of  God  set  up  in
the  last  days  by  the  gathering  toge-
ther of  his  people  in  an  elevated
region  of  country,  called  a  mountain.
By  and  by  that  stone  will  roll  forth,
until  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
broken  in  pieces,  and  as  the  Prophet

j  Daniel  said,  the  kingdom  shall  not
be  left  to  other  people,  but  shall
stand  forever;  all  those  other  earthly
kingdoms,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  saw
to  his  dream,  will  vanish  away,  like
a  night  vision,  or,  in  other  words,
become  "like  the  chaff  of  the  sum-
mer  threshing  floors  ;  ami  the  wind
carried  them  away,  and  no  plan*  was
found  for  them,"  There  are  many
politicians  that  are  trying  to  foretell
the  future.  They  speak  of  what  this

,  government,  and  that  government,
and  the  other  government  will  be,
several  hundred  years  hence,  or  per-
haps in  ages  hence,  as  though  they
could  see  ami  understand,  naturally,
the  condition  of  the  various  govern-
ments and  kingdoms  of  the  earth,
for  a  long  time  to  come;  but  Daniel,
who  was  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the
living  (iod,  saw  that  all  these  earth-
ly governments — with  the  setting
up  of  which  God  had  nothing  to  do
particularly,  that  is,  their  founders
were  neither  prophets  nor  revela'ors


280


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


so  as  to  found  them  upon  the  prin-
ciples of  the  everlasting  Gospel —
were  to  vanish  away,  like  the  chaff
of  the  summer  threshing  floor,  And
you  know  how  that  vanishes,  espe-
cially when  the  wind  blows  strongly.
So  shall  it  be  with  all  the  govern-
ments, kingdoms,  powers,  republics,
and  empires  upon  the  face  of  this
globe,  except  one  government,  name-
ly, that  government  which  the  God
of  heaven  shall  establish  in  the  lat-
ter-days upon  the  mountains.  This
is  the  work  of  God.  It  is  God  that
causes  these  kingdoms  to  vanish
away.  It  is  our  God  that  will
cleanse  the  earth  from  wickedness.
"  A  fire  shall  devour  before  him,  and
it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round
about  him.'1  He  it  is  that  will  speak
and  the  wicked  shall  melt  away.
He  it  is  that  will  cause  violent
whirlwinds  to  go  forth  and  de-
stroy this,  that,  or  the  other
city,  according  to  his  own  will.  He
it  i*  that  will  send  forth  pestilence
and  plague,  and  will  perform  all  that
has  been  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  his
prophets,  concerning  the  destruction
that  is  to  take  place  in  the  latter
davs.

To  prove  still  more  clearly  the  na-
ture of  this  great  latter-day  work  of
gathering,  read  the  writings  of  John
the  Revelator.  He  saw  the  intro-
duction of  the  Gospel  in  the  latter
days.  He  saw  another  angel  "
should  bring  it.  He  saw  that  it
should  be  published  to  every  nation,
kindred,  tongue  and  people.  He
saw  that  following  that  angel  there
would  come  great  and  terrible  judg-
ments. He  saw  that  after  that  angel
should  come  with  the  Gospel,  there
w  ould  come  a  voice  from  heave  u,
sayi»gf  u  Come  out  of  her,  my  peo-
ple, that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her
sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her
plagues.  For  her  sins  have  reached
unto  heaven,  and  God  hath  remem-


bered her  iniquities."  This  voice
from  heaven,  this  new  revelation,
that  was  promised  hy  the  mouth  of
John  the  Revelator,  and  the  sound
to  all  is :  "  Come  out  from  among
these  nations.  Come  out  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth.  Come
out  from  Great  Babylon,  '  Mystery,
Babylon  the  Great/  that  you  may
escape  the  desolation  and  plagues
that  will  soon  overtake  her."  Read
concerning  the  coming  of  that  angel
with  the  Gospel.  Read  the  declara-
tion that  that  should  be  the  hour  of
God's  judgment,  When  the  Gospel
is  preached,  it  is  the  last  message  to
the  human  family,  the  last  warning
voice  that  they  will  hear  before  the
coming  of  the  Lord.  If  they  receive
it,  they  will  flee  out  from  the  nations;
if  they  receive  it  not,  then  know
assuredly  that  the  hour  of  God's
judgment  is  come,  and  God  himself
will  judge  the  people,  as  written  in
this  50th  Psalm.

But  we  will  not  detain  you  longer*
May  the  Lord  bless  you.  May  he
pour  out  his  Spirit  upon  all  the  faith-
ful of  the  Latter  day  Saints,  and  if
there  are  any  unfaithful  ones,  num-
bered with  the  people  of  God,  may
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  strive  with
you,  until  you  shall  repent  of  your
unfaithfulness,  and  become  pure,
upright,  virtuous,  and  holy  before
the  Lord,  that  you  may  be  entitled
to  his  Holy  Spirit  And  if  there  be
any  strangers  present,  this  afternoon,
who  desire  to  know  the  truth,  we
w  ould  ask  them  to  search  the  sacred
Scriptures,  call  upon  the  name  of  the
Most  High  God,  and  he  will  show
you  whether  these  Scriptures  are
true  or  not ;  he  will  reveal  to  you
whether  he  has  sent  his  angel  from
heaven  or  not ;  he  will  give  you  a
testimony  that  is  greater  than  the
testimony  of  men,  provided  you  will
go  humbly  before  him,  and  call  upon
him,  with  all  your  hearts.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  in the  Salt  Lake  Assembly  Hall,  at  the  Priesthood

Meeting,  Sunday  Evening,  July  4th,  1880*

(lieported  by  John  Irvine.)

RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PRIESTHOOD  —  EXHORTATION TO  FAITH-
FULNESS, ETC;


As  this  is  the  priesthood  meeting
of  the  elders  of  Israel  and  those  bear-
ing the  priesthood,  I  feel  I  would
like  to  say  a  few  words  in  connection
with  what  Brother  Taylor  has  said
I  look  upon  our  condition  or  our
position,  as  a  people,  that  we  are
called  to  a  certain  work.  When  we
send  men  upon  missions,  or  to  per-
form any  branch  of  business  or  labor,
of  course  we  expect  them  to  perform
it,  and  the  Lord  expects  them  to  do
the  same.  Now  I  look  upon  the  el-
ders of  Israel  here  to-night,  and  in
this  Church  and  kingdom,  as  upon  a
mission-  We  have  been  ordained  to
a  mission,  and  we  have  our  time  set
to  do  it  and  to  perform  it.  Not
that  I  know  exactly  how  many  days
or  years  we  are  going  to  spend  in  it.
But  t  his  mission  is  required  at  our
hands,  not  at  the  hands  of  Brother
Taylor,  Brother  Joseph,  or  Brother
Brigham  alone,  but  it  is  required  at
our  hands  by  the  God  of  heaven,  and
we  are  performing  a  work  and  laying
a  foundation  which  we  have  got  to
meet  on  the  other  side  of  the  vail.
It  docs  not  make-  any  difference  to
what  position  we  are  called  or  or-


j  dained.  If  we  are  called  to  the  office
of  a  bishop  we  should  fulfill  the  du-
f  ties  pertaining  to  that  office.  I  know
I  it  has  been  considered  a  very  hard
I  office,  and  one  to  which  a  good  deal
of  time  has  to  be  devoted.  Yet  there
are  a  great  many  bishops  who  don't
spend  much  time  in  it,  while  others

A  #

are  true  to  their  calling.  A  bishop's
calling  is  an  important  one,  He  is
called  to  be  a  father  to  the  people  of
his  ward.  And  when  labor  is  laid
upon  us  to  perform  we  should  not
ignore  that  labor  or  lay  it  aside*
There  is  an  account  kept,  whether
we  keep  one  or  not  There  are  a
good  many  revelations  which  show
us  that  this  is  the  case.  Your  his-
tory goes  before  you.  All  of  you
will  find  it  when  you  get  the  other
side  of  the  vail  Every  man's  his-
tory— his  acts — are  written,  whether
he  has  kept  a  record  here  or  not
This  is  plainly  manifested  in  the  re-
velation known  as  the  "Olive  Leaf."

As  I  view  it,  we  are  not  placed
here  as  elders  of  Israel,  apostles,  or
bishops,  merely  to  get  rich  in  gold
and  silver,  and  the  things  of  this
,  world. We  have  a  labor  laid  upon


282


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


our  shoulders.  Joseph  Smith  had,
Brigham  Young  had,  the  Twelve
Apostles  have,  we  all  have,  and  we
will  be  condemned  if  we  do  not  ful-
fill it  We  shall  find  it  out  when  we
get  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail.  It
is  through  this  neglect  of  duty  that
so  many  have  left  this  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,  There  is  hardly  a
tithe  of  the  people  who  have  been
baptized  in  water  for  the  remission
of  sins  that  have  died  in  the  faith.
In  the  United  States  there  are  tens
of  thousands  of  apostate  Mormons,
Many  a  time  in  my  reflections  I  have
wished  I  could  fully  comprehend  the
responsibility  I  am  under  to  God,
and  the  responsibility  every  man  is
under  who  bears  the  priesthood  in
this  generation.  But  I  tell  you,
brethren,  I  think  our  hearts  are  set
too  much  upon  the  things  of  this
world,  W*j  do  not  appreciate,  as
men  bearing  the  holy  priesthood  in
this  generation  should,  the  mighty
responsibility  we  are  under  to  God
and  high  heaven,  as  well  as  to  the
earth.  I  think  we  are  too  far  from
the  Lord.  1  do  not  think  we  live
our  religion  as  we  ought  to.  I  do
not  think  our  hearts  are  set  upon
building  up  this  kingdom  as  they
should  be  as  Latter-day  Saints.
Now,  do  not  think  I  am  your  enemy
because  I  tell  you  these  things.  I
feel  we  have  an  important  work  to
perform,  and  others  will  continue
the  work  when  we  have  passed  away.
I  look  around  and  view  the  work  of
time.  I  look  around  and  find  that
eight  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  have
passed  into  the  world  of  spirits  since
we  came  into  this  valley  ;  I  expect
to  go  there  myself,  I  expect  my  bre-
thren will ;  we  shall  all  go  there  be*
fore  many  years  are  over.  I  do  not
look  for  anything  else  ;  and  I  will
say  that  for  the  last  year  or  two  in
my  reflections  I  have  felt  that  I  have
no  other  business  on  this  earth  but


to  try  to  build  up  this  kingdom.  I
do  not  feel  that  I  am  justified  in  set-
ting my  heart  upon  the  things  of
this  world  to  the  neglect  of  any  duty
that  God  requires  at  my  hands.  And
another  thing,  when  I  look  at  this
generation,  when  I  think  of  over
twelve  hundred  millions  of  people
who  d  well  in  the  flesh,  many  of  them
ripening  for  the  judgments  of  God,
a  generation  that  is  ready  to  receive
the  wrath  of  God  upon  their  heads
— when  I  consider  these  things,  I
know  that  if  I  neglect  to  bear  my
testimony  before  them,  if  I  neglect
to  bear  my  testimony  to  this  genera-
tion when  I  have  an  opportunity,  I
shall  feel  sorry  for  it  when  I  go  into
the  spirit  world.

That  is  the  way  I  feel  with  regard
to  this  work.  God  requires  that  we
bear  record  of  it  to  this  generation  ;
and  when  I  think  of  the  extent  of
this  generation,  the  greatness  of  it,
when  I  consider  that  this  is  a  gene-
ration  and  dispensation  when  God
has  set  his  hand  to  establish  a  king-
dom, the  great  and  last  kingdom,
and  the  only  kingdom  that  the  Lord
ever  did  establish  in  any  aire  of  the
world,  to  remain  on  the  earth  through
the  millenium.  when  I  think  of  these
tilings  I  can  realize  the  greatness  of
this  work.  The  Lord  never  had
prophets  in  any  age  of  the  world
who  could  stand  in  the  flesh  and
live,  and  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God.  The  world  has  always  made
war  upon  them  and  destroyed  them,
with  the  exception  of  Enoch  who
was  taken  up  to  heaven  with  his
city.  Now,  if  we  could  realize  that
we  have  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth  to-day,  with  the  promise
of  God  our  Father,  that  it  will  stay
upon  the  earth  until  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man — if  we  could  realize
this  and  realize  our  responsibility,  it
seems  to  me  that  we  would  all  have
a  desire  to  magnify  our  call  i  n;


RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


233


As  I  was  going  to  say,  with  a  gen-
eration like  this,  with  the  nations  of
the  earth  as  they  are  to-day,  having
the  power  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God  to  stay  here,  having  the
power  to  rear  temples  to  the  Most
High  God,  against  the  wrath  and
indignation  of  a  thousand  million
people — 1  say,  having  this  power,
and  being  sustained  by  the  Lord,  we
certainly  ought  to  be  willing  to  do
our  part  of  the  work.  We  have
borne  testimony — I  have,  my  bre-
thren have,  the  elders  of  Israel  have
— to  this  generation  for  many  years.
We  have  borne  testimony  of  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  Book
of  Mormon  and  of  the  prophets  of
God  who  has  been  raised  in  this  our
own  time,  and  those  testimonies  will
rise  up  in  judgment  against  this  gen-
eration and  will  condemn  those  who
reject  them.

This  kingdom  is  in  our  hands  to
bear  it  off*  The  God  of  heaven  is
with  us.  He  has  sustained  us.  He
turns  away  the  wrath  of  man.  He
binds  the  hands  of  our  enemies  and
breaks  every  weapon  that  is  formed
against  Zion.  He  has  established
his-  people  in  these  valleys  of  the
mountains.

I  would  say  to  bishops,  and  to  all
men  in  authority,  we  should  have
an  interest  in  carrying  on  this  work.
We  should  labor  to  get  the  Spirit  of
God.  It  is  our  right,  our  privilege,
and  our  duty  to  call  upon  the  Lord,
that  the  vision  of  our  mind  may  be
opened,  so  that  we  may  see  and  un-
derstand the  day  and  age  in  which
we  are  living.  It  is  your  privilege,
and  mine  too,  to  know  the  mind  and
will  of  the  Lord  concerning  our  du-
ties, and  if  we  fail  to  seek  after  this,
we  neglect  to  magnify  our  calling.

As  Brother  Taylor  has  said,  here
we  are  at  headquarters.  We  are  an
en  sample  for  all  the  other  Stakes  to
look  at We  should  not  consider


anything  we  are  called  to  perform  a
labor.  Anything  we  are  called  upon
to  do  we  should  do  with  a  will.  I
look  back  to  the  days  of  our  early
missions.  Brother  Taylor,  Brother
Brigham,  myself  and  others,  had  to
go  our  ways  sick  with  fever,  ague,
and  the  power  of  death  surrounding
us  ;  had  to  leave  our  wives  and  chil-
dren without  food,  without  raiment,
and  go  without  purse  and  scrip  to
preach  the  Gospel,  We  were  com-
manded of  God  to  do  it,  and  if  we
had  not  done  it  we  should  not  have
been  here  to-day.  But  having  done
these  things,  God  lias  blessed  us.
He  has  sustained  the  faithful  elders
of  this  Church  and  kingdom,  and  he
will  continue  to  do  so  until  we  get
through.

I  wanted  to  express  my  feelings
in  relation  to  these  matters.  I  re-
flect upon  our  position.  1  realize
that  we  have  a  testimony  to  bear,
and  that  we  shall  be  held  responsi-
ble for  the  manner  in  which  we  per-
form our  duties.  As  apostles,  seven-
ties, elders,  priests,  etc.,  we  are  ac-
countable to  the  Most  High  God.  If
we  do  our  duty,  then  our  skirts  will
be  clean.  We  are  watchman  upon
the  walls  of  Zion.  It  is  our  duty  to
warn  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  of
the  things  that  are  to  come,  and  if
they  reject  our  testimony,  then  their
blood  will  be  upon  their  own  heads.
When  the  judgments  of  God  over-
take the  wicked  they  cannot  say
they  have  not  been  warned.  My
garments,  and  the  garments  of  thou-
sands of  others,  are  clean  of  t  he  peo-
ple of  this  generation,  as  also  the
garments  of  Joseph  Smith,  Br  igham
Young,  and  those  of  the  elders  of
Israel  who  have  died  in  the  faith.
We  have  borne  our  testimony,  and
when  the  judgments  of  God  come,
men  cannot  say  they  have  not  been
warned.  I  consider  our  position  be-
fore this  generation  is  of  vast  im-


JOUitNAL  OF


IHSCOUKSES


porta  nee  to  us  and  them.  I  do  not
want,  when  I  go  into  the  spirit  world,
to  have  this  generation  rise  up  and
condemn  me,  and  say  I  have  not
done  iny  duty.

There  never  was  a  generation  like
this.  There  has  never  been  a  people
like  thus.  There  has  never  been  a
work  like  this  since  God  made  the
world.  True,  there  have  been  men
who  have  preached  the  Gospel  j  but  j
in  the  fulness  of  times  the  Lord  has
set  his  hand  to  establish  his  king-
dom. This  is  the  last  dispensation.
He  has  raised  up  men  and  women
to  carry  on  his  work,  and  as  I  have
often  s;rid,  many  of  us  have  been
held  in  the  spirit  world  from  the
organization  of  this  world,  until  the
generation  in  which  we  live.  Our
lives  have  been  hid  with  Christ  in
God,  and  the  devil  has  sought  to  kill
us  from  the  day  we  were  born  until
the  present  hour.  But  the  Lord  has
preserved  us.  He  has  given  us  the
priesthood,  he  has  given  us  the  |
kingdom  and  the  keys  thereof.  Shall
we  disappoint  our  heavenly  Father  1
Shall  we  disappoint  the  ancient  pro-
phets and  apostles  who  looked  for-
ward to  this  daj  ]  Shall  we  disap-
point Joseph  Smith,  and  those  bre-
thren who  have  gone  before,  who
laid  the  foundatiau  ot  this  work  and
left  us  to  labor  after  them  1  Bre-
thren, for  God's  sake  do  not  let  us
set  our  hearts  on  the  things  of  this
world  to  the  neglect  of  the  tilings  of
eternal  life.  Do  not  let  the  bishops
feel  it  is  a  hard  matter  to  carry  out
any  of  the  counsels  given  by  those
who  are  called  to  direct  all  these
things.  Bless  your  souls,  if  you  lived
here  in  the  tfesh  a  thousand  years,
as  long  as  Father  Adam,  and  lived
and  labored  all  your  life  in  poverty,
and  when  you  got  through,  if,  by
your  acts,  you  could  secure  your
wives  and  children  in  the  morning
of  the  first  resurrection,  to  dwell


with  you  in  the  presence  of  God,
that  one  thing  would  amply  pay  you
for  the  labors  of  a  thousand  years*
What  is  anything  we  can  do  or  suf-
fer, to  be  compared  with  the  multi-
plicity of  kingdoms,  thrones  and
principalities  that  God  has  revealed
to  us  1

i  Well,  we  have  got  the  kingdom,
and  we  must  bear  it  off. It  won't

I  pay  you  nor  me  to  apostatize.  But
then  theie  is  this  danger,  you  know*
Brother  Joseph  used  to  counsel  us
in  this  wise:  "The  moment  you
permit  yourselves  to  lay  aside  any
duty  that  God  calls  you  to  perform,
to  gratify  your  own  desires  ;  the
moment  you  permit  yourselves  to

i  become  careless,  you  lay  a  foundation
for  apostasy.  Be  careful ;  understand
you  are  called  to  a  work,  and  when
God  requires  you  to  do  that  work  do
it."  Another  thing  he  said:  (*ln  all
your  trials,  tribulations  and  sickness,
in  all  your  sufferings,  even  unto
death,  be  careful  you  don't  betray
God,  be  careful  you  don't  betray  the
priesthood,  be  careful  you  don't  apos-
tatize ;  because  if  you  do,  you  will  be
sorry  for  it,! We  received  a  great

I  deal  of  that  kind  of  counsel,  and  I

I  have  remembered  it  from  that  day
until  the  present

But  I  do  not  wish  to  detain  you.
I  felt  to  back  up  the  testimony  Bro-
ther Taylor  lias  given,  I  take  it  to
myself  I  can  make  nothing  by  ne-
glecting any  duty,  I  have  never
committed  a  sin  in  this  Church  and
kingdom,  but  what  it  has  cost  me  a
thousand  times  more  than  it  was
worth*  We  cannot  sin  with  impuni-
ty ;  we  cannot  neglect  any  counsel
with  impunity,  but  what  it  will
bring  sorrow ;  and  the  only  safe  way
is  to  round  up  our  shoulders  and  do
our  duty,  and  thus  bear  off  the  king-
dom. None  of  us  have  a  long  time
to  stay  here.  When  I  look  around
and  reflect  upon  my  brethren  that


1


RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


285


are  gone,  I  ask,  Where  are  they  1
Where  are  they  gone  %  Here  is
Brother  Taylor,  myself  and  others,
who  form  part  of  the  early  organiza-
tion of  this  quorum,  who  have  tra-
veled with  the  Church  for  a  great
many  years ;  but  Brother  Joseph
Smith  and  others  have  been  gone
for  a  long  time—  gone  into  the  spirit
world.  While  I  reflect  upon  these
things  I  often  ask,  What  are  their
views  toward  us  1  How  does  the
Lord  look  upon  us  as  a  ] people  t  I
consider  the  Lord  and  the  heavenly
hosts  are  watching  us*  I  know  they
manifest  great  interest  in  our  wel-
fare and  in  the  course  we  pursue,  I
do  not  want  to  miss  salvation.  I
want  to  go  where  Brother  Joseph  is,
I  want  to  go  to  my  heavenly  Father,
and  to  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  to
the  old  prophets  who  lived  in  their
generations.

Let  us  try  to  live  our  religion.  Let
us  seek  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  it
may  dwell  in  our  bosoms  day  by  day*
Bless  your  souls,  we  have  all  we  want
of  this  world's  goods.  Who  ever
saw  a  people  so  well  off  as  the  peo-
ple of  Utah  in  these  valleys  of  the
mountains]  Who  has  given  us  these
things!  Our  heavenly  Father.  He
has  blessed  the  land  for  our  use.
This  donation  that  has  been  made,
some  mav  call  it  a  sacrifice  ;  but
Brother  Taylor  had  a  desire  to
stretch  out  the  hand  of  kindness  to
the  oppressed  of  the  Lattter-day
Saints.  We  want  them  to  have  the
benefit  of  this.  We  should  therefore
labor  with  a  will  No  matter  how
long  you  are  a  bishop,  your  work
will  be  closed  in  the  flesh  by  and  by*
Where  are  many  of  the  bishops  of
this  Church  and  kingdom  who  hell
office  thirty  years  ago  I  Gone ;  and
the  bishops  who  are  here  to-night,
others  will  supply  their  places  by
and  by.  We  will  all  pass  away  in
our  turn,  and  the  faithful  will  come


forth  at  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  which  is  but  a  little  while.

I  feel  anxious  that  we  may  not
forget  God  :  I  feel  anxious  that  we
may  not  forget  the  position  we  occu-
py before  him ;  for  I  will  say  this
concerning  myself :  if  ever  I  had
any  satisfaction  or  happiness,  I  have
had  it  in  "Mormonism,"  If  there
is  anything  to  me  or  about  me,  it
has  been  given  to  me  in  "  Mormon-
i>m."  If  I  have  ever  received  any
blessings  ;  if  I  have  ever  had  power
to  testify  of  the  things  of  God,  and
been  the  means  of  bringing  any  into
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  it
has  been  by  the  power  of  God,  or
by  that  which  is  termed  "  Mormon-
ism,"  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  I  know
it  is  the  power  of  God  that  has  ac-
complished these  things.  It  has
been  by  the  power  of  God  that  we
have  received  all  we  are  in  possession
of — our  riches,  our  gifts,  our  wives
and  our  children.  How  many  of
you  have  had  sealed  upon  your  heads
kingdoms,  powers  and  principalities
in  the  world  to  corne  l  Who  can
compare  these  blessings  with  gold
and  silver  and  the  things  of  this
world  ]  Or  what  is  to  be  compared
with  the  gift  of  eternal  life  1

I  pray  God,  our  heavenly  Father,
to  bless  you,  to  bless  all  those  who
bear  the  holy  priesthood  ;  that  the
blessings  of  God  may  be  over  you.
I  feel  that  we  as  a  people  have  got
to  rise  up  and  clothe  ourselves  with
the  power  of  God,  There  must  be
a  reformation,  or  a  change,  in  our
midst.  There  is  too  much  evil
among  us.  The  devil  has  got  too
much  power  over  us,  A  good  many
that  bear  the  name  of  Christ  and
the  holy  priesthood,  are  get  ring  cold
in  the  things  of  God.  We  must
wake  up ;  we  must  trim  our  lamps,
and  be  prepared  for  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man.  May  God  bless
you. May  he  guide  and  direct  us


236


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSED.


all.  May  he  keep  us  in  the  hollow
of  his  hand.  May  he  sanctify  us
and  prepare  us  to  inherit  eternal


life,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


■


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

July  18th,  1880,


(Reported  hy  John  Irvine.)

VISIONS  OF  MOSES — REBELLION  IN  HEAVEN — SATAN  CAST  DOWN — OUR
FIRST  PARENTS  FELL — BEFORE  THE  FALL  THEY  WERE  IMMORTAL —
AFTER  THE  FALL,  MORTAL — THE  COMMAND  TO  MULTIPLY  WAS  GIVEN
TO  TWO  IMMORTAL  BEINGS  — THIS  COMMAND  MORE  FULLY  TO  BE
CARRIED  INTO  EFFECT,  AFTER  THE  RESURRECTION,  ETC,


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the  con-
gregation to  a  portion  of  the  word
of  God,  that  was  given  unto  Moses
before  he  delivered  the  children  of
Israel  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt*  It
may  be  well  for  me  to  mention,  be-
fore reading,  that  Moses  received
many  communications,  by  visions
and  by  revelation,  before  he  was  sent
from  the  land  of  Midian  to  visit  his
brethren  who  were  in  bondage  in
Egypt,  He  beheld,  in  these  visions,
many  great  and  inportant  events,
some  of  which  took  place  in  the
spirit  world.  Among  other  things
which  he  saw  was  the  pre-existence
of  the  children  of  men,  and  also  the


rebellion  that  took  place  among  the
great  family  of  spirits  before  the
world  was  made ;  and  in  this  vision
the  Lord  thus  speaks  to  him :

"  And  I,  the  Lord  God,  spake  unto
Moses,  saying,  that  Satan  whom
thou  hast  commanded  in  the  name
of  mine  Only  Begotten,  is  the  same
which  was  from  the  beginning,  and
he  came  before  me  saying  :  Behold
I,  send  me,  I  will  be  thy  son,  and  I
will  redeem  all  mankind,  that  one
soul  shall  not  be  lost ;  and  surely  I
will  do  it.  Wherefore,  give  me
thine  honor.  But,  behold,  my  be-
loved Son,  which  was  my  beloved
and  chosen  from  the  beginning,  said


VISIONS  OV  j£TC


287


unto  me,  Father,  thv  will  b<*  d&fca.
and  the  glory  he  thine  Ibve^er.
Wherefore,  because  that  Satan  re-
belled against  me,  and  sought  to  de-
stroy the  Agency  of  man,  which  I,
the  Lord  God,  had  given  him,  and
also  iuni  I  should  give  unto  him
KKn£  ^vn  power,  by  the  power  of
v;.urv;  Only  Begotten,  I  caused  that
should  he  cast  down,  and  he  be-
came Satan,  yea,  even  the  devil,  the
father  of  all  lies,  to  deceive,  and  to
blind  men,  and  to  lead  them  captive
at  his  will,  even  as  many  as  would
not  hearken  unto  my  voice.  And
now,  the  serpent  was  more  subtle
than  any  beast  of  the  field  which  I,
the  Lord  God,  had  made.  Ami
Satan  put  it  into  the  heart  of  the
serpent  (for  he  had  drawn  away
many  after  him),  and  be  sought
also  to  beguile  Eve,  for  he  knew  not
the  mind  of  God,  wherefore  he
sought  tiie  destroy  the  world,  and
he  said  unto  the  woman,  Yea,  hath
God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  every
tree  in  the  garden?  (And  he  spake
by  the  mouth  of  the  serpent.)  And
the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  We
may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of
the  garden  ;  but  of  the  fruit  of  the
tree  which  thou  beholdest  in  the
midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath  said,
Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall
ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die.  And  the
serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye
shall  not  surely  die  3  for  God  doth
know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof
then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and
ye  shall  be  as  Gods,  knowing  good
and  evil."

These  few  words  which  I  have
read  from  the  "Pearl  of  Greaf,  Price,"
were  suggested  to  my  mind  immedi-
ately before  rising  to  my  feet.  The
short  history  that  is  here  given,  by
new  revelation  to  Joseph  the  Proph-
et, contains  a  vast  amount  of  infor-
mation for  so  few  words.  It  shows
the  origin  of  evil,  pertaining  to  the


inhabitants  of  this  creation.  I  do
not  suppose  that  this  was  the  first
origin  of  evil.  We  do  not  consider
that  this  creation  on  which  we  dwell
was  the  first  one  that  was  made.
We  do  not  consider  that  the  rebel-
lion which  took  place  in  heaven  prior
to  this  creation  was  the  first  rebel-
lion that  had  ever  existed.  We  do
not  consider  that  those  beings  who
rebelled  was  the  first  ones  that  ever
had  their  agency  ;  but  we  believe
that  God  has  always  been  at  work,
from  all  eternity  ;  and  that  the  cre-
ations which  he  has  made  are  innu-
merable unto  mem  No  man  is  ca-
pable of  conceiving  of  the  number.
And  those  creations  were  made  to
be  inhabited  by  rational,  intelligent
beings,  having  their  agency.  But
this  seems  to  be  the  origin  of  evil  so
far  as  the  inhabitants  intended  for
this  earth,  and  who  were  then  living
in  heaven,  were  concerned.  They
had  their  agency  ;  and  when  I  speak
of  the  inhabitants  that  dwell  in  hea-
ven, pertaining  to  this  creation,  I
mean  the  spirits  of  men  and  women,
I  have  no  reference  to  the  mortal
tabernacles  which  we  have  received
here,  but  I  have  reference  to  those
beings  who  dwell  within  these  taber-

!  nacles,  who  are  intelligent,  who  have
their  agency,  who  had  a  pre-exist-
ence,  who  lived  before  the  world  was
made.  The  inhabitants  of  heaven,
who  were  selected  to  come  on  this
creation,  were  agents,  just  as  much
as  we  are.  They  had  a  law  given  to
them,  just  as  much  as  we  have.  They
had  penalties  aftiixed  to  that  law,
just  the  same  as  we  have.  They

I  could  keep  that  law  given  to  them
in  heaven,  just  as  well  as  we  could
keep  a  law  given  to  us.  They  could
rebel  against  that  law,  because  of
their  agency,  the  same  as  we  rebel
against  the  laws  of  heaven,

We  have  an  account  given  here  of

'  a  personage  called  Satan,  who  stood


ass


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


up  in  heaven,  being  an  angel  of
light,  an  holy  angel,  prior  to  that
time —  who  stood  up  before  the  Fa-
ther and  the  Son,  an  d  made  a  proposi
tion  concerning  the  new  creation
that  was  to  be  made.  "  Behold/'
said  he  to  the  Father,  "  send  me,  I
will  be  thy  son,  and  I  will  redeem
all  mankind,  that  one  soul  shall  not
be  lost,  and  surely  I  will  do  it  ;
wherefore  give  me  thine  honor.1 '
This  was  the  language,  according  to
this  revelation  which  I  have  just
read,  made  use  of  by  this  angel  who
stood  in  the  presence  of  God.  But
the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,
the  First-born  of  this  great  and
numerous  family  in  heaven,  said
unto  his  Father  :  "  Father,  thy  will
be  done,  and  the  glory  be  thine  for-
ever." Then  we  have  an  account
that  the  Lord,  because  Satan  thus
transgressed,  and  because  he  sought
to  destroy  the  agency  of  man,  and
to  redeem  all  mankind,  that  not  a
soul  should  be  lost,  was  displeased
with  the  proposition.  And  why
should  he  not  be  %  An  agency  was
given  to  all  intelligent  beings ;  and
without  a  proper  agency,  intelligent
beings  could  not  receive  glory  and
honor,  and  a  reward  and  a  fullness
of  happiness  in  the  celestial  king*
dom.  There  must  be  an  agency  '
wherever  intelligence  exists,  and
without  agency  no  intelligent  beings
could  exist ;  and  because  Satan
sought  to  destroy  this,  and  to  frus-
trate the  great  and  eternal  plan  of
Jehovah,  the  Lord  was  displeased
with  him.  He  did  not  repent  of
his  rebellion,  nor  of  the  wicked  pro-
position ;  but  he  sought  to  turn
away  the  family  of  heaven — the
family  of  spirits  that,  were  in  the
presence  of  God — he  sought  to  turn
them  away  and  convert  them  to  his
plan.  But  he  did  not  succeed.  He
did  succeed  in  leading  away  about  i
one*  third  part  of  that  great  family


I  of  spirits,  because  of  their  agency.
They  hearkened  to  his  propositi' >a  ;
they  thought  it  would  be  a  very
great  and  important  thing  to  des-
troy the  agency  of  man  in  the  future
creation  that  was  about  to  be  made,
arid  to  redeem  them  all  in  their
sins,  and  consequently  they  joined
with  this  rebellious  character;  hence
came  the  fallen  angels.  What  be-
came of  them?  They  were  thrust
i  down  from  the  presence  of  God  and
the  Lamb  after  this  creation  was
made,  and  they  were  permitted  to
dwell  in  this  creation.  Finally,  one
of  those  spirits  who  kept  their  first
estate  was  placed  in  a  body  upon
this  creation,  and  likewise  a  woman;
i  and  Satan  came  before  the  woman
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  tempted
her.  What  was  his  object  in  tempt-
ing this  woman)  He  did  not  suc-
ceed in  overcoming  her  in  the  first
estate — I  mean  he  did  not  succeed
!  in  turning  her  away  from  God's
commands;  but  inasmuch  as  they
were  now  placed  under  different
circumstances — placed  in  bodies  of
,  flesh  and  bones — placed  in  the  Gar-
den of  Eden,  he  thought  that  he
i  would  assault  them  with  a  new
temptation,  to  see  if  he  could  possi-
bly overcome  them.  He  succeeded
in  overcoming  Eve,  the  woman  that
was  given  to  this  first  man,  and  pre-
vailed upon  her  to  trangress  the
law  of  heaven,  to  partake  of  the  for-
bidden fruit,  and  she  succeeded  in
leading  her  husband  to  transgress
the  same  law.  Now,  here  arises  a
question.  Did  Adam  partake  of  this
forbidden  fruit,  being  deceived  as
Eve  was  deceived  %  or  did  he  partake
of  it  knowingly  and  understand-
ingly  ?  I  will  give  you  my  views
upon  this  subject,  Adam  very  well
knew  that  his  wife  Eve,  atter  she
had  partaken  of  the  forbidden  fruit,
having  transgressed  the  law  of  God,
must  die. He  knew  this ;  he  knew


VISIONS  OF

that  she  would  have  to  be  cast  out
of  the  garden  of  Eden,  from  the
presence  of  her  husband  ;  she  could
no  longer  be  permitted  to  dwell  with
him.  Hence,  inasmuch  as  there
was  a  great  separation  threatened
between  husband  and  wife — the
wife  having  transgressed — he  con-
cluded that  he  would  not  be  sepa-
rated from  the  woman,  and  hence
he  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman
was  deceived;  he  partook  of  the  for-
bidden  fruit  to  prevent  a  separation
between  the  two,  and  fell,  even  as
the  woman  fell,  and  both  were  cast
out  together  If  one  only  had  trans-
gressed and  been  cast  out,  the  great
command  that  had  been  given  prior
to  that  time — to  multiply  and  re-
plenish the  earth — could  not  have
been  fulfilled,  because  of  the  sepa-
ration. In  order,  therefore,  that  the
command  first  given  might  be  ful-
filled, Adam,  though  not  deceived,
partook  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  was
cast  out  with  Eve,  and  hence  began,
as  far  as  possible,  to  fulfil  the  com-
mand, and  to  multiply  his  species
upon  this  earth.  There  is  one  very
important  item,  right  here,  to  be
understood,  and  should  be  thor-
oughly understood  by  every  person
desirous  of  knowing  the  truth,  and
that  is,  that  when  Adam  and  Eve
were  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  before
this  transgression  took  place,  they
were  not  subject  to  death;  they  were
not  subject  to  any  kind  of  pain,  or
disease,  or  sickness,  or  any  of  the
afflictions  of  mortality.  Now,  per-
haps those  who  are  not  in  the  habit
of  reflecting  upon  this  matter,  may
suppose  that  when  Adam  was  placed
on  the  earth,  and  Eve,  his  wife,  they
were  mortal,  like  unto  us ;  but  that
was  not  so.  God  did  not  make  a
mortal  being.  It  would  be  contrary
to  this  great  goodness  to  make  a  man
mortal,  subject  to  pain,  subject  to
sickness,  subject  to  death.  When
No.  19.


MOSES,  ETC,  939

he  made  this  creation,  and  when  he
made  these  two  intelligent  beings
and  placed  them  upon  this  creation,
he  made  them  after  his  own  like-
ness and  his  own  image.  He  did
not  make  them  mortal,  but  he  made
them  immortal,  like  unto  himself*
If  he  had  made  them  mortal,  and
subject  to  pain,  there  would  have
been  some  cause,  among  intelligent
beings,  to  say  that  the  Lord  sub-
jected man,  without  a  cause,  to  af-
flictions, sorrows,  death  and  mor-
tality. But  he  could  not  do  this;  it
was  contrary  to  the  nature  of  his
i  attributes,  contrary  to  the  nature  of
that  infinite  goodness  which  dwells
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,  to  make  a  being  subject  to  any
kind  of  pain.  At  the  time  of  the
creation,  all  things  that  proceeded
forth  from  his  hands  were  considered
very  good.  How  came,  then,  Adam
to  be  mortal!  How  came  Adam  to
I  be  filled  with  pain  and  affliction  and
;  with  great  sorrow!  It  was  in  conse-
quence of  transgression.  Hence,
the  Apostle  Paul,  in  speaking  upon
this  subject,  said,  that  by  transgres-
sion sin  entered  into  the  world,  and
death  by  sin.  Death,  then,  instead
of  being  something  that  the  Lord
created,  instead  of  being  something
that  he  sent  into  the  world,  and
by  sin;  the  Lord  suffered  it  to  come
upon  Adam  in  consequence  of  trans-
gression. Two  immortal  beings,
then,  were  placed  in  the  garden  of
Eden,  male  and  female.  Was  then
any  commandment  given  to  those
two  immortal  beings  before  the  fall!
There  was  one  commandment^
.namely:  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,
land  replenish  the  earth/'  What  I
Did  the  Lord  command  two  immor-
|  tal  beings  to  multiply  their  species  I
He  did.  In  meditating  upon  this
great  command  giveti  to  these  two
immortal  beings,  it  opens  to  us  *
field  of  reflection,  of  knowledge

Vol  XXI,


200


JOURNAL  OK  DISCQI7KSE8,


concerning  the  great  designs  of  the
Almighty,  It  imparts  to  us  a  know-
ledge that  the  Lord  our  God  in-
tend ed  that  immortal  beings  should
multiply  their  species.  Can  you
find  any  place  in  the  book  of  Gene-
sis where  our  first  parents  were
commanded  to  multiply  after  the
fall  ?  I  do  not  remember  any  such
scripture.  I  have  read  the  scripture*
very  diligently  ;  I  do  not  remember
any  such  command.  Yet  they  did
so,  and  the  consequences  were  that
children  of  mortality  were  born —
mortal  beings  came  upon  the  earth*
"W  hy  ?  Because  after  the  fall,  Adam
and  Eve  became  mortal,  and  their
species,  of  course,  were  after  the
order  of  t he  world,  mortal  in  their
nature.  As  the  parents  were  sub-
ject to  death,  subject  to  pain,  and
sorrow,  and  distress,  and  all  kinds  of
evil,  so  were  all  their  posterity.  It
was  contrary  to  the  law  of  God  for
mortal  beings  to  bring  forth  child-
ren of  immortality ;  it  was  contrary
to  the  order  of  heaven  for  mortal
beings  to  multiply  their  species  in
the  form  of  immortal  beings.  But
may  we  not  suppose  that  it  was
really  necessary,  notwithstanding
there  was  no  command  given,  that
the  children  of  mortality  should
multiply  their  species]  Notwith-
standing  the  Lord  said  nothing  to
Adam  and  Eve  tipon  this  subject
after  the  fall,  so  tar  as  it  written,
yet  we  may  suppose  it  was  accord-
ing to  his  purpose  and  design  that
they  should  multiply  children  of
mortality,  even  though  Jie  gave
them  no  command  after  their  fall  to
this  effect.  They  have  continued  to
<Lo  so,  and  their  children  after  them,
in  all  of  their  generations,  until  the
present  time,  and  will  continue  to
de  so  in  future  generations,  until
the  earth  has  filled  the  measure  of
4ts  creation,  according  to  the  num-
ber of  souls  that  existed  before  the

:  at


world  was  organized,  in  the  family
of  the  two-thirds  who  kept  their
first  estate.

But  will  the  time  come  in  the
endless  duration  of  the  future,
when  our  first  parents  will  fulfill
that  command  which  was  given  to
them  while  they  were  yet  children
of  immortality)  In  other  words
will  the  time  ever  come  when  Adam
and  Eve  will  become  immortal  and
carry  out  the  command  that  was
given  to  them  in  the  days  of  their
first  immortality  ?  I  answer,  yes  ;
without  this,  the  command  of  God
never  could  be,  in  all  respects,  ful-
filled. Though  there  should  be
hundreds  of  thousands  of  millions,
or  more,  of  the  descendants  of  those
mortal  beings  come  here  upon  the
earth,  the  command  is  not  fully
complied  with  ;  though  he  may  have
begotten  sons  and  daughters,  Cain,
Abel,  Seth  and  many  others  for
some  nine  hundred  years  and  up-
wards, yet  all  the  sons  and  daughters
he  begat  while  he  was  mortaf  here
upon  the  earth  did  not,  in  all  re-
spects, fulfill  the  command  given  to
him  while  an  immortal  being.  That
has  to  be  fulfilled  after  Adam  and
Eve  are  resurrected  from  the  grave.
Have  they  yet  been  resurrected  $  I
think  so.  There  were  a  great  many
that  were  resurrected  at  the  time  pf
the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Christ
was  the  first  fruits  of  the  resurrec-
tion, and  then  there  were  a  great
many  Saints  who  came  forth  out  of
their  grayes  and  were  resurrected,
and  permitted  to  enter  into  the
celestial  glory  and  dwell  at  his  right
hand.  Among  the  number,  I  have
no  doubt  hut  what  our  first  parents
Adam  and  Eve,  were  permitted  to
come  forth  and  enter  into  celestial
glory;  and  I  have  no  doubt  but
what  they  have  been  fulfilling  the
commandment  given  to  them  before
they  felL Nearly  two  thousand


VISIONS  OF  MOSES,  ETC


291


years  have  passed  since  the  first
resurrection  of  the  Saints.  I  can-
not believe  that  Adam  and  Eve,
during  these  nineteen  centuries,  have
been  in  idleness.  I  cannot  believe
that  they  alone  constitute  their
whole  family;  but  I  believe  that
during  this  time  they  have  been  ful-
filling literally  the  commandment
that  was  given  to  them  in  the  morn
of  creation,  and  as  immortal  beinjjs
nave  brought  forth  immortal  sons
and  daughters  since  their  resurrec-
tion. Thus  tins  commandment  of
the  Most  High  was  not  made  void,
but  is  in  process  of  fulfillment

But  let  us  enquire  still  further
concerning  this  matter;  for  this
seems  to  open  up  another  field  be-
fore our  minds.  The  children  of
immortality  are  obliged  to  multiply,
in  order  to  fulfill  this  commandment.
Hence,  there  is  more  contained  in
the  Gospel  in  all  its  fulness  and  glory
than  what  this  world  ever  dreamt
o£  The  Christian  world,  so  called,
have  not  looked  forth  unto  the  great
future  ;  they  have  not  recognised  the
great  law  which  God  ordained  for
immortal  beings  to  bring  forth  their
species  ;  for  if  our  first  parents  must
do  this,  in  order  to  obey  the  com-
mand alent  that  was  given  before  the
fall,  so  must  their  children,  or  else
ever  be  transgressors,  one  or  the
other.  Their  children,  I  say,  never
can  fulfill  the  object  of  the  com-
mandment, that  was  given  to  im-
mortal beings,  unless  they,  as  im-
mortal beings,  so  multiply  their
species;  and  for  this  reason,  we  find
incorporated  in  the  Gospel  that  Paul
preached  this  great  saying,  "  Never-
theless, neither  is  the  man  without
the  woman,  neither  the  woman
without  the  man,  in  the  Lord/'
What !  Can  I,  can  you,  can  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  really  not  be
in  the  Lord,  and  yet  not  be  united
together  in  the  holy  covenant  of


marriage  the  male  with  the  female  ?
so  Paul  says.  It  is  a  very  curious
kind  of  saying,  however,  in  the  case
of  this  generation,  who  have  lost  the
knowledge  of  God  through  the  apos-
tasy of  their  fathers.  They  have  all
the  time  supposed  that  they  could
enter  into  a  fulness  of  the  glory  of
the  celestial  world  without  being
united  in  the  bonds  of  eternal  union.
But  it  is  not  so;  it  was  not  so  in  the
beginning.  The;  very  first  marriage
that  was  ever  known  in  this  crea-
tion, was  not  a  marriage  between
the  children  of  mortality,  but  was
a  marriage  consummated  by  divine
authority,  by  divihe  power.  It  was
a  marriage  between  two  immortal
beings.  No  other  marriage  could  be
so  important,  so  essentially  neces-
sary, to  the  inhabitants  of  this  crea-
tion, as  the  first  one  celebrated  in
the  beginning.  What  do  you  think,
Christians  of  the  nineteenth  century,
w3\o  belong  to  the  various  denomi-
nations 1 — what  are  your  views  in
regard  to  marriage?  Your  looks
inform  us.  Your  articles  of  faith
inform  us.  The  disciplines  that  you
have,  for  the  government  of  your
churches,  inform  us  that  when  mar-
riage is  performed  among  you,  it  is
between  two  mortal  beings,  and  they
are  only  married  till  death  shall
separate  and  part  them.  Oh !  how
different  from  the  first  marriage  on
record  between  two  immortal  per-
sonages, whose  days,  inasmuch  as
they  keep  the  commandments  of
God,  were  never  to  end,  but  their
lives  were  to  be  endless  or  eternal
The  Latter-day  Saints  have  a  differ-
ent form  of  marriage  from  these  sec-
tarians* We  have  a  marriage  in  our
church,  between  the  male  and  female,
which  reaches  forward  to  the  end*
less  ages  of  eternity;  we  do  not  con-
sider a  marriage  of  very  great  im-
portance, unless  is  takes  hold  of
eternity. We  do  not  believe  in


■


292


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


these  marriages  which  arc  to  remain
in  force  barely  while  this  mortal
thread  of  existence  continues;  we  do
not  believe  in  a  marriage  that  must
be  broken  up,  dissolved  and  divorced
by  that  tyrant  called  death.  Death
has  nothing  to  do  with  dissolving
marriages — I  mean  those  marriages
that  are  performed  according  to  the
inind  and  will  of  God.  Death  may
come  in  and  separate  the  two  for  a
short  season,  but  it  does  not  dissolve
the  marrigeties.  If  Eve  dies  before
her  husband,  Adam,  she  is  not
divorced  from  him,  neither  is  he
divorced  from  her,  but  she  considers,
while  dwelling  in  a  celestial  para-
dise, that  she  has  legally  and  law-
fully a  husband  in  the  flesh  on  the
earth,  Adam,  if  he  still  continues
to  live  on  the  earth,  while  Eve  has
taken  her  flight  to  the  eternal  world,
considers  that  he  has  a  wife  in  hea-
ven, though  separated  for  a  short
time  from  hen  She  still  is  his  wife,
and  will  be  his,  until  he  himself
shall  fall  into  the  grave,  and  even
that  does  not  dissolve  the  marriage
tie.  The  great  redemption  wrought
out  through  the  only  begotten  Son
— the  great  redemption  that  reclaims
Adam  and  Eve  from  their  graves,
restores  them  also  from  this  short
period  of  separation  that  has  taken
place  by  reason  of  death;  it  restores
them  again  to  each  other's  society,
as  husband  and  wife  ;  and  they  will
remain  in  that  relationship  while
eternity  shall  endure.

But  here  arises  another  question,
— one  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the
children  of  men  of  all  generations,
and  that  is,  are  there  any  marriages
that  God  will  recognize  which  he  is
not  the  author  of?  In  other  words,
supposing  that  two  persons  in  the
Boman  Catholic  church,  in  the  Greek
church,  iu  any  Protestant  church,  or
two  persons  that  do  not  belong  to
any religious denomination,  are


married  by  a  minister,  by  a  justice
of  the  peace,  by  any  person  profess-
ing to  have  authority  among  ment
to  celebrate  the  marrige  ceremony
— have  they  any  claim  upon  each
other  when  death  separates  them  ?
According  to  their  own  covenants
they  do  not  The  minister  only
married  them  till  death  should
them  part.  When  death  comes
along  and  separates  these  two  per-
sons their  marriage  covenant  has  ex-
pire* I;  it  has  run  out,  it  is  at  an  end,
But  inquires  one,  will  not  the  Lord
permit  them  to  live  together  as  hus-
band and  wife,  after  the  resurrec-
tion 1  Why  should  he  1  If  he  had
joined  them  together,  according  to
the  marriage  ceremony  that  was
administered  to  the  first  pair  of
immortality,  then  they  could  claim,
each  other,  after  the  resurrection  ;
but  inasmuch  as  the  ceremony  was
performed  by  an  uninspired  man,
not  sent  of  God,  and  having  no
power  to  seal  on  earth  that  it  should
be  sealed  in  heaven,  of  course  their
marriage  covenant  expires,  that  is
the  eternal  end  of  their  association.
Now,  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  not
willing  to  go  according  to  the  tradi*-
tion  of  the  sectarian  denominations
of  the  earth ;  but  we  desire  this
great,  this  important  ceremony  to  be
performed  so  that  it  may  be  endu-
ring, so  that  it  never  shall  have  an
end,  but  last  while  eternal  ages  shall
last.

How  came  we  to  obtain  any  know-
ledge upon  this  subject  1  Not  of
our  own  wisdom,  not  by  searching
the  scriptures  of  truth.  If  God  had
not  revealed  himself,  had  not  given
instructions  upon  this  important
point,  we  should  be  in  ignorance,  the
same  as  all  the  rest  of  the  world  ■  and
our  marriages,  like  them,  would  only
be  for  time.

Another  important  question  arises
right  here,  in  relation  to  those  mar-


TISIONS  OF  MOSES,  ETC,  293


riages  administered  without  autho-
rity ;  it  is  this.  Many  of  you  Latter-
day  Saints  when  you  embraced  this
Gospel  in  Great  Britain,  in  Scandi-
navia, in  various  parts  of  the  United
States,  and  among  the  various
nations— were  men  having  families,
wives  and  children ;  you  were  mar-
ried by  the  laws  of  the  respective
nations  among  whom  you  dwelt ;
you  were  married  till  death  should
separate  you  ;  you  were  not  married
for  eternity.  When  you  came  up
here  to  this  land  you  began  to
inquire  more  fully  into  the  nature  of
the  marriage  covenant.  You  found
that  there  should  be  an  eternal  cove-
nant, an  eternal  union.  The  ques-
tion then  arises,  will  your  former
marriage  be  sufficient  ?  Not  at  all.
You  would  have  no  wife  in  the
morning  of  the  resurrection,  no  chil-
dren that  would  be  yours  legally  and
lawfully.  Whyl  Because  your
marriage  was  not  legal,  only  legal  so
far  as  the  laws  of  the  land  were  con-
cerned, only  legal  according  to  the
traditions  of  men.  What  should  i
you  do,  then,  in  order  that  you  may
be  legally  married,  in  order  that
your  marriage  may  stand  the  test  in
the  judgment  day,  in  order  that  you
may  have  claim  upon  your  families
after  the  resurrection  J  You  should
have  the  ceremony  performed  again.
Every  couple  that  was  married
abroad,  among  the  nations,  must  be
re-married,  not  by  mans  authority,
but  by  divine  authority.  Your
covenants  should  be  eternal,  and  ,
sealed  by  divine  authority,  and  then
you  will  have  a  claim  upon  each
other.  But  what  about  your  child-
ren, that  were  begotten  while  you
were  yet  among  the  nations  ?  Can
you  claim  them  in  the  morning  of
the  resurrection  ?  No :  you  cannot,
unless  they  are  sealed  to  you  by
proper  authority — your  sons  and
your  daughters  must  be  sealed  to  I


you,  by  one  having  authority  from
God  ;  otherwise  you  have  no  claim
upon  them.  Why?  Because  they
were  begotten  under  a  marriage
with  which  the  Lord  had  nothing  to
do,  only  to  suffer  it ;  he  suffered  it
for  a  wise  purpose,  that  the  human
species  might  not  be  destroyed,  or
come  to  an  end  upon  the  earth  ;  but
as  for  commanding  them  he  had
nothing  to  do  with  that  ;  conse-
quently, not  onlyyour  husbands  and
wives  have  to  be  re-married,  by
divine  authority,  but  all  of  your
children,  that  were  born  to  you,
under  the  old  marriage,  must  be
sealed  to  you  in  order  that  you  may
claim  them  in  the  morning  of  the
resurrection.

But  this  opens  up  another  field,  I
am  talking  to  some  who  have  a  sec-
ond wife.  You  lost  your  first  wife,
did  you  not,  and  you  re-married
according  to  the  laws  of  the  nations?
What  about  these  two  wives?  one
living  and  the  other  dead ;  perhaps
the  dead  one  was  just  as  good  as  the
living;  perhaps  the  person  that  died,
before  you  gathered  here  to  these
mountains,  was  morally  as  good  as
any  Latter-day  Saint,  lived  up  to  all
the  light  and  knowledge  which  she
was  in  possession  of,  yet  she  was  not
married  to  you  by  divine  authority
— what  of  her?  Must  she  stand
aside  in  the  resurrectiou  1  and  the
second  wife,  because  she  happens  to
live  and  to  receive  the  Gospel,  and  to
gather  up  from  among  the  nations,
into  the  mountains,  where  the
authority  to  adminster  these  ordi-
nances is  revealed — must  she  sup-
plant the  first  one  that  happened  to
fall  into  her  grave  before  she  heard
these  things!  Must  the  first  one
remain  without  her  family,  without
her  children,  according  to  the  order
that  exists  in  the  eternal  world,  while
the  second  one  enjoys  all  these
things  because  she  happened  to  live


294  JOURNAL  OF

a  little  longer?  What  do  you  think
about  it  1  Are  there  no  provisions
made  for  the  first  wife  that  has
fallen  asleep  just  as  much  as  there  is
for  the  second  t  for  God  is  without
respect  of  persons,  so  far  as  people
are  honest  and  obedient;  and  though
people  may  fail  to  receive  the  fulness
of  the  blessings,  pertaining  to  the
Gospel,  because  it  might  not  be  sent
to  them  and  they  fall  asleep,  yet
God  was  not  so  short-sighted,  in
laying  of  the  plan  of  salvation,  that  he
made  no  provisions  for  them,  He
did  make  provisions  for  them ;  and
in  what  way  1  That  the  living  shall
act  for  the  dead;  this  is  the  provision,
Hence,  we  read  concerning  one  of
the  sacred  and  holy  ordinances,
called  baptism,  that  the  saints  in
the  Corinthian  church,  in  ancient
times,  were  baptised  for  those  that
were  dead.  What  was  the  object  of
this?  The  object  was  that  eternal
blessings  might  be  bestowed  upon
those  who  were  dead,  because  of  the
actions  of  the  living  in  their  behalf,
providing  that  the  dead  would  re-
ceive what  was  done  for  them  by
the  living.  The  same  great  Being
that  ordained  the  principle  of  bap-
tism for  and  in  behalf  of  the  dead,
also  ordained  eternal  union  through
other  sacred  ordinances  referring  to
the  man  and  the  woman,  not  only
for  the  living  but  also  for  the  dead,
that  they  might  be  benefited  not  only
by  the  actions  of  the  living  in  bap-
tism, but  also  by  the  acts  of  the  living
in  relation  to  the  marriage  covenant;
one  is  just  as  consistent  as  the  other.
If  there  is  any  great  principle  that
has  a  bearing  upon  the  eternal  wel-
fare of  the  human  family,  any  great
ordinance  necessary  to  be  attended
to  that  will  give  them  a  right  and
title  to  eternal  blessings,  it  matters
not  whether  it  be  baptism,  or  the
laying  on  of  hands,  or  any  other
orninance  which  God  has  instituted,


DISCOURSES*

it  will  be  recognized  in  the  eternal
heavens.  Well  did  the  Apostle  say,
"Neither  is  the  man  without  the
woman,  neither  the  without  the
man  in  the  Lord-"  He  understood
the  principle.

But  shall  we  carry  this  one  step
further?  I  have  spoken  of  these  two
women,  one  dying  without  hearing
the  Gospel,  the  other  having  all  the
privileges  of  the  Gospel,  pertaining
to  every  blessing  relating  to  eter-
nity, Now  if  the  living  can  act  for
the  dead,  by  proxy,  in  other  w  ords,
if  the  Lord  our  God  gives  a  com-
mandment, to  his  living  Saints,  to
administer  in  all  of  these  ordinan-
ces for  and  in  behalf  of  the  dead,
then  the  dead  will  have  claim  upon
these  sealing  powers  and  ordinances,
the  same  as  though  they  were  living.
But,  says  one,  I  see  one  difficulty
here.  What  is  it?  Why,  if  these
two  women  come  forth  in  the  resur-
rection, and  these  ordinances  are
recognized  in  heaven,  the  man  would
have  two  wives  at  once  in  the  eter-
nal world,  and  that  would  shock  our
consciences  very  much  !  Well,  the
Lord  is  not  particularly  anxious  that
your  consciences  should  not  be
shocked.  He  is  not  going  to  swerve
from  the  principles  of  eternal  truth
in  order  that  your  consciences  or  tra-
ditions may  not  be  in  the  least  de-
gree disturbed.  He  is  not  going  to
vary  from  this  law,  he  ordained  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
in  order  to  suit  yours  or  anybody
else's  conscience,  But,  says  one,
that  would  be  preaching  up  plu-
rality, for  th^e  that  are  brought
forth  in  the  eternal  world  Two
women  would  go  into  the  same
family,  and  be  wives  for  all  eternity;
and  as  von  have  said  that  the  Lord
1  commanded  this  multiplication  to
take  place,  when  they  were  immor-
tal beings,  then,  of  course*  both  of
these  wives  would  raise  up  post  exit


in  all  ages  of  eternity,  being  imnior-  j
tal  personages,  and  thus  fulfil  the
great  and  first  commandment.  Now,
says  one,  these  are  the  consequences
that  grow  out  of  the  doctrines  you
are  teaching.  I  admit  they  are  ;
perhaps  you  may  be  willing  to  admit
the  truth  of  this,  so  far  as  eternity
is  concerned,  and  those  that  have
left  here  without  hearing  the  Gospel.
But  let  me  ask  a  question  here — Is
it  any  more  right  tor  two  women  to
claim  the  same  husband,  after  they
come  forth  from  the  grave,  than  it  is
for  two  women,  here  in  time  living
on  this  earth,  to  claim  a  man  as  their
husband]  If  one  is  right,  the  other
is  right  also  j  ami  if  the  latter  is  not
right,  then  the  first  doctrine  that  I
have  named  is  not  right

But  I  have  not  got  through  with
this  subject  There  are  other  points
to  be  considered,  I  have  only  spok-
en of  two  women.  Now,  says  one,
here  is  a  woman  who  survives  her
husband  and  marries  a  second  hus-
band. The  second  husband  receives
the  Gospel  and  comes  into  the
Church;  the  first  husband  died
without  ever  hearing  it.  What  are
you  going  to  do  with  him  ?  Do  you
suppose  that  God,  iu  laying  down
the  great  plan  of  salvation  would
forget  to  make  any  laws,  provisions,
or  conditions,  in  regard  to  these  mat-
tery? Not  at  all.  He  has  ordained
that  every  man  who  is  worthy  shall
have  a  family  of  his  own  ;  but  he
never  did  ordain,  neither  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  nor  during
any  of  the  dispensations  that  have
existed  on  the  earth,  that  a  woman
should  have  two  husbands  living  at
the  same  time.  He  did  ordain  that
a  man  should  have  two  or  more
wives,  and  did  acknowledge  it,
sanction  it,  did  bless  those  that
entered  into  his  order  of  marriage  in
ancient  times  j  but  we  have  no
account  of  his  ever  approbating  the


contrary.  Well,  Inquires  one,  what
will  become  of  this  good  man  that
happened  to  be  in  this  condition?
There  are  provisions  ordained  from,
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
which  take  into  consideration  all
these  cases;  namely,  that  all  the
human  family  who  have  deid  with-
out the  law  or  between  the  dispen-
sations, when  there  was  no  divine  -
authority  on  the  earth,  shall  have  a
proper  chance,  by  the  living  acting
for  the  dead;  and  as  there  are  innu-
merable females  who  have  died  and
who  never  had  wives,  provisions  are
made  for  them  all  providing  that
they  embrace,  in  the  spirit  world
the  great  plan  of  salvation  in  all  its
fulness,

We  might  say  much  more  upon
this  subject  We  might  set  forth
before  this  congregation  a  case  some-
thing like  this  :  Here  is  a  young
man.  He  i;oes  forth  into  the  com-
munity, and  seeks  out  a  wife.  He
goes  before  those  holding  divine  au-
thority— power  to  bind  on  earth,  and
it  shall  be  bound  in  heaven — and  he
I  is  married  to  her  for  time  and  all
eternity.  By  and  bye  she  dies.  Per-
haps she  may  have  had  one  or  two
children,  perhaps  she  may  not  have
had  any  children,  as  the  case  may
be.  She  dies,  leaves  her  husband
still  in  his  youth.  Must  this  youth,
this  good  man,  the  man  that  has
kept  the  commandments  of  God
and  been  obedient  to  the  Gospel  of
the  Son  of  God — must  he  remain  all
'i  the  days  of  his  life,  perhaps  50  or  60
years  longer,  without  having  the
privilege  of  taking  another  wife,  his
first  wife  having  died?  Oh,  says
one,  the  law  does  not  forbid,  when  a
man's  wife  dies,  his  taking  another.
Suppose  he  takes  another,  what
then?  If  he  could  have  only  one
wife  after  the  resurrection  from  the
dead,  what  would  his  second  wife
,  do  ? Would  she  not  be  apt  to  say,


296


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


m  No,  sir,  you  have  a  wife,  she  is  in
her  grave,  she  was  married  to  you
for  time  and  all  eternity,  now  I
desire  a  husband  for  all  eternity
myself.  Is  there  any  provision
made  for  me  if  I  go  in  as  the  second
wile  ]"  Why,  yes.  The  provision
is  that  both  may  be  sealed  to  him
for  time  and  all  eternity  and  not
violate  the  law  of  God,

All  these  principles  that  I  have
treated  upon,  pertaining  to  eternal
marriage,  the  very  moment  that


they  are  admitted  to  be  true,  it
brings  in  plurality  of  marriage,  and
if  plurality  of  marriage  is  not  true
or  in  other  words,  if  a  man  has  no
divine  right  to  marry  two  wives  or
more  in  this  world,  then  marriage
for  eternity  is  not  true,  and  your
faith  is  all  vain,  and  all  the  sealing
ordinanecs  and  powers,  pertaining
to  marriages  for  eternity  are  vain,
worthless,  good  for  nothing  ;  for  as
sure  as  one  is  true  the  other  also
must  be  true.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY  ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  at  Logan,  Sunday  morning,

august  1st,  1880,

(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibhs.)

revelation, prophesying, predictions of  the servants  of

god,  etc.


It  is  a  common  saying  with  us,
that  the  Lord  has  set  his  hand  to
build  up  his  kingdom  ;  but,  notwith-
standing, it  is  a  true  and  a  very
interesting  one*  Let  us  turn  our
minds  which  way  we  will,  as  men
of  God,  as  Elders  in  Israel,  if  we  en*
joy  any  portion  of  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  we  cannot  help  seeing  the
hand  of  the  Lord  in  his  works  in


these  mountains  and  in  the  earth.
It  is  a  difficult  matter,  many  times,
for  men  of  the  world  to  understand
the  literal  fulfilment  of  revelation  ;
in  fact,  some  of  our  leading  men,
men  of  wisdom,  men  who  have  en-
joyed a  good  portion  of  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord — it  has  been  difficult  for
them  to  understand  the  fulfilment
of  prophecy. In  conversation  with


REVELATION,  ETC,


297


persons  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of
our  nation,  I  remember  President
Young  telling  them  that  there  would
be  a  division  in  our  nation  between
the  North  and  South,  "  But,"  said
they,  "  that  cannot  be  ;  the  stability
of  our  governmont  is  of  too  durable
a  nature  to  even  permit  of  any  such
thing."  This  is  the  way  that  our
leading  men  felt  before  the  rebellion;
this  is  the  way,  as  a  general  thing,
that  leading  men  feel  to-day.  They
cannot  comprehend,  it  is  not  in  their
hearts  to  believe  in  the  fulfilment  of
prophecy ;  they  cannot  understand
how  it  is  that  any  power  or  wisdom
that  God  can  exercise,  cau  bring  to
pass  the  prophecies  that  remain  to
be  fulfilled  We  had  examples  of
this,  as  I  have  said.  But  the  crisis
came  ;  a  four  years'  war  was  waged,
which  laid  in  the  grave  a  million
and  a  half  of  the  strength  uf  our  na-
tion, and,  as  I  have  often  said,  and
which  I  believe  is  true,  cost  them  a
debt  which  they  will  :iever  live  to
pay.  They  could  not  comprehend
this  until  it  was  over.  It  is  so  with
our  nation  to-day ;  they  cannot
comprehend,  notwitstanding  the
mighty  evidence  that  is  rolling  be-
fore them  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,
one  event  after  another  in  their  ful-
filment; but  they  cannot  realize  how
the  Lord  can  make  use  of  the  ele-
ments known  to  mankind  to  bring
about  the  destruction  of  a  nation
like  ours.  When  Brother  John
Morgan  was  speaking,  I  was  remin-
ded of  a  certain  spirit  that  arose  in
the  hearts  of  men  a  few  years  ago,
incited  through  the  oppression  of
capital  against  labor.  A  few  men
rose  up  in  Pittsburg  and  other  places
in  Pennsylvania,  and  in  three  days
destroyed  some  twenty  million  dol-
lars worth  of  railroad  property*  When
this  element  once  rises,  what  power
has  law,  what  power  have  the  offi-
cers of  the  law  or  the  government  to


j  control  it  1  It  cannot  be  controlled
by  human  power.  As  Latter-day
Saints,  we  can  in  a  measure  under-
stand, when  we  come  to  reflect  that
God  rules  and  overrules  and  can  do
anything  he  has  a  mind  to  with
regard  to  the  fulfilment  of  these
events. I  believe  the  Bible ;  I

j  believe  the  Book  of  Mormon  ■  I
believe  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
and  I  believe  that  the  predictions
they  contain  will  in  their  fulfilment
roll  upon  our  heads,  and  upon  the
heads  of  this  nation,  and  upon  the
heads  of  the  people  of  Zion,  and  the
judgment  of  God,  that  have  been
proclaimed  in  the  hearing  of  the
people  for  the  last  fifty  years,
through  the  mouth  of  Joseph  Smith
and  of  Brigham  Young  and  the  apos-
tles and  the  elders  of  Israel,  by  the
gitt  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost —
not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  what  has  been
declared  will  fall  to  be  ground  un-
fulfilled, and  the  Latter-day  Saints
ought  to  be  prepared  for  them*  I
know  many  of  these  things  look
dark  when  men  look  upon  them
with  the  natural  vision,  and  as  a
consequence  doubt  and  unbelief  fol-
low; but  when  you  look  upon  them
with  your  mind  enlightened  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  the  spirit  of  inspira-
tion and  revelation,  we  then  are  able
to  understand  them,  and  how  easily
it  is  for  God  to  bring  to  pass  the  pre-
dictions of  Ins  servants.

The  Lord,  in  a  revelation  given  to
Orson  Hyde  and  William  McClellan
in  the  early  days  of  the  Church,  in
sending  them  out  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel, told  them  that  when  they
preached  they  should  speak  as  they
were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost ;  and  that  if  they  did  not  have
the  Holy  Spirit  to  direct  them,  they
were  told  not  to  teach,  "And,"
said  the  Lord,  "  when  you  do  speak
as  you  are  moved  upon  by  the  Holy

'  Ghost,  your  words  are  the  words  of


298


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


God,  they  are  scripture,  and  they
are  the  mind  of  the  Lord  to  the
people,"  (Sec.  68.)  Many  have  an
idea  that  it  is  something  very  strange
for  men  now-a-days  to  have  revela-
tion, and  that  nobody  should  have
revelation  excepting  Brother  Taylor.
Here,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  you
are  upholding  the  quorum  of  the
Twelve  twice  a  year  in  General  Con*
ference,  besides  doing  so  at  your
quarterly  conference,  as  prophets,
seers  and  re  vela  tors,  and  you  pray  ,
for  them  twice  a  day,  and  perhaps
oftener,  and  should  it  be  anything
very  strange  if  they  should  receive
a  revelation  1  How  strange,  indeed!  j
There  are  in  this  Church  some  six
thousand  seventies,  and  four  thou-
sand high  priests,  and  for  thousand
elders,  who  hold  the  Melehisedec
priesthood,  which  is  after  the  order
of  the  Son  of  God,  besides  many
thousands  of  priests  holding  the
Aaronic  priesthood,  and  I  would  like
to  ask,  if  it  was  wrong  to  desire
revelation  %  What  business  have  we
with  this  priesthood,  if  we  have  not '
power  to  receive  revelation  ?  What
is  the  priesthood  given  for  %  If  we
do  not  have  revelation,  it  is  because
we  do  not  live  as  we  should  live,
because  we  do  not  magnify  our
priesthood  as  we  ought  to^if  we  did
we  would  not  be  without  revelation,
none  would  be  barren  or  unfruitful.
We  have  one  man  who  holds  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  and  it  is  his  business  to  ■
give  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  the
guidance  of  the  Church.  But  here
we  have  apostles  and  men  of  God,
holding  the  holy  priesthood,  acting
in  behalf  of  the  Church  in  different
parts  of  this  Territory,  and  also  in
different  parts  of  the  earth  ;  and  we  ;
have  men,  say,  acting  as  Church
agents  in  Europe,  part  of  whose
business  it  is  to  charter  ships  for  the
transit  across  the  ocean  of  tens  of  |


thousands  of  the  people  of  God  ;  is  it
the  right  of  such  men  to  have  reve-
lation from  the  Lord  to  guide  them
in  their  operations  ¥  Yes,  it  is  ;  and
I  no  man  should  undertake  to  act  in
positions  affecting  the  interests  of
Zion,  unless  he  lives  so  as  to  be  <?uid-
ed  and  directed  by  revelations  of
God.  And  every  man  who  presides
over  a  temple  should  live  day  by
day  in  the  revelations  of  Jesus
Christ  And  every  seventy,  and
every  high  priest,  and  every  man
bearing  the  holy  priesthood  should
live  in  that  way  to  get  revelation  to
guide  and  direct  him  in  his  labors.
This  idea  that  no  man  has  any  right
to  call  upon  God  and  receive  revela-
tion is  wrong,  and  it  has  been  wrong
wherever  it  lias  existed  in  any  age
of  the  world.  As  was  said  of  old,
when  a  complaint  was  made  con-
cerning certain  of  the  elders  prophe-
sying in  the  Camp  of  Israel,  so  say
I :  "  I  would  to  God  that  all  were
prophets because  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy is  the  testimony  of  Jesus,

With  regard  to  prophesying,  I
wish  to  say,  that  we  have  a  great
mauy  times  the  revelations  of  God
given  unto  us  through  his  spirit,
when  we  do  not  comprehend  what
revelation  is.  How  many  of  you
have  had  the  still  small  voice  uf  the
spirit  whisper  things  to  you,  and
when  you  have  followed  the  dicta-
tions of  that  spirit  it  has  become  in
you  a  principle  of  revelation.  I
would  not  be  here  to-day  if  I  had
not  listened  to  the  whisperings  of
that  still  small  voice  which  has
guided  me  in  my  journeyings  ;  I
never  could  have  passed  through  the
dangerous  scenes  and  incidents  of
my  life  had  I  not  followed  the
whisperings  of  the  spirit  of  the  Lord
to  me.  And  with  regard  to  our
preaching  I  will  say,  that  as  apostles
of  God  and  as  men  appointed  to  lead
!  and  guide  Israel,  we  have  a  great


REVELATION,  ETC


299


many  things  presented  to  our  minds
that  at  the  time  appear  to  be  beyond
our  comprehension.  Brother  Heber
C.  Kimball,  for  instance,  was  a
natural  prophet  j  he  would  at  times
give  utterance  to  things  when  preach-
ing under  the  influence  of  the  huly
Spirit  that  would  frighten  himself,
and  has  many  times  been  known  to  '
say  after  he  had  finished  preaching,
"  What  have  I  said  f  I  am  remind-
ed of  a  circumstance  which  occurred
in  the  early  settlement  of  Utah,  at  a
time  when  we  were  all  in  very  desti-
tute circumstances,  without  the1
shadow  of  any  reasonable  hope  for
seeing  better  times*  At  such  a  time
Brother  Kimball  in  preaching  one
day  told  the  congregation  that  many
months  would  not  pass  before  we
would  be  able  to  buy  goods  in  Salt
Lake  City  as  cheaply  as  they  could
be  bought  in  New  York  City,
When  Brother  Kimball  had  said  this
he  actually  felt  frightened  for  he
could  not  see  how  it  could  come  to  :
pass,  but  it  was  spoken  under  the
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
therefore  it  was  revelation,  I  was
thinking  to-day  of  a^tiine  many  years  1
ago,  when  President  Young  and
several  brethren  of  the  Twelve,  were
in  Logan  ;  it  was  a  time  when  a  1
railroad  up  to  this  region  was  not
even  dreamed  of,  the  time  when
Brothers  Ezra  T.  Benson  and  Peter
Maughan  presided  here  :  when  at  a
meeting  President  Young  called  upon
me  to  talk  to  the  people  assembled.
The  night  before,  however,  we  had  j
been  met  by  a  long  line  of  children
and  young  people,  from  three  up  to
twenty  years  of  age  ;  they  had  come
out  to  moet  the  prophet,  and  pre-
sented a  fine  sight.  While  talking
to  the  people  I  felt  led  to  speak  to
the  children  and  young  people  ;  and
I  told  them  that  I  wanted  them  to
remember  the  visit  which  the  presi
dent  was  making  them  because  the  |


day  would  come  when  they  were
grown  up,  when  they  would  talk  to
one  another  and  say,  that  on  such  a
day  President  Young  and  party
visited  us,  and  we  were  told  then
that  we  should  see  the  day  when  a
temple  should  be  built  in  this  place,
from  the  top  of  which  w?e  would  be
able  to  survey  the  country  around
which  would  be  occupied  by  ten
thousand  of  our  people  ;  and  you  will
say  that  this  was  told  to  us  when
brother  Benson  and  brother  Maughan
presided  here.  We  never  thought
'  ot  building  a  temple  here  at  that
time,  it  had  never  entered  into  the
heart  of  man  to  do  so.  Brother
Benson  and  Maughan  have  been  for
some  years  now  in  the  spirit  world.
To-day  you  are  engaged  building  a
temple  which  will  be  completed  and
dedicated  ;  and  when  this  shall  be
done  these  young  people  will  have
the  opportunity  of  going  to  the  top
of  the  building  and  will  then  see
what  I  promised  to  you  in  those
early  days.

I  mention  this  to  show  vou  how
things  are  presented  to  our  minds
and  given  utterance  to  in  our  public
teachings  about  which,  at  the  time,
we  have  little  or  no  idea.

When  in  the  western  country,
many  years  ago,  before  we  came  to
the  Rocky  Mountains,  I  had  a  dream.
I  dreamed  of  being  in  these  moun-
tains, and  of  seeing  a  large  fine  look-
ing temple  erected  in  one  of  these
valleys  which  was  built  of  cut  gran-
ite stone,  I  saw  that  temple  dedica-
ted, and  I  attended  the  dedicatory
services,  and  I  saw  a  good  many
men  that  are  living  to-day  in  the
midst  of  this  people.  And  I  saw
them  called  of  God  and  sent  forth
unto  the  United  States  and  to  Baby-
lon, or  what  is  called  the  Christian
world,  to  bind  up  the  law  and  seal
up  the  testimony  against  the  nations
|  of  the  earth,  because  they  had  re-


300  JOURNAL  OF

jected  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  and  of
the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth.  When  the
foundation  of  that  temple  was  laid
I  thought  of  my  dream  and  a  great
many  times  since*  And  whenever
President  Young  held  a  council  of
thebrethrenof  the  Twelve  and  talked
of  building  the  temple  of  adobe  or
brick,  which  was  done  I  would  say
to  myself,  **  No,  you  will  never  do
it;"  because  I  had  seen  it  in  my
dream  built  of  some  other  material.
I  mention  these  things  to  show  you
that  things  are  manifested  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  sometimes  which
we  do  not  know  anything  about,
only  as  they  are  given  by  the  Spirit
of  God.

I  will  say  to  Israel  who  are  here
to  day,  we  should  take  hold  of  this
work  in  earnest  and  build  this  tem-
ple and  redeem  the  dead  as  well  as
the  living ;  and  have  faith  in  God
believing  that  this  is  the  work  of
God  which  will  roll  on  to  its  fulfil-
ment in  the  earth,  God  will  not
disappoint  you  in  these  the  last  days;
he  will  not  disappoint  the  wicked,  he
will  not  disappoint  the  devils  in  hell,
nor  the  angels  of  God  in  the  heaven
will  not  be  disappointed  with  regard
to  the  fulfilment  of  the  revelations  ;
whatever  may  be  the  unbelief  of
this  generation  it  will  make  no  differ-
ence with  regard  to  the  fulfilment
of  the  revelations  of  God  and  the
predictions  of  his  servants.

When  in  the  Tabernacle  at  Salt
Lake  City  on  the  24th  of  July,  in
looking  upon  the  assembled  mul-
titude and  in  contemplating  tht
magnitu  de  and  grandeur  of  the  pro-
cession, I  said  to  myself  (i  What  can
be  the  feelings  of  the  world  f 9  What
can  be  the  feelings  of  our  enemies
who  are  laboring  to  "break  up
Mormonism,"  and  who  have  for
these  many  years  past  indulged  in
the  fond  expectation, and  have


DISCOURSES.

even  gone  so  far  as  to  predict
year  after  year  that  in  a  few
years  more  "  Mormonism"  will  be
done  away.  The  world  do  not
know  what  to  do  with  "Mormon-
ism;11 the  heads  of  our  own  nation
and  the  kings  of  the  earth  are  alike
undecided,  with  regard  to  this  hand-
ful of  people  that  are  growing  up  in
these  mountains.  They  see  our
union  and  the  work  already  accom-
plished by  us;  they  see  the  elements
of  prosperity  and  power  manifested
in  this  people,  and  although  they  do
not  say  it  themselves  it  is  a  fact,  the
spirit  of  fear  to  a  degree  is  taking
hold  of  them,  they  are  afraid  that
the  *'  Mormons"  tell  the  truth  when
the  say  the  God  of  heaven  has  set
his  hand  again  for  the  last  time  to
establish  his  rule  and  government
in  the  earth,  which  is  destined  to
become  a  great  kingdom  and  fill  the
whole  earth.  The  great  men  of  the
earth  are  not  ignorant  of  the  exist-
ence of  this  people;  they  are  studying
our  history,  and  they  are  watching
the  result  of  our  labors.  Although
we  are  located  in  the  interior  of  this
mountain  country,  and  so  recently
considered  without  the  pale  of  civ-
ilization, the  Latter-day  Saints  are
not  hid  from  view,  their  light  is  not
under  a  bushel,  but  they  are  already
known  and  talked  of  throughout  all
Christendom ;  and  this  Zion  will
continue  to  grow  and  no  power  will
hinder  it  Let  us  prepare  ourselves
and  keep  the  faith,  obey  the  com-
mandments of  God  and  exercise  faith
in  these  things  ;  and  let  our  prayer3
ascend  into  the  ears  of  the  God  of
Sabaoth  day  and  night,  for  the  ful-
filment of  these  revelations  and
prophecies.

The  Lamanites  will  fulfill  all  that
God  has  said  about  them,  and  the
Jews  will  fulfill  and  realize  all  that
has  been  said  respecting  them  and
all  that  has  been  promised  and  pre-


REVELATION,  ETC,


301


dieted  upon  their  heads  by  their
father  Jacob  and  by  the  prophets.
It  was  foretold  by  the  prophet  Moses
that  they  should  be  driven  and  des-
pised by  their  enemies,  and  that
they  should  be  cursed  of  God,  and
that  his  curse  should  follow  them
until  Christ  came;  and  that  they
would  reject  him,  and  then  they
would  be  scattered  as  corn  is  sifted
in  a  seive,  etc*  But  hear  it  all  Israel,
after  your  sorrow  and  pain  and  dis-
tress and  after  the  days  of  your  trib-
ulation, your  great  Eloheim  will
stretch  out  his  hand  and  gather  you
from  every  nation  wherever  you  are
driven,  and  he  will  bring  yuu  home
to  your  own  land,  and  you  shall  re-
build, your  temple  and  city,  and  you
shall  be  delivered  by  Shiloh  when
he  comes.  That  will  be  fulfilled;
and  all  that  God  has  said  with  re-
gard to  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,
strange  as  it  may  appear,  will  come
to  pass.  They  will,  as  has  been  said
concerning  them,  smite  the  rock,
and  the  mountains  of  ice  will  flow
before  them,  and  a  great  highway
will  be  cast  up,  and  their  enemies
will  become  a  prey  to  them;  and  their
records,  and  their  choice  treasures
they  will  bring  with  them  to  Zion.
These  things  are  as  true  as  God
lives.

When  I  contemplate  the  condition
of  our  nation,  and  see  that  wicked-
ness and  abominations  are  increas-
ing, so  much  so  that  the  whole  heav-
ens groan  and  weep  over  the  abomi-
nations of  this  nation  and  the  na-
tions of  the  earth,  I  ask  myself  the
question,  can  the  American  nation
escape  I  The  answer  comes,  No ;  its
destruction,  as  well  as  the  destruc-
tion of  the  world,  is  sure ;  just  as
sure  as  the  Lord  cut  oflF  and  de-
stroyed the  two  great  and  prosperous
nations  that  once  inhabited  this
continent  of  North  and  South  Amer-
ica, because  of  their  wickedness,  so


will  he  them  destroy,  and  sooner  or
later  they  will  reap  the  fruits  of
their  own  wicked  acts,  and  be  num-
bered among  the  past.

I  cannot  help  it ;  I  would  to  God
they  would  repent,  that  their  eyes
might  be  opened  to  see  their  condi-
tion ;  but  the  devil  has  power  over
them  ;  he  rules  the  children  of  men,
he  holds  Babylon  in  his  own  hand,
and  leads  the  people  whithersover
he  will  There  are  changes  await-
ing us,  they  are  even  nigh  at  our
very  doors,  and  I  know  it  by  the
revelations  of  Jesus  Christ;  I  know
it  by  the  visions  of  heaven  :  I  know
it  by  the  administrations  of  angels,
and  I  know  it  by  the  inspiration  of
heaven,  that  is  given  to  all  men  who
seek  the  Lord ;  and  the  hand  of  God
will  not  stay  these  things.  We  have
no  time  to  lose,

I  pray  God's  blessing  upon  the
men  working  on  the  temple,  and
his  blessing  upon  the  Saints,  that
their  hearts  may  be  inclined  to  build
them.  If  you  knew  and  understood
the  feelings  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  and  those  of  his  brethren  as-
sociated with  him,  and  the  feelings
of  the  millions  of  the  human  family
who  are  shut  up  in  their  prison
houses  we  would  not  tire,  we  would
labor  with  all  our  might  until  the
building  was  finished  and  dedicated,
and  then  we  would  labor  for  the  re-
demption of  our  dead.  Ask  Bishop
Hunter  if  he  ever  expects  to  meet
with  his  friends  and  associate  with
those  who  have  passed  away,  unless
he  redeems  them  in  the  flesh,  and
he  will  tell  you,  no.  He  could  not
mingle  with  them  if  he  did  not  re-
deem them  in  the  flesh,  I  know  the
same.  too.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you,  and  to
pour  out  his  spirit  upon  my  brethren
of  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve,  that
we  may  walk  in  the  light  and  be
guided  aright  in  all  our  ministra-


302


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUKSES.


tions.  And  I  tell  you  again  ;  God
will  not  disappoint  you ;  this  king-
dora  will  never  go  backward,  neither
will  it  ever  be  given  into  the  hands
of  anot  her  people  ;  but  it  will  rest
upon  the  shoulders  of  our  sons  and
daughters  when  Christ  comes  in  the
clouds  of  heaven*  We  have  no  time
to  thro  w  away,  or  spend  in  the  fool-
ish tl iiii^s  of  the  flesh  j  what  time  is
at  our  disposal  should  be  used  in
building  up  the  Zion  of  God,  and  in
preparing  ourselves  and  our  families
for  the  tilings  that  await  us.  Oh,  I
wish  many  times  that  the  vail  was
lifted  off  the  face  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  ;  I  wish  we  could  see  and
know  the  things  of  God  as  they  do
who  are  laboring  for  the  salvation  of
the  human  family  who  are  in  the
spirit  world ;  for  if  this  were  so,  this
whole  people,  with  very  few,  if  any,
exceptions,  would  lose  all  interest  in
the  riches  of  the  world,  and  instead
thereof  their  whole  desires  and
labors  would  be  directed  to  redeem
their  dead,  to  perform  faithfully  the
work  and  mission  given  us  on  earth  ;
so  that  when  we  ourselves  should  1
pass  behind  the  vail  and  meet  with
Joseph  and  the  ancient  apostles,  and
others  who  are  watching  over  us
and  who  are  deeply  interested  in  our
labors,  we  might  feel  satisfied  in
having  done  our  duty.

This  is  how  I  feel,  this  is  my  faith.
I  read  the  Bible,  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon and  the  Book  of  Covenants,
and  1  look  for  everything  contained
in  them  to  be  fulfilled.  We  are
making  history  day  by  day,  and  we
are  fulfilling  the  events  which  they
predicted  would  transpire  in  the
Utter  days.  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  in
vision  this  people  in  the  mountains,
exclaims :


u  Sing,  0  heavens  ;  and  be  joyful,
0  earth  ;  and  break  forth  into  sing-
ing, 0  mountains  \  for  the  Lord  hath
comforted  his  people,  and  will  have
mercy  on  his  afflicted.

"But  Zion  said,  The  Lord  hath
forsaken  me,  and  my  Lord  hath  for-
gotten me.

(t  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking
child,  that  she  could  not  have  com-
passion on  the  son  of  her  womb  f
yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will  I  not
forget  thee,"

In  the  own  due  time  of  the  Lord
all  things  spoken  by  the  prophets
will  be  literally  fulfilled.

I  pray  God  to  help  us  to  do  our
duty  and  to  help  us  to  feel  interested
in  our  labors  in  tne  flesh.  And  as  a
closing  remark,  seeing  that  this  is
election  time,  I  will  say,  do  not,  my
brethren,  allow  the  spirit  of  conten-
tion and  dissension  to  creep  in  among
you.  I  am  ashamed  of  some  of  our
people  who,  iu stead  of  using  their
powers  and  influe  nee  in  en  deavoring  to
unite  the  people,  go  to  work  and  raise
strife,  and  the  result  is  that  in  some
of  our  cities  an  opposition  ticket  is
gotten  up,  and  our  own  people  in
these  places  divide  one  against  the
other.  I  say,  shame  on  the  elder  or
man  holding  the  priesthood,  the
authority  delegated  to  him  by  high
heaven,  who  will  do  this  thing  j  the
heavens  are  displeased  with  such  a
man,  and  unless  he  repents  he  will
certainly  be  found  numbered  with
those  who  are  arrayed  against  God
and  his  kingdom  on  the  earth.  We
have  the  whole  world  against  us,
besides  many  evil  spirits  to  contend
with,  and  we  certainly  should  not
divide  one  against  another.

May  God  bless  Israel,  is  my  prayer,
through  Jesus  Christ.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Deu\  l:l;ed  in  The  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

SEPT.  19th,  1880.


(Reported  hy  John  Irvine.)

A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY — THE  AUTHORITY  OF THIS  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC,


It  is  with  peculiar  feelings  that  I
arise  to  at] dress  this  congregation
who  are  assembled  this  afternoon.
Ail  event  in  regard  to  myself  has
this  day  happened  that  generally
only  happens  once  iu  the  course  of  a
mans  life.  Fifty  years  ago  to-day  I
was  baptized  into  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
Hence,  it  might  be  said  that  it  is  in
reality  a  year  of  jubilee,  so  far  as  I
am  concerned — I  mean  that  the  past
year,  which  is  the  fiftieth  year  of
my  membership  in  the  Church,
closing  with  to-day,  has  been,  indeed
and  in  truth,  a  year  of  Jubilee.

There  is  another  thing,  connected
with  these  fifty  years  in  the  Church,
that  is  also  pleasing  to  your  humble
servant  Sixty-nine  years  ago  to-
day I  was  born  into  this  world,
making  this  day  a  double  birth-
day to  myself.  How  very  thankful
I  ought  to  be  for  this  great  privilege
which  has  been  bestowed  upon  me.
The  hearing  of  the  fulness  of  the
everlasting  Gospel,  yielding  obedi-
ence to  the  same,  and  entering  into
the  Church  ani^xngdom  of  God,  in


my  early  youth,  certainly  is  a  bles-
sing that  is  worthy  of  all  thanks  and
praise  to  my  Father  who  is  in  hea-
ven, who  granted  this  privilege  to
me  in  my  youth.  There  were  many
scores  of  millions — yes,  hundreds  of
millions  of  the  inhabitants  of  our
globe  that  did  not  enjoy  this
privilege.

It  seems  that  the  Lord  our  God,
some  fifty  years  ago  and  a  little  up*
wards,  saw  proper  to  organize  his
kingdom,  to  establish  it  on  the  earth
by  the  ministration  of  holy  angels,
and  by  the  revelations  of  his  Spirit,
and  by  sending  down  authority  from
the  heavens  to  minister  here  on  the
earth,  and  by  bringing  forth  that
great  and  precious  record,  the  Book
of  Mormon,  and  causing  the  same
to  be  printed  for  the  benefit  of  all
mankind.  How  great  a  privilege
conferred  on  me,  to  come  to  the  un-
derstanding of  the  contents  of  that
book  when  I  was  but  nineteen  yean
of  age  !  How  great  a  privilege  to
live  in  a  day  and  age  of  the  world
when  God  has  again  revealed  him-
self to  the  children. of  m^n  j  There


304  JOURNAL  OF

have  been  many  periods  of  time
since  the  creation  in  which  the  heav-
ens, in  an  especial  manner,  have
been  favorable  to  the  children  of
men,  by  sending  communications
and  revelations  from  on  high.  But
a  long  time  had  intervened,  during
which  no  such  privilege  had  been
granted  to  mortal  man.  So  far  as
the  nations  of  the  Eastern  Hemi-
sphere were  concerned,  upwards  of
seventeen  centuries  had  passed
away,  during  which  they  were  left
in  darkness,  having  no  legally  au-
thorized minister,  no  one  that  could
legally  baptize,  or  administer  the
Lord's  Supper,  or  build  the  Church
of  God,  or  administer  in  any  of  the
ordinances  of  his  Gospel;  that  was  a
long  time  for  the  nations  to  be  left
in  darkness.  So  far  as  our  Western
Hemisphere  is  concerned,  they  were
not  left  quite  so  long  a  period  with-
out information  from  the  heavens.
Some  fourteen  hundred  years  and
upwards  had  passed  away,  on  this
Western  continent,  during  which
the  people  were  left  in  darkness ;
hence,  the  whole  earth  for  fourteen
centuries,  at  least,  had  no  Gospel
preached  by  divine  authority,  no  j
Church  of  the  living  God  in  any
quarter  thereof — so  far  as  we  are  ac-
quainted. It  is  true,  that  daring
these  fourteen  centuries  the  nations
had  a  book  that  contained  the  history
of  the  Gospel  as  it  was  preached  in
ancient  times — a  book  called  the  Bi-
ble, But  a  book  containing  the  his-
tory of  the  Gospel  is  one  thing,  and
the  power  and  authority  to  adminis-
ter the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  is
another  thing;  they  are  entirely  dis-
tinct A  book,  itself,  authorizes  no
man,  under  the  whole  heavens,  to
build  up  the  Church  of  Christ ;  it
authorizes  no  man  to  preach  the
Gospel  No  man  ever  receives  divine
authority  by  means  of  an  ancient '
book  that  was  given  to  prophets  and


DISCOURSES*

inspired  men  centuries  before  he  was
born.  We  never  knew  of  the  Lord's
calling  men  by  ancient  books.  If
the  Lord  calls  any  one  In  this  day,
it  is  by  a  new  revelation,  not  a  reve-
lation given  1800  years  ago,  How
inconsistent  it  would  be  to  suppose
that  a  man  is  now  called  to  sit  in
the  presidential  chair  of  the  United
States,  because  we  have  the  history
that  Washington  once  sat  in  that
chair.  Would  that  authorize  any
person,  among  the  scores  of  millions
of  the  population  of  these  States,  to
go  and  teke  possession  of  that,  chair,
and  undertake  to  administer  in  the
office  of  a  president  over  this  great
people?  The  thing  would  be  so
ridiculously  absurd,  that  the  people
would  rise  up  universally  and  con-
demn any  such  imposition.  So  in
regard  to  the  things  of  God,  God  is
a  God  of  order.  And  if  mankind
have  an  order  in  relation  t©  authority
to  administer  in  governmental  affaire,
how  much  more  the  Lord  ?  Has  he
not  as  much  wisdom  as  his  creatures?
Is  the  Lord  so  much  beneath  his
own  creation  that  he  would  prefer
illegality  to  legality?  that  he  would
let  any  one  assume  the  authority
and  power  without  calling  him  to  an
account  in  the  great  judgment  day  f
"  But,"  inquires  one,  <(  how  do  yon
know,  Mr.  Prati^  but  what  the
Lord  has  called  some  one  during  the
many  centuries  that  you  say  the
people  have  lived  in  darkness?  How  do
you  know  but  what  he  has  authorized
servants  and  ministers,  to  proclaim
his  Gospel  among  the  children  of
men  T  Now  this  is  a  very  import-
ant point.  I  do  not  blame  those
who  have  not  considered  this  sub-
ject, in  putting  such  a  question.  It
is  perfectly  reasonable  that  they
should  inquire  how  a  person  may
know  what  grounds  we  have  for
supposing  that  there  has  been  no
one  commissioned  with  divine  autho-


rity,  during  the  fourteen  centuries
that  have  rolled  over  the  heads  of
the  people,  until  the  Lord  sent  his
angel,  upwards  of  fifty  years  ago,
and  restored  the  authority.  There '
are  various  reasons  that  can  be  ad-
vanced to  prove  that  the  earth  has
been  destitute  of  any  such  authority.
One  reason  is,  that  among  the  three
or  four  hundred  millions  of  Christen*
dom,  or  those  who  profess  to  be  the
followers  of  Christ,  we  find  one  uni-
versal belief  among  them,  and  they
have  acted  upon  that  belief,  namely:
that  God  gives  no  new  revelation  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  during
their  day.  That  is  enough  for  me  ;
it  is  all  the  evidence  that  I  would
want,  although  there  is  an  abun-
dance of  other  evidence  ;  but  that  is
sufficient  for  me  to  know  that  God
never  sent  them.  "  But,"  enquires
one,  "  may  not  a  person  be  sent  of
the  Lord,  be  divinely  commissioned,
and  yet  no  revelation  be  given  in  his
day  ]"  I  answer,  impossible,  impos-
sible! *'  But,11  you  may  still  further
inquire,  "may  not  others  who  re-
ceived divine  revelation  in  ancient
times,  have  communicated  that  au-
thority to  their  cotemporaries  who
outlived  them  1  And  may  not  those
cotemporaries,  thus  receiving  divine
authority,  have  conferred  it  upon
others  still  younger,  and  they  upon
others  1  And  thus,  may  not  the  au-
thority have  been  handed  down  by
a  regular  succession  of  ordination,
from  the  days  of  the  apostles  to  our
own  period  of  time?'  I  will  say
that  would  be  possible,  just  the  same
as  the  Church  of  God,  in  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era,  deliver-
ed the  authority  to  preach  and  ad-
minister ordinances  from  one  to  ano-
ther, among  the  various  nations  of
the  earth  -  it  was  continued  along
during  the  whole  of  that  century —
just  as  easily  it  could  have  continu-
ed, the  second  century,  and  the
No,  20.


third,  and  each  succeeding  century
down  to  our  own  time.

Here,  then,  arises  another  question
— may  not  the  authority  have  thus
been  transferred]  I  answer — where
has  there  been  an  unbroken  succes-
sion of  that  same  authority  that  was
administered  in  the  first  century?
I  will  tell  you  where  the  succession
was  broken.  In  the  very  period
that  new  revelation  ceased  to  be
given  to  the  human  family,  no  fur-
ther succession  could  be  continued.
It  would  be  impossible  for  any  per-
son to  be  ordained  with  divine  au-
thority, for  instance,  to  the  apostle-
ship,  unless  there  was  some  person
that  had  authority,  and  had  really
obtained  divine  intelligence,  by  new
revelation,  from  the  heavens,  that
such  authority  should  be  conferred
upon  some  other  person.  When  did
divine  revelation  cease?  Where
shall  we  go  for  testimony  upon  this
subject  t  So  far  as  the  inhabitants
of  the  eastern  portions  of  our  globe
were  concerned,  divine  authority
ceased  about  the  close  of  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era.  Why
did  it  cease  ?  Because  we  have  no
account  of  any  new  revelation  having
been  given  after  tht  close  of  that
century  ;  and  when  new  revelation
ceased,  divine  callings  ceased;  divine
authority  ceased  ;  persons  ceased  to
confer  that  authority  in  succession  ;
because,  for  this  obvious  reson,  they,
without  new  revelation,  did  not  know
whom  to  call ;  they  did  not  know
who  should  be  authorized  to  receive
the  apostleship,  or  any  other  calling.
Every  person,  during  the  first  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  era,  who  was
ordained  with  authority  and  power
to  administer  in  the  ordinances  of
the  Gospel,  was  ordained  by  the
spirit  of  piophecy  and  revelation.
Timothy  was  a  young  man,  com-
pared with  many  of  the  apostles;
He  only  received  the  calling  be-

VoL  XXI.


306


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


stowed  upon  him  through  the  laying
on  of  the  hands  of  the  servants  of
God,  or  of  those  who  were  authorized,
by  new  revelation,  to  administer
and  to  confer  authority  upon  him.
Thus  it  is  written  in  this  good  hook
(the  Bible)  that  Paul,  who  was  au-
thorized as  an  apostle,  called  Timo-
thy by  virtue  of  the  spirit  of  revela-
tion and  prophecy. "  Neglect  not,"
said  Paul,  "  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,
which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy
with  the  laying  of  the  hands  of"  the
presbytery." And  when  we  speak
of  missions,  in  those  early  periods  of
Christianity  no  person  assumed  to
go  on  a  mission  among  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth,  unless  he  was
sent,  unless  he  was  set  apart.  Even
as  great  a  man  as  the  Apostle  Paul
had  no  authority  to  go  forth  as  a
missionary,  only  by  the  laying  on  of
the  hands  of  thepeisons  who  admin-
istered to  him.  Hence,  it  is  written
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  the
Holy  Ghost  said  unto  certain  proph-
ets that  were  in  the  Church  at  Anti-
och,  "Separate  me  Barnabas  and
Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have
called  them," Here  is  a  new  reve-
lation, Saul  could  not  be  separated
and  set  apart  to  any  work  of  the
ministry,  only  as  the  Lord  called
hiin ;  and  that  calling  was  made
known  to  the  prophets  that  were  in
the  Church  at  Antioch. If  perad-
venture,  a  man  had  been  called  by
the  spirit  of  revelation  and  prophecy,
and  set  apart  by  the  laying  of  the
hands  of  a  prophet  or  apostle,  to  be
an  especial  minister  to  the  nations
of  the  earth,  there  would  arise  still
another  great  question  to  be  solved,
in  regard  to  whether  that  man,  thus
set  apart,  could  fulfil  the  object  of
his  mission  without  new  revelation  1
I  say  that  it  would  be  utterly  im-
possible. No  man  can  fill  a  mission
acceptably  before  the  heavens,  un-
less God  should  give  to  him  revela-


tion, from  time  to  time,  to
him  in  all  his  missonary  labors*  We
have  abundant  testimony  in  the  New
Testament  concerning  this  matter.
Even  when  aome  of  the  rery  greatest
revelators  that  we  have  any  record
of,  undertook  to  do  things  of  their
own  accord,  they  were  led  directly
different  from  their  own  judgments,
in  regard  to  their  missionary  labors*
Paul  had,  at  a  certain  time,  a  great
desire  to  visit  a  certain  place  ;  such
desire  arose  from  his  own  natural
judgment;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  for-
bade him.  Here  it  required  a  new
revelation  to  know  whether  his  own
inclinations  should  be  followed  or
not.  Again,  we  find  that  the  reve-
lations of  the  Most  High  were  very
necessary,  in  the  case  of  the  travels
of  these  missionaries,  among  the  in-
hibitants  of  the  earth,  Philip  had
done  a  great  work  in  the  city  of  Sa-
maria- He  had  succeeded  in  con-
vincing large  numbers,  concerning
Jesus,  and  had  baptized  them,  and
organized  a  great  church  in  the  city
of  Samaria.  One  would  have  thought,
that  after  having  performed  labors
of  such  magnitude,  he  would  be
required  to  stay  among  that  people,
and  administer  to  them;  but  no;  the
Lord  gave  a  new  revelation  to  the
man  Philip.  He  said,  "  Arise  and
go  toward  the  south,  unto  the  way
that  goeth  down  from  Jerusalem
unto  Gaza,  which  is  desert"  In
other  words,  "  leave  your  present
field  of  labor ;  you  can  do  more  good
somewhere  else-"  Now,  a  man  left
to  his  own  judgment,  without  new
|  revelation,  would  not  want  to  go
somewhere  else;  his  own  inclinations
would  be  to  stay  where  so  many  had
received  his  testimony.  But  no  ;  the
Spirit  of  God  thought  differently.
"Arise  Philip,  go  unto  the  south
country."  He  was  not  told  what  he
should  do  in  the  South  country,  but
he  started  oflF  according  to  the  new


A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY,  ETC


30T


Tevelatiom  And  after  journeying  a
short  distance,  he  saw  a  chariot  before
him,  probably  driving  along  at  a
slow  pace,  and  it  required  another
revelation.  The  old  one  that  he  got
awhile  before,  requiring  him  to  go
to  the  south,  he  had  already  begun
to  fulfil.  But  while  he  yet  journe-
yed, he  did  not  know  his  further
duty;  and  if  God  had  not  given  him
new  revelations,  he  would  have  gone
forth  blindly  in  his  missionary
labor.  But  another  revelation
came,  "Go  near  and  join  thyself
to  his  chariot."  He  therefore
obeyed,  and  when  he  arrived  at  the
chariot,  he  found  a  man  reading
not  the  new  Testament,  but  the
law  and  the  prophets.  Philip,  being
wrought  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
said  unto  this  man,  "Understandest
thou  what  thou  readestf  "How
can  J,'*  said  the  man  in  the  chariot,
except  some  man  should  guide  mef
And  Philip  began  to  explain  unto
Jiim,  the  things  that  he  happened  to
be  reading  from  the  prophecies  of
Isaiah,  concerning  Jesus,  and  Philip
was  invited  into  the  chariot.  They
jrode  along  until  they  came  to  where
there  was  water  of  sufficient  depth
to  attend  to  baptism,  for  it  seems
that  Philip  had  converted,  or,  in
other  words,  had  proved  by  his
arguments  that  Jesus  was  the  very
Christ,  and  the  man  desired  baptism
.and  the  chariot  stood  still,  and
Philip  went  down  into  the  water
.and  baptized  him*  Now  Philip  had
no  authority  to  confirm  by  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands,  as  is  evident,  in  the
case  of  those  who  were  baptized  in
the  great  city  of  Samaria,  There
was  great  rejoicing  there  because
Philip  had  baptized  them,  but  none
had  received  the  Holy  Ghost*  till
another  authority,  higher  than  that
of  Philip,  came  and  laid  hands  upon
.  them  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Crhost ;  having  baptized  these  peo-


ple, he  could  go  no  further ;  he  could
not  administer  the  blessing  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  and  hence,  havin  2;  ful-
filled the  object  of  the  two  revela-
tions on  this  subject,  the  Lord  had
another  place  for  him.  He  did  not
go  there  of  his  own  accord,  but  it
required  a  very  powerful  manifesta-
tion to  get  him  away  from  that
water;  the  scriptures  testify  that
££  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away
Philip,  that  the  eunuch  saw  him  no
more ;  and  he  went  on  his  way
rejoicing.w  Have  you  ever  heard
anything  of  the  kind  in  these  days,
where  men,  in  fulfilling  their  mis-
sions, have  been  caught  away  to
some  othet  place  1  "But  they  that
wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew
their  strength  ;  they  shall  mount  up
with  the  wings  of  eagles,"  says  the
Prophet  Isaiah.  Philip  must  have
been  borne,  as  it  were  upon  eagle's
wings.  Now  if  ft  person — a  man
light  enough,  I  mean— could  get  on
an  eagle's  wings  and  be  carried
through  the  air,  it  would  be  a  very-
good  representation  of  some  of  those
that  wait  upon  the  Lord,

I  mention  these  various  circum-
stances—and might  mention  scores
of  others — to  show,  that  without  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God,  to  impart
revelations,  no  man  could  administer
to  his  fellow  man,  no  man  would
have  the  authority  to  administer.
This  brings  me  back  to  the  state-
ment I  have  already  made.  You
recollect  the  question  is,  can  it  be
proved,  or  is  there  any  evidence
that  there  has  been  any  man  called
to  the  ministry  among  all  the  nations
during  the  long  period  to  which  I
have  referred  1  We  take  their  own
testimony.  They  say  that  there  has
been  no  revelation  since  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era.  Who
says  so?  The  whole  Catholic
church  to  begin  with,  and  the  Greek
Church,  another  branch of  the


3DS


JOURNAL  of  discourses.


Christian  church  so  called,  arid  then
the  Protestants  that  protested
against  those  two  branches,  and
came  out  from  among  them,  have
continued  the  same  false  traditions,
that  no  new  revelation  is  needed —
that  the  last  revelation  which  was  \
intended  for  the  human  family,  was
given  towards  the  close  of  the  first
century  of  the  Chrristian  era.  They
do  not  seem  to  know  how  such  an
expression,  if  admitted,  cuts  them
off  from  all  authority  and  power
which  are  divine  ;  they  do  not  seem
to  know  that  they  cannot  possibly
he  ordained  by  proper  authority,
unless  God  speaks  again  j  they  do
not  seem  to  know  that  the  writings
of  men  who  are  dead  and  gone,
centuries  ago,  do  not  authorize  them
to  preach  the  Gospel,  nor  give  them
any  divine  authority  to  administer
its  ordinances.  Hence  you  see  the
impossibility  of  there  being  a  regu-
lar succession  from  generation  to
generation,  because  of  the  want  of
new  revelation,  A  great  many
other  testimonies  might  be  brought
to  prove  this  fact,  but  this  one  is
sufficient.  "  Well  then/'  says  one,
if  your  arguments  be  true,  if  your
belief  be  correct,  there  has  been  no
Christian  church  on  the  earth  for
many  generations.  We  can  come
to  no  other  conclusion  ;  there  is  no
half-way  business  about  it.  We
come  to  testify  that  there  has  been
no  church  on  the  earth  that  God  has
recognized  as  his  church  for  the  last
fourteen  centuries,  at  least;  and
among  the  European  nations  and
the  nations  of  Asia  and  Africa  there
has  been  none  since  the  close  of  the
second  century  of  the  Christian  era.
What  a  woeful  condition  it  is  for
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  be  in.
We  would  be  in  the  same  condition
that  they  are,  if  God  had  not  con-
descended again  to  give  new  [
revelation ; Jand  this  brings  me  |


to  the  subject  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon. ™  Y

Fifty-three  years  will  have  passed
away,  next  Wednesday  morning,
the  22nd  day  of  September,  since
the  gold  plates  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon were  delivered  into  the  hands
of  a  boy,  by  the  name  of  Joseph
Smith,  a  fanner's  boy,  an  illiterate
boy,  uneducated  in  the  higher
branches  of  learning,  uneducated  in
regard  to  what  is  contained  in  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  uneduca^
ted  in  the  dogmas  and  creeds  of
men,  uneducated  in  all  branches  of
science,  except  it  be  some  of  the
first  principles,  the  rudiments  of
education,  as  taught  in  the  common
schools  of  the  State  of  New  York.
I  say,  fifty  three  years  have  almost
expired  since  this  great,  this  marvel-
ous, this  wonderful  event  happened;
since  an  angel  of  God  delivered
sacred  records  into  the  hands  of  an
illiterate,  common  youth,  not  yet
twenty-two  years  of  age.  Such  was
the  beginning,  as  it  were,  of  a  great
revelation,  I  will  not  say  the  pre-
cise time  of  the  beginning  ;  for  God
prior  to  this  time,  had  given  revela-
tion to  this  youth,  on  many  occasions.
The  first  one  that  he  gave  to  him
was  in  the  spring  of  1820,  before
Joseph  Smith  was  of  the  age  of
fifteen.  Then  a  wonderful  revela-
lation  was  given  to  him,  the  first  one
he  ever  received.  In  a  great  and
glorious  open  vision,  in  answer  to  his
prayers,  there  was  the  manifestation
of  two  of  the  great  personages  in
the  heavens — not  angels,  not  mess*
engers,  but  two  persons  that  hold
the  keys  of  authority  over  all  the
creations  of  the  universe.  Who
were  they  ?  God  the  Etejnal  Father
and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  through
whom  God  the  Father  made  the
worlds  !  These  glorious  personages
descended  from  heaven  -  two  person*
ages  whose  countenances  outshone


A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY,  ET£


309


the  sun  at  noonday  ;  two  personages
clothed  with  a  pillar  of  light  round
about  them,  descended,  stood  before
this  lad,  and  revealed  thomselves  to
him-  He  saw  their  countenances  ;
he  saw  the  glory  of  their  personages ;
he  heard  the  glorious  words  that
proceeded  from  the  Father,  as  he
pointed  to  his  Son  and  said,  to  Jo-
seph, "  This  is  my  beloved  Son  in
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  This
was  a  new  revelation  ;  something
different  from  what  had  been  made
manifest  for  a  great  many  centuries,
according  to  the  declarations  of  the
articles  and  creeds  of  men.  How
often  I  have  read  the  declaration  of
King  James'  translator  of  the  Bible,
wherein  King  James  is  represented
as  the  head  of  the  church,  and
wherein  the  Bible,  as  translated  by
those  that  were  chosen  and  appointed
for  that  purpose,  was  intended  for
the  light  and  benefit  of  the  children
of  men  ;  and  for  fear  that  mankind
would  cavil  on  the  subject  these
uninspired  men,  the  translators,  in
connection  with  those  who  were  in
their  council,  concluded  to  tell  the
people  that  this  was  the  whole  canon
of  scripture;  in  other  words,  we  have
translated  sixty-six  books,  and  they
are  compiled,^  about  to  be  compiled
and  printed  for  the  benefit  of  man-
kind :  and  these  sixtv-six  books  of
the  Old  and  New  Testament  are  the
only  books  that  Christians  should  1
receive,  the  only  revelation  that
they  should  have  to  guide  them  in
all  their  future  lives.  The  people
were  just  simple  enough  to  believe
what  they  said,— just  simple  enough
to  take  it  for  granted,  because  learned
men,  that  were  not  inspired  of  God,
had  made  this  unqualified,  unproved
declaration.  Now,  "  we,  the  Church
of  England,  must  get  up,  besides
these  66  books,  some  'Articles  of
Faith1 — some  thirty-nine  Articles  we
will  invent We  have  got  no  pro-


phets among  us  to  write  these
'  Articles, — no  inspired  revelator  sent
from  God  ;  and  therefore,  we  will
originate  out  of  our  own  hearts  some-
thing that  will  prevent  the  people
from  receiving  any  new  revelation.
We  will  cunningly  tell  them  that
these  6G  books,  called  the  Bible,
contain  all  the  revelation  that  God
ever  gave  to  man,"  What  further
have  you  to  say  in  your  thirty-nine
articles  1  "  We  say  that  every  per-
son that  does  not  limit  and  confine
his  faith  to  the  sixty-six  books  of
the  Old  and  New  Testament,  or  if
he  undertakes  to  receive  any  other
revelation,  he  is  to  be  expelled  from
our  church.  That  is  what  is  said —
not  directly,  but  indirectly.  In  other
■  words,  every  person  who  pretends  to
be  a  prophet,  he  is  not  to  be  a  per-
son considered  worthy  of  belonging
to  our  church/1  Has  any  other
church  but  the  Church  of  England
adopted  these  false,  soul-destroying
delusions  ?  Yes,  a  great  many  others.
They  have  invented  articles — not
exactly  thirty-nine,  but  articles  of
faith,  creeds  the  are  called  in  some
instances,  and  disciplines  in  others,
and  so  on.  What  are  the  objects  of
these!  They  are  not  revelation;
God  had  nothing  to  do  with  giving
them,  men  wrote  them  out  of  their
own  uninspired  hearts,  but  they  were
all  very  careful  to  take  up  the  ideas
inculcated  in  the  days  of  King  James,
namely,  that  the  sixty-six  books  of
the  Old  and  New  Testament  were  to
he  their  rule  of  faith,  and  be  their
guide  and  nothing  else  was  to  be
received  as  inspired.  Oh,  how  blind  !
If  they  did  but  know  it  these  very
declarations  in  these  articles  and
creeds  would  cut  them  off  from  all
authority.  But  they  were  just  sim-
ple enough  to  receive  such  a  false
doctrine ;  just  simple  enough  to
accept  their  want  of  authority
before  God ;  and  thus  by  their  own


310  JOURNAL  OF

acknowledgement,  by  their  own
printed  works  they  prove  to  the
whole  world  that  God  did  not  estab-
lish their  churches,  that  God  did  not
establish  among  them  the  ancient
order  of  things ;  for  the  ancient
church  of  the  living  God  was  never
destitude  of  the  spirit  of  revelation.

If  the  Lord  had  left  us  in  this
condition,  we  would  have  been  wan-
dering in  darkness  to  tins  day.  The
people  who  are  here  assembled  this
afternoon,  would  be  no  better  off
than  the  Protestant  denominations,
bo  better  off  than  the  Greek  and
Bom  an  Chatolic  C  hurches  that  have
existed  from  generation  to  genera-
tion, during  many  long  centuries  of
apostaey.  But  God  having  looked
upon  the  darkness  that  covered  the
earth,  and  the  minds  of  the  people,
having  looked  upon  the  people  that
were  honest  in  heart,  and  seeing  the
dilemma  in  which  they  were  placed
— without  inspiration,  without  any
knowledge  that  comes  from  heaven
in  their  day,  without  any  one  who
has  the  right  and  the  authority  from
heaven  to  baptize — concluded  to  fall-
£1  that  which  was  predicted  by  the
ancient  apostles,  namely,  to  send  an
angel  again  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  It  was  a  long  time  for  the
earth  to  be  left  without  angels.  Per-
haps some  of  you  may  inquire,
"  Why  did  the  Lord  leave  the  peo-
ple so  long  ?  Why  did  so  many  gen-
erations pass  away,  and  no  Church
of  Christ  on  the  earth,  no  prophets,
no  revelatory  etcT  It  was  because
of  the  apostasy  of  the  people  ;  and
then  after  the  apostasy  commenced,
near  the  close  of  the  first  century,
they  killed  off  the  apostles,  prophets
and  revelators — killed  off  the  Saints
who  embraced  the  true  Gospel,  and
the  world  became  so  exceedingly
wicked  and  corrupt  that  the  Lord
did  not  see  proper  to  send  them  any
other  message. But  perhaps  you


DISCOURSES.

may  inquire,  must  all  those  people
who  have  lived  so  many  generations
ago,  go  down  to  an  endless  perditioa
in  the  etenal  worlds,  because  no  ono
had  authority  on  the  earth  to  ad-
minister Gospel  ordinances  to  them?
No;  the  Lord  is  more  just  than  this.
Every  man  and  every  voman  that
has  not  had  the  privilege  of  hearing
the  Gospel  in  this  life,  preached  by
one  holding  divine  authority,  will-
have  the  opportunity  of  hearing  it
in  the  world  to  come;  so  that  there
is  no  partiality,  so  far  as  the  preach-
ing of  the  Gospel  is  concerned.  But,
says  one,  there  is  a  little  partiality,
it  seenjs  to  me  j  for  some  have  the
privilege  of  hearing  the  Gospel  in
this  life,  instead  of  waiting  till  the
next  But  the  Lord  in  looking  upon
the  various  generations  upon  the-
earth,  judges  after  this  wise  :  that
when  a  people  become  so  darkened,
through  their  own  apostaey,  through
their  own  wickedness,  through  their
shedding  the  blood  of  righteous  men,
the  Lord  sees  proper,  because  of
this,  to  make  them  wait  If  the-
true  authority  had  been  revealed^
during  the  time  of  the  administra-
tion of  these  corrupt  men,  the  Gospel
would  have  been  banished  again
from  the  earth.  For  instance,  if
God  had  sent  the  angel  in  the  second
century  of  the  Christian  era,  to  re-
new his  church  on  the  earth,  what
would  have  been  the  consequence?
There  would  have  been  no  place
upon  all  the  face  of  the  globe,  where
the  people  would  have  suffered  such
a  church  to  exist..  If  he  had  sent  the
angel  in  the  third  century,  or  in  the-
fourth,  or  in  any  of  the  centuries  in-
terventing,  before  religious  liberty  was
established,  the  consequence  would
have  been  the  shedding  of  the  blood
of  apostles,  prophets  and  saints  again,
and  in  ©rder  that  they  might  not
bring  upon  themselves  this  great
condemnation  the  Lord  saw  that  it


A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY,  ETC,


311


was  far  better  to  postpone  the  send-
ing of  the  angel,  until  he  should  '
prepare,  among  the  political  govern-
ments of  the  earth,  a  nation  where
the  church  could  exist,  and  have  a  ,
little  degree  of  safety.  And  even
our  nation,  the  best  nation  on  the
earth,  having  the  wisest  laws,  laws
that  are  calculated,  if  put  into  exe-
cution, to  protect  all  religious  de-
nominations, laws  founded  upon  jus-
tice and  principles  of  equity — even
in  our  nation,  it  has  been  just  as
much  as  the  Lord  could  do,  without
destroying  the  agency  of  man  to  get
his  Church  once  more  established
on  the  earth*  See  what  persecution
has  attended  it  !  See  what  hatred  !
See  the  Saints  fleeing  before  infuri-
ated mcbs  ;  men,  women  and  chil-
dren, murdered;  prophets,  patriarchs,
apostles  and  revelators  martyred.
The  Saints  could  scarcely  And  a
resting  place  for  the  soles  of  their
feet,  after  all  the  preparation  that
was  made  by  the  establishment  of  a
great  and  free  government  No  won- .
der,  then,  that  the  Lord  did  not  be-
gin it  two  or  three  centuries  ago ;  no
wonder  that  he  did  not  begin  it  in
the  days  when  Catholicism  and  the  ,
Greek  church  had  universal  sway
over  the  eastern  continent.  The
Church  of  the  living  God,  if  it  had
been  established  then,  would  have
been  immediately  rooted  out  from
the  earth;  and  great  would  have  been
the  condemnation  resting  upon  the
nations  if  such  had  been  the  case.  But 1
now  it  lives.  Circumstances  have
changed,  and  though  the  saints  have
been  driven  from  their  homes,  and
from  their  farms,  though  they  have
been  persecuted,  and  the  lives  of
many  of  the  Saints  destroyed,  and
their  prophets  put  to  death,  yet,
notwithstanding  all  this  the  Lord
has  preserved  his  Church,  until
the  present  time.  Fifty  years
have rolled  away, and  upwards


since  the  Lord  commenced  this
great  work

!  Now,  then,  a  few  words  on  the
future.  Years  are  to  come,  as  Bro-
ther Angus  Cannon  said  to  me  while
"sitting  upon  the  seat  this  morning.
He  came  to  me,  and  I  mentioned  to
him  that  this  last  year  was  my
fiftieth  in  the  Church — in  other
words — that  I  had  been  in  the
Church  fifty  years,  A  peculiar  kind
of  answer  was  made  by  Brother
Cannon.  Said  he,  "Brother  Pratt,
I  hope  you  may  have  millions  of
days  or  anniversaries  of  your  birth-
day/' I  thanked  him  very  much.
Well,  now,  let  me  begin  to  speak  up-
1  on  this  subject*  God  has  promised
eternal  life  to  his  children,  "That
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should
not  perish  but  have  eternal  life,"
Now,  I  can  see  a  consistency  in  the
good  wishes  of  Brother  Cannon,
upon  this  subject,  I  hope  for  eternal
life,  I  have  had  this  hope  for  the
last  fifty  years.  If  I  obey  the  com-
mandments of  heaven,  if  I  receive
Wis  sayings,  and  abide  in  his  word,  I
hope  never  to  die,  as  it  is  promised
in  the  New  Testament  But,  says
one,  did  not  Jesus  die  ?  and  he  kept
all  of  his  Father's  sayings.  Did  not
the  apostles  die]  and  they  kept
the  Fathers  words.  And  were  not
all  the  ancient  Saints  subject  to
death  t  And  they  kept  the  sayings
of  the  Lord.  Yes,  they  suffered  what
is  termed  the  death  of  the  body.
There  is,  however,  quite  &  difference
between  the  death  of  the  outward
tabernacle,  andthedeathofthe  spirit*
In  other  words,  the  spirit  that  God
has  placed  within  the  tabernacle  will
live  forever,  and  those  who  have  the
opportunity  of  dwelling  in  the  next
world,  iu  light,  in  glory  and  in  a
fullness  of  happiness,  get  what  is
termed  eternal  life  ;  there  is  *\o  end
to  it  Consequently  it  can  no  ':be  ex-
pressed fully  in  the  language  of


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


brother  Cannon  that  millions  ot  such
anniversaries  might  be  enjoyed.  But
there  is  something  still  greater  in  the
expression  of  eternal  life,  than  that
of  a  few  millions  of  years.  It  is  some-
thing that  has  no  end.  It  may  have
a  beginning.  A  person  may  begin
to  exist  in  this  fleshly  tabernacle  as
I  commenced  ray  existence  here  on
this  earth  sixty-nine  years  ago  to  day.
That  was  the  beginning  of  my  exist-
ence here  in  this  world  ;  but  there  is
such  a  thing  as  a  person  having  a
beginning  to  his  existence  in  the
flesh,  and  yet  have  no  end*  Those
persons  that  were  translated  in  the
twinkling  of  an  eye  in  ancient  days
did  not  have  a  separation  of  body
and  spirit  They  were  changed  ;
they  were,  by  the  power  of  Almigh-
ty God,  wrought  upon  instantane-
ously; they  were  changed  from  mor-
tality to  immortality;  but  still  retain
their  flesh  and  bones.  Now,  I  would
ask,  is  there  any  end  to  their  ini- 1
mortal  tabernacles  when  thus
changed  ?  There  is  a  beginning  but
no  end.  Their  spirits  are  combined
with  their  bodies  forever.  I  have
this  hope.  You  Latter-day  Saints
have  the  same  hope,  so  far  as  eternal
life  is  concerned.  You  expect  it,
you  pray  for  it,  you  desire  to  have  a
life  that  is  endless;  figures  are  unable
to  express  the  endless  duration  of
ages  that  are  to  come.  Eternal  life
is  said  to  be  the  greatest  gift  of  God
unto  the  human  family.  There  are
many  gifts  of  God,  but  this  is  the
greatest  of  all.  In  the  first  place,
God  has  given  his  Son  to  die  for  the
human  family.  What  a  great  gift  |
If  it  had  not  been  for  this  gift  of  our
Heavenly  Father  to  the  inhabitants
of  our  fallen  world,  the  consequence
would  have  been  that  we  should
have  had  eternal  death.  What  are  we  '
to  understand  by  the  term  eternal
death,  supposing  that  there  had  been
no  atonement  made  ?  What  is  the


meaning  of  the  term!  Could  yom
multiply  figures  enough  if  you  were
to  take  the  figures  that  are  now  in
use  and  extend  them  in  a  line — ex-
tend them  in  a  series  so  that  the
figures  themselves  would  be  as  nu-
merous as  the  particles  of  the  globe
—would  that  express  eternal  life?  or
would  it  express  the  duration  of
eternal  death,  provided  there  had
been  no  atonement  1  No ;  it  cannot
be  expressed.  Hence  the  atonement
of  our  Savior,  which  is  the  gift  of
God  to  the  fallen  inhabitants  of  this
creation,  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all
the  other  gifts  given  unto  the  chil-
dren of  men.  It  is  because  of  this
gift  that  we  are  permitted  to  repent
of  our  sins.  How  could  there  have
been  an  individual  upon  all  the  face
of  the  globe  who  could  have  repent-
ed, provided  there  had  been  no
atonement?  Hence  you  see  that
repentance  is  the  gift  of  God,  pur-
chased by  the  atonement.  Again,
could  baptism  have  been  a  holy  ordi-
nance if  it  had  no  saying  power  in  it?
Could  it  have  been  for  the  remission
of  sins,  had  it  not  been  for  the  blood
of  the  atonement?  No.  Baptism,
then,  is  a  gift  to  the  children  of  men
as  well  as  repentance.  Would  the
laying  ou  of  hands  have  had  any
effect  upon  any  person  of  the  human
family,  in  bestowing  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  had  there  been  no  atone-
ment ?  No.  Then  that  is  also  a  rift
— the  gift  of  God  to  man,  that  his
servants  should  lay  their  hands  upon
baptized  believers,  and  that  they
should  be  baptized  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  fire.  Could  we  have
been  permitted  to  partake  of  the
Lord's  Supper  with  any  effect  what-
ever? No.  Then  it  is  also  a  gift  of
God  unto  man.  And  thus  we  may
go  through  all  the  ordinances,  that
God  ordained  from  before  the  foun-
dation of  the  world  unto  the  present
time,  and  all  of  them  can  be  called


A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY,  ETC.


313


the  gifts  of  God  unto  man  on  condi-
tions, and  some  of  them  without  con-
ditions. The  atonement  came  with-
out any  condition  on  the  part  of  man.
It  was  without  repentance,  without
faith  on  the  part  of  man.  The  atone-
ment was  something  given  through
the  pure  love  of  God  to  fallen  man,
without  any  acts  of  good  works  on
the  part  of  man.  There  are  some  of
the  blessings,  then,  that  God  has
ordained  for  the  fallen  inhabit-
ants of  our  globe  which  come  inde-
pendent of  our  works,  and  this  is  one
of  which  I  have  been  speaking.
Would  there  have  been  any  light  or
intelligence,  or  goodness  or  happi-
ness, to  be  partaken  of  by  fallen
man,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  atone-
ment %  None  at  all;  there  could  have
been  no  righteousness.  But  then,
all  the  other  gifts  that  we  receive
are  through  works,  and  by  faith  and
works  combined,  and  it  is  because  of
the  distinction  between  these  two
separate  gifts  that  many  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  erred.
Some  of  them  profess  to  believe  that
they  can  obtain  all  the  gifts  of  God
without  works,  because  of  some  of
the  sayings  of  the  ancient  apostles  ;
while  others  consider  that  work  must
be  combined  with  faith.  Now  both
of  these  ideas  are  true  when  taken
in  their  true  light.  Eternal  life  is
among  all  those  gifts  that  are  prom-
ised of  God;  such  as  the  gift  of  re-
pentance, baptism,  laying  on  of
hands,  etc*  All  these  are  not  to  be
compared  with  the  greatness  of  the
gift  called  eternal  life.  I  hope  that
all  the  Latter-day  Saints  under  the
sound  of  my  voice  may  attain  to
this,  the  greatest  of  all  the  gifts  of
God,

Now,  I  wish,  before  taking  my
seat  to  bear  my  testimony  before  the
people  here  asseembled,  I  do  know
by  the  power  of  God,  by  the  shed-
ding forth  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon


my  heart,  by  the  revelations  of  the
spirit,  by  the  many  manifestations  of
the  goodness  of  God  to  me,  I  do  know
that  God  has  sent  his  angel  from
heaven,  I  do  know  that  he  has
raised  up  the  great  latter-day  king-
dom predicted  by  Daniel  I  do  know
that  he  has  called  apostles  and  pro-
phets; that  he  has  sent  forth  his  ser-
vants divinely  commissioned,  with
power  from  on  high,  to  declare  to  the
nations  of  the  earth  the  great  and
last  message  of  mercy  unto  the  in*
habitants  thereof,  to  prepare  all  those
that  are  willing  to  be  prepared,  for
the  great  day  when  the  heavens
shall  be  opened,  and  all  the  heavenly
hosts  shall  descend  with  power  and
with  great  glory,  to  reign  here  on  the
earth,  I  do  know  that  God  by  his
power  has  gathered  together  his  peo-
ple from  the  various  nations  of  the
earth,  and  established  them  here  in
these  mountains  for  a  little  season,
for  an  especial  purpose.  And  what
is  that  purpose  ]  To  prepare  you
while  dwelling  here  in  these  moun-
tains, territories  and  regions,  that
you  may  receive  the  blessings  or-
dained for  you  in  a  future  time,  which
time  is  not  far  distant.  I  do  know
that  this  people  will  return  and  will
possess  the  land  that  God  has
promised  to  them,  even  in  Missouri,
and  in  Kansas,  and  in  the  regions
round  about  I  do  know  that  God
will  build  up  in  Jackson  County,
Missouri,  a  great,  and  wonderful,  and
beautiful  city,  that  shall  be  called
"  the  Perfection  of  Beauty,"  the  New
Jerusalem.  I  do  know  that  God  will
light  up  the  habitations  of  that  city
by  his  power,  by  his  glory,  by  a  cloud
in  the  day  time,  and  by  a  pillar  of
fire  in  the  night.  I  do  know  that
when  the  people  shall  gather  together
in  their  religious  assemblies,  as  you
are  hero  gathered  this  afternoon,
that  God  will  light  up  your  assem-
blies, by  his  divine  power  even  in


JOURNAJ,  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  night  time,  making  your  habitar
tions,  where  you  meet,  glorious  in
the  extreme.  I  do  know  that  God
will  fulfil  all  that  which  he  has
spoken,  by  the  mouths  of  his  holy
prophets,  since  the  world  began,  j
pertaining  to  this  last  dispensation
of  the  fulness  of  times,  which  will
come  to  pass  in  their  times,  and  in
their  seasons,  and  that  this  dispen-
sation will  be  far  more  glorious,  than
all  the  other  dispensations  combined
together,  before  everything  shall  be
completed,  for  the  bursting  heavens
to  reveal  the  Son  of  God,  and  all
those  that  are  with  him.  These
thin  us,  and  scores  of  other  things
that  I  might  name,  I  know  will  be
fulfilled  in  their  times  and  in  their
seasons,  and  that  all  who  are  fait] if ul
will  be  made  partakers  of  these
blessings-  Amen,


REMARKS  BY
ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF.

.It  is  not  my  purpose  at  all  to  de-
tain tins  congregation,  but  before
dismissing  I  feel  that  I  would  like  to
say  a  few  words.  We  are  not  in  the
habit  of  flattering  anv  man,  but  I
want  to  say  a  few  words  concerning
Broth  er  Pratt  If  there  is  any  man
dead  or  alive  who  has  dwelt  "longer
in  this  church  and  kingdom  than  he
has  I  do  not  know  him.  If  there  is
any  man  that  has  travelled  mure
miles  in  preaching  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  in  bearing  testimony  of  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,  I  do
not  know  who  he  is.  When  Brother
Pratt  embraced  this  Gospel  he  was  a
boy — in  one  sense  of  the  word  illiter-
ate and  unlearned,  the  same  as
Joseph  Smith  and  the  most  of  us*
Whatever  knowledge  Brother  Pratt
has  obtained,  either  of  the  learning
of  the  world  or  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  he  has  obtained  it  by  diligence
and  labor  since  he  embraced  this  I


Gospel.  I  have  been  associated  with
Brother  Pratt  myself  for  47  years,
I  have  travelled  with  him  by  sea  and
by  land,  in  foreign  countries  and  at
home,  and  I  never  saw  a  man  in  my
life  that  I  know  of  that  lias  spent  as
few  moments  idly  as  he  has,  I  have
never  seen  a  storm  at  sea  so  heavy
— even  when  shipping  seas  over  the
bow,  side  and  stern — but  what  he
would  read  his  book.  Whenever
the  breakers  became  too  heavy  he
would  simply  shut  up  the  book  until
they  were  over.  If  there  is  a  man
on  this  continent  who  is  more  at
home  in  the  starry  heavens,  in  the
astronomical  world  than  Brother
Pratt  I  do  not  know  who  he  is.
If  there  is  a  man  more  deep-
ly versed  in  mathematics  than
Brother  Pratt,  I  do  not  know  who  he
is.  There  may  be  many  men  equal
to  him  in  these  things,  but  if  there
are,  I  do  not  know  them.  How  has
he  obtained  his  knowledge1?  He
has  obtained  it  since  he  embraced
this  work.  He  has  improved  his
time.  Brother  Pratt  is  the  only
living  man  to-day  that  was  in  the
tirst  quorum  of  the  Twelve  in  its
first  organization ?  and  I  am  pleased
to  listen  to  his  testimony  of  the  Gos-
pel of  Christ ;  for  I  want  to  say  to
Brother  Pratt  and  to  all  other  men
we  all  have  to  acknowledge  this  ;
Joseph  Smith,  Brigham  Young,  the
Apostles,  and  all  men  in  this
Church  and  kingdom,  if  there  is
anything  to  us,  if  there  is  anything
about  us,  if  we  have  any  knowledge,
or  any  power,  or  any  influence,  we
have  to  give  God  the  honor  of  it.  It
is  not  of  ourselves,  Joseph  Smith
always  acknowledged  this,  as  have
all  men  in  this  Church  and  King-
dom, We  haveTbeen  called  from  the
plow,  from  the  plane,  from  the  ham-
mer— ignorant,  illiterate  boys,  and
thrust  into  the  vineyard ;  and  all
the  power  we  have,  or  ever  had,  in


A  DOUBLE  BIRTHDAY,  ETC


315


building  up  the  Kingdom,  we  have
to  acknowledge  it  as  coming  from
the  hand  of  God.  Brother  Pratt
was  one  of  the  earliest  men  who
shouldered  his  knapsack  and  traveled
through  the  American  continent  to
preach  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to
this  nation.  Frequently  he  would
suffer  from  ague  all  day  and  go  along
and  preach  his  sermon  at  night.
These  are  experiences  that  he  and
others  have  passed  through  in  the
early  rise  of  this  Church,  and  I  feel
to  thank  God  that  we  can  still  hear
his  voice  and  the  voice  of  others
who  have  been  long  in  this  Church
and  Kingdom,  I  hope  the  Lord
will  preserve  his  life  until  he  is
satisfied  with  it  He  has  lifted  up
his  voice  long  and  loud,  according  to
the  commandment  of  God  to  him,
in  beariug  record  of  this  Gospel  an  d
kingdom  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,
I  was  struck,  in  contemplating  our
own  experience,  with  some  of  the
remarks  he  has  made  to-day  with
regard  to  the  Apostle  Philip — how
our  own  experience  has  agreed  with
that  of  the  ancient  apostle.  How
many  times  have  we  been  called  by
revelation  to  go  to  the  right  and
left,  here,  there  and  the  other  place,
contrary  to  our  expectation  ?

I  will  here  relate  what  took  place  in
my  own  experience,  I  was  in
Staffordshire  in  the  year  1840.  I
was  in  the  town  of  Stanley  and  held
a  meeting  in  the  City  Hall.  I  had
a  week's  appointments  out  in  that
town.  Before  I  rose  to  speak  to
the  people,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
said  to  me,  "  this  is  the  last  meeting
you  will  hold  with  this  people  for
many  days."  I  told  the  congrega-
tion when  I  arose  what  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  had  mani-
fested to  me.  They  were  as
much  surprised  as  I  was,  I  did  not
know  what  the  Lord  wanted,  but  I
saw  the  purpose  of  God  afterwards.


The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  said  to  me,
"  Go  south."  I  traveled  eighty
miles  ;  went  into  the  south  of  Eng-
land, As  soon  as  I  arrived,  I  met
John  Benbow.  It  was  clearly  made
manifest  to  me  why  I  had  been
called  thither.  I  had  left  a  good
field,  where  I  was  baptizing  every
night  in  the  week.  When  I  got  to
this  place,  I  found  a  people — some
GOO  of  them — who  had  broken  off
from  the  Wesley  an  Methodists  and
formed  themselves  into  a  sect  called
the  United  Brethren.  I  found  that
they  were  praying  for  light  and
truth  and  that  they  had  gone  about
as  far  as  they  could  go.  I  saw  that
the  Lord  had  sent  me  to  them,  I
went  to  work  amongst  them  and
ultimately  baptized  their  superinten-
dent, forty  preachers  and  some  600
members  ;  1  baptized  every  member
of  that  denomination,  but  one*
Altogether  some  18(H)  were  baptized
in  that  field  of  labor.  I  suppose
some  of  those  then  baptized  may  be
in  this  congregation  to-day,  I  name
these  tilings  to  show  how  we  have
to  be  governed  and  controlled  by  the
revelations  of  God  day  by  day.
Without  this  we  can  do  nothing.
Many  of  our  brethren  who  were  with
us  at  that  time  and  who  came  to
this  valley,  have  passed  behind  the
vail  Eight  of  the  quorum  of  the
Twelve  who  were  in  the  flesh  and
most  of  them  with  the  pioneers,  to-
day are  in  the  spirit  world.  We  are
passing  away.

I  know  as  Brother  Pratt  has  said,
that  this  is  the  kingdom  of  God.
Israel  is  being  gathered  together.
The  revelations  of  God  are  being
fulfilled,  and  nothing  will  be  left
unfulfilled.  Therefore,  as  Saints  of
the  living  God,  let  us  be  faithful  to
our  testimony.  We  have  the  king-
dom of  God,  We  are  called  of  God
by  inspiration  and  commandment  to
warn  this  generation ?  to  preach  the


315


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


Gospel,  to  gather  the  people,  to  build
up  Zion,  to  build  temples,  to  redeem
the  living  and  the  dead,  and  to  carry
on  the  great  work  which  is  laid  upon


our  shoulders ;  and  may  God  enable
us  to  accomplish  these  things  for
Jesus'  sake.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Oct.  10th,  1S80,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gihbs.)

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY, — RESPONSIBILITY  OF  THE

SAINTS,  ETC.


There  are  many  times  when  I
feel  a  great  desire  to  speak  to  the
people  because  I  have  things  in  my
heart  that  I  would  like  to  say.  I
cannot  say  at  the  present  time  how-
ever, that  I  have  any  great  desire  to
speak,  still  I  will  bear  my  testimony
and  express  a  few  thoughts  in  my
reflections  that  are  upon  me  to-day.

I  am  happy  and  greatly  pleased
in  what  I  have  witnessed,  and  I  feel
that  the  heavens  are  pleased  with
our  proceedings  this  day.  I  feel
that  they  are  right.  The  kingdom
of  God  is  onward ;  it  is  not  back-
ward. It  is  wisdom  that  we  per-
form what  we  have  done  to-day.

The  act  of  organizing  the  council


of  the  first  presidency  of  the  church
and  kingdom  of  God,  I  have  regard-
ed as  a  most  solemn  scene,  to  see
this  mighty  host  of  priesthood  who
are  assembled  in  this  house  vote  in
such  unanimity,  and  to  see  this  vast
congregation  rise  in  a  body  with
uplifted  hands  to  heaven,  it  is  like
the  rushing  of  many  waters — there
is  power  in  it ;  there  is  power  with
this  people  ;  there  is  power  with  the
priesthood  and  in  the  ordinances  of
the  house  of  God,  And  what  we
have  done  to  day  will  have  its  effect,
it  will  have  its  effect  in  the  heavens
and  on  the  earth.  The  responsibil-
ity that  we  bear  as  elders  of  Israel,
before  the  heavens  and  before  the


earth  and  before  each  other,  is  very
great.  We  are  called  of  God  ;  we
have  been  chosen,  we  have  been
ordained  as  men  who  have  been
called  to  bear  the  priesthood  and  to
attend  to  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God,  to  preach  the  Gospel,  to
warn  this  generation,  to  build  up
Zion,  to  redeem  the  earth,  to  erect
temples  unto  the  name  of  the  Most
High  God,  to  redeem  the  living  and
the  dead,  and  to  cany  out  those
great  purposes  which  have  been
fore-ordained  before  the  world  was.
It  is  a  great  calling,  it  is  a  great
responsibility :  and  I  feel  that  we,
as  servants  of  God  and  as  elders  of
Israel,  that  we  should  try  in  our
minds  to  comprehend  these  things,

I  reflect  a  good  deal  with  regard
to  our  position,  as  was  described  to
us  to-day  by  Brother  Pratt  It  has
been  my  faith  and  belief  from  the
time  that  I  was  made  acquainted
with  the  Gospel  that  no  greater  pro-
phet than  Joseph  Smith  ever  lived
on  the  face  of  the  earth  save  Jesus
Christ  He  was  raised  up  to  stand
at  the  head  of  this  great  dispensa-
tion— the  greatest  of  all  dispensa-
tions God  has  ever  given  to  man.
He  remarked  on  several  occasions
when  conversing  with  his  brethren  :
**  brethren  you  do  not  know  me,
you  do  not  know  who  I  am"  As  I
remarked  at  our  priesthood  meeting
on  Friday  evening,  I  have  heard
him  in  my  early  days  while  con-
versing with  the  brethren,  sayf  (at
the  same  time  smiting  himself  upon
the  breast)  "  I  would  to  God  that  I
could  unbosom  my  feelings  in  the
house  of  my  friends,"  J oseph  Smith
was  ordained  before  he  came  here,
the  same  as  Jeremiah  was.  Said
the  Lord  unto  him,  "Before  you
were  begotten  I  knew  you"  etc.

So  do  I  believe  with  regard  to
this  people,  so  do  I  believe  with
regard  to  the  apostles,  the  high


priests,  seventies  and  the  elders  of
Israel  bearing  the  holy  priesthood,  I
believe  they  were  ordained  before
they  came  here  ;  and  I  believe  the
God  of  Israel  has  raised  them  up,
and  has  watched  over  them  from
their  youth,  and  has  carried  them
through  all  the  scenes  of  life  both
seen  and  unseen,  and  has  pre-
pared them  as  instruments  in  his
hands  to  take  this  kingdom  and
bear  it  off.  If  this  be  so,  what
manner  of  men  ought  we  to  be  ?  If
anything  under  the  heavens  should
humble  men  before  the  Lord  and
before  one  another,  it  should  be  the
fact  that  we  have  been  called  of
God,

I  believe  the  eyes  of  the  heavenly
hosts  are  over  this  people  ;  I  believe
they  are  watching  the  elders  of
Israel,  the  prophets  and  apostles  and
men  who  are  called  to  bear  off  this
kingdom,  I  believe  they  watch
over  us  all  with  great  interest.

I  will  here  make  a  remark  con-
cerning my  own  feelings.  After  tha
death  of  Joseph  Smith  I  saw  and
conversed  with  him  many  times  in
my  dreams  in  the  night  season.
On  one  occasion  he  and  his  brother
Hyrum  met  me  when  on  the  sea  go-
ing on  a  mission  to  England.  I  had
Dan  J  ones  with  me*  He  received
his  mission  from  Joseph  Smith  be-
fore his  death ;  and  the  prophet
talked  freely  to  me  about  the  mis-
sion I  was  then  going  to  perform.
And  he  also  talked  to  me  with
regard  to  the  mission  of  the  Twelve
Apostles  in  the  flesh,  and  he  laid  before
me  the  work  they  had  to  perform;  and
he  also  spoke  of  the  reward  they
would  receive  after  death.  And
there  were  many  other  things  he
laid  before  me  in  his  interview  on
that  occasion,  And  when  I  awoke
many  of  the  things  he  had  told  me
were  taken  from  me,  I  could  not
comprehend  them, I  have  had


T318


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOUBSES


many  interviews  with  Brother
Joseph  until  the  last  15  or  20  years
of  my  life  ;  I  have  not  seen  him  for
that  length  of  time.  But  during  my
travels  in  the  southern  country  last
winter  I  had  many  interviews  with
President  Young,  and  with  Heber
C,  Kimball,  and  Geo.  A,  Smith,  and
Jedediah  M.  Grant,  and  many
others  who  are  dead.  They  attended
onr  conference,  they  attended  our
meetings.  And  on  one  occasion,  I
saw  Brother  Brigham  and  Brother
Heber  ride  in  carriage  ahead  of  the
carnage  in  which  I  rode  when  I  was
on  my  way  to  attend  conference ;
and  they  were  dressed  in  the  most
priestly  robes.  When  we  arrived  at
our  destination  I  asked  Prest.  Young
if  he  would  preach  to  us.  He  said,
11  No,  I  have  finished  my  testimony
in  the  flesh  I  shall  not  talk  to  this
people  any  more*  But  (said  he)  I
have  come  to  see  you  ;  I  have  come
to  watch  over  you,  and  to  see  what
the  people  are  doing.  Then  (said
he)  I  want  you  to  teach  the  people
— and  I  want  you  to  follow  this  coun-
sel yourself — that  they  must  labor
and  so  live  as  to  obtain  the  Holy
Spirit,  for  without  this  yeu  cannot
build  up  the  kingdom;  without  the
spirit  of  God  you  are  in  danger  of
walking  in  the  dark,  and  in  danger
of  failing  to  accomplish  your  calling
as  apostles  ami  as  elders  in  the
church  and  kingdom  of  God.
said  he,  Brother  Joseph
me  this  principle,"  And  I  will
here  say,  I  have  heard  him  refer
to  that  while  he  was  living.  But
what  I  was  going  to  say  in  this :  the
thought  came  to  me  that  Brother
Joseph  had  left  the  work  of  watch-
ing over  this  church  and  kingdom  to
others,  and  that  he  had  gone  ahead,
and  that  he  had  left  this  work  to
men  who  have  lived  and  labored
with  us  since  he  left  us.  This  idea
manifested  itself  to  me,  that  such


And,
taught


men  advance  in  the  spirit  world.
And  I  believe  myself  that  these  men
who  have  died  and  gone  into  the
spirit  world  had  this  mission  left
with  them,  that  is,  a  certain  portion
of  them,  to  watch  over  the  Latter-
day  Saints.

I  feel  myself  as  though  we  are
blessed  of  the  Lord,  and  that  we
ought  to  be  satisfied.  I  feel  that  we
should  humble  ourselves  before  God,
that  we  should  labor  to  magnify  our
callings,  and  honor  this  priesthood
which  we  received  before  we  came
here  while  we  live  out  the  few  days
appointed  to  man  in  the  flesh.  And
I  do  hope  and  pray  God  that  we  may
magnify  our  priesthood  and  calling
while  we  tarry  here,  so  that  when
we  get  through  our  earthly  mission
and  go  into  the  spirit  world,  we  may
meet  with  Brothers  Joseph  and
Brmhaan  and  Heber  and  the  rest  of
the  faithful  men  whom  we  knew
and  labored  with  while  in  the  fiesh,
as  well  as  Father  Adam,  Enoch,
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  all
the  prophets  and  apostles  who  have
had  their  day  and  their  time  and
their  generation,  and  who  have  fin-
ished their  work  here  below  and
gone  home  to  glory.  Do  you  not
think  they  are  interested  about  us  I
I  tell  you  they  are.  And  I  desire
when  I  die,  and  my  spirit  goes  into
the  spirit  world,  to  meet  these  men
and  to  go  where  they  are ;  and  I  wish
to  live  in  that  w~ay  and  manner  so
as  to  be  worthy  of  this  blessing.
And  when  I  say  this  of  myself  I
wish  it  to  apply  to  all  Israel.  It
will  not  pay  us  apostatize  \  neither
will  it  pay  us  to  sin,  it  costs  ten
thousand  times  more  than  it  is  worth
from  beginning  to  end.  Therefore,
let  us  be  true  and  faithful  to  God,
And  inasmuch  as  we  have  voted  to-
day to  sustain  the  presidency  of  this
church  and  kingdom,  let  our  prayers
ascend  night  and  morning  into  the


ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  in  behalf
of  the  men  who  now  stand  at  our
head,  and  also  in  behalf  of  the  apos-
tles and  in  behalf  of  all  the  priesthood
of  God  in  their  place  and  station.
And  inasmuch  as  we  do  this  we  will
grow,  we  will  advance,  the  Spirit  of
God  will  be  poured  out  upon  us  I


which  will  reveal  unto  us  the  mind
and  the  will  of  God  concerning  Us*
And  Zion  will  continue  to  increase
in  power  on  the  earth,  and  eventually
accomplish  all  for  which  it  is  de-
signed, which  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen,


*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  horning,

august  1st,  1880.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS — HEAVEN  AND  EARTH  TO  PASS  AWAY — NOT
ANNIHILATED — HEAVEN  AND  EARTH  NOT  CREATED  FROM  NOTHING—
MATERIALS  ETERNAL — MATERIALS  UNDER  THE  DOMINION  OF  LAWS —
CENTRAL  AND  ORBITAL  FORCES — COMPOUND  AND  ELEMENTARY  SUB-
STANCES— EARTH  IN  THE,  BEGINNING — NO  MORTALITY,  THEN  KNOWN,
ON  THIS  CREATION— THE  FALL — THE  EARTH'S  BAPTISM  IN  WATER —
ITS  BAPTISM  IN  FIRE — ITS  BAPTISM  BY  THE  SPIRIT — ITS  JUSTIFXCA-
TI0N — ITS  SANCTIFICATION — ITS  PURIFICATION — ITS  THOUSAND  YEARS'
REST,  ETC.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the
congregation  to  a  few  passages  of
Scripture,  which  will  be  found  in
the  20th  and  21st  chapters  of  the
Bevelations,  given  to  St*  John.  In
the  20th  chapter  we  find  these
"words :  —


"And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,
and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from  whose
face  the  earth  and  heaven  fled
away :  and  there  was  found  no  place
for  them,

"And  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and
great  stand  before  God;  and  the


JOURNAL  OF


books  wore  o]>ened :  and  another
book  was  opened,  which  is  the  hook
of  life  :  and  the  dead  were  judged
out  of  those  things  which  were  writ-
ten hi  the  books,  according  to  their
works,

"Ami  the  s+ ji  gave  up  tlie  dead
which  were  in  it  :  and  death  an  J
hell  delivered  up  the  dead  whieh
were  in  them  :  ami  they  were  judged
every  nun*  according  to  their  works,

"And  death  and  hell  were  east
into  the  lake  of  lire.  This  is  the
second  death,  and  whensoever  was
not  found  writ mn  in  the  lunik  of  life
were  east  into  t!ie  lake  of  tire,'1

In  the  -1st  chapter,  commencing  !
with  tin1  h<  verse, we  read  I  hew
words  :  —

"And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a
Hew  earth  :  lor  the  first  heaven  and
the  first  earth  were  passed  away;
in nl  there  was  no  more  sea,

"And  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,
New  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from
God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a
bride  adorned  for  her  luusbftiid.

"And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of
heaven  saying,  Heboid  the  taber-
nacle uf  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  ,
dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be
his  people,  and  tiod  1 1 tinsel f  shall  be
with  them,  ami  he  their  Uod,

"And  trod  shall  wipe  away  all
tears  from  their  eyes  ;  and  there
shall  he  no  mole  death,  neither
sorrow,  nor  crying,  neit  her  shall  i
there  he  any  more  pahl  :  for  the
former  things  are  passed  away.

"And  he  that  jsat  upon  the  throne
said,  Heboid  I  make  all  things  new.  '
And  he  said  unto  me,  Write  :  for
these  words  are  true  and  faithful

''Anil  he  said  unto  me,  It  is  done.
I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  begin-
ning  and  the  end.  1  will  give  unto
him  that  is  nthirst  of  the  fountain  of
the  water  of  Jife  freely.


"  Fie  that  overcometh  shall  inherit
all  things;  and  I  will  be  his  God,
and  he  shall  be  my  son,"

It  is  a  great  and  important  under-
taking to  rise  up  before  a  congrega-
tion of  the  children  of  men,  and
endeavor  to  declare  the  words  of
eternal  life  to  tlietn.  No  man  living
can  do  this  acceptably  in  the  sight
of  God,  unless  God  is  with  him,  by
the  power  of  his  spirit  and  by  the
inspiration  thereof,  I  often  fee!  ni)
own  weakness  ami  Hit  per  feet  ion  as
a  man,  when  endeavoring  to  do  a
work  of  this  nature.  1  oftentimes
feel  In  a-!,  liiy.-i  if  I  In*  ipustioii  ■
what  am  I,  and  bow  can  I  perform
|  the  work  which  the  Lord  requires  at
my  hand,  unless  he  assists  met
Son  retimes  1  almost  feel  tit  shrink  ;
but  then  I  know,  from  past  experi-
ence, that  God  has  assisted  me,  and
I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that
he  will  continue  so  to  do,  inasmuch
as  I  am  humble  and  exercise  faith  in
him,  and  strive  to  do  his  wilt.
These  words  written  in  the  20  th

and  Lilfit,  chapters  of  the  Kevelations,
give;]  to  St,  John  on  the  Uleof  PaL-
mos.  oeeurred  to  my  mind,  a  few
j  moments  before  1  rose  to  my  feet  ;
for  it  is  the  practice  of  most  of  the
elders  of  this  church,  to  lakft  no
thought  before  hand,  what  they  shall
say,  and  it  is  very  seldom  that  t.Ho
officer  of  the  church  endeavor  to
'plan  out  in  their  own  minds  any
particular  form  of  discourse,  but
I  sometimes  the  spirit  of  the  Lord
may  suggest  certain  passages  of
scripture,  and  then  that  same  spirit
may  dictate  ami  direct,  in  regard  to
the  form  **f  words  that  shall  be  used
in  delineating  the  ideas  contained  in
those  texts.

We  are  told  in  tha  words  which  I
have  read,  thai  there  is  a  period  of
!  time  yet  in  the  future,  wherein  this
earth  upon  which  we  stand,  where


i


HEAVEN  AND  EARTH


TO  PASS  AWAY,  ETC


321


we  have  our  being,  and  from  which
we  derive  our  sustenance,  will  pass
away;  and  the  heavens  that  are  over
our  heads  will  also  pass  away;  at
the  time  this  great  event  shall  hap- 1
pen,  we  are  informed  that  a  great  |
white  throne  shall  appear ;  that  a
certain  personage  will  sit  thereon,
and  that  so  great  will  be  his  glory,
and  so  great  the  power  attending
him,  that  the  earth  itself  will  flee
away  from  before  his  presence,  ami
the  heavens,  the  literal  heavens
that  are  over  our  heads— probably
meaning  the  heavens  that  pertain  to
this  creation — will  pass  away;  the
atmosphere  and  those  things  included
in  the  atmosphere;  and  the  earth
itself,  the  solid  portions  thereof,  and
the  liquid  portions,  will  all  pass  away,
before  the  face  of  him  that  sits  upon
this  throne.  This  is  believed  not
only  by  the  Latter-day  Saints,  but
by  all  Christian  denominations,  with
very  few  exceptions.  They  believe
that  the  heaven  and  the  earth  will,
at  some  future  period  have  a  great
change  wrought  upon  them.  They
expect  that  they  will  pass  away  but
I  believe  that  most  of  them  consider
that  the  earth  will  become  annihil- 1
ated  ;  that  the  very  materials  of
which  it  is  composed  will  be  reduced
to  nothing.  I  think  that  used  to  be,
when  I  was  a  boy,  a  tenet  of  the  sec-  j
tarian  world ;  it  used  to  be  their  idea,
that  the  earth  was,  in  the  beginning,
made  out  of  nothing  by  the  word  of
God,  and  that  it  would  be  reduced  to
nothing  when  it  passed  away.

But  I  have  not  time  to  dwell  upon
the  idea  of  the  Christian  world,  and
their  views,  concerning  this  matter ;
I  shall  touch  upon  those  things  ac-
cording to  the  ideas  and  the  faith  of
the  people  called  Latter-day  Saints.
We  do  not  believe  that  the  earth
was  made  out  of  nothing,  like  the
modern  Christian  idea ;  we  have  no
such  belief ;  for  we  do  not  find  any

No,  2L


such  declaration  contained  any-
where in  the  scripture. We  do  not

I  take  it  for  granted,  because  they

i  have  incorporated  these  things  in
their  modern  theology,  in  their  doc-

j  trines,  in  their  disciplines,  in  their
church  articles,  in  their  creeds — we
do  not  receive  it  on  this  testimony ;
but  we  search  to  see  what  the
scriptures  of  truth  have  said  upon
this  subject ;  and  when  we  have
searched  them,  we  find  there  is  no
indications  whatever,  that  the  earth
was  made  out  of  nothing,  or  that
it  sprang  into  existence,  where  there
was  nothing  on  which  to  work,

We  read  in  the  first  chapter  of
Genesis  that  God  created  the  heaven
and  the  earth,  and  the  earth  was
without  form  and  void,  but  there  is
nothing  in  this  passage  that  informs
us  that  he  made  the  earth  out  of

:  nothing. Our  view  is  that  the  ele-

I  ments  out  of  which  this  and  all
other  worlds  were  made  existed  from
all  eternity ;  they  never  had  any
beginning.  There  are  a  few  indi-
viduals on  the  earth  that  make  no
profession  of  religion — some  call
them  materialists — who  believe  this

I  same  principle  ;  and  in  doing  so,  they
have  got  one  truth  incorporated
among  their  ideas,  though  they  do
not  believe  in  God,  The  materials
of  this  creation,  according  to  our
view,  and  that  which  God  has  re-
vealed to  us,  in  this  last  dispensation
have  existed  from  all  eternity*
These  materials  have  been,  from  all
eternity,  subject  to  the  command  of
the  great  Jehovah  ;  they  are  under
his  jurisdiction  ;  he  has  power  to
control  them  :  he  gave  them  laws ;
they  act  according  to  these  laws;
and  they  have  been  governed  by
laws,  so  far  as  we  have  any  know-
ledge, and  so  far  as  our  creation  is
concerned,  for  indefinate  ages  past ;
and  we  have  every  reason  to  believe

|  that  they  have  been  under  the

Vol.  XXL


322


JOURNAL  GI?  DISCOURSES


dominion  of  law,  so  long  as  there
has  been  a  Supreme  Being,  And
you  might  ask  how  long  is  that?
We  answer,  that  he  is  co-eternal  in
his  existence,  with  the  materials  of
creation  ; — one  existed  as  long  as
the  other;  and  .neither  of  theru  had
any  beginning.  There  may  have
been  an  endless  cycle  of  organizations
and  disorganizations  among  the
materials  of  nature,  governed  for  a
certain  period  of  time,  for  a  wise
purpose,  according  to  wise  and  just
and  holy  laws,  adapted  to  their  con-
dition, and  to  bring  about  the  great
purposes  of  the  great  Jehovah,  We
find  that  everything,  at  present,  so
far  as  we  have  any  knowledge  and
understanding  to  discern  the  work-
ings of  nature,  seems  to  be  under
the  dominion  of  law.  The  earth
rolls  in  its  destined  orbit  according
to  laws.  The  force  by  which  it  is
supposed  to  have  been  projected,  is
according  to  a  certain  law.  The
great  central  force  by  which  it  is
governed,  or  to  use  a  modern  word
"attracted/'  is  according  to  a  certain
law.  The  projectile  force,  so  called,
is  adapted  to  the  central  force  ;  and
it  has  rolled  in  its  destined  path,
ever  since  its  present  organization,
or  for  some  GO 00  years,  and  how
much  longer  it  has  rolled  in  that

_

path  or  orbit,  we  do  not  know.  It
had  a  beginning  in  its  present  organ-
ization, as  Moses  clearly  gives  us  an
idea.  But  in  organizing  this  world
the  Lord  did  not  call  it  into  exist
ence  from  nothing,  but  called  the
eternal  elements  that  were  spread
abroad  in  space  and  commanded
them  to  come  together,  according  to
certain  laws ;  and  the  earth  was
formed  and  placed  in  its  proper
position,  in  the  midst  of  many  other
creations  which  roll  around  the
great  central  orb, — the  sun,  .  It  was
no  small  work ;  it  required  the
<power  of  an  Almighty  Creator  to


organize  a  world  like  this,  to  adapt
it,  in  its  organization,  to  the  princi-
ple of  life,  which,  more  or  less,  per-
vades all  of  its  materials,  causing
them  to  fulfil  various  laws,  ordained
iji  relation  to  their  action,  obeying
what  are  called  chemical  laws,  in
forming  the  numerous  compounds  of
which  our  earth  is  composed.  The
solid  portions,  the  liquid  portions,
I  and  the  serial  positions,  were  all
'  formed  chemically  by  the  power  of
the  Almighty, — I  mean  the  com-
pounds which  constitute  those  por-
tions,-— and  when  we  come  to  reduce
these  compounds  to  their  elements,
we  find  upwards  of  sixty  elementary
principles,  from  which,  being  joined
together  according  to  chemical  laws,
all  the  numerous  compounds  are
formed.  Now,  these  laws  in  all
their  operations,  are  laws  given  by
the  Divine  Being.  He  it  is  that
causes  them  to  operate.  Light,
heat,  electricity,  and  every  sub-
stance combined  with  the  materials
of  our  globe,  are  all  under  the
dominion  of  numerous  laws ;  and  the
results  that  are  brought  about,  or
the  good  that  is  bestowed  upon  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  upon  t lie
animal  creation,  giving  them  life,
happiness,  and  peace — have  all  been
brought  about  by  the  wise  ordina-
tion of  these  laws,  exhibited  through
all  the  elements  of  this  creation,  I
say  it  required  an  Almighty  power
to  so  wisely  organize  these  elements ;
and  when  they  were  organized  it
required  great  wisdom  and  judgment
to  produce  the  orbital  motion  of  the
earth.  The  ascertained  velocity  that
the  earth  has  in  its  orbit,  as  it  flies
in  its  destined  course  around  the
sun,  is  between  eighteen  and  nineteen
miles  per  second.  It  not  only  re-
quires great  power  to  organize  the
elements  into  a  world,  but  it  re-
quires infinite  wisdom  to  organize
the  elements  into  flesh  as  at  present


HEAVEN  AVD  EAJtTH  TO  PASS  AWAY,  ETC.  323


in  the  animal  creation,  including
man,  to  give  life  to  the  beings  which
dwell  in  these  tabernacles,  |
This  world,  however,  is  not  now
as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  that  is
when  I  speak  of  the  beginning,  I
have  reference  to  the  beginning  of
the  earth ,  in  its  present  organiza-
tion ;  I  do  not  have  reference  to  the
beginning  of  duration,  for  it  had  no
beginning  ;  I  do  not  have  reference
to  the  beginning  of  an  endless  past,
but  I  have  reference  to  the  beginning
relative  to  our  little  globe.  In  the
beginning  of  our  creation,  the  earth
was  verj  fair,  quite  different  from
what  it  is  now.  There  were  no
children  of  mortality  upon  it,  no
animals  that  were  mortal  upon  it,  no
birds,  nothing  wherein  we  observe
life  in  this  creation  existed  in  its
mortal  state;  but  everything  that
had  life  was  immortal ;  every  bird,
fish,  fowl,  insect,  creeping  thing,
cattle,  and  man — all  were  immortal
The  earth  had  no  curse  resting  upon
it ;  the  earth  itself  was  immortal,  and
would  have  continued  in  all  its
glory,  as  it  issued  from  the  hand  of
the  Creator  to  the  present  time,
without  any  curse,  had  it  not  been
for  the  transgression  of  our  first
parents.  That  was  the  introduction
of  mortality,  of  pain  and  sorrow,
misery  and  wretchedness,  not  only
upon  man,  but  upon  all  creation  that
then  existed ;  everything  was  brought
under  the  dominion  of  the  curse.  The
curse  came  upon  man — that  being
who  could  stand  in  the  presence  of
God  and  converse  with  him  face  to
face — the  seeds  of  mortality  were
sown  in  his  immortal  body  ; — a
change  came  and  his  whole  system
was  affected  thereby.  The  seeds  of
death  were  placed  within  the  taber-
nacle of  man,  within  the  tabernacle
of  the  lion,  of  the  ox,  and  every  beast
of  the  field,  and  every  fish  ot  the  sea,
and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  A  very
great  change  then  came  over  tnis


creation.  First,  it  was  spiritual  in
all  its  blessings  and  fullness  of  life
and  glory.  Then  it  was  reduced  to  a
temporal  condition,  wherein  misery
and  wretchedness  existed.

Another  great  change  happened
nearly  two  thousand  years  after  the
earth  was  made.  It  was  baptized  by
water.  A  great  flow  of  water  came,
the  great  deep  was  broken  up,  the
windows  of  heaven  were  opened  from
on  high,  and  the  waters  prevailed
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  sweeping
away  all  wickedness  and  transgres-
sion— a  similitude  of  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins.  God  requires  the
children  of  men  to  be  baptized.
What  fori  For  the  remission  of
sins.  So  he  required  our  globe  to  be
baptized  by  a  flow  of  waters,  and  all
of  its  sins  were  washed  away,  not
one  sin  remaining.  You  were  bap-
tized, Latter-day  Saints,  for  the  re-
mission of  your  sins,  believing  in
I  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  repenting  of
your  sin  with  all  your  heart,  going
down  and  being  buried  beneath  the
liquid  grave,  you  came  forth  as  new
creatures.  So  says  the  New  Testa-
ment j  you  buried  the  old  man  with
all  of  his  wicked  deeds,  and  came
forth  out  of  the  liquid  element  born
anew.  So  the  earth  in  a  measure
Was  renewed,  not  fullv,  no  more
then  we  are  renewed  fully  by  bap-
tism ;  we  are  not  made  immortal,
when  we  come  out  of  the  waters  of
baptism  ;  we  still  retain  the  effects
of  the  fall  so  far  as  mortality  is  con-
cerned. So  does  the  earth  j  the
earth  retains  the  effects  of  sin  and
transgression  that  came  upon  its
;  lace.  But  notwithstanding  it  retains
these  effects  so  far  as  mortality  is
concerned,  yet  it  was  cleansed  in  a
measure  from  this  transgression.  But
alas  !  this  earth  has  again  become
I  corrupted.  We  are  required,  after
being  baptized  for  the  remission  of
our  sins,  to  sin  no  more,  to  live  holy
and  perfect  lives,  so  far  as  we  possi-


DISCOURSES.


324  JOURNAL  OF

bly  can,  and  to  keep  the  command-
ments of  God  iu  all  things,  and  to
walk  in  newness  of  life,  and  this  to
the  end  of  our  days*  The  earth  has
not  been  permitted  to  rest  during
the  period  of  four  thousand  years
and  upwards  since  its  baptism.
Wickedness  again  has  accumulated
upon  its  face.  The*  inhabitants  of
the  earth  have  corrupted  and  defiled
the  earth  by  their  transgression.  By
and  by  another  great  change  will
come.  As  the  earth  was  cleansed
from  its  transgression  by  baptism  in  |
water,  so  it  must  again  be  cleansed,
before  it  is  made  immortal.  It  must
be  cleansed  by  an  element  that  is
stronger  and  more  purifying  than
that  of  water,  namely,  the  element
of  fire,  Fire  must  prevail  over  all
the  face  of  this  earth.  What  for?
For  the  purpose  of  cleansing  the
earth  from  its  transgressions,  the
same  as  the  Latter-day  Saints  ex-
pect to  be  cleansed  and  purified  more
fully  than  by  baptism  in  water — by
the  baptism  of  fire  and  the  Holy
Ghost  This  is  the  promise  to  all
that  will  repent  of  their  sins  and  be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  the
game,  that  they  shall  receive  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  an-
other baptism,  more  effectual,  more  .
cleansing,  more  purifying  in  its  na-
ture, sanctifying  the  inner  man  and
the  outward  man,  and  making  him
a  new  creature.  So  this  earth  in
due  time  must  be  baptized  with  fire
first,  and  then  the  Holy  Ghost.
Fire  will  cleanse  all  the  proud  and
they  that  do  wickedly  from  its  f ace-
all  persons  that  are  corrupt,  all  sin-
ful persons,  all  disobedient  persons,
all  who  do  not  keep  the  command-
ments of  God ;  it  will  cleanse  the
earth  by  burning  them  as  stubble,
fulfilling  the  words  of  the  prophet
Malachi,  in  the  last  chapter,  which
reads  thus  :  "For,  behold,  the  day
cometh  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven,


and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that
do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble  :  and
the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them
up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that
it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor
branch."

It  seems,  then,  that  this  e*orth  has
to  undergo  a  process  very  similar  to
that  of  the  redeemed  man.  It  has
to  obey  all  the  great  sacred  ordinan-
ces of  the  Gospel,  so  far  as  its  first
pirnciples  are  concerned  ;  the  earth
has  to  undergo  a  cleansing  process,
first  by  water,  a  similitude  of  water
baptism,  and  then  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  a  similitude  of  baptism  by
fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost  which  you
receive  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands
of  those  who  have  authority.  Does
this  make  man  immortal  1  No  ;  man
still  retains  his  mortality,  even  after
he  is  baptized  with  fire  and  with  the
Holy  Ghost — his  body  is  subject  still
to  death.  It  may  be  burned  at  the
stake;  it  may  pass  away  as  the  earth
will  pass  away;  not  annihilated,  foot
one  particle  of  our  earthly  taberna-
cles shall  be  struck  out  of  existence ;
but  the  elements  may  be  separated
asunder,  they  may  mingle  jierhaps
with  other  elements — all  this  may
take  place,  even  after  we  have  been
sanctified  and  purified  by  the  bap*
tism  of  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost*
So  with  our  earth,  when  it  is  re*
newed  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  when  he
shall  descend,  as  Paul  says,  in  flam-
ing fire.  What  effect  will  that  have?
It  will  have  the  effect  that  is  spoken
of  by  Malachi,  all  the  proud,  includ-
ing every  wicked  man,  every  wicked
woman,  will  be  swept  away  like
stubble  before  the  devouring  flame.
It  will  be  thus  when  Jesus  descends
in  the  clouds  of  glory.  The  ele-
ments will  be  cleansed,  the  same  as
you  receive  a  cleansing  by  the  Holy
Ghost.  You  are  made  new  crea-
tures. So  the  earth  will  be  madt


HEAVEN'  AND  EARTH


TO  PASS  AWAY,  ETC,


325


new,  and  :;reat  knowledge  will  be
imparted  to  the  inhabitants  thereof,
as  predicted  in  the  11th  chapter  of
the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  The  know-
ledge of  God  will  then  cover  the
earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  mighty
deep.  There  will  be  no  place  of  ig-
norance, no  place  of  darkness,  no
place  for  those  that  will  not  serve
God,  Why]  Because  Jesus, the  Great
Creator,  and  also  the  Great  Redeem-
er, will  be  himself  on  the  earth,  and
his  holy  angels  will  be  on  the  earth,
and  all  the  resurrected  Saints  that
have  died  in  former  dispensations
will  all  come  forth,  and  they  will  be
on  the  earth.  What  a  happy  earth
this  creation  will  be,  when  this  puri-
fying process  shall  come,  and  the
earth  be  filled  with  the  knowledge
of  God  as  the  waters  cover  the  great
deep  !  What  a  change  !  Travel,
then,  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to
another,  you  can  find  no  wicked  man,
no  drunken  man,  no  man  to  blas-
pheme the  name  of  the  Great  Crea-
tor, no  one  to  lay  hold  on  his  neigh-
bor's goods,  and  steal  them,  no  one
to  commit  whoredoms — for  all  who
commit  whoredoms  will  be  thrust
dbwn  to  hell,  saith  the  Lord  God  Al-
mighty, and  all  persons  who  commit
sin  will  be  speedily  visited  by  the
judgments  of  the  Almighty  !  But,
inquires  one,  can  they  sin?  Yes;
their  agency  will  still  be  left  We
read  in  the  65th  chapter  of  Isaiah  that
then  "There  will  be  no  more  thence
an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man
that  hath  not  filled  his  days ;  for  the
child  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old;
but  the  sinner  being  an  hundred  old
shall  be  accursed,"  Children  will
grow  up  without  sin  unto  salvation,
as  a  general  thing,  and  in  order  to
show  how  swift  the  judgments  will
come  upon  the  people,  after  Jesus
comes  and  stands  upon  the  Mount
of  Olives,  and  all  the  Saints  with
Mm,  we  have  only  to  refer  to  the
last  chapter  of  Zachariah,  where  it


is  stated,  "  that  every  one  that  is
left  of  all  the  nations  which  came
against  Jerusalem,  shall  even  go  up
from  year  to  year  to  worship  the
King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  to
keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  And
it  shall  be  that  whoso  will  not  come
up  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth
unto  Jerusalem  to  worship  the  King,
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  even  unto  them
shall  be  no  rain,"  From  this  it  ap-
pears that  people  who  refuse  to  come
up  to  the  land  of  Jerusalem,  to  wor-
ship God  and  to  keep  the  feast  of
tabernacles,  are  to  be  immediately
visited  with famime.  They  shall  have
no  rain,  and  that  will  stir  them  up,
during  the  Millennium,  to  repent  of
their  sins  ;  but  if  the  Egyptians  do
not  come  up  from  year  to  year  to
Jerusalem,  they  shall  be  visited  with
a  great  plague.  What  kind  of  a
plague  1  The  plague  will  be  so
severe  in  its  operations,  says  the
prophet  Zachariah,  that  "  their  flesh
shall  consume  away,  while  they  stand
upon  their  fact,  and  their  eyes  shall
consume  away  in  their  holes,
and  their  tongue  shall  consume  away
in  their  mouth."  Thus  you  see  that
swift  judgment  will  come  upon  those
that  are  rebellious,  after  Jesus
descends.  This  shows  that  mortality
still  continues,  that  people  ura
subject  to  plauges,  subject  to
pain,  and  subject  to  be  afflic-
ted with  famine,  for  the
want  of  rain#  But  by  and
by,  when  Jesus  has  been  here  in
person  a  thousand  years,  and  all  the
ancient  Saints  that  have  been  resur-
rected, and  the  modern  Saints  also,
after  they  have  lived  upon  the  earth
for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years,  it
seems  that  Satan  is  to  be  loosed  out
of  his  prison,  and  permitted  to  go
forth  and  tempt  Whom  shall  he
tempt  1  Those  whom  Jesus  has
brought  from  heaven  1  No,  they
are  beyond  temptation.  Whom  will
he  tempt  1 Those  that  are  yet  nior-


-f  4.1.

i


22(5  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


t:il— t lie  innumerable  inhabitants  of  e  ted  1  or  is  there  no  place  for  the
tin1  earth  who  have  multiplied  and  j  earth  in  its  organized  form  ;  for  the
&1  we  a  i  1  forth ,  an  i  1  I  i  n  n  e  a  1  most  [elements  w  il  1  p  ass  aw  ay ,  be  scattered
as  numerous  as  the  sands  upon  the  I  in  space  over  millions  and  millions


sea  shore*  He  will  tempt  them,  lit-
will  go  out  in lo  the  four  quarter*  of
the  earth,  and  gather  together  all
that he  rati  overcome,  and


bring


thinks  that  lie  will  tight  and  over-
come the  camp  of  the  Saints.  They
will  Vie  Cant] ied  beside  the  bt'loved


of  miles,  just  the  same  as  our  bodies
after  we  have  been  sanctified  and
I  untied,  innv  be  burned  a-  martyrs
at  the  stake  and  the  elements  of  < «ur
them  up  against  the  camp  of  the  bodies  posed  into  the  atmosphere
Saints  ami  the  beloved  city. Mo  j  and  into  the  surrounding  country.

So  will  the  earth  pass  away  in  like
manner-  lint  by  and  by  the  same
voice,  the  satin?  point  that  calls
city;  for  all  the  Saints  will  then  foci  h  our  hodies  from  the  sleeping
be  gathered,  just  the  same  as  yon  tnmk  tha:  unites  bone  to  it-  bone,
are  now  gathered from  the  four  \  sinews  and  skin  and  imisrh-s,  and

the  various  compartments  of  the
>  \  stem,  that  breathes  the  breath  of
life  into  them*  that  nnvkea  them
ini  mortal,  eve?!  so  will  irie  Kurd
l  oid,  in  due  tinte.  speak  by  Ins  power
and  call  the  seat to red  elements  id'
this  creation  from  their  dispersion,
bring  them  together  again,  and
organize  them  into  a  new  heaven


quart  ens  of  the  earth,  to  escape  the
varinitg  judgments  [hat  are  ei-ming,
and  finally  the  judgment  of  tire.  Su
will  i he  Saints  be  gathered  together
to  the  new  Jerusalem,  and  round
about  oli I  Jerusalem,  and  Satan
will  gather  up  his  beat*,  that  have
apostatized  I  mm  the  truth,  and  he
will  marshal  them  round  about  the


rih,  and  tire  will  descend  iV^m  I  i f »i I  and  a  now  earth.  "\\" ill  there  he  one
out  of  heaven,  and  devour  that  por  particle  of  tiie  earl li  lost  ?  No  every
ti  "ii  of  the  am  iv  of  Satan  that  is  nartiele  that  now  m  combined
ill  mortal.  The  elements  of  their  I  with  the  heaven  and  the  earth  will
bodies  will  be  separated  ;  they  will  still  exist,  U  ill  it  be  modelled  alter
be  .■*. turned,  the  same  as  the  wicked  the  present  model 'f  No,  It  may
will  have  been  consumed  over  a  thou- 1  have  the  same  shape  and  form  that


sand  years  before  that,  and  this  will

be  nlh  'liifT i'\  ■  ■ :  i ' rliaii:;e. fnit  tll6

earth  is  not  yet  immortal,  not  vet
in  its  glonlted  state,  as  i:  ^.n  before
man  fell.  Then,  after  Satan's  army
is  devoured,  and  after  Satan  is  east
into  hell  ami  all  «i\ er  u  horn  lie  lias


il in  iw l.a-;, ihe same as  our

bodies  when  they  are  brought-  forth
out  of  (he  Lriave  will  have  a  form
some  tiling  after  the  present  form,
Kvcry  harr  i»l  tlie  head  wilt  he  re-
stored, e\  t  rv  part  will  In'  resin  red
ti)  it rn  i iioper  form,  not  after  'In*


power— then  all  (he  inhabitants  of  form  d  mortality,  lo  sicken  again,
the  earth  will  be  judged  ;  this  great  I  to  have  pain  and  to  die  ;  hut  though
white  throne  that  1  have  been  read-  the  body  is  restored  to  the  tame
ing  aboni,  will  nppear;  the  great  and  image,  so  far  as  the  outlines  nre  con-
final  judgment  will  romc;  and  when  '  corned,  yot  it  is  immortal,  no  more
this  white  throne  appears,  the  earth  ,  subject  tu  pain,  01  Borrow,  but  is
itself  and  the  literal  temporal  hea- restored  tu \ ci  happiness  and  to


Vens  that  are  overhead  will  the
away,  ami  there  will  bp  found  no
phuv  for  them. What  does  this

mean  t I  'oes  it  mean  that  the  de-


bodies  That  nil!  endure!  while  eter-
nity endures.  So  it.  will  be  with  the
earth.  A  great  many  of  mi r  scien-
tific nn  ii  murder  that  tin1  earth  ban


meuts  themselves  will  be  annihihv  |  never  had  a  beginning  as  an  organ-


■


HEAVEN  AND  EARTH  TO  PASS  AWAY,  ETC,


327


ized  body,  but  they  look  back  many
millions  and  millions  of  years,  when
they  suppose  that  such  and  such  an
event  brought  about  such  and  such
a  cause  ;  and  they  say,  (the  infidel
portion  of  them)  that  the  earth  will
never  have  an  end.  Well,  now,
they  am  right  so  far  as  the  materials
are  concerned,  but  they  are  entirely
out  of  the  way  so  far  as  the  great
revolutions  I  have  named  are  con-
cerned, and  so  far  as  the  annihilation
of  the  earth  is  concerned.  The
earth  never  will  have  an  end,  so  far
as  the  materials  are  concerned.  The
earth  after  it  is  made  anew,  resur-
rected from  its  old  materials,  will
continue  forever,  and  will  be  the
abiding  place  of  all  the  righteous,
throughout  all  the  future  aires  of
eternity.  Hence,  we  read  that
John,  after  the  earth  fled  away,  '
saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth  ;  but  the  new  one  was  much
altered.  There  was  no  more  sea.
There  must  be  a  great  alteration
when  the  sea,  the  elements  that
compose  the  water,  the  oxygen  and
hydrogen,  and  the  various  elements
that  enter  into  thh  constitution  of
sea  water,  shall  be  otherwise  com-
bined. Will  tlnvre  be  a  new  set  of
geologist  in  those  days,  who  will
figure  as  they  do  iu  our  days,  and
say  such  and  such  events  exist,  and
they  must  have  existed  from  all
eternity,  or  they  must  have  been
brought  about  by  such  and  such
changes ;  that  is,  will  the  geologists
be  as  limited  in  their  views  as  the
present  ones  are  ?  But  the  geologists  i
that  shall  live  ten  thousand  years
hence,  or  even  two  thousand  years
hence,  when  this  great  cliauge  shall
have  come  over  the  earth,  will  be
able  t»  philosophize  clearly;  fur  they  '
will  be  full  of  knowledge,  under-
standing and  comprehension,  and
they  will  be  able  to  understand
souiethiiigaboutthe  process  of  world-
making,  creating  worlds,  the  changes


j  that  cGme  upon  worlds,  and  the  final
!  change  when  worlds  ure  made  anew
and  immortal,  and  their  philosophy,
their  ideas,  and  their  system  of  ge-
ology will  be  correct  am  I  can  be  de-
pended upon.  Why?  Because  they
were  there  ;  they  saw  the  changes,
they  were  present  when  the  changes
were  made,  anil  they  have  not  for-
gotten all  these  things,  and  they
will  know  them,  and  understand
them,  after  the  final  change  comes.
There  will,  however,  be  a  change
which  shme  of  the  mortal  inhab-
itants of  this  earth  will  forget.
Isaiah  says,  in  the  Goth  chapter :
"  For  behold,  I  create  new  heavens
and  a  ne\V  earth  :  and  the  former
shall  not  be  remembered,  nor  come
into  mind."  Now,  that  hns  refer-
ence to  the  creation  that  will  be  re-
newed, at  the  beginning  of  the  mil-
lennium. People  will  not  reniein-
I  ber.  Our  children  that  will  be  born
during  the  millennium  will  not  re-
!  member  all  the  wickedness  and  cor-
ruption that  existed  in  the  days  of
their  fathers.  It  will  not  come  into
their  minds,  unless  God  puts  it
there :  but  when  they  become  im-
mortal, after  the  thousand  years
have  ended,  then  I  think  they  will
comprehend  the  process  by  which
this  world  was  made.  But,  in  quires
one,  how  will  they  know  it  1  They
will  know  it  because  they  were  all
present  when  it  was  made.  You
understand  it,  Latter-day  Saints ;
you  and  I  were  there  when  this
world  was  made.  We  have  forgot-
ten it>  but  we  will  remember  it  when
we  wake  up  in  eternity,  with  all
the  fulness  of  knowledge  that  will
he  given  after  everything  is  made
anew.  Well,  inquires  one,  what
will  be  the  occupation  of  this  people,
after  descending  upon  the  newearth?
I  After  Jesus  has  been  on  the  earth  a
thousand  years,  God  himself  is  to
be  on  the  new  earth.  What  is  he  to
do  t  He  is  to  "  wipe  away  all  tears  ;


328


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,
neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither
shall  there  be  any  more  pain  ;  for
the  former  tilings  are  passed  away.11
We  will  be  there  if  we  are  righteous  ;
enough,  if  we  keep  the  command-
ments of  God.  If  we  will  endure  to
the  end,  we  will  have  an  inheritance
in  this  world  when  it  is  resurrected
and  made  anew.  Moreover,  it  says
there  will  be  no  more  death*  What!
a  world  without  death  ?  A  world
thickly  populated  as  this  creation
will  be  ?  What  a  joyful  creation  !
The  tree  of  life  will  be  on  the  earth
n  the  midst  of  that  city  that  will
descend  on  the  earth,  and  whoever
eats  of  the  fruit  of  that  tree  will !
live  forever,  just  the  same  as  the
tree  of  life  was  placed  upon  the  earth
before  Adam  transgressed.  Any
one  eating  of  the  fruit  of  that  tree
could  not  die,  for  the  decree  of  the
Lord  had  gone  forth,  and  his  word
must  be  fulfilled.

There  are  some  few  things  to
which  I  wish  now  especially  to  call
your  attention,  in  relation  to  this
new  earth  of  which  I  am  speaking.
I  said  that  the  saints  would  receive
an  inheritance  upon  it.  I  would  ask
you,  my  brethren,  upon  what  prin-
ciple they  receive  an  inheritance
upon  the  new  earth  ?  It  is  by  secur-
ing it  through  a  promise  here  in  this
life*  If  you  can  secure  40,  or  80,  or
160,  or  (UD  iic  res  of  land  by  promise
here  in  this  life — 1  do  not  mean  the
promise  of  mortal  men,  I  would  not
give  much  for  their  promise  concern-
ing any  blessing  after  death  comes  ;
but  if  you  can  get  a  promise  from
hiin  who  has  a  right  to  promise,  (for
the  earth  is  the  Lords  and  the  ful-
ness thereof.)  that  you  shall  inherit
the  earth  for  an  everlasting  possess-
ion, then  it  will  be  given  to  you.
But,  says  one,  supposing  I  do  not
get  any  promise  1  I  do  not  know,  j
then,  that  you  will  have  a  claim  on  ,


a  solitary  foot  of  it  Abraham  got
the  promise,  not  after  he  was  dead,
but  here  in  this  life.  The  Lord,  be-
cause of  his  faith,  made  him  a  pro-
mise, and  told  him  to  go  out  from
his  own  country  to  a  land  he  had
never  seen  ;  and  after  getting  there,
the  Lord  said  unto  him,  44  Now,
Abraham,  walk  through  this  land  in
the  length  and  breadth  of  it ;  to
thee  will  I  give  itT  and  to  thy  seed."
For  how  long  1  For  an  everlasting
possession.  Abraham  did  not  care
about  having  a  deed  for  time  only,
did  not  care  about  getting  a  few
acres  just  merely  for  a  little  while,
and  then  have  it  taken  from  him,
and  he  have  no  claim  upon  it  after-
wards. Did  Abraham  inherit  it  on
this  earth  ?  Did  his  seed,  Isaac,  or
his  grandson,  Jacob,  to  whom  the
promises  were  confirmed  and  renew-
ed—did they  get  any  of  it  while
they  lived  1  No.  The  prophet  Ste-
phen, who  was  murdered  for  the
Christian  religion,  has  recorded  in
the  New  Testament,  speaking  of  this
promise  made  to  Abraham,  that  the
Lord  <;gave  him  none  inheritance
in  it,  no,  not  so  much  as  to  set  his
foot  on."  What!  Stephen,  are  you
not  mistaken  ?  You  lived  several
thousand  years  after  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob  were  in  their  graves — do
you  mean  to  say  that  the  Lord  did
not  even  give  them  as  much  as  a
foot!  What  did  he  do  for  them,
Stephen  t  He  made  them  a  promise
that  they  should  have  it,  and  their
seed  after  them  ;  for  an  everlasting
inheritance.  Oh,  then,  they  are
still  to  have  it,  are  they,  for  an  ever-
lasting inheritance,  by  virtue  of  the
promise  made  in  this  mortal  state  ?
Who  are  Abraham's  seed?  All  that  do
the  works  of  Abraham — all  that  are
baptizedinto  Christ  They  are  Abra-
ham's seed  according  to  the  promise.
What  promise!  The  promise  that
he  and  his  seed  should  have  the  land


HEAVEN  AND  EAKTH  TO  PASS  AWAY,  ETC.


329


of  Palestine,  east  and  north-east  of
the  Mediterranean  Sea,  for  an  ever-
lasting possession.  Now  all  who
have  received  the  same  covenants,
obeyed  the  same  Gospel,  obeyed  the
new  and  everlasting  covenant,  have
the  promise  in  connection  with
Abraham's  seed*

Has  the  earth  been  parcelled  out
to  anybody  else  except  Abraham  and
his  seed  1  Yes.  The  Lord  brought
a  natiou  to  this  great  western  hemi-
sphere, called  Jaredites,  from  the
Tower  of  Babel.  When  He  brought
them  here  they  were  a  righteous
people,  and  he  made  promises  to
them ;  and  among  the  promises
given  was  the  promise  that  this
great  western  hemisphere  should  b*
given  to  them,  and  to  those  that
were  worthy  besides  thein,  for  an
everlasting  possession,  We  Gentiles
have  come  here  ;  we  have  got  upon
the  land  ot  these  Jaredites,  and  we
think  we  are  very  rich  if  we  have
got  G40  acres,  or  perhaps  ten  times
that  amount  of  land.  Says  one
man,  "  I  have  got  my  deed  from  the
Land  office  ;  I  am  the  owner."  But,
hold  on  ;  there  is  the  original  owner;
that  you  know  nothing  of,  that  came
here  from  the  tower  of  Babel,  that  had
all  this  western  hemisphere  promised
to  him  and  the  righteous  of  his  seed
for  an  everlasting  possession.  What
will  become  of  your  040  acres  then  1
What  will  become  of  your  farms
when  these  resurrected  men  shall
come  forth  and  show  their  deeds*
Perhaps  you  may  think  they  did  not
keep  any  records  in  those  day.  But
let  me  tell  you  they  had  records  of
deeds ;  and  ail  these  things  are
spoken  of  and  testified  of  in  the
great  books  that  are  kept  in
the  eternal  world,  and  it  will  be
found  that  they  are  the  inheritors
before  us,  that  is  before  the  Gentiles
that  came  over  here  four  hundred
years  ago  and  upwards. But  what


about  the  Xephites  that  came  here
about  six  hundred  years  before
Christ.  When  they  got  here,  the
first  thing  the  Lord  did  was  to  con-
firm his  promise  unto  them.  He
told  them  it  was  their  inheritance
for  an  everlasting  possession.  Hold
on,  says  one,  that  would  take  away
the  right  of  the  Jaredites.  Oh,  no.
The  Lord,  in  making  this  promise,
did  not  do  it  according  to  the  deed-
makers  of  this  day  ;  he  did  not  follow
after  the  pattern  of  men.  The  rec-
ords that  he  makes  on  the  books  in
eternity  are  records  made  upon  prin-
ciples in  accordance  with  celestial
law,  not  in  accordance  with  Gentile
laws,  nor  our  notions  of  things.  The
notion,  or  idea,  that  the  Lord  had
was  that  this  continent,  North  and
South  America,  should  be  inhabited
by  the  righteous  who  will  be  resur-
rected from  the  dead,  and  who  lived
here  on  this  continent.

Latter-day  Saints,  do  you  not  feel
a  little  concerned  1  Has  any  pro-
mise been  made  to  you,  or  are  you
left  out  while  the  Nephites  ami  Ja-
redites gobble  up  all  the  land,  and
leave  you  to  go  around  the  streets
begging '  Hear  what  the  Lord,  our
God^  had  to  say,  through  the  Pro-
phet Joseph,  concerning  you,  on  the
2nd  day  of  January,  1831.  I  was
present  when  the  Lord  gave  this
revelation,  in  the  midst  of  a  confe-
rence, to  his  servant  Joseph.  I  will
repeat  the  words  :  "And  I  will  hold
forth  and  deign  to  give  unto  you  "
(speaking  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
assembled  in  conference,  and  to  all
that  should  become  Saints)  "greater
riches,  even  a  land  of  promise,  a
land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,
upon  which  there  shall  be  no  curse
when  the  Lord  cometh.  And  1  will
gi^e  it  unto  you  for  the  land  of  your
inheritance.  And  this  shall  be  my
covenant  with  you,  ye  shall  have  it
for  the  land  of  your  inheritance,  and


i


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


for  the  inheritance  of  your  cliil dren
forever,  while  the  earth  shall  stand,
and  ye  shall  possess  it  again  in  eter-
nity, no  more  to  pass  away/'  The
same  promise  you  see  ;  very  different
from  the  promise  of  men  ;  you  will
possess  it  again  in  eternity,  no  more
to  pass  away.  He  did  not  reveal  to
us  the  central  portion  of  our  land
of  promise  on  that  conference  day,
but  told  us  it  should  be  revealed  at
a  future  time*  Hence,  in  that  same
year  he  appointed  his  servant  Joseph
and  some  twenty  or  thirty  of  the
elders  to  go  from  Kirtland,  Ohio,
west  ward  through  the  State  of  Ohio,
State  of  Indiana,  State  of  Illinois,
State  of  Missouri,  to  the  western
boundaries  thereof  There  he  pointed
out  by  revelation — which  you  will
find  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants — [the  central
portion  of  our  inheritance,  where
the  great  temple  should  be  built
upon  which  a  cloud  of  glory  should
rest,  and  told  us  that  that  was  the
land  of  promise,  in  time  and  in
eternity,  the  same  as  the  promise
made  to  the  ancient  Saints  of  Goth
We  are  not  in  possession  of  it  at  the
present  time.  It  cannot,  however,
be  said  concerning  us,  as  it  was  said
by  Stephen  concerning  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob,  He  said  he  gave
those  old  ancient  men  not  so  much
as  to  set  their  foot  on.  But  it  hap-
pens we  paid  for  some  of  that  land,
and  we  got  our  deeds  at  the  Land
Office,  and  we  claim  this  at  the
hands  of  our  God,  and  ask  him,  if
we  do  not  get  it  right  now,  this  year,
or  ten  years'  hence,  we  will  ask  our
Father  to  give  us  that  land  after  the
resurrection,  at  any  rate.  But  will
we  inhabit  any  of  it  in  time?  Oh,
yes*  We  will  buihi  a  great  city  in
Missouri.  We  will  also  build  a  great
temple  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  in
that  city,  and  the  temple  block  and
plate  where  it  is  to  stand  is  already


!  known*  It  was  laid  out  in  the  year
1831,  and  the  corner  stone  laid,  and
we  will  build  a  temple  there,  and
build  it  after  the  pattern  that  the
Lord  gave  to  his  servant  Joseph,  the
Prophet,  and  also  according  to  the
pattern  that  he  shall  hereafter  show,
if  the  pattern  is  not  already  given

I  in  full  I  will  toll  you  another  thing
that  will  happen  in  our  promised
land,  after  that  temple  is  built :
there  will  a  cloud  of  glory  rest  upon
that  temple  by  day,  the  same  as  the
cloud  rested  upon  the  tabernacle  of
Moses,  that  was  carried  in  the  wil-
derness. Not  only  that,  but  also  a
flaming  fire  will  rest  upon  the  tern-  .
pie  by  night,  covering  the  whole
temple  ;  and  if  you  go  inside  of  the
temple,  the  glory  of  God  will  be
seen  there  as  it  was  anciently ;  for
the  Lord  will  not  only  be  a  glory
and  a  defense  on  the  outside  of  that
wonderful  building,  but  ho  will  also
be  a  glory  and  a  power  in  the  inside
thereof,  and  it  shall  come  to  pass
that  every  man  and  every  woman
who  is  pure  in  heart,  who  shall  go
inside  of  that  temple,  will  see  the
Lord.  Now,  how  great  a  blessing
it  will  be  to  see  the  Lord  of  Hosts
as  we  see  one  another  in  the  flesh.
That  will  take  place,  but  not  till
after  the  temple  is  built-  Moreover,
you  will  not  only  be  favored  with
this  great  privilege,  but  Isaiah  tells
Us  that  "  the  Lord  will  create  upon
every  dwelling  place  of  Mount  Zion,
and  upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud
and  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining

,  of  a  flaming  flre  by  night/'  When
you  hold  your  meeting  in  the  day
time,  you  shall  be  sheltered  by  a
cloud,  and  when  you  hold  your  meet-

|  ings  in  the  night  time,  instead  of
lighting  up  your  lamps  with  common
oil,  or  with  gas,  or  anything  of  this
kind,  you  will  have  no  need  of  any
artificial  light,  for  the  Lord  God
will  be  the  light  thereof,  and  his


TTIE  INCREASE  AND  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


331


glory  will  be  there,  and  you  will  see
It  and  you  will  hear  his  voice.  Have
you  not  read  in  this  book  called  the
Bible,  about  the  Lord  suddenly  com-
ing to  his  temple  1  Read  the  3rd
chapter  of  Malachi :  "  Behold,  I  will
send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall
prepare  the  way  before  me  ;  and  the
Lord  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddetdy
come  to  his  temple,  ?  *  *  And
he  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier
of  silver ;  and  he  shall  purify  the
sons  of  Levi  and  purge  them  as  gold
and  silver,  that  they  may  offer  unto
the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteous- 1


ness/'  That  same  fire  will  rest  upon
the  abodes  of  those  that  come  into
that  temple,  and  they  will  be  filled
with  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost  They
will  be  purged  of  all  iniquity,  and
every  ordinance  that  will  be  admin-
istered in  that  temple  will  be  admin-
istered by  holy  hands,  and  you  will
understand  and  know  the  meaning
thereof.  The  Lord  will  reveal  these
things  in  their  day  ;  he  will  reveal
everything  that  is  needful,  so  that
the  knowledge  of  God  may  rest  upon
jou,  and  that  there  may  be  no  dark-
ness with  you.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  H.  W.  NAISBITT,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  afternoon,

AUGUST  29,  1880.


( Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

THE  INCREASE  AKD  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS— TRUE  EDUCATION,  ETC.


I  stand  here  to  day,  as  you  are  ali
aware,  to  speak  of  those  things
which  pertain  to  the  faith  that  we
have  received,  of  that  order  which
we  call  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
that  order  which  the  world  entitles
"  Mormonis!^1'  a  system  which  con-
tains within  itself  many  elements
which  are  strange  to  mankind,  but
which  are  very  powerful  in  their
character  and  calculated  in  their
progress  and  growth  to  arrest  the
attention  of  the  human  family
With  all  the  faults,  weaknesses  and
traditions  which  encumber  the  peo-
ple who  dwell  in  these  mountains,  I


believe  the  universal  testimony  is,
that  they  are  entitled  to  credit  for
earnestness,  for  industry,  for  hon-
esty, and  for  many  results  which
have  grown  out  of  these  character-
istics. One  source  of  territorial,  or
state,  or  national  greatness  consists
in  a  proper  understanding  of  the
purposes  for  which  men  dwell  upon
the  earth,  upon  their  ideas  in  regard
to  family  organization,  social  ethics,
or  those  principles  which  bind  man
to  man  and  family  to  family,  and
make  of  a  nation  a  grand  unit  id
whole.

The  Latter-day  Sainti  it  is  well


known  are  strong  advocates  of  mar-  j
riage.  They  believe  that  every  man
and  every  woman  should  enter  into
that  relationship.  They  believe  in
the  divinity  of  that  first  command,
that  the  human  race  were  destined
to  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth.
Consequently,  wherever  any  large
assembly  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  brought  together,  there  you  will
find  a  very  large  proportion  of  those
who  are  young  in  years.  The  theo-
ries which  are  held  by  some  philo-
sophers, by  some  men  and  women
who  enter  the  marriage  state,  find
no  place  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
The  universal  faith  among  them  is
that  children  are  "an  heritage  from
the  Lord  that  happy  is  the  man
who  hath  his  quiver  full  of  them,"
in  contradistinction  to  an  increasing
tendency  elsewhere,  to  believe  that
there  should  be  a  limit  to  the  num-
ber of  children  which  a  man  should
possess,  and  that  wheresoever  they
may  be  considered  undesirable,  from
the  claims  of  society,  frotti  the  dis-
position to  follow  the  fashions  of  the
age,  from  a  feeling  that  self-gratifi-
cation is  the  highest  destiny  of  the
human  family,  that  there  the  family
increase  should  be  curtailed.  Among
the  Latter-day  Saints  those  ideas !
have  not  obtained  a  foothold.  Al-
though they  have  come  from  the
outside  world,  gathered  from  the
nations  of  the  earth  and  measurably
partaken  of  the  influences  which
prevail  there,  yet  they  have  not  so
far  done  violence  to  the  instincts
which  God  has  planted  within  them
as  to  practice  the  theories  of  the
parties  to  whom  I  have  alluded.
And  in  all  our  assemblies,  as  I  have
said  before,  in  this  tabernacle  as  an
illustration,  in  our  ward  meetings
and  in  all  our  settlements  and  colo-
nies, there  is  substantial  testimony
to  be  found  of  the  fact  that  in  this
obedience  to  the  law  of  primitive


[  times,  to  the  law  of  the  constitution
of  human  nature,  and  to  the  law  as
revealed  to  us  in  this  £i  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times,"  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  have  paid  marked  and
decided  attention.

This  increase  of  population  brings
with  it  many  thoughts ;  it  is  the
father  or  parent  of  much  reflection
to  those  who  grasp  the  situation.  I
recollect  many  a  time  in  my  travels
east,  when  gentlemen  in  the  great
cities  of  this  country  made  rvllcc-
tions  in  regard  to  our  emigration
!  from  the  different  portions  of  the
earth,  I  have  said  :  "  Yes,  we  have
quite  an  emigration  ;  the  gathering
is  a  fixed  fact,  fundamental  in  the
economy  of  this  Gospel."  But  out-
side of  this  gathering  there  is  an-
I  other  one,  which  fails  to  arrest  the
attention  of  the  world  because  it
;  comes  in  a  less  ostentatious  manner,
and  that  is  the  wonderful  home  in-
!  crease  of  that  people  dwelling  in  the
'  mountains.  And  whenever  tourists
visit  here,  if  they  travel  outside  the
limits  of  this  citj,  if  they  visit  our
settlements  in  the  length  and
breadth  thereof,  they  cannot  fail  to
be  struck  with  the  rapid  multiplica-
tion of  those  who  have  thus  gath-
ered from  the  nations  of  the  earth*
When  we  inform  the  world  that  in
a  population  of  150,000  souls  there
can  be  found  in  the  neighborhood
of  50,000  in  attendance  upon  our
schools  j  when  we  realize  the  im-
mense number  under  the  age  of
maturity,  it  would  require  a  mathe-
matician to  tell  what  will  speedily
be  the  increase  if  the  present  policy
is  pursued.  In  a  few  generations  to
come,  if  this  characteristic  continues
to  manifest  itself  proportionately,
there  will  be  a  continual  necessity
for  spreading  forth,  Utah  will  be-
come too  small  for  her  spreading
population,  and  in  all  the  adjacent
Territories  and  States,  those  who


THE  INCREASE  AND  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


333


have  been  drawn  together  under  her
institutions,  who  have  accepted  her
faith  and  believe  in  her  destiny, —
those  will  be  found  measurably  car-
rying out  the  ideas  which  to-day
permeate  our  society  in  a  local  capa-
city.

In  considering  this  element  grow-
ing up  in  our  midst,  we  may  form
some  idea  in  regard  to  the  future  of
the  people  who  dwell  here.  I  believe
there  is  an  ancient  proverb  which
says  that  "  the  stream  cannot  rise
higher  than  its  fountain,"  that  "  as
men  sow  so  shall  they  also  reap  ;"
and  whatever  we  may  have  anti-
cipated when  illuminated  with  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  whatever  our
private  ideas  may  be  in  regard  to
the  glory  and  the  greatness  that
shall  rest  upon  the  people,  one  thing
is  sure,  that  it  depends  upon  the
growth,  development  and  character-
istics which  are  imprinted  and  made
manifest  in  the  posterity  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.

Education  is  one  of  the  ^  catch
words"  of  this  generation.  It  is  con-
sidered to  be  one  of  the  mightiest
levers  for  the  future  prosperity  of  the
United  States  j  but  opinions  in  re
gard  to  what  constitutes  education
are  as  various  almost  as  the  individ-
uals who  are  questioned*  With  a
very  large  number,  education  is  sup-
posed to  consist  in  the  ability  to  read
and  write,  and  in  the  understanding
of  the  geographical  character  of  the
country  in  which  the  student  lives.
It  is  considered  to  be  comprehended
m  the  rules  of  arithmetic  and  in  the
various  branches  of  an  advanced  or
classical  education,  as  it  is  called,
where  the  youth  of  the  country  gra-
duate, and  are  then  called  scholars.
But  I  apprehend  this  style  of  educa-
tion may  be  given  with  a  generous
and  extended  hand  to  every  son  and
daughter  of  this  republic,  and  yet
when  you  come  to  analyze  the  whole


you  will  find  that  the  mass  of  the
people  thus  trained  are,  as  a  rule,
absolutely  deficient  in  the  great  and
grand  element  which  constitutes  the
higher  form  of  education  and  of
human  culture.

There  is  in  the  scholastic  institu-
tions of  the  United  States  something
of  a  disposition  to  eradicate  from
them  everything  which  savors  of
religious  training.  It  has  been
sought  in  many  places  to  exclude
the  Bible  as  a  text  book,  or  a  book
to  be  used  in  any  form  whatever,
much  more  the  idea  of  including  any
form  of  religious  faith  or  practice.
Rather  has  there  been  an  idea  in  the
mind  of  most  Americans  that  it  was
fundamental  in  the  constitution  and
genius  of  the  country  that  there
should  be  an  eternal  separation  be-
tween what  is  considered  and  called
religious  and  secular  things.  Yet,
when  we  reflect  upon  the  wonderful
organization  we  have  and  that  we
see  around  us,  when  we  reflect  upon
the  faculties  and  endowments  which
men  possess,  can  we  not  see  that  this
very  idea  of  "  church  and  state,"  or
religious  and  secular  faculty,  is  in-
terwoven and  is  the  very  fabric  of
humanity,  placed  there  by  God  him-
self, and  that  there  is  a  disposition
under  the  religious  sentiment  to
draw  sustenance  and  support,  com-
fort and  solace  from  the  conceptions
which  pertain  to  divinity  j  and
growing  out  from  this  fundamental
religious  idea  or  sentiment  and
established  thereupon  can  come  alone
all  the  highest  attributes  that  we
look  for  in  the  future,  a  time  when
man  shall  find  all  his  powers  and
functions  harmoniously  developed.
And  it  is  just  as  impossible  to
separate  this  great  constitutional
principle  which  exists  in  the  human
organisation  as  it  is  to  divide  o?
break  asunder  anything  which  is
formed,  created,  or  intended  to  bo


334


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


formed,  created,  or  intended  to  be
adopted  by  the  great  ruler  of  the
universe*  Man  possesses  his  reli-
gious faculties,  no  matter  how  dor-
mant they  may  be,  no  matter  how
wrapt  up  by  superstition,  or  blinded
by  the  ignorance  and  misconceptions
of  the  teachers  who  have  moulded
him,  God  has  planted  in  the  hu-
man organization  those  attributes
which  seek  communion  with  the
divine.  And  it  is  upon  righteous
conceptions  of  man's  origin  that  Ids
future  will  depend.  If  the  young
men  of  any  community  have  no  cor-
rect ideas  in  regard  to  this  j  if  they
believe  that  they  are  but  the  product
of  chance  :  if  they  are  impregnated
with  the  thought  that  they  are  sim-
ply in  a  transitory  condition  and
that  they  may  "  eat  and  drink,  for
to-morrow  we  die/'  if  these  are  the
thoughts  which  entertain,  all  their
actions  will  correspond  with  these
thoughts,  they  will  not  reach  out,
nor  after  the  higher  attributes  which
belong  to  humanity,  they  will  be
filled  with  selfishness,  with  a  dispo-
sition to  gratify  their  own  passions,
even  if  they  have  to  accomplish  this
at  the  sacrifice  of  the  feelings  and
interests  of  those  with  whom  they
come  in  contact  But  if  the  youth
of  our  country  realize  that  they  are
the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  living
God  ;  if  they  realize  and  compre-
hend the  fact  that  before  they  dwelt
upon  the  earth  they  enjoyed  a  pre-
eristence,  that  their  spirits  dwelt  in
the  eternities,  and  had  a  home  there,
had  associations  there,  and  that  they
comprehended  something  of  the  pur-
poses for  which  they  should  come
and  tabernacle  in  the  flesh,  then  we
may  be  sure  that  such  thoughts  and
feelings  will  have  their  influence
upon  the  entire  course  of  their  after
life.  If  the  youth  of  a  community
are  thus  trained,  if  they  comprehend
the  relationship  which  they  sustain,


to  the  great  ruler  of  the  universe
if  they  have  faith  in  God  and  have
received  of  the  fact  that  God  lives,
that  he  holds  in  his  hand  the  desti-
nies of  the  human  family,  that  he
hath  provided  rewards  for  virtue
and  penalties  for  vice — if  they  com-
prehend these  things,  their  actions
in  life  will  be  shaped  by  these  en-
nobling thoughts.  But  if  the  educa-
tion which  the  youth  of  a  country
receives  is  devoid  of  training  for  the
religious  sentiment,  if  the  grand
revelations  of  the  ancient  times
which  God  has  given  through  "his
servants  the  prophets,"  are  set  on
one  side,  and  if  instead  thereof
education  is  supposed  to  consist  of
arithmetic  and  the  kindred  branches
of  that  science,  of  political  know-
ledge and  all  that  goes  to  make  up
what  is  called  a  scholar,  leaving  out
the  cultivation  of  other  attributes
which  God  has  implanted  in  man, —
if  that  is  the  kind  of  education  im-
parted, then  of  necessity  it  will,  at
some  period  of  time  in  the  history
of  that  country,  bring  about  religious
death,  and  as  a  consequence  the
bonds  of  society  would  become  loos-
enecl,  men  would  live  for  themselves
instead  of  living  for  each  other,  and
they  would  become  simply  as  "  the
beasts  that  perish,*'  ignoring  the
past  and  caring  nothing  at  all  for  the
future.  Hence  I  believe  that  this
education  and  training  is  an  im-
portant matter  as  pertaining  to  the
youth  of  a  country,  that  it  should
not  be  a  Sabbath  exercise  only,  but
that  at  home,  at  the  family  circle,
and  in  the  common  day  school  there
should  be  as  much  attention  given
to  the  religious  faculties  as  there
should  be  given  to  intellectual  and
mental  culture  about  which  we  talk
so  much,  and  for  which  we  erect  so
many  schools.  And  it  is  also  to  be
remarked  that  according  to  the  con-
ceptions of  the  people  on  religious


THE  INCREASE  AND  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


335


matters,  so  also  will  be  their  concep-
tions in  regard  to  morality.  Morality
is  the  outgrowth  of  religion.  It  is
the  fruitage  of  the  tree  of  life  in  re-
gard to  men's  ideas  of  God,  of  the
past,  and  of  the  future.  Without
the  cultivation  and  spirit  of  true  re-
ligion, the  moral  faculties  are  very
likely  to  he  perverted,  warped  and
misdirected.  If  the  idea  of  brother-
hood finds  no  place  in  the  education
of  uur  youth,  they  will  be  disposed
to  take  advantage  of  their  brethren,
take  advantage  in  trade,  speculation,
etc.,  and  society  would  thus  become
so  individualized,  that  men  would
"become  a  race  of  Ishmaelites,  "every
man's  hand  against  his  brother/'

1  believe  that  among  the  people
who  inhabit  these  mountains  that
this  idea  of  brotherhood — the  broth-
erhood of  the  human  family — forms
a  very  prominent  feature  in  their
education,  I  think  our  youth  an1
taught  that  they  should  not  live  for
themselves  alone,  but  rather  that  in
living  for  others  they  can  and  do
best  subserve  their  own  interests*
And  we  have  examples  of  this  in
many  directions,  most  notable  among
which  is  the  missionary  system
which  obtains  among  the  Latter-day
Saints.  Have  we  not  seen  in  our
experience  in  this  Territory,  some
300  to  400  men  called  at  once  to  go
forth  and  preach  the  Gospel,  to
leave  their  homes  and  families,  their
friends  and  business,  and  travel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth  to  propa-
gate the  religious  ideas  which  they
"had  received*  We  have  known
those  men  sent  throughout  the
United  States,  to  every  section  of
Europe  to  Australia,  to  the  Islands
of  the  sea,  to  China  and  to  India,
and  such  lias  been  the  devotion  of
those  who  were  thus  called,  that  in
the  course  of  three  or  four  weeks,
every  man  had  left  the  scenes  and
associations  that  were  dear  to  him,


I  and  through  the  midst  of  difficulties
and  trials  have  finally  found  them-
selves in  these  widely  divergent
points  of  the  compass,  to  which  they
had  been  called  by  the  voice  of  the
people  and  by  the  authority  presiding
over  them*  And  when  they  have
gone  to  these  different  nations  they
have  gone  in  the  spirit  of  brother-
hood, they  have  looked  upon  the
human  family  as  their  brethren  and
their  sisters.  They  have  gone  in
the  capacity  of  saviors,  and  they
have  carried  with  them  those  prin-
ciples which  are  the  foundation  of
that  civilization  which  the  Almighty
intends  to  establish  on  the  face  of

I  the  earth,  They  have  not  gone  to
preach  that  which  would  narrow  the

.  views  of  mankind  ;  they  have  not
gone  to  teach  that  which  would  in-
troduce a  spirit  of  selfishness  or  of
anything  degrading,  but  have  gone
carrying  with  them  the  principle  of
universal  brotherhood  which,  when
put  into  practice,  will  cement  and
bind  society  together  in  such  a  man-
ner, that  should  any  power  touch
the  interests  of  one  they  would  in-
evitably touch  the  interests  of  the
whole.  And  it  has  been  by  the
faith  which  they  have  exhibited,
by  the  earnestness  with  which  they
have  labored,  by  the  blessings  of
God  and  the  power  uf  his  spirit  which
accompanied  them,  that  they  have
been  able  to  gather  from  among  the
nations  the  best  elements  of  their
society,  and  transplant  them  into
these  valleys  of  the  mountains,  then
weld  them  into  a  comparatively
united  people — a  people  measurably
animated  by  one  thought,  one  im-
pulse, one  faith,  believing  in  one
God,  and  putting  into  practice  one
order — a  people  who  are  looking  for
one  result,  and  that  is  the  regenera-
tion and  redemption  of  ail  those
who  place  themselves  beneath  the
influence  of  those  ideas  and  ordi-


336  JOURNAL  OF

nances  which  have  been  advanced.
This  is  the  tree  which  has  been
planted,  and  the  seed  which  has
been  sown,  and  the  result  can  be  best
calculated  by  those  who  have  given
most  attention  to  that  which  has
been  taught

This  idea  creeps  out  in  almost
every  direction.  I  have  given  this
illustration,  of  the  missionary  effort
which  has  sent  its  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands  from  this  commu-
nity—  even  when  it  was  much
smaller  in  numbers  than  it  is  at  pre-
sent— around  the  habitable  globa
There  is  also  another  phase  of  this
same  spirit  which  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  exhibited,  they  have
not  only  sent  and  are  sending  these
men  on  missions,  and  sustaining
them  by  their  means,  by  their  faith
and  prayers,  but  in  obedience  to  the
spirit  of  gathering  they  have  given
great  assistance  to  those  who  were
unable  to  gather  of  themselves.
Indeed,  in  the  history  of  the  past
have  we  not  seen  the  time  when  the
authorities  of  the  Church  have  called
for  from  200  to  600  teams  to  jour-
ney to  the  Missouri  River  to  trans-
port the  poor  and  the  meek  of  the
earth  across  those  dreary  plains —
where  the  railroad  now  makes  its
welcome  music — and  they  have
landed  thousands  in  this  way  in  the
midst  of  these  mountains  and  intro-
duced them  to  the  new  order  of
civilization  which  has  been  inspired
by  the  spirit  of  the  living  God.  In
addition  to  all  this  they  have  taken
from  these  valleys,  and  laid  up  at
convenient  points  on  the  route,  pre-
cisions enough  to  sustain  those
thousands  while  thus  traveling  for
three  or  four  months  across  the
plains,  they  have  also  provided  at
such  times  a  strong  mounted  body
guard  of  the  youth  of  the  territory
to  protect  the  emigrants  from  the
assaults  of  the  Indians,  so  that  they


discourses.

might  perform  their  journey  in
safety.  And  they  have  gone  still
further  :  they  have  not  only  brought
those  thousands  from  the  boundaries
of  civilization,  and  from  the  training
and  education  of  the  systems  and
governments  of  the  old  world,  but
they  have  colonized  all  these  val-
leys, and  it  is  those  thousands  who
constitute  to-day  the  cities,  towns,
and  villages  of  Utah.  Not  only  have
they  been  placed  in  these  settlements
but  they  have  been  taught  the  rudi-
ments and  the  advanced  principles
of  self-sustenance  and  of  positive
independence.  The  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands  of  Utah  are  be-
yond the  depths  of  poverty  that  you
find  exhibited  in  the  old  world.  The
poverty  which  is  known  to  exist
there,  the  strikes  which  occur  in  the
ranks  of  labor  in  the  old  world,  the
difficulties  which  belong  to  even  in
so  blessed  country  as  the  United
States,  find  no  place  among  the  peo-
ple who  dwell  in  these  valleys.  The
majority  of  those  who  have  thus
come  in  strangers,  who  have  been
thus  surrounded  by  new  conditions,
and  subjected  to  new  influences,
have  produced  good  results.  Travel
wherever  you  will  throughout  this
territory  and  you  will  find  the  ma-
jority of  peopie  live  in  their  own
homes ;  they  pay  no  rent  to  anybody;
they  are  not,  when  poor  and  unem-
ployed, subject  to  be  turned  out  into
the  public  streets ;  they  are  not,
when  old  age  creeps  upon  them,
likely  to  be  thrust  into  the  union,  or
poor  house  as  it  is  called,  where  the
husband  is  separated  from  the  wife
and  the  wife  from  the  husband,
thereby  giving  practical  force  to  the
new  reading  of  the  marriage  cere-
mony as  suggested  by  some  of  the
radicals  of  the  old  world,  that  that
service  should  read,  not  as  it  does  at
present,  but  "till  death  or  poverty
do  us  part" — they  are  not  subject  to


THE  INCREASE  AND  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


337


these  conditions,  but  a  man  and
woman  have  the  privilege  of  living
together,  the  man  with  the  wife  of
his  youth  ;  they  see  their  posterity
grow  up  in  thrift  and  peace,  and
when  "  the  weary  wheels  of  life
stand  still"  they  lay  themselves
down  in  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrec-
tion unto  eternal  life !

There  is  also  another  feature  which
is  worthy  of  remark  in  this  territory,
Can  it  not  be  safely  said  that  the
mortality  of  the  people  thus  gath-
ered together  bears  a  marked  con-
trast to  that  which  exists  elsewhere  ?
Can  it  not  be  said  that  the  influence
of  industry,  of  peace,  and  of  good
order,  has  had  a  good  effect  upon
the  masses  in  many  directions.  The
mental  pressure  which  excites  else-
where sends  tens  of  thousands  to
suicide  or  drives  them  into  houses
built  for  those  suffering  from  in-
sanity, does  not  exist  in  the  midst
of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  Mentally,
ihe  people  of  tins  territory  are  pretty
evenly  balanced ;  one  of  the  re-
sults of  their  faith  in  God,  is  that
it  enables  them  to  contend  manfully
and  patieutly  with  difficulties  in-
stead of  yielding  to  the  circum-
stances thrust  upon  them,  and  thus
they  become  valiant  in  the  battle
of  life  ;  they  are  not  afraid  of  ob-
stacles, or  danger,  or  duties  which
may  surround  them ;  they  believe
that  it  is  best  to  work,  to  fight  and
overcome,  instead  of  cowardly  tak-
ing into  their  hands  the  opportunity
of  depriving  themselves  of  living
upon  the  earth  and  filling  a  suicide's
grave,  The  faith  of  the  Gospel
teaches  them  that  life  is  a  school,
that  it  is  an  honor  and  works  out
future  glory  to  submit  to  its  discip-
line, to  overcome  its  difficulties,  to
solve  its  problems  and  to  fill  its  pur-
poses, so  that  all  the  attributes  of
their  manhood  may  be  cultured  and
developed* .This  springs  from  the

No.  22*


fundamental  idea  which  the  people
of  this  territory  have  received  and
which  they  have  accepted  in  their
faith,  and  whatever  social,  comraei^
cial,  political,  or  other  class  of  diffi-
culties may  arise,  and  even  though
surrounded  by  the  fire  of  persecu-
tion, they  will  still  exercise  this  faith
in  God,  and  believe  that  from  all
apparent  evil  he  will  bring  forth
good*  Does  not  the  mental  balance
which  this  people  exhibit,  this  ab-
sence of  that  tendency  toward  suicide
and  lunacy — which  exists  in  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  by  virtue  of  the
pressure  which  society  brings  to  bear
upon  the  characteristics  of  men —
does  not  the  fact  that  this  pressure
is  unknown  among  the  people  of
Utah,  (or  at  least  if  not  unknown,
nearly  so)  stand  as  an  evidence  of
the  better  character  of  the  institu-
tions under  which  they  live  ?  On
the  other  hand  they  are  giving  to
their  posterity  all  that  the  world
calls  education.  Not  that  they  con-
sider it  the  primary  object  and  end
of  life,  but  they  do  consider  it  useful
to  their  children  in  enabling  them
to  fulfil  some  of  the  responsibilities
of  manhood,  to  attend  to  the  busi-
ness duties  and  affairs  of  life,  and
for  this  they  are  building  school-
houses,  for  this  they  employ  teachers
and  erect  academies,  and  in  this  way
they  have  spent  in  poverty  as  inuch,
comparatively  speaking,  as  will  bear
a  pleasant  contrast  with  any  part  of
this  country,  of  which  they  are  a
part.  And  while  they  have  endeav-
ored to  carry  out  this  joint  style  of
education — that  is,  the  cultivation
of  the  highest  attributes,  which  con-
sist of  faith  in  God,  faith  that  we
can  commune  with  him,  faith  in  the
Scriptures  handed  down  to  us  by  the
ancient  servants  of  God,  faith  that
by  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel
and  the  practice  of  its  principles  will
be  laid  the  foundation  of  a  higher

Vol  XXI.


338


JOURNAL  QY  DISCOURSES


civilisation,  calculated  in  its  nature  to
supercede  all  other  forms  with  which
man  may  have  been  acquainted  in
the  ages  that  are  past — yet  for  all
this,  politically  they  do  not  feel
obliged  to  be  either  democrats  or
republicans,  whigs  or  nationalists,
but  rather  feel  to  cultivate  all  the
qualities  of  patriotism  and  citizen-
ship, developing  these  to  the  highest
possible  perfection.  But  even  in
connection  with  a  system  which  aims
at  these  results,  a  system  which  has
set  before  its  believers  so  elevated  a
platform,  there  will  occasionally  in
individuals  be  comparative  failure.
But  wherever  men  are  possessed  of
this  faith,  it  is  simply  a  question  of
time  as  to  its  ultimate  success,  and
the  day  is  not  far  distant  when  those
who  hold  this  faith  will  not  be  con-
fined to  Utah  and  the  adjacent  ter-
ritory, they  will  not  be  held  in  bond-
age and  vassalage,  and  have  ap-
pointed over  them  men  in  whose
election  they  have  no  voice,  but  they
will  stand  qualified  with  all  that  of
excellence  they  desire,  and  have  the
privilege  of  being  free  and  full
American  citizens.
■  I  said  awhile  ago  that  there  had
been  a  good  deal  of  talking  and  a
good  deal  of  writing  in  regard  to  a
bugbear  called  the  union  of  Church
and  State.  But  it  is  folly  to  talk  or
write  against  a  thing  which  God  has
incorporated  into  the  very  fabric  of
man's  being ;  and  it  would  be  a  good
deal  better  now  for  the  nation  in
which  we  live  if  the  ranks  of  poli-
tical parties  were  less  divided,  were
more  imbued  with  a  sense  of  honor,
virtue,  purity,  and  the  spirit  of
brotherhood*  This  would  remove
from  them  a  great  many  of  the  evils
with  which  they  are  afflicted :  it
-would  help  to  strengthen  their
efforts  for  the  good  of  the  nation —
in  every  way — if  they,  in  the  spirit
iof  the  Christian  faith,  went  forth  to


receive  the  suffrages  of  their  fellow
men,  and  then  take  with  them  into
the  halls  of  Congress  the  same
spirit,  there  to  labor  with  just  con*
ceptions  of  justice  and  brotherhood,
realizing  that  **  God  hath  made  of
oneblood  all  the  nations  of  the  earth/'
If  our  political  parties  were  animated
by  this  spirit,  would  not  the  name
of  America  stand  higher  than  has
ever  yet  been  dreamed  of  by  those
who  entered  her  counsels  or  sat  to
administer  her  affairs.  I  an  an  ad-
vocate for  the  system  which  has  been
established  in  Utah  Territory,  because
I  have  studied  it,  I  have  seen  its
influences,  I  have  marked  its  power
over  the  lives  of  those  who  have
been  obedient  and  subservient  to
it,  and  I  know  myself  that  it  is
calculated  to  develop  the  best  fea-
tures of  our  humanity,  to  unite  the
human  family  together,  to  bring
heaven  to  earth,  to  bring  men  into
communion  with  the  angels,  and
to  hasten  the  day  when  not  only  the
angels,  but  Jesus  shall  come  to  the
earth  and  reign,  and  when  the
thousands  of  those  who  have  been
prepared  under  the  influence  and
institutions  of  Zion  shall  have  the
privilege  of  associating  with  "the
Church  of  the  first-born  ;  and  the
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect"
This  I  know  to  be  the  power  and
spirit,  the  end  andj  aim,  the  final
triumph  of  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  feel
proud  that  thousands  in  Utah  have
consecrated  all  that  they  possess  to
the  establishment  of  this  divine
system  which  you  can  read  of  in  the
history  of  the  past,  and  which  has
again  been  revealed  in  our  day
through  the  ministration  of  angels
to  the  Prophet  Joseph,  on  the  east-
ern shores  of  the  continent  of  North
America,  I  know  also  that  in  the
progress  of  this  work  it  will  not
only  take  hold  of  the  poor  and  meek


THE  INCREASE  AND  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


33!)


of  the  earth,  but  the  day  is  not  far
distant  when  it  will  take  hold  of
many  of  the  more  thoughtful  and
•cultivated  among  men  ;  and  while
we  may  look  back  through  the  his-
tory of  the  past  and  think  there
never  were  statesmen  like  Wash-
ington and  others  who  have  left
their  names  on  the  records  of  fame,
yet,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  the
Gospel  tells  us  that  these  were  only
the  precursors  of  many  in  the  future
who  in  intellect  and  culture  shall
stand  unfolded  in  all  that  harmony
and  glory  which  belongs  to  the
■eternities.

I  know  the  Latter-day  Saints  un-
derstand these  things,  and  in  the
spirit  thereof  they  are  seeking  to
cultivate  their  faith  in  God,  seeking
to  consecrate  their  time,  talent  and
ability  to  the  building  up  of  Zion
upon  the  earth  ;  and  to  those  who
are  strangers  in  their  midst  who  are
not  acquainted  with  their  pro-
gramme, not  acquainted  with  the
ambition  which  prompts  and  in-
spires the  Latter-day  Saints — to
such  we  say  these  are  the  ideas  by
which  we  are  actuated  They  know
they  are  workers  for  God,  they  are
laborers  in  the  great  field  of  human
progress,  and  they  are  using  that
which  they  have  received  from  the
heavens,  believing  that  divine  pur-
poses are  best  served  by  divine  edu-


cation and  divine  culture,  and  when
these  are  operating,  all  the  facilities
about  which  men  boast,  sink  into
comparative  insignificance  iu  con-
trast with  that  higher  education
which  belongs  to  and  grows  out  of
the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ

I  ask  our  friends  who  turn  in  with
us  occasionally,  to  give  us  credit  for

|  this  earnestness  of  purpose,  and  al-
though they  it  ay  not  see  as  we  see,
although  they  may  consider  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  mad,  yet  they  must
admit  tiiat  "there  is  method  in
their  madness*" The  results  which

1  are  now  seen  are  but  the  drops  he-
fore  the*  shower,  the  little  progress

'  now  made  is  but  the  shadow  of  that

!  which  shall  be  seen  when  they  shall
return  to  the  land  of  the  rising  sun,
for  then  in  every  State  of  the  Union
will  be  found  wonderful  colonies
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  wielding
power  and  influence  under  the  ad-
ministration and  institutions  of  Zion,
working  as  they  work  now  for  the
elevation  and  progress  and  redemp-
tion of  the  human  family.

■P  mm

May  God  give  us  wisdom  "to
work  while  it  is  day/1  to  labor  dili-
gently in  the  duties  to  which  we
have  been  called,  and  when  we  have
done  this,  may  we  be  saved  in  the
celestial  kingdom  of  our  God,  through
Jesus  Christ  Amen.


340


JOURNAL  OF  DiSCOURS


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Jan,  2d,  1881.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS — THE  SUBLIMITY  OF  THE

GOSPEL*  ETC.


I  am  pleased  to  have  another  op- 1
portunity  of  meeting  with  you  on  i
this  the  first  Sabbath  of  the  New
Year;  and  I  will  add  to  all  the  faith- ;
fill,  ten  thousand  more  of  them.  For
we,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  do  not  con-
sider that  our  existence  ends  with
time,  as  we  generally  term  it,  but
that  it  reaches  into  ^eternity.  And
that  while  we  are  here  in  a  state  of

Srobation  to  fulfil  the  various  duties
evolving  upon  us,  as  Saints  of  the
living  God ;  while  we  come  into  the
world  and  exist  in  it  for  &  time  and
then  leave  it,  we  have  hopes  and
aspirations  beyond  the  grave,  and
anticipate  that,  as  ages  and  cycles
shall  pass  along  and  generation
succeeds  generation,  if  we  are  true
to  our  trust  and  live  our  religion,
keeping  the  commandments  of  God
and  fulfilling  the  various  covenants
devolving  upon  us  to  attend  to,
that  we  shall  associate  with  the  just
in  the  eternities  to  come  !  therefore
we  are  living,  and  hoping,  and  ex-
pecting, and  planning,  and  contriv-
ing and  operating,  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  object  We  do  not
look  upon  the  affairs  of  this  life  as
those  alone  in  which  humanity  is
interested.  We  have  been  taught
differently  by  those  who  have  had
communication  with  the  Lord,  and


to  whom  he  has  revealed  his  will.
We  have  been  taught  differently  by
the  holy  priesthood  that  we  have  in
our  midst  ;  we  have  been  taught
differently  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which
we  have  received  in  God's  appointed
way,  according  to  his  law  ;  which
spirit  has  enlightened  our  minds
and  given  unto  us  an  evidence
and  a  testimony  similar  to  that
which  we  heard  Brother  Smith  speak
of  that  he  knew  this  work  to  be  of
God.  How  did  he  know  itt
Through  obedience  to  the  law  of
God,  by  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost  and  through  the  union  and
communion  that  exists  between  God
and  his  children  upon  the  earth.
This  is  a  principle  of  certainty  and
testimony,  and  an  evidence  that  we
all  have  the  privilege  of  enjoying  for
ourselves,  and  of  knowing  that  God
lives  j  of  knowing  that  this  is  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the
kingdom  of  God ;  and  of  knowing
also  that  God  lives  and  that  he  is  our
Father,  and  that  we  are  his  children  f
and  of  further  knowing  that,  "  when
this  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle
is  dissolved, "  we  can  feel  like  one  of
old,  that  "we  have  a  building  of
God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens,"  waiting  for
us,  and  not  for  us  only  but  for  all


THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS,  ETC-  341


*who  love  the  appearing  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  Were  it
not  for  this  hope,  were  it  not  for
this  spirit,  were  it  not  for  this  intel-
ligence that  has  been  communicated
unto  us  by  the  light  of  revelation
and  by  the  manifestation  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  through  the  revela-
tions of  God  to  man  in  these  the
last  days,  by  the  opening  of  the
heavens,  by  the  administration  of
holy  angels,  and  by  the  revelations
of  the  will  of  God  to  man ;  were  it
not  for  this  we  should  not  have  been
here  to  day,  this  congregation  would
not  have  been  assembled  here  as
they  are  ;  the  Latter-day  Saints
would  not  have  been  in  this  terri-
tory ;  nor  would  they  have  been  any-
where else  ;  for  it  is  because  God  has
seen  tit  in  the  fullness  of  time?,  ac-
cording to  the  testimony  given  by
the  holy  prophets,  who  have  pro-
phesied since  the  world  was,  accord-
ing to  the  designs  and  eternal  pur-
poses of  God  pertaining  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth — those  who
now  live,  those  who  have  lived  and
those  who  will  live  ;  were  it  not  for
the  purposes  of  God  pertaining  to
these  things,  and  the  communica-
tions of  his  will  to  us,  we  could  not
be,  as  I  before  stated,  in  the  position
we  now  occupy,  But  God  having
designed  to  accomplish  his  work  in
the  interests  of  the  people  of  the
world,  in  this  day  and  age,  in  the
interest  of  the  myriads  who  have
passed  out  of  the  world,  in  the  in-
terest of  the  living  and  the  dead,
he  has  commenced  his  work  for  the
salvation,  for  the  redemption  and
for  the  exaltation  of  the  human
family,  and  hence  things  are  as  we
see  them  nmong  us  to-day.

When  we  talk  about  the  theories
of  men,  they  are  matters  of  very
little  importance;  when  we  reflect
upon  their  ideas  or  views,  they  are
imlly  unimportant,  but  when  we


|  talk  about  the  law  of  God,  the  plans
of  Jehovah  and  his  designs  pertain-
ing  to  the  world  in  which  we  live
and  its  inhabitants,  and  to  the  inha-
bitants that  have  lived,  and  to  all
humanity,  then  we  touch  upon  a

J  subject  that  is  grand,  noble  and  sub-
lime ;  one  that  enters  into  the  re-
cesses of  the  heart  and  that  touches
every  fibre,  and  that  causes  our
hopes  and  aspirations  to  reach  within
the  vail,  where  Christ  our  forerun-
ner has  gone,  and  we  feel  convinced
that  there  is  an  eternal  fitness  in
all  the  laws,  in  all  the  truths,  in  all
the  ordinances,  and  in  everything
that  God  has  revealed  for  the  salva-
tion and  exaltation  of  the  human
family.  We  are  here,  and  how  did
we  come  here  ?  What  was  it  that
brought  us  here  ?  Some  hardly
know  ;  and  then  there  are  a  great
many  who  do  understand  this  thing
very  well  We  are  here  because  we
listened  to  the  eternal  truths  of  the
gospel,  and  that  gospel  could  not
have  been  known  unless  it  had  been
revealed.  For  no  m^n  nor  any  set
of  men,  to-day,  understand  those
principles  which  are  calculated  to
exalt  men  in  the  celestial  kingdom
of  God,  nor  could  they  comprehend
them  unless  God  had  revealed  them.
And  when  we  hear  of  the  folly,  the
raving  and  ranting  of  ignorant  men
who  know  not  God  nor  his  laws,  who
would  presume  to  dictate  to  Jeho-
vah, who  would  teach  something  that
they  know  nothing  about ;  but  being
without  revelation,  are  fitly  repre-
sented in  the  Scriptures  as  "  Know-
ing nothing  but  what  they  know

!  naturally  as  brute  beasts,  made  to  be
taken  and  destroyed."  For  instance,
we  have  our  cattle,  our  sheep  and
other  animals  which  we  raise  and
provide  food  tor  and  feed  and  fatten
them*  What  for  ?  For  the  knife.
How  could  we  do  it  if  they  knew
what  we  were  doing  it  for  I I  do


342  JOURNAL  Oh*

not  think  they  would  get  very  fat
Still,  one  of  the  old  prophets,  in
speaking  of  these  men  who  are  with-
out revelation,  says,  "They  know
nothing  but  what  they  know  natu-
rally as  brute  beasts."  We  certainly
do  not  wish  such  men  fur  our  in-
structors,

'  Many  men  at  the  present  day  will
tell  us  that  they  will  believe  nothing
but  what  they  can  see  with  their
eyes,  handle  with  their  hands  and
comprehend  with  their  judgments.
And  what  are  they  pre  pared  for  i  I
might  here  ask,  What  does  man  in
reality  know  of  God  and  of  his  laws,
or  of  the  proper  fitness  of  things  1
What  does  he  know  ahout  that
vitality  that  he  himself  is  in  posses
siou  of,  or  that  which  any  other
animal  is  in  possession  of?  He
knows  nothing  pertaining  to  it,  nor
can  he  impart  it  When  we  talk
about  the  wisdom  of  man,  how  far
does  it  go  ]  We  learn  a  few  of  the
laws  of  nature.  Who  gave  these
laws?  Who  originated  or  organized
them?  Who  placed  these  eternal
laws  in  nature]  Who  made  the
solar  system,  for  instance,  to  move
with  that  accuracy  ami  punctuality
accordiug  to  exact  rules  and  laws  1
Who  made  any  portion  of  that  sys-
tem, gave  it  its  original  force  or  sus-
tains it  in  its  motion  ?  Who  planted
in  matter  its  exact  and  various  laws'?
Can  any  of  the  learned  and  the  wise
of  this  day  and  age  make  anything
of  that  kind  or  anything  approach*
ing  to  it?  Who  gives  life  and
vitality  to  man  1  I)oes  man  give
it I  We  are  told  that  "  there  is
a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Almighty  giveth  it  u ri-
ders tanding,"  but  without  that  what
are  we,  although  our  organization
may  be  complete  in  all  its  parts,  yet
without  the  spirit  the  body  is  lifeless,
motionless  and  inanimate.  What
are  we  t At  best  but  little  specs  in


DISCOURSES.

motion  moving  about  in  the  world*
puffed  up,  in  many  instances,  with
things  we  profess  to  know,  when
really  we  know  nothing  only  as  God
communicates  it,  and  can  under-
stand nothing  only  as  he  makes  it
manifest.  Can  all  the  philosophers
of  to-day  make  a  grain  of  wheat  and
give  vitality  to  it,  much  less  a  world  ?
Or  can  they  make  a  simple  blade

|  of  grass?  It  is  not  a  big  thing  to
ask  a  wise  man  to  do,  especially
those  who  desire  to  ignere  God  in
his  works,  but  can  the  wisest  of  our
philosophers  do  it]  No,  nor  can
they  discover  the  secrets  of  life,  nor
the  impulses  which  act  upon  all  na-
ture in  all  the  varied  operations.
Who  governs  the  planetary  sj stem?
The  great  God,  the  same  who  causes
our  earth  as  well  as  other  systems  to
revolve  upon  their  axes,  and  provides
for  them,  and  has  measured  and
given  them  their  times  and  seasons,

1  and  their  laws,  Who  is  it  that  causes
the  blood  to  flow  through  our  veins?
He  that  has  given  and  does  give  in-
telligence to  man.  Can  anybody
point  out  any  of  those  vital  prin-
ciples and  show  that  they  originated
independently  of  God]  No,  they
cannot  And  so  it  is  through  ail
creation,  no  matter  what  you  touch
pertain  ing  to  nature.  When  man
discovers  a  law  of  nature  either  in
the  mineral,  the  animal,  the  vege-
table or  any  other  kingdom,  he

;  will  find  that  it  is  governed  by
strict  eternal  and  unchangeable  and
unde  via  ting  laws  ]  And  when  men
discover  that,  what  do  they  find  out?
Something  which  God  has  placed
there,  something  that  has  always
existed  We  talk  sometimes  about
the  great  discoveries  we  have  made.
We  will  refer  to  gas,  for  instance ;
some  of  us  can  remember  very  well
when  there  was  no  such  thing
known  among  us  as  gas  for  lighting
purposes. Who  originated  the  ele-


THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


343


merits  of  which  it  is  composed  1  The
great  God  ;  and  that  principle  al-
ways existed.  We  speak  about
electricity  and  the  uses  to  which
it  can  be  applied,  Who  origi-
nated that  principle  1  "  Of  it  was
found  out  a  few  years  ago  and  we
found  it  very  useful  in  communi-
cating one  with  another  j  through
its  use  we  can  send  a  message  to-
day from  one  part  of  the  world  to
another,  and  can  he  in  communi-
cation really  with  the  world,"  Well,
we  think  we  have  done  something
very  remarkable,  in  discovering
something  of  that  kind,  and  it
really  is  a  great  discovery;  but
then  that  principle  always  existed,
ever  since  the  wojld  was  framed  ;
the  only  thing  that  we  can  boast  of
is  that  we  have  discovered  a  certain
principle  which  we  did  not  know  of
before  ;  and  there  are  ten  thousand
other  principles  beyond,  which  we
have  not  yet  discovered ;  but  when
we  do  discover  them  we  shall  find
them  to  be  the  some  eternal  laws  of
God,  I  am  reminded  sometimes  of
a  little  infant.  You  look  at  the
body ;  it  conies  into  the  world  ;  it  has
its  common  faculties.  By  and  by  it
makes  a  discovery,  it  finds  out  that
it  lias  a  hand,  and  it  looks  at  it  as
much  as  to  say,  It  is  a  very  curious
thing,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  dis-
covery that  I  have  made.  Why,  it
always  had  a  hand,  but  the  baby
did  not  always  know  it.

It  lias  been  remarked  here  by  Bro,
Penrose  that  all  things  are  governed
by  law.  This  is  so  whether  in  the
material  world,  or  whether — I  was
going  to  say — in  the  immaterial
world,  but  we  do  not  know  of  such
a  thing  ;  I  will  say  therefore,  the
spiritual  world,  if  you  please.  We
are  very  singularly  constituted,
forming  a  combination  of  body  and
spirit.  We  learn  a  little  about  the
bodies  of  men,  but  do  we  know  about


the  spirits  ?  We  know  from  history
of  some  things  which  have  taken
place  in  the  past,  but  what  do  we
know  about  things  pertaining  to  the
future  1  Who  can  comprehend  God
or  his  ways  ?  One  of  old  in  speaking
upon  this  subject  says,  "It  is  high
as  heaven  ;  what  canst  thou  do  ?
Deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou
understand  V  There  are  some  pro-
minent features  which  God  has  re-
vealed to  us ;  and  there  are  ten
thousands  of  principles  which  he  has
not  revealed.  Those  principles  that
he  has  revealed  to  us,  like  every-
thing else  pertaining  to  the  works
and  the  designs  of  God,  bring  a  de-
gree of  certainty,  assurance,  intelli-
gence and  .satisfaction  that  nothing
earthly  can  impart.  The  Saints
themselves,  do  not,  in  many  in-
stances, understand  the  "  whys1*
and  the  **  wherefores"  pertaining
to  these  matters.  We  art*  taught
to  obey  certain  laws ;  we  are  taught
to  repent  of  our  sins,  and  to  have
hands  laid  upon  our  heads  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  Here
is  a  law  that  God  has  appointed,
jti*t  the  same  as  he  has  regulated
these  other  systems  of  which  I  speak,
and  with  which  we  are  more  or  less
familiar.  We  have  electricity  float-
ing around  us  in  every  direction.
In  order  to  make  it  subserve  our
desires  we  have  to  use  it  according
to  certain  laws.  At  present  we  have
to  string  up  wire  properly  connect-
ing it  and  use  a  battery  and  a  ma-
chine made  for  the  purpose,  in
order  to  convey  our  thoughts  to
others  at  a  distance  j  and  without
first  paying  due  regard  to  these  or
other  appliances  that  perhaps  might
be  substituted,  we  could  not  com-
municate. When  you  comply  with
the  law  governing  this  matter,  that
is,  when  you  erect  the  poles,  string
the  wire,  make  your  battery  and
have  the  machine  and  thu  circuit


*


complete,  you  may  then  convey  your
thoughts  correctly  over  the  wire  by
the  means  of  electricity  to  others  at
a  distance.  You  know  they  have
been  correctly  sent  because  you  can
receive  your  answer  back ;  and  if
necessary,  have  the  message  you  sent
repeated.  Now  the  same  principle
is  true  in  regard  to  the  other  tilings.
And  do  the  persons  who  operate  the
telegraph  machine  always  understand
all  about  the  philosophy  of  it  t  No,
but  very  few  of  them  comparatively.
Yet  they  learn  to  o]>erate  while
somebody  else  does  the  thinking  and
prepares  the  machine  and  appliances
for  them  for  the  purpose  of  introduc-
ing this  mode  of  communicating.
Now  then,  look  at  the  principle  that
looks  to  many  very  simple  associated
with  that  way  which  God  has  or-
dained and  appointed  for  man  to
become  acquainted  with  him,  and
to  be  introduced  to  him  and  to  his
laws.  How  is  it]  why  the  elder
goes  forth  to  preach,  and  what  is  he
told  to  preach  ?  Faith  in  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  Repentance  and  bap-
tism for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  re*
ception  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now
these  look  to  many  as  being  very
simple  things,  very  simple;  yet  they
are  things  which  God  has  ordained,
they  are  his  laws,  they  were  in  for-
mer times,  they  are  in  this  time*
We  cannot  violate  these  and  receive
the  blessings,  and  no  other  people
can  ;  I  do  not  care  who  they  are,  they
cannot  do  it.  Let  us  go  back  to  our
experience.  There  are  hundreds
of  you  present  who  have  received
the  spirit  of  the  living  God  ;  how
did  you  receive  it1  You  say,  an
elder  came  along,  ami  we  heard  him
preach  ;  he  told  me  to  believe  in  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  to  repent  of
my  sins,  and  that  he  was  authorized
to  baptize  me  for  the  remission  of


my  sins,  and  he  told  me  that  if  I  did
this  that  hands  should  then  be  laid
upon  my  head  and  I  should  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  This  is  the  doc-
trine you  heard.  Then  you  had
faith  in  God  ;  you  repented  of  your
sins,  your  follies  and  ^wickedness,
and  you  covenanted  to  fear  God  and
keep  his  commandments,  and  to  ob-
serve his  laws.  The  elder  then  went
forth  arid  led  you  into  the  water,
and  he  said,  "  Being  commissioned
of  Jesus  Christ  I  baptize  you  for  the
remission  of  your  sins  in  the  name
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen."  He  then
buried  you  in  the  water  and  raised
and  brought  you  out  of  it.  After
lie  did  this,  he  laid  his  hands  upon
your  head,  and  by  the  same  autho-
rity he  confirmed  you  a  member  of
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  said,  "Receive
ye  the  Holy  Ghost"

Now  that  is  a  very  peculiar  opera-
tion when  you  come  to  think  upon
it.  Why  is  it  thus  1  A  man  goes
forth  who  has  authority  given  him
of  Jesus  Christ,  he  baptized  you  for
the  remission  of  your  sins  in  the
name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son
and  cf  the  Holy  Ghost,  There  is
something  very  peculiar  about  it  It
looks  very  simple  ;  but  if  that  man
had  no  such  authority,  then  he  was
an  impostor  ;  and  if  the  man  or  men
who  ordained  that  elder  conferring
on  him  this  priesthood,  had  not  the
authority  to  do  so,  then  he  or  they
were  impostors  j  and  if  God  had
not  given  revelation  instructing
Joseph  Smith  in  relation  to  these
things,  how  they  were  to  be  done,
then  Joseph  Smith  himself  was  an
impostor,  as  well  as  the  apostles  and
all  men  professing  authority.  These
are  self-evident  facts.  We  as  a  peo-
ple do  not  profess  to  have  received
any  authority  from  any  other  source,


THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


345


from  any  man  or  set  of  men,  or  any
church  or  any  organization  existing  ;
and  if  God  lias  not  revealed  it,  then
the  whole  thing  is  a  falsehood  and
fiction,  and  there  is  nothing  to  it.
Here  is  a  picture  [p0™1"1^  to  t'ie
ceiling]  of  the  angel  Moroni  appear*
ing  unto  Joseph  Smith,  revealing
to  him  among  other  things  the  plates
from  which  the  Book  of  Mormon
was  translated.  We  have  another
here  [pointing  to  John  the  Baptist
conferring  upon  Joseph  Smith  and
Oliver  Cowdery  the  Aaronic  priest*
hood],  and  still  another,  represent*
ing  Peter,  James  and  John  confer-
ring upon  Joseph  Smith  the  Mel-
chisedec  priesthood  Very  well  Are
these  things  true  t  There  are  thou-
sands of  Latter-day  Saints'who  will
tell  you  they  know  it.  We  will
come  to  these  things  by  and  by.
But  if  these  things  were  not  so,  then
our  faith  is  in  vain,  then  we  are
dark  and  benighted  as  others  are,
then  the  things  we  believe  in  are  a
phantom  and  can  avail  us  nothing,
either  pertaining  to  this  world  or
the  world  to  come  ;  then  the  build-
ing of  these  temples  amounts  to
nothing,  if  these  things  are  a  fiction,
and  everything  we  have  done  and
are  engaged  in  amounts  to  nothing.
But  if  they  are  true,  then  there  is
nothing  of  so  great  importance  to
the  work!  of  mankind  and  to  us,  as
the  revelation  of  these  truths  to  man
in  these  last  days,  and  pertaining
also  to  our  association  therewith.

Now,  when  an  elder  lays  his  hands
upon  a  man  and  confirms  upon  him
the  Holy  Ghost,  he  tells  him  to  re-
ceive it  by  virtue  of  the  authority
conferred  upon  him.  What  author-
ity 1  Why  God  restored  the  author-
ity of  the  holy  priesthood  by  those
who  held  the  keys  of  that  priest^
hood  and  who  administer  in  time
and  in  eternity,  who  hold  that  priest-
hood upon  the  earth,  and  who  now


hold  it  in  the  heavens.  They  came
here  to  impart  it  to  men,  and  did
restore  it  to  men.  Very  well,  that
being  the  case,  man  was  again  placed
in  communion  with  his  God  ;  not
left  any  longer  to  guess  and  sup-
pose and  surmise  and  to  think,  but
to  know.  For  instance,  I  have  my-
self been  thousands  of  miles  and
hundreds  of  thousands  to  preach
this  Gospel ;  would  I  have  gone  if  I
had  not  known  it  to  be  true  I  No,  I
would  not  There  is  nothing  very
pleasing  in  going  forth  to  an  unbe-
lieving world  to  meet  the  errors  and
the  prejudices  of  ages,  and  to  oppose
the  false  theories  of  men,  to  intro-
duce the  principles  that  are  opposed
and  repudiated  by  the  carnal  mind,
and  by  the  corrupt  every  where ;
I  there  is  nothing  very  pleasant  or
inviting  to  be  traduced  and  to  have
your  name  cast  out  as  evil,  no  mat-
ter how  honorable  you  may  be,  this
has  been  the  lot  of  the  elders  of  this
Church  and  is  their  lot  to-day,  by
men  who  know  not  of  what  they
speak,  by  men  who  are  bigoted,  su-
perstitious ami  ignorant ;  men  who
comprehend  not  God  nor  his  laws  ;
but  we  know  it,  and  I  know  the
truths  of  which  I  speak,  and  bear
testimony  to  it  before  you.  If  others
do  not  know  it,  I  cannot  help  it ;  I
have  obeyed  the  method  appointed
to  receive  these  thing?,  as  you  have
!  had  to  do,  to  he  initiated  into  the
Church  and  kingdom,  according  to
the  laws  which  God  has  ordained*
What  I  have  done,  then,  all  others
in  this  Church  have  clone  ;  and  the
elders  of  Israel  have  been  actuated
by  the  same  impulses,  have  obeyed
the  same  doctrines  and  ordinances,
and  have  administered  the  same
ordinances  to  others.  They  are
influenced  by  the  same  spirit,  and
they  realized  and  knew  for  them-
selves of  the  things  which  they  pro-
mulgated and  taught Is  this  con-


346


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


fined  to  elders  alone !  No.  To
the  apostles  and  presidents  1  No.
To  the  seventies  or  high  priests  or
elders,  bishops,  priests,  teachers  or
deacons  1  No.  This  is  a  thing
which  pertains  to  all  ;  all  who  are
Latter-day  Saints,  all  who  have
complied  with  the  requirements  and
who  have  thus  placed  themselves  in
the  condition  to  receive  this  know-
ledge j  and  you  men  who  are  before
and  around  me  to-dav  are  witnesses
of  the  truth  of  that  which  I  say,
because  you  yourselves  did  receive
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  God
which  imparted  to  you  a  knowledge
of  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  and
placed  you  in  communion  with  God
your  heavenly  Father.  And  this
Spirit  has  borne  witness  to  our
spirits  as  it  has  been  said  by  one  of
old,  "  that  we  are  the  children  of
God,  and  if  children,  then  heirs  ;
heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with
Christ/'  We  sometimes  treat  these
things  rather  lightly,  scarcely  com-
prehending what  we  are  doing  ;  and
I  often  think  that  our  elders  them-
selves hardly  realize  the  significance
of  the  situation  they  occupy  when
they  say  to  him  that  believes,  re-
pents and  is  baptised,  Receive  thou
the  Holy  Ghost/1  Is  there  a  thing
of  more  importance  that  we  can
think  of  anywhere  than  this  which
bo  many  of  us  treat  so  lightly.  The
idea  of  a  man,  human  and  "fallible,
pronouncing  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost  upon  his  fellow  man.
and  his  fellow  receiving  that  heav-
enly treasure,  is  one  of  the  greatest
manifestations  of  the  faithfulness
of  God,  in  sanctioning  the  acts  of
his  elders  that  it  is  possible  for  us
to  conceive  of.  He  has  said  that
through  these  ordinances  lie  would
confer  the  Holy  Ghost ;  he  has  also
fulfilled  it,  as  the  thousands  who
hear  me  to-day  can  bear  record.
Here  is  the  thing  that  operated


upon  you  and  which  was  the  means
of  bringing  you  here  to  this  place,
from  many*  of  the  nations  of  the


Some  people  find  fault  with  us
about  these  things.  I  have  said  fre-
quently to  men  that  I  cannot  help
my  faith  and  I  am  sure  you  cannot
help  it;  no  man  living  can  control
my  faith,  for  I  have  received  a  por-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  and  I
know  it ;  and  if  you  have  received  a
portion  of  that  same  Spirit  you  know
it,  and  you  cannot  un-know  it — it
is  impossible,  you  cannot  un-know
it,  unless  you  sin  against  God  and,
as  the  apostle  said,  grieve  the  Spirit
by  which  jou  were  sealed  ;  then  it
withdraws  from  you,  then  you  will
not  know  much  about  it,  no  more
than  some  do  who  take  this  course
against  us.  The  apostle  said,  "Grieve
not  the  Spirit  of  God  by  which  you
are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption;"
do  not  grieve  it,  do  not  sin  against
God,  do  not  violate  his  laws,  do  not
corrupt  yourselves  ;  do  not  corrupt
your  bodies,  for  are  they  not,  as  one
has  said,  fci  the  temples  of  the  living
God?"  Do  not  allow  your  spirits
to  be  contaminated  and  led  astray
from  correct  principles,  but  cleave
unto  God  in  all  humility,  fidelity,
faithfulness  ;  observing  his  laws  and
keeping  his  commandments.  Why,
then,  let  me  ask,  are  you  here  ?  You
are  here  because  the  elders  of  Israel
visited  the  place  where  you  lived  in
this  nation,  or  in  nations  afar  off,
preaching  the  principles  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  which  had  been  re-
stored ;  and  you  believed  their  tes-
iiiony,  and  obeyed  the  Gospel,  and
received  a  knowledge  of  its  divinity,
and  because  of  this  you  came  here  ;
and  hence  the  elder?,  the  apostles,
the  presidents,  aud  all  the  various
peoples  and  members  being  touched
by  the  spark  of  that  fire  that  dwells
in  the  bosom  of  God,  being  enlight-


THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


347


ened  by  that  Holy  Spirit  which  is
promised  to  those  who  obey  his  law,
you  left  your  homes,  your  friends,
your  associations,  and  came  here  to
mingle  with  the  Saints  of  the  Most
High,  to  unite  with  them  and  to
assist  in  carrying  out  those  purposes
that  God  designs  pertaining  to  the
human  family.  Now  in  ail  this
Joseph  Smith  and  those  associated
with  him — Oliver  Cowdery,  Martin
Harris,  Hyrum  Smith,  Sidney  Rig*
don  and  others, — understood  these
principles ;  they  commenced  this
work  not  of  their  own  free  will,
and,  yes,  of  their  own  free  will,
too  j  but  they  did  not  originate
them.  God  originated  them  and
they  were  instrumental  in  his  hands
in  introducing  them.  These  men
having  been  ordained  themselves,
ordained  others  who  went  forth  to
proclaim  that  word  of  truth  which
they  had  received-  And  why  did
you  come  here*  Because  yon  re-
ceived that  testimony  and  believed
it  and  obeyed  it  and  received  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  associated  with
those  who  believed  the  same  princi-
ples. There  was  something  that  pro-
pelled you  forward,  you  hardly  knew
why  or  how,  but  you  were  desirous
to  come  to  Zion.  Why  ?  Because
you  are  living  in  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times,  when  God  will
gather  together  all  things  in  one,
and  the  keys  of  the  gathering  dis-
pensation had  been  introduced  ;  and
because  you  had  received  of  that
spirit,  and  you  never  felt  easy  until
you  got  here.  Well,  how  was  that!
What  operated  upon  you !  The
Spirit  of  God.  Was  it  a  some-
thing that  was  craving  after  wealth
and  position  and  power  and  ag-
grandizement, to  have  a  great  and
honorable  name?  No,  it  was  as
you  first  were  taught  and  as  you
afterwards  comprehended,  it  was
how  to  learn  to  save  yourselves,  to


save  your  progenitors,  to  save  your
posterity ;  it  was  that  you  might
obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of
life,  fulfil  the  measure  of  your
creation,  and  that  while  you  felt
as  a  man  among  men  upon  the
earth,  you  might,  by  and  by,  through
obedience  to  pure  principles,  stand
among  the  Gods  as  a  God,  in  the
eternal  worlds,  and  be  exalted
through  the  power  of  the  Gospel,
This  is  why  you  came  here,  and  are
coming  here,  and  being  here,  we
brought  our  bodies  with  us.  We
have  to  eat  and  drink,  we  need
clothing.  The  curse  has  not  been
removed  from  the  earth  yet,  there-
fore we  have  "  to  eat  our  bread  by
the  sweat  of  our  brow."  We  have
to  do  in  regard  to  these  matters  as
others  do ;  and  b^iug  here,  what
then  ?  Why  a  number  of  people
make  what  may  be  termed  a  com-
munity* We  are  living  on  land,
and  that  land,  in  a  territorial  capa-
city is  part  and  parcel  of  the
United  States,  and  as  a  territory
of  the  United  States,  we  neces-
sarily form  an  integral  part  of  the
United  States ;  being  men,  and  hav-
ing bodies  as  other  men, independent
of  our  general  feelings,  thoughts,
actions  and  sentiments,  we  have  to
live  and  move,  to  eat,  to  drink,  to
occupy  farms,  houses,  cities,  and
lands ;  and  to  perform  all  the  varied
duties  of  citizens,  associated  with
the  body  politic.  What  next]  We
have  our  religious  duties  to  perform,
and  that  is  to  fear  God  and  to  ob-
serve his  laws.

What  else  ?  We  build  temples.
What  for  %  To  administer  the  ordi-
nances of  God.  What  ordinances  ?
Those  that  God  has  revealed,  and
those  that  the  world  know  nothing
about ;  and  if  they  had  the  temples
already  built  for  them  to-day  they
would  not  know  any  more  what  to
do  with  them  than  that  pitcher  does ;


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


nor  would  we  unless  God  ha  J  re*
vealed  it.  Now  we  are  going  on
quietly  to  attend  to  our  duties,  build*
ing  our  temples  and  administering  in  I
them.  Here  is  Brother  John  I*
Smith — how  long  Brother  Smith
have  you  been  administering  in  the  j
Temple  at  St  George  ?  [Brother  1
Smith  :  Four  years,  sir,]  And  for
whom  I  For  himself?  Yes,  a  little,  1
not  much  however,  principally  for
others.  For  the  welfare  of  whom  ?
The  living.  Who  else?  Of  the
dead  ;  that  we  may  fulfil  certain
duties  that  God  has  called  us  to
perform,  to  help  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  designs  and  purposes,
And  that  as  God  has  been  pleased
to  restore  to  the  earth  the  keys
which  Elijah  held,  who  conferred  his
power  upon  others  to  turn  the  hearts
of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  arid
the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the
fathers,  that  the  fathers  who  existed
upon  the  earth  in  generations  gone
past,  and  we  who  are  now  in  exis-
tence and  our  children  that  are  fol
lowing  after  us,  might  be  cemented
and  united  together  by  eternal  bonds
which  God  has  pointed  out  That
there  might  be  an  alliance  and  co-
operation between  those  in  the  hea-
vens and  those  on  the  earth  ;  that
there  might  be  a  welding,  uniting,
cementing  principle  ;  in  which  the
priesthood  in  the  heavens  and  on
the  earth  are  united,  to  carry  out  the
great  designs  of  our  heavenly  Fa-
ther in  the  salvation  ami  redemption
of  the  living  and  the  dead,  and
that  we  might  operate  for  them  on
the  earth  while  they  are  operating
for  us  in  the  heavens*  For  it  is
written,  that  They  without  us
cannot  be  made  perfect,"  neither
can  we  become  perfect  without  them.
We,  then,  are  operating  in  our  part
and  they  in  theirs  ;  we  on  the  earth,
they  in  the  heavens ;  and  with  God
they  are  operating,  and  with  Jesus


Christ,  who  is  the  mediator  of  the
new  covenant,  and  with  the  ancient
prophets  and  apostles  of  God,  who
lived  before,  who  administered  in
time  and  in  eternity,  holding  the
everlasting  priesthood,  and  who  are
all  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the
1  world  and  the  exaltation  of  man.
Well,  now,  what  shall  we  do  ?
Shall  we  go  on  with  it  ?  We  will
try  to,  the  Lord  being  our  helper.
Some  people  say  we  are  very  wicked.
Well,  I  do  not  think  we  are  as
good  as  we  ought  to  be  by  a  long
way,  but  I  do  think  we  are  very
much  better  than  they  are.  This  is
my  opinion,  with  all  our  follies  and
all  our  weaknesses,  and  all  our
infirmities.  And  —  well,  I  wTould
not  like  to  say  what  1  know  about
them.  God  knows  it  We  will  let
that  go.  The  Lord  will  judge  men
by  their  acts,  and  he  will  judge  us
and  all  others  by  our  acts.

Now,  we  have  a  territorial  form
of  government  I  will  come  to
that  again.  What  shall  we  do  ?
Observe  the  laws  of  men  J  I  think
that  is  a  verv  easy  thing  to  do.
There  is  nothing  very  hard  about
that ;  if  they  will  not  interfere  with
us  in  religious  matters,  there  is
nothing  very  hard  about  keeping
the  laws  of  the  land.  Will  we  pay
taxes  1  Yes,  Will  be  loyal  to  the
government  ]  Yes.  Will  we  sus-
tain all  good,  honorable  men  that
are  rulers  1  Yes,  and  pray  God  to
inspire  them  with  wisdom,  that  they
may  be  led  in  the  right  path.  Will

■  we  fight  with  them  and  quarrel  with

■  them,  and  say  hard  words  about
them  and  misrepresent  them  as  they
do  us  ?  No,  we  will  not  It  would
try  me  very  much  sometimes  to  have
to  tell  the  plain  and  unpalatable
truth  about  them,  of  things  which,
without  falsehood,  I  can  say,  I  know
for  myself.  Still,  will  they  try  to
interfere  with  us  ?  Yes, Who  J  All


THE  ETERNITIES  BEFORE  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


340


kinds  of  foolish  people,  ignorant,!
narrow-minded,  degraded,  wallowing
in  iniquity  and  besmeared  with  cor-
ruption of  every  kind  ;  and  yet  they
talk  to  us  about  our  impurities.
They  have  reason  to  talk  a  little,
but  not  much.  We  are  not  what
we  should  be  by  a  long  way  ;  we
ought  to  be  a  great  deal  better  than|
we  are.  I  pray  that  God  may  en-
able us  to  be  so.

Well,  we  do  not  interfere  with
them.  Whose  religion  do  we  inter*
fere  with  1  Nobody's,  I  hope  you
do  not,  I  know  I  do  not ;  if  they
are  satisfied  with  it,  I  am  satisfied
that  they  should  have  it.  I  believe
in  every  man  using  the  free  exercise
of  his  judgment  and  conscience,
leaving  the  balance  with  God,  I  will
tell  people  the  truth  ;  if  they  obey
it,  all  right,  if  not,  certainly  I  will
not  prosecute  them  or  persecute
them  because  of  their  views.  But
on  the  contrary,  if  anybody  were  to
interfere  in  any  May  with  the  reli-
gious faith  of  any  one,  I  care  not
how  foolish  it  might  be,  I  would  be^
among  the  first  to  stand  forth  in  the
defense  of  him  whose  rights  were
assailed ;  not  because  I  believed  in
his  religion  at  all ;  but  because  my
sense  of  justice  and  equal  rights
would  impel  me  to  this  action  ;  for
if  I  claim  those  rights  myself  I  ought
to  respect  them  in  others,  holding
as  I  do  that  it  is  the  right  of  all  men!
to  believe  in  and  worship  as  they
please.  And  while  there  are  thou-
sands of  highminded  honorable  men
in  this  great  nation  who  believe  in
and  sustain  the  principles  of  freedom
and  equal  rights,  there  are  very
many  foolish,  inconsiderate  men,
who  would  recklessly  tear  down  the
temple  of  freedom  erected  by  the
fathers  of  this  nation,  and  ruthlessly
proscribe,  prosecute  and  persecute
all  who  cannot  subscribe  to  their
narrow  erratic,  unsupported  ideas.


But  will  you  not  conform  to  their
ideas  1  No,  I  will  not,  the  Lord
being  my  helper,  and  then  the  peo-
ple will  not  God  being  their  helper.
The  Lord  has  revealed  unto  us  the
truth,  and  we  know  it,  and  we  will
stand  by  it  and  maintain  it  from
this  time  forth,  God  being  our  helper  ;
and  all  who  believe  in  that  say  aye
[the  congregation  said  aye].  That
is  the  feeling  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  I  know.  But  will  we  inter-
fere with  anybody  ?  No  !  no  !  we
will  not.  With  their  politics  ?  Not
much.  For  while  we  are  interested
in  the  welfare  of  the  nation,  we  care
very  little  about  the  present  political
issues.  We  think  that  a  great  and
magnanimous  nation,  however,
could  well  afford  to  let  us  alone,
and  would  feel  like  endorsing  General
Grant's  axiorn,  * 4  Let  us  have  peace.*
But  then  if  people  will  interfere
with  us  while  we  are  pursuing  the
even  tenor  of  our  way,  we  will  de-
fend and  protect  ourselves  from
their  assaults  as  best  we  may,  and
then  we  will  commit  them  to  God.
We  have  not  started  this  work,  God
commenced  it,  not  us,  and  we  are
simply  endeavoring  to  carry  out  his
will  and  law,  Wiill  we  do  it  t
With  the  Lord's  help  we  will
Will  we  fight  against  authority?
No,  Will  we  oppose  the  princi-
ples of  this  government  1  No.  We
will  sustain  them.  But  if  people
will  act  foolishly  we  cannot  help  it.
If  this  nation  can  stand  the  results
of  the  violation  of  constitutional
principles,  we  can.  If  they  tear
down  the  bulwarks  of  freedom  and
with  impunity  trample  under  foot
the  rights  of  men  we  cannot  help  it
If  it  is  our  turn,  to-day,  to  suffer
wrong,  it  will  be  somebody  else's
to-morrow,  national  retrogression!*
are  not  often  arrested.  It  behooves
statesmen  to  pause  in  their  career.
The  floodgates  once  opened  who


350  JOURNAL  OF

shall  stay  the  torrent  1  We  of  ail
men  would  save  the  ship  of  state
and  would  say  to  these  national
patricides  avaunt !  But  if  they  will
act  foolishly  and  eontinue  to  do  so
until  they  subvert  the  principles
of  liberty,  and  thus  destroy  one
of  the  best  governments  ever  in-
stituted on  earth,  then  if  forsaken
by  all  else,  the  elders  of  this  Church  ,
will  rally  round  the  Constitution,
lift  up  the  standard  of  freedom,
which  is  being  trodden  under  foot
and  bed  rabbled  by  demagogues,  and
proclaim  liberty  to  the  world ;
equal  rights,  liberty  and  equality  j
freedom  of  conscience  and  of  wor-
ship to  all  men  everywhere.  That
is  not  a  prophecy  of  mine ;  it  is  a
prophecy  of  Joseph  Smith's,  and  I
believe  it  very  strongly.  Will  we
oppose  them  1  No,  Let  them  go  on
in  their  own  way  and  we  will  pray
to  God  to  turn  the  designs  of  wicked
men,  and  if  they  will  not  repent  and
turn  from  their  evil  deeds,  pray  to
him  that  they  may  be  taken  in  their  ;
own  trap,  be  caught  in  their  own
snare,  and  fall  into  the  pit  which
they  dig  for  us.  Can  you  pray  with
a  good  conscience  that  this  may  be-
fall them  I  Certainly,  If  men  dig
a  pit  for  others  they  should  not  find
fault  if  they  fall  into  it  themselves.
And  as  sure  as  God  lives  they  will
do  it,  if  they  persevere  in  their  ini-
quity, and  as  sure  as  we  stand  faith-
ful to  the  principles  of  truth,  God
will  stand  by  us,  and  the  wrath  of
man  will  he  made  to  praise  him,  and
the  remainder  he  will  restrain ;
and  they  cannot  help  themselves.
For  both  they  and  we  are  in  the
hands  of  God,  and  they  can  go  no
further  than  he  permits  them,  nei-
ther can  we.  And  we  will  try,  as
the  friends  of  this  nation  and  of  hu- 1
manity,  to  do  right,  and  to  sustain  I


DISCOURSES.

all  correct  principles,  in  the  main-
tenance of  justice  and  equal  rights
to  all ;  cultivating  peace,  respecting
law,  sustaining  our  institutions,  and
praying  that  right,  justice  and  equity
may  prevail  throughout  the  land  ;
and  that  the  hands  of  all  honorable
men  may  be  strengthened  to  pre-
serve inviolable  the  God-given  insti-
tutions of  this  great  nation .  Let  us
also  try  to  fulfil  all  of  our  duties  as
fathers,  and  our  duties  as  mothers,
our  duties  as  children  and  our  duties
as  citizens  of  the  United  States,
our  duties  as  Presidents,  our  duties
as  Apostles,  our  duties  as  High
Priests,  our  duties  as  Seventies,
our  duties  as  Elders  and  our  duties
as  Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons,
and  our  duties  as  members  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints-  Let  us  humble  our-
selves before  the  Lord,  live  in  the
light  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  the
Holy  Spirit  which  we  have  received
may  be  in  us  "  as  a  light  that  shines
brighter  and  brighter  until  the  per-
fect day,"  And  if  we  are  faithful,
God  will  stand  by  Israel ;  he  will
preserve  his  elect ;  he  will  listen  to
our  prayers  :  and  we  will  go  to  work
by  his  help  to  build,  up  Zion  and
establish  the  Kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth  ;  and  we  and  our  posterity
will  never  cease  doing  it  until  the
"  kingdom  of  this  world  shall  be-
come the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and
his  Christ,  and  he  shall  rule  forever
and  forever  and  then  throughout
the  endless  ages  of  eternity  among
the  Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds  we
will  join  in  singing,  "  blessing  and
glory  and  honor  and  power  and
might  and  majesty  and  dominion
be  ascribed  to  him  that  sitteth  upon
the  throne  and  unto  the  Lamb  for-
ever/1  Even  so.  Amen*


THE  GOSPEL, — A  PRACTICAL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  RELIGION, iTC.  351

DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  CHAS,  W.  PENROSE,

Delivered  in  the  Salt  Lake  Assembly  Hall,  Sunday  Ajternoon,

January  2nd,  1881.

( Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

THE GOSPEL,— A  PRACTICAL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  RELIGION, AND  THE
MEANS  OF  ETERNAL  EXALTATION,


I  can  endorse  heartily  the  remarks  !
that  have  been  made  to  us  by
Brother  John  L,  Smith,  an  old  ac-
quaintance whom  I  am  pleased  to
see.  I  feel  gratified  to  know  that
he  is  still  laboring  for  Israel,  that
his  heart  is  in  the  right  place,  and
that  his  desires  are,  as  they  always
have  been  so  far  as  I  have  been  ac-
quainted with  him,  to  serve  God,  to
keep  his  commandments,  and  teach
men  so.

When  Jesus  was  on  the  earth  he
said,  "  Whosoever  therefore  shall
break  one  of  these  least  command-
ments, and  shall  teach  men  so,  he
shall  be  called  least  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  ;  but  whosoever  shall  do
and  teach  them,  the  same  shall  be
called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  hea-
ven." I  believe  it  is  the  object  and
desire  of  all  our  brethren  who  are
called  to  occupy  responsible  posi-
tions in  the  midst  of  the  people  to
carry  out  this  saying  of  Jesus —
that  is,  to  keep  his  commandments
themselves  and  to  teach  others  to
do  the  same.  This  desire,  at  any
rate,  should  animate  every  one  who
is  called  to  be  a  servant  of  God.  It
is  not  enough  to  believe  in  the  Gos-
pel ;  it  is  not  enough  to  have  faith
in  the  work  that  God  Almighty  has


r  commenced  on  the  earth  ;  it  is  not
enough  to  have  a  testimony  that
Joseph  Smith  was  a  prophet  of  God,
that  angels  have  come  from  heaven,
restored  the  Gospel  and  brought
back  the  ancient  priesthood,  that
God  has  commenced  the  great  lat-
ter-day work  spoken  of  by  all  the
I  ancient  prophets  and  that  we  are
called  to  assist  in  that  work — a  mere
testimony  that  this  is  the  case  is  not
enough.  We  are  called  to  be  workers
of  righteousness.  And  we  are  not
only  called  to  do  what  is  right,  but
also  to  aid  in  establishing  righteous-
ness on  the  earth  by  teaching  others
to  follow  our  example.

The  religion  which  we  have  re-
ceived  is  a  practical  religion.  It
offers  some  thing  for  us  to  do  all  the
time.  There  is  no  need  for  us  at
any  time  to  stand  still,  we  are  called
to  be  active  workers  in  the  cause  of
God.  Every  man  and  every  woman
who  has  received  the  Gospel  and
been  baptized  into  the  Church  is
expected  to  take  an  active  part  in
this  work  ;  not  to  leave  it  to  those
1  who  are  called  upon  to  preside  in
the  various  wards  and  stakes  and
over  the  Church  of  God,  but  each
one  of  us  has  an  individual  interest
in  this  Church  {or  ought  to  have)


352


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  should  manifest  it  by  a  desire
to  do  something  that  the  work  of
our  God  may  roll  forward  in  the
earth.

We  have  had  made  plain  to  our
understanding  some  few  of  the  first
principles  of  salvation  ,  and  these
have  been  made  clear  to  our  minds
not  merely  as  objects  of  faith,  but
as  something  for  us  to  lay  hold  of,  as  |
a  guide  to  our  feet,  as  a  light  to  our
path,  and  as  an  incentive  to  action.
We  are  called  to  be  Saints  not  only
in  the  Assembly  Hall,  or  in  the
Tabernacle,  or  in  the  place  of  prayer,
but  in  every  condition  of  life,  and  to
bring  into  practice  those  things  that
God  has  made  known  to  us  to  influ- ,
ence  us  in  all  that  we  do,  that  we  i
might  be  a  different  people  from
the  great  mass  of  mankind,  striving
after  the  condition  of  sainthood—
that  is,  to  become  holy  in  the  Lord,
to  be  sanctified  in  all  our  being  to
the  service  of  the  Almighty  and  the
establishment  of  his  kingdom  and
government  on  the  earth.  That  is
what  we  are  here  for,  in  these  val-
leys of  the  mountains.

There  is  an  idea  in  the  world  con-
cerning religious  affairs  that  they
are  mere  matters  of  sentiment,
something  to  think  about,  some-
thing to  pray  about,  something
to  sing  about,  something  to  exalt
the  feelings.  This  is  all  very  good
so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  is  only  a
small  part  of  religion.  Religion  is
not  a  mere  matter  of  emotion  or  of
sentiment,  or  of  feeling.  True  re-
ligion is  something  to  guide  us,  to
make  us  better,  to  teach  us  in  every
respect.  True  religion  will  teach  us
how  to  use  properly  every  power
with  which  our  great  Creator  has
endowed  us.  True  religion  not  only
affects  the  spiritual  part  of  our
*  being,  the  internal  part  of  man  or
woman,  but  affects  the  whole  na-
ture, spiritual,  mental  and  physical.


It  comes  here  on  the  earth  and  is
fitted  to  our  condition  where  we  live
and  while  we  live.  It  is  adapted  to
us  to-day.  It  not  only  unfolds  to  us
something  of  the  future  and  elevates
that  standard  of  beauty  and  perf ec
tion  before  us,  that  we  expect  some
time  to  arrive  at,  but  it  unfolds  to  us
our  duty  to-day  and  tells  us  how  to
act  in  every  movement  of  our  lives
and  in  every  condition  in  which  we
may  be  situated ;  in  fact,  there  is  no
p^ace  that  we  may  be  called  upon
to  occupy,  or  in  which  we  may  And
ourselves,  where  our  religion  ought
not  to  influence  us  in  what  we
should  do.  Not  only  does  our  reli-
gion come  to  us  to  influence  us  in
our  acts,  in  our  bodies  as  well  as  our
spirits,  but  it  also  comes  to  us  to  di-
rect us  in  our  thoughts,  that  we  may
be  able  to  turn  our  minds  in  the  pro-
per channel,  so  that  we  may  think
good  thoughts  and  not  evil,  that  we
may  have  good  desires  and  not  evil,
and  that  we  may  become  so  sanc-
tified in  our  natures  that  the  spirit
and  influence  which  comes  direct
from  God  our  Heavenly  Father,  who
dwells  in  the  bosom  of  eternity,  may
descend  into  our  souls  and  have  free*
and  uninterrupted  access  thereto,
and  that  we  may  become  Saints,  in-
dividually and  collectively,  a  royal
generation,  a  peculiar  people,  zealous
of  good  works.  This  is  the  kind  of
religion  we  have  received.

When  we  heard  the  Gospel  and
believed  in  Christ  and  in  God  the
Father,  and  went  forth  repenting  of
our  sins  and  were  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  received  the
Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of
hands,  this  was  the  beginning  of  our
religion,  these  were  the  preliminary
steps  in  the  path  that  leads  to  the
presence  of  God.  When  we  came
into  the  Church,  having  put  off  the
old  man  with  his  deeds,  we  were
supposed  to  have  put  on  Christ,  to*


HE  GOSPEL, — A  PRACTICAL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  RELIGION,  ETC.  353


pattern  after  him  in  all  our  acts,  to
seek  Ibr  his  spirit,  to  be  guided  by
his  example,  so  that  by  and  by  we
might  become  as  he  is  and  lit  to
stand  where  he  stands — in  the  pre-
sence of  God,  and  abide  there,  Some
people  who  are  in  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
as  well  as  some  people  outside  the
church,  have  an  idea  that  salvation
consists  in  belonging  to  a  certain
sect  or  party  or  in  having  a  certain
condition  of  mind.  They  do  not
grasp  the  idea  that  exaltation  is  only
brought  about  through  a  natural
process — the  putting  away  of  that
which  is  evil  and  laying  hold  of  that
which  is  good  ;  the  putting  away  of
that  which  is  wrong  and  taking  hold
of  that  which  is  right :  departing
from  the  ways  of  the  world  and
walking  in  the  ways  of  God.  We
need  to  understand  this  fully  and
clearly,  my  brethren  and  sisters.
You  and  I  will  not  be  saved  in  the
presence  of  God  with  an  exaltation
like  that  which  is  held  out  to  lis
simply  because  we  are  called  Latter-
day  Saints,  or  because  we  have
complied  with  a  certain  form  of  re-
ligion, or  even  because  we  have  gone
into  sacred  places  and  received  holy
ordinances  whereby  we  might  be
washed  and  cleansed  and  made
anew  and  anointed  unto  righteous-
ness. We  shall  not  be  brought  up
into  the  presence  of  our  Father  to
abide  there  and  participate  in  his
glory  simply  because  of  these  things.
If  we  ever  get  there  to  stay,  it  will
be  because  we  are  fitted  to  be  there,
because  we  are  prepared  to  abide  his
glory,  to  stand  in  his  presence  and
rejoice  with  him  and  aid  him  in  his
glorious  works  in  the  midst  of  the
universe-  We  will  stay  there  be-
cause we  are  like  him  and  lit  to  be
where  he  is.  If  it  is  found  that
we  are  not  like  him,  that  we  are
not  of  his  spirit,  not  actuated  by  the
No.  23.


same  motives  that  snimate  his
bosom,  not  governed  by  the  same
laws,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  abide
his  presence  and  cannot  stay  there.
If  we  do  stay  there,  it  will  be  because
we  are  fit  to  be  there  in  the  nature
of  things  because  natures  corres-
pond with  his,  our  spirits  harmo-
nizing with  his,  our  acts  being  con-
trolled by  the  same  motives  and
governed  by  the  same  laws  as  those
by  which  he  governs  himself,  and
not  merely  because  we  have  adopted
a  certain  creed,  not  merely  because
we  have  bowed  to  a  certain  form,
not  merely  because  we  have  sub-
mitted to  certain  ordinances  and
ceremonies.

All  these  ordinances  and  ceremo-
nies instituted  by  the  Almighty  and
comprehended  in  that  which  is
called  the  Gospel  are  necessary-
There  is  no  such  thing  as  non-essen-
tial ordinances  ;  every  one  of  them
is  essential  Exaltation  cannot  be
arrived  at  without  them*  But  exal-
tation does  not  consist  of  the  mere
compliance  to  certain  forms  and
ceremonies  that  the  Almighty  has
instituted  and  placed  in  his  Church.
There  is  something  more  required,
something  superior  to  all  this.  What
is  it?  It  is  the  spirit  that  comes
from  our  Father  to  dictate  us  in
every  act,  to  make  us  righteous  and
holy  unto  the  Lord,  and  to  sanctify
us  and  bring  us  into  complete  sub-
tection  to  and  harmony  with  the
I  (tore  that  govern  the  celestial  king-
dom. There  is  no  real  happiness
either  in  this  world  or  the  world  to
come  except  through  obedience  to
proper  law.  That  is  the  only  way
that  happiness  can  be  obtained*  We
ought  to  understand  this  and  teach
it  to  our  children.  There  is  a  spirit
growing  in  the  world  which  leads
inaiikind  to  throw  off  restraint-  to
cast  aside  laws  and  regulations,
which  leads  people  to  become  "a law

Vol  XXL


354


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


unto  themselves/1  This  is  the  teach-  j
ing  of  "spiritualism,"  that  peeping
and  muttering  system.  The  ex-
pounders of  that  faith — if  it  may
be  rallied  a  faith — teach  the  doctrine
of  man  kind  becoming  a  Jaw  unto
themselves — no  forms,  no  ceremo-
nies, no  regulations — each  one  in-
dependent for  himsetf  and  herself.
Now,  while  we  sing  sometimes

<f  Know  this  that  every  bouI  is  freet
To  choose  lm  life  and  what  he'll  be

and  while  we  acknowledge,

**  For  this  eternal  truth  is  #ivent
That  God  will  force  no  man  to  heaven.'1

Yet  on  the  other  hand,  we  recog-
nize the  fact  that  there  is  a  law
given  to  all  things  in  the  economy
of  God  in  the  heavens  above  and  in
the  earth  beneath.  "  All  kingdoms
have  a  law  given."  So  we  are  told
heae  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants.  We  learn  from  that
Book  that,  "  there  are  mauy  king-
doms ;  for  there  is  no  spice  in  which
there  is  no  kingdom ;  and  there  is
no  kingdom  in  which  there  is  no
space,  eit  her  a  greater  or  lesser  king- '
dom.  And  unto  every  kingdom  is
given  a  law  :  and  unto  every  law
there  are  certain  bounds  also  and
conditions."  Every  kingdom  that
is  governed  by  law  is  preserved
by  law  and  sanctified  by  the  same,
no  matter  in  what  part  of  the
universe  it  may  be  and  those
who  abide  the  laws  of  that  king-
dom and  that  condition  in  which
they  find  themselves,  gain  happiness
and  are  preserved  and  sanctified
and  become  exalted  thereby.  Now,  !
although  these  laws  are  given  of|
God,  they  do  not  interfere  with  the
volition  of  man.  Every  man  has
his  free  agency.  Light  and  truth
are  placed  before  us,  truth  and  error
are  here,  and  we  can  choose  the  one
and  refuse  the  other,  or  refuse  the
-one  and  choose  the  other,  just  as  it  ;


was  with  our  first  parents  in  the
garden  of  Eden.  The  history  of  the
fall  is  placed  before  us  that  we  might
understand  this  great  principle  of
agency  ;  the  tree  of  life  and  the
tree  of  death,  the  tree  of  light  and
the  tree  of  darkness.  The  Lord  has
said  to  us  in  substance,  "I  have
placed  before  you  truth  and  error,
choose  which  you  will  receive.  You
can  receive  the  light  or  the  darkness,
you  can  receive  the  truth  or  the
error  as  you  please  ;  but  by  and  by
you  must  give  an  account  of  your
acts."  We  find  ourselves  here  on
this  planet  that  God  has  created  for
us,  a  branch  of  his  great  family,  and
he  has  given  us  certain  principles  to
govern  ourselves  by.  He  does  not
force  them  upon  us.  God  will  force
no  man  to  heaven  or  to  hell *  but  if
we  choose  we  can  lay  hold  of  these
principles  and  be  governed  thereby,
and  by  doing  that  we  will  be  im-
proved in  our  nature  in  proportion
to  our  reception  of  light  and  truth,
and  exaltation  will  come  to  us  on
this  principle  and  no  other.

This  spirit  of  so-called  indepen-
dence, or  **  liberty,"  as  some  per-
sons misuse  the  term,  is  spreading
throughout  the  world,  It  has  its
influence  among  us.  There  is  to  a
certain  extent  in  our  midst  a  desire
and  disposition  to  throw  off  the  re-
straint that  comes  from  the  heads  of
families,  the  influence  that  parents
exercise  over  children,  to  rebel
against  the  laws  of  the  community
in  whioh  we  live,  to  resist  the  re-
striction that  comes  from  the  laws
of  the  land,  and  from  the  laws  of
the  Church — the  laws  of  God.  This
spirit  exists  to  a  great  extent  in  the
world,  and  is  bound  to  have  more  or
less  effect  upon  us  here  in  the  moun-
tains, because,  although  we  are  in
some  degree  separated  from  the
world,  yet  we  are  also  connected
with  the  world,  and  must  expect,


THE  GOSPEL, — A  PRACTICAL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  RELIGION,  ETC*  355


as  a  part  of  the  human  family,  that
some  among  us  will  be  more  or
less  affected  by  this  spirit,  Now,
we  ought  to  get  this  idea  clearly
upon  our  minds  and  upon  the  minds
of  our  children.  We  ought  to  un-
derstand the  necessity  of  yielding
obedience  to  proper  laws.  We  ought
to  learn  to  understand  the  laws  that
pertain  to  our  bodies  so  that  they
may  be  kept  healthy.  And  we
should  become  fully  acquainted  with
the  laws  that  govern  our  Church.
Every  principle  that  God  has  re-
vealed should  be  clear  to  our  minds,
and  in  order  to  understand  them  we
should  read  the  books  given  to  us,
the  Bible,  the  Book  of  Mormon,
and  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants.  These  ought  to  direct
us  in  our  every  day  lives.  Then
when  we  come  to  meeting  and
hear  our  brethren  speak  the  word
of  the  Lord,  we  should  try  to
treasure  up  in  our  hearts  the  words
of  life,  put  them  into  practice,  and
also  teach  the  same  to  our  children  ;
for  it  is  on  this  principle  that  we
will  become  prepared  to  go  into
the  presence  of  God  by  and  by,
and  not  merely  because  we  are
called  Saints,  not  merely  because
we  have  been  ordained  to  some  office
in  the  priesthood,  not  merely  be-
cause we  may  have  been  put  into
some  position  to  preside  or  direct
our  fellows.  This  will  not  exalt  us,
but  the  practice  of  what  is  right  and
true  will  exalt  us.  In  fact  every
person  in  doing  what  is  good  and
right  is  naturally  bettered  thereby,
and  every  individual  in  doing  what
is  evil  is  degraded  thereby.  All  our
acts  are  known  by  the  powers  on
high  whom  we  cannot  see.  They
understand  us,  although  we  may
think  no  one  sees  what  we  do.  Yet
though  no  one  should  see  us,  if  no
one  but  ourselves  knows  our  acts,
if  we  do  what  is  evil  and  debasing


we  are  that  much  the  worse  for  it ;
if  we  do  that  which  is  risrht  and
good  we  are  that  much  the  better
for  it  And  if  we  practice  right-
eousness and  teach  men,  so  we  will
bocome  great  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven  on  natural  principles.

We  should  all  five  according  to
the  laws  of  God,  to  the  best  of  our
ability — although  we  are  beset  with
many  weaknesses  and  infirmities
and  faults,  many  of  which  have
been  transmitted  to  us  from  our
forefathers  away  back  for  ages  and
are  concentrated  in  us  who  live  in
the  latter-days.  But  so  far  as  we
have  power  and  ability,  we  are  re-
quired to  battle  with  and  overcome
our  inherent  failings,  and  if  we  take
hold  of  the  principles  of  righteous-
ness, in  the  very  act  of  doing  that
we  are  bettered,  and  if  we  continue
in  this  path  we  will  go  on  from  grace
to  grace,  from  light  to  light,  from
purity  to  purity,  from  holiness  to
holiness,  "  till  we  all  come  in  the
unity  of  the  faith,  and  ot  the  know-
ledge of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a
perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of
the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ/'
We  must  be  clothed  with  his  light,
and  be  filled  with  his  fullness,  and
be  fit  to  stand  in  his  presence  and
dwell  with  the  Father.  And  this
is  the  promise :  "  To  him  that
overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with
me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  over-
came, and  am  set  down  with  my
Father  in  his  throne."  There  is  no
need  for  us  at  any  time  to  be  in  the
dark  concerning  our  duties.  We
need  not  be  in  the  dark  concerning
any  act  we  desire  to  perform,  if  we
will  go  to  the  Father  and  say,  il  Fa-
ther,  make  thy  will  known  to  me.
Enable  me  to  walk  in  thy  light  to
do  that  which  is  pleasing  to  thee ;
enable  me  to  overcome  all  that  is
contrary  to  thy  law."  If  we  live  in
this  kind  of  spirit,  there  will  always


356


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUBSES,


be  a  voice  whispering  in  our  souls
telling  us  that  which  is  right  and
wrong,  and  our  progress  will  be  on-
ward and  upward  in  the  straight
and  narrow  path  that  leadeth  unto
the  eternal  continuation  of  the
lives.  7 *  j**

Now,  by  and  by,  when  we  come
into  the  presence  of  God  to  be
judged  we  will  be  valued  for  what
we  are,  not  for  what  men  have  called
us,  not  for  what  we  have  appeared
to  be  to  one  another,  but  we  will
stand  just  as  we  are,  with  all  of  our
spots  and  blemishes.  If  we  are  clean
and  white  and  pure  when  we  appear
in  the  presence  of  our  Heavenly
Father,  and  in  the  presence  of  the
hosts  around  him,  we  shall  be  seen
as  such  ;  if  we  are  foul  and  evih  no
matter  how  fair  we  have  appeared
to  men,  we  will  be  comprehended
as  we  are,  we  will  "  see  as  we  are
seen  and  known  as  we  are  known."
We  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  our  im-
perfections from  one  another.  We
shall  be  weighed  in  the  balance,  and
if  we  are  found  wanting  we  cannot
receive  a  fullness  of  glory.  But,
saws  some  one,  I  have  had  certain
blessings  pronounced  upon  my
head ,  I  have  been  promised  an
exaltation  in  the  presence  of  God  ;
I  have  been  promised  thrones,  prin-
cipalities, powers  and  dominions,
and  are  not  the  promises  of  God  to
be  fulfilled  1  Yes ;  but  every  pro-
mise is  made  on  certain  conditions,
and  unless  we  comply  with  these
conditions  God  cannot,  in  consonance
with  eternal  justice,  bestow  those
blessings  upon  us,  no  matter  what
may  have  been  promised  upon  our
heads.  We  are  told  that  those  who
will  not  sanctify  themselves  by  the
jaw  of  the  celestial  kingdom  can-
not receive  a  celestial  glory.  Kow,
what  glory  will  you  and  I  have?
.  Just  exactly  that  glory  we  are  fitted
'to  have  and  no  other. This  is


only  just,  and  God  must  be  just  or
he  would  cease  to  be  God.  Yet  God
will  force  no  man  or  woman  to  keep
the  law  of  light  and  truth  ;  but
unless  we  live  the  laws  of  rmht-
eousness  and  obey  the  law  of  the
celestial  kingdom  we  cannot  in  the
nature  of  things  receive  and  abide  a
celestial  glory.  Then  our  chief  busi-
ness is  to  find  out  the  law  of  God,
and  do  that  which  is  right  and  true
and  good.  We  should  watch  well
the  path  of  our  feet  and  avoid  every-
thing that  is  evil ;  for  that  which  is
evil  naturally  contaminates  and  de-
bases, and  that  which  is  good  natu-
rally purifies  and  exalts.  We  should
all  the  time  strive  for  the  guidance
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  we  may  be
in  harmony  with  those  who  are
placed  over  us,  and  that  we  may
train  our  desires  and  our  acts  so  m
to  be  in  consonance  with  the  mind
and  will  of  God.

Now,  the  Lord  has  made  known
to  us  a  few  things.  We  should  make
it  our  business  to  carry  these  things
out,  and  we  shall  find  the  value  of
them  by  and  by  if  we  do  not  sense
them  to-day  ;  for  as  I  said  just  now
when  we  are  in  the  act  of  perform-
ing that  which  is  right  we  become
purified  in  our  character,  and  more
fit  to  abide  the  glory  of  our  Father,
while  the  less  we  do  what  is  right
the  further  we  will  be  away  from
that  purity  which  is  necessary  for
dwelling  in  his  presence.  We  ex-
pect to  gain  a  celestial  glory.  That
is  what  you  and  IJstarted  out  to  win.
We  are  not  satisfied,  as  our  sectarian
friends  are,  to  sing  :

44  I  want  to  be  an  angel,

And  with  the  angels  stand,"

That  is  not  what  you  and  I  are  aim-
ing at.  We  are  after  a  glory  superior
to  that.  We  read  that  the  Saints
shall  judge  the  angels,  Who  are  the
angels  ?  They  are  ministering  spirits
to  those  that  are  worthy  of  "a  far


THE  GOSPEL, — A  PRACTICAL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  RELIGION,  ETC.  337

9


more  and  exceeding  ami  eternal
weight  of  glory/'  That  is  what  you
and  I  have  started  out  to  gain,  to
obtain  a  celestial  glory,  to  obtain  a
celestial  crown,  and  we  shall  be
satisfied  with  nothing  else  than  that.
How  shall  we  obtain  it  ]  We  shall
obtain  it  in  no  other  way  than  by
abiding  the  laws  that  pertain  to  the
celestial  kingdom.  Let  us,  then,
find  out  the  laws  of  the  celestial
kingdom  as  fast  as  we  can  and  prac-
tice them,  and  if  we  make  this  the
business  of  our  lives  we  will  find  the
Lord  very  near  to  us,  we  will  find  it
easy  to  approach  him  and  learn  of
his  ways.  We  can  have  the  still
small  voice  to  make  glad  our  souls
and  open  out  our  under  standi  tigs*
We  should  live  in  this  spirit*  my
brethren  and  sisters,  so  that  we  may
enjoy  happiness  and  peace  to-day  as
well  as  the  prospect  of  having  eter-
nal happiness  and  peace  in  the  world
to  come,

I  pray  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  to  stamp  these  truths  upon
our  hearts,  so  that  we  may  be  ablr
to  order  our  lives  by  the  laws  of
truth  and  righteousness,  individually
and  as  a  people  ;  that  we  may  live
for  the  Lord  and  for  the  truth,  and
for  one  another — not  for  selfish
objects,  but  for  the  glory  of  God
and  the  salvation  of  our  race*

I  feel  thankful  this  afternoon  to
be  in  the  congregation  of  the  Saints,
to  be  numbered  among  the  people
of  the  Most  High  God,  and  to  take
part in the religion that  God


Almighty  has  revealed  in  tin*  d;^y
and  ane  of  the  world  I  know
this  is  the  work  of  God.  I  know
this  by  the  witness  of  the  eternal
spirit  in  my  soul.  I  know  the
peace  it  brings  when  I  act  in  con-
sonance with  its  laws.  My  desire
is  to  live  as  becomes  a  Saint  of
God  *  to  live  as  a  servant  of  the
Most  High  ;  to  incorporate  in  my
being  the  principles  that  will  make
men  and  women  holy  and  pure,  for
I  know  that  they  make  men  and
women  great.  I  desire  to  live  these
principles,  and  as  tar  as  I  have  ability
to  teach  them  to  others,  for  I  know
that  in  them  is  joy  and  happiness,
power  and  might  —  power  to  the
spirit  and  might  to  the  body.  The
power  of  God  belongs  to  and  is  with
this  Church.  It  enters  into  our
whole  being,  spiritual  and  physical
This  work  is  good  for  the  body  and
for  the  soul,  and  if  we  live  according
to  the  dictations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
we  will  be  happier,  stronger  and
mightier  in  all  our  being,  and  when
we  come  up  in  the  presence  of  the
Father,  having  been  purified  and
our  robes  made  white  through  the
blood  of  the  Lamb  and  our  faith-
fulness to  the  cause  of  truth,  we  will
be  able  to  abide  the  presence  of  the
Great  Eternal  without  shame.

May  the  blessing  of  God  rest  upon
us,  and  may  we  be  saved  in  the
celestial  kingdom  of  our  Father,  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
A  men.


3.58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  Paris,  Bear  Lake,  Sunday  Morning,  August  8th,  1880.

■

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)

THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


[It  will  be  perceived  that  it  is  a
long  time  since  this  discourse  was
delivered,  and  at  a  time  when  the
Twelve  Apostles  were  acting  as  First
Presidency  of  the  Church.]

I  arise  this  morning  to  make  a
few  remarks  to  you  as  I  may  be  led
and  dictated  by  the  Spiiit  of  God.
I  am  sorry  that  we  have  not  more
time  to  spend  with  you,  but  having
a  conference  to  attend  at  Manti,
Sanpete,  on  next  Saturday  and  Sun- ,
dav,  which  is  quite  a  loner  way  from
here,  and  in  the  meantime  having
business  to  attend  to  at  home,  we
shall  be  obliged,  in  order  to  make
connections  with  the  train  at  Logan,
to  leave  this  place  at  the  close  of
this  meeting.  I  should,  and  so
would  my  brethren  with  me,  have
been  very  much  pleased  to  have
visited  you  at  your  several  settle-
ments, but  owing  to  these  circum-
stances it  will  be  impracticable  to
do  so.

There  are  a  few  items  to  which  I
wish  to  call  your  attention.  Yes-
terday ire  heard  a  very  interesting
discourse  from  Brother  Snow  in
which  he  compared  the  climate,  etc.,
of  your  valley  with  that  of  Southern
Utah  ;  and  the  remarks  made  will
doubtless  have  the  effect  to  dispel  a
good  deal  of  the  restlessness  which


I]  understand  many  have  manifested
because  of  the  severity  of  your  win-
ters. And  I  would  further  remark
in  relation  to  these  matters,  that
this  is  the  Zion  of  our  God  ;  that
we  are  gathered  here  not  for  the
purpose  of  seeking  to  do  our  own
wills  or  to  carry  out  our  own  de-
signs, our  own  ideas  or  theories  ;  but
to  be  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  to
the  order  of  God  and  to  the  priest-
hood of  God  ;  and  that  our  greatest
safety  and  happiness,  under  all  cir-
cumstances, is  in  rendering  strict
obedience  to  His  law,  and  to  the
counsels  that  may  be  given  from
time  to  time  through  the  Holy
priesthood.  We  are  to-day  a  king-
dom of  priests  holding  to  a  very
great  extent  the  holy  priesthood ;
and  it  is  essential  that  we  submit
ourselves  to  the  laws  of  that  priest-
hood and  be  governed  by  them  in
all  of  our  actions.  The  Seven  ties,,
for  instance — that  is,  those  who
understand  themselves — expect  to
be  on  hand  at  any  time  to  go  to  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature,  That  would  be  no
more  than  their  duty,  which  is  in
keeping  with  the  command  of  God
to  them.  And  as  to  whether  they
live  in  hot  or  cold  countries  is  really
a  matter  of  very  little  importance


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES


OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  359


to  them,  their  calling  being  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  every ,  creature  the
world  over.  Then  the  High  Priests
have  certain  duties  to  perform,  and
if  they  are  in  an  organized  condi-
tion, as  the  people  of  this  Stake  are,
for  instance,  their  duties  are  to  pre-
pare themselves  for  certain  events
that  may  transpire  and  to  be  learn-
ing to  preside.  For  the  duties  of
the  Melchisedek  or  High  Priesthood
have  been  in  all  ages  of  the  world
to  preside.  So  says  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  extracts  from  which
I  may  read  to  you.  Bat  it  is  not
because  a  man  is  a  Hkdi  Priest  that
he  should  necessarily  preside  until
he  is  called  to  fulfil  some  of  the
duties  and  responsibilities  devolving
upon  that  Priesthood  And  it  is
the  duty  of  a  President  of  the  High
Priests  to  get  the  members  of  his
quorum  under  him  together  and  to
instruct  them  as  to  the  duties  of  the
presidency,  so  that  in  the  event  of
any  bsing  called,  say,  to  occupy  the
office  of  ous  of  the  Twelve  Apostles
who  are  High  Priests,  they  would  be
prepared  to  enter  upon  such  duty ;
or  that  in  case  they  should  be  culled
to  preside  over  a  Stake,  they  would
be  prepared  to  enter  upon  the  duties
of  that  office  ;  or  if  they  should  be
called  to  be  Counselors  to  the  Presi-
dent of  the  Stake,  they  could  act
wisely  ami  <;fliciently  in  that  position  ;
or  if  they  should  he  called  upon  to
be  High  Counselors,  they  would
know  how  to  act  righteously  and
equitably  in  all  cases,  that  they
might  be  called  upon  to  adjudi-
cate* And  then  if  they  should
be  called  to  be  Bishops  or  Bishop's
Counselors,  as  the  case  may  be,
they  should  be  prepared  to  occupy
these  or  any  otlu-r  offices  that  they
might  be  called  to  officiate  in.
High  Priests  have  those  duties
devolving  upon  them  just  as  much
as  it  devolves  upon  the  Seventies


to  go  to  the  nations  to  preach ,  and
there  is  no  such  thing  in  the  pro-
gramme as  sitting  and  "singing
ourselves  away  to  everlasting  bliss, 1
or,  if  we  are  called  to  fill  an  office  we
should  not  feel  at  liberty  to  neglect
its  responsibilities  and  sit  down  and
do  nothing.  The  idea  is  that  we  are
to  magnify  our  office  and  calling,  no
matter  what  its  duties  may  be.

Then,  there  are  certain  duties
devolving  upon  the  Bishops,  and
also  upon  the  Presidents  of  Stakes.
And,  then,  the  Twelve,  wherever
they  may  be  located,  have  also  their
particular  duties,  and  especially  is
this  the  case  in  the  present  organi-
zation of  the  Church;  the  Twelve
occupying  the  position  of  the  First
Presidency.  I  wish,  for  your  infor-
mation, to  offer  si  i me  few  ideas  on
some  of  these  leading  points  that
you  may  understand  something  of
the  nature  of  the  duties  anil  respon-
sibilities that  devolve  upon  us  to
attend  to.

It  is  not  correct  to  snppo.se  that
the  whole  duty  of  carrying  this  king-
dom devolves  upnn  tht^  Twelve  or
the  First  Presidency,  as  the  case
may  be,  or  upon  the  Presidents  of
the  Stakes,  or  upon  the  High
Priests,  or  upon  the  Seventies,  or
upon  the  Bishops,  or  upon  any  other
officer  in  the  Church  and  Kingdom
of  God  ;  that  to  the  contrary,  all  of
us  have  our  several  duties  to  per-
form. And  I  may  go  farther  in  re-
gard to  the  duties  of  men,  and  also
in  regard  to  those  of  women,  all
have  their  duties  to  perform  before
God.  The  organization  of  this
Church  and  Kingdom  is  for  the
express  purpose  of  putting  every
mini  in  his  place,  tind  it  is  then
expected  that  every  man  in  that
place  will  magnify  Ids  office  and
calling.  For  through  the  ordinances
of  the  Gospel  and  the  operations
of  the  priesthood  the  blessings  of


SCO


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


God  are  manifested,  and  without  the
ordinances  we  cannot  enjoy  the  ful-
ness of  these  blessings  among  us,
Latter-day  Saints,  nor  could  the
Saints  in  any  age  of  the  world
among  any  people  that  ever  ex-
isted.

We  are  of  the  household  of  faith,
the  children  of  God.  We  are  gath-
ered together  for  the  express  pur-
pose of  being  taught  in  the  laws  of
life,  so  that  we  may  comprehend  the
position  that  we  occupy,  and  the  du-
ties and  responsibilities  which  de-
volve upon  us.  And  as  I  have  before
stated,  we  are  not  here  simply  to
carry  out  our  own  designs  or  to  suit
our  own  fillings  or  wishes,  or  to
aggrandize  ourselves.  Beyond  this
earth  as  it  now  is,  beyond  time,  in
the  eternities  that  are  to  come  we
have  a  work  to  perform  and  we  have
to  prepare  in  part  for  it  while  we  are
upon  this  earth  ;  and  God  has  called
us  together  for  this  purpose.  The
whole  world  is  wallowing  in  iniquity,
corruption,  wickedness  and  evil  ;
and  it  is  for  us,  in  the  first  place,  to
rid  ourselves  of  everything  of  that
Kind,  and  to  feel  that  we  are  the
children  of  God,  that  He  is  our
Father,  and  that  we  are  urnier  His
law,  and  that  we  have  to  be  subject
to  His  commands  ;  and  that  He  has
ordained  and  organized  and  set
apart  a  Priesthood  for  this  purpose.
And  what  is  that  Priesthood  1  It  is
the  rule  and  government  of  God ;
whether  on  the  earth  or  in  the
heavens;  and  is  the  means  by  which
God  has  operated  in  all  the  ages  of
the  world.  There  is  an  order  in
this,  every  man  in  his  place,  the
First  Presidency,  or  Twelve,  as  the
case  may  be,  in  their  place,  the
Presidents  of  Stakes  in  their  places,
the  High  Council  in  their  places,
the  Hiffh  Priesthood  in  their  place,
the  Seventies  in  their  place,  the
Elders  in  their  place,  the  Presiding


I


Bishop,  with  his  Counselors,  in  his
place,  and  the  other  Bishops  in  their
place,  and  the  Priests,  Teachers  and
Deacons  in  their  place,  and  every
one  feeling  that  they  are  the  servants
of  the  living  God,  and  that  they  are
clothed  upon  with  the  Holy  Priest-
hood, and  that  they  have  a  duty  to
perform  in  His  kingdom  — that  they
stand  ready,  at  all  times,  to  carry
out  anything  that  God  may  dictate
through  His  regularly  constituted
authority  in  regard  to  themselves,
their  families,  their  neighborhoods
wherein  thev  live,  or  in  the  Church
or  the  world,  that  their  duty  is  to
spread  the  Gospel  to  the  ends  of
the  earth,  to  gather  the  people,  to
build  temples,  and  to  accomplish
anything  and  everything  that  God
requires,  and  that  when  we  have
built  temples  it  is  our  duty  to  ad-
minister in  them,  that  we  may  be
the  children  of  God,  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion,  and  be  the  blessed  of
the  Lord  of  Hosts  and  our  offspring
with  us.  This  is  the  position  we
occupy  here  upon  the  earth.

Now,  I  will  read  to  you  from  the
Doctrine  and  Covenant's*  In  speak-
ing of  Priesthood  we  are  told  that,
"There  remains  hereafter,  in  the
due  time  of  the  Lord,  other  Bishops
to  be  set  apart,  in  the  Church,  to
minister  even  according  to  the  first.
Wherefore  they  shall  be  High
Priests  who  are  worthy,  and  they
shall  be  appointed  by  the  First
Presidency  of  the  Melchisedek
Priesthood,  except  they  be  literal
descendants  of  Aaron.  If  they  be
the  literal  descendants  of  Aaron
they  have  a  legal  right  to  the
Bishopric,  if  they  are  the  first-born
among  the  sons  of  Aaron  ;  for  the
first  born  holds  the  right  of  the
Presidency  over  this  Priesthood  and
the  keys  and  th*  authority  of  the
same.  *

"  No  man  lias  a  legal  right  to  this


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


3G1


office,  to  hold  the  kevs  of  this  Priest-
hood,  except  he  is  a  literal  descend-
ant of  Aaron.

u  But  as  a  High  Priest  of  the  Mel-
chisedek  Priesthood  has  authority  to
officiate  in  all  the  lesser  offices,  he
may  officiate  in  the  office  of  a  Bishop
when  no  literal  descendant  of  Aaron
can  be  found,  provided  he  is  called
and  set  apart  ami  ordained  unto
this  power  by  the  hands  of  the
Presidency  of  the  Melchisedek
Priesthood.

"And  a  literal  descendant  of
Aaron  also  must  be  designated  by
this  Presidency  a? id  found  worthy,
and  appointed  and  ordained  under
the  hands  of  this  Presidency  ;  other-
wise they  are  not  legally  authorized
to  officiate  in  their  Priesthood."

hfc  But  bv  virtue  of  the  decree
concerning  their  right  to  the  Priest-
hood descending  from  father  to  son,
they  may  claim  their  appointment
if  at  any  time  they  can  prove  their
lineage  or  ascertain  it  by  revelation
from  the  Lord,  under  the  hands  of
the  above  named  Presidency."

This  is  speaking  more  particularly
in  regard  to  the  Bishops.  I  have
not  time,  to-day,  to  enter  into  many
detail*  pertaining  to  this  ;  but  will
simply  draw  your  attention  to  one
point,  which  is  this  :  If  we  had
among  us  a  literal  descendant  of
Aaron,  who  was  the  firstborn,  lie
won  hi  have  a  right  to  the  keys,  or
presiding  authority  of  the  Bishopric.
But  then  he  would  have  to  be  set
apart  and  directed  by  the  First  Pre-
sidency, no  matter  what  his  or  their
claims  might  be,  or  how  clear  their
proofs.  The  same  would  have  to  be
acknowledged  by  the  First  Presi-
dency, These  claims  of  descent
from  Aaron  would  have  to  be  acknow-
leded  by  the  First  Presidency,  and,
further,  the  claimant  would  have  to
be  set  apart  to  his  Bishopric  hy
them,  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  a


High  Priest  of  the  Melchisedek
Priesthood  called  to  fill  the  same
office.  Thus,  in  either  case,  as  a
literal  descendant  of  Aaron,  or  as  a
High  Priest,  the  rignt  to  officiate  is
held  first  by  authority  of  the  Priest-
hood, and  by  appointment  and  ordi-
nation as  above  stated.

And,  then,  here  is  another  thing
I  desire  briefly  to  mention.  A  Bish-
op of  this  kind,  holding  the  keys  of
tii is  Priesthood,  must  be  set  apart
by  the  First  Presidency,  and,  should
occasion  arise,  must  also  he  tried  by
the  First  Presidency.  This,  how-
ever,  does  not  apply  to  all  Bishops,
for  there  are  a  variety  of  Bishops,  as
for  instance  Bishop  Partridge,  who
presided  over  the  Land  of  Zion,  and
whose  duty  was  to  purchase  land
and  divide  it  among  the  people,  as
their  inheritances,  and  to  take
charge  of  the  temporal  affairs  of  the
Church,  not  only  in  Zion  but
throughout  all  the  western  country,
and  also  to  sit  as  a  common  judge  in
Israel,  and  to  preside  in  the  capacity
of  Bishop,  not  to  act  as  President
over  a  district  of  country  that  was
then  called  Zion,  but  as  a  general
Bishop.  George  Miller  was  after-
ward appointed  to  the  same  Bishop-
ric. Newel  K,  Whitney  was  ap-
pointed also  as  a  general  Bishop,
and  presided  over  Ki  it  land  and  all
the  churches  in  the  eastern  country.
The  calling  of  these  men,  you  will
perceive,  was  very  different  from
that  of  a  Bishop  over  one  of  the
Wards  ot  a  Stake,  for  he  can  only
preside  over  his  own  Ward  ;  outside
of  that  lift  has  no  jurisdiction.
While  the  calling  of  the  former  was
general,  that  of  the  latter  is  local.
And  there  were  Bishops1  agents
appointed  formerly.  There  was
Sidney  Gilbert ;  lie  was  a  Bishop's
agent  appointed  to  assist  Bishop
Partridge  in  his  duties ;  and  Bishop
Whitney  also  had  his  assistants  or


362


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


agents  to  assist  him  in  his  admin-
istrations, the  one  presiding  as
Bishop  over  the  affairs  of  the
Church  in  the  west,  the  other  pre-
siding over  the  affairs  of  the  Church
in  the  east  But  neither  of  them
was  presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church
at  that  time.  But  you  will  find
that  afterwards  George  Miller  was
appointed  to  the  same  Bishopric
that  Edward  Partridge  held  ;  and
that  Vinson  Knight  was  appointed
to  the  Presidency  over  the  Bishop-
ric, with  Samuel  II.  Smith  and
Shadrach  Koundy  as  his  counselors,

I  speak  of  these  things  to  throw
out  pome  general  ideas  ;  and  you
will  have  to  examine  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants  for  yourselves,  and
this  will  give  to  you  the  key  how  to
arrive  at  the  truth  in  relation  to
these  principles.

Now,  these  general  Bishops  had
to  be  appointed  by  the  First  Presi-
dency ;  they  had  to  be  tried  by  the
First  Presidency  as  well  as  the  Pre-
siding  Bishop,  because  they  were
general  Bishops,  and  were  appointed
by  the  First  Presidency.  But  Stake
Bishops  stand  in  another  capacity.
They  have  a  presidency  over  them,
and  although  it  is  proper  for  them
(the  Stake  Presidency)  to  consult
with  the  First  Presidency  of  the
Church,  yet  they  preside  over  them,
as  well  as  over  the  affairs  of  their
Stake.  There  is  one  thing  associated
with  this  matter  that  1  will  mention
here,  which  is  this.  While  you  have
a  High  Council  in  your  Stake,  and  a
presidency  of  your  Stake,  you  also
have  Brother  Charles  C.  Rich  resid-
ing here,  who  is  one  of  the  First
Council  of  the  Church.  And  if  I
were  a  President  of  this  Stake  I
should  always  confer  with  him  about
any  matters  of  importance  pertaining
to  the  interests  of  the  Church  in
the  Stake  over  which  I  presided.
Because  the  Twelve  mtc  hold  the


right  of  Presidency ;  and  as  he
is  one  of  the  Twelve,  it  would  be
proper,  and,  indeed,  I  should  con-
sider it  quite  a  privilege,  if  I  was  a
president  here,  to  apply  to  hini  for
council  in  all  matters  pertaining  to
the  interests  of  the  Stake.

Now,  I  speak  of  this  for  your  in-
formation, and  by  so  doing  you  will
avoid  a  great  deal  of  trouble  that  you
might  otherwise  fall  into.  Because
Brother  Rich  is  not  only  an  Apostle,
but  you,  in  connection  with  the
other  Stakes,  have  voted  for  him  as
one  of  the  First  Presidency,  and
therefore  he  would  be  ihe  proper
person  to  counsel  in  any  matters  of
that  kind.  And,  then,  if  there
should  be  anything  not  exactly  clear
to  him,  it  would  be  his  privilege  to
apply  to  his  quorum  to  obtain  their
mind  in  regard  to  it  ;  and  when  this
course  is  adopted  everything  moves
on  harmonious]}*.  Now,  for  instance,
here  is  Brother  Erastus  Snow,  he
and  Brother  Brigham  Young,  under
the  counsel  and  direction  of  the  First
Presidency,  will  shortly  take  a  mis-
sion  into  the  southern  portions  of  the
Church,  in  Colorado  ami  Arizona,
and,  perhaps,  in  New  Mexico,  to
look  after  the  interests  of  the  com-
munity there.  Over  the  settlements
throughout  those  regions  of  country
there  are  Presidents,  and  these  Pre-
sidents preside  over  Stakes  where
Stakes  are  organized.  Brother  Snow
informs  me  there  are  two  Stakes.
He  and  Brother  Brigham  go  clothed
upon  with  the  authority  of  the  First
Presidency  to  regulate,  to  set  in
order,  and  counsel  in  all  matters
pertaining  to  the  interests  of  that
people.  *  Wherever  they  may  go,  no
matter  who  presides,  we  should
expect  them  to  regard  their  coun-
sel, and  to  be  governed  by  them
in  all  of  their  acts.  Because  the
Twelve  cannot  go  everywhere  as  a
body,  and the interests of  the


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


303


Church  are  being  extended,  and  we
are  growing  larger  all  the  time ;  and
Zion  will  continue  to  grow  until  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  will  become
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his
Christ,  and  that  as  a  matter  of  course
means  that  if  this  is  the  kingdom  of
God  and  the  Priesthood  is  the  repre-
sentation of  that  kingdom,  the  pro-
per authorities  of  the  holy  Priest-
hood, wherever  they  go  to  represent
the  Priesthood,  must  be  respected
in  their  position  ;  and  as  these
brethren  represent  the  First  Pre-
sidency where  they  are  going,  they
must  be  respected  and  their  counsels
adhered  to  as  such.

Now  if  that  would  be  proper  for
Brother  Snow  and  Brother  Brigham,
it  would  also  be  proper  for  Brother
Rich,  for  they  all  hold  the  same  au-
thority; and  we  expect  thetn  to
represent  to  us  things  as  they  are,
that  we  may  be  enabled  to  counsel
and  direct — and  they  always  do
counsel  with  us,  and  are  glad  to  get
our  counsel  On  the  other  hand,
for  instance,  I  am  President  of  the
Twelve  Apostles,  and  by  that  means
President  of  the  Church  at  present.
Well,  say  that  Brother  Rich  or  any
member  of  the  Quorum  of  the
Twelve  comes  along,  having  some-
thing to  offer  or  lay  before  the  Coun-
cil, I  would  say,  such  a  man  is  an
Apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  I  have  a  right  to  listen  to  his
counsel  or  to  whatever  he  has  got
to  say,  and  at  the  same  time  pay  due
deference  to  it.  For  I  am  glad  to
have  the  counsel  of  my  brethren,
and  they  are  always  pleased  to  re-
ceive mine.  That  is  the  kind  of
feeling  existing  among  us,  and  this
same  feeling  should  exist  every-
where throughout  the  whole  Church.
It  is  not  for  a  member  of  the  High
Council  to  say,  (il  am  one  of  the
prominent  men,  and  I  am  going  to
show  you  how  things  are  done  here;


and  furthermore,  I  have  my  own
ideas  about  things,  and  am  going  to
try  to  carry  them  out."  It  will  not
do  for  a  president  to  say  that ;  but
it  would  be  more  in  accordance  with
our  calling  for  us  to  say,  "  O  God,
thou  art  our  Father,  and  we  are  thy
children.  We  are  engaged  in  thy
service  ;  wilt  thou,  0  Lord,  show  unto
us  thy  will,  that  we  may  do  it?"
Not  our  own  will •  we  do  not  want
to  do  our  will  nor  carry  out  our  pur-
poses, nor  do  anything  for  our  per-
sonal aiiifrandizement,  nor  for  that
of  our  friends  or  anybody  else  ;  but
to  do  that  which  is  right  and  just
and  equitable  before  God  and  the
holy  angels  and  all  honorable  men.
And  then  when  we  have  done  that,
we  do  not  ask  any  odds  of  the  tur-
bulent t»r  dissatisfied  who  are  crying,
good  Lord  and  good  devil,  not  know-
ing whose  hands  they  may  fall  into.
We  do  not  care  about  their  ideas;
but  we  do  care  about  having  the
smiles  and  approbation  of  our  Hea-
venly Father  aud  of  all  good  men.
su  that  when  we  get  through  and  are
called  upon  for  an  account  of  our
stewardship,  we  may  say,  O  God,
we  have  done,  so  far  as  thou  hast
given  us  ability,  the  work  thou  hast
placed  in  our  hands.  And  then  every
member  of  the  priesthood  ought  to
feel  just  the  same  ;  not  like  some
of  our  unruly  horses  when  they  get
the  bits  in  their  mouths  and  run
off,  because  they  make  a  good  deal
of  trouble  for  themselves  and  other
people  too.  We  should  ever  seek  to
operate  together  and  be  one  accord-
in  z  to  the  laws  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood.

1  now  want  to  show  something
about  this  Priesthood,  and  will  again
read:  "As  a  High  Priest  of  the
Melchisedek  Priesthood  has  authority
to  officiate  in  all  the  lesser  offices,  he
may  officiate  in  the  office  of  Bishop
where  no  literal  descendant  of  Aaron


3G4


JOURNAL  OF  PISCOURSKS,


can  be  found,  provided  he  is  called
and  set  apart  am!  ordained  unto  this
power  by  the  hands  of  the  presi?
dency  of  the  Melchisedek  priest
hood/'  There  is  where  it  comes  in,
and  this  applies  primarily  to  the
presiding  Bishop  ;  but  I  would  say
that  it  applies  in  a  more  extended
view  to  High  Priests  who  are  ordained
and  set  apart  as  Bishops,  in  the  seve-
ral Stakes  of  Zion,  and  who  thus
come  under  the  supervision  of  those
presidents  of  Stakes,  and  stand  in
the  same  relationship  to  them  that
the  First  Bishops  did  to  the  First
Presidency  of  the  Church.  The
First  Presidency  at  that  time  presided
over  the  Stake  in  K inland,  over  the
High  Council,  over  the  Bishops  and
over  all  the  organizations  of  the
Stake,  and  were  really  the  presi-
dents of  that  Stake.  But  it  will  be
seen  that  while  they  were  presidents
of  the  Stake  and  occupied  the  same
position  that  presidents  now  do  over
the  Stakes,  they  were  at  the  same
time  presidents  of  the  Church  in
all  the  world,  whilst  the  authority
of  our  present  presidents  of  Stakes
is  confined  to  the  limits  of  their
several  Stakes.  And  thus  there  is
perfect  order  in  all  these  things  in
relation  to  these  matters.

L  again  quote  :  "  There  are  in  the
Church  two  Priesthoods,  namely,
the  Melchisedek  and  Aaronic,  in-
cluding the  Levitical  Priesthood."
jMow  1  will  make  a  statement  or  two
about  this.  What  is  the  Levitical
Priesthood  ?  There  were  in  the  days
of  Moses  a  tribe  of  the  children  of
Israel  set  apart  to  officiate  in  some
of  the  lesser  duties  of  the  Aaronic
Priesthood,  and  their  office  was
called  the  Levitical  Priesthood.  You
High  Priests,  you  Seventies  and
Bishops  can  examine  these  things
Irom  your  Bible,  and  what  the  Bible
does  not  tell  you  the  Book  of  Cove-
nants will,  and  you  ought  to  be  ae-


qu minted  with  this  matter,  it  is  your

j.  r  *  »

duty  to  investigate  these  things,  to
search  in  the  records,  to  examine  the
revelations  of  God  and  make  your-
selves acquainted  with  principle,  and
laws,  and  governments,  and  all
things  calculated  to  promote  the
welfare  of  humanity.

**The  office  of  an  Elder  comes
under  the  Priesthood  of  Melchisedek.
The  Melchisedek  Priesthood  holds
the  right  of  presidency,  and  has
power  and  authority  over  all  the
offices  in  the  Church  in  all  ages  of
the  worhl,  to  administer  in  spiritual
tilings."

say  you,  "  I  thought
that ;  that  has  been  my  idea,  the
Bishops  should  have  all  the  temporal
tilings  to  attend  to."  We  will  read  a
little  further.  It  is  by  taking  up
little  odd  texts  that  mistakes  are
o  ft  e n  made  an  d  i  ncorrec t  ideas
conveyed.  We  must  take  the  whole
thing  to  ascertain  what  is  intended,
and  rightly  divine  the  word  of
truth.  ,  T.  rjjo

"The  Presidency  of  the  High
Priesthood,  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chisedek, have  a  right  to  officiate  in
all  the  offices  in  the  Church/*

Now,  will  you  show  me  an  office,
or  calling,  or  duty,  or  responsibility,
temporal  or  spiritual,  that  does  not
come  under  this  statement  ?  From
this  I  think  this  Presidency  have
something  to  do  with  tiie  Bishops
and  temporal  things  as  well  as  with
the  Melchisedek  Priesthood  and
spiritual  things,  and  with  all  things
pertaining  to  the  interests  and  wel-
fare of  Ziom  That  is  the  way  I
understand  these  matters.  I  could
enter  very  elaborately  into  these
questions,  but  I  do  not  purpose  to
do  so,  there  not  being  time.  But
this  is  the  position  they  occupy.

"  High  Priests,  after  the  order  of
the  Melchisedek  Priesthood,  have  a
right  to  officiate  in  their  own  stand-


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


3G5


ing,  under  the  direction  of  the  Pre-
sidency, in  administering  spiritual
things  ;  and  also  in  the  office
ot  an  Elder,  Priest  (of  the  Lev;-
tical  order)  Teacher,  Deacon  and
member,"  etc.

This  shows  really,  in  as  few  words
as  the  matter  could  be  conveyed  to
your  understanding,  the  way  that
God  has  appointed  for  the  governing
of  those  atfairs  in  His  Church  and
Kingdom,  without  entering  elabo-
rately into  detail.

When  we  have  a  Stake  organiza-
tion, as  you  have  here,  the  Presi-
dency of  the  Stake  presides  over  all
Bishops,  High  Councils,  and  all  au-
thorities of  the  Stake.  The  several
Bishops  preside  over  their  respective
wards  and  manage  their  affairs,  un-
der the  direction  of  the  Stake  Presi-
dency, wh6  in  their  office  and  calling
are  responsible  to  the  First  Presi-
dency of  the  Church.  The  Bishops
are  also  under  the  direction  of  pre-
siding Bishop  Hunter  in  all  affairs
connected  with  the  temporal  in-
terests of  the  Church.  And  Bishop
Hunter  is  under  the  direction  of  the
First  Presidency,  the  Aaron ic  Pries  t-
hood  being  an  appendage  to  the
Melehisedek  Priesthood.  It  is  how-
ever, the  special  duty  of  the  Aaron  ic
Priesthood  to  attend  to  temporal
matters  ;  but  then  the  First  Presi-
dency presides  over  all  Bishops,  all
Presidents,  all  authorities,  and  lastly
God  presides  over  all.

Now  we  are  sometimes  fond,  that
is,  some  of  us  are,  of  talking  about
our  authority.  It  is  a  thing  I  care
very  little  about.  I  tell  you  what  I
want  to  do  if  I  can  :  I  want  to  know
the  will  of  God  so  that  I  may  do  it  ;
and  I  do  not  want  to  dictate  or
domineer  or  exercise  arbitrary  con-
trol. Then  a&iin,  all  men  oindit  to
be  under  proper  control  to  the  Pre-
sidency and  Priesthood  presiding
over  their. If  I  were  a  Bishop  I


should  want  to  know  what  the  Pre-
sident of  my  Stake  desired,  and
I  should  confer  with  him;  and  if
there  was  anything  in  which  Bishop
Hunter  was  interested,  I  should
want  to  know  his  mind.

I  will  read  a  little  further  with
regard  to  this  subject  of  priest-
hood :

"  How  long  can  rolling  waters  re-
main impure!  What  power  shall
stay  the  heavens  1  As  well  might
man  stretch  forth  his  puny  arm  to
stop  the  Missouri  river  iti  its  decreed
course,  or  to  turn  it  upstream,  as  to
hinder  the  Almighty  from  pouring
down  knowledge  from  heaven  upon
the  heads  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
Behold  there  are  many  called,  but
few  are  chosen.  And  why  are
they  not  chosen  ?  Because  their
hearts  are  set  so  much  upon
the  things  of  this  world,  and
aspire  to  the  honors  of  men."

Now,  I  wish  you  to  take  particu-
lar notice  of  this,  you  Fjlders,  you
High  Priests,  you  Seventies,  and
you  Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons,
and  all  men  holding  the  Priesthood ;
**  That  they  do  not  learn  this  one
lesson — that  the  rights  of  the  Priest-
hood are  inseparably  connected  with
the  powers  of  heaven,  and  that  the
powers  of  heaven  cannot  be  con-
trolled nor  handled  only  upon  the
principles  of  righteousness  ;*f  and
not  upon  any  other  principle.  And
when  anybody  steps  aside  from  that
and  acts  upon  a  principle  of  unright-
eousness, the  result  will  be  as  is
stated  in  the  context,  namely :
"That  they  may  be  conferred  upon
us,  it  is  true  ;  but  when  we  under-
take to  cover  our  sins,  or  to  gratify
our  pride,  onr  vain  ambition,  or  to
exercise  control,  or  dominion,  or
compulsion,  upon  the  souls  of  the
children  of  men,  in  any  degree
of  unrighteousness,  behold  the
heavens  withdraw  themselves  :  the


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  grieved ;  and
when  it  is  withdrawn,  Amen  to  the
Priesthood,  or  authority  of  that
man,"  That  is  the  result  of  wrong-
doing ;  that  is  the  result  of  pervert-
ing the  authority  that  God  lias  con-
ferred upon  us  to  our  personal  ends
and  to  gratify  our  own  ambition.
"  Behold  !  ere  he  is  aware,  he  is  left
unto  himself  to  kick  against  the
pricks,  to  persecute  the  Saints,  and
to  fight  against  God."  Can  they
thwart  the  purposes  of  God  ?  No.
They  are  as  harmless  as  babies.
He  that  sits  in  the  heavens  laughs
at  them,  and  all  men  holding  the
Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God.
care  nothing  about  their  fulmi na-
tions and  the  efforts  they  make  to
hinder  the  progress  of  truth  in
the  earth,  for  all  they  can  do,  we
know,  will  be  overruled  for  our  good.
They  are  going  the  downward  road
that  leads  to  death,  and  by  and  by
they  will  have  their  reward.  We
would  like  to  see  it  otherwise,  but
we  cannot,  that  is  one  of  the  things
they  have  to  see  to  themselves  j  it
belongs  to  us  to  be  true  to  God  and
to  our  Priesthood,  and  all  will  be  well
with  us.

Again,  we  quote,  "  We  have
learned  by  sad  experience  that  it  is
the  nature  and  disposition  of  almost
all  men,  as  soon  as  they  gut  a  little
authority,  as  they  suppose,  they  will
immediately  begin  to  exercise  un-
righteous dominion.  Hence  many
are  called,  but  few  are  chosen.  No
power  or  influence  can  or  ought  to
be  maintained  by  virtue  of  the
Priesthood  only  by  persuasion,  by
long  suffering,  by  gentleness  and
meekness  and  by  love  unfeigned  ;
by  kindness  and  pure  knowledge,
which  shall  greatly  enlarge  the  soul,
without  hypocrisy,  and  without
guile,  reproving  betimes  with  sharp-
ness when  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  then  showing  forth  after-


wards an  increase  of  love  toward
him  whom  thou  hast  reproved,  lest
he  esteem  thee  to  be  his  enemy,  that
he  may  know  that  thy  faithfulness
is  stronger  than  the  cords  of  death.
Let  thy  bowels  also  be  full  of  charity
towards  all  men,  and  to  the  house-
hold of  faith,  and  let  virtue  garnish
thy  thoughts  unceasingly ;  then
shall  thy  confidence  wax  strong  in
the  presence  of  God,  and  the  doc-
trine of  the  Priesthood  shall  distil
upon  thy  soul  as  the  dews  from  hea-
ven. The  Holy  Ghost  shall  be  thy
constant  companion,  and  thy  sceptre
an  unchanging  sceptre  of  right-
eousness and  truth,  and  thy  domin-
ion shall  be  an  everlasting  dominion,
and  without  compulsory  means  it
shall  flow  unto  thee  for  ever  and
ever,"

What  a  beautiful  state  of  things
God  presents  to  us  !  Shall  we  try
to  live  it  ?  or  shall  we  take  our  own
way  and  pursue  our  own  course?
These  things  are  beautiful  when  we
reflect  upon  them.  We  all  know
they  are  true,  and  they  are  principles
which  recommend  themselves  to  our
hearts.  Let  us  try  then  and  live
them.

There  are  other  orders  of  the
Priesthood  j  we  have  Elders,  and
they  have  their  duties  to  perform,
which  I  do  not  propose  to  talk  about
now.  And  we  have  our  Priests,
Teachers  and  Deacons,  all  of  whom
hold  important  positions,  and  all
should  seek  to  magnify  their  calling.
And  what  should  they  do  ?  I  will
tell  you  a  circumstance  that  took
place  with  me  upwards  of  forty
years  ago.  I  was  living  in  Canada
at  the  time,  and  was  a  traveling
Elder.  I  presided  over  a  number  of
the  churches  in  that  district  of  coun-
try. A  difficulty  existed  in  a  branch
of  the  church,  and  steps  were  taken
to  have  the  matter  brought  before
me  for  settlement I  thought  very


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC,


367


seriously  about  it,  and  thought  it  a
very  insignificant  affair.  Because
we  ought  to  soar  above  such  things,
and  walk  on  a  higher  plane,  for  we
are  the  children  of  God  and  should
be  willing  to  suffer  wrong  rather
than  do  wrong ;  to  yield  a  good  deal
to  our  brethren  for  the  sake  of  peace
and  quietness,  and  to  secure  and
promote  good  feelings  among  the
Saints.  At  that  time  I  did  not  have
the  experience  I  now  have,  and  yet
I  do  not  know  that  I  could  do  any-
thing better  than  I  did  then.  Before
going  to  the  trial  I  bowed  before
the  Lord,  and  sought  wisdom  from
him  to  conduct  the  affair  aright,  for
I  had  the  welfare  of  the  people  at
heart  When  we  had  assembled  I
opened  the  meeting  with  prayer,
and  then  called  upon  a  number  of
those  present  to  pray ;  they  did  so,
and  the  Spirit  of  God  rested  upon  us.
I  could  perceive  that  a  good  feeling
existed  in  the  hearts  of  those  who
had  come  to  present  their  grievances,
and  I  told  them  to  bring  forward
their  case.  But  they  said  they  had
not  anything  to  bring  forward.  The
feelings  and  spirit  they  had  been  in
.possession  of  had  left  them,  the
Spirit  of  God  had  obliterated  these
feelings  out  of  their  hearts,  and  they
knew  it  was  right  for  them  to  for-
give one  another.

You  Priests,  Teachers  and  Dea-
$otis,  seek  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will
bless  you.  And  you,  my  brethren,
when  the  Teachers  visit  you,  do  not
think  that  you  are  Higli  Priests  and
that  they  are  only  Teachers  hardly
Worthy  of  your  attention.  They  are
your  Teachers,  and  you  should  re-
verence them.  And  if  you  expect  to
be  honored  in  your  calling,  you  must
honor  them  in  theirs.  When  the
Teachers  come  to  visit  me  I  am
pleased  to  see  them ;  and  I  call  to-
gether the  members  of  my  family
.that  may  be  in  the  house  at  the


time,  to  hear  what  they  have  to
say  to  us.  And  I  tell  them  to  talk
freely  and  plainly  to  us,  to  myself,
my  wives  and  children  j  in  other
words,  to  do  their  duty  as  Teachers,
ami  then  I  will  help  them  to  carry
out  their  instructions.  This  ia  how
I  feel  towards  our  Teachers.  The
eye  cannot  say  to  the  ear,  we  have
no  need  of  thee  ;  neither  the  head  to
the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  thee,  for
if  one  of  the  members  suffer  all  the
other  members  suffer  with  it ;  and
if  one  member  rejoice,  all  the  other
members  partake  of  the  same  feel-
ing. Consequently  I  feel  in  duty
bound  to  attend  to  these  things.

We  have  here  our  Relief  Societies,
and  they  have  done  a  good  work*
And  people  are  desirous  to  know
something  of  these  organizations.
I  was  in  Nauvoo  at  the  time  the
Relief  Society  was  organized  by  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  I  was
present  on  the  occasion.  At  a  late
meeting  of  the  Society  held  in  Salt
Lake  City  I  was  present,  and  I  read
from  a  record  called  the  Book  of
the  Law  of  the  Lord,  the  minutes
of  that  meeting.  At  that  meeting
the  Prophet  called  Sister  Emma  to
be  an  elect  lady.  That  means  that
she  was  called  to  a  certain  work ;
and  that  was  in  fulfilment  of  a  cer-
tain revelation  concerning  her.  She
was  elected  to  preside  over  the  Re-
lief Society,  and  she  was  ordained
to  expound  the  Scriptures.  In  com-
pliance with  Brother  J oseph's  request
I  set  her  apart,  and  also  ordained
Sister  Whitney,  wife  of  Bishop
Newel  K.  Whitney,  and  Sister
Cleveland,  wife  of  Judge  Cleveland,
to  be  her  counselors.  Some  of  the
sisters  have  thought  that  these  sis-
ters mentioned  were,  in  this  ordina-
tion, ordained  to  the  priesthood.
And  for  the  information  of  all  inter-
ested  in  this  subject  I  will  say,  it  is
not  the  calling  of  these  sisters  to


3G8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


hold  the  Priesthood,  only  in  con-
nection with  their  husbands,  they
being  one  with  their  husbands,
Sister  Emma  was  elected  to  expound
the  Scriptures,  and  to  preside  over
the  Relief  Society ;  then  Sisters
Whitney  and  Cleveland  were  or-
dained to  the  same  office,  ami  I
think  Sister  Eliza  K.  Snow  to  be
secretary-  A  short  time  ago  I  at-
tended a  meeting  in  Salt  Lake  City,
where  Sister  Snow  and  Sister  Whit-
ney were  set  apart  I  happened  to
be  the  only  member  of  the  Twelve
in  town  at  the  time,  the  other  mem-
bers of  the  Quorum  being  unavoid-
ably absent.  I  went  to  this  meeting
and  set  apart  Sister  Whitney  and
Sister  Snow  w  ho  were  two  of  those
I  set  apart  some  forty  years  ago,
in  Nauvoo.  And  after  I  had  done
so,  they  reminded  me  of  the  coin-
cidence. At  this  meeting,  however,
Sister  Snow  was  set  apart  to  preside
over  the  Relief  Societies  in  the  land
of  Zion,  and  Sister  Whitney  her
counselor,  with  Sister  Zina  D,  Young,
her  other  counselor,  I  speak  of  this
for  the  information  of  the  Sisters,
although  I  presume  they  may  have
read  of  it  in  their  paper,  the
Exponent.

With  regard  to  those  Societies,  I
will  say,  they  have  done  a  good
work  and  are  a  great  assistance  to
our  Bishops,  as  well  as  being  pecu-
liarly adapted  to  console,  bless,  and
encourage  those  of  their  sisters  who
need  their  care,  and  also  to  visit  the
sick,  as  well  as  to  counsel  and  in-
struct the  younger  women  in  the
things  pertaining  to  their  calling  as
children  and  Saints  of  the  Most  High.
I  am  happy  to  say  that  we  have  a
great  many  honorable  and  noble
women  engaged  in  these  labors  of
love,  and  the  Lord  blesses  them  in
their  labors,  and  I  bless  them  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,  And  I  say  to  our
sisters,  continue  to  be  diligent  and


faithful  in  seeking  the  wellbeing
and  happiness  of  your  sex,  instruct
and  train  your  own  daughters  in  the
fear  of  God,  and  teach  your  sisters
to  do  likewise,  that  we  may  be  the
blessed  of  the  Lord  and  our  oft  spring
with  us.

Our  young  peoples  Improvement
Associations  are  very  creditable  in-
stitutions, and  the  fruits  of  the
labors  of  those  engaged  in  this  work
are  already  manifesting  themselves*
I  feel  in  my  heart  to  say,  God  bless
the  young  men  and  young  women
of  Israel ;  let  it  be  the  desire  of  your
hearts  to  imitate  the  virtues  of  your
parents  and  of  all  good  men  and
women,  keeping  your  bodies  and
spirits  pure  before  God  and  man.

Then,  we  have  our  Sunday  Schools,
and  many  of  our  brethren  and  sis-
ters in  this  direction  are  doing  a
good  work.  I  would  advise  the  sup-
erintendents of  Sunday  Schools  to
endeavor  to  collect  the  best  talent
they  can  to  teach  and  instruct  our
children.  What  greater  or  more
honorable  work  can  we  be  engaged
in  than  in  teaching  the  children  the
principles  of  salvation  1  You  that
are  diligent  and  that  give  your  hearts
to  these  things  God  will  bless,  and
the  day  will  come  when  the  youth
of  Israel  will  rise  up  and  call  you
blessed.

Then  with  regard  to  our  common
schools,  let  us  try  to  instruct  our
youth  as  best  we  can,  and  get  the
best  of  teachers,  men  and  women  of
intelligence  and  education  who  are
not  only  moral,  but  good  Latter-day
Saints;  men  and  women  who  are
not  only  capable  of  imparting  to  our
children  the  rudiments  of  education,
but  who  are  also  capable  of  teaching
them  the  laws  of  God  as  he  has
revealed  them  for  our  guidance.
And  when  you  get  good  teachers
you  should  appreciate  them,  and
you  should  co-operate  with  them


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES


OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


369


in  their  endeavors  to  teach  our
youth ;  and  then  see  that  they  are
properly  remunerated  for  their  ser-
vices.

Some  people  talk  about  the  great
ignorance  of  the  "  Mormons."  In
regard  to  education  we  are  the  peers
of  the  United  States.  We,  it  is
true,  do  not  possess  such  notable
academies  and  universities  as  may
be  found  in  the  great  centres  of  our
nation,  but  official  figures  show  our
educational  status  to  be  above  that
of  the  average  of  the  United  States.
And  I  may  add,  that  our  grade
of  literacy  is  higher  than  that  of
the  nation.  When  we  take  into
consideration  the  fact  that  we  have
not  received  one  penny  from  any
outside  source,  while  the  leading
institutions  of  learning  have  real-
ised millions,  yes  scores  of  millions
of  dollars  to  enable  them  to  educate
their  youth.  This  is  something  that
we  have  a  right  to  be  proud  of.
Then  let  us  continue  to  encourage
education ;  and  let  our  trustees  be
alive  to  supply  the  school  houses
with  all  the  necessary  charts  and
books;  let  them  not  feel  niggardly
in  regard  to  these  things.  And
above  all,  let  everything  we  do  con-
spire to  advance  the  interests  of  the
Church  and  Kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth*

I  feel  like  saying,  God  bless  you,
my  brethren  and  sisters.  And  God
bless  Brother  Budge,  who  is  doing  a
good  work  in  England,  and  who,  by
the  way,  will  be  back  among  you
very  shortly.  And  God  bless  Brother
Hart  and  Brother  Osmond,  and  the
High  Council,  and  the  Bishops  and
their  counselors,  and  may  God  bless
the  Elders  and  the  Seventies,  and
the  High  Priests,  togeiher  with  the
Belief  Societies  and  Mutual  Im-
provement Associations ;  and  may
God  bless  all  men  who  love  Israel,
and  who  are  desirous  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God;  and  the

No.  24.


Lord  help  us  to  be  true  to  our  reli-
gion, and  true  to  our  God,  and  true
to  our  integrity,  that  we  may  be
saved  ultimately  in  the  Celestial
Kingdom  fo  God,  I  ask  it  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


ELDER  ERASTUS  SNOW

Then  made  the  following  Remarks  :

I  feel  that  we  have  had  a  feast  of
fat  things  this  morning ;  that  the
remarks  made  by  President  Taylor
have  been  replete  with  genuine
truths,  and  full  of  instruction  and
counsel,  and  that  blessing  will  abide
with  all  those  who  permit  these  in-
structions to  find  place  in  their
hearts  and  understandings.

While  President  Taylor  was  treat-
ing upon  the  orderof  the  Priesthood,
the  history  of  which  has  been  given
in  the  Bible  through  Mose3,  and  also
in  certain  revelations  given  unto
this  Church  through  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  he  awakened  a  train  *
of  reflection  that  carried  the  mind
biick  from  the  time  of  Moses  to
that  of  Abraham,  Noah,  Enoch  and
Adam.  Adam  was  the  first  man
appointed  of  God  as  the  ruler  of  the
earth ;  to  him  it  was  said,  thou
shalt  have  dominion  over  the  earth
and  over  the  things  therein.  And
as  he  began  to  multiply  and  replen-
ish the  earth,  and  as  his  children
and  their  families  increased  in  the
land,  there  was  a  right  of  dominion
given  ;  it  was  called  the  birth-right,
and  it  belongs  to  the  first-born  of  the
sons.  And  this  seems  to  have  been
an  order  existing  in  the  heavens
even  before  Adam.  For  it  is  written
of  Jesus,  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  he
was  the  first-born  of  many  brethren.
Moreover,  his  rights  of  dominion
as  the  first-born  continued  with
.  him  because  he  loved  righteous-
ness and  hated  iniquity;  therefore
|  was  he  anointed  with  the  oil  of
i  gladness  above  his  fellows.  But

Vol.  XXL


370


JUUKN4L  OF  U  i  SCO  U  USES


notwithstanding  his  birthright,  had
he  not  loved  righteousness  and
hated  iniquity,  and  exercised  his
rights  and  his  dominion  in  connec-
tion with  the  powers  of  heaven  and
the  principles  of  righteousness,  he
won  Id  not  have  been  chosen  nor
have  received  this  anointing  with
the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows.
But  because  he  did  exercise  it  rightly
and  pi  eased  his  Father,  he  was
chosen,  as  was  his  right  to  have
been,  ur,  1  will  say,  Ins  privilege
rati  *  :  ,  because  he  honored  Ins  birth
right,  and,  therefore,  he  was  an-
oint e  U  above  his  fellows,  and  be-
came the  Chief  Apostle,  the  High
Priest  of  our  profession,  the  Son,
the  mediator  between  us  and  the
Father.

The  same  principle  fell  upon
Adam's  children  ;  and  hence  Cain,
being  ihe  firtt-born  of  his  fathers
family,  according  to  the  Bible  ac-
count, might  have  been  the  head  of
this  Priesthood,  under  his  father,
holding  the  right  by  birth ;  but
instead  of  exercising  his  birthright
on  the  principles  of  righteousness,
and  in  accord  with  the  powers  of  I
heaven,  he  wa.s  befogged  and  under
stood  not  his  true  position  ;  and  his
-offering  was  not  accepted*  But
Abel,  his  younger  brother,  who  was
meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and  who
sought  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit,  j
was  led  to  bring  as  his  offering  the
firstlings  of  his  flock,  which  were
a  true  representation  of  the  Lamb
of  G od  ;  and  besides,  the  ofleringwas  j
made  iu  the  true  spirit  of  his  min-
istry and  priesthood,  therefore  it
pleased  the  Father,  and  he  accepted  ,
it  Then  when  Cain  found  that  his
-offering  was  not  accepted,  and  his
brother,  Abel's  was  accepted,  Satan  j
■tempted  him,  and  entered  into  him
and  led  him  into  the  way  of  all
apostates, — he  became  possessed
with  the  spirit  of  murder.  1  men-
ition  it  as  the  first  apostacy  of  which  1


I  we  have  record  after  the  fall  of  man,
through  it  Cain  lost  his  privilege  as
first-born,  and  the  blessing  fell  on
one  more  worthy,  and  the  rights  of
the  priesthood  passed  to  the  next
9on  of  Adam,  which  according  to
Bible  record  was  Seth,  who  mag-
nified the  Priesthood,  honored  his
birth -rig  lit,  and  held  the  blessing
of  the  Priesthood,  which  was  sealed
upon  him  by  his  father  ;  and  from
him  it  descended  upon  the  righteous
1  of  1 1  ts  posterity*  }it
There  a;v  many  instances,  from
that  time  forward,  of  which  the
scriptures  speak  of  this  birthright
continuing  among  the  descendants
of  Seth,  until  it  came  to  Noah  and
•  his  sons,  of  which  sons  Shem  re-
ceived the  blessings  pertaining  to
the  priesthood.  Abraham  came
through  Shem,  and  the  Savior
came  through  this  lineage  ;  and
through  this  blessing  of  Noah  upon
Shem,  the  Priesthood  continued
through  his  seed  ;  while  the  off-
spring of  Ham  inherited  a  curse,  and
it  was  because,  as  a  revelation
teaches,  some  of  the  blood  of  Cain
became  mingled  with  that  of  Hani's
family,  and  hence  they  inherited  that
curse. . ,  !  .

Now  we  will  pass  by  the  places  in
the  Bible  which  speak  of  this  birth-
right until  we  come  to  Isaac,  the
son  of  Abraham,  and  to  Jacob,  the
son  of  Isaac,  who  bought  the  birth-
right of  Ins  brother  Esau.  From  the
story  that  is  told  of  Rebekah  help-
ing her  son  Jacob  to  get  the  first
blessing  from  his  father  Isaac,  on
purpose  to  secure  the  birthright  from
his  brother  ifeau,  many  would  be
inclined  to  think  that  deceit,  dishon-
esty and  unrighteous  means  were
employed  to  secure  it,  and  they  per-
haps wonder  why  it  should  be  so.
This  was  really  not  the  case ;  it  is
only  made  to  appear  so  in  the  eyes
of  those  who.  do  not  understand  the
dealings  of  God  with  man,  and  the


1


THE  ORDER  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC,


37i


workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  bring
about  His  purposes.  There  was
neither  unrighteousness  in  Rebekah
nor  in  Jacob  in  this  matter ;  but  on
the  contrary,  there  was  the  wisdom
of  the  Almighty,  showing  forth  his
providences  in  guiding  them  in  such
a  manner  as  to  bring  about  his  pur-
poses, in  influencing  Esau  to  trans-
fer his  birthright  to  Jacob,  that  He
might  ratify  and  confirm  it  upon
the  head  of  Jacob  ;  knowing  as  He
did  that  Jacob  and  his  seed  were,
and  would  be,  more  deserving  of  the
birthright,  and  would  magnify  it  in
its  true  spirit.  While  Esau  did  not
sense  nor  appreciate  his  condition
and  birthright  ;  be  did  not  respect
it  as  he  should  have  done,  neither
did  he  hearken  to  the  counsels  of  his
father  and  mother,  On  the  contrary,
he  -went  his  own  way  with  a  stubborn
will,  and  followed  his  own  passions
and  inclinations  and  took  to  wife  one
of  the  daughters  of  the  Cannaanites
wltom  the  Lord  had  not  blessed  ;
and  he  therefore  rendered  himself
unacceptable  to  God  and  to  his  fa-
ther and  mother*  He  gave  himself
to  wild  pursuits — to  hunting,  and
to  following  the  ways  uf  the  Canaan-
itea,  and  displeased  the  Lord  and
his  parents,  and  was  not  worthy  of
this  right  of  seniority.  The  Lord
therefore  saw  fit  to  take  it  from  him,
and  the  mother  was  moved  upon  to
help  the  younger  son  to  bring  about
the  purpose  of  the  Lord,  in  securing
to  himself  the  blessing  through  the
legitimate  channel  of  the  Priesthood.
And  as  you  know,  his  father  was
induced  to  bless  him  and  confirm
this  blessing  upon  him,

Now,  whilst  all  these  instances  in
Scripture  reeognize  the  right  called
the  birthright,  that  lias  descended
from  the  beginning,  the  same  prin-
ciple is  exhibited  in  all  those  instan-
ces set  forth  in  the  revelation  read
by  President  Taylor — that  none
can  hold  these  rights  of  the  Priest-


hood  except  in  connection  with  the
powers  of  heaven,  and  cannot  be
exercised  only  on  the  principles  of
righteousness  ;  and  all  who  fail  to
exercise  these  rights  on  the  princi-
ples of  righteousness  and  in  connec-
tion with  the  powers  of  heaven
subject  to  its  counsels  and  directions
and  laws,  forfeit  their  birthright,
and  the  right  passes  to  another.

We  have  another  instance  of  this
kind  in  Renben,  the  eldest  of  the
twelve  sons  of  Jacob*  We  find  that
the  birthright  passed  from  him.  He
committed  a  transgression  which
offended  the  Lord  anil  offended  his
father,  and  it  was  of  such  a  charac-
ter that  it  could  not  be  passed  over
with  impunity  ;  and  the  birthright
was  taken  from  him  and  given  to
the  sons  of  Joseph.  We  find  it  ex-
plained in  Chronicles,  that  because
Ken  ben  defiled  his  father's  bed,  the
birthright  was  taken  from  him  and
given  to  the  sons  of  Josseph  ;  and
the  Priesthood  was  reckoned  after
that  lineage,  though  Judah  prevailed
above  his  brethren  to  this  extent,
that  through  him  came  the  Chief
Ruler  of  Israel,  while  unto  Epbraim,
the  son  of  Joseph,  wras  given  the
kejs  of  the  Priesthood — or  those
rights  that  apply  to  the  birthright.
Of  the  two  sons  of  Joseph—  Eph-
raim  and  Manassah,  the  Lord  sau],
Manassah  shall  be  great,  but  Eph-
raim  shall  be  greater  than  he  ;  ami
he  shall  become  a  multitude  in  the
earth.  And  when  the  patriarch
was  blessing  Joseph's  two  sons,
though  he  was  blind,  he  was  careful
to  cross  his  hands  in  blessing  the
boys,  Joseph  observing  what  his
father  was  doing,  informed  him  that
he  was  putting  his  right  hand  on
the  head  of  the  younger  boy,  but
the  old  man  replied,  I  know  it,  my
son,  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord
prompted  him  to  do  as  he  did —
to  confer  the  greater  blessing  upon
Ephraim,  the  younger  brother.  It


372


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


was  for  this  reason  that  God  spake
through  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah
concerning  the  gathering  of  Israel :
*- 1  am  a  father  to  Israel,  and  Eph-
raim is  my  first  born/'  That  is  ac-
cording to  his  purposes.  He  acknow-
ledged and  re  confirmed  this  birth-
right upon  Ephraim  the  younger  of
the  two  sons  of  Joseph,  when  he
referred  to  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times  and  the  ushering
in  of  its  great  work — when  the  Lord
should  set  his  hand  to  gather  His
people,  and  be  a  father  to  Israel,
even  to  Ephraim  His  firstborn.

Now,  the  Levitical  Priesthood  re-
ferred to  was  not  a  new  Priesthood,
We  do  not  understand  it  to  be  an
order  of  the  Priesthood  instituted  at
the  time  Israel  was  in  the  wilder
ness  of  Sinai,  but  that  it  had  been
from  the  beginning  a  part  of  the
Holy  Priesthood,  an  appendage,  or
a  subdivision,  or  branch  of  the  same
Priesthood  The  rights  of  this  de-
scended from  father  to  son,  among
the  first-born,  unless  the  first-born
failed  to  appreciate  it  and  exercise  it
in  righteousness.  In  that  event  it
passed  to  one  of  the  others.

We  see  the  same  principle  set
forth  when  the  Lord  commanded
Moses  to  take  the  tribe  of  Levi  and
set  them  apart  to  be  Priests,  He
told  them  the  reason.  Now,  said
He,  I  have  claimed  the  first-born  of
all  the  families  of  Israel  as  my  own.
When  I  sent  forth  my  angel  to  smite
the  first-born  of  the  sons  of  Egypt,
I  caused  mine  angel  to  pass  by  the
families  of  Israel,  that  he  smite
not  their  first  born.  In  remem-
brance of  this  He  instituted  the
ordinance  called  the  Passover,  to
preserve  in  the  minds  of  the  Israel-
ites, the  occasion  when  the  Lord
passed  over  their  first-born,  while
the  first-born  of  the  sons  of  Egypt
He  caused  to  be  slain. For  this  rea-


son, He  said,  I  have  consecrated  the*
first-born  as  mine  own ;  and  now,
said  He  to  Moses,  I  will  take  from
the  tribes  of  Israel  the  house  of  Lew,
and  you  shall  consecrate  them  to
officiate,  etc*  This  principle  has  con-
tinued from  the  beginning.  We  see
it  exemplified  in  the  calling  of  the
Lamb  of  God,  who  was  the  first  born
among  many  brethren,  and  was  in
all  things  obedient  to  his  Father;
who  loved  righteousness  and  hated
iniquity,  and  was  therefore  chosen
and  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness
above  his  fellows.  So  in  after  years,
those  who  in  like  manner  exercised
their  birthright  in  connection  with
the  powers  of  heaven,  and  on  the
principles  of  virtue,  integrity  and
righteousness  had  these  lights  con-
firmed upon  him.  But  in  no  case,
when  acting  unrighteously,  were
they  chosen  to  receive  the  confir-
mation of  the  ordinances  of  the-
Priesthood  In  the  days  of  Eli,  who
permitted  his  sons,  who  were  heirs
of  the  Priesthood,  to  set  bad  exam-
ples and  work  iniquities  in  Israel,
God  held  the  father  responsible  for
their  course,  and  He  destroyed  both.
Eli  and  his  sons,  and  raised  up  ano-
ther in  his  place.

The  article  read  in  your  hearing
from  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants
shows  most  clearly  that  the  rights
and  blessings  and  keys  of  this  Priest*
hood  can  only  be  held  and  exercised
in  connection  with  the  powers  of
heaven  and  on  the  principles  0f
righteousness.  It  is  most  beautiful
to  contemplate.  It  is  like  appLs  ni
gold  in  pictures  of  silver.

And  that  God  may  enab
preserve  these  thing  in  our  Je  us  to
and  that  we  may  attain  to  hearts  ;
He  has  prepared  for  us,  is  all  that
est  prayer,  in  the  name  my  earn-
Amen.  0f  jesus>


OPPOSITION  TO  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC.  375


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Tuesday

Afternoon,  Oct.  7th,  1879,


Reported  hif  Geo.  I\


OPPOSITION  TO  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC,


[Owing  to  press  of  important
business  the  publication  of  this  dis-
course has  been  delayed.  Its  con-
tents will  bo  found  as  valuable  to-
day as  when  it  was  delivered, — Ei>-
D,E,K]

I  mil  state  to  the  Conference  that
we  have  no  financial  account  to  pre-
sent, because  we  do  not  get  our
returns  from  the  various  Stakes
until  the  close  ot  each  year ;  in  con-
sequence of  this  we  find  it  imprac-
ticable to  present  a  satisfactory  ac-
count to  the  General  Conference
oftener  than  once  a  year,

The  Lord  has  given  us  a  certain
work  to  accomplish ;  and  the  feel-
ings or  ideas  of  men  in  the  world
in  relation  to  this  work  have  but
little  to  do  with  us.  We  are  gath-
ered here  for  the  express  purpose  of
building  up  the  Church  and  King-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth.  We
are  endeavoring  to  do  this — that  is,
a  great  many  of  the  people  are,  to
the  very  best  of  their  ability ;  and
we  consider  ourselves  responsible  to
God  for  the  action  we  take  and  for
the  course  we  pursue  in  relation  to
the  fulfilment  of  His  purposes.  We
think  that  in  building  Temples,
sending  the  Gospel  to  the  nations  of
the  earth  and  prosecuting  our  other
labors  that  we  are  carrying  out  the


word  and  will,  and  the  commands  of
God,  Yet  it  not  unfrequently  hap-
pens, that  when  we  are  doing  our
very  best  to  promote  correct  prin-
ciples among  ourselves,  as  well  as  to
spread  them  abroad,  even  to  all  na-
tions, that  we  meet  with  determined
and  unrelenting  opposition.  This
we  cannot  help.  We  do  not  seek  it,
but  we  do  not  fear  it.

There  has  existed  a  principle  of
antagonism  ever  since  the  dawn  of
creation,  namely,  the  powers  of  God
have  been  opposed  by  the  powers
of  the  Evil  One,  Satan  and  w  icked
men  have  operated  to  subvert  the
plans  and  designs  of  Jehovah,  And
if  we  have  a  little  of  such  opposition
to  contend  with  in  our  day,  there  is
nothing  new  in  it  The  martyr
Stephen  when  arraigned  before  u  the
Council"  to  answer  to  a  charge  of
blasphemy,  said,  "  Which  of  the
prophets  have  not  your  fathers  per-
secuted ?  and  they  have  slain  them
which  showed  before  of  the  coming
of  the  Just  One ;  of  whom  ye  have
been  now  the  betrayers  and  murder-
ers/* We  have  always  expected  that
there  would  be  a  spirit  of  antagonism
to  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of  God,
and  our  Elders  have  been  telling  us,
more  or  less,  during  the  last  fifty
years,  that  this  feeling  still  existed


374


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and,  indeed,  every  now  ami  then,
we  have  occasion  to  believe  then: ;
or,  to  use  an  old  saying,  £- The  devil
is  not  dead  yet  and  lie  uses  his
influence  now,  as  in  former  days,  to
oppose  the  principles  that  God  has
revealed.

We  are  gathered  here  from  many
nations  in  order  that  God  may  pi  1  n t
among  us  the  principles  and  laws  of
eternal  lives  ;  that  we  may  operate
in  the  Priest  hoot  I  with  the  holy  men
who  held  it  in  former  ages,  arid  with
God  the  Father,  and  with  Jesus  the
Mediator,  and  with  the  holy  angels
in  the  interests  of  mankind,  not
only  in  t  in i igs  ] >ert  a initio  to  o ursel  v es
individually,  but  in  those  that  con-
cern the  whole  world ;  not  only  to
the  people  that  now  live,  but  also
to  those  who  have  lived  ;  lor  the
plans  of  God  reach  back  into  eter-
nity and  forward  into  eternity,  and
we  are  being  taught  and  instructed
through  the  holy  Mekhisedek  Priest-
hood, which  holds  now,  as  in  past
ages,  the  keys  of  the  mysteries  of
the  revelations  of  God.  It  is  our
privilege  to  operate  through  this
order,  with  men  who  have  held  the
same  keyg  and  possessed  the  same
powers  and  have  had  the  same  com-
munication with  God,  and  who  have
looked  forward  to  the  time,  with
joyful  anticipation,  that  we  now  live
in,  namely,  to  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times-  For  this  pur-
pose we  are  gathered  together,  j'or
this  purpose  we  are  building  Tem-
ples according  to  the  order  and  reve-
lations of  God — for  until  He  revealed
these  things  to  us  we  knew  nothing
about  them*  And  the  world  of
mankind  to  day  know  nothing  about
Temples  and  their  uses.  If  we  were
to  build  Temples  for  them  according
to  the  order  of  God,  they  would  not
know  how  to  administer  in  them  ;
neither  could  we  know  had  the  Lord
not  revealed  to  us  how  to  do  it,  j


which  lie  did  through  the  Prophet
Joseph,  We  are  acting  upon  this
revealed  knowledge  to-day,  Keeking
to  carry  out  the  will,  the  designs
and  the  purposes  of  God,  in  the
interest  of  common  humanity,  not
for  a  few  people  only,  not  for  the
people  of  the  United  States  only,
nor  for  those  of  two  or  three  na-
tions, but  for  the  people  of  the  whole
world.  And  the  hearts  of  the  people
are  being  drawn  after  these  princi-
ples ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  hearts
of  the  children  are  beinir  turned
toward*  the  fathers,  as  well  as  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  towards  the
children.

The  spirit  that  is  being  manifested
in  the  various  Stakes  of  Zion  is  very
creditable  in  this  respect  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.  And  we  purpose,
God  being  our  helper,  and  the  devil
not  hindering  us,  to  l:o  on  with  our
work,  to  build  our  Temples  and  to
administer  in  them  and  to  act  as  the
friends  of  God  upon  the  earth-  And
if  we  are  not  His  friend?,  He  has
none,  for  there  is  no  people  anyr-
where,  except  the  Latter-day  Saints,
who  will  listen  to  His  laws— and  as
they  say  sometimes,  w  it's  a  tight
squeeze"  for  us  to  do  it  The  ques-
tion is,  Shall  we  falter  in  our  calcu-
lations ;  I  think  not  ;  but  I  think
we  will  say,  as  the  ancient  servant
of  God  said  to  a  man  who  was  seek-
ing to  hinder  the  progress  of  the
building  of  a  Temple  to  the  Lord
of  Hosts  :

work  ;  hinder  me  not.
doing  a  great  work,  and  we  would
say  to  our  outside  friends  ami  to
people  generally  who  are  not  con-
versant with  our  affairs,  will  vou  be
so  kind  as  to  let  us  alone  and  hinder
us  not ;  so  that  we  may  go  on  with
our  labor  of  love  in  the  common  in-
terests of  humanity  and  in  our
efforts  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the
world  at  large.


I  am  doing  a  great

" AVe  are


This  is  one  tiling  we  have  to  do,
and  we  will  try  to  do  it.  the  Lord
being  our  helper.

Then  another  thing  we  are  called
upon  to  do  is  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creatine  throughout  the
world,  il  Why,  the  people  will  op-
pose you?"  That  they  always  did.
But  Jesus  said,  and  I  will  say  by
way  of  repeating  His  words— for
they  are  a*  true  to-day  as  they  w^re
iu  His  day — "Blessed  are  ye,  when
men  *h:dl  revile  you,  and  persecute
you.  and  shall  say  all  maimer  of  evil
against  you  faUely,  for  my  sake,
Kejoiee,  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for
great,  is  your  reward  iu  heaven  ;  lor
so  persecuted  they  the  prophets
which  were  before  you."  There-
fore we  need  not  be  troubled  about
it.  When  we  first  started  out  in
this  work  we  never  looked  for  a! ly-
thbig  else,  and  we  have  nut  looked
in  vain  either  ;  we  have  found  an
abundance  of  it,  and  we  have  com-
menced to  regard  it  sw  a  natural
thing.  Hut  we  must  not  forget
that  we  owe  a  duty  to  tiie  world.
The  Lord  has  given  to  us  the  light
of  eteiniiv  :  and  we  are  commanded
not  to  conceal  our  light  under  a
bushel,  but  on  the  contrary  we
should  let  it  shine  forth  as  a  city  set
upon  a  hill  that  cannot  be  hid.  Wo
need  not  try  to  get  into  an  out-of-
the-way  corner  from  the  gaze  of  the
public  eye,  fur  we  cannot.  We
though i  we  hail  wandered  a  long
way  from  civilization  when  we  came
here  :  but,  according  to  the  remarks
of  the  speakers  this  morning,  a  cer-
tain degree  of  it  has  followed  us,  and
we  are  not  quite  out  of  it  yet.  Uut
there  are  some  things  we  can  do.
We  will  let  them  pursue  their  course,
and  we  will  ask  them,  if  they  will
be  so  good  and  .so  kind  as  to  let  us
worship  God  according  to  the
dictate**  of  our  consciences.  This
is  not  a  very  great  boon  to  ask


of  anybody.  Still  we  do  ask  that
we  may  be  permitted,  in  tins  land
of  liberty,  in  this  land  which  we
call  the  I j oine  of  the  brave  and
the  land  of  the  free;  the  asylum
of  the  oppressed  of  all  nations,
we  ask  that  we  may  have  the
simple  privilege  of  worshiping  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  our  own
consciences.  Then,  while  they  are
trying  to  injure  us,  we  will  try  to
do  them  irood.  We  will  teaeh  them
good  principles  at  home,  and  we  will
send  the  Gospel  abroad.  And  the
kind  of  men  we  want  as  bearers  of
this  Gospel  message  are  men  who
have  faith  iu  God;  men  who  have
faith  iu  their  religion  ;  men  who
honor  their  Priesthood  ;  men  in
whom  tin*  people  who  know  them
have  faith  and  iu  whom  God  has
confidence  and  not  some  poor  un-
fortunate beings  who  are  wanted  to
leave  a  place  because  they  cannot
live  in  it ;  but  we  want  men  full  of
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  power  of
God  that  they  may  go  forth  weeping
bearing  precious  seed  and  sowing
the  see  U  of  eternal  life,  and  then
returning  with  gladness,  bringing
their  sheaves  with  them,  Tnese
are  the  kind  of  men  we  want.
We  do  not  want  the  names  of  men
of  tiie  former  class  presented  to  us
to  go  on  missions  ;  if  they  are  and
we  Sad  .it  out,  we  shall  not  send
them  5  for  such  men  cannot  go
with  our  fellowship  and  good  feeling.
Men  who  bear  the  words  of  life
among  the  nations,  ought  to  be  men
of  honor,  integrity,  virtue  and  pu-
riiy  ;  a  id  this  being  the  command
ot  Go  i  to  us,  we  shall  try  and  carry
it  out.

Some  imagine  that  we  have  al-
most  got  tii rough  with  our  work  ;
when  the  truth  of  the  matter  is,  we
have  hardly  commenced  yet.  Here
is  Brother  Joseph  Young,  who  re-
presents the  Seventies,  —  Brother


376


JOURN  AL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Joseph,  how  many  Seventies  are  1
there  enrolled  ?  [Brother  Young
replied  that  there  were  5,320],  I  am
told  that  there  are  5,320  Seventies  ;
we  expect  to  call  upon  a  great  many
of  these  men  to  go  abroad  and  pro-
claim the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  I
We  received  a  smali  order  lately —
you  know,  we  talk  business  some-  I
times — for  forty  missionaries  to  go
and  labor  in  one  place  ;  they  did  not
send  the  money  to  pay  their  fares  ;
but  then,  we  have  the  missionaries,
and  we  will  trust  in  God  for  our  pay
and  we  shall  get  it  if  we  are  found
doing  His  will  and  carrying  out  His
purposes.

Again,  another  duty  we  have  to
do  is  to  preserve  the  order  of  God
among  ourselves.  And  here  is  a
great  responsibility  resting  upon  the
Presidents  of  Stakes  and  their  Coun-
selors, and  upon  the  Bishops  and
their  Counselors,  and  upon  all  men
holding  authority  in  the  Church  and
Kingdom  of  God,  and  upon  the
Twelve  specially,  to  see  that  the
order  of  God  is  carried  out,  and  that
iniquity  does  not  exist  among  the
Saints  of  the  Most  High  God.

We  talk  sometimes  about  the  out-  '
side  world,  and  we  sometimes  in-
dulge in  casting  reflections  upon
them — and  there  is  plenty  of  room
for  it,  no  doubt ;  but  then,  what  of
ourselves  I  What  do  we  do  ?  Do
not  our  own  members  keep  some  of
the  very  saloons  we  talk  about  1  and  |
do  not  we  engage  in  this  business
because  we  are  afraid  somebody  else
will  1 Why,  that  is  the  argument  1


of  the  thief.  He  says,  "  If  I  do
not  steal,  somebody  else  will"  But,
besides,  say  these  brethren,  "  We
want  to  get  a  living,"  But  before
I  would  live  in  that  way,  I  would
die  and  make  an  end  of  it ;  I  would
not  be  mixed  up  with  such  concerns
nor  have  any  hand  in  them,  but
pursue  another  and  more  honorable
course  to  get  a  living  than  in  seek-
ing to  put  the  cup  to  the  mouth  of
the  drunkard  and  in  leading  our
youth  and  others  who  may  be  in-
clined that  wayi  in  the  path  that
leads  to  death.  What  else  do  we
do  %  Why  some  of  us  Elders,  and
some  of  us  High  Priests  and  Seven-
ties, frequent  these  places  and  get
drunk  and  disgrace  ourselves  and
our  families,  and  the  people  with
whom  we  are  associated.  And  what
else  do  we  do  t  We  are  commanded
to  remember  the  Sabbath  day  to
keep  it  holy  ;  and  yet  we  find  that
our  trains  leave  this  city  every  Sab-
bath, until  the  weather  gets  too  cold
to  bathe,  carrying  many  of  our  peo-
ple, who  indulge  in  all  kinds  of
amusements  and  thus  violate  the
Sabbath,  which  we  are  commanded
to  keep  holy,  which  many  respectable
Gentiles  would  never  think  of  doing*
And  yet  you  are  Latter-day  Saints,
are  you?  You  are  a  good  people,
and  you  will  talk  about  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Spirit  of
God  being  in  you,  while  you  are
violating  some  of  the  plainest  every-
day principles  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ.


(continued  on  1st  PAGE  JOURNAL  0£  discourses,  vol,  xxil)
