JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
PRESIDENT BRiGHAM  YOUNG,
HIS  COUNSELORS,
AND THE TWELVE  APOSTLES.
HE POET ED  BY
DAVIT)  W.  EVANS,
JJfD  1LE8FECTFULLT  DEDICATED  TO  TH  K  LATTER-  DAY  HAIXTH  IS  ALL  THE  WOULD,
VOL.  XVII.
LIVERPOOL-
MINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  ALBERT  CAREINGTQN,  «f  ISLINGTON-
LONDON:
tATtla  UATjflAIKTB'  ZjQX.  DlfOT,  2Ut  KMEUll  OIOTE,  BALl/ft  POND  BO  AD  ULIKOTOS,
IK  TEE  ED  AT  SCAT  ]  Off  EtRT  1UM  .
INDEX.
Date,  Page.
Preface,  Tii
What  the  Gospel  teaches— Bevel  at  ion  from  God  necessary— The
faith  and  Doctrines  of  the  Latter-day  -Saint-.
John  Tatlgk. Feb. lf 1S71  1
Living  faith  in  God — The  Providences  of  the  Almighty  in  behalf
of  1  f  i ^  people— Lay  up  treasures  in  heaven— The  mt^ek  rri
inherit  tho  earth — The  Word  of  Wisdom, Orson  HvnE. „ 8, „  f
Kemarks  to  the  Young.  William  C*  Duxfar. Jan- 4, „  15
The  kingdom  not  organized  by  man— Man  utterly  unable  to
organize  ibe  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth  without  revela-
tion— The  Nephitea  and  Lamanites  had  all  thinars  in  com*
rnon — Consecration — The  danger  of  pride— The  United
Order.  0*  Pratt. April 0,  ,,24
Cease  to  bring  in  and  build  up  Babylon — Separate  yourselves
from  sinw-ra  and  f a rr j  sin — Have  not  come  with  any  new
d'tftrine — We  must  be  One — Without  work*  it  cannot  be
proved  that  faith  exist* — The  time  come  to  organize  the
Saints — The  time  and  energies  of  the  Saints  ail  that  is
wanted — Geological  researches  of  Professor  Marsh — Scien-
tific demonstration  of  r  he  truth  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.
ii.  Young. April  19,  36
Tlie  United  Order— We  want  the  most  perfect  union— The  work
jn£  of  th*  Order  to  be  such  that  ail  hooest  men  can  sustain
it—  Home  manufacture.  Joffs  Taylor. April  19, )t  47
The  things  of  God  known  by  the  Spirit  of  God— The  light  and
intelligence  of  God  without  money  anrl  price — No  true
religion  without  science— All  will  l>e  saved  except  the  sous
of  perdition.  H  Yocra. May 3, „  51
The  United  Order — a  system  of  oneness,  economy  and  wisdom  in
becoming  self- sustaining.  K  You  Me. May 7,  56

Zioe  to  be  redeemed  through  the  law  of  consecration— Persecu-
tions of  the  Sainti — A  oneness  arrw:i_'  tue  Saint*  necessary
■ — The  hearts  of  th«  Fathers  to  be  turned  to  the  children,

and  the  children  to  the  fathers.  < :  r  .  A.  Sam  u. .May 7, »,  SS

The  portion  the  Saints  have  occupied  ha»  been  a  peculiar  one —
The  unity  of  the  Saints— Home  manufacture  pre  Arable  to
i  it i  porta t ion—  Organisation  necessary  to  self- sustenance.

,fons  TayUjh, W  -\ 7,  „


Union  is  Btren^h— Unit. -J  order  will  brin^  nkmt  ti-hijuiral  sal-
vation—Hie  time  has  come  to  favor  Z ion— The  judgments
of  God  are  at  the  door  of  this  generation.

W i t.FORt *  WntnuiL-rr. May 8,  1S74,  tifl

The  United  Oi\lrr  o!  Z\on  affords  the  utmosi  five- I m  and  liberty,
Brotherly  love  and  good*  ill  to  man — True  riches  relate  to
eternity — Establish  confidence  in  our  hearts  witli  God.

flit  a  si' us  Sxow. May 8*  74

The  blessings  of  eternal  life  attained  at  the  sacrifice  of  all
things— Tithing— ftcfinomy  noeyss&ry  to  self -sustenance  —

Home  manufacture.  i*tiQt  A,  S  um, May 1\ tl  si

Education  of  children—  The  neeemty  of  suppurtiuir  hume  pub-
1  irations—  Ladies'  relief  gwoioties — Sl  George,  and  Salt  L  ike
City,  Temples— Snbbath  schools,  tiKo.  A.  Smith, May 10, „  M

General  Doniphan's  connection  with  the  early  history  yf  the
Church  Persecutions  nf  the  Saints— Mormon  battalion—
Hardships  experienced  in  the  settlement  ol  Utah— Plurality

wives.  Gflo.  A*  Smith. May 21,  W

Interest  manifested  relating  t"  temporal  alfiirs  -  lu'wluiions
pertaining  to  being  one  in  temporal  things — Consecration  —

Stewardship- -Jackson  L\mufy--Sauetification. *V  Pratt. ,luiie  14, lf  103

The  ea! ling  of  (he  Priesthood,  ■■■  preach  the  Gos^cL  and  pro-
ceed with  tlif  organization  of  the  Kingdom  i  f  Cod,  pre-
paratory  to  the  coming  of  the  S,»i  of  Man, ..All  gooi  U  of
the  Lord.,  .Sal  vat  ion  and  life  everlasting  are  before  us.

&.  Young. Juno  26, „ 11 3

The  belief  of  the  Saints  in  the  mission  of  flic  Savior... Pertain-
ing to  inheritances  u^ou  the  earth  that  shall  be  everlasting,.*
It  takes  a  higher  power  than  a  hill  uf  divorce,  to  take  a  wo-
ml  in  from  a  good  man.  B. Yot'N<j. June  28, tl  llfr

God  has  ere  tl  tad  us  to  be  h  an  py  ..Experience  an  Ihdegate  from
Utah  in  Congress. . .There  is  nothing  like  communion  with

the  Holy  Spirit  Gift Catftfoei. duly  12;  120

It  ia  of  little  import  how  we  leuvi  this  world,  so  that  we  are  pre-
pared t^  live  or  die*.. God  ban  ordained  tbut  all  men  must

die,  John  Ta  vi.uk, July Jf,  130

Fa i til  of  the  Latter  day  .Saints  in  relation  to  the  resurrect! oil

Geo.  Q.  0oK*o>'. July  1&, „  XU

Nothing  strange  or  new  to  live  and  die  ,. Must  die  in  order  to  be
quickened  The  world  ei 'mankind  ignorant  of  immortality,
f(p* righlcoiis  nlnudil  live  to  enjoy  t lie  lipiit.  uf  the  spirit,,.
All  people  are  the  children  of  God... They  learn  by  contrast
...worlds  to  be  organ "need  and  peopled  iJ1  future  existence.

li  YuiTXii, July  19, n  13&

All  nations  believe  in  a  future  stilt*  of  existence. . .  All  inherit  the
curse  in  the  death  of  the  body.  The  /Turn  of  Eaioeli  taken
to  the  besotu  of  Gori.-XVleatial,  Terrestrial  ami  Telesttal
aphiTt's..  Baptism  in  water  essentia]  to  solvation., ..Diviuo

au thority.,. Eternal  marriage  on IhSuc J  of  trOnL 0,  fturr. July  3  9, tJ  143

The  United  Order  is  (he  order  of  Urn  kingdom  where  God  and
i  'hriM  dwidl.-.The  law  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  protects
all  people  in  their  ruligious  worship**. In  obeying  counsel

there  ia  salvation.  "B,  Youxa. Auj.  9, „ 1 5 1

Prayer  must  be  remembered  iii  families.. .  Klders  to  be  sent  on
illusions  BioUUoj; 'Irniplea^.'Camph^  fteecssary  to  salva-
tion. Home  M;mvttncttt]vs1  +  .The  United  Order.

Gm  A.  Smith. Get.  11,  1G»


Crime  a  transgression  of  la v . . . Saints  are  under  divine  law...
The  Gospel  a  perfect  Jaw, .  .The  Constitution  of  the  United
States  a  just  instrument ..  Saints  must  be  patient  and
mitfcrmg... Latter-day  faints  prepare  by  good  works  to  meet
the  Savior.  Albert  Carres  row Oo£,  II,  1S"4<  Joa

Guard  against  temptation.,. Those  who  trust  in  God  will  not  be
disappointed _Jof«pii  Smith  a  Prophet  of  God,,, If  there
were  so  caufce  creating  evil,  there  would  be  no  evil  works.

Charted  G  Rkh, Oct.  11, „  169

Knowledge  received  by  immediate  revel  atiou  .  -Co-operation  in
temporal  fiffairs...The  Saints  are  heirs  of  God  and  joint-
heira  with  Christ  John  Tatcor. Oct, 9t Si  172

Ail  rapn  to  he  judged  out  of  the  hooks,..  A  Jam  the  Ancient  of
days...  In  the  days  of  Enoch  the  righteous  gathered  together
from  thr  cuds  of  th*  earth  to  one  place... The  great  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  raised  up  by  God  to  reveal  hidden  mysteries.

0.  Pratt. Oct.  It, „  151

The  Go y pel  "f  Christ  unpopular  in  every  a^e  of  th<?  world.., We
have  to  live  by  faith  God  has  decreed ^ that  His  kingdom
will  be  established..  The  Priesthood  conferred  upon  Joseph
Smith  by  holy  an  gels...  All  blessing*  to  he  obtained  from
the  God  the  Saints  worship,  Wilforl*  Woodruff, Oct.  7,  188

Individual  Balfation  Th^  success  of  the  Work  of  the  Lord  not
dependent  on  ii.:;ti  FJuconrage  home  manufacture-  .  B.«ild
Temples..,5tfety  on  the  old  ship  Zioo. Gro,  A,  Smith, Oct, 6, „  195

Saints  are  living  witnesses  of  the  truth,.. The  people  of  God  pre-*
served  by  divine  Providence  iVr^culi  on...  Individual
salvation,  .  B.  Youvo,  Jun, Oct, 6, „  200

Dextrin  tion  of  the  wicked  by  the  flood,  wisdom  in  God...Priest-
hood«,TempleH.,.frife];t_'  rce  comes  from  God... The  Lord
will  take  care  of  the  Saints.  -  Angela  operating  wna  men  in
the  work  of  human  redempnoEr.  Joh.v  Taylor. Oct. 7, „  204

God's  ancient  people  polygamic*.  Marriage  relations  are  to
continue  forever.,. No  power  binding  in  marriage  but  that
of  the  Holy  Priesthood  possessed  by  the  Latter -day  Saints.

O.  Peatt. Oct 7,  214

&eek  for  perfection*.. Reign  of  righteousness Live  in  union..*

The  United  Order.  Geo*  Q.  Cassoj*. Oct St ,»  220

Saints  are  rhosen... Eternal  life  worth  more  than  all  things  else
...Works  must  correspond  with  faith  .  Prayer  to  God  a  duty,

Wjlpord  WoonRUFF. Oct* 9, n  244

Faith  without  works  is  dead  .  Pray  to  Cod... Keep  the  Sahbatb-

day  holy. ..Encourage  Sunday  schools, Geo.  A.  Smith. Oct.  llt „  251

Saint* 'he  liojht  of  th**  world... Live  down  faUeh'M.-d. ..I'm  on

in  t ht  Church  aH  important  Uro.  Q.  CtMM&L Oct  31, ,T  260

The  Gospel  restored  from  heaven. ..Signs  fallow  believers. ♦.Ful-
fillment of  Prophecy  ..  . Book  of  Mormon  a  Divine  i>vlaf.ion.

O,  Pa  ATT, Nov.  15, „  264

Joseph  Smith's  first  visions  .The  Book  of  Alormna...  American
fudians  ij^cendants  of  the  house  of  hrael  Prorbecien
fulfilled,  O.  Pratt. Sept  20, „  21$

Bedemptton  of  Zion  .„  Perseen ti on  ...  Baptism  of  Indians...
>*-eond  com.  f  Christ„.Every  jot  aud  every  tittle  of
Divine  revelation  will  be  fulfilled  0.  Pratt. Feb,  7,  2M


+  ■  -
Till


Second  coming  of  Christ.,. The  kingdom  of  (Joi .1... Immediate
revelation  .A  highway  cast  up.. .Gathering'  of  Israel--*

One  umversal  government  on  eai  lh+  0*  Pratt. Feb,  £$. 1875  307

Man  is.  the  offspring  of  God . . . T rut h  is  etcr n al . . . Th e  doet ri n os
of  Christ... The  law  of  gravitation...  Free  agency.

O.  Pratt, Mar.  14, „  322

Congress  and  the  /faint*. .  Kfiicacy  of  prayer..  . Strength  of  char-
acter necessary.  ..The  true"  Church...  Gathering to  the

ineuiitaius,  K.i  i'.ii.  CJ.  Carson. MitTt2S, Tj  333

The  Saints  3i;wo  the  PHesLhoiul.^Thc  kingdom  of  heaven  to  be
set  up  iti  the  last  days,*.  The  Saints  must  be  «eLf-au  staining

1>.  JJt  Wki.i-5. April  ti, „  343

Education  necessary  .« "  Mormnuism"  la  trutli..+CortvcvNimi  **(

Indians*  Uil.*o%  1 1  \  i  -t-:- April  t'\ „  350

The  Gathering.  Kih  i  u  led^  of  salvation  enj oy ed  by  th e  L at  t  cr -

day  Saints.  Build  up  the  kingdom  of  God, Ciias.  C,  Kick, April  0. „  357

Temporal  afiaira..,ConsistenL<y  necessary  in  business,  B*YotTMi. April  7* n  ^GO

Self-nliaiice,,.llelp  the  feeble,,. Keep  out  of  debt. E.  Snow* April  7, TJ  363

Man  the  offspring  of  God,  a  dual  being,,.  Immediate  revelatiou

...Operate with  the  Priesthood,  '■  T.iviou. April  S,  UGi)


JOUBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DiiLTVEPyRfi  i>-  the  Fouj^e^tit  Wai:l»  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake

City,  Sits  day  Aft£e.?too;Sj  Feb.  1,  1874.


(Bsrprt&td  hj  David  W,  Evans.)


WHAT  THE  MS  PEL  TEACH  E££*-R  EVE  LATIOX  fiOD  NECESSARY — Till

'FAITH  AXD  D0CTRIXE8  OF  IHE  LATTETI-DAY  SAINTS,

[CGSTDil/ED  PAGE  376,*  VOL.  1GJ


^Jrfin  the  Bevel ator,  when  on  the-;-:  the  ordinances  that  he  intra.
Jfte%f  £atn*os,  wrapt  in  prophetic  jfaced,  and  that  were  practiced  hj


▼idiot),  raid — **I  »,iw  mother  angel
flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  hav-
ing the  everlasting  Gospel  to  preach
to  them  that  dwell  npon  the  earth,
to  every  nation,  kindred,  tongue
and  people,  cry with  a  load  voice,
'  Fear  God  and  give  glory  to  hira,
for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is
come.' ,T  He  also  saw  a  time  when
a  certain  power  "would  mate  war


hiH  disciples  ;  we  believe  in  the  same
Spirit  and  revelation  that  they  be-
lieved in.  I  do  not  wish  to  argue
these  matters,  or  to  go  into  details,
for  time  won  Id  fail  on  the  present
occasion;  but  the  Scriptures  are
before  us,  and  i  shall  only  attempt
to  touch  npon  some  of  the  princi-
ples that  Jesus  enunciated,  and
which  were  taught  by  him  and  hia


with  the  Saints,  and  prevail  against disciples ;  and  it  is  for  belitivrng  jjt


thern^  aad  they  should  bo  ^iven  into
his  hand  until  'i  rime,  times  and  the
dividing  of  a  Lime,"

Well  then,  to  come  back,  to  ac-
commodate my  strange  friend,  who-
ever he  may  ~bet  I  will  any  tl  it  we,
the  Latter-day  Saints,  believe  this
Gospel  just  as  Jesus  taught  it.  \\
believe  in  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  that  we  should  reve-
rence him  as  the  Sjn  of  his  heavenly
Father  and  our  Father. We  believe

So*  L


God  and  Jesus  Christ,  in  prophecy
and  revelation,  that  we  are  continu-
ally arraigned  before  the  world  as
impostors  and  deceivers.  Wt  he-
li'jve  in  be  in  14  honest  to  ourselvei
and  Kith  every  body,  whether  they
are  with  us  or  nut;  we  believe  ia
men  acting  all  the  time  as  though
they  were  in  the  presence  of  God
and  holy  angels,  and  that  for  al!
their  acts  they  will  be  brought  to
judgment,  for  we  believe  that  God

VoL  XVI L


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


will  bring  men  into  judgment  tc  for
every  word  and  every  secret  thought/'
We  believe  a  good  deal  as  David
Bays — Who  is  he  that  can  dwell  with
devouring  fire,  and  among  everlasting
burnings?  That  man  who  has
feared  God  in  his  heart,  and  who  h;*s
cot  lied  in  his  heart,  that  man  who
will  swear  to  his  own  hurt  and  change
not,  a  pure,  virtuous,  holy  man  who
regards  the  rights  of  others  as  he
regards  bis  own ;  a  man  who  will
concede  to  others  all  that  he  would
ask  for  himself,  and  who  seeks  to
promote  the  welfare  of  the  human
family.

The  Elders  of  this  Church  have
been  called,  as  the  disciples  of  Jesus
were  in  former  times,  to  go  and
preach  -the  Gospel  without  purse
and  script.  I  have  traveled  hun-
dreds and  thousands  of  miles  on  this
errand  myself,  and  I  see  men  all
around  me  here  who  have  done  the
,  ssrme.  What  for?  To  benefit  man-
kind, to  tear  away  the  veil  of  igno-
rance, to  combat  error,  to  reveal
truth,  to  make  known  the  Divine
will,  to  tell  to  the  human  family  that
God  has  spoken,  that  angels  have  ap-
peared, that  the  heavens  have  been
opened,  that  light  and  intelligence
have  been  communicated  to  man,
that  the  everlasting  Gospel  has  been
restored,  and  that  we,  in  this  age,
can  enjoy  the  same  blessings  that
the  Saints  enjoyed  in  former  days,
and  to  point  out  to  them  the  way
of  life  and  salvation.  We  have  re-
ceived this  commission  from  our
God,  and  we  have  endeavored  faith-
fully to  fulfill  it,  so  that  our  blood
may  be  clear,  and  that  when  we
come  to  stand  before  the  Great
Eloheim,  when  all  nations  shall  be
gathered  together,  we  can  say,  "  Oh
God,  we  have  finished  the  work
which  thou  gavest  us  to  do/*

What  else?  We  are  standing
now  rather  in  a  political  capacity.


How  is  this  ?  We  cannot  help  our-
selves, the  Gospel  told  us  to  gather
together.  Do  the  Scriptures  say  any.
thing  about  it?  Yes;  but  if  they
did  not,  and  God  gave  us  that  com-
mand, the  silence  of  the  Scriptures
would  make  no  difference  at  all.
But  they  do,  for  the  ancient  Pro-
phets had  a  view  of  the  gathering
of  the  Saints  in  the  latter  days ;  they
saw  them  flocking  to  the  moun-
tains like  doves  to  the  windows;
and  through  them  the  Lord  de-
clared that  ho  would  gather  his
people  H  from  the  east  and  from  the
west,  from  the  north  and  from  the
south."  It  is  said — "1  will  tak
them  one  of  a  city  and  two  of  a  family
and  bring  them  to  Zion,  and  give
them  pastors  after  my  own  heart,
who  will  feed  them  with  knowledge
and  understanding;"  and  in  speak-
ing of  the  calamities  of  the  last
days  he  says  that  in  Mount  Zion
and  in  Jerusalem  there  shall  be  deli*
verance/'  But  we  gathered  because
the  revelations  given  through  our
Prophet  commanded  us  to  do  so,
these  revelations  agreeing  with  those
given  on  the  same  subject  formerly.

Standing  in  this  capacity,  we  form
a  large  body  of  people.  We  have
lived  in  different  places,  and  as  the
believers  in  the  Gospel  in  other  ages
were  persecuted,  so  have  we  been;
and  having  been  persecuted  and
driven  we  have  come  here,  aa  Geo.
A.  Smith  said  on  a  certain  occasion,
li  because  we  could  not  help  it."  We
could  not  live  in  Nauvoo,  yet  we
neither  injured  nor  robbed  anybody,
neither  did  we  interfere  with  any-
body's rights.  They  drove  us  from
Missouri  and  from  Illinois,  and  here
we  ere,  and  what  now?  We  we
on  Mexican  territory  when  we  ar-
rived here,  having  been  forced  to
flee  from  the  United  States  beca
we  could  not  have  protection*  Why
was  it  ? Who  can  tell  why  it  was


WHAT  TIIE  GOSPEL  TEACHES,  ETC.


3


that  people  who  strewed  their  gar-
ments and  spread  branches  of  palm
trees  in  the  path  of  Jesus,  crying,
"Hosanna,  blessed  be  he  that  com-
eth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord/'  should
cry,  a  short  time  after — "  Crucify
him,  cracify  him  ?"  Said  Pilate,  41 1
Trash  my  hands  of  this  just  man's
blood  ;f  and  the  people  said,  11  let  his
blood  be  upon  us  and  our  children."
Tembly  have  they  realiied  that  in-
vocation, for  the  avenging  hand  of
the  Almighty  has  been  heavy  upon
them,  and  in  every  nation  in  which
they  have  sojourned,  they  have  been
robbed,  stripped,  their  property  con-
fiscated ^  and  they  have  been  de-
prived of  all  the  rights  of  men.  The
time  will  come  when  God's  wrath
will  be  satisfied  towards  them,  and
when  they  will  again  be  his  elect
people  and  gathered  to  their  own
land,  even  to  Jerusalem,  where,  as
the  Proph  t  says,  "  The  measuring
line  shall  go  forth,  and  little  boysand
girls  shall  again  play  in  the  streets
of  that  city;"  and  when  the  Son
of  God  will  descend  and  "  set  his  feet
on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  it  will
cleave  in  twain,  and  there  will  be  a
great  valky,  and  they  will  See  from
before  him  like  they  fled  in  the
days  of  Oz  I  all,  King  of  Judah  and
"  the  Lord  our  God,"  we  are  told,
"  will  come  and  all  his  Saints  with
him/'  and  there  will  be  deliverance
in  Ziou  and  in  Jerusalem  in  the  rein-
Bant  whom  the  Lord  our  God  shall
call/J

Well,  we  are  here  in  a  political
capacity,  inhabiting  a  Territory,
and  forming  an  integral  part  of  the
United  States,  Whom  do  we  inter-
fere with  ?  Nobody.  Do  we  rob  or
pillage  anybody,  or  interfere  with
the  rights  ot  any  ?  No.  Do  we  mske
incursions  on  the  citizens  of  sur-
rounding Territories?  No,  we  in-
terfere with  the  civil  or  religious
rights  of  no  persons  in  this  or  any


other  city  or  Territory ;  we  never
did,  we  do  not  now  ;  but  we  can
not  help  being  in  the  capacity  that
we  occupy  to-day.  We  form  a  body
politic,  and  have  necessarily  be-
come a  Territory,  and  we  could  not
help  ourselves  if  we  would.  But
we  do  not  interfere  with  anybody,
we  observe  all  good  and  wholesome
law*  People  will  lie  about  us;  but
that  makes  QO  .diffeivnci?,  they  lied
about  Jesus.  Our  enemies  say —
"  You  are  a  bad  people,  and  that  is
the  reason  we  persecute  you/'  That
is  what  the  enemies  of  Jesus  said
about  him  j  it  was  not  because  he  wai
good;  you  never  saw  a  religious  per-
secution got  np  on  that  account,  all
such  persecutions  have  been  "  be-
cause of  the  wickedness  of  the  peo-
ple." The  Scribes  and  Pharisees,
after  seeing  Jesus  heal  the  blind
man,  said — "Give  God  the  glory,
for  we  know  this  man  is  a  sinner,
it  is  true  that  he  cast  out  devils,
but  he  does  it  through  Beelzebub,
the  prince  of  devils."  Well,  if  they
persecuted  the  Lord  of  the  house,
they  will  persecute  the  members  of
his  household  j  if  they  do  these
things  in  the  green  tree,  what  will
they  do  in  the  dry  ?  The  fact  is,
there  is,  and  always  has  been,  and
always  will  be,  an  antagonism  be-
tween truth  and  error,  light  and
darkneas,  between  the  servants  of
God  and  the  servants  of  the  adver-
sary. The  devil  is  called  the  father
of  lies,  and  he  delights  therein.
What  difference  does  that  make  to
us,  what  do  we  care  about  it  ?  Very
little.  But  suppose  we  are  oppres-
sed. We  have  fctood  it  before  and
we  can  stand  it  again.  Suppose
they  should  pass  prescriptive  lawa
against  us.  All  right,  if  the  nation
can  stand  it  we  can,  I  will  risk  up-
holding and  standing  by  correct
principles  which  emanate  from  God
We  will  cleave  to  truth,  honor,  holi„


4  JOURNAL  OF

ness,  and  to  all  the  principles  that
God  has  revealed  to  us,  and  we  will
go  on  increasing  in  every  good.

This  nation  and  other  nations  will
be  overthrown,  not  because  of  their
virtue,  bat  because  of  their  corrup-
tion and  iniquity.  The  time  will
come,  for  the  prophecies  will  be  ful-
filled, when  kingdoms  will  be  de-
stroyed, thrones  cast  down  and  the
powers  of  the  earth  shaken,  and
God's  wrath  will  be  kindled  against
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  it  is
for  us  to  maintain  correct  princi-
ples, political,  religious  and  social,
and  to  feel  towards  all  men  as  God
feels.  He  makes  the  sun  to  shine
on  the  just  as  well  as  on  the  unjust;
and  if  he  has  enlightened  our
minds  and  put  us  in  possession  of
more  correct  principles  than  others
have,  let  us  be  thankful  and  adore
the  God  of  Israel.  Let  us  thank
our  heavenly  Father  for  his  good-
neas  towards  us  in  making  us  ac-


DISCOURSES.

quainted  with  the  principles  of  the
everlasting  Gospel,  and  let  us  go  on
from  strength  to  strength,  from
purity  to  purity,  from  virtue  to  virtue^
from  intelligence  to  intelligence ;
and  when  the  nations  shall  fall
and  crumble,  Zion  skall  arise  and
shine,  and  the  power  of  Cod  shall
be  manifest  among  his  people.  Xa
man  can  overturn  or  permanently
hurt  those  who  do  right.  .They
may  kill  some  of  our  bodies,  but  that
is  all  they  can  do<  We  shall  live
and  shout  among  the  assembled
throng,  in  the  eternal  heavens,
"  Hosanna,  blessed  be  the  God  of
Israel,"  and  his  kingdom  shall  grow
and  increase  until  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  shall  become  the  king-
doms of  our  God  and  his  Cbrist,  and
he  will  i  ale  and  reign  for  ever  and
ever*  *

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amaru


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  HYDE,

Delivered  is  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  L  vke

City,  Soitoay  Evbndjg,  Feb,  8,  1874.


{Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


LIVING  FAITH  IN  GOD — THE PROVIDENCES OF THE ALMIGHTY IN  BE-
*HALF  OF  HIS  PEOPLE— LAY  Up TREASURES IN  HEAVEN — THE  MEEK
TO  INHERIT  THE  EARTH — THE  WORD  OF  WISDOM,


I  rejoice  very  much,  brethren  and  worship  the  Lord  our  God,  and  to
sisters,  at  the  opportunity  we  enjoy  I  wait  upon  him,  that  vte  may  renew
to-night of  meeting together to  I  our  strength. It  is  the  desire  of  my


■


LIVING  FAITH

heart  to  do  all  I  can  to  inspire  in
you  a  living  faith  in  God,  and  I  am
sorry  to  say  that  there  are  those  in
our  midst,  against  whom  I  have  no
particular  charge  to  make,  but  who,
by  reason  of  the  favors  which  fortune
or  this  world  hag  bestowed  upon  them,
have  become  weak  and  sick  in  the
faith,  and  who,  I  may  say,  have  al-
most no  faith  at  all,  I  feel  on  this
occasion  that  if  wealth  would  destroy
what  little  faith  I  have  I  would
rather  that  it  would  take  to  itself
wings  and  fly  beyond  my  reach.  I
have  no  faith  to  boast  of,  but  what
little  faith  I  may  possess  I  think
more  of  than  I  do  of  the  wealth  of
this  world,  for  the  wealth  of  this !
world  will  not  carry  me  successfully
through  the  dark  valley  of  the
shadow  of  death  ;  it  will  not  open
to  me  the  portals  of  bliss,  but  real
and  genuine  faith  in  God  will  ac-
complish this.  I  remember  once,
in  Nauvoo,  when  we  felt  ourselves
happy  and  fortunate  if  we  could
get  half  a  bushel  of  meal  to  make
mush  of,  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
talking  to  some  of  us  at  the  house
of  brother  John  Taylor,  said —
m  Brethren,  we  are  pretty  tight  run
now,  but  the  time  will  come  when
you  will  have  so  much  money  that
you  will  be  weary  with  counting  it,
and  you  will  be  tried  with  riches;"
and  I  sometimes  think  that  per-
haps the  preface  to  that  time  has
now  arrived,  and  that  the  Saints
will  soon  be  tried  with  riches;  bat
if  riches  would  kill  our  prospects  of
eternal  life  by  alienating  us  from
the  Priesthood  and  kingdom  of  God,
I  say  it  would  be  fur  better  for  us  to
remain  like  Lazarus,  and  that  all
our  tine  things  should  perish  like
the  dew,  and  we  come  down  to  the
bedrock  of  faith,  and  trust  in  the
true  and  living  God.  i  The  question
is  whvther  we  have  to  coma  there
in  order  to  inherit  eternal  life.  I


IN  GOD,  ETC.  5

will  read  a  little  of  the  words  of  our
Savior,  as  recorded  in  the  6th  chap-
ter of  Matthew.  Said  he— u  Take
no  thought,  saying  what  shall  we  eat
or  what  shall  we  drink,  or  where-
withal shall  we  be  clothed,  for  after
all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek,
for  your  heavenly  Father  knoweth
ye  have  need  of  these  things,  but
seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God
and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these
things  shall  be  added  unto  you.  Take
therefore  no  thought  for  the  morrow,
i  for  the  morrow  shall  take  thought  for
the  things  of  itself  Sufficient  unto
the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."

There  are  many  Saints  at  this
time  who  are  laboring  to  acquire
wealth;  and  the  kingdom,  in  the
hearts  of  a  good  many,  has  become
a  secondary  consideration;  if  we
were  to  reverse  this  order  of  pro-
ceeding and  seek  the  kingdom  of
God  first,  we  could  then  put  our
heavenly  Father  to  the  proof  whe-
ther all  these  things  shall  be  added
to  us,  and  thus  also  test  the  troth  of
our  religion,  and  I  believe  that  this
would  be  a  legitimate  way  to  test  it
to  our  satisfaction.

[  I  have  heard  several  very  abla
discourses,  by  good  men,  showing
that  unless  our  exports  equal  our
imports,  we  are  not  making  head-
way financially.  This  is  all  very
good  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  reasoning
of  that  kind  is  not  our  Savior's,  it
is  the  reasoning  of  this  world,  and
so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,
their  reasoning,  if  correct  is  just  as
good  as  any  other  reasoning;  but  if

1  it  is  not  correct,  and  we  are  swerved

1  by  its  force  and  power  frum  the  line
marked  out  for  us  to  walk  by,  we
shall  become  the  losers.  I  wish  now
to  refer  you  to  certain  events  that
have  transpired  in  days  gone  by,  and
then  any  of  you  may  tell  me  by  what
financial calculations these  things

i  happened,  and  whether  they  were


6  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


brought  down  to  the  very  nicety  of
worldly  reason ing,  or  whether  they
were  left  open  to  tho  providences  of
qur  God,

Once  on  a  time  there  was  a  great
famine  in  Samaria,  and  so  sore  was
that  famine  that  a  male's  head  sold
for  four  score  pieces  of  silver  in  the
market,  and  a  cab  of  dove's  dung
sold  for  food  in  the  market,  I  can
not  recollect  for  how  much.  We
should  consider  it  pretty  much  of  a
task  or  penalty  to  be  compelled  to
use  an  article  like  that  for  food  ;  but
the  people  of  Samaria  were  sorely
distressed  with  famine,  and  which
way  to  turn  to  save  themselves  they
knew  not.  About  this  time,  the
King  of  Syria,  with  a  large  army,
came  to  besiege  the  city,  and  there
was  a  mighty  host  of  them,  and
they  brought  everything  in  the
shape  of  food  that  was  necessary
for  the  comfort  and  happiness  of
man;  and  although  the  famine  was
so  sore  among  the  Samaritans,  the
old  Prophet,  Elisha  I  think  it  was,
told  them  that  on  the  next  day
meal  should  be  sold  in  the  gate  of
their  city  at  very  low  figures,  lower
than  it  had  ever  been  known  to  be
sold  before*  A  certain  nobleman,
who  heard  the  prophecy  of  Elisha
expressed  his  doubt  of  its  truth,  and
he  said  that  if  the  windows  of  hea-
ven were  opened  and  meal  poured
down  from  above  it  could  not  fall
to  such  low  figures.  Now  see  what
he  got  by  doubting  the  words  of
the  Prophet — said  Elisha  to  him —
'*  Your  eyes  shall  see  it,  but  you
shall  not  taste  it."  That  night  the
Lord  sent  forth  the  angels  of  his
presence  and  they  made  a  rustling
in  the  trees,  and  sounds  like  horses
hoofi  and  chariots,  as  if  the  whole
country  had  combined  to  go  out  to
battle  against  the  Syrians,  and  they
did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it,
and  they  .were  frightened,  and  fled,


leaving  almost  every  thing  they  had
brought  with  tbem  in  the  borders
of  the  town ;  and  as  they  went,  the
rustling  of  the  trees  and  the  noise  of
the  horses  and  chariots  seemed  to
pursue  them,  and  in  order  to  make
their  burdens  as  light  as  possible,
they  threw  away  everything  they
had  with  them,  and  their  track  was
strewed  with  everything  good  and
desirable.  The  next  morning  the
people  of  Samaria  went  out  and
brought  the  spoils  into  the  market,
and  it  was  overstocked  with  provis-
ions, and  the  word  of  the  Lord
through  the  Prophet  was  fulfilled.

Now,  you  see,  the  Lord  knew
they  had  eaten  mules'  heads  long
enough,  and  that  they  had  need
of  something  more  palatable;  he
had  had  the  matter  under  advise-
ment, no  doubt,  when  tho  crusade
was  inaugurated  against  the  people
of  Samaria,  and  he,  in  all  probability,
inspired  them  to  take  abundant
supplies,  that  they  might  feel  all
the  more  confident  on  account  of
their  great  numbers  being  so  well
provided  for  They  no  doubt  cal-
culated that  they  had  the  sure
thing,  little  thinking  that  God  was
making  them  pack  animals  to  take
to  his  people  what  they  needed.
Their  Father  in  heaven  knew  that
they  had  need  of  them,  and  he
sent  them,  and  the  people  of  Sa-
maria brought  thorn  into  market,
and  behold  and  lo  tho  multitude
rushed  together  just  as  hungry  peo-
ple will,  and  this  nobleman  came  out
also,  and  he  was  trodden  down  un-
der foot  and  stamped  to  death — he
saw  it  but  he  never  tasted  it.  That
is  the  reward  of  those  who  disbelieve
the  Prophets  of  God ;  it  was  so  then,
aud  if  the  same  thing  does  uot  oc-
cur in  every  instance  something  «f
a  similar  character  is  sure  to  take
place.  There  was  no  living  faith  in
that  man,  he  could  not  believe  the


testimony  of  the  Prophets,  and  in
this  he  was  like  some  of  oar — what
shall  I  say,  great  men,  whose  faith
is  weak  and  sickly,  and  they  thick
they  know  it  all,  and  can  chalk  out
right  and  left  that  which  would  be
best  for  building  up  the  kingdom  of
God.

Well,  after  the  flight  of  Sennach-
erib and  his  hosts,  the  starring  mul-
titudes of  Samaria  had  an  abundant
supply  of  food.  By  what  financial
calculation  was  this  brought  about  ?
Was  it  by  worldly  financiering,  or  was
it  by  the  bounteous  dispensation  of
kind  Heaven,  who,  disregarding
worldly  technicalities,  sent  a  full
supply  to  administer  to  and  supply  the
wants  of  those  who  put  their  trust  in
Him,  for  at  that  time  the  people  of
Samaria  stood  fairly  before  him,  and
he  plead  their  cause.

Said  the  Savior  — u  Take  no
thought  what  ye  shall  eat  or  what
ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye
shall  be  clothed ,  for  after  all  these
things  do  the  Gentiles  seek."  Have
the  Gentiles  come  here  to  make
money  and  to  become  wealthy  ?
They  say  they  have ;  I  am  told  that
that  is  their  sole  errand,  I  have
not  the  least  objection  to  it,  but  I
have  an  objection  to  my  brethren
and  sisters  adopting  their  spirit  by
which  their  faith  withers  and  be-
comes like  a  dried  reed.  The  Lord
said  to  Joseph  Smith  once — *'  As  I
live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  give  not  onto
you  that  ye  shall  live  after  the
manner  of  the  world."  Are  we
seeking  to  live  after  the  manner  of
the  world  by  our  trading  and  traf-
ficking ?  I  do  not  know,  however,
that  there  is  anything  objectionable
about  legitimate,  honorable  trading,
and  I  am  not  going  to  speak  against
it ;  but  in  these  days  it  is  a  pretty
rare  thing  to  find  an  honorable
dealer.  There  may  be,  and  undoubt-
edly there  are,  men  who  do  nothing


but  honorable  business  transactions,
but  most  business  men  are  eager  to
lay  up  a  fortune,  and  to  get  rich  in  a
short  time.  Some  of  oar  merchants
think  they  ought  to  get  rich  in  from
five  to  ten  years,  and  then  retire;
but  in  honorable  business  transac-
tions it  takes  almost  a  lifetime  to
amass  a  fortune.  I  will  not,  how-
ever, speak  of  things  that  occurred
in  old  times,  but  will  come  down  to
onr  own  experience,

I  recollect  when  we  were  forced
away  from  Nauvoo,  at  the  point  of
the  bayonet,  and  when  we  crossed
the  river  to  the  Iowa  side  there  were
hundreds  of  our  people  camped  along
the  shore,  and  what  had  they  to  eat,
or  to  make  themselves  comfortable
with,  in  the  scorching  sun  and
burning  with  fevers  ?  Nothing,
We  wanted  meat  and  other  comforts,
but  we  had  not  the  means  to  procure
them,  and  the  Lord  in  mercy  sent
clouds  of  quails  right  into  camp.
They  came  into  the  tents,  flew  into
the  wagons,  rested  on  the  wagon
wheels,  ox  yokes  and  wagon  tongues,
and  our  little  children  could  catch
them,  and  there  was  an  abundant
supply  of  meat  for  the  time  being.
Who  financiered  that,  and  by  what
calculation  of  two  and  two  make  four
did  it  happen  ?  It  was  the  mercy
and  generosity  of  kind  Providence,
After  the  people  arrived  here  in  Salt
Lake,  they  had  pretty  hard  times.  I
was  not  one  of  the  honored  ones  first
here,  but  I  arrived  soon  after,  and
I  can  recollect  very  well  hearing  of
the  hard  times,  when  the  brethren
and  sisters  were  foroed  to  dig  roots,
and  boil  up  thistletops,  and  anything
that  could  bo  converted  in  the  seeth-
ing pot  into  food  for  the  stomach.
In  th  ose  days  the  rations  of  our
people  were  very  short  indeed.  The
Lord  was  aware  of  the  position  of
the  Saints  in  those  times,  he  knew
that  they  craved  and  had  need  of  th*


8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


necessaries  and  comforts  of  life,  and  |
he  provided  a  way  for  them  to  obtain
thetn. He  opened  the  mines  of  Cali-
fornia, and  he  caused  the  news  to  fly
eastward,  and  this  inspired  the  people
of  the  East,  almost  en  masse,  to  go  to
the  Eldorado  of  the  West  to  secure
the  precious  me  tali. 1  happened  to
be  on  the  borders  at  the  time  the  ex-
citement was  in  progress,  and  having
crossed  the  Plains  once  or  twice,
people  came  to  me  to  know  what
they  should  load  with. I  told  them
to  take  plenty  of  flour, for  that
would  be  good  anyhow,  and  if  they
took  more  than  they coo  Id  carry  1
they  could  trade  it  with  the  Indians
to good  advantage  for  something
that?' they  needed. I  also  told  them
to  take  plenty  of  bacon,  the  very
best  that  they  could  bring;  plenty
of  sugar,  and  also  plenty  of  coffee
and  tea,  we  were  not  quite  so  con-
scientious in  those  days  about  using
tea  and  coffee  kh  we  profess  to  be
now. I  also  told  them  to  take  plenty
of  clothing,  such  as shirts,  over-
coats, blankets  and  everything  that
would  keep  the  body  warm  ;  and  I
told  them  that  tools  of  every  kind
would  be  very  convenient  and  almost
indispensable,  such  as  spades,  sho-
Tels,  planes,  saws,  augurs,  chisels,
and everything that a  carpenter
needs,  for  said  I — "  When  you  get
to  the  end  of  your  journey  you  may
not  find  everything  to  your  hand
that  you  want,  and  these  things  will
be  very  convenient  for  you  to  build
with," And  T  gave  them  this  coun-
sel in  good  faith,  for  I  thought  if
they  did  not  feel  disposed  to  carry
all  these  things  through,  they  could
Tery  readily  exchange  them  iu  our
Yalley  for  something  that  our  folks
could  spare  and  which  the  emigrants
would  find  useful.

Well,  they  fitted  up  train  after
train  with  these  staple  articles,  and
to  use  a steamboat phrase,  they


loaded  to  the  very  guards,  and  when
many  of  them  reached  here,  having
been  retarded  by  their  heavy  loads,
it  was  so  late  that  they  said — **  If  we
attempt  to  go  through  to  California
with  this  outfit,  we  shall  be  swamped
in  the  snows  of  the  Sierra  Nevada
Mountains,  and  so  we  must  leave  it
here."  They  had  brought  it  just
where  God  wanted  it,  for  said  he —
"  1  knew  you  had  need  of  these
things ; "  and  while  many  of  those
who  brought  them  along  were  good,
honorable  men,  it  so  happened  in  the
providence  ol  God  that  his  people
were  abundantly  supplied.

Did  not  brother  Kimball  prophecy
here  once,  in  a  time  of  the  greatest
strait,  that  goods  and  merchandize
of  every  kind  would  be  so  cheap  and
plentiful  within  a  certaia  time,  that
they  would  have  to  be  piled  up  on
the  way  side  ?  Yes,  and  his  predic-
tion came  true,  and  the  merchandize
had  to  be  placed  by  the  wayside  be-
cause there  were  not  houses  enough
to  put  it  in,  Wei!,  when  the  emi-
grants got  here  with  their  jaded
teams,  they  were  glad  to  trade  them
oil  8a id  they — 44  Here  gentlemen,
are  the  dry  goods,  merchandize,  tools,
and  other  tilings  we  have  brought
along,  they  are  at  your  service,  give
us  a  pack  mule  and  a  pack- sa  J  die,  a
lariat  and  a  pair  of  spurs  that  we
may  go  on  our  way."  This  was  the
way  matters  were  arranged  in  many
instances,  and  there  was  no  fault  to
find,  we  did  the  hist  we  could  under
the  circumstances,  and  they  did  the
best  they  were  obliged  to  for  us.

Who  financiered  that  ?  Wjjs  that
on  the  principle  of  two  and  two
make  four  ?  I  do  not  object  at  all  to
that  principle,  but  one  is  the  result
of  human  skill  and  wisdom,  the
other  is  based  upon  unshaken  faith
in  God.  That  is  what  I  am  coming
to — unshaken  faith  in  God,  which
in  this  case,  in  our  own  experience,


brought  deliverance  to  the  Saints,
for  they  were  well  supplied  with
tools,  wagons,  clothing  and  all  they
needed  to  make  them  comfortable.
Our  community  was  small  then,  a
few  trains  heavily  laden  were  suffi-
cient to  supply  it,  but  now  it  would
take  a  number  of  railroad  trains.
We  are  growing  and  increasing,  and
I  fear  that  we  are  growing  beyond
our  faith,  we  are  taking  thought  fbi
to-morrow  too  much.

To  illustrate  this  matter  I  will
Suppose  that  I  say  to  iny  sons—
"  Here,  my  boys,  I  want  yon  to  go
and  plough,  take  care  of  the  stock,
or  make  the  garden  beautiful ;  "  and
they  reply — "  Father,  we  want  some
boots,  pants  and  hats."  "I  tell
them  I  know  they  have  need  of
these  things,  but  I  want  them  to
attend  to  what  I  require  of  them
without  first  receiving  the  boots,
pants  and  hats.  What  would  you
think  of  these  boys  if,  because  father
did  not  give  them  what  they  thought
they  needed  just  at  the  time,  they
should  say  "we  will  strike  out  on  our
own  hook,  for  we  must  hare,  and  are
determined  to  have  these  things  ?"
How  many  of  us  are  there  now  who
feel  as  though  we  could  chalk  out  and
financier  our  own  course  irrespective
of  what  the  Prophet  says  ?  Perhaps
some  would  be  grieved  if  their  faith
in  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  and
in  the  servants  of  God  were  ques-
tioned ;  but,  as  I  said  in  the  start,  to
come  down  to  the  bedrock,  leaving
fiction  out  of  the  question,  how  many
of  us  are  there  who  are  ready  to  strike
hands  with  the  Prophet  of  God  and
to  hang  on  to  him  blow  high,  or  blow
low,  come  coarse  or  come  fine  ?
There  are  some  men  who  have
acquired  fortunes  and  who  are  rich,
and  I  have  reason  to  believe,  though
perhaps  good  men  in  every  other
respect,  there  will  be  a  divorce  be-
tween them  and  their  silver  and  gold,


or  I  fear  they  may  not  enter  the  king-
dom  of  God.  The  rich  man  may
say — 14  Divorced  !  is  it  possible  that
I  must  be  divorced  from  that  to
which  I  am  so  devotedly  attached —
my  riches — in  order  that  I  may  ob-
tain life  everlasting  ?"

In  further  illustration  of  the  sub-
ject we  have  under  consideration,  I
will  quote  the  saying  of  the  Savior,
u  Lay  not  op  for  yourselves  treasures
on  earth,  where  moth  and  rost  can
corrupt,  and  where  thievess  break
through  and  sterd,  but  lay  np  for
yourselves  treasures  in  heaven  where
neither  moth  nor  rust  can  corrupt,
nor  thieves  break  through  and  steal,"
If  heaven be beyond  the  bounds
of  time  and  space,  as  some  of  our
religious  friends  believe,  it  would
require  a  long  arm  to  deposit  oar
treasures  there; bat I  apprehend
that  the  heaven  here  referred  to  is
not  so  far  away. I  believe  it  is  near,
and  that  when  I  yield  my  treasures
to  the  powers  that  govern  the  king-
dom of  God  I  lay  up  treasure  in
heaven. Whenever  I  see  the  hun-
gry and  feed  him,  the  naked  and
clothe  him,  the  sick  and  distressed
and  administer  to  their  wants  I  feel
that  I  am  laying  up  treasure  in  hea-
ven. When  I  am  educating  my  chil-
dren and  embellishing  their  minds
and  fitting  them  for  osef illness,  I  am
laying  up  treasures  in  heaven.  I
would  ask  that  little  boy,  who  is  well
educated  and  well  trained,  "What
thief  can  enter  in  and  steal  the  know-
ledge you  have  got  ?" It  is  beyond
the  power  of  the  thief  to  steal,  it  is
out  of  his  reach,  that  treasure  is  laid
up  in  heaven,  for  where  is  there  a
place  more  sacred  than  the  hearts  of
the  rising  generation which  beat
with  purity,  and  with  love  to  their
parents,  and  with  love  to  God  and
his  kingdom  ? What  better  place
cau  you  find  in  which  to  deposit
treasures  than  that  ? But  all  our


obligations  are  not  pointing  to  one
source  or  quarter,  there  are  many
ways  in  which  we  can  lay  up  treasures
in  heaven  by  doing  good  here  on  the
earth.

The  Bible  says,  "  Take  no  thought
beforehand,  what  ye  shall  eat  or
what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal
ye  shall  be  clothed."  Says  one —
**  If  we  are  to  take  no  thought  be-
forehand  I  would  like  to  know  how
the  farmer  will  ever  contemplate
sowing  his  seed  if  he  does  not  look
with  an  eye  to  the  harvest,  if  he
does  not  take  some  forethought  ?  "
I  do  not  see  any  necessity  for  this.
I  know  that  the  times  and  seasons
roll  around,  and  when  Spring  comes
my  natural  senses  tell  me  then  is
the  time  to  plough,  and  I  go  and
plough,  because  I  know  it  is  my
duty  to  plough,  1  keep  on  plough-
ing clay  after  day  until  I  get  through,
and  then  I  commence  sowing  seed.
It  is  no  use  for  me  to  give  n^self
any  anxiety  about  the  harvest — I
have  no  control  over  that,  as  the
Scriptures  say — 14  Paul  may  plant
and  Apollos  water,  but  God  giveth
the  increase,"  and  I,  with  all  my
figuring,  can  not  swell  the  kernels
of  wheat  and  cause  them  to  germi-
nate. I  can  do  my  duty  in  the  time
and  the  season  thereof,  but  I  must
leave  the  issue  with  God.  When  I
see  that  the  grain  wants  watering  I
can  turn  on  the  water,  but  never
mind  to-morrow,  let  that  take  care
of  itself.  As  each  day  rolls  around
I  can  do  the  duties  thereof,  but  to-
morrow is  beyond  my  reach  or  con-
trol.  We,  however,  are  looking  to
great  results  from  our  present  labors
as  Latter-day  Saints,  and  perhaps
there  is  no  particular  harm  in  this ;
but  it  is  far  safer  for  us  to  do  the  du-
ties of  to-day  than  to  neglect  them
by  dreaming  of  the  glory  that  is  to
be  revealed  in  the  future.  That  is  in
safe-keeping. The hands  of  the


Lord  are  strong  and  true,  they  will
keep  the  reward  in  reserve  fur  the
faithful,  and  none  can  rob  them  of
it.  Let  us  do  the  work  of  to-day,
then,  and  our  heavenly  Father  know-
eth  that  we  have  need  of  all  these
things.

There  is  one  very  peculiar  saying
of  our  Savior  in  the  New  Testament
which  I  believe  I  will  quote.  Said
the  Savior,  "  It  is  easier  for  a  camel
to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle
than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into
tho  kingdom  of  God,"  This  is  a
saying  which  very  few  people  who
live  now  seem  to  believe,  for,  appa-
rently, the  main  object  for  which
most  people  labor  is  to  get  rich,  and
hence,  according  to  the  saying  of
Jesus,  to  keep  themselves  out  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  I  know  men  in
this  Church  whom  I  would  have
gladly  seen  here  to-night,  but  I  do
not  see  them,  I  suppose  they  have
so  much  riches  they  have  no  time  to
attend  meeting.  Maybe  they  are
here,  I  hope  so,  my  sight  is  not  very
keen,  and  I  can  not  see  all  over  the
room  ;  but  I  do  hope  and  pray  that  I
shall  never  get  so  much  wealth  that
1  shall  have  no  time  to  attend  meet-
ings, or  so  much  as  to  keep  me  busy
taking  care  of  it,  so  that  I  shall  not
have  time  to  enrich  my  heart  with  the
knowledge  of  the  Lord  our  God  by
putting  myself  in  the  way  to  obtain
it.  "Easier  for  a  camel  to  enter  the
eye  of  a  needle  than  for  a  rich  man
to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.'*
Said  the  disciples  "Who  then  can
be  saved  ?"  The  Savior  answered,
41  That  which  is  impossible  with  man
is  possible  with  God."

Now  I  want  to  look  a  little  at  the
possibilities  and  impossibilities  of
the  matter,  not  that  I  claim  to  un-
derstand everything,  but  sometimes
a  train  of  thought  comes  through
my  mind  which  cheers  and  does  me


LIVING  FAITH  IN  GOD,  ETC.


11


good,  That  man  who  claims  to  be
under  the  jurisdiction  of  an  autho-
rity that  he  professes  to  believe  is
paramount  with  God,  and  yet  is
engaged  in  this  way,  that  way  and
the  other  way,  in  getting  rich  so  that
he  has  no  time  to  honor  it,  the  ones-
tion  is,  Can  thai  man  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  God  ?  I  am  not  going
to  say,  bat  I  will  bring  up  another
case  that,  perhaps,  may  have  a  bear*
ing  on,  and  serve  to  illustrate  this
subject.

There  was  a  certain  rich  man  who
fared  sumptuously  every  day.  He
had  abundance  of  everything  that
was  good.  Then  there  was  a  poor
man  named  Lazarus,  who  lay  at  his
gate,  and  the  dogs  carae  and  licked
his  sores.  This  poor  man  would
have  been  glad  of  the  crumbs  that
fell  from  the  rich  man's  table.  By
and  by  poor  Lazarus  died  and  was
carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's
bosom.  I  was  once  conversing  with
a  Presbyterian  minister  on  the  sub-
ject of  polygamy.  Said  I  to  him —
"My  dear  sir,  where  do  you  expect
to  go  when  you  die  ?  "  He  said —
**  To  some  good  place,  I  hope,"
"  To  heaven,  1  suppose  ?"
said  he,  "  I  hope  to  go  there,"  Said
I — "  Right  into  Abraham's  bosom,"
Well,  he  said,  figuratively,  that  was
correct.  Said  I,  u  If  you  go  right
into  Abraham's  bosom  there  will  be
on  one  side  Sarai  and  on  the  other
Hagar,  and  if  you  make  a  deadshot
right  into  Abraham's  bosom  how
do  you  expect  to  dodge  polygamy  ?
If  you  get  into  Abraham's  bosom
yon  get  into  a  curious  place."  By
this  time  his  argument  was  ex-
hausted and  our  conversation  closed.
But  Lazarus  went  to  Abraham's
bosom,  I  suppose  he  has  a  pretty
large  bosom  and  a  large  heart,  large
enough  to  embrace  all  the  faithful
from  his  day  down  to  the  end  of
time,  for  in  him  and  his  seed  shall


all  the  families  of  the  earth  be
blessed.

By  and  by  the  rich  man  died,  and
it  is  said  that  he  lifted  up  his  eyes
in  hell,  or  in  torment,  and  he  saw
Abraham  afar  off  with  Lazarus  in
his  bosom  :  Said  he — "  Father  Abra-
ham, send  Lazarus  that  he  may  dip
the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water  that
he  may  cool  my  tongue,  for  I  am
tormented  in  this  flame,"  Abraham
replied,  and  he  spoke  to  him  very
kindly  and  fatherly,  **  Son,  remem-
ber that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receiv-
ed st  thy  good  things,  and  likewise
Lazarus  evil  things,  but  now  he  is
comforted  and  thou  art  tormented.
And  besides  all  this,  between  us  and
you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed,  so
that  they  who  would  pass  from
hence  to  you  cannot,  neither  can
they  pass  to  us  who  would  come
from  thence."  Here,  then,  we  see
illustrated  the  fate  of  the  man  who
obtained  wealth  independent  of  the
Lord  Almighty,  He  obtained  wealth
and  enjoyed  it,  and  down  he  went  to
hell,  while  that  poor  man  who,  in  this
life,  lay  at  the  rich  man's  gate  and  de-
sired to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  that
tell  from  his  table,  was  carried  by
angels  into  Abraham's  bosom.  Pro-
bably, in  life,  this  rich  man  had  op-
pressed and  dealt  wrongfully  by  that
poor  man,  I  cannot  tell  how  that  was,
but  at  any  rate  he  went  to  hell.

Now,  let  me  ask  you  who  the  man
is  who  may  be  rich,  and  still  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God.  There
was  father  Abraham  himself,  none
of  you  will  dispute  that  lie  was  a
rich  man  while  here,  yet  there  he
was,  on  the  otner  side  of  the  great
gulf,  prepared  to  welcome  Lazarus
to  happiness  and  heaven.  But  how
did  Abraham  get  rich  ?  Was  it  bj
cheating  and  defrauding,  by  calcu-
lating and  financiering  ?  or  did  he
get  it  by  doing  his  duty  and  trusting
in  God  to  bestow  upon  him  what  he


12  JOURNAL  OF

eaw  fit.  He  trusted  in  the  Lord,
and  the  Lord  gave  to  him  all  the
Land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting
possession  and  promised  him  that
his  seed  should  be  as  numerous  as
the  stars  in  the  sky,  or  the  sands  on
the  sea  shore.  The  Lord*  made
Abraham  rich,  Abraham  did  not  do
it  himself;  he  did  not  cheat  any-
body,  but  in  the  providences  of  God
he  was  elevated  and  made  rich.
Why,  there  are  some  men  who  can
not  sleep  nights  for  laying  plans  to
get  rich,  but  I  would  advise  them,
if  they  want  to  get  riches  that  will
last  for  ever,  just  to  lay  plans  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  in
other  words  take  the  advice  of  Jesua
— "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God
and  His  righteousness,  and  all  things
else  shall  be  added  unto  you,"  I
nsed  to  think — I  can  not  get  mar-
ried  until  1  get  rich,  for  I  can  not
support  a  wife ;  and  it  was  not  half
60  hard  to  support  a  wife  in  the  days
when  I  married  as  it  is  now,  because
there  was  not  half  the  pride  or  fashion
to  support  then  that  there  are  now.
Then  I  did  not  make  money  very  fast,
and  I  thought  that  if  I  waited  until
I  got  rich  before  I  married  I  should
wait  too  long,  and  finally  I  concluded
that  I  would  marry  and  take  hold
tvith  my  wife  and  we  would  work  to-
gether. It  is  certainly  better  to
have  two  oxen  than  one,  for  if  one
ie  yoked  up  at  one  end  the  n'her  end
of  the  yoke  drags,  and  when  one
wheel  is  off  and  the  other  is  on,
the  point  of  one  axle  drags  iu  the  i
Band,  and  it  is  a  complete  nothing  at
all,  that  is  just  what  it  is.  Well  then
I  would  give  the  same  advice  to  my
young  brethren  and  sisters  that  I
acted  upon  myself,  and  that  is — Get
married  and  get  rich  afterwards,  and
dispense  with  this  fashion  that  so
many  are  anxious  to  follow.  We
cannot  very  well,  unless  we  are  born
princes,  heirs  or  millionaires,  sup-


DISCOURSES.

port  the  fashion  of  the  present  day
and  prosper,  and  we  had  better  dis-
pense with  it,  I-  like  to  see  every-
body cleanly  and  comfortable,  but
all  this  display  and  paraphernalia
that  fashion  demands  of  its  votaries
seems  to  me  like  clogging  the
wheels  and  creating  discomfort
rather  than  comfort  When  I  was
in  the  old  country,  I  recollect  hear-
ing a  lady  say — *  Some  people  wrap
themselves  up  and  put  on  so  much
that  they  are  completely  clogged.
If  you  draw  a  net  over  a  fish,  how
can  it  swim  in  the  water?  It  is
freedom  they  want,  and  it  is  a  light
covering  we  want,  especially  in
warm  weather,"  I  like  to  see  per-
sons neat  and  clean,  and  would
rather  sae  them  thus  than  adoined
in  fine  feathers,  dresses,  caps  and
jewelry.  I  believe  God's  people  will
be  so.  I  have  no  particular  fault  to
find,  I  am  only  telling  what  I  think
would  be  good*

The  man  that  goes  along  and  does
his  duty,  and,  without  straining  a
point,  picks  up  honestly  and  fairly
the  blessings  and  meaus  that  God
strews  in  his  pathway,  can  appre-
ciate and  do  good  with  his  means ;
and  as  long  as  he  keeps  an  open
heart  and  is  willing  to  do  good,  God
will  continue  to  put  wealth  in  his
way,  and  wealth  obtained  in  this
way,  no  matter  how  much,  if  it
swells  as  large  as  the  mountains  on
the  east  here,  can  not  keep  its  pos-
sessor out  of  the  kingdom,  because
it  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  not  the
fruits  of  over- reaching  dishonesty.
God  is  not  going  to  keep  me  out  of
his  kingdom  because  I  have  wealth,
no  matter  how  much,  if  I  obtain  it
honestly  in  his  sight,  and  strive
continually  to  do  good  with  it.  The
reason  why  men  of  God  were  rich
in  old  times  was,  that  they  were  will-
ing and  desirous  that  God  should
rule,  govern  and  control  them  and


LIVING  FAITH

their  means,  while  the  miserable
calculators  after  the  fashion  of  the
world  shut  God  out  of  the  question
altogether.  Such  men  are  a  stink
in  the  nostrils  of  the  Almighty,  and
he  will  hurl  them  from  his  presence,
and  they  will  find  that  it  is  easier
for  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of
a  needle  than  for  them  to  enter  into
His  kingdom.  This  is  my  faith,  and
I  hope  it  will  last  me  all  the  way
through  and  for  ever,  that  if  we  will
keep  the  commandments  of  God,
build  up  his  kingdom,  and  lay  up
treasure  in  heaven  by  doing  good
with  whatever  means  and  ability
God  may  entrust  us  with  here,
wealth  will  roll  in  upon  ua  from
quarters  we  are  not  aware  of,  and  in
a  way  that  eye  has  not  seen  nor  ear
heard,  neither  has  it  altered  into
the  heart  of  man  to  conceive*  All
the  world  is  for  the  Saints,  and  if
they  only  take  the  right  course  and
do  as  they  are  required,  wealth  will
roll  in  upon  them  and  can  not  go
anywhere  else.  The  world  say  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  the  lowest  of
all  people,  and  just  for  argument's
sake  we  will  grant  it;  but  then,  if
we  are  so,  that  tact  is  only  a  pvoof
of  our  excellence,  for  everything
that  has  weight  and  worth  rolls
down  and  finds  the  centre,  the  froth
only  rises  to  the  top*  I  will  venture
to  say  that  if  you  take  a  dollar  and
place  it  on  the  edge  of  a  nice  wash-
basin, it  will  roll  down  to  the  centre,
and  if  we  are  there,  we  shall  all  be
in  the  right  place.  It  is  the  meek
and  lowly  who  are  to  inherit  the
e'ii  th  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  i
enjoy  the  gifts  of  heaven.  i
I  have  spoken  once  to-day  before
pretty  freely,  and  I  begin  to  feel  a
little  sore  about  the  Hides,  and  I  do
not  think  I  shall  talk  to  you  much
longer  on  this  occasion,  1  was  talk-
ing this  afternoon  about  the  ante-
diluvians, How  strong  they  were  j


IN  GOD,  ETC.  13

I  in  their  own  estimation  !  They  wore
able  to  carve  out  their  own  destiny t
and  to  amass  and  spend  their  own
fortunes;  but  when  the  flood  cama
they  and  their  wealth  went,  toge-
ther. They  were  not  in  the  ark,  they
had  no  interest  in  it  whatever,  I
suppose  they  were  a  good  deal  as
some  people  are  at  the  present  day*
I  saw  a  little  ticket  out  here — I  did
not  stop  to  read  it — but  in  passing  I
read  the  words — "  Not  one  cent  for
Tithing."  I  suppose  that  was  the
motto  of  the  aute-diluvians.  "Not
one  cent  for  Tithing,"  not  one  iota
to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God*
Well,  they  went  to  destruction.
I  I  wish  to  say  to  my  brethren  I
have  had  considerable  experience  in
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  I  have
had  some  experience  that  a  man
never  ought  to  h;ive,  and  let  me
here  ask  my  brethren  and  sisters  if
every  tiling  could  be  arranged  to  suit
all,  where  under  the  heavens  would
there  be  any  trial  of  our  integrity  ?
There  would  be  no  such  thing.  As
the  Methodist  say — "  When  I  (.-an
read  my  title  clear  to  mansions  ia
the  skies,"  and  neither  stumbling-
block  nor  obstacle  in  the  way,  I
shall  begin  to  think  that  I  am  on
the  wrong  road,  for  I  do  know  that
in  the  way  of  exaltation  and  eternal
life  there  are  stumbling-blocks  and
difficulties  to  overcome,  and  if  I
keep  in  that  way  I  shall  have  some
i  things  to  swallow  that  are  unplea-
sant and  uncomfortable.  But  they
will  appear  smaller  and  less  difficult
to  overcome,  if  we  swallow  less
whisky.  I  would  advise  all  my
brethren  to  avoid  it,  and  to  have  no
connection  with  it;  and  if  we  sea
those  who  are  feeble  in  faith,  and
more  inclined  to  find  fault  than
they  are  to  approve,  let  us  Libor
with  them  and  do  all  we  can  to
bring  them  back  to  a  sense  ol  t  Ueir
j  obligations.  ,


H


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


"  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,
what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall
drink,  nor  wherewithal  ahall  ye  be
clothed,"  but  go  to,  and  do  just  as
God,  through  your  brethren,  tells
you,  and  never  be  the  means  of  ad-
ministering a  blow  or  doing  one  act
that  shall  cause  a  division  among  the
Saints  of  God,  for  says  Jesus — '*  Ex-
cept you  are  one  you  are  not  mine,"
and  how  many  are  there  in  this
city  and  throughout  the  country
who  are  kind  of  half  Jew  aud  half
Ashdod,  and  more  Ashdod  than
Jew  in  many  instances  ?  Do  not
understand  me  to  apply  this  to  the
body  of  the  Saints,  but  to  them  that
are  pairing  off,  the  disaffected  and
dissatisfied,  and  those  who  seem  as
if  tliey  had  just  swallowed  a  dose
of  fishhooks,  and  were  choking  over
it  I  would  advise  such  to  grease  it
well,  and  it  will  go  down*  Let  the
oil  of  the  grace  of  God  be  applied,
and  there  is  no  obstacle  that  we  can
not  overcome.  I  say  then,  let  us
never  allow  ourselves  to  be  the
entering  wedge  to  divide  the  peo-
ple of  God.  If  we  cannot  overcome
a  little  difficulty  or  a  little  trial,  how
much  faith  have  we  got  ?  Not  much,
I  say  to  my  brethren — God  bless
you;  and  to  the  weak,  the  Lord,
through  the  Prophet,  says,  "Be
strong."  Be  as  weak  as  you  have  a
mind  to,  but  when  there  is  need  of
strength  put  it  on.  If  we  have  the
right  spirit,  the  more  strength  we
need  the  more  we  shall  have,  but
keep  the  fire  burning,  and  may* the


Lord  God  of  heaven  bless  you.

I  could  say  many  more  things,
but  I  have  said  a*  many  as  I  should
say.  May  the  Lord  bless  you  here
in  the  14th  Ward.  I  used  to  know
all  the  people  who  were  here,  but
now  I  do  not  kuoff  &  tithing  of  them;
they  have  either  grown  up  out  of  my
knowledge,  or  else  there  is  another
set,  or  else  we  have  lost  our  faith
and  our  countenances  are  changed.
I  do  not  know  which.  Well  now,
let  these  pipes  and  tobacco  alone,
and  let  whisky  alone;  and  sisters,
let  tea  and  coffee  alone*  I  know
I  am  touching  you  in  a  vital  place,
but  will  you  do  it  ?  "  Oh  dear,  I
shall  die  if  I  can  not  have  some/'
Well,  we  have  got  to  die  once,  and
it  had  better  be  in  a  good  cause  than
in  a  bad  one.  Then  let  us  keep  the
Word  of  Wisdom,  and  keep  our-
selves unspotted  from  the  world
and  live  to  the  honor  and  glory  o  f
God,  that  when  we  have  got  through  ,
having  really  complied  with  the  will
of  heaven,  we  may  see  opening  before
lis  fields  of  everlasting  bliss,  and
crowns  and  dominions  beyond  calcu-
lation opening  in  the  wide  expanse
of  eternity.  Oh,  shall  we  come
short,  or  shall  we  not?

Brethren  and  sisters,  live  to  God,
and  may  God  bless  you.  I  want
to  live  until  the  power  of  God  will
be  felt  and  acknowledged  in  this
world,  and  that  day  is  not  far  remote*
May  God  bless  us  for  ever,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


REMARKS  TO  THE  YOUNG,


15


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  WILLIAM  C,  DUNBAR,

Delivered  is  the  Twentieth  Ward  School-house,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  Jan.  4,  1874.

(Reported  ly  David  W.  Evans.)

RE3MARKS  TO  THE  YOUNG,


Last  Sunday  evening  I  asked  the
privilege  from  the  Bishop  to  give  a
little  lesson  to  the  young,  and  to  the
old  and  middle-aged  about  the
young.  It  ia  something  new  for
me  to  ask  for  the  privilege  of  speak-
ing, for  my  weakness  has  generally
led  me  to  decline  speaking  when
asked  to  do  so ;  but  inasmuch  as  I
have  assumed  the  task,  I  trust  I
shall  bo  assisted  by  that  Spirit  that
illuminates  the  understanding,  and
that  it  will  on  this  occasion  dictate
things  which  will  be  for  our  good.

I  have  heard  some  say  that  they
thought  we  made  too  much  fuss  and
talk  about  the  rising  generation ;  but
when  we  take  into  consideration  the
circumstances  in  which  we  arc  placed
as  Latter-day  Saints,  we  shall  see  that
this  is  not  the  case.  We  are  con-
nected with  the  kingdom  of  God,
established  in  these  last  days  never
to  be  cast  down  again.  We  are  not
connected  with  a  system  of  religion
which  is  to  expire  when  we  expire,
but  with  one  which  is  to  exist  when
we  are  gone,  and  there  is  a  prospect
of  a  great  many  of  us  departing  this
life  before  very  many  years  more  pass
away.  There  are  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands  of  us  who  embraced
the  Gospel  soon  after  the  Church  was
organized by  the  Prophet  Joseph


Smith,  and  who  are  now  arriving  at
an  age  when  we  must  naturally  ex-
pect that  we  will  not  live  long  upon
the  earth,  hence,  in  the  minds  of
all  such  who  reflect,  there  is  an
anxiety  about  the  young.  Why  ?
Because  they  have  an  anxiety  about
the  kingdom  of  God  being  perpet-
uated \  they  have  an  anxiety  about
the  young,  realizing  that  the  respon-
sibility of  bearing  off  this  king-
dom and  its  principles  must  shortly
rest  u [!■  n  their  shoulders,  when  they
will  have  to  preach  the  Gospel  and
to  administer  the  laws  and  ordinances
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  bear
oflf  its  principles  while  they  shall
live  upon  the  earth,  hence  the  anx-
iety of  the  old  members  of  the  Church
to  know  that  their  children  are  in  a
position  to  be  able  to  perform  the
duties  devolving  upon  them  as  well
as,  if  not  better  than,  their  prede-
cessors.

We  have  around  us  a  multitude
of  children  growing  up.  We  are  in
the  habit  of  calling  them  children
and  of  treating  them  as  such,  and
all  the  time  our  speeches  to  them
are  as  if  directed  to  children;  but  all
of  a  sudden  it  has  come  to  our  no-
tice that  some  of  these  children
have  arrived  at  the  years  of  ac-
countability. Some  of  our  sons,  for


16


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


instance,  are  as  old  as  we  were  our-
selves  when  we  went  forth  to  pnach
the  Gospel,  and  we  see  around  us  a
multitude  of  young  men  and  wo-
men who  were  baptized  when  they
were  eight  years  old,  and  who,  al-
most unnoticed,  have  arrived  at
years  when  they  begin  to  think  and
act  for  themselves.  Among  them
are  those  who  have  a  knowledge,
by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat-
ter-day Saints  is  the  Church  and
work  of  God,  and  perhaps  a  great
proportion  of  them  have  this  know-
ledge. Then,  there  are  a  great  many
of  them  who  say  they  have  not  this
knowledge,  but  they  believe  "Mor-
monisin"  is  tree  because  father  and
mother  say  it  is;  that  is,  they  be-
lieve it  by  education  and  not  by  con-
viction and  through  understanding  it
for  themselves,  Among  these  chil-
dren to  which  I  am  referring  is  a
small  number  who  havo  come  in
con  trie  t  with  certain  influences,  and
who  are  becoming  skeptical  and  un-
believing as  to  the  principles  of  the
C hutch  of  Jesus  Christ  QfTlatTer-day-

We  may  shut  our  eyes  to  these
things,  bat  they  are  facts,  and  the
question  is,  How  shall  we  treat
them  ?  If  we  knew  that  two  Gen-
tiles were  in  this  meeting,  we  would
so  arrange  our  discourse  as  to  be
suitable  to  them,  and  let  all  the  rest
of  the  congregai  ion,  who  already
know  these  principles,  sit  and  listen.
But  it  appears  to  me  that  we  have
to  take  a  new  departure  in  regard
to  onr  preaching,  We  most  adapt
ourselves  to  circumstances,  and  re.
member  that  there  are  those  amongst
us  of  the  kind  I  have  mentioned.
It  is  true  our  oim&en  have  been  raised
and  grounded,  as  it  were,  in  the  prin-
ciples of  "  Mor monism  : "  they  have


ones  here  that  lam  so  much  concerned
about,  but  it  is  the  young  men  and  the
young  women,  from  sixteen  to  twen-
ty* two  or  twenty-three  years  of  age,
who  go  oat  in  life  for  themselves.
Perhaps  the  sisters  go  to  service  in
various  parts  of  the  city  and  among
various  kinds  of  people;  and  the
young  men,  they  go  to  learn  trades
— learn  to  be  carpenters,  masons,
blacksmiths,  or  some  other  occupa-
tion. They  have  to  go  ont  in  life,
and  they  meet  with  a  great  many
influences  now  that  were  not  to  be
found  in  our  midst  years  ago ;  for
amongst  ns  now  fire  those  who  are
straining  every  effort  to  undermine
the  education  that  we  have  been
giving  to  our  children.  When  I
say  education,  I  mean  the  religions
training  which  we  have  been  giving
them*  There  are  men  in  our  midst
who  consider  they  have  a  mission  to
perform,  and  that  mission  is  to  nnd er-
mine our  religion.  There  are  many
amongst  ns  now  who  do  not  believe
in  and  who  care  nothing  about  our
religion.  Some  of  these  have  come
i&in  the  mountains,  to  ox  rract  the
ver  and  get  a  fortune;  they  care
nothing  about  religion  of  any  kind.
There  are  others  here  who  consider
they  have  a  mission  to  undermine
"  Mormon  ism,"  and  who  think  the
only  way  for  them  to  do  that  is  by
undermining  the  education  of  our
young  people.  They  say,  "  We  can
only  reach  the  young,  so  far  a*  faith
in  "Mormonism"  is  concerned;  but
if  we  succeed  in  making  the  rising
generation  skeptical,  "  Mormonismn
will  be  a  thing  of  the  past  and  al-
most forgotten  in  the  next  genera-
tion." There  is  a  class  of  so-call^i
religious  men  whoso  aim  ia  to  ma  ice
our  young  folks  skeptical;  there  ia
the  apostate,  who  is  either  an  infi-
del or  a  deist,  working  to  accomplish
grown  up  and  have  scarcely  heatijt^&he  same  object;  there  is  also  the


IB


anything  else* It  is  not  these  litti


Gentile,


who  is  a  deist  or  a  free-


REMARKS  TO

thinker,  and  does  not  believe  in  God  !
or  in  a  life  hereafter ;  and  they  all
feel  that  it  is  their  special  mission
to  undermine  what  we  have  been
doing  during  the  last  twenty  years
to  establish  in  the  minds  of  the  rising
generation  the  truth  of  the  principles
which  we  have  espoused,  and  which
we  know  to  be  true.

Now,  if  it  has  taken  all  the  know-
ledge thai  We  have,  all  the  testi-
mony that  we  have  received  from
the  Almighty,  to  carry  us  through
to  the  present  moment;  if  it  has
taken  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost
and  the  Spirit4*  of  God  to  enable  ns
to  stand  and  resist  the  various  op-
posing influences  by  'wjiich  we  have
been  assailed  since  we  obeyed  the
Gospel,  it  will  take  the  game  testi-
mony and  the  same  understanding
to  enable  the  rising  generation  to
carry  off  this  kingdom  triumphantly
in  spite  of  all  the  combined  opposition
that  may  be  brought  against  it.
Hence  the  necessity,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  of  being  exercised  about
the  young,  and  hence  the  reason  that
they  should  have  a  knowledge  of  the
principles  of  truth  that  we  have
received,  that  when  we  are  departing
this  life  we  can  lay  our  hands  upon
them  and  bless  them,  and  set  them
apart  for  the  work  that  we  have
about  closed.  Then  the  fathers  in
Israel  can  say — **  Here  are  our  sons,
who  will  carry  out  what  we  have
begun  j"  and  the  mothers  can  say —
"  Here  are  our  daughters,  who  will
carry  out  what  we  have  commenced."
Under  such  circumstances  the  feelings
of  the  dying  will  be  those  of  joy
and  pleasure,  for  they  will  know
that  they  are  leaving  behind  them
a  multitude  upon  whose  hearts  is  in-
effaceably  impressed  the  conviction
of  the  divinity  of  this  work.  I

I  am  pleased  when  I  hear  a  young
man  or  young  woman  testify  that
they  know  this  is  the  kingdom  of

No,  2.


THE  YOUNG.  17

God ;  but  I  should  not  be  pleased  to
hear  them  testify  that  they  did
know  if  they  did  not ;  I  should  not
be  pleased  to  hear  them  say  they  be-
lieved if  they  did  not  believe.  It
might  cost  me  sorrow  to  hear  my
son  or  my  daughter,  or  your  son  or
your  daughter,  say,  14 1  do  not  know
that  *  Mormon  ism*  is  true."  or  "  I  do
not  believe  it  is  true,"  or  to  see
them  in  a  kind  of  betwixt  and
between  state  of  mind,  not  know-
ing what  to  believe ;  but  at  the  same
time  I  would  rather  they  would
honestly  say  just  what  is  the  fact,
than  to  have  them  hypocritically
say  one  thing  and  mean  another.
I  would  not  like  to  see  this  among
children  or  among  men  and  women.
But  if  a  person  is  really  sick  and  we
can  find  out  what  the  disease  is,
then  we  can  apply  the  remedy ;  if,
however,  the  patient  insists  that  he
is  not  sick,  and  that  nothing  is  the
matter  with  him,  we  can  not  touch
him.  Hence  I  say,  if  we  know  the
circumstances  in  which  we  are
placed,  we  know  what  remedy  to
apply.  A  young  man  or  young
woman  will  ask  this  question,  for
instance,  which  is  very  natural —
"  Father,  I  hear  you  say  that  all  the
sects  in  the  Christian  world  are
wrong  except  the  'Mormons;'  but
yet  I  find,  when  I  attend  the  Epis-
copal, Roman  Catholic  or  Method  list
,  church,  that  they  quote  from  the
very  same  Bible  which  you  quote
from.  How  is  it  that  they  are
wrong  ?  Do  you  recollect,  brethren
and  sisters,  how  we  were  when  first
the  Gospel  reached  our  ears  ?  One
of  the  first  questions  that  we  asked
of  the  Elder  who  preached  to  as
was—"  You  say  that  fi  Mormon  ism'
only  is  right,  but  how  is  it  that  all
these  other  sects  and  parties,  who
say  they  believe  in  God,  the  Bible
and  Jesus  Christ,  are  wrong  an  J
you  only  are  right?' This  was  a

Vol.  XVII.


18  JOURNAL  OF

kind  of  a  my  stery  to  us,  it  caused  a
query  to  arise  in  our  minds,  and  we
could  not  exactly  understand  it.
This  brings  to  my  remembrance  a
figure  that  was  yery  frequently
used  by  the  Elders  when  preaching
the  Gospel  in  the  old  country  ia
early  days.  To  explain  this  seem-
ing mystery  to  the  minds  of  the
new  converts,  they  would  liken  the
Gospel  and  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  its  orgavization,  to  a  watch,
with  all  its  complicated  machinery,
including  wheels,  pivots  and  pins,
face,  fingers  and  mainspring.  All  •
these  properly  combined  will  cor-
rectly tell  the  time  of  day.  "  But,"
said  the  Elders,  "Suppose  a  man
comes  along  and  takes  one  of  these
wheels  away,  and  another  man
takes  another  wheel,  and  another
takes  another  wheel ;  another  man
takes  a  pin,  and  auothar  another
pin ;  another  man  takes  a  pivot,  and
another  takes  another  pivot;  one
takes  the  face,  another  takes  a  fin- ;
ger,  and  another  takes  another  fin-
ger, and  so  on,  until  finally  the
whole  watch  is  divided  up,  say
among  six  hundred  different  peo-
ple, every  one  of  whom  says — "I
have  got  the  watch,  and  I  can  tell
the  time  of  day."  Says  the  watch-
maker— "  Do  you  think  I  am  such
a  fool  as  to  believe  that  any  of
you  can  tell  the  time  of  day?  A
watch  can  not  tell  the  time  unless  it
is  combined  and  united  together,  j
every  wheel  and  pivot  in  its  place,  i
with  the  mainspring  in  tgood  order.
It  takes  the  whole  machine  to  tell
the  time  of  da  v.  and  when  a  man
says — *  I  have  got  the  watch/  and
he  has  only  got  a  wheel,  n  pivot,  or  1
a  pin,  the  face,  mainspring,  or  case,
he  does  not  tell  the  truth,  whether  I
he  knows  it  or  not,"  I
So  it  is,  my  young  friends  and  ,
brethren  and  sisters,  iu  regard  to  the
Bible; every  religious  sect  takes


DISCOURSES,

that  part  of  it  which  suits  them,
and  they  all  say  they  believe  in  it,
and  they  have  got  the  plan  of  lalva
tion.  For  instance,  one  sect  or  party
will  take  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and
say  that  is  all  that  is  necessary  for
the  salvation  of  man.  Another
sect  will  perhaps  take  baptism,  and
say  that  faith  and  baptism  are  ne-
I  cessary  for  salvation,  and  throw
away  something  else;  and  thus  you
find  the  whole  Christian  world,
although  professing  to  believe  in  the
same  Savior  and  in  the  same  Bible,
opposed  to  each  other.  And  then
the  "Mormons"  come  along  and
they  say — "  All  these  sects  are  wrong
and  we  are  right."  Tbey  say  to  the
sects — "  Why,  you  have  not  got  the
watch,  you  have  only  got  one  of  the
wheels,  one  of  the  pins  or  fingers,
or  you  have  only  got  the  case,  and
there  is  nothing  ia  it,  and  it  re-
quires the  case  with  all  its  contents
properly  arranged  to  tell  the  time
of  day  correctly ;  in  other  words,  if
you  would  teach  the  people  how  to
be  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
you  must  teach  them  to  obey  every
principle  of  the  plan  of  salvation,'*
That  is  precisely  what  the  Elders  of
this  Church  do,  and  that  makes  the
grand  distinction  and  difference  be-
tween them  and  the  so-called  reli-
gious teachers  of  the  day.

Now  to  illustrate  this.  You  at-
tend a  church  or  a  chapel,  and  you
perhaps  hear  a  minister  preach  from
the  16th  chapter  of  St.  Mark's  Gos-
pel, where  the  Apostles  are  com-
manded to  go  and  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature,  with  the  promise
I  that  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized
shall  be  saved,  <fcc.  Some  of  our
young  people  have  not  read  the
Bible  a  great  deal.  It  is  true  that
many  of  them  who  attend  Sunday
school  do  read  it,  but  as  a  general
thing  the  class  I  am  referrngtodo
not  attend  Sunday  school.  They


REMARKS  TO

consider  that  they  are  too  old,  that
they  know  too  much,  or  that  it  is
rather  humiliating  to  associate  with
children ;  and,  with  a  few  excep-
tions, those  I  mean  are  not  of  the
kind  who  have  read  the  Bible ;  bnt
you  will  find,  no  matter  how  much
it  may  chagrin  us  to  admit  it,  that
they  would  rather  read  the  Ledger,
BawbeVSj  or  some  other  book  of  that
character,  than  the  Bible,  and  con-
sequently when  they  hear  a  secta-
rian minister  quote  from  it,  that  he
that  believeth  in  Jesus  shall  be  saved,
they  take  it  for  granted  that  he  is
reading  the  Bible,  when,  if  they
had  read  and  studied  its  pages  for
themselves,  they  would  know  that
he  only  quotes  part  of  it.  Is  it  not
singular  that  sectarian  ministers,  as
a  general  thing,  manage  to  forget
that  little  word  "baptism"  when
exhorting  sinners  to  repent  and  be
saved  ?  Is  it  not  singular  that  the
divines  of  the  day,  as  a  general
thing,  although  they  have  made  \
the  Bible  their  study,  and  have
gone  to  college  on  purpose  to  study
how  to  explain  its  contents,  should
stop  short  and  say,  "  He  that  be-
lieveth  shall  be  saved,"  leaving  out
all  about  bapf  ism  ?  I
What  is  the  difference,  in  this  re-
spect, between  the  "Mormon"  and
the  sectarian  teacher  ?  The  "  Mor-
mon" teacher  reads  the  whole  of  it
— the  text  and  the  context,  and  he
declares  to  the  people  that  he  that
belie veth  and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved;  and  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  condemned.  la  it  not  sin-
gular that  men  professing  to  be  ser-
vants of  God  and  ministers  of  sal-
vation, when  they  quote  Scripture,
should  only  quote  part  of  it  ?  This  I
is  the  course  pursued  by  the  mini-
sters of  nearly  every  denomination
in  Christendom,  One  will  take  a
pivot  or  a  wheel,  and  leave  all  the
rest  of  the  machinery;  another  will


THE  YOUNG,  19

do  the  same,  and  so  on,  and  if  we
were  to  examine  the  whole,  we
should  perhaps  find  that  all  of  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  are  scattered
amongst  them,  bat  all  of  them  reject
some  portions  of  it.

On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  a
large  multitude  of  people  where  as-
sembled at  Jerusalem,  the  Apostles
of  the  Savior,  who  had  been  endowed
with  power  from  on  high,  plainly
and  unmistakably  declared  unto
th  em  the  way  of  life  and  salvation.
In  answer  to  the  earnest  and  anx-
ious inquiries  of  many  on  that  occa-
sion, Peter,  the  chief  of  the  Apostles,
said  —  "  Repent  and  be  baptized,
every  one  of  you,  for  the  remission
of  your  sins,  and  you  shall  receive
the  Holy  Ghost,"  &c.  But  how  is
this  Scripture  quoted  by  those  who
take  only  one  wheel  or  pivot?
They  say — "  Repent  and  be  saved  ;"
or,  "  Believe  in  Jesus  and  be  saved  j"
but  somehow  or  other,  either  through
a  defective  memory,  or  from  some
other  cause,  they  fail  to  quote  the
rest  of  it.

Here  is  the  difference  between  the
sectarians  and  us  who  are  called
u  Mormons'"  We  take  the  whole
chapter,  we  want  the  whole  watch.
We  know  we  can  not  tell  the  time
correctly  if  we  only  take  a  part  of  it,
and  we  know  we  can  not  get  full
salvation  in  the  celestial  kingdom  of
God  unless  we  obey  the  whole  Gos-
pel, which  is  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation  unto  all  who  believe  it
enough  to  obey  it*

The  Apostle  Paul,  in  writing  to
the  Corinthians,  lays  down  the  orga-
nization of  the  Church,  as  esta-
blished by  its  founder,  Christ.  He
says  that  in  the  Church  are  placed
Apostles,  Prophets,  Evangelists,  Pas-
tors and  Teachers.  What  for  ?  For
the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,  And
for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  until


20  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


we  all  come  to  the  unity  of  the  faith.
The  Apostle  also  says  that  there
are  in  the  Church  a  diversity  of
gifts,  such  as  tongues,  the  interpre-
tation of  tongue?,  healing,  know-
ledge, faith,  wisdom,  &c.  Now,  how
much  does  a  sectarian  pick  out  of
this  when  he  q notes  it  ?  He  takes
Pastors  and  Teachers,  but  he  throws
away  Apostles,  Prophets,  gifts,  helps,
tongues,  healings,  <fca  ;  in  fact,  he
claims  to  have  the  whole  watch,
when,  at  the  same  time,  he  has  but
one  little  pin  or  pivot,  and  throws
away  the  principal  part  of  the  ma-
chinery.

Did  you  ever  think  of  these  things
my  brethren  and  sisters  ?  If  you
would  read  the  Bible  and  New  Tes-
tament you  would  get  an  understand-
ing of  them  just  as  we  did.  How  was
that  ?  Most  of  us  were  trained  to
read  the  Bible,  and  when  we  heard  the
Latter-day  Saints  preach  we  said, —
"  This  is  different  from  anything  we
ever  heard  before.  The  Bible  seems
like  a  new  book,  we  never  knew  there
were  such  things  in  it  Our  minis-
ters never  taught  us  these  principles,
and  when  me  mention  them  to  them
they  say  they  are  done  away,  and
no  longer  needed ; "  in  other  words
they  say  that  a  watch  does  not  need
a  mainspring  now;  it  was  necessary
1800  years  ago  for  a  watch  to  have
a  mainspring  and  a  variety  of  wheels
and  pins  all  united  together  in  one
case,  but  now  it  is  not  necessary,  for
you  can  tell  the  time  of  day  with  one
of  the  fingers,  or  a  pin,  or  with  the
empty  case*  We  who  had  read  the
New  Testament,  when  we  heard  the
Elders  explain  the  organization  of
this  Church,  could  at  once  see  that  it
was  in  accordance  with  the  Scripture
pattern,  and  that  it  was  different  to
the  churches  of  Christendom;  but
the  reason  that  our  young  men  and
women  are  sometimes  in  a  quandary

hen  they  hear  sectarians  preach  is


because  they  have  not  read  the
Scriptures,  and  hence  when  they  hear
a  man  in  a  pulpit  make  an  assertion,
they  are  not  able  to  tell  whether  he
quotes  the  whole  or  only  a  part  of
the  passage,  and  hence  the  necessity
for  them  to  make  themselves  more
acquainted  with  the  Bible.

When  I  was  about  seventeen
years  of  age  I  6rst  heard  this  Gospel
preached  by  Elder  Orson  Pratt.  He
quoted  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles, and  althoagh  I  had  another
word  of  testimony  within  me  that
what  he  said  was  correct,  that  he
was  a  servant  of  God  and  that  Jo-
seph Smith  had  had  the  ministration
of  angels,  when  he  quoted  from  the
Scriptures  I  could  not  say  whether
it  was  so  or  not,  because  I  had  never
read  the  Bible.  I  had  never  been
allowed  to  read  it,  for  re  as  jus  which
I  stated  this  afternoon,  but  I  went
home  directly  and  read  the  Bible,
and  found  that  what  he  said  was
true.  Then  I  went  to  another  place
of  worship  and  I  heard  a  man  quote
the  same  chapter,  but  somehow  or
other  he  failed  to  quote  the  whole
passage,  and  quoted  only  a  little  bit
of  it.  This  led  some  of  us  to  inves-
tigate, and  we  did  so  j  ust  as  we  would
any  other  branch  of  knowledge.  No
young  man  would  think  of  reading
Robinson  Crusoe  in  order  to  make
himself  acquainted  with  geography,
neither  would  he  read  the  history  of
Scotland  in  order  to  master  algebra ;
and  no  young  man  or  young  woman
would  think  of  studying  any  branch
of  science  or  art  by  reading  novels,
But  if  they  really  desired  to  acquire
any  branch  of  knowlege  they  would,
I  of  course,  procure  works  that  treated
on  that  subject,  and  make  it  a  matter
of  earnest  study*  I  knew  a  man
who  did  nothing  but  study  grammar
from  the  time  he  was  fifteen  years  old
\  until  be  was  twenty-five.  They  used
to  call  him  "  Old  Syntax"  for  a  by-


REMARKS  TO  THE  YOUNG.


21


name.  So  it  ig  with  our  young —
they  must  not  expect  to  study  "Mor-
monism"  by  reading  novels,  but  they
must  read  the  Bible,  Book  of  Mor-
mon, Doctrine  and  Covenants,  Mil*
lennial  Star,  Orson  Pratt's  Works,
the  Voice  of  Warning  and  many
others.  These  are  the  works  our
children  must  study  if  they  ever
find  out  for  themselves  the  truth  of
the  principles  of  "Mormonism."
And  besides  doing  this,  they  must
also  pray  unto  I  he  Almighty  for  the
testimony  of  his  Holy  Spirit  How
did  we,  now  growing  old  in  the  work,
get  a  knowledge  of  its  truth  ?  Many
of  us,  after  hearing  the  testimony  of
the  servants  of  God,  went  into  our
closets,  and  some  of  us  labored  for
months  with  the  Almighty  before  we
obtained  that  knowledge.  We  prayed
11  Lord,  if  the  testimony  of  this  man
is  true,  make  it  known  unto  us,  by
some  means  or  another ; "  and  we
finally  received  impressions  which
induced  us  to  repent  and  be  bap-
tized, and  we  had  hands  laid  upon
us  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost;
and  still  we  labored,  and  prayed,
and  contended  for  the  faith  once
delivered  to  the  Saints,  until  God
in  his  mercy  manifested  himself  unto
us  in  such  a  manner  that  we  knew
this  was  his  work  and  kingdom.

Now,  if  a  young  man  rises  and
bears  testimony  that  he  knows  this
is  the  kingdom  of  God,  perhaps
some  other  young  man  may  make
fun  and  say,  "  How  do  you  know
it  ?"  Perhaps  he  cannot  explain,
for  the  revelations  of  God  to  the
mind  and  soul  of  man  can  not  always
be  explained,  any  more  than  Columbus
could  explain  when  he  asserted  there
was  a  vast  continent  that  had  not
then  been  discovered,  or  than  the
philosopher  could  explain  to  un-
believers that  the  globe  was  round
and  not  flat ;  they  could  not  under-
stand it  without  studying  natural  laws


as  he  had  done.  The  testimony  of
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Revelations
of  God  give  knowledge  to  the  mind
of  him  upon  whom  they  are  conferred
but  he  can  not  explain  theiroperations
to  others.  In  the  Scriptures  we  are
told  that  the  thingsof  man  are  known
by  the  spirit  of  man,  and  the  things
of  God  only  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
the  promise  to  those  who  obey  the
Gospel  is  that  they  shall  know  for
themselves  of  its  truth, and  this  is  the
only  condition  on  which  the  fulfill
ment  of  this  promise  can  be  obtained.
Said  Jesus — "Do  my  will  and  you
shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether
it  is  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of
myself,"

Oar  children  were  baptized  when
they  were  eight  years  old,  but  that
was  more  by  our  agency  that  theirs.
The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  con-
ferred upon  them,  and  that  Spirit  is
within  them,  and  if  they  understood
its  whisperings  and  dictates  I  believe
that  they  would  admit  they  know  a
great  deal  more  than  they  now  think
they  do  ;  and  if  they  would  heed  its
teachings  it  would  lead  them  in  the
way  of  eternal  life.  But  there  is  a
great  difference  between  the  "  Mor-
mons" and  the  rest  of  the  religious
world  when  we  come  to  the  fundamental
principles  of  all  religion,  namely,
belief  in  God,  The  sectarian  world
say  that  the  believe  in  God,  but  that
he  has  neither  body,  parts  nor  passions,
and  yet  there  are  three  persons  in  the
godhead — Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghost.  If  you  were  to  attend  the
Sabbath  schools  of  our  friends  who
ara  not  of  us,  you  would  probably
hear  these  principles  taught.  But
this  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
Bible,  for  that  teaches  that  God  made
man  in  his  own  image.  If  you  waut
to  know  what  the  Almighty  looks
like,  look  at  man,  only  he  is  in  a
fallen  condition  and  clothed  with
humanity. Jesus  said  that  he  was


JOURNAL.  OF


DISCOURSES,


the  express  image  and  likeness  of  his
Father.  Tne  u  Mormons"  believe
this,  bot  the  sectarians  believe  in  a
God  without  body,  parts  and  passions;
they  believe  in  Jesus  sitting  at  the
right  hand  of  a  God  without  body
parts  and  passions ;  they  believe
in  a  God  who  lovet  the  righte-
ous, and  who  is  angry  with  the
wicked  every  day,  bat  yet  he  has
neither  body,  parts  nor  passions.
I  am  not  saying  this  with  a  design  to
deride,  or  anything  of  the  kind,  bat
I  am  simply  stating  tacts  as  they  are.
The  "  Mormons"  believe  these  things
just  as  the  Bible  tells  them;  they
believe  that  God  is  a  great  and
exalted  Being,  filled  with  knowledge
and  understanding,  that  he  created
this  earth,  but  not  out  of  nothing.
One  of  the  principles  taught  by  the
religious  world  of  Christendom,  is
that  the  earth  was  made  out  of
nothing,  in  six  of  our  days.  No
wonder,  as  Brother  Maeser  said  the
other  Sunday  evening,  that  people
consider  that  science  and  religion  are
opposed  to  each  other.  True  science
and  true  religion  are  not  opposed  to
each  other ;  false  religion  and  true
science  are  opposed  to  each  other,  and
it  is  this  very  fact  which  has  caused
infidelity  to  spread  with  such  rapidity
of  late  years.  As  men  become  ac-
quainted with  the  laws  of  nature,
which  are  the  laws  of  God,  they  are
compelled  to  lay  false  religon  aside,
and  consequently  they  say  religion  is
all  nonsense.  For  instance,  the
chemist  finds  that  he  can  not  bring
one  particle  of  matter  from  nonentity
neither  can  he  annihilate  one  particle,
therefore  he  disbelieves  in  the  world
being  created  out  of  nothing.  When
a  man  descends  into  the  bowels  of
the  earth  and,  through  science,
becomes  acquainted  with  the  laws
which  govern  the  materials  there
contained,  be  understands  that  the
earth  could  not  be  made  out  of


,  nothing;  he  also  understands  that  it

,  could  not  be  made  in  mx  of  our  days,
and  consequently,  rather  than  throw
aside  science,  the  truth  of  which  he
can  demonstrate,  he  throws  religion
to  one  side,  the  truth  of  which  he  can
not  demonstrate.  But  if  he  were  in
possession  of  true  religion  be  would
not  have  to  throw  it  away,  neither
would  he  have  to  abandon  his  science
because  they  would  harmonize.

j  We  Latter-day  Saints  do  not  be-
lieve the  world  was  created  out  of
nothing,  but  that  it  was  created  just
upon  the  same  principle  that  a  build-
er creates  a  house,  that  in,  there  is
matter  in  existence  and  he  organizes
it  and  changes  its  condition  suitable
to  the  circumstances  that  he  wishes  to
use  it  for;  the  builder  changes  the
bricks,  lumber  and  other  materia)  into
a  house  or  other  structure ;  the
Almighty  by  his  power  and  wisdom
takes  existing  matter  and  combines  it
and  makes  a  world;  and  he  places
the  stars  and  the  sun  and  moon  in
the  firmament,  giving  to  each  the
laws  by  which  its  movements  are

;  governed.  If  we  understand  it  we
should  see  that  it  was  all  done  upon
true  scientific  principles.  Scientific
truth  and  God*s  truth  are  just  the
same,  hence  when  a  man  becomes
acquainted  with  science  or  the  laws
of  nature  he  has  to  throw  away  his

;  belief  in  a  God  without  body,  parts
and  passions,  and  in  the  estimation  of
the  religious  world,  he  becomes  an
infidel.  But  suppose  he  were  to  obey
the  Gospel  as  taught  by  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  what  would  be  the
consequence  then  ?  His  science  and
religion  would  help  and  sustain  each
other,  and  would  enable  him  to  bear
testimony  to  the  wonderworking
hand  of  God,  not  only  in  revealing
the  true  principles  of  salvation,  but
also  in  revealing  the  laws  of  nature
or  the  principles  of  science,  and  he
would  embrace  both  as  emanations


REMARKS  TO

from  the  same  great  Deity.

Here,  my  young  brethren  and
sisters,  is  another  great  distinction
and  difference  between  the  Latter-day
Saints  and  the  rest  of  the  Religions
World,  and  if  yon  were  to  study  the
Bible  sometimes — I  do  not  say  it  is
necessary  to  throw  away  every
other  book  and  study  the  Bible  only —
you  would  come  to  an  understanding
of  these  principles  for  yourselves,  then
you  would  know  why  your  fathers
and  mothers  declare  that  they  know
"  Mor monism"  is  true,

I  have  endeavoured  to  drop  a  few
hints,  to  show  the  necessity  of  our
young  people  taking  a  course  by
which  they  may  attain  the  same
realizing  sense  of  the  truth  of  the
Gospel  and  work  of  God  which  their
seniors  possess.  If  a  son  or  a  daugh-
ter belonging  to  any  one  of  us  should
say — "Father,  I  know  you  have
always  taught  me  to  believe  that
Joseph  Smith  wag  a  true  prophet,  and
you  say  that  God  has  revealed  it  to
you,  but  he  has  not  revealed  it  to  me
and  I  do  not  know  it,"  shall  we  get
mad  at  them,  and  resort  to  coercion


THE  YOUNG.  23

in  order  to  make  them  believe  as  we
believe?  No,  we  may  be  sorry  to
hear  them  make  such  an  avowal,  but
we  must  neither  get  mad  nor  use
harsh  language  towards  them,  for
I  hat  might  drive  them  to  do  that
which  we  are  so  anxious  to  prevent.
We  must  treat  them  as  men  and
women,  or  as  rational,  intelligent
beings,  and  reason  with  them,  and
labor  with  and  pray  for  thera  just  as
much  as  if  we  were  sent  to  preach
,  the  Gospel  to  the  world.  That  is  the
course  I  believe  we,  the  fathers  and
mothers  of  Israel,  should  pursue  with
the  rising  generation.

I  have  said  all  I  desire  to  say  on
the  present  occasion.  May  God  bless
us  !  May  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  rest
upon  our  young,  that  they  may  be
led  to  investigate  its  principles  and
come  to  an  understanding  thereof  for
themselve,  that  they  may  be  prepared
for  the  responsibilities  that  will  rest
upon  those  who  will  succeed  us  in
carrying  on  the  work  of  the  Lord,
and  be  enabled  to  bear  it  off  triumph-
antly is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
1  Jesus. A  men.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  Forty- fourth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lattebday  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Monday  Morning,  April  0,  1874,

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  KINGDOM  NOT  ORGANIZED  BY  MAN — MAN  UTTERLY  UNABLE  TO
ORGANIZE  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  ON  THE  EARTH  WITHOUT  KEV ELA-
TION— THE  NEPHITES  AND  LAMANITES  HAD  ALL  THINGS  IN  COMMON
— CONSECRATION— THE  DANGER  OF  PRIDE— THE  UNITED  ORDER.


Forty-four  years  ago  to  day,  the
kingdom  of  God  was  organized  on
this  earth,  for  the  last  time,  never  to
be  broken  up,  never  to  beconfounded
or  thrown  down,  but  to  continue  from
that  time,  henceforth  and  for  ever,
This  kingdom  was  not  organized  by
man,  nor  by  the  wisdom  of  man,  but
by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  he
baying  guided  and  directed,  by  revel-
ation, everything  in  regard  to  its
organization,  and  bestowed  Authority
upon  his  servants  to  perform  the
work,  and  they  being  only  agents  or
instruments  in  his  hands.

All  other  Chriatian  denominations
for  many  long  centuries,  hava  been
organized  without  revelation.  The
organizers  of  these  various  denomin-
ations did  not  even  pretend  that  God
had  given  them  any  information  from
Heaven;  thy  did  not  even  pretend
that  there  was  one  sentence  which
had  been  received  in  their  day  from
the  Lord,  in  relation  to  the  organize-
ation  of  their  institutions,  In  this
respect  the  Latter-day  Saints  differ
widely  from  all  Chriatian  denomina-
tions! it  is  an  essential  difference,  a
peculiar  characteristic,  and  one  of  the
utmost  importance. Every  person


with  a  little  reflection,  can  see  that
without  divine  information,  man  is
utterly  unable  to  organize  the  King-
dom of  God  on  the  earth.  He  may
organize  kingdoms,  empires,  republics
and  various  kinds  of  civil  government
and  a  great  variety  of  governments
in  a  religious  capacity,  and  when  he
has  organized  them  they  are  without
foundation  and  authority.  The  Lord
communicates  nothing  to  them,  but
they  are  compelled  to  ponder  over
that  which  had  been  revealed  in
former  ages,  and  get  all  the  informa-
tion they  can  from  what  God  spake
formerly.  But  how  impossible  it  is
for  people  to  learn  their  duties  from
what  God  said  formerly  to  somebody
else.  We  might  as  well,  in  the  or-
ganization of  a  civil  govern  men  t, say ,
"  the  canon  of  laws  is  sealed  up,  we
need  no  legislators  or  Congressmen,"
If  the  question  be  asked  why  we  do
not  need  them,  the  answer  is,  "  Oh,
we  depend  upon  the  laws  which  were
made  by  our  fathers ;  they  are  suffi-
cient for  our  guide/'  Just  fancy  the
people  of  this  great  republic  being
governed  by  the  laws  enacted  in  the
first  Congress  after  the  revolutionary
fathers  framed the  constitution


THE  KINGDOM  ETC


25


Only  think  of  All  the  people  now
appealing  to  those  ancitntlaws,  made
before  any  of  them  were  bom,  and
having  nothing  farther  to  govern
them !

This  would  jast  be  as  consistent
as  it  would  be  to  suppose  that  God
some  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,
gave  all  the  information  that  he  ever
intended  to  give  in  relation  to  the
government  of  His  kingdom  and  His
affairs  here  on  the  earth.  You  know
that  in  civil  governments  laws  are  con-
tinually required,  circumstances  call
them  forth.  Laws  made  last  year
are  not  always  suitable  to  the  circum-
stances of  this  year,  and  those  made
ten  years  ago,  might  be  altogether
unsuitable  for  events  now  happening,
and  hence  the  necessity  of  something
new,  direct  from  the  law-making
department.  So  in  regard  to  the
kingdom  of  God.  God  spake  to  the
ancients,  but  many  of  the  words  he
spake  then  are  not  binding  upon  the
people  now.  Some  few  of  the  great
moral  principles  revealed  to  the
ancients  are  binding  for  ever,  but  the
great  majority  of  the  revelations  from
Heaven  were  only  suited  to  the  in-
dividuals to  whom  they  were  given.
Take,  for  instan  ce,  the  case  of  A  bran*
He  was  living  in  Chaldea,  the  land  of
his  fathers.  The  Lord  spake  to  him,
and  commanded  him  to  arise  and
leave  his  native  country,  and  journey
to  a  strange  land,  which  was  promised
to  him  for  an  inheritance.  Now,  I
ask,  was  any  other  people  upon  the
face  of  tha  whole  earth  bound  to  obey
this  divine  law  given  to  Abraham  ?
No ;  it  was  suited  to  him  and  to  him
only.  If  we  were  all  under  this
ancient  law,  then  every  one  of  us
would  have  to  go  to  Chaldea ;  and
after  we  got  there  we  should  have  to
leave  that  country  and  go  to  some
land  which  we  should  expect  to  receive
for  an  inheritance,  which  would  be
the  very  height  of  absurdity.


Again,  when  God  led  forth  Abra-
ham into  the  land  of  Palestine,  we
find  that  he  not  only  communicated
laws  to  him,  but  that  he  also  made
precious  promises  relating  to  him  and
his  seed,  which  did  not  pertain  to  all
the  nations  and  kingdoms  of  the
earth.  God  commanded  Abraham  on
that  occasion  to  arise,  and  to  pass
through  the  length  and  breadth  of
the  land,  and  to  go  out  on  to  a  certain
high  place  and  to  cast  his  eyes  east-
ward and  westward  and  northward
and  southward,  for  said  the  Lord  onto
him,  "  All  this  land  which  thou  seest
shall  be  given  to  thee,  and  to  thy  seed
after  thee  for  a  possession."  Under
this  law  have  I  been  commanded  to
go  to  the  land  of  Palestine  and  walk
through  the  length  and  breadth  of
the  land  r  Never.  Have  you  been
commanded  to  do  it  ?  Never.  It
is  not  a  law  that  is  binding  upon  us,
neither  was  it  binding  upon  future
generations  after  the  days  of  Abra-
ham,

Again,  when  God  made  the  pro-
mise to  Abraham  that  he  should
have  that  land  for  a  possession,  and
his  literal  seed  after  him,  he  did
not  mean  you  nor  me,  nor  the  gene-
rations of  the  earth  who  are  not  the
literal  descendants  of  Abraham.

Again,  when  God  revealed  himself
to  Moses,  and  told  him  to  go  down
into  Egypt  and  deliver  Israel  from
bondage,  that  was  a  law  binding  upon
Moses  and  Moses  alone.  The  Latter-
day  Saints  are  not  under  that  law,
neither  are  any  othtr  people.  So
we  might  continue  to  multiply  in-
stances by  thousands  where  God
spake  to  individuals,  and  they,  and
they  alone,  were  the  persons  who
were  to  give  heed  to  his  laws.  Again,
where  he  spoke  in  some  cases  to  the
nation  of  Israel,  Israel  and  Israel
alone  could  obey  those  laws.  But
sometimes  he  would  reveal  to  an  in-
dividual or  to  a  people  certain  great


26  JOURNAL  OF

moral  principles  that  were  binding !
npon  them  and  upon  all  people  nnto
the  ends  of  the  earth,  when  they  were  1
made  manifest  nnto  them.  Such
laws  are  everlasting  in  their  nature.
Sometimes  God  revealed  ordinances
as  well  as  commandments  and  laws.
These  ordinances  were  binding  just
as  far  as  God  revealed  them  for  the
people  to  attend  to.  For  instance,
the  law  of  circumcision  was  binding
upon  Abraham  and  his  seed,  and  was
to  bt  continued  for  a  certain  season,
but  by  and  by  it  was  to  be  superseded
by  some  other.  God  also  revealed,
in  the  days  of  the  introduction  of  the
Gospel,  many  eternal  laws,  different
from  those  that  had  been  revealed  in
former  times.  He  revealed  many
things  afresh  and  anew  when  he
came  personally  on  the  earth,  which
had  also  been  revealed  prior  to  his
day.  For  instance,  we  will  take  the
law  of  faith  and  repentance.  These
principles  were  taught  in  every  dis-
pensation, and  were  binding  npon  all
people  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  j
earth,  and  in  all  generations  before
Jesus  came;  they  were  eternal  prin-
ciples, and  were  to  be  continued  for-
ever. We  will  take,  again,  the  law
of  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins.
Wherever  the  Gospel  was  preached
this  ordinance  was  binding  upon  the
people.  Wherever  men  were  sent
forth  with  the  fullness  of  the  plan  of
salvation  to  declare  to  the  children
of  men,  the  law  of  baptism  accom-
panied that  message,  and  all  people,
as  well  as  Israel,  were  required  to
obey  that  sacred  ordinance.

In  the  latter  days,  when  God  esta-
blishes his  kingdom  on  the  earth  for
the  last  time,  there  will  be  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  of  precepts
and  commandments  revealed  to  cer-
tain individuals,  which  will  be  binding
upon  them  alone.  Then  there  will
be  other  commandments  that  will  be
adapted  to  all  the  Church,  and  they


DISCOURSES.

will  be  binding  upon  the  Church  and
npon  the  Church  alone.  Then  there
will  be  certain  other  commandments
that  will  be  binding  upon  all  nations,
people  and  tongues,  and  blessed  are
they  who  give  heed  to  the  com-
mandments and  institutions  and
ordinances  which  pertain  to  them
and  which  are  adapted  to  their  cir-
cumstances, and  which  are  given
for  them  to  obey.  But  we  will  re-
turn again  to  the  Church  and  king-
dom.

Forty-four  years  have  rolled  over
our  heads  since  God  gave  com-
mandment to  a  young  man,  a  youth,
to  organize  baptized  believers  into  a
Church,  which  was  called  the  king-
dom of  God,  not  organized  in  its  full-
ness, for  there  were  not  materials
enough  at  that  time  to  institute  all
the  officers  that  were  needed  in  that
kingdom.  iThe  kingdom  needed
inspired  Apostles,  Seventies,  High
Priests  after  the  order  of  Melchizedecj
it  needed  the  Priesthood  of  Aaron —
|  the  Levi  heal  Priesthood,  which  the
ancient  Prophat  said  should  be  re-
stored in  the  latter  days.  The  king,
dom  needed  all  the  appendages  and
blessings  of  these  two  Priesthoods,
and  there  were  not  a  sufficient
number  then  baptized  to  make  the
organization  perfect  and  complete;
but  so  far  i  s  there  were  individuals
i  the  organisation  was  commenced,
although  there  were  then  only  six
;  members.  Two  of  these  were  Apos-
tles, called  of  God  to  be  Apostles;
!  called  by  new  revelation  to  be
Apostles;  called  by  the  ministration
of  angels  to  be  Apostles;  ordained
by  the  laying  on  of  hands  of  im-
mortal personages  from  the  eternal
;  worlds.  Hence,  being  ordained  by
this  high  authority,  called  by  this
high  and  holy  calling,  and  chosen
to  go  forth  and  organise  the  king-
dom, and  to  preach  the  message  of
life  and  salvation  among  the  children


THE  KINGDOM,  ETC


27


of  men,  they  were  obedient;  and
tbe  other  four  individuals  were
organized  in  connection  with  them,
upon  the  foundation  that  had  been
laid  by  the  Lord  himself,  and  not
upon  a  creed  that  had  been  con-
cocted in  some  council  of  uninspired
men;  not  npon  some  articles  of  faith
that  were  framed  by  uninspired  men
to  guide  and  govern  them ;  but  what
they  received  was  by  direct  revela-
tion. Not  one  step  was  taken  with-
out obtaining  a  revelation  in  regard
to  the  manner  of  proceeding  in  rela-
tion to  the  laying  of  this  foundation.
How  very  different  this  from  the
Methodists,  the  Baptists,  the  Presby-
terians, the  Church  of  England,  and
the  various  societies  and  denomina-
tions that  exist  throughout  all  the
Protestant  world;  not  one  of  them
was  organized  in  that  way  !  Sup-
posing that  some  of  these  Christian
denominations  should  happen  to  get
the  form  pretty  nearly  correct,  and
yet  not  have  the  authority,  that  would
make  all  the  difference.  The  form
with  the  authority  is  one  thing,  and
the  form  without  the  authority  and
divine  appointment  and  ordination  is
another  thing.  One  has  power,  but
the  other  has  not ;  one  is  recognized
by  tbe  Lord  Almighty,  but  the  other
is  only  recognized  by  man.  I  think
we  can  sea  the  difference  between
man's  churches  and  God's  Churches,
between  man's  organization  and  God's
organization.  In  the  first  place  there
never  were  a  people,  since  Adam  was
placed  in  the  Garden  of  Eden  to  the
present  day,  who  were  acknowledged
of  God,  unless  they  were  founded  and
directed  and  counseled  by  him ;  un-
less there  were  a  Priesthood  having
authority  from  him;  unless  God
spake  to  them,  and  sent  bis  angels
to  them.  There  never  was  a  people,
in  any  age  of  the  world,  whom  God
recognized  as  his  people,  without
these  characteristics. Says  one,


"  How  very  uncharitable  you  Latter-
day  Saints  are!  You  exclude  the
whole  of  us,  you  do  not  except  one  of
our  churches  or  good  Christian  deno-
minations, and  there  are  very  good,
moral  people  in  them."  We  do  not
dispute  but  what  they  are  a  very
good,  moral  people ;  that  is  one
thing,  and  a  Christian  Church  is
another.  Morality  is  good  in  its
place,  and  it  must  be  in  the  Christian
Church.  Morality  may  exLst  outside
of  the  Christian  Church,  but  both  can
not  exist  together  without  God  orga-
nizes the  Church.

Perhaps  I  have  spoken  sufficiently
long  upon  the  subject  of  the  organi-
zation of  the  Church.  I  might  enter
fully  into  the  investigation  of  these
matters,  and  give  you  the  particulars
about  the  angels  of  God  who  des-
cended from  heaven  and  conferred
the  authority  upon  chosen  vessels*
I  might  tell  you  about  the  day  which
God  set  apart,  and  upon  which  he
commanded  that  his  Church  should
be  organized,  for  the  very  day  was
mentioned  by  revelation.  I  might
also  relate  to  you  many  instructions
that  were  given  at  that  time  to  all
the  members  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
But  I  have  other  subjects  upon  my
mind  that  seem  to  present  themselves
before  me.

There  have  been"  probably  scores
of  revelations  given  from  time  to
time  during  the  last  forty-four  years,
which  are  not  binding  now,  neither
were  they  binding  upon  all  the  peo-
ple at  the  time  tbey  were  given.
For  instance,  God  give  a  revelation,
through  his  servant  Joseph,  on  the
14th  (Jay  of  November,  1830,  to  your
humble  servant  who  is  now  speaking,
commanding  him  to  go  forth  and
preach  the  Gospel  among  the  nations
of  the  earth,  preparing  the  way  of
the  Lord  for  his  second  coming,  and
to  lift  up  his  voice,  both  long  and
loud,  and  cry repentance  to  this


28  JOURNAL  OF

crooked  and  perverse  generation,  I
ask  this  congregation  if  there  is  an
individual  present  here,  but  your
humble  servant  who  is  under  this
direct  command  ?  No.  If  you  have
been  commanded  to  do  the  same,
you  have  been  commanded  by  a  dis-
tinct revelation.  The  revelation  given
to  me  was  not  given  to  any  other
individual,  and  was  not  binding  upon
any  other.  So  in  regard  to  the
gathering  up  of  the  Saints.  We
were  dwelling  in  the  State  of  New
York,  and  on  the  second  day  of
January,  1831,  God  commanded  that
all  the  Saints  in  that  State,  the  State
in  which  the  Church  was  organized,
and  all  who  were  dwelling  in  all  the
regions  round  about,  should  gather
up  to  the  State  of  Ohio.  Is  that  a
commandment  binding  upon  any  of
this  congregation  ?  Not  one  of  them,
it  was  only  suited  to  the  circum-
stances that  then  existed,  and  when
fulfilled  it  was  no  longer  even  binding
upon  them.  The  Lord  gave  a  com-
mand ment  after  we  had  gathered  up
to  the  land  of  Kirtland,  that  some
of  his  servants  should  go  forth,  two
by  two,  preaching  through  Indiana,
Ohio,  Illinois  and  Missouri,  that  they
should  meet  together  in  general  Con-
ference on  the  western  boundaries  of
the  State  of  Missouri,  and  that  the
Lord  God  would  reveal  unto  them
the  land  which  should  be  given  unto
them  for  an  everlasting  inheritance.
These  persons  were  commanded  to
do  this.  This  commandment  was
binding  upon  them  and  them  alone.
They  were  the  individuals  who  were
commanded  to  do  this  work — it  was
not  required  of  the  rest  of  the
Church.  They  fulfilled  their  ap-
pointment— as  many  as  were  faithful
went  through,  two  by  two,  on  differ-
ent routes,  preaching  and  calling  upon
the  people  to  repent  and  be  baptized,
confirming  them  by  the  water  side,
aud  organizing  Churches.  Finally


DISCOURSES.

those  persons  thus  commanded  as-
sembled in  August  and  September,
!  on  the  western  boundaries  of  the
State  of  Missouri,  in  Jackson  County.
Then  the  commandment  was  fulfilled;
and  it  was  no  longer  binding  upon
those  to  whom  it  was  given.  Thus
you  see  that  what  is  suitable  for  this
month  is  not  always  suitable  for
next  month,  and  what  is  suitable  for
to-day  is  not  always  suitable  for  to-
morrow. It  needs  new  revelation.

When  these  missionaries  assem-
bled in  Jackson  County,  the  Prophet
Joseph,  being  with  them,  inquired
still  further,  and  a  commandment
was  given  on  that  occasion,  before
the  Church  had  gathered,  except  one
email  branch,  called  the  Caalsville
Branch,  and  that  commandment
was  to  be  binding  upon  all  the
Latter-day  Saints  who  should  gather
np  to  that  land.  What  was  it  ?
That  all  the  people  who  should  gather
to  Jackson  County,  the  land  of  their
inheritance,  should  consecrate  all
their  property,  every  tiling  they  had
— they  were  to  withhold  nothing.
Their  gold  and  silver,  their  bedding,
household  furniture,  their  wearing
apparel  and  everything  they  pos-
sessed was  to  be  consecrated.  That
placed  the  people  on  a  level,  for  when
everything  a  people  has  is  consecrated
they  are  all  equally  rich.  There  is  not
one  poor  and  another  rich,  for  they
all  possess  nothing-  I  do  not  know
but  you  might  call  that  poor;  but
they  have  something  in  common,
namely,  that  which  they  have  con-
secrated, and  this  brings  me  to  an
item  which  I  happened  to  think  of
just  about  a  half  minute  before  I
arose.

I  will  now  read  to  you  what  took
place  on  this  American  continent
thirty- six  years  after  the  birth  of
Christ.  Jesus  appeared  here  on  this
continent  and  organized  his  Church,
i  He  chose  twelve  disciples  and  com-


THE  KINGDOM,  ETC,


20


manded  them  to  go  and  preach  the
Gospel  in  both  the  land  south  and  the
land  north,  and  they  did  so.  This
extract  gives  us  a  little  information
about  the  repentance  of  the  people : —
"  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the
thirty  and  sixth  year,  the  people  were
all  converted  unto  the  Lord,  upon  all
the  face  of  the  land,  both  Nephites
and  Lamanites,  and  there  were  no
contentions  and  disputations  among
them,  and  every  man  did  deal  justly
one  with  another  ;  and  they  had  all
things  common  among  them,  there-
fore they  were  not  rich  and  poor,
bond  and  free,  but  they  were  all
made  free,  and  partakers  of  the
heavenly  gift,"

Now,  was  not  that  a  marvel  ?  Per-
haps yoa  may  ask  how  it  was  that
they  were  all  so  easily  converted.
That  would  be  a  very  natural  ques-
tion to  arise  in  the  minds  of  many,
for  they  must  have  been  a  very  dif-
ferent people  from  those  living  now-
adays. We  have  preached,  year
after  year,  and  have  only  converted
here  and  there  one.  But  all  those
millions,  inhabiting  both  North  and
South  America,  were  converted  unto
the  Lord.  Was  not  that  a  wdnder-
ment  ?  If  I  explain  a  little  what
took  place  beforehand,  it  will  clear  op
the  wonderment  a  little-
Just  before  Christ  was  crucified  in
the  land  of  Jerusalem,  the  people
on  this  land  had  become  exceedingly
wicked,  and  it  was  foretold  to  the  in
by  their  Prophets  that,  when  Jesus,
their  Savior,  should  be  crucified  in
the  land  of  their  fathers,  there  should
be  great  destruction  come  upon
those  who  were  wicked  in  this  land,
and  that  many  ef  their  cities  should
be  destroyed — they  should  be  sunk
and  burned  with  fire,  and  God  would
visit  them  in  great  and  terrible  judg-
ments if  they  did  not  repent  and
prepare  for  the  coming  of  their  Sa-
vior, for  they  expected  him  to  appear


after  his  resurrection.  The  wicked
did  not  repent,  and  all  those  destruc-
tions came,  just  as  the  prophets  fore-
told. Darkness  covered  the  face  of
this  land  for  three  days  and  three
nights,  while  at  Jerusalem  it  was  only
three  hoars.  Three  days  and  three
nights  they  suffered  darkness  upon
all  the  face  of  this  land,  and  very
many  of  their  cities,  which  were
great  and  populous,  were  sunk,  and
lakes  came  up  instead  of  them ;  a
great  many  were  burned  with  fire,
a  great  many  were  destroyed  by  ter-
rible tempests,  and  a  great  destruc-
tion came  upon  the  wicked  portions
of  the  people,  who  had  stoned  and
put  the  Prophets  to  death,  and  only
the  more  righteous  portion  of  the
people  were  spared.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  in
which  Jesus  was  pat  to  death,  he
descended  among  a  certain  portion  of
the  people  on  this  continent,  gathered
in  the  northern  part  of  what  we
term  South  America.  He  descended
from  heaven  and  stood  in  their  midst;
and  on  the  next  day,  when  a  larger
multitude  were  gathered  together,  he
came  a  second  time,  and  there  were  a
great  many  thousands  on  that  occa-
sion* He  often  appeared  to  them
after  that  period,  within  the  course  of
one  or  two  years,  and  he  chose  twelve
disciples,  and  so  great  was  the
power  made  manifest  before  those
thousands,  that  when  they  went  forth
into  the  north  and  south  and  preached
the  word,  according  to  the  command-
ments of  God,  the  more  righteous
portion  of  the  people,  who  had  been
spared,  and  who  had  humbled  them-
selves and  partially  repented,  but
did  not  understand  the  fullness  of  the
Gospel,  were  easily  converted,  and
that  is  the  reason  why  all  the  people
in  North  and  South  America  were
converted  unto  the  Lord ;  and  in  the
thirty- sixth  year,  reckoning  from
the  birth  of  Jesus,  they  were  not


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


30

only  all  converted  upon  the  face  of  i
this  whole  land,  hut  they  were  all
organized  upon  a  common  stock  prin-
ciple, and  there  were  no  poor  among  !
them,  and  they  dealt  justly  one  with
another.

Says  one,  "They  did  the  same
thing  in  the  land  of  Jerusalem."  Yes,
but  they  did  not  keep  it  up  in  the
land  of  Palestine — they  seem  to  have
failed,  for  we  have  no  account  that !
this  common  stock  principle,  as  at
first  organized,  continued  among  the
Saints  on  the  Asiatic  Continent.
Churches  were  built  up  in  various
parts  of  Asia  and  Europe,  one  in  one
place,  another  in  another,  and  they
all  seem  to  have  had  property  of
their  own ;  and  I  believe,  myself,
that  they  unprepare  i,  in  their

scattered  condition,  to  enter  into  this
order  of  things.  There  was  too
much  wickedness  at  Ephesus,  in
Galatia,  at  Corinth,  and  in  the  vari-
rious  places  where  small  branches
were  organized,  to  enter  into  this
common  stock  principle,  and  carry  it
out  successfully.  Bat  on  this  conti-
nent there  was  a  fine  opportunity,
for  all  the  people,  millions  and  mil-
lions of  them,  were  in  the  same  laith.
How  easily,  then,  could  they  be
guided  and  directed,  and  put  in  their
property,  and  organize  it  as  a  com-
mon stock  fund;  and  they  did  so,  and
were  exceedingly  blessed  and  pros-
pered in  their  operation.  And  I  will
tell  you  how  long  it  existed — about
one  hundred  and  sixty-five  years.  But
in  the  year  two  hundred  and  one
after  the  birth  of  Christ,  the  people
began  to  be  lifted  up,  on  this  con-
tinent, in  pride  and  popularity,  and
began  to  withdraw  their  funds  from
this  common  stock,  and  take  them
into  their  own  hands,  and  call  them
their  own,  and  they  continued  to  do
this,  until  the  great  majority  of  the
people  had  corrupted  themselves  and
withdrawn  from  this  order*  Then,


after  having  broken  up  this  common
fund  in  a  great  measure,  only  a  few
individuals  here  and  there  still  hold-
ing on  to  it,  they  became  proud  and
high  minded,  and  lifted  up  in  their
hearts,  and  looked  down  upon  those
who  were  not  so  prosperous  as  them-
selves, and  in  this  way  a  distinction
of  classes  was  again  introduced,  and
the  rich  began  to  persecute  the  poor ;
and  thus  they  continued  to  apostatize,
until,  about  three  hundred  and  thirty-
four  years  after  Christ,  they  began  to
have  great  and  terrible  wars  among
themselves,  which  lasted  about  fifty
years,  during  which  millions  of
them  were  destroyed.  Finally,  they
became  so  utterly  wicked,  so  fully
ripened  for  destruction,  that  one
branch  of  the  nation,  called  the
Nephites,  gathered  their  entire  peo-
ple around  the  hill  Camorah,  in  the
State  of  New  York,  in  Ontario
County ;  and  the  Liamauites,  the
opposite  army,  gathered  by  millions
in  the  same  region.  The  two  na-
tions were  four  years  in  gathering
their  forces,  during  which  no  fight-
ing took  place ;  but  at  the  end  of  that
time,  having  marshalled  all  their
hosts,  the  fighting  commenced,  the
Limani tea  coming  upon  the  Nephites,
and  destroying  all  of  them,  except  a
very  few,  who  had  previously  deserted
over  to  the  Lanianites.

Before  this  decisive  battle  the  Ne-
phites, who  had  kept  records  of  their
nation,  written  on  gold  plates,  hid
them  np  in  the  hill  Cumorah,  where
they  have  lain  from  that  day  to  this.
Mormon  committed  a  few  plates  to
his  son  Moroni,  who  was  a  Prophet,
and  who  survived  the  nation  of  the
Nephites  about  thirty-six  years,  and
he  kept  these  few  plates,  while  all  the
balance  of  them  were  hid  up  in  that
hill;  and  then,  Moroni,  being  com-
manded of  God,  hid  up  the  few  plates
from  which  the  Book  uf  Mormon  was
translated.


THE  KINGDOM,  ETC.


31


I  make  mention  of  these  circum-
stances for  the  par  pose  of  showing
you  that,  when  people  have  been  once
enlightened  as  the  Nephites  were,
and  have  had  all  things  common,  and
have  been  blessed  with  an  abundance
of  the  riches  of  the  earth,  working
together  in  harmony,  until  riches
were  poured  out  upon  them  in  vast
abundance,  and  then  withdraw  them-
selves from  the  order  of  God,  they
Boon  bring  swift  destruction  upon
their  heads*  We  see  the  Nephites,
after  taking  this  course,  descending
lower  and  lower  in  their  wickedness,
going  into  idolatry,  offering  up  hu-
man sacrifices  unto  their  idol  gods,
and  committing  every  species  of
abomination  that  they  had  ever
known  or  heard  of,  all  because  they
had  been  once  enlightened  and  had
apostatized  from  the  truth,  and  with-
drawn from  the  order  of  God,  in
which  their  forefathers  had  had  a
long  experience.

The  Lord  gave  a  caution  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  when  he  told  them,
in  a  revelation,  given  in  1831,  to
enter  into  the  same  order  pertaining
to  our  possessions  in  Jackson  County.
Prior  to  that,  he  gave  us  a  promise,
saying,  that  if  we  would  be  faithful
we  should  become  the  richest  of  all
people;  but  if  we  would  not  be  faith-
ful in  keeping  his  commandments,
but  should  become  lifted  up  in  the
pride  of  our  hearts,  we  should,  per-
haps, become  like  the  Nephites  of
old.  41  Beware  of  pride,"  says  the
Lord,  in  one  of  these  revelations,
**  lest  you  become  like  the  Nephites
of  old."

I  have  no  doubt  that  you  Latter-
day  Saints  are  the  best  people  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  God  has  gathered
you  out  from  among  the  nations  j  you
were  the  only  people,  to  whom  the
message  of  life  and  salvation  was
sent,  who  received  the  missionaries
of  the  Mostimligb  when  they  came


to  your  respective  nations.  You  not
only  received  the  Gospel  of  repent-
ance and  baptism,  but  you  hearkened
to  those  missionaries  and  the  counsels
of  God,  and  gathered  to  this  land.
Hence,  you  have  done  better  than  all
other  people,  and  you  have  been
blessed  above  all  other  people.  Bat
there  is  danger,  after  having  been
made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  having  had  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,
made  manifest  more  or  less  according
to  our  faith,  if  we  become  lit  ted  up
in  the  pride  of  our  hearts  and  think,
because  we  have  gathered  an  abun-
dance of  the  wealth  of  this  world,
that  we  are  a  little  better  than  oar
poor  brother  who  labors  eight  or  ten
hours  a  day  at  the  hardest  kind  of
labor.  Any  person  having  the  name
of  Latter-day  Saint  who  leels  that  he
is  better  than,  and  distinguishes  him-
self from,  the  poor  and  supposes  that
he  belongs  to  a  little  higher  class
than  they,  is  in  danger.  "Beware
of  pride,  lest  you  become  like  unto
the  Nephites  of  old/'

In  order  that  this  pride  may  be
done  away,  there  must  necessarily  be
another  order  of  things  in  regard  to
property.

Why  does  pride  exist  at  all  ?
Let  us  make  a  little  inquiry  about
this.  Do  you  know  the  reason  ?  It
all  arises  out  of  the  love  of  riches.
Tli is  is  what  generally  constitutes
pride.  Now  supposing  you  were  all
brought  on  a  level  in  regard  to  pro*
perty  by  a  full  consecration  of  every-
thing that  you  have  into  a  common
stock  fund,  would  there  be  among
that  number  one  who  should  thus
consecrate  all  that  he  had,  who  would
have  anything  to  boast  of  above  his
neighbor  ?  Not  at  all  He  might
have  the  use  of  property,  one  man
might  have  perhaps  a  hundred  times
more  than  another,  to  use  as  a  stew-
ard or  agent  for  this  general  fund;
but  when  he  has  used  it  he  has  hi*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


living  oat  of  it — bis  food,  his  rai-
ment, the  necessaries  and  comforts  of
life,  whether  he  handles  hundreds  of
thousands  or  merely  a  small  steward-
ship, for  the  man  that  takes  chaSp
of  a  great  manufacturing  establish;
ment  would  require  more  funds  than
he  who  has  a  small  farm,  but  the
fond s  woald  not  belong  to  him,  he
only  has  hia  food,  raiment  and  the
necessaries  and  comforts  of  life.  But
here  is  another  branch  of  business,
iost  as  important,  as  far  as  it  goes,
as  this  lirge  manufactory  esW
lishment.  What  is  it  ?  To  make
mortar,  to  lay  up  our  buildings,  for
without  them  we  should  soon  suffer.
The  man  who  makes  mortar,  then,
is  just  as  honorable  as  tbe  man  who
takes  charge  of  a  large  establishment
which  requires  fire  hundred  thousand
dollars  to  carry  it  on.  But  in  both
cases,  the  surplus  of  their  labor,  after
taking  therefrom  the  necessaries  of
life,  goes  to  the  common  stock  fund ;
and  the  mim  who  has  had  charge  of  the
large  establishment  has  nothing  that
he  can  boast  of  over  the  man  who
makes  mortar — one  is  just  as  rich  as
the  othei1.  1

But  I  know  there  are  many  Latter-
day  Saints  who  have  formed  an
erroneous  idea  or  opinion  in  regard
to  this  common  stock  fund.  Some
for  want  of  reflection,  may  suppose
that  every  man  and  every  woman
must  have  the  same  fashioned  houses
to  live  in,  or  there  would  not  be  an
equality;  they  must  have  the  same
amount  of  furniture,  or  there  would
not  be  an  equality.  Some  may  sup-
pose that  all  must  have  the  same  kind
of  bedding  and  everything  precisely
alike  or  there  would  be  no  equality.
But  this  is  not  the  way  God  manifests
himself  in  all  the  works  of  his
hands.  Go  to  the  field,  the  pasture
or  meadow,  and  learn  wisdom.
Search  from  one  end  of  the  pasture
to  the  other  an^  see  if  yon  can  find


two  blades  of  grass  that  are  exactly
alike.  It  can  not  be  done,  there  is  a
little  deviation,  a  little  variety,  and
hence  we  see  from  this  that  God  de-
lights in  variety.  But  because  one
blade  of  grass  might  be  formed  a
title  mdffe  pleasing  to  the  eye  than
another,  would  the  first  have  any
right,  if  it  could  reason,  to  say,  w  I
am  above  that  other  ?"  Not  at  all.
It  was  made  for  a  certain  purpose,
and  so  in  regard  to  everything  elee,
No  two  men  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  have  the  same  features*  We
have  the  general  characteristics  of
the  human  form,  and  we  do  not  look
like  the  original  of  man  according  to
Darwin's  idea;  we  do  not  look  like
the  monkey  or  baboon,  from  which
Darwin  says  man  originated,  Men
the  world  over,  have  many  features
bearing  a  general  resemblance,  and
their  form  is  moulded  in  the  image
of  the  Most  High.  But  when  you
come  to  scan  the  features  of  man
minutely;  yon  will  see  some  deviation
in  the  countenances  of  all  men
throughout  aH  creation.  Now,  are
they  not  equal  f  Do  those  little  dis
tinguishing  characteri sties  in  the
features  make  them  unequal  ?  Not
in  the  least.  Then,  because  it  might
fall  to  my  lot  to  make  mortar,  and
to  another  man's  to  take  charge  of  a
great  store  of  merchandize,  both  of
us  being  agents,  that  does  not  make
the  mercantile  agent  any  better  than
the  man  who  makes  the  mortar,
and  I  should  not  expect  to  wear
the  same  kind  of  apparel  that  the
man  did  who  was  behind  the
counter.  If  I  was  making  mortar  I
should  not  want  on  broadcloth,  silk,
or  satin;  I  should  want  apparel
adapted  to  theparticukrelassof  labor
I  was  engaged  in.  Hence,  there  will
be  a  distinction  in  these  things.

Then  again,  do  you  suppose  that
when  we  come  togeth^'  it*  would  be


pleasing  in  the  sighpff  God  for  every


man  and  every  woman  to  have  on  a
Quaker  bonnet  or  dress,  or  to  pattern
after  tho  Shaking  Quakers;  that
each  of  the  ladies  should  hare  on  a
ribbon  that  should  come  under  the
bonnet,  and  be  of  just  the  same
length?  Not  at  all,  God  delights
in  variety  ;  we  ses  it  throughout  all
the  works  of  his  hands,  in  every  de-
partment of  creation.  Therefore
men  and  women  will  dress  according
to  their  taster,  so  far  as  they  can  get
the  means*

You  draw  your  means  from  the
common  stock  fund,  and  if  you  have
stewardships  set  apart  to  you  to
manage,  and  you  make  little  in  the
stewardships,  the  Bishops  who  take
charge  of  these  matters  will  not  begin
to  inquire  of  you,  "  Well,  brother,
what  kind  of  a  hat  have  you  worn  ?
Was  it  -straw,  and  was  the  itraw  just
so  fine  or  just  so  coarse,  or  was  it  a
palm  leaf  hat  you  wore  ?  I  should
like  to  know  what  kind  of  a  hat  band
you  have  had  ?  Was  it  a  hat  band
having  a  bow  knot,  and,  if  so,  was  it
any  longer  than  your  neighbors?"
No  such  questions  as  these  will  be
asked  ;  but  each  man,  each  family  in
the  stewardship,  whatever  they  make,
can  exercise  their  own  judgment  in
regnrd  to  many  of  these  things,  as
they  do  now ;  and  when  you  come
together  on  Sunday,  it  is  not  ex-
pected that  every  man's  and  every
woman's  tastes  would  be  to  dress
precisely  like  their  neighbors,  but
have  variety,  and  that  out  of  the
means  of  your  stewardship,  1

But  when  you  come  to  render  up
an  account  of  that  stewardship  to  the
Bishop  at  the  end  of  the  year,  there
may  be  some  prominent,  leading
q  nest  ions  asked,  but  not  about  these
little  matters.  It  will  be  asked  if
you  have  squandered  your  steward,
ship  unnecessarily;  have  you  been
very  extravagant  in  things  unneces-
sary, and  neglected  other  things  of  i

No.  3.


importance  ?  If  you  have  done  these
things,  you  will  be  counted  an  un-
wise steward,  and  you  will  be  re-
proved; and  perhaps,  if  you  v  have
gone  Jdb  far,  you  may  be  removed
out  of  your  stewardship,  and  another
person  more  worthy  may  step  into  it,
and  you  be  dropped  because  of  doing
wrong.  But  there  never  will  be  any
Bishop,  who  has  the  Spirit  of  the
living  God  upon  him,  who  will  in-
quire whether  you  have  the  same  size
stoves  in  your  house,  and  the  same
kind  of  plates,  knives,  forks,  and
spoons  as  your  neighbor;  but  you
will  have  to  give  an  account  of  those
prominent  items.  That  is  the  way  I
look  at  this  common  stock  operation.
Then  again,  I  do  not  know  that
the  common  stock  operation  which
God  commanded 1  us  to  enter  into  in
Jackson  County,  Mo.,  will  be  suit-
able in  the  year  1874.  I  commenced
my  discourse  by  showing  that  what
was  suitable  one  year  was  not  always
suitable  the  next.  I  do  not  know
but  here  in  Utah  it  may  be  necessary
to  vary  materially  from  the  princi-
ples that  were  commanded  to  be
observed  ia  Jackson  County,  Mo.  I
do  not  know  but  we  may  be  required
here  to  not  only  consecrate  all  that
we  have,  but  even  ourselves  as  well  as
the  property  we  possess,  so  that  we
may  be  directed  by  the  Bishops  and
their  counselors,  or  whoever  may  be
appointed,  in  regard  to  all  our  daily
avocations.  I  do  not  know  how  it
will  be.  I  have  not  heard.  Down  in
Jackson  County  they  were  not  thus
directed*  Every  man  got  bis  ste-
wardship, and  he  occupied  it,  and
rendered  an  account  of  the  same
from  time  to  time.  But  I  do  not
know  but  it  may  be  necessary  here
in  Utah  that  we  should  be  directed
oftener  than  once  a  year,  it  may  bm
that  we  shall  be  told  weekly,  and
perhaps  in  some  cases  daily;  and
perhaps  the  Bishop  or  overseer  may

Vol,  XVII-


34  JOURNAL  OF

say  to-day,  "  Here,  brother,  I  would
like  you  to  do  so  and  so  to-day  /'
and  to-morrow  lie  comes  along  and
says,  *(  I  would  like  you  to  stop  that
now ;  we  have  something  else  on
baud ;  come  with  me,  I  will  pot  in
my  hands  as  well  as  you,"  for,  al-
though you  have  selected  me  by
your  own  voice  to  take  charge,  I  am
no  better  than  you  are,  therefore  I
will  take  hold  with  you  and  do  all  I
can  in  connection  with  you,  and  let
us  go  at  this  business  to-day."  To-
morrow there  may  be  something
else,  and  the  next  day  something
else,  perhaps,  according  to  the  judg-
ment of  the  Bishop  and  those  who
are  appointed  with  him.  In  .this  j
way  we  could,  perhaps,  more  effectu-
ally carry  out  the  mind  and  will  of
God  here  in  thi^desert  country,
than  we  could  if  wernried  to  imitate
the  pattern  which  was  given  to  us  in
another  country.

We  can  not  work  here  as  we  could
in  Jackson  County,  Mo.  In  that
country  we  did  not  have  to  irrigate*
We  could  settle  on  a  piece  of  rising
ground  there,  and  the  rains  of  heaven
watered  it.  We  could  settle  in  the
valley,  and  there  were  no  ditches  to
bs  made.  We  could  settle  in  any
part  of  the  county,  or  of  the  counties
round  about,  and  the  rains  of  heaven  1
would  descend  and  water  our  land.
And  furthermore,  there  was  timber  ■
all  around,  groves  of  timber,  and  we
could  go  out  before  breakfast  and
get  a  load  of  wood,  and  in  the  course
of  a  few  days  split  rails  enough  to
fence  considerable  of  a  patch  of
ground.  Here  we  have  to  labor
under  other  circumstances.  Here
we  have  not  timber  so  that  ev#ry
man  can  fence  his  little  farm  or  ste-
wardship; we  have  not  strength
snough.  If  we  happen  to  farm  on
some  of  these  high  grounds,  it  is
very  difficult  to  dig  canals  and  water-
ditches  to  water  our  little  steward-


DISCOURSES.

ships.  What  shall  \je  do,  then  ?
Join  ir_  toget  her,  be  of  one  heart  and
one  mind,  and  let  there  be  a  common
stock  fund,  so  far  as  property  is  con-
cerned, >md  so  far  as  o5jt  own  indi-
vidual labor  is  concerned*  Conse-
quently, we  need  not  think,  becaase
we  may  not  be  organized  precisely
according  to  the  law  that  was  adapted
to  Jackson  County,  that  this  counsel*
ing  is  void  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Do
not  let  any  person  begin  to  think
this.  You  need  to  co-operate  toge-
ther in  your  labors.  This  is  neces-
sary in  fencing  a  great  many  of  our
farms.  Yon  need  to  co-operate  in
getting  out  your  water  from  your
water-ditches  to  water  your  laud,  and
yoo  need  to  do  it  in  a  great  many
other  respects.

For  instance,  these  mountains,
which  rise  so  majestically  on  the
east  and  on  the  west,  are  fall  of
rich  minerals,  this  is  one  of  the
richest  countries  in  the  world.  Will
not  some  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
eventually  be  required  to  act  in  the
department  of  mining  as  well  as  in  the
department  of  agriculture  ?  Yes.
Can  one  individual  do  as  well  as  half
a  dozen,  or  as  well  as  a  hundred,  at
mining  ?  It  may  require  the  expe-
rience of  a  vast  amount  of  labor  in
order  to  develop  the  resources  of  these
mountains,  and  in  that  case  co-opera-
tion will  be  absolutely  necessary,

"But,"  says  one,  "  the  Gentiles
have  already  done  that."  But  very
little,  I  will  assure  you.  Here  and
there  they  have  opened  a  mine,  but
not  one  thousandth  nor  one  teu-thoa*
ssndth  of  that  which  exists  and  which
will  be  developed  hereafter,  Now,
in  all  these  departments  the  Latter*
day  Saints  must  learn  to  be  united,
and  I  am  glad  to  see,  I  rejoice  ex-
ceedingly to  hear,  that  the  President
has  been  moved  upon,  not  only  before
he  left  Salt  Lake  City  to  go  down
South,  but  while  he  has  been  there,


THE  KINGDOM 5  ETC


S3


to  alter  the  order  of  things  that  has
existed  for  many  years  here  in  these
mountains,  among  the  Latter-day
Saints.  In  what  respect  P  To  bring
:i bout  a  an i ted  order  of  things  in  re-
gard to  their  property  and  labor,
and  the  development  of  the  resources
of  our  farming  land ;  in  regard  to
raising  flocks  and  herds,  building,
and  developing  the  mineral  resources
of  our  mountains  In  all  these
respects  the  President  has  seen  the
necessity  of  beginning  to  bring  about,
gradual ly,  as  the  way  may  open,  a
different  order  of  things  that  will
strike  the  nxe  at  the  root  of  this  pride
and  distinction  of  classes*  I  am
glad ;  I  rejoice  in  it.  Several  of  the
Branches  of  the  Church  south  have
already  entered  into  this  order.

Inquires  one,  "  What  is  it,  what
kind  of  an  order  is  it  ?  Tell  us  all
about  it."  I  would  tell  you  as  much
as  I  thought  was  wisdom,  if  I  under-
stood it  myself;  but  I  do  not;  I  have
had  but  very  little  information  about
it.  Suffice  to  say  that  I  know  that
the  order  of  things  that  could  have
been  carried  out  successfully  in  Jack-
Bon  County  cannot  be  carried  out
here,  on  the  same  principle,  without
a  little  variation.  It  cannot  be
done — circumstances  require  different
laws,  different  counsel,  an  order  of
things  suited  to  the  condition  of  this
desert  country,

"Are  all  the  people  going  directly
into  this  thing  at  once."  "Yes,  if
they  choose;  bat  you  may  depend
upon  it  that  in  all  cases  whenever
God  has  moved  upon  his  servants  to
introduce  anything  for  the  good  of
the  people,  it  takes  time  for  tbe  peo-
ple to  receive  it — they  do  not  receive
it  all  in  a  moment.  The  Lord  is
long- suffering — he  bears  with  the
weaknesses  and  traditions  of  the
people  for  a  long  time.  When,  by
the  months  of  his  servants,  he  coun-
sels the  people  to  do  this,  that,  or  the


other,  and  they  are  a  little  backward
about  it,  he  does  not  come  out  in
judgment  ag  he  did  to  ancient  Israel,
and  cut  them  off  by  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands. He  does  not  do

|  that,  but  lie  hears  with  them,  waits
year  after  year.  How  long  he  has
borne  with  all  of  us !  Forty-three
years  ago  we  were  commanded  to
become  one  in  regard  to  our  property.
Forty- three  years  we  have  been  in
disobedience.  Forty- three  years  have
rolled  over  our  heads,  and  we  are  far
from  oneness  still.  God  has  not  cut
us  off,  as  he  did  ancient  Israel,  but
he  has  borne  with  ns.  Oh,  how
patient  and  long- suffering  he  has
been  with  us,  perhaps  thinking,
"  Perad venture  thgy  will,  by  and  by,
return,  reform,  rffffcmt,  and  obey  my
commandments  that  I  gave  them  in
the  first  rise  of  the  Church,  I  will
wait  upon  them,  I  will  extend  forth
my  hand  to  them  all  the  day  long,

t  and  see  whether  they  will  be  obedi-
ent." That  is  the  way  the  Lord  feels
towards  us.  Should  we  not  pattern
after  him  ?  If  this  order  of  tilings
should  reach  Salt  Lake  City,  if  these
different  wards  should  begin  to  be
organized  in  some  measure,  and  the
people  begin  to  be  divided,  some
entering  into  the  order  and  others
refusing,  should  we  not  bear  with
those  who  do  not  ?  Te§,  bear  with
them,  just  as  the  Lord  has  borne
with  ns,  and  riot  begin  to  think  that
we  arc  better  than  our  neighbors  who
have  not  entered  into  the  order,  and
flatter  ourselves  that  we  are  above
them,  and  revile  and  persecute  them,

and  exerciseour  influence  against  them,
saying,  "  Oh,  they  do  not  belong  to
the  united  order  of  God,  they  are
outside  of  it,  and  consequently  we
have  not  much  respect  for  them,"
We  must  not  do  this,  for  perhaps,
though  we  may  think  we  are  on  a  firm
foundation,  it  may  slip  from  under
us,  and  we  alao  may  be  brought  into


3G  JOURNAL  OF

straightened  circumstances*  If  we
exercise  patience,  long-suffering,  and
forbearance  with  the  people  until
they  learn  by  experience  what  God  is
doing  in  oor  midst,  many  of  these
rich  people  may  come  into  the  order,
who  now  say  in  their  hearts,  "  We
will  wait  and  see  whether  this  thing
will  prosper/'  If  they  are  honest  in
heart,  they  will  finally  come  to  the
conclusion  that  the  people  in  the
united  order  are  a  happy  people ;  they


DISCOURSES.

are  not  lifted  Bp  in  pride  one  above
another,  and  they  will  say,  "  I  think
I  will  go  there,  with  all  I  have ;  I
will  become  one  of  them  ;  *'  and  in  a
little  while  they  will  come  along,
while  others,  perhaps,  will  apostatize
entirely.  However,  if  they  want  to
go,  let  them  go,  they  are  of  no  par-
ticular benefit  if  they  feel  to  aposta-
tize from  anything  which  God  has
established  for  the  benefit  of  the  peo-
ple. May  God  bless  you.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  is  the  Meetixo-housk  01  Nephi  City,  Juab  County,

Satcrday  Morning,  Apbil  18,  1874.


(Reported  hy  Duval  W.  Evans,)

CEASE  TO  BEING  IN  AND  BUILD  UP  BAIiYLON — SEPARATE  YOURSELVES
FROM  SINNERS  AND  FROM  SIN— HAVE  NOT  COME  WITH  ANY  NEW
DOCTRINE  —  WE  MUST  BE  ONE  —  WITHOUT  WORKS  IT  CANNOT  BE
PROVED  THAT  FAITH  EXISTS— THE  TIME  COME  TO  ORGANIZE  THE
SAINTS — THE  TIME  AND  ENERGIES  OF  THE  SAINTS  ALL  THAT  IS
WANTED  —  GEOLOGICAL  RESEARCHES  OF  PROF.  MARSH — SCIENTIFIC
DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON-


I  am  thankful  that  I  enjoy  the
privilege  of  meeting  with  the  Saints
here  this  morning*  While  I  at-
tempt to  speak,  I  pray  that  I  may
have  the  spirit  of  the  holy  Gospel,
and  have  strength  to  proclaim  its
teachings  to  my  own  and  to  your
satis  faction.  I  also  pray  that  you
may  give  strict  attention.  This
prayer  is  offered  to  yon,  my  brethren
and  sisters.  Pray  for  the  Spirit  to
open  your  minds,  enlighten  your
understandings,  strengthen  me,  and


[  go  help  me,  that  I  may  speak  the
words  of  troth  to  you,  and  that  your
hearts  may  be  prepared  to  receive

\  them.

I  My  remarks  this  morning  I  design
as  a  text  for  my  brethren  and  sisters
to  speak  and  act  upon.  We  have
not  come  to  you  with  any  new  doc-
trine, nor  with  a  new  Bible,  not  by
any  means.  Yet  the  doctrine  we  are
now  preaching,  in  order  to  bring

i  about  a  nnion  among  the  Saints,
seems  to  be  about  as  new  to  them


CEASE  TO  BRING  IN,  ETC,


37


as  the  preaching  by  the  Elders  when  I
they  first  came  to  their  several
neighborhoods  and  called  upon  them
to  hear  and  obey  the  first  principles
of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  I  can  say,
with  all  thankfulness  and  gratitude,
that  we  have  never  seen  the  day,
from  the  time  we  first  became  ac-
quainted with  Joseph  and  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
when  the  hearts  of  the  people  were
so  well  prepared  to  receive  the  greater
blessings  of  the  kingdom  as  they  are
now.  We  are  happy  in  saying  this,
for  it  is  true;  this  is  encouraging,
and  fills  me  with  hope  and  consola-
tion, that,  after  laboring  aud  toiling
with  Joseph,  and  since  his  death,  to
unite  the  Latter-day  Saints,  this  is
the  first  time  that  we  have  seen  that
we  can  bring  their  hearts  into  a
union.  This  should  be  encouraging
to  each  and  every  Latter-day  Saint,
and  shoti id  teach  as  that  the  Lord  is
merciful  to  us,  that  he  still  remem*
bers  ns,  that  he  is  still  feeling  after
us,  and  that  he  is  sending  forth  his
voice — the  voice  of  his  Spirit,  into
the  hearts  of  his  people,  crying  unto
them — "Stop!  Stop  your  course!
Cease  to  bring  in  and  build  up  Baby-  j
Ion  in  your  midst"  It  is  the  duty
of  each  and  every  one  of  us  to  re-
fleet  upon  the  office  and  calling  we
possess,  and  SCO  whether  we  are  doing
the  will  of  the  Lord,  and,  if  we  are  j
not,  we  should  stup  and  begin  anew
to  establish  the  kingdom  of  God  upun
the  earth,  |
I  will  now  read  a  portion  of  Scrip-  j
lure  from  the  14th  chapter  of  the
Revelations  of  John,  beginning  at
the  Gth  verse :  "  And  I  saw  another
angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth,  and  to  every  nation,  and
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,
saying  with  a"  loud  voice,  Fear  God,
and  give  glory  to  him ;  for  the  hour


of  his  judgment  is  come  ;  and  wor-
ship him  that  made  heaven,  and
earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains
of  waters/'  I  will  also  read  from
the  ISth  chapter  of  Revelation,  com-
mencing at  the  4th  verse :  "  And  I
heard  another  voice  from  heaven,
saying,  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,
that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,
aud  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues*
For  her  sins  have  reached  unto  hea-
ven, and  God  hath  remembered  her
iniquities.1*

1  will  ask  the  Latter-day  Saints,
Do  we,  as  a  people,  believe  that  the
angel  referred  to  in  the  6th  verse  of
the  14  th  chapter  of  John's  revelation,
has  flown  through  the  midst  of  hea-
ven, that  he  has  been  to  earth,  called
upon  Joseph,  delivered  the  revela-
tions of  the  Lord,  restored  the
Priesthood,  Ac?  Do  we,  as  Latter-day
Saiuts,  believe  that  this  angel  lias  been
to  earth,  and  that  he  has  committed
the  Gospel  unto  the  children  of  men?
We  certainly  should  not  be  here  to-
day, if  we  did  not  believe  this,  and
that,  too,  with  all  our  hearts.  This
is  the  answer  given,  for  himself  and
herself,  by  every  Latter-day  Saint,
"  We  believe,  most  firmly,  that  the
Gospel  has  been  revealed  in  these
last  days  unto  and  through  Joseph
Smith  the  Prophet;  that  the  Priest-
hood and  its  keys  were  bestowed
upon  him,  and  through  him  upon
others ;  and  that  the  proclamation
has  gone  forth  to  the  nations  of  the
earth — "Come  out  of  her,  my  peo-
ple," &c,  as  mentioned  in  that
portion  of  Scripture  contained  in
Revelations,  1 8th  chap,  and  4th  verse*

Has  this  proclamation  been  heard
by  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  ?  Yes,  the  Latter-day  Saints
most  assuredly  believe  that  this  Scrip-
ture was  fulfilled  in  the  rise  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
duy  Saints.  By  and  by  the  cry  will
be,  as  prophesied  by  John  the  Reve


36


JOURNAL  OF  DISCUUB


lator,  "Babylon  is  fallen."  This  is
in  the  future;  but  this  people  believe
that  the  voice  of  the  angel  has  been
heard,  calling  upon  the  honest  in
heart  in  every  nation,  to  come  out
from  con  fusion  and  discord,  and  from
the  transgressions  of  the  children  of
men.  The  cry  has  come  to  them —
"  Separate  yourselves  from  sinners*
and  from  sin."  If  we,  as  a  people,
had  not  believed  this,  we  should
not  have  been  here  this  day.  14  Be
not  partakers  of  her  sins,  lest  ye
receive  of  her  plagues,  for  her  sins
have  reached  unto  heaven,  and  God
hath  remembered  her  iniquities."
Th  is  we  believe,  consequently  I  have
to  say  to  the  people,  we  have  not  come
with  any  new  doctrine ;  we  have  be-
lieved this  ever  since  we  were  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  sins.  Have
the  people  come  out  from  the  na-
tions ?  Yes,  Have  we  separated
ourselves  from  the  nations  ?  Yes.
And  what  else  have  we  done  ?
Ask  ourselves  the  question.  Have
we  not  brought  Babylon  with  us  ?
Are  we  not  promoting  Babylon  here
in  our  midst  ?  Are  we  not  fostering
the  spirit  of  Babylon  that  is  now
abroad  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  ?
I  ask  myself  this  question,  and  I
answer,  Yes,  yes,  to  some  extent,
and  there  is  not  a  Latter-dav  Saint
but  what  feels  that  we  have  too  much
of  Babylon  in  our  midst.  The  spirit
of  Babylon  is  too  prevalent  here.
What  is  it  ?  Confusion,  discord,
strife,  animosity,  vexation,  pride,
arrogance,  self  will  and  the  spirit  of
the  world.  Are  these  things  in  the
midst  of  those  called  Latter-day
Saints  ? Yes,  and  we  feel  this.

I  now  ask  my  brethren  and  sisters
who  enjoy  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  if
we  have  not  traveled  as  far  as  we
should  travel  on  this  road — the  high
road  to  destruction,  the  great  high-
way, the  broad  gate  through  which
so  many  pa^s  ? The  gate  is  wide,


the  way  is  broad,  and  many  there  be
that  go  in  thereat;  and  many  calling
themselves  Latter-day  Saints  are
scrambling  to  see  how  quick  they  can
get  in.  The  spirit  of  confusion  is
in  the  midst  of  this  people,  and  we
have  traveled  this  road  just  as  far
as  we  can  travel  it  and  be  Saints.
Is  this  the  experience  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  ?  I  can  answer  that  it  is ;
and  now,  that  the  Lord  is  moving
upon  his  servants  to  bring  the  Saints
to  a  oneness,  there  is  a  spirit  resting
upon  them,  and  if  you  talk  with
them,  they  will  say,  at  oi;ce,  4i  Yes,
this  is  right,  we  must  be  one.  This
is  the  doctrine  that  Joseph  taught,
and  the  revelations  that  were  first
given  through  Joseph  were  fur  the
Church  to  gather  together.  We
were  then  commanded  to  come  out
from  the  wicked  and  to  consecrate
what  we  had,  lay  it  at  the  feet  of  the
Bishops,  receive  our  inheritance,  im-
prove thereupon,  and  be  one — be  as
the  family  of  heaven  upon  earth."
This  is  the  spirit  of  the  people,  and
they  say :  "  Thank  the  Lord,  I  have
prayed  for  this  for  yenrs  and  years.
I  have  looked  for  and  expected  it,  and
I  am  exceedingly  thankful  it  has
come."

I  will  now  quote  another  portion
of  Scripture,  which  I  think  you  are
pretty  well  acquainted  with,  if  you
read  the  Bible.  It  is  one  of  the  last
petitions  that  the  Savior  presented  to
his  Father  in  heaven,  while  be  was
upon  the  eartli — a  short  prayer  which
he  made  on  behalf  of  his  disciples.
He  had  but  very  few,  for,  notwith-
standing his  many  miracles  and  won-
derful works,  very  few  seemed  to
cling  to  and  have  confidence  in  him
at  all  times  and  under  all  circum-
stances; but  there  were  a  few  who
wished  to  and  who  did  remain  with
him  until  his  death,  that  is,  they
stood  a  little  way  off;  they  said —
"  We  are  going  to  see  what  they  are


CEASE  TO  BRING  IN,  ETC.


3d


going  to  do  with  him:*  Bat  before
Peter  denied  him^  and  before  he  was
taken  by  the  soldiers,  he  offered  a
brief,  simple  prayer  to  his  Father.
He  had  been  talking  with  and  ex-
horting his  brethren,  and  showing
them  the  necessity  of  living  according
to  the  faith  that  be  had  taught  them,
and  he  offered  up  this  petition —
"Father,  make  these  my  disciples
one,  as  we  are  one,  I  in  thou,  thou  in
me,  and  I  in  them,  that  we  may  all
be  one;  and  I  pray  not  for  these
only,  but  for  all  who  believe  on  me
through  their  testimony."  This  is  a
simple  prayer.  Did  he  who  offered
it  mean  anything,  or  did  he  not  ?  If
he  meant  anything,  what  did  he  mean?
How  much  did  he  mean,  and  how  did
he  calculate  his  disciples  to  construe
this  short  prayer  in  their  lives,  in
their  walk,  faith  and  practice  after  he
was  taken  from  them  ?  How  far,
how  much  and  wherein  did  he  want
them  to  be  one  ?  Can  any  of  you
show  to  us  exactly  what  he  meant  ?
If  you  say  he  meant  that  every  one
who  believed  on  him  should  be  one
in  their  belief,  that  is  sectarianism.
Take  the  mother  Church — the  "Holy
Catholic  Church" — and  the  pmyer  of
its  members  is  that  all  may  be  Catho-
lics: **  Father,  I  pray  thee  to  make
the  people  all  holy  Catholics,"  This
is  the  faith  and  prayer  of  the  Catho-
lics, and  the  meaning  they  give  to
the  petition  of  Jesus.  The  same
with  the  Calvinists;  and  when  they
present  themselves  before  the  throne
of  grace,  the  burden  of  their  petition
is — "  I  pray  thee,  Father,  make  these
people  one  as  we  are  one ;  influence
them  to  leave  the  Catholic  Church,
tu  revolt  and  come  out  from  that
wicked  mother,  that  wicked  harlot,
that  wicked  Church,  and  declare
themselves  believers  in  that  pure  and
holy  doctrine  that  God  has  decreed
all  things  that  take  place."  Go  to
those  who  believe  in  the  doctrine  of


freewill,  which,  you  know,  compre-
hends many  of  the  so-called  Chris-
tian societies  of  the  world,  and  they
come  u :  with  a  double  and  twisted
storm — "God  Almighty,  make  them
all  Methodists !  Yes,  lets  all  be
Methodists."  I  pray  thee,  Father,
to  take  away  the  vail  from  the  minds
of  tli is  people,  that  they  may  see*  it
is  free  grace  and  free  will !  God  he
praised,  let's  all  be  Methodists."
This  i*  how  the  sectarians  explain
and  define  the  meaning  of  that  me-
morable prayer  of  the  Savior  that  his
followers  might  be  one;  and  you  will
excuse  me  for  my  manuer  of  illustrat-
ing it — I  did  tli  is  to  illustrate  fac's
just  as  they  are.

Did  Jesus  mean  this,  or  did  he
not  ?  Had  he  any  allusion  whatever
to  one  hero  on  the  right,  and  to  ano~
ther  on  the  left,  each  crying—*6  Lo!
here  is  Christ,  and  lo!  there  is  Christ,
Ho  is  not  yonder  ?  And  another
one  pointing  this  way,  and  another
that  way,  and  so  on  to  every  point  of
the  compass  ?  What  does  all  this
portray  before  the  mind  of  the  ra-
tional being,  the  philosopher,  one
who  has  the  spirit  ot  revelation,  and
who  understands  the  words  of  life
and  has  the  keys  of  life  to  the  peo-
ple; and  to  all  who  believe  in  the
revelations  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the
latter  days  ?  Confusion  upon  confu*
sion,  discord,  strife,  animosity,  vexa-
tion, perplexity,  warring  to  the  knife
and  slaying  each  other.  Oh,  the
number  of  Christian  wars  there  have
been  upon  the  f:ico  of  the  earth  !  We
can  very  readily  and  truthfully  say
that  true  Christians — the  members
of  the  true  Church  of  Christ  on  the
earth — never  take  the  sword  unless
to  defend  themselves.

Brethren  and  sisters,  we  want  to
understand  what  the  Savior  meant
when  lie  prayed  that  his  disciples
might  be  one.  One  in  faith  ?  Yes,  One
in  doctrine  ?  Yes,  One  in  practice  ?


40


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Yes.  One  in  interests  ?  Yee.  One  in
hope  ?  Yes,  and  all  concentrated  in  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth  and  the
establishment  thereof,  the  fulfillment
of  the  Scriptures,  the  gathering  of
the  Saints,  and  the  salvation  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth.  This  is  the
oneness  and  the  union  the  Savior
meant.  Let  me  here  ask  the  ques-
tion, Did  the  Savior  design  that  we
should  be  one  with  regard  to  faith  in
him,  repentance  of  sin,  baptism  for
the  remission  thereof,  the  imposition
of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  that  there  might
be  in  the  Church  first  Apostles,  then
Prophets,  pastors,  teachers,  helps,
governments,  diversities  of  tongues,
the  gift  of  prophecy,  the  gift  of  dis-
cernment of  spirits  ;  also  the  gift  of
faith,  so  that  if  poison  be  adminis-
tered it  should  not  hurt  the  believer;
and  if  there  should  be  a  necessity  to
take  up  serpents,  it  should  be  done
without  danger  ?  Yes,  all  this  is
included  in  the  oneness  prayed  for
by  the  Savior ;  and  some  of  the  gifts
I  have  enumerated  have  been  wifc-
nessed  by  most  of  us.  I  myself  have
seen  rattlesnakes  handled  as  you
would  handle  a  piece  of  rope,  I  re-
member one  night,  when  going  to
Missouri,  in  the  year  1834,  I  was
spreading  our  blankets  on  the  tall
prairie  grass,  which  was  pretty  thick
and  heavy,  that  a  rattle-snake  was
under  my  hands  and  warned  me  of
his  presence  by  his  rattles,  I  called
to  oae  of  the  brethren  who  was  help-
ing, and  turning  back  the  blanket,
said  to  him — "  Take  this  snake  and
carry  it  off  and  tell  it  not  to  come
back  again  ;  and  to  say  to  its  neigh-  i
bors  do  not  come  into  our  camp  to-
night, lest  some  one  might  kill  you,"
He  took  up  the  snake  and  carried  it
off  several  rods  from  the  camp,  and  '
told  it  to  stay  away,  and  to  tell  its
neighbors  not  to  come  into  the  camp, ,


for  they  might  get  killed  if  they  did.
Many  such  circumstances  have  trans-
pired in  the  experience  of  the  Elders
of  this  Church;  but  we  need  not
stop  to  relate  them,  for  it  is  well
known  that  the  gifts  of  the  Gospel
are  in  this  Church,  such  as  healing,
faith,  speaking  with  tongues,  discern-
ing spirits,  prophecy,  &c,  and  I  need
not  dwell  upon  them  new.

I  will  now  ask  the  question,  where
[  is  the  individual  who  can  draw  the
line  and  show  us  that,  when  Jesns
prayed  that  his  disciples  might  be
one,  he  meant  a  oneness  only  in
spiritual  things,  and  that  it  was  not
to  extend  to  temporal  affairs  ?  Will
any  of  you  draw  the  line  and  tell  us  ?
For  I  am  certain  that  I  have  not
wisdom  enough  to  define  the  imc
between  spiritual  and  temporal
things.  I  know  nothing  about  faith
in  the  Lord,  without  works  corres-
ponding therewith;  they  must  go
together,  for  without  works  you  can
.  not  prove  that  faith  exists.  We
might  cry  out,  until  the  day  of  our
death,  that  we  love  the  Savior,  but  if
we  neglected  to  observe  his  sayings
he  would  not  beliuve  us.  We  have
his  own  words  to  prove  this-  There
were  a  great  many  who  pretended  to
think  considerable  of  him  while  he
was  here  in  the  flesh  ;  but  he  said  to
his  disciples — "  If  you  love  me,  keep
my  commandments."  This  was  the
proof  he  demanded,  then  works  and
:  faith  went  together.  The  same  prin-.
ciple  holds  good  with  parents  and
children.  If  any  of  you  have  a  child
which  says — "  I  love  you,  mamma,
Oh,  I  love  you  dearly; "  you,  to  test
!  the  sincerity  of  the  child's  profes-
sions, say:  " Well,  then,  my  child,
you  will  desist  from  doing  that  which
displeases  me.  Come  here,  and  I
will  give  you  a  little  work  to  do  j "
or,  "I  wish  you  to  hit  down  on  that
chair,  and  let  that  crockery  alone;  "
or,  "  Do  not  tear  up  that  cloth,  my


CEASE  TO  EKING  IN,  ETC,


41


daughter ;  if  you  love  me,  come  and
sit  clown  by  my  side*"  "  Oh,  I  love
you  deathly,"  says  the  little  girl,  but
she  keeps  tearing  up  the  cloth,  or
sticking  pins  and  needles  into  the
flesh  of  the  other  children.  *'  Mamma,
I  love  you  most  dearly."  u  Well,
then,"  says  mamma,  *'  you  must  not
afflict  or  give  pain  to  your  sister,  or
yuur  brother;  you  are  naughty  to  do
so,  and  you  must  stop  this  mischief."
But  the  child  continues  her  naughti-
ness, still  declaring  that  she  loves  her
mother,  though  she  will  not  do  one
thing  her  mother  wishes  her  to  do.
Such  a  child  needs  chastisement ;  if
soft  words  will  not  answer,  severity
must.  Is  not  this  a  fact  ?  You
have  older  children  who  profess  to
be  very  fond  of  you;  they  will  say:
"  Father,  I  think  everything  of  you,"
and  yet  they  will  take  a  course
that  is  grievous,  annoying  and  disa-
greeable, and  quite  contrary  to  your
feelings  and  wishes.  Will  a  father
believe  the  professions  of  such  chil-
dren ?  Not  much,  I  think.  To  use
another  comparison :  Suppose  a
young  lady  dearly  loves  a  young
gentleman,  who  states  to  others  that
be  is  equally  as  fond  of  her,  and
would  be  very  glad  to  express  to  lier
his  feelings,  but  he  never  calls  to  see
her ;  now  though  he  may  declare  to
others  how  much  be  loves  her,  the
young  lady  will  say — "I  do  not  be-
lieve a  word  of  it,  for  I  know  that
be  would  make  it  known  to  me,  if  he
did."  He  might  declare  until  dooms-
day, that  he  loved  her,  but,  unless
be  told  her  so  and  proved  it  by  his
works,  she  would  say — u  That  is  all
fully,  he  does  not  mean  what  he  says/'
K  either  will  you  or  I  believe  that
anybody  loves  us  and  wishes  to  pro-
mote our  joy  and  comfort,  so  long  as
thi*t  person  acts  contrary  thereto;
neither  will  Jesus,  And  unless  these
Latter-day  Saints  stop  now,  and  go
to  work  and  prove  by  their  acts  thai


they  are  the  disciples  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  He  will  spew  them  out

We  have  gone  just  as  far  as  we
can  be  permitted  tu  go  in  the  road  on
which  we  are  now  traveling.  One
in  an  has  his  eye  on  a  gold  mine,
another  is  for  a  silver  mine,  ano-

,  ther  is  for  marketing  his  flour  or  his
wheat,  another  for  jselling  his  cattle,
another  to  raise  cattle,  another  to  get
a  farm,  or  building  here  and  there,
and  trading  and  trafficking  with
each  other,  just  like  Babylon,
taking  advantage  wherever  we  can,
and  all  going  just  as  the  rest  of
the  world.  Babylon  is  here,  and
we  are  following  in  the  footsteps
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  who
are  in  a  perfect  sea  of  confusion.
Do  you  know  this  ?  You  ought
to,  for  there  are  none  of  you  but
what  see  it  daily  ;  it  h  a  daily  spec-
tacle before  your  eyes  and  mine,  to
see  the  Latter-day  Saints  tiying  to
take  advantage  of  their  brethren.
There  are  Elders  in  this  Church  who
would  take  the  widow's  last  cow,  for

'  five  dollars,  and  then  kneel  down  and
thank  God  for  the  fine  bargain  they
had  made.

!  I  have  come  to  this  conclusion,
which  I  have  preached  for  years  and
years  and  years,  and  Joseph  preached
it  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  that
the  people  must  leave  Babylon  and
contusion  behind  them,  and  he
the  servants  and  handmaidens  of  the
Lord ;  they  must  be  His  family.
They  have  gathered  oat  from  Baby-
lon, and  they  must  prepare  themselves
to  stand  iii  holy  places,  preparatory
to  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Mam  I
have  Leen  watching  and  waiting,  just
as  steadily,  and  as  earnestly  and
faithfully  as  ever  a  mother  watched
over  an  infant  child,  to  see  when  this
people  would  be  ready  to  receive  the
doctrine,  or  the  first  lessons  or  reve-
lations given  when  the  center  stake
of  Zion  was  first  located  to  consecrate


42


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


their  property,  and  be  indeed  the
servants  and  handmaidens  of  the
Lord,  and  labor  with  all  their  hearts
to  do  His  will  and  build  up  His
kingdom  on  the  earth ;  and  I  have
never  seen  the  time  when  we  could
organize  one  little  society,  or  one  lit-
tle ward  ;  but,  thank  God,  the  time
has  come,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is
upon  the  people.

Is  it  a  new  doctrine  to  us  that
God'i  people  should  and  must  be  one
in  everything?  It  is  an  old  doctrine;
shall  I  say  it  is  as  old  as  the  hills,  as
old  as  the  mountains,  as  old  as  this
world  ?  Yes ?  I  can  say  it  is  as  old
as  my  Father  in  heaven;  it  is  an
eternal  doctrine ;  it  is  from  eternity
to  eternity.  Ask  yourselves  the
question,  Do  you  expect  to  go  to
heaven  when  you  depart  this  life  ?
"  Yes,  yes,  I  am  going  to  the  Para-
dise of  God  ; "  I  am  going  to  dwell
with  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  in
the  presence  of  the  Father  and  the
Son."  How  many  interests  will
there  be  there  ?  How  many  loca-
tions, or  central  places  of  deposit  for
the  affections,  labors  and  wealth  of
nil  who  dwell  there?  All  iu  one,  all
for  God,  all  for  his  glory  find  his
kingdom,  and  the  extension  of  his
dominions  through  the  immensity
of  space,  kingdoms  on  kingdom*,
every  heart  and  every  breath,  every
voice  and  every  eye,  and  every  feeling
for  the  glory  of  God.  Then  ask  our-
selves,— Is  the  Lord  going  to  have
a  Church  upon  the  earth  ?  Is  the
Lord  going  to  have  a  kingdom  on
the  earth  ?  Certainly,  Daniel  saw
this  in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar,
and  gave  a  description,  or  rather  a
hint,  in  regnrd  to  the  establishment
ot  that  kingdom,  when  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  would  lie  handed  over
to  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,  and
they  would  possess  the  kingdom  and
the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  for  ever
and  ever.


Are  we  going  to  enter  into  the
kingdom  ?  Are  we  going  to  be  pre-
pared for  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man  ?  Are  we  going  to  be  prepared
to  enter  into  the  fullness  of  the  glory
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  ?  Not  so
long  as  we  live  according  to  the
principles  of  Babylon.  Nov-*  wo  are,
every  man  for  himself.  One  says :
"  This  is  my  property,  and  I  am  for
increasing  it/*  Another  says :  "  This
is  mine."  Another:  "I  will  do  as
I  please ;  I  will  go  where  I  please  and
when  I  please ;  I  will  do  this,  that,
or  the  other;  and  if  I  have  a  mind
to  raise  grain  here  and  take  it  to
market  and  give  it  away,  it  is  none
of  your  business."  It  will  be  said  to
all  such  persons,  who  profess  to  be
Latter-day  Saints :  —  "I  never  knew
you  ;  you  never  were  Saints/*

Now  I  wish  to  give  you  a  little  of
our  late  experience  with  regard  to
the  Savior  and  his  doctrines.  We
have  organized  in  this  United  Order,
commencing  at  St.  George.  A  thou-
sand thoughts  rise  in  my  mind,  look-
ing at  the  subject  generally.  "  St
George  !  Are  you  going  to  send  me
down  to  St.  George  ?  Why,  it  is
like  sending  me  out  of  the  world ! "
But  I  must  not  talk  about  this  :  suf-
fice it  to  say  that  St.  George  is  o:io
of  the  most  beautiful  places  en  this
little  farm — this  world  that  we  occu-
py— this  little  farm  of  the  Lord's,
one  of  the  choicest  places  on  the  face
of  the  earth.  I  see  more  wealth  in
that  small  place  than  in  any  other
location,  of  its  size,  in  this  Territory,
or  in  these  mountains;  and  I  always
have.

We  have  organized  a  small  Branch
tli ere,  or,  rather,  I  may  say  a  toler-
ably large  one.  I  preached  a  good
deal  in  St,  George.  It  seemed  to  be
the  only  place  we  could  begin  our
work;  they  were  the  only  people  we
could  organize;  but  we  did  organize
there. God  designs  to  make  the


CEASE  TO  EilLNG  IN,  ETC


43


people  of  one  heart  and  one  mind
from  Monday  morning  to  Monday
morning  again,  and  that  everything
they  do  on  the  earth  shall  promote
His  cause  and  kingdom,  and  the  hap-
piness and  salvation  of  the  human
family,  "Well,"  said  they,  41  we  do
not  understand ;  we  believe  we  ought
to  be  one,  and  that  we  ought  to  go
into  the  order  of  Enoch.  We  under-
stand very  well  that  Enoch  was  so
pare  and  holy  that  his  city  was  taken,
and  the  saying  went  abroad  that  Zion
is  fled.  This  we  believe  as  firmly  as
yon  can."  Then  some  others  would
say,  "  There  will  not  be  one  ward
organized  after  the  brethren  go  over
the  rim  of  the  basin."  We  organ-
ized every  ward  or  town  south  of  the
rim  of  the  basin,  and  left  thera  in
tolerably  goud  working  order,  so  far
as  they  had  advanced.  The  only
trouble  with  them  was,  **  they  did
not  understand.'*  They  would  say,
"It  is  right,  and  the  Scriptures  tell
us  about  it ;  but  we  do  not  under-
stand the  mode  of  its  operation,"
One  man  came  to  me,  an  old  "Mor-
mon," whom  I  huve  known  over  forty-
two  years,  just  as  we  were  organizing,
and  sa id — "  Brother  Brigharn,  I
have  preached  for  you  all  the  time,
I  did  the  same  for  brother  Joseph.
Brother  Joseph  preached  this  doc-
trine ;  is  it  not  strange  that  the  peo-
ple do  not  see  it  ?"  "Then,"  said
I,  "you  are  ready  to  pnfc  down  your
name  ?"  His  answer  was — " 1  will
think  about  it"  You  do  not  fully
understand  your  own  faith,  nor  the
doctrines  you  preach  to  the  people,  if
you  do  not  understand  this  doctrine;
and  are  not  as  ready  to  enter  it  as
you  would  be  to  lay  down  this  mortal
body  and  enter  heaven  if  God  should
call  you,  or  to  do  any  other  duty.
Suffice  it  to  say,  God  will  establish
thi*  order  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  if  we  do  not  help  Him/  others  will,
and  they  will  enjoy  the  benefits  of  it.


When  we  came  this  side  the  rim
of  the  basin,  we  found  the  people
more  willing  than  south  of  the  rim
of  the  basin  to  come  forward  and
organize,  for  they  felt  that  we  have
traveled  as  far  as  we  can  on  onr  pre-
sent road,  without  going  to  destruc-
tion. One  Bishop  wrote  to  me —
"  Please  come  and  organize  us.  I
am  glad  yoo  are  coming  this  way,
we  want  to  be  organized.  I  know
that  we  have  to  consecrate  to  some-
body, and  I  would  rather  consecrate
to  the  Lord  than  to  the  devil.  We
have  to  contecrate  to  one  or  the
other,  and  very  soon  too."  He  is  a
very  good  Bishop;  he  is  full  of  the
spirit  of  this  work,  and  can  not  keep
frqm  talking  about  it,

LWe  now  want  to  organize  the
Latter-day  Saints,  every  man,  woman
and  child  among  them,  who  has  a
desire  to  be  organized,  into  this  holy
order.  You  may  call  it  th^  Order  of
Enoch,  you  may  call  it  co-partner-
ship, or  just  what  you  please.  It  is
the  United  Order  of  the  Kingdom  of
God  on  the  earth ;  but  we  say  the
Order  of  Enoch  on  the  same  princi-
ple you  find  in  the  revelation  con-
cerning the  Priesthood,  which,  to
avoid  the  too  frequent  repetition  of
the  name  of  the  Deity,  is  called  the
Priesthood  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chiscdec.  This  order  is  the  order  of
heaven,  the  family  of  heaven  on  the
earth  j  it  is  the  children  of  our
Father  here  upon  the  earth  organized
into  one  body  or  one  family,  to  oper-
ate together.

As  individuals  we  do  not  want
your  farms,  we  do  not  want  your
houses  and  city  lots,  we  do  not  want
your  horses  and  your  cattle,  we  do
nut  want  your  gold  and  your  silver,
nor  anything  of  the  kind,  "  Well,
then,  what  do  you  want  ?"  We  want
the  time  of  this  people  called  Latter-
day  Saints,  that  we  can  organize
this  time  systematically,  and  make


41


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


ibis  people  the  richest  people  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  If  we  are  the  peo*
pie  of  God,  we  are  to  be  the  richest
people  on  the  earth,  and  these  riches  ,
are  to  be  held  in  God,  not  in  the
devil.  God  tells  us  how  we  may  ac-
complish tins,  as  plainly  and  as  surely
as  he  told  Joshua  and  the  people  of
Israel  how  to  cause  the  downfall  of
the  walls  of  Jericho.  They  were  to
march  around  the  walls  once  a  day
for  seven  days,  then  seven  t trues  in
one  day,  and  the  last  time  they  went
round  the  walls  they  blew  their  horns
with  all  their  might,  and  down  fell
the  walls  of  Jericho.  We  do  not
understand  all  about  this,  if  we  did,
we  should  understand  that  it  was  as
simple  as  any  of  the  acts  of  the
Lord  :  as  simple  as  being  baptized
for  the  remission  of  sins.  We  want
now  to  organize  the  people.  Says
one — "Don't  you  want  my  money
and  my  goods?'*  We  want  you  to
put  them  into  the  kingdom  of  God,
into  the  vaults  that  are  prepared,  into
the  archives,  the  safe,  the  institution,
to  help  to  increase  means  fur  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  And
what  are  we  to  have  when  we  enter
this  order  ?  What  we  need  to  eat,
drink  and  wear,  and  strict  obedience
to  the  requirements  of  those  whom
the  Lord  sets  to  guide  and  direct;
that  our  sisters,  instead  of  teasing
their  husbands  lor  a  dollar,  Jive  dol-
lars, twenty-five  dollars,  for  a  fine
dress,  bonnet,  or  artificials  for  th em-
eel  ves  or  their  daughters,  may  go  to
work  and  learn  how  to  make  all
these  things  for  themselves,  being
organized  into  societies  or  classes  fur
that  purpose.  And  the  brethren
will  be  organized  to  do  thuir  farming,
herding  and  raising  cattle,  sheep,
fruit,  grain  and  vegetables;  and  when
they  have  raised  these  products,  every
particle  be  gathered  into  a  storehouse
or  storehouses,  and  every  one  have

_  to

wnat  is  needed  to  sustain  him.  But


the  people  will  stop  going  here,  there,
and  yonder,  and  saying  —  41 1  am
after  the  gold/'  **  I  am  after  the
silver,"  or  this,  that  and  the  other.
They  will  stop  this  folly  and  non-
sense, for  tbey  have  already  im-
poverished themselves  too  much  by
taking  so  unwise  a  course-  Looking
at  matters  in  a  temporal  point  of
view,  and  in  the  light  of  strict  econo-
my, I  am  ashamed  to  see  the  poverty
that  exists  among  the  Latter-day
Saints.  They  ought  to  be  wor  th
millions  and  millions,  and  millions
on  millions,  where  they  are  not
worth  a  dollar.  Should  they  spend
their  means  in  folly  and  nonsense  ?
No,  not  a  dollar  of  it,  but  put  sill
into  the  general  fund  for  the  benefit
of  the  kingdom.  Organize  the  bre-
thren and  sisters,  and  let  each  and
every  one  have  their  duties  to  per-
form. Whore  they  are  destitute  of
houses,  and  it  is  convenient,  the  most
economical  plan  that  can  be  adopted
is  to  have  buildings  erected  large
enough  to  accommodate  a  number  of
families.  For  instance,  we  will  say
there  are  a  hundred  families  in  this
place  who  have  not  houses  fit  to  live
in.  We  will  erect  a  building  large
enough  to  accommodate  them  all
comfortably,  with  every  convenience
for  cooking,  washing,  ironing,  &c. ;
and  then,  instead  of  each  one  of  a
hundred  women  getting  up  in  the
morning  to  cook  breakfast  for  father
and  the  large  boys,  that  they  may  go
to  their  labor,  while  the  little  children
are  crying  and  needing  attention,
breakfast  for  the  whole  can  be  pre*
pnred  by  five  or  ten  women,  with  ^
man  or  two  to  help.  Some  may  say
— **  This  would  be  confusion."  Xot
at  all,  it  would  do  away  with  it.
Another  one  says — "It  will  be  a
great  trial  to  my  feelings,  if  I  am
obliged  to  go  and  breakfast  with  all
these  men  and  women,  I  am  faint
and  sick,  and  do  not  eat  much,  and  I


CEASE  TO  BRING  IN,  ETC


45


want  my  breakfast  prepared  In  peace.
Then  build  side  roomrf  by  the  dozen
or  score,  where  you  can  eat  by  your-
selves; and  if  you  wish  to  Invite
three  or  four  to  eat  with  you,  have
your  table,  and  everything  you  call
for  is  Kent  to  you.  "  Well,  but  I  do
not  like  this  confusion  of  children/'
Let  the  children  have  their  dining
room  to  thcmielves,  and  let  a  certain
number  of  the  sisters  be  appointed  to
take  charge  of  the  nursery  and  see
that  they  have  proper  food,  in  proper
quantities  and  at  proper  times,  so  as
to  preserve  system  and  good  order  as
far  as  possible,  that  a  love  of  order
may  be  established  in  their  youthful
minds,  and  they  learn  how  to  con-
duct themselves.  Then  let  there  be
good  teachers  in  the  school  rooms ;
and  have  beautiful  gardens,  and  take
the  little  folks  out  and  show  them
the  beautiful  flowers,  and  teach  them
in  their  childhood  the  names  and
properties  of  every  flower  and  plant,
teaching  them  to  understand  which
are  astringent,  which  cathartic;  this
is  useful  for  coloring,  that  is  celebra-
ted for  its  combination  of  beautiful
colors,  &c.  Teach  them  lessons  of
beauty  and  usefulness  while  they  are
yonng,  instead  of  letting  them  pipy
in  the  dirt,  making  mud  balls,  and
drawing  the  mud  in  their  bats,  and
soiling  their  dresses,  and  cultivate
their  mental  powers  from  childhood
op.  When  they  are  old  enough,
place  within  their  reach  the  advan-
tages and  benefits  of  a  scientific  edu-
cation. Let  them  study  the  forma-
tion of  the  earth,  the  organization  of
the  human  system,  and  other  sciences;
such  a  system  of  mental  culture  and
discipline  in  early  years  is  of  incalcu-
lable benefit  to  its  possessor  in  mature
years*  Take,  for /instance,  the  young
ladies  now  before  me,  as  well  as  the
yonng  men,  and  form  a  class  in
geology,  in  chemistry  or  mineralogy ;
and  do  not  confine  their  studies  to


theory  only,  but  let  them  put  in
practice  what  they  learn  from  books,
by  defining  the  nature  of  the  soil,  the
composition  or  decomposition  of  a
rock,  how  the  earth  was  formed,  its
probable  age,  and  bo  forth.  All
these  are  problems  which  gcience
attempts  to  solve,  although  some  of
the  views  of  our  great  scholars  are
undoubtedly  very  speculative,  Iu
the  study  of  the  sciences  I  have
named,  our  young  folks  will  learn
how  it  is  that,  in  traveling  in  our
mountains,  we  frequently  see  sea
shells — shells  of  the  oyster,  clam,
&a  Ask  our  lx>ys  and  girls  now  to
explain  these  things,  and  they  are
not  able  to  do  so ;  but  establish
classes  for  the  study  of  the  sciences,
and  they  will  become  acquainted  with
the  various  facts  they  furnish  in
regard  to  the  condition  of  the  earth.
It  is  the  duty  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  according  to  the  revelations,
to  give  their  children  the  best  educa-
tion that  can  be  procured,  both  from
the  books  of  the  world  and  the  reve-
lations of  the  Lord.  If  our  young
men  will  study  the  sciences,  they
will  stop  riding  fast  horses  through
the  streets,  and  other  folly  and  non-
sense which  they  are  now  guilty  of,
and  they  will  become  useful  and
honorable  members  of  the  commu-
nity.

I  have  been  very  much  interested
of  late  with  regard  to  the  studies  and
researches  of  the  geologists  who  have
been  investigating  the  geological
character  of  the  Rocky  Mountain
country.  Professor  Marsh,  of  Yale
College,  with  a  class  of  his  students,
has  spent,  I  think,  four  summers  in
succession  in  the  practical  study  of
geology  in  these  mountain  regions.
What  is  the  result  of  his  researches  ?
There  is  one  result,  so  far,  that  parti-
cularly pleases  me.  There  are  home
here  who  know  a  man  by  the  name
of  John  Hyde,  from  London,  formerly


46


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


a  member  of  this  Church,  who  apos-
tatized ajid  went  back  ;  and  his  great
argument  against  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon was,  ibat  it  stated  that  the  old
Jaredites  and,  perhaps,  the  JTepbites,  :
who  formerly  lived  on  this  continent,
had  horses,  while  it  is  well  known
that  horses  were  unknown  to  the
aboriginal  inhabitants  of  America
when  it  was  discovered  by  Columbus,
and  that  there  were  no  horses  here
until  they  were  imported  from  Eu-
rope, Now,  since  Professor  Marsh
and  his  class  began  their  investiga-
tions! they  have  found  among  the
fossil  remains  of  the  extinct  animals
of  America  no  less  than  fourteen
different  kinds  of  horses,  varying  in
height  from  three  to  nine  feet.  These
discoveries  made  Professor  Marsh's
students  feel  almost  as  though  they
could  eat  up  these  mountains,  and
their  enthusiasm  for  studying  the
geology  of  the  regions  around  Brid-
gets Fort  was  raised  to  tbe  highest
pitch.  In  their  researches  among
these  mountains  they  have  formed  j
the  opinion  that  there  was  once  a  i
'  large  inland  sea  here,  and  they  think
they  have  discovered  the  outlet  where


the  water  broke  forth  and  formed
Green  River*  *Here  in  these  valleys
and  in  these  ranges  of  mountains  we
can  follow  the  ancient  water  line*
This  discovery  of  Professor  Marsh  is
particularly  pleasing  to  us  "  Mor-
mons," because  he  has  so  far  scienti-
fically demonstrated  the  Book  of
Mormon  to  be  true.

Here  is  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  do
you  want  to  enter  into  it,  or  not  ?
{  Do  you  want  the  future  blessings  of
this  kingdom,  or  do  you  not  ?  Ilave
your  choice ;  but  whomsoever  you
list  to  obey,  his  servants  you  will  be,
whether  it  is  Jesus  or  the  devil ;
please  yourselves,  have  your  choice.
But  all  know  we  can  not  serve  two
masters  acceptably ;  if  we  love  one,
we  shall  hate  the  other,  and  if  we
hold  on  to  one,  we  shall  despite  the
other.  We  must  either  be  for  the
kingdom  of  God,  or  not.  But  we
shall  organize  this  holy  order  here
before  we  leave.  We  give  the  invi-
tation to  all  of  you  to  come  and  get
;  organized.  Let  us  be  one;  let  us
|  carry  out  the  order  that  God  has
established  for  the  family  of  heaven.
God  bless  you.


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC,


47


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Meeting-house,  at  Nephi,  Jitae  Cocxty,  Sunday

Morndtg,  April  19,  1S74,

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  rXITEDORDKR-WE  WANT  THE  MOST  PERFECT  UNION-TIIE
WORKING  OP  THE  ORDER  TO  BE  SUCH  THAT  ALL  HONEST  MEN
CAN  SUSTAIN  IT-HOME  MANUFACTURE.


AVe  have  hoard  a  good  deal  since
we  have  assembled,  in  relation  to
what  is  called  the  Order  of  Enoch,
the  New  Order,  the  United  Order,  or
whatever  name  wo  may  give  to  it.
It  is  now  and  then  it  is  old,  fur  it
IB  everlasting  as  I  understand  it
I  am  asked  sometimes — "  Do  you
understand  it  ?  *  Yea,  I  do,  no,  I
do  not,  yea  I  do,  no,  I  don't,  and
both  are  true;  we  know  that  such
an  order  must  be  introduced,  but
are  not  informed  in  relation  to  the
details,  and  I  guess  it  is  about  the
same  with  most  of  you.  We  hare
been  talking  about  an  order  that  is
to  be  introduced  and  established
among  the  Saints  of  God  for  the  last
forty- two  years,"  but  wo  have  very
little  information  given  us  concern-
ing it,  either  in  the  Scrip!  ures  or  in
the  Book  of  Mormon.  The  fullest
detail  that  we  have  of  it  is  in  tho
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
and  that  is  the  case  with  almost
everything  pertaining  to  the  king-
dom of  God  on  the  earth ;  and  hence
I  have  said,  aud  cay  now,  that  I  be-
lieve that  Joseph  Smith  revealed
more  in  relation  to  the  kingdom  of
Gt>d,  and  was  a  greater  Prophet  than
perhaps  any  other  man  who  ever  li  ved
exoept  Jesus. I  do  not  know  how  far


Enoch  and  perhaps  some  others  on
this  continent  went;  if  wo  had  fur-
ther records  from  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon they  might  throw  more  light
on  subjects  with  which  we  are  not  at
present  very  well  acquainted.

We  occupy  a  very  remarkable
position;  we  are  living  in  a  peculiar
day  and  age  of  the  world,  in  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times.
When  the  President  communicated
with  us  a  little  before  starting  from
the  south,  about  this  new  order,  1
really  did  not  know  what  shape  it
would  assume  or  how  it  would  be
introduced,  but  it  had  got  to  come;
and  then,  on  the  other  hand,  I  do  not
know  that  we  need  have  very  much
anxiety  in  relation  to  the  matter,  for
if  it  be  of  God,  it  must  bo  right,  and
its  introduction  is  only  a  question  of
time*  As  to  the  modus  operandi,
that  is  another  question.  1  have
sometimes  thought,  to  tell  the  truth,
that  we  might  have  different  orders,
perhaps  the  patriarchal  order,  per-
haps the  order  of  Enoch,  and  perhaps
an  all- things- in- common  order,  all
operating  under  oue  head ;  but  I  do
not  know  anything  definitely  about
it,  and  it  is  not  my  business,  I  have
had  reflections  of  that  kind  running
through  my  mind,  inasmuch  as  it


is  "the  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times  when  God  will  gRtfaer  toge-
ther all  things  in  one.**  The  greatest
embarrassment  that  we  have  to  con-
tend with  at  the  present  time  is  not
in  knowing  what  to  do,  but  knowing
how  to  do  it,  anil  the  circumstances
with  which  we  are  surrounded,  not  so
much  among  our  own  people  as  out-
siders, and  then  again  among  our
own  people,  for  we  find  all  kinds
of  persons  amongst  ns  now,  as  we
always  have  done.  Some  will  start
right  into  anything  of  this  kind,
perhaps  with  a  determination  to  do
right,  or  at  least  half  right;  bnt
when  they  get  started  in  the  ope-
ration, something  or  other  comes
np  and  they  back  up,  break
the  traces  and  play  the  devil  gene-
rally. I  expect  there  will  be  a  good
deal  of  the  same  kind  of  thing  asso-
ciated with  this,  as  there  has  been
with  other  things  that  have  been
started.  I  do  not  expeel  that  every
one  that  is  loud-mouthed  and
ingly  very  anxioas  that  this  thing
should  be  introduced  is  going  to
stick  by  it  for  ever  and  ever,  any
more  than  many  others  have  done  in
other  things.  At  the  same  time  [
thiik  it  is  very  proper  that  the  ser*
vants  of  God  should  be  brought  un-
der an  influence  which  emanates  from
him,  and  that  that  influence  should
govern  them  in  all  things,  temporal
as  well  as  spiritual.  For  my  part,  I
can  not  see  why  it  is  that  me*r  should
be  so  much  attached  to  the  things
of  this  world ,  and  why  they  are  so
extremely  desirous  to  have  their
own  way  in  relation  to  them  ;  that
is  a  thing  I  never  could  understand.
We  like  freedom,  God  has  put  it  in
our  bosoms ;  and  as  I  said  to  Presi-
dent George  A.?  the  other  day,  in
talking  about  this  matter,  in  organ-
ising the  Order  of  Enoch,  as  it  may
be  called,  we  want  on  the  one  hand
the  most  perfect  union  ;  and  on  the


other  hand  the  most  extended  per-
sonal liberty  that  it  is  possible  fur
men  to  enjoy  consonant  with  carrying
out  the  principles  of  tnrity,  Not  the
liberty  to  trample  on  other  peopled
rights ;  not  the  liberty  to  take  from
people  that  which  belongs  to  them ;
not  the  liberty  to  infringe  upon  pub-
lic interests  or  the  public  benefit,  but
personal  liberty  so  far  as  we  can
enjoy  it.  These  are  my  ideas  and
feelings  in  relation  to  these  matters,
based  upon  the  principles  of  truth
and,  as  it  is  said, — "If  the  truth
shall  make  you  free,  then  shall  you
be  free  indeed,  sons  of  God  without
rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked
and  perverse  generation,'1

In  relation  to  religious  matters  I
would  not  have  a  religion  that  I
could  not  sustain,  and  that  God
would  not  sustain  me  in ;  I  do  not
want  itt  nor  to  have  anything  to  do
with  it  One  thing  I  have  always
felt  proud  of,  and  that  is,  that  the
principles  of  the  Gospel1  of  Jesus
Christ  were  so  plain,  clear,  pointed,
definite  and  incontrovertible  that
they  defied  the  whole  world,  and  so
far  as  I  have  gone,  and  the  servants
of  God  around  me,  no  man  has
ever  been  able  to  successfully  gain-
say one  solitary  principle  connected
with  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth,  that  is,  in  re-
gard to  what  we  term  sometimes
spiritual  things.  I  want  to  see  tbe
same  principle  established  in  rela-
tion to  our  temporal  matters,  and  I
believe,  from  what  little  conversa-
tion I  have  had  with  the  brethren,
thnt  that  is  their  feeling.  In  rela-
tion to  these  matters  I  do  not  war  t
to  see  one  solitary  principle  that  nn
honest,  honorable  man  cannot  sus-
tain ;  but  let  everything  be  so  that
it  can  be  dragged  right  forth  to  the
daylight,  and  turned  otw  and  over
and  over  and  examined  all  sides  np,
and  inside  out,  and  see  that  it  is


THE  UNITED  ORDER*  ETC.


4


true,  good,  honorable,  upright  and
honest  in  every  particular.  That  is
the  kind  of  thing  we  want,  as  honest
men,  and  we  want  to  get  at  things
in  that  kind  of  a  way ;  and  if  they
will  not  bear  investigation  of  that
kind,  I  should  have  just  the  same
opinion  of  them  a3  I  have  about  un-
sound religions  matters,  and  I  should
not  want  anything  to  do  with  them*
I  do  not  want  anything  that  cannot
be  sustained  in  tbe  face  of  open  day,
and  in  the  face  of  God,  angels,  men
and  devils.

It  is  asked — "  Well,  whit  is  the
Order  ?"  We  do  not  know  exactly,
we  know  it  in  part;  it  is  jnst  as  Paul
said  in  his  day—"  We  see  in  part,
and  we  prophecy  in  part"  &c.  But
to  begin  with,  unless  some  change
does  take  place  in  relation  to  our
temporal  matters,  our  situation  is
anything  but  pleasant.  The  fact  of
the  matter  is,  we  are  all  of  us  on  the
highway  to  financial  or  temporal
ruin.  The  world  is  going  to  the
devil  just  as  fast  as  it  can  go.  Cor-
ruption, fraud,  chicanery,  deception,
evil  and  iniquity  of  every  kind  pre-
vail, so  that  you  cannot  trust  a  rtian
in  any  place,  you  can  not  rely  upon
his  wurd,  you  can  not  rely  upon  any
instrument  of  writing:  that  he  gets
up,  and  there  is  nothing  you  can
rely  upon.  Every  day's  news  brings
accounts  of  defalcations,  frauds,  in-
famies, rottenness  and  corruptions  of
every  kind,  enough  to  sink  a  nation
from  the  presence  of  God  and  all
honorable  beings.  And  this  is  not
only  so  in  the  United  States,  but
other  nations,  in  ours  especially.

We,  as  a  people,  have  come  out
from  Babylon,  but  we  have  brought
a  great  amount  of  these  infernal
principles  with  us,  and  we  have  been
grabbing,  grasping,  pinching,  squeez-
ing, hauling,  horning  and  hooking
on  every  side,  and  it  seems  as  though
every  man  was  for  himself  and  the

No.  L


devil  for  nsNdl.  That  is  about  the
position  wt  are  in  to-day,  We  want
a  change  in  these  things.  We  have
come  to  Zion.  What  to  do  P-^WEh^
to  do  the  will  of  God,  to  accomplish
his  purposes,  to  save  ourselves,  our
progenitors  and  our  posterity,  and  wo
have  come  because  the  Spirit  of  God
led  us  here  through  the  ins tr omen-
tal ity  of  the  holy  Priesthood  of  God,
Jesus  says — "  My  sheep  hear  my
voice,  and  they  know  me  and  they
will  follow  me,  and  a  stranger  they
will  not  follow,  because  they  know
not  the  voice  of  a  stranger,"  We
who  have  gathered  hure  have  been
going  in  a  curious,  crooked  kind  of  a
way,  but  we  have  nevertheless  started
to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God  and
to  establish  correct  principles  upon
the  earth  and  to  help  to  redeem  it.
Can  we  accomplish  this  by  continuing
in  the  course  we  have  hitherto  pur*
aued  ?  No,  verily,  no.  But  I  will
tell  you  bow  I  have  always  felt,  both
in  Joseph's  day  and  since  then,  when-
ever the  Lord  has  wrought  upon  the
man  who  stands  at  the  head  of  his
people  to  introduce  anything  for  the
welfare  of  his  kingdom,  it  is  time  to
look  out,  and  to  carry  out  the  coun-
sels that  are  given ;  and  yesterday,
after  1  arrived  here,  and  had  seea
President  Young,  and  conversed  with
him,  and  then  heard  him  and  others
speak  on  these  principles,  I  said  to
him,  "  The  old  fiddle  is  in  tune,  tha
sacred  fire  is  glowing  and  burning ;  f
and  I  think  so  still.  The  old  fiddle
•  is  in  tune,  the  right  feeling,  spirit
I  and  influence  are  operating,  and  we
all  feel  them.

A  great  deal  has  been  said  about
the  evils  that  exist,  and  we  might  talk
for  days  about  the  necessity  of  some-
thing being  introduced  for  the  wel-
fare and  happiness  of  the  Saints  of
God  here  in  Zion.  I  suppose,  on  a
reasonable  calculation,  that  there  are
ten  thouaaud  men  out  of  employment

Vol  XVII,


50  JOURNAL  OF

in  this  Territory,  perhaps  for  fire
months  in  a  year.  Now,  if  they
were  at  work,  and  only  got  one  dol-
lar a  day,  there  would  be  ten  thou-
sand dollars  a  day  earned,  which  in
five  months  would  make  a  very  large  J
sum,  one  million  three  hundred
thousand  dollars  I  think.  We  are
bringing  in  here  all  kinds  of  things
that  we  ought  to  make  ourselves.
What  are  our  broom  makers  and
coopers  doing  ?  What  are  you  doing
with  your  molasses  mills,  and  where
do  you  get  your  cloth,  shoes,  hats,
shirts  and  things  of  this  kind  from  ?
It  takes  quite  an  amount  to  supply
them,  they  must  come  from  some-
where, and  the  question  is,  where  do
they  all  come  from  ?  At  a  Bishops*
meeting  in  Salt  Lake  City  I  said  I
wanted  to  get  a  well  bucket,  but  I
could  not  tell  where  to  get  it,  and  I
wished  some  of  them  would  tell  me
where ;  but  they  could  not  tell  me,
although  there  were  a  good  many
Bishops  present.  This  is  a  pretty
state  of  things-  It  is  true  that  we
have  made  some  advances  in  some
branches  of  manufacture-  There  is
a  big  factory  in  Provo,  some  near  Salt


DISCOURSES,

Lake  City,  one  at  Ogden,  one  at  Box-
Elder  and  one  in  the  South,  It  has
required  great  efforts  on  the  part  of
President  Young  and  others  to  esta-
blish these  institutions,  and  when  we
get  them  we  do  not  want  the  cloth.
We  do  no  not  want  our  shoes  made
here — we  would  rather  send  off  our
\  hides,  and  get  somebody  east  to  make
them,  they  can  make  shoes  so  much
better  there  than  here.  Then  we  do
riot  want  leather  shoes  here,  we  must
send  off  and  get  a  lot  of  psper  things,
with  heels  high  enough  to  put  any-
body *s  ankles  out  of  joint.

Well,  my  opinion  is,  that  with
home  labor  properly  directed  and
applied,  we  shall  have  all  the  bread,
butter,  cheese,  shoes,  cloth,  hats,
bonnets,  shawls  and  everything  that
we  need,  and  I  think,  as  the  Presi-
dent has  said,  if  we  behave  ourselves,
we  shall  get  pretty  rich.  That  is  all
right  enough,  though  riches  are  only
a  little  thing,  in  comparison  to  the
great  principles  of  eternal  lives  and
exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
the  riches  of  eternity.  But  my  time
has  expired  and  I  must  close.  Amen.


*


THE  THINGS  OF  COD,  ETC.


51


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  tub  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  May  3,  1874.


{Reported  by  David  W,  Evans  J


THE  TIIIN'GS  OF  GOD  KNOWN  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD — THE  LIGHT  AND
INTELLIGENCE  OF  GOD  WITHOUT  MONEY  AND  PRICE  —  NO  TRUE
RELIGION  WITHOUT  SCIENCE— ALL  WILL  BE  SAVED  EXCEPT  THE  SONS
OF  PERDITION.


It  is  nearly  time  to  close  this
meeting,  bat  I  desire  to  speak  a  few
words.  I  have  very  much  that  I
wish  to  convey  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  bat  I  can  only  say,  in  as
few  words  ag  possible,  a  little  at  a
time,  upon  a  few  subjects  which  I
wish  to  lay  before  the  Saint*.  First,
looking  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints,
the  inquiry  within  myself  is — Do
yon  know  whether  I  am  leading
yon  right  or  not  ?  Do  you  know
whether  I  dictate  you  right  or  not  ?
Do  you  know  whether  the  wisdom
and  the  mind  of  the  Lord  are  dis-
pensed to  you  correctly  or  not?
These  are  questions  which  I  will
answer  by  quoting  a  little  Scripture,
and  saying  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
what  was  said  to  the  Saints  in  for-
mer times,  "No  man  knoweth  the
things  of  God,  but  by  the  Spirit  of
God."  That  was  said  in  the  days
of  the  Savior  and  the  Apostles,  and
it  was  no  more  true  then  than  it  is
now,  or  than  it  was  in  the  days  of
the  Prophets,  Moses,  Abraham,
Noah,  Bnoch,  Adam,  or  in  any  and
every  age  of  the  world.  It  requires
the  same  manifestations  in  one  age
as  in  another,  to  enable  men  to  un-


derstand the  things  of  God,  I  have
a  request  to  make  of  each  and  every
Latter-day  Saint,  or  those  who  pro-
fess to  be,  to  so  live  that  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  will  whisper  to  them
and  teach  them  'the  truth,  and  de-
fine to  their  understanding  the  dif-
ference between  truth  and  error,
light  and  darkness,  the  things  of
God  and  the  things  that  are  not  of
God.  In  this  there  is  safety ;  with-
out this  there  is  danger,  imminent
danger ;  and  my  exhortation  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  is — Live  your  re-
ligion.

Among  all  intelligent  beings  upon
the  earth  there  is  a  great  mis-
take in  regard  to  *  dispensing  to
others  the  knowledge  they  possess*
In  the  political  world,  right  here,
and  through  our  government  and
other  governments,  there  is  a  great
desire  in  each  and  every  one,  who
is  prominent  and  influential,  to
manage  their  political  afiairs  by
and  with  their  friends,  and  to  keep
their  enemies  from  knowing  any-
thing about  them,  which  creates  a
party  feeling,  and  parties  promote
distrust  and  jealousy,  which  lead  to
discord  and  strife. Such  is  alio  the-


52


JOURNAL  01'  DISCOURSES


case  in  the  financial  world.  In  our
trading  and  trafficking  we  wish  to
confine  the  knowledge  of  our  busi-
ness in  as  small  a  limit  aa  possible,
that  others  may  not  know  what  j
we  are  doing,  lest  we  should  lose
our  good  bargains  and  fail  in  our
schemes.

It  is  more  or  less  the  same  in  the
religious  world.  We  wish  to  know
a  great  deal,  and  do  not  want  oar
neighbors  to  know  as  much  as  we
do,  but  wish  them  to  believe  that  1
we  know  it  all  This  trait  of  char-
acter is  very  common,  both  here
and  through  the  whole  world.  We
all  wish  to  know  something  that
our  neighbors  do  not  know.  ^  ith
sciuutific  men  you  will  often  find
the  same  trait  of  character :  "  My
studies  and  my  researches  are  be-
yond those  of  my  neighbors;  I  know
more  than  they  know;  I  treasure
this  up  to  myself,  and  I  am  looked
upon  as  a  superior  being,  and  that
delights  me/'

I  say  to  the  Latter-dr.y  Saints,
and  to  all  the  world,  this  is  all
wrong.  We  are  here  upon  this
earth  as  the  children  of  our
heavenly  Father,  who  is  filled
with  light  and  intelligence,  and  he
dispenses  that  to  his  children  as
they  can  receive  and  profit  by  it,
without  money  and  without  price.
Is  not  this  a  fact  ?  It  is.  Go  to
every  department  of  life,  to  the
mechanics,  to  the  manufacturers,
to  those  learned  in  all  the  arts  and
sciences,  throughout  the  world,
and  not  one  of  them  possesses  an
item  of  knowledge  or  wisdom  but
what  has  come  from  God,  the
fountain  of  all  wisdom  and  know-
ledge. The  idea  that  the  religion
of  Christ  is  one  thing,  and  science
is  another,  is  a  mistaken  idea,  for
there  is  no  true  religion  without
true  science,  and  consequently
ibere  is  no  true  science  without


true  religion.  The  fountain  of
knowledge  dwells  with  God,  and
he  dispenses  it  to  his  children  aa
he  pleases,  and  as  they  are  pre-*
•  pared  to  receive  it,  consequently  it
swallows  up  and  circumscribes  all.
This  is  the  great  plan  of  salvation;
this  is  the  "  bugaboo"  that  the
Christian  world  hoot  at  so  much,
and  which  they  call  "  Mor  monism"
— it  is  the  Gospel  of  life  and  salva-
I  tion.

Confidence  is  lost  in  the  hearts
of  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Confi-
dence is  lost  one  towards  another,
among  the  religious  sects  of  the
day ;  confidence  is  lost  in  the  scien-
tific and  mechanical  world  ;  in  the
financial  and  in  the  political  world,
and  it  mast  be  restored.  I  make
this  statement,  and  there  is  not  a
scientist  or  divine  on  the  enrth  whe
can  truthfully  controvert  it.

There  is  a  great  deal  bring  said
and  rumored  about  what  we  are
teaching  the  people  at  the  present
time  with  regard  to  being  one  in
'  our  temporal  affairs  as  we  are  one
in  the  doctrine  that  we  have  em-
braced for  our  salvation,  I  will  say
to  you  that  erroneous  traditions  at
once  begin  to  present  themselves*
Why  we  have  received  these  tra-
ditions, those  who  reilect,  read  and
understand  can  pass  their  own
decision.  You  can  not  find  a  sect
anywhere  that  strictly  believes  in
the  New  Testament,  Read  over  the
sayings  of  the  Savior  to  Iris  dis-
ciples, those  of  the  disciples  one  to
another,  and  of  the  people,  with
regard  to  being  one ;  and  then  bring
op  the  fact  that  they  believed  in
this  doctrine,  and  that  they  taught
and  practiced  it  so  far  that  the  be-
lievers sold  their  possessions  and
laid  the  proceeds  at  the  Apostles"
feet.  Now,  what  is  the  tradition
on  tins  point  ?  To  sell  your  houses,
your  farms,  your  stores,  your  cattle^,


THE  THINGS  OF  GOD,  ETC.


53


and  bring  the means  and lay  it

down  at  the  feet  of  the  Apostles,  and
then  live,  eat,  drink  and  wear  until  it
is  all  gone,  and  then  what  ?  Do
without  ?  Yea,  or  be  beggars.  Our
traditions  lead  us  to  this  point,  and
that  throws  us  into  a  dilemma,  out
of  which  we  know  not  how  to  extri-
cate  ourselves*  To  the  Latter-day
Saints,  I  say,  all  this  is  a  mistake;
these  are  false  ideas,  false  conclusions,
I  am  here  to  tell  you  how  things
are,  and,  as  far  as  necessary,  to  tell
you  how  they  were,  aud  then  to
tell  you  how  they  should  be,  and
how  they  will  be.  To  begin  with,
we  will  unitedly  labor  to  sustain
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.
Shall  we  sell  our  possessions,  have
all  things  in  common,  live  upon
the  means  until  it  is  gone,  and  then
beg  through  the  country?  No,
mo+  Sell  nothing  of  our  posses-
sions. True,  the  earth  is  at  present  |
in  possession  of  the  great  enemy  of
the  Savior,  but  he  does  not  own  a
foot  of  it;  he  never  did,  but  he  has
possession  of  it,  and  they  say  that
possession  is  nine  points  of  the  law,
and  it  seems  to  be  so.  Well,  if  I
bave  a  foot  of  land  that  I  have
dedicated  and  devoted  to  my
heavenly  Father  for  his  kingdom
on  the  earth,  I  never  dispose  of
that,  I  have  owned  a  great  deal  of
land,  and  I  now  own  a  great  deal  of
land  in  the  United  States,  and  I
have  never  yet  sold  a  foot  of  it.  I
gay  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  keep
your  land,  dedicate  it  to  God,  pre-
serve it  in  truth,  in  purity,  in  holi-
ness; pray  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
may  brood  over  it,  that  whoever  walks
over  that  land,  may  feel  the  influence
of  that  Spirit ;  pray  that  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  may  cover  our  posses-
sions, then  gather  around  us  the
necessaries  of  life.  Dispose  of  no-
thing that  we  should  keep,  but
continue  to  labor,  praying  the  Lord


to  bless  the  soil,  the  atmosphere  and
the  water,  Then  we  have  our  crops,
our  fruit,  our  flocks  and  herds  to  live
upon,  to  improve  upon,  and  then  go
on  and  make  our  clothing,  build
bouses,  improve  our  streets,  our  cities
and  all  our  surroundings  and  make
them  beautiful ;  beautify  every  place
with  the  workmanship  of  our  own
hands.  Keep  what  is  necessary,  dis-
pose of  what  we  may  have  to  dispose
of.  To  whom  ?  To  those  who  are
operating  in  our  mines  to  develop  the
resources  in  our  mountains,  and  to
all  who  have  need.  By  such  a
course  the  wasting  of  our  substance,
as  has  been  too  much  the  case,  will
be  stopped ;  and  when  we  labor,  let
our  labor  count  something  for  our
benefit  We  ask  concerning  the
rich,  Do  we  want  your  gold  and
your  silver?  No,  we  do  not.  Do
we  want  your  houses  and  lands  ?
We  do  not.  What  do  we  want  !
We  want  obedience  to  the  require-
ments of  wisdom,  to  direct  the
labors  of  every  man  and  every
woman  in  this  kingdom  to  the  best
possible  advantage,  that  we  may
feud  aud  clothe  ourselves,  build  our
houses  and  gather  around  us  the
comforts  of  life,  without  wasting  so
much  time,  means,  and  energy.  And
instead  of  saying  that  I  shall  give  up
my  carriage  for  the  poor  to  ride  in,  we
will  direct  the  ooor  so  that  every  man
may  have  his  carriage,  if  he  will  be
obedient  to  the  requirements  of  the
Almighty,  Every  family  will  have
all  that  they  can  reasonably  desire-
When  we  learn  and  practice  fair
dealing  in  all  our  intercourse  and
transactions,  then  confidence,  now
so  far  lost, -but  so  much  needed,  will
be  restored  ;  aud  we  will  be  enabled
to  effectually  carry  out  our  operations
for  the  friendly  and  proti table  co-
operation of  money  and  labor,  now
bo  generally  and  so  injuriously  an-
tagonistic.


JOURNAL  OK

r  It  has  been  said  that,  a  few  even-
ings ago,  in  the  20th  Ward,  I  made
tise  of  the  expression  that  the  co-
operative^ stores  would  be  used  up
or  spoiled  j  if  I  did  use  such  an  ex~
pression,  it  must  have  been  in  con-
nection with  others  to  qualify  it.
The  question  was  asked,  "  What  are
you  going  to  do  with  the  co-operative
stores  ? "  "  Why,  use  them  up,"
and  some  of  the  brethren  got  the
idea  that  the  destruction  of  these
stores  was  intended,  because,  to
many,  the  idea  of  using  a  thing  up,
is  to  destroy  it ;  but  this  was  not  the
meaning  I  wished  to  convey.  But  I
say  swallow  them  up,  or  circumscribe
them,  or  incorporate  them,  from  time
to  time,  in  more  extensive  co-opera-
tive plans,  #**By  way  of  comparison,
suppose  a  rope  with  seven  strands,
and  bo  me  one  is  suspicious  of  its
strength  and  we  add  a  thousand
strands  to  it,  who  then  can  suspect
its  strength  ?  Now,  comparing  our
present  mercantile  and  stock-raising
institutions,  our  factories  and  every
thing  else  we  have  in  co-operation,
instead  of  weakening  this  cord  of
seven  strands,  we  throw  around  it  n
thousand  other  strands,  and  weave
them  in  to  strengthen  it,  is  not
the  first  cord  swallowed  up  ?  Yes,
it  is,  in  one  sense,  used  up,  wo
cannot  see  anything  of  it;  and  so
we  shall  make  our  additions  of  thou-
sands of  strands  to  every  co-operative
institution  we  have  established,  and,
instead  of  having  a  few  of  the  people
sustain  this  parent  co-operative  store,
or  the  ward  store,  we  will  have  the
support  of  the  whole  people.  That
is  the  difference  ;  can  you  understand
it  ?  How  careful  we  should  be  in
the  use  of  language,  to  prevent,  so  far
as  possible,  the  drawing  of  false
conclusions,  and  the  going  abroad  of
"erroneous  impressions.

This  is  a  comparison  with  regard
to  our  co-operative  stores  and  every  |


DISCOURSES,

co-operative  institution  we  have;  we
I  expect  that  the  whole  people  will  sup-
port them  and  give  them  their  influ-
ence; that  the  whole  people  will  work
for  the  whole,  and  that  all  will  be  for
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.
All  that  I  have  is  in  that  kingdom,
I  have  nothing,  only  what  the  Lord
has  put  in  my  possession.  It  is  his;
I  am  his,  and  all  I  ask  is  for  him  to
tell  me  what  to  do  with  my  time,
my  talents  and  the  means  that  he
puts  in  my  possession*  It  is  to  be
devoted  to  his  kingdom.  Let  every
other  man  and  woman  do  the  same,
and  all  the  surplus  we  make  is  in  one
great  amount  for  accomplishing  tke
purposes  of  the  Lord.  He  says,  "  I
will  make  you  the  richest  people  on
the  earth."  Now,  <;o  to  work,  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  make  yourselves  one,
and  all  needed  blessings  will  fol-
low,

I  will  now  briefly  notice  a  trait
in  the  Christian  world  in  regard  to
their  continually  misrepresenting  naf
which  they  most  emphatically  do.
Wherever  we  go  they  misrepresent
us.  They  do  not  stop  to  reason,  or
for  the  introduction  of  good  sound
logic.  They  do  not  stop  to  know
their  omi  minds,  and  to  ask  themselves
questions  with  regard  to  facts  as  they
exist,  but  are  wholly  uninfluenced  by
,  their  erroneous  traditions.  We
Christians  are  divided  and  sub*
divided,  but  we  all  believe  that
there  are  good  people  among  all  the
sects  of  the  day.  As  a  "  Mormon  "
or  Latter-day  Saint,  I  believe  this  just
as  much  as  any  sectarian  believes  it,
but  I  do  not  believe  it  as  the  secta-
rians believe  it*  We  all  believe
that  good  people  do  lire  and  have
lived  among  the  Christian  sects,
Says  one,  **  My  father  was  a  good
man  ;  or,  My  mother  or  my  sister
wag  a  good  woman,  my  brother
was  a  good  man,  my  neighbor  was
a  good  person ;  they  lived  and  died


THE  THINGS  OF  GOD,  ETC,


55


believing  in  their  several  faiths;
some  of  them  holy  Catholics,  who
died  shouting  and  rejoicing  that
the  time  had  come  for  them  to  be
released  from  this  tenement  of  clay.
Others  were  good  Protestants,  and
they  rejoiced  and  were  exceeding
glad  when  the  time  crime  for  them
to  lie  down  and  rest  their  weary
bodies,  and  they  were  happy/*  Now,
I,  speaking  at  one  of  the  Christian
world,  when  a  man  says  to
me,  "Unless  you  are  born  of  the
water  and  of  the  spirit  you  can  not
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  re-
ply, "  My  dear  friend,  my  father  and
my  mother  were  just  as  good  Chris-
tians as  ever  lived  on  the  face  of
the  earth,  and  they  died  as  happy
as  they  could  be,  and  their  souls
were  fall  of  glory.  Tell  me  that
they  have  not  gone  to  heaven!  It
is  all  noisence,  it  is  folly ;  I  do  not
believe  a  word  of  it;  you  must  be
one  of  those  deceivers  that  the  Sa-
vior taught  should  come  in  the  lat-
ter days/'  This  erroneous  tradition
is  planted  in  the  bosoms  of  the
Christian  world,  and  from  this  they
take  the  liberty  of  saying  that  the
doctrine  preached  by  the  L/a tier-
day  Saints  can  not  be  true,  for  :f  it
is  their  fathers  and  mothers  are  not
saved.  Would  you  not  like  to  know
the  truth  on  this  point,  O  Chris-
tian world  ?  Yes,  yes,  the  honest
ones  would :  I  can  not  sav  so  much
for  the  bread  and  butter  Christians;
but  when  yoa  meet  an  honest  per-
son, he  soys — "I  wish  I  knew  the
truth  about  this.  Our  beloved  bro-
ther and  father  in  the  Gospel,  the
father  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
Church,  John  Wesley,  was  he  not
a  good  maa  ?  Tell  me  that  he  is
not  saved  ! "  The  Christian  world
can  not  endure  such  an  idea,  "John
Knox  not  saved !  and  thousands
of  others  not  saved ! M  They  can
not  endure the thought. I  can


say  to  them  of  a  truth,  but  it  will
need  explanation,  there  is  not  one
of  these  men  who  lived  according
to  the  light  that  he  received,  and
up  to  every  blessing  God  bestowed
upon  him,  but  what  is  happier  to-day
than  he  ever  expected  that  he  could
be.  But  the  Christian  world  im-
bibe the  idea  that,  if  thete  good
men,  who  have  died,  have  not  gone
into  the  presence  of  the  Father  and
the  Son.  and  are  not  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven,  they  must  be  in  the  depths
of  hell.  This  is  folly  in  the  extreme;
but  the  Christians  do  not  know  how
to  comprehend  this,  how  to  under-
stand the  words  of  life.  I  can  say
this  for  all  good  people,  I  do  not  care
where  they  lived  and  died,  they  will
be  far  happier  hereafter  than  they
ever  conceived  of  while  here.  Do
you  think  that  the  good  Chivaman
and  Hindo  will  be  saved  ?  Yes,  as
much  as  the  Methodist.  But  erro-
neous tradition  prevents  the  Christian
world  from  seeing  and  understanding
this*  They  ought  to  stop  and  reflect,
and  ask  the  question — u  Do  we  un-
derstand the  Scriptures  when  we  read
them  ?  "  I  say  that  they  do  not,  if
they  did  they  would  see  that  we  have
the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  would
receive  our  teachings  with  joy.  I
have  not  time  to  fully  explain  this,
but  I  can  say  that  this  erroneous
tradition  palliates,  in  a  measure,  the
conduct  and  /iews  of  the  Christian
world  when  their  prejudices  arise  like
towering  mountains  against  these
poor  Latter-day  Saints.

We  shall  labor  and  go  forward,  as
long  as  we  live,  to  redeem  the
world  of  mankind.  This  is  the
labor  the  Savior  has  undertaken.
The  earth  was  committed  to  him
by  the  Father,  who  said,  "  My  Son,
go  and  redeem  the  world  and  all
things  upon  it;  pay  this  debt,  and
your  brethren,  who  believe  en  you
and  who  are  one,  as  the  Father  and


5G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  Son  are  one,  will  be  co-workers
in  this  great  and  eternal  work,  until
all  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Adam
and  Eve,  that  can  be  saved,  will  be
saved  in  a  kingdom  of  glory,"  and
all  will  be  saved,  except  the  sons  of
perdition.

Can  the  Christian  world  under-
stand this?  No.  Thete  is  not  a
priest  in  the  pulpit,  nor  a  deacon
that  sits  nnder  the  pulpit,  but  what,


if  he  knew  the  facts  as  they  are,
would  give  glory  to  God  in  the  high-
est, that  he  lived  in  this  day  and  age
of  the  world,  and  thank  the  Father
that  he  has  revealed  his  will  from
the  heavens.

I  thank  yon  for  your  attention,
brethren  and  sisters.  I  have  de-
tained you  a  little  longer  than  I  in-
tended to  do. God  bless  you.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

At  the  Opening  op  the  Adjourned  General  Conference,  held  in  the

New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  May  7,  1374.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  UNITED  ORDER — A  SYSTEM OF ONENESS — ECONOMY AND  WISDOM

IN  BECOMING  SELF-SUSTAINING.


I  do  not  expect  to  be  able  to  speak
much  during  this  Conference,  but
I  make  a  request  of  my  brethren
who  may  speak,  to  give  us  their  in-
structions and  views  for  or  against
this  general  co-operative  system,
which  we,  with  propriety,  may  call
the  United  Order,  If  any  choose
to  give  it  any  other  name  that  will
be  applicable  to  the  nature  of  it,
they  can  do  so.  A  system  of  one-
ness among  any  people,  whether
former-day  Saints,  middle-day  Saints,
eleventh  hour  of  the  day  Saints,  last
hour  of  the  day  Saints,  or  no  Saints
at  all,  is  beneficial ;  but  I  wish  the
brethren  to  give  us  their  views  for
and  against  union  in  a  family,  whe-
ther  that family consists of  the


parents  and  ten  children,  or  the
parents,  ten  children,  fifty  grand-
children, or  a  hundred  and  fifty
great-grandchildren,  and  so  on  un-
til you  get  to  a  nation.  I  ask  of
my  brethren  who  may  address  the
congregations,  to  give  ua  their  views
for  and  against  union,  peace*  good
order  j  laboring  for  the  benefit  of  oar-
selves,  and  in  connection  with  each
other  for  the  welfare  and  happiness
of  all,  whether  in  the  capacity  of  a
family,  neighborhood,  city,  state,
nation,  or  the  world.

We  see  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  as  individuals  and  nations,
straggling,  striving,  laboring  and
toiling,  every  one  for  himself  and
nobody  else ;  all  are  anxious  to  bless


THE  UNITED


ORDER,  ETC.


their  own  dear  selves.  If  you  will  I
permit  me  I  will  quote  an  anecdote
in  illustration  of  this  trait  of  char-
acter among  the  human  family.  A
man,  in  asking  a  blessing  upon  his
food,  prayed,  "  0  Lord,  bless  me  and
my  wife,  my  son  John  and  his
wife,  we  four,  and  no  more.  Amen,"
If  u*e  have  generosity  of  feeling
sufficient  to  pray  for  blessings  upon
a  fifth  person,  or  upon  a  whole
family,  neighborhood  or  community,
all  the  better.

We  are  not  entering  into  any  new
system,  order  or  doctrine.  There
are  numbers  of  organizations  of  a
similar  character,  as  far  as  they  go,
in  our  own  country  and  in  other
countries.  Our  object  is  to  labor
for  the  benefit  of  the  whole,  to  re-
trench in  our  expenditures;  to  be
prudent  and  economical;  to  study
well  the  necessities  of  the  commu-
nity, and  to  pass  by  its  many  useless
wants;  to  study  to  secure  life,
health,  wealth,  and  union,  winch
is  power  and  influence  to  any  com-
munity; and  I  ask  my  brethren,
while  addressing  the  people  during
this  Conference,  to  take  up  these
items  of  e very-day  life.  It  seems
to  be  objectionable  to  some,  for  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  enter  into  a
self  sustaining  system,  and  the  pro-
bability of  our  doing  so  causes  a
great  deal  of  talk.  If  we  were  in-
fidels, any  other  sect  of  Christians,
or  neither  Christians  nor  infidels,  but
mere  worldlings,  seeking  only  to
amass  the  wealth  of  this  world,
nut  hi ng  would  be  thought  or  said
against  it  But  for  the  Latter-day
faints  to  make  a  move  to  the  right
or  to  the  left,  to  the  front  or  to  the
rear,  a  suspicion  arises  directly  in
the  minds  of  the  people,  I  will
say  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  whole
earth,  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  going  to  work  to  sustain  them-
selves, to  do  good  to  themselves,  to


their  neighbors  and  to  the  whole

human  family ;  they  are  going  to
labor  to  establish  peace  and  good
order  on  the  earth,  just  as  far  and
as  fast  as  they  can,  aud  to  prepare
them  fur  a  happier  world  than  this.

Talk  about  it,  cry  about  it,  deride
it,  point  the  finger  of  scorn  at  it,
we  cave  not,  wo  are  the  servants
and  handmaids  of  the  Lord,  and
our  business  is  to  build  up  his
kingdom  upon  the  earth,  and  let
all  the  world  s;iy  what  they  please,
it  matters  not  to  us.  It  is  for  us  to
do  our  duty.

Now  let  me  present  one  little
matter.  Here  are  brethren  from  all
parts  of  the  Territory,  to  represent
the  different  brandies  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.
We  find  our  brethren  in  various  parts
of  the  Territory  arc  in  possession  of
a  little  land  ;  take  a  man,  far  in-
stance, who  has  got  a  five  acre  lot
He  wants  his  team,  he  must  have
his  horses,  harness,  wagon,  plow,
harrow  and  farming  utensils  to  culti-
vate that  five  acres,  just  as  though
he  was  farming  a  hundred  acres.
And  when  harvest  comes,  he  is  not
accommodated  by  his  neighbors  with
:t  reaping  machine,  and  he  says —
u  Another  year,  I  will  buy  one,"  and
this  to  harvest  five  acres  of  grain.
Take  the  article  of  wagons  among
this  peo;le,  we  have  five  where  we
should  not  have  more  than  two ;
and  the  money  that  is  spent  need-
lessly by  our  people  for  wagons
would  make  a  small  community  rich.
Again,  take  mowing  and  reaping
machines,  and  we  have  probably
twice  or  three  times  as  many  in  thii
Territory  as  the  people  need.  Thej
stand  in  the  sun  and  they  dry  up
and  spoil,  and  this  entails  a  heavy
waste  of  property.  We  may  take
also  the  article  of  harness  for  hfirses.
If  this  community  would  be  united,
and  work  cattle  instead  of  borsei,


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


they  might  save  themselves  from
two  to  five  hundred  thousand  dol-
lars yearly.  Is  this  economy  or
wisdom  ?  A  few  years  ago  we
raised  our  own  sweet ;  but  when  the
railroad  came  it  brought  sugar  to  tis
very  cheap,  and  where  is  our  sorg-
hum now  ?  There  is  hardly  any
raised  in  th«  whole  Territory.  The
people  say — 41  The  sugar  is  so  cheap,*'
Suppose  sugar  was  only  one  penny  a
pound,  and  yon  had  not  that  penny
and  could  not  get  it,  what  good  would
it  do  you  ?  None  at  all  If  cotton
cloth  can  be  bought  for  fifteen,  ten,
or  gix  cents  a  yard,  what  does  it
profit  a  people  if  they  have  not  the
money  to  buy  it  ?  It  does  them  no
good.  When  they  have  the  ground
to  raise  the  cotton,  and  the  machinery
to  work  this  cotton  up  and  make  the
fabrics  they  need,  they  can  do  it,


f  money  er  no  money.  And  so  we  go
;  on  from  one  thing  to  another,  and
we  would  be  glad  if  our  brethren,  in
their  remarks,  will  give  us  their
views  and  instructions  on  these
points,  and  the  bearing  they  have
had  upon  the  people  in  the  past,  and
how  they  will  affect  them  in  con-
nection with  the  United  Order  which
fve  are  now  seeking  to  introduce.

If  any  man,  merchant,  business
man,  or  anybody  else  has  anything
to  bring  forward  to  show,  as  they
think,  that  the  United  Order  will
militate  against  the  interests  of  the
community,  we  invite  th*m  to  speak
it  freely,  and  give  us  both  sides  of
!  the  question.  We  are  for  the  best,
we  are  for  the  right,  for  that  which
will  accomplish  the  greatest  good  to
the  greatest  number.  I  shall  now
give  place  for  others  to  speak.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  General  Conference,  held  in  the  New

Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Mat  7,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W,  Evans.)


ZION  TO  BE  REDEEMED  TIIROUOH  THE  LAW  OF  CONSECRATION— PERSE-
CUTIONS OF  THE  SAINTS — A  ONENESS  AMONG  THE  SAINTS  NECESSARY
— THE  HEARTS  OF  THE  FATHERS  TO  RE  TURNED  TO  THE  CHILDREN,
AND  THE  CHILDREN  TO  THE  FATHERS,


"  Behold  I  will  send  you  Elijah
the  Prophet,  before  the  coming  of  the
great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord,
and  he  shall  tarn  the  heart  of  the
fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  heart


of  the  children  to  their  fathers,  lest
I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a
curse."  This  passage  will  be  found
in  the  5  th  and  6  th  verses  of  the
4-th  chapter  of  the  Prophet  !Malachi\


ZION  TO  BE  REDEEMED,  ETC


The  Latter-day  Saints  were  driven  ;
from  their  homes  in  Jackson  County,
Missouri,  about  forty- one  years  ago.
A  portion  of  the  mob  commenced
the  outbreak  in  June  or  July,  and
among  their  first  deeds  of  violence
was  the  destruction  of  the  printing
office,  plundering  the  storehouse,  and
the  tarring  and  feathering  of  Edward
Partridge,  the  Bishop.  This  was,
followed  by  whipping  and  killing  the
people  and  burning  their  houses,  and
finally  culminated,  on  the  13th  of
October,  in  driving  some  fifteen
hundred  persons  from  their  homes,
on  the  public  lands  which  they  had
purchased  and  received  titles  for  from
the  United  States.  The  people  thus  1
driven  went  into  different  parts  of  the
State,  the  great  body  of  them,  how-
ever, taking  shelter  in  the  County
of  Clay,

The  settlements  in  Jackson  Coun-
ty were  commenced  on  the  principle  j
of  the  law  of  consecration.  If  you
read  the  revelations  that  were  given,
and  the  manner  in  which  they  were
acted  upon,  you  will  find  that  the
brethren  brought,  before  the  Bishop
and  bis  counselors,  their  property  and
consecrated  it,  and  with  the  money
and  means  thus  consecrated  lands
were  purchased,  and  inheritances
and  stewardships  distributed  among
the  people,  all  of  whom  regarded
their  property  as  the  property  of  the
Lord.  There  were,  however,  at  that
period,  professed  Latter-day  Saints,
who  did  not  see  proper  to  abide  by
this  law  of  consecration;  they
thought  it  was  their  privilege  to  look
after  "number  one,"  and  some  of
them,  believing  that  Zion  was  to  be-
come a  very  great  city,  and  that
being  the  centre  stake  of  it,  they
purchased  tracts  of  land  in  this  vicin-
ity with  the  intention  of  keeping
them  until  Zion  became  the  beauty
and  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  when
they  thought  they  could  sell  their


lands  and  make  themselves  very  rich.
It  was  probably  owing  to  this,  in
part,  that  the  Lord  suffered  the  en-
emies of  Zion  to  rise  against  her.

The  members  of  the  Church  at
that  period  were  very  industrious,
frugal,  and  law-abiding,  and  there
was  no  possibility  of  framing  any
charges  or  claims  against  them  by
legal  means,  and  the  published  mani-
festo, upon  which  the  mob  was  col-
lected, boldly  asserted  that  the  civil
law  did  not  afford  a  guarantee  against
this  people,  consequently  they  formed
themselves  into  a  combination,  a
lawless  mob,  pledging  to  each  other
"  their  lives,  their  property  and  their
sacred  honors"  to  drive  the  u  Mor-
mons" from  their  midst.  From  that
hour  the  heart  of  every  Latter-day
Saint  has  been  occasionally  warmed
with  the  feeling — may  I  be  permit-
ted to  live  until  the  day  when  the
Saints  shall  again  go  to  Jackson
County,  when  they  shall  build  the
Temple,  the  ground  for  which  wai
dedicated,  and  when  the  Order  of
Zion,  as  it  was  then  revealed,  shall
be  carried  out !  And  it  has  been
generally  understood  among  us  that
the  redemption  of  Zion  would  not
occur  Bpon  any  other  principle  than
upon  that  of  the  law  of  consecra-
tion.

Forty  years  and  more  have  passed
away  since  these  events  took  place*
We  have  been  driven  five  times  from
our  homes ;  five  times  we  have  been
robbed  of  our  inheritances.  Our
leaders  and  presiding  officers  have
been  killed,  and  not  in  a  single  in-
stance,  in  any  State  or  Territorz
where  we  have  lived,  has  the  law  been
magnified  in  the  protection  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  until  we  were
driven  into  these  mountains.  In
1834,  Daniel  Dunklin,  the  Governor
of  Missouri,  said  the  laws  were  am-
ple, and  the  Constitution  was  ample,
but  the  prejudices  of  the  people  were


€0  JOURNAL  OF

so  great  that  lie  and  the  other  autho-
rities of  the  State  were  powerless  to
execute  the  law  for  the  protection  of
the  Mormons.  We  have  had  one
protector — our  Father  in  heaven,  to
depend  upon;  but  governors,  judges,
rulers,  officers  of  any  kind,  high  or
low,  have  utterly  failed  to  extend
protection  to  the  Latter-day  Saints.
God  alone  has  been  our  protector,  and
we  aeknow ledge  his  hand  in  every
deliverance  we  have  hitherto  expe-
rienced.

Several  times  the  Church  has
made  advances  to  organize  the  Order
of  Enoch  as  it  waa  revealed  in  the
Book  of  Covenants  in  part,  and  in
the  ancient  history  of  the  Zion  of
Enoch ;  these  advances,  however,  the
Saints  did  not  seem  prepared  to
receive.  We  have  been  gathered
from  many  nations,  and  we  have
brought  many  notions  and  tradi-
tions with  us,  and  it  has  seemed  that
with  these  notions  and  traditions  we
could  not  dispense.  In  I808,  an
attempt  was  made  in  Caldwell  Coun-
ty, Mo.f  the  Latter.day  Saints  own-
ing all  the  lands  in  the  county,  or  all
that  were  considered  of  any  value.
They  organized  ISig  Field  United
Firms,  by  which  they  intended  to
consolidate  their  property  and  to
regard  it  as  the  property  of  the  Lord,
and  themselves  only  as  stewards ;
but  they  had  not  advanced  so  far  in
this  matter  as  to  perfect  their  system
before  they  were  broken  up  and  driven
from  the  State.  I  understand  that
three  hundred  and  eighteen  thousand
dolhirs  in  money  was  paid  by  the
Saints  to  the  United  States  for
lands  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  not
one  acre  of  which  any  one  of  us  has
keen  permitted  to  enjoy  or  to  live
upon  since  the  year  1838,  or  the
Spring  of  1839  ;  though  at  the  time
of  the  expulsion,  the  Commanding
General,  John  W.  Clarke,  informed
the  people  that  if  they  would  re-


DISCOURSES.

nounce  their  religious  faith  they
could  remain  on  their  lands.  He
said  that  they  were  skillful  mechan-
ics, industrious  and  orderly,  and
had  made  more  improvements  in
three  years  than  the  other  inhabi-
tants had  in  fifteen,  and  if  they
would  renounce  their  faith  they
could  remain.  But  they  must  hold
no  more  meetings,  prayer  meelings,
prayer  circles  or  councils,  and  they
must  have  no  more  JJishops  or  Presi-
dents; and  in  view  of  their  refusal
to  comply  with  these  conditions,  the
edict  of  banishment,  issued  by  the
Governor  of  the  State,  was  executed
by  this  general  with  an  army  at  his
heels,  and  the  Latter-day  Sainti
were  driven  from  their  happy
homes,  and  thousands  of  them  scat-
tered to  the  iour  winds  of  heaven.

Since  our  arrival  in  these  valleys,
sermons  have  been  preached  from
year  to  year,  to  illustrate  tons  the
principles  of  oneness.  We  find  that
we  are  one,  generally,  in  faith.  We
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;
we  believe  in  the  first  principles  of
the  Gospel — the  doctrines  of  repent-
ance, and  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins,  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the
resurrection  of  the  dead;  we  readily
receive,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  manifested  to  us  through
the  Prophets,  the  doctrine  of  bap-
tism for  the  dead,  the  holy  anoint-
ing and  the  law  of  celestial  marriage.
This  principle  came  in  opposition
to  all  our  prejudices,  yet  when  God
revealed  it,  his  Spirit  bore  testimony
of  its  truth,  and  the  Latter-day  Saints
received  it  almost  en  masses.  In
order  to  make  a  step  in  the  right
direction,  and  to  prepare  the  people  to
return  to  Jackson  County,  the  princi-
ples of  co-operation  were  taught  and
their  practice  entered  into;  and  for
the  purpose  of  instructing  and  en-
couraging the  miuds  of  the  people


ZluX  TO  BE  UF.DKEUED,  ETC


61


upon  the  benefits  of  united  action,
from  the  earliest  settlement  of  this
Territory  to  the  present  time,  the
presiding  Elders  of  the  Church  have,
every  Conference,  endeavored  to  im-
press upon  their  minds  the  necessity
of  making  themselves  self-supporting.
We  have  looked  forward  to  tho  day
when  Babylon  would  fall,  when  we
could  not  draw  oar  supplies  from  her
midst,  and  when  our  own  ingenuity,
talent,  and  skill  must  supply  our
wants.  The  effect  of  all  this  instruc-
tion is,  that  we  have  made  some  pro*
gress  in  many  directions,  but  not
so  much  as  could  have  been  de-
sired.

The  cultivation  of  cotton  was  in-
troduced in  the  South.  Sheep- breed-
ing lias  been  extensively  adopted,
numerous  factories  have  been  erected
to  manufacture  both  the  wool  and  the
cotton  produced*  Several  extensive
tanneries  have  also  been  established
for  the  manufacture  of  hides  into
leather,  and  various  other  kinds  of
business  have  been  introduced  with  a
view  to  making  ourselves  self- sup-
porting.

Within  a  few  years  the  railroad
has  been  constructed  through  our
Territory,  and  the  expense  of  freight-
ing has  been  greatly  reduced.  Mines
which,  before  the  railroad  was  built,
were  perfectly  worthless,  have
developed  and  made  to  pay,  and  the
minds  of  many  of  the  people  seem
to  have  been  impressed  with  the  idea
that  wo  may  expect  some  regular,
general  business  to  grow  out  of  the
production  of  the  mines,  and  a  great
many  have  been  led  to  neglect  home
manufactures,  aud  to  depend  upon
purchasing  from  abroad.  Some  set-
tlements have,  however,  exerted
themselves  considerably  to  produce
clothing,  and  many  articles  within
themselves.  These  circumstances  are
all  clear  before  us.  You  go  through
Utah  County,  to-day,  and  say  to  a


farmer,  «  Have  you  got  anv  sorgura
to  sell?"  u  No,  haven't  raised
any  for  two  or  three  years ;  sugar
got  so  cheap,  we  could  not  sell  it."
"  I  suppose  you  have  plenty  of
sugar  ?  "  "  No,  we  are  out  of  sugar,
we  haven't  any  money  to  buy  it  with.**
This  is  the  position  which  our  course
of  life  has  led  us  to,  aud  which  we
already  be^in  to  feel.

'  There  is  another  principle  con-
nected with  this  matter  which  we
should  consider,  and  that  is,  when
we  as  a  community,  in  the  valleys
of  the  mountains,  provide  for  our
own  wants,  we  are  not  subject  to
the  fluctuations  and  difficulties  that
result  from  a  money  panic,  or  an  inter-
ruption in  the  currency.  When  we
came  to  this  Conference  a  great  many
of  us  came  w  ith  the  determination  to
take  such  measures  as  should  place
us  as  a  people  on  an  independent
footing,  and  hence  we  propose
through  our  brethren,  to  go  to  work
and  organize  a  united  order.  There
is  at  present  a  deficiency  in  our  or-
ganization so  far  as  our  business
relations  are  concerned.  Of  course,
in  every  settlement,  there  are  many
industrious  men,  then  there's  some
who  are  schemers ;  and  as  each  man
looks  out  for  himself,  that  good
principle  which  the  Savior  taught
so  strongly,  that  a  man  should  love
the  Lord  his  God  with  all  his  heart,

;  and  his  neighbor  as  himself,  is  in
a  great  measure  forgotten,  and  a
few  gather  up  the  property,  while
many  of  the  laboring  men,  who  do
most  of  the  work,  come  out  at  the
end  of  the  year  behind,  without  a
full  supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life.
To  avoid  this,  a  United  Order  would
organize  a  community  so  that  all
the  ingenuity,  talent,  skill,  and
energy  it  possessed  would in  ire  to

I  the  good  of  the  whole.  This  is  the
object  and  design  in  the  establish-
ment of  these  organisations. It  it


62  JOURNAL  OF

perfectly  certain  that  there  is  in
every  community  a  sufficient  amount
of  skill  and  energy  and  labor  to
supply  its  wants,  and  put  all  its
members  in  possession  of  every
necessary  and  comfort  of  life,  if  all
this  skill  and  energy  be  rightly
directed.  We  propose  to  take  mea-
sures to  direct  aright  the  labor  that
we  have  in  our  possession,  and  lay
a  foundation  for  comfort,  happiness,
plenty  and  the  blessings  of  life  within
ourselves.

We,  further,  do  not  believe  that
Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  service  of
the  Most  High,  can  enjoy  that  high
degree  of  respect  in  the  presence  of
the  Almighty  to  which  they  are
entitled,  when  they  are  biting,  de-
vouring, shaving,  skinning,  and
maneuvering,  and  out  -  manceuver-
ing  and  getting  the  advantage  of
each  other  in  littlo  petty  deals.  We
want  to  these  things  cease  en-
tirely, for  we  know  that  we  can
never  be  prepared  for  the  coming
of  the  Savior  only  by  uniting  and
becoming  one,  in  temporal  as  well  as
in  spiritual  things,  and  being  pre-
pared to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  exal-
tation.

The  principles  of  life,  which  we
now  present  for  the  consideration  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  were  carried
out  in  times  past,  as  we  read  in
the  Book  of  Mormon,  among  the
Nephites  and  Lamanites,  who  each
enjoyed  over  a  hundred  years  of
unity,  peace,  happiness  and  plenty,
as  the  result  of  adopting  this  sys-
tem of  unity  j  and  if  we  will  unite
in  one,  acting  in  good  faith,  every
man  esteeming  his  brother  as  him-
self, regarding  not  what  he  possesses
H  his  own,  but  the  Lord's,  all  car-
rying out  these  principle!,  the  result
B  certain — it  is  the  enjoyment  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  it  is  the  light  of
eternity,  it  is  the  abundance  of  the
things  of  this  earth  j  it  ii  an  oppor-


DISCOURSES.

t unity  to  provide  education  for  our
children,  amusement  and  interest
for  ourselves,  a  knowledge  of  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
all  sciences  which  are  embraced
therein,  and  an  advance  in  the  work
of  the  last  days,  preparatory  to  the
redemption  of  the  centre  stake  of
Zion,

Brethren  and  sisters,  think  of
these  things,  and  as  the  spirit  of
the  Almighty  was  in  your  hearts
when  you  received  the  laying  on  of
hands  and  the  baptism  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  bearing  testimony  that  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  was  true,  seek
with  all  your  hearts,  and  know,  by
the  same  spirit,  that  the  establiih-
ment  ef  the  United  Order,  is  ano-
ther step  towards  the  triumph  of  that
great  and  glorious  work  for  which  we
are  continually  laboring,  namely  the
dawning  of  the  Millennium  and  the
commencement  of  the  reign  of  Christ
on  the  earth,

This  is  the  work  of  the  Almighty.
These  principles  are  from  God  ;  they
are  for  our  salvation,  and  unless  we
remember  and  abide  in  theni  our
progress  will  be  slow.  If  we  are
slow  to  learn  and  progress,  but  try
to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  God,
He  will  not  cast  us  off.  He  has
been  very  patient  with  us  these
forty  years,  and  he  may  continue
to  be  so.  But  understand  that  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  must  be  turned
to  the  children  and  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  fathers.  A  unity
must  exist,  thp  Latter-day  Saints
must  love  one  another,  they  must
;  cease  to  worship  this  world's  goods,
they  must  lay  a  foundation  to  build
up  Zion  and  to  be  one,  in  order
that  they  may  be  prepared  for  the
great  day  that  shall  burn  as  an
oven.

I  bear  my  testiranny  to  you  of
the  truth  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  of


THE  POSITION  THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


63


the  ministry  of  Joseph  Smith  and
of  his  servants  the  Elders  that  were
called  of  the  Lord  by  hira,  Brig-
ham  Young  and  the  Apostles  and
Elders  who  have  borne  these  testi-
monies to  the  nations  of  the  eartb,


and  I  say,  brethren,  give  diligent
heed  io  these  things,  lest  by  any
means  we  should  let  them  slip  and
come  short  of  entering  into  rest*

May  the  blessings  of  Israel's  God
be  upon  you  for  ever.  Amen.


i


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  General  Conference,  held  in  the  New

Tabeknacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  May  7,  1874.


(Eeparied  by  Datid  W.  Evans.)


THE  POSITION  THE  SAINTS  HAVE  OO  (  PIED  HAS  BEEN  A  PECULIAR
ONE— THE  UNITY  OF  THE  SAINTS— HOME  MANUFACTURE  PREFER-
ABLE TO  IMPORTATION  —  ORGANIZATION  NECESSARY  TO  SELF-
SUSTENANCE.


Those  things  which  we  have  been
listening  to  are  of  very  great  im-
portance to  the  Latter-day  Saints.
Situated  as  we  are,  entertaining  the
views  that  we  do,  in  possession  of
the  light  and  intelligence  that  have
been  communicated  onto  us,  we
stand,  in  these  respects,  in  an  en-
tirely  different  position  from  that  of
the  world  with  which  we  are  sur-
rounded ;  and,  as  has  already  been
stated,  it  is  necessary  that  we  begin
to  reflect  a  little  upon  that  which
has  been  revealed  to  us,  that  we  may
understand  our  position  and  rela-
tionship to  each  other,  the  duties
and  responsibilities  that  devolve
upon  us  as  fathers,  as  mothers,  as
children,  as  Elders  of  Israel,  and  in
all  the  various  relationships  of  life,
and  that  we  may  comprehend  the
requirements  made  of  us  by  onr


heavenly  Father,  Some  of  those
things  which  have  been  presented
before  ns  are  obvious  to  every  re-
flecting mind,  there  is  nothing
strange,  anomalous  or  peculiar  about
theoi;  they  are  things  which  have
been  more  or  less  advocated  by  dif-
ferent statesmen  among  the  various
nations  of  the  earth,  and,  according
to  circumstances,  they  have  been
adopted,  more  or  less,  by  a  great
many  people,  and  we,  the  Latter-day
Saints,  have  approached  nearer  to
them  than  many  of  us  seem  to  have
any  idea  of.  There  would  not  be
time,  at  present,  to  enter  into  an
elaborate  detail  of  the  various  plans,
ideas  and  workings  involved  in  the
principles  which  have  been  presented
before  us  this  morning ;  but  in  taking
a  cursory  view  of  our  position,  we
shall  find  that  it  is  very  different


6C;  JOURNAL  OF

from  that  of  aiiy  other  peoples  We
have  already  carried  oat  a  great
many  of  those  things  which  have
beeri #  referred  ti>,  that  is,  ft  great
many  of  us  have;  not  all  The
position  that  we  have  occnpied  in
this  nafion,  in  the  States  of  Missouri
and  Illinois,  and  in  the  various  coun-
tries of  those  States,  and  the  history
of  this  people  has  been  a  very  pecu-
liar one.  It  is  true,  as  has  been  said,
that  if  we  would  give  up  our  religion,
and  act  and  feel  as  others  act  and
feel,  we  should  be  hail  fellows  well
met  with  the  world,  and  we  could
have  the  fellowship  of  the  devil  and
all  his  imps.  We  could  have  this
all  the  time  if  we  would  conform  oar
ideas  to  theirs.  But  what  are  their
ideas?  Who  can  describe  them?
They  are  simply  a  ba!>el  of  contrari-
ties,  contradictions,  confusion,  igno-
rance, darkness,  speculation,  mystery,
folly,  vanity,  crime,  iniquity  and
every  kind  of  evil  that  man  can  think  ;
of,  and  if  we  were  willing  to  join  in
with  this  it  would  be  all  rigfit,  and  '
we  should  be  hail  fellows  well  met*
But  we  do  not  propose  to  do  that.
God  has  spoken  from  the  heavens;
the  light  and  intelligence  which  exist
in  the  eternal  worlds  li&ve  been  com-
municated, the  heavens  have  been
opened  and  the  revelations  of  God  '
given  to  man,  and  we  hav&  partici-
pated in  them  in  part,  and  the  light
thus  received  has  enabled  us  to  look
at  the  world  as  it  is;  it  has  opened
to  our  view  the  visions  of  eternity ;
it  has  made  us  acquainted  with  our
God,  with  the  principles  of  truth,
and  we  would  not  barter  that  for  all
the  world  has  to  give  us.  We  re-
joice, therefore,  and  thank  God  for
the  light  and  intelligence  that  he  has
communicated  to  us,  and  so  far  we
have  measurably  been  one,  and  we
could  not  have  helped  ourselves  and
prevented  it,  if  we  had  desired  to,
for  the  world was  determined  to


make  us  one,  or  make  hypocrite5?  of
os,  like  themselves;  one  of  the  two.
We  had  either  got  to  be  one,  or  deny
the  principles  that  God  has  implant*
ed  in  every  honest  man's  soul,  and
we  would  not  do  that  No  man  will
barter  his  independence,  no  man  will
barter  his  convictions,  no  man,  who
is  intelligent  and  honorable,  will
barter  his  religion  or  his  politics  at
the  caprice  of  any  other  man,  God
has  implanted  certain  principles  in
1  man,  and  as  long  as  manhood  is  re-
tained they  can  not  be  obliterated,
they  are  wiitten  there  as  in  letters  of
living  fire,  and  there  they  will  re-
main so  long  as  we  retain  our  man-
hood and  standing  before  God.  What
has  been  the  result  of  this,  so  far  as
it  has  gone  ?  Why,  when  the  peo-
ple in  Missouri  proposed  that  we
should  live  among  them  in  pence  if
we  would  leave  our  religion,  did  we
do  it  ?  Not  quite.  What  did  we
I  do  ?  We  clung  to  our  religion.
And  what  did  those  honest,  gene-
rous, gentle,  intelligent,  Christian
people  do  ?  Robbed  us  of  nearly  all
we  possessed,  and  witfi  the  balance
we  agreed  to  help  one  another  to  get
to  some  place  where  men  could  wor-
ship God  according  to  the  dictates  of
their  conscience/ if  such  a  place  could
I  be  found  in  republican  America.
Well,  we  left.  Did  we  unite  ?  Yes,
we  did  ;  and  every  man  that  hrri  a
team,  a  wagon,  two,  three  or  tour
horses,  two,  three,  four,  five  or  six
yoke  of  cattle,  or  bread,  money  or
clothing,  distributed  among  his  bre-
thren, and  we  helped  one  another
out  until  every  man  who  wanted  to
leave  had  left.  There  might  have
been  a  few  miserable  "  skeezeks,"
such  as  we  have  among  us  here,  a  few
miserable  hounds  left,  but  what  of
1  them  ?  Why,  nothing  at  all,  they  did
not  think  anything  of  themselves,
and  nobody  thought  anything  of
I  them.


THE  POSITION  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


65


We  commenced  again  in  Illinois,
just  on  the  same  principle.  There  ,
we  built  a  Temple,  and  performed
the  ordinances  of  God  [in  his  house ;
there  we  attended  to  our  sacraments,
entered  into  our  covenants,  and  com-
menced anew  to  worship  God  ac-
cording to  the  dictates  of  our  own
consciences,  and  there  again  we  found
a  lot  of  Christiana,  just  the  same  as
in  Missouri,  who  did  not  like  our
religion.  Said  they — "  Gentlemen,
we  do  not  like  your  religion,  but  if
yon  will  be  like  us,  you  can  live
among  us ;  if  you  do  not  believe  and
worship  God  as  we  do,  yon  can  not
stay  here/'  Well,  we  could  not
quite  come  it  then,  any  more  than
we  did  before;  and  they  killed  Joseph
Smith  and  Hyrum  Smith,  burnt
our  houses,  destroyed  our  property,
and  let  loose  mobs  upon  us,  and  de-
prived us  of  the  rights  of  American
citizens ;  and  finally  we  had  to  leave
the  States  and  come  out  among  the
red  men  of  the  desert,  that  we  might
find  that  protection  among  the
savages  that  Christendom  denied  us.
How  did  we  get  here  ?  We  helped
one  another.  In  the  Temple  that
we  had  erected,  and  dedicated  to  the
Most  High  God,  we  lifted  up  our
hands  before  God,  and  covenanted
before  him  that  we  would  help  one
another  to  leave  that  land,  so  long  as
there  was  one  left  in  it  who  desired
to  leave.  Did  we  keep  this  cove-
nant? We  did.  Why?  Because
we  felt  an  interest  in  the  welfare  of
our  brethren;  we  believed  in  our  re-
ligion, in  building  up  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  in  carrying  out  his  pur-
poses and  designs.  The  Christians
object  to  all  this  ?  Of  course  they
do,  but  who  cares  about  them  ?  I  do
not,  not  one  straw ;  we  have  had  so
much  of  their  tender  mercies,  that
they  take  no  effect  now  upon  us.
Again,  we  pay  oer  Tithing.  Some
may  inquire — "  Do  not  the  Priest-  |

No.  5.


hood  rob  you  ?"  I  do  not  know,  I
do  not  think  we  are  robbed  very
much,  or  that  we  are  very  much
injured.  We  do  not  do  enough  of  it
to  bo  injured  very  much,  we  aite
something  like  what  the  boy  said  of
his  father.  A  man  asked  a  boy—
u  Are  you  a  Mormon  ?"  "  Yes/'
"  Is  your  father  a  Mormon  f"  Said
the  boy — "  Yes,  but  he  don't  potter
much  at  it,"  There  are  a  great
many  of  us  who  do  not  potter  much
at  it,  but  still  we  make  the  attempt.

What  have  we  done  Bince  we
came  here  ?  Before  the  railroad  was
made  we  sent  from  here,  year  after
year,  as  many  as  five  hundred  teams
to  help  the  poor  who  were  unable  to
help  themselves.  Hence  you  see
that  a  good  deal  of  this  unity  of
action  has  been  carried  out  among
us,  but  we  have  only  pottered  a  little
at  it,  we  have  not  got  right  into  the
matter,  only  in  part.

Our  Ladies1  Relief  and  other  so-
cieties and  organizations  have  done
a  good  deal  of  this  kind  of  thing,  and
they  are  looking  after  the  interests  of
the  poor,  the  widow  and  the  father-
less. What  is  the  business  of  our
Bishops  ?  Why,  to  attend  to  these
things.  Do  they  do  it  ?  They  do.
And  then,  if  there  is  any  enterprise,
or  anything  required,  the  people  are
ready  to  take  hold  and  do  it,  inde-
pendent, say,  of  these  covenants  we
have  heard  spoken  of,  A  short  time
ago,  in  St.  George,  they  commenced
to  build  a  Temple.  Men  were  called
upon  from  different  parts,  some  from
this  city,  k  great  many  from  Sanpete
County,  and  from  the  different  settle-
ments, to  go  and  assist  down  in  that
locality  in  building  the  Temple.
Did  they  do  it?  Yes.  Was  there
much  grunting  about  it?  I  haVfc
not  heard  that  there  was.  I  hapj-
pened  to  be  in  a  meeting  a  short  time
ago,  and  it  was  said  they  wanted  a
little  means  to  help  to  clothe  thdse

Vol.  XVH.


66


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


men,  and  to  furnish  them  certain
things,  and  in  a  very  little  while
there  were  some  ten  or  twelve  hun-
dred dollars  subscribed,  without  any
grunting.  There  is  a  feeling  of
sympathy  in  the  hearts  of  Latter-day
Saints  towards  one  another,  and  for
the  upbuilding  and  advancement  of
the  kiugdom  of  God.  But  yet  some
of  us  are  a  little  startled  when  we
hear  about  uniting  our  properties,
&c.  I  am  amused  sometimes  to  see
the  manifestation  of  feeling  by  some
on  this  subject.  We  have  been  pray-
ing a  long  while  that  we  might  go
back  to  Jackson  County,  and  build
up  the  Centre  Stake  of  Zion;  that
we  might  enter  into  the  United
Order  of  God,  and  be  one  in  both
temporal  and  spiritual  things,  in  fact
in  everything;  yet  when  it  comes
along  it  startles  us,  we  are  confused  .
and  hardly  know  what  to  think  of  it.
This  reminds  me  of  an  anecdote,
which  I  will  relate  to  you.  Among
the  passengers  on  a  steamer  crossing
the  Atlantic,  was  a  very  zealous
minister  who  was  all  the  time  preach-
ing to  those  on  board  about  the  glory
and  happiness  of  heaven,  and  how
happy  they  would  all  be  when  they
got  there.  During  the  voyage  a
very  heavy  storm  arose,  and  the
vessel  was  drifted  fivm  her  course
and  was  in  great  danger  of  striking  |
on  a  reef  of  rocks.  The  captain
went  to  examine  his  chart,  and  after
a  while  m turned  with  a  very  sorrow-
ful face,  and  said  — *'  Ladies  and
gentlemen,  in  twenty  minutes  from
this  time  we  shall  all  be  in  heaven/'
*'  God  forbid !"  said  the  minister.
Many  of  us  are  a  good  deal  likt  this
minister ;  for  years  we  have  been
talking  about  a  new  order  of  things,
about  union  and  happiness,  and
about  going  back  to  Jackson  County,
but  the  moment  it  is  presented  to  us
we  say — u  God  forbid,'1  But  then
on  sober,  second  thought,  another


feeling  seems  to  inspire  us,  and
wherever  we  go  a  spirit  seems  to  rest
upon  the  people  which  leads  them
almost  unanimously  to  embark  in
these  things;  and  when  we  reflect,
■  saying  nothing  about  our  religion,
an  extended  system  of  co-operation
seems  to  agree  with  every  principle
of  good  common  sense.  Is  there
anything  extraordinary  or  new  in
the  doctrine  that  it  is  well  for  a
community  to  be  self-sustaining?
Why,  the  Whigs,  you  know,  of  this
country,  have  contended  on  that
principle  from  the  time  of  the  orga-
nization of  the  government,  and  they
have  sanctioned  it  and  plead  in  its
behalf  before  Congress,  in  political
caucusses,  and  before  the  people  up
to  the  present  time.  There  is  nothing
new  in  the  doctrine  of  a  people  being
self-sustaining.  The  first  Napoleon
introduced  into  France  what  is  known
as  the  "  Continental  system,"  which
encouraged  the  production  of  all
necessary  articles  at  home,  and  it  is
the  results  of  this  system  which  to-
day gives  stability  to  France,  and
has  enabled  her,  after  the  severe
trials  of  the  late  war,  to  pay  off  her
indebtedness  and  stand  independent
among  the  nations.

Now,  for  instance,  we  require  a
great  many  things  in  connection  with
human  existence.  We  need  boots
and  shoes,  stockings,  pants,  vests,
coats,  hats,  handkerchiefs,  shirts,  we
need  cloth  of  various  kinds,  and
dresses,  shawls,  bonnets,  &a,  and  in
every  reflecting  mind,  the  question
naturally  arises,  Is  it  better  for  ns
to  make  these  things  ourselves  at
home,  or  to  have  somebody  abroad
make  them  for  us?  Is  it  better  for
each  man  to  labor  separately,  as  we
do  now,  or  to  be  organized  so  as  to
make  the  most  of  our  labor?  We
have  a  large  number  of  hides  here  in
this  Territory,  what  do  we  do  with
them  generally  ? Send  them  to  the


THE  POSITION  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


C7


States.  We  raise  a  large  amount  of
wool  here,  what  do  we  do  with  it  ?
We  export  a  great  deal  of  it  to  the
States.  We  have  got  a  large  amount
of  excellent  timber  here,  what  do  we
do  for  our  furnituie  ?  We  send  to
the  States  for  a  great  deal  of  it.
Where  do  we  get  our  pails  and  our
washtubs,  and  all  our  cooper  ware
from  ?  We  send  to  the  States  for
it.  Where  do  we  get  our  brooms
from  ?  From  the  States ;  and  so  on
all  the  way  through  the  catalogue,
and  millions  on  millions  of  dollars
are  sent  out  of  the  Territory  every
year,  for  the  purchase  of  articles,  most
of  which  we  could  manufacture  and
raise  at  home.  This  is  certainly
▼ery  poor  economy,  for  we  have
thousands  and  thousands  of  men  who
are  desirous  to  get  some  kind  of  em-
ployment, and  they  cannot  get  it.
Why?  Because  other  people  are
makiug  our  shoes,  hats,  clothing,
bonnets,  silks,  artificial  flowers,  and
many  other  things  that  we  need.
This  may  do  very  well  for  a  while  in
an  artificial  state  of  society  ;  but
the  moment  any  reverse  comes  that
kind  of  thing  is  upset,  and  all  our
calculations  are  destroyed,

I  believe  in  organizing  the  tan-
ners and  having  the  hides  tanned  at
ho  me.  When  the  hides  are  tanned
I  believe  iu  organizing  the  shoe-
makers, and  manufacturing  our  own
shoes  and  boots.  I  believe  in  keep-
ing our  wool  at  home,  and  in  having  1
it  manufactured  in  our  own  factories,
and  we  have  got  as  good  factories
here  as  anywhere.  They  should
work  up  all  the  wool  in  the  country,  ;
and  if  there  is  not  enough  raised  to
keep  them  running,  import  more. ,
Then  I  believe  in  organizing  men  to
take  ere  of  our  stock — our  cattle
and  sheep,  and  increasing  the  clip  of
wool,  that  we  may  have  enough  to
meet  the  demands  of  the  whole  com-
munity. Then,  when  our  cloth  is  ;


made,  I  believe  in  organizing  tailors*
companies  to  manufacture  thjft  feloth
into  clothing — pants,  coats,  Vests,
and  everything  of  the  kind  that  we
need.  Then  for  our  furniture,  I
believe  in  going  into  the  mountains
and  cutting  down  the  tinlber,^ fra-
ming it  into  proper  shape,  Vnd  then
manufacturing  the  v»Wousf articles  of
furniture  that  we  neeli ;  if  we  require
another  kind  of  timber,.,  import  that,
but  make  the  furniture  here.  When
we  talk  about  co-operation,  we  'have
entered  but  very  little  into  it;  audit
has  been  almost  exclusively  confined
to  the  purchase  of  goods.  There  is
not  much  in  that.  I  wish  wo  would
learn  how  to  produce  them  instead  of
purchasing  them.  I  wish  we  could
concentrate  our  energies,  and  orga-
nize all  hands,  old,  middle-aged
and  young,  male  and  female,  and
put  them  under  proper  directions,
with  proper  materials  to  manufac-
ture everything  we  need  to  wear  and
use.  We  have  forgotten  even  how
to  make  sorghum  molasses,  and  our
memories  are  getting  short  on  other
points.  We  can  hardly  make  a  hat
or  coat,  or  a  pair  of  boots  and  shoes,
but  we  have  to  send  to  the  States
and  import  these  paper  onea,  which
lft si  a  very  short  time*  and  then  drop
to  pieces,  and  you  foave  yftur  hands
continually  in  your  pockets  to  supply
these  wants,  and  by  and  by  your
pockets  are  empty.  It  is  therefore
|  necessary  that  we  right  about  face,
and  begin  to  turn  the>  other  end  to,
and  be  self-swstaining.*?  ■
I  The  President  said  lie  WMiM  Kfeb
the  Elders  to* give  botU  sides  of  thk
question;  but  there  is  only  one  side
to  this  question,  and  that  is  union  in
all  our  operations,  in  everything  we
engage  in.  They  started  a  little
thing  like  this  in  Box  Elder  County
some  time  ago,  and  I  was  very  much
pleased  to  aee  the  way  things  went
there. I  have  spoken  about  it  once


6S  JOURNAL  OF

or  twice  in  public. They  have  got
their  co-operative  store,  it  is  true ;
but  that  is  only  a  small  part  of  it.
Sometime  ngo  I  asked  them — "Yon
have  a  factory  here,  haven't  you  ?"
"res." "Well,  do  you  sell  your
wool,  send  it  to  the  States  to  mix  up
with  shoddy  and  get  an  inferior  arti-
cle, or  do  you  make  it  up  your-
selves ?" "  We  make  it  up  our-
selves" "  Then  you  don't  sell  your
wool,  and  keep  your  factory  standing
idle?" "No,  we  don't,  our  factory
has  never  stood  idle  a  day  for  want
of  wool  since  it  was  organized/1  Said
l_"That  looks  right. What  do
you  do  with  your  hides? Do  you
send  them  off?" "No,  we  have  got
a  very  good  tannery  and  we  tan  them,  j
and  make  them  into  leather  for  shoes,
and  for  harness  and  for  other  pur-
poses." "  Oh,  indeed  !" "  Yes,  that
is  the  way  it  is," "  Well,  then,  what
next  r" "  Why,  when  we  get  our
shoes  made,  we  have  a  saddlers*  orga-
nization, and  they make  all  the
saddlery  and harness we want  ?"
"And  what  do  you  do  with  your
cows  ? Do  you  let  them  run  on  the
plains,  and  live  or  die,  just  as  it  hap-
pens, wi tli out  making  any  cheese  or
butter?" "No,  we  have  a  co-opera-
tive dairy,  and  we  have  our  cows  in
that,  and  we  receive  so  much  from
them  all  the  time  regularly,"  ^Well,"
said  I,  "  that  looks  right. And  are
you  all  interested  in  this  ?" "  Well,
about  two- thirds  or  three-fourths  of
us  are  all  engaged  in  these  matters-"
"  How  about  your  store,  does  it  run
away  with  the  best  part  of  it?"
"  No," "  Does  the  factory  get  the


DISCOURSES,

cream  of  it  ?"  u  No,"  "  Does  some
keen  financial  man  get  his  fingers  in
and  grab  it?"  "No,  we  are  all
mutually  interested  in  everything,
the  profits  as  well  as  the  losses,"  I
have  learned,  since  I  was  there,  that
they  have  made  it  a  great  success.

Now,  then,  if  you  can  prganize
one  little  thing  in  that  way,  every-
thing can  be  done  in  the  same  way,
I  was  talking  with  President  Lorenzo
Snow,  and  he  told  me  that  they  pay
their  men  every  Saturday  night;
they  have  a  money  of  their  own,  and
they  pay  their  hands  with  it,  and
that  is  good  for  everything  they  re-
quire. And  they  make  their  ar-
range men  ta  unitedly,  and  they  oper-
ate together  for  the  general  good.
Said  I — "How  do  they  feel  about
this  United  Order  ?"  "  Oh,"  I  was
told,  "  They  are  ready  for  anything
that  God  may  send  along  "  That  is
the  feeling  among  the  Saints,  I  be-
lieve, generally,  I  was,  I  thick,  at
the  biggest  meeting  I  ever  attended
in  Ogden  City,  along  with  some  of
the  Presidency  and  Twelve  and
others,  and  I  never  saw  more  unani-
mity among  the  people  on  any  ques-
tion than  on  this  one.  That  big
Tabernacle  was  fall,  and  the  aisles
were  full,  and  everything  was  jam-
med to  overflowing,  and  when  a  vote
was  called,  nearly  every  hand  went
up,  I  thank  God  that  his  Spirit  is
operating  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  is  leading  them  to  a  union  in
regard  to  these  things.

May  God  help  us,  and  lead  us  in
the  right  path,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


UNION  IS  STRENGTH,  ETC.  69


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF*


Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  Gexeral  Conference,  held  in  the  New
Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Friday  Morning,  May  8,  1874.

(Reported  ly  David  W-  Evans.)

UNION  IS  STRENGTH— UNITED  ORDER  WILL  BRING  ABOUT  TEMPORAL
SALVATION— THE  TIME  HAS  COME  TO  FAVOR  ZION— THE  JUDGMENTS
OF  GOD  ARE  AT  THE  DOOR  OF  THIS  GENERATION.


We  had  a  request  given  to  us,  at
the  opening  of  the  Conference,  yes-
terday morning,  by  President  Young,
to  give  evidences  for  and  against  the
United  Order  of  Zion.  I  do  not
know  that  I  should  be  a  very  able
advocate  against  it.  I  have  been
looking  over  in  my  own  mind,  the
arguments  which  might  be  brought
against  it,  and  there  are  a  few  things
I  will  name.  If  we  were  to  undertake
to  unite  according  to  the  spirit  and
letter  of  this  order  it  would,  in  one
sense  of  the  word,  deprive  us  of  hav-
ing half  a  dozen  candidates  at  elec-
tions, as  is  the  custom  generally  in
the  Christian  world.  It  would,  in  a
measure,  deprive  these  candidates  of
the  opportunity  of  spending  a  month
or  two  stu mp- speech i tig  to  get  the
votes  of  the  people ;  then,  when  the
election  came,  of  paying  for  two  or
three  barrels  of  bad  whiskey  to  treat
those  who  are  going  to  vote  for  them.
Then  it  might  deprive  Alderman
Clinton,  or  some  other  justice  of  the
peace,  of  the  chance  of  collecting
two  or  three  hundred  dollars  as  fines
from  those  who  had  committed  a
breach  of  the  peace.  It  might  de-
prive the  Benedicts  and  other  sur-
.geonfi  of  the  opportunity  of  collecting


five  hundred  or  a  thousand  dollars
for  mending  broken  arms  and  legs
got  in  free  fights.  Probably  it  would
deprive  the  people  of  the  opportunity
of  spending  fifty  or  a  hundred  thou-
sand dollars  a  year  in  importing
mustard  into  this  Territory,  and
require  the  farmers  to  collect  and  use
that  which  is  now  a  nuisance  on  their
fields.  It  might  also  deprive  us  of
the  privilege  of  paying  a  hundred
thousand  dollars  for  imported  brooms,
and  require  us  to  plant  two  or  three
hundred  acres  of  broom  corn.  These
are  about  the  only  objections  that  I
can  think  of  against  the  order,
though  you  might  carry  it  out  in
detail,  perhaps,  a  good  deal  further;
but  with  regard  to  the  benefits  arising
from  it,  they  are  so  numerous  that  it
would  take  a  long  time  to  enumerate
them.  I  do  not  think  it  requires  a
great  deal  of  argument  to  prove  to  us
that  union  is  strength,  and  that  a
united  people  have  power  which  a
divided  people  do  not  possess.

I  am  very  glad  that  I  have  lived
long  enough  to  see  a  day  when  the
hearts  of  the  people  can  be  united  so
as  to  carry  out  these  things,  while
they  also  act  upon  their  own  agency
in  receiving  and  obeying  them.  We


TO


JOURNAL  OF  DISOOUKSES.


have  been  a  good  many  years  preach-
ing up  the  necessity  of  the  Latter* day
Saints  being  one  in  temporal  as  well
as  in  spiritual  things,  and  I  have  felt,
for  a  long  time,  in  ray  own  mind,  that
there  must  be  a  change  among  us,
Th#  way  we  have  been  drifting,  has
not  seemecj  to  have  a  tendency,  as  a
general  thing,  to  carry  out  the  pur-
poses of  the  Lord,  and  to  prepare  us,
as  a  people,  for  those  events  which
await  us.

In  our  spiritual  labors  we  have  been
united  in  a  measure,  and  in  some
things  perhaps  in  a  temporal  point
of  view,  Now,  for  instance,  the  case
I  referred  to  in  regard  to  our  elections,
I  do  not  think  that,  for  the  twenty-
four  years  we  have  resided  in  these
valleys,  any  man  has  ever  paid  a  six-
pence in  order  to  obtain  any  office  to
which  be  has  been  elected  by  the
votes  of  the  people,  whether  as  De-
legate to  the  Congress  of  the  United
States,  Governor  of  the  Territory,
member  of  the  legislature,  probate
judge,  or  any  other  office.  I  do  not
think  that  any  man  who  has  been  in
office  has  ever  even  asked  for  it  in
any  shape  or  manner.  So  far  as  this
is  concerned  we  have  been  united,
and  we  have  one  consolation  in  re-
gard to  our  officers,  I  do  not  believe
there  has  ever  been  a  single  defaulter
among  them  in  the  whole  Territory,
so  far  as  dollars  and  cents  are  con-
cerned, in  any  office.  la  this  respect
then  wo  see  the  advantage  of  being
united.

There  are  very  many  advantages
that  will  accrue  to  us  if  we  unite  our
hearts,  feelings,  labors,  interests,
property,  and  everything  that  we  are
made  stewards  over,  One  thing  is
certain,  we  can  not  continue  in  the
course  that  we  have  pursued  in  re-
gard to  temporal  matters.  It  is
suicidal  for  any  people  to  import  ten
dollars'  worth  of  products  while  they
export  only  one,  and  it  is  a  miracle


and  a  wonder  to  me  that  we  have
lived  as  lon£  ag  we  have  under  this
order  of  thing?.  We  have  sent  mil-
lions of  dollars  out  of  the  Territory
every  year,  for  articles  for  our  home
consumption,  while  we  have  exported
but  very  little ;  hence  I  say  that  the
establishment  and  success  of  this
new  order  among  us  will  bring  about
our  temporal  salvation.

We  occupy  a  different  position
from  the  rest  of  the  world.  We  be-
lieve in  the  revelations  of  Jesus  Christ
contained  in  the  Bible  as  well  as  in
the  record  or  stick  of  Joseph  in  the
hands  of  Ephraim, — the  Bonk  of
Mormon,  which  gives  a  history  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  this  continent,
We  also  believe  in  the  Book  of  Re-
velations, which  were  given  through
the  mouth  of  Joseph  Smith,  the
Prophet,  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.
Inasmuch,  then,  as  we  believe  these
things,  we,  if  we  carry  out  our  faith,
must  of  necessity  go  to  and  prepare
ourselves  for  the  fulfillment  of  the
revelations  of  God*  When  we  are
in  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  God,
we  understand  that  there  is  a  change
at  the  door,  not  only  for  us  but  for  all
the  world.  There  are  certuin  events
awaiting  the  nations  of  the  earth
as  well  as  Zion;  and  when  these
events  overtake  us  we  will  be  pre-
served if  we  take  the  counnel  that  is
given  us  and  unite  our  time,  labor
and  means,  and  produce  what  we  need
for  our  own  use;  but  without  this  we
shall  not  be  prepared  to  sustain  our-
selves and  we  shall  suffer  loss  and
inconvenience  thereby.  I  am  satis-
fied that  as  a  people,  pursuing  the
course  we  have  pursued  hitherto,  we
are  not  prepared  for  the  Zion  of
Enoch  or  the  kingdom  of  God.  There
was  an  order  carried  out  anciently
by  the  people  of  this  continent  and
by  the  people  of  the  city  of  Enoch,
wherever  that  was  located,  which  waa


UNION  IS  STRENGTH,  ETC


71


very  different  from  the  practice  which
has  prevailed  among  the  Saints  of
latter  days  ;  and  as  far  as  such  a  sys-
tem being  any  injury  to  us  I  can  see
none  in  the  world*  I  can  see  no  [
injury  that  can  overtake  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  by  their  uniting  together,
according  to  the  law  of  God,  and
producing  from  the  elements  that
which  they  need  to  eat,  drink  and
wear,  and  I  feel  as  though  che  time
has  come  for  such  an  order  to  be  in-
stituted; and  the  readiness  with  which
the  people  receive  the  teachings  of
the  servants  of  God  in  regard  to  this
matter  is  a  testimony  that  the  time
has  come  to  favor  Zion,  The  Spirit
of  God  bears  witness  to  the  congre-
gations of  the  Saints  of  tho  import-
ance of  the  principles  which  have
been  given  unto  us,  and  hence  their
readiness  to  receive  them.

From  the  commencement  of  this
work  to  the  present  day,  the  labor
has  been  harder  with  the  servants  of
God  to  get  the  people  prepared  in
their  hearts  to  let  the  Lord  govern
and  control  them  in  their  temporal
labor  and  means  than  in  regard  to
matters  pertaining  to  their  eternal
salvation.  It  was  hard  work  for
Joseph  Smith  to  get  the  minds  of
the  people  prepared  even  to  receive
the  Gospel  in  his  day.  But  the  Lord
opened  the  way,  the  Gospel  was 1
preached  and  the  Church  was  organ-
ized in  its  purity  and  in  the  order  in
which  it  existed  in  the  days  of  Jesus
Christ  and  the  Apostles,  arid  wher-
ever the  Gospel  has  been  sent  the
ears  uf  the  people  have  been  more  or
less  opened  and  a  portion  of  them
have  been  ready  to  receive  it.  This  '
Gospel  has  been  preached  in  every
Christian  nation  under  heaven  where
the  laws  would  permit,  and  people
from  these  various  nations  have  over-
come their  traditions  so  far  as  to  obey
it;  but,  as  I  remarked  before,  it  1ms
been  hard  work  for  the  Latter-day


Saints  to  bring  themselves  to  such  a
state  of  mind  as  to  be  willing  for  the
Lord  to  govern  them  in  their  tern*
poral  labors.  There  is  something
strange  about  this,  but  I  think,  pro-
bably, it  is  in  consequence  of  the  posi-
tion that  we  occupy.  There  is  a  vail
between  man  and  eternal  things;  if
that  vail  was  taken  away  and  we  were
able  to  see  eternal  things  as  they  are
before  the  Lord,  no  man  would  be
tried  with  regard  to  gold,  silver  or
tins  world's  goods,  and  no  man,  on
their  account,  would  be  unwilling  to
let  the  Lord  control  him.  But  here
we  have  an  agency,  and  we  are  in  a
probation,  and  there  is  a  vail  between
us  and  eternal  things,  between  us
and  our  heavenly  Father  and  the
spirit  world ;  and  this  for  a  wise
and  proper  purpose  in  the  Lord  our
God,  to  prove  whether  the  children
of  men  will  abide  in  his  law  or  not
in  the  situation  in  which  they  are
placed  here*  Latter-day  Saints,  re-
flect upon  these  things.  We  have
been  willing,  with  every  feeling  of
our  hearts,  that  Joseph  Smith,  Pre-
sident Young,  and  the  leaders  of  the
people  should  guide  and  direct  us  in
regard  to  our  eternal  interests;  and
the  blessings  sealed  upon  us  by  their
authority  reach  the  other  side  of  the
vail  and  >ire  in  force  after  death,  and
they  affect  our  destiny  to  the  endless
ages  of  eternity.  Men,  in  the  day 3
of  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and
of  Jesus  and  the  Apostles,  had  bless-
ings sealed  upon  them,  kingdoms,
thrones,  principalities  and  powers,
with  all  the  blessings  of  the  New  and
Everlasting  Covenant.  The  ques-
tion may  be  asked,  are  these  eternal
blessings  of  interest  to  us  ?  They
are,  or  should  be.  Are  these  bless-
ings worth  our  earthly  wealth,  whe-
ther we  have  little  or  much  ?  Is
salvation,  is  eternal  life  worth  a
yoke  of  cattle,  a  house,  a  hundred
acres  of  land,  or  anything  that  we


72  JOURNAL  OF

possess  here  in  the  flesh  ?  If  it  is,
we  certainly  ought  to  be  as  ready  to
permit  the  Lord  to  govern  and  con-
trol us  in  all  our  temporal  labors  as
we  are  in  our  spiritual  labors.

Again,  when  a  man  dies  he  can  not
take  his  cattle,  horses,  houses  or  lands
with  him  ;  he  goes  to  the  grave — the
resting  place  of  all  flesh.  No  man
escapes  it,  the  law  of  death  rests  upon
all.  In  Adam  all  die,  while  in  Christ
all  are  made  alive.  We  all  under-
stand that  death  has  passed  upon  all
men,  but  we  none  of  us  know  when
our  tarn  will  come,  though  we  know
it  will  not  be  a  great  while  before  we
shall  be  called  to  follow  the  genera-
tions who  have  preceded  us*  When
we  reflect  upon  these  things  I  think
we  all  should  be  willing  to  let  the
Lord  guide  us  in  temporal  matters.
In  the  Book  of  Mormon  we  learn
that  the  ancient  Nepbites,  who  dwelt
on  this  continent,  entered  into,  and
continued  in,  this  order  for  nearly
two  hundred  years.  They  were
wealthy  and  happy  and  the  Lord
blessed  thera.  They  had  no  poor
among  them.  They  were  united  in
heart  and  in  spirit,  and  the  blessings
of  the  Lord  rested  upon  them.  It  is
true  they  occupied  a  different  position
in  one  sense  to  what  we  do.  They
entered  into  this  order  just  after  the
Lord  had  brought  judgment  upon
the  whole  nation  on  account  of  their
wickedness,  and  many  of  the  wicked
had  been  destroyed :  their  cities  had
also  been  destroyed,  and  it  was  while
bumbled  by  these  judgments  that
they  entered  the  United  Order,  But
a  reign  of  peace  and  prosperity  rested
upon  them  and  continued  until  they
broke  the  order  and  began  to  go,
every  man  for  himself  and  the  devil
for  them  all,  then  utter  destruction
soon  overtook  them.

It  is  different  with  us.  We  are
entering  this  order  before  the  wicked
are  destroyed. We  commence  it  to


DISCOURSES.

prepare  us  for  the  great  events  which
are  at  the  door,  for  if  the  judgments
of  God  ever  were  at  the  door  of  any
generation  it  is  this.  The  whole
volume  of  Scripture  ooints  these
things  out  to  us  in  plain  language,
and  all  the  unbelief  of  the  inhabi-

,  tants  of  the  earth  will  not  alter  the
fact,  it  will  not  change  the  hand  of
God  nor  stay  his  judgments,  which
are  at  the  door  of  Great  Babylon.
She  will  come  in  remembrance  be*
fore  God,  and  he  will  hold  a  contro-
versy with  the  nations ;  his  sword  is
unsheathed  and  it  will  fall  on  Idiimea,
the  world,  and  who  can  stay  his  baud  ?

;  These  things  have  been  proclaimed

,  by  almost  every  Prophet  who  has
ever  spoken  since  the  world  began.
They  point  to  our  day,  and  their
words  must  have  their  fulfillment

Over  forty  years  the  Gospel  of
Christ  has  been  proclaimed  to  this
generation  and  to  the  whole  Christian
world  as  far  as  we  have  had  opportu-
nity. Light  has  come  into  the  world,

I  but  men  have  rejected  it  because
their  deeds  are  evil,  hence  the  judg-
ments of  God  will  rest  upon  the  na-
ttors  of  the  earth  in  fulfillment  of
his  word  through  the  Prophets.  The
Lord  has  called  upon  us  to  unite
together  and  take  hold  of  this  work,
and  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the  great
events  which  are  at  hand,  that  when
the  destroying  angels  go  forth  to
reap  the  earth,  beginning  at  the
sanctuary,  they  need  not  destroy  any
man  upon  whom  is  the  mark  set  by
the  writer  with  theinkhorn,  who  cried
and  mourned  because  of  the  abomi-
nations done  among  men.  The  Pro-
phet, in  seeing  the  vision  of  these
things  in  the  last  days,  saw  that  the
earth  was  reaped,  and  the  reapers
began  at  the  sanctuary,  and  the
wicked  were  cut  off  by  the  judg-
ments of  God.

The  world  now  do  not  believe  this
any  more  than  they  believed  in  the


UNION  IS  STRENGTH,  ETC


73


days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  and  ttiey  are
no  more  prepared  for  it,  and  they  are
growing  wickeder  and  wickeder  every
day  of  their  lives.  Wickedness  is
increasing,  for  the  devil  has  great
dominion  over  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men.  The  Lord  is  try-
ing to  direct  and  dictate  his  Saints,
and  I  feel  that  it  is  our  duty,  as  a
people,  to  unite  our  interests  toge-
ther, also  our  time,  talents,  labor,  and
all  that  we  are  stewards  over,  that,
as  men  who  have  faith  in  God,  we
may  be  prepared  for  those  things
which  await  us,  and  for  the  coming
ot  the  Son  of  Man.  We  are  observ-
ing the  signs  of  the  times,  and  we
c  m  readily  understand  the  necessity
of  entering  into  this  order.  1  think
w  e  can  all  see  this  if  we  enjoy  any
portion  of  the  spirit  of  our  religion
and  the  work  of  the  Lord,  which  we
profess  to  be  engaged  in.  I  can
see  everything  in  favor  but  nothing
against  the  United  Order.  These
teachings  are  of  the  Lord  j  the  ser-
vants of  God  have  been  moved  to
call  upon  the  people,  and  the  Lord
has  moved  upon  the  people,  and
their  hearts  are  being  touched  by  the
light  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they
are  entering  into  this  organization;
and  my  feeling  is  that  if  you  and  1,
who  profess  to  be  the  friends  of
God,  and  have  entered  into  a  cove-
nant with  hina,  withdraw  our  hearts
from  him  that  we  do  not  see  the  ne-
cessity of  uniting  ourselves  accord-
ing to  this  law  of  God,  we  shall


begin  to  dry  up,  and  what  little
life,  light,  or  spirit  we  have  will
leave  us  and  we  shall  go  down  and
we  shall  not  walk  in  the  light  of  the
Lord.  I  view  it  as  a  day  of  decision
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  throughout
the  whole  Church  and  kingdom  of
God,  and  we  shall  find  it  to  our  ad-
vantage to  decide  rightly,  and  to  walk
in  the  path  marked  out  for  us  by  the
servants  of  the  Lord.

I  feel  to  say  God  bless  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  the  honest  iu  heart
and  meek  of  the  earth  throughout
the  whole  world,  and  I  pray  that  the
nations  may  be  prepared  for  that
which  is  to  come,  for  as  God  lives
there  is  a  change  at  the  door,  and
what  the  ancient  patriarchs  and
Prophets  said  will  be  fulfilled  ;  and
if  I  were  to  express  my  feelings  as
the  spirit  reveals  to  me  it  would  be
a  good  deal  as  Daniel  said,  that  all
who  will  not  prepare  themselves
for  the  coming  of  Christ  must  get
out  of  the  way,  for  the  little  stone
that  was  cut  oat  of  tho  mountains
without  hands  will  shortly  grind
them  to  powder,  and  they  will  be  cast
away  as  the  chaff  of  the  summer
threshing  floor.  The  kingdom  of
God,  which  Daniel  saw,  the  Zion  of
God  in  embryo,  is  on  the  earth,  and
is  here  in  these  mountains  j  and  it
will  rise  and  rise,  until  it  is  clothed
with  the  glory  of  God.

May  God  help  us  to  prepare  for
his  coming  and  kingdom,  for  Christ's
,  sake.  Amen.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ERASTUS  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  General  Conference,  held  in  the  New
Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Friday  Morning,  May  8,  1874.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  UNITED  ORDER  OF  ZION  AFFORDS  THE  UTMOST  FREEDOM  AND
LIBERTY— BROTHERLY  LOVE  AND  GOODWILL  TO  MAN— TRUE  RICHES
RELATE  TO  ETERNITY — ESTABLISH  CONFIDENCE  IN  OUR  HEARTS  WITH
GOD,


The  Doited  Order  of  Zion,  pro-
posed for  our  consideration,  as  will
be  seen  from  the  remarks  that  have
been  made  by  former  speakers,  and
fmm  the  articles  which  were  read
yesterday  afternoon,  is  a  grand,
comprehensive,  co-operative  system,
designed  to  improve  us  who  enter
into  it,  financially,  socially,  morally
and  religiously  ;  it  will  aid  us,  as
Latter-day  Saints,  in  living  our
religion,  and  in  building  up  Zion,
and  help  us,  by  a  combined  eflbrt,
to  cultivate  every  virtue,  to  put
from  us  every  vice,  to  conduct  our-
selves and  our  children  sensibly,
and  to  dispense  with  childish  foh
lies;  it  will  enable  us  to  adopt  sen-
sible and  discreet  fashions  and  ha-
bits of  life  and  style  of  dress  and
manners  j  all  of  which  can  be  ef-
fected by  combined  efforts,  but  not
easily  in  our  individual  capacities.
For  what  man,  however  good  be
his  desires,  can  control  himself  and
his  family  in  their  habits  and  man-
ners  of  life  and  fashions,  without
the  aid  of  the  surrounding  commu-
nity ? What  sensible  man  can  hold


me  or  my  brethren  responsible,  in  all
respects,  eiher  for  ourselves  or  our
households,  unaided  by  the  com-
munity and  while  the  community
are  all  working  against  us  ?  But
when  the  community  learn  to  work
together,  and  are  agreed  in  a  com-
mon purpose,  what  is  it  that  they
can  not  accomplish  ?  Union  is
strength,  and  a  combination  of  labor
and  capital  will  give  us  power  at
home  and  abroad.  Our  former  co-
operative systems  in  this  Territory
have  accomplished  very  great  good
for  us,  but  they  have  been  only
combinations  ot  capital ;  the  pro-
posed system  embraces  labor  as  well
as  capital,  and  it  designs  to  mak#
the  interests  of  capital  and  labor
identical.  True,  there  is  one  feature
in  the  articles  read  yesterday  which
may  require  a  little  modification  ;  it
is  at  least  a  good  subject  for  mature
reflection  and  consi deration  before
their  final  adoption ;  and  these  arti-
cles are  presented  before  the  people
for  this  purpose.

The  combination  of  labor  and
capital  in  this  order  will  enable  us


THE  UNITED

to  promote  all  branches  of  industry
which,  shall  appear,  in  the  judgment
of  the  common  Order,  to  be  for  the
general  good.  At  present,  capital-
ists are  loth  to  engage  in  any  enter-
prise which  does  not  vouchsafe  to
them  profitable  returns.  It  has  been
said  by  some  among  us  that  the  best
argument  in  favor  of  co-operation,
was  large  dividends ;  but  this  is  an
argument  that  appeals  only  to  cupid-
ity and  avarice,  and  is  especially
acceptable  to  the  man  who  sees  no-
thing but  the  god  of  this  world  to
worship.  Large  dividends  corrupt
the  morals  of  a  community,  just  as
large  speculations  and  the  profit  re-
sulting therefrom  ;  for  however  de-
sirable in  a  financial  point  of  view  to
those  engaged  in  them,  their  tendency
is  always  to  intoxicate  the  brain,  and
lead  those  engaged  therein  to  further
follies,  until  they  overreach  and  ruin
themselves.  Moderation  is  as  valu-
able in  financial  affairs  as  in  social
ethics,  moderation  in  all  speculation
and  in  all  business,  fair  profits  for
labor,  fair  dividends  for  capital,  and
the  use  of  that  capital  and  labor  to
promote  the  greatest  good  of  the
greatest  number,  and  not  for  my  own
dear  sulf.  The  selfishness  that  is
limited  to  our  own  persons  sa-
vors of  the  lower  instincts  of  our
natures,  and  comes  not  from  above.

Objections  arise  in  the  minds  of
some.  "  Shall  we  not  by  entering
into  this  order,  surrender  our  man-
hood, our  personal  liberty,  and
those  rights  so  dear  to  every  human
being  ?"  I  answer,  no,  not  in  the
least.  *  We  do  no  more  than  what
all  people  do  in  the  formation  of
government,  of  every  kind,  or  asso-
ciations for  any  purpose,  whether
charitable,  religious  or  social.  All
organizations,  corporations,  and  busi-
ness firms  a^ree  to  surrender  certain
personal  privileges  in  order  to  secure
mutual advantages. All  govern-


ORDEK,  ETC,  75

ments,  societies,  corporations  and
firms  are  founded  upon  the  principle
of  mutual  concessions  to  secure  mu-
tual advantages.  Without  this  there
could  be  no  government,  no  power  to
arrest'and  punish  criminals  and  pro-
tect the  rights  of  the  citizen  and  the
sanctity  of  home.

The  Order  proposed  before  us  af-
fords  the  utmost  freedom  and  liberty.
All  things  shall  be  done  by  common
consent,  and  all  the  Branches  of  the
Order,  throughout  all  the  land,  are
to  be  organized  by  the  selection  of
the  wisest,  best  and  most  experienced
persona  in  their  midst,  to  form  their
councils,  and  to  direct  their  business
aflairs  and  the  labors  of  the  commu-
nity, for  the  best  possible  good  of  the
whole,  and  not  to  the  individual
advantage  of  a  few,  who  may  be
schemers  or  who  may  have  acquired
an  education  by  which  they  are
enabled  to  over-reach  their  fellow-
men  financially.

The  grand  principle  upon  which
the  Gospel  of  life  and  salvation  is
founded  and  on  which  Zion  is  to  bo
built,  is  brotherly  love  and  good
will  to  man.  Tins  was  the  theme
of  the  angels  of  God  in  announcing
the  birth  of  the  Savior.  Hitherto,
under  our  old  systems,  it  bus  beea
"  every  man  for  himself,  arid  the
devil  for  ns  all ;  "  but  the  principle
which  the  Lord  proposes  is  that  we
should  square  our  lives  by  a  higher
and  holier  one,  namely,  everyone  for
the  whole  and  God  for  us  all.
,  Will  this  Order  benefit  the  rich  ?
Yes,  it  will  afford  security  for  them-
selves and  families  and  their  capital.
It  is  a  mutual  insurance  institution.
Will  it  afford  security  and  protection
to  the  poor  and  the  honest  laborer  ?
Yes,  it  will  lay  a  foundation  for  wealth
and  comfort  for  them,  and  their  fam-
ilies after  them.  Is  it  a  free  school
system  ?  It  is  a  mutual  education
system, I  ree  ? Not  to  the  laiy,


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


vicious  and  wicked,  but  it  is  a  mutual
education  system  for  the  good  and
industrious,  who  abide  in  the  Order
and  fulfill  the  obligations  thereof*
Who  sli all  be  heirs  of  the  common
property  ?  Every  child  who  is  born
in  the  Order.  Heirs  to  the  whole  of
it  No,  nobody  will  be  heir  to  the
whole  of  it  To  what  portion  of  it
will  they  be  heirs  ?  Just  what  they
need.  Who  shall  be  the  judges  ?
Themselves,  if  they  judge  correct-
ly ;  and  if  they  do  not,  somebody
will  judge  more  correctly  for  them.
•'  Well,  shall  I  surrender  my  judg-
ment to  anybody  else  ?  "  Of  course,
you  will;  we  all  agree  to  that,  if  it
must  needs  be.  But  he  who  judges
for  himself  correctly  shall  not  be
judged,  but  he  who  is  unable  to
judge  himself,  but  covets  every-
thing that  he  sees,  and  wishes  to
scatter  and  destroy  what  others  are
seeking  to  accumulate  and  preserve,
must  have  a  bit  put  in  his  mouth  and
eornc,  who  are  more  sensible,  must
handle  the  reins.  This  is  no  agra-
rian  doctrine,  to  level  those  who  are
exalted,  down  to  the  mean  level  of
those  who  are  in  the  mire,  but  it  is
the  Godlike  doctrine  of  raising  tho^e
who  are  of  low  estate  and  placing
them  in  a  better  condition,  by
teaching  them  economy,  and  pru-
dence; it  is  for  the  strong  to  foster  I
and  bear  the  infirmities  of  the
weak,  for  those  who  possess  skill
and  ability  to  accumulate  and  pre-
serve this  world's  goods,  to  use  them
for  the  common  good,  and  not
merely  for  their  own  persons,  chil-
dren and  relatives,  so  as  to  exalt
themselves  in  pride  and  vanity  over
their  fcllow-rnen,  and  sink  themselves
to  ruin  by  worshiping  the  God  of
this  world.  This  is  beneath  the
character  of  those  who  profess  to  be
the  people  of  God.  We  have  done
that  long  enough,  but  the  word  of
God  to  us  is  to  change  our  front,  and


to  learn  to  love  our  neighbor  as  our-
selves and  so  cultivate  the  spirit  of
the  GospeL

As  to  the  minutoi  of  the  work-
ings of  the  various  Branches  of  this
Order,  the  details  of  the  business
and  the  relations  of  life,  one  meet-
ing of  this  kind  would  not  suffice
to  tell,  nor  could  the  people  com-
prehend it  if  we  were  able  to  tell  it;
but  it  will  be  revealed  to  us  as  we
pass  along,  line  upon  line,  precept
upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there
a  little,  and  everything  necessary
will  appear  in  its  time  and  place,
and  none  need  be  over-anxious  to
pass  over  the  bridge  before  they
reach  it  God  does  not  reveal  to  us
everything  at  once,  for  our  minds
are  not  prepared  to  comprehend  it
Like  children  we  must  have  ex-
perience as  we  pass  along.  One
tiling  is  sufficient  tor  us  to  under-
stand, and  that  is  that  this  Order
has  made  all  nations  and  peoples
who  have  entered  into  and  practiced
it  prosperous.

If  any  one  doubts  for  a  moment
the  success  and  final  triumph  of
these  principles,  that  doubt  is
founded  only  in  his  own  weakness,
and  in  the  weaknesses  of  his  fellow*
men  around  him,  and  the  selfish-
ness that  is  in  our  natures.  If  we
are  determined  to  make  it  a  success
there  is  no  power  beneath  the  hea-
vens that  can  make  it  a  failure.  If
we  engage  in  it  with  full  purpose
of  heart,  with  faith  towards  God,
and  seeking  to  cultivate  confidence
towards  one  another,  and  are  out-
spoken and  frank  iu  all  our  business
relations  and  intercourse  with  each
other,  and  do  all  things  by  common
consent,  with  a  just  and  honest  pur-
pose of  soul,  there  is  no  power  that
can  hinder  our  succeeding  in  our  un-
dertaking. But  if  we  are  determined
to  be  selfish,  and  seek  to  build  our-
selves up  on  the  weaknesses  of  our


I


TIL K  UNITED


ORDEI!,  ETC


fellows,  instead  of  building  up  the
kingdom  of  onr  God,  we  ought  to  go
down,  and  the  sooner  the  better.  For
the  last  dozen  years  many  of  this
people  have  been  goiDg  on  in  the  way
that  our  fathers  and  the  world  gene-
rally walk  in;  and  instead  of  building
up  Zion,  have  been  after  their  per*
sonal  and  individual  interests*  Forty
years  have  passed  over  us  as  a  people
during  which  we  have  been  trying  a
little  to  carry  on  the  work  of  God ;
bat  we  have  been  like  the  wary  trout
in  the  stream,  we  have  been  nib-
bling around  the  hook,  but  we  have
never  swallowed  the  bait  Now  the
hook  is  placed  before  as  naked,  and
we  are  simply  asked  the  question,
"  Will  you  take  it  or  not  ? "
"  What,  are  we  going  to  be  caught  ?"
Yes,  this  is  the  fear — "  We  are  going
to  be  caught  by  the  wily  fisherman
— we  are  going  to  be  enslaved.  Has
not  somebody  got  an  eye  on  our
property  ?  Does  not  somebody  wish
to  have  our  horses  and  carriages,
our  fine  houses,  our  substance,  and
the  property  we  have  gathered  to-
gether ?  "  Yes,  the  Lord  has  an  eye
on  all  this,  for  it  belongs  to  him.
Which  of  us  has  anything  that
does  not  belong  to  him  ?  Where
have  we  got  that  which  we  pos-
sess ?  Who  has  given  us  ability  to
accumulate  and  preserve  ?  To
whom  are  we  accountable  for  our
talents  and  gifts,  as  well  as  our
substance  ?  The  Lord  has  his  eye
upon  all  this.  Is  he  anxious  about
our  property  ?  No-  This  anxiety
is  in  onr  own  breasts,  and  if  we
have  any  idols  the  sooner  we  put
them  away  the  better.  The  Lord
cares  nothing  about  our  hou3oS  and
lands,  onr  goods  and  chattels,  our
gold,  silver  or  raiment,  for  all  upon
the  earth  belongs  to  him,  and  at  the
best  it  is  only  something  that  per-
ishes with  the  using.  He  requires  us
to  be  faithful  in  the  use  of  it,  for  he


has  said,  "  He  that  is  not  faithful
with  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who
shall  commit  to  him  the  true  riches  ?  "
True  riches  relate  to  eternity;  the
riches  that  relate  to  this  life  all  perish
with  the  using.  Our  houses,  horses,
carriages,  clothing,  and  our  gold  and
silver  perish  with  the  using,  together
with  our  tabernacles.  We  look  to
a  glorious  resurrection,  to  a  new
and  enduring  earth,  to  riches  that
are  immortal,  to  the  habitations
that  shall  not  pass  away,  to  a  glory
that  is  beyond  the  grave,  as  the
only  true  riches,  which  the  Gospel
enjoins  us  to  look  after.  "  Seek  ye
first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  its
righteousness,  and  all  things  else
shall  be  added  unto  you."  They
will  be  added  in  God's  own  way,
and  he  wishes  to  show  us  a  better
way,  and,  in  order  to  deal  with  us
as  a  kind  father  does  with  his  chil-
dren, he  proposes  to  enlighten  and
instruct  us,  and  he  will  impart  to
all  of  his  people  who  will  obey  his
voice  the  wisdom  that  is  necessary
to  make  them  the  richest  people  on
the  earth.  This  is  the  purpose  of
the  Lord  concerning  Zion  and  his
people  —  they  are  to  possess  this
world's  goods  in  abundance,  not  to
be  foolish  with  them  and  to  destroy
themselves  and  their  children,  but
that  they  may  preserve  themselves
and  their  children  from  falling  into
the  vices  and  follies  of  great  Baby-
lon. He  will  rise  up  in  their  midst
wise  counselors  to  provide  for  the
welfare  of  the  whole.

Will  our  trading  and  trafficking
with  the  outside  world  cease  ?  Of
course  not.  As  long  as  we  are  in
the  world,  gathering  Saints,  preach-
ing to  the  nations  and  building  up
Zion,  Zion  will  be  as  a  city  set  on
a  hill,  which  can  not  be  hid.  But
the  Lord  proposes  to  preserve  hia
people  as  far  as  possible  from  the
influences of Babylon, and  thm


7*  JOURNAL  OF

transactions  outside  of  the  Order
will  be  carried  on  through  th*
Council  of  the  Order;  agents  will  be
appointed  by  the  voice  of  the  Order,
that  what  we  bring  from  abroad
may  be  bought  from  first  hands  and
in  the  lowest  market,  that  we  may
derive  the  benefits  of  it,  instead  of
giving  the  profits  to  middlemen  who
fire  not  of  us ;  and  what  we  have  for
Bale  we  will  sell  in  the  best  markets,
and  so  enjoy  the  benefits  of  our  labor,
and  not  by  interior  competition  and
underbidding  and  underselling  each
other  "  scatter  our  ways  to  strang-
ers/* as  we  have  done  in  times  past.
By  this  combined  effort  we  shall  be
able  to  obtain  the  full  market  value
of  our  products — the  products  of
the  farm,  dairy,  orchard,  vineyard,
the  products  of  the  woolen  and
cotton  factory,  of  our  shoe  shops,
and  every  mechanical  appliance,  to
enable  us  to  procute  all  labor-saving
machinery,  by  our  combined  efforts,
which  men  in  their  individual  capa-
city are  not  able  to  do-  We  shall
also  be  enabled  to  start  new  enter-
prises, and  if  they  do  not  pay  at  first,
they  are  bound  to  pay  in  the  end,  if
they  are  necessary  adjuncts  to  tho
prosperity  of  society.  Our  common
fund  will  nourish  these  infant  estab-
lishments, instead  of  individuals  fail-
ing and  breaking  down  in  their
vain  efforts  to  build  op  new  enter-
prises in  a  new  country,  as  is  often  ]
the  case  now.  And  if  funds  are
needed  from  abroad  to  aid  us  in
any  general  enterprise,  we  shall
have  the  combined  property  and
credit  of  the  community  as  a  gua-
rantee to  capitalists  abroad,  instead
of  individuals  mortgaging  their  in-
heritances to  procure  money  to
carry  on  individual  "  wild  -  oat  ?
speculations  by  which  thousands
are  ruined*  If  they  were  operating
in  a  United  Order  and  would  submit
their  enterprises  to  the  candid  deci-


DISCOURSES,

sion  of  that  Order,  many  an  enter-
prising man  would  be  saved  from
foolish  ventures  and  from  ruin,  and
the  wise  and  prudent  would  receive
the  necessary  encouragement  and
financial  aid,  to  make  their  under-
takings a  success  for  the  benefit  of
the  whole*

Will  our  merchants  be  worse  off?
No,  our  merchants,  those  who  be-
long to  this  Order,  will  be  just  as
well  off  as  any  of  the  rest  of  the
Order.  They  will  work  where  they
are  appointed,  go  on  missions  when
called,  or  tan  leather,  or  make  hats
or  wooden  shoes,  if  they  are  better
adapted  for  that  than  for  standing
behind  the  counter;  but  if  thuy  are
best  suited  to  handle  the  products  of
the  people  and  to  carry  on  mutual
exchanges  among  ourselves  within
the  Order  and  with  branch  Orders
and  with  the  outside  world,  we  will
appoint  them  to  this  labor  and  ser-
vice, and  hold  them  to  an  account  of
their  stewardships,  and  the  results  of
their  transactions  go  into  the  com-
mon fund.  Then  they  will  not  be
stimulated  to  avarice,  overreaching,
lying  and  deception,  to  put  what  they
call  an  honest,  but  what  I  call  a  very
dishonest,  penny  into  their  pockets.
We  will  endeavor  thus,  by  a  union
of  effort,  to  take  away  temptations
from  our  midst  to  be  dishonest,  and
let  the  dishouest  share  the  fate  of
Ananias  and  Sapphira;  but  let  the
virtuous,  upright  and  good  be  frank
and  outspoken,  and  give  their  senti-
ments, the  witness  of  the  word  of
truth  in  their  hearts,  for  the  good  of
the  whole.  Those  who  lack  laziness
capacity  and  experience  will  labor
where  they  can  be  useful,  that  the
ability  of  all  may  be  available  for
the  general  good.

These  are  the  principles  embraced
in  the  instrument  we  heard  read
yesterday  afternoon.  As  to  these
littla.  personal  objections  that  arise


*


THE  UNITED

ill  the  mind,  we  shall  find  that  they
exist  only  in  the  imaginations  of  our
own  hearts,  arising  from  our  igno-
rance or  a  want  of  proper  under-
standing, and  partly  from  knowing
each  other  too  well,  and  compre-
hending each  other's  selfish ness  and
weaknesses;  because  of  this  we  are
afraid  to  trust  each  other,  The
remedy  for  this  is  for  every  one  to
set  himself  to  work  to  better  his  own
condition,  first  establishing  confidence
in  his  own  heart  between  himself
and  his  God,  and  so  deporting  him-
self that  he  can  command  the  respect
and  confidence  of  his  brethren  and
sisters.  Every  man  and  every  wo-
man should  set  themselves  to  do
this,  and  should  enter  into  this  Order
with  a  firm  determination  to  do  this,
Confidence  will  then  soon  he  re-
stored in  our  midst.  Then  every
man  and  every  woman  will  speak  the
honest  sentiments  of  their  hearts,
and  vote  as  they  feel  to  do  on  every
question,  in  the  selection  of  officers
and  in  the  transaction  of  all  business,
and  we  will  do  whatever  we  do  for
the  general  good,  atcording  to  the
light  that  it  in  us.  Such  a  people
are  bound  to  draw  down  from  the
heavens  above  the  revelations  of
light  and  truth ;  they  will  tap  the
clouds  from  above;  every  man  will
be  a  lightning  rod  to  draw  electricity
from  the  clouds,  in  other  words,  the
revelations  of  light  and  truth,  into
their  own  hearts  and  minds;  they
will  possess  a  combined  intelligence
that  will  accomplish  all  they  under-
take in  righteousness,  and  they  will
prevail  before  the  Lord  and  before
the  world,  and  will  command  the
respect  and  honor  of  the  virtuous
and  good,  at  home  and  abroad.  Those
who  refuse  to  engage  in  these  enter-
prises, and  to  eater  into  the  holy
Order,  will  become  the  unpopular
ones;  and  after  we  have  once  suc-
ceeded in  tbis  effort,  we  shall  marvel


ORDER,  ETC.  79

and  wonder  that  we  did  not  enter
into  it  before.

We  have  been  over  forty  years
trying  to  learn  these  lessons,  and  all
the  time  putting  them  off  to  a  future
day,  waiting  for  oar  children  to
carry  them  out;  but  we  shall  marvel
that  we  did  not  rise  up  and  carry
them  out  before-  Thousands  of
Saints  have  been  anxiously  waiting
and  might,  perhaps,  have  entered
into  this  before  now ;  but  we  have
been  continually  throwing  new  clay
into  the  machine,  drawing  new  mate-
rials from  abroad  and  raising  new
elements  at  home,  and  the  elements
brought  from  Babylon  has  brought
Babylon  with  it,  and  our  habits,  cus-
toms, notions  and  individuality  have
been  so  prominent,  that  we  could  not
see  the  benefits  of  mutual  concessions
to  secure  the  mutual  advantages  and
benefits  of  combined  labor.

I  am  aware  that  some  capitalists
will  object  to  the  idea  of  drawing
■  only  fifty  per  cent,  of  what  remains
to  their  credit,  if  they  should  con-
clude to  withdraw  from  the  Order.
Be  this  as  it  may,  I  can  see  no  prin-
ciple appertaining  to  the  Gospel  and
to  the  building  up  of  Zion,  no  prin-
ciple of  justice  between  man  and
man,  which  would  permit  the  capi-
talist to-day  to  bring  his  capital  into
the  Order  aud  surrender  it  to  the
custody  and  care  of  stout  hearts  and
strong  arms  to  protect  and  preserve
it  and  to  increase  it  by  the  erection
of  factories  and  machinery  and  build-
ings and  improvements,  by  the  com-
bined labor  of  the  people,  and  then
all  the  original  capital,  together  with
all  the  dividends,  to  be  left  at  the
disposal  of  the  few  capitalists  ori-
ginally composing  the  firm,  and  they
be  permitted,  fifty  years  hence,  to
get  up  and  walk  off  with  the  whole
of  it,  leaving  the  great  mass  of  the
community,  that  have  grown  up  from
infancy,  and  preserved  and  iniurtd


and  made  it  valuable,  without  any-
thing but  their  daily  wages,  which
they  have  eaten  up  as  they  passed
along  in  supporting  themselves  and
their  growing  families,  I  say  I  see
no  justice  in  allowing  a  few  capital-
ists to  draw  (he  whole  of  their  ori-
ginal deposits,  together  with  the
whole  of  the  dividends  and  profits
which  have  been  made  by  the  labor
of  the  whole  community,  and  I  con-
sider the  provision  which  limits  that
withdrawal  to  half  the  original
amount  and  half  the  dividends  both
wise  and  necessary,  It  is  a  question
in  my  mind  whether  we  should,  in
this  Order,  recognize  the  right  of
capital  as  above  that  of  labor.  This
is  a  point  which  will  bear  criticism.
But  I  will  pass  that  over  now.


There  are  many  objections  which
will  arise  in  the  minds  of  the  people.
The  enemy  will  endeavor  to  throw
every  possible  objection  before  our
minds;  but  the  more  we  scan  it,  and
the  more  we  seek  to  understand  the
principles  of  this  Order,  aa  set  before
u<3  in  this  instrument,  the  more  we
shall  see  the  wisdom  of  God  mani-
fest therein,  and  the  revelations  of
light  and  truth;  the  more  this  spirit
goes  abroad  among  the  people,  the
more  will  their  hearts  be  opened  and
prepared  to  receive  it  I  praise  God
that  he  has  moved  upon  the  heart  of
his  servant  Brigham  to  call  this  peo-
ple to  "  right  about  face,*'  that  they
may  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,  which
may  God  grant  we  may  be  able  to
do  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,  •

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  General  Conference,  held  in  the  New
Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  May  %  1874.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  BLESSINGS  OF  ETERNAL  LIFE  ATTAINED  AT  THE  SACRIFICE  OF  ALL
THINGS— TITHING— ECONOMY  NECESSARY  TO  SELF-SUSTENANCE — HOME
MANUFACTURE.


The  principles  which  we  have  pre-
sented before  us  in  the  plan  of  salva-
tion require  of  lis  an  effort,  for  we
are  told  that  if  we  would  have  the
blessings  of  exaltation,  we  must  con-
tinue unto  the  end ;  and,  in  the
Lectures  on  Faith,  contained  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  we
•re  informed  that  if  we  would  attain


to  the  blessings  of  eternal  life,  we  d
it  at  a  sacrifice  of  all  things.  The
principles  connected  with  this  la
call  upon  us  to  study  our  acts,  d
signs  and  intentions  in  life.

We  came  into  the  Church  in  di
ferent  parts  of  the  world,  under  th
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the  AI-
I  mighty,  and  we  gathered  here  by  the


THE  BLESSINGS  OF


ETERXAL  LIFE,  ETC,


81


aid  of  otir  brethren,  or  by  our  own
efforts.  We  came  to  this  land  to
learn  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  to
walk  in  his  paths;  but  we  fail  to
understand  or  appreciate!  altogether,  1
the  importance  of  a  strict  attention
to  our  faith,  and  we  become  negli-
gent and  thoughtless,  we  are  anxious  ,
to  obtain  wealth,  and  there  arises
among  ua  a  scramble,  a  kind  of  emu-
lation one  with  the  other,  to  obtain  a
greater  amount  of  this  world's  goods
than  our  neighbors.  On  this  account
many  of  us  neglect  to  pay  Jour  Tithing,
notwithstanding  we  are  very  anxious
to  receive  the  ordinances  which  are
administered  in  a  Temple.  The  real
time  to  pay  Tithing  is  when  we  have
the  means.  When  we  receive  monev.
merchandize  or  property,  if  we,  in
the  first  instance,  go  to  Bishop  Hunter
and  pay  the  tenth,  making  our  record
square  with  our  faith,  we  can  then
usa  the  remainder  with  a  conscience
void  of  offence,  and  we  shall  be  blessed
therein.

Men  may  commence  reasoning  on
this  subjectj  and  say,  "  We  will  figure
all  the  year,  and  if  at  (be  cud  of  it
we  find  that  we  have  saved  anything,
we  will  pay  some  Tithing;  but  if  we
do  not  save  anything,  we  think  the
Bishops  ought  to  pay  us  something."
The  spirit  which  prompts  this  feeling
is  entirely  wrong,  and  those  who
come  to  this  conclusion  will,  in  the
end,  feel  that  if  they  lose  a  crop  any
year  they  ought  to  keep  back  their
Tithing  for  several  years  after  to
make  up  that  loss;  but  the  fact  is  '
that  a  Tithing  of  what  we  receive
from  the  Lord  is  due  to  him,  and
the  residue  we  are  entitled  to  use
according  to  our  best  wisdom.  *The
Prophet  Malachi  says — "  Will  a  man
rob  God  ?  Yet  ye  have  robbed  me.  |
But  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we  robbed
thee?  In  tithes  and  offerings*  Ye
are  cursed  with  a  curse ;  for  yc  have
robbed  me,  even  this  whole  nation.

No.  6.


Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  store-
house,  that  there  may  be  meat  in
mine  house,  and  prove  me  now  here-
with, saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  if  I
will  not  i  *  pen  van  the  windows  of
heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,
that  there  shall  not  be  room  enough
to  receive  it."  Jesus  said,  lie  that
gives  a  cup  of  cold  water,  in  the
I  name  of  a  disciple,  to  one  of  these
little  ones,  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his
reward ;  but  in  order  to  havo  the
blessing  of  faith  connected  with  the
payment  of  Tithing,  it  is  necessary
to  realize  the  importance  of  the  com*
mandrnont  of  God  concerning  it,  for
no  man  can  attain  to  the  faith  neces-
sary to  salvation  and  eternal  life
without  a  sacrifice  of  all  things.
Now,  if  we  prefer  the  things  of  this
world  and  the, pleasures  of  life  to  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  we
can  have  our  own  choice,  but,  so  far
as  the  comparison  is  concerned,  "eye
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  yet
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of
man  to  conceive,"  the  glury  that  is
in  store  for  those  who  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  live  in  ac-
cordance with  his  requirements.  If
we  are  to  adopt  the  order  of  Zion
now,  it  should  become  in  our  hearts
a  cherished  desire,  an  earnest  and
determined  purpose  that,  in  all  our
actions,  we  will  seek  to  love  our
neighbor  as  ourselves,  that  we  will
labor  for  the  good  of  Zion,  and  put
away  selfishness,  corruption  and  falsa
principles.

We  have  been  instructed  upon  the
necessity  of  economy,  of  Jiving  wit bia
ourselves,  and  of  sustaining  ourselves
by  the  production  of  our  own  hands,
yet  we  earelessly  drift  in  another
direction.  How  often  we  have  been
counseled  to  avoid  getting  into  debt.
When  the  Order  of  Enoch  was  orga-
nized in  Rutland -the  brethren  were
,  commanded,  in  the  laws,  not  to  get
|  into  debt  to  thnr  enemies,  and  on  a

Vol.  XVII.


82


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES-


certain  occasion  it  was  commanded
that  we  should  make  it  our  object  to
pay  ail  our  debts  and  liabilities,  and
thai  we  should*  take  measures  tfo
avoid  the  necessity  oHim tiring  more.
One  of  the  earliest  things  I  can  re-
member in  my  boyhood  was  in
answer  to  the  question- — How  to  get
rich  ?  Tlie  answer  was — "  Live  on
half  your  income,  and  lite  a  great
while/1  We  know  how  easy  it  is  to
live  beyond  our  income,  and  to  go
on  the  credit  system.  Credit  is  a
shadow,  and  debt  ia  bondage,  and  I
advise  the  brethren  to  realize  that
the  balloon  system  of  credit  so  gene-
ra! in  out  country  and  among  our*
selves  is  dangerous  in  its  nature,  and
it  is  our  duty,  at  the  earliest  time  in
our  power,  to  close  up  all  our  liabili-
ties, pay  all  our  debts,  and  commence
living  as  we  go.  1  would  rather
.walk  the  streets  in  a  pair  of  wooden
soles  that  I  own  and  owe  no  man  for,
than  in  the  fi  nest  morocco  that  gome
merchant  was  presenting  a  bill  to  me
to  pay  for;  I  should,  in  my  estima-
tion, be  more  of  a  gentleman  and
more  of  an  independent  man  with
the  wooden  sole*  than  with  the  fine
boots,  and  I  would  advise  cur  bre-
thren, if  necessity  requires,  to  adopt
the  wooden  sole  leather  in  preference
to  being  in  debt.

I  visited  the  land  where  my  ances-
tors lived  in  America,  the  graves  of
'three  or  four  generations  of  them,
and  I  saw  on  the  old  farm,  still  occu-
pied by  some  distant  kinsmen,  a  shoe
shop.  Said  I — "What  are  you
doing  here  ?  "  Said  they — l*  Here
is  where  we  make  enr  money,  we  work
the  farm  in  the  summer,  and  in  the
winter  we  sit  down  here  and  earn
three  or  four  hundred  dollars  making
chocs,"  "Where  do  you  sell  them  ?"
11  We  make  them  for  some  houses  in
Salem  and  Lynn,  that  send  them  to
California  and  the  western  Terri  tories
and  sell  them  there/1  Now,  brethren,


think  of  this,  a  man  can  learn  to
make  a  shoe  very  quick  it  he  lias
any  ingenuity,  and  many  of  us  spend
our  time  ivi  partial  idleness  through
the  winter,  and  we  buy  our  shoes
from  manufacturers  in  the  East,
when  we  could  just  as  well  make
them  ourselves.  Another  bad  fea-
ture connected  with  imported  shoes
is,  that  when  we  put  them  on  and
walk  into  the  streets,  if  the  weather
is  wet,  our  feet  are  damp  very  quick,
and  1  believe,  as  a  matter  of  health
as  well  <as  economy,  thitt  if,  in  wet
weather,  we  were  to  adopt  the  wooden
sole,  it  would  save  our  children  from
much  sickness,  avid  a  gre:u  many  of
us  from  then  mutism,  sore  throats  and
coughs,  for  much  of  (he  imported
sole  leather  is  spongy,  and  thai  holds
the  water  and  makes  thefeetdamp
and  cold,  producing  sickness;  and  1
am  inclined  to  believe  the  statement
made  by  the  agricultural  societies  of
Europe,  that  the  use  of  wooden  soles
for  shoes  has  a  tendency  to  prevent  a
great  many  diseases  which  are  inci-
dent to  the  use  of  leather.  But  if  we
are  determined  to  wear  leather,  if  wo
set  ourselves  to  the  work  with  a  will,
we  can  produce  as  fine  leather  of
every  variety,  and  as  fine  shoes  and
almost  every  other  necessary  within
ourselves  as  we  import,  and  a  great
deal  better.  But  we  must  stop  send-
ing away  our  hides  by  the  car  load
and  must  tan  them  ourselves.  We
have  plenty  of  workmen  who  under-
stand the  business,  and  more  can  be
trained,  and  we  shall  then  not  be
compelled  to  ship  car-loads  of  hair
from  the  States  for  the  use  ol  our
plasterers,  in  mixing  the  lime  to
finish  our  walls.  This  is  true  poli-
tical economy.

When  I  went  to  St  George  last
fall,  I  had  a  very  good  pair  of  boots,
made  of  nice  States  sole  leather,  un-
der my  feet  The  soil  of  St  George
has  a  cold  mineral  in  it,  and  although


THE  BLESSINGS  OF  ETERNAL,  LIFE,  ETC,


85


it  may  be  dry  and  pleasant  to  walk
about,  a  man  wants  a  thick  sole  un-
der his  feet.  I  have  bled  a  great
many  years  from  a  rupture  of  the"
loft  lung  which  I  q;ot  while  preaching
in  the  streets  of  London  it>  1840,
and  I  have  suffered  a  great  deal  from
ft,  and  the  moment  I  would  go  out
to  walk  on  the  streets  of  St.  George,
a  shock,  almost  like  electricity,  would
strike,  through  the  spongy  leather
of  my  boot,  from  the  hollow  of  my
foot  to  this  lung  and  cause  a  pain
there.  I  went,  and  got  au  extra  sole
put  on  and  a  thickness  of  wax  cloth
put  between  the  soles,  and  in  this
way  I  wore,  all  winter,  a  boot  just
as  stiff  in  the  sole  as  a  clog,  and  had
no  rheumatism  and  escaped  cold.
This  set  me  to  reflecting- why  I  should
pay  two  dollars  for  those  soles,
brought  from  I  he  States,  when  a  piece
of  cottonwood  was  just  as  good,  and
would  answer  my  purpose  just  as
well*  Says  one — "  Why  not  wear
overshoes  P"  Who  wants  the  air
kept  from  t  buir  feet  by  wearing  a  coat
of  india-rubber,  which  sweats  them
and  makes  them  tender  ?  Tbey  keep
the  feet  dry,  it  is  true,  but  for  my
own  part  it  is  oot  convenient  to  wear
overshoe^  and  never  has  been,  and
on  this  accuimt  I  have  been  com-
pelled to  go  without.  1  also  observe
that  some  of  those  who  do  wear  them,
if  they  ace  not  very  careful^  or  if
they  should  happen  to  forget  and  step
out  into  the  wet  without  them  are
almost  sure  to  take  cold,  and  have  an
Attack  of  rheumatism,  especially  if
they  have  delicate  health.  But  with
as  throughout  the  Territory,  I  be-
lieve it  has  become  almost  a  financial
necessity  that  we  economize  our  shoe
bills.  Think  of  these  things  and
remember  that  it  id  within  our  power
to  manufacture  just  as  good  leather
and  as  much  of  it,  and  as  good  and
handsome  shoes  here  as  anywhere
elae3  only  let  us  take  the  time  neces-


sary to  do  it.

The  same  thing  may  be  said  in
relation  to  hats  and  clothing,  and  in
;  fact  about  nine  out  of  every  ten  arti-
cles that  we  import  One  car-load
of  black  walnut  brought  here  from
the  States,  and  paid  for  as  a  lower
class  of  freight,  will  probably  make
half  a  dozen  car  loads  of  furniture,
and  we  have  the  mechanics  who  know
how  to  make  it  up ;  and  if  we  lack
tht;  necessary  machinery  we  can  pro-
cure it.  If  we  please  we  can  also
bring  lumber  for  every  variety  of
furniture  that  we  want,  that  our
mountain  lumber  will  not  make.  The
same  rule  will  also  apply  to  wagons,
carriages  and  agricultural  imple-
ment 3.  This  course  will  be  much
better  than  wasting  ourselves  by  being
slaves  to  others,  and  paying  out
hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  for
furniture  of  a  not  very  durable  qual-
ity, and  other  articles  that  we  can
manufacture  ourselves.

With  me  this  is  a  very  important
item  of  religion,  and  it  is  time  for
us  to  cease  importing  shoes,  clothing,
wagons  and  so  many  other  things ,
and  that  we  manufacture  them  at
home.  This  will  reduce  instead  of
increasing  our  expenses.  When  a
man  buys  imported  articles  for  the
use  of  hU  family  he  helps  to  create
difficulties  for  himself,  for  by  and  by
the  bills  begin  to-  come,  'and  bonds
and  mortgages  and  all  this  sort  of
tiling  have  to  be  met,  and  then  he
begins  to  worry  and  stew  ;  but  if  he
used  ho  me*  made  products  the  means
is  kept  in  the  Territory,  and  he  has
a  chance  of  working  at  some  branch
of  trade  which  will  in  a  short  time
bring  it  back  to  him  again;  whereas
if  it  is  sent  out  of  the  Territory  it
helps  to  impoverish  all  Why  uot
retrench  ?  Says  one — "  I  want  to
wear  as  good  clothes  and  as  fine  shoes
as  anybody  else,  and  I  think  1  should
be  laughed  at  if  I  were  to  put  clogs


JOLllXAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


on."  Well,  if  they  did  laugh  they
coald  not  do  a  more  foolish  thing.
Why  not  fee!  proud  and  irtdupeudeiiL
of  our  own  high  character,  that  what
we  have  is  our  own,  and  we  are  slaves
to  nobody? That  is  my  feeling


nbout  It.  By  continually  importing
we  run  into  debt  and  cast  our  ways
to  strangers,  when  it  is  perfectly  in
our  power,  if  we  will  do  it,  to  he
independent,  comfortable  and  happy,
and  owe  no  man  anything.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GI


A.  SMI  Til,


Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  General  Co^fjsuekce,  held  is  tbte  New
Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Suxbay  Aftebkoon,  Mav  10,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans.)


EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN — THE  KECESSERf  OF  SUFFOUTINft  HOME  PUB-
UCAT10XS — LADIES*  KKLIEF  SOCIETIES— ST-  GEORGE  AND  SALT  LAKE
TEMPLES — SAB  BATH  SCHOOLS*


I  rise  on  the  present  occasion,  de-  j
siring  the  faith  and  prayer*  of  the
brethren  ami  sisters  that  I  may  be
able  to  address  them  by  ibe  majesty
of  the*  Spirit  of  the  Almighty.  When
we  come  before  the  Lord  to  partake  i
of  the  Sacrament,  in  memory  of  his
death  and  suflering,  we  witness  unto
him  that  wt*  do  remember  him,  thai
we  love  one  another,  and  that  we  are
willing  to  endeavor  tu  do  all  in  our
power  to  fallill  our  several  duties  on
the  earth.

One  of  the  first  and  most  responsi-
ble duties  that  rest  upon  us  is  the
education  j  training  and  cultivation  of
the  minds  of  our  children*  A  child
learns  from  us  by  our  examples,  the
actions  or  examples  of  the  parents
being  ever  remembered  by  the  child-
ren* A  pious  old  deacon  who  may,
by  the  way,  have  been  a  hypocrite,
and  had  two  half  bushel  measures,


one  to  buy,  and  the  other  to  seli
with,  may  be  very  sure  that  his
children  will  bo  dishonest.  So  it
may  be  with  our  children  if  we  do
not  act  before  them  as  hecometh
Saints ;  our  precepts  may  be  very
good,  but  their  effect  will  not  bo  very
powerful  unless  our  eiamples  cor-
respond.

"\Ye  are  more  or  less  cr.veless  as  to
the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  ;  and,
in  consequence  of  the  neglect  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  this  respect,  I
feel  anxious  to  stir  them  up  to  dili-
gence in  attending  mer*iiii£S  on  the
Sabbath  and  on  fast  days,  and  in
having  their  children  do  the  same.
L  have  visited  a  number  of  Sunday
schools,  and  I  have  found  that  there
was  a  good  deal  of  interest  manifested
in  them,  and  that  much  benefit  to
the  rising  generation  is  resulting
from  spending  a  couple  of  hours  on


EDUCATION  OF

the  Sabbath  in  giving  them  religious
or  such  other  instruction  as  may  be
necessary  to  cultivate  their  minds;
find,  I  wish  the  Bishops  and  pre*
eidiog  Elders,  on  their  return  to
their  several  Branches,  to  stir  up  the
minds  of  the  brethren  and  Bisters  to
the  necessity  of  encouraging  the 1
Sunday  schools,  that  they  may  be
interesting  and  agreeable  as  well  as
instructive.  Stir  up  the  parents,  j
too,  that  they  may  be  alive  and
awake  in  getting  the  children  ready
for  school  in  season,  and  that  punctu-
ality in  attendance  be  encouraged.
Endeavor  also  to  induce  parents  and
other  elder  members  of  families  who
can  do  so,  to  attend  the  Sunday
schools,  that  there  may  be  no  lack  of
teachers,  for  one  of  the  most  useful
callings  for  persons  who  can  possibly
or  reasonably  attend  to  it,  is  to  teach
the  youth  in  Sunday  schools*

t  also  advise  that  the  "  Juvenile
Instructor11  be  circulated  extensively
among  our  children.  It  is  a  work
calculated  to  inform  their  minds  on
the  principles  of  the  Gospel ;  from
its  pages  they  may  also  gain  a  know-
ledge of  the  history  of 'the  Church,
as  well  as  a  variety  of  other  useful
and  entertaining  information.  It  is
a  very  useful  publication,  and  the
benefits  it  is  capable  of  conferring  I
upon  our  young  people  are  numerous
and  great.  While  speaking  on  this
subject,  I  will  refer  to  other  papers
published  by  our  brethren  in  these
valleys — the  "  Deseret  News,"  the
"  Salt  Lake  Herald,"  "  Ogden  Junc-
tion," Ai  Provo  Times,"  and  the  "  Bea-
ver" and  Ji  St.  George  Enterprise,"
all  of  which  contain  a  good  deal  of
information  about  our  home  u Hairs
specially,  at  id  of  events  in  the  world
generally.  1  hope  that,  in  all  the
8 Hikes  of  Z;on,  the  people  will  mani-
fest a  spirit  and  determination  to
support  papers  which  are  published
■for  their  benefit. The  **  Deseret


CHILDREN,  ETC-  S5

News,"  daily,  semi-weekly,  and
weekly,  besides  the  general  news  of
the  world,  also  contains  many  of  the
sermons  of  President  Young  and
others  of  the  Church  authorities,  and
it  should  be  widely  circulated  in  all
the  settlements  of  the  Saints.  The
mails  now  run  to  all  parts  of  tho
Territory,  and  though  we  can  not
boast  a  great  deal  about  the  punctu-
ality of  some  of  them,  yet  in  nearly
every  settlement  a  mail  comes  along
once  in  a  while  bringing  tho  "  Deseret
News, 11  and  a  man  is  pretty  safe  on
the  main  thoroughfares  in  taking
the  weekly,  and  in  many  Jocallities
the  semi- weekly  or  daily  may  be
ventured  upon.

We  must  do  something  more  in
relation  to  printing.  The  Women's
Relief  Society  are  publishing  a  paper
Called  tho  "  Woman's  Exponent,"
which  is  a  very  ably  edited  sheet,
and  one  containing  a  great  deal  of
information*  I  am  surprised  that
nil  the  gentlemen  in  the  Territory  do
not  take  it.  I  invite  all  the  Elders,
Bishops  and  presiding  officers  in  the
Stakes  of  Zion,  on  their  return  home,
setting  the  example  themselves,  to
solicit  all  their  brethren,  and  especi-
ally the  sisters,  to  become  subsribcrs
to  this  little  sheet,  for  I  am  sure  that
they  will  be  interested  in  the  instruc-
tion and  information  it  contains*  I
will  say  that  we  expect  in  a  short
time,  through  the  patronage  of  the
brethren  and  sisters,  that  the  ladies
will  be  able  to  enlarge  this  paper,
and  to  extend  its  influence  far  and
wide.

It  has  been  my  privilege  to  maka
visits  to,  and  to  become  acquainted
with  the  Ladies'  Relitsf  Societies  in
many  of  the  settlements  in  the  Ter-
ritory, and  1  am  convinced  that  great
good  results  from  the  labors  of  these
organizations  ;  and  I  feel  certain  that
unless  the  ladies  take  hold  of  any
movement  designed  to  forward  the


86  JOURNAL  OF

work  of  the  Lord  in  the  last  days,  its
progress  will  be  tardy.  In  all  parts
of  the  world,  when  nations  are  at
war,  unless  the  women  take  an  in*
terest  in  the  matter,  the  war  goes  on
very  heavily.  I  am  of  the  opinion
that  in  the  next  war  between  Friii.ee
and  Germany,  the  French  will  get
the  best  of  it.  Not  but  what  I  have
a  great  opinion  of  German  skill,
energy  and  pluck,  but  I  am  satisfied,
from  traveling  and  personal  observa-
tion, that  the  women  of  Prance  are
thoroughly  aroused,  and  that  in  the
next  war  between  those  two  nations,
the  Prussians  will  have  to  fight  the
women  of  France,  and  thtm  France
will  be  likely  to  win.

I  aay  to  our  sisters  of  the  Relief
Societies,  be  encouraged,  meet  toge-
ther and  discuss  fill  questions  thut
are  calculated  to  interest  or  benefit
the  community,  as  you  have  the
ability ;  and  as  no  man  can  be  eleeted
to  office  id  this  Territory  without
the  vote  of  the  ladies,  make  your*
selves  thoroughly  acquainted,  not
only  with  the  politics  of  the  country,
but  with  every  prmcipte  of  local  gov-
ernment that  may  bo  advanced,  and
then,  whatever  is  calculated  to  bene-
fit the  people  in  their  privnte  or
domestic  circles,  you  will  bo  enabled
to  vote  intelligently,  and  to  carry  it
through  without  difficulty.

We  spend  a  great  deal  of  money  in
following  vain  fashions,  and  in  pur-
chasing a  great  many  articles  that
are  useless*  These  societies,  if  they
choose,  can  make  their  own  fashions,
and  they  can  make  them  according
to  wisdom, and  so  as  to  promote  health;
a  great  many  of  the  fashions  of  the
world  are  calculated  to  destroy  health.
A  buudred  questions  connected  with
domestic  economy  —  housekeeping,
cooking,  making  Six  ad  and  kindred
subjects,  that  are  of  importance  to
the  stomach,  health  and  longevity  of
every  man  and  woman  in  the  Terri-


DISCOURSES.

tory  may  be  properly  discussed  in
these  Relief  Societies,  and  useful
information  disseminated.  A  great
many  of  the  women  in  these  valleys
have  not  bad  good  opportunities  to
become  acquainted  with  the  art  of
cooking,  and  that  is  an  art
which  has  something  to  do  with  every
person's  happiness.  The  example  of
the  ladies,  and  the  influence  which
they  exercise,  have  a  tendency,  above
all  things  else,  to  maintain,  create,
and  preserve  good  morals.  Men  are
apt  to  behave  themselves  in  the  so-
ciety of  women,  and  if  women  act
wisely  and  prudently  in  guiding  and
controlling  the  course  and  conduct  of
each  other,  they  will  be  able,  to  a
great  extent,  to  guide,  control,  and
regulate  the  mom  Is  and  the  conduct
of  men*  We  think,  however,  that
the  policy  of  the  Christian  world,  in
throwing  the  responsibility,  so  far  as
morality  is  concerned,  entirely  upon
the  heads  of  women,  is  a  blunder;
the  men  should  he  held  responsible
for  their  own  acts,  and  when  they  are
guilty  of  that  which  is  corrupt,  low
or  degrading,  they  should  be  looked
upon  as  transgressors  and  cast  aside
until,  by  repentance  and  uprightness,
they  prove  that  they  are  worthy  of
confidence.

1  have  been,  from  the  commence-
ment of  the  formation  of  this  Terri-
tory, more  or  less  identified  with  its
polities  I  was  a  member  of  the  Le-
gislature of  Deserett  before  Utah
Territory  was  organised,  and  while  it
was  a  provisional  government.  I
was  a  member  of  the  first  Legislature
of  the  Territory,  and  served  twenty
years.  During  that  period  I  was
brought  in  contact  with  five  different
sets  of  federal  officers,  and  I  had  a
pretty  good  knowledge  of  some  forty-
eight  or  forty-nine  judges.  They
were  men  sent  here,  from  different
parte  of  the  country ,  to  administer
the  law. They  had  a  general  know-


EDUCATION  Or  CHILDREN,  ETC


i>7


ledge  of  .politics,  and  of  the  law  aa
administered  in  their  own  immediate
localities,  But  few  of  thorn  were  of
high  minds  and  noble  sentiments,
and  many  of  them  were  incapable  of
occupying,  with  honor,  the  hi^b
positions  they  were  selected  to  fill.
Our  people  here  in  these  monn tains
did  not  take  much  pains  to  acquaint
themselves  with  the  politics  of  the
conn  try*  We  had  been  five  times
robbed  of  all  wo  posaescd.  Oar
leaders  hud  been  murdered  and  we
had  been  expatriated  arid  driven  from
the  United  States  into  these  valleys,
theu  a  portion  of  the  republic  of
Mexico,  but  afterwards  acquired  by
the  United  States.  We  were  a  great
way  J  ram  any  other  settlement.  It
took  a  month,  generally,  to  get  a
mail,  and  for  about  twelve  years  we
had  about  seven  mails  a  year ;  and  in
the  latter  part  of  October  or  about
the  brat  of  November,  portions  of
the  mails  for  the  winter  before  would
he  brought  in  here  with  ox  teams.
This  was  our  condition  in  early  days.
We  did  not  pay  a  great  deal  of  at-
tentioQ  to  politics;  we  were  not  very
much  divided  and  hence  we  cared
very  little  about  our  elections,  and
did  not  pay  much  attention  to  them ;
and  a  good  many  who  came  from
abroad  were  so  careless  that  they  did
not  obtain  their  naturalization  papers,
although,  from  time  to  time,  we
advised  them  to  attend  to  this  mat-
ter; and  I  now  call  upon  the  Bish-
ops and  presiding  Elders,  when  they
return  home,  to  recommend  the
foreign  brethren  who  are  not  natu-
ralized to  see  to  this ;  and  in  all
localities  or  dish  iota  which  are  fa-
vored with  judges  who  have  more
respect  for  the  law  than  for  religious
bigotry,  let  the  brethren  take  all
pains  to  get  naturalized,  that  they
may  have  the  benefits  of  the  laws  of
our  country,  and  be  permitted  to  per-
form any  duty  "required  thereby,  and


be  faithful  to  do  so  in  all  cases ;  and
never  let  an  election  go  byT  or  any
other  occasion  in  which  it  is  impor-
tant for  us  to  take  part,  without  pay-
ing attention  to  it.  This  advice  is
for  the  ladies  as  well  as  for  the  gen-
tlemen ,  for  every  lady  of  twenty*
one  years  of  age,  who  is  a  citizen
of  the  United  States,  or  whose  hus-
band or  father  is  a  citizen  of  the
United  States,  has  a  right,  under
the  laws  of  Utah  to  vote;  and  no
one  need  hope  to  hold  office  in  Utah
if  the  ladies  say  no.

I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the
Saint  George  Temple.  We  have  got
the  foundation  of  that  Temple  np  to
the  water  table,  about  eighteen  feet
from  the  ground,  and  &  very  nice
foundation  it  is.  The  building  is
about  one  hundred  and  forty-one  feet
long  and  about  ninety-three  feet  wide,
aud  when  the  walls  are  up  they  will  be
about  ninety  feet  high.  We  have  a
very  flue  draught  and  design*  The
building  Is  in  a  nice  locality  and  in  a
very  fine  climate,  where,  all  winter,
and  in  fact  the  whole  year,  there  is
almost  perpetual  spring  and  summer
weather;  and  when  the  Temple  is
completed  there  will  be  an  oppor-
tunity to  go  there  and  spend  the
winter  and  attend  to  religious  ordi-
nances or  enjoy  yourselves;  and  if
you  want  to  go  t tiers  through  the
summer  you  can  eat  as  delicious  fruits
as  ever  grew  out  of  the  earth  in  any
country  I  believe.  As  far  as  i  have
traveled  I  have  never  seen  anything
in  the  way  of  fruit  that  1  thought
was  superior  to  that  which  is  pro-
duced in  St,  George,  Wo  invite  a
hundred  and  fifty  of  the  brethren  to
volunteer  to  go  down  there  this  sum*
mer  to  put  up  this  building,  and  to
find  themselves  while  they  are  doing
it.  We  shall  call  upon  the  Bishops,
presiding  Elders,  teachers  aud  others
from  the  various  stakes  of  Zion  to
take  this  matter  in  hand  when  they


8S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


reach  home,  and  find  brethren,  if
they  can,  who  are  willing  to  go  and
do  this  work,  so  that  by  Christmas
the  build irjg  may  bo  ready  fur  the
roof,  that  we  may,  in  a  very  short
time,  have  the  font  dedicated  and  ihc
ordinances  of  the  holy  Priesthood
performed  in  that  place.  AVe  a o peal
to  our  brethren  and  sisters  in  behalf
of  this  St.  George  Temple.  Onr
brethren  in  thai  vicinity  lire  doing  ill]
they  can  to  push  for  waul  tin:  work,
bnt  five  or  six  months'  help  from  ft
hundred  or  a  htmdred  and  fifty  men
is  very  desirable.

1  will  invite  all  the  brethren  and
sisters  from  the  settlements  who  may
visit  Salt.  Lake  City  this  summer  to
Step  on  to  the  Temple  Block  and  see
what  we  are  doing;  for  the  Temple
here.  Sue  the  beautiful  stones  that
have  been  quarried  in  1  ho  Cottonwood
and  brought  here,  every  one  cut  and
numbered  for  its  place*  And  it  is
the  duty  of  the  brethren  to  call  upon
the  Lord  for  his  blessing  upon  ihc
work  and  upon  the  workmen,  1  also
call  upon  the  Bishops  and  teachers  in
alt  the  stakes  of  Zion,  to  be  on  band
and  to  see  that,  in  the  building  of  this
Temple,  in  the  centre  stake  of  Ziou
in  the  mountains,  we  arc  not  under
the  necessity  of  involving  ourselves
in  disagreeable  liabilities  in  order  tu
move  the  work  tut  ward.  For  the
last  year  we  have  hod  from  sixty  to
ninety  men  engaged  in  catling  stone
on  this  block,  and  a  mi  ruber  of  other
mechanics  to  supply  them  with  tools
and  Other  Eecesr-aries;  last  summer
we  had  n  considerable  force  of  men
laying  these  scones  on  the  wrdU.  In
Little  Cottonwood  canyon  we  have
con  I  i  mmlly  at  work  a  force  of  from
twenty-five  to  sixty  men  quart  ying
granite,  and  every  day,  Sundays  ex-
cepted, two  or  three  car  loads  of  this
granite,  from  ten  to  twelve  tons  each
load,  are  brought  from  the  quarry
to  the  Temple  Block. It  is  really  a


delightful  thing,  to  a  person  who  has
never  seen  it,  to  go  on  to  the  block
and  see  the  skillful  manner  in  which
our  architects  and  workmen  pick  up
these  big  stones  and  pass  them  all
uwr  the  building,  and  lay  them  in
their  place  to  a  hair's  breadth.  It
shows  what  can  be  done  with  a  little
management,  skill  and  ingenuity.

We  earnestly  appeal  to  all  Saints,
Tithe  payers,  to  donate  liberally  and
punctually  for  the  prosecution  of  this
work*  While  we  employ  so  many
skilled  mechanics  and  other  laborers,
their  families  constantly  require  a
supply  of  not  only  homo  products,
but  of  money,  and  merchandize
which  costs  money,  and  unless  the
brc:hreu  furnish  the  means  to  supply
these  necessities,  we  shall  be  obliged
to  dismiss  mauyof  the  workmen,  Wq
have  id  ready  iucurred  liabilities
which  press  upon  us,  and  we  call
upon  the  brethren  to  supply  the
means  necessary  to  enable  us  to
maintain  our  credit  and  continue  the
work.

It  is  the  design  of  the  teachers
and  superintendents  ofSundtir  schools,
to  £et  up  a  chiMreiVg  musical  jubilee.
So:r:e«o:i:£s  have  been  composed,  and
they  arc  being  learned  and  pi  act  iced,
and  they  calculate  to  assemble  some
eight  or  ten  thousand  children  in  this
building  and  have  a  general  time  of
«rand  musical  song,  The  cu-er  prise
is  a  very  Iaud:tble  one.  We  do  not
know  when  the  festival  will  take
place*  but  brother  (ioddard,  the  As-
sistant Superintendent,  and  a  number
of  others  who  are  interested  in  Sun-
day schools  are  doing  all  thay  can,
and  we  ask  the  co-operation  of  the
Bishops,  presidents,  teachers  and
brethren  and  sisters  in  the  several
Stakes  of  Zion  to  take  a  part  in  it,
and  make  it  one  of  the  finest  festivals
of  tli e  kind  ever  held.  The  progress
of  our  Sabbath  schools  will  bo  en-
comMge.l, and the  elevating  ten*


EDUCATION  OF  i

dency  of  music  may  be  appreciated
by  itl I  who  participate  therein.  AW
ask  our  brethren  to  ant  wisely  and
prudently  in  carrying  this  matter  oat,
that  it  may  be  done  in  such  a  maimer
as  shall  he  satisfactory ;  and  if  a  little
means  is  necessary  on  the  part  of
parents  or  friends  let  it  not  be  want- '
ing+  In  the  course  of  my  year's  travel
I  visited  schools  in  various  parts  of
the  world,  but  I  found  none  superior  (
to  our  own.  I  think  that  oars  com-
pare favorably  with  them,  and  in
many  respects  they  are  superior  to
most  that  I  visited,  and  I  hope  that
a  spirit  to  encourage  them  will  be
developed.

I  wish  to  see  the  common  school
system  encouraged  as  far  as  possible.
The  brethren  in  many  settlements
are  forming  Branches  of  the  United
Order,  and  as  soon  as  they  get  fairly
to  work  they  will  be  able  to  introduce  |
improved  systems  of  teaching.  I ;
uotice,  in  visiting  our  settlements,
more  or  less  carelessness  in  relation
to  schools.  Very  little  pains  will  make
a  school- room  quite  comfortable,  and
I  wish  to  stir  up  parents  to  the  im-
portance of  visiting  the  schools  and
seeing  what  their  children  are  doing,
and  what  the  teachers  are  doing,  2nd
out  whether  the  little  fellows  are  sit-
ting on  comfortable  seats;  whether
they  put  a  tit  11  boy  on  a  low  seat,  ov
a  boy  with  short  legs,  on  a  hitrh  seat,
making  him  humpbacked.  The  bap-
pini_^  and  prosperity  of  the  whole  life  '
of  a  chiH  may  be  a  good  deal  im-
paired u  bile  attending  scliool  through
a  block  bead  of  a  teacher  not  knowing
enough  to  get  a  saw  and  sawing  the
legs  of  the  seats  his  pupils  sit  upon,
so  as  to  make  them  comfortable.  It
is  the  duty  of  the  people  to  look  after
the  comfort  of  their  children  while  at
school,  and  also  to  procure  proper
books  fir  them ;  and  to  see  that  the
schools  are  provided  with  fuel,  that
in  the  cold  weather  they  may  be  warm


fHILDEEN,  ETC-  8$

and  comfortable.  In  a  new  conn  try
I  know  there  are  a  good  many  dis-
advantages to  contend  with,  but  I  fael
anxious  that  nothing,  within  our
power  to  promote  the  welfare  of  our
children,  should  be  neglected.  There
ts  no  Deed,  however,  to  send  to  the
States  to  buy  school  benches,  There
is  plenty  of  timber  in  these  moun-
tains, and  a  few  days'  work  proper ly
applied  will  scat  any  school  room
perfectly  comfortable,  for  we  can
make  just  as  good  benches  in  this
country  as  anywhere  eke,  it  is  only  a
question  of  time  aud  attention,  Of
course  if  we  can  do  no  better,  send
and  buy ;  but  in  order  that  we  may
have  means  to  buy  what  we  are  forced
to  buy,  it  is  necessary  that  we  exer-
cise prudence  and  economy  and  sup-
ply our  own  wants  as  far  a 3  possible.
The  wholesale  Co-operative  Store
here  imports  probably  five  million
dollars5  worth  of  goods  per  annum.
One  half  of  these  goods  could  be
produced  at  home  with  our  own  Ja^
bor;  it  is  only  a  question  of  time
and  management  to  do  it-  If  we
were  to  produce  one-half  of  these
goods  we  should  be  in  easy  circum-
stances all  the  time,  and  should  have
plenty  to  buy  everything  we  wanted
to  buy.  We  could  also  produce  many
things  to  sell ;  but  by  purchasing,  in
such  immense  quantities,  articles  that
we  can  make  ourselves,  we  impoverish
ourselves  all  the  time,  bunco  we  ad-
vise our  brethren  and  sistors,  in  all
their  councils,  meetings,  orders,  as-
sociations, and  relief  aud  retrench-
ment societies,  to  take  into  account
every  question  where  economy  can  be
exercised  and  prudence  observed,  aud
where  We  can  save  a  dollar  instead  of
Spending  one  let  us  do  it,  for  hy  tak-
ing this  course  we  can  lay  a  founda-
tion for  permanent  con* fort  at  home,
and  this  will  prevent  us  from  being
dependent  upon  abroad.  This  is  a
part  of  my  religion  aud  this  I  shall


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE


continue  to  preach.

In  relation  to  this  United  Order,  I
will  say  to  those  who  are  entering  it,
if  questions  arise  that  trouble  you
and  that  you  wish  to  have  explained  ;
or  if  anything  should  arise  upon
which  you  wish  for  advice  or  coun-
lel,  if  you  will  write  your  queries  and
send  them  along  here  to  the  Presi-
dent's office,  we  will  answer  them,
and  show  you  that  the  whole  affair
can  be  carried  out  with  perfect  ease.
Only  let  this  people  act  with  one
heart  and  qne  mind,  as  the  Nephites
did,  and  success  is  certain;  and  in  a
short  time  a  great  many  will  wonder,
as  some  in  the  southern  settlements
have  already  expressed  it,  "Why
did  we  not  unite  before  ? 11  I  feel
satisfied  that  the  spirit  which  bos
been  manifested  here  and  elsewhere
on  this  subject,  is  the  same  spirit
which  bore  testimony  to  you,  when
you  went  down  into  the  waters  of
baptism,  that  this  was  the  work  of


God;  and  when  we  have  this  spirit
in  our  hearts  we  can  move  forward
with  joy  and  thanksgiving,  and  can
accomplish  that  which  is  required  of
us.

I  wish  to  return  my  thanks  to  our
musicians— those  who  direct  and  all
who  have  participated  in  the  musical
exercises  of  oar  Conference.  I  have
enjoyed  them,  I  have  visited  many
parts  of  the  world,  and  have  been  to
gee  their  organs  and  to  hear  their
music ;  but  I  have  heard  none  with
which  I  ara  so  wwll  pleased  ;ts  with
our  own.  There  is  something  sweet
and  lovely  here,  and  I  feel  that  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  has  warmed  the
hearts  and  inspired  the  souls  of  those
who  have  made  melody  for  us  during
the  Conference,  I  pray  that  God
may  bless  them,  that  be  may  eulighfcen
their  minds,  enliven  their  souls,  and
make  their  songs  sougs  of  glory  for
ever.  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sukjjay

Afternoon,  May  1874,


(Reported  %by  David  W.  Evans.)


GENERAL  DONIFHAS'S  CONNECTION  WITH  THE  EAIil.Y  HISTORY  UF  TEii
CHU RCH — PERSECUTIONS S  OF  THE  S AI K IS — MORMON  BATTALION— HARD-
SHIPS EXPERIENCED  IN  THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  UTAH — PLURALITY  OF
WIVES,


About  two  days  since  the  daily
papers  announced  the  arrival,  in  this
city,  of  General  A,  W.  Doniphan,  of


Liberty,  Clay  Comity,  Missouri.
This  circumstance  brought  to  my
mind  incidents  thirty-six  years  passed


EARLY  lU STORY  OF  THE  CHURCH.


31


by,  to  which  I  shall  briefly  refer  on
the  present  occasion.  There  are  few
men  whoso  names  have  been  identi-
fied with  the  history  of  our  Church,
with  more  pleasant  feelings  to  its
members,  than  General  Doniphan.
Daring  a  long  career  of  persecution,
abase  and  oppression  characters  occa-
sionally present  themselves  like  slurs
of  the  tirsfc  magnitude  in  defence  of
right,  who  are  willing,  notwithstand-
ing; the  unpopularity  that  may  attach
to  it,  to  stand  np  and  protest  against
mob  violence,  murder,  abuse,  or  the
destruction  of  property  and  constitu-
tional rights,  even  if  the  parties  who
are  being  thus  abused,  robbed,  mur-
dered or  trampled  under  foot  have
the  unpopular  name  of  \  Mormons*"
The  incident  of  General  Doniphan
exercising  his  influence  by  which
means  he  prevented  the  murder  of
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith  and  some
other  Elders,  who  had  hud  u  mock
trial  by  court-martial,  in  the  State
of  Missouri,  some  thirty-six  years
ago,  is  familiar  to  the  minds  of  all
the  LaUer-dav  Saints  who  are  ac-
qnaintcd  with  the  history  of  that
period,  and  there  is  one  man  in  the
Territory  who  was  present  on  the
occasion,  that  is  Timothy  B.  Foote,
of  Nephi,  who  witnessed  the  court,
martial.  It  was  represented  to  Jo-
seph Smith,  by  a  man  known  among
our  people  as  Colonel  H inkle,  that
Major  General  Lucas  and  certain
other  parties  wished  to  have  an  in-
terview with  him*  In  the  vicinity  of
the  town  of  Far  West  there  was  at
thai  time  a  large  body  of  armed  men,
under  the  orders  of  the  Governor
of  Missouri,  but  temporarily  under
the  command  of  General  Lucas,  of
Jackson  County,  Mo.,  who  was  the
ranking  officer*  It  is  understood  by
us  that  H inkle  had  deceived  Joseph
Smith  and  the  brethren  with  the  idea
that  the  interview  was  to  be  of  a
peaceful  and  consul  tor y  character ;


but  when  they  came,  as  they  sup-
posed, to  hold  the  interview,  they
were  taken  prisoners,  tried  by  a
court-martial  and  sentenced  to  bo
shot;  the  execution,  however,  was
prevented  by  the  protest  of  General
Doniphan,  who,  at  that  time,  was
commander  of  a  brigade,  composed,
I  believe,  of  the  militia  of  the  County
of  Clay,  and  who  declared  that  the
execution  of  that  sentence  would  be
coldblooded  murder.

It  was  not  long  after  this  that
General  Clark,  who  had  been  ap-
pointed by  the  Governor  to  this  com-
mand, arrived  and  took  command  of
this  militia.  General  Atchison  was
the  ranking  officer,  being  the  general
of  a  division  on  the  north  side  of  the
river,  commanding  a  division  con-
taining, I  think,  six  counties,  but  he
was  superseded  by  the  appointment
of  Clark.  If  I  remember  right  there
were  as  many  as  thirteen  thousand
men  ordered  out,  and  there  wet e  pro-
bably five  or  six  thousand  collected
together  on  the  ground,  their  object
being  to  expel  the  Latter* day  Saints
from  the  State  of  Missouri.

The  number  of  Latter-day  Saints
at  that  period  is  not  accurately
known,  but  there  were,  I  suppose,  in
the  neighborhood  of  ten  or  twelve
thousand.  The  settlements  had  been
rapidly  formed.  They  had  occupied
the  County  of  Caldwell  when  there
were  only  seven  families  in  it,  A
party  of  Elders  visited  Caldwell
County  to  look  for  a  location.  On
their  arrival  they  fell  iu  with  these
seven  families,  who  were  living  in  log
cabins  and  had  made  very  little  im-
provements. They  said  the  country
was  a  worthless,  naked  prairie,  there
was  very  little  timber  in  it,  and,  their
business  being  bee-hunting,  they  had
huuted  all  the  bees  out  of  the  wooers,
and  they  wanted  to  go  somewhere  else,
as  they  learned  there  was  better  bee-
hunting  and  more  honey  to  be  ob-


92


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


i  tined  up  Grand  River  ;  and  within
an  hour  after  the  arrival  of  the  first
of  these  Elders,  every  one  of  the
leven  men  had  sold  their  places  and
received  their  pay,  congratulating
themselves  on  their  good  fortune  in
leaving  a  country  where  the  taking
of  wild  honey  had  ceased  to  tje  a  pay-
ing business,  and  there  was  not  si
family,  other  than  Latter  -  day  Saints,
residing  in  the  county.  A  good  many
of  our  people  were  settled  in  liny
County,  a  few  in  Clay,  and  so  in  e  in
Livingstone,  Davies,  Clinton  aud
Carroll  1  understand  that  three
hundred  and  eighteen  thousand  dol-
lars had  been  paid  to  the  United
States  for  lands  in  the  State  of  Mis-
souri, the  titles  of  which  were  held
by  L liter- day  Saints,  The  Order  of
Governor  Hoggs  exterminated  these
people  from  the  State,  To  be  sure
they  owned  their  lands,  and  they  were
industrious  and  law-abiding.  They
were  increasing  rapidly  and  making
Tast  improvements.  The  city  of  Far
West  bad  several  hundred  houses,
and  other  towns  and  villages  were
springing  up.  United  firms  were
beiijg  organized,  which  were  put  dug
into  cultivation  very  extensive  tracts
of  land  in  addition  to  the  large
amount  ulready  brought  under  im-
provement

In  consequence  of  the  influence
exerted  by  Genera)  Doniphtm,  General
Luchs  hesitated  to  execute  the  sen-
tence of  Ins  court- martial,  and  he
delivered  Joseph  Smith  and  his
associates  into  the  charge  of  General
Moses  Wilson,  who  was  instructed  to
take  them  to  Jaokson  County  aud
there  put  them  to  death.  1  heard
General  Wilson,  some  years  after,
speaking  of  this  circumstance.  He
was  telling  some  gentlemen  about
having  Joseph  Smith  a  pi-i^oner  in
chains  in  his  possession,  and  s:iid
lie — "He  was  a  very  remarkable
mum I  carried  him  into  my  house.


a  prisoner  in  chains  and  in  less  than
two  hours  my  wife  loved  him.  better
(lain  she  did  me,"  At  any  rate  Mrs.
Wilson  became  deeply  interested  in
preserving  the  life  of  Joseph  Smith
and  the  other  prisoners,  and  this  in*
terest  on  her  part,  which  probably
arose  from  a  spirit  of  humanity,  did
not  end  with  that  circumstance,  for,  a
number  of  yea r s  after w  a  rd * ,  aft  er  the
family  had  moved  to  Texas,  General
Wilson  became  interested  in  raising
a  mob  to  do  violence  to  some  of  the
Latter-day  Saint  Elders  who  were
going  to  preach  in  the  neigborhood,
and  this  coming  to  the  ears  of  Mrs,
Wilson,  although  then  an  aged  lady,
she  mounted  her  horse  and  rode
thirty  miles  to  give  the  Elders  the
information.  Year  before  last  when
J  was  in  California,  attending  the
State  Fair,  I  met  with  a  son  gI'  Mr*
Wilson  :  he  was  president  of  an  ag-
ricultural society,  and  was  attending
the  fair,  aud  I  named  this  circum-
stance to  him.  He  told  me  that  his
mother  deeply  deprecated  the  diffi-
culties with  the  Mormons,  and  did  all
she  could  to  prevent  them.

You  can  readily  see  from  what  I
have  said  that  our  community,  at
tli at  time,  was  very  handsomely  situ-
ated. The  poorest  man  in  it,  appa-
rently, owned  his  forty  acres  of  land,
while  some  of  the  richer  had  several
sections.  Farms  had  been  opened,
and  prosperity  seemed  to  smile  upon
the  people  everywhere.  Mills  wero
built,  machinery  waa  being  con-
structed, and  everything  seemed  to
be  going  oi3  that  could  be  desired
to  make  a  community  prosperous,
wealthy  and  bnppy,  when  suddenly,
in  consequence  of  the  ex  terns  in  a  ting
order  issued  by  Lilburn  W.  Boggs,
anil  executed  by  General  Clark,  and
those  under  his  command,  the  people
were  driven  from  the  State.  If  wo
would  renounce  our  faith  we  could
have  the  privilege  of  remaining,  but


:  \  i :  L .V  IIISTOKV  i>K  HfK  CJIUH':!!,


93


we  were  told  pointedly  that  we  .must  I
hold  no  prayer  nice  ting's,  no  prayer
circles,  no  conferences,  and  that  we
must  have  neither  Bishops  nor  Pre-
si  limits,  and  that  if  we  indulged  in
any  of  theso  forbidden  luxuries  the
citizens  would  be  upon  us  and  destroy
us.  A  very  few  accepted  the  condi-
tions and  remained,  and  1  believe  i
that,  to  this  day,  one  or  two  families
occupy  their  inheritances  who  then
renounced  their  faith*

This  people  landed  in  Illinois  des-
titute. Most  of  their  animals  had
been  plundered  from  them  during  the
difficulties,  and,  to  use  a  comparative
expression,  they  arrived  in  th at  State
almost  naked  and  barefoot.  They
were,  however,  a  very  industrious
people,  and  they  immediately  went  to
work;  anywhere  and  everywhere  that
they  could  2nd  anything  to  do  their
hands  laid  hold  upon  it,  and  pros-
perity very  soon  began  to  smile  upon
them,  Joseph  Smith  was  kept  in
prison  during  the  winter,  but  in  the
spring  ho  and  several  of  his  fellow
prisoners,  among  them,  Bishop  Alex-
ander McRae  of  the  11th  Ward,"
escaped  and  made  their  way  to  the
State  of  Illinois.

Our  people  had  a  very  singular  idea
of  justice  and  right;  they  supposed,
having  paid  their  money  to  the  United
States  for  their  lands,  having  actu-
ally purchased  and  received  titles  for
them,  that  it  was  the  business  of  the
United  States  to  protect  them  there-
on ;  having  little  acquaintance  with
law  they  entertained  the  somewhat
wild  idea  that  that  was  no  more  than
justice  on  the  part  of  the  Govern-
ment. Of  course,  the  government
could  only  be  expected  to  protect
them  against  any  adverse  titles  that
might  arise ;  but  so  far  as  protecting
then i  from  mobs  or  from  illegal
violence  from  the  State  in  which
they  lived,  from  oppression  from
those  in  authority,  or  from  marauders


who  might  burn  their  houses,  or
murder  them  and  ravish  their  wives,
this  was  no  part  of  the  business  of
the  United  States;  but  m  their  lack
of  knowledge  on  these  subjects  they
fancied  that  the  United  States  should
protect  them  on  their  lauds,  hence
Josepn  Smith  and  several  of  big
brethren  went  directly  to  Washing-
ton, carrying  the  applications  of
some  ten  thousand  persons,  ami  asked
tbe  Government  to  protect  them  in
the  possession  of  their  lands  and  in
their  rights,  and  to  restore  them  to
their  homes.  They  had  an  interview/
on  the  subject  with  llr.  Van  Bu-
rcn,  at  that  time  President  of  the
United  States,  and  the  answer  that
lie  gave  has  become  almost  a  house-
hold word.  Said  he — "  Gentlemen,
your  cause  is  just,  but  we  can  do
nothing  for  you."  Joseph  accord-
ingly returned  to  his  friends  in  tho
western  border  of  Illinois,  and  they
commenced  purchasing  lands  in  the
vicinity  of  INauvoo,  and  they  laid
out  and  built  a  city  and  remained
there.

This  occurred  in  the  Spring  of
18130 ,  and  Joseph  remained  there
until  the  Summor  of  1344,  during
which  time  he  bad  several  very
grevious  law-suits,  which  arose  out  of
attempts  on  the  part  of  the  autho-
rities of  Missouri  to  carry  him  back
to  that  State.  He  was  arrested
sever;il  times,  and  had  one  trial,  and
was  discharged  on  habeas  corpus  in
the  circuit  court,  before  Judge  Ste-
phen A,  Douglas;  one  trial,  and  dis-
charged on  habeas  corpus  before
Judge  Pope,  United  States  jndge  in
the  district  of  Illinois ;  and  one  trial
before  the  municipal  court  of  NYiuvoo.
These  several  trials  cost  a  great  deal
of  money  and  a  great  deal  of  time,
and  were  a  very  discouraging  feature
in  the  progress  of  the  settlements  in
that  vicinity,  though  the  industry
and  enterprise  of  the  people  were


94


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Audi  that  they  purchased  a  large
port.ion.or  the  lands  in  that  county
and  in  adjoining  counties.  They
laid  out  and  built  the  city  of  Nauvoo,
containing  some  twelve  thousand
inhabitants,  and  they  were  building  a
Temple  and  making  other  improve-
ments, when  Joseph  Smith  and  his
brother  Hyrum  were  murdered,  which
took  place  ou  the  twenty- seventh  of
June,  1844*

I  will  say  in  relation  to  the  pro*
gross  of  the  work,  that  missionaries,
among  them  the  Twelve  Apostles,
had  been  sent  abroad  to  preach,  and
&  great  many  people  had  received
the  Gospel.  The  Apostles  took  their
departure  directly  from  the  re.com*
mencing  of  the  foundation  of  the
Temple  in  the  city  of  Far  West,  on
the  20 ih  of  April,  1639.  They  went
on  a  mission  to  Europe  for  about  two
years ,  baptizing  some  seven  thousand
persons,  and  laying  a  foundation  for
the  gathering  from  the  old  world,
which  has  continued  up  to  the  pre-
fient  time.  The  circumstances  con*
noeted  with  the  death  of  Joseph  and
Hyrum  Smith  weru  such  as  to
impress  upon  their  enemies  even,  the
disgrace  inflicted  upon  the  State  by
their  murder,  and  upon  the  world
the  importance ,  of  their  mission.
The  governor  of  the  State  pledged
himself,  when  fliey  gave  themselves
up,  that  they  should  be  protected
and  bave  a  fair  trial,  but  he  placed
them  in  the  hands  of  men,  who,  he
was  assured  by  many,  were  their
enemies,  and  who  would  murder  them
if  they  had  the  power.  Joseph
Smith  had  been  brought  before  legal
tribunals  forty-seven  times,  and  had
in  every  instance  been  acquitted.
Everything  in  the  shape  of  a  vexatious
law  suit  that  could  be  trumped  up
against  him  had  been,  and  in  this
instance  he  was  arrested  on  the
affidavit  of  a  man,  whose  word  wo  nil
not  have  been  taken  at  a  saloon  in


Carthage  for  a  glass  of  grog,  who
swore  that  he  was  guilty  of  treason,
and  he  wiiis  thrown  into  prison,  and
murdered  while  being  detained  wait-
ing for  an  examination.  The  governor,
in  a  communication  to  the  Elders  in
Nauvoo,  said  that  the  people  fell,  that
it  was  very  wrong  that  he  should  be
murdered  in  that  way,  but  the  great
mass  of  them  was  very  glad  that  he
was  dead ;  and  I  have  reason  to
believe  that  this  feeling  was  caused
by  religious  prejudice,  which  arose
from  the  fact  that  he  came  preaching,
what  was  considered  a  new  doctrine,
which  attacked  all  the  hireling
priests  and  religious  crafts,  and
offered  free,  to  all  people,  a  religion,
plain  and  simple  and  in  accordance
with  the  Bible,  and  which,  if  accepted,
would  have  a  tendency  to  throw  a
large  portion  of  the  hireling  clergy
of  i he  age  out  of  employment,  or
compel  them  to  do  a3  the  Apostles
did  in  the  days  of  Jesus — preach  the
Gospel  without  purse  and  scrip.
Vexatious  Jaw-suits,  mob  violence,
tar  and  feathers,  and  finally,  blood-
shed were  successively  adopted  in
hopes  of  stopping  this  religion,  and
it  was  believed  by  those  who  regarded
"  Mormon  ism"  as  a  wild  theory,  that
the  death  of  Joseph  would  scatter
the  people  and  destroy  their  faith  in
the  work.  They  did  not  realize  that
he  hud  laid  the  foundation  of  a
living,  truthful  organization,  which
would  be  likely  to  increase  the  faster
the  more  it  was  persecuted.  But  bo
it  whs,  for  the  people  continued  to
gather,  and  the  public  buildings —
Temple  and  Nauvoo  House — ivere
being  pushed  forward  more  rapidly
than  ever,  and  when  this  was  ascer-
tained, there  was  an  organization
formed  which  expelled  the  people
from  the  State.

The  authorities  of  the  Church  at
Nauvoo  being  aware  of  this  com-
bination, petitions  were  sent  to  the


EARLY  HISTORY  Of-  1  ME  CHUKCIL


95


government  of  the  United  States,
aud  also  to  the  governor  of  every
State  in  the  Union,  asking  each  one
to  give  us  an  asylum  in  his  State.
The  governor  of  Arkansas  gave  us  a
respectful  answer,  all  the  rest  treated
our  petition  with  silent  contempt.

In  September,  1845,  the  mob  com-
menced burning  houses,  and  they
continued  hurraing  in  different  parts
of  the  settlements,  mostly  in  Hancock  |
County,  until  they  burned  one  i
hundred  and  seventy- five  houses
The  governor  and  authorities  of  the
State  were  notified,  and  finally  the
sheriff  of  the  County  took  a  posse,
mostly  Latter-day  Saints,  and  stopped
the  house-burning.  The  instant  this
was  done  the  people  of  the  nine
adjoining  counties  rose  up  and  said
— li  You  '  Mormons1  must  leave  the
county  or  you  *  Mormons'  must  die/*
They  then  made  an  agreement  that
we  should  have  time  to  move  nwny
and  dispose  of  our  property,  and  that
vexatious  law- suits  and  mob  violence
should  cease.  This  we  kept  most
faith  fully,  hut  so  far  as  they  were
concerned  the  agreement  was  never
observed,  mob  violence  continued,
bouse  burnings  and  murders  occurred
occasionally,  vexatious  law-suits  were
renewed ;  and  before  the  remnant  of
the  people  were  permitted  to  get  out
of  the  county  they  were  surrounded
by  armed  mobs,  as  many  as  eighteen
hundred  in  a  single  body,  and  can-
nonaded out  of  their  houses.

Tbe  people  thus  driven  commenced
a  journey  to  seek  the  home  where  we
now  reside.  The  white  setile meats
extended  sixty  or  seventy  miles  west
of  the  Missouri  River,  Keosauqua  was
tbe  most  western  one.  From  that
place  we  made  the  roads,  and  bridged
the  streams,  some  thirty  in  number,
across  Iowa,  to  Council  Bluffs,  arriv-
ing there  in  June,  1S46.  The  people
who  started  on  this  journey  started
under  the  most  forlorn  circumstances.


They  left  their  houses,  lands,  crops,
and  everything  they  had  if  they  could
get  a  yoke  of  cattle,  wagons  without
iron  tires,  carts,  or  anything  of  which
tljcy  could  make  an  outfit,  and  com-
menced a  journey  to  hunt  a  home
so  me  w h e re  wh ere  so-ca lied  C h  r  i s ti an  s
would  not  be  able  to  deprive  them  of
the  right  to  worship  God'  according
to  the  diet aies  of  their  consciences,  a
right  which  is  actually  moie  dear
than  life  itself.

f  tli  ink  between  thirteen  and
fourteen  hundred  miles  of  road  were
made,  though  u  u occasionally  followed
trappers1  trails,  and  ou  the  '2-Lth  of
July,  1817.  President  Young  led
the  pioneer  party — numbering  one
hundred  and  forty  three  men — on  to
this  ground,  then  a  portion  of  Mexican
Territory  and  one  of  the  most  deso-
late, barren  looking  spots  in  tbe  world,
mid  dedicated  it  to  the  Most  High,
that  we  might  once  more  find  an
asylum  where  liberty  could  be  enjoyed.
We  should  most  probably  have
reached  this  place  before  we  did,  but
the  United  States,  the  year  before,
iuvited  our  camps  tosend  live  hundred
men  to  aid  them  iu  the  war  with
Mexico,  which  they  did,  and  they
were  mustered  into  service  on  the
I  Oth  of  July,  1810,  aud  made  the
route  through  from  New  Mexico  to
the  PaciSc  coast.

Il  is  a  remarkable  fact  in  his  lory,
that  while  these  live  hundred  Latter-
day  Saints,  mustered  into  service  at
Council  B  lull  a,  were  bearing  the
American  flag  across  the  desert,  from
New  Mexico  to  the  Pacific  Coast,  a
march  of  infantry  characterised  by
General  Cook  as  unparalleled  ia

military  annals,  the  remnant  of  their
families  in  Nauvoo  were  surrounded
by  eighteen  hundred  armed  men  aud
cannonaded,  aud  driven  across  the
river  into  the  wilderness,  without
shelter,  food  or  protection,  iu  con-
sequence of  which  very  many  of  them


86  JOURNAL  OF

lost  their  lives.

Our  friends  pass  through  here  and
they  say — "What  a  beaut  ifut  city
you  have  got !  What  beautiful  shade
tr#es  !  What  magnificent  fruit  frees,
what  grand  orchards  and  wheat
fields !  What  a  splendid  place  you
have  got  !*'  When  the  pioneers  came
here  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind,
and  a  more  dry  and  barren  spot  of
ground  than  this  was  then  could
hardly  be  found.  Still  the  little
streams  were  running  from  the
mountains  to  the  Lake.  We  knew
nothing,  then,  about  irrigation,  but
the  streams  were  soon  diverted  from
their  course,  to  irrigate  the  soil*  For
the  first  three  years  wo  had  but  little
to  eat.  We  brought  what  provisions
we  could  with  us,  and  we  eked  thera
out  as  well  as  we  could  by  hunting
over  the  hills  for  wild  segoes  and
thistle  roots.  There  was  very  little
game  in  the  mountains,  and  Jjut  few
fish  in  the  streams,  and  hence  we  had
but  a  short  allowance  of  food,  and  for
three  years  after  our  arrival  there
was  scarcely  a  family  win  eh  dared  to
eat  a  full  meal.  This  was  the  con-
dition in  which  this  settlement  was
commenced.  There  was  no  inter-
course except  witli  Western  Missouri,
and  it  was  ten  hundred  and  thirty*
four  miles  to  the  Missouri  river,  if
we  struck  it  at  the  mouth  of  the
Platte,  where  Omaha  is  now;  and
our  supplies,  which  were  generally
brought  by  way  of  that  place,  were
all  purchased  in  Western  Missouri.

Iu  1850  a  sufficient  crop  was  raised
here  to  supply  the  inhabitants  with  |
food,  hut  previous  to  that  time  we
had  divided  our  scanty  supplies  with
hundreds  and  thousands  of  emigrants,
who  drifted  in  here  in  a  state  of
starvation  while  on  their  way  to
California,  for  the  discovery  of  the
gold  mines  there  had  set  the  world
almost  crazy.  Many  people  started
*n  the  Plains  without  knowing  how


DISCOURSES,

to  outfit  or  what  to  do  to  preserve
their  supplies,  and  by  the  time  thej
reached  here  their  outfits  would  be
completely  exhausted.  We  saved
the  lives  of  thousands  who  arrived
here  in  that  condition,  many  of  them
our  hitter  enemies,  and  we  aid  ad
them  on  their  way  in  the  best  possible
man  nor  that  we  could.

There  are  several  incidents  which
occurred  here  in  early  times  which,
to  us,  were  miraculous.  The  first
year  after  our  arrival  the  crickets  in
immense  numbers  came  down  from
the  mountains  and  destroyed  much
of  the  crops.  The  people  undertook
to  destroy  them,  and  after  having
done  everything  they  could  to  ac-
complish this  object,  they  gave  it  up
for  a  bad  job;  then  the  gulls  came
in  immense  numbers  from  the  lakes
and  devoured  the  crickets,  uutil  they
were  all  destroyed,  and  thus,  by  the
direct  and  miraculous  intervention  of
Providence,  the  colony  was  saved
from  destruction.

While  crossing  the  Plains  we  had
to  form  in  companies  of  sufficient
size  to  protect  ourselves  against  the
Indians,  there  being  from  fifty  to  a
hundred  men  in  each  company.  In
these  companies  existed  onr  religious
organization,  and  we  also  had  a  civil
organization,  by  which  all  the  difficul-
ties that  arose  in  the  oom  panics  were
settled;  and  then  a  militia  organiza-
tion, composed  of  able  bodied  men,
whose  duty  it  was  to  guard  the  camps
from  attacks  by  Indians,  and  from
accidents.  We  had  our  meetings
every  Sabbath,  at  which  the  Sacra-
ment was  administered ;  we  had  drtya
also  set  apart  for  washing,  and  occa-
sionally wo  had  a  dance,  and  .  our
travels  were  so  regulated  that  the
cultivation,  enjoyment  and  associa-
tions of  society  were  experienced
almost  as  much  as  when  living  together
in  a  settled  and  well  regulated  com*
ra  unity.


EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH,


9T


When  we  started  on  our  journey
wo  knew  very  little  about  Indians,  :
but  we  exercised  towards  them  such
a  spirit  of  justice,  and  such  vigilant
watchfulness,  that  we  lost  very  little,
and  suffered  very  little  on  account
Of  difficulties  with  them  during  the
many  years  that  we  were  crossing
these  plains.

Before  we  left  Nauvoo  we  had
covenanted,  within  the  walls  of  our
Temple,  that  we  would,  with  one
heart  and  one  m:nd,  abide  by  each
otherf  and  aid  one  another  to  escape
from  the  oppressions  with  which  we
were  surrounded,  to  the  extent  of  our
influence  and  property,  and  just  as
soon  as  the  brethren  were  able  they
formed  a  perpetual  emigration  fund  1
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  1849  Bishop
Hunter,  with  five  thousand  dollars  in
gold,  was  sent  back  with  instiuctions  j
to  use  that  and  what  other  means  he
could  gather  in  helping  those  to  come  j
here  who  were  not  able  to  come
before;  and  from  year  to  year  this
Work  has  continued,  being  a  grand
system  of  brotherly  love  and  united
co-operation,  in  a  few  years  after
reselling  here  we  sent  a  hundred  ;
teams  back  to  the  frontiers,  each
team  being  a  wagon  and  four  yoke  of
oxen  or  six  mules  or  horses  ;  and  as
we  increased  in  strength,  we  sent
annually  two  hundred,  three  hundred,
four  hundred,  five  hundred, and  finally
six  hundred,  to  bring  home  those
who  wished  to  settle  in  these  valleys;
and  even  at  the  present  time,  our
system  of  emigration  has  been  ex-
tended across  the  pea,  to  gather  all
who  wish  to  gather  with  the  Saints,
There  ate  many  thousands  of  people
in  these  valleys  who,  had  it  not  been
for  the  organization  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  the  kind  and  fatherly
care  of  President  Brigham  Young,
would  never  have  owned  a  foot  of
land,  or  any  other  property,  but  they
would  have  been  dependent  all  their

No.  7.


lives  upon  the  will  of  a  master  for  a
very  precarious  subsistence.

Our  plan  of  settlement  here  wai
entirely  different  from  that  we  had
adopted  in  any  olher  country  in
which  we  had  ever  lived.  The  first
thing,  in  locating  a  town,  was  to
build  a  dam  and  make  a  water  ditch  ;
the  next  thing  to  build  a  school
house,  and  these  school  houses  generally
answered  the  purpose  of  meeting
houses.  Ton  may  pass  through  all
the  settlements,  from  north  to  south,
and  you  will  find  the  history  of  them
to  be  just  about  the  same— the  dam,
the  water  diteh,  then  the  school
house  and  the  meeting  house.  Crops
were  put  in,  trees  were  planted,
cabins  were  built,  mills  were  erected,
fields  were  enclosed,  and  improve-
ments were  made  step  by  step.  This
Territory  is  so  thoroughly  a  desert
that  unless  men  irrigate  their  land
by  artificial  means  they  would  raise
comparatively  nothing.  The  settle-
ments at  the  present  time  stretch
some  five  or  six  hundred  miles,  ex-
tending into  Arizona  on  the  south
and  into  Idaho  on  the  north.

We  have  had  some  difficulty  with
the  Indians,  resulting  principally
frbm  the  interference  of  outsiders.
Those  of  yon  who  have  read  the  his-
tory of  John^.  Fremont's  journey
through  Western  Arizona,  may  re-
member that  he  gives  an  account  of
some  of  his  party  killing  several  of
the  native  Piute  Indians  From  that
tim«  the  war  seems  to  have  com-
menced between  the  Indians  and  the
whites*  Some  of  you  may  also  re-
member the  declaration,  in  regard  to
the  Indians,  made  by  Mr,  Calhoun,
one  of  the  early  governors  of  New
Mexico.  He  informed  the  govern-
ment that  the  true  policy  in  regard  to
the  Digger  and  Piute  tribes,  in  the
western  part  of  the  Territory,  which
then  embraced  Arizona  and  portions
of  Utah,  was  to  exterminate  them,

Vol  XYYL


98


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  it  was  utterly . useless  ever  to
attempt  to  civilize  them,  or  to  do
anything  else  but  exterminate  them.
This  was  the  policy  adopted  by  a
great  many  travelers  who  passed
through,  and  when  they  saw  an
Indian,  the  feeling  was  to  shoot  him.
This  was  especially  the  case  in  the
district  of  country  now  comprised  in
the  southern  portions  of  this  Terri-
tory and  the  western  part  of  Arizona,

When  we  came  into  the  country
our  motive  was  to  promote  peace  with
the  Indians,  to  deal  justly  with
them  and  to  act  towards  them  as
though  they  were  human  beings,  and
so  long  as  we  wero  permitted  to  carry
out  oar  own  policy  with  them  we  were
enabled  to  maintain  peace,  and  there
were  but  few  instances  in  which  diffi-
culties occurred,  A  band  of  men,
rowdies,  from  Western  Missouri!  on
the  way  to  the  mines,  shot  some
Snake  squaws  and  took  their  horses,
up  here  on  the  Malad.  This  aroused
the  spirit  of  vengeance  in  the  In-
dians, and  they  fell  upon  and  killed
the  first  whites  they  found,  and  they
happened  to  be  "Mormons"  who
were  engaged  in  building  a  mill  on
the  northern  frontier,  just  above
Ogdeu.  This  difficulty,  of  course,
had  to  be  arranged,  and  a  good  many
circumstances  of  this  kind,  at  vari-
ous times,  have  made  it  difficult  to
get  along  without  having  a  muss  with
the  indians.

Again,  we  had  people  among  ut
who  were  reckless  in  their  feelings,
and  who  ware  not  willing  always  to
be  controlled  and  to  act  wisely  and
prudently.  All  these  things  con*
ai  tared,  when  we  realize  that  we  al-
ways bad  four  frontiers,  and  that  we
were  about  a  thousand  miles  from
any  white  settlement  in  any  direc-
tion, that  the  Iadiaos  were  oa  every
aide  of  us,  and  many  of  them  very
wild  and  savage,  it  is  perfectly  won-
derful that  we  have  had  as  little  diffi-


culty with  them  as  we  have.  But
the  United  States,  in  sending  agents
here,  have  frequently  been  not  alto-
gether fortunate  in  their  selection,
and  in  some  instances  have  not  sent
very  good  men. Some  who  have
been  sent  have  been  very  good  men,
but  they  were  totally  ignorant  of
the  business  of  dealing  with,  con-
trolling or  promoting  peace  with  the
Indians, This,  of  course,  has  been
more  or  less  detrimental  to  the  set-
tlements, and  it  has  cost  them  a  great
deal  to  supply  the  natives  with  food
and  to  aid  them  in  getting  along,  for
it  is  much  cheaper  to  feed  the  In-
dians than  to  fight  them. But  the
general  feeling  among  the  Indians  is,
that  as  far  as  the  *'  Mormons "  ara
concerned,  they  desire  to  deal  with
them  in  a  spirit  of  justice  and  friend-
ship* There  is  now  little  difficulty
except  from  distant  Indians,  and  we
sometimes think  that  white  men,
perhaps,  have  employed  Indians  to
plunder  ranches  and  drive  off  cattle
four  or  five  hundred  miles  and  sell
them. Some  instances  of  this  kind
may  have  occurred,  but  we  have  got
along  wonderfully  welL

The  people  here  have  shown  a  vast
amount  of  enterprise  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  roads  through  the  Terri-
tory. Strangers  who  come  here  run
down  to  this  city,  go  down  to  Prove
aud  up  to  Logan,  and  to  various  other
places  on  the  little  branches  of  our
railroad  system ;  but  if  they  were  to
travel  through  these  mountains  and
extend  their  investigations  into  the
valleys,  which  are  well  worthy  the
attention  of  any  traveler  for  their
beauty,  they  would  find  that  in  many
places  they  are  so  rugged  that  it  is
almost  a  wonder  there  were  ever  men
enough  in  the  country  to  make  the
roads.  Then  the  telegraph  wires
have  been  extended  some  twelve
hundred  miles  through  a  number  of
the  settlements,  north  and  south;


EARLY  HISTORY

these  wires  have  sometimes  been
used  to  prevent  the  plunder  of  the
ranches  by  the  Indians.  From  year
to  year  we  are  extending  our  railroad
system.  We  have  had  no  encour-
agement from  the  General  Govern-
ment in  relation  to  railroads ;  we
have  never  been  permitted  even  to
have  the  right  of  way,  by  act  of
Congress,  over  a  foot  of  ground,  un-
til we  have  occupied  it  with  a  railroad
for  a  year  or  two,  and  sometimes  not
then ;  and  we  are  extending  onr  rail-
road system  without  any  aid  from
Congress  or  any  other  source,  bat  our
own  ingenuity  and  means,  and  that
of  our  friends.  j

We  are  doing  all  we  can  to  unite
onr  brethren  to  co-operate  in  the
building  of  iuctories,  in  the  construc-
tion  and  establishment  of  machinery
of  various  kinds,  in  commercial  oper-
ations, in  the  building  of  railroads,
the  enclosing  of  farms,  and  in  every  1
branch  of  business  possible  we  are  I
endeavoring  to  unite  the  people  in
order  to  save  labor,  economize,  and
produce  within  ourselves  as  many
Articles  as  we  possibly  can  that  we
need  to  consume,  and  some  to  sell,
for  onr  history  for  the  past  few  years
has  proved  that  we  have  traded  too
much — we  have  bought  more  mer-
chandize thau  the  products  of  the
country  would  justify,  and  a  system
of  manufacturing  is  very  important,
and  our  people  have  constructed  some
very  fine  mills  for  the  manufacture  of
woolen  and  other  g  ads.

While  we  are  tracing,  for  the  con-
sideration of  our  friends,  onr  progress,
we  here  say  that  we  have  had  very
little  encouragement  from  the  outside.
Our  mines  were  worthless  in  this
country  until  the  railroad  was  built
In  1832,  we  presented  to  Congress,
by  our  Delegate,  Dr.  Bernhisal,  a
petition  for  a  railroad  across  the  con-
tinent. Members  of  Congress  then
ridiculed  the  idea  as  being  a  hundred


OF  THE  CHURCH.  99

years  ahead  of  the  age.  Oar  Dele-
gate invited  his  friends  to  come  and
see  him  when  the  road  was  con-
structed, and  some  of  them  have
done  to.  The  memorial  was  pre-
sented six  or  eight  times,  being  re-
pea  ted  session  after  eession,  before
any  steps  were  taken  by  Congrsss
towards  the  construction  of  the  road#
,  and  it  was  finally  completed  much
earlier  thaa  it  would  have  been  had
it  not  been  for  the  co-operation  of  the
people  of  this  Territory,  who  m*de
the  road-bed  for  four  hundred  miles
over  the  wor&t  part  of  the  route,  and
also  furnished  a  good  deal  o  busi-
ness for  the  road  to  do  when  it  was
finished.

As  soon  as  the  railroad  was  com-
pleted mines  here,  containing  lead,
with  a  small  per  cent,  of  silver,  be-
came valuable.  They  were  not
worked  before.  Of  course  we  worked
them  a  little  when  we  wanted  a  little
lead,  but  the  silver  mines,  as  they
are  termed  now,  were  not  worth  a
dollar  then.  But  as  soon  as  the  great
railroad  and  our  branch  lines  were
completed  the  mining  property  jf
the  country  became  valuable.  It
would  have  seemed  that  a  wise  gov-
ernment would  have  encouraged  sucbf
enterprises,  but  this  has  n  jt  been  the
policy  of  the  General  Government
towards  Utah.  They  have  seemed  to
think  that  all  that  was  necessary  was
to  send  governors  and  judges,  and
to  pick  the  most  bigoted  men  they
could  find  to  fill  these  positions;
though  I  must  say  that,  during  the
twenty-four  years  that  we  have  been
a  Territory,  we  have  had  many  very
excellent  men  sent  here,  including
very  good  governors,  and  very  good
judges,  and  some  who,  I  think,
would  have  been  better  employed  in
other  callings.  It  is  really  an  unfor-
,  tunata  circumstance  to  pick  op  men
and  send  them  to  any  country,  to
I  occupy  important  offices,  who  ar»


100


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


totally  unacquainted  with  Hie  country
and  who  have  no  interest  in  it,  and
whose  prejudices  are  against  the
people.  The  better  policy  is  the  one
announced  in  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  that,  in  relation  to
these  United  States,  the  consent  of
the  governed  should  be  had.  This
would  be  a  better  policy,  more  repub-
lican and  more  agreeable,  hat  we
seem  lo  he  a  special  people,  and,  of
course,  acta  hare  to  be  perlnrmei  for
our  special  case.

There  is  one  ground  of  complnint
that  is  alleged  against  us  here,  and
that  if?,  we  believe  in  a  plurality  of
ives.  A  great  many  men  and  wo.
men  have  practiced  this  piinciple
.rigidly,  in  all  good  faith;  and  until
^we  cm  tin  1  some  man  who  c?m  show
us  a  single  passage  in  either  the  Old
r  New  Testament,  that  actually
nhihits  it,  we  feel  justified  in  follow-
nj^ihe  examples  ot  Prophets,  Patri-
archs, and  holy  men,  fathers  of  the
aithful,  believing  that  if  it  were
ight  in  their  case  it  can  not  he
^\  J^wrong  in  ours.  We  are  told  that
\^the  Old  Testament  sets  forth  such  an
^  ^example,  but  that  the  New  Testament
condemns  it,  for  that  the  Savior  did
i\away.  The  only  question  I  would
asK^in  reference  to  this  subject  is —
If  the  Savior  did  away  with  plural
marriage,  why  didn't  be  say  so  ?  If
the  Apostles  put  it  down  why  did  they
not  tell  u*  of  it  ?  In  the  la^t  two
chapters  of  the  Bible  we  have  an  ac-
count of  the  Holy  City,  the  New
Jerusalem,  the  gates  of  which  we  are
told  are  to  be  named  after  the  twelve
sons  of  four  wires  by  one  father;
and  if  we  enter  the  gates  of  that  city
we  tace  this  polygamy,  and  if  we
can  net  face  this  polygamy  we  cannot
•nter  the  gates  into  the  city.  So  we
understand  the  New  Testament  On
account  of  our  belief  in  and  practice
of  this  Scriptural  doctrine,  extraor-
dinary legislation  has been  asked


against  us,  that  our  lives,  liberty,
property  and  pursuit  of  happiness
may  be  at  the  control  of  four  or  five
individuals.  This  is  the  eitreme
of  folly.

In  considering  this  subjact,  let  us
nsk  where,  in  all  the  world,  has  a  Ter-
ritory been  settled  under  as  many
di  sad  vantages  as  this  ?  Where  have
a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  people
been  collected  together  and  exhibited
more  order,  and  given  proof  of  mora
industry  and  prosperity  under  the
circumstances  than  we  have?  No-
where. Brigham  Young,  as  Presi-
dent of  the  Church  and  leader  of  the
people,  from  the  death  of  Joseph
Smith  to  the  present  time,  through
tin*  influence  that  he  has  exercised
with  his  brethren  and  friends  th rough-
on  f  the  world,  has  been  able  to  bring
thousands  of  people  from  America
and  other  nations,  and  to  locate  them
in  the^e  valleys  and  put  them  iu
possession  ot  happy  homes,  and  to
make  thriving,  flourishing  and  pros-
perous communities.  4t  By  their
fruits  yp  shall  know  them."  Then,
the  true  policy  is  to  leave  men  to  the
enjoyment  of  their  religion,  to  the
enjoyment  of  the  holy  Gospel  as  they
may  receive  it,  extending  liberty,
peace,  good  order  and  happiness  to
all.  I  believe  to-day  there  is  no
Territory  so  lightly  taxed  and,  with
all  the  drawbacks,  none  so  well  goT-
erned  as  this,  It  is  true  that  since
the  mil  road  has  come  here  there  has
drifted-in  a  population  iu  favor  of
sustaining  grog-shops.  I  notice  that
in  the  last  week  a  petition  hug  Ijeen
signed  by  tour  thousand  ladies,  asking
the  City  Council  to  shut  up  the
drinking  hells.  These  institutions
are  a  portion  of  civilization  that  has
followed  the  railroad,  and  that  would
have  caused  astonishment  here  a  few
years  ago.  I  wish  the  City  Council
would  grant  the  petition  of  the  ladies;
I  suppose  they  may  be  restrained  by


EARLY  HISTORY

a  decision  of  a  court  which  claims  to
question  their  jurisdiction ;  but  I
have  no  doubt  the  City  Cuuncil  will
shut  up  these  hells  if  it  is  in  their
power,  consistent  with  the  relations
that  exist  between  the  Territorial  au-
thorities and  those  of  the  United
States.  But  I  am  ashamed  of  our
Congressmen,  I  am  ashamed  of  our
judges,  I  am  ashamed  of  our  federal
authorities  for  fastening  upon  a  peo-
ple such  a  system  of  drunkenness,
licentiousness  and  debauchery,  while
they  arc  making  such  a  terrible  howl
over  a  man  who  may  have  two  wives,
and  who  labors  hard  for  their  support,
and  for  the  education  of  their  chil-
dren, and  acknowledges  them  hon-
orably before  the  world.  Everybody
to  his  taste.

When  Mr.  Morrill,  of  Vermont,
the  author  of  what  is  termed  the
anti-polygamy  bill  of  1862,  told  me
that  he  would  not  care  any  tiling
about  plurality  of  wives  if  it  were
not  in  the  United  States,  and  he  was
afraid  that  Vermont  was  partly  re-
sponsible for  it,  I  told  him  that  they
had  a  system  of  licensing  prostitu-
tion in  Vermont  I,  however,  should
raise  no  objection  to  that,  but  I  felt
myself  disgraced  and  ashamed  be-
cause I  was  associated  with  a  State
that  licensed  such  a  system  as  that  j
and  that  if  I  could  put  up  with  Ver-
mont, he  could  put  up  with  Utah,
that  was  no  more  than  fair,  it  was
shake  for  shake.

I  heard  it  stated,  or  read^  not  long
since,  that  a  hundred  thousand  in-
fanticides annually  occur  on  Man-
hattan Ialaud.  That  is  a  most  horri-
ble state  of  affairs  if  it  is  half  true,
or  quarter  true.  Can  nothing  be
done  to  change  this  system?  I  will
refer  my  friends  to  the  pamphlet
published  by  a  very  learned  minister,
Rev.  Doctor  Tood,  of  Pittsfield,
Mass,,  showing  the  spirit  of  death,
corruption,  licentiousness,  and  mur-


OF  THE  CHURCH.  101

j  der  that  exists,  even  in  the  churches
among  professing  Christians  in  Mas-
sachusetts and  other  parts  of  New
England.  I  felt  not  a  little  surprised
to  go  back  into  the  neighborhood
where  I  was  raised,  where  they  used
to  have  fifty  scholars  annually,  to
find  that  t bey  were  borrowing  one
or  two  from  another  neighborhood  to
make  out  fifteen,  so  that  they  could
draw  the  public  money*  There  were
as  many  houses  in  the  neighborhood
as  formerly,  and  a  few  more,  new
ones,  had  been  built;  there  were  also
more  families  in  the  neigh borhood,
but  they  had  stoppel  having  child-
ren. I,  as  au  American  citizen,  feel
myself  disgraced  to  be  associated
with  any  community  who  have
adopted  these  expedients,  at  the  same
time  I  do  not  expect,  under  any  cir-
cumstances, ever  to  undertake  to
interfere  with  their  lucal  regulations,
and  I  simply  ask  my  fellow  men  to
give  us  the  same  opportunity.

The  Lord  has  blessed  us  with  many
children,  and  there  is  no  Latter-day
Saint,  who  has  an  abiding  faith  in

;  the  Gospel  and  in  the  great  com-
mand which  God  first  gave  to  the
children  of  men,  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth,  but  what  rejoices
in  them,  and  regards  them  as  a
blessing  from  on  high  ;  and  nobody
in  the  mountains  that  I  know  of  has
ever  complained  of  the  number  of
children,  except  some  of  our  friends
up  here  in  Idaho.  When  they  ran
the  southern  line  of  Idaho,  it  was
found  that  several  settlements  and
parts  of  three  counties,  before  then
supposed  to  ba  in  Utah,  were  in  that
Territory,  The  people  of  Idaho  have
a  school  law  and  a  school  fund,  and
the  most  that  had  been  done  before
with  this  fund  was  to  give  it  to  the
officers  ;  but  with  the  addition  of  the
"  Mormon11  settlements  to  the  Terri-
tory, there  was  an  addition  of  several

I  thousand  "Mormon"  children,  and


102  JOURNAL  OF

they  were  included  in  the  school
report.  The  officers  said — "This
cannot  be,  this  most  be  a  humbug,
there  cannot  be  anything  like  this
number  of  children but  when  they
came  to  investigate  and  count  noses
they  found  it  verily  true,  and  there
were  "Mormon"  people  raising
hearty,  hale  little  fellows  to  walk
over  these  mountains  and  make  them
blossom  like  the  rose.

I  remember  once,  in  traveling
through  the  State  of  Indiana,  en-
countering a  gentleman  who  called
himself  Professor  Jones,  connected
with  a  university  there.  Ho  asked
me  a  great  many  questions  about  our
system  in  the  mountains,  and  wanted
to  know  how  we  did  this  and  how  we
did  that.  I  explained  it  to  him  as  '
correctly  as  I  could.  I  traveled  with
him  a  day  or  two,  and  he  kept  ask-
ing questions  and  making  notes.
When  we  parted  he  said  he  was  very
much  surprised,  he  had  supposed  that
oar  system  was  one  of  immorality,
but  he  had  learned  to  the  contrary.
He  did  not  pretend  to  say  anything
about  its  justness  and  correctness;
of  course  he  did  not  sympathize  with
it,  but  one  thing  was  sure,  said  he,  j
**  If  you  continue  the  course  you  are
now  pursuing,  you  will  produce  a  set  |
of  men  in  those  mountains  who  will
be  able  to  walk  the  rest  of  mankind
under  their  feet"  I  suppose,  like
enough,  he  may  be  one  of  the  men
who  would  like  to  proscribe  us  now.  '
I  know  this,  if  the  reports  of  learned
men  are  true,  the  course  now  being
pursued  by  a  great  many  of  our
Christian  friends  in  the  E  tst,  will,  in
a  few  generations,  wipe  out  the  race
of  76  and  gire  the  country  into  the


DISCOURSES.

hands  of  strangers.  It  is  time  that
somebody  was  fulfilling  the  great
1  command  of  God,  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth,  and  put  away
licentiousness,  and  labor  for  the  up-
building and  welfare  of  the  human
race.

Men  take  up  "Mormonism,"  and
i  they  say  it  is  a  humbug.  There  is
where  they  make  a  mistake.  My
friends,  the  Gospel,  as  preached  by
the  Latter-day  Saints,  is  true.  **  Mor-
mon ism*'  is  no  humbug.  Joseph
Smith  was  a  true  Prophet;  he  re-
vealed a  true  religion,  ar.d  all  at-
tempts to  destroy  it  will  prove  vain,
I  bear  this  testimony,  I  know  thia
to  be  true,  and  I  warn  my  fellow-
men  to  receive  this  faith,  and  to
repent  and  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  Repent  of  your  sins  and  be
baptized  for  their  remission,  and  re-
ceive the  laying  on  of  hands,  thai
you  may  enjoy  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  for  that  Spirit  will  rest  upon
you  if  you  receive  and  obey  this
Gospel  with  full  purpose  of  heart.
Then  add  to  your  faith  virtue,  to
your  virtue  knowledge,  to  your  know-
ledge temperance,  to  your  temper-
ance patience,  to  your  patience  godli-
ness, to  your  godliness  brotherly
kindness,  to  your  brotherly  kindness
charity,  and  if  these  things  be  and
abound  in  you,  you  will  neither  be
barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  know-
ledge of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ.  You  will  know  these  things
for  yourselves,  and  you  will  testify,
as  I  testify,  that  you  know  this  work
!  is  the  work  of  God.

May  God  enable  us  to  do  so,  is
my  prayer  iu  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


INTEREST  MANIFESTED,  ETC.


103


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Aftkknoon,  Junk  14,  1874*

(Reported  by  David  TV.  Evans.)

INTEREST  MANIFESTED  RELATING  TO  TEMPORAL  AFFAIRS — REVELATIONS
PERTAINING  TO  BEING  ONE  IN  TEMPORAL,  AS  IN  SPIRITUAL  THINGS
— CONSECRATION— SI  K  WARDSHIP — JACKSON  COUNTY — SANCTIFICATION.


There  seems  to  be  at  the  present
time  a  great  deal  of  interest  mani-
fested among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  even  among  those  who  are  con-
nected with  our  Church,  in  regard  to
some  instructions  that  have  been
imparted  to  the  Latter- day  Saints  in
relation  to  their  temporal  affairs*
The  instructions  which  have  been
imparted,  and  which  the  people  pre,
in  some  measure,  receiving,  are  com-
paratively new  in  their  estimation,
that  is,  it  is  supposed  they  are  new,
and  something  which  we,  in  times
past,  have  not  practiced.  But  if  we
appeal  to  the  revelations  of  Gud,  we
shall  find  that  no  new  thing  has  been
required  ot  us.  It  is  generally
termed,  however,  by  Latter-day
Saints,  the  New  Order.  You  hear
of  it  in  all  parts  of  the  Territory.
What  is  meant  by  the  New  Order  ?
Is  it  really  new  in  the  revelations  of
God,  or  is  it  something  new  for  us  to
practice  it  ?  We  have  been  required,
in  t  he  year  1874^  to  come  back  again
to  an  old  order,  as  taught  in  ancient
Mormon  ism.  What  I  mean  by  an-
cient Mormonism  is  Morrnonism  as
it  was  taught  some  forty- three  or
forty-four  years  ago,  There  is  a
generation  now  living  on  the  earth


who  seem  to  be  comparatively  igno-
rant of  the  doctrines  which  wera
taught  some  forty  years  ago  to  men
who  are  now  old  and  have  grey  heads
and  gray  beards.  Since  that  time  a
new  generation  haa  arisen  ;  and  they
begin  to  think  that  something  new,
something  that  will  turn  things  up-
side down,  is  being  introduced  into
Mormonism.  I  will  say  to  all  who
have  such  ideas,  you  are  entirely
mistaken,  it  is  not  so  ;  we  are  trying
to  get  the  people  to  come  back  again
to  the  old  principles  of  Mormonism,
to  that  which  God  revealed  in  the
early  rise  of  this  Church.

Every  man,  whether  he  is  or  is  not
a  Latter-day  Saint,  when  becomes  to
study  our  written  works,  the  written
revelations  which  God  has  given,
will  acknowledge  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  cannot  be  the  people  they
profess  to  be,  they  cannot  be  consis-
tent with  the  revelations  they  profess
to  believe  in  and  live  as  they  now
live;  they  ha^e  got  to  come  into  the
system  which  the  Saints  call  the
New  Order,  otherwise  they  cannot
Comply  with  the  revelations  of  God,

I  believe  that  I  will  quote  a  few
revelations  tins  morning,  in  order  to
show  you  what  God  said  in  relation


104


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


to  property  or  temporal  things,  in
the  early  rise  of  this  Church,  The
first  revelation  that  now  occurs  to  my
mind  will  be  found  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  on  page
217;  it  was  given  in  March,  1831,
forty- three  years  ago  last  March.  In
the  third  paragraph  of  this  revelation
.We  read  these  words:

"F^r,  behold,  the  beasts  of  the
field  and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and
that  which  cometh  of  the  earth,  is
ordained  fur  the  use  of  man  for  food
and  for  raiment,  and  that  he  might
have  in  abundance;  but  it  is  not
given  that  one  man  should  possess
that  which  is  above  .'mother,  where-
fore the  world  lieth  in  sin."

Do  you  believe  this  revelation,
Latter-day  Saints  ?  "  Oh,  yes,"  says
one — u  we  believe  Joseph  Smith  was
s  Prophet/*  Have  yon  practiced  it?
Oh,  that  is  another  thing.  How,
then,  are  we  to  know  that  you  be-
lieve this  revelation  if  you  do  not
practice  it  ?  How  are  the  world  to
know  yuu  are  sincere  in  your  belief,
if  you  have  a  revelation  which  you
profess  to  believe  in,  aud  yet  give  no
heed  to  it,  1  do  not  wonder  that  the
world  say  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
do  not  believe  their  own  revelations.
Wliy?  Because  we  do  not  practice
them.  It  is  not  given  that  one
man  should  possess  that  which  is
above  another,  wherefore  the  world
lieth  in  sin,"  There  may  be  some
strangers  here,  and  they  do  not  be-
lieve this  book,  but  I  will  tell  you  what
they  would  say  as  men  of  reason,
they  would  say  that  if  you  Latter-
day  Saints  call  this  your  book  of  faith,
and  doctrines,  and  covenants,  to  be
consistent  you  ought  to  comply  with
it.  That  is  what  they  would  say,
and  it  is  really  a  true  saying,  and
consistent  and  reasonable-  if  we
believe  this,  let  us  practice  it ;  if  we
do  not  believe  in  it,  why  profess  to
believe  in  it  ?


I  will  now  refer  jou  to  a  revelation
given  on  the  second  day  of  January,
1831,  it  is  on  page  120  of  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants*  I  will
tell  you  how  this  revelation  was
given,  for  I  wag  present  at  the  time
it  was  given.  The  Church,  then,
was  about  nine  months  old.  The
Prophet  Joseph,  who  received  all  the
revelations  contained  iu  this  book,
was  then  living  in  the  State  of  New
York,  in  the  town  of  Fayette,  Seneca
County.  He  called  together  the
various  branches  of  the  Church  that
bad  been  organized  during  the  nine
months  previous  in  that  State,  and
they  assembled  together  in  the  house
in  which  this  Church  was  organized,
namelv,  Father  Whitmer'a  house.
You  will  recollect,  in  reading  the
I  Book  of  Mormon,  that  the  sons  of
j  Father  Whitmer,  young  men,  are
noted  as  witnesses  of  the  Book  of
Mormon,  David  Whitmer  having  seen
|  the  angel,  and  the  plates  in  the  hands
,  of  the  angel,  and  heard  him  speak,
and  the  hand  of  the  angel  was  placed
on  his  head,  and  he  said  unto  hi  in —
u  Blessed  be  the  Lord  and  they  that
keep  his  command ments."  And  he
heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  in  con-
nection with  three  other  persons
testifying  out  of  the  heavens,  at  the
same  time  that  the  angel  was  admin-
istering, that  the  Book  of  Mormon
had  been  translated  correctly  by  the
gift  and  power  of  God,  and  command*
ing  him  to  bear  witness  of  it  to  all
people,  nations  and  tongues,  in  con-
nection with  the  other  three  that
were  with  him.  These  were  some
of  the  individuals  also  who  saw  the
plates  and  handled  them,  and  saw  the
engravings  upon  them,  and  who  gave
their  testimony  to  that  effect  in  the
Book  of  Mormon,  It  was  in  their
father's  house  where  this  Church  was
organized,  on  the  6th  of  April,  lb30;
it  was  in  their  father's  house  where
this  little  Conference  was  convened


INTEREST  MAKIEFSTED,  ETO.


105


on  the  2nd  of  January,  1831,  and
this  Conference  requested  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  to  inquire  of  the  Lord
concerning  their  duties.  He  did  so.
He  sat  down  in  the  midst  of  the  Con-
ference, of  less  than  one  hundred,  I
do  not  know  exactly  the  number,  and
a  scribe  wrote  this  revelation  from  his
mouth.  One  item  contained  therein,
in  the  fifth  paragraph,  reads  thus  : —

"  And  let  every  man  esteem  his
brother  as  himself,  and  practice  vir-
tue and  holiness  before  me*  And
•gain  I  say  unto  you,  let  every  man
esteem  his  brother  as  himself;  for
what  man  among  yuu  having  twelve
sons,  and  is  no  respecter  of  them,
and  they  serve  him  obediently,  and
he  saith  unto  the  one,  Be  thou  clothed
in  robes  and  sit  thou  here;  and  to  the
other,  Be  thou  clothed  in  rags  and
git  thou  there,  and  looketh  upon  his
eons  and  saith,  I  am  just.  *c  Behold,
this  have  I  given  unto  you  a  parable,
and  it  is  even  as  I  am  :  I  say  unto
you,  be  one ;  and  if  ye  are  not  one,
ye  are  not  mine."

Perhaps  the  Saints  may  think  that
this  has  reference  to  spiritual  things
atone,  and  means  to  be  one  in  doc-
trine, principle,  ordinances,  faith,  I
belief,  and  so  on,  and  that  it  has  no  j
reference  whatever  to  temporal
things;  but  in  order  to  show  you
that  this  has  reference  to  temporal
as  well  as  to  spiritual  tilings,  let  me
quote  that  which  God  said  a  few
months  after  this  in  another  revela-
tion, I  have  not  time  to  turn  to  all
these  revelations,  but  I  will  quote
them.  The  Lord  says — "  Except  ye
are  equal  in  the  bonds  (or  bands)  of
eat  thly  things,  how  can  you  be  made
equal  in  the  bands  of  heavenly
things  r"  Here  was  a  question  put
to  us :  How  can  you  be  made  equal
in  the  bands  of  heavenly  things,  un-
less you  are  equal  in  the  bands  of
earthly  ?  Surely  enough,  we  can  not
be  made  equal. It  we  are  unequal  j


in  this  life,  and  are  not  one,  can  we
be  entrusted  with  the  true  riches,  the
riches  of  eternity  ?  I  believe  I  will
read  to  you  a  small  portion  of  ano-
ther revelation  that  was  given  on
stewardships.  The  Lord  commanded
certain  ones  among  his  servant!  to
take  charge  of  these  revelations  when
they  were  in  manuscript,  before  they
were  published,  that  they  might  be
printed  and  sent  forth  among  Hie
people,  and  he  also  gave  them  charge
concerning  the  Book  of  Mormon,
and  made  them  stewards  over  tlie.se
revelations  and  the  avails  arising
from  them.  And  the  Lord  said —
"  Wherefore,  hearken  and  hear,  for
thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  them,  I,  ihg
Lord,  have  appointed  them  and  or-
dained them  to  be  stewards  over  the
revelations  and  commandments  which
I  have  given  unto  them,  and  which  I
shall  hereafter  give  unto  them  ;  and
an  account  of  this  stewardship  will  I
require  of  them  in  the  day  of  judg-
ment;  wherefore  I  have  appointed
unto  them,  and  this  is  their  business
in  the  Church,  to  manage  them  and
the  concerns  thereof,  and  the  benefits
thereof,  wherefore  a  command  men t
give  I  unto  them  that  they  shall  not
give  these  things  u : j  t  ■  the  Church,
neither  unto  the  world,  nevertheless
inasmuch  as  they  receive  more  than
is  needful  for  their  necessities  and
their  wants,  it  shall  be  given  into  my
storehouse  and  the  benefits  shall  be
consecrated  unto  the  inhabitants  of
Zion,  and  unto  their  generations,  in-
asmuch as  they  become  heirs  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom.

Now,  you  notice  here,  the  Lord  did
not  intend  those  individuals  whom  he
named  to  become  rich  out  of  the
avails  of  the  sale  of  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  and  other  revehttiuna
and  the  literary  concerns  of  his
Church,  he  never  intended  that  they
should  become  rich  while  others  were


106


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


poor,  that  was  not  the  order;  but
inasmuch  as  they  received  more  than
was  needful  for  their  support  what
shonld  they  do  with  it  ?  Should
they  aggrandize  themselves  while
their  poor  brethren  were  destitute  ?
No,  not  at  all ;  they  were  to  give  all
the  surplus,  over  and  above  what  was
really  necessary  to  support  them,  into
the  Lord's  store-house,  and  it  was  to
be  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  people  of
Zion,  not  only  the  living  but  for  their
generations  after  them,  inasmuch  as
they  hecame  heirs  according  to  the
laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

There  was  a  certain  way  to  become
heirs  according  to  the  laws  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  Heirs  of  what  ?
Heirs  of  the  avails  arising  from  the
sale  of  the  revelations  which  all  the
inhabitants  of  Zion  were  to  be  bene-
fited by.  Says  one — "  But  perhaps
that  was  limited  to  those  six  individ-
uals who  are  here  named,  and  did  not
mean  the  whole  Chuch,"  Wait,  let
us  read  the  next  sentence — "  Behold,
this  is  what  the  Lord  requires  of
every  man  in  his  stewardship,  even
as  1  the  Lord  have  appointed  or  shall
hereafter  appoint/*  From  this  we
learn  that  all  the  stewards  which  the
Lord  bad  appointed  ;  and  nil  that  he
should  appoint,  in  a  future  time,  to
stewardships,  were  to  hand  over  all
their  surplus — all  that  was  not  neces-
sary to  feed  and  clothe  them — into
the  Lord's  store  house.  None  who
belonged  to  the  Church  of  the  living
God  are  exempt  from  this  law.  Does
that  law  include  us  ?  It  includes  all
who  belong  to  the  Church,  not  one  is
exempt  from  it.  Have  we  been  doing
this,  Latter-day  Saints,  for  the  last
forty-three  years,  since  this  revelation
was  given  ?  Have  we  been  comply,
ing  with  the  order  we  undertook  in
the  year  1831,  to  enter  into  ?  This
old  order  is  not  a  new  order  that  you
talk  so  much  about.

Iu  the  year  1831,  we  commenced


emigrating  to  the  western  part  of  tht
State  of  Missouri,  to  a  county,  quite
new  then,  called  Jackson  County;
most  of  the  land  at  that  time  was
Government  land.  When  we  com-
menced emigrating  there  the  Lord
gave  many  revelations.  The  Prophet
Joseph  went  up  among  some  of  the
earliest  to  that  county,  and  God  gave
many  revelations  contained  in  tho
Rook  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  in
relation  to  how  the  people  should
conduct  their  affairs.  Among  the
revelations  then  given  was  the  com-
mandment that  every  man  who  should
come  up  to  that  land  should  lay  all
things  which  he  possessed  before  the
Bishop  of  his  Church,  Another
revelation,  given  before  we  went  up
to  that  land,  speaking  of  a  land  whick
the  Lord,  at  some  future  time,  would
give  us  for  an  inheritance,  com-
manded that  we  should  consecrate  all
our  property  into  his  store- house.  If
we  had  wagons,  horses,  mules,  oxen,
cows,  sheep,  farming  utensils,  house*
hold  furniture,  gold  and  silver,  jew-
elry, wearing  apparel,  it  mattered  not
what  it  was,  the  Lord  said,  in  a  reve-
lation given  in  February,  1831,  that
it  should  all  be  laid  before  the  Bishop
of  his  Church,  and  that  it  shonld  be
consecrated  to  the  Lord's  store-house.
This  reduced  us  all  on  a  level.  If  a
man  had  a  million  dollars  when  he
gathered  up  to  Jackson  County,  if
he  complied  with  the  law,  he  would
be  just  as  rich  as  the  man  who  had
not  one  farthing.  Why  ?  Because
he  consecrated  all  he  had,  and  the
poor  man  could  not  do  any  more  than
that,  hence  all  who  complied  with  the
law  were  equally  poor  or  equally
rich.

What  was  the  next  step  after  this
consecration  ?  Iu  those  days  we  had
but  one  Bishop— his  name  was  Ed-
ward Partridge,  and  he  was  called  by
revelation — and  the  next  step  after
this  general  consecration,  the  Lord


INTEREST  MANIEFSTED,  ETO.


commanded  the  Bishop  and  his  two
counselors  to  purchase  all  the  land
in  Jackson  County,  and  in  the  coun-
ties round  about,  that  could  con-
veniently be  got,  the  general  price
being  one  dollar  and  a  quarter  an
acre.  And  what  next  ?  After  pur-
chasing these  lands  as  far  as  they  had
the  means  to  do  so,  every  man  that
had  consecrated  his  property  was  to
receive  an  inheritance.  Now  recol-
lect, none  except  those  who  consecra-
ted, none  who  disobeyed  that  law,
vrere  to  receive  an  inheritance  or
stewardship  ;  but  all  who  consecrated
their  properties  according  to  this  law
were  to  receive  their  stewardship*

What  is  the  meaning  of  a  steward-
ship ?  A  steward  is  one  who  is  ac-
countable to  somebody  for  the  pro-
perty that  he  manages,  and  that  is
his  stewardship,  whether  it  be  landed
property,  farming  utensils,  wagons,
cows,  oxen,  horses,  harness,  or  what-
ever may  be  committed  to  him.  To
whom  were  the  brethren  in  Jackson
County  accountable  for  the  steward-
ship committed  to  them?  To  the
Bishop,  The  Bishop  was  called  in
these  revelations  a  common  judge  in
Zion,  ecclesiastically  speaking,  not
according  to  the  civil  laws;  so  far  as
our  ecclesiastical  laws  were  concerned
he  was  to  be  a  common  jud^e,  arid
each  person  was  to  render  an  account
of  the  stewardship  which  he  had  to
the  Bishop.  I  do  not  know  how
often  ;  perhaps  once  a  year,  perhaps
longer  than  that,  perhaps  oftener.  I
do  not  know  that  there  was  any
specified  time  given  in  these  revela-
tions about  how  often  these  accounts
should  be  rendered  op.  But  how
were  the  people  to  live  out  of  the
avails  of  the  stewardship  committed
to  their  charge  ?  They  were  to  have
food  and  raiment,  and  the  necessary
comforts  of  life.  Well,  of  course,  a
f?ise  and  faithful  steward,  having
health  and  strength,  and  perhaps  a


[  good  deal  of  talent,  might  so  tako
charge  of  a  stewardship  that  he  might
gain  more  than  he  and  his  family
needed,  and  keeping  an  account  of
all  these  things,  and  rendering  the
same  when  required,  some  of  them

1  would  have  a  considerable  surplus
above  that  which  they  and  their
families  needed.  What  was  to  be
done  with  that  ?  Why,  as  stewards,
they  would  have  to  consecrate  it  into
the  Lord's  storehouse,  the  Lord  being
the  ownar  of  the  property  and  we
only  his  stewards.

There  were  some  men  who  were
entrusted  with  a  larger  stewardship
than  others.  For  instance,  here  was
a  man  who  knew  nothing  about
farming  particularly,  but  he  might
be  a  master  spirit  as  far  as  some
other  branch  of  business  was  con-
cerned. He  might  understand  how
to  carry  on  a  great  cloth  jnann factory
and  everything  in  the  clothing  line

'  necessary  for  the  inhabitants  of  Zion.
Such  a  man  would  require  a  greater
stewardship  than  the  man  who  culti-
vated a  small  farm,  and  had  only
himself  and  a  wife  and  two  or  three
children  to  support*  But  would  the
fact  of  one  man  having  a  greater
stewardship  than  another  make  one
richer  than  Another?  No.  Why
not  ?  Because,  if  one  received  fifty
or  a  hundred  thousand  dollars  to
build  and  stock  a  large  manufactory
for  the  purpose  of  manufacturing
various  kinds  of  fabrics  for  clothing,
although  he  might  have  a  surplus  of
several  thousand  dollars  at  the  end  of
the  year,  he  would  not  be  any  richer

1  than  the  farmer  with  his  few  acres  of
land,  and  let  rue  show  you  how  they
would  be  equal*  The  manufacturer
does  not  own  the  building,  the
machinery,  the  cotton  or  the  flax,  ns
the  case  may  be,  he  is  only  a  steward,
like  the  farmer,  and  if,  at  the  end  of
the  year,  he  has  five,  ten,  or  fifty
thousand  dollars  surplus,  does  that


make  -  him  a  rich  man  ?  By  do
means,  it  goes  into  the  Lord's  store-
house at  the  end  of  each  year,  or  as
often  as  may  be  required,  thus  leaving
him  on  the  same  platform  of  equality
with  the  farmer  and  his  small  ste-
wardship. Do  you  not  see  the  equa-
lity of  the  thing  ?  In  temporal
matters  it  is  not  given  that  one  man
eh  all  possess  that  which  is  above
another,  saith  the  Lord.  |
Now  did  the  people  really  enter
into  this,  or  was  it  mere  theory  ?  I
answer  that,  in  the  year  1831,  we
did  try  to  enter  into  this  order  of
things,  but  the  hearts  of  the  people
had  been  so  accustomed  to  holding
property  individually,  that  it  was  a
very  difficult  matter  to  get  them  to
comply  with  this  law  of  the  Lord.
Many  of  them  were  quite  wealthy,
and  they  saw  that  on  that  land  a
great  city  called  Zion,  or  the  New
Jerusalem,  was  to  be  built;  they
understood  that  from  the  revelations,
and  they  said  in  their  hearts — "  What
a  tine  chance  this  will  be  for  us  to
get  rich.  We  have  means  and  money,
and  if  we  consecrate  according  to  the
law  of  God  we  can  not  get  rich;  but
we  know  that  people  by  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  will  gather  up
here,  and  these  lands  will  become
very  valuable.  We  can  now  get
tbem  at  the  government  price,  a
dollar  and  a  quarter  an  acre,  and  if
we  lay  out  a  few  thousands  in  land,
we  can  sell  it  out  to  the  brethren
when  they  come  along  at  a  thousand
per  cent,  profit,  and  perhaps  in  some
cases  at  ten  thousand  per  cent.,  and
make  ourselves  wealthy,  so  we  will
not  consecrate,  but  we  will  go  ahead
for  ourselves  individually,  and  we
will  buy  up  the  lands  to  speculate
upon/'  These  were  the  feelings  of
come  who  went  up  to  that  country;
but  others  were  willing  to  cdmply
with  the  word  of  God,  and  did  just
as  the  revelation  required,  and  they


laid  every tlnng  they  had  before  the
Bishop,  and  received  their  steward-
ship.

After  he  had  organized  these
things,  Joseph  the  Prophet,  in  Au-
gust of  the  year  1831,  went  hack  to
Kirtland,  about  a  thousand  miles
east,  and  while  there  the  Lord  re-
vealed to  him  that  the  inhabitants  of
Jackson  County  were  not  complying
with  his  word;  hence  Joseph  sent
letters  up  to  them  containing  the
word  of  the  Lord,  chastening  them
because  of  their  disobedience  and
rebellion  against  the  law  of  heaven.
He  did  this  on  several  occasions,  and
one  occasion,  especially,  as  you  will
find  recorded  in  the  history  pub-
lished in  some  of  our  periodicals.  I
think  you  will  find  it  in  the  fit  teen  th
volume  of  the  Millennial  Star,  in
language  something  like  this — "If
the  people  will  not  comply  with  my
law,  which  I  have  given  them  con-
cerning the  consecration  of  their
property,  the  land  shall  not  be  a  land
of  Zion  unto  them,  but  their  names
shall  be  blotted  out,  and  the  names
of  their  children  and  their  children's
children,  so  long  as  they  will  not
comply  with  tny  laws,  and  their
names  shall  not  be  found  written  in
the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,*'

In  another  revelation,  published  in
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenauts,
the  Lord  says — "The  rebellious  are
not  of  the  blood  of  Ephraim,  where-
fore they  shall  be  plucked  up  and
shall  be  sent  away  out  of  the  land."
When  this  revelation  was  given  all
was  peace  in  Jackson  County.  We
had  no  enemies  there  any  more  than
we  had  elsewhere,  wherever  the
Church  might  be  located ;  all  wTas
comparative  peace.  But  the  Lord
said  that  the  rebellious  should  be
plucked  up  and  sent  away  out  of  the
land.  The  people  thought  there  was
no  prospect  whatever  of  that  revela-
tion being  fulfilled. All  was  peace,


INTEREST  MANIEF8TED,  ETO,


109


and  to  say  that  they  were  to  be
plucked  up  and  driven  out  of  the
land  was  out  of  the  questiou.  They
did  not  repent,  that  is  all  of  them,
but  continued  in  their  disobedience,
neglecting  to  consecrate  their  pro- 1
pcrttes,  according  to  the  requirements
of  the  law  of  the  Lord  ;  and  hence,
when  they  had  been  there  about  two
years  and  five  months  from  the  time
of  their  first  settlement  or  location,
they  were  literally  plucked  up  and
east  away  out  of  the  land.  You  have
the  history  before  you.  Their  ene-
mies arose  upon  them  and  began  to
tear  down  their  houses,  and  they
burned  two  hundred  and  three  of  the
dwellings  onr  people  had  built  in  that
land.  They  horned  down  their  grain
stacks,  hay  stacks  and  fences,  and
chased  the  Latter-day  Saints  around
from  one  part  of  the  county  to  ano-
ther, sometimes  tying  them  up  to
trees  and  whipping  them,  in  some
instances  until  their  bowels  gushed
out.  They  tore  down  the  printing
office  and  destroyed  it,  alio  one  of
our  dry  goods  stores,  and  scattered
the  goods  through  the  streets;  they
went  into  houses  and,  taking  there-
from the  bedding  and  furniture,  piled
them  up  in  the  streets  and  set  fire  to
them,  and  thus  they  continued  their
persecutions  until,  finally,  they  suc-
ceeded in  driving  the  Latter-day
Saints  from  the  county,  and  thus  the
word  of  the  Lord  was  fulfilled  which
said — **I  will  pluck  them  up  and
send  thera  away  out  of  the  land,  for
none  but  the  obedient  shall  eat  of  the
good  of  the  land  of  latter  Zion  in
these  latter  days."

Another  revelation  God  gave,  to
warn  the  people,  in  which  he  told
them  to  remember  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  the  new  covenant  which  he
had  revealed,  and  which,  if  they  did
not  observe,  he  said — "  Behold,  I  the
Lord  have  a  scourge  and  a  judgment
which  shall  be  poured  out  upon  your


heads."  This  was  given  between  one
and  two  vears  before  we  wen*  driven
out  of  that  county,  in  Kirtland,
Ohio,  through  the  Prophet  Joseph,
and  sent  up  to  them  to  warn  them.
Another  revelation  said  if  the  people
did  not  do  thus  and  so,  they  should
be  persecuted  from  city  to  city,  and
from  synagogue  to  synagogue,  and
but  few  should  stand  to  receive  am
inheritance — meaning  those  who  had
gone  into  that  county.

Now  go  through  this  Territory,
from  one  end  thereof  to  the  other,
hunt  up  the  greyheaded  and  grey-
bearded  men  and  the  old  ladies,  who
were  once  in  Jackson  County,  and
see  how  many  you  can  find  who
lived  there  then,  and  you  can  judge
whether  the  word  of  the  Lord  has
been  fulfilled  or  not,  I  guess  that
you  will  tin- 1  but  very  I  w  if  you
hunt  all  through  the  Territory.

Let  us  read  a  little  further  in  the
revelations,  and  see  whether  God
has  cast  us  entirely  off  or  not.  In
one  of  the  revelations,  given  after  we
were  driven  out  across  the  Missouri
River  into  Clay  County,  and  into
the  surrounding  counties,  the  Lord
said,  concerning  the  people  who  were
scattered  and  driven — "Behold,  I
have  suffered  these  things  to  come
upon  them  because  of  their  sins  and
wickedness  ;  but  notwithstanding  all
these  afflictions  which  have  come
upon  my  people,  I  will  be  merciful
unto  them,  and  in  the  day  of  wrath
I  will  remember  mercy,  wherefore  I,
the  Lord,  will  not  utterly  ea*t  them
off."  Though  but  few  should  stand
to  receive  an  inheritance,  the  Lord
said  he  would  not  utterly  cast  them

off.  ?  7  <•  '^^

What  nest  ? He  gives  an  inferior

law,  called  the  law  of  Tithing,  suittd

aad  adapted  to  us. After  we  had

been  driven  for  neglecting  to  com  pi  j

with  the  greater  law  of  consecration

of  all  we  had,  he  thought  he  would


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES,


not  leave  us  without  a  law,  but  he
gave  us  an  iuferior  law,  namely,  that
we  should  give  in  one- tenth  part  of
our  annual  income.  This  law  was
given  in  May,  1838,  I  do  not  remem-
ber the  exact  date,  and  I  believe  that
we  have  tried  to  comply  with  it;
but  it  has  been  almost  an  impossi-
bility to  get  the  people  universally  to
comply  with  it

There  is  another  item  connected
with  this  law  of  Tithing  that  has  but
seldom  been  complied  with,  namely,
the  consecration  of  all  surplus  pro-
perty* Now  go  round  among  the
Saints,  among  the  emigrants  who !
have  gathered  up  from  time  to  time,
and  there  has  been  only  now  and  ,
then  a  man  who  had  any  surpus
property,  let  him  be  the  judge.  If
a  man  had  fifty  or  a  hundred  thou-  ,
sand  dollars,  he  said  in  his  own
heart — "  I  really  need  all  this,  I  want
to  speculate,  I  want  to  buy  a  great
deal  of  land  to  sell  again  when  the
price  of  land  shall  rise ;  I  want  to
Bet  up  a  great  store  in  which  to  sell
merchandise  to  the  people,  and  if  I
consecrate  any  of  this  it  will  curtail
my  operations,  because  it  will  dimi-
nish my  capital,  and  I  cannot  specu-
late to  the  extent  I  should  if  I  re-
tamed  it  all,  and  I  shall  therefore  I
consider  that  I  have  no  surplus  pro-
perty. Now  an  honest-hearted  indi-
vidual would  have  a  little  surplus
property,  and  he  would  put  it  in;
but  from  that  day  until  the  present
time  I  presume  that  the  tenth  of
their  annual  income  has  been  paid  by
the  majority  of  the  people.  I  do  not
really  know  in  relation  to  this  matter,
at  any  rate  the  Lord  has  not  utterly
forsaken  us,  hence  I  think  we  have
ktpt  his  law  in  some  measure,  or  in
all  probability  he  would  have  cast  ua
off  al  together.

But  how  is  it  that  we  have  been  smit-
teu,  driven,  cast  out  and  persecuted,  and
Ike  lives  of  our  Prophet  and  Patri-


arch and  hundreds  of  others  destroyed
by  rifle,  cannon,  and  sword  in  tht
j  hands  of  our  enemies  ?  How  is  it
I  that  such  things  have  been  permitted
in  this  free  republic?  "Oh,"  saya
one,  "  It  is  because  you  practiced
polygamy,"  I  answer  that  we  did
not  practice  polygamy  in  the  days  of
the  persecutions  which  I  have  named,
they  came  upon  us  before  we  began
that  practice,  for  the  revelation  on
polygamy  was  not  given  until  some
thirteen  years  after  the  rise  of  this
j  Church,  and  that  was  after  we  had
been  driven  and  smitten  and  scat-
tered to  and  fro,  here  and  there  by
the  hands  of  our  enemies,  hence,  it
was  not  for  that  that  we  were  per-
secuted- But  if  we  take  the  printed
circulars  written  by  our  enemies,  we
can  give  you  their  reasons  for  perse-
cuting us.  One  of  their  reasons  was
thai  we  believed  in  ancient  Chris-
tianity, namely,  speaking  in  tongues,  .
interpretation  of  tongues,  healing
the  sick,  etc. ;  and  our  enemies  did
■  not  believe  in  having  a  community
in  their  midst  who  claimed  to  have
Apostles  and  Prophets  and  to  enjoy
the  gifts  of  the  Gospel  the  same  as
the  ancient  Saints.  Our  enemies
said  they  would  not  have  such  a  peo-
ple in  their  society,  and  if  we  did  not
renounce  these  things  they  would
drive  us  from  our  homes.  You  can
read  this  with  the  names  of  the  mob
attached  to  it,  in  connection  with  a
great  many  priests  and  ministers  of
different  denominations.  The  Rev.
Isaac  M*Coy  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bogard,
and  many  others  who  might  bo
named,  were  among  the  leaders  of
the  mob  who  persecuted  the  Latter-
day  Saints.

Now,  why  is  it,  Latter-day  Saints,
that  we  have  been  tossed  to  and  fro
and  smitten  and  persecuted  for  these
many  years  P  It  is  because  we  have
disobeyed  the  law  of  heaven,  we  have
not  kept  the  commandments  of  the


INTEREST  MAKIEFSTED,  ETO.


Ill


Most  High  God,  we  have  not  ful-
filled his  law;  we  have  disobeyed  the
word  which  he  gave  through  his  ser-
vant Joseph,  and  hence  the  Lord  has
suffered  us  to  be  smitten  and  afflicted
under  the  hands  of  our  enemies.

Shall  we  ever  return  to  the  law  of
God  ?  Yes.  When  ?  Why,  when
we  wilL  We  are  agents;  we  can
abide  his  law  or  reject  it,  just  as  long
as  we  please,  for  God  has  not  taken
away  your  agency  nor  mine.  But  I
will  try  to  give  you  some  information
in  regard  to  the  time.  God  said,  in
the  year  18*52,  before  we  were  driven
out  of  Jackson  County,  in  a  revela-
tion which  you  will  find  here  in  this
book,  that  before  that  generation
should  all  pass  away,  a  house  of  the
Lord  should  be  built  in  that  county,
(Jackson  County),  "  upon  the  con-
secrated spot,  as  I  have  appointed;
and  the  glory  of  God,  even  a  cloud
by  day  and  a  pillar  of  flaming  fire  by
night  shall  rest  upon  the  same."  In
another  place,  in  the  same  revelation,
speaking  of  the  priesthood,  he  says
that  the  sons  of  Moses  and  the  bods
of  Aaron,  those  who  had  received  the
two  priesthoods,  Bhould  be  filled  with
the  glory  of  God  upon  Mount  Zion,
in  the  Lord's  house,  and  should  re-
ceive a  renewing  of  their  bodies,  and
the  blessings  of  the  Most  High
should  be  poured  out  upon  them  in
great  abundance.

This  was  given  forty-two  years  ago.
The  generation  then  living  was  not
only  to  commence  a  house  of  God  in
Jackson  County,  Missouri,  but  was
actually  to  complete  the  same,  and
when  it  is  completed  the  glory  of  God
should  rest  upon  it.

Now,  do  you  Latter-day  Saints
believe  that?  I  do,  and  if  you  believe
in  these  revelations  you  just  as  much
expect  the  fulfillment  of  that  revela-
tion as  of  any  one  that  God  has  ever
given  in  these  latter  times,  or  in  for-
mer ages. We  look,  just  as  much


for  this  to  take  place,  according  to
the  word  of  the  Lord,  as  the  Jews
look  to  return  to  Palestine,  and  to
re-build  Jerusalem  upon  the  place
where  it  formerly  stood.  They  expect
to  build  a  Temple  there,  and  that  the
glory  of  God  will  enter  into  it ;  S3
likewise  do  we  Latter-day  Saints
expect  to  return  to  Jackson  County
and  to  build  a  Temple  there  before  the
generation  that  was  living  forty-two
years  ago  has  all  passed  away.  Wall,
then,  the  time  must  be  pretty  near
when  we  shall  begin  that  work.  Now,
can  we  be  permitted  to  return  and
build  up  the  waste  places  of  Zion,
establish  the  great  central  city  of
Zion  in  Jackson  County,  Mo,,  and
build  a  Temple  on  which  the  glory
of  God  will  abide  by  day  and  by  night,
unless  we  return,  not  to  the  "  new
order,"  but  to  that  law  which  was
given  in  the  beginning  of  this  work  ?
Let  me  answer  the  question  by  quoting
one  of  these  revelations  again,  a  reve-
lation given  in  183 k  The  Lord,
speaking  of  the  return  of  his  people,
and  referring  to  those  who  were  driven
from  Jackson  County,  says — "They
that  remain  shall  return,  they  and
their  children  with  them  to  receive
their  inheritances  in  the  land  of  Zion,
with  songs  of  everlasting  joy  upon
their  heads."  There  will  be  a  few
that  the  Lord  will  spare  to  go  back
there,  because  they  were  not  all
transgressors.  There  were  only  two
that  the  Lord  spared  among  Israel
during  their  forty  years  travel —
Caleb  and  Joshua,  They  were  all
that  ware  spared,  out  of  some  twenty,
five  hundred  thousand  people,  from
I  twenty  years  old  and  upwards,  to  go
into  the  la: id  of  promise.  There
may  be  three  in  our  day,  or  a  half  dozen
or  a  dozen  spared  that  were  once  on  that
land  who  will  be  permitted  to  return
with  their  children,  grand-child rea
and  greatgrandchildren  unto  tba
waste  places  of  Zion  and  build  them


up  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy.

But  will  they  return  after  the  old
order  of  things  that  exists  among  the
Gentiles — every  man  fur  himself,
this  individualism  in  regard  to  pro-
perty ?  No,  never,  never  while  the
WorM  stands*  If  jou  would  have
the^e  revelations  fulfilled  you  must
comply  with  the  conditions  thereof.
The  Lord  said j  concerning  the  build-
ing up  of  Zion  when  we  do  return —
".Except  Zion  be  built  according  to
the  law  of  the  celestial  kingdom,  I
can  not  receive  her  unto  myself.*'  If
we  should  be  permitted,  this  present
year,  IS 74,  to  go  back  to  that  county,
and  shoiid  undertake  to  build  up  a
city  of  Zion  upon  the  consecrated
Spot,  after  the  order  that  we  have
en  living  in  during  the  last  forty
years,  we  *4*>uM  be  cast  out  again,
the  Lord^pould  not  acknowledge  us
as  his  people,  neither  would  he  ac-
knowledge the  works  of  our  hands  in
the  building  of  a  city*  If  we  would
go  back  then,  we  must  comply  with
the  celestial  law,  the  law  ot  consecra-
tion* the  law  of  oneness,  which  the
Lord  has  spoken  ot  from  the  begin-
ning. Except  you  are  one  you  are
not  mine.  Query,  if  we  are  Dot
the  Lord's  who  in  the  world  or  out" of
the  woild  do  we  belong  to  ?  Here  is
a  question  for  us  all  to  consider.
There  is  no  other  way  for  us  to  be-
come one  but  by  keeping  the  law  of
heaven,  and  when  we  do  this  we  shall
become  sanctified  before  God,  and
never  before.

Talk  about  sanctification,  we  do  not
believe  in  the  kind  of  sanctification
taught  by  the  sectarian  religion —
that  they  were  sanctified  at  such  a
minute  and  such  an  hour  and  at  such
a  place  while  they  were  praying  in
secret.  We  believe  in  the  sanctifi-
cation  that  comes  by  continued  obe*
dience  to  the  law  of  heaven,  I  do
not  know  of  any  other  sanctification
that  the  Scriptures  tell  about,  of  any


other  sanctification  that  is  wortli  the
consideration  ot  rational  beings.  If
we  would  be  sanctified  then,  we  must
begin  to-day,  or  whenever  the  Lord
points  out,  to  obey  his  laws  just  as
far  as  we  possibly  can;  and  by  obedi-
ence to  these  laws  we  continually  gain
more  and  more  favor  from  heaven,
more  and  more  of  the  Spirit  of  God,
and  thus  will  be  fulfilled  a  revelation
given  in  ]  83 1,  which  says  that  before
Zion  is  redeemed,  let  the  armies  of
Israel  become  very  great,  let  them
become  sanctified  before  me,  that
they  may  be  as  fair  as  the  sun,  clear
as  the  moon,  and  that  their  banners
may  he  terrible  unto  all  the  nations
of  the  earth.  Not  terrible  by  reason
of  numbers,  but  terrible  because  of
the  sanctification  they  will  receive
through  oh  dience  to  the  law  of  God.
Why  was  Enoch,  and  why  were  the
inhabitants  of  the  Zion  built  up  be-
fore the  flood  terrible  to  all  the  na-
tions around  about  ?  It  was  because,
through  a  long  number  of  years,  they
observed  the  law  of  God,  and  when
their  enemies  came  up  to  fight  against
thera,  Enoch,  being  filled  with  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  speak-
ing the  word  of  God  in  power  and  in
faith,  the  very  heavens  trembled  and
shook,  and  the  eaith  quaked,  and
mountains  were  thrown  down,  rivers
of  water  were  turned  out  of  their
course,  and  all  nations  fuared  greatly
because  of  the  pewer  of  God,  and  the
terror  of  his  might  that  were  upon
his  people.

We  have  this  account  of  ancient
Zion  in  oi-e  of  the  revelations  that  God
has  given.  What  was  it  that  made
their  banners  terrible  to  the  nations?
It  was  not  their  numbers.  If,  then
Zion  must  become  great  it  will  be
because  of  her  sanctification.  When
shall  we  begin,  Latter-day  Saints,  to
carry  out  the  law  of  God,  and  enter
upon  the  process  necessary  to  our
sanctification  ? We  are  told  by  the


THE  CALLING  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC,


113


highest  authority  that  God  has  upon
the  earth  that  now  is  the  accepted
time  and  now  ii  the  day  of  salva-
tion, so  far  as  entering  into  this
Older  which  God  has  pointed  out  is
concerned.  Shall  we  do  it  ?  Or
shall  we  say  no  ?  Shall  there  be
division  amoiag  the  people,  those  who
are  on  the  Lord's  side  come  out  and
those  who  are  against  the  Ia*r  of  God
corao  out  ?  I  hope  this  division  will
not  be  at  present  I  hope  that  we
shall  take  hold  with  one  heart  and
with  one  mind.  The  time  of  the
division  will  come  soon  enough.  It
will  be  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord's
power,  when  his  face  shall  be  un-


veiled in  yonder  heavens,  and  when
he  shall  come  in  his  glory  and  in  his
might  Then  the  heavens  will  be
shaken  and  the  earth  will  reel  to  and
fro  like  a  drunken  man.  w  Then/*
saith  the  Lord,  "  I  will  send  forth
mine  angels  to  gather  out  of  my
kingdom  all  things  that  offend  and
that  do  iniquity/'  That  will  be  time
enough  for  this  great  division,  Let
us  not  be  divided  now,  Latter-day
Saints,  but  let  us  manifest  our  wil-
lingness to  comply  with  the  word
and  law  of  the  Most  High,  and  be
prepared  for  the  blessings  which  he
has  in  store  for  us.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BBTGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  iy  the  Bowery,  at  Brig  ham  City,  Saturday  Morning,

June  26,  1874.


(Repotted  hj  David  W.  Evans,)


THE  CALLING  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  TO  PREACH  THE  GOSPEL  AND  PRO-
CEED WITH  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,1  PREPARA-
TORY TO  THE  COMING  OF  THE  SOV  OF  MAN — ALL  GOOD  IS  OF  THE
LORD— SALVATION  AND  LIFE  EVERLASTING  ARE  BEFORE  US*


A  few  of  ns  have  come  to  talk  to
the  people  in  this  place  upon  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  our
calling  is  to  preach  the  Gospel,  initi-
ate people  into,  and  proceed  with,
the  organization  of  the  kingdom  of
God  as  far  as  we  can,  preparatory  to
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man*  We
have  commenced  to  organize,  I  will
»ay  partially,  in  the  Holy  Order  that
God  has  established  for  his  people  in

No.  8.


all  ages  of  the  world  when  he  has  had
a  kingdom  upon  the  earth.  We  maj
call  it  the  Order  of  Enoch,  the  Order
of  Joseph,  the  Order  of  Peter,  or
Abraham,  or  Moses,  and  then  go
back  to  Noah j  and  then  step  to  our
own  position  here,  and  say  that  we
will  organize  as  far  as  we  have  the
privilege,  taking  into  consideration
and  acting  under  the  laws  of  the
I  land. Many  branches  of  industry

Vol  XVII.


1U


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


have  been  organized  here  to  help  to
sustain  each  other,  to  labor  for  the
good  of  all,  and  to  establish  co-
operation in  the  midst  of  the  Church
in  this  place*

In  most  of  the  business  transactions
of  this  Church  and  people,  as  far  as  I
have  directed,  I  have  waited  for  busi-
ness to  be  presented,  and  endeavored
to  so  live  that  the  Lord  will  dictate
according  to  his  own  mind  and  plea-
sure, and,  at  the  very  time  it  is  neces-
sary, have  that  knowledge  which  will
enable  us  to  perform  every  labor  ac-
ceptably to  God  and  to  the  heavens,
ind  to  discharge  our  duties  one  to
another,  and  to  accomplish  in  every
particular  the  work  which  our  Father
in  heaven  has  given  us  to  do.  I  am
a  minute-man.  It  is  very  seldom
that  I  take  thought  what  I  shall  say
or  what  I  shall  do.  When  we  meet
in  the  capacity  of  a  Conference,  the
business  matters  are  presented,  and  I
generally  know  what  to  do,  and  I  do
not  know  but  what  I  understand  the
workings  of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  by  the  manifestations  of
the  Spirit  at  the  moment,  as  well  as
I  should  if  I  had  studied  them  for
months;  and  I  can  truly  say  that  I
have  fulfilled  one  of  the  sayings  of
the  Savior  tolerably  well — to  take  no
thought  what  ye  shall  say,  for  in  the
▼ery  hour  or  moment  when  you  need
it,  it  shall  be  given  to  you.

I  hope  that,  during  our  meetings
here,  the  people  will  be  edified  and
comforted,  and  that  the  system  of
laboring  together  for  each  other's
good  will  be  wisely  and  satisfactorily
laid  before  them,  and  that  each  and
every  one  of  us,  with  ready  minds
and  willing  hearts,  will  proceed  to
do  the  things  that  are  required  of  us
by  our  heavenly  Father.

Much  can  be  said  upon  the  doc-
trine of  lift  and  salvatios,  but  I  will
say  this  to  the  Saints  iu  this  place
concern iug  the  workings  of  the  king-


dom of  God  upon  the  earth— all  good
comes  from  heaven,  all  good  is  of
the  Lord ;  whatever  promotes  the
happiness  of  mankind  and  the  glory
of  God,  whatever  increases  peace  and
righteousness  upon  the  earth,  and
leads  the  people  in  the  way  of  godli-
ness, comfort,  contentment  and  en-
joyment, and  tends  to  increase  health
and  wealth,  and  life  here  and  here-
after, is  of  God  ;  and,  in  laboring  for
each  other's  welfare  and  happiness,
if  we  cfin  not  do  all  that  we  want  to
do,  let  us  do  what  we  can,  and  leave
the  event  with  the  Lord,  and  wait  tor
the  time  when  we  Can  fully  enter
into  the  organization  of  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth,  and  fully
upon  those  initiatory  steps  which
will  hasten  the  perfection  of  the
Saints,  and  prepare  them  to  enter
iuto  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  When
we  are  permitted  to  do  in  part,  we
will  step  forward  and  do  in  part,  go
as  far  as  we  can,  and  do  as  much  as
we  can  to  perfect  ourselves  and  pre-
pare for  the  building  up  of  the  Centre
Stiike  of  Zion.

We  hope  and  pray  that  all  ^ho
may  speak  during  our  meetings  here
will  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  and  that  tho^e  who  pray,  sing
and  hear  may  be  filled  with  the  same
Spirit,  that  we  may  increase  in  know-
ledge and  wisdom,  and  grow  in  the
things  of  God,  This  is  what  we
desire  and  what  we  pray  for,  and  we
hope  that  our  meetings  will  be  profit-
able to  alL

This  is  a  hard  place  to  speak  in,
and  we  request  the  brethren  and
sisters  to  be  as  still  as  they  conveni-
ently can,  so  that  they  can  hear  what
is  said.  Let  all  be  quiet,  and  every
keart  be  lilted  to  God,  that  we  may
learn  his  mind  and  will  concerning
us  -  then  ask  for  power  to  do  his  will,
for  a  disposition  to  give  us  victory  over
every  passion  and  slothful  feeling,  that
we  may  be  awake  to  righteousness.


*


THE  BELIEF  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETO


115


Salvation  and  life  everlasting  are
before  us;  it  is  our  business  to  secure
them  in  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and
to  prepare  for  the  restoration  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  who  have
slept  without  the  Gospel Let  us  do


what  we  can  to  bless  ourselves,  our
posterity  and  our  progenitors,  and  to
save  the  human  family,  and  so  fulfill
the  mission  which  the  Lord  has  given


us.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  Bow  key,  Brigham  City,  Suxdat  Afternoon,

June  28,  1874+


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  BELIEF  OF  THE  SAINTS  IN  THE  MISSION  OF  THE  SAVIOR  PER-
TAINING TO  INHERITANCES  UPON  THE  EARTH  THAT  SHALL  BE  EVER-
LASTING— IT  TAKES  A  HIGHER  POWER  THAN  A  BILL  OF  DIVORCE  TO
TAKE  A  WOMAN  FROM  A  HOOD  MAN.


I  should  like  the  people  to  keep
quiet  as  possible,  I  have  a  few
words  to  say  to  them  concerning  the
inheritances  of  the  Saints.  I  will
talk  to  those  who  are  b  lie  vers  in  the
Old  and  New  Testaments,  n&  this
book  whmh  lies  before  me  is  called —
the  Bible,  and  in  the  mission  of  the
Savior,  I  will  ask  the  Litter- day
Saints  if  they  believe  that  the  man
Christ  Jesus,  who  was  crucified  at
Jerusalem,  over  eighteen  hundred
years  ago,  was  the  Savior  of  the
world,  and  that  he  paid  the  debt
contracted  by  our  first  parents,  and
redeemed  the  children  of  men  from
the  full  ?  Of  coure,  they  will  answer
in  the  affirmative.  You  believe,
then,  in  the  mission  of  the  Savior
to  the  earth  ?  "  Of  course  we  do,"
is  the  answer.  Do  we  believe  that
the  Savior  is  heir  to  this  earth,  I


will  answer  for  all  Saints  and  al
believers  in  the  Savior  and  say  we  do-
Do  we  believe  that  this  man  Christ
Jesus  has  received  his  inheritance;
has  he  finished  the  work  which  he
came  into  the  world  and  was  mani-
fested in  the  flesh  to  accomplish  ?
I  will  answer  for  all  Christians  and
say  he  has  not,  as  yet,  finished  his
work  or  received  the  kingdom.  As
for  the  proof  of  this  you  can  go  to
the  Bible  and  all  the  other  revela-
tions that  we  have  in  our  possession,
and  you  will  find  it  there.  Are  we
co-workers  with  the  Savior  to  redeem
the  children  of  men  and  all  things
pertaining  to  the  earth  ?  I  will  an-
swer for  the  Saints  and  say  that  we
most  assuredly  believe  we  are.  All
who,  while  in  the  flesh,  received  and
were  faithful  to  the  Priesthood,  la-
bored with  the  Savior  while  they


1


remained  here,-  and  when  they  passed
into  the  spirit  world  their  labors  did
not  censi1,  but  they  passed  into  the
prison,  and,  to  this  day,  they  are
preaching  to  the  spirits  there,  and
laboring  for  the  salvation  of  the
human  family  and  for  the  earth  and
all  things  pertaining  to  it.

Have  these  men,  who  have  lived
npon  tiie  earth  and  enjoyed  the  bless-
ings of  the  holy  Priesthood,  received
their  inheritances  ?  I  take  the  lib-
erty of  answering  for  all  Saints  in  the
negative,  They  have  not  received
their  inheritances,  but  they  have
received  promises  like  Abraham  of
old  when  he  was  shown  the  land  of
Canaan,  and  it  was  promised  to  him
that  it  should  be  his  inheritance,  and
that  of  his  seed  after  him  forever
and  ever.  To  this  day  they  have  not
inherited  the  land  according  to  the
promises  that  were  made  to  Abra-
ham, So  it  is  with  all  others.  Hare
any  of  us,  in  the  latter-days,  received
inheritances  upon  the  face  of  this
earth  iliat  ^hall  be  everlasting  ?  No,
we  are  ^ut  prepared  to  receive  them,
and  they  are  not  prepared  for  us,  I
am  telling  you  these  things  that  you
may  know  and  understand  that,  when
we  talk  about  property,  or  anything
else  that  we  seem  to  possess,  we  have
not  yet  received  anything  for  an
everlasting  inheritance.  If  ws  are
faithful  we  shall  receive  after  a  long
time,  that  is,  it  may  seem  long  to  us
who  reckon  time  by  years,  months,
weeks,  days,  minutes  and  seconds.  I
should  like  to  have  the  Latter-day
Saints  understand  what  their  labor
is,  and  to  have  each  one  understand
his  dufy,  and  then  understand  the
reward  of  obedience  to  that  duty.  |

We  get  a  great  many  good  gifts
here — we  enjoy  a  great  deal  that  the
Lord  g:ves  us;  gifts  that  we  will  say
are  inherent  natural  gifts.  What  a
beau  til  u  I  gift  the  power  of  the  eye  is
for  a  man  to  enjoy  ! What  a  beau-  i


tiful  gift  the  power  of  hearing  is  to
the  people,  and  all  our  senses — tast-
ing, smelling,  Ac.,  and  the  passions
when  they  are  governed  and  con-
trolled, how  beautiful  they  are!
Shall  we  inherit  them  for  ever  and
ever,  or  shall  we  take  a  course  that
they  shall  be  taken  from  us  ?

We  are  talking  now  to  the  brethren
about  being  one,  operating  together,
submitting  all  to  the  kingdom  of
God.  What  for  ?  Am  I  to  give
what  I  have?  "Why,  this  is  my
house,  this  is  my  farm,  these  are  my
cattle!"  We  only  seem  to  have
them,  they  are  only  in  our  possession
for  the  present,  "This  is  my  wife,
these  are  my  wives,  here  are  my
children!"  We  seem  to  possess
them,  but  whether  we  shall  possess
them  forever  depends  entirely  upon
our  future  course.  How  lung  will
this  state  of  things  last  ?  Until  we
have  passed  the  ordeals  allotted  to
finite,  intelligent  beings,  and  have
passed  from  one  degree  and  state  to
another;  until  the  work  is  completed
by  the  Savior,  pertaining  to  this
earth,  and  our  eternal  salvation  is
sealed  to  us.  While  we  live  hire  in
the  flesh  we  are  subject  to  turn  to  the
right  and  to  the  lef  t,  and  we  have  the
vanities  and  allurement!  of  the  world
to  contend  with;  and  we  see  Latter-
day  Saints,  after  traveling  five,  ten,
twenty,  and  even  forty  years,  faithful
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  turn  away
from  the  holy  commandments.  They
will  be  lost,  and  all  that  they  have
had,  and  all  that  they  think  they
have  will  be  taken  from  them  and
given  to  those  who  are  faithful ;  and
those  who  are  faithful  will  not  re-
ceive their  inheritances,  so  that  they
can  say  they  are  tb«ir  own,  until  they
have  passed  all  these  ordeals,  and
until  the  Savior  has  completed  the
woik  of  redemption.  He  is  now
trying  to  get  the  people  to  avail
themselves  of  the  advantages  of  his


THE  BELIEF  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETO


117


atonement,  and  we,  professedly,  are
enjoying  these  advantages,  but  how
alow  and  slothful  we  are !  What
trifling,  frivolous  shadows,  I  may
say  vain  ideas,  will  turn  the  hearts
and  the  affections  and  judgment  and
will  of  man  from  the  principles  of
truth !  I  want  you  to  understand
that  you  have  not  your  eternal  in-
heritances, although  you  may  have
an  inheritance  here  in  this  city.

By  and  by  the  centre  stake  of  Zion
may  be  redeemed*  We  may  go  there,
and  Zion  may  be  built  up  and  spread
abroad  and  we  receive  our  inheritan-
ces; and  if  we  are  faithful  we  shall
receive  all  that  has  been  promised  to
us.  But  suppose  that  we  turn  away
from  our  covenants,  all  will  be  taken
from  us  and  given  to  others.

When  shall  we  receive  our  inherit*
ances  so  that  we  can  say  they  are  our
own  ?  When  the  Savior  has  com-
pleted the  work,  when  the  faithful
Saints  have  preached  the  Gospel  to
the  last  of  the  spirits  who  have  lived
here  and  who  are  designed  to  conie  to
this  earth;  when  the  thousand  years
of  rest  shall  come  and  thousands  and
thousands  of  Temples  shall  be  built,
and  the  servants  and  handmaids  of
the  Lord  shall  have  entered  therein
and  officiated  for  themselves,  and  for
their  dead  friends  back  to  the  days  of
Adam  ;  when  the  last  of  the  spirits
in  prison  who  will  receive  the  Gospel
has  received  it ;  when  the  Savior
comes  and  receives  his  ready  bride,
and  all  who  can  be  are  saved  in  the
yarious  kingdoms  of  God — celestial,
terrestrial  and  telestial,  according  to
their  several  capacities  and  opportu-
nities; when  sin  and  iniquity  are
driven  from  the  earth,  and  the  spirits
that  now  float  in  this  atmosphere  are
driven  into  the  place  prepared  for
them ;  and  when  the  earth  is  sanctified
from  the  effects  of  the  fall,  and  bap-
tized, cleansed,  and  purified  by  fire,
and  returns  to  its  paradisiacal  state,


and  has  become  like  a  sea  of  glass,  a
urim  and  thummim;  when  all  this  is
done,  and  the  Savior  has  presented
the  earth  to  his  Father,  and  it  is
placed  in  the  cluster  of  the  celestial
kingdoms,  and  the  Son  and  all  his
faithful  brethren  and  sisters  have
received  the  welcome  plaudit — "  En-
ter ye  into  the  joy  of  your  Lord,"
and  the  Savior  is  crowned,  then  and
not  till  then,  will  the  Saints  receive
their  everlasting  inheritances.  I  want
you  to  understand  this.  We  seem
to  have  something  now,  but  how  long
shall  we  keep  it  ?

The  Latter-day  Saints  are  believers
in  the  atonement  of  the  Saviur,  and
I  would  like  to  have  the  Elders  of
Israel  understand  as  far  as  they  can
all  the  points  of  doctrine  in  regard
to  the  redemption  of  the  human  fam-
ily,  that  they  may  know  how  to  talk
about  aud  explain  them.  No  one
who  believes  in  the  Bible  and  in  the
mission  of  the  Savior  believes  that
the  wicked  are  going  to  possess  this
earth ;  but  they  believe  that  when  it
is  prepare:  1  it  will  be  given  to  the
Saints  and  they  will  inherit  it.  The
Savior  has  requested  us  and  all  of  his
disciples  to  remember  him  as  oft  as
we  meet  together,  and  to  break  bread
in  remembrance  of  his  body  which
was  broken  for  us,  and  to  drink  from
the  cup  in  remembrance  of  the  blood
that  was  shed  for  us.  We  meet,  as
we  are  doing  to  day,  and  partake  of
the  bread  and  the  water  in  compli-
ance with  this  request  of  the  Re-
deemer, We  have  a  great  work
before  us ;  and  that  portion  of  it
we  are  now  trying  to  inaugurate  is
not  new.  The  doctrine  of  uniting
together  in  our  temporal  labors,  and
all  working  for  the  good  of  all  is
from  the  beginning,  from  everlasting,
and  it  will  be  for  ever  and  ever.  No
one  supposes  for  one  moment  that  in
heaven  the  angels  are  speculating,
that  they  are  building  railroads  and


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


factories,  taking  advantage  one  of
another,  gathering  up  the  substance
there  is  in  heaven  to  aggrandize
themselves,  and  that  they  live  on
the  same  principle  that  we  are  in  the
habit  of 'doing.  No  Christian,  no
sectarian  Christian,  in  the  world  be-
lieves this;  they  believe  that  the
inhabitants  of  heaven  live  as  a  fam-
ily, that  their  faith,  interests  and
pursuits  have  one  end  in  view — the
g'ory  of  God  and  their  own  salva-
tion, that  they  may  receive  more  and
more, — go  on  from  perfection  to  per-
fection, receiving,  and  then  dispensing
to  others;  they  are  ready  to  go,  and
ready  to  come,  and  willing  to  do
whatever  is  required  of  them  and  to
work  for  the  interest  of  the  whole
community,  for  the  good  of  all.  We
all  believe  this,  and  suppose  we  go  to
work  and  imitate  them  as  far  as  we
can.  Would  it  be  anything  deroga-
tory to  the  character  of  a  gentleman
or  a  lady  p  I  think  not.  As  far  as
I  understand  true  principle  the  title
of  gentleman  should  not  be  applied
to  any  man  on  the  earth  unless  he  is
a  good  man.  No  gentleman  takes
the  name  of  the  Deity  in  vain.  Some
who  do  take  his  name  in  vain  may  be
called  gentleman,  but  it  is  a  mistake,
they  are  not  gentlemen.  A  gentle*
man  carries  himself  respectfully  be-
fore the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  at
all  times,  in  all  places  and  under  all
circumstances,  and  his  life  is  worthy
of  imitation.  She  who  is  worthy  of
the  title  of  lady  adorns  her  mind
with  the  rich  things  of  the  kingdom
of  God  j  she  is  modest  in  her  attire
and  manners ;  she  is  prudent,  discreet
and  faithful,  and  full  of  all  goodness,
charify,  love,  and  kindness,  with  the
love  of  God  in  her  heart.  Such  a
woman  has  a  right  to  the  title  of
lady,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  any
others  have,  whether  they  are  elect
or  not.

We  will  try  to  imitate  in  some


small  degree,  tha  family  that  lives  im
heaven,  and  prepare  ourselves  for
the  society  that  will  dwell  upon  the
earth  when  it  is  purified  and  glorified
and  comes  into  the  presence  of  the
lather.

For  us  to  think  that  we  have  an
inheritance  on  the  earth  is  folly,  un-
less God  has  declared,  and  sealed  it
upon  us,  by  revelation,  that  we  shall
never  full,  never  doubt,  never  come
short  of  glorifying  him  or  of  doing
his  will  in  all  things,  No  person,
unless  he  is  in  the  possession  of  this
blessing,  has  the  least  right  to  sup-
pose that  he  has  an  inheritance  on
the  earth.  For  the  time  being  we
have  our  wives,  children,  farms  and
other  possessions,  but  unless  we
prove  ourselves  worthy,  what  we  seem
to  have  will  be  taken  from  us  and
given  to  those  who  are  worthy,  con-
sequently we  need  not  worry  with
regard  to  the  defects  of  one  another*
I  say  to  the  brethren,  yon  need  not
have  the  least  concern  in  the
world  about  meeting  a  man  in  the
celestial  kingdom  that  you,  if  you
are  worthy  and  are  so  happy  as  to  get
into  the  celestial  kingdom,  can  not
fellowship ;  and  if  yon  should  hap-
pen to  be  the  one  that  is  in  fault  and
you  cannot  pass  the  sentinel,  and  your
neighbor  or  brother  does,  he  wilt  not
see  you  there,  you  need  not  be  con-
concerned  in  the  least  about  being
joined  to  any  person  by  the  holy  seal-
ing power,  that  will  not  do  right  in
the  next  world.  I  say  to  my  sisters
in  the  kingdom,  who  are  sealed  to
men,  and  who  say,  "  We  do  not  want
this  man  in  eternity  if  he  is  going
to  conduct  himself  there  as  he  does
here" — there  is  not  the  least  danger
in  the  world  of  your  ever  seeing  him
in  eternity  or  of  his  seeing  you  there
if  he  proves  himself  unworthy  here.
But  if  he  honors  his  Priesthood,  and
you  are  to  blame  and  come  short  of
doing  your  duty,  and  prove  yourself


THE  BELIEF  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


119


unworthy  of  celestial  glory,  it  will  be
left  to  him  to  do  what  he  pleases  with
you.  You  will  be  very  glad  to  get
to  him  if  you  find  the  fault  was  in
yourself  and  not  in  him,  But  if  yon
are  not  at  fault,  b-  not  troubled
about  being  joined  to  him  there,  for
no  man  will  have  the  privilege  of
gathering  bis  wives  and  children
around  him  there  unless  he  proves
himself  worthy  of  them,  I
I  have  said  n  number  of  times,
and  I  will  say  again,  to  yon  ladies
who  want  to  get  a  bill  of  divorce
from  your  husbands,  because  they  do
not  treat  jou  right,  or  because  you
do  not  exactly  like  their  ways,  there
is  a  principle  upon  which  a  woman
can  leave  a  man,  but  if  the  man
honors  his  Priesthood,  it  will  be  pretty
hard  work  for  you  to  get  away  from
him*  If  he  is  just  and  right,  serves
God  and  is  fall  of  justice,  love,  mercy
and  truth,  he  will  have  the  power
that  is  sealed  upon  him,  and  will  do
what  he  pleases  with  you.  When
you  want  to  get  a  bill  of  divorce,  you
had  better  wait  and  find  out  whether
the  Lord  is  willing  to  give  you  one
or  not,  and  not  come  to  me.  *  I  tell
the  brethren  and  sisters,  when  they
come  to  me  and  want  a  bill  of  di-
vorce, that  I  am  ready  to  seal  people
and  administer  in  the  ordinances,
and  they  are  welcome  to  my  services,
but  when  they  undertake  to  break
the  commandments  and  tear  to  pieces
the  doings  of  the  Lord,  I  make  them
give  me  something.  I  tell  a  man
he  has  to  give  me  ten  dollars  if  he
wants  a  divorce.  For  what?  My
services  ?  No,  for  his  foolishness.
If  you  want  a  bill  of  divorce  give  me
ten  dollars,  so  that  I  can  put  it  down  1
in  the  book  that  such  a  man  and  such
a  woman  have  dissolved  partnership.
Do  you  think  you  have  done  so  when
you  have  obtained  a  bill  of  divorce  ?
No,  nor  ever  can  if  you  are  faithful  to
the  covenants  you  have  made.  It


takes  a  higher  power  than  a  bill  of
divorce  to  take  a  woman  from  a  man
who  is  a  good  man  and  honors  his
Priesthood — it  must  be  a  man  who
possesses  a  higher  power  in  the
Priesthood,  or  else  the  woman  ia
bound  to  her  husband,  and  will  be
forever  and  ever.  You  might  as  well
ask  me  for  a  piece  of  blank  paper  for
a  divorce,  as  to  have  a  little  writing
on  it,  saying — u  We  mutually  agree
to  dissolve  partnership  and  keep  our-
selves apart  from  each  other,"  &c.  It
is  all  nonsense  and  folly ;  there  is  no
such  thing  iu  the  ordinances  of  the
house  of  God ;  you  cannot  find  any
such  law.  It  is  true  Jesus  told  the
people  that  a  man  could  put  away  his
wife  for  fornication,  but  for  nothing
short  of  this.  There  is  a  law  for
you  to  be  obedient,  and  humble  and
faithful.

Now,  brethren,  the  man  that  honors
his  Priesthood,  the  woman  that  honors
her  Priesthood,  will  receive  an  ever-
lasting inheritance  m  the  kingdom  of
God ;  but  it  will  not  be  until  this
earth  is  purified  and  sanctified,  and
ready  to  be  offered  up  to  the  Father,
But  we  can  go  to  work  now  and  lire
as  near  as  we  can  like  the  family  of
heaven,  that  we  may  secure  to  our-
selves the  blessings  of  heaven  and  of
earth,  of  time  and  of  eternity,  and
life  everlasting  in  the  presence  of  the
Father  and  the  Son.  This  is  what
we  want  to  do.  Remember  it,  bre-
thren and  sisters,  and  try  to  live
worthy  of  the  vocation  of  your  high
calling.  You  are  called  to  be  Saints
— just  think  of  and  realize  it,  for  the
greatest  honor  and  privilege  that  can
lie  conferred  upon  a  human  being  is
to  have  t  he  privilege  of  being  a  Saint.
The  honor  of  the  kings  and  queens  of
the  earth  fades  into  insignificance
when  compared  with  the  title  of  a
Saint.  You  may  possess  earthly
power,  and  rule  with  an  iron  hand,
but  that  power  is  nothing,  it  will


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


goon  be  broken  and  pass  awaj ;  bat
the  power  of  those  who  lire  and  honor
the  Priesthood  will  increase  forever
and  ever.

Now  I  am  going  to  yield  for  my
brethren  to  talk  to  you.  I  have  said
a  few  things.  Remember  the  ex-
hortation I  gave  you  this  morning.
Live  according  to  the  faith  of  our
religion.  Let  contention,  all  con-
tention cease ;  cease  finding  fault
with  and  casting  reflections  upon
those  who  are  mot  exactly  with  us.
Let  us  show  by  our  daily  walk  and
doings  that  we  have  something  better
than  they  have,  I  will  say  to  you
who  enter  this  Order,  with  regard  to
your  temporal  affairs,  cease  your  ex-
travagance. The  Lord  has  said  he
would  make  the  Latter-day  Saints


the  richest  people  on  the  earth  ;  but
all  he  will  do  is  to  give  us  the  ability
and  place  means  in  our  possession,
and  we  must  go  to  work  and  organise
this  means  and  make  ourselves  rich  j
and  the  first  step  is  to  stop  our  ex-
travagance, cease  this  needless  ex-
pense, learn  to  make  that  which  we
wear,  raise  that  which  we  eat,  liva
within  ourselves,  accumulate  the  good
things  of  life,  and  so  make  ourselves
wealthy.

I  pray  the  Lord  our  God  to  blesa
you  and  to  inspire  every  heart  to
faithfulness,  that  we  may  be  prepared
for  a  better  place  than  this— -for  this
world  when  it  shall  be  sanctified  and
glorified,  that  we  may  then  enjoy
the  society  of  each  other  without  sin
and  without  these  annoyances.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  July  12,  1874.

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  TO  BE  HAPPY-EXPERIENCE  AS  DELEGATE
FROM  UTAH  IN  CONGRESS— THERE  IS  NOTHING  LIKE  COMMUNION
WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.


I  rejoice,  to-day,  in  the  opportu-
nity which  I  have  of  meeting  with
my  brethren  and  sisters,  but  it  would
give  me  much  greater  satisfaction  to
ait  and  look  upon  their  faces,  and  to
listen  to  the  voice  or  voices  of  others,
than  to  occupy  the  time  myself,  I
am  thankful,  however,  that  I  am  in
your  midst,  and  that  circumstances
are  so  favorable  with  ns  as  they  are.


I  expect,  from  all  I  have  heard
that  this  past  season  has  boen  one  of
some  degree  of  anxiety  on  the  part
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  the  Terri-
tory of  Utah,  But  I  do  not  belie v
that  your  happiness  has  been  much
interfered  with,  if  I  am  to  judge  of
your  feelings  by  my  own,  We  have
had  so  many  things  to  contend  with
all  the  days  that  we  have  beea  asso-


GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  TO  BE  HAPPY,  ETC.


121


elated  with  this  work,  and  we  made
calculations  when  we  espoused  it  upon
the  character  of  the  opposition  to  be
contended  with,  that  when  we  meet
it  there  ia  no  disappointment.  In
this  respect  the  Latter-day  Saints
differ  from  every  other  people  with
whom  I  have  met.  If  any  other
peopte  in  this  government  were  as*
sailed  as  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
been,  and  were  to  have  so  many  in-
tolerant and  sweeping  measures  sug-
gested for  legislation  by  the  Congress
of  t  he  United  States,  real  estate  would
be  of  very  little  value,  and  all  kinds
of  business  would  he  unsettled  and
ruined,  But  I  cannot  perceive  that
values,  business,  or  jour  faith  in  the
Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has
been  in  the  least  disturbed.

I  have  been  questioned  a  good
many  times  since  I  returned,  as  to
my  feelings  during  my  absence.  My
reply  has  been  that  I  never  felt  better
in  my  life  than  during  the  past  eight
months.  I  have  been  absent  from
home  a  good  many  times,  and  I  have
traveled  in  a  good  many  lands,  and
mingled  with  many  people  under  a
variety  of  circumstances,  but  I  can
say  truly  this^day,  that  at  no  period
in  any  of  my  travels,  or  under  the
different  circumstances  ip  which  I
have  been  placed,  have  I  ever  felt
better  than  i  have  during  my  recent
absence  from  home.

This  may  surprise  some  who  are
not  acquainted  with  this  work,  and,
in  fact,  it  may  excite  some  degree  of
surprise  in  the  breasts  of  those  who
are  familiar  with  it;  but  my  theory
is  that  when  a  man  is  conscious,  or  a
people  are  conscious,  that  he  or  they
are  in  the  path  of  duty,  doing  that
which  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God,
they  should  always  be  happy,  no
matter  what  the  circumstances  may
be  which  surround  them.  I  think
that  God  baa  created  us  to  be  happy,
and  my  belief  is  that  he  has  placed


happiness  within  the  reach  of  all,  and
it  is  man's  own  fault  if  he  is  not  happy
and  does  not  enjoy  himself  every  day
of  his  life.  This  is  one  of  my  rea-
sons for  liking  my  religion,  this  sys-
tem called  "  Mor  monism,"  because  it
bestows  full  happiness  and  joy  upon
its  believers.  They  can  be  happy  in
the  midst  of  the  most  adverse  cir-
cumstances; they  can  rejoice  when
surrounded  with  enemies,  and  when
their  lives  are  imperilled.  During
my  absence  my  feeling  has  been  that
God  was  with  his  people;  I  also  felt
that  the  faith  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  was  greatly  exerted  in  my
behalf,  and  that  it  was  sustaining
and  strengthening  me*

In  some  respects  my  position  as
delegate  from  this  Territory  was  not
an  enviable  one,  arid  from  the  time
that  I  reached  Washington  until  the
close  of  Congress  there  was  one
puper,  at  least,  which  poured  out  un-
limited abuse  upon  myse!f  and  upon
I  my  constituents.  Scarcely  a  day
passed  that  some  falsehood  was  not,
circulated  or  some  vile  slander  or
charge  published  about  the  people
in  these  mountains,  or  about  myself.
Appeals  of  every  imaginable  char-
acter were  made  to  the  Congress  of
the  United  States,  that  is,  to  the
House  particularly,  to  take  instant
measures  to  expel  me,  and  when,  as
these  writers  thought,  a  disposition
was  manifested  not  to  comply  with
their  demands,  recourse  was  had  to
the  charge  of  bribery — that  we  were
spending  money,  and  that  member*
of  Congress  were  paid  to  prevent
their  action  upon  my  case.  In  this
respect  the  condition  of  a  delegate
mi^ht  be  considered  an  unenviable
one,  but  I  felt  a  strength,  I  felt  a
power,  I  had  an  influence,  or  thought
I  had,  at  least,  that  no  other  member
of  the  House  of  Representatives
possessed.  For  instance,  the  mem-
bers of  the  House  generally  were


122


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


constantly  harassed  with  the  thought
as  to  what  their  constituents  would
think  of  them,  how  they  would  view
their  action,  how  they  would  like
their  votes,  &c,,  whether  they  would
be  displeased  with  such  and  such  a
measure,  Ac.  Their  future  election,
they  knew,  depended  upon  their
having  a  popular  record,  and  to
Becure  this  required  considerable
thought  and  ingenuity  upon  the  part
of  many,  I  was  divested  of  this  fear,
I  had  no  thought  as  to  what  my  con-
stituents would  think  of  me,  it  never
cost  me  a  single  moment's  reflection,
because  I  knew  that  I  had  the  entire
contidence  of  the  peoplo  whom  I  re-
presented ;  and  I  knew  that  whatever
I  did,  so  long  as  I  did  the  best  I
could,  I  should  be  sustained  in  doing
it  by  you  and  by  all  the  people
throughout  these  valleys,  aud  in  this
respect  I  had  a  strength  which  no
other  one  had.  I  often  told  mem-
bers, when  it  was  convenient  and
appropriate  to  speak  in  this  strain,
that  I  bad  the  faith  of  the  entire
people,  and  that  they  were  praying
for  me.  This  would  amuse  a  good
many,  but  1  have  never  failed,  during
my  absence,  to  convey,  whenever  I
could,  the  idea  that  we  were  a  people
who  believed  in  and  prayed  to  God,
and  that  we  had  faith  in  our  prayers*
One  of  the  great  lessons  that  we  have
to  teach  the  world  to-day  is  faith  in
God,  and  though  a  member  of  Con-
gress, dealing  with  political  questions
and  matters  which  are  considered
foreign  to  religion  by  the  great
majority  of  men,  I  have  not  thought
that  religion  was  like  a  Sunday  gar-
men  t,  to  be  worn  on  Sunday  in  the
meeting  house,  tabernacle,  chapel  or
church,  and  to  be  laid  aside  again  on
Monday  morning.  I  have  nerer  had
that  idea  of  religion,  I  do  not  have
it  now.

There  is  at  the  present  time  an
almost  entire  absence  of  faith  iu  God


|  among  men,  I  have  been  struck
with  this  more  than  any  other  feature
that  I  have  witnessed  during  my
absence.  Converse  with  well  mean-
ing, intelligent  men,  men  of  good
moral  character,  and  you  will  be  sur-
prised at  the  extent  of  the  unbelief
there  is  in  the  world.  There  seems
to  be  an  idea  that  God  our  Eternal
Father  resides  in  some  remote  place
so  far  removed  from  us  that  he  takes
no  special  cognizance  of  us  or  of  our
actions,  that  he  governs  the  universe
and  the  affairs  of  men  by  great
natural  and  unalterable  laws,  that
there  are  no  special  providences  in
favor  of  men,  but  that  man  prospers
according  to  his  wisdom,  strengh  and
talent,  and  that  weak  men  and  a  weak
people  stand  no  chance  in  opposition
to  the  strong;  hence  the  remark  was
made  to  me,  I  may  say,  hundreds  of
times  during  my  absence  —  "You
people  must  conform  to  the  ideas  of
the  rest  of  the  world,  or  you  will  go
to  the  wall."  "  You  people  must
abandon  your  strange  ideas  and  your
peculiar  views,  or  you  will  inevitably
be  overthrown."  On  such  occasions
I  would  not  fail  to  give  the  ideas  that
we  believed  in  God,  that  we  believed
this  was  God's  work,  that  God  had
sustained  and  delivered  us  in  the
past,  that  we  were  still  willing  to
trust  him  for  the  future,  and  that  he
would  provide  a  way  of  escape.  But
while  men  would  listen  patiently  and
kindly  to  such  remarks,  you  could  see
incredulity  on  every H  lineament  of
their  countenance,  a  sort  of  pitying
incredulity,  as  though  they  looked
upon  you  as  very  well-meaning,  but
in  this  respect  a  very  much  mistaken
person.  The  idea  that  prevails  is
that  God  or  Providence  is  on  the  side
of  the  strongest  artillery,  and  that  if
we  are  weak  and  are  warred  against
we  must  go  down  because  ol  our  weak-
ness, v r t  :•,:"../  :}  Ki\

Of  course,  where  this  idea  prevails,


GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  To  UK  HAPPY,  ETC.


123


there  can  be  bat  little  faith  in  God's
special  providences-  If  this  were  a
correct  idea,  there  would  be  little  use
in  prayer,  in  supplicating  God,  in
entreating  him  for  his  blessing  and
his  power  to  be  bestowed  upon  us.
But  we  have  proved  the  efficacy  of
prayer  so  often  ourselves,  that  there
is  no  need  for  us  as  a  people  to  be
fortified  upon  this  point,  or  to  have
arguments  urged  upon  us*  My  own
life  is  full  of  incidents — as  is  the  life,
doubtless,  of  every  individual  present
who  has  faith  in  God — which  are
evidences  of  his  interposition  in  an*
iwer  of  prayer,  and  my  lee  ling  is
that  one  ot  the  great  duties  devolving
upon  us  is  to  teach  the  world  that
there  is  a  God,  and  that  he  has  power
to  save  to-day,  as  much  as  in  ancient
days,  those  who  are  willing  to  trust
him.  It  is  this  peculiar  feature  that
makes  everything  connected  wth  this
work  so  incomprehensible  to  men.
Those  of  you  who  have  kept  posted
in  relation  to  affairs,  know  how  won-
derfully matters  have  been  arranged
for  our  good.  When  I  look  back  at
the  seven  or  eight  months  that  are
past  and  see  what  has  been  done,  I
am  amatol,  knowing  how  thorough
have  been  the  measures  and  the
efforts  to  strip  us  of  every  right  and
to  bring  us  into  bondage.  No  less
than  eight  or  nine  bills  were  intro-
duced into  Congress  early  in  the
session,  for  the  express  purpose  of
reaching  the  "  Mormon'*  case.  These
bills  vvere  referred  to  various  com-
mittees, and  arguments  had  to  be
made  upon  them  before  these  com-
mittees; but  there  was  a  determina-
tion on  the  part  of  a  great  many
members  to  vote  upon  any  bill,  no
matter  what  its  features  might  be,
that  might  be  introduced  into  the
House  from  a  committee.  You  can-
not judge,  however,  in  every  instance,
of  the  private  feelings  of  men  hy
heir  votes. A  great  many  members


of  Congress  would  rather  not  cast
their  votes  against  us  if  they  could
have  their  way  ;  but  the  timidity  of
members  upon  the  "  Mormon"  ques-
tion is  the  strength  of  the  enemies  of
the  people  of  Utah,  and  they  count
upon  that  as  a  means  of  insuring  the
success  of  their  schemes  of  villainy.
They  are  well  aware  that  there  is  a
feeling  of  reluctance  on  the  part  of
public  men  to  place  themselves  on
the  record  in  favor  of  anything  that
would  look  like  sustaining  or  giving
countenance  to  what  is  called  "Mor-
mon ism."  Our  enemies  counted
upon  this  last  session.  In  the  begin-
ning of  the  session  they  depended
upon  that  as  the  means  by  which
they  would  prevent  me  from  taking
my  seat  in  the  House  of  Representa-
tives. Disappointed  in  that,  they
then  commenced  operations  before
the  committee  on  elections  and,  m
you  are  doubtless  well  aware,  did
everything  in  their  power  to  precipi-
tate that  question  upon  the  House.
I  need  not  rehearse  to  you  how  these
attempts  have  been  overruled.  To
my  mind  the  hand  of  God  is  as  plainly
manifest  in  all  these  circumstances
as  is  this  li£jht,  or  those  ohjects  which
I  see  before  me  in  the  light  of  this
day.

When  the  bills  against  Utah  were
introduced,  they  were  referred,  as  I
have  said,  to  committees.  They
were  principally  copies  of  the  bill  that
passed  the  Senate  in  the  last  session
of  the  forty-second  Congress,  called
the  Frelinghuysen  bill.  One  of
these  was  introduced  by  the  chairman
of  the  Committee  on  Territories  and
was  called  the  McKee  bill.  This  bill
was  argued  at  ^reat  length  before  the
Committee  on  Territories,  and  it  was
reported  to  the  House-
To  the  astonishment  of  its  reputtd
author,  a  point  of  order  was  raised
upon  it  for  which  he  was  not  prepared,
and,  before  he  scarcely  knew  it,  the


124


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


bill  was  taken  oat  of  his  hands  and
referred  to  the  committee  of  the
whole  and  virtually  defeated  for  that
session.  Of  course,  our  enemies
were  not  suited  with  that  arrange-
ment, they  wanted  some  other  bill
passed,  and  hoping  that  the  Poland
bill  would  he  the  least  objectionable
and  would  pass  the  easiest,  they
brought  that  forward  and  urged  its
passage  before  the  Judiciary  Com-
mittee. A  number  of  meetings  were
held,  arguments  were  made  for  and
against  the  bill,  and  finally,  through
laboring  bard  with  prominent  mem*
bersuf  that  committee  a  modification
was  obtained  in  one  important  sec-
tion of  the  bill,  namely,  that  refer-
ring to  the  selection  of  jurors.  As
the  bill  originally  stood  it  possessed
the  same  feature  that  all  the  rest  did,
giving  to  the  Judge  of  the  District
Court,  his  clerk  and  the  II  S.  Mar-
shal, the  right  to  select  all  our  ju-
rors. This  section  was  fought  earn-
estly, and  finally  Judge  Poland  was
induced  to  modify  it  sufficiently  to
have  three  commissioners  appointed,
who  should  have  the  selection  of
jurors*  Eventually  another  change
was  made  in  that  section,  and  the
feature  that  now  stands  in  the  law  as
it  passed  was  introduced  giving  the
right  to  select  jurors  to  the  Probate
Judge  of  each  county  and  the  clerk
of  the  District  Court,  each  to  select
alternately  a  juror  from  lists  already
prepared*  I  felt  that  this,  itself,  was
a  very  great  triamph,  because  as  the
■bill  originally  stood  it  virtually  left
us,  our  lives,  our  liberties  and  all  our
property,  at  the  mercy  of  three  indi-
Tidals  who,  judging  by  past  experi-
ence in  this  Territory,  would  pack
juries  upon  us  without  any  scruples;
and  I  felt  that  it  was  a  great  advan-
tage to  us  that  the  infamous  raid  had
been  made  upon  us  two  years  ago  by
the  Judge  of  this  district  and  those
associated  with  him,  for  it  gave  me


an  opportunity  of  setting  forth  what
had  been  done  in  the  past  when  there
was  no  law  to  sustain  such  opera-
tions, and  to  argue  what  we  might
expect  it  there  were  a  law  to  sustain
them.

When  the  Poland  bill  was  brought
before  the  House  there  seemed  to  be
a  forget  fulness  on  the  part  of  itg
sponsor — not  its  author  but  its  spon-
sor— Judge  Poland,  that  there  was  a
rule  in  operation  requiring  every  bill
that  contemplated  an  appropriation
from  the  federal  treasury  to  be  re-
ferred to  the  committee  of  the  whole.
He  had  forgotten  the  point  that  had
been  made  on  the  McKee  bill,  and
when  his  reputed  bill  was  introduced
that  point  was  again  made,  and  sus-
tained by  the  Speaker.  Judge  Poland
saw  that  he  could  not  carry  it  over
the  decision  of  the  Speaker  and  the
decision  of  the  best  parliamentarians
in  the  House  and,  to  save  his  bill
from  being  referred  to  the  committee
of  the  whole,  he  withdrew  it.  At
this  point  a  man  who  had  been  down
there,  very  anxious  to  get  legislation,
and  urging  it  with  his  might,  met  me
on  the  floor  of  the  House,  and  said —
"  Mr.  Cannon,  before  you  left  Salt
Lake  you  told  me  that  God  was  on
your  side,  and  I'll  be  d  —  d  if  I  don't
begin  to  believe  it/'  I  told  him  He
was,  and  was  on  the  point  of  telling
him  that  he  would  be  damned  if  he
did  not  believe  it,  when  we  separated.
For  the  moment,  his  fears  being
alive,  I  suppose  he  thought  there  wag
some  power  with  us,  as  this  was  thg
second  bill  that  had  been  so  nearly
killed  for  that  session.  J udge  Poland
succeeded  afterwards  in  getting  the
privilege  of  reporting  the  bill  to  the
House  and  having  it  there  considered
as  in  committee  of  the  whole,  and
this  saved  the  point  of  order.

As  I  have  told  you,  the  strength
of  our  enemies  did  not  consist  in  the
justice  or  rightfulness  of  their  cause;


GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  TO  EE  HAPPY,  ETC,


it  did  not  consist  in  the  strength  of
their  arguments ;  it  did  not  consist,
in  fact,  in  anything  of  this  character
that  could  be  brought  before  mem-
bers; but  their  principal  reliance
was  upon  the  circulation  of  abomina-
ble falsehoods  and  slanders  and  the
unreasoning  prejudices  which  existed
against  the  people  of  this  Territory,
which  made  members  timid  in  deal-
ing fairly  with  our  question,  A
people  who  profess  the  characteristics
of  many  of  the  residents  of  this  Ter~
ritory,  and  who  have  shown  such
willingness  to  suffer  all  things  for
what  they  consider  the  right,  hare
difficulty  in  comprehending  how  men
in  power  can  be  timid  where  principle
is  involved*  But  the  power  of  mem-
bers of  Congress  is  very  ephemeral.
The  tenure  of  office  of  many  is  fre-
quently based  upon  slight  grounds.
Some  have  to  struggle  hard  to  get
to  Congress,  and  they  struggle  still
harder  to  keep  there.  Viewed  from
their  stand  point  such  reason  in  this
wise  :  I  follow  politics  as  a  profes-
•ion ;  I  expect  to  live  by  that  profes-
sion; I  reach  Congress  with  difficulty,
for  my  district  is  closely  contested.
I  must  vote  in  a  way  not  to  lessen
my  majority  in  my  district,  or  to  de-
crease  my  influence.  There  is  a  pre-
judice against  the  Mormons,  and  if  I
seem  to  favor  them,  my  opponents
would  use  it  against  me  on  the  stump
in  the  next  campaign,  even  if  I
should  succeed  in  getting  a  nomina-
tion from  the  convention  of  my
party.

As  you  know,  the  Poland  bill
passed  the  House  and  was  sent  to
the  Senate.  It  was  expected  that  it
would  pass  the  Senate  almost  instan-
taneously; that  it  would  be  refer-
red, as  a  matter  of  form,  to  the
Committee  on  the  Judiciary  and  be
instantly  reported  back  for  passage.
But  the  members  of  the  Judiciary
Committee  in  the  Senate,  although


I  the  Frelinghuysen  hill  had  passed
during  the  previous  Congress,  were
not  disposed  to  pass  this  kistily
through.  There  had  been  conside-
rable said,  a  good  many  arguments
made,  and  conversations  held  with
Senators,  and  the  true  state  of  affairs,
as  far  as  possible,  had  been  repre-
sented to  them,  and  they  had  this
fear — that  this  whole  attempt  at  le-
gislation was  merely  a  pretext  by
which  a  raid  could  be  made  on  the
property  of  the  "  Mormons"  in
Utah  Territory,

i  There  were  two  very  powerful  aids
that  I  had  in  Washington.  One,
that  idea  to  which  I  have  just  refer-
red, that  all  this  was  a  scheme  on
the  part  of  certain  interested  parties
for  the  purpose  of  getting  up  a  raid
under  cover  of  polygamy  and  "  Mor-
monism  "  to  rob  the  people  of  their
hard-earned  possessions.  Many  Sen-
ators and  members  had  been  to  Utah
and  were  aware  of  the  increased
value  of  property  through  the  dis-
covery of  mines.  They  had  no  faith
in  carpet-baggers,  hence  there  was  a
reluctance  on  the  part  of  considerate
men  to  lend  themselves  to  anything
like  a  scheme  of  this  character.

The  other  great  aid  I  had  were  the
looks  ot  the  men  who  were  urging
legislation.  All  1  had  to  do  was  to
point  to  these  men  and  ask  Son  at  org
and  members  how  they  would  like  to
have  power  put  in  the  hands  of  such
persons  if  they  resided  in  Utah
Territory  ?  The  argument  was  a
conclusive  one  if  they  had  the  oppor-
tunity of  seeing  the  persons  who  were
urging  legislation  at  that  time.  I
do  not  exaggerate  when  I  suy  that
those  who  went  down  there  to  contest
my  seat  and  urge  legislation  were  the
best  aids  that  could  have  been  fur-
nished me.  Some  have  thought  I
ought  to  have  had  some  help,  but  I
tell  you  truly  that  they  were  the  besfc

i  helps  that  could  be  sent. I  have


136


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


been  asked  repeatedly  what  we  paid
one  of  them  at  least  to  be  there.  The
first  time  the  question  was  put  to  me
I  was  a  little  surprised  at  it,  and  could
not  help  expressing  my  surprise,  not
understanding  exactly  its  drift.  I
said — *'  We  pay  him  nothing,  what
do  you  mean?"  "Well,"  said  the
gentleman  who  asked  the  question,
"if  you  do  not  pay  him  you  certain-
ly can  afford  to  pay  him  to  keep  him
here/'  These  were  strong  reasons
on  our  side,  and  they  contributed
materially  to  lid  p  our  cause.

When  the  bill,  as  I  have  said,  came
from  the  Judiciary  Committer  to  the
Senate,  it  came  in  its  original  form
except  the  striking  out  of  one  section
which  extended  the  common  law  over
this  Territory.  But  there  was  a
disposition  to  so  modify  the  bill
that  it  could  not  be  used  in  the  way
that  it  was  designed  by  its  originators,
and  you  know  how  it  has  been  pruned.
To  me,  as  I  have  said  respecting  this
other  matter,  so  I  can  say  concerning
it,  that  the  hand  of  God  was  very
visible  to  me,  and  I  felt  that  he  was
laboring  on  our  side,  and  that  he
would  help  us  and  deliver  us  as  he
had  delivered  others  in  other  times
and  in  past  ages ;  and  the  Lord  did
soften  the  hearts  of  men,  cause  them
to  feel  favorable  to  us  and  to  feel  fa-
vorably disposed  to  our  cause.

It  has  betm  said  as  an  explanation
of  this,  so  I  have  understood,  that
we  have  used  money  at  Washington
to  defeat  legislation,  I  have  not
•een  these  statements  myself,  for  I
made  it  a  point  never  to  read  books
or  papers  which  villify  this  people.
I  really  have  too  little  time  to  read
the  works  and  papers  which  are  in-
structive *and  pleasant  to  me,  and
with  which  I  ought  to  be  familiar,  to
spend  one  moment  of  time  in  reading
abusive,  lying  and  slanderous  writings
concerning  this  people  or  myself.
While  I  was  absent,  there  was  a


paper  published  in  Washington  that
had  almost  daily,  as  I  have  remaked,
articles  againsi  you  and  myself.  I
made  it  a  point  never  to  read  one  of
them.  I  did  not  want  to  be  disturbed
in  my  feelings.  ''Where  ignorance
is  bliss,"  the  poet  says,  "'tis  folly  to
l>e  wise."  I  thought  the  scheme  was
a  blackmailing  one;  I  knew  the  in-
fluences which  were  put  in  operation
to  keep  up  this  abuse  and  I  was  de-
termined it  should  not  annoy  me,
Whenever  the  use  of  money  has  been
alluded  to  in  the  hearing  of  President
Young  he  has  stated,  emphatically,
that  so  far  as  he  was  concerned  he
would  not  spend  one  cent  of  money
to  preierve  our  rights,  or  to  obtain
extended  liberties  for  us  as  a  people.
This  has  been  his  emphatic  declara-
tion, his  expressed  determination.
His  views  on  this  subject  have  been
accepted  as  every  way  correct.

I  want  to  say  to  you  here,  to-day,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  that  not  one
cent  of  money  has  been  spent  with
any  man  for  the  purpose  of  influenc-
ing htm.  I  believe  my  word  can  be
relied  upon  by  this  people ;  you  have
known  me  all  my  life,  and  when  I
say  this  you  can  put  implicit  and  per-
fect reliance  in  what  I  say.  We
have  had  no  aid  of  this  kind,  we  have
used  no  means  of  this  character,  wo
have  had  no  lobbyist.  That  which
has  been  done  has  been  fairly  and
above  board,  and  it  has  been  the
blessing  of  God  upon  us  in  answer
to  the  united  faith  and  prayers  of
this  people  that  has  produced  the  re-
sults that  we  have  witnessed,  I  am
thankful  that  we  have  been  enabled
to  take  this  course  and  that  we  can
trust  in  God  and  rely  upon  him,  for
he  will  save  to  the  very  uttermost.

I  recollect  writing  home  a  letter
some  weeks  ago,  some  weeks  in  fact
before  th©  adjournment,  in  which  I
said  that  so  far  jia  the  sight  of  the
eye,  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  and  na-


GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  TO  BE  HAPPY,  ETC


127


tural  judgment  were  concerned  men
might  be  justified  in  thinking  there
would  be  legislation  that  would  be
very  severe,  and  that  I  would  lose
my  seat.  And  yet  I  cau  truly  say
that  from  the  day  of  ray  election  up
to  the  time  that  I  left  Washington  I
never  had  a  single  doubt,  not  a
shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  my  keeping
my  seat — it  never  cost  me  one  mo-
ment's thought.  I  knew  when  I  left
here  that  I  would  be  admitted  to  my
seat ;  1  knew  when  the  attempt  was
made  to  expel  me  that  it  would  be  I
unsuccessful ;  I  knew  farther,  that
every  attempt  to  get  legislation  such
as  was  contemplated  would  be  de-
feated, and  if  a  bill  did  pass  it  would
be  in  a  comparatively  mild  form.  Of
Course,  having  these  ideas,  I  have  felt,
as  I  stated  in  the  commencement  of
my  remarks,  very  happy.  I  have
had  joy  all  the  time,  I  have  had
peace  all  the  time,  and  I  have  had
good  cause  to  be  thankful  to  God  our
heavenly  Father  for  his  blessings
upon  me.

That  I  was  not  expelled  from  my
seat,  however,  was  not  due  to  the  ;
absence  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the
person  who  wanted  it.  It  was  re-
ally amusing  to  hear  the  pathetic
manner  in  which  the  poor  creature
and  his  confederates  alluded  to  the
technical  and  legal  reply  which  I
made,  (;md  which  was  published  in
this  city.)  to  his  charges  against  me
in  his  notice  of  contest  for  the  place
of  delegate.  He  had  piled  charge
upon  charge  against  me,  nothing
being  too  false,  vile  or  malignant  to
embody  in  these  accusations,  and  be-
cause I  acknowledged  nothing,  but
threw  the  onus  of  the  proof  upon
him,  he  murmured  considerably.  It
would  doubtless  have  been  very  grat-
ifying to  him  to  have  had  his  case
completed  for  him*  As  it  was,  re-
course was  had  to  the  most  despicable
methods  to  obtain  euch  evidence  as


was  thought  necessary.  Spies  pryed
into  my  domestic  affairs,  and  from
them  and  apostates  cooked  affidavits
were  obtained  with  which  it  was
hoped  the  desired  end  would  be
achieved.  If  Tile  slanders,  base
falsehoods,  false  affidavits  or  atro-
cious attacks  could  have  had  the  de-
sired eflect  I  would  not  have  kept  my
seat  in  Congress.  If  grossly  libelous
newspaper  articles,  if  shameless  and
indecent  lectures,  if  frantic  appeals
to  popular  prejudice,  or  the  seciet
circulation  of  documents  signed  by
perjured  affiants  could  have  influenced
Congress  to  take  hasty  and  ill-con-
sidered action,  the  place  of  delegate
from  Utah  might  have  been  declared
vacant.  My  opponents  attacked  me
for  being  a  44  Mormon "  of  the  most
ultra  and  pronounced  type;  their
great  efforts  were  to  prove  that  in  «
the  enunciation  and  practice  of  every
feature  of  my  religion  I  was  bold
though  shrewd  and  not  a  whit  behind
the  foremost,  and  because  of  this
should  not  have  a  seat  in  Congress,
This  endorsement,  if  it  had  been
worth  anything,  would  have  pleased
me.  But  it  did  not  always  suit  to
give  me  this  character.  For  circula-
tion here,  another  plan  was  adopted.
I  was  accused  of  not  standing  up  to
my  principles.  This  charge  was
false  but  did  not  displease  me,  any
more  than  the  others  pleased  me,  I
am  thankful  tos  iy  that  I  have  learned
to  view  all  such  charges  with  com-
plete indifference.  Conscious  of  the
propriety  of  my  own  course  and  that
I  had  the  confidence  of  ray  consti-
tuents, my  enemies'  attacks  gave  me
no  concern.  Indeed,  I  accepted  them
as  compliments.  I  was  quite  willing
to  be  investigated.  I  had  tried  to
live  so  that  I  had  no  fear  of  a  micro-
scopic investigation  of  the  acts  of
my  life.  At  the  same  time  I  never
conceded  that  Congress  had  the  right
to  investigate  my  domestic  affain,


128  JOURNAL  OF

I  have  no  idea  that  I  shall  ever  be
convinced  that  it  has  that  right

So  far  as  my  personal  treatment  has  a
been  concerned,  I  have  been  treated
with  respect  and  consideration,  A
few  individuals,  a  few  mem  tiers,  have
sought  to  do  us  injury;  a  few  men
can  make  a  great  disturbance  on  a  \
question  noon  which  men  are  so  tender
as  this  question  of  "  Mormon  ism/' I
But  by  the  great  majority,  by  ninety-  |
Dine  hundredths  of  the  men  with
whom  I  have  been  brought  in  con-
tact, as  members  of  the  House,  as
senators,  as  heads  of  departments,  I
could  not  ask  any  better  treatment
than  I  have  received,  I  could  not  ex-
pect it,  I  have  enduavored  to  de-
port myself  as  a  gentleman  in  all  the
relations  of  life,  to  treat  everybody
with  the  consideration  and  respect
that  were  due  to  them,  and  I  have,  in
return,  been  treated  in  the  same
manner,  I  take  pleasure  in  bearing
this  testimony,  because  one  might  I
imagine,  from  reports  that  have  |
reached  fa  ere,  that  I  have  been  in  a
constant  war  and  difficulty.  It  has
been  a  constant  war,  but  it  has  been
a  war  that  has  been  confined  to
fighting  and  counteracting  the  lies,
the  machinations,  the  slanders  and
the  miserable  schemes  of  those  who
have  been  plotting  against  us.  And
1  wish  to  bear  testimony  to  yon  this
afternoon,  that  if  you  will  put  your
trust  in  God  he  will  never  desert
you.  I  never  felt  for  a  moment  con-
cerned  about  our  affairs  but  once,  i
and  that  was  when  I  heard  of  the
divisions  in  our  elections  here;  that ,
gave  me  concern.  If  these  Latter-
day  Saints  are  only  united,  if  they
will  keep  the  command  men  ts  of  God
and  do  his  will,  let  me  say  to  you
that  there  is  no  power  on  earth  or  in
hell  that  can  injure  us  or  retard  the
onward  progress  of  this  work*  I
know  this  as  well  as  I  know  I  stand
here. But  you  be  divided,  you  lose


DISCOURSES,

your  faith,  you  array  yourselves  one
against  another,  and  then  where  is
your  strength  ?  Yon  are  no  better
than  any  other  people,  and  God  will
visit  you  with  scourges  and  with
disaster,  and  yon  will  be  punished
and  your  enemies  will  have  power
over  you.  I  hear  of  men  being  iu
doubt  concerning  their  faith  in  the
Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I
am  astonished  at  it.  It  seems  to  me
that  every  evidence  that  is  necessary
to  convince  people  of  the  divinity  of
this  work,  people  who  examine  it
carefully  and  prayerfully,  has  been
given  unto  us  as  a  people.

I  thought  I  knew  something,  be-
fore I  left  here,  concerning  the  power
of  God ;  I  thought  I  knew  something
of  the  providences  of  God  our  hea-
venly Father;  but  I  never  had  such
an  experience  in  my  life  as  I  have
had  while  I  have  been  absent,  I
know  that  God  is  with  this  people.
I  know  that  God  has  chosen  Brigham
Young  to  be  his  servant,  and  to  pre-
side over  his  Church  on  the  earth.
I  know  this  as  well  as  I  know  that  I
live,  and  I  might  as  well  doubt  my
own  existence,  doubt  the  existence  of
the  heavens  above  my  head,  or  the
earth  on  which  I  stand,  as  to  doubt
this,  and  I  know  that  those  who
follow  his  counsel  will  be  blesRed  and
will  be  delivered,  while  those  who
reject  his  counsel  will  have  to  suffer
therefor.

This  may  sound  strange  that  a
man  should  have  this  power  given  to
him  in  these  days,  but  it  is  consistent
with  the  plan  of  what  ion  as  revealed
in  ancient  days*  Recollect  the  power
that  Jesus  gave  to  Peter  —  that  he
should  bind  on  earth  and  it  should
be  bound  in  heaven,  and  that  he
should  loose  on  earth  and  it  should
be  loosed  in  heaven.  What  great
power  this  was  to  give  to  one  man,
Jesus  said  to  him,  "  And  I  will  give
unto  thee  the  key  of  the  kingdom  of


GOD  HAS  CREATED  US  TO  BE  HAPPY,  ETC-


129


heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shall
bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  hea-
Yen,  and  whatsoever  thou  shall  loose
on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven*

When  God  chooses  a  man  to  be
his  servant,  he  expects  all  his  child-
ren  to  honor  that  man  when  they
become  acquainted  with  the  char-
acter of  his  mission,  and  those  who
honor  him  He  will  honor,  and  they
who  despise  him  He  will  despise,
and  I  know  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  prospered,  it  has  been
the  experience  of  my  entire  life,  from
my  biyhood  up  to  this  day,  in  obey-
ing the  counsel  of  God's  servant.
During  the  days  of  Joseph,  when  the
Latter-day  Saints  obeyed  his  counsel
they  were  prospered  ;  and  since  his
death,  for  thirty  years  now,  when
they  have  obeyed  the  counsel  of
Brigham  they  have  been  blessed  and
prospered.  And  there  is  this  evi-
dence, which  I  consider  one  of  the
greatest  evidences  that  we  can  have
— whenever  we  do  that  which  is  re-
quired of  us  we  have  peace  in  our
hearts,  and  ^  hen  we  oppose  it  we  are
disturbed  in  our  spirits.  I  look  up>n
this  as  one  of  the  best  guides  to  judge
of  the  character  of  a  spirit  by  which
we  may  be  assailed,  or  which  may
present  itself  for  admission  to  our
hearts.  Whenever  a  spirit  presents
itself  that  produces  disturbance  of
feeling,  agitation,  pain,  darkness  or
donbt,  we  can  know  if  we  will  judge
as  we  should  do,  that  it  is  not  of
God ;  bat  a  spirit  that  produces
peace,  a  spirit  that  produces  joy,
light  and  happiness,  comes  from  God,
and  as  a  people  we  should  be  able  to
judge  between  these  two  classes  of
influences.

I  said,  in  the  commencement,  that
it  is  the  privilege,  in  my  opinion,  of
every  man,  every  human  being  on
the  face  of  the  earth  to  be  happy,  if
he  will  seek  happiness  in  the  right
direction, The  heathen  who  lives

No.  9.


up  to  the  light  God  has  given  hina
can  be  a  happy  man. The  idolater,
no  matter  what  his  condition  or  be-
lief, if  he  lives  up  to  the  light  God
has  given  him,  can  be  happy  if  he
will  observe  those  laws  which  God
has  made  plain  unto  all  of  us.  Now,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  there  are
lying  spirits  gone  forth  in  the  world
who  seek  to  deceive. The  spirit  of
falsehood  reigns  to-day  in  the  midst
of  the  earth. Men  delight  in  slander
and  in  that  which  is  false.  You
have  proved  this  sufficiently,  and  if
you  are  not  careful  you  will  be  as-
sailed by  this  spirit  and  partake  of  it
before  you  are  aware  of  it.  How
can  you  know  a  good  spirit  from  m
bad  spirit? By  the  effect  it  pro-
duces upon your minds. I  know
that  there  are  some  who  think  that
unless  a  man  doubts  he  cannot  ac-
quire knowledge. This to  me  is
great  folly. I  do  not  think  it  at  all
necessary  to  doubt  or  to  hold  contro-
versies with  the  devil  in  order  to
acquire  knowledge. I  never  saw  a
man  who  pursued  that  course  who
was  not  disturbed  in  his  mind  and
darkened  in  his  understanding.  Seek
for  that  which  produces  a  good  effect
upon  your  minds;  if  we  follow  that
it  will  bring  us  back  to  God.  Wg
need  never  be  deceived  by  any  spirit
or  influence, and we  may  always
know  the  truth  when  we  hear  it.
We  have  a  guide  within  ourselves,
which  all  of  us  carry,  and  that  is
the  power  to  detect  truth  from  error,
right  from  wrong,  good  from  evil,
the  spirit  of  light  from  the  spirit  of
darkness. I  want  no  spirit  within
me  that  produces  any  unhappy  feel-
ing. I  want  no  spirit  to  enter  into
my  heart  that  produces  darkness  and
doubt* I  want  a  spirit  that  produces
peace  and  joy,  and  that  will  cause  me
to  rejoice  in  the  midst  of  my  enemies
and  when  threatened  by  danger;  or
if  I  have  to  walk  that  narrow  and

Vol.  XVII.


130


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


dreadful  path  that  leads  to  death  be-
cause of  my  faith,  or  any  other  ter-
rible consequence,  that  I  can  walk  it
and  have  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Fpirit
of  peace,  joy  and  resignat  ion  therein,
without  doubt  or  darkness  assailing
me-  That  is  the  spirit  that  we  as  a
people  should  seek  for.  And  when
you  are  disturbed  in  your  feelings
and  assailed  with  doubt  and  do  not
feel  happy,  withdraw  yourselves  from
the  world,  leave  the  cares  that  press
you,  lay  them  aside,  withdraw  to
your  secret  chamber,  and  bow  your-
selves down  before  your  God  and
entreat  him,  in  the  name  of  Je»us,  to
give  you  his  Spirit,  and  do  not  leave
your  chamber  until  you  are,  as  it
were,  baptized  in  the  Spirit  of  God
and  full  of  peace  and  joy,  all  your
cares  and  troubles  dissipated  and  dis-
missed. This  is  the  course  we  should
take  as  Latter-day  Saints,  and  this
will  be  far  more  profitable  to  na  than
any  thing  else  we  can  do  during  that
period.  There  is  nothing  like  com-
munion with  the  Holy  Spirit,  there
is  no  blessing  to  equal  it I  have


proved  it  abundantly  during  ray
absence,  and  I  rejoice  that  I  can  bear
this  testimony  to  you  to-day,

I  expect  it  sounds  strange  for  a
man  who  has  been  occupied  as  I  have
been  to  talk  in  this  strain ;  but  there
is  nothing  of  greater  importance  to
me,  according  to  my  understand  lug,
than  the  salvation  of  the  human
family,  temporally  and  spiritually,  in
the  kingdom  of  God  our  heavenly
Father ;  nothing  of  greater  import-
ance than  teaching  men  and  women
hotv  to  live  so  as  to  be  always  in  the
enjoyment  of  light  and  wisdom  and
the  peaceful  Spirit  of  God  our  hea-
venly Father.

That  God  may  bless  you,  that  God
may  preserve  you,  that  God  may
unite  your  hearts  and  make  you  one,
and  make  you  a  people  who  shall
prove  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
that  God  still  lives  and  that  he  is
unchanged,  that  he  is  the  same  to-
day that  he  was  yesterday,  and  that
lie  will  be  the  same  forever,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  an  the  Funeral  Services  of  Elder  Thomas  Williams,
in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Morning,  July  19,  1874.

(Reported  by  David  Wt  Evans.)

IT  IS  OF  LITTLE  IMPORT  HOW  WE  LEAVE  THIS  WORLD,  SO  THAT  WE
ARE  PREPARED  TO  LIVE  OR  DIE — GOD  HAS  ORDAINED  THAT  ALL
MEN  MUST  DIE,


We  are  met  this  morning  to  at-  man  exiitence.  People  generally
tend  to  one  of  those  ceremonies  that 1  feel  reflective  on  sorrowful  occasions
are  intimately  connected  with  ha-  j  like  the  present,  and  there  is  some-


IT  IS  OF  LITTLE  IMPORT,  ETC.


131


thing  about  the  manner  in  which  this,
our  beloved  brother,  was  taken  from
ns,  that  rather  tends  to  increase  this
feeling  of  commiseration,  not  for  the
departed,  bat  for  his  family,  friends
and  associates*  Taken  away  in  the
bloom  of  life  and  health,  without  a
moment's  warning,  snatched  off  in
the  face  of  his  family  and  ushered,
as  it  were,  immediately  from  this
world  into  another  state  of  exist-
ence, it  produces  feelings  that  are
more  easily  imagined  than  des-
cribed. However,  my  ideas  in  re-
lation to  this  matter  are  that  go
long  as  we  are  prepared  to  live  or
to  die,  so  long  as  we  are  living  in
the  fear  and  favor  of  the  Almighty,
bo  lon£  as  we  are  fulfilling  the
various  obligations,  duties  and  re-
sponsibilities that  devolve  upon  us,
it  is  a  matter  of  very  little  import-
ance how  or  in  what  manner  we
leave  this  world  a  id  go  into  ano-
ther. It  is  appointed  for  man  once
to  die,  and  we  can  not  evade  the
fiat  which  fate  has  decreed.  No
persons  have  yet  been  able  to  avoid
the  operations  and  summons  of  the
grim  monster  whenever  his  call  has
made.  And  when  we  reflect
the  position  that  we  occupy
the  earth  it  is  analogous,  in
this  respect,  to  that  of  myriads  of
human  beings  who  haveexisted  before.
In  various  parfn  of  the  world  there
have  been  a  variety  of  opinions  about
the  resurrection  ?i txd  nbout  the  state
of  man  after  tie  it  li  j  hut  there  has
been  very  little  difference  of  opinion
about  death  i : self.  The  myriads
of  human  beings  who  have  lived
upon  this  earth  have  all  gone  in
the  same  wny.  that  it  more  or  less.
Some  have  died  peaceably  and
quietly  in  their  beds;  others  have
been  submernvd  in  the  ocean,  and
drowned  far  from  fi  lends  and  homes,
some  in  the  violent  struggles  of  the
battle-field,  and  s  jme  have  departed


been
upon
upon


this  life  after  enduring  the  agony  and
pain  of  lingering  disease.  There  are
phases  associated  with  human  exis-
tence and  the  depart  ore  of  humanity
from  this  world  that  are  more  plea-
sant than  others,  and  we  should  like
generally,  if  we  could  have  our  way,
to  make  all  preparations,  have  every-
thin'r  arranged,  and  to  leave  this
world,  bidding  adieu  to  our  friends
and  companions  as  quietly  and  eagily
as  practicable.  We  should  all  like
this  if  we  could  have  our  own  way
about  it.  Bat  we  do  not  have  our
choice.  "God  moves  in  a  mysterious
way,"  we  are  told,  and  the  dispensa-
tions of  Providence  are  inscrutable.
Nor  is  it  a  matter  of  very  much  mo-
ment, according  to  my  ideas,  how,  or
in  what  way,  we  leave  this  world  ;  the
great  object  is  and  the  great  ques-
tions for  us  to  solve  are,  are  we  pre-
pared ?  Have  we  formed  a  union
with  ( iod  our  heavenly  Father  ?
Have  we  obtained  the  forgiveness  of
our  sins  ?  Are  we  living  our  reli-
gion ?  Are  we  keeping  the  com-
mandments of  God  ?  Have  we  made
arrangements  for  our  everlasting
associations  with  beings  in  the  eternal
worlds  ?  If  we  have,  if  this  is  our
position,  it  matters  but  little  how
or  when  we  leave  this  world,  that
mast  be  left  for  the  Almighty  to
n  filiate  and  to  decide  upon.

Gud,  in  his  eternal  decrees,  has
ordained  that  all  men  must  die,  but
as  to  the  mode  and  manner  of  our
exit,  as  I  said  before,  it  matters
very  little.  As  part  of  the  house-
hold and  family  of  God,  as  beings
associated  with  eternity  as  well  as
time,  it  behooves  as  to  reflect,  and
that  calmly  and  deliberately,  upon
our  present  position,  and  our  rela-
tionship and  standing  before  God  our
heavenly  Father,  These  are  important
questions  for  us  to  solve,  and  if  we  can
solve  them  satisfactorily,  then  all  is
right.


132  JOURNAL  OF

These  events  that  are  continually
transp:ring  around  and among  us
convince  us  of  the  fallacy  of  all
earthly enjoyments as  associated
merely  with  this  life. No  matter
what  our  acquirements — no  matter
what  our  talents or abilities,  no
matter  what our  wealth,  position
or  circumstances  in  life,  we  all  have
to  submit  to  the  same  grim  mon-
ster,  hence  the  question  naturally
comes  to  our minds,  why  are  we
thus  situated  ? We  seem  attached,
more  or  less,  to  this  world. We  are
straggling,  and  striving,  and  grap-
pling and  grasping  to  possess  the
things  of  this  world. Of  what  use
are  they  now  to  this  brother  whose
lifeless  remains  lie  before  us  ?  And
yet  our  whole  lives,  and  thoughts,  and  1
energy,  and  talent  are  generally  bent
on  their  acquisition. In  a  short  time,
the body now lying here,  with
whose  face  we  have  been  familiar,
and  whose  company  we  have  en-
joyed, will  be  lying  up  there,  en-
closed in  mother  earth. Dust  to
du^t,  ashes  to ashes, the  worms
preying  upon  his  system,  and  his
spirit  gone  into  another  state  of  ex-
istence. That  which  we  see  here
to-day,  will  be  our  case  in  a  short
time. Myriads  who  have  lived  be-
fore us  h*ve  gone  the  same  way.
Where  are  the  statesmen,  warriors,
orators,  princes,  potentates,  empe-
rors,  philosophers,  and  great  men
whose  names  are  found  upon  the
pages  ot  history  ? They  have  gone  !
gone!  gone!  and  we  are  all  sliding
down  the  plane  of  time  and  hurry-
ing into  eternity.  This  is  the  position
of  all  men  that  ever  have  lived  on
the  fare  of  the  earth. Is  this  our
abiding  place  then? Is  this  the
land  of  our  immortal,  eternal  in-
heritance ? Not  until  a  change  takes
place. And  what  of  the  affairs  of  the
earth — the baubles, tinsel,  glitter
and  show,  the  empty  name  and  ap-


DISCOURSES.

I  pearance  of  earthly  things  ?  Why,
just  as  a  great  and  very  sensible  man
expressed  himself:  Said  he,  "  Whea
I  am  gone  you  will  build  a  monu-
ment over  me,  and  you  will  write
upon  it —

**#  H#re  lies  the  great ;  —

bat  if  I  could  rise  from  the  tomb,
and  could  again  speak,  I  would  say —

"  False  marble,  where  ?
Nothing  but  poor  and  son  lid  dust
lies  there  ! "

So  it  will  be  with  all  of  us,  with  me
with  you,  we  shall  soon  all  be  in
that  position.  I  do  not  care  what

!  our  hopes,  aspirations  or  position  in
life  may  be,  we  have  all  got  to  go
through  the  dark  valley  of  the
shadow  of  death.  We  have  all  got
to  appear  before  the  tribunal  of  a  just
God  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds
done  in  the  body,  whether  those  deeds
have  been  good  or  evil.

And  in  the  various  changes  that
have  taken  place,  in  the  cycles  of
time  as  they  have  rolled  forward,

I  and  as  they  will  continue  to  take
place,  what  of  the  eftrth,  what  of
the  men  who  have  lived  and  died
and  live  again,  and  what  (if  ns  ?
What  are  our  position,  ideas  and
prospects  ?  We  believe  that  God'
has  spoken;  we  believe  that  light
has  emanated  from  the  eternal
worlds;  we  believe  that  God  has
given  us  revelation  for  our  guide  in
time,  and  to  prepare  us  for  an  eternal
inheritance.  For  this  the  Gospel
has  been  preached ;  for  this  the
Elders  of  the  Church  and  kingdom
of  God  have  gone  abroad  ;  for  thig^J
we  have  gathered  from  distant
lands;  for  this  wo  build  our  Tem-
ples and  our  Tabernacles ;  for  thia
we  preach  and  pray  daily  that  God
may  inspire  our  hearts  with  the  spirit
of  revelation  that  emanates  from  him,
and  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit
of  truth,  may  rest  upon  and  dwell
within  us,  that  when  we  get  through
with  this  time,  we  may  be  prepared,


IT  IS  OF  LITTLE  IMPORT,  ETC,


133


with  our  progenitors  and  oar  poste-
rity, to  inherit  an  eternal  exaltation
in the celestial kingdom of  our

God.

And  what  is  anything  without
this  ?  Do  1  mourn  over  that  man  ?
No,  I  do  not,  I  feel  sorry  for  his
family,  I  do  not  mourn  over  him,
Dot  a  particle.  I  would  not  shed  a
tear  over  him.  He  was  a  good  man,
a  man  who  feared  God,  loved  his
religion,  kept  the  commandments
of  God  and  walked  humbly  before
him  ;  he  was  a  man  who  was  hon-
ored and  respected  by  the  good,  re-
epected  and  honored  of  God  and  of
holy  angels,  and  it  is  all  right  with
him.  Do  I  mourn  that  he  is  taken
away  ?  No,  we  would  like  to  have
our  good  men  stay  among  us,  but
perhaps  they  have  something  to  do
in  another  sphere.  Perhaps  the
aervices  of  brother  Williams  are
required  somewhere  else.  There
are  other  positions  for  men  to  occupy
besides  this  earth.  Wo  had  an  exist- 1
cnce  before  we  came  herd.  We  came
here  to  do  a  certain  work.  He  has
done  his  and  gone.  Perhaps  God
required  him  and  has  taken  him
away.  All  right,  we  will  say,  it  is
the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seems  him
good.  \

In  regard  to  ourselves,  that  is
another  thing  that  we  have  individu-
ally and  personally  to  do  with.  It
is  all  right  with  him,  how  is  it  with
us  ?  I  talk  to  the  living,  to
those  who  are  in  existence,  who
have their volition, who  have


the  power  of  action  and  their  rea-
soning faculties,  and  I  say  onto
them,  look  where  you  will  be  in  a
short  time,  and  ask  yourselves  are
you  prepared,  like  him,  to  meet
your  God,  and  to  have  an  inhe-
ritance in  the  celestial  kingdom  of
God  ?  These  are  the  questions  that
i  would  ask,  and  I  would  say  that
no  matter  what  your  position,  what
your  wealth,  what  your  prospects
or  ideas  pertaining  to  this  world,
they  are  none  of  them  worth  anything
except  sanctified  by  God  and  appro-
priated for  the  building  up  of  his
kingdom  and  the  establishment  of
righteousness  upon  the  earth.

But  the  question  is,  are  we  the
friends  of  God  ?  Is  God  our  friend  ?
Are  we  living  and  walking  in  the
light  of  his  countenance  ?  Do  we
feel  that  our  spirits,  feelings  and
consciences  are  right  before  him,
that  we  have  consciences  void  of
offence  towards  God  and  towards
man  ?  These  are  some  of  the
thoughts  and  reflections  that  we
have  to  do  with,  and  it  is  for  us  to
think  seriously,  calmly  and  delibe-
rately upon  these  things,  and  to
act  as  wise,  prudent,  intelligent  beings,
that  we  may  keep  the  commandments
of  God,  live  our  religion  and  obtain  an
inheritance  in  the  celestial  kingdom
of  God  when  we  ahall  have  got
through  with  the  affairs  of  time,  with
which  we  are  surrounded.

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful  and
keep  his  commandments,  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  Amen.


134


JUl'KNAL  OF  DISCUUKSES


DISCOUBSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  thr  Fuxekal  Services  of  Elder  Thomas  Williams,  in
the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Morning,  July  19,  1874,


(Repotted  by  David  W.  Evarw.)


FAITH  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  IN  RELATION  TO  THE  RESURRECTION.


While  Elder  Taylor  was  speaking
of  the  future  condition  of  the  depart- 1
ed,  the  words  of  a  writer  in  the  Book
of  Mormon  came  to  my  mind,  and  I
think  that,  probably,  reading  it  will
be  as  appropriate  on  the  present  occa-
sion, to  refresh  the  minds  of  the
Saints  in  relation  to  their  faith,  and
if  there  should  be  strangers  present,
it  will  give  them  an  idea  of  the  faith
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  relation
to  the  resurrection,  I  think,  1  say,  |
it  would  be  as  appropriate  as  any-
thing I  could  say.  They  are  the
words  of  Jacob,  the  brother  of  Nephi,
and  are  recorded  in  the  second  book
of  Nephi  and  sixth  chapter.  Speaking
to  a  people  who  were  there,  Jacob
says —

"Behold,  my  beloved  brethren,  I
speak  unto  yon  these  tilings  that  ye
may  rejoice,  and  lift  up  your  heads
forever,  because  of  the  blessings
which  the  Lord  God  shall  bestow
upon  your  children*  For  I  know
that  ye  have  searched  much,  many
of  you,  to  know  of  things  to  come;
wherefore  I  know  that  ye  know  that
our  flesh  must  waste  away  and  die;
neveitheless,  in  our  bodies  we  shall
see  God*  Yea,  I  know  that  ye  know,
that  in  the  body  he  shall  show  him-
■elf  unto  those  at  Jerusalem,  from
whence  we  came  ;  for  it  is  expedient
that  it  should  be  among  them;  for  it


behove th  the  great  Creator  that  he
suffereth  himself  to  become  subject
unto  man  in  the  flesh,  and  die  for  all
men,  that  all  men  might  become  sub-
ject unto  him,  For  as  death  hath
passed  upon  all  men,  to  fulfill  the
merciful  plan  of  the  great  Creator,
there  must  needs  be  a  power  of  resur-
rection, and  the  resurrection  mast
needs  come  unto  man  by  reason  of
the  fall;  and  the  fall  came  bv  reason
of  transgression;  and  because  man
.  became  fallen,  they  were  cut  ofi  from
the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  wherefore
it  must  needs  be  an  infinite  atone-
ment; save  it  should  be  an  infinite
atonement,  this  corruption  could  not
put  on  incorruptinn,  Wherefore,  the
first  judgment  which  came  upon  man,
:  must  needs  have  remained  to  an  end-
less duration.  And  if  so,  this  flesh
must  have  laid  down  to  rot  and  to
crumble  to  its  mother  earth,  to  rise
no  more.

"  O  the  wisdom  of  God !  his  mercy
and  grace !  Fur  behold,  if  the  flesh
should  rise  no  more,  our  spirits  must
become  subject  to  that  angel  who  fell
from  before  the  presence  of  the  eter-
nal God,  and  became  the  devil,  to
rise  no  more.  And  oar  spirits  must
have  become  like  unto  him,  and  we
become  devils,  angels  to  a  devil,  to
be  shut  out  from  the  presence  of  oar
God,  and  to  remain  with  the  father


FAITH  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC.


135


of  lies,  in  misery,  like  unto  himself;
yea,  to  that  being  who  beguiled  our
first  parents  :  who  transformeth  him-
self nigh  unto  an  angel  of  light,  and
atirreth  Dp  the  children  of  men  unto
secret  combinations  of  murder,  and
all  manner  of  secret  works  of  dark-
ness.

11  O  how  great  the  goodness  of  our
God,  who  prepare  t h  a  way  for  our
escape  from  the  grasp  of  this  awful
monster  j  yea,  that  monster,  death
and  hell,  which  I  call  the  death  of
the  body,  and  also  the  death  of  the
spirit.  And  because  of  the  way  of
the  deliverance  of  our  God,  the  Holy
One  of  Israel,  this  death  of  which  I
have  spoken,  which  is  the  temporal,
shall  deliver  up  its  dead ;  which
death  is  the  grave.  And  this  death
of  which  I  have  spoken,  which  is  the
spiritual  death,  shall  deliver  up  its
dead  ;  which  spiritual  death  is  hell ;
wherefore,  death  and  hell  must  deli-
ver up  their  dead,  and  hell  must  deli-
ver up  its  captive  spirits,  and  the
grave  must  deliver  up  its  captive
bodies,  and  the  bodies  and  the  spirits
of  men  will  be  restored  one  to  the
other ;  and  it  is  by  the  power  of  the
resurrection  of  the  Holy  One  of
Israel.

"  O  how  great  the  plan  of  our  God  !
For  on  the  other  hand,  the  paradise  of
God  must  deliver  up  the  spirits  of  the
righteous,  and  the  grave  deliver  up
the  body  of  the  righteous;  and  the
spirit  and  the  body  is  restored  to
itself  again,  and  all  men  become  in-
corruptible, and  immortal,  and  they
are  living  souls,  having  a  perfect
knowledge  like  unto  us  in  the  flesh  ;
save  it  be  that  our  knowledge  shall  be
perfect ;  wherefore,  we  shall  have  a
perfect  knowledge  of  all  our  guilt,
and  our  uucleanness,  and  our  naked-
ness;  anJ  the  righteous  shall  have  a
perfect  knowledge  of  their  enjoyment,
aud  their  righteousness,  being  clothed
with  purity,  yea,  even  with  the  robe


of  righteousness.

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that
when  all  men  shall  have  passed  from
this  first  death  unto  life,  insomuch  as
they  have  become  immortal,  they
must  appear  before  the  judgment
seat  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel;  and
then  enmeth  the  judgment,  and  then
must  they  be  judged  according  to  the
holy  judgment  of  God.  And  as-
suredly, as  the  Lord  liveth,  for  the
Lord  God  hath  spoken  it,  and  it  is
his  eternal  word,  which  cannot  pass
away,  that  they  who  are  righteous,
shall  be  righteous  still,  and  they  who
are  filthy,  shall  be  filthy  still,  where-
fore, they  who  are  filthy,  are  the  devil
and  his  angels ;  and  they  shall  go
away  into  everlasting  lire,  prepared
for  them;  aud  their  torment  is  as  a
lake  of  tire  and  brimstone,  whose
flame  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever,
and  has  no  end.

*'  0  the  greatness  and  the  justness
of  our  God  !  For  lie  executeth  all  his
words,  and  they  have  gone  forth  out
of  his  mouth,  and  his  law  must  be
fulfilled.  But,  behold,  the  righteous,
the  Saints  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,
they  who  have  believed  in  the  Holy
One  of  Israel,  they  who  have  endured
the  crosses  of  the  world,  and  despised
the  shame  of  it;  they  shall  inherit
the  kingdom  of  God,  which  was  pre-
pared for  them  from  the  foundation
of  the  world,  and  their  joy  shall  be
lull  forever.

"  0  the  greatness  of  the  mercy  of
our  God ;  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  !
For  he  delivereth  his  Saints  from
that  awful  monster  the  devil,  and
death,  and  hell,  and  that  lake  of  fire
and  brimstone,  which  is  endless  tor-
ment.

"  0  how  great  the  holiness  of  our
God !  For  he  kuoweth  all  things,
and  there  is  not  anything,  save  he
knows  it.  And  he  cometh  into  the
world  that  he  may  save  all  men,  if
they  will  hearken  unto  his  voice;  for


126  JOURNAL  OF

behold ,  he  suffereth  the  pains  of  all
men ;  yea,  the  pains  of  every  living
creature,  both  men,  women,  and
children,  who  belong  to  the  family  of
Adam*  And  he  suffereth  this,  that
the  resurrection  might  pass  upon  all
men,  that  all  might  stand  before
him  at  the  great  and  judgment  day.
And  he  commandeth  all  men  that
they  must  repent,  and  be  baptized  in
his  name,  having  perfect  faith  in  the
Holy  One  of  Israel ;  or  they  cannot
be  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
And  if  they  wilt  not  repent  and  be-
lieve in  his  name,  and  be  baptized  in
his  name,  and  endure  to  the  end,  they
must  be  damned;  for  the  Lord  God,
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  has  spoken
it;  wherefore  he  has  given  a  law;
and  where  there  is  no  law  given,  there
is  no  punishment;  and  where  there
is  no  punishment,  there  is  no  con-
demnation ;  and  where  there  is  no
condemnation,  the  mercies  of  the
Holy  One  of  Israel  have  claim  upon
them,  because  of  the  atonement;  for
they  are  delivered  by  the  power  of
him ;  for  the  atonement  satisfieth  the  i
demands  of  bis  justice  upon  all  those
who  have  not  the  law  given  to  them,
that  they  are  delivered  from  that
awful  monster  death  and  hell,  and
the  devil,  and  the  lake  of  fire  and
brimstone,  which  is  endless  torment ;
and  they  are  restored  to  that  God  who
gave  them  breath,  which  is  the  Holy
One  of  Israel,"

There  is  much  more  in  this  chap-
ter of  a  similar  character,  very  in-
structive to  those  who  read  and  have
faith  to  believe  the  testimony  of  this
mam

In  speaking  to  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  who  are  familiar  with
the  life  of  him  whose  remains  are
in  our  midst  this  morning,  I  need
Bot  say  to  you  scarcely  what  our
views  and  hopes  are  concerning  him.
We  know  when  a  man  dies,  inasmuch
as  he  dies  faithful  to  the  truth,  hav-  |


DISCOURSES,  I

ing  kept  the  command  mints  of  God  J
and  obeyed  the  ordinances  of  the
house  of  God  as  far  as  thly  have  been
revealed  and  as  he  has  had  an  oppor-
tunity, that  he  is  secule,  that  his
future  is  assured* He  foes,  as  we
are  taught,  to  the  Paradjse  of  God,
there  to  await  the  morning  of  the
first  resurrection. We  know that  I
his  body  will  be  called  forth  from  the
dust  and  from  the  tomb,  and  that  his  '
spirit  will  re-animate  it,  and  he  enter  1
upon  that  glorious  condition  of  enis-  I
teijce  concerning  which so  many
promises  have  been  made. In  this
respect  the  faith  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  is  not  a  chimera,  it  is  some-  1
thing  tangible.  I
While  I  sat  here  and  listened  to  J
the  words  of  our  brother  the  reflec-
tion came  across  my  mind  —  how  1
often  we  are  called  upon  to  partici-
pate in  sad  scenes  like  the  present,  I
and  yet  throughout  all  this  Terri-
tory, among  all the Latter -day  1
Saints, there is this peculiarity,  I
which  was  not  witnessed  in  the  case
of  our  brother  because  of  the  sudden-
ness of  his  taking  off;  but  I  have  1
never  yet  found,  in  any  instance  where
people  have  been  summoned  hence  by
death,  that  there  were  death  and  *>r-  ]
row,  and  feelings  of  pain  and  anguish,
and  dread  concerning  the  future  as  I
have  witnessed  elsewhere. In  the
early  days  of  this  Church  God  pro-
mised unto  the  Latter-day  Saints  that  |
their  deaths  should  be  peaceful,  and
that  the  dread  of  death  should  be
taken  away  from  them,  and  after  i
forty-four  years*  experience  we,  to-
day, and  in  all  the  years  that  are
passed,  have  realized  the  truth  of  this
promise-
There  is  something  tangible  about
the  faith  which  God has  revealed.
If  1  go  forth  believing  in  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  am  baptized  for
the  remission  of  my  sins,  and  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost,  1  kuow  that


*


FAITH  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC*


137


I  have  done  that  which  God  re-
quires at  my  hands,  and  if  I  should
die  at  such  a  time  what  have  I  to
fear  ?  If  the  Holy  Ghost  has  de-
scended npon  me  it  is  a  witness  and
evidence  to  me  that  I  have  received
a  remission  ot  my  sins,  and  that  the
promise  of  God  has  been  fulfilled  to
me,  and  that  the  man  who  admin-
istered that  holy  ordinance  to  me  was
an  authorized  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.

That  was  the  case  with  brother
Williams. His  testimonies  were  of
the  most  remarkable  character.  I
have  heard  him  speak  about  the
evidences  of  its  truthfulness  he  had
when  he  joined  this  Church,  and  I
have  been  almost  overpowered  with
joy  that  I  lived  in  a  day  and  age  of
the  world  when  God  revealed  his
mind  and  will  unto  man  as  he  did
in  ancient  days. A  more  powerful
testimony, probably,  could  not  be
heard  than  has  been  borne  so  repeat-
edly by  our  deceased  brother.  And
then  what  ? Why  the  Spirit  of
God  rested  upon  him  and  impelled
him  to  leave  his  friends  and  his
former  home  and  associations  and
gather  with  the  Saints. Did  he  do
this  because  some  "  Mormon  "  Elder
told  him  it  was  right  to  do  it  ?  No,
he  did  this  because  the  Spirit  and
power  of  God  rested  upon  him  and
impelled  him  to  do  it He  was  filled
with  joy  and  peace  in  obeying  this
commandment  of  God,  and  it  was  so
after  he  came  here  in  all  the  works
that  devolved  upon  him. Only  the
day  before  he  died  we  had  a  long
conversation about these  things
together,  and  I  trust  I  shall  never
forget  the  spirit  that  rested  upon
him and myself while  talking.
Speaking  about the  unfaithfulness
of  men,  he  did  not  say  in  these
exact  words,  but  he  conveyed  the
idea to  me  that  he  would  rather
die,  rather  lay  down  his  life  than
prove  recreant  to  the  principles  of


the  Gospel  which  he  had  espoused,
he  valued  them  so  highly,  more
than  life  and  everything  else  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  He  has  done  all
that  he  could  do.  That  power  which
God  promised,  or  which  Jesus  rather
gave  unto  Peter,  when  he  said  that
he  should  have  the  power  to  bind  on
earth  and  it  should  be  bound  in  hea-
ven, and  the  power  to  loose  on  earth
and  it  should  be  loosed  in  heaven,
has  been  exercised  in  behalf  of  our
deceased  brother.  He  took  a  wile
and  she  was  sealed  to  him  by  the
power  of  the  holy  Priesthood,  and
he  entered  into  this  holy  ordinance
and  obeyed  celestial  marriage  as  it
was  revealed  to  him  in  the  fullness
of  bis  faith,  although  it  was  a  trial
to  him.  But  he  was  impelled  to  do
so  by  the  power  which  rested  down
upon  him,  and  he  knew  he  did  that
which  was  right.  He  went  forward
in  obedience  to  the  commandments,
putting  his  trust  in  God,  and  I  know,
as  he  knew  and  still  knows,  though
gone  behind  the  vail,  that  he  has  se-
cured to  himself,  so  far  as  his  own
works  could  secure,  through  the
grace  and  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ,
his  eternal  exaltation  in  the  pre-
sence of  God  our  heavenly  Father.

It  is  tiot  a  strong  assurance  or  hope
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  have,  that
they  will  receive  these  blessings  in  the
eternal  worlds ;  but  when  the  pro-
mise is  sealed  upon  their  heads  that
they  shall  come  forth  in  the  morning
of  the  first  resurrection  and  be  crowned
with  glory,  immortality  and  eternal
lives,  there  is  a  testimony  from  God,
our  eternal  Father  in  the  heavens
above,  which  rests  down  upon  them
and  confirms  the  truth  of  these  words
upon  the  soul  of  a  faithful  man  or
woman,  and  they  know,  when  words
are  pronounced  upon  them  by  a  man
who  has  the  authority,  sealing  upon
them  blessings,  keys,  thrones,  prin-
cipalities, powers  and  exaltations  in


138  JOURNAL  OF

the  eternal  kingdoms  of  God  our  Fa-
ther, I  say  they  know,  by  the  testi-
mony of  the  Spirit  of  God  which
rests  down  upon  them  at  such  times,
that  these  words  are  not  the  words
of  men,  but  that  they  are  the  words
of  the  Spirit  of  God  inspiring  that
man,  and  that  God  takes  a  record  of
that  ordinance  in  the  heavens,  and
that  it  is  sealed  upon  them  and  upon
their  children,  and  that  they  will  ac-
tually come  forth  in  the  morning  of
the  first  resurrection,  according  to
the  promise,  hence,  there  is  no  fear
of  death  in  the  minds  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  If  the  stake  was  stand-
ing before  us,  prepared  for  our  execu-
tion— if  we  had  that  faith  that  we
should  have,  and  which  animated  the
Saints  of  God  in  ancient  days,  we
would  walk  as  calmly  to  that  stake
and  be  bound  to  it  as  we  would  walk
to  eat  a  meal  of  victuals,  knowing
that  God,  our  heavenly  Father,  will
bestow  all  the  blessings  that  have
been  sealed  upon  us.

This  was  the  faith  which  animated
the  ancients  and  sustained  them  in
the  midst  of  persecutions,  and  this
is  the  faith  that  we  should  cherish
and  cultivate  as  a  people  and  as
individuals.  Woe  to  the  man  who
has  lost  that  faith  !  Dreadful  is  his
condition  if  he  has  not  that  faith


DISCOURSES.

living  within  him.  Woe  to  that  man,
for  his  condition  is  far  worse  than  his
firat  condition,  that  is  before  he  had
these  blessings  sealed  upon  him.

My  associations  with  our  brother
who  has  gone  have  been  of  the  most
tender  character.  I  have  known  him
as  I  have  known  a  brother.  Our
associations  have  been  very  intimate
from  the  day  I  first  made  his  acquain-
tance, on  the  Missouri  river,  in  I860
until  the  present  time,  I  have
watched  his  course,  and  have  been
pleased  with  his  faithfulness.  A
more  amiable,  more  kind-spirited  or
more  loving  man  I  scarcely  ever  met
I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  met  one
more  so.  He  has  been  beloved  by  all
who  have  known  him.  A  raodestt
unobtrusive  man,  never  setting  him-
self forward,  but  faithful  and  diligent,
performing  the  labors  assigned  to  hira
without  any  parade  but  with  the
greatest  devoticm  and  zeal.

That  God  may  bless  his  wives
and  his  children,  and  pour  out  upon
them  the  spirit  of  consolation,  that
he  may  preserve  his  little  ones,  tkat
they  may  grow  up  in  the  truth,  and
tread  the  straight  and  narrow  path
which  he  has  trodden  to  the  end,
and  like  him  be  crowned  with  glory,
is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  Amen.


NOTHING  STRANGE,  ETC.


139


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Deli  visaed  at  the  Fpnekal  Services  of  Elder  Thomas  Williams,
in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Morning,  July  19,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

NOTHING  STRANGE  OR  NEW  TO  LIVE  AND  DIE— MUST  DIE  IN  ORDER
TO  BE  Q1CKENED — THE  WORLD  OF  MANKIND  IGNORANT  OF  IMMOR-
TALITY— THE  RIGHTEOUS  SHOULD  LIVE  TO  ENMOY  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE
SPIRIT — ALL  PEOPLE  ARE  THE  CHILDREN  OF  GOD — THEY  LEARN  BY
CONTRAST— WORLDS  TO  BE  ORGANIZED  AND  PEOPLED  IN  FUTURE
EXISTENCE.


I  do  not  wish  to  detain  the  congre-
gation, for  I  realize  that  it  is  very
warm  and  uncomfortable ;  but  on
this  occasion  I  feel  to  offer  a  few
reflections,  and  pray  that  they  may
be  instructive  to  the  living,  and  en-
courage us  in  the  faith  of  the  holy
Gospel,  strengthen  us  in  the  little
faith  that  we  now  possess,  and  open
Dp  to  our  minds  the  future  prospects
and  blessings  that  the  Lord  has  in
reserve  for  the  faithful.

We  call  this  a  solemn  occasion,
for  we  have  met  together  to  pay  our
last  respects  to  on©  who  has  lived
with  us,  and  with  whom  we  have
associated,  and  we  delight  to  show
our  respect  to  the  mortal  remains  of
those  who,  in  life,  have  been  near
and  dear  to  us.  But  for  me  to
address  a  lifeless  lump  of  clay  would
be  useless,  while  to  address  the  living,
who  have  ears  to  hear  and  hearts  to
understand,  may  be  profitable.  I
requested  the  brethren  to  speak  who
have  already  addressed  you,  and
there  are  more  here  who  would  like
to  speak  on  the  present  occasion.


The  testimony  that  has  been  bornd
concerning  the  character  of  our  be-
loved brother,  whose  body  is  now  a
lifeless  mass  of  clay  before  us,  is  true,
and  more  we  can  say  than  what
has  been  said.

The  scene  that  we  are  now  called
to  witness  is  painful  to  near  and  dear
friends — it  is  a  scene  calculated  to
wring  the  very  heart — the  inmost
heart.  Such  scenes  are  always  pain-
ful, still  we  witness  them  day  by
day,  and  when  we  contemplate  the
vast  number  of  souls  that  come  into
existence  and  inhabit  bodies  here  on
this  earth,  and  the  vast  number  that
are  departing,  almost  every  moment,
it  is  nothing  strange  or  new.  Ex-
cept this  plant  die  it  cannot  be  quick-
ened ;  except  this  mortality  is  put
off  it  can  not  put  on  immortality;
except  this  body  that  we  have  re-
ceived from  the  earth  returns  to
mother  earth,  it  can  not  be  brought
forth  in  the  morning  of  the  resur-
rection. This  we  know  and  under-
stand; yet  how  strange  it  is,  and  yet
we  may  say  it  is  not  strange,  thai


140


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  living,  with  all  that  they  witness
concerning  the  departure  of  the
living  to  another  state  of  existence,
how  few  there  are  who  lay  it  to
heart,  how  few  there  are  who  profit
by  it,  how  few  there  are  who  seek
unto  God  for  wisdom,  knowledge
and  understanding  to  enable  them  to
acquit  themselves  well  here  prepara-
tory to  this  change.  There  are  some
who  do,  but  very  few,  and  though
we  mourn  at  the  loss  of  our  friends,
when  our  natural  feelings  have  passed
away,  and  our  hearts  have  ceased  to
mourn,  cheerfulness  takes  the  place
of  these  mournful  feelings,  and  we
think  no  more  of  it  This  is  the
common  condition  of  the  children  of
men,  those  who  profess  to  be  Christ-
ians,  and  to  believe  on  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Savior  of  the
world.  They  have  made  many  in-
quiries with  regard  to  this  passing
from  one  state  of  existence  to  ano-
ther. It  seems  to  be  a  great  mystery
to  them,  A  great  deal  has  been  said
and  a  great  deal  has  been  written,
and  there  have  been  many  reflections
—more  than  has  been  spoken  or
written,  and  yet  it  is  one  eternal
mystery  to  the  world.  Why  ?  Be-
cause they  havii  not  eyes  to  see,  nor
ears  to  hear,  and  they  do  not  under-
atand  the  providences  of  God ;  and
if  they  read  the  word  of  the  Lord —
the  revelations  that  he  has  given
concerning  the  living  and  the  dead —
they  do  not  understand  them,  and  so
the  world  is  left  in  darkness,  to  grope
their  way  like  the  blind  man  by  the
wall  Thus  it  is  with  the  children  of
men,  taking  the  whole  of  the  Christ-
ian world.

It  is  true  the  Laiter^day  Saints
have  received  a  little  more — they
have  received  something  beyond  the
imagination  of  the  heart  We  have
facts  before  us,  we  have  experience
that  is  satisfactory,  and  we  can  re-
joice in  the  hope  that  God  has  given


us.  But  if  we  will  be  prepared,  as
this  our  beloved  brother  was  pre-
pared, to  go  at  a  moment's  warning  ;
if  we  live  in  this  way,  we  live  just
as  we  should  live.  No  person  who
believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has
a  right  to  spend  a  day,  an  hour,  or  a
minute  of  his  life  or  her  life  in  a
manner  unbecoming  the  profession
of  a  Saint ;  they  should  be  ready  to
depart  this  life  any  moment.  I  say
that  those  who  understand  the  things
of  God  have  no  right,  neither  have
they  any  wish,  to  live  only  so  that
they  may  enjoy  the  light  of  bis
Spirit,  enjoy  communion  with  God,
with  his  son  Jesus  Christ  and  with
the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  they  may  be
instructed  day  by  day  how  to  walk
in  the  path  that  lies  before  them,  the
path  that  leads  to  life  everlasting.
But  how  easy  it  is  for  those  who  pro-
fess to  be  Saints,  to  be  of  the  earth,
earthy,  and  to  seek  after  and  love
the  world,  and  fall  into  the  spirit  of
the  world.  How  easy  it  is  fur  them
to  receive  the  spirit  of  the  world,
and  to  forget  the  spirit  of  salvation
that  has  been  in  their  hearts.  If  we
could  keep  constantly  in  our  minds
and  before  us  what  we  really  know,
what  the  Lord  has  taught  us,  what
we  have  read  and  what  we  have  re-
ceived by  the  whisperings  of  the
Spirit,  this  would  be  satisfactory ;
but  many  do  not  retain  these  things,
they  pass  from  them,  and  when  they
have  passed  away  doubt  seizes  their
minds,  and  they  are  at  a  loss  to
determine  whether  they  ever  under-
stood anything  or  not.

In  the  great  providences  of  God,
in  bringing  forth  worlds  into  exist-
ence, as  he  has  this,  which  worlds  are
continually  coming  into  existence
and  passing  from  one  state  to  ano-
ther, inhabitants  come  forth ;  every
living  creature  that  we  have  any
knowledge  of  God  sends  forth  upon
the  earth  that  he  frames,  there  to


NOTHING  STRANGE,  ETC.


141


livo  and  to  enjoy,  or  to  endure  all
that  his  providences  bring  forth  upon
the  earth,  that  they  may  have  an
experience,  that  they  may  be  pre-
pared  for  another  change.  These
changes  are  taking  place  continually,
and  have  been  from  the  beginning.
In  the  vegetable  and  in  the  mineral
kingdoms,  as  well  as  in  the  animal
kingdom,  these  changes  are  continu-
ally going  on.  Man  comes  on  to
this  stage  of  action,  and  he  is  con-
tinually undergoing  a  change  until
the  time  of  his  departure.  He  comes
here — he  knows  not  how.  We
know  we  are  here;  but  who  is  it
understands  how  we  came,  and  the
design  and  purpose  of  our  Heavenly
Father  in  sending  us  heref  Here
is  the  mystery  to  the  Christian  and
scientific  world  ;  they  do  not  under-
stand it,  "  Would  that  we  could"
say  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and
especially  those  who  believe  on  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  How  glad  I
should  be  to  know  where  Jesus  lives!"
u  How  glad  I  should  be  to  know
whether  I  am  going  to  him  when  I
leave  this  world  !  But  it  is  a  mys-
tery." Why  should  it  be  a  mystery  ?
Because  the  curtain  is  shut  down
before  ns,  and  the  vision  of  our
minds  is  closed  up  for  a  trial  for  us,
for  ns  to  prove  ourselves,  and  to
show  whether,  while  passing  through
darkness  and  affliction,  in  ignorance
and  with  clouds  of  unbelief  over  us,
after  being  made  acquainted  with
the  things  of  tGod,  we  will  persevere
and  be  firm  to  our  faith,  and  so  prove
ourselves  worthy  to  receive  a  glorious
resurrection,  a  change  to  a  more  ex-
alted state  of  being  than  we  can
possess  and  enjoy  hereon  this  earth.

We  are  made  expressly  to  dwell
with  those  who  continue  to  learn,
and  who  receive  knowledge  on  know-
led,  wisdom  on  wisdom  j  we  belong
to  the  family  of  heaven.  I  am  look-
ing now  upon  a  body  of  divinity.


Every  face  that  I  see  sheds  forth  a
certain  amount  of  the  divinity  I
worship — my  Father  in  heaven.  Here
we  are,  we  are  God's  children,  and
we  are  brought  forth  to  give  us  an
experience,  that  we  may  know  good
from  evil,  light  from  darkness  ;  that
we  may  know  how  to  serve  God ;
that  we  may  know  why  and  where*
fore  we  .should  refuse  the  evil  and
choose  the  good.  I  ask  the  philo-
sophers— and  I  think  it  is  probahl©
there  are  some  here  to-day — how  do
you  prove  facts  ?  By  their  contrast.
How  do  you  know  this  or  that  r  By
its  contrast.  We  know  and  prove
things  by  their  opposite ;  we  under-
stand the  evil  because  the  good  is
present  with  us,  and  the  Lord  sends
forth  his  intelligent  children  on  the
face  of  the  earth  to  prove  whether
they  are  worthy  to  dwell  wi  h  hi  as
in  eternity.

How  frequently  the  question  arisen
in  the  minds  of  the  people — "  I  wish
I  knew  where  I  was  going!"  Chq
you  find  out  ?  Well,  you  will  go  into
the  spirit  world,  where  brother  Tho-
mas now  is.  He  has  now  entered
upon  a  higher  state  of  being,  that  is,
his  spirit  has,  than  when  in  this  body.
u  Why  cannot  I  see  him  ?  Why
cannot  I  converse  with  his  spirit  ?  I
wish  I  could  see  my  husband  or  my
father  and  converse  with  him  !  "  It
is  not  reasonable  that  you  should,  it
is  not  right  that  you  should;  per-
haps you  would  miss  the  very  object
of  your  pursuit  if  yon  had  tins  privi-
lege, and  there  would  be  the  sarna
trial  of  faith  to  exercise  you,  not  so
severe  a  path  of  affliction  for  you  to
walk  in,  not  so  great  a  battle  fo  fight,
nor  so  great  a  victory  to  win,  and  yon
would  miss  the  very  object  you  are  in
pursuit  of.  It  is  right  just  as  it  is,
that  this  veil  should  he  closed  down;
that  we  do  not  see  God,  that  we  do
not  see  angels,  that  we  do  not  con-
verse with  them  except  through  strict


142  JOURNAL  OF

obedience  to  his  requirements,  and
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  When  we  con-
template the  condition  of  man  here
upon  the  earth ,  and  understand  that
we  are  brought  forth  for  the  express
pnrpose  of  preparing  ourselves
through  our  faithfulness  to  inherit
eternal  life,  we  ask  ourselves  where
we  are  goin^,  what  will  be  oar  condi-
tion, what  will  bo  the  nature  of  our
pursuits  iu  a  state  of  being  in  which
we  shall  possess  more  vigor  and  a
higher  degree  of  intelligence  than  we
possess  here  ?  Shall  we  have  labjr  ?
Shall  we  have  enjoyment  in  our  la*
bor  ?  Shall  we  have  any  object  of
pursuit,  or  shall  we  sit  and  sing  our-
selves away  to  everlasting  bliss  ?
These  are  questions  that  arise  in  the
minds  of  people,  and  they  many
times  feel  anxious  to  know  some-
thing about  hereafter.  What  a  dark
valley  and  a  shadow  it  is  that  we  call
death !  To  pass  from  this  state  of
existence  as  far  as  the  mortal  body  is
concerned,  into  a  state  of  inanition,
how  strange  it  is !  How  dark  this
valley  is  !  How  mysterious  is  tkis
road,  and  we  have  got  to  travel  it
alone.  1  would  like  to  say  to  you,
my  friends  and  brethren,  if  we  could
Bee  things  as  they  are,  and  as  we  shall
see  and  understand  them,  this  dark
shadow  and  valley  is  so  trifling  that  we
shall  turu  round  and  look  upon  it  and
think,  when  we  liave  crossed  it,  why
this  is  the  greatest  advantage  of  my
whole  existence,  for  I  have  passed
from  a  state  of  sorrow,  grief,  mourn-
ing, woe,  misery,  pain,  anguish  and
disappointment  into  a  state  of  exis-
tence, where  I  can  enjoy  life  to  the
fullest  extent  as  far  as  that  can  be
done  without  a  body*  My  spirit  is
set  free,  I  thirst  no  more,  I  want  to
sleep  no  more,  I  hunger  no  more,  I
tire  no  more,  I  run,  I  walk,  I  labor,
I  go,  I  come,  I  do  this,  I  do  that,
whatever  is  required  of  me,  nothing
like  pain  or  weariness,  I  am  full  of


DISCOURSES.

life,  full  of  vigor,  and  I  enjoy  the
presence  of  my  heavenly  Father,  by
the  power  of  his  Spirit  I  want  to
say  to  my  friends,  if  you  will  live  your
religion,  live  so  as  to  be  full  of  the
faith  of  God,  that  the  light  of  eter-
nity will  shine  upon  you,  you  can  see
and  understand  these  things  for  your-
selves, that  when  you  close  your  eyes
upon  mortality  you  wake  up  right  in
the  presence  uf  the  Father  and  the
Son  if  they  are  disposed  to  withdraw
the  vail,  they  can  do  as  they  please
with  regard  to  this;  but  you  are  in  the
spirit  world  and  in  a  state  of  bliss
and  happiness,  though  we  may  call
it  Hades  or  hell  It  is  the  world  of
spirits,  it  is  where  Jesus  went,  and
where  all  go,  both  good  and  bad.
The  spirits  of  the  living  that  depart
this  life  go  into  the  world  of  spirits,
and  if  the  Lord  withdraws  the  vail
it  is  much  easier  for  us  then  to  be-
hold the  face  of  our  Father  who  is  in
heaven  than  when  we  are  clothed
upon  with  this  mortality.  I  have
not  time  at  present  to  follow  these
reflections  further.

Then  we  should  be  encouraged,  we
should  strengthen  our  faith  by  our
hope,  we  should  seek  unto  the  Lord
until  our  hope  is  made  perfect,  that
we  may  have  power  to  bear  like  Saints
all  the  afflictions  we  meet  with  here
on  the  earth.  If  we  do  this,  when  we
have  c tossed  the  dark  valley  of  the
shadow  of  death  ifc  will  be  so  easy  to
turn  round  and  behold  tho  path  that
we  have  walked,  wherein  we  have
had  the  privilege,  the  same  as  the
Gods,  of  learning  the  difference  be-
tween good  aud  evil.

You  recollect  that  it  was  said  in
ancient  daya,  to  her  that  we  call  Mo-
ther, **  Your  eyes  will  be  opened  if
you  will  eat  of  this  fruit,  and  you  will
know  as  the  Gods  know,  good  from
evil."  This  probation  is  given  us
that  we  may  learn  this  lesson,  and  if
we  are  faithful  in  it  we  shall  learn


NOTHING  STRANGE,  ETC.


143


how  to  succor  those  who  are  tempted
and  tried  as  we  are,  when  we  have  j
the  power  to  rescue  them  from  the
ravages  of  the  enemy.

This  earth  is  oar  home,  it  was
framed  expressly  for  the  habitation
of  those  who  are  faithful  to  God,
and  who  prove  themselves  worthy  to
inhei  it  the  earth  when  the  Lord  shall
have  sanctified,  purified  and  glorified
it  and  brought  it  back  into  his  pre-
sence, from  which  it  fell  far  into
space.  Ask  the  astronomer  how  far
we  are  from  the  nearest  of  those
heavenly  bodies  that  are  called  the
fixed  stars*  Can  he  count  the  miles  ?
It  would  be  a  task  for  him  to  tell  us
the  distance.  When  the  earth  was
framed  and  brought  into  existence
and  man  was  placed  upon  it,  it  was
near  the  throne  of  our  Father  in  hea-
ven* And  when  man  fell — though
that  was  designed  in  the  economy,
there  was  nothing  about  it  mysterious
or  unknown  to  the  Gods,  they  under-
stood it  all,  it  was  all  planned — but
when  man  fell,  the  earth  fell  into
space,  and  took  up  it*  abode  in  this
planetary  system,  and  the  suu  became
our  light.  When  the  Lord  said —
"  Let  there  be  light,"  there  was  light,
for  the  earth  was  brought  near  the
sun  that  it  might  reflect  upon  it  so
ay  to  give  us  light  by  day,  and  the
moon  to  give  us  light  by  night  This
is  the  glory  the  earth  came  from,  and
when  it  is  glorified  it  will  return
again  unto  the  presence  of  the  Fa-
ther, and  it  will  dwell  there,  and
these  intelligent  beings  that  I  am
looking  at,  if  they  live  worthy  of  it,
will  dwell  upon  this  earth*

As  for  their  labor  and  pursuits  in
eternity  I  have  not  time  to  talk  upon
that  subject ;  but  we  shall  have  plenty
tti  do.  We  shall  not  be  idle*  We
shall  go  on  from  one  step  to  another,
reaching  forth  into  the  eternities
until  we  become  like  the  Gods,  and
shall  be  able  to  frame  for  ourselves,


by  the  behest  and  command  of  the
Almighty,  All  those  who  are  counted
worthy  to  be  exalted  and  to  become
Gods,  even  the  sons  of  God,  will  go
forth  and  have  earths  and  worlds  like
those  who  framed  this  and  millions
on  millions  of  others.  This  is  our
home,  built  expressly  for  us  by  the
Father  of  our  spirits,  who  is  the
Father,  maker,  framer  and  producer
of  these  mortal  bodies  that  we  now
inherit,  and  which  go  back  to  mother
e:*rth.  When  the  spirit  leaves  them
thi  y  are  lifeless;  and  when  the  mo-
ther feels  life  come  to  her  infant  it  is
the  spirit  entering  the  body  prepara-
tory to  the  immortal  existence.  But
suppose  an  accident  occurs  and  the
spirit  has  to  leave  this  body  prema-
turely, what  then  :  All  that  the
physician  says  is — "  it  is  a  still  birth/1
and  that  is  all  they  know  about  it ;
but  whether  the  spirit  remains  in  the
body  a  minute,  an  hour,  a  day,  a  yeary
or  lives  there  until  the  body  has
reached  a  good  old  age,  it  is  certain
that  the  time  will  come  when  they
will  be  separated,  and  the  body  will
return  to  mother  earth,  there  to  sleep
upon  that  mother's  bosom,  That  is
all  there  is  about  death.

Brother  Thomas  Williams  is  no
more  dead  than  he  was  a  week  ago.
His  clay  is  simply  dead  ;  and  inas-
much as  he  honored  this  tabernacle
that  lies  before  us,  it  will  take  a  sleep
in  the  dust,  to  come  forth  immortal
in  the  dav  of  the  first  resurrection.

This  will  be  the  case  with  us  all;
if  we  honor  our  being  here.  This  is
our  path,  and  our  great  object  should
be  to  honor  our  calling  here-  We
have  bodies  which,  in  infancy,  child-
hood and  youth,  are  just  as  pure  ai
the  angels,  and  if  we  honor  thes*
bodies,  and  preserve  them  in  chastity,
purity  and  holiness,  they  are  just  as
good  as  the  bodies  of  those  that  dwell
in  endless  life,  and  they  will  be  pre-
pared to  come  forth  in  the  glorious


144  JOURNAL  OF

resurrection,  and  be  crowned  with
glory,  immortality  and  eternal  lives.
This  is  the  privilege  of  all,  and  the
work  that  the  Savior  has  undertaken
is  to  save  all  that  will  come  unto  him;
none  will  be  eternally  lost  except  the
sons  of  perdition ;  and  the  great  work
that  God  has  brought  forth  in  the
latter-days  in  restoring  the  Priest-
hood is  for  the  living  and  for  the  dead,
to  bring  them  up  that  they  may  en*
joy  a  glorious  resurrection.  '

Brother  Thomas  has  honored  his
body  here,  and  he  now  goes  into  his
glory,  that  is,  as  far  as  he  can  in  the
spirit  world*  He  goes  where  he  can
do  more  good*  He  has  gone  where
he  can  preach  to  those  who  have  lived
and  died  on  the  earth  without  the
Gospel,  that  they  may  have  the  pri-
vilege of  receiving  and  obeying  it,
that  they  may  be  judged  according
to  men  in  the  flesh,  and  have  the
privilege  of  a  glorious  resurrection.

This  is  the  work  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  if  we  are  hated  for  any-
thing, it  is  for  trying  to  save  tha  peo-
ple; if  we  are  persecuted  it  is  for
trying  to  do  good  to  those  who  are
living  and  those  who  are  dead.  I
say,  then,  to  the  Saints,  pursue
your  course,  live  your  religion  and
be  ready  at  a  moment's  warning.
Brother  Thomas  Williams,  while  he
sat  at  table  eating  his  dinner,  had  not
the  privilege  of  speaking  a  word.
A  blood  vessel  broke,  and  his  mouth
and  throat  were  instantly  filled  with
blood  to  that  degree  that  he  could  not
speak  a  word.  He  tried  to  swallow
a  little  salt  and  water,  and  probably
he  got  a  little  down,  but  I  doubt  it
very  much.  The  blood  gushed  most
probably  from  both  stomach  and
lungs.  The  vessels  were  ripe  and
prepared  to  break,  and  the  blood
within  him  gushed  out  so  copiously
that  ho  never  spoke  another  word.
How  could  he  repent  of  his  sins  if
h#  had  not  been  prepared  ?  What


DISCOURSES,

kind  of  a  confession  could  he  have
made  if  he  had  wished  to  ?  None
at  all.  He  could  not  ask  a  Priest  to
pray  for  him  if  he  had  wanted  to  do
so ;  no,  he  was  prepared  to  go ;  he
never  spoke  a  word,  but  committed
his  sou  I  to  God  without  a  moment's
warning.  I  try  to  so  live  that  my
work  is  always  done;  I  have  done
everything  that  can  be  done  up  to  the
moment,  just  as'  he  did  it.  I  wish  our
business  men  would  take  pattern  by
hira  who  lies  before  us.  He  was  our
paymaster  in  the  Parent  Branch  of
Z.  C.  M.  L,  and  attended  to  this
Branch  of  the  financial  business  of
the  Institution,  and  there  was  not  an
order  that  was  to  be  paid  or  filed,  but
what  he  had  written  a  description  of
it  and  pinned  it  on  to  that  order  be-
fore he  went  to  his  dinner.  Iu  all
his  business  there  was  not  one  scratch
of  the  pen  wanted  to  be  done  by  other
clerks,  but  every  iota  was  done  just
as  much  as  though  he  had  known
that  he  was  going  to  breathe  his  last
in  twenty  minutes.

Saints,  I  wish  you  would  take
pattern  by  this  man,  and  live  your
lives  as  he  lived  his  life.  I  pray  yoa
in  Christ's  stead  live  your  religion.
If  you  want  to  know  whether  1  live
mine  judge  by  my  works,  judge
from  my  daily  walk  and  conversation*
You  have  the  right  to  judge,  but  yoa
be  sure  and  live  so  that  yon  will  know
whether  I  do  or  not.  I  live  so,that
I  know  whether  you  do  or  not,  exactly.
Latter-day  Saints  live  your  religion
and  honor  your  God.

I  say  to  this  family,  the  wives  and
children  of  brother  Williams,  God
bless  you  and  comfort  your  hearts;
and  I  say,  will  you  please  live  your
!  religion  so  that  yoa  may  be  prepared
;  to  meet  him  ? If  you  do  not  live
!  so  as  to  honor  your  Priesthood,  you
will  come  short  of  meeting  him  in
the  resurrection,  I  assure  you.  Now
live  your  religion. God  is  not  to


ALL  NATIONS  BELIEVE,  ETC.


be  mocked,  the  laws  of  God  are  to
be  honored,  and  all  of  his  on li nances
and  requirements  are  to  be  filled  and
fnlBl led.  He  requires  strict  obedi-
ence of  his  children,  and  if  we  are


not  obedient  we  shall  come  short  of
that  glory  that  we  anticipate  now*

1  hope  and  pray  that  the  Lord
will  bless  yon  all.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Old  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lakb  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

•July  19,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


ALL  NATIONS  BELIEVE  IN  A  FUTURE  STATE  OF  EXISTENCE — ALL  INHE-
RIT THE  CURSE  IN  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  BODY— THE  ZtON  OF  ENOCH
TAKEN  TO  THE  BOSOM  OF  GOD— CELFISTIAL,  TERRESTRIAL  AND  TELES-
TIAL  SPHERES — BAPTISM  IN  WATER  ESSENTIAL  TO  SALVATION —
DIVINE  AUTHORITY — ETERNAL  MARRIAGE  ORDAINED  OF  GOD,


I  hope  the  congregation  will  (five
their  attention  and  pray  for  the  Holy
Spirit  to  be  shed  forth  upon  all  those
who  are  upright  in  heart,  that  we
may  be  edified  and  instr acted  by  the
inspiration  and  power  thereof,  for
this  is  one  of  the  objects  which  we
have  in  view  in  assembling  ourselves
together,  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath,
to  be  instrncted  in  the  things  pertain-
ing to  the  kingdom,  and  also  to
partake  of  the  emblems  of  the  death
and  sufferings  of  oar  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ

We  find  ourselves  here,  upon  this
creation,  intelligent  beings,  and
questions  no  doubt  arise  in  (he  minds
of  almost  every  man  and  every  wo*
man  in  relation  to  the  future  destiny
of  the  human  family,  and  what  is  the
object  of  our  being  placed  here  on
this  earth  for  a  short  season  and  then

No.  10.


passing  away.  It  is  a  question  not
only  asked  by  intelligent  beings  who
believe  in  divine  revelation,  but  the
heathen  and  semi-  birbarons  nations,
in  fact  all  people  reflect,  more  or  less,
concerning  the  object  of  thefr  exist-
ence here,  and  what  awaits  them  in
the  future.  Mankind  gain  very  little
light  on  this  subject  unless  through
the  medium  of  divine  revelation,
hence  we  find  among  all  people  a
great  variety  of  views  in  rel  *tion  to
this  matter.  Our  American  Indians
have  some  ideas  of  a  future  state  of
existence  —  they  cannot  persuade
themselves  to  believe  that  man  is
destined,  when  he  lays  aside  this
mortal  tabernacle,  to  be  annihilated,
but  they  look  forward  to  a  future
state,  a i hi  the  pleasures  they  will
hereafter  enjoy  in  their  happy  hunt-*
iug  grounds. Some  people  believe

Vol.  XVII.


H6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


one  principle  and  some  another  in
relation  to  this  matter,  and  the  only
way  man  can  be  satisfied  on  a  subject
of  so  great  importance  is  by  receiving
revelation  from  that  order  of  beings
—far  in  advance  of  ns — who  have  a
knowledge  of  the  future  state  and
condition  of  man.

We  find  recorded  in  the  revela-
tions of  the  Most  High,  called  the
Bible,  as  well  as  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  the  various  modern
revelations  which  God  has  given,
that  man  is  destined  to  live  forever,
God  having  revealed  this  fact  to
ancients  and  to  moderns,  raised  up
witnesses  to  bear  testimony  to  the
children  of  men  that  they  are  im-
mortal beings,  and  that  this  change
which  comes  upon  them,  denomina-
ted death,  is  not  an  annihilation  of
their  being  or  an  end  of  their  exist-
ence, but  it  is  merely  a  casting  off
or  laying  aside  of  the  mortal  tabcr-
nacle  ;  that  man  lives  in  the  eternal
world  even  after  he  appears  to  be
dead,  and  that,  if  a  righteous  man,  he
has  joy  and  happiness,  but  if  a  wicked
man,  he  has  ihe  gnawing  of  con-
science, and  misery,  and  wretched-
ness; and  that  he  expects,  accord-
ing to  divine  revelation,  to  receive
again,  in  due  time,  the  tabernacle
that  he  has  thrown  off  for  a  moment,
It  is  sown  in  weakness,  says  the
Apostle  Paul,  it  is  raised  in  power ;
it  is  laid  down  as  a  mortal  body,  it
is  raised  up  as  an  immortal  body.

If  we,  by  study  or  research,  could  ,
discover  some  method  or  principle  by
which  we  could  remain  in  this  world  i
and  live  in  this  tabernacle  forever,
we  should  be  willing  to  do  so  with
all  ibe  inconveniences  of  the  present
order  of  things,  and  still  be  joyful  in
oar  hearts.  If  any  man  could  by
jesearch  or  learning  discover  some
kind  of  a  way,  or  means  or  medicine
that  would  give  immortality  to  the
children  of  men,  even  in  their  present


state,  he  would  be  eonsiderded  one
of  the  greatest  men  that  ever  lived,
and  the  one  who  had  bestowed  the
greatest  blessing  upon  his  fellow-
creatures  ;  he  would  be  lauded  to
the  very  skies,  and  his  name  would
be  handed  down  among  all  people
and  nations  as  one  of  the  greatest
benefactors  of  mankind  ;  so  earnestly
do  we  feel  to  cling  to  life  and  desire
to  live,  that  we  would  be  very  willing
to  put  up  with  the  inconveniences  of
the  present  state  if  we  could  only
.  remain  and  the  monster  death  have
no  power  over  us*  But  it  is  in  the
order  of  God  that  man  should  die.
Man  brought  this  upon  himself  by
transgressing  the  laws  of  heaven.  By
!  putting  forth  his  hand  and  partaking
of  that  which  God  had  forbidden,  he
|  brought  this  great  evil  into  the
world.  Death  not  only  came  upon
our  first  parents,  who  committed  the
first  great  transgression,  but  the  curse
has  been  inherited  by  all  their  gene-
rations. None  can  escape  the  cursa
so  far  as  the  mortal  body  is  con-
cerned. |

!  I  think,  perhaps,  this  broad  as-
sertion may  be  c  ui trad ic ted  in  the
minds  of  some.  They  may  tell  us  of
Enoch,  who  was  translated  to  heaven;
they  may  speak  of  Elijah,  who  was
caught  up  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  and
say,  "Here,  at  least,  are  two  ex-
ceptions to  the  general  rule/'  Bufc
what  do  we  know  concerning  tran-
slation ?  What  has  G**d  revealed  in
all  the  revelarions  contained  in  the
Old  arid  New  Testaments  in  relation
to  a  translated  being  ?  Are  wo
assured  that  such  beings  never  will
have  to  undergo  a  change  equivalent
to  that  of  death  ?

Our  new  revelations  that  we  have
received  inform  us  of  a  gre?*t  many
individuals  that  were  translated  he-
I  fore  the  flood.  We  read  that  a  yreat
and  mighty  Prophet  of  the  Most
High  God  was  sent  forth  in  the  day*


ALL  NATIONS  BELIEVE,  ETC,


147


of  Adam,  namely  Enoch,  the  seventh
generation  from  Adam,  who  lived
Contemporary  with  his  ancestor  Adam  ;
that  in  his  days  a  great  number  of
people  heard  the  plan  of  salvation
preached  to  them  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost  that  rested  upon  Enoch
and  those  who  were  called  with  him  ;
that  they  received  this  plan  of  salva-
tion and  gathered  themselves  out
from  among  the  various  nations  of
the  earth  where  they  had  obeyed  the
Gospel;  that  they  were  instructed,
after  they  assembled  in  one,  in  right-
eousness, for  three  hundred  and
sixty-five  years;  that  they  learned
the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  and  con-
cerning God  and  every  principle  of
righteousness  that  was  necessary  to
enable  them  to  enter  into  tlie  fullness
of  the  glory 'of  heaven;  they  were
instructed  to  build  up  a  city,  and  it
was  called  a  city  of  holiness,  lor  God
came  down  and  dwelt  with  that  peo-
ple; he  was  in  their  midst,  they  be-
held his  glory,  they  saw  hi*  face,  and
he  condescended  to  dwell  among
them  for  many  long  years,  during
which  time  they  were  instructed  and
taught  in  all  ot  his  ways,  and  among
other  things  they  learned  the  great
doctrine  and  principle  of  translation,
for  that  is  a  doctrine  the  same  as  the
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the
dead,  which  is  among  the  6r*t  prin-
ciples of  the  plan  of  salvation;  and
we  may  also  say  that  the  doctrine  of
translation,  which  is  intimately  con-
nected with  that  of  the  resurrection,
is  also  one  of  the  first  principles  of
the  doctrine  of  Christ  They  were
instructed  in  relation  to  this  govern-
ment, the  object  of  it,  &c.

According  to  the  light  and  know-
ledge which  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  upon  thin  subject,  revealed  in
the  revelations  given  through  Joseph
Smith,  we  find  that  those  people,
when  they  were  fully  prepared,  hav-
ing learned  the  doctrine  of  transla-


tion, were  caught  up  into  the  heave! is,
the  whole  city,  the  people  and  their
habitations.  How  much  of  the  earth
was  taken  up  in  connection  with
their  habitations  we  are  not  informed.
It  might  have  been  a  large  region.
You  may  ask—**  Where  was  this  city
of  Zion  built  in  ancient  days?"
According  to  new  revelation  it  was
built  upon  this  great  western  hemis-
phere. When  I  speak  o:  this  west-
ern hemisphere  I  speak  of  it  as  it
now  exists.  In  those  days  the  land
was  united  ;  the  eastern  anil  the  west-
ern hemispheres  were  one;  but  they
dwelt  in  that  portion  of  our  globe
that  is  now  called  the  western  hem  is-
piiere,  and  they  were  taken  up  from
this  portion  of  the  globe.  No  doubt
all  the  region  of  country  occupied
by  them  was  translated,  or  taken
away  from  the  earth.

Does  this  prove  that  they  were
immortal  beings  from the  time  of

their  translation  ?  No;  it  does  not
prove  any  such  thing.  How  are  we
to  know  anything  about  it  ?  VVre
can  not  learn  anything  in  relation  to
it,  except  by  revelation.  God  has
revealed  to  us  that  they  are  held  in
reserve,  in  some  part  or  portion  of
space  ;  their  location  is  not  revealed,
but  r  hey  are  held  in  reserve  to  be
revealed  in  the  latter  times,  to  return
to  their  ancient  mother  earth  ;  all  the
inhabitants  that  were  then  taken
away  are  to  return  to  the  earth.

Some  five  thousand  years  have
passed  away  since  they  were  caught
□p  to  the  heavens.  What  has  I  eon
their  condition  during  that  time  ?
Have  they  been  free  from  death  ?
They  have  been  held  in  reserve  in
answer  to  thf*ir  prayers.  What  were
their  prayers  ?  Enoch  and  his  people
prayed  that  a  day  of  righteousness
might  be  brought  about  during  their
day  ;  they  sought  for  it  with  H\\  their
"hearts ;  they  looked  abroad  over  the
face  of  the  earth  and  saw  the  corrup-


148  JOURNAL  OF

tions  that  had  been  introduced  by  the
various  nations,  the  descendants  of
Adarn,  and  their  hearts  melted  within
thern,  and  they  groaned  before  the
Lord  witli  pain  and  sorrow,  because
of  the  wickedness  of  the  children  of
men,  and  they  sought  for  a  day  of  rent,
they  sought  that  righteousness  might
be  revealed,  that  wickedness  might
be  swept  away  and  that  t lie  earth
might  rest  for  a  season.  Gi>d  gave
them  visions,  portrayed  to  them  the
future  of  the  world,  showed  unto
them  that  (his  earth  must  fulfill  the
measure  of  its  creation;  that  gene-
ration after  generation  must  be  born
and  pass  away,  and  that,  after  a  .
certatn  period  of  time,  the  earth
would  rest  from  wickedness,  that  the
wicked  would  be  swept  away,  and  the
earth  would  be  cleansed  and  sanc-
tified and  he  prepared  for  a  righteous
people.  *4  Until  that  day,"  saith  the
Lord,  "yon  and  your  people  shall
rest,  Zion  shall  be  taken  up  into  my
own  bosom/*  Ancient  Zion  should
be  held  in  reserve  until  the  day  of
rest  should  come,  u  then  "  said  tlie
Lord  tj  Enoch,  **  thou  and  all  thy
city  shall  descend  upon  the  earth,
and  your  prayers  shall  be  answered.  *
They  have  been  gone,  as  I  have
already  stated,  about  five  thousand
years.  What  have  they  been  doing?
All  that  we  know  concerning  this
subject  is  what  has  been  revealed
through  the  great  and  mighty  Pro-
phet of  the  last  days,  Joseph  Smith
— tli at  unlearned  youth  whom  God
raised  up  to  bring  for'h  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  to  establish  this  latter-
day  Church.  He  has  told  us  thnt
they  have  been  ministering  angels
during  all  that  time.  To  whom  ?
To  those  of  the  terrestrial  order,  if
yon  can  understand  that  expression*
God  gave  them  the  desires  of  their
hearts,  the  same  as  he  gave  to  the
three  Nephites,  to  whom  he  gave  the
privilege,  according  to  their  request,


DISCOURSES.

of  remaining  and  bringing  sonls
onto  Christ  while  the  world  should
stand.  Even  so,  he  granted  to  the
people  of  Enoch  their  desire  to  be-
come ministering  spirits  unto  those
of  the  terrestrial  ordtr  until  the  earth
!  should  rest  and  they  should  agaia
return  to  it.

Joseph  inquired  concerning  their
condition,  whether  they  were  subject
to  death  during  that  period,  and  was
informed,  as  yon  will  find  in  the  his-
tory of  this  Church,  m  printed  in
|  the  Millennial  Star  and  other  pub-
lications thereof,  that  these  person-
ages have  to  pass  through  a  change
equivalent  to  that  of  death;  notwith-
standing their  translation  from  the
earth,  a  certain  change  has  to  be
wrought  upon  thera  that  is  equivalent
to  death,  and  probably  equivalent
also  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.
'  But  before  that  change  comes  they
j  minister  in  their  office  unto  those  of
another  order,  that  is  the  terrestrial
order.  Strangers  will  not  understand
perhaps  what  we  moan  by  the  terres-
trial order.  If  they  will  take  the
opportunity  of  reading  the  doctrines
of  this  Churc\  as  laid  down  in  the
;  revelations  given  through  Joseph
Smith,  they  will  learn  what  our  views
are  in  relation  to  this  matter.  God
revealed  by  vr  ion  the  different  orders
of  being  in  the  eternal  worlds*  One
class,  the  highest  of  all,  is  called  the
celestial ;  another  class,  the  next  to
the  celestial  in  glory,  power,  might
and  dominion,  is  called  the  terrestrial^
another  class,  still  lower  than  the
terrestrial  in  glory  and  exaltation,  is
called  the  telestial.  This  m
class,  whose  g'.ory  is  typified  by  th»
|  glory  of  our  moon  in  the  firmament
of  the  heavens  as  compared  with  the
son,  are  those  who  once  dwelt  ou  this
or  some  other  creation  and,  if  they
have  had  the  Gospel  laid  before  them
they  have  not  had  a  full  opportunity
of  receiving  it;  or  they  have  not


ALL  NATIONS


BELIEVE,  ETC


149


heard  it  all,  and  have  died  without
having  the  privilege.  In  the  resur-
rection they  come  forth  with  terres-
trial bodies.  Thev  must  be  admin-
istered  to  says  the  vision,  and  God  h  is
appointed  agents  or  messengers  to
minister  to  these  terrestrial  beings,
for  their  good,  blessing,  exultation,
glory  and  honor  in  the  eternal  worlds,

Enoch  and  his  people  understand-
ing this  principle  sought  that  they,
before  receiving  the  fullness  of  their
celestial  glory,  might  be  the  instru-
ments in  the  hands  of  God  of  doing
much  good  among  beings  of  the  ter-
restrial order.

We  read  in  the  New  Testament
concerning  certain  angels  that  are  in
the  eternal  worlds,  and  the  question
is  asked  by  the  Apostle  Paul — **  Are
they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent
forth  to  minister  for  those  who  shall
be  heirs  of  salvation  ?" — not  for  those
who  were  already  heirs  of  salvation,
but  for  those  who  shall  be — those
who  were  to  be  redeemed,  that  were
to  be  brought  forth  and  exalted.  ,
Enoch  and  his  people  were  appointed
to  this  ministry,  holding  the  Priest-
hood thereof,  with  power  and  autho-
rity to  administer  in  order  that  those
beings  may  be  exalted  and  brought
up,  and  inherit  all  the  glory  that  they
are  desirous  to  receive,  I

Much  might  be  said  concerning
these  different  orders  of  glory,  but
we  fe^  1  to  pass  on,  and  we  will  speak
a  few  words  now  concerning  the  re-
surrection from  the  dead  of  those  who
have  fully  prepared  themselves  for  the
highest  glory,  the  glory  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom,  tho  highest  of  all,  the
holiest  of  all,  the  kingdom  where  God
the  Father  sits  enti ironed  in  glory
and  in  power,  ruling  and  governing
all  tilings.  There  is  a  certain  law,
which  God  ordained  before  the  foun-
dation oi  the  world,  an  irrevocable
decree  that  those  who  would  obey
that  law  should  have  this  great  and


!  most  glorious  of  all  the  resurrections,
be  raised  to  celestial  power,  thrones
and  exaltations,  where  thev  could
dwell  in  the  presence  of  their  Father
and  their  Go  J,  throughout  all  the
futnre  ages  of  eternity.

Do  ynu  enquire  what  this  law  is
which  God  revealed,  and  which  was
fore-ordained  in  the  counsels  of  eter-
nity, to  be  made  manifest  unto  the
sons  and  daughters  of  men  for  their
exaltation  to  this  highest  heaven  ?
Do  yuu  desire  to  know  the  ro;td,  the
ordinances,  the  principles,  by  which
we  may  attain  to  that  highest  of  all
exaltations  ?  I  will  begin  and  say
to  all,  that  every  individual  that  ever
attains  to  the  fullness  of  that  glory,
I  mean  those  who  have  come  t  »  the
years  of  understanding  and  maturity
not  referring  at  all  to  little  children
—  must  be  born  of  the  water  and  of
the  Spirit  in  order  to  be  prep-ired  to
enter  that  highest  glory  of  all.  No
one  gets  there  upon  any  other  prin-
ciple.  No  ordinances,  principles,
laws  or  institutions  laid  down  by  the
■  children  of  men  that  vary  from  that
principle,  will  ever  bring  us  into  the
celestial  kingdom.  We  have  the
words  of  Jesus  on  this  subject,  when
speaking  to  Nicodemus —  ''Verily,
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  except  a  man
be  born  of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,
he  can  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  heaven/'  It  is  an  impos-
sibility, because  the  word  of  the  great
Jehovah  h:is  gone  forth,  and  will  not
be  revoked,  and  unless  we  are  born
of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  we
cannot  enter  there.

What  do  we  understand  by  being
born  of  the  water  ?  What  we  an-
derstand,  what  God  has  revealed  to
us,  as  well  as  to  the  ancients,  is,  that
we  must  be  luid  under  the  water  and
be  brought  forth  out  of  the  water,
typical  of  birth,  for  this  is  a  birth
of  the  water.  Who  is  a  fit  subject
for  this  birth  of  the  water  ?  None


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


but  those  who  truly  believe  in  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Savior  of
the  world  ;  those  who  believe  that  he
died  to  redeem  the  world  and  that  he
shed  his  blood  to  atone  fur  the  sins
of  the  m  rid  ;  those  who  believe  this
and  truly  repent  of  all  their  sins  are
the  only  subjects  who  are  justified
before  God  in  going  down  into  the
waters  of  baptism,  being  immersed
id  the  water  and  brought  forth  again
out  of  the  water,  which  is  the  new
birth  of  the  water  It  will  do  no
person  any  good  to  be  baptized  a
hundred  times  if  his  baptism  is  not
connects!  with  true  faith  in  God  and
in  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  his  revelations
and  commandments;  and  unless  he
sincerely  and  truly  repents  of  his
sins,  reforms  his  life  and  enters  into
a  covenant  with  God  to  serve  him  in
all  righteousness,  humilitj*,  meekness
and  lowliness  of  heart,  his  baptism
would  be  good  for  nothing,  it  wo^M
not  be  acknowledged  in  h^ven,  it
would  not  be  recorded  in  the  archives
of  eternity  to  his  justification  in  the
great  judgment  day.  Let  me  go  still
further,  and  say,  that  if  we  have
repented  of  and  been  baptized  for  the
remission  of  our  sins,  if  we  do  not
seek  after  the  birth  of  the  spirit  also,
our  baptism  will  avail  us  nothing ;
they  must  go  hand  in  hand — the
birth  of  the  water  first  and  then  the
birth  of  the  spirit

What  do  we  understand  by  the
birth  of  the  spirit  ?  I  answer,  that
there  is  a  birth  of  the  spirit,  in  other
words,  those  persons  who  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  are  filled  with  it,  are  im-
mersed within  it,  they  are  clothed
upon  therewith,  and  consequently
are  born  anew  of  it,  and  they  are
without  desires  to  do  evil,  their  de-
sires to  do  that  which  is  wrong  are
taken  away,  and  they  become  new
creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  being  born
of  the  spirit,  as  well  as  being  bom  of
the  water. Here  then  are  certain


r*.  ■  m  ;</  ,rr  ,j  <I.  W  j!  l
laws,  ordinances  or  principles,  as  a

beginning  or  starting  point,  by  which
we  mny  gain  an  entrance  into  that
highest  glory  of  which  1  have  been
speaking.

Another  thing  to  be  considered  in
receiving  these  ordinances — I  may  be
ever  so  sincere  and  humble  and  ever
so  willing  to  repent  of  my  sins;  I
may  have  ever  so  much  faith  in  God
and  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  yefc
if  I  am  not  baptized  by  a  man
holding  divine  authority  from  God,
having  the  right  to  baptize  me  in  the
name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  my  baptism
will  not  be  legal,  it  will  not  be  the
new  birth,  and  I  cannot  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God.  according  to
the  words  of  Jesus.  What  then  does
it,  require  to  constitute  a  man  having
divine  authority  ?  Can  any  one  by
a  mere  impression  upon  his  mind
consider  that  he  has  divine  authority
to  baptize  his  fellows?  No;  it
needs  a  call  from  heaven,  it  needs  a
new  revelation  cotemporary  w  ith  the
individuals  that  act,  a  revelation  from
God  calling  the  persons  by  name,
setting  them  apart,  ordaining  them
and  calling  them  to  officiate,  com-
manding them  to  administer.  Any
other  person  who  attempts  to  admin-
ister baptism  will  not  be  acknow-
ledged in  heaven.  But  a  man  hold-
ing the  right  by  virtue  of  his  divine
calling  and  ordination,  and  by  virtue
of  the  power  that  God  baa  bestowed
upon  him  and  the  commandment  that
God  has  revealed  to  him,  can  go  down
and  administer  the  baptism  of  water,
and  it  will  be  recognized  in  heaven  ;
it  will  not  only  be  recorded  on  earth
arcong  the  Saiuts  in  the  Church  here
on  the  earth,  but  it  will  be  recorded
in  the  books  of  eternity,  the  records
that  are  kept  on  high,  and  in  that
day j  when  all  men  shall  be  judged
out  of  the  books  that  are  written,  it
will be  found  that  the  books  kept


ALL  NATIONS  BELIEVE,  ETC.


151


here  on  earth  will  accord  with  those
books  that  ;ire  kept  in  heaven,  and
by  these  books  will  parties  be  justi-
fied, and  by  these  books  will  the  legal
ordinances  that  hare  been  adminis-
tered be  acknowledged  and  recognized
in  heaven.

This  calls  forth  another  query  by
the  world — u  Why  is  it  that  you
Latter-day  Saints  are  so  exclusive  in
the  administration  of  the  ordinances
that  you  will  not  admit  me,  a  Baptist,
to  join  your  society  ou  my  old  bap-
tism ?  I  have  been  immersed, "  says
the  Biptist;  "I  was  sincere,  1  re-
pented of  rny  sins,  acd  yet  you
Latter-day  Saints  will  not  receive  me
into  your  communion  and  to  become
a  member  of  your  Church  unless  I
am  baptized  by  one  ot  your  autho-
rities." The  answer  is,  we  do  not
recognize,  as  I  have  already  stated,
the  authority  of  the  Baptists,  Presby-
terians, Methodists,  lioman  Catho-
lics, nnr  of  any  Christian  society  upon
the  whole  face  of  our  globe  to  admin-
ister in  the  sacred  ordinances,  unless
God  has  called  thern  by  new  revela-
tion, even  as  Aaron  was  called  in
ancient  days.  Have  they  b<ien  thus
called  ?  Ask  the  in,  ani  they  will
tell  you  no.  Ask  thera  if  there  has
been  any  later  revelation  than  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  and  ail
these  societies  will  tell  you  that  God
has  nut  given  any  revelation,  raised
np  any  Prophets  or  inspired  Apostles,
sent  imy  angels,  or  given  any  visions,
since  the  d  iy  that  John  the  Revela-
tor,  the  'List  of  the  Apostles,  closed
up  his  tvriting.  Oh  what  an  awlul
condi lit m  they  must  be  in  if  this  is
the  e  t-?  !  And  who,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  latter-day  Saints,  I  «sk
again,  among  all  nations,  kindreds,
peoples,  tongues,  and  religious  deno-
minations, upon  the  face  of  our  globe,
has  any  divine  authority  ?  Not  one,
hence  their  baptisms  are  illegal,  their


administrations  of  the  Lord's  Supper
are  illegal,  and  all  their  administra-
tions in  ordinances  are  not  recognized
in  heaven,  If  God  has  not  said
anything  since  the  days  of  the  an-
cient Apostles,  no  wonder  that  ho
commanded,  in  these  latter  days,
that  we  should  not  receive  any  into
our  Church  unless  they  came  in  by
the  door  of  baptism.

But  we  have  only  told  you  some
of  the  first  principles  of  the  Gospel
of  the  Son  of  God,  which  are  neces-
sary to  prepare  the  human  family  to
enter  into  that  highest  glory  that  ii
spoken  of  by  the  Apostle  Paul — the
glory  of  the  celestial,  He  says  in
the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  first
epistle  to  the  Corinthians — "There
is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  another  glory
of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of
the  stars ;  for  as  one  star  differs  from
another  star  in  glory,  so  also  is  the
resurrection  of  the  dead/1  The  glory
of  the  sun  is  the  highest,  it  is  called
by  Pan!  the  celestial,  *md  I  have
told  you  some  of  the  tirst  principles
of  the  celestial  law.  If  you  would
inherit  a  celestial  jjory  you  must  be
willing  to  abide  by  to?  celestial  iaw,
otherwise  you  will  come  short,  But
tio  we  stop  with  these  first  principles  ?
No,  there  are  many  other  great  and
glorious  principles,  connected  with
the  celestial  law,  which  God  has
revealed,  and  set  forth  as  necessary
for  his  people  to  receive,  in  order  to
prepare  them  to  enter  inlo  that  glory.
I  wkll  name  one — marriage*

We  know  very  little  about  the
order  of  heaven,  so  far  as  marriage  is
concerned,  and  all  that  we  do  know
God  has  revealed.  He  has  told  ua
in  the  New  Testament,  "  What  God
hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  put
asunder."  It  seems  then  that  there
is  a  marriage  wherein  God  officiates,
or  in  other  won  Is,  he  officiates  by
his  power  and  authority,  he  officiates


152


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


in  the  uniting  of  men  and  women  in
marriage,  hence  it  is  called  joining
them  together  of  God — what  God
joins,  not  what  man  joins.  It  is  a
divine  institution,  it  cannot  be  admi-
nistered by  the  law-making  (depart-
ment There  may  be  marriages
under  the  civil  law ;  Congress,  or
the  Legislatures  of  the  various  States
and  Territories  may  pass  laws  regu-
lating the  marriage  institution,  and
marriages  performed  according  to  the
provisions  thereof  would  be  legal,  so
far  as  the  laws  of  man  are  concerned.
But  1ms  God  anything  to  do  with
these  marriages  ?  Just  as  much  as
be  has  with  baptism  when  it  is  admi-
nistered illegally.  I  have  already
shown  you  that  a  baptism  admini-
stered by  a  man  without  authority  is
good  for  nothing;  and  a  man  and
woman  united  in  marriage  by  any
civil  law  ever  framed  since  the  world
began,  are  illegally  married  in  the
sight  of  heaven  ;  to  be  legal  there,  it
must  be  performed  by  a  mnu  called
by  revelation  and  ordained  and  com-
manded to  celebrate  that  ordinance.

Now  I  want  to  say  a  few  words  to
our  young  people  who  dwell  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  Territory.  I  have
heard  that  some  of  them,  perhaps
through  a  want  of  understanding  of
the  laws  of  God,  have  suffered  them-
selves to  be  married  by  the  civil  law
— for  instance,  by  a  justice  of  the
peace,  alderman  or  judge.  That
will  do  very  well  so  far  as  the  laws
of  the  land  are  concerned,  but  has
God  anything  to  do  with  such  mar-
riages ?  Nothing  at  all.  Has  he
ever  authorized  marriages  to  be
solemnized  after  this  order?  Not  at
all.  Are  children  born  of  such  mar-
riages your  legal  sons  and  daughters
in  the  sight  of  heaven  ?  Not  at  all ;
they  are  in  one  sense  bastards.
That  is  a  pretty  hard  saying,  is  it
not  ?  They  are  actually  bastards.
For  instance, there are  many  old


people  who  never  heard  of  the  divine
appointment  and  authority  which
God  has  sent  forth  from  heaven  in
relation  to  marriage,  who  have  been
married  according  to  the  laws  of  the
countries  in  which  they  resided  be-
fore they  heard  of  this  work.  They
complied  literally  with  their  laws,
and  so  far  as  the  law  was  concerned
that  was  all  right.  But  were  they,
legally,  in  the  sight  of  God,  husband
and  wife?  Just  as  much  as  I  would
be  a  son  of  God  and  bom  of  water,  if
I  were  sprinkled  by  a  sectarian
priest,  or  baptized  by  a  Baptist
priest,  just  as  much.  Could  we
claim  a  celestial  glory,  and  all  the
privileges  and  blessings  and  exalta-
tion that  God  has  ordained  from  the
foundation  of  the  wurld  to  be  be-
stowed upon  those  who  comply  with
the  celestial  law,  unless  we  complied
with  this  law  ?  Could  our  children,
in  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,
corne  up  and  say  unto  us — "  We
claim  you  as  our  legal  parents  ;**  "  I
am  your  son,"  "  I  am  your  daughter,
and  you  are  my  parents,  and  there-
fore 1  claim  the  privilege  of  partaking
of  all  the  glory  that  you  partake  of,
and  of  receiving  thzones  and  domi-
nions and  kingdoms  and  powers  and
principalities  in  heavenly  places  in
Christ  Jesus?'*  They  could  not
claim  any  such  thing ;  neither  could
the  parents  have  a  claim  upon  these
children;  neither  could  they  be
gathered  together  and  organized  into
a  family  capacity,  Why  r  Because
the  celestial  lnw  has  not  been  at-
tended to.  Inquires  one — "Do  yon
meati  to  make  us  all  out  bastards  ?"
Not  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  but  in  the
eyes  of  heaven.  1  am  pointing  out
the  difference  now  between  the  two
laws — the  law  of  man  and  the  law  ot
God,  or  the  celestial  law.  Parents,
if  you  would  have  your  families
connected  with  you  in  a  social  capa-
city hereafter,  you  must  take  steps


ALL  NATIONS  BELIEVE,  ETC.  153


to  secure  them  by  obeying  the  celes-
tial law.

Inquires  one — "  Is  there  any  re-
medy for  these  illegal  marriages  that
we  entered  into  before  we  heard  the  ,
Gospel  ?"  Yes,  God  has  ordained
from  before  the  foundation  of  the
world,  laws  and  institutions  adapted
to  the  condition  of  all  the  human
family,  which,  when  revealed,  if  they
are  attended  to  by  the  children  of
men,  will  bless  and  exalt  them,  and
consequently  the  propriety  of  gath-
ering, God  has  not  revealed  a  law
in  relation  to  marriage  which  may  be
officiated  in  everywhere,  at  random,
without  any  record  ;  he  has  ordained
that  in  the  last  days,  in  Zion  and  in
Jerusalem,  and  in  thi1  remnant  whom
the  .Lord  our  God  shall  call,  there
shall  be  deliverance.  Deliverance
from  what  ?  From  all  oor  former
foolish  traditions,  and  from  the
powers  of  darkness  and  everything
evil.  For  this  reason  the  people  are
gathering  up  from  the  nations  of  the
earth,  that  they  may  be  taught  the
law  of  deliverance ;  that  they  may
be  taught,  legally  and  properly,  how
to  become  connected  as  husbands  and
wives  in  the  sight  of  heaven;  and
inasmuch  as  our  children  have  been  <
born  unto  us  under  the  covenants  of
the  civil  law,  that  our  marriages  may
be  renewed  under  the  new  covenant
that  God  has  revealed,  and  be  re-
corded and  sealed  on  earth  and  in
heaven  for  the  benefit  of  our  children
and  their  posterity  for  ever  and  ever.
You  will  find,  when  you  learn  further
concerning  the  celestial  glory,  Paul's
words  to  be  true,  that  in  that  glory,
those  who  are  in  God  must  them-
selves he  connected  in  marriage  ;  for
says  the  Apostle  Paul,  '*  the  man  is
not  without  the  woman  in  the  Lord,
and  the  woman  ia  not  without  the
man  in  the  Lord.1'  This  is  an  eter-
nal principle,  an  eternal  law  pertain-
ing to  that  glory. You  may  try  to  \


get  the  fullness  thereof  singlehanded,
but  you  can't  do  it,  for  God  has  made
this  a  point  of  order  and  law,  that
all  beings  who  are  exalted  to  that
highest  glory  shall  be  united  in  the
Lord,  as  husband  and  wife.

Inquires  one — "  Do  you  mean  that
such  relationship  is  going  to  continue
after  this  life  in  the  eternal  worlds  ?,f
Yes,  that  which  God  has  appointed
and  ordained  in  eternity,  in  relation
to  the  creations  aud  worlds  that  he
has  made,  must  be  fulfilled.  There
is  no  such  thing  as  a  woman  dwelling
scparatety  and  independently,  and
inheriting  a  fullness  of  the  glory  of
heaven,  or  a  man  either;  they  must
be  united  together  in  the  Lord,

Now  you  begin  to  understand  a
little  of  the  principle  of  marriage,
as  believed  in  by  the  Latter-day
Saints.  We  might  point  out  a  great
many  other  principles  of  the  celestial
law,  necessary  to  observe  in  order  to
attain  the  highest  glory,  but  as  the
heat  is  intense,  it  would  not  be  wis-
dom to  detain  you.  Let  me  say  to
my  young  brethren  and  sisters,  do  not
transgress  the  law  of  heaven.  These
things  could  be  done  without  any
very  gteat  condemnation  by  people
abroad,  but  when  we  are  at  the  place
where  we  can  be  taught  and  instructed
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  if  we  then,
with  our  eyes  wide  open,  go  and  get
our  marriages  celebrated  by  the  civil
authorities  of  the  land  alone,  we  shall
find  ourselves  under  great  condemna-
tion, God  will  judge  the  people
according  to  the  light  they  have,  and
if  you  have  been  properly  instructed
in  regard  to  his  laws  and  ordinances
do  not  transgress  them,  but  attend
to  them  according  to  the  order  of
heaven,  as  you  are  instructed.  Let
all  your  marriages  be,  not  for  time
only,  according  to  the  fien tile  system
of  marriage,  but  let  them  be  cove-
nants for  eternity,  and  let  them  be
sealed  upon  you  by  a  man  of  God


154


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


having  authority  to  do  these  things ;  !
and  let  them  be  recorded,  and  let
these  records  be  such  that,  when  the
books  are  opened,  they  will  be  found
to  accord  with  the  records  of  heaven,
then,  if  yoo  are  faithful,  you  will  be


entitled  to  your  wife  and  your  chil-
dren, to  all  eternity,  by  virtue  of  the
covenants  which  you  have  entered
into,  and  which  have  been  sealed  on
earth,  by  divine  authority,  an  i  sealed
in  heaven  in  jour  behalf.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  iw  the  Meeting  house,  at  Lehi  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

August  9,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  UNITED  ORDER  IS  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  KINGDOM  WHERE  GOD  AND
CHRIST  DWELL — THE  LAW  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN"  PROTECTS
ALL  PEOPLE  IN  THEIR  RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP — IN  OBEYING  COUNSEL
THERE  IS  SALVATION.


There  are  a  few  ideas  and  reflec-
tions that  I  wish  to  give  to  the  people.
I  shall  have  to  make  my  remarks
brief  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  our
journey  r.orth^vard.  You  hear  a  pood
denl  from  time  to  time,  and  you  think
a  good  deal,  nbont  the  condition  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  what  we
are  trying  to  do  with  them  concerning
the  United  Order.  I  wish  you  to
understand  that  this  is  no  new  reve-
lation ;  it  is  the  order  of  the  kingdom
where  God  and  Christ  d*ell;  it  has
been  from  eternity  and  will  be  to
eternity,  without  end,  cons',  queutly
we  have  nothing  particularly  new  to
offer  yon,  but  we  have  the  command-
ments that  have  been  from  the  be-
ginning. With  regard  to  those  who
wish  to  have  new  revelation  they  will
plrzise  to  accommodate  themselves
and  call  this  a  new  revelation.  On
this  occasion  I  will  not  repeat  any-


thing particular  in  respect  to  the
I  mguage  of  revelation,  further  than
to  say — Thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  my
servant  Brigham,  Call  ye,  call  ye,
upon  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,  to  or-
ganize themselves  in  the  Order  of
Enoch,  in  the  New  and  Everlasting
Covenant,  according  to  the  Order  of
Heaven,  for  the  furtherance  of  my
kingdom  upon  the  earth,  for  the  per-
fecting of  the  Saints,  for  the  salva-
tion of  the  living  and  the  dead.

You  can  accommodate  yourselves
by  calling  this  a  new  revelation,  if
you  choose ;  it  is  no  new  revelation,
but  it  is  the  express  word  and  will  of
God  to  this  people.

How  many  do  you  think  would  like
and  have  hearts  to  enter  into  this
Order  ?  Let  me  ask  you  a  question.
You  sisters  as  well  as  the  brethren
who  have  read  the  Bible  and  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,


THE  UNITED

whether  you  have  read  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  the  sermons  or  not,  who
is  there  among  you  who  does  not
know  and  understand  that  the  people
called  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,
or  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
in  nst  be  of  one  heart  and  of  one  mind  ?
I  do  not  think  there  are  any  of  yon
who  do  not  know,  feel  and  undei stand
this  just  as  I  do,  and  yet  perhaps  you
do  not  realize  it.  We  can  see  that
it  does  not  sit  upon  the  hearts  and
take  huld  of  the  affections  of  the
people;  it  does  not  break  up  every
particle  of  the  fallow  ground  of  their
hearts  so  that  they  can  receive  this
into  their  affections  and  bring  forth
fruit  to  the  glory  of  God.  If  those
now  be  fire  rjie,  brethren  and  sisters,
who  profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints,
were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  mind
in  the  sense  of  the  Scripture  that  is
given  to  us,  revealed  in  days  of  old
ant]  in  our  day,  we  never  should  have
to  say  to  them — Pay  your  Tithing ;
but  the  feeling  of  every  heart,  and
the  language  of  every  one  who  has
come  to  years  of  discretion  would  be
if  there  is  a  Temple  to  be  built —
"What  can  I  do  to  forward  this  Tem-
ple ?  Do  you  want  my  work  ?  I
have  abundance  for  my  family  to  eat, ;
they  are  capable  of  clothing  them-  ;
selves  with  a  little  help  from  me,  I
cau  spend  all  my  lime;  "  find  the  sis-
ters would  say — **  We  can  make  the
stockings  and  the  shirts,  and  we  can
make  up  the  cloth,  if  you  will  give
it  to  ns,  for  the  hands,  and  we  chii
make  their  bats  and,  if  necessary,  we
can  make  their  shoes,"  If  this  was
in  the  hearts  and  affections  of  the
people  it  would  no  longer  be  Tithing
alone,  bat  the  inquiry  would  lye —
**  What  do  you  want  ?  We  have
abundance. "

We  ask  nothing  but  the  labor  of  the
people,  and  if  the  Latter-day  Saints
felt  the  importance  of  the  mission
that  is  upon  them,  and  of  fulfilling


ORDER,  ETC.  135

the  requirements  of  heaven  that  are
resting  upon  them,  you  would  see
Temples  rising  here  like  mngic ;  it
would  be  nothing  bat  »  breakfast
spell  for  us  to  build  a  Temple,  How
do  you  think  those  feel  who  do  un-
derstand the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord,  and  view  the  condition  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  as  it  really  is  ?
Unless  you  see  it  by  the  Spirit,  you
ktjow  nothing  about  it,

I  We  can  say  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  it  is  the  mind  and  will  of  God
that  we  organize  according  to  the
best  plans  and  putterns  and  system

I  that  we  can  get  for  the  present  We
can  do  this,  and  thus  far  give  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  the  mind  and  will
of  the  Lord;  but  we  can  not  make
a  man  or  a  woman  yield  to  the  will
of  God  unless  they  are  disposed  to.
I  can  plant,  I  can  water,  but  I  cannot
pive  the  increase;  I  cannot  cause  the
wheat  and  corn  to  grow.  It  is  true
I  can  bre»k  up  nnd  prepare  the
ground  and  cast  the  seed  therein,  but
I  cannot  cause  it  to  grow,  that  can
only  be  done  by  the  people  having
willing  hearts,  ready  minds,  and  a
disposition  to  go  forth  with  a  firm
determination  and  a  willing  hand  tc
build  up  the  kingdom,  I  will  do  my
part — I  have  done  it  Brother  Erag-
tus  Snow  has  made  certain  eulogistic
remarks  about  my  career  in  the
Church,  but  I  will  say  this  with  re-
gard to  Brother  Brigham — I  do  not
know  anything  about  what  he  has
earned,  1  never  inquired  about  that
or  about  what  he  deserves.  All  I
have  to  do  is  to  take  good  care  of
everything  that  the  Lord  gives  me,
imptove  upon  every  means  of  grace
and  every  talent  he  gives  me,  improve
upon  the  visions  of  the  Spirit  and
speak  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  the
people.  My  mind  has  been  and  it  is
to-day,  that  there  is  not  an  Elder  in

;  all  Israel  that  can  do  his  duty  in  de-
claring the  things  of  God  to  the  na-


156  JOURNAL  OF

tions  of  the  earth  unless  he  declares
those  truths  by  the  power  of  revela-
tion. He  must  speak  by  the  p  mvr
of  God  or  he  does  not  magnify  his
call  fug.  The  theory  of  our  religion
17V ill  not  answer  the  purpose  of  saving
us.  I  can  call  upon  the  people,  but
will  they  organize  themselves?  Some
inquire,  "  Is  this  exactly  the  order
that  the  Lord  requires  ?  It  is  just
exactly  what  the  Lord  requires.

I  will  say  to  you  with  regard  to  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth — Here
is  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints,  organized  with  its
rules,  regulations  and  degrees,  with
the  quorums  of  the  holy  Priesthood,
from  the  First  Presidency  to  the
teachers  and  deacons;  here  wo  are,
an  organization,  God  called  upon
Joseph,  he  called  upon  Oliver  Cow-
dery,  then  others  were  called  through
Joseph,  the  Church  was  organized,  lie
with  his  two  counselors  comprised  the
First  Presidency.  In  a  few  years  the
Quorum  of  the  Twelve  was  organized,
the  High  Counsel  was  organized,  the
High  Priests1  quorum  was  organized,
the  Seventies1  quorums  were  organ-
ized, and  the  Priests'  quorum,  the
Teachers'  quorum  mid  the  Deacons'.
This  is  what  we  are  in  the  habit  of
calling  the  kingdom  of  God.  But
th  ere&re  further  organizations-  The
Prophet  gave  a  full  and  complete
organization  to  this  kingdom  the
Spring  before  he  was  killed.  This  ;
kingdom  is  the  kingdom  that  Daniel
spoke  ot^  which  was  to  be  set  up  in
the  last  days;  it  is  the  kingdom  that
is  not  to  be  given  to  another  people ;
it  is  the  kingdom  that  is  to  be  held
by  the  servants  of  God,  to  rule  the
nations  of  the  earth,  to  send  forth
those  laws  and  oriiinunces  that  shall
be  suitable  and  that  shall  apply  them-
selves to  the  Church  of  Je&us  Christ
of  Latter-day  Saints;  that  will  ap-
ply themselves  to  the  mother  Church,
"the  holy  Catholic  Church they


DISCOURSES*

will  commend  themselves  to  every.
Protestant  Church  upon  the  earth;
they  will  commend  themselves  to
every  class  of  infidels,  and  will  throw
their  protecting  arms  around  the
whole  human  family,  protecting
them  in  their  rights.  If  they  wish
to  worship  a  white  dog,  they  will  have
the  privilege;  if  they  wish  to  wor-
ship the  sua  they  will  have  the  pri-
vilege; if  they  wish  to  worship  a
man  they  will  have  the  privilege,  and
if  they  wish  to  worship  the  "  un-
known God"  they  will  have  the  pri-
vilege. This  kingdom  will  circum-
scribe them  alt  and  will  issue  laws
and  ordinances  to  protect  them  iu
their  rights— every  right  that  every
people,  sect  and  person  can  enjoy;
and  the  full  liberty  that  God  has
granted  to  them  without  molestation.
Can  you  understand  me  ?  This
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  is  organized  for  the  building
up  of  this  Church  alone ;  it  is  not  for
the  building  up  of  Catholicism,  it  is
not  for  promoting  any  or  all  of  the
dissentients  from  the  Mother  Church,
it  is  alone  for  the  Church  ot  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  find  for
no  other  body  of  people.  When  we
organize  according  to  these  laws  and
ordinances  we  make  this. people  one,
but  we  do  not  bring  in  the  Methodists,
Presbyterians  or  Calvin ists,  they  are
independent  of  themselves.  But  tho
kingdom  of  God,  when  it  is  esta^
blialied  and  bears  rule,  will  defend
the  Methodists  in  their  rights  just  as
much  as  Latter-day  Saints,  but  it
will  not  allow  them  to  infringe  upon
the  rights  of  their  neighbors;  this
will  he  prohibited.  These  sects  may
want  to  afflict  the  Saints  just  as  now  ;
they  may  want  to  persecute  each
other  just  as  they  now  do;  they  may
want  to  bring  everybody  to  their
standard  just  as  they  do  now.  But
the  kingdom  of  God,  when  it  is  set
up  upon  the  earth,  will  be  after  the


THE  UNITED

pattern  of  heaven,  and  will  compel
no  man  nor  woman  to  go  contrary  to
bis  or  her  conscience,  Thev  would
compel  us  to  go  contrary  to  our  con-
sciences, wouldn't  they  ?  I  recollect
when  there  were  but  few  Methodists,
wheu  they  were  poort  and  when  there
was  scarcely  a  college-bred  minister
on  the  continent  of  America  in  the
Methodist  Ghnrch.  I  recollect  them
in  their  infancy,  but  what  would  they
do  now  ?  Then  they  were  persecuted,
and  thought  they  bore  a  great  deal
for  Christ's  sake. Perhaps  they  did.

Now  I  want  to  give  you  these  few
words — the  kingdom  of  God  will
protect  every  person,  every  sect  and
all  people  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth,  in  their  legal  rights*  I  shall
not  tell  you  the  names  of  the  mem-
bers of  this  kingdom,  neither  shall  I
read  to  you  its  constitution,  but  the
constitution  was  given  by  revelation.
The  day  will  come  when  it  will  be  |
organized  in  strength  and  power.
Now,  as  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  L  itter  day  Saints,  we  work  our
way  along  the  best  we  can.  Can  you
understand  this  ?

A  few  words  upon  the  organization
of  this  United  Order.  We  regret
that  we  are  not  in  a  capacity  to  make
oar  own  laws  pertaining  to  our  do-
mestic affairs  as  we  choose;  if  we
were  in  a  State  capacity  we  could  do
so.  The  legislature  could  then  pass
laws  by  which  we  won  Id  have  the
right  to  deed  our  property  to  the
Church,  to  the  Trustee-in-Trust,  if
we  chose,  or  in  any  other  way  the
people  would  like  to  deed  their  pro-
perty to  God  and  hi.;  kingdom.  But
we  can  not  do  this  now,  we  are  not  a
State.  Wo  are  in  the  capacity  of
servants  now,  where  we  have  to  bow
to  the  whims  and  capiices  of  the  ig-
norant, and  to  the  prejudice  of  wilful,
ignorant  sectarianism ;  consequently
we  are  under  the  necessity  of  getting
np  our  constitution  or  the  articles  of


ORDER,  ETC,  157

our  association  so  that  they  will  agree
with  existing  statutes  and  be  legal,
that  we  can  carry  on  business  as  we
wish  without  being  infringed  upon  or
molested  by  anybody.

Some  have  complained,  And  say —
**  This  does  not  incorporate  the  whole,
we  want  articles  of  agreement  under
which  we  can  give  all  that  we  have
got."  Let  me  say  to  you  that  our
articles  of  confederation,  agreement
or  association  will  allow  us  to  deed
every  particle  of  property  that  we
have  got  to  this  co-operative  institu-
tion— our  houses,  farms,  sheep,  cat-
tle, horses,  our  labor,  our  railroad
stock,  bank  stock,  factories,  and
everything  that  we  have  we  can  deed
to  the  trustees  of  this  association.
Whatever  you  have  here  in  Lehi  that
you  wish  to  dee  1  over  to  those  yon
have  selected  to  be  a  board  of  trustees
vou  can  deed  to  them  to  take  the  su~
pervision  of  it,  and  then  you  will  put
it  out  of  the  hands  perhaps  of  unruly
froward  children  and  spendthrifts,
and  do  good  by  so  doing.  And  if
you  can  put  in  every  particle  of  your
property,  and  have  this  governed
and  controlled  by  the  best  men  you
have  here,  why  not  do  this  just  as
well  as  to  deed  it  to  George  A.  Smith,
the  Trustee- in-Trust  ?  Does  not  this
answer  every  purpose  ?  It  does.
Look  at  the  reason  of  it  if  you  wish
to.  If  it  is  the  word  and  the  wish
and  the  will  of  the  organization  here
to  deed  only  part  of  the  property,  I
expect  they  will  take  the  liberty  of
doing  so ;  but  this  would  not  suit
me.  If  1  had  property  here  in  this
place  I  should  wish  to  deed  every
particle  of  it  to  this  association,  I
wish  to  deed  every  particle  of  my
property  in  Provo,  just  as  quick  as
there  is  an  opportunity,  and  have  it
done  in  a  way  that  it  will  be  beneficial
to  the  people.  I  am  laboring  under
a  certain  embarrassment  and  so  are
many  others,  with  regard  to  deeding


158


JOURNAL  OV  DISCOURSES


property,  a::d  that  is  to  find  men  who
know  what  to  do  with  property  when  i
it  is  in  thar  hands. I  will  relate  a
circumstance  here,  which  I  related  to
aome  of  the  brethren  the  other  day.
There  was  a  very  excellent  goad  man
in  this  Cnurch  who  found  it  very
hard  to  get  along  with  his  large  fam
ily. He  received  a  very  fine  present,
for  which  he  was  very  thankful  to  j
the  donor;  but  after  it  was  given  to  j
him,  he  said  he  did  not  know  what
to  do  with  the  elephant  now  that  he
had  got  it. He  called  his  present
an  "elephant"  on  his  hands;  he
could  not  plow  with  hirn,  he  couM
not  ride  him  to  meeting,  he  could
not  harness  him  to  a  carriage,  and  in
fact  he  could  not  do  anything  with
him,  the  "elephant"  was  too  large

m

for  him  to  handle.  When  this  fac-
tory at  Provo  can  go  into  the  hands
of  men  who  know  what  to  da  with  it,
it  will  go;  when  ray  factory  in  Sdt
Like  County  can  go  into  the  hands
of  tnen  who  know  what  to  do  with
it,  it  will  go.  There  is  my  he  loved
brother  James  W.  Cummings,  who
has  worked  my  factory  ten  or  twelve
yeans  ;  he  counts  himself  A  No.  1  in
alt  financial  business,  I  hare  of-
fered the  factory  to  him  and  his
workmen  on  the  co-- »perative  system,
in  the  order  that  we  wi«h  to  adopt
I  said  to  him — "Take  it  and  manage
it,  you  are  welcome."  Sa:d  he — 14  If
I  only  had  plenty  of  money  to  fur-
nish it  I  suppose  I  Could  do  it"
Have  not  I  furnished  it  without  mo-
ney f  Yes,  I  had  not  the  first  six-
pence to  begin  with.  I  turnUhed  my
factories,  and  I  have  built  what  I
have  built  without  asking  how  much
they  cost,  or  where  I  was  to  get  the
money  to  do  it  When  we  find  some-
body that  knows  what  to  do  with  pro-
perty, so: neb  >dy  who  knows  how  to
handle  the  "elephant,"  we  will  give
them  charge  of  it.  If  1  had  him  I
would make the  "elephant"  get


down  on  his  knees  to  me  and  keep
him  there  until  I  allowed  him  to  get
up,  and  then  teach  him  to  get  up
with  his  burden  on  his  bick,  and
carry  it  where  I  said.  As  quick  as
we  can  find  men  who  know  what  to
do  with  the  "  elephants"  we  will  put
the  "elephants"  into  their  hands;
but  here,  as  elsewhe  e,  you  will  find,
in  all  these  business  trans  actions,  that
the  greatest  difficulty  will  be  hi  find
men  who  know  what  to  do  with  mo-
ney or  means  when  they  have  it.  Can
you  understand  this  ?  I  want  to  say
to  you  who  have  a  little  money,  a
farm  or  other  property,  seek  first  to
know  where  God  wants  you  to  put
that  propei ty.  That  is  the  word  of
the  Lord  to  you.  Hearken  and  hear
it,  men  nnd  women,  seek  to  know
w  lie  re  God  wants  you  to  put  it,  and
if  it  is  into  a  factory  where  you  will
not  get  a  firthing  for  ten  years,  put
it  there,  and  in  the  end  the  Lord  will
brin^  out  more  means  to  vou  than  if
you  let  it  out  at  twenty  four  percent.
You  will  make  by  it.  41  How  do  yon
know,  brother  Brig  iam  ?"  I  know
by  my  own  experience;  my  character
and  my  life  have  shown  that  from  the
first  time  I  had  fifty  cents  after  I
came  into  the  Church  my  first  desire
whs  to  know  what  to  do  with  it  In
the  d  iys  of  Joseph  where  we  lived
and  worked,  it  was  harder  thim  to
get  fifty  cents  thnn  it  h  for  a  poor
man  to  ^et  a  hundred  dullars  now,
but  if  Joseph  came  along,  ami. said- —
"Brigham,  have  you  gol  tilty  cents  ?"
44  Yes,  I  have."  %i  I  want  it"  14  Yon
can  have  it  always  and  forever.'1  If
it  was  a  hundred  dollars,  or  two  hun-
dred dollars,  he  had  it,  and  had  it
freely,  an  I  I  never  a*>ked  for  it  again.
And  if  ever  I  could  work  at  home
and  get  fifty  cents  in  money  to  buy  a
little  molasses  for  my  family  to  sop
their  johnny  cike  in,  if  Joseph
wanted  it  he  always  had  it,  and  I  got
rich  by  it,  and  I  can  say  so  of  all  who


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  BTC.  159


take  the  same  course;  while  the
covetous,  those  who  are  striving
continually  to  build  themselves  up  in
the  things  of  this  life,  will  be  poor
indeed;  they  will  be  poor  in  spirit
and  poor  in  heavenly  things,  1
You  have  heard  me  say,  a  groat
many  times,  that  there  is  not  that
man  or  woman  in  this  Church,  and
there  never  was  and  never  will  be,
who  torn  op  their  noses  at  the  coun-
sel that  19  given  them  from  the  First
Presidency,  but  who,  unless  they  re-
pent of  and, refrain  from  such  con-
duct, will  eventually  go  out  of  the
Church  and  go  to  hell,  every  one  of
them;  and  I  expect  one  thing  will
be  true  that  Joseph  said  when  living.
A  gentleman  came  to  see  him  and
asked  him  a  great  many  questions,
and  among  the  rest  he  said— u  I  sup-
pose you  calculate  that  you  are  just
right,  and  that  you  '*  Mormons"  are
all  going  to  be  saved  and  everybody
else  will  be  damned."  Said  Joseph,  |
"Sir,  I  will  tell  you  this  one  thing,
all  the  rest  of  the  world  will  be  damned,
and  I  expect  that  most  of  the  "  Mor-
mons '*  wi  1 1  be  unless  they  do  better  than
they  have  done,"  The  man  Hid  not
e top  for  an  explanation.  What  Joseph
meant  by  being  damned  was  that
people  tvill  go  into  tho  spirit  world
without  the  Priesthood,  and  conse-
quently they  are  under  the  power  of
Satan,  and  will  have  to  be  redeemed,
or  eNe  thpy  will  be  forever  under  his
power.  That  is  all  there  is  about
that

Now  Litter-day  Saints,  I  want  to
■ay  this  to  you,  when  a  man  lifts  his
hee  1  a£  tinst  the  counsel  that  we  give
him,  I  know  that  man  will  apostatize,
just  as  sure  as  ho  is  a  living  being,
unless  he  repents  and  refrains  from
euch  conduct.  Brother  George  A.
Smith  has  been  reading  a  little  out
of  the  revelation  concerning  celestial
marriage,  and  1  want  to  say  to  my
sisters  that  if  you  lift  your  heels


against  this  revelation,  and  say  that
you  would  obliterate  it,  and  put  it  oat
of  existence  if  you  had  the  power  to
nullify  and  destroy  it,  I  say  that  if
you  imbibe  that  spirit  and  feeling,
you  will  go  to  hell,  just  as  sure  as
you  are  living  women.  Emma  took
that  revelation,  supposing  she  had
all  there  was;  but  Joseph  had  wis-
dom enough  to  take  care  of  it,  and
he  had  handed  the  revelation  to
JJishop  Whitney,  and  he  wrote  it  all
off  After  Joseph  had  been  to  Bishop
Whitney's  he  went  home,  and  Emma
began  teasing  for  the  revel  ition.
Said  the — "Joseph,  you  promised
me  that  revelation,  and  if  you  are  a
man  of  your  word  you  will  give  it  to
me,"  Joseph  took  it  from  his  pocket
and  s aid — "  Take  it."  She  went  to
the  fire-place  and  put  it  in,  and  put
the  candle  under  it  and  burnt  it,  and
she  thought  that  was  the  end  of  it,
and  she  will  be  damned  ns  sure  as  she
is  a  living  woman.  Joseph  used  to
say  that  he  would  have  her  hereafter,
if  he  had  to  go  to  hell  for  her,  and
he  will  have  to  go  to  hell  for  her  as
sore  as  he  ever  gets  her.

You  sisters  may  say  that  plural
marriage  is  very  hard  for  you  to
bear.  It  is  no  such  tiling.  A  man
or  woman  who  would  not  spend  his
or  her  life  in  building  up  the  king-
dom of  God  on  the  earth,  without  a
companion,  and  travel  and  preach,
valise  in  hand,  is  not  worthy  of  God
or  his  kingdom,  and  thr*y  never  will
be  crowned,  they  cionot  be  Towned;
the  sacrifice  must  be  complete.  If  it
is  the  duty  of  a  husband  to  take  a
wife,  take  her.  But  it  is  not  the
privilege  of  a  woman  to  dictate  the
husband,  and  tell  who  or  how  many
he  shall  take,  or  what  he  shall  do
with  them  when  he  gets  them,  but  it
is  the  duty  of  the  woman  to  submit
cheerfully.  Says  she — "  May  hus-
band does  not  know  how  to  conduct
himself,  he  lacks  wisdom — he  does


160


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


m

not  know  how  to  treat  two  wives  and
be  just/*  That  all  may  be  true,  but
it  is  not  her  prerogative  tu  correct
the  evil,  she  must  bear  that ;  and  the
woman  that  bears  wrong — and  any
number  of  them  do  in  this  order-
patiently,  will  be  crowned  with  a  man
far  above  her  husband ;  and  the  man
that  is  not  worthy,  and  who  does  not
prove  himself  worthy  before  God,  his
wife  or  wives  will  be  taken  from  him
and  given  to  another,  so  the  women
need  not  worry.  It  is  the  man  who
has  need  to  worry  and  watch  him-
self, and  see  that  ho  does  right
Where  is  the  man  who  has  wives,
and  all  of  them  think  he  is  doing
just  right  to  them  ?  I  do  not  know
each  a  man;  I  know  it  is  not  yonr
humble  servant.  If  I  would  only  be
dictated  by  women  I  should  make  a
hell  of  it;  but  I  cannot  be,  I  can


humor  them  and  treat  them  kindly,
bat  I  tell  them  I  shall  do  just  what
I  know  to  be  right,  and  they  may
help  themselves  the  beat  they  can,
I  do  not  say  that  in  so  many  words,
hot  that  is  what  I  mean,  and  I  let
them  act  it  out.

It  is  time  to  close  this  meeting.  I
say  to  the  brethren  and  sisters,  peace
be  with  yoaf  and  may  God  bless  you.
If  you  walk  humbly  before  Htm  so  as
to  enjoy  his  Spirit,  it  will  lead  into
all  truth.  I  have  one  little  sermon
to  the  Bishops,  Bishop  Young  and
all  the  rest  of  them,  and  to  the  El-
ders, I  want  to  see  a  pattern  set  for
this  holy  order,  and  I  give  to  each
one  of  them  a  mission  to  go  and  call
together  five,  ten,  twenty  or  fifty
families,  and  organize  a  complete
organization,  and  show  the  rest  of  ut
how  to  live.


J  REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A,  SMITH,

Delivered  at  thb  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  dat  Saints,  in  thb  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  October  11,  1874.


(Repotted  by  David  W.  Evans.)


PRAYER  MUST  BE  REMEMBERED  IN  FAMILIES —  ELDERS  TO  BE
SENT  ON  MISSIONS— BUILDING  TEMPLES  —  TEMPLES  NECESSARY
TO  SALVATION— HOME  MANUFACTURES— THE  UNITED  ORDER. i 1


I  have  been  much  interested  in  the
remarks  of  the  Elders  this  morning
as  all  through  the  Conference,  and  I
hope  the  instrnclions  we  have  received
will  be  treasured  op  in  the  hearts  uf
all,  and  carried  home  to  our  house-
holds and  wards,  and  that  the  Elders


who  have  attended  Conference  will
stir  up  the  people  to  diligence,  teach
them  to  remember  the  Sabbath  day
and  to  keep  it  holy,  and  instead  of
fooling  away  their  time  in  labor  or
pleasure,  to  devote  that  day  to  the
worship  of  God  and  to  rest,  according


PRAYER,  ETC.


161


to  the  original  design  of  heaven.  We
should  remember  our  prayera  at  all
times  in  our  families,  we  should  also
remember  to  observe  the  word  of
wisdom,  and  be  careful  to  continually
pursue  such  a  course  as  will  entitle
us  to  the  blessings  of  the  Lord,  and
that  his  Spirit  may  unceasingly  abide
in  our  hearts.  As  members  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  we  should  let  our  light  shine
before  men,  by  observing  the  princi-
ples which  we  profess  to  have  obeyed.
We*  need  not  be  troubled  because
false  reports  are  sent  abroad  into  the
world  concerning  us;  this  has  been
the  universal  lot  of  Saints  in  all  ages
of  the  world.  The  Savior  said —
"  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  per-
secute you  and  say  all  manner  of  evil
against  you  falsely  for  my  name's
sake-"  If  we  are  only  conscious
within  ourselves  that  these  charges
are  false  we  need  not  fear,  and  we
should  nevei^  hesitate  to  lift  up  our
voices  among  the  children  of  men  in
bearing  testimony  of  the  truth  re-
vealed in  these  latter  days,  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,

We  are  anxious  to  publish  the
standard  works  of  the  Church  to  a
greater  extent  than  hitherto.  Some
of  them  have  been  republished,  and
others  are  in  progress,  and  we  wish
to  have  the  co-operation  of  the  Saints,
generally,  throughout  the  Territory,
in  helping  on  this  work.  Oar  pub-
lications should  be  in  every  family  of
the  Saints,  and  we  wish  to  exercise
that  kind  of  influence  in  the  midst
of  our  people  that  will  lead  them  to
make  themselves  acquainted  with  the
contents  of  the  Bible,  Book  of  Mor-
mon, Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, and  such  other  works  as  are
or  have  been  published  illustrative
of  the  principles  of  life  and  salvation
made  known  in  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  that  they  may  be  more  gene-
No.  1L


rally  understood  by  those  professing
to  be  Latter-day  Saints.

We  expect,  before  the  Conference
closes,  to  call  a  considerable  number
of  Elders  to  eo  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel  in  the  United  States.  There
have  been  but  few  missionaries  sent
to  the  States,  aud  the  present  gene-
ration there  have,  to  a  great  extent,
formed  their  notions  of  us  and  our
faith  from  the  false reports  sent
through  the  press;  and  as  we  all
know  that  notions  so  formed  can  not
be  other  than  erroneous,  we  shall  call
a  considerable  number  of  Elders  to
go  and  travel  through  the  States,
representing  the  Gospel  in  its  true
light,  and  bearing  testimony  to  the
truth,  that  the  generation  that  have
grown  np  since  we  were  driven  into
the  wilderness,  may  learn  and  know
for  themselves  the  facts  concerning
as, pWi*?fc>  vj  it'fci
We  are  laboring,  as  has  been  re-
ferred to  Jby  some  of  the  brethren
who  have  adJressed  the  Conference,
to  bnild  a  Temple  in  St.  George,  and
one  in  this  city. The  work  is  mov-
ing on  in  both  places. I  feel  quite
gratified  at  the  success  of  the  work-
men the  present  season  on  the  Tern-
pie  here. Taking  the  granite  from
the  boulders  in  the  mountains,  bring-
ing  it here, enttirjg  the  blocks,
placing  the  pillars  in  position,  and
getting  everything  in  the  mechan-
ical style  that  it  is,  in  the  last  two
years,  is  perfectly  wonderful  to  me.
The  erection  of  a  Temple  like  this  is
a  great  work,  it  requires  a  vast
amount  of  means,  energy  and  skill.
We  have  not  had  as  much  means  to
sustain  the  brethren  who  have  been
laboring  upon  it  as  we  anticipated,  in
consequence  of  the  change  of  the
times,  and  the  failure  of  some  to
come  forward  and  pay  their  Tithing
and  thereby  supply  the  demand.  Yet
we  have*  moved  the  work  forward
gloriously. Brother  Pinuock  has  the

Vol,  XVII.


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


gates  open,  and  I  invite  the  Bishops
and  all  ilio  brethren  and  sisters  from
distant  places  to  go  and  see  the
beautiful  work  we  have  done  on  that
Temple;  and  while  you  are  inspect*
ing  what  has  been  done  try  and
realize  the  amount  of  labor  and  means
that  have  been  required  to  accom-
plish it. Think  of  the  millions  of
dollars  that  King  Solomon  expended
in  building  the  foundation  of  his
Temple,  and  of  the  heavy  tax  it  was
upon  the  people;  and  then,  if  you
want  to  compare  his  work  with  ours,
think  of  the  manner  in  which  we  are
Harrying  this  forth.  I  wish  the  Saints,
also,  when  visiting  the  Temple,  to
raise  their  hearts  in  prayer  to  the
Most  High,  that  he  will  bless  the
efforts  that  are  being  made  to  rear
a  house  to  his  holy  name. We  in-
vite all  the  brethren  and  sisters  to
contribute  their  monthly  offerings  in
money, that  these  workmen  may
have  a  portion  of  their  wages  in  mo-
ney, and  such  necessaries  as  can  nut
be  obtained  without  it For  a  con*
sidcrahle  portion  of  the  present  se^
aon  the  Temple  workmen  have  hnd
to  do  almost  entirely  with  home  pro-
ducts* Some  of  them  have  stuck  to
it  faithfully,  others  have  been  com-
pelled to  quit. In  fact,  for  want  of
means,  we  were  under  the  necessity
at  one  time  of  dismissing  fifty  hands.
But  we  have  kept  the  work  moving,
and  if  the  brethren  will  go  and  see
what  we  have  done  they  can  but
be  surprised  and  delighted. It  is  a
glorious  work,  and  one  that  is  to  be
dedicated  to  the  Most  High  God*
Then  let  our  hearts  bo  lifted  to  him
in  prayer  that  this  work  may  continue,
that  we  may  be  protected  from  the
wrath  of  our  enemies  and  from  the
vengeance  of  the  wicked  one,  and  be
able  to  complete  this  Temple  and
dedicate  it,  that  the  glory  of  the
Lord  may  rest  upon  it,  the  various
quorums  of  the  Priesthood  be  organ-


ized with  in  it,  and  that  we  and  our
children  may  be  permitted  to  enter
its  sacred  precincts,  and  receive  the
ordinances  of  the  Priesthood  and  the
blessings  of  the  Gospel  of  peace
which  can  be  received  only  in  a  Tem-
ple of  the  Lord.

I  wish  to  bear  my  testimony  to
the  principles  of  the  Gospel  which
have  been  revealed*  I  never  wish
to  stand  before  the  Saints  without
doing  that,  for  when  I  was  called
as  one  of  the  first  Seventies  to  bear
testimony  to  the  people,  I  lifted
my  hand  to  heaven  and  said  —  "If
I  ever  forget  to  bear  testimony  to
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the
true  mission  of  Joseph  Smith,  let
my  right  hand  forget  its  cunning
and  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of
my  month.*'  From  that  day  to  thig
I  always  remember  to  bear  my
fesTimony  when  I  address  the  people,
for  I  know  that  this  Gospel  and  plan
of  salvation,  revealed  by  Juseph
Smith  and  taught  by  the  Apostles  of
this  Church,  is  true.  Men  may  say
that  Brigham  Yonng  and  the  Elders
of  this  Chinch  are  impostors;  but  I
know  that  they  were  called  by  revela-
tion and  ordained  and  set  apart  to  do
this  work  through  Joseph  Smith,  and
they  are  the  servants  of  the  Most
High  God.  They  were  called  to
proclaim  the  Gospel  and  to  adminis-
ter its  ordinances,  and  with  all  their
hearts  they  have  labored  to  accom-
lish  the  work  assigned  them.

It  is  written  that  "Elias  was  a
man  subject  to  like  passions  a 3  we
are,  and  he  prayed  earnestly  that
it  might  not  rain ;  and  it  rained  not
on  the  earth  by  the  space  of  three
years  and  six  months."  This  shows
that  a  man  of  like  passions  to  our-
selves may  obtain  faith  to  perform
great  and  good  works,  to  give  wise
instructions,  to  proclaim  the  princi-
ples of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  to
bear  testimony  to  the  truth,  to  ad-


PRAYER,  ETC.


1GS


minister  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  and  I
bear  of  his  kingdom.  And  it  is  our
duty,  as  we  have  already  been  warned,  |
to  exercise  faith  for  those  in  authority,
that,  while  they  contend  with  like
passions  with  ourselves,  they  may
have  the  Spirit  of  the  Almighty  to
preserve  and  guide  them,  and  to
ens  tain  their  hands,  and  in  all  cases
be  careful  never  to  be  found  speaking
evil  of  the  Lord's  anointed.  A
tattling  tongue  is  a  curse,  and,  as
the  Apostle  James  expresses  it,  "is
set  on  fire  of  hell ; "  and  when  we
are  found  speaking  evil  against  the
servants  of  God  and  accusing  the  1
brethren  we  are  only  following  in
the  u nke  of  the  wicked  one.  Let
us  then  avoid  these  things,  and
learn  to  apeak  those  things  that  are
good,  upright  and  true,  and  bear  a
faithful  testimony  of  the  Gospel.

As  [  said  before,  I  wish  the  Saints
generally  to  remember  the  brethren
who  are  laboring  on  the  Temple  at
St.  George,  They  have  been  work-
ing all  the  season,  with  very  little  i
to  supply  them,  and  some  of  them
are  destitute  of  clothing,  and  other
necessaries.  Some  of  the  workmen
there  have  labored  on  the  Temple
from  the  very  beginning,  and  the
walla  are  now  thirty  feet  high,  and
the  work  is  going  ahead  prosper-
ously. We  have  invited  the  people  '
in  every  settlement  to  contribute  of
their  means  to  continue  the  work,
and  we  have  also  invited  brethren  to
go  down  to  St.  George,  and  labor  upon
the  Temple  this  winter,  that  the  build-
ing may  be  prepared  for  the  roof  as
soon  as  possible.  It  will  be  a  magni-
ficent Temple,  and  will  contain  all
the  conveniences  of  the  Temples  of
KirtJand  and  Nsuvoo.  It  will  be
one  hundred  and  forty- three  feet
long  and  ninety-seven  wide,  and  the
walls  will  be  eighty-eight  feet  high.
It  is  desirable  that  the  brethren  con-
tribute their  meais  to  supply  the


wants  of  those  who  are  laboring  on
that  Temple,  that  they  may  he  en-
couraged to  continue. We  are  anx-
ious to  push  this  Temple  forward  to
completion  as  early  as  possible.  It
is  not  so  large  nor  so  elaborate  in  its
design  as  the  one  in  course  of  erec-
tion in  this  city. St,  George  is  a
place  in  which  parties  living  in  the
northern  settlements,  who  may  desire
to  do  so,  can  go  and  spend  the  win-
ter, and  attend  to  the  ordinances  of
the  Priesthood. When  that  Temple
is  finished  we  can  go  down  there  and
be  baptized  for  our  dead,  receive  our
anointings  and  ordinances  and  all  the
blessings  pertaining  to  the  Priest-
hood, and  get  our  records  made  to
perform  that  great  work  which  ie
placed  upon  us  for  the  salvation  of
all  the  generations  from  the  time  that
t  he  Priesthood  was  lost,  the  covenant
broken, the laws  trampled  under
foot  and  the ordinances  forsaken,
unto  the  present  time,  tor  the  3ul-
vation  of  all  who  have  died  ainco
then  rests  upon  us  as  a  generation,
But  if  any  of  us  suffer  ourselves  to
be  led  into  darkness  by the  cun-
ning and  craftiness  of the  wicked
one  or  evil  spirits,  we  lose  great
and  glorious  blessings,  and  a  great
and  glorious  responsibility  which  is
laid  upon  us  pertaining  to  the  salva-
tion of  ourselves  and  our  ancestors.
We  call  upon  all  the  brethren  to  con-
sider t\m:e  things,  and  we  do  not  wish
any  to  go  and  labor  on  that  Temple
this  winter  unless  they  desire  to  do
so,  and  have  got  the  spirit  to  go  in
order  that  they  may  assist  in  for-
warding the  work.

It  is  very  probable  that  some  who
live  in  the  northern  settlements,
who  are  able  to  do  so,  will  make  a
practice  of  spending  the  winter  in
St,  George,  because  of  the  mild
pleasant  weather  which  prevails
there  during  the  winter  season.  Last
winter  the  masons  worked  on  the


164  JOURNAL  OF

walls  of  tbe  Temple  all  the  winter,
except  seven  and  a  half  days,  when
they  were  prevented  by  rain.  But  to
all  who  may  have  any  intention  of
going  there  to  spend  the  winter,  I
would  say,  never  go  with  light  shoes
and  thin  clothing,  but  take  good
warm  cloth ing  and  thick-soled  shoes.
Do  not  be  deceived  with  the  idea  that
you  will  find  summer  weather  there
in  the  winter  season,  it  is  more  like
pleasant  spring  weather,  and  when
evening  comes,  good  thick  warm
clothing  is  needed.

In  speaking  of  the  press  I  wish  to
name  especially  the  paper  published
by  our  sisters — The  Woman's  Ex-
ponent I  feel  as  though  I  hardly
need  suggest  to  the  brethren  that
natural  gallantry  would  require
them,  all  through  the  Territory,  to
subscribe  to  ibis  little  sheet,  and  I
believe  that  if  the  brethren  would
do  so  the  paper  would  be  much  more
widely  circulated  and  would  do  much
more  good  than  at  present.  The
brethren  should  remember  that  our
sisters  hold  the  ballot  in  this  country,
that  tbey  have  equal  influence  at  the
polls  with  the  men,  and  I  certainly
think  that  we  should  patronize  them
in  their  press,  for  I  am  satisfied  that
the  prospects  of  any  man  being
elected  to  the  Legislature  of  Utah
Territory  would  be  very  poor  if  the
women  were  opposed  to  him,  for  I
presume  that  the  women  compose  a
majority  of  the  legal  voters  of  the
Territory,  hence,  under  these  circum-
stances, our  natural  gallantry  and  the
national  characteristic  to  desire  office
should  prompt  us  to  sustain  their
publication.

I  hope  also  that  the  brethren,  in
reflecting  upon  the  instructions  which
have  been  given  during  Conference,
will  not  forget  what  has  been  said  in
relation  to  sustaining  ourselves  with
our  own  material.  We  have  me-
chanics here  who  can  make  good


DISCOURSES.

coffins,  yet  a  great  many  coffins  are
imported  from  the  States  into  this
Territory,  for  which  the  money  has
to  be  paid-  I  say  that  we  ought  to
be  ashamed  of  this,  and  I  here  pub-
licly request  my  friends,  whoever  may

|  live  to  place  me  in  the  ground,  to
place  me  there  in  a  coffin  made  of
our  mountain  wood  by  our  own  me-
chanics, and  I  prohibit  anybody  who
may  outlive  me  paying  a  dollar  for  a
coffin  for  roe  that  is  imported  from
the  States.  That  is  my  sentiment,
and  I  wish  it  was  of  every  man  and
woman  in  the  Territory.  It  may  ba
said  to  be  a  small  matter,  but  it  takes
thousands  of  dollars  of  our  money
away  just  to  gratify  pride*  Says
one — u  I  am  just  as  good  as  such  a
one,  and  why  not  I  have  a  coffin  from
Chicago  or  St.  Louis  as  well  as  he
have  one  r"  This  is  a  sentiment  re-
sulting purely  from  pride  and  love  of
display,  which  is  unworthy  of  a  Lat-
ter-day Saint.  Carry  this  principle
out  and  it  leads  us  to  reject  home-
made shoes  and  other  articles  which
are  far  superior  to  the  foreign-made
i  m  ported  articles.

We  have  been  talking  about  the
United  Order,  and  getting  up  tan-
neries, shoe  shops,  &c.s  and  initiatory

I  steps  have  been  takeu  in  some  of  the
settlements  with  these  objects  in  view;
but  it  takes  time  to  carry  out  and
successf  ully  accomplish  such  projects.

i  But  we  can  produce  these  things
within  ourselves,  and  it  is  our  duty  to
do  it,  and  instead  of  manifesting  a

;  disposition  to  oppose  anything  of  this
kind,  we  should  exert  all  the  influ-
ence and  energy  we  possess  to  bring
it  about,  and  to  make  ourselves  self-
sustaining.  It  is  true  that  the  prin-
ciples of  the  United  Order  are  such
that  a  great  portion  of  our  people  at
the  present  time  are  not  in  a  condi-
tion to  take  hold  of  it  with  all  they
have,  for  many  of  them  have  been
foolish  enough  during  the  success  of


CRIME,  ETC


165


business  for  the  last  four  years,  in-
stead of  paying  their  debts,  to  launch
into  business  of  various  kinds  mid
get  deeper  into  debt  That  class  of
men  have  to  get  their  bands  untied
before  they  can  take  hold  to  promote
the  great  project  of  uniting  the
whole  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
all  their  business  affairs.  But  this
must  be  done  as  fast  as  possible,  and
the  work  of  making  Zion  self-sus-
taining mast  be  regarded  as  part  of
the  work  of  the  Lard ;  for  it  is  an
obligation  devolving  upon  us  to  pro-


vide within  ourselves  labor  and  the
necessaries  of  life.  We  must  take
hold  of  this  matter,  brethren  and
sisters,  with  all  our  hearts,  and  never
let  ourselves  rest  until  Zton  is  inde-
pendent of  her  enemies  and  all  the
world-
May  peace  and  the  light  of  truth
abide  with  you,  that  you  may  under-
stand these  things  and  act  upon  them
with  all  the  spirit  and  power  of  the
gospel  of  peace,  is  my  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen,


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  ALBERT  CARRINGTON,

Delivered  at  the  Abjourneu  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- day  Saikts,  in  thb  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Sunday,  October  11,  1874.


(Repotted  by  David  W.  Evam.)


CRIME  A  TRANSGRESSION  Of  LAW— SAINTS  ARE  UNDER  DIVINE  LAW —
THE  GOSPEL  A  PERFECT  LAW— THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED
STATES  A  JUST  INSTRUMENT— SAINTS  MUST  BE  PATIENT  AND  LONG-
SUFFERING — LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  PREPARE  BY  GOOD  WORKS  TO  MEET
THE  SAVIOR,


I  have  been  much  interested  du-
ring our  meetings  in  this  Conference,
and,  with  you,  I  measurably  realize
the  benefits  to  he  derived  in  thus
as?.f mbling  together.  In  ray  reflec-
tions in  refereuce  to  some  remarks
that  have  been  made  I  have  been  led
to  ask  myself — What  is  crime :
Simply  a  transgression  of  the  law,
human  or  divine.  What  is  law  ?  It
is,  or  should  be,  a  rule  of  order
founded  in  justice,  for  the  benefit
of  those  to  whom  it  may  apply.


Now,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  in
regard  to  law,  we  are  under  divint
law,  the  Gospel,  the  grand  plan  of
salvation — a  law  that  is  perfect,  plain
and  simple  as  well  as  jnst,  and  ap-
plicable to  the  whole  human  family
at  nil  times,  and  in  this  we  shonid
rejoice.  But  we  are  also  under  hu-
man laws  as  well,  we  pertain  to  a
number  of  what  are  termed  human
governments,  subject,  in  a  greater  or
less  degree,  to  man-made  institutions,
and  are  they  perfect? No,  each  and


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


every  one  of  them,  notwithstanding

the  intelligence  possessed  by  man-
kind, and  their  centuries  ot  experi-
ence, contain  the  seeds  of  their  own
dissolution,  and,  in  the  providence  of
God,  they  are  all  destined,  in  their
times  and  in  their  seasons,  to  be  su-
perseded by  the  government  and
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth — a
fact  at  which  every  human  being
should  rejoice.  Bat  do  they  ?  Does
even  that  portion  of  the  world  termed
Christian  rejoice  in  the  ushering  in
of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth  ?  1  am  sorry  to  say,  and  cha-
grined for  humanity  at  being  com-
pelled  to  say,  that  all  Christendom,
almost  to  a  unit,  perhaps  as  much  a
unit  on  that  subject  as  upon  any  one
thing,  although  they  have  the  Bible
in  their  hands,  are  opposed  to  the
establishment  of  the  government  of
God  upon  the  earth.  What  lolly,
absurdity  and  inconsistency  on  the
part  of  so-called  Christendom  to
oppose  that  which  was  devised  in  the
wisdom  of  the  Gods  in  the  eternal
worlds  and  which,  in  its  very  nature
and  constitution,  is  calculated  to
bent  lit  and  to  promote,  to  the  utmost
possible  degree,  the  welfare  of  man-
kind in  all  their  relations !

What  about  the  government  under
which  we  live?  Why,  it  is  one  of
the  very  best,  as  to  its  form,  that  the
human  family  have  ever  devised*  It
was  founded  by  excellent,  honorable,
upright,  liberal  and  high- minded
men  who,  in  framing  the  constitution,
were  measurably  inspired  by  that
Holy  Spirit  which  our  Fathr  r  in  the
heavens  bestows  upon  whom  he  will.
That  is  the  view  that  we,  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  have  in  regard  to  the
fundamental  or  basic  instrument  of
the  government  of  the  United  States
termed  the  Constitution;  and  how-
ever much  we  may  be  misrepresented,
maligned  or  lied  about  in  regard  to
that  matter,  as  a  people we  are


loyal  to  that  constitution  to  the  mi-
nutest principle  therein  contained.
We  understand  that  constitution —
its  spirit  as  well  as  its  letter — and,
so  far  as  it  is  observed,  it  is  a  very
excellent  instrument  for  the  con-
ducting of  human  affairs.  We  are  a
people  that  uphold  that  constitution,
and  we  ever  have  done  so,  and  take
great  pleasure  in  doing  so,  and  so
also  with  every  constitutional  law;
and  I  am  at  the  defiance  of  the  wide
world  to  truthfully  controvert  the
statement  that  we,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  have  ever  transgressed  one
single  particle  of  constitutional  law,
or  have  ever  had  any  occasion  to  do
so,  or  ever  will  have  in  obeying  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  and  laboring
to  build  up  and  establish  t  he  kingdom
of  God  on  the  earth.  What  do  yoa
think  of  that  ?  The  world  will  tell
you  that  we  are  a  terrible  set,  that  we
nre  disloyal,  ignorant,  stupid,  fanat-
ical, bigoted,  deceivers  and  deceived,
and  in  all  these  statements  and  as
many  more  about  the  Latter-day
Saints,  the  world  will  lie  like  the
devil.

Now,  you  heard  me  sny  constitu-
tional la  -v.  Mark  it  well.  I  under-
stand, as  a  general  thing,  somewhat
of  what  I  am  saying  when  I  speak,
and  I  made  use  ot  the  expression
understand  ingly.  The  constitutional
laws  of  this  government,  what  are
they  ?  They  are  laws  enacted  in
j  ursuance  of  the  principles  couched
in  that  constitution  under  the  aut ho-
rny ltivi  u  the  <,\ 'Hirers  of  oui  Italian
to  enact  laws  for  the  whole  United
States,  and  to  make  treaties  for  our
government.  All  that  is  beyond  that
one  hair's  breadth  is  just  that  far
usurpation,  tyranny  and  wrong.
Have  we  obeyed  that,  more  or  less  ?
Oh,  no  doubt;  we  have  had  to  do  so
now  these  many  years.  In  the  days
of  the  stripling  Joseph,  when  he  was
!  first  called  of  God  to  bring  forth  this


CRIME,  ETC


1S7


great  latter-day  work  that  the  Lord
our  Gad  has  set  his  hand  to  accom-
plish, he  was  assailed  unconstitu-
tionally, so  far  as  the  constitution  of
the  State  v\  New  York  was  can
ce rued,  by  the  citizens  of  that  State  ;
and  again,  the  same  thing  occurred
in  Ohio,  in  Missouri,  and,  finally,  in
Illinois,  where,  contrary  to  the
plighted  faith  of  the  governor  of  the
State,  he  was  slain  by  a  mob,  beciuse,
according  to  their  own  testimony,  the
law  could  not  reach  him,  for  he  had
lived  above  it  What  right,  then,
had  they  to  assail  or  interrupt  him  ?
No  ri^iit  whatever.

Now,  we  as  a  people,  left  the
States,  and  I  may  say  we  left  Chris*
ten do  m,  from  the  simple  fact  that  we
were  obliged  to  do  so  in  order  to  live
our  religion.  But  would  they  let  us
aione  after  we  had  left  the  States  ?
No.  After  having  aided  in  the  con-
quest of  the  very  region  to  which  we
tied  to  avoid  persecution  and  religions
tyranny,  they  wore  not  satisfied  even
then  to  leave  us  unmolested  to  wor-
ship the  true  and  li.ing  God  accord-
ing to  the  dictates  of  our  own  con-
sciences; but  they  have  followed  us
as  a  nation,  and  are  following  us  to
this  day — a  professed  Christian  na-
tion is  trying  to  force  upon  us  the
tyranny  and  oppression  of  unconstitu-
tional law,  administered  by  officers
for  whose  appointment  there  is  nut  a
scintilla  of  right  under  the  constitu-
tion* What  do  vou  think  of  that  ?
And  we  are  enduring  their  inter-
ference with  our  domestic  affairs
with  a*  much  patience  as  we  may.
We  have  endured  these  things  with
considerable  patience  for  many  long
years,  and  I  trust  that  we  shall  still
be  able  to  do  so,  realizing  that  pa-
tience is  one  of  the  great  require-
ments of  our  Father  concerning  us  as
his  children.  He  desires  that  we
should  be  longsufferimj  towards  those
who  seek  to  afflict  and  oppress  us,  as


he  is  longsuffering  towards  the  hu-
man family  in  their  wickedness  and
waywardness,  and  we  must  become
liktt  unto  him  in  these  respects  if  we
are  his;  and  if  we  expect  to  become
perfect  in  our  sphere  as  he  is  in  his,
we  not  only  have  to  be  patient  and
Ion  gauffering,  but  we  shall  have  to
continue  in  patience  and  longsnfFering.
Will  we  do  so  ? I  trust  so,  knowing
the blindness, ignorance,  bigotry,
superstition,  and  consequent  intole-
rance of  our  fellow* beings;  knowing
also  that  they  as  well  as  we  are  an-
swerable to  the  Lord  oar  Gofl,  being
careful,  while  leaving  events  in  the
hands  of  the  Supreme  Hi  iter,  that
uur  conduct,  day  by  day,  is  such  that
it  will  bear, not  only  tho  strictest
examination  and  scrutiny  of  our  fel-
low-beings,  but  also  of  our  Father
and  his  angels ;  realizing,  also,  now
as  anciently,  that  whosoever  will  liva
godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  must  needs
suffer  persecution. Do not  forget
that  this  is  in  the  very  nature  of
things,  from  the  simple  fact  that,  in
order  to  constitute  this  a  probation,
wickedness  has  been  permitted  upon
the  earth,  and  hence  good  and  evil ;
and  wickedness  is  and  ever  has  been
aggressive, tyrannical,  oppressive,
cruel  and  murderous,  and  so  it  will
ever  continue  to  be. Do  not  forget
these  plain  facts,  and  when  yon  hear
the  wicked  he,  and  see  them  strive  to
oppress  you  and  to  deprive  you  of
I  your  rights  do  not  get  impatient
about  it  and  fancy  that  it  is  anything
new,  but  remember  that  it  has  ever
been  so  since  the  days  of  Cain,  and
J  that  it  will  continue  until  wickedness
-  is  swept  from  this  footstool  of  Jeho-
vah, and  not  before  that  time  can  we
hope  to  cease  to  be  oppressed  and
wronged, And  this  is  necessary  to
prove  whether  we  will  endure  all
things,  as  the  great  Captain,  pattern,
aud  exemplar  of  our  faith  and  the
great  High  Priest  of  our  salvation


JOURNAL  OF  1>  IS  COURSES*


endured,  in  his  time. He  was  buf-
feted,  scourged  and  mobbed  and  led
like  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter — a  being
id  whom  was  no  guile,  who  finally
terminated  his  mortal  career  by  a
cruel  death  on  the  cross. He  was
opposed  by  his  own  when  he  came  to
call  and  gather  them  as  their  king
and  ruler.  Who  were  his  own?  The
tribes  of  Israel,  and  he  came  more
particularly  to  that  most  stubborn
and  stiffnecked  of  all  the  tribes — the
tribe  of  Judah. And  did  ttie  scribes
and  pharisees,  the  rabbins  and  law-
yers, the  wise,  intelligent  and  noble
hail  and  welcome  him? No,  most
assuredly  not;  then  how  much  less
need  we  expect  that  they  will  hail
and  welcome  us, h  is  professed  followers !
When,  instead  of  himself,  his  word,
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
came  to  Christendom  with  its  almost
numberless  free  schools  and  its  mil-
lions of  bibles  and  legions  of  priests,
did  the  people  hail  that  word  ?  No,
they  spurned  it,  and  in  every  con-
ceivable way derided him  who
brought  it;  and,  as  in  the  days  of
the  Savior,  the  Priests,  the  pharisees
and sadducees, the lawyers  and
scribes,  the  wise  in  their  own  estima-
tion and  the wealthy all  banded
together  to  keep  from  the  children  of
men  the  word  of  God,  which  is  truth,
and  which  is  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation  to  all  who  will  believe  and
obey  it Are  not  these  facts  ?  I
know  they  are, though  the  whole
world  may  gainsay  I  know  that  J
am  telliug  you  the  truth,  as  God  lives
I  know  it  for  myself.

Now,  then,  with  regard  to  these
matters  that  we  are  immediately
passing through  —  the  attempted


enforcement  of  laws  that  are  not
constitutional  and,  through  not  being
constitutional,  that  are  not  valid,
and  consequently  of  no  force  or  effect
whatever,  in  justice,  what  are  we
going  to  do  about  it  ?  I  trust  that
we  will  endure,  with  all  patience,
whatever  the  Lord  our  God  may  per-
mit the  evil  one  and  those  who,
through  the  exercise  of  their  agency,
list  to  serve  him,  to  accomplish ;  and
while  enduring  with  all  patience,  that
we  seek,  in  all  faithfulness  and  up-
rightness  for  the  guidance  of  his
Holy  Spirit  to  lead  ns  in  the  path  of
truth  and  to  enable  us  to  walk  there-
in, and  to  endure  meekly  and  pa-
tiently all  things  that  he  in  his  pro-
vidence may  see  fit  to  place  upon  ns,
in  order  to  prove  whether  we  as
individuals  and  as  a  people  will  serve
him  in  evil  as  well  as  in  good  report.
Is  there  anything  bigoted  or  contrary
to  the  principles  of  eternal  truth  as
taught  by  the  Savior  and  h:s  Apostles
in  all  this  ?  No.  Then  why  not
the  world  turn  to  the  Lord  our  God,
and  Jive  ?  Why  not,  Latter-day
Saints,  for  our  own  sakes,  live  faith-
fully,, humbly  and  uprightly  and  in
all  respects  honor  the  requirements
of  the  Gospel,  until  we  become  pow-
erful through  good  works  and  able
to  meet,  with  joy,  the  coming  of
the  Savior,  and  prepared  to  hail  with
gladness  the  society  and  companion-
ship of  just  men  made  perfect,  being
worthy  to  associate  with  them  and
to  share  iu  their  blessings,  and  finally,
be  saved  in  the  celestial  kingdom  of
our  Father  ?  That  this  may  be  our
lot  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


*


GUARD  AGAINST  TEMPTATION  ETC*


1C9


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  CHARLES  C.  RICH,

Delivered  at  toe  Adjourned  Semiannual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesls  Christ  of  Latter- day  Saints,  in  the  Nsw  Tabernacle,  Salt

Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  October  11,  1874.


4

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


GUARD  AGAINST  TEMPTATION — THOSE  WHO  TRUST  IN  GOD  WILL  NOT  BE
DISAPPOINTED — JOSEPH  SMITH  A  PROPHET  OF  GOD — IF  THERE  WERE
NO  CAUSE  CREATING  EVIL,  THERE  WOULD  BE  NO  EVIL  WuHKS.


I  have  rejoiced  in  listening  to  the
instructions  that  we  have  received
this  morning,  as  well  as  during  the
whole  of  this  Conference. It  seems
to  me  that  they  ou^ht  to  make  an
everlasting impression upon  the
minds  of  the  Saints,  and  that  we,
one  and  all,  should  be  determined,
under  the  influence  thereof,  to  live
more  faithfully,  and  to  keep  the  com*
mand  ments  of  God  a*  near  as  possi-
ble in  all  tilings; and  I  have  no
doubt  that  this  is  the  feeling,  at  the
present  time,  of  most  of  those  who
have  attended  this  Conference. It  is
for  us  to  guard  against  temptation
that  may  be  presented  before  us,
and,  when  we  leave  this  place,  that
we  suffer  not  ourselves  to  do  or  to
say  anything  that  is  wrong,  but  be
willing,  with  an  eye  single  to  the
glory  of  God,  to  carry  out  the  coun-
sels of  bis  servants,  and  to  perform
all  the  labors  required  at  our  hands
in  aiding  to  advance  his  cause  and  to
build  up  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth,
that  we  may  prepare  ourselves  for
that  which  is  to  come  both  on  the
earth  and  in  the  eternal  worlds.  I


know  very  well  that  there  is  no  being
upon  the  earth  who  is  thus  engaged,
hut  what  feels  well ;  all  such  rejoice
in  their  labors,  and  the  Spit  it  and
power  of  God  will  rest  upon  the
Saints  when  they  take  tins  course
and  adopt  this  policy.

We  have  been  permitted  to  live  in
one  of  the  most  auspicious  times  or
dispensat  tons  that  has  ever  been
ushered  in  upon  the  earth — the  dis-
pensation of  the  gathering  together
of  all  tilings  in  Christ,  both  which
are  in  heaven  and  which  are  oa
earth.  We  may  teel  our  weakness
and  inability,  but  it  it  not  our  strength
or  wisdom  that  is  to  bring  about  the
triumph  of  the  purposes  of  God  upon
the  earth,  we  are  simply  co-workers
with  our  heavenly  Father,  and  his
power  will  bear  off  his  Saints  in  the
future  as  it  has  done  in  the  past  and
up  to  the  present  time.  It  is  upon
his  arm  that  we  have  to  lean,  and  in
him  wc  must  put  our  trust.  When
has  there  been  a  time  when  the
Saints  have  trusted  in  God  and  been
disappointed  ?  Never  ;  inasmuch  as
we  have  done  our  part,  the  Almighty


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


has  never  failed  to  do  hi  a  and  fulfill
his  promises.  We  have  the  power
to  carry  on  this  work  and  to  perfect
ourselves,  and  also  to  perform  a  labor
for  our  benefit  and  for  the  benefit  of
oar  friends  who  lived  before  us,  who
did  not,  have  such  an  opportur.ity  as
we  have.  This  si  ion  Id  be  impressed
upon  our  minds,  and  we  should  not
suffer  our  si  Ives  to  neglect  any  duty
that  is  incumbent  upon  us,  whether
for  our  benefit  or  for  the  benefit  of
those who have lived before  ns.

hen  we  pass  behind  the  vail  and
meet  with  our  friends,  if  we  can  tell
them  that,  while  we  were  in  the
flesh,  we  attended  to  and  performed
certain  ordinances  and  ceremonies  in
their  behalf  which  they,  white  here,
had  not  the  privilege  of  attending  to
and  performing  for  themselves,  and
which  they  had  not  power  to  accom-
plish in  the  spirit  world,  it  certainly
will  be  a  matter  of  rejoicing  to  us
and  also  In  them  ;  but  if,  on  meeting
them  there,  we  have  to  admit  that
we  neglected  to  do  that  for  their
benefit  which  it  had  been  in  our
power  to  attend  to,  we  shall  not  feel
pleasant,  and  our  friends  will  most
assuredly  be  disappointed.

In  speaking  of  the  Temples  now
in  course  ot  erection  in  which  m  per-
form the  ordinances  for  the  dead,  our
hear  is  ought  to  be  inspired  with
determinations  to  do  all  we  can  to
push  them  forward  to  completion,
that,  in  our  day,  while  we  yet  live  in
the  flesh,  we  may  have  the  privilege
of  doi  ng  a  work  therein  tur  our  dead
friends  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  All
these  things  are  before  us,  and  our
eyes  should  be  single  to  the  glory  of
God,  and  our  hearts  set  upon  build-
ing up  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth,
and  not  upon  objects  that  do  not
tend  in  this  direction,  I  have  felt,
for  many  years,  that  1  was  not  safe
in  any  place  or  upon  any  errand,
and  had  no  business  to  be  engaged  in


any  labor,  no  matter  what  it  might
be,  unless  that  business,  errand  or
labor  was  directed  by  the  Priesthood:
and  I  feel  to-day  thnfc  all  the  labors
and  operations  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  temporal  and  spiritual,  ought
to  be  organized  and  directed  by  the
Priesthood  which  God  has  established
to  lead  his  people.  If  our  labors  are
thus  directed  they  will  tell  in  the
right  direction — Ur  the  upbuilding
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  nut  lor
the  promotion  of  evil  upon  the  earth.
This  is  a  thing  against  which  we
should  be  continually  on  our  guard.
Human  nature  is  weak,  and  many
people  when  brought  in  contact  with
evil  influences  are  liable  to  be  led
away,  they  are  in  danger,  and  the
best,  the  safest  policy  is  to  keep
away  from  dangerous  ground  and  be-
yond the  range  of  evil,  and  we  should
not  associate  with  iho-e  \vln.,so  influ-
ence is  evil.

Our  lives  are  made  up  of  small
items,  of  labors  performed  a  little  at
a  time.  If  our  lids  are  good,  if  our
words  are  such  that  the  righteous
can  approve  of  them,  we  need  nut
fear  tvheu  they  are  summed  up  and
judgment  rendered,  for  our  lives
having  been  spent  in  the  performance
of  good  deeds,  it  will  be  all  right
with  us,  and  if  we  have  this  con-
sciousness we  can  rejoice  wherever
we  are,  I  can  b  ar  testimony  that  I
have  never  been  disappointed  wiien
I  have  been  engaged  in  the  work  of
the  Lord,  and  in  carrying  out  the
counsels  of  his  servants  unto  me,  I
can  bear  testimony  that  this  is  the
work  of  God,  and  that  Joseph  Smith
was  a  Prophet  of  God,  that  Brig  ham
Young  is  a  Prophet  of  God,  and  that
the  Gospel  which  they  have  preached
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  is  the  Gos-
pel of  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  inasmuch
as  we  live  according  to  its  precepts
we  shall  be  delivered  frornevih  Sol-
vation is  revealed  in  the  Gospel,  and


GUARD  AGAINST


TEM  PTATION  ETC*


171


that  salvation  commenced  to  be  re-
ceived-by  us  when  we  obeyed  it.
We  can  be  freed  from  oar  sins  when
we  learn  and  obey  the  truth,  for  in
the  Gospel  there  is  deliverance  frura
tin  if  we  will  but  apply  its  principles
to  our  lives.  When  we  find  a  diffi-
culty in  the  midst  of  the  people,  it  is
simply  because  some  one  or  more  have
done  that  which  they  ought  nut  to
have  done,  and  had  they  applied  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  applicable  to
that  particular  case,  the  difficulty
might  have  been  avoided.  When  we
practice  the  principles  of  this  Gospel
to  perfection,  we  shall  be  delivered
from  evil,  whether  in  this  world  or
in  the  world  to  come.  For  instance,
if  no  murders  are  committed,  pom  of
the  evils  will  be  experienced  which
grow  ontof  that  crime;  if  the  people
generally  would  cease  lying,  the  evils
now  resulting  because  of  the  great
prevalence  of  falsehood  in  the  world
would  be  unknown.  And  so  we
mi^ht  enumerate  all  of  the  evils  that
are  committed  by  the  human  family
and  say  that,  if  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ  were  universally
observed,  the  evils  of  every  kind  now
so  abundant  in  all  puris  of  the  world
would  be  known  no  more.  Then  it
is  for  us,  to  whom  this  Gospel  has
been  revealed,  to  learn  %  hat  is  right,
and  to  be  faithful  in  practicing  it,
and  the  more  faithful  we  are  in  apply,
ing  ourselves  to  this  important  duty,
the  more  speedily  will  etil  disappear
from  amongst  us,  and  the  salvation
promised  by  the  Gospel  be  by  us  en- .
joyed,  and  that  is  precisely  what  we
want — a  present  as  well  as  an  eternal
salvation  by  an  application  of  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  to  our  daily
lives.

If  this  course  were  pursued  by
mankind  generally,  it  would  soon
bring  about  a  millennium,  or  that
still  more  happy  time  spoken  of  by
the  Prophets,  when  the  knowledge  of  1


God  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the
waters  cover  the  great  deep,  and
when  men  all  the  world  over  are
friends  and  brothers.  This  is  the
direction  in  which  the  practice  of  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  lends  us,
and  a  continued  and  close  attention
thereto  will  enable  us  to  overcome
every  imperfection.  At  the  same
time  our  heavenly  Father  is  disposed
to  try  those  who  profess  to  have
taken  upon  them  the  name  of  Christ,
and,  in  fact,  he  is  trying  us  con-
tinually in  order  to  prove  whether
we  will  serve  him  in  all  things.  If
an  evil  is  presented  before  ns,  we
must  either  receive  or  reject  it.  If
we  reject  it  we  have  overcome;  if
we  accept  it,  we  are  overcome  of  evil.
And  we  may  say  that  we  have
continually  a  trial  before  us,  and  it
is  tor  us  to  be  on  our  guard  that  we
enter  not  into  temptation,  and  that
we  are  not  overcome,  no  matter  in
what  guise  or  how  temptingly  evil
may  present  itself  to  us.  We  need
to  be  valiant  befoie  the  L  »rd,  valiant
in  testimony,  valiant  in  keeping  his
commandments,  valiant  in  rejecting
every  evil  principle  atid  practice  that
may  be  presented  before  us;  and  if
this  is  our  course,  and  we  continue
therein,  the  time  will  come  when  wo
will  be  counted  worthy  of  an  inheri-
tance and  exaltation  among  the
sanctified  in  the  presence  of  our
Father.

I  feel  to  rejoice  in  the  principles
of  the  Gospel  that  the  Lord  has  re-
vealed to  us,  and  that,  many  years
ago  I  had  the  privilege  of  hearing
and  obeying  them,  I  can  say  t  hat,
from  that  time  until  the  present,  I
have  never  had  the  first  moment's
sorrow  because  of  any  tiling  that  I
have  been  called  to  pass  through  in
connection  with  t!ie  Gospel,  and  I
hope  I  never  shall.  My  experience
in  this  cause  and  kingdom  has  been
a  source  of  continual  rejoicing,  and


172


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


I  believe  it  will  be  bo  to  the  end,  I
trust  brethren  and  sisters  that  this
is  also  your  experience,  and  that  you
and  I  may  continue  faithful  to  the
end,  that  we  may  be  conn  tod  worthy
of  the  privilege  of  mingling  with


that  great  company  of  the  sanctified
and  just  whom  we  have  heard  spoken
of  this  morning,  and  that  with  them
we  may  receive  a  crown  of  glory  and
immortality.  This  is  my  prayer  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Semi-Annual  General  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Sainto,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Friday  Afternoon,  October  9,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evan-.)


KNOWLEDGE  RECEIVED  BY  IMMEDIATE  REVEL  ATI  031 — CO-OPERATION  IN
TEMPORAL  AFFAIRS — THE  SAINTS  AJJE  HEIRS  OF  GOD  AND  JOINT-
HEIRS  WITH  CHRIST.


In  oor  assemblies  at  Conference
the  representatives  of  the  people
from  the  various  parts  of  the  Terri-
tory meet  together  to  be  informed  in
relation  to  any  and  all  measures  that 1
may  be  determined  upon  for  the  fur-
therance of  our  interests  as  n  people,
and  the  interests  of  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth;
for  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God
is  established  upon  the  earth,  and
God  has  communicated  unto  us  his
will,  and,  by  revelation,  has  in-
structed us  how  to  organize  the
various  orders  of  the  Priesthood  as
they  have  been  presented  before  you
to-day.  I  feel  that  we  are  acting  in
the  presence  of  God  and  of  the  holy
angels,  and  that  we  are  operating  for
our  own  welfare,  the  welfare  of  our
ancestors  and,  in  part,  for  the  welfare
of  the  millions  who  have  lived  upon


the  earth,  and  for  the  introduction  of
principles  which  hare  emanated  from
God,  which  are  calculated  to  rege-
nerate, evangelize  and  redeem  the
world  in  which  we  live-
There  is  something  peculiar  in  the
relationship  that  we  sustain  to  t  ach
other,  to  those  who  have  gone  before
us,  to  our  God  and  to  the  building  up
of  his  kingdom.  We  are  not  acting
for  ourselves  individually,  but  in  the
interests  and  for  the  benefit  of  all
men  that  have  ever  lived  upon  the
earth,  as  well  as  of  those  now  living
upon  it.

We  are  acting  in  conjunction  with
the  Almighty,  with  Apustles  and
Piophets  and  men  of  God  who  have
lived  in  the  various  ages  of  the  world,
to  accomplish  ttie  great  programme
that  God  had  in  his  mind  iu  relation
to  the  human  family  before  the  world


KNOWLEDGE  RECEIVED,  ETC.


17$


existed,  and  which  will  as  assuredly
come  to  pass  as  God  lives.  We  feel,
at  the  same  time,  that  we  are  encom-
passed with  the  infirmities,  weak-
nesses, imperfections  and  frailties  of
human  nature,  and  in  many  instances
we  err  in  judgment,  and  we  alwayB
meed  the  sustaining  hand  of  the  Al-
mighty ;  the  guidance  and  direction
of  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  counsel
of  his  Pritstbood  that  we  may  be  led
and  preserved  in  the  path  that  leads
to  life  eternal ;  for  it  is  the  desire  of
all  Latter-day  Saints  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God,  live  their
religion,  honor  their  profession  and
magnify  their  calling,  and  so  prepare
themselves  for  an  inheritance  in  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God.

We  have  had  presented  before  us
to-day,  the  Church  authorities.  This
may  seem  to  many  of  us  a  mere  mat-
ter of  form ;  bat  it  is  at  the  same
time  a  matter  of  fact,  and  one  in
which  we  are  individually  and  col-
lectively interested.  It  presents  to
our  minds  a  train  of  reasoning,  ideas,
thoughts  and  reflections  which  men
generally  do  not  experience.  Here
is  a  President  and  his  council,  here
arc  the  Twelve,  the  Bishops,  High
Priests,  Seventies,  Elders  and  the
various  authorities  and  councils  of  the
Church  upon  the  earth — the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints
What  is  that  Church  ?  Is  it  a  phan.
torn,  a  theory,  an  ideality,  something
that  has  been  got  up  by  the  schools,
by  the  wise  men  and  philosophers  of
the  day  ?  No,  it  is  something  that
emanates  from  God,  that  had  its
origin  with  him.  It  is  to  him  that
wo  arc  indebted  for  all  the  light,  in-
telligence and  knowledge  that  we
possess.  How  did  we  know  that  we
needed  a  President  ?  God  told  us.
How  did  we  know  that  we  needed
counselors  ?  The  Lord  told  us.  How
did  we  know  that  it  was  necessary
that  there  should  be  a  Twelve  in  the


Church  and  kingdom  of  God  ?  The
Lord  told  u^.  How  did  we  know
that  there  should  be  quorums  of
Seventies,  High  Priests,  Elders,  High
Councils,  and  all  these  various  or-
ganizations ?  The  Lord  told  us,  and
we  have  come  together  and  passed
upon  these  principles,  and  have  united
together  in  the  Commonwealth  of
Israel.  And  when  we  talk  about
this  Priesthood,  as  has  been  very
properly  remarked  by  one  of  the
speakers  during  this  Conference,  why,
we  all  of  us  belong,  more  or  less,
thereto.  It  is  emphatically  that
which  was  spoken  of  in  the  days  of
Moses — a  kingdom  of  Priests.  We
are  in  reality  a  kingdom  of  Priests,
and  we  are  in  possession  of  principles
that  will  endure  throughout  all  eter-
nity. We  are  associated  with  men
who  have  lived  before  us,  and  who  are
connected  with  the  same  ministry
and  calling  as  we  possess,  and  they
are  operating  with  us  and  we  with
them  for  the  accomplishment  of  cer-
tain ubjects  which  God  has  in  view.
And  who  of  us  can  point  out  the  path
wherein  we  should  walk  ?  Who  of
us  can  direct  our  steps  in  relation  to
the  great  principles  that  lie  before
us  ?  We  need  the  guidance,  instruc-
tion, intelligence  and  revelation  that
flow  from  heaven  to  lead  us.  We
have  needed  them  to  bring  us  thus
far.  When  the  Lord  got  angry  with
the  children  of  Israel  because  of
their  follies,  and  said,  "  I  will  not  go
up  with  you,  but  my  spirit  shall  go
with  you,"  Moses  might  well  plead
and  say — "  0  God,  if  thou  goest  not
up  with  us  carry  us  cot  up  hence."
He  felt — what  can  we  do,  what  course
shall  we  pursue  unless  the  Lord
directs  us?  We,  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  in  the  same  position —
unless  the  Lord  guides  us  we  are  in
a  poor  fix.

Now  then,  what  wer<3  Apostles,
Prophets,  Pastorg,  Teachers,  Evan-


*


gelists  and  other  officers  placed  in  the
Church  for  in  former  days?  Paul
tells  us  for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,
and  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of
Christ  until  we  all  come  to  a  unity  of
the  faith,  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Son  of  God,  unto  the  fullness  of  the
statu ro  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ,
that  wo  be  no  more  children,  tossed
about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,
and  the  cunning  craftiness  whereby
men  lie  in  wait  to  deceive,  and  that
we  may  prow  up  in  him,  our  living
head,  in  all  things.  What  are  Apos-
tles, Prophets,  Evangelists,  Pastors,
Teachers,  Ac.,  placed  in  the  Church
now  for  ?  For  precisely  the  same
reasons  that  they  were  then,  only
much  more  so,  for  they  were  con-
nected with  a  system  that  had  to
succumb  to  the  adversary,  and  to
be  rooted  out — a  certain  power
was  to  rise  up  and  was  to  prevail
against  them  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with
us — onr  course  is  onward*  We  are
connected  with  that  little  stone  that
was  hewn  out  of  the  mountain  with-
out hands,  and  that  was  to  continue
to  rull  ontil  it  filled  the  whole  earth.
Tli  it  is  the  position  that  we  occupy,
and  it  is  said  that  the  kingdom  shall
not  be  given  into  the  hands  of  another
people.

These  several  officers,  we  are  told,
were  placed  in  the  Church  for  the
perfecting  of  the  Saints — we  need
their  labors ;  they  are  for  the  work
of  tne  ministry — we  need  a  little  of
it;  they  are  for  the  edifying  of  the
body  of  Christ — we  need  edifying.
How  long  ?  Until  we  all  come  in
the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  until  we
are  perfect  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Son  of  God.  We  are  not  quite  there
yet  There  is  a  little  faltering,  shak-
ing, tottering  and  stumbling  like
babes  amongst  us  once  in  a  while,
and  we  need  the  sustaining  hand,  and
instruction  of  God  to  support  us  and


help '  us  to  pass  along  in  the  path
marked  oat  for  us. He  has  led  us

;  along  remarkably,  and  he  has  united
us  to  a  certain  extent  in  mauy  things,
and  there  is  something  pleasant  and
delightful  in  union.  We  have  done
a  good  deal  in  being  unite  d.  Here

;  are  many  of  these  Elders  around  me
who  have  been  ready,  in  any  mo-
ment, to  go  anywhere,  just  as  these
Elders  who  have  been  railed  to-day
to  go  to  ,the  States,  England,  Scot-
land, France,  Genu  any,  Spain,  Por-
tugal ,  or  any  other  part  of  the  earth,
to  preach  the  Gospel,  build  up  settle-
ments or  whatever  else  they  are
req u i red  to  do  in  o rd er  to  f u r 1 1 2 e r  t h e
purposes  and  to  build  up  the  king-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth*  1  was
very  much  pleased  at  a  meeting  we
bad  the  other  evening  in  the  Taber-

;  nacle,  to  learn  that  over  three  hun-
dred men  could  be  found  who  would
go  down  to  St  George  this  winter,
Hud  their  own  food  and  work  as
teamsters,  carpenters,  stone-cutters,
and  in  other  callings  necessary  to
forward  the  work  on  the  Temple.
That  shows  there  is  something  like
union  among  the  Latter-day  Sainta.
I  like  to  see  principles  of  that  kind
operating  among  us,  it  shows  that  we
possess  a  portion  of  the  spirit  of  the

I  work,  and  that  we  appreciate  the
Gospel.  And  we  have  done  a  good
deal  of  this  kind  of  thing  heretofore.
Many  of  you  remember  what  took
place  when  we  left  Far  West  When
our  people  there  had  been  robbed  of
everything  that  the  thieves  could  get
hold  of,  t  hey  put  the  balance  of  their
means  together  to  help  one  another
out,  until  there  was  not  a  man  left
who  wanted  to  leave  the  State.  We
agreed  to  do  that  and  we  did  it
Then,  afterwards,  when  we  left  Nau-
voo,  we  covenanted,  in  the  Temple
that  we  built  there,  that  we  would
never  cease  our  endeavors  until  every
man  who  wanted  to  leave  that  coun-


KNOWLEDGE  IV

try  and  come  here  had  had  the  op-  I
port  unity,  and  that  we  would  assist
him  in  doing  so.  Did  we  carry  it
out  ?  We  did,  and  we  were  united
In  our  efforts,  and  we  did  a  sond
many  things  besides  what  we  pro-
mised to  do.  We  have  sent  as  many
as  five  hundred  teams  at  a  time  from  i
here  with  provisions  and  other  neces-
saries, to  bring  the  poor  from  the
frontiers  to  this  land,  before  the  rail-
road was  in  existence;  and  since
then  we  have  operated  and  co-opera-
ted with  oar  means  to  bring  them  by
the  railroad.  So  far  these  things  are
good,  honorable  and  praiseworthy.

Then  again,  we  are  a  good  deal
united  in  our  doctrinal  affairs,  and  we
begin  to  feel  that  we  are  part  of  God's
creation,  that  we  are  operating  in
this  particular  day  and  age  of  the
world  to  accomplish  a  certain  work,
and  that  work  is  not  for  our  own
individual  interests  alone,  it  is  not  to
build  up  and  aggrandize  ourselves,
bat  it  is  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God  and to  forward  his  purposes
upon  the  earth. That  is  what  we  are
here  for. You might talk  about
principle  to  a  great  many  men  until
your  heads  turned  gray  and  your
tongues  cleave  to  the  roofs  of  your
mouths,  and  it  would  make  no  dif-
ference— they  are  not  prepared  to
receive  it.  But  the  Latter-day  Saint*
are  to  a  very  great  extent Why  ?
Because  the  very  first  tiring  that  God
did  with  us  was  to  get  us  converted,
to  got  us  baptized  and  in  a  position
where  we  con  Id  receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  then  we  were  placed  in
what some  people  call  m  rapport
with  God — brought  into  communica-
tion -din]  relationship  with  him  so  that
we  could  recognize  him  as  our  Father
and  friend,  and  we  are  his  friends ;
and  he  and  we,  and  others  who  have
lived  and  died  here  on  the  earth,  who
obeyed  the  same  principles  that  we
bare  obeyed,  are  all  operating  tog*


ECEIVED,  ETC.  175

|  ther  for  the  accomplishment  of  the
purposes  of  God  on  the  earth.  That
is  what  we  are  doing.  It  is  a  great
work,  and,  everyone  of  us  needs  to
ponder  the  path  of  our  feet,  to  mark
well  the  course  that  is  laid  out  to  us,
and  seek  to  do  the  will  of  our  hea-
venly Father.  We  are  living  in  a
critical  and  an  important  age.  Men
sometimes  are  astonished  when  they
see  the  corruption,  wickedness  and
evil,  the  departure  from  honesty  and
integrity,  and  the  villainy  that  every*
I  where  exist;  but  why  should  they
be  ?  Have  we  not  been  preaching
for  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years  that
the  world  would  grow  u  worse  and
worse,deeeiviug  and  being  deceived  P"
Has  it  not  been  preached  to  us  that
the  nations  of  the  earth  had  the  ele-
'  ments  of  destruction  within  them-
selves and  that  they  were  bound  to
crumble  ?  And  when  we  see  honor
trampled  under  foot,  and  integrity
and  truth  standing  afar  off,  while  the
wicked,  corrupt  and  froward  manage
and  direct  affairs,  we  may  expect  that
the  axe  is  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree
and  that  it  is  decaying  and  will  soon
fall.  And  that  is  what  is  being  ac-
complished among  the  nations  to-
day. We  need  not  whine  or  think
there  is  anything  strange  or  remarka-
ble  about  it.  We  have  eipected
Ihese  things  to  transpire,  and  they
will  be  a  great  deal  worse  than  they
i  are  to-day.  But  we  are  engaged  im
introducing  correct  principles,  and
we  are  trying  to  get  united.  We
are  united,  as  I  said  before,  in  many
things,  for  the  religion  that  we  have
embraced,  in  its  spiritual  significa-
tion, brings  us  into  communication
one  with  another,  and  helps  us  to
love  one  another,  and  I  wish  there
was  a  little  more  of  that  disposition
among  us,  and  that  we  loved  one
another  a  little  better,  and  studied
one  another's  interests  a  little  more.
I  wish  we  could  sympathise  with


our  brethren,  and  be  foil  of  loving-
kindness  and  generosity  one  towards
another*  I  wish  that  vsv  could  feci
tlntt  brotherly  lore  continued,  and
that  it  was  spreading  and  increasing,
Hawing  from  the  fountain  of  life —
from  God — from  heart  to  heart  as
oil  is  poured  from  vessel  to  vessel,
that  harmony,  sympathy,  kindness
and  love  might  be  universal  among
us.  This  is  what  the  Gospel  will  do
for  us  if  we  will  only  let  it.  Said
Jesus,  when  speaking  to  the  woman
of  Samaria — "  If  thou  hadst  asked  of
me  I  would  have  given  thee  water
that  should  have  been  in  thee  a  well
springing  up  to  everlasting  life."
-Let  us  drink  a  little  more  deeply  of
our  religion,  it  leads  us  to  God,  it
opens  up  a  communication  between
us  and  our  Father,  whereby  we  are
enabled  to  cry  "  Abba  Father,"  The
principles  of  the  Gospel  that  we  have
embraced  reach  into  eternity,  they
penetrate  behind  the  veil  where  Christ
our  forerunner  h  is  gone,  if  we  are
living  oar  religion  and  keeping  the
coram  mdments  of  God ;  and  wher-
ever the  influence  of  this  Gospel  is
exerted  it  binds  people  together,  and
at  the  same  time  spites  them  with
their  God  who  rules  in  heaven,  and
with  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New
Covenant,  and  with  the  heavenly
throng,  and  their  minds  are  illumi-
nated until,  like  the  vision  of  Jacob's
ladder,  they  can  see  the  angels  of
God  ascending  and  descending,  carry-
ing messages  to  and  from  God  and
his  people.  Said  Jesus,  abuut  the
last  thing  when  be  was  leaving  the
earth — "  Father,  I  pray  for  those
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  and  not
for  these  only,  but  for  all  who  shall
believe  on  me  through  their  word,
that  they  all  may  be  one,  even  as  I
and  the  Father  are  one,  that  they
may  be  one  in  us" — one  in  sentiment,
feel  ing,  desire  and  action  for  the  ac-
complishment of  the  purposes  of  God,


whether  in  the  heavens  or  upon  the
earth,  * -  ;  4  ft .;

Can  we  conceive  of  these  things?
We  have  little  glimpses  in  relation
to  them  sometimes,  by  which  we  are
enabled  to  form  a  very  faint  idea  of
the  effect  of  that  unity  which  exists
heaven,  and  of  the  unity  that


m


ought  to  exist  on  earth.  What  cau
bring  this  latter  about?  Some
speculative  theory  ?  No.  We  want,
in  the  first  place,  to  have  our  hearts
united  to  God  ;  we  want  to  have  the
Spirit  of  God  planted  in  our  bosoms;
we  want  to  have  the  power  of  the
Gospel  in  our  households;  we  want
a  union  with  each  other  there,  and  a
onion  with  our  God,  and  everyone
of  us  to  feel  as  one  felt  formerly — ■
"  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will
serve  the  Lord/'  As  a  starting
point,  we  each  of  ns  must  feel — "No
matter  what  others  do,  I  and  my
house  will  fear  God,  keep  his  com-
mandments, and  do  that  which  is
right  in  his  sight,  and  in  the  sight
of  holy  angels."  And  what  then?
Why,  we  will  do  everything  else  that
God  wants  ns.  If  it  is  to  build  Tem-
ples ?  Yes*  Is  it  profitable  ?  God
knows  best  about  that.  If  it  does
not  make  much  money,  it  brings
something  in  the  heart  that  the  world
cannot  give  ar*d  that  man  cannot
take  away — it  gives  peace  and  joy
and  satisfaction,  and  you  feel — "I
am  of  the  household  of  faith,  I  am  a
child  of  God,  I  am  carrying  out  the
will  of  my  Father,  and  they  who
have  lived  and  we  who  now  live  are
operating  together  for  the  redemption
of  the  living  and  the  dead,  for  the
regeneration  of  the  world,  for  the
carrying  out  of  the  purposes  of  the
great  El  oh  ei  in,  for  the  introduction
of  principles  that  will  ennoble  and
exalt  man  and  enable  him  to  stand
in  the  dignity  of  his  office,  calling
and  Priesthood  as  a  Priest  of  the
Most  High  God." That  is  the  posi-


KNOWLEDGE  RECEIVED,  ETC,


tion  that  we  ought  to  occupy,  and
that  is  what  we  are  after.  It  is  no
little  boys*  play  that  we  are  engaged
in,  it  is  a  life-long  service,  and  that
life  will  last  while  eternity  endures.
We  want  to  operate  here  all  the  time,
so  that  we  may  have  our  own  appro-
ving conscience,  that  we  may  have
the  approval  of  all  good,  honorable
men  ;  that  we  raay  have  the  sanction
and  approval  of  God  and  of  the  holy
angels,  and  of  the  Priesthood  who
have  lived  before,  and  that  we  may
feel  that  we  are  operating  for  the
general  benefit  of  the  world  that  was,
that  is,  or  hi  to  come.

We  are  called  upon  once  in  a  while
to  take  a  new  step  in  this  great  work.
At  one  time  it  was  polygamy,  at  ano-
ther it  was  baptism  for  the  dead,  then
it  was  building  Temples,  then  certain
endowments,  then  the  sealing  of  our
children  to  us,  then  certain  promises
made  to  ourselves,  such  as  God  made
to  Abraham  in  former  days,  and  now
it  is  that  we  must  get  a  little  closer
together,  and  bo  more  united  in
regard  to  our  temporal  affairs,  that
we  may  be  prepared  to  act  and  to
Operate  In  all  things  according  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God  and  this  step
in  advance,  like  every  other,  has
caused  its  to  reflect  and  ponder,  and
many  of  us  are  fall  uf  fears  and  doubts
in  relation  to  matiy  things  and  many
men.  Well,  have  we  all  done  right  ?
No.  Have  we  all  been  strictly
honest?  No,  Have  we  all  lived
our  religion  ?  No.  *  Have  we  all
been  upright  in  bur  dealings  one  with
another,  and  done  that  which  is  right
in  the  sight  of  God  ?  No,  we  have
not,  What  then  ?  Shall  we  con-
tinue to  do  wrong  ?♦  We  are  called
upon,  in  this  as  in  many  other  things,
to  take  a  new  step  that  is  contrary  to
oar  traditions,  ideas  and  theories;
bnt  not  contrary  to  the  doctrines  that
have  been  taught  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  But  we  hardly  know,  some-
No,  IV


times,  how  to  get  at  these  things,
how  to  fir  them  up,  how  to  put  them
right.  We  have  been  trying,  since
God  moved  upon  his  servant  Brig-
ham,  to  get  things  into  order,  but
the  ship  moves  very  slowly,  there
seems  to  be  a  good  many  snags  of
one  kind  or  other}  in  the  way.  Many
people  are  very  jjmuch  misinformed
in  relation  to  ma6y  of  these  things.
There  have  been  a  good  many  things
saiil,  and  a  great  many  ideas  in  cir-
culation about  the  order  of  things
that  it  is  desired  should  be  established
among  us.  I  will  tell  you  some  of
my  ideas  in  relation  thereto.

In  the  first  place,  it  has  been  a
matter  of  fact  with  me,  for  years  and
years,  that  such  a  state  of  things  has
to  be  introduced  amongst  us,  I
think  that  is  an  opinion  that  prevails
very  generally  among  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  I  do  not  think  there  is
much  difference  of  opinion  in  relation
to  it.  We  have  read  about  it  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants*  I
thiuk  there  are  as  many  as  a  dozen
revelations  in  that  book  in  reference
to  this  subject,  and  perhaps  more
than  that.  I  do  not  propose  to  quote
them,  however,  at  the  present  time.
We  read  an  account  of  the  City  of
Enoch,  \ythich  'was  established  on  this
principle,  and  how  the  people  acted
there  ;  thSre*  is  also  an  account  of  a
people  who  formerly  lived  on  this
continent,  ifirho  carried  out  the  same
principle  ;  and  when  this  Church  was
first  organized  by  Joseph  Smith,
these  very  principles  were  among
the  first  that  he  introduced  to  the
people,  and  we  have  had  them  before
us  all  the  time,  so  that  we  have  no
need  to  begin  and  argue  the  points  at
all ;  but  I  want  to  come  right  to
matters  of  fact  as  they  exist  among
us  here  to-day.

Many  say,  "  Ljjo  not  like  the  th.ng
as  it  now  is,  I  wish  we  had  it  as  i1  is
laid  down  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine

Vol  XVH1.


178  JOURNAL  OF

and  Covenants."  No  you  don't.  "Well,
we  think  we  do-"  Well,  but  you
don't,  I  am  sure  you  don't,  and  I  will
show  you  why  before  I  get  through.
We  are  living  in  peculiar  times — we
can  not  be  governed  by  "  Tuus  saith
the  Lord"  independent  of  other  in-
fluences. We  are  associated  with
national  and  judicial  affairs  that  are
opposed  to  every  principle  that  God
would  reveal  or  will  reveal.  That  is
a  fact  that  I  need  not  argue  before
the  Latter-day  Saints,  they  all  know
it  Well,  what  then?  The  Spirit
of  the  Lord  has  operated  upon  Presi-
dent Young  to  introduce  these  princi*
pies  in  our  midst,  that  is,  as  near  as
they  can  be  to  conform  to  the  laws
of  the  land,  for  the  people  in  these
United  States  profess  to  be  so  pure,
you  know,  that  they  could  not  think
of  having  anything  contrary  to  law;
they  would  never  dream  of  anything
of  that  kind.  Why,  the  people  of
the  United  States,  including  their
Presidents,  Governors  and  rulers,  are
the  most  law  abiding  people  you  ever
heard  of,  according  to  their  profes-
sions, are  they  not  ?  They  can  not
think  of  doing  anything  contrary  to
law.

Well,  we  have  to  go  with  the  gen-
eral stream  ;  or  at  least  it  is  necessary
that  we  protect  ourselves  from  legal
cormorants,  and  from  every  man
who  would  devour,  tear  in  pieces  and
destroy,  who  is  after  our  property
and  our  lives  ?  This  class  of  per-
sons would  be  very  glad  to  take  not
only  the  property  but  the  lives  of
some  of  the  leaders  of  God's  people
htre  on  the  earth  ;  nothing  would
suit  them  better,  they  are  so  holy,
pure  and  law-abiding.  These  are
the  circumstances  that  w*  are  placed  I
in.  Now  what  shall  be  done  ?
There  are  certain  principles  that:
•manate  from  God;  but  we  h*ve  to
protect  ourselves  in  carrying  them
out,  and  juake  them  conform,  as  near


DISCOURSES.

r  as  we  can,  to  t Vie  laws  of  the  land.
In  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove
nants  it  is  said,  in  the  first  place,  that
a  man  shall  place  his  property  at  the
feet  of  the  Bishop.  That  is  what
that  lays  down,  and  you  say  that  is
what  you  would  like  to  do.  Some
would,  very  many  would  not.  The
Bishop,  after  examining  into  the
position  and  circumstances  of  the
man,  and  finding  out  what  his  wants
are,  and  what  his  capabilities  and
talents,  what  the  size  of  his  family,
&e  ,  appoints  to  him  a  certain  amount
of  means,  which  he  receives  as  a
stewardship,  "Well,"  say  some,
M  how  does  this  order  you  are  talking
about  introducing  agree  with  that  ?
Where  does  the  stewardship  come
in  ?  '*  I  will  tell  you.  We  have
organized  this  as  near  as  may  be  on
the  principles  of  co-operation,  and
the  voice  you  have  iu  selecting  your
officers,  and  in  voting  for  them  and
the  stock  you  hold  in  these  institu-
tions is  your  stewardship.  You  may
say — "  Is  not  that  taking  away  our
freedom  ?"  I  do  not  think  it  is.  I
am  not  prepared  to  enter  into  dc
tails,  but  I  should  say  that  one-third,
perhaps  one-half,  of  the  wealth  of
the  world  is  manipulated  just  in  the
same  way.  How  so?  Why,  there
are  among  the  nations  national  secu-
rities of  various  kinds  issued,  which
are  taken  by  the  people;  we  have
United  States  bond  a,  State  bonds,
county  and  city  bonds  in  this  country
as  well  as  in  Europe,  to  which  the
people  subscribe  and  in  which  they
have  an  interest,  all  of  which  is  vol*
untary,  and  the  free  act  of  the  people ;
then  wa  have  railroad  bonds,  steam
ship  bonds,  and  we  have  telegraph,

j  mercantile,  manufacturing  and  eft-
operative  associations,  which  are
represented  by  those  who  hold  stock
therein,  and  there  are  hundreds  and
thousands  of  millions  of  dollars
throughout  the  world  that  are  opera-


KNOWLEDGE  RECEIVED,  HIV.


179


ted  in  this  way  by  financiers,  states-
men, men  of  intelligence — merchants,
capitalists  and  others,  in  every  grade
and  condition  in  life,  none  of  whom
consider  that  there  is  any  coercion
associated  with  it.  These  men  all
have  their  free  agency.

What  is  the  modtts  operandi  ?
For  illustration, — a  company  is  or-
ganized, men  subscribe  stock  into
that  company,  or  they  purchase  bonds
perhaps  from  a  government,  for  which
that  government  pays  interest;  or,
if  it  is  in  a  company,  that  company
manipulates  and  arranges  matters,
not  the  stockholders  individually,  1
they  never  think  of  it;  they  select
the  officers  to  do  these  things  for
them,  and  all  they  have  to  do  with  it
is  to  vote  in  these  officers,  each  per-
son voting  according  to  the  amount
of  stock  ho  holds  in  the  institution.
And  then  they  draw  their  dividends
at  certain  specified  times.  This  is
the  way,  I  presume,  that  one  half  or  1
perhaps  three  quarters  of  the  wealth
of  the  civilized  world  is  manipulated
to-day.

Well,  is  freedom  taken  from  these
men  ?  Are  the  men  engaged  in
these  operations  thieves  and  robbers  ?
Some  of  them  net  very  fraudulently
it  is  true,  and  the  amount  of  defalca-
tion and  fraud  in  our  country,  of
late,  is  p'iintYi!  to  reflect  upon;  but
then,  they  consider  they  have  a  per-
fect right  to  buy  or  to  sell  any  of
this  stook,  and  if  parties  enter  into
institutions  of  any  kind,  mercantile
or  manufacturing,  they  must  be  sub-
ject to  the  rules  or  laws  thereof.  But
the  stockholders  do  not  individually
operate  these  institutions,  and  what
I  wanted  to  say  is,  that  herein  we,  as
they,  have  our  stewardship  and  free-
dom ot  action*  I

Well,  but  you  want  to  manipulate
men's  time  hs  well  ?  Yes.  Will
they  have  a  vote  ?  They  ought  to
have,  and  will  have  if  the  law  will


let  them;  the  great  trouble  is  that
the  1  aw  will  not  allow  us  to  do  every-
thing we  would  like;  but  whenever
we  can  get  at  it  we  sh^ll  vote  on  all
these  things  as  you  have  voted  here
to-day.  But  we  have  to  evade  these
things  a  little  now,  because  the  law
will  not  allow  us  to  do  otherwise.

Now  then,  there  is  another  feature
connected  with  this  matter.  You
know  that,  in  this  order  it  is  not  all
putting  in,  there  is  some  taking  out,
and  that  is  a  point  I  want  to  get  at ;
it  would  be  a  very  nice  and  beautiful
thing  if  we  could  carry  it  out  If,
as  described  in  the  revelation,  we
could  have  a  general  treasury  from
which  we  could  all  draw  what  we
needed,  and  then  return  it,  together
with  our  tens,  fifties,  hundred!  and
thousands,  and  all  act  as  one  family
for  tne  general  interest  of  all,  it  would
be  a  very  beautiful  thing ;  but  every-
body is  not  so  honest,  pure  and  up-
right as  this  state  of  things  demands.
If  we  had  a  general  treasury  some
would  be  very  willing  to  go  to  the  trea-
surer and  request  so  much  to  enable
them,  as  they  would  represent,  "  to
carry  out  their  stewardship,"  and  he
would  have  to  liaiul  it  out  to  them
according  to  the  provisions  made  in
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants;  but
that  would  in  all  probability  be  the
last  of  it  with  many.  Would  you
business  men  like  to  have  a  system
like  thru  in  the  United  Order  ?  Yon
say  you  would  like  this  order  carried
out  as  it  is  laid  down  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  but  I  nay
you  would  not.  Would  you  like
every  man,  simply  because  he  was  a
member  of  the  Order,  to  have  power
to  go  to  the  treasurer  and  draw  out
what  he  thought  proper,  and  us«  it
just  according  to  his  fancy  ?  No,
you  would  not,  you  conld  not  aad
would  not  trust  your  neighbors  as  far
as  that,  for  all  men  are  not  capable
an  1  a! I  men  are  not  honest  aud  con-


ISO  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


scienlioDS;  if  they  were  we  should
be  nearly  ready  to  be  caught  op ;  but
we  have  not  reached  that  point  yet,
and  consequently  we  have  to  do  the
best  we  can,

Now  I  will  tell  you  my  opinion.  I
am  living  in  the  14th  Ward;  we,  in
that  ward,  have  selected  a  number  of
men  for  our  directors,  and  I  would
just  as  soon  trust  these  men  with  the
Lament  of  my  property  as  to
manage  it  myself.  I  do  not  believe
that  every  man  is  a  thief,  scallywag
and  rascal.  I  have  no  such  idea.  I
think  there  is  a  great  deal  of  honesty,
truthfulness  and  integrity,  and  if
there  is  not  It  is  time  we  turned  over
a  new  leaf,  and  introduced  better
principles,  that  we  may  be  governed
by  purer,  nobler  laws.

I  cannot  conceive  of  anything
more  beautiful  and  heavenly  than  a
united  brotherhood,  organized  after
the  pattern  laid  down  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants;  when  all  act  for  the
benefit  of  all — when  while  we  love
God  with  all  our  hearts  we  love  our
neighbor  as  ourselves;  where  our
time,  our  property,  our  talents,  our
mental  and  bodily  powers,  are  all
exerted  for  the  good  of  all;  where
no  man  grabs  qt  takes  advantage  of
another  j  where  there  is  a  common
interest,  a  common  purse,  a  common
stock ;  where  as  they  did  on  this  con-
tinent, it  is  said  of  them  that  "  they
all  dealt  justly  to  each  other,"  and
all  acted  for  the  general  well,  "  when
every  man  in  every  place  could  meet
&  brother  and  a  friend,"  when  all  the
generous  and  benevolent  influences
and  sympathies  of  our  nature  are
carried  out,  and  covetousness,  arro-
gance, hatred  and  pride  and  every
evil  are  subdued,  and  brought  into
subjection  to  the  will  and  Spirit  of
God,  These  principles  are  very
beautiful  and  would  be  very  happify-
ing  for  a  community,  a  Territory,  a
State,  nation  or  the  world.


Now,  then,  these  things  are  pre*
sen  ted  before  us,  and  I  suppose  we
shall  have  to  come  into  them  as  best
we  can,  and  if  we  ever  get  into  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God  we  shall
find  that  they  are  just  such  a  set  of
people.  If  ever  we  build  up  a  Zion
here  on  this  continent,  and  in  casa
Zion  ever  comes  down  to  us,  and  we
expect  it  will,  or  that  ours  will  go  up
to  meet  it,  we  have  got  to  be  gov-
erned by  the  same  principles  that
they  are  governed  by,  or  we  can  not
be  one ;  and  if  we  ever  get  into  the
eternal  worlds  we  shall  have  to  be
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with
Jesus  Ciirist;  and  it  would  not  do  for
a  man  of  us  to  go  up  into  heaven
and  say — "  Look  here,  Jesus,"  or,
**  Look  here,  some  of  yon  great  men
who  manage  matters  here,  I  wish
you  would  set  me  off  a  place  by  my-
self, I  would  like  to  have  niy  own
house  and  garden  and  my  own  farm-
ing arrangements  separate  to  myself,
so  that  I  could  manage  things  a  little
in  my  own  way  as  I  used  to,  in  the
place  I  come  from,"  "  Well,"  says
the  individual  addressed — "  I  do  not
see  things  exactly  in  that  way.  We
brought  you  up  here,  believing  yon
were  a  pretty  decent  fellow  ■  but  yon
have  got  to  conform  to  our  rules.
These  things  are  all  ours,  we  are  heirs
of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus
Christ  This  is  a  joint  association,
we  are  united  together  in  the  one
thing,  and  we  are  all  one,  and  if  you
want  to  go  off  by  yourself  you  will
have  to  leave  here/1  That  would  be
just  about  the  position  of  things,  this
is  the  order  that  exists  there — they
are  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with
Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  position
we  have  to  attain  to,  and  to  do  this
there  will  have  to  be  less  individuality
of  feeling  than  there  is  now,  and  we
must  seek  to  introduce  and  establish
the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth. We  are  not  for  our-


ALL  MEN  TO  BE  JUDGED,  ETC.


181


selves ;  but  for  the  kingdom  of  God,
God  called  us  not  to  do  our  own  will,
but  his ,  and  we  arc  operating  to  pre-
pare ourselves  and  our  children  and
all  who  will  be  governed  by  the  prin-
ciples of  truth  for  a  celestial  and
eternal  glory  in  the  kingdom  of  our
"Well,  then,"  says  one,  "you  be-
lieve in  these  things?"  I  do  most
assuredly,  "  Do  yon  believe  in  the
authorities  ?"  Yea,  I  think  I  do, —
I  have  voted  for  them  for  a  great


many  years,  and  by  the  help  of  God
I  mean  to  sustain  them  still.  That
is  my  feeling.  Brethren,  is  it  yours  ?
Shall  we  sustain  the  Elders  of  Israel,
the  Presidency  and  the  authorities  of
the  Church  of  Jcsns  Christ  of  Lat-
ter-day Saints?  Shall  we  do  it,  ye
Latter-day  Saints  ?  (The  congrega-
tion answered,  "Yes!")  All  who
feel  like  it,  say  "Aye,"  by  the  con-
gregation). Now  let  us  go  and  carry
it  out.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  Semiannual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Chrlst  of  Lattkk- day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,  October  11,  1874*


'Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


v


ALL  MEN  TO  BE  JUDGED  OUT  OF  THE  BOOKS — ADAM  THE  ANCIENT  OF
DAYS — IN  THE  DAYS  OF  ENOCH  THE  RIGHTEOUS  GATHERED  TOGETHER
FROM  THE  ENDS  OF  THE  EARTH  TO  ONE  PLACE— THE  GREAT  PRO-
PHET JOSEPH  SMITH  RAISED  UP  BY  GOD  TO  REVEAL  HIDDEN  31 YS-
TERIES.


[The  speaker  took  as  a  foundation
for  bis  remarks  the 9th,  10th,
11th,  12th  and  13th  verses  of  the
7th  chapter  of  the  prophecies  of
Daniel,  and  the  20th  chapter  of
the  revelations  of  St.  John.]
All  Bible  believers  are  looking  for-
ward to  the  time  when  the  inhabi-
tants of  this  creation  shall  be  brought
into  judgment,  and  btj  judged  out  of
the  books  which  are  written,  every
man  according  to  his  works.  We
should  rather  conclude  from  these
sayings  in  Daniel  and  in  the  revela-


tions of  St  John,  that  there  is  a
record,  or  perhaps  many  records,
kept  of  the  works  of  men — their
deeds  done  in  this  probation.  How
these  records  are  kept  in  heaven  is
not  for  me  to  say  ;  what  language
they  are  recorded  in,  or  what  are  the
symbols  of  the  ideas  of  the  heavenly
hosts  who  are  engaged  in  recording,
how  many  records  there  are,  etc.,  is
not  known  to  us;  but  from  what  is
written,  we  can  form  some  conclu-
sions in  relation  to  this  matter,  for
we  are  told  in  the  sayings  of  Jesus,


182


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


in  the  New  Testament,  that  for  every  1
idle  word  and  every  idle  thought
men  shall  give  an  account  in  the
great  judgment  day.  Hence  these
words  and  thoughts  must  be  had  in
remembrance  either  in  books,  or  im-
pressed upon  the  minds  of  beings
who  are  capable  of  retaining  all
things  in  their  remembrance*  There
must  be  some  way  by  which  the  idle
words  and  thoughts  of  the  children
of  men  shall  be  kept  in  remembrance,
and  if  the  dead  are  to  be  judged  out
of  the  books  that  are  to  be  opened,
we  should  naturally  draw  the  con-
clusion that  they  are  memorandum
books  of  the  idle  words  and  thuughu
of  the  children  of  men.  i
We  also  read  in  the  Book  of  ilor- 1
mon — a  record  which  all  Latter-day
Saints  profess  to  believe  in,  and  con-
sider equally  sacred  with  the  rest  of
the  word  of  God  that  is  recorded  in
the  Bible  and  elsewhere — the  sayings
of  Jesus,  that  were  spoken  on  this
continent  some  eighteen  hundred
years  ago.  Jesus  says — "  All  things
are  written  by  the  Father/'  I  sup-
pose by  his  agents,  that  is  through
his  direction,  by  bis  authority.  u  AH
things  are  written  by  the  Father/'
Taking  all  these  passages  ot  Scripture
togt  t  her,  we  may  look  for  a  general
reckoning  with  all  the  inhabitants  of
this  earth,  both  the  righteous  and  the
wickf  il.  Huw  long  this  day,  called
the  day  of  judgment,  will  be,  is  not
revealed,  It  may  be  vastly  lunger
than  what  many  suppose.  It  seems
to  me  that  unless  there  were  a  great
number  engaged  in  judging  the  dead,
it  would  require  a  very  long  period
of  time;  for,  for  one  being  to  per-
sonally investigate  all  the  idle
thoughts  and  words  of  the  children
of  men  from  the  days  of  Adam  down
until  that  time,  it  would  require  a
great  many  millions  of  years,  and
therelnie  1  come  to  another  conclu-
sion, namely,  that  God  has  his  agents,


and  that  through  those  agents  the
dead  will  be1  judged.

This  reminds  me  of  what  was  said
by  the  Apostle  J  i-ul  when  reproving
(he  ancient  Christians  for  going  to
law  one  with  another.  He  tries  to
shame  them  out  of  this  evil  practice
by  referring  them  to  the  lowest
esteemed  among  them  that  were
called  Saint?,  Says  he,  in  substance —
"Let  them  be  your  judges,  it  is  not
necessary  for  you  10  go  to  the  highest
authorities,  but  let  even  those  who
are  least  among  you  become  j  udges
in  regard  to  many  of  these  things
that  you  now  take  before  unbelievers,
and  for  which  you  require  a  judgment
from  those  who  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  Saiiits  of  God/1  or  rather
with  the  Gospel  in  which  they  be-
lieved. And,  in  connection  with
these  sayings,  be  asks  this  question —
"Know  ye  not  that  the  Saints  shall
judge  the  world  P

This  reminds  me  of  some  sayings
that  are  recorded  in the  Book  of
|  Mormon,  as  also  of  otbeis  contained
in the Bible. Jesus  said  to  his
twelve  disciples  or  Apostles — "  You
that  have  followed  me  in  the  regene-
ration, when  the  Son  of  Man  shall
come  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  his
glory,  then  you  aha! I  also  sit  upon
.  twelve  thn.  ne*,  and  shall  eat  and
drink  in  my  presence,  and  shall  judga
the twelve  tribes  of  Israel/'  It
seems,  then,  that  there  are  certain
!  personages  to  be  engaged  in  judging
!  the  world. The  Twelve  Apostles
are to  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel,  and  the  Saints  will  ho  set  to
judge  the  world.

The  Book  o:'  Mormon,  speaking
on  this  same  subject,  i  nforms  us  that
there  were  Twelve  chosen  among  the
ancient  Nephites  on  this  American
land,  and  that,  while  the  Twelve
chosen  by  Jesus  on  the  continent  of
Asia  were  to  judge  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel,  the Twelve  chosen  from


ALL  MEN  TO  BE  JUDGED,  ETC


183


among  the  Nephites  should  judge  the
remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel  that
dwelt  on  this  land.

Here^then,  is  another  quorum  of
judgment,  another  council  that  is
appointed  to  judge,  and  so  we  might
coii tin ne  the  subject  and  bring  in  all
the  councils  that  God  has  ordained
in  any  generation  of  those  whom  he
has  appointed  and  selected,  and  or-
dained with  power  and  authority
from  on  high.  To  them  was  granted
not  only  the  privilege  of  acting  here
in  relation  to  the  ordinances  of  mercy,
but  hereafter  in  relation  to  thu  ordi-
nances of  justice ;  hence  both  justice
and  mercy  were  committed,  in  some
measure,  into  the  hands  ot  those  who
were  ordained  ot  the  Lord.  But  in
these  respects  there  is  one  thing  to
console  the  Saints  of  all  ages,  an  well
as  to  console  the  whole  world,  and
that  is,  that  when  the  final  time  shall
come  to  judge  the  children  of  men,
whoever  the  agents  may  be  who  shall
sit  in  judgment  upon  their  several
cases,  they  will  do  it  by  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Almighty,  and  hence  it
will  be  done  right.

This  reminds  me  of  what  Jesus
said  to  the  Twelve  who  were  chosen
among  the  Israelites  on  this  conti-
nent, eighteen  hundred  years  ago.
Said  he — **  Know  ye  not  that  ye  shall
be  judges  of  this  people  ?  What
manner  of  persons,  therefore,  ought
ye  to  be,  in  all  holiness,  and  purity
and  uprightness  in  heart,  if  you  are
to  judge  this  great  nation?"  In
other  words — u  If  you  are  to  sit  in
judgment  upon  ail  of  their  deeds
done  in  the  bodv,  and  to  render  a
righteous  decision  before  the  AL
mighty,  how  pure,  holy,  upright  and
honest  you  twelve  disciples  ought  to
be  in  order  to  become  judges  indeed
of  the  people,  that  in  judging  them
you  may  not  condemn  yourselves."

Having  quoted  these  passages,
which  give  as  a  little  understanding


of  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty  in
regard  to  judging  the  world,  I  will
now  quote  another  passage  of  Scrip,
tare  that  lias  a  bearing  in  some  mea-
sure upon  this  subject,  showing  that
it  was  a  principle  understood  by  the
ancient  Saints  of  God,  and  that  the
eternal  judgment  that  was  to  be
administered  by  the  Saints  at  some
future  time  was  numbered  among  the
first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of
Christ.  It  was  not  one  of  those
hidden  mysteries,  one  of  those  secret
things,  one  of  those  wonders  that
were  to  be  search t-d  oat  by  the  faith-
ful, but  that  it  was  a  doctrine  num-
bered among  the  lirst  principles  of
the  oracles  of  God.  I  will  now,
leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrines
of  Christ  according  to  King  James9
translation,  quote  from  another  tran-
slation which  I  have  seen,  and  which
I  believe  to  be  more  correct.  The
passage  to  which  I  will  direct  your
attention  reads  —  44  Therefore,  not
leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine
ot  Christ,  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection,
not  laying  again  the  foundation  of
repentance  from  dead  works,  of  faith
towards  God  and  of  the  doctrine  of
baptisms,  and  of  the  laying  on  of
hands,  and  of  the  resurrection  of  the
dead,  and  of  eternal  judgment/*

These  principles  of  the  doctrine
of  Christ  were  thoroughly  understood
by  the  faithful  ones  who  lived  eight-
een hundred  years  ago.  They  un-
derstood that  the  day  would  come
when  God  would  set  them,  not  only
to  judge  the  world,  but  to  judge  an*
gels.  Some  angels  have  got  yet  to
be  judged,  and  the  Saints  will  be  the
agents  to  perform  this  great  work
and  render  the  decision  of  judgment

;  Jesus  said  to  the  Twelve  among  the
ancient  Nephites — "  Know  ye  this,

I  that  your  judgment" — speaking  of
their  judging  the  Nepbite  nation —
"shall  be  that  judgment  which  the
Father  shall  give  unto  you; J1  in  other


184  JOURNAL  OF

words — "  You  shall  not  judge  by  your  j
own  natural  wisdom  j  ypu  shall  not
judge  according  to  the  on t ward  ap-
pearance ;  but  it  shall  be  that  judg-
ment which  the  Father  shall  give
unto  you."  Now,  the  Lord  judges
mankind  according  to  the  law  and
the  testimony.  The  revealed  law  is
delivered  to  the  people,  and  those  to
whom  it  is  revealed  will  be  judged
by  that  law,  hence  Jesus  says— u  My
words  shall  judge  you  at  the  last
day."  It  is  not  the  tradition  of  the
children  of  men  that  is  going  to
judge  the  world,  that  is  not  the  Jaw.
The  traditions  of  flic  children  of  men
are  one  thing,  and  the  law  is  another
thing;  popular  ideas  are  one  thing
and  the  law  of  God  is  another  thing.
Wo  are  not  to  be  judged  by  the
creeds,  doctrines,  disciplines  and  ar-
ticles of  faith  invented  by  uninspired
men,  but  by  the  pure  law  of  God  as
it  issued  forth  from  his  own  mouth
and  by  the  mouths  of  his  ancient
Prophets  and  Apostles.  The  testi-
monies will  be  forthcoming,  one  of
which  will  be  the  record,  the  books
that  are  written.  Every  idle  word
that  is  spoken,  every  idle  thought
that  lias  ever  entered  into  the  hearts
*of  man  will  be  written  and  brought
up,  and  out  of  thnt  record  of  our
conduct — our  thoughts,  words  and
deeds— will  we  be  judged.

Now,  if  there  is  to  be  a  vast  num-
ber of  individuals  engaged  in  the
work  of  judgment,  it  may  be  a  speedy
work ;  lor  let  all  mankind  be  classi-
fied— a  certain  pa:  t  ion  delivered  over
to  the  Apostles  of  ancient  days,  auo-
ther  portion  to  the  Twelve  chosen
from  among  the  ancient  Nephites,
another  portion  delivered 'over  to  the
Saints  who  lived  iu  the  first  ages  of
the  world,  another  portion  to  the
Saints  who  lived  after  tie  flood,
and  another  portion  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  let  all  he  en-
gaged in  this  work  of  judging  the


DISCOURSES.

j  human  family  and  the  work  can
speedily  be  accomplished.  It  may
require  years,  and  it  may  be  accom-
j  plished,  perhaps,  iu  less  than  one
year,  that  is  a  matter  that  we  cannot
decide  upon  now.  There  is  to  be,
however,  a  prior  judgment  to  the
final  judgment  day,  and  we  will  speak
upon  that  awhile.

There  is  a  certain  degree  of  judg-
ment rendered  upon  every  man  aiid
every  woman  as  soon  as  they  have
j  passed  the  ordeals  of  this  present
probation.  When  they  lay  their
hodies  down  their  spirits  return  into
the  presence  of  God,  when  a  decree
of  judgment  and  sentence  is  imme-
diately passed.  Hence  we  read  in
the  Book  of  Mormon,  that  the  spirits
of  all  men,  as  soon  as  they  depart
|  from  this  mortal  body,  return  home
i  again  to  that  God  who  gave  them
life,  and  then  shall  it  come  to  pass
that  the  spirits  of  the  righteous  shall
enter  into  a  state  of  rest,  peace  and
happiness,  called  Paradise,  where  they
shall  rest  from  all  their  labors.  And
then  shall  it  come  to  pass  that  the
spirits  of  the  wicked — for  behold
they  have  no  part  or  portion  of  the
spirit  of  the  Jjord — shall  depart  into
outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weep-
ing, and  wailing  and  gnashing  of
teeth;  and  in  these  two  states  or  con-
ditions the  children  of  men  shall  be
placed  until  the  time  of  the  resur-
rection*

I  Then  again  there  will  be  a  judg-
ment after  the  resurrection,  that  will
not  be  the  final  judgment,  that  is  the
judgment  of  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel,  spoken  of  by  our  Savior,  which
will  take  place  when  he  and  the
Twelve  return  again  to  the  earth.
That  judgment  will  be  exercised
more  directly  on  the  whole  house  of
Israel  that  have  loved  the*  Lord  and
kept  his  commandments.

Here  then  are  the  various  times  of
judgment,  the  various  cunditious  and


ALL  MEN  TO  BE  JUDGED,  ETC


185


circumstances  of  the  children  of  men
in  the  spiritual  state,  judged  before
the  resurrection,  assigned  to  happi-
ness or  misery  as  the  case  may  be,
and  in  the  judgment  of  the  first  re-
surrection certain  rewards,  glory,
power,  exaltation,  happiness  and
eternal  life  will  be  conferred  upon
the  righteous.  But  another  sentence
of  judgment  will  bo  pronounced  upon
those  who  are  not  favored  with  corn-
ing forth  on  the  morning  of  the  first
resurrection,  namely,  those  who  have
disobeyed  the  Gospel,  To  all  such
the  voice  of  the  angel  will  be — "Let
sinners  stay  and  sleep  until  I  call
again,"  their  sins  having  been  suffi-
ciently judged  beforehand,  that  they
are  not  counted  worthy  of  a  resur-
rection among  the  just  and  the  right-
eous ones  of  the  earth*  This  agrees
with  another  passage  recorded  in  the
"Book  of  Covenants,  that  at  the
sound  of  the  third  trump  then  come
the  spirits  of  men  that  are  under
condemnation.  These  are  the  re^t
of  the  dead,  and  they  live  not  again
until  the  thousand  years  are  ended,
neither  again  until  the  end  of  the
earth.  Why  ?  Because  a  certain
measure  of  judgment  is  pronounced
upon  them  even  then.  Now  then,
let  us  go  to  the  angels  which  the
Saints  are  to  judge.  We  find  that
the  angels  who  kept  not  their  first
estate  are  reserved  in  chains  of  dark-
ness until  the  judgment  ot  the  great
daj\  Those  angels  that  fell  from
before  the  presence  of  God  were
judged  in  a  measure  upon  their  fall,
and  were  cast  out  to  wander  to  and
fro  upon  the  face  of  this  earth,  bound
as  it  were  with  chains  of  darkness,
misery  and  wretchedness,  and  this
condition  is  to  continue  during  the
whole  of  the  temporal  existence  of
this  earth,  until  the  final  judgment
of  the  great  day,  when  the  Saints,
in  the  authority  and  power  of  the
Priesthood  which  U  d  Almighty  has


conferred  upon  them,  will  arise  and
judge  these  fallen  angel*,  and  they
will  receive  the  condemnation  of
which  they  are  worthy.

Having  made  these  few  preliminary
remarks  in  regard  to  1  he  judgment
of  the  children  of  men,  let  us  now
refer  again  to  the  passage  contained
in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Dauiel. —
Says  that  ancient  Prophet — il  I  be-
held till  the  thrones  were  cost  down,
and  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,
whose  garment  was  white  as  snow,
and  the  hair  of  his  headJ ike  the  pure
wool;  his  throne  wa^  like  the  fiery
flame,  and  bis  wheels  as  burning  lire.
A  fiety  stream  issued  and  came  forth
from  betore  him;  thousand  thou-
sands ministered  unto  him,  and  ten
thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood
before  him:  the  judgment  was  set
and  the  books  were  opened.*1

How  many  are  ten  thousand  times
ten  thousand.  One  hundred  millions.
That  would  be  a  larger  congregation
than  you  or  I  ever  saw,  and  larger,
probably,  than  any  congregation  that
lias  ever  been  collected  together  upon
this  earth  at  any  one  time.  They
would  occupy  a  vast  region  of  coun-
try, even  for  a  foothold,  A  hundred
million  people  stood  before  this  per-
sonage— the  Ancient  of  days.  Who
was  this  personage  called  the  Ancient
of  days  ?  We  are  lold  by  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith — the  great  Pro-
phet of  the  last  days,  whom  God
raised  up  by  his  own  voice  and  by  the
ministration  of  angels  to  introduce
the  great  and  last  dispensation  of
ther  fullness  of  times — the  last  dis-
pensation on  the  earth  so  far  as  the
proclamation  of  mercy  is  concerned;
1  say  we  are  told  by  this  Prnpliet
that  the  Ancient  of  days  is  the  most
ancient  personage  that  ever  had  an
existence  in  days  here  on  the  earth.
And  who  was  lie  ?  Why,  of  couse,
old  father  Adam,  he  was  the  most
ancient  man  that  ever  lived  in  days


186  JOURNAL  OF

that  we  have  any  knowledge  of,  lie
comes,  then,  as  a  great  juilge,  to
assemble  tins  innumerable  host  of
which  Daniel  speaks.  He  comes  in
flaming  fire.  The  glory  and  blessing
and  great ness  of  this  personage  it
would  be  impossible  even  for  a  man
as  great  as  Daniel  fully  to  describe.
He  comes  as  a  irtan  inspired  from  the
eternal  throne  of  Jehovah  himself.
He  comes  to  set  in  order  the  councils
of  the  Priesthood  pertaining  to  all
dispensations,  to  arrange  the  Priest-
hood  and  the  councils  of  the  Saints
of  all  former  dispensations  in  one
grand  family  and  household.

What  is  all  tli is  fur?  Why  all
this  arangenient  ?  Why  all  this
organization  ?  Why  all  this  judg-
ment arid  the  opening  of  the  books  ?
It  is  to  prepare  the  way  for  anot  her
august  personage  whom  Daniel  saw
coming  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,
namely  the  Son  of  Man,  and  these
clouds  of  heaven  brought  the  Son  of
Man  near  before  the  Ancient  of  days.
And  when  the  Son  of  Man  came  to
the  Ancient  of  days,  behold  a  king-
dom was  given  to  the  Son  of  Man,
and  greatness  and  glory,  that  all
people,  nations  and  languages  should
serve  him,  and  his -kingdom  should
be  an  everlasting  kingdom,  a  king-
dom that  should  never  be  done  away.

This  explains  the  reason  why  our
father  Adam  comes  as  the  Ancient '
of  days  with  all  these  numerous
hosts,  and  organizes  them  according
to  the  records  or  the  book,  every  man
in  Ins  place,  preparatory  to  the  com-  I
ingof  the  Son  of  Man  to  receive  the
kingdom.  Then  every  family  that
is  in  the  order  ot  the  Priesthood,
and  every  man  and  every  woman,
and  every  son  or  daughter  what  ever
their  kindred,  descent  or  Priesthood,
will  know  their  place*
1  Where  will  this  great  conference
ake  place  ?  The  Lord  lias  revealed
this  ulso« The  Lord  did  nut  raise


DISCOURSES.

up  this  boy,  Joseph,  for  nothing,  or
merely  to  reveal  a  few  of  the  first
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ;
but  he  raised  him  up  to  reveal  the
hidden  mysterious  things,  the  won-
ders of  the  eternal  worlds,  the  won-
ders of  the  dispensation  of  the  full-
ness of  times,  those  wonders  that
took  place  before  the  foundation  of
the  world;  and  all  things,  so  far  at
it  was  wisdom  in  Gocln  were  unfolded
by  this  parsonage  called  by  his  ene-
mies **  Old  Joe  Smith/4  w  ho  was
about  fourteen  years  old  when  the
Lord  raised  him  up,  1  say  that  hef
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
the  spirit  of  revelation,  revealed  the
very  place  where  this  great  assem-
blage of  ten  thousand  times  tea
thousand  of  the  righteous  shall  be
gathered  together  when  the  books  are
opened.  It  will  be  on  one  of  the  last
plnces  of  residence  of  our  father
Adam  here  on  the  earth,  and  it  is
called  by  revelation  Adam-ondi-
ahman,  which,  being  interpreted,
means  the  valley  of  God  where  Adam
dwelt,  the  words  belonging  to  the
language  which  was  spoken  by  the
children  of  men  before  the  confusion
took  place  at  Babel.  In  that  valley
Adam  called  together  Seth,  Enos,
C  s  i  i  na  n ,  Mah  a  1  alee! ,  J  a  red ,  Enoch ,
Methusaleli  and  all  the  high  Priests
and  righteous  of  his  descendants  for
sdme  seven  or  eight  generations.
Three  years  before  his  death  he  there
stood  up,  being  bowed  with  age,  and
preached  to  that  vast  assembly  of
people,  and  pronounced  upon  them
his  great  and  last  patriarchal  bless-
ing, and  they  rose  up  by  the  autho-
rity and  power  and  revelation  of  the
r^oly  Priesthood  which  they  held,  and
t  pronounced  their  blessing  upon  thei^
great  common  progenitor  Adam,  and
he  was  called  the  Prince  of  Peace,
and  the  Father  of  many  nations,  and
it  was  said  that  he  should  stand  a*
the  head  of  and  rule  over  his  people


ALL  MEN  TO  DE  JUDGED,  ETC


187


of  all  generations,  notwithstanding
he  was  so  aged.  That  w:is  the  bless-
ing  pronounced,  three  years  before
his  death,  upon  the  great  head.
Patriarch  and  Prophet  of  this  crea-
tion, the  man  whom  God  choose  to  be-
gin the  works  of  this  creut  ion,  in  other
words  to  begin  the  peopling  of  this
earth.

Where  was  that  valley  in  which
that  grand  patriarchal  gathering  was
held  ?  It  was  about  fifty,  sixty  or
seventy  miles  north  of  Jncksou  Coun-
ty, Missouri,  where  the  /ion  of  the
latter  days  will  be  built.  Where  the
garden  of  Eden  was  is  not  fully  re-
vealed ;  where  Adam  eat  the  forbid-
den trait  is  not  revealed  so  far  as  I
know,  that  is,  the  particular  location
on  the  earth,  no  revelation  informs
us  where  he  passed  the  first  few  cen-
turies of  his  life ;  but  suffice  it  to  say
that,  when  Adam*was  about  six  or
seven  hundred  years  old  there  was  a
great  gathering  of  the  people.
Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,
who  lived  contemporary  with  his  old
ancestor,  and  others  who  wire  called
by  him,  went  forth  and  gathered  out
the  righteous  from  all  the  nations,
and  as  there  was  no  Atlantic  Ocean
in  tho^e  days  rolling  between  the
eastern  and  western  continents,  they
could  gather  together  by  land  from
Asia,  Africa  and  Europe,  In  those
days  the  earth  was  not  divided  as  it
was  after  the  flood,  in  the  days  of
Feleg.  In  that  gathering  many  came
from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Adam
might  have  been  among  the  emigrat-
ing companies,  if  not,  then,  he  most
probably  bad  his  residence  at  that
central  place  of  gathering.  Let  this"
be  as  it  may,  it  is  not  revealed.  There
is  a  place,  however,  where  this  great
Conference  took  place  in  ancient
times,  where  the  Lord  revealed  him-
self to  that  vast  assembly,  and  stood
in  their  midst,  and  instructed  them
with  his  own  mouth,  and  they  saw


his  face.  There  is  the  place  where
it  was  ordained  that  Adam  should
have  the  power,  as  the  Ancient  of
Days,  after  a  certain  period  and  dis-
pensations had  rolled  away,  to  come
in  his  glory  accompanied  by  the  an-
cient Saints,  the  generations  that
should  live  after  him  and  should  take
up  their  abode  upon  that  land  where
they  received  their  last  blessing,  there
in  the  valley  of  Adam-ondi-ahman.

This  man,  will  sit  upon  his  throne,
and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand
immortal  beings — his  children — will
stand  before  him,  with  all  their  dif-
ferent grades  of  Priesthood,  accord-
ing to  the  order  which  God  has  ap-
pointed and  ordained.  Then  every
quorum  of  the  Priesthood  in  this
Latter-day  Saint  Church  will  find
its  place,  and  never  until  then.  If
we  go  behind  the  vail  we  will  not  see
this  perfect  organization  of  the  Saints
of  all  generations  until  that  period
shall  arrive.  That  will  be  before
Jesus  comes  in  his  glory.  Then  we
will  find  that  there  is  a  place  for  the
First  Presidency  of  this  Church  ;  for
the  Twelve  Apostles  called  in  this
dispensation  ;  for  the  twelve  disciples
that  were  called  among  the  remnants
of  Joseph  on  this  laud  in  ancient
times;  for  the  Twelve  that  were
called  among  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel
in  the  north  country ;  for  the  Twelve
that  were  called  in  Palestine,  who
administered  in  the  presence  of  our
Savior ;  all  the  various  quorums  and
councils  of  the  Priesthood  in  every
dispensation  that  has  transpired  since
the  days  of  Adam  until  the  present
time  will  find  their  places,  according
to  the  callings,  gifts,  blessings,  ordi-
nations and  keys  of  Priesthood  winch
the  Lord  Almighty  has  conferred
upon  them  in  their  several  genera-
tions. This,  then,  will  be  one  of  the
giandest  meetings  that  has  ever
transpired  upon  the  face  of  our  globe.
What  manner  of  persons  ought  yon


188  JOURNAL  OF

and  I,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  and
all  the  people  of  God  in  the  latter
days  to  be,  that  we  may  be  counted
worthy  to  participate  in  the  august
assemblies  that  are  to  come  from  the
eternal  worlds,  whose  bodies  have
burst  the  tomb  and  come  forth  im-
mortalized and  eternal  in  their  nature.

It  will  be  found  then  who  it  is  who
have  received  ordinances  by  divine
authority,  and  who  have  received
ordinances  by  the  precepts  and  au-
thority of  men.  It  will  then  be
known  who  have  been  joined  together
in  celestial  marriage  by  divine  au-
thority, and  who  by  wicked  counsels,
and  by  justices  of  the  peace  who  did
not  believe  in  Gud  at  the  time  that


ISCOURSES.

they  did  it,  or  those  who  have  been
married  merely  until  death  shall  part
them,  it  will  then  be  known  that
those  who  have  received  the  ordi-
nances of  marriage  according  to
divine  appointment  are  married  for
all  eternity ;  it  will  then  be  known
that  their  children  are  the  legal  heirs
to  the  inheritances,  and  glories,  and
powers,  and  keys  and  Priesthood  of
their  fathers,  throughout  the  eternal
generations  that  are  to  come ;  and
every  man  will  have  his  family  gath-
ered around  him  which  have  been
given  unto  him  by  the  sealing  of  the
everlasting  Priesthood,  and  the  order
and  law  which  God  has  ordained,
and  none  other-  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDEU  WILFOKD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  at  the  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake

City,  Wednesday,  October  7,  1874.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans*)

THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST  UNPOPULAR  IN  EVERY  AGE  OF  THE  WORLD —
WE  HAVE  TO  LIVE  BY  FAITH — GOD  HAS  DECREED  THAT  HIS  KING-
DOM WILL  BE  ESTABLISHED — THE  PRIESTHOOD  CONFERRED  UPON
JOSEPH  SMITH  BY  HOLY  ANGELS— ALL  LLKSSINGS  TO  BE  OBTAINED
FROM  THE  GUI)  THE  SAINTS  WORSHIP.


I  did  not  have  the  privilege  of
listening  to  all  the  remarks  of  Klder
Taylor  this  forenoon,  yet  to  what  I
did  hear  I  can  bear  testimony  of  its
truth.  I  always  delight  in  seeing  a
man  valiant  in  the  testimony  of  Jesus
Christ.  There  is  something  glorious
in  the  principles  of  the  Gospel.  I
alwajs  did,  iroin  my  boyhood,  hope


and  pray  that  I  might  live  lung
enough  in  the  earth  to  find  some
man  who  would  have  sufficient  con-
rage  and  independence  of  mind  to
believe  in  the  same  doctrine  and
Gospel  that  Jesus  Christ  taught,  and
I  have  lived  lung  enough  to  see,  hear
and  partake  of  it,  and  I  glory  in  it,
because  it  is  true*


*


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


189


The  religion  or  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  is  a  very  unpopular  thing,
and  has  been  in  every  atje  of  the
world. Show  me  a  man  who  was
ever  inspired  of  the  Lord  God  of
Israel  to  do  a  work  for  him  who  was
popular. You  can  not  find  such  a
man m the whole  history  of  the
world. You  may  take  Noah,  who
was  about  a  hundred  and  twenty
years  building  an  ark,  and  how  many
friends  did  he  have  ? I  think  about
seven  in  all. Lot  was  very  unpopu-
lar the  morning  he  left  Sodom  and
Gomorrah,  and  so  have  been  all  the
Patriarchs  and  Prophets in  every
ago of tho world. Jesus  Christ,
when  he  came  to  Jerusalem,  the  Son
of  God,  the  Savior  of  the  world,  the
great  Shiioh  of  the  Jews,  came  to
his  own  father's  house,  yet  there  was
not  a  man  more  despised  in  all  Judea
and  Jerusalem  than  was  Jesus  Christ,
from  the  day  of  his  birth  until  he
came  to  the  cross. Why  is  this?
Because  men  love  darkness  rather
than  light — because  their  deeds  are
evil. The  Lird  Almighty,  in  the
last  days,  has  set  his  hand  to  carry
out  and  fulfill  his  words  for  the  past
five  or  si* thousand  years,  given
through  the  mouths  of  his  servants
the  Prophets  and  Apostles  whenever
he  has  had  them  on  the  earth.  He
has  commenced  this  work  and  he  will
perform  it,  for,  as  brother  Taylor  has
justly  said,  there  is  no  power  on  the
earth  that  can  stay  his  hand,  for  the
simple  reason  that  God  controls  the
destinies  of  all  men — kings,  princes,
rulers,  presidents,  statesmen,  gov-
ernors, nations,  tongues  and  people,
upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and
men  are  placed  in  a  position  where
they  are  under  the  necessity  of  ex-
ercising faith  in  God  in  order  to  build
up  his  kingdom. Read  the  eleventh
chapter  of  Hebrews,  and  you  will
find  that,  beginning  with  the  creation
of  the  world,  everything  has  been


accomplished  by  faith.  The  whole
of  the  work  of  all  the  ancient  Patri-
archs and  Prophets  was  accomplished
by  the  exercise  of  this  principle  ;  and
it  is  just  so  in  the  last  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times. When  God

;  sent  angels  to  Joseph  Smith,  lie
knew  and  understood,  by  the  teach-
ings given  unto  him,  what  he  had  to

1  perform  in  a  measure.  The  Lord
called  him  to  do  a  work,  and  raised
him  up  for  this  purpose.  Was  Joseph
Smith  popular  among  men  ?  No,
never,  he  was  persecuted  until  the
day  of  his  dr  ath,  until  he  scaled  his
testimony  with  his  blood.  But  the
persecution  against  him,  and  the  un-
belief of  the  world,  do  not  make  the
truth  of  God  without  effect.  The
Lord  has  carried  out  and  fulfilled  all
these  prophecies  from  the  commence-
ment until  now;  there  never  has
been  a  jot  or  tittle  allowed  to  fall  un-

'  fulfilled ;  there  never  was  a  revela-
tion, from  the  days  of  father  Adam
until  this,  given  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Holy  Ghost  through  the  mouth
of  Patriarch  or  Prophet  that  will  fall
unfulfilled.  Though  the  heavens  aud
the  earth  pass  away,  these  things
will  not  fail  of  their  fulfillment,  and,
as  brother  Taylor  has  said,  the  world
cannot  stay  the  work  of  God,  They
never  have  done,  and  they  never
will

This  is  a  different  dispensation
from  all  others.  God  has  set  to  his
hand  to  build  up  his  kingdom  and
Zion,  and  that  kingdom  and  Zion
must  be  built  up,  or  tho  revelations
of  God  will  fall  unfulfilled.  The
Bible  is  full  of  these  teachings,  and
they  must  have  their  fulfillment,  and
I  bear  testimony  to  their  truth.  The
Bible  is  true,  arid  its  prophecies  were
spoken  by  holy  men  of  old  as  they
were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  revelations  of  Isaiah  concerning
I  the  building  up  of  the  Zion  of  God
I  in  the  last  days  will  have  their  ful-


190  JOURNAL  OF

fill m en t.  The  house  of  God  will  be
established  upon  the  tops  of  the
mountains,  and  all  nations  must  flow
unto  it.  Zion  must  arise  and  put  on
her  beautiful  garments,  she  must  be
clothed  with  the  glory  of  her  God,
The  Temple  of  God  has  got  to  be
built  also  upon  the  tops  of  the  moun-
tains; the  Gospel  must  be  preached
to  every  nation  under  heaven  before
the  end  shall  come.

The  world  say  they  do  not  believe
these  things;  that  is  true,  we  do  not
expect  them,  we  never  have  expected
them  to  believe  them,  but  the  un-
belief of  the  world  does  not  change
the  work  of  God.  We  have  to  live
by  faith.  When  Moroni  hid  in  the
earth  the  record  which  the  Book  of
Mormon  was  translated  from,  four
hundred  years  after  Christ  came  in  the
flesh,  he  did  it  by  faith,  as  much  so
ma  Noah  built  the  ark.  He  looked
forward  and  saw  that  record  come
forth  in  the  last  days,  in  fulfillment
of  the  sayings  of  Ezekiel  and  of  the
saying  of  Isaiah,  when  the  stick  of
Joseph  should  be  put  with  the  stick
of  Judah,  and  they  should  become
one  stick  in  the  hands  of  the  servants
of  the  Lord  before  the  eyes  of  the
world,  and  \v!n»n  the  truth  should
spring  out  of  the  earth  and  righte-
ousness look  down  from  heaven.
These  things  were  to  be  a  beginning
of  the  great  work  of  Go  1  preparatory
to  the  gather  ing  of  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel  in  the  latter  days.  That
work  has  come  forth,  just  as  every-
thing has  been  ful tilled  which  lias
been  done  by  faith  and  by  the  com*
mandrnent  of  God.  1  ;

Wheu  Joseph  Smith  began  to  re-
ceive revelations  from  God  he  was  a
boy,  an  illiterate  youth  ;  and  had  he
not  had  faith  and  the  inspiration  of
the  Almighty  upon  him,  he  never
could  have  had  power  and  courage  to
go  forth  and  introduce  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ  in  the  midst  of  a  gene-


DISCOURSES,

j  ration  of  false  doctrine,  ignorance
and  darkness.  But  God  preserved,
inspired  and  sustained  him,  and
caused  him  to  live  upon  the  earth
until  he  had  planted  this  kingdom,
in  fulfillment  of  the  revelations.  He
organized  the  Church,  he  received  the
holy  Priestfiood  from  the  hands  of
angels  sent  from  God — men  who  had
held  the  Aaron ic  and  Melcbizedec
Priesthood  in  other  generations  upon
the  earth  ;  they  conferred  upon
Joseph  all  the  powers  and  keys  of
the  Priesthood  necessary  to  build  up
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
and  he  lived  long  enough  to  organize
that  kingdom,  and  it  will  never  be
thrown  down  any  more  forever.

The  revelations  of  God  to  us  have
been  encouraging,  and  we  have  seen
them  fulfilled,  and  we  shall  continue
to  do  so  until  the  end,  I  will  say  to
the  Latter  day  Saints,  that  we  are  in
the  same  position  that  other  genera-
tions have  been — we  have  got  to  walk
by  faith,  we  must  have  confidence  in
the  fulfillment  of  the  revelations  of
God.  No  man  or  woman  on  the
face  of  the  earth  will  ever  be  dis-
appointed with  regard  to  the  fulfill*
ment  of  t  he  word  of  the  Lord,  for  he
has  uttered  decrees,  made  covenants,
and  through  his  servants  the  Pro-
phets has  declared  his  word  and  will
concerning  the  world  and  its  inhabi-
tants, and  not  one  of  his  sayings  will
fail,  all  mnst  be  fulfilled.  If  it  conld
be  otherwise,  the  Zion  of  God  would
never  be  built  up;  but  God  has  de-
creed that  his  kiugdom  will  be  esta-
blished, that  Zion  will  arise  and
shine,  and  that  every  weapon  formed
against  her  will  be  broken.

The  prayers  of  hundreds  and
thousands  of  Saints,  dwelling  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains,  daily  ascend
into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,
beseeching  him  to  fulfill  his  word
upon  the  earth  and  to  sustain  his

l  servants. Do  not  the  Saints  pray


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


131


for  anybody  else  ?  Yes,  they  pray
for  everybody — for  President  Grant,
Judge  McKean,  the  Governor  of  Utah, ;
and  every  man  holding  official  posi-
tions here,  as  well  as  for  Btigham
Young  and  the  Apostles.  These
prayers  ascend  before  the  Lord  and
they  will  be  heard  and  answered.

Talk  about  Brigham  Young  and
Joseph  Smith,  how  many  have  said
to  Joseph  Smith — "How  on  the
ear tli  do  you  govern  and  control  this
people  ?  How  easy  you  do  it  Our
enemies,  to-day,  look  at  Brigham
Young,  and  they  say — "  If  he  would
only  die  Mormonism  would  stop;"
but  in  this  they  are  mistaken.  This
work  does  not  depend  upon  President
Young;  it  did  not  depend  upon
Joseph  Smith.  All  the  world
thought  if  they  could  only  slay
Joseph  Smith  there  would  be  an  end
of  Mormon  ism,  and  so  there  would
have  been  had  it  not  been  the  work
of  God  Almighty ;  if  it  had  been  the
work  of  man  it  would  long  since
have  ceased  to  exist  on  the  earth.
The  power  that  has  sustained  this
work  from  the  beginning  sustains  it
now.  As  brother  Taylor  has  said,
all  the  holy  Prophets  and  Apostles
who  have  been  slain  on  the  earth  for
the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  the  word
of  God,  and  who  now  sit  on  the
right  hand  of  God  in  the  heavens,
are  just  as  much  engaged  in  carrying
on  the  work  of  God  here  as  when
they  lived  in  the  flesh,  and  more  so,
because  they  have  more  light  and
power.  And  Jesus  Christ,  himself,
who  died  on  the  cross,  and  after  his
resureection  visited  the  other  sheep
of  his  fold  on  this  continent,  and
offered  the  Gospel  to  Jew  and  Gen.
tile,  that  same  Jesus  is  pleading  with
the  Father  to-day,  and  has  been  from
the  day  his  body  lay  in  the  tomb,  to
carry  out  and  fulfill  his  purposes  and
to  accomplish  his  work  in  our  day
and  generation. We  are  not  alone


in  our  efforts  to  carry  on  the  work  of
God.  If  the  eyes  of  the  world  were
open,  they  would  see  that  there  are
more  for  us  than  against  us.  We  are
only,  in  one  sense  of  the  word,  worms
of  the  dust  in  the  hands  of  God.
This  work  does  not  depend  on  any
man  or  set  of  men.  The  Lord  Al-
mighty has  set  his  hand  to  accom-
plish his  purposes,  and  he  is  feeling
after  the  honest  and  meek  throughout
the  world,  in  order  to  tin  J  those  who
are  willing  to  take  hold  and  help  to
build  up  his  kingdom  in  the  latter
days.  He  has  found  a  few,  and  he
will  find  many  mora.

How  has  it  been  with  Joseph
Smith,  Brigham  Young,  the  Apos-
tles, and  thousands  of  the  Elders  of
Israel  who  have  gone  forth  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  the  world  without  purse
or  scrip,  offering  the  word  oCJife  and
salvation  without  money  and  without
price  ?  They  have  carried  their
knapsacks  on  their  backs,  or  with
valise  in  hand  have  traveled  thou-
sands and  thousands  of  miles  for  this
purpose.  They  have  been  inspired
to  do  this  by  the  power  of  the  Most
High  God,  and  that  inspiration  has
sustained  them  all  the  way  through;
it  has  upheld  this  Church  from  the
time  it  came  forth  until  this  hour,
and  will  unto  its  consummation.  We
came  in  here  on  the  21th  of  July,
184-7,  having  been  driven  from  our
homes,  the  graves  of  our  fathers,  and
from  lands  we  purchased  from  the
general  Government  because  of  the
word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of
Jesus  Christ,  or,  in  other  words,
because  of  our  religion.  We  came
here  and  found  a  barren  desert,  con-
taining nothing  but  a  few  roving
Indians,  coyote  wolves,  crickets  and
grasshoppers.  There  was  do  mark
of  the  Anglo  Saxon  race  or  of  the
white  man  here  then,  but  the  whole
region  of  country  was  a  desert  of  the
most  forbidding  and  desolate  charac-


1U2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUR


ter.  Now  when  strangers  came  ap
to  Zion  on  this  great  highway,  cast
up  in  fulfillment  of  the  revelations
of  find,  what  do  they  see  ?  They
Bf  e  no  longer  a  desert,  but  a  belt,  for
six  hundred  miles,  of  cities,  towns,
villages,  orchards,  fields  and  crops*
Who  luis  dona  this  ?  The  Lord  God
of  Isral  lias  inspired  his  Saints  to  do
it.  President  Young  has  been  led,
guided,  counselled  and  moved  upon
by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  by  the  revela-
tions of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  which
strangers  now  heboid  in  this  Taber-
nacle, and  throughout  this  Territory  '
is  in  fulfillment  of  that  volume  of
revelation  which  you  can  read  in  the
prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  others  of
the  Prophets  and  Patriarchs.  These  1
things  are  true  and  your  eyes  can  see
them,  whether  you  believe  them  or  <
n  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  I  will
tell  yon  that  if  this  wr.rk  had  not
been  of  God,  and  God  had  not  born©
testimony  to  the  preaching  of  the
Elders,  we  might  have  preached  until
we  had  been  as  old  as  Methuselnh
and  we  could  not  have  gathered  the
people  from  almost  every  nation  !
under  heaven  as  we  have  done,  ac-
cording to  the  predictions  of  the
ancient  Prophets  contained  in  the
Bible.  But  the  Lord  has  never  dis-
appointed anybody  so  far  as  his  work
is  concerned.  It  did  not  stop  after
the  death  of  Joseph,  and  it  never
will  on  account  of  the  death  of  any
man,  Prophet,  Apostle  or  any  other
man,  for  it  is  in  the  hands  of  God,
and  he  has  decreed  that  it  shall  stand
for  ever,  and  that  it  shall  extend  until
its  dominion  becomes  universal.

We  do  not  see  to-day  what  we  saw
twenty- four  years  ago,  and  we  do  not
see  to  day  what  will  be  seen  twenty-
four  years  hence;  there  will  be  no
stoppage  to  the  building  up  of  the
Zion  of  God,  or  to  the  carrying  out
of  his  work.  Joseph  Smith  was  a
Prophet  of  God,  raised  up  by  the


Lord  Almighty,  and  the  inspiration
of  God  guided  and  sustained  him  to
the  day  of  his  death.  He  sealed  his
testimony  with  his  blood,  and  thttt
testimony  is  in  force  upon  all  the
world.  This  record  which  I  hold  in
my  hands  (Rook  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants)  contains  the  revelations
of  God,  and  in  one  of  them  the  Lord
says — **  Let  earth  and  hell  combine
against  you,  and  they  shall  not  pre-
vail, the  kingdom  is  yours — I  have
given  it  into  your  hands — and  yon
are  c  died  upon  to  build  it  up.1*  The
Lord  is  at  the  helm  to  govern,  guide
and  control  this  work,  and  he  will  do
so  unto  the  end.  .  *

Now  when  men  undertake  to  fight
against  this  work,  as  brother  Taylor
has  said,  tiny  fight  against  God  j  it
is  not  against  Brigham  Youns^,  the
Apostles  or  this  people  alone,  but  it
is  against  God*  Every  man  will  be
rewarded  according  to  his  works.
Our  prayers  go  up  before  God  day
and  night,  that  he  will  execute  j  is-
tice,  judgment,  righteousness  and
truth,  that  he  will  sustain  every-
thing that  leads  to  good,  and  does
good,  and  that  he  will  overthrow  all
tint  lead  to  evil  and  do  evil;  and  we
are  assured  by  revelation  that  the
Lord  will  hear  and  answer  our  prayers.
The  Lord  is  with  this  pe  ople ;  but
as  Latter-Jay  Saints,  I  do  not  think
that  we  always  prize  our  privileges.
We  are  called  upon  to  perform  a
work ;  the  Lord  has  placed  this
work  in  our  hands,  and  we  are  held
responsible?  before  the  heavens  and
the  earth  to  use  the  talents — the  light
and  truth,  which  have  been  commit-
ted into  our  hands.

What  is  this  life  ?  What  are  the
things  of  this  life  ?  The  Latter-day
Saints  are  living  for  things  the  other
side  of  the  vail,  the  same  as  all  ser-
vants of  God  have  done  in  every  age
of  the  world.  Xow  is  it  not  a  curi-
osity that  so  few  of  the  human


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC,


193


family  have  an  interest  in  eternal
tilings — things  the  other  side  of  the
vail  ?  Bless  yonr  souls,  our  lives
here  are  only  a  few  days  in  duration,
but  on  the  other  side  of  tho  vail  we
shall  live  eternally,  we  shall  live  and
exist  just  as  long  as  our  Creator
will  exist,  and  our  eternal  destiny
depends  upon  the  manner  in  which
we  spend  our  short  lives  here  in  the
flesh.  Will  it  not  pay  any  man,  any
Prophet,  Apostle  or  Saint,  in  this
or  any  other  age  of  the  world,  to  be
true  and  faithful  to  his  God,  to
magnify  his  calling,  to  be  valiant
in  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,
to  preach  the  Gospel,  to  bear  record
of  the  things  of  the  kingdom  to
Jew  and  Gentile  in  his  day  and  gene-
ration ?  Ten,  it  will  pay  men  to  do
right,  and  men  will  sorrow  and  bit-
terly regret  taking  any  course  in  this
or  any  other  generation  against  God
or  his  wot k*  What  have  been  the
afflictions  of  the  Jews  who  rejected
Jesus  Christ  ?  Why  every  word
Spoken  concerning  them  by  Hoses
and  Jesus  has  had  its  fulfillment
until  the  present  day,  for  hundreds
of  years  prist  and  got-e.  They  have
b  ren  a  hiss  and  a  by. word,  and  trod*
den  under  the  feet  of  the  Gentiles,  In
fulfillment  of  the  words  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  they  will  continue  .in
their  present  position  until  the  full-
ness of  the  Gentiles  has  come  in,
Jesus  off* -red  his  Gospel  to  the  Jews
I t i  his  day,  but  in  these  latter  days
it  has  been  offered  8rst  to  the  Gen-
tiles, thus  fulfilling  the  saying  that
the  first  shall  be  last  and  the  last
shall  he  first ;  and  when  the  Gentiles
count  themselves  unworthy  ot  eternal
life,  the  Gospel  will  go  to  the  House
of  Israel  and  they  will  receive  it.
The  Gentiles  should  heed  the  warn-
ing  given  them  by  the  Apostle  Paul,
lest  they  fall  through  the  example
of  unbelief  as  did  the  Jews,  who
were  bioken  off  because  they  rejected
No.  13.


the  Messiah,  and  refused  the  mes-
sage of  salvation  which  he  delivered
unto  them.  From  that  day  to  thia
they  have  been  scattered,  peeled  and
afflicted  ;  their  city  was  overthrown
and  their  Temples  destroyed,  and
the  land  of  their  fathers  has  been
in  the  hands  of  Gentile  nations  until
to-day. The  Lord  has  said — "  Ven-

1  geance  is  mine  and  I  will  repay,"
and  we  may  rest  assured  that  the
Lord  will  reward  those  who  seek  to
destroy  the  lives  of  his  people  and
to  overthrow  his  kingdom.  Ven-
geance is  in  the  hands  of  the  Al-
mighty. "  I  will  fight  your  battles,"

!  saith  the  Lord.  We  do  not  seek  any
man's  hurt,  however  much  of  an
enemy  he  may  be  to  us,  we  leave  him
in  the  hands  of  God,  we  know  that  he
will  reward  Lira,  and  the  reward  will
be  all  that  God,  Saints,  angels,  devils  or

!  wicked  men  can  ask,  and  it  will  be  all
that  any  man  can  want.  When  wo
undertake  to  fight  against  God  we  have
to  pay  for  it.  Men  will  have  to  pay
for  every  sin  committal!  in  the  flesh;
no  matter  what  they  do,  they  will
have  to  be  accountable  for  it.  If  a
man  does  right,  is  valiant  in  the  testi-
mony  of  Jesus  Christ,  obey  s  the  Gospel,
and  keeps  his  covenants,  when  he
passes  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail
lie  has  an  entrance  into  the  presence
of  God  and  the  Lamb ;  having  kept
celestial  law  lie  enters  into  celestial
glory,  he  is  preserved  by  that  law,
and  he  participates  in  that  glory
through  the  endless  ages  of  eternity.
It  pays  any  man  under  heaven  to
obey  and  be  faithful  to  the  law  of
God  the  few  days  he  spends  in  tho
flesh.  I  say  to  the  world,  to  every
sect  under  heaven,  if  you  ever  ob-
tain any  blessings  in  the  eternal  worlds

I  from  anybody  at  all  it  will  be  from
the  God  the  Latter-day  Saints  wor-
ship, for  God  made  us  all ;  whether
we  are  Methodists,  Baptists,  Mor-
mons or  anything  else  we  are  all  the

VoL  XVIL


194


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


children  of  one  parent*  Then  why
should  we  persecute  one  another  be-
cause of  our  religion  ?  It  is  folly  in
the  highest  degree.  We  live  in  a
land  and  under  a  constitution  which
guarantees  the  right  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  con-
science to  every  sect,  party,  name
and  denomination  under  heaven,  then
why  should  we  be  so  narrow- minded
as  to  hate  or  seek  to  persecute  or  kill
our  neighbor  because  he  differs  from
us  in  religion  ?

We  worship  God  and  we  are  Lat-
ter-day Saints  because  we  know  that
the  Gospel  which  has  been  revealed
in  these  latter  days  is  true.  We
have  receivid  it  and  have  realized
the  promises  made  to  those  who
would  obey  it.  The  Holy  Ghost  and
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Clirist  never
deceived  us,  and  we  have  received
that  testimony  while  abroad  in  almost
every  nation  under  heaven.  By  this
power  we  have  been  gathered.  That
is  the  reason  we  are  Mormons,  as
the  world  call  us.  We  know  this
wotk  is  true,  we  know  it  is  the  Gos-
pel of  Jesus  Christ,  We  would  not
persecute,  abase,  or  quarrel  with  any
man  because  of  his  religious  views,
A  man's  religion,  let  it  be  what  it
will,  is  between  him  and  his  God,
He  is  going  to  the  eternal  world,  and
he  will  receive  his  reward,  and  there
is  no  reason  or  use  in  quarreling
about  religion,  and  we  have  never  felt
to  do  this  in  onr  lives.  Whatever
may  have  been  said  concerning  us,
our  Tabernacles — this  and  others —
have  been  open  to  every  minister
who  came  along,  no  matter  to  what
sect  or  party  he  belonged.  We  are
not  afraid  of  oui  doctrines,  and  we
are  not  afraid  to  have  our  children
hear  the  doctrines  of  others.  If  any
man  has  got  a  truth  that  we  have  not
got,  let  us  have  it.  Truth  is  what
we  are  after,  and  we  are  not  afraid  of
the  doctrines  of  any  man;  we  are


willing  to  stand  by  the  revelations  of
God.  These  are  the  feelings  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  When  our  Me*
thodist  friends  came  to  this  city,
erected  their  tent  and  held  their  big
camp  meeting,  what  was  the  course
pursued  by  the  Latter-day  Stints?
The  President  of  the  Church,  the
Twelve  Apostles  and  citizens  with
their  wives  and  children  gave  them
a  congregation  of  many  thousands,
and  we  sat  in  their  tent  and  listened
to  them  while  they  abused  us  just  at
much  as  they  pleased.  We  believe
in  giving  every  man  the  piivilege  of
saying  what  lie  pleases,  we  bare
always  been  willing  to  let  every  man
express  his  sentiments  here  ahnong
us.  We  are  not  afraid  of  them.
If  we  have  not  the  truth,  that  is
what  we  are  after,  we  want  it.  But
we  know  that  *e  have  it,  that  the
Gospel  as  restored,  revealed  through
Joseph  Smith,  is  the  tiuth  of  God,
and  we  know  that  the  Lord  basset  to
his  hand  to  build  up  Zion,  and  he  ii
going  to  do  it.  We  bear  record  of
rhis  because  we  know  it  is  true.

I  pray  that  God  will  bless  the
Latter-day  Saints.  1  pray  that  we
may  prize  our  piivileges,  that  we  may
enjoy  the  spirit  of  our  calling,  and
that  the  Holy  Ghost  may  enlighten
our  tuinds  continually,  that  we  may
not  walk  in  the  dark  bat  in  the
light,  I  pray  that  the  Spirit  of  God
may  bear  record  to  the  stranger
within  our  gates.  I  am  satis  lies  I  that
it  does,  and  ir  has  done  more  or  less
for  the  forty  years  that  are  past  and
gone.  But  it  is  the  same  to-day  as
it  was  in  the  days  of  Jesns.  He
told  Nicodemus  that  light  had  come
into  the  world,  but  men  loved  dark-
ness rather  than  light  because  their
deeds  were  evil,  and  here  is  where
condemnation  comes  in,  but  we  can
not  help  that.  My  brethren  and  I
have  traveled  a  great  many  thousand!
of  miles  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  our


INDIVIDUAL  Si

fellow-men ;  we  have  done  this  be-
cause we  know  this  Gospel  is  true. ;
We  are  willing  to  stand  by  this  Gos-
pel, tb is  testimony  and  this  wurk  in
life  and  in  death,  in  time  and  in
eternity.  We  shall  meet  the  stran-
gers who  come  here  and  visit  us,  on
the  other  side  of  the  vail;  they  will
meet  as  there,  and  if  they  never


LVATluN,  ETC.  195

know  before,  they  will  know  then
that  our  testimony  is  true,

I  piny  God  our  heavenly  Father
that  he  will  bear  testimony  by  hia
Holy  Spirit  to  the  meek  aud  honest
among  the  children  of  men,  that  they
may  receive  the  truth  and  be  pre-
p  i red  to  inherit  eternal  life,  for  Jesus'
sake*  Amen.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  Semi-Ajtnual  Conference  of  the  Church  op  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacles, Salt  Lakb

City,  Tuesday  Morning,  October  6,  1874.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

INDIVIDUAL  SALVATION — THE  SUCCESS  OF  THE  WORK  OF  THE  LORD
NOT  DEPENDENT  ON'  MAN — ENCOURAGE  HOME  MANUFACTURES — BUILD
TEMPLES— SAFETY  ON  THE  OLD  SHIP  ZION.


The  present  occasion,  a  Semi-annual
Conference,  is  one  which,  in  the  his-
tory that  we  are  making,  is  marked
with  more  than  ordinary  importance.
I  always  feel  thankful  to  be  permit-
ted io  meet  the  faces  and  greet  the
ooutitfTin rices  of  the  brethren  and
sisters  from  the  different  p  irts  of  the
Territory  and  elsewhere,  who  assem-
ble at  these  Conferences ;  and  I  feel
it  important  that,  in  doing  so,  we
should  lay  aside  the  ordinary  business
transactions  of  life,  and  try  and  com-
pare  notes  with  ourflulves  as  to  onr
actual  progress  in  the  things  of  the
kingdom.  We  have  received  the  first
principles  of  the  Gospel,  and  we  have
started  in  their  observance;  and  in
doing  so  we  have  become  obligated


by  our  personal  agreements,  and
covenants  in  the  waters  of  baptism,
and  in  the  ordinances  which  pertain
to  the  Gospel,  to  live  in  accordance
with  those  principles  which  are  re-
vealed, In  pursuing  oar  daily  avo-
citions  we  become  mixed  up,  more
or  less,  with  the  world;  we  are  called
to  battle  with  the  world,  and  we  have
exhibitions  from  time  to  time  of  the
weaknesses  of  human  nature*  I  re-
member very  well  in  the  days  of
Kirtland,  hearing  men  testify  that
they  knew  this  was  the  work  of  God,
and  that  they  had  seen  visions  of  the
armies  of  heaven  and  the  horsemen
thereof,  as  did  Gehazi,  the  servant
of  the  Prophet,  and  then,  in  conse-
quence of  the  failure  of  a  bank,  or


I


196


JOURNAL  OP  WSCOUUSE8.


because  some  business  transaction  did
not  come  out  in  accordance  with  their
expectations  or  desires,  they  would
apostatize  and  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that  they  never  knew  anything
about  it,  and  become  infidels.  This
shows  the  weakness  to  which  some
individuals  have  been  subject.  I  also
remember,  in  the  great  apostaey
which  took  place  in  Kirtland,  that
those  who  apostatized  considered  that
all  the  talent  of  the  Church  had  left
it,  and  yet  the  work  rolled  right
along,  and,  so  far  as  they  were  con-
cerned, they  were  never  missed,  and
were  soon  forgotten,  and  nobody
could  tell  where  they  went  to-  I
have  occasionally  met  them  twenty
or  thirty  years  afterwards,  and  could
hardly  tell  where  they  dropped  out,
their  disappearance  made  no  ripple.
The  facts  are,  brethren,  that  the
work  of  the  Lord  does  not  depend
upon  us.  If  we  go  into  darkness,
if  we  let  our  hearts  be  filled  with
covetousness  or  corruption,  or  give
way  to  licentiousness,  drunkenness,
Sabbath -breaking,  unbelief,  or  any
crime  that  corrodes  our  system  or
organization,  so  that  our  tabernacles
become  unfit  for  the  holy  Spirit  to
dwell  in,  it  will  withdraw  from  us,
and  theli^ht  that  is  in  us  becomes
darkened,  and  that  darkness  is  so
great  that  we  grope  as  a  blind  man
and  wander  hither  and  thither,  and
th.-.»sv  who  suffer  themselves  to  be  led
by  these  blind  men  fall  into  the  ditch
with  them,  but  the  work  rolls  right
along.

Now,  we  assemble  here,  and  we
want  to  review  our  conduct  and  our
characters  before  the  Lord.  It  is
one  of  the  weaknesses  of  human
nature  to  sit  in  judgmeut  on  others,
but  on  the  present  occasion  we  should
bring  ourselves  to  account,  one  and
all,  and  determine  whether  we  are
living  in  accordance  with  the  princi-
ples of  the  holy  Gospel  that  we  have


received.  I  recollect  hearing  once
that  Satan  had  invented  for  men  a
cerfain  kind  of  loaf  Iter  spectacles
which,  when  a  man  looked  at  his
own  sins,  made  thern  louk  very
small,  and  when  he  looked  at  his
own  righteous  nets,  made  them  look
very  large;  when  he  looked  at  his
neighbor's  eins  they  seemed  very
large,  and  when  he  looked  at  his
neighbor's  righteous  acta  they  ap-
peared very  small.  Spectacles  of
this  kind  should  be  avoided,  and  we
should  be  very  careful  when  we  are
examining  ourselves  that  we  do  not
get  them  on,  as  well  as  when  we  ex-
amine our  neighbors.

The  first  step,  then,  in  relation  to
the  business  of  this  Conference,  is  to
preach  the  principles  of  repentance
and  reformation.  We  should  ques-
tion ourselves,  and  determine  whet  her
we  have  suffered  ourselves,  with  the
cares  of  the  world,  the  deceit  fulness
of  riches,  the  desire  of  gain,  or  from
any  other  cau^e,  to  become  darkened
in  our  minds.  There  ore  many  false
spirits  gone  out  into  the  world,  and
when  Joseph  Smith  communicated
the  keys  uf  the  Priesthood  to  the
servants  of  the  Lord,  he  gave  them
the  power  to  try  these  spirits,  and
this  power  was  given  to  the  Church,
and  no  man  need  be  led  astray  only
as  he  suffers  himself  to  lose  the  Holy
Spirit,  which  is  the  result  of  sin,
wickedness,  neglect  or  transgression.

In  addition  to  tins  general  reforma-
tion which  we  wish  to  impress  upon
the  mi nds  of  our  brethren  and  sisters
at  the  opening  of  the  Conference,  we
want  to  take  such  steps  as  will  be
for  the  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare
of  the  Saints.  The  changes  which
have  transpired  in  the  world  show
us  how  uncertain  a  tenure  our  busi-
ness arrangements  are  placed  upon.
From  the  time  that  the  revelation
was  given  to  the  Saints,  commanding
them  to  let  the  beauty  of  their  gar-


INDIVIDUAL  SALVATION,  ETC.


197


meats  be  the  workmanship  of  their
own  hands,  to  the  present  time,  that
doctrine  has  been  preached,  and  yet,
it  now  seems  more  necessary  than
ever  that,  in  all  our  settlements  and
associations,  we  should  organize  and
take  such  measures  as  will  enable  us
to  provide,  within  ourselves  as  far  as
possible,  the  articles  which  we  need.
It  is  oar  duty  to  ourselves  and  to  our
God  to  unite  our  interests  in  such  a
manner  that  we  can  produce  what
we  need  within  ourselves,  without
being  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of
water  to  strangers.  We  have  made
a  good  deal  of  progress  in  this  direc*
tiou,  as  we  can  see  by  the  numbers
of  people  who  come  here  clothed  in
the  manufacture  of  their  own  facto-
ries or  looms.  Still  there  is  room
for  further  progress  in  this  direction,
and  during  the  Conference  instruc-
tions will  be  given  us  may  be  consi-
dered necessary  to  aid  us  in  facilita.
ting  the  work  of  manufacturing  oar
own  wool,  leather,  shoes,  h  its  and
every  other  article  ol  domestic  neces-
sity, just  as  far  as  our  country  will
admit

We  are  always  commanded,  so  says
the  revelation  contained  in  the  B>ok
of  D  >c trine  and  Covenants,  given  on
the  10:h  of  January,  1841,  to  build
Temples  to  the  huly  name  of  our
Father  in  heaven.  We  are  now  en*
gaged  in  this  work;  we  are  building
a  Temple  in  this  city  and  one  in  St,
George ;  and  if  any  of  you  ever  cast
an  eye  at  the  beautiful  foundation
that  is  now  raided  up  here  by  the
Tithes  and  offerings  of  the  brethren,
you  can  but  rejoice  in  the  idea  that
we  are  buil  ling,  to  the  name  of  our
Father,  an  edifice  creditable  to  the
work  for  which  it  is  designed.  We
wish  our  brethren  and  sisters  to  re-
member this.  It  has  been  c  muscled
and  advised  by  our  President,  and
by  those  in  authority,  that  it  would
be  a  wise  thing  for  every  persou  in


the  Church  to  contribute  a  monthly
donation  of  a  half  dollar  in  money  for
the  Temple,  that  their  names  may
be  put  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  the
Lord,  that  old  and  young  among  the
Latter- lay  Saints  may  feel  an  inter-
est in  this  matter,  that  on  their  fast
days  they  may  make  this  contribu-
tion to  aid  in  supplying  the  neces-
sary means  to  the  workmen  that  can
not  be  procured  without  money,  and
the  necessary  materials  to  facilitate
the  work.  If  anybody  will  go  and
examine  that  foundation,  and  the
granite  blocks  that  are  lying  around,
and  consider  the  expense  of  quarrying
them  and  bringing  them  here,  and  of
cutting  them  and  fitting  them  in
that  foundation,  they  will  realize  that
the  brethren  have  been  very  industri-
ous, and  that  a  great  work  has  been
done,  for  such  edifices  are  not  erected
without  great  labor,  -  time  and  ex-
pense. We  therefore  desire  the  bre-
thren to  take  into  consideration,
during  the  Conference,  such  subjects
as  pertain  to  the  advancement  of
these  Temples.  We  also  wish,  du-
ring the  Conference,  to  call  the  at-
tention of  the  brethren  to  the  pro-
priety of  some  two  or  three  hundred
hands  from  different  parts  of  the
northern  settlements  volunteering  to
go  to  St  George  this  winter  to  work
on  the  Temple,  making  a  donation
of  their  labor.  During  last  winter
quite  a  number  of  the  brethren  went
down  from  Sanpete  aud  some  of  the
neighboring  counties,  and  pat  in
about  three  months  work,  and  during
the  entire  winter  there  were  only
seven  and  a  half  days  they  could
not  lay  stone  on  the  Temple,  and
they  were  mostly  rainy  days.  Those
of  us  who  have  not  got  anything  to
employ  us  to  advantage  during  the
winter,  can  go  down  there  and  put
in  three  or  four  months*  work  on
that  Temple,  in  getting  lumber,  and
hauling  it,  in  quarrying  rock,  and  in


198  JOURNAL  OF

catting  and  setting  it;  in  making
mortar,  providing  lime  and  hauling
it,  and  in  aiding  in  all  the  various
departments  of  labor  necessary.  We
can  have  the  w?i!Is  put  up  and  get
the  timber  ready  for  the  roof  during
the  winter,  while  we  should  be  doing
comparatively  little  at  home.  This
is  one  item  that  I  wish  to  have  con-
sidered through  the  Conference.

There  will  be  some  missionaries
called  during  Conference,  whose  duty
it  will  be  to  preach  the  Gospel  and
defend  the  interests  of  Zion  in  the
United  States,  Canada,  and  other
parts  of  the  world.

We  would  invite  our  brethren  and
sisters  living  in  this  neighborhood,  as
long  as  there  are  vacant  seats  here,
to  come  and  occupy  them  while  the
Elders  shall  give  them  instruction;
and  we  ask  every  man  and  woman
who  fears  the  Lord  to  lift  their  hearts
to  him  in  prayer,  that  his  blessing
may  rest  upon  the  Elders,  that  Pre-
sident Young  may  be  healed  of  his
afflictions,  and  have  health  and
strength  %to  perform  the  duties  of  his
calling  and  that  all  the  Elders  who
rise  to  speak  may  be  filled  with  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we
may  be  instructed,  not  from  the
mere  natural  wisdom  of  the  individ-
ual, but  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Almighty,  that  our  tes-
timony, our  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,
th  e  principles  of  salvation  as  revealed
unto  us,  may  be  inspired  unto  us  by
the  power  of  the  Almighty,  that  we
may  know  for  ourselves  and  not  for
another  that  we  have  received  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  These  are
some  of  the  items  that  will  be  spo-
ken of  during  the  Conference  as  the
Spirit  may  direct,  as  well  as  other
matters  pertaining  to  Zion.  You
remember  the  revelation  in  the  Hook
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  given
.Tune  22,  1^3t,  on  Fishing  River,
Clay  County,  Mo, It  says:


DISCOURSES.

7.  "  And  let  all  my  people  who
dwell  in  the  regions  round  about  be
very  faithful,  and  prayerful,  and
humble  before  me,  and  reveal  not  the
things  which  I  have  revealed  unto
them,  until  it  is  wisdom  in  me  that
they  should  be  revealed.  Talk  not
of  judgment,  neither  boast  of  faith,
nor  of  mighty  works,  but  carefully
gather  together,  as  much  in  one  re-
gion as  can  be  consistently  with  the
feelings  of  the  people;  and  behold,
I  will  give  unto  yon  favor  and  grace
in  their  eyes,  that  yon  may  rest  in
peace  and  safety,  while  you  are  say-
ing unto  the  people,  Execute  judg-
ment and  justice  for  us  according  to
law,  and  redress  us  of  our  wrongs.

8,  "  Now,  behold,  I  say  unto  yon,
rny  friends,  in  this  way  you  may  find
favor  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  until
the  army  of  Israel  becomes  very
great  ;  and  I  will  soften  ihe  hearts  of
the  people,  as  I  did  the  heart  of  Pha-
raoh, from  time  to  time,  until  my
servants  Baurak  Alt ,  and  Banee-
my,  whom  I  have  appointed,  shall
have  time  to  gather  up  the  strength
of  my  house,  and  to  have  sent  wise
men  to  fulfill  that  which  I  have  com-
manded concerning  the  purchasing
of  all  the  lands  in  Jackson  Coanty
that  enn  be  purchased,  and  in  the
adjoining  counties  round  about;  for
it  is  my  will  that  these  lands  should
be  purchased,  and  after  they  are  pur-
chased that  my  Saints  should  possess
them  acrcrding  to  the  laws  of  con-
secration which  I  have  given ;  and
after  these  lands  are  purchased,  I  will
hold  the  armies  of  Israel  guiltless  in
taking  possession  of  their  own  lauds
which  they  have  previously  purchased
with  their  monies,  and  of  throwing
down  the  towers  of  mine  enemies
that  may  be  upon  them,  and  scatter-
ing tlieir  watchmen  and  avenging  me
of  mine  enemies  unto  the  third  and
fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate
me.


INDIVIDUAL  SALVATION,  ETC.


199


9.  "  But  firstly,  let  my  army  be-
come very  great',  and  let  it  sanc-
tified before  me,  that  it.  may  become
fair  as  the  sun,  and  clear  as  the  moon,
and  that  her  banners  may  be  terrible
unto  all  nations ;  that  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  may  be  constrained  to
acknowledge  that  the  kingdom  of
Zion  is  in  very  deed  the  kingdom  of
our  God  and  his  Christ:  therefore
let  ns  become  subject  unto  her  1  iws.

10.  *'  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  it  is
expedient  in  me  that  the  first  Elders
of  my  Church  should  receive  their
endowment  from  on  high  in  my
house,  which  I  have  commanded  to
be  built  unto  my  name  in  the  land
of  Kirtland ;  and  let  those  com-
mandments which  I  have  given  con-
cerning Zion  and  her  law  be  executed,
and  fulfilled,  after  her  redemption.
There  has  been  a  day  of  calling,  but
the  time  has  come  for  a  day  of  choos-
ing, and  let  those  be  chosen  that  are
worthy;  and  it  shall  he  manifest,  unto
my  servant,  by  the  voice  of  the  Spirit,
those  that  are  choseu  and  they  shall
be  sanctified  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they
foil  ow  the  counsel  which  they  receive,
they  shall  have  power  after  many
days  to  accomplish  all  things  pertain-
ing to  Zion*

Hi  "And  again  I  say  onto  you,
sue  for  peace,  not  only  the  people
that  have  smitten  you,  but  also  to
all  people;  and  lift  up  an  ensign  of
peace;  and  make  a  proclamation  for
peace  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth;
and  make  proposals*  for  peace  unto
those  who  have  smitten  you,  accord-
ing to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  which
is  iu  you,  and  all  things  shall  work
together  for  your  good  ;  therefore  be
faithful,  and  behold,  and  lo,  I  am  with
you  even  unto  the  end.  Even  so.
Amen,"

Let  us  consider  these  things  and
sanctity  ourselves  iu  all  humility,
God  has  preserved  us  from  all  our
enemies  for  over  forty  years  since


:  this  revelation  was  given,  and  we
occupy  many  cities,  towns  and  settle-
ments, and  should  improve  in  all  the
goodly  graces  of  the  Gospel  prepar-
atory to  the  great  work  still  before
us,  for  the  promises  of  God  are  true
aud  will  not  fail.

Oliver  Cowdery,  previous  to  his
apostacy  said  to  President  Joseph
Smith  : 44  If  I  should  leave  the  Church
it  would  break  up."  Joseph  said  to
Oliver — "  What,  who  are  you  ?  The
Lord  is  not  dependent  upon  you,  the
work  will  roll  forth  do  what  you  will"
Oliver  lef  t  the  Church,  and  was  goua
about  ten  years  ;  then  he  came  back
again,  to  a  branch  of  the  Church  in
meeting  on  Mosquito  Creek,  in  Pot-
tawattamie County,  Iowa.  The  body
of  the  Church  had  come  off  here  to
the  west,  but  there  was  still  remain-
ing there  a  branch  of  about  fifteen
hundred  or  two  thousand  people,  and
when  he  came  there  he  bore  his  tes-
timony to  the  truth  of  the  Hook  of
Mormon  and  the  divine  mission  of
the  Twelve  Apostles,  and  asked  to  be
received  into  the  Church  again,  and
said  that  lie  had  never  seen  in  all  his
life  so  large  a  congregation  of  Saints
as  the  one  then  assembled.  We  loved
to  hear  brother  Oliver  testify,  we  were
pleased  with  his  witness,  but  when
he  passed  off  and  went  among  our
enemies  he  was  forgotten,  aud  the
work  rolled  steadily  along  stop  by
step,  so  that,  ten  years  alter,  when
be  came  buck  to  an  outside  branch,
he  expressed  his  astonishment  at
seeing  such  a  vast  body  of  Saints.
Same  men  in  their  hours  of  darkness
may  feel — I  have  heard  of  men  feel-
ing so — that  the  work  is  about  done,
that  the  enemies  of  the  Saints  have
become  so  powerful,  and  bring  such
vast  wealth  and  energy  to  bear  against
them  tb  it  we  are  alt  going  to  be
crushed  out  pretty  soon,  i  will  say
to  such  brethren,  it  is  very  bad  policy
tor  you,  because  you  think  the  old


200


JOURNAL  Oh  DISCOURSES


ship  Zion  is  going  to  sink,  to  jump
overboard,  for  if  yoo  jump  over-
board you  are  gone  anyhow,  and  the
old  Sship  Zion  will  rirle  triumphantly
through  all  the  storms,  and  every-
body who  proves  unworthy  to  remain
on  board  of  her  and  jumps  overboard
will  repent  of  it  when  it  is  too  late,
as  many  have  done  already.

The  gospel  of  Jesus  CbViet  is  true,
and  the  Lord  has  revealed  this  work.
It  has  been  said — 41  Oh  what  vast,
what  wonderful  ability  Hrigham
Young  has  possessed  to  do  what  has
been  done !  "  The  tact  in  the  case  is,
it  is  the  Lord  who  has  done  it  He
baa  girded  and  directed  mid  his  done
the  work,  and  his  servants  who  have
labored  in  it,  have  only  been  instru
ments  in  bis  hands,  he  has  given
them  all  the  ability,  wisdom  a\d
knowledge  which  have  been  mani*
fested ;  uud  the  same  God  has  tha


power  to  still  guide,  control,  instruct
and  uphold,  and  he  will  do  go.  Those
who  fall  into  darkness,  error,  folly
and  wickedness  simply  lose  their
position ;  but  they  who  endure  to  the
end  the  same  will  be  saved.  The
great  work  which  has  been  com-
menced in  these  last  dnvs  will  con-
tinue  until,  by  and  by,  when  the  Lord
sees  tit,  he  will  come  to  his  Temple
and  will  receive  his  Saints  a*  Ins


own.

Let  os  then  devote  our  time  and
attention  for  a  few  days  to  receiving
instruction  and  counsel,  that  we  may
have  our  hearts  comforted  and  renew
our  testimony,  for  I  can  assure  yf>u,
as  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  lives,  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  true,  and
all  of  us  who  fall  into  darkness  and
go  astray  will  be  the  losers.  Zion  will
ride  triumphant,  which  may  Gud
grant  for  Jesus'  sake,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,  Jun.

Delivered  at  the  Semi -Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake

City,  Tuesday  Morning,  October  6,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  IF.  Evans.)


SAINTS  A  HE  LIVING  WITNESSES  OF  THE  TRUTH — THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD
PRESERVED  BY  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE  —  PERSECUTION  —  INDIVIDUAL
SALVATION.


I  have  a  testimony  also  to  offer  to
my  brethren  and  sisters.  It  is  a
great  thing,  in  my  estimation,  to
know God  and  his  Son,  to  know


that  God  has  established  the  king,
dorn  of  the  latter-days,  and  to  realizd
that  there  are  men  upun  the  earth,
who  are  capable,  through  the  revel  a-


SAINTS  ARE  LIVING  WITNESSES,  ETC*


201


1 1 oris  of  Almighty  God,  to  teach  the
people  the  way  of  life,  to  point  out
to  them  the  path  by  which  they  may
regain  the  presence  of  their  Father
and  God.  Such  is  the  testimony  I
have  had,  such  a  testimony  I  have  at
the  present  time.  I  am  aware  that
to  some  it  seems  incredible,  and  that
in  their  ears  it  sounds  preposterous
to  utter  such  words,  and  especially
does  it  seem  so  to  those  who  consider
th  it  they  are  living  in  the  blaze  of
of  the  Christian  religion,  for  the  1  irge
majority  of  that  class  of  pe  pie  will
Dot  fur  a  moment  entertain  the  idea
that  God  will  ever  again  speak  to
men  upon  the  earth,  or  inspire  them
as  he  did  anciently.  They  believe
the  day  as  gone  xV'it  li  slu''1  things
can  be,  and  that,  having  the  Bible  in
their  possession,  it  is  no  more  nece  sa  y
for  G-al  to  make  known  his  wi  1  to
man.  I  am  aware  that  the  Christian
world  view  it  in  this  light,  but  I  can
nut  help  that,  I  am  not  responsible
for  them,  nor  they  for  me.  1  stand
for  myself  and  am  supported  by  the
evidence  which  I  have  received  from
Almighty  God.  If  they  can  testify
to  me  that  the  Christian  religion  is
true,  I  can,  in  turn,  testify  to  them
that  God  has  revealed  himself,  that
he  has  again  spoken  to  men  upon  the
earth,  and  that  they  hear  his  voice
j ust  as  much  as  Isaiah,  Ezekiel  or
any  if  the  Prophets  of  ancient  days.
This  is  my  testimony,  and  I  know  it
to  be  true.  By  the  same  Spirit  that
revealed  unto  Peter  his  Lord  and
Savior  I  know  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ,  This  has  not  become  know-
ledge with  rae  through  the  testimony
of  others  alone.  I  sought  and  re-
ceived that  testimony  for  myself
Said  Jesus  unto  Peter,  11  Blessed  art
thou,  Simon  Baijoua,  for  flesh  and
blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,
but  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven;"
and  I  testify  to  you  this  day,  that
that  same  Gjd  has  revealed  unto  rae


that  these  things  are  true,  that  this
is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
that  this  people  represent  the  king-
dom of  God  which  Daniel  and  others
of  the  ancient  Prophets  said  should
be  established  upon  the  earth  in  the
latter-days.  That  is  the  testimony
which  I  have  to  offer  here  this  morn-
ing. If  I  stood  al  >ne  in  this  matter,
and  there  was  no  other  person  who
could  bear  the  same  testimony  per-
haps people  would  be  justified  in  dis-
believing me,  that  is,  if  I  gave  them
no  evidence  of  the  truth  of  my  words;
but  when  the  proof  is  positive  and
the  evidences  incontrovertible;  when
there  are  scores  of  thousands  of  peo-
ple gathered  from  as  well  as  scattered
through  the  nations  of  the  earth  who
can  rase  as  one  person  and  bear  this
testimony,  the  nations  of  the  earth
will  be  condemned  if  they  reject  it*

It  is  true  that  Joseph  Smith  was
an  unsupported  witness  in  some  re-
spects of  the  Gospel  which  he  had  to
reveal  unto  the  human  family.  He
came  forth  a  boy,  alone ;  his  testi-
mony7 was  given  to  the  world,  and
God,  in  his  wonderful  providences,
fulfilled  the  words  of  that  boy,  and
others  were  induced  to  believe  what  he
told  them.  He  told  the  people  that
if  they  would  obey  the  will  of  the
Father,  if  they  would  repent  of  their
sins,  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
them  and  have  hands  laid  upon  them
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
they  should  leceive  it,  and  it  should
be  a  witness  unto  the  n  that  his  words
were  true  and  faithful.

H*ve  the  words  of  Joseph  Smith
been  fulfilled  in  this  and  in  other  re-
spects? I  answer  yes.  He  bore
this  mission  unto  the  people,  and  it,
with  its  promises,  came  to  me,  and  I
obeyed  it,  doing  as  I  was  told  in  order
that  I  might  obtain  the  evidences
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Did  I  obtain
them  ?  Yes  I  did ;  and  here  is  a
congregation  before  me,  the  repre-


JOURNAL  OK


DISCOURSES,


gentatives  of  a  great  people,  who  can
bear  witness  with  me  this  day  that
the  words  of  Joseph  the  Prophet  were
true  and  faithful  to  this  generation*
Our  testimony  is  not  unsupported,
for  I  have  gone  forth  into  the  midst
of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  have
stood  before  strangers  and  have  said
unto  them — 44  If  you  desire  the  know-
ledge that  the  Prophets  who  were
with  Jesus  on  the  earth  possessed,  if
you  will  do  those  tilings  which  have
been  commanded  you  shall  know  of
the  doctrine  whether  I  speak  of  tny-
self,  or  of  God  who  gent  me."  I
have  borne  this  testimony  hundreds  of
times  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  be-
cause I  was  sent  forth  to  do  it,  and  I
had  a  testimony  that  it  was  my  mis-
sion to  testify  of  these  things.  What
has  been  the  result  of  the  Elders
going  to  the  nations  of  tl.#*  earth  and
bearing  this  testimony  ?  We  see  be-
fore us  a  mighty  people  gathered  in
these  mountains,  There  is  scarcely
an  adult  who  has  been  gathered  here
who  came  with  any  other  purpose
but  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
because  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy
Spirit  which  he  or  she  received
through  obedience  to  the  words  which
were  declared  unto  them.  If  any
have  gathered  here  with  any  other
purpose  they  are  not  in  this  Church,
or  if  they  are  they  will  not  remain  in
it  very  Jong.  This  people  have
gathered  here  by  scores  of  thousands,
can  not  those  who  nre  not  of  us  put
their  prejudices  to  one  side  for  a
moment  and  take  a  fair  and  impart iu I
view  of  the  circumstances  which  sur-
round us  ?  Can  not  the  world  look
upon  the  Latter-day  Saints  and  ask
themselves — "  Is  it  possible  for  men
to  make  these  promises,  and  yet  be
impostors  and  deceive  the  people  to
the  extent  they  haver"  Have  the
Elders  deceived  the  people?  It  looks
to  me  like  folly  in  the  extreme  for
people to  entertain  such  an  idea*


Have  we  deceived  the  people  ?  No
sirs,  we  have  not,  Were  those  words
false  which  were  uttered  by  the  Elders
when  they  called  upon  the  people  to
repent  ?  No.  The  people  verily  re-
ceived that  testimony  of  the  truth  of
this  work  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  G  host  which  was  promised  them
by  the  Elders,  and  that  is  the  reason
why  so  many  have  gathered  to  these
mountains.

But  the  majority  of  people  uow
are  like  the  Jews  when  they  arraigned
Jesus — they  want  a  miracle.  "  Then
did  they  ^pit  in  his  face  and  buffet  ted
him;  and  others  smote  him  with  the
palms  of  their  hands,  saying,  Pro-
phecy unto  us,  thou  Ciirist,  who  is  ho
that  smote  thee/'  That  is  exactly
the  same  spirit  that  prevails  now—
"  If  you  Latter-day  Saints  have  the
blessings  and  gifts  you  talk  of,  why
don't  you  rise  up  in  power  ?  Why
does  not  God  come  out  of  his  hiding
place  and  preserve  you  from  your
enemies  ?"  I  can  testify  to-day  that
he  has  done  so.  Prom  my  earliest
recollections  I  have  been  wandering
with  this  people. I  have  been  with

i  them  when  driven  before  their  ene-
mies, with  my  father  and  his  fam-
ily in  their  persecutions,  and  I
know,  as  1  know  that  I  live,  that

i  God  has  stretched  out  his  hand  and
preserved  this  people  when  nothing
but  his  providences  could  have  saved

'  them,

Who  are  they  who  smite  this  peo-
ple ?  Are  they  righteous  men,  men
who  are  seeking  to  benefit  the  hu-
man family  f  Are  they  men  who
are  turning  their  whole  attention  to
benefit  their  fellow-men,  or  building
up  principles  of  righteousness  and
truth,  to  sustain  the  poor,  and  to
gather  them  from  the  nations  of  the
earth  to  a  land  where  they  can
possess  those  comforts  and  blessing*
which  should  surround  the  sons  and
daughters  of  our  God  ? No,  they


SAINTS  ARE  LIVING  WITNESSES,  ETC.  1


203


do  not  busy  themselves  about  such
things  as  these,  they  have  business  on
hand,  which  they  think  is  more  im-
portant ;  they  have  the  Latter-day
Saint 3  to  persecute.  They  do  not
have  time  to  turn  their  attention,  nor
their  minds  to  such  trifles  as  bringing
the  poor  from  the  nations  of  the
earth  or  developing  the  resources  of
this  great  country.  They  have  no
time  for  this,  they  have  a  far  greater
work  on  hand,  opposing  the  progress
of  this  people  and  the  fulfillment
of  the  prophecies  of  men  uf  God
who  have  lived  upon  this  earth.
That  is  the  view  I  take  of  it  from
my  standpoint.  Of  course  I  do  not
expect  others,  outside  of  the  Church,
to  look  at  it  aa  I  do.  But  this  peo-
ple are  engaged  in  what  ?  First,  at
the  present  time,  in  defending  them*
selves,  trying  to  secure  their  lives
and  property  from  men  who  are
seeking  to  deprive  them  of  both;
they  ate  also  continuing  their  efforts
to  bring  the  downtrodden  of  Eu-
rope and  every  other  nation,  to  this
laud  of  America,  where  they  can
enjoy  freedom  and  religious  liberty,
and  have  a  home  and  not  he  servants
of  those  who  are  more  wealthy  than
themselves.  This  people  are  expend-
ing millions  of  dollars  to  gather  the
poor  from  the  nations  of  the  earth
that  they,  with  us,  may  enjoy  the
blessings  of  religious  liberty,  and  the
blessings  of  this  free  land.

Why  don't  these  men  who  are
persecuting  us,  and  all  the  time
telling  how  mean  and  contemptible
we  are  as  a  people  turn  their  atten-
tion, not  to  our  sins,  but  to  their
own  shortcomings,  and  pick  the
beam  out  of  their  own  eyes  before
attending  to  the  mote  in  ours,  and
then  try  and  do  something  to  amelio-
rate the  condition  of  the  human
family  ?  These  are  simply  my
views  on  this  subject,  and  I  would
to  God  that  every  man  in  this  great


nation  would  do  right  himself  and
not  seek  to  persecute  his  neighbors
because  he  thinks  they  are  doing
wrong !  A  man  might  do  a  thing
in  which,  according  to  his  con-
science, he  would  be  perfectly  jus-
tified, but  from  my  standpoint  it
would  be  very  wicked,  A  heathen
might  be  justified  in  doing  that
which  I  should  consider  a  great
crime.  Shall  I  go  to  work  and  per-
secute an  individual  that  does  not
see  exactly  as  I  see  ?  Should  I  be
justified  in  doing  this  ?  No,  If  I
see  a  person  in  the  wrong  I  am
justified  in  gfoing  to  him  and  try-
ing to  teach  him  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  which  I  find  contained
in  the  Bible,  and  which  God  has
revealed  to  the  human  family  for
their  salvation;  in  other  words,  I
should  be  justified  in  trying1  to  lead
him  in  what  I  believe  to  be  the  path
of  righteousness,  but  I  should  not
be  justified  in  trying  to  drive  him.

Is  this  the  course  that  is  being
pursued  with  us?  By  bo  means.
The  spirit  manifested  towards  us
continually  is — "  If  you  don't  do  as
we  say  we  will  force  you."  Nobody
comes  here  to  persuade  as,  their
object  is  to  compel  us  to  bow  to
their  wishes.  They  wish  to  make
us  forsake  that  which  we  revere
and  consider  holy,  simply  because
they  despise  it,  and  deride  it  at
something  that  ought  to  be  put
down  by  force.  It  is  not  a  Christian
spirit  that  induces  persecution,  not
at  all.  Why  not  take  the  exam-
ple of  Jesus,  whom  they  profess
to  worship  ?  If  this  people  are
wrong,  convince  them  of  their  error*
"  Oh"  say  they,  "  we  can't  do  it/*
It  is  like  the  King  of  Denmark,
Frederick  the  Seventh,  if  I  mistake
not.  The  Priests  complained  to  him
and  said  that  they  could  not  put  down
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  that  thej
were  proselyting  in  spite  of  all  they


204  JOURNAL  OF

could  do.  Said  the  King— "  Why
dont  you  take  the  Bible,  and  con-
found them  and  let  the  people  see
Iheir  errors  ?*  The  Priests  said —
"  We  have  tried  that,  but  have  not
succeeded,  they  have  more  arguments
in  the  Bible  than  we  have*  "  Well,"
said  the  King,  "I  think  yours  is  the
poorest  religion  of  the  two,  I  will  let
the  Latter  day  S  dnts  go  on,  and
shall  nut  interfere  with  them."  I
would  like  this  position  to  be  taken
by  those  in  this  nation  who  are  op-
posed to  us.  But  they  will  not  as-
sume this  position,  for  we  can  correct
them  with  the  Scriptures  of  divine
truth.  Why  do  they  not  use  the
word  of  God in their  opera lions


DISCOURSES,

against  us,  instead  of  the  carnal
weapons  which  they  happen  to  have
because  they  belong  to  a  certain
patty  ?  Why  not  imitate  the  ex-
ample of  Jesus  and  try  and  pprsuade
us  if  we  are  in  the  wrong,  and  put  us
in  the  ri^ht  We  desire  to  be  saved ;
it  is  salvation  we  hope  for.  It  is  the
desire  for  salvation  in  the  kingdom
of  God  that  prompts  me  to  say  these
things;  and  as  loner  as  God  shows  to
me  that  I  am  right,  as  Ions?  as  I  have
an  approving  conscience  before  Him
in  carrying  oat  the  doctrines  which  I
believe  in,  so  Ion lt,  with  the  help  of
(Jod,  will  I  advocate  them,  let  the
issue  be  what  it  may. A  men.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake

City,  Wednesday,  October  7,  1874.

(Repotted  by  David  W.  Evam.)


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  WICKED  BY  THE  FLOOD,  WISDOM  IN  GOD — PRIEST-
HOOD—TEMPLES— INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FBOM  GOD — THE  LORD  WILL
TAKE  CARE  OF  THE  SAINTS— ANGELS  OPERATING  WITH  MEN  IN  THE
WORK  OF  HUMAN  REDEMPTION.

I  am  happy  to  have  the  opportu-  thing  else  that  exists  at  the  present
city  of  meeting  with  the  brethren  time  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and
and  to  talk  over  the  affairs  pertain-  in  mauy  respects  it  differs  from
ing  to  the  kingdom  of  God  in  this  anything  that  ever  has  existed.  I
Conference.  We  are  engaged  in  a  do  nut  know  that  we  are  in  any  wise
work  in  which  all  of  us  are  inter-  responsible  for  this,  or  for  the  posi-
es ted,  individually  and  collectively,  tiou  in  which  we  find  ourselves.  The
It  is  a  work  that  differs  from  any- circumstances  with  which we  are


DESTRUCTION  OF

surrounded  are  not,  particularly  or
specially,  of  our  own  making,  nor
the  principles  in  which  we  believe.
We  have  an  abiding  faith,  as  we
heard  referred  to  this  morning,  iu  j
certain  principles  which  have  eraa-
nuted  froru  the  heavens ;  and  we  find
ourselves  on  the  earth  at  this  par-
ticular time,  in  this  peculiar  dispell
eation,  and  engaged  in  a  work  that  is  .
de[  emlent,  I  was  going  to  say,  alto-
gether upon  the  Almighty,  and  which
is  part  tttid  pucel  of  that  programme
which  existed  in  his  mind  before  the
world  rolled  into  exisrenee.  I

There  have  been  different  dispen-
sations existing  in  the  various  ages
of  time,  as  the  purposes  of  God  have
rolled  on  in  relation  to  this  earth ;
all  i)f  them,  mure  or  less,  partook
of  the  same  principles  that  have  been
revealed  unto  as,  that  is  so  far  as  the
Gospel  is  concerned,  but  all  of  them
mure  or  less  differing.  ;

The  first  command  given  to  man
w;b  to  be  fruitful,  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth ;  in  other  words,
an  earth  had  been  created,  and  it  was
necessary,  as  it  had  been  brought  into
exister.ee  and  man  placed  upon  it,
th  >t  his  seed  should  be  propagated,
that  there  might  he  bodies  prepared
fur  spirits  to  inhabit,  that  they
together  might  accomplish  certain
pnqjoses,  in  the  designs  of  God,  per-
taining to  the  creation  of  the  earth.

By  and  by  we  find  the  people  de-
parting from  the  principles  of  truth,
from  the  laws  of  the  Gospel,  repu-
diating the  fear  of  God,  grieving  his
Holy  Spirit  and  incurring  his  dis-
pleasure. Then  a  flood  came  and
the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  with
the  inception  of  a  very  few,  were
swept  from  it,  alter  the  Gospel
had  been  preached  to  all  who  then
lived  and  all  had  had  an  opportunity
to  believe  in  and  obey  it.  A  few
of  them  did  so  and  lived  iu  the  fear
of  God,  and,  according  to  the  revela-


THE  WICKED,  ETC,  205

tions  winch  we  have,  they  were  trans-
lated and  caught  up,  they  had  a  sepa-
rate existence  from  those  who  lived
upon  the  earth,  and  occupied  the
position  of  translated  beings  and  were
necessarily  governed  by  other  laws
than  the  denizens  of  the  earth.  This
was  one  peculiarity  of  the  dispensa-
tion before  the  flood. Then  cauie
the  flood,  which  many  people,  unac-
quainted with  things  as  they  existed
iu  the  bosom  of  God  and  with  his
purposes  and  designs,  consider  was  a
great  cruelty,  an  act  of  tyranny,
evincing  a  spirit  of  outrage  and  op-
pression upon  the  inhabitants  of  the
world. Sceptics  reason  iu  this  man-
ner sometimes,  the  only  reason  of
their  caviling  being  that  they  do  not
understand  God  or  his  laws  and  de-
signs in  relation  to  the  earth  and  the
inhabitants  that  live  upon  it,  and
being  ignorant  of  these  things  they
are  not  competent  judges  as  to  the
flrn ess  of  things  generally,  and  the
course  pursued  by  the  Almighty  in
relation  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  hence  they  anive  at  all  kinds
of  foolish  conclusions. The  fact  is
there  were  certain  ideas  connected
with  the  destruction  of  the  world  that
were good, proper and  merciful.
Mankind  had  committed  unto  them
certain  powers,  among  which  was  the
power  to  perpetuate  their  own  species,
of  which  they  could  not  according
to  the  laws  of  nature  be  deprived
while  living.  And  they  had  a  certain
agency  of  their  own,  which  they
could  act  upon,  and  the  people  who
were  destroyed  in  the  flood  had  de-
parted from  the  laws  of  God.  Man
has  a  dual  being,  not  only  a  body  or
mortal  tabernacle,  but  a  spirit,  and
that  spirit  existed  before  he  came
here;  and  if  men  before  the  flood
had  been  allowed  to  go  on  in  their
iniquities  and  if,  with  every  thought
and imagination  of  their  hearts,
which  were  all  unlawful  and  evil.


JUL  UNA L  Ui  lilSCOUKSES


they  bad  been  allowed  to  perpetuate
that  kind  of  existence,  of  course
God  would  have  had  very  little  to
do  with  the  operations  of  the  earth
and  the  inhabitants  thereof,  it  would
therefore  have  been  unjust  to  the
spirits  created  by  our  Far  her  in  the
eternal  worlds  to  force  them  to  come  ;
and  inhabit  the  degenerated  bodies
which  they  must  have  received  from
such  characters  as  the ,  generation
drowned  in  the  flood  ;  and  hence  God
took  away  their  agency  by  destroying
them  from  the  face  of  the  earth,
because  they  were  prostituting  th>ir
powers  to  an  improper  use  arid  not
only  injuring  themselves  by  defying
the  law  of  God,  Lnt  also  inflicting
an  evil  upon  unborn  generations  by
perverting  their  own  existence  and
by  their  powers  of  procreation  en-
tailing misery  upon  millions  of
spirits  that  had  a  just  right  to  look
for  protection  from  their  Father.
The  Almighty  therefore  took  this
awful  method  to  redress  this  aggra-
vated wrong  and  he  had  a  right  to
do  it.  Why,  our  stock  raisers  act
npon  that  principle  a  good  Heal.  I
was  talking  to  one  of  them  a  little  1
while  ago  who  had  a  large  flock  of
sheep,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had  ;
got  some  better  stock,  and  was  going
to  kill  off  the  poor  ones  in  order  that  ;
he  might  raise  only  good  stock  and  a
better  breed  than  he  then  had.  I
suppose  that  God  had  as  much  right  to
do  this  as  sheep  raisers  and  cattle
raibers  have,  and  thus  by  cutting  off
that  wicked  generation  from  the
earth  he  deprived  them  of  the  pri-
vilege of  propagating  their  own
species.  And  what  then  ?  Oh,  they
were  all  damned.  No,  they  were
not  quite,  yes  they  were  in  part  and
partly  not.  God  understands  all
these  things  and  manages  mn tiers
according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will,
and  hence  he  provided  a  way
whereby  the  people  who  were  thtn


drowned,  who  would  not  listen  to
God's  law  and  who  had  departed
entirely  from  the  precepts  of  Jeho-
vah, might  hereafter  have  a  chance
of  obeying  the  laws  of  life  and  salva-
tion. Well,  were  they  not  all  tee-
totally  doomed  to  go  and  be  roasted
in  flames  forever  and  ever.  Not
quite;  for  we  read  that  Jesus,  when
he  was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  was
quickened  in  the  spirit,  by  which  he
tvent,  and  preached  to  the  spirits  in
;  prison  that  sometime  were  disobedi-
ent in  the  days  of  Nosjh,  when  once
the  long-suffering  of  God  waited  upon
them  in  those  days.  Hence  we  sea
that  instead  of  being  eternally
damned,  Jesus  went  to  preach  the
Gospel  of  life  and  salvation  to  those
whom  God,  in  the  days  of  Noah,
swept  off  hy  the  flood,  in  order  that
he  might  introduce  another  state  of
things,  and  try  to  raise  np  a  people
who  would  listen  to  his  laws  and
obey  his  precepts.

The  Scriptures  say  that  Je-us  went
and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,
the  same  as  he  bad  preached  to  others
on  tho  e;irth.  What  did  he  preach?
Do  the  Scr  iptures  say  what  he  came
to  preach  ?  Yes,  they  say  "  he  came
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor,  to
bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  set  at
liberty  those  who  were  bound,  and  to
open  the  prison  doors  to  the  captive. **
That  is  what  he  came  to  do,  and  he
did  it. - ?v  rj  -

We  are  not  connected  with  a  some-
thing that  will  exirtt  only  fur  a  few
years,  some  of  the  peculiar  kWs  and
dogmas  of  men,  some  nice  theory  of
their  forming ;  the  principles  that
we  believe  in  reach  back  into  eter-
nity, they  originated  with  the  Gods
in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  they  reach
forward  to  the  eternities  that  are  te
come.  We  feel  that  we  are  opera-
ting with  God  in  connection  with
those  who  were,  with  those  who  are,
'  and  with  those  who  are  to  come.


i


DESTRUCTION  OF  THK  WICKKD,  FTC.


207


We  find  that  after  the  days  of
Noah  an  order  was  introduced  called
the  patriarchal  order,  in  which  every
man  managed  hie  own  family  affairs,
and  prominent  men  among  thern
were  kings  an  i  priests  unto  God,  and
officiated  in  what  is  known  among
ns  as  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of
God,  or  the  Priesthood  after  the1
Ord  r  of  Jlelchisedec*  Man  began
•pain  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  the  heads  of  families  be-
came their  kings  and  priests,  that  is,
the  fa tliers  of  their  own  people,  and
they  were  more  or  less  under  the
influence  and  guidance  of  the  Al-
mighty. We  read,  for  instance,  in
oar  revelations  pertaining  to  these
matters,  of  a  man  called  Melchizedee,
who  was  a  great  high  priest.  We
are  told  that  "  there  were  a  great
many  high  pries* s  in  his  day,  and
before  him  and  after  him  }*  and  these
men  had  communication  with  God,
and  were  taught  of  him  in  relation
to  their  general  proceedings,  and  ac-
knowledged the  hand  of  God  in  all
things  with  which  they  were  associ-
ated, Noah  and  bis  defendants,
for  a  length  of  time,  did  that  which
was  right  in  the  sit'ht  of  God  to  a
very  great  extent,  but  by  and  by
they  departed  from  his  law,  and
Abraham  was  raised  op  as  a  special
agent  in  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  to
disseminate  correct  principles  among
the  people,  and  as  a  medium  through
which  God  would  communicate  in-
tell  igeuce  and  blessings  to  the  human
family.  He  went  through  a  very
rigid  course  of  discipline,  and  was
tried  in  almost  every  possible  way,
until,  finally,  he  was  called  upon  to
offer  no  his  son;  aud  then,  when  lie
attempted  to  do  that,  and  the  Lord
had  fully  proved  him,  the  Lord  said  —
ul  know  that  Abraham  fears  me,
that  he  has  not  withheld  his  only
Bon  from  me,  and  I  know  that  he
will  command  his  children  after  him


to  fear  my  name."  After  God  had
tried  Abraham,  \w  took  him  on  to  a
mountain  and  said  unto  him — "  Lift
up  thine  eyes  eastward  and  west-
ward, and  southward  and  northward,
for  to  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee
will  I  give  this  land  ;  and  in  thee
and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  That  was
a  great  blessing,  and  it  placed  Abra-
ham in  a  most  prominent  aud  im-
portant position  before  God,  before
the  people,  and  before  the  world.
Now,  although  God  made  that  pro-
mise onto  Abraham,  yet  Stephen,
who  lived  some  two  thousand  years
afterwards,  said  that  "  God  gave  him
none  inheritance  in  that  land,  no  not
so  much  as  to  set  bis  foot  on,  yet  he
promised  that  he  would  give  it  to
him  and  to  his  seed  after  him/1
There  was  a  something  peculiar  about
all  these  men — being  in  possession
of  the  everlasting  Priesthood,  which
is  without  beginning  of  days  or  end
of  years,  they  me  isuied  things  with
the  eye  of  the  Almightly,  by  the
principle  of  faith,  by  the  knowledge
and  intuition  which  the  Sp  rit  of  God
gave  them,  and  the  revelations  which
it  imparted,  and  they  felt  like  one  of
old  who  said — "  When  a  man  dies
shall  he  live  again  ?  All  the  days
of  my  life  to  my  appointed  time  will
I  wait  until  the  change  come."  In-
spired by  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God,  in  possession  of  the  principles
of  revelation,  holding  the  keys  of
the  everlasting  Priesthood,  which
unlocked  ihe  mysteries  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  they  looked  forward
and  backward,  and  felt  that  they
were  a  p*rtof  the  great  programme
which  God  designed  to  accomplish
in  regard  to  the  earth.  It  was  not
for  the  immediate  possession  of  some
te  i  porary  good  ;  not  for  I  ho  gnsp-
ing  of  something  that  they  c  mid
hold  for  the  time  being  that  they
were  anxious;  but  they  were  alter


208  JOURNAL  OF

riches,  exaltations,  glory  and  bles-
sings thai  would  continue  44  while
life  or  thought  or  Ving  lasts  or  im-
mortality endure?/'

From  the  loins  of  Abraham  a
great  many  great  Prophet*,  seers,
rev  ela tors,  men  of  God,  kings,
princes  and  aotho  ities  descended;
and  they  raised  up  a  nation  that  was
powerful  in  its  d^y  and  generation.
But  they,  like  others,  finally  de-  1
parted  from  the  laws  of  God  and
from  the  principle*  of  eternal  truth,
and  then  the  power  of  the  Mclchisedec
Priesthood  was  withdrawn  from
them,  and  the  law  was  pdded  because
of  transgression,  and  although  they
became  a  nntnerous,  great,  wealthy,
wise  and  intelligent  people,  yet  they
lost  for  a  long  time  the  power,  in-
telligence, life  and  light  of  revela-
Hon  which  the  Gospel  imparts.

Then  came  the  time  when  Jesus
appeared  on  the  earth.  He  was  44  a
Iamb  slain  from  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world,"  and  he  came  to
accomplish  things  winch  had  been
planned  by  the  Almighty  before  the
world  was.  He  was  the  Reing  to
whom  the  anted iluvhtns,  and  Abra-
ham, and  L*aac  and  Jacob,  and  the  i
Prophets,  Patriarchs  and  those  who
were  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God
and  the  light  of  revelation  referred  I
to,  and  to  whom  they  looked  ;  to 1
him  pointed  all  their  sacrifices  and
the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  bulls
and  goats,  heifers,  lambs,  &c.  Je^us
introduced  the  Gospel,  and  if  the '
people  would  have  received  and
obeyed  the  principles  which  he 'aught,
the  kingdom  of  God  would  have  been
established,  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times  brought  in,  and  in
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  the  bap-
tisms for  the  dead  would  have  gone
on,  and  the  redemption  of  the  living
and  the  dead  would  have  proceeded.
But  the  people  could  not  receive  the
teachings  of  Jesus* Here  was  a  dis-


DISCOURSES.  '

pensation  di0erent  from  any  of  the

others.  •

There  was  an  Elias  to  come,  who
was  to  turn  the  hearts  ot  the  children
to  the  fathers,  and  the  hearts  of  the
fathers  to  the  children  ;  and  when  it
was  asked  Jtsus — "Art  thou  t f to
Elias  which  was  to  come,  nr  do  we
look  for  another  rn  it  was  told  them,  >
"This  is  he  if  ye  can  receive  it'*
But  they  miild  not,  and  consequently
they  beheaded  John  the  Baptist  and
crucified  Jesus,  and  it  was  declared
that  not  one  stone  of  their  magnifi-
cent Temple  should  be  left  upon
another  wit  hour  being  thrown  down,
which  was  literally  fulfilled,  and  the
ground  upon  wlveb  it  stood  wag
ploughed  over.  Jesus  told  his  dis-
ciples that  when  they  saw  44  Jerusa-
lem encompassed  about  with  armies
they  were  to  fhe  to  the  mountains/'
One  ot  the  Prophets,  in  speaking  of
the  idfiirs  that  were  then  to  take
placv,  s  id  that  a  certain  power
should  arise  which  should  make  war
with  and  prevail  against,  the  Saintf^
and  that  that  p  >wer  should  seek  to
change  the  times  and  the  laws,  and
that  they  should  be  given  into  his
hand,  for  a  time,  and  t  ines  and  the
dividing  of  limes.  Very  well,  these
things  bave  taken  place-

We  now  turn  our  attention  to  thia
Contiient,  and  find  that  Gnd  trans-
planted a  people  who  were  of  the  set  d
of  Abraham,  from  Palestine  to  this
continent.  Here  the}  passed  through-
all  kinds  of  vicissitudes  and  changes,
sometimes  abounding  in  Iniquity  and
vice,  at  o'her  times  full  of  virtue;
sometimes  they  acknowledged  the
hand  of  God,  and  at  other  times  diar
regat  ded  ii  ;  sometimes  they  were
chastened  by  the  Almighty,  and  m
other  times  permitted  to  go  on  in
their  iniquities.  At  one  time  there
was  a  people  on  this  continent  who
lived  for  ueaily  two  hundred  years  in
the  fear  of  Gud,  under  the  direction


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  WICKED,  ETC,


209


of  his  spirit,  governed  by  the  laws
of  the  Gospel,  and  they  had  all  things
common  among  them,  and  we  are
informed  that  there  never  was  a  more
united,  happy  and  prosperous  people
upon  the  face  of  the  tarth.

These  are  some  of  the  changes  that
have  taken  place  here.  And  now,  we
are  living  in  another  age  and  under
other  circumstances.  The  world  is
waxing  old  ;  myriads  of  people  have
lived  upon  it,  generation  after  gen-
eration have  come  and  gone,  iorae
good,  some  bad,  some  very  wicked,
some  very  righteous ;  some  pure  and
holy,  others  to  the  contrary,  embrac-
ing every  kind,  and  all  the  peculiar
phases  that  have  been  developed  by
the  human  family.  They  have  come
into  existence  and  they  have  died,
and  what  of  them  r  What  of  the
good  and  what  of  the  bad?  What
of  the  righteous  and  what  of  the
unrighteous?  What  of  their  stand-
ing before  God,  and  what  of  the
nations  that  have  existed,  that  do
exist  and  that  will  exist  ?  These
are  things,  which,  as  intelligent,
immortal  beings,  demand  our  con-
sideration. And  what  of  us  as  part
of  them  ?  need  to  reflect,  and

it  is  proper  that  we  should  under*
stand  something  in  relation  to  these
things.  We  have  onr  part  to  per-
form. We  find  ourselves  in  the
world  in  thin  day  and  age,  which  is
that  which  was  spoken  of  by  Paul
• — **  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness
of  times,  wh^n  God  would  gather
together  all  things  in  one,  whether
they  be  things  in  the  heavens  or
things  on  the  earth."  There  is
something  very  remarkable,  very
peculiar  in  that  expression.  What
the  gathering  is  in  the  heavens  it
is  not  for  us  to  say  at  the  present
time ;  what  the  gathering  is  on  the
earth  we  have  some  little  idea  of
from  the  things  with  which  we  are
associated. There  is  a  peculiarity

No.  14.


about  it  As  I  said  before,  we  find
ourselves  living  in  this  day,  and  we
are  called  upon  to  perform  a  certain
work  in  connect  ion  with  the  eco-
nomy and  designs  of  God  pertaining
to  the  earth  we  live  on,  pertaining  to
ourselves,  to  our  progenitors  and  to
the  whole  human  family  that  have
existed  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.
We  are  here  to  do  a  certain  work
which  God  has  set  ua  to  do,  and,  as
I  have  said,  we  have  had  very  little
to  do  in  bringing  about  the  matter.
We  did  not  originate  it,  \Ve  talk
sometimes  about  Joseph  Smith,  he
did  not  originate  it.  He  told  us
about  a  greats  many  things  that  we
tnlk  about,  and  unfolded  many  prin-
ciples unto  us.  But  how  did  he  know
thum  ?  God  called  htm  and  set  him
apart  as  he  called  Noah  in  his  day,
and  as  he  called  Enoch,  Abraham  and
Moses  in  their  day,  and  as  he  called
the  Prophets  and  Jesus  in  their
day,  as  he  called  Nephi,  Lehi,  Mor-
oni and  Alma  in  their  day  upon
this  continent  He  has  called  us,
and  has  introduced  to  our  view  cer-
tain principles,  and  we  have  been
learning  these  princples  gradually.
The  first  thing  was  to  get  biptized,
a  very  simple  affair,  a  very  little
thing,  nevertheless  it  was  an  ordi-
nance of  God,  he  appointed  it,  and
we  went  and  were  baptized.  Then
we  had  hands  laid  upon  us  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
we  partook  more  or  less  of  its  influ-
ence, according  to  oir  faithfulness
and  diligence  in  keeping  the  com-
mandments of  God.

We  had  not  anything  to  do  with
originating  this  work ;  neither  had
Joseph  Smith,  neither  had  Oliver
Cowdery,  nor  Brigham  Young,  nor
auy  of  the  Twelve,  nor  the  first
Council,  nor  the  Bishops,  nor  auy
other  m;m  living.  God  has  his  work
to  perform,  and  at  the  proper  time
and  in  his  own  way  he  will  fulfill  his

ToL  XVH.


210  JOURNAL  OF

own  purposes  and  bnild  np  his  king-
dom. He  commenced  it  at  his  own
time,  and  he  called  Joseph  Smith
and  gave  him  revelation  He  told
him  about  the  ancient  history  of  the
people  of  this  continent  and  enabled
him  to  translate  it,  he  gave  him  a  key
to  all  these  things.  He  could  not
have  done  it  without  any  more  than
you  or  I  could.  He  was  indebted  to
God,  just  as  much  as  you  and  I  are,
and  so  were  his  brethren  who  weie
with  him.  Joseph  Smith  had  many
revelations,  but  who  gave  them  to
him,  by  what  spirit  and  intelligence
were  they  unfolded  and  communi-
cated to  his  mind  ?  God  revealed
them  to  hinf,  he  obeyed  the  behests
of  Jehovah.  When  God  called  him
and  act  him  apart  he  was  obedient,
just  the  same  as  you  and  I  were.
When  the  Elders  of  Israel  came  forth
to  preach  the  everlasting  Gospel  we
obeyed  it  and,  through  obedience,  we
obtained  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that
brought  us  into  the  position  which
we  occupy  at ttre  present  time.

And  now  whom  the  gathering,  who
understood  anything  about  it  ?  The
ancient  Prtfpliets  prophesied  about
it,  but  what  did  we  know  about  it,
or  what  do  the  world  to  day  know
about  it  ?  Nothing,  only  as  it  has
been  revealed.  If  God  had  not
revealed  it  we  should  have  been  as
ignorant  as  the  rest  of  mankind  are.
And  so  we  should  about  our  seal  in  gs,
and  the  eovenauts  that  man  and  wo-
men make  with  one  another,  that  the
fools  around  us  do  not  comprehend ;
they  think  we  are  fools,  but  we  know
they  are ;  that  is  the  difference  be-
tween ui.  We  know  they  are  igno-
rant, brutish,  foolish  and  know  not
God  nor  his  laws,  nor  the  principles
of  truth;  but  we  know  something
about  these  things,  because  God  has
revealed  them  to  us.

We  heard  this  morning  that  this
was  a  time  in  which  to  build  Tera-


DISCOURSES.

pies,  and  you  know  that  we  are
now  engaged  in  a  work  of  that
kind. Why  are  we  thus  engaged  ?
Is  it  for  our  sakes  only  ? God  for-
bid. The  Gospel  that  we  preach  is
not  for  ourselves  only. We  have
not  preached  it  these  many  years
that  we  might  make  money  by  it,
I  have  traveled  a  great  many  thou-
sands of  miles  to  preach  this  Gospel
without  purse  and  without  scrip,  and
I  see  many  men  around  and  before
me  who  have  done  the  same  thing*
Was  it  for  ourselves  ? No.  Was
it  because  it  was  pleasant  ?  No,
but  God  had  revealed  certain  princi-
ples to  us  pertaining  to  the  salvation
of  the  world  in  which  we  live ;  he
had  committed  a  dispensation  of  the
Gaspel  to  us,  and  it  was  woe  unto
us  if  we  preached  not  that  Gospel,
whether  we  liked  it  or  not.  But
we  did  like  it,  and  we  went  forth  in
the  name  of  Israel's  God,  and  God
went  with  us  and  sanctioned  our
testimony  by  his  Spirit,  and  by  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost, We  could
not  have  done  these  things  or  I  will
acknowledge  that  I  could  not,  neither
could  any  of  my  brethren,  unless
God  had  been  with  us,  we  had  not
sufficient  faith  and  intelligence;  but
I  God  imparted  his  Spirit,  bis  intelli-
gence and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
,  to  th«  Elders  of  Israel,  and  they
went  forth bearing  precious  seed,
the  seed  of  eternal  life,  and  they
cams  again  rejoicing  and  bringing
their  sheaves  with  them,  and  here
they  are  gathered  into  the  garner.
What  for  ? For  ourselves  ?  No,
we  are,  or  ought  to  be  co- workers
with  God  in  the  accomplishment  of
,  his  purposes  in  relation  to  the  world
!  in  which  we  live,  and  people  that
have  lived  before  us,  and  those  that
shall  come  after  us. The  principles
which  we  are  in  possession  of  ema-
nated from  God. The  Priesthood
which  God  has  revealed  em  ana  tod


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  WICKED,  ETC.


and  originated  with  the  Gods  in  the
eternal  worlds ;  it  is  the  principle  by
which  they  are  governed  and  by
which  God  governs  all  tilings  which
exist,  and  we,  as  the  servants  of  God,
acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  all
these  things.  Can  I  preach,  do  I
have  any  intelligence  ?  God  im-
parted it.  Can  my  brethren  preach  ?
have  they  intelligence  ?  God  im-
parted it.  Did  Joseph  Smith  or
Brig  ham  Young  have  intelligence  ?
God  imparted  it.  Have  we  been
delivered  at  various  times,  and  has
the  hand  of  God  been  manifested
in  our  behalf  ?  Yes,  or  we  conld
not  have  been  here  to-day,  the
powers  of  darkness  would  have
prevailed  against  us,  the  enemies  of
Zion  would  hare  put  their  feet  upon
our  necks,  and  would  have  trample' 1
ua  to  the  dust  of  death  long  ago.
We  talk  about  the  intelligence  that
has  been  manifested  in  connection
with  this  work.  Where  did  it  come
from  ?  It  came  from  God.  As  you
heard  this  morning,  God,  in  answer
to  the  prayers  of  thousands,  has  in-
spired his  servants  and  has  given
them  intelligence  to  carry  on  his
work,  and  it  has  been  carried  on
under  the  influence,  guidance  and
direction  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  With-
out that  none  of  us  could  have  done
anything  more  than  the  rest  of  man-
kind. Who  led  us?  God,  Who
has  sustained  ua  here  ?  God,  and
who  will  continue  to  sustain  us  ?
The  Almighty.  These  fools  who
think  they  can  trample  under  foot
the  servants  of  God,  and  overthrow
the  kingdom  of  God  are  reckoning
without  their  host,  they  are  pushing
against  the  buckler  of  the  Great
Jehovah,  and  they  will  find  that  he
will  put  a  hook  into  their  nose  and
lead  them  in  a  path  they  know  not
of,  Israel  will  rise  and  shine,  and
the  power  of  God  will  rest  upon  his
people,  and  the  work  that  he  has


commenced  will  roll  forth  "  until  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his
Christ,  and  he  shall  rule  for  ever
and  ever.'*  The  purposes  of  God
are  not  going  to  be  thwarted  by
the  folly,  vanity  and  ignorance  of
men;  and  as  we  had  very  little  to  do
with  introducing  these  things,  we
have  really  very  little  to  do  with
carrying  them  on.  Somebody  wag
speaking  this  morning,  in  reference
to  certain  men  who  thought  that,  if
they  left  the  Church,  the  work  would
not  go  on ;  that  is  perfectly  ridicu-
lous. There  are  certain  things  that
have  to  be  accomplished  in  the  eco-
nomy of  God,  and  no  man  or  com-
bination of  men  oan  stop  them,  no
influence  that  ,  he  world  can  exert  can
hinder  them,  for  God  is  at  the  helm,
and  he  will  roll  forth  his  own  work.
Hear  it,  you  men  of  the  world,  yoa
can  not  go  further  than  God  will  let
you,  any  more  than  the  Latter-day
Saints  can.  It  is  in  God's  work  that
we  are  engaged.  There  is  nothing
really  selfish  about  our  operations
when  we  come  right  down  to  the
bottom  of  the  work ;  for  we  are  all
engaged  with  God,  and  with  the
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and
with  the  Priesthood  that  have  existed
before  us,  and  with  the  intelligences
that  surround  the  throne  of  God ;
with  all  these  intelligences  wo  are
united  in  the  grand  work  of  rolling
forth  the  designs  and  purposes  of
God.  You  do  not  have  the  Latter-
day  Saints  only  to  fight  against,  but
you  have  to  tight  all  the  just  and
good  who  hare  lived  and  died  on  the
earth,  and  who  live  again ;  and  be-
sides these  you  have  to  fight  with
God  and  his  angcli  and  tho  intelli-
gences who  surround  his  throne.

As  Latter-day  Saints,  we  are  some-
times apt  to  think  that  we  must  look
after  ourselves  individually.  We
are  a  good  deal  like  the  man  who,


212  JOURNAL  OF

when  praying,  said — "  God  bless  me
and  my  wife,  my  son  John  and  his
wife,  us  four  and  no  more,  amen."
There  was  no  philanthrophy,  benevo-
lence or  kind  feeling  towards  the
rest  of  naaukind  there,  and  too  many
of  us  feel  a  good  deal  in  the  same
way.  As  Latter-day  Saints  we  oayhfc
to  feel — and  when  we  feel  right  we
si i all  feel — that  we  are  the  represen-
tatives of  Gad  upon  the  earth,  that
wc  are  engaged  in  building  up  his
kingdom;  that  we  are  living  in  an
atje  when  God  designs  to  accom-
plish certain  purposes,  and  we  are
desirous  of  co-operating  with  him  i
in  Ihnt  labor,  ami  it  is  our  mission
to  help  to  save  the  living,  to  redeem
the  dead  and  to  Imwj;  to  pass  the
things  spoken  of  by  the  Prophets.
Tli is  is  the  position  that  we  occupy,
and  a  great  many  things  have  yet  to
be  introduced  before  these  things  can
b  >  accomplished,  I
We  are  commencing  to  build  Tem-
ples, and  hence,  as  I  said  before,  onr
dispensation  differs  from  others  which
have  preceded  it.  It  is  kind  of  a
time  for  settling  up  accounts.  You
know  when  a  man  goes  to  work  on
Monday,  Tuesday,Wedneaday,  Thurs-
day and  Friday,  he  keeps  account  of
what  he  does,  and  wben  Saturday
comes  i|  is  a  kind  of  settling-tip  day.
It  is  so  with  us,  it  is  so  with  the
world,  our  day  is  a  kind  of  settling- 1
up  day.  The  Elders  have  been  forth
aud  gathered  together  a  few  of  the
people  to  wiiom  they  have  preached  ;
others  are  gathering,  and  now  we,  at
home  here,  are  engaged  in  building
Temples  ?  What  tor,  for  ourselves  ?
Yes.  For  somebody  else  ?  Yes,
For  our  friends  who  have  lived  ?  Yes.
For  other  people's  friends  whe  have
lived  ?  Yes,  and  to  feel  after  all
nations  who  have  lived,  for  we  are
interested  in  the  welfare  of  all  the
peoples  who  have  ever  existed  on  this  j
earth,  and  like  God,  we  are  feeling


DISCOURSES*

after  them  with  a  fatherly,  kind,
generous  and  philanthropic  feeling.
That  is  why  we  are  building  our
Temples,  that  is  why  men  are  called
upon  to  labor  upon  these  Temples,
for  wo  desire  to  enter  therein  and  to
officiate  and  administer  for  the  living
and  the  dead.

"  Well,  but  it  takes  a  little  money."
Oh,  does  it  ? Never  mind,  the  gold
and  the  silver  are  the  Lord's,  the
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  are  his,  and
we  shall  get  a  little  of  his  gold  and
silver,  and  in  using  it  in  building
temples  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  we
are  taken  in  to  partnership  with  him,  we
unite  with  God,  and  with  the  angels,
and  with  the  spirits  of  just  men  made
perfect,  with  the  priesthood  that  ex-
isted anciently  aud  with  the  Gods.
We  all  unite  together  for  the  accom-
plishment of  God's  purposes,  and  we
will feel  after  the Inhabitants  of
the  earth. If  people are  foolish
around  us  we  cannot  help  that ;  let
them  go  on  and  exhibit  their  folly,
God  will  take  care  of  us,  he  is  as
much  interested  about  us  as  we  are,
and  a  good  deal  more,  and  he  is  as
much  concerned about  the  rolling
forth  of  this  work  as  we  are,  and  a
good  deal  more*  The  ancient  Nephites
who  lived  on  the  earth,  those  men  of
God  who, through faith,  wrought
righteousness,  accomplished  a  good
work  and  obtained  exaltation,  are  as
much  interested  in  the  welfare  of
their  descendants  as  we  are,  and  a
good  deal  more ;  and  Abraham,  laaac
and  Jacob,  and  those  ancient  men  of
God  who  once  lived  on  the  earth,  and
who  yet  live,  are  as  much  interested
in  the  accomplishment  of  God's  pur-
poses as  we  are,  and  a  good  deal  more.
Well,  then,  what  have  we  to  do?
Why  to  fulfill  the  duties  devolving
upon  us  as  they  come  along  day  by
day,  and  to  introduce  every  principle
that  is  calculated  to  save  the  living
and  redeem  the  dead. We  are  not


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  WICKED ,  ETC,


313


alone  in  these  things,  others  are
operating  with  us,  I  mean  all  the  men
of  God  who  ever  lived,  and  they  are
as  much  interested  as  *ve  are,  and  a
good  deal  more,  for  they  know  more,
and  "  they  without  us  cannot  be  made
perfect1'  neither  can  we  be  perfected
without  them,  We  are  building
temples  for  them  and  for  their
posterity,  and  wo  are  going  to  operate
in  these  temples,  as  we  have  done  here-
tofore, for  their  welfare  and  for  the
welfare  of  their  posterity.  And  then
they  are  operating  for  us  behind  the
vail  with  God  and  the  intelligences
which  surround  his  throne;  and  there
is  a  combination  of  earthly  beings
and  of  heavenly  beings,  all  under  the
influence  of  the  same  priesthood,
which  is  an  everlasting  priesthood,
and  whose  administrations  are  effec-
tive in  time  and  in  eternity.  We  are
all  operating  together,  to  bring  about
the  same  things  and  to  accomplish
the  name  purposes.

Well  then,  what  shall  we  do  ?  We
will  build  the  temples.  And  don't
yon  think  we  shall  feel  a  little  better
while  we  are  doing  it?  1  think  we
shall,  for  while  we  are  so  doing  we
shall  have  the  approbation  of  God  our
XAtv-enly  Father,  and  of  all  good  men
who  have  *  vor  liTed,and  we  may  need
this  by  and  uy  *  hen  we  get  through
this  world.  These  Gentiles  do  not
need  anything  of  this  ki^  !.  they  are
all  going  to  heaven  anyhow ;  ozt  we
want  to  make  friends  of  the  mammun
of  unrighteousness  that  when  we  fail
they  may  receive  us  into  everlasting
habitations.  I  want  friends  behind
the  vaiL  I  want  to  be  the  friend  of
God  and  God  to  be  my  friend  ;  I  want
to  help  to  roll  forth  the  Kingdom  of
God  and  to  build  up  the  Zion  of  the
Most  High,  and  I  want  to  see  my
brethren  engaged  in  the  same  work,
and  we  will  do  it.  In  the  name  of
Israel's  God  we  will  do  it

We  talk  about  the  Order  sometimes,


well,  we  will  do  that  too.  What,
would  you  ?  Yes,  to  be  sure  I  would,
or  anything  else  that  God  wants  of
ma.  I  am  on  hand,  that  is  my  feel-
ing about  these  things.  Well  but,  is
there  not  a  good  many  weaknesses  to
see  ?  I  think  there  is,  don't  you
think  there  is  about  yon?  Just  ex-
amine yourselves  and  then  answer  the
question  whether  you  have  not  a  ^ood
many  weaknesses.  I  think  there  are
a  great  many  things  among  us  that
we  ought  to  be  ashamed  of.  We  are
covetous  grasping  and  grinding;
there  is  not  enough  human  sympa-
thy, brotherhood  and  kindly  feeling
among  us.  Every  man  in  Zion  ought
to  feel  that  in  every  other  he  has  a
brother  and  a  friend,  and  not  a
ravenous  character  who  would  grasp
everything  that  he  has  and  grind  him
to  the  dust  of  the  earth.  I  want
liberality,  generosity,  kindness  and
the  love  of  God  within  us,  and  flowing
around  us  like  wells  of  water  spring-
ing up  unto  everlasting  life.  These
are  the  principles  by  which  we  ought
to  be  actuated  and  governed.  Let  the
potsherds  of  the  earth  strive  with  the
potsherds  of  the  earth,  God  will  take
care  of  his  own  a  flairs  and  manage
them  his  own  way.  Zion  is  onward,
her  progress  can  not  and  will  not  be
retarded,  I  will  prophesy  it  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God.  It  is  onward,
onward,  onward,  until  the  purposes
of  God  shall  be  accomplished,  until
the  towers  of  Zion  shall  arise,  until
her  temples  shall  be  built,  until  th«
living  shall  be  saved,  until  the  dead
shall  be  redeemed,  and  until  "th*
knowledge  of  God  shall  cover  the
earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,"
Let  us,  then,  cleave  to  righteous-
ness and  truth,  lay  aside  our  folly,
vanity  and  nonsense,  our  egotism,
ignorance  audcovetousnessaud  every-
thir^  that  is  wicked,  sinful,  narrow
and  contracted,  and  let  us  feel  that
we  are  servants  of  God,  engaged  in


214


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


rolling  forth  his  kingdom  and  accom-  |  May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful,  in
plishing  his  purposes  upon  the  earth. the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  Semi-Anni- al  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in-  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lakb

City,  Wednesday,  October  7?  1874,


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evanc.)

GOD'S  ANCIENT  PEOPLE  POLYGAMISTS— MARRIAGE  RELATIONS  ARE  TO
CONTINUE  FOREVER — NO  POWER  li  IN  DING  IN  MARRIAGE  BUT  THAT
OF  THE  HOLY  ERIKSTHOOD  POSSESSED  BY  THE  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS.


1  have  been  requested,  this  after-
noon, to  preach  upon  the  subject  of
marriage.  It  is  a  subject  which  has
been  often  laid  before  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  it  is  certainly  one  of  great
importance  to  the  Saints  as  well  as  to
the  Inhabitants  of  the  earth,  fur  I
presume  that  no  person,  who  believes
in  divine  revelation,  will  pretend  to
say  that  marriage  is  not  a  divine
institution;  andif thisbethecasetit is
owe  which  affects  all  the  human  family.

I  will  select  a  passage  of  scripture
in  relation  to  this  divine  institution
as  it  existed  in  the  days  of  Moses,
In  select  in  ir,  however,  this  passage,  I
do  not  wish  the  congregation  to  sup-
pose that  we  are  under  the  law  of
Moses  particularly.  There  are  many
great  principles  inculcated  in  that
law  which  the  Lord  never  did  intend
to  come  to  an  end  or  be  done  away —
eternal  principles,  moral  principles,
then  there  are  other*?  that  were  done
a  way  at  the  coming  of  our  Savior,  he
having  fulfilled  the  law. Because  we


find  certain  declarations,  contained  in
the  law  given  to  Muses,  that  does  not
prove  that  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
under  that  law ;  that  grime  God  thit
gave  the  law  of  Moses — the  being
that  we  worship — is  just  as  capable
of  giving  laws  in  our  day  as  in  Moses*
day ;  ami  if  he  sees  proper  to  alter
the  code  given  to  Moses,  and  to  give
something  varying  from  it,  we  have
no  right  to  say  that  be  shall  not  do
so.  Therefore,  in  selecting  the  pas-
sage which  I  am  about  to  read,  it  is
merely  to  show  what  God  did  w
ancient  times,  and  that  he  may  do
something  similar  in  modern  times.

In  the  21st  chapter  of  Exodus,
speaking  of  a  man  who  already  had
one  wife,  J  loses,  says — "  If  he  take
him  another  wife,  her  food,  her
raiment  and  her  duty  of  marriage
shall  he  not  diminish.*'  It  will  be
recollected  that  this  law  was  gi  ven  to
a  polygamic  nation.  When  I  speak  of
a  polygamic  nation,  I  mean  a  nation
that  practised  both  plural  and  single


god's  ancient  people  polygamists,  etc.


215


marrisge,  and  believed  one  form  to  be
just  as  sacred  as  the  other.  Their
progenitors  or  ancestors  were  poly-
gamists ;  and  they  were  considered
patterns  for  all  future  generations.
Their  piety,  holiness,  purity  of  heart,
their  great  faith  in  God,  their  com-
munion with  him,  the  great  blessings
to  which  they  attained,  the  visions
that  were  made  manifest  to  them,  the
conversation  that  God  himself,  as  well
as  his  angels,  had  witjb  them,  entitled
them  to  be  ealled  the  friends  of  God,
not  only  in  their  day,  but  they  were
considered  by  all  future  generations
to  be  his  friends,  Thev  were  not
only  examples  to  the  Jew:;  h  nation,
but  in  their  seed,  the  seed  cf  these
polygamists,  all  the  nations  and
kingdoms  of  the  earth  were  to  be
blessed,

I  hope  that  pious  Christians  in  this
congregation  will  not  find  fault  this
afternoon  with  their  Bible,  and  with
the  Prophets  and  inspired  mtn  who
wrote  it.  I  hope  that  they  will  not
Cud  fault  with  God  for  selecting
polygamists  to  be  his  friends.  I  hope
that  they  will  not  find  fault  with  Jesus
because  he  said,  some  two  thousand
years  or  upwards  after  the  days  of
these  polygtmists,  that  they  were  in
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  were  not
condemned  because  of  polygamy.
Jesus  says,  speaking  of  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob — "Many  shall  come
from  tim  cast  and  from  tue  west,  from
the  north  and  from  the  south,  and
shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God/*
Do  not  find  fault  with  Jesus,  you
Christians,  because  he  has  these  poly-
gamists  in  his  kingdom,  and  oecause
he  has  said  that  the  Gentiles  will  be
blessed  through  the  seed  of  these
polygnmisrs ;  neither  find  fault  with
him  because  he  has  tnken  these  poly-
gauiists  into  his?  kingdom,  and  that
many  will  come  from  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth  and  have  the  privilege  ot


sitting  down  with  them  therein.

Jacob  married  four  wives,  and  may
be  considered  the  founder  of  that
trreat  nation  of  polyga mists.  He  set
the  example  before  them.  His  twelve
sons,  who  were  the  progenitors  of  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  were  the
children  of  the  four  wives  of  the
prophet  or  patriarch  Jacob.  So
sacred  did  the  Lord  hold  these  poly-
gamists that  he  said,  many  hundred
years  after  their  death — "  I  am  the
God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac
and  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  this  shall
be  my  memorial  unto  all  generations/1
Now,  Christians,  do  not  find  fault  if
Gad  chose  these  polygamists  and,  at
the  same  time,  wished  to  make  them
a  sample,  a  memorial  to  all  genera-
tions, Christians  as  well  as  Jews.

Several  hundred  years  after  God
raised  up  these,  his  friends,  and
founded  or  began  to  found  the  twelva
trit 'es  of  Israel,  ho  saw  proper  to  raise
up  a  mighty  man  caller!  Moses  to
deliver  thu  children  of  Israel  from
the  bondage  in  which  they  had  been
oppressed  and  afflicted  by  the  Egyp-
tian nation.  So  great  had  this
affliction  become  that  the  King  of
Egypt  issued  a  decree  commanding
the  Israeli  tish  mid  wives  to  put  to
death  all  the  male  children,  born
among  the  Israelites.  This  murder-
ous law  was  carried  out.  This  was
about  eighty  years  before  Moses  was
sent  down  from  the  land  of  Midiam
to  deliver  the  children  of  Israel  from
this  cruel  bondage.  How  long  this
great  affliction  of  putting  to  death  the
male  children  existe.1,  is  not  given  in
the  Bible;  but  it  seems  to  have
waxed  worse  and  worse  during  ths
following  eighty  years,  after  which
Moses  was  sent  to  deliver  them.  We
may  reasonably  suppose  that  the
oppressive  hand  of  Pharoah  was  not
altogether  ease  !  up,  but  continued  on
for  scores  of  years,  destroying  many
of  the  male  ciiilJren,  making  a  great


216


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


surplus  of  females  in  that  nation*
A  great  multitude  of  females  over  i
and  above  that  of  males,  will  account
for  the  peculiar  passage  of  Scripture
to  which  I  will  now  refer  you.  It
will  be  foucd  in  the  3rd  chapter  of
Numbers,  I  have  not  time  to  turn
to  it  and  read  it,  but  1  will  quote  you
the  substance  thereof  Hoses  and
Aaron  were  commanded  to  number
all  the  males  in  Israel  from  a  mouth
old  and  upward  that  were  called  the  j
firstborn  among  the  various  tribes.
Now  the  firstborn  does  not  mean  the
oldest  male  child  of  the  first  wife,  fur
sometimes  the  first  wife  hits  no  child-
ren, but  it  means  the  first  born  son
that  is  born  to  the  father  whether  by  J
the  first  wife,  or  second,  or  third,  or
any  number  of  wives  that  he  may
have ;  the  term  firstborn  pertains  to
the  first  male  child  that  is  born  to  the
father.  So  it  was  accounted  to
Jacob's  family  of  twelve  sons.
Reuben  only  was  called  the  first-
uorn  of  Israel  until  he  lost  his  birth-  I
right,  through  transgression,  which,
wo  are  told  in  the  5lh  chapter  of  first
Chronicles,  was  taken  from  him  and
given  to  one  of  the  sons  of  Joseph.
But  so  far  as  age  or  birth  was  cou-  :
cerced,  Reuben  was  the  firstborn ;
and  had  it  not  been  tor  his  transgress-
ion, he  would  have  inherited  a  double
portion  of  his  father's  substance,  for
that  was  the  law  in  ancient  times.

Now  how  many  of  the  firstborn
could  bo  found  in  the  midst  of  Israel  ?
TVe  are  told  that  there  were  twenty-
two  thousand  two  hundred  and
seventy-three  firstborn  males  among
the  eleven  tribes:  the  tribe  of  Levi
was  not  reckoned  at  that  time,  but
all  the  male  members  of  the  tribe  of
Levi,  from  a  month  old  and  upwards
was  twenty- two  thousand  souls.  Now
if  the  tribe  of  Levi  numbered  in
proportion  to  the  other  eleven  tribes,
the  number  of  firstborn  males  in  all
the twelve tribes  would  probably  5


amount  to  between  twenty- four  and
twenty -five  thousand  souls,  it  could
not  have  run  over  that.  There  might
have  been  some  of  the  firstborn  who
were  dead,  which  would  make  a  few
more  families :  then  there  might
have  been  other  families  who  never
hud  any  male  children,  which  would
increase  the  families  still  more.
Supposing  then,  in  order  to  give  all
the  advantages  possible,  and  to  make
as  many  lam i lies  as  we  possibly  can
cousisti-ntly,  that  we  say,  in*teaJ  of
twenty-five  thousand  firstborn  in  the
midst  of  all  Israel,  that  there  were
thirty  thousand ;  that  is  allowing  for
all  these  contingencies  I  have  named,
where  families  have  no  males  and
those  families  that  have  male  children
under  a  month  old  which  were  not
reckoned,  and  those  families  which
might  have  had  firstborn  mal<*  clt;.  *-
ren  who  died  and  the  number  might
possibly  be  increased  to  foar  or  five
thousand  more,  making  the  total
number  of  families  about  thirty-
thousand.

Thus  we  see  that  the  number  of
firstborn  males  from  a  month  old  or
upwards  give  us  a  clue  to  the  number
of  families;  we  may  not  be  able  to
determine  the  number  exactly,  but
these  data  will  enable  us  to  approxi-
mate very  closely.  It  is  generally
admitted,  that  Israel,  at  that  time,
numbered  twenty-five  hundred  thou-
sand souls.  There  might  have  been
a  variation  from  this  of  a  few  thou-
sand souls,  but  according  to  the
Scriptural  and  all  other  evidences
that  can  be  gleaned,  the  number
above  referred  to  is  about  the  number
of  souls  that  existed  in  Israel  at  that
time.  Among  that  twenty* five  bun-
red  thousand  souls  then,  there  were
thirty-tbou*and  families.  How  many
were  there  in  a  family?  All  that
you  have  to  do  to  tell  how  many
there  were  in  a  family,  is  to  divide
twenty -five hundred thousand  by


GOD'S  ANCIENT  TEOPLE  rOLYGAMISTS,  ETC.


217


thirty  thousand  and  yon  will  find
that  the  quotient  is  eighty-three,
showing  that  number  of  souls  on
an  average  in  ench  family.  Now  if
these  families  we!e  all  raonogamic,
how  many  children  most  have  been
born  to  each  wife?  Eighty-one.

This  argument  is  founded  on
Scripture,  And  it  shows  plainly,
even  if  yon  should  double  the  num-
ber of  families  or  of  the  firstborn,
that  they  could  not  be  all  mouogamic
families,  for  if  we  suppose  there  were
sixty  thousand  families,  it  would  make
every  married  woman  the  mother  of
forty  odd  children,  an'!  if  sucn  a
supposition  cuuid  be  entertained  it
w«  Lild  go  to  show  that  women  in  those
days  were  more  fruitful  than  they  are
now.  These  declarations  are  given
in  your  Bible,  which  is  also  my  Bible;
that  is,  in  King  James'  translation.
We  all  believe,  or  profess  to  be  Bible
believer*  or  Christians.  Do  not  be
star  tied  my  hearers  at  these  declara-
tions of  your  Bible.  No  wonder  then
that  this  passage  which  I  have  taken
for  my  text  was  given  to  that  people,
because  they  were  a  people  who
needed  to  be  guided  in  relation  to
their  duty.  "  If  a  man  take  another
wife/'  that  is,  after  he  has  got  one,  if
he  take  another  one,  "  her  food" —
whose  food  ?  the  food  of  the  first
wife ; — "  her  raiment  "  that  is  the
raiment  of  the  first  wife,  a  her  doty
of  marriage,  he  shall  not  diminish."
Now  this  is  plain,  pointed  and  positive
language  in  regard  to  polygamy  as  it
existed  among  the  house  of  Israel  in
ancient  times.  Why  did  not  the
Lord  say,  if  polygamy  were  a  crime
or  a  ain — "  If  a  man  take  another  wife
let  all  the  congregation  take  him
without  the  camp  and  stoue  him  and
put  him  to  death  r"  or  if  that  was
too  severe  let  them  incarcerate  him
in  a  prison  or  dungeon  for  several
years  ?  If  it  be  a  crirrs  why  did  he
not  say  so  ? It  is  just  as  easy  to  say


that,  as  to  give  directions  as  to  what
course  a  man  shall  pursue  with  regard
to  his  first  wife,  if  he  take  another


one.


This  is  Bible  doctrine  as  it  existed
in  those  days*  I  know  that  it  has
been  argued  that  the  first  woman,  here
spoken  of,  was  merely  a  betrothed
woman,  and  not  married.  But  if  this
be  so,  what  a  curious  saying  this  in
our  test — that  her  duty  of  marriage
shall  he  not  diminish  if  he  take
another  wife.  This  and  other  ex-
pressions show  clearly  that  they
were  both  wives,  and  that  there  was
n  certain  dnty  to  be  attended  to  by
the  a^-V.nd,  besides  providing  them
with  food  asd  raiment.  It  was
argued  here  in  this  i?u^r:ncle  before
some  eight  or  ten  thousand  peupie,
on  a  certain  occasion ,  that  the  He-
brew word  translated  "  duty  of  mar-
riage" ought  to  have  been  translated
41  dwelling* — "  Her  food,  her  rai-
ment and  her  dwelling  he  shall  not
diminish,"  I  recollect  asking  the
learned  gentleman,  Rev,  Dr.  New-
man, why  be  translated  it  dwelling,
instead  of  translating  it  as  all  other
Hebraists  have  done  ?  I  asked
kirn  to  produce  one  passage  in  all  the
Bible  where  that  word  translated
"duty  of  marriage,"  meant  a  "dwell-
ing," but  he  could  not  do  it.  The
Hebrew  word  for  ''dwelling,"  and
the  Hebrew  word  for  "  duty  of  mar-
riage," are  two  entirely  distinct
words.  I  referred  him  to  the  learned
professors  in  Yale  College,  and  to
many  others  who  have  translated
this  Hebrew  word  "duty  of  mar-
riage." These  professors  and  other
learned  translators,  have  referred  to
this  special  passage,  and  have  trans-
lated it  in  two  ways — one  is  4t  duty
of  marriage,"  and  the  other  is  co-
habitation. Now,  if  this  latter  be
correct  -her  food,  her  raiment  and
her  cohabitation,  shall  not  be  dimin-
ished. I  asked  him  why  he  varied


in  his  translation  of  the  Hebrew,
from  all  these  translators  and  lexico-
graphers ?  His  only  answer  was
that  he  found  a  certain  Jew  in  Wash-
ington who  told  him  that  it  meant
"dwelling,"  or  rather  that  its  original
root  referred  to  a  44  dwelling/1  I
thought  that  was  a  very  poor  argu-
ment against  all  the  translators  of
the  Christian  world,  who  are  mostly
monogamists.  But  we  will  pass  on.
I  do  not  intend  to  dwell  too  long  on
the?e  subjects.

So  far  as  the  law  of  Moses  is  con-
cern ed,  to  prove  that  the  house  of
Israel  kept  up  their  polygamous
institution  from  generation  to  gene-
ration, let  me  refer  you  to  another
law  to  show  that  they  were  compelled
to  do  this,  or  else  to  come  out  in
open  rebellion  against  the  law  of
Moses,  In  the  a 5th  chapter  of
Deuteronomy,  we  read  something
like  this — 41  When  brethren  dwell
together,  and  one  of  them  die,  the
living  brother  shall  take  the  widow
of  the  deceased  brother,  and  it  shall
come  to  pass  that  the  firstborn  that
is  raised  up  shall  succeed  in  the  name
of  his  brother/*  This  was  a  positive
command  given  to  all  Israel.  Now
was  this  command  confined  to  young
men  who  were  unmarried,  or  was  it
an  unlimited  command  so  far  as
living  brothers  were  in  existence  ?
This  is  a  question  to  be  decided.
There  is  nothing  in  all  the  Scriptures
that  makes  any  distinction  between
a  married  brother  who  survives  and
an  unmarried  brother;  the  law  was
just  as  binding  upon  a  lining  brother,
if  be  had  already  a  wife  living,  as
it  was  upon  a  living  brother  if  he  had
no  wife,  it  being  a  universal  law,
with  no  limits  iu  its  application,  s  >
far  as  the  house  was  concerned.  This
law,  then,  compelled  the  children  of
Israel  to  be  polygamists;  for  in  many
instances  the  living  brother  might  be
a  married  man,  and  in  many  instan-


ces there  might  be  two  or  three
brothers  who  would  take  wives  and
die  without  leaving  seed,  and  in  that
case  it  would  devolve  upon  tha
surviving  brother  to  take  all  the
widows.  This  law  was  not  given  for
thai  generation  alone,  but  for  all
future  generations.  Some  may  say,
that  when  Jesus  came,  be  came  to  do
away  that  law.  I  doubt  it  He
can&e  to  do  away  the  law  of  sacrifice*
and  of  burnt  offerings,  and  many  of
those  ordinances  and  institutions,
rites  and  ceremonies  which  pertained
to  their  tabernacle  and  temple,  be-
cause they  all  pointed  forward  to
him  as  the  great  and  last  sacrifice.
But  did  become  to  do  away  all  these
laws  that  were  given  in  the  five  books
of  Moses  ?  No.  There  are  many
of  these  laws  that  were  retained
under  the  Christian  dispensation*
One  of  the  laws  thus  retained  was
repentance.  The  children  of  Israel
were  commanded  to  repent,  and  no
person  will  pretend  to  s s*y  that  Jesus
came  to  do  away  the  law  of  repent-
ance. Another  was  the  law  of  hon-
esty, upright  dealing  between  man
and  man  ;  no  one  will  pretend  to  say
that  that  Liw  ceased  when  Jesus
came.  The  la^s  concerning  families
and  the  regulation  of  the  domestic
institutions  were  not  intended  to  cease
when  Jesus  came,  and  they  did  not
ceaso  only  as  they  were  disregarded
through  the  wickedness  of  the  chil-
dren of  men.  The  laws  concerning
monogamy,  and  the  laws  concerning
polygamy  ware  just  as  binding  after
Jesus  had  come,  as  they  were  before
he  came.  There  were  tome  law*
which  Ezekiel  says  were  not  good.
Jesus  denounced  thrm,  and  said
they  were  given  because  of  the  hard-
ness of  the  hearts  of  the  children
of  Israel,  Ezekiel  says  that  God
gave  them  statutes  ;i;.u  ju.^ment*
by  which  they  shuuld  not  live.  \V.:t
did he  dr> it? Because  of  their


god's  ancient  people  polygamists,  etc.


219


wickedness  and  hardness  of  heart  I
will  tell  you  bow  this  law  became
done  away  and  ceased  to  exist  among
the  children  of  Israel — it  was  in
consequence  of  their  rejectiou  of  the
Messiah.  In  consequence  of  this
their  city  was  overthrown,  and  their
nation  destroyed,  exempt  a  miserable
remnant,  which  were  scattered  abroad
among  the  Gentile  nations,  where
they  could  not  keep  the  law  in  legard
to  their  brother*'  widows.  When
John  the  Baptist  was  raised  up  to
that  nation,  be  must  have  found  thou-
sands on  thousands  of  polygamists,
who  were  made  so,  and  obliged  to  be  so,
by  the  law  which  I  have  just  quoted*
Some  of  you  may  enquire — "  Had
not  a  surviving  brother  the  right  to
reject  that  law  of  God  ?"  He  had,
if  he  was  willing  to  place  himself
under  its  penalty,  I  will  quote  you
the  penalty,  and  then  you  can  see
whether  he  could  get  away  from  poly-
gamy  or  not.  One  penalty  was  that
be  should  be  brought  before  the
Elders  and  that  the  widow  whom  he
refused  to  marry,  according  to  the
law  of  God,  should  pluck  his  shoe
from  off  his  foot,  and  should  then
spit  in  his  face,  and  from  that  time
forth  the  house  of  that  man  should
be  donopnepd  »»  the  horns  of  him
that  hath  his  shoe  loosed,  a  reproach
among  all  Israel.  Instead  of  being
a  man  of  God,  and  a  man  to  be  fa-
vored by  the  people  of  God ;  instead
of  being  a  man  such  as  the  Christian
world  would  now  extol  to  the  heavens
because  he  rejected  polygamy,  he
was  a  man  to  be  scorned  by  all  Israel.
That  was  the  penalty.  Was  thai  the
only  penalty  ?  I  think  riot.  Read
along  a  little  further,  and  it  says —
*  Cursed  be  he  that  continues  not  in
all  things  written  in  this  book  of  the
law/*  Oh,  what  a  dreadful  penalty
that  was,  compared  with  being  re*
proached  by  the  whole  people!  Oh,
what  a  fearful  curse  upon  a  man  that


refused  to  become  a  polygamist,  and
would  not  attend  to  the  law  of  God !
A  curse  pronounced  by  the  Almighty
upon  him,  also  the  anathemas  of  all
the  people  as  well  as  from  God  !  The
word  of  the  Lord  was  that  all  tkt
people  should  say  amen  to  this  curse.
Now,  if  I  had  lived  in  those  days,  I
should  not  have  considered  it  very
desirable  to  bring  myself  under  the
curse  of  heaven,  and  then  have  the
curse  of  all  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel
upon  my  head,  I  should  not  have
liked  it  at  all.  I  would  rather  have
goue  into  polygamy  according  to  the
com  mi  and,  even  if  it  had  subjected
me  to  a  term  of  five  years  in  a  peni-
tentiary.

We  find  many  other  passages,
touching  upon  this  subject,  I  will
quote  one,  which  will  be  found  in  the
21st  chapter  of  Deuteronomy.  It
reads  qs  follows:  u  If  a  man  have
two  wives,  one  beloved  and  another
hated,  and  they  have  borne  him  chil-
dren, both  the  beloved  and  the  hated;
and  if  the  first-born  son  be  hers  that
was  hated,  then  it  shall  be  when  he
makes  his  sons  to  inherit  that  which
he  hath,  that  he  may  not  make  the
son  of  the  beloved,  firstborn  before
the  son  of  the  hated,  which  is  indeed
tha  firstborn."

Now  this  applies  to  two  classes  of
polygamist s.  First,  to  those  who
may  have  two  wives  living  at  the
same  time,  and  then  to  those  who
may  have  married  two  wives  in  suc-
cession. It  applies  to  both  classes,
for  both  classes  existed  in  those  days,
and  the  Lord  gave  tbia,  not  to  con-
demn polygamy,  not  to  do  away  with
it,  but  to  show  that  the  individual
who  had  two  wives  should  be  im-
partial in  regard  to  his  children.  Did
lie  approbate  this  man  that  might
have  two  wives  in  his  hatred  of  one,
and  in  loving  the  other  ?  No,  he
did  not,  but  inasmuch  as  man  is
weak  and  may  sin  against  God,  and


220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


suffer  himself  to  be  overcome  with
prejudice  and  hatred  to  one  person,
and  feel  in  his  heart  to  love  and
respect  another,  the  Lord  gave  laws
in«case  any  such  crime  should  exist
among  them  as  a  husband's  hating
one  wife  and  loving  another;  he  gave
laws  to  regulate  it,  not  that  he  ap-
probated the  hating  part

As  I  have  already  proved  to  you
that  there  were  great  and  vast  num-
bers of  polygamic  families  in  Israel,
and  that  there  were  thousands  of
firstborn  from  these  plural  wives,
these  firstborn  persons,  whatever
might  be  the  conduct  of  their  mo-
thers, were  entitled  to  their  inherit-
ance, namely  a  double  portion  of  all
that  the  father  had  to  bestow.  That
was  the  law  in  on^nt  time*.  We
might  close  here  so  far  as  the  law  or
Moses  is  concerned,  but  I  wish  to  call
your  attention  to  a  peculiar  saying
in  this  law.

This  law  has  got  to  be  restored
again.  Says  one — "  Yon  astonish
me  beyond  measure,  I  thought  it  was
done  away  for  ever,"  Well,  listen  to
what  the  Lord  said  to  Israel  in  the
closing  of  this  book  of  Deuteronomy.
When  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be
scattered  in  consequence  of  their
iniquities  to  the  uttermost  parts  of
ihe  carta  zimung  aii  the  nations,  and  j
their  plagues  shall  be  of  long  contin-
uance, and  they  shall  be  cursed  in
their  basket  and  in  their  store,  and
with  numerous  curses  which  he  men-
tioned should  come  upon  them ;  after
these  things  had  been  of  long  con-
tinuance, the  Lord  says — "  After
they  shall  return  unto  me  and  hearken
unto  all  the  words  contained  in  this
book  of  the  law,  then  1,  the  Lord
God,  will  gather  them  out  from  all
the  nations  whither  they  are  scat-
tered, and  will  bring  them  back  into
their  own  land. 51  Oh,  indeed  !  Theu
when  they  do  absolutoly  return  and
hearken  to  all  the  words  of  the  book


of  this  law  God  bag  promised  to
gather  them  again ;  that  is,  they
must  enter  into  polygamy,  they  must
believe  when  their  brother  dies  and
leaves  no  seed,  that  the  surviving
brother,  though  he  has  one,  two,  or
a  half  a  dozen  wives  living,  shall  take
that  widow.  That  is  part  of  the  law,
and  they  must  fulfill  all  the  words
of  this  law,  and  then  God  has  pro-
mised to  gather  them  again.  Says
one,  "  When  that  is  fulfilled  it  will
U  in  the  days  of  Christianity."  We
can't  help  it;  polygamy  belongs  to
Christianity,  as  well  as  to  the  law  of
Moses.

Says  one — "  The  children  of  Israel
have  been  scattered  now  some  1800
years  among  all  the  nations  and
kindreds  of  the  earth,  in  fulfillment
Oi  Cm.-  curse,  but  if  we  believe  that
saying  wh>h  you  have  just  quoted,
we  are  oblige  to  believe  that  the
children  of  Israel  ^  yet  to  return
to  attend  to  all  thest  vmtitutions,
and  that  too  while  the  Christian
religion  is  in  vogue,  and  that  they
are  to  regulate  their  households  ac-
cording to  the  law  of  God,  whether
those  families  are  monogamic  or
polygamic."  What  will  the  good
Christians  think  when  that  is  ful-
filled ?  They  cannot  help  them-
selves, for  God  will  not  gather  Israel
until  they  do  return  with  all  thair
hearts  unto  hira,  and  hearken  to  and
obey  all  the  words  of  this  law,  writ-
ten in  this  book.  This  is  the  word
of  the  Lord,  and  how  can  you  help
yourselves  ?  Says  one  "  We  will
pass  laws  against  them."  That  will
not  hinder,  when  God  sets  his  hand
to  carry  out  his  purposes,  laws  that
may  be  passed  by  England,  Denmark,
Norway  or  any  other  Christian  com-
munity will  not  hinder  the  Israelites
from  attending  to  all  the  words  con-
tained in  the  book  of  his  law;  for
they  will  want  to  get  back  again  to
their  own  land.


GOD'S  ANCIENT  PEOPLE  rOLYOAMISTS,  ETO

4


221


Inasmuch  then  as  the  Lord  has
promised  to  restore  all  things  spoken
of  by  the  mouth  of  all the  holy
Prophets  since  the  world  began,  sup
posing  that  he  should  begin  this  great
work  of  restoration  in  our  day,  how
are  we going  to  help  ousselvea?
I  can't  help  it. Brigham  Young,
our  President,  can't  help  it;  Joseph
Smith  conld  not  help  it If  God
aees  proper  to  accomplish  this  great
work  of  restoration — the  restitution
of  all  things,  it  will  include  what  the
Prophet  Mosta  has  said,  and  it  will
bring  back  with  it  a  plurality  of
wives. The  4th  chapter  of  Isaiah
conld  never  bt  fulfilled  without  this
restoration- The  passage  to  which  I
refer  ii  familiar  to  all  the  Latter-day
Saints — "In  that  day  the  branch  of
the  Lord  shall  be  beautiful  and  glo-
rious, and  the  fruit  of  the  earth  shall
be  excellent  and  comely  ;  and  in  that
day  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of
one  man,  saying,  we  will  eat  our  own
bread  and  wear  our  own  apparel,  only
let  as  be  called-  by  thy  name  to  take
away  our  reproach." Now  will  this
prophecy  ever  be  fulfilled,  unless  this
great  restoration  or  restitution  shall
take place  ? It cannot. If  this
great  restitution  does  not  take  place,
Jesus  will  never  come,  for  it  is  writ-
ten in  the  New  Testament,  in  the  3rd
chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
that  "the  heaTens  must  receive  Jesus
Christ,  until  the  times  of  the  resti-
tution of  all  things  which  God  has
spoken  by  the  mouths  of  bis  holy
Prophets, since  the  world  began/'
Jesus  will  bare  to  stay  a  long  time
in  the  heavens  providing  that  monog-
amist principles  are  the  only  princi-
ples that  will  be  introduced,  in  fact
he  never  can  come,  for  the  Scriptures
say  the  heavens  must  retain  him  until
all  things  are  restored.

God  has  said  that  seven  women
shall  take  hold  of  one  man  for  the
purpose  of  having their  reproach


taken  away,  that  they  may  he  called
by  his  name,  not  cast  off  as  harlots
or  prostitutes;  not  to  take  away  the
name  of  the  father  from  the  children,
and  cast  them  into  the  streets,  as  the
Christain  nations  have  been  doing  for
many  long  centuries  that  are  past.
But  the?e  seven  women  will  be  de-
sirous of  having  the  name  of  their
husband  for  themselves  and  their
children.  Isaiah  says  it  shall  be  so,
and  it  will  have  to  be  under  the
Christian  dispensation.  How  are  the
Christians  going  to  get  rid  of  this  ?
Can  yoo  device  any  way  ?  Is  there
any  possible  way  or  means  that  you
can  think  of  that  will  put  a  stop  to
the  Lord's  fulfilling  his  word  ?  I  will
tell  you  one  way — if  you  will  all  turn
infidels  and  burn  up  the  Bible,  and
then  begin  to  persecute,  the  devil
will  tell  you  that  you  can  successfully
overcome,  and  that  God  will  never
fulfill  and  accomplish  his  word;  but
if  you  profess  to  believe  the  Bible,
by  the  Bible  you  shall  be  judged,  for,
saith  the  Lord,  "  My  words  shall
judge  you  at  the  last  day."  The
books  will  be  opened,  God's  word  will
be  the  standard  by  which  the  nations
will  be  judged;  hence  if  you  wish  a
righteous  judgment  I  would  say —
Forbear,  do  not  destroy  the  Bible
because  it  advocates  polygamy;  but
remember  that  every  word  of  God
is  pure,  so  it  id  declared  ;  and  he  has
nowhere  in  this  book,  condemned
plural  marriage,  even  in  one  instance.

I  know  that  it  has  been  argued
that  there  is  a  law  against  polygamy;
but  in  order  to  make  the  law  the
Scripture  had  to  be  altered.  It  is
in  that  famous  pass-i^e  which  has
become  a  byword  in  the  mouth  of
every  schoolboy  in  our  streets,  Levit-
icus xviiL  ch.,  IS  v.  Now  let  us
examine  for  a  few  moments  that  pas-
sage and  see  what  it  says.  You  will
find  that  the  fore  part  of  this  chapter
forbids marriage between  certain


blood  relations.  Prior  to  this  time
it  had  been  lawful  for  a  man  to  mar-
ry  two  sisters.  Jacob,  for  instance,
married  Rachel  and  Leab,  find  there
was  no  law  against  it  prior  to  this
time.  It  had  also  been  lawful  for  a
man  to  marry  his  own  sister,  as  in
the  days  of  Adam,  for  you  know
there  were  no  other  ladies  on  the  face
of  the  earth  for  the  sons  of  Adam
except  their  own  sisters,  and  they
were  obliged  to  marry  them  or  to
live  bachelors.  Bat  the  Lord  saw
proper  when  he  brought  the  children
of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  into  the  wil-
derness, to  regulate  the  law  of  mar-
riage, so  far  as  certain  blood  relations
Were  concerned,  called  the  lav?  of
consanguinity,  which  speaks  of  a
great  many  relationships,  and  finally
comes  to  a  wife  and  her  sister.  This
law  was  given  to  regulate  the  mar-
riage relations  of  the  children  of  Israel
in  the  wilderness.  It  was  not  to  re-
gulate those  who  lived  before  that
day  who  had  married  sisters ;  not  to
regulate  those  who  might  live  in  the
latter  days,  but  to  regulate  the  chil-
dren of  Israel  in  that  day.  It  reads
thus :  "Neither  shalt  thou  take  a  wife
to  her  sister^to  vex  her,  to  uncover
her  nakedness  besides  the  other  in
her  lifetime/'

This  passage  has  been  al  tered  by  cer-
tain monogamists  in  order  to  sustain
their  ideas  of  marriage,  and  we  find
in  some  large  Bibles  what  are  called
marginal  readings  that  these  mouoga-
mista  have  put  in,  and  instead  of  tak-
ing this  in  connection  with  all  other
blood  relationships,  they  have  altered
it — Neither  shalt  thou  take  one  wife
to  another.  The  men  who  translated
King  James*  Bible  were  monoga-
mists, yet  they  had  sense  enough  to
know  that  the  original  Hebrew
would  not  bear  that  construction
which  has  been  given  by  later  mono-
gamists. The  original  Hebrew,  when
translated  word  for  word,  makes  it


just  as  Kinjr  James'  translators  have
made  it*  The  Hebrew  words  are —
Ve-itkatv  elahotah-lo  takkah.  These
are  the  original  Hebrew  words,  and
if  they  fire  translated  literally,  word
for  word,  the  translation  stands  just
as  it  is  in  the  text*  But  this  is
not  saying  but  what  the  words,  El-
ahotah,  under  certain  circumstances,
are  translated  in  another  form,  name-
ly, M one  to  another,"  "one  lister  to
another/*  and  I  am  willing  that  it
should  be  translated  that  way.  Then
it  would  read — "Thou  shalt  not  take
one  sister  to  another  to  vex  her  in
her  life  time."  So  you  may  take  it
either  way,  and  it^  bears  out  King
James1  translation,  or  the  meaning

;  giveq  by  hira.

I  do  not  profess  to  be  a  Hebraist
to  any  very  great  extent,  although  I
studied  it  sufficiently many  years

,  ago,  to  understand  its  grammatical
construction,  and  to  translate  any
passage  in  the  Bible;  but  then,  hav-
ing lacked  practice  for  many  yiars,
ot  course  a  persoo  may  become  a

|  little  rusty  in  regard  to  these  matters.
But  I- have  searched  out  all  the  pas-
sages that  can  be  found  in  the  Old
Testament,  either  singular  or  plural,
masculine  or  feminine,  pertaining  to
the  words  contained  in  this  text,  and
I  find  a  fir  greater  number  ren-
dered according  to  the  words  that
are  hire  given,  literally,  in  this  text
than  what  are  translated  —  <hune  sitter
to  another/'  But  I  am  willing  that
this  translation  should  be  allowed.

Now,  if  we  thought  the  congrega*
tion  would  like  to  hear  the  transla-
tion of  all  this,  and  the  reasons  why,
we  could  give  it;  but  1  presume  that
there  are  but  few  Hebrew  scholars
present,  and  if  the  translation  were
given,  the  great  majority  of  the  con-
gregation would  not  understand
whether  it  was  translated  correctly
or  not,  and  for  that  reason  I  shall  not
take  up  your  time  by  referring  to


god's  ancient  people  polygamists,  etc.


223


these  technicalities*  Bat  I  will  make
the  broad  statement,  that  there  is  not
a  Hebrew  scholar  living  on  this  earth
who  can  translate  that  passage  from
the  words  contained  in  the  original
Hebrew,  without  adding  words  of  his
own,  not  contained  in  the  original  text,
if  he  translates  it,  as  Dr.  Newman
did, — "one  wife  to  another/1  If  the
fir*t  word — Ve  Iskaw  means  onet  as
he  wonld  try  to  have  us  understand,
it  does  not  mean  wife  also:  but  if  it
means  wife,  it  con  not  be  translated
ms  he  has  it,  and  therefore  it  cannot
bear  out  that  construction*  Bnt  I
see  that.  I  am  dwelling  too  long  on
the  subject  of  the  law  of  Moses.

Now  I  wish  to  come  directly  to
the  point  in  regard  to  polygamy  as
it  exists  at  the  present  time  among
the  Latter-day  Saints.  I  stated  in
the  beginning  of  my  remarks,  that
polygamy,  or  any  other  institution,
that  was  given  at  one  age,  might  not
be  binding  upon  another,  with  oat  a
fresh  revelation  from  God.  I  made
that  statement  when  I  wag  discus-
ling  that  subject  in  this  house.  I
still  aay,  that  we  are  mot  under  the
necessity  of  practiciog  polygamy  be-
cause God  gave  laws  and  command-
ments for  its  observance  and  regula-
tion in  ancient  times.  Why  then
do  the  Latter-day  Saints  practice
polygamy  ?  That  is  a  plain  question.
I  will  answer  it  just  as  plainly.  It  is
because  we  believe,  with  all  the  since-
rity of  our  hearts,  as  has  been  slated
by  former  speakers  from  this  stand,
that  the  Lord  God  who  gave  revela-
tions to  Moses  approbating  polygamy,
bas  given  revelations  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  not  only  approbating  it,
bnt  commanding  it,  as  he  commanded
Israel  in  ancient  times.

No  v  let  us  reason  on  this  point.
If  God  did  do  such  things  in  former
ages  of  the  world,  why  not  the  same
Being,  if  he  sees  proper,  perform  the
same  or  similar  things  in  another  age


of  the  world  ?  Can  any  one  answer
this?  If  God  saw  proper  to  give
certain  laws  in  ancient  times,  and
then  to  revoke  them ;  or  if  he  saw
proper  to  give  laws  that  were  not
revoked,  but  done  away  by  the
transgressions  of  the  children  of  men,
has  ho  nut  a  right,  and  is  it  not  just
as  consistent  for  that  game  Divine
Being  to  give  laws,  for  instance,  in
the  19th  century,  concerning  our
domestic  relations,  as  it  was  for  him
to  do  it  in  the  days  of  Moses?  And
if  he  has  that  right,  as  we  Latter-
day  Saints  believe  that  he  has,  are
not  the  people's  consciences  just  as
sacred  in  regard  to  such  laws  in
these  days,  as  the  consciences  of  an-
cient Israel  ?  or  must  there  be  somt
power  to  regulate  our  religious  con-
sciences ?  Here  is  a  grand  question.
Shall  our  religious  consciences  be
regulated  by  civil  government  or
civil  laws,  or  shall  we  have  the  pri-
vilege of  regulating  them  according
to  the  divine  law  of  the  Bible,  or
any  divine  law  that  may  be  given  in
accordance  with  the  ancient  Bible?
I  answer  that,  when  I  was  a  boy,  I
thought  I  lived  in  a  country  in  which
I  could  believe  in  anything  that
agreed  with,  or  that  could  be  proved
by  the  Bible,  whether  it  was  in  the
law  of  Moses  or  in  the  doctrines  of
the  New  Testament.  I  really  thought
the  Jews  had  a  right  to  reject  Christ,
or,  in  other  words,  it  they  had  not
the  right  to  do  it  morally,  they  had
the  right,  so  far  as  civil  law  is  con-
cerned, to  reject  this  Messiah,  and
to  believe  in  and  practice  the  law  of
Moses  in  our  land;  but  I  am  told,
that  such  liberty  of  conscience  is  not
to  be  tolerated  in  our  Republican
govern mtnt.  If  the  Jews  should
collect  in  any  great  numbers,  and
should  say  one  to  another — "  Come
brethren,  we  are  the  descendants  of
Abraham,  let  us  now  begin  to  prac-
tice according  to  the  laws  that  were


224


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


given  to  our  ancient  fathers,  and  if  a
brother  dies  and  leaves  a  widow,  but
no  children,  let  his  living  brother,
though  a  married  man,  marrj  the
widow,  according  to  our  law,"  it  ig
doubtful  whether  they  would  be
permitted  to  associate  together  and
practice  those  lair,  now,  if  they  were
bo  deposed.  Why?  Because  the
prejudice  of  the  people  is  so  great
that  they  are  not  willing  others
should  believe  in  the  whole  Bible,
bat  only  in  such  portions  as  agreg
with  their  ideas.  If  we  were  insti-
tuting a  practice  that  the  Lore!  God
never  approbated*  but  for  the  punish,
ment  of  which  he  bad  prescribed
penalties,  or  if  we  were  introducing
something  foreign  and  contrary  to
the  Bible,  then  there  would  The  some
excuse  for  the  people  in  saying  that
inch  a  thing  should  not  be  practiced,
in  the  name  of  religion,  But'whefi
we  take  the  Bible  as  a  standard  iif
relation  to  crime,  it  is  altogether
another  thing;  and  I  do  think  that
eVery  American  citizen  who  professes
to  believe  in  any  part  or  portion  of
that  sacred  record,  ou  which  all  the
laws  of  Christendom  pretend  to  be
founded,  has  the  right  to  do  so,  and
to  practice  it,  and  that,  too,  without
being  molested.

Now,  after  having  said  so  much  in
relation  to  the  reason  why  we  prac-
tice polygamy,  I  want  to  say  a  few
words  in  regard  to  the  revelation  on
polygamy,  God  has  told  us  Latter-
day  Saints  that  we  shall  be  con-
demned if  we  do  not  enter  into  that
principle ;  and  yet  I  have  heard  now
and  then  (I  am  very  glad  to  say  that
only  a  few  such  instances  have  come
under  my  notice.)  a  brother  or  a
sister  say,  **  I  am  a  Latter-day  Saint,
but  I  do  not  believe  in  polygamy."
Oh,  what  an  absurd  expression  !  what
an  absurd  idea !  A  person  might  as
well  say,  u  I  am  a  follower  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  I  do  not  be-


lieve in  him"  One  is  jnsfc  as  con-
sistent as  the  other.  Or  a  person
might  as  well  say,  "I  believe  in
Mormonism,  and  in  the  revelations
given  through  Joseph  Smith,  but  I
am  not  a  polygamist,  and  do  not  be-
lieve in  polygamy."  What  an  ab-
surdity !  If  one  portion  of  the  doc-
|  trines  of  the  Church  is  true,  the
whole  of  them  are  true.  If  the  doc-
trine of  polygamy,  as  revealed  to  the
Latter~day  Saints,  is  not  true,  I
would  not  give  a  fig  lor  all  your
*  other  revelations  that  came  through
Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet;  I  would
renounce  the  whole  of  them,  because
,  it  is  utterly  impossible,  according  to
-the  revelations  that  are  contained  in
thes£  books,  to  believe  a  part  of  them
•to  be  divine — from  God — aad  part  of
them  to  be  from  the  devil  j  tbj»t  is
J  foolishness  in  the  extreme;  it  is  an
absurdity  that  exists  because  offthe
ignorance  of  some  people.  I  lfave
been  astonished  at  it.  I  did  hope
there  was  more  intelligence  among
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  a  greater
understand  ing  of  principle  than  to
suppose  that  any  one  can  be  a  mem-
ber of  this  Church  in  good  standing,
and  yet  reject  polygamy.  The  Lord
has  said,  that  those  who  reject  this
principle  reject  their  salvation,  they
shall  be  damned,  salth  the  Lord  ;
those  to  whom  I  reveal  this  law  and
they  do  not  receive  it,  shall  be
damned.  Now  here  comes  in  our
consciences.  We  have  either  to
renounce  Mormon  ism,  Joseph  Smith,
Book  of  Mormon,  Book  of  Cov-
enants, and  the  whole  system  of
things  as  tamght  by  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  my  that  God  has  not
raised  up  a  Church,  has  not  raited
up  a  prophet,  has  not  begun  to  restore
all  things  as  he  promised,  we  are
obliged  to  do  this,  or  else  to  say,  with
all  our  hearts,  *Tes,  we  are  polyga-
mists,  we  believe  in  the  principle,
and  we  are  willing  to  practice  it,


GOD'S  ANCIENT  PEOPLE  POLYGAMISTS,  ETC


223


because  God  hr*s  spoken  from  the
*  heavens/'  1

Now  I  want  to  prophecy  a  little.
If;  is  noi  very  often  that  1  prophecy,
though  I  was  commanded  to  do  so,
when  I  was  a  boy.  I  want  to  pro-
phecy thr.t  all  men  and  wom?n  who
oppose  the  revelation  which  God  has
given  in  relation  to  polygamy  will
find  themselves  in  darkness;  the
Spirit  of  God  will  withdraw  from
them  from  the  very  moment  of  their
opposition  to  that  principle,  until
they  will  finally  go  down  to  hell  and
be  damned,  if  they  do  not  repent.
That  is  just  as  true  as  it  is  that  all
the  nations  and  kingdoms  of  the
earth,  when  they  hear  this  Gospel
which  God  has  restored  iu  those  hist
days,  will  be  damned  if  they  do  not
receive  it ;  for  the  Lord  has  said  so*
One  is  just  as  true  as  the  other.  I
will  quote  this  litter  saying;,  as  re-
corded in  the  Book  of  Covenants.
The  Iiord  said  to  the  Elders  of  this
Church,  in  the  very  commencement
as  it  were,  u  Go  ye  forth  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  and  as
I  said  unto  mine  ancient  Apostles,
even  so  I  say  unto  you,  that  every
soul  who  believes  in  your  words,  and
will  repent  of  his  sins  and  be  bap*  I
tized  in  water  shall  receive  a  remis-
sion of  his  sins,  and  shall  be  tilled
with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  every  soal
in  all  tne  world  who  will  not  believe
in  your  words,  neither  repent  of  his
sins,  shall  be  damned  ;  mid  this  reve-
lation or  command  men t  is  in  furce
from  this  very  hour,  upon  all  the
world,"  as  fast  as  they  hear  it.  That
is  what  the  Lord  has  said.  Just  so,
in  regard  to  polygamy,  or  any  other
great  principle  which  the  Lord  our
God  reveals  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth.

Now,  if  you  want  to  get  into  dark-  H
ness,  brethren  and  sisters,  begin  to
oppose  this  revelation. Sisters,  you
bepin  to  say  before  your  husbands,

No.  If.


or  husbands  you  begin*  to  say  before
your  wives,  *  I  do  not  believe  in  the
principle  of  polygamy,  and  I  intend
to  instruct  my  children  against  it."
Oppose  it  in  this  way,  and  teach  your
children  to  do  the  same,  and  if  yoa
do  not  become  as  dark  as  midnight
I  there  is  no  truth  in  Mormonism.  I
am  taking  up  too  much  time.  I
would  like  to  dwell  on  another  more
pleasing  part  of  this  subject,  if  there
were  time.  (President  G.  A.  Smith —
"  There  is  plenty  of  time,  brother
Pratt")

I  will  go  on  and  tell  the  people  why
polygamy  was  instituted  in  this  dis-
pensation. So  far  as  a  future  state
is  concerned,  God  has  revealed  to  us
that  marriage  as  instituted  by  him,
is  to  benefit  the  people,  not  in  this
world  only,  but  to  all  eternity,  That
is  what  the  Lord  has  revealed.  Do
not  misunderstand  me;  do  not  sup-
pose that  I  mean,  that  marriage  and
giving  in  marriage  are  to  be  performed
after  the  resurrection ;  I  have  not
stated  any  such  thing,  and  there  will
be  no  such  thing  after  the  resurrec-
tion. Marriage  is  an  ordinance  per-
taining to  this  mortal  life — to  this
world — this  probation,  just  the  same
as  baprisrn  and  the  laying  on  of
hands;  it  reaches  forth  into  eternity,
and  has  a  bearing  upon  our  futuro
state ;  so  does  baptism ;  so  does  the
ordinance  of  the  laying  on  of  hands  ;
so  does  erery  ordinance  which  the
Lord  our  God  has  revealed  to  us.  If
we  attend  to  these  things  here  in  this
life,  they  secure  something  beyond
this  life — for  eternity.  They  neither
baptize,  nor  receive  baptism,  after
the  resurrection.  Why  ?  Because
neither  was  intended  to  be  admin-
istered after  the  resurrection*  After
the  resurrection  they  neither  marry
nor  are  given  in  marriage.  Why  ?
Because  this  is  the  world  where  these
ceremonies  are  to  be  attended  to.
That  which  is  secured  here,  will  be

Vol.  XVIL


22G  JOURNAL  OF

eecnred  hereafter,  if  it  be  secured
upon  the  principles  of  law  which
Gud  lias  revealed.  Marriage,  then
for  eternity,  is  the  preat  principle
of  marriage  with  the  Latter-day
Saints;  and  yet,  1  am  sorry  to  say,  |
thnt  there  ate  some  of  our  youug
people  who  will  flutfrr  themselves  to
be  nun  Tied  by  the  civil  law;  not  fur
eternity,  but  jngt  like  the  old  Gentile
Custom  —  t  tie  way  our  forefathers
were  married.  A  justice  of  the  peace,
B  judge,  or  feome  one  having  the
right  by  the  civil  laws,  will  pro-
nounce f  hem  husband  and  wife  for  a
short  space,  called  time;  perhaps  to
last  only  about  three  score  years,
find  then  it  is  all  over  with  the  mar-
riage contract;  it  is  run  out^;  they
are  husband  and  wife  until  death  shall
Separate  them,  and  then  they  are
fully  divm-i-d.  We  do  not  believe
in  any  such  nonsense;  it  is  one  of
the  ideas  of  the  Gentile  world  in  re-
gard to  marriage,  |
The  fiibt  if  rent  marriage  celebrated
in  this  world  of  ours  —  that  of  our
first  p  i  rents  —  is  a  sample  of  mar-
riage thar.  should  be  introduced  and
praciieed  by  arid  among  all  genera-
tions and  nations,  so  far  as  the  eter-
nity of  its  duration  in  concerned.  Oar
first  parents  were  immortal  beings;
they  knew  nothing  about  death;  it
was  a  word  that  ha  i  never  been
Bpoken  in  their  ears.  The  forbidden  ;
fruit,  had  never  been  [aid  before  them;  !
Ho  law  in  respect  to  that  was  yet
given.  But  Eve  was  brought  to  our
father  Adam  as  an  immortal  woman,
whose  body  could  not  die  to  all  ages
of  eternity;  she  was  given  to  an  im-
mortal husband,  whose  body  could
Dot  die  to  all  future  periods  of  dura-
tion, unless  thev  brought  death  upon
themselves.  Sin  ent<  red  into  the
world,  and  death  by  sin;  death  is  one
of  the  consequences  of  sin  ;  and  they
brought  it  upon  themselves.  But
before  that,  they  were  married — the


DISCOURSES.

immortal  Adam  had  the  immortal
Eve  given  to  him.

Now  if  it  had  been  possible  for
them  to  have  resisted  that  tempta-
tion, they  would  have  been  living
now,  just  as  fresh,  and  as  full  of
vigor,  life  and  animation,  after  sir
thousand  years,  as  they  were  on  the
morning  in  which  this  ceremony  of
marriage  took  place;  and  if  you
should  reflect  upon  mil  lions  and  mil-
lions of  ages  in  the  f  uture,  they  would
still  be  considered  husband  and  wife,
while  eternity  should  last.  You  cjuld
not  get  a  time  —  you  could  not
point  your  finger  at  a  moment  or
hour,  when  they  would  be  separated,
and  the  union  be  dissolved,
j  That  is  the  kind  of  marriage  that
we  Latter-day  Saints  believe  in;  and
yet  some  of  our  young  people,  pro-
fessing to  be  members  of  the  Church,
and  who  say  they  wish  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God,  go  and  get
married  by  a  justice  of  the  peace,  or
some  person  authorized  to  perform
that  ceremony  by  the  civil  law.  Ask
parties  who  are  guilty  of  such  folly,
why  they  were  married  by  these  offi-
cers of  the  law  until  death  should
part  them?  and  they  will  .say,  "We
did  it  inconsiderately,  and  without
reflection,"  or  perhaps  they  will  say
that  their  parents  did  not  teach  them
on  that  point.  Do  you  not  know
I  that  such  marriages  are  riot  sealed
by  him  that  is  appointed  by  divine
authority?  that  they  are  not  of  God
and  are  illegal  in  his  sight,  and  your
children  are  illegitimate  in  the  sight
of  God  ?  If  you  expect  to  have  any
benefits  in  eternity  arising  from  your
children,  they  must  be  yours  legally,
according  to  divine  appointment,
under  a  divine  marriage.  "What
God  has  joined  together  *et  not  man
put  asunder/*  Bat  what  has  God  to
do  with  it,  when  a  magistrate,  who,
perhaps,  is  an  infidel,  and  does  not
believe  in  a  God  at  all,  says  to  a  man


GOD'S  ANCIENT  I'Kul'LK  I'OLYGAMISTS,  ETC.  227


and  woman,  "Join  your  hands  to*
gether,"  and  then,  when  they  have
done  so,  he  says,  **I  pronounce  you
husband  and  wife?"  What,  lifts  God
to  do  with  such  a  marriage  as  that  ?
Has  God  joined  them  together?  No,
a  civil  magistrate  has  done  it;  and  it
is  legal  so  far  as  the  laws  of  the
country  are  concerned,  and  the  chil-
dren are  legal  and  heirs  to  their
parents  property  so  far  as  the  civil
law  is  concerned,  but  what  has  God
to  do  with  it?  Has  he  joined  the  n
together?  No,  and  the  marriaju  is
illegal,  and,  in  the  si^ht  of  heaven,
the  children  springing  from  such  a
marriage  are  bastards.

How  are  we  going  to  legalize  these
matters?  There  are  many  who  are
very  sorry  for  the  Latter-day  S  tints  j
so  sorry  that  they  would  favor  tin*
passing  of  a  law  which  would  legalize
all  the  children  who  have  b  en  horn  in
polygamy,  and  thus  prevent  them
from  being  what  they  consider  bus-
tards. Now  we  are  just  as  anxious,
on  the  other  hand,  to  get  all  our
fathers  and  mothers,  who  have  been
married  by  these  Gentile  institutions,
joined  together  by  divine  authority,
in  order  that  they  may  become  legal
in  the  sight  of  God,  We  do  not
want  their  children  to  be  bas'ardiz.'d;
and  hence,  we  get  them  adopted,  or
we  shall  do  so  when  the  Temple  is

built:  I  mean  all  those  who  have
been  born  of  parents  that  have  never
been  joined  together  of  the  L  ml  ur
by  his  authority.  All  such  children,
as  well  as  men  and  women,  married
only  by  the  civil  law,  have  got  to
have  ordinances  performed  fur  them
in  the  Temple,  The  men  and  women
will  have  to  be  legally  married  there;
and  the  children  born  before  their
parents  were  thus  leg  illy  married,
will  have  to  piss  through  nidi  nances
in  order  that  they  may  become  the
legal  sons  and  daughters  of  their
parents;  they  will  have  to  be  adopted


according  to  the  law  of  God.  You
young  men  and  women,  who  are  mar-
ried in  a  manner  that  the  Lord  does
not  authorize  or  own,  put  yourselves
to  a  great,  deal  of  trouble,  bee -use
you  will  have  H  great  *eal  of  work  to
do  hereafter  in  temples  in  order  to
net  tilings  letfahzfd.  How  much
better  it  would  he  for  you  to  come  to
those  whom  God  1ms  appointed,  and
have  jour  marriages  solemnized  as
immortal  beings,  *vho  have  to  live  to
all  eternity.

It  is  true  that  we  have  all  to  die
by  and  by,  and  we  shall  be  separated
[  for  a  little  season;  but  this  separa-
tion is  a  trood  deal  I  ke  a  man's  leav-
ing his  tamily  to  go  on  a  mission:  he
returns  alter  a  while  to  his  wives  and
children,  and  he  has  not  lost  the  one
nor  lias  he  been  divorced  from  the
other,  because  they  have  been  separ-
ated. And  if  death  separates,  for  a
little  season,  rhnse  who  are  married
according  to  Go  is  law,  they  expect
to  return  to  each  other's  embraces  by
virtue  of  their  former  union;  for  it  is
as  eternal  as  G*»d  himself.

k*  Do  you  mean  to  say,"  says  onet
"that  people  in  (he  immortal  state,
will  be  united  in  the  capacity  of  hus-
bmds  and  wives,  with  their  children
around  litem r"  Yes,  we  do  btlUve
that  all  per  Sims  who  have  the*e  bles-
sings sea  ltd  upon  them  here,  by  the
authority  of  the  Host  High,  will  find
that  they  rearh  for  ward  into  the  eter-
nal world,  and  they  c;ui  hold  fast  to
I  ha!  which  God  h  <s  placed  upon  them,
41  Whatsoever  jou  seal  on  earth,**  said
the  Lord  to  the  ancient  Apostles,
•* shall  be  sealed  in  the  heavens."
What  could  be  of  more  importance
than  the  relationship  of  families  —
the  solemn  and  sacred  relationship  of
marriage?  Nothing  that  we  can  con-
ceive of.  It  affects  us  here  and  it
■fleets  us  hereafter  in  the  eternal
world;  the  re  to  re,  if  we  can  have
these  blessings  pronounced  upon


228


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


by  divine  anthority  and  we,  when  we
wake  up  in  the  morning  of  the  first
resurrection,  find  that  we  are  not
under  the  necessity  of  either  marry-
ing or  giving  in  marriage,  having
at  tended  to  our  duty  beforehand,  how
happy  we  shall  be  to  gather  our
wives  and  our  children  aronnd  us!
How  happy  old  Jacob  will  be,  lor
instance,  when  in  the  resurrection,  if
lie  has  not  already  been  raised — a
great  many  Saints  wore  raised  when
Jesus  arose  and  appeared  to  many—
if  Jacob  did  not  rise  then,  and  his
four  wives,  and  Ms  child ren,  how
happy  he  will  be,  when  he  does  come
forth  from  the  grave*,  to  embrace  his
family,  and  to  rejoice  with  them  in  a
fulness  of  joy,  knowing  that,  by  vir-
tue of  that  which  was  sealed  upon
him  here  in  time,  he  will  reign  upon
the  earth !  Will  it  not  be  a  glorious
thing,  when  that  polygamist,  by  vir-
tue of  promises  made  to  him  here,
comes  forth  to  reign  as  kin?  and
priest  over  his  seed  upon  the  earth?
1  think  that  in  those  days  polygamy
will  not  be  bated  as  it  is  now#  I
think  that  all  things  that  have  been
prophesied  by  the  ancient  prophets
will  bft  fulfilled,  and  that  Jacob  will
get.  his  wives,  by  virtue  of  the  cove-
nant of  marriage;  and  that  he  will
have  them  here  on  the  earth,  and  he
will  d  well  with  them  here  a  thousand
years,  in  spite  of  all  the  laws  that
may  be  passed  to  the  contrary.  And
they  will  bo  immortal  personages,  full
of  glory  and  happiness.  And  Jesus
will  also  be  here,  and  the  Twelve
Apostles  will  also  sit  on  the  twelve
thrones  here  on  the  earth,  judging
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel;  and  dur-
ing a  whole  thousand  years,  they
will  eat  and  drink  at  the  table  of  the
Lord,  according  to  the  promise  that
was  made  to  them.

Old  Father  Abraham  will  come  np
with  his  several  wives,  namely  Sarah,
Hagar  and  Keturah  and  tome  others


mentioned  in  Genesis;  and  besides
these  all  the  holy  prophets  "ill  be
here  on  the  earth.  I  do  not  think
there  will  be  any  legislation  against
polygamy.

By  and  by  they  will  build  a  poly-
gamous city,  and  it  will  have  twelve
gates,  and  in  order  to  place  as  much
honor  upon  these  gates  as  possible,
they  will  name  them  after  the  twelve
polygamist  children  that  were  born  to
t ho  four  polygamous  wives  of  Jacob;
and  these  good  old  poljgamists  will
be  assembled  together  in  this  beaut i-
'  fol  city,  the  most  beautiful  that  ever
had  place  on  the  earth.

By  and  by  some Christian  will
come  along,  and  he  will  look  tit  these
gates  arid  admire  their  beauty,  for
each  gate  is  to  be  constructed  of  one
immense  splendid  pearl Ti>e  gates
are  ch  sed  fast  and  very  hi^h,  and
while  admiring  their  beauty  he  ob-
serves the inscriptions  upon  them.
Being  a  Christian be  of  course
expects  to  enter,  but  looking  at  the
gates,  he  finds  the  name  of  Reuben
insciihed  on  one  of  them. Says  he
—  "lieu hen  was  a  polygamous  child
I  will  go  on  to  the  next,  and  see  if
there  is  the  name  of  a  monogamous
child  anywhere/' He  accordingly
visits  all  the  twelve  gates,  three  on
each  side  of  the  city,  and  finds  in*
scribed  on  each  gate  the  name  of  a
polygamous  child,  and  this  because
:  it  is  the  greatest  horn*  that  cou'd  be
conferred  ou  their  father  Jacob,  who
is  in  their  midst,  for  he  is  to  bit  down
with  all  the  honest  and  upright  in
heart  who  come  from  all  nations  to
1  partake of  the  blessings of  that
kingdom.

•But,"  says  this  Christian,  "I
1  really  do  not  like  this;  I  see  this  is
a  polygamous  city,  I  wonder  if
there  is  not  some  other  place  for  me!
I  do  not  like  the  company  of  polyga-
mist s.  They  were  hated  very  b  idly
back  yonder. Congress  bateJ  them*


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC*


the  President  hated  them,  the  cabinet
hated  them,  the  Priests  ha^eil  them,
and  everybody  hated  them,  and  I
engendered  the  same  hatred,  and  I
have  not  £Ot  rid  of  it  yet  I  wonder
if  there  is  not  some  other  place  for


me  ?v  Oh  yes,  there  is  another  place
for  you.  Without  the  gates  of  the
city  there  are  dogs,  sorcerers,  whore-
mongers, adulterers  and  whosoever
loveth  and  muketh  a  lie*  Now  take
your  choice,  A  in  en.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON.

Delivered  at  the  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake

City,  Thursday  Afternoon,  October  8,  1874.


(Reported  by  David  W*  Evam$.)


SEEK  FOR  PERFKfTION—  KEION  OF RIGHTEOUSNESS — LIVE IN U MON-
TH E  UNITED  ORDER.


Six  weeks  ngo  yesterday  I  left  this  r
city  to  visit  the  settlements  through-
out the  southern  portion  of  our  Ter-
ritory. My  trip  his  been  one  of  the
most  interesting  and  pleasant  I  ever
undertook,  and  I  have  rejoiced  ex-
ceedingly in  the  opportunity  which  I
have  had  of  meeting  with  the  pea-
pie  in  that  section  of  country.
There  ia  a  great  anxiety  in  many
places  and  with  many  people  to  know
what  the  condition  of  affiira  is  in
that  region.  I  can  say  that  I  never
saw  our  people  feeling  better  as  a
general  thing,  and  more  willing  to
do  that  which  is  required  of  them
than  at  the  present  time.  There  was
great  anxiety  among  -them  to  be
instructed,  and  the  meetings  in  every
instance  were  crowded>  the  people
turning  out  with  great  alacrity,  and
expressing  regret  that  we  count  not
stay  longer.  Brother  Eragtto  Snow
and  brother  Husser  and  myself  at-


tended most  of  the  meetings*  Part
of  the  time  in  visiting  the  western
settlements  I  was  alone.  The  anxiety
of  the  people  seems  to  be  to  know
what  to  do  and  to  be  instructed  in
the  best  manner  of  doing  that  which
God  requires  at  their  hands;  and
this  is  the  spirit  which,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  we  should  entertain  and
cherish,  God  has  called  us  to  be  a
peculiar  people;  he  has  raised  up
Prophets,  has  organized  his  Church,
has  placed  within  it  those  callings
and  offices  and  gifts  and  qualifica-
tions and  blessings  which  character-
ized the  Church  in  ancient  days,  and
he  has  condescended  in  his  mercy  and
goodness  to  reveal  himself  unto  the
children  of  men,  to  teach  them,  coun-
sel them  a  [id  inspire  them  so  tt«at
they  may  be  instruments  in  his  hands
in  building  up  his  kingdom,  and
laying  the  foundation  of  that  work
of  which  the  Prophets  have  spoken,


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  which  we  are  told  shall  stand  for
ever We  ns  a  people,  with  t!.^  views
which  we  entertain,  should  not  make
up  our  mi  rids  to  live  in  accordance
with  the  methods  of  fi'e,  the  model
of  doing  business,  and  t lie  habits  and
the  tradition**  of  our  forefathers,  who
have  lived  in ignorance of  ihese
principles  and  of  t liis  spirit  of  reve-
lation— for  we  are  n  quired,  in  obey-
ing this  Gospel,  to  liuhl  out-set  vis  in
a  position  to  receive  the  won)  of  God,
to  be  counselled,  to  he  dinc'ed,  to
be  guided  by  that  word  in  ail  our
transactions,  in  the  doctrines  which
we  believe,  in  the  habits  of  1  fe  wh  ch
we  adopt  and  in  a] I  our  practices  and
labors. This  is  one  of  the  tir.>t.  les-
sons which  is  impressed  ii[Mm  us  in
starting  oat  in  obedience  to  tin*  Gos-
pel of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The
very  first  teachings  we  received  im-
pressed upon  our  minds  the  necessity
of forsaking  tuese  errors  and  fdse
traditions  which  we  have  received
fmm  our  fathers — errors  in  doctrine,
faUe  traditions  concerning  God,  con-
cerning his  kingdom,  and  concerning  |
the  plan  of  salvation  which  be  lias
revealed;  and  if  we  have  prufited  by
that  first  lesson  we  have  been  con  tin-
uully  progressing,  learning  newt ruths,
new  to  us,  acquiring  knowledge  c in-
coming  ourselves, concerning the  i
work  with  which  we  are  connected,
concerning  the  earth  and  the  inhab-
itants thereof,  and  we  have  been  un-
learning and  forsaking  the  errors  and
the  faults  of  our  forefathers  and  of  i
the  world  from  which  we  have  been
gathered.  I
The  prayer  which  Jesus  taught  his
disciples  to  ask  the  Father  that  his
kingdom  might  come,  and  his  will  be
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  will
be  fulfilled  by  means  of  this  work
with  which  we  are  identified.  The
foundation of that kingdom  has
already  been  laid. And  the  aim  of
every  true  Latter-day  Saint,  from  the


day  that  he  or  she  joined  this  Church
until  to-day,  has  been  to  approximate
to  t hat  life  which  we  are  told  is  led
by  those  who  are  exalted  through
keeping  the  commandments  of  God —
to  do  the  will  of  God  on  earth  as  it
is  done  in  heaven;  for  as  the  Apostle
John  says — 41  Beloved,  now  ;ue  we
the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet
appear  what  we  shall  be;  but  we
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we
shall  l>e  like  him,  for  we  shall  see
hira  as  he  is.  And  every  man  that
h^ith  this  hope  within  him  purifieth
himself  even  as  he  is  pure."'  So
with  the  Latter-day  Saints,  they
have  a  hope  of  salvation  within
them,  they  desire  to  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  they  have
lieen  seeking,  from  the  beginning
until  to-day,  to  purify  themselves,  to
live  a  heavenly  life,  and  to  reduce  to
practice  in  their  daily  walk  and  con-
versation, those  precepts  and  laws,
obedience  to  which  would  prepare
them  to  dwell  eternally  with  God  in
the  heavens.  .

There  is  a  characteristic  about  the
faith  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in
which  they  perhaps  differ  from  most
of  the  professed  followers  of  Jesus
Christ — they  do  not  believe  that  God
expects  or  desires  them  to  put  off
acquiring  these  perfections,  powers,
gifts  and  graces  which  belong  to
the  heavenly  world  until  they  reach
that  world ;  but  they  believe  that
God  has  placed  them  here  in  a  statp
ot  probation,  and  that  he  has  hid
himself  only  to  a  certain  extent  from
them;  that  he  has  drawn  a  veil  of
darkness  between  himself  and  his
children  on  the  earth  for  the  purpose
of  trying  their  faith,  of  developing
their  knowledge  and  testing  their
integrity,  so  th  t  those  who  will  feel
alter  him  in  faith,  persevering  in  the
midst  of  ignoiance,  darkness,  doubt,
confusion  and  the  temptations  of
Satan,  and  all  the  evils  with  which


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC,


231


we  come  in  contact  in  this  state  of
being  may  receive  his  blessings  ami
the  gifts,  graces  and  favor*  which  he
bestows  upon  his  most  favored  chil-
dren. Hence!  the  Latter-day  Saints
believe  in  doing  everything  here  that
will  help  to  prepare  them  for  life
eternal  in  his  presence.  They  look
upon  this  world  as  a  place  where  they
should  attend  to  these  tilings.  By
baptism  ?  Yes,  By  having  hands
laid  upon  them  ?  Yes*  Have  the
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Certainly,
have  them  here  as  well  as  hereafter  ;
have  them  here  to  a  partial  extent  to
prepare  them  for  the  Life  that  is  to
come.  Have  the  voice  of  God  here  ?
Yes,  why  should  we  not  know  God's
will  here  ?  Why  should  we  he  closed
out  entirely  from  all  knowledge  of
God  here,  and  yet  believe  that  as
soon  as  we  die  wo  are  ushered  into
the  fulness  of  his  glory.  Receive
these  blessings  here  ?  Yes,  every
blessing  that  is  necessary.  Be  perfect
here  ?  Yes,  it  is  man's  privilege,
the  Latter-day  Saints  believe,  to  be
as  perfect  in  his  sphere  as  God  our
eternal  Father  is  in  his  sphere,  or  as
Jesus  iii  liis  sphere,  or  as  the  angels
in  their  spheres.  Said  Jesus  to  his
disciples — "  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as
your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect/'
Perfection,  then,  is  to  a  certain  extent
possible  on  earth  for  those  who  will
live,  lives  that  are  agreeable  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God*

Now  as  fast  as  the  Latter-day
Saints  can  comprehend  the  life  that
God,  his  angels  and  those  who  are
made  perfect  in  his  presence  lead,
they  s  iould  be  willing,  and  I  believe
that  the  most  of  them  are  willing,
to  copy  after  that  life  in  this  state  as
quickly  as  possible,  u  Well  but,"
says  one,  44  how  useless  it  is  for  frail,
fallible,  mortal  beings  to  attenpt  to
live  lives  of  perfection  like  the  angels
and  those  who  are  just  and  perfect
in  the  presence  of  God ! " 1  know


that  if  we  are  to  judge  of  men  na-
turally, as  we  see  them  in  the  midst
of  their  sins,  breaking  the  owimand-
ments  of  God,  trampling  upon  his
holy  ordinances,  disregarding  his
requirements,  we  should  $<iy  it  is
useless;  and  it  is  not  only  useless  but
it  is  impossible  for  men  ever  to  reach
that  perfection  of  which  we  speak.
Bsit  I  am  encouraged  in  my  hopes
that  perfection,  to  a  certain  extent  at
le;ist,  is  possible  even  in  this  mortal
life,  by  witnessing  the  results  in  tho
in i list  of  a  people  who  aie  striving
after  it.  I  know  that  the  eff  rts  of
this  people  in  this  direction,  though
not  always  crooned  with  the  success
that  we  h?*ve  desired,  yet  there  lias
been  abundant  causa  for  rejoicing
and  thanksgiving  in  tho  progress
which  we  have  made.  We  have
attained  unto  a  degree  of  union  and
love  that  approximates  to  Rome  extent,
to  that  union  and  love  which  we
believe  exist  in  the  eternal  worlds.
We  have  not  yet  reached,  probably,
that  point  when  we  can  love  our
neighbor  as  w«  do  ourselves;  bub
still,  if  we  strive  for  and  keep  that
object  in  view,  and  endeavor  to  reach
that  perfection,  undoubtedly  we  fdiall
overcome  our  selfishness,  and  all
those  feelings  which  seem  to  be  a  part
of  fdlen  human  nature,  sufficiently
to  carry  out  that  command  of  God,
If  we  could  get  a  glimpse  of  hea-
ven, that  heaven  to  winch  we  are
hastening,  or  to  which  we  hope  we
arc  hastening,  have  you  any  idea
that  there  would  be  any  conflict  of
interests  among  the  inhabitants  of
that  blissful  abode?  Do  you  ima-
gine that  we  should  see  one  arrayed
against  another,  that  thf  re  would  be
clashing  and  struggling,  each  one
scrambling  to  get  the  advantage  of
his  neighbor,  and  to  acquire  influence
and  power,  and  the  blessings  that
belong  to  that  abode  more  and  greater
than  his  neighbor? That  is  not  the


idea  that  we  have  formed  of  heaven ;
we  have  not  entertained  such  views,
bat  we  imagine  when  we  get  there
that  God  will  be  the  possessor — he  is
the  possessor — of  all  things  that  are
comprehended  within  thatspheieof
existence, that the thrones,  the
principalities; powers and  crown?,
and  even  the  very  garments  that  the
exalted  wear  helnng  to  God,  and  that
he  will  give  them  to  us,  that  we  shall
possess  them,  subject,  of  course,  to
his  law  and  to  those  regulations  which
he  will  enact,  or  winch  he  basal  read}'
enacted, I  do  not  suppose  there  was
a  Christum  that  ever  lived,  1  do  not
suppose  tlieie  was  a  heathen  that
ever  lived  who  expected  that,  when
he  got  to  the  next  world,  to  the  place
of  bliss  which  he  anticipated  in  his
faith  while  here,  he  would  live  in
anything  like  the  condition  he  occu-
pied here. Converge  with  the  Christ-
ians about  the  next  world,  and  they
will  all  say  that  they  do  not  expect
1u have anything; that  they  are
redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of
the  Lamb,  and  that  all  the  glory  and
honor  of  their  salvation  they  ascribed
unto  God  and  the  Lamb;  that  they
will  be  content  with  anything  he
chooses  to  give  them  when  they  reach
there,  they  would  be  content  to  be
door-keepers  or  to  occupy  the  lowest
position  if  they  could  only  be  permit-
ted to  dwell  in  the  presence  of  God.
And  the  heathen  who  believe  in  a
future  state  of  existence,  and  thin  be-
lief is  universal  among  them,  (I  be-
lieve it  was  Bancroft  who  said  that
•  theism  is  the  sin  or  crime  of  civili-
zation, and  not  of  heathendom  or  of
natural  men.)  the  heathen  universally
believe  in  a  tature  state  of  existence,
and tln*y picture to  themselves  a
condition  such  as  I  have  described,
of  course  varying  areordiug  to  their
faith  and  their  viyvs  of  this  life,
tli inking  that  they  will  have  circutn-
stances  similar  in  that  life  which  is


to  come,  with  this  difference  only,
that  they  will  be  more  perfect  and
will  be  delivered  from  the  evils  to
which  they  are  subjected  here  as
mortal  bungs.

If  then,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
we  are  striving  to  live  in  accordance
with  that  life  to  which  wc  are  has-
tening, we,  by  a  little  reflection,  can
see  how  much  there  is  for  us  to  do
in  order  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
One  of  the  first  teachings  or  revela-
tions that  was  given  to  this  church
after  its  organ  i  ant  ion,  was  to  the  ef-
fect that  we  should  dwell  together  as
une  family:  that  there  should  be  an
identity  of  interests  among  ns;  that
we  should  approximate  to  some  ex-
tern t  at  least,  and  as  far  as  practicable
to  that  identy  of  interest  which  we
understood,  by  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ,  to  exist  in  the  eternal
worlds.  This  revelation  is  one  of
the  earliest  given  to  this  people,  and
its  practice  was  entered  upon  in  early
days*  We  have  been  told  by  those
who  are  old  enough  to  know,  and
who  had  experience  at  that  time,  that
to  the  disobedience  or  failure  of  the
people  in  carrying  out  this  revelation
was  due  the  ex^uihlon  of  the  Lattcr-
day  Saints  from  Jackson  county  in
the  Stale  of  Missouri;  and  that,
afterward,  the  same  causes  operated
to  produce  the  resulU  which  the  peo-
ple experienced  at  that  time,  God
suffering  the  enemies  of  his  kingdom
and  people  to  have  power  over  them
because  of  their  disobedience  to
respond  to  the  call  which  he  made
upon,  and  to  the  commandments
which  he  gave  unto,  them.

This  is  one  of  the  traditions  that
lias  come  down  to  us  of  a  younger
generation,  from  the  fathers  of  this
Church.  It  has  been  i&ught  to  us
and  impressed  upon  us  for  year.^,
probably  upou  many  of  since  wc
knew  anything  of  this  work,  until


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC


2Z3


the  belief  is  fastened  upon  the
hearty  consciences  and  feelings  of
the  great  bulk  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  that  at  some  time  or
other,  in  the  future  of  this  Church
that  doctrine  would  be  again  taught,
and  the  requirements  embodied  in
that  revelation  would  be  ngain  made
upon  us  as  a  people ;  in  fact  the
teachings  I  havn  received  have  been
that  until  we  did  obey  that  the  privi-
lege of  going  back  and  building  up
the  centre  stake  of  Zion  and  redeem-
ing that  land  which  God  tirst  gave
unto  his  people  as  an  inheritance,  in
the  State  of  Missouri,  would  not  be
granted  unto  us,  and  that  until  we
did  obey  it  we  should  bo  pilgrims
and  wanderers,  and  should  not  have
the  privilege  of  fjoing  back  and  lay-
ing the  foundation  of  the  centre
Btakti  of  Zion  and  of  that  great  Tem-
ple which  God  has  said  shall  be
reared  in  this  generation.  So  that
for  years,  speaking  of  my  own  feel-
ings, I  have  awaited,  I  will  not  s*»y
with  anxiety,  but,  with  great  desire,
the  time  when  this  people  would  have
sufficient  faith,  and  when  t lie  circum-
stances should  be  so  favorable  that
God  should  command  us  to  enter
upon  the  practice  of  that  principle,  or
to  enter  into  that  order  which  he  com-
manded us  in  the  beginning  to  obey.

Every  time  I  have  traveled  among
the  nations  of  the  earth,  I  have
thanked  God  that  he  had  provided
a  panacea  for  the  evils  which  I  unw
everywhere  around  me*  When  I
saw  the  rich  revelling  in  luxury,
crowding  upon  the  poor,  crushing  out.
their  lives,  the  poor  living  in  squalor
and  misery,  their  lives  a  burden  to
them,  not  having,  in  many  instances,
enough  food  to  eat,  or  raiment  to
wear,  or  a  shelter,  and  when  winter
approached  dreading  it  with  feelings
indescribable.  In  society  in  the
world  there  is  a  large  class  of  people
having  more  means  than  they  can


spend  for  their  comfort  and  conveni-
ence. They  have  the  finest  houses,
abundance  of  food,  every  con  venience,
troops  of  servants  to  wait  upon  them
to  do  their  bidding,  and  have  all  the
wealth  they  can  desire,  every  luxury
they  c  in  conceive  of.  At  the  same
lime  there  are  living  in  the  sime
community  thousands  of  poor  crea-
tures destitute  of  the  necessaries  of
life-  My  heart  has  been  pained
within  me  in  visiting  the  large  cities
of  Europe,  at  seeing  women  degraded
like  beasts  of  the  field,  and  their
lives  continual  bnrdens  to  them,  their
existence  almost  joyless,  h  has  been
a  won  dor  to  me  how  people  could
keep  from  committing  suicide  in  the
midst  of  the  want  jhat  was  every-
where apparent.  I  Intve  thong  hL
how  can  God  bear  with  thin  people,
and  the  cries  of  the  poor  ascending
to  him  continually;  and,  as  I  have
said,  I  have  thanked  God  in  my  heart
that  he  hud  provided  a  means  of  deli-
verance from  such  evils  for  his  people.

There  is  an  expression  used  in  the
prophets,  which  1  have  often  thought
of,  about  the  rich  grinding  the  faces
of  the  poo£  It  is  a  most  fotcible
and  significant  metaphor.  The  tyr-
rany  and  oppression  that  are  prac-
ticed upon  the  poor  are  terrible.  In
many  places  their  faces  are  literally
ground  by  those  who  rule  over  them.
Yet  t iu  t e  are  philanthropic  men  and
women,  rich  people  who  do  not  take
comfort  in  their  riches  because  of  the
ex  stence  of  this  misery  on  every
hand  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and
they  form  benevolent  societies  of
every  natae  and  nature  in  order  to
relieve  the  wants  of  the  suffering
pour,  and  yet.  with  all  their  eflorts
the  suffering  is  not  lessened  to  any
measumble  extent.  The  people  live
and  toil  and  die  in  the  most  squaled
misery  hy  thousands  in  =  j 1 1  the  large
cities  of  thickly  populated  countries*
I  have  uls  >,  iu  conversation  at  vari*


234  JOURNAL  OF

ous  times  and  under  various  circum-
fstarces,  been  told  by  those  with
whum  I  have  conversed  and  who
have  taken  some  interest  in  the  work
with  which  we  are  identified,  that  so
long  as  we  were  a  primitive  people
and  were  simple  in  oar  habits,  bo
lontr  as  we  did  not  have  a  great  deal
of  wealth  in  our  midst  we  should
probably  continue  to  prosper  and  in-
crease and  bring  forth  and  manifest
in  our  lives  t lie  virtues  which  I
described  as  having  an  existence
among  us.  Men  have  told  me —
"O  yes,  Mr.  Cannon,  the  picture  you
draw  of  the  manner  of  life  of  your
people  is  very  delightful  ;  it  is  de-
lightful to  find  a  people  exhibiting
such  qualities  as  you  describe  as  exist-
ing among,  or  possessed  by,  your  peo-
ple ;  bat  you  are  a  new  people,  a  new
s<  ci  or  denomination  ,  but  wait
awhile,  wait  until  you  have  grown  in
wealth,  importance,  numbers  and
power,  and  then  we  shall  see  whether
your  system  possesses  elements  supe-
rior to  the  systems  with  \v;;ich  we
are  acquainted  and  which  have  prece-
ded yours."  Men  who  have  reflected,
who  have  read  and  made  themselves
acquainted  with  the  histories  of  other
pe-  pies,  know  full  well  that  when
once  wealth  increases  in  the  midst  of
a  people,  when  class  distinctions
make  their  nppearanee,  when  ed □ca-
tion is  promoted  and  aspired  after  by
certain  classes  which  other  classes
cannot  reach;  when  refinement,  the
refinement  of  education  and  culture,
has  its  effects,  creating  distinctions
among  a  people  who  originally  were
primitive,  and  luxurious  habits  come
in  to  foster  these  differences,  then  the
strength  of  former  com  muni  lies  has
disappeared,  and  nations  which  have
been  noted  as  possessing  the  strength
and  the  union  uf  iron,  have  fallen
into  decay  and  have  lost  their  power
and  have  been  broken  into  fragments
ami have eventually  disappeared.


DISCOURSES,

!  Judging  us  by  the  light  of  this  kind
of  experience  many  have  made  pre-
dictions which  you  have  probably
seen  in  the  papers  thousands  of
times,  that  there  were  causes  operat-
ing in  the  midst  of  the  Mormon
community  that  would  work  out  its
disintegration  and  eventually  bring
about  its  utter  overthrow  and  down-
fall, or  at  least  bring  about  an  assimi-
lation between  it  and  the  systems  by
which  it  was  surrounded.

There  is  one  thing,  however,  that  is
not  taken  into  account  in  measuring
us,  and  that  is  that  God  lias  laid  the

|  foundation  of  this  work.  Men  do
not  recognize  that,  but  they  recog-
nize other  causes  and  other  influences
that  are  apparent  to  them  and  with
which  they  are  familiar  We  have
consoled  ourselves,  in  listening  to
these  predictions,  with  the  reflection
that  we  are  the  people  of  God,  that
God  has  made  promises  unto  this
people,  that  be  has  said  that  this
work  shall  stand  forever,  and  shall
not  be  given  into  the  hands  of  an-
other people*  These  predictions,
therefore,  have  not  had  any  di scour*
raging  effect  upon  us.  But,  with  all
our  confidence,  we  must  not  lose
sight  of  the  fact,  that  God  works  by
means.  If  we  are  to  withstand  the
encroachments  of  the  evil  one  we
must,  on  our  part,  do  that  which  will
fortify  us  against  his  encroachments,
we  must  take  steps  to  render  us
impregnable  to  his  assaults.  We  are
not  the  first  people  to  engage  in  such
a  work  as  this.  Others  have  made
repeated  attempts  to  establish  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  One

;  by  one  the  prophets  fell,  one  by  one
they  became  victims  to  the  power  of
the  evil  one  and  to  the  assaults  of

I  the  wicked. The  Son  of  God  him-  -

'  Belt  fell  a  martyr  to  this  fell  spirit  ;
his  apostles  one  by  one,  although
they  endeavored  in  their  day  aud
generation  to  establish  this  order  of


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC.


235


Enoch  to  which  I  have  referred,  also
fell  martys  to  the  same  spirit  of  per-
secution, until  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  had  either  slain  or  driven  off
every  apostle,  and  not  a  man  was
left  to  stand  up  in  the  midst  of  the
people  to  say — "Thus  saith  the
Lord,"  having  the  authority  and
power  of  the  apostlcship  and  of  the
holy  priesthood  from  God  to  admin-
inister  in  the  things  of  God  and  to
communicate  the  mind  and  will  of
God  unto  the  people*

What  followed  ?  A  reign  of  night,
darkness  and  confusion  covered  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  There  was
no  heavenly  voice  to  disturb  the  sol-
emn stillness  that  ensued.  Every
man  of  God  who  aspired  to  revela-
tion had  been  killed  or  swept  from
among  men,  and  then,  and  not  till
then  was  the  vengeance  of  the  adver-
sary satiated ;  but  as  long  as  there
was  a  holy  man,  who  aspired  to  the
distinction,  or  to  the  honor  or  blessing
of  knowing  God's  will  so  long  there
were  those  arrayed  against  him  who
scrupled  not  to  shed  his  blood,  and
were  not  satisfied  until  that  blood
was  spilled.

You  trace  the  various  dispensa-
tions down  from  the  days  of  Adam
until  the  days  of  these  apostles  of
which  I  have  spoken,  and  see  how
short-lived  were  the  attempts  to
establish  a  reign  of  righteousness.
If  we  turn  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,
which  gives  an  account  of  God's
dealings  on  this  land,  we  shall  find
that  while  the  circumstances  which
surrounded  the  Jaredites  and  the
Nephites  were  more  favorable  than
those  which  surrounded  the  people  of
Asia,  yet  the  same  causes  operated
on  this  land,  and  after  Jesus  came
and  the  wicked  had  been  swept  off  by
the  judgments  of  God,  and  none  were
left  but  those  who  were  righteous  or
paitly  so  at  least,  that  then  they
sought  to  establish  this  holy  order


among  them  and  were  successful,  it
continuing  in  their  midst  until  the
year  two  hundred  and  one  after  the
birth  of  Jesus,  And  we  are  told
that  during  that  time  all  the  genera-
tions that  lived  passed  away  in
righteousness  before  the  Lord.  The
circumstances  were  undoubtedly  fa-
vorable for  the  establishment  of  an
holy  order  among  that  pen  pie,  be-
cause, as  I  have  said,  the  judgments
of  God  had  visited  the  land,  and  the
wicked  had  been  swept  off;  but  no
sooner  did  they  begin  again  to  divide,
each  one  seeking  after  his  own  affairs
to  the  exclusion  of  the  general  affairs
of  the  people  than  they  began  again
to  fall  into  sin  and  transgression,  and
the  result  was  that  they  were  pun-
ished of  God,  and  the  Nephites  were
eventually  blotted  out;  but  we  are
informed  that  one  hundred  and  sixty-
seven  years,  terminating  in  the  year
Si! 01  of  the  Christian  era,  were  passed
in  perfect  peace  and  righteousness.
It  was  almost  millennial  righteous-
ness. Satan  was  bound  almost  as
much  during  that  one  hundred  and
sixty-seven  years  in  his  operations
a  MNg  the  Nephites,  if  we  may  judge
by  the  short  record  which  lias  come
to  us,  as  if  he  did  not  have  an  exist-
ence, or  as  he  will  be  during  the
thousand  years'  rtign  of  peace,  that
is  so  far  as  leading  away  the  hearts
of  the  people  to  commit  sin  is  con-
cerned.

I  have  alluded  to  these  various
attempts  on  the  part  of  holy  men  to
establish  truth  and  righteousness  on
the  earth.  We  have  seen  that  they
have  only  been  partially  successful;
they  did  not  succeed  in  overcoming
sufficiently  to  entirely  bind  Satan
and  to  banish  from  the  earth  the
evils  of  which  he  is  the  cause;  but
we  are  told  that  in  the  last  days  God
will  establish  his  kingdom  Brother
Penrose  described,  this  morning,  in
the  close  of  his  remarks,  some  of  the


236


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


results  which  should  follow*  He  said
that  the  Iamb  and  the  wolf  should
lie  down  together,  nnd  the  bear  and
the  cow  should  feed  together,  and
there  alio  aid  be  nothing  to  hurt  or
destroy  in  all  the  mountain  of  the
Lord,  but  that  peace  and  union  and
love  should  prevail  throughout  the
ear tli  for  one  thousand  years.  The
Prophets  have  spoken  of  this  time,
those  to  whom  I  have  referred,  who
fell  victims  to  the  rage  of  their  per-
secutors ;  they  looked  forward  to  the
time  when  this  kingdom  should  be
established  and  should  be  successful,
and  they  dwelt  upon  it  with  great
delight  and  anticipation.  The  Apos-
tles John,  the  Revelator,  speaks
about  a  thousands  years  of  peace  and
righteousness,  when  Satan  should  be
bould  and  should  not  have  power
over  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
men  to  tempt  them,  or  to  lead  them
astray,  and  that  this  should  hist  for
one  thousand  years,  and  then  at  the
close  ot  that  period  he  should  be
loosed  again  for  a  little  season.

The  revelations  which  we  have
received  through  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith  .speak  of  the  same  period,  that
is,  anticipate  such  a  time  as  this  that
the  Apostle  John  £  peaks  of;  and  we
have  been  taught  from  the  beginning
until  the  present  time  that  this  work,
this  system,  this  gospel,  called  Mor-
monism,  should  be  the  beginning  of
this  work,  and  that  it  should  spread
and  increase  until  it  should  till  the
whole  earth,  and  bring  to  pass  the
fulfill  ment  of  these  predictions*  Now
what  I  wish  to  impress  upon  your
minds,  in  bringing  them  to  this
point  is  this,  that  if  we  are  engaged
in  a  work  that  is  to  be  more  success-
ful than  any  other  work  that  has  been
established  by  God  our  Heavenly  Fa-
ther from  the  beginning  until  now  there
must  be  greater  faith  and  union,
there  must  be  more  power,  there
must  be  a  willingness  to  sacritice


more  than  1ms  ever  been  manifested
by  any  people  who  have  preceded  us
in  works  of  this  character,  or  in  any
dispensation  which  God  has  given
unto  men.  I  know  that  many  think
thai  Cod  will  do  a  great  deal.  I
believe  that  I  am  a  believer  in  God's
power  to  the  fullest  extent,  but
I  have  noticed  in  my  experience
that  God  works  by  means,  and  that
he  does  not  himself  come  down  in
person,  neither  does  he  send  his
angels  down,  except  on  visits  occa-
sionally; but  he  commands  his  peo-
ple, his  children  on  the  earth  to  do
that  which  he  requires  at  their  hands,
and  then  helps  them  in  doing  this,
and  ray  conclusion  is  that  if  we  lay
the  foundation  of  a  work  that  shall
stand  forever,  that  shall  never  be
overthrown  or  given  into  the  hands
of  anutber  people,  we  must  have
more  faith,  practice  a  higher  right-
eousness, ho  more  valiant  for  the
tnu  h  and  possess  more  of  God's
power  than  any  people  who  have  ever
preceded  us.  Are  we  prepared  for
this?  Did  the  Latter-day  Saints
take  this  into  their  calculation  when
they  joined  this  church?  If  they
did,  it  is  well,  if  they  did  not,  (hey
had  better  begin  to  investigate  the
matter  and  satisfy  themselves  as  to
what  their  duties  are.  It  may  be
said,  as  I  have  already  stated,  that
God  will  assist  ua.  Undoubtedly  he
will;  lie  assisted  his  servants  in
ancient  days.  But  we  have  a  foe  to
contend  with  who  is  sleepless*  The
adversary  of  our  souls  has  not  lost
bis  cunning,  He  knows  that  his
time  is  short  ami  that  the  last  strug-
gle is  approaching,  and  he  will  not
relax  in  the  least  degree  his  vigilance
or  his  diligence  in  seeking  to  destroy
this  work  and  to  martyr  or  destroy
the  men  and  the  women  connected
with  it.  The  supremacy  of  the  earth
depends  upon  the  issue  of  the  con-
test* He  has  held  the  sway,  he  has


SEEK  FOR  FEHFECTIONj  ETC


237


been  dominant,  he  has  been  success
ful  in  destroying  the  holiest  and  the
beat  that  ever  trod  the  earth's  surface.
The  Son  of  God  himself  and  the
pure  and  holy  in  all  ages  he  has  suc-
ceeded in  destroying,  and  in  spreading
his  pall  of  darkness  over  the  earth,  j
and  in  destroying  faith  from  the
midst  of  the  children  of  men,  and
now  that  the  attempt  is  made  to
revive  the  work  of  God  and  to
establish  his  kingdom  on  the  earth
we  may  make  calculations  with  all
certainty  that  he  will  not  cease  his
endeavors  until  either  he,  or  God  and
his  kingdom  are  triumphant.  He
wants  to  vanquish  and  he  will  van-
quish if  possible,  and  he  will  spare
no  means  to  destroy  this  work,  for  if
it  is  established  the  foundation  of  his
kingdom  is  sapped,  I
There  are  principles  taught  unto
us  now  which  will  fortify  m  more
effectually  than  anything  that  has
ever  been  taught  to  us  before,  so  far
as  resisting  this  pressure  that  is
brought  to  bear  upon  us  to  destroy
us.  I  refer  to  this  Order  to  which  I
have  alluded  before — the  Order  of
God,  the  order  that  is  called  after
Enoch  because,  as  we  are  told  in  the
revelations,  he  established  it  among
his  people,  and  brought  about  that
perfection  which  enabled  him  and  his
city  to  be  translated,  I  know  there
are  many  feelings  among  the  people
in  relation  to  this.  I  have  heard
more  since  I  returned  to  Salt  Lake
City,  in  the  few  days  I  have  been
here  concerning  the  feelings  of  men
who  call  themselves  Latter-day
Saints,  than  I  imagined  existed
among  us,  In  the  south  the  people
have  organized,  and  they  have  gone
along  very  well  during  this  last  sea-  ,
son.  Bishop  Callister  remarked  to  1
me,  when  I  was  at  Fillmore  passing
south,  that  he  doubted  whether
Enoch  himself  and  his  people  made
more  or  better  progress  than  they


had  made  in  the  same  time.  I
doubted  it  also,  and  subsequent  obser-
vation confirmed  tho  truth  of  this
remark.  So  far  as  other  settlements
are  concerned  I  found  the  people  in
some  instances  discouraged  a  little,
but  on  the  whole  they  were  greatly
■  encouraged  by  the  results  of  the  sea-
i  sons  labor,  and  they  felt  to  organize
themselves  more  perfectly  according
to  the  new  articles  of  association,
and  to  carry  out  the  requirements
which  had  been  made  upon  them.  I
was  delighted  in  visiting  a  little  town
on  the  banks  of  the  Rio  Virgen,
called  Price.  There  the  superintend-
ent of  the  farminsf,  Brother  Baker,
remarked,  "  I  wish  you  had  come
about  an  hour  earlier,  you  would  have
seen  us  all  here  together  at  our  meal."
Said  I — "What  do  you  mean  ?  "  He
said  they  had  just  got  through  din-
neer.  Said  I — "  Do  you  eat  toge-
ther P  *  "  O  yes/*  said  he,  "  we  have
been  living  as  one  family  all  this
season/*  I  was  surprised  fur  I  had
not  heard  of  it,  and  I  was  so  much
interested  in  it  that  I  commenced
to  make  enquiries  as  to  their  condi-
tion. I  found  that  there  were  from
forty  to  forty-four  men,  women  and
children  who  had  joined  together  in
accordance  with  the  counsel  given
by  President  Young  while  in  the
South.  They  had  proceeded  to  farm
together,  and  to  live  together  as
one  family.  I  thought  that  the  best
persons  that  I  could  refer  to,  to  ob-
tain information  as  to  the  real  work-
ings of  the  affair  would  be  the  sisters,,
so  I  proceeded  to  interrogate  them.
The  leading  sister  told  me  that  some-
times it  was  rather  bard  work.  I
did  not  wonder  at  it  when  I  saw  the
kitchen.  They  had  three  small  cook*
ing  stoves,  and  they  were  quite
inconveniently  situated.  But  she
added — "  We  have  felt  excellently
and  feel  greatly  encouraged,"  Said
I — "  Are  the  people  satistied  ?  don't


23«


JUUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


you  sometimes  have  fault-fitidins^  with
your  conkinu,  or  your  meals,  or  some-
thing of  this  kind  ?  M  No,  she  said,
there  h:td  been  no  fault  found.  "How
do  the  sisters  feel*  are  they  tired  of
it?"  No,  she  said,  they  were  not,
they  felt  greatly  encouraged,  and  they
divided  the  labor  so  that  it  was  not
very  heavy  upon  any  of  them,  not
too  heavy,  **  How  do  you  arrange
about  your  washing  ?"  They  told
me,  that  in  the  beginning  they  put
their  washing  all  together,  but  they
had  no  machinery,  and  they  found
that  it  was  no  advantage,  as  it  was
too  heavy  even  for  the  strong  women,
and  they  concluded  that  it  was  better
to  divide  their  washing,  and  for  each
fumily  to  do  its  own,  I  spoke  to  the
Superintendent — **  How  do  you  man*
age  with  your  men?  Are  the  bre-
thren willing,  when  you  require  them
lo  do  anything,  do  they  go  with  alac-
rity, or  do  you  have  difficulty  in
controlling  them?"  "Not  in  the
least,"  said  lie,  "  I  have  never  made
a  requirement  or  asked  a  man  to  do
a  thing  that  he  has  refused  to  do,  and
in  our  forming  they  have  worked  well
and  patiently  together,  and  they  are
satisfied  with  the  arrangement/*  I
spoke  to  others  who  worked  there
and  made  inquiries  of  them,  and
I  found,  in  every  instance,  that  there
was  a  good  deal  of  satisfaction  in  the
arrangement,  and  they  hoped,  if  they
could  yet  up  a  suitable  building  and
have  suitable  convenience  for  their
cooking,  that  a  threat  deal  of  this
labor  wuuld  be  lightened  and  they
would  get  along  much  better  even
than  they  had  done,

Brother  Samuel  Miles  is  one  of
the  company,  a  man  whom  many  of
this  congregation  know,  and  who  has
been  a  long  time  in  the  Church.  I
talked  with  him,  being  an  old  ac-
quaintance, and  he  told  me  that,
from  his  observation  during  the  entire
season,  he  deemed  that  what  was


originally  an  experiment  was  an  en-
tire success,  and  he  felt  very  much
gratified  with  the  result  After
rising  in  the  morning  they  meet  in
one  room  together  and  have  prayers ;
then  they  sit  down  to  breakfast,  and
while  at  breakfast  the  Superintendent
converses  with  the  men  as  to  the  ar-
rangement of  labor  for  the  day;  Af-
ter breakfast  they  go  to  their  work,
one  to  one  department,  another  to
another.  At  noon  they  again  assem-
ble, for  dinner,  cat  their  dinner  after
having  asked  a  blessing  upon  it,  and
then  spend  a  little  leisure — until  ono
o'clock  or  the  hour  expires — and  then
resume  their  labors.  They  come
together  again  in  the  evening,  when
they  have  supper  and  attend  to
prayers,  and  spend  the  remainder  of
the  evening  in  social  conversation  or
in  conversation  on  business  or  in
arranging  their  affairs,  as  the  case
may  be*  '

I  afterwards  visited  a  little  settle-
ment of  the  name  of  Hebron,  where
there  are  about  thirty  families.  Tho
Bishop,  George  H.  Crosby,  said  they
had  brick  and  lumber  on  hand  to
build  several  residences,  but  they
hesitated  about  building  as  they  had
some  thought  of  carrying  out  the
suggestions  which  President  Young
made  to  the  people,  or  to  some  of
them,  to  enter  into  a  family  arrange-
ment,  and  they  thought  that,  pro-
bably it  would  be  well  to  use  their
material  and  build  a  suitable  building.
It  was  afterwards  suggested  that  they
build  a  dining-room  and  a  commo-
dious kitchen,  etc.,  and  that  they
live  in  their  own  residences  during
this  coming  summer  and  try  the  effect
of  eating  together.  This  they  may  do.
They  had  found  that  it  would  be  far
more  convenient  for  them,  in  their
labor,  to  be  together  during  tht
summer  season  at  least  and,  the  wea-
ther being  fine,  they  could  walk  from
their  houses  to  the  dining  room  and


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC.


229


eat  their  meals,  and  then  the  men  go
to  their  labor  and  the  women  and
children  separate  again-  In  that
settlement  they  have  1m bored  daring
this  past  season  in  the  United  Order,
and  they  told  me  they  had  raised
double  the  amount  of  crops  they
ever  raised  before ;  and  all  their
labors  are  proportionately  advanced,
and  this  is  the  testimony  of  a  good
many  settlements.  There  are  some
complaints  as  a  matter  of  course.  I
beard  some  about  tools  being  misused,
about  wagons  not  being  greased,
about  animals  no t  bei rig  fed,  harness  not
being  cared  for;  but  these  results  are
due  to  a  great  extent  to  want  of  system.

Another  objection  that  we  found
and  that  has  resulted  badly  in  some
instances,  is  that  men  have  put  in  a
portion  of  their  property  only  and
kept  out  a  portion ;  of  course,  the
portion  that  is  kept  out  absorbs
nearly  all  their  attention,  while  that
which  is  put  into  the  Order  does
not  receive  that  share  of  attention
which  it  should  have,  and  when  they
were  called  upon  to  labor  they  had
other  interests  which  called  them  off',
and  they  excused  themselves  or  sent
their  boys  to  attend  to  it.  In  some
wards  and  settlements  they  have
been  crippled  in  consequence  of  this.
But  recent  instructions  which  have
been  given  by  the  First  Presidency,
that  no  one  should  be  admitted  into
the  Order,  unless  he  enters  with  all
he  has,  (except  in  case  of  debt,  then
the  board  of  directors  to  exercise
their  discretion  about  that,)  will  have
a  good  effect  throughout  the  entire
South,  It  will  concentrate  the  labors
of  the  people  in  one  direction,  and
where  a  man's  treasure  is  there  will
his  heart  be  alsoj  and  if  all  a  man's
property  is  in  the  United  Order  if
he  be  a  Latter-day  Saint,  he  will
labor  with  fidelity  for  the  furtherance
of  the  objects  which  the  Order  has
in  view.


There  is  one  thing  which  has  been
demonstrated  by  this  season's  lab;>r,
namely,  that  better  results  cm  bo
produced  by  a  combination  of  labor,
as  proposed  in  the  United  Order,
than  by  individual  effort  to  the  s  una
extent  I  was  much  gratified  at
finding  that  this  was  the  universal
testimony  of  all  with  whom  I  con-
versed on  the  subject.

While  at  St.  George,  after  holding
two  days'  meeting,  brother  Snow
and  myself  held  meetings  with  the
Bishops,  superintend?;  tst  foremen
and  leading  men  in  the  various  settle-
ments throughout  that  Stake.  We
requested  them  to  give  us  \i  full  and
free  expression  of  their  feelings  con-
cerning the  season's  labors,  to  tell  us
all  the  causes  of  discouragement  if
there  were  any,  and  also  the  causes
of  encouragement,  and  those  that  I
have  already  alluded  to  were  the
principal  ones  given.  There  have
been  in  some  instances  indolence,
carelessness  and  indisposition  to
work,  and  an  inclination  manifested
to  throw  the  labor  upon  those  who
are  industrious  and  energetic*  It
might  be  expected  that  such  would
be  the  result,  it  could  scarcely  ba
otherwise.  I  was  reminded  very
much,  in  hearing  the  statement  of
the  brethren,  of  what  the  Prophet
Joseph  said  when  alive  about  the
indolence,  carelessness  and  indiffer-
ence to  work  manifested  by  some
men.  He  said  there  were  thiee  ki  nds
of  poor — the  Lord's  poor,  the  devil's
poor,  and  the  poor  devils,  I  thought
that  this  Order  was  bringing  to  the
surface  the  poor  devils,  and  I  should
not  be  surprised  if  it  would  have  this
effect;  in  fact,  if  a  man  who  is  not
inspired  with  right  feelings  should
get  connected  with  the  Order,  there
is  no  doubt  that  lie  would  shirk  work
and  be  careless  and  indiff  rent  when*
ever  he  could  be.  We  know  that
there  are  many  eye-servants  among


us — men  who  work  only  when  they
are  watched  ;  and  so  far  as  the  use
of  tools  is  concerned,  any  man  who
has  employed  other  men*  and  lias
not  b^en  in  a  position  to  look  after
them  and  watch  what  they  are
doin*:,  knows  how  men  work,  even
as  we  are  situaTed  at  the  present
time.  He  knows  how  his  tools  are
misused  and  mislaid,  and  his  harness
and  his  wagons  and  his  teams  »re
used  or  abused,  and  that  it  requires
much  care  on  his  part,  or  on  the  part
of  somebody  equally  trusty  to  pre-
serve his  property.  He  has  to  fre-
quently buy  new  tools — new  spades,
hoes,  forks,  ploughs,  and  it  he  has
a  mower  and  entrusts  it  to  other
hands  than  his  own,  in  many  instan-
ces he  gets  it  hrnken.  This  is  not
always  the  case;  but  it  is  too  much
the  case,  and  we  have  these  things
to  contend  with  now,  and  in  my
opinion  judging  by  n-y  observation,
as  far  as  it  lias  extended,  they  are  no
worse  in  the  United  Order;  and  there
is  this  about  this  Gospel — it  brings
every  im  per  feet  ion  to  the  light  that
a  man  has  within  him.  When  this
Gospel  has  been  preached  fort  lie  first
time  in  neighborhoods,  I  have  heard
hundreds  say  to  me,  at  different
times — *' Oh,  I  am  so  glad  that  I
have  got  this  truth,  there  is  Mr.  So
and  so,"  or  11  there  is  my  aunt*'  01
"my  uncle"  or  "such  and  such  a
friend,"  "  my  wife"  or  "  such  a  rela-
tive," *  there  is  my  minister,  if  1  go
to  him  and  tell  him  what  I  have  re-
ceived he  will  embrace  it  gla  dy  and
be  a  Latter-day  Saint,"  and  they  gu
and  tell  what  they  have  reaived.
Probably  hundreds  of  you  who  are
here  to-day,  have  gone  filled  with
zeal — "Why,  I  have  got  the  truth,
I  want  you  to  hear  the  truth,"  and
w  .at  lias  been  the  result  ?  The
dwil  has  manifested  himself  im  me-
et ately  and  they  have  found  that
their  relatives  had  a  spirit  which


they  never  dreamed  of,  and  they  have-
proved  their  ministers  to  be  anything
but  willing  to  receive  the  truth.
This  Gospel  has  that  effect,  it  brings
men  and  women's  imperfections  to
light,  it  shows  the  imperfections  of
their  characters;  it  tests  people  and
tears  the  covering  from  hypocrisy
and  false  pretensions  as  nothing  cl*o
can.  The  United  Order  being  one
of  its  principles  will,  I  expect,  have
this  effect;  but  would  it  not  be  better
for  cur  faults  and  imperfections  to  be
brought  to  light  in  this  life  than  to
fait  until  1he  next  and  have  them
brought  to  the  surface  then ?

Tiie  people  feel  very  well  so  far  as
I  have  had  opportunity  to  observe*
We  have  explained  the  articles  of
iatioii  to  th<  ni  ;  they  have  Invn
gratified  at  the  explanations  which
have  been  made.  Many  have  rea-
soned upon  it  like  this — "if  I  put
all  I  have  got  into  the  United  Order,
and  1  begin  to  draw  days*  wages  only
out  of  the  Order,  I  have  got  a  large
family,  how  can  i  sustain  them  upon
my  day's  wages  ?  It  takes  the  pro-
duct of  my  property  managed  with
care  and  economy,  in  addition  to  my
o/v-n  labor,  to  enable  me  to  live,  and
if  I  put  all  my  property  into  the
Order,  how  am  I  to  live  ?"  This  has
b^en  the  inquiry  more  frequently
made  than  another.  It  is  not  the
intern  ion,  in  estaolishing  the  United
Order,  to  destroy  the  productiveness
of  property;  it  is  not  the  intention
to  take  property  from  men  who  have
it  and  give  it  to  those  who  have  none.
There  are  two  extremes  to  be  avoided,
one  is  the  disposition  of  the  rich  to
aggrandize  themselves  at  the  expense
of  the  poor.  That  is  what  we  are
trying,  in  this  United  Order,  to  put  a
stop  to,  so  that  we  may  prevent  the
growth  °f  class  distinctions,  the  in-
crease of  wealth  in  a  certain  class,
:md  that  cJmss  have  interests  diverse
from  and  frequently  adverse  to  the


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC,


241


rest  of  the  community.  That  is  one
extreme.  The  other  is  this  idea  to
which  I  have  referred,  the  anxiety  of
poor  people  to  get  possession  of  the
accumulations  of  the  rich,  and  to
have  them  divided  among  them,  and
a  general  levelling  take  place.  There
is  no  such  idea  connected  with  this
order,  such  a  thing  conld  not  stand
very  long  ;  and  let  rne  say  to  you  who
find  fault  with  this  United  Order,
ask  yourselves  when  you  ever  saw
anything  connected  with  this  Church
or  its  doctrines  that  w;is  unnatural,
that  was  not  consistent  with  good
common  sense  ?  Do  you  think  that
we  can  teach  and  practice  anything
that  will  repress  people,  that  will
destroy  individual  effort,  that  will
take  away  from  enterprise  its  incen-
tive ?  No,  there  is  nothing  con-
nected with  this  system  of  this
character,  and  it  is  upon  this  point
that  men  and  women  are  so  much
deluded  by  the  false  and  slanderous
reports  which  are  circulated.  There
never  was  a  day  since  onr  organiza-
tion as  a  people,  according  to  my
ideas  and  my  reading  of  our  early
history  and  my  subsequent  experi-
ence, when  there  were  so  many  false-
hoods in  circulation  about  any  prin-
ciple as  there  have  been  about  this
United  Order.  There  is  far  too
much  ignorance  among  us,  and  men
take  advantage  of  this  to  deceive
the  people  by  their  falsehoods.  It  is
the  intention  to  preserve  that  which
we  have.  If  a  man  is  a  man  of :
business  let  him  have  a  chance  to
show  his  business  capacity,  not  stop
him,  not  take  his  property  from  him
and  give  it  to  somebody  who  never
had  anything.  The  intention  is  to
use  the  skill  of  the  business  man  in
elevating  those  who  are  not  business
men,  to  bring  up  the  poor  from  their
level  to  the  broad  upper  level,  not  to
pull  down  the  upper  level  to  the
plane  of  the  lower.  That  is  not  the
No,  16.


design,  but  it  is  that  we  shall  work
for  ench  other's  good;  and  whert
men  have  property  let  them  take
means  to  preserve  it,  not  to  destroy
it.  It  is  not  the  intention  for  boards
of  directors  to  use  arbitrary  power
over  men  and  property.

There  are  many  cases  where  if  a
man  were  to  put  all  that  he  has  into
the  Order,  it  would  be  found  that  he
already  manages  that  property  better
than  the  board  of  directors  could.
Under  such  circumstances  it  would
be  better  to  say :  "  Here,  you  have
managed  this  property  economically,
you  have  done  well  with  it,  we  could
not  do  so  well  with  it  if  we  took  it
There  is  no  object  to  be  gained  by
our  taking  it  from  yon ;  you  continue
to  use  and  manage  it  as  a  steward-
ship, and  keep  up  its  productive-
ness." This  will  have  to  be  done
doubtless  in  many  instances.

But  as  to  our  farming  interests,  we
can  farm  together  far  better  than
separately.  Instead  of  having  so
many  mowers  and  reapers,  and  so
many  tools,  teams  and  wagons  as  we
have  now,  we  can  concentrate  our
labors  and  have  better  results  from
the  use  of  a  given  quantity  of  capi-
tal and  labor  than  under  our  present
system;  and  I  do  hope  that  the
Bishops  in  this  city  will  take  hold  of
this  matter  as  they  should  do.  Will
they  do  it  ?  or  will  they  stand  in  the
way  of  the  people  ?  I  firmly  be-
lieve that  many  of  our  leading  men
are  standing  to-day  in  the  way  of  the
people  in  relation  to  the  organization
of  this  United  Order;  but  jf  they
were  to  do  as  they  should  do,  as  God
requires  of  them,  they  would  take
bold  of  this  principle  in  the  spirit
of  it

"  Well,  but,"  says  one,  t;  suppose
I  lose  my  property  r"  Suppose  yon
do,  it  is  not  intended  that  you  should
lose  it,  but  suppose  that  you  do  ?
If  my  property  goes,  what  odd*  is  it  ?

Vol,  XVII.


242


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


God  gave  it  to  me,  and  if  I  lose  it  in
obeying  his  commandments,  who
cares  ?  I  do  not.  When  I  got  old
enough  to  understand  this  Gospel  I
saw  that  it  might  take  everything"
men  had,  and  even  thdr  lives,  to
maintain  it  in  the  earth,  and  if  a
man  is  not  willing  to  lay  down  his
life  for  this  Gospel,  he  is  not  worthy
of  it;  if  he  should  not  be  willing  to
risk  his  property  in  carrying  oat  a
great  principle,  of  what  value  are  his
professions  of  faith?  And  when
God  calls  upon  us,  we  who  have  been
saying  all  the  day  that  our  property
was  upon  the  altar,  and  proposes  a
plan  to  save  and  exalt  us  and  give  us
strength,  we  bepin  to  mourn  about
our  property,  and  to  tell  what  failures
Ahere  have  been  in  the  management
t»f  property,  about  co-operation  being
a  failure,  and  thus  justify  ourselves
for  refusing  to  do  what  God  requires!
And  yet  call  ourselves  Latter-day
Saints  !  Out  upon  men  and  women
calling  themselves  Samts  of  God  and
making  the  professions  which  they
do,  and  striving  for  the  exaltation
which  they  profess  to  be  aiming  for,
who  would  make  such  expressions,
Suppose  that  in  doiug  that  which
God  requires,  all  of  our  property
ebould  be  taken,  which  we  may  rest
assured  will  not  be  the  case  ?  If
God  were  to  permit  a  mob  to  come
upon  ua,  they  could  sweep  away  the
whole  of  our  property.  If  a  mob
were  to  come  upon  us  and  drive  us,
how  much  would  any  of  as  be  worth  ?
And  can  not  God  let  oar  enemies
have  power  to  scourge  us  ?  1  think
he  can  ;  and  unless  there  is  a  different
spirit  manifested  by  leading  men,  by
Bishops  and  by  men  who  ought  to
have  the  Spirit  and  power  of  God
resting  upon  them,  and  by  the  people
themselves  in  many  instances  anger
may  be  aroused  against  us.  I  believe
that  to-day  President  Young  is  pros-
trated under  a  load  that,  if  we  were


obedient  he  would  be  relieved  from.
I  believe  he  would  have  been  sound
and  well  able,  to-day,  to  teach  us
from  this  stand  if  we  had  done  as  we
should  have  done,  He  is  wearied  by
his  labors  in  teaching  and  laboring
in  our  midst,  calling  upon  us  early
and  late,  entreating  us  to  listen  to
the  counsel  of  God,

I  have  said,  and  I  repeat  it,  that
if  we  do  not  know  that  this  United
Order  is  true  of  ourselves  by  the  re-
velations of  God,  we  should  be  willing
to  obey  it  just  because  President
Young  torches  it,  a  man  who  has
tang  lit  us  and  led  us  for  so  many
years,  so  faithfully  and  so  successfully,
God  having  blessed  him  as  he  has
done  in  so  signal  a  manner  all  the
time.  If  this  people  would  take
hold  of  the  principle  in  that  spirit
they  would  soon  know  that  it  was  of
God ;  the  testimony  of  Jesus  would
rest  upon  them,  and  they  would  know
it  for  themselves;  and  then,  when
they  get  that  spirit,  they  would  not
care  about  property,  if  it  took  it  all,
they  would  bay,  "  all  right."

When  you  made  up  your  minds  to
obey  this  Gospel,  did  you  hesitate
because  your  friends  told  you  that
if  you  became  Mormons  you  would
spoil  your  prospects  and  lose  your
friends?  No;  you  sacrificed  every
worldly  consideration,  you  risked  all
for  the  truth,  for  the  salvation  which
God  promised  you.  And  so  in  this
United  Order  if  you  have  a  testimony
that  it  is  of  God,  you  will  feel — "No
matter  what  it  costs,  all  right/'
Failures,  yes  there  may  be  failures,
I  expect  there  will  be  fail  ares  and
mistakes  as  long  as  we  are  so  full  of
frailty,  but  who  cares  for  that  ?  But
this  will  not  be  the  fault  of  the  prin-
ciple If  God  commands  us  to  do
anything,  let  us  do  it  with  all  our
heart,  and  he  will  prepare  the  way
and  preserve  us  from  the  bad  effects
of  failures ;  he  always  has  controlled


SEEK  FOR  PERFECTION,  ETC,


results  for  oar  good,  and  he  will  do
it  again,  Why  there  are  men  who
would  say  that  the  mission  of  Jesus
was  a  failure,  (was  he  not  killed  by
the  Jews  ?)  and  the  plan  of  salvation
is  a  failure,  and  that  creation  id  a
failure,  and  they  may  just  as  well
say  these  things  a3  to  say  that  co-
operation is  a  failure,  and  that  many
other  things  are  failures.  Some  say
that  God  failed  in  patting  Adam  and
Eve  in  the  garden  and  allotting  the
serpent  to  tempt  them  and  cause
them  to  fall,  and  the  whole  scheme
was  a  failure-  Why  not  as  well  say
that  as  to  say  that  other  things  are
failures  ?  There  are  some  people
who  can  only  judge  of  merit  by  suc-
cess. If  successful,  no  matter  what
it  may  be,  it  is  meritorious.  It  may
have  its  origin  in  hell,  and  success  is,
in  their  estimation,  a  test  of  merit.
The  best  of  schemes  and  plans  have
failed  frequently  in  this  sense,  and
yet  have  been  true  and  perfect.

I  know  that  God  requires  this
union  at  our  hands,  and  by  the  help
of  (1  oil  I  am  determined,  with  all
the  influence  and  power  that  he  has
given  me  or  that  he  may  give  me,  to
use  my  endeavors  with  the  people  to
organize  in  a  manner  to  resist  every
encroachment  made  against  them*
All  hell  is  arrayed  against  us,  and
the  powers  thereof  are  bound  to  de-
stroy this  work  if  they  can,  and  it  is
our  duty,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  to
band  ourselves  together  in  the  power
of  God.  We  shall  be  able  to  do  it
if  we  do  right,  and  the  wicked  will
not  gain  a  single  advantage  over  us.
That  is  just  as  true  as  that  God  lives,
and  I  know  it.  I  know  that  this
United  Order  is  of  God,  for  God  has
revealed  it  to  me ;  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ  have  imparted  this
knowledge  to  me,  and  I  know  it  for
myself  I  know  by  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  that  it  is  our  duty  as  a
people,  and  as  individuals,  to  enter


into  this  United  Order  and  carry  it
out  in  the  spirit  that  God  has  revealed
it  in.  Listen  to  this  testimony,  and
the  men  and  women  who  have  the
love  of  the  truth  within  them  have,
or  will  have  the  testimony  of  Jeans
that  these  words  are  true  and  faithful.

And  I  desire  to  say  further — thr  re
has  got  to  be  a  spirit  of  repent  mi  ice
sought  for  by  many  of  those  who  are
now  called  Latter-day  Saints,  or  they
will  lose  the  spirit  of  God  and  their
standing  among  this  people.  Will
God  prosper  us  in  this  United
Order  ?  Yes,  and  we  cannot  be  a
rich  people,  we  cannot  be  the  peo-
ple which  God  designs  us  to  he,
until  we  live  after  that  pattern.
There  are  hundreds  of  men  w!jo
are  praying  constantly  to  God  to
deliver  them  from  apostacy  and
there  are  others  who  pray  that  God
will  deliver  them  from  being  rich,
because,  they  perceive  that,  fre-
quently, when  men  get  rich,  they
are  not  easily  handled,  they  bee. i me
intractable,  they  lose,  in  some  iti-
stances,  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and
therefore,  they  pray  that  God  will
deliver  them  from  being  rich,  i  at
they  may  not  be  lifted  up  in  pride.
Yet  we  know  that  the  revelations
and  prophecies  say  that  God  will
make  us  a  rich  people.

Speaking  about  the  Ziou  of  the
last  days,  Isaiah  says  that  tbe  Lord
will  bring  for  brass  gold,  for  iron
silver,  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones
iron  to  build  up  the  Zion  of  God.
When  will  that  be  done  ?  When  we
are  united,  go  that  we  shall  not  con*
sume  the  wealth  that  God  will  give
us  upon  our  lusts,  upon  creating  chtss
distinctions,  raising  one  clans  alove
another,  one  class  living  in  luxury
and  another  class  grovelling  in  pov-
erty ;  but  when  we  are  so  organized
that  there  will  be  no  rich  and  no
poor,  but  all  partaking  alike  of  the
bounties  that  God  shall  give  unto


244  JOURNAL  OF

us,  then,  and  in  my  opinion,  not  till  i
then,  can  he  bestow  upon  ns  the
wealth  that  be  has  promised.  It
would  ruin  lis  to-day  if  we  had  it,
and  God,  as  I  view  his  providence,  I
withholds  these  blessings  from  us
because  of  the  effects  they  would
have  upon  us  as  a  people. He  does
not  wish  to  destroy  us. But  when
we  are  organized  aright,  then  what?  i
Why,  then  will  be  fulfilled  after  a
while  another  saying  of  Isaiah's, —
"And  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed
your  flocks,  and  the  sons  of  the  alien
shall  be  your  ploughmen  and  your


DISCOURSES.

vinedressers ;  but  ye  shall  be  named
the  Priests  of  the  Lord ;  men  shall
call  you  the  ministers  of  our  God/'

All  these  problems  of  capital  and
labor  can  be  solved  by  this  principle
and  in  no  other  way,  and  there  will
be  an  incessant  and  never-ending
conflict  between  capital  and  labor
until  they  are  solved  in  this  manner.
I  That  God  may  pour  out  his  holy
Spirit  upon  you,  my  brethren  and
I  sisters,  and  fill  you  therewith,  to
enable  you  to  do  his  will  perfectly,
is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  at  the  Semi- Annual  Conference  op  the  Chubch  of  Jfisua

Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Friday  Morning,  October  9,  1874.

 1  1

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

SAINTS  ARE  CHOSEN — ETERNAL  LIFE  WORTH  MORE  THAN  ALL  THINGS
ELSE — WORKS  MUST  CORRESPOND  WITH  FAITH— PRAYER  TO  GOD  A
DUTY*  ?>  l^tc-M  •  -  ' <•  ?t


We,  as  a  people,  have  had  a
great  deal  of  teaching  and  counsel  in
olt  daj  and  generation.  Some  of
ns  have  been  taught  in  the  things  of
this  kingdom  for  over  forty  years,
an  I,  by  this  time,  we  ought  to  ex-
ercise faith  in  the  promises  of  God.
We  have  looked  forward  to  the  ful-
fillment of  the  revelations  which
have  been  given  in  all  ages  and  dis-
pensations which  are  past  and  gone ;
and  we  have  not  only  expected  their
fulfillment,  but  we  have  helped  to
fulfill  a  great  many  of  them  in  the


contse  of  our  lives.  This  work  is
the  work  of  God,  it  is  not  the  work
of  man.  The  Lord  has  set  his  hand
in  these  last  days  in  fulfillment  of
revelation  and  prophecy  and  the  pro-
mises which  have  been  made  for
thousands  of  years  past  and  gone,
concerning  the  earth  and  the  dispen-
sations thereof

I  will  here  say  that  all  inspired
men,  from  the  days  of  father  Adam
to  the  days  of  Jesus,  had  a  view,
more  or  less,  of  the  great  and  last
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  timtsf


SAINTS  ARE  CHOSEN,  ETC.


245


when  the  Lord  would  set  his  hand  to
prepare  the  earth  and  a  people  for  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  and  a
reign  of  righteousness. One  of  the
brethren  was  speaking  here  about
the  views  entertained  by  some  in  the
world  who  regard  Christianity  and
the  work  of  God  as  a  failure, I  will
say  that  the  work  of  the  Lord  has
never  been  a  failure  and  it  never  will.
His  purposes  have  to  be  accomplished
in  the  earth. There  is  one  thing
true  with  regard  to  the  history  and
travels  of  the  Saints  of  God  in  every
age  of  the  world — tbey  have  had  to
pass  through  trials,  tribulations  and
persecutions,  and  have  had  to  contend
with  opposition,  and  this  will  always
be  their  fate  until  the  power  of  evil
is  overcome. This  is  one  of  the
legacies  that  is  designed  from  God  to
the  Saints  while  dwelling  in  the  flesh
among  a  world  of  devils, for  the
world  is  full  ot  them,  there  are  mil-
lions and  millions — all  that  were  cast
out  of  heaven  ;  they  never  die,  and
they  never  leave  the  earth,  but  they
dwell  here  and  will  continue  to  do  so
until  Satan  is  bound. As  a  people
we  have  to  meet  this  warfare,  and
the  Saints  of  God  have  had  to  con-
tend with  it  in  every  age  of  the
world. Any  man  who  undertakes  to
serve  God  has  to  round  up  his  should-
ers and  meet  it,  and  any  man  who
will  not  trust  in  God  and  abide  in  his
cause  even  unto  deatii  is  not  worthy
of  a  place  in  the  celestial  kingdom.
Said  Jesus — "  I  have  chosen  you  oat
of  the  world,  therefore  the  world
hate  you;  if  you  were  of  the  world
the  world  would  love  its  own.  They
have  hated  me,  they  will  hate  you ;
and  if  they  persecute  me  they  will
persecute  you." This  is  the  legacy
which  all  Saints  may  depend  upon
receiving. True,  there  has  been  a
difference  in  the  various  dispensa-
tions. This  is  the  only  dispensation
that  God  has  ever  established  that


was  foreordained,  before  the  world
was  made,  not  to  be  overcome  by
wicked  men  and  devils.  All  other  dis-
pensations have  been  made  war  upon
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and
the  servants  and  Saints  of  God  have
been  martyred. This  was  the  case
with  Jesus  and  the  Apostles  in  their
day. The  Lord  gavo  that  good  old
Prophet  Enoch, President  of  the
Zion  of  God,  who  stood  in  the  midst
of  his people three  hundred  and
sixty  five  years,  a  view  of  the  earth
in  its  various  dispensations,  showing
him  that  the  time  would  come  when
it  would  groan  under  the  wickedness,
blasphemy,  murders,  whoredoms  and
abominations  of  its  inhabitants.  The
Prophet  asked the  Lord  whether
there  would  ever  be  a  time  when  the
earth  should  rest; and the  Lard
answered  that  in  the  dispensati  on  of
the  fulness  of  times  the  earth  would
fill  the  measure  of  its  days,  and  then
it  would  rest  from  wickedness  and
abominations, tor  in  that  day  he
would  establish  his  kingdom  upon  it,
to  be  thrown  down  no  more  forever.
Then  a  reign  of  righteousness  would
commence  and  the  honest  and  meek
of  the earth would be  gathered
together  to  serve  the  Lord,  and  upon
them  would  rest  power  to  build  up
the  great  Zion  of  God  in  the  latter
days. These  things  were  also  shown
to  Abraham,  and  many  others  of  the
ancient  servants  of  God  had  glimpses
of  them  by  vision,  revelation  ami  the
inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
what  they  saw,  or  an  account  of  what
they  saw,  has  been  left  on  rec  >rd.

This  dispensation  is  one  that  all
the  Patriarchs  and  Prophets  had
their  eye  upou,  aud  the  Lord  has
commenced  it,  and  has  carried  ir  on
now  for  more  than  forty  years,  since
this  Church  was  organized  with  six
members.  We  have  not  altogether
traveled  on  beds  of  ease,  we  have
had  warfare  and  opposition  from  the


24G  JOURNAL  OF

commencement  until  this  day;  but
we  and  the  world  may  set  our  hearts
at  rest  concerning  "  Mormonism,"
for  it  will  never  cease  until  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  comes  in  the  clouds
of  heaven.  This  nation  and  other
nations  will  war  with  the  Saints  of
God  until  their  cup  is  full ;  and  when
they  become  ripened  in  iniquity  the
Lord  Almighty  will  cut  them  off,  and
the  judgments  of  the  Most  High
God  will  follow  the  testimony  of  the
Elders  of  Israel.

This  is  the  way  I  look  upon  it.
We  are  called  upon  to  do  our  duty
wit':,  regard  to  the  subject  which  has
been  spoken  of  by  brothers  Van  Cott
and  Cannon.  What  is  this  world  I
would  like  to  know  ?  What  are  the
things  of  this  world  ?  What  are
houses  and  lands,  goods  and  chat-
tels, and  the  treasures  of  the  earth
generally,  to  us  ?  What  are  they  to
any  Saints  of  God  compared  with
eternal  life  ?  We  should  certainly
be  as  well  off  to  unite  ourselves  and
our  interests  together  in  the  things
of  God  as  to  be  separate.  There
have  been  too  much  selfishness  and
division  and  every  man  for  himself
amongst  us,  and  the  devil  for  us  all.
Eternal  life  is  worth  more  to  a  Saint
of  God  than  all  things  else  put
together,  in  fact  it  is  the  greatest  gift
God  ever  gave  to  man,  or  that  he  can
give  to  him,  and  whatever  the  Lord
requires  at  our  hands  we  should  be
ready  to  do,  individually  and  collec-
tively.

As  I  have  often  remarked  in  my
testimony,  from  my  youth  up  I  had
a  desire  to  live  to  see  a  people  rise
up  in  the  earth  and  contend  for  the
faith  once  delivered  to  the  Saints,
who  would  receive  and  teach  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  as  it  was
taught  in  his  day  and  generation.
When  I  heard  this  Gospel  I  embraced
it.  The  first  sermon  I  ever  heard
the  Spirit  of  God  bore  record  to  me


DISCOURSES.

that  it  was  true,  and  I  went  forth
and  was  baptized  for  the  remission
of  my  sins.  I  received  the  laying
on  of  hands  and  the  Lord  gave  me
the  Holy  Ghost  and  a  testimony,
just  the  same  as  he  gave  to  you,  and
to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  those
who  have  obeyed  the  Gospel.

It  was  but  a  short  time  after  em-
bracing the  work  that  I  was  called
to  go  with  my  brethren  a  thousand
miles  for  the  redemption  of  Zion.  I
went  willingly,  for  I  knew  it  was
the  work  of  God,  it  was  what  I  had
sought  for  from  the  time  I  was  eight
years  old,  what  I  had  been  taught  in
the  Presbyterian  Sunday  School  and
what  I  had  read  in  the  New  Testa-
ment in  my  father's  house.  From
that  time  up  I  had  looked  for  these
things,  and  I  had  a  testimony  that  I
should  live  to  see  them,  and  I  did,
and  when  I  embraced  this  Gospel  my
heart  was  filled  with  joy  and  conso-
lation ;  and  as  for  this  world,  if  I
had  the  whole  of  it,  I  felt  in  those
days  as  I  feel  now,  it  would  not  stand
in  my  path  in  seeking  for  eternal
life.

I  was  called  to  take  my  life  in  my
hands  and  go  up  to  Missouri,  and  a
little  handful  of  us  went  up  to  re-
deem our  brethren.  We  certainly
had  to  go  by  faith.  My  neighbors
called  upon  and  plead  with  me  not  to
go ;  said  they — "  Do  not  go,  if  you
do  you  will  lose  your  life."  I  said
to  them — "  If  I  knew  that  I  should
have  a  ball  put  through  my  heart
the  first  step  I  took  in  the  State  of
Missouri  I  would  go."  I  went,  and
I  did  not  get  shot,  neither  did  any  of
the  rest  of  us,  but  we  fulfilled  the
commandment  of  God.  That  is  the
way  I  felt  in  those  days  with  regard
to  the  work  of  God,  and  that  is  the
way  I  feel  to-day.  I  am  after  salva-
tion and  eternal  life,  and  I  do  not
want  anything  to  stand  between  me
and  that  which  I  am  in  pursuit  of.


p


SAINTS  ARE  CHOSEN,  ETC


247


It  does  not  make  any  difference  what
we  as  a  people  may  be  called  to  pass
through.  Men  can  go  no  further
than  they  are  permitted  by  the  Lord,
I  have  often  remaiked,  and  I  repeat
it,  your  destiny,  the  destiny  of  this
nation,  and  the  destiny  of  every  king,
prince,  president,  statesman  and
ruler  under  heaven  are  in  the  hands
of  the  God  of  Israel.  He  made  the
world  and  all  its  inhabitants,  and
they  can  go  no  further  than  they  are
permitted.  If  we  unite  ourselves
according  to  the  law  of  God  we  shall
have  far  more  safety  than  if  we  turn
away  from  the  commandments  of  the
Lord  and  set  our  hearts  upon  the
things  of  this  world.  If  we  forget
God  we  are  liable  to  be  scourged;
that  is  my  feeling  this  morning*

This  is  the  work  of  God.  The
Lord  has  set  his  hand  to  build  up  his
kingdom,  and  he  will  do  it  whatever
the  consequences  may  be.  Whatever
the  persecutions  or  difficulties  his
Saints  may  be  called  to  pass  through,
the  L  rd  will  never  withdraw  his
hand,  for  he  decreed,  before  the  foun-
dation of  the  world,  that  in  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fulness  of  times  his
kingdom  should  be  set  up  upon  the
earth,  never  more  to  be  thrown
down.

The  world  has  had  its  dispensa-
tions :  we  are  at  the  end  of  the  sixth
thousand  years,  and  are  bordering
upon  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man
in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power
and  great  glory,  to  reward  every
mar)  according  to  the  deeds  done  in
the  body  ;  and  whatever  the  feelings
of  the  world  may  be  the  Lord  has
decreed  a  woe  upon  that  man,  that
house,  that  nation  or  that  people  that
rejects  the  testimony  of  his  servants.
The  Lord  says  that  he  will  hold  a
contr^veisy  with  the  nations,  and
judge  ihe  world  with  fire  and  sword,
and  he  will  plead  with  all  flesh,  and
the  slain  of  the  Lord  will  be  many.


What  if  some  of  ns  do  have  to  sacri-
fice our  lives  for  the  word  of  God  and
the testimony of  Jesus Christ  ?
What  of  it  ?  'What  is  a  man's  life  ?
The  whole  world  will  die.  Armies,
containing thousands  of  men,  go
forth  for  the  honor  of  being  killed,
in  order  to  defend  a  king  or  a  gov-
ernment. Is  it  any  worse  to  die  for
the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony
of  Jesus  Christ  than  to  die  serving
the  devil  ? Not  a  particle. I  glory
in  my  feelings  at  the  valiant  spirit
that  is  and  has  been  manifested  by
the  servants  of  the  living  God  in  the
cause  of  trufh  and  in  defence  of  the
great  latter-day  work. The  Lord
never  raised  up  a  better  set  of  men
and  women  since  the  world  was  than
are  they  who  have  embraced  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  in  these  latter
days. They  have  the  testimony  of
Jesus  Christ  with  them,  and  they  have
been  called  to  pass  through  many
trials  thus  far  in  the  history  and
progress  of  the  work  of  God.  It
is  true  that  many  have  broken  their
covenants  and  turned  away  from  the
Lord,  and  the  reason  is  that  they
stopped  serving  God  and  undertook
to  serve  themselves,  and  that  led
them  into  darkness. They  rejected
the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
and  the  spirit  of  God  was  taken  from
them,  and  that  class  of  people,  in
every  age  of  the  world  is  the  darkest
of  any  who  ever  breathe  the  breath
of  life. They  lose  all  confidence  in
every  principle of salvation  and
eternal  life  revealed  to  man.

With  regard  to  our  present  po-
sition I  want  to  say  that  it  is  the
duty  of  every  Saint  of  God  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains  to  let  his
prayers  ascend  into  the  ears  of  the
Lord  of  S  ibaoth,  day  and  night  in
the  season  thereof,  in  the  family  cir-
cle and  in  private  places,  lor  the
Lord  to  sustain  his  people,  build  up
Zion  and  fulfill  his  promises.  We


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


are  in  duty  bound  to  fulfill  ours,  and
the  Lord  will  not  fail  now  any  more
than  he  has  any  other  time-  He  did
not  fail  in  the  days  of  Jesus  Christ,
Dot  a  b it  of  it  Jesus  was  poor,  arid
from  the  manger  to  the  cross,  spent
his  whole  life  in  the  deepest  poverty,
suffering  and  affliction  ;  lie  descended
below  all  things  that  he  might  rise
above  all,  and  we  are  told  that,  he
had  not  money  enough  to  pay  his
taxes  to  Cassar,  and  had  to  send  Peter
to  catch  a  fish  to  got  money  for  that
purpose.  He  was  poor  all  the  way
through  his  life.  Ib  it  any  worse  for
you,  or  me,  or  any  other  Saint  of
God,  to  suffer  persecution,  affliction,
poverty  or  trials  than  tor  our  great
Leader,  President,  Redeemer,  King
and  Savior,  who  is  going  to  come  in
the  clouds  of  heaven  ?  No,  not  a
particle.  As  some  of  our  brethren
have  said,  there  is  need  for  ns  to
repent  and  humble  ourselves  before
the  Lord  cur  (Jucl,  that  we  may  have
and  enjoy  more  of  the  Holy  Spirit
to  prepare  us  for  that  which  lies  he-
fore  us.  It  iri  our  duty  to  unite
together  as  a  people;  our  temporal
salvation  lies  in  this,  and  we  should
not  be  backward  in  thin  matter
We  should  not  only  preach  it,  but
be  also  ready  to  practice  it;  as  lead-
ers and  as  people,  all  should  unite  in
carrying  out  that  which  is  required
of  us.  As  an  individual  I  am  not
afraid  of  starving  to  death,  I  never
was  afraid  of  that  in  my  life,  and  I
have  traveled  a  great  many  thousand
miles  to  preach  the  Gospel  without
money  and  without  price,  and  so  have
many  of  my  brethren  who  are  around
me,  and  we  never  starved  to  death,
and  we  do  not  expect  to.  The
amount  of  it  is  that  everything  we
have  herein  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains,—this  Tabernacle,  this  Temple,
these  public  grounds,  and  all  the
cities  and  towns  that  have  been  built
over  six  hundred  miles  of  Territory,


are  the  gift  of  God  to  ue.  The  Lord
knows  this  country  was  barren
enough  when  we  came  here,  and  a
faithful  people  were  tried  here  with
cricket  and  grasshopper  wars,  until
famine  stared  them  in  the  face;  but
they  trusted  in  God,  and  they  did
not  get  disappointed.

Our  prayers  should  go  up  day  and
night  in  behalf  of  our  President,  and
the  Presidency  whom  God  has  sus-
tained from  the  beginning,  and  also
for  the  leaders  of  the  people  and  for
each  other.  We  should  labor  and
pray  for  this.  We  are  making  his*
tory.  The  travels  and  experience  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  have  been  as
interesting  as  the  history  of  any
people  in  any  dispensation  since  the
world  began,  Joseph  Smith  was
a  Prophet  of  God,  and  he  was  calk-d
to  lay  the  foundation  of  this  king-
dom ;  he  was  raised  up  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  world  tor  this
purpose,  and  he  came  forth,  through
the  loins  of  ancient  Joseph  who  was
sold  into  Egypt,  and  dwelt  in  the
flesh,  and  nothing  failed  in  its  fulfill-
ment as  far  us  he  was  concerned.
He  lived  until  he  planted  the  Gospel,
until  he  received  the  apostleship,  and
every  branch  of  the  Priesthood  of
Aaron  and  Melchizedek,  all  the  kevs
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  everything
that  was  necessary  in  order  to  lay
the  foundation  of  this  Church  and
Kingdom,  which  God,  through  the
mouths  of  holy  Prophets,  declared
should  be  established  in  the  latter
uays,  to  be  thrown  down  no  more
for  ever.

Under  these  circumstances,  of
course,  faith  is  required  on  the  part
of  the  Saints  to  live  their  religion,
do  their  duty,  walk  uprightly  before
the  Lord  and  build  up  his.Zion  on
I  lie  earth.  Then  it  requires  works
to  correspond  with  our  faith.  I
know  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ
is  not  palatable;  it  does  not,  and


SAINTS  AHE  CHOSEN,  ETC,  249


never  did,  suit  the  ears  of  the  world
at  large.  Christendom  to-day  does
not  like  "  Mormon  ism,"  because  it
comes  in  contact  with  the  traditions
handed  down  from  the  fathers ;  the
world  never  did  like  the  truth.  We
can  not  help  that,  it  is  our  duty  to
bear  a  true  and  faithful  testimony  to
the  work  of  God,  and  to  preach  the
Gospel  which  has  been  revealed  to  as
in  our  day  by  the  ministration  of
angels  out  of  heaven.  That  Gospel
is  the  same  as  was  taught  by  Adam,
and  the  ancient  patriarchs,  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob,  Noah,  Enoch,  lie-  i
thuselah  and  all  the  ancient  Prophets,
til  so  by  Jesus  and  the  Apostles.
There  never  was  but  one  Gospel,  and
never  will  be  but  one  delivered  to
the  children  of  men,  and  that  never
changed  and  never  will  change  in
time  or  eternity.  It  is  the  same  in
every  a^e  of  the  world  ;  its  ordinan-
ces are  the  same,  Believers  in  the
Gospel  had  faith  in  Jesus  before  he
came  in  the  flesh,  and  repentance  of
sin  was  preached  before  his  day  as  well
as  since;  they  also  practiced  baptism
for  the  remission  of  sins  and  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost;  and  they  had  the  organ-
ization of  the  Church  with  inspired
men  therein.  Saith  the  Lord  Jesus,
"I  have  set  in  the  Church,  first
Apostles,  second  Prophets,  third
Teachers,  pastors,  gifts,  helps,  and
governments,"  What  for  ?  For  the
work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  per-
fecting of  the  Saints,  etc.  These
things  are  necessary  in  every  age  of
the  world,  and  they  have  been  re-
stored in  these  last  days,  and  they
are  true  and  will  have  their  effect
upon  the  children  of  men.  When  I
this  Gospel  is  preached  to  the  Gen-
tiles apd  they  count  themselves  on-
worthy  of  eternal  life  it  will  go  to  the
hoa»e  of  Israel,  and  the  first  will
then  be  last,  as  the  last  has  been
first.


It  is  our  duty  as  a  people  to  unite
together  and  not  to  be  slothful  in
well-doing.  As  I  have  already  said,
we  should  let  our  prayers  ascend  be-
fore the  Lord.  I  have  more  faith  in
prayer  before  the  Lord  than  almost
any  other  principle  on  earth.  If  we
have  no  faith  in  prayer  to  God,  we
have  n^t  much  in  either  him  or  the
Gospel  We  should  pray  unto  the
Lord,  asking  him  for  what  we  want.
Let  the  prayers  of  this  people  ascend
before  the  Lord  continually  in  the
-season  thereof,  and  the  Lord  will  not
turn  them  away,  but  they  will  be
heard  :md  answered,  and  the  king-
dom and  Zion  ot  God  will  rise  and
shine,  she  will  put  on  her  beautiful
!  garments  and  be  clothed  with  the
glory  of  her  God,  and  fulfill  the  ob-
ject of  her  organization  here  upon
the  earth.  Therefore,  I  say,  brethren
and  sisters,  let  us  do  our  duty.  Let
us  pray  for  the  Presidency  of  this
Church  ;  let  us  uphold  and  sustain
them  by  our  faith  and  by  our  works.
J  They  are  called  of  God,  they  have
been  our  leaders  for  years.  Presi-
dent Young  has  led  tbft  Church  lon-
ger a  great  deal  than  any  other  man.
His  works  and  his  life  have  been  be-
fore you,  and  you  know  him,  and  the
coarse  he  has  pursued,  God  has
blessed  him  and  he  has  been  profitable
unto  us.  The  revelations  of  God
and  the  principles  which  he  has
brought  forth  have  been  a  consola-
j  tion  to  Israel.  Our  prayers  should
ascend  for  him  that  he  may  be  re-
stored to  beakh  and  be  preserved  by
the  hand  of  God,  We  should  pray
to  the  Lord  for  everything  else  that
we  stand  in  need  of.  Then  we  should
go  to  and  do  our  duty  in  building  the
Temples  of  our  God,  that  we  may
1  magnify  our  calling,  and  be  saviors
on  Mount  Zion,  for  the  living  and
the  dead.  In  the  seventeen  hundred
years  which  are  past  and  gone,  over
1  fifty  thousand  million  people  have


gone  into  the  spirit  world  who  never
siw  the  face  of  a  Prophet  or  of  an
Apostle,  ami  never  heard  the  words
of  an  inspired  man,  for  daring  the
whole  of  that  time  no  man  was  called
of  God  to  build  up  his  kingdom  on
the  earth.  Whatever  the  Christian
world  may  think,  these  things  are
true.  When  the  Apostles  were  put
to  death  the  Priesthood  went  from
the  earth,  and  the  Church  went  into
the  wilderness,  or,  in  other  words,
there  was  a  falling  away  among  the
Gentiles,  as  there  had  been  before
among  the  Jews,  Those  generations
are  in  the  spirit  world,  shut  up  in
prison;  they  have  got  to  be  visited
by  men  who  held  the  Priesthood  in
the  flesh,  that  they  may  preach  the
Gospel  unto  them,  the  same  as  Jesus
did  when  he  went  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison  during  the  three  days
and  nights  when  his  body  lay  in  the
tomb.  This  is  our  duty.  And  I
will  here  say  that  every  Elder  of
Israel  who  lays  down  his  life,  whether
he  dies  in  his  bed,  or  is  put  to  death
by  the  enemies  of  truth,  when  he
goes  into  the  spirit  world  his  works
follow  him,  find  he  rests  in  peace.
The  Priesthood  is  not  taken  from
him,  and  he  has  thousands  more  to
preach  to  there  than  he  ever  had  here
in  the  flesh.  But  it  depends  upon
the  living  here  to  erect  Temples,
that  the  ordinances  for  the  dead  may
be  attended  to,  for  by  and  by  you  will
meet  your  progenitors  in  the  spirit
world  who  never  heard  the  sound  of
the  Gospel.  You  who  are  here  in
Zion  have  power  to  be  baptized  for
and  to  redeem  your  dead.  The
resurrection  and  the  coming  of  the
Messiah  are  at  the  door.  The  signs
of  heaven  and  earth  indicate  the
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
The  tig  trees  are  putting  forth  their
leaves  in  the  eyes  of  every  man  who
has  the  faith  of  the  Gospel,  Let  us,
therefore,  try  and  do  our  duty.  Let


us  attend  to  the  ordinances  of  the
house  of  God,  and  unite  ourselves
according  to  his  law,  for  Jesus  will
never  receive  the  Zion  of  (Sod  unless
its  people  are  united  according  to
celestial  law,  for  all  who  go  into  the
presence  of  God  have  to  go  there  by
this  law.  Enoch  had  to  practice  this
law,  and  we  shall  have  to  do  the  sfime
if  we  are  ever  necepfed  of  God  as  ha
was.  It  has  been  promised  that  the
New  Jernsnlem  will  be  built  up  in
our  day  and  generation,  and  it  will
have  to  be  done  by  the  United  Order
of  Zion  and  according  to  celestial
law.  And  not  only  so,  but  we  have
to  keep  that  law  ourselves  if  we  ever
inherit  that  kingdom,  for  no  man
will  receive  a  celestial  glory  unless
he  abides  a  celestial  law;  no  man
will  receive  a  terrestrial  glory  unless
he  abides  a  terrestrial  law,  and  no
man  will  receive  a  telestial  glory
unless  he  abides  a  telestial  law.
There  is  a  great  difference  between
the  light  of  the  sun  at  noonday  and
the  glimmer  of  the  stars  at  night,
but  that  difference  is  no  greater  than
the  difference  of  the  glwry  in  the
several  portions  of  the  kingdom  of
God.

I  always  have  said  and  believed 9
and  I  believe  to-day,  that  it  will  pay
you  and  me  and  all  the  sons  and  all
the  daughters  of  Adam  to  abide  the
celestial  law,  for  celestial  glory  is
worth  all  we  possess;  if  it  calls  for
every  dollar  we  owu  and  o^r  lives
into  the  bargain,  if  we  obtain  an
entrance  into  the  celestial  kingdom
of  God  it  will  amply  repay  us.  The
Latter-day  Saints  have  started  out
for  celestial  glory,  and  if  we  can
only  manage  to  be  faithful  enough
to  obtfun  an  inheritance  in  the  king-
dom, where  God  and  Christ  dwell,
we  shall  rejoice  through  the  endless
ages  of  eternity,

I  thank  God  that  my  ears  have
heard  the  sound  of  the  Gospel,  I


SAINTS  ABE  CHOSEN,  ETC.


251


thank  God  that  I  have  been  preserved
upon  the  earth  to  live  to  see  the  face
of  an  Elder  of  Israel,  to  be  called
of  God  and  to  administer  the  ordi-
nances of  his  house.  I  traveled  a
good  many  miles  with  President
Joseph  Smith,  as  scmie  of  you  did;
I  have  also  traveled  a  good  many
miles  with  President  Young  and  with
the  Apostles  and  Elders  of  Israel,
and  I  have  never  seen  the  hoar  yet,
in  the  midst  of  our  deepest  afflictions
and  persecutions,  that  I  was  sorry
that  I  had  embraced  the  Gospel,  and
I  hope  I  never  shall.


I  pray  God  my  heavenly  Father
that  he  will  inspire  our  hearts  as
Latter-day  Saints,  that  we  may  be-
come one  and,  not  having  the  fear
of  man  before  our  eye?,  but  the  fear
of  God,  that  we  may  be  ready  to  do
whatever  is  required  of  us,  and  to
carry  out  the  counsels  of  the  servants
of  God.  When  we  do  this  we  shall
be  happy,  and  we  shall  be  saved
whether  in  life  or  in  death,  I  pray
that  we  may  pursue  this  course,  and
that  we  may  overcome  the  world,  tho
flesh  and  the  devil,  and  inherit  eter-
nal life,  for  Jesus*  sake.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  Semi- Annual  Conference,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,

Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,  October  11,  1874

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

FAITH  WITHOUT  WORKS  IS  DEAD — PRAY  TO  OOD — KEEP  THE  SABBATH-
DAY  HOLY— E\ COURAGE  SUNDAY-SCHOOLS,


This  being  the  closing  day  of  the
Conference,  and  as  we  are  adminis-
tering the  sacrament,  we  naturally
call  onr  oiinds  up  in  a  way  of  dis-
cipline for  ourselves,  on  various  sub-
jects which  pertain  to  our  every  day
life.  The  Apostle  James  tells  us
that  "  faith  without  works  is  dead,
being  alone,"  and  good  works  are
certainly  the  best  illustrations  of  that
faith  which  prompts  us.

As  our  brethren  will  soon  scatter
through  the  different  wards  and
settlements  of  the  Territory,  and  to


other  parts  of  the  world,  we  wish
them  to  carry  forth  just  and  wise
impressions  in  relation  to  the  simple
principles  of  faith  and  practice
which  pertain  to  the  holy  Gospel,
and  to  disseminate  the  instructions
they  have  received,  that  all  may  be
benefited  thereby.  When  we  come
here  and  take  bread  and  drink  of
the  cup  in  memory  of  the  death
and  sufferings  of  our  Savior,  we  wit*
ness  unto  him  that  we  remember
him,  that  *ve  love  his  law,  that  we
are  determined  to  abide  by  his  Gos*


252


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


pel  and  that  we  will  do  all  in  our
power  to  walk  in  the  principles  of
faith  and  patience,  forbearance  and
longsuffering,  and  of  trnth  and
righteousness  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged. As  a  short  illustration,  and
to  draw  the  minds  of  the  congrega-
tion directly  to  the  points  of  instruc-
tion, I  am  disposed  to  read  a  portion
of  the  rules  of  the  United  Order

Rule  one  says,  "  We  will  not  take
the  name  of  the  Deity  in  vain,  nor
speak  lightly  of  his  character  or  of
sacred  things."  I  am  sorry  to  say
that  many  professed  Latter-day
Saints  are  careless  in  the  observance
of  this  rule,  which  every  Latter-day
Saint,  and  every  person  who  has
respect  for  his  own  character  must
certainly  consider  most  wholesome
and  wise,  and  absolutely  obligatory.
Let  us  he  very  careful,  and  never
indulge  in  profane  language  or  use
the  name  of  the  Deity  except  in  such
a  manner  as  becomes  his  high  and
holy  position  nod  our  dependence
upon  him  for  every  breath  we  draw;
and  let  us  also  inculcate  in  our  chil-
dren a  respect  for  that  chaste,  dis-
creet, upright  and  pure  language
which  is  becoming  Saints  of  the
Most  High.

Rule  two  reads — "  We  will  pray
in  our  families  morning  and  even-
ing, and  also  attend  to  secret  prayer/1
Now  brethren  and  sisters,  remember
this.  Those  of  you,  if  any,  who
have  been  careless  and  negligent  on
this  subject,  remember  how  often
God  has  heard  our  prayers  and  how
dependent  we  are  upon  him  for  every
blessing  we  possess  and  enjoy,  and
for  the  protection  which  has  been
extended  unto  us.  While  almost
all  the  world  has  been  ready  to  de-
stroy the  Latter-day  Saints  from  off
the  earth,  the  Lord  has  answered  our
prayers  and  has  protected  us,  as  it
were,  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.
Let  us  not  forget  to  call  upon  him


morning  and  evening,  that  our  fam-
ilies may  learn,  from  their  childhood,

|  to  observe  th  s  great  and  important
duty.  And  befute  we  lie  down  to
rest  or  rise  in  the  morning  let  us  lift
up  our  hearts  in  secret  prayer  to  the
Most  High,  asking  his  protection
and  blessing  in  all  things,  that  by
united  faith  we  may  be  able  to  per-
form the  great  and  arduous  duties
which  are  placed  upon  us.  And  in
our  prayers  let  us  remember  our
Bishops  and  Teachers  and  those  in
authority, — the  President  of  the
Church,  his  counselors  and  all  those
who  act  in  the  holy  Priesthood
that  the  Spirit  of  the  Almighty
may  rest  upon  them  as  well  as  upon
us,  that  with  one  heart  and  one
mind  we  may  have  a  knowlege  of
the  things  of  God ;  and  that  by  ob-
serving these  duties  of  prayer  and
preserving  ourselves  in  purity  be-
fore the  Lord,  when  teaching,  in-
struction, or  counsel  is  sent  forth
among  the  Saints,  or  revelation  is
proclaimed  unto  us,  we  may  have
enough  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our
hearts  to  know,  each  for  himself  or
herself,  whether  these  tilings  are  true
or  not;  and  that  when  false  spirits
go  forth  and  lead  men  astray  into
darkness,  error  and  folly,  we  may
know  the  true  from  the  false,  detect
those  who  are  liars,  and  expose  them
as  may  be  necessary.

The  third  rule  is — u  We  will  ob-
serve or  keep  the  word  of  wisdom,
according  to  the  spirit  and  meaning
thertof,"  Remember  this,  .brethren
and  sisters. I  hear  occasionally  of

:  brethren  indulging  in  intoxicating
drinks,  and  I  see  many  of  them  yet,
even  young  men,  who  indulge  in  the
use  of  tobacco,  a  habit  which  is  very
pernicious  and  injurious  to  health,
and  a  viol  at  ion  of  the  word  of  wis-
dooi.  There  are  also  other  viola-
tions of  this  rule  among  us  which
should  cease,  for  we  are  told  in  the


FAITH  WITHOUT  WORKS  IS  DEAD,  ETC


253


word  of  wisdom  that  if  we  will  ob- !
serve  it  with  all  oar  hearts,  keeping  j
the  commandments  of  God,  we  shall
*bave  faith,  health  and  strength,  mar-
row in  our  bones,  and  have  wisdom
and  great  treasures  of  knowledge,
and  the  destroyer  will  pass  by  us  and
not  slay  us.  Brethren,  how  general
it  is  with  us  when  persons  are  sick
and  afflicted,  or  when  our  children
are  sick,  to  say  to  the  Elders—
"  Brethren,  come  and  lay  your  hands
upon  them/1  and  in  thousands  of
instances  they  arc  healed.  Perhaps
we  are  losing  some  of  oor  faith.  We
read  in  the  Scriptures  that  King
Asa,  whom  God  had  healed  and
blessed,  when  he  was  diseased  he
trusted  not  to  the  Lord,  but  sought
physicians,  and  King  Asa  died.
While  we  recommend  and  approve  \
of  using  every  reasonable  means
within  our  power  to  preserve  our
lives  and  those  of  our  children,  we
do  depend,  first  of  all,  upon  faith  in
the  hol^Gospel,  the  administration
of  its  ordinances  and  the  fulfillment
of  the  promises  of  God  ;  and  inas-
much as  we  observe  the  word  of  wis*
dom  and  keep  the  commandments
of  God  we  have  faith,  and  we  have  :
the  promisee  of  Go  J,  upon  which  we
can  rely,  and  by  which  thousands
and  thousands  are  delivered  from
the  afflictions  which  prey  up;  n  tbern.

"  We  will  treat  our  families  with
kindness  and  affection;  arid  set  before
them  an  example  worthy  of  imita-
tion. In  our  families  and  in  our  j
intercourse  with  all  persons  we  will
refrain  from  being  contentious  and
quarrelsome.  We  will  cease  to
speak  evil  one  of  another,  and  culti-
vate a  spirit  of  charity  towards  all.
We  consider  it  our  first  duty  to  keep  |
from  acting  selfishly  or  from  covet-
ous motives,  and  we  will  seek  the
interests  of  each  other  and  the
salvation  of  all  mankind  "  This  is
rale  four,  and  in  calling  your  at  ten-


!  tion  to  it  I  wish  it  to  be  remembered
i  that  it  enters  into  our  business
transactions  and  every-day  life.  I
have  noticed  in  the  course  of  many
years  that  I  have  traveled  and
preached,  being  in  hundreds  of  fam-
ilies— that  some  men  were  pleasant
and  agreeable,  while  others  were
crabbed,  cross,  ill-natured  and  surly
in  their  disposition;  the  very  tone
of  their  voice  would  show  it  This
is  all  wrong.  We  should  cultivate
kindness,  forbearance  and  patience
in  our  families,  and  a  spirit  that  will
incline  them  unto  us,  and  in  all
things  set  such  an  example  before
our  children  that  we  may  be  as
\ shining  lights  unto  them,  that  as
they  grow  up  imitating  our  examples
they  may  become  pillars  of  society,
plants  of  renown  and  ornaments  in
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  not  be  led
by  covetousuess,  dishonesty,  idolatry
or  any  corrupt  motive  whatever.
Consider  all  these  things,  and
!  remember  this  as  one  of  the  rules  of
the  United  Order  which  it  is  of
special  importance  that  we  should
observe.

Rule  five  teaches — "  Wo  will  ob*
serve  personal  cleanliness,  preserve
ourselves  in  all  chastity,  refrain
from  adultery,  whoredom  and  lustf
and  discountenance  and  refrain  from
all  vulgar  and  obscene  language  and
con  luct.,J  In  regard  to  this  rule,  I
am  sorry  to  say  that  the  influx  of
so-called  civilization  and  Christianity
in  our  midst  has  shown  its  effects
upon  some  portions  of  our  commu-
nity, and  that  strict  and  firm
adherence  to  the  principles  of  chas-
tity, for  which  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  remarkable  ever  since
the  organization  of  the  Church  and
the  gathering  of  the  people,  seems,
in  some  instances,  to  be  wanting.
We  call  upon  all  such  persons  to
repent  and  humble  themselves  before
the  Lord ;  and  we  exhort  all  Lat-


i


■


204 .  JOURNAL  UJ?*

ter-day  Saints  to  maintain  such  a
high  position  before  God  that  erery
act  of  their  lives  may  be  approved
of  him*  Never  let  us  be  guilty  of
any  word  or  deed  that  we  will  be
ashamed  of  before  oar  father,  mother,
brother,  or  sister,  or  before  our  hea-
venly Father,  This  is  a  principle
that  we  should  cultivate,  maintain
and  abide  by  in  all  things;  and
wherever  any  have  been  foolish
enough  to  fall  or  go  astray,  through
the  toils  or  snares  that  have  been  set
for  them,  let  them  repent  and  humble
them  selves  before  the  Lord,  and  let
a  spirit  of  unity,  harmony,  peace,
stern  integrity,  purity  and  chastity
abide  in  every  heart,  for  if  we  ever
inherit  blessings  and  glory,  if  we
ever  are  made  partakers  of  the
t  h  rones,  d  o  mi  nion  s,  pri  nci  pal  i  ties,
powers  and  endless  lives  which  per-
tain to  the  exaltation  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  we  shall  do  so  by  maintain-
ing a  purity  like  that  of  Joseph  who
was  sold  into  Egypt.

The  sixth  rule  is — "  We  will  ob-
serve the  Sabbath  day  and  keep  it
holy."  I  regret  to  say  that  I  have
noticed  a  great  many  instances  of
laxity  in  the  observance  of  this
rule,  and  I  wish  the  Elders  and
teachers  in  all  the  Branches  and
settlements  to  preach  and  practice
the  observance  of  the  Sabbath.
Brethren,  work  six  days,  and  on  the
seventh  rest  and  observe  the  Sab-
bath according  to  the  revelation;
and  impress  this  principle  upon  the
Saints  everywhere  by  practice-  I
remember  once  I  was  in  a  hurry
to  come  to  Salt  Lake  City.  Fill-
more was  then  the  only  settlement
between  my  place  in  Parowan,  Iron
County,  and  the  settlements  in  Utah
County.  The  Sunday  was  very
fine ;  we  bad  attended  meeting  and,
having  been  a  long  time  away  from
the  brethren  in  Salt  Lake  City,  we
wanted  to  hurry on. I  certainly


DI&GOUKSfift.

thought  we  could  travel  twenty  miles
on  Sandfly  evening,  as  well  as  not,
so  we  started.  I  was  a  little  con-
science-stricken; I  auid  to  myself — •
**  This  is  not  exactly  right,  and  I
am  afraid  we  shall  not  get  along
as  well  as  we  would  to  have  staid
until  Monday  morning/'  We  drove
about  twenty  or  twenty-two  miles
that  evening.  I  told  the  brethren
to  tie  up  the  horses,  but  some  of
them  got  loose  and  went  clear  back,
and  in  the  morning  the  brethren
had  to  go  the  whole  distance  after
them.  That  is  what  we  gained  at
the  start  by  breaking  the  Sabbath  j
but  it  did  not  end  there.  The  next
day  we  broke  a  wagon,  and  then  we
got  into  a  storm,  and  we  were  six
days  in  reaching  Fillmore,  and  it  took
us  some  twelve  days  to  reach  this
city.  Now,  I  do  not  believe  that,  as
a  general  thing,  anything  is  gained
in  property  or  in  time  by  working
on  the  Sabbath  ;  and  I  advise  and
exhort  all  men  professing  to  belong
to  the  United  Order,  or  to  be  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  to  observe  the  Sab-
bath j  keep  it  holy,  devote  it  to  wor-
ship, to  the  study  of  good  books,  to
rest,  to  imputing  ins  traction,  to
attending  meeting,  and  do  not,  un-
der any  circumstances,  lapse  into  a
habit  of  thinking  that  yon  can  do
as  you  please  on  the  Sabbath,  and
that  so  doing  is  clear  gain.  We
have,  some  day,  to  meet  our  Father
in  heaven,  and  that  day  is  not  very
far  off  with  many  uf  us.  I  meet
here  at  this  Conference  quite  a  num-
ber with  whom,  forty  years  ago
this  summer,  or  last  spring,  I
marched  on  the  Z ion's  Camp  jour-
ney— a  thousand  miles.  That  does
not  seem  long,  but  we  are  marching
steadily  to  our  last  account,  and
we  should  not  let  our  love  for  self,
our  desire  for  gain,  or  our  anxiety
for  pleasure  so  mar  our  path  that
when  we  come  into  the  presence


FAITH  WITHOUT  WORKS  IS  DEAD,  ET<\


2o5


of  our  Father  in  heaven  we  shall
be  smitten  wirh  the  reflection  that,
instead  of  observing  the  Sabbath,
according  to  the  command,  we  went
off  spreeing,  or  hunting,  or  we  went
looking  after  cattle,  or  getting  wood,
or  dashing  around  and  breaking  the
Sabbath  time  and  again,  for  if  our
conscience  reprove  us,  God  is  greater
than  our  consciences,  and  he  surely
will  condemn  us.

Rule  seven — "  That  which  is  nut
committed  to  our  care  we  will  not
appropriate  to  our  own  use/*  That
is  a  very  modest  way  of  agreeing  or
promising  that  we  will  not  steal  or
take  that  which  does  not  belong  to
us.  One  of  the  ten  com  m mid  men  ts
teaches — u  Thou  shalt  not  steal ;  "
and  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants  we  are  informed  that  he
that  sttals  shall  be  cast  out  and  de-
livered to  the  law  of  the  land.  These
tilings  should  never  be  forgotten  by
those  professing  to  be  Latter  day
Saints.  I  have  noticed,  in  the  course
of  my  life,  a  great  many  men  pro-  !
fessing  a  great  deal  of  piety,  who
have  been  very  dishonest  In  the
neighborhood  where  I  was  raised
there  were  men  who  would  charge  a
good  round  price  for  a  bushel  of
wheat,  and  then  use  a  false  measure.
In  that  way  they  reared  children  to
bt!  dishonest.  If  there  are  fathers
or  teachers  in  Israel  who  indulge  in
this  covetous  practice,  or  who  take
that  which  does  not  belong  to  them,
they  set  examples  before  their  chil-
dren winch  cause  them  to  grow  up
a  generation  of  thieves.  I  was  once  I
conversant  with  an  incident  illus-
trative of  this  principle,  A  young
man  was  cut  off  from  the  Church
for  stealing.  When  he  cime  home
his  mother  upbraided  him  for  it,
**  but,"  said  he,  u  mother,  you  have
yourself  to  thank  for  it  My  father
always  told  me  not  to  steal ;  he  com-
manded me  not  to  touch  a  thing  that


did  not  belong  to  me,  but  you  used
to  send  me  to  the  neighbors  to  steal
eggs ;  yon  taught  me  to  steal,  and
you  are  measurably  responsible  for
my  disgrace."  This  was  rather  a
bitter  pill  for  the  mother,  but  it  con-
tains an  important  lesson,  if  we  will
consider  it
i  "That  which  we  borrow  we  will
return  according  to  promise,  and
that  which  we  iind  we  will  not  ap-
propriate to  our  own  use,  but  will
seek:  to  return  it  to  the  proper
owner."  There  is  too  much  of  a
want  of  confidence  in  the  midst  of
the  Saints.  When  some  promise
they  too  often  fail  to  keep  their  word  ;
and  those  who  are  in  business  do
not  feel  as  free  to  trust  their  breth-
ren as  outsiders  do.  I  have  had
brethren  come  to  me  and  say — -
"  They  are  not  as  accommodating  to
me  as  outsiders  arc,"  and  I  sometimes
answer  them  by  saying — u  Perhaps
you  are  not  as  punctual  to  pay  your
brethren  as  you  would  be  to  pay  au
outsider."  Many  of  our  brethren
arc  not,  and  this  is  all  wrong.  Con-
fidence should  be  established  in
each  other  by  fulfilling  what  we  un-
,  dertake.  What  we  borrow  we  should
return ;  what  we  agree  to  do  we
should  fulfill.  We  should  be  careful
to  make  our  agreements  so  that  we
can  fulfill  them,  and  then  do  so,  and
if  through  some  unforeseen  circum-
stances we  are  unable  to  do  so,  we
should  immediately  make  known  the
facta  of  the  case,  and  be  honest.  I
hope  these  cases  are  by  no  means
|  common,  but  I  am  satisfied  they  are
more  numerous  than  they  ought
to  be,  V

The  ninth  rule  requires  us,  as
soon  as  possible,  to  cancel  all  in-
debtedness, and  thereafter  to  avoid
getting  into  debt.  For  the  last  few
years,  owing  to  the  opening  of
mines,  the  construction  of  railroads,
and  the  good  crops  that  have  been


256


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


raised,  the  prosperity  of  the  people
has  beeD  very  great,  and  as  a  wise
and  prudent  community  we  should
have  taken  a  course  to  have  had  the
benefits  of  all  this  means  without
being  involved  in  debt,  for,  not-
withstanding wc  have  been  pat  to
vast  expense  in  consequence  of  per-
secution and  oppression  from  oar
enemies,  we  have  been  in  a  condi-
tion to  have  saved  a  great  deal.  But
many  of  our  brethren  are  in  debt,
notwithstanding  all  this  prosperity.
Now  this  rule  requires  that  we  take
measures  to  pay,  or  cancel,  our
debts  as  soon  as  possible,  and
then  avoid  getting  into  debt  by
living  within  our  means.  Ambi-
tion to  push  forward  and  make
wealth  should  not  induce  us  to  in-
volve ourselves  in  debt,  but  we
should,  with  economy  and  prudence,
live  within  our  means.

The  residue  of  these  rules  I  will
not  read,  but  commend  them  to  the
co r.sideration  of  all  the  brethren,  as
peing  of  the  utmost  importance,
There  is  one,  however,  to  which  I
will  just  call  your  attention.  It
refers  to  our  manner  of  dress  and
living,  and  requires  us  to  use  proper
economy  and  prudence  in  the  man-
agement of  all  things  intrusted  to
our  care.  I  exceedingly  regret  to
see  the  disposition  to  extravagance
which  exists  among  us,  as  also  a
disposition  to  purchase  from  abroad
a  variety  of  articles  that  are  not  of
the  first  necessity.  I  do  think  that
it  is  right  and  proper  that  we  should
take  the  utmost  pains  in  our  power,
as  a  United  Order  and  a  united  peo-
ple, to  provide  everything  that  we
can  produce  within  ourselves,  and
not  be  sending  away  all  the  money
we  can  get  to  buy  things  that  we  can
make  ourselves.  Our  brooms,  for
instance,  and  u  great  deal  of  our
clothing,  and  most  of  our  shoes  can
be  made  here. With  all  the  ridicule


that  lias  been  expended  in  relation
to  wooden  -  soled  boots  and  shoes,
I  sincerely  advise  every  man  who
is  afflicted  with  a  cough,  or  who  is
subject  to  colds  or  rheumatism,
asthma,  or  any  ailment  of  that  kind,
to  put  wooden  soles  under  his  feet
this  Fall,  They  will  preserve  health
a  great  deal  better  than  rubber;  and
if  they  happen  to  be  paid  fur  it  will
be  much  better  than  to  owe  a  trader
for  them,  or  to  wear  leather  that  is
like  a  sponge,  through  which  the
damp  will  penetrate,  striking  di-
rectly to  and  promoting  cough  or
rheumatism,  I  am  of  the  belief
that  wnoden  -  soled  shoes  worn  ia
winter  will  cure  nine  cases  out  of
ten  of  rheumatism  and  will  save
the  lives  of  many  of  our  children,
by  keeping  their  feet  dry  and  warm.
I  feel  like  preaching  up  wooden  shoes
ns  a  medical  prescription,  if  *yoa
please,  as  well  as  on  the  score  of
economy.

I  wish  you  brethren  when  yoa
return  to  the  settlements  to  look
after  the  schools,  see  that  th^y  are
established  in  all  the  settlements
for  the  winter,  that  no  child  be  left
without  a  chance  to  acquire  a  know-
ledge of  the  common  branches  of
education.  See  that  all  the  poor  are
provided  with  the  means  of  sending
their  children  to  school,  that  no  child
be  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  at-
tending school  through  the  poverty
of  its  parents.  Make  your  school*
houses  comfortable  and  pleasant.
Make  the  seats  of  the  proper  bight
and  comfortable,  so  that  the  children
may  not  become  humpbacked  or
round  shouldered,  nor  contract  spinal
c  i  in  plaints,  or  anything  of  that  kind
through  their  seats  being  awkwardly
constructed.  There  is  plenty  of
lumber  in  the  mountains,  and  plenty
of  workmen ;  let  them  make  good
comfortable  seats  for  the  children.
See  that  your  school-rooms  are  pro-


FAITH  WITHOUT  WORKS  IS  DEAD,  ETC,


257


perly  warmed,  and  be  careful  as  to
the  characters  of  the  men  you
employ  for  school  teachers.  Do
not  hire  a  scoundrel,  a  seducec,  or
blackleg  for  the  position,  for  if  you
employ  as  teachers  of  your  schools
those  who  are  foul,  wicked,  and
corrupt  in  their  habits,  you  assume
a  terrible  responsibility,  for  t hc3  im-
pressions made  upon  and  the  lessons
tautrht  to  the  children  while  at-
tending school  have  a  great  influ-
ence for  good  or  for  evil,  upon  their
ful  tire  lives  and  welfare*  1  believe
I  have  preached  upon  this  subject
almost  every  Conference  since  f.  can
remember,  or  since  I  began  to  speak
at  Conferences,  and  I  shall  continue
to  do  so.  Let  parents  be  stirred  up
in  regard  to  the  education  of  their
children,  and  provide  for  their  wel*
fare.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Ter-
ritory the  first  house  built  in  every
settlement,  as  a  general  rule,  was  a
school-house.  Let  this  rule  still  be
followed,  and  let  our  children  receive
their  education  directly  within  our-
selves ;  and  if  we  want  them  to
study  the  advanced  branches,  fill  up
our  home  universities;  instead  of
sending  them  abroad  to  be  educated
in  foreign  schools,  uphold  your  own
university  and  sustain  your  own
schools.

After  the  close  of  this  Conference
meetings  in  tins  building  will  be
discontinued  during  the  winter  and
will  be  held,  under  the  direction  of
the  Bishops,  in  the  ward  assembly
rooms,  every  Sunday  afternoon  and
evening.  The  forenoons  will  be  de*
voted  to  Sunday  Schools,  and  1
exhort  the  brethren  and  sisters  to
have  their  children  ready,  so  that
they  can  be  at  school  in  time,  And
I  invite  the  young  men  and  espe-
cially the  young  sisters,  to  attend
Sunday  schools;  I  want  to  stir  up
the  young  men  to  go  there  and
form  Bible  classes. And  I  exhort

No.  17.


the  Elders  to  be  present  as  teachers,
that  there  may  be  no  lack  of  teach-
ers. I  want  to  express  my  admira-
tion of  brother  Goddnrd  and  a
number  of  other  school  superinten-
dents and  teachers,  with  whom  I
am  acquainted,  because  of  their
efforts  to  spread  among  the  young
throughout  the  Territory  a  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
}<H,  as  taught  in  the  Bible,  Book
of  Mormon,  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  in  the  standard
works  of  the  Church,  .And  I  say
to  the  young  men,  that  if  they  will
attend  the  Bible  classes  and  study
the  catechism  in  use  in  our  schools,
and  make  themselves  familiar  with
it,  they  will  become  so  thoroughly
informed  in  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  and  the  evidences  of  it,  that
when  called  upon  to  go  abroad  to
defend  the  doctrines  of  Zion  they  will,
be  well  prepared  to  do  so.  I  invite
the  Elders  to  see  that  these  classes
are  formed  in  all  the  settlements.

I  wi!l  again  repeat  the  idea  that
has  already  been  presented,  to  sus-
tain our  own  literary  institutions
and  publications, — the  Juvenile  In-
strntior,  the  Woman**  E.qwn_>uty  the
Deseret  News, which  contains  dis-
courses by  the  First  Presidency  and
Twelve,  and  also  the  publications  in
the several counties. They  are
cond acted  by  men  who  take  pains  to
disseminate  the  truth,  as  well  as  the
general  news  of  the  world,  and  they
ought  to  be  sustained,  that  their
influence  may  be  extended  and  in-
creased. Do  not  spend  your  money
in  buying  lies,  nor  your  time  in  read*
ing  yellow- covered  literature,  or  in
studying  such  things  as  are  calcu-
lated in  their  nature  to  degenerate
the  human  mind  and  degrade  the
soul. One  of  the  best  books  yon  can
read  on  the  earth  is  the  Bible. It  is
the  finest  history  ever  published  in
Great  Britain, Study  its  history  and

Vol  XVII.


S5S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO tTR:


its  precepts.  It  is  the  foundation
of  the  sciences  of  the  world,  and
the  basis  of  the  laws  of  all  the
Christian  nations ;  and  although  men
in  every  direction  have  departed  from
it,  we  can  read  and  understand  it  for
ourselves.  See  that  it  is  on  every
table,  in  every  household,  in  every
pulpit,  and  that  it  is  the  school  book
of  every  family  throughout  the  Ter-
ritory.

I  want  to  say,  with  regard  to  the
Temple  at  St  George,  that  the  walls
are  between  twenty-five  and  thirty
feet  high.  Some  of  the  brethren
remained  at  work  upon  it  all  summer,
some  of  them  without  shoes  aud
poorly  supplied  with  clothing.  About
309  persons  have  reported,  I  believe,
as  going  there  thig  winter  to  aid  in
pushing  forward  the  work  on  this
Temple,  as  volunteers  from  the  dif-
ferent settlements  of  the  Territory.
We  hope,  by  means  of  this  help  and
the  contributions  that  may  be  sent
there,  to  have  the  roof  on  early
next  spring,  and  very  soon  a  bap-
tismal font  in  the  basement,  in
which  we  can  begin  the  administra-
tion of  the  principle  of  baptism  for
the  dead  and  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel  in  connection  with  our  fa-
thers. The  climate  in  St.  George  is
well  suited  to  those  in  feeble  health,
and  inch  of  that  class  of  persons  as
desire  to  do  so  can,  after  the  Temple
is  completed,  go  theie  and  spend  the
winter,  and  attend  to  the  ordinances
for  their  dead.

I  have  invited  the  brethren,  during
the  Conference,  to  go  and  look  at  the
Temple  foundation  in  this  city,  It
is  a  very  beautiful  foundation,  and
the  design  of  the  building  is  grand.
The  labor  of  taking  the  granite  from
the  mountains,  bringing  it  on  to
this  ground  and  cutting  it  and
putting  it  in  position  is  immense.
You  saw  a  great  many  prepared  stones
that  are  not  laid  :  I  will  explain  how


that  has  happened.  We  had  a  good
many  beginners  who  could  shape  a
rough  stone,  but  not  so  many  stone-
cutters who  could  do  a  finished  job,
and  all  the  stones  for  the  outside
had  to  be  done  by  skillful  workmen.
A  great  number  of  those  that  you
see  lying  round,  numbered  up  as
high  as  thirteen  or  fourteen  courses,
were  cut  by  men  who  were  not  skilled
workmen.  That  is  the  reason  why
so  many  are  not  yet  laid  in  the  build-
ing. We  found  it  necessary  during
the  harvest  to  dismiss  fifty  workmen
of  this  kind  from  the  block,  that
they  might  go  and  aid  in  gathering
in  the  harvest,  because  we  could  not
supply  them  with  work  so  far  in
advance  of  the  laying.  J  j  rut  lie  v
Trueman  O.  Angell  has  been  exceed-
ingly zealous  in  attending  to  this
work :  he  has  been  so  fearful  lest  a
stone  should  be  laid  wrong  that  he
has  been  on  the  walls  early  and  late  to
see  that  every  .-tone  has  been  set  in  its
proper  place,  to  a  hairs  breadth.  His
zeal  has  bean  such  that  I  have  almost
ieared  that,  in  spite  of  the  faith  of
the  Saints  and  ihe  energy  of  the
man's  soul,  he  would  work  himself
into  the  ground.  I  want  the  brethren
to  pray  for  him  that  he  may  be  sus-
tained in  his  arduous  labors.

One  great  difficulty  in  getting
along  on  this  Temple,  has  been  the
want  of  money  to  supply  the  work-
men with  actual  necessaries.  We
have  been  accustomed,  during  the
prosperous  times  of  the  past  year
or  two,  to  pay  them  one-fourth  in
cash  or  rcerehandize ;  this  season
wo  were  unable  to  do  that,  hence  an
invitation  was  given  by  the  First
Presidency  and  the  Bishops,  to  all,
the  Saints,  far  and  near,  to  make
a  donation  of  fifty  cents  a  month
to  aid  in  the  prosecution  of  the
work  on  the  Temple ;  the  names  of
all  who  respond  are  4:0  be  entered  in
the  "  Book  of  the  Law  of  the  Lord/


p


FAITH  WITHOUT  WORKS  IS  DEAD,  ETC


239


Quite  a  number  have  responded,
and  some  means  has  come  in  from
this  source.  1  now  invite  the  breth-
rens,  sisters,  strangers,  and  all  who
feel  an  interest  in  the  Temple,  and
wish  to  have  their  names  enrolled
in  the  "Book  of  the  Law  of  the
Lord/'  to  make  this  monthly  con-
tribution, that  the  hearts  of  the
workmen  may  be  gladdened  and
that  the  hands  of  those  who  are
called  to  conduct  this  business  may
not  be  tied.  We  have  been  com-
pelled to  borrow  money  and  to  pay
interest  to  carry  on  this  work ;  the
resources  that  have  come  in  have
been  insufficient,  and  the  kind  that
has  come  in  lias  not  been  such  that
we  could  make  it  available  in  car-
rying on  the  work  as  vigorously  as
we  desired  to  do  on  this  Temple
and  upon  that  at  St.  George.  I  ap-
peal to  the  brethren  also  to  remember
the  Temple  in  their  prayers.  Let
us  pray  that  God  will  give  us  power
to  erect  and  dedicate  it,  and  that
be  will  preserve  the  life  of  our
President  to  organize  the  Priest-
hood in  all  its  beauty  mid  order  in
that  Temple,  and  fulfill  to  the  utter-
most the  duties  of  those  keys,  which
were  delivered  to  him  by  Joseph
Smith,  pertaining  to  the  twelve  and
to  the  church f  and  to  the  bearing  ofi
of  this  work  in  the  last  days.  Let
us  lift  our  hearts  to  God  that  be  will
preserve  his  servants  for  the  accom-
plishment of  this  work.  And  while
we  raise  our  hearts  in  prayer  for  this  \
object,  let  our  souls  be  filled  with  be-
nevolence and  liberality  to  pay  our
tithes  and  offerings.  I  fully  believe
that,  if  one  half  of  the  brethren  haii  .
honestly  paid  tithing  as  we  under-
stand it,  our  hands  would  not  have
been  tied.  Think  of  these  things
and  act  upon  them.

Most  of  the  emigration  the  present
season  has  been  through  their  own
means  and  the  aid  of  relatives  and


friends,  and  a  goodly  number  have
thus  been  gathered.  We  now  again
invite  all  those  who  ovve  t lie  Perpe-
tual Emigration  Fund,  or  whose  rela*
lives  or  friends  are  indebted  to  it,  to
remember  their  obligations,  that
those  in  the  old  countries  who  desire
it  may  be  gathered  here  as  fast  as
possible.  We  also  invite  the  breth-
1  ren  to  send  for  their  friends  from
abroad;  but  before  expending  your
money  for  that  purpose,  find  out
whether  those  whom  you  wish  to
gather  still  remain  Saints,  or  whether
they  have  corrupted  their  ways  before
the  Lord.  It  would  be  a  very  good
idea  to  learn  this  before  expending
money  to  help  them,  though  it  is  an
act  of  charity  to  bring  anybody  from
the  old  world  and  place  them  on  the
broad  plains  of  America,  where  they
may  be  enabled  to  obtain  homes  of
their  own.

I  want  to  say,  in  relation  to  the
missionary  labors  of  President  Brijr-
ham  Young  in  going  to  Europe  and
founding  and  starting  the  system  of
emigration,  and  gathering  thousands
upon  thousands  of  people  from  the
old  world  and  placing  them  in  posi-
tions to  get  homes  of  thoir  own,  that
he  is  the  most  distinguished  and  ex-
tensive  benefactor  of  his  race  of  any
living  man  within  my  knowledge.
We  regret  that  he  has  been  unable  to
to  speak  to  us  during  this  Conference.
We  feel  confident,  however,  that,  had
the  gospel  which  he  has  preached  for
the  last  forty- three  years  to  the  in-
habitants of  the  world,  been  received
.  as  honestly  by  those  who  heard  it  as
it  has  been  declared  by  him  and  his
brethren,  all  the  human  family  would
have  liEid  a  knowledge  of  the  gospel
to-day,  and  the  Millennium  would
have  been  brought  it.  This,  however,
has  not  been  the  case;  but  the  former
preaching  of  President  Young,  and
the  acts  of  his  life  in  teaching  and
being  a  father  to  the  people  will  be


260


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


had  ineverlnsting  remembrance;  and
we  will  exercise  our  faith  that  God
will  restore  his  health,  that  his  voice
may  again  be  heard  amongst  us,
though  that  is  not  possible  at  this
time. We  are  gratified  to  know  that


he  is  able  to  be  in  our  midst,  to  hear
our  testimonies,  see  our  countenances,
and  know  that  within  us  there  is  a
portion  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which
God  has  revealed  for  our  salvation.


■


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  Adjourned  Semi- Annual  Conference  or  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  is  the  New  Tabernacle,
Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Aftsrkoon,  October  11,  1874.

(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans.)


SAINTS  ABE  THE  LIGHT OF THE  WORLD  —  LIVE DOWN  FALSEHOOD  —

UNION  IN  THE  CHURCH  A LL-QIPORTAT.


The  teachings  which  we  have  heard
at  this  conference  have  been  of  a
character  most  important  to  us  as  a
people,  and  should  be  treasured  tip
by  all  who  have  heard  them;  and
those  of  us  who  reside  in  other
places  who  have  attended  Conference
should  carry  the  instructions  they
have  received  to  the  places  where
they  reside,  that  the  spirit  of  this
work  and  the  spirit  of  this  conference
may  be  disseminated  among  all  the
Saints*

We  are  living  in  one  of  the  most
important  periods  of  the  earth's  his-
tory. Events  are  of  such  a  character
connected  with  us  as  to  excite  the
greatest  interest,  and  no  one  connect-
ed with  the  people,  who  feels  as  he
or  she  should,  can  help  being  inter-
ested in  the  way  in  which  this  work
is  progressing  and  attracting  atten-
tion throughout  the  earth.  There  is
no  people,  to-day,  on  the  face  of  the


earth  who  are  situated  in  this  respect
as  are  the  Latter-day  Saints,  God  is
dealing  with  us  in  a  most  remarkable
manner,  and  is  fulfilling,  through  his
people,  the  predictions  of  the  holy
prophets,  and  we  behold  on  every
hand,  when  we  open  our  eyes  to  see
and  our  hearts  to  understand,  the
great  events  which  God  said  should
transpire  in  some  day  and  age  in  the
future.

There  is  one  thing  with  which  I
am  greatly  impressed,  and  that  is,
within  a  few  years  how  determined
the  enemies  of  the  kingdom  of  God
have  been  to  destroy  that  work  which
he  has  founded.  How  they  have
envied,  maligned,  and  maliciously
persecuted  this  people,  and  how  they
have  concocted  plots  for  their  over-
throw !  In  this  last  Congress  no  less
than  eight  bills  were  introduced,  hav-
ing for  their  object  the  subjugation
of  the  people  of  Utah  to  the  ring  of


SAINTS  ARE  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD,  KTC


2G1


men  who  have  sought  their  destruc-
tion, and  yet  the  population  of  this
entire  Territory  dues  not  number  as
much  as  a  second  class  city  in  the
United  States,  I  remarked  to  mem*
berg  of  Congress,  of  the  House  and
of  the  Senate,  that  Congress  was
paying  us  a  great  compliment,  a  peo-
ple so  insignificant  numerically,  so
devoid  of  wealth,  in  the  estimation
of  many  so  illiterate,  so  deluded,  so
bound  and  fettered  and  so  barbarous
in  our  habits.  I  think  it  a  great
compliment  that  the  representatives
of  forty  millions  of  people  should  be*  j
stow  such  attention  upon  one  hun-
dred and  fifty  thousand.  Yet  it  is
not  these  representatives  who  wish  so
much  to  do  us  harm,  but  it  is  a  body
of  men  here  who  are  anxious  to  gain
power  and  influence  at  the  expense
of  a  people  whose  prosperity  ar.d  in-
fluence they  envy.  I  have  been  im-
pressed with  the  wonderful  manner  in
which  we  have  been  advertised  now
for  some  years  back,  I  can  not  fail
to  recognize  the  hand  of  God  in  this,
1  look  around  me  and  I  see  a  people
who,  if  they  were  not  Latter-day
Saints,  if  they  did  not  believe  the
gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
would  not  be  noticed  in  any  particu-
lar manner,  but  who,  because  they
are  Latter-day  Saints,  are  known
more  widely  and  whose  movements
attract  more  attention  and  excite
greater  interest,  whose  public  raerf
are  more  advertised  and  their  lives
and  characters  published  more  widely
throughout  the  earth  than  those  of
many  rulers  of  great  nations.  Men
say  it  is  because  this  is  such  a  great
imposture,  because  Brigham  Young
is  a  false  prophet,  and  because  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  deluded.  These
are  singular  statements  to  make,  as  j
though  a  few  deluded  and  ignorant
people,  led  by  a  false  prophet,  could
occupy  the  attention  of  the  nations
of  the  earth. It  is  something  un-


heard of  in  history  except,  as  we  tes-
tify, in  the  case  of  those  who  have
preceded  us  in  the  same  work.  Jesus
said  to  his  ancient  disciples,  "Ye  are

■  the  light  of  the  world,  A  city  that
is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid."
The  eyes  of  the  world  were  upon
them.  And  in  our  day  we  behold
the  same  effect.  The  Latter-day
Saints  and  their  work  have  been  like
a  city  set  on  a  hill.  They  have  at-
tracted the  gaze  of  the  nations,  and
that,  too,  without  any  especial  effort
on  their  part  to  make  themselves
conspicuous.  The  clamor  of  oar  ene-
mies has  greatly  contributed  to  this.
What  do  their  attacks  accomplish  for
us?  They  advertise  us  and  sjive  usau
importance  to  which  we  could  not
otherwise  attain.  Every  effort  that
is  made  to  destroy  this  work  or  to

■  embarras  its  onward  progress,  or  to
deprive  its  leaders  of  their  lives  or  of
their  liberties  only  enhances  its  im-
portance in  the  midst  of  the  earth,
gives  it  publicity,  preaches  the  gos-
pel, attracts  attention,  causes  men
and  women  to  think,  to  reason  and  to
investigate  what  it  is  about  this  peo-
ple that  creates  so  much  excitement.

I  have  said,  and  I  do  not  think  I
exaggerate  iu  the  least  degree,  that
the  efforts  of  the  past  three  or  four
years,  in  this  Territory,  to  destroy
this  work  and  to  deprive  the  leaders
of  this  people  of  their  liberty  have
had  more  effect  in  preaching  what  is
called  Mormonisrn  than  the  efforts  of
a  thousand  missionaries  would  have
been  abb  to  accomplish,  ''Well,
but,"  says  one,  "they  say  such  terri-
ble things  about  you,  and  it  is  no  ad-
vantage to  be  spoken  of  in  this  man-
ner, to  be  maligned  and  accused  of
wrong,"  It  is  an  advantage,  because,
as  I  have  said,  it  causes  men  and
women  to  reason  and  reflect,  and  it
promotes  investigation.  There  have
beea  hundreds  who  have  come  here
and  been  brought  in  contact  with  this


2G2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


people,  who  have  been  astonished  at  |
what  they  have  seen,  because  what  |
thev  have  seen  has  been  so  different
in  every  respect  from  the  stories  that  1
they  have  heard,  and  the  effect  and
revulsion  of  feeling  have  been  much
greater  than  they  would  have  been
had  they  never  heard  anything  about
us  at  all*  And  it  is  our  businesss  to
live  down  the  lies  that  are  put  in  cir-
culation about  us.  I,  myself,  rejoice
in  these  things,  because  I  see  the
hand  of  God  in  it  all,  I  see  the  ful-
fillment  of  the  predictions  of  the
holy  prophets,  I  see  a  people  being-
gathered  togethed  who  are  united,
not  so  much  as  they  should  be,  but
still  more  united  than  they  were  be-
fore they  heard  this  gospel,  and  I  re-
joice that  this  is  the  case.

I  hope  that  we  shall  continue  to
cultivate  within  us  the  principle  of
union.  Remember  the  story  of  the
Scythian  king.  When  on  his  death-
bed he  told  his  boys  to  bring  him  a
bundle  of  arrows,  "Now,"  said  he,
"let  me  see  you  break  this/'  They
tried  one  after  another,  but  they
could  not  break  the  bundle.  "Cut
the  string  that  ties  them,7' said  the
king,  "and  try  to  break  them  singly."
They  cut  the  string  and  tried  the  ar-
rows singly  and  broke  the  entire
bundle  with  ease.  There  is  power  in
concentration  of  effort,  and  it  is  this
which  gives  us  our  character  in  the
earth  to-day.  Cause  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  be  disunited,  divide  us
asunder,  split  us  into  factions  and
what  would  we  amount  to  ?  Why,
nothing  at  all,  we  would  not  count
anything  in  the  history  of  the  race
or  of  the  earth ;  but  the  very  notice
that  we  receive,  the  attention  that
we  attract  is  a  tribute  to  our  union
and  to  that  amount  of  the  cementing
influence  which  prevails  among  us
as  a  people.  Union  among  us  is
all-important,  because  we  have  a
power  opposed  to  us  that  will  destroy


us  if  it  can,  there  is  no  disguising
this  fact,  it  is  publicly  announced
everywhere.  It  was  hoped  when
the  railroad  was  completed  that  that
would  do  it  ;  it  was  hoped  that  when
the  mines  were  discovered  and
emigration  floated  in  here  thut  the
accompanying  influences  would  ac-
complish it,  that  fashion,  luxury,
vice  with  all  their  corroding  influen-
enecs  at  work  at  this  system  would
destroy  it,  or  produce  the  disintegra-
tion of  the  entire  people.  Every
effort  of  this  kind  has  for  its  object
the  destruction  of  the  union  of  this
people.  Why,  if  we  were  disunited,
if  we  were  split  into  factions  v?e
might  have  houses  of  ill-fame  on
every  corner  in  juxtaposition  with
churches;  we  rai^ht  have  drinking
saloons  and  gambling  saloons;  we
might  practice  harlotry  to  the  full-
est extent,  and  who  would  indict  us
for  it  or  say  one  word  against  our
practices  ?  No  one;  we  would  be
following  the  fashion  of  the  world.
Why,  it  would  furnish  themes  for
preachers  and  they  would  have
excellent  texts,  for  where  these  things
abound  they  flourish.  But  because
we  are  united,  because  we  have  set
our  faces  against  these  things,  be-
cause we  discourage  vice  we  are  un-
popular, and  we  shall  continue  to  be
so  until  a  better  judgment  prevail,
I  have  said  there  is  no  disguising
the  fact,  nobody  attempts  to  disguise
it,  that  the  object  sought  for  at  the
present  time  is  the  destruction  of
this  people  as  a  people.  Not  that
many  would  avow  their  wish  to  have
our  lives  taken,  but  to  destroy  our
union,  to  destroy  the  influence  of  our
leading  men*  Now,  I  ask  you,
Latter-day  Saints,  are  you  so  blind
and  so  foolish  as  not  to  see  that  this
is  the  object  of  every  attack  which
is  made  upon  us  ?  You  who  do  not
feel  in  favor  of  more  union  and  of
concentrating  our  efforts,  ask  your-


SAINTS  ARE  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD 3  ETC.


203


selves  this  question  and  reflect  upon  '
the  objects  sought  to  be  obtained  by
those  who  are  arrayed  against  us.
Wo  do  not  seek  the  destruction  ot
any,  we  have  never  been  aggressive,
we  have  never  sought  to  force  our
opinions  upon  any  one ;  we  nave
invited  all  to  come  to  this  land  and
proclaim  their  principles  here,  with-
out let  or  hindrance.  They  have  not
been  gagged  in  their  faith,  or  re-
strained or  restricted  in  any  manner.
They  have  had  the  privilege  of
preaching  to  the  fullest  extent  in  our  !
tabernacles  and  meeting-houses,  and
we  have  not  had  the  least  objection
thereto,  but  on  the  contrary  we  have
been  pleased  to  see  them.  This  is
the  course  we  have  taken.  Bat
when  we  are  threatened  with  destruc-
tion, as  a  pure  matter  of  self  de-  i
fence  it  is  our  duty  to  organize
ourselves  to  resist  these  attacks,  and
the  people  who  would  not  do  it  are
unworthy  of  an  existence  upon  the
earth,  I,  therefore,  have  ever  been,
am  now,  and  will  always  be,  while  I
feel  as  I  do  at  the  present  time,  in
favor  of  greater  union  among  this
people,  in  favor  of  the  United  Order,
in  favor  of  everything  that  will  give
us  strength  and  cement  us  closer  and
closer  together  and  make  our  lines
more  impregnable  than  they  are.  ,
And  as  I  said  the  other  day  so  say  I
ag-iin,  with  the  help  of  God,  my  life
shall  be  devoted  to  that  object  with
all  the  strength,  influence  and  ability
which  God  shall  give  me  among  this
people.  Is  there  any  harm  in  this  ?
Not  in  the  least,  so  long  as  our  ob-
jects are  what  they  are.  We  want
to  save,  we  want  to  preserve,  we  want
to  disseminate  good  principles,  and
any  man  or  woman  who  will  practice
this  can  live  forever  in  the  midst  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  and  never  have
any  difficulty.  Every  fair-minded
man  who  comes  to  this  land  and
deports  himself  as  a  gentleman,  and


any  fair-minded  lady  who  comes  and
deports  herself  in  like  manner,  might
live  here  until  they  were  as  old  as
Methuselah  was,  if  we  continued  as
we  have  been,  without  ever  having
the  least  cause  of  feeling  against  us*
We  ask  no  more  from  others  than  we
are  willing  to  extend  to  them  with
the  greatest  liberality  and  freedom  ;
but  we  expect  to  have  liberty  and
freedom  for  ourselves,  and  we  shall
contend  for  them  in  every  constitu-
tional and  legal  manner'  as  long  as
we  live.

My  brethren  and  sisters,  if  you
have  not  got  this  spirit  of  union  let
me  advise  you  to  seek  for  it.  Hum-
ble yourselves  before  God  and  seek
for  it  until  the  desire  to  be  more
closely  united  will  burn  within  you,
until  you  regard  it  as  one  of  the
greatest  objects  that  can  bn  attained*
In  a  family  capacity,  in  a  ward  ch pit-
city,  or  as  a  people,  from  north  to
south,  we  should  not  have  these
clashing  and  conflicting  interests —
Latter-day  Saints  against  Latter-day
Snints,  and  yet  all  of  us  professing
to  have  the  building  up  of  God's
kingdom  at  heart,  I  do  not  know
of  anything  else  that  we  have  to  do,
God  has  sent  us  here  for  this  object,
aiid  I  do  not  know  any  better  thing
that  we  can  engage  in  than  to  build
up  the  Zion  of  God,  It  is  as  good
and  as  preat  a  labor  as  we  can  be
engaged  in,  in  fact  it  is  the  labor
which  God  has  assigned  unto  us  as  a
people  and  as  individuals,  and  if  any
of  ns  are  engaged  in  anything  else
we  are  not  in  the  line  of  our  dutv,
and  we  should  turn  aside  from  that
and  pursue  the  path  which  God  has
marked  oat

Hay  God  bless  you  and  fill  you
with  his  Holy  Spirit,  thtit  you  may
carry  it  with  you  to  your  various
homes  in  the  re  mo  to  parts  of  the
Territory,  and  that  it  may  live  and
burn  within  you,  fill  you  with  good


261  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  holy  desires  to  do  the  will  of

God,  keep  his  com  maud  meats  and
lire  in  close  common  ion  with  him,
and  then  you  need  never  be  afraid  of
being  deceived,  for  yon  can  not  be


if  you  have  the  Holy  Ghost  within
you,  and  that  this  may  be  the  case,
is  rny  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Sunday  After*

noon,  November  15,  1874.


(Reported  hij  David  IF.  Evans  J


THE  GOSPKL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN— SIGNS  FOLLOW  BELIEVERS—
FULFILLMENT  OP  PROPHECY — BOOK  OF  MORMON  A  DIVINE  REVE-
LATION, ■  4»\".  f -  1


We  profess,  Latter-day  Saints,  to
be  living  in  a  dispensation  called
the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of
times,  a  dispensation  commence  1  and
committed  to  men  in  oar  age  by  the
administration  of  angels,  by  the  reve-
lations of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  bring-
ing forth  the  word  of  Gdd  to  the
people,  by  restoring  authority  to  the
children  of  men  to  administer  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and  by
committing  to  them  a  message  which
is  required  to  be  published  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  It  is
very  evident  from  what  was  declared
by  the  ancient  Apostle  that  another
dispensation  after  his  day  was  to  be
introduced  among  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth.  We  read,  in  the  first
chapter  of  Paul's  epistle  to  the  Ephe-
sians,  that  in  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times  all  things  that
are  in  Christ  shall  be  gathered  toge-
***r  in  one. It  is  in  accordance,


therefore,  with  this  dispensation  that
we  see  the  people  gathering  here  in
this  Territory  and  extending  their
settlements  east  nnd  west,  north  and
south.  But  we  are  only  a  very  few
of  the  people  that  God  intends  to
gather  together  in  one  in  this  dispen-
sation. It  is  literally  a  dispensation
of  gathering,  not  merely  a  gathering
together  of  those  who  are  here  on
the  earth  in  the  flesh;  but  before  it
is  completed  all  things  in  Christ
which  are  in  heaven  will  also  be
gathered  and  united  with  those  who
are  in  Christ  on  the  earth.  We  have
but  harely  commenced  in  this  glori-
ous dispensation.  The  Church  has
been  organized,  by  divine  revelation,
angels  have  appeared,  the  apostolic
authority  has  been  restored  by  the
ministration  of  angels,  aud  the  king*
dotn  of  God  has  been  set  up  in  ful-
fillment of  the  promise  made  to  the
ancient  Prophet  Daniel — a  kingdom


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN",  ETC,


265


which  shall  never  be  destroyed,  never
ngain  be  rooted  out  of  the  earth  and
never  be  committed  to  another  peo-
ple, bot  it  shall  continue  forever,
while  all  human  governments,  of
whatever  name  they  shall  be,  will  be
rooted  out  of  the  earth  by  the  divine
judgments  tbat  will  b,t/pl„M  as  th.
kingdom  of  God  rolls  forth  among
the  nations.  This  is  clearly  foretold
by  nearly  all  the  Prophets  whose
words  are  recorded  in  the  divine
Scriptures.  They  have  spoken  of
the  day  when  the  Gospel  should  be
restored;  they  have  spoken  of  the
period  in  which  the  kingdom  of  God
should  be  set  up  and  what  it  should


relation  to  the  future  and  the  hour
of  God's  judgment  if  there  never
was  to  be  another  dispensation  made
manifest  to  the  children  of  men  ?
Certainly,  before  John  saw  this
vision  the  Gospel  had  been  very
extensively  preached  among  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth,  to  both  Jews
and  Gentiles,  so  much  so  that  Paul,
prior  to  this  time,  speaking  upon  the
subject  of  the  preaching  of  the  Gos-
pel, says  it  bad  been  preached  to
every  creature  under  heaven,  "  where-
of I,  Paul,  am  made  a  minister/'
It  seems,  according  to  his  declaration,
that  he  had  an  understanding  in  some
way,  either  by  revelation  or  from


accomplish ;  they  have  spoken  of  the  some  other  source,  that  the  Gospel

-  i  *- 111  3  */■ A it  *xjJ* 1  ■ "1 t  i


signs  that  should  be  made  manifest
in  those  days  both  in  the  heavens
and  upon  the  earth ;  they  have  told
us  concerning the gathering,  not
only  of  the literal  descendants  of
Israel,  from  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth,  but  also  of  the  gathering
of  all  the  Saints. These  are  matters
SO  clearly  foretold  that  I  have  often
wondered  in  my  own  mind  that  people
professing  to  believe  the  Bible  and
to  receive  the plain and  pointed
instructions  contained  therein,  have
not  been  looking  for  a  dispensation
connected  with  all  these  events  that
I  have  named.

What  can  possibly  be  the  meaning,
Latter-day  Saints,  of  that  prediction
in  the  revelations  of  St'  John,  that
another  angel  should  fly  through  the
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  to  them
that  dwell  on  the  earth,  to  every
nation  and  kindred  and  people  and
tongue,  saying  with  a  loud  voice —
" Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  him;
for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is
come;  and  worship  him  that  made
heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and
tho  fountains  of  waters  !  "  What
can  possibly  be  the  meaning  of  this
prediction  and  vision of  John  in


that  was  committed  in  his  day  had
already  been  preached before  his
death  to  every  creature  under  heaven ;
yet  John,  after  this  period,  while  on
the  Island  of  Patrnus,  afu  having
written  several  epistles  to  the  churches
that  were  built  up  called  the  seven
churches, and reproved  them  for
their  wickedness,  apostacy  and  luke-
warmness, threatening to  remove
their  candlesticks  out  of  their  places,
and  fighting  them  with  the  spirit
of  his mouth; after  having  seen
all  this  in  vision on  Pat  mas  and
writing  to  these  churches,  had  pre-
sented before  him  a  scene  that  was
still  in  the  future — a  scene  of  dark-
ness, apostacy,  sin  and  corruption,
wherein  all  nations  should  be  more
or  less  overcome,  and  during  which
certain  powers  should  arise  and  fight
against  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
make  war  with and  overcome  the
Saints, and then another  power
should  be  established  on  the  earth
under  the  name  of  **  The  Mother  of
Harlots" — an ecclesiastical  power,
described  as  a  woman  sitting  on  a
scarlet-colored  beast,  having  a  golden
cup  in  her  hands  full  of  the  fihhiness
and abominations of the  earth,
causing  all  nations  to  drink  out  of


2G6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  cup,  and  making  them  drunk
with#the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her
fornication.  John  saw  this  portrayed
among  the  events  that  were  to  take
place  after  his  day.  He  saw  the
Saints  overpowered  and,  as  the
Apostle  Paul  had  clearly  predicted,
a  great  falling  away  take  place,  and
that  men  should  be  lovers  of  their
own  selves,  proud  boasters,  blas-
phemers, disobedient  to  parents,
unholy,  without  natural  affection,
truce  breakers,  &a,  having  a  form
of  godliness  but  denying  the  power  j
thereof.  Th  is  was  clearly  seen  by
the  revelator  on  Patmos,  as  well  as
by  the  Apostle  Paul.  After  having
seen  this,  beholding  all  nations  over-
come, all  people,  kindred  and  tongues
worshiping  according  to  the  creeds
and  ceremonies  of  this  great  eccle-
siastical power  that  had  risen,  and
supping:  out  of  the  golden  cup,  the
angel  who  revealed  these  things  to
John,  in  order  to  encourage  him,
showed  that  this  wickedness  would
not  always  continue  among  the  na-
tions, and  also  gave  him  a  view  of
the  manner  in  which  God  would
again  visit  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth ,  and  be  uses  this  prediction
which  I  have  quoted  about  the  com-
ing of  another  angel.

It  seems  that  this  angel  was  to
come  at  a  period  when  there  would
be  no  nation,  kindred,  tongue  or
people  on  the  whole  earth  that  had
the  power  and  authority  to  administer
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  The  ancient
Apostles  had  very  different  views  on
this  subject  from  those  entertained
by  the  divines  of  the  present  day.
Almost  all  Christian  denominations
suppose  that  there  have  been  Chris*
tian  churches  on  the  earth  ever  since
the  days  of  the  Apostles,  according
to  the  New  Testament  pattern ;  but
the  ancient  Apostles  saw  that,  in-
stead of  being  churches  of  Christ,
th*y  would  have  a  form  of  godliness,


denying  the  power,  in  other  words,
they  would  have  nu  power  to  admin-
ister the  Gospel  as  it  was  adminis-
tered in  ancient  times;  and  this
nposlacy  should  be  so  universal  in
its  nature  that  all  people,  nations
and  kindreds  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  globe  should  lie  overcome  by
it,  so  much  so  that  there  should  be
no  Christian  church  left,  no  people
left  that  should  have  authority,  no
people  hit  th;;t  could  administer  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and  hence
it  needed  to  lx>  restored  from  heaven,
and  the  method  of  its  restoration
was  to  be  by  an  angel  from  heaven*
If  we  go  among  all  these  different
denominations  culling  themselves
Christians,  and  enquire  of  them  if
God  has  sent  an  angel,  the  answer
of  every  soul  will  be — *  No  angel
has  come  in  our  day.  God  sent
angels  to  the  Christian  church  in
the  primitive  ages  of  Christiiinit}-,
but  now,  for  something  like  seventeen
hundred  years  we  have  not  been  visi-
ted by  angels,  and  no  new  message
has  been  given."  This  will  be  their
declaration  throughout  the  four  quar-
ters  of  the  globe,  wherever  Christian
churches,  so  called,  are  organized.
Go  to  the  great  Mother  Church,  the
oldest  in  existence  among  those
professing  Christianity,  and  make
the  enquiry  of  her  members,  and
they  will  make  the  same  declaration
— "No  message  later  than  that  given
in  the  New  Testament.  God  lias
said  nothing  by  new  revelation  to
guide  onr  church.  The  holy  Scrip-
tures  and  the  traditions  handed  down
from  the  fathers  are  our  rules  of
faith  and  practice."  Go  to  the  Greek
church,  which  separated  from  the
Roman  Catholics,  the  members  of
which  are  now  so  numerous  that  they
number  their  millions,  and  ask  them
if  they  have  received  any  message
from  God,  and  they  will  give  an  an-
swer similar  to  that  given  by  the


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


2G7


Catholics — "Nothing  new,  our  ecele-  I
siastical  authorities,  archbishops,  car-
dinals, etc.,  do  not  reveal  anything
new."  This  yoa  will  find  recorded
iu  their  writings.  They  declare  that
it  is  their  business  to  interpret  the
old  and  to  bring  forth  what  the
ancient  fathers  have  said,  and  the
church  must  be  guided  by  these  in-
terpretations, and  by  the  decrees  of
its  uninspired  authorities.  Thus  we
may  trace  the  Christian  world  in  the
four  quarters  theieof,  and  we  shall
find  that  they  all  acknowledge  and
declare  that  this  angel,  spoken  of  by
John  the  ilevelatur,  has  never  ap-
peared to  any  of  them.

Suppose  that  we  now  enquire  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  What  do  yoa
believe,  Latter-day  Saints,  about  this
matter?  Why  your  universal  an-
swer is — "We  as  a  people,  without
one  dissenting  voice,  believe  with  all
our  hearts  that  God  has  sent  his
angel  from  heaven  and  restored  the
everlasting  gospel  in  all  its  fulness/'
What  do  you  say,  you  missionaries,
elders  and  high  priests,  and  you
seventies  and  apostles  who  have  gone
forth  during  the  last  forty-four  years,
and  published  these  tidings  in  the
four  quarters  of  the  globe?  Why
your  universal  answer  is — "Wher-
ever we  have  been  we  have  published
that  which  we  were  commanded —
namely,  that  God  has  sent  his  angel
from  heaven,  that  that  angel,  by  his
administrations  in  our  day,  has
brought  to  light  a  sacred  record  call-
ed the  Book  of  Mormon,  containing
the  fulness  of  the  everlasting  gospel
as  it  was  preached  in  ancient  times
upon  this  American  Continent  among
the  forefathers  of  ihe  Indians/*
This  has  been  your  testimony  for  al-
most half  a  century  has  it?  Yes,
Why  did  you  bear  this  testimony
among  the  people?  Because  yoa
were  commanded  to  do  so,  it  was  a
message  committed  to  you,  and  if  you


had  not  fulfilled  the  requirement
given  in  the  commandment  ^ you
would  have  been  under  condemna-
tion.

Then  so  far  as  the  faith  of  this
people  is  concerned  it  is  consistent
with  the  prediction  that  was  uttered
by  the  Apostle  John.  John  said  that
such  should  be  the  case,  the  Latter-
day  Saints  say  that  such  is  the  case;
one  predicted  that  it  should  be  in  the
future,  the  other  declares  that  is  has
already  come  to  pass,  and  that  God,  in
our  day,  has  commissioned  that  angel
and  that  he  has  appeared  unto  some,
and  through  them,  committed  the
fulness  of  the  everlasting  gospel  to
the  human  family  and  commanded
them  to  bear  record  of  it  to  all  peo-
ple. There  is  nothing  inconsistent
so  far  as  this  item  of  faith  is  con-
cerned.

But  here  will  arise  a  question  in
the  minds  of  some  who  have  not  in-
vestigated this  subject;  they  will
admit  that,  if  our  testimony  is  true,
the  message  which  wc  proclaim  is
one  of  the  most  important  that  lias
been  committed  to  man  for  seventeen
hundred  years  past  This  all  will
admit;  for  this  message  does  not
concern  one  nation  alone,  but  all  na-
tions, for,  as  John  stated,  it  is  to  be
declared  to  every  nation,  kindred,
I  tongue  and  people.  Why  ?  Because
none  of  them  had  the  gospel  at  the
time  it  was  revealed,  that  is  the  rea-
son. If  there  had  been  one  little
corner  of  the  earth  where  the  gospel
was  preachad  and  its  ordinances  ad-
ministered by  divine  authority,  there
would  have  been  no  necessity  for  its
restoration  by  an  angel,  all  we  would
have  had  to  do  would  have  been  to
hunt  up  that  little  corner  of  the
earth,  where  some  tongue  or  people
had  the  gospel  and  the  church  orga-
nized among  them ;  they  could  have
baptized  and  confirmed  us,  and  admi-
nistered to  us  the  sacrament  and  all


268


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  blessings  of  the  gospel  Bat  j
from  the  very  fact  that  there  were
no  such  people  on  the  earth  in  the
four  quarters  thereof,  it  had  to  be  re-
stored anew  from  heaven.  This  is
our  testimony,  and  it  is  plain  and  ,
pointed,  but  the  query  is,  among
those  who  have  not  investigated  it —
"Is  this  true?"

Among  t  he  evidences  that  have  ac-
companied tin;  committing  of  this
gospel  to  men  in  our  day  by  an  angel,
let  me  refer  you  to  those  which  were
given  before  this  church  arose,  when
Joseph  Smith,  that  farmer's  boy,  was
commanded  to  go  to  the  hill  Cumo-
rah  and  take  from  the  place  of  their
deposit  the  plates  from  which  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  translated,  and  I
to  translate  them.  When  he  was
commanded  to  do  this  work,  and
while  in  the  act  of  doing  it,  the  Lord
God  sent  his  angel  to  three  men  be-
sides the  translator,  and  to  these  men
the  angel  exhibited,  leaf  by  leaf,  the
unsealed  portion  of  these  plates,  and
at  the  same  time  the  voice  of  the
Lord  from  heaven  was  heard,  testify-
ing that  the  work  had  been  translated  ;
correctly,  and  commanding  them  to
bear  witness  of  it  unto  all  people,  na-
tions and  tongues  to  whom  this  work
should  be  sent.  They,  therefore,  pre-
fix their  testimony  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  to  that  effect,  testifying  to
the  ministration  of  the  angel,  to  see-
ing the  plates  and  the  engravings
thereon,  and  to  its  correct  translation.

Here  then,  were  four  witnesses —
the  translator  and  three  others,  before
the  rise  of  this  church,  who  testify
that  God  sent  his  angel.  It  is  not  a  J
speculation  with  them,  but  something  '
absolutely  certain.  They  could  not
be  deceived  in  relation  to  this  matter.
Joseph  Smith  could  not  be  deceived
when  the  angel  told  him  to  go  and
obtain  these  plates,  and  gave  him  a
vision  of  the  very  place  where  they
were  deposited,  and  he  actually  ob-


tained them,  and  with  them  the  Uritn
and  Thummim,  by  which  he  transla-
ted them.  There  was  no  possibility
of  his  being  deceived  in  relation  to
the  matter.  And  when  these  three
men,  in  answer  to  their  prayers,  saw
the  angel  in  his  glory,  saw  him  de-
scend from  heaven  clothed  with  glory,
saw  him  take  these  plates,  saw  them
in  his  hands,  heard  the  voice  of  God
from  heaven  bearing  testimony  to  the
correctness  of  the  translation,  com-
manding them  to  bear  witness  to  all
people,  they  could  not  be  deceived  in
relation  to  this  matter,  it  was  some-
thing positive  to  them  ;  and  if  yon
say  they  were  deceived,  with  the
same  propriety  an  infidel  may  say
that  all  the  prophets  from  Adam
down  to  the  days  of  John,  who  pro-
fessed to  see  angels,  were  deceived  ;
with  the  same  propriety  they  could
con  ten  J  against  the  holy  Scriptures
;  on  the  same  ground  that  many  would
contend  against  the  tesiirnony  of  the
Book  of  Mormon.

Were  there  any  others  who  saw
the  plates  besides  these  four  men  ?
Yes.  How  many  ?  Eight,  all  before
this  church  was  organized.  These
eight  witnesses  have  also  given  their
testimony,  and  it  is  prefixed  to  the
Book  of  Mormon.  The  eight  did
not  see  the  angel,  but  they  saw  the
plates,  and  they  testify  that  they
handled  them,  and  saw  the  engra-
vings thereon,  all  of  which  had  the
appearance  of  ancient  workmanship,
and,  in  the  close  of  their  testimony
they  say — *(  And  this  we  bear  testi-
mony of,  and  we  He  not,  God  bearing
'  witness  of  it."

■  This  makes  twelve  witnesses  to
the  original  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.
Would  to  God  that  we  had  twelve
witnesses  to  the  original  of  the  Bible,
so  that  it  might  stand  on  equal  testi-
mony with  the  Book  of  Mormon!
But,  alas,  there  is  not  one  original
in  existence  that  we  know  of,  and


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.  2G9


neither  has  there  been  for  many  gen-
erations past,  of  any  one  book  of
the  Bible  from  the  beginning  of  Gen-
esis to  the  end  of  Revelation,  Says
one — "  Do you  mean  to  say  that
King James's translators  did  not
translate  the  Bible  from  the  origi-
nal ? " Yes  that  is  what  I  say.
They  translated  it  from  from  the  lan-
guage of  certain  manuscripts,  which
language,  of  course,  was  not  the  Eng-
lish  language; bat  they  did  not
translate  from  the  original. Why  ?
Because,  for  aught  we  know,  these
manuscripts  might have been  the
91) 9th  copy  from  the  original.  There
might  have  been  two  thousand  copies
handed  from  one  scribe  to  another
and  transcribed  instead  of  the  origi-
nal. Indeed,  what  man  for  the  last
ten  centuries  has  ever  seen  one  of  the
originals  of  the  Bible  ? I  do  not
know  of  any,  and  we  have  no  account
in  history,  either  sacred  or  profane,
that  the  original  has  ever  been  seen
by  any  person  for  the  last  ten  or
twelve  centuries; but  we  have  the
testimony  of many learned  men,
men  who  profess  Christianity  and  to
believe  the  Bible,  that,  in  gathering
together  the most original  manu-
scripts they  could  find  and  comparing
them  one  with  another — manuscripts
in  the Hebrew,  Greek  and  other
ancient  languages — they  found  that
they  contradicted  one  another,  and
that  there  are  something  like  thirty
thousand  different  readings  among
those  different  manuscripts.  Some
of  these  learned  men  have  collected
together  an  immense  quantity  of  these
different  manuscripts  and  have  ex-
pended large  fortunes  in  so  doing.
For  what purpose? That  they
might  translate  them  into  the  English
language; but  when  they  came  to
compare  them  they  found  snch  a  va-
riety of  contradictions  that  they  gave
the  task  up  in  despair. Others  have
taken  such  manuscripts  as  they  could


get  hold  of,  and  have  done  the  best
they  could.  One  thing  is  certain,
King  James's  translators,  being
among  the  wisest  men  and  greatest
scholars  of  their  day,  did  justice  to
the  subject  as  far  as  it  was  possible
by  uninspired  men.

Now  the  Christian  world  believe
the  Bible,  so  do  the  Latter-day  Saints.
\Vc  believe  that  the  original  was  just
as  true  as  the  Book  of  Mormon,  that
is  our  faith  ;  and  that  the  Bo  >k  of
Mormon  is  just  as  true  as  the  original
books  of  the  Bible.  The  world  be-
lieve that  the  Bible  is  a  divine  record,
but  on  what  evidence  do  they  believe
it?  Certainly  not  because  there  is
the  testimony  of  any  parties  who  ever
saw  the  original.  Here,  then,  we
bring  forth  the  Book  of  Mormon  to
you,  and  we  present  to  you  twelve
witnesses  who  have  seen  the  original
of  that  book.  Do  you  not  perceive
that,  so  far  as  this  one  species  of  evi-
dence is  concerned,  the  Book  of  Mor-
I  mon  is  supported  by  a  greater  amount
i  of  evidence  than  the  Bible  ?  Is  there
one  person  among  all  the  Christian
churches  and  denominations,  for  the
■  last  sixteen  centuries,  who  knows  the
Bible  to  be  true  by  the  ministration
of  an  holy  angel  ?  No,  not  a  single
individual,  for  according  to  the  testi-
!  mony  of  all  the  Christian  sects,  dur-
ing the  whole  of  that  time  no  angel
has  been  sent  and  nothing  new  has
been  revealed.

If  it  lie  true  that  God  has  not  re-
vealed anything  since  the  days  of
John  the  Rsvelator,  then  no  person
has  had  a  knowledge  given  him  as  to
:  the  truth  of  the  Bible.  But  how  is  it
with  the  Book  of  Mormon  ?  Four
men  have  seen  an  angel  Now  com-
pare or  contrast  this  evidence  con-
cerning the  two  books.  These  four
men  were  men  of  your  own  times,
men  whom  you  could  cross  question,
witnesses  whom  you  had  the  privilege
i  of  interrogating  in  relation  to  their


270  JOURNAL  UK

testimony.  But  we  are  told  that  the
Bible  bears  record  of  its  own  divi-
nity, and  that  the  Saints  who  lived
in  ancient  days  did  see  angels.  Now
suppose  we  admit  that  tlie  Bible  does
Bear  testimony  of  its  own  divinity.
Turn  To  and  read  the  declarations  of
Nephi  and  Alma,  And  of  the  prophet
J  a  cub,  and  many  other  prophets  who
wrote  the  various  books  in  tlie  Book
of  Mormon,  and  they  b^ar  testimony
that  they  saw  angels*  The  Bible
be ?irs  testimony  that  the  prophets
who  wrote  the  various  books  which
it  contains  did  the  same.  Now  put
one  on  a  par  with  the  other  and,  so
far  as  that  species  of  evidence  is  con-
cerned, one  is  just  equal  to  the  other.

Again,  the  Bible  says,  in  giving  a
commission  to  the  ancient  apostles  to
go  and  pi  each  the  gospel,  that  certain
signs  should  follow  all  the  believers
t brought  the  whole  world.  u  Go  ye
forth  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every
creature  under  heaven,  he  that  be-
lieves and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,
and  he  that  believe th  not  shall  be
damned  ;  and  these  signs  shall  follow
them  that  believe — in  my  name  they
shrill  cast  out  devils,"  Mark,  now,
not  the  apostles  alone,  they  were  not
the  only  ones  whom  these  signs
should  follow,  but  they  were  to  follow
every  creature  in  all  the  world  who
should  believe,  making  it  us  definite
and  unlimited  as  possible*  They
were  not  only  to  have  salvation,  but
they  were  to  be  blessed  with  certain
signs  following  them.  What  were
they  ?  "  In  my  name  they  shall  cast
out  devils,  they  shall  speak  with  new
tongues,  they  shall  take  up  serpents,
and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it
shall  not  harm  them,  they  shall  lay
hands  on  the  sick  and  they  shall  re-
cover," Certain  definite  promises
were  made  to  the  believers  by  which
they  could  distinguish  themselves
from  all  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  it
is  recorded  in  the  following  verses  of


DISCOURSES,

of  the  same  chapter,  that  the  apos-
tles went  everywhere  preaching  the
word,  the  Lord  working  with  ihem
and  confirming  the  word  by  signs  fob
I  lowing.

What  are  we  to  understand  by  con-
firming the  word  with  signs  follow-
ing ?  Are  we  to  understand  that  the
Apostles  alone  confirmed  the  word  ?
No,  There  were  certain  signs  which
were  to  follow  the  believers  wherever
they  preached.  The  promise  was
to  every  creature  in  all  the  world.
They  went  everywhere  and  preached
this  word,  and  the  Lord  wrought
with  them  by  confirming  the  word  to
every  believer  throughout  all  the
world,  by  causing  the  promise  to  be
fulfilled  to  those  believers.  Here
then,  the  believers  had  no  particular
necessity  for  asking  the  apostles  to
perforin  miracles,  for  they  themselves
were  blessed  with  certain  miraculous
signs,  and  the  Lord  confirmed  these
sitfns  upon  them,  so  that  they  were
not  obliged  to  seek  foreign  testimony,
or  for  miracles  wrought  by  somebody
else,  for  ever}'  person,  male  or  female,
who  believed  and  obeyed  that  gospel,
obtained  for  himself,  the  sigus  pro-
mised. This  is  what  the  Scriptures
inform  us,  and  in  this  dispensation,
w"  en  God  revealed  this  Gospel  anew,
and  sent  his  angel  and  organized  his
church,  and  sent  forth  his  servants,
the  same  promise  was  made  as  to  the
anrient  Saints.  I  can  read  it  here
in  this  book,  for  this  is  the  book  of
the  revelations  and  commandments
that  was  given  to  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith  before  the  rise  of  this  church,
and  a  short  period  after  its  rise.  In
this  book  we  find  recorded  something
like  this — "As  I  said  unto  mine
ancient  apostles  I  say  unto  you" —
speaking  to  the  elders  of  this  church
— ugo  ye  forth  among  all  the  nations,
preaching  my  gospel ;  he  that  believ-
eth  aud  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,
and  be  that  believeth  not  shall  be


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FK03I  HEAVEN,  ETC.


damned ;  and  these  signs  shall  follow
them  that  believe — in  my  name  they
shall  cast  out  devils,  in  my  name
they  shall  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,
they  shall  unstop  the  ears  of  the
deaf,  they  shall  cause  the  tongue  of
the  dumb  to  speak,  and  the  lame
man  to  leap  a3  a  hart/1  This  pro-
mise was  not  made  to  the  elders
alone  who  went  forth  in  this  dispen-
sation, but  to  all  throughout  the
world  who  believe  in  their  testimony.

This  was  pretty  bold  language  to
be  used  if  Joseph  Smith  was  really
an  impostor;  if  he  was  an  impostor
he,  in  using  such  language  and  mak-
ing such  a  promise,  laid  the  founda-
tion for  the  overthrow  of  his  own
system.  It  is  a  very  easy  matter  to
make  a  promise  of  this  kind,  nothing
is  easier  than  that ;  but  to  fulfill  that
promise  is  altogether  another  thing.
Here  was  a  promise  made  iu  the  very
early  rise  of  this  church,  upwards  of
forty  years  ago,  that  certain  signs
should  follow  them  that  received  and
obeyed  this  gospel.  Let  us  inquire
on  this  subject,  for  this  is  one  species
of  evidence  that  is  dwelt  upon  by  the
opposers  of  this  work  wherever  we
go.  When  the  elders  came  to  you
Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  various  na-
tions where  you  resided,  and  preach-
ed the  gospel  to  you,  did  the  Lord
confirm  these  promises  unto  you,  or
did  he  not  ?  You  can  hear  the  united
testimony  of  some  fifty  or  a  hundred
thousand  people  dwelling  in  this  Ter-
ritory, that  God  did  truly  and  in  re-
ality confirm  this  promise  unto  his
servants,  and  unto  his  handmaidens
while  in  the  different  nations  from
which  they  emigrated ;  that  he  did
•ause  the  blind  to  see,  the  lame  to
walk,  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  to
speak,  and  that  be  did  cause  his
pcftver  to  be  made  manifest  in  very
deed,  just  as  the  promise  was  given.

Here  then,  was  a  vast  cloud  of
witnesses,  some  fifty  thousand  living


witnesses.  Can  we  find  one  living1
witness  who  will  bear  such  evidence
as  this  to  the  truth  of  the  Bible?
No.  Go  among  all  the  Christian  de-
nominations and  ask  them — "Are
you  believers  ?"  "  0  yes,  we  are  be-
lievers."  "Do  the  signs  follow  yon
that  Jesus  said  should  follow  the  be-
lievers?" What  is  their  answer?
No,  almost  without  an  exception.
There  may  be  some  few  exceptions;
but  what  was  the  universal  answer
before  spiritualism  commenced,  before
the  days  in  which  Joseph  brought
forth  this  work,  and  for  some  few
years  after,  among  the  Christian  de-
nominations? It  'wits — "No,  God
has  not  shown  forth  any  of  those
signs  that  he  said  should  follow  the
believers."  Why  then  do  yon  call
yourselves  believers?  If  God  has  not
confirmed  the  word  to  you  by  signs
following  how  do  you  know  that  you
are  believers  F  May  it  not  be  that
you  are  deceiving  yourselves  ?  May
it  not  be  that  you  have  merely  got  a
form  of  godliness,  and  that  the  power
does  not  attend  you?  According  to
their  own  testimony  they  have  no
right  nor  authority  to  call  themselves
believers;  and  the  promise  contained
in  the  Bible,  made  to  believers,  have
never  been  confirmed  to  any  of  the
so-called  Christian  sects  since  the
days  that  King  James'  translators
translated  them.  But  when  we  take
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  examine  it
on  this  kind  of  evidence  we  have
fifty  thousand  witnesses  ready  to  tes-
tify to  the  fulfillment  of  these  pro-
mises, many  of  them  having  experi-
enced the  fulfillment  thereof  in  their
own  persons,  while  others  have  seen
the  manifestations  of  God's  power  in
healing  the  sick  and  afflicted  among
his  people  from  time  to  time  ;  conse-
quently the  Latter-day  Saints  have
fifty  thousand  times  more  evidence
so  far  as  the  signs  following  are  con-
cerned, of  the  divinity  of  the  Book


272


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCOUn^ I2S.


of  Mormon  than  what  the  Christ! fin
world  have  of  the  divinity  of  the
book  called  the  Bible.

Morover  there  is  another  kind  of
evidence  which  the  Lord  promised
before  the  rise  of  this  church,  when
he  conferred  the  apostles!) ip  .again
upon  the  heads  of  the  children  of
men,  and  gave  them  authority  to
preach  this  gospel  and  to  administer
its  ordinances; he  told  them  that
they  should  preach  the  gospel,  and
that  they  should  baptize  every  peni-
tent believer  who  desired  baptism,
and  that  they  should  lay  their  hands
upon  the  heads  of  thos^  penitent  be-
lievers in  confirmation,  pronouncing,
by  the  authority  of  their  apostleship
and  office  and  calling,  the  Holy  Ghost
upon  those  baptized  believers;  nnd
God  promised,  before  the  rise  of  this
church,  that  every  soul  among  all
people,  nations  and tongues  that
would  receive  this  gospel  with  full
purpose  of  heart,  should  be  baptized
with  fire  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost
by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  his
servants. It  is  a  very  easy  matter
for  an  impostor  to  make  a  promise  of
this  kind,  but  supposing  it  should  not
be  fulfilled,  supposing  that  the  Holy
Ghost  did  not  come  upon  the  people,
in  the  course  of  one  or  two  years  the
believers,  so  called,  in  Mormomsm
would  all  apostatize,  they  would  very
naturally say — "the  promise  was
made  that  we  should  receive  the  Holy
Ghost  through  the  ordinance  of  the
laying  on  of  hands,  and  yet  we  have
not  received  it." "  Here  is  the  pro-
mise that  we  should  heal  the  sick,
and  that  the  various  signs  should
follow  us,  but  these  promises  have  not
been  fulfilled,  we  turn  away  from
your  system  with  disgust,  we  do  not
believe  there  is  any  authority  in  it,1'
and  Morinonism  would  soon  have
been  banished  out  of  existence.  But
what  are  the  facts  ? Tho  fact  that
there  is  now  a  hundred  thousand


Latter-day  Saints  gathered  from  the
various  nations  of  the earth  into
these  mountain  regions  proves  to  me
beyond  dispute  or  controversy  that
they  did  realize  the  promise,  namely,
that  the  Holy  Ghost  did  vest  upon
them,  nnd  that  by  virtue  of  that  gift
they  did  receive  revelation  and  visions
and  prophecies  and  thn  word  of  the
Lord  to  themselves,  and  knew  of  a
surety  that  this  was  the  work  of  God;
and  in  consequence  of  this  know*
le:lge,  not  mere  faith,  but  in  conse-
quence of  this  knowledge  which  they
received  in  their  own  native  lands
they  gathered  up  here  to  this  land.
It  would  require  a  great  degree  of
faith  to  induce  people  to  forsake
their  own  lands  and  tho  homes  and
graves  of  their  ancestors,  to  come
across  the  ocean  some  three  thousand
miles,  then  take  nu  inland  journey
of  two  or  three  thousand  miles  or
more,  and  come  to  a  desert  country,
as  we  did  when  we  first  settled  this
land  ;  I  say  it  would  reqairc  a  great
deal  of  faith  to  induce  people  to  do
this. But  let  me  tell  you  that  it  was
not  by  faith  alone  that  the  believers
in the  system established  by  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  did  this;  it
was  something  beyond faith — they
obtained  a  knowledge  before  they
started. There  may  have  been  some
exceptions, but  many  of  them  ob-
tained ft  knowledge  before  they  left
their  native  countries  that  this  was
the  work  of  God* You  obtained
this  knowledge  through  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost;  the  gifts
of  that  Spirit  were  manifest  among
vou  as  they  were  among  the  mem-
bers of  the  ancient  Church,  a: id  by
its  inspiration  you  were  edified  and
instructed,  and  you  received  a  know-
ledge, in  lnlfillmcnt  of  the  promise
of  Jesus  made  in  ancient  tim^s — "  If
any  man  will  uu  the  will  of  my  Fa-
ther, he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,
whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC


273


speak  of  myself."  In  the  first  place,
they  have  to  believe  before  they  can
do  the  will  of  the  Father;  but  belief
and  knowledge  are  two  very  different
things,  By  faith,  without  a  know-
ledge, many  repent  ami  obey  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and  then
they  receive  a  testimony  to  them-
selves, some  in  one  way,  some  in
another;  some  by  having  visions
given  to  them,  some  by  the  minis-
trations of  holy  messeni^rs,  some
by  the  healing  of  the  sick,  some  by
the  revelations  and  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost

These  are  the  evidences  then,
which  we  have  to  present  before  the
wor!d,  to  substantiate  the  divine
authenticity  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.
Have  you  any  objection  to  them  ?


Says


one


"  Here is my  ob-


jection; it  matters  not  how  many
miracles  are  wrought,  how  nmuy
signs  are  given,  and  whatever
evidence  may  be  pretended  to  have
been  received,  it  does  not  matter
about  this,  if  a  thing  is  inconsistent
in  and  of  itself,  if  it  contradicts  it-
self, if  it  contradicts  the  Bible  I  shall
rtject  it."  I  honor  you  for  that
judgment.,  I  would  do  the  same.  If
the  Book  of  Mormon  contradicted
the  revelations  of  God  called  the
Bible,  given  on  the  other  continent,
yon  might  tear  up  the  sycamore  trees
and  cast  them  into  the  sea,  or  you
might  say  to  this  mountain — 44  De-
part hence/'  and  if  it  should  be  done
it  would  not  be  sufficient  evidence  in
my  mind  to  make  me  receive  it  A
thirffr  must  bo  consistent,  and  when
we  come  to  open  and  read  the  Book
of  Mormon,  do  we  find  any  evidence
therein  of  its  falsity  ?  Read  it  from
beginning  to  end  in  relation  to  its
historical  matter.  It  pretends  to  be
a  history  of  the  coining  of  a  small
colony,  two  or  three  families,  from
the  city  of  Jerusalem,  led  by  the
band  of  the  Lord.  They  built  a  ship
No,  18.


by  the  command  of  the  Lord,  and
were  guided  by  his  hand  across  the
ocean;  they  landed  on  the  western
coast  of  South  America,  about  six
hundred  years  before  Christ;  and
after  that  they  worked  their  way  up
towards  the  narrow  strip  of  land  we
call  ihe  Isthmus,  and  founded  settle-
ments and,  finally,  about  fifty  years
before  Christ,  sent  forth  their  colonies
into  the  north  wing  of  the  continent,
which  we  call  North  America,  and  in
process  of  time  the  whole  land  be-
("i  iH'  peopled  and  overspread  with
millions  of  people.  Now  read  this
history  from  the  time  they  left  Jeru-
salem until  the  time  that  the  Nephite
nation  were  destroyed  by  another
portion  of  the  nation  called  Laman-
ites,  and  their  records  were  hid  up  by
their  last  Prophet:  read  this  history
and  see  if  you  can  find  any  contra-
dictious therein ;  if  you  can  not,  you
can  not  condemn  the  book  so  far  as
the  historical  matter  is  concerned.

Says  one — "Oh,  but  if;  might
have  been  got  up  by  some  conning
individual,  who  wad  very  careful  in
his  management,  so  as  to  get  all  the
links  of  the  history  perfectly  in  ac-
cordance one  with  another,  and  §till
it  may  be  false."  On  what  ground  ?
Says  the  objector — *'  Perhaps  the
doctrines  taught  in  the  ditferent  nges
by  the  several  Prophets  mentioned  in
the  various  books  of  the  compilation
do  not  agree."  Very  well,  read  the
whole  of  the  books  contained  in  the
compilation,  the  period  included  in
which  comprises  a  thousand  years,
from  the  time  they  landed  on  the

HP

continent  to  the  time  the  Nephites
were  destroyed,  search  the  doctrine
preached  by  each  Prophet  in  the
successive  generations  and  see  if  you
can  find  any  contradictions;  if  you
cannot  find  anything  that  contradicts
itself,  then  see  if  you  can  find  in  that
book  anything  that  contradicts  what
is  contained  in  the  compilation  of

Vol.  xvu.


274  JOURNAL  OF

the  Prophets  on  the  eastern  hemis-
phere; see  if  von  can  find  anything
in  the  Book  of  Mormon  that  clashes
with  or  contradicts  the  Bible,  then
perhaps  you  will  have  a  little  justi-
fication for  saying  you  do  not  believe
it  Bat  when  you  have  made  this
thorough  examination  and  find  no
contradictions  between  the  two  re-
cords you  will  certainly  have  no  right
to  say  the  book  is  false,  so  far  as  its
doctrines  are  concerned.

Says  one — "  That  book  called  the
Book  of  Mormon  professes  to  be  a
prophetic  record,  and  has  a  great
many  prophecies,  and  perhaps  these
prophecies  may  disagree  with  the
prophecies  contained  in  the  Old  Tes-
tament, or  perhaps  they  may  disagree
among  themselves,  in  which  case  it
would  weaken  my  faith  in  regard  to
it."  In  this  ease  I  would  say  as  I
said  concerning  its  doctrines — search
all  its  prophecies  diligently — aud  it
contains  prophecies  that  reach  to  the
very  end  of  the  earth — search  dili-
gently those  that  have  been  fulfilled
since  the  rise  of  the  Church  as  well
as  before,  and  search  those  that  are
yet  to  be  fulfilled  from  this  time
until  the  coming  of  the  Savior,  and
from  that  time  down  to  the  end  of
the  earth,  and  see  if  you  can  find  one
contradiction  in  all  the  record;  and
then  compare  them  with  the  prophe-
cies contained  in  the  Bible,  and  if
they  do  not  contradict  one  another,
have  you  or  I  any  right  to  say  that
it  is  not  a  revelation  from  God  ?
There  must  be  some  evidence  that
we  can  bring  forward  by  which  we
can  be  justified  in  rejecting  a  book
as  being  a  divine  revelation.  Now
where  is  that  evidence,  what  species
of  evidence  is  it,  where  can  it  be  ob-
tained, from  what  quarter,  in  order
to  condemn  that  book  as  not  being  a
divine  revelation  ? I  know  of  none.

I  have  given  you,  very  briefly,  my


DISCOURSES.

reasons,  and  the  reasons  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  for  believing  that  book
to  be  a  divine  revelation.  Moreover,

;  let  me  go  still  further.  We  tind  in
the  Bible,  the  Jewish  record,  many
prophecies  that  point  forward  to  the
coming  forth  oi'  a  similar  record  to
that  called  the  Book  of  Mormon,
pointing  out  what  should  be  fulfilled
when  a  certain  record  or  book  should
come  forth;  pointing  out  a  period,
time  or  age  of  the  world  when  it
should  cotne  forth,  and  the  object  for
which  it  should  come  forth.

Now  the  Book  of  Mormon  has
come  forth  to  fulfill  these  ancient
prophecies,  I  have  not  time  to  refer
to  them  to-day  particularly,  but  those
who  have  heard  these  things  for  forty
years  past  are  well  versed  in  relation
to  the  predictions  of  the  Bible,  con-
cerning the  coming  forth  of  such  u
work  as  the  Book  of  Mormon,  Now
let  any  learned  man  prove  that  this
work  has  not  come  forth  in  fulfill-
ment of  these  prophecies,  show  some

I  discrepancy,  show  wherein  it  can  not
possibly  be  the  fulfilling  of  these
prophecies.  Can  they  do  this  ?  If
they  can  they  perhaps  may  have  a
little  justification  for  rejecting  tho
work;  but  if,  on  t he  other  hand,
they  can  not  show  the  fulfilling  of
those  prophecies  in  any  other  facts
that  have  been  revealed ;  if  they  can
not  prove  that  the  Book  of  Mormon
is  not  the  fulfillment  of  those  pro-  .
phecies  they  certainly  can  not  be
justified  in rejecting  it.  "Well,"

'  says  one,  "  is  there  any  special  pro-
phecy in  the  Bible  that  calls  that
book  by  name,  or  that  there  should
be  a  book  called  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, come  forth  ?"  In  answering
this  question,  let  me  ask  you  another
question — Is  there  anything  in  the
prophecy  of  Isaiah  or  any  Prophet
who  lived  before  hU  days  that  speaks
particularly  of  a Prophet  coming

I  forth  by  the  name  of  Jeremiah,  who


THE  GUSPEL  iU£TOK£D  JtKOM  HJSAVKN,  ETC


should  revenl  certain  revelations  ?
wOb  no,"  says  one.  Well,  then,
ought  you  not  to  reject  the  prophecy
of  Jeremiah,  inasmuch  as  no  Prophet
preceding  him  spoke  of  him,  no  one
who  lived  before  him  who  said  a
word  about  his  book  called  the  Book
of  Jeremiah  ?  Moreover,  were  there
no  Prophets  that  prophecied  concern-
ing the  coming  of  Ezekiel  and  his
book,  and  Hosea  and  his  book,  and
of  Joel,  Araos,  Malaehi,  and  many
of  the  ancient  Prophets  who  might
be  named  ?  What  preceding  Prophet
prophecied  concerning  the  coming
forth  of  these  books  ?  None  at  all.
The  Jews  would  have  had  the  same
right  in  the  days  of  these  Prophets
to  say — "  I  will  reject  you  Jeremiah,
and  I  will  not  receive  your  revela-
tions, and  my  reasons  for  rejecting
yon  are  that  none  of  the  preceding
Prophets  have  named  you  by  name,
and  they  have  not  spoken  of  your
book,"  The  Jews  might  have  re-
jected the  whole  catalogue  of  the
Prophets  on  this  ground  j  therefore,
this  is  another  species  of  evidence  in
favor  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  over
and  above  that  which  can  be  brought
to  establish  the  divinity  of  the  pible.

What  more  might  be  said  to  prove
the  divinity  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  ?
1  will  bring  up  some  other  evidence
besides  all  that  I  have  named.  We
are  told  in  the  prophecies  of  the  holy
Prophets,  not  only  about  the  coming
of  the  angel,  but  we  are  told  that
when  God  should  set  up  his  kingdom
and  send  that  angel,  it  should  be  a
dispensation  of  gathering  the  people
of  God,  Now,  supposing  that  Joseph
Smith  had  all  these  proofs  that  I
have  named  to  testify  concerning  the
divinity  of  this  book,  ar.d  had  said
nothing  about  the  gathering,  what
then  ?  Why  you  and  I  could  go  to  |
our  homes  and  say,  "good  by  Joseph
Smith,  we  do  not  believe  you  to  be  a  :
Prophet/' "Why?" « Because  the


latter-day  dispensation  was  to  be
characterized  by  the  gathering  to-
gether of  all  things  in  one  that  are
in  Christ,  and  you  have  said  nothing
about  it,  and  therefore  we  reject  you."
But  is  it  so  ?  No;  before  the  rise
of  this  Church,  while  Joseph  Smith
1  was  translating  the  Book  of  Mormon,
it  is  predicted  here,  in  this  transla-
tion, that  the  Church  should  go  forth
from  this  continent  to  all  the  people,
nations  and  tongues  of  the  earth,
and  that  all  who  believed  should  be
gathered  in  one.  Now  how  did
Joseph  Smith  know  that  that  would
be  fullilled  when  there  was  no  Church
in  existence  ?  It  is  a  very  e^sy
matter,  as  I  said  before,  to  prophesy,
but  to  fill  till  is  another  thing.  But
here  in  Utah  is  the  fulfillment,  for
here  are  upwards  of  a  hundred  thou-
sand people  gathered  out  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  proving  defi-
nitely, at  least  so  far  as  this  species
of  evidence  is  concerned,  that  Joseph
Smith  certainly  was  a  true  Prophet,
for  he  predicted  it  before  it  com-
menced to  take  place.

There  is  another  species  of  evi-
dence in  this  book.  It  is  foretold
within  its  pages  that  after  it  should
come  forth  in  the  latter  day  and  the
Church  should  have  been  established,
the  blood  of  tho  Saints  should  cry
from  the  ground  against  their  perse-
cutors and  those  who  should  slay
th  em.  This  was  a  prophecy,  the
fulfillment  of  which  in  an  enlightened
age  like  this,  seemed  very  unlikely.
We  find  that,  since  the  organization
of  this  free  government,  and  our
great  charter  of  liberties  and  consti-
tution, since  the  time  of  the  enunci-
ation of  these  choice  republican
principles  upon  tins  continent  by  this
great  and  powerful  nation,  that  the
blood  of  no  sects  or  parties  has,  as  it
were,  stained  our  ground  because  of
the  belief  of  the  people.  Sometimes
they  get  killea  in  mobs  about  anti-


276


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


slavery,  or  something  of  that  kind ;
but  when  it  comes  to  religion  it  has
generally  been  a  little  persecution
with  the  tongue,  and  that  has  been
about  all.  But  here  was  a  prediction
befoie  the  rise  of  the  Church  that  the
blood  of  the  Saints  should  cry  from
the  ground  against  their  persecutors.
This  has  been  literally  fulfilled.  We
have  no  need  te  refer  you  to  the
scores  of  Saints  that  were  shot  down
in  cool  blood,  who,  while  emigrating
with  their  wives  and  children  in  order
to  locate  in  another  country,  were
fallen  upon  by  mobs,  chased  into  a
blacksmith's  shop,  and  there  some
eighteen  or  twenty  of  them  were
shot  down  by  their  persecutors,  who
pointed  their  guns  between  the  logs
of  the  shop,  it  being  a  log  building.
Then,  when  they  had  got  through
with  these  murders  they  began  to
rob  them  ot"  their  clothes  and  pulled
off'  their  boots  and  put  them  on,  and
while  in  the  act  of  doing  this  they
discovered  two  or  three  little  children
who  hud  crept  under  the  bellows  in
hope  of  escaping-  What  did  they
do  with  these  children?  Called  them
out,  mid  placing  their  guns  to  their
beads  ^hot  them  down  and  destroyed
them.  AH  these  things  have  trans-
pired  within  the  past  forty  years
upon  this  great  and  glorious  land  of
ours.  The  constitution  is  good,  that
is  not  to  blame,  that  gives  us  the
privilege  of  religious  liberty;  but
those  who  have  lived  under  this  free
government  have  seen  proper  to  thus
persecute  and  murder  the  Sainis,  and
their  blood  has  been  shed,  and  it  now
cries  flunk  the  ground  for  vengeance
on  the  nation.

Says  one — "Why  on  the  nation ?"
Because  it  was  not  done  by  a  private
mob,  but  by  the  officers  of  a  State ;
it  was  done  by  the  highest  authority
and  power  of  a  State,  by  individuals
who  were  organized  under  State  au-
thority to  go  against  an  innocent


people.  We  had  never  broken  a  law,
and  the  records  of  their  courts  could
not  show  one  case  wherein  this  people
had  transgressed  the  laws  of  the
land.

The  people  thus  organized  to  drive
the  Latter-day  Saints,  of  course,  had
their  reasons  for  so  doing,  everybody
has,  or  endeavors  to  find  a  reason  for
the  course  he  pursues.  One  reason
assigned  for  persecuting  the  Saints
was  that  they  believed  in  the  gifts
that  the  ancient  Saints  believed  in.
Some  may  be  disposed  to  doubt  the
truth  of  this  statement,  but  to  such
I  say,  go  and  read  their  documents
and  there  you  will  find  the  reasons
they  set  forth  for  this  murderous
work,  and  among  those  reasons  they
say — **A  certain  people  have  come
amongst  us  who  believe  in  speaking
in  tongues,  in  the  interpretation  of
tongues,  in  the  healing  of  the  sick,
and  in  the  various  gifts  that  were  in
existence  in  the  ancient  Church,  and
we  pledge  ourselves  and  our  property
and  all  that  we  have  that  we  will  re-
move them  from  our  midst,  peaceably
if  we  can  and  forcibly  if  we  must/'

Now,  would  you  believe  that  people
would  be  driven  from  their  homes
and  murdered  by  individuals  because
they  were  exercising  religious  rights
guaranteed  to  them  by  the  constitu-
tion of  their  country?  Bid  Joseph
Smith  know  that  such  persecution
would  arise  before  the  Church  was
organized?  Could  he  have  written
such  prophecies  and  the  Book  of
Mormon  if  he  had  been  an  impostor?
How  did  he  know  they  would  ever  be
fulfilled?  How  did  he  know  that
this  Gospel  would  he  spread  to  the
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth?  How
did  he  know  that  the  people  abroad
in  other  nations  would  gather  to  this
land,  according  to  the  prophecies
that  were  uttered  ?  All  these  things
prove  him  to  be  a  prophet  sent  of
God,  as  his  prophecies  were  fulfilled.


THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


277


Finally,  examine  every  point  of
evidence  you  can  think  of ;  take  up,
step  by  step,  the  various  events  that
must  take  place — the  preaching  of
the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles  to  bring
in  their  fulness  that  their  times  may
be  fulfilled;  the  preaching  of  it  to
the  Jews;  the  preaching  of  it  to  the
scattered  tribes  of  Israel,  and  all  the
other  events  predicted  in  connection
with  this  Latter-day  work;  take
them  up  one  by  one,  and  see  if  this
people  have  left  one  thing  out  of
their  faith  that  should  characterize
the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of
times.  Do  the  Scriptures  foretell
the  gathering  of  the  Jews  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth?  The
Book  of  Mormon  does  the  same
thing.  Do  the  Scriptures  say  that
the  Jews  should  remain  scattered
until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are
fulfilled  ?  The  Book  of  Mormon  and
the  Revelations  given  to  this  Church
declare  the  same  thing.  Did  the
ancient  Prophets  and  Apostles  d&-
clare  that  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom
should  be  preached  to  all  nations,


that  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles
should  come  in  before  all  Israel
should  be  saved?  This  also  is  ac-
cording to  the  faith  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints'  Church  and  is  contained
in  our  writings.  And,  finally,  take
up  every  principle,  predicted  by  the
ancient  Prophets,  pertaining  to  the
great  preparatory  work  for  the
coming  of  the  Lord  from  the  heave  us
and  see  if  it  differs  in  the  least  iota
from  the  belief  of  the  Latter-day
Saints.  When  frc  come  to  com-
bine all  these  evidences  we  are  not
ashamed  of  our  faith,  we  are  not
ashamed  of  our  doctrine,  we  are  not
ashamed  of  the  dispensation  which
has  been  committed  to  us,  We  are
abundantly  able,  through  the  assist-
ance of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down
from  heaven,  and  the  grace  of  God
shed  forth  in  our  hearts  to  maintain
with  all  boldness  and  confidence  the
great,  heavenly  and  glorious  princi-
ples which  God  our  heavenly  Father
has  revealed  to  ns  in  these  latter
times.  Amen.


278


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  After

noon,  September  20,  1874,


(Reported  hj  David  IF.  Evans.)


JOSEPH SMITH'S FIRST VISIONS— THE BOOK OF MORMON — AMERICAN
INDIANS  DESCENDANTS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ISRAEL — PROPHECIES

FULFILLED.


I  will  read  the  3rd  and  4th  verses  I
of  the  29  th  chapter  of  Isaiah  :

"And  I  will  camp  against  4hee  round
about*  and  I  will  lay  sitge  ayainst  thee  with
a  mount,  and  I  will  raise  forts  against  thee,

i

"And  thou  shalt^be  brought  down,  and
shalt  speak  out  of  the  ground,  and  thy
speech  shall  be  low  out  of  the  dust,  and  thy
voice  shall  be  as  of  one  that  hath  a  familiar
spirit,  out  of  the  ground,  and  thy  speech
flhail  whisper  out  of  the  dust,"

[The  speaker  also  read  the  10thT
11th,  12tb,  13th,  14th  and  18th
verses  of  the  same  chapter,]

It  will  be  forty-seven  years  the  day
after  to-morrow  since  the  plates,  from
which  the  Book  of  Mormon  was
translated,  were  obtained  by  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith,  and  as  there  may
be  persons  in  this  assembly  who  are
unacquainted  with  the  circumstances
of  the  finding  of  this  book,  I  will  re-
late some  circumstances  in  relation  to
the  beginning  of  this  great  and  mar-
velous work.

Joseph  Smith,  generally  known  in
the  world  as  "  Old  Joe  Smith/*  was
a  boy  about  fourteen  years  of  age  at
the  time  the  Lord  first  revealed  him-
self in  a  very  marvelous  manner  to
him.  The  circumstances  were  these:
This  boy,  in  attending  religious  meet-
ings that  were  held  in  his  neighbor-
hood,  stemed  to  be  wrought  upon  in


a  very  wonderful  manner,  and  he  felt
great  concern  in  relation  to  the  sal-
vation of  his  soul.  Many  young
people  were  wrought  upon  by  the
same  spirit,  and  they  commenced
seeking  the  Lord,  and  professed  to  be
converted,  Among  this  number  were
several  of  the  Smith,  family,  who
united  themseves  with  the  Presbyte-
rians. During  the  progress  of  this
revival  a  sort  of  rivalry  sprang  up
among  the  various  denominations,
and  each  one  seemed  determined  to
obtain  as  many  of  the  converts  as
possible,  and  have  them  unite  with
bis  particular  religious  order.  This
boy,  Joseph  Smith,  was  solicited  and
advised  to  unite  himself  with  some
of  the  religious  denominations  in  that
vicinity,  but  being  of  a  reflecting
turn  of  mind,  he  inquired  in  his  own
heart  which  among  these  several  re-
ligious bodies  was  right  I  presume
that  many  of  you,  at  some  period  of
your  existence,  have  been  wrought
upon  in  the  same  manner,  because
you  have  been  anxious  to  join  your-
selves to  the  true  church  of  God  if
you  could  only  find  which  was  God's
church.  It  was  not,  therefore,  at  all
strange  that  this  young  man  should
have  these  ideas  passing  through  his
mind;  but  how  to  satisfy  himself  he


JOSEPH  SMITH'S  FIRST  VISIONS,  ETC


did  not  know-  If  he  went  to  one  de-
nomination they  would  say,  *4We  are
right,  and  the  others  are  wrong/' and
so  said  all  the  others.  Like  most
boys  of  his  age,  Joseph  had  never
read  the  Bible  ro  any  great  extent,
hence  he  was  unable  to  decide  in  his
own  mind,  as  to  which  was  the  true
church.  When  he  saw  several  deno-
minations contending  one  with  the
other,  he  naturally  enough  supposed
that  some  of  them  must  be  wrong.
He  began  to  search  the  Bible  in  his
leisure  time  after  his  work  was  done
upon  the  farm;  and  in  perusing  the
New  Testament,  he  came  across  a
passage  which  is  very  familiar  indeed
to  most,  of  my  hearers  ;  the  passage
reads  thus — It  any  of  you  lack  wis-
dom let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth
to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth
not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him."  Mr.
Smith  really  believed  this  passage.
He  did  not  read  this  as  one  would  read  a
novel,  thinking  that  it  was  all  ima-
ginary ;  but,  from  his  heart,  he  be*
heved  that  it  meant  what  it  said,  and
he  said  to  himself — "I  certainly  lack
wisdom  in  relation  to  my  duty.  I  do
not  know  which  of  these  denomina-
tions is  comet,  and  which  is  the
church  of  Christ.  I  desire  to  know,
with  all  my  heart,  and  I  will  go  be-
fore the  Lord,  and  call  upon  his
name,  claiming  his  promise."  He
therefore  retired  a  short  distance
from  his  father's  house,  into  a  little
grove  of  timber,  and  called  upon
the  Lord,  claiming  this  promise,
desiring  to  know  his  duty  and  to  be
informed  where  the  true  Church  of
Christ  was*  While  thus  praying,
with  all  his  heart,  he  discovered  in
the  heavens  above  him,  a  very  bright
and  glorious  light,  which  gradually
descended  towards  the  earth,  and
when  it  reached  the  tops  of  the  trees
which  overshadowed  hirn,  the  bright
ness  was  so  great  that  he  expected  to
see  the  leaves  of  the  tree  consumed


by  it;  but  when  he  saw  that  they
were  nut  consumed  he  received
courage.  Finally  the  light  rested
down  upon  and  overwhelmed  him
in  the  midst  of  it,  and  his  mind  at

.  the  same  time  seemed  to  be  caught
away  from  surrounding  objects,  and
he  saw  nothing  excepting  the  light

!  and  two  glorious  personages  stand ing
before  him  in  the  midst  of  this
light  One  of  these  personages,
pointing  to  the  other,  said — "Be-
hold n:y  beloved  Sou,  hear  ye  him."
After  this,  power  was  given  to  Mr.
Smith  to  speak,  and  in  answer  to
an  inquiry  by  the  Lord  as  tro  what
he  desired,  he  said  that  be  desired
to  know  which  was  the  true  Church,
that  he  might  be  united  thereunto,
He  was  immediately  told,  that  there
was  no  true  Church  of  Christ  on  the
earth,  that  all  had  gone  astray,  and
had  framed  doctrines,  and  dogmas,  and
creeds  by  human  wisdom,  and  that
the  authority  to  administer  in  the
holy  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  was
not  among  men  upon  the  earth,
and  he  was  strictly  commanded  to
go  not  after  any  of  them,  but  to
keep  aloof  from  the  whole  of  them.
He  was  also  informed  that,  in  due
time,  if  he  would  be  faithful  in
serving  the  Lord,  according  to  the
best  of  his  knowledge  and  ability,

i  God  would  reveal  to  him  still  further,
and  make  known  to  hirn  the  true
Gospel,  the  plan  of  salvation,  in  its
fulness.

Mr.  Smith  had  this  vision  before
he  was  fifteen  years  old,  and,  imme-
diately after  receiving  it,  he  began
to  relate  it  to  some  of  his  nearest
friends,  and  he  was  told  by  some  of
the  ministers  who  came  to  him  to
enquire  about  it,  that  there  was  no
such  thing  as  the  visitation  of
heavenly  messengers,  that  God  gave
no  new  revelation,  and  that  no
visions  could  be  given  to  the  chil-
dren of  men  in  this  age. This  was


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


like  telling  him  that  there  was  no
such  thing  as  seeing,  or  feeling,  or
hearing,  or  tasting,  or  smelling.
Why  ?  Because  lie  knew  positively
to  the  contrary  ;  he  knew  that  he
had  seen  this  light,  that  he  had  be-
held these  two  personages,  and  that
he  had  heard  the  voice  of  one  of
them ;  he  also  knew  that  he  had
received  instruction  from  them,  and
therefore,  to  be  told  that  there  was
no  such  thing  as  revelation  or  vision
in  these  days,  was  lik^  telling  him
that  the  sun  did  not  shine  in  these
davs.  He  knew  to  the  contrary,
and  he  continued  to  testify  that  God
had  madu  himself  manifest  to  him;
and  fn  consequence  of  this,  the  pre-
judices of  the  different  denominations
were  aroused  against  him.

Why  should  they  feel  such  con-
cern and  anxiety  in  relation  to  his
testimony  as  to  persecute  him,  a
boy  not  quite  fifteen  years  of  age  ?
The  reason  was  obvious — if  that
testimony  was  true,  not  one  of  their
churches  was  the  true  Church  of
Christ.  No  wonder,  then,  that  they
began  to  persecute,  point  the  finger
of  scorn,  and  say — "  There  goes  the
visionary  boy."

In  the  year  1823,  Mr.  Smith,
being  not  quite  eighteen  years  old,
was  meditating  in  his  heart  con-
cerning the  former  vision,  and  was
feeling  great  anxiety  that  the  pro-
mise might  be  fulfilled  to  him,  that
he  should,  at  some  future  time,
have  revealed  to  him  the  Gospel  in
all  its  fulness,  He  retired  to  his
room  one  Sunday  evening,  in  Sep-
tember and  commenced  to
pray  with  all  the  earnestness  and
faith  that  he  could  possibly  obtain,
that  the  Lord  would  fultill  the  pro-
mise that  he  had  made  to  him.
While  thus  praying,  he  discovered
that  a  light  seemed  to  be  breaking
into  his  room,  growing  brighter  by
degrees,  nntil  he  saw  a  personage,


apparently  an  angel,  standing  before
him.  This  personage  wore  a  white
robe,  and  his  countenance  had  the
appearance  of  lightning,  but  yet
appeared  of  an  innocent  expression.
This  personage  did  not  si  and  upon
?he  floor  of  the  room,  but  his  feet
were  a  short  distance  above  the
floor.  He  inforrred  this  boy  that
tiie  Lord  bad  sent  him  as  a  messen-
ger, in  answer  to  his  prayer,  in
order  to  impart  unto  him  further
information.  And  then  he  com-
menced telling  him  that  this  great
American  continent  was  once  occu-
pied by  a  numerous  people,  the
descendants  of  the  house  cf  Israel,
most  of  them  the  descendants  of  a
remnant  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph;  that
they  came  here  from  Jerusalem  by
the  direct  guidance  of  the  Almighty,
some  six  centuries  before  Christ;
that  in  a  vessel,  which  they  built
by  the  command  of  God,  they  came
round  by  the  Gulf  of  Arabia,  crossed
the  Great  Pacific  Oceau,  and  landed
on  the  western  coast  of  South
America ;  that  the  descendants  of
these  people  had  many  Prophets
among  them,  and  that  after  they
bad  been  on  this  continent  about  a
thousand  years,  during  the  progress
of  which  they  had  become  divided
into  two  distinct  nations,  they  fell
into  great  wickedness,  and  that  God
threatened  them  with  overthrow;
the  people  of  one  of  these  nations
were  called  Liamanites,  from  La-
man,  one  of  the  colony  which  came
out  of  Jerusalem ;  that  the  people
of  the  other  nation  were  called
Nephites,  taking  their  name  from
Nephi,  the  brother  of  Laman;  that
between  three  and  four  centuries
after  Christ  these  two  nations  occu-
pied the  two  great  wings  of  this
continent,  the  Lamanites  occupying
South  America,  and  the  Nep bites
North  America;  but  the  Nephites,
at that time, having  apostatized


JOSEPH  SMITH'S  FIRST  VISIONS,  ETC*


281


from  the  religion  of  their  fathers,
and  many  of  them  having  become
exceedingly  wicked,  the  Lord  threat-
ened them  with  an  overthrow.  And
he  commanded  one  of  the  last  Pro-
phets, named  Mormon,  to  make  an
abridgment  of  all  the  records  of
former  Prophets  who  had  been
raised  up  on  this  land,  an  abridgment
of  the  history  of  the  nation  from
the  time  that  they  left  Jerusalem
until  that  time.  He  did  so,  and
committed  the  abridged  record,  writ-
ten on  plates  of  gold,  into  the  hands
of  another  Prophet,  his  son  Moroni,
The  original  records,  from  which
the  abridgment  was  made,  were  hid
up  by  Mormon  in  a  hill  called  Cu-
morah,  in  the  interior  of  what  is
now  called  the  State  of  New  York,
but  the  abridgment  was  still  in  pos-
session of  the  Prophet  Moroni.
About  this  time,  or  a  little  before
this  time,  there  had  been  a  lifty  years
war  between  the  inhabitants  of  Nort  h
and  Sooth  America ;  and  finally  the
Lamanites  of  South  America  drove
the  Nephites  from  the  Isthmus,  and
continued  to  burn  their  towns,  cities
and  villages,  and  they  destroyed
hundreds  and  thousands  of  the  Ne-
phites; and  ultimately  they  were
driven  into  what  we  now  call  the
State  of  New  York,  Three  hundred
and  eighty  years  after  the  birth  of
Christ  they  entered  into  terms  of
peace,  or,  in  other  words,  an  arm-
istice, for  the  space  of  ibur  years,
during  which  time  the  two  nations
gathered  together  all  their  forces
into  one  vicinity,  near  the  hill  Cu-
morah.  And  when  the  four  years
of  peace,  or  armistice,  had  expired,
they  came  together  in  battle,  in  which
the  Nephites  were  overpowered,  and
hundreds  of  thousands  of  them  killed,
including  women  and  children.
Moroni,  who  was  among  the  few
Nepl rites  who  were  spared,  and  in
whose  possession  was  the  abridgment


which  had  been  made  by  his  father,
Mormon,  was  commanded  to  hide  up
that  abridgment  in  the  hill  Cumornh,
near  the  town  of  Manchester,  On-
tario  County,  State  of  New  York,
The  Lord  commanded  him  not  only
to  hi<?e  up  the  record,  but  also  to
deposit  with  it  the  Urirn  and  Thum-
mim,  an  instrument  used  by  the
ancient  seers  who  dwelt  on  this  Con-
tinent, The  Lord  promised  Moroni
that,  in  the  latter  days,  he  would
bring  forth  that  book  out  of  the
ground,  that  it  should  whisper  out
of  the  dust;  that  it  should  speak
unto  the  living  as  if  it  were  from
the  dead,  and  when  he  should  bring
it  forth  this  Urim  and  Thlimmim,
deposited  with  it,  should  enable  the
tinder  to  translate  it  into  the  lan-
guage of  the  people  who  should  then
inherit  the  land.

I  have  now  given  you  a  brief
statement  of  these  things,  in  sub-
stance, as  they  were  taught  by  the
angel  of  God  who  administered  to
Joseph  Smith  in  September,  1823,
After  giving  this  instruction  the
angel  disappeared;  and  as  Mr,  Smith
continued  to  pray  and  call  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord,  the  angel  ap-
peared the  second  time,  and  mario
the  same  narration  in  relation  to  the
Lamanites  and  Nephites  m  he  made
on  his  first  visit.  When  conversing
with  Mr.  Smith  about  these  records,
the  vision  of  his  mind  was  opened  so
that  he  was  enabled  to  see  where  the
records  were  deposited,  and  he  wag
told  by  the  angel  that,  if  he  would
be  faithful  and  do  according  to  the
commandments  of  the  Lord  his  God,
he,  in  due  time,  should  have  the
privilege  of  bringing  the  records
forth,  and  that  he  should  translate
them  for  the  benefit  of  the  people.

The  angel  again  departed,  and
Mr,  Smith,  being  unable  to  go  to
sleep,  continued  to  pray,  and  the
vision  was  renewed  again ;  the  angel,


282  JOURNAL  OF

on  his  third  visit,  not  only  reiterating
his  previous  statement,  but  also
declaring  many  things  that  were
then  in  the  future  in  relation  to  the
marvelous  work  and  wonder  which
the  Lord  was  about  to  perform  upon
the  earth.  When  he  had  withdrawn
for  the  third  time,  daylight  began  to
appear  in  the  east,  and  Mr,  Smith
had  not  slept  the  whole  night ;  but
lie  nevertheless  went  to  work  with
his  father  in  the  field,  at  their  usual
early  hour.  But  the  visions  of  the
night  wrought  upon  his  mind  to  that
degree,  that  his  natural  strength
began  to  fail,  and  his  father,  noticing
that  he  looked  pale,  advised  him
to  return  at  once  to  the  house.  He
started  to  do  so,  but  had  only  gone
part  of  the  way,  when  he  again  saw
the  light  in  the  heavens,  and  the
angel  ot  God  came  down  and  stood
before  him,  and  commanded  him  to
return  to  his  father,  and  relate  the
visions  of  the  previous  nig  lit  to
him.  He  did  so;  and  the  old  man
commanded  his  son  to  be  obedient
to  the  heavenly  messenger,  believing
with  all  his  heart  that  the  vision  was
from  the  Almighty,  On  this  last
occasion  the  angel  told  Mr*  Smith  to
go  to  the  hill  Cumorah,  which  had
been  shown  to  him  in  vision  the  pre-
vious night,  which  was  about  three
miles  from  his  father's  bouse,  and
there  he  should  have  the  privilege  of
beholding  the  records.  He,  after
having  spoken  to  his  father,  ac-
cordingly went,  and  beheld  the
records.  He  knew  the  place  as  soon
as  he  saw  it  He  saw  the  crowning
stone  of  the  stone  box  that  covered
the  records.  It  was  ova)  in  form,
and  was  partially  bare,  the  edyes
being  under  the  sod.  He  imme-
diately rtmoved  the  turf  that  cov-
ered the  edges  of  this  stone,  and,
with  a  lever,  succeeded  in  lifting  off
i he  upper  stone,  which  was  cemented
to  four  others,  in  the  forrh  of  a  box,


DISCOURSES*

within  which  he  saw  the  plates  and
the  Urim  and  Thummim.  He  was
about  to  iP\:,  furth  his  hand  to  take
the  phues,  when  lo!  the  angel  of  God
appeared  again,  and  told  him  that
the  time  had  not  fully  come  for  these
records  to  come  forth  ;  that  he
(Joseph)  was  yet  inexperienced,  and
needed  strength,  and  that  if  he  would
be  obedient  to  the  commands  which
he  wuuld  give  to  him,  and  which  the
Lord  would  impart  from  time  to
time,  he  should,  in  due  time,  be  per-
mitted to  receive  these  records,  com-
manding him  at  the  same  time  to
come  there  one  year  from  that  date,
and  that  he  wuuld  appear  ag;jin  to
him,  and  give  him  further  instruc-
tions; and  thus  he  should  do  from
year  to  year,  until  he  should  receive
the  plates,  provided  that  he  should
prove  himself  worthy  before  God;
for  the  angel  said  unto  him,  that
these  plates  could  not  be  obtained
by  any  person  for  speculative  pur-
poses; that  they  contained  records
that  were  sacred,  prophecies  and
doctrines  that  were  written  by  ancient
Prophets  and  that  the  Lord  God  had
promised  that  these  prophecies  and
level  at  ions  should  go  forth  to  all
people,  nations  and  tongues,  and  that
they  could  not  be  entrusted  vviih  any
one  to  get  gain.

From  that  time,  Mr.  Smith,  on
the  22 ud  of  September  each  year,
continued  to  visit  this  place,  until
the  year  1S27,  he  being  then  not  quite
twenty-two  years  old.  On  the  morn-
ing of  the  22nd  of  September,  in
the  year  l^iiT,  the  angel  of  the
Lord  permitted  him  to  take  these
records,  with  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim, and  he  carried  them  to  his
j  father's  house.  The  people  in  that
neighborhood,  having  learned  about
these  things,  sought  by  every  means
in  their  power — by  persecution,  mobs,
and  every  other  means  that  they
\  could  bring  to  bear,  to  find  these


JOSEPH  SMITH'S  FIRST  VISIONS,  ETC.


283


plates  and  take  them  from  him.  But
the  Lord  gave  him  directions,
through  the  Urim  and  Thummim,
what  lie  should  do  with  the  plates,
where  he  should  hide  them,  and  gave
him  all  the  information  that  was
necessary  to  keep  them  out  of  the
hands  of  the  mobs*

Fin  [illy,  the  persecution  became  so
great,  that  this  young  man  was
obliged  to  leave  his  father's  house,
and  proceed  to  the  Susquehanna
river,  in  Pennsylvania,  and  there
he  commenced  to  transcribe  or  make
a  facsimile  of  some  of  the  characters
or  words  that  were  written  on  these
metallic  plates;  and  the  transcript,
then  made,  was  taken  by  a  man
named  Martin  Harris  to  the  city  of
New  York,  and  exhibited  to  the
learned,  to  see  if  they  could  translate
them.  Remember,  it  was  not  the
plates  that  were  taken  to  the  learned,
but  it  was  the  words  of  the  book,
transcribed  from  the  plates,  and  the
learned  were  requested  to  read  them.
But  31  r.  Harris  could  not  succeed  in
finding  any  person  who  was  able  to
translate  them  ;  although  he  found
one  man — Professor  Anthon — well
known  through  the  United  States,
and  in  European  nations,  as  a  great
linguist,  who  said  that  he  would  as-
sist, according  to  his  best  ability  and
judgment,  in  translating  the  tran-
script presen  ted  to  him  by  Mr.  Harris,
and  he  gave  a  written  promise  to
that  effect,  "  But/'  said  he,  a  where
did  you  get  these  records  ?"  Mr.
Harris  informed  him  that  they  had
been  revealed  by  an  angel  of  God  to
a  young  man  named  Joseph  Smith*
Mr,  Anthon  then  said  to  Mr.  Harris,
"  Give  me  that  paper  1  have  given
you,"  Mr.  Harris  handed  it  hack
to  him,  and  he  tore  it  in  pieces,  say-
ing — H  There  is  no  such  thing  as  the
ministering  of  angels  in  these  days,
but  bring  the  record  here,  and  we  will
see  what  we  can  do  in  relation  to


assisting  in  translating  it."  Mr*
Harris  replied  that  a  part  of  the
record  was  sealed,  and  that  only  one
portion  of  if.  w;.s  prnnint'd  to  be
translated  at  the  present  time.  This
learned  man  said — "  I  can  not  read  a
sealed  book,"  thus  fulfilling  the  words
I  have  read — "And  the  vision  of  all
is  become  unto  you  as  the  words  of
a  book  that  is  sealed,  which  men
deliver  to  or  e  that  is  learned,  saying,

*  Read  this  I  pray  thee/  and  he  saith,

*  I  can  not  for  it  is  sealed,  I  can  not
read  a  sealed  book.'  "  The  next  •
verse  says — "  And  the  book  is  de-
livered to  him  that  is  not  learned,
saying — 'Read  this  I  pray  thee;*
and  lie  saith — '  I  am  not  learned.'  "

When  Martin  Harris  reported  to
this  boy,  what  the  learned  had  said,
and  how  they  had  proceeded  in  rela-
tion to  this  matter,  the  Lord  God
commanded  this  young  man  to  tran-
slate the  record  himself,  through  the
aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.
But  he  made  this  excuse — "I  am
not  learned."  And  the  Lord  an-
swered him  in  the  very  words  of
Isaiah,  as  recorded  in  the  next
verse — u  Wherefore  the  Lord  said,
inasmuch  as  this  people  draw  near
me  with  their  mouth  and  with  their
lips  do  honor  me,  and  have  removed
their  hearts  far  from  me,  and  their
fear  toward  me  is  taught  by  the  pre-
cepts of  men,  therefore,  behold,  I
will  proceed  to  do  a  marvelous  work
among  this  people,  even  a  marvelous
work  and  a  wonder ;  for  the  wisdom
of  their  wise  men  shall  perish,  and
the  understanding  of  their  prudent
men  shall  be  hid."  Tiiat.  is  the  an-
swer that  the  Lord  made  this  young
man,  commanding  him  to  read  the
book.

It  was  marvelouR  that  a  man  who
did  not  possess  the  ordinary  educa-
tion, obtained  in  the  common  schools
of  t  he  country,  and  who  could  barely
read,  and  could  write  but  very  little;


a  nvi\n  who  had  only  read  the  bible  a
very  little,  and  who  knew  but  little
about  the  various  theological  doc-
trines of  the  day  ;  I  sny  that  for  such
a  man  to  be  called  of  the  Lord  God,
and  commanded  to  translate  from  an
ancient  record  and  to  bring  forth  a
book  for  the  benefit  of  all  nations,
kindreds,  tongues  and  peoples,  was
marvelous  in  the  extreme,  and  it  did
literally  cause  the  wisdom  of  the
wise  to  perish.  "  And  I  will  raise
forts  against  them,  they  shall  be
'brought  down,  and  Khali  speak  out
of  the  ground,  and  thy  speech  shall
be  low  out  of  the  dust/'  <fec.

Now  this  record  is  as  if  one  spoke
from  the  dead  ;  it  is  the  voice  of  the
ancient  dead  Prophets  who  once  in-
huuited  this  great  continent ;  it  is
the  voice  of  the  dead  to  the  living,
a  warning  voice,  the  everlasting
Gospel  in  all  its  plainness  and  parity,
speaking  out  of  the  ground,  whis-
pering out  of  the  dust,  just  as  this
passage  of  Scripture  declares.  Not
the  book,  but  the  words  of  the  book
were  sent  to  the  learned ;  and,  lastly,
the  hook  itself  was  commanded  to  be
translated  by  the  unlearned.  All
this  is  marvelous.

The  eighteenth  verse,  which  I  read,
says — u  And  in  that  day  shall  the
deaf  hear  the  words  of  the  book  "
^Yiiht  r>ook?  We  answer,  the  one
that  the  Prophet  had  been  speaking
of,  the  one  that  was  to  speak  out  of
the  ground,  and  that  was  to  be  trans-
lated bv  the  unlearned. u  In  that

m

day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words  of
the  book,  and  the  eyes  of  the  blind
shall  see  out  of  obscurity  and  out  of
darkness.  The  meek  also  shall  in-
crease their  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  the
poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the
Holy  One  of  Israel."

This  book,  that  has  thus  been
marvelously  translated,  is  for  the
benefit  of  the  meek  and  the  poor
among  men. When  Jesus  came  in


ancient  days,  and  preached  the  Gos-
pel to  the  learned  and  the  unlearned,
we  are  told  that  on  one  occasion,  the
disciples  of  John  came  and  asked
him  if  lie  was  the  true  Messiah,  or
should  they  look  for  another  f  And
he  said  unto  them — "  Go  and  tell
John  that  the  dead  are  raised,  that
the  blind  see,  and  that  the  poor  have
the  Gospel  preached  to  them."  So,
in  these  latter  days,  when  the  Lord
God  causes  a  book  to  come  forth  out
of  the  ground,  and  to  whisper  from
the  dust,  it  is  for  the  benefit  of  the
poor  among  men,  and  they  are  to
rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.

Has  this  ever  been  fulfilled  lite-
rally  ?  It  has,  Wc  have  lifted  up
our  voices  for  forty- four  years  and
upwards  among  the  inhabitants  of
this  nation,  and  also  for  many  years
among  the  inhabitants  of  other  na-
tions, bearing  testimony  to  all  people
that  the  Lord  God  has  sent  his  angel,
according  to  the  promise  made  in
the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Reve-
lations of  St.  John,  flying  through
the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  to  every
nation,  kindred,  tongue  and  people
that  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.
We  have  borne  testimony,  faithfully
and  diligently  without  purse  or  scrip,
for  these  many  years  among  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  to  the  rich
as  well  as  the  poor.  But  the  rich
will  not  obey  it;  no,  they  have  their
riches  to  look  after.  One  says —
"  I  have  a  yoke  of  oxen  that  I  have
just  bought,  I  must  go  and  try  them/'
Another  says — "  I  have  invested  so
many  hundred  thousand  dollars  In
merchandize,  I  must  attend  to  that."
Another  says — 44 1  have  some  other
business,  I  must  look  after  that"
But  the  poor  among  men,  whose
hearts  are  pure  and  meek  because
of  the  oppression  that  they  have
received  from  the  monopolist,  and
from  the  rich,  are  humble,  and  they


JOSEPH  SMITH'S  FIRST  VISIONS,  ETC


2*5


receive  this  work,  hence  they  have
gathered  out  from  among  the  vari-
ous nations,  where  they  are  no  longer
oppressed  or  under  taskmasters,  and
have  accumulated  homes  of  their
own,  and  lands,  and  flocks  and  herds
of  their  own,  which  neither  they  nor
their  fathers  in  the  old  countries
inherited  from  generation  to  genera-
tion. The  poor  among  men,  when
they  shall  hear  the  words  of  the
book,  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One
of  Israel

To  show  more  fully  the  time  when
this  book  tehould  he  brought  to  light,
let  roe  say  that  it  is  a  latter-day  work,
and  to  prove  it,  I  will  read  the  fol-
lowing verses.  "The  poor  among
men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of
Israel,  for  the  terrible  one  is  brought
to  naught,  and  the  scorner  is  con-
sumed, and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity
are  cut  off;  all  that  make  a  man  an
offender  for  a  word,  or  that  lay  a  snare
for  him  that  re  pro  vet  h  in  the  gate,
or  that  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing
of  naught."  All  these  are  to  be  cut
off.  When  ?  When  they  have  heard
the  words  of  this  book,  when  the  |
proclamation  has  been  sounded  in
their  ears.  When  they  are  become
fully  ripened  in  iniquity,  they  will  be
cut  off  according  to  the  declaration
of  the  Prophet  Isaiah.  But  their
times  must  first  be  fulfilled ;  their
fulness  must  come  in,  before  these
terrible  judgments  and  destructions
shall  lay  waste  the  nations  of  the
Gentiles.  But  is  there  no  hope  for
Israel,  when  this  book  comes  forth  ?
When  I  speak  of  Israel  I  mean  the
literal  Israel,  the  descendants  of  the
twelve  tribes,  whose  fathers  inherited
ancient  Palestine.  Is  there  no  hope
for  them  when  this  great  and  marvel-
ous work  shall  be  accomplished  ?
We  will  read  the  next  verse,  "There-
fore, thus  saith  the  Lord,  who
redeemed  Abraham,  concerning  the
house  of  Jacob. Jacob  shall  not  now


be  ashamed,  neither  shall  his  face
now  wax  pale;  but  when  he  seeth
his  children,  the  work  of  mine  hands,
in  the  midst  of  him,  they  shall
sanctify  my  name,  and  sanctify  the
Holy  One  of  Jacob,  and  shall  fear  the
God  of  Israel"

It  seems  then,  that  Jacob  was  to
be  scattered  and  dispersed,  and  made
ashamed,  his  face  was  to  wax  pale,
and  he  be  counted  a  hiss  and  a  by-
word among  the  people,  until  the
set  time  should  arrive,  until  God
should  rise  up  in  his  majesty  and
power  in  the  latter  days,  and  should
set  to  his  hand  according  to  the
words  of  the  Prophets,  a  second  time
to  recover  bis  people  from  the  four
corners  of  the  earth.  And  when  he
should  commence  this  great  work,  he
would  bring  forth  the  words  of  them
that  have  slumbered  in  the  dust,
should  whisper  out  of  the  ground,
and  their  speech  should  be  low  out  of
the  dust;  and  Israel,  after  that  time,
should  no  longer  be  made  ashamed,
neither  should  their  faces  wax  pale.
Why  ?  Because  they  must  be  ga-
thered from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth  by  means  of  that  book.

There  is  another  object  expressed
in  the  next  verse,  the  last  verse  of
the  chapter,  for  the  bringing  forth  of
this  book,  "And  they  also  that
erred  in  spirit  shall  come  to  under-
standing, and  they  that  murmured
shall  learn  doctrine."  How  many
hundreds  of  thousands  of  good,  up-
right, moral  people  among  all  the  na-
tions of  Christendom,  have  erred  in
spirit  because  of  the  false  doctrines
that  have  been  promulgated,  from
generation  to  generation,  in  their
midst;  doctrines  of  form  without
any  power?  Doctrines  that  exclude
all  communications  with  the  heavens,
that  shut  up  the  voice  of  the
Almighty  in  continued  silence;  that
closed  up  the  heavens  as  brass  over
their  heads;  that  proclaimed  in  all


their  creeds,  articles  of  faith,  and  dis-
cipline, that  the  Bible  contained  all
that  God  would  ever  reveal  to  the
children  of  men.  Millions  have
erred  in  spirit  because  of  these  doc-
trines; others  have  murmured  be-
cause of  them,  and  have  found  fault,
and  said,  "How  can  we  know  the  true
doctrine,  or  the  true  church,  when  we
•find  several  hundred  all  teaching  dif-
ferent, each  one  going  his  own  way,
each  proclaiming  his  own  dogma,
creed  and  discipline?  Contradicting
and  quarrelling  with  one  another?
Christian  nations  figlitin^  against
Christian  nations etc.  Thej  have
murmured  about  it;  and  many  have
begun  to  think  that  there  is  nothing
in  revealed  religion.  It  has  made
thousands  on  thousands  of  infidels;
and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at;  for
instead  of  taking  the  Bible  as  their
guide,  and  comparing  ancient  Chris-
tianity with  the  truth,  they  have
taken  this  Babel  of  confusion,  called
modern  Christianity,  and  have  asked
if  that  could  be  from  heaven  ?  And
they  do  not  believe  in  it.  They  do
not  believe  that  God  is  the  author  of
confusion,  and  they  have  murmured,
contended  and  complained,  But
when  this  book  should  come  forth,
"they  that  murmured  should  learn
doctrine,  and  they  that  erred  in  spirit
should  come  to  understanding."
How  ?  In  what  way?  Because  this
book,  translated  from  those  plates,
contains  the  doctrine  of  Christ  in
such  perfect  plainness,  that  no  two
persons  who  read  that  doctrine  disa-
gree in  relation  to  it.  It  is  plain,
and  easy  to  be  understood.  For  in-
stance, let  me  mention  in  relation  to
one  ordinance  about  which  there  is
much  contention  among  the  sects  of
Christendom,  namely  the  ordinance
of  baptism.  One  says  it  must  be
by  pouring,  another  by  sprinkling,
another  by  immersion ;  a  fourth  says
you  must  be  baptized  three  times,


onre  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  once
in  the  name  of  the  Son,  and  then  in
the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  And
thus  they  quarrel,  and  contend,  and
have  their  different  views  about  that
one  doctrine,

Now,  when  you  lake  up  the  Book
of  Mormon,  and  read,  in  the  latter
part  of  the  book,  concerning  this
ordinance,  you  find  that  our  Lord  and
Savior,  after  his resurrection,  de-
scended to  the  northern  part  of  what
we  call  South  America,  and  stood  in
the  midst  of  a  large  congregation  uf
people  who  saw  him  descend,  and  who
also  beheld  the  wounds  in  his  Bands
and  in  his  feet,  and  they  heard  him
teach  his  gospel,  and  lie  commanded
them  that  they  should  no  more  offer
sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings  on  this
American  continent,  as  their  fathers
had  been  accustomed  to  do,  but  that
they  should  do  away with  these
tilings. And  he  taught  them  his  gos-
pel, and  commanded  them  to  believe
and  repent  with  all  their  hearts,  and
to  come  down  into  the  depths  of  hu-
mility, like  little  children,  and  be
baptized  in  his  name  for  the  remission
of  their  sins,  and  promised  them,  if
they  would  do  so,  that  they  should  be
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost And  he
called  twelve  disciples  on  this  Ameri-
can continent,  the  same  as  he  called
twelve  apostles  in  ancient  Palestine,
And  after  he  had  called  and  ordained
these  twelve  disciples,  he  commanded
thorn  to  baptize  all  penitent  believers,
and  he  gave  them  the  pattern,  saying
unto  them — "You  shall  go  down  and
stand  in  the  water  and,  in  my  name,
you  shall  baptize  them. And  now,
behold,  these  are  the  words  which
you  shall  .say,  calling  them  by  name
— 1  Having  authority  given  me  of
Jesas  Christ,  I  baptize  you  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen,'  and
then  shall  ye  immerse  them  in  the
water,  and  shall  come  forth  again  out


JOSEPH  SMITH'S  FIRST  VISIONS,  ETC*


287


of  the  water.  And  after  this  manner
shall  ye  baptize  in  my  name,  for  be-
hold the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghost  are  one,"  etc.

Now,  let  me  ask,  who  could  draw
any  two  conclusions  from  words  as
plain  as  these?  No  person  could;
and  there  could  be  no  two  churches
differing,  or  built  up  upon  the  prin-
ciple of  baptism  as  here  revealed.
So  it  is  in  regard  to  every  other  point
of  doctrine  relating  to  the  plan  of
salvation  revealed  in  this  book;  they
are  all  just  as  plain  as  the  one  to
which  I  have  called  yoar  attention.
Hence,  when  people  understand,  and
comprehend  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  that  this  record  is  divine,
and  when  they  can  once  put  their
confidence  in  it  as  such,  they  never
after  that  need  be  at  a  loss  concern-
ing the  points  of  the  doctrine  of  our
Lord  and  Savior.  "  They  that  erred
in  spirit  shall  come  to  understanding;
they  that  murmured  shall  learn  doc-
trine."

Again  he  says — "The  deaf  shall
hear  the  words  of  the  book.1'  Has
this  been  literally  fulfilled,  or  must  it
be  spiritualized ?  "The  eyes  of  the
blind  shall  also  see  out  of  obscurity
and  out  of  darkness  in  that  day."
Does  this  mean  those  who  are  blind
spiritually,  or  does  it  mean  literally  ?
I  think  it  means  both.  Those  who
have  been  blind  spiritually  are  seeing
out  of  obscurity  and  out  of  darkness,
and  those  who  have  been  deaf  spiritu-
ally are  beginning  to  hear.  But  this
is  not  the  entire  meaning.  Do  not
the  greater  part  of  this  congregation,
now  sitting  before  me,  know  of  a
surety  that  the  Lord  God  has,  since
he  sent  forth  the  proclamation  of  this
Gospel  among  the  people,  caused  the
eyes  of  the  blind — those  blind  physi-
cally, born  blind — to  be  opened  ?  Do
they  not  know  that  the  ears  of  some
who  were  so  deaf  that  they  could  not
hear  the  loudest  sound  have  been


literally  opened?  Yes;  you  know
this,  for  it  has  been  done  in  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.  Not  in  some
obscure  corner,  where  a  few  indivi-
duals have  seen  it,  but  among  the  na-
tions and  kingdoms  where  this  gospel
has  been  preached ;  therefore,  the
Lord  God  has  indeed  fulfilled,  to  the
very  letter,  these  predictions,  uttered
by  the  ancient  prophets  in  relation  to
the  great  work  that  should  be  per-
formed on  the  earth  in  the  latter
days,  when  lie  should  bring  forth  this
book,  and  should  cause  the  earth,  as
it  were,  to  open  and  bring  forth  sal-
vation.

This  agrees  with  the  testimony  of
David  the  Prophet;  for  not  only
Isaiah,  but  David  says,  in  the  85th
Psalm,  when  enquiring  about  the
long  captivity  of  Jacob — "Lnrd  wilt
thou  not  bring  back  the  captivity  of
Jacob,  that  Israel  may  rejoice,  and
that  thy  people  may  be  glad  ?"  The
Lord,  in  answering  this  prayer  of
David,  tell  him  how  he  will  do  it.
Says  he — "I  will  cause  truth  to
spring  out  of  the  earth  and  righteous-
ness shall  look  down  from  heaven,
and  they  shall  go  before  us,  to  set  us
in  the  way  of  his  steps."  Yes,  by
bringing  forth  this  work  out  of  the
earth,  and  by  raising  up  his  church,
by  the  divine  authority  which  he  re-
stored again,  and  by  pouring  out  the
Holy  Ghost  from  heaven,  by  sending
down  righteousness  from  heaven,  and
by  truth,  which  has  sprung  forth  out
of  the  earth,  the  Lord  has  set  us
again  in  the  way  of  his  steps.  And
Israel  will  truly  be  made  glad,  and
the  house  of  Jacob,  when  this  work
shall  go  forth  to  them,  will  no  longer
be  made  ashamed.

This  agrees  with  another  prophecy,
where  the  Prophet  Isaaiah,  in  looking
after  the  consolation  and  redemption
of  Jacob  in  the  last  days,  says —
"  Let  the  skies  pour  down  righteous-
ness, and  let  the  earth  open  and  bring


288  JOURNAL  OF

forth  salvation/'  It  seems  then  that
the  earth  was  to  bring  forth  truth
and  salvation,  and  the  skies  at  the
same  time  were  to  pour  down  the
blessings  of  eternity  upon  the  heads
of  the  people,  and  by  this  means  the
Lord  God  would  save  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  redeem  Israel  from  the
four  quarteis  thereof.  Hut  alas!  for
the  wicked  in  that  day.  Let  us  see
what  is  to  become  of  them,  I  have
already  quoted  one  passage  stating
that  they  were  to  be  cot  off  in  a  ter-
rible manner,  and  be  brought  to
naught,  the  sco itkt  being  consumed,
and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  being
cut  off".  Let  us  read  another  passage,
in  tliis  same  29th  chapter — "The
multitude  of  all  nations  that  fight
against  Zion  shall  be  as  a  hungry
man  who  drcarncth  and  behold  he
eateth,  but  he  waketh  and  his  soul
is  empty;  or  as  when  a  thirsty  man
dreameth  and  behold  he  drinketh,
but  he  waketh,  and  behold  he  is  faint,
and  his  soui  hath  appetite,  So  shall
the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  be
that  fight  agaiuBt  Mount  Zion/1

Has  that  ever  been  fulfilled  upon
the  nations  of  the  earth  ?  It  dors
not  matter  how  many  of  them  there
are,  they  are  in  the  hands  of  the
Almighty,  and  by  the  blast  of  his
nostrils  they  can  bo  consumed,  and
swept  away  by  the  breath  of  his  lips,
and  they  will  become  like  a  hungry
or  a  thirsty  man  who  dreams  that  he
has  something  to  eat  or  to  drink,  and
behold  it  is  all  die  appointment;  for
he  wakes  and  his  soul  is  thirsty  and
Lath  appetite.  So  it  will  be  with  all
people  that  tight  against  the  great
latter-day  work;  for,  saith  the  same
Prophet,  "they  shall  be  visited  of  the
Lord  of  hosts  with  thunder  and  with
earthquake,  with  great  noise,  with
storm  and  tempest,  and  the  flame  of


DISCOURSES,

devouring  fire."  It  will  be  a  day  not
|  of  destruction  by  a  flood  of  waters,
but  by  various  judgments,  end  tug
I  with  the  flame  of  devourfrig  fire,
which  will  sweep  the  earth,  and  de-
stroy the  wicked  out  of  it.  Behold
the  day  will  come,  and  is  close  at
hand,  when  Malachi's  prophecy  will
be  fulfilled,  that  shall  burn  ns  an  oven;
when  all  the  proud  and  they  that  do
wickedly  shall  become  as  stubble,  and
they  shall  be  burned  up,  saith  the
Lord  of  hosts.  That  day  shall  leave
them  neither  root  nor  branch.  No
branches  of  the  wicked  left,  no  roots
left  among  the  nations,  but  the  earth,
and  all  the  fulness  thereof,  will  be
given  into  the  hands  of  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High,  as  was  predicted  by
Daniel  the  Prophet,  that  "the  king-
clow  and  the  dominion,  and  the  great-
ness of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole
heavens,  shall  be  given  into  the
hands  of  the  Saints  of  the  Most
High.  A  King  shall  reign  in
righteousness  in  those  days  and  his
name  shall  be  the  Lord  of  Hosts,
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  great  Messiah.
The  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of
lords  will  reign  over  the  nations  in
those  days,  as  he  now  reigns  king  of
Saints.  And  behold  this  is  the  pre-
paratory work.  This  book  that  has
now  come  forth  will  be  sounded
among  the  various  nations  and  king-
doms of  the  earth.  They  who  hear
the  words  thereof,  and  repent  of  their
bins,  and  turn  away  from  all  unright-
eousness, and  will  receive  the  fulness
of  the  everlasting  gospel,  will  be
gathered  together,  and  the  sons  and
daughters  of  God  will  come  from  the
ends  of  the  earth,  even  every  one
that  is  called  by  bis  came.

We  might  go  on  still  further,  but
this  is  sufficient  for  the  time  being.
Amen.


REDEMPTION  OF  ZION,  ETC.


289


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON PRATT,  /


Delivered  in  the  Twentieth  Ward  Meeting  House,  on  the  evening

of  Sunday,  Fkbruary  7,  1875*  v


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

REDEJIPTION  OF  ZION — PERSECUTION — BAPTISM  OF  INDIANS— SECOND
COMING  OF  CHRIST — EVERY  JOT  AND  EVERY  TITTLE  OF  DIVINE
REVEL  ATI  UN  WILL  BE  FULFILLED,


I  will  read  the  third  paragraph  of
a  revelation  that  was  given  in  1834,
It  commences  on  page  292  of  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.

14  Bat  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I
have  decreed  that  your  brethren
which  have  been  scattered  shall  re-
tarn  to  the  land  of  their  inheri-
tances, and  build  up  the  waste  pi  rices
of  Zion;  for  after  much  tribulation,
as  1  have  said  unto  you  in  a  former
commandment,  conieth  the  blessing,
Behold,  this  is  the  blessing  which  I
have  promised  after  your  tribula-
tions, and  the  tribulations  of  your
brethren ;  your  redemption  and  the
redemption  of  your  brethren,  even
their  restoration  to  the  land  of  Zion,
to  lie  established  no  more  to  be
thrown  down;  nevertheless,  if  they
pollute  their  inheritances,  they  shall
be  thrown  down,  for  I  will  not  spnre
them  if  they  pollute  their  inheri-
tances. Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  the
redemption  of  Zion  must  needs  come
by  power;  therefore,  I  will  raise  up
unto  my  people  a  man,  who  shall
lead  them  like  as  Moses  led  the
children  of  Israel,  for  ye  are  the
children  of  Israel,  and  of  the  seed  of
Abraham,  and  ye  must  needs  be  led
out  of  bondage  by  power,  and  with
a  stretched  out  arm:  and  as  your

-No.  19.


fathers  were  led  at  the  first,  even  so
shall  the  redemption  "trf-  Zion  be.
Therefore  let  not  your  hearts  faint,
for  I  say  not  unto  yon  as  I  said  unto
your  fathers,  mine  angel  shall  go  up
before  you,  but  not  my  presence;
but  I  say  unto  yon,  mice  angels
shall  go  before  you,  and  also  my
presence,  and  in  time  ye  shall  possess
the  goodly  land."

It  is  many  months  since  I  met
with  the  people  here  in  this  Ward.
I  recollect  when  I  was  here  last  I
partly  promised  to  say  something*
about  the  redemption  of  Zion.  What
I  may  be  able  to  communicate  to
you  in  relation  to  that  great  event?,
regarded  as  of  so  much  importance
by  this  people,  I  am  unable  to  say,
I  may  not  bo  able  to  throw  upon
the  subject  any  special  information
more  than  what  you  are  already  in
possession  of.  All  that  any  of  us
know,  and  all  that  we  possibly  can
know  in  relation  to  the  future  is
that  which  God  in  his  mercy  reveals.
The  Lord  understands  the  future  as
well  as  the  past  and  the  present,  and
his  Spirit  understands  that  which  is
to  come,  and  the  promise  is  that
that  Spirit  shall  be  given  to  us
through  the  prayer  of  faith,  so  that
we  may  be  able  to  comprehend  in

Vol.  XVII.


200


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


some  measure  the  things  of  the
future.  The  promise  of  the  Savior
to  the  ancient  Apostles  was,  that
when  the  Spirit  of  truth  should  come
ha  should  guide  them  into  all  truthf
and  show  them  things  to  come.  That
same  Spirit,  imparted  to  the  servants
of  God  in  the  19th  century  of  the
Christian  era,  is  just  as  capable  of
opening  up  the  future,  lighting  up
the  irind  of  man  and  showing  him
events  that  are  to  take  place,  as  it
was  the  first  year  after  the  crucifix-
ion of  Christ,  on  the  day  of  Pente-
cost, or  in  any  other  former  age  of
the  world — it  is  the  same  from
eternity  to  eternity,  and  it  is  jost  as
needful  for  us,  as  Latter-day  Saints,
to  know  the  things  of  God,  as  it  was
for  the  former-day  Saints  to  know
them.  The  great  and  important
thing  with  us  is  to  exercise  sufficient
faith  before  the  heavens,  that  God
may  pour  out  the  spirit  of  prophecy
upon  us.  The  same  faith  will  pro-
cure the  same  blessings,  and  the
spirit  of  prophecy  was  considered  by
the  ancient  Apostles  as  one  of  the
best  gifts,  far  greater  than  the  gift
of  tongues  or  than  the  gift  of  in-
terpretation of  tongues.  It  was  a
spirit  that  was  given  for  the  edifica-
tion of  the  Saints  of  the  living  God,
and  the  same  spirit  is  promised  to
nil  bis  servants  who  live  faithful
before  him,

I  well  recollect,  when  I  was  but
about  nineteen  years  old — forty-four
years  last  fall — that  believing  Joseph
Smith  to  be  a  Prophet,  and  being
led  by  the  Spirit,  I  went  a  journey
of  two  hundred  miles  to  visit  him.
I  well  recollect  the  feelings  of  my
heart  at  the  time*  He  inquired  of
the  Lord,  and  obtained  a  revrlation
for  your  humble  servant  He  re-
tired into  the  chamber  of  oli  Father
Whitmer,  in  the  house  where  thia
Church  was  organised  in  1830,  John
Whitmer  acted  as  his  scribe,  and  I


accompanied  him  into  the  chamber,
for  he  had  told  me  that  it  was  my
privilege  to  have  the  word  of  the
Lord ;  and  the  Lord  in  that  revela-
tion, which  is  published  here  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
made  a  promise  which  to  me,  when
I  was  in  my  youth,  seemed  to  be
almost  too  great  for  a  person  of  as
humble  origin  as  myself  ever  to
attain  to.  After  telling  in  the  reve-
lation that  the  great  day  of  the  Lord
was  at  hand,  and  calling  upon  me  to
lift  up  my  voice  among  the  people,
to  call  upon  them  to  repent  and  pre-
pare the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  that
the  time  was  near  when  the  heavens
should  be  shaken,  when  the  earth
should  tremble,  when  the  stars  should
refuse  their  shining,  and  when  great
destructions  awaited  the  wicked,  the
Lord  said  to  your  humble  servant—
"  Lift  up  your  voice  and  prophesy,
and  it  shall  be  given  by  the  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost"  This  was  a
particular  point  in  the  revelation
that  seemed  to  me  too  great  for  me
ever  to  attain  to,  and  yet  therp  was
a  positive  command  that  I  should  do
it.  I  have  often  reflected  upon  this
revelatioB,  and  have  oftentimes  in-
quired in  my  heart — "Have  I  ful-
filled that  commandment  as  I  ought
to  have  done?  Have  I  sought  as
earnestly  as  I  ought  to  obtain  the
gift  of  prophecy,  so  as  to  fulfill  the
requirement  of  heaven  ?"  And  I
have  felt  sometimes  to  condemn
myself  because  of  my  slothful ness,
and  because  of  the  little  progress
that  I  have  made  in  relation  to  this
great,  heavenly,  and  divine  gift  I
certainly  have  had  no  inclination  to
prophesy  to  the  people  unless  it
should  be  given  to  me  by  the  inspi-
ration and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;
to  prophesy  out  of  my  own  heart  is
something  perfectly  disagreeable  to
my  feelings,  even  to  think  of,  and
hence  I  have  oftentimes,  in  my  pub-


n


REDEMPTION

lie  discourses,  avoided,  when  a  thing
would  come  before  my  mind  pretty
plain,  uttering  or  declaring  it  for
fear  that  I  might  get  something  out
before  the  people  in  relation  to  the
future  that  was  wrong.  But  still,
notwithstanding  all  this,  there  is  one
thing  that  I  have  endeavored  to  do,
and  tint  is.  to  inform  my  mind  as
far  as  I  could  by  reading  what  God
has  revealed  to  both  ancient  and
modern  Prophets,  in  relation  to  the
future,  and  if  I  have  not  had  many
important  prophecies  and  revelations
given  directly  to  myself,  I  certainly
have  derived  great  advantage  and
great  edification  from  reading  and
studying  that  which  God  has  re-
vealed to  others;  and  hence  most  of
my  prophesying  throughout  my  life,
so  far,  has  been  founded  upon  the
revelations  given  to  others.

We  are  told  that  Zion — this  peo-
ple, the  Latter-day  Saints,  are  called
Zion — shall  be  redeemed  and  restored
to  the  lands  of  their  inheritances,
and  in  consequence  of  this  promise
made  to  us  by  the  Lord,  many  of  us
have  felt  much  anxiety  to  know
when  the  Lord  would  fulfill  this
great  revelation,  and  some  perhaps
who  were  little  boys  and  girls  when
it  was  given,  and  now  grey  headed —
for  it  is  about  forty -two  years  since —
have  not  considered  or  reflected  much
about  what  God  has  promised  to  do
with,  or  what  blessings  he  has  pro-
raised  to  bestow  upon,  this  people.
In  their  family  prayers  they  have
heard  their  fathers  pray  to  the  Most
High  to  remember  Zion  and  to  re-
deem Zion,  and  to  restore  his  people
to  the  lands  of  their  inheritances,
and  perhaps  some  of  them  have  re-
flected upon  the  subject.  Some  may
have  thought  it  was  merely  a  form
of  prayer  which  their  fathers  had
learned,  without  any  expectation  of
anything  of  the  kind  taking  place,
and  they  have  felt  careless  about  it,


OF  ZION,  ETC*  .  2^1

i'  knowing  nothing  about  whether
Zion  was  ever  to  be  redeemed  or  not*
But  those  who  have  reflected  upon
the  subject,  and  who  have  made  it  a
matter  of  prayer  and  of  deep  study,
in  order  to  know  the  times  and  the
seasons,  and  the  mode  in  which  God
would  bring  to  pass  this  great  event,
have  been  full  of  hope,  expectation
and  desire,  and  their  constant  prayer
has  been,  before  the  family  altar  and
in  the  public  congregations,  that  the
redemption  of  Zion  might  be  brought
about  soon.

We  are  promised  that  after  much
tribulation  comes  the  blessing.  The
I  Lord  .says — "  I  the  Lord  have  de-
!  creed  a  certain  decree  that  my  people
shall  realize,  that  after  their  tribula-
tions they  shnll  be  redeemed,  and
restored  to  the  lands  of  their  inheri-
tances." Little  did  we  suppose  when
we  were  driven  out  from  Jackson
County,  the  place  where  God  has
promised  to  give  his  Saints  their
inheritances,  and  in  the  regions
round  about,  that  nearly  half  a
century  would  pass  o?er  our  heads
before  we  would  be  restored  back
again  to  that  land.  This  long  period
of  tribulation,  and  the  dispersion
from  our  homes  and  inheritances,
have  bren  the  cause  perhaps  of  a
groat  many  going  down  to  the  grave
without  having  the  opportunity  and
privilege  of  returning  to  participate
in  the  blessings  that  were  promised.
Now,  it  would  be  a  source  of  comfort
and  consolation  to  those  who  are
still  living,  to  whom  this  promise
was  made,  if  they  could  be  assured
in  their  own  minds  that  they  would
live  here  in  the  flesh  to  behold  that
day.  But  let  me  say  a  few  words  in
relation  to  this.  We  need  not  ex-
pect, from  what  God  has  revealed,
that  a  very  great  number  of  those
who  were  then  in  the  Church  and
who  were  driven,  will  have  the  pri-
vilege of  returning  to  that  land.  We


292


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


need  rot  expect  anything  of  the  kind.
"Why  not  ?  "  inquires  one.  Because
the  Lord  informs  us  that  but  a  few
of  those  who  were  then  driven  out
should  stand  to  receive  their  inheri-
tances. We  read  this,  or  indications
thereof,  in  several  revelations,  the
language  being  something 'like  this
— "You  shall  be  persecuted  from
synagogue  to  synagogue,  and  from
city  to  city,  and  but  few  shall  stand
to  receive  their  inheritances."  Now
if  a  great  portion  of  those  who  were
driven  out  should  live  and  they
should  he  restored  back  again,  they
might  afterwards  say — "This  does
not  seem  to  agree  with  the  revelation,
here  are  pretty  much  all  that  were
driven  out."  But  this  will  nut  be  the
ci^e.  When  you  come  to  count  up,
a  few  years  hence,  those  who  were
driven  forth  from  that  land,  you  will
find  that  there  will  be  very  few  m-
deed  ;  there  will,  however,  be  some
out  of  that  number,  but  > only  a  very
few.  There  will  be  some  that  will
live  to  behold  that  day,  and  will  re-
turn and  receive  their  inheritances,
they  and  their  children,  grandchil-
dren, and  great  grandchildren,  ac-
cording to  the  promise.

We  have  a  special  promise  in  re*
lation  to  that  land  given  to  us  as
Latter-day  Saints,  a  promise  which
I  believe  I  have  formerly  repeated
in  this  bouse.  It  was  first  given  on
the  2nd  day  of  January,  18^1,  at  a
general  conference  of  pretty  much
all  the  Saints  who  lived  in  the
State  of  New  York,  held  in  the
house  where  the  Church  was  first
organized.  The  revelation  was  given
in  their  presence,  written  by  a
scribe  as  the  sentences  fell  from
the  mouth  of  the  Prophet  Joseph.
Among  the  great  things  then  made
known  was  the  following — "  I  hold
forth  and  deign  to  give  to  you
greater  riches,  even  a  land  of  pro*
niise, a land upon which  there


shall  be  no  curse  when  the  Lord
shall  come  j  and  this  is  my  cove-
nant with  you,  that  I  will  give  it
unto  you  and  unto  your  children
after  you,  for  an  everlasting  inher-
itance ;  and  you  shall  possess  it  in
time  and  possess  it  again  in  eter-
nity, never  more  to  pass  away."  If
there  are  any  strangers  here  I  will
say,  for  their  information,  that  this
is  the  reason  why  we  call  that  land
a  land  of  promise.  And  though  we
have  been  deprived  of  it  now  for
upwards  of  forty  years,  some  of  us
hold  deeds  for  portions  of  it  which
we  purchased,  paying  our  moneys
to  the  United  States  officials,  who
sold  it  to  us  at  the  government
|  price,  but  we  were  not  permitted  to
live  upon  the  landa  thus  purchased.
You  may  think  this  rather  a  curious
thing  in  this  great  American  re-
public, one  of  the  most  liberal  gov-
ernments on  the  face  of  the  whule
earth  ;  but  if  it  is  a  strange  thing
it  is  known  as  the  truth  to  thou-
sands and  tens  of  thousands  that  we
were  dispossessed  of  our  inherit-
ances. The  land  is  still  there,  bat
it  is  occupied  by  those  who  do  not
own  it

Inquires  one  —  "  Why  were  you
driven  from  that  land  ? "  I  might
answer  you  by  repeating  the  words
of  our  enemies,  for  they  have  pub-
lished their  reasons  for  driving  us
from  our  homes.  One  reason  was
that  we  pretended  to  speak  in
tongues,  which  was  considered  a
mortal  offence  against  religionists.
This  was  one  accusation  that  they
brought  against  us,  as  you  will  find
in  their  published  declarations,  in
which  they  pledged  their  lives,  their
property  and  their  sacred  honor  to
dispossess  us  of  our  homes.

Another  accusation  was  that  we
professed  to  heal  the  sick.  What
a  terrible  crime  it  was  for  a  maja^to
lay  his  hands  on  sick  persons  and


REDEMPTION  OF  ZIOX,  ETC.


293


ask  the  Lord  to  heal  thera,  and  then
if  the  Lord  healed  the  sick  they
should  not  be  worthy  to  keep  their
land,  but  should  be  driven  from
their  homes  and  be  deprived  of  their
property !

Another  reason  was  that,  besides
believing  in  the  gifts  of  speaking  in
tongues  and  healing  the  sick,  we
assumed  to  foretell  future  events.
They  did  not  like  that  at  all  To
think  that  people  should  believe
in  that  part  of  the  Gospel  in  the
19th  century  was  too  much  for  our
enemies,  and  they  said — ct  We  can
not  have  such  people  in  our  midst,
to  corrupt  our  morals,  and  to  intro-
duce the  old-fashioned  religion  that
is  taught  io  the  New  Testament.
We  have  a  religion  that  does  away
all  these  things,  it  does  not  believe
in  the  order  of  things  that  the  New
Testament  sets  forth,  and  you  pre-
tend that  this  New  Testament  reli-
gion is  to  be  enjoyed  in  onr  day;  our
wives  and  children  must  not  be  cor-
rupted  by  it'*

These  wero  the  main  reasons  for
driving  us,  as  set  forth  in  their
published  programme.  I  did  not
know,  in  those  days,  that  it  was  a
crime  for  the  Latter-days  to  believe
in  this  part  of  the  New  Testament;
I  really  thought  that,  in  our  country,
the  Constitution  guaranteed  to  us
the  privilege  of  believing  the  whole
of  the  New  Testament  as  well  as  a
part ;  but  it  would  seem  to  be  other-
wise, for  forty  years  have  passed
away  and  we  are  still  disfranchised
so  far  as  our  property  is  concerned.
We  have  appealed  to  the  United
States  government  to  bestow  upon
us  our  rights  as  American  citizens.
Have  they  done  it  ?  Oh  no ;  they
have  referred  us,  however  to  those
persons  who  drove  us  out  of  the  State,
supposing  that  they  would  have  the
magnanimity  to  restore  to  us  our
rights* Who  ever  heard  of  mur-


derers, robbers  and  thieves  turning
round  and  restoring  that  to  their
victims  of  which  they  had  plundered
them  ?  I  scarcely  ever  heard  of
such  an  instance;  there  may  be
soints  few  instances  in  history,  but
they  are  very  rare,  in  which  a  person
will  repent  and  try  to  restore  four-
fold. The  United  States  Govern-
ment told  us  that  we* must  appeal
to  those  who  had  murdered,  robbed
aud  driven  us  from  our  homes,  for
the  redress  we  sought.  But  we
have  had  the  revelation  of  the  Lord
pretty  well  fulfilled — "You  shall  be
persecuted  from  city  to  city  and  from
synagogue  to  synagogue,  and  but  few
shall  stand  to  receive  their  inherit-
ances*"

We  were  driven  from  Jackson
County,  in  the  State  of  Missouri,
in  the  Fall  of  the  year  1833,  and
three  or  four  months  after  that  event
the  revelation  was  given  from  which
I  have  read  this  extract,  promising
that,  after  much  tribulation,  we  and
our  children  after  us  should  be
restored  to  the  lands  of  our  inherit-
ances.

Have  we  had  much  tribulation  ?
Yes,  Look  at  the  many  times  we
have  been  driven  since  that  revela-
tion was  given.  We  were  driven
oat  of  Clay  County,  then  out  of
Kirtland,  in  Geauga  County,  now
called  Lake  County,  Ohio;  and
after  that  we  were  driven  from
Caldwell  County,  from  Davies'
County,  Ray  County,  and  several
other  surrounding  counties  in  the
Btata  of  Missouri,  and  finally  ex-
pelled from  the  State,  leaving  a  great
many  thousand  acres  of  land  for
which  we  hold  the  deeds  to  the  pre-
sent day.  After  that  we  settled
in  the  State  of  Illinois,  in  Nauvoo.
We  were  there  but  a  few  years  when
the  Prophet,  his  brother  and  several
others  were  killed,  and  again  we
were  driven,  and  finally  there  was  a


294


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


treaty  made  with  this  people.  Now,
whoever  heard  of  one  part  of  the
United  States  making  treaties  with
another  part  of  the  United  States  ?
Or  who  ever  heard  of  the  people  in
one  part  of  the  country  making  a
treaty  with  the  people  in  another
part  ?  That  treaty  waa  in  words
like  this — "  You  must  leave  all  the
States  of  the  Union,  you  mast  not
stop  this  side  the  Rocky  Mountains,
you  must  go  beyond  the  Rocky
Mountains;  if  you  will  do  this  you
may  depart  in  peace,  but  we  will
take  your  houses  and  lands  and  oc-
cupy them  without  remuneration,  we
will  not  pay  you  for  them;  but  if
yon  can  get  away  without  selling
your  property  and  yon  will  agree  to
go  beyond  the  Rocky  Mountains  you
may  have  the  privilege  of  going,
otherwise  we  will  kill  you/'  1

What  were  the  crimes  of  which
we  were  accused  in  the  various
places  from  which  we  were  expel-
led ?  If  any  of  our  people  had  been
guilty  of  breaking  the  laws  it  was
in  the  power  of  our  enemies  to
bring  us  before  their  courts  of  jus-
tice, for  in  all  these  places  they
held  all  the  civil  offices  in  their  own
1  lands.  But  they  very  well  knew
that,  so  far  as  the  laws  of  the  coun-
try were  concerned,  tiu-y  v  uild  not
reach  this  people.  Why  ?  Because
we  were  not  guilty  of  the  trans-
gression of  any  of  their  laws.

When  we  were  driven  from  Nau-
voo  there  were  some  unable  to  leave
— pour,  feeble  and  sick;  Nauvoo
was  a  kind  of  a  sickly  place  and  a
great  m»ny  people  were  sick  there,  1
and  many  of  the  sick,  infirm  and  |
pour  had  to  be  left  behind,  being
unable  to  leave  with  the  main  body
of  the  Saints.  We  walked  over  the
Mississippi  river  on  the  ice  and
wandered  and  wallowed  about  in
the  Rnowd lifts  of  Iowa  with  our
teams  and  wagons,  but  these  poor  |


people  could  not  get  away  in  time,.
The  mob  were  very  anxious  to  come
in  possession  of  our  property,  and
hence  after  the  main  body  got  out
one  or  two  hundred  miles  from  Naa-
voo,  where  there  were  no  inhabit-
ants, cut  off  from  all  resource*,  and
unable  to  obtain  any  information
from  our  poor  brethren,  the  mob  was
so  anxious  to  get  the  property  of
which  they  had  forcibly  deprived
us,  that  they  attacked  the  city  with
cannon  and  musketry,  and  finally
drove  these  poor  people  out  and
compelled  them  to  cross  the  river,
where  a  great  many  of  them  per-
ished. Were  not  these  tribulations  ?
Yes,  and  they  were  all  foretold  years
before  they  came  to  pass.  u  After
much  tribulatipn  comes  the  blessing,
and  this  is  the  blessing  which  I,  the
Lord  God,  have  promised  unto  you,
that  after  your  tribulation  you  shall
be  redeemed  and  be  restored  again
to  the  lands  of  your  inheritance."

Since  our  arrival  in  these  moun-
tains we  have  had  a  hard  time
here.  We  have  had  a  land  such  as
no  other  people  would  ever  have
pretended  to  occupy.  It  was  once
considered  the  most  dreary,  deso-
late, barren  place  on  the  face  of  all
North  America,  a  land  where  it  was
supposed  l  hat  no  human  being
could  subsist,  or  in  which  if  he
undertook  to  subsist  by  the  labor
of  his  hands  by  cultivating  tha
earth,  he  would  perish.  But  by
hard  labor  and  perseverance  we
have  made  ourselves  comfortable
homes  in  what  was  formerly  a  de-
sert, and  the  Lord  has  been  very
favorable  to  us  and  really  has  blessed
us  far  beyond  anything  we  could
have  anticipated  when  coming  here,
and  he  has  caused  that  the  seasons
should  be  very  fruitful  as  a  gene-
ral thing;  and  this  land,  which
appeared  so  desolate,  barren,  parched
up  and  so  full  of  drouth,  has  be*


REDEMPTION  OF  ZIOX,  ETC.


2H


come  a  fruitful  land,  and  the  Lord
has fulfilled many and many  a
prophecy  recorded  in  Isaiah  and  the
Psalms of  David in relation  to
making  the  desert  blossom  as  the
rose  and  making  it  like  the  garden
of  the  Lord, It  is  thus  prophesied,
and  that  it  has  been  fulfilled  no
one  can  dispute, who  will  reflect
ai  d  realize  for  a  moment  what  the
Lord  has  done  since  we  came  here
to  this  land. When  the  pioneers
reached  here,  in  July,  18-47,  we  went
out  to  what  is  now  termed  Black
Rock,  over  beyond  the  first  point
of  the  western  mountains;  we  went
into  the  lake  to  bathe,  and  we  could
walk  up  to  that  rock,  the  water  be*
ing several feet below  the  dry
ground on which we walked  to
get  to  it. What  do  you  now  be-
hold ? Ten  feet  of  water  over  that
ground  on  which  we  walked.  The
Lake,  since  then,  has  been  continu-
ally rising,  until  ten  or  twelve  feet
of  water  have  been  added  to  it.  We
might  naturally  have  supposed  that
it  would  have  fallen  that  much  in-
stead of  rising. Why  ?  Because
the  waters,  which  before  then  had
been  continually  emptying  into  tin*
Lake were  withheld  from  it  and
used  to  irrigate  the  soil  and  evapo-
rated again  into  the  heavens.  This,
according to natural  appearances,
would have  a  tendency to  lower
the  streams;  but  with  all  the  use
of  the  waters  and  of  the  streams
for  the  irrigation  of  crops,  &c.,  there
has  been  a  continual  rise  in  the
Lake. We  read  numerous  prophe-
cies referring  to  the  last  days,  in
which  it  is  said  that  the  wilderness
should  be  like  the  Garden  of  Eden,
and  that  the  desert  should  be  made
to  blossom  as  the  rose,  that  it  should
blossom abundantly, and  rejoice
even with joy  and singing,  and
that they  should have  songs  of
melody,  thanksgiving  in  the  desert,


&c.  I  might  quote  you  numerous
chapters  in  Isaiah  and  in  the  Psalms
of  David,  relating  to  this  subject,
but  I  have  not  time,  I  want  to  pass
along  to  some  other  points*

Notwithstanding  all  these  favors
and  blessings  since  we  came  here,  we
have  had  to  wear  ourselves  out,  so
great  has  been  the  labor  we  have  had
to  perform. We  could  not  go  out
before  breakfast  and  cut  and  haul  a
a  load  of  wood,  as  we  could  in  Jack-
son County ;  we  could  not  go  out  and
get  in  one  day  three  or  four  loads
of  logs  and  poles  to  fence  our  farms
as  we  could  in  places  where  we  for-
merly resided. But  we  had  to  ex.
pend  an  immense  amount  of  labor,
and  a great deal of  capital  and
means  was  expended  in  working  roads
up  into  these  difficult  rugged  kan-
yons  in  order  to  get  timber  for  build-
ing and  fencing  purposes,  and  tor
fuel. Then  we  hud  to  atop  up  of
nights  to  take  the  little  amount  of
water  allotted  to  each  man  or  family,
for  it  was  necessarv  to  husband  it  as
economically  as  possible  in  order  to
bring  our  crops  to  maturity.  This
excessive  labor  has  worn  many  out,
and  sent  them  to  untimely  graves.
It  is  a  marvel  to  me  that  we  have
1  been  able  to  build  school  houses  and
educate  our  children  in  any  degree,
especially  when  considering  the  vast
labor  that  has  baen  required  of  them,
for  as  they  began  to  grow  up  and
ought  to  have  been  at  school,  they
i  have  had  to  be  in  the  mountains
herding  sheep,  or  at  work  irrigating;
the  soil;  and  under  all  these  mult i
plied  difficulties,  it  is  certainly  asto-
nishing  beyond  measure,  that  the
:  people  throughout  all  the  settlements
of  Utah  Territory  have  been  able  to
build  school  houses  and  to  educate
j  their  children,  but  the  feeling,  on  the
part  of  both  parents  and  children,
has  been  to  acquire  as  good  an  educa-
j  tion  us  possible  under  the  cireum-


29G  JOURNAL  OF

stances.  Would  any  other  people  |
have  accomplished  this  ?  No.  Had
any  other  people  come  to  this  desert
wild  and  undertaken  to  cultivate  the
soil  they  could  not  have  done  it,  they
would  have  broken  up ;  there  would
not  have  been  union  enough  among
any  class  of  people  on  the  face  uf  the
American  continent  to  accomplish
what  the  Latter-day  Saints  have  ac-
complished in  reclaiming  the  desert.
Others  would  have  fought  over  the
water  and  thousands  of  other  things,
where  this  people  have  been  pea  cable
and  quiet,  and  subject  to  good  order.

Having  now  brought  the  people
down  to  the  present  period,  and  hav-
ing seen  the  fulfillment  of  ancient
and  modern  prophecies,  literally  be-
fore our  eyes,  the  question  now  is,
What  prophecies  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  |
luture  relate  to  this  people  and  to  the
great  events  which  must  take  place
when  Zion  is  redeemed  ?  I  will  en-
deavor  to  point  out  some  things  that
must  take  place  before  Zion  is  re-
deemed, besides  the  tribulations
which  we  have  endured.  One  thing
which  I  will  name  is  contained  in  the
Book  of  Mormon,  in  the  teachings  of
Jesus.  It  is  a  matter  which  directly
concerns  the  Saints,  and  something
which  they  must  fulfill  and  accom-
plish before  the  redemption  of  Zion.
I  will  read  the  passage.  The  words
it  contains  are  the  words  or  our  Lord
and  Savior  after  he  had  risen  from
the  dead,  and  when  he  descended
from  heaven  upon  this  American
continent,  and  taught  the  Israelites
who  dwelt  on  this  land.  The  passage
I  refer  t  j  commences  with  the  second
paragraph  of  the  7  th  chap,  of  the  book
of  Nephi,  pages  iGi  and  465  of  the
Book  of  Mormon,  It  reads  as  follows  :

"And  now  it  came  to  pass  that
when  Jesus  had  spoken  these  words,
he  said  unto  those  twelve  whom  he
had  chosen,  ye  are  my  disciples;'1 —
this  did  not  mean  the  twelve  Apos-


DISCOURSES,

|  ties  chosen  at  Jerusalem,  but  the
twelve  chosen  by  our  Savior  on  this
American  land — "and  ye  are  a  light
unto  this  people,  who  are  a  remnant
of  the  house  of  Joseph.  And  be-
hold, this  is  the  laud  of  your  inheri-
tance; and  the  Father  hath  given  it
unto  you.  And  not  at  any  time  hath
the  Father  piven  me  commandment
that  I  should  tell  it  unto  your  breth-
ren of  Jerusalem;  neither  at  any
time  hath  the  Father  given  me  com-
mandment, that  I  should  tell  unto
them  concerning  the  other  tribes  of
the  house  ot  Israel,  whom  the  Father
hath  led  away  out  of  the  land.  This
much  did  the  Father  command  me,
that  I  should  tell  unto  them,  that
other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of
this  fold ;  them  also  I  most  bring,
and  they  shall  hear  my  voice;  and
there  shall  be  one  fold  and  one  shep-
herd. And  now  because  of  stiff-
necked  uess  and  unbelief,  they  under-
stood not  my  word  :  therefore  I  was
commanded  to  say  no  more  of  the
Father  concerning  this  thing  unto
them-  But,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,
that  the  Father  hath  commanded  me,
and  I  tell  it  unto  you,  that  ye  were
separated  from  among  them  because
of  their  iniquity;  therefore  it  is  be-
cause of  their  iniquity  that  they
knew  not  of  you.  And  verily,  I  say
unto  you  again,  that  the  other  tribes
hath  the  Father  separated  from  them;
and  it  is  because  of  their  iniquity,
that  they  know  not  of  them," — that
is  the  ten  tribes.  "And  verily,  I  say
unto  you,  that  ye  are  they  of  whom
I  said,  other  sheep  I  have  which  are
not  of  this  fold ;  them  also  I  must
bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice;
and  there  shall  be  one  fold,  and  one
shepherd*  And  they  understood  me
not,  for  they  suppbsed  it  had  been
the  Gentiles;  for  they  understood
not  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  con-
verted through  their  preaching;  and
they  understood  me  not  that  I  said


REDEMPTION

they  should  hear  my  voice;  and  they
understood  me  not  that  I  said  that  the
Gentiles  should  not  at  any  time  hear
my  voice;  that  I  should  not  manifest
myself  unto  them,  save  it  were  by
the  Holy  Ghost.  But  behold,  ye
have  both  heard  my  voice,  and  seen
me ;  and  ye  are  my  sheep,  and  ye  are
numbered  among  those  whom  the
Father  hath  given  me.

"And  verily,  verily,  I  Fay  unto
you,  that  I  have  other  sheep,  which
are  not  of  this  land ;  neither  of  the
land  of  Jerusalem ;  neither  in  any
parts  of  that  laud  round  about,
whither  I  have  been  to  minister.  For
they  of  whom  I  speak,  are  they  who
have  not  as  yet  heard  my  voice ;  nei-
ther have  I  at  ;  ny  time  manifested
myself  unto  them.  But  I  have
received  a  commandment  of  the
Father  that  I  shall  go  unto  them" —
these  other  sheep  he  is  now  speaking
of  were  the  ten  tribes  whom  he  vis-
ited after  he  had  visited  the  people
on  this  land — "and  that  they  shall
hear  my  voice,  and  shall  be  numbered
among  my  sheep,  that  there  may  be
one  fold,  and  one  shepherd ;  there-
fore I  go  to  shew  myself  unto  them.
And  I  command  you  that  ye  shall
write  these  sayings,  after  I  am  gone,
that  if  it  so  be  that  my  people  at
Jerusalem,  they  who  have  seen  me,
and  been  with  me  in  my  ministry,
do  not  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,
that  they  may  receive  a  knowledge
of  you  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  also
of  the  other  tribes  whom  they  know
notNof,  that  these  sayings  which  ye
shall  write,  shall  be  kept  and  shall
be  manifested  unto  the  Gentiles," —
that  is,  they  should  come  forth  in  the
latter  days,  manifested  unto  the
Gentiles  as 'it  has  been  to  this  great
nation — a  that  through  the  fulness
of  the  Gentiles,  the  remnant  of  their
seed  who  shall  be  scattered  forth
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  because
of  their  unbelief,  may  be  brought


OF  ZION,  ETC.  297

in,  or  may  be  brought  to  a  knowledge
of  me,  their  Redeemer.  And  then
will  I  gather  them  in  from  the  four  '
quarters  of  the  earth,  and  then  will
I  fulfill  the  covenant  which  the  Fa-
ther hath  made  unto  all  the  people
of  the  house  of  Israel.

"  And  blessed  are  the  Gentiles,
because  of  their  belief  in  me,  and
i  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  witnesses
unto  them  of  me  and  of  the  Father.
Behold,  because  of  their  belief  in
me,  saith  the  Father,  and  because  of
the  unbelief  of  you,  O  house  of  Israel,
in  the  latter  day  shall  the  truth  come
unto  the  Gentiles,  that  the  fulness  of
these  things  shall  be  made  known
unto  them.  But  wo,  saith  the  Father,
unto  the  unbelieving  of  the  Gentiles,
1  for  notwithstanding  they  have  come
forth  upon  the  face  of  this  laud,  and
have  scattered  my  people,  who  are  of
the  house  of  Israel ;  and  my  people
who  are  of  the  house  of  Israel  have
been  cast  out  from  among  them,  and
have  been  trodden  under  foot  by
them ;  and  because  of  the  mercies
of  the  Father  unto  the  Gentiles,  and
also  the  judgments  of  the  Father
upon  my  people,  who  arc  of  the  house
of  Israel,  verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
you,  that  after  all  this,  and  I  have
caused  my  people  who  are  of  the
house  of  Israel,  to  be  smitten  and  to
be  afflicted,  and  to  be  slain,  and  to  be
cast  out  from  among  them,  and  to
become  hated  by  them,  and  to  become
a  hiss  and  a  byword  among  them." —
Has  that  been  fulfilled  ?  Have  the
Indians  been  hated?  Have  they
been  cast  out  and  trodden  under  foot  ?
Have  they  been  despised  ?  The
people  who  are  acquainted  with  the
history  of  the  Indians  can  answer
this  question, — w  And  thus  com-
manded! the  Father  that  I  should
say  unto  you  at  that  day  when  the
Gentiles  shall  sin  against  my  Gospel"
— that  is  the  Gospel  contained  in  this
book  which  he  promised  to  bring


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


forth  unto  them — "  and  shrill  be
lifted  tip  in  the  pride  of  their  hearts
above  all  nations,  and  above  all  the
people  of  the  whole  earth  * — you  can
.judge  whether  this  is  true  or  not  so
fur  as  the  American  nation  is  con-
cerned— "and  shall  be  tilled  with  all
manner  of  lyings,  and  of  deceits,
and  of  mischiefs,  and  all  manner  of
hypocrisy,  and  m orders,  and  priest-
crafts, and  whoredoms,  and  secret
abominations;  ana  if  they  shall  do
nil  those  things,  and  shall  reject  the
fulness  of  my  Gospel,  behold  saith
the  Father,  I  will  bring  the  tulness
of  my  Gospel  from  among  them/*

Now  here  is  a  point  which  I  wish
to  speak  upon  and  explain  before  1
go  on  to  the  next  sentence,  which
has  h  bearing  upon  something  which
we  have  yet  got  to  do.  The  Lord
has  told  us  in  this  saying  that  if  the
Gentiles  should  not  believe  in  this
book — the  fulness  of  the  Gospel —
and  should  be  lifted  up  in  their  pride
above  all  nations,  and  be  filled  with
all  manner  of  lyings,  mischiefs,
whoredoms,  abominations  and  every
kind  of  evil,  that  he  would  bring  the
fulness  of  his  Gospel  from  among
them.  I  wish  to  state  that  when  I
read  this  in  1>3U  it  was  a  great  mys-
tery to  me.  Recollect  this  was  writ-
ten and  printed  before  there  was  any
Latter-day  Saint  Church  in  existence,
and  yet  here  was  a  prophecy  that  the
Lord  would  bring  the  fulness  of  his
Gospel  from  among  the  Gentiles  if
they  did  not  receive  it.  When  the
Lord  commanded  us  to  go  up  and
settle  in  Jackson  County  I  thought
to  myself — 11  Well,  if  we  build  up  a
great  city  here,  according  to  that
which  is  predicted  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  we  shall  be  right  in  the
midst  of  the  Gentiles,  and  how  will
it  be  possible  fur  that  prophecy  ever
to  be  fulfilled  It  was  a  mystery
to  me,  I  could  not  see  it.  I  knew  it
was  true,  for  God  had  given  me  a


witness  and  evidence  that  I  knew  as
well  as  I  know  that  I  lived  that  that
book  was  true;  but  yet  I  could  not
understand how the Lord  would
briii-  the  fulness  of  his  Gospel  from
among  the  Gentiles  if  we  were  going
to  l>e  permitted  to  build  np  a  city  in
Jackson  County,  Missouri,  and  stay
there. But  some seventeen  years
after  the  rise  of  this  Church  circum-
stances rolled  round  by  which  the
Lord  fulfilled  this  prophecy  in  taking
the  main  body  ot  the  people  from
among the  Gentiles* Not  volun-
tarily altogether,  for  we  did  not  all
feel  perfectly  willing  to  leave  our
houses. We  had  been  driven  four
times  before  from  lands  and  homes,
and  we  did  not  really  feel  willing  to
leave;  but  still,  rather  than  be  shot
down  and  mobbed,  as  many  ot  our
people had  been,  we  concluded  to
move  the  fifth  time,  and  we  did  so
because  we  were  obliged  to,  but  little
did  we  think  then  that  we  were  ful-
filling a  prophecy  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  such  a  thought  had  not
entered into  our  hearts. But  we
were  brought  out  west  here  to  these
mountains,  and  I  do  not  know  of
another  place  on  the  face  of  this  vast
continent  where  we  could  have  been
so  completely  isolated  from  the  Gen-
tiles, the  wicked  who  had  rejected
the  Gospel,  as  we  were  by  coming
out  en  masse  to  this  land, "  if  the
Gentiles  shall  sin  against  the  fulness
of  my  Gospel,  behold,  saith  the  Fa-
ther, I  will  firing  the  fulness  of  my
Gospel  from  among  them/' It  was
done,  the  prediction  was  fulfilled  to
the  very  letter. You  might  have
passed  through  the  land  there  for
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  miles,  from
city  to  city,  and  inquired  for  an  El-
der who  had  authority  to  baptize  for
the  remission  of  sins  and  to  build  up
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
and  the  answer  would  have  been —
I  "  There  is  no  such person  here,"


REDEMPTION  OF  ZION,  ETC.


"Where  are  they?"  "They  have
gone  away  beyond  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains/' more  than  a  thousand  miles
away  from  civilization  they  called
it.  When  we  got  here  and  again
searched  the  prophecies  we  found
that  the  Lord  had  been  fisgoodas  his
word,  and  had  literally  ful tilled  that
which  he  had  spoken  concerning  tak-
ing his  Gospel  from  the  midst  of
those  who  had  sinned  against  and
rejected  it*

There  is  one  thing  which  I  a  in  now
about  to  read  which  has  not  yet  been
fulfilled,  and  which  we  must  fulfill
before  Zion  is  redeemed.  I  will  read
it— "  Behold,  gaith  the  Father,  I  will
bring  the  fulness  of  my  Gospel  from
among  them,  and  then  [will  remem-
ber my  covenant  which  I  have  made
unto  my  people,  0  house  of  Israel,
and  I  will  bring  my  Gospel  unto
them."  Now  then,  we  are  here  in
this  land,  the  house  of  Israel  are
scattered  all  around  us,  some  in  the
great  basin,  some  in  Arizona,  some
in  Idaho,  some  in  Colorado,  some  in
Montana,  some  in  one  place,  some  in
another;  I  refer  to  the  American
Indians,  all  remnants  of  Joseph  and
belonging  to  the  house  of  Israel,
They  have  become  very  degraded  in
consequence  of  the  apostacy  and
wickedness  of  their  ancient  fathers.
This  people — the  Latter-day  Saints,
before  they  can  ever  return  to  build
np  the  waste  places  of  Zion  and
receive  their  inheritances  in  Jack-
eon  County,  Missouri,  have  got  to
exert  themselves  to  bring  the  rem-
nants of  Joseph  to  a  knowledge  of
the  truth.  We  have  not  made  any
very  great  exertions  in  this  direction
unto  the  present  time.  I  he  Lord
has  given  us  time  since  he  brought
the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  from  among
the  Gentiles  to  lay  a  foundation  so
that  we  could  commence  this  mis-
sionary work  in  behalf  of  and  among
the  remnants  of  Joseph. We  have


got  the  foundation  laid,  we  have
succeeded  in  building  many  cities,
towns,  villages,  Ac,  fc*  some  four
hundred  miles  north  and  south;  we
have  got  our  farms  fenced  and  our
water  ditches  dug,  and  we  have  begun
to  prosper  in  the  land,  so  that  now,
I  think,  is  the  time  for  us  to  wake
up  our  minds  in  relation  to  the  scat-
tered remnants  of  the  house  of  Israel/*
"Behold,  then  I  will  remember  ray
covenant  which  I  have  made  unto
my  people,  0  house  of  Israel,  and  I
will  bring  my  Gospel  unto  them,"

It  seems  that  the  Lord  is  workiug
among  that  people,  and  that  he  is
determined  this  prophecy  shall  be
fulfilled  whether  we  take  it  in  hand
not. What  do  my  rars  hear  ?


or


What  do  we  all  hear  ?  Messengers
are  visiting  these  wild  tribes  in  the
basin,  and  in  the  regions  round  about
hundreds  of  miles  apart.  These
messe tigers  come  to  tliem,  and  they
speak  in  their  own  language  in  great
plainness,  and  tell  them  what  to  do;
they  tell  them  to  repent  of  their  sins
and  to  be  baptized  for  the  remission
thereof ;  tell  them  also  to  cease
roaming  over  the  country  and  to  cul-
tivate the  land ;  tell  them  to  go
to  the  Elders  of  this  Church
and  receive  the  ordinances  under
their  hands.

Who  are  these  messengers  ?  Read
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  you  will
find  what  God  promised  to  do  for  the
remnants  of  Joseph  fourteen  hundred
years  ago,  about  the  time  that  most
of  them  were  becoming  wicked  and
corrupt.  The  L  >rd  said  when  their
record  should  come  forth  in  the  latter
days  that  he  would  send  his  messen-
gers to  them,  and  Among  these  mes-
sengers he  mentioned  three  persons
who  lived  some  eighteen  hundred
j ears  ago,  three  of  the  Twelve  who
were  chosen  on  this  land.  The  Lord
made  a  promise  to  these  three  that
they  should  administer,  as  holy  mes»


300  JOURNAL  OF

sengors  in  the  latter  days,  for  and  in
behalf  of  the  remnants  of  the  house
of  Israel,  which  should  fall  into  a  low
and  degraded  condition  in  conse-
quence of  the  great  wickedness  and
apostacy  of  their  ancient  fathers ;
that  they  should  be  instruments  in
his  hands  in  bringing  these  remnants
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  We
hear  that  these  messengers  haVe
come,  not  in  one  instance  alone,  but
in  many  instances.  Already  we  have
heard  of  some  fourteen  hundred
Indians,  and  I  do  not  know  but  more,
who  have  been  baptized*  Ask  them
why  they  have  come  so  many  hun-
dred miles  to  find  Elders  of  the
Church  and  they  will  reply — "  Such
a  person  came  to  us,  he  spoke  in  our
language,  instructed  us  and  told  us
what  to  do,  and  we  have  come  in
order  to  comply  with  his  require-
ments."

Perhaps  you  may  inquire — "  May
not  this  great  work,  the  redemption
of  these  Indian  tribes,  take  place
after  we  have  returned  to  our  inher-
itances ?"  No  doubt  but  what  there
will  be  a  great  work  transpire  among
the  Indians  after  we  do  return;  but
let  me  say  to  you  that  there  will  also
be  a  great  work  performed  among
them  before  we  return  to  receive  our
inheritances  and  before  the  redemp-
tion of  Ziou.  In  order  to  prove  this
I  will  read  what  Jesus  has  said  further
on  this  subject.  After  having  fore-
told a  great  many  things  that  should
transpire  in  the  latter  days  our  Lord
and  Savior  also  spoke  of  that  portion
of  the  Gentiles  which  would  repent
and  receive  this  book  called  the  Book
of  Mormon,  and  he  makes  the  fol-
lowing promise  unto  them  — "  If
they  will  repent  and  hearken  unto
my  words,  and  harden  not  their
hearts,  I  will  establish  my  Church
among  them."  This  the  Lord  has
done,  and  the  Church  now  numbers
over  a  hundred  thousand  right  here


DISCOURSES.

in  this  great  desert  "  I  will  esta-
blish my  Church  among  them,  and
they  shall  come  in  unto  the  covenant
and  be  n timbered  among  those  of  the
remnant  of  Jacob  unto  whom  I  have
given  this  land  for  their  inheritance."

A  great  many  have  desired  to
know  what  this  means.  Are  you
Mormons  going  to  be  numbered  with
them  and  wander  about  with  them  in
these  mountains  ?  Are  you  going
to  hunt  as  they  hunt,  and  lead  a  wild,
nomadic,  vagabond  life  as  they  do  ?
No*  What  is  the  meaning  of  it
then  ?  The  meaning  of  it  is  this —
the  Lord  God  made  a  promise  to  the
forefathers  of  the  Indians,  about  six
hundred  years  before  Christ,  that  all
this  continent  should  be  given  to
them  and  to  their  children  after  them
for  an  everlasting  inheritance;  and
he  made  a  promise  also  by  the  mouth
of  Nephi,  one  of  the  first  colonists
who  came  from  Jerusalem,  some
twenty- four  hundred  years  ago,  that,
when  the  Gentiles  in  the  latter  days
should  come  forth  upon  the  face  of
this  land  and  receive  the  records  of
the  descendants  of  those  ancient
colonists,  they  should  be  numbered
with  the  remnants  of  Jacob  in  the
inheritance  of  the  land.  Not  num-
bered with  them  to  come  down  to
their  foolish,  degraded,  wicked,  war-
like customs,  but  numbered  with  them
in  the  inheritance  of  the  land.

Another  thing  mentioned  in  pro-
phecy is  that  they,  "  the  Gentilai,
shall  assist  my  people,  the  house  of
Israel,  the  remnant  of  Jacob,  and
also  as  many  of  the  house  of  Israel
as  shall  come,  that  they  may  build  a
city,  which  shall  be  called  the  New
Jerusalem;  and  then  shall  they  assist
my  people,  who  are  scattered  upon
all  the  face  of  the  land,. that  may  be
gathered  in  unto  the  New  Jerusalem;
and  then  shall  the  power  of  heaven
come  down  and  be  in  the  midst  of
this  people,  and  I  also  will  be  in  their


REDEMPTION  OF  ZION,  ETC.


301


midst.  And  then  shall  the  work  of
the  Father  commence,  at  that  day,
even  when  this  Gospel  shall  be
preached  among  the  remnant  of  this
people.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  in
that  day  shall  the  work  of  the  Father
commence  among  all  the  dispersed
of  my  people."

What  I  wish  to  call  your  special
attention  to  now,  so  far  as  these  say-
ings are  concerned,  is  this — the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  in  these  mountains
never  can  have  the  privilege  of  going
back  to  Jackson  County  and  building
that  city  which  is  to  be  called  the
New  Jerusalem,  upon  the  spot  that
was  appointed  by  revelation  through
the  Prophet  Joseph,  until  quite  a
large  portion  of  the  remnants  of
Joseph  go  back  with  us.  Now  then,
here  is  a  work  for  us,  and  wa  have
no  need  to  pray  the  Father  to  return
us  to  Jackson  County  until  that  work
is  done.  We  can  pray  to  the  Father,
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  to  convert
these  Indian  tribes  around  us,  and
bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of  the
truth,  that  they  may  fulfill  the  things
contained  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.
And  then  when  we  do  return,  taking
them  with  us,  that  they  shall  be  in-
structed not  only  in  relation  to  their
fathers  and  the  Gospel  contained  in
the  record  of  their  fathers,  but  also
in  the  arts  and  sciences.  They  will
also  be  instructed  to  cultivate  the
earth,  to  build  buildings  as  we  do,
instructed  how  to  build  Temples  and
in  the  various  tranches  of  industry
practised  by  us ;  and  then,  after  hav-
ing received  this  information  and
instruction,  we  shall  have  the  privi-
lege of  helping  them  to  build  the
New  Jerusalem.  The  Lord  says, —
*'  They,"  the  Gentiles,  who  believe  in
ttie  Book  of  Mormon,  "shall  assist
my  people,  the  remnant  of  Jacob,
that  they  may  build  a  city,  which
shall  be  called  the  New  Jerusalem/'

Now,  a  great  many,  without  read-


inft  these  things,  have  flattered  them-
se  .ves  that  we  are  the  ones  who  are
going  to  do  all  this  work.  It  is  not
so;  we  have  got  to  be  helpers,  we
have  got  to  be  those  who  co-operate
with  the  remnants  of  Joseph  in  ac-
complishing this  great  work  ;  for  the
Lord  will  have  respect  unto  them,
because  they  are  of  the  blood  of
Israel,  and  the  promises  of  their  fa-
thers extend  to  them,  and  they  will
have  the  privilege  of  building  that
city,  according  to  the  pattern  that
the  Lord  shall  give.  Do  not  misun-
derstand me,  do  not  think  that  all
the  Lamanite  tribes  aro  going  to  be
converted  and  receive  this  great
degree  of  education  and  civilization
before  we  can  return  to  Jackson
County,  Do  not  think  this  fur  a
moment,'  it  will  only  be  a  remnant ;
for  when  we  have  laid  the  foundation
of  that  city  and  have  built  a  portion
o(  it,  and  have  built  a  Temple  therein,
there  is  another  work  which  we  have
got  to  do  in  connection  with  these
remnants  of  Jacob  whom  we  shall
assistinJ'Building  the  city.  What  is
it  ?  "We  have  got  to  be  sent  forth
as  missionaries  to  all  parts  of  this
American  continent.  Not  to  the
Gentiles,  for  their  times  will  be  ful-
filled ;  bat  we  must  go  to  all  those
tribes  that  roam  through  the  cold
regions  of  the  north — British  Amer-
ica, to  all  the  tribes  that  dwell  in  the
Territories  of  the  United  States,  also
to  all  those  who  are  scattered  through
Mexico,  and  Central  and  South
America,  and  the  object  of  our  going
will  be  to  declare  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  unto  them,  and  bting  them
to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  "Then
shall  they  assist  my  people  who  are
scattered  on  all  the  face  of  the  land,
that  they  may  be  gathered  in  to  the
New  Jerusalem,"

Will  not  this  be  a  great  work  ?  It
will  take  a  good  while  to  gather  all
these  tribes  of  South  America,  for


some  of  them  will  have  to  come  from
five  to  eight  thousand  miles  in  order
to  reach  the  New  Jerusalem.  This
will  be  quite  a  work,  and  yet  we
shall  have  to  perform  it  after  the  city
is  built.

What  then  ?  After  they  are  all
gathered,  "  then  shall  the  powers  of
heaven  come  down  and  be  in  th©
midst  of  this  people,  and  I  also  will
be  in  your  midst."  Now  I  do  not
say  that  this  will  be  a  period  after
his  second  corning  in  the  clouds  of
heaven,  but  I  believe  that  it  will  be  a
coming  prior  to  that  time,  when  he
conies  to  manifest  himself  to  all  the
nations  and  kindreds  of  the  earth.
It  will  be  a  fulfillment  of  that  saying
in  the  Psalms  of  David — "  Give  ear,
0  shepherd  of  Israel,  thon  that  lead-
esfc  Joseph  like  a  flock.  Stir  up  thy
strength  and  come  and  save  us,"  He
is  called,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  the
shepherd  of  Israel.  This  is  what  is
meant  also  in  the  blessing  of  Jacob
upon  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  or
mure  especially  upon  the  tribe  of
Joseph*  You  recollect  he  called  up
his  twelve  sons  to  bestow  upon  them
his  last  prophetic  blessing.  He  told
them  that  he  would  inform  them
what  should  take  place  in  the  latter-
days.  Joseph,  he  said,  is  a  fruitful
bough  by  a  well,  whose  branches  ran
over  the  wall.  As  much  as  to  say
that  the  descendants  of  Joseph  would
be  so  numerous  that  they  would  not
all  stay  on  the  old  homestead  near
Jerusalem,  but  some  of  them  would
ran  over  the  wall,  that  is,  go  to  some
other  place,  "The  archers  have
sorely  grieved  him,  they  have  shot
at  him  and  hated  him,  but  his  bow
abode  in  strength,  and  the  arms  of
his  hands  were  made  strong  by  the
hand  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob ;
from  thence  is  the  Shepherd,  the
Stone  of  Israel"

Now  who  can  explain  and  tell  us
what  this  means? Can  any  of  the


I  wise  commentators  of  the  day  ?  Can
any  of  those  who  have  studied  theo-
logy all  their  life-time,  tell  us  why  it
is  from  Joseph  that  the  Shepherd,
the  Stone  of  Israel  is  to  be  marie  mani-
fest ?  Says  one — "  It  cannot  have
reference  to  his  birth,  because  Jesus
descended  from  Judah,  instead  of
Joseph,  oat  of  the  loins  of  Judah,
through  the  lineage  of  David.  He
is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah."

!  Why  then  this  peculiar  saying  of  the
old  Prophet  Jacob,  about  the  tribe
of  Joseph,  that  from  thence  is  the
Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel,  if  he
was  not  born  of  Joseph,  and  did  not
descend  through  that  tribe  ?  This
is  a  very  curious  kind  of  a  saying.
But  he  will  be  made  manifest  in  the
character  of  a  shepherd,  and  that
shepherd  will  lead  Joseph  as  a  flock,
and  he  will  stir  up  his  strength  and
will  save  the  house  of  Joseph,  But
it  will  be  in  his  own  time  and  way.
First,  a  remnant  will  be  converted  ;
second,  Zion  will  be  redeemed,  and
all  among  the  Gentiles  who  believe
will  assist  this  remnant*  of  Jacob  in
building  the  New  Jerusalem;  third,
a  vast  number  of  missionaries  will  be
sent  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  this  great  continent,  to
gather  all  the  dispersed  of  his  people
in  unto  the  New  Jerusalem;  fourth,
the  power  of  heaven  will  be  made
manifest  in  the  midst  of  this  people,
and  the  Lord  also  will  be  in  their
midst,  in  the  character  of  a  shepherd,
and  he  will  lead  Joseph  as  a  Hock,
and  he  will  instruct  and  counsel  them
personally  as  he  did  their  ancient
fathers  in  the  days  of  their  righteous-
ness. •  7
This  is  what  we  must  look  for —
these  are  the  things  that  must  be
fulfilled,  and  for  which  we  must  seek
and  pray  in  an  understanding  man-
ner. Not  asking  God  to  redeem
Zion  before  he  has  redeemed  a  portion
of  the  remnants  of  Joseph ;  not  ask-


REDEMPTION

ing  God  to  establish  this  people  upon
their  inheritances  in  Jackson  County,
until  the  other  things  are  fulfilled  in
their  order,  and  in  their  times  and
seasons*

Perhaps  some  may  inquire — "  Have
you  any  idea,  brother  Pratt,  how  we
will  be  redeemed  when  we  have  ac-
complished this  work  yon  have
spoken  of?"  Not  much,  I  do  not
pretend  to  have  a  great  deal  of  un-
derstanding upon  the  subject ;  but
there  are  some  few  things  revealed,
some  of  which  I  read  to  you  at  the
commencement  of  my  remarks.
Speaking  of  the  redemption  of  this
people,  the  Lord  says — "  Behold  I
will  raise  up  a  man  like  unto  Moses."
This  did  not  mean  Joseph  Smith,  he
was  already  raised  up  and  was  among
ua.  He  was  the  one  who  received
that  revelation  ;  he  was  the  one  to  ho
brought  to  light  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  translated  it  by  the  inspi-
ration of  the  Holy  Ghost  But  the
Lord,  who  understands  the  end  from
the  beginning,  saw  that  when  his
work  was  completed,  he  would  be
taken  awav,  and  that  another  would
be  raised  up.  When  this  was  first
given  I  used  to  inquire,  in  my  own
mind,  whether  it  meant  Joseph,  and
I  got  it  into  ray  heart  that  Joseph,
perhaps,  would  lead  us  until  he  be-
came a  very  old  man  j  I  was  in  hopes
all  the  time  that  such  would  be  the
I.  like  many  others,  did  not
seem  to  understand  that  this  was  a
prediction  of  the  future.

When  Joseph  was  taken  away,
and  our  beloved  brother,  President
Young,  was  appointed  to  take  the
lead,  and  received  the  keys  and  the
power  of  the  holy  Priesthood  that
bad  been  conferred  upon  Joseph,  I
was  in  hopes  that  he  might  be  the
man,  and  I  still  have  a  lingering
hope  that  such  may  be  the  case.  But
he  is  now  becoming  aged,  and  how
long  the  Lord  will  bless  us  with  his


OF  ZION,  ETC.  303

presence  I  do  not  know,  but  this
much  I  do  know,  that  either  he  will
be  preserved,  or  that  some  other
personage  will  be  raised  to  fulfill
that  prophecy.  "  Behold  t  say  unto
you,  the  redemption  of  Zion  must
needs  come  by  power,  therefore  I
will  raise  up  unto  my  people  a  man
who  shall  lead  them  like  as  Moses
led  the  children  of  Israel,  for  ye  are
the  child rea  of  Israel,  and  of  the  seed

j  of  Abraham,  and  ye  must  needs  be
led  out  of  bondage  by  power,  with
an  outstretched  arm,  and  as  your
fathers  were  led  at  the  first,  even  so

|  shall  the  redemption  of  Zion  be."
It  seems  then  that  this  people,  at

:  some  future  time  in  their  sojourn
here  in  this  land,  may  possibly  be  in
bondage  greater  than  they  are  at  the
present  time.  I  try  to  hope  for  the
best,  and  to  think  that  the  bondage
we  are  in  and  have  been  in  for  years,
in  consequence  of  the  efforts  of  those
who  are  striving  to  take  away  our
rights  as  American  citizens,  and  to
trample  us  down  in  the  dust;  I  say
I  have  been  in  hopes  that  that  would
be  all  the  bondage  that  was  meant
here  in  this  prophecy,  but  I  do  not
know  but  what  there  may  be  a
greater  signification  to  these  words.
I  do  not  know  what  the  purposes  of
the  Lord  are  in  relation  to  this
particular  thing.  It  may  be  that  we
shall  have  our  rights  completely
taken  from  us;  it  may  be,  if  we  do
not  live  sufficiently  faithful  before
the  Lord,  that  he  will  yet  bring  us
into  still  greater  tribulation  than
that  which  we  have  hitherto  had.
It  may  be  that  we  shall  yet  be  in
bondage  like  the  Israelites  in  the
land  of  Egypt;  for  the  Lord  has  said
that,  when  this  man  should  be  raised
up,  he  would  redeem  his  people  by
power  out  of  bondage,  and  they
should  be  led  as  their  fathers  were
led  at  the  first.  Says  the  Lord —
"  I  say  not  unto  you  as  1  said  unto  your


sot


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


fathers — '  mine  angel  shall  go  before
you,  but  not  my  presence' — but  I  say
unto  you  that  mine  angels  shall  po
before  you,  and  also  my  presence."
It  wan,  in  ancient  days,  a  great
calamity  to  Israel,  when  the  Lord
sware  in  his  wrath  that  be  would  not
go  op  in  their  midst,  but  that  he
would  send  an  angel  l>efore  tliem,
"Why  did  the  Lord  do  this  ?  Because
of  the  wickedness  and  stiffbeckfcdnesa
of  that  people.  He  had  redeemed
them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt;-  and
they  would  not  hearken  to  the  words
of  Moses,  they  would  not  obey  the
voice  of  the  Lord,  but  they  stiffened
their  necks  and  hardened  (heir  hearts
against  the  counsels  that  they  re-
ceived, and  for  this  reason  the  Lord
was  under  the  necessity  of  leading
them  fur  forty  years  in  the  wilder-
ness, considering  them  unworthy  to
go  into  their  choice  and  promised
land,  and  he  sware  an  oath  that  all
of  that  company — hundreds  of  thou-
sands— who  had  come  out  of  the  land
of  Etjypf,  from  twenty  years  old  and
upward,  except  Joshua  and  Caleb,
should  not  enter  into  the  Land  of
Promise,  so  great  was  their  wicked-
ness ;  and  he  fulfilled  iiia  word.  So
provoked  was  he  on  one  occasion  at
their  rebellion,  that  he  threatened  to
consume  them  in  a  moment,  but
Moses  plead  with  the  Lord  to  spare
kis  people,  lest  the  people  around
about  should  say  that  the  Lord  could
not  bring  his  people  into  the  Pro*
bused  Land.  Moses  said« — "  Remem-
ber thy  covenant  which  thou  didst
make  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  our  fathers,  that  they  and
their  seed  should  have  this  land  for
an  everlasting  inheritance/  "  No,"
said  the  Lord,  "  I  can  raise  up  seed
unto  you  Moses,  that  you  may  go  in
and  possess  the  land."  H  No,"  said
Moses,  "  remember  that  ancient
covenant,  that  thy  people  may  not  be
deprived  of  their  inheritance;"  and


|  the  Lord  finally  concluded  to  hearken
to  the  voice  of  Moses,  and  to  let
them  go  into  the  land.  But  said  he —
'*  My  presence  shall  not  go  up  with
you,  lest  I  break  forth  upon  you  in
my  wrath,  and  you  bo  consumed  in  a
moment,  but  I  will  send  an  angel
with  yon."

In  these  last  days,  in  redeeming
his  people  from  bondage,  he  has  told
us  in  plain  words,  that  his  angel
should  go  before  us  and  also  his  pre*
sence  ;\  $nd  as,  in  the  deliverance  of
Israel  *in  ancient  times  the  waters
were  divided  and  plagues  sent  forth
upon  the  Egyptian  nation,  it  would
not  surprise  me  at  all  if  there  should
be  similar  power  manifested  in  the
redemption  of  Zion.  There  maybe
a  few  individuals  go  to  prepare  the
way,  to  purchase  a  little  more  laud
and  get  things  in  order;  but  when
that  is  accomplished,  this  people  as  a
body  will  return  to  that  land,  the
Lord  going  with  them,

In  ancient  times,  so  long  as  the
Lord  did  continue  with  Israel,  he
manifested  his  glory  over  their  camp
by  a  cloud  by  day  ;  and  whenever
the  cloud  arose  they  followed  it,
and  wherever  it  rested,  there  they
pitched  their  tents  and  remained  until
the  cloud  moved  again,  when  they
again  journeyed  on.  Now,  if  Zion
is  to  be  redeemed  after  the  'same
manner,  yon  need  not  be  surprised
if  the  Lord  God  should  let  his  glory,
in  the  form  of  a  cloud  by  day  and
the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night,
be  over  all  the  camp  of  Zion  .  This
is  what  I  look  for ;  perhaps  I  am  a
little  enthusiastic,  but  it  is  really
what  I  look  for  and  expect;  and
when  the  Lord  says  that  bis  presence
shall  go  with  us,  I  expect  he  will  be
in  the  midst  o-'  this  people  as  he  was
in  the  midst  of  ancient  Israel  until
they  rejected  him  from  their  midst

Did  he  converse  with  them  in  the
wilderness  before he left  them?


REDEMPTION

Yes,  lie  talked  with  them  out  of
a  burning  cloud  in  the  burning
mom  it,  he  spoke  in  their  ears  by
the  voice  of  a  tramp,  and  sounded
in  the  ears  of  all  the  house  of  Israel
the  ten  commandments,  and  they
all,  met),  women  ami  children,  heard
it,«  Do  I  look  for  similar  manifesta-
tions of  God's  power  and  presence
when  Zion  is  redeemed  ?  I  do.
He  nny  not  come  down  upon  any
mountains,  but  he  will  converse  with
this  people  as  audibly  to  men,  wo-
men and  children,  as  he  did  in  an-
cient times,  Zion  must  needs  be
redeemed  by  power,  with  an  ^out-
stretched arm,  *he  angel  of  the
Lord  going  before  the  camp  of  this
people,  and  they  will  return,  and  a
remnant  df  the  Laraanites  ^srith  them
to  build  up  the  city  of  Zion  in  Jack-
son County.

How  about  our  inheritance  when
we  get  back  there,  our  farms,  <fcc.  f
Vie  need  give  ourselves  no  uneasiness
a  bo- it  that,  there  will  be  no  specula-
tion, no  grabbing  in  those  days ;
no  one  to  say — "  I  am  going  to  take
up  all  the  land  round  about  so  that
I  can  speculate  with  it  in  selling  it
to  my  brethren/'  No  such  thing  as
♦  his,  not  a  solitary  soul  among  all
the  Latter-day  Saints  will  receive  an
inheritance  in  this  way.  Another
person  is  to  come  for  the  special
purpose  of  dividing  to  the  Saints
their  inheritances.  "Behold,"  saith
the  Lord  God,  "I  will  send  one
mighty  und  strong,  clothed  with  light
as  with  a  garment,  whose  bowels
shall  be  a  fountain  of  truth,  who
shall  utter  words,  eternal  words,
and  who  shall  divide  to  the  Saints
their  inheritances  by  lot."

Have  you  read  this  revelation  ?
It  was  published  in  the  fourteenth
volume  ot  the  "Millennial  Star,"
and  it  has  been  published  in  other
publications.  Says  one — "If  the
inheritances  of  the  Saints  are  to  be

No.  20,


OF  ZION,  ETC.  305

apportioned  by  lot,  a  good  man,  per-
haps, will  be  put  off  with  the  poorest
inheritance,  and  some  not  so  good
will  get  some  of  the  best,  it  is  all
haphazard."  Oh  no,  wo  find  that
lots  cast  by  divine  appointment  in
ancient  times  were  cast  upon  a  prin-
ciple which  designated  the  very
thing  which  the  Lord  desired.  How
was  it  on  a  certain  occasion  about
casting  lots  to  discover  the  trans-
gressor among  all  the  hosts  of  Israel  ?
A  certain  man  had  taken  a  gold
wedge,  and  the  people  had  been
forbidden  to  take  it.  No  one  knew
anything  about  iCbufc  the  transgres-
sor, and  he  hid  it  in  the  earth.  Lots
were  cast  and  the  lot  fell  upon  a
certain  iribe,  it  did  not  designate
the  man  at  first ;  they  cast  lots  again,
and  it  fell  upon  a  certain  portion  of
that  tribe  ;  they  cast  lots  again,  and
it  fell  on  a  certain  family,  and  finally
it  fell  on  a  certain  man  in  that  fam-
ily, and  being  called  up,  it  proved
that  lie  was  the  very  man  among1  all
the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Israel.
Now  here  was  a  casting  of  lots  by
divine  appointment,  and  the  Lord,
who  orders  all  these  things  well,
caused  the  very  thing  to  be  revealed
according  to  his  own  mind.  And
when  the  lots  are  cast  for  this  people
to  receive  their  inheritances,  the
Lord  will  so  order  it  that  every  man
will  be  rewarded  according  to  his
works,  and  that  too  by  lot,  however
great  the  miracle  may  be.

Now  I  have  told  you  about  all  I
know,  so  far  aa  it  ft  revealed,  con-
cerning the  redemption  of  Zion*
There  is  one  little  thing,  however,
that  I  wish  to  name — that  there
will  be  quite  a  company  of  us  be-
fore the  redemption  of  Zion.  Saith
the  Lord,  in  a  certain  revelation —
"  Let  mine  army  become  very  great,
and  let  it  become  sanctified  before
me,  that  they  may  he  as  fair  as  the
sun,  as  clear  as  the  moon,  that  their

Vol.  xvn.


banners  id  ay  be  terrible  unto  all  the
nations  of  the  earth."  We  learn
from  this  declaration  of  the  Lord,
that  before  Zion  is  redeemed  we  are
to  be  quite  a  numerons  people;  and
this  agrees  with  what  is  in  the  six-
tieth chapter  of  Isaiah — 14  A  little
one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and  a
amall  one  a  strong  nation,"  That
is  our  destiny.  However  much  our
enemies  may  howl,  whatever  may  be
our  future  tribulations,  the  Lord  Gud
has  decreed  that  Zion  shall  become  a
strong  nation,  that  the  armies  of  Israel
shall  beeome  very  great,  and  not
only  very  great,  but  they  will  be
sanctified  before  him,  and  there  will
be  such  a  power  made  manifest  in
Mjeir  midst,  that,  their  banners  will  be
terrible  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.
They  will  not  be  terrible  because  we
outnumber  the  nations,  but  this  terror
of  Zion  which  will  be  among  the
nations,  will  be  because  of  the  power
of  the  great  Jehovah  that  will  be
manifested  in  their  midst,  something
that  the  nations  will  discern  and  un-
derstand ;  ami  when  telegraphic  dis*
patches  are  sent  forth  to  the  most
distant  parts  of  the  earth,  it  will  be
said — "  Who  can  stand  before  the
armies  of  Zion  ?  Behold,  the  Lord
God  is  with  them  as  a  cloud  by  day,
and  as  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.'*
Fear  will  seize  upon  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  the  banners  of  Zion
will  be  terrible.

These  are  some  few  things  per-
taining to  the  redemption  of  Zion,
I  would  to  the  Lord  that  we  were
righteous  enough  to  know  a  few
more !  There  are  a  great  many
things  that  I  would  like  to  know
about  the  redemption  of  Zion  that  I
do  not  know,  and  I  presume  that  yon
aLso  would  like  to  know  them.  But
what  the  Lord  has  revealed  is  very
plain  when  connected  together;  and
whtn  wa  reflect  upon  it,  it  is  aston-


ishing to  us  to  think  that  in  our  day
the  Lord  has  decreed  to  perform  such
a  great  work  in  the  midst  of  the
I  earth.  It  will  be  astonishing  to  us
when  the  time  comes  for  the  Lord  to
gather  in,  from  every  part  of  this
great  continent,  these  poor,  miserable,
degraded  Lamanites,  that  his  servants
may  have  power  over  them  in  order
to  bring  them  to  civilization.  It
looks  impossible  to  us,  but  remember
that  that  is  the  day  of  the  Lord's
power,  and  that  then  will  be  fulfilled
the  saying  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  that  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  si  ml  I  be  shed  forth  upou  the
hearts  of  those  who  are  ordained  to
that  power*  that  every  man  among
these  remnants  of  Joseph  will  hear
the  Gospel  in  his  own  tongue,  by  the
|  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  shed  forth
upon  those  who  are  ordained  unto
thig  power.  There  is  such  a  saying
as  that  in  the  Rook  of  Covenants,
and  when  that  day  comes  the  Lord
God  will  work  mightily  by  signs,
wonders  and  miracles  in  various  ways
that  will  have  an  influence  over
these  remnants  of  Joseph  to  convert
them  and  bring  them  to  a  knowledge
of  the  truth,  that  the  prayers  of  their
ancient  fathers,  and  of  the  Prophets
and  Elders  who  once  dwelt  on  this
American  continent,  may  be  fulfilled
upon  their  heads.

I  do  not  know  that  I  have  done
justice  to  the  subject  of  the  redemp-
tion of  Zion;  if  I  have  cot  it  is
because  I  do  not  sufficiently  under-
stand it  I  do  not  know  that  I  know
anything  in  relation  to  the  matter
only  what  God  has  revealed.  I  have
had  no  vision,  no  revelation  in  rela-
tion to  that  particular  subject ;  yet  I
know,  from  what  has  been  revealed
to  me,  that  these  thinge  are  true,  and
that,  in  their  times  and  seasons,
every  jot  and  every  tittle  thereof  will
be  fulfilled.  Amen,


SECOND  CUMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.  *  307


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  February  28,  1875.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST — THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD— IMMEDIATE  REVE-
LATION— A  HIGHWAY  CAST  UP — GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL— ONE  UNI-
VERSAL GOVERNMENT  ON  EARTH.


I  will  read  a  passage  with  which
the  Latter-day  Saints,  especially,  are
familiar — "  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the
world  and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see
ye,  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on
the  mountains  ;  and  when  he  bloweth
a  trumpet  hear  ye."  This  is  the
third  verse  of  the  18th  chapter  of
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  |

All  people  who  have  any  confi-
dence in  the  OU  and  New  Testa-
ments, and  who  have  read  the  pages
of  the  Bible,  are  expecting  certain
great  and  important  events  to  tran-
spire upon  the  earth  ;  they  look  for
an  entire  change  to  come  over  the
nations,  and  also  for  a  universal
kingdom  to  be  established  on  the
earth  never  to  be  overthrown.  These
things  are  so  clearly  predicted  in  the  !
prophecies  of  the  holy  Prophets,  that
I  believe  all  who  profess  any  faith  in  j
the  Bible  are  looking  for  something
of  this  kind  to  take  place.  All  who  1
believe  in  the  New  Testament  believe
that  the  Son  of  God,  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ,  is  to  come,  not
as  he  did  formerly,  in  a  meek  and
lowly  manner,  born  in  a  manger,
hated,  derided,  buffeted  and  spit
upon,  and  finally  crucified  by  the
hands  of  wicked  men,  but  that  when
he  comes  again,  it  will  be  in  very


great  majesty  and  glory,  accompanied
by  all  the  armies  of  heaven  and  by
the  Saints  of  all  dispensations,  who
will  be  raised  from  the  dead  at  that
important  time,  and  who  will  be
caught  up  into  the  clouds  and  come
with  him.  All  people  who  believe
in  the  New  Testament  believe  that
such  an  event  as  this  has  got  to
transpire.  Those  who  believe  in  the
Old  Testament,  and  discard  the  New,
believe  that  there  has  to  be  a  great
change  come  over  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  and  over  the  whole  of  this
creation.  The  Old  Testament  speaks
of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  the  sun
will  be  darkened,  when  the  moon
and  the  stars  will  refuse  to  shine,
when  the  Lord  will  punish  the  wicked
for  their  wickedness,  when  sinners
will  be  swept  from  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  when  there  will  be  none
but  the  righteous  left.  It  is  believed
that  a  day  will  come,  when  the
wicked  among  the  inhabitants  of  this
globe  will  be  burned  as  stubble,  and
when  there  will  be  neither  root  nor
branch  left  of  the  proud  and  of  them
that  do  wickedly.  So  that  believers
in  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,
or  in  either  of  them,  are  expecting
that  auch  a  great  and  terrible  event
will  come. But  very  few,  however,


308  JOURNAL  OF

of  the  inhabitants  of  our  globe  have
taken  into  consideration  the  great
preparatory  work  for  this  grand
change ;  they  have  not  searched  the
Scriptures  in  regard  to  how  this
work  is  *o  be  accomplished,  and  who  1
the  persons  will  be  who  will  be  ready
and  prepared  to  abide  that  day  ;  how
that  great  change  will  come,  and
what  the  signs  of  it  will  be  they
know  not,  and  yet  the  'Bible  is  very
plain  and  full  in  relation  to  these

matters.  ,
The  words  of  our  text  communicate  .
to  us  the  knowledge  that  a  profit  ma*  |
tion  is  to  become  so  conspicuous- at
that  day,  that  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  world  and  dwellers  on  the  earth  ;
will  be  required  to  see:  and  udder-
stand,  when  the Lord  comnaenqes
this  work,  when  he  lifts  up  an  ensign
on  the  mountains, . I  suppose  that
a  great  many  have. been  looking- for  !
the  Lurd  to  do  something,  but  in
what  portion  of  our  globe  he  would
commence  his  work  tbey  did  not
know. There  are  some  fewt  who
have  searched  the  Bible  diligently,
who  have  been  looking  for  the  king-
dom of  God  to  be  set  up  on  the  earth
in  the  latter  times,  never  to  be  des-
troyed. Some  have  supposed  th;;t
the  kingdom  that  was  built  up  by
the  early  Christians,  some  eighteen
hundred  years  ago,  was  that  king-
dom predicted  by  the  Prophet  Daniel.
Others,  not  being  able  to  reconcile
the  ideas  communicated  by  Daniel
on  this  subject,  have  looked  forward
to a  day  when  there  should  be,
literally,  a  kingdom  established  on
this  eaith  by  the  power  of  God  in
fulfillment  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel.
Those  who  have  believed;  or  tried  to
believe,  that  the  ancient  Christians
constituted  that  kingdom,  have  been
at  a  loss  as  to  how  it  could  exist
broken  up  into  a  thousand  f  ragments,
a  thousand  different  classes  of  people
with  as  many  different  faiths  clashing


DISCOURSES.

one  with  another.  They  have  said
in  their  hearts^ — "  Is  this  the  kingdom
of  God,  where  there  is  no  union  ?"
!  Some  two  hundred  millions  of  the
human  family  professing  Christianity,
and  yet  contending  one  with  another
about  their  doctrines  and  principles,
one  believing  a  doctrine  and  another
condemning  that  doctrine  and  be-
lieving something  directly  different*
Another  discarding  both  these  doc-
trines and  believing  in  something
else,  and  so  on,  until  inextricable
confusion  is  the  result.  They  have
looked  upon  the  babel  thus  created
6s  something  so  different  from  the
nature  of  that  kingdom  predicted  by
the  fincient  Prophets,  that  they  have
been  unablo  to  reconcile  the  idea  in
their  own  mifeds  that  it  could  possibly
be  the  kingdom  of  God.

^  SupjjoSe  that  we  quote  the  passage
in  tlje  second  chapter  of  Daniel,  in
regard  to  the  setting  up  of  God's
kingdom.  It  is  there  said  that
Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,
had  a  dream,  which  portrayed  before
him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth
for  many  generations,  under  the
similitude  of  a  great  image,  whose
head  was  of  gold,  breast  and  arms  of
silver,  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,  legs
of  iron,  and  feet  part  of  iron  and  part
of  potter's  clay.  Besides  the  imago
he,  in  his  dream,  beheld  something
entirely  distinct  therefrom,  and  form-
ing no  part  nor  portion  of  it,  cut  out
of  the  mountains  without  hands.  It
I  was  called  a  stone  from  the  moun-
tains, uhich  smote  this  great  image,
representing  the  kingdoms  of  the
world,  upon  the  feet,  and  when  the
feet  were  smitten  all  the  other  king-
doms crumbled  to  pieces,  and  they
were  carried  away  before  the  force  of
this  little  stone  like  the  chaff  of  the
summer  threshing  floor,  and  no  place
could  be  found  for  them ;  but  the
stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


30J


great  mountain  and  filled  the  whole
earth, *  S

Now,  ancient  Christianity,  or,  in
other  words,  the  kingdom  which  God
set  up  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,
did  not  accomplish  the  prediction  or
fulfill  that  which  was  spoken  by
Daniel ;  neither  waa  that  kingdom
which  was  then  set  up  at  a  time
when  this  great  image  had  been  com-
pleted. No  feet  nor  toes  of  the  im-
age were  yet  formed  when  the  ancient
kingdom  of  God  was  set  up  on  the
earth.  It  is  true  that  Nebnchadnez-  a
zer,  and  the  Babylonish  kingjjpn^l
over  which  he  ruled,  represent iiijf  ]
the  head  of  gold,  had  existed.  The  j
Medes  and  Persians,  who  succeeded  I
him,  had  existed,  and  they  repre- <
Ben  ted  the  breast  and  arms  uf  silver;
the  Macedonians  or  Grecians  existed,
representing  the  third  kmgdotjt  that
boro  rule  over  all  the  eartjj  j^tbe
great  Roman  empire  had  begun  to  |
exist,  but  it  was  not  .Jit  divided  in
its  two  legs  of  iron  as  *it  was  several
centuries  after  Christ.  The  feat  and
toes  of  the  image  were  ijjpt  yet
formed,  but  it  will  be  noticed,  by  the
testimony  of  Daniel,  that  when  that
stone,  cut  out  of  the  mountain  with-
out hands),  that  is,  without  the  hand
of  human  wisdom;  when  that  should
be  cut  out  and  should  commence  its
rolling  forth  from  the  mountain,  the
very  first  attack  that  it  should  make
would  be  on  the  feet  and  toes  of  the
image.

The  ancient  kingdom  of  God  could
not  do  this,  for  the  reason  that  the '
feet  and  toes  on  the  two  legs  of  iron
were  not  yet  in  existence,  and  hence
that  kingdom  did  not  represent  the
one  that  Daniel  spoke  of,  though  the
kingdom  then  set  up  was  the  kingdom  j
of  God,  but  not  the  one  that  was  to
bear  rule  over  all  the  earth,  as  pre-
dicted,

Another  reason  why  that  kingdom
was  not  the  otw  spoken  ot  by  Daniel


is  this — the  kingdom  spoken  of  by
the  ancient  Prophet,  that  was  to  be
set  up  by  the  God  of  heaven,  was
never  to  be  destroyed,  but  it  should
break  in  pieces  all  other  kingdoms
and  should  stand  for  ever,  and  never
be  left  to  another  people.  Did  Hie
kingdom  commenced  by  Christ  and
his  Apostles  fulfill  these  predictions  ?
No.  Why  not  ?  Because  it  was
predicted  both  by  Daniel  and  by
John  the  Revelator  that  the  king-
dom which  was  to  be  built  up  in  the
tday*  of  Christ's  lirst  coming,  instead
of  prevailing  against  the  kingdoms  of
flie  world,  was  to  be  overcome.  It
Was  written  concerning  that  king-
dom- tbajk-war  should  be  made  upon
it  bv  the  powers  of  this  world,  and
that  they  should  prevail  and  over-
come it.-  Not  so  with  the  latter-day
kingdom — that  never  can  be  over-
come or  prevailed  againat,
'  Was  -the  prophecy  of  John  and
Daniel,  concerning  the  former  day
kingdom  being  overcome,  fulfilled?
Yes.  Certain  powers  arose  and
made  war  upon  that  kingdom/  and
spre^l  forth  their  doctrines  and
principles  until  all  nations  became
drunk  with  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of
the  fornication  of  that  great  ecclesi-
astical power.  Instead,  then,  of  the
kingdom  of  God  overcurning  the  na-
tions, it  was  overcome  and  banished
from  the  earth.

Perhaps,  some  may  inquire — "Do
you  believe,  then,  that  the  Christian
Church  has  been  so  overcome  that
it  has  not  existed  on  the  earth  ? "
That  is  what  we  believe,  that  is
one  of  the  principles  taught  by  this
people  during  the  last  forty -lour
years  of  the  existence  of  this  Chnrch.
Says  one — "  You  have  no  charity/*
Yes,  we  have  charity  just  as  far  as
the  Lord  God  permits  us  to  have
charity;  but  we  have  not  charity
sufficient  to  call  darkness  light,  nor
the  doctrines' and  creeds  of  men  the


310  JOURNAL  OF

doctrines  of  heaven.  We  have  not  II
charity  sufficient  to  say  that  that
which  is  organized  by  human  wisdom
is  of  God,  or  that  the  traditions
and  commandments  of  men  crni  he
substituted  for  those  of  God.  Char-
ity does  not  lead  us  to  make  these
assertions-  Perhaps  you  may  in-
quire— "  What  evidence  have  you
then,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  was
overcome,  besides  the  predictions
that  you  have  quoted  ?n  We  have
this  evidence — in  the  kingdom  of'
God  there  were  always  inspired  Apos-
tles. There  is  no  testimony  in  this
sacred  volume,  the.  New  Testament,
that  the  kingdom  of  God  ever  ex-
isted without  Apoatles  in  it.  Where
are  your  Apostles  inspired  of  God,
modern  Christendom  ?  Where  have  '
they  been  for  the  last  seventeen  cen-
turies of  the  Christian  era  ?  If  you  1
had  had  Apostles  during  that  time
they  would  have  continued  to  exer-  1
cise  the  functions  and  gifts  of  Apos-
ties :  they  would  have  received
revelation  from  heaven,  and  those
revelations  would  have  been  just  as
sacred  as  the  revelations  that  were
given  to  the  first  twelve  Apostles,
and  it  would  have  been  just  as  ne-
cessary to  have  them  compiled  in
the  sacred  canon  as  to  compile  the
revelations  of  those  who  lived  in
the  first  century  of  the  Christian
era.  This,  then,  is  a  testimony  and
a  very  important  one  too,  that  the
kingdom  that  was  set  up  anciently
did  not  continue,  but  was  overcome,
bo  much  so  that  Apostles  had  no
existence  on  the  earth,  and  they  have
not  had  for  many  long  centuries  of
darkness  that  are  passed  and  gone.  J
Recollect  now,  that  in  the  New
Testament  order  of  things,  given  for
the  organization  of  the  true  Christian
Church,  Paul  says — "  God  hath  set
in  the  Church  first,  Apostles,  secon-
darily Prophets,'*  &c.  Take  away,
then,  this  first  uilicer  of  the  Church,  1


DISCOURSES.

and  say  that  no  Apostles  are  needed
to  inquire  of  God  and  receive  reve-
lations, and  you  do  away  with  the
foremost  and  most  essential  member
in  the  kingdom  of  God  from  what
you  call  the  Christian  Church.
"  Secondarily  Prophets.**  Who  does
not  know  that  for  seventeen  centuries
past  the  Christian  world  so-called
has  not  believed  in  any  prophecy,
that  is  the  foretelling  of  future
events,  or  in  inspiration  from  heaven?
Who  does  not  know  that  all  new  re*
velation  has  been  discarded,  not  only
by  the  great  mother  Church,  called
the  Roman  Catholic,  but  by  the
Greek  Catholics,  and  also  by  all  her
descendants,  her  daughters,  the  vari-
ous Protestant  sects  ?  They  have
all  denounced  everything  in  the  shape
of  new  revelation.  But  the  kingdom
or  Church  of  God  never  did,  and  it
never  can,  exist  without  inspiration
and  new  revelation,  without  inspired
Apostles  and  Prophets ;  therefore
this,  besides  the  predictions  that  I
have  named,  proves  to  every  person
who  believes  in  the  sacred  test  that
the  kingdom  nf  God  has  not  been
upon  the  earth  for  a  long  period  of
time.

We  might  go  on  and  show  other
reasons  why  it  has  not  been  upon  the
earth.  In  order  for  the  kingdom  of
God  to  be  upon  the  earth  there  must
be  a  continuation  of  authority.  Says
one — "  Authority  for  what  ?"  Au-
thority to  administer  its  ordinances.
Where  that  authority  ceases  the  sa-
crament can  not  be  administered;
where  that  authority  ceases  no  person
can  administer  baptism,  or  the  laying
on  of  hands  for  the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  fact,  where
that  authority  ceases  all  the  ordi-
nances of  the  kingdom  of  God
cease.  Says  one — u  Have  they  not
had  the  Christian  ministry  among
the  Roman  Catholics,  among  the
Greek  Catholics,  and  among  all  the


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


311


Protestants  who  have  dissented  from
those  two  ancient  Churches  ?  "  Yes,
they  have  had  a  ministry, hut  lias


days  of  the  ancient  Apostles  down
to  this  time  been  called  by  Dame
to  the  ministry  ? If  so,  that  will


that  rainistty  had  divine  authority  ? alter  the  case. Bat  I  find  that  thia


That  is  the  great  question  to  be  de*
termined.  If  they  have  hnd  divine
authority,  then  the  kingdom  of  God
has  existed  on  the  earth  just  as  long
as  that  authority  has  existed;  if
they  have  not  had  divine  authority,
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth
ceased  when  that  authority  ceased*
How  are  we  to  determine  this  ?
Says  one — "  Determine  it  bv  the
standard,  the  holy  Scriptures."  In
appealing  to  them  we  find  that  Paul
says — "  No  man  taketh  this  honor
unto  himself,  save  he  be  called  of
God  as  was  Aaron/*  EvQty  persorv
who  has  read the Old  Testament

Scriptures,  knows  that  Aaron  ,  was,
called  bv  immediate  and  direct  reve-
1  at  ion  in  his  day.  He  was  not  called
by  revelation  that  was  giverj  several
hundred  yesrs  before  ho  was  horn,
to  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac  or
Jacob;  he  was  not  called  by  some
commission  that  was  given  in  former
generations,  but  by  direct  revelation
in  his  day.  Can  no  person,  then,
take  this  ministry  to  himself,  unless
ho  is  called  the  .same  as  Aaron  was
called  ?  So  says  Paul.  Have  any
of  these  ministers,  among  all  these
so-called  Christian  denominations,
been  called  by  new  revelations  ?  If
they  have  they  deny  their  own  words,
for  they  have  incorporated  in  their
disciplines,  creeds  and  articles  of
faith  that  the  sixty  sii  books  con-
tained in  the  Old  and  New  Testament
are  all  the  revelations  that  God  bus
ever  given  to  man.  Is  that  so  ?
Let  us  search  these  sixty-six  books
and  sec  if  any  man  that  lived  in  the
second  century  i\^the  Christian  era
is  mentioned  thcrtffn,  orilft  the  third
or  fourth,  or  in  any  succeeding  cen-
tury down  to  this  day.  Has  any
man  in  the  Christian  wafld  from  the


ancient  compilation  of  revelation*
does  not  mention  by  name  a  solitary
individual  who  has  dwelt  on  the
earth  for  the  last  seventeen  hundred
years,  hence  none  of  them  have  been
called  by  ancient  revelation ;  and,  in
order  to  be  called,  according  to  the
declaration  of  Paul,  as  Aaron  was,
they  must  be  called  by  new  re  vela*
tion.

Says  one — "Stop,  that  will  not  do,
the  very  moment  that  we  admit  new
revelation,  we  say  that  the  canon  of
Scripture  is  not  full,  and  that  vHH
le:id  us  right  in  oppsition  to  all  the
declarations  and  traditions  of  our
fathers,  therefore  we  will  not  tako
that  ground,  and  we  will  not  say  that,
iye.  have  been  called  by  new  revela-
tion as  Aaron  was,"  How  will  you
get  around  it,  then?  Says  one — "I
think  that  we  can  get  authority  from
this  good  old  book,  though  our  names
are  not  mentioned  therein  as  be  ins;
called  as  Aaron  was,  by  direct  revela-
tion*** Well,  let  us  examine.  What
authority  do  you  think  you  can  get
from  this  ancient  record?  .Says  on**
— 14  You  turn  to  the  last  chapter  of
Mark,  It  is  there  written  that  Jesus
said  unto  his  eleven  disciples,  after
he  rose  from  tbe  dead— *  Go  ye  into
all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature**"  Indeed!  D  ies
that  cull  you?  Did  it  call  Paul,
Timothy  or  Titus?  Did  ;t  call  any
other  person  that  lived  even  then,
except  the  eleven  to  whom  Jesus
spoke?  No,  it  did  not ;  every  qtber
person  who  received  any  call  had  to
receive  it  by  new  revelation.  Even
then,  in  that  age,  a  commission  givea
to  eleven  men  did  not  commission
the  twelfth.  A  cum  mission  gi  ven  to
tlu^e  el u veil  men  did  not  commission
any  Christian  minister  who  lived  m


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era.
Hence  we  find  in  the  13th  chapter  of
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  there
were  certain  prophets  in  the  Christian
church  at  Autioch — do  not  be  asto-
nished! professed  Christians,  that
there  were  prophets  in  the  Christian
church  at  Antioch — "And  the  Holy
Ghost  said  unto  the  to,'1  prepare  your-
selves for  hearing  a  new  revelation —
"separate  unto  ire  Barnabas  and
Saul  onto  the  work  of  the  ministry
to  which  I  have  called  them."  Here
th  en  was  a  new  revelation  for  Barna-
bas and  Saul  in  relation  to  their
ministry  and  calling.  But  could
they  under  tike  their  ministry  by
virtue  of  some  old  commission  given
prior  to  their  calling  ?  No*  Timothy,
who  lived  contemporary  with  the
aneieut  Apostles,  was  not  called  by
virtue  of  a  commission  given  to  the
eleven,  neither  was  he  culled  by  virtue
of  a  commission  given  to  Paul  and
Barnabas;  but  he  was  called  as  the
Apostle  Paul  has  declared  in  his
epistle  to  Timothy — H  Neglect  not
the  gift  which  is  in  time,  which  was
given  thee  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
and  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands."
What!  Did  Timothy  live  in  the  day
of  Prophets,  and  when  Prophets
could  find  out  in  relation  to  his  call-
ing-, and  lay  their  hands  upon  him
and  set  him  Hpart  to  the  work  of  the
ministry  unto  which  Gi>d  had  called
him  f  Yes,  and  so  with  all  the  rest,
and  no  man  can  take  this  honor  to
himself,  save  he  be  called  of  God  as
was  Aaron.

God  is  a  very  consistent  being ;  he
does  not  do  things  at  haphazard,  but
he  is  very  orderly  in  his  work,  and
everything  in  his  kingdom  is  con-
sistent and  according  to  law.  That
is  the  way  the  Lord  works.  He  is
far  more  consistent  than  the  political
governments  of  our  day;  and  even
they,  with  all  their  imperfections,
would  never  be  so  unwise  as  to  re-


ceive a  foreign  minister  simply  be-
cause some  other  foreign  minister
had  been  called. Supposing  that  a
man  from  Great  Britain  should  go
to  Washington,  and  should  declare
to  the  President  of  the  United  States,
and  to  the  various  authorities  of  the
government  there — UI  am  a  minister
plenipotentiary, I have  authority
from the British Government  to
transact  whatever  business  it  may
have  to  transact  with  the  Govern-
ment of  the  United  States  " "  Very
well,9*  say  the  President  and  those
associated  with  him  at  the  bead  of
the  Government,  "let  us  see  your
credential*." u  My credentials  !"
says  this  man. "  Bless  you,  I  have
not  any  new  commission. The  au-
thorities of  Great  Britain  have  not
said  anything  to  me  about  being  sent
to represent them in  the  United
States,  but  nevertheless  I  have  au-
thority to  act as their  minister.'*
"Well,"  what  is  the  nature  of  your
authority  ?  pray  tell  us" "  Why,"
says  he,  u  having  access  to  Rome  old
documents  I  found,  in  searching  them
over,  that  there  was  a  man  c  tiled
about  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago  to  act
in  this  nation  as  minister  plenipo-
,  tentiary  for  Gre.it  Britain/1 "  What
has  that  to  do  with  you  ?"  say  those
who  are  questioning  him. Says  he —
**I  did  not  suppose  that  I  needed
any  new  commission,  so  I  just  took
this  old  document  and  put  it  in  my
pocket,  I  thought  it  would  authori^
me  to  act  as  minister  because  one
that  is  dead  and  gone  acted  by  virtue
of  the  authority  it  conferred/1  What
do  you suppose  our  Government
would  think  of  such  a minister  ?
Don't  you  think  they  would  regard
him  as  a  little  insane,  or  beside  him-
self? They  certainly  would.  Do
you  suppose  that  God  has  less  wis-
dom than  our  general  Government?
Do  you  suppose  that  he  lets  tilings
run  at  random  ? Or  does  he  have  a


SECOND  COMING

system  to  his  kingdom  ?  If  oar
Government  would  not  receive  a
man  on  an  old  commission  given  to
a  person  dead  and  gone,  why  should
it  be  supposed  that  Hie  Lord  is  so
inconsistent  as  to  say  that  Tom,  Dick
and  Harry t  and  all  the  world,  or
part  of  it,  were  called  to  be  ministers
because  a  commission  was  given  to
eleven  men  some  eighteen  hundred
years  ago  ?  Why,  that  commission
did  not  authorize  any  but  those  to
whom  it  was  given  ;  ana  to  my  mind
it  looks  supremely  ridiculous  for  any
person  to  claim  that  he  is  com-
missioned to  preach  and  to  ad  mini-
ster  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,
because  eleven  men  received  autho-
rity to  do  so  eighteen  hundred  years

Says  one — ;t  You  are  very  unchari- 1
table."  Can't  help  it;  if  that  is
uncharitable,  I  will  confess  that  I
am  uncharitable,  and  I  cannot  help
it;  though  I  believe  that  true  charity
leads  us  to  believe  things  that  are
reasonable,  consistent,  and  in  accord-
ance with  the  word  of  God,  and  that ■
I  try  to  do.  However  numerous  my
own  imperfections  may  be,  it  is  my
real  desire,  and  has  been  from  my  ,
youth  to  the  present  time,  to  be  con*
sistent.  These  are  some  reasons,
among  a  multitude  that  might  be
named,  why  we,  as  Latter-day  Saints,
believe  that  the  kingdom  of  God
which  was  set  up  in  ancient  days  has
had  no  place  on  the  earth  for  some
seventeen  centuries  past,  so  far  as  the  |
eastern  continent  is  concerned.  The
kingdom  of  God  was  set  up  iu  ancient
America,  and  it  existed  until  between
three  and  four  centuries  after  Christ,
consequently  when  we  say  that  it
has  not  existed  upon  the  earth  for
upward**  of  seventeen  centuries  past,
we  have  reference  particularly  to  the
nations  of  the  east.  jj

Says  one— "That  is  an  awful  con-
dition for  our  earth  to  be  in  to  have


OF  CHRIST,  ETC.  313

no  Christian  Church  upon  it  for  so
long  a  period.  Can  not  help  it.  If
it  is  a  woeful  condition,  it  is  necessary
for  us  to  search  the  Script  urea  in
order  tint  we  may  learn  if  God  ever
intends  to  alter  this  order  of  things,
and  if  he  ever  intends  to  again  esta-
blish bis  kingdom  upon  the  earth.
Daniel,  in  his  prophecy,  has  informed
us  that  such  will  be  the  case.  He
saw  the  time  when  that  great  event
would  take  place.  He  saw  the  four
great  kingdoms  which  should  bear
rule  over  all  the  earth.  The  fourth
great  power  which  bore  rule  over  the
world  was  the  great  Human  Empire,
which  was  represented  by  the  two
legs  uf  the  great  image  which  he  saw.
And  as  the  world  grew  older  this
empire  was  divided,  and  the  various
kingdoms  which  sprang  therefrom
became  so  weakened  that  they  were
represented,  not  by  iron  a! together,
but  by  iron  mixed  with  miry  clay*
They  h;id  not  the  strength  of  former
kingdoms,  and  they  are  the  kingdoms
;  of  modern  Europe  and  the  Republic
of  America,  which  hag  been  built  up
by  people  who  have  come  over  to
the  American  continent,  and  have
established  one  of  the  wisest  and  best
governments  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  earth,  but  yet  not  established
altogether  after  the  order  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  j

All  these  modern  kingdoms  as  yon
now  behold  them,  the  Scandinavians,
for  instance,  in  the  north,  and  the
Germans,  Italians,  Swiss,  French,  the
Spaniards  and  Austrians,  and  all
other  kingdoms  representing  Christen-
dom, have  grown  out  of  the  great
Roman  Empire,  which  once  had
dominion  over  all  these  lands,  and
they  were  represented  by  the  feet  of
the  image  spoken  of  by  the  Prophet
Daniel.

It  is  comparatively  an  easy  task  to
locate  the  kingdoms  represented  by
the  various  portions  of  the  completed


image.  The  head  of  gold  we  may
place  away  in  Asia,  representing  the
Babylonish  Km  pi  re,  with  Nebuchad-
nezzar at  its  head.  Next  the  Medes
and  Persians,  represented  by  the
breast  and  arms  of  silver;  their  loca-
tion was  also  in  Asia,  running  partially
into  Europe.  Then  came  the  Mace-
don  i»ns  and  Greeks,  represented  by
the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass;  and
finally  the  Romans,  represented  by
the  legs  of  iron.  Thus  we  can  locate
the  great  image,  with  his  head  in
Asm,  his  feet  reaching  over  here  to
the  western  continent,  all  of  them
governments  of  human  institution
instead  of  having  been  organized  by
divine  authority  ;  they  have  all  been
organized  without  having  a  direct
"Thus  saith  the  Lord"  in  relation  to
the  matter.

By  and  by  the  time  came  when,  in
the  providence  of  God  it  became
necessary  to  set  up  his  kingdom  on
the  earth.  How  is  it  set  up  ?  Is  it
cut  out  of  the*  mountain  with  ha?;ds,
that  is,  with  human  wisdom  alone?
Oh  no,  the  Lord  spake;  the  Lord
sent  his  angel;  the  Lord  gave  com-
mandment from  the  heavens;  the
Lord  informed  his  servants  how  to
organize  his  kingdom;  the  Lord
fulfilled  that  which  he  spake  by  thu
month  of  the  ancient  Apostles;  the
Lord  sent  that  angel  which  he  pro-
mised that  he  would  send  in  the
14th  chapter  of  the  Revelations  of
St#  John.  What  did  he  send  that
angel  for  ?  To  restore  the  Gospel  of
the  kingdom.  t  «  Then  you  mean  to
say  that  the  kingdom  of  God  can  not
be  established  without  the  Gospel
being  sent,  do  you  ?"  Yes.  "  But,"
says  one,  "  have  we  not  got  the  Gos-
pel in  this  -0'>d  book  of  ours,  the
Bible?"  We  hive  a  history  of  it.
But  can  you  and  I  embrace  it  ?  No,
I  have  already  proved  that  we  could
not  be  baptized,  and  baptism  is  one
of  the  first  essential  ordinances  to


become  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of
God.  I  have  alsu  shown  that  we
can  not  leguily  partake  of  the  sacra-
ment, because  it  requires  a  divinely
authorized  person  to  administer  it.
We  can  not  have  hands  laid  upon  us
for  the  baptism  of  fire  and  the  Holy
Ghost,  because  that  requires  God's
ministers  to  administer  it,  and  the
Lord  would  not  pour  out  the  Holy
Ghost  through  an  unauthorized  mini-
ster. Hence  you  see,  however  much
we  might  read  the  history  of  the
Gospel  as  preached  in  ancient  times,
and  the  history  of  the  organization
of  the  ancient  church,  it  could  not  do
us  any  good  so  far  as  receiving  the
ordinances  is  concerned.  It  is  true
that  we  might  be  benefited  by  ob-
serving the  moral  principles  taught
therein,  and  being  moral,  virtuous,
upright  and  just  before  all  men  ;  but
to  become  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of
God  requires  divine  authority,  and
therefore  it  was  necessary  that  we
should  have  something  more  than  a
mere  history  of  the  Gospel,  and  that
something  was,  and  must  be,  autho-
rity sent  down  from  heaven.  This
is  what  John  predicted.  I  will  quote
the  passage  for  the  benefit  of  stran-
gers, for  our  people  are  familiar  with
it,  even  our  Sunday  school  children
understand  it.  The  passage  I  refer
to  is  contained  in  the  6th  verse  of
the  14th  chapter  of  Revelations.  It
reads  as  follows — u  And  I  saw  ano-
ther angel  fly  in  the  mid^t  «>f  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  nnto  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth,  and  to  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people."  Accompanying
this  message  of  the  everlasting  Gjs.
pel  brought  by  an  angel  were  these
remarkable  words — 44  Fear  God  and
give  glory  to  him;  for  the  hour  of
his  judgment  is  come."  That  is  th
eleventh  hour,  the  last  time  thnt  h
will  send  laborers  to  labor  in  hL
vineyard. When  tie  sends  these  last


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


315


laborers  to  prune  big  vineyard  for
the  last  time,  he  communicetes  the
message  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  by
an  angel  sent  from  heaven.  Not  for
one  people  or  one  nation  only,  but  to
be  preached  to  every  nation,  tongue
and  people  that  dwell  upon  the  earth.
This  alone,  if  I  had  not  brought
any  evidence  or  testimony  to  prove
that  the  kingdom  of  God  lias  been
done  away  from  the  earth,  this  alone
proves  it-  If  there  had  been  any
people  on  the  face  of  this  wide  world
of  ours,  who  had  the  Gospel,  it  would
have  been  unnecessary  to  send  an
angel  from  heaven  with  it.  If  there
had  been  in  any  part  of  the  earth  a
people  who  had  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, and  authority  to  administer  its
ordinances,  do  you  suppose  that  an
angel  would  have  been  sent  from
heaven  to  restore  that  Gospel  ?  Such
a  supposition  is  unreasonable.  All
wo  would  have  had  to  do,  would  have
been  to  find  them  and  to  have  them
to  administer  baptism,  the  laying  on
of  hands  and  the  other  ordinances
of  the  Gospel  tinto  us,  and  then  to
have  ordained  us  to  the  work  of  the
ministry.  But  no;  so  completely
had  tho  world  of  mankind  aposta-
tized that  no  authority  existed;  no
kingdom  or  Church  of  God,  no  voice
of  revelation,  no  Prophet  or  inspired
man  among  all  the  nations,  hence
God  sent  his  angel  in  our  day,  and
here  I  hold  m  my  hands  a  book  of
between  five  and  six  hundred  pages,
containing  the  everlasting  Gospel  as
it  was  taught  on  this  continent  by
the  risen  Savior  eighteen  hundred
years  ago,  Jesus,  after  he  had  finished
his  ministry  and  burst  the  tombs  at
Jerusalem,  came  to  this  western
hemisphere  of  ours,  and  chose  twelve
disciples  and  ordained  them  and  sent
them  forth  to  preach  the  Gospel
among  (ho  inhabitants  of  this  land.
Those  men  went  forth  and  organized
the  Church,  and  the  doctrines  and


Gospel  which  Jesns  administered  on
this  continent  were  recorded  in  this
book.  When  the  angel  came  from
heaven  he  brought  this  book  to  light.
He  did  not  reveal  it  to  the  great  and
learned  of  the  earth,  or  to  those  wh<*
were  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  but  he
found  a  farmer's  boy  between  four-
teen and  fifteen  years  of  age,  and
set  him  to  do  this  work,  and  it  has
come  forth,  and  the  Gospel  is  re-
vealed.

But  there  is  one  thing  I  wish  to
at  ate  now  very  pointedly,  that  though
this  angel  brought  forth  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  and  revealed  it  by  the
Urim  and  Thummim  to  Joseph
Smith,  the  unlearned  farmer's  boyf
yet  that  did  not  authorize  Joseph
Smith  to  baptize  you  or  me ;  it  did
not  authorize  him  to  lay  hands  upon
me  nor  you  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost;  it  did  not  authorize  him  to
administer  the  Lord's  supper;  it
merely  revealed  the  fulness  of  the
everlasting  Gospel  through  him  for
the  benefit  of  every  people,  nation,
kindred  and  tongue  of  our  globe,
"  Well,"  says  one,  11  if  he  could  not
baptize  you,  how  were  you  first  bap-
tized ?"  I  answer  that  the  Lord  was
consistent,  and  that  when  he  sent
this  everlasting  Gospel  by  his  angel,
he  i lid  not  forget,  when  the  work  was
translated  by  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim, to  again  send  an  angel  from
heaven  to  ordain  indh  iduals  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  to  administer
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and
to  call  them  as  Aaron  was  called,
by  new  revelation.  Angels  were
sent  down  from  heaven,  and  the
Apostleship  was  conferred,  that  same

authority  which  Peter,  James  and
John  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles
held  in  ancient  days  was  conferred,
and  many  others  were  called  and  the
Church  was  organized,  not  by  the
wisdom  of  man  and  by  Ins  cunning
and  craft,  but  everything,  even  to


the  very  month  and  day  on  which  it
should  be  organized  was  revealed  of
God  from  heaven,  and  no  person  was
called  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,
only  by  revelation.  The  Apostleship
was  conferred  by  revelation,  and  the
work  began  and  spread  forth,  and
the  people  began  to  believe  in  this
everlasting  Gospel,  and  the  Church
was  organized  again  with  inspired
Apostles  and  Prophets,  according  to
the  ancient  pattern.

It  may  be  said — "  This  is  a  very
high  pretension."  We  do  not  pre-
tend this  thing  of  ourselves;  all  the
glory  is  unto  God,  He  sent  the
Gospel,  he  restored  the  everlasting
Priesthood  and  Apostleship,  and  to
liira  be  all  the  glory*  He  bestowed
these  blessings;  we  received  them
and  we  feel  thankful  for  them.  And
in  connection  with  the  restoration  cf
the  Priesthood,  and  the  kingdom —
fur  God  calls  it  his  kingdom — in  the
midst  of  this  people,  though  they
may  be  hated,  persecuted,  driven
time  and  time  again,  and
driven  into  these  mountain
yet  the  kingdom  is  here,  it
overcome:  God's  kingdom  is  heie
and  it  will  endure  forever,  tor  that
is  the  prediction  of  Daniel.

Is  this  an  appropriate  place  for  the
kingdom,  away  up  in  this  mountain
region,  so  isolated  from  all  the  na-
tions ?  We  are  not  so  isolated  but
what  we  can  fulfill  the  prediction
given  in  ancient  times  through  John ;
not  so  isolated  but  what  this  Gospel,
uhich  was  sent  by  an  angel  from
heaven,  can  be  published  to  all  the
nations  of  the  earth-  Look  at  what
has  been  already  accomplished,  du-
ring the  short  period  of  its  existence.
Forty-five  years  have  not  rolled  over
our  heads  since  we  were  organized
with  only  six  members.  What  has
God  done  since  then  in  rolling  forth
his  work  ?  He  has  sent  missionaries
by  hundreds,  not  only  to  the  inhab-


finally
wilds,
is  not


itants  of  the  various  States  of  this
Union  and  to  those  of  British  Amer-
ica;  but  he  has  sent  them  by  hun-
dreds to  foreign  lauds.  They  have
lifted  up  their  voices  in  the  midst  of
the  British  nation,  among  the  Welsh,
the  Scotch,  the  Irish,  among  the
Scandinavians  of  the  north,  among
the  Germane,  among  the  French,  the
Swiss,  the  Italians,  among  the  Hin-
dostanese  and  the  inhabitants  of
South  Australia  and  New  Zealand,
and  various  islands  of  the  sea;  and
from  the  midst  of  these  various  peo-
pies  a  hundred  thousand  souls  have
been  gathered  to  these  mountains,
whence  the  kingdom  of  God — the
stone  cut  out  of  the  mountains— is
to  roll  forth,  until  it  fills  the  whole
earth.  We  did  not  come  here  with
the  idea  of  fulfilling  that  prophecy,
I  doubt  whether  there  was  scarcely
one  among  us,  when  we  were  driven
hero,  who  entertained  the  idea  that
this  was  the  appropriate  place  for
the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  true,  we
had  read  in  Daniel  that  the  stone
should  be  cut  out  of  the  mountain
\vithout  hands,  and  that  it  should
accomplish  the  great  work  that  God
had  decreed,  in  filling  the  whole
earth.  We  had  read  this,  but  did
we  realize  it  when  our  enemies  can-
nonaded os  from  oar  lands  and  homes
in  the  States  ?  While  living  there
we  were  driven  time  after  time,  and
finally  were  driven  to  these  moun-
tains; and  before  leaving,  our  em
mies  made  us  enter  into  an  agreement
that  we  would  not  stop  shore  of  the
Rocky  Mountains,  and  that  we  would
ho  even  beyond  the  summit  of  the
Rocky  Mountains.  Said  they-
"  You  must  do  this  or  we  will  kill
you.  We  have  killed  your  Prophet
and  some  of  your  best  men,  and  we
have  robbed  and  driven  you  four  or
five  times;  and  now,  this  time,  we
will  not  sulTtr  you  to  stop  within  our
borders,  you  must  go  beyond  the


SECOND  COMING

Rocky  Mountains."  We  started
because  we  were  obliged  to;  we  got
here  ;  and  now  we  are  becoming  quite
a  people.  But  what  wa^  the  object
of  our  enemias  in  driving  us  here,
into  what  was  termed  the  Great
American  desert  ?  Tbey  no  doubt
thought  that  if  we  once  got  here,  we
should  surely  perish,  for  they  sup-
posed that  no  human  being  could
ever  gain  a  livelihood  by  cultivating
the  earth  in  this  desert  The  only
inhabitants  it  then  contained  was  a
few  Indians,  who  lived  by  digging
roots,  and  catching  and  drying  crick-
ets, and  grasshoppers  and  rattle-
snakes, with  now  and  then  a  rabbit ;
and  these  Indians  would,  once  in  a
while,  be  able  to  partially  clothe
themselves  with  rabbit  skins.  Oar
enemies  thought — "  If  we  can  only  :
get  the  4  Mormons  *  into  that  desert,
that  will  be  the  end  of  *  Mormon-
ism.

We  are  here,  what  have  we  done,
with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  and
his  multiplied  kindness  and  mercies
upon  us  ?  We  have  found  that  God
has  blessed  the  land  and  blessed  the
exertions  of  his  people.  He  has
blessed  them  in  building  up  many
cities,  towns  and  villages,  for  some
four  hundred  miles  in  extent,  in  the
very  heart  of  these  great  interior
mountains  of  America.  He  has
blessed  us  in  erecting  several  hun-
dred sch  ool  houses ;  he  has  blessed  us
in  reclaiming  the  desert,  and  with
many  blessings  that  might  bo  named.
Ail  praise  be  to  him!  He  it  is  who
has  sent  rains  upon  this  burnt  and
parched- up  soil.  When  we  came
here,  Salt  Lake  was  twelve  feat  lower
than  it  is  now.  We  took  all  these
little  streams  and  turned  them  on  to
our  land,  and  according  to  all  natural
supposition,  the  waters  of  Salt  Lake
would  have  become  lower  and  lower.
Why  ?  Because  all  these  streams
were  cut  off  from  enterics:  it.  But


OF  CHRIST,  ETC.  31  7

instead  of  becoming  lower  and  lower,
we  tind  that,  after  taking  stream
after  stream,  and  rivulet  after  rivulet
to  irrigate  our  crops,  God  has  actually
sent  rains  from  the  heavens  in  such
abundance  that  Salt  Lake  is  now
about  twelve  feet  higher  than  when
the  pioneers  same  here  in  18  17.

Is  there  anything  said  about  this
desert  in  prophecy  ?  Yes.  You  cm
find  many  prophecies  in  Isaiah,
David's  psalms,  and  other  Prophets,
predicting  that,  about  or  near  the
time  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,
"the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place
shall  be  made  glad  for  them.1'  That
the  "desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom
as  the  rose  ;  it  shall  blossom  abund-
antly, and  rejoice  even  with  joy  and
singing/'  Isaiah  further  says  that
"  the  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion ;  he
shall  comfort  all  her  waste  placest
he  shall  make  her  wilderness  like
Eden,  and  her  desert  like  the  g  irden
of  the  Lord  ;  joy  and  gladness  shall
be  found  therein,  thanksgiving  and
the  voice  of  melody/'  Also  that  he
would  u  cause  springs  of  water  to
break  out  in  the  desert,  and  that  the
parched  ground  should  become  pools
of  living  water,"

How  is  it  brethren  ?  I  appeal  to
you  who  are  acquainted  and  were
here  in  18 ±7  ?  Many  of  you  know
that,  in  places  where  there  would
be  a  little  spring  then,  about  suffi-
cient to  water  half  an  acre,  now
there  is  water  enough  to  water  land
sufficient  to  sustain  several  hundred
families.  This  is  a  literal  fulfillment
of  the  prophecy  which  says  that
"  the  parched  ground  shall  become
pools  of  living  water/'*

Now  let  us  come  more  directly  to
the  words  of  our  text.  I  had  almost
forgotten  the  text.  "All  ye  inhabit-
ants of  the  world,  and  dwellers  on
the  earth,  see  ye,  when  he  liftcth  up
an  ensign  upon  the  mountains,  and
when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet  hear  ye/*


JOURNAL  lUSUuURSEtt


It  seems  then  that  God  is  going  to
lift  up  an  ensign  upon  the  mountains.  ,
What  do  you  mean  by  an  ensign  ?
According  to  the  definitions  given
by  our  lexicographers  an  ensign  is
a  kind  of  a  standard  to  which  people
rally  and  around  which  they  gather.
The  Lord  is  going  then,  to  lift  up  an
ei:sign  on  the  n;oun  tains,  and  it  is  to
be  so  wonderful  in  its  nature,  some-
thing of  so  much  importance  that
not  part  of  the  people  are  required
to  understand  it ;  but  in  the  language
of  Isaiah,  "all  ye  inhabitants  of  the
world/*  all  nations,  languages  and
kindreds  are  required  to  see,  when
the  Lord  lifts  up  an  ensign  on  the
mountains:  " When  he  bloweth  a
trumpet  hear  ye."  What  kind  of  a
trumpet  ?  The  trumpet  of  the
Gospel,  that  which  takes  the  Gospel
to  all  these  nations,  calling  upon
them  to  floe  oat  of  their  own  lands.
Gather  out  from  the  nations,  come
together  in  one,  go  up  into  the  moun-
tains where  the  kingdom  of  God  is  1
established  for  the  last  time.  What
for  ?  To  escape  the  judgments  and
tribulations  which  must  come  upon
the  nations  of  great  Babylon.

There  is  an  indication  in  prophecy
where  these  mountains,  in  which  this
ensign  is  to  be  raised,  are  located ;
the  Lord  has  not  left  us  in  the  dark
concerning  this  matter.  Let  us  read
the  first  verse  of  the  chapter  from
which  our  text  is  taken.  "Woe  to
the  land  shadowing  with  wings,
vhich  is  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethio-
pia. All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,
and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see  ye,
when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on  the
mountains;  and  when  he  bloweth  a
trumpet  hear  ye."  I  wll  also  read
the  fifth  and  sixth  verses — "  For
afore  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is
perfect,  and  the  sour  grape  is  ripen-
ing in  the  flower,  he  shall  both  cat
off  the  sprigs  with  pruning  hooks,
and  take  away  and  cut  down  the


branches.  They  shall  be  left  toge-
ther unto  the  fowls  of  the  mountains,
and  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth ;  and
the  fowls  shall  summer  upon  them,
and  all  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall
winter  upon  them."

It  seems,  then,  that  the  Prophet
saw  in  vision  a  land  that  seemed  to
represent  two  great  wings,  and  a
land,  too,  that  was  beyond  the  rivers
of  Ethiopia,  from  where  the  Prophet
delivered  this  prophecy.  Palestine,
the  land  where  Isaiah  dwelt  when
he  delivered  this  prophecy,  was
northeast  from  Ethiopia,  and  he
speaks  of  a  land  shadowing  with
wings  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia.
We  have  not  any  map  in  this  room,
or  we  might  point  out  how  the  two
divisions  of  the  continent  of  North
and  South  America  resemble  two
great  wings,  connected  together  at
the  Isthmus.  I  scarcely  ever  look
at  the  outlines  of  the  two  divisions
of  this  continent  as  depicted  on  a
map,  will j out  being  reminded  of  the
wings  of  a  bird ;  and  I  presume  that
when  Isaiah,  in  vision,  saw  this  west-
ern continent,  it  made  the  same  im-
pression upon  his  mind,  and,  as  be
did  not  know  what  name  would  be
given  to  the  continent  of  America,
he  had  no  better  way  to  give  expres-
sion to  his  ideas,  than  to  call  it  the
land  shadowing  with  wings,  iu  other
words,  having  the  appearance  of  huge
wings,  and  that  it  would  be  beyond
the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  from  where
he  dwelt.  If  you  trace  the  maps,
and  pass  through  the  land  of  Ethio-
pia, where  could  you  find  a  land  the
outlines  of  which  so  much  resemble
the  wings  of  a  bird,  as  the  land  of
America  ?  I  do  not  know  of  any.
And  it  seems  that  this  land  so  de-
scribed, had  a  woe  pronounced  upon
it  u  For  afore  the  harvest,  when
the  bui  is  perfect,  and  the  soar  grape
is  ripening  in  the  flower,  he  shall  cut
off  the  sprigs  with  pruning  hooks


SECOND  COMING


OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


319


and  take  away  and  cut  down  the
branches.  They  shall  be  left  together
unto  the  fowls  of  the  mountain,  and
to  the  beasts  of  the  earth:  and  the
fowls  shall  summer  upon  them,  and
all  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  win-
ter upon  them."  This  is  an  awful
judgment  to  come  u|>on  that  land
beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia.

But  first,  before  this  judgment  is
to  come  upon  the  wicked  of  that
land,  the  Prophet  speaks  of  a  message,
or  something  that  should  concern  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  world  and  the
dwellers  on  the  earth,  showing  that
the  people  will,  in  God's  mercy,  be
warned  before  these  awful  judgments
come;  showing,  also,  that  after  the
raising  of  the  ensign  on  the  moun-
tains, the  inhabitants  of  this  western
continent  will  be  among  the  first  to
experience  these  terrible  judgments.

The  harvest  is  paid  to  be  the  end
of  the  wicked  world;  and  if  it  is  so,
**  afore  the  harvest,"  thai  is,  before
the  final  end  conies  he  will  visit  the
inhabitants  of  the  land  shadowing
with  wings,  beyond  the  rivers  of
Ethiopia  with  judgments  that  are  ter-
ribly severe,  that  will  cause  them  to
lie  by  hundreds  and  thousands  unbe-
ried,  from  one  end  of  the  land  to  the
other,  to  be  meat  for  the  fowls  of  the
air  and  the  beasts  of  the  earth.
Why?  Because  the  judgments  will
be  swift,  giving  no  time  for  burial.

Inquires  one — "  Do  you  really  be-
lieve that  such  judgments  are  coming
upon  our  nation?"  I  do  not  merely
believe,  but  I  know  it,  just  as  well  as
I  knew,  twenty-eight  years  before  it
commenced,  that  there  would  be  war
between  the  North  and  the  South.
We  kjiew  that  by  a  revelation  which
God  gave  through  his  servant  Joseph
Smith,  twenty-eight  years  before  the
war  of  the  rebellion  commenced  j  nnd
it  was  published  in  the  languages  of
various  nations  years  and  years  before
the  war  was  inaugurated,  and  it  took


place  precisely  according  to  the  words
of  the  Prophet,  and  it  began  in  the
very  locality  specified  in  the  revela-
tion, namely,  South  Carolina.  We
know  that  these  judgments  are  com-
ing with  the  same  certainty  that  wo
knew  concerning  the  war  of  the  re-
bellion.

But  there  will  be  a  chance  to  escape
from  these  judgments  for  all  who  are
willing  to  gather  to  the  place  of  re-
fuge which  God  has  appointed  in  the
mountains;  all  people  can  rally  and
gather  to  that  place  if  they  wish  to
do  so.  This  is  spoken  of  in  many
places.  Let  us  turn  to  the  fifth
chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  see  what  is
said  there,  concerning  the  ensign.
In  the  26th  verse  we  read — "And  he
will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations
from  afar,  and  will  hiss  unto  them
from  the  ends  of  the  earth;  and  be-
hold they  shall  come  with  speed
swiftly/1  An  ensign  for  the  nations
lifted  up  from  afar!  Isaiah,  where
were  you,  when  you  delivered  that
prophecy?  In  Palestine.  What
land  would  be  far  off  from  Palestine,
where  you  rLsicled?  I  think  this
American  continent  would  be  about
as  far  o2  as  almost  any  portion  of
the  globe.

When  the  Lord  commences  this
message  it  will  be  sent  from  the  na-
tion "afar  off"  to  the  ends  of  the
earth  ;  and  there  will  be  a  gathering
connected  with  it,  of  that  people  who
shall  pome  with  speed  swiftly.  The
Prophet  probably  did  not  know  the
nature  and  power  of  steam  in  the
days  to  which  he  referred,  and  that
the  gathering  would  be  effected  by
means  of  steamboats  and  railroads;
but  he  did  understand  that  there
would  be  some  very  swift  method  of
conveyance.  He  did  not  understand
the  meaning  of  railroads,  and  many
things  connected  with  them,  for  they
arc  a  modern  invention,  and  the
terms  used  in  designating  them  are


laid

(la  VS.


also  of  modem  origin.  But  lie  saw
in  vision  that  people  should  came
with  speed  swiftly  from,  the  ends  of
the  t  arth,  when  the  Lord  should  hiss
unto  them.  He,  of  course,  described
the  events  be  saw  in  the  best  lan-
guage at  his  command.  In  his  sixty-
second  chapter,  Isaiah  says — "Go
through,  go  through  the  gate^;  pre-
pare the  way  of  the  people;  cast  up,
east  up  the  highway  ;  gather  out  the
stones;  lift  np  a  standard  for  the  peo-
ple. Behold,  the  Lord  hath  pro-
claimed unto  the  end  of  the  world.
Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  Be-
hold, thy  salvation  Cometh;  behold,
hi*  re  war*  1  is  with  hirn,  and  his  work
before  him/1  It  seems  then  that  he
did  describe  somet hi og about  making  ]
thi  e  i a: I n >ad?-  4*  Bu t/*  inquires  one,
did  he  mean  by  saying  *go
tough  the  gates?'"  I
''Probably  he  did  not
what  a  tunnel  was  in
but  when  he  saw  in
>n  a  lung  train  of  cars,  without
any  animal  power  to  draw  them,  dart
into  the  mountain,  and  emerge  on  the
isite  side  of  the  mountain,  I  do
know  that  he  could  describe  it  in
better  language  than  by  saying
—  uGo  through,  go  through  the
gates;'1  and  then,  when  he  wanted
to  represent  the  smoothness  of  the  !
railroads,  I  do  not  know  that  he
coul^  do  it  any  better  than  by  saying
— 44  Oast  up  a  highway,  gather  out
the  stones/-  etc* KV  ;  y *  ^

With  the  casting  up  of  this  high-
way a  proclamation  was  to  be  made,
How  extensive  ?  In  one  region  of
cfiuntry  ?  Oh,  no*  "  Behold,  the
Lor  I  has  proclaimed  unto  the  ends  of
the  world,  behold  thy  salvation  com-
etii,  his  reward  is  with  him,  and  his
wotk  before  him,"  What  else?
"They  shall  call  them  the  holy  peo-
ple/* What  people?  Why,  the
people  that  should  lift  up  the  stand-
ard spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verse.


Lift  up  a  standard  for  the  people,
prepare  the  way  for  the  people;  be-
hold they  shall  call  thee  the  redeemed
of  the  Lord;  thou  shalt  be  called,
songht  out.  a  eitv  not  forsaken.  Je-
rnsalem  was  not  sought  out,  neither
has  it  been  a  city  not  forsaken.
Every  one  knows  that  Jerusalem  was
in  existence  before  Joshua  led  the
people  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  it  was
an  ancient  city  among  the  heathen,
before  it  was  conquered  and  taken
possession  of  by  the  house  of  Israel.
And  every  one  knows  that  Jerusalem
Was  to  be  forsaken  for  a  good  many
centuries  before  the  generation
should  come  that  this  proclamation-'


tlnough,  go  t
do  not  know,
under
those
vie


should  be  made,  or  tl
should  be  east  up,  or
should  be*
when  the
holy  pe<


is  highway
the  ensign
ised  upon  the  mountains,
►edple  should  be  called  a
.  the  redeemed of  the


Lord,  culle !,  sought  out,  a  city  not
forsaken,  etc.*  _,;  : :  ■ '  l  *

1  can  bear  testimony,  so  can  a  great


t  w


we  came


opp

not
any


here  in  the  summer  of  Is 47,  and
sought  out  this  city,  the  headquar-
ters of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter-day  Suinta,  we  sought  it
out  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  the


Spirit  of  re


n which  rested


upon  us,  and  we  were  guided  by  that
Spirit.  We  did  not  lay  out  a  little
narrow  tract  of  land,  half  a  mile
square,  but  understanding  the  purpo-
ses of  God  in  some  measure,  we  laid
out  this  city  with  broad  streets,  and
extended  it  over  an  area  of  several
square  miles;  aod  as  you  see  it  at  the
present  time.  Why  did  we  take  this
course?  Because  we  knew  by  the
Spirit  of  God  that  lested  upon  ns,
the  great  work  that  the  Lord  onr*
Godintended  to  accomplish  here  in  the
midst  of  the  desert.  We  knew  that
he  would  gather  his  people  from  the
various  nations  ami  establish  them
here  in  Zion,  as  a  standard  or  ensign
to  the  nations,  that  as  many  as  would


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


321


might  gather  here  before  the  judg-
ments should  come*  Read  the  i  It b
chapter  of  Isaiah  about  this  same
ensign.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that
day  that  the  Lord  shall  set  his  hand
again  the  second  time  to  recover  the
remnants  of  his  people,  which  shall
be  left,  from  Assyria,  and  from
Egypt,  and  from  Pathros,  and  from
Cush,  and  from  Elam,  and  from
Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from
the  islands  of  the  sea.  And  he  shall
set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations,  and
shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,
and  gather  together  the  dispersed  of
Judah  from  the  four  comers  of  the
earth."

Before  Judah  and  the  ten  tribes  of
Israel  could  ever  be  gathered  an
ensign  has  to  be  lifted  up  for  the
nations.  Not  for  Judah  and  Israel
alone,  but  for  the  nations  afar  off,  for
the  Gospel  has  been  restored  for  the
benefit  of  the  Gentiles — every  na-
tion, kindred,  tongue  and  people —
as  well  as  for  the  benefit  of  the  dis-
persed tribes  of  Israel*

Ho  far  the  work  has  progressed,  so
far  the  Lord  our  God  has  stretched
forth  his  hand  to  establish  his  king-
dom upon  the  earth.  But  what  is
the  destiny  of  this  kingdom  ?  Read
the  Prophets ;  hear  what  Daniel  says.
He  saw  the  kingdom  of  the  latter
days,  which,  in  its  commencement,
was  like  a  stone  cut  out  of  the  moon-
tains  without  hands,  become  a  great
mountain  and  fill  not  only  the  Ame-
rican continent,  but  the  whole  earth.
What  else  does  Daniel  say  ?  "  And
the  kingdom,  and  the  dominion  and
the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under
the  whole  heavens  shall  be  given  into
the  hands  of  the  Saints  of  the  .Most
High,  for  his


kingdom


is  an  ever-


lasting kingdom,  and  it  shall  stand
forever/*

It  seems  then  that  this  is  the  des-
tiny of  this  king  torn.  If  you  want
to  know  the  destiny  of  the  nations  of
our  globe,  it  is  this — one  govern-
ment, one  kingdom,  not  half  a  dozen
empires,  republics,  and  this,  that  and
the  other  governments,  but  one  king-
dom, everlasting  ill  its  nature,  will
have  dominion  over  the  whole  of  our
globe.  But  are  you  not  committing
treason  to  preach  in  this  way  ?  If
such  predictions  mean  treason,  per-
haps it  would  be  well  enough  for
some  of  our  good  judges  to  get  out
an  indictment  against  the  Prophet
Daniel  and  other  ancient  Prophets,
and  bring  them  up  and  try  them,
and  see  if  they  are  treasonable  char-
acters  or  not.  We  are  preaching
their  words  ;  and  if  it  is  treason  to
pleach  the  Bible,  would  it  not  be  a
^god  plan  to  burn  it  up,  and  not  have
rdtich  things  for  the  people  to  read
and  preach  about  ?  But  if  we  have
the  liberty  in  this  glorious  land  of
ours,  to  believe  the  Bible  and  the
prophecies  it  contains,  have  we  not
nlso  the  liberty  to  tell  them  from
that  good  Book  what  is  going  to
take  place  on  the  face  of  the  earth  ?
I  think  so.  And  I  have,  this  after-
noun,  as  simply  as  I  know  how,  iu
the  simplest  language  I  have  at  my
command,  endeavored  to  convey  to
your  judgments  and  understanding*
that  which  God  has  spoken  by  the
mouths  of  his  ancient  Prophets,  that
you  may  know  what  he  is  now  doing,
and  what  he  intends  to  do  until  the-
consummation  determined  upon  is
performed  upon  all  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  the  elect  gathered  out
from  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Amen..


No.  21.


Vol  XVI I.


322


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Sixteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  March  14,  1875.

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

MAN  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD — TRUTH  IS ETERNAL — THE  DOCTRINES
OF  CHRIST — THE  LAW  OF  GRAVITATION — FREE  AGENCY.


I  will  read  a  few  paragraphs  which
jou  will  find  recorded  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  com-
mencing  near  the  middle  of  the
second  paragraph  of  a  revelation
given  December  27,  1832  :

M  In  that  he  comprehended  all
things,  that  he  might  be  in  all  and
through  all  things,  the  light  of  truth;
which  truth  shineth.  This  is  the
light  of  Christ,  As  also  he  is  in  the
sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  the
power  thereof  by  which  it  was  made.
As  also  he  is  in  the  moon,  and  is  the
light  of  the  moon,  and  the  power
thereof  by  which  it  was  made.  As
also  the  light  of  the  stars,  and  the
power  thereof  by  which  they  were
made.  And  the  earth  also,  and  the
power  thereof;  even  the  earth  upon
which  you  stand,

"  And  the  light  which  now  shineth,
which  giveth  you  light,  is  through
him  who  enlighteneth  your  eyes,
which  is  the  same  light  that  quick-
eneth  your  understandings;  which
light  proceedeth  forth  from  the  pre-
sence of  God  to  fill  the  immensity  of
space.  The  light  which  is  in  all
things;  which  giveth  life  to  all
things;  which  is  the  law  by  which
all  things  are  governed;  even  the
power  of  God  who  sitteth  upon  his
throne, who is in the  bosom  of


eternity,  who  is  in  the  midst  of  all

things"

We  will  now  pass  on  to  the  ninth
paragraph  of  this  same  revelation,
given  through  Joseph  Smith  the
Prophet :

u  AU  kingdoms  have  a  law  given;
and  there  are  many  kingdoms;  for
there  is  no  space  in  the  which  there
is  no  kingdom  ;  and  there  is  no  king-
dom in  which  there  is  no  space,  either
a  greater  or  lesser  kingdom.  And
unto  every  kingdom  is  given  a  law ;
auji  unto  every  law  there  are  certain
bounds  also  and  conditions.

"  All  beings  who  abide  not  in  those
conditions  are  not  justified ;  for  in-
telligence cleaveth  unto  intelligence;
wisdom  receiveth  wisdom ;  truth
embraceth  truth  ;  virtue  loveth  virtue;
light  cleaveth  unto  light;  mercy  hath
compassion  on  mercy,  and  claimeth
her  own;  justice  continueth  its
course,  and  claimeth  its  own ;  judg-
ment goeth  before  the  face  of  him
who  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and
governeth  and  erecuteth  all  things ;
he  comprehendeth  all  things,  and  all
things  are  before  him,  and  all  thingg
are  round  about  him;  and  he  is
above  all  things,  and  in  all  things,
and  is  through  all  things,  and  is
round  about  all  things ;  and  all  things


1


MAN  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC.


arc  by  him,  and  of  him,  even  God,
for  ever  and  ever.

"  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto
yon,  he  hath  given  a  law  unto  all
things  by  which  they  move  in  their
times  and  their  seasons ;  and  their
courses  are  fixed  ;  even  the  courses
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  wliich
comprehend  the  earth  and  all  the
planets ;  and  they  give  light  to  each
other  in  their  times  and  in  their
Beasons,  in  their  minutes,  in  their
hours,  in  their  days,  in  their  weeks,
in  their  months,  in  their  years  ;  and
these  are  one  year  with  God,  but  not
with  man.

4i  The  earth  rolls  upon  her  wings,
and  the  sun  giveth  his  light  by  day,
and  the  moon  giveth  her  light  by
night,  and  the  stars  also  giveth  their
light,  as  they  roll  upon  their  wings
in  their  glory,  in  the  midst  of  the
power  of  God.  Unto  what  shall  I
liken  these  kingdoms,  that  ye  may
nnderstand  ?  Behold,  all  these  are
kingdoms,  and  any  man  who  hath
seen  any  or  the  least  of  these,  hath
seen  God  moving  in  his  majesty  and
power.  I  say  unto  you,  he  hath  seen
him  ;  nevertheless,  he  who  eame  unto
his  own  was  not  comprehended.  The
light  shineth  in  darkness,  and  the
darkness  comprehendeth  it  not;
nevertheless,  the  day  shall  come
when  you  shall  comprehend  even
God  ;  being  quickened  in  him  and
by  him.  Then  shall  ye  know  that
ye  have  seen  me,  that  I  am,  that  I
am  the  true  light  that  is  in  yon,  and
that  yon  are  in  me,  otherwise  ye  could
not  abound,

"  Beho!d,  I  will  liken  these  king-
doms unto  a  man  having  a  field,  and
he  sent  forth  his  servants  into  the
field  to  dig  in  the  field  ;  and  he  said
nnto  the  first,  go  ye  and  labor  in  the
field,  and  in  the  first  hoar  I  will
come  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  behold
the  joy  of  ray  countenance ;  and  he
aaid  unto  the  second,  go  ye  also  into


the  field,  and  in  the  second  hour  I
will  visit  you  with  the  joy  of  my
countenance ;  and  also  unto  the  third,
saying,  I  will  visit  you ;  and  unto
the  fourth,  and  soon  unto  the  twelfth.

"And  the  lord  of  the  field  went
unto  the  first  in  the  first  hour,  and
tarried  with  him  all  that  hour,  and
he  was  made  glad  with  the  light  of
the  countenance  of  his  lord;  and
then  he  withdrew  from  the  first  that
he  might  visit  the  second  also,  and
the  third,  and  the  fourth,  and  so  on
unto  the  twelfth ;  and  thus  they  all
received  the  light  of  the  countenance
of  their  lord  ;  every  man  in  his  hour,
and  in  his  time,  and  in  his  season ;
beginning  at  the  first,  and  so  on  unto
the  last,  and  from  the  la.st  unto  the
first,  and  from  the  first  unto  the  last
every  man  in  his  own  order,  until  his
hour  was  finished,  even  according  as
his  lord  had  commanded  him,  that
his  lord  might  be  glorified  in  bira,
and  he  in  him,  that  they  all  might
be  glorified,

f  Therefore,  unto  this  parable  will
I  liken  all  these  kingdoms,  and  the
inhabitants  thereof;  every  kingdom
in  its  hour,  and  in  its  time,  and  in
its  season;  even  according  to  the
decree  which  God  hath  made.

41  And  again,  verily  I  bay  unto
you,  my  friends,  I  leave  these  sayings
with  you,  to  ponder  in  your  hearts
with  this  commandment  which  I  give
unto  you,  that  ye  shall  call  upon  me
while  I  arn  near  j  draw  near  unto  me
and  I  will  draw  near  unto  you ;  seek
me  diligently  and  ye  shall  find  me ;
ask  and  ye  shall  receive;  knock  and
it  shall  be  opened  unto  you;  whatso-
ever ye  ask  the  Father  in  my  name
it  shall  be  given  unto  you,  that  is  ex-
pedient for  you;  and  if  ye  ask  any.
thing  that  is  not  expedient  for  yon,
it  shall  turn  unto  yonr  condemnation,

"  Behold,  that  which  you  hear  is
as  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the
wilderness — in  the  wilderness,  because


324  JOURNAL  OF

you  cannot  see  him — my  voice,  be-
cause my  voice  is  spirit;  my  spirit
is  truth  ;  truth  abideth  and  hath  no
end;  and  if  it  be  in  you  it  shall
abound.

*  And  if  your  eye  be  single  to  my
glory,  your  whole  bodies  shall  be
filled  with  light,  and  there  shall  be
do  darkness  in  you,  and  that  body
•  which  is  filled  with  light  compre-
hendeth  all  things.  Therefore  sanc-
tify yourselves  that  your  mind  be-
come  single  to  God,  and  the  days
will  come  that  you  shall  see  him  ;  for
he  will  unveil  bis  face  unto  you,  and
it  shall  be  in  his  own  time,  and  in
his  own  way,  and  according  to  his
own  will."

I  have  read  these  sayings  from  a
revelation  given  a  little  over  forty-
two  yearn  ngo,  to  that  youth,  called
Joseph  Smith,  a  farmer's  boy.  Do
they  sound  like  the  ravings  of  a
madman  ?  Do  they  sound  like
something  that  was  invented  or
composed  by  the  wisdom  of  man,  or
do  they  sound  like  the  truth  ?
Joseph  Smith  was  not  a  learned  man,
he  had  to  work  for  his  living:  when
he  was  a  lad ;  and  when  God  called
him  and  gave  these  revelations
through  him  he  had  not  studied
any  more  than  the  generality  of  the
young  men  who  now  sit  in  this
congregation,  and  probably  not  near
as  much.  Yet  these  words  were
given  to  him,  and  they  contain
information  and  knovvlcge  far  be-
yond that  which  you  will  find  re-
corded in  the  writings  of  the  learned,
information  expressed  so  simply
that  a  common  mind  can,  in  some
degree,  grasp  it,  and  yet  so  sublime
and  so  great  that  when  we  come  to
investigate  its  depths,  it  requires
greater  powers  and  greater  under-
standing than  what  man  naturally
possesses.

We  are  told,  in  the  part  of  the
fiist  paragraph  that  I  read,  that  God


DISCOURSES.

is  in  the  stin  of  our  firmament,  that
.  he  is  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  that
he  is  the  power  of  the  sun  by  which
it  was  made.  We  are  alsj  told  that
he  is  in  the  moon,  and  that  he  is  the
light  of  that  heavenly  luminary,
and  the  power  by  which  it  also  waff
made.  We  are  also  told  that  God
is  in  the  stars,  those  worlds  so  distant
from  ours,  those  great  centres  around
which,  no  doubt,  millions  on  millions
of  opaque  bodies  revolve  as  our  pla-
nets revolve  around  our  central
body,  the  sun;  that  he  is  in  those
1  stars,  that  he  is  their  light,  and  the
power  by  which  they  are  governed  ;
or  to  come  home  directly  to  our  earth,
he  is  in  the  earth,  and  is  the  power
and  light  and  glory  that  is  attached
to  the  elements  of  our  globe.

This  would  seem  to  exhibit  be-
fore us  the  nature  of  that  Being
whom  we  worship.  We  worship
him  because  of  his  glory,  greatness,
goodness,  justice,  mercy,  knowledge,
and  wisdom.  We  worship  him,
because  he  has  the  power  to  gov*,
ern  and  control  the  universe,  and
because  he  has  commanded  us  so  to
do.  He  is  a  personage  ;  and  we  are
told  that  in  the  beginning  man  was
created  in  his  image.  We  are  also
told  that  we  are  his  sons  and  his
daughters,  that  we  were  begotten
by  him,  before  the  foundation  of
this  world;  that  we  are  his  off-
spring, as  much  so  as  the  little  chil-
dren in  this  room  are  the  offspring
of  their  parents.  Seeing  then,  that
he  is  a  peisonage  and  that  we  are
■  in  his  image,  we  can  form  soma
idea  of  the  general  outlines  and  re-
semblance of  that  personage,  bufc
can  we  form  an  idea  of  the  intelli-
gence that  he  possesses  ?  We  hav#
but  a  very  limited  idea  of  that.  Ha
comprehends  all  things,  all  things
are  before  him,  all  things  are  round
about  him,  and  he  is  the  great  and
supreme  Governor  of  all  the  works


MAN  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC.


3^5


of  his  handg.

We  are  told  that  the  same  light
which  Bhmes  from  the  sun,  from
the  moon,  and  from  the  stars,  is  the
same  light  that  quickens  the  under-
standings of  the  children  of  men.
But  who  is  there  in  tins  congregation,
or  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  that ,
can  tell  how  thst  light  operates  in
quickening  the  understandings  of
men  ?  It  is  the  same  light  by  which
jou  are  enabled  to  see  each  other,
and  surrounding  nature.  The  light
that  proceeds  forth  from  all  these
heavenly  luminaries,  with  very  great
velocity,  is  the  same  light  that
quickens  the  understanding.  Do
you  know  how  that  is  done  ?  I  do
not ;  yet  this  is  what  God  has  re*
vealed.  He  is  the  light  that  is  in
all  things.  Do  you  or  I  comprehend
how  that  light  is  connected  with  all
things  ?  No.  These  are  lessons  i
which  we  have  got  to  learn  in  the  !
future,  when  we  ascend  in  that  sc  de
of  knowledge  and  intelligence  now
possessed  by  celestial  beings.  How
long  it  will  be  before  we  comprehend
these  things  I  know  not.  How  our
capacities  may  hereafter  be  enlarged,
I  know  not;  how  they  will  be  de-
veloped and  quickened  so  as  to  com-
prehend all  these  great  truths  and
principles,  I  know  not;  but  we  are
told  in  this  revelation  that  the  liffht
that  quickens  the  understandings
of  the  children  of  men,  and  lighteth
all  things  is  one  and  the  same  and
that  it  is  also  the  life  of  all  things.
What  are  we  to  understand  by  this  ?
Have  we  life  ?  Yes,  we  certainly
have.  Where  did  we  obtain  this
life  ?  When  was  it  created  or  made  ?
There  is  a  revelation  upon  this  sub-
ject  which  says  thatinteliigence,orthe
light  of  truth,  was  not  created,  neither
indeed  can  be-  Is  it  then  eternal  ?
Yes.  Then  this  light  that  shines
is  eternal  in  its  nature  is  it  ?  Yes,
because  it  is  the  same  light  that


gives  lifr  to  all  things.  "Did  our
.spirits,  that  have  power  to  think
and  to  reason,  have  life  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  ?  Yes
And  what  gave  them  this  life  ?  The
elements,  composing  our  spirits  were
eternal ;  they  were  never  created,
neither  indeed  can  be;  they  existed
from  all  eternity,  and  were,  at  a
certain  period,  combined  or  organized
in  the  form  of  our  spirits;  and  hence
the  pre»existence  of  man  before  the
world  was  made.

This  same  light  which  gives  us
life,  and  without  which  we  could
not  abound,  proceeds  forth  from  the
presence  of  God  to  fill  the  immen-
sity of  space.  Can  we  get  away
from  it?  No;  for  it  fills  all  the
intermediate  spaces  between  world
and  world,  between  one  system  and
another,  and  between  universe  and
universe;  "and  there  is  no  space  in
which  there  is  no  kingdom,  and  there
is  no  kingdom  in  which  there  is  no
space ; "  hence,  this  being  the  case,
all  eternity,  as  far  as  your  minds  can
possibly  stretch,  is  tilled  with  king-
doms, and  with  this  power  of  God,
this  light  which  is  the  life  of  all
things,  and  the  law  by  which  all
things  are  governed*

Perhaps  you  may  ask  me  why  I
dwell  on  this  mysterious  subject  ?
I  answer,  why  did  the  Lord  dwell
upon  it  forty-two  years  ago,  if  he
did  not  want  us,  in  some  measure
to  understand  it  ?  Would  lie  speak
at  random  ?  Would  he  give  a  reve-
lation without  expectiug  that  the
people  would  ever  try  to  understand
it  ?  If  the  Lord  wished  as  to
understand  something,  and  conde-
scended to  reveal  something,  why
should  we,  after  forty- two  years  of
experience,  think  that  we  are  step-
ping over  our  bounds  in  trying  to
approximately  comprehend  what  the
Lord  desired  us  to  understand,  in
some  measure,  forty- two  years  ago  ?


326


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


It  is  an  old  sectarian  whim  and  no-
tion, to  suppose  that  we  must  not  try
to  understand  revelation*  You  know
that  when  they  come  to  something  in
the  d  i vine  records  which  they  do  not
understand,  they  will  say — *' Oh,  the
Lord  never  intended  us  to  under-
stand that,  that  is  a  mystery,  we
must  not  search  into  these  things,
they  are  mysteries,"  Just  as  though
the  Lord  would  reveal  something
that  he  never  intended  or  wished
the  human  family  to  understand.
Saying  nothing  about  the  Deity,  it
would  be  an  act  of  foolishness  on
the  part  of  a  man  to  attempt  a  reve-
lation of  something  that  he  never
intended  his  fellow-men  to  under-
stand. The  Lord  is  more  consistent
than  man ;  and  if  he  reveals  any-
thing, he  surely  intends  that  thing
to  be  for  the  profit  and  edification
of  the  pure  in  heart.

I  was  going  to  soy  that  we  had
dwelt  too  long  on  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins,  But  no,  we  should
still  retain  that  in  our  remembrance*
Not  leaving  the  principles  of  the
doctrine  of  Christ,  we  ought  to  go  on
to  perfection, I  believe  that  Kiug

n.es's  translation  of  that  passage
savs, — "  Therefore  leaving  the  prin-
ciples of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  let
th  go  on  unto  perfection.1'  But  the
translation  given  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  the
Prophet  of  the  Lord  puts  in  the  little
word  not  "  Therefore  not  leaving
the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of
Christ,  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection,"
I  do  not  want  the  people  to  leave
baptism,  or  to  cast  from  their  minds,
and  forget  the  tirst  principles  of  the
doctrine  of  Christ  ;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, you  should  always  retain
them  in  your  memories,  AY  hen
you  repented  you  did  a  good  work;
retain  that  good  work  in  your
minds.  When  you  were  baptized
for the remission of your  sins,


through  the  ministration  of  a  servant
of  God  divinely  authorized,  you  did
a  good  work ; retain that  in  your
minds,  do  not  leave  that  principle.
When  you had hands laid  upon
you  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  that  was  confirmed  upon  you,
you  were  obedient  to  one  of  the
principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ;
do  not  leave  that,  but  retain  it  in
your  minds, Do  not  suppose,  how-
ever, that  those  first  principles  are
the  only  ones  to  be  learned ;  do  not
become  stereotyped in  your  feel-
ings, and  think  that  you  must  al-
ways dwell  upon  them  and  proceed
no  further. If  there  be  knowledge
concerning  the  futeie;  if  there  be
knowledge  concerning  the  present;,
if  there be knowledge  concerning
ages  that  are  past,  any  species  of
knowledge  that  would  be  beneficial
to  the  mind  of  man,  let  us  seek  for
it,  and  that  which  we  can  not  obtain
by  using  the  light  which  God  has  ^
placed within us, by using  our
reasoning  powers,  by  reading  books,
or  by  human  wisdom  alone,  let  us
seek  to  a  higher  source — to  that
Being  who  is  filled  with  knowledge,
and  who has given laws to  all
things and who, in his  wisdom,
goodness,  justice  and  mercy,  con*
trols  all  things  according  to  their
capacity,  and  according  to  the  variou*
spheres  and  conditions  in  which  they
are  placed.  ,
i When  we  reflect  upon  this  subject,
the  query  naturally  arises in  our
minds — if  he  has  given  a  law  unto,
all  things  and  has  set  bounds  and
conditions  to  every  law  which  he
has  given,  will  it  hurt  any  intel-
,  ligent being to learn  concerning
those  laws  as  far  as  he  possibly  can  ?
I  think  not. To  illustrate  this,  let
us  suppose  that  a  learned  man,  by
years  of  research  and  study,  hag.
d  is  covered  many  of  the  great  laws
(  of  nature,  and  that  he  has  a  family


MAN  IS  TIIE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC,


327


of  children  growing  up,  do  yon
think  that  he  would  be  displeased
with  his  children  because  they  had
a  curiosity  and  a  desire  to  know
something  in  relation  to  that  which
their  father  understood  ?  No,  you
say,  he  would  be  pleased  to  see  the
intellectual  faculties  and  powers  of
his  children  expanding,  and  to  hear
them  inquiring  about  this,  that,  and
the  other  thing,  with  which  he  was
perfectly  familiar,  but  of  which  they
were  ignorant.  Furthermore,  if  it
would  be  pleasing  to  a. father  to  hear
his  children  making  such  inquiries,
would  it  not  be  still  more  pleasing  to
him  to  impart  useful  information  unto
thern  ?  You  reply ,  "  Oh  yes,  nothing
would  delight  me  more  than  to  im-
part useful  instruction  to  my  chil-
dren, and  to  aid  them  in  developing
their  mental  powers."  Well,  that  is
just  the  way  our  heavenly  Father
feels  in  relation  to  his  children.  Any-
thing that  would  be  for  our  good  to
know — and  all  knowledge  is  for  our
good  if  we  make  a  right  use  of  it —
he  is  willing  to  impart,  if  we  but
seek  unto  him  in  a  proper  and  accep-
table manner.  Let  us  then  keep  all
the  commandments,  and  laws,  and
conditions  which  God  has  appointed
for  us  to  keep.  It  is  our  right  and
privilege  to  knock,  and  we  have  the
promise  that  it  shall  be"  opened
to  us;  to  seek,  and  when  we  do  seek,
to  do  so  with  the  expectation  of
finding.  In  this  way  we  may  re-
ceive more  and  more  information
and  knowledge,  concerning  the  things
of  God,  and  the  works  of  his  hands.
There  are  many  things  that  we  can
learn,  already  within  our  reach,
without  any  special  and  direct  re-
velation, that  is,  when  I  say  special
revelation,  I  mean  without  the  Lord
revealing  directly  by  a  vision,  the
ministration  of  an  angel,  or  by  direct
words,  as  he  revealed  many  things  to
the  ancient  revelators,  seers,  and  Pro-


J  phots*  There  are  a  great  many  things
that  we  can  learn  independently  of
these  direct  revelations ;  but  still  we
need  the  help  of  the  Lord,  in  some
measure,  in  our  researches,  to  learn
anything ;  we  need  the  influence  of
the  Spirit  of  God  to  quicken  the
light  that  is  within  ua,  for  light
cleaves  to  light,  and  the  Spirit  of
(  Jod  is  light,  and  it  cleaves  unto  the
light  that  enters  into  the  composi-
tion of  the  spirit  of  man  ;  and  when
we  keep  his  commandments  the
Lord  is  ever  ready  and  willing  to
quicken  the  judgment,  inform  the
mind,  and  lead  us  along  in  our  think-
ing and  reflecting  powers,  that  we
may  have  power  to  understand  a
great  many  truths,  without  his  com-
ing out  and  saying, — "Thus  saith
the  Lord.*'

There  are  a  great  many  truths
which  might  be  revealed  to  me  in
words  which  I  should  not  be  able
to  understand ;  that  is,  a  law  of  na-
ture might  be  revealed  to  me  in
words,  bat  I  could  not  understand
the  principle  involved  therein  after
it  was  thus  revealed.  For  instance,
I  could  reveal  a  great  many  things
to  school  children  in  words,  which
they  could  not  possibly  comprehend.
I  could  give  them  a  revelation  that
would  take  them  perhaps  two  or  three
years  deep  study  to  comprehend,  and
yet  it  could  be  printed  in  a  very  few
words.  Just  so  with  the  Lord — ho
could  reveal  in  a  few  words,  a  prin*
ciple  to  us  which  it  would  take  us
years  of  study  and  reflection  to
understand.  Suppose,  for  illustra-
tion, we  tnke  the  principle  of  force
or  gravitation,  by  which  things  fall
to  the  earth,  and  by  which  the  plan-
ets arQ  held  in  their  orbits,  and  do
not  fly  away  from  the  great  central
luminary  of  our  system — the  sun.
We  will  suppose  that  we  know  nothing
about  this  law  of  force,  called  gravity,
and  that  some  man  among  us  should


Z26


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO IKSES.


get  a  direct  revelation,  expressing
that  law ;  if  he  had  never  studied
sufficiently  to  understand  the  nature
of  these  words,  the  very  words
that  he  would  receive  wuuld  be  in-
comprehensible to  himself,  "  For
instance,  the  law  of  gravity  is  ex-
pressed, in  the  words  of  Sir  Isaac
Newton,  as  follows — "  Every  par-
ticle of  matter  in  the  universe  at-
tracts every  other  particle  with  a
force  varying  indirectly  as  its  mass,
and  inversely  as  the  square  of  its
distance  from  every  particle,*1  Now
supposing  that  law  had  been  given
to  Newton,  or  to  the  world,  and
that  there  had  been  no  knowledge
of  mathematics  among  men,  what
would  they  have  understood  about
the  law  ?  They  might  have  said
— "  There  is  a  formula  which  com-
prehends the  law  of  the  force  of
the  universe ; "  but
they  know  about  it  ?
they  understood  the
they  would  know  how  the  force
varied  at  different  distances  from
the  attracting  or  gravitating  body.
That  is  the  real  revelation :  it  is
not  the  words.  A  thousand  things
might  be  revealed  to  this  congre-
gation, bat  if  merely  revealed  in
words,  they  perhaps  would  not
know  anything  about  them.  We
rrust  understand  the  nature  of  the
thing,  the  nature  of  the  idea  com-
prehended in  any  law  in  order  to
have  it  a  revelation  to  us ;  words  are
nothing  but  signs  of  ideas;  if  the
ideas  are  not  understood,  the  words
will  be  a  mystery*

When  we  undertake  to  investigate
the  laws  which  govern  the  various
departments  of  nature,  we  are  inves-
tigating the  laws  of  God,  Says
one — "Do  yon  mean  to  say  that  the
law  of  gravitation,  which  was  dis-
covered by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  by
which  all  the  bodies  in  the  universe
are  held  in  their  proper  position,  is  a


what  would
If,  however,
terms  used,


law  of  God?"  Yes.  If  he  h
given  this  law  of  force  to  all  bodi
then  it  is  one  of  his  laws,  and  %1I
who  study  that  law  study  one  of  the
laws  of  God,  To  illustrate  this  still
more  familiarly  to  the  minds  of  the
congregation,  we  will  say — here  is
brother  Kesler,  who,  I  presume  has
been  teaching  school  in  this  house.
Perhaps  he  has  some  students  in
algebra,  and  perhaps  in  geometry;
then,  perhaps  he  has  many  scholars
who  know  nothing  about  these  things.
Now  suppose  that  brother  Kesler
should  call  up  a  cla&s,  the  members
of  which  know  nothing  whatever  of
the  sciences  I  have  named,  and  should
express  certain  rules  in  algebra  to
them,  would  that  be  a  revelation  to
that  class  ?  It  would  in  words,  but
what  would  they  comprehend  about
it?  Not  a  thing;  it  would  be  as
dark  as  midnight  There  are  the
words  in  which  the  rules  are  ex-
pressed, but  could  the  students  in
that  class  put  those  algebraic  rules
into  opt  r. it  ion?  No,  a  process  is
necessary  in  order  to  enable  these
children  to  understand  the  revela-
tion, and  that  process  is  cine  of  slo
growth,  mastered  a  little  to-day,  a
little  to-morrow,  and  a  little  the
nest  day,  and  by  and  by,  in  one  or
two  years,  they  would  probably  com-
prehend the  algebraic  revelation
given  to  them  so  long  before  in
words.  It  is  so  with  arithmetic,  with
grammer,  geography  and  almost  any
branch  of  science  taught  in  oar
common  schools  or  universities.  No
wonder  then,  to  me,  that  Paul  in
speaking  of  a  man,  who  was  caugli
up  to  the  third  heavens,  said  he  saw
things  that  were  not  lawful  to
uttered,  that  could  not  be  uttered;
for  if  he  had  undertaken  to  utter
tht'tn,  he  would  have  uttered  some-
thing that  the  people  could  not  pos-
sibly comprehend,  until  they  bad
learned  previous  principles. Such  a


s


i


r


MAN  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOB,  ETC,


329


man  might  tell  about  certain  laws
which  prevail  in  heaven,  and  certain
glories  which  he  saw  there,  but  yet,
unless  the  people  lo  whom  such  things
were  told  had  placed  themselves  in  a
position  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost,  or
the  visions  of  heaven  opened  to  their
Blinds,  the  words  uttered  would  not
be  a  revelation  to  them,  for  it  would
be  altogether  beyond  their  powers
to  comprehend.

The  revelation  which  Sir  Isaac
Newton  obtained  concerning  the
forces  of  the  universe,  has  been
developed  from  his  day  until  the  pre-
sent time*  The  whole  learned  world
of  mathematicians  have  brought  all
their  faculties  and  powers  to  bear
upon  this  one  little  law  whioh  I  have
expressed  to  you,  and  have  they  got
through  with  it  ?  Oh  no,  it  is  just
beginning  to  unfold  to  them  some
of  the  common  phenomena  of  the
universe,  and  th'U  ia  about  all.  In
about  a  century  hence,  if  the  Lord
should  spare  the  world,  and  men
make  as  much  advance  in  these
matters  as  they  have  done  in  the
century  past,  this  law,  there  is  no
doubt,  will  be  carried  out  imo  a
great  many  channels  and  branches
that  we  know  nothing  a  boot  now]]
Says  one — w  If  it  requires  so  much
study  on  the  part  of  the  learned
world  to  unfold  and  comprehend
this  one  law,  it  is  discouraging  to
think  that  there  are  perhaps  hundreds
of  other  laws  as  intricate  as  this  to
investigate  before  it  is  possible  to
come  to  an  mule:  standing  of  them."
We  need  not  be  discouraged  upon
this  subject ;  for  if  we  do  the  best  we
can  according  to  the  position  in
which  we  are  placed,  and  the  oppor-
tunities which  we  have,  we  do  all  that
the  Lord  requires ;  and  by  and  by  we
shall  be  placed  in  a  condition  in
which  we  can  learn  much  faster  than
we  can  now.  We  need  not  be  dis-
couraged, Perh-ips the  man  who,


under  a  sense  of  discouragement,
gives  up  and  does  not  make  the  best
of  his  present  limited  opportunities,
will  be  Jimited  hereafter  in  the  life
to  come,  and  will  not  be  allowed  to
progress  very  fast,  because  of  his
laziness  and  Ins  want  of  desire,  cou-
rage and  fortitude  to  pursue  certain
channels  of  knowledge  that  were
opened  up  to  him  here  in  this  life.
But  when  we  see  individuals  nut  only
willing  to  receive  some  few  of  the
simple  principles  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  but  are  willing  to  press  on-
ward towards  perfection  as  far  as
opportunities  present  themselves,  we
may  rest  satisfied  that  they  will  be
honored  of  the  Lord  according  to
their  diligence,  perseverance,  forti-
tude and  patience  in  striving  to
understand  the  laws  which  he  has
given  to  all  things.

We  might,  if  we  had  time,  point
out  a  great  many  other  laws*  The
law  of  light,  for  instance,  and  the
law  of  the  velocity  of  light,  or  the
manner  in  which  light  is  permitted
to  go  from  world  to  world,  and  in
touching  upon  these  and  similar  sub-
jects we  should  be  describing  to  you
the  power,  wisdom,  greatness  and
majesty  of  the  Creator,  who  has
constructed  all  these  things  according
to  law,  and  all  of  them  are  governed
by  his  laws.  It  would  seem  almost
impossible  to  untutored  minds,  if
we  were  to  tell  them  that  a  motion
could  be  tranferred  from  world  to
world  at  the  rate  of  one  hundred  and
eighty-five  thousand  miles  every  se-
cond of  time.  Wonderful.  We  al-
most start  back  at  the  declaration,
and  almost  doubt  the  possibility  of
the  velocity  thus  indicated.  But
incredible  as  it  may  seem  to  the
uneducated,  it  is  a  certain  thing^  it
does  not  rest  upon  the  imaginations
of  the  children  of  men;  it  is  just  as
certain  that  light  travels  at  nearly
that  rate  from  one  creation  lo  ano-


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ther,  as  it  is  that  men  can  time  the
speed  of  horses  with  a  watch  held  in
their  hands,  and  the  most  ignorant
will  admit  that  it  is  perfectly  easy  to
do  that.  Well,  it  is  jast  as  easy  to
demonstrate  the  velocity  of  light,
and  it  has  been  done  not  only  by  one
law,  but  by  many  laws  ;  not  only  by
one  phenomenon,  but  by  many  phe-
nomena, and  it  is  a  thing  that  cannot
be  disputed  by  those  who  have  inves-
tigated and  are  capable  of  under-
standing the  methods  of  demonstra-
tion that  have  been  given.

What  causes  this  immense  velo-
city, and  who  constructed  the  great
etherial  medium  that  intervenes
between  all  worlds,  by  means  of
which  a  jar  can  be  carried  from
world  to  world  with  that  immense
velocity  ?  It  was  God,  that  Being
who  is  said  to  be  in  all  things,  not
by  his  person,  but  by  his  Spirit  and
his  agency.  He  const rncted  this
great  medium  so  that  it  should  com*
municate  vibrations  or  jars,  from
world  to  world  at  that  rapid  rate.

We  see  an  illustration,  on  a  small
scale,  here  on  the  earth,  in  connec-
tion with  our  atmosphere.  Who
constructed  this  atmosphere  and  gave
it  its  elasticity,  and  all  its  principles
and  powers,  by  which  sound  is
communicated  from  place  to  place
at  a  very  rapid  rate  ?  God.  He
constructed  all  these  things.  Sound,
we  are  told,  flies  at  the  rate  of  ten
hundred  and  ninety  feet  in  a  second.
How  does  it  travel  with  that  velo-
city ?  Do  the  particles  from  a
sounding  body — for  instance  a  bell
that  is  ringing — travel  all  that  dis-
tance ?  Oh  no,  it  is  merely  the
vibration,  or  wave  that  is  sent  through
the  great  mass  of  the  atmosphere,
from  the  sounding  body  to  the  organ
of  the  ear;  and  it  is  sent  at  the  rate
of  speed  I  have  mentioned  —  over
one- fifth  of  a  mile  in  a  second — and
we  call  that  very  rapid  velocity ;  but


what  is  it  compared  with  a  hundred
and  eighty- tiee  thousand  miles  a
second.

When  you  study  all  these  things
you  are  learning  lessons  concerning
God.  He  it  is  who  ha3  thus  organ-
ized all  these  materials  of  nature,
has  given  them  their  properties,
endowed  them  with  their  elasticities,
placed  them  in  certain  proportions;
or,  as  one  of  the  inspired  writers
says — "  He  has  weighed  the  moun-
tains in  a  balance1."  Everything  ia
adjusted  in  the  best  possible  man-
ner, to  carry  on  his  operations
throughout  the  great  universe  which
he  has  constructed.  But  I  do  not
wish  to  dwell  lengthily  upon  these
subjects;  of  more  importance  than
all  these  Jaws  which  govern  the
materials  of  nature,  are  the  intelligent
beings  who  inhabit  these  creations.'
God,  in  constructing  these  materials
into  creations  and  worlds,  has  done
it  for  a  wise  arid  noble  purpose.  The
great  purpose  that  lie  had  in  view
was  the  intelligent  beings  who  should
occupy  these  creations.  No  law
was  given  to  our  earth  and  its  ma-
terials, or  to  the  planets,  Mercury,
Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Ura-
nus, Neptune  and  the  vnrious  aste-
roids, merely  for  the  sake  of  giving
laws ;  but  the  Lord  had  a  useful  de-
sign in  view,  namely  to  add  to  his
own  glory  and  to  the  happiness  of  *
millions  of  his  sons  and  daughters
who  should  come  to  people  these
worlds  I  have  named,  that  they
might  be  prepared  to  be  redeemed
from  their  fallen  condition,  as  the
people  of  this  creation  are  to  be  re-
deemed from  theirs.

Inquires  one — "  Do  yon  mean  to
say  that  other  worlds  have  fallen  as
well  as  ours  ?1'  Yes,  man  is  an  agent;
intelligence  cannot  exist  on  any  other
principle.  All  beings  having  intel-
ligence must  have  their  agency.
Laws  must  be given,  suited  and


MAN  IS  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC


331


adapted  to  this  agency ;  and  when
God  sends  inhabitants  on  various
creations  he  sends  them  on  the  great
and  grand  principle  of  giving  them
an  opportunity  to  exercise  that
agency ;  and  they  have  exercised  it,
and  have  fallen.  Is  there  anything
revealed  to  prove  that  other  worlds
have  fallen  as  well  as  ours?  Oh
yes,  read  some  of  the  other  revela-
tions. 1  might  quote  you  one  which
now  occurs  to  my  mind,  given  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  revealing
anew  that  which  was  formerly  re-
vealed to  Enoch,  before  the  flood,
concerning  the  vastness  of  the
creations  of  the  Almighty,  and
many  other  things.  After  speaking
of  these  innumerable  creations,
Enoch  exclaims  —  "  Thou  hast
taken  Zion  to  thine  own  bosom
out  of  all  the  creations  thou  hast
made/'  Why  should  the  Lord  take
Zion  from  all  these  creations?  Be*
cause  all  of  their  inhabitants  were
not  worthy.  The  very  expression
shows  that  there  were  only  a  few  on
each  of  these  creations  that  he  could
denominate  Zion.  You  know  what
Zion  means  :  it  means  the  pure  in
heart,  and  only  a  few  could  be  select-
ed from  each  of  all  the  creations
which  have  been  made,  as  worthy  to
be  taken  to  his  own  bosom  as  a  Zion,
Does  not  that  show  that  they  have
fallen  ?  If  they  had  not  transgres-
sed, but  had  always  been  obedient,
the  Lord,  as  an  impartial  Being,
would  have  redeemed  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  these  creations  and  taken
them  all  to  his  own  bosom.  But  it
seems  that  ooly  a  few  had  the  privi-
lege  of  being  gathered  into  the  bosom
of  God.

Says  one — "  There  is  another  thing
I  would  like  to  have  explained,  about
the  parable  you  have  read.  *  Behold,
I  will  liken  these  kingdoms  unto  a
man  having  a  field,  and  he  sent  forth
his  servants  into  the  field  to  dig  in


the  field;  and  he  said  unto  the  first,
go  ye  and  labor  in  the  field,  and  in
the  first  hour  I  will  Cyme  unto  you,
and  ye  shall  behold  the  light  of  my
countenance,1  And  he  said  unto  the
second  in  the  same  manner,  and  unto
the  third,  and  so  on  nnto  the  twelfth.
And  when  they  had  fulfilled  certain
conditions,  their  Lord  comes  unto
them,  and  they  are  made  glad  with
the  light  of  bis  countenance,  during
their  hour.  After  he  has  visited  the
first,  he  visits  the  second,  then  the
third,  and  so  on  until  the  twelfth,
each  man  in  his  own  order,  according
to  his  time  and  season.  Now  what
does  all  this  mean  r"  The  Lord
wanted  to  represent  these  kingdomi
so  that  we  could  understand  what  he
desired  to  impart,  and  he  gave  it  as  a
parable,  in  order  to  assist  our  weak
comprehensions  to  understand  some-
thing about  Mercury,  Venus,  Jupiter,
Saturn,  Uranus  and  others  of  the
various  worlds  that  he  has  formed*
Says  the  interrogator  — u  I  do  not
comprehend  this  idea  of  the  Lord's
withdrawing  from  one  and  going  to
another."  In  order  to  comprehend
this  let  us  come  back  to  our  own
globe.  Do  we  not  expect  that  the
Lord  will,  by  and  by,  come  and  visit
us  and  stay  a  little  while,  about  a
thousand  years*  Yes,  and  then  we
shall  be  made  glad  with  the  joy  of
the  countenance  of  our  Lord.  He
will  be  among  us,  and  will  be  our
King,  and  he  will  reign  as  a  King  of
kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  He  will
have  a  throne  in  Zion,  and  another  in
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  he  will
have  with  him  the  twelve  disciples
who  were  with  him  during  his  mini-
stry at  Jerusalem  ;  and  they  will  eat
and  drink  with  hi  in  at  his  table;  and
all  the  people  of  this  globe  who  aro
counted  worthy  to  be  called  Zion,  the
pure  in  heart,  will  lie  made  glad  by
the  countenance  of  their  Lord  for  a
thousand  years,  during which  the


332


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


earth  will  rest.  Then  what?  He
withdraws.  What  for?  To  fulfill
other  purposes;  for  he  has  other
worlds  or  creations  and  other  sons
and  daughters,  perhaps  just  as  good
as  those  dwelling  on  this  planet,  and
they,  as  well  ns  we,  will  be  visited,
and  they  will  be  made  glad  with  the
countenance  of  their  Lord,  Thus  he
will  go,  in  the  time  and  in  the  season
thereof,  from  kingdom  to  kingdom  or
from  world  to  world,  causing  the
pure  in  heart,  the  Zion  that  is  taken
from  these  creations,  to  rejoice  in  his
presence

But  there  is  another  thing  I  want
you  to  understand.  This  will  not  be
kept  up  to  all  eternity,  it  is  merely  a
preparation  for  something  still  greater.
And  what  is  that?  By  and  by,
when  each  of  these  creations  has
fulfilled  the  measure  aud  bounds  set
and  the  times  given  for  its  continu-
ance in  a  temporal  state,  it  and  its
inhabitants  who  are  worthy  will  be
made  celestial  and  glorified  together.
Then,  from  that  time  henceforth  and
for  ever,  there  will  be  no  intervening
veil  between  God  and  his  people  who
are  sanctified  and  glorified,  and  he
will  not  be  under  the  necessity  of
withdrawing  from  one  to  go  and  visit
another,  because  they  will  all  be  in
his  presence.  It  matters  not  how
far  in  space  these  creations  may  be
located  from  any  special  celestial
kingdom  where  the  Lord  our  God
shall  dwell,  they  will  be  able  to  see
him  at  all  times.  Why  ?  Because
it  is  only  the  fall,  and  the  vail  that
has  been  bhut  down  over  this  creation,
that  keep  us  from  the  presence  of
God,  Let  the  vail  be  removed,
which  now  hinders  us  trom  beholding
the  glory  of  God  and  the  celestial
kingdom;  let  this  creation  be  once
perfected,  after  having  passed  through
its  various  ordeals,  after  having  en-
joyed the  light  of  the  countenance  of
our  Lord,  in  our  hour  and  in  our


season,  and  let  all  things' be  perfected
and  glorified,  and  there  will  be  no
necessity  for  this  vail  being  shut
down.

Says  one — I(  Do  you  mean  to  sa}',
then,  that  there  is  a  faculty  in  man,
that  he  can  behold  the  Lord  and  be
in  his  presence,  though  millions  on
millions  of  miles  distant,  on  another
creation  ?"  Yes,  just  as  easy  as  we
can  behold  one  another  here  in  this
room,  We  shall  then  see  as  we  aro
seen,  and  know  as  we  are  known,
and  there  will  be  a  perfect  redemp-
tion. In  this  way  all  the  creations
that  are  redeemed  can  enjoy  the  con-
tinned  and  eternal  presence  of  the
Lord  their  God.  I  mean  those  who
are  made  celestial,  not  those  who  are
in  the  lower  orders,  who  are  gov-
erned  by  telestial  laws,  but  those  who
are  exalted  to  the  highest  degree  of
glory,  those  who  will  bo  made  kings
aud  priests,  those  who  have  kept
celestial  law,  obeyed  celestial  ordi-
nances, and  received  the  Priesthood
which  God  has  ordained,  and  to
which  he  has  given  power  and  autho-
rity to  administer  and  to  seal  ou
earth  that  it  may  be  sealed  in  hea-
ven. The  people  who  are  thus  glori-
fied are  snid  to  be  taken  into  the
bosom  of  the  Almighty;  as  Enoch
says — "Thou  hast  taken  Zion  from
all  these  creations  which  thou  hast
made,  and  thy  bosom  is  there,"  &c.
He  does  not  mean  that  the  Lord  God
is  right  within  a  few  rods  of  every
individual ;  this  would  be  an  impossi-
bility, fio  far  as  the  person  is  con-
cerned ;  but  he  means  that  there  is  a
channel  of  communication,  the  privi-
lege of  beholding  Zion,  however  great
the  distance;  and  the  privilege  of
enjoying  faculties  and  powers  like
this  is  confined  to  those  high  and
exalted  beings  who  occupy  the  celes-
tial world.  All  who  are  made  like
him  will,  in  due  time,  be  able  to  see,
to  understand  and  to  converse  with


CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


333


each  other  though  millions  and
millions  of  miles  apart.  With  all
the  imperfections  of  the  present  state
men  have  invented  means  by  which
they  can  converse  with  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  uttermost  parts  of  the
earth*  We  may  sit  down  in  onr
chimney  corners  and  converse  with
the  people  in  Asia,  England,  France,
and  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe;
we  can  bid  each  other  "good  night/'
or  "  good  day,"  as  the  case  may  be  ;
and  if  man  with  all  his  imperfections
can  do  this  by  using  some  of  the
gross  powers  and  materials  of  nature,
why  may  not  that  God  who  has
power  to  control  and  govern  all  these
materials,  so  organize  and  construct
the  machinery  of  the  universe  that
we  may  be  able  to  communicate  in-
telligence a  distance  of  millions  on
millions  of  miles  in  the  twinkling  of
an  eye,  so  that,  according  to  the
words  which  are  revealed,  we  may  I


be  considered  ta  be  in  his  own  bosom,
where  we  C3ii  converse  with  hina,  see
him,  hear  him^&c.

Time  will  not  permit  me  to  pursue
this  matter  any  further.  Some  of
the  items  of  this  subject  occurred  to
my  mind  a  little  while  before  I  came
into  the  house.  I  have  been  in  the
hnbit  of  preaching  a  great  deal  in
the  13th  and  11th  Wards,  where
many  strangers  attend  wTao  wish  to
hear  about  our  doctrines.  But
having  a  congregation  of  Saints  be-
fore me  to-day,  I  thought  I  would
touch  upon  things  that  are  revealed
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants. It  contains  many  ideas  that
arc  great  and  grand  in  the  extreme,
and  which  are  calculated  in  their
nature  to  inspire  every  faculty  of  the
soul  of  man  with  desires  to  know  and
comprehend  more  of  tho  things  of
God.

May  God  bless  you.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  HOX  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  ix  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  March  28,  1875,

{Reported  ly  David  T7.  Evans.)

CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS  —  EFFICACY  OF  PRAYER— STRENGTH  OF
CHARACTER  NECESSARY — THE  TRUE  CHURCH— GATHERING  TO  THE
MOUNTAINS.


If  I  were  to  consult  my  natural
feelings  this  afternoon,  I  should  sit
and  listen  to  some  one  else  speak
rather  than  gwe  utterance  to  any  of


my  own  feelings.  But  I  do  not  sup-
pose that  this  would  be  satisfactory
to  anybody  else,  at  least  to  most  of
the  Saints,  and  especially  to  Bishop


331


Jut'KNAL.  OF  WStOL'liSKh


Taylor,  I  therefore  rise  to  say  such
tin  BgH  as  shall  be  suggested  to  mc
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  on  this
occasion-
To  one  who  has  been  absent  for  a
long  time  from  home,  the  privilege
of  mingling  with  one's  brethren  and
sisters,  those  of  the  same  faith,  who
have  the  same  views,  an  J  who  are
laboring  for  the  same  objects,  the
privilege  of  returning  aud  associating
with  them  is  very  delightful,  at
least  it  is  so  to  me,  and  it  takes  away
from  me  whatever  disposition  I  might
have  under  other  circumstances  to
speak.  My  feelings,  upon  returning
after  a  lengthy  absence  from  home,
have  seemed  to  me  entirely  too  big
for  utterance  ;  I  could  not  command
language  to  give  proper  expression
to  them.  Where  one  is  at  home  all
the  time,  this,  probably,  will  not  be
appreciated.

During  my  absence  I  have  en-
joyed excellent  health  and  I  have
had  a  good  deal  of  peace ;  in  fact  I
may  say,  as  it  will  probably  be  satis-
factory lo  many  to  know,  that  I  have
enjoyed  myself  far  better  than  I
could  have  expected.  There  has
been  a  very  different  feeling  in
Washington  during  this  last  session
of  Congress  from  that  which  pre-
Tailed  during  the  first  session,  that
is  so  far  as  we  are  concerned.  There
has  been  a  greater  feeling  of  liber-
ality, a  disposition  to  look  upon  the
people  of  Utah  more  as  fellow-citi-  ;
aens  than,  I  think,  was  manifested  !
during  the  tir^t  session  of  this  Con-
gress*^ There  were  times  during  the
first  session  when  it  seemed  to  me
that  it  required  all  the  faith  and
energy  that  I  could  muster  to  resist
that  oppressive  feeling  which  pro-  !
bably,  many  who  are  here,  have
experienced  when  they  have  been
brought  in  contact  jvith  a  strong
feeling  of  opposition.  It  is  more  of
a  spiritual  feeling,  a  feeling  that


appeals  to  the  spiritual  senses,  than
anything  that  I  could  describe  of  a
physical  character.  There  were
times  daring  the  first  session  when
that  feeling  was  very  strong,  es-
pecially during the pendency  of

'  the  McKee,  Poland  and  other  bills
framed  for  the  express  purpose  of
giving  our  enemies  power  over  us.
But  I  had  comparatively  little  or
none  of  that  feeling  during  the  last
session ;  although,  as  you  are  doubt-
leas  aware,  so  far  as  I  myself  was

'  concerned,  my  seat  seemed  to  be
in  greater  peril  during  last  session
than  it  was  the  first  session.  A  por-
tion of  the  Committee  on  Elections
reached  a  conclusion  upon  my  case,
a  technical  majority  of  the  members
of  the  committee  present  having
adopted  a  resolution  to  exclude  me
from  my  seat  They  varied  the
language  usually  adopted  on  such
occasions  to  make  it,  I  suppose,  not
hurt  so  badly,  by  calling  it  exclu-
sion instead  of  expulsion.  But  not-
withstanding this  was  the  case,  and

I  it  might  be  said  that  I  stood  in
greater  peril  personally,  I  enjoyed
myself  much  better,  and  there  was
greater  liberality  and  a  greater  dis-
position manifested  to  deal  justly
and  fairly  with  us  who  live  in  this
Territory.  Whether  this  feeling
was  the  result  of  last  Fall's  elec-
tions or  not  I  will  not  say.  Yon
who  are  politicians  can  judge  for
yourselves,  I  suppose  that  every
one  who  has  democratic  inclinations
or  proclivities  will  be  very  apt  to
attribute  this  change  of  feeling  to
the  fact  that  the  democrats  ob-
tained some  victories  last  Fall,  But
whatever  the  cause  was,  the  fact  is
as  I  have  stated ;  and  as  it  is  a  mat*
ter,  doubtless,  of  some  interest  to
all  of  you,  and  it  is  not  contrary  to
our  views  to  talk,  on  a  Sunday,  about
matters  that  pertain  to  our  temporal
salvation,  because  our  temporal  and


CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


335


spiritual  salvation  are  so  intimately
blended  that  they  may  be  said  to  be
inseparable,  of  course  I  do  not  think
it  improper  to  allude  to  it

My  feelings  respecting  us  as  a
people,  at  the  present  time,  outside
of  what  I  see  at  home,  are  of  a
more  cheerful  and  hopeful  character
than  I  have  had  cause  to  indulge
in  for  years.  There  are  some  things
at  home  which  if  I  were  to  look  at
them  very  closely,  would  discourage
»e  in  some  respects,  because  I  think
that  we  are  far  from  being  what  we
ought  to  be ;  and  you  know  our  views
on  these  subjects  are  that  we
cannot  expect  much  prosperity,
for  ourselves  or  for  the  cause  with
which  we  are  identified,  so  long
as  we  ourselves  are  not  in  a
position  to  warrant  the  bestowal
of  that  prosperity  upon  us*  Believ-
ing, as  we  do,  that  God  our  Eternal
Father  is  at  the  foundation  of  this
work,  and  that  his  providence  is  over
it  and  controlling  all  things  for  its
good,  we,  of  course,  cannot  imagine
that  he  is  going  to  give  auy  very
great  prosperity  to  this  cause,  or  to
ns  as  a  community  unless  we  are  in  a
position  to  be  benefitted  thereby ;  he
ii  not  going  to  bestow  blessings  upon
us  that  will  injure  us,  and  which,  in-
stead of  proving  advantageous,
would  prove  destructive  to  us.  On
this  account  I  have  entertained  some
doubts  concerning  our  future  since  I
returned  home,  as  the  result,  proba-
bly, of  very  partial  observation,  how-
ever, for  I  have  had  very  limited
opportunities  of  seeing  or  of  judging
correctly  about  this.  But  to  have  a
great  degree  of  prosperity,  there
should  be  more  faith  manifested  by
ns,  more  union,  more  love,  and  more
of  those  graces  which  ought  to  adorn
the  character  of  the  Latter-day
Saints.

But  I  think  there  is  a  bright  and
▼ery  encouraging  future  for  us  as  a


people,  In  Congress,  as  I  have  said,
there  has  been  a  greater  disposition
than  has  been  manifested  for  years,
to  accord  to  Utah  her  rights.  There
has  been  a  feeling,  which  some  have
taken  pains  to  foster,  that  the  best
means  that  a  Federal  official  could
take  to  obtain  office,  and  then  to  re-
tain it  after  he  had  obtained  it,  was
to  declare  war  among  the  people  in
whose  midst  he  was  sent  to  act.
This  has  actually  been  the  policy
that  has  been  adopted  by  some  in  this
Territory  for  years,  and,  judging  from
their  actions,  the  idea  has  been  that
no  better  passport  to  favor  with  the
Administration  could  be  urged  than
the  fact  that  an  official  was  inimical
to  the  people  and  was  laboring  stren-
uously to  destroy  them  and  their  re-
ligion ;  and  every  man  holding  office,
who  has  not  adopted  this  policy  has
been  placed  under  a  ban,  and  has  been
made  to  feel  that  he  stood  in  jeop-
ardy. The  result  has  been  antagon-
ism and  hostility  between  classes
when  there  should  have  been  union;
in  fact,  where  there  was  already  too
great  a  disposition  for  it  to  exist  na-
turally, it  has  received  encourage-
ment from  those  who  have  had  this
feeling;  and  a  great  many  in  high
places,  legislators  and  others,  have
seemed  to  think  that  in  passing  lawa
it  was  only  necessary  to  know  that
they  were  designed  to  operate  in  Utah,
to  receive  their  sanction,  without  car-
ing any  thing  about  the  nature  of  the
laws  themselves.  Hence  the  favor
with  which  were  received  such  bills
as  Cullora's,  McKee's,  Frelinghuy-
sen's  and  others  which  have  been  in-
troduced into  Congress,  intended  to
operate  exclusively  in  Utah.

During  this  last  session  I  heard
the  enquiry  made,  when  a  bill  was
introduced — "  Is  it  intended  for  Utah
alone?"  and  many  members  were
ready  to  jump  to  their  feet  and  op-
pose it  because  it  was  so  intended*


is  was  a  marked  change,  and  I
coul  ]  not  but  notice  it.  The  patience
which  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
manifested  now  for  four  or  five  years
in  the  midst  of  the  judicial  difficul.
ties  which  have  environed  them,  has
been  productive  of  good  effects
abroad,  it  has,  in  my  opinion,  pro-
duced a  reaction  in  the  public  mind.
Many  persons  have  become  familiar
with  the  actual  condition  of  affairs
here,  and  their  sympathies  have  been
awakened  by  what  they  have  heard,
and  they  have  felt  disposed  to  do
what  they  could  in  a  quiet  way  to  re-
lieve us  from  these  difficulties;  and
if  we  continue  to  exercise  patience
and  longsuffering  in  the  future  as  we
have  in  the  past,  there  is  no  doubt  in
my  mind  about  the  results.  It  is  our
duty  to  do  this*  It  is  a  duty  made
incumbent  upon  us  by  our  religion  '
to  he  pjitient,  forbearing,  and  long-
Ftiffering,  and  if  we  encourage  the.se
feelings  in  ourselves  and  in  our  chil-
dren, putting  our  trnst  in  God,  rely-
ing upon  him  continually,  there  is  no
doubt  in  my  mind  as  to  what  the  re-
sult will  be.  Men  may  point  the  fin-
ger of  scorn  at  us  and  ridicule  us  be*
cause  of  our  religion  ;  but  if  we  are
true  to  its  principles,  if  we  abide  in
the  faith  which  God  has  revealed  unto
us,  we  can  afford  to  submit  to  all  of
this  obloquy,  and  everything  of  that
character.  It  will  pass  away  and  be
forgotten,  but  the  virtues  which  we
possess  will  endure  and  have  their
effect,

It  lias  afforded  me  the  greatest
pleasure  to  speak  about  the  condition
and  management  of  affairs  in  this
Territory,  I  could  point  with  a
great  dead  of  pride  to  the  fact  that
we  were  a  lightly  taxed  people,  pro-
bably as  lightly  taxed  as  any  com mu-
mity  within  the  confines  of  the
Union ;  that  we  were  out  of  debt ;
that  Salt  Lake  City  had,  at  the  last
report,  a  goodly  sum  in  its  treasury,


besides,  nearly  an  equal  amount  in  as-
sets ;  that  every  other  municipality
in  the  Territory  was  in  the  same
condition  ;  that  our  county  organiza-
tion! were  free  from  debtj  that  the
Territory  itself  did  not  owe  a  dollar
in  any  form,  but  bad  a  large  amount
to  its  credit.  This  speaks  volumes
to  a  great  many  people,  especially  to
men  acquainted  with  government,
and  who,  themselves,  live  in  the
midst  of  tax-oppressed  communities^
groaning  under  public  debts  created
by  unwise  and  dishonest  officials.
They  could  appreciate  facts  of  this
kind,  and  they  bore  volume's  of  tes-
timony respecting  the  good  order
and  wisdom  that  have  characterized
the  operations  of  those  who  have  had
charge  of  public  affairs  in  this  Terri-
'  tory.

Another  thing  to  which  my  atten-
.  tion  uas  called  a  great  many  times,
waa  the  grasshopper  scourge  with
which  Utah  had  been  visited  so  fre-
quently, A  great  many  had  inqui-
ries to  mnke  on  the  subject.  Kansas^
Nebraska,  and  part  of  Iowa  were
afflicted  with  grasshoppers  this  last
season*  and  the  people  were  exceed-
j  ingly  desirous  to  obtain  legislation  in
their  behalf — they  wanted  Congress
to  relieve  them  by  sending  seeds  and
by  giving  them  pecuniary  assistance  f
Tales  of  distress  came  by  every  mail
to  members  of  Congress,  in  which
the  writers  plead  piteously  with  them
to  have  Congress  extend  aid  to  the
sufferers,  as  you  have  doubtless  seen
in  the  papers,  particularly  in  the  New
York  Trihwie3  which  had  a  column
daily  containing-  the  names  of  Sou-
day  School  children,  servant  girls,
widows,  and  other  persons  who  bad
c mttibuted  their  mites  to  help  the
sufferers  in  the  districts  ravaged  by
the  grasshoppers  in  the  States  I  have
named. Knowing  that  Utah  had
1  been  afflicted  by  grasshoppers,  a  good
many  came  to  me  to  enquire  how  we


CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS,  ETC-


327


had  got  along,  and  it  was  a  great
source  of  satisfaction  to  me  to  be
able  to  say  that  notwithstanding  some
of  our  settlements  had  suffered  from
the  devastations  of  grasshoppers  five
years  in  succession,  there  had  been
no  clamor,  and  that  no  begging  ap-
peal had  gone  up  or  out  from  Utah
to  other  portions  of  the  United
States,  although. many  of  our  settle-
ments had  their  entire  crops  destroyed
years  in  succession*  I  distinctly
remember  that  WelUvilio,  in  Cache
Valley  had  its  crops  destroyed  fivq
years,  while  scarcely  a  settlement  in
the  Territory  escaped  a  visitation  of
this  kind  three  years  in  succession*

All  these  things,  when  mentioned,
called  forth  admiration.  Men  would
siy — "There  must  be  something
very  peculiar  about  your  organization
to  enable  you  to  manage  these  things
so  well.  Were  not  your  people  over-
whelmed with  debt,  their  farms  all
mortgaged?'*  "No."  "How  did
you  sustain  yourselves  ?"  "Well,  we
believed  in  assisting  each  other;
and  if  our  people  lived  in  a  Sta*9
like  Kansas  or  Nebraska  they  would
be  too  proud  to/call  for  help  from  the
rest  uf  the  nation  because  their  crops
bad  been  destroyed  one  yean  We
believe  in  helping  ourselves;  we  be-
lieve in  laboring  and  in  asking  tho
blessing  of  God  upon  our  labors,  and
in  putting  our  trust  in  him,  believing
that  be  wilt  sustain  us,  and  thus  far
he  has  done  so,"  7

I  allude  to  these  things  because
they  are  of  public  interest*  So  far
as  our  admittance  into  the  Union  is
concerned,,  it  is  generally  acknow-
ledged ,  I  believe,  among  the  members
of  the  Senate  and  House  of  Repre-
sentatives, that  Utah  was  fully  en-
titled to  statehood,  and  that  it  ought
to  have  a  state  government.  And,
gentlemen  would  say — "  If  it  were
not  for  your  peculiar  institution,
you would be admitted  readily/1

No.  22.


"No,"  I  remarked,  "you  mistake,
sir ;  it  is  not  that,  there  is  something
more  than  that,  I  know  that  the
general  opinion  is  that  it  is  our  sys-
tem of  marriage  which  prevents
Utah  from  being  admitted  as  a  State,
but  it  is  a  mistake,  if  we  did  not
believe  in  that  there  would  be  some-
thing else."  This  they  would  be
loth  to  admit,  but  many  admitted
so  far  as  the  elements  of  a  State  were
concerned,  in  having  a  substantial
footing  in  the  land  and  being  wedded
to  the  soil,  in  having  developed  the
resources  of  the  country,  agricultural
and  mineral,  and  in  establishing
manufactures,  that  Utah,  with  her
railroads  and  other  improvements  is
ahead  of  every  other  Territory.  But,
as  I  have  said,  the  idea  was  that  we
were  scarcely  fit  to  be  admitted  be-
cause of  our  "  peculiar  institution/'
I  occasionally  remarked  when  talk-
ing on  this  subject  to  members  of
Congress — "Yuu  are  determined  to
make  what  you  call  'the  peculiar
institution'  of  Utah  of  national  im-
portance ;  you  commit,  according  to
my  views,  a  great  blunder  by  so
doing.  Suppose  there  is  one  out  of
every  ten  among  the  people  of  Utah
connected  with  polygamy  —  some
think  that  is  a  high  estimate — and
that  there  are  one  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  people  in  Utah,  and  some
think  that  is  a  high  estimate  also,
thr;t  would  make  fifteen  thotiMft)
people  in  Utah  Territory  who  are
either  poly ga mists  or  connected  witfo
polygamy.  Now  think  of  it,  hem
you  are  the  representatives  of  forty
millions  of  people,  and  by  your  ac-
tion in  a  national  capacity  you  uplift
the  practices  of  fifteen  thousand,
people  from  obscurity  and  give  them
a  national  importance  in  the  eyes*
not  only  of  our  own  country,  but  in
the  eyes  of  Europe.  Does  it  seeru
statesmanlike  that  the  practices  of
fifteen  thousand  people  should

Vol  XVIL


338


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


made  sn  prominent  ?"  Yon  talk  to
men  in  that  strain,  and  many  would
vay  —  "Certainly,  it  is  folly,  we
ought  to  leave  it  to  the  arbitrament
of  time ; "  but  there  were  others  who
thought  it  was  comparable  to  slavery.
But  slavery  was  the  practice  of
eleven  millions  of  people  at  the  time
uf  the  rebellion,  hence  there  is  no
comparison  between  them.  But  it
seems  as  though,  in  the  providence
of  God,  men  are  determined  to  give
this  an  importance  to  which  it  is  not
entitled,  if  the  number  of  those  who
practice  it  bu  taken  into  account.  It
seems  that  men  are  determined  to
make  it  public,  to  advertise  it,  and
have  it  known.

But  notwithstanding  all  these
things  we  are  gaining  influence.
There  is  no  people  to-day  on  this
continent  of  our  numbers  who  attract
so  much  attention,  and  concerning
whom  there  is  so  muoh  interest  felt
as  the  people  of  Utah.  So  also  with
the  delegate  from  Utah  Territory  ;
he  has  always  been  one  of  the  mem-
bers to  whom  strangers  have  been
most  desirous  to  be  introduced.  This
has  been  the  case  from  the  time  of
the  first  delegate,  and  I  do  not  think
the  interest  has  lessened  of  late.
So  that,  not  only  are  the  people  ob-
jects of  interest,  but  everything
connected  with  them  and  their  his-
tory, and  notwithstanding  all  that  is
said  about  us  we  are  growing  in  in-
fluence in  the  nation,  and  it  has  sur-
prised me  to  see  how  widely  our
influence  is  spreading,  and  how  many
channels  it  occupies  and  how  wide  its
ramifications  extend  throughout  the
nation.  How  difficult  it  is  to  strike
Hi  a  blow  without  hitting  somebody
else !  How  difficult  it  is  to  do  any-
thing inimical  to  us  without  others
feeling  that  they  will  be  injured  by
that  action  !  This  has  surprised  me
wonderfully  this  past  winter,  and  in
fact  this  past  two  years. I  have  seen


the  growth  of  the  influence  of  this
people  and  its increase in  many
directions. Many  acknowledge  while
they  deprecate  it. Of  course  this
has  caused  me  to  rejoice  more  than  I
can tell, I  have  felt  that  God's
hand  has  been  with  us  as  a  people.
I  felt  so  during  the  first  session.  The
passage  of  the  Poland  bill,  in  its
present  form,  was  to  me  one  of  the
most wonderful manifestations  of
Providence  I  ever  beheld  ;  that  which
has  occurred  this  last  session  has
been  equally  so,  because  I  have  be-
lieved that  I  could  see  the  hand  of
God  in  it  all;  I  believed  that  his
providence  was  over  us;  I  believed
that the prayers  of  this  people,
offered  continually  unto  the  Lord,
were  heard  and  answered  by  him.  A
very  prominent  gentleman  remarked
to  me  one  day — "  Mr.  Cannon,  it  ia
wonderful  how  you  retain  your  seat,
it  surprises  me,  one  would  think  yoa
would  have  been  ousted  long  ago,
considering  the  efforts  which  have
been  made." I  made  some  remark
in  reply,  and,  the  conversation  con-
tinuing I  remarked,  calling  him  by
name — **  There  are  over  a  hundred
thousand  people  in  Utah  Territory
praying  for  you  members,  and  for
me,  and  they  are  a  sincere  people,
and  their  prayers  are  heard."  Said
he — "  I  do  believe  that  is  the  case."
It  may  seem  a  trifling  thing,  in  these
days  of  unbelief,  to  think  that  God
hears  and  answers  prayer ;  but  it  has
been  a  great  satisfaction  to  me  all  the
time  to  tell  my  fellow- members  that
we  were  a  praying  people,  and  that
God  was  being  supplicated  by  yoa
to  avert  every  blow.

It  is  something  refreshing  at  this
time  in  the  midst  of  the  unbelief  of
men  to  meet  with  a  man  who  believes
that  God  lives,  and  that  he  hears  and
answers  prayer,  You  would  be  sur-
prised to  find  how  few  such  men
there  are  in  this  world,  especially  in


CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


333


public  life,  The  belief  in  God,  that
he  exists,  that  he  takes  any  cognizance
of  human  affairs,  and  that  he  hears
and  answers  prayer  is  almost  extinct;
it  is  a  rare  thine:  to  find  a  man  who
entertains  it  Yet  men  do  not  ignore
God  entirely,  hut  they  deny  his  in-
terposition in  ha  man  affairs.  On
this  point  we  stand  out  in  marked
contrast  with  every  other  people.  We
believe  that  God's  providences  are
overall,  that  not  a  hair  of  our  head
falls  without  his  notice,  that  not  even
a  sparrow  &iu  fall  to  the  ground
without  his  being  aware  of  it,  and
that  he  hears  and  answers  prayer
when  we  supplicate  him  in  faith  in
the  name  of  Jesus  for  those  things
that  we  need ;  and  we  have  this  les-
son to  teach.  I  helieve  that  the  day
is  not  far  distant  when  there  will  be
a  reaction  in  this  respect.  There  is
at  the  present  time  a  determination,
apparently,  to  swing  to  the  extreme
of  infidelity;  but  I  look  for  a  re-
action. I  believe  that  the  example,
teaching  and  influence  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  will  be  attended  with  good
effects.  I  think  it  is  the  duty  of
every  one,  not  offensively,  not  in  a
manner  to  disgust,  but  in  a  proper,
wise  manner,  to  endeavor,  as  far
as  possible,  to  inculcate  by  example
and  by  precept  faith  in  God  and  in
the  efficacy  of  prayer  to  him.

Of  course  there  were  times  when
inquiries  would  be  made  respecting
our  belief,  and  many  persons  scarcely
think  that  we  believe  in  Jesus  Christ
and  in  the  Bible.  Some  have  the
idea  that  we  are  a  sort  of  heathen ;
or,  in  other  words,  that  we  have
discarded  everything  connected  with
Christianity.  Others  have  no  definite
ideas  in  regard  to  our  belief,  their
minds  being  fufly  occupied  with  the
marriage  system  of  the  ■  Mormons,"
they  having  heard  of  that  and  not
much  else,  and  they  suppose  that  we
do  not  believe  in  anything  but  mar-


rying and  living  in  polygamy.  When
you  converse  with  men  of  intelligence,
who  have  any  comprehension  of
truth,  and  relate  to  them  our  views,
they  acknowledge  that  we  are  a  dif-
ferent people  to  what  they  imagined.

I  have  remarked  when  in  conversa-
tion upon  our  principles  that  if  the
gratification  of  licentiousness  were
our  object,  we  could  do  that  in  a
much  more  popular  and  in  a  much

'  cheaper  manner  than  the  way  we
have  adopted.  I  told  them  that  it
was  only  necessary  to  follow  the  ex-
ample of  some  public  men  and  we
should  get  along  without  any  diffi-
culty, and  there  would  he  no  fault
found  with  ua  at  all.  Many  would
acknowledge  that  this  was  true  if  the
object  we  had  in  view  was  the  grati-
fication of  sensuality. But  wherever

I I  have  had  the  opportunity,  I  have
endeavored  to  impress  those  with
whom  I  have  conversed  with  the  idea

I  that  we  regarded  men  and  women
guilty  of  immoral  practices  as  being
guilty  of  the  worst  possible  crime
next  to  shedding  blood.  I  have  said
that  we  regard  murder  as  the  greatest

'crime  in  the  .sight  of  God,  ?ind  that
noxt  to  that  we  look  upon  anchastity
and  unvirtuous  actions.  This  has
created  some  surprise,  but  it  is  a
lesson  that  we  have  yet  to  teach
mankind  on  this  point,  and  I  trust
that  we  shall  be  true  to  our  princi-
ples.

I  have  heard,  since  I  returned,  and
in  fact  I  heard  it  before,  that  there
is  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  some
to  yield  to  the  temptations  that  sur-
round us,  young  mr?n  and  young
women  falling  away  and  being  guilty
of  nnchustity,  yoan^  men  going  to
billiard  saloons,  gambling  saloons,
drinking  saloons,  indulging  in  the
habits  of  smoking  and  swearing;
and  not  only  young  persons  but  men
of  ma  tare  years.  I  am  surprised  at
it I  am  surprised  that  Latter-day


310


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Saints  should  have  so  little  strength
of  character,  and  so  easily  yield  to
these  wicked  influences.  Do  yon
think  that  anybody  respects  a  man
who  takes  a  course  of  this  kind  ?
Certainly  not,  yet  there  are  some  who
think  they  gain  respect  by  so  doing.
Let  me  say  to  you  that  a  wicked
man,  a  man  who  is  unchaste  and
unvirtuous,  has  no  respect  for  a  man
who  is  like  himself.  A  man  who  is
profane  will  admire  a  man  who  will
not  indulge  in  profanity.  Yon  never
«aw  a  man  who  was  a  drunkard  and
who  indulged  in  the  use  of  intox-
icating drinks  who  did  not  admire
the  man  who  refrained  from  their
use.  He  may  banter  and  ridicule
him,  but  in  his  secret  soul  he  admires
him;  and  so  it  is  with  all  evil  habits,
and  I  would  not  give  a  fig  for  a  Lat-
ter-day Saint  who  could  not  in  the
midst  of  all  these  temptations,  be
sincere  and  true  to  his  convictions
and  live  the  religion  that  God  has
revealed  to  him ;  such  men  are  not
Worthy  of  the  name,  and  sooner  or
later  they  will  lose  the  name  and  their
standing  and  place  in  the  Church.  I
know,  so  far  as  my  experience  has
gone,  that  men  respect  sincerity.
Men  despite  Latter-day  Saints  who
do  not  act  consistently  with  the
principles  they  profess,  while,  what-
ever a  man's  religion  may  be,  he  will
command  respect  in  proportion  as  he
clings  to  ami  honors  the  principles
which  he  professes,  under  all  circum-
stances under  which  he*  may  be
placed.

The  Lord  is  working  with  us  as
well  as  with  the  nation,  and  I  feel
sure  he  will  cleanse  from  our  midst
everything  that  is  impure  and  un-
godly, I  expect  that  we  shall  have
ordeals  that  will  cleanse  everything
of  this  character  from  our  midst,  and
that  everything  that  can  be  shaken
will  be.  In  former  days  we  had
mobs  to  con  tend  with,  and  other  diffi-


culties that  were  trying  to  the  fait]
of  the  people,  and  those  who  were
not  grounded  on  the  reck  fell  by  tin
way.  If  they  could  be  frightened,
or  if  threats  or  difficult  circumstance
could  affect  them  or  their  faith,  why,
of  course,  they  dissolved  their  con-
nection with  the  Church,  But  I
rather  think  the  day  of  mobs  hai
gone  by.  We  certainly  have  been
led  to  expect  that  the  time  will  com*
when  we  shall  be  delivered  from  the
power  of  mobocracy.  What  then
will  be  the  means  of  trying  the  peo-
ple ?  Probably  prosperity,  good
circiim stances,  the  increase  of  wealth,
the  effects  of  which  are  far  moi
trying  on  a  people  than  poverty*
The  influences  which  attend  wealt
and  comfortable  circumstances  will
probably  have  the  same  effect  on  the
people  in  cleansing  from  our  midst
that  which  is  unsound,  as  mobocracy
and  the  difficult  circumstances  con-
nected with  it  had  in  former  days*
But  I  never  expect  to  see  the  day
when  the  Latter-day  Saints  will  be
free  from  influences  which  will  test
their  fidelity  to  God,  and  be  a  means
of  removing  from  their  midst  that
which  is  unworthy  to  be  associated
with  his  Church.  That  is  my  feel-
ing, and  has  been  for  a  long  time,
and  I  believe  that  God  is  causing  us
to  pass  through  these  circumstances
expressly  to  test,  prove  and  try  us,
and  see  whether  we  will  be  true  to
him  or  not.

He  has  revealed  to  us  the  ever-
lasting Gospel ;  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel !  the  truth  as  it  is  contained  in
this  book  (Bible)  ;  he  has  taught  us
what  to  do  in  order  to  gain  favor  in
his  sight  How  many  of  you  who
are  here  to-day  have  seen  the  time  in
your  early  life  when,  if  you  could  have
known  that  God  would  bestow  upon
you  the  gifts  of  his  Holy  Spirit  as
they  were  enjoyed  in  ancient  days  by
his  servants,  you  would  not  have  felt


CONGRESS  AND  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


341


as  though  yon  could  travel  the  earth
over  to  obtain  such  precious  bles-
sings ?  I  suppose  there  are  scores  in
this  congregation  to-day  who  have
had  such  feelings,  they  hare  felt  as
-though  it  would  be  the  greatest  boon
that  could  be  bestowed  upon  them
to  have  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
sod  the  various  gifts  thereof  that
were  bestowed  upon  and  enjoyed  by
the  ancient  Saints.  God  has  be-
stowed these  blessings  upon  us  ;  he
has  revealed  unto. us  the  truth;  he
lias  shown  unto  us  how  we  can  obtain
a  remission  of  our  sins,  and  in  accord-
ance with  his  word  delivered  eighteen
hundred  years  ago  by  his  Son  Jesus  j
and  by  his  Apostles,  that  if  we  believe
in  Jesus,  if  we  repent  of  our  sins  and
are  baptized  for  their  remission,  we
shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.

These  blessings  have  been  pro-
mised to  and  bestowed  upon  us ;  the
Church  has  been  organized  in  its
ancient  purity  and  simplicity,  with
Prophets,  Apostles,  Teachers,  Pastors,
Evangel ists  and  all  the  officers  which
existed  in  ancient  days.  Is  not  this
a  blessing  which  people  should  appre-
ciate? This  has  been  given  unto
us,  and  we  have  been  guided  bv  the
spirit  bf  revelation  and  prophecy*
There  has  not  b*?en  one  moment  since
I  have  known  this  Church  that  we
have  not  ha  1  revelation  to  guide  us,
and  it  has  been  all  of  a  character
that  we  could  understand.  It  has
not  been  some  man  who  was  opera-
'ling  over  the  people,  speaking  in
muttered  tones  as  an  oracle  to  the
people,  so  that  they  could  scarcely
comprehend  what  he  meant;  but  it
has  been  in  plainness  and  simplicity,
so  that  every  man  and  every  woman
in  this  Church  has  been  appealed  to
to  go  and  ask  God  for  themselves,
and  they  have  had  an  opportunity  of
knowing  for  themselves  concerning
the  truth  of  the  doctrines  taught  and
of  the  counsel  that  has  been  given.


This  constitutes  the  great  strength  of
this  work,  and  how  we  ought  to
appreciate  the  blessings  which  God
has  bestowed  upon  us  in  this  respect.

Now  if  we  were  left  without  any
testimony  of  oar  own*  and  had  to
receive  the  ipse  dixit  of  some  man  in
authority,  and  to  act  blindly  upon
that,  it  would  be  very  different,  it
would  require  a  much  greater  degree
of  faith  than  we  have  to  exercise  at
the  present  time.  But  how  was  it
in  the  days  of  Joseph  ?  Was  there  a
doctrine  taught  which  was  not  ac-
companied by  the  testimony  of  the
Spirit  to  the  minds  of  the  peopfe?
Certainly  not  How  has  it  been  in
the  days  of  the  Prophet  Brighum  ?
It  has  been  the  same.  When  the
servants  of  God  proclaimed  that'pod
had  established  his  Church,  that  he
had  restored  the  everlasting  Priest-
hood and  its  ordinances,  they  were
told  to  go  and  ask  God  for  them-
selves, and  they  had  an  opportunity
of  testing  the  truth  of  that  which  was
taught  unto  them,  and  there  was  no
chance  for  imposture.

Many  think  that  the  people  culled
Latter-day  Saints  are  a  deluded,  igno-
rant set,  led  by  cunning  priestly
leaders,  who  exercise  power  nwr
them  because  of  their  shrewdness
and  ability,  and  that  the  people  are  a
blind  herd  led  at  the  will  of  these
shrewd  deceivers.  We  know  that
this  is  not  the  case.  We  know  that
the  most  frequent  appeals  that  have
been  made  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  to  investigate  for  them-
selves and  to  know  for  themselves.
When  we  started  out  from  Illinois
and  traveled  over  these  plains,  were
we  following  President  Young  because
he  said,  **  Come  on  ?"  Were  we
striking  out  blindly  into  the  wilder-
ness, hoping  that  he  would  find  some
place,  and  trusting  to  his  sagacity
and  shrewdness?  Certainly  not,
that  was  not  the  feeling;  but  every


t


342  JOURNAL  OF

Latter-day  Saint  who  crossed  the
Mississippi  river,  who  was  indeed  a
Latter-day  Saint,  had  a  testimony
that  lie  or  she  was  going  in  a  direc*
tion  that  God  was  leading,  and  when
night  came  each  was  as  confident
that  he  was  in  the  path  that  God  re-
quired him  to  walk  in  as  ever  the
children  of  Israel  were  when  led  out
of  Egypt.  When  I  look  back  at
those  days,  and  consider  the  circum-
stances that  surrounded  the  people,
I  wonder  and  am  astonished  at  the
faith,  calmness  and  confidence  they
manifested.  When  the  crickets
came  down  from  the  mountains  in
1848,  and  devoured  iitnrly  the  entire
crops,  I  can  not  recall  now  any  mur-
muring, or  expressions  of  distrust,
fear  or  apprehension,  but  there  was  a
calmness  and  serenity  of  feeling
among  the  people  which,  when  I  re-
flect upon  now,  surprises  me.  Then
I  was  but  a  youth  and  had  no  re-
sponsibilities, but  I  have  had  re-
sponsibilities since  then,  and  I  have
wondered  how  men  having  wives  and
children  a:  id  the  care  of  a  great  peo-
ple resting  upon  them,  as  onr  bre-
thren had  who  were  here  then,  could
maintain  their  equanimity  in  the
midst  of  those  circumstances*  Yet
throughout  this  valley  there  was  not
a  murmur  or  expression  of  Hist  rust,
and  if  there  were  fears  iudulged  in
they  were  not  publicly  expressed.
So  it  has  been  all  the  time.  God
has  been  bearing  testimony  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  by  his  Holy  Spirit,
giving  auto  them  evidence  which  has
been  of  a  most  satisfactory  character;
ami  every  man  and  woman,  boy  and
girl,  ought  to  live  so  that  they  will
have  this  testimony  within  them,
that  they  may  know  concerning  the
doctrine  and  the  counsel  that  is
given ;  that  when  President  Young
speaks,  we  rray  know  for  ourselves
whether  it  is  from  God  or  not,  and
when  any  other  teacher  among  us


DISCOURSES.

speaks,  we  may  know  whether  the
doctrine  he  advances  is  from  God  or
not;  and  so  that,  if  necessary,  we
could  go  to  the  .stake,  and  have  no
doubts  on  the  subject.  Or,  like
Darnel  of  old,  be  cast  into  the  den  of
lions  and  have  no  fears;  or,  like  the
three  Hebrew  children,  be  cast  into  a
fiery  furnace.  We  pray  that  God
will  restore  to  ns  the  faith  once  deli-
vered to  the  Saints,  and  this  is  the
kind  of  faith  they  had,  and  it  sus-
tained them  in  the  midst  of  all  their
trials  and  afflictions.  And  men  and
women  have  had  this  faith  who  have
not  had  the  fulness  of  tlie  Gospel  as
we  have;  thousands  of  them,  in
what  are  called  the  dark  ages,  suffered
the  most  painful  deaths  for  the  sake
of  their  religion  ;  and  they  were  sus-
tained by  the  consciousness  that  they
were  doing  that  which  God  required
at  their  hands,  that  they  were  living
up  to  the  light  of  truth  as  far  as  they
had  it  And  now,  living  with  the
facilities  and  opportunities  that  we
have,  we  ought  to  have  still  greater
faith  and  po^ver,  and  be  able  to  en-
dure far  more  for  the  sake  of  this
great  truth,  for  I  tell  yuu,  my  bre-
thren and  sisters,  it  is  one  of  the
most  inestimable  of  blessings,  it  is
beyond  all  price,  the  knowledge
which  God  has  given  to  us,  that  he
hears  and  answers  prayer.  To  think
that  in  the  midst  of  affliction,  when
you  are  harassed  and  oppressed,  when
your  family  probably  is  sick,  and
you  are  surrounded  by  circumstances
which  human  aid  cannot  relieve,  there
is  a  Being,  all  powerful  in  heaven,
who  is  near  at  hand,  to  whom  you
can  offer  your  supplications  and
make  your  appe?ds,  with  a  certainty
that  he  will  hear  and  answer  them.
What  is  there  to  compare  with  it  in
value  on  the  face  of  the  earth  ?  Who
would  not  give  all  they  have  to  have
that  knowledge  ?  Who  would  not
be  stripped  of  everything  they  hold


THE  SAINTS  HAVE  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC*


343


valuable,  so  far  as  earthly  possessions
are  concerned,  for  the  sake  of  snch
knowledge  as  this  ?

This  is  the  knowledge  that  you
hnve.  If  yon  have  obeyed  the  Gospel
in  sincerity,  every  one  of  yon  should
have  in  your  heart,  no  matter  what
your  circumstances  may  be,  or  what
difficulties  and  trials  yon  may  be
called  upon  to  pass  through,  the
knowledge  that  yon  have  an  abiding
FrJ.end  who  will  hear  ani  answer
yom .  prayers,  and  will  never  desert
you.  I  delight  to  bear  testimony
that  God  does  hear  and  answer
prayer,  that  he  will  bless  and  deliver
those  who  put  their  trust  in  him.
And  I  wish  that  all  of  us  would  cul-
tivate more  of  this  spirit,  and  teach
it  to  our  children.  We  hear  about
infidelity  increasing.  Why  does  it
increase  ? Because  men  and  women


do  not  live  so  as  to  know  that  God
lives.  That  is  the  reason.  If  they
were  to  live  in  close  communion  with
him,  there  would  be  no  chance  for
infidelity  to  increase;  but  the  fact
that  they  do  not  thus  live  cause  ;
that  increase.  We  should  teach  our
children  to  pray  to  and  to  have  faith
in  God.  If  we  do  this  we  shall  seo
good  effects  flow  therefrom  :  faith
will  increase  in  the  land  and  will
spread  abroad,  and  we  shall  be  tho
means  in  the  hands  of  God  of  raising
up  a  people  who  believe  in  him,  and
who,  if  necessary,  would  go  to  the
stake  to  show  their  faith  in  the  truth
of  their  doctrines.

That  God  may  bless  you,  my  bro-
thers and  sisters,  and  help  you  to
overcome  everything  that  is  evil,  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen,


■


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Delivered  at  the  Forty- Fifth  Annual  Conference  op  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  on  Tuesday  Morning,  April  6,  1875.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  SAINTS  HAVE  THE  PRIESTHOOD— THE  KINGDOM  OF HEAVEN  TO  BE
SET  UP  IN  THE  LAST  DAYS— THE  SAINTS  MUST  BE SELF-SUSTAINING i.


To  day  we  have  met  together,  as  is
our  custom  on  the  6th  day  of  April,
according  to  appointment,  in  comme-
moration of  the  day  on  which  the
Chmch  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Sa'nts  was  organized. We  are


professed  Latter-day  Saints,  and  have
been  called  forth  in  this  age  of  the
world  to  be  co-workers  with  onr
Father  in  heaven  in  bringing  to  pass
his  purposes  and  establishing  his
kingdom  upon  the  earth,  to  be  tuo


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


recipients  of  the  authority  of  the
holy  priesthood,  to  stand  in  holy
places  and  to  administer  in  the  ordi-
nances of  the  house  of  God,  that
once  again  upon  this  earth  his  au-
thority and  kingdom  may  be  esta-
blished, and  holy  and  righteous  prin-
ciples and  the  institutions  of  high
heaven  have  a  place*  We  are  the
honored  instruments,  or  may  be  so,
of  being  co-workers  with  God,  and
he  will  tbrt-ugh  us  his  servants,  his
children,  bring  to  pass  his  purposes
if  we  will  let  him.  This  is  a  great,
glorious  and  holy  calling,  and  it  is  a
happy  thing  for  us  to  be  born  in  a
day  and  generation  when  these  things
are  coming  forth,  tor  we  can  thus
have  part  and  lot  in  this  matter.  It
is  no  joke  or  phantasy,  no  matter  of
mere  enthusiasm,  to  use  in  one's
mind  for  a  few- days,  weeks  or  months
and  then  dissipate  away  into  thin  air;
but  it  is  our  high  duty  and  privilege,
as  long  as  we  live,  to  bear  off  these
principles  that  have  been  revealed,
and  to  sustain  and  uphold  the  institu-
tions of  heaven,  and  that  authority
through  and  by  which  the  mind  and
will  of  G'i-1  our  Father  are  made
known  unlo  us  upon  the  earth*

This  work  commenced  smalL
Great  and  glorious  instructions  were
given  to  a  few  in  the  commencement,
and  through  the  blessing  of  the  Al-
mighty they  have  been  sent  forth  to
the  nations  of  the  earth  and,  in  obe-
dience thereunto,  a  great  people,  in
comparison  with  what  the  church
was  originally,  have  gathered  to  these
mountains,  and  the  work  of  the  Lord
has  continued  to  grow  and  increase,
taking  root  downward  and  bearing
fruit  upward.  It  is  true  that  many
have  undertaken  to  run  the  gospel
race  and  have  faltered  and  fainted
by  the  wayside,  still  the  work  has
progressed  and  has  been  onward  and
upward  until  the  present  time;  and
luring  the  forty- live  years  of  its  ex-


istence  upon  the  earth  this  church
and  kingdom  has  never  seen  a  day  or
an  hour  that  it  has  not  been  growing
and  becoming  greater  in  the  earth,
in  numbers  as  well  as  in  intelligence,
for  the  stieam  of  light  from  ueaven
has  not  been  withdrawn  or  cut  short,
but  has  continued  to  flow  to  the
minds  of  the  children  of  men,  bear-
ing testimony  to  the  hearts  of  the
honest,  and  elevating  them  in  the
scale  of  human  existence.  I  take
pleasure  in  bearing  this  testimony,
knowing  that  it  is  true,  and  also
knowing  that  the  great  desire  among
Godfs  people  here  in  Zion  is  to  sus-
ta  n  and  bear  off  the  principles  of
truth  and  righteousness  in  the  earth.

We  are  here  for  this  express  pur-
pose, and  to  avoid  the  evils  and  judg-
ments which  are  abroad  in  the  earth.
Are  the  judgments  of  God  abroad  in
the  earth? They  are,  and  the  word
of  the  Lord  to  his  Saints  is — "Come
out  of  her,  0  ray  people,  that  ye  be
not  partakers  of  her  sins,  that  ye  re-
ceive not  of  her  plagues-" This  was
spoken  centimes  ago,  but  it  is  speci-
ally applicable  to  us,  and  to  the  work
of  God  in  the  last  days. But  if  we
do  not  divest  ourselves  of  the  sins  of
the  world,  bave  we  any  assurance  that
we  shall  escape  the  plagues  and  judg-
ments  of  the  almighty  ? By  no
means. We  gather up to  these
mountains  that  we  may  not  be  par-
takers ot  her  sins. This  is  the  ap-
pointed place  where  God  can  work
with  bis  people  on  the  earth ;  and  in
order  that  he  may  be  able  to  do  so
effectually  it  is  necessary  that  wt'  di-
vest  ourselves  of  every  evil,  stand  be-
fore God  blameless,  and  become  uni-
ted as  the  heart  of  one  man  in  sus-
taining the  cause  of  Zion. The  re-
sponsibility of  building  up  this  king-
dom rests  in  a  manner  upon  us,  who
have  taken  upon  us  the  name  of  the
Most  High. We  have  gathered  to-
gether that  we  may  build  Temples  to


*


THE  SAINTS  HAVE  THE  TPJESTHOOD,  ETC.


345


bis  holy  name,  wherein  we  may  re-
ceive the  blessings  of  time  and  eter-
nity, both  fur  the  living  and  the  dead.
It  becomes  us,  then,  to  enquire  how
^we  mav  best  set  ourselves  about  this
gr  oat  work ;  we  must  find  out  the  de-
sign of  our  Father  concerning  us,
and  to  do  this  we  must  have  commu-
nication with  him,  and  we  must  live
SO  that  we  can  have  the  Holy  Spirit
to  direct  our  minds,  mid  to  qualify  us
the  better  fur  the  performance  uf  the
duties  which  devolve  upon  us  The
channel  has  been  opened  between  the
Leavens  and  the  earth  by  which  we
may  learn  the  mind  and  will  <>f  our
Father  concerning  us.  But  when  we
have  learned  that  it  is  our  business
to  go  to  and  unflinchingly  carry  out
and  accomplish  that  which  he  requires
of  us  according  to  our  best  skill  and

ability-
la  it  necessary  that  we  should  obey
the  principles  uf  the  gospel,  which
we  are  told  is  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation  ?  I  think  that  no  one  will
deny  that.  We  must  repent,  we
must  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
sins,  receive  the  administration  of
hands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  then  go  on  with  the  light
of  the  Spirit,  having  received  the
testimony  of  the  truth  of  the  work,
and  maintain  that  wort:  against  every
opposing  obstacle,  What  is  a  man
good  for  who  flies  the  track  the  very
moment  an  obstacle  presents  itself  in
his  way?  Such  a  man  will  not  ob-
tain salvation  and  exaltation  in  the
presence  of  God  j  he  who  does  that
must  be  unflinching  in  the  path  of
duty.

Is  God  ever  going  to  establish  his
kingdom  and  bring  to  pass  his  pur-
poses on  the  earth?  AH  believers  in
Christianity  say  so,  and  they  all  pre-
tend to  believe  it;  but  when  will  it
be  ?  As  soon  as  the  Lord  Jesus  finds
a  people  who  are  willing  to  take  upon
them  his  name,  and  will  follow  him


through  evil  as  well  as  through  good
report,  and  who,  if  need  be,  will  even
go  to  death  in  the  maintaining  of  the
principles  of  truth  upon  the  earth.
Just  as  soon  as  he  finds  a  people  who
will  be  united  and  will  not  sift  their
ways  to  strangers,  but  will  hold  that
which  he  bestows upon  them  for
him  and  for  his  kingdom,  will  he  es-
tablish that  kingdom  upon  the  earth.
What  right  has  a  Latter-day  Saint,
who  has  taken  upon  himself  the  name
of  God  and  has  enlisted  uuder  King
Emmanuel's  banner,  to  strew  the  bles-
sings he  receives  from  God  to  the
wicked. Are  they  given  to  him  for
that  purpose  ? No,  they  are  given
him  to  use  tor  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.  It
is  said,  and  we  profess  to  believe  it,
that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
to  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord
and  of  bis  Christ,  and  that  that  king-
dom and  its  fulness  shall  be  given  to
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High. It  is
not  to  be  given  to  the  wicked,  or  to
a  people  who  will  hand  it  over  to  the
wicked  as  fast  as  the  Lard  hands  it
over  to  them. We  may  as  well
learn  this  lesson  to-day  as  at  any
other  time* The  blessings  of  the
Lord  are  not bestowed upon  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  be  placed  by
!  them  in  the  hands  of  the  wicked.
When  could  the  Lord  establish  his
purposes  with  a  people  who  will  act
in  that  way? Never  in  the  world.
The  time  will  come  and  is  now  has*
tening  when  the  people  of  God  will
not  be  a  dependent  people,  that  is,
dependent  upon  the  outside  world;
of  course  they  will  always  be  depend-
ent upon  the  Lord,  but  the  day  will
come  when  they,  under  the  blessing
of  heaven,  will  be  an  entirely  $el£
sustaining  people,  and  the  Lord  is
ready  and  willing,  as  he  ever  has
been  and  ever  will  be,  to  sustain  the
efforts  of  his  people  in  this  direction.
They  must  put  forth  their  hands  to


346


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


be  self-sustnimng,  and  then  the
blessings  of  the  Almighty  will  at-
tend them  even  more  abundantly.

The  Lord  has,  from  time  to  time,
through  his  .servants,  given  forth  a
line  of  conduct  or  principle  for  us
to  be  guided  by,  so  that  we  may  be-
come more  united  than  we  have  been
hitherto;  and  while  it  may  he  said
that  we  are  slowly  approaching  that
point,  we  are  far  fmra  having  ad-
vanced in  the  principles  of  unity  to
the  fullest  extent,  and  hence  we
cannot  realize  the  blessings  that  will
accrue  when  that  unity  which  the
Lord  desires  to  see  among  his  people
is  fully  established.  But  we  have
commenced,  and  we  can  work  in  that
direction,  and  it  is  our  bounden  duty
to  do  so ;  and  the  farther  we  progress
the  more  will  his  blessings  mul-
tiplied towards  us;  and  if  we  con-
tinue in  the  path  marked  out  for  us
by  the  Almighty  through  his  servants,
we  shall  ultimately  attain  to  a  fulness.
This  is  the  way  I  understand  it.

We  have  come  up  here  to  be  taught
in  his  ways  that  we  may  walk  in  his
paths.  Men  should  not  mark  out
paths  for  themselves  to  walk  in,  they
are  not  capable  uf  doing  so.  You
may  any  that  this  infringes  upon  \
mans  agency  and  independence;  but
it  makes  no  difference  what  may  be
said  or  thought  of  this,  it  is  true,
and  we  need  only  look  abroad  in  the
world  to  see  the  difficulties  which
beset  the  people  on  every  hand  to
find  ample  confirmation  of  this  state-
ment. Are  the  people  satisfied  with
the  paths  they  have  marked  out  for
themselves  ?  No,  nowhere  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  There  is  one
whose  guidance  we  need,  he  is  wiser
than  we  are,  for  he  has  passed  '
through  all  the  ordeals  and  trials
of  a  lower  estate,  and  has  gained  an
experience  far  beyond  the  experience
of  men,  and  he  is  now  willing  to  lead
and  guide  his  children  here  on  the


1  earth  if  they  will  only  allow  him  to
,  do  so.  But  men  generally  think
they  know  best  themselves,  they  are
not  willing  to  be  guided  by  the  God
of  heaven,  they  give  the  preference
to  the  paths  marked  out  by  them-
selves. Are  their  own  counsels  the
best  ?  No,  they  are  not,  and  the
Latter-day  Saints  ought  to  know  it
by  this  time.  A  great  many  of  them
do  know  it ;  some  do  not,  but  I  trust
that  they  will,  and  that  they  will  con-
tinue to  learn  and  progress  in  these
things,  until  they  know  beyond  all
question  that  God's  way  is  the  best,
and  that  it  is  not  only  superior  to
man's  way,  but  that  there  is  no  other
by  which  men  and  women  can  build
up  a  community  which  will  be  wise,
virtuous  and  happy,  and  by  which
the  resources  of  the  earth  may  be
developed  and  the  elements  used
so  as  to  best  promote  the  general
goou.  God's  way  is  as  much  better
than  man's  way,  as  the  heavens  are
higher  than  the  earth.

There  is  no  true  principle,  no  true
philosophy,  no  good  thing  that  comes
from  any  source  except  that  which
I  have  been  speaking  of.  No  matter
through  whom,  or  by  whom  it  comes
to  the  children  of  men,  it  has  ema-
nated from  that  source — from  God
our  Father,  Then  why  can  we  not
implicitly  trust  him,  and  put  our
faith  and  confidence  in  him  ?  We
may  rest  assured  that  he  will  with-
hold no  good  thing  that  will  prove
beneficial  to  us.  He  never  did  and
he  never  will  reveal  a  thing  to  the
children  of  men  bet  what,  if  it  can
be  carried  out  according  to  his  de-
sign, will  prove  an  advantage  and  a
blessing  to  them.  Men  may  under-
take to  change  that  which  God  has
revealed,  and  try  to  make  it  mean
something  else;  but  it  is  folly  to  do
so*  In  taking  this  course  they  go
into  by  and  forbidden  paths,  and,  »
being  then  without  the  light  of  truth,


THE  SAINTS  HAVE  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


ur


they  are  compelled  to  grope  their
way.

Now,  what  is  necessary  in  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth  ?
We  arc  not  talking  about  building
up  his  kingdom  in  some  far-off
realm,  away

"  Beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and  space
Where  human  mind  can  never  traces
The  Saints1  secure  abode,"

as  our  sectarian  brethren  sing  about,
I  do  not  understand  this  to  be  the
work  of  the  Saints  of  God  upon  the
earth  at  all.  I  understand  that  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  are  to  become
the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  bis
Christ,  just  so  soon  as  the  God  of
heaven  finds  a  people  who  will  be
obedient  to  his  law.  Well,  what  is
necessary  then  ?  Why,  in  the  first
place  there  must  be  a  people  to  gov- 1
ern,  and  a  king  to  rule  over  them.
It  takes  that  much  anyhow  to  con.  |
stitnte  a  kingdom.  The  people  must
have  a  place  to  dwell.  They  must
have  land,  streams  of  water,  valleys,
mountains,  ranges,  grass,  timber,
rock,  canyons  and  everything  we  find
here  on  the  earth,  the  elements  with
which  it  is  covered  and  surrounded,
and  which  are  found  in  its  depths  in
order  to  obtain  a  sustenance.  All
these  things  are  necessary  in  any
kingdom.  The  people  want  houses
to  live  in,  orchards  for  fruit,  also
vegetables;  they  want  land  suscep-
tible of  irrigation  and  cultivation,
cattle,  horses,  carriages,  wagons,
vehicles  to  transport  things  in  and
to  do  business.  All  these  things  are
necessary  in  building  up  the  kingdom
of  God.  There  must  also  be  schools,
Temples  and  cities  built  to  the  name
of  the  Moat  High,  according  as  he
shall  direct.  It  is  necessary  to  build
Temples  that  we  may  attend  to  the
ordinances  for  those  who  have  gone
before,  for  millions  of  them  have
lived  according  to  the  best  light
they  had,  and  they  were  moral  and


!  exemplary  all  the  days  of  their  lives,
and  did  all  the  good  they  could.
Without  Temples  they  could  not
have  the  privilege  and  opportunity
of  beiny  officiated  for  in  the  ordi-
nances  of  the  Gospel  of  salvation
devised  by  our  Father  in  heaven
before  the  world  was  organized.  This
plan  of  salvation  was  devised  beforo
this  earth  was  organized  and  made
habitable  for  the  children  of  men  to
dwell  on,  away  in  the  eternities  back,
"  when  the  morning  stars  sang
together  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  fur  joy,"  if  you  know  when
that  was.  We  have  to  obey  that
plan  of  salvation  here  in  our  earthly
probation  in  order  that  we  may  have
the  privilege  cf  going  back  into  the
presence  of  God.  We  need  not  go
to  tinkering  that  plan  of  salvation,
for  we  cannot  make  it  any  better  if
we  do.  The  world  have  been  doing  so
ever  since  men  came  to  dwell  upon  the
earth.  But  I  do  not  see  that  they  have
done  anything  to  improve  it  God's
plan  of  saving  his  sons  and  daughters
stands  just  the  same  to-day  as  it  was
in  the  beginning,  and  it  will  continue
so  through  a  never-ending  eternity.

£f  am  not  aware  that  God  ever  asked
us  here  to  help  to  devise  a  plan  for
our  own  salvation,  1  never  heard  of
any  such  thing.  He  had  the  right
to  do  it  himself  and  he  did  it,  and
it  is  for  mankind  to  receive  it  if  they
choose  to  do  so;  and  if  they  do
choose  so  to  do  it  is  nobody's  business,
they  have  that  power  if  they  have  a
mind  to ;  and  other  people  have  a
right  to  believe  in  and  embrace  man-
made  systems  and  to  hold  on  to
them  if  they  choose  to  do  so,  and  it
is  none  of  our  business  any  more
than  it  is  theirs  it  we  choose  to  obey
the  plan  the  Lord  has  revealed.  We
are  on  an  equal  footing  in  rogard  to
this  matter,  and  all  we  ask  is  hujids
off  and  show  us  fair  play,  the  same
as  we  are  willing  to  extend  unto  yo«t


343


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  is  all We  have  a  right  to  ask  II
an  J  demand  that,  and  to  maintain  it,
and  we  expect  to  do  it

But.  we  who  have  embraced  the
principles  of  truth,  should  we  not
begin  to  divest  ourselves  of  some  of
our  notions  and  ideas,  and  go  to  and
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God  more
perfectly  ? In  our  hearts  and  feel-
ings we  desire  to  do  if,  but  our  tra-
ditions, to  which  we  cling  with  such
tenacity,  sometimes  prevent  us  from
coming  quite  up  to  the  mark,  and
we  do  not  advance?  in  this  direction
perhaps  quite  as  fast  as  we  should  do.
The  line  is  marked  out; the  Lord
tli rough  his  servants  is  continually
showing  us  the  way,  but  I  sometimes
think  that  we  are  slow  coming  to  it
We  should  become  more  self-sustain-
ing. We  have  been  drifting  in  the
wrong  direction  for the  past  few
years. It  is  necessary  for  us  to  turn
a  short  corner  and  drift  in  a  direction
that  will  make  us  stlf- sustaining.  If
we  do  this  we  shall  become  more
independent  and  more  closely  united,
and  in  a  short  time  we  shall  find  that
it  will  be  the  path  of  prosperity.  It
is  a  matter  of  good  political  economy
for  any  community  to  become  self-
sustaining  ; and  not  only  to  raise
and  manufacture  what  they  need  for
their  own  use,  but  also  somo  for  ex-
portation, Then  the  balance  of  trade
will  be  in  their  favor, 13 ut  I  do  not
care  whether  it  is  the  people  of  Utah,
Colorado, Wyoming, the  United
States,  England,  or  any  other  com-
munity or  nation,  political  economy
says  that  they  must export  more
than  they  import,  or  the  balance  of
trade  will be continually  against
them,  and  any  country  or  community
in  that  position  will  be  drained  of  the
circulating  medium,  and  will  be  more
or  less  impoverished  thereby. If  a
community  wishes  to  become  wealthy,
it  must  manage  to  produce  not  only
all  it  needs  for  the  wants  of  its  own


members,  but  also  to  partially  supply
some  of  the  wants  of  its  neighbors.
This  is  sound  philosophy  and  poli-
tical economy  in  any  community,
and  particularly  so  with  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  We  have  the  elements
around  us,  from  which  with  our  own
industry  and  economy  all  our  wants
can  be  supplied  in  abundance,  if  our
labor  is  applied  in  the  right  direction,
which  can  only  be  done  by  laboring
unitedly  and  according  to  the  counsel
that  may  be  given  us  by  the  Lord
through  his  servants.  By  taking
this  course  we  can  produce  almost
every  tiling  necessary  for  our  own
consumption  and  a  great  deal  to  ex-
port

We  have  commenced  in  this  order,
and  some  of  our  settlements  have
progressed  more  than  others  ;  and  I
am  glad  to  believe  that  we  are  drift-
ing in  the  right  direction,  I  hope
to  sec  this  work  continue,  and  can
promise  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty
upon  those  who  will  persevere  there-
in. They  will  succeed  if  they  are
wiae  and  do  as  they  are  told,  and
they  will  be  blessed  of  the  Lord  and
will  come  off  victorious.

These  things  are  worthy  of  oar
attention,  they  constitute  part  of  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth.  It  is  a  material  king-
dom, and  not  something  ethereal  that
we  cannot  comprehend  nor  have  any
part  or  lot  in.  It  involves  our  every-
day lite,  labor  and  duty,  just  as  we
pass  along;  it  is  not  beyond  our
reach,  but  is  right  within  the  purview
of  our  ability  to  accomplish  to  a
certain  extent  We  cannot  jump  at
a  single  leap  to  its  fulness;  but  the
small  wedges  break  the  big  rock.
Drill  the  holes  here  and  there,  then
put  in  the  wedges  and  tap  them
lightly,  and  after  awhile  these  taps
will  break  the  big  rock  in  two.  That
■  is  the  way  the  Lord  has  worked  with
this  people. We  commenced  small,


THE  SAINTS  HAVE  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  349


went  in  at  the  small  end  of  the  horn,
and  we  are  bound  to  come  out  at  the
big  end,  we  cannot  come  back
through  the  same  channel.  Here
we  are,  a  spectacle  before  the  hea-
vens and  before  the  world,  a  handful
of  Latter-day  Saints.  What  shall
we  do  ?  Pursue  that  suicidal  policy
in  regard  to  sustaining  ourselves  that
is  calculated  to  impoverish  us  and
to  make  us  depend  upon  our  enemies,
those  who  would  only  be  too  glad  to
see  us  overthrown,  wasted  away  and
destroyed  ?  No,  no  !  Latter  -  day
Saints,  we  will  not  take  any  such  a
course  as  that,  not  if  we  know  it.
Well,  let  us  be  careful  and  learn
what  is  the  proper  course  to  take,
and  take  it,  that  we  may  grow,  in-
crease in  wealth,  in  numbers,  and  in
every  good  and  perfect  thing  that  the
God  of  heaven  is  willing  to  bestow
upon  os*  Let  us  beautify  the  earth,
bring  forth  from  the  elements  thuse
things  which  are  necessary  for  our
subsistence;  work,  be  industrious,
live  prudently,  economically,  and  walk
in  the  path  that  the  God  of  heaven
marks  out  for  us.  Then  we  shall  be
successful ;  then  the  blessings  of  the
Almighty  will  flow  unto  us  abun-


dantly, and  we  shall  have  great  cause
to  rejoice  continually  in  the  name  of
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  We  have
done  this  to  a  certain  extent  as  we
have  passed  along,  and  according  to
our  faithfulness  we  have  received  the
blessings,  and  beyond  our  expecta-
tions, for  we  could  not  have  expccied
as  much  as  we  have  received.  We
may  go  on  still  more  gloriously  if  we
will  be  more  faithful.

May  the  God  of  heaven  bless  us
and  help  us  to  sec  the  path  marked
out  for  us  to  walk  in,  and  thus  help
us  to  be  faithful  and  diligent,  and
put  away  our  own  devices  aud  tra-
d  it  ions  that  we  have  inherited  from
the  fathers,  inasmuch  as  they  are
wrong,  and  we  have  been  led  to  see
that  wrong,  and  our  judgments  con-
vinced concerning  the  work  of  the
Almighty.  Let  us  put  away  these
things  that  are  of  no  profit,  and  seek
to  that  which  is  good,  which  comes
from  above,  and  which  is  for  our  own
best,  interests  here,  and  for  our  eternal
welfare  in  the  world  to  come.  That
we  may  do  this  unitedly,  as  the
heart  and  voice  of  one  man,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ*
Amen.


*


JuUKNAL  OF  UISCULKSEb.


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  ORSON  HYDE,


Delivered  at  the  Forty  Fifth  Annual  Conference  of  tub  Church  of
Jesui  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabkknacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Tuesday  Afternoon,  April  6,  1875,


(BeporUd  by  David  W.  Evans.)


EDUCATION  NECESSARY— MORMONISM IS  TRUTH — CONVERSION  OF

INDIANS.


I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  beheld  a
mora  pleasing  sight,  than  that  which
I  behold  here  to  day.  So  many
children,  of  both  sexes,  most  of  them
born  in  this  Territory,  assembled
here  to  offer  up  a  song  of  praise  to
God  our  heavenly  Father,  To  hear
their  childish  voices  chime  in  with
the  voices  of  tlio.se  who  are  older  and
more  experienced,  is  really  something
that  I  admire,  and  intelligence  can-
not refrain  from  doing  so,

I  am  pleased  at  the  opportunity
that  is  offered  me  on  this  occasion.
I  do  not  expect  to  detain  yon  any
length  of  time.  Be  this,  however,
as  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  may  direct.
I  listened  to  some  very  excellent
remarks  in  the  former  part  of  the
day,  and  I  will  say  that  if  the  loaf
has  been  broken  by  more  able  and
competent  hands  than  mine,  it  will
not  be  unbecoming  in  me  to  try  and
gather  up  some  of  the  fragments,
that  we  may  enjoy  the  whole.

Here,  perhaps,  are  some  five  thou-
sand of  the  rifting  generation  before
me  who,  in  future  time,  will  become
actors  upon  the  stage  of  life.  How
important  it  is  that  their  characters
be  formed  so  as  not  only  to  reflect
honor  upon  their  parents,  but  also


upon  the  cause  of  Zion  in  which  we
arc  engaged.  How  beautiful  it  is  to
see  the  rising  generation  growing  up
in  intelligence,  and  in  good  will  and
kindness  one  toward  another,  As
our  settlements  spread  to  the  east,
west,  north  and  south,  a  certain  ele-
ment appears  therein  which  some  of
you  may  understand  and  recognize
by  the  name  of  modern  civilization.
This  element,  which  seems  to  be  un-
congenial with  the  spirit  of  purity,
righteousness  and  integrity,  has
reached  down  as  far  as  onr  place,
and  it  seems  that  nothing  will  satisfy
it  short  of  saloons,  grog-shops,  whisky-
holes,  and  other  concomitants  of
modern  civilization,  I  want  to  say
to  our  young  friends — avoid  these
dens  as  you  would  avoid  the  source
of  pestilence,  keep  far  away  from
them,  and  betake  yourselves  to  learn-
ing. No  doubt  you  do,  but  there  are
some,  perhaps,  who  do  not  to  the
extent  that  they  might  Instead  of
being  in  the  streets  of  a  night,
making  unearthly  noises,  as  some  do,
seemingly  under  the  influence  of
modern  civilization,  keep  at  your
homes,  study  your  books,  and  spend
your  time  in  improving  your  minds.
Sometimes,  when  preaching  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  Territory,  while  the


EDUCATION  NECESSARY,  ETC


851


congregation  were  listening  to  the
words  that  were  being  spoken,  I
have  seen  our  little  boys  in  the
streets  playing  at  ball,  or  engaging
In  other  recreations,  and  while  such
a  course  has  been  innocent  on  their
part,  it  has  been  an  evidence  to  mc
that  they  have  not  received  that
at  tent  ion  and  instruction  from  their
parents  which  1  consider  parents  owe
to  their  children ;  and  while  the
parents  would  seek  to  enjoy  the  words
of  life  themselves,  they  have  seemed
io  be  thoughtless  with  regard  to  the
whereabouts  of  their  children.  This
being  the  ease,  it  is  necessary  that
we  pay  more  particular  attention  to
our  children,  and  to  know  that  they
are  at  the  house  of  God.  To  be  sure,
children  can  not  profit  by  every  word
that  is  spoken,  their  minds  are  not
capacious  enough  to  comprehend
every  idea  that  may  be  advanced ;
but  every  once  in  a  while,  a  word
will  take  root  in  their  hearts,  and
grow,  and  this  will  enable  them  the
more  readily  to  appreciate  and  under-
stand that  which  they  may  hear  in
the  future,

I  realize  that,  as  a  parent,  I  have
not  been  so  faithful  mid  diligent  in
this  respect  as  I  should  have  been,
and  I  feel  that  I  ara  far  from  being  a
proper  example  to  my  brethren  and
sisters ;  but  sometimes  when  I  have
been  about  to  open  the  meetings  and
have  seen  that  all  my  children  were
not  there,  what  have  I  done?  I
have  left  the  stand,  gone  into  the
streets  and  found  my  boyi,  and
brought  them  in  and  seated  them  in
the  congregation,  that  they  might
not  set  an  unworthy  example  before
others.  Not  only  so,  but  sometimes
when  I  have  gone  to  bed  at  an  early
hour  and,  after  having  had  a  nap,  I
have  waked  up  about  the  usual  bed
time  and  found  my  boys  not  at
home,  I  have  got  up  and  gone  into
the  streets  in  search  of  them,  and


have  searched  until  I  have  found
them  and  brought  them  home.

I  feel  that,  as  parents,  we  cannot
bestow  too  much  attention  upon
those  who  are  rising  up  to  inherit
our  responsibilities  and  to  bear  off
the  kingdom  in  the  eyes  of  all  the
nations  of  the  earth.  I  know  that
I  come  short  of  my  duty  in  this  re-
spect, but  I  am  tryiug  to  fulfill  it
in  this  as  well  as  in  manv  other  di-
rections,  and  I  can  not  rest,  either
day  or  night  unless  I  know  where
my  children  are,  and  what  they  are
doiug.  By  following  the  dictates
of  this  feeling  I  have  been  able,  un-
der the  blessing  of  God,  to  rejoice  in
the  society  of  my  children,  both
morning  and  evening,  and  to  know
where  they  are  ;  and  I  have  proved
that  they  will  learn  to  respect  the
wishes  of  their  parents,  and  now  I
have  the  pleasure  to  hear  them  say —
u  Father,  may  I  go  out  to  such  a  place
to-night  ?"  and  they  will  set  one
hour  or  two  hours.  I  reply,  "Yes,
if  you  will  go  nowhere  -  else,  and
behave  yourselves  and  make  no
disturbance  in  the  streets,  go,  and
God  bless  you,  but  return  at  the
time  you  say.  I  will  sit  up  until
you  come  homo,  then  we  will  have
prayers  together  before  we  go  to
bed,"  It  is  very  pleasing  to  me  to
cali  my  wives  and  children  together
in  the  morning  and  to  spend  a  few
minutes  in  giving  them  a  few  worda
of  kindly  instruction.  I  have  prac-
ticed it  until  it  is  as  much  of  a
pleasure  to  me  as  it  is  to  eat  my
breakfast  when  I  have  a  good  one,
and  I  feel  lost  without  it.  I  say  to
this  requirement  and  to  that  require*
ment  —  Stand  aside  uutil  I  dis-
charge this  duty.  I  do  not  make
these  remarks  because  I  wish  to
show  myself  any  better  than  any-
body else ;  but  if  there  is  any  bless-
ing or  benefit,  brethren  and  sisters,
to  be  derived  from  what  I  have  said


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


you  are  abundantly  welcome  to  it,
and  to  act  upon  it,  or  something
similar  to  it  that  your  own  better
wisdom  may  devise-,  but  do  not  neg-  ;
lect  to  cultivate  the  tender  minds  of
yonr  children*

It  is  good  to  have  SabbaMi  schools;
they  are  a  source  of  amusement
and  recreation  as  well  as  of  mental  <
and  intellectual  improvement  and
development.  But  is  this  all  that
is  necessary  and  needful  ?  Our  day
schools  should  not  be  neglected.
What  are  we  here  for  but  to  raise
up  children  and  endow  and  qualify
them  for  future  usefulness?  Says
one — "  It  costs  so  much  to  keep  up
schools."  It  costs  some  persons
something  to  do  it,  then  there  are
others  who  let  a  school  bill  be  about
the  last  one  they  pay,  and  after
having  availed  themselves  of  the
labors  of  a  teacher  for  the  benefit  of
their  children  they  allow  him  to  go  1
unrewarded  until  his  ambition
sinks  within  him,  and  he  concludes
to  go  to  some  other  business,  and  '
thus  we  deprive  ourselves  of  the
best  class  of  school  teachers,  and  we
have  to  put  up  with  persons  of  se-
cond or  third  rate  ability.  We  ought
to  employ  the  best  talent  that  can
be  procured  as  school  teachers.  I
have  been  through  the  world  con-
siderably, one  time  and  another,
but  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  city  in
which  a  good  educational  system
was  maintained  in  which  the  people
suflered  in  character  or  prestige,  or
where  poverty  was  increased  in
consequence  thereof  ;  but  it  has  added
to  their  influence  and  prestige  and
improved  their  morals,  and  surely  if
heaven  will  thus  prosper  the  efibrts
of  parents  to  educate  their  children
there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not
go  into  it  a  little  stronger  than  we
do.

Perhaps  you  who  dwell  in  this
cfry  are  far  in  advance  of  those  who


dwell  in  other  parts  of  the  Terri-
tory,— my  remarks  are  more  par-
ticularly intended  for  us  country
people,  who  do  not  live  in  the  full
blaze  and  refulgence  of  intelligence,
but  away  yonder  in  the  corners,  on
the  outskirts  and  in  the  by- places,
for  I  know  that  many  among  us  do
not  pay  that  attention  to  education
that  we  should  do.  Suppose  that  in
a  coming  day  we  come  up  before  our
heavenly  Father  and  say — "  Fat  her,
thy  pound  hath  gained  ten  pounds,  or
five  pounds,"  as  the  case  may  be,
"  I  have  acquired  so  much  and  have
laid  it  up  in  store.1'  Another  one
says — 14  Father,  I  have  here  those
whom  thou  gavest  me,  and  have  lost
none  of  them;  they  are  all  here.  I
have  no  gold  or  silver,  but  I  have
gems,  in  the  persons  of  these  chil-
dren ;  they  are  bright  and  intelligent,
and  are  calculated  to  radiate  society
wherever  they  are.  I  have  bestowed
everything  upon  them  which  I  could
command  to  improve  and  elevate
them,  and  I  have  withheld  no  op-
portunity from  them/*  I  am  in-
clined to  the  opinion  that  the  latter
would  receive  much  more  commen-
dation than  the  former,  though  he
heaped  together  millions,  especially
if  his  children  were  not  educated.

u  But,"  says  one,  "  I  am  poor  and
can  not  do  it."  Well,  so  far  as  my
experience  has  gone,  those  who  are
willing  and  determined  to  educate
their  children  generally  find  the
means  to  do  it,  while  those  who
,  complain  of  poverty,  as  a  general
thing,  make  poverty  the  scapegoat
to  bear  of  their  unwillingness  to
teach  and  instruct  their  children,  or
to  put  them  in  the  way  of  instruction.
Now  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?
I  would  suggest  to  all  parents — I  do
not  mean  those  in  this  city  particu-
larly, for  I  om  not  called  to  instruct
with  regard  to  these  thii.gs  here,
jet  if  any  are  disposed  to  be  benefited


EDUCATION  NECESSARY,  ETC.


353


by  my  remarks,  even  in  this  city,  I
have  not  the  lenst  objucti  m  ;  but  I
won lii  suggest  to  all  parents  that  it
is  our  duty,  when  we  employ  a  good
teacher  to  keep  his  heart  whole,  and
his  spirit  up  by  paying  him  what  we
agree  to  pay  him,  and  pay  it  before
he  starves  to  death  or  is  forced  to  go
away  and  engage  in  some  other  occu-
pation. If  you  have  got  a  good
teacher,  keep  him,  at  almost  any
price,  to  educate  your  children.
Suppose  a  man  had  forty  children- —
some  have  as  many  as  that — and
they  were  all  well  trained  and  edu-
cated, how  much  honor  would  that
reflect  upon  the  father,  upon  the
mother,  and  upon  the  community  in
which  they  dwell  ?  Would  it  not  be
a  cause  of  pleasing  remark  to  the
intelligent  so  far  as  they  were  known  ?
Most  :issurrdly.  Well,  now  then,
brethren  jand  sisters,  pny  the  teacher.
We  think  a  good  deal  of  a  horse  or
a  span  of  horses,  and  they  are  ani-
mals given  to  us  by  Providence  fur
our  comfort  and  convenience ;  but  to
turn  them  out,  after  working,  without
food  or  care  won  Id  certainly  I  jo  cruel
on  our  part,  And  to  employ  teach-
ers and  then  not  reward  them  so  that
they  can  feed  and  clothe  themselves
certainty  reflects  no  honor  upon  any
community  ;  and  I  say  that  if  we
care  for  our  teams,  we  certainly  on ght
to  care  for  oar  teachers,  and  pay  them
according  to  agreement;  then  their
ambition  is  kept  up  to  the  highest
pitch  and  they  feel  inspired;  but
if  we  subject  them  to  the  incon-
venience of  earning  their  wages  three
or  four  times  by  collecting  small
sums  from  one  and  another,  they
become  discouraged  and  are  finally
compelled  to  turn  their  attention  to
some  other  vocation,

Brethren  and  sisters,  these  are
important  matters*  Our  children
are  entrusted  to  our  care  and  man-
agement, and  unless  we  do  our  best

No.  23.


to  cultivate  and  improve  them,  have
we  any  right  to  be  the  agents  in
bringitig  their  spirits  from  the  realms
of  uay  to  earth  and  then  neglect
them  ?  Are  we  justified  in  doing
this  ?  It  seems  to  me  not,  it  seems
to  me  that  we  are  not  doing  our  duty
towards  them.

Our  enemies  reproach  us  and  our
children  on  account  ot  our  alleged
ignorance  and  general  inferiority.
Be  this  as  it  may,  there  was  not
intelligence  enoagh  in  the  "big
tent*'  nor  in  the  Rev,  Dr.  Newman
to  mnke  headway  against  the  small
amount  of  knowledge  that  exists
here  in  the  Mormon  community.
Act  as  we  may  and  do  what  we  will,
we  cannot  satisfy  the  accusers  of  our
brethren.  The  name  of  their  accu-
sations is  Legion;  and  we  are  not
disposed  to  make  any  great  effort  to
satisfy  them.  It  is  ourselves  and  our
God  that  we  labor  to  satisfy, — by  no
means  ignoring  the  friendly  hints  of
all  honorable  men.

I  leel  thankful  for  this  opportunity
of  bearing  my  testimony,  and  [  bear
my  testimony  that  what  is  called
*■  Mormonism"  is  the  truth  of  God,
and  that  the  Lord  is  fulfilling  hia
word  in  the  last  days*  There  are
sdmo  very  curious  sayings  in  the  Bible
respecting  John  the  Revelator,  one
of  which  is — u  If  I  will  that  he  tarry
until  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?*'
which  led  to  the  saying  that  that
disciple  was  not  going  to  die.  But
Jesus  did  not  say  that.  Certain
Nephites  on  this  continent  wanted
to  live  to  bring  souls  to  Christ  until
he  came.  Their  desires  were  grant-
ed to  them,  an  1  they  were  permit-
ted to  live,  or  they  had  the  promise
that  they  should  not  pass  behind  the
vail  until  the  second  coming  of  the
Savior.  Whether  the  saying  of  the
old  Prophet  had  anything  to  do  with
this  matter  I  cannot  tell,  but  he  said
— "  Lord,  they  have  digged  down.

Vol.  XVII,


2Z±


JOURNAL  UV  DISCOURSES.


thine  altars,  killed  thy  Prophets,
and  I  am  left  here  alone,  and  they
seek  my  life,"  The  answer  of  the
Lord  was — "  I  have  reserved  to  my-
self seven  thousand  men  who  have
never  bowed  the  knee  to  the  image
of  Baal."  Whether  that  has  refer-
ence to  any  characters  that  were  not
to  pass  away,  but  that  were  to  live
and  be  witnesses  in  the  earth  and
bring  their  testimony  to  a  focus  in
the  last  days — the  days  in  which  we
live  —  to  make  the  truth  of  God
blaze  like  the  light  of  heaven  upon
all  the  world  I  cannot  say,  I  do  not
know;  but  the  Lord  has  not  left
himself  without  a  witness,  and  some
of  you  will  no  doubt  recollect  that,
three  or  four  years  ago,  I  told  the
Saints  in  this  Tabernacle  that  the
testimony  in  favor  of  the  truth  of
;i  Mormonism"  would  increase  and
that  the  source  of  evidence  in  its
favor  would  multiply  and  grow
stronger.  Now  we  hear  of  a  re-
markable movement  that  has  recently
commenced  among  the  Indians.  Be-
fore proceeding  further  on  this  sub*
ject  I  will  say  that  we  have  labored
in  our  weakness  among  the  Indians,
trying  to  convert  them  from  the
error  of  their  ways,  and  to  persuade
them  to  cease  shedding  blood,  com-
mitting depredations  on  the  white
people,  and  to  turn  their  attention  to
agriculture-  I  recollect  going  away
up  here  to  Snake  River  to  visit  a
settlement  that  had  been  made  there
for  the  purpose  of  instructing  the
Indians  in  agriculture,  and,  if  pos-
sible, to  reclaim  them  from  their
disposition  to  steal  and  shed  blood.
I  have  also  been  to  other  places
where  similar  efforts  have  been  made;
but  we  have  not  been  able  to  accom-
plish much,  I  do  not  say  that  no
good  was  done — perhaps  some  little
good  was  done.  But  it  seems  that
the  time  had  not  come  for  the  means
to  be  brought  into  requisition  which


Heaven  had  ordained  to  be  used  in
the  reformation  of  the  Lamanites.
For  some  time  past,  the  Indians  have
been  telling  us  very  strange  stories.
They  suy  that  certain  strange  men
have  visited  them  and  spoken  to
them,  and  have  taught  them  what  to
do  in  order  to  be  saved  in  the  king-
dom of  God.  Strange  men  have
come  to  and  talked  with  them  per-
haps an  hour  at  a  time,  and  while
the  Indians  are  looking  at  them  they
vanish  out  of  sight,  and  they  know
not  where  they  go.  I  do  not  know
that  it  is  so,  but  this  is  what  the
Indians  declare  and  testify  to,  and  I
am  a  little  inclined  to  believe  that
there  is  something  in  it,  for  you  know
the  Apostle  Paul,  in  speaking  to  his
brethren,  said — "  Be  not  forgetful  to
entertain  strangers,  for  thereby  some
have  entertained  angels  unawares."
Perhaps  one  of  these  old  men  might
come  along  in  disguise,  incog.,  not
in  his  real  character,  and  appear  like
any  other  man,  clad  as  any  other
man,  and  stay  over  night  with  some
of  the  brethren.

Some  say  that  the  **  Mormons "
have  no  Pt  it  s:  hood,  power  or  autho-
rity from  God  ;  but  if  this  be  so  why
do  these  good  old  men  who  go  to  the
Indians  send  them  to  the  "  Mor-
mons" to  be  baptized  ?  Why  do
they  not  send  them  to  theMethodists?
You  have  Methodists,  Presbyterians,
Episcopalians  and  Catholics  right
here  in  town,  why  do  not  these  men
who  come  to  instruct  the  Indians  tell
them  to  go  to  some  of  these  bodies
to  get  baptized  ?  It  is  singular  that
they  should  tell  tbem  to  go  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  It  is  a  good  deal
like  the  angel  who  told  Cornelius  to
send  to  the  house  of  one  Simon  a
tanner,  and  call  for  Simon  surnamed
Peter,  and  he  would  tell  him  words
whereby  he  and  his  bouse  might  be
saved.  Why  send  to  Peter  when
Cornelius  and  his  house  lived  anong


EDUCATION  NECESSARY,  ETC.


the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  ?  Peter
had  the  keys  of  the  kingdom ;  the
angel  knew  that,  and  said  he — tS  Go
to  Peter  and  he  will  tell  you  words
whereby  ynu  and  your  house  can  be
saved.1*  These  men  say  to  the  In-
dians— "  Go  to  the  "  Mormons"  and
they  will  tell  yon  words  whereby  you
can  be  saved  ;  "  but  if  we  had  no
Priesthood,  no  keys  of  the  kingdom,
no  power  to  administer  the  ordinances
of  the  Gospel,  why  should  these  old
men,  who  declare  that  they  are  more
than  a  thousand  years  old,  and  tell
the  Indians  that  their  fathers  were
white  and  that  they  shall  be  if  they
only  do  as  they  are  commanded,  I  say,
why  should  these  men  tell  the  Indians
to  come  to  the  Latter-day  Saints  ?
There  is  something  singular  about
it.  What  «an  the  world  of  mankind
eay  to  it  ?  How  can  they  meet  it  ?
I  will  tell  you.  It  is  a  wave  of  evi-
dence which,  like  a  wave  of  the  sea,
completely  submerges  everything  on
which  it  flows,  it  overturns  every
objection  that  the  world  can  offer-
God  Almighty  will  vindicate  his  own
cause — he  has  got  the  means  pre-
pared for  that j

Now  let  me  say  to  you,  brethren
and  sisters,  look  we^l  to  these  lit  tie
children.  Teach  them  good  morals,
teach  them,  when  you  go  to  meeting,
to  go  with  you,  and  be  sure  that  yon
do  not  stay  behind  just  because  you
do  not  feel  exactly  the  spirit  of  it.
If  you  do  not  feel  the  spirit  of  it
yourselves,  feel  it  for  the  sake  of
your  children,  and  bring  them  to  the
house  of  God  that  they  may  be  taught
and  instructed,  I  recollect  very
well  in  early  days,  sometimes  I  heard
a  good  a? id  kindly  word  from  a  sec-
tarian minister,  there  were  no  other
ministers  when  I  was  a  boy  j  but  they
sometimes  spoke  words  in  my  I j caring
that  I  have  not  yet  forgotten,  they
took  root  in  my  heart,  and  I  still  bear
them  in  mind, I  exhort  you,  bre-


thren and  sisters,  to  cultivate  the
morals  of  your  children,  for  we  ace
not  going  to  stay  here  always;  we
shall  be  gathered  with  our  fathers  by
and  by,  and  these  little  ones  will  have
to  assume  the  responsibilities  which
we  now  bear.  Hence  I  say  qualify
them  for  the  positions  which  they
will  be  called  to  fill  in  future.  Teach
them  that  which  is  good  and  right,
and  may  the  blessing  of  the  Father
rest  upon  you  and  upon  all  Israel,
and  may  we  live  to  see  the  truth  of
God  triumph  !

I  feel  thankful  that  God  has  heard
our  prayers.  Says  the  Lord — "  By
this  you  may  know  whether  God
hears  you,  if  you  receive  the  things
which  you  ask  for,"  If  you  receive
the  things  you  ask  for,  know  ye  that
God  has  heard  your  prayers.  Who
is  there  among  the  Latter-day  Saints
who  has  not  prayed  for  the  removal
of  an  unjust  judge  ?  If  there  are
any  who  have  not  done  it  they  ought
to  be  turned  out  of  the  citadel  I
believe  you  all  have.  Well,  the
Lord  lias  heard  our  prayers  in  that
respect,  and  not  only  so,  but  I  will
say,  that  if  we  were  to  pray  against
every  official  who  is  a  bigot,  a  fool
and  an  ass,  the  Lord  would  hear  our
prayers  and  turn  him  out  no  matter
by  what  agency  it  is  done.  Let  us
try  it.  Never  pray  against  a  liberal,
good  man,  whether  "  Mormon  "  or
Gentile;  if  he  is  a  fair  and  honest
man,  and  is  willing  to  live  and  let
live,  let  him  live  just  as  long  as  God
is  willing  to  let  him,  and  do  not  pray
against  him.  But  if  he  tries  to  over-
throw and  destroy  us,  or  to  withhold
from  us  our  rights,  let  the  volume  of
our  prayers  ascend  np  to  God  for
him,  and  if  he  does  not  hear  from  it
some  time  I  shall  wonder.  But  he
will  hear  from  it,  you  may  be  assured
of  this.  Why  should  we  despair
when  the  means  of  self-defence  and
self-protection  are  embedded  in  our


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


own  spirits,  when  we  have  the  wea-
pons right  here  ?  Not  carnal  wea-
pon?, not  the  sword,  not  the  deadly
rifle,  but  we  have  something  more
potent — the  sword  of  the  Spirit
This  is  our  means  of  ^elf-defense  and
self* protection,  and  let  us  use  it  I
have  tried  it  Not  that  I  have  any
reason  to  boast,  but  1  have  great  rea-
son to  be  thankful  tu  God  my  hea-
venly Father.  I  do  know  that  when
we  want  anything  special,  if  we  will
make  that  a  subject  of  continual
pleading;  if  we  will  go  into  our
closets  and  shut  the  door,  and  lay  the
matter  before  the  God  that  made  us,
lay  our  hearts,  as  it  were  upon  the
altar  arid  importune  at  his  feet,  in
process  of  time  he  will  hear  as  and
avenge  our  wrongs,  no  matter  what
the  wicked  do  or  how  much  they
may  rage ;  and  there  is  no  subject  ou
the  face  of  the  earth  that  Is  exempt
from  the  influence  of  our  prayers,
high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  noble  or

ignoble.

Let  us  exercise  ourselves  in  this
direction  and  teach  our  children  to
do  the  same.  You  know  it  is  said
that  the  religious  world  despair  of
converting  us  old  llormons,  u*,  old
heads  who  are  dyed  in  the  wool ;  but
they  hope  to  convert  our  children  by
insidiously  sending  their  missionaries
to  establish  schools  in  our  midst,  by
which  they  hope  to  entice  and  win
their  tender  minds  over  to  their  side.
That  is  the  tack  they  are  taking.
Well,  brethren  and  sisters,  you  do
your  duty  toward  your  children ;  pray
for  them  morning  and  evening;  in-
struct them  by  means  of  little  short
sermons  every  day,  then  you  may
turn  them  out  to  go  to  school  if  you
like,  as  far  as  1  am  concerned,  even
1o  our  friends  of  the  sectarian  world,
and  if  they  can  exert  a  stronger  in-
fluence than  you  with  your  prayers
nnd  instruction,  and  the  parental  tie
1  hat  binds  them  to  you,  it  will  be
something  very  singular,  and  I  do


I  not  believe  they  can  do  it*

One  young  minister,  a  very  kind,
gentlemanly  man,  has  appeared
among  us  down  in  Sanpete.  I  have
not  a  word  to  say  against  his  morality
or  behavior,  it  is  all  very  nice,  and
to  all  appearance  he  is  a  polished
gentleman.  He  has  spoken  in  seve-
ral of  our  settlements,  and,  in  his
way,  has  endeavored  to  teach  the
people.  Said  J ,  on  one  occasion,  to
Bishop  jL'etersou,  "  What  did  you
think  of  that  tn uii's  sermon  last
night  r'  1  did  nut  happen  to  be
there.  Brother  Peterson's  reply  was
— "  So  far  as  morality  was  con-
cerned it  could  not  be  beat;  but
when  you  come  to  doctrine  and  prin-
ciple he  was  entirely  ignorant.  Our
little  children  know  better."  In  order
that  this  minister  might  be  properly
posted  with  regard  to  some  of  our
doctrines,  1  took  the  liberty  of  se:id-
iug  him  the  Deserd  Netr  ,  containing
an  excellent  argumentative  discourse
by  brother  Orsun  Pratt  I  did  that
for  the  purpuse  of  in  forming  hi*
mind  in  reference  to  the  arguments
be  would  have  to  meet  and  contro-
vert if  he  success  fully  prosecuted  his
labors  in  this  Cuuntry.  I  hope  and
I  expect  that  he  read  it,  for  it  cer-
tainly would  not  Jo  anybody  any
harm  to  read  it.

Ilrelhren  and  sisters,  I  will  not
detain  you  longer.  My  remarks
have  perhaps  been  a  little  scattering,
but  scattering  shot  sometimes  bit
mure  birds  than  a  rifle  shot.  Sufliee
it  to  say,  yuu  have  my  best  wishes
for  your  success  and  prosperity.  May
peace  be  with  you,  and  God  bless  you
and  me,  and  the  Twelve,  and  the
servants  of  God  with  whom  we  have
labored  from  the  beginning;  and
may  our  lives  be  spun  out  as  long  as
they  tend  to  the  honor  and  glory  of
God.  And  that  we  may  obtain  a
mansion  and  crown  in  the  realms  of
bliss,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


•


THE  GATHERING,  ETC.  357


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  CHARLES  C.  RICH,

Delivered  at  the  Forty-Fifth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Chbist  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Tuesday  Morning,  April  6,  1875.

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evms.)

THE  GATHERING—  KNOWLEDGE  OF  SALVATION  ENJOYED  BY  THE  LATTER-
DAY  SAINTS— BUILD  UP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.


I  have  been  gratified  this  morning
in  listening  to  the  instr actions  that
we  have  received  in  relation  to  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation.  It
is  no  doubt  the  desire  of  every  indi-
vidual to  obtain  eternal  life  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  But  to  do  this  it
is  necessary  that  we  hear  and  *obey
the  o^qjmandnients  which  he  has
given  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  on
the  manner  of  building  up  this  king-
dom ap6n  the  earth.  In  every  dis-
pensation of  God  to  man  ho  has  had
par  poses  for  his  people  to  fulfill,  and
a  labor  for  them  to  perform,  and  I
those  purposes  and  that  labor  have
not  always  been  the  same  in  every
respect ;  but  as  far  as  the  principles
of  eternal  life  are  concerned,  they
have  been  and  will  be  the  same  from
all  eternity  to  all  eternity.  When
Noah  was  upon  the  earth  he  was  re-
quired  to  build  an  ark;  Enoch  to
build  a  city  ;  the  Prophets,  in  their
several  dispensations,  had  a  labor  to
perforin,  varying  somewhat  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  circumstances
by  which  they  and  the  people  to !
whom  they  were  s"nt  were  sur-
rounded. The  Apostles,  chosen  by
the  Savior,  had  to  proclaim  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  all  the  world,  and


the  same  may  be  said  of  the  servants
of  God  in  our  day.  But  in  every
dispensation  those  who  have  b
wilHpjy  to  receive  the  everlasting
Gospel  have  been  required  to  sanctify
themselves  by  living  accordiog  to  its
precepts,  that  they  might  prepare
themselves  for  the  coming  of  the
Lord*  X
As  wre  have  been  told,  the  dispen-
sation in  which  we  are  living  is  one
of  great  importance — it  is  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fulness  of  times,  in
which  all  things  which  are  in  Christ
will  be  gathered  together,  both  those
which  are  in  heaven  and  those  which
are  on  the  earth.  The  labor  which
is  required  of  the  Saints  can  not  be
performed  short  of  their  beingr  ga-
thered together,  for  it  is  absolutely
necessary  that  they  should,  in  all
things,  observe  the  commands  of  God
in  building  up  his  kingdom  here  on
the  earth,  which  they  could  not  do
while  in  a  scattered  condition.  The
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  is  a  labor  which  will
require  all  our  time  and  attention,
and  our  best  efforts,  and  we  have  no
time  to  idle  away  or  to  spend  in
foolishness,  but  our  eyes  should  be
continually  single to the  glory  of


God,  and  our  efforts  should  be  as  the
efforts  of  one  man  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  purposes.

We  meet  together  in  Conference
for  the  express  purpose  of  taking
these  matters  into  consideration,  and
of  being  instructed  in  onr  duties  and
in  the  requirements  made  upon  us  by
our  heavenly  Father  in  spread  ins;
forth  his  Gospel  anion?  the  nations,
that  the  honest  in  heart  therein  may
hear  and  embrace  them  and  be
gathered  out  with  the  Saints,  and
thus  have  a  better  opportunity  of
accomplishing  their  mission  upon  the
earth.  I  esteem  such  opportunities
as  the  present  as  glorious,  and  as  a
means  of  great  blessing  to  us  all.
How  is  it  possible  for  us  to  bnild  up
God's  kingdom  on  the  earth  unless
he  directs  our  labors,  and  bestows
upon  us  the  influence  and  guidance
of  his  Holy  Spirit?  It  is  not
possible;  and  as  the  labor  which  he
requires  of  us  is  of  the  greatest  inter-
est and  importance  to  us,  and  indeed
to  all  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
it  behooves  us  to  seek  diligently  unto
Lira  that  we  may  become  the  honored
instruments  in  his  hands  of  building
up  his  kingdom.  This  is  no  mere
fancy  or  chimera  on  the  part  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  We  know  that
among  the  sects  of  the  Christian
world  there  is  nothing  certain  about
the  lite  to  come,  or  about  thetzv  ac-
ceptance with  God.  The  most  they
attain  to  in  tins  respect  h  a  mere
hope — they  hope  they  are  accepted,
and  they  trust  their  sins  are  forgiven;
but  with  the  faithful  Latter  day
Saints  the  case  is  very  different —
they  know  and  can  bear  testimony
by  the  gift  and  power  of  God  that
they  are  right  in  his  sight;  they
know  they  have  received  the  ever-
lasting' Gospel;  fhey  know  that  they
are  U boring  in  accordance  with  his
mind  and  will,  and  they  know  that
they  are  building  up  his  kingdom


here  on  the  earth.  This  knowledge
is  a  source  of  joy  unspeakable  to  the
Saints,  and  possessing  it  they  can
have  native  lands,  homes  and  pos-
sessions, parents,  friends  and  every*
thing  they  value  and  hold  dear,  if
necessary,  in  order  to  perform  and
accomplish  the  labor  which  the  Lord
requires  at  their  hands.

The  principles  which  have  been
laid  before  us  this  morning  in  re-
gard to  our  becoming  a  self  sustain-
ing people,  are  plain  and  easy  to  be
comprehended.  They  are  self  evi-
dent to  every  reflecting  mind,  and
are  worthy  of  our  earnest  attention,
for  while  we  are  dependent  upon
others  for  this,  that  and  the  other
which  is  indispensable  to  our  well-
being  and  comfort,  we  can  plainly
see  that  our  course  is  not  only  not
the  most  advantageous  to  ourselves,
but  also  that  it  is  not  the  most  plea-
sing to  our  heavenly  Father,  for  in
the  revelations  given  by  him  in  the
early  rise  of  this  Church,  his  Saints
were  requested  to  pursue  such  a
course  in  their  home  affairs  as  would"
make  them  self-sustaining.  We
have  seen  times  in  our  experienca
here  in  this  Territory,  when  it  has
been  extremely  difficult  for  us  to
obtain  from  abroad  many  things
which  we  needed,  and  there  is  little
doubt  that  we  shall  see  such  times
again  in  the  future ;  henco  the  very
great  necessity  to  adopt  a  policy  in
regard  to  temporal  matters  that  will
free  us  from  the  inconveniences  that
would  arise  in  such  a  contingency^
and  that  can  only  be  done  by  pro-
ducing as  far  as  possible,  according
to  our  ci  ream  stances  and  the  possi-
bilities of  our  climate  and  Territory,
everything-  that  we  need  to  sustain
ourselves  in  comfort  and  convenience.

In  the  Gospel  we  find  a  remedy
for  every  evil.  A  faithful  observ-
ance of  its  principles  will  eventu-
ally free  and  deliver  ua  from  the


4


THE  GATHERING,  ETC.


350


consequence  of  every  evil  practice ;
and  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  we
believe  in  are  easy  to  adopt,  and
they  are  a3  applicable  to  a  community
as  to  an  individual. We  are  I  old
that  in  union there is  strength:
then, if  as  a  community  we  will
go  to  and,  as  the  heart  of  one  man,
carry  out  the  counsels  of  the  servants
of  God,  it  will  be  easy  for  us  to  avoid
any  difficulties  which  we  otherwise
might  have  to  encounter. A  ghmce
at  matters  abroad  in  the  world  will
show  the  difficulties  which  the  people
everywhere  have to  contend  with,
and  if  we  could  trace  them  to  their
source,  we  should  no  doubt  find  that
they  arise  through  the  absence  of
the  principle  of  union ;  and  one  of
the  principal reasons  of  the  great
difference  between  us  and  them  is,
that  we  observe  this  principle  much
more  generally  and  perfectly  than
they  do,  and  hence  we  free  ourselves
from  many  of  the  difficulties  and
troubles under  which they  labor*
This union will become  stronger
among  us,  in  temporal  as  well  as
spiritual  atfairs,  in  proportion  as  we
observe  and  keep  the  commandments
and  counsels  of  our  heavenly  Father,
He  has  said  that  his  Saints  should
become  the  richest  of  all  people.  But
how  will  this  be  brought  about  ? If  ■
we  follow  our  former  notions,  and  the
notions  of  the  world  in  general,  what
more  can  we  do  than they  have
done  ? We  might  say,  simply,  that
we  could  bring  about  the  very  same
result  here  as  they  have  there ;  but  j
that  would  not  spread  comfort  and
happiness,  so  far  as  temporal  things
are  concerned,  among  the  whole  of
his  people,  and  hence  if  his  promise
unto  us  on  this  subject  is  ever  ful-
filled, it  will  only  be  by  our  following
his  counsel  in  all  things.

How  thmkfuL  we  should  be  that
we  live  in  an  age  of  the  world  when
God  is  again  willing  to  speak  to  his  ;


people,  and  to  tell  them  what  he  re-
quires of  them  !  I  say,  what  a  bles-
sing this  is  to  the  Saints,  and  to  the
whole  world  if  they  would  receive  it !
But  it  is  written  that  as  it  was  in  the
days  of  Noah,  so  should  it  be  in  the
days  o  the  coining  of  the  Son  of
Man,  This  was  verily  so — *ibe  peo-
ple were  not  willing  to  hearken  to
him,  they  would  not  believe  his  testi-
mony, neither  would  they  receive  his
counsel,  It  is  measurably  so  in  our
own  times.  The  world  at  large
manifest  the  same  unwillingness  to
receive  the  counsel  of  heaven  as  they
have  done  in  any  preceding  age-
But  a  few  have  been  ready  and  will-
ing to  receive  the  testimony  of  tht;
servants  of  God,  and  thuy  have  betn
gathered  out  from  the  nations  tor  the
express  purpose  of  preparing  them-
selves for  the  coming  ot  the  Lord,
and  to  engage  in  the  labor  of  build-
ing up  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth,
and  also  to  do  a  work  for  the  salva-
tion of  those  who  have  gone  before.
Then  it  is  for  us  as  Latter-day  Saints
to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  God,  and
to  give  diligent  heed  to  all  things
which  he  has  proclaimed  to,  and
which  he  requires  of,  us  in  these
days.  If  we  take  this  course,  his
blessings,  which  have  been  bestowed
upon  us  liberally  in  the  p,ist,  will  be
dispensed  more  abundantly.  In  these
things  we  have  a  right  to  rejoice,
and  as  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God
we  do  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  of
the  fact  that  his  hand  has  been  over
us  from  the  day  that  the  Church  was
organized  with  six  members  unto  the
present  time,  His  hand  hag  been
visibly  manifest  in  our  behalf,  and
his  blessings  have  been  showered
upon  us,  and  we  have  been  led  by
his  power  and  dictated  by  his  ler-
vants  all  the  day  long.  If  this  had
not  been  so,  we  should  not  have
occupied  the  enviable  position  which
we  occupy  to-day,  our  enemies  would


360


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


have  overcome  as  long  ago.  Bat  the
outstretched  arm  of  the  God  we  serve
has  been  over  us,  and  his  mercies
and  blessings  have  been  freely  be-
stowed upon  us,  and  we  have  been
sustained,  and  we  shall  be  from  this
time  forward.  We  have  need  to  ex-
ercise faith  ;  we  have  need  to  put  our
trust  in  him,  and  we  have  need  to
labor  as  he  directs  us.  1  presume
that  the  feeling  of  all  who  huve  re-
ceived a  knowledge  of  the  truth  of


the  Gospel,  is  to  do  everything  that
the  Lord  requires  of  them,  and  that
they  will  devote  all  their  energies
of  body  and  mind  to  the  building  up
of  his  kingdom  here  upon  the  earth*

That  we  may  pursue  this  course
and  adopt  this  policy,  and  perform
the  labors  that  may  be  continually
reqnired  of  us,  and  ultimately  be
saved  and  exalted  in  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God,  is  my  prayer  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


REMAUKS BY  PRESIDENT  BRCGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  at  the  Fobty-Fiftii  Annual  Conf^kbkce  op  tbe  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Lattgr-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  on  Wednesday  Afternoon,  April  7,  1875.

(Rcpo.led  Iff  David  IF.  Ev**n$.)


TEMPORAL  AFFAIRS — CONSISTENT  V  NECESSARY  IX  BUSINESS*


There  is  a  little  matter  of  some
importance  to  lay  before  the  Con-
ference, concerning  those  little  in-
sects that  hnve  done  so  much  in*
jury  to  om  fruit  the  last  two  years.
I  mean  what  are  called  the  codling
moths.  We  had  better  go  to  work
and  see  whether  we  can  destroy
them  ;  and  when  we  have  done  all
we  can,  perhaps  we  may  have  faith
that  the  Lord  will  rebuke  the  do-
vourer.  We  wish  to  (ecominend
the  people  who  have  orchards,  in
this  county  and  throughout  the
valleys  of  the  mountains,  to  meet
together  and  enter  into  some  ar-
rangements and  adopt such  mea-


sures as  will  enable  us  to  destroy
these  little  pests.  I  recommend
I  that  brother  Woodruff  give  out  an
appointment  for  a  meeting  of  all
who  are  engaged  in  raising  fruit
Brother  Woodruff  ts  the  President
of  the  Deseret  Agricultural  and
i  Manufacturing  Society,  and  I  should
like  for  him  and  all  interested  in
this  subject  to  confer  together  and
adopt  such  plans  as  tbey  may  think
necessary  and  best  to  kill,  not  only
the  millers,  but  the  worms  before
they  become  millers.  They  put  me  in
mind  of  what  I  heard  brother  Kim-
ball  say,  some  years  ago,  at  the  tirre
the  revelation  on  celestial  marriage


TEMPORAL  AFFAIRS,  ETC*


361


tv as  published.  Brother  Kimball
got  to  talking  upon  celestial  mar-
riage, and  lie  made  a  comparison  ;  said
lie — "  The  cat  is  out  of  the  bag ;  and
that  is  not  all — this  cat  is  going  to
have  kittens;  and  that  is  not  all,
those  kittens  are  going  to  have  cats/'
Well,  these  worms  make  millers,
and  the  millers  make  worms,  and  I
if  we  wish  to  get  rid  of  them  we
must  go  to  work  and  kill  both  of
them  off.  I  want  to  have  arrange-
ments made  for  destroying  these
insects  before  Conference  adjourns,
while  the  brethren  are  assembled
here  from  the  furious  parts  of  the
Territory.  i

There  is  another  item  I  wish  to
bring  before  this  Conference,  and
especially  before  the  brethren  and
sisters  wh  >  have  stock  in  Zion's  ;
Co-operative  Mercantile  Institution,  j
There  was  quite  a  number  of  them
together  on  Monday  last,  and  the
desire  universally  expressed  on  that
occasion  was  in  favor  of  continuing
the  business.  If  we  do,  I  have  some  •
propositions  to  make  ;  and,  as  I  sup-
pose there  are  as  many  of  the  stock-
holders here  this  afternoon  as  were
together  on  Monday,  and  perhaps  a
good  many  more,  I  will  make  them
now,  I  propose  to  the  brethren  and
eisters  that  we  build  a  house  to  do
our  trading  in,  and  that  we  own  it
and  pay  no  rent.  I  also  propose
that  we  get  clerks  who  will  wait
upon  the  people  and  do  right ;  and
then  I  propose  that  we  go  to  that
place  and  do  our  trading;  and  if  we
want  a  cent's  worth  of  candy,  get
it;  if  we  want  a  dollar's  worth  of
maple  sugar,  and  they  have  it,  get
it ;  and  if  we  want  five  yards  of
calico,  have  clerks  who  will  cut  it
off  for  the  person  who  wants  it  and
will  pay  for  it

Our  brethren  who  are  engaged  in
the  retail  trade  may  say  — "  You
are  going  to  make  a  retail  store  of


this."  Yes,  for  ourselves  and  for  all
who  will  patronize  it.

My  proposition  is  that  we  build
this  store  independent  of  the  capital
stock ;  we  have  none  too  much  of
that,  and  would  rather  add  to  it  than
not ;  and  we  will  get  oar  business
settled  ap  jast  as  quickly  as  possible,
and  as  fast  as  possible  do  our  pur-
chasing abroad  upon  a  ready  cash
principle,  without  asking  credit,

I  have  said,  not  only  to  my  breth-
ren here,  but  to  our  creditors  in  the
city  of  New  York,  "If  yon  have
any  dubiety  or  fears  with  regard  to
crediting  this  Institution,  I  am  very
much  obliged  to  you  for  having  thetn,
and  I  hope  and  pray  that  you  will
never  trust  it  any  more."  I  do  not
wish  to  injure  the  credit  of  the  Insti-
tution, but  I  wish  that  we  could  not
get  anybody  to  trust  us,  but  that  we
would  do  our  trading  altogether  upon
the  ready  money  priuciple.  We  are
perfectly  able  to  do  it,  and  could  have
done  it  from  the  beginning,  if  we
hud  taken  the  course  that  we
should  have  taken,  and  never  asked
credit,  and  never  traded  beyond
our  means.  It  is  within  my  know-
ledge and  the  knowledge  of  thou-
sands of  this  people  that  this  insti-
tution has  saved  our  community
from  one  to  three  mil  lions  annually
in  prices.  Our  merchants  have
hearts  that  are  too  elastic,  entirely
too  elastic ;  they  are  so  elastic  that
they  do  not  ask  what  they  cati  afford
to  sell  an  article  for,  but  they  ask
what  they  can  get  the  people  to
pay;  and  as  much  as  the  people
will  pay,  so  much  will  the  mer-
chants take — a  hundred,  or  a  thou-
sand per  cent,  if  they  can  get  it,
and  then  thank  Gcd  for  their  suc-
cess. They  put  me  in  mind  of  some
men  I  have  seen  who,  when  they
had  a  chance  to  buy  a  widow's  cow
for  ten  cents  on  the  dollar  of  her
real  value  in  cash,  would  make  the


3G2  JOURNAL  OF

purchaset  and  then  thank  the  Lord
that  he  had  so  blessed  them.  Such
men  belong  to  the  class  of  Chris-
tians referred  to  on  one  occasion  by
Charles  Gnnn ;  and,  if  yon  will  ex-
cuse me,  I  will  tell  you  what  he  said
about  them.  He  said  thnt  "hell
was  full  of  such  Christians*"

Zion*s  Co-operative  Mercantile
Institution  has  saved  an  immense
amount  of  means  to  this  commu-
nity, and  we  wish  to  continue  the
business,  hence  I  propose  that  we
put  up  a  building,  and  then,  in*
stead  of  paying  somebody  in  New
York,  St.  Louis,  Sacramento  or  San
Francisco,  three,  four,  five,  six  or
eight  thousand  dollars  to  insure  it,
that  we  insure  it  ourselves  and  save
that  money.  I  will  tell  you  why ;
if  another  man  can  make  money
by  taking  my  means  and  insuring
my  property,  I  certainly  can  save
as  much  as  he  can  make,  conse-
quently I  keep  my  money  and  do
not  insure  my  property.  I  have
about  as  many  buildings  as  anyone
in  this  Territory,  and  I  never  yet
paid  a  dollar  to  insure  one  of  them,
or  any  of  my  property,  or  myself.
My  faith  is  to  build  a  house  so  that
it  will  not  take  fire;  but  when  I
ride  round  here  and  see  stovepipes
running  through  the  roofs  of  houses
and  through  wooden  partitions,  as
many  of  them  do,  I  do  not  wonder
that  we  want  fir©  companies.  If  I
had  the  dictation  of  the  building
of  a  city  there  nerer  would  be  any
use  fur  a  fire  company,  and  never
an)'  need  to  have  an  insurance  com-
pany, but  we  need  save  all  this
clerk  hire  and  the  expense  of  keep-
ing large  offices. What  a  saving


DISCOURSES.

that  would  be  to  the  people !  Build
your  houses  and  your  cities  so  that
they  will  not  take  fire  unless  you
purposely  set  them  on  fire.  When
we  see  an  insurance  si^n  over  a
door,  and  then  read  a  list  informing
us  that  hundreds  or  thousands  have
insured,  say  in  this  city,  then  we
may  look  for  fires.  Some  will  get
their  buildings  insured  as  high  as
possible,  and  then  they  will  acci-
dentally take  fire  on  purpose.  Some
of  you  recollect  a  circumstance  which
transpired  here  some  years  ago.
Certain  merchants  got  broken  up
with  their  pockets  full  of  money,
and  they  had  a  large  amount  of
pork  on  hand,  but  they  could  not
stll  it.  Finally  they  gut  it  insured
aud  stowed  it  away  in  a  cellar  be-
longing to  brother  Branch,  who
lived  near  to the  Seventies*  Hall.

I  The  pork  got  on  fire  in  the  cellar
and  was  burned  up,  aud  all  the  in-
surance in  the  world  could  not  put

;  out  the  fire,  But  the  house  would
not  burn,  and  how  they  could  burn
the  pork  without  burning  the  bouse,
was  a  mystery  to  me.  Whether
they  got  the  insurance  money  I  do
not  know.  These  are  facte  right
before  us,  and  ought  to  teach  us  a
le>sun.

If  we  call  for  the  brethren  and
sisters  who  hold  stock  in  the  Institu-
tion, we  shall  expect  them  to  meet
together  and  decide  with  regard  to
building?  a  house  in  which  to  do  our
trading?

I  think  we  had  better  hold  our
Conference  during  the  continuance
of  this  wintry  weather,  and  wait
until  it  moderates  before  we  adjourn
|  to  go  home.


SELF-RELIANCE,  ETC.  363


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ERASTUS  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  Fortt-Fjfth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  i>ay  Saints,  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  Wednesday  Afterxuov,  April  7,  1ST 5.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

SELF-RELIANCE— HELP  THE  FEEBLE —  KEEP  OUT  OF  DEBT*


If  I  can  be  heard  I  desire  to  make
myself  understood,  for  I  have  a  few
reflections  to  present  to  the  people.
I  love  this  people,  because  I  am  p*j?*
goaded  that  the  very  great  majority
of  them  are  seeking  after  truth.  AVe
dt-sire  to  improve  and  to  pursue  the
path  that  will  lead  us  onward  and
upward  in  the  scale  of  being,  to  de-
velop the  powers  within  us  that  f|p£-
tain  to  the  Godhead,  created  as  Vc
are  in  his  image,  bearing  in  mind
this  injunction  of  one  of  the  Apostles
— "  D^t  this  same  mind  be  in  you
which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,  who,
when  he  found  himself  in  the  form
of  God,  thought  it  no  robbery  to  be
equal  with  him/'  No  other  people
that  I  have  any  knowledge  of  upon
the  earth  have  such  faith,  such  as-
pirations, such  hope  for  the  future  as
the  Latter-day  Saints  possess,  as  is
taught  us  iu  the  sacred  books  of  our
holy  religion,  and  as  was  taught  us
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and
which  are  manifested  by  the  Holy
Ghost  in  us.  We  look  for  greater
things  than  any  other  people  ;  and
wo  must  labor  to  develop  within  our-
selves and  within  our  children  the
gifts  and  powers  that  are  within  us,
and  which  are  embraced  ia^onr  faith.
Anything,  therefore,  that  serves'  to


stultify  us  in  any  wise  tend  downward
rather  than  upward.

The  subject  of  self-reliance  was
spoken  of  this  morning,  in  our  in-
dividual capacity  and  in  our  family
relationships ;  yesterday  brother
Wells  gave  us  some  very  excellent
instructions,  some  beautiful  truths,
touching  national  or  political  econo-
my, portraying  the  necessity  that
exists  for  nations,  or  communities
like  ours,  becoming  self  m;  taining,
self-reliant,  and  taking  a  course  to  be
free  from  bondage  and  oppression
and  of  being  needlessly  beholden  to
others,  and,  instead  of  letting  our
eyes  wander  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,
lusting  after  everything  we  see  or
hear  of,  educating  and  training  our-
selves to  so  curtail  our  wants  that
we  can  supply  them  by  our  own  in-
dustry. What  is  true  of  nations  and
communities  is  true  of  individuals,
and  the  principles  applicable  in  one
case  are  so  in  the  other  ;  and  unless
these  principles  ate  appreciated  and
applied  in  our  individual  and  family
capacity,  they  will  not  be  in  our
larger  national  capacities.  As  com-
munities, that  which  stands  chiefly
in  our  way  is  thr  pride  of  life — the
natural  ambition  that  is  within  us,
which  in  and  of  itself  is  a  godlike


364


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  noble  principle,  prompting  us  to
go  forward  and  to  in  lit  ate  those  who
are  higher  and  farther  advanced  than
ourselves.  It  is  this  which  stimu-
lates nations,  communities,  families
and  individuals  to  improve.  Bat
there  is  a  true  line  of  demarcation
which  we  should  learn  to  tread,  and,
as  far  as  in  us  lies,  we  should  neither
vary  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left
from  that  true  line  ;  if  we  do  we
shall  receive  the  rewind  of  our  error.

To  say  that  we  are  not  mutually
dependent  upon  each  other,  is  to  say
that  which  is  not  strictly  true;  and
I  believe  that  our  Father  has  orga-
nized us  and  society  so  that  we  should
be  mutually  dependent,  in  order  to
cherish  those  principles  of  friendship,
love,  charity  and  brotherly  kindness,
and  those  noble  social  qualities  that
make  us  feel  that  we  are  one  family,
the  children  of  one  parent,  and  tend-
ing to  one  common  end,  and  that  we
are  in  duty  bound  to  work  for  each
other  as  well  be  for  ourselves.  But
the  Lord  requires  no  man  or  set  of
men  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  others
entirely,  nor  does  he  justify  any  man
or  people  in  leaning  entirely  upon
others  and  doing  nothing  for  them-
selves. In  all  the  works  of  God  we
see  this  principle  predominant.  He
has  made  simple  provision  upon  this
earth  for  all  the  inhabitants  thereof
to  brcomc  self-sustaining,  py  using
the  bounties  and  gifts  which  he  has
bestowed  upon  them,  and  putting
forth  their  hands  and  appropriating
to  their  use  the  elements  of  life  and
prosperity  with  which  they  are  sur-
rounded ;  and  though  he  permits  the
birds  of  the  air  and  the  fowls  to  prey
a  little  upon  our  crops,  and  to  pick
the  berries  that  grow  in  the  moun-
tains, yet  even  these  have  to  arouse
themselves  from  their  nests  and  go
in  quest  of  their  food,  and  all  God's
creatures  on  the  earth  are  required
to  exercise  the  powers  and  faculties


they  possess  to  avail  themselves  of
the  bounties  which  heaven  has  so
plentifully  placed  upon  the  earth  for
their  sustenance.  Industry  is  re*
quired  of  us,  and  coupled  with  in-
dusrry,  frugality  and  economy,  with-
out which  the  rewards  of  industry
are  squandered  and  lost.  Industry,
frugality  and  economy  are  parts  and
portions  of  our  faith  and  holy  reli-
gion* We  are  dependent  upon  our
Father  and  God  for  our  being,  and
all  our  faculties  j  tor  the  earth,  our
dwelling  place,  and  the  elements
ground  us;  botf  in  order  to  avail
ourselves  of  these  blessings,  he  re-
quires us  to  use  the  faculties  we
possess,  to  be  industrious,  economical
and  prudent,  and  to  exemplify  that
charity  and  brotherly  love  which
pertain  to  our  holy  religion.  The
tiord  has  said  that  the  idler  shall  not
eat  the  bread  nor  wear  the  garments
of  the  laborer.  One  of  the  rules  of
the  United  Order  says — t£  Thou  shalfc
pay  thy  brother  -for  that  which  thou
hast  of  him;"  and  those  rules  not
orjjy  make  it  obligatory  to  pay  or
discharge  our  present  indebtedness,
as  fast  as  in  us  lies,  but  henceforth  to
contract  no  debt  beyond  our  ability
to  pay,  or  without  having  a  reason*
able  prospect  before  us  of  fulfilling
our  engagements*  These  principles
become  necessary  not  only  to  be
spoken  of,  but  to  be  treasured  and
lived  up  to  in  order  to  preserve  and
maintain  confidence  between  us  as
brethren,  and  to  entitle  us  to  the
consideration  of  friends  and  brethren
to  assist  us  when  our  time  of  adver-
sity shall  come.

Those  who  are  entitled  either  to
free  education,  free  meals,  free
clothing,  or  to  be  freely  housed,  en-
tertained, comforted  and  blessed,
are  those  who  are  industrious,  pru-
dent, frugal,  using  the  faculties
they  possess,  but  who,  through
sickness,  misfortune,  or  old  age,  are


SELF-RELIANCE,  ETC.


305


unable  to minister to their  own
wants ;  or  children  of  tender  age  who
require  the  care  of  parents,  friends  or
guardians. To  all  others  it  may
be  said— Bear  your  own  burdens;
and  we  may  also  quote  the  words
of  the  Apostle  Paul,  when  he  says —
"Bear  one  anolher's  burdens,  and
so  fulfill  the  law  of  Christ  ;  "  also  in
another  place  the  same  author  says
— "  Let  every  man  bear  his  own
bur  Jen/' Both  are  true  and  cor-
rect when  we  understand  bow  tj
apply  [hem  conectly. Let  all  men
auu  all  women  bear  their  own  bur-
dens  according  to  their  .strength,
and  when  that  fails  let  somebody
else  take  hold  and  help  them  and
so  fulfill  the  law  of  Christ So  let
every  Hither  and  mother  beg! a  the
work of  education  with  their  off-
8Pr'ntTt and teach them to  heat
their  o*vn  burdens  at  the  earliest
practicable  day,  and  let  them  beshi
to  learn  and  leceive  this  practical
education  of  which  our  President
gave  us  such  illustrations  this  fore-
noon, such  an  education,  both  physi-
cal and  mental,  as  shall  fit  them  for
all  the  practical  dunes  of  life-  Let
no  mother,  in  hei  misplaced  sym-
pathy and  her  love,  and  her  anxiety
to  serve  her  offspring,  wear  bei^elf
needlessly out in waiting  upon
the.ii when  they  are  ahie  to  wait
upon  tiiemselres; but make  snub
provision  as is necessary,  which
children  are  not  able  to  make  them-
selves, and  teach  tlicrn  io  wait  upon
aud  se.'ve  themselves,  a^d  also  re-
pay their  father  aud  mother  for  the
labor bestowed upon them.  Let
them  have  a  place  for  their  hats,
bonnets  and  clothing  to  be  hung  up
in,  and  instead  of  going  round  the
house  after  them,  picking  u;)  their
shoes  and  other  things,  take  them  ,
and,  if  necessary,  spank  them,  and
make  John  understand  that  it  is  his
duty  to  hang  up  his  hat,  and  Sally


to  put  her  sunbonnet  in  its  proper
place.  And  when  they  want  a  drink,
let  them  understand  th  it  there  is  the
cup  and  there  is  the  pump,  and  teach
them  to  help  themselves,  and  bring  a
drink  to  mother,  instead  of  mother
waitiug  upon  them ;  and  so  commence
and  so  continue  that  practical  educa-
tion. And  when  they  are  able  to
begin  to  hoe  the  potatoes  aud  sow
the  onions,  teach  them  how  to  do  it
instead  of  doing  it  all  yourselves,
and  leaving  them  to  lie  io  the  shade
or  to  run  round  the  streets,  wearing
out  shoe  leather  aud  learning  mis-
chief. If  you  are  too  old  and  feeble
to  take  the  lead  iu  the  performance
of  these  several  labors  take  your
rocking  chair  into  the  shade  under  a
tree  Somewhere,  and  sit  and  gWe
directions  and  all  James  or  John
what  to  do  aud  how  to  do  it.

This  practical  education  has  been
before  this*  p?ople  all  the  days  of
our  lives;  or  I  will  say  that  our
President  and  leader  has  kept  pro-
minently before  us  die  great  and
important  lessons  of  self  -  reliance.
His  doctrine  h;is  always  been  that
the  best  way  to  relieve  the  poor  is
to  show  them  how  to  help  them-
selves. To  continue  to  hand  oat
your  food  and  your  substance  to  the
beggar  who  comes  to  your  doors
without  putting  him  in  a  position
to  hulp  himself  and  to  supply  his
jwn  wants  is  to  encourage  him  in
folly  and  wickedness,  and  is  throw-
ing away  the  blessings  of  heaven
which  God  has  placed  in  yunr  hands.
Shall  we  not  teed  the  hungry?  Yes.
Shall  we  not  receive  the  stranger  into
our  gates?  Yes.  If  any  come  along
who  are  weary,  hungry,  without
mouev  and  need  relief,  shall  we  min*
ister  to  their  wants?  Yes.  Shall
we  feed  them  ?  Yes.  Shall  we  give
them  rest  ?  Yes*  Warm  them  by
our  tires  ?  Yes.  Let  them  stay  and
rest  themselves  under  our  roof  ?  Yes.


How  long  ?  Until  they  are  able  to
begin  and  do  something  to  help
themselves.  And  supposing,  when
they  have  stayed  one  night  and
had  their  sappers,  and  their  break-
fast  next  morning,  then  dinner,
and  supper  again,  and  then  stay
another  night,  and  finally,  finding
that  they  fare  very  welt,  they  want  to
stop  altogether,  then  we  should  say,
*'  Here  is  a  spade,  go  and  dig  that
ditch,"  or,  "  take  this  axe  and  cut
that  wood/'  14  take  this  Uam  and  haul
a  load  of  wood,1'  or  put  them  to
something  by  which  they  may  use
their  powers  and  minister  to  their
own  wants ;  and  if  they  demur  at
this  then  say — "Well,  you  can  go
without  eating  until  you  arc  willing
to  hoe  the  potatoes;  you  can  go  out
and  cut  your  own  wood,  make  your
own  fires  and  camp  where  you  please,
you  can  not  have  shelter  longer  under
my  roof,  the  good  things  which  God
has  given  me  are  to  bless  and  happify
my  fellowman,  not  to  encourage
vagrancy  and  idleness."

These  are  no  new  principles  before
the  Latter-day  Saints.  Our  motto
is  "  The  Hive  of  Deseret,"  and  here
is  the  place  for  the  working  bees,
the  place  where  they  sting  the
drones  to  death.  There  has  been  a
tendency  with  some  of  us  for  a  few
years  past  to  try  and  live  by  our  wits,
or  with  as  little  physical  labor  as
possible,  and  to  watch  the  corners  of
the  streets  and  various  places  for
some  advantage,  or  some  way  or  other
by  which  we  may  obtain  something
for  nothing;  and  some  succeed — they
find  some  unsuspecting  person  igno-
rant of  the  value  of  things,  and  they
obtain  something  for  nothing,  some-
thing that  is  valuable  for  that  which
possesses  very  little  value,  I  speak
not  in  reference  to  legitimate  trading.
There  is  a  legitimate  trade  and  traffic
recognized  by  all  right  thinking  men
of  the  world  everywhere. A  legiti-


mate interchange  of  commodities
is  profitable  to  all  and  makes  all
better  off,  and  it  is  as  necessary  to  the
prosperity  of  any  people  as  any  other
class  of  labor.  In  my  present  re-
marks I  refer  to  that  class  the  mem*
bers  of  which,  in  common  California
parlance,  are  called  bummers  and
hoodlums.  Some  among  us  have
been  in  the  habit  of  giving  way  to
this  spirit  too  much,  and  when  the
re-acting  comes  we  are  repaid  for  our

i  folly. We  are  in  the  habit  too,  of

1  allowing  ambition  to  prompt  us  to
make  improvements  and  to  build  for
ourselves  convenient  and  tasteful
habitations;  to  adorn  our  persons,
and  those  of  our  families.  This  is
all  noble  and  good,  but  in  our  efforts
in  this  direction  some  of  us  over-

1  reach  ourselves,  that  is,  we  go  beyond
the  means  which  are  legitimately  at

!  our  command.  We  run  a  little  too
fast  and  we  stumble,  and  by  and  by
we  fiud  that  there  is  an  accumulation
of  debts  upon  us.

The  credit  system  has  always
seemed  to  me  to  be  an  evil  to  man-
kind in  general* To  the  capitalists,

I  who  accumulate  so  much  means  that
they  can  not  take  care  of  it,  the  cre-
dit system  is  a  benefit,  for  they  trust
it  to  others  to  speculate  upon,  and
so  distribute  it  more  or  less  through
the  community.  In  this  respect  the
credit  system  may  not  bo  altogether
without  benefit  to  the  world  at  large.
But  as  for  our  community,  composed
mainly  of  laboring  people,  of  com-
paratively small  means,  depending
upon  our  industry,  economy  and  fru-
gality for  all  that  we  have  and  for
all  that  we  expect  to  have,  I  am
persuaded  that  the  credit  system  is
and  always  has  been  a  positive  evil,
though  there  may  be  even  among  us

I  exceptional  cases.  But  I  am  satisfied
in  ray  own  mind  that  it  is  better  for

,  us  to  pay  as  we  go,  instead  of  obtain-
ing credit  from  either  brethren  or


SELF-RELIANCE,  ETC.


3G7


strangers,  and  so  endanger  our  free-
dom. We  have  done  this  too  much,
and  in  a  great  many  instances  oar
possessions  are  mortgaged  to  pay  for
oar  past  follies.  We  have  ceased  to
be  free,  we  are  in  bondage,  for  debt
is  a  yoke  of  bondage  to  all  theme  who
are  brought  under  it,  though  some
wear  it  much  lighter  than  others.
Some  adopt  the  philosophy — "Let
those  worry  whom  I  owe,"  while
others  adopt  the  philosophy  of  worry-
ing because  they  owe,  and  they  are
greatly  troubled  about  procuring  the
means  to  pay  their  debts.  It  is  for
the  benefit  of  this  class  I  speak,  the
other  class  is  to  be  shunned.  Let
those  who  are  troubled  about  paying
their  debts  take  warning  and,  having
once  had  their  fingers  in  the  fire,  be
careful  about  potting  them  in  a^ain ;
and  let  all  who  still  have  them  in  the
fire,  and  feel  the  smart,  be  as  prompt
and  diligent  as  possible  in  freeing
themselves  from  this  yoke  of  bond-
age, and  discharging  their  debts.
This  credit  system  involves  us  all
more  or  less.  Our  great  mercantile
institution,  in  attempting  to  supply
the  wants  of  this  great  community,
is  under  the  necessity  of  retorting  to
the  common  credit  system  of  the
commercial  world ;  and  our  several
co-operative  associations  in  the  settle-
ments throughout  the  Territory  wish
to  avail  themselves  of  the  same  pri-
vileges, and  ask  for  time.  They
want  goods  on  credit.  And  then  in
our  individual  and  family  relation-
ship we  adapt  the  same  principle,  and
we  think  it  hard  if  our  home  mer-
chants do  not  extend  to  us  the  same
privilege;  and  the  wife  and  child  are
teasing  the  husband  and  father  for
this,  that  and  the  other  from  the
stores,  whether  he  has  the  means  to
pay  for  it  or  not.

What  is  the  remedy  for  all  this  ?
To  my  mind  the  proper  remedy  for
this  is  for  us  to  educate  oupselves  into


the  feeling  that  we  can  do  without
things  until  we  are  able  to  pay  for
them;  that  if  we  need  a  hat  we  will
try  and  make  one  out  of  bamboo,
straw,  leaves,  or  imitate  the  Indians
and  use  the  covering  that  nature  has
provided  for  us.  If  we  need  shoes
and  can  not  pay  for  thorn,  that  we
will  patch  up  the  old  ones,  or,  if  we
can't  do  that,  we  will  find  some  back-
skin,  or  go  barefoot,  for  barefoot  came
we  into  the  world,  and  it  mattereth
not  whether  we  have  any  shoes  when
we  go  out.  If  our  clothes  are  get-
ting scarce,  hunt  up  the  old  ones  and
patch  them  up  and  make  them  last
until  we  have  earned  enough  to  buy
some  new  ones.

But  says  the  wife,  or  perhaps  the
husband,  and  if  not  they,  then  the
sons  and  daughters — u  Neighbor  so
and  so  has  got  a  new  bonnet,  and  my
playmate  yonder  has  got  a  new  hat,
and  somebody  else  has  a  new  pair  of
boots,  and  I  do  not  see  why  I  am
not  just  as  good  as  they  are;"  and
says  the  wife — 44 my  children  are  just
as  good  as  the  neighbors'  children,
and  if  they  can  hare  new  hats,  shoes
or  clothing,  mine  shall,  and  if  father
has  not  the  means  to  pay  for  them  he
must  run  in  debt  for  them  at  the
store,"

This  is  not  the  doctrine,  or  the
system  of  education  I  would  incul-
cate among  this  people,  for  it  tends
to  bondage,  and  downward  rather
than  upward,  because  it  leads  to  dis-
honesty ;  for  when  we  are  in  debt  the
tempter  tempts  us  to  resort  to  dis-
honorable, unrighteous  means  to  free
ourselves  therefrom.  And  further-
more, if  we  will  indulge  in  every  lust
of  the  eye  and  yield  to  the  pride  of
life,  and  seek  to  gratify  them  beyond
our  legitimate  means,  the  tempter
prompts  us  to  resort  to  lying,  swindl-
ing, thieving  and  all  manner  of  mis-
chief to  supply  and  gratify  these
wants. It  is  an  old  and  truthful


36S


JOCJBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ad a^e  that  honesty  is  the  best  policy,
I  would  apply  it  to  nations,  commu-
nities and  individuals.

In  days  of  commercial  prosperity,
when  capital  is  being  diffused,  and
men  of  means  nse  Ixjth  capital  and
credit  for  ^reat  achievements, such  as
building  railroads,  tovvns,  cities,  fac-
tories, mills,  etc*,  then  is  the  time  we
are  allured  on  to  excesses.  Prospe-
rous times,  high  interest,  big  divi-
dends find  great  bargains  stimulate
■  others  to  seek  after  the  same  tilings,
and  not  un  frequently  resort  to  unjus-
tifiable means  to  acquire  them.  It
is  not  best  for  us  to  go  out  into  the
mountains  lo  hunt  nuggets  of  gold;
it  is  far  better  lor  us  to  go  out  and
find  a  few  raspberries,  or  a  place  to
sow  some  onions  or  to  plant  Rome  po-
tatoes. These  would  supply  our
wants  in  a  moderate  way,  without
crazing  our  brain.  But  nuggets  of
gold  turn  the  headset"  many  to  leave
the!r  legitimate  pursuit  and  follow  a
phantom.  Nuggets  of  sold  are  not
to  be  met  with  very  often,  and  where
one  person  Buds  one,  ten  thousand
spend  months  bunting  for  them  but
never  find  one.  But  ten  thousand
might  sow  onions  and  plant  potatoes
and  perhaps  not  more  than  one,  unless
through  folly  and  neglect,  would  fail
to  reap  the  fruit  of  his  labors.  It  is
not  great  dividends  that  are  going  to
make  either  the  United  Order,  or  any
of  our  co-operative  associations  pros-
perous, permanent  and  successful,  but
honesty  and  straightforward  business
habits,  and  contentment  with  reason-
able profits  and  rewards  for  our  labors.

The  last  year  or  two  has  been  a


time  of  pecuniary  stress,  not  only
throughout  this  community,  but
more  or  less  in  all  parts  of  the  land,
though  perhaps  the  effects  of  the  re-
action of  this  overtrading  is  felt  in
this  community  after  it  has  been  felt
and  measurably  overcome  in  the  great
central  marts  of  commerce.  This
community,  on  the  outskirts  of  this
ere- it  credit  system,  is  now  feeling
Hie  pressure  ot  that  re  action.  -  What
s!mnltl  we  do  to  aHord  relief?  It  is
not  to  be  expected  that  either  our
b-inks  or  our  great  trading  institu-
tions can  bear  this  strain  alone;  they
Imve  not  been  brought  into  this  con-
dition l>y  their  own  acts  which  they
could  have  well  remedied,  it  has  been
by  the  acts  of  this  whole  community
in  over-trading,  over-living,  exceed-
ing their  ley  it  i mate  hounds  in  every
respect,  and  the  weight  and  strain  of
this  re-action  centres  upon  these
great  central  institutions  which  we
lean  upon.  They  must  not  go  down,
for  if  they  do  we  go  with  them,  and
we  all  suffer.  We  must  commence
to  remedy  the  evil  where  the  evil
commenced,  and  that  Is  at  home,  by
retrenchment.  Every  man  and  every
woman  must  pay  their  debts  as  soon
as  possible,  and  instead  of  hunting
around  for  opportunities  to  contract
I  new  ones  they  must  hunt  around  for
means  to  pay  their  old  ones,  and  let
every  dollar  be  used  for  that  purpose
before  new  debts  are  contracted ;  and
I  do  without  the  sugar,  tea,  coffee,
boots,  hats,  bonnets,  ribbons  and
1  clothing  until  the  old  scores  are
wiped  out.

! God  bless  you.  Amen,


MAN,  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC*  ^369


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHX  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Forty-Fifth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  i>»  the  New  Tabernacle,  Sam

Lake  City,  Thursday  Morning,  April  8,  1875,

{Reported  by  David  TF,  Evans.)

MAN,  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  A  DUAL  BEING — IMMEDIATE  REVELATION

— OPERATE  WITH  THE  PRIESTHOOD.


We  have  tret  together,  as  is  our
wont,  on  this  Conference  occasion,
to  speak  and  to  hear,  to  deliberate,
to  reflect,  and  to  teach  principles  and
doctrines  that  are  calculated  to  bene*
fit  and  bless,  to  comfort,  ctider  and
direct  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,
here  and  throughout  the  world  .  But
in  our  meetings,  and  in  our  teachings
and  instructions  we  need,  to-day  as
much  as  we  ever  did,  to  be  under  the
guidance  and  direction  of  the  Al-
mighty, There  is  no  man  living,
and  there  never  was  a  man  living,
who  was  capable  of  teaching  the
things  of  God  only  as  he  was  taught,
instructed  and  directed  by  the  spirit
of  revelation  proceeding  from  the
Almighty,  And  then  there  are  no
people  competent  to  receive  true  in-
telligence and  to  form  a  correct  judg-
ment in  relation  to  the  sacred  princi-
ples of  eternal  life,  unless  they  are
under  the  influence  of  the  same  spirit,
and  hence  speakers  and  hearers  are
all  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty,

We  are  met  together  for  the  pur-
pose of  trying  to  benefit  each  other,
old  and  young,  and  the  generation
that  now  lives,  the  generations  that
have  lived,  and  those  who  will  live
hereafter ;  for  there  is  something  in
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  that

No.  24.


is  wide  and  expansive,  and  that  ex-
tends to  all  circumstances  and  situa-
tions in  life.  It  embraces  the  past,
the  present  and  the  future,  and  in
its  principles  we,  both  as  individuals
and  as  a  community,  are  immediately
interested  ;  and  so  in  fact  are  all  the
world,  if  they  could  only  comprehend
the  situation.  We  occupy  a  peculiar
position  among  the  nations  of  the
earth;*  Our  faith  and  ite  doctrines
and  principles  are  different  from
those  of  any  other  religious  body  in
many  particulars ;  our  prospects,  our
hopes  of  the  future,  and  our  ideas
respecting  man's  present  and  .  past
differ  very  materially  from  the  ideas
on  the  same  subjects  which  are  enter-
tained by  other  people.  We  are  not
the  originators  of  the  peculiar  ideas
that  we  believe  in,  or  of  the  peculiar
doctrines  which  we  inculcate.  We
happen  to  live  in  an  age  of  the  world
when,  in  the  economy  of  God,  certain
principles  have  to  be  introduced  for
the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes,,
as  a  part  of  the  great  work  he  has
been  engaged  in  from  the  time  be-
fore the  world  was  framed,  or  "  tha
morning  stars  sang  together  for  joy/'
Certain  events  have  to  be  brought
about ;  certain  circumstances  have  to
transpire ;  certain  doctrines  have  to

Vol.  XVII,


370  JOURNAL  OF

be  made  known,  that  we  may  operate
in  our  day  with  the  Almighty  in
the  accomplishment  of  his  designs.
The  principles  of  salvation  are  not  so
narrow  and  contracted  as  some  men
suppose.  God  is  not  contracted  in
his  ideas,  feelings,  or  general  dealings
with  the  human  family.  The  Scrip-
tures say  that  "we  are  all  his  off-
spring," no  matter  who  we  are,  or
when  or  where  we  lived  upon  the
earth.  God  is  the  God  and  Father
of  all  flesh,  and  consequently  he  feels
interested  in  the  welfare  of  all  hu-
manity, no  matter  of  what  age,  clime,
nation  or  people  ;  and  he  has  seen
proper  in  the  last  days,  in  which  we
live,  to  reveal  certain  principles
which  were  revealed  in  former  ages
to  other  peoples  and  under  other
circa  instances  ;  and  as  it  was  in  for-
mer days,  so  in  these — he  has  given
these  revelations  to  man  for  the  ac-
complishment of  his  designs  upon  the
earth  ;  hence  these  revelations  are  of
great  importance,  and  while  we  are
called  to  take  an  active  part  in
bringing  to  pass  certain  events  in
the  programme  of  the  Almighty,  we
are  as  much  dependent  upon  him  for
guidance,  sustenance,  intelligence
and  protection  as  any  other  people,
and  before  we  get  through  we  shall
find  out  that  it  is  not  in  man  to  direct
his  own  steps.  We  are  all  of  us  de-
pendent, for  all  things,  upon  our
heavenly  Father.  We  are  only  an
integral  part  of,  end  are  operating  in
and  with  others,  according  to  our
intelligence,  in  our  sphere,  in  the
great  plan  which  God  organized  be-
fore the  world  was,  and  in  which  all
mankind,  of  all  ages  and  nations,  are
deeply  interested.

We  talk  about  the  Gospel  of  the
Son  of  God,  and  there  are  many
curious  ideas  and  theories  prevalent
among  mankind  in  relation  to  it
The  Gospel  is  not  something  new,
or  that  never  existed  until  Jesus


DISCOURSES.

Christ  came  upon  the  earth ;  but  it
is  an  eternal  principle,  -and  it  has  a
Priesthood  associated  with  it  which,
like  the  Gospel  itself,  is  without  be*
ginning  of  days  or  end  of  years.
When  God  organized  the  world  he
had  in  his  mind  certain  ideas  and
plans  which  he  calculated  to  bring
about  in  relation  to  'the  inhabitants
who  should  live  upon  it ;  and  the  first
great  commandment  that  was  given
to  them  was  to  "  be  fruitful,  multiply,
and  to  replenish  the  earth,  to  have
dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  field,
the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  everything
that  creeps  upon  the  face  of  the
earth."  Man  was  created  in  the
image  of  God,  and  he  was  the  off-
spring of  Deity  himself,  and  conse-
quently made  in  his  likeness;  and
being  made  in  that  likeness,  be  was
a  son  of  God,  and  the  very  object  of
his  being  planted  upon  the  earth  was
that  he  might  multiply.  Why  ?
That  the  spirits  which  had  existed
with  their  heavenly  Father  might
have  tabernacles  to  inhabit  and  be-
come mortal,  and,  through  the  pos-
session of  these  tabernacles  and  the
plan  of  salvation,  that  they  might  be
raised  to  greater  dignity,  glory  and
exaltation  than  it  would  be  possible
for  them  to  enjoy  without  these ;  and
hence,  though  a  man  was  made  a
little  lower  than  the  angels,  the  time
will  come  when  he  will  be  a  little
higher  than  many  angels,  for  the
Apostle  says,  in  speaking  of  those
who  had  received  the  Gospel,  a  Know
ye  not  that  ye  shall  judge  angels  ?"
God  had  a  purpose,  therefore,  in  the
organization  of  this  earth,  and  in  the
placing  of  man  upon  it,  and  he  has
never  deviated  one  hair  to  the  right
or  to  the  left  in  regard  to  man  and
his  destiny  from  that  time  until  the
present.  He  is  eternal  and  unchange-
able, and  so  are  his  ideas  in  regard
to  the  world  that  we  inhabit  and
mankind  who  live  upon  it ;  and  he


MAN f  THE  0FFSP1

has  been  seeking,  from  the  commence-
ment of  creation  to  the  present  time,
to  benefit  mankind,  just  as  much  as
it  was  in  his  power  to  accomplish,
consistent  with  certain  laws  govern-
ing and  regulating  the  same,  that  he
could  not  violate  any  more  than  we
can.

There  are  certain  ideas  that  men
entertain  pertaining  to  the  world
that  we  live  in,  that  it  is  enough
for  them  if  they  have  only  some-
thing to  eat,  drink  and  wear.  These
ideas,  of  a  sensual  nature,  men
seem  to  be  governed  by  to  a  very
great  extent.  Jesus,  in  his  day,
said  to  the  people,  and  to  his  disci-
ples especially — "Take  no  thought
for  the  morrow,  what  ye  shall  eat,
what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal
ye  shall  be  clothed,  for  after  all
these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek."
That  is  the  acme  of  their  zeal,  en-
ergy, struggles,  perseverance  and
thought  "  What  shall  we  eat,  what
shall  we  drink,  and  wherewithal
shall  we  be  clothed  ?"  Said  Jesus —
u  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,
they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin,
and  yet  Solomon  in  all  his  glory
was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these."
God  takes  care  of  the  beasts  and
the  fowls,  the  creeping  things,  and
of  everything  that  lives  and  moves
upon  the  earth;  he  regularly  pro-
vides for  them  their  breakfast,  din-
ner and  supper,  and  if  he  did  not  do
it  they  would  have  to  go  without,
lie  provides  for  us  also,  and  has
taken  care  of  us  from  our  birth  up
to  the  present  time,  and  we  are
not  so  independent  as  many  of  us
think  we  are  in  very  many  particu-
lars. Witness,  for  instance,  our
breathing.  We  breathe  what  we
call  the  breath  of  life ;  is  it  by  any
action  of  ours  ?  God  made  us  and
planted  that  principle  within  us,
and  sleeping  or  waking  our  longs
continue  to  play. There  is  some-


LNG  OF  GOD,  ETC,  371

thing  remarkable  about  it  I  have
sometimes  gazed  upon  an  old  man,
just  on  the  verge  of  eternity,  per-
haps seventy,  eighty,  or  ninety
years  of  age,  and  I  have  watched
the  beating  of  his  pulse,  the  draw-
ing of  the  breath  and  the  sight  of
the  eye.  His  breath  has  been  in-
haled all  the  years  of  his  life,  not
throfigh  any  agency  or  volition  of
his  own,  but  simply  by  the  organ*
ism  which  God  made  and  gave  to
him.  Our  pulse  beats  in  the  same
way,  from  hour  to  hour,  minute  to
minute,  and  our  blood  flows  from
the  heart  to  the  extreme  parts  of
the  system  simply  by  the  energy
and  vitality  which  God  imparts.
When  we  come  to  examine  our-
selves we  are  not  so  independent  af-
ter all.  What  have  we  to  do  with
the  functions  of  digestion,  and  many
other  things  connected  with  the
hnman  system  ?  In  God  we  live,  in
God  we  move,  and  from  God  we
have  our  being,  and  let  him  withdraw
the  breath  of  life  and  the  pulse  stops
beating,  and  in  a  short  time  we  be-
come helpless,  inanimate  clay.  We
are  not  very  independent,  we  are  all
of  us  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  when
he  withdraws  the  vital  power  we  go
to  decay.

God  is  watching  over  us,  and  he  is
watching  over  his  people.  We  realize
that  we  possess  certain  faculties  and
powers  of  mind,  and  these  and  the
power  of  conveying  them  to  the  brain,
or  thought  and  reflection,  comes
from  God ;  we  are  indebted  to  him
for  every  power  we  have,  and  so  are
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  j  and
as  I  have  already  said,  he  has  been
seeking  to  benefit  the  human  family
just  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power,  from
the  beginning  until  the  present  time.

The  first  thing  was — "Multiply
and  replenish  the  earth."  Then,  by
and  by,  through  the  power  of  Satanf
who  I  suppose  was  a  necessary  influ-


372


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ence  to  be  used,  or  he  would  not  have
been  there,  men's  minds  got  estranged
from  God,  and  every  imagination  of
the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  was
evil  and  it  was  necessary  that  they
should  be  cnt  off  and  that  God  should
commence  another  seed,  and  that
those  men  who  lived  at  that  time
should  not  have  the  power  to  propa-
gate their  species  in  unrighteousness
and  entail  misery  upon  their  parte,
rity.  Why  bo  ?  Because  man  is  a
dual  being,  possessed  of  a  body  and
a  spirit,  having  to  do  with  time  and
eternity.  Whether  we  think  about
and  reflect  upon,  or  believe  it  or  not,
it  makes  no  difference.  We  existed
before  we  came  here;  we  exist  here
in  another  form  from  what  we  did
then,  and  we  shall  live  in  another
and  different  sphere  when  we  leave
here,  whether  we  believe  it  or  not;
and  no  action  of  ours  can  alter  it,
and  no  matter  what  our  thoughts
and  reflections  on  this  subject  may
be,  they  will  not  change  the  course
of  the  Great  Jehovah  in  regard  toman.
•  Well,  when  God  found  that  the
people  were  transgressing  his  laws
continually,  and  that  they  were  rais-
ing up  a  posterity  who  followed  in
the  same  path,  to  prevent  justice
being  done  to  spirits  unborn  by  those
who  were  in  the  flesh,  he  cut  them
off  and  raised  up  another  seed ;  and
change  has  succeeded  change,  and
God  has  dealt  with  nations  and  with
individuals  according  to  his  wisdom
for  the  best  good  of  the  human
family.  He  raised  up  Abraham,
and  Moses;  and  by  and  by  Jesus
came  to  accomplish  certain  objects,
and  to  restore  the  Gospel,  which  had
been  lost  in  consequence  of  trans-
gression. Jesus  preached  the  Gospel.
Was  it  right?  Yes.  Why  did  it
not  continue  ?  I  do  not  know,  but
it  did  not  continue,  and  the  Prophets
said  it  would  not,  and  one  of  them
prophesied  that  a  certain  power


would  seek  to  make  war  with  the
Saints  of  God,  and  thaj  it  would
prevail  against  them,  and  that  they
would  be  given  into  his  hands  until
a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividing
of  a  time.  And  then  other  events
had  to  transpire,  and  other  plans
and  principles  had  to  be  introduced,
and  by  and  by  the  time  came  for  the
restoration  of  the  Gospel  again,  and
Joseph  Smith  was  raised  up,  and
through  him  the  revelations  of  God
and  the  Priesthood  were  restored,
I  the  same  Priesthood  that  Jesus  had,
and  which  existed  upon  the  earth
long  before  bis  day.  There  was
nothing  new  about  it.  Why,  Adam,
before  he  left  the  earth,  gathered  his
people  together  in  the  Valley  of  Adam-
ondi-ah-man,  and  the  curtain  of
eternity  was  unfolded  before  him,
and  he  gazed  upon  all  events  pertain-
ing to  his  descendants,  which  should
transpire  in  every  subsequent  period
of  time,  and  he  prophesied  to  them.
He  saw  the  flood  and  its  desolating
influence;  he  saw  the  introduction
again  of  a  people  in  the  days  of  Noah ;
he  saw  their  departure  from  the  right
path.  He  saw  Abraham,  Moses  and
the  Prophets  make  their  appearance
and  witnessed  the  results  of  their
acts;  he  saw  nations  rise  and  fall;
he  saw  the  time  when  Jesus  would
come  and  res  tort  the  Gospel  and
when  he  would  preach  that  Gospel
to  those  who  perished  in  the  days  of
Noah ;  and  in  fact  he  saw  everything
that  should  transpire  upon  the  earth,
until  the  winding  up  scene.  He  was
acquainted  with  the  day  in  which  we
live  and  the  circumstances  with  which
we  are  surrounded.  Many  other  men
have  possessed  a  portion  of  the  same
power,  influence,  knowledge  and  in-
telligence, and  they  have  obtained  it
from  the  same  source.

There  have  been  many  peculiar
circumstances  connected  with  the
past  history  of  mankind.  Enoch,


MAN,  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC


373


for  instance,  occupied  a  peculiar  posi-
tion in  his  day,  before  the  flood,  when
the  imaginations  of  the  hearts  of
the  people  were  evil  In  that  day
God  endowed  men  with  the  spirit  of
revelation  and  prophecy,  and  they
went  forth  and  proclaimed  to  the
people  the  same  Gospel  that  we  are
proclaiming  now.  And  Enoch  gath-
ered together  his  people  and  they
were  taught  of  God  by  the  everlasting
Priesthood,  which  holds  the  keys  of
the  mysteries  of  the  revelations  of
God,  and  which  has  done  so  ic  every
age  of  the  world  whenever  it  has
existed.  Those  men  were  taught  of
God ;  but  they  could  not  stop  the  evil
nor  stem  the  march  and  progress  of
iniquity,  but  they  could  gather  toge-
ther those  who  would  be  obedient  to
the  revelations  of  God,  and  they  did
gather  them  together,  and  Enoch  and
his  city  being  perfected,  and  the
world  doomed  to  destruction,  the
Lord  moved  them  out  of  the  way,
and  the  rumor  went  forth — "  Zion
is  fled."  They  were  taken  up  out
of  the  way  of  the  world  into  the
keeping  of  the  Almighty,  Then
came  the  Flood,  then  came  many
other  events,  and  finally  Joseph  Smith
came,  through  whom  God  revealed
the  principles  by  which  he  governs
the  world.  Joseph  knew  nothing
about  these  things  until  the  Lord
revealed  them.  There  was  nothing
particular  about  him,  he  wag  a  man
like  the  balance  of  us.  But  the  Lord,
for  certain  reasons  of  his  own,  I  sup-
pose, selected  him  to  be  his  mouth-
piece to  the  nations  in  this  age  of
the  world.  Perhaps  Joseph,  as  well
as  many  others,  was  set  apart  to  a
certain  office  before  the  world  was.
Christ  was  the  Lamb  slain  from  be-
fore the  foundation  of  the  world*
Abraham  was  set  apart  to  his  office,
and  a  great  many  others  in  the  same
way  ;  and  Joseph  Smith  came  to  do
his  work


What  was  that  work  ?  Why  things
seemed  to  be  changed  around  in  a
great  men  sure  here  from  what  they
were  in  early  days.  God  said  to
Adam — "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply
and  replenish  the  earth."  What
docs  he  say  now  ?  He  says — "  Build
Temples  !  Build  Temples  !  !  "  What
for  ?  "  To  accomplish  certain  pur-
poses that  I  had  in  my  mind  before
the  world  was  ;  that  you  may  operate
for  yourselves,  that  you  may  be  in-
structed therein  in  the  laws  of  life —
the  laws  pertaining  to  your  bodies
and  to  your  spirits ;  the  laws  pertain-
ing to  the  living  and  the  dead."  Prin-
ciples in  which  all  mankind  that  hare
ever  lived  or  that  .ever  will  live  are
interested.  The  Lord  took  Lehi  and
his  family,  and  planted  them  upon  this
continent,  and  they  increased  and
spread  abroad,  and  the  Lord  revealed
unto  them  his  law ;  and  after  Jesus
left  the  Continent  of  Asia,  he  eaino
here  and  organized  his  Church  and
made  the  people  acquainted  with  the
principles  of  truth,  as  he  did  on
the  other  continent,  only  more  so,
for  they  had  more  light,  revelation
and  intelligence  here  than  there,  and
they  lived  in  union  and  harmony  here
for  more  than  two  hundred  years.
They  had  all  tilings  in  common  one
with  another,  and  covetousness  was
in  a  great  measure  destroyed.  The
great  secret  of  their  success  in  this
direction  was  that  "  they  dealt  justly
one  with  another."

Well,  these  various  Priesthoods
that  have  existed,  and  these  Prophets
that  have  lived,  such  for  instance  as
Nephi,  Alma,  Lehi,  Mahoni,  Moroni,
Mormon  and  others,  were  taught  and
instructed  in  the  principles  of  life
and  the  laws  of  God,  and  they  have
left  their  testimony  on  record,  and
we  have  it  here,  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon ,  They  administered  here  in
time,  and  they  are  all  administering
in  eternity,  and  they  are  operating


374


JOUKXAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  co*operating  with  us  and  with
the  Almighty  for  the  accomplishment
of  his  purposes  upon  the  earth.  We
talk  sometimes  about  co-operation ;
but  the  plan  of  salvation,  if  you
please,  is  a  grand  Co-operative
Scheme,  as  expansive  as  the  heavens
and  as  wide  as  eternity;  it  pene-
trates through  all  time,  extends
through  all  ages,  and  reaches  men
in  every  position,  living  or  dead;
they  who  have  lived,  we  who  now
live,  and  they  who  will  live  hereafter
are  all  working  together  in  this  grand
co-operative  plan,  and  we  can  not  be
made  perfect  without  our  progenitors,
neither  can  they  be  perfected  without
us,  and  they  are  as  much  dependent
upon  us  as  we  are  dependent  upon
them.  We  can  build  Temples,  they
can  not ;  it  is  not  their  province  to
administer  in  them  at  present,  but
it  is  ours,  and  we  are  called  upon  to
do  so.  They  are  interested  in  our
welfare,  they  are  our  fathers,  we  are
their  children;  they  are  laboring
there,  we  here,  for  our  mutual  salva-
tion and  exaltation  in  the  kingdom
of  God*  The  plan  of  salvation  is  no
isolated  affair;  it  is  not  narrow  and
circumscribed  like  the  man  I  have
heard  of,  who  prayed — "  God  bless
me  and  my  wife,  my  son  John  and
his  wife,  us  four  and  no  more,
Amen  ;  M  but  it  is  as  high  as  heaven,
as  deep  as  hell  and  as  wide  as  the
universal  creation ;  it  extends  to  the
time  that  is  past  and  to  the  eternities
that  are  to  come.  The  living  and
the  dead  so-called  iu  Christ  are  all
working  for  the  accomplishment  of
the  same  great  objects  and  purposes.
Don't  you  think  that  they,  behind
the  vail,  feel  as  much  interested  in
the  work  as  we  do  ?  Read  the  little
glimpse  given  by  John  in  the  Reve-
lations, where  he  speaks  about  the
souls  of  those  before  the  altar,  who
prayed  day  and  night  that  he  would
avenge  them  of  their  adversaries;


and  again,  when  the  time  came  when
Babylon  was  cast  down  there  was
rejoicing  among  the  angels  in  heaven.
This  gives  us  some  faint  idea  of  the
feelings  entertained  by  those  on  the
other  side  of  the  vail  in  relation  to
events  here*

Don't  you  think  that  Adam,  the
father  of  us  all,  feels  interested  in
the  welfare  of  his  children  ?  I  think
he  does.  Don't  you  think  that  Enoch
feels  interested  in  the  welfare  of  hig
people  ?  I  guess  ho  does.  Don't
you  think  that  Noah  does  ?  Yes,
and  even  some  of  the  Prophets,  in
speaking  about  events  in  the  future,
tell  of  a  time  when  Ethiopia  shall
stretch  out  her  hands  to  God.  Are
they  not  all  interested  ?  Yes.  Are
not  all  of  you  interested  in  your  pos-
terity ?  Yes,  you  are.  Does  the
Gospel  show  you  how  to  take  care  of
them  ?  Ik  does.  Does  it  enable
yon  to  bless  your  posterity  as  Jacob
did  ?  It  does,  and  to  seal  blessings
upon  their  heads.  Does  it  give  you
promises  pertaining  to  the  future?
It  does,  pertaining  to  you  and  your
posterity*  And  are  not  all  of  these
men  engaged  with  us  in  the  same
object  ?  Yes,  and  they  are  just  as
much  interested  as  we  are,  and  ten
thousand  times  more,  because  they
know  more;  and  they  have  been
operating  in  the  various  ages,  and
when  they  were  permitted  they  have
come  forth  and  communicated  the
will  of  God  to  man.  And  when
Joseph  Smith  was  raised  up  as  a
Prophet  of  God,  Mormon,  Moroni,
Nephi  and  others  of  the  ancient  Pro-
phets who  formerly  lired  on  this
Continent,  and  Peter  and  John  and
others  who  lived  on  the  Asiatic  Con-
tinent, came  to  him  and  communi-
cated to  him  certain  principles  per-
taining to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God.  Why  ?  Because  they  held
the  keys  of  the  various  dispensations,
and  conferred  them  upon  him,  and


MAN,  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  GOD,  ETC,


375


be  upon  ug.  He  was  indebted  to
God ;  and  we  aro  indebted  to  God
and  to  him  for  all  the  intelligence
that  we  have  on  these  subjects.  Who
in  this  generation  knew  anything
about  Temples  arid  their  uses  until
Joseph  revealed  it  ?  No  body .  Who
knew  anything  about  baptism  for
the  dead  until  then  ?  Nobody.  Who
kueuT  anything  about  the  past  or  the
future  ?  Why,  when  I  commenced
to  preach  this  Gospel,  years  ago,  it
was  enough  to  damn  anybody  to  even
mention  the  principle  of  revelation.
In  this  enlightened  age  we  were  so
far  ahead  of  God  that  we  could  have
a  religion  without  him,  and  could  go
to  heaven  without  him;  we  did  not
want  any  revelation  from,  or  com-
munication with,  God.  But  the  Gos-
pel brings  us  into  communication
with  God,  and  makes  us  one  with
him  and  with  those  who  have  opera-
ted before;  and  those  holy  men  of
God  who  have  lived  in  the  various
ages  feel  interested  in  our  welfare,
and  they  are  watching  over  us,  and
we  are  better  taken  care  of  t  han  many
of  us  think  for.  Many  of  us  are
careless,  thoughtless,  heedless,  reck-
less, unbelieving  and  full  of  doubts
and  anxiety ;  but  God  has  given  his
angels  charge  concerning  us  lest  we
should  dash  our  foot  against  a  stone,
God's  bowels  of  mercy  have  been  ex-
tended to  us  in  spite  of  our  wayward-
ness, folly,  weakness,  corruption  and
imbecility.

We  have  an  organization  that  was
planned  and  ordained  by  the  Al-
mighty. We  have  the  First  Presi-
dency— President  Brigham  Young,
set  apart  by  God  to  occupy  the  posi-
tion that  he  does,  and  his  Counsel.
Who  told  men  about  such  an  organi-
zation as  this?  God.  What  did
we  know  about  it  till  then  ?  Nothing.
Who  knew  about  the  organization  of
the  Twelve  ?  Nobody,  Who  knew
about  an  organization  of  High  Priests?


Nobody,  yet  they  had  them  in  various
ages  of  the  world,  according  to  the
record  that  we  have* Who  knew
about  an  organization  of  Seventies,
and  of  the  various  Quorums  of  the
Priesthood,  and  the  duties  that  should
j  devolve  upon  them  ?  Nobody.  Who
knew about the organization  of
Bishops? Nobody, Have  they  not
got Bishops  ? Yes,  but  they  are
not  in  the  right  place,  and  they  are
not  bishops,  they  call  them  so,  but
they  are  not  bishops. I  remember
introducing)  brother Hunter to  a
gentleman  in  Provo. "  Mr.  So  and
So,"  said  I,  "  this  is  Bishop  Hunter,
our  presiding  Bishop  here. In  Eng-
land you  have  your  lords  spiritual,
but,"  said  I,  "  this  is  our  lord  tempo-
ral, and  he  attends  to  the  affairs  of
our  bread  and  cheese,"  &a  But
elsewhere  their bishops are  made
spiritual  officers,  which  Bishops  were
never  intended  fur. Who  knew  any-
thing about  other  organizations  of
the  Priesthood  that  we  have,  such  as
Elders,  Priests,  Teachers,  Deacons,
and  their  various  duties  ?  Nobody*
Where  did  this  originate?  With
God, Where  is  the  pattern?  Iu
the  heavens. When  will  this  Priest-
hood cease  ? Never. It  originated
with  God,  and  when  we  get  through
with  the  affairs  of  time  you  will  find
just  the  same  organization,  the  same
Priesthood,  the  same  power,  the  same
principles  that  exist  here.  Why?
Because  the  things  which  exist  in
the  Church  of  God  here  are  patterns
of  those  which  exist  in  the  heavens
God  said  to  Moses — "  See  that  thou
make  all  things  according  to  the
pattern  that  I  showed  thee  in  the
mount." The  pattern  that  we  have
is  a  pattern  of  that  which  exists  in
the  heavens,  the  organization  of  the
Priesthood  that  will  exist  throughout
eternity.. And  these  are  heavenly
things  committed  to  us  in  the  flesh
for  our  benefit,  and  for  the  benefit  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOtTRSES.


the  world  that  we  live  in.  It  is  not
to  aave  or  bless  me  or  my  family
alone,  or  yo*  and  your  family  alone ;
but  it  ia  to  bless  and  save  all  who
will  avail  themselves  thereof,  who
have  ever  lived,  and  all  who  live  now
or  ever  will  live.

When  the  purposes  of  God  in  re-
gard to  the  earth  shall  have  been
fulfilled,  the  earth  will  resume  its
former  paradisiac  glory,  and  go  on  to
be  oelestialized, J  To  help  on  this
good  time  we  are  requested  to  intro-
duce certain  principles,  and  we  have
heard  a  good  deal  said  about  the
United  Order,  Who  would  not
want  to  be  united  with  an  order  like
this  that  I  speak  of?  The  order
into  which  we  are  bow  requested  to

[continued  on  V


enter  is  a  very,  very,  very  little
portion  of  the  other,  that  is  all ;  but
as  we  show  by  our  acts  that  we  can
not,  or  will  not,  be  one  in  temporal
things,  how  can  we  be  one  in  spiritual
things?  Says  Jesus — "If  I  have
told  you  earthly  things  and  you  do
not  believe,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I
tell  you  of  heavenly  things  ?"  But
we  do  believe  in  these  principles,
and  we  are  governed  by  them  to  a
certain  extent,  and  we  are  desirous  to
do  what  is  right,  and  God  desires  to
help  us.  What  shall  we  do  then  ?
Why,  keep  his  commandments,  and
obey  the  counsels  of  his  servants,  and
esteem  it  a  privilege  to  be  one  with
them.

GB  1,  VOL.  18.] "  '


4


t
