JOURNAL  OK DISOOI  KSKS.
HY
PRESIDENT I>  RIG  HAM  Y0ONG#
if  is  ;'oi  ns  k \a)  us,
AttD THE TffELVK  APOSTLES.
KEFORTUD  BV
D.  \\\  KVANH,  GEO.  F.  niBBa,  AND  OTIIEK&
JuH  D  REM  F  ECTFl'  LL¥ l>RmCAT£JJ  TO  T>1H  I,  ATI  KR-  L>Alf  SAINTS  IJf  ALL  THR  WORD.
VOL.  XVII  i.
LIVERPOOL  :
PRINTED  AND  IT  BUSHED  BY  JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,  4L\  ISLINGTON.
LONDON :
LATTBU  UAT  SAINTS1  HOOK  DEPOT,  U0T  iHrtHOP'*  OBOVE,  BA&t/tf  VUSB  BQAU  laUH^TOif.
1877*
fctiTEEU) AT  .sTATJOnRS*  HALL.
r  i;  kface
 o— —
Wis  now  present  the  Ki^hteonth  Volume  of  the  -l^niN.ih  Diy,
GuUItHKS  to  ihr  Saints,  and  to  all  lovers  ol  the  Truth-
Wo  tW*1  confident  thai  the  impi irtaut  iiistnu'lioTia  on  principle
aiul  doctrine  therein  contaiuei].  u'l-iim-  [o  I  he  building  of  Temple^
the  salvation  of  the  dead,  the  introduction  of  the  Order  of  Enoch,
and  the  general  progress  :imt  development  of  great  Luter-day
Work,  will  prove  as  iiitamting,  gratifying  and  ben>  lii  li\  to  tho  Saints
and  to  posterity.  a>  th^e  t hat  h.ov  1  11  previously  publisher!  through
this  medium.
We  rogru  that  the  circulation  of  tho  JtH" knai.  ■  >;■  Disun  i:sks  is
su  limited*  Its  importaiii  <■  would  warrant  a  thousand-fold  greater
extension  of  this  work  Wo  anticipate  ;i  time,  not  distant  in  tho
future,  when  a  copy  of  tho  present  volume  will  bo  more  previous  than
gold*  h  is  even  now  aliu-«st  impossible  to  obtain  a  complete  series,
Copies  should  1 1  a -n  ifori  ho  carefully  preserved  by  all  Kubscribtax
Wr  also,  with  tWliiip;  of  regret,  chronicle  here,  which  we
think  a  betiUmg  pian\  the  death-  -du  duly  o3  157CM-of  llder
David  \\ \  VtViim,  to  whom  for  main  \var-  i\<"  have  been  indebted
for  the  reports  of  the  discourses  of  the  First  presidency,  tho  TweKu
Apostles  and  others.  libs  ie&tb  being  the  cause  of  the  teni]Kiftuy
suspension  of  tho  publication  of  this  jounml.
In  his  demise  the  Saints  have  sustained  the frmporr.l loss  of
a  ia:  a  .d v,  ■! ■ ■■ . . ,.ad :iu- p  ;"■  r ..  i  i  able
THE  PUBLISHER
-


■


I  N  l>  B  X  .


n


Mite*  Patje.

■  «  ■

Ml.


Corel u<led  from  pay*  37G,  Vul.  IT  Mm  I  he  "tT>f tiusj  of  03  ad,  •
dual  U viiij ...  Imiiuuiiale Revelation,.. Operate with  tin

Priesthood.  hL  Tavi.hu. April S, 1875,  I

There  is  Pause  for  I iiiit-i nur . , ,TIip  Html  of  Divine  Providence
over  the  iSaims  ..Phased  with  being  a  Territory..  .Maintain

tint  High i  ..lie True  in  Pntiriplr.  0-  <&  OaHWon, April 8, „  *2

Co-opera  I  ion  ,-i  True  Principle. .  .Saint  must  be  Self-sii.Htuinuig*,,
Patronize  Hume  Manufactures...  Home  hidu^rrtl  Institu-
tions, ii. I'u^s. April  „  Ki

Gathering  of  Israel.  ..The  Work  i  f  the  Father  emmm-m-eil
Dme  Nophite  Apostles  rit^er  vo  taste  of  drarh The  Ten
Tribes  to  eome  to  '/aou  from  tin*  ftorth  Conn  tries.

0.  Pic  ATT. April  11. „  1ft

Li:tie  ehttdreu  are  innocent,  — and  all  will  ]>e  saved...  OohI,  &
iVisnn  ,.JC TjiluM'iiiifh1 The  Life  of  thr  Srtvinrt  *  lili' of
'twtang...  Second  Coming  of  Chnrt, W.  Wo<»nKi7ff4 June  :!7, ♦  .  29

Immediate  Revelation.  Spiritual  (iifis  Neeessarv  in  the

tijin  Church, ..Apnaraey... 'Hie  Ue-toratien  of  the  <*ospel...
All  iliinga  to  be  gathered  in  nne  .  I*jvju*1  Authority  ..  Mar-
riage., .Celestial  Mamage.. .  liaptusin  tnr  the  nit-ad.

\K  Tnur. July It, .,  II

Reanrreottnn  of  the  Si,.ntfl...Hivnnd.  advent  of  the  Messiahs,
Pffr&AratQry  Work...  Ilrtn:  u  ■  »["  [lie  Jews  to  Jerusalem.  >.
(> tiering  of  the  Saint*  to  Zn>ti  .Christ*!  perform!  rt-i^31  ■

0.  Ph.vrr. J  uly  2.1, T,  "'7

Pjtftseut  Revelation  necessary  to  lead  the  Church .  The  A  pnsile-
tliip  Present  Kevtflutttut  neoessary  for  all- Evils  of  W:i*te,
lutein  pe  ranee,  and  Extra  valance., .True  reformation  ia  to

cease  froni  doing  ^ S'ucni:. Au^  ill,  70

The  United  Urder... I  low  Unity  is  to  be  Attained... Fteform
Necea«ary„-The  Order  of  the  KingJoin  of  God,., Steward-
ships. J*  Tavlui. Aug,  ill, tt  7%

The  pleasure  of  serving QM..  Importance  of  Cohering...

Necessity  of  Obedience  ttt  the  Priesthood. &  Q,  CamNoK. Oct. iit ,,  8fl


Ti  INDEX*


The  Blessing*  of  Life  for  evermore,, .The  Lord  commanded  the
Tutted  States  Government  to  purchase  freedom  for  their
ftla v  es . .  H etorm at i on  nece* wary  thai  i  J 1 1  ■  S :t  j  1 1 ts.  may  p  re^re sa
l:i*tvr.  .Salvation  comes  by  faithfulness  and  endurance  in
Chris  r.  Ih  JL  Wki.i.sj. Oct. 7,  1875.  *£

Sel  f-presii  vat  ion . ,  United Order. .  .Individual ^te  wardab  !  p«. . .

Home  Manufactures.  ft,  Q-  Cannon. Oct. 8, Tf  103

Parable  of  The  Ten  Virgins., .Importance  of  the-  last  disp>'iisriijnri
,.,IUfjCo*ibilHieB  resting  ujion  the  £Uleta.,.  JudkpneiiU  at
thi  'i"  I  The  Liuii:i:i;!'  -.f!":iii-  \i -Mi 1  uris+„  Laying
Up  wheat.  W,  Wooi*JU:i'K Sept.  12,

The  Ileaurrection...Laj-ing  the  cornerstone  of  the  Temple  in
Jack  on  County...  Mission  of  the  Twelve  Apu>tlrs  ..bap!  jam
of  nearly  six  himdrt-d  of  the  11  United  Brethren"..  The
ttainm  hold  the  kt-ys  of  salvation  for  all  Israel.  .J  udg-
inenls  await  the  wicked  ..Folly  of  the  fashions.

\V\  WoOURUFf.


Oct,

*

tt  \™

Oct,

„  1.11

Oct.

10,

*,  133

Oct

„  13*

On  the  Dedication  of  the  New  Tabernacle,  ih  Thatt,

'What  the  Lord  requires  of  his  Saint*-  J,  F,  Smith.

The  Purposes  of  God--* Duties  and  Responsibilities  of  the  Saints

J*  Tailoh.

Fulfillment  of  Propbecy\..Tbe  Desert  Watered  and  the  Wilder-
ness male  rYuitfuL.Zmn  in  the  Valleys  of  the  Mountains
Increase  of  her  Famdies  like  a  Flock...]]  t-r  u  i'k'uty,
and  Prosperity-  O.  J'Kait. Aug-  30, lp  144

Book  of  Mormon  ...U  rim  and  Thnm mi m.„ Appearance  of  a  Holy
-Angel  in  LS2B  to  four  per  son  a-. -Their  Testimony  to  the
Truth  of  the  Jlouk  of  Mormon— Also  ei^ht  other  witucssea . ,
Uaiah's  Prophecy  relates  t'>  that  lk>ok.-.Ezekiei'£  Prophecv,

O.  fiiATT- July 18, „  155

Keel  oration  of  the  Gospel,  probable  and  script  uraL..  Sent  hi  at
to  the  Gentiles,  then  to  IsraeL.Tbis  is  a  g-athering  dispeu-  *
satiou,  or  the  Kullne-K*  of  T.im  ■• Destiny  of  all  nations

O.  PaATT- Mar,  20, 1871.  m

lujiiteltty  'if  the  Christian  World..  Duties  aud  Rontons  tbiliti  4  h  of
lUe  riaiuts..,- Necessity  of  a  Temple,  and  works  in  behalf  of

the  dead.  \\\  WWviutF. April C, „  ]  %

How  V.in.l  s  jjiivjms^s  are  fulfilled.. Similarity  of  Ancient  ami
Modern  Church  Go  vet  anient...  Inter  view  with  tiamu  Roths-
child.. Object  of  building  Temples, „Ttie  peril-el  ui'^unua-
tiun  of  the  Church  ol  Chtisi...\\  vi  ka  indiripensLiUi;  to
Halvation-  J.  Tavlok. April ti. H  193

Unbelief  of  the  present  age.-Tho  S&intft  called  to  build  up  U  td'a
Kingdom.., Their  Italics  and  KespoustbdiLim.

lh  h.  WiaLs. April  6f  ,,203

The  (lathering  of  the  Sainia  is  the  Load's  Work..  .Knowledge  of
the  ti'  spel  atiaiuaulo  only  by  KtVeJaliuu . . . The  L-ro  ok1-
tatcd  iku  tYopitet  Joseph  Smith  ut  all  Uilu^s,  pa'tammi;  to
the  establishment Uie  Churcu  ot  Cbnst  upon  the  eauh.

J.  TAttfm* Jtjly  o"U, „  Jfut

Very  few  will  inherit  Celestial  Glory,,. Lust  after  th  '  things  of  thu
world  produces  apostaey...No  real  bappineat  ouiaide  of
(iotllineis,..The  Lord  requires  the  heart*  p£  tue  ehUdren  of
met).  Young. Aug-  15, ||  212


]M'I\  Tii

SifBpIir  i  ty  nnd  i\m-h:tuv^\ih\fiw.-^  t*i  the  <l  si .1  r  must  be
pivaelii-il  in  ail  (In- \.  ^rl;  >><  Uov  the iin  n  mms  lh:tms

and  HHpmHihUit.es  of  the  Smote.  \\\  Wonrnri*. Aug, 13,  1870,  21

Propheeii  n  o\'  .lnHi'jih  Smith  j.ud  tUoir  literal  fidtillrnrnL./n.e
riM-  ut"  tlii'  ('lu.ivh  ami  thx-  I l;itlu*L'i!i-j  Marivnloni  of  t.U$
.Saints  n ml  llitjht  o:  th>»  ( liurrh  to  tin*  Knrky  MouiitJii us.
The  limit  United  HfiUtK  Kobe, lion  I  ho  Gospel  to  be
preached  to  the  ({entile*,  then  to  tin"  Jew*,  .Plagium  of  t-li ^
Jews. .  .Plagues  of  tho  Ust  days. . .  Millennial  I  iviqm

0.  Pratt. Aug.  26\ „  223
Personal  Urvdatmn  the  Basis  of  Persotul  Knowledge., Philo-
sophic View  ill*  Creation  —  Apostaey  Invokes  hisnTxaniza-
tinu  jirnl  I'rtum  in  Primi.ivf  IHommt Our-Mmi  I'nwor,

B.  Yorsin. Sept.  17, t)  230
Secret  of  Hiippim>i3...Hulf^gamination.,  Joseph  Smith  a  man
of  obedience  to  QocI^  Baptism  for  (he  dtsd. .  .Temporal
and  Spiri tit al -One*. .A  Dream  ..Order  of  fttioeh,  tin*  order

of  God. ..A  good  word  far  the  women,  li.  YnuNt;. June  23, H  235

Visit  to  Sahl>;ii!i  Srh^ds.  Inflection*  <>ii  the  emirs?  we  pursue...
Common  blessings  s<UT.i>riines  umWvalned  The  Ooatiej
gua raiiteo.H  its  own  testimony  ...Apottscy  ^  sit  her  an  cviuV...  e
of  health,  than  a  symptom  »f  disease**. Trsf imony.

<i.  U.  Cannon* Sept.  17,  260

Phihisimhy  of  man  npu-n  the  earth..  .The  greal  and  ^rand  hoc  ret
Of  Balviifnm Are 0  r': Nature of Stewardship,, .

X  nor  ease  of  Temples — Hear  ye,  Mothers* II.  Young. <Vt* 8, ,,  ~o7

Youthful  K k i ii  lii1  in  i TllifrfMnfl  *  itluui  t  purse  ami  scrip  Indi-

\  idual  U'st  1 1  l  \  i  Hun  dan and  latiafactory  ,  .Joseph  Smith

noi  xi t i  i:noosiur  .His  promises  fulfil led. ..Komi  ot  t'hureh
orsjaui zatum  imperative... h*  rretoratiim  jo  prophecy  ami
fact.  0.  Pis  a  it. Aug,  20, tl  364

The  flnspel  Trumpet— Salvation  mmr  than  Baptism  and  the
laving  on  of  hand*. ..  lietponsihilitiea  of  believers  Lai  n  irsi
and  opportiinition"  of  the  Spirit  World. ..The  1  dire  of  the
Holy  .Spirit.  ...Know  ledge  ot  the  0  oapel,  certain  ami  a  u  re ...
Its  Fruits  good,  ami  manifest  io  the  lives  of  those  who  re-
ceive it.  J,  T.  Smith. April 8, ti  271

Position  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  ..  Proteata  litis  in  makes  no

claim  to  revelation  Priesthood,  how  restored  ;  its  ptir-

p  -M- iVrser'-tam.  the  horiM^-  "! I.ic  " 1  'i I  !i ,  ..•

mu^t  kr.ow  the  will  of  Qod  and  do  it^ltespeH  the  Aulhn-
viiirs,  ami  '-esiieet  «ut  profpasicm, — A  void  in  gall  evils,  cleave

to  the  good.  J*  Taylor. Nov, 5,  ,,278

ftalviition  Tfln^ibl£»...personalijy  ef  Gtnl...t'hsi-fleter  of  fiod...
Pre-t'Xtstence  of  man . . .Ji'-.us  our  Klder  Br- ith^r.. .TrunsfHir-
mation  of  the  Earth,— t^reaiirtTi  ind  Organization  ;  It-*  fin  il
destiny,  the  home  of  the  >;m.r>.  I ievehitiottn  by  .lo?i"ph

Smit's  in  ]iarmony  with  Scripture.  O.  Pu  vn  + Nov.  PJ. .  _S*5

Apostolic  Snc^saion  ami  Responsibility*  **SiK^  il  position  affords
no  release  from  responsibility..  Jf  the  otfiee  does  not  honor
a  ni.iu  he  is  called  lo  honor  ibe  otfiee, ..Mrm'a  future  depen-
dent on  integrity  here.  L.  Snow. Oct, 6, *,  "295

Reipeet  for  the  dead^.Pre^stiteiicc.  the  key  to  this  ...The  future
life  depends  en  this  ..The  Latter-4ay  Saints  dependent  upon
revplat-ion  for  their  knowledge  ot  these  thing's. *.  Life  per-
seeunons  as  noihinir,  eontrasted  wi^h  the  promisee  pcrr.ain-
in^  to  the  future...  Me  a 'a  future  glories  jire  as  the  lawR  un  y
al.ide.  J.  Tatloh. Bee*  31  f ,*  306


R


■


Till  0FD1X

Prophecies  unfulfilled^*  J  -ha-cure*  En  the  rontiguratinn  ofihe  globe
,  ..Miracles  the  result  of  laws  not  yet  per  fee  Hy  understood...
The  re- format  ion  of  the  earth,  its  i*hara''t*-r  Miring'  the
Milieu nium.  its  purification  by  fire*  The  new  heaven*,  and
the  new  earth.  The  Gospel  the  Celestial  law*  and  only
passport  to  existence  on  it  celestial  ized  earth. Qr  Pratt. Dec. 31,  187G,  314

Burial  services*  an  ancient  practice*  GodT  the  f*ou"  of  the  living.
Key*  committed  I  ;  Joseph  Smith.  Tin*  last  di<t|i<-NftaTirjri  ..
Jeans  the  (ire at  Redeemer.  An  everlasting  Pries  1  hood.
The  powers  ul  the  resurrection,  scriptural,  pl«i E ■  ^.-i ^ ; ■  I j .
a ud  ee rUi m Seat in%  pa we  rs ,  eternal*  J.  Tin-Oa, D ec ■  3 1  f ,  t  y j 4

The  great  privilege  of  Laving  a  Temple  completed...  Past  effort  a
for  tin*  purpose,** Bernard*  on  Con.inrr..  Baitk,  Heaven,
and  Hell.  at  tho  Latter- ita\  Saints... Running  after

holes  in  the  ground.  ..  Arrangements,  for  the  future*

J*.  Young. Jan. 1,  IS? 7.  303

Daniel's  Vision,  NrliiiriiiLcliiezgar1*  If  ream*  i(s  interpretation.
Thi.  eoming  of  the  Ancient  of  days,  Joseph  Smith's  pro-
phecy, yet  to  be  fulfilled.  The  valley  ot  flod  where  A 1  lam
dwelt. TH«  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God-  The

conunjjr  MillE'Tin turn  arid  triufcph  of  1  Jit*  Samts. ( ),  Phait, Feb,  23,,  3;^

Ffteht.££  in  tfie  Temple.  Value  of  the  Sacred  Records*  The
i  J  oa  pel  ft  1  j  da  test  1  u  j  0  ny  i  11  o  pp<  j  si  i  i  0  i . .  T  h  e  Uosj  Ml  al  w  ay  i
this  same, Martyrs  vt  rtrn  heroes. Ordinances  fur  the  dead,

G,  Q.  Qjosnim. April 4S „  .14D

The  United  Order.  The  duty  of  the  Priesthood.  The  Gospel
not  Comm  uu  ism.  Teaching  the  peoplo  how  tn  lire.  Inde-
pendent of  Uuhybu.  The  Saint*  will  continue,  to  spread
Unity  of  piirjio^e  and  action  will  hin^  n^am  Xir>n ...  Free
tichoo Is  criticised. Education al  s  a  ih  o.  our  children,

B*  Yoi  Nn. April Ot TP  353

The  Lord  rules,  The  hand  of  Ciod  in  persecution.  The  (.o*pel
e n il  traces  1 1 9 e  t rut In  No  need  1 1 1  W orry ,  the  1  .0 rd  w i  11  d eal
out  justice. Joseph  slain  fur  the  tiospel. The  dissatisfied

will  be  satisfied. Full  of  blessing.  L>.  Y^uxu. M  ty Gf „  358

Dedicatioii  Prayer  in  the  Toniple  at  St.  Guorge, IXH.Wki.Jvi. Anril i<, (1  36.1

Necessity  fir  effort,  Kiyulation  *>:  temporal  affairs*  Cunsecra-
tion  and  stewardship.  Preparation  tor  bunding  hi  Jackson
Uouniy.  Hespotjsibilitii  3  of  Presidents.  Huw  rnnriilenee
is  created... Tue  United  Order ...Desire*  for  the  future.

Lr  .Snow. Ap:il 5, ?1  371


JOUJttNAL  OF  DISCOl.rjJS.KS


DISCOURSE  Br  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  the  Fouty-Fiktu  Avnvai  Cum  <  ubsce  of  the  Church  of

JkSUS UllUlsT H|+ LaTTKIL- IHY S.UNTK, IN T1IH  NbW  TAltEKNACLE^  SALT

Lake  City,  Thui»i»ay  Mousing  April  8,
(incited Dtioti  IF.  Euan*,)

MAN,  THE  OPPSl'lilXG  OF  GOD,  A IK'AL  i:i  i\ <., —  IM.UMHATE  II EV ELATION

— OVVi:  \te  WITH  TUB  PRIESTHOOD,


[oonTrN-rtii*  fk>m

We  talk  sometimes  about  iho
lYii-strunid.  Wild  tin"  w<  U'fio
are  these  Latter-day  Saints  before
me  to-day  ?  Arc  thoy  noA  the
Priesthood  ?  Aiv  ymi  not,  really
ami  truly,  a  kingdom  of  Priests  ?
Do  you  not  belong  to  the  First  Pre-
sidency, the  Twelve,  the  Hi^h
Priests,  the  Hiirh  Council,  the  Kl-
fers,  Priests,  I  t  rollers  and  Deacons,
or  hold  some  office  in  the  Cb  arch  and
kingdom  of  (Soil  ?  Is  not  this
really  and  truly  a  fact  p  To  a  very
great  extent  it  is,  not  exclusively  or
entirely.  Have  you  not  received
tins  Priesthood  ?  Arc  you  no:  re-
sponsible to  Cod  to  carry  ont  hi*
purposes  and  designs,  so  far  rus  :hey
have  been  corn  mi  I  tod  unto  yoa,  iu
relation  to  the  building  up  a:id  esta-
blishing of  Ins  kingdom  and  tho
introduction  of  righteousness  upon
the  earth  ?  Arc  you  not  engaged  in
these  things  ?  If  you  am  not  you
ought  to  be,  this  is  your  calling  and

Ho,  1.


AOK  370, Vi»i..  17  ]

profession  What  si  nil  we  do  then  r
Humb!e  ^irnelvea  before  God,  every
one  of  us.  We  all  need  it*  Humble
yourselves,  repent  of  your  si  in,  and
evils,  iv n  1  w :.\ \  w ard mass,  of  your
iniquities  Imsehoitfl,  covetonsnesa,
pride,  haughtiness  and  corruptions
of  every  kind,  and  lay  them  aside,
and  become  men  of  truth,  integrity,
,  virtue,  purity  and  better;  that  your
hearts  and  spirits  and  feelings  may
bo  pure  before  God, Say  to  the

L  ■■  ,i -  ■ irr'i me,  ■  ■. < i.ti.  hth!
prove  me,  and  if  there  is  any  way  of
wickedness  within  mi*  lid  it  depart,
and  let  me  live  my  religion,  Iionm
my  ti L  walk  m  ol'ediey-v  J  >  hi-'

laws,  magnify  my  Priesthood,  and
,  prepare  myself  and  my  posterity  fa*  an
inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
Let  me  associate  myself  with  those
men  of  God  who  have  gone  before,
'  and  with  (rod,  and  with  Jesus,  who
is  the  Mediator  of  tin?  New  Covenant,
that,  all  combined,  we  may  roll  on

Vol  XVII J.


2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  work  of  God,  and  accomplish  his
purposes  here  upon  the  earth.

Why,  some  of  these  men  yon
heard  Elder  Hyde  talking  about
here  the  other  day  are  beginning  to
visit  the  Lara  ani  tea  Somebody
asked  me  why  they  did  not  come  to
some  of  us.  Said  I — "  I  do  not
know,  but  I  think  that  if  I  was  the
father  of  these  folks  I  should  go  to
them  first,  seek  after  them  first/*
But  no  matter,  let  them  operate  and
ns  operate,  and  God  operate,  and
don't  let  us  stand  in  the  way  of  God.
Let  ns  humble  ourselves;  let  us
reverence  the  Priesthood  and  honor
those  who  nre  keeping  the  command-


ments of  God  and  managing  the
affairs  of  his  Church  and  kingdom  on
the  earth.  Let  us  operate  also  with
the  living  Priesthood  of  all  ages;
with  Adam,  Seth,  Enoch,  Noah,
Jlelchizedek,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,
the  Prophets,  Jesus,  his  Apostles,
with  Ether,  Jared  and  his  brother—
Lehi,  Alma,  Moroni,  Mormon,  the
Prophets  and  Apostles  on  this  con*
tinent,  and  men  that  have  held  the
same  Priesthood  that  we  do,  and  with
them  help  our  heavenly  Father  to
establish  and  roll  on  this  kingdom  ;
to  save  the  living  and  the  dead  and
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  Forty -Fifth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jksus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  Thursday  Afternoon,  April  8,  1875.


(Reported  ly  David  W.  Evatts.)


THERE  IS  CAUSE  FOR  REJOICING — THE  HAND  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE
OVER  THE  SAINTS — PLEASED  WITH  BEING  A  TERRITORY— 3IAINTAIX
THE  RIGHT— BE  TRUE  TO  PRINCIPLE.


There  have  been  a  number  of  items
of  interest  touched  upon  by  the  bre-
thren who  have  spoken  daring  this
Conference,  and  as  it  is  a  time  when
we  meet  together  for  the  purpose  of
receiving  general  instructions,  it
seems  to  me  very  desirable  that  the
time  should  be  occupied  in  dwelling
upon  principles  which  immediately  I


pertain  to  our  condition  and  present
circumstances*  In  the  remarks
which  I  shall  make  this  afternoon,  I
trust  I  shall  be  led  to  speak  upon
those  things  which  immediately  con-
cern us,  and  which  pertain  to  our
daily  lives.

I  rejoice  exceedingly  in  this  oppor-
tunity, that  is,  the  opportunity  of


THERE  IS  CAUSE  F


OR  REJOICING,  ETC,


4

being  present  at  Conference.  I  be-
lieve that  I  can  appreciate  ifc  better
than  I  could  possibly  have  done  had
I  been  here  all  the  time  during  the
winter.  I  have,  however,  daring
my  absence,  enjoyed  myself  better
than  I  could  have  expected,  I  have
felt  that  the  Lord  lias  been  with  us  as
a  people,  that  his  power  has  been
manifested  in  our  behalf,  and  that,  so
far  as  the  prospects  of  Zion  in  the
future  are  concerned,  we  have  abun-
dant reason  to  be  thankful  and  re-
joice. I  know  that  the  hope  is  in-
dulged in  in  many  quarters  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  fast  losing  that
faith  for  which  they  have  been  noted,
aad  by  the  operation  of  which  they
have  been  enabled  to  accomplish  the
labors  that  have  devolved  upon  them
in  the  past  in  this  country  at?  pioneers,
and  as  pioneers  in  the  religious  world.
I  am  quite  willing,  myself,  if  it  is
any  satisfaction  to  any  individual  to
entertain  this  idea,  that  he  should  do
so ;  but  for  myself,  and  I  believe  I
speak  the  sentiments  of  the  people,  I
never,  in  my  life,  saw  greater  cause
for  rejoicing  in  the  cause  of  Cod
than  I  do  to-day,  I  am  not  in  the
least  discouraged,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, I  feel  exceedingly  encouraged.
I  know,  it  seems  to  me,  better  than  I
ever  knew,  that  God  is  with  this
people,  that  he  hearkens  to  their
prayers,  and  that  he  vv  ate  Ills  over
them.  It  is  true  that  there  are  in-
fluences operating  upon  us  at  the
present  time  that  we  have  only  re-
cently had  to  contend  with,  they  are
comparatively  new  influences  and,  to
a  certain  extent,  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  unaccustomed  to  them,  especially
the  rising  generation.  But  it  has
been  taught  us  from  the  beginning
that  Zion  is  to  become  a  great  po^er
in  the  earth,  and  that  she  will  tri-
umph; but  £  cannot  conceive  how
Zion  can  become  that  which  we  have
expected,  or  that  it  "will  achieve  the


destiny  predicted  concerning  it,  un-
less it  be  by  passing  through  ordeals
such  as  those  we  already  have  to
encounter,  and  others,  still  greater,
that  are  yet  in  the  future,  by  which
Zion  will  show  its  superiority  over
every  institution  and  power  that
exists  on  the  foce  of  the  earth,

I  have  expected  for  years  that  the
seclusion  which  we  sought  in  coming
to  these  mountains  would  be  termi-
nated. Everything  in  the  predic-
,  tions  of  the  holy  Prophets  concerning
the  work  of  God  in  the  last  days
conveyed  this  idea  to  my  miud.  I
looked  upon  our  retreat  here  as  a
temporary  one,  for  I  well  knew  from
the  character  of  the  people  and  their
achievements  that,  in  a  short  time,
we  should  have  the  world  trooping
to  us  j  we  should  be  like  a  city  set
on  a  hill,  we  could  not  be  hid,  and
that  the  eyes  of  men  would  be  attracted
Zionward,  therefore  I  have  not  been
disappointed  in  witnessing  that  which
we  see  around  us  to-day.  It  has
come  probably  in  some  form  that
I  had  net  looked  for,  because  I
could  only  take  a  general  view,  the
details  I  did  not  understand,  but
that  we  should  pass  through  ordeals
that  should  test  as,  test  our  faith,
test  our  institutions,  test  the  char-
acter of  our  doctrines,  test  the  prac-
tical value  of  everything  connected
with  us,  I  never  had  a  doubt;  and
so  far  as  the  future  is  concerned  I
look  forward  to  an  increase  rather
than  a  decrease  of  these  things,  to
an  increase  of  tests,  a  multiplication
of  ordeals  that  will  be  calculated  in
their  very  nature  to  test  and  try  us
aud  the  system  with  which  we  are
identified  to  the  perfect  satisfaction
of  every  one  connected  with  it.
How  else  could  we  expect  that
Zion  should  become  a  power  in  the
earth  ?  How  else  could  we  expect
that  that  respect  should  be  accorded
to  Zion  which  we  are  led  to  believe


4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


will  be  the  case  ?  How  else  will  the
wisdom  and  power  that  God  will
bestow  upon  his  people  be  made  clear
in  the  eyes  of  this  nation  and  of  the
nations  of  the  earth  only  by  these
practical  tests,  by  these  trials,  by
surmounting  these  difficulties,  and  by
showing  a  capacity  to  meet,  grapple
with  and  overcome  evety  emergency
and  contingency  that  may  arise  ?
Can  we  achieve  that  distinction  which
is  inevitably  in  store  for  us  as  a  peo-
ple if  the  predictions  of  the  Pro-
phets be  fulfilled  short  of  such  an
experience  as  this  ?  I  think  not.
The  enemies  of  this  work  may  in
dulge  in  whatever  anticipations  of
our  discomfit  are  or  downfall  they
please,  but  as  for  us,  let  us  take  a
practical,  sensible  view  of  the  work
with  which  we  are  identified,  and  pre-
pare , ourselves  accordingly,  so  that
when  the  hour  of  trial  shall  come,
be  it  severe  or  not,  we  may  be  pre-
pared therefor,  having  strength  and
faith  sufficient  to  endure  it,  and  to
bear  witness  unto  all  men  that  we
have  not  cherished  this  faith  in
vain.

There  is  this  peculiarity  about
this  work,  that  no  power  that  has
yet  arrayed  itself,  against  it  has
succeeded  in  its  attempts  to  gain
advantage  over  it.  It  is  true  there
have  been  seemingly  temporary
successes;  there  have  been  times
when  mobs  ar:d  violent  men  have
achieved  a  temporary  success  and
when  they  have  flattered  themselves
with  the  idea  that  their  designs
against  this  work  have  been  suc-
cessful* But  one  peculiarity  has
ever  marked  the  career  of  this  peo-
pie,  that  is,  that  events  in  our  his-
tory which  have  seemed  to  bo  deadly
blows  against  us  and  the  work  in
which  we  are  engaged,  have  turned
out  to  be  magnificent  successes  for  us
as  a  community.  Trace  our  history
from  the  beginning,  peruse  it  care-


fully, draw  the  lessons  from  it  which
I  believe  are  intended  to  be  conveyed
by  it,  and  what  do  you  see  ?  The
Church  and  Zion  of  God  emerging
from  the  'difficulties,  trouble  and
seeming  disaster  sought  to  be  brought
upon  it  by  its  enemies,  brighter,
stronger,  more  firmly  planted,  more
united  than  it  was  when  the  difficulty
commenced,  or  the  trouble  was  first
visited  upon  us.  The  loss  of  houses
and  lands,  expulsion  from  homes
that  were  dearly  bought,  had  no
such  effect  upon  this  people,  pro-
duced no  such  thrill  and  such  death-
like sorrow  in  the  hearts  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  as  did  the  mar-
tyrdom ot  our  beloved  Prophet  and
Patriarch  ;  had  we  lost  our  dearest
friends;  had  wo  lost  everything
that  we  valued  on  earth,  it  seems
to  me  it  would  not  have  compared
with  the  poignant  sorrow,  the  deep,
heartfelt  anguish  that  prostrated  this
people  in  the  depths  of  humility
when  the  news  of  the  cruel  murder
of  their  beloved  leaders  reached
them ;  yet  deadly  as  that  blow  was,
to  all  human  appearance  prostrating
the  entire  people,  who  felt  that  they
had  lost  those  who  stood  nearest  to
God  and  nearest  to  them,  God  in  his
mercy,  out  of  that  great  affliction
brought  forth  a  great  triumph  and
raised  up  a  man  to  take  the  place  of
the  Prophet,  who  has  been  in  some
respects  like  Blisha  following  Elijah,
possessing,  as  EHsha  desired  it  might
be  the  case  with  him,  a  double  por-
tion of  the  spirit  that  rested  down
on  his  master,  Elijah.  And  God
has  led  us,  God  has  prospered  us,  and
God  gave  us  success  that  seemed  to
be  commensurate  with  the  depth  of
our  anguish  and  sorrow,  and  lifted
us  up  from  the  depths  of  humility
into  which  we  had  sunk,  and  placed
vlb  upon  the  heights  of  gladness  and
joy,  and  caused  us  to  rejoice  as  we
could  not  have  done  probably  under


THERE  IS  CAUSE  FOR  REJOICING,  ETC,


s


other  circumstances-  And  so,  when  I
we  wore  driven  out  of  civilization  so-
called  ;  when  we  wended  our  weary
way  through  the  wilderness,  not
knowing  where  we  were  going,  it
seemed  as  though  the  last  blow  had
been  struck  and  we  had  been  left  a  prey
to  internal  dissensions  or  to  the  vio-
lence of  the  savages.  But  God  in
his  mercy,  out  of  that  seemingly
great  affliction,  has  brought  forth
great  blessing  and  glory  to  us,  and
has  honored  us,  has  enriched  us,  has
raised  us  up  and  endowed  us  with
blessings  that  we  could  not  have  had  ,
where  we  lived ;  so  that  that  great
blow  aimed  at  us  by  our  enemies  has
been  over-ruled  to  be  the  means  of
great  and  wonderful  blessings  to  us,
and  as  an  entire  people  we  rejoice  to-  I
day  in  the  possession  of  a  land  that
God  has  given  unto  us,  to  which  he
led  us  and  which  lie  designated  by
the  finger  of  inspiration  as  the  land
which  we  should  occupy,  and  which"
we  this  day  possess  despite  all  the
machinations  of  the  wicked  and  their
efforts  to  strip  us  of  all  power  herein,  j
Until  this  day  he  has  given  unto  us
the  supremacy  in  this  land,  from
north  to  south,  from  east  to  west,
and  he  has  made  it  productive  and
fertile  for  our  sakes.  When  we
reflect  upon  our  history  since  we
came  here;  when  we  think  of  the  '
many  plots  and  schemes,  of  the  many
men  who  have  lent  themselves  to
these  plots,  who  have  done  all  in
their  power  against  and  to  entrap
this  people ;  when  we  reflect  upon  it  '
all,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  am
filled  with  amazement,  and  with
thanksgiving  to  God  our  Eternal
Father  for  his  goodness  and  mercy
unto  us  as  a  people.  I  know,  as  well
as  I  know  that  I  live,  that  no  human
power  could  have  saved  us  time  and
time  again  as  we  have  been  rescued  ;
that  there  is  no  wisdom  of  man  that
was  equal to the  emergencies  in


J  which  we  have  been  placed ;  hut
God,  in  his  infinite  mercy  and
wisdom,  in  his  kindness  and  watch-
i  care  over  us  as  a  people,  has,  at  the
very  moment  when  salvation  was
needed,  stretched  forth  his  Ah  nighty
arm.  He  has  rescued  us  from  the
grasp  of  the  destroyer  when  i  t  seemed
as  though  destruction  was  inevitable
and  we  could  not  escape.  The  last
tive  years  have  been  as  fruitful,  pro-
bably, as  any  period  in  our  history
in  events  of  this  character.  Time
and  time  again  has  it  seemed  as
I  though  destruction  was  sure  to  coma
upon  us,  as  though  there  were  no  way
possible  for  us  to  escape;  but  God
has  heard  our  supplications  and  has
opened  the  way  of  deliverance  in  a
most  wonderful  manner,  and  has
rescued  us  from  the  grasp  of  those
who  would  destroy  us.  Others  may
not  sea  the  hand  of  God  10  these
things;  they  may  say  that  these
things  come  about  from  and  are  the
results  of  natural  causes,  but  those
who  have  prayed  to  God,  whose
hearts  have  been  drawn  out  in  suppli-
cation to  him  and  who  have  waited
tremblingly  for  the  salvation  which
he  has  promised,  have  seen  and  they
cannot  but  acknowledge  the  hand  o'*
God  in  these  deliverances,  because,
as  I  have  said,  they  have  wa relied,
waited  and  prayed  anxiously  and
earnestly  in  the  name  of  Jesus  for
deliverance,  and  when  it  has  come
their  faith  has  been  strengthened  and
their  joy  increased  in  the  Holy  One
of  Israel ;  because  he  has  heard  and
answered  their  prayers:  and  to-day
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  the  people
of  all  people  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  who  know  that  God  lives,
i  because  he  hears  and  answers  their
prayers.  And  he,  it  leems,  is  deter-
mined to  have  a  people  upon  the
earth  who  will  be  compelled  to  pat
their  trust  in  him  and  not  in  man,
because  man's  power  would  utterly


6  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


fail  to  save  them,  and  no  power  but
bis  can  do  it.  When  I  look  at  all
these  things  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise
to  me  that  men  cannot  see  the  hand
of  God  in  this  work.  Yet  there  are
many  whose  hearts  have  been  touched
by  the  evidences  of  God's  favor  unto
us,  and  they  have  been  surprised  and
have  expressed  their  wonder  that  we
have  been  so  signally  delivered  as  we
have  been.

Now  there  is  a  great  future  in  store
for  us  as  a  people,  God  has  said  so,
and  his  words  cannot  fail  in  being
fulfilled.  There  is  a  destiny  in  store
for  this  people  that  few  can  compre-
hend* .  We  have  to  teach  the  world
lesson  after  lesson  that  they  have
entirely  forgotten,  or  that  they  never
knew.  We  have  to  teach  them  and
show  them  by  our  example  that  there
is  such  a  thing  as  living  faith,  that
there  is  such  a  thing  as  trusting  in
God,  being  saved  by  him,  that  there
is  such  a  power  as  faith  in  the  land,
and  that  prayer,  when  offered  in  faith,
is  effectual  in  reaching  him.  We
have  to  show  the  nations  of  the  earth
that  God  with  a  small  people  can
accomplish  wonderful  results.  When
I  think  of  our  numbers,  how  few  we
are, — we  are  a  great  people  in  some
respects,  but  in  numbers  we  are  few
and  feeble — yet  with  this  few  people
what  is  God  doing  in  the  earth  !
What  a  name  he  is  gaining  for  his
people,  his  servants !  You  may  travel
throughout  the  earth,  in  every  land,
among  every  people,  and  let  it  be
known  that  you  are  a  Latter-day
Saint,  and  you  will  Hnd  that  the  fame
of  the  people  has  preceded  you,  and
you  will  find  yourselves  distinguished
from  everybody  else.  It  is  exceed-
ingly wonderful  that  a  people  so
small,  numerically  so  insignificant,  a
people  not  wealthy,  but  it  may  be
said  poor,  are  so  noted  in  the  earth.
Yet  this  is  the  fact,  that  God  intends
to  make  us  still  more  so,  he  intends


to  give  us  a  name  and  a  place  among
the  nations  of  the  earth  that  shall  be
distinguished  above  all  other  people.
We  are  accused,  you  know,  of  being
disloyal.  This  has  been  a  story  told
of  us,  a  charge  repeated  against  us
from  the  very  beginning,  because
men  have  thought  it  would  be  most
effective  in  destroying  our  influence.
The  idea  prevails  in  many  quarters
that  wc  are  scarcely  as  true  to  the
government  as  wTe  should  be.  I  have
j  heard  it  stated  that  were  it  not  for
these  troops  at  Camp  Douglas,  Utah
Territory  would  rebel*  By  such
nonsense  as  this  do  men  who  oppose
us  seek  to  deceive  the  world  at  large
respecting  us  and  our  motives  and
feelings,  I  have  had  occasion  fre-
quently  to  talk  upon  this  .subject.
I  have  told  men  that,  from  my  early
boyhood,  I  have  been  taught  to
believe  that  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  was  revealed  of  God,
and  that  the  destiny  iu  store  for  the
Latter-day  Saints  was  to  uphold  con-
stitutional government  upon  this
land  j  and,  that  being  the  case,  how
could  it  be  reconcilable  with  the  idea
thai  we  were  disloyal  to  the  Govern-
ment ?  But  there  is  a  class  of  men
who  consider  everybody  disloyal  who
does  not  dance  to  their  tunes,  and
who  does  not  re-echo  the  sentiments
which  they  express  and  seem  to
entertain.  We  have  a  class  of  men
among  us  here  who  talk  about  the
one-man  power  and  the  tyranny  that
exist  in  the  Utah  Territory,  but  at
the  same  time  if  an  official  were  to
come  here  and  associate  with  citizens
of  this  Terrritory,  u  Mormon"  citizens
I  mean,  they  would  put  him  under  a
ban  and  brand  him  as  disloyal  and
unfit  to  hold  an  official  position  under
the  Government  And  why  ?  For
years  here  it  has  been  considered  by
certain  officials  as  one  of  the  best
1  recommendations  to  the  favor  of  those
[  in  power  to  hate  and  abuse  the"Mor-


THERE  IS  CAUSE  FOR  REJOICING,  ETC.


mon"  people  of  Utah  Territory;  and
if  a  man  were  to  dare  to  associate
with  "  Mormons/'  were  to  speak
kindly  of  or  to  associate  with  them,
and  to  treat  them  as  he  would  other
people  he  would  be  ostracised  and
banished,  so  far  as  association  with
them  is  concerned  a  n on- intercourse
act  would  be  passed  immediately.
And  these  very  individuals  talk  about
the  intolerance  of  the  Mormons.

We  have  these  things  to  contend
with,  we  have  these  lies  to  lire  down,
and  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  let
them  always  be  lies;  let  no  man
have  it  in  his  power  to  say  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  an  intolerant,
proscriptive  or  an  unjust  people.
Never  let  this  be  said  of  us  with
truth ;  but  if  it  be  said,  let  our  ene-
mies continue  to  lie  about  us  until
they  are  tired  of  it,  or  until  the  world
become  sickened  with  the  falsehoods
that  are  told  concerning  us.  And
for  us,  let  us  pursue  the  path  that
God  has  marked  out,  being  liberal,
truthful,  upright,  dealing  fairly,  hon-
estly and  tolerantly  with  every  man,
so  that  every  class  of  men  who  come
into  our  midst  may  learn  that  we
have  received  a  religion  that  admits
of  toleration  in  the  broadest  sense  of
the  word.

It  has  been  a  matter  of  considera-
ble satisfaction  to  me  to  state  that  in
Utah  Territory  our  pulpits,  stands,
tabernacles  and  meeting-houses  have
always  been  open  to  every  sect  and
denomination  to  come  and  preach
their  peculiar  views,  creeds  and
doctrines,  and  that  our  people  have
turned  out  in  large  congregations  to
listen  to  speakers  or  preachers  of
other  denominations  advancing  their
doctrines;  and  that  not  only  have
congregations  of  adults  been  fur-
nished, but  the  children  of  the  Sun-
day schools  have  frequently  been
assembled  in  the  New  Tabernacle,
8alt  Lake  City,  that  they  might  pur-


posely  hear  and  become  familiar  with
the  ideas  and  views  entertained  by
other  religious  denominations.  This
stands  out  in  marked  contrast  with
the  practice  of  almost  every  other
sect,  and  it  gives  the  falsehood  to  the
stories  which  have  been  so  frequently
told  about  us.

Now  respecting  all  these  things
that  we  are  passing  through,  I  re-
cognize the  hand  of  God  in  them  all,
I  think  that  we  have  learned  lessons
of  late  that  have  been  profitable  to
us.  For  instance,  we  now  know  and,
while  the  recollection  of  the  past
few  years  is  vivid  in  our  minds  we
shall  continue  to  know,  how  to  value
a  just  man  who  sits  as  a  judge,  and
it  may  be  that  it  will  be  bo  impressed
upon  us,  that  when  power  shall  come
into  our  midst,  and  come  it  will,  as
inevitably  as  the  snn  rises  in  the
morning  over  the  eastern  hills  so  sure
will  power  come  unto  us;  but  when
it  does  come  I  trust  that  the  recol-
lection of  the  past  will  be  vivid  in
our  minds  and  that  we  will  always
seek  to  deal  justly  and  fairly  with
all  who  may  seek  justice  at  our  bands.
It  has  been  said  that  when  we  acquire
power  we  shall  be  intolerant,  as  other
sects  have  been.  The  Puritans,  who
fled  from  England  because  of  reli-
gious persecution  became,  in  turn,
themselves  the  persecutors  when
they  had  the  power.  Roger  Wil-
liams fled  from  them  and  took  refuge
in  what  is  now  Rhode  Island,  They
persecuted  the  Quakers  and  others
who  came  within  their  borders  with
an  intolerance  that  was  quite  equal
to,  if  it  did  not  exceed,  the  intoler-
ance to  which  they  themselves  had
been  the  victims.  And  it  ha*  heen
said  concerning  us,  that  if  we  had
the  power,  we  would  probably  tread
in  the  same  path,  that  persecution
would  only  harden  ns  and  make  us
deal  with  others  with  a  severity
which  we  would  not  know  anything


3


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


about  had  we  ourselves  n.jt  been  victims
beforehand. Bat  I  think  that  God
in  his  mercy  will  strip  as  if  there  be
any  vestige  of  this  about  us ;  I  hope
he  will s  at  any  rate. If  we  achieve
the  destiny  that  is  in  store  for  us,  ,
certainly  to  maintain  that  character  ,
and  to  retain  that  power,  it  will  be
necessary  that  we  should  be  just,
upright,  forbearing  and  tolerant,  and
that  we  should  be  willing  that  every
man  in  this  broad  land  should  wor-
ship God  according  to  the  dictates
of  his  own  conscience,  whether  his
god  be  the  workmanship  of  his  own
bands,  whether  it  be  the  sun,  the
moon,  some  animal,  or  the  God  of
heaven,  with  Jesus  his  Son,  that  we
shall  be  willing  t  hat  every  man  should
worship  God  according  to  his  own
feelings  upon  the  subject,  so  long  as
he  does  not  interfere  with  us,  or  with
others. I  think  we  have  learned  this
lesson  in  part. I  think  the  lessons
that  have  been  impressed  upon  us
have  had  an  effect  in  this  direction,
at  least  they  have  had  the  effect  to
broaden  us ;  and  every  lesson  of  this
kind  will  have  such  a  result  as  this
with ns as a people, and  on
this  account I  am thankful  for

I  am  thankful  to-day  that  we  are
not  a  State,  There  have  been  times
when  I  have  wished  exceedingly  that
we  might  be  released  from  territorial
vassalage  and  be  incorporated  in  the
Union  as  a  sovereign  state,  I  have
desired,  and  labored  for  it  ;  but  this  last
winter  I  have  been  exceedingly  thank-
ful that  Utah  was  a  territory  and  not
a  state.  We  are  told  to  acknowledge
the  hand  of  Got!  in  nil  things,  and  I
do  not  see  why  we  should  not  acknow-
ledge it  in  being  kept  in  this  coudition
of  tutelage  and  vassalage  as  well  as  in
anything  else.  But  it  may  be  asked
— "  Why  do  you  think  our  condition
better  as  a  territory  than  as  a  state  ?n  ;
When  I  heard  of  events  in  Louisiana,  I


the  federal  troops  maintaining  a
government  there,  against  which  I
was  informed,  and  as  I  believed,  th©
mass  of  thtf  people  revolted,  I  though ^
to  myself — Better  be  an  insignificant
territory  than  a  atate  if  we  cannot
h^ve  the  right  of  choosing  our  own
rulers  and  have  them  act  in  tho
offices  to  which  they  are  elected.
Thanks  to  our  insignificance  federal
i  roups  have  not  interfered  with  us
here;  but  if  we  had  been  a  State,
with  two  votes  in  the  Senate,  a
vote  or  two  in  the  House,  and  elec-
toral votes  in  the  Presidential  Elec-
tion there  might  have  been  a  tempta-
tion to  have  done  with  Utah  as  with
other  states.  But  we  had  no  vote ;
our  delegate  in  Congress  had  no  vote ;
we  hud  no  senatorial  representation ;
we  had  no  vote  at  the  Presidential
Election,  and  this  denial  to  us  of  our
rights,  by  keeping  us  in  a  Territorial
condition,  has  thus  far  helped  to  save
us*  With  such  a  feeling  as  there
has  been  in  this  city  and  territory,
for  contesting  elections,  when  they
have  been  overwhelmingly  on  one
side — twenty  thousand  and  upward
against  two  or  three  thousand  ;  when
men  will  contest  elections  uuder  such
circumstances,  and  endeavor  by  un-
just means  to  wrest  the  power  out  of
the  hands  of  the  people  and  defeat
the  will  of  the  majority  j  when  they
will  do  this,  as  has  been  done  in  this
Territory,  it  would  not  need  a  very
strong  pretext  to  have  them  to  go
farther,  to  have  them  appeal  for
Federal  interference,  and  to  try  and
induce  the  government  to  say —
<;  Those  whom  you  call  the  minority
are  the  majority,  they  have  been
unjustly  dealt  with;  affidavits  have
come  here  showing  that  the  polls
have  not  been  managed  properly,  the
ballots  have  not  been  deposited  as
they  should  be,  and  we  must  decide
against  you  "  Mormons "  and  the
men  whom  you  have  elected,  and  put


THERE  IS  CAUSE  FOR  REJOICING,  ETC


your  opponents  into  power."  I  do
not  say  that  this  is  the  case  in  Louis-
iana, I  do  not  pretend  to  decide  upon
that  question,  it  admits  of  a  good
deal  of  argument;  but  I  have  been
told  by  members  of  Congress  who
visited  there — the  Committee  sent  by
Congress  to  investigate  matters,  that
if  the  federal  troops  had  been  with-
drawn from  Louisiana  this  winter
twenty-four  hours  would  not  have
elapsed  until  theMcEnery  government
won lil  have  been  put  in  power,  and
the  whole  difficulty  would  have  been
solved.  But  the  presence  of  federal
troops  maintained  a  government  that
could  not  be  maintained  in  and  of
itself.  What  is  the  use,  then,  of
being  a  State  government  if  the
Federal  government  is  to  interfere  in
this  manner  ill  State  affnhs?  And
with  the  causes  that  exist  in  Utah
Territory  to  make  interference  popu-
lar ami  a  thing  to  be  approved  of  by
thousands,  a  State  government  would
not  be  so  desirable.  I  have,  there-
fore, so  far  as  my  own  feelings  have
been  concerned,  been  very  much
pleased  at  being  a  territory.  I  have
seen  the  hand  of  God  and  his  wisdom
in  this  thing,  when  if  my  wish  or
my  will  could  have  been  gratified  we
should  have  been  a  State  long  ago.

The  Lord,  in  his  mercy,  will  pre-
serve us  from  these  evils;  in  his
overruling  wisdom  and  providence
he  will  deliver  us  until  the  time  shall
come  for  us  to  be  a  state  if  that  be
his  will,  and  I  doubt  not  that  we
shall  be  surprised  at  it  ourselves.  I
have  come  to  the  conclusion,  as  one
individual,  that.  I  shall  not  be  anxious
on  this  subject  in  the  future,  and
shall  leave  it  to  the  overruling  provi-
dence of  God  to  bring  about  when  it
shall  seem  good  unto  him.

As  to  some  of  the  States  in  the
South  they  are  in  such  a  condition
that  we,  if  we  were  iu  the  same,
should  think  our  lot  dreadful.  1


have  heard  stories  of  usurpation  and
tyranny  by  officials  in  those  states
that  have  caused  me  to  think  that,
notwithstanding  all  that  we  have
had  to  endure  in  Utah  Territory,  our
lot  has  been  a  fortunate  one  com-
pared with  that  of  others.  They
have  drunk  the  cup  of  humiliation  to
its  very  dregs.  You  know  there  wns
a  time  here  when  it  seemed  as  though
every  effi/rt  was  made  to  bring  us
under  military  rule  in  tins  Territory,
and  when  the  provocations  endured
by  the  people  here  come  to  be  road
in  history  surprise  will  arise  in  the
mind  of  the  reader,  and  admiration
for  the  people  who  so  patiently  en-
dured the  wrongs  that  were  imposed
upon  them,  especially  when  it  is
remembered  what  power  we  hold
here.  Why,  think  of  it,  a  few  years
ago  a  Governor  came  to  this  Territory
immediately  after  a  long  and  bloody
Indian  war,  in  which  our  citizens
were  masssacred,  their  property
stolen,  their  settlements  robbed  and
their  stock  driven  off;  and  imme-
diately after  that  war  a  Governor
came  here  who  prohibited  the  militia,
every  able-bodied  man  in  the  Terri-
tory, from  bearing  arms — a  most
unheard  of  tyrannical  exercise  of
power ;  and  then  a  Secretary,  while
acting  governor,  afterwards  repeated
the  same  proclamation.  And  this
people  have  borne  it  patiently  and
never  lifted  their  hands  against  these
contemptible  tyrants.  It  was  doubt-
less hoped  that  we  would  commit
some  overt  act  to  provoke  trouble,
so  that  the  federal  troops  could  be
brought  in  and  be  placed  under  the
control  of  these  officials,  who  for  once
in  their  lives  happened  to  hold  p->su
tton.  Not  only  this,  bat  on  one
occasion  when  certain  citizens  met
together  as  a  company,  to  celebrate
the  fact  of  their  band  having  got  a
new  set  of  instruments  a  federal  judge
committed  them  to  a  military  prison


10


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


for  violating  this  proclamation,  as
though  a  proclamation  of  the  Gover-
nor was  law  !  With  as  great  pro-
priety might  an  Executive  claim  that
he  has  the  power  to  restore  the  car-
few,  and  say — 46  You  must  have  your
fires  extinguished  by  eight  o'clock  at
night,  or  we  will  put  you  in  a  mili-
tary prison ;  and  you  must  rise  in
the  morning  at  the  tap  of  the  bell,  or
we  will  treat  you  as  criminals."  If
a  Governor's  proclamation  is  law,
and  is  to  b#  respected  as  such,  where
will  it  end  ?  Will  it  end  with  the
imprisonment  of  men  who  act  as
militia  men?  No;  if  such  acts  of
usurpation  continue,  no  citizen  will
be  safe,  and  they  will  end  in  the
overthrow  of  liberty  and  constitu-
tional right  wherever  permitted.

We  have  borne  these  things,  and
wc  have  borne  others,  the  recollection
of  which,  were  I  to  recite  them  to
yon,  would  make  our  blood  boil.  It
is  not  necessary  that  I  should  do  so ;
but  in  talking  thus  do  we  talk  dis-
loyally ?  American  citizens  have  the
right  to  talk  about  officials  who
trample  upon  their  rights  in  this
manner;  we  all  have  the  right  to
question  the  acts  of  men  in  power;  it
is  a  right  given  to  us,  and  the  man
is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  freeman
who  will  not  thus  criticize  acts  of
oppression  and,  in  a  proper  manner,
resent  them  and  show  his  abhorrence
of  them.  It  is  because  they  are
violative  of  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples of  our  government  that  I  thus
talk  about  them  :  and  in  any  other
Territory  than  this  they  would  have
provoked  a  storm  of  indignation
that  would  have  overwhelmed  their
authors.  One  of  the  lessons  we  have
to  learn  is  to  have  patience,  but  not
to  stop  remonstrating,  not  stop  talk-
ing, not  atop  appealing,  not  hold  our
tongues  and  let  our  children  grow  up
with  the  belief  that  these  things  are
right. No,  proclaim  against  them,


let  it  be  known  that  they  are  wrong,
that  they  are  contrary  to  the  law  of
the  land,  to  the  Constitution  and  to
the  principles  of  our  government;
let  this  be  known,  and  let  our  chil-
dren understand  what  is  right,  and
all  men  recognise  the  fact  that  we
understand  our  rights,  whether  they
are  denied  to  us  or  not

I  expect  to  see  the  day  when  the
Latter-day  Saints  will  be  the  people
to  maintain constitutional  govern-
ment on  this  land. Men  everywhere
should know  that we believe  in
constitutional  principles, and  that
we  expect  that  it  will  I>c  our  destiny
to  maintain  them. That  the  pre-
diction will  be  fulfilled  that  was  made
forty-four  years  ago  the  seventh  of
last  March,  wherein God  said  to
Joseph  Smith — "  Ye  hear  of  wars  in
foreign  lands;  but  behold  I  say  unto
you,  they  are  nigh,  even  at  your
doors,  and  not  many  years  hence  ye
shall  hear  of  wars in your  own
lands ;  "  but  the  revelation  goes  on  to-
gay  that  the  day  will  come  among
the  wicked,  that  every  man  that  will
not  take  his  sword  against  his  neigh-
bor, must  needs  flee  unto  Zion  for
safety. A  portion  of  that  revela-
tion has  been  fulfilled,  the  remainder
will  be. The  causes  are  in  operation
to  bring  it  about. We  are  not  alone
in  the  thought  that  thfi  republic  is
drifting  steadily  in  that  direction  ;
that  we  are  leaving  the  old  constitu-
tional landmarks,  and  that  the  time
is  not  far  distant  when  there  will  be
trouble  in  consequence  of  it,  when
there  will  be  civil  broils  and  strife ;
and,  to  escape  them,  we  believe,  men
will  be  compelled  to  flee  to  the  "Mor-
mons," despised  as  they  are  now.
Does  this  seem  incredible  ?  Why,
look you, to-dty, throughout  onr
Union,  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  the
most  lightly taxed  of  any  people
upon the face of this  continent.
I  do  not  know  a  community  as  free


THERE  IS  CAUSE  FOR  IlEJOICING,  ETC


11


from  debt  as  we  are. There  are  one
or  two  States  I  believe  free  from  debt,
but  they  have  had  to  tax  heavily  to
free  themselves. But  as  a  Territory
we  hare  never  been  in  debt,  and
although  we  have  had  many  tempta-
tions to  drift  in  that  direction,  not  a
bond  belonging  to  the  Territory  has
ever  been  issued;  not  a  dollar  is
owing  that  cannot  be  paid.  Our
cities  are  out  of  debt;  our  counties
are  out  of  debt,  and  I  hope  they  will
continue  so* Our  legislators,  county
courts  and  city  officers  will  doubtless
take  .special  pains  to  keep  down  ex-
penses and  let  us  be  burdened  as  little
as  possible  with  taxation,  so  that  wo
may  be  a  happy  and  a  free  people.
Let  taxes  accumulate,  and  there  is  a
constant  temptation  for  officers  to
steal  your  taxes;  there  must  be  men
elected  to  take  care  of  your  taxes,
and  there  will  be  hundreds  of  leaks
by  which  your  means  will  go  without
benefit  to  the  community,  therefore,
let us be  a  lightly  taxed  people.
We  are  that  to-day,  and  that  is  one
evidence of  the  good  government
there  is  in  this  Territory. We  have
peace  here,  and  we  should  have  little
or  no  litigation  if  it  were  not  forced
upon  us,  and  our  courts,  so  far  as
litigation  is  concerned,  would  have
very  little  to  do  from  the  Latter-day
Saints  ;  we  would  settle  our  difficul-
ties by  arbitration,  and  prevent  litiga-
tion and  money  being  spent  therein,
All  the  tendencies  of  this  people  are
towards  peace,  and  their  aim  is  to
preserve  peaceful  relations  with  each
other  and  with  the  outside  world,  and
we  have  shown  this  all  the  day  long.

What  is  the  case  elsewhere  ?  Why
corruption  stalks  through  the  land,
and  taxation  and  debt  are  increasing.
It  is  considered  a  light  thing  for  a
man  to  get  his  hand  into  the  govern-
ment treasury ;  that  is  all  right,  and
if  so  he  steal  the  funds  of  a  city,
county  or  State,  they  do  not  call  it


stealing,  however:  0  no,  that  is  a
vulgar  name  ;  it  will  do  for  the  man
who  robs  his  neighbor's  hen  roost,
but  they  have  more  fashionable  lan-
guage for  the  acts  to  which  I  refer.

Men  in  public  life,  under  the  pre-
sent reign  of  extravagance,  can  not
meet  their  expenses,  therefore  they
are  exposed  to  temptatiou  and  are
led  to  take  advantage  of  their  posi-
tion. This  is  not  always  the  case,
there  are  many  exceptions;  but  this
is  the  case  too  frequently,  and  good
men  mourn  over  and  regret  it,  and
they  would  like  to  stem  the  tide  and
arrest  this  downward  tendency.

This  is  a  lesson  that  we  have  to
profit  by ;  our  officials  must  be  care-
ful, and  we  must  maintain  a  standard
of  honesty  that  does  not  exist  any-
where else.  It  will  not  do  for  the
idea  to  prevail  that  because  a  man
has  an  office  he  has  the  right  to  en-
rich himself  from  that  office.  This
has  not  been  the  case  in  this  Terri-
tory thus  far;  and  we  may  reasonably
expect  it  will  not  be.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  let
us  live  for  the  destiny  that  is  in  store
for  us.  Let  us  remember  that  God
has  a  great  fature  for  this  people,
and  that  how  soon  it  will  be  granted
unto  us  depends  upon  ourselves.  If
we  were  prepared  for  it  I  know  that
that  time  would  soon  corne,  and  we
should  have  opportunities  given  us
of  doing  good  that  we  do  not  have
to-day.  But  I  am  told  that  one  of
the  effects  of  this  ordeal  through
which  we  are  passing,  is  that  there
are  some  young  men,  and  possibly
young  women,  who  yield  to  certain
temptations.  Young  men,  who  for-
merly would  have  been  ashamed  to
be  seen  smoking  on  the  streets  or
entering  a  billiard,  a  gambling,  or  a
drinking  saloon,  are  now  seen  in  such
places,  and  they  do  not  scruple  to  use
the  name  of  God  in  vain,  or  to  swear
and  be  profane,  and  there  are  some


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


who  seem  to  imagine  that  it  is  an
evidence  of  independence  and  smart-
ness to  indulge  in  tln.se  things;  ami
it  may  be  that  they  go  a  little  farther
and  are  guiHy  of  other  acts  of  greater
turpitude  than  these.

No  man  loses  credit  by  being  ime
to  his  principles.  If  he  is  a  Latter-
day  Saint,  let  him  act  out  his  princi-
ples wherever  he  goes.  If  he  does
Dot  believe  in  drinking  intoxicating
drinks,  let  him  refrain  from  doing  so
everywhere;  if  he  does  not  smoke,
refrain  from  smoking ;  if  he  does  not
swear — which  no  man  ought  to  do —
let  him  refrain  from  it,  no  matter
where  he  is,  an  !  let  him  be  true  to
the  principles  of  his  religion  always
and  under  all  circumstances,  and  he
will  gain  influence  that  he  would  not
have  otherwise.  Let  us  as  a  people
take  a  course  of  this  kind.  But
there  is  this  tendency — "0,  we  must
be  like  somebody  e!*e.M  You  can
see  that  tendency  at  the  present  time
in  many  things  besides  men's  conduct.
There  are  men  here  who  would  change
our  city  and  make  it  like  places  they
know.  They  would  cut  down  our
streets  until  they  would  not  be  fifty
feet  wide,  and  cut  down  our  city
blocks  until  they  were  like  other
city  blocks,  and  would  narrow  our
sidewalks,  cut  down  our  shade  trees,
and  completely  change  the  character
of  everything  there  is  about  us.
They  would  rob  the  city  of  every  dis-
tinctive feature,  and  fill  the  city  with
nest  holes  of  vice.  You  can  see  this
tendency  here  to  imitate  and  do  as
somebody  else  does,  instead  of  our-
selves being  the  staudard;  instead  of
recollecting  that  God  has  chosen  us
and  placed  his  name  upon  us,  that  he
has  called  us  to  be  his  Saints,  and
that  it  is  our  duty  to  maintain  our
principles,  and  carry  them  out  in
our  lives,  doing  that  which  is  right,
regardless  of  whether  it  may  suit
other  people  or  not. It  is  our  duty


to  have  some  mind  of  our  own,  and
if  we  have  a  good  thing  not  to  be
willing  to  part  with  it  because  other
people  make  sport  of  it.  I  like  our
city,  our  sidewalks  and  the  width  of
our  streets ;  others  may  not,  but  that
is  the  pattern  and  plan  upon  which
the  city  was  laid  out.  I  would  like
to  see  everything  connected  with  our
city — and  I  speak  of  this  because  it
is  a  case  in  point,  and  I  merely  speak
of  it  to  illustrate  everything  else—
I  would  like  to  see  us  carry  out  that
which  is  right  ourselves.  If  we  hav«
idea?;  of  our  own,  cling  to  them,  and
not  abandon  them,  because  they  do
not  happen  to  be  popular.  And  so
with  our  practices.  A  man  who
does  not  smoke  is  not  any  worse  for
it;  he  is  no  less  a  gentleman  when  he
goes  into  company  because  of  that.
He  is  no  less  a  gentleman  because  he
does  not  drink  or  because  he  does  nob
swear,  because  he  does  not  go  into  a
gambling  house  or  a  house  of  ill-
fame  ;  and  how  can  a  man  who  calls
himself  a  Latter-day  Saint,  think
that  he  is  any  more  of  a  gentleman
or  any  better  a  man  because  he  can
do  these  things  when  he,  in  and  of
himself,  knows  they  are  wrong.  God
lias  taught  us  that  it  is  not  good  for
us  to  do  these  things ;  he  has  given
us  counsel,  he  has  given  us  a  word  of
wisdom,  and  the  man  who  thus  disre-
gards the  word  of  God  and  his  coun-
sel does  not  show  very  great  respect
to  hitn,  and  I  do  not  imagine  that
God  is  going  to  show  very  great
respect  to  him.

Let  us  be  true  to  our  principles;
men  admire  sincerity,  truth  and  up-
rightness, and  they  admiro  a  Latter-
day  Saint  who  abides  by  his  principles
much  more  than  they  admire  one
whj  is  not  true  to  that  which  ho
professes;  and  you  will  never  lose
anything  by  telling  who  you  are  and
what  you  are  iu  a  respectful  manner,
and  maintaining  that  which  is  right.


COOPERATION  A  TRUE  PRINCIPLE,  ETC.


13


Of  coarse  we  need  not  be  bigoted  or
offensive,  or  run  to  any  extremes.

May  God  bless  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  fill  you  with  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  with  desires  to  teach  your
children  the  ways  of  righteousness,
and  enable  you  to  bring  up  a  gener-


ation that  is  healthy,  pure,  virtuous
and  full  of  integrity  in  this  land
which  God  has  given  unto  us.  That
he  may  thus  bless  and  preserve  us  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen,


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  at  the  Forty  Fifth  Annctal  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jescs  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  os  Friday  Afternoon,  April  9,  1875.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

CO-OPERATION  A  TRUE*  PRINCIPLE— SAINTS  MUST  BE  SELF-SUSTAININC —
PATRONIZE  HOME  MANUCACTURERS  —  HOME  INDUSTRIAL  INSTITU-
TIONS.


We  have  abundantly  proved  in
our  experience  that  if  we  do  not  sus-
tain ourselves,  no  other  people  will
sustain  ns,  and  that  we  mast  be
united,  as  was  said  this  morning,  in
our  temporal  as  well  as  in  our  spiri-
tual a  flairs;  and  that  If  we  would
build  up  and  strengthen  ourselves
in  the  earth,  it  must  be  by  union  of
effort,  and  by  concentrating  our
means  in  a  way  that  shall  produce
the  best  results  for  the  work  with
which  we  are  identified.  Co-opera-
tion, or  a  onion  of  effort,  has  been
proved  in  our  experience,  when  pro-
perly carried  out,  to  be  most  success-
ful. With  small  means  and  limited
incomes  we  can  accomplish,  by  wisely
uniting  our  efforts,  great  results,  and


tu  bring  about  greater  anion  should
Le  our  coo ti nual  effort  As  has  been
said,  there  may  be  failures  and  mis-
m«  nagetuent  occasionally,  but  the
principle  itself  is  a  true  one,  and  it
recommends  itself  to  every  reflecting
mind.  We,  however,  in  our  mercan-
tile operations  in  this  city  and  Terri-
tory, have  been  *nore  than  ordinarily
successful  I  have  Leard  reproaches
indulged  in,  or  rather  reflections
cast,  upon  our  general  co-operative
institution.  I  think  it  has  been  one
of  the  most  successful  establishments
and  institutions  that  we  ever  have
had  among  us,  and  I  do  not  know
that  it  has  been  equalled  any  when,
when  we  reflect  that  in  the  short
space  of  three  years  those  who  in*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


vested  their  means  in  that  institution
made  one  hundred  per  cent. — doubled
tbeir  original  stock  ;  and  when  the
financial  crisis  came  in  the  east — the
panic  as  it  was  termed,  and  many
strong  houses  went  down  before  It,
oar  institution  was  able  to  withstand
the  storm,  and  tide  over,  and  has  met
every  dollar  of  its  indebtedness
promptly,  or  at  least  to  the  satis-
faction of  its  creditors.  We  have
been  subjected  to  a  great  deal  of  ex-
pense in  various  ways ;  but  the  ex*
perience  of  the  past  few  years  enables
lis  to  see  now  bow  this  expense  can
be  curtailed;  and  profiting  by  this
wisdom  and  experience,  as  a  commu-
nity we  should  take  the  necessary
steps  to  establish,  or  rather  to  ar-
range it  so  that  it  will  give  the
greatest  satisfaction.  A  good  deal
might  be  said  oq  this  subject  in  this
connection  but  as  we  shall  have  a
meeting  very  shortly  in  relation  to
our  co-operative  business  affairs,  pro-
bably that  would  be  the  proper  place
for  remarks  of  this  character.  But  I
would  say,  as  one  individual,  to  all
the  Saints — Let  us  by  every  means
in  our  power,  that  is,  by  collecting
the  little  means  that  we  have,  seek
to  build  up  and  strengthen  these
institutions  in  our  midst,  and  they
will  prove  profitable  to  us,  and  be  a
great  blessing  to  the  entire  commu-
nity and  to  Zion,

At  this  afternoon's  session  of  the
Conference  the  authorities  of  the
Church  will  be  presented,  and  it  is
desirable  that  there  should  be  a  gene-
ral attendance  of  the  members  of  the
Church,  as  far  as  they  can  possibly
come.

To  refer  again  to  this  subject  of
co-operation.  We  have  seen  its  good
effects  in  the  settlements  throughout
the  entire  Territory-  I  consider  that
if  it  had  not  been  for  our  institution
regulating  prices  and  governing  and
controling  the  mercantile  interests  of


this  Territory,  we  should  have  lost,
by  having  to  pay  high  prices,  thou-
sands and  thousands  of  dollars  that
we  have  saved.  In  Brigham  City
particularly,  judging  by  accounts  that
we  have  heard,  have  ihe  principles  of
co-operation  been  exceedingly  bene-
ficial to  the  people,  because  of  the
perfection  to  which  they  have  been
carried  out.  The  great  difficulty
with  us  heretofore  has  been  that,  as  a
people,  we  have  not  had  capital  to
achieve  any  very  great  results.  No
one  man,  until  quite  recently,  has  had
sufficient  means  to  carry  on  any  great
undertaking,  but  by  the  masses  of
the  people  uniting  under  a  co-opera-
tive plan,  aad  putting  their  funds  in
the  hands  of  those  who  are  judicious
and  good  business  men,  we  can  esta-
blish every  kind  of  manufacture  that
is  necessary  in  this  country  to  make
us  self-sustaining.  The  manufacture
of  iron  into  hollow- ware,  and  every
thing  of  this  character  that  is  made
of  iron;  tlife  manufacture  of  rails  for
our  railroads,  of  jvoolen  goods  of  the
best  character,  thp  establishment  of
sheep  and  cattle  herds,  of  cheese
factories  and  tanneries,  and  of  every
branch  of  manufacture  that  is  adapted
to  our  climate  and  Territory  can  be
carried  on  upon  this  principle,  and
efforts  should  be  made  by  us  as  a
people  to  establish  and  make  them
sucoessfal,  I  took  down  with  me,
when  I  went  to  Washington  last  fall,
a  suit  of  clothes  manufactured  here
in  this  Territory  — the  wool  was
grown  here,  the  cloth  was  made  at
President  Young's  factory,  and  the
clothes  were  made  by  our  tailors.
Tbere  was  a  good  deal  of  discussion
in  the  early  part  of  the  session  con-
cerning the  resumption  of  specie
payments-  I  remarked  to  a  good
many  of  my  friends  that  if  I  were  a
believer,  as  some  of  them  were,  in.
the  power  of  the  General  Govern-
ment to  make  laws  respecting  such


CO-OPERATION  A  TRUE  FRIXCITLE,  ETC*


15


matters,  I  should  be  in  favor  of
making  a  law  that  would  prevent
the  importation  into  this  country  of
anything  that  we  could  make  oar-
selves  ;  and  I  believe  that  specie <
payments  will  be  postponed  until
there  is  a  stnp  to  the  extravagance
which  reigns  throughout  the  country.
The  stream  of  gold  which  ought  to
be  setting  in  the  direction  of  the
United  States,  in  consequence  of  the
multiplicity  of  our  productions  and
the  greatness  of  our  trade,  is  con-
stantly flowing  toward  Europe ;  and
while  this  is  the  case,  we  may  strug-
gle in  vain  to  get  back  to  specie
payments.  That  which  is  true  con-
cerning a  nation  is  true  concerning
us  as  a  Territory.  If  we  would  be
independent,  if  we  would  keep  the
circulating  medium  in  abundance  in
our  midst,  we  must  stop  the  stream
that  is  flowing  from  the  Territory,
and  every  dollar  that  we  spend  here
in  sustaining  a  home  institution ,  for
making  clothes,  paying  the  cloth
manufacturer  for  his  cloth,  the  wool-
grower  for  his  wool,  the  tanner  for
his  leather,  or  the  shoemaker  fur
making  that  leather  into  shoes  and  ,
boots,  is  that  much  saved  to  the
entire  community.  One  very  pro-
minent free.trade  member  of  the
House,  during  a  discussion  on  this
subject  last  session,  remarked  that
the  suit  of  clothes  be  had  on  cost
him  but  a  comparative  small  amount*
and  that  he  had  them  sent  from
Canada.  Some  one  replied,  by  way
of  joke,  that  he  had  probably  bought
a  second  hand  suit ;  but  there  is  no
doubt  the  clothes  were  new.  But
suppose  they  cost  less  in  Canada
than  the  same  suit  would  in  the
States,  can  not  you  and  every  body
see,  without  lengthy  reflection,  that
that  money  all  went  into  foreign
hands,  and  did  not  benefit  the  people
of  this  country  ?  The  producer  of
the  wool,  the  manufacturer  of  the


cloth,  and  the  maker  of  the  clothes
in  Canada  received  the  benefit.  But
;  supposing  that  thirty-five  or  forty
dollars  had  been  paid  for  that  suit  of
clothes  in  the  United  States,  or  in
the  community  where  the  purchaser
lived,  you  can  readily  perceive  that
by  the  circulation  of  that  money  in
his  immediate  vicinity,  he,  himself,
|  if  he  were  in  any  business,  would
receive  the  benefit  of  the  expenditure,
and  that  the  extra  cost  would  not  b*
an  entire  loss  to  him  like  paying  it
oat  to  a  foreign  community.  And  so
it  is  with  our  own  manufactures.  We
talk  about  brooms  and  about  cheese,
butter  and  other  things  which  can
be  brought  from  the  east  at  lower
figures  than  we  can  produce  them;
but  it  is  better  for  us  to  pay  twenty-
live  per  cent,  more,  and  I  do  not
know  but  even  a  larger  per  ccnta^e,
for  our  home  productions,  than  to
send  the  money  away  to  a  distant
i  community  where  it  is  circulated
and  we  receive  no  benefit  from  it
If  we  bought  home  made  cheese,
and  had  to  pay  ten  or  fifteen  cents
a  pound  more  for  it  (which,  how-
ever, we  are  not  required  to  do)
than  if  it  were  brought  from  abroad,
it  is  not  an  entire  loss  to  the  com*
munity,  for  we  all  derive  some  ben-
efit from  the  means  so  spent,  because
it  is  circulated  amongst  us,  and  if  we
have  any  tiling  to  sell  we  get  prices
in  proportion  for  it,  and  thus  we  sus-
tain ourscl  ves.  Men  may  say  that
such  and  such  things  can  be  bought
cheaper  abroad  than  they  can  be
bought  at  home,  and  therefore  it  is
better  to  buy  them  ;  but  I  say  that
it  is  suicidal  for  any  community  to
pursue  such  a  policy,  and  we,  with
the  experience  that  we  have  had  in
this  country  on  these  points  for  up-
wards of  a  quarter  of  a  century,
should  begin  to  learn  wisdom,  and
begin  to  foster  home  manufactures
and  home  institutions. Our  co-oper-


16


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


stive  institutions  should  take  into  r
consideration  the  people's  good,  and,  j
if  there  is  ink,  matches,  cloth,  leather  '
or  anything  else  to  sell  that  is  manu-
factured in  this  counfry,  they  should  1
give  the  preference  every  time  to  the
home  manufactured  article  so  far  as
possible,  and  endeavor  to  stimulate
and  foster  home  production  and  not
operate  against  it.  j
By  this  means  we  build  ourselves


up,  and  the  people  themselves,  where
1  they  are  ignorant,  will  soon  perceive
the  propriety  and  the  advantage  of
taking  this  course;  whereas  if  we
pursue  the  old  and  opposite  course
we  shall  be  impoverished  and  stripped
of  our  means,  and,  having  no  branches
of  home  manufacture,  we  shall  con-
tinue to  be  a  poor,  dependent,  helpless
people.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Morn  ma,  April  11,  1875.

Meported  by  David  W.  Evans,

GATHERING  OP  ISRAEL — THE  WORK  OF  THE  FATHER  COMMENCED —
THREE  NEPHITE  APOSTLES  NEVER  TO  TASTE  OF  DEATH — THE  TEX
TRIBES  COME  TO  ZION  FROM  THE  NORTH  COUNTRIES.


If  the  congregation  will  give  their  !
attention  I  will  read  a  few  passages
from  the  last  chapter  of  Isaiah,  com-
mencing in  the  middle  of  the  18th
verse.  [The  speaker  read  from  the
18th  verse,  commencing — "It  shall
come,1'  &a,  unto  the  end  of  the  20th
verse.] ,  ,

There  are  some  very  great  and  im-
portant events  predicted  in  these  few
lines  which  I  have  read,  concerning
the  gathering  of  all  nations  and
tongues,  but  more  especially  the
gathering  of  the  house  of  Israel,  a
sign  heing  promised — that  when  that
period  shall  arrive,  in  the  purposes


of  God,  a  sign  shall  be  given  to  the
children  of  men,  that  they  may  know
when  these  great  events  are  to  take
place.  In  this  passage  we  are  not
told  what  the  sign  shall  be,  we
merely  have  it  promised ;  but  we
won  Id  naturally  draw  the  conculsion
that  it  will  be  something  of  a  pecu-
liar character,  something  that  can  be
distinguished  by  the  nations,  kindred
and  tongues  of  the  earth  preparatory
to  the  great  gathering  that  is  pro-
mised in  the  Scriptures  of  truth,
"  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them/*
And  after  netting  this  sign  he  will
send  missionaries  to  Tubal,  to  Javan,


r


GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC


17


to  the  isles  that  are  afar  off,  to  Tar-
shish,  Pul  and  Lnd,  and  to  them  that
draw  the  bow."  And  it  is  said  con-
cerning the  missionaries  who  are
thus  sent  forth,  that  "  they  shall
declare  my  glory  among  the  Gen-
tiles." Then,  when  the  sign  is  set,
the  missionaries  are  sent  forth  and
the  glory  of  God  begins  to  be  de-
clared among  the  Gentiles,  the  Lord
will  bring  about  the  gathering  of  his
people  Israel,  bringing  them  upon
horses,  in  chariots,  in  litters,  upon
swift  beasts  and  upon  mules  to  his
holy  mountain  in  Jerusalem ;  and
he  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues
whon  that  dispensation  shall  coma

The  Lord  has  set  that  sign;  tho
Lord  has  sent  forth  the  messengers
here  spoken  of  to  the  various  na-
tions, as  predicted,  and  already  the
voice  of  these  messengers  is  heard
in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,
declaring  the  word  of  the  Lord
amon^  the  Gentiles,  preparing  them
for  the  great  event  predicted  by  the
mouth  of  Isaiah  the  Prophet.

Do  this  people  desire  to  know
what  the  sign  predicted  by  the  month
of  Isaiah  means  ?  Do  yon  wish  to
know  the  nature  of  that  sign  ?  Let
me  refer  you  to  the  words  of  the
everlasting  God  that  have  been
uttered  from  the  heavens,  declared
in  this  record  brought  forth  in  the
last  days,  the  Book  of  Mormon.
Let  us  refer  to  a  prediction  ottered
by  the  mouth  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ,  when  he  appeared
personally  upon  this  great  western
continent,  and  taught  the  ancient
nations  of  America.  He  has  told  ns
by  his  own  mouth  what  the  sign
should  be  for  the  gathering  of  all
the  dispersed  of  his  people,  the  house
of  Israel  I  will  read  the  words  of
our  Savior  to  the  ancient  inhabitants
of  this  western  continent.  *'  Verily,
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  all  these
things" — the  things  which  he  had

tfo.  2.


been  speaking  about  to  the  multi-
tude— "shall  surely  come,  as  the
voice  of  the  Father  hath  commanded
me.  Then  shall  this  covenant  which
the  Father  hath  covenanted  with  his
people  be  fulfilled ;  and  then  shall
Jerusalem  begin  to  be  inhabited  with
my  people,  and  it  shall  be  the  land
of  their  inheritance.  And  verily  I
say  unto  you,  I  will  give  you  a  sign
that  you  may  know  the  time  when
these  things  shall  be  about  to  take
place,  that  I  shall  gather  in  from
their  long  dispersion,  my  people,  O
house  of  Israel,  and  shall  establish
a?ain  among  them  my  Zion.  And
behold  this  is  the  thing  which  I  will
give  unto  you  for  a  sign,  for  verily
I  say  unto  you  that  when  these
things  which  1  declare  unto  you,
and  which  I  shall  declare  onto  you
hereafter,  of  myself,  and  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
shall  be  given  unto  you  of  the  Father,
shall  be  made  known  unto  the  Gen-
tiles"— that  is,  when  this  book,  called
the  Book  of  Mormon,  should  be  made
known  unto  the  Gentiles — "  that  they
may  know  concerning  this,  my  peo-
ple, who  are  a  remnant  of  the  house
of  Jacob,  and  concerning  this,  my
people,  who  shall  be  scattered  by
them  in  the  latter  days.  Verily  I
say  unto  you  when  these  thingi
shall  be  made  known  unto  them  of
the  Father,  and  shall  come  forth  of
the  Father  from  them  unto  you/'

Now,  such  is  the  sign.  First,
this  work  will  be  made  known  to
the  Gentilea,  and  will  come  forth
from  the  Gentiles  unto  the  Indians.
Li  fc\>r  it  is  wisdom  in  the  Father
that  they  should  be  established  in
this  land,  and  be  set  up  as  a  free
people  by  the  power  of  the  Father,
that  these  things  might  come  forth
from  them  unto  a  remnant  of  your
seed,  that  the  covenant  of  the  Father
may  be  fulfllled  which  he  has  cove-
nanted with  his  people,  0  house  of

Vol  XVI1L


18  JOURNAL  OF

Israel.  Therefore  when  f  hese  works,
and  the  works  which  shall  be  wrought
among  you  hereafter" — that  is,  the
works  which  were  performed  during
the  first  three  or  four  ceu tunes  of
the  Christian  era  on  the  American
continent,  recorded  in  their  records
called  the  Book  of  Mormon — "  when
these  works  and  the  works  which
shall  be  wrought  am:  ng  you  here-
after shall  come  forth  from  the  Gen-
tiles unto  your  seed,  which  shall
dwindle  in  unbelief  because  of  ini-
quity"

Now  this  dwindling  in  unbelief
of  the  American  Indians  is  very
evident  even  to  the  antiquarians  of
our  country,  all  of  whom  will  admit
that  once  a  civilized  nation  dwelt  on
this  continent  No  learned  man
living  disputes  this.  Why  do  they
suppose  any  such  thing  ?  The  ruins
of  their  ancient  cities,  palaces  and
temples,  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  all
living  that  once  there  dwelt  on  this
hemisphere  a  great  and  powerful
people,  who  were  civilized  and  under-
stood the  art  of  constructing  beauti-
ful and  substantial  building**.  But
now,  O  !  how  degraded,  fallen  and
sunk  into  the  very  depths  of  dark-
ness are  the  descendants  of  that  once
great,  powerful  and  exalted  people !
"  They  shall  dwindle  in  unbelief  be-
cause of  iniquity  because  they  re-
jected the  Gospel.  In  the  fourth
century  of  the  Christian  era  they
apostatized  from  the  religion  of  their  '
fathers ;  they  were  cursed  by  the
Almighty,  a  skin  of  darkness  came
upon  them  ;  they  were  cursed  in  all
that  they  set  their  hands  to  do,  and
the  withering  curse  of  the  Almighty
has  been  upon  them  from  generation
to  generation,  until  the  present  day.
They  were  to  dwindle  in  unbelief
because  of  iniquity,

"  For  thus  it  behooveth  the  Fa-
ther that  it  should  come  forth  from
the  Gentiles,  that  he  may  show  forth  |


DISCOURSES.

his  power  to  the  Gentiles,  for  this
cause,  that  the  Gentiles,  if  they  will
not  harden  their  hearts,  that  they
may  repentr,  and  come  unto  me,  and
be  baptized  in  my  name,  and  know
of  the  truth  of  my  doctrine  that  they
may  he  numbered  among  my  people,
0  house  of  Israel."

Such  is  the  object  of  bringing  this
work  forth  to  the  Gentiles  first.
That  is  why  God  prepared  the  way
for  a  great  and  powerful  nation,
free  from  all  other  nations  under
heaven,  to  be  established  here  on
this  continent  The  great  purpose
which  God  had  in  view  was  to  set
up  a  kingdom  in  the  latter  days  in
which  there  should  be  full  and
complete  religious  liberty  and  free-
dom of  conscience,  that  the  king-
dom might  go  forth  unto  the  ends
of  the  earth  j  u  and  when  tliese
things  shall  come  to  puss,  that  thy
seed" — the  American  Indians  —
"shall  begin  to  know  these  things.
It  shall  be  a  sign  unto  them,  that
they  may  know  that  the  work  of
the  Fattier  hath  already  commenced,
unto  the  fulfilling  of  the  covenant
which  he  hath  made  unto  the  people,
who  are  of  the  house  of  Israel."

Now  then,  here  is  a  prediction  in
Isaiah,  that  before  the  Lord  gath-
ers Israel  he  would  set  up  a  sign,
showing  not  only  to  us  but  to  all
people,  nations  and  tongues  in  the
tour  quarters  of  the  earth  that  he
is  about  to  gather  together  all  the
people  ■  f  the  hou^e  of  Israel,  That
sign  is  when  these  American  In-
dians shall  begin  to  know  the  Gos-
pel taught  and  practiced  by  their
ancient  fathers.  M  When  that  day
shall  cotne  it  shall  come  to  pass
that  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths,
for  that  which  had  not  been  told
them  shaJl  they  see,  that  which
they  had  not  heard  shall  they  con-
sider; for  in  that  day,  for  my  sake,
shall  the  Father  work  a  work  which


GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC.


19


shall  be  a  great  and  marvelous  work
among  them ;  and  there  shall  be
among  them  which  will  not  believe
it,  although  a  man  shall  declare  it
imto  them.  Bat  behold,  the  life  of
my  servant  is  in  mine  hand,"  &c,

We  will  now  pass  on  to  the  next
page,  fct  And  then  shall  the  work
of  the  Father  commence  at  that
day,  even  when  this  Gospel  shall
be  preached  unto  the  remnant  of
this  people" — unto  the  Indians —
*'  verily  I  say  unto  you,  at  that  day
shall  the  work  of  the  Father  com-
mence among  all  the  dispersed  of
my  people,  yea  even  the  tribes
which  have  been  lost,  which  the
Father  hath  led  away  out  of  Jeru-
salem, yea  the  work  shall  com-
mence among  all  the  dispersed  of
my  people,  with  the  Father  to  pre-
pare the  way  whereby  they  may
come  unto  me ;  that  they  may  call
upon  the  Father  in  my  name,  and
then  shall  the  work  commence  with
the  Father  among  all  nations  in
preparing  the  way  whereby  his  people
may  be  gathered  home  to  the  land  of
their  inheritance.  And  they  shall
not  go  out  in  haste,  nor  go  by  flight,
for  I  will  go  before  then?  saith  the
Father,  and  I  will  be  their  rearward  "

Forty-five  years  have  passed  away
since  God  brought  forth  this  sign,
the  Book  of  Mormon,  and  aent
missionaries  to  the  nations — to
Tarshish,  Pul,  Lud,  Tubal,  Javan,
and  to  the  islands  afar  off,  that  have
not  heard  his  fame  neither  have
seen  his  glory  and  these  missionaries
have  declared  his  glory  among  the
Gentiles.  Forty-five  years  of  pro-
clamation to  the  nations  of  the  Gen-
tiles !  For ty-fi ve  years  of  warning
to  all  nations  and  tongues !  Now,
after  so  long  a  period  has  elapsed
since  God  brought  forth  this  wonder-
ful sign,  he  has  begun  to  work  among
the  remnants  of  the  house  of  Israel,
the  American  Indians, upon  this


continent,  by  his  own  power.  What
is  it  that  has  stirred  them  up  to
believe  in  this  work  ?  Has  it  been
your  exertion  ?  Not  altogether ;
yet,  no  doubt,  yon,  in  some  small
degree,  as  far  as  your  faith  would
permit,  have  helped  on  the  work
among  these  wild  tribes.  You  have
sought  to  recover  them,  yon  have
fed  and  clothed  them  to  some  ex-
tent; you  have  told  them  occasion*
ally  about  the  records  of  their  fathers ;
you  have  tried  to  bring  them  to  re-
pentance; but,  after  years  of  labor,
you  have  said  —  "Alas!  alas  for
them  !  What  can  be  done  to  reclaim
a  people  so  far  fallen  into  the  depths
of  ignorance  and  corruption  ?"
Yonr  hearts  have  been  almost  dis-
couraged so  fur  as  your  own  labors
were  concerned.  But  how  soon  and
how  marvel uusly,  when  the  time  had
come,  h.;s  the  Lord  our  God  begun
to  operate  upon  them  as  nations  and
as  tribes,  bringing  them  in  from
hundreds  of  miles  distant  to  inquire
after  the  Elders  of  this  Church,
What  for  ?  What  do  they  want
with  the  Elders  ?  They  want  to  be
baptized.  Who  told  them  to  come
and  be  baptized  ?  They  say  that
men  came  to  them  in  their  dreams,
and  spoke  to  them  in  their  own
language,  and  told  them  that  away
yonder  was  a  people  who  had  au-
thority from  God  to  baptize  them;
but  that  they  must  repent  of  their
sins,  cease  their  evil  habits  and  lay
aside  the  traditions  of  their  fathers,
for  they  were  false;  that  they  must
cease  to  roam  over  the  face  of  the
land,  robbing  and  plundering,  and
learn  to  live  ns  the  white  people.

Who  are  these  men  who  have  been
to  the  Indians  and  told  them  to
repent  of  their  sins,  and  be  baptized
by  the  "  Mormons  ? "  They  are
men  who  obtained  the  promise  of
the  Lord,  upwards  of  eighteen
centuries  ago,  that  they  should  be


20  JOURNAL  OF

instruments  in  his  hands  of  bringing
about  the  redemption  of  their  de-
scendants. The  Lord  God  promised
them  the  privilege  of  working  for
and  in  behalf  of  their  descendants
in  the  latter  days ;  and  they  have
begun  the  work,  All  this  was  fore-
told in  this  record*  the  Book  of
MormonJ?

Now  I  will  read  a  little  for  the
benefit  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  for
though  they  have  this  record  lying
upon  their  shelves,  I  fear  there  are
some  who  are  careless  about  reading
its  contents,  and  perhaps  do  not  un-
derstand the  signs  of  the  times,  and
the  fulfillment  of  the  purposes  of
God,  which  are  here  so  clearly  set
furih.  Jtsus  appeared  on  this  Amer-
ica u  Continent  soon  after  his  resur-
rection, three  different  times  that
are  recorded,  and  how  many  other
times  that  are  not  recorded,  I  do  not
know.  But  he  showed  himself  to
them  and  brake  bread  with  them.
But  the  third  time  he  came  to  the
Twelve  whom  lie  had  chosen  on  this
land, — as  he  was  about  to  leave  them
he  put  a  very  important  qoestion  to
them.  He  said  unto  his  twelve  dis-
ciples, speaking  unto  them  one  by  '
one — "  What  is  it  that  you  desire  of
met  after  that  I  am  gone  unto  the
Father  ?  n  And  they  all  spake  save  -
it  were  three — "  We  desire  that,
after  we  have  lived  unto  the  age  of
men,  that  our  ministry  wherein  thou
hast  called  us  may  have  an  end,  and
that  we  may  speedily  come  to  thee  in
thy  kingdom."  And  he  said  unto
them  —  "Blessed  are  ye  because
ye  have  desired  this  thing  of
me;  therefore  after  that  ye  are
seventy-two  years  old,  ye  shall  come
unto  me  in  my  kingdom,  and  with
me  ye  shall  find  rest."  And  when  he
had  spoken  these  words  unto  the  nine,
he  then  turns  to  the  three  and  said
unto  them — "What  will  ye  that  I
shall  do  unto  you  when  I  am  gone  to


DISCOURSES.

the  Father?"  And  they  sorrowed
in  their  hearts,  for  they  dare  not
speak  unto  him  the  thing  which  they
desired.  And  he  said  unto  them —
"Behold  I  know  your  thoughts,  and
you  have  desired  the  thing  which
John,  my  beloved,  who  was  with  me
in  my  ministry  before  I  was  lifted  up
by  the  Jews,  desired  of  me,  therefore
more  blessed  are  ye,  for  ye  shall
never  taste  of  death."  These  three
men  had  the  promise  that  they  should
never  taste  death ;  "  but,"  said  the
Savior  unto  them — "ye  shall  live  to
behold  all  the  doings  of  the  Father
unto  the  children  of  men,  even  until
all  things  shall  he  fulfilled  according
to  the  will  of  the  Father,  when  I
come  in  my  glory  with  the  powers  of
heaven.  Ye  shall  never  endure  the
pains  of  death,  but  when  I  shall  come
in  my  glory  ye  shall  be  changed  in
the  twinkling  of  an  eye  from  mortal-
ity to  immortality;  then  shall  ye  be
blessed  in  the  kingdom  of  my
Father,  And  again  ye  shall  not  have
pain  while  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  flesh,
neither  sorrow,  save  it  be  for  the  sing
of  the  world;  and  all  this  will  I  do
because  of  the  thing  which  ye  have
desired  of  me ;  fur  ye  have  desired
that  ye  may  bring  the  souls  of  men
unto  me  while  the  world  shall  stand;
and  for  this  cause  ye  shall  have  ful-
ness of  joy,  and  ye  shall  sit  down  in
the  kingdom  of  my  Father;  yea  your
joy  shall  be  full,  even  as  the  Father
hath  given  me  fulness  of  joy ;  and  ye
shall  be  even  as  I  am,  and  I  am  evea
as  the  Father,  and  the  Father  and  I
are  one;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  beareth
record  of  the  Father  and  me ;  and
the  Father  giveth  the  Holy  Ghost
unto  the  children  of  men  because  of
me."

What  a  glorious  promise  was  made
to  these  three  men !  Did  they  re-
ceive any  change?  Yes,  they  did;
not  to  immortality  however,  hut  a
change  sufficient  was  wrought  in  their


I


GATHERING  OF

bodies  that  death  should  not  have
power  over  them.  But  let  m  read
a  little  farther,  it  is  very  interesting.
"And  it  came  to  pass  that  when  Jesus
had  spoken  these  words,  he  touched
every  one  of  them  with  his  finger  save
it  were  the  three  who  were  to  tarry
that  is,  he  touched  tlie  nine  who  were
to  preach  until  they  were  seventy- two
years  old  and  who  were  then  to  be
taken  home  to  God,  "and  then  he  de-
parted, and  behold  the  heavens  were
opened  and  they  (the  three)  were
caught  up  into  heaven,  and  saw  and
heard  unspeakable  things.  And  it
was  forbidden  them  that  they  should
utter;  neither  was  it  given  unto  them
power  that  they  could  utter  the
things  which  they  saw  and  heard;
and  whether  they  were  in  the  body
Or  out  of  the  body  they  could  not
tell,  for  it  did  seem  unto  them  like  a
transfiguration  of  things/*  That  is
the  way  that  they  received  their  par-
tial change,  "But  it  came  to  pass
that  they  did  again  minister  upon  the
face  of  the  earth;  nevertheless  they
did  not  minister  of  the  things  which
they  had  heard  and  seen,  because  of
the  commandment  which  was  given
them  in  heaven/'

Now  these  men  lived  in  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era  on  this
continent;  and  when  that  generation
all  passed  away  they  also  lived  in  the
second  century  of  the  Christian  era,
and  ministered  to  the  ancient  inhabi-
tants on  this  land.  And  when  the
second  sentury  had  all  passed  off  the
stage  of  action  they  also  lived  in  the
third  century ;  and  in  the  fourth  cen-
tury the  Lord  took  these  three  men
from  the  midst  of  the  remnant  of
Israel  on  this  land.  Where  did  he
take  them  ?  I  do  not  know,  it  is  not
revealed.  Why  did  he  take  them
away  ?  Because  of  the  apostacy  of
the  people,  because  the  people  were
unworthy  of  the  ministration  of  such
great  and  holy  men;  because  they


ISRAEL,  ETC-  21

sought  to  kill  them;  because  they
cast  them  into  dens  of  wild  beasts
twice;  and  these  men  of  God  played
with  these  wild  beasts  as  a  child
would  play  with  a  suckling  lamb,
and  received  no  harm  from  thorn.
They  cast  them  three  times  into  a
furnace  of  fire,  and  they  came  forth
therefrom  and  received  no  hurt
They  dug  deep  pits  in  the  earth  and
cast  them  therein,  supposing  that
they  would  perish ;  but  by  the  power
of  the  word  of  God  that  was  in  thera,
they  smote  the  earth  in  the  name  of
the  Lord,  and  were  delivered  from
these  pita.  And  thus  they  went
forth  performing  signs,  wonders  and
miracles  among  this  remnant  of  Is-
rael, until  their  wickedness  became  so
great  that  the  Lord  commanded  them
to  depart  out  of  their  midst  And
the  remnant  of  Israel,  from  that  day
to  the  present — between  fourteen  and
fifteen  centuries — have  been  dwin-
dling in  unbelief,  in  ignorance,  and
in  all  the  darkness  which  now  sur-
rounds them;  but  notwithstanding
their  darkness  and  misery,  the  three
Nephites,  for  many  generations,  have
not  administered  to  them,  because  of
the  commandment  of  the  Almighty
to  them.

But  are  they  always  to  remain
silent?  Are  there  no  more  manifes-
tations to  come  from  these  three  men  ?
Are  they  never  again  to  remember
the  remnants  of  the  House  of  Israel
on  this  land  ?  Let  us  read  the  pro-
mise. "Behold  I  was  about  to  write
the  names  of  those  who  were  never
to  taste  of  death,  but  the  Lord  for-
bade; therefore  I  write  them  not,  for
they  are  hid  from  the  world ;  but  be-
hold I  have  seen  them."  Mormon
saw  them  nearly  four  centuries  after
they  were  caught  up  into  heaven,  and
after  they  received  their  partial
change.  Mormon  saw  them  and  they
administered  unto  him.  He  siys —
" Behold  I  have  seen  them  aud  they


22


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


have  ministered  unto  me ;  and  behold
they  will  be  among  the  Gentiles,  and
the  Gentiles  knoweth them  not"
They  will,  no  doubt t  call  them  poor
deluded  Harmons,  and  say  that  they
ought  to  be  hooted  out  of  society,
and  that  they  ought  to  be  persecuted,
afflicted,  and  bated  by  all  people
"They  will  be  among  the  Gentiles
and  the  Gentiles  knoweth  them  not.
They  will  also  be  among  the  Jews,
and  the  Jews  shall  know  them  not
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  when  the
Lord  seeth  fit,  in  his  wisdom,  that
they  shall  minister  unto  all  the  scat-
tered tribes  of  Israel,  and  unto  all
nations,  kindreds,  tongues  and  people,
and  bhall  bring  out  of  them  unto
Jesus  many  souls,  that  their  desire  1
may  be  fulfilled  ;  and  also  because  of  I
the  convincing  power  of  God  which
is  in  them  ; and  they  are  as  the
angels  of  God. And  if  they  shall
pray  unto  the  Father  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  they  can  show  themselves  unto
whatsoever man  it seemeth  them
good  ;  therefore  great  and  marvelous
works  shall be  wrought  by  them
before  the  great and coming  day
when  all  people  must  surely  stand
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.
Yea  even  among  the  Gentiles  shall
there  be  a  great  and  a  marvelous
work  wrought  by  them,  before  that
judgment  day/*

Now,  having  read  these  things,  let
us  come  back  again  to  this  spiritual
movement  that  we  hear  of  among  the
remnants  of  Jacob,  in  these  western  j
deserts,  in  the  northwest  hundreds  of
of  miles,  in  the  west  and  in  the
southwest  It  is  not  confined  to  hun-
dreds, but  thousands  testify  that  men
have  appeared  individually  in  dreams,
speaking  their  own  language  and,  as
Brtther  Hyde  said  last  Tuesday,
these  men  tell  their  descendants  what
their  duties  are,  what  they  should  do,
and  how  they  should  hunt  up  this
people,  repent  of  their  sins,  be  bap-


tized, etc.  And  the  parties  who  have
been  thus  instructed  time  and  time
again,  have  fulfilled  the  command-
ments that  ,  they  received,  and  some
of  them  have  come  hundreds  of
miles  to  be  baptized,  and  they  art
now  desirous  of  laying  aside  their
savage  disposition,  their  roaming
habits,  and  they  want  to  learn  to  cul-
tivate the  earth,  to  lay  down  their
weapons  of  war,  cease  stealing  and  to
become  a  peaceable  good  people.

The  work  thus  commenced  will
not  stop  here.  The  Book  of  Mor-
mon says — "When  thy  seed  shall
begin  to  know  these  things,  it  shall
be  a  sign  onto  them,  that  they  may
know  that  the  work  of  the  Father
hath  already  commenced  unto  the
fulfilling  of  his  covenant  which  he
I  hath  made  with  his  people  who  are
of  the  House  of  Israel."  This  rem-
nant, the  American  Indians,  do  not
comprise  all  Israel,  they  arc  but  a
small  remnant  of  one  single  tribe,
namely  the  descendants  of  that
Joseph  who  was  carried  into  Egypt.
Away  in  yonder  north  couu  tries,
where  I  do  not  know,  but  away  in
those  regions  are  ten  tribes  of  the
house  of  Israel.  How  do  you  know
,  they  are  in  the  north  country  ?  Be-
cause this  Bible  has  told  cs  that  in
I  the  latter  days  they  should  come  out
of  the  north  country,  and  if  they
were  not  in  the  north  country  they
could  not  come  from  there.  Jere-
miah says  in  his  thirty-first  chapter
— "Behold  I  will  bring  them  from
the  north,  the  blind  and  the  lame
with  them,  and  the  woman  with  child;
they  shall  come,  a  great  company  out
of  the  north  countries.*1  Where  will
,  they  go  to?  Will  they  go  imme-
diately to  Palestine,  where  they  for-
merly had  their  inheritance?  No,
Jeremiah  tells  us  where  they  will  go;
!  he  tells  us  there  is  to  be  a  place  called
Ziou  before  these  tribes  come  out  of
the  north  countries,  and  when  they


GATHERING  OF

come  with  a  great  company,  the
blind  and  the  lame  with  them,  and
the  Lord  God  leads  them  with  sup-
plication and  with  tears  and  with
prayers,  bringing  them  forth  from
those  dreary,  desolate,  cold  arctic
regions :  when  that  day  shall  come
there  si t fill  be  a  Zion  prepared  to  re-
ceive these  ten  tribes,  before  they
finally  go  back  to  Palestine.  Is  there
anything  in  the  Scriptures  about  this?
Yes.  In  the  same  chapter  of  Jere-
miah we  read  that  u  they  shall  come
and  sing  in  the  height  of  Zion/'
Zion,  then,  will  have  to  be  built  up
before  they  come;  Zion  will  have  to
be  reared  somewhere  and  prepared  to
receive  them;  and  it  will  he  a  holy
place,  and  it  will  be  a  holy  people
who  will  build  up  Zion,  so  much  so
that  the  Lord  will  bring  these  ten
tril>es  in  to  the  height  of  Zion,  into
the  nudst  of  it.

What  will  then  take  place  ?  They
shall  flow  together  Id  the  goodness  of
the  Lord,  for  the  wheat,  the  wine,  the
oil,  or  the  young  of  the  flock ;  their
sonls  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden,
and  they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more
at  all.  Why  ?  Because  they  have
got  among  a  good  paople,  where
there  is  no  need  to  sorrow  ;  they
have  come  np  into  a  land  that  is
choice  above  all  other  lauds,  a  land
that  brings  forth  wheat,  and  grapes
for  the  producing  of  wine,  where
flocks,  herds,  <fca,  are  multiplied,  and
their  souls  will  be  like  a  watered
garden,  and  all  the  sorrows  they
have  experienced  for  twenty -five  hun-
dred years,  in  the  cold  regions  of  the
north,  will  be  done  away;  and  they
will  not  sorrow  any  more  at  alL

This  same  thing  is  predicted  in
the  sixteenth  chapter,  as  well  as  in  the
thirtv-Grst  of  Jeremiah.  The  Lord
says  in  the  sixteenth  chapter—*'  Be-
hold the  days  shall  come  when  it
shall  no  more  be  suid  the  Lord
liveth  that  brought  up  the  children


ISRAEL,  ETC*  23

of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt
but  instead  of  that  saying,  there  will
be  another  more  glorious  saying,
namely,  that  "  the  Lord  liveth  who
brought  up  the  children  of  Israel
from  the  north  country,  and  from  all
other  countries  whither  he  has  driven

I  them,**  But  will  that  do  away  the
former  saying  —  u  The  Lord  liveth
who  brought  up  Israel  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt  ?"  Yes,  Some  may
suppose  that  as  the  Jews  retain  that
saying  to  this  day  it  never  would  be
done  away.  The  Jews,  wherever
they  may  be  scattered,  whether  in
Christian  lands,  or  among  the  hea-
thens where  they  are  anxious  to  con-
vert them  to  idolatry,  say,  "We
worship  that  God  who  brought  up
our  fathers  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,
and  wrought  signs,  wonders  and
mighty  deeds  in  bringing  them  forth,
leading  them  through  the  waters  of
the  mighty  deep  into  the  Promised
Land,  Palestine."  But  notwithstand-
ing they  have  retained  this  saying,  it
will  be  one  day  done  away,  super-
seded by  the  manifestations  of  God's
power  in  bringing  Israel  from  the
north  country  and  all  other  countries
whither  they  have  been  scattered,
and  gathering  them  to  their  own
land.  The  Israel  of  the  latter  day
has  got  to  cross  the  sea  dry  shod,

just  as  ancient  Israel  did.  It  is  thus
predicted  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of
Isaiah.  After  saying  that  the  Lord
would  lift  up  an  ensign  for  the  na-
tions, he  declares,  "I  will  gather  the
outcasts  of  Israel  and  the  dispersed
of  J  ad  ah  from  the  four  corners  of
tlte  earth,  and  I  will  causo  them  to
pass  through  the  river  in  its  seven
streams,  and  I  will  smite  the  tongue
of  the  Egyptian  sea,  and  an  highway
shall  be  cast  up  unto  Israal  that  was
lei t  from  Assyria,  like  as  it  was  to
Israel  when  they  came  out  of  the
laud  of  Egypt," They  shall  go  over

I  dry  shod. They  will  not  have  to


24  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


refer  back  three  or  four  thousand
years  to  the  miracles  wrought  an-
ciently by  the  God  they  worship,  but
they  vvill  tell  of  tilings  wrought  in
their  own  day,  which  have  taken
place  while  they  themselves  live.
*'  The  Lord  livcth  that  brought  up
Israel  out  of  the  north  country ;  the
Lord  livetb  who,  in  our  day,  emote
the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  sea,  and
also  the  river  Nile  in  its  seven  mouths;
the  Lord  liveth  who,  in  oar  day,  cast
up  a  highway  in  the  midst  of  the
great  deep,  for  his  chosen  to  come
over."

Now  I  will  quote  a  parallel  pro-
phecy, delivered  to  Joseph  Smith,
one  of  the  greatest  Prophets  who  has
lived  on  the  earth  in  any  generation,
save  it  b6  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ  Some  forty- three  years  ago,
in  speaking  of  the  lost  ten  tribes
of  Israel,  the  Lord  says— 11  They  who
are  in  the  north  countries  shall  come
in  remembrance  before  the  Lord,  and
their  Prophets  shall  hear  his  voice,
and  shall  no  longer  stay  themselves;
and  they  shall  smite  the  rocks,  and
the  ice  shall  flow  down  at  their  pre-
sence. And  an  highway  shall  be
cast  up  iti  the  midst  of  the  great
deep.  Their  enemies  shall  become  a
prey  unto  them,  and  in  the  barren
deserts  there  shall  come  forth  pools
of  living  water;  and  the  parched
ground  shall  no  longer  be  a  thirsty
land.  And  they  shall  bring  forth
their  rich  treasures  unto  the  children
of  Ephraim  ray  servants.  And  the
boundaries  of  the  everlasting  hills
shall  tremble  at  their  presence."  To
show  that  they  come  with  power,
they  come  on  a  highway  cast  up  for
them  ;  the  ice  feels  the  power  ot  God
and  flows  down,  making  room  for
them;  and  the  barren  deserts  of  the
north,  wherever  they  may  go  and
need  water,  will  yield  forth  pools  of
living  water  to  quench  their  thirst.
As  they  come  to  sing  in  the  height


of  Zion,  the  everlasting  hills,  this
great  Rocky  Mountain  range,  ex-
tending from  the  arctic  regions  south  ,
to  the  central  portions  of  America,
will  tremble  beneath  the  power  of
God  at  the  approach  of  that  people.
Then  will  be  fulfilled  the  saying  of
David,  that  the  mountains  shall  skip
like  rains,  and  the  little  hills  like
lambs,  before  his  people.  The  very
trees  of  the  field  will  clap  like  hands,
as  the  Psalmist  David  has  said.
Then  will  be  ful  tilled  the  passage
that  was  quoted  yesterday  by  brother
Woodiufl- — u  Sing  0  heavens,  be  joy-
ful 0  earth,  and  break  forth  into
singing  0  mountains,  for  the  Lord
hath  redeemed  his  people,"  &c.  And
when  they  get  to  Zion  they  will
begin  to  say — Ll  The  place  is  too  strait
for  me,  give  place  to  me  that  I  may
dwell;"  then  the  saying  will  go
forth — "Behold  I  was  a  captive.
Zion  was  a  captive,  moving  to  and
fro,  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  not  c  >m-
forted.  Behold  I  was  left  alone."
But  where  have  this  great  company
been,  where  has  this  mighty  host
come  from  ?  They  have  come  from
their  hiding  place  in  the  north
country;  they  have  been  led  thence
by  the  Prophets  of  the  Most  High
God,  the  Lord  going  before  their
camp,  talking  with  them  out  of  the
cloud,  as  he  talked  in  ancient  days
with  the  camp  of  Israel,  uttering  his
voice  before  his  army,  for  his  camp
will  be  very  great.  So  says  the
Prophet  Joel,  and  his  prophecy  will
be  fulfilled.  When  they  return  to
Zion  to  sing  in  the  height  thereof,
M  They  will  fall  down  there  and  be
crowned  with  glory  by  the  hands  of
the  servants  of  the  Lord,  even  the
children  of  Ephraim."

Now  what  does  this  mean  ?  A
people  that  have  had  such  mighty
power,  a  people  before  whose  camp
the  Lord  of  hosts  has  been  seen,  and
his  glory  by  day  and  by  night;  a


GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC.


people  before  whom  the  moan  tains  ]
and  the  hills  tremble  and  0ee;  shall
a  people  of  that  description  fall  down
and  be  crowned  by  another  people  ?
Who  are  this  other  people,  that  is,
these  highly  favored  children  of
Ephraim?  What  particular  bles-
sing has  the  Lord  for  Ephraim  ?  He
holds  the  birth-right.  (t  Ephraim  is
my  first-born/'  aaith  the  Lord  in  the
31st  chapter  of  Jeremiah.  The  tirsfc-
boru  in  the  great  latter-day  work,
holding  the  keys  of  blessings  for  all
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  God  has
an  order  in  his  kingdom.  Certain
blessings  can  be  received  in  one  way;
other  blessings  are  ordained  to  be
received  in  another  form,  by  certain
authorities  that  are  appointed,  and
who  hold  the  keys  pertaining  to
these  blessings.  God  did  nut  take
away  the  birth-tight  of  Reuben,  the
first-born  of  Israel,  and  tranfer  it  to
the  heads  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  for  a
purpose  that  was  of  no  particular
account ;  but  he  transferred  the  birth-
right from  Reuben  to  Joseph  that
they  might  hold  it  as  the  iirst-born
among  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  to
bless  them  in  the  latter  days.

How  long  will  they  who  come
from  the  north  countries  tarry  in  the
heights  of  Ziun  ?  Sometime.  They
have  got  to  raise  wheat,  cultivate  the
grape,  wine  and  oil,  raise  flocks  and
herds,  and  their  souls  will  have  to
become  as  a  watered  garden.  They
wjli  dwell  in  Zion  a  good  while,  and
during  that  time,  there  will  be  twelve
thousand  chosen  out  of  each  of  these
ten  tribes,  besides  twelve  thousand
that  will  be  chosen  from  Judah,
Joseph,  and  the  remaining  tribes,
one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand
in  all.  Chosen  for  what?  To  be
sealed  in  their  foreheads.  For  what
purpose?  bo  that  the  power  of
death  and  pestilence  and  plague  that
will  go  forth  in  those  days  sweeping
over  the  nations  of  the earth  will


have  no  power  over  them.  These
parties  who  are  sealed  in  their  fore-
heads will  go  forth  among  all  people,
nations  and  tongues,  and  gather  up
and  hunt  out  the  house  of  Israel,
wherever  they  are  scattered,  and
bring  as  many  as  they  possibly  can
into  the  Church  of  the  first-born,
preparatory  to  the  great  day  of  the
coming  ot  the  Lord,  One  hundred
and  forty-four  thousand  missionaries !
Quite  a  host.  All  this  has  got  to'
take  place.  There  are  persons  in
this  congregation  who  will  be  in  the
midst  of  Zion,  when  the  ten  tribes
come  to  Zion  from  the  north  coun-
tries, and  will  assist  in  bestowing  the
blessings  promised  by  the  Almighty
rpon  the  heads  of  the  tribes  of
Israel.  There  are  servants  of  God  in
the  midst  of  this  congregation  who  -
I  will  lay  their  hands  upon  many  of
each  of  these  twelve  thousand,  chosen
out  of  tiie  ten  tribes,  and  set  them
apart  as  missionaries  to  visit  the
nations  of  the  earth  and  hunt  up  the
remnants  of  the  seed  ot  Jacob,
|  Having  spoken  concerning  the
gathering  of  the  ten  tribes,  I  will
refer  again  to  their  Prophets,  Their
Prophets  shall  hear  his  voice/1  Do
not  think  that  we  are  the  only  peo-
ple who  will  have  Prophets.  God  is
determined  to  raise  up  Prophets
among  that  people,  but  he  will  not
bestow  upon  them  all  the  fulness  of
the  blessings  of  the  Priesthood.  The
i  fulness  will  be  reserved  to  be  given
to  them  after  they  come  to  Zion*
But  Prophets  will  be  among  them
while  in  the  north,  and  a  portion  of
the  Priesthood  will  be  tliere ;  and
John  the  Revelator  will  be  there,
teaching,  instructing  and  preparing
them  for  this  great  work;  for  to  him
were  given  the  keys  for  the  gather-
ing of  Israel,  at  the  time  when  he  ate
that  little  bouk  while  on  the  Isle  of
Patmos.  At  that  time,  John  was  a
very  old  man;  bat  the  Lord  told  him


2G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  he  must  yet  prophesy  before
many  kingdoms,  and nations,  and
peoples,  and  tongues,  and  he  has  got
that  mission  to  perform,  and  in  the
last  days  the  spirit  and  power  of
Elias  will  attend  his  administrations'
among  these  ten  tribes,  and  he  will
assist  in  preparing  them  to  re  torn  to
this  land. Whether  missionaries  will
be  sent  from  Zion  to  hunt  up  these
dispersed  tribes  in  the  north  I  do  not
know ;  hut  one  thing  I  do  know,  from
that  which  is  reported  by  those  who
have  tried  to  find  a  passage  to  the
pole,  that  t litre  is  a  wanner  country
off  there,  and  that  birds  of  passage  !
go  north  to  find  a  warmer  climate*
That  I  know  from  the  writings  of  in-
telligent men  who  have  been  on  voy-
ages of  discovery. And  I  know,  fur-
thermore, that  they  have  crossed  by
means  of  dogs  and  sledges  a  certain
portion  of  this  great  band  of  ice  and
have  come  to  an  open  sea,  which
proves  that  there  is  a  warmer  coun-
try further  north. There  is  a  tract
of  country  around the  pole,  some
seven  or  eight  hundred  miles  in  dia-
meter, that  no  man  among  the  na-
tions that  we  are  acquainted  with,
has  ever  explored. But  how  much  j
of  that  land  may  be  fit  for  habitation
I  am  not  preparer!  to  say,  for  1  do  not
know. I  know  it  would  be  a  very
easy  matter  for  the  Lord  God,  by  the
aid  of  great  mountain  ranges  encir-
cling them  around  about,  to  produce
a  band  of  ice  which  wot  s  Id  prevent
other  nations  and  people  very  easily
reaching  them. I  also  know  that  it
would  be  a  very  easy  matter  for  the
Lord  God  to  cause  deep  and  exten-
sive valleys,  very  deep  in  comparison
wilh high ranges of  mountains
around  them,  where  the  temperature
would he comparatively  mild,  the
same as  in  these  mountains  here.
We  see  all  the  rigors  of  an  arctic
winter on our eastern ranges  of
mountains,  while  at  the  same  time


here  are  deep  valleys  in  which  there
is  a  comparatively  warm  climate,
which  makes  me  think  of  that  which
wps  spoken  by  the  month  uf  Isaiah
the  Prophet  in  referring  to  the  latter-
day  work.  He  says  that  "when  it
shall  hai!,  corning  down  upon  the  for-
ests, the  city  shall  be  low  in  a  low
place/1  where  the  climate  is  warm.

Let  me  say  a  few  more  words  in
regard  to  certain  things  that  have
already  taken  place,  predicted  in  the
Book  of  Mormon  by  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  appear-
ed on  this  western  hemisphere  and
taught  this  remnant  of  Israel.  H#
told  them  of  certain  events  which
should  transpire  before  the  remnants
of  Joseph  should  be  converted.  He
says — 14  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unta
you  that  I  have  other  sheep  which
,  are  not  of  this  land" — meaning
America — "  neither  of  the  land  of
Jerusalem,  neither  in  any  parts  of
that  land  round  about  whither  I  have
been  to  minister.  But  they  of  whom
I  sptttk  have  not  as  yet  heard  my
voice,  neither  have  I  at  any  time
I  manifested  myself  unto  them ;  but  I
have  received  a  commandment  of  the
Father  that  I  shall  go  unto  them  and
they  ahull  be  numbered  among  my
sheep,  and  there  shall  be  one  fold  and
one  shepherd,  therefore  I  go  to  show
myself  unto  them,"  After  leaving
this  continent,  he  went  to  the  lost
tribes  and  placed  one  measure  of
leaven  in  the  meal  that  was  in  that
country,  having  already  planted  a
little  leaven  among  the  Jews  at  Jeru-  •
salem,  and  another  little  portion  of
leaven  here  in  America,  at 'tor  which
'  he  goes  to  the  lost  tribes,  and  plants
leaven  in  the  third  mess  of  meal,  and
left  it  to  work.  He  says — "  I  com-
mand you  that  you  shall  write  these
sayings  after  I  am  gone,  that  if  it  so
be  that  my  people  at  Jerusalem,  they
who  have  seen  nie,  and  been  with  me
in  my  ministry,  do  not  ask  the  Father


GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC*


27


in  my  name,  that  they  may  receive  a
knowledge  of  you  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  also  of  the  other  tribes  which
they  know  not  of,  these  sayings
which  ye  shall  write  shall  be  kept  and
shall  be  manifested  unto  the  Gentiles,
that,  through  the  fulneas  of  the
Gentiles,  the  remnant  of  their  seed
who  shall  be  scattered  upon  the  face
of  the  earth  because  of  their  unbelief,
may  be  brought  in,  or  may  be  brought
to  a  knowledge  of  me,  their  Re-
deemer. And  then  will  I  gather
them  in  from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth,  and  I  will  fulfill  the  covenant
which  the  Father  hath  made  unto  all
the  people  of  the  house  ot  Israel."

Now  I  want  you  to  take  particular
notice  of  the  following  paragraph,
or  a  portion  of  it,  which  I  will  read.
"  But  woe,  saith  the  Father,  unto  the
unbelieving  of  the  Gentiles'* — having
reference  more  particularly  to  the
Gentiles  of  this  great  nation — "  for
notwithstanding  they  have  come
forth  upon  the  face  of  this  land,  and
have  scattered  my  people  who  are  of
the  house  of  Israel,  and  my  people
who  are  of  the  house  of  Israel  have
been  cast  out  from  among  them,
and  have  been  trodden  under  foot  by
them,  and  because  of  the  mercies  of
the  Father  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  the
judgments  of  the  Father  upon  my
people  who  are  of  the  house  of  Israel,
verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  yon,  that
after  all  this,  and  I  have  caused  my
people  who  are  of  the  house  of  Israel
to  be  smitten,  and  to  be  afflicted,  and
to  be  slain,  and  to  be  cast  out  from
among  them" — just  as  our  forefathers
have  done  for  two  or  three  generations
past  in  smiting,  destroying,  casting
out  arid  driving  the  poor  American
Indians  —  "  thus  commanded  the
Father  that  I  should  say  unto  you
at  that  day,  when  the  Gentiles  shall
sin  against  my  Gospel," — meaning
sinning  against  this  fullness  of  the
Gospel,  that  is  the  Book  of  Mor-


mon, when  it  shall  be  sent  forth  in
the  latter  days) — "  when  the  Gentiles
sliall  sin  against  my  Gospel,  and
shall  be  lifted  up  in  pride  above  all
nations,  and  above  all  the  people  of
the  whole  earth,  and  shall  be  filled
with  all  manner  of  lyings  and  de-
ceit, and  of  mischiefs,  and  all  man-
ner of  hypocrisy,  and  murders,  and
priestcrafts,  and  whoredoms,  and  of
secret  abominations,  and  if  they  shall
do  all  these  things,  and  shall  reject
the  fulness  of  my  Gospel,  behold,
saith  the  Father,  I  will  bring  the
fulness  of  my  Gospel  from  among
them."

This  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled.
It  was  delivered  and  in  print  before
there  was  any  Latter-day  Saint
Church  in  existence.  Now  how  did
Joseph  Smith,  a  farmer's  boy,  know
naturally  anything  about  the  Lord's
taking  this  work — the  Book  of  Mor-
mon— and  this  people  who  believe  in
i he  fullness  of  the  Gospel  and  the
bringing  of  them  out  from  this  Gen-
tile nation  to  these  solitary  regions  ?
How  did  he  know  this  so  far  back  as
the  year  1830  ?  How  did  he  know
this  before  the  Church  was  organized
with  six  members  ?  Yet  it  has  all
come  to  pass.  How  unlikely  it  was
for  such  a  thing  to  come  to  pass,  if
there  was  no  God  in  it !  If  the  Gen-
tiles should  reject  this  Gospel  which
the  Lord  has  brought  forth  by  his
puwer;  "  and  shall  be  lifted  up  in
the  pride  of  their  hearts  above  all
nations,  peoples,  kindreds  and
tongues,  and  shall  be  filled  with  all
manner  of  lyiogs,  deceits,  mischiefs,
hypocrisy,  murders  and  whoredoms,
and  shall  reject  the  fulness  of  my
Gospel,  Behold,  saith  the  Father,  I
will  bring  the  fulness  of  my  Gospel
from  among  them."

For  twenty-seven  years  the  Lord
has  been  fulfilling  this  directly  before
the  eyes  of  all  this  nation.  Little
did  they  think  when  they  came  upon


\


23  JOUKNAL  OF

us  in  Nauvoo,  and  drove  us  out  from
our  homes  and  firesides  and  told  us
to  flee  away  beyond  this  great  chain
of  rocky  mountains,  that  they  were
fulfilling  this  great  prophecy  uttered
before  this  people  had  an  existence.
*'  I  will  bring  the  fulness  of  my
Gospel  from  among  them;1'  and
mark  the  next  sentence  —  u  and
then  I  will  remember  my  covenant*'
"When  ?  When  lie  gets  the  people
out  from  the  midst  of  this  nation.

Then  I  will  remember  my  covenant
which  I  made  unto  my  people,  O
house  of  Israel,  and  I  will  bring  my
Gospel  unto  them,"  Has  it  been
fulfilled  ?  Yes.  It  is  over  a  quarter
of  a  century  since  the  Lord  brought
us  out,  and  laid  a  foundation  for  us
to  live  here j  and  we  have  been  en-
abled by  bis  power  to  erect  towns,
villages  nnd  cities,  to  open  up  farms,
and  begin  to  live,  and  we  have  got  a
broad  foundation  laid ;  and  now,  the
next  thing  is — "  I  will  bring  the  ful-
ness of  my  Gospel  unto  thee,  O  house
of  Israel ;  "  that  is,  unto  the  Indians ;
in  other  words  —  they  shall  come
unto  a  knowledge  of  the  fulness  of
my  Gospel  "Yet  if  the  Gentiles
will  repent  and  return  unto  me,  saith
the  Father,  behold  they  shall  be
numbered  among  my  people,  the
boose  of  Israel/*

That  is  the  only  hope  that  we  Gen-
tiles have.  No  hope  tor  ns  whatever,
no  hope  for  this  great  and  powerful
nation,  only  by  being  numbered  with
these  poor,  degraded,  despised,  out-
cast, dark,  and  benighted  Indians.
Are  you  willing  to  be  numbered  with
them  ?  In  what  respect  ?  Not
to  come  down  to  their  customs
and  habits,  their  uncleanness,  filth,
wickedness,  darkness  and  ignorance;
but  be  numbered  with  them  in  the
inheritance  of  this  great  continent,
which  was  given  to  them  by  promise,
the  same  as  Palestine  was  given  to
Abraham  and  Isaac. God  gave  it  by


DISCOURSES.

the  mouth  of  Jacob,  who  pronounced
it  upon  the  head  of  his  eon  Joseph,
it  wns  promised  that  he  should
have  a  separate  land  from  that  given
to  Abraham  and  Isaac.  Read  it  in
the  49th  chapter  of  Genesis.  The
Lord  gave  North  and  South  America
to  these  Indians,  nearly  six  hundred
years  before  Christ.  And  he  pro-
mised that  the  Gentiles,  in  the  latter
days,  who  should  come  upon  the  face
of  this  land,  if  they  would  repent
when  this  Gospel  should  come  forth
unto  thern,  they  should  have  the
privilege  of  receiving  their  inherit-
ance in  common  with  this  remnant
of  Israel  —  these  Indiana.  But  if
they  did  not  repent  there  is  another
decree.  And  what  is  that  ?  41  They
shall  be  utterly  cut  off  from  among
my  people."  Thus  it  is  predicted
and  you  have  read  it  for  for ty* five
years.  In  another  place  the  Lord
suys — "  If  they  will  not  repent,  be-
hold I  will  cut  off  the  cities  of  their
land,  I  will  throw  down  all  their
strongholds,  and  I  will  cut  off  their
horses  out  of  the  midst  of  them,  and
I  will  execute  vengeance  and  fury
upon  them  such  as  they  have  not
heard  of.  In  another  place,  which  I
have  not  time  to  turn  to  and  read,  it
says  —  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass
that  every  soul  that  will  not  repent
of  their  sins  and  come  unto  my  be-
loved sou,  will  I  cut  off  from  among
my  people,  0,  house  of  Israel,  and  it
shall  be  done  unto  them  even  as
Moses  has  said,  they  shall  be  cut  off
from  among  my  people,"

Now  Muses  has  told  us  of  that
time,  and  it  is  repeated  again  in  the
3rd  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles, that  the  Lord  would  raise  up  a
Prophet,  and  it  should  come  to  pass
that  every  soul  that  would  not  hear
that  Prophet  should  be  cut  off  from
among  the  people.  We  are  told  that
that  Prophet  was  Jesus,  and  we  be-
lieve it. Jesus  Christ  was  that  Pro-


LITTLE  CHILDREN  ARE  INNOCENT,  ETC


29


phet,  and  the  day  is  to  come,  as  sure
as  the  Lord  lives  in  yonder  heavens,
when  every  son!  that  will  not  repent,
and  receive  his  work,  will  he  literally
cut  off  from  among  the  people,  just
as  Moses  has  predicted.  And  it  shall
come  to  pass  that  "  kings  shall  shot
their  mouths,  for  that  which  had  not
been  told  them  shall  they  see,  and
that  which  they  have  not  heard  shall
they  behold,"  a  marvelous  work  and
a  wonder,  a  work  that  the  Lord  would
perform  in  the  latter-days.  A  strange
work,  a  strange  act,  so-called  by
Isaiah  the  Prophet

0  that  I  had  time  to  go  into  the
numerous  prophecies  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  and  point  out  the  desola-
tions that  are  to  come  upon  this  na-
tion and  this  generation,  if  they  do
not  repent !  But  every  jot  and
every  tittle  that  has  not  been  fulfilled
since  the  coming  forth  of  the  Book  of
Mormon,  will  be  fulfilled  to  the  verv
letter. Zion  will  arise,  clothed  with


the  glory  of  her  God ;  the  Lord  will
he  her  defence;  he  will  be  her  shield
and  her  buckler;  and  the  power  of
his  own  right  hand  will  protect  his
people.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass
that  every  nation,  and  every  kindred
and  tongue  and  people  that  will  fight
against  the  people  of  God,  and
against  his  Zion,  will  perish  out  of
the  earth,  and  all  nations  that  "  fight
against  Mount  Zion  shall  become  aa
the  dream  of  a  night  vision.  Like  a
hungry  man  who  dreams  and  thinks
that  he  eats,  but  lie  wakes  and  hia
soul  has  appetite;  "  so,  in  the  latter-
days,  it  shall  be  with  not  only  one
nation  but  all  the  nations  that  fight
against  Mount  Zion.  God  has
stretched  forth  his  hand  to  exert  the
powers  of  the  heavens,  and  he  will
fulfill  and  accomplish  his  work;  and
there  is  no  power  beneath  the  heavena
that  can  stay  his  almighty  hand. —
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  June  27,  1875,  ix  the  Second  Ward  School-house,  Salt
Lakh  City,  at  the  funkkal  services  op  John  Houseman,  aged  six:

YEAKS,  AND  WlLLIE  FllANKLIN,  AGED  FOUR  YEARS,  SO^S  OF  WlLLlAM  AND

Ann  Wheeler,  burned  to  death  at  Wanshif,  Summit  Cooty,  U.  T,t
JUJ4B  24,  3875.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

LITTLE  CHILDREN  ARE  INNOCENT,  AND  ALL  WILL  RE  SAVED— GOD,  A
PERSONAGE  ©F  TABERNACLE — THE  LIFE  OF  THE  SAVIOR,  A  LIFE  OF
SUFFERING— SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST.

mm

I  am  entirely  dependent  this  morn-  ]  say  upon  this  painful  occasion*
irtg  upon  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  |  Those  who  have  assembled  here —
guide  and  directs  me  in  what  I  may  Brother  and  Sister  Wheeler,  and  their


30


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE*,


friends  who  mourn  with  them,  are
dependent  upon  the  same  source  for
comfort  in  their  serious  bereavement;
and  in  fact  wo  are  all  dependent  upon
the  blessing  and  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in
all  the  labors  of  life,  and  I  hope  that,
in  our  services  this  morning,  a  large
measure  of  that  Spirit  will  be  impar-
ted unto  us,

I  fuel  disposed  to  read  the  first
chapter  of  Job  as  a  preliminary  to
an y  re r n a rka  I  i nay  m a ke.  fTlie
speaker  read  the  first  chapter  of  the
Book  of  Job,]  We  also  see  in  read-
ing the  history  of  Job  that  the  devil
did  not  finish  with  him  there,  as  it
seems  the  devil  had  another  conversa-
tion with  the  Lord  on  this  subject,  in
which  he  informed  the  Lord  that  a
man  would  give  anything  for  his  life,
and  that  if  he,  the  devil,  touched
Job's  flesh,  he  would  certainly  curse
God.  And  it  seems  from  reading
this  history  that  the  Lord  put
Job  into  the  hands  of  the  devil,
to  do  as  he  pleased  with  him,
only  to  spare  his  life.  Of  course
the  history  is  familiar  to  you  all
who  have  read  the  Bible,  and  you
are  aware  that  the  devil  smote  Job,
and  he  was  covered  with  boils  from
the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  soles  of
his  feet,  so  that  he  was  in  great  dis-
tress, trouble  and  tribulation,  yet  in
the  midst  of  it  all  he  did  not  sin,  but
acknowledged  the  hand  of  the  Lord.

I  may  say  with  regard  to  the  case
which  has  brought  ns  together  this
morning,  it  is  a  little  similar  to  that
of  Job,  We  meet  with  some  strange
things  in  the  history  of  oar  lives  in
the  dispensations  and  dealings  of  God
with  men.  In  the  case  before  us  we
are  called  to  mourn  the  loss  of  two
children  taken  from  Brother  and
Sister  Wheeler,  we  may  say  as  sud-
denly and,  in  one  sente  of  the  word,
as  miraculouslv.  as  were  the  sons  and
daughters  of  Job.  His  affliction  con-
sisted not  only  in  the  loss  of  two


children,  but  of  all  his  children  and
also  of  all  the  possessions  that  he
had,  yet  still,  under  all  this  he  said —
"Nuked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's
womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return
thither;  the  Lord  gave,  and  the
Ljrd  bath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the
name  of  the  Lord."

I  know  very  well  it  is  hard  for  any
person  to  be  called  to  pass  through
the  scenes  that  we  sometimes  are
culled  to  pass  throup^rrirf ^hii  ine^ii*
is  so  in  the  case  before  us  this  morn*
ing,  The  loss  of  these  little  children,
taken  away  as  they  were,  is  certainly
painful,  not  only  to  the  parents,  but
to  eyery  person  who  reflects ;  and  it
is  a  very  hard  matter  for  any  of  us
to  enter  into  and  appreciate  the  depth
of  sorrow  which  parents  feel  on  occa-
sions like  this,  it  is  difficult  to  bring
the  matter  home  to  our  own  hearts
unless  we  have  been  called  to  pass
through  similar  affliction  and  sorrow.
At  the  same  time  there  is  no  doubt
that  we  all  sympathize  with  oar
friends  when  called  to  pass  through
trials  and  bereavement.  And  I  will
here  say  to  Brother  and  Sister
Wheeler,  and  to  all  my  friends,  there
are  a  great  many  worse  things  in  this
world  than  the  case  we  are  now  call-
ed to  mourn,  ,

Our  children  are  taken  away  from
us  in  infancy  and  childhood,  and  they
are  taken  away  as  Job's  were,  in  one
sense  of  the  word,  through  the  dis-
pensations of  Providence,  causing  us
severe  trials.  This  we  will  acknow-
ledge; but,  as  I  have  already  said,
there  are  many  things  in  this  world
that  are  far  more  painful  and  afflict-
ing than  to  have  our  children  burned
to  death,  My  friends  may  ask—
**  What  is  Brother  Woodruff  driving
at  in  this  remark?"  I  will  tell  you.
I  have  lived  in  these  valleys  twenty-
seven  years,  since  the  pioneers  came
here.  I  have  seen  a  whole  genera-
tion of  men  and  women  grow  np  in


LITTLE  CHILDREN  ARE  INNOCENT,  ETC*


31


these  valleys  of  the  mountains,  and
they  have  become  parents.  I  have
seen  some,  I  will  not  say  a  great
many,  but  I  have  seen  some  young
men,  I  say  nothing  about  maidens,
who  have  met  with  untimely  deaths
and  who  have  gone  to  the  grave  dis-
graced, and  a  dishonor  to  themselves
and  to  their  parents.  Circumstances
of  thia  kind  are  far  more  painful  to
any  parent  in  the  world  than  it  is  for
their  children  to  meet  with  sudden
death  hy  accident  or  any  other  way.
1  do  not  make  these  remarks  to  apply
to  Brother  and  Sister  Wheeler,  for
none  of  us  know  what  course  our
children  will  take.  We  set  good  ex-
amples before  them,  and  we  strive  to
teach  them  righteous  principles,  but
when  they  come  to  years  of  accounta-
bility they  have  their  agency  and
they  act  for  themselves.

Many  things  are  transpiring  in  the
earth  to-day  which  we  should  regard
as  great  calamities  and  as  grievous  to
be  borne  if  we  had  to  pass  through
them.  Ti  ink  of  these  late  earth-
quakes in  South  America,  eight  thou-
sand people  out  of  ten  thousand  in
one  city  sunk  in  the  earth  in  a  few
moments*  And  then,  the  tremen-
dous floods  that  are  sweeping  over
France  and  other  parts  of  the  earth,
causing  the  death  of  hundreds  and
thousands  of  men,  women  and  chil-
dren. All  these  things  are  in  fulfill
ment  of  the  revelations  of  God,  and
of  the  judgments  which  he  has  pro-
mised should  come  upon  the  earth  in
the  last  days.  One  of  the  purposes
which  the  Lord  has  in  view  in  gather-
ing his  Saints  to  the  valleys  of  the
mountains  is  that  they  may  not  share
in  the  sins  or  partake  of  the  plagues
of  Babylon  ;  therefore  we  have  rea-
son to  rejoice  before  the  Lord  because
of  his  mercies  and  blessings  unto  us.
And  with  regard  to  a  case  like  this
before  m  this  morning — the  loss  of
these  children — I  want  to  say  a  few


words  for  the  consolation  of  those
who  are  sorrowing-  In  the  first  place
these  children  are  innocent  before  the
Lord  ;  as  to  their  death  and  the  cause
thereof,  that  is  in  the  hands  of  God,
and  we  should  not  complain  of  the
Lord  or  his  dispensations  any  more
than  Job  did.  These  children  have
been  taken  away  very  suddenly,  and
in  such  a  manner  as  to  cause  great
sorrow  and  distress  to  their  parents,
but  there  is  this  consolation  connected
with  the  matter — they  are  innocent,
they  are  not  in  transgression.  They
have  paid  the  law  of  death  which
God  passed  on  Adam  and  all  his  pos-
terity; but  when  their  spirits  left
their  bodies  and  got  into  the  spirit
world  their  trouble  and  affliction  were
over.  Their  death  was  a  very  pain-
ful one,  but  their  suffering  is  now
over,  and  in  a  few  years  from  now
they  will  come  forth  out  of  their
graves  in  the  morning  of  the  resur-
rection, not  marred  by  fire  or  any  ele-
ment, hut  clothed  with  glory,  immor-
tality and  eternal  life,  in  eternal
beaufy  and  bloom,  and  they  will  be
given  into  the  hands  of  their  parents,
and  they  will  receive  them  in  the
family  organ iza tion  of  the  celestial
world,  and  their  parents  will  have
them  for  ever.  They  will  live  as
long  as  their  God  lives.  ThLs,  to
Latter-day  Saints,  who  believe  in  the
resurrection,  should  be  a  source  of
comfort  and  consolation*

Why  our  children  are  taken  from
us  it  is  not  for  me  to  say,  for  God
never  revealed  it  unto  me.  We  are
all  burying  them.  I  have  buried  one-
third  of  the  children  that  have  been
given  unto  me.  1  have  had  some
thirty  children  born  to  me,  and  ten
of  them  are  buried,  all  of  them
young.  The  question  may  arise  with
me  and  with  you — "Why  has  the
Lord  taken  away  my  children  ?"  But
that  is  not  for  me  to  tell,  because  I
do  not  know ;  it  is  in  the  hands  of  the


Lord,  and  it  has  been  so  from  the
creation  of  the  world  all  the  way
down-  Children  are  taken  away  in
their  infancy,  and  they  go  to  the  spirit
world.  They  come  here  and  fulfill
the  object  of  their  coming,  that  is,
they  tabernacle  in  the  flesh.  They
come  to  receive  a  probation  and  an
inheritance  on  the  earth  ;  they  obtain
a  body  or  tabernacle,  and  that  taber-
nacle will  be  preserved  for  them,  and
in  the  morning  of  the  resurrection
the  spirits  and  bodies  will  be  reunited,
and  as  here  we  find  children  of  vari-
ous ages  in  a  family,  from  the  infant
at  the  mother's  breast  to  manhood,  so
will  it  Le  in  the  family  organization
in  the  celestial  world.  Our  children
will  be  restored  to  us  as  they  are  laid
down  if  we,  their  parents,  keep  th*;
faith  and  prove  ourselves  worthy  to
obtain  eternal  life;  and  if  we  do  not
so  prove  ourselves  our  children  will
still  bo  preserved,  and  will  inherit
celestial  glory.  This  is  my  view  in
regard  to  all  infants  who  die,  whether
they  are  born  to  Jew  or  Gentile,
righteous  or  wicked.  They  come
from  their  eternal  Father  and  their
eternal  Mother  unto  whom  they  were
born  in  the  eternal  world,  and  they
will  be  restored  to  their  eternal  pa-
rentage; and  all  parents  who  have
received  children  here  according  to
the  order  of  God  and  the  holy  priest-
hood, no  matter  in  what  age  they
may  have  lived,  will  claim  those  chil-
dren in  the  morning  of  the  resurrec-
tion, and  they  will  be  giveu  unto  them
and  they  will  grace  their  family  orga-
nizations in  the  celestial  world-
Wit  h  regard  to  the  future  state  of
tho*e  who  die  in  infancy  I  do  not  feel
authorized  to  say  much.  There  has
been  a  great  deal  of  theory,  and  many
views  have  been  expressed  on  this
subject,  but  there  are  many  things
connected  with  it  which  the  Lord  has
probably  never  revealed  to  any  of  the
Prophets  or  patriarchs  who  ever  ap


pea  red  on  the  earth*  There  are
some  things  which  have  not  been
revealed  to  man,  but  are  held  in  the
bosom  of  God  our  Father,  and  it  may
be  that  the  condition  after  death  of
those  who  die  in  infancy  is  among
the  things  which God has  never

,  revealed ;  but  it  is  sufficient  for  me
to  know  that  our  children  are  saved,
and  that  if  we  ourselves  keep  the  faith
and  do  our  duty  before  the  Lord,  if
we  keep  the  celestial  law,  we  shall  be
preserved  by  that  law,  and  our  child-
ren will  be  given  unto  us  there,  as
they  have  been  given  here  in  this
world  of  sorrow,  affliction,  pain  and
distress.  It  has  no  doubt  been  a
marvel  many  times,  in  the  minds  of
men  and  women,  why  God  ever
placed  men  and  women  in  such  a
world  na  this,  why  he  causes  his
children  to  pass  through  sorrow  and
affliction  here  in  the  body.  The
Lord  has  revealed  something  to  us
concerning  this  matter,  and  we  have
learned  enough  about  it  to  know  that
this  thing  is  necessary.  We  know
that  we  are  created  in  the  image  of
God,  both  male  and  female;  and
whoever  goes  back  into  the  presence
of  God  our  eternal  Father,  will  find
that  he  is  a  noble  man,  a  noble  God,
tabernacled  in  a  form  similar  to  ours,
for  we  are  created  after  his  own  im-
age ;  they  will  also  learn  that  he  has
placed  lis  here  that  we  may  pass
through  a  state  of  probation  and  ex-
perience, the  same  as  he  himself  did
in  his  day  of  mortality.  And  time
and  again  it  has  been  revealed  in
the  revelations  of  God  given  in  onr
day,  as  well  as  in  the  Bible  and  Book
of  Mormon,  that  these  things  are
necessary  in  order  to  enable  us  to
comprehend  good  and  evil,  and  to
be  prepared  for  glory  and  blessings
when  we  receive  them.  As  the
Apostle  argues  very  strongly  in  the
Book  of  Mormon  —  "If  we  never

( taste  the  bitter  how  will  we  know


:ttle  children  are  innocent,  etc.


33


M  £J


gave  lip

Still  ha
2  I  the

The  q


how  to  comprehend  the  sweet  1  If
we  never  partake  of  pain  how  can
we  prize  ease?  And  if  we  never
pass  through  affliction,  how  cm  we
comprehend  glory,  exaltation  and
eternal  blessings  V

The  Lor  l  has  said  concerning
Jesus,  that  he  descended  below  ell
things  that  he  might  rise  above  all
things,  and  comprehend  all  things.
No  man  descended  lower  than  the
Savior  of  the  world.  Bora  in  a
stab1?,  crniled  in  a  ma:r_rer,  he  trr,-
veled  from  there  to  the  crocs  through
suffer ri^  minded  w:th  Hood,  to  a
throve  nf  grr.^e  ;  and  in  all  h:»  life
there  wa-s  nothing  of  ftrt  fiSa&My
nature  that  spine  l  to  be  worth
pos-esrng.  His  whole  life  was
passed  in  novertv,  suffering  pain,
affliction,  labor,  prayer,  in^u;
and  sorrow,  until  !«
ghost  on  the  crojs.
God's  firstborn  ro:i
deerner  of  the  world,
might  be  asked  why  the  L t :\1
suffered  his  So  *  to  coroe  h?re  anflto
live  a  :d  die  as  he  did-  When  we
get  into  the  zf  At  .odd,  and  ihe
vail  h  withdraw  we  b\:z\\  then
perhaps  understand  the  whys  and
wherefore j  of  all  these  thing?.
In  the  d:spe:::;:ii!on3  and  urovidencss
of  Go  1  to  man  it  seerns  that  we  are
born,  to  suffer  naiu,  affliction,  sor-
rows  and  trials  ;  .  this  is  what  God
has  decreed  that  the  Inmmi  family
shall  pa^s  through  ;  and  if  we  make
a  right  use  of  this  probation,  the
experience  it  brings  will  eventually
prove  a  great  blessing  to  us,  and
when  we  receive  immortality  and
eternal  life,  exaltation,  kingdoms,
tl irones,  prln'-'palities  avd  power.-
with  all  the  Slessings  of  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  we  shall
u j i d era i<r : d an  1 corn nreh  en  1  w  ■  \  v

A.  *f

we  were  c  .lied  to  p.^s  through  a
continual  warfare  d  iring  the  few
y  ars  we  ;pent  in  the  tlssh,
No.  3.


It  certainly  does  require  a  good
deal  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to
give  comfort  and  c annotation  to  a
father  and  mother  mourning  for  the
loss  of  their  children  j  and  without
the  Gospel  of  Christ  the  separation
by  death  is  one  of  the  most  gloomy
subjects  i\  is  possible  to  contemplate;
but  just  as  soon  ~s  we  obtain  the
Gospel  and  lerjn  the  princ'ple  of
the  rosnrrection,  the  gloo  n,  sorrow
find  suffering  occrs:o  :c\  by  death

is


i,  m  a  g


1  hava  often  thotHzht  that,  to  see  a

Till

dead  body,  r.n  !  to  s?e  hat  b  )dy  laid
in  the  grnv?  ar  !  cov^^d  with  ea"'th,
is  one  of  the  i: M
earth ;  wlhiiou!:  t
ing  a  le;>p


quick  as  we  oh


;  o  >-.ny  3  :r  3  on
Gx^td  It  is  b"ke
ib  da  k#  >ot  as
i  *ho  G: o^eL  as
nu*:  :s  c  light-

atioa  of  the  Al-


easd  by  the*  ffigj!

mighty,  he  can  ex  11  i  w:th  n  le  of
old — "  Oil  grave,  w]  ere  is  thj  vic<-
tory,  Oh  death,  where  h  thy  stinirt
The  sting  o;*  J  >ath  is  sin,  ?/.d  the
gift  of  God  is  eter.'d  Vfe,  through
on r  Lord  J^sus  C ! : .  rs ; . "  T1  :e  res-
rri  :ti  > %  f  e  dsad  pnseats  itself
before  ths  o  ill  hte d  rrmi  1  of  :nan,


1  r


a


I-


eon  lor  his
spi  it  to  imt  ;:;  o:\  That  :s  the
rof  itio::  of  the  &/.te>day  S-i^.ts  to-
d?y.  We  do  1:now  for  oursshres,  we
a  e  not  in  the  Iftrjt  with  T^r;r rd  to
Viii  matter ;  Gc  i  '  as  reverie  1  it  to
us,  and  we  d  >  zr.  lersta  d  the  princi-
ple of  the  re  urre^lion  ef  the  dead,
and  that  the  G:re'  brings  life  and
imaaor  alitv  to  lH*t.  Vfe  have  re-
eelved  the  (JospeL  :m  \  if  we  ar^  ^.rin1
to  the  pri  ci;  It  s  of  that  Gospel  as
h  ng  as  we  livo,  we  shall  he  made
:ers  of  immortality,  exaltation
d  gloiy.


I  know  vph


11  I


the  !oss  of


I-


m  :n  thb  terribl
i:rr  is  a  sr.d  affliction  to  brother  and


i


I-


rr"  a  sad  afflic-
tOQ  for  Job  wheu  hia  childron  and

Vol.  xv  hi.


34  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


possessions  were  taken  from  him  in
an  hour,  but  yet  he  had  sense  or
knowledge  enough  to  understand
and  say  that  when  he  came  into  the
world  he  possessed  neither  children,
houses,  lands,  horses,  oxen,  camels
nor  asses,  but  that  all  his  wealth
had  been  given  to  him  by  the  Lord,
and  that  the  Lord  had  taken  them
away  and  blessed  be  his  holy  name.
J  will  say  to  our  mourning  friends,
your  children  are  taken  away  and
you  can  not  help  it,  wo  cannot  any
of  us  help  it ;  there  is  no  censure
to  be  given  to  parents  when  they
do  the  best  they  can,  A  mother
should  not  be  censured  because  she
can  not  save  her  sick  child,  and  we
liave  to  leave  these  things  in  the
hands  of  God,  It  will  be  but  a
little  time  until  they  will  be  restored
to  us  ;  in  a  little  time  brother  and
sister  Wheeler  will  again  have  the
children  whose  loss  they  now
mourn,

AVith  regard  to  the  growth,  glory,
or  exaltation  of  children  in  the  life
to  come,  God  has  not  revealed  any*
thing  on  that  subject  to  me,  either
about  your  children,  mine  or  any-
body else's,  any  further  titan  we
know  they  are  saved.  And  I  feel
that  we  have  to  put  our  trust  in  the
Lord  in  these  afflictions,  we  have
to  lean  upon  his  arm  and  to  look  to
him  for  comfort  and  consolation,
We  do  not  mourn  under  these
afflictions  as  those  who  have  no
hope  j  we  do  not  mourn  the  loss  of
our  children  as  though  we  were  never
going  to  see  them  again,  because  we
know  better.  The  Lord  has  taught
us  better,  and  so  has  the  Gospel ;
the  revelations  of  Jesus  Christ  have
shown  us  that  they  will  be  restored
to  us  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just.
And  1  will  here  say  with  regard  to
the  Gospel  of  .Christ,  that  it  is  one
of  the  greatest  mysteries  under  the
heavens  to  me  why  there  are  »u  few


of  the  human  family,  whether  in  the
Christian,  Pagan  or  Jewish  world,
who  take  any  interest  in  eternal
things,  in  the  state  of  man  after
death.  If  we  read  the  Bible  we
learn  that  Noah,  filled  with  revela-
tion, and  with  the  Gospel  in  his
hand,  although  he  labored  a  hundred
and  twenty  years,  could  not  get  a
solitary  soul  except  his  own  family
to  go  with  him  for  salvation.  It
was  similar  in  the  days  of  the  Patri-
archs and  Prophets,  and  if  we  come
down  to  the  days  of  Christ,  we  find
that  his  testimony  was  rejected  by
the  rabbis,  high  priests  and  the
great  mass  of  the  people,  and  he
chose  for  his  Apostles  twelve  poor
fishermen,  and  they  and  very  few
of  the  people,  comparatively  speak-
ing, were  all  that  received  the  teach-
ings of  Jesus  and  followed  him
through  the  regeneration  ;  while  the
whole  Jewish  nation,  with  these
few  exceptions,  were  ready  to  put
their  ShUoh  to  death,  and  he  was
the  person  upon  whom  the  salvation
of  the  whole  house  of  Israel  de-
pended. It  is  just  so  to-day.  The
great  majority  of  the  people  reject
the  words  of  life  and  salvation,
which  are  proclaimed  unto  them.
God,  in  these  last  days  revealed  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to  Joseph
Smith  by  the  teachings  of  angels
out  of  heaven,  and  its  principles  are
made  known  to  the  world,  and  there
lias  never  been  a  congregation  of
Gentiles,  from  that  day  to  this,  to
whom  the  Elders  of  Israel  have
borne  record  of  these  things,  but
what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  also
borne  record  of  the  truth  of  their
testimony ;  and  herein  lies  the  con-  ■
demnation  of  this  generation,  for
u  light  has  come  into  the  world,
but  men  love  darkness  rather  than
light,  because  their  deeds  are  eviL"
I  ask,  in  the  name  of  God  and  huma-
nity, why  is  it  that  intelligent  being?.


LITTLE  CHILDREN  AUK  INNOCENT,  ETC


35


made  in  the  image  of  God,  take  no
interest  in  their  condition  after
death  ?  They  know  they  are  going
to  die,  and,  if  they  have  any  sense  or
reflection,  they  know  tliey  will  live
after  the  death  of  their  mortal  bodies;
still  men  will  sell  their  eternal  inter-
est for  money,  for  a  few  hundred  or
a  few  thousand  dollars  they  will  sell
all  the  interest  they  have  in  the
eternal  world  ;  in  fact,  they  take  no
interest  in  their  eternal  welfare.
Their  cry  is — "  Give  me  gold,  silver
and  honors  the  few  years  I  spend
here,  and  eternal  life  may  go  where
it  pleases,  I  have  no  interest  in  that/'
I  ask  again,  why  is  it  that  the  human
family  take  no  interest  in  these
things  ?  We  have  preached  over
forty  years.  I  have  been  engaged  in
that  work  over  that  time,  and  have
proclaimed  the  words  of  eternal  life
to  millions  of  people,  and  have  tra-
veled more  than  a  hundred  thousand
miles  in  so  doing,  and,  as  the  Pro-
phet has  said,  I  have  found  one  of  a
family  and  two  of  a  city  who  have
had  eyes  to  see,  ears  to  hear,  and
hearts  to  understand,  and  they  have
been  gathered  up  from  the  various
nations  of  the  earth  into  the  moun-
tains of  Israel,  and  here  to-day  we
have  a  little  handful  of  people,  out  of
the  twelve  hundred  millions  who
dwell  upon  the  earth,  who  feel  an
interest  in  building  up  the  Zion  and
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,  and
who  are  desirous  of  being  saved  in
that  kingdom.

Now  I  would  rather  be  poor  all  the
days  of  my  life,  I  would  rather  go
through  poverty  and  affliction,  it
matters  not  how  severe,  even  to  the
sacrifice  of  my  own  life,  than  lose
salvation  and  eternal  life,  because
I  have  faith  in  it  and  always  had.  I
always  have  had  faith  in  the  Bible
and  in  the  revelations  of  God  since  I
was  a  boy  like  these  sitting  on  these
seats,  eight  or  tea  years  old,  when  I


went  to  the  Presbyterian  Sunday
school  and  read  about  Jesus  Christ.
I  believed  then  that  he  was  the
Savior  of  the  world  j  I  believed  that?
the  Old  and  New  Teatament  was  true,
I  believe  it  to-day.  What  would  it
profit  a  man  to  gain  the  whole  world
and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  What  will
a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?
When  he  comes  into  the  presence  of
God  he  can't  buy  it.  This  is  the
position  of  th  e  world.  There  is  none
of  us  going  to  live  but  a  little  while ;
we  shall  all  pass  away  soon,  and  our
eternal  destiny  depends  npon  the
few  days,  weeks,  months  or  years
that  wo  spend  here  in  the  flesh.  Do
you  not  think  it  will  pay  a  man  or  a
woman  to  keep  the  commandments
of  God  ?  It  will,  and  when  we  enjoy
the  Holy  Spirit,  when  we  are  trying
to  live  our  religion  here  on  the  earth,
we  are  the  happiest  people  on  God's
footstool,  no  matter  what  our  circa  in-
stances may  be.  I  do  not  care
whether  we  are  rich  or  poor,  whether
in  happiness  or  affliction,  if  a  man
is  living  his  religion  and  enjoys  the
favor  and  Spirit  of  God,  it  makes
no  difference  to  him  what  takes  place
on  the  earth.  There  may  be  earth-
quakes, war,  fire  or  sword  in  the  land,
but  he  feels  that  it  is  all  right  with
him.  That  is  the  way  I  feel  to-day.
With  regard  to  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  it  is  a  thing  that  we  should
all  labor  to  maintain  the  few  years
that  we  spend  here.  When  I  get
through  with  this  life  and  go  into  the
spirit  world,  I  do  not  want  to  miss
what  I  have  in  anticipation.  I  have
always  desired  to  the  Savior.
Father  Adam,  Enoeh,  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  and  those  old  Prophets
we  read  about  in  the  Bible,  I  de-
sired'this  before  I  heard  this  Gospel,
I  desire  it  to-day  ;  and  I  do  not  wish
to  miss  this,  for  nothing  in  this  world
would  pay  me  for  such  a  sacrifice.
But  I  know  that  it  requires  constant


3(5  JOURNAL  OF

warfare,  labor  and  faithfulness  before
the  Lord  in  order  for  us  to  keep  in
fellowship  with  ihe  Holy  Spirit,  and
to  live  in  such  a  manner  that  we  may
obtain  these  blessings,  Jesus  says —
"  Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  the
way  that  leads  to  eternal  lives,  and  ,
few  there  are  who  find  it,  whi!e  hr^aJ
is  the  way  that  leads  to  death,  and
many  there  be  who  go  In  thereat."
The  road  to  death  is  broad  enough  to
catch  the  whole  world,  and  tney  do
not  like  to  walk  in  the  strait  and
narrow  one,  they  du  not  like  tu  Keep
the  celestial  law.  I  have  met  wkh
processed  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  in
my  travels,  aL  wh^se  tobies  I  Lave
eaten  ami  drank,  and  I  have  given
them  the  Hook  ot  Alormua  and  the
Book  jf  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
and  have  talked  iu  and  labored  with
ill  em,  and  i  have  know  a  sumo  of;
them  pei id  day*  and  dajs  in  t!ns
warfare,  trying  to  decide  which  to  do,
whether  ^o  receive  tije  Gospel  uf
Christ  and  take  the  reproach  of  the
world,  ui  reject  it;  and  I  may  say
that  in  nine  cases  oat  of  ten  diey
have  come  to  the  conclusion  to  reject
it.  When  I  visaed  Fox  Island  the
iirst  time,  I  wen.  to  the  housj  of
Mr.  Newton,  a  Baptist  luinisiui*;  a;vd
I  stayed  with  him.  liut  Gr*t  I  weufc
to  his  church  and  heard  him  pre  ch,
and  when  he  ^ut  through  I  wanted
to  hear  iceori  of  the  Gospel,  for  I
had  a  message  to  that  people,  and  .
appointed  a  meeting  fur  four  o'cluck
in  the  afternoon,  and  1  preached  the  j
Gospel  to  them,  and  Mr,  ITewton  took
me  to  his  home  and  i  g  ve  him  t^e
Bouk  uf  Mormon  and  the  -ovk  of
ijoctrine  and  Covenant and  fji  ten
davs  that  man  walked  about  hsroom
until  midnight  trying  to  decide  what
he  should  do.  The  Spirit  of  the
Lvvd  bore  record  to  him  that  my
testimony  was  true,  and  he  felt  that
if  he  oliyed  the  Gospel  which  I  had
proclaimed  umo  him  he  would  I^e


DISCOURSES.

h!s  good  name  and  honor  among  men,
but  ihat  *f  be  did  not  receive  it,  he
would  be  damned, Finally  he  re-

'  rejected  it,  and  the  consequence  was
that  he  became  a  vagabond,  and  a
miserable  outcast  I  baptized  all
his  fiock  who  uwned  any  portion
of  the  meeting-hou  e,  and  if  he  had
embraced  the  Gospel  and  been  gath-
ered with  them  he  would  have  been
here  and  saved  in  the  kingdom  of
God,  instead  of  the  vagabond  that
he  has  since  Income.  I  merely  men-
tion this  to  show  huw  the  minds  of
borne  men  are  acted  upon  by  the  tid-
ing of  the  Gospel,  Some  of  ihom
feei  th.  I  'twould  be  a  ^reat  reproach
to  obey  that  Gospel  and  u  keep  the
commandments  uf  God*  Dlessyour
souls,  we  who  obey  the  Gospel  of
Christ  are  all  in  ;uo.l  co.^auy.
Whenever  you  ,:re  pcrsec.ted  J  or
righteousness  soke,  said  Jlsus,  rejoice
and  be  exceeding  glad  lor  >>o  perse-

'  cuted  they  the  Prophets  ani  Apjstles
which  were  before  you,

I  will  say  to  all,  whether  in  the
ehnreh  or  in  the  woild,  it  will  pay
you  to  keep  the  commandments  of
God.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  a  wife
tnat  he  thinks  a  grvat  dtal  of  ;  they
have  lovely  children,  a  ad  the  ties  of
affection  bind  them  closely,  liOW
should  not  -such  a  "iau  h^ve  respect
enough  for  God  to  keep  his  com-
mandments and  so  secure  to  him  r  f

,  his  wife  and  his  children  in  the  celes-
tial world  af«er  the lesu.T^ction  ?

I  Eat  you  cannot  get  worldlings  to
belie v j  in  such  a  priucipbj  the
peo,  *e,  as  I  said  before,  have  not  in-
terest enough  :u  the  tilings  uf  the
kingdom  of  Go3  to  be  willing  lo  keep
the  commandments  of  God,

I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  w  e
should  be  faithful  to  our  ^Jod,  We
are  blessed  above  all  the  people  that
breathe  the  breath  of  I7e  upon  the
earth,  and  we  are  blessed  abjve  all
other  dispensations  and  generations


LITTLE  CHILDREN  ARE  INNOCENT,  ETC*


87


of  men,  for  the  Lord  hag  put  into
our  hands  the  power  to  build  up  his
Zion  upon  the  earth,  never  more  to
be  thrown  down,  and  this  is  what  no
other  generation  has  ever  been  called
to  do*  But  although  this  is  the  mis-
sion of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  we
have  a  continual  warfare  to  waeje — a
warfare  with  the  powers  of  darkness,
and  a  warfare  with  ourselves.  The
ancients  had  a  similar  experience  to
pass  through — they  hud  their  day
of  trials,  troubles  and  tribulations.
Enoch  labored  three  hundred  and
sixty- five  years  in  building  up  Zion,
and  he  hud  the  opposition  of  the
whole  world.  But  t  ie  Lord  blessed
him  so  that  he  maintained  his  ground
for  that  length  of  time,  and  gathered
together  a  few  out  of  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  they  were  sanctified
before  the  Lord,  and  he  had  to  take
them  away,  and  the  saying  went  forth
— tfc  Zion  is  fled."  So  you  may  trace
down  all  the  Prophets.  Read  the
history  of  Ezekiel,  Jeremiah,  Isaiah
and  others,  and  yon  will  rind  that  it
was  a  warfare  with  them  all  the  way
through.  And  so  with  Jesus  and  the
Apostles.  But  all  those  dispensa-
tions have  passed  and  gone  into  the
spirit  world,  and  they  have  their  eyes
upon  us,  and  in  fact  God  our  heavenly
Father  and  all  under  him — the  whole
heavenly  host,  have  their  eyes  turned
towards  the  Latter-day  Saints,  be-
cause this  is  the  great  dispensation
of  which  Adam,  Enoch  and  all  the
ancient  patriarchs  and  Prophets  have
spoken,  in  which  shall  take  ph*ee  the
final  redemption  of  the  House  of
Israel,  the  restoration  of  their  kin**-
dom,  the  rebuilding  of  their  city  and
Temple,  the  restoration  of  their
oracles  and  Priesthood,  of  the  Urim
and  Thummim,  and  the  preparation
for  the  final  winding  up  scene  in  the
last  days;  all  these  things  will  take
place  in  the  dispensation  in  which  we
are  permitted  to  live*


Let  us,  then,  try  and  fulfill  and
perform  our  duties  as  good  Latter-day
Saints.  Let  us  bear  with  each  other's
faults,  and  bear  the  yoke  of  Christ,
live  our  religion  and  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God.  Let  us  try  and
bring  up  our  children  in  the  nurture
and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  Let
us  set  them  good  examples  and  teach
them  good  principles  while  they  are
young.  They  are  given  to  us  by  our
heavenly  Father;  they  are  our  king-
dom, they  are  the  foundation  of  our
exaltation  and  glory;  they  are  plants
of  renown,  and  we  should  strive  to
bear  them  up  before  the  Lord,  and
tench  them  to  pray  to,  and  to  have
faith  in,  the  Lord  as  far  as  we  can,
that  when  we  are  passed  and  gone
and  tln-y  succeed  us  on  this  stage  of
action,  they  may  bear  off  the  ^reat
latter*day  work  and  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.  I  do  not  believe
that  the  day  is  very  far  distant  when
the  revelations  which  God  lias  given
concerning  the  last  days  will  have
their  fulfillment,  I  believe  there  are
many  children  now  living  in  the
mountains  of  Israel  who  will  never
taste  of  death,  that  is,  they  will  dwell
on  the  earth  at  the  coming  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  will  acknowledge
that  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  done,
and  the  Lord  has  not  revealed  to  man
the  day  or  the  hour,  bat  he  has  re-
vealed the  generation ;  and  the  fig
trees  are  now  putting  forth  their
leaves  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations,
indicating  the  near  approach  of  the
second  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.
It  is  my  faith  that  hundreds  and
thousands  of  the  children  that  have
been  given  to  us  will  be  alive  in  the
flesh  when  Christ  comes  in  the  clouds
of  heaven  in  power  and  great  glory.
The  Lord  will  not  disappoint  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  iu  these  last
days  in  regard  to  his  second  coming,
any  more  than  he  has  with  regard  to
other  great  eveuts  and  dispensations.


36  JOURNAL  OF

Wc  live  in  a  very  important  age
and  generation;  we  live  in  the  day
and  time  when  God  lias  set  his  hand
to  fulfill  a  measure  of  prophecy  and
revelation  to  man,  in  the  great  dis-
pensation of  all  dispensations.  As
an  individual  I  do  not  believe  that
many  more  years  will  roll  over  the
heads  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
before  the  resurrection  will  be  upon
them,  and  then  these  children,
which  we  are  called  to  bury  to-day,
will  come  forth  from  their  graves,
clothed  with  glory,  immortality  and
eternal  life.  You  may  ask  why  I
believe  this.  I  believe  it  because  the
revelations  of  God  say  so.  1  read
the  Scriptures,  and  I  believe  that  the
revelations  and  prophecies  therein
contained  mean  what  they  say,  and
I  also  believe  that  the  saying  of
every  Prophet  or  Apostle  spoken
under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy
Ghost  will  have  its  fulfillment,  and,
as  Paul  said,  no  prophecy  of  Scriplure
hath  any  private  interpretation,  but
holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were
moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost.
They  spake  the  mind  and  word  of
the  Lord,  and  none  of  their  sayings
will  fail  to  be  fulfilled,  for  the  Lord
has  siid — "  Though  the  heavens  and
the  earth  pass  away,  my  word  shall
not  fail,  but  shall  be  fulfilled;'  That
is  the  way  I  read  prophecy  and  reve-  \
lation.

The  Jews  will  be  moved  upon  by
and  by,  and  they  will  return  to  the
land  of  their  fathers,  and  they  will
rebuild  Jerusalem, These  Laman-
ilea  here  will  receive  the  Gospel  of
Christ  in  fulfillment  of  the  revela-
tions of  God. The  Prophets  which
have  been  shut  up  in  the  north  coun-
try with  the  nine  and  a  half  tnbes
led  away  by  Shalmanezer,  King  of
Assyria,  thousands  of  years  ago,  will
come  in  remembrance  before  God;
they  will  smite  the  rucks  and  moun-
tains of  ice  will  flow  down  before


DISCOURSES.

them,  and  those  long  lost  tribes  will
come  forth  in  your  day  and  mine,  if
we  live  a  few  years  longer,  and  they
will  be  crowned  under  the  hands  of
the  children  of  Ephraim — the  Elders
of  Israel  who  dwell  in  the  land  of
Zion.  And  by  and  by  the  testimony
of  the  Gospel  will  be  sealed  among
the  Gentiles,  and  the  Gospel  will
turn  to  the  whole  bouse  of  Israel,
and  the  judgments  of  God  will  back
up  the  testimony  of  the  Elders  of
this  Church,  and  the  Lord  will  send
messengers  who  will  yo  forth  and
reap  down  the  earth.  The  unbeliever
may  say  that  what  we  term  judg-
ments have  always  prevailed  more  or
less  among  the  nations,  and  that
God  has  nothing  to  do  with  them,
they  are  all  natural,  Well,  if  they
have  always  prevailed,  they  will  pre-
vail to  a  greater  extent  m  these  last
days  than  ever  before,  until  every-
thing that  God  has  spoken  shall  have
come  to  pass.  Judgments  await  the
world,  and  they  await  this  nation^
and  the  day  is  at  hand  when  the
Lord  will  sweep  the  earth  as  with  a
besom  of  destruction.  In  the  vision
which  the  Lord  gave  to  Enoch,  he
saw  the  heavens  weeping  over  the
earth  because  of  the  fall  of  man ;  and
when  Enoch  asked  the  Lord — "  When
will  the  earth  rest  from  under  the
curse  of  sin:"  the  Lord  told  him
that  in  the  last  days  the  earth  should
rest,  for  then  it  should  be  redeemed
from  tbe  sin,  wickedness  and  abomi-
nations that  were  upon  it  The
earth  is  now  pretty  near  ripe,  and
when  ripened  the  Lord  will  cat  them
off'  These  things  are  before  the
Latter-day  Saints,  bnt  the  world  do
not  believe  in  them  any  more  than
they  believed  in  the  message  of  Xoah
or  Lot.

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  read
the  revelations  of  God  for  ourselves,
and  when  we  read  them,  let  us  be-
lieve them,  and  try  to  live  in  such  a


LITTLE  CHILDREN  ARE  INNOCENT,  ETC


way  that  we  may  be  ready  for  what-
ever dispensation  the  Lord  may  have
in  store  for  us,  and  so  that  we  can
acknowledge  his  hand  as  Job  did,
and  not  find  any  fault  with  him  be-
cause of  his  providences  toward  us.
If  we  cannot  comprehend  them  now,
we  shall  be  able  to  do  so  in  a  little
while*  The  Lord  may  have  purposes
in  view  in  his  dealings  with  us  thai
we  do  not  understand  ;  I  presume  he
has.  In  fact,  the  whole  of  the  deal-
ings of  God  to  man  are  a  mystery.
There  is  a  vail  over  the  world,  and
it  is  ordained  of  God  that  it  should
be  so,  for  if  it  were  not  so,  ami  if
men  could  comprehend  eternal  things,
as  God  comprehends  them,  there  is
no  man  on  the  earth,  no  matter  how
wicked  he  may  be,  but  what  would
be  willing  to  keep  the  commandments
of  God,  and  to  pass  through  any-
thing that  God  ordained,  for  therein
he  would  see  there  was  salvation  and
eternal  life.  But  God  has  an  order
in  the&e  matters,  as  he  revealed  unto
Joseph  Smith.  He  said  unto  Joseph
— "  I  will  prove  you  whether  you
will  abide  in  my  covenant ;  if  you
are  not  willing  to  abide  in  my  covenant
even  unto  death,  yon  are  not  worthy
of  rne."  And  it  is  so  with  the  Suints.
If  they  are  not  willing  to  abide  in
the  covenants  they  have  made  with
God,  even  unto  death  if  necessary,
they  are  not  worthy  of  him.  Jesus
laid  down  his  life  to  redeem  the
world,  and  passed  through  suffering
and  affliction  all  his  life  in  order  that
he  might  fulfill  the  mission  which
w as  given  him.  So  it  is  with  n<.
The  Lord  says — "I  am  going  to
prove  the  children  of  men,"  There
are  a  few  individuals  in  this  dispen-
sation who  will  inherit  celestial  glory,
and  a  few  in  other  dispensations;
but  before  they  receive  their  exalta-
tion they  will  have  to  pass  through
and  submit  to  whatever  dispensation
God  may  decree. But  tor  all  this


they  will  receive  their  reward — they
will  become  Gods,  they  will  inherit
thrones,  kingdoms,  principalities  and
powers  through  the  endless  ages  of
eternity,  and  to  their  increase  there
will  be  no  end,  and  the  heart  of  man
has  never  conceived  of  the  glory  that
is  in  store  for  the  sons  and  daughters
1  of  God  who  keep  the  celestial  law,
And  yet  God  has  a  vail  over  all  in
regard  to  these  things.  The  whole
world  will  be  judged  according  to  the
deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  they  will
inherit  kingdoms  according  to  the
laws  which  they  have  kept,  every
man  being  preserved  by  the  law
which  he  has  observed,  aud  all  will
be  saved  in  some  glory,  except  the
sons  of  perdition.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  the
Gospel  of  Christ  is  before  us.  We
are  all  passiug  along,  and  it  will  only
be  a  little  time  before  a  good  many
of  us  will  be  on  the  other  side  of  the
vail.  Our  friends  are  passing  oif
every  day,  and  we  look  in  vain  for
many  with  whom  we  have  been  fa-
miliar in  years  that  are  past.  If  I
go  into  a  congregation  of  ten  thou-
sand and  enquire  for  the  Saints  [
knew  in  Kirtlaud,  and  request  them
to  lift  up  their  hands,  it  will  be  like
a  standard  bearer  on  the  mountains,
there  is  only  here  and  there  one*
You  ask  a  congregation  how  many  of
them  knew  Joseph,  Smith,  and  it  is
only  here  and  there  one,  they  are
passing  away  to  the  other  side  of  the
vail.  It  is  so  with  us  all,  we  are
hastening  to  the  end  of  life's  journey,
and  a  good  many  of  us  are  on  the
downward  grade,  I  ask  that  what
little  time  I  live,  I  may  keep  the  faith
and  have  the  fellowship  of  the  lloly
Spirir  and  uf  the  Saints  of  Gud,  that
when  I  get  through  I  may  be  satis-
fied with  life,  sat i^ tied  with  my  acts,
that  I  may  receive  a  welcome  into  the
Kingdom  ot  God.  That  is  nil  i  ask
and  all  I  labor  ix>i\ As  tor  riches  and


40


JOURNAL  01'  JJISCUUKSE*


wealth,  I  do  not  want  tliem  if  they
will  damn  me.  I  would  like  to  have
enough  to  clothe,  fchoe  and  feed  my
wives  and  children,  and  to  make  them
comfortable,  it  I  can  get  it  honestly
before  the  Lord;  but  I  would  rather
myself  and  them  all  be  in  poverty
than  to  have  wealth  and  be  destroyed.
Riches  are  dangerous  unless  we  can
use  them  so  as  not  to  destroy  us;  if
we  cannot  use  them  to  the  glory  of
God  and  fur  the  building  up  of  his
Kingdom,  we  are  better  without
them.  I  do  not  expect  to  live  a  great
many  year**  longer.  The  young,  the
middle-aged  and  the  old  are  dying  off
For  many  years  of  my  life  the  gospel
of  Jesus  Christ  lias  been  a  consola-
tion to  me.  I  have  spent  a  good  deal
moie  than  half  of  my  life  in  laboring
in  this  Church,  I  labored  to  find  this
Church,  1  may  gay,  from  my  child-
hood up,  and  many  a  midnight  hour
have  I  plead  with  tho  Lord,  in  the
wilderness,  to  the  woods,  and  in  my
mill,  and  under  various  circumstances,
that  the  Lord  would  k-t  me  find  a
people  who  contended  for  the  faith
once  delivered  to  the  Saints.  I  de-
sired this  from  reading  the  Bible,  and
from  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  for  in  the  pages  of  that  sacred
book  I  learned  that  a  people  once
lived  upon  the  earth  who  had  com-
munion with  God,  and  they  had
power  to  command  the  elements,  and
they  obeyed  them ;  ihey  conversed
with  angels,  and  had  the  gifts  and
graces  of  a  religion  which  had  power
and  salvation  in  it.  I  could  not  find
this  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  I
prayed  to  the  Lord  to  let  me  live  to
find  such  a  people,  and  he  promised
thai  I  bhotild,  and  I  have  lived  to
find  them.  I  have  seeu  the  faces  of
Prophets  and  inspired  men,  mid  it
has  been  a  great  consolation  to  me,
I^have  my  failings  and  imperfections,


and  I  expect  that  we  are  all  subject
to  them,  more  or  less.  I  want  to
1  overcome  them,  because  I  desire  to
partake  of  eternal  life.  I  albo  desire
this  for  the  Saints  of  God  and  for  the
honest  and  meek  of  the  earth  every-
where.

I  have  labored  many  years,  and  tra-
veled without  purse  and  scrip,  preach-
ed without  money  and  without  price,
for  the  purpose  of  saving  my  fellow-
men. I  labor  on  Mount  Zion  to  try
and  save  the  dead ; I  spend  a  good
deal  of  time  in  this. It  is  a  conso-
lation to  me,  I  pray  God  my  heaven-
ly  Father  to  bless  you  and  all  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  that  he  will
give  us  enough  of  his  Holy  Spirit  to
keep  us  in  the  pith  of  duty  and  rec-
titude, virtue  and  righteousness,  that
;  we  may  be  justified  before  him.  I
!  pray  my  heavenly  Father  that  he  will
bless  Brother  and  Sister  Wheeler  in
!  their  bereavement,  and  give  them  his
Holy  Spirit,  that,  when  they  lie  down
at  night  and  rise  in  the  morning  and
miss  their  children  they  may  feel  to
commit  themselves  into  the  hands  of
the  Lord,  and  realize  that  their  sepa-
ration from  their  lit  lie  ones  is  not  for
ever,  but  that  in  a  little  while  they
will  he  restored  to  them. This  ap-
plies to  us  all  in  the  loss  of  our  chil-
dren. We  lay  them  away  in  the
grave,  but  they  will  come  forth  in  the
morning  ,  of  the  resurrection,  and  if
we  are  faithful  to  the  truth,  we  shall
receive  them  and  rejoice  with  them;
and  when  we  have  passed  through  the
sorrows  of  mortality  and  have  the  joy
,  and  glory  of  the  celestial  kingdom
|  conferred  upon  us  we  shall  then  know
that  the  afflictions  of  mortality  have
prepared  us  for  and  enabled  us  to  ap-
preciate the  blessings  which  God  has
in  store  for  the  faithful.
| May  God  bless  us,  and  give  us  his
Spirit,  for  Jesus'  sake,  Amen.


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC


41


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

i

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  ox  the  occasion-
of  the  attendance;  of  the  New  England  and  New  York  Editorial
Excursion  Party,  Sunday  Afternoon,  July  11,  1875.

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

IMMEDIATE  REVELATION — SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  NECESSARY  IN THE  CHRIST-
-  IAN CHURCH — APOSTACY — THE RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL — ALL
THINGS  TO  BE  GATHERED  IN  ONE — DIVINE  AUTHORITY — MA  Kill  AGE —
CELESTIAL  MARRLtGE— BAPTISM  FOR  THE  DEAD.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the  con-
gregation to  a  portion  of  the  word  of
God  contained  in  the  19th  chapter  of
th&  Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew,  !
[The  speaker  tend  tiie  ^,  4,5,  0,  7,

and  9  verses.]

I  have  read  these  passages  of
Scripture  in  order  to  dwell,  this
afternoon,  if  the  Lord  will,  and  his
Spirit  shall  so  direct  my  mind,  upon
the  subject  of  marriage,  and  to  show
wherein  the  people  called  Latter-day
Saints  differ  in  their  views  from  other
Christian  denominations  in  relation
to  this  great  and  divine  ordinance,
and  to  make  such  other  remarks,  not
particularly  connected  with  the  sub-
ject, as  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  may
direct.

First,  however,  before  taking  up  ;
this  divine  ordinance,  it  may  be  well
to  state,  in  brief  terms,  some  of  the
views  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  |
regard  to  the  doctrine  which  they  j
have  embraced, I  shall  endeavor  to
he  very  brief  on  every  point,  in  order
to  enumerate,  as  far  as  possible,  the
variety  of  doctrines  and  principles
which  we  have  embraced,  that  are
peculiar  to  us  as  a  people. I  will  ,


commence  by  saying,  that  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saiuts
has  not  grown  out  oi  iho  various  re-
ligions  societies  that  now  exist,  o?
that  have  existed,  in  Christendom;
neither  has  it  grown  out  of  any  of
their  institutions*  Our  Priest huud,
our  doctrine,  our  authority,  the  orga-
nization of  our  Church,  and  every-
thing connected  therewith,  have  been
something  revealed  directly  from  the
heavens.  Perhaps  you  may  inquire
— "  Have  you  not  been  guided  more
or  less  in  relation  to  these  principles
by  the  book  which  is  called  the
Bible?"  I  answer  that,  in  the  orga-
nization of  the  kingdom  of  God  on
the  ennh  in  the  nineteenth  century,
we  have  been  guided  by  direct  reve-
lation to  us  from  heaven.  We  do
not  profess  that  oar  doctrines  and
principles  are  entirely  distinct  and
something  entirely  different  from  those
which  are  recorded  in  the  Bible,  we
are  far  from  making  any  such  pro-
fession ;  but  we  believe  that  the  same
God  who  organized  his  kingdom  in
ancient  times,  and  revealed  his  will
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  has
revealed,  in  these  last  dajs,  principles


42  JOURNAL  OF

in  accordance  with  those  revealed  in
former  times,  and  that  he  is  a  con-
sistent Being,  and  that  he  would  not
communicate  a  Gospel  for  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth  to  observe  in  the
19th  century  that  was  not  revealed
and  understood  in  former  ages.  The
same  Gospel,  therefore,  which  God
has  revealed  anew  in  our  day,  when
compared  with  the  Gospel  contained
in  the  New  Testament,  is  found  to
accord  in  every  principle,  and  in  all
its  ordinances  and  institutions,  with
ancient  Christianity.

This  Church  was  organized  on  the
6th  day  of  April,  1830.  The  very
day  ot  the  month  on  which  it  should
be  organized  was  pointed  out  by
new  revelation;  the  officers  that
were  placed  in  the  Church  were  ap-
pointed, and  the  names  of  many  of
them  were  given  by  new  revelation,
The  duties  of  these  officers  were  also
appointed  by  direct  revelation  from
hiaven.  God  organized  the  Church
with  Apostles  in  it,  the  same  as  he
organized  his  ancient  Church ;  he
organized  it  with  Bevelators  and
with  Prophet*,  inspired  from  on
high,  the  same  as  he  organized  the
Ancient  Christian  Church.  He  com-
manded the  people  to  believe  in  his
Son  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  great  Re-
deemer who  died  in  the  meridian  of
tirre  for  the  sins  of  mankind.  He
commanded,  by  new  revelation,  that
we  should  believe  in  the  same  Re-
deemer and  in  the  same  atonement;
ho  commanded  us  to  repent  of  all  our
sins,  forsake  all  unrighteousness,
cea»e  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do  well,
and  to  reform  our  lives  in  every  re-
fcptct,  the  same  as  he  commanded
the  people  in  the  ancient  dispensa-
tion ot  the  Gospel*  By  new  revela-
tion we  weie  commanded  to  be  bap-
tized by  immersion  in  water,  for  the
remission  of  oar  sins,  the  same  as  he
commanded  the  people  in  ancient
times  to  attend  to  the  same  divine


DISCOURSES,

ordinance*  By  new  revelation,  he
commanded  his  servants  the  Apostles,
and  those  to  whom  he  gave  power
and  authority,  to  lay  hands  on  all
baptized  believers,  and  to  confirm
upon  them  the  baptism  of  fin  and  the
Holy  Ghost t  the  same  as  was  prac-
ticed among  the  Saints  in  ancient
times.  By  new  revelation  the  Lord
promised  that  certain  signs  should
follow  the  believers  among  all  na-
tions, ki iid reds,  tongues  and  people
to  whom  this  Gospel  should  be  sent.
All  that  would  believe,  men  and  wo-
men, were  promised  certain  signs,
among  which  I  will  name  that  they
should  cast  out  devils,  speak  with
new  tongues,  and  if  they  should  take
up  serpents,  or  drink  any  deadly
thing,  it  should  not  hurt  them,  they
should  lay  their  hands  upon  the  sick
and  they  should  recover.  The  same
promise  was  made  by  our  Savior
under  the  ancient  dispensation  of  the
Gospel  He  commanded  his  ser-
vants, in  these  days,  to  go  forth  and
preach  to  the  Gentile  nations  first;
and  when  we  had  faithfully  borne
our  testimony  to  them,  and  they  were
sufficiently  warned,  then  we  were  to
turn  to  the  scattered  and  dispersed
remnants  of  Israel  in  the  four  quar-
ters of  the  earth,  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  them.  He  commanded,  by
new  revelation,  that  his  servants
should  say  unto  the  inhabitants  of
all  the  earth  that  would  believe,
repent,  be  baptized,  and  receive  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  they
should  leave  their  respective  nations,
and  gather  together  in  one  placef
which  the  Lord,  by  new  revelation,
should  appoint*

All  this  was  given  by  newT  revela-
tion. Does  it  agree  or  disagree  with
the  Scriptures  contained  in  the  Bible?
Judge  ye  for  yourselves.  Did  the
ancient  Christian  Church  have  in-
spired Apostles,  who  had  power  to
j  call  upon  God  and  receive  new  reve-


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC.


43


la t ion  from  him  ?  So  does  the  mo-
dern Christian  Church,  which  God
has  reorganized  on  the  earth,  claim
to  have  the  same  officers,  Apostles,
not  in  name  merely,  hut  inspired
from  heaven,  to  receive  new  revela-
tions, as  the  ancient  Apostles  were.
Is  there  any  disagreement,  then,  be-
tween the  former  pattern  and  the
latter  day  pattern  ?  Did  the  ancient
Christian  Church  have  a  multitude
of  inspired  Prophets,  men  and  wo-
men, who  could  prophesy  concerning
future  events?  So  the  latter-day
Christian  Church,  organized  by  new
revelation,  has  an  abundance  of  Pro-
phets and  Prophetesses  to  whom  the
future  has  been  opened,  and  they
foretell  future  events;  hence  there
is  no  disagreement  between  the  an-
cient pattern  and  the  latter-day
pattern.  Did  the  Apostles  lay  on
hands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  did  the  Spirit  of  God
descend  from  the  heavens,  and  fall
upon  the  baptized  believers  through
the  laying  on  of  hands?  So  in  the
latter  days  have  the  same  blessings
been  given  among  all  the  nations  and
people  and  kindreds  and  tongues,
wherever  this  Gospel  has  been
preached-  No  difference,  then,  so
far  as  this  is  concerned.

Did  the  ancient  Christian  Church
have  a  great  variety  of  members
possessing  a  variety  of  spiritual  gifts  ?
So  does  the  latter-day  Christian
Chuch  believe  in  the  same  thing.
Did  any  in  the  Christian  Church  pre-
sume,  in  ancient  times,  to  take  anto
themselves  the  authority  of  the  mini-
stry, without  being  called  of  God  by
new  revelation  ?  Never,  no  never!
All  were  called  by  new  revelation  to
officiate  in  the  various  offices  of  the
Church,  alter  the  same  pattern  that
Aaron  was  called,  '*  No  man,"  says
Paul,  "taketh  this  honor  unto  him-
self, but  he  that  is  called  of  Cod  as  was
Aaron/' Everybody  knows,  from  the


history  given,  how  Aaron  was  called
by  new  revelation.  Have  any  among
all  the  peoples  and  nations  of  the
earth  authority  to  administer  bap-
tism? Yes.  Who  are  they?  Those
who  are  called  by  new  revelation,
and  none  else.  Have  any  authority
to  administer  the  Lord's  Supper
among  all  the  Christian  nations  of
the  earth  ?  Yes.  Who  are  they  ?
Those  to  whom  the  Lord  has  spoken,
whom  the  Lord  has  called  as  he
called  Aaron.  Have  any  Christian
denominations  who  deny  new  revela-
tion, authority  to  administer  this
sacred  ordinance?  Not  one  upon
the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  Are
ordinances,  administered  by  those
who  deny  new  revelation,  accepted
by  the  Most  High  ?  Not  one  of
them.  Why  ?  Because  God  does
not  sanction  that  which  is  not  ap-
pointed by  him,

Perhaps  some  may  inquire,  if  this
does  not  cut  off  the  Christian  Church
from  the  face  of  the  earth  f  I  an-
swer, it  does,  unless  God  has  a  Chris-
tian Church  with  revtlators  and  Pro-
phets in  it,  and  whose  officers  are
called  by  new  revelation.  Inquires
one — "  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  we
have  had  no  true  Christian  Church
on  the  earth  for  a  great  many  cen-
turies ?"  I  do  mean  to  say  this,  un-
less there  have  been  persons  autho-
rized, according  to  the  requirements
;  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  if  we  can
>  find  a  Church  anywhere  on  the  face
of  the  earth  that  has  Apostles  in  it,
and  revehitors,  and  inspired  men,  then
we  have  a  true  Christian  Church  ;
but  if  we  can  not  find  this,  then  we
have  no  such  Church.  If  we  can
find  a  church  that  has  the  gifts  and
the  signs  spoken  of  by  the  New
Testament,  we  can  find  a  true  Chris-
tian  Church ;  but  if  we  can*t  find
such,  we  have  no  reason  to  believe
that  there  is  such  a  Church  on  the
earth. "  But,"  says  one,  "  we  call


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCO V USES,


ourselves  Christians/*  That  is  a  very
easy  matter;  bat  calling  yourselves
Christians  or  Christ  inn  churches  does
not  make  you  such*  Inquires  one —
"Is  it  not  contrary  to  the  Scriptures
to  suppose  that  the  world  would  be
left  for  so  many  centuries  without  a
Christian  Church?"  No;  it  is  in
accordance  with  the  Scriptures,  for
they  foretell  the  Apostacy,  the  falling
away  and  the  darkness  that  should
reign  over  the  nations,  and  show  that
instead  of  having  true  teachers,  men
would  heap  to  themselves  teachers
without  authority  from  God,  unin-
spired men,  whose  ears  would  be
turned  away  from  the  truth  unto
fables.  This  great  apostacy  com-
menced about  the  close  of  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era,  and  it
has  been  waxing  worse  and  worse
from  then  until  now,  A  short  time
after  the  death  of  the  last  of  the
Apostles,  the  Christian  Church,  what
few  of  them  remained,  were  perse-
cuted from  mountain  to  mountain,
from  den  to  den,  from  one  cave  of  the
earth  to  another,  and  from  nation  to
nation  until  they  were  entirely  ex-
terminated and  rooted  out  of  the
earth.  Well,  what  was  left  ?  An
apostate  Christianity,  a  Christianity
without  revelators,  without  any  voice
of  God,  without  any  Prophets  to
unfold  the  future,  without  visions,
without  any  communications  from
the  heavens.  Apostacy  succeeded
the  Christian  Church  and  has  borne
rule  over  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;
and  these  Scriptures  have  been  ful-
filled ;  for  they  say  that  a  certain
power  should  arise,  and  make  war
with  the  Saints  and  overcome  them,
and  they  should  be  given  into  the
hands  of  that  power.

But  is  our  earth  always  to  be  left
without  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God,  and  without  Apostles,  Prophets,
or  a  voiee  from  the  heavens  ?  No.
John  saw  in  his  vision  on  Patmos


how  the  Gospel  should  again  be
preached  among  the  nations,  after
great  Babylon  should  arise,  after  she
should  persecute  the  Saints  and  de-
stroy (hem  from  the  earth,  and  present
her  golden  cup  full  of  filthiness  and
abominations  for  all  nations  to  drink
thereof.

After  he  had  seen  this,  he  saw  how
the  C*ir  stia  :  Church  should  again
return  to  the  earth.  In  the  fourteenth
chapter  of  Revelations  and  sixth
verse,  he  says — 41 1  saw  another  angel
flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  to  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth,  u  lo  every  nation,  and  kindred,
a  id  tongue,  and  people,  saying  w.th
a  load  voice,  "  Fear  God  and  give
glory  to  him,  for  the  hour  of  his
judgment  is  corned  And  another
angel  followed  this  one  that  had  the
Gospel,  saying — "Babylon  is  fallen,
is  fallen."  Whv  ?  Because  she
hath  made  all  nations  drink  of
the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  forni-
cation.

Immediately  after  tlrs  the  Son  of
Man  was  seen  by  John,  sitting  upon
a  white  cloud,  coming  in  his  glory
and  power  to  destroy  the  nations  of
the  earth.  Here,  then,  were  three
great  events  portrayed  by  the  ancient
Apostle  John,  which  should  take
place  just  prior  to  and  at  the  time
of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,
The  Gospel  is  to  be  brought  by  an
angel.  For  whom  ?  For  all  people.
Now,  if  there  had  been  any  people,
nation,  kindred,  or  tongue,  in  any  part
of  the  earth  that  had  the  Gospel,
and  had  the  authority  to  administer
its  ordinances,  t  lie  re  would  be  no
necessity  for  this  angel's  doming,  all
we  would  have  had  to  do,  would  be
to  hunt  up  that  people,  and  there,
among  them,  we  should  hare  found
Apostles,  Prophets,  revelators,  and
men  having  power  to  call  upon  God,
and  get  revelation ;  and  then  persona


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC.


45


would  be  called  by  ,ew  :e  vela  lion  to
the  ministry.  But  n  such  people
ex's  ed,  a i  1  lion:?,  when  the  angel


ft]

•

ed  !:j  rdl  4x?upb,  nations  i  ..I  Ungues,
arid  r  ho  whole  heavens.

Now  ir.e  LmtLivby  Saints  have


c


h>'.;>-pe.:ed  to  II  .'^  "n  the  uay  w\e
Lo*d  has  seat  this  &ngsl,  and  wheo
he ar;  again  c^ta"  li^hel  hs  Cha*ch.


an


;as  com:*  aaded  his  servants  to

* i


n  *


p  each  the  Gu^  al  to  ilzepeopU, with-
out ^nte  *,:;d  scrip,  io  orgaiaz^  Vi
pe,p?a  among  nil  natluos  I  L  cay
o  i  D.ii — "Gather  ul  fr  1  rM
t;  nations  nut-  ui;e  p  ace,1*
"Bu,"  s*|«  on  "what  Joes  this
mo:*.?  D:"l  Jio  anule  t  A  sties
an  *  Lie  ancient,  C')ri3i"au  Caa,ci*c?s
£nt"  e  ?u  I  ;i  ^wei  v  at  tb  i  sruie
.  ct  fines  uhic'.  I  y  l&fljK-  t  rre
taught  In  i^ics/  tlays;  yt*t  wle..  it

c<  'r*f*«  In  anirm ' lift  /rn.nt  i.pm**:  r


me  4 rear  Leftx  ral
p;  pies  !'  ^Ivatkpi  Qod  *  as  .aaed
in  liia  ;  la  *s  iii  t-.e  y  dispensa  Ion.
T/Noah  a  coai  ^and  was  £ivp:i  to


.1


2  t\fry  i


tax7. J  aa
*ch  a  :s

saiVatlon  0;  a.  w.c.s  n  wis  dry.
ALiirha was  Co  uiiaaded  tu  leave
h  s  cyjii  ry,  k*  \  AeJ  aa  !iv\;  a ;
tl  a'.,  wa^  a  command f  ,1  vet  ;  drf-


^  1  )i  c  a  ac^r  ld  0  u  ve  £it£n  in
the  ispe  scti:  o?  No&h-  In  the
UifS 3f  M.ses,  anot!  * on  n.anJ


ill  0


i


s .  3*  cut  f  'O  !lBt

e:  .acr _^aj  or  A  ..a;:  n:iT
wn# I *he  'a 7  >  vf  Ju-


zqs,  so  fhr  as  temporal  aalva&N  n  wan
concerned,  thj  berev^rs  wcru  pe>
netted  bp  remain  a  C  -:*th,  Epbosas,
v  ,rIa  la  a;*  7  in  a11*  t  \ibf*r-
;ver  the  Ch:'saftn  Charch  vvaa  or-
gfu'zed;  t-:c.e  wag  ru  0a.' cr'n^  "n

day.  But  :he  hat  "soojsatl^tt
16  ^  be  a  L^pcns&tlon  gavherlnr,
iOgc  .Lci  of  *J;  of  the  people  of  God,
1^  13  ^pokon  of  by  Paul  n  the  fhsi
chap :  of  I'"3  c;  :s-e  to  .hj  Epic*


slans,  w!iere  it  is  said  "  that,  in  the

dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times,
the  Lord  will  gather  together  in  one
al!  that  are  In  Christ,  whether  t:  ey
be  in  t!>.e  heavens  nr  up:);;  the  earth,
that  t'.cy  may  all  uv  gathered  lu

11

one.

Not  If  this  an>e!  who  brought
this  Gospel  from  the  heavens,  and
eo  .ijnandcd  his  Church  to  he  or-
giiniztrd,  had  left  out  this  gaihertag
together  in  one,  we  wonM  have  had
reason  to  snppose  him  to  l^e  an  im-
postor. Why  ?  Because  the  great
BBtoptttiai  feature  of  the  l.7itter-dny
diapensation  was  a  gathering  together
in  one  of  ail  thiagfi  in  Christ.  That
13  tlia  rep.aan  why  these  vrdes  are
aVcd  with  Inhabitants  of  diiTercnfe
na/ ins  a. id  to ogiles ;  t :  ey  have  eaid
in  diTeie.;t  t>arLs  of  t\e  e;;rth  the
-u  of  ihz  Gjspel  which  G  J  ha.i
1^  Li ... '  1  (  i^hi  ia  these  ^stter-df^a
by  aa  rn^e!;  they  heard  votcc  t
the  L  Td  ca,!*ag  apoo  the^ii  tg  flee
from  Babylon,  and  to  gather  together
In  one,  and  that  1st  why  they  are  here.
m|jls  agrees  with  the  tt^LtiK^y  of
John,  thftt,  after  Lie  angc*  came,
tue  Go?j>el  should  le  preacued  to  all
nations.  He  heard  a  srea^  v</co
froJaa  heavo-i,  say 'fig — lK  Come  1  lu  jf
hcr^  my  people,  lest  ye  lo  /ai  ^  kers
of  her  sins  and  j?ecei?e  6f  lier
plagues ;  f  r  her  sins  Lave  reached  to
iho  l:ea ven j,  a- J  God  hath  remom-
lered  her  iniquities."  T'jat  volce^
r  c  .  .ct,  vtns  nut  to  *  o  a  rUJ'i  ng!y

devised  fab^e,  got  up  by  a  certain
i:«:i:ber  of  ^iviaes  vr  theo'ogIaT;s,
according  to  their  o^u  wisdom;  it
was  to  be  a  voice  from  heave:  ,  a  j  ew
revalat-on,  co.n;nanding  the  peop  le
to  <'o  this.  Alou;  a  hundred  thuu-
sa.jd  of  the  Latter-day  Sal nis,  dwell-
ing in  th  s  u*ouuraiu  re0ion,  but  ding
np  toifVDS  and  cities  fo.  tome  f^ur  or
five  hnudred  miles  in  exten-,  have
heard  the  v:>ice  of  t.ie  Lord  from  the
heavens  and  have  gathered  out.  You


46


JOURNAL  OF  ULSCOUKSJiS.


have  heard  tlio  proclamation,  when
the  latter-day  kingdom  was  esta-
blished, to  take  your  lamps  and  tjo
forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom.  In-
stead of  staying  in  Europe,  Asia,
Africa,  Australia,  or  among  the  is-
lands of  the  sea,  yon  hare  been  com-
manded to  take  your  lamps  and  gather
out;  this  is  like  the  tish  net  that  was
cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  all
kinds,  both  good  and  bad,"  "  Do  yoa  '
mean  to  say,"  says  one,  4<  that  there
ore  some  gathered  among  you  who
are  bad  ?"  Yes ;  if  there  were  not ,
the  panible  of  our  Savior  would  not
be  fulfilled-  But  by  and  by  there
will  be  a  sorting  out,  and  the  bad  will
be  cast  away  unto  their  own  place,
while  the  good  will  be  gathered  into
vessels  and  be  saved.

This  will  be  fulfilling  the  words
of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  in  the  43rd
chapter — "  I  will  gather  them  from
the  east,  and  from  the  west,  I  will
say  to  the  north  give  up,  and  to  the
south  keep  not  back.  Bring  my  sons
from  afar,  and  my  daughters  from  j
the  ends  of  the  earth,  even  every
one  that  is  called  by  my  name." —
Says  one — **  Do  you  really  think  there
will  be  no  Christians  left  in  the
north,  nor  in  the  south,  nor  in
the  east,  nor  in  the  west,  but
that  every  one  that  is  called
by  the  name  of  the  Lord  will  be
gathered  in  one  ?'*  Yes,  that  is  what
we  believe,  and  that  is  one  of  the
peculiarities  of  what  the  world  call
**  Mormon  ism,"  we  do  not  believe
there  will  be  a  Christian  left  on  the
whole  lace  of  the  earth,  but  what  will
be  gathered  together.  "  Well,"  says
one,  "if  that  is  true,  if  Isaiah  told
the  truth  about  that,  and  the  day  is
at  hand  for  his  prophecy  to  be  ful-
filled, the  nations  will  truly  be  in  an
awful  dilemma,  when  every  Christian
is  gathered  out."  I  think  they  will,
I  think  you  draw  a  very  correct  con-
clusion*


Why  does  the  Lord  gather  them
out  ?  As  the  Prophet  Isaiah  has
said  in  another  place,  he  gathers
them  out  to  the  mountains,  and  they
say  one  to  another — 4i  Come,  let  us
go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord
and  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Ja-
cob." What  for  ?  "  That  he  may
teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  that  we
may  walk  in  his  paths."  It  seems,
then,  that  the  Lord  will  have  one
people  somewhere  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  up  in  some  mountainous  region,
who  are  going  to  teach  the  nations
his  ways,  and  how  to  walk  in  his  paths.

Now,  if  we  can  find  out  where  that
mountain  is  where  the  Lord  is  going
to  have  a  house  built,  and  to  which
the  nations  shall  gather,  it  will  be
well  for  us  to  open  our  eyes  and  to
see  whether  we  are  gathering  toge-
ther to  learn  the  ways  of  the  Loid.

Perhaps  you  may  enquire,  M  What
peculiarities  are  to  be  taught  in  the
mountains  different  from  what  are
taught  abroad  ?"  I  answer,  un-
doubtedly there  will  be  a  great  many;
and  among  the  rest  is  that  of  mar-
riage, and  now  we  come  to  the  words
of  our  text  You  may  ask,  "  Do
you  not  marry  here  in  the  moun-
tains, as  we  do  in  the  East  ?"  In
reply,  I  will  say,  in  the  first  place,  that
marriage  is  a  divine  ordinance,  as  you
see  by  the  words  of  my  text, —
"What  God  hath  joined  together,  let
not  man  put  asunder,"  Now  how
does  the  Lord  join  together  persons
in  marriage  ?  Does  he  ordain  a
justice  of  the  peace,  who  avows  him-
self to  be  an  infidel,  and  does  not
believe  in  God,  or  his  Son  Jesus
Christ,  or  in  the  Gos[»el  of  life  and
salvation  ?  Has  such  a  man  the
authority  of  God  to  join  the  sexes
together  in  marriage  ?  Suppose  that
such  pronounce  the  marriage  cere-
mony, what  has  the  Lord  to  do  with
it  ?  Does  the  Lord  inspire  the  infi-
del,— one  who  has  no  faith  nor  con-


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC


47


fidence  in  him,  to  join  together  the
sexes  in  marriage  ? I  think  not.

But  suppose  we  pass  by  the  infidel
who  holds  the  authority  of  the  civil
law  to  administer  the  ordinance  of
marriage,  are  there  not  many  per-
sons among  the  Christian  nations,
who  do  believe  in  God  and  his  Son
Jesus  Christ,  who  are  justices  of  the
peace,  and  who  have  authority,  under
the  civil  laws  of  the  country,  to
administer  the  ordinance  of  marriage?
I  answer — there  are  many  who  hold
this  authority  under  their  respective
governments ;  we  do  not  dispute  this.
The  infidel  I  was  speaking  of,  who
is  a  justice  of  the  peace,  has  autho-
rity by  the  laws  of  his  State  or  coun-
ty, to  administer  and  officiate  in  the
ceremony  of  marriage.  But  God
has  nothing  to  do  with  it ;  it  answers
the  ends  of  the  civil  law,  and  that  is
as  far  as  it  goes.

Now  suppose  you  take  those  per-
sons who  are  not  infidels,  but  who
profess  to  believe  in  God,  and  they
hold  authority,  under  their  various
governments,  to  pronounce  a  man
and  woman  husband  and  wife,  has  the
Lord  anything  to  do  with  that  ?
He  has  if  he  has  appointed  that
minister  or  justice  of  the  peace ;  if
he  has  giveu  him  a  revelation  autho-
rizing him  to  officiate  in  the  ordinance
of  marriage,  then  he  has  authority  to
do  it,  according  to  the  mind  and  will
of  God.  Biit  on  the  other  hand,  if
God  has  said  nothing  to  him,  he  has
no  divine  authority — and  if  he  is  a
sectarian  he  is  sure  to  reject  all  reve-
lation, unless  it  happens  to  be  in  the
Bible,  and  the  Bible  calls  no  man
by  name  in  the  llHh  century  to  offi-
ciate in  marriage,  neither  in  baptism
rtor  any  of  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel — his  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  does  not  give  him  divine  au-
thority to  administer  the  ordinance
of  marriage.  Nevertheless  the  in-
dividuals whom  he  marrios  are  mar-


ried according  to  the  laws  of  the
country,  and  the  marriage  is  legal  so
far  as  the  laws  of  the  country  are  con-
cerned ;  but  if  God  lias  not  spoken
to  tho.se  men,  if  he  has  not  given
them  revelation  authorizing  them  to
do  this,  their  ceremony,  so  far  as  God
is  concerned,  would  be  just  the  sumo
as  though  it  was  administered  by  a
heathen  priest,  just  the  same  as
though  it  was  ministered  by  an  infidel,
for  God  has  nothing  to  do  with  it*

Who  is  it  then,  that  the  Lord  joins
together  ?  It  is  those  who  are  mar-
ried by  one  authorized  of  God  to  offi-
ciate in  that  sacred  and  holy  ordinance,
and  the  Lord  could  not  do  this,  with-
out he  gave  new  revelation ;  hence
you  begin  to  understand  what  our
views  are  as  Latter-day  Saints  in  re-
gard to  the  nature  of  marriage.  In-
quires one — "Do  you  mean  to  say
that  there  have  been  no  marriages
legal  in  the  sight  of  God  for  nearly
seventeen  hundred  years  past,  among
all  the  nations?"  Yes,  that  is  what
we  say.  Those  old  and  middle-aged
men,  who  were  married  in  the  nations
he  fore  they  heard  the  sound  of  the
Gospel,  were  married  legally  according
to  the  laws  of  man,  and  their  mar-
riages will  stand  all  the  controversies
of  the  law,  and  their  children  are
legal  heirs  to  their  property;  but
they  are  not  joined  together  of  the
Lord.

Now  let  us  come  to  a  marriage
where  the  Lord  officiates.  It  is
indirectly  referred  to  here,  in  this
19th  chapter  of  Matthew — "  In  the
beginning  God  made  them  male  and
female."  And  who  officiated  in  the
first  great  marriage  ceremony  ?  It
was  the  Lord.  Probably,  if  there
had  been  any  man  on  the  earth  at
that  time  who  held  the  keys,  autho-
rity and  power,  the  Lord  would  not
have  come  and  officiated  directly;
but  inasmuch  as  the  marriage  was
between  the  first  pair  who  dwelt  upon


the  earih,  and  there  wus  nobody  else
to  officiate,  the  Lord  t  ok  it  in  hand
to  officiate  himself  j  and  after  he  had
f  rmed  the  woman  he  Lruught  her  to
the  man,  and  the  man  ^aid  —  u  This,
now,  is  bone  of  mv  bone  and  flesh
of  my  fit  fib,  therefore  she  shall  be
called  woman,  i  ecaose  she  was  taken
oat  of  man/'  f

PEow  let  ua  inquire  to  regard  to
the  jierpetu'iy  o  this  first  larriage,
for  al1  Christendom,  and  I  do  not
n. '.v  Lju  zd  iieiihe  .  io;*v


nave


il.e  ca.iQOS  idea  into  their  henfs  that
marriage  pertains  o^ly  to  L/*  little
speck  of  t"  c  ca!  cd  ua:  yre%  nt  l'fo,
an  i  i.  i&l  *y  in  !  y  ac  gr!m  n  user

I  eau.  willeo;.»e  ^lorg  an  I  pari  .;an
and  wl!u  a*ui*,1erf  anT  tiiat  :s  tue  end
uf.iiic  ..  an  age n  n. Sue*  h  the

t &  V..1J

ib.'in  I
1


m,  .1


rit.es


r  they  ma.  ry ; i a  tci  «  14
mt  jus  dees  of  :he  pe^ee,  t!te
sa  I'lin  sters  c
*i.e  judicial  au
v  Kvtts  suites, i.e  ritur  es,  mtions,
count  lies  and  empires  of  t  e  world
h.  e  officiated  in  t  ie  u«rria,.e  ce>  3
Dwnv— "i


if


J


it


an


1


*  tu  wre.


I  pronounce  yon  «  lis
as  be  e<iFe  uay  ^e,  "  utkai
giiti  ,lu  pari,"  Oi  indeed!  It/
a  vc.  *  ^  ri  t*^  „  e  carried,  is  h
gj&§  ?  Tfe njjgiit  t*ie  in  in-,:  Cjuise  of
a  day  or  ,*wu  afur  ^eing  .  ar  led,
then  the  contv  Gt  is  ran  out,  n  ■  mc  e
claim  after  ti.at,  :iCl  rdin-^  i  e*
dea. .  J3u.  now,  in  relai'oti  t  ti  ! ,
firs,  trrrria^*  Le^wcen  Adam  an  1
Sy.,  w  jo  -v^rj  tJuey  ?  vv  t  \at  :i„rta!
Vein  s.  Wti&fl  Does  G  d  mir  y
aui  ii  a"  he:  ?  Yc  .  e  have
no  a  count  >f  i  coming  uffi  la'  y  t  j
pugg  y  a  c  up  e  >f  topi  al  tetngs;  I
du  no*.  *au;W  t  at  we  ha  ^  any  si  ch


I thought  marriage  j  pertained  to

mortality,  and  until  death  should  u%
part,  and  that  was  the  end  of  it."
I  know  that  we  have  had  a  great
many  erroneous  ideas  about  baptism,
alo  the  laying  on  of  hands,  about
marriage,  an  J  about  a  great  many
things  all  of  which  cam^  in  conse-
quence of  the  darkness  that  is  spread
over  the  naiiuns,  since  ancient  Christ-
ian'ty  was  ruled  oat  of  fhe  e  rth,
Tw;>  immoral  beings — Adam  t:  ^
bi  'dcgioonv  Eve  the  br:de,  stood  up
t  get  ier,  and  V\0  Lonl  gave  t;  e  '  ride
ro  the  bridgr  om.  Vor  -i  w  *j;ig,  I
wonder?  If  he  had  le^rnejl  the
cer  oi  tij  of  these  Protects  i  and
Catho  c  len  ■?  -:i  ati  n^,  he  i
hare  said — *'I  pronounce*/  n
!  and  an*  wife  nnJl  death  ar  se-
parate yoii.**  No,  I  think  *»e  had
ncvei'  learned  that;  death  had  uo:
hen  GO"'  into  oar  orld;  the  for-
!  id  ien  Vuit  dn,»t  been  eaten  .hen;
tnei\-  \%  e  no  fallen  beings  t  en  o  i
the  r^arth,  :io  uiortality  yet  ::pon  the


irgut

1  ^  ■  ^  flf—


wo  i  r-


acc  uut  anj?wlje*e.  li  ,.  t.  ese  two
personages,  Adam  ;.nd  I^v were  ira-


iLcrt:;l


a


on


'  I  neve /  *v  .  ew


he  ^rc  ihat  immj.tal  be'ngs  wee  io
beconn-rcled  a^  aus"  vA^  and  wivis.


ace  oj  our  !a  r  creation,
tu  rtal  l»eings  wh  were  capal!e  of
rnd to  all  ages  of  eternlt/  were
u.  ited  fcogefcI*er  In  man-  age.

I  'ils,  tiien,  was  mar^age  ?or  et  r-
n"  y,  n  L  r  a  It. tie  speck  oftin  e^
u  t  for  a  Lundrel  :>r  a  thcus^nd
yca.r>#  not  for  a  :Mion  y^v.  =?  '  nt  I  -
a'!  eternity t  to  e  as  ;ura  le  i  i;s
nature,  .ction  and  effects  as  the  im-
ln  rtnl  1  eings  Lliemse:vm.  u  T^ut,^
inqt:-i es  ooe,  "  are  y  u  sure  t'  at
Awi-m  and  Ev^e  were  immorta'  ?"  I
am;  the  Scrip.-tres  inform  me  that
ly  ..-ansg:ess:un  ^in  rame  into  the
.vur  d,  and  death  by  sin*  If  sin  ha  I
not  c  m$  nto  t*»e  world  t  ere  wogM
have  been  no  death*  M  Bat,  !o  yoa
reallv  hink  i\\:\t  Ad;  m  and  Eve
would  iiave  been  alive  to-day  :u  es.
Ca i )  y  u  reflect  *n  your  minds  pona
period  in  the  Tuture,  w'  ?n  the\r  would
net  be  Immortal  when  Toy  would
be  overcome? Can  you  point  out


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC.


49


the  time  when  they  would  no  longer  ]
be  husband  and  wife  ?  Never  When
did  the  Lord  give  the  commandment
to  he  fruitful  and  multiply,  etc.  ?
He  gave  it  to  them  as  immoital  be-
ings.  S apposing  it  had  been  possible
for  Ad  im  and  Eve,  before  they  fell,
to  have  had  children,  what  kind  of
children  would  they  have  been  ?
Would  mortal  children  have  descend-
ed from  immortality  without  any
transgression  ?  Would  people  of
flesh  and  blood  and  bones  come  into
the  world  from  immortal  parents  ?
No,  We  must  suppose,  then,  that
when  God  said  to  Adam  and  Eve,
"  be  fruitful  and  multiply"  that  he
spoke  to  them  as  beiugs  that  were  not
fallen*

Perhaps  yon  may  enquire,  how
Ion?  would  they  have  multiplied  and
fulfil  It  d  thjs  commandment  ?  I  an*
swer,  as  long  as  eternity  endures.
Can  you  tell  how  long  that  will  be  ?
"  Do  you  mean  to  say  there  would
be  no  end  to  their  increase  ?  "  None
at  all  If  they  had  fulfilled  that  great
command  men  r,  and  had  multiplied
their  posterity,  their  children  would
have  been  immortal,  as  well  as  the
parents,  and  there  never  would  have
beeu  a  period  throughout  ail  the  end-
less ages  of  eternity  but  what  they
would  have  continued  to  increase
their  children — their  own  sons  and
daughters.

Perhaps  you  may  say — w  I  really
thought  that*  mankind  now,  over  the
face  of  the  earth,  were  fulfilling  that
great  first  commandment."  You  have
been  highly  mistaken;  we  have  not
one  of  us  fulfilled  it.  u  Do  you  mean
to  say  that  all  these  people  here  who
ha?e  been  married  and  have  multi-  I
plied  sous  and  daughters  throughout  !
all  this  Territory,  have  not  been  ful-
filling the  command  given  to  Adam?"
Not  one  pair  of  us,  we  were  not  in  a
condition  to  do  it;  we  shall  be  by
and  by,  however,  when  we  get  our

No-  4.


immortal  bod  les,  as  Adam  had  his.
But  while  we  are  here,  we  are  per-
mitted to  multiply — what  ?  Poor,
weak,  pusillanimous,  (alien,  sickly
bodies,  calculated  to  last  at  the  long-
est, seventy,  eighty,  or  a  hundred
years,  and  then  crumble  back  to
their  mother  earth.  Are  you  going
to  substitute  such  an  offspring  as  this
to  fulfill  the  great  first  commandment
that  was  given  to  immortal  man  ?
Oh  no,  the  Lord  will  accept  no  such
substitution  as  this*

But  how  can  we  fulfil  the  com-
mandment then  ?  I  will  tell  yon
how — be  married  for  all  eternity,  as
your  first  parents  were,  and  then,
when  you  come  up  in  the  morning  of
the  first  resurrection,  and  God  again
restores  to  you  your  bodies,  niale  and
female,  you  can  fulfil  that  command-
ment that  was  given  in  the  begin-
ning, to  the  first  immortal  p*iir.

Shall  we  continue  to  multiply
through  all  eternity?  Yes;  there
never  will  be  a  time  when  those  who
are  really  married  for  eternity  will
cease  to  multiply  their  species,  not
children  subject  to  pain,  disease  and
death,  but  children  of  immortality.
Millions  on  millions  will  be  multi-
plied, worlds  without  end,  by  each
pair  of  immortal  parents,  and  their
children  will  be  as  immortal  as  them*
selves*  Then  the  commandment  will
be  fulfilled.

Perhaps  some  of  you  may  siv, —
<£Y_ur  remarks  explain  a  certain
passage  we  have  often  read,  the  11th
chapter  of  Paul's  first  epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  and  11th  verse,  whicb
says — 'Neither  is  the  man  without
the  woman  in  the  Lord,  neither  is
the  woman  without  the  man  in  the
Lord.'  We  never  knew  what  that
meant  before,  but  it  seems  that  you
Latter-day  Saints  have  got  a  clue  to
it."  It  seems  then  that  if  we  wish
to  fulfil  the  object  of  our  creation,
and  if  we  are  truly  in  the  Lord,  then

Vol.  XVIII


50


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


wo  must  go  into  the  eternal  worlds
as  married,  not  for  time  j  not  by -some
justice  of  the  peace  that  is  an  infidel ;
not  by  a  man  that  has  no  right  to
join  us  together  under  the  revelation
and  authority  of  the  Most  High ;
hut  we  must  bo  married  fur  eternity
by  a  man  who  baa  the  right  to  speak,
being  commanded  of  the  Lord,  hold-
ing the  keys  of  authority  and  power,
who  can  say  to  the  man  and  woman,
I  pronounce  you  husband  and  wife
for  time  and  all  eternity.  Then  you
will  be  married  according  to  the  j
pattern  given  ;  then  you  will  have  a
claim  upon  each  other  after  death.
But  have  married  people,  in  the
nations,  a  claim  upon  each  other
after  death  ?  I  mean  those  who
have  not  been  man  ied  after  the  pat-
tern and  authority  of  heaven.  By
no  means.  Then  contracts  ate  made
only  for  a  little  space,  some  twenty,
thirty,  fifty  or  seventy  years,  as  the
case  may  be,  then  death  comes  along
and  the  contract  runs  out ;  and  when
you  come  up  in  the  resurrection  who
are  you  ?  Have  you  any  wife  there  ?
Oh,  no.  W^y  not  ?  Because  you
were  not  sealed  or  married,  to  each
other  by  divine  authority,  that  is  the
reason.  What  position  will  yon  oc-
cupy ?  If  you  have  been  pretty
good  people  and  have  kept  the  com-
mandments of  God  as  far  as  you
understood  them,  and  have  done  well
in  many  respects,  you  may  have  the
opportunity  of  becoming  angels ;  but
there  is  quite  a  difference  between
angels  and  those  who  have  the  privi-
lege of  endless  increase,  and  of  being
crowned  as  kings  and  priests  in  the
eternal  worlds.  Whom  do  you  sup-
pose you  will  reign  over  ?  Will  you
get  somebody  else  to  multiply  and
spread  forth  their  offspring,  and  then
give  that  offspring  to  you  ?  Will
you  go  to  your  neighbors  and  say, —
i£  Come,  you  were  married  for  eternity
when  you  were  back  in  yonder  world,


■

and  you  have  come  forth,  having  a
claim  to  your  wife  or  wives  in  the
morning  of  the  resurrection,  I  did
not  attend  to  that  matter  while  there,
and  I  was  not  married  there  accord-
ing to  the  first  pattern  that  was  given
in  the  Bible,  and  inasmuch  as  I
failed  in  doing  this  will  you,  neigh-
bor, give  me  part  of  your  children?
I  should  like  to  be  a  king,  and
have  some  subjects  to  reign  over,
will  you  part  with  some  of  your  chil-
dren ?"  "Oh  no,"  says  the  neighbor,
"  if  you  neglected,  in  yonder  world,
the  divine  ordinances  pertaining  to
the  probation,  you  must  bear  the
lo>s,  I  cannot  spare  any  of  my  chil-
dren* They  belong  to  mc ;  they  are
under  my  patriarchal  government,
they  will  be  my  kingdom  and  I  shall
reign  over  my  own  offspring  for  ever
and  ever."

What  will  this  poor  man  do  then  ?
Why  he  will  have  to  be  an  old  bache-
lor, if  we  may  use  the  expression,
and  continue  that  way  to  all  agea  of
eternity.  He  will  do  for  a  servant,
and  they  will  have  a  great  many
servants  there,  A  man  of  God  baa
a  great  kingdom,  and  his  kingdom
spreads  forth,  and  his  subjects  mul-
tiply like  the  stars  of  heaven,  or  the
sands  upon  the  seashore,  and  he  will
naturally  want  some  who  have  bodies
of  flesh  and  bones  to  go  and  minister
for  certain  purposes ;  and  those  who
have  deprived  themselves  of  the
benefits  of  marriage  for  eternity,  will
do  first-rate  for  that,  if  they  have
been  righteous  enough  to  get  into  a
position  where  angels  are-
There  were  some  in  the  days  of
our  Savior  righteous  enough  for  that,
but  through  the  apostacy  that  had
prevailed  some  three  centuries  before
he  came,  they  had  lost  the  authority
of  obtaining  this  higher  glory,  and
when  Jesus  spake  to  them  about  the
resurrection  of  the  dead,  he  said —
u  In  the  resurrection  they  neither


IMMEDIATE  REVELATION,  ETC.


51


marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage/'
To  whom  was  he  talking  ?  Not  to
the  righteous,  but  to  some  of  the
members  of  the  pious  denominations
that  happened  to  exist  in  that  day,
that  had  in  some  measure  lost  the
spirit  of  the  Lord.  Such  never
having  been  married  for  eternity  in
this  world  could  rise  no  higher  than
angels  in  the  next  world ;  and  if  they
became  righteous  enough  to  become
celestial  angels,  they  would  be  ser-
vants for  ever.  Set  van  ts  to  whom  t1
Those  that  are  worthy  to  receive  a
kingdom  and  a  glory,  that  have  at-
tended to  their  ordinances  and  to  the
commandments  of  God,  and  have
been  led  by  him  in  all  things  pertain-
ing to  marriage  as  well  as  other
things.

Let  us  now  come  to  another  item
that  grows  out  of  marriage  for  eter-
nity. For  instance,  there  are  a  great
many  in  this  congregation  who  were
married  by  the  Gentile  laws,  by  jus-
tices of  the  peace  and  various  other
officers,  in  England,  Scotland,  Wales,
Denmark,  and  in  the  various  nations
of  Christendom.  They  come  up  here
with  their  wives,  many  of  them  just
as  good  people  as  can  be  found  any-
where on  the  earth.  Were  they  mar-
ried by  divine  ordinances  ?  Did
God  join  them  together  ?  No.  Are
they,  therefore,  to  be  condemned  ?
No.  Whj*  not  ?  Bee i use  God  did
not  send  the  word  to  them.  When
the  word  goes  forth  from  the  Lord
Almighty  to  a  people,  and  light
comes  into  a  nation  and  among  a
people,  then  comes  condemnation  if
that  light  is  rejected,  but  not  till
then.

The  word  of  the  Lord  told  you  to
gather  up  here.  What  for?  That
you  might,  among  other  things,  be
married  according  to  the  law  ot  God.
I  **m  endeavoring  to  tell  you  snme
of  our  peculiarities.  We  do  believe
that  every  man  who  gathers  up  with


the  Saints,  whether  married  by  the
Gentile  law  or  not,  should  be  mar-
ried by  one  holding  divine  authority
to  officiate,  and  thus  have  the  ordi-
nance, the  ministration  sealed  on
earth  that  it  may  be  sealed  in  the
heavens ;  then  it  will  stand ;  but
everything  that  is  not  done  by  the
authority  of  God  will  not  stand,  but
will  be  shaken  ;  and  when  the  day  of
the  resurrection  shall  come,  it  will
only  be  that  which  God  has  appointed
that  will  endure  the  test.  In  that
day,  when  they  come  up  out  of  their
graves,  there  will  be  no  chance  for
people  to  be  married,  any  more  than
there  will  be  for  them  to  be  baptized.
If  people  do  not  get  baptized  here
in  this  life,  they  will  have  no  chauce
to  be  baptized  there.  And  Jesus
says}  that  if  you  are  not  born  of  the
water  and  of  the  spirit,  yon  ran  not
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
that  is,  into  the  highest  kingdom,  the
highest  glory,  the  third  heaven;  you
can  not  enter  there,  consequently  you
must  not  put  off  baptism  until  the
resurrection  day,  and  say  you  will
atteud  to  it  then,  for  that  will  be  too
late  fur  baptism,  and  also  for  mar-
riage. _  *

Here  is  another  question.  A  great
many  of  those  good  people  abroad,
who,  with  their  ancestors,  back  for
seventeen  hundred  years,  while  God
had  no  authority  or  Church  on  the
earth ,  have  gone  down  to  their  graves,
without  knowing  anything  about  the
pattern  of  marriage  as  recorded  here
in  the  Bible,  which  is  eternal  in  its
nature.  What  are  you  going  to  do
with  them  ?  I  answer,  it  would  look
rather  hard  if  there  was  no  provision
made  for  them,  would  it  not  ?  There
are  about  seventeen  centuries  or  gen-
eratiuns,  and  if  we  compute  a  thou-
sand million  of  people  for  every
generation,  coming  upon  and  passing
away  from  the  earth,  we  shall  have
about  fifty  thousand  million  altoere-


52  JOURNAL  OF

ther,  wbo  have  gone  down  to  their
graves  without  baptism,  without  the
administration  of  the  ■  ordinances, -
without  divine  authority  to  admin-
ister in  their  marriages !  Do  you
suppose  that  the  Lord  has  made  no
provision  for  all  these  things  1  All
must  have  a  chance.  There  is  not
an  individual  that  ever  lived  upon
the  earth,  from  the  days  of  Adam
down  to  this  time,  whether  it  was
among  the  heathen  or  savages,  who
never  heard  of  Jesus  or  of  the  true
God,  and  who  went  down  to  his  grave
in  total  ignorance;  there  never  was
a  man  or  woman  on  the  face  of  the
globe,  but  what  will  have  an  oppor-
tunity, either  in  this  life  or  in  the
life  to  come,  to  obey  and  enjoy  the
benefits  of  the  Gospel  of  Salvation,

"  But  did  you  not  say  that  there
was  no  opportunity  for  them  to  at-
tend to  these  ordinances  in  the  life
to  come  ?"  I  did.  H  Then  why  did  j
you  say,  that  there  will  be  an  oppor-
tunity for  them  ?"  There  is  quite
a  difference  between  having  an  op-
portunity, and  attending  to  the  ordi-
nances. You  can  not  attend  to  the
latter  in  the  life  to  come.  Parties
who  have  died  in  this  generation
or  in  the  generations  passed,  without
having  an  opportunity  to  be  baptized
by  a  man  holding  authority,  will
have  an  opportunity  of  hearing  the
Gospel  in  the  life  to  come ;  but  they
can  not  attend  personally  to  the
ordinances  thereof.  Why  ?  Be-
cause God  has  ordained  that  men,
here  in  the  flesh,  shall  he  baptized
in  this  life  \  or,  if  they  die  without
a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  and  its
ordinances,  that  their  friends  in  the
flesh,  in  the  day  of  his  power,  when
he  brings  forth  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, shall  officiate  for  them,  and  in
their  behalf.  This  is  another  pecu-
liarity of  the  doctrine  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints — baptism  for  the  dead.

You  see  a  Temple  building  here,


DISCOURSES,

east  of  this  tabernacle,  and  a  great
many  inquiries  are  made  respecting
the  nature  of  this  building.  Some
suppose  that  we  are  going  to  hold
meetings  in  it,  and  preach  to  the
people ;  but  no,  that  pertains  to  the
tabernacle-  God  has  pointed  out
the  u&es  of  a  Temple  by  new  revela-
tion, the  same  as  he  pointed  out  the
object  of  a  tabernacle  in  the  days  of
Moses,  and  the  object  of  the  Temple
of  the  Lord  in  the  days  of  Solomon;
and  among  those  objects  he  has  told
us  thut  in  the  basement  of  the  Tem-
ple there  should  bo  a  baptismal  .font.
What  for  ?  That  those  who  are
living  here  on  the  earth  may  be  bap-
'  tiaed  for  and  fa  behalf  of  those  who  die
without  a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel.

Does  that  reach  back  to  all  gener-
ations who  have  died  in  ignorance  ?
Yes.  To  all  our  ancestors  ?  Yes ;
it  reaches  back  to  our  fathers,  our
grandfathers  and  their  progenitors
away  back  to  ancient  days,  when  the
Priesthood  was  upon  the  earth-
Baptism  for  the  dead  !  The  same
thing  was  attended  \o  in  ancient
timis,  sa  that  we  have  not  got  a  new
pattern,  it  is  the  old  pattern  renewed.
Pitul  says,  in  the  15th  chapter  of  the
first  ot  Corinthians  —  "  Else  what
shall  they  do  who  are  baptized  for  the
dead  ?  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all,
why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the
dead  ?  '*  Sure  enough  !  it  was  a
strong  argument  to  prove  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead,  that  the  people
who  belonged  to  the  ancient  Christiau
Churches  had  the  privilege  of  going
!  an  i  being  baptized  for  those  who
,  had  died  before  the  Gospel  came
among  them.

Now  do  you  not  see  that  we  are
not  so  uncharitable  as  a  great  many
would  suppose  ?  Instead  of  sending
all  the  generations  who  lived  in  for-
mer ages  to  hell,  because  they  did  not
happen  to  bear  the  Gospel,  and  be-
I  cause  there  was  no  Christian  Church


upon  the  earth ;  I  say  that,  instead
of  sending  them  all  to  an  endless  hell,
God  has  made  provisions  that  the
living  may  act  for  and  in  behalf  of
the  dead.  The  ordinances  thus  at-
tended to  here  on  the  earth  in  behalf
of  the  dead,  will  be  recorded  and
sealed  here  by  proper  authority  ;  and
what  is  thus  recorded  and  sealed
here  will  be  recorded  and  sealed  in
the  heavens  in  behalf  of  those  indi-
Tiduals ;  and  if  those  spirits  who  are
in  prison  and  in  the  eternal  worlds
*  will  repent  when  the  Gospel  is  taken
to  them,  they  can  have  the  benefit  of
the  ordinances  administered  for  and
in  their  behalf  here,  and  they  will
have  part  in  the  first  resurrection.

Then  again,  if  baptism  for  the
dead  is  true,  every  other  divine  ordi-
nance is  equally  true  and  necessary
for  the  dead,  for  one  is  just  as  con-
sistent as  the  other.  The  laying  on
of  hands  in  confirmation  upon  a
person  that  is  living  here  in  the  flesh,
for  and  in  behalf  of  those  who  are  in
their  graves,  is  just  as  consistent  as
baptism  for  the  dead.

Again,  if  our  fathers  and  mothers,
grandfathers  and  grandmothers,  have
died  without  being  married  by  divine
authority,  the  same  authority  that
would  cause  a  people  to  act  for  the
dead  in  relation  to  baptism,  would
cause  them  to  act  for  and  in  behrtlf
of  the  dead  in  relation  to  their  mar-
riage ceremonies  too.  Such  a  plan
gives  them  all  a  chance*  For  there
are  no  marrying,  nor  baptisms,  nor
confirmations,  in  and  after  the  res-
urrection. The  resurrected  dead  can
do  none  of  these  things;  but  if  it  is
done  here  for  them,  and  they  will
accept  of  it,  it  will  be  acknowledged
in  the  heavens,  Hence,  here  is  ano-
ther peculiarity  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  pertaining  to  the  Temple,  the
house  of  the  Lord  to  be  built  in  the
tops  of  the  mountains  in  the  latter
days,  as  Isaiah  says  in  the  second


chapter — "Many  people  shall  say,
Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain
of  the  Lord,  to  the  hoose  of  the  God
of  Jacob,  that  he  may  teach  ns  of  his
ways,  that  we  may  walk  in  his  paths/'
A  Temp!e,  therefore,  instead  of  being
a  place  for  teaching  and  preaching,  is
a  place  for  the  administration  of  holy
ordinances*

Another  question,  A  great  many
have  wondered  why  so  many  people
in  the  eastern,  southern  and  middle
States  have  been  stirred  up  for  a

j  number  of  years  p*st  in  searching  out

i  their  ancestors.  Now  the  Lord  docs
a  great  many  things  unknown  to  the
people,  and  this  is  one  of  them.  The
people  do  not  know  why  they  are
interested  in  their  ancestry,  hut  they*
are  wrought  upon  by  some  invisible
operation,  and  they  feel  very  anxious
to  know  about  their  progenitors,  I
think  that  some  four  hundred  differ-
ent families  have  already  got  extended
family  records,  tracing  their  ancestry
back  from  generation  to  generation
to  the  first  settlements  of  the  New
England  States,  and  then  back  into
Old  England  if  it  is  possible,  to  make

'  out  the  connection.  Do  they  know
what  they  are  doing  this  for  Y  No;
they  feel  wrought  upon,  that  is  all
they  know  about  it.  Now  I  will  tell
you  why  it  is,  for  a  great  many  of
the  people  in  this  congregation,  and
many  who  are  scattered  through  the
villages,  towns  and  settle m ents in  this
Territory,  emigrated  from  the  Nutv
England  States,  and  they  had  fathers
and  mothers,  grandfathers  and  grand-
mothers, and  ancestors,  now  in  their
graves,  who  were  just  as  pure,  up-
right, virtuous  and  honest  in  their
feelings  as  we  their  children  are.
Now  we  are  going  to  act  tor  them.
We  have  not  time  to  search  up  all
these  genealogies,  but  all  we  have  to
do  is  to  go  and  get  the  books  which
the  Lord  has  wrought  upon  them  to

!  get  up,  containing  the  names  of  huii-


54  JOURNAL  OF

drcds  and  thousands  of  the  dead,  and
we  will  receive  baptism,  confirmation
and  marriage  for  eternity,  and  all  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel  for  them,
that  they,  if  they  will  receive  what  is
done  for  them,  may  come  forth  in  the
resurrection,  and  inherit  all  that  their
children  will  inherit  Why  ?  Be-
cause  they  were  worthy  of  it.  Our
pilgrim  fathers  were  a  good  people,
just  as  worthy  as  we  are,  but  un-
fortunately they  did  not  happen  to  !
live  in  the  time  thafc  God  has  set  for
establishing  his  kingdom  on  the
erirth,  and  sending  his  angels  from
the  heavens.  1
Thus  you  see  that  this  Gospel*
reaches  after  the  dead  as  well  as  the
living.  Our  Savior  set  the  example
in  regard  to  this  matter,  for  we  are
told  that  when  bis  body  lay  in  the
tomb,  his  spirit  was  not  idle  \  and
instead  of  going  off  into  the  heavens
and  Bitting  down  there  for  three  days
and  three  nights  in  perfect  idleness,
he  had  something  to  do,  and  while
his  body  lay  in  the  tomb,  his  spirit
went  and  opened  the  prison  doors  in
which  were  confined  those  who  were
drowned  in  the  flood.  What !  Were
they  in  prison  ?  Yes.  Did  Jesus
truly  visit  them  ?  Yes.  Did  he
preach  to  them?  Yes.  Where
have  we  this  recorded  ?  In  Peter's
declaration.  He  says  that,  "Jesus
was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but
quickened  in  the  spirit,  by  which  he  ,
also  went  and  preached  to  the  spirits
which  were  in  prison,  which  some-
time were  disobedient  when  once  the
longs u Bering  of  God  waited  in  the
days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  pre-
paring/' Oh  indeed  j  He  went  to
those  old  antediluvians  then,  that  had
not  received  their  resurrection,  and
preached  to  them.  What  did  he
preach  to  them  ?  The  following
verses  tell  us  what  he  preached.
What  would  you  think  he  preached  ?
Says  one — "If  he  followed  the  ex-


DISCOURSES*

amples  of  our  sectarian  preachers,  he
would  go  and  tell  them  that  their
doom  was  irrevocably  fixed,  \h-\t  they
were  cast  down  to  prison,  never  to  be
recovered  j  that  as  the  tree  falls  so  it
lies,  and  that  there  was  no  hope  in
their  case."  Well,  that  was  not  the
kind  of  preachjng  that  Jesus  did  to
the  antediluvian  spirits,  iL  For,  for
this  cause,"  says  Peter,  46  was  the
Gospel  preached  to  them  that  are
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  ac-
cording to  men  in  the  flesh,  and  live
according  to  God  in  the  spirit."
Though  they  were  in  the  spirit  world,
without  any  bodies,  yet  they  had  the
privilege  of  hearing  the  same  Gospel
that  Jesus  preached  to  those  here  in
the  flesh.  They  could  repent,  for
that  is  an  wet  of  the  mind ;  they
could  believe  in  Jesus,  for  that  is  also
an  net  of  the  mind;  but  the  spirits
could  not  be  baptized,  for  that  is  an
act  of  the  body,  it  is  something  that
pertains  to  this  life.  Jesus  could
preach  repentance  to  them,  he  could
preach  the  same  Gospel  to  those
antediluvians  that  he  had  preached
to  men  in  the  flesh,  and  they  could
then  be  judged  according  to  men  in
the  flesh,  and  live  according  to  God
in  the  spirit.  Men  in  the  flesh  could
be  baptized  for  them,  and  they  could
come  forth  and  receive  all  the  bles-
sings of  those  who  received  the  Gos-
pel  in  the  flesh.

There  are  a  few  more  remarks
which  I  would  like  to  make,  if  time
will  permit,  upon  a  subject  which
grows  out  of  this  eternal  marriage  or
union  between  the  male  and  the
female.  For  instance,  here  is  a  good
young  man  who  courts  up  a  wife  in
the  kingdom  of  God.  He  says  to
her,  "  Let  us  go  and  be  married  for
time  and  all  eternity,  according  to
the  requirements  of  heaven."  Very
well;  they  are  agreed  in  it;  they
attend  to  the  ordinance,  and  it  is
sealed  upon  their  heads  and  recorded


for  their  benefit.  We  will  say  thai,  I
in  the  course  of  two  or  three  months  1
after  this  marriage,  some  accident
befals  the  wife  and  she  dies.  They  i
loved  each  other  and  were  married
for  all  eternity,  and  he  mourns  over
the  fact  that  in  his  youth,  in  the  very  !
prime  of  his  manhood,  he  is  left  alone,
a  widower,  Now  is  it  right  for  him
to  marry  another  wife  after  having
been  married  to  one  for  time  and  for
all  eternity?  Is  it  right  for  him
again  to  receive  a  young  lady  for  a
wite  ?  "Oh,  yes/1  you  answer,  "it
is  perfectly  right,  because  that  would
not  be  living  with  two  on  the  earth
at  the  same  time/*  Very  well,  he
goes  and  marries  again;  and  now
the  question  arises,  suppose  that  they
only  marry  for  time,  or  until  death
shall  part  them — we  will  suppose
this,  because  the  man  already  has  a
wife  on  the  other  side  of  the  vail —
what  is  to  become  of  the  second  wife
in  the  morning  of  the  resurrection  ?
Can  you  answer  that  question  ?  If
be  only  marries  her  for  time,  she  has
no  husband  when  the  resurrection
comes.  Perhaps  she  is  just  as  good
a  woman  as  the  wife  the  man  married
first  for  all  eternity.  What  are  you
going  to  do  with  her?  Shall  she  be
left  in  a  condition  where  she  can  have
no  posterity,  no  endless  increase,  no
kingdom  in  connection  with  a  hus-
band, and  no  husband  ?  Shall  she
he  left  throughout  all  the  future  ages
of  eternity  without  any  such  privi-
lege, while  the  first  wife,  no  better
than  she  is,  is  married  tor  all  eternity,
and  inherits  all  the  blessings  arising
therefrom  ?  Would  not  there  be
partiality  in  thi=s  ?  There  certainly
would.  How  are  you  going  to
remedy  this  ?  We  answer,  when  this
widower  takes  this  second  wife,  let
her  also  be  married  tu  him  for  time
and  all  eternity,  the  same  as  the  first;
then,  by  and  by,  when  the  resur-
rection comes, there  come  up  the


two  women.  What  will  yon  do  then?
This  introduces  plurality  into  the
next  life,  does  it  not  ?  Polygamists
in  the  next  woild?  It  certainly
does ;  and  these  two  women,  both
having  received  this  man  as  their
husband  for  all  eternity,  one  of  them
will  now  be  in  just  as  good  a  condi-
tion as  the  othrr.

Let  this  principle  he  extended.
There  are  some  cases  in  life  where
two  women  might  die,  and  a  man  be
still  left  in  his  young  days  without  a
wife,  and  he  marries  a  third  and  per-
haps a  fourth ;  in  the  resurrection
they  are  contemporaneously  his  wives.
Plurality,  therefore,  would  be  per-
fectly consistent  in  the  world  to
come,  but,  "  Ob,"  says  a  sectarian,"
"  how  awful  it  is  in  this  world  ! "

Thus  you  see  that  the  very  moment
we  admit  the  eternity  of  marriage,
the  very  moment  that  we  admit
that  Adam  and  Eve  were  immortal
beings,  when  they  were  married,  and
we  undertake  to  follow  that  pattern,
plurality  necessarily  comes  along;
either  marriage  has  no  bearing  upon
eternity,  and  no  bearing  upon  im-
mortality and  immortal  beings,  or
else  plurality  of  wives  necessarily
must  exist  in  eternity.

Says  one  — u  Turn  it  about  the
other  way,  then  we  shall  have  plu-
rality of  husbands."  Let  me  say  to
the  congregation  that  the  object  of
marriage  is  to  fulfill  the  command-
ment  which  God  gave  to  immortal
beings.  Could  a  woman  multiply
faster  by  having  two  husbands  ?
Everybody  knows  that  in  this  respect
there  is  a  ditference  between  the
male  and  the  female*  In  this  life,
at  any  rate,  if  one  woman  had  two
husbands,  instead  of  making  her
more  fruitful,  the  probability  is  that
it  would  prevent  her  raising  any
offspring  at  all;  utid  if  she  did,  how
would  the  father  be  known  ?  And
hence,  God  haa  strictly  forbidden,  iu


56  JOURNAL  OF

this  Bible,  plurality  of  husbands,  and
proclaimed  against  it  in  his  law.

I  should  be  glad  to  touch  upon  a
great  many  other  points,  in  relation
to  plurality,  but  time  will  not  permit.
You  have  heard  partially  explained
gome  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  faith
of  the  people  called  Latter-day  Saints.
Now  what  is  necessary  in  regard  to
polygamists  ?  Our  enemies  say,
**  There  should  be  a  law  parsed  that
all  polygamists  should  be  shut  up  in
prison  from  tire  to  ten  years,  as  the
case  may  be,  and  pay  a  heavy  fine/'
Very  well ;  this  is  the  voice  of  the
people.  But  does  the  voice  of  the
people  rule  in  a  manner  that  is  incon-
sist<  nt  with  the  Constitution  of  our
country,  by  taking  away  the  rights
of  the  minority  ?  Is  it  the  order  of
our  government  that  the  minority
must  have  their  rights  wrenched  from
them  because  the  majority  decide
against  them  ?  Let  me  ask,  sup-
pose the  majority  of  the  people
should  decide  against  infant  spriuk-
ling,  many  look  upon  that  with  the
utmost  horror,  and  it  is  onlj  a  small
minority  in  our  nation  that  believe
in  that  awful  doctrine,  suppose  the
majority  should  take  it  into  their
heads  that  those  who  practise  infant
sprinkling  should  be  imprisoned,
they  have  the  same  right  to  do  that
as  to  do  the  other  thing  which  I
have  named.

Again,  there  is  a  certain  class  of
people,  and  they  are  far  in  the  minor-
ity in  this  great  nation,  who  believe
in  dancing  on  the  Sabbath-day.  I
allude  to  the  Shaking  Quakers.
Would  it  be  right  to  pass  a  law
against  this  small  minority,  and  say
they  shall  be  imprisoned,  because
the  voice  of  the  people  in  general
happens  to  denounce  their  practice
of  dancing  as  a  crime  ?  u  But  then/*
says  one,  "  polygamy  is  a  crime,"
.Who  told  you  m  ?  Does  the  Bible
tell  you  so  ? Oh  no,  neither  the  Old


DISCOURSES.

nor  the  New  Testament ;  no  Prophet,
no  revelator,  no  Apostle,  do  man  of
God,  nor  Jesus  himself,  nor  any  angel
ever  denounced  it  as  a  crime,  but
on  the  contrary  they  advocated  itf
and  the  Lord  hi  in  self  administered
in  this  divine  ordinance.  He  gave  to
Jacob  his  four  wives  and  children,  so
Jacob  tells  us  in  Genesis.

Then  we  might  continue  and  show
that  every  Christian  denomination
in  the  United  States  possesses  pecu-
liarities which  the  majority  do  not
believe  in,  and  which  they  are  con-
vinced should  be  denounced  by  the
civil  law  as  criminal,  and  that  those
who  practice  such  peculiarities  ought
to  be  imprisoned  for  duing  so.  But
because  the  majority  of  people  con-
demn a  principle,  that  is  no  proof
that  it  is  a  crime.  Supposing  that
the  great  majority  of  the  people  con-
demned the  principle  of  baptism  by
immersion,  would  it  be  right  to  puss
laws  punishing  those  who  practice  it  ?
No,  the  Constitution  of  our  country
was  framed  to  protect  the  people  in
every  item  of  doctrine  that  they
might  glean  out  of  this  Bible,  and
instead  of  condemning  these  doctriues
as  criminal,  all  the  States  and  all  the
Territories  ought  to  leave  Bible  prin-
ciples as  matters  of  conscience  j
especially  the  great  principle  of  mar-
riage should  be  left  open  and  free  to
all,  either  to  marry  one  wife,  or  two
or  three,  or  a  dozen,  as  the  case  may
be,  only  making  laws  in  relation  to
criminal  abuses  of  the  marital  state,
and  in  regard  to  property,  how  it
should  descend  to  the  children,  etc.
But  the  very  moment  that  they  pass
laws  that  are  prescriptive  and  restric-
I  tive  in  their  nature,  condemning
principles  that  are  not  condemned  in
the  Bible,  taking  away  the  privileges
of  the  people  to  belie  re  that  which
is  contained  in  the  word  of  God,  re-
ligious liberty  is  in  danger,  and  there
is  no  telling  where  that  infringement


RESURRECTION  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


57


will  lead  to.  By  and  by  they  may
have  a  blending  of  Church  and  State ;
and  no  one  must  believe  anything,
unless  it  be  doctrines  or  creeds  got
up  by  the  State,  or  by  Congress,  or
by  some  legislative  body ;  and  every-
body must  bow  to  that,  or  be  fined,  |


or  imprisoned,  or  be  burned,  butcher-
ed, or  hung.

That  our  great  and  free  country
may  never  be  afflicted  with  such  a
species  of  despotism,  is  my  most
earnest  prayer.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  ix  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  July  25,  1875.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans*)

RESURRECTION OF THE  SAINTS— SECOND ADVENT OF THE  MESSIAH
PREPARATORY WORK  —  RETURN OF THE JEWS TO  JERUSALEM
GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS  TO  ZIUN — CHRIST'S  PERSONAL  REIGN.


I  will  read  a  few  verses  in  the
latter  part  of  tbQ  fourth  and  in  the
fore  part  of  the  fifth  chapters  of
Paul's  first  epistle  to  the  T hessa Io-
nian s.  [The  speaker  read  from  the
13th  verse  of  the  ith  chapter,  to  the
6th  verse  of  the  5  th,  both  iuclusive.]

I  have  read  these  few  passages  of
Scripture  relating  to  the  great  day
of  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  according
as  it  is  predicted  by  the  month  of
the  ancient  Apostle,  and  also  con-
cerning  a  very  important  event  which
will  then  happen,  namely,  the  resur-
rection of  the  righteous  dead — those
who  are  in  Christ ;  and  also  another
event  closely  connected  with  the
resurrection — namely,  the  ascension
of  the  Saints  then  living  upon  the
earth,  to  meet  the  Lord  at  his  com-
ing. These  events  are  looked  for  by
most  of  the  Christian  world,  indeed


we  may  say  that  all  the  Christian
world,  who  do  not  spiritualize  the
Scriptures,  are  looking  for  events
similar  to  those  here  described.  They
believe,  according  to  the  New  Testa-
ment, that  there  is  a  time  fixed  in
the  mind  of  the  Almighty,  when  the
heavens  shall  be  parted  as  a  scroll
is  parted  when  it  is  rolled  up,  and
that  the  heavens,  invisible  to  us  now,
will  be  unveiled  before  the  eyes  of
all  people;  that  the  armies  of  hea-
ven, the  spirits  of  just  men  made
perfect,  through  obedience  to  the
law  of  God,  will  bo  revealed  ;  that
the  angels  who  stand  in  authority  in
the  presence  of  God  and  do  his  bid-
ding, will  also  be  numbered  with
that  great  company  which  will  be
revealed  from  the  heavens.  We  also
believe,  and  so  do  the  inhabitants  ot
the  Christian  world  at  large,  thit


58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


there  will  be  an  audible  sound  of  a
trump — the  trump  of  the  archangel
—in  the  heavens  at  the  time  this
grand  scenery  is  opened  to  mankind ;
that  at  the  sound  of  that  trumpet  the
dead  in  Christ  will  come  forth  from
their  silent  dusty  tombs  ;  that  at  the
soond  of  that  trump  the  Saints  then
living  will  be  instantaneously  caught
up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  Tbis
doctrine  is  believed  in  by  Christians
generally  who  do  not  spiritualize
altogether  the  sense  and  meaning  of
the  Scriptures*

It  may  be  well  for  us,  in  the  ex-
amination of  that  great  event,  the
second  coming  of  Christ,  to  refer  to
tome  of  the  predictions  of  inspired
writers  in  regard  to  the  time  of  our
Savior's  revelation  from  the  heavens.
I  do  not  mean  to  s*y  the  day  nor  the
hour  of  his  coming,  for  that  is  un-
known, no  man  that  lives  on  the  face
of  the  earth  knows  anything  about
the  day  or  the  hourj  neither  will
there  be  any  man  on  the  earth  prior
to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  who  will
know  the  day  and  the  hour,  for  it  is
hidden  from  mortal  man.  However,
the  age  in  which  that  great  event
will  take  place  is  very  clearly  re-
vealed in  both  the  Old  and  the  New
Testament  That  age  is  to  be
characterized  by  certain  events,  pre-
dicted by  the  inspired  writers,  which
are  unmistakable  in  their  nature,  and
which  can  be  easily  understood  by  all,
both  learued  and  unlearned.  These
events  are  to  be  so  conspicuous  that
I  presume  there  will  not  be  a  nation,
people,  kindred  or  tongue  upon  the
lace  of  the  whole  earth  but  what  will
know  that,  according  to  the  Scrip-
tures, flome  great  event  is  about  to
take  place,  tor  every  people  in  that
day  will  be  more  or  less  enlightened
in  the  Scriptures,  for  before  that
great  day  shall  come,  missionaries
will  be  sent  to  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  earth,  to  testify  to  all  people  con-


cerning the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
and  they  will  cry  in  the  ears  of  all
living,  saying  unto  them — u  Prepare
ye,  prepare  ye,  for  the  great  and
com i ng  day  of  the  Bridegroom/*
They  will  have  a  preparatory  message
to  deliver  to  all  nations.

When  the  Lord,  in  the  meridian
of  time,  came  and  took  upon  himself
a  mortal  body,  he  saw  proper  to  send
as  his  forerunner  one  of  the  greatest
Prophets  that  ever  was  born  into  our
world — John  the  Baptist,  and  he
went,  announcing,  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Spirit  and  by  the  power  ot  his
holy  calling,  that  there  was  one  to
come  after  him  who  was  mightier
than  he,  whose  shoe  latchet  he  was
not  worthy  to  unloose;  and  that
when  he  should  come  he  would
thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and  that
he  would  baptize  with  fire  and  with
the  Holy  Ghost.  Said  John— "  I
merely  come  to  prepare  the  way.  I
am  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the
wilderness,  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the
Lord  and  make  his  paths  straight.  I
come  preaching  unto  you  repentance,
and  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
but  he  who  comes  after  me,  holding
higher  authority  and  a  greater  Priest-
hood, shall  baptize  you  with  a  bap-
tism that  is  greater  t  ban  that  of  water —
the  baptism  oi  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost,"

Now,  if  the  Lord,  when  he  carre
the  first  time,  in  his  humility  and
meekness,  born  in  a  manger,  of
parents  of  low  estate,  saw  that  it
was  necessary  to  prepare  the  way
before  him  by  raising  up  one  of  the
greatest  Prophets  that  ever  came
into  the  world,  why  should  it  be
thought  unreasonable  that  he  should
also  raise  up  a  latter-day  Prophet  to
prepare  the  way  before  one  of  the
mightiest  and  grandest  events  that
ever  has  taken  place,  or  that  ever
will  take  place  on  our  earth  in
its  temporal  condition?  If  the  hea-
vens are  to  be  revealed  ;  if  the  face


RESURRECTION  OF


THE  SAINTS,  ETC


of  the  Son  of  God  is  to  be  un  vailed  ;
if  the  glory  of  his  countenance  is  to
outshine  the  sun  in  his  strength  j  if
he  is  to  come  in  flaming  fire,  while
the  very  heavens  themselves  shall
shake  by  his  power,  and  the  earth
reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunken  man,
the  mountain  themselves,  feeling  his
power,  are  sunk  and  the  valleys  are
raised  up;  if  all  these  grand  events
are  to  attend  the  second  advent  of
the  Son  of  God,  is  it  unreasonable
that  he  should  raise  up  a  great  Pro-
phet in  the  latter  days  to  make  pre-
parations for  so  great  an  event  ?  Or
will  he  let  the  world  pass  on  in
blindness  and  darkness  without  any
signs  of  the  times,  without  any  warn-
ing voice,  without  any  inspired  man
sent  of  God  to  wake  them  up  from
their  condition,  and  to  prepare  the
way  for  his  coming  ?  To  me  it  looks
consistent  and  reasonable  that  such  a
preparatory  work  should  be  sent
forth  among  the  children  of  men,
and  it  looked  consistent  to  the  ancient
inspired  writers,  hence  they  have  left
an  abundance  of  testimony  on  record
in  this  good  book  (the  Bible)  con-
cerning this  preparatory  work.

One  of  the  means  which  God  will
use  to  prepare  the  way  before  his
second  coming,  is  to  send  angels
from  heaven  with  a  proclamation,
Dot  to  benefit  a  few  individuals,  not
for  one  nation  alone,  but  to  all  the
inhabitants  of  our  globe,  and  that  too
before  he  comes.  Do  you  want  to
know  where  this  prediction  is  re-
corded ?  Let  me  refer  you  to  the
fourteenth  chapter  of  the  revelations
given  to  St.  John  on  Patmos.  Did
St.  John  behold,  in  vision,  the  com-
ing of  the  Son  of  God  ?  He  did.
How  does  he  describe  it  in  that
fourteenth  chapter  ?  He  said,  as
you  will  find  by  reading  the  chapter
through,  that  he  saw  one  sitting  on
a  white  cloud,  having  a  sharp  sickle
in  his  hand. He  had  reference  to


the  time  when  Jesus  should  come  in
the  clouds  of  heaven  ;  however,  be-
fore John  saw  the  personage  sitting
on  the  cloutl,  he  saw  a  preparatory
work  commence,  as  it  is  declared  in
the  sixth  verse,  in  which  the  Prophet
says — u  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  unto  them
that  dwell  on  the  earth,  unto  every
nation  and  kindred  and  tongue  and
people,"  declaring  that  the  hour  of
God's  judgment  was  come.

Now  if  that  angel  does  not  come
and  bring  the  Gospel,  then  the  Son
of  Man  will  not  come;  no  trumpet
will  sound  and  call  forth  the  nations
of  the  righteous  from  their  sleeping
tombs;  there  will  be  no  destroying
the  wicked  as  stubble  from  the  face
of  the  earth  ;  no  shaking  of  the  hea-
vens and  causing  the  earth  to  trem-
ble and  to  remove  to  and  fro.  None
of  these  events  will  transpire  if  no
angel  comes,  for  one  is  just  as  certain
as  the  other  ;  and  to  show  that  one
is  to  precede  the  other,  there  must
be  a  time  for  this  everlasting  Gospel
to  be  preached  to  every  nation,
kindred,  tongue  and  people  after  the
angel  appears  with  it.  That  will
take  some  length  of  time,  however
rapidly  it  may  go  forth,  for  the  mere
preaching  of  the  Gospel  would  be  of
no  benefit,  unless  there  were  persons
authorized  to  administer  its  ordi-
nances. The  angel  might  preach,
but  who  could  obey  it  ?  No  one.
It  is  true  that  we  might  repent  if  we
heard  the  angel  proclaim  it  by  his
own  voice,  as  he  flow  from  nation  to
nation  and  from  kingdom  to  king-
dom ;  and  we  might  also  believe  in
Jesus  Christ,  but  how  could  we  be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  our  sins  ?
Would  the  angel  come  down  from
heaven  and  take  every  believing
penitent  person  and  baptize  him  him-
self? How  long  would  it  take  an
angel  to  go  over  all  the  nations  and


60  JOURNAL  UF

baptize  all  the  penitent  believers?
It  would  take  ages  and  ages  for  hirn
to  do  it  personally.  But  it  is  very
evident  to  every  one  who  reflects
upon  these  passages,  that  when  that
angel  comes  with  the  everlasting
Gospel,  there  will  be  authority  given
to  man  on  the  earth  to  administer
the  ordinances  of  that-  Guspel,  to
build  up  the  Christian  Church  again
on  the  earth  as  it  was  built  in  ancient
times,  a  Christian  Church  organized
according  to  the  pattern  that  God
has  given  in  the  New  Testament ;  a
Christian  Church  having  Apostles
inspired  from  heaven;  a  Christian
Church  with  Prophets  called  of  God
to  prophesy  future  events;  a  Chris-
tian Church  possessing  the  gifts  and
graces  of  the  ancient  Gospel  in  all
their  beauty,  power  and  fulness,  as
they  were  possessed  in  ancient  times.
These  works  and  these  ordinances
must  be  administered  by  man,  and
not  by  the  angel  who  brings  the
Gospel.  Will  that  be  a  preparatory
work  ?

What  other  preparations  are  ne-
cessary to  be  made  besides  the  preach-
ing of  this  Gospel  to  all  nations  ?  ,
Supposing  that  among  the  nations  of
the  earth  there  were  to  be  raised  un
a  true  Christian  Church,  is  there
anything  particular  for  that  Christian
Church  to  do  after  having  received
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  in  order
to  more  fully  prepare  them  for  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  God  ?  I  an*  !
swer,  yes.  The  Christian  Churches
built  up  in  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth  after  the  angel  comes,  will  be
required  to  gather  from  all  these
nations  unto  one  place.  That  is
something  which  no  Christian  deno-
mination believes  in,  or  if  they  do
believe  in  it  they  do  not  practice  it,
for  the  members  of  Churches  called
"Christian  remain  in  the  respective
nations  where  they  receive  the  truth ;
it  is  true  that  individuals  may  emi-


DISCOUllSES.

!  grate,  but  as  Churches  they  do  not,
But  the  Scriptures,  speaking  of  the
great  day  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,
say  there  is  to  be  a  gathering  from
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  unto  one
place  of  those  who  have  taken  upon
;  them  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.
That  great  gathering  is  referred  to
in  the  chapter  I  have  quoted  from,
also  in  another  chapter  in  which,
referring  to  the  downfall  of  spiritual
Babylon,  it  k  declared  that  there
shall  be  a  gathering  of  the  people,
and  that  too  by  inspiration,  by  the
command  of  the  Almighty;  it  will
not  be  left  to  the  wisdom  of  man,  but
it  will  be  directed  by — "  Hear  ye  the
word  of  the  Lord,"  as  declared  to
John  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos.  He
says — "  I  heard  a  great  voice  from
heaven  saying — 'Come  out  of  her,
my  people ! 1  "  What  people  ?  "  My
people."  Who  are  God's  people  ?
Those  who  obey  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel which  the  angel  brings  by  autho-
rity, "  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,
that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins
and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her
plagues.  For  her  si  us  have  reached
unto  heaven,  and  God  hath  remem-
bered her  iniquities and  now,  you
who  are  Saints,  you  who  have  obeyed
the  Gospel  restored  by  the  an^el,
come  out  of  her,  for  the  Lord  is  go-
ing to  punish  great  Babylon.  How-
is  he  going  to  punish  her  ?  By  cast-
ing her  down,  and  causing  her  over-
throw. Alter  speaking  of  the  bring-
ing of  the  Gospel  by  an  angel,  the
very  next  verse  says — "  There  fol-
lowed another  angel/'  What,  two
angels  come.  Yes,  aud  mark  the
message  of  the  second  one.  u  There
followed  another  angel,  saying, i  Baby-
loo  is  fallen,  is  fallen,  that  great  city,
because  she  made  all  nations  drink
of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  for-
nication.1 '*

The  description  of  this  fall  of
Babylon  is  given  in  various  places


RESURRECTION  OF


THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


in  John's  revelations.  Awful  and
most  terrible  judgments  will  fall
upon  Mystery  Babylon  the  Great.
She  is  to  be  punished  with  plagues
of  various  kinds  ;  a  grievous  sore  will
fall  upon  her  people,  so  much  so  that
they  will  blaspheme  God,  but  they
will  not  repent  of  their  sins.  They
are  to  be  punished  with  having  the
fountains  and  rivers  turned  into
blood,  and  the  waters  of  t'e  great
ocean  are  to  become  as  the  blood  of
a  dead  man,  and  every  living  thing
that  is  therein  will  die;  and  one  of
the  last  plagues  and  judgments  that
will  he  poured  out  upon  her  will  be
devouring  tire,  and  she  will  sink  as  a
millstone,  and  hor  name  will  be  blot-
ted from  under  heaven  and  all  that
are  connected  with  her.

Before  these  terrible  judgments
are  sent  forth  upon  the  nations  of  the
earth,God  will  save  all  who  receive  the
ever) asti rig  Gospel  by  gathering  them
to  one  p!:ice,  where  they  can  serve  him
and  keep  his  commandments*  He
will  not  merely  give  them  some  idea,
by  reading  the  Scriptures,  that  he
desires  them  to  gather,  but  John  says
there  will  be  a  great  voice  frotn  hea-
ven proclaiming — "  Come  out  of  her,
my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers
of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not
of  her  plagues.**

Then  there  is  to  be  a  gathering  of
the  people  of  God  in  the  latter  days  ?
Yes.  Do  yon  marvel  to  see  this
people  coming  forth  from  all  the
various  nations,  leaving  the  homes
of  their  ancestry,  the  graves  of  their
ancient  fathers,  leaving  their  ac-
quaintances and  friends,  and  gather-
ing up  here  into  these  mountain
vales  ?  Do  you  see  it  ?  Do  you
marvel  at  it  ?  Remember,  O  ye
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  who  are
looking  upon  these  things,  that  you
are  beholding  the  fulfillment  of  pro-
phecy, prophecy  spoken  by  the  Apos-
tle Paul,  in  the  first  chapter  of  his


epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  Paul  saw
the  gathering;  he  saw  that  it  would
be  a  new  dispensation,  a  dispensation
to  come  after  his  day.  Let  me  repeat
Paul's  words — "  That  in  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fullness  of  times  he
might  gather  together  in  one  all
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in
heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth/*'
Thus  you  see  that  all  things  in  Christ
are  to  be  gathered  together  in  ono.
What  does  this  include  ?  Are  the
inhabitants  of  heaven  to  be  made  one
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
that  are  in  Christ  ?  Yes.  The
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times
is  to  bring  about  one  of  the  grandest
events  that  our  earth  has  ever  expe-
rienced— the  uni'iii  of  all  things  in
Christ,  both  in  heaven  and  upon
earth.  Are  the  Saints  in  Christ  ?
As  many  of  you  as  have  been  bap-
tized into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ,
consequently  if  you  are  in  Christ,  if
you  live  in  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times,  you  will  be  required
to  take  pnrt  in  this  great  and  grand
gathering  together  of  those  who  are
on  the  earth.  But  how  about  all
things  in  Christ  in  heaven,  are  they
to  come  too  ?  That  is  what  I  have
been  explaining,  When  Christ  conies
the  inhabitants  of  heaven  will  come
with  him.  The  spirits  of  the  right-
eous of  all  dispensations,  who  have
not  already  received  a  resurrection,
will  then  come  forth,  and  when  the
trump  of  the  archangel  shall  sound,
the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first*
Then  those  spirits  which  appear  in  the
heavens  will  take  possession  of  their
renewed  immortal  bodies  which  will
spring  forth  from  the  tomb,  and  they
will  be  with  those  who  are  gathered
here  on  the  earth.  Then  the  dispen-
sation will  be  complete — all  things  in
Christ,  whether  in  heaven  or  on
earth,  will  be  gathered  in  one.

Enquires  one — "  Do  you  really
think  that  we  poor  mortals,  frail  as


C2


JOURNAL  OF  DIKUOUKSKs


we  are  with  all  our  imperfections,
that  have  come  because  of  the  fall,
are  going  to  associate  with  those  high
and  exalted  beings  that  dwell  in  the
presence  of  God  in  the  eternal
worlds  ?  Are  we  to  be  gathered
with  them  ?"  Yes.  Why  not  be
with  them  ?  If  our  hearts  are  pure
as  their  hearts  are  pure,  if  we  have
received  and  obeved  the  truth,  and
have  been  sanctified  by  it,  shall  we
not  have  boldness  in  that  day  ?  Or
shall  we  bang  down  our  heads,  and
sin  ink  with  shame,  before  the  face
of  Him  who  sits  upon  his  throne.
If  we  have  received  the  truth  we
shall  look  upon  the  face  of  our  Re-
deemer with  all  the  joy  that  we  look
upon  the  face  of  a  kind  and  benevo-
lent parent  here  on  the  earth.  There
will  be  no  fear,  no  shrinking,  but  we
shall  feel  that  he  is  indeed  our  Re-
deemer and  that  we  are  his  sons  and
his  daughters,  and  that,  having
obeyed  his  doctrine,  we  are  prepared
to  associate  with  him  and  to  dwell
in  his  presence.  Oh,  how  happy
the  ancient  Apostles  were  when  they
saw  their  risen  Redeemer  I  There
was  no  shrinking.  They  were  out
fishing  on  a  certain  time,  and  when
they  had  learned  that  their  Redeemer
was  on  the  shore,  and  calling  to
them,  they  cou!4  not  wait  for  the
ship  to  reach  the  shore,  but  they
must  plunge  into  the  sea,  to  try  and
get  there  as  soon  as  possible.  Their
Redeemer  was  there,  and  instead  of
shrinking  they  were  eager  to  behold
hi  in  once  more.  Then,  do  not  ,  for  a
moment,  suppose  that  the  people  of
God  who  keep  his  commandments
and  live  in  the  latter  days,  in  the
great  and  grand  dispensat  ion  of  gath-
ering, will  shrink  when  the  heavens
shall  unvail  the  face  of  the  Son  of
God.  They  will  be  prepared  to  take
these  resurrected  beings  by  the  hand,
and  they  will  go  forth  and  salute
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  tor  they


are  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  Jesus
said,  a  I  though  they  were  polygamists,
that  they  are  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
We  shall  be  very  glad,  in  the  day
when  the  heavenly  hosts  are  revealed
to  men,  to  take  them  by  the  band
and  to  sit  down  with  them,  as  Jesus
has  said — l£  Many  shall  come  from
the  east  and  from  the  west,  and  shall
sit  clown  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac
and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."
It  will  be  some  pleasure  then  to  be  in
the  company  of  polygamists,  will  it  not?

Now,  as  I  go  along  with  item  after
item  of  the  work  preparatory  to  the
coming  of  the  Savior,  I  want  to  ask
what  the  belief  ot  this  people  is,  and
whether  we  are  or  are  not  fulfilling
the  word  of  the  Lord  which  I  have
quoted  ?  Joseph  Smith  brought
forth  the  Book  of  Mormon,  —  the
Lord  calls  it  the  everlasting  Gospel,
because  it  is  the  same  Gospel  which
Jesus  himself  preached  to  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  continent,  and  to
the  people  who  dwelt  anciently  on  the
continent  of  Asia.  It  was  brought
forth  in  these  latter  days  by  his
power,  by  an  angel  sent  f  rom  heaven,
and  revealed  to  this  generation.  And
have  missionaries  been  sent  forth  ?
Yes.  What  for  ?  To  carry  this
Bonk  of  Mormon,  containing  the
everlasting  Gospel,  to  every  nation,
kindred,  tongue  and  people.  And
these  missionaries,  as  far  as  time
would  permit,  have  fulfilled  the  mis-
sions that  were  given  unto  them.

We  first  began  to  preach  this  Gos-
pel in  the  little  town  where  this
Church  was  organized  with  six  mem-
bers only,  on  the  6th  day  of  April,
1  $30.  A  few  missionaries  then  be-
gau  to  teach  in  the  neighborhood,
next  in  the  county,  next  in  the  ad-
joining county,  next  in  the  ad-
joining States,  next  in  the  adjoining
Territories,  next  in  British  America,
and  finally  across  the  great  ocean
i  among  the  European  nations.  Have


RESURRECTION  OF


THE  SAINTS,  ETC


63


these  missionaries  visited  and  preach-  I
ed  to  any  other  people  besides  those
living  on  the  continent  of  Europe,
and  those  of  the  United  States  and
the  Canadas  ?  Yes.  They  have
preached  this  same  Gospel  contained
in  the  Book  of  Mormon  on  the  Is-  1
lands  of  the  sea,  in  Australia,  New
Zealand,  the  Society  Islands,  Sand-
wich Islands — where  thousands  have
received  this  Gospel  and  been  bap-
tized. Missionaries  hare  also  carried
this  everlasting  Gospel  to  the  north-
ern portions  of  Europe — Norway,
Denmark  and  Sweden  ;  also  into  the
German  States,  to  Austria,  Italy,
Switzerland,  France,  some  of  the
islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  to
Hindostaij,  and  in  fact  wherever  there
has  been  a  sufficient  degree  of  liberty
to  permit  the  proclamation  of  the
Gospel,  thither  have  missionaries,
called  of  God  to  declare  the  message
of  life  and  salvation  to  the  people,  1
been  and  proclaimed  it.

Wherever  we  have  preached  this
Gospel,  the  word  has  so  been  pub*  ,
lished  by  command  of  the  Almighty,
saying — "Come  oat,  my  people,  from
the  nations  you  now  inhabit,"  "Where
shall  we  go  ?  "  H  Go  to  the  place  '
which  I  have  appointed  by  revelation,
by  the  voice  of  my  servants,  by  my
own  voice — to  the  mountains  of  the
new  world,  where  my  kingdom  shall  !
be  established  as  a  stone  cut  oat  of
the  mountain  without  hands."  Daniel
predicted  that,  in  the  last  days,  the
kingdom  of  God  should  be  established
upon  the  earth,  and  that,  in  its  com-
mencement, it  would  be  like  a  little
stone  cut  out  of  the  mountains  with-  j
out  hands,  but  that  it  would  gradu-
ally gain  power  and  greatness  among
the  people ;  and  the  reason  that  you
have  gathered  to  these  mountains
from  the  various  nations  in  which  yon
obeyed  the  Gospel  is  that  you  may
assist  in  establishing  and  building  up
that  kingdom  spoken  of  by  Daniel.  |


Not  a  week  has  elapsed  since  some
seven  or  eight  hundred,  from  the
northern  regions  of  Europe,  arrived
in  our  city.  A  few  days  after  their
arrival  we  look  around  and  we  scarce-
ly notice  that  there  is  any  addition.
1  Where  are  thev  ?  Friends  have
taken  them  by  the  hand  and  invited
them  to  their  homes.  Any  more
coming  ?  Yes,  numerous  hosts  are
coming.  We  have  sent  across  the
Atlantic  ocean  between  one  and  two
hundred  ships,  most  of  them  loaded,
to  the  fullest  extent  that  the  law
would  allow,  with  Latter-day  Saints
gathering  together  to  one  place  in
fulfillment  of  the  predictions  of  the
ancient  Prophets,

Says  one — "  How  long  will  this
continue  ?" Until  the people  nre
thoroughly  warned. At  the  present
time  there  are  some  nations  who  will
I  not  permit  any  religion  to  be  pro-
claimed within  their  borders  except
that  which is  established  by  law.
When  God  shall  cast  down  thrones,
which  he  will  soon  do  ;  when  he  shall
overturn kingdoms and  empires,
which  time  is  very  near  at  hand,  then
other  governments  will  be  formed
more  favorable  to  religious  liberty,
and  the  missionaries  of  this  Church
will  visit  those  nations. Already  we
,  find  greater  religious  liberty  advocated
in  the  northern  portions  of  Europe
.  where  formerly  imprisonment  was  the
penalty  of  declaring  any  other  reli-
gious doctrine  than  that  which  was
permitted  by  their  laws.  Austria,
that  great  Roman  Catholic  power,
containing thirty-one millions  of
I  Catholics,  is  increasing  in  religious
liberty. Spain,  which  for  centuries
has  persecuted  every  tiling  but  the
established  religion,  where  countless
martyrs  have  been  tortured  and  put
to  death  by  the  so-called  "  Holy  In-
\  quisition,"  is  at  present  forming  a
I  constitution  which  proposes  to  grant
;  a  large  share  of  religious  liberty-


64  JOURNAL  OF

Aod  so  we  might  enumerate  what
God  is  doing  among  these  despotic
powers,  overturning  and  changing
long-established  usages  and  institu-
tions, that  His  servants  may  go  by
His  own  command,  to  deliver  the
great  and  last  message  of  the  Gospel
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  pre-
paratory to  the  coming  of  his  Son.

After  the  times  of  t fie  Gentiles  are
fulfilled,  which  period  is  set  in  the
mind  of  God,  another  scene  will  open
up  before  the  world,  in  the  grand
panorama  of  the  last  days.  What  is
that  ?  The  downfall  of  the  Gentile
nations.  Says  one—**  Whom  do  you
call  Gentiles?"  Every  nation  ex-
cepting the  literal  descendants  of
Israel  We,  the  Latter-day  Saints,
are  Gentiles;  in  other  words,  we  have
come  from  among  the  Gentile  na-
tions, though  many  of  us  may  have
the  blood  of  Israel  within  our  veins.
When  God  has  called  out  the  righte-
ous, when  the  warning  voice  has  been
sufficiently  proclaimed  among  these
Gentile  nations,  and  the  L  jrd  says
"It  is  enough,"  he  will  also  say  to
Lis  servants — uO,  ye,  my  servants,
come  home,  corae  out  from  the  midst
of  these  Gentile  nations,  where  you
have  labored  and  borne  testimony  for
eo  long  a  period ;  come  out  from
among  them,  for  they  are  not  worthy;
they  do  not  receive  the  message  that
I  have  sent  forth,  they  do  not  repent
of  their  sins;  come  out  from  their
midst,  their  times  are  fulfilled.  Seal
»ip  the  testimony  among  them  and  !
bind  up  the  law."  What  then?
Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  will  be —
*£  ye?  ™y  servants,  I  have  a  new
commission  for  yoc.  Instead  of
going  forth  to  convert  the  Gentile
nations,  go  unto  the  remnants  of  the
house  of  Israel  that  are  scattered  in  i
the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.  Go
and  proclaim  to  them  that  the  times
of  their  dispersion  are  accomplished ;
that  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are


DISCOURSES.

fulfilled;  that  the  time  has  arrived
for  my  people  Israel,  who  have  been
scattered  for  generations  in  a  dark
and  cloudy  day,  to  gather  unto  their
own  homes  again,  and  to  build  up
old  Jerusalem  on  its  former  heap.
And  then  will  commence  the  gather-
ing of  the  Jews  to  old  Jerusalem  ;
then  the  ten  tribes  in  the  northern
regions,  wherever  they  may  be,  after
having  been  concealed  from  the  na-
tions for  twenty- five  hundred  years,
will  come  forth  and  will  return,  as
Jeremiah  has  said,  from  the  north
country.  A  great  com  p  my  will
come,  and  they  will  siug  in  the
height  of  Zion,  and  "flow  together
for  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  for
wine  and  for  oil,  and  for  the  young
of  the  fl.K.?k ;  and  their  souls  shall  be
as  a  watered  garden,  and  they  shall
not  sorrow  any  mare  at  all."  What
a  happy  time  fur  them,  when  they
come  from  their  cold  quarters  in  the
north  !  The  Jews  dispersed  among
the  Gentiles  will  not  come  and  sing
in  the  height  of  Zion,  or  but  very
few  of  them,  they  will  go  to  Jerusa*
lem.  Some  of  them  will  believe  in
the  true  Messiah,  and  thousands  of
the  more  righteous,  whose  fathers  did
not  consent  to  the  shedding  of  the
blood  of  the  Son  of  Go  J,  will  receive
the  Gospel  before  they  gather  from
arnon^  the  nations.  Many  of  them,
however,  wilt  not  receive  the  Gospel,
but  seeing  that  others  are  going  to
Jerusalem  they  will  go  also;  and
when  they  get  back  to  Palestine,  to
the  place  where  their  ancient  Jerusa-
lem stood,  and  see -a  certain  portion
of  the  believing  Jews  endeavoring  to
fulfill  and  carry  out  the  prophecies^
they  also  will  take  hold  and  assist  in
the  same  work.  At  the  same  time
I  they  will  have  their  synagogues,  in
:  which  they  will  preach  against
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  "that  impostor,"
j  as  they  call  him,  who  was  crucified
by  their  fathers.


RESURRECTION  OF


THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


G5


After  awhile,  when  tens  of  thou-
sands of  them  have  gathered  and
rebuilt  their  Temple,  and  re-esta-
blished Jerusalem  upon  its  own
heap,  the  Lord  will  send  forth
amongst  them  a  tremendous  scourge.
What  will  1  it-  tlu*  nature  of  that
scourge  ?  The  nations  that  live  in
the  regions  round  about  Jerusalem
will  gather  up  like  a  cloud,  and  cover
all  that  land  round  about  Jerusalem.
They  will  come  into  the  Valley  of
Jehoshaphat,  east  of  Jerusalem,  and
they  will  lay  siege  to  the  city.  What
then!  The  Lord  will  raise  up  two
great  Prophets,  they  are  called  wit- 1
nesses,in  the  Revelations  of  St  John,  i
Will  they  have  much  power?  Yes,
during  the  days  of  their  prophecy  -
ing  they  will  have  power  to  smite
those  who  undertake  to  destroy
them,  and  until  their  testimonies  are
fulfilled  they  will  be  able  to  keep  at
bay  all  those  nations  besieging  Jeru-
salem, so  that  they  will  not  have
power  to  take  that  city.  How  long
will  that  be  ?  Three  and  a  half
years,  so  says  John  the  Re  vela  tor.
If  any  man  hurt  them,  they  shall
have  power  to  bring  upon  that  man,
nation  or  army,  the  various  plagues
that  are  there  written.  They  will
have  power  to  smite  the  earth  with
plague  and  famine,  and  to  turn  the
rivers  of  water  into  blood.  And
when  they  have  fulfilled  their  pro-
phecy, then  the  nations  that  have
been  lying  before  Jerusalem  so  long,
waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  destroy
the  city,  will  succeed  in  killing  these
two  Prophets,  and  their  bodies,  says
John's  revelations,  will  lie  in  the
streets  of  Jerusalem  three  days  and
a  half  after  they  are  killed.  What
rejoicing  there  will  be  over  the  death
of  these  men !  Those  who  have
been  waiting  so  long  and  anxiously
for  this  to  take  place,  will  no  doubt
send  gifts  one  to  another,  and  if  the
telegraph  wires  are  not  destroyed,

No.  5.


they  will  telegraph  to  the  uttermost
parts  of  the  earth  that  they  have
succeeded  in  killing  the  two  men
who  had  so  long  tormented  them
with  plagues,  turning  the  waters
into  blood,  etc.  But  by  and  by,
right  in  the  midst  of  their  rejoicing,
when  they  think  the  Jews  will  now
certainly  fall  a  prey  to  them,  behold
there  is  a  great  earthquake,  and  in
the  midst  of  it  these  two  Prophets
rise  from  the  dead,  and  they  hear  a
voice  up  in  the  heavens  saying —
"  Come  up  hither and  they  imme-
diately ascend  in  the  sight  of  their
enemies.

What  next  ?  Notwithstanding
all  this,  those  nations  will  be  so  in-
fatuated, and  so  determined  to  per-
secute the  people  of  God — as  much
so  as  Pharaoh  and  his  army  in  ancient
days— that  they  will  say — "  Come,
now  is  the  time  to  pitch  into  the
Jews  and  destroy  them."  And  they
will  commence  their  work  of  destruc-
tion, and  they  will  succeed  so  far
as  to  take  one  half  the  city,  and
while  they  are  in  the  very  act  of  des-
troying Jerusalem,  behold  the  heavens
are  rent,  and  the  Son  of  God  with
all  the  heavenly  hosts  appears,  and
he  descends  and  rests  upon  the  sum-
mit of  Mount  Olives,  which  is  before
Jerusalem  on  the  east.  And  so
great  will  be  the  power  of  God  that
will  then  be  rnaile  manifest,  that  the
mountain  will  divide  asunder,  half
going  towards  the  south,  and  half
towards  the  north,  producing  a  great
valley  going  east  and  west,  from  the
walls  of  Jerusalem  eastward.

What  next  ?  The  Jews  that  are
not  taken  captive  by  these  nations,
will  flee  to  the  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains, says  the  Prophet  Zechariah  ;
and  when  they  get  into  that  great
valley,  where  these  personages  are
who  have  descended,  they  expect
to  find  the  Deliverer  which  their
Prophets  have  spoken  of  so  long.

Vol.  XVLU.


60


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


But  they  do  not  for  a  moment  sup-
pose that  it  is  Jesus,  oh  no,  Jesus
was  an  impostor.  The  personage
thev  have  Wen  looking  for  some
i-ight'-en  hundred  years  is  the  true
Messiah,  and  now,  say  they — "  He
has  come  to  deliver  us."  But  how
great  will  be  their  astonishment
when,  while  looking  at  their  Deliv-
erer, they  see  that  his  hands  are  mar-
red considerably  !  Say  they,  one  to
another— "  Thriv  are  large  sears  in
liis  hands ;  and  there  is  another
large  scar  in  his  side,  and  behold  his
feet,  they  are  scarred  also  r  And,
as  the  Prophet  Zechariah  has  said,
they  will  be^in  to  enquire  of  him —
"  What  are  these  wounds  with  which
thou  art  wounded?"  And  he  re-
plies— u  These  are  the  wounds  with
which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of
my  friends."

What  then  ?  Then  they  begin  to
believe,  then  the  Jews  are  convinced,
I  mean  that  portion  of  them  who
formerly  despised  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
and  being  convinced  they  begin  to
mourn,  and  they  mourn  every  family
apart,  and  their  wives  apart.  The
family  of  the  house  of  Levi  apart
and  t  heir  wive*  apart ;  the  family
of  the  house  of  David  and  their
wives  apart,  and  all  their  families
that  remain  will  mourn,  they  and
their  wives  apart,  and  there  will  be
such  mourning  in  Jerusalem  as  that
city  never  experienced  before.  What
is  the  matter?  What  are  they
mourning  about  ?  They  have  looked
upon  him  whom  their  fathers  pierced,
they  behold  the  wounds,  they  are
now  convinced  that  they  and  their
fathers  have  been  in  error  some
eighteen  hundred  year?,  and  they
repent  in  dust  and  ashes.

The  next  step  for  them  will  be
baptism  for  the  remission  of  their
sins.  They  look  upon  him  whom
their  fathers  pierced,  and  they
mourn  for  him  as  one  who  mourns


for  his  only  son,  and,  as  Zechariah
says,  they  are  in  bitterness  for  him.
But  repentance  alone  would  not  be
sufficient,  they  must  obey  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel ;  bence  there
will  be  a  fountain  opened  at  that
time  on  purpose  for  baptism.  Where
will  it  be  opened  ?  On  the  east  side
of  the  Temple,  A  stream  will  break
out  from  under  the  threshold  of  the
Temple,  says  the  Prophet,  aud  it  will
run  eastward,  and  will  probably  pass
directly  through  the  deep  valley
made  by  the  parting  of  the  Mount
of  Olives,  It  will  run  eastward,
and  as  you  go  down  from  the  Tem-
ple a  few  thousand  cubits  it  increases
so  rapidly  that  it  becomes  a  great
river  that  cannot  be  forded*

This  is  the  fountain  that  Zechariah
says  is  open  to  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem  and  to  the  house  of  David
for  sin  and  uncleanness*  "  How  is
it  that"  says  one?  "Water  for  sin
and  unc leanness  *r"  Why  yea,  bap-
tism for  the  remission  of  sins.  Then
the  Jews  will  receive  the  Gospel  and
they  will  be  cleansed  from  all  their
sins  by  being  baptized  In  water  for
their  remission.  Then  will  be  ful-
filled the  words  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,
when  speaking  of  Jerusalem  —  "For
henceforth  there  shall  no  more  come
into  thee  the  uncircumcised  and  the
unclean/'  But  the  name  of  the  city
from  that  day  will  be  —  k  The  Lord
is  there;"  that  is,  the  Lord  will  be
personally  there,  there  with  Ids
Applies  and  with  all  his  ancient
Saints,  for  Zechariah  says  that  when
he  comes  and  stands  his  feet  on  the
Mount  of  Olives,  all  his  Saints  will
come  with  him.

We  have  found  out  the  place
where  Jesus  will  descend,  and  wTe
have  found  out  who  comes  with  him.
Now  we  enquire  will  he  remain  on
the  earth  after  lie  thus  descends  ?
Yes,  he  will  remain  on  this  earth  as
literally  and  personally  as  he  went-


RESURRECTION  OF

around  in  ancient  times,  and  taught
the  people  from  house  to  house  and
synagogue  to  synagogue.  And  in
that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord,
and  his  name  one.  There  will  not
be  any  heathen  gods,  for  there  will
be  no  heathens ;  no  idolatrous  wor-
ship, but  one  Lord,  and  h  is  name  one.

And  this  water  which  breaks  out
from  the  threshold  of  the  Temple,
will  not  only  run  eastward  but  west-
ward also,  and  there  will  be  a  great
change  in  the  land  there,  certain  por-
tions rising  up,  others  lowered,  rough
places  made  smooth  and  mountains
cast  down;  and  half  the  waters  of
this  spring  which  will  burst  forth,
will  go  towards  the  former  sea  and  half
to  the  other  .sea ;  in  other  words  half
towards  the  Dead  Sea  and  half  to-  j
ward  the  Mediterranean,

From  that  day  forward  there  shrill
be  written  upon  the  bells  of  the
horses  and  upon  the  vessels  of  the
bouse  of  the  Lord, — "Holiness  to
the  Lord and  thenceforth  all  the
people  who  are  spared  from  the  na-
tions round  about,  will  have  to  go  up
to  Jerusalem  year  by  year  to  worship
the  King,  the  Lord  of  Hosts,

These  are  some  of  the  grand  events
spoken  of  in  this  Bible;  these  are
events  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
believe  iu,  and  that  so  far  as  it  lies  j
in  their  power,  they  are  trying  to
fulfill.  If  we  are  not  Jews  we  are
not  required  to  go  to  old  Jerusalem,
but  we  are  required  to  build  up  a
Zion  ;  that  is  .spuken  of  as  well  as
the  building  of  Jerusalem.  Zion  is
to  be  built  up  in  the  mountains  in
the  last  days,  not  ut  Jerusalem.  Bead
the  fortieth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  where
lie  speaks  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord
being  revealed,  and  all  flesh  to  see
him  when  he  comes  the  second  time,
and  how  the  mountains  and  hills
should  be  lowered  and  the  valleys  be
exalted ;  and  in  the  same  chapter,
the  Prophet  also  says  that,  before


THE  SAINTS,  ETC.  67

|  that  great  and  terrible  day  of  the
Lord  Zion  is  required  to  get  up  into
the  high  mountains,  Isaiah  predicts
this.  Says  he,  in  his  fortieth  chap-
ter— "Oh  Zion,  thou  that  briugest
good  tidings,  get  thee  Up  into  the
high  mountains,"

Thus  you  see  that  the  people  who
organize  Zion  through  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  which  the  angel  brings,
have  good  tidings  to  declare  to  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  But
these  people  are  required,  according
to  this  prophecy,  to  get  up  into  the
high  mountains.  You  Latter-day
Saints  are  four  thousand  three  hun-
dred feet  above  the  level  of  the  ocean,
scattered  over  four  hundred  miles  of
Territory,  north  and  south,  and  you
are  extending  your  settlements  con-
tinually, and  are  building  up  some
two  hundred  towns,  cities  and  villa-
ges  in  the  mountains  of  the  great
American  desert,  fulfilling  the  pro-
phecies of  the  holy  Prophets,
fBy  and  by  you  will  lea?e  this
country.  Says  one — "  What,  are  the
Mormons  going  to  leave  Utah  ?"
<  Mi  yes,  most  of  us;  we  are  going  to
leave,  but  we  shall  disappoint  some
of  you.  You  want  to  know  which
way  we  are  going  f  We  are  going
by  and  by  eastward,  I  do  not  say
that  we  shall  go  directly  from  this
city  eastward,  but  we  shall,  after  a
while,  be  in  Jackson  County,  in  the
western  borders  of  Missouri.  Why
are  we  going  there  ?  Because  it  is
the  great  central  gathering  place  for
the  Saints  of  latter  days,  for  all  that
will  be  gathered  from  South  America,
Central  America,  Mexico,  the  Can  a-
das,  and  from  all  the  nations  of  the
Gentiles — their  head  quarters  will  be
in  Jackson  County,  in  the  State  of
Missouri.  We  shall  roll  down  from
the  mountains,  and  though  we  may
be  considered  but  a  little  stone  cut
out  of  the  mountains  without  human
ingenuity,  without  mankind  under-


C8  JOURNAL  OF

taking  to  carry  on  this  work  of  their
own  accord,  the  time  will  come  when
God  will  cause  the  stone  of  the  moun-
tains to  roll,  and  then  it  will  roll
down  finil  build  up  the  central  city  of
Zion,  and  that,  too,  long  before  this
giithering  from  the  distant  nations
shall  cense.  I  do  not  know  how
niuch  before  the  ten  tribes  will  come
from  the  north  ;  but  after  Zion  is
built  in  Jackson  Comity,  and  after
the  Temple  is  built  upon  that  spot  of
ground  where  the  corner  stone  was
laid  in  1831 ;  after  the  glory  of  God
in  the  form  of  a  cloud  by  day  shall
rest  upon  that  Temple,  and  by  night
the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  will  fill
the  whole  heavens  round  about;
after  every  dwelling  place  upon
Mount  Zion  shall  be  clothed  upon  as
with  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  and  a
cloud  by  day,  about  that  period  of
time,  the  ten  tribes  will  be  heard  of,
away  in  the  north,  a  great  company,
as  Jeremiah  says,  coming  down  from
the  northern  regions,  coming  to  sing
in  the  height  of  the  latter-day  Zion.
Their  souls  will  be  as  a  watered
garden,  and  they  will  not  sorrow  any
more  at  all,  as  they  have  been  doing
during  the  twenty-five  hundred  long
years  they  have  dwelt  in  the  Arctic
regions.  They  will  come,  and  the
Lord  will  be  before  their  camp,  he
will  utter  his  voice  before  that  great
army,  and  he  will  lead  them  forth  as
he  led  Israel  in  ancient  days,  This
long  chain  of  Rocky  Mountains,  that
extends  from  the  cold  regions  of  the
north  away  into  South  America,  will
feel  the  power  of  God,  and  will  trem-
ble before  the  hosts  of  Israel  as  they
come  to  sing  on  the  heights  of  Zion.
In  that  day  the  trees  of  the  field  will
clap  like  hands,  says  the  Prophet,
and  in  that  day  the  Lord  will  open
w uters  in  the  wilderness,  and  streams
in  the  desert,  to  give  drink  to  his
chosen,  his  people  Israel.  And  when
tl  ey  come  to  the  height  of  Zion  they


DISCOURSES.

shall  be  crowned  with  glory  under
the  hands  of  the  servants  of  God
living  in  those  days,  the  children  of
Ephraim,  crowned  with  certain  bles-
sings that  pertain  to  the  Priesthood,
that  they  could  not  receive  in  their
own  lands.  In  that  day  will  be  set
apart  twelve  thousand  out  of  each  of
these  ten  tribes — one  hundred  and
twenty  thousand  persons  ordained  to
the  High  Priesthood,  after  the  order
of  the  Son  of  God,  to  go  forth  to  all
|>eople,  nations,  kindreds  and  tongues,
for  the  salvation  of  the  remnants  of
Israel  in  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth,  to  bring  as  many  as  will  come
unto  the  Church  of  the  firstborn.  Thus
God  will  have  twelve  thousand  out
of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  fulfill  his
purposes ;  and  when  they  have  com-
pleted his  work  here  on  the  earth,
they  will  be  culled  home  to  Zion,  be
crowned  with  glory  and  stand  upon
Mount  Zion  and  siug  the  song  of  the
redeemed,  the  song  of  the  hundred
and  forty-four  thousand,  and  the
Father's  name  will  be  written  in
their  foreheads.

By  and  by,  when  all  things  are
prepared — when  the  Jews  have  re-
ceived their  scourging,  and  Jesus  has
descended  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives*
the  ten  tribes  will  leave  Zion,  and
will  go  to  Palestine,  to  inherit  the
land  that  was  given  to  their  ancient
fathers,  and  it  will  be  divided  amongst
the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  They  will  go  there  to
dwell  in  peace  in  their  own  land
from  that  time,  until  the  earth  shall
pass  away.  But  Zion,  after  their
departure,  will  still  remain  upon  the
western  hemisphere,  and  she  will  be
crowned  with  glory  as  well  as  old
Jerusalem,  and,  as  the  Psalmist
David  says,  she  will  become  the  joy
of  the  whole  earth,  **  Beautiful  for
situation  is  Mount  Zion  on  the  sides  of
the  north,  the  city  of  the  great  King."


RESURRECTION  OF


THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


63


Zion  will  be  caught  up  when  Jesus
comes,  to  meet  him.  Jesus  will
descend  not  only  upon  the  Mount  of
Olives,  bat  he  will  descend  and  stand
upon  Mount  Zion,  But  before  he
stands  upon  it,  it  will  be  caught  up
to  meet  him  in  the  air.  Will  the
buildings  of  Zion  be  caught  up?
Yes.  And  its  land?  Yes.  And
Jesus  will  stand  upon  Mount  Zion,
according  to  the  prediction  of  John
the  Revelator,  and  he  will  reign  over
his  people  during  a  thousand  years;
and  his  associates  will  be  the  resur-
rected righteous  of  all  former  dis-
pensations, those,  among  others,  who
dwelt  on  this  continent  before  the
flood.  Says  one — "  Do  you  mean  to
say  that  America  was  inhabited  be-
fore the  flood  ?**  Yes,  Adam  dwelt
on  this  continent.  I  do  not  know
that  the  Garden  of  Eden  was  here,
but  we  know  from  what  God  has
revealed  to  us,  that  before  Adam
closed  his  days  he  dwelt  on  a  certain
portion  of  this  continent  with  a  great
number  of  the  righteous.  All  the
righteous  that  lived  on  this  continent
before  the  flood,  those  who  lived  upon
this  continent  who  were  righteous,
who  came  from  the  Tower  of  Babel,
after  the  flood,  and  lived  here  some
sixteen  hundred  ye^rs,  before  the
nation  was  destroyed.  All  the  Pro-
phets, and  wise,  and  good  men  of  these
several  periods,  will  be  permitted  to
reign  as  kings  and  priests  upon  this
western  hemispere  during  the  period
of  Christ's  reign  on  the  earth.  The
Israelites,  too,  the  remnants  of  Joseph,


the  forefathers  of  these  poor  degraded
Indians,  who  are  righteous,  will  come
forth  also  to  reign  as  kings  and
priests  on  this  land.

We  might  continue  this  subject
much  further.  We  might  portray
before  you  the  duties  that  will  be
performed  by  these  resurrected  righte-
ous who  reign  as  immortal  beings  on
this  continent  and  on  the  eastern
continent.  We  might  portray  some
of  the  great  doings  that  will  be  ac-
complished by  the  King  of  kings  and
Lord  of  lords,  when  he  shall  sit  upon
bis  throne  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusa-
lem, surrounded  by  his  Twelve  Apos-
tles, who  will  also  sit  upon  twelve
thrones  to  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel  We  might  also  relate  to  yon
concerning  the  judges  and  the  thrones
of  those  that  were  beheaded  for  the
witness  of  Jesus  and  for  the  word  of
God,  who  will  reign  on  the  western
hemisphere  as  well  as  on  the  eastern;
but  time  will  not  permit  us  to  con-
tinue this  subject  any  further.

May  God  bless  the  Latter-day
Saints  in  the  kingdom  of  God  esta-
blished here  in  the  tops  of  the  moun-
tains; bless  you  in  your  residences,
in  your  towns,  in  your  Gities,  in  your
villages,  and  throughout  the  length
and  breadth  of  the  land,  and  increase
and  multiply  you  as  the  stars  of  hea-
ven that  cannot  be  numbered,  until
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  sh;ill  be-
come the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and
his  Christ,  and  the  Saints  shall  reign
forever  and  ever*  Amen.


70  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Old  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug.  31,  1873,

(Reported  by  David  IF.  Evans.)

PRESENT  REVELATION  NECESSARY  TO  LEAD  THE  CHURCH — THE  APOS-
TLESHIP — PRESENT  REVELATION  NECESSARY  FOR  ALL — EVILS  OF
WASTE,  INTEMPERANCE,  AND  EXTRAVAGANCE — TRUE  REFORMATION  IS
TO  CEASE  FROM  DOING  EVIL.


Brethren  and  listers,  we  have  met
here  to  talk  over  the  principles  of
our  faith,  and  if  we  say  that  we  are
going  to  be  Saints,  and  that  we  are
going  to  live  our  religion,  we  do  not
expect  to  pive  ourselves  the  lie,  to
eat  our  own  words  and  to  falsify  our
characters  ana  our  testimonies  before
God;  but  we  expect  to  live  our  reli-
gion as  well  as  we  know  how.  We
want  yoa  who  wish  to  be  Saints,  to
know,  that  we  will  do  everything  in
our  p;)wer  to  help  you  to  live  so,  that
you  will  be  entitled  to,  and  enjoy,
the  revelations  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;
that  every  man  and  every  woman
may  know  and  understand  their  duty
before  God,  pertaining  to  themselves
and  what  is  required  of  them,  just
as  much  as  your  humble  servant  who
is  talking  to  you.

It  is  a  great  privilege  to  know  the
mind  and  will  of  God,  and  this  pri-
vilege we  enjoy,  and  I  wish  that  all
good  people  of  every  nation,  sect  and
party  would  so  live  that  they  might
understand  the  will  of  the  Lord  for
themselves;  but  in  bestowing  this
Upon  us  the  Lord  requires  us  to  live
accordingly,  and  he  has  placed  us  and
all  pe  pie  under  this  obligation.

It  is  my  duty  to  know  the  mind


of  the  Lord  concerning  myself  and
also  concerning  this  people;  and  I
think  I  know  it  just  as  well  as  I
know  the  road  home.  I  do  not
know  the  path  from  that  door  to
my  own  borne  any  better  than  I
know  how  to  dictate  this  people,  if
they  will  only  hearken  to  me.  This
is  a  great  blessing  and  a  great  privi-
lege, and  if  I  were  to  reject  it  aud
take  a  course  to  deprive  myself  of
the  spirit  of  revelation,  according  to
what  the  Lord  has  given  to  me,  and
to  magnify  the  Priesthood  that  I
received  through  his  servant  Joseph,
I  would  be  taken  forthwith  from  this
world,  I  would  not  remain  here  at
all  to  darken  the  minds  of,  or  to  lead
astray,  any  of  the  members  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  According  to  the
revelations  that  I  and  others  of  my
brethren  and  sisters  have  received,
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  and
others  who  have  lived  upon  the  earth,
if  I  observe  my  duty,  I  shall  have
the  privilege  of  living  and  enjoying
the  society  of  my  brethren  and
sisters,  and  of  instructing  them;
but  let  me  neglect  this  and  I  shall
he  removed  out  of  my  place  forth-
with.

s  Now  it  is  no  more  my  duty  to


PRESENT  KKVELATIOX,  ETC.


71


live  so  as  to  know  the  mind  and  v v i  1 1  f
of  the  Lord  than  it  is  the  duty  of  my
brethren,  the  rest  of  the  Twelve.  I
say  the  rest  of  the  Twelve,  because  I
am  the  President  of  the  Quorum  of
the  Twelve  Apostles  on  the  earth,
and  the  only  one  that  the  Lord  has
ever  acknowledged.  It  is  true  that
Thomas  B.  Marsh  was  once  Presi-
dent, but  the  Lord  never  acknow-
ledged any  man  by  revelation  as  Pre-
sident of  that  Quorum  but  myself.
At  the  denth  of  Joseph  1  stepped
out  from  that  position  in  the  advance,
according  to  the  organization  of  the
Church,  fur  the  sake  of  preserving
the  flock  of  God,  but  not  according
to  my  wishes,  nor  the  desire  of  my  !
heart,  but  it  was  my  duty.  Wit  en
I  beard  of  the  Prophet's  death  I
eaid  — 11  What  will  become  of  the
people  ?  What  will  the  Saints  do
now  that  the  Prophet  has  gone  ? n
It  was  Day  whole  desire  to  preserve  ,
the  sheep  of  the  flock  of  God,  and
it  is  so  to-day.  Brother  Kimball
also  stepped  into  the  first  Presi-
dency, and  we  called  others  and
fM'dc'uued  them  to  take  our  place  1
for  the  time  being,  that  the  Church
might  be  fully  organized,  and  we
expect  to  ordain  more  when  we
feel  like  it ;  but  because  a  man  is
ordained  an  Apostle  it  does  not  prove  '
that  he  belongs  to  the  Quorum  of
the  Apostles,  I  just  mention  this
that  you  may  understand  it.  !

Now,  in  regard  to  the  Twelve
Apostles,  it  is  their  imperative  duty
to  live  so  that  they  will  know  the
mind  and  will  of  the  Lord  concerning
them  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties
as  a  quorum,  and  also  as  individuals;
and  they  are  under  just  the  same1
obligations  to  live  so  as  to  enjoy  the  '
Spirit  of  revelation  that  I  am.  And
so  it  is  with  the  (Seventies,  the  High
Priests,  the  Eldets  and  the  Bishops.
It  is  the  imperative  duty  of  a
Bishop — called to  preside over  a


ward — to  live  so  that  he  will  know
the  mind  and  will  of  God  concern-
ing his  ward  just  as  much  as  I  do
concerning  this  people.  But  when
Bishops  say  they  are  willing  to  do  as
brother  Brigham  says,  and  that  is
t lie  end  of  their  researches  to  know
the  raind  and  will  of  the  Lord,  they
will  always  be  making  mistakes,  al-
ways doing  something  that  they  will
regret;  they  will  neglect  their  duty
here  and  there,  and  when  they  make
a  move  it  will  not  be  risjht  unless
brother  Brigham  is  there  to  tell  them
the  words  they  should  say  and  the
acts  they  should  perform;  and  hence
the  necessity  of  them  living  day  by
day  so  that  they  will  know  the  miud
and  will  of  the  Lord  for  themselves.

And  so  you  may  follow  on  through
every  quorum  there  is  in  the  Church,
not  only  Seventies,  High  Priests,
Elders  and  Bishops,  but  also  the
Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons,  who
administer  to  the  people  in  going
from  house  to  house.  It  is  their
duty  to  live  so  that  they  know  and
understand  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord  concerning  the  people  to  whom
they  administer,  as  much  as  it  is  m:ue
to  know  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord  concerning  the  entire  people.
And  it  is  the  duty  of  every  father
and  mother  to  live  so  that  they  may  X
have  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Lord
concerning  their  duties  to  thmr  fami-
lies, if  they  are  uut  called  to  exer-
cise the  priesthood  which  they  hold,
mote  than  to  administer  to  their
children,  it  is  their  duty  to  live  so  as
to  know  how  to  teach,  lend  and  ad-
vise their  children;  and  if  they  are
disposed  they  may  Irtve  the  privilege,
for  it  is  God's  mind  and  will  that
they  should  know  just  what  to  do  for
them  when  they  are  sick.  Instead
of  calling  foi  a  doctor  you  .should  ad-
minister to  them  by  the  laying  on  of
bauds  and  anointing  with  oil,  and
give  them  mild  lood,  and  herbs,  and


72


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


medicines  that  you  understand  ;  and
if  you  want  the  mind  and  will  of
God  at  such  a  time,  get  it,  it  is  just
as  much  your  privilege  as  of  any
other  member  of  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  Hod.  It  is  your  privi-
lege and  duty  to  live  So  that  you
know  when  the  word  of  the  Lord  is
spoken  to  you  and  when  the  mind  of
the  Lord  is  revealed  to  you.  I  say
it  is  your  duty  to  live  so  as  to  know  j
and  understand  all  these  things.
Suppose  I  were  to  teach  you  a  false
doctrine,  how  are  you  to  know  it  if
you  do  uot  possess  the  Spirit  of  God?
As  it  is  written,  44 The  things  of  God
knoweth  no  man  but  by  the  Spirit

of  God."

Now  I  want  to  say  a  few  words  to
the  sisters,  though  1  will  say  that  1
do  not  feel  the  least  like  chastising
either  my  brethren  or  my  sisters  this
morning.  I  feel  Kind,  and  I  do  not
want  to  say  words  to  them  that  they
would  think  harsh  or  unkind.  Bat
I  will  say,  to  both  brethren  and  sis^
ters,  that  whenever  any  of  us  spend
means  needlessly,  say  to  the  amount
of  one  cent,  dime,  or  dollar,  we  con-
sume it  upon  the  lusts  of  our  flesh.
Here  is  a  man,  for  instance,  who  has  j
an  appetite  for  tobacco,  and,  during
a  year,  he  spends  ten  or  twenty  dol-
lars in  cigars  and  tobacco,  which  do
him  no  good,  but  injure  him;  do
you  think  that  such  a  may  will  be
brought  to  an  account  hereafter  for
that  waste  ?  Such  means  does  not
go  to  build  temples,  or  to  help  to  sus-
tain Elders  who  have  gone  abroad  to
proclaim  the  gospel ;  it  is  not  ap-
plied to  assist  in  feeding  or  clothing
their  wives  or  children,  to  find  them
a  little  fuel  in  the  winter,  when  it  is
cold,  or  to  get  them  a  cow,  so  that
they  can  have  milk  and  a  Httle  but-
ter to  make  them  more  comfor-
table ;  but  it  is  spent  in  the  pur-
chase of  tobacco  and  is  utterly  wasted;
and  they  who  gut  rid  of  their  means


so  foolishly  will  most  surely  be
brought  to  account  therefor.  The
same  may  be  said  of  money  spent  in
the  purchase  of  beer.  It  is  a  mild
drink,  and  is  very  pleasant  and  agree-
able to  a  great  many;  but  when  a
man  pays  his  fifty  cents,  his  dollar  or
his  ten  dollars  for  beer  it  goes  into
the  hands  of  the  grocery  keepers  and
tbvjy  send  it  off,  and  it  does  no  good
to  the  community.  The  beer  itself
does  no  pood,  it  injures  the  system  of
those  who  habitually  indulge  in  the
use  of  it,  and,  whether  they  think  of
and  realize  it,  or  not,  they  will  be
brought  to  account  for  the  means
they  have  thus  wasted.

Here  in  the  midst  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  where  we  can  know  and
understand  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord  concerning  us,  many  of  us  have
not  taken  the  pains  to  ask  what  the
Lord  wants  us  to  do  or  what  noi  to
do;  and  if  we  are  extravagant  in  tliG
use  of  tea  or  coflee,  which  do  ns  no
good,  but  which  injure  our  systems,
we  shall  certainly  be  brought  to  ac-
count fur  it.  Parties  may  say — 4 4 We
did  this  thoughtlessly  and  ignorautly ;
we  did  not  think  there  was  any  harm
in  drinking  tea,  coffee,  beer  or  a  little
liquor,  or  in  smoking  or  chewing  to-
bacco; and  having  worked  for  our
wages,  we  considered  that  we  had  a
right  to  spend  a  portion  of  them  in
these  luxuries,  if  we  were  disposed  to
do  so"  But  Justice  will  say,  4  If
you  had  enquired  you  might  have
learned  that  the  use  of  these  things
was  not  only  no  good  to  you,  but  was
absolutely  injurious,  and  that  the
means  used  in  purchasing  them  was
utterly  wasted,  and  hence  you  who
have  been  guilty  of  this  folly  must
be  brought  to  an  account  for  it."

We  might  follow  this  subject
through  all  the  varied  ramifications
of  our  practice  in  life,  but  it  is  not
necessary  on  this  occasion.  Suffice
it  to  say  that  we  want  to  understand


PRESENT  REVELATION,  ETC


73


and  do  better  than  we  have  done,  and
to  be  governed  by  the  dictates  of
good,  solid,  sound  sense  in  the  use  of
the  wealth,  privileges  and  talents  that
are  given  to  us  in  our  present  life.
Let  me  ask,  what  is  real  wealth  ?  Do
you  know  ?  I  say  that  time  is  all  the
wealth  we  have;  and  to  illustrate, let
os  suppose  that  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  were,  to-day,  in  the  same
position  that  oar  first  parents  were
in  when  they  were  placed  in  the  Gar-
den, Here  is  the  naked  earth,  with-
out any  improvements  whatever ;  and
the  people,  being  without  experience,
have  not  the  ability  to  raise  anything
to  eat,  to  build  dwellings  to  reside  in,
or  to  gather  up  or  utilize  the  stock
that  is  running  at  large.  Would  a
people  in  that  condition  have  any
wealth?  No;  but  you  put  them  in
possession  of  ability  to  work  with
their  hands  and  to  raise  their  food
and  clothing  from  the  earth,  also  ma-
terials to  build  their  houses,  lay  out
their  streets,  make  their  gardens,
farms,  etc.,  and  they  will  soon  accu-
mulate by  their  labor,  and  hence,  you
can  easily  see  that  all  the  wealth
there  is  on  the  earth  consists  of  the
booe,  sinew  and  time  of  the  people.
That  is  the  capital  stock  of  every
individual  and  of  every  nation,  and
all  the  capital  stock  they  have.  If
they  have  money — seeming  wealth —
it  may  go  from  them,  they  do  not
know  how  quickly.  Cities  may  burn
up;  thieves  may  steal  their  gold  and
silver,  and  their  greenbacks  may  be
burned  up  with  their  banks,  and  then
their  wealth  is  gone,  or  rather  that
which  is  the  representative  of  wealth  ;
but  they  still  have  the  ability  and  the
bone  and  sinew  necessary  to  go  to
work  to  rebuild  their  cities  and  to
make  new  farms,  to  mine  out  gold
and  silver  from  the  mountains  to
make  vessels  for  convenience,  for
table  use,  or  for  ornaments  —  ear
rings,  nose  jewels,  bands  for  their


wrists,  ankles,  etc.  But  it  must  all
be  done  by  labor.

The  enquiry  rises —  Who  gives
the  ability  to  labor  ?  Who  gives  us
the  physical  power  to  cut  down  trees,
to  saw  them  into  lumber,  and  to
shape  the  lumber  for  use,  so  that  we
can  make  improvements  in  building,
fencing,  and  everything  that  labor
can  be  used  for?  Is  this  ability  otir
own  individual  property,  independent
of  God  and  every  other  being?  Not
at  all,  we  are  dependent  upon  him  for
strength,  health,  life  and  every  power
and  faculty  we  possess.  Hence  we
may  say  that  Time  is  really  all  the
capital  stock  that  is  possessed  by  any
people  or  nation,  by  Saint  of  sinner,
good  or  bad.  Time  and  the  ability
to  labor  are  the  capital  stock  of  the
whole  world  of  mankind,  and  we  are
all  indebted  to  God  for  the  ability  to
use  time  to  advantage,  and  he  will
require  of  us  a  strict  account  of  the
disposition  we  make  of  this  ability;
and  he  will  not  only  require  an  ac-
count of  our  acts,  but  our  words  and
thoughts  will  also  be  brought  into
judgment*

Now,  returning  to  the  subject  of
wasting  means,  suppose  that  in  the
providences  of  God,  I  have  been  able
to  gather  means  around  me,  and  I
fancy  and  am  able  to  pay  fur  a
breakfast  that  would  cost  a  hundred
dollars,  and  I  suy  to  my  wife — *  Pre-
pare me  such  and  such  a  breakfast,"
and  I  actually  eat  a  breakfast  that
has  cost  a  hundred  dollars,  the  ques-
tion  arises — Am  I  justified,  have  I
to  give  an  account  of  this  ?  I  am
not  justified,  and  I  certainly  shall
have  to  give  an  account.  A  fifteen
or  twenty  cent  breakfast  would  satisfy
the  demands  of  my  nature,  and  would
be  ju3t  as  good  for  my  system  as  the
hundred  dollar  breakfast,  so  that  by
indulging  in  such  a  luxury  I  waste
ninety-nine  dollars  and  eighty  cents,
it  has  gone  to  the  winds,  gone  to


74


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  enemy.  Now  what  is  my  duty  ?
I  say  that  after  eating  my  fifteen  or
twenty  cent  breakfast,  if  I  have  a
Lund  red  dollars  that  I  can  afford  to
spend  therein,  my  duty  is  to  give  the
residue  towards  sustaining  the  poor,
building  Temples,  school- houses,  sus-
taining the  teachers,  maintaining  the
orphan  child,  to  that  it  may  have  an
education,  sending  an  Elder  to  preach
the  Gospel,  and  sustaining  his  family
while  lie  is  away,  or  something  or
other  that  will  advance  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth.  \

Or  again,  suppose  I  say  to  a  tailor
— "  I  have  some  grey  cloth,  and  I
want  you  to  make  me  a  coat  just  ac-
cording to  my  own  notions/'  *s  Very
well,  what  will  you  have  ?"  "I
want  you  to  make  the  coat  of  this
grey  cloth,  and  I  want  you  to  take
this  piece  of  blue  cloth  and  cut  it
into  narrow  strips  about  a  third  of  an
inch  wide,  and  strip  my  coat  all
around,  and  ring  it  around,  and  put  a
pull"  here  and  another  there,  and  I
want  home-made  epaulets  on,  and  I  j
want  you  to  put  fifteen  or  twenty
dollars  worth  of  work  on  this  coat,"
most  of  which,  after  all,  is  of  not  the
least  use  in  tlio  world,  Am  I  justi-
fied in  doing  this,  and  shall  I  or  shall
I  not,  have  to  give  an  account  o*  thus
spending  my  means  and  using  the
time  of  the  tailor  for  naught  ?  I
think  I  shall,  and  I  may  say,  as  far
as  I  am  concerned,  I  know  I  shall
have  to  give  an  account,  But  the
people  do  not  think  of  this.  j

Now,  then,  leaving  the  useless
thing*  which  the  brethren  use — tea,
coffee,  tobacco,  beer,  whiskey,  etc,  I
will  allude  to  some  that  the  sisters
use  and  wear,  such  as  tea,  coffee,
snuff,  tobacco,  opium,  and  then  the
ruffles,  bow£,  puffs,  trimmings,  and
thi>,  that,  and  the  other  that  they
wear  on  their  dnsses  that  arc  useless.
What  shall  we  do  in  regard  to  these
tilings? My  senses  tell  me  that  the


children  of  Zion  should  forsake  every
seedless  fashion  and  custom  which
they  now  practise.  My  wives  dress
very  plainly,  but  I  sometimes  ask
them  the  utility  of  some  of  the  stripes
and  puffs  which  I  see  on  their  dresses.
I  remember  asking  a  lady  this  ques-
tion once,  and  enquired  if  they  kept
the  bed  bugs  and  flies  away.  Well,
if  they  do  that  they  are  very  useful;
hut  if  they  do  not,  what  use  are
they  ?  None  whatever.  Now,  some
ladies  will  buy  a  cheap  dress,  say  a
cheap  calico,  and  they  will  spend  from
five  to  fifteen  dollars  worth  of  time
in  making  it  up,  which  is  wasting  so
much  of  the  substance  which  God
has  given  them  on  the  lust  of  the  eye,
and  which  should  be  devoted  to  a
better  purpose-  I  have  had  an  ob-
servation made  to  me  \\hich  I  be-
lieve I  will  relate;  I  never  have
done  it,  but  I  believe  I  will  now,
It  has  been  said  to  me — **  Yes,  bro-
ther Brigham,  we  have  seen  ladies
go  to  parties  in  plain,  home-made
cloth  dresses,  but  every  man  was
after  the  girls  who  had  on  a  hundred
dollars  worth  of  foll-the-roll,  and
they  would  dance  with  every  woman
and  girl  except  the  one  in  a  plain
dress,  and  they  would  let  her  stay  by
the  wall  the  whole  evening,"  It  may
be  in  some  cases,  but  should  not  be*
It  adds  no  beauty  to  a  lady,  in  my
opinion,  to  adorn  her  with  fine
feathers.  When  I  look  at  a  woman,
I  look  at  her  faee,  which  is  composed
of  her  forehead,  cheeks,  nose,  mouth
and  chin,  and  I  like  to  see  it  clean,
her  hair  combed  neat  and  nice,  and
her  eyes  bright  and  sparkling  j  and
if  they  are  so,  what  do  I  care  what
she  has  on  her  head,  or  how  or  of
what  material  her  dress  is  made  ?
Not  the  least  in  the  world.  If  a  wo-
man is  clean  in  person,  and  has  on  a
nice  clean  dress,  she  looks  a  great
deal  better  when  washing  her  dishes,
making her butter or  cheese,  or


PRESENT  REVELATION,  ETC.


75


sweeping  her  house,  than  those  who,
as  I  told  them  in  Provo,  walked  the
streets  with  their  spanker  jib  flying.
It  adds  no  beauty  to  a  lady  or  gen-
tle m an  to  have  a  great  many  frills
on  their  dresses  or  coats;  beauty
must  be  Bought  in  the  expression  of
the  countenance,  combined  with  neat-
ness and  cleanliness  and  graceful
manners.  All  the  beauty  which  na-
ture bestows  is  exhibited,  let  the
dress  be  ever  so  plain,  if  the  wearer
of  it  be  only  neat  and  comely.  Do
not  fine  feathers  look  well  ?  Yes,
they  are  very  pretty,  but  they  look
just  as  well  on  these  dolls,  these
fixed  up  machines  which  they  have
in  the  stores,  as  anywhere  else ;  they
certainly  add  nothing  to  the  beauty  of  a
lady  or  gentleman,  so  far  as  I  ever  saw.

Now,  then,  labor  is  our  capital,
and  the  source  and  creator  of  all  the
wealth  that  we  possess;  and  I  feel  it
ft  duty  to  say  to  the  sisters  as  well  as
the  brethren,  that  we  must  stop  the
course  that  has  been  so  generally
pursued  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
of  spending  time  and  means  lor  no-
thing. I  will  mention  one  article  to
illustrate,  and  that  is  the  sewing
machine.  A  sewing  machine  that
costs  twenty-two  dollars  to  manu-
facture, we  pay  one  hundred  and
twenty- five  dollars  for  ;  for  one  that
costs  fourteen  dollars  to  manufacture,
we  pay  eighty-five  dollars;  and  for
one  that  costs  sixteen  dollars,  we  pay
one  hundred*  And  then,  when  a
man  gets  his  wife  a  sewing  machine,
she  will  spend  from  five  to  fifteen
dollars  worth  of  time  in  making  a
dress.  This  is  wasting  time  j  and
we  want  the  brethren  and  sisters  to
understand  that  when  they  waste
time,  they  are  wasting  the  capital
stock  which  God  has  given  them  to
improve  upon  here  upon  the  earth.
Says  one — **I  have  nothing  to  do*"
Yuu  very  easily  can  have  if  you  wish
for  it


Now  for  the  men.  I  have  been
into  houses  which  have  not  had  the
least  convenience  for  the  women,  not
so  much  as  a  bench  to  set  their  water
pails  on,  and  they  have  to  set  them
on  the  floor,  and  yet  their  husbands
will  sit  there  year  after  year,  and
never  make  so  much  improvement  as
a  bench  to  set  the  pail  on.  Yet  they
have  the  ability,  but  they  will  not
exercise  it.  They  ought  to  make
every  hour  of  the  day  useful,  and  if
they  have  nothing  else  to  do,  they
should  spend  their  time  in  making
improvements  in  and  around  their
homes.  They  might  fix  the  garden
fence,  hoe  the  garden,  set  out  trees
and  cultivate  and  attend  to  them,  fix
the  yard  and  make  it  look  neater,  fix
up  the  house  and  make  it  more  con-
venient for  the  wives  and  the  children,
A  certain  portion  of  the  time  should
also  be  spent  in  storing  their  minds
with  useful  knowledge,  reading  the
Bible,  Book  of  Mormon,  and  other
Church  works,  and  histories,  scientific
works  and  other  useful  books.  I  have
seen  people  live  year  after  year  in  a
log  house,  with  never  so  much  as  a
nail  to  hang  a  broom  on,  and  the
broom  is  first  in  one  corner  and  then
in  another,  on  the  floor  or  out  of
doors.  Never  had  a  place  to  put  the
discloth  in,  or  to  hang  it  on,  and  it
would  be  — "  Susan,  where  is  the
dishcloth  r"  or— "  Sally,"  or  "  Peggy,
where  is  the  broom  ?"  "  I  don't
know,  there  is  no  place  for  the
broom;"  and  a  man  living  there
year  after  year,  who  never  seemed
to  wake  up  the  senses  in  him  enough
to  drive  a  peg  into  the  crack  of  a  log
to  have  a  place  to  hang  a  broom  or  a
dishcloth  on,  or  to  moke  a  bench  for
a  water  or  a  milk  pail.  I  have  seen
such  men,  year  after  year,  without  a
chair  in  their  houses  ;  and  if  you  ask
them  why  they  do  not  go  to  work
and  make  some  chairs  they  will  say
— **  We  don't  know  how."  Then


76  JOURNAL  OF

why  not  go  to  work  and  learn  ?  Do
as  I  did  when  I  went  to  learn  the
carpenter  and  joiners'  trade.  The
first  job  my  boss  gave  me  was  to
make  a  bedstead  out  of  an  old  log
that  had  been  on  the  beach  of  the
Lake  for  years,  water-logged  and
watersoaked.  Said  he — u  There  are
tools,  yon  cat  that  log  into  right
lengths  for  a  bedstead.  Hew  out  the
side  rails,  the  end  rails  and  the  posts;
get  a  board  for  a  head  board,  and  go
to  work  and  make  a  bedstead/1  And
I  went  to  work  and  cut  up  the  log,
split  it  up  to  the  best  of  my  ability,
and  made  a  bedstead  that,  I  suppose,
they  used  for  many  years*  I  would
go  to  work  and  learn  to  make  a  wash-
board, and  make  a  bench  to  put  the
wash  tub  on,  and  to  make  a  chair.
This  is  spending  time  usefully;  but
when  we  spend  our  time  for  naught
we  waste  that  which  God  has  given
us  as  our  capital  stock  with  which  to
make  ourselves  useful  in  life,  and  to
give  to  our  fellow- beings  that  which
belongs  to  them.

Now,  we  want  the  sisters,  as  well
as  the  brethren,  to  use  their  capital
stock  to  the  very  best  advantage.
And  we  wish  them  to  make  their  ov^n
fashions  in  regard  to  dress;  but  if
they  will  not  do  that,  then  copy  the
fashions  of  Babylon  only  so  far  as
they  are  useful;  then  stop,  go  no
further,  and  sustain  and  uphold
trade  with  the  outside  world  only  so
far  as  it  is  really  necessary.  If  the
sisters  remain  with  us  they  will  do
as  they  are  told ;  and  if  they  do  this
we  say  —  You  are  at  perfect  liberty
to  go  and  renew  your  covenants  b}'
baptism;  but  if  you  will  not  live
according  to  the  instructions  that  are  i
given,  we  object  to  you  renewing
your  covenants ;  we  do  not  wish  you
to  say  one  thing  and  do  another.  We
shall  require  the  sisters  to  take  bold
and  do  something  for  themselves.
Where  does  our  knitting  come  from  ?


DISCOURSES.

Everybody  goes  to  the  store  to  buy
knitted  goods;  but  this  is  not  right,
we  ought  to  knit  our  own  stockings.
If  the  sisters  want  some  little  hoods
or  jackets  for  their  children  they  go
to  the  store  for  them,  they  ate  very
cheap  there.  Yet  we  raise  the  best
of  wool  here,  and  we  are  spinning  it
just  as  nice  as  in  any  factory  in  the
world,  We  have  knitting  machines
and  all  the  material  necessary,  and
we  have  also  the  ability  to  knit  or
weave  all  the  hoods,  jackets,  drawers,
undershirts,  etc.,  that  we  need;  and
if  the  sisters  will  do  their  duty,  they
will  do  their  own  knitting  and  pre-
pare this  Fall  to  raise  silk  another
year.  I  have  been  at  thousands  of
dollars  expense  in  encouraging  the
people  here  to  raise  silk,  but  they  do
not  do  it,  and  in  this  respect,  as  in
many  others,  they  have  neglected
their  duty,  for  it  is  their  duty  to  take
hold  of  this  industry.  The  sisters
will  say  to  their  husbands — "  I  want
so  and  so,  and  I  want  you  to  give
me  the  money  to  buy  it."  Instead
of  this,  I  say,  let  the  sisters  go  to
work  and  raise  some  silk,  and  this
will  find  them  and  their  children
profitable  employment*  If  you  have
not  got  any  mulberry  trees,  plant  out
some  immediately,  they  are  here  by
the  hundreds  and  thousands  in  nur-
series, and  as  soon  as  possible  raise
silk,  and  that  when  raised  and
thoroughly  cured,  will  bring  the
money.  Then  you  can  raise  the  mo-
ney, without  having  to  call  on  your
husbands.  Now  if  a  man  buys  a
sewing  machine  for  his  wife,  she
wants  a  hired  girl  to  run  it ;  at  least,
I  will  say  that  some  women  take
this  course,  and  they  spend  their  time
uselessly  and  waste  the  capital  stock
which  God  has  given  them.  This  is
the  course  that  some  pursue  instead
of  doing  good.  We  want  a  turning
point  to  arrive  for  women  of  this
class,  and  for  all  to  be  guided  in  their


PRESENT  REVELATION^  ETC


77


conduct  by  the  dictates  of  good,
sound  sense;  and  us  the  sisters  like
to  be  noticed  by  the  brethren,  I  will
say  that  they  who  keep  themselves
neat  and  clean,  and  whose  countenan-
ces are  bright  and  clear,  are  the  ones
that  will  be  noticed  by  the  good*

Now,  sisters,  if  you  will  consider
these  things  you  will  readily  see  that
time  is  all  the  capital  stock  there  !
is  on  the  earth;  and  you  should
consider  your  time  golden,  it  is  actu-
ally wealth,  and,  if  properly  used,
it  brings  that  which  will  add  to  your
comfort,  convenience,  and  satisfaction.
Let  us  consider  this,  and  no  longer  sit
with  hands  folded,  wasting  time,  for
it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  and  of
every  woman  to  do  all  that  is  possible
to  promote  the  kingdom  of  God  on
the  earth.

Without  going  further  into  the
details  regarding  the  duties  of  this
people  we  can  say,  in  a  very  few
words,  that  our  Father  in  heaven,
Jesus,  our  elder  brother  and  the  Sa-
vior of  the  world,  and  the  whole
heavens,  are  calling  upon  this  people
to  prepare  to  save  the  nations  of  the
earth,  also  the  millions  who  have
slept  without  the  Gospel,  and  here
we  are  neglecting  oor  duty,  wasting
our  time,  running  here  and  there  as
though  there  was  nothing  to  do  only
to  serve  ourselves-  We  have  glory,
immortality  and  eternal  lives  to  gain,
and  it  is  our  duty  to  take  a  course  to
gain  them,  that  we  may  enter  into
the  highest  state  of  intelligence  and
enjoy  the  society  of  the  pure  and
those  who  dwell  with  God.

You  have  now  heard  some  things


that  we  want  of  the  sisters*  I  will
now  say  a  word  to  the  brethren.  If
any  brother  is  found  drinking  with
the  drunkard  we  certainly  shall  look
after  him ;  and  my  counsel  and  advice
are  for  every  man  and  every  woman
to  pause  well  before  they  go  and  re-
new their  covenants,  and  know  whe-
ther they  are  going  to  be  Saints  or  not.
A  person  may  say  —  "If  I  have
strength  I  am  going  to  be  a  Saint.'*
The  drunkard  may  say  —  u  I  mean  to
reform  the  swearer  may  say — "  I
mean  to  reform  ;  "  the  liar  says — <£  I
mean  to  reform ;  "  and  the  thief  may
say — "  I  mean  to  reform."  There  i»
no  man  or  woman  on  the  earth  in  the
habit  of  stealing,  but  what  can  cease
the  practice  right  square  if  they  are
disposed.  And  so  with  the  liar,  he
can  stop  lyin#,  and  lie  no  more,  and
tell  the  truth.  It  only  wants  the
will  to  do  it,  and  that  will  brought
into  exercise  to  enable  the  liar  to  be
truthful,  the  thief  to  be  honest,  and
the  swearer  to  stop  his  evil  speaking.
So  with  the  ladies.  If  they  only  have
I  the  will,  and  will  exercise  it,  they  can
cease  spending  their  time  in  useless
fashions,  and  they  can  turn  their
:  attention  to  storing  their  minds  with
all  useful  knowledge,  then  adorn
themselves  with  all  that  is  necessary
to  make  themselves  neat,  nice,  comely
and  commendable  to  the  eyes  of  God
and  angels,  and  of  the  good  every-
where. Then  they  will  be  right.  I
pray  the  Lord  to  bless  you,  preserve
you  and  guide  your  entire  lives  that
we  may  be  saved  in  the  Kingdom  of
our  God,  Amen.


78


JOL  KNAL  OF  DIS


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Deliyrkid  in  the  Old  Tadeknaclk,  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug.  31,  1875.

(ReporUl  ly  David  ty,  Evam,)

THE  UNITED  OKTjKR — HOW  UNITY  IS  TO ATTAINED — REFORM  NECES-
SARY— TUK  ORDER  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD — STEWARDSHIPS*


In  relation  to  the  rales  that  we
have  heard  read  over,  there  is  no-
thing in  them  but  what,  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  we  have  always  professed
to  believe  in.  Same  of  us  have  been
around  teaching  these  principles
among  the  people ;  and  I  have  some-
time spoken  of  them  as  baby  rules,
that  is,  as  rales  which  people  like  the
Latter-day  Saint**,  who  are  in  posses-
sion of  correct  principles,  ought  al-
ways to  be  governed  by  ;  Latter-day
Saints,  who  have  been  faithful  from
the  commencement  of  their  career
in  the  Church,  have  been  governed
by  these  very  principles  that  we  are
now  talking  about.

We  profess  to  be  governed  by  the
laws  of  God,  and  to  be  associated
with  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth  j  we  piofess  to
be  related,  more  or  less,  to  other
parties  who  have  held  the  same
Priesthood,  powers,  light,  and  in-
telligence that  we  possess;  those
who  under  stand  themselves  profess
to  be  associated,  more  or  less,  with
the  Church  of  the  first  -  born,  with
Jesus,  whom  Paul  calls  the  Mediator
of  the  New  Covenant,  and  with
God,  the  Father  of  all ;  and  our  re-
ligion and  the  revelations  that  have
been  given  to  us  are  for  the  express
purpose  of  leading  us  to  a  union


among  ourselves,  with  those  who
have  gone  before,  and  with  Jesus,
and  God  the  Father,  who  are  all  of
them  interested,  as  we  ought  to  be,
in  seeking  to  carry  ont  the  designs
and  purposes  of  the  Almighty  upon
the  earth.  Those  parties  who  have
lived  before,  lived  not  for  themselves,
but  for  God,  When  Jesus  was  upon
the  earth  he  said  —  44 1  came  not  to
do  my  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Fa-
ther who  sent  me,"  and  every  man
who  is  associated  with  the  Church  and
kingdom  ot  God  expects  and  under-
stands, if  he  understands  things  cor-
rectly, that  he  is  part  of  the  great
household  of  faith,  belonging  to  a
celestial  kingdom  that  be  anticipates
inheriting,  and  that  he  ought  to  be
governed  by  celestial  laws,  by  which
other  intelligences  who  have  lived
before  have  been  governed.  Those
men  of  whom  Paul  speak.-,  all  of
whom  died  in  faith  and  in  hope  of  a
better  inheritance,  did  certain  things
by  which  they  proved  to  the  world
that  they  desired  a  city  whose
builder  and  maker  was  God,  where*
fore  Paul  tells  us  that  God  was  not
ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  for
he  had  prepared  a  city  for  them.
We  read  of  the  Zion  that  was  built
up  by  Euoch,  and  that  this  2fion
and  the  people  that  were  united


THE  UNITED

with  Enoch,  who  were  subject  to  the
same  laws  which  God  ia  seeking  to
introduce  among  us,  wore  caught  up
into  the  heavens.  We  have  been
expecting  all  along  to  build  np  a
similar  Zi  m  upon  these  mountains,
and  we  have  talked  a  great  deal  about
going  back  to  Jackson  County,  We
can  not  build  up  a  Zion  unless  we  are
in  possession  of  the  spirit  of  Zion,
and  of  the  light  and  intelligence  that
flow  from  God,  and  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  Priesthood,  the  living
oracles  of  God,  to  lead  us  in  the  paths
of  life.  We  do  not  know  them  with-
out, and  we  need  all  these  helps  to
lead  ns  along,  that  by  and  by  we
may  come  to  such  a  unity  in  our
temporal  and  in  our  spiritual  affairs,
and  in  everything  that  pertains  to
oar  interest  and  happiness  in  this
world  and  in  the  world  to  come,  that
we  may  be  prepared  to  enter  a  Zion
here  upon  the  earth,  help  to  build
Temples  of  the  Lord  and  to  admin-
ister in  them,  and  so  operate  and
co-operate  with  the  Gods  in  the  eter-
nal worlds,  and  with  the  Patriarchs,
Prophets,  Apostles,  and  men  of  God,
who  were  inspired  by  the  spirit  of
revelation  in  generations  that  arc
passed  and  gone ;  we  want  to  be  one
with  them,  one  with  God,  and  one
with  each  other,  for  Jesus  said, —

_____  J  1

'*  Except  you  are  one  you  are  not
mine-"  Then  the  question  arises,  if
we  are  not  Jesus',  whose  are  wo  ?

It  is  evident,  in  relation  to  the
position  that  we  have  been  in,  that
all  kinds  of  confusion,  folly,  vanity,
evil,  pride,  haughtiness,  covetousness,
drunkenness,  and  every  kind  of  sin
have  existed  among  us,  as  a  people.
I  am  not  surprised  that  the  President
should  feel  inclined  to  shake  off  many
of  these  tilings.  Why  ?  Because,
if  they  are  permitted  in  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  servant
of  God  and  his  coadjutors  do  not  lift
up  their  voices  against  them,  God


ORDEK,  ETC,  79

would  hold  them  responsible.

Does  President  Young  want  to
bear  the  sins  of  the  people  ?  No,
Do  the  Twelve  and  others  want  to
bear  the  sins  of  the  people  ?  No,
It  is  for  the  President  to  point  out
the  way  of  life,  and  for  all  of  ns  to
walk  in  ifc.  This  is  the  order  of  God,
and  every  man  and  woman  should
fulfill  the  various  duties  that  devolve
upon  them.

Now  then,  in  regard  to  our  tem-
poral affairs,  these  are  the  things
which  seem  to  perplex  us  more  or
less.  We  have  been  brought  up  in
Babylon,  and  have  inherited  Baby-
lonish  ideas  and  systems  of  business;
we  have  introduced,  too,  among  us,
all  kinds  of  chicanery,  deception
and  fraud.  It  is  time  that  these
things  were  stopped,  and  that  mat-
ters assumed  another  shape;  it  is
time  that  we  commenced  to  place
ourselves  under  the  guidance  and
direction  of  the  Almighty.  You  can
not  talk  in  many  places  about  tem-
poral matters,  but  everybody  is  on  the
alert  at  once,  and  the  idea  is — Do  you
want  my  property  ?  No,  Do  yoa
want  my  possessions  ?  No,  no ;
there  is  no  such  feeling,  but  we  do
want  men  and  women  to  give  God
their  heart?,  we  do  want  people,  while
they  profess  to  fear  God,  not  to  be
canting  hypocrites  and  to  depart
from  every  principle  of  right.  We
remember  the  time  very  well,  or
most  of  us,  when  we  first  entered
into  this  Church,  if  a  man  was
found  lying  he  would  be  brought
before  the  Church  and  dealt  with;
if  a  man  was  found  stealing  he
would  be  brought  up  before  the
Church  and  dealt  with ;  if  a  man
defrauded  his  neighbor,  and  it  could
be  proved,  he  was  brought  up  and
dealt  with ;  and  so  if  a  man  got
drunk;  and  for  all  these  delinquen-
cies if  parties  did  not  repent  of
them  they were immediately  cut


80


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


off  from  the  Church  as  unworthy  of
fellowship.  And  now,  after  so  many
years  travail,  are  we  to  continue  and
fellowship  all  these  evils  ?  No,  no,
we  can  not  do  it,  and  God  will  not
do  it ;  and  if  we  carry  them  along
with  ug,  we  shall  not  enter  into  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God.

Now  then,  with  regard  to  this
onion  of  property,  what  is  it  ?  Why,
it  is  something  to  draw  the  people
nearer  together,  to  prepare  them  for
future  developments.  What  is  the
Order?  Well,  we,  here,  have  thought
proper,  at  the  suggest  ion  of  Presi-
dent Young,  to  act  as  stewards  over
oar  own  property.  In  some  places
where  there  is  not  so  much  property
as  here,  it  might  be  better  to  pursue
another  course ;  but  as  to  that,  no
matter  if  our  hearts  are  together,
and  we  do  what  we  do  in  all  sincerity
before  God.  What  we  are  after  is
to  give  our  hearts  to  God,  to  renew
our  covenants,  and  then  be  one  in
our  temporal  affairs ;  and  this  is  to
be  under  the  direction  of  the  living
Priesthood,  and  not  under  any  parti-
cular dead  letter.  Here  is  a  certain
form  that  everybody  ought  to  submit
to  ;  every  man  and  every  woman  in
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  ought  to  be  governed  by
these  rules,  and  we  know  it  in  our
hearts,  I  mean  when  they  refer
particularly  to  our  morals.  When
we  come  to  other  points,  that  is  a
matter  of  judgment  and  principle
that  we  want  to  be  governed  by  as
the  law  of  God.  We  have  an  orga-
nization here  in  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  it  is
one  of  the  most  perfect  that  ever  ex-
isted on  the  earth.  And  how  is  it
organized  ?  Why,  we  have  the  Pre-
sidency, with  President  Young  at  the
head,  as  the  mouthpiece  of  God  to
this  people.  That  is  the  way  that
we  Latter-day  Saints  profess  to  be-
lieve in  him,  whether  we  do  so  or


not;  and  if  we  do  not  believe  it
then  we  are  acting  the  hypocrite.
Then  come  the  Twelve,  then  the  High
Priests,  Bishops,  Seventies,  High
Councils,  Bishops"  Councils,  Elders,
Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons,  all
organized  by  the  Almighty.

Now,  then,  do  I  believe  that  the
Lord  Almighty  directs  President
Young?  I  do,  with  all  my  heart
Do  yon  believe  it?  That  is  the
question.  Do  you  believe  that  he
and  his  first  council  have  the  right
to  dictate  and  manage  all  affairs  per-
taining to  the  temporal  and  spiritual
interests  of  the  Church  and  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth  ?  I  believe
it,  do  you  ?  These  are  questions
that  we  want  to  put  to  ourselves
fairly  and  frankly  and  honestly,  with-
out any  equivocation  or  reservation,
for  this  is  really  a  part  of  the  order
of  God.

Now  then  come  the  Twelve  and
all  the  other  authorities.  We  be-
lieve that  they  are  ordained  of  God,
that  they  are  part  of  his  economy
and  government,  all  these  various
quorums  as  they  exist  on  the  earth,
and  that,  by  and  by,  when  we  get
through  in  this  world,  we  shall  all
assume  our  proper  position  and  pro-
per Priesthood,  with  Joseph  Smith
at  the  head  of  this  dispensation,  and
that  we  shall  be  associated  there  with
that  Priesthood  that  we  have  been
connected  with  here.  Now,  then,  we
do  not  want  to  be  playing  fast  and
loose,  part  God,  part  the  world,  part
the  devil,  part  the  Lord's  way  and
part  our  way,  and  every  man  follow-
ing the  devices  and  desires  of  his  own
heart.  We  have  come  under  the
government  of  God,  and  God  expects-
our  strict,  full,  implicit  and  unequi-
vocal obedience  in  all  particulars.
God  says,  "  Give  me  thy  heart."  We
have  covenanted  long  ago  to  do  this,
and  this  is  simply  a  renewal  of  this
covenant,  and  of  many  covenants


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


81


that  we  have  entered  into  in  relation
to  these  matters.  Is  it  a  sacrifice  ?
Are  we  doubtful  and  fearful  about
this,  that,  and  the  other?  What
have  we  to  sacrifice  ?  What  hold
have  we  upon  this  earth  ?  What
hold  have  we  upon  any  property  on
this  earth  ?  It  may  be  said  to  us  as
it  was  to  a  man  who  Baid — **  I  have
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years,
soul  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and
be  merry it  may  be  said  to  us  as
it  was  said  to  him  —  "Thou  fool,
this  night  thy  soul  is  required  of
thee/7  and  then  whose  will  these  be  ?
What  have  we  that  we  did  not  get
from  God  F  I  have  heard  President
Young  say  that  there  is  not  one
solitary  thing  that  he  has — wife,
dollar,  horse,  carriage,  or  properry
of  any  kind  that  he  did  not  receive
from  God.  Have  any  of  us  got
anything  that  we  did  not  receive
from  him  ?  Not  a  penny*  Can  we
keep  anything  any  longer  than  the
Lord  has  a  mind  to  permit  us  ?  Not
one  moment  longer,  In  his  hands
are  the  issues  of  life  and  death,  and
the  only  hope  we  have  is  to  be  one
with  God,  with  the  Priesthood  upon
the  earth,  that  is  connected  with
the  Priesthood  in  the  heavens,  that
we  may  unite  in  a  phalanx  with  them,
with  God,  with  the  Patriarchs  and
Prophets,  with  all  good  men  that
have  ever  lived,  that  we  may  form
a  cemented  united  body  with  them
in  the  accomplishment  of  the  pur-
poses of  God,  for  the  bringing  of
salvation  to  the  world  in  which  we
live,  for  the  redemption  of  the  living
and  the  dead,  for  the  spreading  forth
of  truth,  the  establishing  of  cornet
principles,  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  the  building  of
Temples;  and  then  when  we  get
through  here,  that  we  may  unite
with  them  in  the  celestial  kingdom
of  our  Father.

The-e  are  some  of  the  ideas  that

No.  6.


we  believe  in,  in  relation  to  these
matters,  and  the  thing  that  is  now
proposed  is  very  simple  and  straight-
forward. The  President  has  said
that  there  are  many  men  in  this
city  and  elsewhere  who  want  to  know
whom  they  shall  place  over  their
affairs;  they  c^n  not  tell.  Well,
what  then  ?  Why  those  who  cannot
do  that,  let  them  unite  together  in  a
united  order  similar  to  that  which  is
spoken  of,  as  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants  expresses  it — though
it  varies  a  little  from  that  form  here
— and  lay  it  at  the  Apostles'  feet,
and  let  the  Bishop  give  them  their
inheritances-  Here  another  ihintr  is
contemplated,  here  we  are  stewards
over  our  own  property ;  and  yon
have  heard  read  that  the  avails  of
rhat  system,  after  supplying  the
families,  are  to  be  under  I  he  direc-
tion of  the  board  of  directors,  to
say  what  shall  be  done  with  them.
Then  again,  if  there  is  extravagance
in  families,  in  dress,  eating  or  in
living  of  any  kind,  no  matter  what
it  may  be,  we  want  that  checked,
we  do  not  want  the  Saints  to  be
extravagant;  we  do  not  want  to
do  anything  that  God  does  not
want  us  to  do,  and  no  good  Saint,
man  or  woman,  wants  to  clo  what
God  does  not  want  All  such  feel
like  one  of  old — Oh,  Gud,  search  me
and  try  me,  and  prove  me,  and  if
there  is  any  way  of  wickedness  in
me,  exhibit  it  to  me ;  let  me  see  it
that  I  may  bid  it  adieu,  and  let  me
be  a  good  Saint;  let  me  live  in  the
enjoyment  of  thy  favor  and  let  the
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of
revelation  rest  upon  me;  let  me  he
in  favor  with  God  and  ray  brethren
and  all  good  men,  and  then  when
I  get  through,  receive  the  reward  of
the  just.

May  God  help  us  to  appreciate
these  privileges,  and  not  think  that
we  are  making  sacrifices,  for  we  are

Vol  XVIII,


82  JOURNAL  OF

merely  seeking  the  guidance  of  the
Almighty  to  direct  us  in  our  tem-
poral affairs,  that  we  may  inherit
thrones,  principalities,  powers  and


DISCOURSES.

dominions  in  the  eternal  worlds,
which  we  never  shall  inherit  unless
we  are  one.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  at  the  Forty  Sixth  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Chfrch
op  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  Wednesday  Afternoon,  October  6,  1875,

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  PLEASURE  OF  SERVING  GOD  —  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE GATHERING  —

NECESSITY  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  PRIESTHOOD,


It  is  exceedingly  interesting  to  me,
as  I  have  no  donbt  it  in  to  all  Latter-
day  Saints,  to  hear  the  Elders  who
have  been  on  missions  bear  a  faithful
testimony,  on  their  return,  to  the
truth  of  the  work  in  which  they  have
been  engaged.  It  is  a  tolerably  eas3T
matter  to  tell,  in  listening  to  them
speaking,  whether  they  have  been
faithful  or  not  in  magnifying  their
Priesthood  and  calling,  for  a  man  who
does  not  magnify  his  Priesthood,  and
who  is  not  faithful  in  the  discharge  of
the  duties  entrusted  to  him,  generally
manifests  it  by  the  spirit  which  he
possesses  and  with  which  he  speaks,
'And  so,  also,  when  men  have  been
faithful  and  have  striven  to  magnify
their  calling,  a  spirit  aud  influence
attend  them  that  bear  testimony  of
their  faithfulness.  No  man  can  go
out,  ordained  by  those  who  have  the
authority,  in  faith  and  in  humility  to
preach  the  principles  of  the  everlast-
ing Gospel,  however  peculiar  and


difficult  the  circumstances  may  be
that  surround  him,  however  great  the
trials  and  the  persecutions  that  he
may  have  to  contend  with,  without
receiving  an  unction  from  the  Holy
One,  that  will  bear  testimony  to  him
that  the  work  in  which  he  is  engaged
is  of  God,  and  that  he  has  been  called
of  God  to  declare  the  principles  of
lifo  and  salvation  unto  the  people
among  whom  his  lot  may  be  cast.
There  is  this  peculiarity  and  influence
about  this  work,  there  is  the  demon-
stration of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
descends  with  convincing  and  over-
whelming power  upon  all  those  who
place  themselves  in  a  position  to
receive  itj  and  there  is  no  labor
under  the  sun,  I  care  not  what  it
may  b.j,  or  how  pleasant  the  circum-
stances that  surround  him,  at  all
comparable  with  the  labor  of  aa
Elder  in  this  Church,  who  endeavors,
in  humility  and  meekness,  to  magnify
his  calling ;  there  is  no  joy  which  a


THE  PLEAS  LIKE  OF  SERVING  GOD,  ETC


83


human  soul  is  capable  of  compre-
hending, that  approaches  the  delight
aii'l  the  satisfaction  which  laboring
in  the  ministry  of  the  Son  of  God
confers  upon  him  who  does  so  in
faithfulness.  He  may  be  destitute,
he  may  be  without  purse  and  scrip,
as  our  Elders  travel,  he  may  be  in
the  midst  of  enemies,  he  may  be
haled  to  prison,  and  treated  with
contumely,  and  have  all  manner  of
evil  heaped  upon  him;  but  if  he  is
faithful  to  God,  if  lie  is  faithful  to
his  Priesthood,  and  magnifies  it  to
the  extent  of  his  ability,  there  is  a
power,  an  influence,  and  a  joy  resting1
upon  and  Accompanying  him,  and
filling  him  from  the  crown  of  his
head  to  the  soles  of  his  feet,  that  are
incomprehensible  to  those  who  have
not  experienced  them ;  and  for  such
a  in: in  to  doubt  that  God  is  with
him,  and  that  the  work  he  is  engaged
in  is  the  work  of  God,  would  be  as
difficult  as  to  doubt  that  the  sun's
rays  ever  beam  upon  him,  or  that
there  is  no  warmth  or  light  con-
nected with  them  ;  in  fact,  such  a
man  could  as  easily  doubt  his  own
existence,  and  the  testimony  of  every
sense  that  he  possesses,  as  to  doubt
the  testimony  of  God  whiea  rests
down  upon  him.

And  these  blessings  ure  not  con-
fined to  those  who  go  forth  as  mis-
sionaries, but  they  extend  themselves
to  all  who  enter  into  covenant  with
God,  take  upon  them  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  resolve  in  their
hearts  to  repent  of  their  sins,  and  to
tread  humbly  and  meekly  in  the  path
which  the  Suvtur  has  marked  out  for
all  to  walk  in.  They  receive  also,
according  to  the  measure  of  their
responsibilities,  and  the  position
which  they  occupy,  the  same  gifts
and  blessings,  and  the  same  joy  tills
their  hearts  that  does  the  hearts  of
ihe  faithful  Elders.

When  I  listen  to  the  Elders,  as


we  have  to-day,  speaking  their  ex-
perience, and  relating  that  which
they  have  met  with,  and  the  joy
they  have  had,  it  has  seemed  to  me
that,  if  any  of  the  Elders,  or  if  all
the  EUers,  could  comprehend  thig
and  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it,  they
would  say  that  they  would  devote
themselves  with  all  they  possess,
with  every  feeling  of  their  heart,
with  every  power  of  their  mind,
with  all  the  strength  and  the  ability
which  God  has  given  them,  to  the
rolling  forth  of  his  work  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.  But  the  diffi-
culty with  us  as  individuals  is,  that
we  are  like  the  iran  of  whom  the
Apostle  James  speaks:  we  lo'>k  in
the glass, we see ourselves,  our


features  are  distinct to  us,


every


thing  is  plain  to  us,  we  see  the  mir-
rored resemblance  of  ourselves  in
the  glass  that  we  look  upon,  but  we
turn  away,  and  we  speedily  forget
what  manner  of  men  we  are.  And
so  it  is  with  many  who  are  ir.  this
Church.  They  have  experienced  joy,
they  have  had  testimonies  from  God,
they  have  had  the  power  and  the  gifts
of  God  resting  upon  them ;  but  after
a  little  while,  coming  in  contact  with
the  world,  and  the  spirit  of  the  world,
they  forget  these  things,  the  remem-
brance of  them  fades  away  from
their  minds  and  other  things  appear
more  desirable  to  them.  This  is
the  difficulty  that  the  servants  of
God  have  to  contend  with  in  their
ministering  among  men*  It  would
appear,  looking  at  matters  naturally,
that  it  men  and  women  had  tasted
the  word  of  God,  had  received  reve-
lation from  God,  had  knowledge
poured  into  their  souls  concerning
this  being  the  work  of  I  rod,  they
would  always  be  faithful  to  the  truth ;
but  it  is  not  so,  and  this  is  evidence
of  the  great  power  which  the  ad-
versary exercises  over  the  hearts  of
the  children  of  men, Men  may


84


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


behold  the  heavens  opened  and  see
Jesus,  they  may  see  visions,  and
have  revelations  given  to  them,  and
yet  if  they  do  not  live  as  they  should
do,  and  cherish  the  Spirit  of  God  in
their  hearts,  all  this  knowledge,  and
these  revelations  and  wonderful  man*
ifestations  fail  to  keep  them  in  the
Church,  to  preserve  them  from  the
power  of  the  adversary,  and  to  de-
liver them  from  the  snares  that  he
spreads  for  the  feet  of  all  the  children
of  God.  And  in  our  own  experience
we  CHn  comprehend  very  easily  how
the  Church  of  God,  in  ancient  days,
fell  away  from  the  truth,  wandered
into  darkness,  and  lost  the  knowledge
of  God  and  the  ordinances  which  he
had  established  in  his  Church  for  the
salvation  of  his  people.  How  long
would  it  be,  were  it  not  for  the  teach-
ings, warnings  and  reproofs  of  those
who  are  set  to  preside  over  them,
before  many  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  probably  a  majority  of  them,
would  stray  into  by  and  forbidden
paths,  and  forget  the  knowledge  that
they  once  had  and  the  blessings  they
once  enjoyed  ?  And  yet  I  am  thank-
ful that  people  cannot  stay  in  this
Church  and  practice  unrighteousness.
I  am  thankful  that  God  allows  those
who  do  not  keep  his  commandments
to  fall  away,  so  that  his  Church  may
be  cleansed,  and,  in  this  respect,  this
Church  is  different  from  any  other
that  is  upon  the  earth,  A  man  may
practice  iniquity  and  do  wrong  in
other  churches,  and  he  may  cover  it
up  for  years,  and  nobody,  or  probably
but  a  few — himself,  his  God,  and  a
few  others — be  aware  of  this  wrong,
and  he  may  pass  along  and  nobody
ever  imagine  that  there  is  anything
wrong  with  him.  But  it  is  not  so  in
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat-
ter-day Saints — no  man  can  stand  in
this  Church,  or  retain  the  Spirit  of
God  and  continue  in  a  course  of  hy-
pocrisy for  any  length  of  time.  God


will  tear  away  the  covering  of  lies
and  expose  the  wrong ;  he  will  leave
the  transgressor  to  himself,  and  the
strength  that  he  formerly  had,  which
enabled  him  to  stand  and  maintain
his  associations  with  the  people  of
God,  will  be  taken  away  from  him,
and  he  will  be  left  to  go  down  to  des-
truction unless  he  repents.  It  is
true  that  the  Lord  has  said  that  the
tares  shall  grow  with  the  wheat  until
harvest,  but  it  is  not  said  that  tares
will  not  be  plucked  up  from  time  to
time,  for  if  it  were  not  so  they  would
overpower  and  choke  out  the  wheat.
The  sifting  or  weeding  process  has
been  going  on  from  the  commence-
ment of  this  Church  until  the  present
time  ;  hence  it  is  that  the  leaders  of
this  Church  are  stirred  up  in  their
feelings  from  time  to  time  to  call
upon  the  people  to  repent.  They
understand  clearly  that  unless  there
is  a  godly  life  and  conversation  cor-
responding with  our  profession,  this
people  would  soon  fall  into  darkness
and  error,  and  stray  from  the  path
of  righteousness.

Our  enemies  are  not  mistaken  in
some  of  their  ideas  respecting  us,
that  is,  respecting  the  power  that  caa
be  brought  to  bear  to  destroy  us*
They  seem  to  be  well  aware  of  the
fact  that,  if  we  only  conform  to  their
customs,  fashions,  ideas  and  prac-  ;
tices,  we  would  soon  fall  away  und
cease,  as  a  people,  to  preserve  our
identity.  They  understand  this,  and
hence  the  efforts  which  have  been
made  of  late.  It  has  seemed  as
though  the  adversary  has  been"  ex*
ertiijg  every  power  and  bringing  I
every  influence  within  his  reach  to
destroy  us ;  and  the  most  lamentable
feature — the  one  that  has  given  me
most  concern  connected  with  it — has
been  the  apparent  blindness  of  our
people  respecting  these  designs;  it
has  seemed  as  though  we  could  not
see  and  understand  their  nature,  and


THE  PLEASURE  OF  SERVING  GOD,  ETC.


83


we  have  to  a  certain  extent  yielded
ourselves  willing  captives  and  dupes
to  the  plots  that  have  been  under-
taken in  our  midst  to  destroy  us.
The  fact  that  God  predicted,  through
the  mouth  of  his  servant  Daniel,  and
through  others,  that  this  kingdom
should  stand  for  ever,  has  seemingly
lulled  a  great  many  to  sleep  and
caused  them  to  think  that  we  are
perfectly  safe,  and  that  no  danger
can  overtake  ns ;  and  the  fact  also
that  we  have  remained  in  these
mountains,  now,  for  twenty -eight
years  without  mobs,  and  that  so  many
of  the  people  who  have  grown  up
and  have  come  here  and  never  knew
anything  about  them,  who  have
joined  the  Church  since  the  days  of
mobocracy,  these  causes  combined
have  had  the  effect  to  cause  a  great
many  to  be  very  supine,  and  to  im-
agine, apparently,  that  we  could  not
be  disturbed,  or  that  our  safety  could
not  be  endangered  by  anything  that
might  be  done  against  us.  Hence,
when  the  servant  of  God  has  called
upon  us,  and  given  us  counsel  upon
many  points,  we  have  not  seemed  to
understand  the  benefit  of  the  counsel.
Wo  are  here  in  these  mountains,
Latter-day  Saints.  We  have  made
this  country,  notwithstanding  all
that  may  be  said  to  the  contrary,  all
that  it  is  to-day.  Why,  the  very
officials  of  this  Territory  to-day  may
thank  God  that-  he  raised  up  Joseph
Smith  and  Brigham  Young,  because
if  he  had  not  done  so  there  would
have  been  no  governors,  judges  or
other  federal  officials  of  Utah  Terri-
tory; there  would,  in  fact,  have  been
no  Territory  of  Utah  if  it  had  not
been  for  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter-day  Saints.  Men  may  my
what  they  please,  but  every  thinking
man  in  this  country  must  admit  that
our  settlement  of  this  country  has
forwarded  settlement  in  the  adjacent
Territories  and  States  more  than  a


I  quarter  of  a  century.  We  hive  de-
monstrated one  great  fact — that  men
can  live  here,  that  fruit,  corn  and
wheat,  and  all  the  cereals  which  be-
long to  this  latitude  can  be  raised
here  by  a  judicious  application  of
water,  combined  with  industry  and
perseverance.  We  have  demonstra-
ted this;  it  is  no  longer  a  problem
as  to  what  this  country  can  produce,
hence  you  now  hear  of  agriculture
in  Montana,  Idaho,  Wyoming,  Colo*
rado  and  Nevada;  but  it  is  a  very
great  query  whether  this  would  have
been  the  case  for  another  generation,
at  least,  had  it  not  been  for  the  Lat-
ter-day  Saints.  What  could  have
induced  men  to  come  here  if  they
had  not  been  prompted  by  the  feeling
that  started  us  out  ?  We  had  no
plnce  to  go  to  excepting  this.  We
wanted  the  meanest  and  most  unde-
sirable part  of  the  continent,  so  that
our  enemies  would  not  rob  us  of  it,
as  soon  as  we  had  improved  it ;  and
when  we  came  here  we  hoped  we  had
reached  a  place  where  we  could  live,
at  least  for  a  time,  undisturbed,  until
we  could  increase  and  raise  a  genera-
tion who  would  be  firm  in  the  faith,
and  be  so  numerous  that  they  could
carry  on  the  work  whose  foundations
their  fathers  hud  laid.  We  came
here  in  that  spirit  and  with  that  view.
Not  to  exclude  other  men  from  the
land  that  we  had  settled,  but  to
create  homes,  and  a  place  to  which
men  and  women  of  every  nation  could
come,  and  where  they  could  worship
God  unmolested,  as  we  desired  to
worship  him.  We  cared  not  what
their  creed  might  be,  or  whether  they
were  Jews,  Pagans,  Moslems,  or
Christians,  We  asked  no  man  who
came  here  to  believe  as  we  believed,
and  we  had  no  disposition  to  deny
them  the  rights  that  we  enjoyed  be-
cause they  did  not  believe  as  we  be-
lieved, It  was  in  that  spirit  that  the
foundation  stones  of  this  superstruc-


8G  JOURNAL  OF

ture  of  government  in  Utah  Terri-
tory  weie  laid,  It  was  that  here,  not
only  Latter-day  Saints,  but,  as  I  have
said,  nun  of  every  creed  and  clime
might  come  and  worship  God  unmo-
lested hy  their  neigh  bo rs.

But  there  were  others  who  did  not
feel  as  we  felt,  and  they  were  deter-
mined to  curtail  us  of  our  privileges,
and  now  for  vears  there  has  been  a

m

studied  and  unrelenting  effurt  to
destroy  the  work  that  we  have  done,
and  to  strip  us  of  all  the  advantages
we  have  gained  by  coming  here;  to
wrest  from  us  by  any  means  that
could  be  used,  however  despicable
and  illegal,  the  power  that  God  has
given  us,  and  to  which  we  are  en-
titled under  the  laws  and  constitution
of  our  country.  There  has  been  no  con-
cealment  of  these  designs,  no  attempt
made  to  gloss  them  over ;  they  have
been  avowed,  plainly  and  publicly,  to
all  the  land  and  to  all  the  Latter-day
Saints  throughout  these  mountains,
that  if  they  could  get  the  power  tostrip
ns  of  our  rights  they  would  do  it  without
any  hesitation  or  compunctions  of  con*
science.  j
Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  let
me  ask  you,  this  being  the  case,  what
is  our  plain  and  bounden  duty  ?  It
is  to  preserve  ourselves,  not  only  for
our  own  sakes,  not  only  for  the  Hake
of  our  children,  but  for  the  sake  of
humanity  everywhere,  and  for  the
sake  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,
upon  this  land  which  God  has  given
to  us.  Many  will  pass  away  after  a
little,  and  here  are  children,  and  here
are  mankind,  many  of  whom,  in  wit-
nessing the  bold  stand  we  have  taken,
are  anxious  to  see  us  preserve  our-
selves and  to  see  civil  and  religious
liberty  maintained  by  us  on  thin  land.
And  we  owe  it  to  them,  as  well  as  to
posterity,  that,  by  every  means  in  our
power,  we  do  preserve  ourselves  and
our  liberties  intact  If  we  do  not,
we  are  recreant  to  our  high  trust,  and  .


DISCOUKSES.

to  the  high  calling  which  we  have
received  from  our  Almighty  Father,
In  doing  this,  must  we  intrude  upon
others?  Is  there  any  necessity  for
this  ?  No;  our  policy  is  not  aggres-
sive; the  true  policy  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  is  a  preservative  and  de-
fensive policy  ;  to  preserve  and  de-
fend ourselves  when  we  are  attacked;
not  to  be  aggressive,  not  to  intrude
upon  others*  rights,  but  to  preserve
our  own  rights.  Every  man  and
woman  belonging  to  this  community
should  therefore  keep  constantly  in
mind  that  this  is  the  policy  for  which
we  should  labor,  and  not  consult  in-
dividual interests;  not  say — "I  can
make  one  dollar  or  two  dollars  by
stepping  aside  from  the  policy  that
has  been  marked  oat."  Many  so-
called  Latter-day  Saints  have  done
this.  We  have  people  among  us
who,  if  we  may  judge  by  their  ac-
tions, would  sell  every  liberty  that
God  has  given  unto  us  for  a  few  dol-
lars, and  yet  they  call  themselves
Latter-day  Saints.  When  counsel
has  been  given  by  President  Brigham
Young — than  whom  a  wiser  counselor
does  not  live  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  —  instead  of  accepting  that
counsel  and  looking  at  it  in  its
true  light,  in  its  elevated  light,  there
have  been  persons  who  have  looked
at  it  from  their  pieayumsh  stand-
point. They  have  asked — '*  How  ia
that  counsel  going:  to  affect  my  indi-
vidual interests  ?'*  And  many  have
said  by  their  actions:  "Now  is  .my
chrince  to  make  money;  while  the
bulk  of  the  people  are  obeying  coun-
sel, it  will  be  to  my  advantage  to
disobey  it.  I  can  make  money  by
so  doing."  And  they  have  actually
taken  advantage  of  the  obedience
of  the  people  to  make  money  by
their  disobedience,  and  yet  have
called  themselves  Latter-day  Saints!
Is  not  this  the  case  ?  Do  you  not
know  it  to  be  the  case? And  that


THE  PLEASURE  OF  SERVING  GOD,  ETG.


87


spirit  has  been  spreading  and  diffus-
ing itself  among  this  people,  the
example  of  one  encouraging  another,
nntil  too  many  have  indulged  in
and  given  way  to  it,  to  the  injury  of
the  cause  of  God.  And  hence  the
leaders  of  this  Church  have  been  so
deeply  impressed,  of  late,  to  go  forth
and  call  upon  this  people  to  repent
and  turn  from  their  folly  and  listen
to  God's  voice  through  his  inspired
servant,  lest  He  should  send  calam-
ities upon  them  ;  for  it  is  plain  to  be
seen,  as  brother  Squires  said,  except
we  are  one  we  are  not  Christ's,  we  are
not  God's,  and  that  union  is  the  only
principle  upon  which  we  can  be  pre-
served. We  have  not  strength,  we
have  not  numbers,  we  have  not
wealth,  bnt  we  have  union  when  we
choose  to  avail  ourselves  of  it,  and
with  union  there  is  strength,  especially
when  God  has  promised  his  bless-
ing*.

Now,  can  you  not  see,  you  Latter-
day  Saints,  how  unwise  it  is  for
ns  to  disobey  counsel,  when  that
counsel  is  given  for  the  benefit  of  the
whole  people?  This  man  says — H  I
can  gain  some  advantage  by  dis-
obeying that  counsel  f  this  woman
says — "  I  can  gain  some  advantage
by  going  contrary  to  that  counsel,"
not  caring  anything  as  to  what  the
results  may  be,  so  that  their  little
ends  can  be  served  to  some  trifling
extent,  and  being  blind  to  the  fact
that  we  must  preserve  ourselves  by
looking  after  our  own  interests,  and
taking  care  of  the  great  work  which
God  has  entrusted  to  us.  Why,  it
took  all  the  eloquence  of  President
Young  for  years  to  en  use  this  people
to  see  that  it  was  not  to  their  interest
to  sustain  their  enemies,  foster  their
enemies,  feed  their  enemies,  take  all
their  wealth  and  give  it  to  their
enemies,  and  thoso  enemies  plotting
all  the  time  against  their  liberties
and  their  lives,  auct  avowing  it  pub-


licly and  undisguisedly.  Do  you  not
remember,  before  co-operation  was
started,  how  long  and  loud  the  Pre-
sident of  this  Church  and  his  coun-
sellors, and  other  men,  had  to  plead
with  the  people  to  get  them  to  see
this  plain  matter  of  self- preserving
policy  ?  They  could  not  see  it,  that
is,  a  great  many  could  not  see ;  and
when  co-operation  was  suggested  they
could  not  see  that,  and  there  are  a
great  many  who  can  not  see  it  now,
and  who  are  opposed  to  it  in  their
hearts,  and  they  are  opposed  to  every-
thing that  will  bring  this  people
closer  together,  and  make  them  mora
one,  and  they  fight  it,  and  they  do
not  know  the  spirit  that  prompts
them.  It  is  the  same  to-day  re-
specting the  United  Order;  many
seem  to  he  blind,  they  can  not  uoder-
derstand  what  it  is  that  blinds  them;
but  it  is  miserable  selfishness;  they
become  so  eager  alter  money  that
their  judgment  is  beclouded.  If  we
were  united,  we  could  control  thiugs
in  this  country  to  an  extent  you  have
no  conception  of,  and  we  could  be*
come  rich,  if  riches  were  the  desire
of  our  hearts,  there  is  nothing  to
prevent  us;  if  we  will  be  guided  by
the  counsel  of  God's  servants,  we  can
have  all  the  riches  that  heart  can
desire.  But  our  miserable,  short-
lighted  selfishness,  that  miserable,
contracted,  narrow  policy  that  is  nob
of  God,  blinds  our  eyes  and  darkens
our  understandings,  and  prevents  us
from  seeing  the  true  policy  of  build-
ing up  the  Zion  of  God  on  the  earth,
and  preserving  the  liberty  which
Gud  has  given  unto  us*

God  requires  one  thing  of  the  peo-
ple called  Latter-day  Saints,  and  if
they  will  receive  and  obey  that,
everything  else  wilt  follow,  and  that
is — to  obey  the  counsel  of  God'a
servants*  If  you  will  do  that,  every-
thing else  will  follow  in  the  train.
And  why  should  we  not  d  j so  ?


83


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Have  we  not  a  leader  whom  God  has
blessed  as  he  has  no  other  man  of
whom  we  have  any  knowledge  at
present  on  the  earth  ? Look  at  what 1
has  been  done! See  how  God  1ms
prospered  him  and  those  who  have
received  his  counsel! Whenever  he
has  told  us  to  do  anything,  as  a  peo-
ple, and  we  have  done  it,  God  has
blessed  us  in  its  performance;  and
whenever  the  people,  or  a  portion  of ,
them,  have  disobeyed  his  counsel,
they  have  not  been  prospered*  They
have  invariably  lost  the  spirit  and
gone  into  darkness. Do  you  not
know  this  ? Has  not  the  experience
of  the  past  thirty-one  years  confirmed  ,
tli is  to  us  ? How  was  it  with  as
when  we  crossed  the  plains  and  when
we  came  here? Did  any  of  yon
know  whither  you  were  corning  ?  I
know  the  people  did  not  know,  but
they  followed  his  lead,  believing  that
God  led  and  inspired  him,  and  that
God  would  lead  him  to  a  place  where
we  conld  locate. And  look  nt  what
we  see  throughout  these  valleys  to-
day! Where  is  there  anything  like
it  on  the  face  ot  the  earth  ? A  f)eo-
ple  gathered  from  every  nation,  speak-
ing almost  every  tongue,  brought  up


in  the  midst  of  every  creed,  and  with
every  kind  of  habit,  and  yet  homo-
geneous and  dwelling  together  in
union  and  love,  without  litigation
and  strife !  Where  can  you  see  any-
thing on  the  face  of  the  earth  that
compares  with  it?  Is  it  any  won-
der that  we  have  faith  in  God  and  in
his  servant  ?  I  tell  you  that  if  there
is  any  condemnation  resting  upon
these  Latter-day  Saints,  it  is  because
of  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of
heart  iu  not  listening  to  his  counsel,

Now  let  us  be  taught ;  let  us  profit
by  the  experience  of  the  past,  and
not  allow  ourselves  to  be  deluded  by
the  adversary,  and  by  anj\  even  if
they  should  call  themselves  our
friends.  But  no  man  who  weakens
ot  tries  to  weaken  that  counsel  which
has  led  us  all  the  time,  is  a  friend  to
this  people.
1  May  God  bless  yon,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  fill  you  with  his  Holy
Spirit,  rend  the  veil  of  darkness  that
beclouds  our  minds,  darkens  our
eyes,  and  prevents  our  seeing  the
i  truth,  and  the  true  policy  of  the
kingdom,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,


Delivered  at  the  Forty-Sixth  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
or  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  on  Wednesday,  Oct,  6,  1875*

(Reported  by  David  IF,  Evam.)

GOD  PRESERVES  HIS  PEOPLE— INTERNAL  FOES  THE  MORE  DANGEROUS—

REDEMPTION  OF  THE  DEAD— THE  PRIESTHOOD.


It  is  always  a  source  of  pleasure  to
mo  to  meet  with  my  brethren  and
sisters  in  the  Gospel  covenant,  I
rejoice  exceedingly  in  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  that  I  have  the
privilege  of  being  numbered  with  the
Saints  of  latter  days,  I  am  thankful
for  the  blessings  that  we  enjoy  as  a
people  in  these  vallejs.  1  feel  grate-
ful for  the  many  evidences  we  have
experienced  of  God's  mercy  and  pro-
tection. I  am  thankful  that  I  have
been  able  to  see  his  hand  in  our  deli-
verance from  the  powers  and  machi-
Dations  of  our  enemies,  from  the
earliest  period  uf  our  existence  as  a
people;  and  I  am  thankful  that  I  am
able  to  see  the  hand  of  the  Lord  over
us  at  present  as  conspicuously  and  as
clearly  as  at  any  former  period  of  our
history.

We  read  in  the  revelations  that
have  come  to  us  through  the  Pro-
phets, both  ancient  and  modern,  con-
cerning the  purposes  of  the  Lord  in
the  latter  days,  and  the  restoration
of  the  Gospel  to  the  earth  by  a  holy
angel,  that  it  is  to  be  preached  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue,  and
people  under  the  whole  heavens,  that
every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam
ahall  have  the  privilege  of  hearing  it,


embracing  it,  partaking  of  its  bles-
sings, and  of  being  saved  by  its
power.  We  read  that  the  Lord  is
going  to  do  this  work,  and  that  he  is
going  to  cut  it  short  in  righteous-
ness; that  it  is  his  design  to  gather
out  the  honest  in  heart — those  who
are  willing  to  hearken  to  his  counsels
and  obey  his  laws.  It  is  his  design
to  gather  all  such  out  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  that  he  may
make  of  them  a  people  worthy  of  his
name  and  his  blessings,  and  prepare
them  to  meet  him  when  he  shall
come  to  make  up  his  jewels;  when
he  shall  come  to  take  vengeance  upon
the  wicked  and  ungodly,  who  know
not  Godf  and  who  keep  not  his  com-
mandments upon  the  earth.

The  hand  of  the  Lord  has  been
visible  in  the  gathering  together  of
this  people  for  the  last  twenty -eight
years;  yes,  for  the  last  forty-five
years,  and  no  more  so  in  that  than
in  everything  connected  with  the
labors  of  his  servants,  their  counsels
unto,  and  their  guidance  of,  the
people  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Al-
mighty that  was  in  them  from  the
very  beginning.  At  no  time  in  the
history  of  this  Church  has  the  hand
of  the  Lord  been  withdrawn  from


90  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


this  people,  bis  power  shortened,  or
his  eye  slept,  bat  his  eye  has  been
upon  us,  his  hand  has  been  over  us,
and  his  providences  have  been  in  our
favor. Circumstances have  been
over- ruled  for  pood,  the  hand  of  the
enemy  has  been  turned  away  para-
lyzed, the  efforts  of  the  wicked  to
destroy  us  have  resulted  in  our  good
and  in  their  own  discomfiture.  The
greater  the  efforts  on  the  part  of  our
enemies  to  destroy  usf  the  greater  the
growth  of  the  Church  and  kingdom
of  God,  and  the  closer  has  our  union
been,  the  better  have  we  been  able  to
see  the  hand  of  the  Lord  over  nst  and
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  in
the  counsels  of  his  servants,  and  the
more  have  we  been  inclined  to  re-
spect and  abide  by  the  counsels  given.
The  very  fact that the  spirit  of
bitterness  in  the  hearts  of  the  wicked
toward  us  at  the  present  time  is  as
virulent  as  it  ever  was,  and  is  every
way  similar  to  that  manifested  against
the  former-day  Saints, against  the
Savior  when  he  was  upon  the  earth,
and  against  his  disciples,  or  the  peo-
ple of  God  in  any  former  age  of  the
world,  is  an  unmistakable  evidence
that  the  Lord  God  Almighty  is  with
us  to-day  as  much  as  he  ever  was
since  the  organization  of  the  Church,
or  as  much  as  he  ever  was  with  any
people  he  ever  acknowledged  as  his
since  the  world  began. I  do  not
believe  there  ever  was  a  people  who
were  guided  by  revelation, or  ac-
knowledged of  the  Lord  as  his  people,
that  were  not  hated  and  persecuted
by  the  wicked  and  the  corrupt,  and
perhaps  no  people  were  ever  more
persecuted  than  this  people  would  be,
if  it  were  in  the  power  of  the  enemy
to-day  to  persecute  us,  as  it  was  in  the
power  of  Nero  and  the  Romans  to
persecute  the  Saints  in their  day.
There  never  was  a  time  when  it  was
moie  fixed  and  determined  in  the
heart  of  the  wicked  to  fight  against,


and  destroy  the  kingdom  from  the
earth,  than  now,  and  their  failure
will  be  due  only  to  the  impossibility
of  the  task  they  have  undertaken.
And  this  is  an  evidence  to  every  one
that  possesses  the  least  spark  of  the
light  of  the  Holy  Spirit — and  should
he  to  all  mankind — that  the  kingdom
of  God  is  established,  that  his  Priest-
hood is  here,  that  the  Saints,  or
many  of  them,  are  magnifying  their
calling  and  honoring  the  Priesthood,
and  also  the  Lord,  both  with  their
lives  and  with  their  substance,  winch
are  his.

For  my  part  I  do  not  fear  the  in-
fluence of  our  enemies  from  without,
as  I  fear  that  of  those  from  within.
An  open  and  avowed  enemy,  whom
we  may  see  and  meet  in  an  open  field,
is  far  less  to  t  e  feared  than  a  lurk-
ing, deceitful,  treacherous  enemy
hidden  within  us,  such  as  are  many
of  the  weaknesses  of  our  fallen  human
nature,  which  are  too  often  allowed
to  go  unchecked,  beclouding  our
minds,  leading  away  our  affections
from  God  and  his  truth,  until  they
sap  the  very  foundations  of  our  laith,
and  debase  us  beyond  the  possibility
or  hope  of  redemption  either  in  this
world  or  that  to  come.  These  are
the  enemies  that  we  all  have  to  battle
with,  they  are  the  greatest  that  we
have  to  contend  with  in  the  world,
and  the  most  difficult  to  conquer.
They  are  the  fruits  of  ignorance,
generally  arising  out  of  unrebuked
sin  and  evil  in  our  own  hearts.  The
labor  that  is  upon  us,  is  to  subdue
our  passions,  conquer  our  inward
foes,  and  see  that  our  hearts  are  right
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  that  there
is  nothing  calculated  to  grieve  his
Spirit  and  lead  us  away  from  the
path  of  duty.

Those  only  who  possess  the  light
of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  faith  of
the  Gospel,  which  can  only  be  pos-
sessed through  faithfulness  and  obedi-


GOD  PRESERVES  HIS  PEOPLE,  ETC,


91


ence  to  the  requirements  of  heaven,
can  discern  and  know  the  voice  of
the  true  Shepherd  when  they  hear  it.
We  need  not  expect  to  be  able  to
discern  the  right  from  the  wrong,  the
truth  from  error,  and  light  from
darkness,  unless  our  eye  is  single,
and  we  have  declared  ourselves  for
God  and  his  work.  If  we  are  divided
in  our  thoughts,  affections,  and  in-
terests,  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  we
need  not  expect  to  comprehend  the
will  of  the  Lord  when  made  known
to  us,  no  matter  how  powerfully  or
directly  it  may  come.  It  will  be  all
the  same  to  us  unless  we  are  in  a
position  to  receive  the  light  and  the
truth  when  it  is  offered  unto  us.

What  shall  we  do  if  we  have  ne-
glee  ted  our  prayers  ?  Let  us  begin
to  pray.  It  we  have  neglected  any
other  duty,  let  us  seek  unto  the  Lord
for  his  Spirit,  that  we  may  know
wherein  we  have  erred  and  lost  our
opportunities,  or  let  them  pass  by
ns  unimproved.  Let  us  seek  unto
the  Lord  in  humility,  determined
to  forsake  everything  that  would  be
an  obstruction  to  our  receiving  the
intelligence  and  the  light  that  we  need,
and  an  answer  to  our  prayers,  that
we  may  approach  him  confident  that
his  ears  will  be  open  to  our  petitions,
that  his  heart  will  be  turned  unto  us
in  mercy,  that  our  sins  may  be  for-
given, our  minds  enlightened  by  the
influence  and  power  of  God,  that  we
may  comprehend  our  duty  and  have
a  disposition  to  perform  it,  not  to
postpone  it,  not  to  set  it  aside,  nor
to  say  in  our  hearts,  "  We  must  serve
the  wor  Id  or  the  devil  a  little  longer  ;
we  are  not  yet  prepared  to  serve  the
Lord  fully,  to  give  up  our  evil  habits,
to  lay  aside  this  and  that  folly,  and
walk  straightforward  in  the  path  of
duty  j  we  must  sow  o  few  more
wild  oats  before  we  can  fully  make
up  our  minds  and  determine  upon
serving  the  Lord  and  doing  bis  will


upon  earth  as  it  should  be  done,  and
as  we  know  how  to  do  it,  if  we  but
yield  obedience  to  the  light  that  has
come  into  the  world."  But  when  we
see  what  is  necessary  to  be  done,  it
becomes  our  duty,  and  we  should  go
to  with  all  our  might  and  do  it,  no
matter  what  our  desires  may  be  to
the  contrary.  Whatever  comes  from
the  Priesthood  by  inspiration  we
should  be  willing  to  receive  as  the
counsel  of  the  Almighty,  which  we
must  of  necessity  obey  and  execute
in  order  that  we  may  be  accepted
of  hirn.

This  is  a  lesson  thnt  we,  as  God's
people,  should  cheerfully  learn.  Do
you  think,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
that  we  can  climb  up  some  other
way,  or  enter  in  at  some  other  door  ?
Do  you  think  that  we  can  take  the
things  of  God  and  bring  them  to
onr  standard,  or  squart  the  principles
of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  by  our
rule  ?  Do  you  think  that  we  would
ever  succeed  in  an  effort  to  dictate  to
the  Almighty  the  terms  of  our  sal-
vation ?  If  we  think  so  we  are
mistaken,  deceived  ;  we  c:*nnot  do  it.
The  purposes  of  the  Almighty  are
unchanged  and  unchangeable,  his
laws  endure,  and  he  is  the  same  yes-
terday, to-day  and  forever.  His  pur-
poses will  ripen  and  be  consummated,
and  his  designs  be  completed.  There-
fore, if  we  do  not  conform  to  his
will,  obey  his  laws  and  yield  to  his
requirements  in  this  world,  we  will
be  consigned  to  "  the  prison  house,"
where  we  will  remain  until  we  pay
the  debt  to  the  uttermost  farthing.
This  is  a  Scriptural,  a  reasonable,
and  a  true  doctrine;  for  it  is  a  doc-
trine of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  the  Saints  understand  it,  but
there  may  be  some  here  who  do  no^
and  for  their  benefit,  as  .well  as  to
refresh  the  memories  of  those  who
may  not  have  reflected  for  a  little
season  upon  this  principle,  I  will  re-


$2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


fer  to  it  as  briefly  expressed  in  the
third  iiTid  fourth  chapters  of  the  first
Epistle  of  Peter,  There  you  will
see  that  Jesus  himself  preached  the
Gospel  to  the  spirits  in  prison,
4*  which  some  time  were  disobedient,
when  once  the  long  suffering  of  God
waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the
ark  was  a  preparing,  wherein  few,
that  is,  eight  souls  were  saved  by
water."  This  may  seem  strange  to
some,  that  Jesus  should  yo  to  preach
the  Gospel  unto  the  wicked,  rebellious
antediluvians,  whose  bodies  had
been  destroyed  in  the  flood  because
they  rejected  the  testimony  of  Noah,
who  had  been  sent  to  rebuke  their
iniquities  and  warn  them  of  destruc-
tion decreed  against  them  if  they  did
not  repenr,  nevertheless  it  is  true,
From  this  Scripture  we  not  only  learn
the  condition  of  those  who  are  cut
oil  in  their  sins  because  of  their  wick-
edness  in  rebelling*  against  the  laws
of  God  and  rejecting  his  servants,
but  such  of  them  as  have  not  sinned
against  tbft  Holy  Ghost,  however
Wicked  they  may  have  been  in  this
world — save  committing  that  unpar-
donable sin — will  have  the  privilege
of  hearing  the  Gospel  in  the  spirit
world  ;  "  for,"  as  the  Apostle  says,
"for  this  cause  was  the  Gospel
preached  also  to  them  that  are  dead,"
"  Yes,"  says  one,  "dead  in  sin,  but
not  dead  as  to  the  flesh."  But  the
Apostle  does  not  say  so,  but  to  the
contrary,  for  the  dead  here  referred
to  had  perished  in  the  flesh  and  the
Apostle  continues  — 11  That  they
might  be  judged  according  to  m*n
in  ike  fiesh^  but  live  according  to
God  in  the  spirit;"  that  is,  out  of
the  body  until  the  resurrection  from
the  dead.  But  first  they  must  re-
main in  hell — the  "prison  house,"
until  they  have  paid  the  penalty  of
their  sintf  in  the  flesh,  even  to  the
**  uttermost  farthing."  "But,"  says
one,  "  is  this  possible  r" The  people


in  Europe,  where  we  have  been
preaching,  were  struck  with  wonder
and  astonishment  when  we  mentioned
this  doctrine,  and  say  they,  "We
had  supposed  that  '  as  the  tree  fell  so
it  should  lie,'  and  that  *  there  was
no  salvation  in  the  grave/  "  Nei-
ther is  there  any  salvation  in  the
grave,  and  "  as  the  tree  falls,  so
it  lies,"  but  this  is  pertaining  to
the  flesh.  Does  the  spirit  lie  with
the  body  ?  Is  the  spirit  confined  in
the  grave  ?  No.  As  the  body  falls,
so  it  will  lie  until  the  resurrection;
there  is  no  salvation  in  the  grave,  but
in  Christ,  who  is  the  "  light  of
life,"  and  the  spirit  soars  beyond  the
grave;  it  does  not  slumber  in  the
dust,  but  is  wafted  to  the  place  pre-
pared for  it  in  the  spirit  world,  to
receive  its  reward  or  punishment,
having  passed  the  first  judgment  of
God,  there  to  await  his  mercy,  and
the  resurrection  from  the  dead  and
the  final  judgment  of  the  great  last
day.

Thus  we  see  those  wicked,  unre-
pentant antediluvians  who  even  had
the  privilege  of  hearing  the  Gospel
in  the  flesh,  as  preached  by  Noah,
and  who  rejected  the  message  of  that
servant  of  God,  were  actually  visited
in  the  "  pi  ison  hou.se"  by  the  Savior
himself,  and  heard  the  Gospel  from
his  own  mouth  after  he  was  "  put  to
death  in  the  flesh."  Their  prison
was  opened,  and  liberty  was  pro-
claimed unto  them  in  their  captivity,
in  fulfillment  of  the  prediction  of  the
Prophet  Isaiah,  as  you  might  read
in  his  61st  chapter,  that  they  may
come  forth,  when  they  shall  have
fulfilled  the  decree  of  judgment
upon  them  in  the  prison,  or  hell,  to
do  the  first  works  necessary  unto  sal-
vation, which  they  refused  to  do  in
the  beginning.

Here  will  come  in  the  principles
of  baptism  for  the  dead,  and  of
proxy and heirship, as  revealed


GOD  PRESERVES  HIS  FQEPLE,  ETC


93


through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  |
that  they  may  receive  a  salvation  and
an  exaltation,  I  will  not  say  a  fullness
of  blessing  and  glory,  bat  a  reward
according  to  their  merits  and  the
righteousness  and  mercy  of  God,
even  as  it  will  be  with  you  and  with
me-  But  there  is  this  difference  be-
tween m  and  the  antediluvians —  j
they  rejected  the  Gospel,  consequently
they  received  not  the  truth  nor  the
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ;  therefore
they  did  not  sin  against  a  fullness  of
light,  while  we  have  received  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel ;  are  admitted
to  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
a  knowledge  of  the  living  and  true
God,  whose  will  it  is  also  our  privi-
lege to  know,  that  we  may  do  it.
Now  if  we  sin,  we  sin  against  light
and  knowledge,  and  perad venture  we
may  become  guilty  of  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ,  for  which  sin  there  is
no  forgiveness,  neither  in  this  world
nor  in  the  world  to  come,  Jesus
himself  declares  (Matt.  12,  31,)
thai  "  all  manner  of  sin  and  bias-
phemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men,
but  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy
Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto
nien,  neither  in  this  world,  neither
in  the  world  to  come/'  This  is  not
a  new  doctrine  that  has  just  been
revealed  through  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  or  President  Brigham  Youug,
but  it  is  the  doctrine  of  Jesus,  a  part
and  portion  of  that  Gospel  which  is
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  or
unto  damnation*  For  whosoever  will
believe,  repent,  and  be  baptized  for
the  remission  of  sins  shall  be  saved,
and  he  that  believes  not  and  is  not
baptized  shall  he  damned*  And  he
that  believes,  is  baptized  and  re-  :
ceives  the  light  and  testimony  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  walks  well  for  a
season,  receiving  the  fullness  of  the
blessings  of  the  Gospel  in  this
world,  and  afterwards  turns  wholly
unto  sin,  violating  his  covenants,


he  will  be  among  those  whom
the  Gospel  can  never  reach  in
the  spirit  world  ;  all  such  go  beyond
its  saving  power,  they  will  taste  the
second  death,  and  be  banished  from
the  presence  of  God  eternally*

I  feel  well  in  the  Gospel  of  Je^us
Christ*  I  know  that  it  is  true,  and
I  never  like  to  have  au  opportunity
pass  me  without  bearing  my  testimony
to  it.  I,  therefore,  bear  my  testi-
mony to  you,  that  God  has  restored
the  Gospel,  that  Joseph  Smith  was
and  is  a  true  Prophet,  and  that  Pre-
sident Young  is  his  rightful  succes-
sor.1 ■  - u '  *  \  '  ,

I  have  been  surprised  before  now
at  hearing  remarks  from  the  disaf-
fected and  apostates  against  Hie
Priesthood,  as  if  there  was  something
terrible  concealed  beneath  that  term.
What  constitutes  the  Priesthood  ?
A  legal  and  direct  cum  mission  from
God  to  man.  And  who  are  clothed
with  its  authority  and  power  ?  Pre-
sident Young  ?  Yes.  But  is  he  the
only  man  who  holds  the  Priesthood?
No,  Nor  are  his  counselors  and  the
Twelve,  the  only  ones  who  hold  itf
but  the  High  Priests,  the  Seventies,
the  Elders,  Priests,  Teachers,  and
Deacons,  all  hold  a  portion  of  the
Holy  Priesthood.  There  is  scarcely
a  member  of  the  Church  who  is  not
numbered  in  the  tanks  of  those
clothed  upon  by  this  power  ;  certainly
it  is  so  with  every  man  who  has  re*
ceived  blessings  in  the  house  of  the
Lord,  inasmuch  as  he  has  continued
faithful,  and  of  such  is  the  Church
composed,  for  the  unfaithful  cut
themselves  off  in  a  measure  both  from
the  Church  and  from  the  power  and
privileges  of  the  Priesthood,  and  are
not  to  be  relied  upon*  Therefore,
when  the  Priesthood — or  those  hold-
ing, it — are  ridiculed,  reviled,  or
persecuted,  the  blow  is  aimed,  and
the  evil  is  designed,  against  the  whole
Church  and  not  individuals,  although


94


JOURNAL  UK  U


as  our  enemies  single  out  individuals
as  targets  on  whom  to  vent  their
wrath  and  spleen.  A  blow  openly
aimed  at  President  Young,  is  secretly
destined  against  the  whole  people
constituting  the  Church  over  which
he  presides ;  any  attempt  to  pro-
scribe  or  destroy  him  or  his  brethren
as  individuals,  because  of  their  influ-
ence or  position  among  the  people,  is
so  far  indirectly  an  attempt  to  pro-
scribe and  destroy  the  whole  commu-
nity of  which  they  are  but  members,
and  every  member  of  the  community
should,  and  so  far  as  guided  by  a  pro-
per sense  of  justice  and  right,  most
assuredly  does,  consider  himself  or
herself  personally  assailed  and  ag-
grieved by  any  such  attempts.  How
contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  this  whole
people,  therefore,  must  they  be  who
rail  against  the  Priesthood,  and  at
the  same  time  make  themselves  so
conspicuously  loud  in  their  profes-
sions of  friendship  to  the  masses.
They  leave  the  covering  of  their  de-
signs too  thin  to  conceal  their  hypo-
crisy and  their  determined  bitterness
and  enmity  against  the  people  and
the  work  of  God.

A  deacon  in  the  Church  should
exercise  the  authority  of  that  calling
in  the  Priesthood,  and  honor  that
position  98  sincerely  and  faithfully  ns
a  high  Priest  or  an  Apostle  should
his  calling,  feeling  that  he  bears  a
portion  of  the  responsibility  of  the
kingdom  of  God  in  the  world,  in
common  with  all  his  brethren.  Ev-
ery man  should  feel  in  his  heart  the
necessity  of  doing  his  part  in  the
great  latter-day  work.  All  should
seek  to  be  instrumental  in  rolling  it
forth.  More  especially  is  it  the  duty
of  every  one  who  possesses  any  por-


tion of  the  authority  of  the  Holy
Priesthood  to  magnify  and  honor
that  calling,  and  nowhere  can  we
begin  to  do  so  to  better  advantage
than  right  here,  within  ourselves,
and  when  we  have  cleansed  the  in-
side of  the  platter,  cleansed  our  own
hearts,  by  correcting  our  own  lives,
fixed  our  minds  upon  doing  our  whole
duty  towards  God,  and  man,  we  will
be  prepared  to  wield  an  influence
for  good  in  the  family  circle,  in
society,  and  in  all t he walks  of

life.  *

We  should  seek  to  do,  and  to  be,
good.  It  is  true  that  Jesus  says  there
is  none  good  but  one,  that  is  God;
we  must  accept  this  in  the  fullest
sense  of  the  word,  but  there  are
other  degrees  of  goodness,  so  that
we  may  be  good,  righteous,  and
even  perfect  in  our  spheres,  as  God
is  good,  righteous,  or  perfect  in  his
exalted  and  glorious  sphere.  These
excellent  qualities  of  mind  and  soul
should  govern  our  lives  in  the  midst;
of  our  families  and  neighbors, among
our  brethren  of  the  household  of
faith,  and  in  all  our  intercourse  with
mankind,  that  we  may  win  souls  from
error,  ignorance,  folly  and  crime,  to
God  and  his  Christ,  and  help  them
to  stand  until  they  become  strong  in
the  faith,  and  thus  become  saviors  of
men  upon  Mount  Zion,  worthy  of  the
name  of  our  God*

May  the  Lord  bless  you  and  all
Israel,  and  especially  his  aged  servant
who  stands  at  our  head,  and  his  as-
sociates in  counsel,  the  loved  face  of
one  of  whom,  on  looking  round,  I
find  gone  from  our  midst,  but  his
life-long  example  still  lives  with  us,
and  will  live  forever.  Amen.


THE  BLESSING  OF  LIFE,  ETC,


95


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Delivered  at  the  Forty-sixth  Semi  annual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Thursday  Morning,  Oct,  7, 1875.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evanc.)

THE  BLESSING  OF  LIFE  FOR  EVERMORE — THE  LORD  COMMANDED  THE
UNITED  STATES  GOVERNMENT  TO  PURCHASE  FREEDOM  FOR  THEIR
SLAVES— REFORMATION  NECESSARY  THAT  THE  SAINTS  MAY  PROGRESS
FASTER — SALVATION  COMES  BY  FAITHFULNESS  AND  ENDURANCE  IN
CHRIST.


It  a  Boris  me  pleasure  to  meet  once  '
more  with  the  Saints  in  General
Conference  assembled,  where  we  may
pledge  ourselves  again,  and  bear  our
testimony,  and  raise  our  warning
voices  to  the  world  in  rrgud  to  the
great  work  that  the  Lord  is  accom-
plishing in  the  earth  through  the
instrumentality  of  his  children  who
have  enlisted  under  King  Emanuel's
banner,  and  are  willing  to  unite  with
him  in  accomplishing  his  purposes
on  the  earth.  His  kingdom  is  being
established  here  in  the  valleys  of
the  mountains.  Settlements  are
being  formed,  towns  and  villages  are
springing  up,  and  people,  who  have
made  a  covenant  with  God,  are  re-
claiming the  earth  from  the  thraldom
of  sin  and  iniquity  in  which  it  has  so  J
long  been  held  in  bondage ;  and  in-
stead of  being  in  a  little  city  or  town
in  Illinois,  where  we  were  not  per-
mitted to  dwell,  we  are  here  in  the  [
valleys  of  the  mountains,  possessing
from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two
hundred  towns,  villages  and  settle-
ments. The  Lord  has  thus  strength-
ened the  stakes,  enlarged  the  bor-


ders, and  lengthened  the  cords  of
Zion,  and  he  has  reclaimed  from  the
dominion  of  the  wicked  the  amount
of  the  earth's  surface  that  is  now
occupied  by  his  Saints,  at  least,  so
long  as  they  hold  it  for  him  and  his
kingdom,  and  themselves  for  his
work,  The  world  belongs  to  the
Lord,  and  he  lias  the  right  to  govern
and  control  it,  and  he  is  going  to  do
so.  We  are  preparing  the  way  for
his  kingdom  and  coming,  for  lie  cer-
tainly designs  to  come  here  just  as
soon  as  the  people  are  prepared  to
receive  him,  and  perhaps  sooner  than
some  will  be  willing  to  receive  him,
I  have  sometimes  thought,  that  if  he
were  now  at  the  gate,  we  should  feel
we  would  rather  he  would  wait
awhile  until  we  could  fix  up  matters
before  he  was  introduced.  The  way
is  preparing,  however,  and  I  feel  to
rejoice  this  morning  that  I  can  bear
my  testimony  to  the  increase  of  the
numbers  of  the  Saints  of  God,  and  to
the  increase  of  faith  and  good  works
among  them.

The  dominion  of  the  Lord  is  ex-
tending upon  the  earth,  a  little  here


9G


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


and  a  little  there,  sometimes,  per-
haps, going  a  little  too  far,  and
dodging  back  a  little  for  a  time,  and
then  springing  forward  again,  and
so  going  on,  on  every  side.  The
Lord  has  made  no  mistake,  he  un-
derstands what  he  is  doing  a  great
deal  better  than  some  of  us  do,  and
I  apprehend  that  a  great  many
people  art*  bringing  about  the  Lord's
purposes  unwittingly.  Perhaps  they
would  not  do  as  well  in  this  respect
as  they  are  now  doing  if  they  under-
stood, to  the  fullest  cxtmt,  the  result
of  the  course  they  are  taking.  But
really  the  Lord  is  at  work  with  a  great
many  people,  some  of  whom  see  the
kingdom,  and  some  do  not;  and  fie
has  even  said  that  he  will  pause  the
wrath  of  the  wicked  and  ungodly  to
praise  him,  and  the  remainder  of  their
wrath  he  will  restrain.  Tins  is  true,
and  has  been  illustrated  in  the  his-
tory of  this  people.  When  they
were  driven  from  Nauvoo,  the  dis-
position of  their  enemies  was  to  de-
stroy every  vestige  of  the  authority
of  the  holy  Priesthood  from  the
face  of  the  earth;  and  that  disposi-
tion still  exists  in  the  hearts  of  a
great  many  people,  and  if  they  had
the  power  they  would  carry  it  out.
Well,  the  Lord,  in  the  early  days
of  the  Church,  suffered  enough  of
this  disposition  to  he  gratified  to
cause  the  exodus  of  his  people  from
Missouri  and  Illinois,  and  they  were
finally  kicked  right  into  the  middle
of  the  floor,  into  these  valleys  of  the
mountains;  and  when  the  purposes
of  the  Lord  were  so  far  subserved  by
the  wrath  of  the  wicked,  he  restrained
them,  and  his  people  have  been
blessed  and  prospered,  and  the  earth
has  been  made  to  bring  forth  its
strength  for  their  sustenance,  and
we  tee  prosperity  on  every  hand  in
the  dwelling  places  of  the  Saints,
A  country  has  been  put  into  their
possession where the Lord  can


strengthen  their  feet,  and  he  is  doi
so,  whether  we  understand  it  or  not
Many  will  doubtless  make  shipwreck
of  their  faith,  and  will  be  led  away
by  the  allurements  of  sin  into  by  and
forbidden  paths;  yet  the  kingdo
will  not  be  taken  from  this  people
and  given  to  another,  but  a  people
will  come  forth  from  among  us  who
will  be  zealous  of  good  works,  willing
I  to  do  the  bidding  of  the  Lord,  who
will  be  taught  in  his  ways,  and  who
will  walk  in  his  paths.  We,  if  we
are  willing,  may  be  humble  instru-
ments in  the  hands  of  God,  in  bringing
to  pass  hisgreatand  glorious  kingdom.

We  have  a  Temple  pretty  neat
ready  to  go  into  in  St.  George.  It  is
progressing  very  favorably,  and  is
a  ma  eminent  structure,  and  in  a
short  time  we  shall  he  able  to  enter
it,  and  receive  blessings  for  time
and  eternity,  for  ourselves  and  our
lead.  Let  me  say  to  the  Latter-day-
Saints,  that  the  blessings  of  the
Lord,  even  life  for  ever  more,  are
commanded  hero  in  these  valleys
of  the  mountains.  I  will  read  a
few  words  from  the  Psalmist, — 4*  Be-
hold, how  good  and  how  pleasant  it
is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in
unity  !  It  is  like  the  precious  oint-
ment upon  the  head,  that  ran  down
upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard,
that  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his
garments ;  as  the  dew  of  Hermon,
and  as  the  dew  that  descended  upon
the  mountains  of  Zion :  for  there
the  Lord  commanded  the  blessing,
even  life  for  evermore/'  Anciently,
this  blessing  was  commanded  in  the
mountains  of  Zion  on  the  eastern
hemisphere,  but  in  our  day  the  Lord
has  revealed  himself,  and  has  spoken
from  the  heavens  to  his  servant  on
the  western  continent*  Where  the
authority  of  the  holy  Priesthood  is,
dwells  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,
and  there  has  he  commanded  the
blessing,  even  life  for  evermore.


THE  BLESSING  OF  LIFE,  ETC.


97


We  are  united  in  our  faith,  in
our  works,  and  in  our  feelings  and
interests  ;  and  in  every  capacity  that
is  possible  the  Latter-day  Saints
should  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder,
presenting  before  the  Lord  and  be-
fore the  world  an  unbroken  phalanx
to  resist  the  powers  and  insinuations
of  the  enemy  and  the  approaches  of
evil  in  every  direction. The  people
here  are  increasing  and  multiplying,
they  are  disposed,  as  a  general  thing,
to  do  as  the  Lord  wants  them  to  do ;
but  wickedness  will  creep  in.  We
must  purify  our  hearts. The  Lord
ssiys "  Son,  give  me  thy  heart''
We  must  'rive  our  hearts  to  the
Lord  our  God,  then  he  can  accept  of
us. Many  are  called  but  few  are
chosen. We  are  all  called  to  be  co-
helpers  with  the  Lord  in  establishing
hU  purposes  in  the  earth,  in  sustain-
ing holy  and  righteous  principles,
and  the  institutions  of  high  heaven
which  the  Lord  has  revealed,  and
the  organizations  which  he  has  in-
troduced in  the  midst  of  the  earth.
We  are  called  upon  to  sustain  them,
and  to  bear  thein  off  triumphantly,
to  lay  a  foundation  for  the  rule  of
truth, peace,  and  righteousness  in
the  earth,  and  to  prepare  the  way
for  the  ushering  in  of  that  great
and  glorious  kingdom  of  peace  that
will  stand  for  ever  and  ever.  This
is  the  work  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  the  Lord  will  perform  it  through
the  instrumentality  of  those  who
are  willing  and  obedient  in  the  day
of  his  power. We  can  have  lot  and
part  herein  if  we  have  a  mind  to ;
so  may  all  the  children  of  earth  ;
all  they  have  to  do  is  to  render
obedience  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,
and  the  wholi^  world  ought  to  be
glad  of  the  opportunity  to  do  that.
The  Lord  invites  us  to  come,  he  is
anxious  and  desirous  that  we  should
come  to  him  and  learn  of  him.
He  says — u  Take  upon  you  my  yoke,
No.  7.


for  it  is  easy,  and  my  burden,  for  it
is  light ;  come,  partake  of  the  waters
of  life  freely/'  "Turn  from  your
evils,  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house
of  Israel"  The  Lord  is  talking  to
the  people,  and  sending  forth  his
warning  voice  to  the  nations  of  the
wicked  and  ungodly,  and  as  it  was  in
the  days  of  Noah,  so  it  will  be  in
the  days  of  the  coming  of  the  Son
of  Man ;  the  righteous  were  saved
and  the  wicked  were  destroyed  then,
so  they  will  be  ifa  these  latter  days,
for  the  hour  of  God's  judgment  is
come,  and  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  will  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  of  his  Christ,  and  they
will  be  given  to  his  Saints.

Who  would  not  be  a  Saint  1  Why
a  great  many  people  reject  the  word
of  the  Lord  and  have  no  respect  for
it  whatever,  and  too  many  of  those
who  profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints
are  in  the  same  condition.  It  is  not
a  great  while  since  the  word  of  the
Lord  ^ame  through  Joseph  Smith,
the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  to  this
nation,  to  free  their  slaves,  and  for
the  Government  to  pay  for  them  out
of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States.
Would  the  people  receive  the  word
of  the  Lord  through  his  servant  1
No,  they  would  not.  What  was  the
result  1  Why  a  fratricidal  civil  war
!  in  which  thousands  of  millions  of
dollars  were  spent,  devastation  was
spread  over  the  land  and  rivers  of
blood  were  shed,  and  all  this  might
have  been  avoided  and  the  slaves
liberated  by  peaceful  means  at  not
more  than  one- tenth  of  the  expense^
if  they  would  have  hearkened  to
the  word  of  the  Lord.  Everybody
can  see  now  that  that  would  have
been  the  best  course  to  take,  but
nobody  could  see  it  and  nobody
would  receive  it  when  it  was  given.
Do  not  Jet  us  be  afraid  of  the  word
of  the  Lord,  He  never  did  and  he
I  never  will  reveal  a  principle  to  the

Vol.  XVIII.


98  JOURNAL  OF

children  of  men,  but  what,  if  it  be
carried  out,  will  prove  to  their  great-
est interest  and  advantage.  1  merely
mention  this  to  illustrate  a  subject
which  is  quite  familiar  to  the  Saints,
but  which  the  world  do  not  know
go  much  about.  I
Now,  we  arc  here  in  obedience  to
a  great  command,  a  command  given
by  the  Almighty  to  his  Saints  to
eat  her  out  from  Babylon,  lest  they
Ee  partakers  of  her  sins  and  receive
of  her  plagues.  But  if  we  are  going
to  partake  of  her  sins  in  Zion,  and
to  nourish  and  cherish  the  wicked
and  ungodly,  what  better  shall  we
be  for  gathering?  Shall  we  escape
her  plagues  by  so  doing  ?  No,  there
is  no  promise  to  that  effect,  but  if
we  practise  the  sins  and  iniquities  of
Babylon  here  in  Zion,  we  may  ex-
pect to  receive  of  her  plagues  and
to  be  destroyed.  We  have  duties
to  perform  here,  which  devolve  upon
us  as  Saints  of  the  Most  High.
The  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants
informs  us  that  things  will  be  reveal-
ed, in  this  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times,  that  have  been
kept  hidden  from  before  the  foun-
dation of  the  world.  Should  we  be
surprised,  then,  when  a  new  principle
is  manifested  among  us  from  the
Lord  through  the  channel  of  the
holy  Priesthood  ?  Do  we  realize
that  this  is  the  channel  through
which  the  mind  and  will  of  God  our
Father  is  made  known  unto  us  ?
Here  is  the  Bible,  of  what  is  it  com-
posed ?  Of  a  compilation  of  things
made  known  to  the  children  of  men
in  former  ages  through  the  instru-
mentality of  the  holy  Priesthood.
The  word  of  the  Lord  to  the  people
has  always  come  through  that  chan-
nel, and  it  always  will.  It  is  the
-same  authority  that  exists  in  the
heavens,  by  which  the  Gods  them-
selves are  governed,  and  by  which
they  control  all  things ;  and  it  is


DISCOURSES.

among  the  privileges  of  every  man
and  (  very  woman  to  approach  the
Lord  through  this  channel  and  learn
his  mind  and  will  concerning  them.
And  through  this  same  channel  a
Bishop  may  learn  the  mind  of  the
Lord  about  his  ward,  the  president
of  a  quorum  about  his  quorum,  and
the  President  of  the  whole  Church
the  mind  and  will  of  the  Lord  con-
cerning the  people  ;  and  so  through
all  the  quorums  and  organizations  of
the  Church,  from  first  to  last,  all
may  approach  the  Lord  through  the
channel  of  the  holy  Priesthood,  and
learn  his  mind  and  will  concerning
them.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the
father  and  mother  of  a  family  to
obtain  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Lord,
to  enable  them  to  guide  their  chil-
dren in  the  ways  of  eternal  life.
This  is  no  child's  play,  or  fable.
The  Lord  has  spoken  from  the  hea-
vens, and  we  bear  testimony  thereof
to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Lis-
ten, then,  to  his  voice  !  It  comes  to
all,  it  comes  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
through  the  channel  of  the  Priest-
hood located  here  in  the  valleys  of
the  mountains.  Hear  it,  all  ye  na-
tions of  the  earth  !  Come  up  here,
and  learn  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord.  Take  warning,  that  you  may
escape  his  WTath  when  his  judg-
ments shall  be  poured  out,  because
they  will  be  just  as  sure  as  they  were
in  the  days  of  Noah.  This  is  the
work  of  the  Lord,  and  we  bear  tes-
timony of  these  things  continually
in  your  ears.  You,  of  course,  d#
as  you  please  about  receiving  or  be-
lieving our  testimony  ;  that  makes
no  difference  in  regard  to  the  truth
of  the  matter.  It  is  God's  truth,
and  it  is  extending  and  will  continue
to  do  so  until  it  prevails  and  triumphs
over  every  obstacle.

The  Latter-day  Saints  have  a  work
to  do,  not  only  in  proclaiming  the
Gospel  and  warning  the  people,  but


THE  BLESSING  OF  LIFE,  ETC*


99


to  build  up  Zion  right  hare  upon  the
earth.  Not  afar  off  in  some  for  dis-
tant sphere,  but  here,  where  the
Lord  has  planted  their  feet,  in  the
valleys  of  the  mountains.  And  we
must  be  united  and  must  operate
together,  as  far  as  in  our  power  lies,
to  bring  to  pass  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty,  because  righteousness,  and
peace  and  harmony  must  dwell  in
the  kingdom.  A  house  divided
against  itself  can  not  stand.  Is  a
reformation  needed  amongst  the
Saints  ?  Yes,  it  is  needed  with  us
all.  We  must  reform  and  continue
to  reform*  We  have  inherited  lies
from,  and  are  full  of  the  traditions
of,  the  fathers.  We  have  all  imbibed
errors  in  our  infant  years,  and  the
enemy  is  on  the  alert,  ready  to  enter
in  and  to  lead  into  by  and  forbidden
paths  the  footsteps  of  the  young,  that
he  may  crmse  them  to  make  ship-
wreck of  their  faith  and  go  away
from  the  truth,  the  eternal  truth  of
heaven.  The  world  is  waging  a
warfare  against  this  little  handful  of
people  in  the  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains. Why  ?  Because  we  have  got
the  truth,  the  true  faith  of  the  holy
Gospel ;  we  have  the  authority  of  the
holy  Priesthood  that  has  come  down
from  heaven.  They  are  anxious  to
destroy  this  authority  and  the  ser-
vants of  the  Lord  who  bear  it,  and
they  are  anxious  to  uproot  and  de-
stroy us  as  a  people.  Then,  in  order
to  defend  ourselves,  let  us  go  to  with
our  mights,  unite  as  the  heart  of  one
man,  and  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder
in  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.  If  we  have  lost
our  faith  in  the  work,  why,  of  course,
we  can't  be  expected  to  do  anything
more  towards  building  it  up;  but
if  we  are  assured  in  our  own  minds
that  this  is  the  truth,  that  "  Mor-
monism"  so-called,  is  the  everlasting
Gospel,  that  it  has  been  revealed  by
direct  revelation  from  the  Lord  in


these  last  days,  and  that  we  are
really  his  people,  let  us  go  to  and  reform
our  lives.  There  is  need  of  it,  we
have  been  slack,  negligent  and  dila-
tory, and  peradventure  we  have  done
a  great  many  things  we  ought  not  to
have  done  j  perhaps  we  have  been
guilty  of  sins  of  omission  as  well  as
sins  of  commission,  and  we  need  to
repent,  and  to  go  down  into  the  wa-
ters of  baptism  inasmuch  as  we  have
the  privilege,  and  have  our  sins
washed  away,  and  have  hands  laid
upon  us  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  rise  in  newness  of  life,  with  a  firm
determination  that  henceforth  we  will
divest  ourselves  of  those  evils,  that
we  will  keep  the  Lord's  day  holy,
attend  to  our  meetings,  partake  of
the  Sacrament,  and  that  we  will  be
more  diligent  in  regard  to  the  words
of  the  Lord  that  have  been  given  to
□s,  and  that  are  given  to  us  continu-
ally, for  the  stream  flows  unceasingly
through  the  channel  of  the  Priest-
hood to  the  people.  Let  us  listen  to
the  voice  and  the  whisperings  of  the
Spirit,  and  if  there  be  an  obstacle  in
the  way  let  us  remove  it#  If  we
have  hard  feelings  one  towards  ano-
ther, envyings,  strifes,  or  anything
that  is  calculated  to  mar  our  peace
and  happiness,  let  us  go  and  make
that  right,  and  then  come  and  par-
take of  the  emblems  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  through
whose  sufferings  and  death  an  atone-
ment has  been  worked  out  for  our
salvation.  Every  Latter  day  Saint
needs  the  inspiring,  refreshing  influ-
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  flow
to  him  continually.  Reflect  a  mo-
ment, and  remember  that  when  the
plants  in  our  gardens  and  fields  are
withering  under  the  scorching  sun,
how  carefully  we  go  along  the  water
sects,  clear  out  every  obstacle  and
turn  in  t  he  water,  so  that  it  may  reach
and  revive  every  plant,  that  they
may  all  live  and  grow. So  should


1 00  JOURNAL  OF

the  Latter-day  Saints  remove  every
obstacle  that  lies  in  their  way  to  the
reception  and  flow  of  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  to  them.  If  yon  have
aught  against  your  neighbor  or  friend,
go  mid  make  that  right;  if  you  have
done  any  wicked  thing,  broken  any
of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,
repent  and  he  baptized  for  the  remis-
sion of  these  sins,  and  turn  away
from  them.  No  man  can  get  a
greater  evidence  of  the  Lord's  hav-
ing forgiven  him  his  sins,  than  the
knowledge  that  he  has  actually
turned  away  from  them,  and  that  he
is  living  in  obedience  to  the  princi-
ples of  the  holy  Gospel  Every  man
and  every  woman  knows  this  for  him-
self or  herself,  and  if  they  have,
then  may  they  know  that  the  L  >rd
has  forgiven  them  their  sins,  and  not
without.  A  person  may  commit
iniquity  and  think  he  can  hide  it  up;
but  let  me  say  to  such  a  person  that
you  know  it,  and  that  is  one  too  j
many,  and  the  Lord  knows  it,  and
that  is  two  too  many,  and  out  of  the
mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every
word  will  be  established,  and  you
will  give  this  evidence  against  your-
self sooner  or  later.  And  all  who
have  committed  sin  or  transgression
of  any  kind  must  repent  ot  it  and
be  baptized  for  the  remission  thereof ;
and  unless  they  repent  sincerely,  with
a  repentance  that  needs  not  to  be
repented  of,  they  had  better  not  go
near  the  waters  of  baptism,  for  it  will
be  a  solemn  mockery  before  high
heaven.  I  say  that  if  you  intend
to  keep  straight  along  in  yonr  own
indifferent  way  all  the  time,  stay
away,  never  offer  yourselves  for  bap-
tism, for  that  would  be  a  mockery
and  would  only  add  to  your  condem-
aation,  instead  of  being  a  benefit  to
you,

I  might  enumerate  what  evils  we
are  guilty  of,  but  I  do  not  wish  to

confess  the  i?ins  of  the  people,  I  have


DISCOURSES.

enough  of  my  own.  But  let  us
examine  ourselves  individually,  and
repent  of  that  wherein  we  have  done
amiss  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,
How  indifferent  we  have  been  about
his  word  from  time  to  time  when  it
has  been  given  to  us !  The  servants
of  the  Lord  have  proclaimed  his  will
unto  ns  year  after  year,  and  I  some-
times think  that  we  are  preached  to
too  much  ;  but  yet  when  a  principle
is  revealed  from  the  Lord,  the  people
are  very  reluctant  to  take  hold  of
it,  which  shows  that  we  need  to  be
instructed  in  regard  to  our  duties  as
Saints  of  God,  that  we  may  be  so  in
very  deed.  Latter-day  Saints  must
progress,  they  can  not  sttmd  still;
and  if  they  do  not  progress  in  the
faith  of  the  holy  Gospel,  and  in  the
things  of  God,  they  are  progressing
in  the  other  direction,  and  they  will
finally  come  to  a  point  when  the
counsel  of  their  minds  will  be  dark-
ened, and  they  will  be  unable  to  see
tl  e  kingdom*

This  qause  is  great  and  glorious,
and  it  is  worthy  of  our  utmost  en*
deavors  and  attention,  and  all  that
we  have  and  are,  or  can  be.  It  it
worthy  of  all  the  means  we  can  con-
trol, and  of  all  the  talents  and  ability
that  pertain  to  us  in  this  life,  for  in
it  lie  our  best  interests,  for  by  em-
bracing and  living  according  to  the
faith  of  the  holy  Gospel,  we  shall  be
exalted  in  the  scale  of  human  exis-
tence, and  it  is  impossible  to  be  other-
wise. If  we  embrace  principles  of
vice  and  go  in  the  ways  of  wicked-
ness and  wicked  men,  we  are  on  the
way  to  death  and  destruction.

There  are  some  amongst  us,  per-
haps, who,  in  their  feelings,  have
given  way  to  a  spirit  of  fault- finding
with  those  who  are  over  them,  it  may
be  with  their  Bishop,  or  with  the
President.  If  they  persist  in  this
course,  it  will  not  belong  before  they
give  expression  to  their  feelings  to


THE  BLESSING

some  friend  who  is  of  like  mind,  aud
who  sympathizes  with  them,  and  it
will  not  be  a  great  while,  if  such  per-
sons do  not  turn  a  short  corner  and
repent,  before  they  make  shipwreck
of  their  faith,  and  they  will  go  to  the
devil  at  last  How  many  of  us  have
seen  those  who  have  stood  firm  in
the  faith  a  great  while,  and  through
whom  the  Lord  has  made  manifest
his  goodness  and  deliverances  from
time  to  time,  in  the  laying  on  of
bands  and  healing  the  sick,  and  yet
they  have  let  the  devil  cheat  them
out  of  their  salvation  at  last,  by
causing  them  to  commit  some  kind
of  iniquity,  perad  venture  adultery,
and  you  know  that  the  Book  of  Don-
trine  and  Covenants  says  that  whoso-
ever will  do  that  will  deny  the  faith
anyhow,  unless  they  repent*  If  any
have  been  guilty  of  any  of  these  evils,
it  is  important,  if  they  want  salva-
tion, that  they  repent,  and  do  them
no  more  for  ever.

We  read  in  this  book,  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  how  people
may  attain  to  the  different  degrees  of
glory,  telestial,  terrestrial,  and  celest
ial,  and  we  are  told  that  it  is  by  ob-
serving the  laws  which  pertain  to
these  several  kingdoms.  There  is  no
other  way  that  I  know  of.  If  we
ever  expect  a  celestial  glory,  we  must
observe  the  laws  of  the  kingdom
where  that  glory  exists;  and  so  with
•ny  other  degree  of  glory.  Well,
then,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  we  see
that  we  have  enough  to  do.  We
have  to  be  united  that  we  may  resist
the  encroach meuts  of  the  enemy,  that
we  may  be  prospered  and  blessed  in
the  earth,  and  work  to  better  advan-
tage than  we  have  been  doing  hereto-
fore, and  co-operate  with  each  other
and  with  the  Lord  in  building  up  his
kingdom  upon  the  earth.  If  we  can
gee  that  kingdom,  let  us  go  to  and
man  the  ship  Zion,

I  feel  to  bear  my  testimony  to  this


OF  LIFE,  ETC.  '  101

great  work  of  the  last  days,  and  also
in  behalf  of  the  people,  that  the  pre-
dominating influence  among  them  is,
in  my  opinion,  for  God.  I  am  grati-
fied exceedingly  to  be  able  to  make
this  statement,  and  to  bear  this  testi-
mony. Still  we  have  need  to  re-
pent, that  we  may  progress  faster,
that  we  may  accomplish  a  great  work
during  the  day,  for  the  night  Cometh
when  no  man  can  work.  It  is  in-
cumbent upon  each  and  every  one  of
us  to  do  all  that  in  our  power  lies,
and  not  neglect  our  opportunity,  for
when  once  passed  it  has  passed  for-
ever. It  is  for  us  then  to  work  for
the  Lord  and  his  cause  and  kingdom
with  all  our  might,  mind,  and
strength,  and  to  sustain  the  princi-
ples and  institutions  of  high  heaven
that  he  has  organized  among  his
people,  and  so  be  prepared  to  receive
that  which  may  come;  for  we  may
expect,  if  we  have  the  living  oracles
among  os,  which  we  have,  and  I  bear
testimony  tn  it,  that  other  new  prin-
ciples will  keep  coming  along  as  fast
as  the  people  are  prepared  to  receive
them,  and  a  great  deal  faster  than  a
great  many  are  prepared.  I  hear
my  testimony  that  there  is  a  con-
stant stream  of  revelation  concerning
us  here,  and  that  the  mind  and  will
f of  God  is  being  poured  out  upon  us
continually.  It  has  not  been  slack-
ened one  particle,  but  it  is  right  here
with  us  to-day.  The  Bible  is  a  com-
pilation of  the  revelations  of  God
which  have  been  given  in  various
ages,  and  it  is  good.  Bat  the  living
oracles  are  for  us.  We  are  not
called  upon  to  build  and  enter  into
an  ark,  like  Noah  was;  the  ark  of
safety  that  we  have  to  build  is  differ-
ent from  what  it  was  in  his  day.
But  as  Noah  had  to  lie  guided  in
laying  the  foundation  and  rearing  the
superstructure  of  his  ark  by  revela-
tion from  the  God  of  heaven,  so  have
we  in  these  latter  days;  and  by  the


102  JOURNAL  OF

revelations  of  heaven,  through  the
channel  of  the  holy  Priesthood,  we
have  to  he  continually  taught  in  the
ways  of  the  Lord,  that  we  may  walk
in  his  paths.  It  is  not  for  every
man  to  go  after  his  own  foolish
notion,  and  the  phantom  of  his  own
brain;  the  kingdom  can  never  be
built  up  if  every  one  walka  in  the
path  he  marks  out  for  himself.  It  is
God's  kingdom,  and  it  is  ours  also,
inasmuch  as  we  will  make  our  ways
correspond  with  his,  and  take  a
course  to  be  reckoned  among  his
jewels  when  he  makes  up  those  upon
whom  he  will  confer  eternal  riches.

This  earthly  probation  is  a  day  of
trial.  We  have  to  pass  through
teats  and  ordeals,  and  have  to  prove
ourselves  worthy  to  be  numbered
among  that  great  company  who  will
stand  as  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion,
with  the  very  impress  of  Deity  upon
them — the  name  of  God  written
upon  their  foreheads.  "  These  are
they,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  who  come
up  through  much  tribulation.1'  The
Lord  will  have  a  tried  people,  those
who  have  proven  their  integrity  be-
fore high  heaven,  and  none  others
will  be  counted  worthy  to  receive  and
inherit  the  eternal  riches.  He  that
endures  faithful  to  the  end,  the  same
will  be  saved;  but  the  word  endure
is  there,  we  have  to  endure  all
things.  He  that  is  faithful  over  a
few  things,  will  be  made  ruler  over
many  ;  but  the  word  faithful  is  there.
We  can't  go  indifferently  along  all  |
the  days  of  our  lives,  and  fly  the
track  the  very  moment  an  obstacle
is  presented  before  us,  or  a  difficulty
looms  up  in  the  way ;  we  must  over-
come that  difficulty,  and  rise  above
that  obstacle,  and  not  swerve  to  the
right  hand  or  to  the  left.  So  shall
we  prove  our  integrity  before  heaven,
and,  by  enduring  to  the  end,  we  shall
be  8  wed  in God's  kingdom ;  find


DISCOURSES.

having  been  faithful  over  a  few
things,  we  shall  receive  others,  and
be  made  rulers  over  many  things.
You  thus  see  that  salvation  to-day  is
gained  upon  the  same  principle  as
that  upon  which  it  was  gained  in  the
days  of  the  Savior  and  his  Apostles,

I  feel  to  thank  the  Lord  for  his
blessings,  and  that  I  can  see  hit
handiwork  in  the  midst  of  the  people.
I  can  see  the  increase  of  his  power
and  his  dominion  in  the  earth,  for
rest  assured  it  is  increasing  on  every
side,  and  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,
and  we  wish  it  to  increase  more
rapidly  there  for  their  own  sakes,  for
your  sake,  for  my  sake,  and  it  is  for
our  advantage  individually-  The
Lord  and  one  good  man,  we  are  told,
are  a  great  majority,  so  it  does  not
matter  so  much  to  him  how  many
there  are  on  his  side ;  the  principal
thing  is  for  those  who  profess  to  be
his  followers  and  servants  to  be  faith-
ful and  true  in  keeping  the  cove-
nants they  have  made  with  him,  and
not  be  everlastingly  breaking  the
same,  and  thereby  forfeiting  the
rights  and  blessings  they  might
otherwise  enjoy*  We  can't  be  blessed,
we  can  not  stand,  we  can  not  be
made  rulers  over  many  things,  we
can  not  receive  inheritances,  king-
doms,  thrones,  principalities,  powera,
dominions,  exaltations  in  the  celestial
kingdoms,  unless  we  are  faithful  in
all  things,  if  need  be  unto  death;
and  if  we  fail  in  this  we  shall  most
assuredly  be  clipped  of  our  glory,
|  Let  us,  then,  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters, live  so  that  we  may  at  least  have
a  reasonable  hope  of  attaining  to
these  great  blessings  which  are  the
gift  of  God.  That  we  may  do  so
and  preserve  ourselves  iu  integrity
before  high  heaven,  and  be  united
together  as  the  heart  and  voice  of  one
man,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
|  Jebus.  Amen.


SELF  PRESERVATION,  ETC.


103


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q,  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  Forty-Sixth  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  thg  Church
ok  Jksus  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  Saturday  Morning,  October  8,  1875.

(Repotted  by  David  W.  Evans.)

SELF  PRESERVATION  —  UNITED  ORPKR  —  INDIVIDUAL STEWARDSHIPS  —

HOME  MANUFACTURES,


Our  Conference,  thus  far,  has  been
exceedingly  iu  teres  ting  to  me,  and
1  have  no  doubt  it  has  been  to  every
one  present,  We  have  heard  a  great
many  ideas  and  counsels,  and  have
received  instruction  which,  if  treas-
ured np  by  us  and  carried  into  prac-
tical effect  in  our  lives,  will  have  a  very
beneficial  result  in  the  midst  of  this
people.  There  has  never  been  any
lack  of  instruction  among  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  I  think  it  was  President
A Wlls  who  said  the  other  day  that
he  sometimes  thought  we  had  too
much  preaching  and  teaching,  I
have  no  doubt  myself  that  the  ease
with  which  we  obtain  instinct  ion,
the  abundance  of  it,  and  the  readi-
ness with  which  it  is  imparted  have
made  very  important  counsels  that
would,  if  carried  out,  have  a  very
beneficial  effect  upon  the  entire  peo-
ple, seem  cheap  and  unimportant.
There  are  some  duties,  however,
that  have  been  dwelt  upon  with
considerable  plainness  in  order  that
they  may  be  kept  permanently  before
the  minds  of  the  people*  The
leading  points  among  these  are  those
which  relate  to  our  self-preservation,
because  if  we  do  not  adopt  and  carry
cut  in  our  lives  principles  that  will


preserve  us,  the  gathering  together
of  the  people  in  these  valleys  and  all
the  labors  that  have  been  expended
in  our  behalf  will  not  amount  to
much,  God  has  blessed  us  with  a
good  land;  he  has  multiplied  upoa
us  many  favors,  that,  when  we  came
here,  some  of  us,  at  least,  did  not
expect  to  enjoy.  He  has  given  the
land  a  fertility  that  we  never  dreamed
of.  I  say  that  we  never  dreamed  of,
but  I  will  speak  for  myself,  and  say
that  I  never  thought  that  this  land
could  have  been  made  so  fruitful
as  it  has  been.  Others,  probably,
who  had  had  more  experience,  might
have  entertained  different  feelings,
I  have  heard  President  Young  say  a
great  many  times  that  he  saw  all
that  has  been  done,  when  we  first
came  here  he  saw  what  the  result
would  be.  But  the  land  was  barren,
and  the  fertility  that  it  now  possesses,
could  scarcely  then  have  beeti  ex-
pected. God  has  given  unto  us  this
and  many  other  favors,  and  as  a  peo-
ple we  should  wisely  appropriate
them  for  the  extension  of  the  prin*
ciph  s  of  truth  and  righteousness.

I  was  very  much  pleased  yesterday
with  the  remarks  which  were  made
in  relation  to  the  principles  of  the


101  •  JOURNAL  OF

United  Order,  Tins  is  a  subject
which  I  have  thought  of  considerably,
and  it  is  one  which  I  think  ou^ht
to  nppeal  very  strongly  to  ns.  The
efforts  which  are  being  made  to  unite
US  and  bring  us  together,  to  blend
our  interests  «nd  to  amalgamate  us  j
and  make  us  one  are  of  the  ut-
most importance  to  us,  and  I  sup-
pose that  a  great  many  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  who  have  come  to
this  Conference  have  had  the  de-
sire in  their  hearts  that  something 1
might  be  said  in  relation  to  the
Course  that  they  should  adopt  in
order  to  become  more  united.  I
think  I  made  a  statement,  about  a
year  ago,  that  many  of  the  people
were  far  more  willing  than  many
of  their  leaders  lo  enter  upon  a
system  having  that  cud  in  view.  I .
still  entertain  that  same  opinion,  I
believe  that  the  bulk  of  the  L  itter-  !
day  Saints  are  anxious  to  under-
stand what  they  shall  do,  and  are
willing  to  carry  out,  when  directed,
any  plan  that  shall  be  suggested  to
them.  Several  plans  have  been  sug-
gested, but  there  have  been  feelings
of  one  kind  and  another  and  difficul-
ties interposed  to  prevent  the  gene-
ral carrying  out  of  any  plan.  How-
ever, the  President  has  felt  of  late,
and  has  thus  spoken  to  (hose  who
have  been  immediately  around  him
and  to  several  others,  that  it  would
be  well  for  us  to  carry  out  the  plan  that
was  spoken  of  yesterday,  and  that
has  been  referred  to  a  good  many
times  of  late,  namely,  individual
stewardships.  There  is  something
about  this  which  appeals  strongly  to
most  men's  minds.  They  can  see
how  this  can  be  effected ;  they  can
See  that  under  such  a  system  what
are  called  individual  rights  might  be
better  preserved,  and  property  not  be
absorbed  in  a  way  to  cause  loss  or
waste,  and  yet  the  great  principle  be
carried  out  that  is  aimed  at,  namely,


DISCOURSES.

the  uniting  of  the  hearts  of  the  peo-
ple in  ona

We  have  had  meetings  here  in
this  city,  at  which  these  principles
have  been  laid  before  a  number  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  all  of  whom
have  seemed  to  receive  the  ideas
with  satisfaction,  and  have  Mt  that
they  suited  them  exactly,  and  they
were  willing  to  do  that  which  was
required  of  them.  And  I  believe
that  this  feeling  will  be  extended
throughout  all  the  Territory  and
throughout  all  these  mountains;  for
wherever  we  have  gone  this  summer,
laboring  among  and  talking  to  the
people  in  relation  to  their  economy,
and  the  management  of  their  tem-
poral affairs,  we  have  found  a  great
willingness  manifested  on  the  part
of  the  people  to  do  whatever  they
were  counselled  to  do,  and  to  carry
out  the  principles  to  the  extent  of
their  ability,  and  I  believe  that  this
will  be  the  result.

We,  as  a  people,  must  change  our
policy  if  we  become  the  people
which  we  aim  at,  and  which  ne
believe  God  designs  that  wo  shall
be.  There  is  nothing  clearer  than
this  to  every  thinking  mind.  We
can  sue  very  plainly  that  we  must
be  a  self-sustaining  people,  that  we
must  manufacture  in  our  own  midst,
to  the  greatest  possible  extent,  that
which  we  consume,  that  is  neces-
sary for  our  comfort  and  convenience.
Unless  we  take  this  course,  it  is  an
impossibility  that  we  can  become  the
people  that  we  design  to  be,  and  that
God  in  his  revelations  has  predicted
we  shall  be.  No  people  who  are
dependent  upon  others  can  become  a
great  people,  A  people  who  are
constantly  producing  for  others  to
manufacture,  never  can  become  a
great  people.  If  we  produce  wool,
and  hides,  and  grain,  arid  other  things
from  the  earth,  and  send  them  away
to  be  manufactured,  we  shall  con-


SELF  PRESERVATION,  ETC


105


stantly  pay  tribute  to  other  people,
and  the  object  of  the  United  Order  is
to  stop  this.  We  have  skill  here,
for  there  is  probably  no  community
on  this  continent,  of  our  numbers,
which  h:is  as  many  skilled  artisans
as  are  to  be  found  here.  Men  who
are  familiar  with  every  branch  of
indnstry  almost  that  can  be  named
are  in  these  mountains.  But  we
have  not  capital ;  yet  by  combining
our  means  we  can  obtain  all  the
capital  that  is  necessary  ;  anil  then,
if  there  can  be  a  public  sentiment
developed  here  which  will  induce  the
people  to  sustain  these  manufactures,
the  whole  question  is  solved,  and  we
are  placed  upon  a  pinnacle  of  great-
ness that  we  never  can  attain  to
unless  we  pursue  this  policy.

You  take  a  pound  of  wool,  and  it
costs  what  ?  You  cau  buy  it  here  in
our  market  for  twenty*five  or  twenty,
six  cents.  You  send  that  pound  of
wool  to  the  Eastern  States,  nnd  let
the  looms  of  the  East  manufacture
it,  the  workmen  of  the  East  bestow  their
labor  upon  it,  and  that  pound  of  wool
comes  back  to  us  manfactured  into
cloth,  and  contrast  the  price  of  that
wool  before  it  is  manufactured,  with
its  cost  when  it  is  manufactured,  and
you  can  form  some  idea  of  how  much
we.  have  to  pay  the  skilled  men  of
other  communities,  A  case  was
given  to  us  yesterday.  A  hide  was
cold  to  a  purchaser  who  sent  it  from
this  Territory.  It  came  back  to
Cache  County,  where  the  brand,  still
legible  on  the  leather,  was  recognized
as  one  of  their  own  brands.  Now
the  difference  between  the  price  ob-
tained for  the  hide  in  its  raw  state,
and  the  cost  of  it  when  manufactured
into  leather,  was  the  amount  that  we
paid  to  some  manufacturer  in  the
East  for  changing  that  raw  hide  into
leather  suitable  to  be  worn.

What,  then,  ought  to  be  our  policy?
It  ought  to  be  to  bestow  all  the  skill


and  labor  possible  upon  everything
we  produce.  Not  one  pound  of
wheat  ought  to  go  out  of  this  Terri-
tory until  it  has  received  all  the
labor  possible  to  be  bestowed  upon  it,
or,  in  other  words,  until  it  is  made
into  the  finest  of  flour.  This  is  the
true  policy  for  us.  To  send  our
wheat  away  for  other  men  to  grind
and  take  a  toll  off,  and  then  send  it
back  to  us  manufactured  into  flour,
why  it  is  suicidal !  To  send  our
hides  away  for  somebody  else  to
manufacture  them  into  leather,  and
boots  and  shoes,  when  we  have  tan-
ners, bark,  and  all  the  material  and
skill  necessary  to  do  the  same  lying
idly  here !  why,  it  is  folly  in  the
highest  sense,  or  in  the  lowest  sense,
whichever  you  please  to  call  it,  for  us
to  pursue  a  course  of  this  kind.  And
so  with  everything  that  we  have  here.
We  are  probably  sending  away  a
million  pounds  of  wool  this  season.
We  have  not  machinery  enough  to
manufacture  all  our  wool,  but  we  can
manufacture  a  great  deal,  but  our
machinery  will  not  manufacture  all
we  need  to  supply  our  present  wants,
and  a  million  pounds  of  wool  go  east
to  be  manufactured,  and  we  have  to
pay  manufacturers  for  the  cloth  made
from  that  wool,  and  we  are  thus
paying  tribute  to  other  communities.
And  so  it  is  with  everything  that  we
use  that  is  manufactured  abroad.
When  you  buy  a  jar  of  pickles,  a
gallon  of  molasses,  or  canned  corn,
tomatoes,  or  fruit,  or  anything  of
this  kind,  you  are  paying  your  money
to  sustain  communities  afar  off,  while
your  own  people  are  suffering  for
want  of  labor.

We  ought  not  to  have  an  idle  man,
woman  or  child  in  these  valleys.
Says  one — "  But  we  can  not  afford  to
pay  the  prices  that  are  asked  for
home-manufactured  goods,"  Let  me
ask,  Can  we  afford  to  sit  idle  ?  Can
we  afford  to  do  nothing,  and  to  pay


money  to,  and  employ  others  ?  I
Bay  that  we  can  not ;  but  we  are
doing  it  all  the  time*  We  are  bring-
ing wagons  and  carriages  into  this
country,  when  we  have  abundance  of
skill  here  to  manufacture  them.  And
the  same  is  true  of  many  other  things
which  we  might  manufacture  and
supply  our  own  wants*  j
Now  what  is  the  object  of  the
United  Order  ?  It  is  to  enable  us  to
appropriate  the  means  which  God
has  given  us  to  manufacture  those
things  that  are  necessary  for  our  own
sustenance.  Let  us  take  the  illus-
tration that  is  afforded  us  by  Brig-
ham  City,  brother  Lorenzo  Snow's
place  of  residence.  In  that  little
town,  numbering  probably  three
thousand  people,  they  have  over
thirty  branches  of  manufacture.  They
have  a  circulating  medium  of  their
own — a  little  nation,  as  it  were — and
the  workmen  are  paid  in  that  medium,
and  with  it  they  buy  what  they  want
of  the  various  articles  which  they
manufacture;  and  by  the  combina-
tion that  has  been  effected,  they  are
gradually  growing  to  a  degree  of
independence  that  is  unknown  almost
everywhere  else.  But  the  great
difficulty  there,  is,  that  the  masses  of
the  people  do  not  see  their  own  in-
terests, but  many  of  them  are  as
blind  there  as  they  are  elsewhere,
and  a  few  wise  men  have  to  take  the
lead  and  the  responsibility,  and  to
labor  and  contrive  to  maintain  these
branches  of  manufacture.  But  what
will  be  the  result  if  this  be  continued  ?
All  the  surrounding  country,  unless
the  people  do  the  same,  will  be  pay-
ing tribute  to  Brig  ham  City  and  its
manufacturers,  and  every  youth  in
Brigham  City  will  be  learning  some
branch  of  skilled  handicraft,  and  the
rawhides  and  everything  in  its  raw
state  will  be  brought  to  Brigham
City,  and  Brigham  City  will  pay  in
manufactured  articles  which  its  arti-


zans  have  made,  and  upon  which  they
have  a  profit ;  and  if  that  were  to  go
on,  Brigham  City  would,  in  a  little
I  vvhile,  own  all  the  surrounding  coun-
try.

I  mention  this  as  an  illustration  of
what  can  be  done,  and  what  we  ought
to  do.  We  ought  not  to  produce
more  wheat  than  we  need  for  our  own
use,  that  is,  we  should  not  depend
upon  exporting  wheat,  we  can  not  get
enough  for  it,  it  does  not  pay  us,
!  But  we  should  turn  our  attention  to
other  articles  and  to  manufactures.
There  is  Bear  Lake  country,  abound,
ing  in  timber,  the  men  of  which  live
nearly  half  the  year  housed  up.  If
they  would  organize  wisely,  and  com-
bine their  capital,  skill  and  labor,
they  could  manufacture  everything
out  of  wood  that  we  need  in  this
country,  and  they  have  the  best  of
timber  there  to  do  it  with.  But  in-
stead of  that  their  time  is  spent
during  the  winter  in  feeding  their
cattle  and  doing  such  chores  as  are
needed  around  their  places;  and  du-
ring the  remaining  five  months  thej
are  worked  exceedingly  hard.  This
is  impolitic  and  unwise,  and  if  per-
sisted in  would  be  called  bad  man-
agement.

These  are  the  lessons  that  have  been
taught  us  all  the  day  long.  It  is  not
a  new  thing,  but  is  something  as  old
as  our  residence  in  these  mountains.
I  have  heard  such  instructions  ai
these  from  my  boyhood,  when  we  first
came  here.  But  we  have  been  slow
to  hear  and  carry  out  these  practical
lessons  of  wisdom  that  have  been
delivered  to  us  by  the  servants  of
God,  and  have  been5  to  some  extenfct
reluctant,  fearful  and  suspicious  that)
if  we  did  these  things,  somebody
would  be  a  little  more  benefitted  than
we.  Now  it  is  time  for  a  reforms-
tion.  I  do  nut  wonder  at  the  Lord
calling  upon  his  servants  to  ask  tha
people  to  go  and  be  baptized,  and


SELF  PRESERVATION,  ETC*


107


rebaptized  into  a  different  spirit,  a
spirit  to  obey  the  counsel  that  is
given.  All  of  yoa  have  proved  by
your  experience  the  wisdom  of  this
counsel.  We  know  that  we  have  a
man  leading  us  who  has  more  wisdom
in  managing  the  affairs  of  a  commu-
nity than  any  man  on  the  American
Continent  or  anywhere  else  that  we
know  anything  of.  He  lias  proved
this ;  it  is  no  boast,  it  is  a  fact  that
is  recognized  by  thousands  outside
of  this  Territory.  Those  who  are
unprejudiced  in  other  parts  of  the
nation  see  the  results  of  the  policy
that  has  been  urged  upon  the  people
of  this  Territory;  and  if  that  policy
were  carried  out  we  would  soon  be-
come an  independent  people,  we  would
•oon  be  full  of  wealth  and  means,
and  instead  of  seeing  men  walking
around  with  their  hands  in  their
pockets,  because  of  not  having  work,
there  would  not  be  au  idle  man  in
the  Territory.  For  any  portion  of
our  people  to  be  idle  is  wrong,  and
there  is  something  radically  wrong
about  a  system  that  admits  of  or  has
m  tendency  to  keep  a  portion  of  the
community  in  idleness*  There  is  no
necessity  for  such  a  state  of  things,
and  we  are  to  blame  if  it  exists  here.
If  every  man  and  woman  worked,
and  every  child  worked  as  soon  as  it
is  capable,  after  having  received  the
necessary  schooling,  you  would  soon
see  the  difference  there  would  be  in
this  country  in  our  means  and  appli-
ances* It  is  skill,  and  that  skill  well
applied,  thai  contributes  to  the  great-
ness of  a  nation.  Look  at  France,
to-day.  France  was  burdened  by  an
enormous  debt,  laid  upon  her  by  Ger-
many, and  which  Germany  hoped
would  cripple  her  for  years.  But
France,  with  her  wonderful  industrial
resources,  has  a  stream  ot  wealth
flowing  into  her  to-day  from  all  the
nations  because  of  her  taste  and  skill.
By  these  means  she  has  paid  her


debt,  and  Germany  is  alarmed  at  the
rapidity  with  which  it  has  been  paid.
To  what  is  it  due  ?  It  is  due  to
French  skill,  to  their  workmen  of
taste  and  ability,  and  when  people
elsewhere  want  fabrics  of  the  greatest
elegance  they  send  to  France  for
them.  A  lady  in  fashionable  society
in  Washington,  or  in  leading  eastern
cities  generally,  does  not  consider
herself  dressed  in  the  leading  style,
unless  her  dresses,  as  well  as  the  ma-
terials of  which  they  are  made,  arc
manufactured  in  France.  The  high-
est fashion  demands  that  her  dress
shall  be  made  in  Paris.  And  look
at  Geneva,  it  is  another  of  the  work-
shops  of  the  world.  You  travel
through  Switzerland,  and  you  will
find  that  in  her  secluded  valleys  the
people,  in  their  little  cabins,  manu-
facture the  finest  kind  of  watches
and  clocks,  and  other  articles  that
are  valuable  and  rare,  which  are  sold
to  all  the  nations  round,  and  the  skill
of  her  people  has  made  Switzerland
a  comparatively  rich  country.

We  have  skill  here,  and  we  have
materials  here  that  we  should  utilize,
instead  of  letting  them  go  to  waste.
I  have  heard  parties  say,  and  it  is
true,  that  there  is  more  waste  in  Utah
Territory  than  in  any  country  they
had  ever  seen  in  their  lives,  I  have
heard  men  of  experience  say  this,
and  I  believe  it.  We  have  got  so
much  that  we  waste  that  which  God
has  given  unto  us,  instead  of  using
it  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
designed.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  you
who  have  come  to  this  Conference,
do  try  and  put  into  operation  the
teachings  that  you  hear.  It  is  no
use  talking  unless  we  go  to  work.
To  say  after  Conference — "  Oh,  what
a  good  Conference  we  have  had,"
"What  excellent  teachings  we  had  !  "
and  then  forget  all  about  thern,  and
do  nothing  practical  connected  with


108  JOURNAL  OF

them,  would  be  folly  in  the  extreme.

you  get  a  principle  try  and
carry  it  out,  try  and  make  it  practical
In  your  livts.  Endeavor,  in  your
communities  to  organize  branches  of
labor.  Let  the  Bishops  and  the  men
who  have  wisdom  provide  means  of
employment  for  every  man  and  every
woman  in  their  settlements  and  wards,
and  let  their  bruins  be  exercised,  as
President  Young's  has  been,  for  the
good  of  the  whole*  We  should  use
the  power  which  God  has  given  us
in  these  directions  in  endeavoring  to
lift  ourselves  up  from  our  abject  con-
dition, and  not  think — **  I  must  have
five  dollars  or  four  dollars  for  a  day's
work;"  but  go  to  work  if  you  can-
not get  as  mucli  as  that.  We  should
all  be  employed  in  doing  something
every  day.  We  should  train  our  boys
and  girls  to  work ;  the  best  education
that  we  can  give  them  is  to  give
thera  skill  and  teach  them  habits  of
industry,  not  forgetting,  of  course,
the  principles  of  our  religion,  without  i
which  they  cannot  be  truly  great.
You  know  the  old  saying — "  An  idle
man's  brain  is  the  devil's  workshop;*'
and  it  is  so.  If  you  want  a  good
people,  a  people  who  can  be  easily
managed,  a  temperate  people  and  a


DISCOURSES.

sensible  people,  have  an  industrious
people.  But  have  an  idle  people  and
they  become  intemperate,  and  I  be-
lieve that  many  of  our  young  men,
because  they  have  no  opportunities
to  develop  their  energies,  take  to
drinking,  chewing  tobacco,  and  row-
dyism, whereas,  if  labor  were  pro-
vided for  them,  and  their  energies
were  rightly  directed,  they  would
be  useful  members  of  society  and  be
ornaments  to  their  father's  house*
and  to  their  friends.  Youth  is  full
of  energy,  and  wise  rulers  will  utilize,
husband  and  direct  it  for  the  good
of  the  whole,  and  not  let  it  be  ex-
pended on  foolish  objects  or  in  a
wasteful  manner.  This  is  one  of  the
difficulties  with  us.  We  have  plenty
of  energy  ?  our  young  men  are  full
of  it,  and  our  land  is  full  of  young
men.  Their  energies  should  be
rightly  directed,  and  they  be  trained
to  be  useful  men  in  society;,  and  the
girls  should  be  trained  to  bo  useful
women  in  society.

That  God  may  bless  us  in  our  Con*
ference,  and  help  us  to  treasure  up
the  counsels  that  we  hear,  and  to
cany  them  out  practically,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


PARALLE  OF  THE  TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC


10»


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt- Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  12,  1875,


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


PARABLE  OF  THE  TEX  VIRGINS— IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  LAST  DISPENSA-
TION— RESPONSIBILITIES  RESTING  UPON  THE  ELDERS  —  JUDGMENTS
AT  THE  DOOR — THE  LAMANITES — HOME  MANUFACTURES— LAYING  UP
WHEAT,


I  will  call  tbe  attention  of  the
congregation  to  a  few  verses  in  the
25th  chapter  of  St,  Matthew.  [The
speaker  read  the  first  thirteen  verses;
also  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,
and  eighth  paragraphs  of  the  four-
teenth section  of  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants-]

This  revelation,  a  portion  of  which
I  have  been  reading,  treats  in  a  mea-
sure upon  the  subject  of  the  "parable
that  Jesus  spoke,  namely,  the  ten
virgins  j  both  refer  to  his  second
coming,  and  to  his  work  in  the  latter
days.  In  no  age  or  dispensation  can
a  man  be  called  to  a  greater  calling
than  to  administer  in  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  God,  and  nothing
but  the  power  of  God  and  the  inspi-
ration of  the  Almighty  can  sustain
and  uphold  any  man,  no  matter  what
age  he  may  li  ve  in,  who  is  called  of  God
to  declare  the  words  of  life  and  salva-
tion, and  to  preach  repentance  to  an
unbelieving  generation*  This  may
perhaps  sound  strangely  in  the  ears
of  many  people,  but  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth,  both  Jew  and  Gentile,
should  remember  that  the  Lord  God
Almighty  himself, hia  Son  Jesus


Christ,  and  his  Gospel  and  work,
have  been  very  unpopular  in  every
age  of  the  world  among  the  hosts  of
men.  No  more  unpopular  doctrine
was  ever  presented  to  the  humaa
family,  than  the  doctrine  of  life  and
salvation,  I  do  not  care  in  what
age  of  the  world  a  Prophet,  Apostle
or  inspired  man  has  been  raised  up
to  declare  the  commands  of  God,  he
has  had  to  contend  with  the  pre-
judices of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  It  is  so  in  our  day,  and  it
was  so  in  the  days  of  Jesus  Christ*
When  he  came  to  the  Jews,  his  own
Father's  house,  the  house  of  Israel,  at
the  great  ahiloh  of  Judah,  and  the
Savior  of  the  world,  a  more  unpopular
i  man  than  he  never  dwelt  in  Judea  or
Jerusalem,  from  the  day  of  his  birth
to  the  day  of  his  death,  when  he
gave  up  the  ghost  on  ths  cross,  and
went  home  to  glory  as  a  martyr  for
the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony
which  he  bore.  And  this  is  why  I
say  that  when  any  man,  in  any  age
of  the  world,  is  called  of  God  to  de-
clare the  words  of  life,  he  has  to
contend  with  the  traditions  of  ages
that  rest  upon  the  minds  of  the  in*


no


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


habitants  of  the  earth.

The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins  is
intended  to  represent  the  second
coming  of  the  Son  of  man,  the
coming  of  the  Bridegroom  to  meet
the  bride,  the  Church,  the  Lambs
wife,  in  the  last  days ;  and  I  expect
that  the  Savior  was  about  right  when
he  said,  in  reference  to  the  members
of  the  Church,  that  five  of  them  were
wise  and  five  were  foolish ;  for  when
the  Lord  of  heaven  cornea  in  power
and  great  glory  to  reward  every  man
according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the
body,  if  he  finds  one-half  of  those
professing  to  be  members  of  his
Church  prepared  for  salvation,  it  will
be  as  many  as  can  be  expected,
judging  by  the  course  that  many  are
pursuing.

I  wish,  if  I  ran  get  enough  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  answer  my  own
mind,  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  pre-
sent occasion  to  my  brethren  and
sisters,  the  Latter-day  Saints,  those
who  have  taken  upon  them  the  name
of  Christ  We  live  in  one  of  the
most  important  dispensations  that
God  ever  gave  to  man,  namely,  the
great  and  last  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times,  the  dispensation  of
all  dispensations,  and  the  one  in
which  the  whole  flood  of  prophecy  in
the  holy  Bible  will  be  fulfilled,  for
most  all  of  the  prophecies  contained
in  that  sacred  volume,  from  Adam  to
John  the  Revelator,  point  to  the
great  work  of  God  in  the  last  days,
the  days  in  which  the  God  of  heaven
would  set  up  a  kingdom  that  should
be  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  to
whose  dominion  there  should  be  no
end,  and  the  kingdom  and  the  great-
ness  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole
heavens  should  be  given  into  the
hands  of  the  Saints  of  the  Most
High  God,  and  they  are  to  possess  it
for  ever  and  ever.  I  wish  to  have
the  Latter-day  Saints  understand
their  appointment,  position,  and  re-


sponsibility before  the  God  of  hea-
ven, and  their  responsibilities  to  both
Jew  aod  Gentile,  living  and  dead,  on
this  and  the  other  side  of  the  vail.

The  Lord  never  has  built  up  bis
kingdom  in  any  age  of  the  world
except  by  calling  upon  his  servants
and  laboring  through  the  taberna-
cles of  men  on  the  earth ;  but  this
he  has  done  in  a  great  many  ages
and  dispensations,  And  whenever
the  Lord  has  had  an  Apostle,  Pro-
phet, or  inspired  man  on  the  earth,
he  has  had  power  to  administer  in
the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  God,
and  he  has  labored  for  the  advance*
ment  of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  whether  he  has  had  few
or  many  followers.  As  it  was  in
the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  so  shall
it  be  in  the  days  of  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man.  We  live  in  the
day  when  God  has  set  his  hand  to
establish  that  great  kingdom  that
Daniel  saw,  We  live  in  the  day
when  the  angel  of  God  has  deliv-
ered the  everlasting  Gospel  in  fulfill-
ment of  the  revelations  of  St  John,
when  he  says  —  "I  saw  another
angel  flying  through  the  midst  of
heaven  having  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel to  preach  to  them  who  dwell  on
the  earth,  to  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people  under  the  whoit
heavens,  saying  with  a  loud  voice—
*Fear  God  and  give  glory  to  him,
for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is
come.'  "

There  never  was  a  generation  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in  any
age  of  the  world  who  had  greater
events  awaiting  them  than  the  pre-
sent  As  I  before  remarked,  the
fulfillment  of  this  whole  volume  of
revelation  points  to  our  day.  The
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
the  building  up  of  the  Zion  of  God,
in  the  mountains  of  Israel,  tht
erection  of  a  standard  for  the  Gen-
tiles to  flee  onto,  the  warning  *f  the


PARABLE  OF  THE

nations  of  the  earth  to  prepare
them  for  the  great  judgments  of
our  God,  the  building  up  of  the
Church,  the  sanctifying  of  the^peo-
pie,  the  building  of  Temples  to  the
Most  High  God,  that  his  servants
may  enter  therein  and  become  saviors
on  Mount  Zion,  redeeming  both  the
living  and  the  dead,  all  these  things
are  to  be  performed  in  our  day.  And
an  age  fraught  with  greater  interest
to  the  children  of  men  than  the  one
in  which  we  live  never  dawned  since
the  creation  of  the  world*

Where  is  the  man,  priest,  or  peo-
ple, in  the  whole  sectarian  world,
to-day,  who  believes  in  the  literal
fulfillment  of  the  revelations  of  God
contained  in  the  Bible  ?  If  there
Is  one  I  should  like  to  see  and  con*
Terse  with  him.  The  whole  Chris-
tian world  profess  to  believe  the
Bible,  and  perhaps  they  do  when  it
is  shut.  But  open  the  Bible  and
read  the  declarations  contained  there-
in, concerning  the  last  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times,  and  where
is  the  man  who  believes  them  ?  You
can  not  find  one,  and  it  requires  faith
even  among  the  Latter-day  Saints  to
believe  the  revelations  of  God,  and  to
prepare  themselves  for  those  things
which  await  the  world.

The  fig  trees  are  leafing,  the  sum-
mer is  nigh,  the  signs  of  heaven  aud
earth  all  indicate  the  second  coming
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  who
are  really  looking  and  preparing  for
the  coming  of  the  great  Bridegroom  ?
I  do  not  know  that  any  people  on
the  earth,  except  the  Latter-day
Saints,  are  looking  for  this  great
event.  There  may  be  exceptions,
there  may  be  men  who  believe  in  the
second  coming  of  Ch  rist  The  people
called  Millerites,  believe  in  the  second
coming  of  the  Savior,  and  they  havt
set  a  great  many  days  when  it  should
take  place.  But  he  did  not  come,
and  he  never  will  come  until  the


TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC,  111

revelations  of  God  are  fulfilled  and
a  people  are  prepared  for  his  com-
ing. He  will  never  come  until  the
Jews  are  gathered  home  and  have
re-built  their  Temple  and  city,  and
the  Gentiles  have  gone  up  there  to
battle  against  them.  He  will  never
come  until  his  Saints  have  built  up
Zion,  and  have  fulfilled  the  revela-
tions which  have  been  spoken  con-
cerning it.  He  will  never  come
until  the  Gentiles  throughout  the
whole  Christian  world  have  been
warned  by  the  inspired  elders  of
Israel.  They  are  called  to  thrust  in
the  sickle  and  reap,  for  the  harvest
is  ripe  and  the  time  has  come,  which
is  referred  to in this  revelation,

1  when  the  Lard  commands  the  Elders
to  go  forth  and  warn  the  world  for

i  the  last  time,  and  call  upon  the  in-
habitants  of  the  earth  to  repent
And  what  I  wish  to  say  to  the  El-
ders and  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
is — Have  we  faith  in  God  and  in
his  revelations  ?  Have  we  faith  in
our  own  religion  ?  Have  we  faith
in  Jesus  Christ  ?  Have  we  faith  in
the  words  of  the  Prophets  ?  Have
we  faith  in  Joseph  Smith,  who,  bj
the  aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  translated  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, giving  a  record  of  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  country,  and
through  whom  the  Lord  gatre  the
revelations  contained in  the  Book

i  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  ?  If  wo
have  faith  in  these  things,  then  we
certainly  should  prepare  ourselves
for  the  fulfillment  of  them.  I  con-
sider that  as  a  people  and  as  Elders
of  Israel  we  occupy  one  of  the  most
important  positions  ever  occupied
on  the  face  of  the  earth  by  those
who  have  been  called  to  work  for
the  Lord*  We  have  received  our
appointment  for  this  work,  and  we
should  prepare  ourselves  to  perform
the  duties  devolving  upon  us  in
connection  with  it. Truth  is  one


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


he  attributes  of  the  Lord,  and
he  never  makes  a  declaration  bat
what  is  certain  and  true.  And,  as
one  of  the  Apostles  says,  44  There  is
no  prophecy  of  any  private  inter-
pretation, but  holy  men  of  old
spake  as  they  were  moved  upon  by
the  Holy  Ghost therefore  what
they  said  is  true,  and  their  prophe-
cies will  have  their  fulfillment.  No
man  can  point  to  any  of  the  reve-
lations of  God  in  the  old  prophets
concerning  events  up  to  our  day,
bat  what  have  had  their  fulfillment.
Everything  that  Jesns  Christ  spake
concerning  Judea  and  Jerusalem  has
had  its  fulfillment  to  the  very  letter.
The  Temple  at  Jerusalem  was  over-
thrown until  not  one  stone  was  left
upon  another,  and  the  Jews  have
boon  scattered  and  trodden  under
the  feet  of  the  Gentiles  now  for
eighteen  hundred  years,  and  bo  they
will  remain  until  the  times  of  the
Gentiles  ate  fulfilled,  and  that  is  pret-
ty near.  Ana,  as  the  Lord  has  told
ub  in  these  revelations,  we  are  called
upon  to  warn  the  world.

We  have  been  laboring  now  for
forty-five  years  in  preaching  the
Gospel  of  Christ  throughout  the
Gentile  nations.  We  say  Gentiles,
because  the  Gospel  goes  to  the  Gen-
tiles first,  that  the  first  may  be  last  j  rest  upon  him  to  enable  him  to  orga-


went  into  the  wilderness,  and  the
face  of  a  Prophet,  Apostle,  or  in-
spired man,  called  of  God  to  admi-
nister the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,
h^H  not  been  seen  for  some  eighteen
hundred  years,  until  the  Lord  raised
up  a  Prophet  in  the  day  and  age  in
which  we  live.  Therefore  the  Gospel
brought  forth  in  the  last  days  has  to
go  to  the  Gentiles  first  ;

Sometimes  our  neighbors  and
friends  think  hard  of  us  because  we
call  them  Gentiles;  but,  bless  your
souls,  we  are  all  Gentiles,  The
Latter-day  Saints  are  all  Gentiles  in
a  national  capacity.  The  Gospel
came  to  ns  among  the  Gentiles.  We
are  not  Jews,  and  the  Gentile  nations
have  got  to  hear  the  Gospel  first.
The  whole  Christian  world  have  got
to  hear  the  Gospel,  and  when  they
reject  it,  the  law  will  be  bound  and
the  testimony  sealed,  and  it  will  tura
to  the  house  of  Israel,  Up  to  the
present  day  we  have  been  called  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles,
and  we  have  had  to  do  it.  For  the
last  time  we  have  been  warning  the
world,  and  we  have  been  engaged  in
that  work  for  forty-five  years.  ff
When  Joseph  Smith  was  called  of
God,  it  required  faith,  inspiration,
and  the  power  of  the  Almighty  to


and  the  last  first.  Anciently  the
Jews  were  first  in  having  the  Gospel
sent  unto  them,  but  they  rejected  it,
and  they  were  broken  off  through
unbelief,  and  hence  the  Gospel  turned
to  the  Gentiles  j  and,  as  Paul  says—
**Ye  Gentiles,  take  heed  and  fear,
lest  ye  fall  through  the  same  example
of  unbelief,  for  if  God  spared  not  the
natural  bi finches,  take  heed  also  lest
he  spare  not  ye."  The  Gentiles  are
fallen  through  the  sujne  example  of
unbelief  as  did  the  Jews*  They
have  put  to  death  every  Prophet,
Apostle,  and  inspired  man  since  the
days  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  Church


nize  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of
God,,  and  to  preach  the  Go? pel
again-?  \hr  traditions  of  the  ChrUt^in
world,  for  they  had  spiritualized  the
Bible  until  there  was  not  a  remnant
left  in  a  literal  point  of  view.  Hence
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  were
not  looking  for  the  Church  and
Kingdom  of  God  to  be  established  in
their  midst.  Darkness  has  prevailed
upon  the  earth,  and  does  to-day,  in
all  the  nations,  and  this  causes  silence
to  reign,  and  all  eternity  is  pained
because  of  the  sin,  wickedness,  and
abominations  which  prevail  through-
out the  whole  Christian  or  Gentile


PARABLE  OF  THE


TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC


113


world,  and  throughout  the  whole
Jewish  world,  for  darkness  prevails
upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and
the  Lord  is  calling  upon  all  the  in-
habitants thereof  to  repent  and  re-
ceive the  Gospel,  and  when  they  have
done  so  to  gather  out  of  Babylon  to
the  place  he  has  appointed  for  the
dwelling  place  of  his  Saints.  The
Latter-day  Saints  heard  this  Gospel
among  the  Gentiles  wherever  they
dwelt,  in  almost  every  nation  under
heaven,  and  by  this  Gospel  we  have
been  gathered  out  unto  Zion.  We
have  been  gathered  here  for  a  certain
purpose,  and  that  purpose  is  to  fulfill
the  revelations  of  God,

When  we  left  Missouri  and  Nau-
voo,  leaving  behind  the  graves  of  our
fathers  and  children,  we  were  driven
by  oar  enemies  into  this  desert,  in
the  expectation  that  we  should  perish,
and  for  nothing  but  because  we  be-
lieved revelation  and  prophecy,  and
in  living  prophets  and  servants  of
God.  We  thought  it  was  hard  to  be
driven  from  our  homes  and  lands,
which  we  had  bought  of  our  govern-
ment, and  paid  the  money  for ;  bat  I
will  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints  that
if  we  had  not  come  here  there  cer-
tainly would  have  been  a  flood  of
prophecy  fallen  unfulfilled,  prophecy
in  regard  to  the  mountains  of  Israel,
and  the  great  company  gathering  up
thereto,  with  regard  to  the  lifting  up
of  a  standard  therein,  and  thu  build-
ing of  cities  and  the  Temple  of  God
in  their  midst  All  these  things
would  have  fallen  unfulfilled  if  we
had  not  come  to  these  mountains  and
fulfilled  them.  And  so  with  many
other  prophecies.  We  have  been
called  together  to  perform  the  work
of  the  Lord,  and  now  the  Lord  looks
to  us  to  fulfill  our  covenants  and  keep
his  commandments.  It  we  do  this
he  has  made  great  promises  unto  us.
The  Lord  has  given  the  holy  Priest-
hood unto  the  Elders  of  Israel,  and

No.  8.


he  requires  at  oar  hands  to  fulfill  all
these  revelations  and  commandments;
and  in  regard  to  the  parable  which  I
have  read,  I,  as  an  individual,  feel
that  it  is  necessary  for  me,  and  I  may  .
say  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  whole
people,  to  have  oil  in  our  lamps  if  we
expect  to  see  and  comprehend  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

The  Lord  has  chosen  a  royal
,  Priesthood  and  a  holy  people  from
amontr  the  weak  things  of  the  world,
in  fulfillment  of  his  revelations  ;  and
we  have  been  commanded  to  go  forth
and  bear  record  of  these  things,  and
we  have  done  it  We  should  have
been  condemned  and  the  curse  of
God  would  have  rested  upon  us  if  we
had  not,  because  the  full  set  time  has
come  to  build  up  and  favor  Zion,  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  warn
the  world  and  prepare  them  for  the
judgments  of  the  Almighty.  The
Millennium  is  dawning  upon  the
world,  we  are  at  the  end  of  the  sixth
thousand  years,  and  the  great  day  of
rest,  the  Millennium  of  which  the
Lord  has  spoken,  will  soon  dawn  and
the  Savior  will  come  in  the  clouds  of
heaven  to  reign  over  his  people  on  the
earth  one  thousand  years.  The  Lord
has  a  great  work  ahead  and  he  is  pre-
paring a  people  to  do  it  before  hia
coming.  Now  the  question  arises
here,  brethren  and  sisters,  are  we  pre-
pared in  our  hearts  V  Do  we  realize
these  things  ?  As  a  people  do  we
realize  our  responsibilities  before  the
Lord  ?  The  Lord  has  raised  up  a
kingdom  of  priests  here  in  the  last
days  to  establish  his  Church  and
kingdom,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for
the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,
and  the  God  of  heaven  has  put  into
the  hands  of  his  servants  the  keys
of  the  kingdom,  and  he  has  said —
"  Whatever  I  have  decreed  in  these
my  servants  shall  be  fulfilled,  for  to
them  is  given  power  to  bind  and  to
seal  both  on  the  earth  and  in  heaven,

Vol.  XVIII.


114


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


against  the  day  of  the  wrath  of  Al-
mighty God,  which  id  to  he  poured
out  upon  the  world,"

I  think,  many  times,  that  we,  as
Elders  of  Israel  and  as  Latter- da j
Saints,  come  far  short  of  realizing
our  position  before  the  Lord.  The
woik  required  at  our  hands  is  great
and  mighty  ;  it  is  the  work  of  Al-
mighty God.  We  are  held  respon-
sible for  presenting  the  Gospel  of
Christ  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,
to  warn  the  Gentiles,  to  prepare  for
the  return  of  the  lost  ten  tribes  of
Israel,  and  for  carrying  the  Gospel
to  the  whole  tribes  of  Israel,  We
are  held  responsible  for  all  this,  and
for  building  Temples  to  the  Most
High,  wherein  we  can  enter  and  at-
tend to  ordinances  for  the  salvation
of  our  dead.  There  are  fifty  thou-
sand million  spirits  shut  up  in  the
spirit  world  who  never  saw  the  iace
of  a  Prophet,  Apostle  or  inspired
man  in  their  lives.  No  man  having
the  authority  of  God  ever  deehred
the  words  of  lite  and  salvation  unto
them,  and  without  authority  their
ministrations  are  useless,  for  this  is
what  the  Priesthood  is  for.  The  God
of  heaven  has  ordained  this  from
eternity  to  eternity.  These  persons
in  the  spirit  world  died  in  the  flesh
without  the  law,  without  the  Gospel,
and  they  are  shdt  up  in  prison.  Jo-
seph Smith  is  preaching  to  them,
and  so  are  thousands  of  the  Elders
of  Israel  who  have  died  and  gone  to
the  other  side  of  the  vail  George
A.  Smith,  who  dwelt  with  us  until
within  the  last  few  days,  will  take  part,
with  j^y  and  rejoicing,  with  his
brethren  in  the  great  work  the  other
side  of  the  vail.  When  I  saw  ten  or
twelve  thousand  people  met  in  this
Tabernacle  to  pay  their  last  respects
to  the  body  of  that  man,  I  thought
to  myself — u  How  much  larger  a
congregation  surrounds  his  spirit,  in


the  spirit  world/'  Yes,  they  number
millions  there,  to  where  we  have  units
here,  and  the  servants  of  God  will
preach  to  them  the  same  as  Jesus
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison.
While  his  body  lay  three  days  and
nights  in  the  tomb  he  went  and
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,  that
they  might  be  judged  according  to
men  in  the  flesh,  that  they  might
receive  part  in  the  resurrection,  ac-
cording to  the  testimony  which  they
received.  As  I  said  before,  the  God
of  heaven  requires  this  at  your  hands.
They  will  not  baptize  anybody  in  the
spirit  world ;  there  is  no  baptism
there ;  there  is  no  marrying  or  giv-
ing in  marriage  there;  all  these
ordinances  have  to  be  performed  on
the  earth,  Paul  says,  in  referring  to
this  subject  —  "Why  are  ye  baptized
for  the  dead  ?  If  the  dead  rise  not
why  then  are  ye  baptized  for  the
dead  ?"  The  Lord  holds  us  respon-
sible for  going  to  and  building  Tem-
ples, that  we  may  attend  therein  to
the  ordinances  necessary  for  the  sal-
vation of  the  dead.

In  every  dispensation  the  Lord  has
had  those  who  were  fore-ordained
to  do  a  certain  work,  We  all  dwelt
in  the  presence  of  God  before  we
came  here,  and  such  men  as  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  the  ancient  Prophets,
Jesus  and  the  Apostles  received  their
appointments  before  the  world  waa
made.  They  were  ordained  before
the  foundation  of  the  world  to  come
and  tabernacle  here  in  the  flesh  and
to  work  for  the  cause  of  God,  and
this  because  of  their  faith  and  faith-
fulness. You  can  see  the  great
variety  of  spirits  that  have  dwelt  ia
the  presence  of  God,  from  those  who
are  in  the  presence  of  God,  down  to
the  devils,  A  good  many  of  the
hosts  of  heaven  were  cast  out  because
of  ther  wickedness.  Lucifer,  son
of  the  morning,  and  those  who  fol-


PARABLE i  OF  THE


TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC,


115


lowed  after  him  were  cast  down  to
earth,  and  tin  y  dwell  here  to  this  day
— a  hundred  to  every  man,  woman
and  child  that  breathes  the  breath  of
life.  Ther  dwell  here  without  bodies,
only  what  tabernacles  they  can  get
into,  to  rule  and  preside  over.

We  are  required  to  build  Temples
in  which  to  attend  to  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  that  the
prison  doors  may  be  opened,  and
the  prisoners  go  free.  The  world
fiay — "We  do  not  believe  in  such
•tnff."  We  know  that  perfectly  well ;
it  was  so  in  the  days  of  Noah  and
Lot,  but  the  unbelief  of  the  people
did  not  stop  the  flood  and  the  fire,
neither  will  the  unbelief  of  this  gene-
ration stay  the  hand  of  God  one  mo-
ment. The  angels  of  God  have  been
waiting  in  the  Temple  in  heaven  for
forty  -  five  years  to  go  forth  to  reap
down  the  earth.  The  wheat  and  the
tares  must  grow  together  until  har-
vest; the  people  must  be  warned,
the  Saints  gathered  out,  Zion  built
mp,  Temples  reared,  the  living  warned,
the  dead  redeemed,  that  the  pkirts
of  the  Elders  of  Israel  may  be  clean
before  all  men.

It  is  by  the  power  of  God  that  the
Elders  have  been  sustained  in  days
past  and  gone.  And  I  want  to  say
to  my  brethren — and  what  I  say  to
them  I  take  lo  myself— we  should
wake  up,  we  should  open  our  eyes  to
see,  our  ears  to  hear,  and  we  should
open  oar  hearts  to  understand  our
appointment  and  position  before  the
Lord  ;  fur  if,  ad  Latter-day  Saints,  we
are  going  to  stop  praying,  lose  the
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  turn  to
the  beggarly  elements  of  the  world,
the  Lord  wilt  have  to  say  to  us —
M  Get  out  of  my  way,  my  purposes
can  not  be  thwarted;"  and  he  will
raise  up  somebody  else  to  perforin
this  work.  The  Lord  has  never  told
any  lies  or  made  any  false  promises.
"  Who  am  I,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  that


I  promise  and  do  not  fulfill  ?"  "Who
am  I,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  that  I  com-
,  mand  and  am  not  obeyed  ?"  The
amount  of  it  is  that  the  promises  of
the  Lord  are  yea  and  amen,  and
though  the  heavens  and  the  earth
pass  away,  his  word  never  will  fail  of
its  ful fill meut.

In  one  paragraph  of  the  revelation
|  which  I  read  to  yon  this  afternoon,  it
says —  :

u  And  again,  the  Lord  shall  utter
his  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,
hearken,  0  ye  nations  of  the  earth,
and  hear  the  words  of  that  God  who
made  you.  O,  ye  nations  of  the
earth,  how  often  would  I  have  gath-
ered you  together  as  a  hen  gath-
ereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,
but  ye  would  not  ?  How  oft  have  I
called  upon  you  by  the  mouth  of  my
servants,  and  by  the  ministering  of
i  in  gels,  and  by  mine  own  voice,  and
by  the  voice  of  thunderings,  and  by
the  voice  of  lightnings,  and  by  the
voice  of  tempests,  and  by  the  voice
of  earthquakes,  and  great  hailstorms,
and  by  the  voice  of  famines  and  pes-
tilences of  every  kind,  and  by  the
great  sound  of  a  trump,  and  by  the
voice  of  judgment,  and  by  the  voice
of  mercy  all  the  day  long,  and  by  the
voice  of  glory  and  honor,  and  the
riches  of  eternal  life,  and  would  have
saved  you  with  an  everlasting  salva-
tion, but  ye  would  not  ?  Behold
the  day  has  come  when  the  cup  of
the  wrath  of  mine  indignation  is
full."

How  often  has  the  Lord  sent  Pro-
phets, as  in  the  days  of  Noah,  Lot,
Abraham,  Enoch,  Jesus  Christ,
Joseph  Smith  and  Brigham  Young  ?
How  often  have  the  Elders  of  Israel
lifted  up  their  voices  to  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  and  been  rejected  ?
Will  not  these  thing*  rise  in  judg-
ment against  them  ?  Yea,  verily
they  will  The  Lord  has  offered  the
1  fullness  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  to


116


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to-day,
and  they  refuse  to  receive  it.  Bro-
ther Pratt,  here,  myself  and  thou*
sands  of  us  have  traveled  ten  thou-
sand miles  on  foot,  without  purse  or
scrip,  carrying  our  knapsack  or  valise,
and  we  have  waded  swamps,  swam
rivers,  and  begged  our  bread  from
door  to  door  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
this  generation.  And  how  many
have  we  got  to  believe  it  ?  Two  of
a  city  and  one  of  a  family,  as  the
Prophet  has  said,  and  we  have
gathered  them  to  Zion.  Neverthe-
less the  warning  voice  has  gone  forth
to  the  world.  But  what  do  we  see
to-day  ?  What  do  the  Gods,  the
heavens  and  all  eternity  see?  They
see  a  generation  of  men  and  women
making  war  against  God  and  his
Christ,  making  war  against  Prophets
and  Apostles,  and  laboring  night  and
day  t«i  overpower  and  annihilate  every
principle  of  salvation  and  eternal  life
which  God  has  restored  to  the  world.
And  I  will  here  say,  in  the  ears  of
this  congregation,  that  were  this  not
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times,  and  w  ere  it  not  for  the  decrees
which  the  Lord  has  made  in  relation
to  it,  one  of  which  is  that  he  will  set
up  a  kingdom  which  shall  stand  for
ever,  there  is  not  an  Apostle  or  Lat-
ter-day Saint  on  the  face  of  the  earth
bat  would  have  to  seal  his  testimony
with  his  blood,  as  has  almost  every
other  Apostle  that  ever  breathed  the
breath  of  life.  I  say  that  were  it
not  for  these  things,  we  should  all
have  to  follow  our  leaders,  Joseph
and  Hyrum  Smith,  who  laid  down
their  lives  for  the  word  of  God,  and
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ  But
hear  it  ye  Gentilb  nations  and  all  ye
nations  of  the  earth,  the  Lord  Al-
mighty has  set  to  his  hand  to  build ]
up  his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  and  he
will  not  be  thwarted.  The  Lord  is
going  to  make  a  short  work  in  the
earth,  and  he  will  defend  his  anointed,


his  Prophets,  his  Zion  and  his  people.
This  is  the  decree  of  Almighty  God.
The  eyes  of  all  heaven  are  over  this
people,  they  are  over  the  earth,  over
the  Gentiles,  and  over  the  Jews,  and
the  Lord  holds  in  his  hands  the  des-
tinies of  all  men.  And  we  are  com-
manded of  God  to  rise  up  and  warn
the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  and  we  call
upon  the  Latter-day  Saints,  upon  the
Eiders  of  Israel,  upon  the  mothers
and  daughters  in  Zion  to  lay  aside
their  fooleries  and  nonsense,  and  to
no  longer  let  their  hearts  he  set  upoi
the  fashions  of  the  world,  but  turn  to
and  read  the  Bible,  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  the  revelations  of  God
given  in  these  days,  and  get  the  Hoi
Spirit  and  walk  in  the  light  of  the
Lord,  that  your  eyes  may  be  opened,
that  you  may  sue  and  comprehend
the  position  you  occupy  on  the  earth,
for  you  are  held  under  great  respon-
sibility for  the  manner  in  which  yon
do  your  duty  and  magnify  your  call-
ings before  the  Lord,  and  he  is  not
trifling  with  us,  nor  with  this  gene-
ration.

If  the  eyes  of  the  Gentiles  were
opened  one  moment  to  see  the  things
of  eternity,  and  the  judgments  which
await  this  generation,  they  would  not
wonder  that  the  servants  of  God  are
moved  upon  to  cry  aloud  to  the  na-
tions of  the  earth,  I  tell  you  that
the  judgments  of  God  are  at  the
door  of  both  Zion  and  great  Babylon,
Great  Babylon  has  come  in  remem-
brance before  God,  and  His  sword  is
bathed  in  heaven  and  it  will  fall  on
Idumea  and  the  world.  Who  can
stand  before  the  hand  of  Almighty
God  ?  No  man,  no  nation,  nor  set
of  nations  on  the  face  of  the  earth.

I  would  to  God  that  the  eyes  of  the
world  were  opened !  I  would  to  God
that  the  eyes  of  the  Gentile  nations
were  opened,  that  they  could  see  and
understand  what  belougs  to  their
peace! How  much  has  the  Lord


PARABLE  OF  THE


TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC.


117


pleaded  with  the  nations  of  the  earth
to  give  them  celestial  glory,  honor,
immortality,  and  eternal  life  ?  He
baa  pleaded  with  them  for  the  last  six
thousand  years,  and  has  raised  np
his  servants  from  time  to  time  and
called  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  to  prepare  themselves  for  the
great  day  of  his  second  advent  and
coming,  which  is  at  hand.  He  is
calling  upon  them  loudly  to-day;
and,  as  I  have  said  to  some  of  my
brethren  tately,  the  Lord  now  wants
to  know  whether  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  willing  to  work  with  him
or  not.  It  is  a  day  of  decision.  I
do  not  expect  that  more  than  half  of
us  will  have  oil  in  our  lamps  and  be
prepared  to  enter  into  the  marriage
supper  with  the  Bridegroom.  That
will  he  about  as  much  as  we  can  ex-
pect, unless  we  repent  of  our  sins
and  turn  from  oar  follies,  fooleries,
and  the  fashions  of  Babylon — things
which  our  hearts  have  been  set  upon
instead  of  upon  building  up  the
kingdom  of  God.  It  seems  to  me
that  there  will  be  but  a  remnant  even
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  who  will  be
prepared  to  inherit  eternal  life  and
for  ttie  coming  of  the  Bridegroom.

in  my  bones  and  -in  my
spirit,  that  there  is  a  change  at  the
door,  both  with  Zion  and  Habylon,
Great  events  await  us  and  this  gene-
ration. As  I  said  before,  judgments
are  at  the  door.  The  augels  of  God
are  waiting  for  the  great  command
to  go  forth  and  reap  down  the  earth.
All  earth  and  hell  are  stirred  up
against  Zion.  The  spirit  of  lying
is  abroad  in  all  the  world,  and  the
people  will  not  receive  the  truth.
In  my  meditations,  whether  in  regard
to  the  past  or  present,  it  has  always
seemed  one  of  the  greatest  mysteries
why  so  few  have  been  willing  to  be-
lieve the  revelations  of  God.  In  the
days  of  Jesus,  among  all  the  Jewish
rabbis,  with  their  Urim  and  Thum-


mim,  ephod,  sacrifices,  giving  the
law,  and  all  the  blessings  of  Judah
which  they  held  in  their  hands,  it
has  been  a  marvel  to  me  that  so  few
had  an  interest  in  their  Shiloh,  their
Savior,  who  came  to  die  to  redeem
the  world.  The  whole  spirit  of  Jeru-
salem and  Judea  was — "  Crucify  him,
crucify  him,  let  his  bio  ad  be  upon  us
and  our  children/1  It  was  and  has
been,  and  they  have  felt  it.  And
the  Gentiles  have  cause  to  take  heed
lest  they,  too,  fall  through  unbelief,

I  would  tell  Jew  and  Gentile,  and
all  the  earth  if  I  had  power,  that  God
never  had  but  one  Gospel  to  deliver
to  the  ious  of  men,  and  that  Gospel
is  the  same  to-day,  yesterday,  and
forever,  it  never  changes.  The  Lord
never  had  a  Church  in  any  age  of  the
world  that  he  acknowledged,  but
what  it  had  a  head  to  it,  and  it  was
organized  with  Prophets,  Apostles,
Pastors,  Teachers,  gifts,  helpd,  gov*
ernments,  inspiration  and  gifts  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  and  God's  Church  to-
day is  the  same  as  in  every  other  age.

This  Gospel  is  offered  to  the  world,
and  that  men  generally  have  such  a
desire  to  root  it  out  of  the  earth,  is
the  strongest  proof  imaginable  that
they  are  under  the  dominion  and
control  of  the  father  of  lies.  If  any
man  has  a  truth  that  we  have  not
got,  we  say,  "  Let  us  have  it,"  I  am
willing  to  exchange  all  the  errors  and
false  notions  I  have  for  one  truth,
and  should  consider  that  I  had  made
a  good  bargain.  We  are  not  afraid
of  light  and  truth.  Our  religion
embraces  every  truth  in  heaven,  earth
or  hell;  it  embraces  all  truth,  the
whole  Gospel  and  plan  of  salvation,
and  the  fulfillment  of  the  whole
volame  of  revel  fit  ion  that  God  has
ever  given.  We  have  not  power,
men  have  not  language,  to  show
forth  tno  eternal  truths  of  God  in  all
their  fullness  and  beauty;  all  we  can
do  is  to  warn  the  children  of  men,


118


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  the  Lord  hag  chosen  the  Elders
of  Israel  for  that  very  purpose.  That
lias  been  one  fault  that  men  have
found  with  the  work  of  the  Lord.
A  man  asked  me  awhile  ago — t¥  Why
did  the  Lord  choose  Joseph  Smith
to  build  up  his  kingdom  ?  Why
did  he  nut  choose  Dr.  Porter,  Henry
Ward  Beech  er,  or  some  such  men  ?"
Said  I — "Such  men  would  sell  the
kingdom  of  God  and  everything  in
it  for  money  and  popularity,  and  as
the  Lord  lives  he  never  could  rale
and  handle  them,  none  of  them  would
work  with  him,  they  are  too  much
like  the  Pharisees,  Saddacees,  High
Priests  and  Rabbis  of  Judea  and
Jerusalem,"  Did  the  Lord  ever
chouse  such  men  to  perform  his
woik?  Go  through  the  whole  his-
tory of  the  world,  and  you  will  find
that  whenever  God  wanted  a  servant,
an  Apostle  or  a  Prophet,  he  chose
the  very  humblest  man  that  could  be
found.  When  king  was  wanted  (or
Israel,  he  could  not  find  one  out  of
all  the  tall  sons  of  Jesse;  and  when
the  Prophet  asked  if  Jesse  had  not
another  sod,  he  was  toll  no,  only  the
boy  that  looked  after  the  sheep.
Nobody  thought  any  thing  about  him,
he  was  of  no  consequence.  "  Let  me
see  him/*  said  the  manx»f  God  ;  and
when  he  was  brought,  the  Prophet
puured  oil  on  his  head  and  anointed
him  King  of  Israel.  So  it  has  been
nil  the  way  through-  Take  Moses,
the  leader  of  Israel  Hid  mother
east  him  in  the  bulrushes  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Nile,  to  the  croco-
diles. But  how  carefully  the  Lord
watched  over  him !  Finally  the
daughter  of  Pharaoh  got  him  out,
while  bathing,  and  gave  him  to  his
mother  to  be  trained  and  nursed,
Tou  could  see  the  hand  of  the  Lord
in  this.  When  the  Lord  called
Moses  to  deliver  Israel  from  Egypt,
said  he — "How  can  I  do  this?  1
am  a  man  of  a  hurd  language  and


slow  of  spoech.  He  thought  he  could
not  get  along,  for  he  had  not  a  good
command  of  language.  But  the
Lord  told  him  that  he  would  find  a
spokesman  for  him*  So  all  the  way
through  the  Lord  has  chosen  the
weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound
the  wise,  and  the  things  that  are
nought,  to  bring  to  nought  the  things
that  are.  Jesus  Christ  himself  was
born  in  a  stable  and  cradled  in  a
manger;  and  who  were  his  A|K>stles?
Illiterate  fishermen,  men  of  the  low-
est Sailing  almost  in  Judea,  Salt
Lake  City,  or  anywhere  else;  but
fishermen  can  Le  ju*t  as  honorable
men  as  any  others,  and  they  are  gene-
rally regarded  as  very  humble  men,
and  that  is  the  kind  uf  men  God  has
always  chosen.

The  Lord  called  Joseph  Smith
because  he  was  foreordained  before
the  world  was  to  build  up  this  Church
and  Kingdom,  and  he  came  through
the  loins  of  ancient  Joseph.  He  was
aii  illiterate  youth,  but  the  Lord  used
him,  and  he  lived  to  fulfill  the  mea-
sure of  his  appointment ;  he  lived  as
long  as  the  Lord  required  him  to  live,
aud  until  he  received  every  key  held
by  every  Prophet  and  Apostle  that
ever  lived  in  the  flesh  from  the  days
of  Adam  down  to  his  day,  which
belonged  to  this  dispensation.

Joseph  Smith  received  his  first
ordination  under  the  hand  of  John
the  Baptist,  who  was  beheaded,  and
who,  while  in  the  flesh,  held  the
Aaronic  Priesthood.  Peter,  James,
rind  John,  who  were  Prophets,  and
were  crucified  and  put  to  death,  at
least  Peter  and  James  were,  they
came  and  ordained  Joseph  Smith  to
the  A  pas  ties  hip ;  and  every  ordina-
tion that  he  obtained,  lie  obtained
from  the  spirit  world  from  men  who
had  tabernacled  hero  in  the  flesh.
These  are  the  eternal  truths  of  the
God  of  heaven,  and  eternity  will
reveal  them  to  the  inhabitants  of  the


PARABLE  OF  THE  TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC.


earth,  It  is  by  this  power  that  this
Church  has  been  planter!,  not  of  man
nor  by  the  will  of  man,  but  by  the
revelations  of  Jesus  Christ  We
call  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints,  we
look  to  them,  and  the  Lord  looks*  to
them,  the  heavens  look  to  them,  to
take  hold  and  build  up  this  kingdom.
Some  of  the  outside  world  are
finding  a  good  deal  of  fault  with  the
Indians.  Who  are  the  Indians?
Read  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and  you
will  learn  that  they  are  the  literal
descendants  of  Israel;  they  have
been  cursed  through  the  transgres-
sions of  their  fathers,  and  a  skin  of
darkness  has  come  upon  them.  This
history  tells  us  that  they  were  once
a  white  and  delightsome  people,  and
had  great  power  on  this  land,  but
that  they  were  degraded  and  cast
down  because  of  their  sins.  When
we  came  here,  we  found  them  living
upon  crickets,  grasshoppers,  roots,
and  anything  they  could  possibly
eat,  poor,  miserable,  degraded  beings,
though  they  have  immortal  souls,
and  are  of  the  house  of  Israel.  What
is  the  Lord  doing  tor  them  f  He  is
stretching  forth  his  hand  over  them,
in  remembrance  of  the  promises
made  to  their  fathers*  President
Youn^  and  his  people  arc  accused  of
stirring  up  the  Indiana  against  the
general  government,  and  against  the
white  man.  This  is  not  true.  We
have  preached  to  the  Indians  a  good
many  years,  as  we  have  had  oppor-
tunities, but  what  effect  did  it  have?
Not  much.  We  preached  to  Walker,
Arapene,  and  many  other  chiefs  who
have  dwelt  here,  but  have  now  passed
away,  but  our  preaching  had  but  little
effect.  Now  the  Lord  is  st retelling
out  his  hand  over  the  Lamanites,  and
their  eyes  are  being  opened,  and  they
a;e  receiving  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  at  the  hands  of  the  Elders  of
Israel.  Whose  work  is  this?  Not
the  work  of  man,  but  it  is  the  work


113

of  God,  and  if  the  nations  of  the
earth  try  to  stay  it,  the  warfare  is
between  them  and  God,  and  not  be*
twe^n  them  and  us.  So  with  every
other  principle  which  God  has  re*
vealed  to  us.  This  work  is  the  work
of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  not  the
work  of  man ;  not  the  work  of  Brig-
ham  Younir,  the  Twelve  Apostles,  or
anybody  else.  The  hand  of  the  Lord
is  feeling  after  that  people,  and  if  we,
as  Latter-day  Saints,  do  not  arise  and
magnify  our  callings  and  fnlfill  our
missions,  the  Lord  will  take  that
people  and  build  up  his  kingdom,
and  we  will  be  cast  out.  It  is  timu
that  we  awoke  and  realized  this
truth,  and  that,  as  Bid  erg  of  Israel,
we  realized  our  position  before  the
Lord,  Now  there  is  a  very  general
desire  manifested  by  this  people  to
get  rich,  and  to  labor  for  self  rather
than  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  But
what  will  it  protit  you  or  me  to  give
up  praying  and  to  go  to  and  get  rich?
W  hat  will  it  profit  a  man  to  gain
the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own
soul  ?  Not  much.  '  What  will  a
man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul,
when  he  gets  on  the  other  side  of  the
vail  ?  I  marvel  very  much  at  the
little  interest  manifested  by  the  in-
habitants uf  the  earth  generally  in
their  future  state.  There  is  not  a
person  here  to-day  but  what  is  going
to  live  on  the  other  side  of  the  vail
as  long  as  his  Creator — to  the  end-
less ages  of  eternity,  and  the  eternal
destiny  of  every  individual  depends
upon  the  manner  in  which  the  few
short  years  of  the  life  in  the  flesh  are
spent  / 1  a&k,  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  what  is  popularity  to  you  ur
me  ?  What  is  gold  or  silver,  or  this
world's  goods  to  any  £f  ue,  any  fur-
ther than  to  enable  us  to  obtain  what
we  need  to  eat,  drink,  and  wear,  and
to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God.
And  for  us  to  stop  praying,  and  to
become  crazy  alter  the  r  ehes  ot  the


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


world,  is  the  very  height  of  foolish-
ness and  folly.  To  see  the  way  that
some  people  act,  you  might  suppose
that  they  are  going  to  live  here
eternally,  and  that  their  eternal  des-
tiny depends  upon  the  number  of
dollars  they  have.  I  sometimes  ask
the  Latter-day  Saints,  how  much  we
bad  when  we  came  here?  How
much  did  we  bring,  and  where  did  it  j
Come  from  r  I  do  not  think  any
one  of  us  brought  a  wife  or  a  brick
house ;  J  do  not  think  that  any  of
us  were  born  on  horseback  or  in  a
carriage,  or  that  we  brought  railroad
scrip  and  cattle  and  houses  with  us,
but  we  were  born  naked  as  Job,  and
I  think  that  we  shall  leave  here  as
naked  as  he  did.  Then  with  regard
to  this  world's  goods,  what  do  they
amount  to  with  us,  that  they  should
induce  us  to  lose  salvation  for  them  ?
I  say,  rather  than  that,  let  me  be
poor  all  the  days  of  my  life  j  if  riches
are  going  to  damn  me,  and  take  front
me  jthe  glory  I  have  in  prospect
through  keeping  the  command  men ts
o!  God,  I  pray  God  that  I  may  never
possess  them,

God  holds  the  riches  of  this  world
in  his  hands;  the  gold  and  silver,
the  cattle  and  the  earth  are  his,  and
he  gives  to  whom  he  will  give.  When
Christ  was  npon  the  mount,  Lucifer,
the  devil,  showed  him  all  the  glory
of  the  world  and  offered  to  give  it
to  him  if  he  would  tall  down  and
worship  him.  But  do  you  know
that  that  poor  devil  did  not  own  a
single  foot  of  laud  in  the  whole  world,
and  that  he  had  not  even  a  body,  or
tabernacle  ?  The  earth  is  the  ioof-
stool  of  the  Lord,  and  if  we  ever
have  any  of  it  for  our  own  the  Loid
wilt  give  it  to  us;  and  we  ought  to
be  ju.st  as  faithful  to  our  religion  if
we  had  ten  thousand  million  dollars,
as  if  we  had  not  any  at  all.  Eternal
life  is  what  we  are  or  ought  to  be  af-
ter, and  thai,  whatever  our  circum-  j


stances  and  condition  in  life  may  be»
should  be  our  first  object,

I  say  to  the  brethren  and  sisters —
you  have  your  appointment ;  the
Lord  lias  raised  up  these  Elders  of
Israel,  and  I  can  prove  from  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  that  you
received  the  Priesthood  from  eternity,
and  your  lives  have  been  hid  with
Christ  in  GoJ,  and  you  knew  it  not.
You  are  literally  and  lawfully  heirs
of  the  Priesthood  through  the  lineage
of  your  fathers,  and  that  Priesthood
will  continue  throughout  eternity,
therefore  you  have  received  your
appointment,  and  the  Lord  looks  to
you  to  build  up  his  Zioti  and  king-
dom upon  the  earth.

Let  us  try  to  be  faithful  and  to
live  our  religion  ;  let  us  iry  to  believe
in  the  revelations  of  God.  I  think
it  will  be  better  for  our  daughters,
for  our  wives,  for  our  sons  and  for
ourselves  to  lay  aside  the  New  York
Ledger  and  yellow  covered  literature
genera  My,  and  take  hold  and  read  the
revelations  of  God,  and  comprehend
them.  When  I  read  the  revelatious,
whether  in  the  Bible,  Book  of  Mor-
mon, or  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, I  look  upon  them  as  truet  and
I  look  for  their  fulfillment.  Up  to
the  present  day,  one  jot  or  tittle  of
them  has  never  gone  unfulfilled,  and,
as  the  Lord  has  said  —  "  What  I
have  .spoken  I  have  spoken,  and  I
excuse  not  myself,  and  though  the
heavens  and  the  earth  pass  away,  not
one  jot  or  tittle  of  my  word  shall  go
unfulfilled,  whether  by  my  own  voice
ur  by  the  voice  of  my  seivauts  it  is
the  same.  Behold  and  lo  I  am  God,
and  truth  will  be  and  abide  for  ever
and  ever,  Amen."  Now  let  us  try
and  live  our  religion  and  keep  the
commandments  of  God.  As  Latter-
day  Saints  let  us  see  where  we  are,
and  if  we  have  no  oil  iu  our  lamps
let  us  stop  trying  to  get  rich,  and  let
us  pray  to  the  Lord  until  we  get  his


PARABLE  OF  THE  TEN  VIRGINS,  ETC,


121


Spirit  and  oil  in  our  lamps,  and  light
unto  the  glory  of  God,  and  take  hold
and  labor  to  build  up  his  Kingdom
and  Zion.

Before  I  close  I  want  to  apetik  on
one  temporal  point*  I  have  been
talking  about  getting  riches.  I  do
not  find  fault  with  riches*  The  gold
and  silver  are  the  Lord's,  We  want
houses  building  and  we  must  cultivate
the  earth.  This  is  all  right.  I  do
not  find  fault  with  a  man  getting  rich,
I  fiud  fault  with  our  selling  the  king-
dom  of  God,  our  birthright,  selling
the  Gospel  and  depriving  ourselves
of  eternal  life,  for  the  sake  of  grati-
fying the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  pride
of  life  and  the  fashions  of  the  world ;
and  setting  our  hearts  upon  these
things.  It  is  right  to  build  houses,
to  plant  vineyards  and  orchards,  to
cultivate  the  earth  and  to  make  the
desert  blossom  as  the  rose,  to  adorn
our  duelling  places  and  to  build
Temples.  This  is  all  right.  I  have
no  objection  to  the  ladies — our  wives,
daughters  and  mothers — in  Zion
adorning  themselves  as  much  as  they
please,  if  they  only  make  what  they
wear.  Set  out  your  mulberry  trees
and  make  your  own  silk ;  get  straw
and  make  your  own  bonnets;  make
your  artificial  flowers  to  adorn  your-
selves with,  and  let  all  be  the  work-
manship of  your  own  hands,  and  do
not  import  these  things  at  the  expense
of  the  means  we  have  in  the  Terri-
tory, I  have  not  any  fault  to  find
with  your  adorning  yourselves,  if  you
only  make  that  which  you  require
yourselves.

I  want  to  say  one  word  to  our  farm*
ers  before  I  close.  I  want  to  ask
you  if  you  ever  heard  brother  Kim-
ball tell  about  laying  up  wheat  ?
*'  Yes/*  say  some  "  we  have  heard
him,  but  the  famine  has  not  come
yet."  No*,  but  it  will  come.  The
Lord  is  not  going  to  disappoint  either
Babylon  or  Zion, with  regard  to


famine,  pestilence,  earthquakes  or
storms,  he  is  not  going  to  disappoint
anybody  with,  regard  to  any  of  these
things,  they  are  at  the  doors,  and  I
want  to  give  a  word  of  exhortation
to  our  farmers,  and  I  say  to  them,
lay  up  your  wheat,  for  according  to
the  spirit  that  has  been  in  my  bosom
the  Us!  three  or  four  months,  and  in
the  breasts  of  a  good  many  others,
the  day  will  come  when,  if  yu  i  do
not  take  this  counsel,  yon  will  want
your  wheat  for  bread.  I  fuel  to  ex-
hort the  brethren,  and  to  say  to  them
— lay  up  bread,  do  not  sell  it  for  a
song;  let  your  wives  and  daughters
go  for  awhile  without  ribbons  and
ornaments,  let  your  wheat  stay  in
your  bins;  let  us  try  to  get  along
with  old  coats  and  old  hats,  and  keep
the  wheat,  and  in  a  little  while  you
will  see  the  reason  why  this  coun-
sel has  been  gi^en.  Lay  up  your
wheat  and  other  provisions  against  a
day  of  need,  for  the  day  will  come
when  they  will  be  wanted,  and  no
mistake  about  it.  We  shall  want
bread,  and  the  Gentiles  will  want
bread,  and  if  we  are  wise  we  bhall
have  something  to  feed  them  and
ourselves  when  famine  comes.  We
have  fed  thousands  of  them  in  days
past,  who  would  have  laid  their  bones
on  these  plains  if  it  had  not  been  for
the  counsel  of  President  Young  to  us
to  cultivate  the  earth  and  have  wheat
on  hand  to  feed  them.  And  the  day
will  come  again  when  corn  will  be
wanted  in  Zion,  and  it  will  be  sought
for.  I  hope  the  Latter-day  Saints
will  take  heed  to  these  things  and  be
wise. i  .  "

I  pray  that  God  will  bless  you,  that
he  will  give  you  his  spirit,  that  you
may  see  and  understand  your  position
before  him.  And  I  pray  that  he  will
open  the  eyes,  ears  and  hearts  of  the
Gentiles,  that  they  may  receive  the
Gospel  of  Christ,  and  be  numbered
with  the  house  of  Israel  in  the  last


122


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times,
that  they  may  stand  in  holy  places
when  the  judgments  of  God  pnss
through  the  nations,  for  they  will
come  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  Zion


and  Babylon.  There  is  no  getting
away  from  them,  for  the  Lord  has
said  so,  and  what  he  has  said  will
come  to  pass.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  at  the  Forty  Sixth  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Cuu*ch
*f  Jestjs  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Friday  Morning,  October  8,  1875.


(Repotted  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  RESURRECTION— LAYING  THE  CORNER  STON'E  OF  THE  TEMPLE  IN
JACKSON  COUNTY — MISSION  OF  THE  TWELVE  APOSTLES— IU1TIRM  OF
NEARLY  SIX  HUNDRED  OF  THE  "  UNITED  BRETHREN"— THE  SAINTS
HOLD  THE  KEYS  OF  SALVATION  FOR  ALL  ISRAEL — JUDGMENTS  AWAIT
THE  WICKED — FOLLY  OF  THE  FASHIONS.


"Oh  Death,  where  is  thy  ating  ?
Oh  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?
The  sting  of  death,  is  sin,  and  the
gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ."
This  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of
the  dead  is  most  glorious*  It  is  com-
forting, at  least  to  my  spirit,  to  think,
that,  in  the  morning  of  the  resurrec-
tion, my  spirit  will  have  the  privilege
of  dwelling-  in  the  very  same  body
that  it  occupied  hero.  As  Elders  of
Israel  we  have  traveled  a  great  many
thousand  miles  in  weariness  and  fa-
tigue, laboring  to  preach  the  gospel
of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  children  of
men.  I  would  be  very  glad  to  have
the  same  body  in  the  resurrection
with  which  I  waded  swamps,  swam
rivers  and  traveled  and  labored  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God  heie


on  the  earth.  I  like  this,  I  rejoice  in
the  privilege  we  enjoy  at  this  Confer-
ence, of  meeting  with  so  many  Lat-
ter-day Saints.  I  feel  that  we  have
had  a  good  deal  of  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  with  us,  and  I  hope  that  it  may
continue  until  we  get  through  with
the  Conference,

President  Young  referred,  yester-
day, in  his  remarks,  to  the  experience
of  some  of  us  in  past  days.  I  have
reflected  a  guod  deal  upon  these
tilings  as  well  as  on  the  futnre;  I
have  long  been  associated  with  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  I  wish  to  refer
for  a  moment  to  what  was  said  yes-
terd  ay  on  that  subject.  The  mission
then  mentioned  was  one  of  much  in*
teres*  to  the  Twelve,  if  not  to  the
Church.  The  whole  of  that  mission
to  England,  from  the  beginning  to


THE  RESURRECTION,  ETC.


123


the  end,  placed  the  apostles  in  such  a
position  that  they  had  to  walk  by
faith  from  first  to  last  The  Lord
gave  a  revelation,  with  date,  day,
month  and  year,  when  they  were  to
go  up  to  lay  the  corner-stone  in  Cald-
well county,  Far  West,  Missouri,
When  that  revelation  was  given  all
was  peace  and  quietude,  compara-
tively, in  that  land*  But  when  the
time  came  for  the  Twelve  Apostles  to
fulfill  that  revelation,  the  Saints  had
all  been  driven  out  by  the  exterrni-
minatiug  order  of  Governor  Boggs,
and  it  was  as  much  as  a  man's  life
was  worth,  especially  one  of  the
Twelve,  to  be  found  in  that  State;
and  when  the  day  came  on  which  we
were  commanded  by  the  Lord  in  that
revelation  to  go  up  and  lay  the
corner-stone  of  that  Temple,  aud
there  take  the  parting  hand  with  the
Saints,  to  cross  the  waters  to  preach
the  gospel  in  England,  the  inhabi-
tant) of  Missouri  had  sworn  that  if
all  the  revelations  of  "old  Joe
Smith"  were  fulfilled,  that  should  not
be,  because  it  had  a  day  and  date  to

President  Young  asked  the  Twelve
who  were  with  him — "What  shall  we
do  with  regard  to  the  fulfillment  of
this  revelation  ?  "  He  wanted  to  -
know  their  feelings.  Father  Smith,
the  Patriarch,  said  the  Lord  would
take  the  will  for  the  deed  ;  others
said  the  Lord  could  not  expect  the
Twelve  Apostles  to  go  up  and  sacri-
fice their  lives  to  fulfill  that  revela-
tion ;  but  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ;
rested  upon  the  twelve,  and  they  said —
"  The  Lord  God  has  spoken,  and  we  will
fulfill  that  revelation  and  command-
ment ; "  and  that  was  the  feeling  of
President  Young  and  of  those  who
were  with  him.  We  went  through
that  State,  and  we  laid  that  corner-
stone- George  A.  Smith  and  myself
were  ordained  to  the  Apostleship  on
that  corner-stone  upon  that  day.  We


returned  in  safety,  and  not  a  dog  to
move  his  tongue,  and  no  man  shed
our  blood.

As  soon  as  we  got  home  we  pre-
pared ourselves  to  go  on  our  mission
to  England,  and,  as  President  Young
has  said,  the  devil  undertook  to  kill
us.  I  have  myself  been  in  Tennes-
see and  Kentucky  for  two  or  three
years,  where,  in  the  Fall,  there  was
not  well  persons  enough  to  take  care
of  the  sick  during  the  ague  months,
and  yet  I  never  had  the  ague  in  my
life  until  called  to  go  upon  that  mis-
sion to  England*  There  was  not  one
solitary  soul  in  the  Quorum  of  the
Twelve  but  what  the  devil  undertook
to  destroy;  and,  as  was  said  yester-
day, when  Brother  Taylor  and  my-
self, the  two  first  of  the  Quorum
ready  for  the  trip,  were  on  hand  to
start,  I  was  shaking  with  the  ague,
and  I  bad  it  every  other  day,  and  on
my  well  day,  when  I  did  not  have  itf
my  wife  had  it*  I  got  up  and  laid
my  hands  upon  her  and  blessed  her,
and  blessed  my  child,  having  only
one  at  the  time,  and  I  started  across
the  river,  and  that  man  who  sits  be-
hind me  to-dav*  the  President  of  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  paddled  me  across  the  Mis-
souri river  in  a  canoe,  aud  that  is  the
way  1  landed  in  Nauvoo,  I  lay  down
on  a  side  of  sole  leather  by  the  old
postoffice,  and  I  did  not  know  where
to  go,  and  I  was  not  able  to  stand  on
my  feet,  and  I  lay  down  there*  By
and  by  the  Prophet  came  along  and
said  he — "Brother  Woodruff,  you  are
going  on  your  mission  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I
said, "  but  I  feel  more  like  a  subject  for
the  dissecting  room  tban  lor  a  mis-
sion." He  reproved  me  for  what  I
said  aud  told  me  to  get  up  and  go.
Brother  Taylor,  thtj  only  member  of
the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve  who  was
well,  and  I  traveled  together,  and  on
the  waj  he  fell  to  the  ground  as
though  he  had  been  knocked  on  the


124  JOCKNAL  Q\?

head  with  an  axe.  Old  Father  Coul-
ton  was  carrying  us,  and  Brother
Taylor  fell  twice  in  that  way,  taken
with  the  bi lions  fever,  and  no  man  in
that  Quorum  could  boast  thnt  he  went
on  that  mission  without  feeling  the
hand  of  the  destroyer,  for  it  was  laid
upon  us  alb  I  had  the  shaking  ague,
and  lay  on  my  back  in  a  wagon,  and
was  rolled  over  stumps  and  stones,
QntU  it  deemed  as  if  my  life  would  bo
shaken  out  of  me.  I  left  Brother
Taylor  behind,  by  bi&  advice,  for  said
he,  "  We  are  both  sick,  and  if  you
stay  you  can't  do  anything  here;*'  so
old  Father  Coulton  carried  me  along
in  his  wagon  until  I  got  to  Buffalo,
N.  Y.  From  there  I  traveled  alone
to  Farmington,  Connecticut,  my  na-
tive place,  and  I  stayed  there  fifteen
days  at  my  father's  house,  coughing
and  shaking  every  day.  My  father
uever  expected  that  I  should  leave  my
bed,  and  my  step- mother  did  not  ex-
pect that  I  should  ever  get  better,
A  message  came  from  an  nncle  of  j
mine,  who  had  just  died,  and  his  last
words  were — u  I  want  you  to  send  for
Friend  Wilford,  I  want  him  to  come
and  preach  my  funeral  sermon."  My
father  said  — "  You  can't  go  and
preach  that  sermon,  for  you  can't  sit
up  in  your  bed."  Said  I — "  Never
mind,  get  up  your  horse  and  wagon ;  "
and  he  did  so  and  I  got  into  it,  and
rode  over  that  morning  in  a  chilly
wind,  and  the  hour  that  my  ague  was
coming  on  I  got  before  a  big  blazing
fire  and  preached  the  funeral  sermon
of  my  friend,  and  the  ague  left  me
from  that  day,  and  I  went  back  and
went  on  my  way  rejoicing.

In  process  of  time  Brother  Taylor
came  along  and  he  and  I  crossed  the
ocean  together,  and  arrived  in  Eng-
land, and  here  I  want  to  make  a  lit-
tle statement  of  my  experience  in
tho^e  days  concerning  circumstances
that  took  place  with  me,  When
Brother  Brigham  left  home  he  told


DISCOURSES.

you  that  all  his  family  had  was  one
barrel  of  rotten  flour.  Two  hundred
cents  would  have  bought  every  pound
of  provision  I  left  with  my  family
when  I  left  home.  But  we  left  our
wives,  for  we  had  the  commandment
of  God  upon  us,  and  we  were  either
going  to  obey  it,  or  die  trying.  That
was  the  spirit  of  the  Elders  of  Israel ;
and  I  blessed  my  wife  and  child  and
left  them  in  the  hands  of  God,  and
to  the  tender  mercies  of  our  noble
Bishops,  and  those  who  were  acquain-
ted with  them  know  how  it  was  in
those  days.  However,  I  went  on  my
way,  and  I  want  to  speak  of  one  lit-
tle circumstance.  I  had  with  me  an
old  cloak  which  I  got  in  Tennessee
when  traveling  with  Brother  Smoot
over  forty  years  ago*  It  had  once
been  a  dandy  cloak,  and  had  on  keg
buttons,  and  when  new  had  a  good
deal  of  trimming  and  fancy  work
about  it;  but  it  was  then  pretty  well
threadbare  and  worn  out,  I  wore  it
in  Kirtland  and  I  carried  it  to  Eng-
land with  me;  and  when  I  was  call-
ed by  revelation  to  go  to  John
Ben  bow's  and  preach  the  gospel  I
wore  that  cloak.  I  went  there  snd
found  over  six  hundred  people,  called
United  Brethren,  and  among  them
were  eighty-three  preachers,  and  they,
as  a  people,  were  prepared  for  the
word  of  the  Lord,  and  I  wanted  to
catch  them  in  the  gospel  net.  Be-
fore em h racing  the  doctrine  of  the
United  Brethren,  Sister  Benbow  had
been  what  is  called  a  41  lady  "  in  Eng-
land, and  she  had  worn  her  silks  and
satins;  but  after  obeying  the  doc-
trine of  this  religious  body  she  cut
up  and  burned  and  destroyed  her
silks  and  satins  and  wore  the  plainest
calicoes  she  could  get,  because  she
thought  that  was  religion.  When  I
went:  there  to  preach  she  looked  at
me  with  this  old  cloak  with  the  keg
buttons  on,  and  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  bore  testimony  to  me  that  reli-


THE  RESURRECTION,  ETC.


gion,  so  far  as  she  was  concerned,  had
a  good  deal  of  tradition  about  it,  and
that  her  faith  could  be  tried  by  the
coat  a  man  wore ;  and  as  Paul  said,
if  eating  meat  offended  bis  brethren,
he  would  never  eat  any  more,  so  I  felt
a  good  deal,  and  one  morning  I  went
out  and  cut  off  the  buttons  from  my
old  cloak,  and  never  had  a  button  on
it  afterwards.  By  doing  this  and
some  other  things,  which  some  per-
haps would  call  foolish,  I,  through
the  blessing  of  God  and  with  the  as-
sistance of  Brother  Young,  George
A.  Smith  and  Willard  Richards,
caught  the  whole  flock  and  baptized
every  so 9 1  except  one  solitary  person
into  the  church  and  kingdom  of  God,
llany  of  them  are  here  in  this  room
to-day,  and  some  of  them  have  passed
away.  I  mention  this  just  to  show
our  position.  We  traveled  without
purse  and  scrip,  and  we  preached
without  money  and  without  price.
Why  ?  Because  the  God  of  heaven  !
had  called  upon  us  to  go  forth  and
warn  the  world*  j
Now  I  want  to  say  again,  I  have
looked  around  within  the  last  few
years  and  I  have  thought:  Where,  Oh
where,  are  the  eons  of  the  Prophets,
Apostles,  and  fathers  in  Zion,  prepar-
ing in  these  last  days  to  rise  up  and
bear  off  this  kingdom  when  we  are
on  the  other  side  of  the  vail  ?  Some-
times, in  thinking  on  this  subject,  I
have  felt  that  they  were  very  few  and
far  between  who  had  the  spirit  of
their  fathers  and  were  prepared  to
bear  off  this  kingdom.  But  I  thank
God  that  I  find  it  is  now  something
like  it  was  in  the  days  of  Elijah.
When  the  Prophet  said,  referring  to
the  followers  of  Baal — "They  hare
killed  thy  Prophets,  and  pulled  down
thine  altars,  and  I  alone  am  left,"  the
Lord  said — "Oh  no,  I  have  seven
thousand  men  in  Israel  svho  have  not
yet  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal/'  Well,
I  begin  to  feel,  since  I  have  heard  the


testimonies  of  our  young  brethren  at
this  Conference,  that  some  of  the  sons
of  the  servants  of  God  are  becoming
filled  with  the  fire  and  spirit  of  the
Prophets.  We  want  a  good  many  of
them  to  rise  up  and  bear  off  this  king-
dom.

Now  I  want  to  say  a  word  or  two
on  another  subject,  I  have  heard
some  of  our  brethren  remark — "  If
the  Twelve  Apostles  have  the  word
of  the  Lord,  we  would  like  to  receive
it."  I  want  to  say  a  few  words  with
regard  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  I
think  that  many  of  this  people  are
mistaken  with  regard  to  the  word  of
the  Lord.  They  sometimes  wondi  r
why  President  Young  does  not  give
them  the  word  of  the  Lord.  I  have
been  acquainted  with  President
Young  more  than  forty  yeirs.  It  is
over  forty  years  since  I  traveled  a"
thousand  miles  with  him,  Joseph
Smith,  Orson  Hyde,  Orson  Pratt,
Charles  C.  Rich,  aud  many  others
perhaps  in  this  congregation,  and  I
never  saw  a  day  from  that  day  un-
til the  present,  but  what  President
Brigham  Young,  even  before  the
Twelve  Apostles  were  organ izedt
always  had  the  word  of  the  Lord

j  for  the  people ;  and  instead  of  think-
ing there  is  no  word  of  the  Lordt
my  faith  is  that  there  is  not  an  Elder

I  in  Israel  who  has  any  business  to
preach,  unless  he  has  the  word  of
the  Lord  to  the  people.  The  Twelve
Apostles  should  have  the  word  of  the
Lord  to  the  people ;  the  High  Priest-
hood should  have  the  word  of  the
Lord  to  the  people;  these  four  thou-
sand Seventies,  the  messengers  of
Israel  to  the  nations  of  the  earth f
should  have  the  word  of  the  Lord  to
the  people;  and  every  Elder  of  Israel,
when  he  speaks,  should  have  the
word  of  the  Lord,  and  the  whole
Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  men
and  women,  should  have, each  for  him-
self and  herself,  the  testimony  of


120  JuUKNAL  OF

Jesus  Christ,  which  ig  the  spirit  of
prophecy.  This  should  be  in  the
possession  of  every  man  and  woman
in  the  Church,  for  their  own  govern-
ment and  guidance,  and  this  has
alwaj's  been  the  teaching  to  us  of
President  Brigham  Young.  And
this  h  backed  up  by  the  revelations
which  the  Lord  has  given  in  these
last  days,  as  you  will  find  if  you  read
the  twenty-second  section  of  ti  e  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.  That
revelation  was  given  over  forty  years
ago,  to  Elders  Orson  Hyde,  Luke
Johnson,  Lyman  Johnson  and  Wil-
liam E.  McLellin  ;  and  on  that  occa-
sion  the  Lord  said — "  Go  forth  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  people.
And  when  you  go  forth  you  are  called
to  teach  the  people  and  not  to  be
taught  And  you  must  teach  as
you  are  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  by  the  power  of  God,  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord ;  and  when  you
speak  as  yon  are  moved  upon  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  your  words  are
scripture,  they  are  the  word  of  the
Lord,  they  are  the  mind  of  the  Lord,
they  are  the  will  of  the  Lord  and
the  power  of  God  unto  s  J  vat  ion  unto
every  one  that  hears."

Yes,  we  have  plenty  of  testimony
with  regard  to  these  things,  and  I
will  say  to  my  brethren  that  what-
ever the  word  of  the  Lord  may  be  to
them  I  know  what  the  word  of  the
Lord  is  to  me.  The  word  of  the  Lord
to  me  is,  that  it  is  time  for  Zion  to
rise  and  let  her  light  shine;  and  the
testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to
me  is  that  this  whole  kingdom,  this
great  kingdom  of  Priests,  this  forty
thousand  men  in  these  mountains  of
Israel,  who  have  borne  the  Priesthood,
have  thoroughly  fulfilled  one  part  of
the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  What
is  that  ?  Why,  that  while  the
Bridegroom  has  tarried  we  have
all  slumbered  and  slept ;  as  a  Church
and  kingdom  we  have  slumbered  and


discourses.

slept,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  me
is  that  we  have  slept  long  enough ;
and  we  have  the  privilege  now  of  ris-
ing and  trimming  our  lamps  and
putting  oil  in  our  vessels.  This  is  the
word  of  the  Lord  to  me.

The  word  of  the  Lord  to  me  again,
is,  that  it  is  time  for  this  whole  peo-
ple, these  forty  thousand  Elders  of
Israel  who  dwell  in  these  valleys  of
the  mountains,  and  I  believe  that  it
is  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  them,  that
we  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord
through  the  lawgiver,  and  unite
ourselves  in  temporal  things,  a*d  that
we  labor  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  cease  to  labor  to'  build  up
ourselves  alone,  against  the  interests
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  is  the
word  of  the  Lord  to  me,  and  I  think
it  is  to  you.

It  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  through
the  mouth  of  his  servant  Brigham,
and  hat  been  a  long  time  the  word
of  the  Lord  to  me,  that  as  Twelve
Apostles,  as  Seventy  Apostles,  as
High  Priests,  and  as  Elders  of  Israel,
it  is  time  that  we  should  rise  up
and  bear  the  burden  that  rests  upon
the  shoulders  of  Brigham  Young,
who  is  far  advanced  in  life,  and  has
had  the  weight  and  burden  of  this
Church  and  kingdom  upon  his  shoul-
ders. It  is  our  duty  to  rise  up  and
bear  off  this  burden,  and  lift  it  from
our  President,  and  also  to  cry  aloud
unto  the  people  to  unite  themselves
together.  It  is  our  duty  to  cease
shaking  in  our  shoes  for  fear  the  Lord
Almighty  should  give  some  of  his
words  to  govern  and  control  us  in
our  temporal  affairs.  Who,  to  use  a
comparison,  expects  to  have  a  fort^  (
acre  lot  alone  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
or  in  heaven,  when  we  get  there  ?
None  need  expect  it,  for  in  that  king-
dom, in  heaven  or  upon  earth,  we
shall  find  unity,  and  the  Lord  requires
at  our  hands  that  we  unite  together,


THE  RESURRECTION,  ETC,


127


according  to  the  principles  of  his
celestial  law.

This  is  what  I  consider  to  be  the
word  of  the  Lord  to  us.  It  is  our
duty  to  unite  ourselves  together,  and
to  sustain  the  institutions  which  have
been  established  in  these  mountains
by  ihc  revelations  of  God  unto
tis-
There  is  another  word  of  the  Lord
unto  me,  and  which  has  been  like  fire
shut  up  in  my  bones  for  the  last
three  months;  that  is,  to  call  upon
all  the  inhabitants  of  these  moun-  i
tains,  as  far  as  I  have  an  opportu-  |
nity,  io  go  to  and  hy  up  their  grain,
that  they  may  have  bread.  For  the
last  three  months  I  have  not  felt  j
as  if  I  could  answer  my  own  feel-
ings, unless,  at  ercry  meeting  I
have  attended,  I  called  upon  the
farmers  to  lay  up  their  grain,  u  Oh,
yes/1  say  some,  "  Heber  C.  Kimball
cried,  *  Famine,  famine  *  for  years,
and  it  has  mot  come  yet"  Well,
bless  your  soul,  there  is  more  room
for  it  to  come.  "  Who  am  I,  saith
the  Lord,  that  I  promise  and  do  not
fulfill  ?  "  The  day  will  come  when
if  this  people  do  not  lay  up  their
bread  they  will  be  sorry  for  it.  The
Lord  has  felt  after  us  in  days  past
and  gone  by  the  visitations  of  crickets
and  grasshoppers  time  after  tirre,  and
had  it  not  been  for  his  mercy  we
should  have  had  famine  upon  our
heads  long  before  this.  It  is  the
duty  of  the  farmers  in  these  moun-
tains not  to  sell  their  bread,  or  to
throw  it  away  for  a  song,  but  to  lay  it
^  up,  or  you  will  find  that  the  day  is
not  a  great  way  off  when  you  will
need  it  That  is  the  voice  of  the
Lord  to  me,  and  it  is  the  way  I  have
fdtfora  good  while,  and  I  believe
it  is  the  same  to  my  brethren.  J

We  are  living  in  a  very  important
time,  and  the  Lord  has  raised  up
this  people  to  accomplish  his  pur-
poses; and  as  some  of  these  reve-


lations convey  the  idea,  they  were
chosen  from  before  the  foundation
of  the  world.  The  Lord  says, — "  I
have  called  you  by  my  everlasting
Priesthood,  and  your  lives  have  been
hid  with  Christ  in  God;'  and  you
have  not  known  it.  You  have  been
called  here  and  God  has  pat  into  your
hands  his  cause  and  kingdom,  and
the  salvation  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile,
Tliis  people  hold  in  their  hands  the
salvation  of  the  twel  ve  tribes  of  Israel.
It  was  not  to  the  oldest  son,  but  to
Ephraim,  the  son  of  Joseph,  that
these  promises  were  made.  Joseph
was  the  youngest  but  one  of  the
Twelve  Patriarchs,  and  through  his
son  Ephraim  God  has  raised  you  up
and  has  put  this  power  into  your
hands,  and  you  hold  the  keys  for  the
salvation  of  Israel  And*  the  ten
tribes  of  Israel  in  the  north  country
will  come  in  remembrance  before  God
in  due  time,  ^nd  they  will  smite  the
;  rocks  and  the  mountains  of  ice  will
.flow  down  before  them,  and  the
everlasting  hills  will  tremble  at  their
presence.  A  highway  will  be  cast  up
through  the  midst  of  the  great  deep
for  them  to  come  to  Zion,  and  they
will  bow  down  in  the  midst  thereof,
and  receive  the  Priesthood  at  the
hands  of  the  inhabitants  of  Zion.

Then  what  manner  of  men  ought
we  to  be,  we,  who  have  been  ordained
and  called,  and  had  such  responsibil-
I  ities  placed  upon  us  by  the  God  of
heaven  ?  Our  lives  have  been  hid
with  Christ  in  God,  and  we  are  heirs
of  the  eternal  Priesthood,  through
the  lineage  of  our  fathers.  Thus
saith  the  Lord  through  the  mouth  of
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  who  sealed
his  testimony  with  his  blood,  and  his
testimony  from  that  hour  has  been
,  in^ibrce  upon  all  the  world.  Know
ye,  Latter-day  Saint*,  that  the  Lord
will  not  disappoint  you  or  this  gene-
ration with  regard  to  the  fulfillment
of  his  promises. No  matter  whether


123  JOURNAL  OF

they  have  b^en  uttered  by  his  own  ,
voice  out  of  the  heavens,  by  the  min-
istration of  angels,  or  by  the  voice
of  his  servants  in  the  flesb,  it  is  the
same;  and  though  the  earth  pass
away  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his
word  will  fall  unfilled.  There  is
no  prophecy  of  Scripture  of  any
private  interpretation,  but  holy  men
of  oi  l  spoke  as  they  were  moved
upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  their
words  will  he  fulfilled  to  the  very
letter,  and  it  certainly  is  time  that
we  prepare  ourselves  for  thai  which
is  to  come.  Great  things  await  this
generation — both  Zion  and  Babylon,
All  these  revelations  concerning  the
fall  of  Babylon  will  have  their  ful-
fillmmt.  Forty -five  years  ago,  in
speaking  to  the  Church,  the  Lord
said  —  "  You  are  clean,  but  not  all,
and  I  am  not  well  pleased  with  any
who  are  not  clean,  because  all  flesh
is  corrupted  before  my  face,  and  dark-
ness prevails  among  all  the  nations
of  the  earth."  This  causes  silence
to  reign,  and  all  eternity  is  pained.
The  angels  of  God  are  waiting  to
fulfill  the  great  commandment  given
forty- five  years  ago,  to  go  forth  and
reap  down  the  earth  because  of  the
wickedness  of  men,  How  do  you
think  eternity  feels  to*  day?  Why
there  is  more  wickedness,  a  thou-
sand times  over,  in  the  United
States  now,  than  when  that  revela-
tion was  given.  The  whole  earth  is
ripe  in  iniquity  ;  and  these  inspired
men,  these  Elders  of  Israel,  have
been  commanded  of  the  Almighty
to  go  forth  and  warn  the  world,  that
their  garments  may  be  clear  of  the
blood  of  all  men.

I  tell  you  that  God  will  not  dis-
appoint Zion  or  Babylon,  the  heavens
or  the  earth,  in  regard  to  the  judg-
ments which  he  has  promised  in
these  last  days,  but  every  one  of
them  will  have  its  fulfillment  upon
the  heads  of  the  children  of  men ;


DISCOURSES.

and  when  they  are  fully  ripened  in
iniquity  the  nations  of  the  earth  will
be  swept  away  as  with  the  besom  of
destruction*

What  did  the  Lord  say  to  that  meek
and  humble  man,  the  brother  of  Jared,
thousands  of  years  ago,  with  regard
to  the  land  of  America — a  chosen
land  promised  by  old  Father  Jacob
to  his  sous?  He  said  that  no  nation
should  ever  occupy  it,  unless  the  peo-
ple thereof  kept  his  commandments ;
and  if  they  failed  to  do  that  they
should  be  cut  off  when  they  were
ripened  in  iniquity.  The  Lord  has
already  swept  away  two  mighty  na-
tions from  this  continent,  because  they
have  not  fulfilled  his  word,  spoken
through  that  humble  man.  The
Lord  chooses  the  weak  tilings  of
the  world 9  tilings  which  are  naught
to  bring  to  naught  things  which
are,  and  he  will  as  purely  perform
his  work  in  this  age  of  the  world  as
he  bus  done  in  any  other.  We  need
not  fear  man,  nor  the  wrath  of  man,
but  fe-Av  God,  who  holds  in  his  hands
the  destinies  of  all  men.

Before  I  close  my  remarks,  I  want
to  say  a  few  words  to  our  sisters  and
daughters  iu  Ziou,  for  I  feel  that
there  are  some  words  of  the  Lord  to
them.  This  is  a  time  that  the  daugh-
ters of  Ziou  should  hearken  to  the
words  of  the  Prophet  of  God,  who
has  been  set  to  lead  us.  I  feel  that
it  is  time,  forty  years  after  they
were  organized,  that  the  Female
Relief  Societies  should  labor  with  all
their  might  to  carry  out  the  object  of
their  organization  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith.  You  may  ask,  "What
was  the  object  of  that  organization  ?"
I  will  say  that  in  organizing  thtso
societies  there  were  several  objects  in
view,  some  of  which  I  will  refer  to
before  I  get  through.  President
Young  has  been  calling  upon  you,  as
one  branch  of  the  land  of  Zion,  to
take  hold  and  help  to  build  it  up.


THE  RESURRECTION,  ETC


129


He  desires  that  the  sisters  here  in  I
the  land  of  Zion  should  govern  and
control  the  fashions  of  Zion,  Instead
of  heaping  to  yourselves  and  imitat-
ing the  fashions  that  have  adorned
Babylon,  you  should  have  indepen-
dence enough  to  form  your  own ;  and
those  which  are  not  comely  and  com-
fortable should  be  laid  aside,  I,  my-
self, do  not  think  it  has  been  pleasing
in  the  sight  of  God,  to  see  the  man-
ner in  which  the  mothers  and  daugh-
ters in  Zion,  for  years  past,  have  been
ready  to  adorn  themselves  with  every
fashion  that  Babylon  has  contrived
and  invented.  I  need  not  mention
all  these  things,  but  I  will  mention
two  or  three.  For  instance,  how  is
it  with  regard  to  the  head  dress  of
the  ladies  ?  The  Lord  has  given  to
women  generally  a  fine  head  of  hair,
which,  we  are  told  in  the  Scriptures,
is  the  glory  of  the  woman ;  and  she
should  let  the  hair  given  unto  her
adorn  her  head  without  adding  any
foreign  substance,  as  is  now  done,  in
order  to  imitate  and  follow  after  the
fashions  of  the  world-  Again,  just
as  quick  ns  the  daughters  of  Babylon
extend  their  crinolines  until  they
cannot  move  in  a  space  less  than  sis
or  eight  feet  wide,  in  a  coach,  assem.
bly  room,  or  anywhere  else,  why  the
daughters  of  Zion  must  follow  the
same  uncomely  fashion.  But  a  fash-
ion the  reverse  of  this  is  now  adopted,
and  at  the  present  time  the  daugh-
ters of  Babylon  wear  their  elastics
so  tight  that  they  have  not  room
left  for  locomotion  when  walking  in
the  streets ;  and,  of  course  the
daughters  of  Zion  must  practice
the  same.  And  now,  see  one  of
them,  dressed  in  the  height  of  fash-
ion, crossing  the  street,  and  a  run-
away team  comes  thundering  along.
What  a  position  she  is  in  !  AVhy
the  only  way  she  can  save  her  life  is
to  lie  down  and  roll  across  the  street
like  a  saw  log*
No.  9.  i


All  these  fashions  are  uncomely
and  should  be  laid  aside.  The
daughters  of  Zion  should  do  better
than  to  trail  silks  and  satins  in  the
mud  when  walking  in  the  street*
The  Female  Relief  Societies  should
lay  hold  of  and  regulate  these  things,
and  introduce  fashions  that  are
comely  and  comfortable ;  it  is  their
duty  to  do  it.  Again,  you  can  do  a
good  deal  in  regard  to  maintaining
the  independence  of  Zion,  by  going
to  and  carrying  out  the  counsel  of
President  Young  in  raising  your
owrn  silk  for  dresses,  bonnets  and
trimmings,  so  that  your  adorning
may  be  the  workmanship  of  your
own  hands.

I  felt  as  though  I  wanted  to
say  so  much  with  regard  to  our  sis-
ters in  Zion,  President  Young  says,
and  I  know  it  is  the  truth,  that  this
is  the  best  people  on  the  face  of  the
earth.  But  however  good  we  may
be  we  should  aim  continually  to  im-
prove and  become  better.  We  have
obeye  d  a  different  law  and  Goipel
to  what  other  people  have  obeyed,
and  we  have  a  different  kingdom  in
view,  and  our  aim  should  be  corres-
pondingly higher  before  the  Lord
our  God,  and  we  should  govern  and
control  ourselves  accordingly^  and  I
pray  God  my  heavenly  Father  that
his  Spirit  may  rest  upon  us  and  en-
able us  to  do  so.

Another  word  of  the  Lord  to  me
is  that,  it  is  the  duty  of  these  young
men  here  in  the  land  of  Zion  to  take
the  daughters  of  Zion  to  wife,  and
prepare  tabernacles  for  the  spirits  of
men,  which  are  the  children  of  our
Father  in  heaven.  They  are  waiting
for  tabernacles,  they  are  ordained  to
come  here,  and  they  ought  to  be  born
in  the  land  of  Zion  instead  of
Babylon.  This  is  the  duty  of  the
young  men  in  Zion  ;  and  when  the
daughters  of  Zion  are  asked  by  the*
young  men  to  join  with  them  in

Vol.  XVIII.


130  JOURNAL  OF

marriage,  instead  of  asking — £i  Has
this  man  a  fine  brick  house,  a  span
of  tine  horses  and  a  fine  carriage  V
they  should  ask — "  Is  he  a  man  of!
God?  Has  he  the  Spirit  of  God
with  him  ?  Is  lie  a  Latter-day  Saint?
Does  he  pray  ?  Has  he  got  the  Spirit
upon  him  to  qualify  him  to  build  up
the  kingdom  r"  If  he  has  that,
never  mind  the  carriage  and  brick
house,  take  hob  I  and  unite  yourselves
together  according  to  the  law  of ;
God,  I  rejoice  to  see  the  population
increasing  in  the  hind  of  Zion,  Why
is  it  that  ninety-nine  women  out  of
every  hundred  over  the  whole  laud
of  Zion,  who  are  of  proper  age  and
married,  are  bringing  forth  posterity
until  our  children  swarm  in  uiir
streets  almost  like  bees  ?  Because
the  God  of  heaven  is  raising  up  a
royal  Priesthood,  and  a  generation
to  bear  off  this  kingdom  in  the  day
when  his  judgments  will  come  upon
the  earth.

Let  us  do  our  duty  ;  let  us  cease
setting  our  hearts  upon  the  fashions
and  things  of  this  world,  and  labor-
ing  to  enrich  ourselves  at  the  sacri-
fice of  the  kingdom  of  God.  We
have  a  co-operative  mercantile  insti-
tution ;  and  it  is  the,  duty  of  these
Latter-day  Saints  to  sustain  and  j
uphold  it ;  and  so  with  everything
else  that  is  in  the  kingdom,  for  these
are  the  stepping  stones  to  us  to  a
fullness  of  the  celestial  kingdom
of  God.

I  thank  God  that  I  live  in  this
day  and  age  of  the  world,  when  my
ears  have  heard  the  sound  of  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  I
thank  God  that  I  have  seen  the  face
of  Prophets,  Apostles,  and  inspired
men.  I  rejoice  in  this,  and  I  pray
God  my  heavenly  Father  that  I,  and
my  brethren  and  sisters,  may  have
power  to  unite  and  take  hold  and
build  up  this  kingdom.  When  we
do  this  it  will  not  be  in  the  power


DISCOURSES.

of  earth  or  hell  to  take  away  our
rights  and  privileges ;  for  I  tell  you
that  if  this  people  were  united  ac-
cording to  the  law  of  God,  wherein
we  should  become  fully  justified  be-
fore the  Lord,  sinners  in  Zion  would

;  tremble  and  fearfulness  would  sur-
prise the  hypocrite;  the  power  of
God  would  rest  upon  Zion,  the  an-
gels of  God  would  visit  the  earth,
iiie  judgments  of  God  would  be
poured  upon  the  wicked,  the  Zion  of
God  would  he  redeemed,  the  Tem-
ples of  God  would  be  reared,  the
prison  doors  would  be  opened  and

1  the  prisoners  in  the  spirit  world
would  go  free,  because  we  would  feel
the  spirit  and  power  of  our  mission
and  calling  and  should  fulfill  it.

j  I  pray  that  God  will  bless  this
people,  and  that  he  will  bless  Pre-
sident Young,  who  has  already  out-
lived four  of  his  counselors.  The
Lord  says  —  I  will  take  whom  I  will
t  ake,  and  I  will  preserve  whom  I  will
preserve."  All  these  counselors
were  younger  men  than  President
Young,  yet  he  has  outlived  them*
God  has  ordained  President  Young
to  live,  and  he  has  lived  so  long,  and
has  had  the  prayers  of  hundreds  and
thousands  of  Saints,  which  have
entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of
Sabaoth  for  his  preservation ;  and
the  Lord  has  heard  and  answered
these  prayers.

Let  us,  as  Elders  of  Israel,  rise  up
and  bear  off  this  kingdom.  Let  us
forsake  our  evils  and  wickedness,
and  repent  of  our  sins,  and  renew
our  covenants  and  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God ;  that  we  may
lighten  the  burdens  of  our  President,
that  his  spirit  may  be  cheered,  and
that  the  power  of  God  may  attend
him  in  his  labors  for  the  advance-
ment of  Zion  upon  the  earth.

This  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Ameru


DEDICATION  OF  THE  NEW  TABERNACLE


131


REMARKS BY ELD  Kit ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  at  the  Forty-sixth  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Saturday  Morning,  Oct.  9,  1875.


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


ON  THE  DEDICATION  OF  THE  NEW  TABERNACLE.


It  is  with  peculiar  feelings  that  I
arise  on  this  occasion  to  speak  a  few
words  to  this  vast  assembly.  While
listening  to  the  sacred  words  of  the
prayer  that  has  been  offered  up  this
forenoon  in  the  dedication  of  this
large  building  as  a  place  of  worship,
and  the  dedication  of  the  ministry
who  administer  therein,  my  heart
has  been  full  of  joy  and  satisfaction,
and,  while  listening  to  these  glorious
words,  my  mind  was  led  to  reflect
upon  dedications  of  houses  and  tab-
ernacles of  the  Most  High  in  for-
mer ages  of  the  world,  and  also  upon
the  peculiar  manifestations  often-
times connected  with  those  dedica-
tions.

The  Lord  our  God  accepts  the
dedieat  ioi l  by  h in  servants  the
Priesthood,  of  those  things  which
he  has  ordained  and  established;
and  though  he  may  not  always  man-
ifest that  acceptance  in  a  visible
manner,  so  that  all  the  people  may
see,  yet  there  is  a  peculiar  manifes-
tation thai  we  can  feel  if  we  can
not  see,  which  whispers  to  us  that
God  is  manifest  in  his  works,  ordi-
nances and  institutions,  and  in  his
own  buildings  that  are  built  with  an


eye  single  to  his  glory,  and  in  his
name.  It  is  an  easy  matter  for  the
Great  Jehovah  to  manifest  himself,
if  he  pleases  so  to  do,  upon  a  moun-
tain or  hill,  or  in  the  secret  closet ;
or  while  we  slumber  upon  our  pil-
lows by  night,  the  visions  of  eter-
nity may  be  opened  to  our  minds,
and  we  may  receive  great  consolat  ion,
joy  and  peace,  through  the  manifes-
tations given  us  by  the  gift  and  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost  But  then,  the
Lord  has  oftentimes  laid  out  a  great
work  for  his  people  to  perform,  and
when  that  work  is  performed  by  the
sous  of  men  with  all  their  hearts  and
mi glit,  and  with  all  the  strength,
ability  and  power  that  God  has
given  them,  it  is  then  that  he  shows
forth  his  approbation  from  the  hea-
vens, and  tills  them  with  a  peculiar
feeling  of  joy  and  gladness  that  it
is  impossible  for  language  to  des-
cribe. How  often  have  we  felt  these
peculiar  feelings  and  sensations  per-
vading our  minds,  when  we  have
assembled  on  occasions  something
similar  to  the  present  one  !

I  look  back  to  the  first  Temple
that  was  built  in  this  generation  by
command  of  the  Most  High,  some


132  JOURNAL  OF

forty  years  ago,  in  the  State  of  Ohio,
in  Kin  land,  according  to  the  pattern
which  God  showed  by  vision.  When
that  was  completed,  and  the  servants
of  God  were  called  in  from  the  east
and  west,  and  north,  and  south,  and
entered  that  sacred  edifice,  God  was
there,  his  angels  were  there,  the  Holy
Ghost  was  in  the  midst  of  the  people,
the  visions  of  the  Almighty  were
opened  to  the  minds  of  the  servants
of  the  living  God  ;  the  vail  was  taken
off  from  the  minds  of  many ;  they
saw  the  heavens  opened  ;  they  he-
held  the  angels  of  God ;  they  heard
the  voice  of  the  Lord ;  and  they
were  filled  from  the  crown  of  their
heads  to  the  soles  of  their  feet  with
the  power  and  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  uttered  forth  pro-
phecies in  the  midst  of  that  con-
gregation, which  have  been  fulfill-
ing from  that  day  to  the  present
time.  «\n

It  was  in  that  Temple  that  the
visit ms  of  the  Almighty  were  opened
to  our  great  Prophet,  Seer  and  Re-
velator,  Joseph  Smith,  wherein  the
future  was  portrayed  before  him,
wherein  keys  were  committed  to
him  in  relation  to  this  great  Lat-
ter-day dispensation,  and  the  power
of  God  whs  made  manifest  through
the  hoi j  Priesthood  sent  down  from
heaven.  In  that  Temple,  set  apart
by  the  servants  of  God,  and  dedi-
cated by  a  prayer  that  was  written
by  inspiration,  Lhe  people  were
blessed  as  they  never  had  been
blessed  for  generations  and  genera-
tions that  were  passed  and  gouts.
Why  ?  Because  that  work  was  of
(i'i'L  Luu I  !,;id  raised  up  a  mighty
Prophet ;  God  had  brought  to  light
great  and  glorious  revelations;  God
had  >ent  down  the  holy  Priesthood
from  the  heavens;  the  Lord  our
God  had  established  his  kingdom  on


DISCOURSES.

the  earth  ;  he,  therefore,  gave  unto
his  servants  power,  wisdom  and
strength  that  they  might  administer
among  the  people  aud  do  them  good.

Since  that  time  buildings  have
been  reared  to  the  name  of  the
Most  High,  and  the  Priesthood  have
been  called  together,  and  the  coun-
cils of  the  Priesthood  have  been
blessed,  endowments  have  been  made
manifest,  and  ordinances  of  endow-
ments, keys  of  endowments,  signs
and  tokens  of  endowments,  aud
principles  that  were  calculated  to
give  joy  and  to  impart  happiness,  for
the  Lord  had  com  mantled,  that  in
the  midst  of  Zion,  life  for  evermore
should  be  poured  out  upon  t ho  fallen
sons  and  daughters  ot  his  people,

Now  another  occasion  is  afforded
us  of  dedicating  a  large  and  com-
inodioQs  Tabernacle,  which  has  been
built  to  the  name  of  the  Host  High.
God  it*  here;  God  is  with  his  ser-
vants, with  the  quorums  of  the  ever-
lasting Priesthood,  and  his  Spirit
is  here;  and  the  prayer  that  has
been  offered  up  is  accepted  by  the
heavens,  and  we  rejoice  and  give
praise  to  God  who  has  redeemed  us,
who  sits  upou  his  throue,  whose
bowels  of  mercy  yearn  towards  all
of  his  sons  and  daughters;  whose
bosom  is  filled  with  compassion
towards  all  bis  people.  We  praise
his  name,  and  though  we  have  not
the  opportunity  of  giving  expression
to  the  joy  and  thanksgiving  of  our
hearts,  still  we  feel  to  say — "  Halle-
lujah to  the  Lord  God  Almighty,
who  sits  upon  his  throne,  who  rei^n*
for  ever  and  ever,  for  he  will  bless
his  Zion,  he  will  extend  forth  her
borders,  he  will  pour  out  his  Spirit
upon  his  ministry,  aud  he  will  fulfill
and  accomplish  his  work  unto  the
'  uttermost.  Amen*


WHAT  THE  LORD  REQUIRES  OF  HIS  SAINTS.


133


*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,


Delivered  at  the  Forty-Sixth  Semi  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  on  Sunday  Morning,  Oct,  10,  1875,

(Reported  by  David  W,  Evans.)
WHAT  THE  LORD  REQUIRES  OF  HIS  SAINTS.


I  have  been  very  much  interested
and  instructed  during  our  Conference,
and  in  rising  at  this  time — a  few
moments  only  remaining  before  the
close  of  our  forenoon  meeting — I  feel
that  I  can  only  bear  my  testimony
to,  and  express  my  conviction  of,  the
truths  that  we  have  had  delivered
unto  us  during  our  meetings  from
the  first  day  of  our  Conference.  We
have  had  instructions  here  upon  spi-
ritual Mad  upon  temporal  matters
sufficient,  if  they  were  carried  out,  to
make  this  people  the  best,  purest,
noblest,  and  greatest  people  that  in-
habit the  world.  The  instructions
that  have  been  given  unto  us  in  re-
gard to  temporal  matters,  and  in  re-
gard to  bringing  ns  to  a  union  of
faith  and  works,  are  ca  leu  hi  ted  in
their  nature,  if  adopted  and  carried
out  in  the  practices  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  to  make  thera  the  most  inde-
pendent people  that  live  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  depending  indeed
only  upon  the  Lord  our  God,  the
giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  yift.
I  can  see,  as  el  early  as  it  is  possible
for  me  to  see  the  light  of  the  sun,
that  if  the  instructions  that  were
given  here  yesterday,  and  the  day


■

before,  in  relation  to  uniting  our*
selves  together  in  temporal  affairs,
were  carried  out  by  the  people,  we
would  soon  no  longer  be  beholden  to
the  world,  and  it  would  be  said  of  us,
that  we  were  dependent  upon  no
power  upon  the  earth  but  t he  power
of  God.  It  is  very  different,  how-
ever, with  us  at  present,  for  now  we
are  very  dependent,  notwithstanding
the  vast  amount  of  blessings  that  the
Lord  has  poured  out  upon  us — bles-
sings of  the  soil,  of  the  labors  of  our
hands,  of  the  elements  that,  surround
us.  He  has  given  us  an  abundance
of  everything  our  hearts  can  desire
in  righteousness,  insomuch,  as  it  was
remarked  yesterday,  that  we  have
b -come  almost  recreant  to  these  Lies*
sings  ;  we  squander  and  waste  them,
run  over  them,  trample  them  under
our  feet  as  it  were,  and  regard  them
as  of  very  little  importance,  or  worth-
less. The  Lord  truly  lias  blessed  \\U
people;  he  has  poured  out  Iris  Spirit
upon  us,  opened  our  way,  delivered
us  from  our  enemies,  blessed  and
enriched  the  soil,  tempered  the  ele-
ments, and  made  them  favorable  to
us,  turned  away  cursings,  and  given
us  blessings  on  every  hand,  and  has


prospered  us  in  the  earth*  But  we
have  been  careless,  and  in  a  measure
blind  to  the  presence  and  value  of  the
blessings  that  have  been  poured  out
upon  us  so  abundantly,  and  have  1
failed  to  recognize,  as  we  should  at
all  times,  the  hand  of  God  therein,
We  have  also  come  far  short  of  appre-
ciating our  brethren  the  Prophets,
who  have  borne  the  burden  in  the
heat  of  the  day ;  who  have  stood
boldly  and  fearlessly,  tilled  with  wis-  ,
dom  and  intelligence  from  above,  to
give  us  counsel,  and  to  guide  and
direct  us  in  the  channels  uf  prospe-
rity, pence,  and  happiness.

Will  we  come  to  a  knowledge  of
the  truth  ?  Will  we  learn  to  appre-
ciate the  bles&ings  that  we  enjoy,
and  to  realize  from  whence  they
come  ?  Will  we  begin  to  follow  more
faithfully  the  Counsels  that  are  given
to  us  by  the  servants  of  the  Lord,
aud  come  together  in  the  unity  of
the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the
Son  ot  God,  that  we  may  become
perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  even  to
the  fullness  of  the  measure  of  his
stature  ?

There  is  a  circumstance  lecorded
in  the  Scriptures,  that  has  been  '
brought  forcibly  to  my  mind  while
listening  to  the  remarks  of  the  Elders
who  have  spoken  to  us  during  Con-
ferenee.  A  young  man  came  to
Jesus  and  asked  what  good  thing  he
should  do  that  he  might  have  eternal
life.  Jesus  aaid  unto  him — "  Keep
the  commandments."  The  young
man  asked  which  of  them.  Then
Jesus  enumerated  to  him  some  of  the
commandments  that  he  was  to  keep
—he  shuuld  not  murder,  nor  commit
adultery,  nor  steal,  nor  bear  false,
witness,  but  he  should  honor  his  father
and  mother,  and  love  his  neighbor  as
himself,  &o.  Said  the  young  man —
"All  these  I  have  kept  from  my;
you tli  up,  what  luck  1  yet  ?"  Jesus
said — **If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  go,


and  sell  that  thou  hast  and  give  to
the  poor,  and  thou  shnlt  have  treasure
in  heaven,  and  come  and  follow  me,"
And  we  are  told  that  he  turned  away
sorrowful,  because  he  had  great
possessions*  He  would  not  hearken
to,  or  obev  the  law  of  God  in  this
matter.  Not  that  Jesus  required  of
the  young  man  to  go  and  sell  all  that
he  possessed  and  give  it  away ;  that
is  not  the  principle  involved.  The
great  principle  involved  is  that  which
the  Elders  of  Israel  are  endeavoring
to  enforce  upon  the  minds  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  to-day.  When  the
young  man  turned  away  in  sorrow,
Jesus  said  to  his  disciples — "  How
hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  !,f

Ih  this  because  the  rich  man  is
rich?  No.  May  not  the  rich  man,
who  has  the  light  of  God  in  his  heart,
who  possesses  the  principle  and  spirit
of  truth,  and  who  understands  the
principle  of  God's  government  and
law  in  the  world,  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  heaven  as  easily,  and  be
as  acceptable  there  as  t  he  poor  man
may?  Precisely.  God  is  not  a
respecter  of  persons.  The  rich  man
may  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  hear
ven  as  freely  as  the  poor,  if  he  will-
bring  Ins  lieirt  and  affections  into
subjection  to  the  law  of  God  and  to-
the  principle  of  truth  ;  if  he  will
place  his  affections  upon  God,  his
heart  upon  the  tiuth,  aud  Ins  soul
upon  the  accomplishment  of  God's
purposes,  and  not  fix  his  affections
and  his  hopes  upon  the  things  of  the
world*  Here  is  the  difficulty,  and
this  was  the  difficulty  with  the  young
man.  He  had  great  possessions,
and  he  preferred  to  rely  upon  his
wealth  rather  than  forsake  all  and
follow  Christ,  If  he  had  possessed
the  spirit  of  truth  in  his  heart  to
have  known  the  will  of  God,  and  to
have  loved  the  Lord  with  all  his
heart  and  his  neighbor  as  himself,  he


WHAT  THE  LORD  REQUIKES  OF  THE  SAINTS.


135


would  have  said  to  the  Lord — "  Yea,
Lord,  I  will  do  as  you  require,  I  will
go  and  sell  all  that  I  have  and  give
it  to  the  poor,1*  If  he  had  had  it  in
his  heart  to  do  this,  that  alone  might
have  been  sufficient,  and  the  demand
would  probably  have  stopped  there,
for  undoubtedly  the  Lord  did  not
deem  it  essential  for  him  to  go  and
give  his  riches  away,  or  to  sell  his
possessions  and  give  the  proceeds
away,  in  order  that  he  might  be  per-
fect, for  that,  in  a  measure,  would
have  been  improvident  Yet,  if  it
had  required  all  this  to  test  him  and
to  prove  him,  to  see  whether  he  loved
the  Lord  with  all  his  heart,  mind,
and  strength,  and  his  neighbor  aa
himself,  then  he  qui* ht  to  have  been
willing  to  do  it,  and  if  he  had  been
lie  would  have  Licked  nothing,  and
would  have  received  the  gift  of
eternal  life,  which  is  the  greatest
gift  of  God,  and  which  can  be  re*
ceived  on  no  other  principle  than
the  one  mentioned  by  Jesus  to  the
young  man.  If  you  will  read  the
sixth  lecture  on  faith  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants, you  will
learn  that  no  man  can  obtain  the  gift
of  eternal  life  unless  he  is  willing  to
sacrifice  all  earthly  tilings  in  order
to  obtain  it  We  cannot  do  this  so
long  as  our  affections  are  tixed  upon
the  world.

It  is  true  that  we  are  in  a  measure
of  the  earth,  earthly ;  we  belong  to
the  world.  Our  a  (lections  and  oar
souls  are  here;  our  treasures  are
here,  and  where  the  treasure  is  there
the  heart  is. But  if  we  will  lay  up


our  treasures  in  heaven  ;  if  we  will
wean  our  affections  from  the  things
of  Ibis  world,  and  >ay  to  the  Lord
our  God — l*  Father,  not  my  will  but
thine  be  done,"  then  may  the  will  of
God  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  done
in  heaven,  aud  the  kingdom  of
God  in  its  power  aud  glory  will  be
established  upon  the  earth.  Sin
and  Satan  will  be  bound  and  ban-
ished from  the  earth,  and  not  until
we  attain  to  this  cot  id  it  ion  of  minci
and  faith  will  this  be  done.

Then  let  the  Saints  unite;  let
them  hearken  to  the  voices  of  the
servants  of  God  that  are  sounded
in  their  ears  ;  let  them  hearken  to
their  counsels  and  give  heed  to  the
truth  ;  let  them  seek  their  own  sal-
vation, for,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,
I  am  so  selfish  that  I  am  .seeking
after  my  salvation,  and  I  Know  that  I
can  tind  it  only  in  obedience  to  the
laws  of  God,  in  keeping  the  com
niaudrnenta,  in  performing  works  of
righteousness,  following  in  the  foot-
steps of  our  file  leader,  Jesus,  the
exemplar  und  the  head  of  alL  He
is  the  way  of  life,  he  is  the  light  of
the  world,  he  is  the  door  by  which  we
must  enter  in  order  that  we  may  have
a  place  with  him  in  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God.

May  Gud  grant  that  we  may  see
and  comprehend  the  whole  truth,
and  be  submissive  to  the  require-
ments of  the  Gospel  and  obedient
to  the  Priesthood  of  God  upon  the
earth  in  all  things,  that  we  may  ob-
tain eternal  life,  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


15G


JuTKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  the  Forty-Sixth  Semi- Annual  Conference  of  the  Church
op  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt
Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  October  10,  1875.


(Ti  spotted  hy  David  IF.  Evans,)


THE  PURPOSES  OF  GOD— DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES  OK  THE  SAINTS.


It  is  extremely  difficult  to  speak  to
a  congregation  so  large  as  tins,  and
I  there  Tore  request  that  as  pood  or-
der as  possible  may  be  maintained,
because  it  is  almost  impossible  for
the  human  voice  to  encompass  so
large  a  congregation  as  the  one  as-
sembled here  to-day.

We  all  of  have  an  object  in  as-
sembling together  as  we  have  done
on  this  conference  occasion.  I  speak
now  to  L  itter- day  Saints,  as  it
is  to  then*  I  purpose  to  address  my
remarks  this  afternoon. We  do  not

ways  understand  the  influences  by
which  we  are  operated  upon  ;  hut
nevertheless  there  are  certain  prin-
ciples at  work  in  this  generation
which  move  upon  the  minds  of  the
human  family,  and  which  lead  them
to  reflect  and  study  more  or  less,  ac-
cording to  the  circumstances  sur-
rounding them  and  the  positions  they
occupy.  We,  the  Latter-day  Saints,
stand  in  a  different  relationship  to
the  Almighty  from  any  other  people
that  exist  on  the  face  of  the  earth.
The  principles  that  we  have  received
emanated  not  from  man,  nor  from
the  wisdom,  intelligence  or  philoso-
phy of  man  ;  we  believe  that  they


proceeded  from  God.  That  is  our
universal  belief ;  it  is  the  faith  of
every  good  Latter-day  Saint.  NoM
of  us,  previous  to  the  Lord  mani-
festing his  will,  knew  anything  about
the  laws  of  God.  We  did  not  know
anything  about  God  ;  we  were  not
acquainted  with  anybody  who  could
give  us  information  in  relation  to
him,  and  we  art?  indebted  to  revel  a*
tion  from  him  for  all  the  intelligence
that  we  have  that  is  true  in  regard
to  ourselves,  the  world  in  which  we
live,  the  people  who  have  lived  before
us,  and  those  who  will  live  after  us  ;
also  in  regard  to  God  the  Father,  and
Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  New
Covenant,  We  had  certain  vague,
indistinct  ideas  about  these  .things
before,  but  we  had  nothing  real,  tan-
gible or  reliable.  Nor  is  it  out  of
any  consideration,  particularly,  to
ourselves  personally,  that  these  tilings
are  made  manifest  Gud  has  certain
purposes  to  accomplish,  pertaining
to  the  world  in  which  we  live,  in
which  the  interests  and  happiness
of  the  human  family  are  concerned,
to  those  who  live  in  the  world  to-day,
to  those  who  have  lived  in  other  ages
and  dispensations,  back  to  the  time


THE  PURPOSES  OF  GOP,  ETC.


137


of  Adam,  and  also  forward,  to  the
latest  generation  of  time,  to  the  last
man  who  shall  be  born  upon  earth.
The  ancient  Patriarchs  and  Prophets,
men  of  God  who  basked  in  the  light
of  revelation,  and  comprehended
the  mind  of  Jehovah,  and  who
held  the  everlasting  Priesthood,
and  enjoyed  the  Gospel  as  we  en-
joy it;  all  these  together  with  God
our  heavenly  Father  and  till  the
angelic  hosts,  are  interested  in  the
work  that  the  Father  has  commen-
ced in  thete  last  days;  and  hence
a  revelation  was  made  unto  Joseph
Smith.  Holy  angels  of  God  ap-
peared to  him  and  communicated  to
him  the  mind  and  will  of  Jehovah,
as  a  chosen  messenger  to  introduce
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times,  wherein  all  heaven  and  all  that
have  ever  dwelt  on  the  earth  are
concerned  and  interested.  He  did
nut  reveal  himself,  particularly,  be*
cause  ot  Joseph  Smith,  individually,
nor  because  of  any  other  individual
man,  nor  for  the  peculiar  interest,
emolument  or  aggrandisement  of  any
set  of  men;  but  for  the  purpose  of
introducing  certain  principles  that  it
was  necessary  that  the  world  of  man-
kind should  be  made  acquainted  with ;
in  fact,  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  in-
trod uci rig  what  we  call  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,
in  which  all  who  have  ever  lived  or
whoever  will  live  up>n  this  globe  nre
interested.

The  Gospel  that  we  talk  of,  al-
though  it  may  be  a  personal  thing,
yet  at  the  same  titne  is  as  high  as
the  heavens,  wide  as  the  universe  and
deep  as  hell.  It  permeates  through
all  time,  and  extends  to  all  people,
both  living  and  dead.  We  talk  some-
times  about  tin*  Church  of  God,  and
why  ?  We  talk  about  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  why  ?  Because,  before
there  could  be  a  kingdom  of  God,
there  must  be  a  Church  of  God,  and


hence  the  first  principles  of  the
Gospel  were  needed  to  be  preached
to  all  nations,  as  they  were  formerly
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and
others  made  their  appearance  on  the
earth.  And  why  so  ?  Because  of
the  impossibility  of  introducing  the
law  of  God  among  a  people  who
would  not  be  subject  to  and  be  guided
by  the  spirit  ot  revelation.  Hence
the  world  have  generally  made  great
mistakes  upon  these  points.  They
have  started  various  projects  to  try
to  unite  and  cement  the  people  toge-
ther without  God ;  but  they  could
not  do  it.  Fourierism,  Communism
— another  branch  of  the  same  thing
— and  many  other  principles  of  the
same  kind  have  been  introduced  to
try  and  cement  the  human  family
together.  And  then  we  have  had
peace  societies,  based  upon  the  same
principles  ;  but  all  these  things  have
failed,  and  they  will  fail,  because,
however  philanthropic,  humanitarian,
benevolent,  or  cosmopolitan  our  ideas,
it  is  impossible  to  produce  a  true  and
correct  union  without  the  Spirit  of
the  living  God,  and  that  Spirit  can
only  be  imparted  through  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel;  and  hence
Jesus  told  his*  disciples  to  go  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and
said  he — "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,
even  to  the  end."  It  was  by  this
cementing,  uniting  spirit,  that  true
sympathetic,  fraternal  relations  could
be  introduced  and  enjoyed.

When  John was  on  the  Isle  of
Patmos  he  had  a  remarkable  vision
pertaining  to  many  things,  and  said
he — u  I  saw  a  mighty  angel  flying  in
'  the  midst  of  heaven, having  the
I  everlasting  Gospel  to  preach  to  those
j  who  dwell  on  the  earth,  to  every  na-
I  tion  and kindred  and  people  and
'  tongue,  crying  with  a  loud  voice—
*  Fear  God,  and  give  glory  to  himj  .


138  *  JOURNAL  OF

for  the  hour  of  bis  judgment  is  come;
and  worship  hitn  who  made  heaven,
and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  foun-
tains of  waters.'  n

Joseph  Smith  had  this  communica-
tion made  to  him,  together  with  the
light  of  the  Gospel,  and  bad  con-
ferred upon  him  the  keys  of  the  holy
Priesthood,  with  power  to  administer
therein  and  to  ordain  others  to  the
same  ministry.  And  be,  himself,
was  baptized  as  Jesus  was  baptized,
and  be  baptized  others,  and  they
others,  and  they  then  laid  their  hands
upon  them  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  they  received  it.
And  then,  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty,  they  were  directed  to
gather  together,  which  they  have
done.  And  how  many  of  yon  who
are  hearing  me  to* day  hardly  knew
the  reason  why  you  gathered  together?
But  you  had  a  feeling,  a  horning  de*
sire  in  vour  hearts  to  mingle  with
the  Saints  of  God,  The  Scriptures
say — **  I  will  take  them  one  of  a  city
and  two  of  a  family  and  bring  them
to  Zion  ;  and  I  will  give  them  pastors
after  my  own  heart,  that  shall  feed
them  with  know  ledge  and  with  un-
derstanding/'

In  accordance  with  these  principles
the  Elders  of  Israel  went  forth,  as
you  have  heard  here  during  this  Con-
ference, not  in  their  own  name,  nor  in
their  own  strength,  nor  by  their  own
wisdom;  but  in  the  name  and  strength
and  power  of  Jehovah,  and  as  his
chosen  messengers  to  administer  life
and  salvation  to  a  fallen  world.  And
God  went  with  them,  and  his  holy
angels  accompanied  them ;  and  the
Spirit  and  power  of  God  were  with
them  ;  and  the  words  that  they  spake
they  spake  not  of  themselves  but  as
they  were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Giio&t,  And  God  wor  ked  with  them
and  the  truth  came  to  your  hearts
and  you  received  it  and  rejoiced
therein, God  had  a  people  scattered


DISCOURSES,

abroad  among  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  his  Priesthood  were  instru-
mental in  his  hands  in  gathering  that
people  together;  and  in  these  days  as
in  days  of  old,  Jesus  said  —  "My
sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  know  it  and
follow  me,  and  a  stranger  will  they
not  follow,  because  tbfcy  know  not
the  voice  ot  a  stranger,"

Here  then,  God  was  desirous  of
introducing  his  kingdom  upon  the
earth,  and  he  had  in  the  6rst  place,
to  organize  his  Church,  to  organize
the  people  that  be  had  scattered
among  the  nations  and  to  bring  thera
together,  that  there  might  be  one  fold
and  one  shepheid,  and  one  Lord,  one
faith  and  one  baptism,  and  one  God,
who  should  be  in  all  and  through  all,
and  by  which  all  should  be  governed.
To  facilitate  this  object  he  organized
his  holy  Priesthood  as  it  existed  in
the  heavens,  and  he  gave  a  pattern
of  these  things,  just  as  much  as  he
did  in  the  days  of  Moses,  only  more
so,  God  said  to  Moses — u  See  that
thou  make  all  things  according  to  the
pattern  that  I  showed  thee  in  the
mount/'  God  said  to  Joseph — 11  See
that  thou  organize  this  Church  ac-
cording to  the  pattern  that  I  have
showed  thee.'1  And  be  placed  in  his
Church  Presidents,  Apostles,  Patri-
archs, Seventies,  High  Priests,  Bish-
ops, Priests,  Teachers,  Deacons,  Bish-
ops* Councils  and  High  Councils,  and
other  organizations  which  God  had
developed  and  given  to  his  Priest-
hood; and  hence,  when  the  angel
came  which  is  mentioned  by  John  on
Patmos,  he  restored  the  Gospel  as
it  existed  with  Adam,  and  with  Enoch,
and  with  Seth,  and  with  Methusalab,
and  with  Noah  and  Melchizedek,  and
with  Abraham,  with  the  Prophets,
and  with  the  Apostles  and  Jesus,
whether  on  the  Continent  of  Asia,
on  this  continent,  or  anywhere  else;
and  this  people  who  possess  this
Priesthood  and  the  authority  from


THE  PURPOSES  OP  GOD,  ETC*


13*


God  to  administer  therein,  when  they
get  behind  the  vail  they  will  enter
again  into  the  office  of  their  calling
and  will  be  united  with  their  several
Priesthoods  there,  for  the  Priesthood
on  this  and  on  the  other  side  of  the
vail  are  parts  of  the  same  eternal
system  ;  and  hence  with  a  people  like
this  in  possession  of  the  Pries thood,
and  enjoying  the  revelations  of  hea-
ven, God  could  communicate  and,
through  them,  could  reveal  his  will
to  the  human  family,  but  not  to  a
people  who  would  not  listen  to  his
laws  and  obey  hie  precepts.

This  Priesthood  was  held  by  John
the  rt*  vela  tor,  by  Peter,  by  Moroni,
one  of  the  Prophets  of  God  on  this
continent*  Nephi,  another  of  the
servants  of  God  on  this  continent,
had  the  Gospel  with  its  keys  and
powers  revealed  unto  him.  We  know
that  these  things  were  so,  and  we  do
not  profess  to  argue  them,  tor  we  all
know  it.  We  read  that  Moses  and
Eli  as  appeared  to  Jesus  and  his  dis-
ciples on  the  mount,  and  Jesus  was
transfigured  before  them.  Who  were
Moses  and  Elias  ?  They  were
Prophets  of  the  living  God  who  held
the  Gospel  and  the  Priesthood  in
former  days,  and  they  were  sent  to
administer  to  Jesus  and  to  Peter,
James  and  John  on  the  mount.

We  also  learn  that  when  John  was
upon  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  the  visions
of  heaven  svere  unfolded  to  his  view,
and  a  great  and  mighty  angel  stood
before  him  and  showed  to  him  many
great  and  important  things  pertain-
ing to  the  future ;  and  John  fell  down
to  worship  him.  Bat  said  he —
"  Hold  !  do  not  worship  me."  "Why?
Who  are  you  ?"  "  I  am  one  of  thy
fellow-servants  the  Prophets,  who
kept  the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  the
word  of  God.  Do  not  worship  me,
I  am  one  of  those  who  held  the
Priesthood  in  time  and  now  I  am  ad-
ministering iu  eternity, aud  have


come  forth  as  a  messenger  of  the
Lord  to  thee."

It  was  precisely  in  tins  way  that
Joseph  Smith  was  administered  unto,
and  by  the  same  kind  ot  messengers,
who  held  the  same  kind  of  authority;
and  they  came  to  introduce  and
u.sher  in  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times,  that  all  things
that  are  in  Christ  might  be  gath-
ered together  in  one,  whether  they
be  things  in  the  earth  or  things
in  the  heaveus.  This  was  done  that
God's  people  might  be  gathered  in
one,  that  God's  word  might  be  gath-
ered iu  one,  that's  God's  Priesthood
might  be  gathered  in  one,  and  that
all  in  Christ  on  earth  might  be  united
hy  indissoluble  ties  with  the  Priest-
hood that  exists  in  heaven,  that  they
all  might  operate  together  for  the
accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of
God  on  the  earth.  Hence  it  is  said
that  *'  we  without  them  can  not  be
made  perfect,  and  that  they  without
us  can  not  be  made  perfect ;  "  a  per-
fect union  between  heaven  and  earth
was  needed.  Under  such  circum-
stances what  did  we  do  ?  What
could  we  do  ?  What  intelligence
were  we  in  possession  of,  in  and  of
ourselves  ?  Who  among  us  knew
the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine
of  Christ  ?  Not  a  man  living  under-
stood them  correctly,  and  we  are  in-
debted to  God  for  our  intelligence  in
relation  to  these  things.  Who  knew
anything  about  the  organization  of
the  Church  ot  God  ?  Nobody.  Was
there  any  such  thing  in  existence  on
the  face  of  the  earth  ?  You  might
have  searched  for  it,  but  it  would
have  been  in  vain,  it  could  not  have
been  found.  There  were  the  systems,
creeds  and  notions  of  men,  but  no-
body to  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."
No  prophecy,  no  inspiration,  no
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God.
Who  knew  any  tiling  about  the  ne-
cessity of  Presidents  or  Apostles  ?


140


JGL'itNAL  UF  DISCOURSES


Nobody,  Who  knew  what  an  Apostle
was  ?  Nobody.  Who  knew  what  a
High  Priest  or  a  Seventy  was  ?
Nobody,  Who  knew  what  an  Elder
was  in  the  true  acceptation  of  the
term?  Nobody;  neither  was  there
an}* body  who  knew  anything  about
the  office  of  a  Bishop,  Priest ,  Teacher
or  Deacon,  or  about  the  functions  of  a
High  Council  or  a  Bishop's  Council,
or  any  of  the  ordinances  of  the  Church
of  God.  Who  knew  anything  about
the  relation  of  man  to  man  or  of
man  to  woman  ?  Nobody,  Who
knew  anything  about  the  relationship
that  exists  between  man  and  God  ?
Nobody,  Who  knew  any  tiling  about
the  eternities  that  ate  to  come  ?
Nobody.  It  was  God  who  revealed
these  I  lungs.  Joseph  Smith  did  not
know  them,  neither  did  Brigham
Toung,  the  Apostles,  nor  anybody  else
until  God  revealed  them,  and  we  are
indebted  to  him  for  all  the  light,
knowledge  and  intelligence  that  we
possess  Jn  regard  to  the  heavens  and
the  earth ?  in  regard  to  the  God  who
made  us  and  the  mode  of  worshiping
him  acceptably.

Now  then,  we  are  here;  we  have
these  various  organizations.  The
Twelve,  for  instance,  have  various
d u  1  i ps  and  respo ! i  b i  1  i  t  ies  d e vo!  v i ng
upon  them  under  the  direction  of  the
First  Presidency;  Then  there  are
the  Seventies,  who  are  to  be  special
messengers  to  the  nations  of  the
earth,  to  ^o  forth  in  the  name  uf
Israel's  God,  clothed  upon  with  his
power  to  administer  life  and  salvation,
and  to  teach  the  people  the  principles
of  truth  under  the  direction  of  the
Twelve,  whose  duty  it  is  also  to  ad-
minister these  principles,  and  see  that
this  Gospel  is  sent  to  all  peoples;  and
hence  the  necessity  that  is  felt  by
them  and  by  the  First  Presidency  in
relation  to  carrying  these  things  out.

And  let  me  say  a  little  farther  on
a  subject  that  I  before  referred  to,


that  is,  that  God  could  not  build  up
a  kingdom  on  the  earth  unless  he  had
a  Church,  and  a  people  who  had  sub-
mitted to  liia  law  and  were  willing  to
submit  to  it  ;  and  with  an  organiza-
tion of  sncli  a  people,  gathered  from
among  the  nations  of  the  earth  under
the  direction  of  a  man  inspired  of
God,  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah  to
his  people;  I  say  that,  with  such  an
organization,  there  is  a  chance  for  the
Lord  God  to  bo  revealed,  there  is  an
opportunity  for  the  laws  of  life  to  be
made  manifest,  there  is  a  chance  for
God  to  in  trod  nee  the  principles  of
heaven  upon  t lie  earth  and  for  the
will  of  (rod  to  lie  done  upon  earth  as
it  is  done  in  heaven.  God  could
never  establish  his  kingdom  upon  the
earth  unless  he  had  a  people  who
would  submit  themselves  to  bis  laws
and  government;  but  with  such  a
people  he  could  communicate,  to  such
a  people  the  heavens  could  lie  opened;
to  such  a  people  the  angels  of  God
could  administer;  and  among  them
the  will  of  God  could  be  done  upon
earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven,  and
among  no  others,  and  that  is  why  we
are  here.  Says  the  Prophet—"  I
will  take  them  one  of  a  city  and  two
of  a  family  and  bring  them  to  Zion/'
What  will  you  do  with  them  ?  "I
will  give  them  pastors  after  my  own
heart,  that  shall  feed  them  with
knowledge  and  understanding;0  that
they  may  be  acquainted  with  each
other  and  with  their  various  duties
and  responsibilities;  that  they  may
be  instructed  in  the  laws  of  the
holy  priesthood,  and  bo  prepared,
eventually,  to  join  their  quorums  in
the  celestial  kingdom  of  God,  anil
that  the  people  may  be  instructed  in
the  laws  of  life.  Hence  our  mar-
riage ceremonies,  relationships  and
covet) ants  are  among  the  principles
of  the  Gospel,  and  they  are  eternal ;
they  existed  with  God  in  eternity,
and  will  exist  throughout  all  the  eter-


THE  TOliPOSES  OF  GOD,  ETC.


141


nities  that  are  to  come.  God  has
shown  us,  in  regard  to  our  marital
relations,  that  our  wives  are  to  bet
scaled  to  us  for  time  and  eternity.
By  what  authority  ?  By  the  autho-
rity of  that  holy  Priesthood  that  ad-
ministers on  the  earth  and  in  heaven,
and  of  which  Jesus  said  that  what-
ever they  should  biud  on  earth  should
be  hound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever
they  should  loose  on  earth  should  be
loosed  in  heaven ;  and  these  relation-
ships that  exist  among  us  here  are
calculated  to  be  consummated  there,
and  men  and  women  who  understand
their  true  position  expect  to  enjoy
eich  oi tier's  society  and  association
there,  as  much  as  they  do  in  their
own  homes  here,  ju-it  the  same.  And
though  they  may  sleep  in  the  dost,
yet,  by  the  power  of  the  resurrection,
which  you  have  heard  of  at  this  Con-
ference, when  the  trump  shall  sound
and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise,
thev  will  burst  the  barriers  of  the
tomb  and  come  forth,  each  and  all
ciai tniug  their  proper  mates — those
with  whom  they  were  associated  on
the  earth — through  eternity.  Tins
is  the  way  we  regard  our  marriage
covenants,  no  matter  what  other  peo-
ple say  about  it,  this  is  our  business,
and  we  shall  do  it  and  keep  on  doing
for  ever  and  ever  while  God  lets  us
live,  because  it  is  the  word  of  God  to
us,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  powers  of
earth  and  hell  we  shall  never  give
way  in  regard  to  oar  marriage  prin-
ciples, for  they  are  eternal  j  and  so
with  regard  to  every  other  principle
of  the  Gospel*  This  is  why  we  have
come  together  to  help  to  build  up  the
kingdom  and  government  of  God
upon  the  earth.  An  earthly  govern-
ment  if  you  please,  and  a  heavenly
government  if  you  please.  13 at  no
man  nor  set  of  men  are  capable  of
introducing  principles  of  this  kind
unless  God  is  with  them  and  stands
by  them;  and  the  first  Elders  of  this


Church  never  could  have  done  what
they  did  without  the  power  of  God
being  with  them  and  accompanying
them,  and  God's  mercy  being  extend-
ed to  them.  And  they  could  not
to  day.

Men  have  strange  ideas  about  the
Mormons,  Why  r  Because  unless
they  are  bom  of  water  they  cannot
see  the  kingdom  of  God;  that  is  what
Jesus  said,  and  that  is  why  people
fail  to  understand  us.  But  we,  who
have  been  baptized  and  enlightened
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  can  see  his
kingdom.  We  know  it,  we  compre-
hend it  in  part,  but  only  in  part.
What  is  the  result  of  all  this  Priest-
hood— the  First  Presidency,  the
Twelve,  the  Seventies,  the  High
Priests,  Elders,  Bishops,  Priests,,
Teachers  and  Deacons  ?  All  of  them
profess  to  be  under  the  direction  of
the  Almighty,  and  if  they  are  not,
they  are  living  hypocrites  before  God
and  holy  angels;  for  these  are  the
covenants  they  have  entered  into,  and
these  are  the  ordinations  they  have
received*  >

We  see  something  strange  in  con-
nection with  us  as  a  people — the
world  follows  us,  and  too  many  of  us
follow  after  the  world.  Can  the  world
give  you  the  light  that  you  have  re-
ceived, and  the  Gospel  and  the  hopes
of  heaven  you  have  received,  and  the
Priesthood  you  have  received  ?  And
will  you  barter  these  things  for  a
mess  of  pottage,  and  wallow  in  the
filth,  corruption,  iniquity,  and  evils
which  abound  m  the  world  ?  What
have  we  come  here  for?  To  wor-
ship God  and  to  keep  his  command-
ments. And  how  is  it  with  many  of
us  ?  We  forger,  in  many  iastance.%
our  high  calling's  glorious  hope,  and
we  give  way  to  follies,  foibles,  weak-
ness, and  iniquity,  and  we  are  gov-
erned more  or  less  by  covetousnesst
drunkenness,  Sabbath-breaking,  and
evils  of  various  kinds. I  sometimes


H2


JOURNAL  Ol"  IMSOH/JtSES


see  Elders  of  Israel  bringing  in  loads
of  wood  find  loads  of  hay  on  the
Sabbath  day.  Why,  it  is  a  burning
shame  in  the  eyes  of  God,  holy  angels,
and  all  other  intelligent  beings.  If
such  men  had  lived  under  the  law  of
ancient  Israel,  they  would  have  been
put  to  death.  Do  you  know  that?
Go  and  read  it  in  your  Bibles,
What  do  you  think  about  a  lying
Elder,  a  swearing  High  Priest,  a
Sabbath  breaking  Seventy,  and  a
covetous  Saint  V  The  souls  of  such
men  ought  to  be  inspired  with  the
light  of  revelation,  and  they  ought
to  be  living  witnesses,  epistles  known
and  read  of  all  men  !  Do  you  think
you  can  live  your  religion,  have  the
Spirit,  of  God  and  obtain  eternal  life,
and  follow  after  these  things  ?  I
tell  you  nay.  It  waff  said  of  olden
time — M  Love  not  the  world,  nor  the
things  that  are  in  t lie  world;  for
if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of
the  Father  is  not  in  him,"  That  is
as  true  to-day  as  it  was  eighteen
hundred  years  ago.  It  is  proper
that  we,  as  Elders  of  Israel,  and  as
heads  of  families,  should  reflect  upon
these  things,  for  in  many  instances
we  are  setting  examples  before  our
children  that  will  tend  to  plunge
them  to  perdition.  Is  this  what  we
are  gathered  here  for  ?  I  tell  you
nay,  we  are  gathered  here  to  serve
God  and  keep  his  commandments,
and  to  build  up  his  Zion  upon  the
earth.

After  praying  for  years  that  God
would  inspire  his  servant  Btigham
with  the  Spirit  of  revelation,  that  he
might  be  able  to  lead  forth  Israel  in
the  path  in  which  they  should  go,  he
tells  us  to  be  one,  as  Jesus  told  his
disciples;  he  tells  us  to  enter  into  a
united  order,  that  God  has  revealed
it,  that  we  are  to  be  one  in  spiritual
things,  and  one  in  temporal  things,
to  be  united  together  in  all  principles,
as  the  Saints  of  God  have  been


wherever  they  have  existed.  But
onr  Elders  can't  see  it,  and  many  of
our  Bishops  can't  see  it,  and  many
High  Priests  and  Seventies  can't  see
it.  Why  ?  Because  the  Bridegroom
has  tarried,  and  we  have  all  slumbered
and  .slept,  and  in  many  instances  we
have  sinned  against  God,  and  our
lamps  have  gone  out,  that  is  the
matter,  and  we  have  lost  the  light,
and  intelligence,  and  revelation,  and
quickening  influence  of  the  living
God,  if  we  were  living  our  religion
and  keeping  the  commandments  of
God,  we  should  feel  and  act  differ-
ently •  we  should  then  know  of  the
doctrine.  Jesus  said — 14  If  any  man
does  my  will  he  shall  know  of  the
doctrine,  whether  it  he  of  God  or
whether  I  speak  of  myself"

What  is  the  matter,  you  High
Priests,  you  Seventies,  you  Bishops
and  others  ?  You  are  not  doing  the
will  of  God,  and  you  do  not  know  of
the  doctrine,  that  is  the  matter  ;  and
yet  we  are  living  in  the  blaze  of
Gospel  day,  surrounded  by  Prophets,
Apostles,  Patriarchs,  and  men  of  God,
Is  it  not  time  that  we  humbled  our-
selves ?  Is  it  not  time  that  we  re-
pented of  our  sins  ?  Is  it  not  time
that  we  forsook  our  iniqm  ties?  Is
it  not  time  that  we  went  back  to  the
first  principles,  and  began  to  con-
sider our  ways,  and  to  walk  in  the
light  of  truth  ¥  That  is  the  way
that  I  understand  it,  and  hence  the
necessity  of  the  Elders  of  Israel,  the
President  of  the  Church,  of  the
Twelve,  and  of  all  men  who  are  in-
spired by  the  light  of  truth  and  the
light  of  revelatiou,  to  stir  up  the
members  of  the  Church  generally  to
good  works*  Theyr  see  Israel  wan-
dering away  after  strange  gods,  for-
saking the  fountain  of  living  water,
and  "  hewing  out  to  themselves  cis-
terns, broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold
no  water  j"  and  hence  the  necessity
of  Apostles  and  Prophets  for  the  per-


THE  PURPOSES

fecting  of  the  Saints  and  the  work  of  i
the  ministry,  and  tbe  edifying  of  the  !
body  of  Christ.  How  is  it  among
many  of  our  Quorums?  Perfectly
dead,  dumb,  and  lifeless,  without  the
light,  and  life,  and  power  of  the
living  God  among  them  ;  and  Elders
of  Israel,  clothed  upon  with  the  Holy
Priesthood,  expect  when  they  get
through,  to  associate  with  the  Gods
in  the  eternal  worlds.  How  is  it?
It  is  time  for  us  to  reflect  and  to  j
think  upon  our  situation,  and  to  con-
sider our  ways  and  be  wise.  What
do  you  want  to  do  ?  Do  you  want
to  get  up  some  excitement?  No,
we  want  to  bring  you  back  to  the
first  principles  of  the  Gospel  of;
Christ  Do  yon  want  us  to  be  bap-
tized ?  Not  particularly,  unless,  as
stated  by  President  Young,  you  re*
pent  of  your  sins  and  your  iniquities
and  your  lying,  and  your  deceiving
and  your  Sabbath-breaking,  and  your
covetousness  and  your  hypocrisy,  and
repent  of  your  speaking  against  the
anointed  of  God  ;  not  unless  yon  are
willing  to  be  governed  by  the  Holy
Priesthood  in  all  things  pertaining  to
this  world  and  the  next,  pertaining
to  time  and  eternity, If  yon  can't


OF  GOD,  ETC*  143

do  this,  don't  be  baptized  ;  it  will  be
better  for  you  not  to  be.

Well,  are  all  in  this  condition  ?
No,  no,  there  are  more  than  "  seven
thousand  who  have  not  yet  bowed
the  knee  to  Baal  f  there  are  more
than  seven  thousand  who  are  seeking
to  do  right,  to  live  their  religion,  and
to  keep  the  commandments  of  God.
I  say,  then,  repent  of  your  iniquities,
do  your  first  works,  live  your  reli-
gion, keep  the  commandments  of
God  ;  let  every  man  do  right  and
depart  from  evil  If  any  man  has
sinned  against  his  brother,  let  him
make  it  right  honestly,  and  squarely,
and  trnly,  and  not  hypocritically ;
and  let  us  do  everything  with  honesty
of  heart,  and  seek  to  God,  and  hum-

I  ble  ourselves  before  him,  and  live  our
religion,  and  God  will  pour  blessings
upon  us  that  we  shall  not  find  room
to  contain.  His  Zion  will  rise  and
shine,  and  the  glory  of  God  will  rest
upon  her,  the  principles  of  truth  will
spread  ou  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left,  and  the  mercy  of  God  will  be
extended  unto  his  people*

I  May  God  help  us  to  fear  him  and
keep  his  commandments,  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


144:


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Deliyerkd  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Aug.  30,  1875*

Reported  hy  David  W.  Emm,

FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY — THE  DESERT  WATERED  AND  THE  WILDER-
NESS MADE  FRUITFUL — ZION  IN  THE  VALLEYS  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS-
INCREASE  OF  HER  FAMILIES  LIKE  A  FLOCK— HER  PEACE,  PLENTY,
AND  PROSPERITY.


I  will  read  the  latter  part  of  the
32nd  chapter  of  Isaiah,  commencing
at  the  13th  verse.  [The  speaker
read  from  the  13th  to  the  20th  verse
inclusive*]

It  is  very  evident  from  these  pre-
dictions of  the  i*rophct  Isaiah,  that
he,  by  that  spirit  which  opens  the
future,  was  able  to  the  calamities
that  would  come  upon  the  bouse  of
Israel,  and  not  only  upon  the  people,
bat  also  upon  the  Promised  Land,
the  land  of  Canaan,  now  called  Pales-
tine. A  curse  was  predicted  upon
that  land,  that  instead  of  bringing
forth  those  things  that  were  neces-
sary to  sustain  a  people,  it  should
bring  forth  briars  and  thorns.  We
are  also  told  that  this  desolation
should  remain  for  a  long  period,
until  the  Spirit  should  be  poured  out
from  on  high,  until,  in  the  purposes
of  the  Most  High,  be  should  pour  out
his  Spirit,  and  that  would  produce  a
great  change  upon  that  land,  but
until  that  time  it  was  to  be  desolate.
All  the  houses  of  joy  in  the  Jewish
city  were  to  be  desolate,  and,  as  it  is
recorded  in  other  passages  in  Isaiah,
they  were  to  be  the  desolations  of


many  generations.  Not  the  desola-
tion of  seventy  years,  as  happened  to
Israel  in  their  Babylonish  captivity^
which  only  comprised  about  one
generation,  but  the  desolations  were
to  be  for  many  generations,  during
which  that  land  was  to  lie  unculti-
vated. The  latter  rains  were  to  be
withheld,  and  the  land  was  to  be-
come dry  and  parched  up,  bringing
forth  thorns  and  briars,  and  this  was
to  continue  until  the  Lord  poured
out  his  Spirit  from  on  high.

It  seems,  then,  that  the  Lord  had
a  particular  set  time  in  his  own
mind,  when  he  would  again  pour  out
his  Spirit  from  on  high  upon  his
people,  and  more  especially  upon  the
house  of  Israel ;  and  when  that  time
arrives,  there  will  not  only  be  a  great
moral  reformation  among  the  people,
but  we  are  told  that  the  revolution
will  extend  to  the  land  also,  for  the
Prophet  says  here,  that  when  the
Spirit  is  poured  out  from  on  nigh,
the  wilderness  shall  be  a  truitful
field,  and  the  fruitful  field  shall  be
counted  for  a  forest.  What  are  we
to  understand  by  the  prediction  that
the  wilderness  shall  be  a  fruitful  field


FULFILLMENT  OF


PROPHECY,  ETC.


H5


when  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  from
on  high  %  We  are  to  understand  the
same  as  19  recorded  in  the  thirty-
fifth  chapter  of  this  prophecy,  a
small  portion  of  which  I  will  read.
Speaking  of  the  gathering  of  the
Israelites  in  the  latter  times,  he  says
— "  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary
place  shall  be  glad  for  them ;  and
the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom
as  the  rose.  It  shall  blossom  abun-
dantly, and  rejoice  even  with  joy  and
singing:  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall
be  given  unto  it,  the  excellency  of
Carmel  and  Sharon;  they  shall  see
the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  excel-
lency of  our  God."

Now,  to  comprehend  that  (his  is
to  be  a  latter-day  work,  and  not  a
work  that  was  to  take  place  soon
after  the  prediction  was  uttered,  we
will  read  the  following  verses —
"Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and
confirm  the  feeble  knees,  8  iy  to
them  that  are  ot  a  tearful  hear  t,  be
strong  and  fear  not ;  behold  yuur
God  will  came  with  vengeance,  even
God  with  a  recompense;  he  will
come  and  save  you,"

That  has  never  been  fulfilled;  but
preparatory  to  the  time  when  God
will  come  with  vengeance  to  sweep
away  wickedness  from  the  fice  of
the  earth,  the  house  of  Israel  will  be
gathered  hack  to  their  own  lands,  and
the  people  of  God  will  be  permitted
to  dwell  in  the  wilderness,  and  that
wilderness  will  become  a  fruitful  field,
It  is  even  said  that  the  desert  should
rtjoice  because  of  those  who  are  gath*
ered,  and  should  blossom  as  the
rose.

Now  that  is  something  that  hns
been  fulfilled  during  the  last  quar-
ter of  a  century,  here  in  this  wil-
derness, barren,  desert  country.
The  great  latter-day  work  has  com-
menced, the  kingdom  of  God  has
been  reorganized  on  the  earth ;  in
other  words,  the  Christian  Chinch

No,  10.


in  all  its  purity  and  with  all  its  ordi
nances,  has  been  reorganized  upon
1  he  face  of  the  earth,  and  the  time
has  at  length  come  when  the  Spirit
of  God  has  been  poured  out  from
on  high.  Until  that  period  arrived,
there  was  no  hope  lor  Israel,  no
hope  for  the  land  of  Palestine,  no
hope  for  the  redemption  of  the
tribes  scattered  in  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth  ;  but  when  the  wilder-
ness should  become  as  a  fruitful
field,  when  the  spirit  should  again
be  poured  out  from  on  high,  through
the  everlasting  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  then  the  people  should  be
gathered  together  by  the  command*
1  lien t  of  the  Lord,  As  is  here  stated,
his  Spirit  should  be  the  instrument
in  gathering  them  together.  14  My
mouth,  it  hatlt  commanded  this
great  gathering."  Then  we  may
look  out  for  a  change  upon  the  face
of  the  land  where  this,  gathering
takes  place ;  wu  may  look  for  the
deserts  to  become  like  the  garden
tif  E  ieti,  to  blossom  as  the  rose  that
blossoms  in  rich  and  fertile  gardens,
to  blossom  abundantly,  and  the
,  desert  to  rejoice  with  joy  and  sing-
ing. We  are  to  look  also,  soon
after  this*  period  of  time,  for  the
gn  at  Redeemer  to  come,  "  Say  to
them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  he
strong,  tear  not,  behold  your  God
will  come  with  vengeance;  he  will
come  and  save  you,"  having  refer-
ence to  his  second  corning  in  the
clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and
with  great  glory,  attended  by  all  the
angelic  hosts;  coming  in  flaming  fire
to  consume  the  wicked  from  the  face
of  the  earth  ns  stubble,  .to  bura
them  up,  both  root  and  branch,  while
the  Saints  that  are  left  will  go  forth
upon  the  face  of  the  earth  and
grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall,  and
tread  upon  the  ashes  of  the  wicked.
The  Prophet  siiys  that,  when  Jesus
conies  witn  vengeance  and  destroys

VoL  XVI U.-


146  JOURNAL  OF

tbe  wicked,  redeems  the  desert,  and
causes  the  wilderness  to  become  a
fruitful  field,  then  the  lame  man  shall
leap  as  a  hart,  the  tongue  of  the
dumb  shall  specie,  theearsof  the  deaf
shall  be  unstopped,  for  in  the  wilder-
ness shall  waters  break  oat,  and
at  mans  in  the  desert,  and  the  parched
ground  shall  become  a  pool,  and  the
thirsty  hind  spr:ng&  of  water,

A  great  ninny  people  enquire  of
the  Latter-day  Haints — "  Why  is
it  Unit  you  do  not  heal  up  all  of  your
eick  and  those  who  are  afflicted
among  you  r"  This  question  is
often  asked.  Say  a  the  enquirer —
**  If  you  are  the  true  Christian
Church;  if  God  has  indeed  sent  his
angel  fro 01  heaven,  as  you  Litter- day
Saints  testify  that  fce  has;  if  he  has
indeed  organized  his  kingdom  on  the
earth  for  the  last  time,  preparatory
to  the  day  of  his  coming;  bow  is  it,
if  you  have  those  gifts  that  they  had
in  the  ancient  Christian  Church',  that
all  your  lame  and  blind  and  dfcmb,
and  those  who  are  afflicted  are  not
belled  up  ?"  1  answer,  for  the
same  reasons  that  the  ancient  Chris*
tians  were  not  all  healed.  If  they
had  always  haen  healed  pi  ancient

t-  *•  *  j%  1 *  J"  ""1  I  I  j  1  A  ill

.lines  in  thft  UnurcrL  they  woekq  have

been  living  now.  The  time  came
for  them  to  diey^nd  they  did  die,  not-
withstanding all  the  faith  of  tbe  an-
cient  Christians,  and  notwithstanding
they  bad  power  to  say  to  the  lame —
*  Be  thou  healed,"  and  the  lame
Would  leap  as  a  hart  ;  notwithstanding
they  had  power,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
to  command  blindness  to  depart  from
the  children  of  men,  and  to  com- 1
maud  aU  manner  of  plagues  and
pestilences  and  they  were  a  abject  to
their  command  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
et,  after  all,  the  ancient  Christians
ied.  Why  did  they  not  heal  them,  j
keep  them  along,  and  not  let  them
die  ?  Because  that  was  not  accord-
ing to  the  order  which  God  had  ea- !


DISCOURSES.

tablisbed.  When  a  man  or  woman
is  up  pointed  unto  death  yon,  nor  It
nor  Peter,  nor  James,  nor  Paul,*  nor
John,  nor  any  other  man  of  God  can
heal  them  in  the  name  of  Jeans.
Why  ?  Because  God  bus  otherwise
determined.  But  that  did  not  do
away  the  gift  of  healing  in  ancient
times;  that  gift  was  abundantly  made
manifest,  notwithstanding  there  were
many  who  were  sick  who  were  not
healed.  v  m

So  in  the  latter-day  kingdom,  when
the  spirit  is  poured  out  again  from
on  high,  when  God  begins  to  manifest
these  ancient  gift*  again  among  his
people,  and  the  blind  among  t!u;m
are  made  to  see,  and  the  deaf  to  hear,
and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  is  made
to  speak,  and  the  lame  is  made  to
walk — when  all  these  things  begin
to  take  place  among  the  people  of
God,  still  there  will  be  many,  very
many,  that  will  not  lie  healed,  other-
wise the  prophecy  will  not  be  ful-
filled.' > :  r  y*

At  the  very  time  the  Savior  makes
his  appearance  and  comes  with  ven-
geance, there  will  be  the  sick,  the
lane,  the  blind,  the  dumb,  the
maimed,  and  those  afflicted  with  all
manner  of  di  seises.  The  Prophet
says  that  when  he  comes  and  finds
them  in  this  condition,  "  Then  shall
the  eyes  of  th*j  blind  bo  opened,  the
ears  of  the  deaf  be  unstopped,  the
tongue  of  the  dumb  speak,  and  the
lame  man  shall  leap  like  a  hart,*'
&2.  So  there  will  be  something  left
for  Jesus  to  do,  when  he  comes  in
A  iming  fire,  to  heal  all  the  sick  who
have  not  fa  th  to  be  healed  prior  to
that  time.  But  when  Jesus  cornea,
he  brings  all  the  Saints  with  him;
he  raises  the  right  eons  dead  from
their  graves,  not  as  he  raised  Lazarus
— to  mortality,  but  he  raises  them
up,  male  and  female,  with  immortal
bodies,  to  reign  here  on  the  earth
during  the  period  that  he  himself


FULFILLMENT  W  PROPHECY,  ETC


147


shall  reign,  during  the  great  Sabbath
of  creation,  the  millennial  reign  of
one  thousand  j-ears.

Now,  we  would  naturally  suppose
that  during  that:  period  of  a  thousand
years  everybody  would  have  Hie
power  of  faith  to  be  healed.  But
no,  though  the  Son  of  God  is  there,
though  the  righteous  dead  with
their  i  mirror  Lai  bodies  are  there,  yet
old  men  will  die  even  then,  for  it  is
according  to  the  design  and  purpose
of  the  great  Jehovah.  Though  there
will  be  no  one  to  fall  asleep  in  in-
fancy ;  though  none  of  the  youth  will
die  in  that  day  ;  though  there  will  be
no  middle-aged  persons  upon  whom
death  will  lay  his  powerful  grasp,  yet
the  aged,  or,  as  Isaiah  says  in  his
last  chapter  but  one, — u  The  days  of
my  people  shall  be  as  the  days  of
a  tree,  and  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy
the  work  of  their  hands,  A  child
shall  not  die  until  he  is  a  hundred
years  old.'W  We  would  naturally  sup-
pose that,  the  Lord  being  here,  all
the  resurrected  Saints  being  here,
he  would  not  let  them  die  when  they
become  old ;  but  he  lets  them  pass
away  according  to  the  decree  that
was  made  when  man  fell  and  was  cast
out  from  I  he  presence  of  the  Lord.
They  must  die,  the  penalty  must
come  upon  them.

But  with  regard  to  the  wilderness
that  is  here  spoken  of — "  Water
shall  break  forth  in  the  desert,  springs
of  living  water,  streams  also  in  the
desert,  and  the  parched  ground  shall
become  a  pool  and  the  thirsty  land
springs  of  water" — have  you  seen
anything  of  the  nature  of  this  pre-
diction.fulfilled  ?  Latter-day  Saints,
how  was  it  with  this  wilderness  twen-
ty-eight years  ago  this  summer  when
the  pioneers  entered  this  laud,  and
when  several  thousands  followed  them
in  the  autumn  of  that  same  year  ?
What  did  you,  who  were  appointed
to  explore  the  country,  find  ?  Many


places  parched  np,  looking  as  thongh
there  had  been  no  water  or  rain  from
heaven  for  many  years.  You  beyan
to  form  your  settlements  on  the
streams  that  ran  down  from  the  melt-
ing snows  in  the  mountains;  and  in
a  very  short  period  of  time  you  began
to  send  forth  your  settlements,  north
and  sou  Hi  and  west.  Occasionally
you  would  find  a  little  spring  that
would  break  out  from  under  the
threshold  of  the  mountain,  sufficient
to  water  perhaps  an  acre  of  ground,
and  only  one  family  could  go  there
and  settle.  What  do  you  find  now  ?
The  same  streams  that  would  only
water  one  acre  of  ground  then — you
know  I  am  speaking  to  people  who
know  for  themselves,  for  they  have
seen  it — the  water  in  those  very
localities  is  now  sufficient  to  writer
from  one  hundred  to  five  hundred
acres.  What  do  you  think  of  that  ?
Have  you  realized  that  the  hand  of
the  Lord  is  with  you  ? — that  he  has
indeed  fulfilled  that  which  ho  spoke
by  the  mouth  of  his  ancient  Prophet,
when  he  said—"  For  in  tlm  wilderness
waters  shall  break  forth  and  streams
in  the  desert,  etc."  ?  He  meant  just
what  he  said,  and  you  have  c me
hither  and  proved  his  words  to  be
true.  *'  l!"  ';.  *  '(<--,  I

I  recollect  traveling  through  this
country,  some  three  or  four  li  and  red
miles,  in  the  early  days,  soon  after
we  had  begun  to  branch  out  from  this
city  to  the  north  and  the  south,  I
found  sometimes  on  a  little  stream
of  water  from  two  to  three  families,
and  one  or  two  of  them  would  be
talking  about  breaking  up  and  going
else w hi1  re,  because  there  was  not  suf-
ficient water  to  enable  them  to  raise
what  was  necessary  to  sustain  Hi  cm-
selves.  Now  we  visit  the  same  set-
tlements and  what  do  we  find  ? —
flourish  in  %  villages  containing  from
thirty  to  fifty  families.  What  is  the
matter  ? The  Lord  has  fulfilled  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


148

which  he  spoke,  causing  streams  in
tbe  desert.

I  recollect  that  the  pioneers,  in  the
month  of  July,  1847,  went  over  on
to  the  north  point  of  the  west  moun-
tain to  see  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  to
see  what  it  looked  like,  what  was  the
nature  of  the  water,  &c.  We  went
to  a  place  that  has  been  called  for
many  years  "  Black  Rock,"  a  rock
that  is  out  in  the  lake  a  few  rods  from
the  shore,  We  concluded  that  we
would  go  out  to  this  rock  to  see  what
the  dei  th  of  the  water  was  beyond
it.  We  did  so,  on  dry  ground,  tbe
waters  of  the  lake  being  then  seve-
ral feet  below  the  place  where  we
walked  to  tbe  Bluck  Rock.  What
do  we  see  now,  and  what  have  we
seen  for  several  yeai  s  past  ?  The  path
on  winch  ihe  pioneers  traveled  on  foot
to  Black  Rock  is  now  covered  with
water  ten  feet  deep.  Showing  that
Salt  Lake  has  risen  some  twelve  or
fifteen  feet  during  the  last  quarter  of
a  century.  What  is  the  meaning  of
this  ?  Can  you  tell  ?  Says  one —
" 1  should  have  thought  the  lake
would  have  become  lower."  That
would  be  a  very  natural  supposition;
for  our  people  have  gone  to  work
and  made  scores  and  scores  of  canals
to  carry  on  to  their  farms  the  water
from  the  mountains  that  formerly
ran  into  the  lake,  and  hence  the  lake
has  had  very  little  water  running  into
it  compared  with  what  it  would  have
had  if  the  streams  from  the  moan-
tains  had  not  been  so  diverted.  But
God  has  said  that  he  would  make
the  wilderness  a  fruitful  field,  and
streams  in  tbe  desert,  and  he  has  ful-
filled his  promise.

Pioneers,  if  any  of  you  are  here
to  day,  let  me  ask  you  a  question —
When  you  came  down  from  the  mouth
of  Emigration  Canyon,  where  Camp
Douglas  is  now  situated,  into  this
Region  of  country,  in  July,  1847,
what  did  the  ground  appear  like  ?


Did  you  dig  down  and  make  any  ex-
periments ?  "0  yes,  in  many  places."
How  far  did  you  dig  down  ?  "  Some
of  us  dug  many  feet  to  see  if  there
was  any  appearance  of  moisture."
Did  you  find  anything  ?  What  was
the  appearance  of  the  soil  ?  It
looked  as  though  there  had  been  no
rain  for  many  generations.  What
do  we  find  now  ?  We  find  this  same
parched- up  soil,  for  some  five  square
miles,  where  Salt  Lnke  City  is  located f
converted  into  fruitful  gardens,  plant-
ed with  apple,  pear,  peach,  plum,  and
other  kinds  of  fruit  trees  adapted  to
the  climate,  and  in  the  spring  season
of  the  year,  in  the  months  of  May
and  June,  this  locality  is  like  one  vast
garden  full  of  blossoms,  so  much  so
that  strangers  are  astonished  beyond
measure  to  see  such  a  large  extent  of
country  so  much  like  a  garden.

Now  let  us  see  what  Isaiah  says
about  it,  for  he  looked  upon  it  as  well
as  you,  if  he  did  live  twenty-five
hundred  years  ago.  44  The  Lord  shall
comfort  Zion,  he  will  make  her  wil-
derness like  Eden,  her  desert  like  the
garden  of  the  Lord,  Joy  and  glad-
ness shall  be  found  therein ,  thanks-
giving and  the  voice  of  melody."
Indeed  !  Did  you  see  it,  Isaiah,  as
well  as  the  people  that  live  in  our
day  ?  Did  you  see  a  people  go  into
the  desert  and  offer  up  thanksgiving
and  the  voice  of  melody  ?  Did  you
see  that  desert  and  wilderness  re-
deemed from  its  sterile  condition
and  become  like  the  garden  of  Eden  ?
u  0  yes,"  says  Isaiah,  "I  saw  it  all,
and  1  left  it  on  record  for  the  benefit
of  the  generation  that  should  live
some  two  or  three  thousand  years
after  my  day."  But  Isaiah,  are  we
to  understand  that  the  people  are  to
be  gathered  together  in  that  desert,
and  that  the  gathered  people  are  to
be  instrumental  in  the  hands  of  God,
in  redeeming  that  desert  ?  Yes,
Isaiah  has  told  us  all  this. We  will


FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY,  ETC


H9


go  back  to  what  we  read  in  his  thirty-
second  chapter — "Until  the  spirit
be  poured  out  upon  us  from  on  high,
and  the  wilderness  be  a  fruitful  field,
and  the  fruitful  field  be  counted  for
a  forest  Then  judgment  shall  dwell
in  the  wilderness  and  righteousness
remain  in  the  fruitful  field/'  What
fruitful  field  ?  Why,  the  wilderness
that  will  be  converted  into  a  fruitful
field.  *6  Tlie  work  of  righteousness
shall  be  peace,  and  the  effect  of  right-
eousness, quietness,  and  assurance
forever  ;  and  my  people  shall  dwell
in  peaceable  habitations,  and  in  sure
dwellings  and  in  quiet  resting  places"
Was  that  the  way  we  dwelt  in
Missouri  or  Illinois  ?  Did  we  live
in  quietness  and  with  assurance  con-
tinually in  those  States  ?  Oh,  no,
we  were  tossed  about ;  as  Isaiah
says — **  tossed  too  and  fro  and  not
comforted,"  That  was  the  case  with
Zion  while  down  in  the  States,  and
that  was  in  accordance  with  a  modern
revelation,  in  which,  speaking  of
Zion,  the  Lord  says — **  You  shall  be
persecuted  from  city  to  city  and  from
synagogue  to  synagogue,  and  but  few
shall  stand  to  receive  their  inherit-
ance." But  when  the  time  should
come  for  Zion  to  go  up  into  the
wilderness  things  would  be  changed  ;
then  ray  people  shall  dwell  in  peace-
»ble  habitations,  in  sure  dwelling
places,  and  in  quietness  and  assur-
anoan

Will  they  have  any  capital  city
when  they  get  up  into  the  mountain
desert  ?  O,  yes.  Isaiah  says  here
— "  When  it  shall  hail,  coming  down
on  the  forest,  the  city  shall  be  low
in  a  low  place."  How  often  have  I
thought  of  this  since  we  laid  out
this  great  city,  twenty-eight  years
ago!  How  often  have  this  people
reflected  in  their*  meditations  upon
the  fulfillment  of  this  prophecy  !
They  have  seen,  on  this  eastern  range
of  mountains  and  on  the  range  of


mountains  to  the  west  of  this  val-
ley, snow  and  storms  pelting  down
with  great  fury,  as  though  winter
in  all  its  rigor  and  ferocity  had  over-
taken the  mountain  territory,  and  at
the  same  time,  here,  *'  low  in  a  low
place,"  was  a  city,  organized  at  the
very  base  of  these  mountains,  en-
joying all  the  blessings  of  a  spring
temperature,  the  blessings  of  a  tem-
perature not  sufficient  to  cut  off  our
vegetation.  What  a  contrast !  "When
it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  the
forest,  the  city  shall  be  low  in  a  low
pi?  ice."  That  could  not  be  Jeru-
salem, no  such  contrast  in  the  land
of  Palestine  round  about  Jerusalem  !
It  had  reference  to  the  latter-day
Zion,  the  Zion  of  the  mountains.

Says  one  —  "  Is  there  anything  in
Isaiah  that  speaks  of  Zion  bving
located  in  a  high  or  elevated  region
in  the  mountains  ?"  Oh  yes,  let  ua
read  and  see  what  he  says  about  it  in
his  fortieth  chapter  :  41  Comfort  yef
comfort  ye,  my  people,  saith  your
God."  Tli en  he  goes  on  to  speak  of
the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  and  he  says — "  Prepare  ye  the
way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight  in
the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God."
The  same  as  you  have  made,  or  as-
sisted in  making,  the  great  highway
through  this  desert  region,  and  con-
structed highways  here  in  the  desert
called  the  iron  railroad.  "  Prepare
ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight
in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our
God."

Says  one — "  That  meant  his  first
corning,  John  the  Baptist,  etc."  Let
us  see.  "  Every  valley  shall  be  ex-
alted and  every  mountain  and  hill
shall  be  laid  low,  and  the  crooked
shall  be  made  straight,  and  the  rough
places  be  made  plain,  and  the  glory
of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and
all  flesh  ^1) all  see  it  together,  for  the
mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."

Did  that  mean  bis  first  coming  ?


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Was  the  glory  of  God  then  revealed  ?
Did  all  flesh  see  it  together  ?  No;
it  has  reference  to  the  second  advent,
the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  his  glory
and  in  his  power,  when  every  eye
shall  see  him.  Then  the  mountains
shall  be  laid  low,  then  the  valleys
shall  be  raised  up,  then  the  rough
places  will  be  made  smooth,  then  the
glory  of  God  will  be  made  manifest
to  all  flesh  living,  and  every  eye —
the  wicked  and  the  righteous — will
behold  him,  and  they  also  who  pierced
him.

But  before  that  day  what  will  take
place  ?  We  will  read  the  9th  verse
in  the  same  chapter.  "OZion" —
something  about  Zion  now,  before  the
Lord  oomes — "O  Zion,  that  bringest
good  tidings,  get  thee  up  into  the
high  mountains/'  Did  you  come  up
into  these  high  mountains,  you  peo-
ple of  the  hitter-day  Zion?  What
did  you  come  here  for?  Because
Isaiah  predicted  that  this  was  the
place  you  should  come  to,  you  should
get  up  into  the  high  mountain.  He
foretold  it,  and  you  have  fulfilled  it
"  0  Zion,  that  bringest  good  tidings/'
What  good  tidings?  What  tidings
have  you  been  declaring  the  list
forty- five  years  to  the  nations  and
kingdoms  of  tho  earth  ?  What  have
you  testified  to,  you  missionaries  ?
Your  missionaries  have  gone  from
nation  to  nation  and  from  kingdom
to  kingdom,  proclaiming  to  the  peo-
ple that  God  has  sent  his  angel  from
heaven  with  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
be  preached  unto  all  people  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  This  is
what  you  have  been  proclaiming.  Is
not  the  everlasting  Gospel  glad
tidings  to  the  children  of  men?  I
think  it  is,  and  especially  when  it  is
brought  by  an  angel  to  prepare  the
way  for  the  greet  and  glorious  doy  of
the  coming  of  t he  King  of  kings  and
L  )id  uf  lords.  It  is  good  tidings
that  people  who  receive  this  everlast-


ing Gospel,  are  commanded  to  £et
up  into  the  high  mountain.  Yon
have  fulfilled  it,  you  have  been  at  it
now  for  twenty-eight  years,  coming
up  from  the  eastern  .slope,  from  the
great  Atlantic  seaboard,  and  gradu-
ally rising  and  ascending  until  you
have  located  yourselves  in  a  place
upwards  of  four  thousand  feet  above
the  level  ot  the  sea.  And  here  in
the  Zion  of  the  mountains  you  have
founded  a  great  Territory,  with  some
two  hundred  towns  and  villages,  with
your  capital  city  "  low  in  a  low
place,"  where  the  temperature  of
spring  prevails,  while  all  the  rigors
of  an  arctic  winter  are  beating  upon
the  tops  of  the  mountains  in  our  im-
mediate vicinity.

But  lest  any  should  suppose  that
this  getting  up  into  the  mountains
was  a  former- day  work,  let  me  read
the  next  verse — "Behold  the  Lord
God  will  come  with  a  strong  hand,
and  his  arm  shall  rule  for  him.  Be-
hold his  reward  is  with  him  and  big
work  before  him/1  Not  corning  to
be  smitten  and  spat  upon,  and  des-
pised, and  to  hang  upon  a  cross,  ai
was  the  case  in  ancient  days  ;  but
the  Lord  God  is  to  come  with  a
strong  hand,  and  his  arm  is  to  rule
in  that  day  as  a  king,  as  a  lawgiver,
as  a  mighty  potentate  to  reign  over
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  which
will  then  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,  I  mean  that
portion  of  them  that  are  not  swept
off  with  devouring  fire.

But.  1  said  that  this  people,  called
the  Zion  of  the  mountains,  that  were
to  cause  the  wilderness  to  blossom  as
the  rose,  were  to  be  a  people  gathered
from  the  four  quarters  ot  the  earth*
Can  it  be  pro  vet)  ?  Yes,  I  will
refer  you  to  the  107th  Psalm,  where
it  is  said — "  Oh,  give  thanks  unto  the
Lord,  for  he  is  God,  and  his  mercy
endureth  forever.  Let  the  redeemed
of  the  Lord  say  so,  whom  he  bath


FULFILLMENT  OF  PROPHECY  ETC.


redeemed  from  the  band  of  the  enemy,
and  gathered  them  out  of  the  lands
from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and
from  the  north,  and  trom  the  sou  Hi"
— a  gathered  people*  Let  us  see
what  this  people  were  to  do.  *  They
wandered  in  the  wihlerness  in  a
solitary  way.  They  found  no  city  to
dwell  in."  I  wisb  yon  had  all  been
with  the  pioneers  iti  the  year  1S  J?7.
When  we  started  out,  in  the  dead  of
the  winter  of  184 3,  upon  the  prairies
of  Iowa,  after  leaving  the  gnat  Mis-
sissippi, and  getting  out  about  fifty
miles  from  that  river,  we  did  not  as
much  as  tind  a  foot  track,  and  no
signs  of  a  human  habitation.  We
wandered  over  that  uninhabited  ter-
ritory some  four  hundred  miles,  until
we  reached  the  Potto  wattamie  and
Omaha  tribes  of  Indians,  then  located
on  the  Missouri  river.  Then,  early
the  next  spring,  we  started  forth,
(one  hundred  and  forty- three  pion-
eers) with  our  faces  stilt  westward,
and  went  up  on  the  north  side  of  the
Platte  river  several  hundred  miles.
Did  we  find  a  road  most  of  that  dis-
tance? No  road  at  all.  We  found
tens  of  thousands  of  buffalo  and  their
paths ;  we  found  a  great  many  hostile
tribes  of  Indians,  who  sought  very
diligently  to  take  away  our  horses
and  mules,  and  to  cripple  us  in  this
manner.  But  we  continued  our
journey,  and  at  length  cone  through
these  mountains,  after  having  cross
at  the  South  Pass,  and  come  forth  to
a  little  fort  called  Fort  Bridger.  We
then  started  into  an  unknown  coun-
try, still  bending  our  course  south-
westerly, for  there  was  a  rumor,  and
nut  only  a  rumor,  but  it  had  been
testified,  that  there  was  a  great  in-
land sea,  called  the  Salt  Like,  in  the
midst  of  the  greit  American  desert.
We  had  heard  this  rumor,  and  had
read  some  of  Fremont's  travels  in
the  midst  of  host  He  Indian  tribes.
We  came  forth  into  this  desert,


■

1  i


wandering  in  the  wilderness  in  a
solitary  way.  Who  were  they  that
thus  wandered?  People  that  had
been  gathered  out  from  the  east  and
the  west,  from  the  north  and  the
south,  redeemed  from  the  hand  of
thoae  who  sought  to  destroy  them.
"  They  wandered  in  the  wilderness,
in  a  solitary  way,  and  they  found  no
city  to  dwell  in,"  How  different  this
was  from  the  ancient  Israelites  when
they  entered  the  land  of  Palestine !
They  found  numerous  cities,  built  by
the  former  in  habit  ants  of  the  land.
Jerusalem  was  a  city  that  had  been
known  tor  a  long  period  l>etore  the
Israelites  went  into  that  hind,  built
np  by  its  former  heathen  inhabitants.
They  found  large  vineyards,  with
grapes  and  fruit  in  great  abundance,
and  cities,  towns,  and  villages  spread
throughout  the  land,  which  the  Lord
( ;  ..  1  gave  th  'in  fur  their  possession.
How  different  was  that  from  the
latter-day  work,  when  the  redeemed
of  the  Lord  should  gather  from  the
four  quarters  yf  the  earth,  and
wander  hi  a  wilderness  in  a  solitary
way ;  they  were  to  find  no  city  to
dwell  in.

Did  we  suffer  anything  ?  Yes.
Did  the  old  Prophet  speak  of  the.se
sufferings?  Yes.  "Hungry  and
thirsty,  their  souls  fainted  in  them  ;
then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their
trouble,  and  he  delivered  them  out  uf
their  distresses,  and  he  led  them
forth  by  the  right  way/'  Yes,  when
our  food  gave  out  j  when  the  crickets
came  in  here  by  armies;  when  tons
and  tons  of  them  poured  in  on  the
little  crops  first  planted,  ready  to
devour  everything  before  them,  and
we  were  living  on  quarter  rations,
what  did  we  do?  We  cried  unto
the  Lord  in  our  distress,  in  our  hun-
ger and  thirst,  believing  that  he
woul  i have  ci»:npa*sion  i»n us,  and

open  some  way  for  our  relief,  and  he
did  so — he  -em  forth  large  tlocks  of


-


152


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


gulls  that  lit  down  upon  these  crick-
ets and  devoured  them  up,  and  thus
the  crops  of  the  people  were  saved.

"Well,"  says  one,  "does  this  have
reference  to  the  same  desert  and
wilderness  that  you  have  been  read-
ing about?"  Let  us  see.  "Let,
them  exalt  him,  also,  in  the  congre-
gation of  the  people,  and  praise  him
in  t  he  assembly  of  the  elders.  He
turns  rivers  into  the  wilderness,  and
wafer  springs  into  dry  grounds,  and
&  fruitful  land  into  barrenness  for  the
wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  there-
in.** Now  notice  t lie  next  prediction
— "  He  turns  the  wilderness  info  ft
standing  water,  and  dry  ground  into
water  springs,  and  there  he  makes
the  hungry  to  dwell"  What  for  ?
"That,  they  may  prepare  a  city  for
habitation/1  Though  we  did  not
find  any  cities  already  built  here,  we
had  to  prepare  one,  and  we  have  done
so,  and  a  very  fine  one  indeed  it  is,
and  the  wonder  and  astonishment  of
strangers  who  come  here  and  see
what  has  been  done  in  ihe  midst  of
a  desert  The  Lord  predicted  it,  and
you  are  the  ones  who  have  fid  til  led
it  "That  they  may  prepare  a  city
for  habitation/'

What,  else?  Were  they  to  be
lazy  and  indolent  ?  No.  That  they
may  "  sow  fields  and  plant  vine-
yards, which  may  yield  fruits  of
increase.  He  bl<  sseth  them  also,  so
that  they  are  multiplied  greatly,  and
snffereth  not  their  cattle  to  decrease/*
Strangers,  if  you  want  to  know  how
fast  we  are  multiplying,  just  go
through  our  settlements,  and  look  at
the  numerous  children  in  our  Sab-
bath schools;  you  never  heard  of
such  an  incr  ase  and  multiplication,
and  the  Lord  foretold  that  it  would
be  so.

There  is  another  very  curious  thing
concerning  tins  people  who  should
come  into  the  desert  .  wilderness.
Isaiah  says — 4*  He  setteth  the  poor


on  high  from  affliction,"  Now,  a
great  many  of  this  people  were  very
poor  on  arriving  here ;  they  had  been
robbed  five  times  of  all  they  had,  and
driven  out.  After  having  been  thus
plundered,  we  came  here  yery  poor;
but  the  Lord  "  setteth  the  poor  on
high  from  affliction,  and  maketh  him
families  like  a  flock/'  What  a  won-
derful prophecy  this  is!  A  poor
man  to  have  not  only  a  family  like  a
flock,  but  even  families.  If  you  do
not  believe  it  strangers,  go  through
our  Territory,  and  see  the  large  fam-
ilies, and  in  some  cases  you  will  find
in  the  same  vicinity  six  or  eight  dif-
ferent families,  witli  their  houses  and
farms,  all  belonging  to  one  man,  and
he  perhaps  a  pour  man  when  he  came
here,  M  He  setteth  the  poor  on  high
from  affliction,  and  maketh  him  fam-
ilies like  a  flock.  The  righteous
shall  see  it  and  rejoice/'  What!
The  righteous  see  this  and  have  joy
in  it  ?  So  says  the  prophecy.
"  But,"  says  one,  "  I  should  have
thought  every  one  would  have  been
disgusted  with  it."  To  think  that  a
man  should  have  a  family  or  families
like  a  flock,  while  the  righteous  see
it  and  rejoice  !  What  else  ?  "  And
nil  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth/*
That has not vet been  fulfilled.

if

u  Whosoever  is  wise  and  will  observe
these  things,  even  they  shall  under-
stand the  loving  .kindness  of  the
Lord/'  That  is,  those  who  observe
these  things  are  called  a  wise  people,
those  who  have  gathered  from  the
f*a>t,  and  the  west,  and  the  north,  and
the  south,  that  wander  in  the  wilder-
ness in  a  solitary  place,  finding  no
city  to  dwell  in,  hungry  and  thirsty,
poor,  stripped,  robbed,  plundered,
forced  into  the  desert,  driven  by  their
enemies,  that  very  people  should
multiply  exceedingly,  the  families  of
the  poor  man  should  become  like  a
flock,  and  the  people  should  rejoice
in  the  midst  of  all  their  afflictions,


FULFILLMENT  OF

while  all  the  wicked  should  eventually
stop  their  mouths.  That  will  be  their
destiny  sooner  or  later*  !

We  will  now  return  to  our  text,
the  32nd  of  Isaiah — "Blessed  are
ye  that  sow  by  the  side  of  all  waters,
and  send  forth  thither  the  ieet  of  the
ox  and  the  ass.*'  Why  did  Isaiah  say
that  a  blessing  should  be  given  to  a
certain  people  that  should  happen  to
mow  by  the  side  of  streams  of  water  ?
Why  did  he  not  bless  the  others  who
lived  on  the  bills  and  mono  tains,  as
they  do  all  over  our  States  and  many
other  countries  of  the  globe  ?  Be-
cause he  saw,  in  looking  at  this  peo-
ple, that  they,  in  their  location,  were  j
to  go  into  a  desert,  and  the  redeemed
of  the  Lord  would  he  under  the  ne-  !
cessity  of  getting  along  the  sides  of
streams;  they  could  not  go  out  seve-
ral miles  from  a  stream  or  spring  and
trust  to  the  rains  of  heaven  ;  no,  the
rains  do  not  come  here,  or  did  not
when  we  first  located,  so  as  to  bless  |
those  who  would  naturally  desire  to
reside  far  from  a  stream  of  water,
but  we  were  all  under  the  necessity
of  get  ting  down  close  to  the  side  of
some  stream  of  water.  What  for  ?
That  it  would  be  handy  to  build  little
canals  to  get  water  out  to  throw  over
the  land.  "  Blessed  are  they  who
mw  by  the  side  of  all  waters  arid
send  forth  thither  the  feet  of  the  ox
and  the  ass."  i

We  have  read  these  words  of  the
ancient  Prophet,  in  order  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  may  call  to  mind
Low  completely  the  Lord  is  fulfilling
every  jot  and  every  tittle,  &o  far  as
lime  will  permit,  of  that  which  he
caused  to  be  spoken,  by  the  power  J
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  his  an-
cient Prophet s.  Strangers  think  it
very  curious  that  this  people  should
have  such  large  families.  If  such
were  not  the  case,  we  would  not  be
the  people  predicted  about  that  were
to  be  so  blessed  ;  but  we  are  that


PROPHECY,  ETC.  153

people,  and  it  is  in  vain  for  us  to  un-
dertake to  turn  the  hand  of  the  Lord
to  the  right  or  to  the  left.  He  lias
his  own  eternal  course  to  pursue,  and
all  his  purposed  he  will  fulfil],  and
there  is  no  power  beneath  the  hea-
vens that  can  stay  his  almighty  hand.
He  will  fulfill  that  which  he  has  spo-
ken, in  order  that  there  may  be  no
room  for  infidelity  in  the  four  quar-
ters of  the  earth.  There  are  a  great
many  infidels  now-a-days,  and  I  do
not  wonder  at  it.  Looking  at  modern
Christendom,  without  any  Prophets,
inspiration,  gifts,  or  the  ancient
powers  of  the  Gospel,  it  is  enough  to
make  three  quarters  or  nine-tenths
of  the  people  infidel  in  regard  to  re*
ligion.  But  the  Lord  is  going  to
leave  the  people  without  any  excuse,
for  every  jot  and  tittle  of  that  which
he  spoke  by  the  mouths  of  his  an-
cient Prophets  he  will  bring  to  pass
in  its  time  and  in  its  season.  Zion
is  destined  to  fill  t he  mountains  in  the
last  days;  Zion  will  become,  as  Isaiab
says,  in  his  fiOtb  chapter,  a  great
people,  A  little  one  shall  become  a
thousand,  ami  a  small  one  a  strong
nation.  The  Lord  shall  bring  it  fortli
in  its  time,  says  Isaiah,  and  in  the
same  chapter  he  speaks  of  the  future
glory  of  that  people,  and  declares
that  while  darkness  should  cover  the
earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  minds
of  the  people,  Zion  should  arise  and
shine.  These  are  the  words  of  the
Prophet — u  Zion  shall  arise  and
shine,  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  has
risen  upon  her.  The  Gentiles  shall
come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the
brightness  of  thy  rising."

Inquires  one — *l  Is  Zion  going  to
become  popular,  so  that  Gentiles  and
kings  and  great  men  will  come  to
her  light  ?"  Yes,  certainly ;  and  not
only  Gentiles,  kings  and  great  men,
but  many  of  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  have  got  to  come  to  Ziun,  and,
according  to  this  very  chapter,  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not
serve  Zion  sball  perish,  and  be  utterly
wasted  away.  Has  I  here  ever  been
such  a  people  as  this  since  the  day
Isaiah  lived  ?  There  never  has;  but
such  a  people  find  such  a  time  are
flaming,  and  Zion  will  be  that  people.
"The  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy
light  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  i
thy  lisinof.  Thy  gates  shall  be  open
continually,  that  men  may  bring  the
forces  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  their
kings  may  te  brought."

It  will  bo  a  time  of  great  plenty
of  the  precious  metals.  In  those
days  God  will  give  the  keys  of  the
treasures  of  the  earth  and  he  will
open  tli em  up  to  the  people,  Isaiah
says,  in  this  connection — "For  brass
I  will  bring  gold,  for  iron  I  will  bring
silver,  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones
iron."  Gold  and  silver  will  be  so
plentiful  that  they  will  he  used  for
the  pavement  of  streets,  Bat  the
covetous  may  s*iy— "  That  will  be  a
fine  chance  for  us  to  stepl ;  if  you  get
pavements  made  with  gold  and  silver
we  shrill  lie  along  after  them."  I  !
think  you  will  not.  Why  ?  Because
Godwill  be  there,  and  I  do  not  think
you  will  have  any  chance  to  steal;
for  it  is  said  in  the  fourth  chapter  of
Isaiah's  prophecy,  that  in  that  day
every  dwelling  place  in  Mount  Zion
and  all  her  assemblies  shall  have  a
cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the
shining  of  a  firming  lire  by  night.
Do  you  think  you  would  like  to  go
into  a  city  where  every  dwelling  place
is  lighted  up  with  a  pillar  of  fire  by
night,  and  undertake  to  dig  up  the
pavements  ?  I  think  you  would  tiol
have  the  heart  to  do  if,  you  would
fear  that  light  would  go  forth  from
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  con-
sume you,  as  it  did  many  rebellious
and  wicked  ones  among  the  Israelites*
Gold  will  be  very  good  for  pavement*?,
if  they  are  only  constructed  properly  j


and  Mount  Zion  will  be  a  very  beau-
tiful city,  one  of  the  most  beautiful
that  has  ever  been  on  the  ftice  of  the
whole  earth.  It  is  spoken  of  by  the
Psalmist  David,  in  the  oOth  psalm
and  also  in  another  psalm — "  Beauti-
ful for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole
earth  is  Mount  Zion,  on  the  sides  of
i  the  north,  the  city  of  the  great
Kins"

You  Christians  quote  the  Psalmist
David,  and  sing  about  this  in  your
chapels  and  meeting  houses,  and  you
sing  about  the  desert  becoming  like
the  Garden  of  E  ien,  and  joy  and
gladness  being  found  therein;  you
have  it  all  fixerl  up  so  that  it  makes
melody  in  the  ears  of  your  respective
congregations.  You  sing  about  the
fulfillment  of  these  prophecies,  but
let  a  man  of  God  be  sent  forth  by  the
inspiration  and  power  of  the  Almighty
to  warn  you  concerning  the  great  day
of  the  Lord  that  is  coming  ;  and  con-
cerning the  fulfillment  of  these  pro-
phecies, and  you  will  gnash  your
teeth  upon  him.  He  reads  to  you
the  same  things  tint  you  sing,  and
brings  forth  the  same  testimony  and
,  the  same  Scriptures  that  are,  every
Sabbath  day,  repeated  in  your  hear-
ing, and  yet  you  stone  him  and  close
the  doors  of  your  synagogues  and
chapels  against  him,  and  cry  "False
Prophets,"  "  delusions,"  "false  teach-
ers/1 and  every  evil  epithet  you  can
possibly  invent  to  prejudice  the  minda
of  the  people  against  him.  Why  ?
Because  he  comes  to  you  with  the
truth  ;  because  he  comes  to  you  as
a  messenger  from  heaven  ;  because  he
comes  to  you,  testifying  that  the  Lurd
God  has  spoken  by  his  own  voice,
tbiit  he  lias  sent  his  angel  with  the
everlasting  Gospel  to  be  proclaimed
to  the  nations  as  a  preparatory  work
for  the  great  day  ot  bringing  in  the
fullness  of  the  Gentiles  and  the
salvation  and  gathering  of  all  thtj


15*


BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC,


house  of  Israel* Yon  cannot  bear  J  and  stir  up  prejudice  against  them,
the  truth,  yon  will  not  hear  it,  and  Amen,
you  cast  out  the  servants  of  God,  |


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivbked  \y  the  New  Tabeknacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sukday

Afternoon,  July  18,  1875,

Reported  by  David  W*  Emm.

book  of  mormon— urim  and  thummim — appearance  of  a  holy
a n < <  el  in  1820  to  four  persons — theik  testimonies  to  the
truth  of  the  book  of  mormon — also  .eight  other  witnesses —
Isaiah's  prophecy  relates  to  that  vqqk — ezekiel's  prophecy.


I  will  read  a  few  versos  in  the  r
29th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  commencing
at  the  18th  verse. [The  speaker
read  from  the  ]  Sth  verse  to  the  ensl
of  the  chapter,]

That  which  I  wish  to  call  to  your
mind,  more  particularly,  on  the  pre-
sent occasion,  will  be  found  in  the
first  verse  that  I  read — "  In  that
day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words  of
the  book/*

The  Latter-day  Saints  are  a  pecu-
liar people  among  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  of  the  present  age,  peculiar
in  many  things,  peculiar  in  many
religious  notions  and  views.  We
profesg  to  believe  in  this  book,  the
Jewish  record,  called  the  Bible.  We
•re  not  peculiar  so  far  as  this  item  of
our  faith  is  concerned  j  but  in  addi-
tion to  the  Bible,  we  believe  iu  ano-
ther book,  called  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, which  we  believe  to  be  equally  I
sacred  with  the  Bible. Some  may,


perl iapp,  call  the  Book  of  Mormon  a
bible,  and  in  one  sense  of  the  word  it
may  be  culled  that,  for  it  is  a  collec-
tion of  sacred  books,  the  same  as  the
Jewish  record  is.  The  difference
between  the  two  records  is  merely  in
the  history,  and  in  some  of  the  pro-
phetic writings.  The  Bible  pro-
fesses to  be  ;i  history  of  the  people
who  lived  on  the  eastern  continent,
while  the  Book  of  Mormon  professes
to  be  a  history  of  the  people  who
lived  in  ancient  America.  We  have
denominated  the  Jewish  record  the
Bible,  because  it  is  a  collection  of
books  said  to  have  been  written  by
inspired  men.  I  do  not  see  any
reason  why  #we  should  not  also,  as
Latter-day  Sainte,  call  the  Book  of
Mormon  a  bible,  it  bein^  a  collection
of  books  written  by  Prophets  and
Kevelutors.  Perhaps,  however,  the
world,  or  those  who  are  strangers  to
the  evidences  concerning  these  two


136  JOURNAL  OF

books,  may  object,  and  say  that  we  i
have  no  ri*jht  to  call  the  Book  of*
Mormon  a  bible,  unless  we  can  bring;
such  evidence  to  substantiate  its  divi-
nity as  we  can  concerning  the  Jewish
record.  But  supposing  that  we  are
in  possession  of  similar  evidences
Concerning  this  book  in  relation  to
ancient  America,  as  you  are  in  re-
gard to  the  Bible,  the  history  of  the
people  of  Palestine;  supposing  that
we  can  bring  forth  as  many  evi-
dences and  substantial  testimonies  to  \
prove  the  divinity  of  the  Book  of
Mormon,  as  you  can  to  prove  the
divinity  of  the  Jewish  record,  then  ,
why  should  we  not  include  it  among
the  sacred  books,  and  denominate  it
a  bible,  as  well  as  cull  the  Jewish
record  such  ?  I  will,  this  afternoon,
by  the  assistance  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  endeavor  to  lay  before  you,
Latter-day  Saints,  and  strangers  who
may  be  present,  some  of  the  evidences
that  we  have  concerning  the  divinity
of  this  book  which  we  esteem  so
highly — the  Book  of  Mormon.

Id  the  first  place,  I  will  give  you  a
very  brief  statement  concerning  the
manner  in  which  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon was  found.  In  the  year  1827t  a  1
young  man,  a  farmer's  boy,  by  the
name  ftf  Joseph  Smith,  was  visited
by  tin  holy  augel,  as  he  had  been  for
several  years  prior  to  this  time.
But  on  this  occasion,  in  the  fall  of
1*27,  he  was  permitted  to  take  into
his  possession  ihe  plates  from  which
the  Book  of  Mormon  w;is  translated
— the  angel  gave  them  into  his
hands,  permitted  him  to  take  them
from  the  place  of  their  deposit,  which
was  discovered  to  Mr.  Smith  by  the
angel  of  God.  WiUi  this  book,
called  the  Book  of  Mormon,  was  a
very  curious  instrument,  such  a  one,
probably,  as  no  person  had  seen  for
many  generations  ;  it  was  called  by
the  angel  of  Go  J,  the  Urim  and
Thummim, We  know  that  such  an


DISCOURSES*

instrument  existed  in  ancient  times
among  the  Jews,  and  among  the
Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  and  that
it  was  used  to  inquire  of  the  Lord,
and  so  sacred  was  that  instrument
in  the  days  of  Moses,  that  Aaron,
the  chief  priest  of  the  whole  house  of
Israel,  was  commanded  to  place  it
within  his  breastplate,  that  when  he
should  judge  the  tribes  of  the  house
of  Israel,  he  should  not  judge  by  hia
own  wisdom,  but  should  inquire  of
the  Lord  by  means  of  this  instru-
ment, and  whatever  decision  the
Lord,  by  aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mini,  should  give,  all  Israel  should
give  heed  to  it.  The  same  instru-
ment was  in  use,  many  hundred
years  after  the  days  of  Aaron,  by  the
Prophets  of  Israel.  David  inquired
by  means  of  an  instrument  of  that
kind,  concerning  his  enemies,  who
pursued  him  from  city  to  city,  asking
the  Lord  certain  questions — whether
his  enemies  would  come  to  the  city
where  he  happened  to  be,  and  whe-
ther he  would  be  delivered  up  to
them  by  the  people  of  that  city  j  and
the  Lord  gave  him  all  necessary  in-
struction, and  by  this  means  he  ivai
delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  his
enemies  from  time  to  time.
||  But  it  seems  that,  before  the
coming  of  Christ,  for  some  reason,
probably  through  wickedness,  the
Urim  and  Thummim  were  taken
away  from  the  children  of  Israel,
and  a  prophecy  was  utteied  by  one
1  of  the  ancient  Prophets,  before  Christ,
that  they  should  be  many  days  with-
out  a  Priest,  without  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  without  the  ephod,  .and
without  many  things  that  God  blessed
them  with  in  the  days  of  their  right-
eousness ;  but  that  in  the  latter  days
God  would  again  restore  all  his  bless-
-  ings  to  the  people  of  Israel,  including
'  their  counselors  and  their  judges  as
at  the  first

With  these  plates  that  Joseph


Smith,  i he  Prophet,  obtained  through
the  instructions  of  the  angel,  he  also
obtained  the  Urim  and  Th  urn  mini,
and  by  their  aid  he  copied  a  few
characters  from  the  plates,  and  trans-
lated them. He  was  not  a  learned
man  himself,  but  an  ignorant  farmer's
boy,  scarcely  having  the  first  rudi-
ments of  education. He  could  read
and  write  a  little,  and  that  was  about
the  amount  of  his  educational  ac-
quirements. After  having  copied  a
tew  of the  characters  from  these
plates  and  translated  them,  lie  com-
mitted them  into  the  hands  of  Mar-
tin Harris,  a  man  with  whom  he
wag  acquainted,  who  lived  not  far
from  his  neighborhood  ;  and  Martin
Harris  took  these  few  characters  and
their  translation  to  the  City  of  Ntjw
York,  to  show  them  to  the  learned,
and  if  possible  to  get  some  informa-
tion in  regard  to  their  meaning.  This
was  in  the  year  1827. Martin  Har-
ris was  then  a  middle-aged  man,  be-
ing about  forty-six  years  of  age.  On
arriving  in  New  York  City,  he  visited
the  learned  Dr.  Mitchell,  professor
of  languages,  and  obtained  some  in-
formation from  him  in  relation  to  the
manuscript  which  he  held,  and  was
recommended  by  Dr.  Mitchell  to  see
Mr.  Anthon,  professor  of  ancient  aud
modern  languages,  probably  one  of
the  most  learned  men  in  ancient  lan-
guages that  ever  lived  in  our  nation,
Mr.  Harris  went  to  see  Mr.  Anthon,
aud  showed  him  the  characters.  The
professor  examined  them and  the
translation,  and,  according  to  the  tes-
timony of Martin Harris,  given
from  this  stand,  he  gave  him  a  certi-
ficate that,  so  far  as  he  could  under*
Btand  the  characters,  the  translation
seemed  to  be  correct;  but  he  wished
further  time,  and  desired  that  the
original  plates  should  be  brought  to
him. Mr.  Harris  then  informed  him
how  Mr,  Smith  came  in  possession  of
the  plates — that  he  did  not  find  them


accidentally,  but  that  an  angel  of
God  revealed  to  him  the  phice  ot  their
deposit.  This  was  after  .Mart in  Har-
ris h»d  obtained  the  certificate  from
Professor  Anthon,  and  just  before
Mr.  Harris  took  his  leave  of  the
learned  gentleman  ;  the  hitter  having
ascertained  how  Mr1.  Smith  cam'1  hi
possession  of  the  plates;  that  part  of
them  were  sealed,  and  that  the  L  »r  I
had  given  a  strict  command  that  they
should  not  be  shown  to  the  public,
but  only  to  certain  witnesses;  I  say
that,  the  pro  feasor,  having  learned
this,  wished  to  see  the  cerrificitu
again;  Mr-  Harris  returned  it  to  him,
and  he  tore  it  up,  saying  that  there
was  no  such  thing  as  angels,  or  com-
munications from  the  L  >nl  in  our
day,  and  upon  Mr.  Harris  telin.j*
him  that  a  portion  of  the  plates  were
sealed,  he  very  Barcasl  ic ally  remarked,
that  he  could  not  read  a  sealed  b  »ok.

Mr.  Harris  left  him,  and  returned,
some  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  or
more,  to  the  neighborhood  where
the  plates  were  found,  and  informed
Mr.  Smith  of  his  success  with  Hie
learned,  after  which  the  Lord  gave  i%
special  command  to  Joseph,  un-
learned as  he  was,  that  he  should
translate  the  record  by  ihe  aid  of  the
Urim  and  Thorn  mi  m.  Mr.  Smith
commenced  the  work  of  translation.
Mr.  Harris,  acting  as  his  scribe,  wrot a
from  his  mouth  one  hundred  and
sixteen  pages  of  the  fir?*t  translation,
given  by  the  Prophet,

The  work  was  continued  from  time
to  time,  until  finally  the  unseahd
portion  of  the  Book  ot  Mormon  wua
all  translated.  In  the  meantime
Martin  Harris,  Joseph  Smith,  the
translator  of  the  book,  Oliver  Cow-
dery  and  David  W  hi  truer,  lour  per-
sons, retired  to  a  little  grove  in  the
year  1829,  not  far  from  the  luu>e
of  old  father  Whitmer,  wfere
this  Church  was  organized.  They
retired  to  this  grove  tor  the  special


158


Jul'iLNAL  OF  DI


purpose  of  calling  on  the  name  of  the
Lord,  ami  they  all  knelt  down  and
commenced  praying,  one  hy  one,  and
while  thus  engaged  they  saw  an  angel
of  God  descend  from  the  heavens,
very  bright  and  glorious  in  his  ap-
pearance ;  and  he  came  and  stood  in
their  midst,  and  he  took  the  plates
and  turned  over  leaf  after  leaf  of
the  unsealed  portion,  and  showed  to
these  four  men  the  engravings  upon
them  ;  and  at  the  name  time  they
heard  a  voice  out  of  heaven  saying
unto  them,  that  the  plates  had  been
translated  correctly,  and  commanding
them  to  bear  testimony  of  the  same
to  all  nations,  kindreds,  tongues  and
people  to  whom  the  translation  should
be  sent.  In  accordance  with  this
command,  Oliver  Cowdery,  David
Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris  have
attached  their  testimony  after  the
title  page  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,
testifying  to  the  appearance  of  the
angel,  signing  their  names  and  testi-
fying to  the  correctness  of  the  trans-
lation ;  testifying  to  having  seen  the
plates  and  the  engravings  upon
them,  and  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,
which  they  heard  out  of  the  heavens.
Now  let  me  say  a  few  words  con-
earning  the  nature  of  this  testimony.
This  testimony  vv;»s  given  prior  to
the.  publication  nf  the  book,  and  also
previous  to  the  organization  of  the
Latter-day  Saint  Church .  The  book
was  printed  early  in  18^0,  with  their
testimony.  Thus  you  perceive  that
this  work,  this  marvelous  work,  was
not  presented  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  for  their  belief,  until  God
had  favored  them  with  four  persons
who  could  bear  witness  to  what  their
eyes  had  seen,  what  their  ears  had
heard,  and  what  their  hands  had
handled,  consequently  there  was  no
possibility,  so  far  as  these  four  men
were  concerned,  that  they  themselves
could  b@  deceived.  It  would  be  im-
possible for  four  men  to  be  together,


and  all  of  them  to  be  deceived  in  see-
ing an  angel  descend  from  heaven,
and  in  regard  to  the  brightness  of  his
countenance-  and  the  glory  of  his
person,  hearing  his  voice,  and  seeing
him  lay  his  hands  upon  one  of  them,
namely  David  Whitmer,  and  speak-
ing these  words — *■  Blessed  be  the
Lord  and  they  who  keep  his  com-
mand merits/'  After  seeing  the
plates,  the  engravings  upon  them,
and  the  angel,  and  hearing  the  voice
of  the  Lord  out  of  heaven,  every
person  will  say  that  there  was  no
possibility  of  either  of  these  men
being  deceived  in  relation  to  this
matter ;  in  other  words,  if  it  were  to
be  maintained  that  in  their  case  it
was  a  hallucination  of  the  brain,  and
that  they  were  deceived,  then,  with
the  same  propriety  might  it  be  asserted
that  all  other  men,  in  every  age,  who
profess  to  have  seen  angels,  were
also  deceived ;  and  this  might  be
applied  to  the  Prophets,  Patriarchs,
Apostles,  and  others  who  lived  in
ancient  times,  who  declared  they  saw
angels,  aa  well  as  to  Oliver  Cowdery,
J  la  r  tin  Harris,  and  David  Whitmer,
But  says  the  objector — "  No,  those
who  testify  that  they  saw  angels
anciently  were  not  deceived,  but  they
who  come  testifying  about  such  mini-
strations in  the  latter  days  may  be
deceived/1  Now  let  me  ask,  is  there
anything  logical  in  such  reasoning  as
this  ?  If  these,  in  the  latter  days,
who  testify  to  having  seen  angels,
were  deceived,  all  who  testify  to  the
same  things  in  former  days  might
have  been  deceived  on  the  same
grounds,  And  then,  if  these  men,
whose  testimonies  are  attached  to  the
Book  ot  Mormon,  were  not  deceived,
it  must  be  admitted  that  they  were
impostors  of  the  most  barefaced
character,  or  else  that  the  Book  of
Mormon  is  a  divine  record  sent  from
heaven;  one  or  the  other  must  be
admitted,  there  is  no  halfway  in  the


BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC.  15'>


mat  ter.  If  they  were  not  deceived —  ]
which  they  could  not  possihly  have
been  according  to  the  very  nature  ,
of  their  testimony— then  there  are
only  two  alternatives  —  they  were
impostors,  or  else  the  Book  of  Mor-
m-ni  is  a  divine  revelation  from
heaven.

Now  let  us  inquire  what  grounds  ,
there  are  to  suppose  that  they  were
impostors  ?  Forty-six  years  have
passed  away  since  this  angel  appeared
and  showed  the  plates  to  these  indi-
viduals. Has  anything  transpired
during  this  time  that  would  give  as
any  grounds  to  suppose  that  they  were
impostors  ?  For  instance!  has  either
of  these  witnesses,  or  the  translator  1
of  the  engravings  on  the  plates,  ever,
under  any  circumstances,  denied  his
testimony  ?  No.  We  have  some
accounts  in  the  Bible  of  men  of  God,
some  of  the  grvatest  men  that  lived
in  ancient  times,  denying  the  things
of  God.  We  read  of  Peter  cursing,
and  swearing  that  he  never  knew
Jesus,  and  yet  he  was  one  of  the
foremost  of  the  Apostles.  His  tes-
timony was  true  so  far  as  seeing  and
being  acquainted  with  Jesus  was  con-
cerned, and  in  regard  to  tbedivinity  of
Jesus.  Why  ?  Because  God  had  re-
vealed it  to  him  and  yet  he  denied  it.
"  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Barjonah,"
said  Jesus,  speaking  to  Peter,  14  for
flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed  this
unto  thee,  but  my  Father  who  is  in
heaven."  Peter  knew,  just  as  well
as  he  knew  that  he  had  a  being,  that
Jesus  was  the  son  of  God,  it  had  been
revealed  to  him  from  the  heavens,
and  though  he  afterwards,  through  !
fear,  in  the  presence  of  the  high
priest,  cursed  and  swore  and  denied
it,  yet  the  former  testimony  that  he
had  given  was  true.

Now  did  either  of  these  three  men,
or  did  the  translator  of  the  Book  of
Mormon,  ever  deny  the  truth,  as
Peter  did  ? Did  they  ever  in  any


way  deny  the  divinity  of  the  Book
of  Mormon  ?  Never,  no  never.
Whatever  the  circumstances  they
were  placed  in,  however  much  they
were  mobbed  and  ridiculed,  however
much  they  suffered  by  the  persecu*
I  tion  of  their  enemies,  their  testimony
i  all  the  time  was — u  We  saw  the  angel
of  God,  we  beheld  him  in  his  glory,
we  saw  the  plates  iq,  his  hands,  and
the  engravings  thereon,  and  we  know
that  the  Book  of  Mormon  is  true."
Joseph  Smith  continued  to  bear  thii
testimony  until  the  day  of  his  death;
:  he  sealed  his  testimony  as  a  martyr
in  this  Church,  being  shot  down  by
his  enemies,  who  were  blackened  up
and  disguised,  in  order  that  they
might  not  be  known.  Oliver  Cow-
dery  did  not  live  his  faith  as  he  should
have  done,  and  he  was  exeommuni-
'  cated  from  this  Church  during  Joseph's
lifetime.  Did  he  atill  continue  to
hold  fast  to  his  testimony  ?  He  did.
Never  was  he  known  to  swerve  from
it  in  the  least  degree;  and  after  being
out  of  the  Church  several  years,  he
returned  to  Council  Bluffs,  where
there  was  a  Branch  of  the  Church,
and  at  a  conference  he  acknowledged
his  sins,  and  humbly  asked  the  Church
to  forgive  him,  bearing  his  testimony
to  the  sacred  things  recorded  in  the
Book  of  Mormon — that  he  saw  the
angel  and  the  plates,  just  accordieg
to  the  testimony  to  which  he  had  ap-
pended his  name.  He  was  rebaptized
a  member  of  the  Church,  and  soon
after  departed  this  life.

M  irt in  Harris  did  not  follow  up
this  people  in  the  State  of  Missouri,
neither  did  he  follow  us  up  to  the
State  of  Illinois;  but  we  often  heard
of  him,  and  whenever  we  did  so  vvg
heard  of  him  telling,  in  public  and
in  private  of  the  great  vision  that  God
had  shown  to  him  concerning  the  divi-
nity of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  A  few
years  ago  he  came  to  this  Territory, an
old  man,  between  eighty  and  ninety


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


years  of  age,  and  spoke  from  this  stand,
in  the  hearing  of  the  people.  He  then
located  himself  in  Cache  County,  in
the  northern  part  of  the  Territory ,
where  he  continued  to  Jive  until  hist
Sat-n nitty,  when  he  departed  this  life
in  his  ninety-third  year — a  good  old
age*  Did  he  continue  to  hear  testi-
mony all  that  length  of  time — over
forty-six  years  of  his  life?  Did  he,  ,
at  any  time  during  that  long  period,
waver  in  the  least  degree  from  his
testimony  ?  Not  at  all.  He  had  a
great  many  follies  and  imperfections,
like  all  other  people,  like  the  ancient
Apostles,  like  Elijah  the  Prophet,
but  after  all  he  continued  to  testify
to  the  very  last  concerning  the  truth
of  this  work.  Nothing  seemed  to
delight  him  so  much  as  to  tell  about
the  angel  ai:d  the  plates  that  he  had
seen*  It  wns  only  a  short  time  prior
to  his  death  that  one  of  our  Bishops
went  in  to  see  the  old  man  ;  his  pulse
was  apparently  sluggibh  in  its  move-
ments, and  nearly  gone,  but  the  sight
of  the  Bishop  Becmed  to  revive  him,
and  he  said  to  him — t#Iam  going."
The  Bishop  related  to  hjra  some
things  which  he  thought  would  be
interesting,  among  them  that  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  translated  into
the  Spanish  language,  for  the  benefit
of  a  great  many  of  the  descendants  of
Israel  in  this  country,  who  understand
the  Spanish  language,  in  Mexico  and
Central  America.  This  intelligence
seemed  to  revive  the  old  man,  and
he  began  to  talk  about  the  Book  of
Mormon;  new  strength,  apparently,
was  imparted  to  him,  and  he  con-
tinued his  conversation  for  some  two
hours,  and  in  his  last  testimony  he  |
bore  record  concerning  the  divinity
of  the  work,  and  was  rejoiced  to
think  that  it  was  going  forth  in '
another  language,  that  those  who
understood  that  language  might  be
made  acquainted  with  the  wonderful
works  of  God,


I  will  here  state  that  Martin
Harris,  when  he  came  to  this  TerrU
tory  a  few  years  ago,  was  rebaptized,
the  same  as  every  member  of  th
Church  from  distant  parts  is  on
arriving  here*  That  seems  to  be  a
kind  at  standing  ordinance  for  all
Latter-day  Saints  who  emigrate  here
from  the  First  Presidency  down ;  al
are  re  baptized  and  set  out  anew  by
renewing  their  covenants.  There
are  thousands  of  Latter-day  Saints
who  have  gone  forth  into  the  bap-
tismal font,  and  been  baptized  to
their  dead  kindred  and  friends.
Martin  Harris  requested  this  privi
lege,  and  he  was  baptized  here  in  S  dfc
L  tke  City  for  many  of  his  kindre
who  ae  dead.  1  mention  these
things  in  order  that  the  Saints  ma
understand  something  concerning  thi
matt  who  has  just  left  us,  almost  a
hundred  years  old,  God  favored
him,  highly  favured  him.  He  was
among  the  favored  few  who  went  up
from  the  State  of  Ohio  in  the  summer
of  1831,  and  journeyed  nearly,  a
thousand  miles  to  the  western  part  of
Missouri,  to  Jackson  County,  The
Prophet  went  at  the  same  time,  and
that  was  designated  as  the  laud
i  where  the  Saints  should  eventually
be  gathered,  and  where  a  great  city
should  be  eventually  reared,  called
the  city  of  Zion,  or  the  New  Jerusa-
lem, and  that  the  Saints  should  he
located  throughout  all  that  region  of
country.  God  gave  many  command-
ments in  those  days  concerning  what
might  be  termed  the  United  Order  ;
in  other  words,  concerning  the  conse-
cration of  the  properties  of  the
Church.  These  things  were  given
by  revelation  through  the  Prophei,
Martin  Harris  was  the  first  man  that
the  Lord  called  by  name  to  consecrate
his  money,  and  lay  the  same  at  the
feet  of  the  Bishop  in  Jackson  County,
;  Mo.,  according  to  the  order  of  con-
|  htcration. He  willingly  did  it;  he


OF  MOUMON,  ETC.


161


knew  the  work  to  be  true  ;  he  knew
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  was  just  as
sacred  as  any  word  that  ever  came
from  the  mouth  of  any  Prophet  from
the  foundation  of  the  wor  Id.  He
consecrated  his  money  and  his  sub-
stance, according  to  the  word  of  the
Lord.  What  for  ?  As  the  revel*
tion  states,  as  an  example  to  the  rest
of  the  Church,

As  I  have  already  mentioned,  one
more  wittier  remains  who  saw  that
angel  and  the  plates.  Who  is  it  ?
David  Whitmer.  a  younger  man  than
Martin  Harris,  probably  some  seventy
vears  of  amj,  I  do  not  recollect  his
age  exactly*  Where  does  he  live  ?
In  the  western  part  of  Missouri,
Does  he  still  hold  fast  to  his  testi-
mony? He  does.  Many  of  the
Elders  of  this  Church,  in  going  to
and  fro  among  the  nations,  have
called  upon  him  from  time  to  tune,
and  they  all  bear  the  same  testimony
—  that  Mr.  David  Whitmer  still,  in
the  most  solemn  manner,  declares
that  he  saw  the  angel  and  that  he
saw  the  plates  in  his  hands,  But  he
is  not  here  with  us  ;  he  has  not  gath-
ered up  with  tlte  people  of  God,
That,  however,  does  not  prove  that
his  testimony  is  not  true,  by  no
mm

then,  let  me  bring  forth
■dictions  or  prophecies  cou-
th ese  three  witnesses.  In
part  of  the  Book  of  Mor
mon,wehave  a  prediction  that  there
should  be  three  witnesses  ;  it  was
littered  nearly  six  hundred  years
before  Christ  by  a  man,  a  Prophet
of  God,  who  came  out  of  Jerusalem
and  came  to  this  American  continent;
and  in  speaking  of  the  last  days,
When  this  record  should  come  forth
to  the  human  family*  he  foretells
that  there  should  be  witnesses  who
should  know  of  a  surety  concerning
its  truth,  I  will  read  what  In--  says,
No.  1L


Now
some  pi
cerning
the  for


"  And  it  si i all  come  to  pass  that  the
Lord  God  shall  bring  forth  unto  you
the  words  of  a  book,  and  they  shall
be  the  words  of  them  which  have
slumbered :  and  behold  the  book
shall  he  sealed,  and  in  the  bonk  shall
be  a  revelation  from  God,  from  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  the  end-
ing  thereof.  Wherefore,  because  of
the  things  which  are  sealed  up,  the
things  which  are  sealed  shall  not  be
delivered  in  the  day  of  the  wicked-
ness  and  abominations  of  the  people,
wherefore  the  book  shall  be  kept
from  them.  But  the  book  shall  he
delivered  unto  a  man,  and  he  shall
deliver  the  words  of  the  book,  which
are  the  words  of  those  who  have
slumbered  in  the  dust ;  and  lie
shall  deliver  these  words  unto  an-


Xow  this  man  spoken  of  was  the
translator,  Joseph  Smith ;  and  the
delivering  the  words  to  another  had
reference  to  what  I  have  already  re-
lated—tin1 delivery  of  a  few  of  the
words  of  the  book  to  Martin  Harris.
-  He  shall  deliver  the  words  unto
another,  but  the  words  which  are
sealed  he  shall  not  deliver,  neither
shall  he  deliver  the  hook  :  for  the
book  shall  he  sealed  by  the  power  df
( lod?  and  the  revelation  which  was
sealed  shall  be  kept  in  the  book,  un-
til the  own  due  time  of  the  Lord,
that  thev  inav  come  forth  :  for  be-
hold  they  reveal  all  things  from  the
foundation  of  the  world  unto  the
end  thereof  And  the  dav  eometh
that  the  won  Is  of  the  book  which
were  sealed  shall  be  read  upon  the
boGM  tops,  and  they  shall  be  read
by  the  power  of  Christ,  and  all  things
shall  be  revealed  unto  the  children
of  men,  which  ever  have  been  among
the  children  of  men,  and  winch  ever
will  be,  even  unto  the  end  of  the
earth.  Wherefore  at  that  day,  when
the  hook  shall  be  delivered  unto  the
man  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  the

Vol,  XVIII.


162


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


book  shall  be  hid  from  the  eyes
of  the  world,  that  the  eyes  of  none
shall  behold  it,  sav«  it  be  that  three
witnesses  shall  behold  it  by  the
power  of  God,  besides  him  to  whom
the  book  shall  be  delivered,  and  they
shall  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  book
and  the  things  therein-  and  there
are  uone  other  which  shall  view  it
save  it  be  a  few,  according  to  the
will  of  God,  to  bear  testimony  unto
the  children  of  men,  for  the  Lord
Got!  has  saiii,  that  the  words  of  the
faithful  should  speak  as  if  it  were
from  the  dead.  AVherefore  the  Lord
God  will  proceed  to  bring  forth  the
words  of  the  book,  and  in  the  mouth
of  as  majiy  witnesses  as  seemeth
him  good,  will  he  establish  Ids  word,
and  woe  be  unto  him  thai  rejecteth
the  word  of  God."

This  was  translated  from  the
plates,  and  written  in  manuscript,
before  Martin  Harris,  David  Whit
nier,  or  Oliver  Cowdery  ever  saw  this
angel,  but  there  was  a  promise  ;  it
was  on  record  ;  it  was  in  the  manu-
script that  three  witnesses  should
behold  it  by  the  power  of  God.  That
prophecy,  as  I  said  before,  was  de-
livered nearly  six  hundred  year*,  be-
fore Christ,  There  was  another  pro-
phecy delivered  nearly  a  thousand
years  afterwards,  which  1  will  also
read> — "  And  now  I,  Moroni,  have
written  the  words  which  were  com-
manded me,  according  to  my  mem-
ory, and  I  have  told  you  the  things
which  I  have  sealed  up,  therefore,
touch  them  not" — speaking  to  the
translator  that  should  Jind  his
records — *(  thereto  re  touch  them  not
in  order  that  you  may  translate,  for
that  thing  is  forbidden  you.  except
by  and  by  it  shall  be  wisdom  in  God  ;
and  behold  ye  may  be  privileged  that
ye  may  show  the  plates  unto  those
who  shall  assist  to  bring  forth  this
work,  and  unto  three  shall  they  be
shown  by  the  power  of  God,  where-


fnre  they  shall  know  of  a  surety  that
these  tilings  are  true,  and  in  the
mouth  of  three  witnesses  shall  these
things  be  established,  and  the  testi-
mony of  three,  and  this  work  in  the
win  eh  shall  be  shown  forth  the  power
of  God,  and  also  his  word,  of  which
t  lie  Fat  her,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy
Ghost  beareth  record  ;  and  all  this
shall  stand  as  a  testimony  against
the  world  at  the  last  day.  And  if
it  so  be  that  they  repent  and  come
unto  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Je-
sus, they  shall  be  received  into  the
kingdom  of  God.  And  now  if  I
have  no  authority  for  these  tilings
judge  ye,  for  ye  shall  know  that  1
have  authority,  when  ye  shall  see
me  and  we  shall  stand  before  God
at  tin?  last  day/1

Here  then  were  two  prophecies
delivered  about  a  thousand  years
apart,  translated  before  the  three
witnesses  saw  the  angeL  It  was  in
consequence  of  these  prophecies  that
these  men  went  out  to  the  grove  to
pray.  You  may  ask  me  why  they
went  there  to  pray  ?  Because  they
had  read  these  things,  and  they  saw
that  there  were  to  be  three  witnesses
that  should  know  by  the  power  of
God,  being  revealed  to  them  from
the  heavens,  concerning  these  mat-
ters, and  they  felt  anxious  that  God
might  show  them  these  tilings,  that
they  might  be  the  favored  three.

Were  there  any  others  who  saw
these  plates?  Yes.  How  many?
Eight;  all  of  whom  arc  now  dead
except  one,  John  Whitiner,  who  is
still  living.  They  saw  and  handled
the  plates,  and  saw  the  engravings
upon  them,  and  they  testify  of  the
same  to  all  people  to  whom  the  work
should  be  sent.  How  many  does
this  make  ?  Three  witnesses,  eight
witnesses  and  the  translator,  twelve
in  all,  twelve  who  saw  and  hare  re-
cord of  the  original  Now  I  ask
every  one  in  this  house,  Saints  and


BUCK  OF  MORMON,  ETC


1G3


strangers,*  have  you  as  many  wit-
nesses that  have  seen  the  original  of
any  one  hook  of  the  Bible,  the  Old
and  New  Testaments?  Have  you
one  witness  even  that  has  seen  the
original  from  which  any  one  of  those
book*  was  transcribed  ?  No,  not
one.  You  have  the  transcription
of  scribes  from  generation  to  genera-
tion; you  have  the  translations
from  these  manuscripts  handed
down  from  generation  to  genera-
tion, and  transcribed  one  copy  after
another,  until  they  have  passed
through,  perhaps,  thousands  of  co-
pies, before  the  art  of  printing  was
known.  But  you  believe  the  Bible,
do  you  not  1  Replies  one — "  Oh
yes,  we  believe  that,  but  as  to  the
Book  of  Mormon  we  doubt  very
much  about  that."

Well,  now,  let  me  ask,  is  there
anything  inconsistent  in  a  people
receiving  the  testimony  of  twelve
witnesses  who  saw  and  handled  the
original  of  the  Hook  of  Mormon,
when  they,  at  the  same  time,  be-
lieve in  the  Bible,  tht*  original  of
which  was  never  seen  or  handled
by  any  man  of  this  generation  1
In  other  words,  which  of  the  two
is  most  consistent  to  believe  in?
The  Latter-day  Saints  believe  in
both,  because  we  know  the  Bible
is  true,  for  the  Book  of  Mormon
testifies  of  it,  and  we  have  ob-
tained a  testimony  of  the  divinity
of  the  Book  of  Mormon ;  and
hence,  as  that  book  speaks  of  the
Bible,  we  know  that  the  Bible  is
true.  When  the  people,  mentioned
in  the  Book  of  Mormon  left  Jeru-
salem, and  came  to  the  hind  of
America,  they  brought  the  books  of
the  Old  Testa atent  with  them  from
the  history  of  the  creation  to  the
prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  ami  in
their  writings  made  on  this  land,
they  speak  of  the  divinity  and
truthfulness  of  the  Old  Testament


scriptures.  Hence  we,  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  know  one  book  to  be
true  just  as  well  as  we  do  the  other.
But  with  the  world  it  is  different,
for  as  they  never  had  this  testimony
the  truth  of  the  Bible  rests  to  them
entirely  upon  secondhand  testimony.
But  we  will  pass  on  to  other  testi-
monies*

I  will  now  refer  you  again  to  the
29th  chapter  of  Isniah,  from  which
I  ix ad  concerning  a  book,  the  words
of  which  were  to  be  heard  by  the
deaf — "In  that  day  shall  the  d^af
hear  the  words  of  the  book  What
book  do  you  mean,  Isaiah  ?  Be
means  the  one  that  he  had  just  been
speaking  of  in  the  11th,  12th,  13th,
and  14th  verses — "  And  the  vision
of  all  is  become  unto  you  as  the  words
of  a  bjok  that  is  sealed,  which  men
deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,
;  Head  this  I  pray  thee ; '  and  he  Hays,
*I  can  not,  for  it  is  sealed/  And
the  book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is
not  learned,  saying  —  'Read  this  I
pray  thee/  and  he  says  — 4  I  am  not
learned/  Wherefore  the  Lord  said,
*  Forasmuch  as  this  people  draw
near  to  me  with  their  mouth,  and
with  their  lips  do  honor  rne,  but  have
removed  their  heart  far  from  me  and
their  fear  towards  me  is  taught  by
the  precepts  of  men,  therefore,  be-
hold I  will  proceed  to  do  a  marvelous
work  among  this  people,  even  a  mar*
velous  work  and  a  wonder,  for  the
wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall
perish  and  the  understanding  of  their
prudent  men  shall  be  hid/  "

Here  we  perceive  the  nature  of  the
hook  that  he  mentions  in  the  18th
verse,  and  we  learn  something  about
the  way  that  it  was  to  be  brought
forth  ;  that  the  words  of  the  book,
not  the  plates  themselves,  not  the
original,  but  the  transcript,  a  copy
of  the  words,  ibe  words  of  the  book
would  be  delivered  to  the  learned f
requesting  tbem  to  read  it-


164  JOURNAL  OF

Martin  Harris,  who  lias  now  gone
from  our  midst,  was  the  honored  in-
strument in  the  hands  of  God  in  ful-
filling this  prophecy,  as  I  have
already  related,  giving  you  the
names  of  the  learned  to  whom  he
presented  these  words*  I  have  also
re  luted  to  yon  the  conversation  in  the
interview  which  Mr.  Harris  had  with
Professor  Anthon ;  when  he  learned
that  an  angel  had  appeared,  and  that
part  of  the  book  was  sealed,  in  a
kind  ot  sarcisfic  way  the  Professor
remarked  —  "I  can  not  translate  a
book  that  is  sealed/'

Now  notice  the  next  sentence —
"And  the  book  is  delivered  to  him
that  is  not  learned,"  Not  the  words
of  the  book,  not  a  few  sentences,  but
the  houk  itself  is  delivered  to  him
that  is  not  learned,  saying, — "  Read
this  I  pray  thee/*  And  what  did  he
say  ?  "  I  am  not  learned,"  He
felt  his  weakness.  That  was  the  ex-
clamation of  Joseph,  when  he  was
commanded  to  translate  the  engrav-
ings on  the  plates.  He  looked  upon
himself  as  too  weak  to  engage  in  a
work  of  this  description,  and  the
Lord  answered  him  in  the  very  words
made  use  of  by  Isaiah.  When  Jo-
seph said — "  1  am  not  learned/*  the
Lord  said  — "  Forasmuch  as  this
people  draw  near  to  me  with  their
mouth,  and  with  their  lips  do  honor
me,  and  their  fear  towards  me  is
taught  by  the  precepts  of  men,  there-
fore behold  1  will  proceed  to  do  a
marvelous  work  among  this  people,
even  a  marvelous  work  and  a  wonder,
for  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men
shall  perish  and  the  understanding  of
their  prudent  men  shall  be  hid/*
And  Joseph  fulfilled  the  command-
ment of  the  Lord,  and  Martin  Harris
wrote  the  first  116  pages  of  manu-
script ;  and  Oliver  Cowdery  and
others  also  wrote  from  the  mouth  of
Joseph,  while  he  was  engaged  in
translating. Was  not  this  a  marvel-


DISCOURSES.

ous  work  ?  What  conld  be  more
marvelous  ?  A  young  man,  a  plough-
boy,  a  boy  that  had  scarcely  any
education,  only  as  ho  obtained  it  in
a  country  school ;  a  man  who  hud
never  studied  theology,  probably  had
never  read  the  Bible  through  in  his
life.  A  young  man  of  this  descrip-
tion to  be  called  upon  to  translate  a
language  that  was  spoken  by  the  an-
cient inhabitants of  this  country  f

I  A  marvelous  work  indeed,  and  a  won-
der and  an  astonishment  to  the  peo-
ple. Isaiah  says  the  people  would
wonder  about  it.  lie  says — "Stay
yourselves  and  wonder,  cry  ye  out
and  cry,  they  are  drunken  but  not
with  wine;  they  stagger  but  not  with
strong  drink.  For  the  Lord  hath
poured  out  upon  you  a  spirit  of  deep
sleep,  and  hath  (dosed  your  eyes;  the
Prophets  and  your  rulers  and  the
seers  hath  he  covered.**  That  is  the
condition  of  the  people;  or  as  is
expressed  by  Isaiah  iu  another  place,
"Darkness  covers  the  earth,  and
gross  darkness  the  minds  of  the
people."  The  Prophets  are  covered  ;
the  seers  are  covered,  the  revelations
of  God  that  were  given  in  ancient
days  are  covered  to  them.  They  are
taught,  not  by  inspired  men,  not  by

J  communications  and  revelations  from
heaven,  but  by  the  precepts  of  meuf
is  the  fear  of  the  Lord  taught  to

,  them,  •

In  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  tho
words  of  the  book,  the  eyes  of  tho
blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity  and
out  of  darkness."  A  great  many
people,  perhaps,  would  want  this
spiritualized;  but,  whether  it  is
spiritualized  or  not,  I  can  bear  testi-
mony to  one  thing  which  I  have  seen
with  my  own  eyes,  and  that  is  that
those  who  were  deaf,  so  deaf  that
they  could  not  hear  the  loudest  sound,
have  been  instantaneously  restored
by  the  administrations  of  the  Elders
of  this  Church,  and  thus  the  deaf,  the


BOOK  OF

literally  deaf,  have  been  enabled  to
hear  the  words  of  the  book.

The  eyes  of  the  blind ,  not  those
alone  who  are  spiritually  blind,  but
of  those  who  are  blind  physically,
should  see  out  of  obscurity  and  out
of  darkness,  when  that  book  was
revealed.  Now  I  know  that  this,
too,  has  been  the  case,  and  many  in
this  congregation  know  it  and  have
seen  it;  some  have  seen  those  who
>vere  born  blind  restored  to  their
sight  by  the  power  of  God  since  this
book  came  forth.  Thus  have  been
fulfilled,  literally,  the  words  of  our
text,  ,

"  The  meek  also  shall  increase
their  joy  in  the  Lord."  There  have
been  a  great  many  meek  persons
among  all  Christian  denominations,
we  do  not  dispute  this;  good,  honest,
upright  persons,  meek,  humble,
prayerful  souls;  but  they  wandered
in  darkness;  they  hardly  knew
'Which  way  to  turn.  One  was  crying,
<(  Lo  here,"  and  another,  "Lo  there;"
another,  "This  is  the  way,  walk  ye
in  it;"  aid  another,  having  an  op-
posite doctrine — "  We  are  the  true
Church,  come  and  join  us."  Thus
they  have  been  distracted  and  their
minds  crazed, comparatively  speaking;
yet  they  were  anxious  beyond  mea-
sure to  know  the  will  of  God.  This
book,  when  it  came  forth,  was  to  set
them  in  the  right  track,  "  The  meek
also  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the
Lord."  In  what  way  ?  "  Because,"  ;
says  the  Prophet,  in  the  24th  verse,  [
€t  they  who  erred  in  spirit  shall  come
to  understanding,  and  they  who  mur-
mured shall  learn  doctrine"  How-
ever much  you  may  have  erred,  be-
cause you  have  been  taught  by  the
precepts  of  men  ;  however  much  you
may  have  walked  in  darkness  and
blindness,  with  the  Prophets,  seers,
and  revelations  of  God  covered,  and
no  voice  of  inspiration  in  your  midst;
however|  much  yuu  may  have  groped


MORMON,  ETC*  165

in  outer  darkness,  yet  if  you  have
been  meek  before  the  Lord,  you  will
come  to  understanding  when  this
book  makes  its  appearance,  and  not
till  then.

But  will  this  take  place  in  the  lat-
ter days  ?  Does  it  not  refer  to  some
former  age  of  the  world  ?  Read
what  is  said  in  the  20th  and  21st
verses,  and  you  can  judge  of  the  age
of  the  world  in  which  this  book  was
to  come  forth.  **  The  poor  among
men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of
Israel,"  Not  the  rich  particularly,
unless  they  have  a  mind  to ;  hut  the
poor  are  to  be  gathered  out  from  the
nations  to  get  homes  for  themselves,
"For  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to
nought,  the  scorner  is  consumed  ;  and
all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  cut  off,
and  they  that  make  a  man  an  u len-
der for  a  word  and  that  lay  a  snare
for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  gate."
AH  these  are  to  be  swept  off  Has
any  Mich  period  ever  arrived  since
Isaiah  uttered  this  prophecy?  No  j
but  when  a  certain  book  should  come
forth  it  should  bless  the  meek  arid
lowly  in  heart,  for  their  joy  should
increase  iu  the  Lord.  And  the  poor
among  men  be  gathered  out  from
the  nations.  Then,  behold  and  lo,
all  that  watch  for  iniquity  shall  be
swept  of  from  the  face  of  the  earth  j
there  will  be  a  clean  sweep  of  them.
As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  so  will
it  1x3  in  the  days  of  the  work  pre-
paratory for  the  second  coming  of
the  Son  of  man — every  wicked  per-
son will  be  destroyed  from  the  face
of  the  earth,  showing  clearly  that  the
revelations  of  this  book  refer  to  a
latter-day  work.  Also  in  the  fourth
verso,  in  speaking  of  the  people  who
should  write  this  book,  the  Prophet
says  they  shall  be  brought  down,
shall  speak  out  of  the  ground,  their
plates,  their  books,  their  records,
their  writings,  should  come  out  of
the  ground — 41  Your  .speech  shall  be


lGti


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


low,  out  of  the  dust,*'  the  same  as
the  Book  of  Mormon  was  takea  out
of  the  hill,  anciently  called  Cumorah,
in  the  State  of  New  York.

Ajjain,  he  says  that  the  multitude
of  all  the  nations  that  fight  against
the  people  of  God,  shall  become  like
the  dream  of  a  night  vision,  shall  be
as  a  hungry  in  an  who  dreams,  and
behold  he  eats,  but  he  awakes  and  bis
soul  is  faint;  like  a  thirsty  man  that
dreams*,  and  heboid  he  drinks,  bat  he
awakes  and  his  soul  hath  appetite.
So  shall  the  multitude  of  al!  the  na-
tions be  that  fight  against  Mount
Zion.

Now,  we  do  not  care  how  many
persecutors  there  are  ;  if  they  include
all  the  nations,  kingdoms,  and  gov-
ernments of  the  earth,  it  mutters  not.
The  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that
fight  against  Mount  Zion  will  become
like  the  dream  of  a  night  vision — be
swept  away.  That  agrees  with  what
I  have  already  quoted — that  all  who
watch  for  iniquity,  all  the  scorn ers,
and  all  who  fight  against  the  work  of
God,  will  be  consumed  from  the  face
of  the  earth.

Now  how  is  this  book  to  affect  the
house  of  Israel  ?  Is  it  for  their
benefit  particularly  ?  They  have
been  a  lon^  time  scattered,  a  long
time  abroad  among  the  nations;  are
they  to  be  affected  by  this  book  that
is  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  ?  Yes.  Read
the  22nd  verse,  which  I  have  already
once  read  before  you — "  Therefore,
thus  saith  the  Lord,  who  redeemed
Abraham,  concerning  the  house  of
Jacob,  Jacob  shall  not  now  be
ashamed,  neither  shall  bis  face  now
wax  pale."  Why  ?  Because  this
book  co i oes  forth  to  bring  the  house
of  Jacob  from  all  the  nations  and
kingdoms  of  the  earth  ;  and  this  will
commence  just  as  soon  as  the  times
of  the  Gent  ilea  are  fulfilled ;  not
until  then.  We  must  be  warned
first; we  Gentiles  must hear  the


word  first ;  and  when  we  count  our-
selves unworthy  of  eternal  life,  and
fight  against  the  book,  and  against
t he  Zion  and  people  of  God,  behold
the  Lord  will  then  remember  the
house  of  Jacob,  and  they  will  no
lunger  be  ashamed,  as  they  have  been
for  about  seventeen  centuries  past;
they  will  no  longer  wax  pale,  as  they
have  done  wherever  they  have  been
scattered,  for  the  Lord  says,  in  the
23rd  verse,  that  Jacob,  when  he  shall
see  his  children,  the  work  of  his
hands,  in  the  midst  of  him,  that  is,
gathered  out  from  among  the  na-
tions, they  shall  sanctify  my  name,
and  shall  sanctify  the  Holy  One  of
Jacob,  and  shall  fear  the  God  of
Israel.

Where  will  this  work  commence
among  ihe  house  of  Israel  ?  Among
the  remnant  that  we  call  the  Ameri-
can Indians,  who  are  the  literal  des-
cendants of  Israel.  They  seem  to  be
inure  sunken  and  degraded  than  all
the  rest  of  Israel,  but  God  will  stretch
forth  his  hand  and  will  bring  them
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  The
descendants  of  Manasseh,  and  the
descendants  of  Ephraim,  are  also
mixed  in  with  them,  and  they  also
will  be  brought  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth,  as  the  Lord  has  said  by
the  mouth  of  Jeremiah,  concerning
the  great  latter-day  work  and  the
restitution  of  the  house  of  Israel, —
41  Ephraim  is  my  firstborn/'  In  the
great  litter-day  work,  then,  the  Lord
will  search  after  the  descendants  of
Ephraim  and  Manwsseh,  and  will
briuir  them  also  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth.

Do  you  wonder,  then,  that  after
forty- five  years  have  passed  away
since  the  organization  of  this  Church,
and  the  voice  of  warning  went  forth
to  the  Gentile  natious,  that  God,  in
his  mercy  and  power,  should  com-
mence a  work  among  this  remnant  of
the  house  of  Joseph,  that  wander  as  a


BOOK  OF  MURMON,  ETC.


1G7


multitude  of  nations  upon  the  face  of  I
tins  continent  ?  Recollect  what
Jacob  said,  concerning  the  seed  of
Joseph,  in  the  4Sth  chapter  of
Genesis — they  were  to  become  a
multitude  of  nations*  They  never
were  a  multitude  of  nations  in  Pales-
tine, neither  in  Asia,  Europe,  nor
Africa,  and  if  the  prophecy  is  not
fulfilled  upon  the  great  western  con-
tinent, it  will  not  he  fulfilled  at  all.
But  it  has  been  fulfilled  on  the  con-
tinent of  America;  and  we  behold
throughout  the  whole  of  its  vast  j
extent,  from  the  frozen  regions  of
the  north,  to  Cape  Horn  in  the  soul  h,
a  multitude  of  nations.  Who  are
they  ?  They  are  principally  the
remnants  of  one  tribe,  the  remnants
uf  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  and  they  are
a  multitude  of  nations  in  the  midst
of  the  earth.  The  Lord  has  com-
menced the  gathering  and  restitution
Of  the  house  of  Israel  among  the
very  lowest  specimens  of  humanity,
and  lie  will  raise  them  up  first,  to
carry  on  his  great  and  marvelous
work.  The  tens  of  thousands  of
Ephraim,  and  the  thousands  of  Man-
asseh,  will  pu.sh  the  people  together
to  the  ends  of  the  eartii,  Ephraim
wiil  not  do  the  work  alone,  but  he
will  be  assisted  by  Manasseh,  The
Indians,  the  Lamanites,  who  will
take  hold  iu  this  great,  latter-day
work,  are  the  horns  of  Joseph,  not  to
scatter  the  people,  but  to  push  them
too  ther.  Where?  To  the  ends  of
the  earth,  the  3;ird  of  Deuteronomy
says,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  when
Moses  saw  this  continent  in  vision,  i
he  called  it  "the  ends  of  the  earth.
There  was  to  be  a  gathering  there  ;
they  were  to  be  pushed  together ;
instead  of  being  gathered  from  the
nations  of  the  earth  back  to  Pales-
tine, they  were  to  be  gathered  in  the
latter  days  away  iu  some  distant
Country,  that  Moses  designates  by
the  term  **  ends  of  the  earth/'  ,


It  is  for  this  reason  that  God  pro-
mised, by  the  mouth  of  Moses  in  the
33rd  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  that
he  would  give  to  Joseph  a  lain!  more
precious  than  the  land  of  all  the
other  tribes — a  land  of  all  climates,
blessed  with  the  precious  things  of
the  earth,  and  a  fullness  thereof;
with  the  precious  things  brought
forth  by  the  auu,  and  the  precious
things  brought  forth  by  the  moan,
with  t ho  chief  things  ot  the  ancient
mountains,  and  the  precious  things
of  the  everlasting  hills.  All  these
were  to  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph,
and  on  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him
that  was  separated  from  his  brethren.
"  Blessed  of  the  Lord  lie  his  land" —
that  was  the  promise  that  God  gave
to  this  one  tribe,  a  land  far  superior
to  the  inheritance  of  all  the  rest  of
the  tribes.  Jacob,  who  lived  a  long
tinip  before  Moses,  pronounced  a
similar  blessing,  as  recorded  in  the
49  th  chapter  of  Genesis,  When
blessing  his  twelve  sons,  and  telling
them  what  should  cu-ne  to  pass  in
the  latter  days,  he  says  concerning
Joseph — 41  He  is  a  fruitful  bough,  a
fruitful  bongh  by  a  well,  whose
branches  run  over  the  wall."  That
is,  his  branches  should  not  stay  iu
Jerusalem,  or  in  Palestine,  or  in  that
land  alone,  but  they  should  run  over
t lie  wall  to  some  distant  country.
Hence  he  says,  in  the  same  olessing,
"The  blessings  of  thy  father  have
prevailed  above  the  blessings  of  my
progenitors,  unto  the  uttermost
bounds  of  the  everlasting  hills,  and
they  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph,
and  on  the  crown  of  the  head  r>f  him
that  was  separated  from  his  bre-
thren."

*  I  suppose  that  Jacob  sa>v  this  land
as  well  as  Moses,  and  he  designates
it  a  land  afar  ofl  ;  the  utmost  bounds
would  signify  a  very  distant,  laud.
He  said  thU  laud  was  over  and  above,
what  his  progenitors  gave  to  him


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES


and  be  would  give  it  to  Joseph. No  I  stick  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  be-

ji nna in tnihO htmfl  -Mlttf  f  MP


come  one  m  mine  hand*  Just  the
same  as  the  two  sticks  were  one  in
Ezekiel's  hands,  bo  the  Lord  would
make  these  two  books,  of  Judah  and
Joseph,  one  in  Ins  hand."  What  to
do,  Lord  ?  What  are  you  going  to
do  when  these  two  records  are  joined
in  oue  ?  "  Say  unto  them,  Thus
saith  the  Lord  God,  behold  I  will


wonder  that  Moses  said — '*  Blessed
of  the  Lord  be  his  land,  for  the  deep
that  coueheth  beneath."  Fur  if
Moses  had  a  vision  of  it,  he  would
look  down  through  the  earth  and  see
that  the  great  Pacific  ocean  rolled
under  his  feet,  that  it  cutiched  be-
neath, and  he  would  spank  of  it  in
that  light,  U  it  was  reveal d  to  him.
No  wonder  that  the  Prophet  Ezekiel,  1  take  the  children  of  Israel  from
in  speaking  of  the  great  latter-day among  the  heathen,  whither  they  be

gone.  I  will  gather  them  on  every
side,  I  will  bring  them  into  their
own  land,  X  will  make  them  one  na-
tion in  the  land  upon  the  mountains
of  Israel  They  shall  he  no  more
two  nations,  neither  shall  they  bo
divided  into  two  kingdoms  any  more
at  all"

Has  that  ever  been  fulfilled?
"Oh,  no,"  says  one,  "  that  has  never
yet  come  to  pass  f  and  it  never  will
until  the  Lr>rd  brings  forth  the
writings  of  Joseph  and  joins  them


work  and  the  restitution  of  Israel,  |
prophesied  concerning  tbd  iccordsofj
Joseph,  that  they  should  come  forth,
aiid he  united with the  record  of
J  nd all,  to  bring  about that  great  j
work. The  precious  things  of  hea-
ven were  to  Lie  given  to  Joseph  on
this  land. Blessed  of  the  Lord  be
his  land  for  the  precious  things  ot
heaven,  more  precious  than  the  full-
ness of  earth,  more  precious  than  the
productions  of  the  various  climates  of
the  earth,  more  precious  than  the

grain,  and  the  gold  and  silver  of  the with  the  Jewish  record. Then  we


earth.  The  precious  things  of  hea-
ven revealed  to  the  people  of  Joseph
on  the  great  laud  given  to  them  unto
the  utmost  bounds  of  the  everlasting
hills,  -tf

Said  the  Lord  to  Ezekiel — 41  Son
of  Man,  take  thou  one  slick  and
write  upon  it,  for  Judab,  and  for  the
house  of  Israel,  his  companions;
then  take  another  -stick  and  write
upon  it,  for  Joseph,  the  stick  of
Ephraim,  and  lur  the  house  of  Israel,
bis  companions,  and  join  them  one  to
another  into  one  stick,  and  they  shall
be  one  in  thine  laud/'  Then  he  said
to  Ezekiel — "  When  the  people  shall
say  unto  thee,  tell  us  what  thou
meanest,  say  unto  them,  Tims  saith
the  Lord  God,  behold  I  will  take  the
stick  of  Joseph,  written  upon  for
Joseph,  and  I  will  put  it  with  the


may  look  out  for  the  restitution  of
Israel  ;  as  soon  as  the  times  of  the
Gentiles  are  fulfilled,  we  may  look
out  for  the  day  of  the  Lord's  power,
when  he  will  cause  the  very  powers
of  heaven  to  shake  for  the  benefit  of
his  people.  The  powers  of  eternity
will  be  moved  to  bring  about  the
great  work  of  the  restitution  of  the
house  of  Israel  Then  the  mountains
shall  tremble,  and  the  little  hills  shall
skip  like  lambs,  as  is  prophesied  by
the  Psalmist  David,  Then  all  things
shall  feel  the  power  of  God,  and  his
arm  will  lie  made  bare  in  the  eyes  of
all  the  nations,  until  the  ends  of  the
earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  dud,
manifested  in  behalf  of  Ins  covenant
people  Israel  It  will  be  emphati-
cally the  day  of  the  Lord's  pjwer.


RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


160


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Fifteenth  Warj*  Meeting  hottse.  Salt  Lake  City,

Sr^DAY  Afternoon,  March  26,  1876,

Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.

RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  PROBABLE  AND  SCR  I  TfUR  AL — SENT  FIRST
TO  THE  GENTILES,  THEN  TO  ISRAEL— THIS  IS  A  GATHERING  DISPEN-
SATION  OR  THE  FULLNESS  OF  TIMES— DESTINY  OF  ALL  NATIONS.


I  will  read  a  few  passages  of  Scrip-  1
hire  in  the  fore  part  of  the  40th
chapter  of Isaiah. [The  speaker
read  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  9th,  10th
and  11th  verses*]

The  particular  portion  of  these
words  which  I  have  read,  to  which  I
wish  to  call  the  attention  of  the  con-
gregation this  afternoon,  is  that  relat-
ing to  the  preparation  for  the  coming
ot  the  Lord,  1  mean  the  second  com-
ing,  when  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall
Lo  revealed  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it
together.  Our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world
socio  eighteen  centuries  ago  in  a  very
humble,  meek  and  lowly  manner.
He  came  to  teach  the  people  thepiin-
ciples  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  open  the
way  whereby  salvation  might  be 1
brought  about  in  behalf  of  the  human
family,  by  offering  an  atonement  be-  j
fore  the  Lord,  his  heavenly  Father,
fur  the  sins  of  the  world.  When  he
came  in  that  humble  manner,  he  con-
sidered it  important  to  send  a  mes-
senger before  his  face  to  make  prepa-
rations for  that  event,  so  that  the
people  might  not  be  altogether  un-
prepared, and  taken  unawares  con-
cerning the  work  he  was  then  to  do
on  our  earth.  Hence  a  great  Prophet
was  raised  j  generally  known  by  the


name  of  John  the  Baptist,  who  went
forth  before  the  Savior,  calling  upon
the  people  to  repent,  testifying  that
the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand,
baptizing  them  for  the  remission  of
sins,  informing  them  that  there  was
one  standing  among  them  that  was
greater  than  he. Although  he  was  a

s  great  prophet,  yet  he  did  not  consider
himself  even  worthy  to  unloose  his
shoe  latches,  and  although  he  was
commissioned  to  baptize  the  humble,
penitent  believer  for  the  remission  of
his  sins,  yet  that  personage  that  stnud
among  them  should  baptize  them  with
fire  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  That
same  Jesns,  after  the  way  had  been
prepared,  went  furth  pre  aching  in  the

;  land  of  Palestine,  and  the  regions
around,  testifying  of  the  things  per-
taining to  t  he  Gospel,  choosing  men,
sending  them  forth  before  him,  with-
out purse  or  scrip,  to  declare  the  glad
tidings  of  the  Gospel  to  the  people-
After  awhile,  after  having  been
persecuted  and  driven  hither  and
thither,  and  mobbed  and  scorned  and
cast  out  in  many  places,  he  was  at
length  taken  hy  the  religious  people
of  that  day,  those  who  were  consi-
dered most  pious — the  high  priests,
Pharisees,  Sadducees  and  many
others,  and  was  brought  before  them


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


in  judgment,  and  wns  condemned  to
die  upon  a  cross,  and  after  having
carried  the  judgment  into  execution
and  put  him  to  death,  Jesus  rose
again  on  the  third  day,  and  appeared,
not  openly  to  the  world,  but  to  a  few
chosen  witnesses;  and  just  before  be-
ing taken  up  into  heaven  he  said  unto
eleven  of  these  men — 41  Go  ye  into  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature;  he  that  belie  vet  h  and
is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that
belie veth  not  shall  be  damned."
And  while  he  was  giving  them  their
commission  and  instructions  and  bles-
sing them  he  was  taken  up  into  hea-
ven, and  a  cloud  received  him  out  of
their  sight.  And  two  angels  stood
by  them  on  that  occasion,  and  they
said— "This  same  Jesus  whom  ve
have  seen  taken  up  into  heaven  shall
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have
seen  him  go  into  heaven."  That  is,
he  was  teceived  into  a  cloud,  taken
up  in  a  cloud,  and  when  lie  comes  the
second  time  he  will  come  in  a  cloud,
personally,  with  his  resurrected  body,
the  same  as  he  ascended  in  the  cloud.
This  was  the  testimony  of  these  two
angels  who  stood  by  on  that  occasion-
It  is  of  this  second  advent,  and  the
preparations  therefor,  that  I  desire  to
speak  this  afternoon.

Jesus  will  come  in  a  cloud,  or  as  is
expressed  here  in  the  40th  chapter  of
Isaiah — "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  will
be  revealed  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it
together  It  is  also  expressed  in  the
revelation*  of  St.  John,  that  when
he  comes  in  a  cloud  every  eye  shall
see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced
him.  It  seems  then  that  the  second
advent  of  the  Son  of  God  is  to  be
something  altogether  of  a  different
nature  from  anything  that  has  hith-
erto transpired  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  accompanied  with  great  power
and  glory,  something  that  will  not
be  done  in  a  small  portion  of  the
earth  like  Palestine,  and  seen  only


by  a  few;  but  it  will  be  an  event  that
will  be  seen  by  all — all  flesh  shall
see  the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  when  he
reveals  himself  the  secoud  time,
every  eye,  not  only  those  living  at
that  time  in  the  flesh,  in  mortality
on  the  earth,  but  also  the  very  dead
themselves,  they  also  who  pierced
him,  those  who  lived  eighteen  hun-
dred years  ago,  who  were  engaged  iu
the  cruel  act  of  piercing  hia  hands
and  his  feet  and  his  side,  will  also  see
him  at  that  time.  Now  an  event  of
so  great  a  character  as  the  one  of
winch  I  am  speaking  must  necessarily
have  a  preparation.  It  the  Lord
would  prepare  the  way  for  the  first
coming,  when  he  came  apparently
as  a  man,  like  other  men ;  if  he
considered  it  important  on  that  oc-
casion to  send  one  of  the  greatest
Prophets  that  ever  lived  among
men,  why  not  also  send  Prophets
or  inspired  men  before  the  face  of
his  second  coming,  to  warn  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  and  prepare
them  for  so  great  an  event  ?  I  know
what  the  traditions  of  the  religious
world  are  in  regard  to  this  matter —
they  consider  that  the  day  of  Pro-
phets h;is  gone  by,  and  that  no  more
Prophets,  Apostles,  Revelators,  or
inspired  men  are  to  appear  among
the  children  of  men.  But  it  is  very
evident  from  a  vast  amount  of
Scripture  that  might  be  quoted,  that
there  will  be  many  Prophets  in  the
latter  days;  indeed  the  time  will
come  when  the  spirit  will  be  poured
out  upon  all  living — all  that  have  not
been  destroyed  from  the  earth,  all
flesh;  and  the  effects  of  that  spirit,
when  it  is  poured  out,  will  be  to  make
Prophets  of  the  people.  Your  sons
and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,
and  your  old  men  shall  dream
dreams  by  the  power  of  that  spirit,
and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,
all  by  the  operations  of  the  spirit
that  will  be  poured  out  upon  all  flesh.


RESTORATION  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


171


This  is  a  prediction  that  must  be
fulfilled.

Prior  to  the  time,  however,  when
the  spirit  is  punted  out  upon  all  flesh
there  will  be  an  angel  sent  from  hea-
ven, and  that  angel  will  bring  the
everlasting  Gospel  to  be  preached.
When  I  speak  of  the  everlasting
Gospel  I  mean  the  same  one  that
was  preached  eighteen  hand  red  years
ago  ;  and  authority  will  be  given  to
some  of  the  children  of  men  to
preach  that  everlasting  Gospel  among
the  nations;  and  when  th^t  shall  take
place  I  have  no  doubt  but  what  there
will  be  many  Prophets  raised  up,
because  the  true  Christian  Church
has  always  been  characterized  by
Prophets  There  never  was  a  gen*
uine  Christian  Church  unless  it  had
Prophets  and  Prophetesses;  indeed,
in  ancient  times  Prophets  were  so
numerous  in  one  branch  of  the  Chris-
tiau  Church,  that  Paul  had  to  set
them  in  order,  and  send  them  an
epistle  and  tell  them  not  to  all  get
up  and  prophecy  at  once,  but  that  if
a  thing  was  revealed  to  any  one  he
was  not  to  get  up  and  declare  it  while
another  one  was  speaking,  but  he
was  to  wait  until  the  first  got  through
speaking,  and  then  he  should  pro
phesy;  for,  said  Paul,  the  spirit  of
the  Prophets  is  subject  to  the  Pro-
phets. That  is,  when  the  spirit  came
upon  Prophets  in  ancient  times,  it
did  not  exercise  a  supernatural  power
upon  them  to  force  them  from  their
se?its  to  stand  up  and  declare  their
prophecies  the  moment  they  were
revealed,  but  that  the  spirit  that  was
given  to  them  was  subject  to  them,
so  that  they  could  stay  upon  their
seats  until  the  first  Prophets  got
through  prophesying.  That  was  the
order  of  the  Christian  Church  when
God  ever  had  one  upon  the  earth —
Prophets  were  very  numerous  in  that

church,  I
But  by  and  by  the  time  came  when


the  Christian  Church  apostatized  and
turned  away,  and  began  to  follow
after  their  own  wisdom,  and  the
Prophets  and  Apostles  ceased,  so
far  as  the  affairs  of  the  Christian
Church  on  the  earth  were  concerned.
Revelation?,  and  visions,  and  the
various  gifts  of  the  spirit  were  also
taken  away,  according  to  their  un-
belief and  apostacy  ;  but  in  the  latter
days  God  intends  to  again  raise  up
a  Christian  Church  upon  the  earth.
Do  not  be  startled,  you  who  think
that  God  will  no  more  have  a  Church
on  the  earth,  for  he  has  promised
that  he  would  again  have  one,  and
that  he  would  set  up  his  kingdom,
and  when  he  does  you  may  look  out
for  a  great  many  Prophets  and  in-
spired men  j  and  if  you  ever  see  a
Church  arise,  calling  itself  a  Chris-
tian Church,  and  it  has  not  inspired
Apostles  like  those  in  ancient  times,
you  may  know  that  it  is  a  spurious
church,  and  that  it  makes  pretensions
to  something  that  it  does  not  enjoy*
If  you  ever  And  a  church  called  a
Christian  Church  that  has  no  men
to  foretell  future  events,  you  may
know,  at  once,  that  it  is  not  a  Chris-
tian Church.  If  you  find  a  Christian
Church  that  has  not  the  ancient  gifts,
for  instance  the  gift  of  healing,  open-
ing the  eyes  of  the  blind,  unstopping
the  ears  of  the  deaf,  causing  the
tongue  of  the  dumb  to  speak  and
the  lame  to  walk  ;  if  you  ever  find
a  people  calling  themselves  a  Chris-
tian Church  and  they  have  not  these
gifts  among  them,  you  may  know
with  a  perfect  knowledge  that  they
do  not  agree  with  the  pattern  given
in  the  New  Testament.  The  Chris-
tian Church  is  always  characterized
with  inspired  men,  whose  revelations
are  just  as  sacred  as  any  contained
in  the  Bible;  and,  if  written  and
published,  just  as  binding  upon  the
human  family.  The  Christian  Church
will  always  lay  hands  upon  the  sick


172


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO L'JiSKS.


in  the  name  of  Jesus,  in  order  that
the  sick  may  be  healed.  The  Chris*
tian  Church  will  always  have  those
among  its  members  who  have  hea-
venly visions,  the  ministration  of
angels,  *nd  the  various  gifts  that  are
promised  according  to  the  Gospel.

But  as  there  has  been  no  Christian
Church  on  the  earth  for  a  great  many
centuries  past,  until  the  present  cen-
tury, the  people  have  lost  sight  of
the  pattern  that  God  has  given  ac-
cording to  which  the  Christian
Church  should  be  established,  and
they  have  denominated  a  great  va-
riety of  people  Christian  Churches,
because  they  profess  to  be*  They  say,
**  We  have  built  chapels  unto  the
name  of  the  Lord;  we  call  our
Churches  Christian  Churches,  they
are  called  the  Church  of  Christ,  St
John's  Church,  St  Paul's  Church,
St  Peter's  Church,  and  after  others
of  the  ancient  Apostles;"  and  one
who  had  never  studied  the  pattern
which  God  has  tziven  of  the  Christian
Church  would  almost  really  believe
that  they  are  Christian  Churches.

But  there  has  been  a  long  apostacy,
during  which  the  nations  have  been
cursed  with  apostate  churches  in
great  abundance,  and  they  are  re-
presented in  the  revelations  of'  St
John  as  a  woman  sitting  upon  a
scarlet  colored  besst,  having  a  golden
cup  in  her  hand,  full  of  filthiness  and
abominations,  full  of  the  wine  of  the
Wrath  of  her  fornication;  that  in
her  forehead  there  was  a  name
written  —  u  Mystery,  Babylon  the
Great,  the  mother  of  harlots/'  This
kind  of  a  church  has  existed  in  great
abundance,  for  as  John  the  Revel  at  or
says,  she  was  to  have  her  dominion
upon  many  waters,  and  she  was  to
make  all  nations  drunken  with  the
wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  fornication.

Now,  we  do  not  dispute  but  what
such  churches  have  existed  and  exist
at  the  present  time,  and that  the


nations  of  the  earth  have  been  cursed
with  their  filthiness  and  abomina-
tions, and  with  the  pride  and  wicked-
ness they  have  practiced  before  the
Lord  of  hosts.  I  have  no  doubt  but
what  some  few  honest- hearted  per-
sons have  been  taken  in  by  them,  be-
cause they  were  so  numerous  and  so
popular  on  the  earth.  But  they  lack
all  the  characteristics  of  the  ancient
Christian  Church,  having  numerous
forms  of  god li Mess,  but  denying  the
power  thereof.  That  is,  they  deny
revelalors  and  Prophets,  deny  the
power  to  foretell  future  events;  deny
that  any  person,  in  these  days,  has
the  power  to  have  visions  or  revela-
tions from  heaven,  as  the  members
of  the  Christian  Church  anciently
did.

Inasmuch  as  there  has  been  such
a  long  apostacy,  and  the  earth  left
without  any  church  of  God  upon  it,
we  might  n.iturally  suppose  that,  be-
fore the  second  advent  of  the  Son  of
God,  there  would  be  as  a  preparation
for  his  second  coming  a  Christian
Church  again  organized,  and  I  will
now  refer  you  to  some  prophecies
upon  this  subject  in  the  Bible,  We
will  first  turn  to  the  14th  chapter  of
the  Revelations  of  St.  John,  where
we  find  a  prophecy  about  the  second
coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  The
14th  verse  says — "  And  I  looked
and  beheld  a  white  cloud,  and  upon
the  cloud  sat  one  like  unto  the  Sou
of  Man,  having  on  his  head  a  golden
crown,  and  in  his  hand  a  sharp  sickle,"
&c.  We  have  not  time  to  read  all
the  events  connected  with  this  per*
sonage  that  was  sitting  upon  the
cloud,  and  coming  in  great  glory  ;
but  we  will  go  back  a  few  verses  and
see  if  there  is  any  preparation  to  be
made  before  he  comes  in  this  cloud.
In  the  6th  verse  he  says — **  And  I
saw  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  having  the  everlasting  Gos-
l  pel  to  preach  unto  them  that  dwell


RESTORATION  OF  TIIR  GOSPEL,  ETC,


173


on  the  earth,  unto  every  nation  and
kindn  <l  and  tongue  and  people,  say-
ing  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear  God,  and
give  glory  to  him,  for  the  hour  of  his
judgment  is  come.  And  there  fol-
lowed another  angel,  saying,  Babylon
is  fallen,  is  fallen,  that  great  city,
because  she  made  all  nations  drunken
with  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her

fornication/'

Here  then,  we  perceive  the  nature
of  the preparatory  work for  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  sitting
upon  a  cloud. The  Gospel  is  to  be
preached  to  all  nations,  and  that  Gos-
pel, when  it  is  restored  to  the  earth,
must  he  restored  by  an  angel  from
heaven. Now  the  Gospel  that  was
introduced  in  the  dispensation  be-
fore John  received  this  revelation,
was  not  restored  by  an  angel  from
heaven ;  Jesus himself  came  and
preached  the  Gospel,  as  well  as  John
the  Baptist,  and  his  Apostles  preached
it,  and  they  were  commanded  in  that
day  to  preach  it  among  all  people,
nations  and  tongues;  and  they  ful-
filled their mission, according  to
Paul's  testimony,  fur  he,  in  speak-
ing of  the  extent  to  which  the  Gos-
pel had  gone  before  his  martyrdom,
says  that  the  Gospel  was  preached  to
every  creature  under  heaven,  "where-
of I,  Paul,  am made  a  minister."
It  seems  then,  that  it  was  sent  forth
very  fully  in  that  day  and  age  of  the
world. And then  came  the  great
apostacy ; and after  this  apostacy
should  continue  for  many  long  cen-
turies, then  an  angel  shoul  i  come.
Just before the  personage  should
appear  in  the  white  cloud,  the  angel
should  come  and  bring  the  Gospelj
and  the  Gospel  should  be  preached
to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  to
every  people,  kindred,  tongue  and
nation. What  does  this  indirectly
prove  ? It  proves  that  there  was  no
nation,  no  people,  no  kindred,  no
tongue,  unon  the  face  of  the  whole


earth  that  had  the  everlasting  Gospel
when  the  angel  should  come;  be-
cause, if  there  had  been  any  people,
however  obscure  they  might  be,  how-
ever distant  they  might  be  from  what
are  termed  civilized  nations,  if  there
had  been  any  people  on  the  earth
who  had  the  Gospel,  they  would
have  a  Christian  Church,  with  Apos-
tles and  Prophets  and  all  the  gifts  of
thd  spirit  therein.  But  inasmuch  as
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people  on  the  whole  earth  was  com-
pletely destitute  of  the  Gospel,  and
of  the  Church  as  organized  in  ancient
days,  it  was  necessary  to  restore  it
anew  from  heaven,  and  it  is  predicted
that  that  should  be  done  by  an
angel.

|  Has  any  such  event  transpired  ?
This  is  a  very  important  question.
To  whom  shall  we  go  and  make  the
inquiry  in  regard  to  the  coming  of
the  angel  ?  Some  one  may  perhaps
say  that  we  had  better  make  the  in-
quiry of  some  Christian  people,  thty

I  would  be  most  likely  to  give  an  an-
swer. Very  well,  let  us  go,  then,

j  to  the  oldest  Christian  Church,  so
called — the  Roman  Catholics,  and
ask  them.  Let  us  go  to  their  cardi-
nals and  archbishops,  or  even  to  the
head  man  of  all  that  church,  who  sits
in  what  is  called  the  chair  of  St.
Peler,  and  a^k  hiru,  or  any  other  of
their  great  men — "  Sir,  do  you  be*
lieve  that  an  angel  has  come  from
heaven  with  the  everlasting  Gospel
to  preach  to  all  nation*,  kindreds,

,  tongues  and  people  since  the  day  that
John  delivered  that  prophecy  ?  What
will  be  the  answer?  It  will  be—
4i  No,  we  do  not.  believe  in  any  such
thing,  we  claim  that  we  are  preach-
ers of  the  everlasting  Gospel;  and
we  hold  the  regular  succession  of  the
authority  that  was  committed  in  the
first  century  of  the  Christian  era,
and  that  the  Gospel  had  been
preached  from  that  day  until  ttk\wf


174  JOURNAL  OF

and  that  the  Christian  Church  has
existed  among  all  nations,  and  there
has  been  no  necessity  for  an  angel
coming  from  heaven  with  it."  "Very
well,  yon  do  not  believe  that  any
angel  has  come  with  the  everlasting
Gospel  ?"  "  Oh,  do,  that  is  contrary
to  our  faith  and  belief."

Go  to  the  next  oldest  Christian
Church,  one  that  broke  off  from  the
Roman  Catholics,  called  the  Gi4ek
Church.  Go  through  all  the  great
nation  of  Russia,  and  ask  them  the
same  question,  and  they  will  answer,
like  the  old  mother,  that  no  angel
has  been  sent :  "  We  did  not  receive
the  Gospel  that  we  preach  by  an  an^
gel  trom  heaven."  Very  well,  we
will  leave  you,  then,  and  we  will  come
down  to  the  modern  Christian
Churches,  that  came  out  from  the
Catholic  Church  two  or  three  centu-
ries ago,  and  ask  them  the  question  ;
go  to  Luther  and  Calvin,  and  all  the
various  reformers  that  seceded  from
the  Church  of  Rome  in  the  16th
century,  and  ask  each  one  in  his  turn,
and  each  will  have  the  same  answer.
"  Martin  Luther,  did  you  receivu  the
Gospel  which  you  preach  from  an
angel  sent  from  heaven  ?"  "  Oh,
no,"  says  he,  fc£  we  got  our  ordination
from  the  church  that  we  dissented
from ;  we  once  belonged  to  the  Ro-
man  Catholic  Church,  but  we  found
out  that  they  were  very  wicked  and
abominable,  and  that  they  were  the
ones  John  spoke  of,  that  should  have
*  Mystery,  Babylon 1  written  in  the
forehead,  that  have  been  drinking  of
the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  forni-
cation, and  we  have  come  out  from
that  church."  "Well,  Mr,  Luther,
did  you  get  any  ordination  in  that
church  ?"  "  Yes,  we  got  an  ordina-
tion." "  And  that  is  your  authority,
is  it  ?  No  angel  was  sent  to  yon
from  heaven  to  restore  the  authority
and  the  Gospel  ?"  "  No,  we  got  oar
authority  from  the  mother  church."  l


DISCOURSES.

"  Well,  do  you  think  the  mother
church  is  very  wicked  ?"  "  Yea,  the
most  wicked  and  corrupt  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth."  "  Then  you
got  your  authority  from  the  most
corrupt  people  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  did  you  ?  What  is  it  good
for  ?  And,  by  the  by,  if  they  have
authority  to  confer  upon  you  the
Priesthood,  and  that  gives  you  a  right
to  baptize  and  to  administer  the  ordi-
nances, have  they  not  also  authority
to  excommunicate  you  ?  Were  yon
excommunicated  from  their  com-
munion yes,  they  exercised
their  authority  in  cutting  me  off  from
their  church  and  casting  me  out,"
"Very  well,  then,  they  took  away
all  the  authority  they  pretended  to
give  you,  did  they  not  ?"  "  Yes,
they  took  it  away,  but  still  we
claim  it  through  them,  and  that  is
the  only  way  we  get  the  chain  of  au*
thority  back  to  the  Apostles,"

Some  of  the  Protestants,  however,
do  not  argue  in  this  way  ;  they  say
that  they  get  their  authority  from
the  Bible,  independent  of  any  church-
Well,  let  me  say  to  some  who  claim
their  authority  in  this  way,  "  What
part  of  the  Bible  called  you  by  name,
Will  iara  ?  You  have  been  ordained,
have  you,  to  preach  the  Gospel  and
baptize  ?  Who  ordained  you  ?  Who
gave  this  authority  to  you?  Who
commissioned  you  ?"  Says  William
— *■  Weil,  I  really  did  not  get  the
authority  from  the  Roman  Catholics,
or  from  any  church  later  than  the
Roman  Catholics,  but  I  got  it  from
the  Bible."  "  What  part  of  the
Bible?"  "Why,  that  saying  of
Jesus  to  his  eleven  Apostles.  Just
before  he  was  taken  up  in  a  cloud,
Jesus  said  to  them — '  Go  ye  into  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature*"  "Well,  how  do
you  know,  William,  that  that  meant
you?  If  it  meant  you,  did  it  not
mean  your  neighbor  also,  and  every


RESTORATION  OF

male  person  who  hag  lived  on  the
earth  since  the  days  of  the  Apostles  ?
How  do  you  know  that  it  meant
yon  ?  Did  God  ever  give  you  a
new  revelation  ?"  11  Oh,  don't  men-
tion it,  we  do  not  believe  in  any  new
revelation,  or  in  inspired  men  in  our
day,"  "Very  well,  then,  you  do
not  think  that  God  has  sent  any
angel  to  restore  the  Gospel,  and
authority  to  preach  it  to  the  children
of  men?"  "Oh,  no,  none  but  a
poor  deluded  sect  called  Mormons,
away  up  in  the  mountains  of  America,
believe  any  such  thing  ;  they  profess
that  God  has  sent  an  angel  from  hea-
ven to  restore  the  Gospel  and  the
authority  of  the  Priesthood,  but  we
do  not  believe  that  God  sends  angels
an  our  day

Th  is  is  about  the  way  yon  would
get  answered  by  all  the  various
churches  that  have  lived  daring  many
hundreds  of  years  past,  in  regard  to
their  authority  ;  they  have  no  more
authority  than  a  heathen  priest
Why  ?  Because  they  have  denied
all  the  fundamental  powers  and  prin-
ciples of  the  ancient  Christian  Church.

Says  one — u  Well,  if  they  have  no
authority,  then  all  our  baptisms  are
illegal."  Certainly  they  are ;  to  be
baptized  by  a  man  who  has  no  autho-
rity, no  matter  how  sincere  I  may
be,  would  avail  me  nothing,  I  might
as  well  go  and  baptize  myself.
*'  Well,*1  says  one,  *L  you  Mormons
believe,  do  youf  that  God  has  actually
sent  an  angel,  and  has  again  com-
mitted to  men  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, and  authority  to  preach  it  and
admiuster  its  ordinances  ?"  "  Yes,
and  we  not  only  believe  it,  but  many
of  us  know  with  a  most  perfect
knowledge  that  he  has  done  so,
having  received  our  knowledge  from
God  himself.1'  "  Then  the  Lord,  you
think,  has  fulfilled  that  passage  in
the  14th  chapter  of  Revelations,  and
that  he  has  actually  sent  an  angel  to


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC,  175

restore  the  Gospel  to  earth  ?"  "  Yes."
"  How  long  since  ?"  Some  forty-six
years  have  passed  away  since  the
angel  came  and  committed  a  record
of  the  Gospel,  not  merely  given  in  a
verbal  manner,  but  caused  to  be
translated  a  record  that  contained
the  everlasting  Gospel  in  all  its  full-
ness. The  ancient  Israelites,  who
once  inhabited  this  country,  were
qdjuainted,  with  the  Gospel.  Jesus
did  not  confine  bin  labors  altogether
to  Palestine  ;  but  after  his  crucifixion
and  resurrection,  became  to  America,
and  appeared  among  its  people,  and
taught  them  the  everlasting  Gospel,
the  same  as  he  had  before  taught  the
people  of  Palestine,  and  he  com-
manded them  to  write  this  Gospel
upon  plates  of  metal ;  they  did  so,
and  they  established  a  Christian
Church  according  to  the  pattern  that
God  gave  to  them,  and  their  writings
have  been  brought  forth.  How  ?
By  the  administration  of  an  angel
from  heaven,  an  angel  sent  to  reveal
ihis  record  containing  the  fulness  of
the  everlasting  Gospel.

Ipquires,  one — "  Did  this  angel
give  any  authority  to  Joseph  Smith,
and  to  others  to  whom  he  revealed
himself,  to  baptize?"  Not  at  all.
He  revealed  the  record,  and  Joseph
was  commanded  to  translate  it  by  the
aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thunimim  that
was  with  it,  and  he  was  told  that  it
would  be  sent  to  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues  and  people.  But  he  did  not
give  Joseph  Smith  authority  to  preach
that  Gospel,  neither  did  he  give  him
authority  to  baptize,  or  to  lay  on
hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Hoi  *  Ghost,
and  the  probability  is  that  the  person
who  held  the  keys  to  reveal  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  did  not  have  the  au-
thority hirnself— it  is  not  all  angels
that  have  this  authority.  Peter,
James,  and  John  had  the  authority,
and  after  the  book  was  translated  they
were  sent. What for? Not  to


176


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


reveal  the  Gospel,  for  that  was  re-
vealed by  another  angel  prior  to
that  time;  hut  they  were  sent  to  lay
their  hands  upon  individuals,  and
ordain  them,  to  the  Apostlesbip.  No
one  can  say  that  Peter,  James,  and
John  did  not  hold  the  apostlesbip,
and  that  people  could  not  be  ordained


under  their  hand
them  to  the  Apo«
<fcmma»dedf'  ip*  *j
Lord,  that  they  a
Gu&pel,  and  ordain
power  and  authori!
f erred  and  rector


They


lined
tto


preach  J  the
to  the  same

hich  was  con-
frora  heaven,
td  to  preach  the


They  were  comruaw
Gospel  to  all  of  the  nations  apd  kind*
reds  of  the  earth  That  was  the  way
that  the  L'jrJ  restored  the  everlasting
Gospel.  V"

What  have  we  been  doing  since
the  authority  was  ie|toret}? Forty -


shall  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  bo
first."  Now  the  Gospel,  when  it  was
preached  in  ancient  times,  waa
preached  first  to  the  Jews,  the  house
of  Israel,  to  those  of  Israeli  tish  origin,
and  when  they  counted  themselves
unworthy  of  eternal  life,  and  rejected
that  Gospel,  44  Lo"  says  Paul,  41  we
tarn  unto  the  Gentijes."  The  Gen-
tiles, then,  heard  it  last  ;  they  wore
last  epibmce  the  Gospel  of  the
kinguOfn,'  and  Ttk*  JeW&'first,  to  at  is,
as  many  of  them  M  woptd  believe
and  repent;  Bat  in  the  last  days,
when  the  angel  brings  the  Gospel,  it
is  reversed,  and  it  ?s  preached  first  to
the  Gentiles,  to  bring  in  their  full-
ness, and  to  fulfil  their  times,  and


six  years  have  now  p


ft  way


and


then  it  u
Israel.

In  the

Savior,  in
should  bel


11


to  the  boost?  of


what  has  been  done  during  that  time
towards  fulfilling  the  prediction
ottered  by  John  the  rerolator?
Much  has  been  done,  (  Iij  the  midst
of  the  most  severe  persecution,  the
servants -nf  God  have  fcuvir*** firth  «uid
preaclied  the  Gospel  to  a  great  many
cations.  They  were  commanded  to
go  to  and  labor  with  the  Gentile
nations  first,  without  parse  and  scrip,
44  Go  and  preach  the  Gospel  as  mine
uocient  Apostles  did,  without  purse
and  scrip ;  and  go  to  the  Gentiles
first.  Warn  them  thoroughly,  and
teach  them  concerning  tny  Gospel."
They  have  done  so,  and  for  forty-six
years  they  have  continued  their
missions  in  the  Gentile  nations.

The  Lord  also  told  them  that  when
the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles  hud  come,
when  their  times  were  fulfilled,  then
bis  servants  should  be  sent  to  all  tlie
scattered  remnants  of  the  house  of
Israel,  who  should  be  grafted  in  ngaiu ;
but  first,  the  fullness  ot  the  Gentiles
must  come  in.  You  know  that
Scripture which says — "The  fir^t


e,  our

fiking  of  tbe  evils  that
the  Jewish: Ration,  says,
44  And  they  (the  Jews)  shall  fall  by
the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  shall  be
led  away  captive  into  all  nations ;
and  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down
of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  times  of  the
^-^jtyBS  bo  lutnllea.  .*  *  ihis  has  been
fulfilled  literally  upon  the  Jewish
nation,  and  they,  have  been  scattered,
according  to  this  prediction,  among
all  nations.  Many  of  thera  were
destroyed  by  the  edge  of  the  sword.
Jerusalem  was  taken  some  seventy
years  after  the  birth  of  Christ,  and
It  as  been  in  possession  of  the  Gentiles
from  that  day  to  this.  Jesus  told
tbern  that  such  should  be  the  fact,
that  Jerusalem  should  be  in  the
possession  of  the  Gentiles,  and  should
be  trodden  down  by  them  until  a
certain  period  —  until  their  times
should  he  fulfilled.

The  great  object  of  the  angel  iu
restoring  the  Gospel  was,  in  the  first
place,  to  fulfil  the  times  of  the  Gen-
tiles, Inquires  one — "  What  do  yoti
mean  by  that  r1'  I  mean  that  God
will  send  this  Gospel,  restored  by  an


*


RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


177


angel,  to  erery  nation,  kindred,  peo-
ple and  tongue  in  the  Gentile  world
before  he  will  permit  his  servants  to
go  to  the  scattered  remnants  of  Israel;
and  they  will  labor  with,  preach  to
and  declare  the  work  of  God  to  the
Gentile  nations,  and  seek  to  bring
them  to  a  knowledge  of  the  ancient
Gospel,  and  to  organize  a  Church
among  them,  so  far  as  they  will
hearken  to  and  receive  their  testi-
mony. Then,  when  the  Gentile  na-
tions shall  reject  this  Orospel,  and
count  themselves  an  worthy  of  eternal
life,  as  the  Jews  did  before  them,
the  Lord  will  say—-"  It  is  enough,
come  away  from  them,  my  servants,
I  will  give  you  a  new  com  miss  ton,
yon  shall  go  to  the  scattered  remnants
of  the  house  of  Israel,  I  will  gather
them  in  from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth,  and  bring  them  again  into
their  own  lands.  They  shall  build
Jerusalem  on  its  own  heap ;  they
shall  rear  a  Temple  on  the  appointed
place  in  Palestine,  and  they  shall  be
grafted  in  again."  Now  that,  in
short,  is  the  nature  of  this  great
latter-day  preparatory  work  for  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,

Now  let  me  .quote  another  passage
that  corresponds  with  one  I  have
already  quoted.**  Paulf  in  the  11th
chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the  Romans,
speaks  of  the  proclamation  of  the
Gospel  to  the  Jews  first,  and  because
of  their  unbelief,  Paul  says  they
were  broken  off  as  branches  of  the
tame  olive  tree ;  u  and,"  says  the
Apostle,  addressing  his  epistle  to  a
Gentile  church,  "you  have  been
grafted  in  the  stead  of  them ; "  in
other  words,  the  kingdom  has  been
transferred  from  Israel  to  you  Gentiles,
and  it  is  committed  into  your  hands,
and  you  are  beginning  to  bring  forth
the  fruits  of  that  kingdom,  the  gifts
of  the  kingdom  are  made  manifest
among  ycfti,  j^ist  as  they  were  among
Israel  in  the  days  of  their  righteous*

No.  12.


ness. "But"  said  Paul— "  They
were  broken  off  by  unbelief,  and
you  Gentiles  stand  by  faith. Be  not
high  minded,  but  fear,  for  if  God
spared  not  the  natural  branches,  if  he
did  not  even  spare  the  tame  olive  tree
— the  natural  branches — take  heed
lest  he  also  spare  not  thee,  for  yon
are  only  wild  branches  grafted  in
contrary  to  natuty.  '*  Take  heed  lest
he  llso  spare  not  fhee,  fof  behold,  #  t
therefore,  the  goodness  «md  the'seve-  »
rify  fcf  God  ;  on  the  house  of  Israel,
that  fell  through  unbelief,  severity;
but  towards  thee,  or  in  other  wo'rds,
towards  y$u,  the  Gentiles,  the  gout^-
nes,s  nf  God  is  extended  if  you  con-
tinue io  his  goodness. It  whs  on  that
condition — if  you  Gentses  continue
in  •his goodness;*  otherwise,  says
Paul,  you  also  shall  be  .cut  off,  just
the  same  as  Israel  were. You  also
shall  be  Qut  off,  and  they  also  shall  be
grafted  in  again,  fur  God  is  able#  to  .
graft  tliem  in  again. For  if  .God
spared  j*ot  the  natural  branches  take
heed  lest  he  also  spare' -not  thee,  etc.
Ttien  he  tells  them  a  mystery.  He
wanted  those  Gentiles '  to  understand
a  certain  mystery,*  and  that  was  that
blindness  in  part  had  happened  to
Israel  until  the  fullness  of  the  Gen-
tiles be  come  in,  and  so  all  Israel
shall  be  saved. As  it  is  written —
There  shall  come  out  of  Zion  a  de- ,
Hverer  who  shall  turn  away  ungod-
liness from  Jacob.  *  u  And  this  shall
he  my  covenant  unto  them,  saith  the
Lord,  when  I  shall  take  away  their*
sins.

It  seems  then  that  Paul  under-
stood, by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  that
if  the  Gentiles  apostatized,  if  thgy
did  not  continue  in  the  place  where
they  were  grafted,  if  they  did  not
continue  in  the  goudness  of  God,  if
they  became  highminded,  they  also*
were  to  be  cut  off,  just  as  they  have  "
been  for  many  lon^  generations  that
are  past ;  cut  off  from  all  the  nncient

Vol.  XVIII.


178


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


*  blessings  of  the  everlasting  0  us  pel
through  the  apostacy  of  their  ancient
fathers.

But  the  Lord  intends  to  make  a
change,  and  thai  change  is  to  send
forth  this  Gospel  from  heaven  to  be
preached  to  the  nations  of  the  Gen-
tiles,  to  give  thera  one  more  chance,
if  they  will  have  it,  to  bung  in  their
fullness;  and  when  that  time  has
come,  and  the  servants  of  the  Lord
find  that  the  balance  of  them  harden
their  hearts  and  reject  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation,  then  the  Lord  will
graft  in  ull  Israel,  and  they  will  be
saved,  being  restored  again  to  the
tame  olive  tree,  and  bringing  forth
the  fruits  thereof. Thus  will  be  ful-
filled the  ancient  covenant  that  God
made  with  them  pertaining  to  the
latter-days. Have  you  read  that
covenant  that  Paul  quotes  from  ?
One  of  the  ancient  prophets,  Jeremiah,
delivered  the  prophecy,  as  recorded
In  his  31st  chapter — *s  Behold  the
day  shall  come  that  I  will  make  a
new  covenant  with  the  house  of  Israel
and  with  the  house  of  Judah,  not
according  to  the  covenant  which  1
made  with  their  fathers,  when  I  took
them  by  the  hand  and  brought  them
forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  And
this  is  the  covenant  I  will  make  with
them  saifch  the  Lord — [  will  write
my  law  in  their  hearts,  print  it  in
their  thoughts,  and they  shall  all
know  me  from  the  least  of  them  unto
the  greatest  of  them, saith  the
Lord."

Now  did  all  Israel  and  all  Judah
know  the  Lord,  from  the  least  of
them  to  the  greatest  of  them  ?  Had
they  no  more  need  to  say,  every  man
to  his  Jewish  neighbor,  know  ye  the
Lord  ?  Was  that  the  case  anciently,
when  the  Lord  offered  them  the  cove-
nant of  the  everlasting  Gospel  ?
No;  instead  of  all  Israel  and  all
Judah  knowing  the  Lord,  from  the
least  to  the  greatest,  they  were  the


very  ones  that  were  cut  off  and  lost
the  privileges  of  that  covenant.
But  in  the  latter  days  when  the  full-
ness of  the  Gentiles  is  brought  in
by  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel
committed  by  the  angel,  then  i&  the
time  that  the  Lord  will  renew  this
covenant,  and  the  same  Gospel  that
he  offered  to  them  eighteen  hundred
years  ago,  and  which  they  rejected,
will  be  offered  to  them  again,  and  all
Israel  will  be  saved.  As  it  is  written
— "  There  shall  come  out  of  Zion  a
deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungod-
liness from  Jacob/*

It  seems,  then,  that  the  Lord,  when
he  shall  fulfill  this  prophecy,  will
have  a  Zion  on  the  earth.  Enquires
one — "  What  do  you  mean  by  Zion
I  mean  the  Church  of  God,  that
is  what  I  call  Zion. God  will  have
a  Church  on  the  earth — a  Zion,  and
out  of  that  Charch  a  deliverer  will
come  for  and  in  behalf  of  all  Israel,
not  only  the  Jews — the  two  tribes
and  a  half  that  were  scattered  after
Christ,  but  the  ten  tribes  that  were
taken  away  out  of  Palestine  some
seven  hundred  years  before  Christ.
All  Israel — the  whole  twelve  tribes —
will  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth  when  God  sends  this  deliverer
out  of  Zion,  proclaiming  the  Gospel
of  the  latter-days  for  their  salva-
tion.

Connected  with  this  everlasting
Gospel  is  another  very  marvelous
event  preparatory  to  the  second  ad-
vent. What  is  that  ?  Every  Chris-
tian upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth
will  be  gathered  from  all  nations,  and
ail  will  be  assembled  in  one.  Say s
one  —  u  There  are  none  of  our  Pro-
testant denominations  gathering ;  the
Roman  Catholics  do  not  gather;  the
Greek  Church  do  not  gather,  and  I
do  not  kuow  any  Church,  except  you
Mormons,  that  gather  out"  Now,
let  us  see  what  is  said  about  this
gathering. I  have  told  you  that


RESTORATION  OF  '

the  Gospel  should  be  committed  by
an  angel;  I  have  told  you  that  it
■hould  be  the  hour  of  God's  judg-
ment— a  peculiar  time  of  judgment,
in  which  the  nations  are  to  be  visited  s
with  sore  and  terrible  judgments.  '
Now  let  us  rend  further — **  Another
angel  followed,  crying,  *  Babylon  is
fallen,  because  she  made  all  nations
drunk  with  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of
her  fornication.'  "  Who  is  Babylon  ?
I  have  already  explained  that  Baby-
lon is  a  great  power  that  should  be
in  the  earth  under  the  name  of  a
church,  a  woman — that  generally !
represents  a  church — full  of  blas-
phemy. She  hurl  the  inscription  of
her  name  upon  her  forehead — "Mys-
tery Babylon,  the  mother  of  harlots
and  abominations  of  the  earth/'
What  is  to  become  of  her?  Where
does  she  sit  ?  Upon  many  waters,
says  John  ;  in  id  to  interpret  this  to
the  understanding  of  the  people,  the
waters  are  many  people,  nations,
kindred  and  tongues  where  the  woman
hath  her  seat.  These  churches  are
scattered  over  the  wide  face  of  the
earth,  and  this  is  called  Babylon,
Another  amM  :s  to  follow  the  one
that  bri?igs  the  Gospel,  after  it  has
been  sufficiently  preached,  and  pro-
claim the  downfall  of  this  great  and
corrupt  power  in  the  earth.  Well,
will  all  the  Christians  that  are  there
perish,  or  will  they  be  gathered  out  ?
Hear  what  John  says — "I  heard  a
great  voice  from  heaven,  saying,
4  Come  out  of  her,  oh  my  people,
that  you  partake  not  of  her  sins,  that
you  receive  not  of  her  plagues,  for
her  sins  have  reached  to  the  heavens,
and  God  hath  remembered  her  ini-
quities.' "  Then  there  is  only  one
way  to  escape,  is  there  ?  We  can't
stay  ia  Babylon  and  be  spared  from
these  judgments,  can  we  ?  Not  at
all.  Why  not  ?  Because  her  sins
have  reached  to  the  very  heavens.
Look  at  her  abominations,  her  whore-


TIIE  UOSPEL,  ETC.  179

doms,  her  murders,  ber  priestcraft,
her  false  doctrines,  her  forms  of
godliness  without  any  power  ;  look
at  them,  all  the  nations  are  following
I  after,  and  consider  it  popular  to  fol-
low and  embrace  these  doctrines.
"  Come  out  of  her,  oh,  my  people."
What  people  ?  God  had  no  people
in  Babylon  until  the  Church  was  or-
ganized, he  could  not  have;  he  sent
his  servants  to  organize  his  Church,
that  there  might  be  a  people  called
his  people.  But  when  that  Church
is  organized  among  these  nations,
kindred,  tongues  and  pen  pie,  its
members  are  not  permitted  to  re-
main where  they  are.  This  is  not
an  invention  of  a  learned  company
of  divines,  saying  it  will  be  a  good
thing  for  us  to  gather  in  one;  it  is
not  something  invented  by  human
I  wisdom  ;  but  the  Rev  el  a  tor  John
says — "  1  heard  a  voice  from  heaven."
What,  n  now  revelation,  John  ?  Yes,
a  voice  from  heaven.  God  was  again
to  speak,  before  the  downfall  of
Babylon ;  and  this  should  be  the
voice  — u  Come  out  of  her,  O  my
people."

Who  has  been  fulfilling  this  among
all  those  calling  themselves  Chris-
tians ?  Have  the  Roman  Catholics  ?
Have  the  Greek  church  ?  Have  the
Protestants,  in  any  of  their  denomi-
nations, been  gathering  out  from  all
the  nations  of  the  earth  ?  No,  but
you  find  one  people  doing  it.  Who
are  they  ?  The  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  organ*
ized  on  the  earth  by  divine  authority.
They  have  gone  forth  proclaiming
these  things  among  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth.  Instead  of  Baying  to
the  people — u  Tarry  where  you  are,"
we  say  to  them — "  Arise,  make  pre-
paration?, and  gather  out  from  this
corruption."  This  has  been  the  pro-
1  clamation  to  the  people  of  Denmark,
Norway,  Sweden,  Germany,  Italy,
France,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  every


IPO  JOURNAL  OF

other  country  the  people  nf  which
h;ive  received  the  Gospel,  and  they
have  been  commanded  not  to  tarry,
but  to  obey  the  word  of  the  Lord,
and  put  her  as  soon  as  possible,

,But  where  shall  they  gather  to  ?
Is  there  anything  indicated  in  pro-
p  h  ccy  a  bo  u  t  w  here  1 1 1  cy  should  gat  her?
Yes.  Daniel  saw  a  Church  organized
in  the  latter  days,  in  a  mountain  or
high  place  of  the  earth.  Read  the
dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of
Babylon,  in  the  second  chapter  of,
Daniel's  prophecies  ?  The  king
could  not  recollect  his  dream  when
he  awoke,  and  he  sent  out  to  all  the
wise  men,  magicians  and  astrologers,
and  requested  them  to  tell  him  what
hi4*  dream  was,  and  then  give  him  an
interpretation.  But  they  could  not
do  it.  Finally  a  man  ot  God,  a
humble  man,  by  the  name  of  Daniel,
besought  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
revealed  to  him  the  dream  and  the
interpretation  thereof  Nebuchad-
nezzar, it  seems,  hud  seen  a  very
greit  image  before  hitn;  the  head
of  that  image  was  gold,  the  breast
and  arms  of  silver,  the  belly  and  ,
thighs  were  of  brass,  the  legs  of  iron,
smd  the  feet  part  of  iron  aud  part  of
potter'*  clay.  He  saw  it  in  all  its
terrible  majesty  composed  of  these  .
different  metals,  together  with  pot-
ters clay.  Then,  after  Daniel  had
described  to  him  what  he  had  seen  in
his  dream,  said  he — "  Thou  sawest
mi* il  that  a  stone  was  cut  oat  of  the
mountain;"  not  out  of  some  low
country  of  the  earth  near  the  sea
level,  u  but  thou  sawest  until  that  a  \
stone  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain
without  handy,  and  it  rolled  forth,
and  smote  the  image  upon  t he  feet,
that  were  part  of  potter's  clay  and
p n  r  of  iron,  and  the  feet  were  broken
to  pieces.  Then  were  the  iron,  the
c!avt  the  brass,  the  silver  and  the
g»i]d  broken  to  pieces  together,  and
Lecame  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer


DISCOURSES.

threshing  floor,  and  the  wind  carried
them  away  and  no  place  was  found
for  them."  What  became  of  the
stone  ?  The  stone  that  smote  the
image  became  a  great  mountain  and
filled  the  whole  earth  ?

Well,  what  was  the  interpretation
of  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  ?  He
told  the  king  that  the  head  of  the
image  represented  the  kingdom  then
organized;  that  after  hitn  would
come  another  kingdom,  that  of  the
Modes  and  Persians,  represented  by
the  breast  and  arms  of  silver;  then
a  third  kingdom  should  follow,  the
Macedonians;  then  a  fourth  king-
dom,  which  should  be  great  and  ter-
rible, compared  to  the  iron  kingdom,
which  every  one  admits  was  the  great
power  of  Rome,  which  flourished
and  had  power  and  dominion  over
the  whole  earth.  Out  of  that  king-
dom grew  other  kingdoms  represented
by  the  feet  and  toes  of  the  image ;
these  kingdoms  had  not  all  the  great-
ness and  strength  of  the  former
kingdoms  represented  by  the  image,
but  they  were  partly  strong  and
partly  weak,  \

Now  what  is  the  location  of  this
great  image  from  the  days  of  Nebu-
chadnezzar umil  now  ?  You  go  into
Asia  aud  you  will  find  there  the  de-
scendants of  the  old  Babylonian
empire  still  in  existence.  Come  a
little  further  westward,  and  you  find
still  the  descendants  of  the  Medeg
and  Persians  who  once  flourished
and  exercised  dominion  over  the
earth*  A  little  further  west  you
find  the  descendants  of  the  third,  or
Macedonian,  empire  still  in  existence.
Come  further  still,  into  Europe,  and
you  find  the  feet  and  toes  of  the
image  in  the  latter  day  kingdoms  of
the  earth,  which  have  branched  across
the  great  deep  and  have  planted
themselves  in  America*  Are  they
partly  strong  and  partly  broken  ?
Yes. Some of them have  some


RESTORATION  OF

strength  apparently,  and  they  have
among  themselves  all  the  character-
istics of  miry  clay  with  the  iron,  for
they  are  divided  one  against  another,
and  they  have  to  keep  up  their  stand-
ing armies  because  they  are  afraid  of
one  another. Bat  where  is  the  stone
from the mountains  ? Where  is
that  kingdom  that  is  called  the  stone?
In  the  interpretation  the  Prophet
says — '*  Thou  snwest  until  the  king-
dom of  God  was  set  up,  and  it  smote
the  image  upon  the  feet,"  and  so  on.
It  does  not  commence  its  attack  away
in  Asia,  where  the  head  of  gold  or
its  descendants  live,  neither  in  any
intermediate  part,  but  it  commences
at  the  very  extremity  of  this  great
image,  as  it  spreads  oat  to  the  west,
and  commences  upon  the  feet  and  the
toes;  it  is  there  where  the  stone  is
cut  out  of the mountain  without
hands,  it  is  there  where  the  God  of
heaven  should  set  up  a  kingdom,  as
Daniel says,  that  should  never  he
destroyed,  neither  shall  it  be  given
into  the  hands  of  another  people,  but
it  shall  stand  for  ever. Not  like  the
former- day  kingdom  that  was  set  up,
before  thje  Roman  empire  had  at-
tained to  its  zenith  of  power.  The
former-day  kingdom  of  Christ  was
aet  up  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles  ;
that  was  overcome  and  destroyed  out
of  the  earth. The  beast  made  war
upon them and prevailed  against
them,  and  they  were  banished  from
the  earth,  and  the  woman  upon  the
scarlet-colored  beast  seems  to  have
had  dominion among all  nations*
inareds,  tongues  and  people,  more
or  less. But  in  the  latter-days  the
kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  built  up
on  the  earth,  that  should  never  be
destroyed;  it  was  not  to  he  like  the
former-day  one,  but  it  should  stand
forever,  while  all  these  other  king-
doms should  not  only  be  destroyed,
but,  like  the  chuff  of  the  summer
threshing  floor,  should be  carried


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  181

completely  away,  and  no  place  should
be  found  for  them.

That  is  the  destiny  of  all  the  na-
tions. A  great  many  wise  men,  and
statesmen, have meditated  deeply
upon  the  past,  present  and  future  of
the  nations,  and  have  no  doubt  in-
quired in  their  own  minds  with  a
great  deal  of  seriousness — "  What
will  be  the  end  of  these  political
powers  ? What  will  be  the  end,  for
instance,  of  this  great  republican
government  of  ours  ? What  will  be
the  end  of  the  governments  organ-
ized in  Europe  ?  " These  questions,
no  doubt,  have  occurred  to  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  of  reflecting
men. The  Bihlo  answers  the  ques-
tion. No  kingdom,  no  form  of  gov-
ernment of  human  invention  will  be
permitted  to  stand. When  God  has
fulfilled the  saying  written  by  the
Prophet  Daniel, there  will  be  one
universal  kingdom,  and  only  one,  and
t hat  will  be  kingdom  of  God,  and
Jesus  kimself  will  be  the  great  king.

Inquires  one — "  What  do  you  mean
by  this  breaking  to  pieces  ?  Do  you
think  Daniel  meant  that  they  should
go  forth  with  physical  force  and  sub-
due all  the  nations  ?"  No,  I  do  not
think  any  such  thing  ;  but  when
the  Lord  God  sends  his  holy  angel
from  heaven  with  the  everlasting
Gospel  and  then  ordains  his  servants
to  t lie  Apostleship,  and  sends  them
forth  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,
and  they  proclaim  the  Gospel  of  the
kingdom  among  the  people,  if  the
people  will  not  hear,  the  Lord  him-
self will  break  them  in  pieces.  It
will  be  the  message  that  he  sends
that  will  ripen  them  for  destruction.

And  the  location  of  his  kingdom
was  to  be  in  the  mountains,  so  savs
Daniel.  Now  you  can  understand
that  saying  in  Uaiah,  which  I  read
at  the  commencement  of  my  remarks.
When  describing  the  glory  of  the
Lord  to  be  revealed  and  all  llesh


IS  3


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


seeing  it  together,  preparatory  to
that  work,  Isaiah  says  there  was  a
certain  people  that  should  get  up  into
the  mountains.  "Oh  Zion,  that
bringest  good  tidings  get  thee  up
into  the  high  mountain,"  That  did
not  mean  a  city  called  Zion,  for  it  k
not  to  be  supposed  that  a  city  would
travel  up  into  a  high  mountain  ;  but
it  meant  a  people,  a  people  who  were
bringing  good  tidings.  What  good
tidings  ?  What  can  be  more  glori-
ous tidings  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  than  the  everlasting  Gospel
sent  by  an  angel,  to  say  unto  the  peo-
ple that  if  they  will  repent  of  their
gins  and  be  baptized  in  water  for  the
remission  of  their  sins,  they  shall
receive  the  baptism  of  fire  and  the
Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  the
hands  of  the  servants  of  God  ?
What  can  be  more  glorious  in  its
nature  than  a  proclamation  of  this
kind  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  ?
Hence  when  the  people  come  out* of
great  Babylon  and  gather  themselves
together,  they  will  gather  into  the
mountains  to  fulfill  this  prophecy.

Any  other  prophecies  about  their
going  to  the  mountaius  ?  Yes.
Read  the  18th  chapter  of  Isaiah.
Isaiah,  when  standing  in  Palestine
deli  vering  his  prophecy,  looked  off  to
the  south-west  and  saw  the  rivers  of
Ethiopia,  or  Africa  ;  and  after  having
seen  these  rivers  in  vision  he  also  sees
a  land  shadowing  with  wings  away
beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  What
kind  of  a  land  was  that,  away  beyond
the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  from  where
Isaiah  stood  in  Palestine  r  Why  it
is  a  land  that  had  the  appearance  of
wings.  You  have  been  struck
doubtless,  with  the  great  resem-
blance that  North  and  South  America
have  to  the  two  great  wings  of  a
bird.  While  Isaiah  was  thus  gazing
upon  a  land  away  beyond  the  rivers
of  Ethiopia,  ifc  looked  so  much  like
the  wiugs  of  a  bird  that  he  says —


A  land  shadowing  with  wings,  away,
beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia/'  Well,
Isaiah,  what  have  you  to  say  about
that  land  ?  Why,  says  he,  there  is
a  proclamation  to  be  had  there.  How
extensive,  Isaiah  ?  To  all  people.
Hear  the  words  of  I>aiah.  S:\ys  he
"All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world
and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see  ye
when  he  lifts  up  an  ensign  on  the
mountains."  Not  on  the  low  places
of  that  land  shadowing  with  wings,
next  to  the  seashore,  but  in  the  moun-
tains. What  is  the  nature  of  this
ensign  ?  It  is  characteristic  of  a
standard,  often  spoken  of  by  the
Prophets,  and  called  by  the  name  of
standard.  Isaiah  speaks  of  it  as  an
ensign  in  a  number  of  places.  What
would  naturally  be  a  standard  ?  The
kingdom  of  God  is  a  standard  to
which  the  people  rally  and  gather
together.  Does  it  affect  all  people,
Isaiah  ?  Yes.  u  All  ye  inhabitants
of  the  world,"  What  could  be  more
extensive  than  that  ?  f*  And  dwell-
ers on  the  earth,  see  ye  when  he  lifts
up  an  ensign  on  the  mountains,  and
when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet  hear  ye."
What  else  is  to  take  place,  Isaiah  ?
He  says  that  a  severe  jndgment  is
to  take  place  on  that  land  shadowing
with  wings.  What  kind  of  a  judg-
ment, one  that  is  to  be  very  severe,
Isaiah  ?  Yes,  for  he  says — "  Afore
the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is  perfect,
and  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the
flower,  he  shall  both  cut  off  the  sprigs
with  pruning  hooks,  and  take  away
and  cut  down  the  branches.  They
shall  be  left  together  uuto  the  fowls
of  the  mountain  and  to  the  beasts  of
the  earth  ;  and  the  fowls  shall  sum-
mer  upon  them,  and  all  the  beasts  of
the  earth  shall  winter  upon  them."
When  will  this  be,  Isaiah  ?  After
this  proclamation,  after  all  the  nations
of  the  world  have  heard  it,  after  the
people  have  heard  the  sound  of  the
warning message ; then the  first


RESTORATION  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


183


among  all  the  nations  where  the  ex-
tremities of  the  image  have  sent  forth
one  of  its  governments,  there  will  be
the  commencement  of  a  most  terrible
judgment,  so  much  so  that  the  people
on  that  land  will  not  have  time  to
bory  their  dead,  and  the  fowls  shall
summer  upon  them.  Why  is  all  this  ?
Because  they  will  not  hearken  when
that  sound  goes  to  all  people;  they
will  not  repent  of  their  sins;  they
will  not  receive  the  message  that  God
has  sent  by  his  angel,  he  therefore
visits  them  first,  because  they  are
the  first  to  hear  those  glad  tidings.
No  wonder,  then,  that  Zion,  that
brings  good  tidings,  was  commanded
by  the  ancient  Prophet  to  get  up  into
the  high  mountain.

Let  123  go  a  little  further,  and  see
what  immediately  follows  this.  Isaiah
says — "For  behold  the  Lord  God
shall  come  with  a  strong  hand/'
What!  The  coming  of  the  Lord
going  to  take  place  after  Zion  has
gone  up  into  the  mountains  ?  Yes,
that  is  one  of  the  great  events  that
will  transpire,  when  the  people  of  the
nations  are  careless  and  indifferent,
when  they  are  eating  and  drinking,
buying  and  selling,  and  their  minds
wholly  swallowed  up  with  the  various
occupations  of  life.  "  Behold,  the
Lord  comes  with  a  strong  hand,  his
arm  will  rule  for  him  and  he  will  re*
ward  his  people ;  then  the  glory  of
the  Lord  will  be  revealed  and  all  flesh
will  see  it  together."

Bat  one  of  the  great  preparatory
works  in  that  dispensation  of  the
gathering  of  Zion  to  the  mountains,
will  be  the  construction  of  a  great
highway,  which  is  to  be  cast  up  in
the  desert.  Let  me  ask  you  who
have  beeu  across  these  numn tains,
from  Omaha  for  many  hundred  miles
westward,  what  kind  of  a  country
is  it  ?  Is  it  a  country  of  orchards,
vineyards,  and  alluvial  soil,  that  is
calculated  to  flatter  the  agriculturist  ?


Says  one — "  No,  I  never  saw  such  a
barren  plain  for  hundreds  and  hun-
dreds of  miles.  In  the  day  time,
1  when  we  had  an  opportunity  of  look-
!  ing  at  it,  it  had  ail  one  appearance,
and  was  a  vast  sage  plain  and  desert,"
Now  Isaiah  said  that  when  his  people
should  get  up  into  the  mountains  a
highway  should  be  cast  up  in  the
desert.  **  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the
Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a
highway  for  our  (iod,"  What !  Is
it  made  for  the  Lord  ?  Yes.  What
is  the  Lord  going  to  do  with  it  ?
He  is  going  to  gather  his  people  from
all  the  nations  on  tins  highway
through  the  desert.  Do  you  want  to
know  anything  more  about  this  high-
way ?  Read  another  chapter  in
Isaiah ;  he  gives  more  particulars
than  what  I  hare  mentioned.

What  I  have  read  in  the  40th
1  chapter  of  Isaiah  about  the  highway
in  the  desert,  is  only  one  thing  con-
nected with  it.  In  another  chapter
he  says — "  Go  through,  go  through
the  gates ;  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the
people  ;  cast  up,  cast  up  the  high*
way  ;  gather  out  the  stones ;  lift  up  a
standard  for  the  people.  Behold,  the
Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end
of  the  world,  Say  ye  to  the  daughter
of  Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  Com-
eth ;  behold,  his  reward  is  with  him,
and  his  work  before  hirn.M  Here  is
the  same  thing  spoken  ot  again,  only
it  speaks  of  tunnels,  or,  in  other
words,  gates  —  u  Go  through,  go
through  the  gates."  I  have  no  idea
but  what  Isaiah,  in  gazing  down  upon
future  generations,  saw  the  time  when
a  long  train  of  carriages  would  be
whirled  across  a  continent,  without
any  apparent  animal  force  or  power.
He  |>erhaps  did  not  understand  the
modern  terms  for  tunnel  through  a
rock,  and  hence  he  calls  them  gates.
41  Go  through,  go  through  the  gates;
prepare  the  way  of  t he  people;  cast
up,  cast  up  a  highway;  gather  o^t


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


the  stones  ;  lift  up  a  standard  for  the
people/*  Then  comes  in  this  uni-  1
versal  proclamation — 41  Behold,  the  i
Lord  hath  proclaimed  from  the  ends
of  the  world,"  Now,  from  the  ends
of  the  world,  we  should  naturally
suppose  that  Isaiah,  standing  in
Palestine,  and  delivering  this,  would
see  a  work  that  was  to  transpire  on  a
very  distant  hind.  He  could  find  no
better  language  to  describe  it,  than
the  expression  "  to  the  ends  of  the
world."  Not  a  work  to  transpire  in
Palestine,  in  his  own  neighborhood,
but,  44  Behold  the  Lord  should  pro-
cla  m  from  the  ends  of  the  world,  to
all  people,  Behold,  your  salvation
Cometh,"  That  is,  the  Lord  was
coining  with  a  strong  hand,  and  this
proclamation  coming  from  the  Lord
was  to  be  sounded  to  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth,  a  standard  was  to
be  raised,  and  a  way  prepared  by
this  highway  being  cast  up.

There  are  a  great  many  in  this
congregation  who  took  part  in  cast-
ing up  this  highway.  We  built  the
most  difficult  portions  of  this  rail-
road, through  these  mountains,  some
four  hundred  miles  in  extent*  Did
you  work  with  a  good  cheerful  heart,
when  you  were  engaged  in  gathering
out  the  stones,  and  when  you  were
making  these  gates  that  Laiah  speaks
of,  through  which  he  saw  a  long  train
of  carriages  dart  into  the  mountain,
losing  sight  of  them  for  a  time,  then
seeing  them  come  out  again  with
great  speed,  from  the  mountain  ?
How  could  he  describe  it  any  better
than  by  saying — 44  Go  through,  go
through  the  gates  ?"  i

But  what  kind  of  a  people  were
these  to  be  who  should  be  gathered
from  the  ends  of  the  world  by  this
proclamation  ?  Read  the  next  verse
— "  They  shall  call  them  the  holy
people,  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,1'
Says  one — 14  Well,  you  are  called
anything  else  but  that; instead  of


being  called  a  holy  people,  you  are
represented,  by  the  priests  and  every-
body else,  as  a  very  unrighteous  peo-
ple," Very  well,  the  Lord  will,  in
his  own  due  time,  enable  you  to  dis-
tinguish between  the  righteous  ai\d
the  wicked.  41  Behold,  they  shall
call  them  the  holy  people,  the  re-
deemed of  the  Lord  ;  and  behold,
they  shall  be  called,  sought  out,  a
cify  not  forsaken."  How  different
from  old  Jerusalem !  Was  that
sought  out?  No;  Jerusalem  was
built  up  a  long  time  before  Israel
came  out  of  Egypt,  and  was  there
ready  for  them  to  take  possession  of
when  they  entered  the  Holy  Land.
Was  Jerusalem  ever  forsaken  ?  Yes,
forsaken  for  many  generations*  Bat
not  so  with  Zion,  that  should  get  up
into  the  mountains;  they  should
seek  out  a  location,  so  much  so  that
the  city  should  be  called  "  Sought
out j"  and  instead  of  being  forsaken,
as  many  people  suppose  the  "Mor-
mons" will  bo,  the  Lord  God  will
protect  them.  According  to  the
words  of  D-iuiel,  the  kingdom  shall
not  be  destioyed,  neither  shall  it  be
given  to  another  people,  and  it  shall
stand  for  erer.  All  these  character-
istics are  being  fulfilled.

Would  you  suppose  that  the  House
of  Jacob,  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,  can
be  gathered  from  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth,  and  brought  back  to  their
own  land,  without  the  lifting  of  this
l  ensign  ?  No.  Read  the  11th  chap-
ter of  Isaiah.  There  he  says — 14 1
will  lift  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations,
I  will  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,
and  I  will  gather  together  the  dis-
persed of  Judah  from  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth."  Until  the  Lord  God
sends  forth  this  proclamation  to  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  world  and
dwellers  on  the  earth,  in  vain  may
we  look  for  the  redemption  of  the
outcasts  of  Israel  and  the  dispersed
of  Judah. Israel,  the  ten  tribes


RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


185


called  the  outcasts,  will  never  return,
the  scattered  Jews  will  never  be  re-
stored, until  such  an  ensign  is  raised.
Isaiah,  in  the  fifth  chapter,  speaks  of
that  ensign — "I  will  lift  up  for  the
nations  an  ensign  from  afar/*  Why
not  lift  it  up  in  Jerusalem,  Isaiah  ?
Why  not  lift  it  up  in  Palestine?
Why  not  commence  t  he  work  in  Asia?
Says  Isaiah — "  I  will  lift  up  an  en-
sign to  the  nations  from  afar/1  How
far  ?  Away  off  to  the  ends  of  the
earth,  from  where  Isaiah  then  was.

After  this  ensign  is  raised,  he
speaks  of  how  swiftly  the  people
shall  come — t;  They  shall  come  with
speed  swiftly.,,  Is  that  the  way  you
came,  Latter-day  Saints  ?  When
you  crossed  the  ocean,  how  did  you
come?  In  steamships;  and  when
you  crossed  through  the  United
States  to  Omaha,  hosv  did  you  come?
In  steam  cars.  And  when  you  crossed
these  desert  sage  plains,  how  did  you
come  ?  With  speed  swif  tly  through
most  of  the  desert,  just  as  Isaiah  saul
you  would  in  his  fifth  chapter.

Many  people  thought  that  when
the  railroad  came  "Mormonism"
would  he  done  away.  But  such  a
supposition  shows  their  ignorance.
Why,  bless  you,  this  people  in  the
year  1847,  when  the  pioneers  crossed
these  plains  without  any  track  to
guide  them,  were  looking  for  this
great  highway  then.  Yes,  I  recol-
lect, almost  every  day  when  I  could
get  an  observation  of  the  sun,  (for
we  had  two  sextants,  and  artificial
horizons,  and  mountain  barometers,
and  one  circle  of  reflection,)  taking
the  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  all
the  prominent  places,  crossing  this
great  desert;  and  not  satisfied  with
getting  the  latitude  and  longitude  we
had  our  mountain  barometers  and
attached  and  detached  thermometers
And  took  the  altitude  above  sea  level
of  all  the  prominent  places  on  the
route  of  this  great  highway  which


was  to  be  cast  up  for  us  in  the  midst
of  the  desert.  Thus  this  people  were
the  first  to  talk  about  this  great  high-
way, and  we  never  lost  sight  of  it.
We  petitioned  Congress  for  its  con-
struction twenty-five  years  ago  ;  our
Legislature,  knowing  the  minds  of
the  people,  sent  our  memorial  to  the
National  Legislature,  and  requested
them  to  cfist  up  the  highway  across
this  country*  Our  memorials  were,
for  awhile,  treated  with  silence;  but
by  and  by,  when  the  proper  time
come,  the  Lord  stirred  up  Congress
and  the  gieat  men  and  capitalists  of
the  nation  to  go  forth  and  construct
this  highway.  Did  we  not  rejoice
and  thank  the  Lord  our  God  for  ful-
filling that  which  we  had  been  ex-
pecting, and  praying  for  so  diligently  ?
We  certainly  did.

We  might  continue  our  remarks,
as  there  are  are  many  things  con-
nected with  this  great  preparatory
work  which,  did  time  permit,  we
would  be  glad  to  lay  before  the  peo-
ple. I  will  quote  a  passage  or  two
more  in  relation  to  the  gathering.
Paul  saw  this  gathering,  and  he  calls
it  a  new  dispensation  that  should
come  after  his  day.  He  says  that  in
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times  he  would  gather  together  in
one  all  things  in  Christ,  whether  they
be  things  in  heaven  or  things  on  the
earth.  The  dispensation  of  the  full-
ness of  times,  then,  was  to  be  charac-
terized by  the  gathering  of  all  per-
sons that  were  in  Christ,  All  the
righteous  dead  that  are  in  heaven,
whose  bodies  are  asleep  in  the  grave,
together  with  all  t lie  Christians  on
the  earth,  will  be  gathered  in  one  in
that  dispensation.  Fulfilling  another
prophecy  in  the  43rd  chapter  of
Isaiah,  where  the  Lord  says  —  "I
will  say  to  the  north  give  up,  and  to
the  south  keep  not  back  ;  bring  my
sons  from  afar  and  my  daughters
from  the  ends  of  the  oarth,  even


186  JOURNAL  OF

every  one  that  is  called  by  my  name."
Will  it  leave  a  Christian  behind  ?
Not  one.  Go  and  search  New  York,
Philadelphia,  and  all  the  eastern
States,  and  the  middle  and  southern
States,  and  then  all  Europe,  for  a
Christian  after  this  prophecy  is  ful-
filled, and  you  can't  find  one.  Why  ?
Because  they  are  all  gathered  in  one.
How  ?  By  new  revelation.  The
Lord  says,  "  I  will  say  to  the  north


DISCOURSES,

give  up,"  The  Lord  :s  going  to
speak,  the  Lord  is  going  to  utter
1  something — "  I  will  ^ay  to  the  south
|  keep  not  back.  I  will  say,  Come  ye,
my 'sons  and  daughters,  from  the
ends  of  the  earth,  even  every  one  that
is  called  by  my  name."  What  an
awful  condition  the  world  will  be  in
when  there  is  not  a  Christian  among
them.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY"  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

u  vi  m  h  at  TiiE  Forty-sixth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Thursday  Morning,  April,  6,  1876.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

INFIDELITY  OP  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD — DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES
OF  THE  SAINTS — NECESSITY  OP  A  TEMPLE,  AND  WORKS  IN  BEHALF
OF  THE  DEAD.


"  Who  am  I,  saith  the  Lord,  that
I  command  and  am  not  obeyed  ?
Who  am  I,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I
promise  and  do  not  fulfill  ?"  We
have  again  the  privilege  of  assembling
ourselves  together  upon  another  An-
nual Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
and  I  hope  and  trust  that,  what  time
we  may  spend  in  Conference,  our
hearts  may  be  lifted  up  unto  the
Lord,  that  his  Holy  Spirit  may  be
given  unto  us,  that  we  may  be
dictated  and  directed  in  our  words,
thoughts,  acts,  and  teachings,  in  such


a  manner  that  we  may  be  justified
before  him.

We  have  said,  time  after  time,
and  year  after  year,  that  we  live  in  a
very  peculiar  age,  generation  and
dispensation,  and  this  is  true.  Time
rolls  on,  carrying  with  it  its  events,
and  fulfilling  the  revelations  of  God,
unto  us  especially.  We  live  in  a
day  ot  darkness;  unbelief  and  infi-
delity are  covering  the  whole  face  of
the  earth,  until  it  seems  as  though
the  whole  Christian  world  had  lost
all  hold  of  faith  in  God  and  in  his
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the  Bible,


-


INFIDELITY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD,  ETC.


the  revelations  of  God  to  man.  And
this  being  the  case,  if  the  Lord  has
any  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
they  should  be  increasing  in  faith  in
him.  You  let  a  Christ  inn  come  here,
no  matter  who,  whether  he  be  a
minister,  professor,  or  believer,  or
any  one  who  professes  to  believe  in
the  Bible,  and  let  him  ask  an  Elder
in  Israel — "Do  yon  really  believe,  in
your  soul,  sincerely  before  the  Lord,
that  Mormonism  is  true  ?"  When
the  Elder  answers  fiirn  "  yes,"  he  is
about  as  much  astonished  as  we  were
yesterday  when  these  magazines  ex-'
ploded.  The  fact  of  it  is,  as  I  said
before,  the  world  do  not  believe  in
God  or  in  revelation,  aud  they  mar-
vel very  greatly  to  find  any  man  who
has  really  got  independence  of  mind
enough  to  stand  up  and  say — "  I
believe  that  Joseph  Smith  was  a
Prophet  of  God,  and  I  believe  in  the
revelations  that  were  given  through
him  ;  I  believe  in  the  literal  fulfill-
ment of  prophecy,  as  written  in  the
Bible."  To  hear  men  say  this
astonishes  the  whole  Christian  world,
and  it  astonishes  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  see  the  amount  of  darkness
and  infidelity  that  are  abroad  in  the
earth.  Hence,  as  Latter-day  Saints,
I  think  it  requires  'on  our  part  an  in-
crease of  faithfulness  in  the  practice
of  our  religion,  and  in  the  various
revelations  of  God  contained  in  the
Bible,  Book  of  Mormon,  and  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.

We  see  before  our  eyes,  year  after
year,  the  signs  of  heaven  and  of
earth,  and  the  fulfillment  o4  prophecy,
but  how  much  are  we  as  a  people
increasing  in  faith  in  God  ?  Do  we
increase  in  that  respect  in  proportion
to  the  increase  of  infidelity  in  the
world  ?  Perhaps  I  am  not  a  judge,
but  it  appears  to  me  that  we  do  not
comprehend.  The  work  in  which  we
are  engaged,  and  the  Bible,  Book  of
Mormou,  and  the  Book  of  Doctrine


and  Covenants,  are  just  as  true  to-
day as  they  were  twenty,  thirty,  or
forty  years  ago,  when  we  shouldertd
our  knapsacks  and  valises,  and  tra-
veled on  foot  from  city  to  city,  State
to  State,  and  from  country  to  coun-
try, to  preach  the  word  of  God  with-
out money  and  without  price,  trust-
ing in  the  living  God  to  sustain  and
uphold  us  in  our  missions.  I  say
that  this  work  is  just  as  true  now  as
then,  and  so  is  the  saying  which  I
quoted — "Who  am  I,  saith  the  Lord,
that  I  command  and  am  not  obejed  ?
Who  am  I,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I
promise  and  do  not  fulfill  P"  I  be-
lieve that  the  Lord  will  fulfill  what
he  says;  I  believe  that  he  will  fulfill
his  promises  unto  the  Latter-day
Saints  and  unto  the  world,  unto
Zion  and  Babylon  ;  and  if  he  does,
there  is  something  at  the  door,  some-
thing for  us,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  to
do.  I  believe  the  Lord  has  held
every  man  responsible,  from  the  day
of  our  great  progenitor,  father  Adam,
into  whose  hands  the  Holy  Priest-
hood and  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of
God  have  been  committed;  and  I
believe  that  every  man,  every  set  of
men,  and  every  people,  will  be  held
responsible,  in  time  and  eternity,  for
the  use  they  have  made  of  the  gifts,
blessings,  and  promises  which  have
been  given  unto  them.  The  amount
of  it  is,  that  if  any  people  undertake
to  keep  a  celestial  law,  it  is  their  pri-
vilege to  enjoy  the  spirit  and  power
of  that  law  ;  it  is  also  the  privilege  of
any  man  or  set  of  men,  who  ever
received  the  Gospel,  to  enjoy  the
btessings  of  that  Gospel,  no  matter
what  age  of  the  world  they  may  have
lived  in.  Every  person  who  has  ever
repented  of  his  sins,  and  has  been
baptized  for  their  remission,  after  the
order  of  God,  and  after  the  similitude
of  Jesus  Chriit,  who  was  buried  in
water  in  the  likeness  of  hLs  death,
and  came  forth  in  the  likeness  of  his


188


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


resurrection,  has  a  right  to  the  Holy
Ghost;  it  is  promised,  and  it  belongs
to  him;  it  is  the  right  of  all  persons
to  enjoy  this,  and  if  they  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  and  its  gifts,  they  have
inspiration,  light,  and  truth ;  they
have  eyes  to  see,  ears  to  hear,  and
hearts  to  understand,  and  they  should
be  in  a  position  before  the  Lord  that
they  can  comprehend  his  work  far
more  perfectly  than  the  world,  for
they  have  not  obeyed  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  and  they  have  no  right  to,  or
claim  upon,  the  gifts  of  that  Gospel.
Bat  all  who,  in  any  age  of  the  world*
obey  the  Gospel,  have  a  right  to  the
Comforter,  and  to  inspiration  and
revelation,  they  belong  to  them,  and
the  Lord  never  had  a  people  on  the
face  of  the  earth  who  did  not  have  a
right  to  these  gifts,  and  it  was  their
privilege  and  duty  to  enjoy  them.

Th  is  is  the  difference  between  those
who  keep  celestial  law,  the  law  of  the
Gospel  cjf  Jesus  Christ,  and  those
who  do  not.  But,  as  I  have  re-
marked, all  in  every  age  of  the  world
who  have  received  a  dispensation  of
the  Gospel,  are  responsible  before  the
Lord  for  their  acts,  and  for  the  man
ner  in  which  they  have  used  their
blessings  and  privileges*  The  Pro-
phets and  Apostles  in  every  age  have
been  held  responsible  for  the  manner
in  which  they  made  use  of  the  Gospel
of  Christ  when  committed  unto  them;
and  that  is  the  way  it  is  wilh  us  to-
day. One  thing  ii  evident  to  every-
body who  reflects  at  all  upon  the
things  of  the  kiugdom  of  God — when-
ever the  Lord  chooses  a  people  out
of  the  world,  they  are  hated  by  the
world,  and  are  unpopular  in  the
world.  This  has  been  the  case  in
every  age.  It  was  so  in  the  days  of
Jesus  Christ.  He  came  to  his  own
father's  house — the  Jews  ;  he  was  of
the  lineage  of  Abraham,  and  when  he
came  to  his  own  brethren  he  was  un-
popular, he  was  rejected  and  opposed.


They  did  not  like  him  nor  his  course.
They  were  looking  for  Shiloh  to
come,  but  not  as  a  babe  born  in  a
stable  and  cradled  in  a  manger,  and
traveling  on  from  that  to  the  cross
and  the  grave  in  poverty  and  afflic-
tion, without  military  authority,  and
without  power  to  govern  and  control,
and  to  deliver  and  uphold  the  Jews
as  a  nation.  Christ  came  as  the  babe
of  Bethlehem,  the  lowest  almost  of
the  human  family,  aud  remained  so
up  to  the  day  of  his  death.  A  poorer
man  never  lived,  that  I  know  of,  in
Judea  and  Jerusalem,  than  Jesus
Christ.  Who  were  his  followers?
They  were  not  the  great,  rich,  learned,
noble,  High  Priests,  or  leading  men
of  Judea ;  many  of  them  were  illi-
terate fishermen,  poor  men,  weak
things  of  the  world;  they  were  the
class  i  hat  Jesus  chose  for  his  disciples,
ami  into  their  hands  he  gave  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  he
gave  them  the  Apostleship,  the  power
to  bind  and  to  seal  both  on  earth  and
in  heaven.  Their  deeds  aud  labors
reached  not  only  through  this  world,
but  they  reached  into  the  eternal
worlds,  and  will  affect  the  inhabitants
of  Judea  and  Jerusalem  from  that
day,  I  may  say,  into  eternity.  Those
disciples  of  Christ  received  the  Holy
Priesthood,  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and
the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
Jesus  held  them  responsible  to  the
day  of  their  death  for  the  course
they  pursued.  However  much  they
were  despised  by  the  world,  they  were
held  responsible  for  bearing  a  true
and  faithful  testimony  to  Jew  and
Gentile,  of  Jesus  Christ  being  the
true  Shepherd  and  the  Savior  of  the
world.

And  so  I  will  say  about  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  the  work  they  are
eugaged  in.  Ezekiel  says  that  in  the
last  days  the  stick  of  Joseph  in  the
hands  of  Ephraim  should  be  placed
with  the  stick  of  Judab,  before  the


INFIDELITY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD,  ETC.


18$


eyes  of  the  nations  in  the  hands  of
the  Lord,  for  a  special  purpose — to
gather  the  house  of  Israel  in  the  lat-
ter days.  These  two  records  were
also  to  be  made  use  of  in  order  to
preach  the  fullness  of  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile;  and
they  will  stand  in  judgment  against
the  generation  living  on  the  earth
when  they  come  forth  ;  and  from  the
day  that  Moroni  gave  that  record  into
the  hands  of  Joseph  Smith,  the  Lord
held  him  responsible  for  the  use
which  he  made  of  it;  and  when  he
gave  him  the  Priesthood  under  the
hands  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  the
Apostleship  under  the  hands  of  Peter,
James  and  John,  tlie  Lord  Almighty
held  him  responsible  unto  the  day
that  he  sealed  his  testimony  with  his
blood,  for  the  conrse  that  he  pursued
with  these  things.  And  he  bore  his
testimony,  left  it  on  record,  and  sealed
it  with  his  blood,  and  laid  down  his
life,  and  that  testimony  is  in  force  to-
day upon  all  the  world,  and  will  re-
main so  uxxto  the  end  of  time*  And
when  I  say  this  of  Joseph  Smith  I
say  it  of  every  other  man.  President
Young  has  led  this  Church  for  many
years,  and  the  Lord  has  held  him
responsible,  and  will  hold  him  so
unto  the  day  of  his  death,  for  the
course  pursued  by  him  while  con-
ducting the  aflairs  of  his  Church
and  kingdom,  and  a] so  for  the  use
he  makes  of  the  holy  Priesthood  and
the  keys  of  the  kingdom.  So  also
with  his  Counselors,  the  Twelve
Apostles,  and  every  one  of  us ;  we
shall  all  he  held  accountable  to  the
day  of  our  death,  and  we  shall  have
to  give  an  account  before  the  God  of
heaven  when  we  go  into  the  spirit
world  and  meet  him  there;  for  the
use  of  this  Priesthood,  and  the  keys
of  the  kingdom,  which  have  been
established  on  the  earth  for  the  last
time,  have  been  committed  into  the
hands  of  this  people,  and  God  will


hold  the  whole  of  us  responsible  for
the  use  we  make  of  the  blessings,
privileges  and  powers  which  we  enjoy
in  connection  therewith.  The  eyes
of  God  and  his  angels,  and  of  every
man  who  dwells  in  the  celestial  world
are  watching  us,  and  the  course  we
pursue*

We  are  gathered  together  here  as
a  people;  we  have  been  in  these
mountains  a  good  while,  and  for  a
good  many  years  we  have  been  or-
ganized as  a  Church  and  kingdom,
in  this  last  age,  in  this  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times;  and
now  the  question  with  me  is — Are
we  living  up  to  our  privileges  ?  Are
we  performing  the  work  icquired  at
our  hands  ?  Can  we,  as  a  people,
claim  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  the  blessings  of  the  celestial
law  and  of  the  celestial  kingdom
of  God  ?  Can  we  claim  these  things
at  the  hands  of  our  heavenly  Father
unless  we  keep  It  is  commandments  ?
This  is  a  question  that  we  want  to
take  home  to  ourselves-  If  we  aro
not  keeping  the  commands  of  the
Lord  can  we  claim  his  blessings  ?
We  can  not;  and  this  is  matter
for  reflection  for  the  Latter-day
Saints*

It  may  be  asked — What  are  the
commandments  of  the  Lord  ?  Many
of  them  are  contained  in  these  re-
cords, the  Bible,  Book  of  Mormon
and  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants ;  and  we  have  the  living  ora-
cles with  us,  and  have  had  from  the
commencement.  The  Ljrd  will  never
leave  his  kingdom  without  a  lawgiver,
leader,  president,  or  some  power  to
direct  the  affairs  of  his  Church  on
the  earth,  for  the  reason  that  it  is
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times,  in  which  God  has  set  up  a
kingdom  which  is  to  be  an  everlasting
kingdom,  and  to  whose  dominion
there  will  be  no  end;  that  kingdom
will  not  be  given  into  the  hands  of


190


JOURNAL  OF  DISC


any  other  people,  buf  it  will  be  given
to  the  Saints  of  ;  oe  Most  High,  and
they  will  possess  it  for  ever  and
ever.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  here
comes  a  question  in  my  mind,  this
morning,  which  I  think  we  ought
to  bring  home  to  ourselves,  and  that
is — Are  we,  as  a  people,  doing  our
daty  in  keeping  the  law  and  com-
mandments of  God,  and  the  cove-
nants which  we  have  made  ?  If  we
are  we  are  justified,  and  we  have  a
claim  upon  the  Holy  Spirit  and
upon  the  blessing  and  approbation
of  God.  Many  things  are  required
at  the  hands  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  there  is  not  one  of  us
who  has  a  lease  of  his  life.  The
Elders  of  this  Chnrch  are  passing
away,  and  almost  every  Conference
we  look  around  and  find  that  some-
body has  left  us ;  and  it  will  be  but
a  short  time  before  many  of  us  who
are  here  to-day  will  have  closed  our
labors  in  the  flush,  and  we  shall  have
passed  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail,
arid  it  is  important  to  us  all  that  we
should  do  what  is  required  of  us.
What  we  find  to  do  to-day  we  should
not  put  off  till  to-morrow.

The  question  may  ariso  in  some
minds — What  is  required  of  the
Latter  -  day  Saints  ?  I  will  Jell  you
some  things  that  are  required  of  us.
The  Lord  requires  us  to  pay  our
Tithing;  and  another  thing  is  that
we  go  to  and  build  the  Temple  in
this  city ;  whether  we  do  it  or  not
it  is  required  of  us,  and  if  we  fail,
we,  in  my  view,  shall  be  under  con-
demnation. I  consider  that  the
building  of  Temples  is  one  of  the
important  things  required  by  the
Lord  of  the  Latter-day  Saints -in
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times,  that  we  may  go  into  those
Temples  and  not  only  redeem  the
living  but  redeem  our  dead.  We
have  been  a  good  many  years  here


in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains,
and  we  have  not  yet  got  a  Temple
finished  to  the  name  of  the  Lord.
We  have  one  pretty  well  forward
in  St.  George,  and  I  am  very  glad
of  it;  bat  we  want  one  here.  We
have  got  the  foundation  laid ;  it
has  been  standing  a  good  many
years,  and  I  think  that  we  should
go  to  and  finish  it,  and  do  what  we
can  to  redeem  our  dead.  This  is
among  the  things  for  which  I  think
jwe  shai^  be  held  responsible.  Very
many  of  us  in  this  Church  and
kingdom  have  been  gathered,  as
the  Prophet  has  said,  one  of  a  family
and  two  of  a  city,  and  many  of  our
progenitors,  now  in  the  spirit  world,
never  saw  the  face  of  an  Apostle,
Prophet,  or  inspired  man,  and  they
are  shut  up  in  prison.  Joseph  Smith,
Hebfr  Kimball,  Geoege  A.  Smith,
and  thousands  of  the  Elders  of  Israel
may  preach  to  those  spirits,  and  they
may  receive  the  testimonies  which
the  Elders  bear;  but  the  Elders  will
not  baptise  believers  there  ;  there  is
no  baptism  in  the  spirit  world  any
more  than  there  is  any  marrying  and
giving  in  marriage.  All  these  things
have  to  be  done  this  side  of  the  vail,
in  the  flesh.  God  is  no  respecter  of
persons;  he  will  not  give  privileges
to  one  generation  and  withhold  them
from  another;  and  the  whole  human
family,  from  father  Adam  down  to
our  day,  have  got  to  have  the  privi-
lege, somewhere,  of  hearing  the  Gos-
pel of  Christ;  and  the  generations
that  have  passed  and  gone  without
hearing  that  Gospel  in  its  fullness,
power  and  glory,  will  never  be  held
responsible  by  God  for  not  obeying
it,  neither  will  he  bring  them  under
condemnation  for  rejecting  a  law
they  never  saw  or  understood  ;  and
if  they  live  up  to  the  light  they  had
they  are  justified  so  far,  and  they
have  to  be  preached  to  in  the  spirit
world. But nobody will  baptize


•
•


*
»


INFIDELITY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD  ETC*


191


them  there,  and  somebody  has  got
to  administer  for  them  by  proxy  here
in  the  flesh,  that  they  may  be  judged
according  to  men  in  the  flesh  and
have  part  in  the  first  resurrection.

This,  in  my  view,  is  the  work  that
is  required  at  the  hands  of  the  Lat-
ter -  day  Saints,  and  when  we  get
through  I  think  we  will  find  this  to
be  true.  And  if  there  is  anything
I  desire  to  live  for  on  the  earth,  or
that  I  have  desired,  it  has  been  to
get  a  record  of  the  genealogy  of  ray
fathers,  that  I  might  do  something
for  them  before  I  go  hence  into  -the
spirit  world.  Until  within  a  few
years  past  it  has  seemed  as  if  every
avenue  has  been  closed  to  obtaining
such  records ;  but  the  Lord  has  moved
upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  nation,
and  thousands  of  them  are  now  labor-
ing to  trace  the  genealogical  descent
of  the  Puritan  fathers,  those  who
landed  at  Plymouth  Bock,  and  whose
descendants  built  up  New  England.
Their  lineages  are  coming  to  light,
and  we  are  gradually  obtaining  ac-
cess to  them,  and  by  this  means  we
shall  be  enabled  to  do  something
towards  the  salvation  of  our  dead.

These  are  some  of  the  things  upon
my  mind  that  I  wished  to  speak  to
you  about.  And  now  let  me  ask —
Have  we  a  right  to  our  endowments
and  to  the  ordinances  and  blessings
of  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
unless  we  fulfill  the  law  of  God.  It
seems  to  me  many  times,  that  there
is  a  darkness  and  a  lack  of  faith  even
among  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
that  as  we  grow  older  we  grow  colder,
and  as  we  advance  towards  the  wind-
ing-up scene  it  seems  as  though  we
have  almost  lost  sight  of  our  calling,
of  the  object  of  our  being  gathered
together,  and  the  purposes  which
God  requires  at  our  hands*  There
is  a  good  deal  for  us  to  do  if  we
baild  up  Zion ;  and  if  we  do  that  and
sanctify  ourselves  before  the  Lord,


it  has  got  to  be  done  through  obedi-
ence to  the  commandments  of  the
Lord,  The  Lord  has  commanded
us,  and  we  have  got  to  obev  his
commandments  if  we  receive  the
blessings  of  obedience.  Our  num-
bers are  not  great,  and  compared
with  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  I  do  not  expect  that
the  number  of  the  Latter  -  day
Saints  will  ever  be  very  great  j  yet
the  Lord  has  promised  that  the
little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,
and  the  small  one  a  strong  nation  ;
agd  out  of  the  house  of  Israel  and
tuose  from  among  the  Gentiles  who
obey  the  Gospel,  God  will  raise  up  a
nation,  and  they  will  have  power
and  strength  in  the  earth.  But
when  we  compare  the  Saints  in  thii
or  any  other  age  with  the  surround-
ing world,  their  numbers  are  few.
I  do  not  know  why  it  is  that  so  few
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  take
any  interest  in  their  eternal  welfare.
The  whole  human  family,  heathen,
pagan,  Christian  and  Jew,  know  that
this  is  not  their  home,  and  that  all
have  got  to  die,  they  can  not  escape
the  law  of  death ;  even  if  translated,
as  some  were  anciently,  they  have  to
undergo  a  change  equivalent  to  death.
Then  why  is  it  there  is  so  little  in-
terest throughout  the  world  with
regard  to  a  future  state  and  to  eternal
matters  ?  The  few  who  show  they
have  an  interest  in  these  things,  and
who  have  gathered  together  to  these
valleys  of  the  mountains,  Gave#need
of  faith ;  we  stand  in  need  of  prayer,
we  stand  in  need  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Al-
mighty to  dictate  and  direct  us,  and
unless  we  possess  and  enjoy  these
things  we  become  barren  and  un-
fruitful before  the  Lord.

Now,  whatever  the  Lord  requires
at  our  hands,  he  does  not  require
anything  of  us  that  we  can  not  per-
form. (  We  can  obey  his  command-


102


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


merits  according  tn  the  position  that
we  occupy  and  the  means  that  we
have  in  our  possession.  There  is
no  man  or  woman  so  poor  bnt  what
he  or  she  can  obey  the  Gospel ;  they
can  go  forth  and  be  baptized  for  the
remission  of  their  sins,  and  if  they
keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord
he  will  put  into  their  hands  power
and  means  to  fulfill  that  which  is
required  of  them.

I  hope,  brethren  and  sister sy  that
while  we  are  together  at  this  Con-
ference,  we  shall  have  prayerful
hearts,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  may  be  poured  out  upon  us;
that  President  Young,  may  have
strength  of  body,  and  that  the  Spirit  !
of  God  may  rest  upon  him  to  such  \
an  extent  that  he  may  be  able  to
give  the  Latter-day  Saints  such  in-
struction as  he  may  desire ;  and  that
the  Apostles  and  Elders  who  may  be
called  upon  to  speak  may  be  made
the  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the
Lord  in  conveying  his  word  to  the
people,  and  that  we  may  be  united  to-

Somebody  or  other  has  got  to
builfl  up  Zion  ;  somebody  has  got  to
build  Temples,  and  to  go  into  them
nnd  attend  to  the  ordinances  therein.
The  Lord  has  said  fcliatf  he  will  come
and  visit  the  earth,  but  before  he.
does  come  the  people  have  got  to
be  pure.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  de-
clared that  He  will  come  and  reign
on  the  earth,  and  if  you  j-ead  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenant*
you  will  find  numerous  predictions
iu  ref&rd  to  his  coming,  such  as —
come  quickly,"  "I  come  at  an
hour  ye  thiok  not,"  **My  coming
is  at  the  door,"  "  I  come  as  a  thief
in  tke  night,"  M  I  come  in  an  hour
when  you  are  not  looking  for  me,"
and  "  Blessed  is  he  who  is  looking  for
the*  coming  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ."  I  say  that  through-
•  out  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures —


the  Old  and  New  Testament,  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  the  second
coming  of  the  Lord  is  frequently
referred  to;  and  has  the  Lord
promised  these  things  without  in*
tending  to  fulfill  them  ?  No,  he  has
not,  they  will  be  fulfilled.  But  be-
fore  Christ  comes,  a  people  have  got
to  be  prepared  by  being  sanctified
before  the  Lord.  Temples  have  got
to  be  built ;  Zion  has  got  to  be  built
up ;  there  must  be  a  place  of  safety
for  the  people  of  God  while  his  judg-
ment* are  abroad  in  the  earth,  for  the
judgments  of  God  will  visit  the  earth,
there  is  no  mistake  about  that,  the
revelations  are  full  of  promises  to  this
effect,  and  as  the  Lord  has  declared
it,  he  will  not  fail  in  keeping  his

word.  ^.  i*- :  - '  -4  - ;  Jflfc*1*"'^  •

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  search
the  revelations  of  God ;  let  us  look
to  ourselves,  and  understand  the
spirit  by  which  we  are  governed
and  controlled  in  our  labors  and  ♦
callings.  We  *are  called  to  a  great
calling.  The  greatest  calling  with
which  any  people  can  be  called  is
;  to  have  placed  in  their  hands  the
i  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  power  to
build  up  his  kingdom  upon  *the
earth*  The  Lord  has  chosen  .the
%reak  things  of  the  world  to  con*
found  the  world,  and  things  that  are
nought  to  bring  to  nought  things
I  that  are.  jHe  has  done  this  in
every  age  of  the  world,  ancf  he  has
done  it*  iu  our  day  and  genenftion ;
and  he  will  hold  us  responsible  for
the  use  we  make  of  the,  holy
Priesthood,  .the  ordinances  of  his
house  and  the  power  that  is  put  into
our  hands  to  accomplish  the  work  of
God,  and  to  build  Temples  to  his
name.  If  we  do  not  do  these  things  *
I  think  that  we  shall  be  under  con*
damnation  before  the  Lord,  and  that
we  shall  suffer  for  it.

I  pray  God,  my  heavenly  Father,,


how  god's  purposes  are  fulfilled,  etc.


193


that  he  will  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon
this  people,  that  we  may  see  and
comprehend  things  as  they  are,  that
we  may  comprehend  oar  duties  and
may  be  inspired  to  labor  while  the
day  lasts,  for  by  and  by  the  night
will  come  when  bo  man  can  work,
I  pray  God  that  wo  may  be  prepared


1  Tor  his  coming,  and  that  toe  may  have
power  and  a  disposition  to  perform
and  accomplish  all  that  is  required  of
us,  that  when  we  go  to  the  other  side
of  the  vail  we  may  be  satisfied  with
our  labors  here  in  the  flesh.

This  is  my  grayer  in  the  name  of
j  i/es  us. Amen.  j  .


DISCOURSE  BY  ELUliit  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  Fokty-sixtii  Anni  al  CoxniKENeK  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Lattk k  -  n  ay  Saints,  in  the  New Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Thursday  Afternoon,  April.  6,  187G.


(Exported  hy  David  W,  Emnc,)


now  nun's  pcrtosim  akl:  FUM'iLLKh— similarity  ok  ancient  and

MODERN CHUUCll GOVERNMKNT — INTKRVIRW Willi BARON  RUTHS-

child — object  ui  building  temples — the  perfect  organization

UF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST— WuRKS  1 N  DISPENSA  RLE  TO  .SALVATION.


When  we  meet  together  on  occa-
sion* like  tin*  present,  it  is  absolute-
ly necessary  that  we  place  ourselves
nuder  the  guidance  and  direction  of
tin1  -Almighty  ;  that  is,  a  thing  in-
deed, which  is  proper  at  all  times,
for  in  the  Lord  we  live  and  move —
from  him  we  derive  our  liein^--
and  to  him  we  are  indebted  for
every  blessing  that  we  enjoy  of  a
temporal  and  spiritual  nature,  for
everything  that  pertains  either  to
this  world  or  that  which  is  to  eome.
We  are  met  together  on  this  ocear
ftion  to  attend  to  the  duties  and  re-
sponsi  bill  ties  that  devolve  upon  us

mm  ■  i  i

JWBWiated  with the Church  and
No.  13.


kingdom'  of  (Jod  upon  the  earth;
and  it  is  very  imj>ortant  that  we
have  his  *pirii  to  direct  us  in  our
speaking  a*  well  as  in  our  hearing,
and  in  the  various  purposes,  plans
ami  calculations  that  may  be  started,
(or  tin*  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth,  for  we  re-
ally are,  or  ought  to  he,  co-laborers
with  the  Almighty  tor  the  accom-
plishment of  his  purposes  on  the
earth.  And  id  though  we  are  very
weak,  and  incompetent  to  do  any-
thing in  and  of  ourselves,  yet  wioii
the  assistance  and  gni dance  of  the
Almighty  we  shall  he  enabled,  hy
diligence  and faithfulness  in  digg

Vol  xvm.


194  JOURNAL  OK

charging  the  various  responsibilities
that  devolve  upon  us,  to  fill  up  the
measure  of  our  day  upon  the  earth
with  honor  before  God,  before  the
holy  angels  and  before  all  good  men,
and  to  lend  at  least  a  helping  hand
in  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  that  we  so  frequently
talk  at  10 ut,  and  to  introduce  those
principles  which  emanate  from  the
Mont  High.  In  this  regard,  how-
ever, we  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves,
neither  could  any  man  who  ever
lived  upon  the  earth  do  anything
in  and  of  himself.  There  is  a  great
suprem  e,  o  ve  r-ru  li  n  g  po  wer  that
shapes,  manages,  controls  and  die- '
tates  the  affairs  of  the  human  fain- 1
ily.  lie  raises  up  one  and  puts
down  another ;  he  regulates  and
controls  the  affairs  of  the  nations
at  his  will,  and  in  regard  to  the
purposes  that  he  has  designed,  per-
taining to  the  earth  whereon  we
live,  of  which  he  has  given  us  some
slight  idea,  he  will  have  to  be,  after
all,  the  principal  co-operator,  the
leading  hand,  the  power  that  guides,
directs  and  controls.  He  has  called
upon  us  to  be  his  assistants  in  the
work  that  he  has  commenced  in
these  last  days,  and  has  called  a
variety  of  laborers  into  his  vine-
yard,  whom  he  has  promised  to
sustain,  to  guide  and  to  direct,  and
heuce,  although  it  may  be  an  un-
speakable privilege  for  us  to  be  co-
laboiers  with  the  Almighty,  yet  it
is  only  through  the  spirit,  power
and  intelligence  that  he  communi-
cates, that  we  shall  be  able  to  do
anything  acceptable  in  the  sight  of
God,  and,  as  1  said  before,  no  man
living  without  this  assistance  is  ca
pable  of  doing  anything  acceptable
in  the  sight  of  God  When  we
look  at  the  works  of  God  in  the  va-
rious ages  that  have  passed,  and  in
the  various  dispensations  that  have
been  ushered  into  the  world,  we


DISCOURSES.

1  see  this  manifestly  pointed  out.
In  fact,  when  we  reflect  upon  the
work  that  we  art;  engaged  in,  to
whom  are  we  indebted  ?  To  any  of
us?  I  think  not  To  Joseph
l  Smith  ?  I  think  not  He  was  made
use  of  as  an  instrument  in  the
hands  of  the  Almighty  to  convey
certain  principles  that  God  revealed
to  him  ;  that  was  all,  and  when  he
came,  it  was  not  his  own  words  that
he  spoke,  it  was  the  revelation  of
God's  will  to  him,  and  it  is  that
which  we  are  in  possession  of
through  him,  as  an  instrument.  It
is  so  with  President  Young  and  his
council,  and  it  is  so  with  the  Twelve,
1  it  is  so  with  all  the  Bishops,  High
I  Councils,  High  Priests,  and  all  the
various  authorities  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth.  It  is  not  that  there  is  any-
thing inherent  in  us,  for  we  know
nothing  only  as  God  revealed  it,
we  know  nothing  only  as  it  was
communicated.  We  did  not  un-
derstand the  .first  principles  of  the
doctrine  of  Christ  even  ;  and  I  have
inner  met  with  anybody  on  the
face  of  the  earth  where  I  have
traveled  who  did  know  any  tiling
about  these  things.  We  are  in-
debted to  the  Lord,  therefore,  for
any  knowledge  that  we  have  of  the
true  doctrine  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Chiist  of  Latter-day  Saints,
and  for  all  the  ramifications  thereof.
We  are  indebted  to  him  for  a  know-
ledge of  the  Priest  hood,  whether  that
Priesthood  be  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chizedek,  which  is  after  the  order  of
the  Son  of  God ;  or  whether  it  be
the  lesser  or  Aaronic  Priesthood.  We
none  of  us  knew  anything  about  it,
and  nobody  ever  did,  until  God  com-
municated it.  And  the  same  thing
holds  good  all  the  way  through.
Go  back  to  the  history  of  the  world,
as  reported  in  the  Bible  and  Hook
of  Mormon,  and  you  will  find  that


HOW  GOD'S  PURPOSES  ARK  FULFILL  CD,  ETC.


195


every  great  movement  ever  made
among  men  that  had  God  to  sup-
port it,  originated  not  with  men,
but  that  God  himself  was  the  au-
thor of  it.  Even  Jesus  himself,
when  he  came,  said — "I  came  not
to  do  rny  will,  but  the  will  of  him
who  sent  me;"  and — "The  words
that  I  speak,  I  speak  not  of  myself,
but  the  Father  that  dwells  in  me.
He  doeth  the  works."  Therefore,
looking  at  things  in  this  point  of
view,  we,  above  all  people  w  io  dwell
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  ought
to  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God
in  all  tilings  ;  and  in  fact  we  have  a
revelation  directly  on  that  point,
which  says—"  that  with  none  is  the
Lord  angry  but  with  those  who  do
not  acknowledge  his  hand  in  all
things."

Wp  ire  here  for  a  certain  purpose  ;
the  world  was  organized  fur  a  cer-
tain purpose  ;  the  world  has  been
destroyed  for  a  certain  purpose,  and
judgments  have  overtaken  it  for  a
certain  purpose;  the  Gospel  has
been  introduced  for  a  certain  pur-
pose, in  the  different  ages  of  time,
and  among  the  different  peoples  to
whom  it  has  been  revealed  and
communicated,  and  we,  to-day,  are
in  subjection  to  the  general  rule*
The  Lord  has  led  usaloivr  as  he  once
led  Israel,  and  as  he  led  the  X ophites
from  the  land  of  Jerusalem*  and  the
ten  tribes,  and  other  peoples,  who
went  to  different  places.  He  has
led  lis  along,  and  the  first  thing  he
did  with  us,  or  to  the  world  whereon
we  liv**,  ur  with  whom  we  are  asso-
ciate I  was  to  send  his  Gospel,  hav-
ing revealed  it  first  to  Joseph  Smith,
and  he,  being  authorized  by  the
Almighty,  and  having  received  his
appointment  through  the  holy  Priest-
hood that  exists  in  the  heavens,  and
with  that  appointment,  authority  to
confer  it  upon  others,  did  confer  it
upon  others,  and  they  ill  turn  upon


others,  and  hence  the  Gospel  was
sent  to  us  in  the  various  nations
where  we  resided.  And  when  these
men  went  forth  to  proclaim  this
Gospel,  they  went,  as  Jesus  said,  not
to  do  their  l£  will,  but  the  will  of
the  Father  who  Kent  them,*'  and  to
co-operate  with  the  holy  Priesthood
here  upon  the  earth  in  introducing
correct  principles.  Hence  they  went
among  the  nations,  and  thousands,
and  tens  of  thousands,  and  millions
listened  to  their  testimonies  ;  but  as
it  was  in  former  days,  so  it  has  been
i  n  latter  days.  Says  Jesus — **  Strait
is  the  gate  and  narrow  the  way  that
leads  to  life,  and  few  there  be  that
find  it  s  while  wide  is  the  gate  and
broad  is  the  way  that  leads  to  de-
struction, and  many  there  be  that  go
in  thereat"  This  has  been  the  case
in  all  ages  and  among  all  peoples,
wherever  and  whenever  the  Gospel
has  been  preached  to  them.

Now  then,  the  Lord  has  been  de-
sirous, in  this  age,  as  he  has  in  other
ages,  to  gather  to  himself  a  people
who  won  hi  flo  h  is  will,  keep  his
commandments,  listen  to  his  counsel
and  carry  out  his  behests.  To  whom
eon  Id  lie  send?  To  the  wise  and
learned,  to  the  philosopher  and
statesman,  to  the  prince  and  poten-
tate? Verily  no.  The  Lord,  in
this  age  as  on  former  occasions,  semis
by  whom  he  will  send  ;  he  selects
his  own  messengers,  and  sends  them
among  the  people.  And  when  the
Elders  of  Israel  went  forth,  he  said
to  them  in  a  certain  revelation —
"  Go  forth,  and  mine  angels  shall  go
before  you,  and  my  Spirit  shall  ac-
company you."  And  they  went
forth,  and  God  was  true  to  his  word,
and  many  of  you,  at  that  time  in
distant  nations,  listened  to  the  words
of  life,  and  when  you  heard  themf
you  knew  and  understood  them,  just
as  Jesus  said — "My  sheep  hear  my
voice  and  know  me,  and  they  follow


196  •  JOURNAL  OF

trie,  bat  a  stranger  will  they  not
follow,  because  tliey  know  not  the
voice  of  a  stranger."  You  heard  the
voice  of  truth  accompanied  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  that  caused  a
chord  to  vibrate  within  your  own
bosoms,  and  yon  yielded  obedience
and  came  out  here,  as  we  find  you
to-day.

Now,  then,  we  are  gathered  toge-
ther to  help,  what  to  do  ?  To  look
after  our  own  individual  interest?
No.  To  accumulate  wealth  ?  No,
To  possess  and  wallow  in  the  good
things  of  this  life  ?  No  ;  but  to  do
the  will  of  God,  and  devote  our-
selves,  our  talents  and  abilities,  our
intelligence  and  influence,  in  every
possible  way  to  curry  out  the  designs
of  Jehovah,  and  help  to  establish
peace  and  righteousness  upon  the
earth.  This,  as  I  understand  it,  is
what  we  are  here  for,  and  not  to
attend  to  our  own  individual  affairs,
and  let  God  and  his  kingdom  do  as
they  please.  We  are  all  interested  in
the  great  latter-day  work  of  God,  and
we  all  ought  to  be  co-workers  therein.
It  is  proper  sometimes  that  we  should
reflect  a  little  upon  some  of  these
things,  and  fiud  out  what  is  our  true
status  and  position  before  the  Lord,
and  before  one  another,  before  the
angels,  and  before  the  world  that  we
are  mixed  up  with,  and  have  more  or
less  to  do  with.  We  want  sometimes
to  pause  and  reflect  a  little  upon
some  of  these  things.  Why  was  God
so  careful  to  preserve  the  plates  upon
which  this  record  was  found,  and
from  which  it  was  translated  ?  Why
was  he  so  desirous  that  the  old  Pro-
phets, who  lived  upon  this  continent
generations  ago,  should  sacredly
guard  and  keep  these  sacred  records?
lie  told  us  what  it  was  for,  and  the
Prophets  told  us  what  it  was  for,
and  Jesus,  when  he  was  here,  told  us
what  it  was  for — that  these  things
might  come  forth  in  the  last  days


DISCOURSES.

for  the  benefit  of  his  people,  and  for
the  benefit  of  all  who  should  believe
in,  and  obey  the  won!  of  (rod  among
the  Gentiles  ?  What  for  ?  That  we
might  have  a  corroborating  testimony
from  a  people  upon  this  continent,
who  had  their  Prophets,  which  should

I  agree  with  the  testimony  which  we
had  from  the  continent  of  Asia  ;  and
that,  through  the  instrumentality  of
that  truth  which  shall  be  developed,
a  nucleus  might  be  formed  through
which  God  could  communicate  hit
will,  and  accomplish  those  purposes
that  he  has  designed  to  accomplish
from  before  the  foundation  of  the
world.  From  the  commencement  of
the  organization  of  this  world,  God
designed  the  accomplishment  of  the
very  thing  I  hat  we  are  engaged  in

I  here  to-day.  We  live  in  what,  the
Scriptures  call  the  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times,  in  which  the
Lord  has  said  th.it  he  would  gather

i  together  all  things  in  one,  whether
they  he  things  on  the  earth  or  tilings
in  the  heavens;  in  this  dispensation
he  designed  to  call  together  his  sficep
that  were  on  the  face  of  the  earth,

1  just  as  much  as  he  did  in  the  days  of
Jesus.  How  was  it  then  ?  Said
Jesus — "Father,  I  pray  for  those
whom  thou  hast  given  me;  thine
they  were  and  thou  gavest  them  me.
I  pray  tor  them  that  they  may  be
one,  as  I>  Father,  am  in  thee  and
thou  in  me,  that  the  world  may  knov?
that  thou  hast  sent  me."  lie  has
done  t tie  same  thing  in  this  day*
He  has  gathered  together  his  sheep,
he  has  organized  his  holy  Pries- hood
in  its  fullness,  perhaps  as  perfectly
as  it  ever  was  organized  on  the  face
of  the  earth.  I  do  not  know,  fully,
the  position  of  things  in  Enoch's
day ;  there  may  have  been  many
things  transpired  on  this  continent
that  we  have  not  had  revealed  unto
us,  fur  we  have  not  all  their  records,
only  part  of  them  were  translated;


HOW  god's  purposes

some  of  the  things  contained  on  the
plates  were  unlawful  to  be  written
at  i  hat  time.  But  there  were  times
when  men  had  communion  with  God;
theie  were  times  when  God  revealed
himself  unto  his  servants  the  Pro-
phets; there  were  times  when  men
catite  with  a — "  Thus  saith  the  Lord"
to  the  people;  there  were  times  when
the  people  would  any — "All  that  the
Lor  1  has  bid  as  to  observe,  that  will
we  observe  and  do  ,'T  there  were  times
when  the  people  said — "The  Lord  is
our  king,  the  Lord  is  our  judge,  the
Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  and  he  shall
rule  over  us,"  God  is  seeking  to
have  a  people  like  that  in  the  present
day,  and  that,  through  the  Priest-
hood upon  the  earth,  we  shall  be
associated  with  thp  Priesthood  in  the
heavi  ns,  and  they  with  their  God.

There  are  no  people  now,  and  there
never  was  a  people,  who  could  ac-
complish anything  without  this,  and,
as  i  said  before,  without  the  guidance
and  direction  of  the  Almighty.  There
are  a  good  many  things  associated
with  these  matters,  and  some  of  them
are  very  plain  and  simple  ;  in  fact,
it  is  said  by  a  certain  individual  that
they  are  so  plain  that  a  **  wuyf uiug
man,  though  a  fool,  need  not  err
therein  and  it  was  said  in  former
days — 14  God  hath  not  chosen  the
wise  and  great  of  the  earth,  but  the
weak  and  foolish  things  of  this  world
to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that
are.11  Then,  he  has  restored  the  holy
Priesthood,  and  that,  as  I  understand
it,  is  the  rule  and  government  ot
God,  whether  on  the  earth  or  in  the
heavens,  the  principle  by  which  all
things  are  governed  in  the  heavens,
and  by  which,  when  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,  all  things
will  be  governed  here  on  the  earth.

These,  then,  as  I  understand  them,
are  things  of  very  great  importance
to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  for  it  is  to


them  that  I  am  speaking  this  after-
noon. We  have  an  organization  in
our  Church  as  they  had  in  former
times.  We  are  told  that  in  the  days
of  Jesus  on  the  Asiatic  continent,
"  God  placed  in  his  Church,  first
A  post  Its,  secondarily  Prophets,  after-
wards Pastors,  Teachers,  Evange-
lists,*'  etc. ;  and  we  are,  moreover,
told  that  these  were  placed  in  the
Church  "for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  tor  the  work  of  the  ministry,
for  the  edifying  of  the  body  ot  Christ,
until  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the
faith,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Son
of  God,  to  a  perfect  man,  to  the  full-
ness of  th  '  measure  of  the  stature  of
j  Christ,  that  we  may  no  longer  he
children,  tossed  to  and  fro  by  every
wind  of  doctrine,  but  that  we  may
grow  up  into  him  who  is  our  living
head  in  all  things,"  that  we  may  in-
deed be  like  him,  one  with  him  as
he  is  one  with  the  Fattier*

This  s  the  kind  of  principles  i  hat
they  had  then,  anil  this  the  kind  of
organisation.  What  have  we  ?  S  mie-
thing  very  similar.  We  have  At  03-
ties  and  a  First  Presidency;  What
are  the  members  of  the  First  Presi-
dency? Aposlles.  We  have  an
organization  of  the  Twelve,  as  ihey
had  then.  We  have  also  Sevenths,
in  all  of  which  we  have  even  m  write
than  they  had,  though  1  do  not  knu#
what  they  had  cm  this  continent,  that
is  not  made  manifest;  we  .shall  know
these  things  by  and  by,  as  the  pur-
poses of  God  roll  forth,  and  their
revelations  are  made  known  to  ns
pertaining  to  the-e  matters*  We
have  our  Bishops,  we  have  our  Hi^h
Councils,  we  have  our  Seventies,  we
have  our  Elders,  Priests,  Teachers,
and  Dea  ons,  all  of  which,  <  r  the
pattern  for  which,  have  been  given
by  the  Almighty,  by  the  revelation
of  his  will  to  Joseph  Smith  ;  and  if
we  have  any  knowledge  thai  « tillers
from  the  rest  of  mankind  in  relation


198


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


to  tlese  matters,  it  is  through  the
revelations  of  God,  and  we  say  to
God  be  the  glory  and  not  to  as*
They  went  forth  in  former  times  and
preached  the  Gospel  without  purge
and  scrip.  We  have  done  the  same,
I  can  see  around  me  scores  and  hun-
dreds of  men  who  have  been  abroad
to  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  preach
the  Gospel  wii  hout  purse  and  scrip,
trusting  in  the  living  God,  holding;
the  same  Priesthood  and  authority;
in  possession  of  the  same  t  rut  lis,  lit
up,  encouraged,  and  sustained  by  t lie*
same  Spirit,  the  same  light,  and  the
same  intelligence  that  they  had.

These  are  some  of  the  distinctive
features  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-dny  Saints.-  Then
we  have  gathered  ourselves  together.
Well,  the  Prophets  saw  it  years
and  years  ago,  and  prophesied  about
it,  bur  it  was  left  for  us  to  do,  Tue
Prophet  says — u  I  will  take  one  of  a
city  and  two  of  a  family  and  I  will
bring  them  to  Zion."  What  will  you
do  with  them  ?  "I  will  give  them
pastors  after  my  own  heart,  who
shall  feed  the  in  with  knowledge
and  understanding/'  I  will  introduce
the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God
Among  them;  I  will  give  them  the
light,  revelation  and  power  of  God
to  be  with  them,  and  I  will  stand  by
them  and  sustain  them.  He  has
revealed  to  us,  as  he  did  to  others,  J
the  nature  of  the  relationship  that
subsists  between  men  arid  their  wives;
he  has  shown  us  that  there  are  eter-
nal associations  and  connections,  and
h  is  shown  us  how  to  accomplish  these
objects,  and  to  secure  to  ourselves,
our  wives  and  our  children,  inasmuch
as  thev  observe  the  revelations  of  God
and  carry  out  his  purposes.  These
are  some  of  the  principles  that  he
has  made  known  unto  rs,  and  he  has
given  us  commandments  relative  to
these  tilings,  and  in  relation  to
building  Temples  to  his  name  and


administering  therein,  so  as  to  be
acceptable  to  him.  He  has  pointed
out  to  us  certain  principles  pertain-
ing to  the  everlasting  covenants  with
us,  with  our  fathers  and  with  our
children,  ami  has  shown  us  how  to
perform  the  various  duties  devolving
upon  us,  according  to  the  counsel  of
his  will,  which  he  has  revealed
through  the  holy  Priesthood  that  he
has  here  upon  the  earth.  These  are
things  with  which  we  ate  most  of  us
familiar,  and  therefore  I  do  not  pro-
pose to  quote  Scripture  about  them
particularly,  but  just  lay  them  briefly
before  your  minds,  that  you  may  re-
flect upon  them.

Before  we  came  into  this  <  "hnrch
and  kingdom,  we  had  certain  con-
fused ideas  about  a  future  state  ;  but
what  did  we  know  about  it  r  Very
little,  very  little  indeed.  We  hoped
we  should  get  to  heaven  when  we
died;  we  hoped  that,  if  we  were
irood,  honest,  upright  and  virtuous,
God  would  accept  us,  which  was  all
very  good  so  far  as  it  went.  But
what  knowledge  had  we  of  the  fu-
ture ?  None  at  all.  What  know-
ledge has  the  world  to-day  nhoot
these  things  ?  None  at  all.  What
knowledge  have  they  of  us  and  of
our  communications  with  God?
None  at  all.  The  world  never  saw
the  kingdom  of  God,  they  never  can
see  it,  it  is  out  of  their  reach,  Jesus
said  in  his  day — "  Except  a  man  is
born  again  he  cannot  see  the  king-
dom  of  God,"  much  less  inherit  it
They  cannot  help  that ;  we  could
not  help  it  when  we  were  in  their
condition  ;  generations  past  coulii  not
help  it  V  What  could  they  do  about
it  ?  Nothing.  What  could  any  of
the  great  reformers,  as  they  are
called,  do  about  these  things  ¥  Kim-
ply  nothing.  Did  any  of  them  ever
introduce  the  Gospel  a^  Jesus  taught
it  ?  Not  one  among  them ;  with
all  their  virtue,  zeal  and  philanthropy,


HOW  GOirS  PURrOSKS  ARE  fulfilled,  etc.


199


with  all  their  desires  to  do  good,  they
could  not  accomplish  these  things.
Were  they  all  wicked  men  ?  By
no  mentis  There  were  ninny  good
men  among  frhpm,  and  so  there  are
to-day  ;  hut  these  good  men  cannot
see  the  kingdom  of  God,  unless  by
the  Spiris  ot  God,  and  we  are  told
definitely  that  "  do  man  knows  the
things  of  God  but  by  the  Spirit  ol
God"  And  how  do  they  get  it  ?
We  have  been  taught,  by  believing  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  repenting
of  our  hi  us,  by  being  baptized,  by
those  possessing  the  authority,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  re  mis-
eion  of  our  sins,  and  by  having  hands
laid  upon  us  by  the  s;:n>e  authority
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Uho*t.
Then  it  is  that  the  Spirit  takes  of
the  things  of  God  and  shows  them
tiuto  us;  then  it  is  that  wv  are  brought
into  communion  with  our  heavenly
Father;  then  it  is  that  we  have  a
hope  that  enters  within  the  vail,
whither  Christ  our  forerunner  is  gone;
then  it  is  that  we  have  an  unction
from  the  Holy  One,  as  they  had  in
former  times,  that  will  teach  us  the
principles  oF  light,  anil  life,  and  intel-
ligence, pertaining  to  our  present  and
future  existence;  then  it  is  that  the
darkness  with  which  tire  world  is
beclouded  is  removed,  and  the  light
of  heaven  id  permitted  to  permeate
our  minds,  and  impart  light  and  in-
telligence thereunto;  then  it  is  that
wo  are  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  dots
Dot  yet  appear  what  we  shall  In*,  says
the  snored  writer;  "but  when  he
who  is  our  life  shall  appear,  then
shall  we  appear  like  unto  him  in
glory;"  it  is  through  this  princi-
ple, and  this  life,  light  and  intelli-
gence, and  that  through  obedience  to
the  commands  of  God.

In  looking  still  forward  we  find
that  there  are  other  things  ahead  of
us,  Que  thing  is  the  building  of
Temples,  and  that  is  a  very  important


item,  and  ought  to  rest  with  fotee
upon  the  minds  of  all  good  Saints.
I  remember,  some  time  aim,  having;
a  eon versation  with  Baron  Rothschild,
a  Jew.  I  was  showing  him  the  Tem-
ple  here,  and  said  he — 14  Elder  Tay.
lor,  what  do  you  mean  by  I  his  Tem-
ple r  What  is  the  object  of  it  ?
Why  ate  you  building  it  r"  Said  I,
"  Your  fathers  had  among  them  Pro-
phots,  who  revealed  to  thera  the  mind
and  will  of  God  ;  we  have  among  us
Prophets  who  reveal  to  us  the  mind
and  wdl  of  God,  as  they  did.  One
of  your  Prophets  said  —  "The
Lord  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly
come  to  his  Temple,  but  who  may
abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ?  For
he  shall  s't  as  a  refiner's  tire  and  a
purifier  of  silver."  "  Now;'  said  I,
"  Sir,  will  yon  point  me  out  a  placo
on  the  face  of  the  earth  where  God
lias  a  Temple  ?"  Said  be,  "  I  do  not
know  of  any."  "You  remember  the
words  of  your  Prophet  that  I  have
quoted?"  Said  he — "Yes,  1  know
the  Prophet  said  that,  bat  I  do  not
know  of  any  Temple  any  where.  Do
you  consider  that  litis  is  that  Tem-
ple u  No,  sir,  it  is  not."  -  Well,
what  is  this  Temple  for  Said  I,
"The  Lord  has  told  us  to  hu:k!  this
Temple  so  that  we  may  administer
therein  baptisms  for  our  dead  (which
I  explained  to  him,)  and  aUo  t<»  per-
form some  of  the  sacred  matrimonial
alliances  and  covenants  that  we  he*
lieve  in,  that  are  rejected  by  the  world
generally,  but  winch  are  among  the
purest,  must  exalting  and  ennobling
principles  that  (iod  ever  revelled  to
man."  "Well,  then,  this  is  not  our
Temple  ?"  "  No,  but,"  said  I,  "  You
will  build  n  Temple,  for  tne  Lord  has
shoivn  us,  among  other  things,  that,
yon  Jews  have  quite  a  role  to  p-rfnrm
in  the  latter  days,  and  that  all  the
things  spoken  by  your  oi  l  pmphets
will  be  fulfilled,  that  yon  will  Ikj
gathered  to  old  Jerusalem,  and  that


m

JOl-KNAL  UK  DISCOURSES,


you  will  build  a  Temple  there;  and
when  you  build  that,  Temple,  and  the
time  Iihs  arrived,  *  the  Lord  whom
you  seek  will  suddenly  come  tu  his
Temple/  Do  you  believe  in  the
Messiah  ?M  14  Yes ?  aB>you  re-
member  reading  in  your  old  prophets
sonething  like*  tins — 'Thy  s  1 1  ;i  1 1
look  upon  him  whom  they  have
pietce^,  and  mourn,  and  be  in  bitter-
ness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitter-
ness !or  his  firstborn.  Ami  one  shall
gay,  What  are  these  wounds  in  thine
bauds  and  in  thy  side  ?  And  he  will
say — These  with  which  I  was  wound-
ed in  the  house  of  rnv  friends  Y  "
"Ah  !  Is  that  in  our  Bible?"  44  Y«  s,
sir,  that  is  in  your  Bibh\"  I  spnke
to  him  then  about  the  Nephi'es  hav
ing  left  Jerusalem  and  told  him  that
the  Book  ut  Alurmon  represents
them  as  descendants  of  their  people,
and  tint  Jesus  came  among  therot
and  i hat  they,  because  of  their  ini-
quity and  departure  from  the  word
ami  law  of  God,  were  stricken  with
blackness.  Said  he  —  *'  What,  as
C  iin  was  *'  Yes,  sir,  as  Cain  was/'
Said  I — *'  The&e  people,  the  Lintait-

ites,  according  to  this  record,"  a
French  copy  of  which  [  gave  him,
be  being  a  Frenchman  ;  "this  people
are  beginning  to  feel  sifter  these
things,  and  they  rue  coming  by  hun-
dreds and  bv  thousands  and  demand-
in^  baptism  at  our  hands,  just  as  you
Bud  recorded  in  that  book  tint  thev

*

would  do,  and  that  is  given  there  as
a  sign  that  tiod's  work  hid  com-
menced a  •nontf  all  nations.  S-iid
he — *■  What  evidence  have  you  of
this  F"  This  conversation  took  place
in  the  Townscud  House,  and  when
the  Baron  asked  me  for  evidence,
said  I — M  Sir,  if  you  wdl  excuse  me
a  few  minutes  [  wi'l  give  you  some
evidence  and  1  went  to  Savage's
book  stand,  in  the  Townseud  House,
and  obtained  a  photographic  copy  of
J)  avid Cannon baptizing  Indians,


standing  in  the  midst  of  a  great
crowd  of  them.  Said  I — "  Here  is
the  evidence/'  *'  Well,  what  shall
we  do  ?" Said I — tfc  You  can  do

wot  him;  unless  God  directs  Yon  us
n  people  are  tied  hau  l  and  foot,  and
have  been  for  generations,  and  you
cat/t  move  a  pes*  unless  God  strikes
off  voiir  tetters.  When  he  says  the
word  the  tilings  spoken  of  by  the
Piophets  will  be  fulfilled  ;  then  the
measuring  line  will  go  forth  again  in
Jerusalem,  then  your  Messiah  will
come,  and  alt  those  things  spoken  of
by  the  Prophets  will  be  fulfilled/'

I  mention*  d  these  matters  to  Baron
Rothschild  merely  to  exhibit  some
ideas  pertaining  fti  the  wurk  in  which
we  are  engaged  :  and  in  speaking  of
the  Tempi** — 41  Well,  this  is  not  the

Temple?*  "No,  not  that  you  are
going  to  build,  this  is  ours,  and  we
expect  to  build  hundreds  of  them  yet,
and  to  administer  in  I  hem  inen  rying
out  i he  work  of  God."  I  Speak  of
this,  that  you  may  n  tlect  a  little,  you
L 'tier-day  Saints,  Has  God  organ-
ized a  FirM  Presidency  ?  Yes.  Has
lie  endowed  them  with  the  Spirit  and
power  of  God  ?  Yes,  Has  he  or-
ganized the  Twelve:  Yes,  Have
they  the  spirit  of  their Hi  *e  ?  Yes,


in
ties
offi


p.irfc. He  1


o  J


i  s


*ven-


;  have  they  the  spirit  "of  their
ne  ?  In  part.  He  has  organized
a  High  Priests'  quorum  ;  have  they
the  spirit  of  their  office  ?  In  part,
and  many  of  these  things  are  onlv
in  pftrt.  He  has  organized  an  Elders'
quoinm,  anil  a  threat  many  Elders
have  been  ordained;  liave  they  the
spirit  of  their  office  *i  In  part.  Are
they  magnifying  it  r  Gnl\  jij  part.
Wliv  we  have  got  redly  and  truly  a
nrtfion  ot  Kings  and  Priests,  ftrdaiued,
set  apart  and  autle  riz  d  to  carry  out
the  purposes  of  God  here  upon  the
earth,  to  operate  with  the  Priesthood
behind  the  vail  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  these  tilings. What  are  we


HOW  god's  purposes  ark  fulfilled,  etc.


201


doing  ?  A  little,  but  many  of  us,
I  am  afraid,  not  very  much.  A  great
many  are  doing  the  best  they  know
how,  and  are  desirous,  with  their
whole  feonl  and  spirit,  with  their  in-
tel  it  ct  and  their  substance  and  every-
thine  they  have,  to  dedicate  them-
selves and  all  they  have  for  God  and
for  his  cause  and  kingdom,  and  for
budding  up  Temples,  and  for  accom-
plishing everything  that  God  requires
at  their  hands.  Then  there  are  some
that  feel  like  the  boy  said  about  his
father,  A  Gentile  came  along  and
spoke  to  a  little  boy  down  street  hero,
and  said — u  Boy,  are  yuu  a  Mormon  ?"
"  i  don't  know,"  said  the  boy.  *  Is
yo  i  father  a  Mormon  r"  "  Uh,  yes,"
said  the  boy,  ubufc  lie  does  not  potter
xnurh  about  it."  There  are  a  good
many  who  feel  a  good  deal  like  that
- — they  don't  potter  much  about  it.
When  their  minds  are  lit  up  by  the
Spirit  of  .  God  they  feel  like  de  jicat-
iiilT  themselves  and  nit  they  have  to
G<»d,  yet,  by  and  by  they  begin  to
weaken  and  falter,  and  quiver,  and
go  away.

Sometime  ago  i  great  many  of  us
renewed  our  covenants  and  were  bap-
tized in  the  na ne  of  Jesus  for  the
remission  of  our  sins,  a! id  we  then
covenanted  before  God,  holy  angels,
and  one  another,  that  we  would  con-
secrate ourselves  and  all  that  we  had
to  God,  t hat  we  would  follow  his
counsel  and  the  counsel  of  his  holy
Priesthood  in  all  things,  temporal
and  spiritual  Now  let  us  talk  a
little  plain  on  some  of  these" things.
Is  not  that  so  ?  Did  you  not  do
these  tilings  ?  You  did.  Well,  what
does  it  mean,  or  what  does  baptism
mean,  or  what  do  any  of  these  things
mean — the  ordinances,  the  Priest-
hood,  the  gathering,  Temples,  endow-
ments and  the  light,  intelligence  and
privileges  that  we  have  received  from
the  hands  ot  God  ?  What  do  they
mean  ? Are  they  a  sacred  reality


that have emanated from God  ?
Are  they  things  in  which  our  present,
future  and  eternal  happiness  is  eon*
cerned,  or  are  they  a  mere  phantasm  ?
It  seems  they  are  very  little  more  to
many,  although,  perhaps,  they  appre-
ciate them  according  to  the  best  of
their  understanding,  light  and  intelli-
gence; snll  they  say  they  aredesirous
of keeping God's  commandments.
I  Let  me  repeat  here  a  passage  of  Scrip-
ture. u  It  is  not  every  one  that  saith
Lord,  Lord,  that  shall  enter  into  my
kingdom,  but  it  is  he  who  does  the
|  will  of  my  Pal  her  who  is  in  heaven,"
I  think  that  is  the  Scripture,  if  I  am
not  very  much mistaken ; I  think
v>u  will  find  it  written  there,  and  I
think  that  Scripture  is  jnst  as  true
to-day  as  it  was  eighteen  hundred
years  ago,  just  as  binding,  and  we
shall  find  the  results  of  it  just  as  true,
and  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  are
revealed,  when  the  judgment  is  set
and the  books are opened,  these
things  will  he  known  and  understood.
How  will  it  be  then  with  Latter-day
Saints  ? Why  those  who  are  doing
,  right  and  ore  full  of  integrity,  and
!  have  kept  their  covenants,  observed
the  law  of  God  and  walked  in  obedi-
ence to  his  commands  will  hear  Jesus
say — "  Thou  hast  been  faithful
a  few  things  and  I  will  make  thee
ruler  over  many  things/' And  then
there are some  others  mentioned.
Who  are  they,  and  what  are  they?
**  Why,  many  will  come  to  me  and
say,  *Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied
in  thy  name  ? Have  we  not  cast  out
devils  in  rhy  name,  and  in  thy  name
done  many  wonderful  woiks  r*  When
he  will  say  to  them— 4  Depart  from
mc,  for  L  never  knew  you,'  **

How  will  that  fit  on  some  of  us  do
you  think  r*  That  belongs  a  little
closer  to  some  of  us  than  we  imagine;
for  I  do  not  think  that  Gentiles  do
much  at  prophesying  in  the  name  i  f
God;  1  do  not  think  they  cast  out


202


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE'S


many  devils  in  the  name  of  God,  or
do  any  wonderful  works  in  his:  mm  p.
Jesus  was  speaking  to  a  people  that
had  done  these  things,  the  same,  per-
haps, as  some  of  yon  have,  and  yet
you  have  become  careless  and  indif-
ferent, and  in  many  instances  have
made  shipwreck  of  a  good  conscience  ,
and  failed  to  keep  the  covenants  you
have  made.

These  are  things  for  us  to  reflect
opon,  and  it  is  well  for  us  all  to  reflect
upon  the  position  that  we  occupy.
How  is  it  with  us?  Are  we  all  en-
gaged in  the  same  work  ?  Not  pre-
cisrly.  Paul  gave  a  very  beautiful
description  of  the  church  of  God  in
his  day.  Said  he — l;  The  body  is  not
one  member,  but  many  ;  and  the  eye
cannot  say  to  t tie  ear,  I  have  no  need
of  thee,  nor  the  head  to  the  feel,  I
have  no  need  of  thee."  They  were
all  engaged  in  the  same  work.  It
was  not  a  work  that  rested  simply
upon  the  Apostles,  or  .Prophet*,  or
Evangelists,  or  some  of  the  leading,
prominent  men  of  the  Church;  it
was  the  work  of  God,  in  which  they  1
Were  all  engaged.  The  body  is  not
one  member,  but  many,  and  if  one
of  the  members  suffer  they  nil  suffer
with  it;  if  one  member  rejoice  a]]  are
honored  with  it*  The  body  is  not  all
head  j  it  would  be  a  curious  kind  of
a  body  without  arms,  stomach,  lees,
feet>  <fcc.  ;  it  would  be  no  body  at  all,
it  could  not  exist  or  act  You  cut
off  any  member  of  the  body,  say  an
arm,  and  the  body  is  maimed ;  pluck
out  an  eye  and  the  body  is  maimed,  !
Pluck  out  both  eyes  and  you  could
not  see.  You  may  have  ever  so  per-
fect a  body  and  take  away  the  legs
and  the  feet,  and  what  then  ?  You
can  do  nothing,  you  cau't  walk,  yuu
have  got  to  be  lifted  by  somebody
else  and  carried  about,  a  helpless,
inanimate  being,  without  motion,
power  and  activity.  So  it  is  with  the
body,  and  if  one  member  suffer  all


the  members  suffer  with  it  The  head
may  be  very  perfect,  but  if  the  arm
is  withered  or  any  part  of  the  body
injured  thd  powera  of  the  body  are
impaired,  and  if  can  not  fully  answer
the  ends  of  its  organization.  Hence
it  is  that  in  the  organization  of  the
;  Church  of  Christ  every  member
should  act  in  its  own  place — the
Presidency  in  theirs,  the  Twelve  in
theirs,  th©  Bishops  in  theirs,  the
Seven  ries  in  theirs,  the  High  Priests
in  theirs,  and  the  Elders,  Priests,
Teachers  and  Deacons  who  are  living
their  religion  in  theirs.  A  Teacher
who  ke^ps  the  commandments  of  God
and  fulfills  his  duties  is  more  honor-
able than  the  Apostle  who  does  not.
You  hurt  any  part  of  the  body,  for
instance,  cut  your  finger,  and  the
;  entire  l>ody  feels  it  immediately.
Touch  the  head  and  every  part  of  the
body  senses  it.  And  so  it  is  with
every  particle  of  the  body — it  is  a
perfect  system  ;  and  so  is  the  Church
of  God,  and  each  of  the  organs,
members  in  particular,  thus  the  or-
ganized body  walks  in  the  path  that
God  marks  out,  and  seeks  to  accom-
plish all  things  that  he  designs  for
us  to  do,  Heuce  there  is  a  mutual
sympathy,  affection  and  regard,  and
a  brotherhood  and  fellowship  among
the  Saints  of  God  who  are  living
their  religion,  all  through  the  organ*
izatiou  of  the  Priesthood,  from  the
head  to  the  foot,

I  And  then  we  are  united  with  the
Priesthood  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and
the  Priesthood  that  we  have  is  of
the  same  nature  as  that  which  they
have.  They  administer  in  time  and
for  all  eternity  ;  we  are  administering
now  in  time,  and  soon  shall  be  in
eternity,  all  of  us.  The  Twelve  who
are  around  me,  and  the  First  Presi-
dency, and  others  will  be,  by  and  by,
beyond  the  vail  in  another  state  of
existence*  And  what  then  ?  Why
then  we  go  to  give  an  account  of  our


UNBELIEF  OF  THE  PRESENT  AGE,  ETC


203


stewardship,  and  it  will  be  well  for
all  of  us  if  we  can  say  with  Paul —
*'  I  have  fought  the  good  fight  of  faith,
I  hfive  finished  my  course,  and  hence-
forth there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown,
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,
shall  give  to  me  at  that  day,  and  not
to  me  only,  but  to  all  who  love  the
appearing  of  our  Lord  and  Savior


Jesus  Christ/1

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful,
live  our  religion  and  keep  his  com-
mandments, that  we  may,  by  and  by,
obtain  an  inheritance  that  is  incor-
ruptible, undefiled  and,  that  fadeth
not  away,  reset  ved  in  heaven  fur  ua,
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Delivered  at  the  Forty  Sixth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  Nkw  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake

City,  Thursday  Morning,  April  G,  1876,


(Repotted  hij  David  W.  Evans.)

UNBELIEF  01-  THE PRESENT AGE— THE SAINTS CALLED  TO BUILD  UP

god's  kingdom— their  duties  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES.


I  am  gratified  with  another  oppor-
tunity of  meeting  in  the  capacity
of  r  General  Conference.  We  have
listened  to  a  very  stirring  discourse
here  this  morning  in  regard  to  the
great  work  in  which  we  are  all  en-
gaged, or  at  least  the  Latter-day
Saints  should  be  all  engaged  in  it;
for  they  ought  to  feel  interested  in  the
work  they  have  espoused,  as  it  is
designed  to  bring  about  the  accom-
plishment of  the  purposes  of  the
Lord  upon  the  earth.  In  the  day  and
age  in  which  we  live,  the  Lord  lias
given  to  his  children  here  below  the
great  privilege  of  being  co-workers
with  him  in  establishing  his  kingdom,
and  the  reign  o*  truth,  peace  and
righteousness  upon  the  earth.


Is  there  any  necessity  for  the  Lord
to  commence  such  a  work  ?  If  we
are  to  believe  our  surrounding*,  and
what  we  see,  hear  and  learn  every
day,  there  is  great  necessity,  for  there
can  be  little  doubt  in  the  minds  of
any  reflecting  person  that  we  live  in
a  very  wicked,  unbelieving,  and  per*
verae  generation.  I  do  not  think
this  proposition  would  be  denied  by
any  one,  it  is  so  manifest  to  everybody
that  they  cannot  deny  it.  Well,  the
time  has  come  when  it  seems  as  if
the  cup  of  their  iniquity  is  about
filled,  and  when  the  Lord  thinks  it  is
enough,  and  he  has  seen  fit  to  com-
mence his  great  latter-day  work  with
a  proclamation  of  the  everhisting
Gospel  among  the  children  of  men,


JOUttNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


with  a  view  of  reclaiming  them  from
the  path  of  perdition,  and  of  saving
all  who  will  yield  obedience  to  his  '
requirements.  ,  I
The  earth  is  now  filled  with  vio-
lence and  evil  as  it  was  in  the  days
be  I » -  re  the  Hood,  ar.d the  Lad  lias
an  id  that  :ih  it  was  in  the  days  of
Noah  so  fhall  it  be  in  I  he  days  of
the  Coming  of  the  Son ot  Alan
How  was  it  in  the  days  before  the

flood  ? Why,  the  wicked  had  filled

the  c»p  ot  their  iniquity,  and  they
were destroyed,  only a  few  —  t he
righteous — being  saved, Well,  it  it
is  to  be  in  the  days  of  the  coming
of  the  Son  of  Man  as  it  was  in  the
days  of  Nodi,  why  the  wicked  will
again  be  destroyed,  and  the  righteous  |
saved. This  is  a  preparatory  work,
and  if  the  peoile  r«ject  the  Gospel
that the Lord has nvealed  from
he  i ven,  t  hey  may  expect  to  be  over-
taki 'ii,  sooner  or  later,  by  his  judg-
ments. They are already  being
poured  out  upon  the  earth. We  see
and  hear  of  them  occasioned  I  v,  but
the  world  is  tilled whh  unbelief.
Uribeli  f  in  God  is  the  crying  sin  of
thi*  generation. They  do  not  believe
in  the  things  of  God,  nor  in  the  prin-
ciples winch  lie  has  enunciated,  and
which  he  is  endeavoring  to  establish
through  the  instrumentality  of  those
among  his  children  who  have  rendered
obedience  to  his  Gospel,  and  who  live
in  accordance  with the  principles
thereof  upon  the  ear t Ik We  have
the  privilege  of  promulgating  the
work  ot  God,  and  of  establishing  his
kingdom  here  among  the  children
of  men  ;  nnd  we  may  have  the  privi-
lege of  building  Tern  [ilea  to  hi&  high
and  holy  ruirne,  wherein  we  may  re-
ceive the  blessings  of  time  and  eter-
nity, nn<f  administer  the  ordinances
Ol solvation  for  the  living  and  the
dead.  I-  r

Ir  does  not  seem  necessary,  and
it  should  nut  be,  to  enter  inio  any


argument  to  prove  these  things  to
tin  LiM-rdiv  Sous;  they  are  al-
ready patent  to  them,  and  in  this
regard  they  know  and  understand
their  duty.  Well  then,  what  is
there  for  us  to  do  ?  Why,  to  take
hold  with  renewed  energy  and  zed;
not  to  falter  but  to  go  ahead,  with
what  interest  we  can  command,  with
all  the  ability  we  have  been  endowed
with,  and  with  the  means  that  the
Lord  ban  bestowed  upon  us,  in  accom-
plishing ids  purposes,  and  in  build-
ing Temples  to  his  holy  name.  It  is
for  our  own  benefit;  it  is  for  the
benefit  of  the  kingdom,  and  for  the
growth  and  spread  thereof.

How  can  we  do  more  than  we  have
dime  ? One way  by paying  our
Tithing. Can  we  go  to  and  assist
in  building  this  Temple,  the  foun-
dations of  which  have  been  laid  so
long  ? I  auswer  that  we  can.  The
next question is — Will" we  do  it  ?
That  I  do  not  know  ;  each  one  will
answer  this  question  for  himself  by
his  acts, if  we  respond  to  this  call
it  will ti  quire  labor, means,  and
Some  attention. For  one  I  will  say
that  f  am  willing  to  take  hold  with
i  my  might,  arid  do  what  I  can  to-
wan  Is  it. I  eat j  do  something,  can
\<sfe? Yes, each and  every  one
rati  do  s  inn-thing,  and  if  the  Litter-
da)  Saints  will be  united in  this
tiling  we  shall  see  the  construction
of  tins  Temple  go  on  rapidly.  We
are  abundantly  able  to  do  it — we
have phnty of  mechanics  and  la-
borers, and  abundance  of  the  means
in  cessarv  to  sustain  them. The  de-
tails  will  be  furnished,  and  the  re-
quirement will be  made. Will  it
t»e  responded  to,  that  is  the  ques-
tion V I  think  it  will;  I  have  faith
to believe that the  Latter-day
Saints  will respond with  alacrity
in  putting  the  wurk  through. I  be-
lieve that  it  is  in  the  hearts  of  the
people,  and  that  they  will  rejoice  in


I


UNBELIEF  OF  THE

ft  -  #


PRESENT  ACE,  ETC


205


it  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  There
may  be  some  lukewarm  in  this  work,
as  in  every  other  j  but  I  ara  satisfied
that,  the  great  mnjority  will  lay  hold
with  a  great  deal  of  energy,  and  will
persevere  in  it,  and  will  rejoice  in
doing  sx  This  is  my  faith,  and  1
am  willing  to  prove  itt  so  far  as  I  am
concerned,  by  my  viorks.  i
I  du  not  consider  it  necessary  to
dwelt  upon  the  importance  of  these
things.  A  great  many  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  have  had  many  bless-
ing* bestowed  upon  them  in  the  house
of  Uorf,  very  great  blessings  indeed.
Shall  we  slacken  our  band  because  of
this?  By  no  means.  There  still  ,
remains  a  great  work  to  be  done  ;
and  it  is  incumbent  up  m  us  to  do  it,
as  brothrr  Woodruff  has  said,  while
we  have  the  opportunity  i?i  the  bVsh,
Before  we  go  behind  the  vail  we  should
lay  a  foundation  to  progress  upon
after  we  have  finished  our  course  here.
We,  by  our  works,  as  well  as  by  our
faith,  while  in  this  life,  should  lay  a
foundation  for  exaltation  in  the  celes-
tial kingdom  of  our  Father  and  our
God,  I

I  am  rejoiced  to  hear  the  subject
of  building  Temples  agitated  again.

A  great  deal  might  be  sai  i  about
it  as  to  the  details,  but  it  will  re-
commend itself  to  every  one.  What
can  a  Bishop  do  in  his  ward  ?  He
Can  do  something,  and  if  he  will  lay
the  matter  before  the  members  of
his  ward  be  will  find  that  he  can
get  very  liberal  contributions  in
labor,  and  in  provisions  and  other
means  necessary  to  pay  the  hands
who  work  steadily  on  the  Temple,
There  is  not  a  ward  in  the  city,  not
|  ward  in  the  county,  nor  in  all  these
counties,  but  what  can  contribute
considerable  to  this  end,  and  that  i
too  right  away,  It  is  not  yoiiig  to
take  so  much  stone  to  go  on  with
in  proportion,  as  it  has  taken  for
the  foundation,  for  the  walls  will  not


be  so  wide  ;  and  although  the  work
is  expensive,  yet  it  can  be  done.
We  have  mechanics  who  are  per-
fectly competent  to  do  it,  and  the
plan  will  be  given  as  fast  as  laborers
i  to  do  the  work  ate  ready.

This  is  one  thing  that  we  can  do,
and  it  is  required  of  us,  and  the  re-
sponsibility of  accomplishing  this
task  rests  up  m  our  shoulders.  Of
course  we  have  other  duties  to  per-
form. Every  person  who  liv^s  in
this  Territory,  here  in  Zion,  who
professes  to  be  a  Latter-day  Sunt,
has  responsibilities  of  various  kinds
resting  up.m  him.  All  ought  to
assist  in  developing  the  resources  of
the  soil,  to  draw  from  the  elements
for  the  support  of  themselves  and
fanilies;  to  bmld  up  and  make  im-
provements, and  not  to  tear  down
and  destroy.  We  should  all  be
united  in  developing,  beautifying
and  improving  this  country,  ia
which  the  L  »rd  has  planted  our
feet,  that  we  may  Income  a  self-
sustaining  people,  bringing  forth
from  the  elements  with  which  the
Lord  lias  surrounded  us,  those  things
necessarv  for  our  sustenance  and
09Qi fort,  We  should  economise  our
time,  and  use  it  and  all  we  have  to
our  own  best  advantage,  and  to  the
glory  and  honor  ut  our  Father.
There  is  plenty  of  labor  here  fur  all
if  they  will  do  it,  and  if  they  will
put  themselves  to  work  in  those
channels  that  are  necessary.  Tuere
are  some  kinds  of  business  that  are
overdone.  A  guo  i  many  ot  our
young  people,  and  others  to,  in-
stead of  turning  their  attention  to
the  cultivation  of  the  earth,  or  to
the  manufacture  of  things  that  are
actually  needed  for  the  welfare  and
comfort  of  the  com  m  unit  v.  se<  k  to
hec<  >me  clerks  and  to  pursue  soma
kind  of  a  calling  that  is  nor  pro-
ductive. Such  a  course  increases
the  consumers,  but  not  the  pi>  lus-


20G  JOURNAL  OF

ers,  and  we  have  no  snrplus  here  of
those  things  necessary  to  support
and  sustain  people.  If  men  were
to  go  into  various  branches  of  manu-
facture, they  would  help  to  create
■  market  for  home  products,  and
that  would  stimulate  production,
the  production  of  fruits  of  the  soil
as  well  'ds  other  thing*.  That  would
be  good  economy.  We,  at  present,
have  no  surplus  of  the  products  of
the  soil  in  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains ;  there  is  no  overplus  even  of
wheat  or  other  grain,  or  of  butter
and  cheese,  and  other  kinds  of  food.
Even  of  meat  we  have  not  any  but
whit  cin  command  a  market,  and  at'
a  price  sufficiently  high  to  justify
the  raising  of  it,  and  the  taking  care
of,  and  increasing  and  multiplying
the  flocks  and  herds,  and  then  using
them  wisely.  What  for  ?  To  sus-
tain the  wicked  and  ungodly  ?  No;
but  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  to  hold  and  use  for  God  and  his
kingdom  continually.  Not  just  for  a
short  time,  and  then  pass  off  in  some
other  direction  ;  but  continually,  day
by  day,  week  after  week,  and  year
after  year,  as  long  as  we  live,  contri-
bute of  what  we  have  for  the  build-
ing up  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  build-
ing of  Temples  to  the  name  of  the
Lord,  And  when  that  is  done,  there
will  be  something  else  in  the  same  1
direction,  for  it  is  the  work  of  the
Lord,  the  great  work  of  the  last
days.  Let  us  act  as  if  we  believed  it,
unitedly,  with  all  our  hearts,  and
with  all  the  means  that  we  possess,
and  not  sift  our  ways  to  strangers.
I  tell  you,  brethren  and  sisters,  this
rests  upon  us,  and  the  work  may
Advance  with  a  great  deal  more
rapidity  than  what  it  has  done,  if  we
will  be  united  in  obeying  the  counsels
that  we  receive  from  time  to  time.
We  must  not  only  listen,  but  act
■pon  the  counsels  we  receive.

The  Lord,  a  great  while  ago,  said


DISCOURSES.

through  his  Prophet,  that  he  would
jjive  the  kingdom  in  its  fullness  to
his  Saints,  and  that  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms
of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ.  We
believe  this,  and  we  believe  that  we
are  his  Saints ;  poor  as  we  are,  we
are  the  best  there  is.  We  have  the
opportunity  to  grow  and  increase  in
grace  and  in  favor  with  the  Lord,
and  in  faith  and  in  good  works,  and
becoming  better  than  we  now  are,
and  of  becoming  more  useful ;  and  as
we  do  so,  why,  the  kingdom  will
grow  faster,  and  things  will  prosper
mure  with  us.  We  shall  have  greater
power  with  the  Lord  and  in  the
world,  and  the  purposes  of  heaven
will  roll  on  and  corne  to  piss  faster
than  they  have  done.  Though  io
this  respect  we  have  no  reason  to
complain,  for  they  have  come  along
about  as  quick  as  we  have  be<m  able
to  stand  it.  But  the  work  will  con-
tinue to  increase  in  greater  ratio  than
it  has  hitherto  done;  it  is  bound  to,
and  cannot  help  it,  any  way  in  the
world.  Whether  we  ourselve-,  indi-
vidually, stand  firm  and  steadfast,
makes  no  difference,  the  work  of  God
will  go  forward  anyhow.  But  we
have  the  blessed  privilege  of  nssist-
in^,  and  of  being  co-worke  s  wit'i  the
Lord,  if  we  are  disposed  to  be  so.
Tnen  let  us  look  to  it  that  we  1  »  not
fail,  for  upon  this  depends  our  own
salvation  and  exdUtiou  in  the  celes-
tial kingdom.  We  have  now  an
opportunity  for  laying  a  loundation
for  hereafter  hearing  the  welcome
plaudit — u  Well  done,  good  and  faith-
ful servant,  von  have  been  ftithfol
over  a  few  things,  now  will  I  make
you  ruler  over  many  things;'  Shall
we  neglect  the  opportunities  that  we
enjoy  to  that  extent,  that  we  shall
come  short  hereafter?  I  hope  and
trust  not.

The  work  we  are  engaged  in  ii
worthy  of  all  our  attention,  for  it  ifl


UNBELIEF  OP  THE  PRESENT  AGE,  ETC,


207


the  work  and  kingdom  cf  God,  that
was  spoken  of  by  the  Prophets  long
ago  ;  that  great  kingdom  spoken  of
by  the  Prophet  Daniel,  that  is  to
break  in  pieces  and  subdue  all  other
kingdoms,  and  stand  forever,  is  actu-
ally being  built  up  in  our  day,  rinht
in  the  face  and  eyes  of  the  whole
world.  Who  understands  it  ?  Does
the  outside  world  ?  No,  and  it
seems  sometimes  as  if  scarcely  half
the  Saints  do  to  the  extent  they
should,  I  am  satisfied  that  neither  I
nor  anybody  else  comprehends  this
work  to  the  fullest  extent.  A  great
many  can  see  the  kingdom,  some  do
not;  some  of  those  who  profess  to  be
Saints,  judging  by  the  course  they
take,  do  not  see  the  kingdom.  But
it  is  here  all  the  surre,  whether  you
see  it  or  not,  and  it  is  actually  trans-
spiring;  and  the  course  and  history
of  the  Litter  day  Saiuts  are  a  testi-
mony to  the  world  from  the  L>rd  of
the  building  up  of  his  kingdom,  the
bringing  to  pass  of  his  purposes,  and
the  fulfillment  of  prophecies  uttered
thousands  of  years  ago.  But  they
cannot  see  it.

One  ot  the  signs  of  the  times  to
be  given  when  the  kingdom  of  God
should  be  built  up,  was  the  heaving
of  the  sea  beyond  its  bounds.  Has
anybody  heard  of  any  such  thing  in
these  days?  Everybody  that  reaas
the  newspapers  knows  that  events  of
this  kind  have  been  common  during
the  past  few  years;  tut  ibis  genera-
tion pay  no  more  regard  to  them  than
they  would  to  the  shaking  of  a  straw
in  the  wind,  so  far  as  beiug  a  sign  of
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  or  of
the  accomplishment  of  the  work  of
the  Lord  in  the  lust  days.  Talk  to
people  generally,  in  the  world,  about
such  things,  and  they  say — "Oh,
they  are  accounted  fur  upon  some
natural  principle." It  is  so  with  all


of  the  signs  that  the  Lord  has  given,
or  that  be  will  give,  Umt  have  been
prophesied  about — they  can  all  be
accounted  for  upon  some  natural
principle.  They  are  never  thelesa
coming  to  pass  in  the  time  that  the
Lord,  through  his  Prophets,  has  said
they  would  come.  Many  things  pro-
phesied of  in  ages  past  and  gone  are
actually  transpiring  to*day,  yet  the
people  generally  do  not  comprehend
iheuj.  But  the  majority  of  the
Litter-day  Saints  do,  and  they  know
that  the  time  of  the  second  coming
of  the  Savior  is  approaching.

Can  we  realize  that  there  is  a  err  eat
work  to  he  accomplished,  and  that
the  responsibility  rests  upon  our
shoulders?  I  hope  and  trust  we
may  ;  I  believe  we  shall,  and  that  we
aha  11  put  forth  renewed  energy  to
perforin  what  is  required  of  us  from
time  to  time,  and  be  earnest  in  ac-
complishing, as  far  as  it  devolves
upon  us,  the  purposes  of  the  Al-
mighty, in  seeking  the  kingdom  of
God  and  its  righteousness,  and  in
developing  the  country  in  which
God  has  planted  our  feet,  and  winch
he  held  in  reserve  for  so  many  hun-
dreds of  years  for  his  Saints,  that
thpy  might  have  a  place  to  come  to
and  inherit.  We  kuow  that  he  hag
given  it  into  our  hands,  and  he  is
pouring  his  blessings  upon  us  from
time  to  time,  and  that  to  u*e  for  him
and  his  kingdom,  and  not,  as  last  as
he  hands  them  to  us,  to  hand  thecn  out
to  build  up  the  devil's  kingdom.

That  we  may  be  united  in  using
our  abilities,  our  means,  our  sub-
stance, and  all  that  we  have,  in  rolling
forth  God's  purposes,  building  up  his
kingdom,  and  establishing  the  princi-
ples of  righteousness  in  the  hearts  of
the  people,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Chris*.  Amen.


9  IS


JOCUXAL  OF  DISCOURSES


K KM AR K.S i:V KL!>KK MIX  TAYLOR,


HfcLIVSRED  IN  THE  NEW  TaBERKACLE,  SaLT  LaK£  ClTY,  SUNDAY

Afternoon,  July  30,  1876,


(Reported  hy  G*  0,  Ferguson.)

THE  GATHKKINTr  OF  THE  SAINTS  IS  THI!  LOKh's  WORK— KNOWLEDGE  OF
THK  GOSFKL  ATTAINABLE  ONLY  BY  REVELATION— THE  LORD  DICTA-
TED THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH  SMITH  IN  ALL  THINGS  PERTAINING  TO  THE
ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  UPOX  EARTH.


I  have  been  pleased  and  interested
bv  the  remarks  of  brother  Staines.
He  \\w  been  very  diligent  and  inde-
f'it i-ffitile  in  looking  after  flit*  interests
of  the  S  ii nt a  who  have  been  emigrat-
ing to  this  place  for  ninny  years.  I
pray  that  God  ivill  ontinu  '  to  blesa
him,  that  be  vet,  may  he  made  i n st r n -
meu'al  it;  guarding  the  interests  and
cheerio?  the  hearts  of  the  S  tints  of
God  for  years  to  c.rm\  This  gath-
ering i.s  part  of  t  lie  work  we  Saints
are  engaged  in.  Tnere  are  associated
with  this  Ubor  same  ideas  that  ate
rather  peculiar.  Tnere  are  many
things  in  the  Scriptures  verv  strange
and  re  nark  able  to  men  who  are  not
inspired  with  the  spirit  by  which
these  principles  were  iacalcated.

The  ijord  in  one  plaod  says  by  his
Pr  >oher  *;  Gather  mv  Saints  to*
lather,  those  that  have  made  a  cove*
nanfc  with  me  by  sacrifice."  Tnere
is  another  passage  of  a  similar  kind,
s;i>  ;i»ii  by  another  Prophet,  44  I  will
take  them,  one  of  a  city  and  two  of
a  family,  and  bring  tnem  to  Zion ;
and  1  will  gi re  them  pastors  after  my
own  heart,  that  will  feed  them  with
kno  w  I  rige  and  un  lei  standi  n  g"  Tnere
are  many  similar  prophecies  in  th<>
Scriptures,  pointing  out  the  day  in


I  which  we  live.  But  men  pass  lightly
over  them,  as  they  do  over  many  other
things  of  Html  importance  tu  the
h  n^i an  family.

But  there  u«r4ait*ly  is  ji  signiHoance
in  these  expressions,  If  these  events
have  not  rd ready  transpired,  they
certainly  will  yet  come  to  pnssl*  If
H  t\  h-ts  said  he  would  take  one  of  a
city  and  two  of  a  family  and  g-ithcr
the  n  to  Zion  and  yive  them  pastors
to  feed  them,  there  must  be  a  time
when  these  things  will  be  accom-
plished. Among  other  things  c  >tn-
municated  to  Joseph  Smith  was  that
the  people  were  to  irather  together,
and'TIiore  is  a  general  impulse  and
feeling  **f  this  kind  prevalent  among
this  people.  Tin  y  scarcely  know  by
what  influence  they  arc  dictated  and
controlled,  nevertheless  this  feeling
is  .i-'j'Hijr  the  Saints  in  foreign  binds
us  well  as  here.  The  feeling  there  is
a  strong  impulse  and  desire  to  come
here,  while  in  this  place  there  is  a
desire  to  help  them  to  come.  H*  ire
the  feeling  is  reciprocal  and  a  ; ^irt
of  the  Gospel,  a  little  of  that  leaven
\  which  Jesus  referred  to  in  his  day,
which  "  leaveneth  the  whole  lump/1
As  regards  the  ideas  men  may  enter-
tain abjutf  this  thing  it  is  a  matter


I'


THE  GATHERING  OP  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


209


of  very  little  importance  to  us.  It
is  sufficient  for  us  to  know  the  prin-
ciples which  God  has  revealed.  The
world  has  no  means  of  knowing  this,
nnd  the  Saints  only  know  by  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel  Brother  Staines
referred  to  the  time  when  it  first
became  a  matter  of  concern  to  him
to  know  whether  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  were  true  or  not  This
same  feeling  has  been  experienced  hy
mi  any  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
they  solved  the  question  by  a  doctrine
of  Christ,  which  the  world  never  seem
to  reflect  upon.  Jeans  said,  "  If  any
roan  will  Ho  his  will 'he  shall  know
of  Hip  doefrin**,  whether  it  is  of  God,
or  whether  L  speak  of  my  self."
There  is  something  so  broad  and
comprehensive,  yet  so  individually
personal,  in  the  principle  here  in-
volved, that  though  this  mode  of
knowing  is  open  to  all,  yet  ench  in*
dividual  must  fee!  and  realize  fur
himself.  There  is  another  scripture
bearing  on  this point,  11  He  that


belie veth  hath  the  witness  in  himself,
and  another  says,  41  The  Spirit  of  God
takes  of  the  things  of  t lie  Father,
and  shows  them  unto  ua"  Again,
another  ssys,  We  have  a  hope  that
enters  behind  the  vail,  where  Christ,
our  forerunner,  lias  gone.  Another,
u  We  know"  not  we  think  we  know,
if  the  earthly  house  of  this  taber-
naclfl  be  destroyed,  we  have  a  build-
ing of  God,  a  house  not  made  with
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  There
is  something  so  definite  to  all  men  j
who  arc  in  possession  of  these  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel,  that  it  may  well
be  said,  **  Life  and  irn mortality  are
brought  to  li&4 lit  by  the  Gospel/'

I  might  gd  on  quoting  Scripture,
hut  this  h  the  Gospel  Jesns  taught
his  disciples,  and  when  he  was  on
thU  con  Linen  t  he  taught  tbo  same
doctrines  and  principles  and  put  the
behe? ers  in  possession  uf  the  same
certainty.  There  is  something  very
■v  No.  14.


satisfying  in  relation  to  these  matters.
It  is  not  with  the  faithful  Saint  a
matter  of  any  importance  what  man
may  think  about  him;  his  religion  is
to  him  a  personal  matter  in  which
he  is  individually  interested.  No
philosophy,  no  worldly  wisdom  can
irnpirt  a  knowledge  of  the  plan  of
salvation.  This  knowledge  is  not
to  be  obtained  except  through  obe-
dience to  the  principles  which  God
has  revealed.  But  hiving  partaken
of  the  light  and  intelligence  com-
municated by  the  Almighty  through
obedience  to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  t  ie  result  is  the  same  now
ns  in  tor fiter  times  Such  a  ninu
has  the  witness  planted  in  himself,
as  Paul  said,  "  Now  we  are  soni
of  God,  but  it  doth  not  yet  appear
what  we  ahall  bf*,  but,  when  he  who
is  our  life  shall  appear,  then  we  shall
be  like  unto  him,  for  we  shall  see  him
as  he  is  "  We  shall  *4  ho  transformed
to  his  glorious  image."  This,  then,
is  the  hope  and  certainty  of  the  Gos=*
pel,  the  reward  of  every  true  believer,
and  hence  it  is  a  personal  thing.
It  is  no  use  presenting  to  men  of  this
kiud  the  nonsense  composing  the
religions  of  the  day  ;  it  is  lost  labor
to  try  and  turn  a  body  of  men  fro  a
principles  like  thjse,  such  a3  God
revealed  person  illy  to  them,  their
souls  Intve  been  lit  up  and  Bred  by
eternal  intelligence,  and  it  is  impos-
sible to  eradicate  this  evidence  and
certainty  front  n  body  of  men  thus
led  and  directed.  God  kne*v  this
when  he  commenced  this  work.

Men  have  had  their  varied  social
communities,  religious  and  other
theories;  but  they  do  not  know  too
secret  springs  of  the  human  heart.
They  do  not  know  the  operations
of  the  spirit  of  the  living  God,
They  cannot  bind  a  conglomerate
mass  of  men  sufficiently  together,
they  will  not  where  they  cmnot
amalgamate them. Nothing  less

Vol,  XVIII.


than  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
will  do  it.  They  have  tried  it  in
various  nations  with  varied  success,
but  they  never  have  accomplished  it
and  they  never  will.  Hence  we  are
brought  back  to  where  we  started,
the  necessity  of  sending  forth  the
Gospel.  Jebus  said,  41  My  sheep
hear  my  voice  and  know  me  and  fn]

if

low  me.  A  stranger  they  will  not
follow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice
of  a  stranger.'*  In  the  commence-
meutof  this  work  the  Lord,  knowing
the  material  required,  raised  up  his
servant  Joseph  Smith,  inspired  by
his  spirit,  power  and  authority,  to
proclaim  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  to  administer  in  the  ordinances
thereof,  and  unite  those  that  were
willing  to  make  covenant  with  the
Lord  by  sacrifice,  those  that  would
lay  aside  their  traditions  and  keep
bis  commandments.  This  was  what
the  Lord  wished  ;  not  to  gather  up  a
promiscuous  crowd,  but  those  who
would  r**ceive  the  Gospel,  "  I  will
take  them  one  of  a  city  and  two  of
a  family  and  bring  them  to  Ziou,"
says  the  Lord,  and  give  them  pastors
after  my  own  heart,  thut  will  feed
them  with  knowledge  and  under-
standing, not  with  false  philosophy,
bnt  with  knowledge  emanating  from
God  ;  men  who  will  manifest  the  will
of  God  and  carry  uut  his  designs,
teaching  the  people  his  law.

The  world  think  riiey  can  learn
the  law  and  will  of  God  at  the  then*
logical  and  other  schools,  and  semi-
naries; but  they  never  did  and  they
never  will  learn  God  or  his  purposes
in  this  way.  God  wishes  to  establish
his  kingdom  in  our  day,  and  he  will
establish  it  by  l  is  own  power,  in  his
own  way.

The  Prophet  speaks  of  a  stone
that  should  be  cat  out  of  the  moun-
tain without  hands,  which  will  roll
forth  and  smite  the  great  image,
become  a  mountain  and  fill  the  whole


earth.  This  will  he  done  by  Israel's
God.  af id  no  power  or  government,
not  ad  the  power  nf  earth  and  hell
combined,  can  stay  its  progress.
This  is  the  work  of  Hod,  not  of  man**
It  is  not  by  this  man  nor  that  man
that  this  will  be  brought  about.  It
is  by  the  power  of  Jehovah.  No
other  p  )wer  can  accomplish  these
things.  He  makes  use  of  men  to
accomplish  certain  objects  he  has  in
view,  and  will  bring  about  his  pur-
poses in  his  own  way  mid  when  it
pleases  him.  But  we  talk  sometimes
a  good  deal  aUjut  Joseph  Smith.
Who  was  Joseph  Smith  ?  Ati  un-
lettered vouth.  Could  he  do  any-
thing to  aeeomplish  these  tilings  ?
Not  unless  God  had  revealed  it  to
him.  He  ask^d  wisdom  of  God  and
received  it.  Till  that  time  he  knew
no  more  ab out  those  things  than  yoa
or  I.  It  was  God  and  God  alone
that  did  these  things.  "  He  can  take
the  weak  things  of  this  earth,  the
base  things  and  the  things  that  are
not,  to  bring  to  naught  the  things
that  are,  that  no  flesh  may  glory  in
his  presence.*'  He  took  Joseph.
Why?  Because  the  time  had  come
to  beerin  a  work,  in  whmh  all  the
holy  Priesthood  of  God  that  had
lived  in  former  ages  were  concerned.
Joseph  was  the  honored  instrument
chosen  to  take  the  initiative.  Who
knew  that  tins  time  had  come  ?  No
one.  The  religious  world  were  as
divided  then  as  as  they  are  to-day.
All  kinds  of  opposing  doctrines  and
dogmas  were  promulgated.  "When
the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Zion,
the  watchmen  shall  see  eye  to  eye."
Hut  when  men  are  governed  by  their
own  notions,  what  do  they  see  of
the  things  of  God  ?  Nothing.
Who  originated  the  doctrines  of
this  Latter-day  work  ?  Who  organ-
ized this  Church  ?  I  have  read  that
in  former  times  God  placed  in  the
Church,  first  Apostles,  secondarily


THE  GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


Proph^K  nfterwards  Pastors,  Teach-
ers, Evangelists,  for  the  perfecting
of  the  Saints,  the  vvork  of  the  min-
istry, for  the  edifying  of  the  body
of  Christ.  Who  knew  anything  of
this:  (.Jon  told  J  ,seph  to  organize
a  Quorum  of  Twelve  Apostles,  and
he  til  I  i*  He  told  him  how  to  orga-
nize h  First  Presidency,  and  he  did
it,  God  told  him  how  to  organize
the  A  ironic  and  Melchizedec  Priest-
hood, fin  I  he  did  it.  Who  knew
anything  of  this?  No  one.  They
had  n  Babel  of  confusion  everywhere,
without  certainty  or  true  intelligence*.
We  re  fid  that  there  were  Seventies,
Who  k  -ew  anything  what  a  Seventy
was?  Joseph  Wiis  told  to  organize
Quorum*  of  Seventy,  and  he  did  it.
He  whs  told  to  organize  a  High
Priests*  Quorum.  He  was  told  what
their  -In tics  were.  Did  Joseph  him
self  kn  >v?  any  thing  of  all  this  ?  Not
till  l.«-  was  told.  He  was  told  to
ordai  Bishops.  All  kinds  of  notions
were  tmiertu  tried  about  the  position
and  dines  of  a  B'shop.  I  remember
talkip/  <o  an  English  nobleman,  1
think  i *  was  Earl  Roseberry.  Slid
I  to  him,  41  Allow  me  to  introduce  to
your  1  rdship  Edw.ud  Hunter,  our
press  in  ^  Kiahop.  You  have  your
Bi  shoos  in  Kn  gland,  *ud  they  are
called  lords  spiritual ;  this  is  our  lord
temp<  ;r,ft  looks  after  our  bread
and  c.tvse"  What  did  any  one
know  of  the  office  and  duties  of
Deae  •  i,  Teacher,  Priest,  or  Elder  r
Nothing.  Who  knows  anything
about  the  building  of  Temples ?  No
One,  n  ti  even  the  Jews  ;  they  do  not
know  'uiiy  what  they  were  for.  God
has  it  veiled  it  to  his  Priesthood.
The  ivl.uionship  of  man  and  wife —
who  k  1*0*8  anything  about  this?
No  one.  Tiie  sectarian  priest  will
get  up  Aitii  a  solemn  visage  and  pro-
nounce a  pnir  to  be  husband  and  wife
till  ct  i  ik I  say  from  such  folly


good  L  )rd  deliver  me  j  but  th^  Lord
has  delivered  me  through  the  Gospel.
God  raised  up  Joseph,  and  made  use
of  him  to  reveal  this  knowledge,  and
we  have  to  be  directed  by  God  alone.
He  placed  in  his  Church  in  days  of
old  Apostles,  Prophets,  Pastors,  eta,
for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the
edifying  of  Christ's  body,  till  we  all
come  to  the  unity  of  the  faith,  to
the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God.
All  those  officers  dis  uprared  \i  ars
and  years  ago,  but  God  has  restored
the  ancient  organisations  of  his
Priesthood  on  earth — Aposth-s,  High
Priests,  Seventies,  Elder*,  Priests,
Teachers  and  Deacons.  He  h.i>  re-
stored Bishops  and  iheir  c  nncils,
and  high  councils,  for  the  ttOeoa  j  pi  isb-
ment  of  his  purposes.  H*»  Hist  insti-
tutes baptism  for  the  remission  of
sina,  then  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  gift  of  the  Holy  (Jh  the
gatheiing  of  the  people,  then  the
building  of  Temples.  Witness  mir
Temple  here,  and  the  one  at  St.
Geotge,  and  many  others.  God  must
dictate.  We  most  be  willing  to
carry  out  his  instructions,  united  as
one  body,  with  feelings  of  sympathe-
tic! kindness  and  brotherhood,  associ-
ated in  our  family  capacit.es,  our
quorum  capacities,  associated  witk
the  Church  triumphant,  with  ths
men  of  God  who  have  lived  in  former
years,  without  whom  v .  o  cannot  be
made  perfect,  nor  they  without  us.
If  diligent  and  faithful  in  these  things,
it  will  he  well  with  us.  Eternal  life
is  within  our  reach,  and  it  fa  for
Apostles,  High  Prie-ts,  Seventies,
JJishops,  and  all  that  pertain  to  the
Church  of  God  to  rise  up  and  do
their  'luty,  perform  their  obligations
to  the  Most  High;  and  I  pray  that
o-r  path  may  be  hke  that  of  she  just,
which  sh  inert  h  brighter  and  righter
till  the  perfect  day.


212


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE  Br  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,
Delivered  at  Logan,  Cache  Valley,  Suxoay,  Aug*  16,  1876.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibls.)


VERY  FEW  WILL  INHERIT  CELESTIAL  GLORY — LUST  A  ITER  THE  THINGS
OF  THE  WORLD  PRODUCES  APOSTACY — NO  REAL HAPPINESS  OUTSIDE
OF  GODLINESS — THE  LORD  REQUIRES  THE  HEARTS  OF  THE  CHILDREN*
.*  OF  MEN.


I  think  it  is  pretty  well  under-
stood, by  my  brethren  and  sisters,
that  my  labor  s,  as  a  public  speaker,
are  somewhat  limited,  compared  with
what  they  used  to  be*

The  first  Mason  the  Twelve  went
on  a  mission  as  the  Twelve  Apostles
I  became  acquainted  with  the  fa-
ther of  brother  William  Hyde,  who
has  just  addressed  you.  Brother
Hyde,  deceased,  was  then  a  boy.
He  with  his  fathers  family  gath-
ered with  the  Saints ;  he  went  to
Missouri  and  returned  to  Illinois,
and  got  married.  And  this  after-
noon we  have  heard  one  of  his  sons
speak  to  us.  It  is  forty  years  this
summer  since  I  first  knew  the  father
of  this  young  man.  For  three
years  previous  to  this  I  had  been
engaged  preaching  the  Gospel,  and
the  Spirit  of  God  would  rest  down
upon  me  to  that  degree  that,  if  I
did  not  open  my  mouth  to  preach
to  the  people,  it  seemed  as  though  my
bones  would  consume  within  me,
consequently  I  used  to  preach  long
and  loiuL  jf :  ■

For  furty-three  years  I  have  been
more  or  less  engaged  preaching  to
the  people.  My  talking  organs  are
now  pretty  much  exhausted,  but  my


general  health  is  good,  even  better
than  when  I  was  a  young  man.  I
never  felt  better  than  I  do  at  pre-
sent. I  have  lungs  enough  to  serve
me  to  preach  a  hundred  years,  pro-
viding the  talking  organs  of  my
stomach  were  correspondingly  good.

I  came  here  to  rest,  to  get  away
from  much  talking  Since  beine
here,  I  have  been  waited  on  by  the
Indians  who  are  passing  through,
and  I  have  had  to  do  a  good  deal  of
talking  to  them,  besides  having  to
converse  with  the  brethren,

I  sometimes  feel  that  I  can  hardly
desist  from  telling  the  Latter-day
Saints  how  they  should  live,  but
my  talking  organs  will  not  permit
me  to  say  as  much  as  I  wish  to.  The
Celestial  Kingdom  of  God  is  worth
seeking  for,  and  there  are  times
when  I  see  the  importance  of  the
people  livdng  their  religion  that  I
almost  feel  to  cry  aloud  and  spare
not,  if  I  had  the  strength  to  do  it.
When  I  consider  the  greatness  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  privi-
lege afforded  us  of  becoming  heirs
to  (iod  out*  Father,  and  joint  heirs
with  Jesus  Christ  our  elder  brother,
and  then  sense  the  condition  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  I  do  not  wonder


VERY  FEW  WILL  INHERIT  CELESTIAL  GLORY,  ETC,


213


that  the  question  was  asked  of  the
Savior  by  his  disciples:  "Who,  then,
can  he  saved  T  There  are  very  few
of  the  children  of  Father  Adam
and  Mother  Eve,  who  will  be  pre-
pared  to  go  into  the  Celestial  King-
dom.  Those  who  prepare  them-
selves here  below,  through  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel j  receiving  through
their  faithfulness  the  keys  of  the
Priesthood,  and  sanctifying  them-
selves through  the  truth,  they  are
preparing  themselves  to  become  the
sons  of  God.  If  we  become  the
sons  of  God,  we  shall  be  joint  heirs
with  Jesus  Christ  to  all  the  inherit-
ances that  the  Father  hath  prepared
for  the  faithful  But  there  are  few
of  all  the  human  family  that  will
ever  attain  to  this  highest  state  of
glory.

We  have  a  work  to  do  just  as
important  iu  its  sphere  as  the  Sav
ior's  work  was  in  its  sphere.  Our
fathers  cannot  be  made  perfect
without  us ;  we  cannot  be  made
perfect  without  them.  They  have
done  their  work  and  now  sleep.
We  are  now  called  upon  to  do  ours  ;
which  is  to  be  the  greatest  work
man  ever  performed  on  the  earth.
Millions  of  our  fellow  creatures  who
have  lived  upon  the  earth  and  died
wi tli out  a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel
must  be  officiated  for  in  order  that
they  may  inherit  eternal  life  (that
is,  all  that  would  have  receive*!  the
Gospel).  And  we  are  called  upon
to  enter  into  this  work.

The  Latter-da)r  Saints  who  turn
their  attention  to  money-making
soon  become  cold  in  their  feelings
toward  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God,  They  neglect  their  prayers,
become  unwilling  to  pay  any  dona-
tions ;  the  law  of  Tithing  gets  too
great  a  task  for  them  ;  and  they
finally  forsake  their  God,  and  the
providences  of  heaven  seem  to  he
shut  out  from  them — all  in  conse-


quence of  this  lust  after  the  things
of  this  world,  which  will  certainly
perish  in  handling,  and  in  their  use
they  will  fade  away  and  go  from
us.  We,  as  well  as  the  whole  world
of  mankind,  know  that  our  time
is  short,  our  days  but  a  span.  And
yet  we  lust  after  this  filthy  lucre,
the  world's  wealth.  It  matters  not
how  much  of  this  world's  *joods  a
man  may  possess,  his  few  days  soon
expire,  and  he  sleeps  with  the  fathers.
To  him  his  riches  are  no  more ;  it
was  only  seeming  wealth.  We  can-
not expect  to  receive  real  wealth
until  we  receive  the  riches  of  eternity,
which  are  eternal  Those  riches
will  not  be  committed  to  us,  until
we  shall  have  tilled  our  measures
here,  having  done  all  the  Lord  re-
quires of  us,  towards  perfecting  our-
selves, and  assisting  him  in  t  he  work
of  the  salvation  of  tin*  human  fam-
ily. Not  until  Jesus  shall  present
all  things  to  the  Father,  saying,  I
have  completed  the  *  ork  thou  gavest
me  to  do ;  here  are  the  results  of
my  labors.  Then,  and  not  until
then,  can  w  e  possess  real  riches,  true
riches,  eternal  riches.

How  vain  it  is  in  man  to  allow
himself  to  think  that  he  can  make
himself  happy  with  the  pleasures
of  this  world  There  is  no  lasting
pleasure  here,  unless  it  is  in  God.
\Vhen  men  leave  the  kingdom  of
God,  their  lives  are  tilled  with  bit-
terness, their  thoughts  are  full  of
Tearfulness,  and  they  are  sorrowful,
day  by  day.  They  may  tell  you
they  are  happy.  Hut  when  you
probe  them,  and  find  out  the  in-
most recesses  of  the  heart,  it  is  a
cup  of  gall ;  they  are  not  happy.
They  may  seek,  to  the  uttermost
parts  of  the  earth,  for  happiness,
but  they  iind  it  not.  W  here  is
happiness,  real  happiness  r  No-
where but  in  God.  By  possessing
the  spirit  of  our  holy  religion,  we


214


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


are  happy,  in  the  morning,  we  are
happy  at  noon,  we  are  happy  in  the
evening ;  for  the  spirit  of  hive  and
union  is  with  us,  and  wo  rejoice  in
the  spirit  because,  it  is  of  God,  and
we  rejoice  in  God,  for  he  is  the  giver
of  every  good  thing.  Each  and
every  Latter-day  Saint,  who  has
experienced  the  love  of  God  in  his
heart,  after  having  received  the
remission  of  his  sins,  through  bap-
tism, and  the  laying  on  of  hands,
realizes  that  he  is  tilled  with  joy,
and  happiness,  and  consolation.
He  may  be  in  pain,  in  error,  in
poverty,  or  in  prison,  if  necessity
demands,  still,  he  is  joyfuL  This
is  our  experience,  and  each  and  every
Latter-day  Saint  can  bear  witness
to  it.

Tli ere  lias  been  much  said  with
regard  to  our  becoming  a  united
people,  living  together  in  what  is
called  the  United  Order.  One  man
rises  up  here,  and  another  there,
saying  44  The  Lord  does  not  want
my  property  ;  it  is  brother  Brigharn,
or  it  is  the  Bishop,1'  and  don't  feel
disposed  to  enter  into  this  organiza-
tion. This,  I  admit,  is  partly  true  ;
the  Lord  does  not  care  anything
about  his  property.  Who  made  the
earth,  and  the  riches  thereof  1  To
whom  does  the  earth  belong?  "The
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fullness
thereof"  Do  you  suppose  that  the
Lord  en  res  anything  about  a  man's
farm  ?  Nothing  at  all,  for  the  whole
earth  is  his  ?  At  his  command  it  is
gone,  and  the  man  who  claimed  pos-
session of  any  part  of  it,  knoweth
not  whither  it  lias  gone.  But  what
does  the  Lord  want  of  his  people?
It  is  written  in  this  Bible,  and  is  said
to  be  the  words  of  the  Lord,  "Son,
give  me  thine  heart/'  Without  it,
you  are  not  worth  anything;  with
it,  he  has  your  gold  and  silver,  your
houses  and  lands,  your  wives  and
children,  your  all


I  have  taught  from  the  stand  in
this  place,  and  in  other  places,  for
years,  the  necessity  of  our  becoming


one.  I  can  say  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  you  have  never  heard  bro-
ther Brigharn  make  a  demand  for
your  property.  All  I  want  is  to  see
this  people  devote  their  means  and
interests  to  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  erecting  Temples,
and  in  them  officiate  for  the  living
and  the  dead,  and  he  instruments
in  the  hands  of  God  of  bringing  up
from  their  graves  those  who  have
slept  without  having'  had  the  privi-
lege of  receiving  the  Gospel,  that
they  may  be  crowned  sons  and
daughters  of  the  Almighty.  We
do  not  want  your  property,  we  want
you.  When  we  all  become  one  in
faith  and  in  spirit,  we  shall  be  one
in  our  acts,  having  the  kingdom  of
God  at  heart  And  the  inquiry  will
be  from  the  brethren,  "  What  can  I
do  for  my  fellow -creatures '?  Can  I
be  the  means  of  saving  a  soul  ?
Can  1  do  anything  for  my  friends
who  have  slept  without  a  knowledge
of  the  truth,  or  can  1  do  anything
for  those  who  are  living  in  foreign
lands  Y  Yes,  I  can/'  These  should
be  the  sentiments  of  our  hearts,  and
this  is  required  of  us.

Many  of  us  have  spent  considt*
rable  of  our  time  in  preaching  the
Gospel  at  home  and  abroad,  and  in
otherwise  assisting  to  establish  the
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
and  we  are  still  engaged  in  this  work,
We  have  donated  towards  the  de-
liverance of  the  i>oor  from  foreign
lands,  bringing  them  here,  where
they  have  the  privilege  of  being
taught  further  in  the  plan  of  salva*
tion,  and  where  they  can  assist  more
materiallv  in  the  establishment  of
/Aon  in  the  earth.

Many  of  the  poor,  after  having
been  brought  here,  relieved  in  many
instances,  from  the  depths  of  pover-


VERY  FEW  WILL  INHERIT  CELESTIAL  GLORY,  ETC.


215


ty,  no  sootier  do  they  become  the
possessors  of  a  little  means,  than
they  lift  their  heels  against  the
Gospel.  Tltis  is  painful  to»the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  who  rendered  them
assistance  ;  it  is  grieving  to  God  who
delivered  them*  Still,  it  is  our  duty
to  send  the  Gospel  to  all  nations,
and  to  continue  to  donate  means  to
gather  out  the  poor.  The  Lord  will
save  a  few,  all  that  will  accept  salva-
tion according  to  the  design  which
the  Lord  has  devised.  He  has  made
the  plan,  not  us.  It  is  not  the  con-
ception of  man.  It  was  the  Gods
who  sat  in  council  together — they
planned  it  and  now  otter  it  to  us.
Will  we  accept  of  it]

There  are  only  two  churches  on
the  earth — only  t*o  parties,  God
leads  the  one,  the  devil  the  other.
As  soon  as  a  man  hears  the  Gospel
preached  and  becomes convi  need  of  its
truth  fulness,  he  is  tempted  of  the  devil,
who,  whenever  there  is  an  opportu-
nity, suggests  doubt  tor  his  reflection.
If  lie  entertain  ihebe  doubting  in-
fluences, it  is  not  lung  before  what  lie
believed  true  becomes  a  matter  of
conjecture*  An  ot  Iter  mny  receive
the  G  ospel,  Havel  and  preach  it  faith-
fully, feeling  in  his  heart  to  exclaim,
"Glory  to  God  in  the  highest!"
having  no  other  motive  than  to  do
good  to  his  fellow  oeings.  By  and
by  he  perhaps*  is  left  to  himself  ;  he
now  begins  to  question  himself,  spy-
ing— "  I  wonder  if  I  really  was
right  ?"  This  single  doubt  is  per-
haps the  beginning  of  his  apostacy
from  the  Church,  In  the  days  ut
Joseph,  people  wire  inclined  to  turn
away  from  the  tairh  and  go  into  apos-
taey,  as  much  a.«  they  do  now  in
proportion  to  our  numbers,  and  I
have  sometimes  thought  more  so.
You  allow  the  devil  to  suggest  to  you
that  I  ana  not  leading  you  right,  and
allow  thai  thought  to  abide  in  your
hearts,  and  I  will  promise  you  that


it  will  lead  you  to  apostacy.  You
allow  yourselves  to  doubt  anything
that  God  haa  revealed,  and  it  will  not
be  a  great  while  before  you  begin  to
neglect  your  prayers,  refuse  to  pay
your  Tithing,  and  find  fault  with  the
authorities  of  the  Church,  You  will
be  repeating  what  apostates  all  say,
"  The  Tithing  is  not  used  aright,"
etc.  There  is  a  feeling  that  some-
times prompts  me  to  ask,  "Did  you
ever  pay  any  Ti tiling  to  me  that  I
kept  ?  Jf  so,  let  us  oe  informed
about  it,"  God  has  so  blessed  me
with  regard  to  things  pertaining  to
this  world,  that  if  it  can  be  shown
that  I  ever  received  thebenefir  of  any
man's  Tithing,  I  am  able  to  restore
it  a  hundred  fold.  This  peihaps  is
a  lit  tie  levity  in  me,  but  I  indulge  in
such  tilings  sometimes.

When  brother  Joseph  was  alive,
he  appointed  me  to  appraise  property
in  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  On  one  oc-
casion, a  saddle  was  brought  in;  it
was  valued  at  two  dollars,  and  Lei ug
in  need  of  a  saddle  I  used  it.  Brother
Joseph,  too,  once  sent  me  the  half  of
a  pig  which  weighed  ninety- three
pounds.  And  while  preaching  in
Boston,  I  received  two  and  a  half
dollars  in  Tithing,  which  I  also  used
and  reported  to  brother  Joseph.
Otherwise  not  a  dime  of  the  Tithing
did  I  ever  Use  in  the  days  of  Joseph;
and  since  his  day  the  right  to  dictate
the  use  of  the  Tithing  belongs  to
me,  and  I  have  used  what  I  thought
whs  necessary,  but  1  have  no  know*
ledge  of  using  one  dollar  of  Tithing
money  for  my  own  purposes,  Tliough
alter  these  statements  I  will  say  that
I  dictate  the  Tithing  very  little.
Neither  the  Bishops  nor  my  clerks
ever  ask  me  anything  about  it,  they
do  what  they  please  with  it,  I  do
not  care  what  is  dor  e  with  U,  if  it  be
right iully  and  properly  used.  They
are  perfectly  welcome  to  Use  my
Tithing  in  common  with  yours;  the


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Lord  will  hold  them  responsible  for  |
its  use.  If  ruy  brethren!  whom  I
employ  to  take  care  of  and  raise  my
stock,  do  as  I  wish  them  to  do,  they
pay  my  stock  Tithing.  No  man  in
this  Ciruich  pas  hi*  Jul)  Tithing.  I
do  not  pay  mine,  but  I  pay  as  much
sis  anybody  ;  and  I  never  h  quire  what
is  dune  with  it.  j

When  we  m  gleet  any  one  of  these
duties,  the  enemy  bays,  **  I  have
made  so  much  ground."  If  Hie  devil
can  induce  an  Elder  to  drink  a  little,
he  is  not  satisfied  with  this  triumph,
but  sa)S  to  him,  "Your  wife  and
children  know  it,  don't  pray  to-night."
The  Eider  says  to  his  family,  14 1  feel
tired  to-night,  we  won't  have  prayers."
The  enemy  says,  **  I  have  trained
another  point,"  Yon  indulge  still
further,  and  yon  will  find  other  ex-
cuses. Your  head  is  not  right,  your
heart  ts  not  right,  voor  conscience  is
not  right,  and  yon  retire  again  with-
out praying.  By  and  by,  you  be^in
to  doubt  something  the  Lord  has
revealed  to  us,  and  it  is  not  long  be-
fore  such  a  one  is  led  away  captive
of  the  devil.

Yuu  Elders  of  Israel,  do  you  not
see  the  necessity  of  an  advance  r
D  >  yuu  not  see  that  we  have  traveled
just  as  far  as  we  cm,  without  adopt-
ing the  revelation  the  Lord  gave
at  Independence,  Jackson  County,
namely,  that  t(  the  property  of  the
Saints  should  he  hud  at  the  feet  of
the  Bishops,  etc.,  and  unless  this  was
done  a  curs©  would  befall  them  ? "
They  refused  to  do  it,  and  the  con-
sequence was,  they  \tere  driven  from
their  homes.  Unless  we  obey  these
first  revelations,  the  people  will  de-
cline in  their  faith,  and  they  will
leave  the  faith  of  the  holy  Gospel.
Do  the  Elders  sense  this  ?  Yes,  a
great  many  of  them  do — also  a  great
many  of  the  sisters.  Were  it  not
for  the  faith  and  prayers  of  the  faith-  |
ful  ones,  this  Church  would  have


been  given  into  the  hands  of  our
enemies.  It  is  the  faith  of  the  Priest-
hood, who  cling  to  the  commandments
of  the  Lord,  that  holds  the  people
where  they  are.  Supposing  you  were
in  a  state  to  say,  We  will  do  what  is
required  of  us  :  It  would  be  enough
for  me  to  say,  It  is  your  duty  to
Hui.sh  that  house  (the  Tabernacle)
without  delay,  and  it  would  he  done,
every  man  doing  his  part  cheerfully.
But,  instead  of  that  being  the  case,
we  might  at  ply  to  brother  John  for
his  team  :  says  brother  John,  "  It
is  very  hard  of  you  to  ask  for  my
team.  I  have  only  the  one  span,  and
I  don't  see  that  I  can  let  you  have
it."  Brother  John  keeps  his  team  ;
but  if  he  could  have  had  faith  suffi-
cient *n  obey  the  request,  the  Lord
would  have  blessed  him  with  two
teams.  But  because  he  keeps  it,  that
is  his  all,  and  very  probably,  will
remain  his  all.  Again,  say  the
Priesthood,  "I  want  vour  house."
"  Take  it."  •  Your  garden."  -  Take
it."  Says  on©*^'  Do  you  feel  so,
brother  Brig  ham  ?"  Precisely  so,  I
want  to  entertain  no  other  feeling.
I  have  nothing  but  what,  if  the  Lord
requires,  it  must  go  freely.  He  can
take  nothing  more  than  is  already  his,
I  say,  take  it,  I  will  trust  in  him  for
more.  This  ii*  the  only  safe  ground
to  walk  upon.  It  is  the  ©nly  way  by
which  we  can  secure  eternal  life,
Jesus  says,  l<  Strait  is  the  gate,  and
narrow  is  the  way,  which  leads  to
life  e  ernal,"  but  which  the  New
Translation  made,  that  leads  to  i4  the
lives,"  and  few  there  be  who  Hud  it.
But  wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  is  the
way  that  leads  to  destruction,  and
many  ihere  l>*  who  go  in  thereat.

The  Lord  would  like  to  see  us  take
the  course  that  leads  unto  the  strait
gate,  that  we  might  he  crowned  sous
and  daughters  of  God,  for  such  are
the  only  ones  in  the  heavens  who  mul-
tiply and  increase,  and  ft  ho  frame  and


SIMPLICITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


217


make  and  redeem  worlds.  The  rest
take  an  inferior  kingdom,  where  this
privilege  is  denied  them#  Thig  the
Lord  has  made  known  unto  us  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  ;  it  is  published
aii'l  so  plainly  written,  that  we  can
rend  and  understand  for  ourselves.
It  is  for  as  to  choose  whether  we  will
be  sons  and  daughters,  joint  heirs
with  Jesue  Christ,  or  whether  we
accept  an  inferior  glory  ;  or  whether
we  sin  against  the  Holy  (J  host,  which
Cannot  be  pardoned  or  forgiven  in
this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to  come;
the  penalty  of  which  is  to  sufler  the
second  death*  What  is  that  we  call
death,  compared  to  the  agonies  of  the
secui-d  death  ?  If  people  could  see
it,  ms  Joseph  and  Sidney  saw  it,  they
Would  pray  that  the  vision  be  closed
*p;  for  they  could  not  endure  the
sight. Neither  could  they  endure  the


sight  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in
their  glory,  for  it  would  consume
them.

The  Lord  gives  us  little  by  little,
and  is  ever  willing  to  give  us  more
and  more,  even  the  fullness,  when  our
hearts  are  prepared  to  receive  all  the
truths  of  heaven.  This  is  what  the
Lord  desires,  what  he  would  delight
in  doing,  for  his  children.

These  are  only  a  few  reflections,
when  we  take  into  consideration  our
Christian  religion,  for  it  incorporates
every  act  of  a  person's  life.  We  never
should  presume  to  do  anything  unless
we  can  say,  4t Father,  sanction  this,
and  crown  the  same  with  success."
If  the  Latter- day  Saints  live  so,  the
victory  is  ours.  There  are  a  great
many  who  want  to  live  so,  and  1  say
God  bless  all  such.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFQRI)  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  ix  the  Nbw  Taj;frnaule,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Aug  13,  1876.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

SIMPLICITY  AND  UNC  HANG  EABLEN  ESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL — IT  MUST  BE
PKEACHEh  IN  ALL  THE  WORLD  BEFORE  THE  SATIQB  COMES— DUTIES
AND  RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  SAINTS.


In  connection  with  the  young
brother,  KldtT  Joseph  H.  Parry,  who
has  just  returned  from  a  prt-achiug
mission  to  England,  I  wish  to  bear
my  testimony,  and  to  make  a  few


remaiks  on  the  Scripture  contained
in  the  last  chapter  of  St.  Mark,  com-
mencing  at  the  14th  verse,  wherein
an  account  is  given  of  the  Savior's
appearing  unto  the  eleven  disciples,


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  of  his  upbraiding  them  for  their
unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,  be-
cause they  believed  not  them  that
had  seen  him  after  he  was  risen,  etc.
At  this  time  the  following  commission
he  gnve  unto  them —

11  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature*
He  that  belie  vet h  and  is  baptized,
shall  be  saved  ;  but  lie  that  believeth
not  shall  be  damned.  And  these
signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe*
In  my  name  shall  they  cast  out
devils;  they  shall  speak  with  new
tongues ;  they  shall  take  up  serpents  j
and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing,
it  sh -ill  not  hurt  them ;  and  they  shall
lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  shall
recover/ '

It  may  appear  singular  to  some,
why  our  Elders  do  not  treat  on  what
is  termed  "  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom."  1  know  of  no  greater
mystery  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  than  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  And  yet  the  Gospel  is  so
plain,  and  so  easy  to  be  understood,
that  the  unlearned  and  the  youth
can  know  of  it  The  Apostle  Paul
said,  '*  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ,  for  it  is  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one
that  believeth."  He  considered  it
of  so  much  importance,  that,  on
another  occasion,  in  writing  to  the
Galatians,  he  said — "  But,  though  we
or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any
other  Gospel  unto  you  than  that  we
have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be
accursed."  Prom  the  fact  of  the
Gospel  being  so  simple,  of  its  being
adapted  to  the  condition  and  circum-
stances of  all  people,  and  of  its  hav-
ing gone  forth  by  the  commandment  |
of  the  Savior,  to  all  the  world,  in
the  event  of  its  being  rejected,
condemnation  must  necessarily  fol-
low.

Notwithstanding  the  simplicity  of
the  Gospel,  where  during  the  last


eighteen  hundred  years  has  been  the
man  or  the  sect  that  has  presented
it  to  the  world,  as  taught  by  the
Savior  and  his  Apostles,  before  it
was  revealed  from  heaven,  in  fulfil-
ment of  ancient  prophecies,  to  the
young  man  Joseph  Smith,  and
preached  by  him  ?  No  voice  had
ever  been  heard  to  proclaim  it.
There  had  never  been  a  church  or  an
organizaton  upon  the  earth,  since
the  days  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles,
I  directed  by  the  revelations  of  heaven
and  owned  of  God.

The  Gospel  now  being  preached
to  all  the  world,  by  commandment
of  the  Lord  to  the  Prophet  Joseph,
is  the  same  as  taught  by  Adatn,
Enoch  and  the  Savior.  It  never
changes  through  lapse  of  time  ;  its
ordinances  and  laws  are  always  the
same,  worlds  without  end.  The  first
principles  of  the  Gospel  taught  from
the  dawn  of  creation,  are  faith,  re-
pentance and  baptism,  and  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands  for  the  reception
uf  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  they  are
the  same  to-day.  To  certain  mimls
there  might  be  a  mystery  connected
with  these  principles.  Why,  say
some,  is  this  so  ?  We  can  only
answer,  because  it  is  the  law  of  the
great  Jehovah,  the  plan  framed  in
the  heavens  for  the  salvation  and
redemption  of  man.  They  are  re-
quirements made  of  the  whole  hu-
man family,  which  must  be  obeyed
in  order  that  the  prevailing  mystery
may  be  banished,  and  the  fruits  and
the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  enjoyed*
The  Gospel  is  free  to  all;  it  is  with-
out money  and  without  price-  13 ut
none  can  officiate  in  its  ordinances,
acceptably  to  God,  except  those  who
have  received  divine  authority  to  do
so.  For,  says  the  Apostle,  no  man
takelh  this  honor  unto  himself,
except  he  be  called  of  God,  as  was
Aaron.  But  there  are  a  great  many
Gospels,  all  claiming  to  be  of  Christ,


SIMPLICITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


and  all  differing,  more  or  less,  from
one  another,  and  from  the  one  taught
by  the  Savior,  when  upon  the  earth.
When  he,  who  has  the  authority,
preaches  the  Gospel,  he  promises,  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  all  that
believe  and  obey,  that  the  Holy  Ghost
will  be  given  them.  By  virtue  of  this
promise,  all  such  can  know  for  them-
selves, whether  it  is  of  God,  or  whether
it  is  of  man.  If  an  unauthorized  man
goes  forth,  pretending  to  proclaim
this  same  Gospel,  and  it  matters  nor
how  able  and  talented  he  may  be,
his  doctrine  can  he  detected,  because
the  promises  which  were  to  follow
the  believers  in  Christ  are  not  re*
alizt'd,  the  Holy  Ghost  which  imparta
its  gifts  unto  men  are  not  received,
and  hence  the  fallacy  of  the  doctrines
of  men  is  exposed,  so  that  none  need  be
deceived.  Our  boys  are  often  called
from  the  plow  and  the  workshop,  to
go  abroad  to  the  nations  to  dissemi-
nate the  principles  of  the  everlasting
Gospel.  By  what  power  are  our
young  men  sustained,  who  go  forth,
inexperienced,  without  much  educa-
tion, presenting  in  meekness,  to  a
learned  and  intelligent  world,  thu
Gospel  of  Christ?  God,  through
his  angels,  attends  them  ;  he  strength*
ens  their  feeble  knees,  and  gives
them  utterance.

I  was  once  preaching  to  a  Luge
assembly  in  Collinsville,  Connecticut;
when  I  got  through,  a  young  clergy-
man came  forward,  and  asked  me  if
I  had  received  any  diploma  from
college.  I  answered  him,  "  No."
uDo  you  know,1*  s;iid  he,  "that  a
man  who  has  not  received  a  college
diploma,  has  no  right  to  preach  ?  "
"No,  sir,"  I  said,  *#  I  do  not  know
it"  "Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "that  is
the  case/'  I  then  asked  him  to  in-
form me  how  it  was  that  Jesus
preached,  without  receiving  a  college
diploma  ?  and  if  such  tilings  as  col-
lege diplomas  were  ever  known  or


219

I  read  of  in  the  ministry  of  Christ  and
his  Apostles  ?

The  Lord  chose  poor,  illiterate
fishermen,  and  sent  them  forth  to
|  combat,  and  even  to  confound  the
wisdom  of  the  wise*  His  Gospel  is
represented  to-day,  hy  tin  weak
things  of  the  earth,  and  has  been
now  for  over  forty  years.  And  what
is  the  refill  It  of  our  preaching?  Let
facts  speak  fur  then  use  Ives.  You  can
behold  for  yourselves,  a  people  ^ath-
I  ered  here  from  the  different  nations,
all  prompted  by  the  same  motives,
namely,  to  build  up  and  establish
Zion  on  the  earth,  in  fulfillment  of
the  words  of  God,  through  the
mouths  of  his  Prophets,  Why  have
we  been  "so  successful,  thus  tar,  in
accomplishing  so  great  a  work  ?
Simply,  because  God  has  confirmed'
our  preaching,  and  the  testimonies
we  have  borne,  by  conferring  the
Holy  Ghost,  with  signs  following
the  believers.  Had  not  this  been
the  case,  Utah  would  be  to  day,  what
it  was  on  the  24th  of  July,  1847,
when  the  pioneers  fhsfc  sut  foot  on
its  i-oil — a  barren,  desolate  laud,
unfit  for  the  habitation  of  man*
The  results  of  our  preaching  bespoke
the  fulfillment  ot  prophecy.  Zion
has  arisen,  and  some  of  the  prophe-
cies concerning  her,  recorded  in  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  are  having
their  fulfillment.

Angels  have  visited  the  earth  and
delivered  the  keys  of  salvation  to
the  Prophet  Joseph.  He  lived  long
enough  to  effect  a  complete  organ-
ization of  the  Church,  strictly  ac-
cording to  the  revelations  of  God  to
him,  God  has  in  our  day  given
gifts  to  men j  for  the  perfecting  of
the  Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  min-
istry, for  the  edifying  of  the  body
of  Christ.  The  Apostle  likened  the
Church  unto  a  perfect  body-  One
part  cannot  say  to  the  other,  I  have
no  need  of  you;  hut  all  the  part*


220


Journal  of  discourses


are  necessary  to  complete  the  organ-
ization; winch  is  just  as  necessary
to  t  Sect  the  perfection  of  the  Saints
of  this  generation  as  of  any  other.
Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
repent n nee  and  baptism  for  t lie  re-
minion  of  sin,  are  absolute  require*
merits,  which  must  be  complied  with,
before  the  Holy  Ghost  can  be  received.
These  signs,  says  the  Apostle,  shall
follow  them  that  believe: in  ruy  name
shall  rhey  cast  out  devils,  they  shall
lay  hands  on  the  sick  and  they  shall
recover,  etc.  These  blessings  are
the  right  of  every  honest  believer  in
Cbiist.  They  were  set  in  the  Church
by  the  Savior,  and  remain  with  the
Church,  as  a  mighty  cloud  of  wit-
nesses throughout  this  Territory
could  testify  to  ;  and  not  only  they
of  this  Territory,  but  those  of  every
land  and  clime  wherever  the  Gospel
has  been  preached  and  a  Branch  of
the  Church  organ i£edt  Says  the
Apostle  John,  this  Gospel  is  to  bo
preached  to  all  that  dwell  on  the
earlh,  to  eveiy  nation,  and  kindred,
and  tongue,  and  people;  as  a  witness
before  the  second  corning  of  our  Sa-
vior to  dwell  on  the  earth,  who  will
come,  not  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,
cot  riding  upon  a  colt,  the  otject  of
the  people's  scorn.  But  he  will  come
in  power  and  great  glory,  taking
vengeance  upon  them  that  love  and
fear  him  not  We,  therefore,  are
eending  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to
whomsoever  will  receive  them,  that
they  may  come  up  to  Zion  and  escape
the  judgments  that  will  most  assur-
edly overtake  the  wicked,

I  know  that  we  areenpnged  in  the
great  latter-day  woik,  the  work  of
the  living  God.  And  I  know  that
Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet  ot  God,
chosen  and  set  apart  to  usher  in  this
last  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times.  He  has  left  a  record,  pub-
lished, wealed  by  his  own  blood,  con-
firm i  eg the truth of the  same.


This  testimony  is  in  force  to  all  the
world,  find  it  w  ill  be  in  force  until
the  end  of  time. This  we  declare
is  the  kingdom  which  the  Prophet
Daniel  saw in  vision,  never  n:ore
to  be  thrown  down  or  given  to  ano-
ther people. In these  mountains
Zion  is  to  be  built  up,  in  fulfillment
'  of  prophecy,  and  every  jot  and  little
that  has  been  spoken of  her  must
come  to  pass. The  hist  is  first,  and
the  first  will  be  last.  The  Gospel  was
first  sent  directly  to  the  Jews ;  the
Savior  himself  was  of  that  lineage,
through  the  loins  of  David.  He
came  to  his  own,  but  they  received
him  not. He  was  reproached  of
thera,  from  the  day  of  his  birth  until,
they  crucified him on the  crossr
Consequently,  the  risen  Redeemeo
|  commanded  his  Apostles  to  turn  te
the Gentiles. They  received  the
work,  and  enjoyed the gifts  and
blessings  of  the  Gospel,  even  the
Comforter, the Holy  Ghost ;  and
the  Priesthood  continued  with  them
until  a  portion  of  them  became  un-
worthy of  it,  through  their  falling
away,  while  the  faithful  were  har-
assed and  persecuted  to  their  death.
The  Gospel  is  now  restored  to  us
Gentiles,  for  we  are  all  Gentile3  in  a
national  capacity,  and  it  will  continue
with  us  if  we  are  faithful,  until  the
law  is  bound,  and the  testimony
sealed,  and  the  times  of  the  Gentiles
are  fulfilled,  when  it  will  again  revert
to  the  Jews,  whom  the  Lord  will
have  pre] m red  to  receive  it.  They
will  gather  to  their  own  land,  taking
with  them  their  gold  and  silver,  and
will  re-build  their  city  and  temple,
according  to  the  prediction  of  M  >ses
and  the  Prophets. When  this  time
arrives,  which  is  nigh,  even  at  our
1  doors,  let  the  Gentile  nations  who
reject  the  Gospel  which  is  now  sent
to  them,  prepare  to  meet  the  judg-
ments of  an offended  God  !  For
I  when  their  cup  is  full  even  to  the


SIMPLICITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


2*1


brim,  the  Lord  will  then  remember
the  chastisements  of  the  Jews,  his
favored  people,  and  at  whose  hands  1
they  will  have  received  double  for
their  iniquities. Offences  must  come,
said  the  Savior,  but  woe  unto  them
by  whom  they  come. Woe  unto  the
Gentiles,  who  have  administerd  afflic-  j
tions  to  the  Jews  for  these  many
years  ! Woe  unto  them  it  they  now
reject  this  only  means  of  salvation,  lj
for  the  awful  calamities  spoken  of
in  these  books,  the  Bible  and  Book
of Mormon, will certainly  befall
them.  !

The  principle  of  gathering  has
been  preached  for  the  past  thirty-
seven  years.  Before  tins  principle
was  preached  by  the  Elders,  a  great
many  of  tlw  people  had  received  the
spirit  of  it;  and  the  consequence
was,  that  no  sooner  had  it  been  taught
by  the  Presidency  of  the  Church,
than  the  people  everywhere  were
ready  to  receive  it.  It  had  been
revealed  to  them  by  (he  Holy  Ghost,
whose  office  it  is  to  reveal  that  which
is  past,  present,  and  that  which  is
to  come,  and  no  surer,  stronger  tes-
timony can  be  given  to  any  one  than
it  affords.  We  have  gathered  here
for  the  express  purpose  of  establish-
ing Ziou,  which,  according  to  the
Scriptures,  must  be  before  the  Gospel
can  be  sent  to  the  Jews.  Passage
after  passage  might  be  found  in  the
Bible,  referring  to  our  coming  here  ;
the  casting  up  of  the  highway  on
which  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord
might  travel ;  the  building  of  our
city  in  a  law  place,  which  was  to  be  |
called  Sought  out,  a  city  not  for-
saken ;  and  how  the  Lord  would
cause  springs  of  water  to  spring. up,
and  the  desert  to  blossom  like  the
rose,  etc*,  all  of  which  have  had
their  fulfillment.  But  bow  do  the
inhabitants  of  t he  earth  regard
these  things  ?  With  great  indiffer-
ence. In  fact  it  would  be  a  marvel  to


me  were  it  otherwise,  for  according
to  the  predictions,  the  people  in
this  age  were  to  be  like  unto  the
people  of  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot
marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,
practising  all  manner  of  wickedness
and  abominations,  and  wholly  un-
prepared for  the  coming  of  t lie  Son
of  Man.  The  Jews  were  under  no
condemnation  for  rejecting  the  Savior,
until  lie  appeared  amongst  them  as
the  light  of  t he  world,  then  they  had
,  no  longer  a  cloak  for  their  sins  ;and
in  rejecting  him,  and  those  who  were
sent  unto  them,  they  stood  con-
demned before  the  Lord,  and,  con-
sequently, his  threatened  judgments
overtook  them.  The  people  who
heard  not  the  Gospel  preached  from
the  days  of  the  Apostles  until  its
restoration  in  our  day,  are  under  no
condemnation  for  rejecting  the  Gos-
pel during  the  time  it  had  been  t^ikea
from  the  earth.  But  tin1  light  again
lias  dawned  upon  the  world,  and  the
Elders  of  Israel  are  engaged  pro-
claiming it  far  and  wide,  and  as  it
was  with  the  Jews,  so  it  will  be  with
the  Gentiles  wh  ■  reject  it,  for  t i u •  pre-
dictions ot  God's  Prophets  most  have
their  fulfillment,  and  neither  you  nor
j  I  can  prevent  it  if  we  would.  We
are  charged  with  being  uncharitable,
because  we  proclaim  these  things.
We  are  n*t  to  blame — we  are  merely
the  creatures  used  by  the  Almighty
in  doing  his  bidding.  The  work  is
his,  the  plan  of  salvation  is  the  crea-
tion of  his  superior  wisdom,  not  ours.

Let  me  say  to  my  brethren  and
sisters,  our  responsibilities  are  trreafc,
far  greater  than  the  outside  world
who  reject  the  Gospel,  We  have
:  received  the  light,  the  knowledge  of
God  ;  we  are  under  sacred  covenants
to  star]  1  by  the  truth,  and  bv  one
another  in  righteousness.  If  we  are
found  traitors  to  the  cause,  crucify  ing
i  the  Son  of  Man  afresh,  great  will  be
our  condemnation. Our  time  all  tted


Jul  RXAL  Ol MSi  'Ml  HSliS

#


as  to  tarry  her©  below  is  short ;  but
our  spirits  are  eternal,  and  will  live
forever,  and  our  future  destiny  de-
pends on  this  our  earthly  career.
Th'  Lord  has  ^  iven  I ■  is  angels  charge
concerning  us;  they  are  our  friends,
and  their  eyes  »re  over  us.  They
stand  in  waiting  uiih  sharp  sickles  -
10  their  hands,  ready  to  gu  forth  and
reap  down  the  earth. Our  calling  is


to  perfect  ourselves,  to  purify  Zionf
an  1  make  it  a  fit  habitation  for  th©
Son  of  God  when  he  comes;  to  build
Temples,  and  in  them  perform  the
rites  and  ordinances  for  the  living
and  the  dead,  and  accomplish  all  that
God  designs  us  to  do.  And  that  we
may  be  faithful  in  the  ^rfbrrnanci
thereof,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Deliver  tin  in  this  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

A  FTB&NooN,  A  i  o 26,  1876.


(Reported  hy  Geo  F,  Gihbs,)


FROPHKCIKS  nF  JOSEPH  SMITH  AND  Til  Kill  LITERAL  FULFILLMENT — THE
RISK  OF  THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  GATHERING — MARTYRDOM  OF  THE
SAINTS  AND  FLIGHT  OF  THE  CHURCH  TO  THE  ROCKY  MOUNTAIN'S —
THE  GREAT  UNITED  STATES  REBELLION  —  THE  GOSPEL  TO  BE
PREACHED  TO  THE  GENTILES;  THEN  TO  THE  JEWS— P.  AGUES  OF  THE
LAST  DAYS  — MILLENNIAL  REIGN.


A  little  upwards  of  forty- six  years
ago,  the  Lord  our  God,  through  the
administration  of  holy  angels,  or-
ganized his  Church  in  the  State  of
New  Fork,  and  called  men  to  the
ministry,  commanding  them  to  go
forth  as  missionaries,  and  preach
to  the  people  of  the  United  States.
They,  in  obedience  to  the  command,
went  forth  in  their  weakness,  com-
mencing their  labors  in  the  State  of
New  Y^rk,  and  succeeded  in  baptizing
belie  vers,  and  organizing  branches
of  the  Church.  From  that  day  to
the  present,  the  Lord  has  been  with


his  servants,  and  with  the  people  who
have  embraced  the  message  they
proclaim.

In  connection  with  the  establish-
ing of  this  Church,  the  Lord  inau-
gurated the  Gathering,  which  is
peculiar  to  the  dispensation  in  which
we  live.  This  work  of  gathering
of  the  people,  has  continued  for
forty -six  years,  and  we  can  behold
its  results — a  people  settled  through-
out these  mountain  valleys,  number-
ing a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand.

I  have  often  reflected  upon  the
early  prophecies  that were  given


PROPHECIES  OF  JOSEPH SMITH,  ETC.


through  oo r  Prophet,  Joseph  Smith,
whom  the  Lord  called  to  organize
his  Church  in  this  last  dispensation,
and  have  often  marveled  at  their
literal  fulfillment.  I  will  refer  to
some  of  them.

It  is  well  known  that  the  Book  of
Mormon  was  translated  by  Joseph
Smith,  from  certain  plates  which  he
di*covered,  deposited  in  a  certain  hill,
anciently  called  Cumorah,  which  is
situated  in  Ontario  County,  State
of  New  York,  having  previously  been
shown  the  place  in  open  vision.
This  book  was  translated,  and  its
first  edition  of  five  thousand  copies
published,  before  the  organiza-
tion of  this  ChureTT  It  was  stated
in  that  book,  that  a  Church  should
arise,  and  the  people  who  should
embrace  the  Gospel  which  it  con-
tained, should  be  gathered  together
into  one  body.  For  the  fulfillment
of  this,  I  have  only  to  refer  you  to
the  people,  the  body  of  this  Church,
inhabiting  thesg  mountain  vales.
This  prophecy  also  speaks  of  the
extent  of  this  future  work — it  should
not  only  be  preached  to  the  people
of  this  American  Continent,  but  it
should  be  proclaimed  to  every  nation,
kindred,  tongue  and  people,  under
heaven,  and  the  gathering  should  be
from  all  the;  e  nations.

An  impostor  may  prophesy,  but
he  cannot  fulfill  his  own  prophecies.
If  Joseph  Smith  was  an  impostor,
as  the  world  say  he  was,  how  could
he  know  beforehand  of  the  rise  of
this  Church,  and  that  the  Gospel
would  be  preached  in  all  parts  of
this  nation  ?  Still  more,  how  could
he  know,  that  it  would  go  to  every
land,  and  be  proclaimed  throughout
every  nation  of  the  earth,  and  even
to  those  inhabiting  the  islands  of
the  sea  ?  Has  this  been  fulfilled  ?
All  you  have  to  do  is  to  make  your-
selves acquainted  with  the  fact.
You  will  find  that  the  Gospel  mes-


2  23

sage  has  been  carried  out  by  our  mis*
sionaries  to  the  nations  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland,  to  France,
Germany,  Italy,  Switzerland,  and
the  countries  of  Scandinavia,  to
Austria  and  Russia,  to  Asia  and
Africa,  to  Australia  and  the  island
of  New  Zealand,  and  the  various
islands  of  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,
as  well  as  to  the  Sandwich  and  So-
ciety Islands.  Among  all  these
nations,  this  work  has  gone  in  fulfill-
ment of  prophecy,  published  before
there  was  any  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter-day  Saints,  Joseph  Smith,
therefore,  so  far  as  the  fulfillment
of  his  prophecies  is  concerned,  has
so  much  to  establish  the  divinity  of
his  mission.

Let  us  rwfer  still  further  to  the
prophecies  contained  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  We  read  in  that  book,
that  not  only  a  Church  should  arise,
etc.,  but  that  the  blood  of  the  Saints
who  should  embrace  its  faith,  should
cry  from  the  ground  to  the  God  of
heaven,  against  the  inhabitants  of
this  nation.  How  unlikely  a  thing
to  be  fulfilled !  Here,  u pun  this
laud,  is  one  of  the  most  free  govern-
ments given  to  man,  bestowing  upon
all,  civil  nnd  religious  liberty.  Iu
other  lands,  persecution  existed  iu
consequence  of  men's  religious  con-
victions ;  here  all  religious  societies
enjoyed  the  freedom  of  religions
liberty  to  the  fullest  extent.  If  an
impostor  were  going  to  prophesy,
wouM  he  not  be  most  likely  to  pre-
dict something  that  would  suit  the
popular  feeling  of  the  people,  some-
thing that  would  naturally  come  to
pass  ?  But  for  him  to  prophesy  that
the  blood  of  the  Saints,  who  were
yet  unconverted,  should  cry  unto
God  for  vengeance,  agaiust  a  people
who  glorified  iu  their  freedom,  who
could  believe  it  ?  The  people  said
such  a  thing  never  could  come  to
pass ;  Joseph  Smith  must  be  an  im-


I


224


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


postor.  But  how  long  was  it  before
this  met  with  its  fulfillment  ?  His-
tory shows  that  three  years  after
the  rise  of  this  Church,  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  numbering  some  twelve
hundred  persons,  were  settled  in
Jackson,  one  of  the  western  coun-
ties of  Missouri,  where  they  pos-'
sessed  flourishing  homes,  which  they
had  made  out  of  the  lands  they  had
bought  of  the  United  States  Govern*
merit,  and  which  they  had  paid  for,
and  where,  in  consequence  of  their
having  preached  the  ancient  Gospel,
which  had  been  restored  to  the
earth  through  the  ministration  of
angels,  they  met  with  serious  op-
position, insomuch  that  they  were
finally  driven  ra  masse  from  their
possessions,  their  homes  were  torn
down  and  destroyed,  their  animals
were  shot  down  as  you  wouIdTJhoot
the  wild  beus's  of  the  forest,  their
hay  stacks  were  burned,  and  their
corn  fields  despoiled,  and  many  of
the  Saints  were  also  shot  dead  by
the  hands  of  thmr  persecutors.  Whit
for?  Was  it  because  they  had  com-
mitted crimes  that  merited  this
treatment  ?  No,  their  court  re-
cords do  not  show  a  single  instance
of  our  people  having  broken  the
laws.  Was  it  polygamy  ?  No,  for
the  principle  of  plural  marriage  was
not  known  among  as  then.  They
said,  "  You  proclaim  that  God  is
a  God  of  revelation.  We  do  not
believe  it.  Yon  say  that  God  has
re-organized  his  Church  on  the  earth,
according  to  the  ancient  pattern*
We  do  not  believe  it.  We  do  not
wish  such  doctrines,  we  do  not
wish  our  families  corrupted  by  be-
lieving in  them,  for  prophets,  and
new  revelation,  and  miracles  are
all  done  away  with  ;  therefore  you
must  leave  us*  We  have  pi  edged
ourselves,  our  lives,  and  all  we  pos-
sess, to  drive  you  from  our  midst."
Perhaps  you  strangers  may  think  I


*m  telling  yon  that  which  is  false.
It  is  written  and  printed  by  our  ene-
mies, and  forms  part  of  history ;  and
'it  famishes  another  testimony  prov-
ing the  divine  calling  of  the  boy  who
.whs  inspired  of  the  Lord  to  translate
that  book.

i  After  we  had  again  established
ourselves  in  a  new  country,  and  built
up  a  beautiful  city,  and  when  all  was
peaceful  and  prosperity  attending
us,  this  same  Prophet,  on  assembling
the  Elders  of  this  Church  on  a  cer-
tain occasion  at  Nauvoo,  told  ns  that
we  would  have  to  flee  to  the  Rocky
Mountains for  saf'etv. The  fulfill-

pj

ment  of  this  prediction  is  apparent
to  all  I  might  mention  scores  of
others,  and  in  no  instance  has  that
man  uttered  a  single  prophecy  that
either  bus  not  already  been  fa!  filled,
to.  thefvery  letrer,  or  will  not  have
its  fulfill rnent  in  the  due  time  of  ths
Lord.  I  will  mention  another « pro-
phecy, which  was  printed  in  several
languages,  and  published  araorig  the
various  natioiHP  ii#%hvse  languageg
it  was  printed,  whJoh  was  twenty-
<el?ht  years  reaching  its  fulfillment.
The  Lord  revealed  to  the  Prophet,
Joseph  Smith,  that  there  would  be  ft
great  rebellion  between  the  Northern
and  Southern  States,  commencing  in
the  State  of  South  Carolina,  and
that  it  should  terminate  in  the  death
and  misery  of  many  souls.  This,  as
you  all  know,  has  been  literally  ful-
filled. When  I  was  a  boy,  I  traveled
extensively  in  the  United  States  and
the  Cauadas,  preaching  this  restored
Gospel.  I  had  a  manuscript  copy
of  this  revelation,  which  1  carried
in  my  pocket,  and  I  was  in  the  hi;  hit
of  reading  it  to  the  people  among
whom  I  traveled  and  preached.  As
a  general  thing  the  people  regarded
it  hb  the  height  of  nonsense,- saying
the  Unto©  ^||s  too  strong  to  be  bro-
ken ;  and  I,  they  said,  was  led  awayf
the  victim  of  an  impostor* I  knew


•


PROPHECIES  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH,  ETC,


225


the  prophecy  was  true,  for  the  Lord
had  spoken  to  me  and  had  given  me
revel  tit  ton.  I  knew  also  concerning
the  divinity  of  this  work.  Year  after
year  passed  away,  while  every  little
while  some  of  rhe  acquaintances  I  had
formerly  made  would  say,  u  Wei!,
what  is  going  to  Leofiie  of  Hi ^ r  pre-
diction  ?  It's  never  going  to  be  lul
filled,"  Si  id  I,  st  Wait,  the  Lord  has
his  set  time."  By  and  hy  it  rani**
along,  and  the  first  battle  was  fought
at  Charleston,  S  iiith  Carolina.  This
is  another  testimony  that  Joseph
Smith  wis  a  Prophet,  of  the  Moat
Hiu'h  God;  he  not  only  foretold  the
C  ommg  of  a  irr^at  civil  war  at  a  time
when  statesman  even  never  dreamed
of  such  a  tiling  but  he  named  the
very  place  where  it  should  commence
I  have  not  time  now  to  notice  any

to/

others.  I  wish,  however,  to  say  mure
particularly  t>  the  strangers  present,
thut  God  informed  us  rm  mediately
after  the  wguuization  of  thin  Church,
that  this  Gospel  should  he  preached
first  to  the  nations  o!  the  Gentifea,
and  then  the  Lord  would  c  dl  in  his


t


a  a  $


mission  to  the  scattered  remnants  of

the  house*  of  Israel,  that  are  among
the  Gentile  nations-  You  have  nor
heard  of  our  trying  to  convert  I  he
Jewt*.  Why  ?  tJectose  G  y\  ha>  de-
cre£g£  and  determine  1  that  he  will
f ti! fill  the  times  \  the  Gentiles  tirst,
in  aoc  >rdauce  with  ancient  prophecy.
When  that  time  arrives,  the  Lord
will  have  prepared  some  of  t lie  Jewish
nation  to  receive  the  (tospeh  and  then
ttiej  will  gather  to  theor  own  hi  no1,
ami  rebuild  their  city  upon  it**  former
site.  lrou  doubtless  will  remember
those  words  of  the  Saviour  referring
to  tin*  J h wish  ^aation,  which  can  lie
found  iii  the  !ilcit  chapter  oi  St.
Luke—"  For  there  shall  be  great
distress  in  the  land,  aud  wrath  upon
propter And  they  shall  fall  by


the


Sword,  and


jNq.  15,


Ud  away  captive  into  all  nations:
and  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  do  wo
of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  times  of  the
Gentiles  be  fulfilled."  How  and  in
what  way  will  the  Lord  fulfill  the
times  of  the  Gentiles  ?  There  must
first  lie  a  revealed  message,  a  Gospel
messajgp,  sent  to  them.  The  preach-
ing of  this  message  is  referred  to  in
the  14th  chapter  of  Revelations,  by
the  Apostle  John*  who  in  vision  saw
the  an^el  in  the  act  of  bringing  it  to
the  earth.  And  we  are  tol  i  it  was  to
be  preached  to  all  nations  which
may  be  said  to  be  composed  of  the

two  peoples  known  as  the  Gunnies
mid  t he  Jews.  But  the  Lot  I  o  s
said  that  u  the  last  shall  be  tirst,  and
tlu*  tirst  shall  be  last,"  Jesos  came
to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  o#
Israel,  but  they  rejected  him,  aud  the
Apostles  were  moved  upon  to  say*
fct  Lo,  vve  turn  to  the  Gentiles;"  and
they  rlid  so,  the  Jews  having  proved
themselves  unworthy  of  e*ernal  life,
k<  and  the  kingdom  uf  Go  1  snail
be  taken  from  you,"  says  the  Savior,
"and  given  to  a  nation  bringing
forth  the  fruits  thereof."  The  Gen-
tile-*,  to  whom  the  Gospel  waq  to  be
given,  received  it,  and  the  gifts  aud
graces  of  the  Church,  woeh  were
far f»re  n joyed  by  Israel,  were  n  ►w
m  unites  ted  anions  the  (jen tiles,  Hut*
brhoid,  they  corrupted  thern>el res,
after  having  received  the  kingdom,
au  l  I  ti*d  nereeived  t  he  decline  of
their  faith,  which  whs  the  betrnoir  a?
of  the  great  4i  fa  1 1 i ng  awa  ,  «  h  i v h
he,  to  ios  .second  episi  ie  to  the  Tit  s-
salon  hi  us,  said  roust  be  before  tt»e  dnyr
ot  the  Lord  came.  Also  in  f hi  11  Mr
Buffer  of  Romans,  P«f*1  sped**  o|
the  Gen  tilt  a  who  had  reee.vei  ohe
Gospel  as  tue  wild  olive  tre**,  h  ivinij
hct'u  grafted  into  the  t  one  utivi*  tjee*
aud  cautious  I  hem  in  t  is  langn  ige—
k4  Because  of  unbelief,  ihey  (l-rntd)
were  broken  ofl',  aud  th<>u  *t  rdest
by  faith. Be  not  hi^hniinde  i,  but

Vol.  XVI  '


226


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


fear*  For  if  God  spared  not  the
natural  brunches,  take  herd  lest  he
also  **pare  not  thee"  This,  with
other  prophetic  warnings  of  a  similar
character,  was  disregarded,

1  will  refer  you  to  another  ancient
prophecy  contained  in  the  4th  chapter
of  the  second  of  Timothy — "  For  the
time  will  come  when  they  will  not
endure  sound  doctrine;  but  after
their  own  lusts  shrill  they  heap  to
themselves  teachers,  having  itching
ears  ;  and  they  shall  turn  away  their
ears  from  the  truth,  and  shull  be
turned  unto  fables;"  and  who,  be
says,  in  the  previous  chapter,  shall
4i  have  a  form  of  godliness,  but  de-
nying the  power  thereof  j  from  such
turn  away/1  It  seems,  then,  that
this  people,  whom  Paul  speaks  of,
were  to  have  a  furm  of  godliness;
they  wcr*%  in  ut  her'  words,  to  be  a  pious
people,  professedly  a  very  religious
people,  but  wen1  only  to  possess  a
form,  lacking  all  power;  to  be  desti-
tute, therefore,  of  Apostles  and  Pro-
phets, miracles,  etc.  How  long  was
the  people  to  continue  in  this  state  ?
John  informs  un  that  this  state  of
things  would  continue  a  long  time;
that,  instead  of  the  Church,  another
ptrat  power  should  arise,  to  be  called
**  Mystery,  Babylon  the  Great,  the
Mother  of  Harlots,  and  abominations
of  the  earth,  presenting  in  her  hand
a  golden  cup  full  of  abominations
and  filthiness  of  her  fornications;
which  should  be  drunken  with  the
blood  of  the  Saints,  and  with  the
blood  of  the  marlvrs  of  Jesus.  And
this  power  was  to  prevail  against  the
Saints  and  destroy  them*  How  long
was  it  to  exist?  Until  another
angel  should  fly  through  the  midst
of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  commit  to  the  earth,  with
power  to  again  administer  its  ordi-
nances. To  whom  is  the  angel  to
bring  the  Gospel?  The  Scriptures
say,  the  first  shall  be  last,  and  the


last  shall  be  first.  The  Gentiles  were
the  last  to  receive  the  Gospel  in  an-
cient times,  but  on  its  restoration  by
the  angel  in  the  last  days,  they  are
to  receive  it  first,  and  then  the  Jews,
But  before  the  Jews  receive  it,  the
following  words  of  the  Savior  must
be  fulfilled — u  Jerusalem  shall  be
trodden  do  mi  of  the  Gentiles,  un  til
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  he  fulfil  led,
when  the  Gospel  again  will  revert
to  that  peonle.  Wbat  do  you  think
will  bring  about  the  fulfillment  of
the  times  of  the  Gentiles?  It.  must
be  the  promulgation  of  the  Gospel,
which  the  angel  brings,  which  is  to
be  sounded  in  the  eaftS  of  the  Gentile
nations ;  all  those  receiving  tt  are  to
gather  out  from  this  spiritual  wick-*
edness  called  Babylon  the  Gftfat,
because  God  lias  decreed  In  r  dowd*
fall.  The  overthrow  of  Babylon  is
spoken  of  in  connection  with  the
bringing  of  the  Gospel  by  the  angel,
who  declares  also,  "the  hour  of  his
judgment  is  come,51  Judgment  upon
whom?  First,  upon  the  Gentile
nations,  when  their  timea  are  ful-
filled. In  what  way?  By  visiting
upon  them  famines,  and  pesulences,
and  earthquakes;  nation  rising  against
nation  in  war,  etc,  until  the  Gentile
nations  are  overthrown.  Or,  to
Speak  in  the  language  of  John,  who
declared  that  after  the  angrf  shall
bring  the  Gospel,  another  ant: el  shall
follow,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  say-
ing, Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen,  be-
cause she  made  all  nations  drink  of
the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  forni-
cation; she  is  fallen  like  a  great  mill-
stone, cast  into  the  depths  of  the
sea,  and  no  more  place  found  for
her*

How  long  will  it  be  before  the
times  of  thi*  Gentiles  are  fulfilled  ?
This  is  a  question  I  cannot  fully  an-
swer. It  will  be  in  the  generation
that  the  angel  comes*  Forty -six
years  have  alretidy  transpired,  since


PKOrilKCIES  OF  JUSEPil  SMITH,  ETC.


227


the  Lord  lent  his  Gospel  message  to
the  Gentile  nations;  and  for  upwards
of  forty  years  the  Saints  have  been
gathering  out  from  the  midst  of
Babylon,  in  fulfillment  of  another
prophecy  of  John — u  And  I  heard
another  voice  from  hen ven,  saying,
Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye
be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that
ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues.  For
her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven,
and  G  >  1  hath  remembered  her  ini-
quities/' Remember,  strangers  and
all,  that  this  gathering  of  the  people
was  it *f  to  result  from  a  cunningly
devised  fable,  or  the  natural  scheming
of  man  ;  but  it  should  be  in  conse-
quence of  new  revelation — a  voice
from  heaven,  commanding  the  people
to  come  nut  from  those  tint  ions  where
the  Mother  of  Harlots  has  her  seat.
For  It  is  written  in  the  revelation  of
John,  that  the  great  wafers  upon
winch  the  millions  called  Babvlon
sit,  are  nations,  and  multitudes,  and
tongues,  and  people.  "  Come  out  of
her  my  people;'1  Why?  That  ye
be  not  pirtakers  of  her  sirs.  How
great  an-*  her  sins  ?  u  Her  sins  have
reached  unto  heaven,  and  God  hath
remembered  her  iniquities/'  Come
out  from  Babylon,  lest  you  be  made
partakers  of  her  plagues.  Death
and  mourning,  lamentation  and  dis>
tress,  will  be  visited  upon  all  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth.  But  blessed
arc  they  who  come  out  from  Babylon,
for  they  shall  stand  in  holy  places  and
not  be  moved,  having  kept  the  com-
mandments of  the  Most  High,

But  if  you  Latter-day  Saints  who
have  r>  (reived  the  message  of  the
everlasting  Gospel,  and  who  have,
in  obedience  to  the  voice  from  hca-
Ttn,  gathered  out  of  Babylon,  if
you  pollute  yourselves  by  turning
again  to  the  vanities,  wickedness,
and  corruptions  of  the  people  from
whose  midst  you  have  been  delivered,
then,  s  iys  the  Lord,  *'  Behold,  judg-


ment shall  begin  at  the  house  of
mod,"  it  shall  begin  with  you  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  then  will  go  forth  to
the  nations  and  kingdoms  of  the
earth,  weeping,  wailing  and  lamen-
tations among  all  people,  which  will
come  to  pass  just  as  literally  as  that
foretold  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
concerning  what  should  take  place
between  the  North  and  the  South.

These  plagues  named  in  John's
revelations,  will  take  place  literally —
"The  Lord  Gud  will  curse  the  waters
of  the  great  deep,  and  they  shall  be
turned  into  bluoil."  ct  The  sea  shall
become  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  man,
and  every  living  thing  in  the  sea
shall  be  destroyed/*  And  the  time
will  come,  when  the  seven  angels
having  the  seven  last,  trumps  will
sound  their  trumps  literally,  and  the
sound  thereof  will  be  heard  among
the  nations,  just  preparatory  to  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  ;  and  all
the  judgments  foretold  by  John,
which  are  to  succeed  the  sound  of
each  of  the  seven  trumpets,  will  he
fulfilled  literally  upon  the  earth  in
their  times  and  seasons.  And  the
wicked  will  gnaw  their  tongues  for
peace,  and  will  curse  God,  wishing  to
die  beca  use  of  t  h  ei  r  pa  i  n .  T  i  i  esc  a  re
they  who  repented  not  when  the  gos-
pel was  preached  to  them,  and  who
bo  ame  hard  ned  in  their  iniquities^
which  were  overflowing,  in  order  that
God  might  visit  them  according  to
all  that  had  been  spoken  by  the
mouths  of  his  ancient  Prophets.

What  will  become  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints?  When  the  judgments
shall  have  ceased,  which  will  be  visited
first  on  the  house  of  the  Lord,  they
wbo  remain  will  spread  forth,  increase
and  multiply;  and  they  will  build
upon  this  continent  a  great  and  mag-
nificent city,  called  Zion,  or  the  New
Jerusalem.  And  they  will  build  a
Temple  within  that  city,  upon  which
a  cloud  will  rest  by  day,  and  the


228


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


shirting  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night ;
and  upon  all  tlie  assemblies  of  the
people  of  Zion  the  Lord  will  create
this  glorious  appendage,  and  will  shed
forth  his  loving  kindness.  This  is
the  destiny  of  Zion,  as  foreseen  by
Isaiah  and  David,  and  ninny  of  tlie
Prop! ie is  who  have  predicted  con-
cerning her.

Says  one,  I  will  wait  to  see  if  Cod
will  do  these  things,  B  »t  perari ven-
ture, while  waiting,  you  may  he  cut
asunder,  and  your  portion  appointed
amonir  the  unbelievers,  where  there
are  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnash-
ing  of  teeth.  Woe  ucto  them  who
wail  to  see  if  God  will  really  fulfill
the  prophecies  of  his  servants,  and
who  repent  nut  of  their  pins!  But
blessed  Hie  they  who  repent  as  soon
9?  M  i  v  h<  -ir  the  sound  of  the  message,
atnl  v\  ho  taru  unto  the  Loiti  their
God  with  all  their  hearts,  for  they
•hall  be  filled  with  the  J  lolv  Ghuht,
which  hears  record  of  the  Father  and
the  Son,  and  t  hey  shall  be  prepared
for  the  dispensation  of  his  providences,
ami  hail  his  coining  with  great  joy
The  people  of  the  autediluvian  world
waited  one  day  too  long;  they  waiied
unit)  the  flood  came,  when  it  was  too
late,  and  they  were  swept  away,
eight  pei sons  only  escaping  The
Savior,  speaking  of  his  second  cont-
h  g,  said — rt  As  it  was  in  the  days  of
K'-uh,  so  shall  if  be  also  in  the  days
o*  the  Son  of  Man.  They  did  eat,
tlify  drank,  they  married  wives,  they
were  given  in  marriage,  until  the
day  that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark,
and  the  flood  came  and  destroyed
them  all  Likewise  also  as  it  was
in  the  days  of  Lot ;  they  did  eat,
they  drank,  they  bought,  they  sold,
they  planted,  they  builded,  15 ut  the
s;ime  day  that  Lot  went  out  of
Sodom,  it  rained  tire  and  brimstone
from  heaven,  and  destroyed  them
all.  Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the
day  when  the  Son  of  man  is  re-


vealed/' Did  the  Lord  raise  up  a
Prophet  and  warn  the  antediluvians
hv  new  revelation?  He  did:  and
he  did  the  same  in  tlie  case  of  tlie
people  in  the  days  of  Lot Will  he


ilo  the  same
irm  { lie  wi


*rior  to  his  second  com-


IL  lie  is  doing  it  by
means  of  his  Gospel,  revealed  for
the  purpose  of  saving  all  who  receive
it,  who  gather  to  a  place  of  saf  ety,
as  Noah  ami  those  who  believed  his
message  did.  But  t  he  day  will  come
when  the  Lord  will  ' not  spare  any
who  remain  in  Babylon  ;  that  will
he,  however*  when  this  prophecy  of
Isaiah  is  completely  fnl  tilled — "  I
will  gather  the  n  from  the  east,  and
from  the  west ;  I  will  say  to  the
north,  give  up,  and  to  ihe  so  ith,
keep  not  back  ;  bring  my  sons  from
afar,  and  my  daughters  from  the
ends  of  the  earth,  even  every  one
that  is  railed  by  name/'  All  tins
is  to  take  place  in  the  very  dispen-
sation in  which  the  angel  should
bring  the  Gospel,  which  is  the  dis-
pensation of  the  f.  diners  of  times.
The  Aj>ostle  Paul  also  refers  to  the
same  great  event,  in  the  following
lam-ua-e  :  '  That  in  the  dispensa-
tion  of  the  fullness  of  tiness  he
might  gather  together  in  ma-  all
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in
heaven  and  which  are  on  earth;
even  in  him/'  It  is  the  purpose  of
God  then,  not  to  confine  the  gather-
ing to  earthly  Saints  alone."  What,"
says  one*  "are  immortal  beirgs
coming  down  from  heaven  to  live
on  this  earth  f  Certainly,  and  thus
fulfill  ini  m  em  us  prophecies  in  the
i  -criptures  ;  one  of  win*  h  is,  44  They
.shall  reign  on  the  earth/'  Who  are
these  persons  ?  They  are  they  whom
John  heard  singing  in  heaven  about
it  They  said,  "Thou  hast  redeemed
us  out  of  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people,  and  hast  made
ua  unto  our  God,  kings  and  ] priests  :
and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth,"


PHOPIILCieS  Q$  JO*lfiPH  .SMITH,  ETC*


229


What  a  glorious  song  !  While  we
are  singing  about  going  to  heaven,
all  heavenly  Wings  are  singing  about
coming  back  to  earth  to  live  and  to
reign.  Why  ?  Because  this  is  their
inheritance,  they  have  been  made
worthy  through  the  blood  of  the
lamb,  and  their  Redeemer  will  be
their  King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of
Lords,  and  to  his  dominion  there
shall  be  no  end.  When  this  takes
place,  then  will  be  fulfilled  the  say-
ing,  that  all  things  which  are  in
Christ,  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth,
shall  be  gathered  together.  The
wicked,  too,  shall  be  gathered,  but
in  bundles  ready  for  the  burning,  |
Marvel  not,  therefore,  Latter-day
Saints,  that  you  have  been  exalted  !
out  from  among  the  Gentile  nations  !
Marvel  not  that  the  Lord  has  said
to  the  North,*  give  up,  and  to  the
south,  keep  not  back,  bring  my  sons
from  afar,  and  my  daughters  from
the  ends of  the earth  ! Marvel  ;


and  by,  angels  will  come  among  the
Latter-day  Saints  who  have  been
gathered  from  the  nations,  and  they
will  pluck  out  one  here,  and  another
there,  putting  them  into  their  place.
The  separation  of  the  fish  will  tnke
place  ;  the  bad  will  be  cast  away,
while  the  good  vv  11  be  reserved  in
vessels  for  the  Master's  use.

May  the  Lord  who  has  redeemed
us  from  among  the  nations  be*  tow
upon  us  the  rich  blessings  of  his
kingdom,  which  he  lias  decreed  to
bestow  upon  his  people  in  the  latter
days  !  And  may  this  people  spread
forth  on  the  riidit  hand  and  on  the
Uft ;  may  they  enlarge  the  place
of  their  dwelling,  and  stretch  forth
the  curtains  of  their  habitation,  until
I  hey  shall  become  a  great  mountain,
as  the  Prophet  Daniel  lias  predicted,
and  till  the  whole  earth,  until  the
kiuudo  n  and  the  dominion,  and  the
greatness  of  the  kingdom,  under
the  whole  heavens;  shall  be  L'iveu  to


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  17,  1876.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

PERSONAL  REVELATION  THE  BASIS  OF  PERSONAL  KNOWLEDGE — I'HILO-
SOPHIC  VIEW  OF  CREATION — APOSTACY  INVOLVES  DISORGANIZATION
AND  RETURN  TO  PRIMITIVE  ELEMENT— ONE  MAN  POWER.


I  am  about  to  do  the  very  thing  I
did  not  intend  to  do  this  afternoon,
that  is,  speak  to  the  people.  I  hare
absented  myself  from  your  meetings
now  for  some  time,  feeling  that  if  X
came  here  my  spirit  would  be  drawn
out  to  such  a  degree  that  I  would
perhaps  be  under  the  necessity  of
talking  to  you;  I  will  venture,  how-
ever, to  use  my  lungs  for  a  few
minutes,  and  present  u  few  words  of
counsel  to  the  Latter-day  Saints.

There  is  a  Scripturt  which  reads,
**  For  what  man  knoweth  the  things
of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man
which  is  in  him  ?  Even  so  the
things  of  God  kuoueth  no  man,  but
tbe  Spirit  of  God."  This  is  as  true
a  saying  as  there  is  in  the  Bible.
And  on  one  occasion  Jesus  said,  '*  If
any  man  will  do  my  will,  he  shall
know  of  the  doetrine,  whether  it  be
of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  uf  my-
self." Brother  Geo,  Q,  Cannon,  who
has  just  spoken,  lias  testified  to  t lie
word.  I  have  made  these  quotations
to  con  (inn  and  strengthen  what  he
has  said.  Tuere  are  people  enough
here  to  publish  to  the  world  that
there  is  a  rnnn  wljp  testifies  thsit  he
known  that  God  lives,  who  knows
that  Jesus  is  the  Chrut,  tht  Savior


of  the  world,  I  aleo  testify  to  the
truth  of  these  things.  I  have  proven
to  my  satisfaction,  according  to  th#
best  knowledge  1  can  gather,  that
m*n  can  be  deceived  by  the  sight  of
the  natural  eye,  he  can  be  deceived
by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  and  by  the
touch  of  the  hand  ;  that  he  can  be
deceived  in  all  of  what  are  called  the
natural  senses.  But  there  is  one
thing  in  which  he  cannot  be  deceived*
What  is  that  ?  It  is  the  operations
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spiiit  and
power  of  God  upon  the  creature.  It
teaches  him  of  heavenly  things  ;  it
directs  him  in  the  way  of  life;  it
affords  him  the  key  by  which  he  can
test  the  devices  of  man,  ancf  jyhich
recommends  the  tilings  of  God.  The
sayings  which  I  have  quoted  I  have
proven  to  be  true,  and  I  bear  testis
mony  to  them*  The  Latter-day
Saints  have  done  likewise.  Not  only
the  Saints  who  are  present,  antl^who
gathered  to  Zion,  but  those  of  every
nation,  continent,  or  island  who  live
the  religion  taught  by  our  Savior
and  his  Apostles,  and  also  by  Joseph
Smith  ;  thev  also  bear  the  same  testi-
mony,  their  eyes  have  been  quickened
.  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  they  see
|  alike,  their  hearts  have  been  quick-


PERSONAL  REVELATION,  ETC,


231


ened,  and  they  feel  and  understand
alike,  and  there  are  no  disputations
among  them  with  regard  to  the  doc-
t t  inea  of  the  Savior,

Men  begin  to  apostatizG  by  taking
to  themselves  strength,  by  hearkening
to  the  whisperings  of  the  enemy  who
leads  them  astray  little  by  little,  until
they  gather  to  themselves  that  which
they  call  the  wisdom  of  man;  then  they
bfrgin  to  depart  from  God,  and  their
minds  become  confused.  But  all  who
keep  the  faith  are  of  one  heart  and
one  mind,  and  this  testimony  is  so
Confirmed  to  all  that  we  cannot  he
mistaken.  If  we  ask  the  Father,  in
the  name  of  Jesus,  for  such  and  such
favor,  and  it  bo  granted  to  us,  should
we  nut  acknowledge  God  in  this?
If  we  hearken  to  the  whisperings  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  we  shall  feel  our-
selves under  obligations  to  do  so.  In
consequence  of  our  obedience  to  the
will  of  the  Father,  we  know  for  our-
selves,  and  our  knowledge  is  con-
firmed as  we  continue  to  apply  the
Commandments  of  God  in  our  every-
day life.

Brother  Cannon  speaks  of  Christ-
ians. We  are  Christians  professedly,
accord ing^  to  our  religion.  People
have  gathered  to  themselves  certain
ideas,  and  laid  them  down  as  sys-
tems, calling  them  religion,  all  pro-
fessing to  believe  at  id  obey  the  Scrip-
tures. Their  religions  are  peculiar
to  themselves — our  religion  is  pecu-
liar to  God,  to  angels,  and  to  the
righteous  of  time  and  eternity.  Why
are  we  persecuted  because  of  our  re*
lsgion  ?  Why  was  Joseph  Smith
persecuted  ?  Why  was  he  hunted
from  neighborhood  to  neighborhood,
from  city  to  city,  and  from  State  to
State,  and  at  last  suffered  death?
Because  he  received  revelations  from
the  Father,  from  the  Sun,  and  was
ministered  to  by  holy  angels,  and
published  to  the  world  the  direct  will
of  the  Lord  concerning  his  children


on  the  earth.  Again,  why  .was  he
persecuted  ?  Because  he  revealed  to
all  mankind  a  religion  so  plain  and
so  easily  understood,  consistent  with
the  Bible,  and  so  true.  It  is  now  as
it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Savior;
let  people  believe  and  practise  thesa
simple,  Godlike  truths,  and  it  will
be  as  it  was  in  the  old  world,  they
will  say,  if  this  man  be  let  alone  he
will  come  and  take  away  our  peace
and  nation.  Why  ?  Because —
41  Shall  I  quote  Scripture?  If  I  do
not,  I  will  make  a  little."  Because
it  takes  away  their  bread  and  butter,
takes  away  their  salaries;  they  be-
come no  longer  able  to  impose  upon
the  people,  and  to  lead  them  blindly
along,  while  they  themselves  feast
and  fatten  upon  the  labors  of  those
whose  son  Is  they  pro  less  a  watch-
c  ire  over.  They  s%y,  "  We  shall  be
broken  up,  we  shall  have  to  raise  our
own  wheat  and  potatoes,  make  our
own  butter  and  cheese,  and  we  cannot
bear  it,  aud  we  will  not,  we'll  drive
this  religion  from  the  earth."  This
is  really  all  the  reason  there  is,  A
man  rises  up  and  says,  "  I  understand
the  philosophy  of  a  good  many
sciences,  and  I  cannot  believe  as  you
Latter-dny  Saints  do/*  All  your
philosophy,  even  every  iota  of  it
which  is  true,  belongs  to  the  religion
oi  the  Latter-' lay  Saints;  and  I  say
to  all  such,  if  you  believe  the  truth,
you  beheve  j  ist  as  the  Latter-day
Saints  believe.  It  is  said  in  this
book  (the  Bible)  that  God  made  the
earth  in  six  days.  This  is  a  mere
term,  hut  it  matters  nut  whether  it
took  six  days,  six  months,  six  years,
or  six  thousand  years.  The  creation
occupied  certain  periods  of  time.  We
are  not  authorized  to  say  what  the
duration  of  ihese  days  was,  whether
Moses  penned  these  words  as  we
have  them,  or  whether  the  transla-
tors of  the  B.bh*  have  given  the
words  their  in  ten  letl  meaning.  How-


232


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ever,  God  created  the  world.  If  I
were  a  sectarian  I  would  say,  accord-
ing to  their  philosophy,  a  a  I  have
beard  many  of  them  say  hundreds  of
times,  u  God  created  all  things  out
of  nothing;  in  six  days  he  created
the  world  oat  of  nothing."  You
may  be  assured  the  Latter-day  Saints
do  not  believe  any  such  thing*  They
believe  God  brought  forth  material!
out  of  which  he  formed  this  little
terra  firma  upon  which  we  roam,
How  lone  had  this  material  been  in
existence?  Forever  and  forever,  in
sun  e  ad  tape,  in  some  condition.  We
need  not  refer  at  all  to  those  who
were  with  God,  and  who  assisted  him
in  this  work,  The  elements  forrri
and  develop,  and  continue  to  do  so
until  they  mature,  and  then  they
commence  to  decay  and  Income  dis-
organized. The  mountains  around
11s  were  formed  in  this  way.  By  and
by,  when  they  Shu II  have  reached  1
tbeir  mat  urn  v,  the  work  ofdisi  te

■me

gratioti  and  decay  will  commence.
h  has  been  so  from  all  eternity,  and
will  continue  to  be  so  until  the*  are
made  eele&t  ial.

Some  of  our  scholars  who  have
acquired  a  1  ttle  smattering  of  know-
li due  rise  up  and  say,  11  I  am  an
it  filel,  I  do  not  believe  in  God,"
Mell,  then,  us  the  Psalmist  says,
The  fool  has  said  in  his  heart  there
i>  no  God."  ]  m-ke  the  application
<y\  the  Psalmist.  Yon  do  not  know
you  right  hand  from  your  left.  How
do  you  happen  to  know  that  t Ids  (the
rt^ht  hand)  is  the  right  hand,  and
that  this  (the  left)  is  the  left  hand  ?  |
Simply  because  it  has  been  handed
down  from  parent  to  child  until  this
dny.  Were  it  otherwise  one  might
feny,  This  (the  left  hand)  is  my  right
b  nd,  a?  d  this  (the  right)  is  my  left
1  .n  i.  Where  did  Professor  M  rse
obtain  Ins  knowledge  of  electricity,
nod  its  application  over  the  tele-
gnph  wire? He  got  it  from  the


God  of  Heaven,  who  is  the  source
of  all  intelligence;  from  him  pro-
ceeds the  knowledge  of  mechanism
and  of  philosophy  in  all  its  phases.

What  do  men  and  women  who
turn  away  from  the  faith,  as  they
occasionally  do,  turn  to?  To  an
empty  sound,  from  a  reality  to  a
shadow  They  njrct  a  knowledge
of  the  eternal  principles  by  which
the  heavens  are,  were,  and  will  be  ;
they  turn  to  the  follies  and  weak-
ness of  man  and  yield  to  the  influ-
ences of  the  devil,  who,  with  the
third  part  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,
rebelled  against  the  Father  and  was
cast  out  of  heaven.  What  is  the
ultimate  result  of  this  downward
e  .urse  which  some  arc  pursuiu.  ?
The  beautiful  org  miz-ition  t  hey
im»w  possess,  will  decrer-se  in  bean  y,
and  con  in ne  to  decrease  until  the
elemeuis  of  which  it  is  formed  dis-
solve arid  relurn  to  their  original
state,  just  like  the  action  of  these
mountains,  which,  in  their  time
decay,  and  return  to  n  other  clay.
They  who  turn  away  from  the  (Jos-
pel  of  the  Sou  of  God,  which  we
preach,  Turn  away  fVom  the  origin
of  all  truth,  from  light  into  dark-
ness, from  wisdom  to  folly,  nntil
they  are  known  no  moie  forever;
this  is  the  end  of  npostacy.  What
has  already  become  of  those  who,
during  our  short  existence  as  a
<  *hurch,  hav**  come  out  against  us,
politically,  judicially,  or  otherwise,
thore  who  have  taised  their  puny
arms  to  destroy  the  kingdom  ol  God
from  the  earth  *  They  have  become
powerless,  like  the  dew  before  the
rising  sun  ;  they  have  vanished  away,
their  names  are  almost  forgotten;
and  it  ibis  is  not  the  case  with  all,
it  will  be*  For  Z  on  must  be  est  a-
blised  on  the  earth,  and  God,  in  Ids
power  and  might,  will  accomplish  it,
and  none  ean  stay  his  purposes.  He
will  gather  together  in  one  aM  things


PERSONAL  REVELATION,  ETC


233


in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven
and  which  are  on  earth,  and  we  will
assist  him.

I  testify  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,
the  Savior  and  Redeemer  of  the
world  ;  I  have  obeyed  his  sayings,
and  realized  his  promise,  and  the
knowledge  I  have  of  him,  the  wis-
dom of  this  world  cannot  give,  nei-
ther can  it  take  away.

To  yon,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
I  wish  to  give  a  little  counsel.  And,
here,  let  me  say,  that  after  I  have
revealed  to  you  the  mind  and  will
of  God  concerning  you,  1  am  not
h$\d  responsible  for  r ho  performance
of  your  d uiies.  Cease  your  folly
and  wickedness,  cease  running  after
B-ibyJou,  and  let  your  young  people
C(  rise  their  Sunday  and  midnight
excursions,  and  everything  that
Savon*  of  Bullion;  tor  soon  she
must  fall,  she  will  pass  away,  the
vie fi m  of  her  own  kicked ness,  and
it  behooves  you  to  watch  and  pray,
lesf  peradventure  you  should  he  lobl
with  her.  I  also  say,  Cease  speaking
evil  oj.e  of  another,  and  cea*e  being
dishonest.  Wasters,  deal  honestly
and  justly  with  those  whom  you
hire,  *  bo  are  called  servants.  Ser-
vants, deal  honestly  and  uprightly
with  those  who  employ  you,  who
an*  O  il  Jed  masters,  that  confidence
and  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  may
be  kindled,  where  now,  in  too  many
instances,  the  desire  to  take  advantage
exists.

We  are  making  an  effort,  by  way
<rf  petitioning  the  City  Council,  to
close  the  drinking  saloons  that  dis-
grace our  city.  How  do  the  people
feel  about  it  r  Are  there  any  Latter-
day  Saints  who  would  not  lift  up
both  hands  against  this  evil  and
say,  u  God  be  thanked  if  we  can  stop
i  he  drunkenness  in  our  streets?"
No.  not  one.  Are  there  any,  whet  bet
"Mormon*  or  non-** Mormon/'  who
claim  to  have  the  fear  of  God  in


their  hearts,  but  who  ought  to  lend
us  their  full  support  in  suppressing
it  ? No,  not  one. A  gentleman,
well  known  to  you,  told  me  that  he
had occasion to  wait  filty  minutes
on  one  of  our  streets,  near  a  beer
saloon, and during that time  lie
eon 1 1 ted  six  women  come  oat,  three
or  four  of  them  had  either  children
in  arms,  or  walking  by  their  Fides.
What  do  yo» think  of  that,  sisters?
It  is  a  disgrace  to  the  name  of  lady.
Is  it  any  more  a  disgrace  in  woman
than  in  man? Yes,  because  he  is  by
nature  coarser  and  more  prone  to
such  wickedness  thm  she  is.  Wo-
man is  altogether  of  a  finer  nature,
and  has  snooker  moral  inclinat inn*  m}
it  is  not  natural  for  her  to  indulge  in
wickedness  that  man  lakes  common
delight  in. Ir  is  a  disgrace  and  a
burning  shame  in  an  Elder  in  Israel
to  all  ow  himself  lo  become  intox-
icated ;  and  further, it is  shameful
in an  Elder  to  frequent  and  help
sustain these saloons, these  sink-
holes  of vice. How would  the
Savior,  were  lie  to  come  among  us,
regard  such  men  who  are  supposed
to  be  engaged  in  the  work  of  building
u  p  Z  i  on  ? 1 1  wou  1  d  he  fair  to  be  I  i  eve
I  bat,  as  he  disposed  of  the  money-
changers  who  contaminated  the  Tem-
ple, by  as  he  said,  turning  it  into  a
den  of  thieves,  so  likewise  the  Elder,
who  would  lend  his  influence  to  turn
Zion  into  a  den  of  drunkards  and
gamblers,  should  be  cast  oat  as  one
unworthy  to  be  engaged  in  so  im-
portant a  work. The  devil  has  sent
his  emissaries  among  us,  some  of
whom  come  in  the  form  of  lawyers,
doctors  and  ministers,  and  others  as
saloon  keepers  and  gamblers,  and  as
"gentlemen"  whose  politenees  and
affability are peculiarly  striking.
Their  special mission seems  to  be
directed  to  the  young  of  both  sexes,
to  decoy  and  lead  them  astray.  To
the  young  man  they  say,  "  Come,


234


JOUKNAL  OF


DISCOURSES,


lake  a  drink;"  or,  "Don't  be  bo
nowise  as  to  allow  yourself  to  be
governed  by  this  one-man  power;  be
free  and  use  your  liberty,  let  every-
body know  that  you  are  a  free  man
and  that  you  have  a  mind  of  your
own/'  And  turning  to  our  girls — -
"Won't  you  take  a  ride,  young  lady  ?"
She  thinks  him  so  nice,  he  lets  her
drive.  "O,  how  lovely  this  is,  don't
I  look  pretty  *4  Won't  you  accept
an  invitation  to  a  dance,  to  the  Lnke,
or  to  the  Gardens,  etc?"  Such
courtesies,  when  accepted,  are  the
beginning  of  sorrow.  There  are  but
two  roads,  one  in  the  way  of  life,
glory  and  excellency,  aud  crowns,
and  kingdoms,  immortality  and  eter-  !
nal  lives ;  the  other  is  drunkenness,
debauchery,  beautiful  manners  in
the  light,  but  shameful  conduct  in  the
dark.  "  0  !  *  say  they,  "  don't  you
think  we  are  wise  ?  Why,  we  are  I
▼ery  wise,  we  have  studied  and  been
to  college,"  Yes,  I  know  the  extent
of  your  wisdom.  I  know,  too,  the  '
road  you  are  traveling  ;  it  leads  down,
down,  down,  until  you  become  as
nothing,  returning  to  native  element,
and  losing  your  identity, — you  are
lost  forever  and  forever.  These  are
they  who  have  sinned  away  the  day
of  grace,  and  denied  the  Lord,  who
bought  them.

As  tor  supporting  the  one-man
power,  as  the  world  term  it,  I  can
say  that  I  never  asked  a  man  to  vote
for  me,  or  to  use  his  influence  in  any
way  to  further  my  individual  inter-  1
ests.  All  I  have  ever  asked  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  is,  to  do  the  will
of  our  Father  in  heaven.  And  in
this,  ai  in  all  other  things,  you  have
the  perfect  liberty  to  do  as  you  please,
I  can  say,  as  wag  once  eaid  from  this
stand,  God  aud  one  man  are  a  great
majority;  and  God  and  the  Latter,
day  Saints  who  are  valiant  for  the
truth,  and  who  live  according  to  the
revealed  will  are  an  overwhelming  |


majority,  and  they  will  live  and  reign
upon  this  earth  when  it  shall  be  re-
deemed from  its  fallen  condition,
while  their  opponents  will  sink  down
to  perdition.

Some  of  our  young  men  rise  up
and  say,  "  I  don't  believe  as  my  fa-
ther believes,  I  can't  see  it,  and  I
shall  do  as  I  please/'  This  is  your
right,  to  do  as  you  please,  your  free
agency  is  given  to  you  for  that  pur-
pose. But  while  you  avail  yourselves
of  this  liberty,  which  is  so  much
abused  and  misunderstood,  be  careful
that  you  do  not  defeat  your  owu  de-
sires; for  these  words  are  as  true
to  day  as  they  were  when  the  Apostle
Paul  uttered  them :  "  Know  ve  not*
that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves
servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are
to  whom  ye  ol>ey;  whether  of  sin
unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto
righteousness,"

I  believe  in  the  oue-man  power.
Who  is  that  man  ?  Our  Father  in
heaven,  God,  the  eternal  Father,  who
is  in  all,  knows  all,  and  who  made
all  that  is  in  heaven,  and  who  brought
this  world  and  all  its  living  creatures
into  existence.  He  is  the  supreme
"man"  I  serve,  believe  in  and  wish
to  obey  in  all  things,  It  is  my  right
and  privilege  to  thus  believe,  acid
all  who  choose  to  differ  from  rue
have  the  privilege  to  do  so.  I  want
to  continue  in  that  course  that  will
secure  to  me  an  exalted  salvation.
What,  to  be  near  to  the  Lord  ?  I
do  not  know,  nor  do  I  upon  tins  point
give  myself  any  trouble.  It  is  pure
and  righteous  principles  1  seek,  and
wc  must  associate  them  with  our*
every -day  lite  until  they  become  part
and  parcel  ot  our  existence;  for  this
brings  us  happiness,  no  matter  where
we  are.  It  is  a  pleasure  for  a  person
to  drink  good  cold  water  when  ex.
tremely  thirsty ;  but  when  he  has
satisfied  himself,  the  extent  of  his
enjoyment  is  realized,  and  so  it  is


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS,  ETC.


235


with  all  our  natural  blessings  or
pleasures.  But  how  different  with
regard  to  the  principles  of  eternal
life!  Of  them  we  drink  and  drink
again,  and  still  we  thirst  fur  more.


These  are  the  principles  which  fdone
can  make  us  happy, — without  them
we  are  miserable  In  time  and  will  be
through  all  eternity.  God  bless  you.
Amea


DISCOURSE  BY  PKESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Delivbked  in  the  Third  Wam>  Meeting  House,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Evening,  June  23,  1874,


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS— SELF  EXAMINATION — JOSEPH  SMITH  A  MAN  OF
OBEDIENCE  TO  GOO  —  BAPTISM  FOR  THE  DEAD  —  TEMPORAL  AND
SPIRITUAL  ONE— A  DREAM— ORDER  OF  ENOCH,  THE  ORDER  OF  GOD —
A  GOOD  WORD  FOR  THE  WOMEN.


I  am  here  in  this  Ward,  especially
to  talk  to  yon,  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters. I  think  I  have  been  here  only
once  before — at  the  dedication  of  this


it  is,"  We  hope  for  life,  salvation
and  exaltation ;  we  have  the  privilege
of  the  Gospel  and  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  God,  while  the  in-


house. I  have  a  few  things  to  say  to habitants of  the earth,  with  the


you,  which  I  hope  and  expect  will  be
received  and  appreciated  according
to  their  merit.

Perhaps  quite  a  portion  of  this
little  congregation  have  left  their
homes,  their  friends,  the  lands  of
their  nativity  for  the  Gospel's  sake,
for  the  sake  of  their  own  salvation
and  that  of  their  families  and  friends
who  would  go  with  them.  I  will
appeal  to  the  experience  of  my  bre-
thren and  sisters  who  have  received
the  Gospel,  and  ask  them  this  ques
tion — Is  not  the  Gospel  dearer  to  us
than  anything  el>e  and  all  else  on  this
earth  ? I  think  I  can  answer  for  all


exception  of  comparatively  a  very
few,  have  not  as  yet  availed  them-
selves of  this  privilege.  We  preach
the  Gospel  to  the  people,  but  they  are
so  erroneously  traditionated  and  so
ignorant  with  regard  to  the  facts
pertaining  to  the  revelations  and  will
of  God  to  the  children  of  men,  that
they  turn  aside  from  it  and  think  it
no  evil  in  so  doing.  They  are  so
educated  that  they  can  neglect  the
Gospel,  and  feel  measurably  justified.
This  is  an  item  of  experience  that  we
could  bring  before  ourselves  and
others  more  fully  than,  perhaps,  it
would  be  prudent  for  me  to  spend


Latterday  Saints,  and  say,  "  Surely tht  time  to  do  this  evening.  But


230  JUU1INAL  UF

the  Gospel  to  us  is  all  in  all.  To
know  Hie  will  of  God,  and  do  it,  is
the  happiest  life  that  intelligent  I
beings,  the  children  of  nor  Father
in  heaven,  can  live.  There  is  no
other  condition  in  life  that  produces
tlit*  same  arnount  of  good  feeling,
peace,  happiness,  joy,  comfort,  con
tentment  find  intelligence  that  the
aervice  of  the  Lord  will  bring.  If
a  petSM  is  very  poor  and  tlie  love  of
God  is  within  him,  lie  ft  vis  rich  and
liaj ►fiy,  an< i  can  measurably  do  with-
out food,  that  is,  longer  and  better
than  they  can  who  do  not  hav-  this
ex|>erience  of  the  love  of  God  wit  hi  i
them,  !

The  person  who  enjoys  the  expe-
rience uf  the  knowledge  of  the
kingdom  of  God  an  the  earth,  and
at  the  same  time  has  the  love  of  God
within  him,  is  the  happiest  of  any
individuals  on  the  earth.  We,  who
belie  e  in  and  have  obeyed  this  Gos-
pel, look  f  rward  with  the  amieipa-
tion  uf  obtaining  a  great  amount  of
knowledge  and  wisdom.  When  we
embraced  the  Gospel,  the  spirit
opened  up  to  onr  mind*  the  fact  that
the  wisdom,  the  knowledge  and  the
power  of  <iod  would  increase  in  ihe
midst  of  the  Saints.  This  is  our  I
experience:  I,  knowing  tor  myselt,
what  Hie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  brings
to  the  understanding,  testify  what,  it
reveals  to  others.  The  same  spirit
that  is  given  to  me,  to  enlighten  my
mind,  is  given  to  others;  the  same
that  is  given  to  y-  u  I  have  received,
consequently  I  speak  hom  personal
k n r>w ledge,  from  that  which  I  have
experienced  and  understand,  and  that
I  live  in;  and  they  who  live  in  and
enjoy  the  spit  it  uf  our  holy  religion
can  testify  to  this.

There  is  a  portion  of  th's  congre-
gation w  ho  are  young,  and  know  but
little  about  the  United  States,  or
about  the  people  ther^;  and  there  is
a  large  percentage  of  our  community


DISCOURSE*.

who  know  nothing  by  experiei  ce  of
the  outside  world.  Ask  them  if  they
know  anything  of  California  ?  No.
Anything  about  the  States  ?  No.
Dili  you  not  come  from  England  ?
No,  but  iny  parents  did  {Consequently
they  have  not  experience.  They
have  lived  here,  they  have  grown  up
with  us,  We  have  brought  them
up  cheerfully  and  kindly,  and  in-
structed and  taught  f hem,  arid  ihey
have  enjoyed  the  spirit  of  life  and
of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  These
children  who  have  been  horn  here  in
the  New  and  Everlasting  Covenant,
do  not  seem  to  realize  this.  This  is
fur  toe  want  of  experience,  which
they  will  obtain  in  future  life.  But
rhose  ot  experience,  those  who  have
left  their  homes  and  their  all  for  the
sake  of  the  Gospel,  are  capable  of
judging  better  about  these  matters.

Now  wi-  as  La  Her- day  Saints,
hope  for  salvation ;  we  are  living  in
anticipation  of  eternal  salvation.  We
have  left  our  homes  and  everything
for  the  sake  of  our  religion.  Mary
women  in  our  community  have  left
their  husbands  ;  many  men  have  left
their  wives  and  children;  young  boys
bave  left  their  parents  and  brothers
and  sisters,  and  young  girls  have
come  away,  and  left  all  They  had
friends,  homes,  plenty,  parents,
brothers  and  sisters;  yet  when  the
spirit  of  t he  Gospel  came  upon  them
they  were  so  enamored  with  it,  and
it  gave  such  light,  knowledge  and
intelligence,  that  they  were  willing
to  forsake  all,  and  follow  with  the
Latter- Hay  Saints  for  life  eternal.
This  is  the  case  with  quite  a  portion
of  our  community.  We  all,  then,
started  for  life  and  salvation,  and  we
still  bave  no  other  object

Nov,  my  brethren  <nui  sisters,  I
vrigh  to  ask — Do  we  not  anticipate
further  knowledge,  wisdom  and  bless-
ings, and  lortber  communications  by
the  spirit  of  the  Lord,  further  de-


SECRET  OF HAPPINESS,  ETC.


237


monslrations  and  further  witnesses,
revel  it  ions,  knowledge*,  etc.,  in  this
kingdom  ?  We  do,  every  one  of
us.  We  ask  the  question  again,
Do  we  expect  that  we  have  already
become  perfect,  and  that  we  are  pre*
pared  lo  be  numbered  with  the  sanc-
tified, and  that  we  are  now  r-repared
to  be  gathered  with  God's  elect,  and
that,  if  we  were  to  hear  the  voice
to-night — "  Uehold  the  bridegroom
Cometh" — we  should  bo  numbered
with  the  irise  ?  Do  we  anticipate
this  ?  If  we  do  we  are  wrong,  fur
we  are  not  prepared.  We  have  passed
Uir-iKj]  a  great  many  scenes,  we
may  say,  of  tribulation,  though  I
would  have  all  my  brethren  under-
stand flint  I  do  not  take  this  to  my-
self, tor  all  that  I  have  parsed  through
has  been  joy  and  joyful  to  me;  but
we  have  seemingly  sacrificed  a  great
deal,  and  passed  through  many  scenes
of  trial  and  temptations,  no  doubt
of  this.  We  have  hud  to  suffer
temptation  more  or  less,  and  we  have
taken  the  spoiling  of  oar  good*  joy-
fully. I  have,  myself,  five  times
before  I  came  to  this  valley,  left
everything  that  the  Lord  had  blessed
me  with  pertaining  to  this  world's
goods,  which,  for  the  country  where
I  lived,  was  not  a  very  little.

Well,  we  have  passed  these  ordeals,
and  we  are  still  going  along.  Now
have  we  profited  by  all  that  we  have
passed  through  and  experienced,  so
that  we  really  do  consider  that  we
are  sane  tided  and  prepared  for  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God,  or  do  we
believe  that  there  is  something^  more
yet  to  be  (lone  ?  Why,  all  hearts
reply — There  is  still  understanding
in  this  kingdom  ;  every  heart  echoes
— We  expect  to  learn  more, we  expect
to  receive  more,  we  nre  not  yet  per-
fect, we  arc  not  complete  in  our  stat-
ure as  men  and  women  in  Christ
Jesus,  Now  I  will  just  ask,  right
here — Shall  we  ever  be  learning  and


never  able  to  come  to  a  knowledge
of  the  truth  ?  No,  I  say  we  shall
not,  but  we  shall  come  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  truth.  This  is  my  hope
and  anticipation,  and  this  is  iny  j  *ym
The  Latter-day  Saints,  as  a  people,
in  many  respects  are  shortsighted,
we  tire  but  babes  or  suckling  infanta
in  tin*  Church  and  kingdom  of  G  id,
comparatively,  and  especially  since
we  bave  been  in  these  valleys*  We
have  enjoyed  peace  and  plenty  here ;
we  have  been  blessed  iu  our  families,
and  in  our  flocks  and  herds,  and  in
our  fir  lis  ail'  1  crops,  aad  we  have
gathered  around  us  the  comforts,  and
even  the  luxuries  of  life,  and  same,
to  a  small  extent,  wealth.  Now,  in
the  enjoyment  of  vdl  this  is  the  king-
dom of  God  first  and  foremost  with
us  F  I  cati  say,  taking  us  a  people,
that  our  hearts  are  too  much  ou  the
things  of  this  life.  We  are,  per-
haps, too  skeptical  in  our  feelings,,
with  regard  to  the  things  of  the
kingdom, We  gather,  as  we  aniici-


pate.


u


rength,  and  we  think


we  are  capable  of  judging  where  wo
are  not  capable  of  judging,  and  the
riches/or  the  good  things  of  this  life,
I  can  not  in  reality  say  the  riches,
but  a  little  of  this  world's  goods,
sometimes  blind  the  mind  and  be-  *
cloud  the  spirit  of  a  person,  I  can
appeal  to  the  experience  of  my  bre-
thren and  sifters,  aged  and  middle-
aged  and  youth,  and  even  to  the
children.  Go  to  the  child,  and  what
does  its  joy  consist  in  P  Toys,  we
may  call  them,  something  that  pro*
duces,  as  they  think,  pleasure;  and
so  it  is  with  our  youth,  our  young
boys  and  girls;  the  r  are  thinking  too
much  of  tins  world  ;  and  the  middle-
nged  are  striving  and  struggling  to
obtain  the  good  things  of  this  life,
and  their  hearts  are  too  much  upon
them.  So  it  is  with  the  a^ed.  Is
not  this  the  condition  of  the  Lnfter-
day Saints? Jt  is. Well,  now,


238


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


take  us  as  a  people,  we  anticipate  life
eternal ;  we  think  we  are  the  best
people  on  the  earth,  and  we  think  we
have  sacrificed  more  for  our  religion
than  anybody  else,  though  in  my  be-
lief, and  in  this  respect  I  probably
differ  with  most  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  for  the  simple  reason  that
God,  our  Heavenly  Father,  in  tils
religion,  does  not  require  men  and
women  to  suffer  as  false  religions  do.
Take  the  religious  of  the  heathen,
and  false  systems  of  religion  generally,
and  they  require  sacrifices  that  the
Lord  does  not  require.  The  Lord
has  off  red  liis  sacrifice  in  the  charac-
ter of  his  Son;  but  be  does  not  re-
quire us  to  sacrifice  our  children  or
ourselves  as  the  heathens  sacrifice  to
their  gods;  consequently  our  sacri-
fices and  our  sufferings  aie  not  to  be
compared  with  those  of  the  heathens.
There  are  professing  Christians  in
our  midst,  who  are  so  strict  in  their
religious  notions  that  they  would
rise  in  the  morning  at  live  o'clock,
and  walk  miles,  if  necessary,  rather
than  miss  their  religious  services;
and  they  are  those  who  are  so  zealous
that  they  would  measure  the  soil
from  here  into  old  Jerusaleu  with
their  bodies  if  they  could,  to  pay
penance,  as  they  call  it.  God  docs
not  require  any  such  sacrifice  as  this ; 1
neither  does  he  require  any  of  these  1
sacrifices  which  involve  the  shedding
of  blood  or  the  loss  of  life.  Such
things  do  not  belong  to  God's  reli-
gion, they  come  through  sin  and
transgrer-siou.  Perhaps  they  who
show  such  manifestations  of  their
faith  strengthen  it  and  do  themselves
some  good.  All  that  is  required  of
us  is  to  sacrifice  our  leelings  and  to
overcome  the  adversary  by  subduing
the  lsst  within  us  for  anything  but
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,
the  gWy  of  God,  and  the  salvation
of  our  friends  and  families  and  of  the
human  family  from  first  to  last ;  that


our  whole  souls  may  be  devoted  to
the  building  up  of  the  kingdom  of
God  on  the  earth,  and  for  the  salva-
tion of  those  who  sleep,  who  died
without  the  Gospel.  We  want  to
sacrifice  enough  to  do  the  will  of  God
in  preparing  to  bring  up  those  who
have  not  had  the  privilege  of  hearing
the  Gospel  while  in  the  flesh,  for  the
simple  reason  that,  in  the  spirit
world,  they  cannot  officiate  in  the
ordinances  of  the  House  of  God.
They  have  passed  the  ordeals,  and
are  beyond  the  possibility  of  person-
ally officiating  for  the  remission  of
their  sins  and  for  their  exaltation,
consequently  they  are  under  the  ne-
cessity of  trusting  in  their  friends,
their  children  and  their  children's
children  to  officiate  for  them,  that
they  may  be  brought  up  into  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God.  All  that
the  Lord  requires  of  us  is  a  perfect
submission  in  oar  hearts  to  his  will.
The  Latter-day  Saints  say  at  once —
"  This  is  correct,  certainly  it  is  right
that  we  should  have  no  other  object
and  aim  in  our  feelings  and  affec-
tions but  to  do  good  and  to  promote
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth/
But  the  weakness  of  man  is  such,
the  humanity  with  which  our  spirits
is  clothed  is  so  frail  that  we  are  liable
to  be  overcome.  These  tabernacles
are  dull,  subject  to  sin  and  tempta-
tion, and  to  stray  from  the  kingdom
of  God  and  the  ordinances  ot  his
house,  to  lust  after  riches,  the  pride
of  life  and  the  vanities  of  the  world,
and  these  things  are  prone  to  be  up-
permost in  the  minds  of  all  ;  old  and
younir,  even  Latter-day  Saints.  The
infant  wants  his  toys,  the  children
want  nice  dresses,  and  this  is  correct ;
and  when  we  understand  how  to
rightly  use  the  things  of  the  world,
there  will  be  the  most  beautiful  chil-
dren in  Zion  that  ever  lived  on  tho
earth.  But  we  wish  the  wealth
or  things  of  the  world  ;  we  think


SECRET  OF  II  AFFIX  ESS,  ETC.


239


about  them  morning,  noon  and  night;
they  are  first  in  our  minds  when  we
awake  in  the  morning,  and  the  last
thing  before  we  go  to  sleep  at  night ;
and  we  dream  about  how  we  shall  do
this,  and  how  we  shall  obtain  that,
and  onr  minds  are  continually  lusting
after  the  things  of  the  world.  Is  not
this  too  much  the  case  with  the  Lat-
ter-day Saint  g.

I  will  ask  this  question  of  tiie  few
who  are  hero — What  think  ye,  my
brethren  and  sisters  of  experience,
j on  that  have  enjoyed  the  light  of
the  spirit,  you  that  can  see  the  travail
of  the  Sain: a,  do  you  think  that  this
people  called  Latter-day  Saints  are
traveling  in  the  path  that,  they  should
go  in?  Do  you  think  that  they  offer
their  oblations  and  sacrifices  to  the
Lord  as  they  should  ?  What  do  you
think  about  it  ?  What  is  the  gene-
ral expression  through  our  com-
munity? It  is  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  drifting  as  fast  as  they  can
into  idolatry,  drifting  into  the  spirit
of  the  world  and  into  pride  and
vanity.

*  ±*m  read  in  the  revelations  given
to  John  0!J  L'lc  I*'B  of  Patmos,  con-
cerning the  lb*ter  days,  that  a  voice
was  heard  crying  to  the  Saints  In
Babylon—*"  Come  out  of  her,  O  my
people,  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,
lestt  ye  receive  of  her  plagues,  for
ber  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven,1'
£tc.  Has  this  voice  been  heard?
Yes,  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
heard  it  Has  the  angel  flown
through  the  midst  of  heaven  and
delivered  the  Gospel  to  the  children
of  men  ?  Yes,  we  believe  all  this.
Do  we  h  elieve  that  the  Lord  sent  his
messenget  ^  to  Joseph  Smith,  and

commanded  him  to  refrain  from
joining  any  Christian  church,  and  to
refrain  from  fche  wickedness  he  saw
in  the  Qhurchea  <  aud  ™fr  delivered
to  him  a  rressag,  1  informing  him  that
the  Lord  was  al  *°ut  to  establish  hls


kingdom  on  the  earth,  and  led  him
on  step  by  step  until  he  gave  him  the
revelation  concerning  the  plates  ?
Yes,  this  is  all  correct.  Did  Joseph
receive  these  revelations  ?  He  did.
Did  the  heavenly  messengers  come
to  Joseph,  and  commit  to  him  the
keys  of  the  Anronic  Priesthood  ?
Yes,  we  believe  all  this,  DM  they
commit  to  him  the  keys  of  the  Mel-
chizedek  Priesthood  ?  Yes.  Tins
is  all  correct,  we  believe  all  this.  Did
the  Lord  speak  from  the  heavens
through  Joseph,  commanding  his
people  to  gather  out  from  the  wicked
before  the  scourges — sickness,  pesti-
lence*, wars,  bloodshed,  and  the  vari-
ous calamities  spoken  of  by  the
Prophets  and  Apostles,  should  pus*
over  the  nations?  Yes,  we  believe
the  Lord  has  called  upon  the  people
who  received  the  Gospel  to  come  out
of  Babylon,  to  separate  themselves
from  the  wicked  and  to  stand  in  holy
places  preparatory  to  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man,  All  Latter-day
Saints  believe  all  this;  then  I  say,
if  we  do  believe  it,  let  us  act  up  to
and  be  true  to  our  faith  and  to  the
knowleJge  that  we  have  of  God  aud
his  kingdom. This  is  what  is  re-

quired  of  us.

We  have  passed  from  one  thing
to  another,  and  I  may  say  from  one
degree  of  knowledge  to  another.
When  Joseph  first  received  the  know-
ledge of  the  plates  that  were  in  the
hill  Cumorah,  he  did  not  then  recei  ve
the  keys  of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,
he  merely  received  the  knowledge
that  i  he  plates  were  there,  and  that
the  Lord  would  bring  them  fotth,
aud  that  they  contained  the  history
of  the  aborigines  of  this  country.
He  received  the  knowledge  that  they
ware  once- in  possession  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  from  thai  time  he  went  on,
step  by  step,  until  he  obtained  the
plates,  and  the  Urim  and  Thammim,
and  had  power  to  translate  them.


540


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO  Utt>


This  did  not  make  him  an  Apostle,
it  « 1  i  \  not  give  to  hi  to  Hie  kevs  of
the  kingdom,  nor  ni-ike  him  an  Elder
in  Israel  He  was  a  Prophet,  and
had  'tii*  spirit  uf  prophecy,  and  had
Deceived  all  tli in  before  the  L ord  or-
dained him  An  i  when  the  L  nd
by  revelation,  toM  him  to<?o  tu  Penn-
sylvania, he  did  so,  and  finished  t';e
translation  of'  the  Book  of  Mormon;
find  when  'he  L  ml,  in  another  reve-
lftio!i,  told  him  to  eome  buck,  into
New  Fork  State,  and  to  go  to  old
Father  Whitmer's,  who  lived  in  a
place  opposite  Waterloo,  and  there
stop,  he  did  *>o.  ani  had  meetings,
and  gathered  up  the  lew  who  believed
in  his  rt'stinwn\%  lie  received  the
Aaron  e  Pries' hojvi,  and  then  he
receive!  the  kuys  of  i h* 1  M'»lchisedek
Pi^thood,  h.kI  organised  the  Church,
He  lit sr  received  tlife  power  la  bapt  ise,
ami  8*  j II  did  nor  know  that  lie  was  to
r^ceivf-*  any  rumv  rmril  the  L  ird  t.uld
him  there  was  more  for  him.  Then
Jit*  n*(*s"iv*.*d  t'»e  k*ivs  of  the  Jtelehise-
dek  Prh-'stif»o**-'i*  and  had  pow-a*  t ■  »
Confirm  after  he  ha I  bap;iz»d,  whien
hi*  nad  nor  n.  torn  He  would  have
Stood  precisely  as  John  the  Baptist
stood,  bad  not  the  Lord  sent  his
Oi  her  messengers,  Peter,  James  and
Jo  ml  m  nro  dfi  J  isetn  to  the  Mel-
c^tsedek  Piiesi  hond«  Then,  ah  r
s«>me  of  Hit*  i>reUnen  had  be*u  out
pOfacuingr  he  had  a  revelation  fhar
they  shoo  id  *£o  up  to  the  Ohio,  I
knew  uf  rh$mt  though  I  was  not  ac-
qua  in  ted  with  rhrin  before  they  went
up  there.  They  were  seen  by  some
of  iiy  famiK,  ruv  father  saw  and
e-mvers'd  wrh  them.  Then  the  way
opened  for  a  large  $4  a  the  ring  in  the
titate  ot  Ohio/  Parley  P.  Pntt,
0 1 1  ver  Gi » w - 1  e ty ,  Sa rn  ue !  Pe t  erson ,
JJ;vid  Wfoilmer,  John  Whitiner,  and
a  few  others,  went  up  there  and
preached  the  Gospel,  and  I  hey  Ca  ue
among  the  members  of  the  society
called  Campbellit.es,  formerly  mem-


bers of  the  Olo^e  Communion  Ban-

tmts,  their  leader's  na  i >0  being  Alt*x-
an  fet  Campbell.  Tins  man  preached
the  duetrine  that  baptism  was  for  the
remission  uf  gins,  and  that  split  tIk*
Chimth  ;  but  when  the  brethren  came
to  Miese  societies  and  taught  them,
not  only  bapiism  for  the  remission  of
si- 1*3,  but  Hie  laying  on  of  hands  for
t he  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they
believed  it,  and  were  baptized  for  the
remission  of  their  sins,  and  received
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  Holy
Sliest,  and  then  received  other  urdi*
nances.

Then  the  L  >rd  revealed  to  Joseph
to  go  out.  to  the  Ohio,  and  he  went
up;  and  aftei  tie  went  up  he  then
nndersto  d  and  w««  taught  of  the
Lord  to  snul  ten  in  the  west  to  haut
nut  a  place  for  the  cirre  stake  of
Zion* Tney  wenf  uccording1  to  the
revelmions  that  J  iseph  received,  and
finailv  Joseph  went  up  to  meet  them,
in [nd**pendene?, J  .ckson  County,  *
MoM  on  t  he  borders  of  the  Larnanites-
Y  fU  can  rear!  alt  tills  in  the  Bjok  of
Docrriae  and  C  ovenants.  Then
had  not  received  all  at  this  tone,,
;it  i  he  time  that,  Zioti's  CaTUpr-tjj  \
cdhfd,  went  up  to  Mtssoj?tU,  ih  It
so  far  as  I  Mfu  aw^rt1,  Jo^enlir
never  received  any  ruti -nation  as
there  beiij£  a  Patriarch  in  the  Church.
On  our  returq  ht»me  from  Misso  irt,
iny  brother Jbfepil Yonug,  wmlo
con  versing'  wii  h  me,  asked  it  iti#Quld
be  right  for  our  father  to  give  uh  a
blessing. Said  he — iC  i  feel  just  as
though  I  wnnt  my  father  to  give  me
a  patriarchal blessing," When  we
reached Kirtland we talked  with
Jos  *ph  on  the  subject,  and  he  Nai<it
M  Certainly,"  and  dnalljRve  ap[K>irtterd
a  day,  and  brother  Joseph,  the  Pro-
phet, came  to  where  we  met  and  ur-
(I  lined  my  father  a  Patriarch,  aad
iie  vvas  the  first:  man  ordained  to  the
f office  of  Patriarch  in  the  Church,
and  he  blessed  his  children;  and  soon


is

id
to


I


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS,  ETC


241


after  this  Joseph  ordained  his  father
a  patriarch  and  his  father  called  his
children  together  and  blessed  them.
Then  Joseph  had  another  revelation,
that  a  record  should  be  kept,  and
when  this  was  revealed  to  him,  he
then  had  his  father  call  his  house
together  again,  and  blessed  them  over

and  a  record  m  kept  of  it.  ■  This
is  to  show  you,  and  especially  those
who  have  no  experience  in  the
Church,  how  the  Lord  has  led  this


people


led  them  alone;,  led


along,
them  along.

We  were  driven  from  Missouri
after  Joseph  went  up  there,  and  we
came  to  Nauvoo,  and  the  Twelve
went  to  England.  While  we  were
in  England,  I  think,  the  Lord  man-
ifested to  me  by  visions  and  his
Spirit,  things  that  I  did  not  then
understand.  I  never  opened  my
mouth  to  any  person  concerning
them,  until  I  returned  to  Nauvoo,
Joseph  had  never  mentioned  this,
there  had  never  been  a  thought  of
it  in  the  Church  that  I  knew  any-
thing about  at  that  time.  But  I
had  this  for  myself,  and  I  kept  it  to
myself,  and  when  I  returned  home
and  Joseph  revealed  these  things  to
me,  I  then  understood  the  reflections
that  were  upon  my  mind  while  in
England.  But  this  was  not  until
after  I  had  told  him  what  I  under-
stood* I  saw  that  he  was  after
something  by  his  conversation,  lead-
ing my  mind  along,  and  others,  to
see  how  we  could  bear  this*  This
was  in  1841  ;  the  revelation  was
given  in  1*43,  but  the  doctrine  was
revealed  before  this ;  and  when  I
told  Joseph  what  I  understood,
which  was  right  in  front  of  my  house
in  the  street,  as  he  was  shaking
hands  and  leaving  me,  he  turned
round  and  looked  me  in  the  eyes,
and  says  he — "Brother  Brigham,
are  you  speaking  what  you  under-
stand,—are  you  in  earnest  f  Says
No.  16.


I-  -<c  I  speak  just  -  as  the
manifests  to  rae," Says  he — t£  God
bless  you,  the  Lord  has  opened  your
mind/'  and  he  turned  a*id  went

off.  : ; '  :

About  this  time  came  a  revelation
concerning  baptism  for  the  dead.
I  know  that  in  my  traveling  and
preaching,  many  a  time,  I  have
stopped  by  beautiful  streams  of
clear,  pure  water,  and  have  said^
to  myself,  ££  How  delightful  it  would
be  to  me  to  go  into  this,  to  be  bap*
tized  for  the  remission  of  my  sins.1*
When  I  got  home  J qseph  told  me  it
was  my  priyidae.  At  this  time
came  a  re  vol  ^^^k  that  the  Saints
could  be  baj^^Hand  re-b<i  :ed
when  they  chose^ind  then  that  we
could  be  baptized  for  our  dear
friends,  but  at  first  it  was  not  re-
vealed that  a  record  should  be  kept
of  those  who  were  baptized ;  but
when  he  received  an  additional  reve-
lation to  that  effect,  then  a  record
was  kept.  Hundreds  and  thousands,
I  suppose,  were  baptized  before  any
record  was  kept  at  all,  and  they  were
baptized  over,  and  a  record  kept  of
the  baptisms  and  the  names  of  the
administrator,  those  who  acted  for
the  dead,  and  of  the  dead,  and  of
the  wit u esses.  You  can  read  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
the  letter  that  Joseph  wrote  when
he  was  away  trom  home  in  regard
to  having  witnesses  at  these  bap-
tisms. I  relate  this  to  show  you
that  the  Lord  did  not  reveal  every-
thing at  once ;  but  1  need  not
dwell  on  this  any  longer.

I  will  now  say  to  my  brethren
and  sisters,  the  Lord,  in  the  first
place,  commenced  to  bring  the  peo-
ple together  upon  the  ground  of
union  and  oneness  ;  but  they  could
not  bear  this.  You  can  read,  on
page  161,  of  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  a  revelation  given
to  the  Colesville  Branch.  Lemon

Vol.  XVIII


212


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Copley  had  a  tract  of  land  that  was
to  be  given  to  the  Saints,  and  they
were  to  build  up  a  stake  of  Zion
until  t lure  was  another  place  pre-
pared for  the  centre  stake  ;  but  lie
apostatized  and  the  pftopb  went
away.  Before  this  the  Lord  revealed
to  Joseph,  that  the  people  would
gather  out  from  Babylon,  and  esta-
blish the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
principles  of  heaven.  They  went
up  to  Jackson  County,  Mo,,  with
this  in  their  faith,  and  with  the
express  understanding  that  when
they  got  there,  everything  was  to
be  laid  at  the  feet  of  the  Bishop,
not  at  tin4  feeb^Htiu'  Apostles,  as
they  did  ;U^HRF.  Then,  you
know,  they  solijRdl  they  had,  and
brought  their  substance  and  laid  it
at  the  feet  of  the  Apostles.  The
revelation  given  through  Joseph  was
tq  lay  all  at  the  feet  of  the  Bishop,
who  was  to  distribute  it  among
the  people,  according  to  the  revela-
tion given  for  that  purpose,  for  their
benefit.  But  they  could  not  bear
this,  consequently  they  were  driven
from  Jackson  County,  and  assembled
again,  some  in  Caldwell,  and  some
in  Davies  County,  and  finally  they
were  driven  from  the  State.  This
was  in  the  fall  of  1838.  I  recollect,
in  Far  West,  Joseph,  talking  upon
these  matters,  said — uThe  people
cannot  bear  the  revelations  that  the
Lord  has  for  them.  There  were  a
great  many  revelations  if  the  people
could  bear  them/'  I  think  it  was
the  eighth  day  of  July,  1811,  Joseph
had  a  revelation  that  the  people
should  consecrate  their  surplus  pro-
perty for  the  building  of  the  Temple
there  in  Far  West,  for  the  support
of  the  Priesthood,  for  the  paying  of
the  debts  of  the  Presidency,  etc.,
which  I  could  give  an  account  of,  for
I  was  present  when  it  came.  Joseph
was  doing  business  in  Kirtland,  and
it  seemed  as  though  all  creation  was


upon  him,  to  hamper  him  in  every
way.  and  they  drove  him  from  his  busi-
ness, and  it  left  him  so  that  some  of
his  debts  had  to  be  settled  after-
wards ;  and  I  am  thankful  to  say
that  they  were  settled  up  ;  still  fur-
ther, we  have  sent  East  to  New
York,  to  Ohio,  and  to  every  place
where  I  had  any  idea  that  Joseph
had  ever  done  business,  and  inquired
if  there  was  a  man  left  to  whom
Joseph  Smith,  jun,,  the  Erophet,
owed  a  dollar,  or  a  sixpence.  If
there  was  we  would  pay  it*  But
I  have  not  been  able  to  find  one.  I
have  advertised  this  through  every
neighborhood  and  place  where  lie
formerly  lived,  consequently  I  have
a  right  to  conclude  that  all  Ids  debts
were  settled*

We  will  now  pass  on.  You  know
the  history  with  regard  to  our  leaving
Niuivoo.  Now  1  have  it  in  my  mind
to  ask  the  question  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints — Are  they  in  earnest  ?
Do  they  mean  what  they  say,  when
they  say  they  believe  that  brother
Brigham  Young  is  the  legal  succes-
sor of  J oseph  Smith,  the  Prophet?
We  believe  in  Joseph  the  Prophet ;
he  sealed  his  testimony  with  his
blood,  consequently  we  can,  with
impunity,  believe  on  him  a  little
better  than  if  he  were  living.  When
he  was  living,  his  testimony  was  not
in  force  upon  the  people  as  it  is  now.
But  is  brother  Brigham  the  legal
successor  of  brother  Joseph  1  This
people,  called  Latter-day  Saints,  by
their  acts,  by  their  voting,  say  they
believe  he  is.  Well,  we  will  admit
the  fact.  I  have  a  little  to  say,
then,  and  shall  come  back  to  former
days  with  regard  to  the  duties  of  the
individual  who  leads  the  kingdom  o
God  on  the  earth.

In  all  ages  of  the  world  that  we
have  any  knowledge  of,  when  there
was  a  people  on  the  earth  whom
God  acknowledged  as  his  people,


SUltKT  (IF  HAITI  NESS,  ETC


243


he  Im*  invariably  dictated  them  in
spiritual  and  in  temporal  things.
This  question  was  agitated  year
after  year  in  the  days  of  Joseph.
The  fir<t  two  Bishops  in  the  Church
—Edward  Partridge  was  the  first —
I  was  w  ell  acquainted  with  him,  and
Newel  K.  \\  liitney  was  the  second —
questioned  the  propriety  of  Joseph
having  anything  to  do  with  temporal
things.  Joseph  would  argue  the
case  with  them  a  little,  and  tell  them
how  things  were,  and  bring  up  Scrip-
ture to  show  them  that  it  could  not
be  otherwise — that  it  was  impossible
for  the  Lord  to  dictate  people  unless
he  dictated  them  in  temporal  affairs!}
The  very  first  act  after  believing  is  a
temporal  act.  After  I  hear  the
Gospel  preached  and  believe  it,  1
go  down  into  the  waters  of  bap-
tism, which  is  a  temporal  act :  it  is
an  act  that  pertains  to  my  will  and
my  ho  ly,  I  will  that  my  body  shall
go  down  into  the  water  and  be  im-
mersed for  the  remission  of  my  sins,
cotiseineiitlv  I  have  to  <za  to  the
Elder  who  taught  me  the  Gospel,
the  spiritual  portion  of  the  kingdom,
and  apply  to  him  to  administer  this
temporal  ordinance,  and  he  has  to
do  it  :  Irving  taught  the  doctrine
he  officiate*  in  the  act,  and  you  will
find  it  through  life,  every  circum-
stance, in  every  case  the  man  that
dictates  the  spiritual  kingdom  of
God,  must  dictate  the  temporal  at-
fairs,  it  can  not  be  otherwise.  I  say
this  to  you,  because  the  idea  in  the
minds  of  a  few  of  the  people  k —
Brigham  ought  not  to  meddle  with
temporal  affiiirs."  They  said  so  to
Joseph,  and  they  said  so  much  about
it,  that  I  went  into  the  Temple  at
Kirtlaud,  and  challenged  the  men
who  were  querying  on  this,  to  prove
orbrii.ji  up  one  instance  where  God
did  npt  manifest  his  will  concerning
temporal  things  whenever  he  made
known  his  will  to  the  children  of


men  for  establishing  his  kingdom  on
the  earth.  They  always  came  to
the  floor ;  they  had  to  do  it,  there
was  nothing  else  for  them  ;  it  pros-
trated every  person.  There  were
William  E,  McLellin,  John  F.  Boyn-
ton,  and  Lyman  Johnson,  who  be-
longed to  the  Twelve,  Frederic  G.
Williams,  second  counselor  to  Joseph,
and  two- thirds  of  the  High  Council
all  talking  about  this,  and  I  went
into  the  Temple  and  just  challenged
them  to  show  wherein  the  Lord  ever
conferred  upon  any  man  in  the  world
the  power  to  dictate  in  spiritual
affairs,  that  he  did  not  in  temporal
affairs?  They  could  not  do  it.  I
told  them  they  could  not  draw  the
line  between  the  spiritual  and  the
temporal.  All  things  were  created
first  spiritual,  and  then  temporal.
Everything  in  the  spirit  world  was
presented  as  we  see  it  now,  and  this
temporal  earth  was  presented  there.
We  were  in  the  spirit  world,  and  we
came  here  into  this  time,  which  is
in  eternity,  nothing  in  the  world
only  a  change  of  time  and  seasons
allotted  to  a  change  of  being  that
makes  it  time  to  us.  It  is  in  eter-
nity, and  we  are  just  as  much  in
eternity  now,  as  we  shall  be  millions
of  years  hence.  But  it  is  time  mea-
sured to  finite  beings,  and  it  is
changeable,  and  we  call  it  temporal,
while  the  fact  i*  it  is  all  spiritual  in
the  first  place,  then  temporal,  then
spiritual,  and  made  immortal,  con-
sequently you  can  not  divide  them.
I  say  this  for  those  to  reflect  upon
who  think  that  there  is  a  difference
between  temporal  and  spiritual
things.  I  do  not  say,  for  I  do  not
know,  that  there  any  such  here.

Now  we  come  to  our  present  con-
dition. You  know  the  past,  These
children  who  were  born  in  this  city
or  Territory,  know  what  they  can
remember,  and  many  of  them  arc
old  enough  to  have  many  reflections


I


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


and  can  see  and  understand  a  great
many  things ;  but  the  older  ones
know  that  this  people  have  drifted
just  as  far  as  they  can  without  a
reformation.  Every  spiritual  mind
knows  this.  I  will  now  say  to  my
brethren  and  sisters,  that  while  we
were  in  Winter  Quarters,  the  Lord
gave  to  me  a  revelation  just  as
much  as  he  ever  gave  one  to  any-
body. He  opened  my  mind,  and
showed  me  the  organization  of  the
kingdom  of  God  in  a  family  capa-
city. I  talked  it  to  my  brethren;
I  would  throwr  out  a  few  words  here,
and  a  few  words  there,  to  my  first
counselor,  to  my  second  counselor
and  the  Twelve  Apostles,  but  with
the  exception  of  one  or  two  of  the
Twelve,  it  would  not  touch  a  man.
They  believed  it  would  come,  0  yes,
but  it  would  be  by  and  by.  Says  I,
"  Why  not  now  ?"  If  1  had  been
worth  millions  when  we  came  into
this  valley  and  built  what  we  now
call  the  "Old  Fort/'  I  would  have
given  it  if  the  people  had  been  pre-
pared to  then  receive  the  kingdom
of  God  according  to  the  pattern  given
to  Enoch.  But  I  could  not  touch
them.  One  would  say,  "I  am  for
California, 11  another  one,  £<  I  am  for
gold,"  and  I  am  for  this  and  f  am  for
that ;  and  some  used  their  influence
in  trying  to  persuade  others  to  go  to
California.  They  said — "  You  can't
itay  here,  you  can't  raise  anything
here,  it  is  too  cold,  too  frosty,  these
mountains  are  not  fit  to  live  in,  this
is  not  the  place  for  white  people,  let
us  go  to  California  and  get  some
gold/*  etc.

Now  I  am  going  to  tell  a  dream
that  I  had,  which  I  think  is  as  ap-
plicable, to  the  people  to-day — the
21st  day  of  June,  1874,  as  when  I
had  it  There  were  so  many  going
to  California,  and  going  this  way  and
that  way,  and  they  did  not  know
what  they  wanted,  and  said  I — £  ( stay


here,  we  can  raise  our  food  hero,  I
know  it  is  a  good  stock  country,  a
good  sheep  country,  and  as  good  a
country  for  raising  silk  as  there  is  in
the  w  orld,  and  we  shall  raise  some
of  the  best  of  wheat.  There  stands
a  man — Burr  Frost,  and  there  is
Truman  0.  Angell,  who  were  present
at  the  time.  Said  I,  "  We  can
raise  all  we  want  here,  do  not  go
away,  do  not  be  discouraged, "  That
was  when  the  pioneers  came ;  the
next  year,  it  was  California,  Califor-
nia, California,  California.  "  No,"
said  I,  "stay  hen*.5'  After  much
thought  and  reflection,  and  a  good
deal  of  praying  and  anxiety  as  to
wl n' flier  the  people  would  be  saved
after  all  our  trouble  in  being  driven
into  the  w  ilderness,  I  had  a  dream
one  night,  the  second  year  after  we
came  in  here.  Captain  Brown  had
gone  up  to  the  Weber,  and  bought  a
little  place  belonging  to  Miles  Good-
year. Miles  Goodyear  had  a  few
goats,  and  I  had  a  few  sheep  that  I
had  driven  into  the  Valley,  and  I
wanted  to  get  a  few  goats  to  put
along  with  the  sheep.  I  had  seen
Captain  Brown  and  spoken  to  hi  in
about  the  goats,  and  he  said  I  could
have  them.  Just  at  that  time  I  had
this  dream,  which  1  will  now  relate.
I  thought  I  had  started  and  gone
past  the  Hot  Springs,  which  is  about
four  miles  north  of  this  city.  I  was
going  after  my  goats.  When  I  had
gone  round  the  point  of  the  moun-
tain by  the  Hot  Springs,  and  had
got  about  half  a  mile  on  the  rise  of
ground  beyond  the  Spring,  whom
should  I  meet  but  brother  Joseph
Smith.  He  had  a  wragon  with  no
bed  on,  with  bottom  boards,  and
tutits  and  camp  equipage  piled  on.
Somebody  sat  on  the  wagon  driving
the  team.  Behind  the  team  I  saw
a  great  flock  of  sheep.  I  heard  their
bleating,  and  saw  some  goats  among'
them.  I  looked  at  the  en  and  thought


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS,  ETC


245


— "  This  is  curious,  brother  Joseph
has  been  up  to  Captain  Browns  and
got  my  goats/'  There  were  men
driving  the  sheep,  and  some  of  the
sheep  I  should  think  were  three  and
a  half  feet  high,  with  large,  fine,
beautiful  white  fleeces,  and  they
looked  so  lovely  and  pure  ;  others
were  of  moderate  size,  and  pure  and
white  j  and  in  fact  there  were  sheep
of  all  sizes,  with  fleeces  clean,  pure
and  white,  Tlien  I  saw  some  that
were  dark  and  spotted,  of  all  colors
and  sizes  and  kinds,  and  their  fleeces
were  dirtyj  and  they  looked  infe-
rior; some  of  these  were  a  pretty
good  size,  but  not  as  large  as  some
of  the  large  fine  clean  sheep,  and
altogether  there  was  a  multitude  of
them  of  all  sizes  and  kind*,  and
goats  of  all  colors,  sizes  and  kinds
mixed  among  them,  Joseph  stop-
ped the  wagon,  and  the  sheep  kept
rushing  up  until  there  was  an  im-
mense herd.  I  looked  hi  Joseph's
eye,  and  laughed,  just  as  I  had
many  a  time  when  he  was  alive,
about  some  trifling  thing  or  other,
and  >aid  I — "  Joseph,  you  have  got
the  darndest  flock  of  sheep  I  ever
saw  in  my  life  ;  what  are  you  going
to  do  with  theln,  what  on  earth  are
they  for  ?"  Joseph  looked  cunningly
out  of  his  eyes,  just  as  he  used  to  at
times,  and  said  he — "  They  are  all
good  in  their  places."  When  I
awoke  in  the  mornin"  1  did  not  find
any  fault  with  those  who  wanted  to
go  to  California;  I  said,  "  If  they
want  to  go  let  them  go,  and  we  will
do  all  n  e  can  to  save  them  ;  I  have
no  more  fault  to  find,  the  sheep  and
the  goats  will  run  together,  but
Joseph  says,  "  they  an
their  places.1'

This  will  apply  precisely  to  what
we  are  doing  at  the  present  time*
We  are  trying  to  unite  the  people
together  in  the  order  that  the  Lurd
revealed  to  Euoeh,  which  will  be


all  good  in


observed  and  sustained  in  the  latter
days  in  redeeming  and  budding  up
Zion  ;  this  is  the  very  order  that  will
do  it,  and  nothing  short  of  it.  We
are  trying  to  organize  the  Latter- day
Saints  into  this  order;  but  I  want  to
tell  \ou,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  that
I  have  not  come  here  to  say  that  you
have  got  to  join  this  order  or  we  will
cut  you  off  the  Church,  or  you  must
join  tins  order  or  we  will  consider
you  apostates  ;  no  such  thing,  oh  not
the  Saints  are  not  prepared  to  sec
everything  at  once.  They  have  got
to  learn  little  by  little,  and  to  receive
a  little  here  aud  a  little  there.  Since
we  commenced  to  organize  at  St.
George,  I  have  not  had  a  feeling  in
my  heart  but  to  say  to  those  who
can  not  see  this  order— Try  and  live
your  religion ;  get  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  and  keep  it;  humble  yourselves
before  the  Lord  and  get  his  Spirit;
ask  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus
to  open  your  minds  and  let  you  see
things  as  they  are,  and  you  will
delight  in  it.  And  I  say  to  all  those
who  wish  to  receive  the  Order,  come
along  and  we  will  organize  you,  and
we  will  do  the  very  best  we  can  for
you.  It  is  true  that  some  who  are  in
the  Onler  talk  very  foolishly  to  those
who  do  not  feel  to  come  into  it ;  they
throw  out  some  very  unbecoming  ex-
pressions* This  is  entirely  wrong.
It  is  not  called  for,  it  is  not  needed,
and  it  will  not  do  the  least  good  in
the  world.  We  must  manifest  and
show  to  our  brethren  a  puter  life
than  we  have  heretofore.  I  will  say
to  you,  who  want  to  be  organized  in
this  Order,  we  will  not  take  one  red
cent  from  you,  but  the  Lord  will  add
to  you  riches  and  honor,  if  you  will
take  counsel.  [  As  we  have  said  from
the  beginningt*>re  do  not  want  a  man's
farm,  we  do  not  want  his  gold  and
his  silver,  and  nothing  in  the  world
but  just  his  time*  We  want  to  dic-
tate the  time  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,


246


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


to  show  them  that  we  can  corae  into
the  Order  of  God,  and  that  we  will  J
be  that  people  that  the  Lord  has  said
with  regard  to  temporal  tilings.  )
Speaking  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
the  Lord  has  said — "  I  will  make
yon  the  richest  people  on  the  earth/'
and  he  can  do  it  just  as  well  as  Dot,
if  we  have  a  mind  to  let  him.  It  is
the  time  of  the  people  we  want  to
dictate.

I  will  branch  off  to  another  thread
of  the  subject  Here  is  a  brother
who  says,  "  Why,  yes,  you  may  have
some  of  my  property,  or  even  take  it
all ;  but  I  want  to  be  a  man  for  my-
self; I  do  not  want  to  be  dictated  ;  I
want  to  pieserve  my  own  freedom;
I  do  nut  want  to  be  a  slave"  What
an  idea  !  It  is  from  the  enemy,  and
because  a  prison  has  not  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  to  see  how  things  are.
There  is  not  a  man  of  us  but  what  is
willing  to  acknowledge  at  once  that
God  demands  tstrict  obedience  to  hi.s
requirements.  Bat  in  rendering  that
strict  obedience,  are  we  made  slaves  ?
No,  it  is  the  only  way  on  the  face  of
the  earth  for  you  and  me  to  become
free,  and  we  shall  become  the  slaves
of  our  own  passions,  and  of  the  wicked
one,  and  servants  to  the  devil,  if  we
take  any  other  course,  and  we  shall
be  eventually  cast  into  hell  with  the
devils.  Now  to  say  that  I  do  not
enjoy  the  volition  of  my  own  will
just  as  much  when  X  pr&y  as  I  would
to  swear,  is  a  false  principle,  it  is
false  ground  to  take.  You  take  the
man  who  swears,  and  he  has  no  more
freedom,  and  acts  no  in  ore  on  Ins
own  will  than  the  man  who  prays;
and  the  man  who  yields  strict  obedi-
ence to  the  requirements  of  Heaven,
acts  upon  the  volition  of  his  own
will  and  excretes  his  freedom  just  as
much  as  when  he  was  a  slave  to
passion;  and  I  think  it  is  much
better  and  more  honorable  for  ns,
whether  children  or  aduhs,  youthful,


middle-aged  or  o!d,  it  is  better  to  live
by  and  better  to  die  by,  to  have  our
hearts  pure,  and  to  yield  strict  obedi-
ence to  I  he  principles  of  lift;  which
the  Lord  has  revealed,  than  be  i  slave
to  sin  and  wickedness.  All  that  the
Lord  requires  of  us  is  strict  obedi-
ence to  the  laws  of  life.  All  the
sacrifice  that  the  Lord  ^ks  of  his
people  is  strict  obedience  to  our  own
covenants  that  we  have  made  with
our  God,  and  that  is  to  serve  him
with  an  undivided  heart.  '

I  say  this  because  I  want  youo  to
understand  our  position,  I  am  the
director  and  counselor  to  this  people
tor  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth.  I  am  the  one  who  will
tell  what  shall  be  done,  and  how  it
shall  be  done,  and  any  man  who
deviates  or  .says  that  there  is  any
design  in  connection  with  the  Lnited
Order  other  than  to  put  the  people
in  a  condition  and  situation  to  be
better  and  freer,  and  in  whi  :li  they
will  enjoy  more  of  the  blessings  of
heaven  and  earth  than  they  em  out
of  it,  does  not  tell  the  truth.  You
all  know  that  it  takes  intelligence  to
enjoy.  Pel  sons  iti  good  heahh  enjoy
their  food.  Why?  Because  they
have  sensibility  and  nervous  feeling.
Take  that  away  and  they  would  be
like  that  stovepipe,  Cut  a  hole  in
that,  and  put  therein  a  nice  beef
steak,  plum  pudding,  or  a  sweet  cake,
and  would  the  stovepipe  enjoy  it?
No.  Why?  Because  it  has  do
sensibility.  We  enjoy  because  we
have  sensibility.  Promote  this  sensi-
bility, seek  to  get  more  and  more
knowledge,  more  wisdom,  and  more
understanding,  and  to  know  the  things
of  God.  He  is  the  author  of  life  and
of  all  joy  and  comfort;  he  is  th©^
auth  r  of  all  intelligence  arid  of  all
good  to  us;  then  become  satisfied  to
obey  hi  hi,  and  seek  to  get  mote  and
more  of  his  nature,  and  learn  more
and  more  of  him. This  will  give  us


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS,  ETC.


247


greater  sensibility,  and  we  shall  know
how  to  enjoy,  and  how  to  endure,  I
say,  if  yon  want  to  enjoy  exquisite! f%
become  a  Letter- day  Saint,  and  then
live  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,
The  man  or  woman  who  will  do  this
will  enjoy  and  endure  most;  and  if
they  will  be  humble  and  faithful  they
will  enjoy  the  glory  and  the  excel-
lency of  the  power  of  God,  and  be
prepared  to  live  with  Gods  and  with
angels.

We  want  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God  on  the  earth.  I  do  not  know
but  "Iain  spending  more  time  than  I
should,  hut  I  must  say  some  things
more*  This  Third  Ward  is  not  or-
ganized. 1  do  not  know  when  it  wilt
be.  We  asked  jour  Bishop,  and  lie
did  not  feel  exactly  prepared  to  enter
into  the  Order.  We  know  the  reason
why.  Will  he  be  prepared  *f  Yes.
I  waut  to  prophesy  that  he  and  Ins
Ward  will  be  prepared  by  and  by,
and  I  hope  ray  prophecy  will  be  ful-
filled. He  does  not  see  things  as
quickly  as  I  do.  I  will  tell  you  wli.it
my  position  has  ahvays  been.  Before
I  embraced  the  Gospel,  I  understood
pretty  will  what  the  different  sects
preached,  hut  I  was  called  »n  infidel
because  I  could  not  embrace  their
dogmas,  1  could  not  believe  all  of
Methodism;  I  could  not  believe  all  of
the  Baptists'  doctrines;  there  were
some  things  they  preached  I  could
believe,  and  some  1  could  not.  I
could  not  fully  agree  with  the
Presbyterians  in  their  doctrine**,  nor
with  the  Quakers,  :.or  the  Catholics,
although  they  all  have  some  truth.
Aa  far  i.s  their  teachings  were  in
accordance  with  the  Bible,  1  could
believe  them,  and  no  further.  1  was
acq  mimed  with  the  creeds  of  nearly
all  the  various  sects  of  dissenters  in
America,  lor  1  h  td  made  it  my  busi-
ness to  inquire  into  the  principles  in
which  thtsj  believed.  I  was  reh-
giousiy  inclined  in  my  youth,  but  1


could  not  believe  in  their  dogmas,
for  they  did  not  commend  themselves
to  my  understanding  though  a  child
I  had  attended  their  camp  meetings,
and  had  seen  what  they  called  the
power  of  God.  I  had  seen  men  and
women  fall,  and  bn  as  speechless  and
breathless  m  that  stove  before  me,
t  bad  seen  scientists  hold  the  lightest
feather  tbey  could  procure  at  the
nostrils  and  mouths  of  females  to  see
if  a  particle  of  air  passed  to  or  from
the  1  tmgs,  and  not  a  particle  was
discernible.  When  a  C'dld  I  saw  all
this,  but  I  could  not  believe  in  their
dogmas.  1  could  not  say  the  people
were  »ot  sincere  iu  i heir  faith  and
acts,  but  it  w;js  all  a  mysiery  to  me.
I  was  not  old  enough,  and  did  not
understand  enough  to  decide.  In
toe  (lays  of  Joseph,  when  the  revela-
tion came  to  him  aud  Sidney  Uigdon,
while  translating  that  portion  of  the
New  Testament  contained  in  the
29th  verse  of  the  third  chapter  of
John,  io  reference  to  the  different
degrees  of  glory,  I  was  not  prepared
to  say  that  I  b  lieved  it,  and  I  hud
to  wait.  What  did  I  do  ?  I  handed
this  over  to  the  Lord  in  my  feelings,
and  said  I,  "X  will  wait  until  the
Spirit  of  God  manifests  to  me,  for  or
again -t."  I  did  not  judge  the  mat-
ter, I  did  not  ;ii^gue  against  it,  no;  in
the  least.  I  never  argued  the  least
:  i 14  i  i  r  j  - 1  a  uy  t  h  i  i j  sf  J  use  [  >h  pro  po <ed ,
Lair  if  1  eon  id  not  see  or  understand
it,  I  handed  it  over  to  the  Lord.  This
is  my  counsel  to  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  and  if  1  wete  sure  my
prophecy  would  be  fulfilled,  I  cer-
tainly would  prophesy  that  all  here,
who  prufess  to  be  Latter*day  Saints,
will  come  into  the  holy  Oneraud
rejoice  in  it.  And  if  you  do  not  (eel
to  eorne  into  th  Order,  assist  those
who  do,  a  id  do  not  say  anything
u  gainst  them.  You  who  come  into
toe  Order,  do  not  lisp  anything
against  those  who  do  not;  if  you  IVel


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


right  you  will  not  have  the  least
feeling  against  them.  Come  along,
for,  as  I  have  saidfJ?f  I  do  not  find
more  than  fifty  men  in  the  kingdom
of  God  who  will  go  with  me  to  or-
ganize the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God  more  perfectly,  I  shall  go  ahtad.
What  for?  More  knowledge,  wis-
dom, a  nd  pet  fret  ion  in  t  he  manage-
ment and  control  of  our  temporal
affairs*  This  is  what  I  calculate  to
do,  and  I  am  going  to  do  Ask  me
if  I  am  going  into  the  Order  with
all  I  hat  I  have  ?  Yes,  as  I  told  them
in  a  meeting  not  long  ago,  I  am
going  in  with  hat,  cnat,  vest,  pants,
fliirt,  boo^s,  and  all  I  have,  And  if
the  question  i$  asked,  If  your  family
do  not  go  into  the  Order,  what  are
you  going  to  do  with  your  property  r
I  am  going  to  seal  it  up  to  t he  king-
dom of  God,  tor  I  do  not  mean  that
the  enemies  of  the  kingdom  shall
have  a  penny  if  I  c«n  help  it.  1  want
it  to  go  to  the  kingdom  of  (Jod,  I
want  it  appropriated  for  the  salvation
of  the  human  family,  to  build  Turn-
pies,  to  sustain  the  families  of  the
Elders  who  go  abroad  to  preach  ;  I
watit  it  to  be  used  for  the  good  of
the  poor  and  for  the  establishing  of
truth  and  righteousness  or.  the  earth*
That  is  all  it  is  for  ;  I  have  no  plea-
sure in  it,  I  have  no  delight  in  it,  it
is  nothing  to  me;  I  want  everything
that  the  Lord  places  in  my  possession,
my  time,  my  talents,  every  ability
I  have,  every  penny  that  he  has  com-
mitted to  me  to  be  used  to  his  glory,
and  for  the  building  up  of  his  king-
dom on  the  earth,  I  have  nothing
but  what  he  has  committed  to  me.
What  do  you  say  to  that,  Jacob  ?
Is  that  right  ?  It  is  exactly,  Thare
is  not  a  maa  here  who  has  got  his
sight,  hearing,  taste  and  smell,  but
ho  is  indebted  to  the  Lord  for  them*
The  Lord  gave  us  everything  we
possess,  whatever  ability  or  talents
we  have;  our  Tabernacles  and  nil


we  enjoy,  are  the  gifts  of  the
Lord,  and  all  should  be  devoted  to
the  promotion  of  his  kingdom  on
the  earth,  and  I  mean  that  mine
shall  be,  the  Lord  being  ray  helper.

I  do  not  want  to  say  to  this  Ward,
you  must  come  into  the  Order,  or  we
shall  not  fellowship  you,  for  we  shall
fellowship  you  if  you  do  not.  A
short  time  ago,  I  said  to  those  of  thia
Ward  who  intended  to  be  organized,
go  to  the  Eighth  Ward  and  organize
with  them,  but  it  was  a  misunder-
stand ing,  that  I  had  dismissed  Bro.
Welter  from  being  Bishop  here ;  and
if  anybody  else  understood  so,  1  think
they  are  mistaken.  He  is  your  Bishop
still,  and  I  charge  him  n<uv  in
God's  name,  not  to  trifle  with  the
sacred  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
or  to  throw  cold  water  on  them  ;  if
he  does  he  will  be  left  dark,  and
tinally  apostatize.  I  say  to  you
Bishop  and  to  the  brethren  and  sis-
ters,  be  faithful,  live  so  that  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  v\jll  abide  within  you,
then  you  can  judge  for  yourselves,
I  have  often  said  to  the  Latter-day
Saints — *'Live  so  that  you  will  know
whether  I  teach  you  truth  or  not,"
Suppose  you  are  careless  and  uncon-
cerned, and  uive  yvay  tp  the  spirit  of
the  world,  and  I  am  led,  likewise,  to
preach  the  things  of  th:s  world  and
to  accept  things  that  are  not  of  God,
how  easy  it  would  be  for  me  to  lead
you  astray  !  But  I  say  to  you,  live  so
that  you  will  know  for  yourselves
whether  I  tell  the  truth  or  not.  That
is  the  way  we  want  all  Saints  to  live.
Will  you  do  it  ?  Yes,  I  hope  you
will,  every  one  of  you.  I  say  to  the
Bishop,  here,  go  along  and  do  not
content!  against  the  things  of  God.
You  and  your  counselors  are  disposed
to  argue  in  regard  to  the  United  Or-
der* There  should  he  no  argument
in  t hit  case;  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
is  the  only  thing  that  can  enlighten
our  minds,  and  give  us  a  knowledge


SECRET  OF  HAPPINESS,  ETC.


249


of  the  things  of  God.  No  earthly
argument,  no  earthly  reasoning  can
open  the  minds  of  intelligent  beings
and  show  them  heavenly  tilings  ;  that
can  only  be  done  by  the  spirit  of  reve-
lation, I  testify  tliis  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  I  feel  to  say  God  bless
you,  peace  be  with  you.  I  have  not
come  here  to  scold  you,  or  anybody
else.  I  am  sometimes  very  routjh  in
my  language  to  the  people,  and  I  give
them  a  rough  scolding,  but  I  do  not
wish  any  evil  to  the  individual,  it  is
to  his  wrong  acts.  If  a  person  does
wrung  I  am  for  exposing  that,  and
chastening  the  perpetrator  if  he  per-
sists in  it.  I  want  wrong  doers  to
refrain.  Now,  I  s?iy,  brother  Jacob,
teach  the  tilings  of  God.  Do  not
have  a  doubt  about  this  any  more
than  about  baptism,  nor  say  a  word
against  it.  How  many  are  there  in
this  Church  who  are  now  wavering
and  shaking  because  they  have  spo-
ken against  the  ordinances  of  heaven,
and  especially  against  that  ordinandi
which  God  has  revealed  for  the  ex-
altation of  the  children  of  men  in
celestial  marriage?  Hold  that  as
sacred  as  your  own  soul :  it  you  can-
Dot  see  the  beauty  and  glory  of  it,  and
feel  it  in  your  own  hearts,  say  nothing
against  it  This  earth  was  placed  in
the  hands  of  Adam  and  his  song,
and  he  is  the  Lord  of  the  earth  ;  the
male  portion  of  the  human  family
are  the  lords  of  the  earth,  and  they
are  full  of  wickedness,  evil  and  des-
truction, and  especially  in  their  acts
towards  the  female  sex.  But  God
will  hold  them  accountable.  The  fact
is,  let  the  pure  principles  ot  the  king-
dom of  God  be  taught  to  men  and
women,  and  far  more  of  the  latter
than  uf  the  former  will  receive  and


obey  them.  What  shall  we  do  with
them  ?  They  want  exaltation,  they  want
to  be  in  the  great  family  of  heaven,
they  do  not  want  to  be  cast  off,  then
they  must  be  taken  into  the  families
of  those  who  prove  themselves  worthy
to  be  exalted  with  the  Gods.  Who
is  it  that  can  not  see  the  beauty  and
the  excellency  of  celestial  marriage,
and  having  our  children  sealed  to  us?
What  should  we  do  without  this?
Were  it  not  for  what  is  revealed  con-
cerning the  sealing  ordinances,  chil-
dren horn  out  of  the  covenant  could
not  be  sealed  to  their  parents;  chil-
dren born  in  the  covenant  are  enti-
tled to  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  and
all  the  blessings  of  the  kingdom,  I
know  that  our  children,  universally,
have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and
when  they  get  old  enough  to  judge
right  from  wrong,  if  they  turn  from
the  good  and  promote  evil  in  their
hearts,  then  will  be  the  time  they
sin.  **:
Now,  I  say  to  you,  brother  Jacob,
tench  the  things  of  God,  and  do  not
trifle  with  this;  do  not  argue  about
this  at  all  ;  if  yon  do  not  see  and
understand,  stand  still  and  see  the
salvation  of  God.  Labor  and  help
those  who  wish  to  go  forward,  and
the  Lord  will  bless  you  in  it.  He
will  open  your  minds  and  yive  you
light  and  understanding,  and  you  will
be  far  happier  than  the  wicked.  How
blessed  are  you  when  you  are  for  God
'  and  none  else  '  Then  you  are  ready
for  whatever  he  reveals.  How  sweet
you  can  sleep !  Your  dreams  are
pleasant  and  delightful,  and  the  days,
weeks,  months  and  years  pass  away
easily  and  joyfully,  you  are  so
happy*

I I  pray  God  to  bless  you,  Amen.


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept,  17,  1870.


(Reported  by  Geo  l\  Gibbs.)


YISIT  TO  SAUBATH  SCHOOLS— REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  COURSE  WE  PURSUE
— COMMON  BLESSINGS  SOMETIMES  UNDERVALUED— THE  GOSPEL  GUAR*
AN  TEES  ITS  OWN  TESTIMONY— APOSTACY  RATHER  AN  EVIDENCE  OF
HEALTH,  THAN  A  SYMPTOM  OF  DISEASE— TESTIMONY,


It  is  a  great  privilege  that  the
Lord  has  granted  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  to  assemble  together  in  peace
and  quietness,  as  we  do  this  day,  to
worship  him  and  partake  of  the  Sacra-
ment in  commemoration  of  the  death
and  sufferings  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ  ;  it  is  a  privilege  which
I,  as  an  individual  member  of  the
Church,  appreciate,  and  I  desire
always  to  do  so.

When  I  reflect  upon  the  many
efforts  which  have  been  made  to
deprive  us  as  a  people  of  our  liberties
and  our  rights  of  worship,  I  cannot
help  feeling  that,  of  all  the  people
who  live  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,
we  should  be  the  most  grateful,  and
should  witness  to  our  Father  and
God,  by  our  devotion,  that  we  appre-
ciate the  kindness  and  mercy  he  lias
manifested  to  us.  It  seems  strange
that  in  this  time  of  religious  tolera-
tion and  freedom,  there  should  be  a
call  for  such  sentiment  as  this.  In
a  land  like  ours,  it  might  be  thought
that  every  one  would  have  a  right  feu
worship  God  according  to  t  he  dictates
of  his  conscience;  but  this  has  not


been  our  experience.  Yet  the  Lord
has  preserved  us,  and  has  defeated
the  machinations  of  the  wicked —
has  preserved  our  rights  and  liberties,
and  granted  to  us  very  many  privi-
leges* Are  we,  as  a  people,  suffici-
ently alive  to  the  importance  of  these
privileges?  Do  we  live  in  a  manner
that  agrees  with  the  revelations  that
the  Lord  has  given  to  us,  to  the  re-
quirements which  he  has  mnde  upon
us?  These  are  important  questions
for  us  to  answer

I  met  with  the  Sunday  school
children  this  morning  in  one  of  the
Wards  of  this  city,  and  while  speak-
ing to  them  I  remarked,  what  I
may  remark  here  (taking  the  Bible
in  his  hand),  There  are  no  people  of
whom  I  know  anything  in  Christen-
dom who  believe  the  Bible,  an. I  are
willing  that  their  children  should  be
taught  all  of  its  principle  in  their
entirely,  as  do  the  Latter-day  Saints.
There  is  no  principle  set  forth  in  the
Scriptures  that  the  Latter-day  Sunta
do  not  incorporate  iu  their  faith  and
practice*  I  related  to  them  a  little
of  my  experience* I  remember  when


VISIT  TO  SABBATH  SCHOOLS,  ETC


251


I  was  a  child  I  read  the  New  Testa-  !
merit.  I  inquired  of  my  father  if
there  were  any  Apostles  then  upon
the  earth,  or  if  there  were  any  people
who  had  the  gifts  which  the  disciples
of  Jesus  possessed  ?  His  reply  was
that  he  knew  of  the  existence  of  no
such  people.  I  could  not  understand
it ;  to  my  mind,  as  a  child,  there
fieemed  to  he  as  great  fi  necessity  for
the  power  of  God  then,  as  there  was
m  those  earlier  days,  I  can  recall
nights  when  I  thought  of  the  bles-
sings which  former  generations  en-
joyed, and  felt  to  grieve  that  I  could
not  live  in  a  generation  when  there
were  Apostles  who  had  the  power  of
God,  I  thought  then  I  would  have
been  willing  to  endure  the  perseen-  j
tioD  and  difficulties  which  they  had
to  encounter  for  so  glorious  a  faith.

This  is  an  advantage  we  have
above  every  other  denomination  with  I
which  1  am  acquainted.  We  believe
the  Bible  in  its  entirety — that  God
is  the  same  to-day  as  lie  was  yester-
day, and  as  he  ever  was — that  he  is
as  willing  now  as  ever  tu  bestow  his
blessings  upon  man,  if  man  will  pre-
pare himself  to  receive  them.  And
if  there  be  an  absence  of  faith  and
power,  and  of  heavenly  gifts,  God
our  eternal  Father  cannot  be  accused
of  partiality  in  withholding  them
from  this  generation.

Do  we  as  a  people  sufficiently  bear
in  mind  that  Uod  requires  us  to  live
Bo  as  to  receive  and  eijoy,  to  the
fullest  possible  extent,  the  gifts  and
graces  which  he  has  to  bestow  upon
his  iaithful  children  ?  I  think,  some-
times, we  are  like  other  people  in
this  respect — we  are  very  liable  to
grow  careless,  to  become  willing  to
allow  the  time  to  pass  along  without
any  particular  cflbtt  on  our  part  to
improve  ourselves,  to  increase  in
godliness  and  the  power  thereof.
We  have  the  human  disposition  to  be
at  case in  the  enjoyment  of  the


earthly  comforts  by  which  ws  may  be
surrounded.  In  this  respect  human
nature  has  been  the  same  in  all  ages,
and  hence  it  has  almost  become  pro-
verbial that  for  a  church  to  prosper
it.  must  be  persecuted,  and  its  mem-
bers placed  in  constant  jeopardy*
But  with  I  he  knowledge  God  has
given  to  us  this  should  not  be  the
case.  It  should  be  a  pleasure,  a
source  of  constant  delight  lo  us,  ag
Latter-day  Saints,  to  keep  all  the
commandments  of  God,  to  seek  and
contend  for  that  faith  ouce  delivered
to  the  Saints,  by  which  they  accom-
plished such  mighty  works.

I  have  said  that  1  greatly  desired
to  live  when  Apostles  were  upon  the
earth.  Are  there  not  hundreds  of
this  congregation  who  have  felt,  in
various  times  in  their  liver,  before
they  heard  the  sound  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  that  they  would  tra-
verse this  earth,  and  undergo  all
manner  of  hardships,  if  they  could
only  bave  the  privilege  to  behold  the
face  of  a  man  of  God,  an  Apostle  of
the  Lord  Jesus  ?  What  would  they
not  have  given  to  hear  words  of  sal-
vation from  such  a  man,  a  man  who
had  authority  to  teach  and  to  admi-
nister the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  ?
Doubtless  there  are  hundreds  present
who  at  various  times  in  their  lives
have  felt  this,  having  grown  up  amid
contending  sects,  I  am  satisfied
that  there  are  hundreds  here  who
felt  in  tin'ir  hearts  that  there  was  no
sacrifice  they  were  capable  of  making,
which  they  would  nut  have  gladly
made,  tu  have  had  the  privilege  they
now  enjoy-  They  are  now  numbered
with  the  Church  of  God,  and  have  a
knowledge  of  this  through  the  power
ot  the  Holy  Ghost,  aud  the  enjoy-
ment of  its  gifts  and  blessings.  And
yet  you  talk  to  these  men  and  women
to-day,  and  what  aie  their  feelings?
A  number  of  them  feel  as  z  alous
aud  warm  in  the  work  of  G^d  as


252


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


they  ever  did. But  many,  doubtless,  1ras  belonging  to  us  and  ours  exclu-


iiave  become  careless.  These  bles-
sings have  become  common  because
of  the  ease  with  which  they  have
been  obtained,  and  indifference  is
the  result.  Yet  are  they  not  just  as
valuable  to-day  ?  Is  it  not  just  as
desirable  to-day  for  human  beings  to
know  that  a  man  has  authority  to
administer  baptism,  and  that  God
will  recognize  the  administration  ?
Is  it  not  a  great  blessing  to  have  the
reality  as  it  was  to  anticipate  it  ?
Certainly  it  is  !  The  authority  which
God  has  restored  to  the  earth  em-
powers man  to  go  into  the  waters  of
baptism,  and  then  baptize  his  fellow-
mat  i  for  the  remission  of  sins,  God
sanctioning  the  act.  This  is  as  great
a  blessing  us  it  ever  was.  The  fact
that  there  are  numbers  of  men  upon
the  earth  thus  authorized,  does  not
make  the  blessing  more  undesirable.
Because  there  are  thousands  of  per-
sons now  living  on  the  earth  who
have  received  of  the  blessings  which
were  to  follow  those  that  believed
and  obeyed  the  Gospel,  does  that  in
the  least  lessen  their  value  ?  I  cer-
tainly think  not;  they  are  just  as
desirable  to-day,  and  should  be  valued
by  every  human  being  who  has  any
appreciation  whatever  of  the  things
of  God.  The  authority  to  admini*
iter  in  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God,  to  say,  "Thus  naith  the
Lord,"  to  counsel,  instruct,  warn,  and
reprove,  is  peculiar  to  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
and  in  this  respect  we  are  different
from  all  other  people.  While  this  i.s
so,  we  do  not  exclude  any  others  from
partaking  of  these  benefits.  We
also — to  use  a  phrase  already  adopt-
ed— we  also  were  Gentiles,  in  igno-
rance concerning  this  Gospel  at  one
time,  that  is,  the  bulk  of  us  were.
Therefore,  while  we  claim  for  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  this  power,  we  do  not  claim  it


sively,  but  to  be  diffused  from  thia
Church  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  so  fast  as  they  will  receive  the
doctrines  of  Jesus  Christ  and  have
faith  to  obey  them.  And  this  is  glad
tidings  of  salvation  to  all  people —
glad  tidings  of  salvation  in  this  age
of  unbelief,  which  might  be  said  to
be  an  age  of  universal  darkness  and
ignorance  concerning  Jesus  Christ.
There  is  scarcely  a  man  to  be  found
who  knows  anything  about  God,
and  who  believes  in  the  literal  resur-
rection of  the  body.  Even  minister!,
as  well  as  members  of  the  various
denominations,  are  in  this  condition*
It  is  a  great  blessing;  that  at  such  a
time  as  thia  there  is  a  people  upon
the  face  of  the  earth  who  testify,  in
all  fsolemnity  and  boldness,  before
God,  before  angels,  and  before  men,
that  God  has  spoken  from  the  hea-
vens, that  he  has  broken  the  silence
that  has  reigned  for  ages  over  the
world,  and  has  once  more  communi-
cated his  mind  and  will  to  man  ;  that
in  this  age  these  M  glad  tidings1'  have
been  communicated  from  the  heavens
by  the  mi nistr.it ions  of  holy  angels
and  the  voice  of  God  himself.

Now  this  is  the  message  of  glad
tidings  which  the  Latter-day  Saint*
have  to  bear,  not  to  themselves  and
their  children  alone,  but  to  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and  to  every
nation  and  kindred,  tongue  and  peo-
ple, that  God  lives,  that  Jesus  lives,
that  the  same  powers  exist  as  existed
anciently,  that  the  same  Gospel  is
powerful  to  salvation  to-day  as  it  was
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  that  the
Holy  Ghost  exists,  and  that  men  can
receive  it  by  taking  the  course  pointed
out  by  the  servants  of  God  anciently.
Who  would  not  be  gladdened  by  such
a  message,  if  they  could  believe  il  to
be  true?  Would  not  ministers  re-
joice in  it  ?  Would  not  the  people?
Would  not  all  the  inhabitants  of  the


VISIT  TO  SABBATH  SCHOOL^,  ETC,


2.53


earth  rejoice  and  praise  God,  if  they
could  belive  such  tidings  as  these'?
The  fact  that  they  do  not  believe
them  does  not  lessen  their  valne,
their  truthfulness,  nor  their  import-
ance. There  are  those  who  do  be-
lieve them,  they  are  found  in  these
mountains,  they  are  Litter- day  Saints,
but  called  "  Mormons"  by  those  who
do  not  choose  to  give  them  their  pro-
per name;  and  they  differ  from  every
religious  sect  and  denomination  in
Christendom,  Their  belief  is  that
God  has  revealed  himself  to  man  in
the  day  and  age  in  which  we  live,  has
restored  the  everlasting  Gospel,  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  gifts  and  graces
thereof.  I  do  not  believe  there  is  a
man  in  Christendom,  nor  in  heathen-
dom, nor  upon  the  whole  face  of  the
earth,  however  wicked  he  might  be,
who  would  not  in  his  secret  heart  be
thankful  if  he  understood  and  knew
these  things  for  himself;  but  there
is  that  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,
there  is  t hat  po.ver  the  adversary  ex-
ercises over  the  children  of  men,
which  blinds  their  eyes  and  beclouds
their  understanding,  making  the
things  of  God  appear  unreasonable
to  them ;  until  it  becomes  fashion-
able for  men  of  education  to  think  it
necessary  that  they  should  doubt  the
existence  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  the  atonement,  because,  forsooth,
they  cannot  comprehend  the  plan  of
redemption  in  all  its  details.  Be-
cause the  resurrection  cannot  be  un-
derstood by  them,  they  must  deny
the  truth  of  the  resurrection  and
doubt  and  deny  the  truth  of  the
atonement  and  mediation  of  Jesus
Christ.  Thn  is  fashionable  in  these
days.  Yet  here  is  a  people,  and  I
rejoice  in  it,  who  do  believe  in  God,
who  testify  that  they  know  God  lives;
that  they  know  that  Jesus  is  the  Sa-
vior of  the  world ;  that  they  know
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  poured  out
upon  men  who  obey  and  do  his  will  ;


who  now  testify  that  they  know  that
God  bestows  his  gifts  and  blessings
upon  man  as  he  did  in  ancient  days.
To  me  it  is  exceedingly  interesting
to  know  that  there  is  a  people  in
these  mountains  who  cherish  this
faith,  notwithstanding  their  weak-
nesses and  failings,  and  notwithstand-
ing  some  of  them  turn  away  from  the
truth  and  become  aliens  to  the  cove-
nants of  Christ.  Notwithstanding
all  these  things,  still  there  is  a  people
who  do  have  this  faith;  who  cherish
it,  and  who  seek  to  teach  it  to  their
children  after  them.

But  it  is  important  for  ns  that  we
should  look  well  to  our  ways,  whether
we  appreciate  the  blessings  God  has
bestowed  upon  us,  and  put  them  to  a
proper  use,  or  not4  How  can  we
know  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and
that  he  lives  ?  How  can  any  man
know  it  ?  I  have  many  times  in  my
life  been  inquired  of  by  intelligent
men  upon  this  point.  "  You  say  that
Jeus  lives,  how  do  you  know  it  ?
You  say  there  is  a  resurrection  of  the
body  and  that  you  know  it.  How
do  you  know  it?"  It  is  only  a  few
weeks  ago  that  a  gentleman  of  supe-
rior  abilities  and  excellent  culture,  a
man  for  whom  I  had  formed  conside-
rable attachment,  said,  "I  would
give  all  the  world,  if  I  had  it,  to
know  what  you  say  you  know.  You
say  you  know  God  lives,  you  say  yon
know  that  Jesus  is  the  Savior  of  the
world,  you  Bay  there  is  a  literal  re-
surrection of  the  body.  I  do  not
know  these  things,  I  cannot  find  oat
anything  about  them.  My  reason
cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  principles
offered  to  me  in  favor  of  these  ideas."
And  he  thought  I  ought  to  be  a  most
happy  man  to  have  such  a  faith,  I
told  him  that  he  could  have  it  by
taking  the  course  God  had  pointed
out.  Can  any  of  us  know  these
things  by  reading  the  Bible,  or  by
hearing  oar  fathers  say  so  ? No,  the


251


JOUKNAL  OF  D i SCO U USES.


information  derived  from  such  a
source  is  only  a  matter  of  belief.
The  Mohammedan  believes  in  the
Koran,  an  1  that  Mohammed  was  a
true  prophet,  because  his  parents
teach  him  so.  And  shall  the  be-
lievers in  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  his
atonement  base  his  faith  upon  no  bet-
ter foundation  than  this  ?  The
heathen  believes  his  doctrine  and
teaches  it  to  his  children*  Belief
alone  is  not  sufficient.  We  must
hmio%  if  we  ever  get  eternal  life.
"  To  know  God  and  Jesus  Christ
whom  lie  has  gent,  is  life  eternal/'

What  difference  is  there  between
Christians  and  Mohammedans  upon
this  point?  The  Christians  believe
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  because  the
Bible  says  so;  the  Mohammedans
base  their  belief  in  Muharutned,  he-
cause  their  fathers  and  mothers  tell
them  he  was  a  prophet  and  the  Koran
is  true*  Jesus  says — u  If  any  man
will  Jo  his  (the  Father'*)  will,  he
shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether
it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of
myself"  He  also  say*,  "  I  am  the
way,  the  truth  and  the  life."  His
Apostle  Peter  says — "Repent  and
be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost."  This  was
the  promise,  and  through  it  every
minister  claiming  to  be  authorized
to  represent  the  Gospel  can  be  tested.
He  who  is  a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ
has  the  right  and  authority  to  make
certain  promises  to  believers,  and
these  promises  heaven  will  fulfill
and  man  cannot.  If  a  man  come
forward  professing  to  be  a  minister
of  Jesus  Christ,  promising  the  be-
lievers that  they  should  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  by  complying  with  cer-
tain conditions,  and  the  promise  fails
in  its  fulfillment,  what  evidence  has
finch  a  one  that  the  minister  is  sent
of  God  ?  None  at  alh  But  if  a
man  come,  saying,  uThe  Lord  has


sent  me  forth  ;  I  have  been  called,
commissioned  and  ordained,  and  have
the  authority  to  go  forth  and  call
upon  the  people  to  repent  and  be
baptized,  and  if  they  do  so  they  shall
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  through  the
laying  on  of  hands;"  if  the  people,
after  obeying  the  requirements,  do
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  then
have  a  testimony  that  he  is  a  man
of  God.  This,  when  received  and
retained,  is  an  ever  living,  ever  pre-
sent witness.  It  is  in  this  way  that
the  Latter -day  Saints  know  that
this  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ;
they  know  that  Jesus  is  the  Savior
of  the  world  because  they  have  re-
ceived the  promised  blessings,  But
will  the  reception  of  one  item  of
knowledge  alone  save  us  ?  No,  We
must  gro>v  from  faith  to  faith,  from
knowledge  to  knowledge,  cultivating
and  cherishing  the  knowledge  which
our  Father  has  given  ns  until  we
arrive  at  power  and  receive  gifts
we  do  not  now  enjoy.  This  is  the
privilege  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.
It  is  not  a  knowledge  based  upon
some  past  experience,  bat  to  know
to*day,  to  have  a  living  faith  within,
by  communion  with  God,  by  having
our  prayers  answered.  This  latter
is  one  of  the  best  and  surest  evi-
dences man  can  have.  When  he
is  in  difficulty,  when  in  danger,  he
can  go  to  God,  and  ask  him  to  grant
him  the  deliverance  he  needs  and  he
receives  it.

Of  what  value  is  religion,  unless
this  blessing  can  be  enjoyed  ?  I
care  not  how  much  piety  people  may
affect,  if  they  do  not  have  their
prayers  answered  there  is  not  much
real,  live  faith  conneeted  with  their
religion.  This  is  a  good  test  for  us.
Do  we  live  in  such  close  communioE
with  God,  day  by  day — not  in  the
remembrances  and  reminiscences  of
the  past,  but  living  in  the  know-
ledge of  to-day — that  we  can  go  to


VISIT  TO  SABBATH  SCHOOLS,  ETC,


255


him  asking  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and
receive  au  answer  to  our  prayers  ?
That  is  a  test  of  fellowship  with  God
and  of  Gospel  truth.  This  ought  to
he  the  experience  of  every  one  every
day  we  live,  not,  as  I  say,  dealing  in
the  remembrance  of  past  favors,  not
something  we  received  when  we
joined  the  Church  or  during  some
subsequent  time,  but  because  of  fa-
Tors  we  receive  and  enjoy  to-day.
This  is  happiness  which  the  world
cannot  give  nor  take  away,  that
makes  a  man  happy  in  the  midst  of
his  enemies*  Like  Daniel  he  may  be
cast  among  wild  beasts,  or  like  the
three  Hebrew  children  he  may  be
thrown  into  a  fiery  furnace,  still  he
is  happy  and  can  praise  his  God.
Onr  religion  cannot  be  laid  aside,  as
we  would  our  Sunday  garments,  and
be  forgotten  until  the  following  Sun-
day. It  is  a  religion  that  enters  into
our  every -day  dealings  with  man,
of  parents  with  children  and  children
with  parents,  we  carry  it  in  our  en-
tire  lives  and  we  exhibit  it  in  the
fruits  of  our  lives,  dealing  kindly
and  mercifully,  justly  and  honorably
one  with  another,  administering  the
words  of  consolation  to  those  who
are  afflicted,  enjoying  the  spirit  of  it
when  we  get  up  in  the  morning  and
through  the  day,  until  we  retire  at
night  This  is  the  way  to  live,  and
for  this  purpose  God  has  revealed  the
Gospel.  Anything  short  of  this  is
not  true  religion.  The  man  who
does  not  so  live,  does  not  enjoy  the
blessings  God  is  willing  to  bestow
upon  him#  You  have  tested  this,  you
Latter-day  Saints  who  have  been
members  of  this  Church  since  its
early  rise.  Were  you  not  happy
when  your  enemies  were  persecuting
you,  when  you  were  driven  from  your
homes  ?  Were  you  ever  more  happy
than  when  upon  the  plains,  trusting
entirely  in  the  providence  of  God,
traveling  like  Abraham  did,  not


knowing  whither  you  were  going  ?
And  were  you  not  happy  when  you
came  here  in  the  midst  of  privations  ?
Certainly  you  were.  Happiness  was
in  your  hearts,  and  gladdened  your
countenances.  Why  ?  Because  the
peace  of  God  was  within  you,  it
rested  upon  you  and  you  rejoiced  in
it.  For  this  purpose  religion,  as  it
is  called,  is  revealed.  What  ia
religion  ?  Does  true  religion  make
man  different  from  what  he  is  natu-
rally ?  Yes,  it  can  do  so  if  his  nature
is  defertivej  if  he  inherit  bad  pas-
sions, improper  appetites  and  wrong
inclinations,  it  enables  him  to  subdue
them.  Some  suppose  it  is  sinful  to
be  merry,  to  dance  or  to  witness
amusements.  Young  people,  espe-
cially in  the  world,  often  say,  "I
don't  want  to  be  religious;  Vll  put
it  off  until  1  get  old ;  I  want  to  en-
joy myself."  These  ideas  have  their
origin  in  false  traditions.  There
is  nothing  that  affords  real  hap-
piness except  in  keeping  the  com-
mandments af  Jesus  Christ  Onr
holy  religion  incorporates  every  bles-
sing man  can  enjoy  ;  there  is  no  good
thing  you  can  desire  in  righteousness
that  is  not  incorporated  in  the  reli-
gion of  Jesus  Christ  God,  who
created  us,  knew  the  wants  of  our
being,  and  therefore,  adapted  the
Gospel  to  our  natures.

It  is  generally  thought  that  "  Mor-
monism"  is  going  to  the  wall  because
men  and  women  leave  the  Church*
It  h ;jg  often  been  said,  let  Fashion
be  introduced  and  ministers  be  sent
here,  let  mines  be  discovered,  and
other  agencies  be  brought  to  bear,
and  the  problem  of  "  Mormon  ism"
wonld  soon  then  be  solved.  I  have
no  doubt  that  many  people  who  are
called  Latter-day  Saints  have  suc-
cumbed to  drunkenness,  and  perhaps
to  other  vices.  But  does  this  affect
the  truth  ?  Is  that  any  evidence
that  "Mormonism,"  or  the  Gospel  of


256  ,  JOURNAL  OF

Jesus  Christ,  is  to  be  overthrown  ?
Not  in  the  least  I  cannot  share  in
the  gloomy  apprehensions  that  some
are  disposed  to  indulge  in  respecting
the  future  of  this  people.  I  think
there  never  was  a  time  when  the
prospects  of  the  future  of  the  Church
were  better  than  they  are  at  present.
I  do  not  anticipate  disaster.  I  ex-
pect men  will  fall  away  ;  this  has  been
the  case  always,  and  as  long  as  the
adversary  has  power  over  the  children
of  men  it  will  continue  to  be  so.  I
thank  God  that  certain  men  have  a
disposition  to  leave  this  Church,  and
80  draw  the  line  between  those  who
are  serving  the  Lord  and  those  who
are  not*  I  mourn  that  men  should
be  so  unfortunate ;  but  when  I  see
the  work  of  cleansing  going  on  it  is
an  evidence  to  me  that  the  body  of
the  Church  is  healthy.  We  are  being
brought  in  contact  with  the  vices  of
the  world,  and  if  Latter-day  Saints
cannot  retain  their  faith  in  the  midst
of  these  things  the  sooner  they  be-
come  disfelluwshipped  the  better  for
the  Church.  If,  however,  we  can
endure  all  things  for  the  sake  of  the
Gospel  of  Cbrist,  if  we  can  maintain
the  faith  valiantly,  in  prosperity  as
well  as  in  adversity,  then  is  our  faith
grounded  upon  the  rock.  It  would
make  no  difference  to  such  people  if
there  were  five  thousand  liquor  and
gambling  saloons  in  our  city,  they
would  be  unmoved  and  undisturbed
by  such  things,  God  will  have  a
tried  and  chosen  people,  even  as  gold
is  seven  times  purified  ;  if,  therefore,
there  be  any  dross  about  us  it  will  be  ,
taken  away.  If  persecution  will  not
do  it,  it  is  very  probable  the  Lord
will  use  other  agencies  to  bring  about
the  same  purpose,  so  that  the  end


DISCOURSES*

will  be  accomplished,

I  bear  testimony  that  this  is  the
work  of  Go  n  I  know,  as  welt  as  I
know  I  live,  that  God  raised  up
Joseph  Smith  and  bestowed  upon  hiru
knowledge  and  power  and  enabled
him  to  organize  the  Church  of  Christ
in  its  primitive  purity,  as  it  exists
and  flourishes  to-day,  in  these  niouq.
tains.  I  know  also  that  he  has  be-
stowed the  same  power  and  authority
upon  his  servant  Brigham,  and  I
know,  too,  that  the  people  who  will
obey  his  counsels  will  be  blessed,  as
they  always  have  been,  and  that  the
anger  of  the  Lord  will  be  enkindled
against  the  people  unless  they  do
obey  him,  because  the  Lord  has  set
him  to  guide  and  to  lead  the  people.
To  lead  the  people  blindly  without
knowing .  themselves  whither  they
are  going?  No,  certainly  not.  When
the  President  of  this  Church  gives
counsel,  it  is  the  privilege  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  know,  for  them-
selves, bv  the  testimony  of  Jesus
within  them,  that  such  counsel  is
right,  and  no  higher  testimony  can
be  given  any  man  than  this.  It  is
the  privilege  of  all  to  know  whether
this  is  the  work  of  God  or  not,  ac-
cording to  the  Sivior's  promise*
whieh  leaves  the  world  without  ex»
cuse.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  import-
ance for  a  man  to  testify  before  God
and  angels  that  these  things  are  true.
If  he  be  an  impostor,  then  the  respon-
sibility of  that  man  is  dreadful  ;  if
his  testimony  be  true,  then  those  who
hear  and  reject  it  assume  greater  re-
sponsibility. That  God  may  help  us
to  stand  pure  and  unspotted  before
him,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus*  Amen.


PHILOSOPHY  OF  MAN,  ETC


257


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  at  thb  Semi  Annual  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  Oct.  8,  1876.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

PHILOSOPHY  OF  MAX  UPON  THE  EARTH  —  THE  GREAT  AND  GRAND
SECRET  OF  SALVATION — ARE  WE  ONE — NATURE  OF  STEWARDSHIP—
INCREASE  OF  TEMPLES — HEAR  YE,  MOTHERS.


I  hope  to  be  able  to  make  myself
heard  by  this  large  congregation.
This  moving  of  feett  whispering  to
each  other,  the  crying  uf  children,
and  the  noise  made  by  those  who
are  walking,  are  like  the  murmuring
of  many  waters.  When  there  is
perfect  quiet neaa,  I  am  satisfied  that
my  voice  can  be  heard  all  over
this  house,  and  no  one  who  is  blessed
with  good  eais  for  hearing  need
mi  as  a  word,  I  should  feel  more
satisfied  if  I  could  prevail  on  our
brethren,  when  speaking  from  this
stand,  to  speak  directly  in  front,  so
that  they  could  be  heard  as  far  as
possible*  Many  of  our  experienced
Elders,  in  their  conversation  to  the
people,  turn  first  to  the  right  and
then  to  the  left,  and  every  time  they
turn  either  way,  a  portion  of  the
congregation  is  unable  to  distinctly
understand  that  which  is  spoken ;
whereas,  if  they  were  to  speak  di-
rectly to  the  front,  the  voice  w«>nld
divide  and  go  equally  to  each  part
of  the  house,  and  all  would  hear.
Whether  I  shall  be  able  to  continue
my  remarks  to  any  length  I  do  not
know;  I  tiJiull  try,  however,  to  use

No,  17.


judgment  in  speaking,  so  as  not  to
injure  n^self.

I  will  give  a  short  text,  to  both
Saint  and  dinner,  and  I  think  if  we
were  to  include  ourselves  among
the  latter  and  say  we  are  all  sinners,
we  would  come  nearer  the  fact  than
to  class  ourselves  among  the  former,
although  we  hope  to  be  Saints,  are
trying  to  be  Saints,  and  probably  a
great  many  of  those  who  are  called
Latter-day  Saints  will  yet  become
Saints  indeed.

First,  the  philosophy  of  man  upon
this  earth.  This  cannot  be  learned
by  studying  the  sciences  of  mankind,
it  is  only  understood  by  the  revela-
tions of  God  to  ourselves,  I  will
give  you  a  part  of  my  own  visions
upon  this  matter.  Mankind  is  com-
posed of  two  distinct  elements;  the
first  is  a  spiritual  organization  in
eternity,  the  second  is  a  natural  or-
ganization on  this  earth,  formed
out  of  the  material  of  which  this
earth  is  composed.  Man  is  first
spiritual,  then  temporal  As  it  is
written  in  the  revelations  of  God  to
man,  all  things  were  first  created
spiritual,  and secondly tp*  npnral.

Vol.  XVUK


J58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


That  is,  spirits  were  begotten,  born
and  educated  in  t lie  celestial  world,
and  were  brought  forth  by  celestial
bodies  By  tracing  this  subject  a
little  we  might  understand  how  this
is  brought  about.  The  spirits  before
inhabiting  bodies  are  as  pure  and
holy  as  the  angels  or  as  the  gods,  they
know  no  evil.  This,  their  fiist  estate,
is  the  commencement  of  their  expe-
rience.

These  spirits  I  shall  leave  for  the
present,  and  refer  to  our  first  pa-
rents, Adam  and  Eve,  who  were
found  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  tempted
and  overcome  hy  the  power  of  evil,
and  consequently  subject  to  evil  and
sin,  which  was  the  penalty  of  their
transgression.  They  were  now  pre-
pared, as  we  are,  to  form  bodies  or
tabernacles  for  the  reception  of  pure
and  holy  spirits.  When  the  body  is
prepared,  at  the  proper  time,  the
spirit  enters  the  tabernacle,  and  all
the  world  of  mankind  in  their  reflec-
tions and  researches  must  come  to
this  conclusion,  for  the  fact  is  they
can  come  to  no  other — that  when
the  mother  feels  life  there  is  an  evi-
dence that  the  spirit  from  heaven
has  entered  the  tabernacle.  So  far,
this  is  the  philosophy  of  our  being.
As  has  been  said,  in  consequence  of
sin,  the  body  is  subject  to  sin,  and
it  requires  all  the  efforts  and  power
that  man  can  exert  in  order  to  resist
temptation  that  this  pure  and  holy
spirit  may  bring  into  subjection  the
body,  so  that  it  may  be  sanctified
by  the  Gospel  or  the  law  of  Christ.
The  inquiring  mind  will  ask,  Why
is  this  so  ?  Simply  that  we  may
know  good  from  evil ;  all  the  facts
which  you  and  I  understand  are  by
contrast,  and  all  glory,  all  enjoyment,
every  happiness  and  every  bliss  are
known  by  its  opposite.  This  is  the
decree,  this  is  the  way  the  heavens
are,  the  way  they  were,  and  the  way
they  will  con tinoe  to  be,  forever,  and  for


ever.  Never  was  there  a  time  when
evil  was  not  in  existence,  but  the
time  will  come  when  this  evil  will
pass  away  and  bt;  no  more,  so  far  as
this  world  is  concerned,  and  nothing
will  be  able  to  endure  only  that
which  is  pure  and  holy,  and  Christ
will  destroy  death  and  him  that
hath  the  power  of  death.  This  ap-
plies to  this  earth,  and  the  ordeals
which  it  passes  through  with  those
that  are  upon  it  until  the  winding-up
scene.

But  to  return  to  this  organization.
We  find  a  pure  spirit  inhabiting
the  tabernacle  of  the  creature  which
is  always  prompting  the  individual
to  good,  to  virtue,  to  truth  and
holiness;  all  of  which  emanate  from
that  source  of  purity  from  which
this  spirit  came.  And  here  the
evil  that  came  through  transgres-
sion that  is  in  this  tabernacle,  is
warring  with  this  pure  spirit,  it
seeks  to  overcome  it,  and  is  striving
with  all  its  power  to  bring  this  spirit
into  subjection,  into  bondage  to  the
i  law  of  sin.  This  is  the  warfare
which  Paul  refers  to  when  speaking
of  the  "  thorn  in  the  flesh,"  which
is  no  more  or  less  than  the  spirit
contending  against  the  flesh,  and  the
flesh  against  the  spirit.  This  pure
spirit  will  remain  in  a  condition  to
receive  the  operations  of  the  spirit
of  God,  which  has  goi:e  forth  into
the  world,  and  which  lightens  every
man  lhat  comes  into  the  world,  re-
gardless of  his  condition,  birth  or
education  ;  the  spirit  of  Christ  light-
ens them  all,  and  instructs  their  pure
spirits,  which  are  organizations  in
the  germ  and  in  their  growth,  to
become  independent  beings,  even
sons  and  daughters  of  the  Almighty;
and  it  will  continue  to  thus  operate
until  this  body,  this  sinful  tabernacle,
has  warred  against  the  spirit  and
overcome  it  to  such  a  degree  as  to
entirely  subject  it  to  the  man  of  sin.


PHILOSOPHY  OF  MAN,  ETC


259


for
sin
of


And  when  the  flesh  attains  this
victory  over  the  spirit,  then  is  the
time  spoken  of  when  man  has  sin-
ned to  that  degree  thai,  says  the
Apostle,  "  ye  shall  not  pray
them,  for  they  have  sinned  a
unto  death/*  Then  the  spirit
the  Lord  ceased  to  strive  with  them,
they  no  longer  receive  light,  having
passed  (he  day  of  grace.  Until  then
every  man  and  every  woman  is  on
saving  ground,  and  they  can  be  re-
deems i  from  sin.

How  is  it  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  el  and  understand  alike,
are  of  one  heart  and  one  mind,  no
matter  where  they  may  be  when
they  receive  the  Gospel,  whether  in
the  north  or  the  south,  the  east  or
the  west,  even  to  the  otter  most
parts  of  the  earth  ?  They  receive
that  which  was  promised  by  the
Savior  when  he  was  about  to  leave
the  earth,  namely,  the  Comforter,
that  holy  unction  from  oo  high
which  recognizes  one  God,  one  faith
and  one  baptism,  whose  mind  is  the
will  of  God  the  Fattier,  in  whom
there  dwelleth  unity  of  faith  and
action,  mid  in  whom  there  cannot  be
division  or  confusion  ;  when  they
receive  t  thus  further  light,  it  mat-
ters iiot  whether  they  have  seen
each  isi  her  or  not,  they  at  once  be-
come brothers  and  sisters,  having
been  adopted  into  the  family  of
Christ  through  the  bonds  of  the
everlasting  covenant,  aud  all  can
then  txctaim,  in  the  beautiful  lan-
guage of  Ruth,  "  Thy  people  shall
be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my
God!1'  And  the  fact  that  we  re-
ceive this  Comforter,  the  Holy
Ghost,  is  proof  that  the  spirit  in
warring  with  the  flesh  has  over-
come, and  by  continuing  in  this
state  of  victory  over  our  sinful  bodies
we  become  the  sons  and  daughters
of  God,  Christ  having  made  us
free,  and  whoever  the  Son  makes


free  is  free  indeed.  Having  fought
the  good  tight  we  then  shall  he  pre-
pared to  hy  oar  bodies  dawn  to  rest
to  await  the  morning  of  the  resur-
rection when  they  will  come  forth
and  be  reunited  with  the  spirits,
the  faithful,  as  it  is  said,  receiving
crowns,  glory,  immortality  and  eter-
nal lives,  even  a  fullness  with  the
Father,  when  Jesus  shall  present  his
work  to  the  Father,  saying,  "Fa-
ther, here  is  the  work  thou  gavest
me  to  do  "  Then  will  they  become
gods,  even  the  sons  of  God ;  then
will  they  become  eternal  fathers,
eternal  mothers,  eternal  sons  and
eternal  daughters  ;  being  eternal  m
their  organization,  they  go  from
glory  to  glory,  from  power  to  power  ;
they  will  never  cease  to  increase  and
to  multiply  world's  without  end*
When  they  receive  their  crowns,
their  dominions,  they  then  will  be
prepared  to  frame  earth's  like  nnto
on rs  and  to  people  them  in  the  same
manner  as  we  have  been  brought
forth  by  our  parents,  by  our  Father
and  God*

I  have  often  remarked  that  if  the
Latter- day  Saints  and  all  the  world
understood  the  philosophy  of  their
own  being,  they  would  bow  in
humble  reverence  to  him  who  is
the  Author  of  our  being  and  the
author  of  all  wisdom  and  all  know-
ledge known  amocg  the  children
of  men.  It  is  very  little  compara-
tively that  we  do  know,  and  but
very  little  we  can  really  compre-
hend. It  is  believed  that  our  scien-
tists and  philosophers  are  very  far
advanced,  and  that  wonderful  pro-
gress has  beeu  made  in  ,the  nine-
teenth century;  but  notwithstand-
ing all  the  knowledge  and  power
of  philosophy  which  so  distinguishes
our  at>e,  who  among  our  most
learned  can  create  as  simple  a  thing
as  a  spear  of  grass  or  the  leaf  of  a
tree  ? No  one ;  this  can  only  be


260


JOURNAL  OF  iilSCUUKiaES


done  fhrougn  the  natural  process ;
no  one  cue  organize  the  simplest
particle  of  element  independent  of
the  laws  of  nature.  When  the
philosopher  of  the  age  readies  that
perfection  that  one  can  waft  him-
self to  the  moon  or  to  the  north
star,  or  to  an j  other  of  the  6xed
planets,  and  be  there  in  an  instant,
in  the  same  manner  that  Jesus  did
when  he  ascended  to  the  Father  in
heaven  and  returned  to  the  earth
again,  then  we  may  begin  to  think
we  know  a  little.  When  we  shnll
possess  the  power  and  knowledge
to  cause  heavenly  planets  to  take
their  position,  giving  them  their
laws  and  boundaries  which  they
rrust  obey,  and  which  they  cannot
pass,  then  we  may  begin  to  feel
that  we  possess  a  little  wisdom  and
power.

The  great  and  grand  secret  of  sal-
vation, which  we  should  ccutinu-
ally  seek  to  understand  through
our  faithfulness,  is  the  continuation
of  the  lives.  Those  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  who  will  continue  to
follow  after  the  revelations  and
commandments  of  God  to  do  them,
who  are  found  to  be  obedient  in  all
things,  continually  advancing  little
oy  little  towards  perfection  and  the
knowledge  of  God,  they,  when
th<y  enter  the  spirit  world  and  re-
ceive their  bodies,  will  be  able  to
advance  faster  in  the  things  per-
taining to  the  knowledge  of  the
Gods,  and  will  continue  onward
and  upward  until  they  become
Gods,  even  the  sons  of  God-  This
I  say  is  the  great  secret  of  the  here-
after, to  continue  in  the  lives  for-
ever and  forever,  which  is  the
greatest  of*  all  gifts  God  has  ever
bestowed  upon  his  children.  We  all
have  it  within  our  reach,  we  ei\n  all
attain  to  this  perfected  and  exalted
state  if  we  will  embrace  its  prin-
ciples and  practice them  in  our


every  -  day  life.  How  accommo-
dating, how  glorious  and  divine  are
the  dealings  of  God  with  his  fallen
children!  We  have  been  called
from  darkness  to  light,  from  the
power  of  Satan  to  the  living  God*
By  ol>eying  the  whispering  of  this
Holy  Spirit,  which  we  have  received
by  virtue  of  obedience  to  the  Gospel,
which  prompts  us  to  purge  from
within  us  all  sinful  desires,  we  can
say  we  are  no  more  in  the  world,  but
we  are  in  Christ,  our  living  head.
The  philosophy  of  our  coming  oot
from  the  world  is  the  putting  off  the
old  man  sin,  and  the  putting  on  of
the  new  man  Jesus  Christ.  How  \s
this  to  be  done  ?  After  we  believed
the  Gospel  we  were  baptized  for  the
remission  of  our  sins — and  by  the
Inying  on  of  hand*  we  received  the
Holy  Spirit  of  Promise  and  felt  that
"  we  shall  be  one/1  I  felt  that  I
should  no  longer  have  need  to  keep
a  day-book  and  ledger  in  which  to
keep  my  accounts,  for  we  were
about  to  consolidate  and  become
one  ;  that  every  man  and  every  wo-
man would  assist  by  actually  labor-
ing with  their  hands  in  plaining,
building  up  and  beautifying  this
earth  to  make  it  l?ke  the  Garden  of
Eden.  I  should  therefore  have  no
farther  occasion  to  keep  accounts,  I
should  certainly  accumulate  and
earn  more  than  I  needed,  and  had
not  a  single  doubt  but  what  my
wants  would  be  supplied.  This  was
my  experience,  and  this  is  the  feeling
of  every  one  who  receives  the  Gospel
in  an  honest  heart  and  contrite
spirit.

Bat  how  are  we  now  ?  What  i«-
oor  present  condition  ?

Are  we  one  temporally  ?  Just
about  as  much  as  Babylon  is.  One
says,  Ht  am  for  the  mines,  I  am  en-
gaged on  my  farm  or  my  factory,  I
am  so  engaged  in my  mercantile


PHILOSOPHY  OF  MAN,  ETC


261


business  that  it  absorbs  all  my
time,  therefore  do  not  trouble  me,
do  not  infringe  on  me."  And  who
are  they  ?  Generally  they  are  men
who,  like  myself,  came  here  nut
only  poor,  but  in  debt,  I  was  driven
from  my  homes  and  possessions,
five  times  stripped  of  my  earthly  pos-
sessions. When  we  arrived  in  this
valley,  we  were  in  a  destitute  condi-
tion. Others  c:vme  here  as  destitute
as  we  were,  but  are  now  compara-
tively wealthy — how  do  they  foe  I  ?
They  wish  to  do  just  as  they  please.
Ask  them  if  they  believe  that  the
law  of  God  requires  us  to  enter  into
a  general  copartnership  in  all  nur
business  relations,  living  and  work-
ing togther  us  one  family?  They
will  tell  you,  "  No,  I  don't  believe
any  such  thing,"  Those  of  this
class  who  are  merchants  will  say,
"  I  want  to  get  rich,  I  will  buy  where
I  please,  and  will  sell  at  a  hundred
percent.,  five  hundred  per  cent.,  or
a  thousand  per  cent,  if  I  can."  You
may  do  so  if  you  will,  but  your  end
will  be  lamentable.  You  count  the
men  who  have  broken  up  i heir  homes
and  gone  in  search  of  gold,  and  then
count  those  who  have  carried  out  my
advice,  and  you  will  readily  acknow-
ledge that  the  latter  class  is  by  far
the  better  off,  not  only  financially,
but  morally  and  spiritually.  You,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  who  were
poor  when  you  came  here,  but  who
now,  through  the  blessing  of  God,
ride  in  your  carriages  and  live  in
fine  houses,  enjoying  all  the  com-
forts of  life,  as  well  as  good  health,
and  the  society  of  friends,  how  do
you  feel  ?  As  fur  myself,  1  have
not  the  slightest  feeling  in  my  heart
that  I  own  a  single  thing.  What  1
am  in  possession  of,  the  Lord  has
merely  made  me  a  .steward  over,  to
see  what  I  will  do  with  it.  Now,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  do  you  feel
the  same  ? If  you  do  you  will  each


enquire  what  is  my  dutv  ?  One
duty  is  to  go  to  work  tnd  build  this
and  other  Temples,  and  the  other
ones  can  be  built  long  before  we
can  finish  this  oue.  Shall  we  do
so  ?  I  say  we  will.  If  we  had
reached  that  perfect  state  of  unity
which  we  should  have  long  before
this,  aud  still  hope  that  we  yet  shall,
do  you  suppose  we  would  ask  a  man
to  pay  Tithing  on  ten  bushels  of
wheat,  or  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  ?
No,  all  that  would  be  necessary  under
such  circumstances  would  be  to  say,
brother  so-and-so,  from  you  we  want
so  much,  anil  from  another  ho
much.  14  Yes,"  they  would  say,  "Take
it.  I  have  nothing.  It  is  all  the
Lord's,  let  it  be  used  to  do  him
service  in  the  building  up  of  his
kingdom,"  "  What  would  you  do,
brother  Brig  ham,  if  you  were  re-
quired to  give  up  all  your  sub-
stance ?"  Just  what  I  have  always
been  willing  to  do.  I  would  con-
tinue to  do  my  duty  and  trust  in
God  for  the  results;  that  is  what  I
have  done  all  my  life.  This,  doubt-
less, seems  foolishness  in  the  eyes
of  the  world,  they  cannot  under-
stand it,  neither  have  they  any
means  of  understanding  it,  for  "the
things  of  God  kuoweth  no  man  but
the  Spirit  of  God,"  Before  I  em-
braced this  Gospel  I  had  studied
the  creeds  of  the  Christian  world.
When  I  inquired  of  them  with  re-
yard  to  heavenly  things,  why  we
came  here,  and  the  nature  of  the
relationship  we  sustained  to  God
and  to  heavenly  beings,  could  I  yet
any  information  ?  No,  not  the
least  idea,  I  once  heard  one  of  the
leading  Elders  in  the  E,  isci  pal
Methodist  Church  undertake  to  ex-
plain to  his  congregation  one  of  the
simplest  of  things,  namely,  '*  What
is  the  soul  of  man  After  he  had
labored  for  two  long  hours,  having
exhausted Ins language, for  know-


2G2  JOURNAL  OF

ledge  he  had  none,  lie  straightened  j
back  in  the  pulpit  and  said,  *■  My
brethren  mid  sisters,  I  most  come
to  the  conclusion  that  the  soul  of
man  is  an  immaterial  substance."
What  a  pretty  thing  to  look  at  !
Excuse  me.  As  far  as  the  spirit
and  teeling  of  mfiny  of  these  peo-
ple are  concerned  with  regard  to
morality,  and  their  endeavors  to
send  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen  na-
tions, it  is  excellent  And  there
are,  doubtless,  mil  lions  of  just  as
honest  people  among  the  several
religious  denominations  as  are
amongst  the  professedly  Latter-day
Saints.  But  they  have  not  the  Gos-
pel, they  are  in  darkness  with
regard  to  the  plan  of  solvation,  and
their  teachers  are  blind  guides,
totally  una  hie  to  give  the  people
the  living  word,  the  way  of  life.  If
they  live  up  to  the  best  light  and
knowledge  they  have  and  can  get,
they  are  safe,  and  in  a  saved  condi-
tion. What  is  the  bin  of  the  nun-
is  try  and  people  of  the  present.
Christian  denominations  ?  It  is  that
light  has  come  to  them  and  they
reject  it  The  condemnation  of  the
Jewish  nation  was  that  light  had
come  into  the  world,  hut  they  chose
darkness  rather  than  light,  because
their  deeds  were  evil ;  so  says  the
Savior.  The  same  Gospel  that
Jet  us  taught  to  those  who  rejected
him,  is  entrusted  to  us  to  preach
to  the  whole  world  with  the  same
consequences  which  must  reach  them
at  some  time,  in  some  condition.

We  have  been  hunted  and  driven
from  place  to  place,  and  the  wicked
have  sought  our  destruction,  simpiy
because  we  offer  to  them  the  light,
the  truth,  the  everlasting  Gospel
Although  we  have  been  robbed  of
our  homes  anil  po^esslons,  they  have
hot  succeeded  in  dest relying  us  yet.
Will they  succeed? I  think  not!
The  Lord  has  said  he  vvould  gather


DISCOURSES*

his  people  for  the  last  time,  which
he  is  doing;  he  will  not  suffer  that
they  shall  be  overcome,  and  the
kingdom  wrested  from  them  as  here-
tofore. Neither  will  he  be  mocked
and  derided  when  he  comes  this  time
— not  because  the  wicked  vvould  not
repeat  the  same  treatment  if  they
were  permitted — but  because  he  will
come  in  judgment,  taking  vengeance
on  the  wicked  and  on  the  ungodly,
and  with  the  besom  of  de&tr action
the  refuge  of  lies  and  all  those  who
love  and  make  lies  will  be  swept
from  the  earth,  and  few  men  will  be
left.  If  the  Latter-day  Saints  do
not  desist  from  running  after  the
tilings  of  this  world,  and  beijin  to
reform  and  do  the  work  the  Father
has  given  them  to  do,  they  will  be
found  wanting,  and  they,  too,  will  be
swept  away  and  counted  as  unprofit-
able servants

Latter-day  Saints,  go  and  take  up
a  labor  with  yourselves,  urge  your-
selves to  the  belief  that  the  Lord  is
God,  that  his  eyes  are  upon  the  works
of  his  hands,  that  even  the  sparrow
does  not  go  unfed,  nor  a  hair  of  our
heads  fall  to  the  ground  unnoticed.
Labor  with  yourselves  unt  il  you  have
confidence  in  God  and  in  his  re  vela-
tiuns  to  us;  become  one  in  temporal
things  as  welt  as  spiritual  things  as
fast  as  you  can-  Enter  into  the
compact,  the  association  we  c  ill  the
United  Order,  that  we  may  com-
mence to  do  the  work  we  have  under-
taken to  do.

Now,  I  will  make  a  proposition,
and  you  may  have  five  years  to  do
the  work  I  am  ahout  to  assign  you.
To  the  reople  of  the  Sevier  Valley,
Millard  County,  Iron  Comity,  Piute
County*  Beaver  County,  with  Juab,
Kane,  Washington,  and  Sanpete
Counties,  I  will  say,  Go  to  work  and
build  a  Temple  in  Sanpete.  As  soon
as  yon  are  ready  to  commence,  I
will  provide  the  plan. The  ground


PHILOSOPHY  OF  MAN,  ETC.


*  f


63


is  already  selected.  We  do  not  a*k
whether  you  are  able  to  do  this;  but
ask  yourselves  if  you  have  faith  suffi-
cient to  do  it,  for  we  know  that  yoa
are  perfectly  able  to  do  i*  if  you  are
willing,  and  do  it  inside  of  three
years  from  next  April.  Then  to  the
people  t.i f  Box  Klder  Comity,  the
Maiad  Valley,  Cache  Valley,  Soda
Springs,  and  Bear  L  ike  Valley,  Rich
County,  find  the  people  on  Bear
River,  I  say,  unite  yuur  labor  and
commence  as  soon  as  yoa  can  to
build  a  Temple  in  Cache  Valley  k
Again,  to  the  poo  pie  of  Weber
County,  Davis  County,  Morgan  and
Summit  Counties,  Salt  Lake  County,
Tooele  and  Utah  Counties,  with  the
people  east  and  west,  1  will  say,  Go
to  work  and  finish  the  Temple  in  this
city  forthwith*  Can  you  accomplish
the  work,  you  Latter-day  Saints  of
these  several  counties  ?  Yes,  that  is
a  question  I  can  answer  readily,  you
are  perfectly  able  to  do  it,  the  ques-
tion is,  Have  yoa  the  necessary
faith  r  Have  you  sufficient  of  the
Spirit  of  God  in  your  hearts  to  enable
you  to  say,  Yes,  by  the  help  of  God
our  Father,  we  will  erect  these  build-
ings to  his  name.  There  will  be
little  money  comparatively  Deeded,
it  is  nearly  all  labor,  such  as  you
can  perform.  If  the  puople  had  pai  1
their  Tithing,  and  paid  the  hands
employed  on  the  Temple  in  pio-
portiou  as  I  have  done,  that  building
would  have  been  litiished  before  no  .v.
But  1  am  not  obliged  to  build  Tem-
ples for  the  people  ;  this  is  our  com*
man  duty,  in  order  that  all  may  have
the  privilege  to  officiate  for  them

Selves  and  their  dead.  How  lon^,
Latter-day  Saints,  before  you  will
believe  the  Gospel  as  it  is  ?  The
Lord  has  dicltred  it  to  he  his  will
that  his  people  enter  into  covenant,
even  as  Enuuh  and  his  people  did,
winch  uf  necessity  must  be  he  lure
we  shall  nave  t he  privilege  of  budd-


ing the  Centre  Stake  of  Zton,  for
the  power  and  glorv  of  God  will  be
there,  and  none  but  the  pure  in  heart
will  be  able  to  live  and  enj  >y  it.
Go  to  now,  with  your  might-  and
with  your  means,  and  finish  this
Temple.  Why,  for  what  reason?
The  reasons  are  very  obvious,  aud
you  understand  them.

A  few  words  to  the  sister- — yon
mothers  who  are  trifling  with  the
ordinances  of  the  house  of  God,  and
the  blessings  that  are  proffered  to
you,  I  will  say  that  the  time  will
conae,  if  you  persist  in  doing  so,
when  you  will  mourn,  and  will  bo
willing  to  give  worlds,  if  you  posses-
sed them,  for  the  privilege  of  living
your  lives  over  again,  S  >me  of  you
are  treating  with  contempt  the  oracles
of  rhe  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  and  in  the  commission  of  this
mu  you  trifle  with  your  own  salva-
tion, as  well  as  the  salvation  of  your
children.  Repent,  and  turn  unto
G  id,  and  teach  your  children  the
importance  of  doing  the  same,  aud
of  the  sac  red  i  j  ess  of  the  ordinances
and  the  laws  of  God,  It  is  the
mothers  influence  that  is  most
effective  in  moulding  the  mind  of
the  child  tor  good  or  for  evih  If
she  treat  lightly  the  things  of  Go  J,
it  is  more  than  likely  her  chihirea
will  be  inclined  to  do  the  same,  and
the  Lord  will  not  hold  her  guiltless
1  when  lie  comes  to  make  up  Ins
jewels;  he  will  disown  all  such  -when
he  cotnes  to  claim  his  own,  and  will
say.  Go  hence,  I  never  knew  you*

Tue  question  may  be  asked,  Are
you  going  to  discontinue  to  give  en-
dowments here?  I  think  it  is  very
pnamble  that  you  will  have  to  go
where  there  is  a  Temple,  or  go  with-
out. I  i  consequence  of  our  having
bee? i  driven  from  our  hour's,  :md
bee  i use  of  our  destitute  circum-
stances, the  Lord  has  per  mil  led  us
to  do  what  we  have  done,  namely,  to


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


use  this  Endowment  House  for  Tern-
pie  purposes,  But  since,  through
the  mercies  and  blessings  of  God,
we  are  able  to  build  Temples,  it  is
the  will  and  command  men  t  of  God
that  we  do  so,

1  thank  vmi  for  vour  attention.
"We  will adjourn this  Conference


until  the  Oth  day  of  April  next,  to
meet  at  ten  o'clock  a.m.,  in  the  Tem-
ple at  St,  George.  We  intend  to
dedicate  it  then.  We  shall  dedicate
some  parts  this  fall,  and  commence
to  work  in  it.

I  feel  to  bless  the  people,  and  say,
May  Heaven  be  kind  to  you.  Amen,


IMSCOURSR  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,  .

Delivered  in  the  Nkw  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Aug.  20,  1876*


(Reported  by  G*>o.  F.  Gihbx.)


YOUTHFUL  EXFEKIKNCES — PREACHING  WITHOUT  PURSE  AND  SCRIP —
INDIVIDUAL  TESTIMONY  ABUNDANT  AND  SATISFACTORY — JOSEPH  SMITH
NOT  AN  IMPOSTOR — HIS  PROMISES  FULFILLED — FORM  OF  CHURCH
ORGANIZATION  IMPERATIVE — ITS RESTORATION IN PROPHECY  AND

FACT* J  \\  ■  :  1  Jf  '*  \  5#s  V •  $  '  '«


We  have  heard,  this  afternoon,  the
testimony  of  one  of  our  young  bre-
thren. Elder  Math  on  i  Pratt,  who  has
just  returned,  rejoicing  in  the  truth,
from  his  first  preaching  mission
abroad.  -V  *

When  speaking  of  his  late  expert*
ence,  tuy  mind  was  carried  back  to
the  days  of  my  youth,  when,  at  the
age  ot  nineteen,  I  went  forth  to  the
world  to  preach  the  great  principles
embraced  in  the  faith  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  I,  too,  felt  my  weak-
ness, being  then  very  timid  and
bashful,  never  having  been  accus-
tomed to  public  speaking,  Bat  the
Lord,  in  whom  i  phiccd  my  trus',


pave  me  strength  according  to  my
fVulh  and  perseverance,  to  proclaim
the  truth  to  the  people.  The  Holy
Ghost,  which  had  been  given  me,
brou glit  to  mind  the  Scriptures  of
eternal  truth,  in  the  very  moment
needful  to  present  them  to  the  people.
Passages  which  I  had  merely  read,
in  my  early  school  cays,  came  a 3
vividly  to  my  mind  as  though  I  had
committed  them  to  memory.  This
was  in  fulfillment  of  a  promise  of
God  to  all  his  faithful  servants.  The
Lord,  through  new  revelation,  has
commanded  his  servants,  who  t/o
furtli  as  missionaries  in  this  last  dis-
pensation, to  take  no  thought  before-


YOUTHFUL  EXPERIENCES,  ETC


265


hind  what  they  shall  say,  for  it  shall
hp  given  them  in  the  very  moment
tp hat  they  shall  say.  This  has  been
verified  in  very  deed  in  my  experi-
ence, Sometimes,  in  consequence  of
my  weakness,  I  would  take  fore-
thought upon  some  few  subjects,  hut
alter  rising  to  express  these  things
to  i he  people,  they  would  be  takeu
Irorn  me.

Tnere  are  many  promises  which
God  has  made  to  his  servant  in
these  latter  times,  and  in  connection
with  these  promises  he  has  given
many  commandments  which  we  are
required  to  observe  and  keep.  One
of  these  commandments,  given  to  his
missionary  servants  in  the  year
reads  as  follows  :  **  Verily  I  say  unto
you,  let  no  man  that  goes  forth  to
preach  my  Gospel,  from  this  hour,
take  purse  or  scrip.  '  We  therefore
went  forth,  as  the  ancient  Apostles,
taking  no  thought  for  the  morrow
what  we  should  eat,  or  what  we
should  drink,  or  wherewithal  we
should  be  clothed.  For,  said  the
Lord,  consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,
they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin,
and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  in
all  their  glory,  are  not  arrayed  like
one  of  these.  There  was  another
promise  made  in  connection  with
these  commandments:  11  They  who
go  forth  without  purse  or  scrip,  and
are  faithful  in  all  filings,  shall  not  be
weary  m  mind,  neither  in  body,  limb,
nor  joint,  neither  shall  they  go
hungry  or  alhirst."

This  is  another  great  promise
which  has  been  verified  upon  me  to
the  very  letter.  I  have  gone  to
foreign  nations,  without  one  farthing
to  either  procure  food  or  a  night's
lodging,  and  God  has  opened  up  my
why,  so  that  1  have  lucked  no  need-
fnl  thing.  This  is  nut  only  my  ex
prurience,  but  the  experience  of  thou-
sands who  have  also  tested,  in  like
manner,  the  truth  of  this  promise.


In  the  early  rise  of  this  Church,  I
sometimes  had  to  sleep  out  in  the
open  air,  the  same  as  our  Savior  had
to  do,  as  he  said,  u  The  foxes  have
holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have
nests,  but  the  Son  of  Man  hath  not
where  to  lay  his  head."  And  so  it
hath  been  with  many  of  his  tatter-
day  servants.  Yet  we  experienced
no  particular  inconveniences  by  being
obliged  to  sleep  at  night  on  the
ground  ;  neither  have  we  suffered
when  calling  on  the  people  from
time  to  time,  as  servants  of  God,  to
obtain  food,  any  more  than  Elijah
did,  when  he  fasted  forty  days,  or
Moses  when  he  was  forty  days  and
forty  nights  withont  eating  or  drink-
ing. There  was  a  power  over  and
in  those  ancient  servants  of  God,  that
satisfied  the  cravings  of  the  appetite,
in  passitig  through  such  circum-
stances, and  such  power  was  not
withheld  from  us.

After  the  Lord  told  us  how  to  go
forth  to  the  world  with  tins  Gospel
message,  he  said,  He  that  receive th
you,  reeeiveth  me ;  and  he  that  re-
ceived me,  reeeiveth  my  Father;
and  he  1  hat  reeeiveth  my  Father,
reeeiveth  my  Father's  kingdom.  He
also  said,  He  that  rejecteth  you,  and
jour  words  and  testimony,  rejecteth
me;  go  away  from  him  and  cleanse
your  feet  with  pure  water,  and  bear
testimony  of  it  lo  your  Father,  and
return  not  again  to  that  man  or
house;  nnd  whatsoever  village  or
city  you  enter  do  likewise.  And
another  great  promise,  made  in  con-
nection with  this,  is  that  every  soul
that  believes  on  your  woids,  and  is
baptized  iti  water  (or  the  remission
of  Mns,  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  these  signs  shall  follow  them
that  believe.  In  my  name  they
shall  cast  out  devils,  heal  the  sick,
open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  unstop
the  ears  of  the  deaf,  and  the  tongue
of  the  dumb  shall  speak  ;  and  if  any


S66


JOUKXAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


man  administers  poison  to  them,  it
shall  not  hurt  them.

The  promise,  therefore,  unto  all
who  receive  this  Gospel,  is  that  they
filial  I  not  only  receive  remission  of
their  sins,  hut  they  shall  also  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  through  the  laying
on  of  hands  ;  a  promise  which  God
alone  can  fulfil.  Suppose  this  Church
was  au  imposition,  and  this  Gospel
message  not  divine,  would  not  the
people  who  have  icndered  obedience
to  its  requirements  have  proved  it
long:  ago  to  he  false  ?  Certainly  they
would,  and  the  message  itself,  with
its  advocates,  would  have  died  away
and  come  to  nought.  Would  they  have
continued,  as  many  have  done,  for
over  forty  years  in  this  Church ;
and  would  the  people,  numbering  in
this  Territory  about  one  hundred
and  fifty  thousand,  have  gathered  as
they  have  done  from  nearly  nl\  the
civilised  nations,  to  the  great  interior
of  this  continent,  if  the  promises
made  thern  through  this  Gospel  had
not  been  fulfilled.  No,  you  might
have  } j reached  and  promised,  but  it
would  have  been  of  no  effect  There
is  a  va^t  cloud  of  witnesses,  no  I  only
these  of  this  congregation,  bur  I
speak  of  the  entire  people.

Do  you  know,  Latter-day  Saints,
that  this  woik  is  true?  You  do.
How  do  you  know  it?  Not  merely
because  the  men  who  proclaimed  it
told  you  it  was  true.  How  then  do
you  know  it?  You  know  it  by
virtue  of  your  obedience  iu  the
message;  you  have  done  the  will  of
the  Father,  aud  you  have  realized
the  fulfillment  of  the  promise;  so
that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  guesswork,
of  mere  opinion  ;  you  know  heyoud  a
single  doubt,  that  a  is  the  vvurk  of
the  living  God,

Suppose  an  impostor  was  to  un<
dtttuke  to  preach  this  Gospel,  offer-
ing the  same  promises  to  believers,
which  of  course  would  not  be  ful-


filled. Do  you  not  therefore  see
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  gather
such  people  together  from  the  dif-
ferent nations  ?  But,  when  the
promises  are  realized,  the  people
receiving  so riU' thing  they  never  be-
fore experienced,  when  those  effects
are  strict! v  in  accordance  with  the
words  of  God,  then  they  have  a  tes-
lirtmny  that  cannot  be  denied.  But
says  one,  u  We  hear  people  belong-
ing to  the  different  Christ  inn  sects  and
denominations  say  that  they  receive
the  spirit  of  God  ;  you  say  the  same.
How  are  we  to  judge  between  you
rind  them  ?"  I  would  answer  in  the
language  of  the  Apostle  John,  who,
iu  the  first  verse  of  the  fourth
chapter  of  his  General  Epistle  said,
"  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,
but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are
of  God  :  because  many  false  pro-
phets are  gone  out  into  the  world."
The  true  spirit  imparts  signs  to  all
believers.  Do  the  Methodist*,  the
liaptists,  the  Presbyterians,  or  any
of  the  Christian  sects  receive  a  spirit
of  this  kind  ?  Do  rhey  lay  their
hands  on  the  sick,  and  are  the  sick
healed  ?  If  they  do  then  they  are
true  believers;  but  if  they  do  not,
it  shows  that  they  have  been  de-
ceived. Do  they  even  profess  to
have  these  signs  r  Xo.  Why  ?
Because  they  know  they  are  not  in
possession  of  them  ;  and  in  order  to
excuse  themselves  with  a  view  of
making  everybody  believe  they  are
true  believer?,  they  say  these  signs
were  only  to  follow  the  servants  of
God  in  the  first  nge  of  Christianity.
Let  us  examine  carefully  the  writ-
ten word,  to  see  whether  this  is  so
or  not.  Jesus,  as  is  shown  in  the
lGth  chapter  of  St.  Mark,  com-
mencing at  the  l-~>th  verse,  ,-aid  to
the  Eleven  Apostles,  lt  Go  ye  into
all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature.  He  that  be-
lie vet h and is baptized shall  be


YOUTHFUL  EXPERIENCES,  ETC


saved  ;  but  be  that  belie veth  not
shall  be  damned.  And  these  signs
shall  fallow  them  that  believe:  In
my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils  ;
they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues;
they  shall  hike  up  serpents,  and  if
they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall
not  hurt  them  \  they  shall  lay  hands
on  tlie  sick  and  they  shall  recover,"
Were  the  believers  here  referred  to
con  fined  to  certain  individuals  ?  No,
this  Gospel  message  was  to  be
preached  to  every  creatore  in  all
the  world,  and  the  promise  was  to  '
every  body  thttt  believed  and  obeyed.
Some  argue  thst  when  the  Gospel
was  first  introduced,  it  was  neces-
sary that  these  signs  should  follow
the  believers,  in  order  that  all  the
world  might  be  convinced  of  its
divinity;  but  that  when  the  Gospel
had  been  fully  established,  by  signs
and  wonders,  they  were  no  longer
needed.  This  is  believed  in  and  ac-
cepted as  truth  by  the  groat  majority
of  the  Christina  world.  This  being
the  case,  I  have  often  wondered  wliy
there  were  not  more  infidels  in  the
world,  than  we  have  a  knowledge  of.
Because  a  man  inclined  to  infidrhty
might  8Hy,  "  If  you  do  not  believe
in  one  part  of  the  Gospel,  what  use
is  there  in  my  believing  any  of  it  ?  "
If  you  can  take  upon  yourselves  the
right  to  do  away  with  a  part  of  the
Gospel,  why  may  not  I  do  away  with
the  whole  of  it  ?"  The  signs  which
the  Savior  promised  should  follow
believers  are  just  as  much  a  part  of
the  Gospel  as  salvation  itself  is.

But  how  shall  we  "  try  the
spirits?"  I  do  not  know  of  a  better
and  surer  w;*y  than  to  follow  the
word  of  God.  In  ancient  times
hands  were  laid  on  the  head  of  the  !
baptized  believer  and  the  Holy
Ghost  was  given,  and  it  produced
certain  effects,  insomuch  that  when
the  hands  were  taken  from  the
heads  of  the  individuals  thus  blessed,


often  times  they  would  speak  with
other  tongues,  and  prophesy,  fore-
telling future  events,  etc.  And  the
effects  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  so
miraculous  and  manifest  that  a
certain  sorcerer,  named  Simon  Mag-
nus, doubtless  tli  inking  it  would
;  be  a  great  acquisition  to  his  cata-
logue of  wonders,  offered  the  Apos-
tles money,  if  they  would  empower
him  to  perform  the  same*  But
Peter  said  unto  him,  u  Thy  mo-
ney perish  with  thee;  repent  of  this
thy  wickedness,"  etc.  i4  For  I  per-
ceive that  thou  art  in  the  u;ill  of
bitterness  and  in  the  boud  of  in-
iquity." There  was  a  power  at-
tending the  demonstration  of  those
men  of  God,  in  ancient  days,  that
left  no  duuht  in  the  minds  of  those
who  experienced  it  ;  they  knew  that
it  was  a  power  not  from  man*

After  the  Lord  had  commissioned
the  Elders  of  ths  Church,  some
forty- four  years  ago,  to  preach  this
Gospel  to  all  nations,  he  promised
that  to  those  who  would  believe
and  oljey  their  words,  should  be
given  power  to  clo  many  wonderful
works,  they  should  open  the  eyes
of  the  blind,  and  unstop  the  ears  of
the  deaf,  and  the  tongue  of  the
dumb  should  be  made  to  speak,  and
the  lame  man  should  be  made  to
walk,  etc.  Has  this  promise  been
fulfilled,  Latter-day  sSaints  ?  Yest
you  know  it  has  been  literally  ful-
filled. You  yourselves  when  living
in  i  scattered  condition,  in  p'acta
where  the  Gospel  found  you,  have
laid  your  hands  upon  the  heads  of
your  little  children  and  others,  who
were  sick,  and,  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  and  hy  virtue  uf  the
j  holy  Priesthood,  you  huve  rebuked
the  sickness,  and  jou  have  seen
the  sick  restored  to  health.  You
have  also  witnessed  the  deaf  lectured
to  their  hearing,  and  the  blind  re-
ceive their  sight By these  and


263


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


other  manifestations  of  tlie  power
of  God,  you  knew  that  we  were
the  servants  of  God,  and  that  our
message  was  divine.  The  world
gay  that  Joseph  Smith  was  an  im-
postor, I  would  ask,  Can  there  he
any  more  effectual  means  of  de-
tecting an  impostor,  of  determining
the  truth  or  falsity  of  his  profession,
than  for  him  to  make  to  public  pro-
mises of  this  kind  ?  It  he  were  an
impostor,  the  signs  spoken  uf  would  I
not  follow  believers,  and  the  power
to  perform  these  wonderful  works
would  not  be  given  to  those  who
obeyed  his  words,  Dj  you  not
know,  strangers,  that  an  impostor
would  carefully  avoid  giving  suHj
unmistakable  proofs  of  his  imposi-
tions ?  Yes,  he  would  be  as  cau-
tious as  the  Methodists,  and  the  rest
of  the  so-called  Christian  denomina-
tions,  for  they  do  not  even  profess  a
belli1!  in  them,  much  less  to  declare
themselves  to  be  in  possession  of
them.  But  l he  tact  that  these  s'gns
do  follow  believers,  that  this  power
does  exist,  is  testimony  sufficient,  and
it  is  a  testimony  to  all  the  world,  that
this  Gospel  message  which  we  preach
is  divine,  and  that  God  is  able  to  do
to-day  t lie  same  as  he  did  anciently  ;
and  j on,  Latter-day  Saints,  are  wit*
nesses  concerning  these  things.

Having  examined  the  message
that  these  missionaries  proclaim,  let
me  speak  a  little  upon  another  sub-
ject. If  you  now  travel  over  the
broad  face  of  the  Christian  world,
and  ask  the  several  Christian  sects  if
they  have  inspired  Apostles  in  their
church,  who  receive  revelation  as
they  of"  old  did?  The  answer  will
be  positively  nof  Why  do  you  not
have  them,  are  they  uot  part  of  the
Go>pel  ?  Hear  what  the  Lord  has
said  upon  this  subject  through  the
Apostle  Paul — 14  God  hath  set  some
in  the  Church,  tiist  Apostles,  se-
condarily Prophets,  thirdly  teachers,


after  that  miracles,  then  gifts  of
healings,  helps,  governments,  diver-
sities of  tongaes."  And  these  are
members  of  the  body  called  the
Church.  Yet  you  say  you  have  not
the  first  member  necessary  to  con-
stitute the  body,  God  has  certainly
set  in  his  Church  Apostles,  Where
are  they,  and  where  are  their  revela-
tions ?  When  there  happens  to  be
some  difficulty  on  points  of  doctrine
among  you,  do  you  go  to  the  minis-
ters you  profess  to  have,  requesting
them  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  concern-
ing the  matter  ?  Oh  no,  you  say,
the  canon  of  Scripture  is  full,  and
there  is  to  be  no  more  revelation.
No  wonder,  then,  you  have  not  the
first  officer  of  the  Church  ;  he  would
be  to  you  a  supeifluous  member,  if
there  is  to  be  no  more  revelation*
Hue  how  do  you  know  this  ?  Has
the  Lord  ever  said  that  the  time
would  come  when  lie  would  have  no
more  inspired  Apostles  in  his  Church  ?
Says  one,  My  minister  says  so,  I
would  advise  you  to  go  to  your  min-
ister and  ask  him  where  he  obtains
his  evidence  to  prove  that  the  canon
of  Scripture  is  full.  You  will  find
that  lie  will  appear  numb,  because  no
man  can  put  his  finger  upon  a  sin-
gle passage  of  Scripture  proving
such  an  assertion.  Perhaps  some
have  tried  to  believe  it,  by  quoting
certain  verses  from  the  last  chapter
of  the  Revelation  of  the  Lord  to
St.  John,  when  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos  ;
I  have  had  them  quote  it  to  me.  You
will  recollect  that  John,  while  on  the
Isle  of  Patrons,  ninety-six  years  after
the  birth  of  Christ,  received  wonder-
ful revelations,  the  Lord  commanding
him  to  write  them.  He  wrote
them  uli  parchment,  and  upon  the
closing  up  of  the  scroll  the  Lord
says,  u  If  any  man  shall  add  unto
these  things,  God  shall  add  onto  him
the  plagues  that  are  written  in  this
book." This  is  often  quoted,  per-


YOUTHFUL  EXPERIENCES,  ETC.


26*


haps  without  knowing  or  considering
that  John,  after  his  release  from
Patmos,  as  history  informs  us,  wrote
the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  Supposing
that  John  was  questioned  on  this
point,  how  do  yoti  think  he  would
have  explained  himself  ?  He  would
have  said  that  that  caution  had  re-
ference to  the  book  written  on  Pat-
mos. He  would  have  said  further,
that  the  caution  was  against  man's
adding,  but  that  God  has  the  right
to  give  to  his  people  line  upon  line,
precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little,
and  there  a  little,  book  after  book,
yea,  even  ten  thousand  revelations,
or  more  as  he  may  deem  proper  ;  and
he  never  pronounced  a  curse  against
himself,  but  that  man  ha*  not  the
right  to  add  a  single  word.  The  same
language  may  be  found  in  the  book
of  Deuteronomy,  which  of  course
has  a  direct  bearing  to  the  five  books
of  Moses,  without  any  reference
whatever  to  the  succeeding  books  ot
the  Bible,  May  not  the  same  ob-
jection be  just  as  consistently  raised
against  all  the  books  of  the  Old  and
New  Testament  which  follow  the  last
book  written  by  Moses,  containing
the  same  caution,  as  against  the
new  revelation  of  to*day  ?  Surely
the  people  who  lived  in  and  after  the
days  of  Moses  might  just  as  con-
sistently have  objected  to  receiving
any  further  revelations  from  the  Lord,
because  of  the  caution  referred  to
appearing  in  the  Book  of  Deuter-
onomy, as  the  people  of  to-day  have
for  objecting  to  receive  any  new  re-
velation, because  the  same  caution
appears  in  the  last  chapter  of  the
revelation  on  Patmos.  Both  have
reference  to  particular  books  only,
and  it  is  absurd  and  folly  in  the  ex-
treme for  men  claiming  to  have  any
knowledge  of  God,  and  the  great  plan
of  salvation  to  interpret  it  otherwise.
And  it  can  be  for  no  other  reason
than  to  attempt  to  cover  up  the  state


of  apostacy  which  the  whole  world  is
in,  that  causes  the  ministers  ot  the
various  sects  to  quote  this  passage  as
they  do.

There  is  another  passage  of  Scrip-
ture which  I  will  refer  to,  in  connec-
tion with  this;  it  reads  as  follows;
"  When  Christ  ascended  up  on  high,
he  led  captivity  captive  and  gave
gifts  to  men.  And  he  gave  so  ne
Apostles;  and  some,  Prophets;  and
some,  evangelists  ;  and  some,  pastors
and  teachers;  for  the  perfecting  of
the  Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  min-
istry, for  the  edifying  of  the  body
of  Christ,"  etc.  It  is  acknowledged
that  you  have  not  Apostles  as  part
of  your  Gospel.  Let  us  inquire
further.  Have  you  got  Prophets?
No,  you  assert  there  is  to  be  no  more
Prophets.  Have  you  workers  of
miracles  or  healers  of  the  sick  ?
No.  Have  you  discerners  of  spirits,
or  speakers  with  tongues,  or  do  an-
gels minister  to  you  ?  No,  yoa
assert  that  these  are  all  done  away.
Do  you  not  know  that  all  these  con-
stitute the  body  of  the  Church  of  the
living  God,  and  that  all  these  are
necessary  to  form  the  whole,  so  that
one  part  or  member  cannot  say  to
another,  M  I  have  no  need  of  yon  V9
What  then  have  yoa  got  ?  You
reply,  We  have  teachers  and  paslors.
Then  you  consider  that  you  have  the
body  of  Christ  among  you  ?  You
reply,  "0  yes;  we  are  the  Church
of  Christ."  Who  authorized  you
to  do  away  with  these  essential  parts
of  the  body  or  Church  of  Christ  ?
Have  you  not  been  instructed  of  the
Lord  through  the  mouth  of  his
Apostles,  that  "If  all  were  one
member,  where  were  the  body  ?  *
If  pastors  and  teachers  are  the  only
members  you  have,  how  is  it  possible
that  the  body  can  exist  among  you  ?
The  Apostle,  in  thus  comparing  the
human  body  complete  with  all  its
members  to  the  body  or  Church  of


270  [ JOUttNAL  OF

Christ,  said — u  The  head  cannot  say
to  the  foot,  I  have  no  need  of  you/'
etc.  By  what  principle  of  right,
therefore,  can  the  legs  or  feet,  which
may  be  said  to  represent  pastors  and
teachers,  say  to  the  head,  which  re-
presents the  Apostles,  "  I  have  no
need  of  you  ?"  You  say  you  have
only  a  couple  of  the  members  of  the
body,  and  that  you  have  received  no
further  revelation  from  God,  the
canon  of  Scripture  being  full,  autho-
rizing you  to  do  away  with  the  other
members.  Were  then  is  the  Church
organization  ns  established  by  the
Savior  ?  No  where,  among  the
sects,  upon  the  whole  earth,  neither
has  it  been  for  many  generations
past.  You  say,  we  are  uncharitable.
We  are  only  comparing  your  church
organization  with  that  of  the  Bible.
We  are  told  to  41  Try  the  spirits,"
and  I  know  of  no  better  way  than  to
do  so  by  the  Word  of  God,  Re-
member that  he  who  dwells  in  the
heavens  will  judge  you  by  his  words
in  the  great  day  of  judgment.  You
pastors  and  teachers,  you  who  pro*
fess  to  be  authorized  of  God,  how  will
you  feel  ju  that  great  day,  when  you
shall  appear  before  him  to  be  judged
out  of  the  books  ?  When  you  hear
him  declare  that  he  placed  in  his
Church,  first  Apostles,  then  Prophets,
etc.,  and  when  he  shall  ask  you  the
reason  why  you  did  away  with  them,
how  will  you  feel,  what  will  you  say  ?
Your  only  answer  can  be  that  "we
did  a  way  with  them,  because  they
were  unpopular,  and  because  we  had
uot  faith  sufficient  to  obtain  revela-
tions ourselves,  and  in  order  to  hide
our  apostacy  we  said  they  were  no
longer  needed/1  Remember,  all  ye,
♦  be  testimony  of  the  Savior — "My
worda  shall  judge  you  in  the  last
day"

The  Lord  has  restored  his  ever-
lasting Gospel,  with  all  its  gifts  and
blessings,  and  in  all  its  fullness,  and


DISCOURSES.

has  called  men  and  commanded
them  to  publish  it  among  the  inhabi-
tants of  nil  the  earth.  Judge  ye
whether  it  be  the  Gospel,  or  whether
it  be  a  man-made  system.  If  it  be
false,  prove  it  to  be  so;  bring  forth
your  strong  reasons;  otherwise  lay
your  hands  upon  your  mouths,  and
let  your  tongues  be  dumb.  There
may  be  imperfections  in  some  of  the
people  who  represent  this  Gospel,
for  the  wheat  and  tares  are  to  grow
together  until  the  second  coming  of
our  Lord,  when  he  will  separate
them  ;  but  there  are  no  imperfections
in  the  Gospel ;  it  is  perfect  so  far  as
God  has  seen  proper  to  reveal  him-
self to  the  human  family,  Will  an
imperfect  system  save  the  people  in
any  part  of  the  world  ?  No.  If
the  Gospel  we  preach  is  not  true,
there  is  certainly  among  you  none
true;  and  we,  therefore,  are  only  one
among  the  others;  for  we  know  they
are  not  true,  because  the  written
word  testifies  against  them.  But  we
present  to  you  a  system  which  is
perfect,  and  which  we  know  to  be
true,  because  the  promised  signs
follow  the  believers.

This  Gospel  must  be  preached  to
all  peoples  everywhere,  fulfilling  the
prophecy  of  John  the  Revelator,
contained  in  the  14th  chapter  of
Revelations,  Judge  ye  whether  that
day  has  come  or  not.  We  declare
that  the  angel  referred  to  there  hag
flown,  and  we  bring  forth  the  evi-
dence of  witness  who  saw  and  con-
versed with  him.  And  we  are  com-
missioned of  God  to  carry  the  Gospel
to  all  nations  under  heaven,  bearing
testimony  that  it  is  the  eleventh  hour
—  the  last  time  that  God  will  ever
send  laborers  into  the  viueyard.  We
testify  that  when  this  Gospel  is
preached  faithfully  to  all  the  world,
then  will  the  end  of  the  wicked
world  come ;  then  shall  the  Son  of
Man  come, sitting  upon  a  white


THE  GOSPEL  TRUMPET,  ETC


271


cloud,  as  predicted  in  the  same  chap-
ter. Theo  woe  to  the  nations  that
reject  this  warning  message,  for  they
shall  he  visited  with  consuming  fire,
and  all  that  shall  be  found  doing
wickedly  dial]  be  burned  up.  Tins
is  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times  that  should  come  in  the  last


days,  gathering  out  the  Lord's  elect
from  the  four  winds  of  heaven ;  a
dispensation  of  the  Lord's  judgments
spoken  of  in  connection  with  the
flying  of  the  angel  in  the  midst  of
heaven ;  and  these  judgments  are
nigh  even  at  the  door.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  P.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  Forty  sixth  Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  ok  Latter  day  Saints,  in  the  New  Tabbrnacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Saturday  Afternoon,  April.  8,  187G.


(Repot ed  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  GOSPEL  TRUMPET — SALVATION  MOKE  THAN  BAPTISM  AND  THE
LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS — RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  BELIEVERS — LABORS
AND  OPPORTUNITIES  OF  THE  SPIRIT  WORLD— THE  OFFICE  OF  THE
HOLY  SPIRIT— KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  CERTAIN  AND  SURE-
ITS  FRUITS  GOOD,  AND  MANIFEST  IN  THE  LIVES  OF  THOSE  WHO
RECEIVE  IT,


It  is  with  humility,  desiring  that
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  may  rest
upon  you,  my  hearers,  as  well  as
upon  myself,  that  I  arise  to  address
you.  I  am  requested  to  "  blow  the
Gospel  trumpet."  I  do  not  know
that  I  shall  be  able  to  make  myself
heard  by  this  large  congregation,
unless  all  keep  quiet  and  exercise
that  faith  which  it  is  our  privilege
to  do  when  assembled  in  a  worship-
ing capacity.

If  we  are  in  the  line  of  our  duty,
we  are  engaged  in  a  great  and  glo-
rious cause. It  is  very  essential  to


our  individual  welfare  that  every
man  and  every  woman  who  has
entered  into  the  covenant  of  the
Gospel,  through  repentance  and
baptism,  should  feel  that  as  indi-
viduals it  is  their  bounden  duty
to  use  their  intelligence,  and  the
agency  which  the  Lord  has  given
them,  for  the  promotion  of  the  in-
terests of  Zion  and  the  establish-
ment of  her  cause,  in  the  earth.
Those  who  are  not  faithful  in  the
discharge  of  these  duties  cannot  be
wholly  acceptable  to  God  ;  for  they
are  more  or  less  in  the  coudition  of


272  JOURNAL  OF

the  Church  which  was  complained
of  l»y  the  angel  to  the  Apostle  John,
as  being  neither  hot  nor  cold,  but
luke-warm.  and  therefore  only  fit  to
be  "spewed  out/*  or  to  he  disowned
of  God.  Manifoldly  more  deserving
of  this  rebuke  and  chastisement  are
tho-e  who  are  not  only  indifferent
to  the  interests  of  the  cause  of  God,
and  its  growth  in  the  earth,  but  who
murmur  and  find  fault  and  who.  in-
stead of  putting  their  shoulders  to
the  wheel,  actually  try  to  retard  its
progress  by  using  what  little  influ-
ence and  means  they  possess  to
obstruct  the  onward  march  of  the
kingdom.

It  was  said  bv  the  Son  of  God,
"Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,
Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God/'

*  *

This  was  said  to  Xicodemus,  a  ruler
of  tlu*  Jews,  who  evidently  believed
that  Jesus  was  sent  of  God,  but
who  went  to  him  by  night,  being
ashamed  to  be  seen  seeking  so  hum-
ble a  person  in  the  daytime,  having,
no  doubt,  that  feeling  of  worldly
pride  which  animates  the  bosoms  of
many  of  the  present  generation,  he
dared  not  identify  himself  with  the
Savior  of  the  world,  because  his  repu-
tation and  standing  in  society  would
be  sacrificed.  But  he  marvelled  at
the  saying  of  Christ,  and  upon  fur-
ther inquiry  the  Savior  explained  by
declaring  that,  "Except  a  man  be
born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
God"  And  I  may  say  still  further,
that  being  born  of  the  water  and
the  Spirit  alow,  will  not  enable  a
man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  There  is  somethiug  still
beyond,  which  is  just  as  necessary
as  this,  the  first  ordinance  of  the
Gospel,  which  must  be  observed
and  honored  by  those  of  this  new
birth  in  order  that  they  may  obtain  t  he
full  salvation  which  is  sought  after.


DISCOURSES,

On  this  particular  occasion  the
Savior  was  speaking  of  Baptism,
and  in  order  to  impress  it  upon
Nicodemus,  that  it  might  be  under-
stood then,  as  well  as  to  be  in  force
ri  all  future  time,  so  that  people
need  not  be  deceived,  lie  spoke
thus  emphatically  on  this  point  of
doctrine.  It  therefore  matters  not
how  devout,  honest,  or  sincere  we
might  be  in  the  profession  of  our
faith  in  Goth  or  in  the  system  of
religion  we  might  have  adopted,
and  which  we  believe  to  be  the
everlasting  Gospel,  without  this  or-
dinance of  baptism  we  cannot  be
saved — but  first  having  repented  of
our  sins  with  that  repentance  which
needeth  not  to  be  repented  of,  in
other  words,  putting  away  from  us

|  every  evil,  and  shunning  even  the
appearance  of  sin,  then  to  be  bap-
tized by  one  authorized  of  God
for  the  remission  of  those  sins,  and
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
we  thus  becoming  heirs  of  God,
and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ;
true  branches,  having  been  grafted
into  the  true  vine,  bearing  fruit  of
the  good  seed,  bringing  forth  an
hundred  fold  to  the  honor  and
glory  of  God,  I  repeat,  it  mat-
ters not  how  honest  we  may  be  or
profess  to  be  in  our  convictions,
without  this  repentance  and  bap-
tism and  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  constitute  the  new
birth,  we  are  not  of  the  family  of
Christ,  but  are  aliens,  estranged
from  God  and  his  laws,  and  in  this
fallen  condition  we  shall  remain,
whether  in  the  body  or  in  the  spirit,
for  time  and  for  eternity,  unless  we
render  obedience  to  the  plan  devised
in  the  heavens  for  the  redemption
and  salvation  of  the  human  family,
The  Latter-day  Saints  may  say,
We  were  taught  this  doctrine  by
the  Elders  in  our  native  lands,  and

f  we  believed  it  and  repented  of  our


THE  GOSPEL  TRUMPET,  ETC


273


sins,  and  were  baptized,  and  we  re-
wived  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  was  a  testimony  to  us  that
we  had  done  the  will  of1  the  Father,
and  since  then  our  testimonies  have
often  bc^en  confirmed  through  the
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God,
and  the  renewal  of  Ids  spirit  in  our
hearts.  Why,  therefore,  say  they,
is  it  necessary  to  refer  to  these  things
now  V  Perhaps  a  reason  may  be  j
found  for  so  doing  in  the  fact,  that,
judging  from  the  actions  of  many
who  profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints,
it  would  seem  that  they  had  come  to
the  conclusion  that  they  had  com-
plied their  work,  that  the  require-
ments of  the  Gospel  were  all  complied
with,  and  nothing  now  remained
but  for  them  to  enter  upon  the  in-
heritances promised  to  the  faithful.
We  perhaps  forget,  in  consequence
of  the  things  of  time,  which  so
tempt  our  fallen  nature,  that,  hav-
ing beau  horn  anew,  which  is  the
putting  away  of  the  old  man  sin,
and  putting  on  of  the  new  man
Christ  Jesus,  we  have  become  sol-
diers of  the  cross,  having  enlisted
under  the  banner  of  Jehovah  for
time  and  for  eternity,  and  that  we
have  entered  into  the  most  solemn
covenants  to  serve  Hod  and  to  con-
tend earnestly  for  the  establishment
of  the  principles  of  truth  and  right-
eousness on  this  earth  continually
while  we  live.  And  having  been
t;  bought  wit! i  a  price,"  that  is,  hav-
ing been  redeemed  from  the  power
of  sin  through  the  atoning  blood  of
the  Savior,  as  the  Apostle  says,
M  We  are  not  our  own  ;n  we  are  his,
and  we  are  dependent  on  him,  not
only  for  the  light  and  knowledge
which  we  have  received  by  virtue
of  the  Gospel  restored  in  this  dis-
pensation through  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  but  for  all  temporal
blessings,  and  even  for  our  very
earthly  being.  Therefore,  it  is  not
No,*  IS.  U


consistent  witli  our  high  and  holy
calling  to  allow  ourselves  to  become
careless  and  indifferent  to  the  inter-
ests of  the  cause  we  have  espoused,
lest  we  fad  through  our  inconsis-
tency, and  return  "  like  the  sow  that
was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the
mire,"  and  perad venture  be  fomid
traitors  to  the  sacred  cause  in  which
we  have  enlisted,  aild  forfeit  the
gift  of  eternal  life  to  which  we
have  been  made  hen's.  There  is  a
course  marked  out  for  us  to  walk
iu— it  is  that  strait  and  narrow
path  which  leads  back  to  the  pre-
sence of  (ml  ;  the  lamp  to  light  our
onward  march  is  the  flolv  Ghost,
winch  we  received  on  or  after  our
new  birth.  If  we  falter  and  turn
aside,  our  lamp  will  burn  dim  and
dually  iro  out,  when  lo.  the  (1om-
forter,  the  source  of  revelation,  will
leave  us,  and  darkness  will  take  its
place  ;  then  how  great  will  be  that
darkness  ■  In  proportion  to  the
light  we  possessed  will  darkness
overpower  us,  arid  unless  a  speedy
repentance  is  made  the  darkness
will  increase  within  us,  until  we
lose  sight  of  our  calling  and  forget
Him  who  redeemed  us  and  claimed
us  for  his  own.  The  Apostle  PauU
in  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corin-
thians, says  :  ifc  Know  ye  not  that
ye  are  the  Temple  of  God,  and  that
the  Spirit  of  (iod  dwelleth  in  you  ?
If  any  man  defile  the  Temple  of
God,  him  shall  God  destroy  ;  tor  the
Temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  Tem-
ple ye  are."  His  language  is  aj*-
plicable  to  us  as  Latter-day  Sain%
and  destruction  must  overtake  \x%
which  is  as  certain  as  it  is  that  God
is  a  just  being,  if  we  render  our-
selves unworthy  of  the  calling  niid
name  we  bear  by  failing  to  perform
the  duties  devolving  upon  us.  A
In  referring  to  the  subject  of
baptism  as  essential  to  salvation,  it
maybe  asked  by  some.  What  wo  dd

Vol.  XVIII


274


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


become  of  those  who  heard  not  the
Gospel,  and  who  therefore  had  not
tin1  opportunity  (>f  being  baptized,
claiming  as  we  do  that  the  Uosj^l
was  taken  from  the  earth  in  conse-
quenee  of  its  being  rejected  when
proclaimed  by  Jesus  and  his  Apos-
tles, I  would  say  to  such  that  God
has  made  ample  pro  vision  for  all
bis  children,  both  the  ignorant  and
the  learned  ;  those  who  have  not
bad  the  Gospel  preached  to  them  in
the  flesh,  will  hear  it  in  the  spirit,
for  all  must  have  the  plau  of  salva-
tion presented  to  them  for  their  ac-
ceptance or  rejection  before  they
€an  become  amenable  to  the  law.
"For,"  says  Paul,  41  where  there  is
no  law  there  is  no  transgression."
To  those  who  heave  not  heard  the
Gospel  in  the  flesh,  if  they  have
not  already  heard  it  preached  in
the  spirit,  they  mast  assuredly  will,
and  that,  too,  by  men  who  have
previously  preached  it  on  the  earth,
who  have  died  faithful  servants,
they  will  continue  their  labors  in
the  spirit  world,  and  those  who  re-
ceive the  Gospel  from  them  will
"  live  according  to  God  in  the
spirit, "  and  all  who  hear  it  will  "  be
judged  according  to  men  in  the
flesh/1  '4  for,"  says  the  Apostlu
Peter,  ''for  this  cause  was  the  Gos-
p*l  preached  also  to  them  that  are
dead"  (1  Peter,  4,  6.)  When,
therefore,  the  law  is  revealed  to  them
and  they  become  instructed  in  it,
then  will  they  be  held  responsible.
If  they  receive  it,  their  kindred  or
friends  who  remain  upon  the  earth
perhaps,  during  the  Millennium,
will  act  for  them,  that  is,  they  will
te  baptized  for  and  in  their  behalf,
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  be
confirmed  members  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  that  work  is  being  done  now;
there  being  only  one  faith,  one
Lord,  and  one  baptism,  which  law


is  eternal  and  unchangeable,  and
therefore  it  is  applicable  to  the  dead
as  well  as  the  living  in  all  ages  and
dint's;  and  further,  no  living  crea*
ture  who  has  become  subject  to  sin
and  tlie  power  of  death  in  conse-
quence of  mortality,  can  evade  this
law  Miid  be  redeemed,  for  it  is  the
door  to  the  fold  of  Christ,  which  fold
cannot  be  entered,  only  through  the
door.  So  great  and  important  is
tli is  labor!  and  so  necessary  for  the
salvation  of  the  human  family,  both
the  living  and  the  dead,  that,  as  the
Prophet  Joseph  said,  it  will  occupy
the  whole  period  of  the  Millennium
to  consummate  it.

In  connection  with  this  work  is
that  >8pokeri  of  concerning  Elijah
the  Prophet,  namely,  "  the  turning
of  the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the
fathers,  and  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children/'  which  if  not  done
the  whole  earth  will  be  smitten  with
a  curse.

The  kingdom  of  God  must  be
erected  upon  the  principles  which
Christ  has  revealed,  upon  t  he  foun-
dation of  eternal  truth,  Jesus  him-
self being  the  chief  corner-stone.
These  holy  and  sublime  principles
must  be  observed  and  honored  in
our  lives,  in  order  that  we  may  ob-
tain an  exaltation  with  the  sanctified
in  the  kingdom  of  God

The  beauty  of  these  principles  is
they  are  tiiie,  and  the  satisfaction
derived  from  their  adoption  is  the
knowledge  which  we  receive  con-
vincing us  of  this  fact.  We  have
not  believed  a  fable,  neither  are  we
cherishing  a  cunningly  devised
scheme,  but  we  have  been  inducted
into  the  truth,  having  Christ  for
our  head,  who  is  our  forerunner,  our
great  High  Priest  and  King.  It  is
true,  there  are  few  comparatively
who  acknowledge  allegiance  to  him*
and  there  are  many  of  these  who  do
not  apparently  comprehend  the  im-


THE UuSPEL TRUMPET,  ETC*


275


portance  and  binding  character  of
their  covenants,  or  allegiance.  This

is  greatly  to  be  regretted,  llot  ^at
the  loyal  and  faithful  subject  will
lose  anything  in  consequence;  but
because  they  who  refrain  from  ex-
ercising themselves  in  his  cause  will
sustain  the  loss,  a  loss,  too,  which
they  cannot  now  estimate.  It  is
indeed  sorrowful  that  any  should
be  indifferent  to  this  all-important
matter.  Who  is  there  of  those  that
have  been,  or  now  are,  associated
with  this  Church,  who  have  not  felt
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
realized  in  dome  measure  the  benefits
of  that  Spirit  through  the  knowledge
which  it  imparts?  This  question
will  meet  all  of  us,  those  who  turn
away  from  the  truth,  and  those  who
are  and  will  remain  indifferent  to
the  causi*  of  Zion,  as  well  as  the
faithful,  when  we  shall  appear  before
the  bar  of  God,  to  render  an  account
of  our  deeds  done  in  the  flesh.

TV  Holy  Ghost  is  a  parsonage
who  acts  in  Christ's  stead.  Just
before  the  risen  Redeemer  left  the
earth  hr  commanded  his  disciples  to
tarry  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  until
they  should  be  endued  with  power
from  on  high.  They  did  so,  and
agreeable  to  promise  the  Comforter
came  whilst  they  were  met  together,
filling  their  hearts  with  unspeakable
joy,  insomuch  that  tliey  spake  in
tongues  and  prophesied ;  and  the
inspiring  influence  of  this  holy  being
accompanied  them  in  all  their  min-
isterial duties,  enabling  them  to  per-
form the  great  mission  io  which  they
had  been  called  by  the  Savior,  We
are  informed  that,  on  a  certain  occa-
sion, whilst  engaged  preaching  the
Gospel,  many  who  heard  the  in  were

convinced  of  the  divinity  of  their
mission,  and  they  cried  out,  saying,
"Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we
do  t 1  They  were  not  told  to  come
to  the  anxious  seat  to  be  prayed  for,


or  to  believe  in  Jesus,  for  they  al-
ready believed  and  were  convinced  j
but  "  Peter  said  unto  them,  Repent,
and  be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  re-
ceive the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost"
The  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is
to  enlighten  the  minds  of  the  people
with  regard  to  the  things  of  God,  to
convince  them  at  the  time  of  their
conversion  of  their  having  doue  the
will  of  the  Father,  and  to  be  in  tbera
an  abiding  testimony  as  a  companion
through  life,  acting  ag  the  sure  and
safe  guide  into  all  truth  and  filling
them  day  by  day  with  joy  and  glad-
ness, with  a  disposition  to  do  good
to  all  men,  to  suffer  wrong  rather
than  to  do  wrong,  to  be  kind  and
merciful,  long  suffering  and  chari ta-
ble. All  who  possess  this  inestima-
ble gift,  this  pearl  of  great  price,
have  a  continual  thirst  after  rhjht-
eousness.  Without  the  aid  of  the
Holy  Spirit  no  mortal  can  walk  in
the  straight  and  narrow  ivay,  being
unable  to  discern  right  from  wrong,
the  genuine  from  the  counterfeit,  so
nearly  alike  can  they  be  made  to  ap-
pear* Therefore  it  behooves  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  live  pure  and
upright,  in  order  that  this  Spirit
may  abide  iu  them  ;  for  it  is  only
possessed  on  the  principle  of  right-
eousness. I  cannot  receive  it  for  yon,
nor  you  for  mej  every  one  must
stand  for  him  or  her  self,  whether  of
high  or  humble  birth,  learned  or  un*
learned,  and  it  is  the  privilege  of  all
alike  to  be  made  partakers  of  it.

I  know  that  God  lives,  and  that
he  has  re  veiled  himself.  I  know
that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  con-
ferred upon  the  children  of  men,  and
that  the  Gospel  has  been  restored  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in  its
fullness.  I  know  that  the  Holy
Priesthood,  which  is  the  power  of  God
delegated  to  man,  has  been  restored


27G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


to  the  earth.  I  do  know  that  God
has  delivered  his  people  and  that  he
will  continue  to  deliver  us  and  lead
us  on  in  his  own  peculiar  way  from
conquering  to  conquer,  from  victory
to  victory,  until  truth  and  righteous-
ness gain  the  ascendency  in  this  His
earth,  inasmuch  as  we  remain  true
to  him  and  to  one  another.

The  question  may  arise  in  the
minds  of  some,  How  do  you  know
these  things  ?

Pei haps  I  can,  in  part  at  least,  an-
swer the  question  by  asking  another
— How  docs  the  child,  or  youth,  im-
mediately know  when  he  performs
the  first  wicked  act  of  his  life  ?  Is
there  not  within  him  a  consciousness
of  right  and  wrong  ?  This  is  a  por-
tion of  divinity  which  lights  every
one  who  is  born  into  the  world,  which
acts  as  a  monitor  to  the  heart  and
soul,  and  never  fails  to  impress  the
mind  with  an  unmistakable  sense  of
right  and  wrong*

Tli is  Fame  spark  of  divinity,  this
monitor  which  speaks  unmistakably
to  the  understanding  of  the  child,
disapprovingly  of  his  wrong,  will
speak,  in  just  as  unmistakable  lan-
guage, anprovingly  of  good  and
righteous  deeds.  Therefore  I  know
what  I  declare  to  be  true,  because
my  conscience  approves  of  my  obey-
ing the  requirements  of  the  Gospel ;
this  inward  monitor  testifies  to  my
spirit  that  in  rendering  this  obedience
I  do  ri^ht,  ;i ml  gives  me  the  self-same
assurance  when  I  am  in  the  diicharge
of  any  other  dulies,  whether  offici-
ating in  the  capacity  of  an  Elder  or
in  the  performance  of  those  duties
which,  as  an  individual,  I  owe  to
iociety.

Is  this  the  only  way  ?  No,  I
know  it  by  the  sight  of  the  eye,  by
the  hearing  of  the  ear,  and  by  the
feeling  of  the  heart.  I  know  that
"  Monnonism"  is  true,  because  the
fruits  of  it  are  pure  and  good.  The


fruits  of  our  religion  can  be  seen
and  heard,  and  their  influence  can  be
felt  For  instance,  here  is  a  brother
who  does  not  take  the  name  of  the
Lord  in  vain ;  he  does  not  steal,  nor
lie,  nor  commit  adultery,  neither
would  he  bear  false  witness  against
his  neighbor  ;  he  honors  his  parents
and  seeks  to  do  to  others  as  he  would
wish  to  be  done  by;  he  bears  the
full  fruit  of  the  Spirit  which  he  has
received  by  virtue  of  his  obedience
to  the  Gospel,  which  is  **  love,  joy,
peace,  longsHffering,  gentleness,  good-
ners,  faith,  meekness,  temperance  ;**
his  influence  is  good,  and  you  know
that  he  has  drunk  at  the  pure  foun-
tain, that  he  has  gathered  his  figs
from  the  fig  tree,  for  were  it  other-
wise his  actions,  the  fruits  of  his  life,
would  be  of  an  opposite  nature.
Further,  this  unmistakable  assurance,
which  is  derived  through  yielding
obedience  to  and  practising  the
principles  of  eternal  life,  is  con-
tinually being  confirmed,  as  it  were,
by  "  line  upon  line  and  precept  upon
precept,"  through  the  revelations  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  a  continu-
ous and  unfailing  source  of  intelli-
gence, of  joy  and  happiness,  drawing
him  who  possesses  it  nearer  onto
God,  and  will  eventually  cause  him
to  appear  like  unto  his  Maker.

It  is  the  fool  who  has  said  in  his
heart,  "  There  is  no  God,"  and  it
would  indeed  be  a  weak  and  foolish
mind  that  would  rest  satisfied  without
out  knowing  beyond  a  doubt  the
Author  and  Source  of  his  religion
when  the  opportunity  of  ascertaining
the  fact  is  extended  to  him.

I  know  the  fruits  of  my  religion
are  good,  they  are  flavored  with  the
sweets  of  heaven,  and  they  impart
health  and  life  to  the  soul,  and  I
know  that  God,  the  Creator  of  heaven
and  earth,  is  its  author.  No  man
need  wonder  whether  this  be  really
true  or  not,  for  all  may  know  for


themselves,  all  may  partake  of  the
fruit  of  the  vine  and  eat  and  live,  all
may  drink  of  the  eternal  spring,  and
drink  and  thirst  for  more.  These
things  I  declare  to  you  to  be  true
and  faithful,  I  have  been  acquainted
with  them  from  my  youth,  and  I
have  felt  their  influence  from  my
childhood,  I  have  seen  the  effect  of
their  opposite,  and  I  know  whereof  1
speak,  1  cannot  deny  these  things,
neither  can  any  man  who  has  ever
known  them,  although  he  may  apos-
tatize from  them,  except  he  deny
himself  and  his  God.

The  man  who  embraces  what  is
called  4i  Mormonism,"  but  which  is
really  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
and  lives  according  to  its  precepts,
will  never  lie  nor  steal  ;  he  will  not
dishonor  his  parents  nor  despise  his
poorer  brethren;  he  will  never,  no
never,  speak  against  the  Lord's
anointed,  nor  be  ashamed  to  own
his  God,  to  whom  he  owes  homage
and  gratitude  now  and  forever;  he
will  never  do  a  dishonorable  act,  nor
fail  to  acknowledge  God  in  all  things,
neither  will  he  refuse  to  render  im-


plicit obedience  to  the  revelations  of
God  which  are  applicable  to  him.
It  is  true,  man  may  err  in  judgment,
he  may  be  wanting  in  many  tilings
because  of  his  fallen  nature,  but  the
system  of  salvation  is  perfect.  Jesus,
the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  in
whom  there  was  no  blemish,  is  its
author  ;  he  is  the  Standard  to  all  the
world,  and  will  be  forever.  He  had
power  to  lay  down  his  life  and  take
it  up  again,  and  if  we  keep  inviolate
the  covenants  of  the  Gospel,  re-
maining faithful  and  true  to  the  end,
we  too,  in  his  name  and  through  his
redeeming  blood,  will  have  power  in
dne  time  to  resurrect  these  our  bodies
after  they  shall  have  been  committed
to  the  earth.

Let  us,  then,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  be  valiant  for  the  truth,  main-
taining our  integrity  to  God  and  our
brethren  in  all  meekness,  that,  we
may  at  last  come  to  the  knowledge
of  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he
has  sent,  whom  to  know  is  life  eter-
nal ;  this  is  ray  prayer  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen,


JOUKNAL  U1-'  M.SUUUKSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ERDKK  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  ix  the  New  Tabekxaclk,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Nov.  5,  1870,


(Repot ed  hj  Geo,  F.  GUIs.)


POSITION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  —  PROTESTANTISM  MAKES  NO
CLAIM  TO  REVELATION — PRIESTHOOD,  HOW  RESTORED,  ITS  PURPOSE —
PERSECUTION  THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  CHURCH— THE  PEOPLE  MUST
KNOW  THE  WILL  OF  CO D,  AND  In*  IT— -RESPECT  THE  AUTHORITIES,
AND  RESPECT  OUR  PROFESSION  —  AVOIDING  ALL  EVILS,  CLEAVE  TO
THE  GOOD.  *


In  meeting-  together  on  Sabbath
days  we  assemble  generally  for  the
purpose  of  renewing  our  spiritual
streugth  by  partaking  of  the  em-  ]
bleins  of  the  broker:  body  and  shed
blootl  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Chnst,  commuting  with  our  own
hearts  and  reflecting  upon  things
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  of  speaking  and  listening  to
those  things  that  have  a  tendency  to
enlighten  our  minds  and  establish  us
in  the  faith,  to  increase  and  confirm
our  hopes,  and  to  enable  us  to  press
onward  with  avidity,  confidence,  and
renewed  determination  in  the  path
which  the  Lord  has  maiked  out  for
us  to  travel  in.  |

As  Latter-day  Saints,  we  occupy  a
singular  position  in  the  world-  Our
yiewa  and  ideas,  theories  and  faith,
doctrines  and  ordinances  are  in
many  respects  different  from  those
which  exist  abroad,  and  from  those
which  many  of  us  have  heen  edu-
cated in.  We  have  become  Latter-
day  Saints  in  obedience  to  strong
convictions,  which  have  been  forced


upon  us  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God,  and  through  the  teaching,  tes-
timony, and  evidence  that  have  been
brought  to  bear  upon  our  minds  by
those  who  visited  us  and  imparted
to  us  the  principles  of  the  Gospel.
In  tliis  respect  we  differ  from  a  great
many  of  the  religious  sects.

When  Protestantism  started,  it
did  not  come  with  a  revelation
from  God,  nor  did  it  profess  any
direct  authority  from  him  nor  any
communication  with  or  from  him.
It  protested  simply  against  certain
errors  which  existed  in  what  was
then  called  the  Catholic  Church.
The  Reformers  did  not  propose  to
introduce  any  direct  communication
from  God,  hut  simply  to  correct
certain  pr  ominent  a  buses  that  they
considered  had  crept,  into  the  church;
and  those  men  wTere  considered  here-
tics by  the  church  they  had  left.

Since  that  time  a  spirit  and  feel-
ing of  a  similar  nature  have  existed
more  or  less  among  other  peoples.
If  we  examine  the  ideas  and  acts  of
Luther,  Mt-Iancthon,  and  some  pro-


POSITION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC.


279


mine  lit  reformers,  we  find  that  a
great  many  sects  and  parties  have
since  then  taken  i he  same  liberty
with  their  creeds  arid  formulas,
which  they  took  with  their  mother
church  ;  and  they  have  generally
used  the  same  kind  of  argument,
namely,  if  it  was  right  and  proper
for  the  first  reformers  to  protest
against  the  doings,  ;<c's,  ordinances,
and  proceedings  of  the  church  which
had  by  them  been  considered  here-
tofore as  the  only  Christian  Church,
and  to  protest  against  the  acts  of  it*
Priesthood,  and  the  doings  of  the
people,  it  was  proper  a Uo  for  other
reformers  to  arise  and  correct  those
first  reformers  on  many  doctrines,
views  and  principles  that  they  may
have  entertained.  This  kind  of  spirit
having  been  inaugurated  and  adopted,
like  leaven,  it  has  worked,  increased
and  spread,  until  great  numbers  of
sects  and  parties  have  appeared
through  Christendom,  all  cl  riming
the  same  rights  that  the  first  ictorrn-
ers  exorcised,  in  correcting  what
they  believed  to  be  wrong  and  un*
scrim  ural

i

With  as,  Latter -day  Saints,  it  is
very different We have  never
claimed any  affinity or  connection
with, or  professed to derive  any
power  or  authority  from, any  of
the  panes, no  matter  what  name
hey  may  bear,  nor  to  any  of  the
Dissenters  who  have  separated  them-
selves from  therm We  have  never
professed  an  adherence  to any  ot
those  principles  that  have  Leen  pro-
mulgated by  others. The  origin  of
our  faith  is  that  God  has  spoken,
that,  in  the  midst  of  conflicting  opim
ions  which  prevailed  with  regard  to
him,  he  has  thought  proper  to  settle
that  question  once  and  lor  all  by  the
revelation  of  his  will  to  the  human
family. Hence, we as  Litter-day
Saints  have  based  our  tnith  upon
these  revelations,  given  originally  to


Joseph  Smith,  and  taught  by  those
who  have  been  ordained  and  set  apart
by  hint,  and  who  have  pone  forth  as
messengers  to  the  natious  of  the
earth  to  proclaim  not  what  somebody
else  said  in  former  times  only,  not  to
make  known  what  other  men  have
done  in  other  dispensations  alone;
hut  to  reveal  to  the  human  family
what  the  will  of  God  is  concerning
them*  This  is  the  posit iou  we  oc-
cupy as  Latter-day  Saints,  If  we
have  any  ideas  of  a  God,  we  have
obtained  them  through  these  revela-
tions, it  we  have  a  worship  which  is
accepted  of  (iod,  it  is  because  the
Lord  has  dictated  as  to  its  form  and
manner  ;  if  we  have  a  Priesthood,  it
is  because  some  of  the  ancient  Priest-
hood who  existed  heretofore  on  the
earth  and  no-v  administer  in  the
heavens,  have  come  and  conferred,
upon  man  on  1  lie  earth,  this  authority ;
if  we  have  ordinances  of  any  kind,
it  is  not.  because  other  people  have
received  these  ordinances  through
whom  we  have  obtained  them,  but
I  because  Got  I  has  revealed  them  to
us  direct  j  and  if  we  have  various
officers  in  the  Church,  it  is  not  be-
cause we  have  c  pied  after  any
rther  church  or  people,  but  because
God  has  told  us  what  his  order  is,
what  his  law  is  in  relation  to  these
matters*  and  the  proper  manner  of
government  to  conduct  and  Hircct
the  affairs  of  God  upon  the  earth.
It  is  in  short  the  revelation  of  the
will  of  God  to  man  in  these  the  last
days.

Now  without  any  kind  of  circum-
locution, these  are  some  leading
prominent  features  of  our  faith.
Predicated  upon  these  the  quorums
of  Priesthood  associated  with  our
Chuich  have  been  established,  which
are  the  First  Presidency,  the  Twelve
Apostles,  High  Priests,  Seventies,
Eldeis,  Bishops,  Priests,  Teachers,
Deacons  and Patriarchs, with  all


28u


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  various  organizations  that  exist
in  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God.
All  these  were  given  riot  by  the
wisdom  or  intelligence  of  man,  nor
Here  they  instituted  according  to
any  p;itlern  that  elsewhere  exists
opon  the  enrth  »t  the  present  time,
nor  based  "p<m  any  faith  promul-
gated by  »ny  ln»dy  of  divines  by  any
scientific  or  literary  associations,  by
any  sjMeiu  of  i  biology  <>r  philosophy,
on  any  pi""  of  any  kind  introduced
by  man's  wisdom  ;  but  they  were  in-
troduced by  the  Almighty  according
to  the  revelations  of  God  to  us,  for
our  guidance  and  direction  in  all  of
our  affairs  in  life,  to  prepare  or  to  ac-
complish not  our  own  will,  but  the
will  of  our  Father  in  Heaven;  not
tp  carry  out  any  ideas  of  our  own,
but  the  ideas,  inter  itions,  com-
mands and  directions  of  the  Al-
mighty, that  we  might  gather  to-
gether from  the  nations  of  the
e  «rth  those  who  are  willing  to  listen
to  the;  principles  uf  eternal  troth,
and  form  ■  grand  nucleus  in  the
valleys  of  the  mountains,  which
should  grow,  increase,  and  spread
under  the  guidance  and  direction
ot  the  Almighty,  until  the  king-
doms of  this  world  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his  Christ,
This  is  real  I  v  the  thing  we  have
engaged  in,  nod  we  are  indebted  to
bim  for  his  ^itection  and  instruc-
tion from  its  first  inception  to  the
piesent  time  ;  and  we  shall  be  thus
indebted,  from  this  time  henceforth
and  forever,  for  the  guidance,  in-
struction, teaching  and  protection
of  the  Almighty  to  enable  ns  to
consummate  the  work  which  he  ori-
ginated and  organized.

It  matters  not  to  us  what  the
Opinions  of  men  may  be  pertaining
to  these  matters.  God  has  given  us
a  mission  to  perform,  and  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God,  and  with  Ins
B&>i*tauce,  we  will  try  to  do  it.  The


ways  of  God,  the  plans  and  designs
of  the  Almighty,  have  never  been
very  congenial  tu  the  feelings  of  hu-
mau  nature,  or  to  the  waywardness
of  the human family.  Whenever
God has  made  known  his  will  to
man  in  any  ago  of  the  world's  his-
tory, there  has  always  Ijeen  a  spirit
of  antagonism  which  has  prevailed
mure  or  less  again>t  it. This  same
opposition  exists today, and  has
done  from  the  first  organization  of
this  Church  ;  and  1  will  siy  it  will
continue  to  go  on  and  increase  and
become  more  intensified  in  propor-
tion to  the  growth  and  spread  of
the  principles  of  troth. We  some-
times think  we  have  had  a  great
deal  to  contend  with. It  is  true,
we  have  had  Ji  little,  bur  VVe  might
have  had  more. Those  who  have
made themselves acquainted  with
the  sayings  of  the  holy  Prophets
contained  in the  word of  God,  as
made  known  on the continent  of
Asia,  as  well  as  on  this  continent,
and the prophecies which  have
bum  fciven  through  the  medium  of
Joseph  Smith, in  relation  to  this
same  sulject, are very  well  aware
that  Ihe  Church is  comparatively
in  its  infancy,  and  so  also  are  the
persecutions  of  those  who  are  op-
posed to  it. We  have  been  in  the
habit  of  reflecting  on  the  position
of  the nations,  for  instance,  and
upon the calamities which  must
overtake  them,  overlooking  perhaps
the  various  powers  which  are  to  be
brought  against  God's  people.  These
have  assumed  at  various  times  dif-
ferent shapes; at tirst,  organize
tions merely  operated against  Jo-
seph Smith,  then  perst  cut  ions  arose
in  small  towns  and  villages  against
those  who  believed  in  this  modern
Prophet  ; then it  followed  us  into
States,  then  we  had  to  endure  exile
from  different  counties  in  Missouri,
and  afterwards  from  one place  to


POSITION  OF  THE  LATTER- PAY  SAINTS,  ETC.


281


another,  until  finally  we  had  to
evacuate  the  State.  We  then  found
ourselves  assuming  a  little  more
importance  in  Illinois,  and  we  learned,
too,  that  as  we  increased  there  in
strength  and  importance,  so  propor-
t innately  increased  opposition  to  us
and  to  the  principles  we  advocated,
until  wv.  had  to  pledge  ourselves  to
leave  a  large  and  beautiful  city  and  an  j
extensive  district  of  country,  and
then  we  came  here  to  these  valleys  of
the  Rocky  Mountains.  Since  then  ,
antagonism  has  presented  itself  in
a  variety  of  forma,  through  United
States  officers,  military  and  civil,
until  it  culminated  in  the  United
States  sending  ont  an  army  against
us.  Since  then  they  have  adopted  j
every  kind  of  method  thart;  man's  {
ingenuity  could  invent  to  harass
and  annoy  us  and  to  interfere  with
our  civil,  social  and  religious  rights,
mud  with  our  interests,  peace,  and
prosperity.

Is  this  the  end  ? No,  for  if  the
Scriptures  be  true  we  have  not  got  [
through  yet. We have not yet  j
built  up  the^  kingdom,  and  conse-
quently the  struggle  is  not  over;  nay,  :
it  has  hardly  commenced.

Nor  arc  we  alone  in  the  dealings
of  God  with  the  people  in  this  dis-
pensation. TKe  Jews  will  have  to
perform  quite  a  role  in  these  last
timer.  They  also  will  have  to  en-
dure a  large  amount  of  trials,  per-
secutions, and  difficulties*  which
have  jet  to  come  upon  tnem.  They
will  in  due  time  be  gathered  to-
gether to  their  own  lands  like  we  are
gathered  here;  and  nations  will  go
up  against  them,  and  then  too  will
certain  nations  come  against  us;
but  we  have  not  yet  got  through
with  the  United  States.  In  relation
to  events  that  will  yet  take  place,
and  the  kind  of  trials,  troubles,  and
sufferings  which  we  shall  have  to
cope  with,  it  is  to  me  a  matter  of


very  little  moment ;  these  things
are  in  the  bands  of  God,  he  dictates
the  affairs  of  the  human  family,
and  directs  and  controls  our  affairs;
and  the  great  thing  that  we,  as  a
people,  have  to  do  is  to  seek  after
and  cleave  unto  our  God,  to  bo  in
close  affinity  with  him,  and  to  seek
for  his  guidance,  and  his  blessing
and  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  and  guide  us
in  the  right  path.  Then  it  matters
not  what  it  is  nor  who  it  is  that  we
have  to  contend  with,  God  will  give
us  strength  a  coon  ling  to  our  day.
There  is  no  question  in  the  hearts
of  all  good  Latter-day  Saints  about
the  future  destiny  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth  ;
that  with  them  is  a  settled  fact.
Neither  does  it  concern  them  what
this  man  or  the  other  man  may  do,
it  makes  no  particular  difference.
God  has  a  certain  object  to  acepm-
plisti,  and  ho  will  do  it  }n  bis  own
way  and  in  his  own  time.  He  holds
the  nations  as  dust  in  the  balances  ;
he  will  manipulate  them  and  their
affairs  as  he  pleases,  and  they  cannot
help  themselves;  he  will  also  man-
ipulate the  affairs  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  having  his  watchcare
over  them,  as  he  ever  has  had  over
all  his  people.  If  we  are  found  to
be  willing  and  obedient,  and  on  the
Lord's  side  for  right,  for  truth,  and
integrity,  for  virtue  and  purity  and
holiness,  adhering  to  the  principles
of  truth  and  the  laws  ol  life,  then
God  will  be  with  us,  and  he  will
sustain  all  those  who  adhere  to
these  principles;  for  be  it  remem-
bered that  these  are  the  principles
we  profess  to  believe  in,  and  those
who  are  not  governed  by  them  he
will  move  out  of  the  way  ;  they  will
drop  down  on  the  right  hand  and
on  the  left  as  many  have  done  be-
fore, and  the  pure  and  virtuous,  the
honorable  and  upright,  will  go  forth
from  conquering to  conquer  until


282


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


they  shall  accomplish  all  that  God
designs  them  to  do  on  this  earth  ;
and  when  they  get  through  lie  will
supply  their  place*  with  others,  who
will  also  take  hold  and  roll  forth  the
kingdom  in  all  its  majesty,  until  the
things  spoken  of  by  all  the  holy
Prophets  be  fulfilled  ;  and  hence  in
relation  to  these  matters  we  cannot
change  the  fiat  of  Jehovah,  which
has  gone  forth,  nor  alter  his  decrees.

He  has  designed  to  gather  toge-
ther his  people  into  one,  and  his
spirit  into  one,  and  his  power  into
one.  The  Scriptures  say  that  God
will  gather  together  all  things,
whether  they  are  things  in  the  hea-
vens or  things  on  the  earth ;  lie  will
gather  them  all  into  nnc,  and  his
people  will  be  gathered  into  one,
and  his  word  will  be  gathered  into
one,  and  hence,  "  The  Nephites  shall
have  the  words  of  the  Jews,  and
the  Jews  shall  have  the  words  of  the
Nephites  ;  and  the  Ne  phi  tea  and  the
Jews  shall  have  the  words  of  the
Ten  Tribes,  and  the  Ten  Trihes  shall
have  the  words  of  the  Nephites  and
the  Jews."  And  he  will  go  on  and
accomplish  his  purposes  in  his  own
way,  and  no  man  can  stay  his  hand.
We  may  think  we  can,  we  may  think
we  can  do  this  thing  and  that  thing
according  to  our  own  caprice,  and
theories  and  judgment  ;  but  God  will
frustrate  and  entirely  overthrow  nil
that  is  based  upon  the  principles  of
truth,  and  carry  Israel  through  tri-
umphant.

We  are  starting  in  on  some  things
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  object
The  spirit  of  God  has  been  opt  rating
upon  President  Young,  to  try  to  get
os  united  in  temporal  affairs.  We
make  sorry  blunders  about  it  some-
times, I  have  sometimes  thought
we  are  slow  to  understand,  and  very
slow  to  perform;  but  still  we  are
doing  a  little,  and  progressing  a  little
here  and  there  in  thtse  tilings,  and  our


feelings  be^in  to  be  drawn  out  a  little,
as  the  Indians  say  [pointing  to  a  small
piece  ot  his  finger]  about  so  much.
We  begin  to  think  there  is  some
meaning  in  it,  and  that  it  is  binding
upon  us,  and  those  who  do  not  do
much  keep  up  a  thinking;  if  we  only

!  continue  to  keep  up  thinking  and
praying  as  well  as  doing,  we  will  get
at  it  by  and  by,  and  get  into  a  better
positiou  than  we  now  occupy.

It  is  a  good  deal  with  some  of  us
in  relation  to  some  of  these  matters
as  with  the  man  who  cried  out,  "Good
Lord  and  good  Devil,'*  for  we  don't
know  whose  hands  we  are  going  to
fall  into,  and  would,  perhaps,  like  to
make  friends  with  both;  we  manifest
a  little  of  oar  own  way,  a  little  of  the
way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  a  very  little
of  the  way  of  the  Lord.

Now,  if  I  understand  my  religion
aright,  if  I  understand  the  Scriptures
and  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  we  have  got,  as  a  people,  to
come  to  this — let  us  knowT  the  will  of
God,  Mod  we  will  do  it,  no  matter
where  it  striken,  what  interest  it  may
come  in  contact  with,  or  whose  views
it  may  overturn.  That  is  my  idea  of
"  Mormonism,"  as  I  have  learned  it.
I  consider  that  God  is  at  the  helm.
\Ye  have  not  dictated  or  found  out
any  tiling  belonging  to  the  problem
we  are  working,  not  a  in  an  amung
us;  all  we  have  received  comes  from
God. If  I  understand  anything  con-

j  cerning  these  things,  it  is  that  the
word  of  Gud  is  law  and  muat  be
obeyed.  If  we  want  to  be  guod,
faithful  Latter-day  Saints,  we  have
got  to  be  willing  to  submit  to  the  will
of  God  in  all  things.  We  must  feel
as  was  once  exclaimed  on  a  certain
occasion  by  the  ancient  Israelites,
"  The  Lord  shall  be  our  Judge,  the
Lord  shall  be  our  King,  the  Lord
shall  be  our  Ruler,  and  he  shall  rule
over  us." That  is  the  way  I  figure

[  up  these  things;  and  if  this  was  not


POSITION  OF  THE  LATTEIl-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC


283


bo  I  would  Dot  give  any  tiling  for  our
religion,  or  our  religious  ideas.  I  do
not  think  that  any  of  us  can  regulate,
manage  or  conduct  any  of  these  mat-
ters, unless  God  be  with  us.  And  I
will  tell  you  another  thing,  God  will
not  be  with  us  unless  we  are  one.
Says  Jesus,  "That  tkey  all  may  be
on<\  as  thou,  Father,  art.  in  me,  and
I  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one
in  us."  "  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,
that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."
And  the  oneness  will  not  consist  in
each  one  of  us  seeking  his  own  inter
est,  his  own  emolument,  and  to  extend
his  own  ideas  and  influence ;  but  in
his  seeking  the  inlerest  and  welfare
of  another,  the  establishment  of  Zion,
that  the  welfare  of  all  may  be  cared
for  and  readied,  both  Among  the  liv-
ing and  the  dead  in  all  time  and  eter-
nity. This  is  the  way  I  have  been
taught  to  regard  the^e  things.  God
is  not  setting  up  a  kingdom  tor  you,
or  for  me,  or  for  any  individual  per-
son.

There  are  a  good  many  points
connected  with  these  things  when
we  come  to  reflect  upon  them,  which
are  of  a  good  deal  uf  importance  to
ns.  How  shall  we  arrive  at  I  hem  ?
Firstly,  by  getting  right  ourselves;
in  our  spirits  and  feelings  one  to-
wards another;  in  upholding  and
sustaining  correct  principles  and  cor-
rect authority,  and  as  a  community
in  being  governed  by  the  Lord  our
God,  How  can  I  expect  to  be  Mes-
sed of  God  if  I  do  not  conduct  myself
as  a  Saint  of  God  ?  Can  I  expect
his  Spirit  ?  No.  Can  I  expect  to
have  the  sweet  whisperings  thereof
to  lead  me  in  the  path  of  life,  if  I
trample  under  foot  his  precepts?
No.  What  then  ?  Tin  re  ate  a
great  many  other  things.  I  will  tell
you  of  one  which  I  have  noticed
lately  that  prevails  to  quite  an  ex-
tent among  us.  I  find  a  great  many
amung  the  Latter-day  Saints  who  arc


a  good  deal  like  those  spoken  of  by
Peter,  14  they  are  not  afraid  to  speak
evil  of  dignities.  Whereas  angels,
which  are  greater  in  power  and
might,  bring  not  railing  accusation
against  them  before  the  Lord."  Jude
the  Apostle,  referring  to  the  same
thing,  says,  "  Likewise  also  these
filthy  dreamers  defile  the  flesh,  des-
pise dominion,  and  speak  evil  of
dignities.  Yet  Michael  the  arch-
angel, when  contending  with  the
devil,  he  disputed  about  the  body  of
Moses,  durst  not  bring  against  him
a  railing  accusation,  but  said,  The
Lord  rebuke  thee."

Now,  as  good  Latter-day  Saints,
let  us  look  at  some  of  these  things
calmly.  Have  we  got  Bishops  in
our  Church  ?  Yes  ;  but  I  was  going
to  sav,  who  the  devil  cares  about
Bishops?  You  do  not  say  it  exactly
like  that,  but  you  think  it  some-
times, don't  you  ?  Then  we  have
the  Twelve  Apostles.  Well,  who
cares  about  the  Twelve  ?  Then,  wo
have  the  First  Presidency*  Well,
who  carts  about  them  ?  If  we  go  a
little  farther,  it  will  be,  Who  the
devil  cares  about  God  ?  It  will
certainly  lead  to  that,  if  we  continue
to  pursue  that  course.  Are  our
Bishops  all  perfect?  No.  Are  the
Twelve?  No;  I  wish  they  were.
Are  the  First  Presidency?  I  hope
they  are.  Are  the  Saints  perfect?
I  wish  you  were.  We  are  all  stir-
rounded  by  weaknesses  and  infirmi-
ties. I  acknowledge  I  am,  and  I
think  I  could  so  speak  for  some  of
my  brethren,  but  I  do  not  propose  to
confess  their  weaknesses.  Notwith-
standing all  the  blessings  conferred
upon  us  through  the  Gospel  we  have
received,  we,  all  of  us,  have  44  the
treasures  in  earthen  vessels.'1  I  sup-
pose that  Gud  has  given  us  these
infiirnities  that  no  flesh  might  glory
in  his  presence,  but  that  we  nv^ht
all  leel  our  littleness  tind  weakness,.


284


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO  UK  SES.


realizing  every  day  that  we  need  to
pr;*y  just  as  the  Lord  taught  his
disciples  io  pray,  saying,  "  Our  Fa-
ther who  art  in  heaven,  hal lowed  be
thy  name  let  me  reverence  thee
and  thy  mime!  "Thy  kingdom
co trie/'  O  God?  let  these  principles,
that  dwell  with  thee  in  the  heavens,
grow  in  my  heart,  and  let  them j
spread  and  expand  until  the  earth
shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge-  r  !
God,  and  until  the  kingdom  of  God
shall  prevail.  "  Let  thy  kingdom
come,  and  thy  will  be  done  on  the
cart  I)  as  it  is  done  in  heaven/1  that
there  may  be  a  people  who  will  listen
to  thy  law,  and  be  governed  by  thy
behests,  "Let  thy  will  be  done  on
earth  as  it  is  done  in  the  heavens"

0  Father,  I  am  a  poor,  helpless,  frail
creature,  lead  me  not  into  tempta-
tion, but  deliver  me  from  evil,"  tor  I
need  thy  help,  11  Give  me  this  day
my  daily  bread,  etc.,  and  deliver  me
from  evil,  for  thine  is  the  kingdom,  :
the  power,  and  the  glory,  forever  and
ever.  Amen/1  Do  not  we  all  need
to  offer  up  this  prayer  every  day  ?

1  do  not  think  it  would  hurt  us  to
do  so.

Then  there  is  another  principle
connected  with  it — "Forgive  us  our
trespasses,  as  we  forgive  those  who
trespass  ugainst  us/*  Do  you  con.
stoutly  think  of  that  ?  We  get
down  upon  our  knees,  and  ninny  of
ns  think  we  are  pretty  decent  fellows ;
but  there  is  brother  So-and-so,  he
does  not  do  exactly  right,  and  I  do
not  like  him  very  well,  and  I  have  j
been  talking  about  him  a  little,  for
he  has  done  me  an  irjury,  and  I
would  like  to  have  full  retribution  ;
but,  O  God,  won't  you  forgke  my
sins?  I  will,  says  the  Lord,  on  con-
dition  that  you  forgive  your  brother,
and  only  on  that  condition.  41  If
thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and
there  re  mem  be  rest  that  thy  brother
hath  ought  against  thee  :  leave  there


thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy
way;  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  bro-
ther, and  then  come  and  offer  thy
gift/'  When  this  law  is  complied
with,  then  we  can  say,  forgive  our
trespasses  as  we  forgive  those  that
trespass  against  us.  In  our  present
condition,  if  the  Lord  were  to  answer
our  prayers,  many  of  us  would  not
be  forgiven.  If  we  want  the  entire
people  to  be  good  Saints,  let  us  be
good  Saints  ourselves.  Let  him  that
says  to  another,  **Yoa  must  not
steal/1  steal  not  himself.  You  that
teach  your  brother  not  to  speak  evil
of  his  neighbor,  do  you  refrain  from
doing  it  yourself?  One  of  the  Apos-
tles says  that  each  one  should  prefer
his  neighbor  to  himself.  We  surely
have  T.ot  got  that  far  yet,  at  least  I
do  not  think  we  have.  Some,  who
think  themselves  pretty  good  people,
would  like  to  get  another  mar/s
monej*  or  property,  but  they  would
not  like  to  be  operated  upon  in  the
same  niauner,  and  then  they  allow
themselves  to  think  they  have  the
favor  of  God  in  such  things  This  is
a  grievous  mistake,  for  we  are  re-
quired to  love  our  neighbors  as  our-
selves. Because  one  man  is  more
talented  than  another,  he  should  not
use  that  talent  to  take  advantage  of
his  brother,  and  then  expect  that
God  will  approve  of  his  actions,  for
he  will  not  do  it ;  he  never  did,  nor
ever  will  We  should  operate  for
one  another's  interest,  having  sym-
pathetic feelings  for  each  other.  We
are  supposed  to  be  brethren  in  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  knit
together  by  the  indissoluble  ties  of
the  everlasting  Gospel,  not  for  time
only,  but  for  eternity.  Hence  all
our  operations  should  be  for  that
end,  founded  on  the  principles  of
righteousness  and  friendship.

We  send  our  missionaries  to  almost
every  country  for  the  put  pose  of
preaching  the  Gospel  and  bringing


POSITION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC,


285-


their  converts  to  Zion,  and  then  we
go  to  work  and  cheat  one  another*
Is  this  right?  No!  Then  let  us
repent  of  our  wrong  doing,  and  do
right,  and  let  the  spirit  of  right  find
room  in  our  hearts,  and  let  it  be  di-
ffused through  our  families.  Let
hnsbands  love  their  wives,  and  be
full  of  kindness  towards  them.  Let
wives  study  their  husbands,  and  with
kindness  seek  to  make  a  heaven  for
them,  that  love  and  happiness  may
reign  in  our  habitations.  Let  parents
teach  their  children  both  by  precept
and  example,  the  vittues  of  Gospel
truths,  that  they  may  grow  up  in
the  love  and  fear  of  God,  and  that
you  may  be  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,
and  yoQr  offspring  with  you.

Let  us  then  begin  to  treat  our
Bishops  with  consideration,  and  then
they  ought  to  treat  us  in  the  same
mariner,  Saith  Jesus  to  Peter,  on  a
certain  occasion,  w  Simon,  son  of
Jonas,  I o vest  thou  me  ?  He  saith
unto  him,  Yea,  L  »rd,  thou  knowest
that  [  love  thee.  He  saith  unto  him,
Feed  my  lambs/*  Do  not  every  time
they  come  near  you,  throw  rocks
at  them  \  but  feed  the  flock,  over
which  you  have  the  watch  care,  with
the  bread  of  life,  with  the  bread  of
intelligence  *iud  eternal  truth  \  be
unto  them  fathers,  full  of  mercy,
kindness  and  benevolence,  and  then
they  will  love  you,  they  will  draw
near  you  and  sustain  you,  that  is,
those  who  are  good  will,  and  the
others  will  naturally  drop  off  on  the
right  hand  and  on  the  left.

Again,  we  have  our  ideas  of  the
rule  of  the  Priesthood.  Supposing
you  may  think  your  Bishop  does  not
do  Hgbt;  you  are  not  always  his
judge  about  those  matters  ;  there  are
others  who  can  judge  him.  Some
of  us  are  too  much  inch  Tied  to  look
upon  these  men  as  enemies,  when
really  thev  are  our  friends.  Should
we  feel  that  we  are  better  than  our


neighbors  ?  Rather  let  us  try  to  do
them  good  thnn  injury.  Some  of  us
think  that  our  Teachers  are  of  very
little  importance.  I  will  tell  you
how  I  regard  them.  If  the  Teachers
do  not  come  to  visit  me  as  often  as
T  think  they  should,  I  do  not  like  it
very  well.  When  they  do  come,  I
acquaint  my  family  with  it,  call  them
together,  and  then  tell  our  visitors
that  we  are  all  under  their  jurisdic-
tion, ready  and  anxious  to  hear  from
them  the  words  of  eternal  life.  That
is  how  I  feel  towards  the  Teachers,
and  in  the  same  manner  I  respect  all
the  Priesthood  in  the  various  posi-
tions they  occupy.  Shall  I  assume
to  dictate  to  those  who  are  above  me  ?
No,  never.  Will  you  ?  That  is  for
you  to  say,  nofe  for  me.  It  is  well
that  we  reflect  upon  these  things,  to
pray  for  our  brethren  in  the  Priest-
bond,  pray  that  the  spirit  aud  power
of  their  office  and  calling  may  rest
upon  them  and  that  they  may  be  led,
and  be  able  to  lead  others,  in  the
paths  of  life.

These  are  some  of  our  duties,  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  these  are  some  of
my  feelings  on  these  subjects.  Let
us  then  seek  to  do  right,  aud  take  a
cor  rect  and  pr  oper  course  in  all  things;
and,  if  all  things  do  not  work  always
according  to  our  ideas  and  notions,
never  mind,  leave  these  things  in  the
hands  of  God,  he  will  direct  and
overrule  everything  for  the  welfare  of
those  who  do  right.  **  No  man  can
harm  you,  if  you  be  followers  of  that
which  is  good,"  It  is  for  us  all  to
take  a  course  that  we  may  secure  the
favor  and  approbation  of  the  Al-
mighty, that  we  individually  may  be
hjd  by  him,  having  his  spirit  always
with  us.  Then  if  the  Presidency  be
under  the  guidance  of  the  Almighty,
and  ( iod  d  irect  the  Priesthood  t  lirough
tfaem  in  nil  its  ramifications,  carrying
out  his  will  in  the  building  up  of
Zion  on  the  earth,  then  we  .shall  be


280


Jul  UN  AL  Ul1  MSCUl/KSKN


one  with  them  and  one  with  God.
This  13  what  we  are  after,  and  tuny
God  help  us  to  cany  out  his  purposes
and  designs.

In  relation  to  the  events  to  come,
they  will  be  developed  just  as  fast  as
we  are  prepared  for  them,  and  I  fear
faster.  Will  God  operate  upon  the
Lanuniites,  and  fulfill  his  word  to  the
Jews?  Yes,  Will  he  gather  the
ten  tribes  ?  Yes.  Will  he  establish
his  name  and  kingdorr  jn  the  earth  ?
Yes.  Will  he  overthrow  the  wicked
nations  that  fight  against  him  ?
Yes,  and  be  will  continue  to  extend
his  principles  and  power  "  until  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  his
Christ"  God  will  have  his  laws
honored,  and  in  his  time  his  decrees
must  be  consummated,  until  every


tongue  confess  and  every  knee  bow
to  him  who  is  the  Lord  of  all.  These
are  tilings  which  will  most  assuredly
be  accomplished.

God  has  given  us  our  little  hibor
to  perform,  which  is  associated  with
these  matters.  Let  us  go  forth  as
rneti,  in  the  humility  and  strength  of
our  Father,  find  do  the  work  he  has
given  us  to  do,  seeking  continually
in  all  earnestness  for  his  blessing  to
guide  us,  and  he  will  direct  us  in  the
path  of  righteousness,  and  by  and  by
we  shall  overcome  and  triumph,  and
with  the  celestial  spirits  who  have
gone  before,  we  shall  join  in  singing,
"  Glory,  honor,  might,  majesty  and
dominion  be  ascribed  unto  him  who
sits  upon  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb,
forever,"  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Nov.  12,  1876.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


SALVATION  TANGIBLE— PERSONALITY  OF  GOD — CHARACTER  OF  GOD  —
PRE-EXISTENCE  OF  MAN — JESUS  OUR  ELDER  BROTHER — TRANSFORMA-
TION OF  THE  EARTH  —  CREATION  AND  ORGANIZATION  —  ITS  FINAL
DESTINY,  THE  HOME  OF  THE  SAINTS — REVELATIONS  BY  JuSEPH  SMITH
IN  HARMONY  WITH  SCRIPTURE,


I  am  pleased  to  see  so  large  a  com-
pany assembled  togethor,  notwith-
standing the  inclemency  of  the
weather;  it  shows  to  me  that  there
is  an  interest  in  the  minds  of  the


Latter-day  Saints  in  regard  to  their
future  salvation.  We,  as  a  people,
have  passed  through  many  scenes
trying  ond  afflicting  to  our  natures,
which  we  have  endured  because  of


SALVATION  TANGIBLE,  ETC


287


the  anxiety  of  our  hearts  to  obtain
salvation.  People  who  are  sincere
will  manifest  their  sincerity  in  under-
going  great  tribulation,  if  necessary,
fur  the  sjike  of  being  saved.  This
mortal  life  is  of  small  consideration,
compared  with  eternal  salvation  in
the  kingdom  of  the  Father.  There
is  nothing  pertaining  to  the  things
of  this  present  life  that  is  worthy  of
being  named,  in  contrast  with  the
riches  of  eternal  life.  Jesus,  in  speak-
ing upon  this  subject  when  he  was
on  the  earth,  asks  this  question :
*l  For  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  he
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his
own  soul  ?  Or  what  shall  a  man
give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ? H
Theie  is  nothing  so  precious,  nothing
of  so  great  importance,  as  thnt  of
securing,  in  this  life,  the  salvation
of  our  souls  in  the  world  to  come.
Far  better  is  it  if  we  can  gain  salva-
tion by  passing  through  various
scenes  of  affliction  and  persecution
in  this  world,  than  to  give  way  to  its
pleasures  and  vanities,  which  can
only  be  enjoyed  fur  a  season,  and
afterwards  lose  that  eternal  reward
which  God  has  in  store  for  the  right-
eous.

It  is  true  we  look  upon  our  future
reward  in  quite  a  different  light
from  the  religions  world  generally.
We  look  for  something  tangible,
something  we  can  form  some  de-
gree of  rational  conception  of,  hav-
ing a  resemblance  in  some  measure
to  the  present  life.  But  how  very
imaginary  are  the  ideas  of  the  reli-
gious world  !  I  do  not  now  refer  to
the  heathen  world,  but  to  the  enlight-
ened Christian  nations,  the  two  hun-
dred million  of  Christians  now  exist-
ing on  the  earth.  If  you  ask  these
people  about  the  future  state  of  man,
some  will  give  you  one  idea  and  some
another,  all  more  or  less,  perhaps,
differing  from  each  other,  but  in
the  main  they  all  agree,  nsmely,  that


it  is  a  state  entirely  spiritual,  that
i^,  unconnected  with  anything  tan-
gible like  this  present  life,  an  exis-
tence which  cannot  be  conceived  of
by  mortals.

You  may  think  I  am  misrepre-
senting our  Christian  friends.  I
will  therefore  say  that  for  many
years  now  I  have  been  engaged,  more
or  less,  in  the  study  of  religion,  and
have  therefore  read  quite  extensively
the  ideas  of  the  religious  world.  I
have  not  accepted  the  ideas  of  a  few
individuals  belonging  to  the  various
sects,  but  I  have  appealed  to  their
standard  writings,  their  articles  of
faith,  which  are  adopted  by  the  va-
rious religious  bodies  and  known  as
their  creeds.  For  instance,  in  the
articles  of  faith  of  a  great  many  of  the
religions  sects,  an  idea  like  this  is
set  forth — that  there  is  a  Being  who
is  entirely  spiritual,  called  God,  and
that  Being  is  described  as  consisting
of  three  persons,  and  these  three  per-
sons are  without  body,  without  parts
and  without  passions.  Such  is  the  God
that  is  worshiped  by  the  Methodists—a
people  whom  I  highly  respect,  and
whose  meetings  I  attended  in  my
early  youth  more  than  those  of  any
other  religious  denomiuation.  The
three  persons  that  compose  this  one
God  are  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  all  of  whom  are  said  to
be  without  bodies  or  passions;  and  in
connection  with  this,  one  of  the  car-
dinal doctrines  of  their  faith,  they
tell  us  that  one  of  this  holy  Trinity,
namely  Jesus,  was  crucified,  dead  and
buried,  and  that  on  the  third  day  he
arose  asrain  irom  the  dead  and  as-
cended  into  heaven.

When  I  was  a  boy,  attending  the
Methodist  meetings,  I,  as  many
now  do  who  are  of  maturer  years,
accepted  sincerity  for  truth.  But
when  I  grew  to  manhood  my  at-
tention was  called  to  this  article  of
faith;  I  tried  in  all  earnestness  to


288


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


J


comprehend  it,  but  could  not,  and
cannot  to  this  day.  It  is  one  of
those  incomprehensible  things  winch
cannot  be  grasped  by  the  human
mind.  You,  my  hearers,  try  now
with  me  for  a  few  moments  to  com-
prehend, if  yon  can,  a  being  consist-
ing of  three  peneons,  and  these  three
persons  withont  any  body,  pirts  or
passions,  I  had  been  taught,  when
studying  the  exact  sciences  that
everything  that  existed  was  composed
of  parts,  that  there  could  not  exist
anything  as  a  whole  unless  it  existed
as  parts.  I  could  not,  therefore,
understand  how  it  was  that  one  of
these  three  persons  could  be  crucified
if  he  had  no  body  ;  how  it  was  pos-
sible and  be  consistent  with  reason,
for  him  to  lay  down  his  body — some*
thing  he  never  possessed — and  arise
again  from  the  tornb,  taking  up  that
same  body*  This  is  indeed  a  mys-
tery!

■mi

Now  it  so  happens  that  the  Scrip*
tures  do  not  teach  anything  so  ab-
surd, so  irreconcilable  and  so  con-
trary to  our  senses.  This  u  a  man-
made  doctrine  the  creation  of  unin-
spired men.  lW  Methodialfe  did  not
originate  this  doctrine, — it  existed
and  was  widely  believed  in  bufore  the
days  ct  the  good  man,  John  Wesley.

The  Latter-day  Saints  believe
that  there  is  a  true  and  living  God,
that  this  true  and  living  God  con-
sists of  three  separate,  distinct  per-
sons,  which  have  bodies,  parts,  and
passions,  which  belief  is  in  direct
opposition  to  this  man-made  doc-
trine. We  believe  that  God,  the
Eternal  Father,  who  reigns  in  yon-
der heavens,  is  a  distinct  personage
from  Jesus  Christ,  as  much  so  as
an  earthly  father  is  distinct  in  his
existence  from  his  son.  That  is
something  I  can  comprehend,  which
I  conceive  to  be  the  doctrine  of  reve-
lation. We  read  about  Jesus  having
been  seen,  after  he  arose,  from  the


dead,  Stephen  the  Martyr,  just  be-
fore he  was  stoned  to  death,  testified
to  the  Jewish  people  that  were  stand-
ing before  him  at  the  time,  saying,
"Behold,  I  *ee  I  be  heavens  opened,
and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the
right  hand  of  God/1  Hero,  then,  the
Father  arid  Jesus,  two  distinct  per-
sonages, were  soon,  and  both  had
bodies.  We  find  numerous  other
authorities  hearing  out  this  same  idea*
I  do  not  intend  to  dwell  upon  this
subject,  because  the  greater  portion
of  tli is  congregation  understand  the
scriptural  view  of  this  subject ;  hence
it  is  not  necessary  to  speak  lengthily
on  it.  We  may,  however,  say  a
few  things  with  regard  to  the  pas-
sions of  these  personages.

It  is  declared,  as  part  of  the  be-
lief of  the  Methodists,  that  God  is
without  passions.  Love  is  one  of
the  great  passions  of  God,  Love  is
everywhere  declared  a  passion,  one
of  the  noble* t  passions  of  the  ba-
nian heart.  This  principle  of  love
is  one  of  the  attributes  of  God,
*  God  is  *  love;*  says  the  Apostle
John,"  and  he  that  dwelleth  in
love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  G)d  in
him."  If,  then,  this  is  one  of  the
great  attributes  of  Jehovah,  if  he  is
tilled  with  love  and  companion
towards  the  children  of  men,  if  his
sou  Jesus  Christ  so  loved  the  world
that  be  gave  his  life  to  redeem  muo-
kind  from  the  effects  of  the  'all,
then,  certainly,  God  the  Eternal
Father  must  be  in  possession  of
this  passion.  Again,  he  possesses
the  attribute  of  Justice,  which  is
sometimes  called  Anger,  but  the  rral
name  of  this  attribute  is  Justice,
t*  He  executeth  justice/'  says  Hie
Psalmist;  also,  "Justice  and  judsj-
ment  are  the  habitation  of  thy  throne*
Justice  is  one  of  the  noble  character-
istics of  our  heavenly  Father ;  hence
another  of  his  passions.

We  have  it  recorded  too  in  this-


SALVATION  TANGIBLE,  ETC.


2S3


sacred  Bible,  that  God  was  seen  by
ancient  men  of  God.  Jacob  testi-
fies as  follows:  "for  I  have  seen
Go  J  face  to  face.'3  I  know  that
there  are  other  passages  of  Scrip-
ture, which  would  seem  to  militate
against  this  declaration.  Fir  in-
stance, there  is  one  passage  whicii
reads,  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at
anv  fime."  This  is  in  direct  con-
tr-idurion  tti  tl  e  t^im-my  of
Jacob.  The  way  I  reconcile  Uiis  is
that  no  iia'ural  man  can  see  the
face  of  God  the  Fat  her  and  live,  it
would  overpower  him ;  but.  one
quickened  b\  I  e  spirit,  as  tdd  father
J  IColi  tVUh,  could  lo  >k  upon  Qt»d,  and
converse  wirh  him  face  to  face,  as
he  says  lie  did,  he  must  have  seen  a
pers^na^e,  a  bemg,  in  his  ^em  r;d
outlines  like  unto  himself;  rtmn,  us
Mows  informs  119,  having  been
created  in  the  image  of  God.

We  misrM. rtlt t to mnnv  other

passages  of  Scripture,  bearing  on
this  subject.  The  Prophet  Isaiah
saw  God  ;  he  s-uv  not  ordy  the  Lord,
but  a  great  congregation  ill  connec-
tion wirh  him,  so  that  his  tiain  filled
the  Temple.  He  is  always  repre-
sented by  those  who  h  i.ve  seen  him
as  a  personage  in  thu  form  of  man.
Having  cite  1  a  very  lew  evidences,
let  us  iiiOUlte  inTo  the  eharaofer
and  being  ut  Go*  I,  ihe  Kternal  Fa-
ther, \V e  are  the  offspring  of  the
Lord,  but  the  res  If  of  animated  na-
ture is  not  j  we  are  j'ist  a*  much
the  sons  aud  daaghfers  of  God  as
thfC  iildren  in  this  congregation  are
r Tie  sons  and  daughters  of  their
parents.  We  were  begotten  by
him.  When  ?  Before  we  were  born
10  the  flesh;  this  limited  smile  of
existence  is  not  our  origin,  it  is
merely  the  origin  of  the  tabernacle
in  which  we  dwelt.  The  mind  we
are  possessed  of,  the  being  that  is
CHpihie  of  thinking  and  reflecting,
that  is  capable  of  acting  according

No.  19.


to  the  motives  presented  to  it,  that
being  winch  is  immortal,  which
dwells  within  us,  which  is  capable
of  reasoning  from  cause  to  effect,
and  which  can  comprehend,  in  some
measure,  the  laws  of  its  Creator,
as  wh\)  trm*  tin-in  out  as  exhibited
in  universal  nature,  that  being,  which
we  call  t  he  J  Li  nd,  existed  before  the
tabernacle*

B  -t  says  one,  "  Th  it  do'*s  not  look
reasonable/'  Why  not?  Do  yoa
nut  believe  that  live  Spirit  will  endure
forever?  0,  yes.  You  may  ask,
what  bf  cn-n  s  of  th  1  spirit,  separated

"r  'in the h Iv nf Acs1! and  bones,

when  M 1  is  i»o  ly  lies  in  the  grave  ?
Has  it  life  and  intelligence  an  d  power
tri  1 1  link  and  reflect  ?  "  LA  11s  heir
wh  ir  was  said  by  those  who  sat  uud'T
1  he allar, who were  slain f>r  the

word  of  G'»d,  and  for  the  tesfi  nony
which  they  held,  as  seen  and  heard
by  John  while  on  Patmos.  "And
they  cried  with  »t  loud  v.iee,  saying,
Hti-v  long;  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,
Host  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our
blond  on  them  that  dwell  on  the
Mrth?  The  Lord  tells  thern  that
they  should  "rest  yet  for  a  little
leaMiu.*1  These  faithful  servants  »*f
God  ara  anxiously  awaiting  1  he  time
when  the  Lord  wilt  avenge  then*
blood?  Why?  Because  that  wdl
Ik*  the  lime  when  t ir  bodies
will  he  redeemed,  fhey  look  forward
with  great  anx.elv  to  'he  time  when
they  shall  be  a^ain  identified  witii
1  he  fleshly  tabern  tele  with  which  fhev
were  known  and  disr iuguisted  while
on  the  e*rth — hence  this  prayer.

Hnre  we  find  another  and  further
existence  tor  the  spirits  of  men  who
exist  in  heaven,  who  are  capable  of
thinking,  of  using  language,  of  un-
derstanding the  future,  and  of  anti-
cipating that  which  was  to  Come,
Now,  if  they  could  exist  after  they
leave  this  tabernacle,  while  the  taber-
nacle lies  mouldering  in  the  dust,  why

VoL  XVIII


290  JOURNAL  OF  ]

not  exist  before  the  tabernacle  had
any  existence  ?  Was  it  not  just  hs
easy  for  an  existence  to  be  given  to
spiritual  person  apt  *s  before  they  took
possession  of  b  'dies  as  it  is  for  them
to  exist  after  the  body  decays  ?  Yes,
mm  I  these  are  our  views,  founded
tipon  new  revelation  ;  not  the  views
of  uninspired  men,  but  founded  upon
direct  revelation  from  G<td.

Where  did  we  exist  before  we
ca  m  e  he  re  ?  W  [  f  h  Go<  i .  W h  e  re  d  <  >es
he  exist?  In  the  plum  John  de-
nominated heaven.  What  do  we
understand  heaven  to  be  r  Not  the
place  described  by  our  Christian
friends,  lieyonfl  the  bounds  of  time
and  space,  for  there  is  no  such  place,
there  never  was,  nor  ever  will  be ;  '
but  I  mean  n  tangible  wot  11,  a  heaven
that.  \h  peril  ct,  n  heaven  with  ma-
terials that  have  been  organized  and
put  together,  sanctified  and  glorified
as  the  residence  and  world  where  God
resided.  Born  there  ?  Yes,  we  were
born  t  here.  E^en  our  great  Redeemer,
whose  death  arel  sufferings  we  are
this  afternoon  celebrating,  was  born  up
in  yonder  wot  I  I  before  he  was  born
of  the  Virgin  M?*ry,  H  ive  yon  not
read,  in  the  New  Testament,  that
Jesus  Christ  wns  the  tirst-born  of
every  creature  ?  From  this  reading
it  would  seem  tint  he  was  the  oldest
of  the  whole  human  family,  that  is,
so  far  as  his  birth  in  the  spirit  world
is  cone  rued.  How  long  ago  since
that  birth  took  phice  is  not  revealed  ;
it  might  have  been  unnumbered
millions  of  years  for  &nght  we  know.
But  we  do  know  that  be  was  born
and  was  the  oldest  of  the  family  of!
spirits.  [Live  you  not  also  read  in
the  New  Testament  that  he  is
called  our  elder  brother  ?  Does 1
this  refer  to  the  birth  of  the  body
of  flesh  and  bones  ?  By  no  means,
for  there  were  hundreds  of  millions
who  were  born  upon  our  earth  be-
fore the  body  of  flesh  aud  bones


DISCOURSES.

was  born  whom  we  call  Jesns,  How
is  it,  then,  that  he  :s  our  elder
brother  ?  We  must  po  back  to  tho
previous  birth.  In.1  fore  the  foundation
I  of  this  earth  ;  we  have  to  go  back
to  past  apes,  to  the  period  when  lie
was  begotten  of  the  Father  among
the  great  family  ot  spirits.  He  be*
came,  by  his  birthright,  t lit*  great
Creator,  God,  through  him,  created
not  only  this  little  world,  this  speck  of
creation,  but  by  him  the  worlds  were
made  and  created.  How  many  we
know  not,  for  it  has  no*  been  revealed.
Suffice  it  to  say,  a  great  many  worlds
w»  re  created  l»y  him.  Why  by  him?
Because  he  had  the  birthright,  he
being  the  oldest  of  his  father's
family,  and  this  birthright  entitles
him,  not  only  to  create  worlds,  but
to  become  the  redeemer  ot  those
worlds,  not  only  the  redeemer  of  the
i Tt i in! »] i :tnta  of  this  our  earth,  but  of
all  the  others  whom  he  created  by  t  he
will  and  power  of  his  Father.

But  save  one,  "  By  that  expres-
sion one  wonld  infer  that  other
worlds  Ivive  (alien  as  well  as  our
own,  having  doubtless  been  placed
in  a  state  of  temptation,  and  it  so
it  would  be  fair  to  presume  that
there  w  is  a  Garden  of  E  leu  to  each
of  these  worlds,  containing  all  kinds
of  fruit,  among  which  was  the  Tree
of  Knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and
that  (hey  became  fallen  precisely  in
the  snme  manner  as  ours  did,  and
consequently  they  would  need  a
redeemer;  and,  therefore,  the  people
of  these  worlds  would  be  redeemed
and  saved  according  to  their  dili-
i  gence  and  faithfulness  in  keeping
the  commandments  of  God  ?'T  Have
you  not  read  in  the  first  chapter  of
Genesis  of  two  persons  appearing  on
this  earth  before  man  was  made,
when  one  who  was  God,  said  to  the
other,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our
image,  after  our  likeness  ? "  Does
not  that  bespeak  a  pre- existence  of


S.UAAii  ^ l  AMilLLK,  ETC


291


another  personage  besides  the  Al-
mighty ?  And  have  you  not  read
too  in  the  same  chapter  that  "God
created  man  in  his  own  image;
male  and  female  created  he  them  ?  H
When  ?  It  is  said  to  have  been  on
the  sixth  period,  or,  according  to
King  James'  translation,  "on  the
sixth  r J ,r v .  *  D>  yon  mean  to  say,
we  were  j*H  in  ex  stence  on  the
sixth  dsv  ? Yes, But  on  the  seven  Mi

m

day,  we  are  told  in  the  following
chapter,  **  there  was  not  a  man  to
till  the  ground. Is  it  not  very  sin*
gular  fh  it  all  should  have  an  exis-
tence on  the  sixth  day,  and  on  the
following  day  there  was  not  a  man
in existence to till  the  ground  ?  j
Why  iii*r  ? Because  man  was  not
yet phenyl in  this  temporal  crea-
tion, but  he  had  an  existence  then
in  heaven,  where  we  were  l>egotten.
You  «nd  I  were  present  when  this
world vv  js  created  and made— you
and  I  (It*-, understood the  nature'
of  its  creation,  and  I  have  no  donht  i
that  v.**  n joced  and  sang  about  it.  j
Indeed,  (Ik*  Lord  put  a  very  carious  |
question  to  the  Patriarch  Job,  apro  [
jpos  ot  t  !n^t He  said  to  him,  *  Where
wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  foundation
of  the  *  ;n  rh  >" Where  wast  thou,
when  the  morning  stars  sang  togeth-  j
er,  ami  nil  Hie  sons  of  God  shouted
for  joy  f9

Supp  >ain£  Job  to  be  living  now,  j
and  thin  mtm  question  put  to  him,

and  S'tpposinj  too,  that,  instead  of
answeri i iu  it  himself,  he  were  to
seek  to  il  learned  Christian  world
for  enlightenment  on  the  subj  ct
what  di*  you  think  would  be  the
natu  e  of  ihe  answer  he  would  re-
ceive ?  It  would  be,  in  effect,  "Why,
Job,  when  fhe  Lord  laid  the  foun-
dation of  the  earth,  you  had  no  ex-
istence, for  you  were  not  born/'
Why  did  not  Job  so  answer  the
Lord  f  if  wns  because  he  under-
stood something  about  man's  pre-


vious estate.  He  was  wise  in  mak-
ing no  reply  to  the  Lord,  for  doubt-
less he  felt  himself  unable  to  do  so.
But  we  find  that  Moses  understood
the  subject,  tor  at  the  time  the
children  of  Israel  transgressed  he
and  his  brother  Auron  fell  upon  their
f'uu's  before  the  Lord,  and  Moses,
pleading  with  great  power  and  faith
in  behalf  of  the  children  of  Israel,
used  these  words,  lt  O  God,  the  God
of  the  spirits  of  nil  flesh,"  etc.  He
understood  that  God  was  the  Father
of  our  spirits,  and  he  addressed  him
as  such.  1  think  too  ihut  the  Apos-
tles in  ancient  days  must  have  had
an  idea  of  the  pre-existenee  of  man,
judging  from  a  certain  question  which
they  put  to  the  Sivior,  It  is  said
that  "as  Jesus  p-'ssed  by,  he  saw  a
man  which  was  blind  from  his  birth.
And  his  disci  plea  asked  him,  saying,
Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his
parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ?  '*

Let  us  now  consider  this  question
in  connection  with  present  modern
ideas,  and  we  shall  at  once  perceive
how  utterly  foolish  it  will  appear.
To  state  the  question  fairly  in  other
words  wu  might  way,  Master,  was
this  man  born  blind  be  a  use  he
had  sinned  ?  The  very  nature  of
this  question  would  indicate,  to
those  even  who  do  not  believe  in
the  principle,  that  this  blind  man
had  an  existence  before  he  was
born  into  this  world,  ana  that  he
was  capable,  too,  of  committing  sin.
To  show  yet  more  (dearly  that  the
principle  of  man's  pre-existence  is
founded  ou  biblical  authority,  I  will
quote  you  part  of  the  Savior's
prayer  to  the  Father,  just  prior  to
Ins  crucifixion— "  And  now,  Q  Fa-
ther, glorify  thou  me  with  thine
own  self  with  the  glory  which  I
had  with  thee  before  the  world  was."
Here  we  find  Je*us  actually  refer-
ring to  the  time  he  dwelt  with  hia
Father  before  he  took  upon  himself


292


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


a  body  of  flesh  and  bones.  He  also
says,  "  For  I  came  down  from  heaven,
not  to  do  mine  own  will,  bat  the
will  of  him  that  sent  me."  lie
came  down  from  the  presence  and
abode  of  his  Father.  On  another
occasion,  while  addressing  the  Jews,
he  .says,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
you,  before  A  bra  hum  was,  I  am."
He  was,  in  fine,  the  fit  st -born  of  every
creature,  and  consequently  the  eldest
of  our  Father's  family.

If,  therefore,  it  be  now  admitted
that  our  elder  brother  had  a  previous
existence  with  the  Father,  why
should  it  be  thought  unreasonable
that  the  rest  of  the  family  should
have  a  pre-exist ence  as  well  as  the
First  Horn  ?  lie  was  born  according
to  man  in  (he  flesh,  and  why  not
his  younger  brethren  have  a  similar
binh  with  him  in  the  spirit  ?

But  now  thid  carries  us  buck  still
further,  and  invites  us  to  ascertain  a
little  in  relation  to  his  Father,  A
gre-tt  many  have  supposed  that  God
the  Eternal  Father,  whom  we  worship
in  connection  with  his  Son,  Jesus
Christ,  was  always  a  self-existing,
eternal  being  from  all  eternity,  that
he  had  no  beginning  as  a  person-
age, But  in  order  to  illustrate  this,
let  us  inquire,  What  is  our  destiny  ?
If  we  are  now  the  sons  and  daughters
of  God,  what  will  be  our  future  des-
tiny ?  The  Apostle  Paul,  iu  si  cak-
ing of  man  as  a  resurrected  being,
says,  u  Who  (Jesu^>)  shall  change
our  vile  body,  that  it  might  be  fash-
ioned like  unto  his  glorious  body,"
which  harmonizes  with  what  John
says,  41  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what
we  shall  be,  but  we  know  that  when
he  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  him,"
Our  bodies  will  be  glorified  in  the
same  manner  as  his  body  is  ;  then
we  shall  be  truly  in  his  image  and
likeness,  for  as  he  is  immortal,  hav-
ing a  body  of  flesh  and  bone,  bo  we
will  be  immortal,  possessing  bodies


of  flesh  and  bones.  Will  we  ever
become  Gods  ?  Let  me  refer  you  to
the  answer  of  the  Savior  to  the  Jews
when  accused  of  blasphemy  because
he  called  himself  the  Son  of  God.
Says  he,  "  Is  it  not  written  in  your
law,  I  said,  Ye  are  gods?  If  ye
called  them  pods,  unto  whom  the
word  of  God  enrae,  and  the  Scrip-
tures cannot  be  broken."  This  clearlj
proves  to  all  Bible  believers  that  in
this  world,  in  our  imperfect  state,
being  the  children  of  God,  we  are
destined,  if  we  keep  his  command-
ments, to  grow  in  intelligence  until
we  finally  become  like  God  our  Fa-
then  By  living  according  to  every
word  nhtch  proceeds  from  the  month
of  God,  we  shall  attain  to  his  like-
ness, the  same  as  our  children  grow
up  and  become  like  their  parents  j
and,  as  child? en  through  diligence
attain  to  the  wisdom  and  knowledge
uf  their  parents,  so  may  we  attain  to
the  knowledge  of  our  Heavenly  Pa-
rents, and  if  I  hey  he  obedient  to  this
CMmmandmeut  they  will  not  only  be
c.dled  the  sons  of  God,  but  be  yods^

Iu  the*  Is'  verse  of  the  14 Mi  chap-
ter of  Revelations,  we  are  told  that
John  saw  one  hundred  and  forty-four
thousand  persons  standing  with  the
Lamb  upon  Mount  Zion,  and  they
had  a  peculiar  name  written  in  their
foreheads — even  their  Father's  nam
him  whom  wo  call,  in  our  language,
God.  Then  there  will  be  written
upon  the  foreheads  of  these  hundred
and  forty-four  thousand  this  insignia,
the  Father's  name  and  thev  will  be
gods;  and  they  will  associate  with
him  as  do  the  Father  and  his  Only
Begotten,  that  is,  the  only  son  be-
gotten in  the  flesh.

From  this  we  can  draw  the  conclu-
sion that  God,  Our  eternal  Father,
who  is  a  spiritual  being,  has  a  body
of  flesh  and  bones,  the  same  as  his
children  wilt  have  after  the  resurrec-
tion.


SALVATION  TANGIBLE,  ETC.


2y3


Says  one,  to  carry  it  out  still  far-
ther, "  if  we  become  gods  and  ate
gloi  ilied  like  unto  hira,  our  bodies
fashioned  like  tin  to  his  most  glorious
bodyt  may  not  he  have  passed  through
A  mortal  ordeal  as  we  mortals  are
now  doing?  Why  not?  If  ii  is
necessary  for  us  to  obtain  experience
through  the  things  that.  are  presented
before  us  in  this  life,  why  not  those
beings,  who  are  already  ex  d  ted  and
become  gods,  obtain  their  experience
in  the  same  way  ?  We  would  find,
were  we  to  curry  this  subject  from
world  to  world,  from  our  world  ro
another,  even  to  the  endless  ages  of
eternity,  that  there  never  was  a  time
but  what  there  was  a  Father  and  Son.
In  other  words,  when  you  entertain
that  which  is  endless,  you  exclude  the
idea  of  a  first  being,  a  first  world ;
the  moment  you  admit  of  a  first,  you
limit  the  idea  of  endless.  The  chain
itself  is  endless,  but  each  link  had
its  beginning.

Says  one,  **  This  is  incomprehen-
sible." It  may  be  so  in  some  respects.
We  can  admit,  though,  that  duration
is  endless,  for  it  is  impossible  for  man
to  conceive  of  a  limit  to  it  If  du-
ration is  endless,  there  can  never  be
a  first  minute,  a  first  hour,  or  first
period;  endless  duration  in  the  pa*t
is  made  up  of  a  con  tin  nation  of
endless  successive  moments — it  had
no  beginning,  Precisely  so  with
regard  to  this  endless  succession  of
personages;  there  never  will  be  a
time  when  fathers,  and  sons,  and
worlds  will  not  exist;  neither  was
there  ever  a  period  through  all  the
past  ages  of  duration,  but  what  there
was  a  world,  and  a  Father  and  Son,
a  redemption  and  expiration  to  the
fullness  and  power  of  the  Godhead.
This  is  what  Jesus  prayed  for,  and
be  did  not  limit  his  prayer  to  his
Apostles,  but  he  said,  44  Neither  pray
I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also
which  shall  believe  on  me  through


their  word;  that  they  all  may  be  one,
as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in
thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in


us


But  says  one,  "  Does  not  that  one-
ness mean  one  person  ?  "  No  ;  Jesus
meant  that  those  who  believed  hi
him  through  his  servants,  might  be
able  to  come  up  to  that  fullness  and
glory  arid  power  nnd  exaltation  which
he  inherited,  even  to  the  fullness  of
the  celestial  glory,  to  be  crowned
with  God  the  Eternal  Father,  and
with  his  Only  Begotten,  to  be  made
equal,  as  it  were,  with  them,  in  power
and  nonunion ;  agreeing  with  some
modern  revelations  God  has  given
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
lie  said  all  thev  that  receive  this
Priesthood,  that  is,  those  who  receive
the  testimony  of  the  servants  of  God,
they  receive  me ;  and  whosoever
receives  my  Father,  receives  my
Fa t he r 's  k i ngd o m  ;  w  1 1 en *  n pon  a  1 1
that  my  Father  hath  shall  be  given
to  him.  This  is  a  glorloLs  promise,
to  be  joint  heirs  with  the  Son  of
God  in  the  inheritance  of  all  things,
even  the  fullness  and  gloiy  of  the
Celestial  world,  their  bodies  eventually
to  become  glorified,  spiritual  bodies
of  flesh  and  bones,  the  same  as  God
the  Father,  1

Before  the  earth  was  rolled  into
existence  we  were  his  sons  and  daugh-
ters. Those  of  his  children  who
prove  themselves  during  this  proba-
tion worthy  of  exaltation  in  his  pre-
sence, will  beget  other  children,  and,
precisely  according  to  the  same  prin-
ciple, they  too  will  become  fathers  of
spirits,  us  he  is  the  Father  of  our
spirits;  and  thus  the  works  of  God
are  one  eternal  round — creation,  glo-
rification, and  exaltation  in  the  celes-
tial kingdom.

How  many  transformations  this
earth  had  before  it  received  its  pie-
sent  form  of  creation,  I  do  not  kno*.
Geologists  pretend  to  say  that  this


294


JOURNAL  OF  1MSUULR


earth  must  have  existed  many  mi!*:
lions  of  yean*,  and  this  assertion  is  \
generally  made  by  men  who  do  not
believe  in  God  or  the  Bible,  to  dis-
piove  the  history  of  the  creation  of
the  world,  as  given  by  the  Prophet
Jlosea.  We  will  go  further  than
geologists  dare  to  go,  and  say  that
the  materials  of  which  the  earth  is
composed  are  eternal,  they  will  never
have  an  end.

What  is  meant  by  creation  ? ,
Merely  organize! iun.  In  six  days,
we  aie  told,  God  created  this  world,
aho  every  living  thing  that  then
existed.  Did  he  create  any  of  these
things  oat  of  nothing?  Did  the  |
materials  then  originate  ?  No,  there
is  no  Scripture  to  be  found  within  the
lids  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,
or  Book  of  Mormon,  or  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  or  in  any  of  the  revela-
tions of  God,  ancient  or  modern,  that
even  intimates  such  a  thing,  for  such
was  not  the  cast*;  but  go  to  the  creeds
of  men  and  you  will  find  these  things
taut/fit  I  was  taught  them  in  my
youth ;  they  were  instilled  into  my
yoimtf  mind,  and  of  course  I  believed
them.  But  as  I  matured  in  years
and  thought,  especially  after  I  began
to  study  the  Hebrew  language,  I
learned  that  the  material  of  which
this  earth  was  made,  always  aid  exist,
and  that  it  was  only  an  organization
or  formation  which  took  place,  du-
ring t he  time  spoken  of  by  M  ises.

How  many  transformations  this
earth  passed  through  before  the  one
spoken  of  by  Moses,  I  do  not  know,
neither  do  I  particularly  care.  If  it
had  gone  through  millions  on  mil*
lions  of  transformations,  it  is  nothing
to  us.  We  are  willing,  for  the  sake
of  argument,  to  admit  that  the
materials  themselves  are  as  old  as
geologists  dare  to  say  they  are  ;  but
then,  that  does  not  destroy  the  idea
of  a  God,  that  does  not  destroy  the
idea  of  a  great  Creator,  who,  accord-


ing to  certain  fixed  and  unalterable
laws,  brought  these  materials,  from
time  to  time,  into  a  certain  onrani-
zation,  and  then  by  his  power  com-
pleted the  worlds  that  were  thus
made,  by  placing  thereon  intelligent
and  animated  beings,  capable  of
thinking  and  having  an  existence;
and  then  again,  for  various  reasons,
he  destroys  their  earthly  existence,
until  finally  lie  exalts  them  from
their  former  condition,  and  makes
tin  in  celestial  in  their  nature.

This  is  the  destiny  of  this  globe  of
ours;  it  will  eventually  attain  a
state  of  organization  that  will  no
more  be  destroyed.  When  ?  After
God  has  fulfilled  and  accomplished
his  purposes,  after  it  has  rested  from
wickedness  one  thousand  years,  du-
ring which  time  Satan  will  not  have
power  to  tempt  the  children  of  men,
during  which  time  the  faithful  will
reign,  as  kings  and  priests  on  the
earth  in  their  resurrected  bodies,
when,  too,  the  kingdom  and  the
greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the
whole  heaven  will  be  in  po>ses>ion
of  the  Saiuts  of  the  Most  High  ;  not
only  in  the  possession  of  those  who
are  mortal  Saints,  but  also  in  the,
possession  of  those  who  are  immortal
Saints,  appearing  a^  they  will  in
their  resurrected  bodies,  rising  up
as  rulers,  as  kings  and  priests,  upon
the  face  of  our  globe.

A  government  administered  by
such  men  will  be  one  that  can  be
depended  on  ;  in  that  respect  it  will
be  very  different  from  the  political
nations  of  mortal  man.  Then  there
will  not  be  the  contention  Ave  now
J  have,  for  all  things  pertaining  to  the
J  government  of  (Joel's  kingdom  will
be  conducted  in  order  and  on  the
eternal  principles  of  righteousness.

The  Twelve  Apostles  who  were
called  by  Jesus,  and  who  ministered
in  his  name  while  they  tarried  on
the earth, will sit upon  twelve


SALVATION TANGIBLE,  ETC.


295


thrones  hereafter,  and  judge  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  *  There  will
be  nothing  intangible  or  etherial
about  these  thrones,  they  will  be
just  as  real  as  any  kingly  throne  of
the  ea r  t h .  Ami  the  Twelve  Apostles
will  rule  over  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel  for  the  space  of  a  thousand
years,  having,  as  they  will  have,
their  celestial  bodies,  an d  1 1  ley  will
eat  and  drink  at  the  table  of  the
LorA  He  will  be  here  also,  he  will
be  King  of  kings,  before  whom  all
must  bow,  all  must  acknowledge  his
power — and  that  will  be  for  the
space  of  a  thousand  years.

By  and  by,  when  the  time  comes
for  this  earth  to  die — for  there  lias
been  a  great  deal  of  wickedness  here
— Satan  will  be  loosed  to  no  forth


again  to  deceive,  for  there  will  still
be  some  of  tne  Saints  mortal,  who
will  be  subject  to  temptation,  and
even  Satan  will  not  only  try  to
deceive  the  mortal  Saints,  but  he
will  gather  together  his  armies
around  the  camp  of  the  Saints,

Then  another  time  comes,  when  a
great  white  throne  will  appear,  and
he  who  sits  thereon  will  be  glorious
in  his  majesty  and  power,  from  he-
fore  whose  face  the  earth  will  Hee
away  and  no  place  be  found  for  it.
Will  he  annihilate  it?  No,  not  a
particle  of  the  earth  will  be  anni-
hilated, not  a  particle  of  the  earth
was  ever  originated,  consequently
not  a  particle  of  it  will  go  out  of
existence  j  but  it  will  flee  away  to
its  original  element,  in  the  same
manner  as  the  human  body  would
were  it  burned  at  the  stake.  The

elements  would  be  diifiiM'd  among

original  matter,  so  with  the  elements
of  our  earth  when  it  undergoes  its
change,  John  was  nor  satisfied
with  only  seeing  the  earth  pass  away,
but  he  saw  still  further,  even  until
he  beheld  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth,  for,  said  he,  the  first  heaven


and  the  first  earth  were  passed
away,  and  there  was  no  more  sea.
)  Again,  he  testifies  further,  saying,
"  And  I,  John,  saw  the  holy  city,
new  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from
God,  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a
bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And
I  heard  a  m-eat  voice  out  of  heaven
saying.  Behold  the  tabernacle  of
I  !od  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell
with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his
people,  and  God  himself  shall  he
with  them,  and  be  their  God.  And
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from
their  eyes;  and  there  shall  be  no
more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor
crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any
more  pain  :  for  the  former  things
are  passed  away  And  he  that  sat
upon  the  throne  said,  Behold.  I
make  all  things  new."

This  creation,  when  made  new,
will  be  inhabited  by  immortal
beings,  w  ho  will  no  more  he  subject
to  death,  consequently  there  will  be
no  more  pain  or  sorrow,  nothing  to
mar  their  peace  or  to  prevent  them
from  entering  into  the  fullness  of
jpiness  and  joy.

This,  I  say,  is  the  destiny  of  this
earth,  and  the  Lord  lias  told  us
that  the  time  is  nigh  at  hand.  lu
other  woids.  this  is  the  last  dis-
pensation, and  we  are  pieparing  for
the  work  of  the  Millennium.  When
the  thousand  years  are  passed,  the
earth  will  be  made  new— it  will
then  become  a  heaven,  the  habita-
tion of  the  former  and  Latter-day
Smuts,  as  well  as  all  they  who  prove
themselves  faithful  who  will  be
horn  during  the  Millennium.  How
long  will  they  inhabit  it  ?  Forever*
When  I  was  a  boy,  nineteen  years
old,  I  first  saw  Joseph  Smith ;  I
attended  a  Conference  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
oh  the  2nd  January.  1*31.  At
that  Conference  the  people  desired
1  him  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  them


4  S


2  G


JUL  UNA  L  OV  DI  SCO  U  USES,


— they  were  anxious  to  know  his
mind  and  will.  They  were  at  that
time  comparatively  few  in  number,
not  being  more  than  two  hundred.
Joseph  Smith  sat  down  at  a  table,
and  received  a  L:reat  revelat  ion,  which
is  now  contained  in  this  Book  of
Doctrine  and  <  'ov*nants. Part  of  it,


their  persecutors,  while  the  wieked,
the  proud  and  the  haughty  have  in-
herited the  earth.  Yet  here  is  a
jirojni.se  that  the  meek  shall  inherit
this  earth,  which  all  of  course  would
readily  admit  has  never  had  its  ful-
fillment. Thru  again  1  was  ^till  more
confirmed  of  the  truth  of  this  doc-


in  relation  to  a  land  of  promise,  j  trine  when  finding  other  corrobora-


reads  as  follow.^ — "And  1  will  give
it  unto  you  for  the  land  of  your
inheritance,  if  vou  seek  it  with  all
your  hearts  :  and  this  shall  he  my
covenant  with  yon,  ye  shall  have  it
for  the  hfhd  of  your  inheritance,  and
for  the  inheritance  of  your  children
for  ever,  while  the  eartli  shall  stand,
and  ye  shall  possess  it  again  in
eternity,  no  more  to  pass  away.

When  I  sat  and  heard  that  reve-
lation, as  it  was  uttered  by  the  Pro-
phet  Joseph,  and  written  by  his
scribe,  I  thought  to  myself,  that  is  a
very  curious  doctrine,  for  I  had  not
then  learned  that  this  earth  was  to
peoome  our  future  home  and  heaven,
and  I  did  not  think  Joseph  Smith
-knew  it  Jin t  it  seenied  so  curious
to  me  to  bring  myself  to  believe  that
the  Lord  was  going  to  give  us  part
of  tins  earth,  to  possess  it  and  our
children  alter  us,  while  time  should
last,  and  to  retain  it  through  all
eternity,  never  more  to  pass  away.
This  was  mo  different  from  anything
I  had  been  taught — I  was  utterly
confounded — to  think  that  my  Fa-
ther in  heaven  would  come  and  live
here  on  this  earth  !  But  when  I
came  to  read  the  Bible  on  this  subject
and  found  how  n anurous  the  pas-
sage* were  promising  that  the  Saints
should  inherit  the  earth  forever,  I

was  perfectly  astonished  that  I  had
never  thought  of  it  before.  "Blessed
are  the  meek,"  says  the  Savior,  "for
they  shall  inherit  the  earth/'  The
meek  have  been  driven  into  the  dens
and  mountains  of  the  earth,  having


live  passages. David,  for  instance,
in  his  3  th  Psalm,  says,  "The  wicked
shall  be  cut  off. The  righteous  shall
inhefjj  tht*  htnd,  and  dwell  thereon
for  ever." I  go  back  to  the  Books
Of  Moses,  ana  there  ascertain  that
the  earth  is  promised  to  the  Saints
forever. J  came  to  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  v*  herein  the  martyr  Ste-
phen, in  answering  the  charge  of
blasphemy,  tells  of  Abraham,  how
he  came  to  leave  his  own  country,
and  how  that  the  Lord  had  promised
him  a  land  for  an  inheritance  which
"he  would  give*  to  him  for  a  posses-
sion, and  to  his  seed  alter  him,"  and
yet  he  never  possessed  any  of  it,
"  no,  not  so  much  as  to  act  his  foot
on,"  and  this  same  promise  was  con-
firmed to  Isaac  and  Jacob,  And
when  I  read  in  the  Revelations  of
John  about  the  new  song  that  he
heard  them  sing  in  heaven  about
their  coming  back  to  the  earth  (Rev.
v,  9,  10),  I  was  fully  confirmed  that
the  new  revelation  was  from  God.
One  portion  of  the  song  which  John
heard  the  angels  sing  was, "  For
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed
us  U>  God  hy  thy  blood  out  of  every
kindled, and  tongue,  and  people,
and  nation  ;  And  hast  made  us  unto
our  God  kiu^s  and  priests ;  and  we
shall  reign  on  the  earth."

How  very  plain  it  is  when  we  oncd
learn  about  our  future  heaven.  We
do  not  have  to  pray,  according  to  the
Methodists,  for  the  Lord  to  take  us
to  a  land  beyond  time  and  space,  the
Saints  secure  abode. How  in  con


had  to  hide themselves  up  from  j  sistent  to  look  for  a  heaven  beyond


SALVATION  TANGIBLE,  ETC


29  T


space  !  The  heaven  of  the  Saints  is  tance,  we  are  to  become  joint  heirs
something  we  can  look  forward  to  with  Jesus  Christ  to  all  the  inheri-
in  the  confident  hope  of  realizing  tauces  and  to  all  the  worlds  that  are
our  inheritances  ami  enjoying  them  made.  We  shall  have  the  power  of
forever,  when  the  earth  becomes  locomotion  ;  and  like  Jesus,  after  his
sanctified  and  math!  new.  And  resurrection,  we  shall  he  able  to
th^re,  as  here,  we  will  spread  forth  mount  up  and  pass  from  one  world
and  multiply  our  children.  How  to  another.  We  shall  not  be  cou-
lon^  ^  For  eternity,  What,  resur-  fined  to  our  native  earth.  There  are
reefed  Saints  have  children?  Yes,  many  worlds  inhabited  by  people
the  same  as  our  God,  who  is  the  who  are  glorified,  for  heaven  is  not
Father  of  our  spirits  ;  so  you,  if  you  one  {dace,  but  many  ;  heaven  is  not
are  faithful  to  the  end,  will  become  one  world  but  many:  "In  my  Fa-
fathers  to  your  sous  ami  daughters,  thers  house  are  many  mansions."
which  will  be  as  innumerable  as  the  In  other  words — In  my  Fathers
sands  upon  the  sea  shore  ;  they  will  house  there  are  many  worlds,  which
be  your  children,  and  you  will  be  in  their  turn  will  be  made  glorified
their  heavenly  fathers,  the  same  as  heavens,  the  inheritances  of  the  re-
our  heavenly  Father  is  Father  to  us,  deemed  {'mm  all  the  worlds  who,
and  they  will  belong  to  your  kinsr-  having  been  prepared  through  similar
doms  through  all  the  vast  ages  of  experience  to  our  own,  will  inhabit
eternity,  the  same  as  we  will  belong  them  ;  and  each  one  in  its  turn  will
to  our  Fathers  kingdom.  be  exalted  through  the  revelations
He that  receive th  my  Father,  says  j  and  laws  of  the  Most  High  God,
the  Savior,  receive! h  my  Fathers  and  they  will  continue  to  multiply
kingdom,  wherefore  all  that  my  their  offspring  through  all  eternity,
Father  hath  sln^l  be  given  to  him.  and  new  worlds  will  be  made  for
It  is  a  kind  of  joint  stock  inheri-  their  progeny.  Amen.


2C8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  Semi -Annual  Conference  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  held  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Friday  Afternoon,  Oct.  6,  1876,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs*)

APOSTOLICAL  SUCCESSION  AND  RESPONSIBILITY  —  SOCIAL  POSITION
AFFORDS  NO  RELEASE  FROM  RESPONSIBILITY — IF  THE.  OFFICE  DOES
NOT  HONOR  A  MAN,  HE  IS  CALLED  TO  HONOR  THE  OFFICE — MAN'S
FUTURE,  DEPENDENT  ON  INTEGRITY  HERE*


We,  the  Latter-day  Saints,  pro-
fess to  have  rtceived  tiora  God  the
fullness  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  ;
we  profess  to  be  in  possession  of  the
holy  Priesthood — the  delegated  au-
thority of  God  to  man,  by  virtue  of
which  we  administer  in  its  ordinances
acceptably  to  him  ;  and  we  testiy,
to  the  whole  world  that  we  know,
by  divine  revelation,  even  through
the  manifestations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son
of  the  living  God,  and  that  ho  re-
vealed himself  to  Joseph  Smith  as
personally  as  he  did  to  his  Apustles,
anciently,  after  he  arose  from  the
tomb,  and  that  he  made  known  unto
him  thu^e  heavenly  nut  lis  by  which
alone  mankind  can  be  saved.  This,
as  was  remarked  by  President  Wtlls
this  morning,  is  assuming  a  very  im-
portant and  responsible  position,
knowing,  as  we  do,  that  God  will
hold  us  accountable  for  the  dis-
position we  make  of  this  sacred
trust  which  he  has  committed  to
us.  As  the  Apostles  appeared  be-
fore the  world,  after  they  had  re-


ceived their  commission  from  the
risen  Redeemer,  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel of  the  kingdom  to  all  nations,
promising  all  who  believed  on  their
word,  the  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghoss
thiough  the  laying  on  of  hands,  to
we  appear.  As  they  by  virtue  of
their  commission,  declared  with  all
ass  u  r  a  nee,  a  midst  per&ec  u  t  i  o  n  and
opposition,  t he  Gospel  to  be  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  all
those  who  believed  and  obeyed,  so
declare  we.  As  they  preached  faith
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  baptism
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  the
laying  on  of  hands,  by  those  duly
authorized,  for  the  reeeption  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  as  being  essential  to
salvation,  so  preach  we.  As  they
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be-
came witnesses  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  the  faithful  bearers  of
his  Gospel  message  to  the  whole
Gentile  world,  so,  by  and  through
the  same  Holy  Spirit,  we  have  be-
come witnesses  of  him,  and,  having
been  called  by  the  same  divine  aud
holy  calling,  we  therefore  assume  the


APOSTOLICAL  SUCCESSION,  ETC.


299


same  position.

Then,  having  assumed  this  posi-
tion, we  assume  all  the  responsibil-
ities of  ambassadors  of  Christ,  we
become  answerable  for  our  individual
acts,  and  for  the  manner  in  which
we  use  the  talents  and  ability  the
Lord  has  given  us.  Now  the  qnes-
tion  is,  do  we  sense  our  position,  do
we  comprehend  fully  the  nature  of
the  work  we  have  undertaken  to
consummate  ?  I  am  sometimes  led
to  believe  that  some  ot  our  brethren,
Elders  in  Israel,  are  too  ready  and
willing  to  shirk  the  obligations  they
are  under  by  reason  of  their  covenants,
the  faith  they  once  possessed  seems
to  be  almost  exhausted,  and  they
appear  to  settle  down  into  the  quiet
satisfaction  of  a  mere  nominal  mem
bership  in  the  Church.  There  are
others  who  think  because  their  names
are  not  very  widely  known,  because
they  are  perhaps  only  employees,
occupying  narrow  spheres,  that  it
does  not  matter  much  what  habits
they  contract,  or  what  kind  of  ex-
amples they  set  before  their  breth-
ren. But  then,  it  they  held  respon-
sible positions,  such  the  Presi-
dency of  the  Church,  or  a  counsel-
lors!) ip,  or  if  they  belonged  to  the
Quorum  of  the  Twelve,  or  were
they  President  of  the  High  Coun-
cil, or  of  the  High  Priests  or  Seven-
ties, then  they  would  consider  it  im-
portant how  they  conducted  them
selves.  Herein  they  manifest  great
weakness  or  gross  ignorance,  their
la  nip  :s  either  growing  dim  or  they
never  sensed  the  position  they  as-
sumed ia  taking  upon  themselves  the
responsibilities  ot  the  Gospel.

We  are  told  in  the  parable  of  the
Savior  that  ti  e  kingdom  of  heaven
is  as  a  householder  who  delivered  his
poods  to  his  servants  as  he  was  about

FIT

to  travel  into  a  tar  com/try.  lo  one
he  gave  five  talents,  to  another  two,
and  to  another  one. The  one  that


received  the  five  talents  went  and
traded,  and  made  other  five  talents,
doubling  the  portion  that  had  been
entrusted  to  him,  and  he  also  that
received  two  talents  went  and  gained
other  two.  But  he  that  received  the
one  talent,  went  and  digged  in  the
earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  money*  Ho
doubtless  considered  that,  his  respon-
sibility was  so  small  that  lie  could
not  do  much,  and  consequently  he
won  Id  not  exercise  a  talent  so  in-
ferior. Dot  s  not  this  apply  directly
to  the  condition  of  some  of  our  El-
ders ?  Says  one,  **  I  am  only  a  car-
penter, or  a  tailor,  or,  perad venture,
only  a  hod-carrier,  therefore  it  can-
not matter  much  how  I  deport  my-
self, whether  I  do  or  do  not  honestly
discharge  my  duties  in  my  humble
sphere.  But  it  would  be  verj  dif-
ferent if  I  were  acting  in  some  more
responsible  and  prominent  position."

Stop,  my  brother;  do  not  aliow
yourself  to  be  deceived  by  such  al-
luring sentiments.  Jt  is  true  yon
may  only  be  a  hod-carrier,  but  re-
member you  are  an  Elder  in  Israel,
you  are  an  ambassador  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Clitist,  and  it'  j  ou  are  in  Hie
line  of  your  duty  you  are  in  posses-
sion of  that  which  the  world  cannot
give  nor  take  away;  and  y on  are
held  accountable  to  God  for  the
honest  use  of  the  talent  over  which
he  has  made  you  sieward,  whether  it
be  I  irge  or  small.

Again,  you  exert  a  certain  degree
of  influence,  and  be  it  ever  so  small,
it  affects  some  person  or  persons^
and  fur  the  resuhs  of  the  influence
you  exert  you  are  held  more  or  less
accountable*  You,  therefore,  whether
you  acknowledge  it  or  not,  have  as-
sumed hii  importance  before  Cio  l  and
man  that  cannot  be  overlooked,  and
from  which  you  cannot  be  released
if  you  wish  to  sustain  the  name  you
bear.

And  what  of  the  prospects  of  that


300


JUUKNAL  OF  DISCO  UKSEs.


individual  ?  I  say  that  if  he  honors
Bis  calling,  and  is  found  faithful  to
the  trust  reputed  in  him,  his  pros*
pectn  for  salvation  Hnd  exaltation
in  t he  kingdom  of  God  are  just  as
.good  as  any  other  man's.  If  he
comprehends  his  position  and  lives
accordingly,  his  prospects  are  equally
good  with  any  man  that  ever  lived
since  the  days  of  father  Adam  to
the  present  moment;  mid  it  is  just
as  important  that  he  deport  himself
properly  according  to  the  sphere  in
which  he  walks,  as  it  is  thai,  any
othrr  individual  should,  who  may  be
called  to  act  in  a  [jig her  position  ;  or,
lib  other  words,  who  may  have  been
made  steward  over  a  larger  number
of  talents*  If  the  roan  of  limited
influence  and  small  talents  be  nor
trustworthy  and  faithful  in  that
which  belongs  to  another,  winch  may
be  committed  to  his  charge,  how  can
he  expect  ever  to  come  in  possession
of  tlie  true  riches,  or  even  receive
that  which  he  calk  his  own  ?  For
mark  well  the  language  of  the  Sa-
vior bearing  directly  on  this — 11  He
that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least
is  faithful  also  in  much;  and  he  that
is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also
in  much."

Therefore,  let  it  be  understood
and  always  remembered  by  those  who
may  be  called  to  follow  the  humbler
occupations  in  life,  that  it  is  abso-
lutely necessary,  for  their  growth
and  progress  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
that  while  acting  therein  they  master
the  situation,  that  they  establish  and
form  a  character  and  a  living  name,
by  which  they  may  be  known  and
distinguished  hereafter  among  the
aons  of  God.  I  respect  the  man
occupying  the  humblest  position,  if
he  is  faithful  in  the  sphere  in  which
he  acts,  and  is  truly  an  honest  man  ;
I  deem  him  just  as  honorable  as  any
person  who  may  act  io  a  higher  posi-
tion. The  Lord  does  not  require


so  much  of  the  man  who  possesses
but  one  talent,  as  of  him  who  pos-
sesses more  than  one;  hut,  according
to  that  which  he  hath,  so  shall  it
he  required  of  him.  Let  all,  there-
tore,  be  et;cou raged,  and  seek  to
improve  the  talents  they  severally
possess;  and  let  him  who  may  have
the  one  talent  use  it  and  not  hide
it  in  the  earrh;  that  is,  Jut  him
who  may  be  endowed  with  little
ability  improve  himself,  and  not
complain  because  nature  may  not
have  been  so  propitious  to  him  as  to
his  more  fortunate  brother.  Let  us
all  be  satisfied  with  our  lot  in  life,
and  should  it  not  be  so  desirable  as
we  could  wish,  we  should  seek  with
becoming  diligence  to  improve  it,
ever  feeling  grateful  for  our  earthly
being,  and  more  especially  for  the
Spirit  of  God  we  have  received
through  obedience  to  the  Gospel,

President  Youtijj  has  said  from
this  stand,  that  tlie  poor  are  ofteu
harder  to  govern  than  the  rich.
There  are,  doubtless,  many  brethren
present  to-day,  who  preside  in  our
various  settlements,  that  can  readily
corroborate  the  statement.  This
should  not  be  so,  fur  one  of  the  im-
port nit  objects  of  the  Gospel  is  to
benefit  the  poor  temporally  as  well
as  spiritually;  and,  therefore,  of  all
o tiier  classes  of  people,  the  poor
should  be  the  most  willing  to  be
directed  and  governed.  The  Lord
has  ever  been  mindful  of  his  poor;
to  them,  while  in  their  adverse  cir-
cumstances, he  has  granted  privileges
which  are  withheld  from  the  rich.
The  fact  that  the  poor  had  the  Gospel
preached  to  them  was  one  of  the
evidences  of  Jesus  being  the  Christ,
which  he  himself  gave  to  the  dis-
ciples of  John  in  answer  to  the  ques-
tion, "Art  thou  he  that  should  come,
or  do  we  look  for  another  ?  "  The
poor  have  always  been  an  especial
charge  of  the  servants  of  God,  in  all


APOSTOLICAL  SUCCESSION,  ETC


;:oi


ages  ;  and  strikingly  has  this  charge
been  sustained  in  this  diaper)  sat  ion
by  President  Young  and  his  brethren.
The  Presidency  of  tins  Church  have
always  been  mindful  of  the  poor,  in
donating  themselves  and  using  their
influence  upon  others  to  Assist  in  the
gathering  of  the  poor  Saints  from
the  various  nations  to  this  land ;  and
upon  their  arrival  hero  have  cause  1
homes  and  food  to  be  provided  for
them  until  such  times  as  they  could
provide  for  themselves;  and  they
have  constantly  manifested  a  dispo-
sing to  elevate  the  pour,  and  to
protect  them  against  that  arbitrary
power  which  perari venture  might  be
used  against  them  by  their  richer
brethren.

The  Gospel  bin  !s  together  the
hearts  of  all  its  adherents,  it  makes
no  ditr*n*rice,  it  knows  no  difference
between  the  rich  and  the  poor;  we
are  all  bound  as  one  individual  to
perform  the  duties  which  devolve
upon  u^.  "  And  if  ye  have  not
been  faithful  in  that  whic'i  is  another
man's,  who  s^all  give  you  that  which
is  your  own  frn  Now  let  me  ask  the
question,  Who  do  possess  anything,
who  can  really  and  truly  call  any  of
this  world's  goods  his  own  ?  I  do
not  presume  to,  I  am  merely  a
steward  over  a  very  little,  and  unto
God  I  am  held  accountable  for  ito
use  and  disposition.  The  Litter- day
S  nuts  have  received  the  law  of  the
Gospel  through  the  revelations  of
God,  and  it  is  so  plainly  written  that
all  can  understand  it.  And  if  we
understood  and  comprehended  the
position  we  assumed  in  subscribing
to  it  wnen  we  entered  into  its  cove-
nant through  baptism  for  the  re-
mission of  sins,  wi'  must  still  be
conscious  of  the  fset  that  that  law
requires  us  to  seek  first  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  that  our  time,  talent
and  ability  must  be  held  subservient
to  its  interest. If  this  wyre  not  so,


how  could  we  expect  hereafter,  when
this  earth  shall  have  been  made
the  dwelling-place  of  God  and  hi3
Son,  to  inherit  eternal  lives  and
to  live  and  reign  with  him  ?  Who
shall  say  that  the  rich,  or  those
t' at  possess  many  talents,  have  any
better  hope  or  prospect  to  inherit
these  blessings  than  the  poor,  or
those  who  have  but  one  talent  ?  As
I  understand  it,  the  man  who  works
in  the  shop,  whether  as  tailor,  car*
pentcr,  shoemaker,  or  in  any  other
industrial  department,  and  who  lives
according  to  the  law  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  is  honest  and  faithful  in  his
calling,  that  man  is  just  as  eligible
to  thr  receiving  of  tlie-e  and  ;dl  the
blessings  of  the  New  and  Everlasting;
Covenant  as  any  other  man  ;  through
his  faithfulness  he  shall  possess
thrones,  principalities  and  powers,
his  children  becoming  as  numerous
as  the  stars  iu  the  firmament  or  the
sands  on  the  sea  shore.  Who,  1  ask,
has  any  greater  prospect  than  this  ?

I  remember  reading  an  anecdote
when  a  boy,  of  a  man  who,  through
his  wisdom  and  patriotism,  had
e  lined  great  renown,  but  who,  through
envy,  was  assigned  to  a  position
which  was  considered  very  degrad  ing.
On  entering  up  m  its  duties,  it  was
said  that  he  made  this  significant
remark:  "If  the  office  dots  not
honor  me,  I  will  honor  the  oOiec.
Much  difficulty  would  he  avoided,
and  our  condition  and  si  mat  ion
would  be  much  more  encouraging,
if  we  all  honored  the  office  in  which
we  arc  called  to  act.  We  are  told
that  the  Lord  himself  made  clothes
for  our  first  parents,  or,  in  other
words,  on  that  occasion,  ac  ed  as
tailor,  also  that  Jesus  Chris'  whs  a
carpenter.  Now,  the  Savior  must
have  been  an  honorable  and  honest
carpenter,  or  he  never  could  have
merited  the  position  he  afterwards
occupied. if  we  could  get  the  bro-


Z\iZ  JUUiiNAL  UiK

thren  and  sisters  to  see  the  import-
ance of  acting  honestly  and  faithfully
in  their  respective  callings,  much  of
the  annoyances  and  troubles  we  now
experience  would  be  averted,  and  the
work  of  God  would  roll  on  with  re-
doubled rapidity,  and  all  bis  purposes
would  be  more  rapidly  and  speedily
accomplished  ;  and  besides,  as  a  peo-
ple, we  would  be  better  prepared
than  we  now  are  for  the  dispensation
of  his  will.  *4  Let  this  mind  be  in
you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesu^ :
Who,  being  iu  the  form  of  God,  !
thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God."  Again  we  are  told,  "It  j
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall
be,  but  we  know  that  when  he  shall
appear  we  shall  be  like  him"  This
spirit  should  influence  us  in  all  our
dealings.  If  we  all  acted  in  keeping
with  its  sacred  whisperings,  there
would  be  little  difficulty  in  the  esta-
blishment and  working  of  the  United
Order,  for  all  would  then  be  faithful
in  the  performance  of  their  several
duties.  But  if,  whether  as  tailors  or
carpenters,  clerks  or  merchants,  we
prove  unfaithful,  "who/*  says  the
Savior,  11  shall  give  you  that  which  is
your  own  T*  On  the  same  principle,
if  we  as  Elders  tail  to  keep  the  cove-
nants we  have  made,  namely,  to  use
our  time,  talent,  and  ability  for  the
upbuilding  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  how  can  we  reason-
ably expect  to  come  forth  in  the
morning of  the  first  resurrection,


identified  with  the  great  work  of
redemption  ?  If  we,  in  our  manner,
habits,  and  dealings,  imitate  the
Gentile  world,  thereby  identifying
ourselves  with  the  world,  do  you
think,  my  brethren,  that  God  will
bestow  upon  us  the  blessings  we
desire  to  inherit  ?  I  tell  you  no,  he
will  not !  Iu  all  our  business  occu-
pations we  must  prove  ourselves
better  than  any  other  people,  or  we
forfeit  all.  We  must  build  ourselves
up  in  the  righteousness  of  heaven,
and  plant  in  our  hearts  the  righteous-
ness of  God.  Said  the  Lord,  through
the  Prophet  Jenvmiah,  "I  will  put
my  law  iu  their  inward  parts,  and
write  it  in  their  hearts;  and  will  be
their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my
people.*1  This  is  what  the  Lord  is
endeavoring  to  do,  and  this  he  will
accomplish  in  us  if  we  conform  to  his
will.

Then  let  us  practice  honesty  and
diligence  iu  our  various  callings,
seeking  unity,  and  to  cultivate  the
spirit  of  brotherhood  financially  as
well  as  spiritually,  that  we  may  be
iu  readiness,  upon  call,  to  go  forth
and  build  up  the  Centre  Stake  of
Zion,  aud  prepare  a  house  in  which
to  meet  the  Lord  our  Savior  and
Redeemer.

May  God  bless  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  and  enable  you  to  act
always  as  wise  stewards  over  that
with  which  you  have  been  entrusted.


THE  GREAT  PRIVILEGE,  ETC.


303


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,
Delivered  at  the  Temple,  St.  George,  Jan.  1,  1877-


(Deseret  News  )


THE  GREAT  PRIVILEGE  OF  HAVING  A  TEMPLE  COMPLETED— V  A  ST  KFFURTS
FOR  THIS  PURPOSE:— REMARKS  ON  CONDUCT — EARTH,  HEAVEN,  AND
HELL,  LOOKING  AT  TIIK  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS— RUNNING  AFTER  HOLES
IN  THE  GROUND — ARRANGEMENTS  FOR  THE  FUTURE.


11 1  cannot  consent  in  my  feelings
to  retire  from  this  house  without
exercising  my  strength,  the  strength
of  my  lungs,  stomach  and  speaking
organs,  in  speaking  to  this  people.  I
hardly  dure  say  what  is  in  my  heart
to  say  to  this  people.  Perhaps  it
would  not  be  prudent,  hot  I  will  say
a  few  encouraging  things  to  the  Lit-
ter-day Saints,  that  is,  they  ought  to
be  encouraging.  We  that  are  here
are  enjoying  a  privilege  that  we  have
no  knowledge  of  any  other  people
enjoying  since  the  days  of  Adam,
that  is,  to  have  a  Temple  completed,
wherein  all  the  ordinance  uf  the
house  of  God  can  be  bestowed  upon
his  people.  Brethren  and  sisters,  do
you  understand  this  ?  It  seems  that
a  great  many  of  the  people  know
nothing  about  it.  It  is  true  that
Solomon  built  a  Temple  for  the  pur-
pose of  giving  endowments,  but  from
what  we  can  learn  of  the  history  of
that  time  they  gave  very  few  if  any
endowments,  and  one  of  the  high
priests  was  murdered  by  wicked  a:.d
corrupt  men,  who  had  already  begun
to  apostatize,  because  he  would  not
reveal  those  things  appertaiuing  to
the  Priesthood  that  were  forbidden


him  to  reveal  until  he  came  to  the
proper  place*  I  will  not  say  but
what  Enoch  had  Temples  and  offi-
ciated <  herein,  but  we  have  no  account
of  it  We  know  that  he  raised  up
a  pro  pie  so  pure  and  holy  that  they
were  not  p  rmiited  to  remain  with
the  wicked  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
but  were  taken  to  another  place.
We  as  Latter-day  Saiuts  have  been
laboring  for  over  forty  years,  and
the  revelations  given  us  in  the  first
were  to  establish  the  kingdom  by
gathering  the  Saints,  building  Tem-
ples, and  organizing  the  people  as
the  family  of  heaven  here  on  the
earth.  We  reared  up  a  Temple  in
Kirtland,  but  we  had  no  basement  in
it,  nor  a  font,  nor  preparations  to  give
endowments  for  the  living  or  the
dead.  It  was  left  by  the  Saints
before  it  was  completed,  they  going
to  Missouri,  Joseph  located  the  site
for  the  IVmple  Block  in  Jackson
County,  Missouri,  and  pointed  out
the  south-east  corner  of  the  Temple
iu  the  year  18;U, — also  laid  the
corner  stone  for  a  Temple  in  Far
West,  Caldwell  County,  Mo.  These
Temples  were  not  built.  We  built
one  in  Nauvoo. I  could  pick  out


JOURNAL  OF  DIriCOVKSKS


several  before  me  now  that  were  th^re  I
when  it  was  built,  and  know  just
how  much  was  finished  and  whrit
was  done.  It  is  true  we  left  brethren
there  with  instructions  to  finish  it,  I
and  they  got  it  nearly  completed  be-
fore it  was  burned,  but  the  Saints
did  not  enjoy  it  Now  we  have  a
Temple  which  will  n'l  be  finished  in
a  few  days,  and  of  which  there  is
enough  completed  to  commence  woik
therein  which  hag  n>t  been  d  mesince
the  days  of  Adam,  that  we  have  any
knowledge  of  ^  Now  those  that  can
see  the  spiritual  atmosphere  can  see
that  rnativ  of  Hie  Saints  are  still
glued  to  this  earth  mid  lasting  and
longing  Hfierthe  things  of  ihis  world,
in  which  there  is  no  profit.  El  is
true,  we  should  look  after  the  things
of  this  world  an  I  devote  all  to  the
building  np  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
Accord  in  it  to  the  present  feelings  rf
many  cf  our  brethren,  they  would
arrosja'e  to  themselves  this  world  an  I
nil  that  pertains  to  it,  and  cease  not
day  nor  night  to  see  that  it  was  de-
voted to  the  building  tip  of  the  king-
dom of  the  devil,  and  if  they  hail
the  power  they  would  build  a  railroad
to  c  irry  it  to  hell  and  establish  them-
'selves  there.  Where  are  the  eyes
and  the  hearts  of  this  people  ?
Where  is  their  interest  for  their  own
salvation  and  that  of  their  fore-
fathers ?  We  enjny  privileges  that
are  enj  >yed  hv  no  one  cite  on  the  lace
of  the  earth.  Suppose  we  were  a  *  ake
to  this  thing,  namely,  the  salvation
of  the  human  family,  this  house
would  be  crowded,  as  we  hope  it  will
be,  frcm  Monday  morning  until  Sa-
turday night.  This  house  was  bnilt
here  in  this  place  purposely,  where  it
is  warm  and  pleasant  in  the  winter
time,  and  cjmfortable  to  work,  also
for  the  LanamtOB,  and  also  those
coming  from  the  south,  and  other
places  to  receive  their  endowments,
and  other  blessings. What  do  you


suppose  the  fathers  would  say  if  fb<*y
oottld  Speak  from  the  dead  ?  Would
they  not  say,  1  We  have  Iain  b'»re
thousands  of  years,  here  in  this
prison  house,  waiting  for  this  dispen-
sation to  corne  ?  Here  we  are,
bound  and  fettered,  in  the  association
of  those  who  are  filthy  ?"  What
wo^I  l  thev  whisper  in  our  ears  ?
Why,  if  they  had  the  power  the  very
thunders  of  heaven  would  be  in  our
ears,  if  we  emld  bnt  tealiz*  the  im-
portance of  the  work  we  are  engaged
Hi.  All  the  angels  in  heaven  are
looking  at  this  li'lle  handfull  of  peo-
ple, rind  stimulating  them  to  the
salvation  of  the  human  family.  So  *
also  are  the  devils  in  hell  looking  at
this  people,  too,  and  trying  to  over-
throw us,  and  the  people  are  still
|  shaking  hands  with  the  servants  of
|  the  devil,  instead  or  sanctifying  them-
:  selves  and  c-illing  upon  the  Lnrd  and
.  doiuz  the  work  which  he  has  com-
ma  tided  us  and  put  into  our  hands  to
do.  When  I  think  upon  this  subject,
I  want  the  tongues  of  seven  thunders
to  wnke  up  the  p  ople*  Cm  the
I  fathers  be  saved  without  us  ?  No.
Can  we  be  s**ved  without  them  ?  Xof
find  if  we  do  not  wake  up  aud  cense
to  long  after  the  things  of  this  earth,
we  will  find  that  we  as  iodtvidnds
will  go  down  to  h^H,  although  the
L  >rd  will  preserve  a  people  unto  him-
self. Now  we  are  ready  to  give  en-
dowments, do  you  have  any  fet  lings
tor  those  who  have  died  without  hav-
ing the  Gospel  ?  The  spirit  was
awakened  in  the  people  io  the  north
when  we  gave  the  word  that,  we  should
do  no  more  work  in  the  Endowment
House — i hey  came  to  us  crying  mid
pleading  to  be  baptized  for  itn'r
dead.  What  else  could  they  du  ?
They  am  come  here  and  do  the  work
for  their  dead,  aud  put  these  poor
prisoners  on  the  ground  where  they
will  be  free.  Do  we  realize  this  ?
As  long  as  we  tarry  here,  we  are  sub-


THE  GREAT  PRIVILEGE*  ETC*


3*6


ject  to  the  world. Bat  now  go  to,
like  men  and  women,  and  say,  we  will
embrace  the  trnth  and  enter  into  the
covenants  of  God  and  carry  them
out. Then  the  bonds  are  broken,
and  the  hearts  of  the  people  arc
united  in  the  Father. Perhaps,  bre-
th  ren  and  sisters,  you  will  not  get  my
meaning,  bat  now  go  to  work  and  let
these  holes  in  the  ground  alone,  and
let  the  Gentiles  alone,  who  would  de-
stroy us  if  they  hnd  the  power.  You
are  running  after  them,  and  some  of
our  brethren  are  putting  their  wives
and  daughters  into  their  society,  and
will  uo  to  the  drvil  with  ihern  too,
it  they  d<i  not  look  out. I  would  not
have  a  dollar  on  the  earth  if  I  had
to  get  it  there. It  has  been  the  king-
dom of  God  with  me. What  I  have,
I  have  got  in  this  kingdom.  Well,
n»w,  some  of  the  Elders  are  running
after  these  holes  in  the  ground,  and
I  see  men  before  me,  in  this  house
that  have  no  right  to  be  here.  They
are  as  corrupt  in  their  hearts  as  they
cm  be,  and  we  take  them  by  the  hand
and  call  them  brother. You  will  tro
to  hell,  lute  of  you,  unless  you  repent.
You  may  think  this  is  plain  talk,  it
is  not  as  plain  as  you  will  find  by  and


by.  If  yon  should  ever  go  to  the
gates  of  heaven,  Jesus  will  say  he
never  knew  you.  While  you  have
been  saying  your  prayers  and  going
to  your  meetings  and  are  as  corrupt
in  yonr  hearts  as  men  can  be.  Yon
had  better  stop  now  and  repent  of"
your  sins  and  sin  no  more,  while
there  is  yet  time,  and  before  the  doors*
are  closed  against  yon,  I  want  to
wake  you  up,  and  if  I  had  the  power
to  lift  the  veil  from  your  eyes  aud  let
you  see  things  as  they  are,  you  would
be  astonished.  Not  but  what  there
are  a  great  majority  of  the  people  as
good  as  they  know  bow  fobe.  N\>w  I
will  6dyr  bless  the  people,  that  they  may
do  better,  but  show  some  of  the  Elders
of  Israel  according  to  their  present
conduct  a  dollar  on  one  side  and  eter-
nal life  on  the  other,  and  I  fear  they
would  choose  the  dollar,

w  We  are  now  prepared  to  attend
to  baptizing  and  giving  endowments,
!  find  shad  appoint  Tuesdays  and  Wed-
nesdays  for  baptisms,  and  Thursdays
and  Fridays  for  endowments  and
sealings,  as  a  standing  appointment
for  the  present.
"  God  bless  yon,  Araeu.


No,  20


*


Vol.  XVIII.


2Q4L  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES-


i

A  FUNERAL  SERMON,
PREACHED  BY ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

At  the  14th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  Dec.

31, 1870, OVER  THE  REMAIN'S  OF  SfSTER MaRY ANN, THK B  Li  LOVED  WIFE

of  Klder  Oeorcie  E  Buurxb.
(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

RESPECT  TO  THE  DEAD— intE- EXISTENCE  THE  KEY  TO  THIS — THE  FUTURE
LIKE  DEPENDS  ON  THIS— THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  DEPENDENT  UPON
REVELATION  FOR  THEIR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THESE  THINGS— LIFE  PERSE-
CUTIONS AS  NOTHING,  CONTRASTED  WITH  THE  PROMISES  PERTAINING
TO  THE  FUTURE— MEN'S  FUTURE  GLORIES  AS  ARE  THE  LAWS  THEY
ABIDE.


We  are  met  together  on  this  occa-
sion, as  we  frequently  are  called  upon
to  do,  to  pay  our  last  respects  to  the
departed  dead.  This  is  one  of  the
incidents  connected  with  humanity,
and  one  that,  always  commands  our
serious  attention.  There  has  an
immutable  decree  gone  forth  from  the
Almighty,  that  man  must  die  ;  and
it  matters  not  what  our  standing  in
society  or  station  in  life  may  be,  all
alike  must  submit  to  the  divine  be-
hest.

When  we  look  back  to  the  gene-
rations that  have  passed,  letting  our
minds  wander  through  the  various
ages  that  have  transpired  since  the
commencement  of  the  human  fam-
ily upon  the  earth,  we  see,  as  it  were,
multitudes  of  human  beings  who  have
had  their  entrance  into  and  exit  from
this  world,  a  great  rolling  wave  of
human  life  coming  and  going.  They
have  existed  simply  for  a  short  time,
mingling  with  and  operating  among
their  fellow  beings,  and  then  they


have  faded  away,  their  bodies  have
decay od  and  returned  to  mother  earth,
while  they  themselves  have  left  this
world  and  gone  into  another  state  of
existence.

We  might  bring  this  reflection  a
little  nearer  home,  by  inquiring.
How  many  are  there  yet  lining  of
my  acquaintances  who  were  in  exis-
tence when  I  was  born  ?  But  few
comparatively  ;  and  so  it  is  with  a
great  many  others.  We  come  into
the  world,  we  thiuk  and  reflect,  we
act  and  operate,  we  carry  out  certain
ideas,  plans  and  calculations,  we  live
but  a  short  time  and  then  die,  leav-
ing all  things  with  which  we  were
connected  pretty  much  as  they  were
when  we  came  here.

We  frequently  talk  of  the  advance*
meats  made  in  society  and  the  pro-
gression of  the  world  generally  in
intelligence,  in  science,  in  literature,
eta  But  what  is  all  that  to  the  man
when  he  is  about  to  leave  his  earthly
tenement,  to  go  hence? Of  what


moment  is  it  to  him  bow  bright  his
genius,  or  how  expansive  and  varied
his  learning  may  be  ?  It  makes  no
difference,  he  is  gone,  and  is  appa-
rently helpless  and  inanimate,  at  least
so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned-  We
struggle  sometimes  while  we  are  oe-
•Ofl pants  of  these  mortal  bodies,  for
riches  ami  position,  for  fame  and
honor.  We  jostle  one  against  ano-
ther, entertaining  various  conflicting
sentiments,  ideas  and  theories,  bat
they  are  »)l  leveled  with  the  balance
in  the  grave.  Such  has  been  and
such  is  the  position  of  the  human
family.

There  is  a  scripture  which  reads,
*' And  as  it  is  appointed  unto  man
once  to  dU\  but  after  this  the  judg-
ment." It'  we  are  only  to  be  as-
sociated with  this  world,  if,  when
this  vitnl  spark  expires,  we  end  our
entire  existence,  it  would  he  scarcely
worth  while  to  pay  that  attention  to
its  affairs  that  we  do,  merely  for  so
short  a  time.  But  when  we  reflect,
we  are  reminded  that  man  is  a  dual
being,  possessing  a  body  and  a  spirit,
and  that  lie  is  associated  with  this
world  ami  the  next,  that  he  is  con-
nected wiili  time  and  eternity.  It
then  becomes  a  matter  of  more  grave
and  serious  importance*  These  are
things  whieh  we  cannot  ignore-  even
if  we  wo .ild.  According  to  our  ideas
of  things  as  they  have  been  reveahd
to  us,  we  had  an  existence  before
we  came  here.  We  came  here  to
accompli 4i  a  certain  purpi-se  which
was  deer^d  by  the  Almighty  before
the  world  was.  We  came  to  receive
bodies  or  Tabernacles,  and  in  them  to
pass  through  a  certain  amount  ot
trial  in  what  is  termed  a  probationary
state  of"  existence,  preparatory  to  u
something  to  be  developed  hereafter.
Hence  this  world  is  the  state  ot  our
probation,  and  we  look  forward  to  the
future  as  something  with  which  we
are  as  much  connected  as  we  are  with


anything  pertaining  to  time.  We
look  forward  to  another  state  of
existence  with  that  degree  of  cer-
tainty and  confidence  that  we  do
when  we  go  to  her]  in  the  evening
expecting  to  see  the  light  of  the  sun
in  the  morning,  or  that  we  do  with
anything  else  that  is  associated  with
any  of  the  affairs  of  this  world  upon
which  we  place  any  degree  of  cer-
tainty. Were  it  n<>t  so,  it  would  be,
as  I  have  already  stated,  of  very  little
importance  what  our  struggles  were,
or  what  we  had  to  do  with  in  this
wo i  Id.  We  would  feel,  as  Paul  philo-
sophically describes  it,  namely,  "  If
in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in
Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  mise-
rable." And  then  he  further  says,
Ct  It  the  dead  rise  not,  let  us  eat
and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."
Or,  in  other  words,  if  in  this  world
only  we  have  hope,  let  us  seize  upon
any  and  every  opportunity  presented
to  us  and  enjoy  life,  mingle  with  and
join  in  the  giddy  strife  of  the  world,
and  glide  along  with  the  stream,  tor
|  our  days  are  but  a  span,  as  a  shadow
they  pass  away  and  we  are  no  more.
But  it  so  happens  that  we  regard
these  things  in  a  very  different  point
of  view,  it  having  been  revealed  to
us  from  heaven  what  the  position  of
man  was,  what  it  now  is,  and  what  it
wilt  be.  In  relation  to  this,  no  mat-
ter what  our  religious  sentiments
may  be,  or  what  the  views  of  men
aie  pertaining  to  these  matters,  there
is  a  kind  of  inexorable  fiat  that
comes  down  the  stream  of  time,  that
sweeps  away  the  human  family  one
after  another — the  good  and  the  bad,
the  righteous  and  the  unrighteous,
the  rich  and  the  poor,  all  classes,
all  grades  and  all  conditions  must
submit  to  it.  It  is  true,  we  read  of
some  very  few  individuals  who  have
avoided  it.  For  instance,  Enoch  and
his  city  were  caught  np  without
seeing  death. We  read  that  when


Mnses  departed  tins  life,  his  body
could  nut  be  found*  Elijah,  too,
ascended  op  to  heaven  without  dy-
ing. Also  John,  the  re  vela  tor.  was
permitted  to  live  upon  the  earth
until  the  Savior  should  come,  and
the  Book  of  Mormon  gives  an  fie-
ri unit  of  three  Nephites,  who  lived
un  tin's  American  Continent,  who
asktd  for  the  same  privilege  and  it
was  granted  to  them.

1  am  not  now  talking  to  the  dead;
she  is  gone,  she  has  left  us,  Iter
ear  is  not  sensitive  to  our  voice,  her
faculties  are  dormant  ;  but  I  am
speaking  to  tlie  living.  In  reflect-
ing upon  these  matters  we  must  see
that  in  a  short  time  we  shall  be  in
the  condition  that  our  sister  is,  whose
remains  now  lie  before  ns.  The
question  that  necessarily  arises,  and
it  is  one  that  engages  the  attention
of  all  people  of  every  age  and  coun-
try, is,  What  of  the  future  *r  Men
have  had  their  various  theories  in
i  elation  to  these  matteis,  which
have  differed  more  or  less  according
to  the  day  and  rge  in  which  they
lived,  according  to  the  intelligence
they  possessed,  and  accord i rig  to  the
circumstances  with  which  they  were
surrounded,  over  which,  perhaps,  they
had  very  little  control.  All  men,
more  or  less,  however,  have  had  a
desire  to  aim  at  exaltation  in  the
hereafter,  or  happiness  of  some  kind.
They  have  had  feelings  in  their
bosoms  that  would  naturally  lend
them  to  this.  I  do  not  remember
reading  of  any  people,  no  matter
how  low  and  degraded  they  were,  hut
what  had  some  kind  of  ideas,  more
or  less  distinct,  in  relation  to  the  fu-
ture, though  they  were  and  now  are
very  much  confused  in  some  particu-
lars, worshiping,  for  instance,  gods
made  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  etc,  and
in  some  ages  they  had  thousands  of
gods.  But  why  did  they  worship
them  ? Because  they  believed  they


had  something  to  do  with  their
destiny,  and  they  wanted  to  seen  re
their  favor  and  approbation.  There
are  a  great  many  of  these  feelings
existing  at  the  present  time  among
the  heathen  nations.  There  are  some
who  believe  that  when  they  die  they  go
into  the  bodies  of  beasts  and  various
animals  and  occupy  them  ;  and  others,
that  there  is  some  kind  of  happiness
provided  for  them.  They  used  to
talk  in  early  days  about  the  Elysian
Fields,  after  having  passed  the  river
tk  Styx,"  where  they  anticipated
some  kind  of  pleasant  enjoyment,
the  nature  of  which  they  knew  not.
There  is  a  very  Urge  body  of  men
at  the  present  time  who  are  what
is  called  Mohammedans,  and  they
have  their  peculiar  ideas  of  heaven-
Then  we  h  ive  Christianity  in  all  its
phases,  vvitli  all  its  ideas,  theories,
opinions,  plans  and  calculations,
which  are  as  much  diversified  per-
haps as  anything  in  existence  upon
the  face  of  the  earth  to  day.  There
is,  too,  a  lack  of  certainty  and  intel-
ligence generally  in  relation  to  these
matters.  Some  of  the  Indians  be-
lieve that  when  they  die  they  go  to
some  pleasant  hunting  grounds,
where  there  is  plenty  of  buffalo,  elk
and  deer,  and  where  they  can  revel
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  ch:ise,  and
where  they  ran  possess  everything
necessary  to  make  thera  comfortable.

As  Latter-day  Saints  we  differ
from  all  of  them.  We  are  dependent
upon  the  revelations  which  God  has
given  unto  us  pertaining  to  the  fu-
ture, and  which  are  in  strict  accord-
ance with  revelations  which  he  gave
at  different  times  to  bis  ancient
Saints.  Our  faith  and  opinion  are
that  being  dual,  immortal  beings,
possessing  a  body  and  a  spirit,  asso*
ciated  with  time  aud  eternity,  ifc  is
proper  for  us  to  know  and  compre-
hend something  pertaining  to  the
future  ;  and  not,  as  is  generally  done


RESPECT  TO  THE  DEAD,  ETC.


309


by  mankind ?  take  a  lenp,  a<*  it  weret
in  tlit*  dark  ;  or  as  I  have  frequently
heard  p  ople  say,  and  Christians  at
that,  41  We  do  not  know  anything  !
about  the  future,  we  have  got  to  leave  '
ourselves  entirely  in  the  hands  of
God."  Of  course  we  have  all  got  to
do  that,  and  that  too  is  proper  in  one
sense  of  the  word.  But  there  were
men  in  former  times  that  had  very
different  ideas  from  this  ;  they  lived
back,  away  back,  in  what  they  now
call  the  **  dark  ages."  For  instance,
I  will  name  Job  and  quote  you  lan-
guage expressing  his  mind  on  this  I
point.  "  For  I  know  that  my  Re-
deemer liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand
at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth  ;  and
though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see
God  ;  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,
and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not
for  another"  There  is  something
expressed  in  that  very  different  from
the  vague,  indefinite  idea  that  many
Christians  seem  to  entertain  in  rela-
tion to  these  tilings*  There  is  some-
thing definite  and  certain  about  it.
I  fatoW)  sod  Job.  How  did  he  know  r
A  man  could  know  nothing  pertain-
ing to  the  future  so  far  off,  could
know  nothing  about  the  vitalizing,
quickening  influence  of  certain
powers,  that  could  so  operate  upon
the  remnants  of  humanity  that,  had
been  buried  in  the  grave,  as  to  bring
them  forth  to  life,  causing  them  to
see,  to  hear,  and  to  understand.  How
and  by  what  principle  could  he  see
these  tilings  develop,  unless  by  some
super-human  influence  which  had
been  manifested  to  him  ?  He  could
only  know  it  upon  this  principle —
that  u  the  things  of  God  kuowcth
no  man,  but  by  the  spirit  of  God,1*  and
being,  too,  in  possession  of  that  spirit
and  possessed  of  life  and  tight  and
intelligence  that  flow  from  God,  he
looked  through  the  dark  vista  of  fu-
ture ages  and  comprehended  the  pur-


p>ses  of  God  in  regard  to  the  human
family  and  in  regard  to  himself.  John
tho  revelator,  too,  "  saw  the  dead,
small  and  great,  stand  before  God  ; "
he  saw  the  sea  give  up  the  dead  winch
were  in  it.  Others  saw,  by  the  same
spirit,  the  grave  open  and  the  power
of  God  rest  upon  the  people  therein,
and  then  hurst  the  barriers  ot  the
tomb,  coming  forth  again  wirli
heal  h  and  vitality,  There  is  no
human  reason,  no  human  intelligence,
with  all  its  boasted  enlightenment
and  scientific  research,  that  could
unravel  a  mystery  of  this  kind.  Yet,
away  back  in  the  dark  ages,  a  man
inspired  by  the  spirit  of  Clod  is  heard
to  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer
It  vet  h,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the
l  itter  day  upon  the  earth  and  he
knew  too  that  in  his  flesh  he  would
see  God.  Such  language  has  a  ten-
dency to  bring  curtain  ideas,  thoughts
and  reflections  to  our  minds.  An
intelligence  of  this  kind  is  not  a
phantom,  it  is  a  reality.

If  we  follow  out  the  Scriptures
in  relation  to  these  things  we  find
the  same  principles  developed  and
the  same  ide:is  entertained  wherever
they  had  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  wherever  they  had  the  light
and  intelligence  that  flow  from  him,
Amongat  all  peoples  wherever  the
Gospel  existed  this  intelligence  pre-
vailed, and  it  was  that  which  buoyed
them  up  and  sustained  them  amidst
all  the  vicissitudes  and  changes  which
they  had  to  battle  with  in  passing
through  time*  Men  of  such  persua-
sion were  generally  considered  vision*
ary.  They  were  scouted  at  by  others
who  were  considered  more  practical,
but,  whom  I  should  call  fools.  Tney
had  to  endure  all  kinds  of  ignominy
and  reproach  ;  in  fact  it  was  and  is
so  ordered  that  it  becomes  necessary,
in  this  probationary  state,  that  they
should  pass  through  certain  ordeals
in  order  to  prepare  and  quality  them


JOURNAL  UF  DISCO I'KSES,


for  something that was to  come.
They  had  these  things  to  pass  through
and  they  could  not  avoid  it. Job  was
upbraided  by  his  friends  and  perse-
cuted by  his  enemies;  he  was  robbed
and  stripped  of  everything  he  owned
in  the  world,  even  bereft of  his
children,  and his  wife,  his  bosom
companion,  turned  upon  him,  saying
to  him  at  last,  "Curse  God  and  die!"
But  said  Job,  "What?  shall  were*
ceive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and
shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?" 44  The
Lord  gave  and  the  Lord  hath  taken
away,  blessed  be  the  name  of  the
Lord." Why  was  it  that  he  had  to
be  thus  tried  ? That  lie  might,  as
stated  elsewhere,  be  made  perfect
through  suffering. (I  Peter,  5,  10.)

We  read  again  of  a  certain  man
who,  while  en  rapped  in  vision,  saw
many  of  the  purposes  of  God  roll
forth;  acd  among  other  things  lie
saw  a  number  that  were  clothed  in
white  raiment,  and  w  ho  were  engaged
in  singing  a  new  song.  Upon  in-
quiring who  those  persons  were,  he
was  told  t liar  they  had  come  u  up
through  much  tabulation.1'  What,
men  having  to  endure  tribulation  for
fearing  God  and  keeping  his  com-
mandments ?  Yes;  and  it  was  ne-
cessary, in  (lie  wisdom  of  God,  that
they  should.  Those  were  they  that
c*me  up  through  much  tribulation,
having  cashed  their  robes  and  made
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.
Ansl  therefore  are  they  next  the
throne  mid  serve  their  Maker  day
and  r-i^lit.

There  are  some  peculiar  lessons
and  important  instructions  developed
in  many  of  these  things,  as  we  see
them  purr  rayed,  I  speak  now  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  We,  a  few  of  us,
have  had  our  >\mve  of  these  things.
I  have  seen  people,  in  the  early  days,
who  had  to  pa  as  through  a  good  dual,
— stripped,  rohW'd,  pillaged,  beaten,
killed,  murdered  for  their  religion's


sake.  They  were  driven  from  their
homes,  they  wandered  about  as  exiles.
They  could  truly  say  as  Jesus  once
said,  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the
birds  of  tin*  air  have  nests;  but  the
Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay
his  head,"  They  had  not  where  to
rest  themselves  except  on  the  bare
earth,  whereon  I  have  seen  hunt! reds
and  thousands  of  Latter  -  day  Saints
find  their  shelter,  when  they  were
fleeing  from  th  1  hands  of  merciless,
ignorant  Christian  people.  Did  they
know  what  they  were  doing  ?  No.
Did  the  Saints  know  what  t  hey  were
doing,  and  the  object  of  their  suffer-
ing ?  Yes,  and  they  do  to  this  day.
They  had  implanted  in  them  a  hope,
which  comes  through  obedience  to
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  that
blooms  with  immortality  and  eter  nal
life.  It  was  iu  view  of  these  things,
like  it  was  with  Home  that  Paul
speaks  f — they  "  were  tempted,  they
were  tried,  they  were  persecuted,  they
were  whipped  and  sawed  asunder;
they  wandered  about  in  sheep  skins
atnl  goat  >kins,  finding  their  homes
in  ceiis  and  caves  of  the  earth,  of
whom  the  world  was  not  worthy/*
These  very  people  that  endured  these
things  the  world  was  not  worthy  of  j
and  they  declared  plainly  that 44  they
soaghl  a  better  country,  even  a  hea*
venly,  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed
to  be  called  their  God.  For  he  hath
prepared  tor  them  a  city,  a  city
which  has  foundations,  whose  builder
and  maker  is  God/'  The  very  thing
that  Jesus  said  they  should  have
when  he  spoke  to  his  disciples  and
pwiid,  lt  In  my  Father's  house  are
many  mansions.  I  uo  to  prepare  a
pi  ice  tor  you.  And  if  I  go  and
prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come
ayain,  and  receive  you  unto  myself;
that  where  I  arn  ye  may  be  also.

There  is  something  about  these
ideas  animating  and  cheering,  that
gives  life  arid  vigor  to  the  human


RESPECT  TO  THE  DEAD,  ETC.


mind  while  traveling  through  the
world ,  and  having  to  meet  with  the
various  conflicts  and  difficulties  that
frequently  obstruct  our  path.

Looking  upon  ourselves  as  eternal
beings,  connected  with  heaven  as  well
as  earth,  with  eternity  as  well  as  time,
what difference  is  it  to  os  what  our
lot  may  be,  whether  we  abound  in
wealth,  or  whether  we  have  to  strug-
gle with  grim  poverty  ;  whether  we
possess  tin-  tfinui  things  of  this  world,
or  have  to  crawl  around  like  Lnzirus
did,  and  be  glad  to  eat  of  the  crumbs
that  fell  from  the  rich  man's  table  ?
It  will  soon  be  with  the  rich  as  if  they
were  not  rich,  and  with  the  poor  as
if  they  had  uoi  to  struggle — all  will
find  a  level  in  the  grave.

What  are  our  views  pertaining  to
the  latere  ?  What  claim  have  we  on
the  Almighty  ?  Can  we  say  as  one
did,  "Fur  we  know  that  if  our  earthly
house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dis-
solved, we  have  a  building  of  God,
a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal
in  the  heavens  ?"  If  we  can  say
that,  it  is  all  right ;  no  difference
what  our  position,  no  difference  what
our  circumstances,  if  our  hearts  ate
pure  before  God,  and  our  spirits  are
upright,  and  we  conscientiously  feel
that  we  are  in  the  line  of  our  duty,
living  in  the  tear  of  God  and  are
enabled  to  cleave  to  him  and  keep
his  commandments,  and  walk  in  ac-
cordance with  his  precepts,  all  is
right.  No  matter  whether  we  live
long  or  short,  it.  makes  no  difference,
God  hike:*  care  ot  his  people,  and  all
is  well.

])•>  we  have  trials? Yes,  and  it
is  necessary  that  we  should  j  but
whatever  you  do,  let  nut  your  trials
interfere  with  your  unties  and  re-
sponsibilities to  God. If  troubles  do
come  along,  and  we  find  it  hard  to
battle  with  the  things  of  life,  never
mind,  let  us  cleave  to  God,  to  truth,
to  virtue,  to  righteousness,  and  main-


tain  our  integrity,  and  we  will  always
feel  that  God  is  our  friend,  and  that
jill  is  well.  We  will  feel  like  saying,
let  the  winds  blow,  and  the  rain
descend,  and  the  storms  come,  uo
matter  what  position  we  occupy,  if
God  givea  us  power  to  breast  the
conflict,  if  we  keep  the  command-
ments of  God,  and  have  our  faith
and  hopes  centered  in  the  Lord  be-
yond the  vail,  we  shall  feel  that  God
is  our  Father  and  friend,  and  we  are
his  children,  and  that  he  will  own  us
and  take  care  of  us  in  time  well  as
in  the  eternities  to  come.

Well,  what  about  others?  Are
you  not  very  prescriptive  in  your
feelings?  No,  nor  at  all.  I  a  a
willing,  as  an  individual,  to  endure
anything  that  God  may  be  pleased
to  place  upon  me,  inasmuch  as  I
have  his  grace  to  sustain  me.  I  can
do  nothing  of  myself,  neither  can
you,  without  the  divine  assistance.
Have  I  my  weaknesses  ?  Yes.  Have
you  weaknesses  ?  Yes.  Are  any  of
us  perfect  ?  No.  We  are  placed  in
this  world  to  prove  n*.  What  shall
we  do  ?  Why,  fear  the  Lord  and
do  the  best  we  can,  trusting  in  him.
If  we  do  that,  all. is  rght  pertaining
to  the  future.  But  what  are  we  all
aiming  at?  I  am  looking  for  a
celestial  glory.  I  want  to  be  associ-
ated with  the  Church  of  the  first-
horn,  whose  names  are  written  in
the  heavens,  and  with  Prophets  and
Apostles,  and  with  all  the  holy  men
of  God  who  were  inspired  with  the
saute  hopes,  win*  lived  generations
ago,  as  well  as  with  such  men  who
now  live.  If  1  can  only  ti^ht  the
good  fight  of  faith,  and  lay  hold  of
eternal  life,  then  all  is  right.  What
of  others?  They  are  in  the  hands
of  God,  and  so  are  we.  Bat  are  we
all  guiug  to  get  into  the  celestial
kingdom?  1  am  afraid  not.  Not
all  the  Litter-day  Saintd?  I  am
afraid  not. We  read  that  rn  my  are


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


called,  but  few  are  chosen.  We  read
also  that  there  were  five  wise  and
five  foolish  virgins.  The  wise  vir-
gins, we  are  told,  had  oil  in  their
lamps,  and  their  lamps  were  trim-
med and  burning.  They  were  pre-
pared to  meet  the  bridegroom  whom
tiny  expicttd.  The  others  bud  no
oil  in  their  lamps  at  (lie  time  the  cry
was  rain-d  1i «t-  all  to  go  forth  and
meet  1  heir  Lord,  They  had  become
careless  and  indifferent,  and  white
the  foolish  virgire  were  away  trying
to  procure  oil  ior  their  lamps,  the
bridgroom  came,  and  only  those  who
were  prepared  to  meet  him  went  in
wjth  him,  when  the  door  was  *hut.
41  Not  every  one  that  Faith  unto  me,
Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  heaven;  but  he  that
eiueth  the  will  ot  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven/'  That  is  the  way  1
rend  these  things.

Now,  then,  we  have  these  princi-
ples before  us,  and  it  is  fur  us  to  do
right,  and  act.  honorably  and  virtu-
ously, uprightly  and  consistently,
and  all  will  be  well-  If  we  do  not,
it  will  not  be  well,  for  every  man
will  be  judged  according  to  the  deeds
done  in  the  body.  And  in  regard
to  olhers  who  receive  not  the  Gospel,
they  too  will  be  judged  according  to
their  works.  Did  God  make  any  of
his  children  for  the  purpose  of  des-
troying them?  I  think  not,  I  think
he  will  do  the  very  best  he  can  with
all  of  us.  But  will  he  take  the  diso-
bedient and  the  careless  and  indif-
ferent ones  into  the  celestial  kingdom,
to  dwell  with  him  and  with  the  just
who  are  made  perfect?  I  think  not.
There  are  bodies  celestial,  bodies  ter-
restrial, and  bodies  telestial,  "  There
is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory
of  the  stars;  for  one  star  differeth
from  another  star  in  glory.  So  also
is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  To
judge  from  these  facts,  does  it  look


to  you  reasonable  that  all  the  Latter-
day  Saints  will  get  into  the  celestial
kingdom  of  our  God  ?  To  me  it
does  not.  But  the  Lord  has  revealed
to  the  children  of  men  many  great
things,  and  has  taught  them  many
great  principles;  it  they  do  not  re-
ceive those  principles,  and  adhere  to
then),  and  keep  his  commandments,
are  they  to  be  damned  and  buried  in
hell  forever? I  think  not.

Some  of  our  sectarian  friends
think  that  we  have  curious  ideas
about  them.  I  tell  you  what  it
arises  from.  We  ate  aiming  at  what
we  term  a  celestial  glory.  They  do
not  understand  this.  Will  they  get
a  gloty  *i  Yes,  they  will  get  all
that  they  are  looking  tor,  just  as
much  as  ihey  C;in  abide,  as  much  ns
it  is  possible  for  God  to  cooler  upon
them  under  the  circumstances.  And
will  i he  heathen  he  saved  ?  Yes,  all
the  children  of  God,  no  matter  by
Mint  ua me  they  are  called,  will  be
saved,  receiving  as  high  a  glory  and
salvation  m  they  ate  capable  of
receiving.  But  are  all  going  to  in-
herit a  celestial  glory  r  No,  but  the
degree  of  their  glory  will  altogether
be  ahead  of  their  ideas  with  legard
to  it.  It  may  doubtless  be  said  of
them,  as  it  was  said  of  others,  that
"eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,
neither  have  entered  the  heart  of
man,  the  things  which  God  bath
prepared  for  them  that  love  him."
These  are  facts  which  we  all  Latter-
day  Saints  entertain,  and  God  does,
aiid  who  Wuuld  raise  an  objection  r

B*  cause  we  have  been  persecuted
and  maltreated,  should  we  entertain
feelings  of  hatred  and  animosity  for
the  human  family  ?  No!  All  good
Latter-day  Saints  who  possess  the
light  and  life  of  Christ,  who  have
thus  suffered,  feel  as  Jesus  did  during
his  moments  of  bitterest  pain,  when
belaid,  "Father,  forgive  them,  for
they  know  not  what  they  do."-  God


RESPECT  TO  THE  DEAD,  ETC*


313


is  the  God  and  Father  of  all  the
spirits  ot  all  flesh  that  now  live,  that
have  lived  through  all  the  ages  of
lime,  and  he  it*  interested  in  the  wel-
fare and  salvation  of  all  ;  but  lie,  as
well  as  we,  is  governed  by  law,  and
btnee  be  is  no  respecter  of  persons,
bat  gives  utiiu  all  according  to  their
works.  I  have  set  my  mark  high,
and  if  God  will  give  me  grace  suffici-
ent to  overcome  every  evil  and  to
surmount  every  trial,  I  intend  to
continue  to  fight  the  good  fight  of
faith,  and  lay  hold  of  eternal  lite.

With  regard  to  .sister  Bourne,  to
whose  remains  we  now  pay  our  last
respects  and  which  lie  before  us,  it  is
all  right,  h  right  !  I  too  have  had
in v  friends  leave  me.  Do  I  feel
fcurry  ?  No.  They  have  gone  and
they  rest  Iroru  earthly  trouble,  and  I
expect,  to  follow  alter  ilium.  I  well
it*  me  ruber  the  conversation  I  had
with  my  father  when  lie  was  about  to
depart  this  life.  I  said,  u  Father,
you  are  going  ?"  He  said,  M  Yes,"
I  then  said,  "That  is  right,  father
jou  came  into  the  world  a  little  be-
fore me,  and  yon  are  leaving  a  little
before.  I  will  not  try  to  disgrace
you,  and  by  and  by  I  will  come  too."
It.  is  true,  we  do  not  like  to  lose  a
gnod,  kind  companion,  a  wife,  a
husband,  a  child,  a  brother,  a  sis*


ter,  or  any  of  our  near  nnd  dear
friends  or  relatives ;  but  we  have  to
do  it,  and  it  is  right  and  proper  that
we  should.  They  go  a  litile  before
us;  when  we  get  there  they  will
receive  and  welcome  us,  and  say,
u  God  bless  you,  you  have  come  at
last,"  That  is  the  way  1  look  at  it.
I  expect  to  strike  hands  and  em  hi  ace
my  friends  who  have  gone  before,
who  have  proved  themselves  faithful
and  true.  Why  should  I  mourn
when  they  leave?  Of  course,  I  like
their  company  and  association,  but  it
was  not  designed  that  I  should
always  have  it  here.  We  came  here
to  live,  and  to  die  that  we  may  live;
and  we  are  all  moving,  moving,
passing  oil  this  stage  of  time.  It  is
J  tor  us  to  prepare  for  the  eternities  to
come,

I  pray  God  to  comfort  the  hearts
of  the  husband,  eh  i  Id  i  en,  relatives
and  friends  of  this  our  depaited
sisier,  and  say,  May  the  peac-*  and
blessings  of  God  be  and  abide  with
you,  and  may  he  lead  us  in  the  pat  lis
1  of  life,  and  enable  us  to  struggle  for
the  glory  and  exaltation  that  are
within  our  reach,  until  we  shall  have
overcome,  and  be  prepared  to  enter
into  the  celestial  kingdom  of  the
Father,  which  may  God  grant  for
Christ's  sake.  Amen.


3H


JUUBNAL  UF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Twentieth  Wabd  Meeting  Hoi  se,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  Deo  3,  1870.


(Reported  hy  Geo,  F.  Gtbbs.)


VlinVHKi  lKS  UXFULHLLKD — CHANGES  IN  THE  CONFIGURATION  OF  THE
ObOBK—  MIRACLES  THE  RESULT  OF  LAWS  NOT  YET  PERFECLY  UNDER-
STOOD—  THE  RE- FORMATION  OF  THE  EARTH— ITS  CHARACTER  DURING
THE  MILLENNIUM  — US  PURIFICATION  BY  FINE — THE  NEW  HEAVENS
AND  THE  HEW  EARTH  —  THE  GOSPEL  THE  CELESTIAL  LAW,  AND  ONLY
PASSPORT  TO  EXISTENCE  ON  A  U  ELKS  IT  A  LIZ  ED  EARTH.


The  following  passages  of  scrip-
ture were  vend — The  2ith  chapter  of
Isaiah,  from  the  1st  to  the  6th
versus,  and  from  the  17th  to  the
2  Mil  verses;  1  he  1  Mi  chapter  of
Revelations,  from  the  ]  2Mi  to  the
17)h  verses;  tin*  3-Hh  chapter  of
Isaiah,  from  the*  1st  to  the  4th  verses;
ami  the  13Mi  chapter  of  Isdah,  Iroin
the  6th  to  the  13 Mi  verses.

Elder  Pratt  then  said — I  have
read  these  passages,  not  with  tike
idea  of  selecting  from  them  an?  one
passage,  but  more  particularly  to
impress  upon  the  congregation  the
fact  that  something  mast  take  place
which  never  lias  been  iu  I  filled*

Since4  the  day  that  Isaiah  lived
and  prophesied  among  the  people,
you  will  admit,  with  me,  that  there
uever  lias  been  a  universal  destruc-
tion of  all  tlie  wicked  and  Mie  traug*
gieasois  from  utf  the  lace  of  the  earth.
1  here  havti  heen  chores  ol  milliuiiS
of  burners  upon  the  earth  since  the
utter-u.ee  ot  this  uropheey  to  the
present  time,  but  th*  wholesale  des~


tr notion  spoken  of  has  never  taken
place.  Yon  will  all  admit  with  me
also  that  the  signs  which  are  to  ap-
pear in  the  heavens,  about  the  time
of  this  universal  destruction  of  the
wickedt  have  not  ujt.  taken  place.
We  are  told  not  only  that  the  snn
shall  be  darkened  in  his  going  forth,
but  the  stars  shall  refuse  their  shin-
ing. It  only  the  sun  were  to  bo
darkened,  the  heathen  nations,  that
could  not  account  for  it,  might  say  it
had  reference  to  some  great  eclipse,
such  as  has  oceurr*  d  in  different
ages;  but  when  they  find  that  all
the  stars  of  heaven  withhold  their
light,  and  there  is  not  even  so  much
as  a  glimmer  ot  Eight,  and  the  sun
too  becomes  as  hhtek  as  sackcloth,
they  cannot  impute  it  to  an  eclipse,
for  an  eclipse  would  not  destroy  the
light  of  the  slurs  that  ate  scattered
over  the  concave  of  heaven.  We
aie  also  told,  in  connection  with  this,
that  the  t^i  Mi  is  to  be  utfi  cieil  as  well
as  Mie  heaven  1  j  bodies;  it  is  to  roil
to  Htkl  fro  like  a  drunken  man,  the


PROPHECIES  UNFULFILLED,  ETC.


mountains  are  to  be  broken  down,
and  the  whole  earth  is  to  be  dissolved,  j
No  such  thing  has  ever  taken  place  I
since  the  day  this  prophecy  was  ut-
tered;  it  is  therefore  yet  to  he  ful-
filled.

Again  Isaiah  in  the  40th  chapter
has  said  that  **  every  valley  shall  be  I
extbeil,  and  every  mountain  and
hul  shall  be  made  low:  and  the
crooked  shall  be  made  sti flight,  and
the  10  ugh  places  phi  in :  and  the  {
glory  uf  the  Loid  shall  be  revealed,
and  all  flesh  shall  *ee  it  together."
Such  an  event  as  that  has  never
occurred,  for  we  have  many  moun-
tains in  all  parts  of  the  earth,  and
the  valleys  are  not  yet  exalted,
neither  are  the  rough  places  made
smooth.  We  are  told  that  not  only
are  the  mountains  to  be  broken
down,  and  (he  valleys  exalted,  and  '
the  rough  pi  whs  made  smooth,  but
the  earth  itself  is  to  be  dissolved.
This  agrees  with  the  prophecies  of
the  Psalmist  David.  He  was  per-
mitted to  see  the  great  day  of  the
corning  of  tie  L*rd,  and  has  de-
scribed it  in  many  of  his  psalms;
among  other  things  which  he  says  I
shall hike  piarc, is that the  hills

should melt,  like  wax at,  the  pre*  i
sence  of  the  Lord. Tiny  of  course  I
will  fall  down  by  the  force  of  gravity,
and  till  up  the  valleys; such  an  event  '
has  never  taken  place  since  the  day
the  pmphtcy  was  unt  ied.  .

We  are  told  also  in  another  place
by  the  Prop! iet  Isaiah,  how  that,
the  servant*  of  <i>d  in  those  notable  \
days  should  edl  upon  the  name  of
the  Lord,  saying,  a  Qo  that  thuu
would st  rend  Die  hetvens,  that  thou
wouldst  come  down  thai  the  moun-
tains might  flow  down  ,at  thy  pre.
sence,  As  when  the  melting  fire
burnetii,  die  tire  causeth  the  waters  )
to  boil,  o*  make  thy  name  known  to
thine  adversaries,  that  the  nations
might tremble  al) thy presence,"  |


which  prayer  shall  be  answered.

Another  thing  is  spoken  of,  be-
sides all  these  changes  that  I  have
named.  There  will  be  a  great  re-
moval  of  certain  portions  of  the
earth.  "The  earth  is  moved  ex-
ceed ingly,"  as  contained  in  the  19th
verse  of  the  24th  chapter  of  Isaiah,
and  in  the  following  verse,  still
referring  to  the  changes  that  this
earth  is  to  undergo,  it  reads,  11  And
shall  be  removed  like  a  cottage.1*
We  are  still  further  told  in  the  same
chapter  that  "the  Lord  maketh
the  earth  empty,  and  maketh  it  waste,
and  turneth  it  upside  down,'*  etc,  j
that  is,  many  portions  of  the  earth
which  now  lie  buried  will  be  thrown
to  the  surface,  and  many  portioos
which  now  are  the  upper  crust  of  the
earth  will  he  turned  under.

The  earth  is  now  divided  into  con-
tinents and  islands.  We  may  ask,
are  these  to  change  their  location  ?
The  answer  is,  yes.  The  Apostle
and  revelator  John,  in  the  6th  chap-
ter of  Revelations,  tells  us  that  be
saw,  in  vision,  after  the  opening  of

ihe  MXth  seal,  mnong  other  remark-
able  things,  that  u  every  mounrain
and  island  were  moved  out  of  their
places/1  Such  islands  as  Great
Britain  will  change  their  location,
as  well  as  those  of  the  Pacific  Ocean
and  all  others  in  like  manner;  and  I
have  no  doubt  there  will  be  a  vast
change  between  the  location  of  con-
tinents and  the  location  of  the  great
oceans  and  seas  at  lh:it  lime.  The
earih  will  doubtless  be  rolled  back
to  I  he  poMtiou  it  lonnerly  occupied.
We  read  that  there  is  to  he  a  restitu-
tion of  nil  things  spoken  of  by  the
mouth  of  all  the  holy  Pmphets.  If
the  ear  til  is  to  be  restored  to  its
former  condition,  as  it  once  existed
si  tun  af  ter  the  creation,  then,  so  far
as  continents  and  oceans  are  con-
cerned, there  will  be  a  restitution
of  those  putM"Tih  of  the  ylole,  as


316


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


well  as  many  things  not  mentions!
in  prophecy

These pas>ages  which  I  havo  read
ocemred  tu  my  mind  principally  af-
ter I  came  to  this  house.  I  had
nothing  particular  to  present  to  the
congregation,  nothing  studied  or
prepared.  I  prefer  to  depend  upon
the  spirit  of  t ho  Lord  to  direct  mo
when  engaged  in  preaching  the
Gospel,  and  my  mind  seems  to  be
directed  to  the  great  events  that  are
to  transpire  in  the  overthrow  and
destruction  of  the  wicked  nations —
the  great  events  to  transpire  in  which
the  sun  will  hi  come  black  as  sack-
cloth, Miid  every  star  withhold  its
)ij*ht  and  cast  ihemselves  down  as
the  failing  of  figs  from  the  fig-tree,
all  of  whieh  will  be  very  remarkable
in  their  nut  tire*

The  Prophet  Joel  says,  "it  shall
come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will
pour  out  my  spirit  upon  all  flesh;
and  your  sons  and  yuur  daughters
fchall  prophesy,  your  old  men  shall
dream  dreamy  your  young  men  shall
see  visions:"  "Ami  I  will  show
wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in  the
earth,  blood,  and  tire,  and  pilhirs  of
amoke«  The  sun  shall  be  turned  into
darkness,  and  the  moon  into  blood,
before  the  great  and  terrible  day  of
the  Lord  come,11  etc.  I  Jo  you  sup-
pose, my  brethren,  that  the  Lord
would  have  inspired  such  men  as
the  Psalmist  David,  the  Prophets
Isaiah,  Joel,  John  the  Re  vela  tor,  as
well  as  many  others,  to  speak  of
events  of  this  description,  which
were  to  take  place  in  the  latter  times,
if  no  such  thing  would  transpire  ?
No,  certainly  not  These  things  too
are  so  frequently  alluded  to  that  we
cannot  have  any  dubiety  upon  our
minds  in  regard  to  the  design  of  the
Lord,

1  have  no  doubt  a  great  many
ch  anges  have  taken  place  upon  our
globe  since  that  great  change  wrought


upon  it  at  the  lime  of  the  creation.
There  certainly  was  a  great  change
wrought  upon  it  then,  forweaie  told
that  when  the  Lord  organized  the
earth  it  was  enveloped  in  a  great
ocean  of  water,  there  being  no  dry
land  in  sight.  But  the  Lord,  by  his
power  and  word,  or,  in  other  words,
by  his  immutable  laws,  caused  that
t he  waters  should  be  gathered  toge-
ther into  one  place,  and  hence  the
dryland  appeared.  1  do  not  suppose
that  this  change  was  effected  in  the
twinkling  of  an  eve;  i  believe  the
Lord  has  certain  established  laws  by
uhich  he  accomplishes  his  wonderful
wotks  pertaining  to  all  his  creations.
How  long  this  (submerged  earth  had
an  existence  before  the  Lord  com-
manded the  great  deep,  that  envel-
oped the  whole  surface  of  the  same,
to  be  removed,  is  not  for  me  to  say  ;
no  one  can  tell  how  many  years,  or
ihousands  of  years,  or  buw  many
millions  ot  years,  this  earth  may
have  existed  in  the  form  of  partial
or  imperfect  organiz  ations  before  this
great  event  happened,  of  which  Hoses
gives  an  account.  The  periods  men-
tions! in  the  history,  as  recorded  in
the  Lt  chapter  of  Genesis,  are  repre-
sented as  beginning  with  the  evening
and  ending  with  the  morning.  Seveu
such  periods  are  mentioned.  How
long  these  periods,  called  days,  were>
I  cannot  tell  ;  it  is  very  evident  they
were  not.  governed  by  the  rotation  of
the  earth  on  its  axis,  because  the  sua
did  not  give  light  during  the  first
three  days  or  periods.  It  was  on
the  fourth  day  that  the  Lord  caused
the  lit;lit  of  the  sun  to  shine  upon
this  little  speck  of  creation.  But
there  were  three  days  prior  to  that,
when  the  sun  did  not  shine  upon  the
earth.  What  then  was  to  distinguish
bet  ween  the  light  and  darkness  we
of  course  cannot  say.  There  was  an
eternity  of  past  duration,  before  the
period,  called  "  the  first  day/*  The


m

PROPHECIES  UNFULFILLED,  ETC.


317


materials  we,  as  Latter- day  Saints,
believe  existed  from  all  eternity,  the
materials  had  no  beginning;  tbey
were  not  created.

There  is  oi)e  particular  to  which  I
wish  to  call  your  attention.  The
ocean  seems  to  have  been  gathered  by
itself,  when  the  dry  land  appeared,
and  whether  or  Dot  there  were  any
islands  at  that  period  of  our  globe's
history,  we  are  not  informed.  You
might  inquire — What  h  is  occasioned
two  great  continents  and  two  great
oceans  intervening  between  them,
and  how  are  we  to  account  for  the
appearance  of  islands  and  seas  as  they
now  exist  ?  These  are  the  results
of  other  changes  since  the  days  of
the  organization  of  this  earth,  as
proclaimed  by  Moses,  The  Hood,  no
duuht,  produced  some  changes  on
the  surface  of  our  globe,  bat  still  I
do  not  believe,  for  a  moment,  that  it
could  have  produced  the  changes  we
now  see.  So  far  as  the  location  of
the  different  islands  and  continents
is  concerned,  we  descend  to  a  period
sine*:  the  flood.  In  the  days  of
Peleg,  we  are  told,  the  earth  was
divided.  This  is  a  very  short  histo-
rical notice  of  a  very  marvelous
event.  If  we  had  the  whole  account
of  this  occurrence  precisely  as  it
transpired,  it  would  certainly  be  ex-
tremely  wonderful.  Supposing  that
the  one  great  ante-deluvian  continent,
which  mast  have  existed  prior  to
that  time,  were  to  be  divided  by
several  thousand  miles  of  water,
would  not  that  be  a  most  wonderful
event  ?

It  may  be  enquired,  what  natural
laws  could  have  performed  such  an
event  ?  I  do  not  pretend  to  say
that  any  regular,  uniform  laws  exist
by  which  it  was  accomplished  ;  but
there  are  laws,  perhaps,  that  finite
man  does  not  comprehend  and  fully
'  understand,  which  might  occasion
the  division  of  the  earth. The  Lord


has  under  his  control  all  the  laws  of
nature,  whether  uniform  or  not.  It
is  just  as  easy  for  the  Lord  to  cause
water  to  stand  up  as  perpendicular
walla,  instanced  in  the  case  of  the
children  of  Israel  crossing  the  Red
Sea,  as  it  is  to  cause  these  waters  to
settle  to  their  common  level.  What
causes  water  to  find  its  level  ?  It  is
the  p;wer  of  God,  and  nothing  else.
We  give  it  the  name  of  gravitation  ;
but  the  power  of  gravitation  is
nothing  more  nor  less  than  rhe  power
God  exercises  upon  the  elements,
producing  uniform  laws.

Has  the  Lord  no  other  laws  ia
operation  but  the  law  of  gravity  ?
Yes,  he  can  cause  the  law  of  gravity
to  be  in  subjection  to  otlier  laws.
For  instance,  a  certain  man  was  cut-
ting down  wood  with  the  Prophet
Elisha  when  his  axe  fell  into  deep
water,  to  all  appearance  lost;  and  the
man  was  somewhat  exercised  about
it,  because  the  axe  was  borrowed*
The  Prophet,  understanding  the  na-
ture of  certain  laws  higher  than  that
of  gravitation,  exercised  the  power
of  the  Priesthood  with  which  he  was
endowed,  commanding  the  iron  to
swim,  and  it  did  so.

Again,  on  another  occasion,  the
Prophet  EHsha,  knowing  that  he
must  succeed  the  Prophet  Ehjah  ia
the  ministry,  and  that  Elij-ih  was
about  to  be  translated  and  taken  to
heaven,  asked  of  him  a  certain  favor
before  he  ascended,  namely,  that  a
double  portion  of  his  (Elijah'*)  spirit
might  rest  upon  him.  Elijah  said
in  response,  "  Thou  hast  asked  a  hard
thing;  nevertheless,  if  thou  secst
me,  when  I  am  taken  from  thee,  it
shall  be  so  unto  thee;  but  if  not,  it
shall  not  be  so."  It  pleaded  the
Lord  to  grant  unto  Elisha  his  desire,
for  he  beheld  the  Prophet  ascend  to
heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  dtawn  by
horses  having  the  appearance  of  fire.
He  then  took  the  mantle  ut  Elijah,


that  fell  from  him,  and  with  it  he
■mote  the  waters  of  the  Jordan,  spy-
ing, "  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of
Elijah  ?"  And  they  parted  hiiher
and  thither,  and  Elisha  went  over  on
dry  ground.  Here,  then,  we  perceive
a  power  greater  than  gravitation.

As  we  have  already  observed,  when
tbe  children  of  Israel  had  passed
over  the  Red  Sen,  the  waters  were
thrown  up  like  walls  on  either  side
of  them;  the  Lord  caused  the  same
waters  to  flow  down  upon  their  ene-
mies, totally  destroying  them.

Again,  while  Israel  was  journeying
in  the  wilderness  we  are  informed
that  they  came  to  tbe  river  Jordcyi,
and  that,  as  the  Priests  who  bore  the
ark  of  the  Covenant  touched  the  watt  r
with  the  soles  of  their  feet,  the  waters
rose  up  in  a  Leap,  and  all  Israel  passed
over  on  dry  ground.

From  these  simple  testimonies  we
have  shown  that  God  controls  the
laws  of  nature.  Again,  the  fact  of
the  Prophet  Elijah  being  taken  up
to  heaven,  records  another  instance
of  the  laws  of  gravitation  King
overcome  by  a  more  powerful  one.
Again,  the  ascension  of  Jesus,  after
he  had  commissioned  his  disciples  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  all  the  world,
was  another  instance  of  the  law  of
gravitation  being  overcome  by  the
power  of  God.  Then  let  no  person
suppose  that  all  the  great  events  that
will  hereafter  transpire  upon  tbe  sur-
face of  land  and  sea,  have  got  to  take
place  hy  reason  of  some  slow  program
fiive  changes,  occupying  hundreds
of  thousands  and  perhaps  millions
of  years,  according  to  the  ideas  of
modern  geologists.  Can  they  show  j
the  way  the  Ljrd  can  govern  and
control  these  things,  bringing  about
events,  in  the  course  of  a  very  short
time,  that  perhaps  would  tuke  mil-
lions of  years  to  accomplish  by  the
mere  progressive  changes,  such  as
are  recognized  by  geologists  ?  How


easy  it  would  he  for  that  same  power
to  be  mace  maniff-st,  in  commanding
tbe  great  ocean  to  leave  its  present
bed  and  to  gather  together  iu  thn
polar  regions  in  our  globe.  One  may
ask,  What  would  lmld  them  there  ?
They  now  occupy  the  common  level
surface  as  near  the  centre  of  gravity
as  they  can,  and  sustain  the  ceniri fa-
gal  force  exercised  by  the  rotation
of  ths  earth  on  its  axis.  If  they
should  be  rolled  back,  whence  they
came  ;  if  a  great  equatorial  continent,
in  oue  continuous  belt,  encircled  the
£>1  >be,  anil  the  two  polar  regions
were  covered  with  oceans,  what
would  hold  them  in  their  position  ?
It  might  be  done  without  infringing
particularly  on  the  laws  of  gravita-
tion. How  easy  it  would  be  for  the
Lord  to  rom press  the  polar  regions
of  our  globe,  and  cause  the  equatorial
regions  to  rise  higher,  so  as  to  balance
the  polar  waters,  and  retain  them  in
the  arctic  and  antarctic  regions.

It  may  be  objected,  that  should
such  a  condition  exist,  even  though
we  should  admit  the  power  of  God
in  thus  dividing  the  waters,  and
giving  us  an  equatorial  continent,
yet  this  would  not  protect  the  inha-
bitants of  the  equator  from  the
burning  heat  of  the  sun,  and  it
would  be  utterly  impossible  for  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  inhabit
the  equatorial  region,  if  this  should
be  the  case  How  easy  it  would  be
for  the  Lord  to  alter  the  position  of
the  earth's  axis,  giving  it  a  greater
inclination  to  the  plane  of  the  eclip-
tic, so  that  the  two  tropics  should
extend  thirty-five  or  forty  degrees
north  and  south  of  the  equator.
What  effect  would  this  have?  It
would  have  the  effect  of  giving
greater  heat  to  the  poles,  and  also
of  giving  less  heat  to  the  equator.

The  earth  will  be  shaped  into  the
form  best  adapted  to  the  occupation
of  a  higher  order  of  beings.  Now,


PROPHECIES  UNFULFILLED,  ETC


319


children  of  mortality  occupy  this
globe.  In  some  portions  of  the  1
earth  we  suffer  extremes  of  heat  and  j
cold.  The  Laplander  has  guarded
against  this  in  his  snow  house,
while  the  people  of  the  torrid  re-  j
gions  have  to  guard  against  intense  j
heat  And  there  is  much  suffering  ;
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  in  ,
their  present  state  of  mortality,
from  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.
But  in  relation  to  the  great  event  I  |
have  named,  I  haveuio  doubt  but
what  everv  motion  and  arrangement
that  the  Lord  will  cause  to  take
place  upon  the  surface  of  our  globe,
will  have  a  tendency  to  prepare  it
for  the  habitation  of  beings  of  a
higher  order  of  intelligence  than
those  who  now  occupy  it  In  testi-
mony of  this,  we  will  refer  you  to
some  few  passages  of  Scripture.
The  inhabitants  of  the  heavens,  who
now  reside  in  the  presence  of  God
the  Father,  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,
do  pot  always  expect  to  reside  there;
they  have  anticipations  as  well  as
we.  And  they  expect  to  receive
another  place  or  location  than  where
they  now  reside.  Have  you  not
read  that  peculiar  passage  contained
in  the  5th  chapter  of  the  Revela
tw  :  .  in  relation  to  the  inhabitants
of  heaven?  The  Revelator,  John,
heard  them  sins;  a  new  and  beauti-
ful  song,  about  the  unsealing  of  a
certain  book — "  Thou  art  worthy  to
take  the  hook,  and  to  open  the  seals
thereof;  for  thou  wast  slain  and
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy
blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation ;
And  hast  made  us  unto  our  God
kings  and  priests  :  and  we  shall
reign  on  the  earth,"  eta  ,

What !  the  inhabitants  of  heaven
coming  to  reign  on  this  earth  %  Yes,
Some  of  you  may  say,  u  I  should  not
think  that  heavenly  people  would 1
want  to  leave  the  presence  of  God


and  the  Lamb,  where  all  is  peace
and  happiness,  where  there  is  no  sin
to  mar  the  peace  of  that  blessed
abode.  I  should  not  suppose  that
they  could  anticipate  joy  in  coming
back  to  this  earth."  But  the  earth
is  to  undergo  a  change  in  which  it
will  be  sanctified  and  made  glorious
when  the  sinners  are  destroyed.
When  the  Lord  performs  what  I
have  read  to  you,  namely,  that  the
inhabitants  of  the  eartli  are  to  be
burned  up,  and  few  men  left  ;  and
all  the  armies  of  the  wicked  slauifh-
tered.  And  when  the  prediction  of
Isaiah  is  fulfilled,  that  the  slain  will
be  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the
other,  and  the  earth  changed  in  its
position,  and  a  beautiful  climate
introduced,  and  all  the  dry  ground
made  habitable,  and  the  rough  places
made  smooth,  the  valleys  raised,  and
the  mountains  levelled  down,  1  think
they  will  then  delight  to  come  here.
Because  this  is  their  old  home,  where
they  once  lived.  ''Thou  hast  re-
deemed us  to  God  by  thy  blood  out
of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and
people,  and  nation  ;  And  hast  made
us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests :
and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth/'

How  will  they  reign  f  Will  they
come  here  as  spiritual  personages
without  bodies  of  flesh  and  bones  ?
No.  There  will  be  a  resurrection,
and  when  these  great  events  take
place  on  the  earth,  which  are  so
clearly  predicted  by  so  many  of  the
ancient  worthies,  who  held  com-
munion with  God,  the  graves  will
give  up  the  righteous  dead.  The
Saints  who  were  heard  singing  that
new  and  beautiful  song,  even  the
spirit  of  the  just,  will  come  from  the
celestial  paradise  to  claim  their  re-
surrected bodies,  no  more  to  be  sub-
ject to  death — they  will  be  immortal
and  eternal.  They  will  have  intelli-
gence in  proportion  to  that  exalted
condition  of  their  spirits  and  bodies


320


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  the  earth  will  he  adapted  to
them  as  a  dwelling-place.  This  is
the  reason  why  these  changes  are  to
take  place.

Ideologists  .say  it  would  take  some
millions  of  year*  to  effect  any  changes
of  the  earth  in  regard  to  the  loca-
tion of  its  continents  and  islands,
and  a  great  n timber  of  intelligent,
readers  are  inclined  to  this  belief.
But  there  is  a  (»od  who  will  disap-
point them  all,  who  will  show  forth
his  power,  causing  the  earth  to  rock-
to  and  fro  like  a  drunken  man  ;  a
God  whose  power  is  able  to  cause
*  the  mountains  to  be  cast  down,  and
the  valleys  to  come  up.  When  it
rains  upon  the  exalted  valleys,  it
will  wash  down  the  rich  soil  upon
the  rocky  mountains  which  have
sunk  beneath,  making  them  fertile  ;
and  thus  the  whole  surface  of  the
earth  will  become  a  fit  abode  for
man  in  his  improved  and  perfected
state,  whether  immortal  or  mortal

**  Do  you  think/1  one  may  say,
"  there  will  be  mortal  beings  living
on  the  earth,  when  these  heavenly
hosts  come]"  Yes,  and  they  will
dwell  together.  What,  people  not
subject  to  sickness,  or  to  sorrow,  or
punishment,  people  whose  bodies
are  celestial  and  immortal,  who  will
endure  in  their  bodies  to  all  eternity !
Will  they  mingle  with  mortal  beings  1
Yes  Have  we  any  Scripture  to
sustain  us  in  this?  Yes.  Our
Savior  was  immortal  when  he  arose
from  the  tomb,  his  body  of  flesh  and
bones  was  no  longer  sensitive  to
pain  ;  it  was  a  glorified,  immortal,
and  eternal  body.  Could  he  mingle
with  the  children  of  mortality  1
Yes,  for  on  a  certain  occasion  the
Apostles,  doubtless  thinking  the
Savior  to  be  dead,  went  to  their  nets,
their  former  pursuit  But  Jesus
knowing  their  hearts,  went  to  the
sea-shore  and  there  made  a  fire.
By  and  by  he  called  them  to  land,


ami  they  came.  He  took  a  fish  and
broiled  it  on  the  coals,  and  gave  it
to  them  to  eat,  and  lie  ate  with
them.  He  was  immortal,  they  wore
mortal.  Was  there  any  perceptible
difference  between  the  appearance
of  the  Savior  on  this  occasion,  and
Ins  disciples  1  No  ;  he  did  not  per-
mit his  glory  to  shine  forth,  as  he
did  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  when
John  received  his  heavenly  mani-
festations. His  glory  was  withheld,
and  they  had  no  difficulty  in  look-
ing upon  his  person.

I  have  no  doubt  there  will  be  a
certain  degree  of  the  glory  of  the
immortal  beings  withheld  from  the
children  of  mortality,  during  the
whole  period  of  the  millennium.
Kings  and  priests  will  come  here  to
reign,  and  will  mingle  freely  among
their  children  of  whom  they  are
ancestors.  And  those  who  are
mortal  can  receive  instruction  from
those  who  are  immortal,  that  will
prepare  them  for  the  time  when  the
earth  is  to  undergo  a  still  greater
change  The  children  of  mortality
will  need  this  preparation  in  order
to  live  when  this  earth  is  burning
up.  which  is  to  be  its  final  destiny.

When  Jesus  comes,  the  events
that  I  have  named  will  take  place.
The  earth  is  destined  to  pass  away  ;
after  these  immortal  beings  have
dwelt  upon  it  for  one  thousand
years,  after*  Jesus  has  been  here
reigning  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord
of  lords,  and  people  have  become
familiar  with  him  and  all  the  an-
cients, by  and  by  the  earth  will  be
burned  up.  You  may  inquire,
"  What  is  the  use  of  burning  it  up  V
I  tell  you  my  reason  why  I  suppose
the  earth  will  be  burnt  up.  It  has
been  cursed  by  reason  of  the  fall.
In  the  early  ages  God  said,  "  Cursed
is  the  ground  for  thy  sake ;  in  sor-
row thou  shalt  eat  of  at  all  the  days
of  thy  life,"  etc. That  curse  has  ^


PROPHECIES  UNFULFILLED,  ETC


321


not  been  fully  removed  to  this  day,
the  earth  has  groaned  under  wicked-
ness. Its  inhabitants  have  had  to
suffer  all  the  inclemencies  of  a  rigid
climate  or  the  intensities  of  heat  and
cold.  Millions  have  thus  suffered
for  many  thousands  of  years,  all  in
consequence  of  the  curse  that  came
upon  this  creation.  This  curse  is  not
all  to  he  removed,  at  once,  it  will  be
mnoved,  in  part,  during  the  Mille-
nium* The  curse  will  not  occupy
the  whole  face  of  the  earth  to  the
game  extent  during  that  time  as  it
has  during  the  days  of  wickedness.
But  so  urt'Ht  has  been  the  curse  thai
Gad  decm  d  that  it  *honl I  suffer
death  like  unto  man  ;  it  cannot  escape
it,  the  change  must  come,  the  final
change,  which  in  equivalent  to  death
itself,  The  Prophet  Isaiah  ppeaks
of  the  earth  dying:  "And  they
that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like
manner/1  As  it  shall  die,  so  shall
all  who  dwell  upon  it.  When  shall
it  see  death  ?  Not  until  after  the
Millennium,  after  the  reign  of  right-
eousness for  the  space  of  one  thou-
sand years;  after,  too,  "the  little
season,"  during  which  period  of  time
Satan  will  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison.
It  will  continue  in  its  temporal  state
with  a  portion  of  the  curse  upon  its
face,  until  the  drvil  shall  gather
together  his  armies  at  the  end  of  the
thousand  years,  when  he  will  marshal
them,  bringing  them  up  on  the
breadth  of  the  earth,  and  compassing
the  camp  of  the  Saints  and  the  be-
loved  city,  Then  the  Lord  will  make
the  final  change;  then  the  last  trump
will  sound,  which  will  bring  forth  all
the  sleeping  nations  ;  they  will  come
forth  with  immortal  bodies  no  more
to  be  subject  to  temporal  death.
They  will  come  forth  from  their
sleeping  tombs,  and  the  sea  will  give
up  the  dead  which  is  in  it.  The
grave§  of  the  wicked  will  be  opened,
and  they  will  come  forth ;  and  a  great

No.  21.


white  throne  will  appear,  as  recorded
in  the  20th  chapter  of  Revelations,
and  the  personage  who  sits  on  it  is
described.  Jesus  comes  then  in  his
glory  and  power,  in  a  manner  far
greater  than  has  ever  been  mani-
fested on  this  earth  before;  so  great
will  be  the  glory  of  him  who  sits
upon  the  throne,  that  from  before  his*
face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  will
flee  away,  and  no  place  shall  be  found
for  them.

Will  not  that  be  a  greater  change
than  casting  down  the  mountains,
etc,  which  is  to  take  place  at  the
beginning  of  the  Millennium  r  The
earth  is  to  b"  burnt  by  lire,  return*
ing  to  its  original  elements.  It  does
rmt  say  there  shall  be  no  place  found
lor  the  elements,  but  there  shall  be.no
place  found  for  the  organized  world.
Like  ourselves,  the  organization  of
the  mortal  body  will  cease, -it  will
be  finally  dissolved,  and  the  elements
of  which  it  is  composed  will  be  scat-
tered in  space ;  but  that  same  God
tin* t  controls  the  laws  by  which  it
exists  now  will  in  due  time,  and  when
he  sees  proper,  speak  to  these  ele-
ments, and  by  his  Almighty  power
they  will  again  come  together,  and
be  formed  into  a  new  earth,  as  is
clearly  portrayed  in  the  21st  chap  er
of  St,  John's  Revelations,  The
Apostle  not  only  saw  the  heaven  and
the  earth  pass  away,  but  he  siw  ua
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  lor  tne
first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were
passed  away."

How  do  yon  suppose  this  new
earth  will  be  made  Y  Do  yon  sup-
pose the  Lord  will  gfo  away  into  tha
immensity  of  space,  and  gather  toge-
ther new  materials  and  command
them  to  be  organized  ?  No,  he  will
take  the  same  materials,  the  elements
which  will  have  been  dissolved  ny
fire,  and  lie  will  command  them  ag  na
to  be  reorganized,  adapting  the  lefur-
rected  creation  to  the  condition  *f

Vol,  xvm.


the  inhabitants  that  will  occupy  it,  I
It  will  then  l»e  far  more  glorious  than
it  will  appear,  during  the  thousand
yearn  of  rest  ;  it  will  then  be  reor-
ganized by  Almighty  God  in  the
most  perfect  furm,  so  that  it  shall  be
capable  of  eternal  and  everlasting
endurance,  no  more  to  he  dissolved,
no  more  to  suffer  from  the  action  of
the  elements  one  upon  the  other,  as
has  Uvn  the  case  with  this  earth,
during  its  temporal  existence.  But
it  will  continue  to  all  eternity,  and
who  are  to  inhabit  it  ?  The  Saints
who  have  before  lived  upon  it,  du-
ring the  seven  thousand  years  of  its
temporal  existence.

Have  we  any  account  to  sustain
us  in  this  ?  Yes,  for  after  John  saw
the  new  heaven  and  new  earth,  the
next  thing  he  tells  us  of  is  the  popu-
lation of  the  new  earth,  "  I  John
saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,
coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her
husband.  And  I  heard  a  great  voice
out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the
tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and
he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they
shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself
shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.
And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears
from  their  eyes,  and  there  shall  be  no
more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  cry-
ing, neither  shall  these  be  any  more
pain,  for  the  former  things  are  passed
away,"

The  earth  then  will  be  made  new,
immortal,  eternal  in  its  nature;  and
holy  beings  that  John  saw  come  down
in  this  holy  city  will  be  its  inhabi-
tants* No  more  death,  no  more  sor-
row, etc, ;  in  other  words,  this  earth,
this  creation,  will  become  a  heaven.
The  heavens  that  exist  now  are  innu-
merable to  man.  God  has  from  all
eternity  been  organizing,  redeeming
and  perfecting  creations  in  the  im-
mensity of  space ;  all  of  which,  when
they  are  sancti&ed  by  celestial  law,


and  marie  new  and  eternal,  become
the  abode  of  the  faithful  former  in-
habitanff,  who  also  become  immortal,
through  and  by  celestial  law.  They
are  the  mansions  referred  to  by  tba
Savior — "In  my  Father's  house  are
many  mansions,'*  In  ot  her  words,  we
may  say,  In  our  Father's  dominions
are  many  mansions.  They  are  not
like  mansions  built  by  men,  they  are
worlds  of  greater  and  lesser  magni-
tude. The  first  grade  are  exalted,
celestial  bodies,  from  which  celestial
light  will  radiate  through  the  im-
mensity of  space.

We  are  anxiously  praying  to  dwell
in  the  presence  of  God  the  Father,
when  we  depart  this  lite.  Where
will  it  \>e  ?  He  will  dwell  with  man
upon  the  earth.  Will  this  con6ne
him  to  this  earth  ?  No,  not  any
more  than  the  kings  of  the  earth  are
confined  to  their  palaces,  or  the  city
in  which  they  may  dwell.  They
have  the  right  to  visit  the  different
portions  of  their  dominions  and  even
any  parts  of  the  earth.  So  will  God
our  Eternal  Father,  when  he  selects
this  earth  as  a  habitation,  make  it  as
one  of  his  dwelling  places,  but  he
will  have  power  to  go  from  one  celes-
tial world  to  another,  to  visit  the  my-
riads of  creations,  as  may  seem  to
bira  good.

In  thus  referring  to  the  changes
that  the  earth  must  undergo  we  might
ask,  Are  we  living  now  so  as  to  be
prepared  for  all  the  dispensations  of
God's  providence  ?  Are  we  pre-
pared to  receive  our  inheritance  upon
this  earth,  when  it  shall  be  made
eternal  ?  If  we  keep  the  celestial
law  which  God  sliall  give  to  us ;  or
in  other  words,  if  we  are  born  first
of  the  water  by  baptism,  and  then
of  the  spirit  by  the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  if  we  con-
tinue to  walk  in  this  spirit  in  newness
of  life,  being  new  creatures  before
the  Lord  our  God,  and  becoming


PR0PHECIE8  UNFULFILLED,  ETC.


313


sanctified  by  tbe  celestial  law,  even
the  law  of  the  Gospel,£we  will  then
be  prepared  to  inherit  this  creation,
when  it  shall  be  made  new,  and  sanc-
tified, and  become  immortal.

If  we  are  not  thus  prepared,  where
shall  we  go  ?  God  is  the  author  of
many  creations  besides  tho*e  that  are
celestial.  He  will  prepare  a  creation
just  adapted  to  the  condition  of  such
people — those  who  are  not  sanctified
by  the  Gospel  in  all  its  fullness,  and
who  do  not  endure  faithful  to  the
end,  will  find  themselves  located  upon
one  of  the  lower  creations,  where  the
glory  of  God  will  not  be  made  mani-
fest to  the  same  extent.  There  they
will  be  governed  by  laws  adapted  to
their  inferior  capacity  and  to  the  con-
dition which  they  will  have  plunged
themselves  in.  They  will  not  only
suffer  after  this  life,  but  will  fail  to
receive  glory  and  power  and  exalta-
tion in  the  presence  of  God  the  Eternal
Father;  they  will  fall  to  receive  an


everlasting  inheritance  upon  this
earth,  in  its  glorified  and  immortal
state. J  Therefore  how  careful  the
Latter-day  Saints  should  be  in  order
to  merit  the  association  of  the  happy
throng  whom  John  heard  singing
that  new  song.  We  desire  our  inhe-
ritance on  this  earth  as  well  as  they.
It  they  could  rejoice  in  anticipation
of  receiving  an  inheritance  on  the
earth,  how  much  more  can  we  who
know  compartively  nothing  of  the
joys  of  heaven,  when  our  globe  will
be  glorified,  a  fit  habitation  for  im-
mortal, glorified  beings.

Let  us  keep  the  commandments  of
the  Most  High  ;  let  us  so  order  our
lives  that  we  can  have  a  claim  upon
the  Father,  looking  forward  to  that
period  of  time  when  these  mortal
bodies,  which  must  slumber  in  the
dust,  will  come  forth  from  the  grave,
fiishioned  after  the  likeness  of  his
most  glorious  body,  to  inherit  the
same  glory  with  him.  Amen.


A  FUNERAL  SERMON,
PREACHED  BY ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,


At  the  7th  Ward  Meeting  House,  Salt  Lake  City,  ok  Sunday  After*
hook,  Dec*  31,  1870,  over  the  remains  qf^Anx  Tenora,  the  wife  of
Isaac  VVaddell  ;  and  also  over  the  remains  of  Gboros  Wm  boh  of
Edward  Callister.


(Reported  by  Geo.  P.  Gibbs.)

BURIAL  SERVICES,  AN  ANCIENT  PRACTICE  — GOD,  THE  GOD  OF  THE
LIVING — KEYS  COMMITTED  TO  JOSEPH  SMITH*  THE  LAST  DISPENSA-
TION— JESUS  THE  GREAT  REDEEMER— AN  EVERLASTING  PRIESTHOOD
— THE  POWERS  OF  THE  RESURRECTION — SCRIPTURAL,  PHILOSOPHICAL,
AND  CERTAIN — SEALING  POWERS  ETERNAL*


After  the  reading  of  the  15th
chapter  of  1st  Corinthians,  com-
mencing at  the  20th  verso,  by  Elder
David  McKenzie,  Elder  Taylor  said  :

It  is  a  sad  thing  to  meet  together
as  we  have  done  on  the  present  oc-
casion, and  to  8nd  here  two  of  our
friends  from  different  families  who
have  been  smitten  by  the  hand  of
the  f  i  est  rover,  thus  having  to  attend
to  a  double  funeral  ceremony.  It
seems  to  be  my  lot  to-day  to  be  mixed
up  with  these  matters,  for  I  have  just
come  from  attending  to  one  funeral
in  the  14th  Ward  ;  and  now  I  meet
again  with  you  to  join  in  praying  our
last  sad  respects  to  the  departed  dead.
There  is  something  about  these  things
that  touches  the  most  sympathetic
feelings  of  human  nature.  God  hav-
ing planted  these  things  in  our
bosoms,  I  presume  it  is  right  and
proper  that  they  should  be  exercised
and  cherished.  I

In  reading  the  history  of  some  of
the  ancient  men  of  God,  such,  for  ;


instance,  as  Jacob,  Joseph,  Abra-
ham and  others,  there  was  great  reve-
rence and  respect  evinced  towards
them,  not  only  by  their  friends  and
relatives,  but  by  strangers.  On  the
death  of  Jacob  there  was  a  very  large
concourse  of  people  assembled  from
the  land  of  Egypt,  including  u  The
servants  of  Pharoah,  the  Elders  of
his  house,  and  all  the  Eiders  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  and  all  the  house  of
Joseph  and  his  brethren  and  his  fa-
ther's house  And  there  went  up
with  him  both  chariots  and  horsemen,
and  it  was  a  very  greut  company^
and  they  mourned  with  a  great  and
very  hove  lamentation,"  The  Egypt-
ians joined  with  the  relatives  in
mourning  his  death.  The  same
feeling  was  manifested  when  Joseph
and  others  died*  Then  were  feelinga
of  sympathy  manifested  towards  the
bereaved  and  also  towards  the  dead.
These  feelings  exist  more  or  less
among  us.  We,  like  them,  hava
ideas  pertaining  to  the  future,  that


are  pregnant  with  importance  and
that  are  full  of  interest  to  every  re*
fleet ive  mind.

When  Abraham  died,  Isaac  knew
that  he  was  a  man  of  God ;  he  had
unquestionably  heard  his  father  talk
over  communications  he  had  had
with  God,  and  he  doubtless  knew
very  well,  when  he  was  tnken  by  his
father  to  be  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice,
that  it  was  in  obedience  to  a  com-
mandment of  God ;  he  knew  very
well  that  his  father  had  communi-
cations with  the  Lord  and  received
revelations  from  him,  and  that  be
had  distinct  and  correct  ideas  also  in
regard  to  the  future,  Jesus,  you  will
remember,  in  speak irg  of  Abraham,
said,  61  A brali am  saw  my  day  and
was  glad,11  Abraham  bad  promises
made  to  him  pertaining  to  the  land
of  Palestine,  that  were  not  really
fulfilled  in  his  time;  and  Stephen,
soon  after  the  Savior  of  the  world
died,  in  talking  about  Abraham,  said
that  God  had  promised  it  to  his  seed ;
and .  yet,  says  Stephen,  the  Lord
"gave  him  none  inheritance  in  it  ;  no
not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  ;
yet  he  promised  that  he  would  give
it  to  liira  for  a  possession,  and  his
seed  after  him,  when  as  yet  he  had
no  child."  There  aie  men  now  liv-
ing among  the  descendants  of  Abra-
ham, who  expect  to  see  that  promise
fulfilled,  when  his  descendants  will
again  inherit  that  land  of  promise,
and  when  all  things  spoken  of  by  the
mouth  of  the  Prophets  will  be  ac-
complished. The  measuring  line  will
yet  go  forth  again  in  Jerusalem,  and
Jerusalem  will  yet  be  inhabited  on
its  own  place,  even  in  Jerusalem,
Abraham  will  vet  realize  the  fulfill-
ment  of  the  promises  made  to  hirn
and  will  stand  in  his  proper  place  and
position  as  their  father  and  the  pro-
per representative  of 'his  seed  in  the
grand  jubilee  in  this  earth,  when
the  pur  poses  of  God  shall  be  accom-


|  plished  pertaining  thereunto.

In  connection  with  this  it  was  said
on  a  certain  occasion,  11 1  am  the
God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of
Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob?  God
is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of
the  living."  We  also  find  a  state-
ment in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Coven  ants,  referring  to  father  Jo-
seph Smith  and  others,  who  it  is
said  "sitteth  with  Abraham  at  his
right  hand."  Consequently  Abra-
ham lives,  and  not  only  Abraham,
but  father  Joseph  Smith,  as  well  as
many  others  of  our  brethren  with
whom  we  have  been  acquainted,  who
have  died  true  and  faithful  to  the
cause.  From  another  revelation,
pertaining  to  one  of  the  High  Coun-
cils that  was  organized,  we  learn
that  God  had  taken  them  to  himself
and  that  they  retained  their  Priest-
hood, that  it  belonged  to  them,  and
no  man  could  take  it  from  them,  and
that  they  were  with  the  Lord.

In  relation  to  these  things  there
is  something  very  interesting  to  all
right. minded  persons  who  are  good
and  faithful  Latter-day  Saints.  We
believe  that  these  men  of  whom  we
have  spoken,  as  well  as  Adam,  Seth,
Noah,  Enoch,  Methuselah  and  all
"  the  Church  of  the  first- burn  whose
names  are  written  in  heaven"  have
their  proper  position  there,  as  well  as
the  Apostles  who  lived  cotempoiary
with  the  Savior.  Of  these  worthies
it  is  said  that  when  Jesos  slmll  come
they  will  come  with  him,  clothed
with  power  and  glory*  In  another
place  we  are  told  that  they,  the
Apostles,  will  "sit  upon  twelve
thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel."

Again,  there  are  other  things  as-
sociated with  these  matters,  all
bearing  more  or  less  upon  the  same
points.  When  God  selected  Joseph
Smith  to  open  up  the  last  diapensa-

I  tion,  which  is  called  the  dispensa-


328  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


tion  of  the  fullness  of  times,  the
Father  and  the  Son  appt-ared  to
him,  arrayed  in  glory,  and  the
Father,  addressing  himself  to  Jo-
seph, at  the  same  time  pointing  to
the  Son,  said,  '*  This  is  my  beloved
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased;
hear  ye  him/'  As  there  were  great
and  important  events  to  be  intro-
duced into  the  world  associated  with
the  interests  of  humanity,  not  only
with  the  people  that  now  are,  but
with  all  people  that  have  ever  lived
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  as
what  is  termed  the  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times  was  about  to
be  ushered  in,  Moroni,  who  held  the
keys  of  the  unfolding  of  the  Book
of  Mormon,  which  is  a  record  of  the
people  who  lived  upon  this  American
continent,  came  to  Joseph  Smith  and
revealed  to  him  certain  things  per-
taining to  the  peoples  who  had  lived
here  and  the  dealings  of  God  with
them,  and  also  in  regard  to  events
that  are  to  transpire  on  this  conti-
nent. |

Then  comes  another  personage,
whose  name  is  John  the  Baptist.
He  ordained  the  Prophet  Joseph  to
that  portion  of  the  Priesthood  of
which  he  held  the  keys,  namely,
the  Aaronie,  or  lesser  Priesthood.
Afterwards  came  Peter,  James  and
John,  who  held  the  keys  of  the
Melcluzedek  Priesthood,  and  of  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times,
they  being  the  hist  in  their  day  to
whom  it  was  committed,  and  there-
fore they  came  to  him  and  revealed
to  him  the  principles  pertaining  to
the  Gospel,  and  the  events  to  be
fulfilled.  Then  we  read  agaiti  of
Elias  or  Elijah,  who  was  to  act  as
a  restorer,  and  who  committed  to
him  the  powers  and  authority  asso-
ciated with  his  position.  Then
Abraham,  who  had  the  Gospel,  the  f
Priesthood  and  Patriarchal  powers,  ]
in  his  day;  and  Moses,  who  stood  I


at  the  head  of  the  gathering  dis-
pensation in  his  day,  and  had  these
powers  conferred  upon  him.  We
are  informed  that  Noah,  who  was  a
Patriarch,  and  all  in  the  line  of  the
Priesthood,  in  every  generation  back
to  Adam,  who  was  the  first  man,
possessed  the  same.  Why  was  it
that  all  these  people  should  be  as-
sociated with  all  these  dispensa-
tions, and  all  could  communicate
with  Joseph  Smith  ?  Because  he
stood  at  the  head  of  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times,  which
comprehends  all  the  various  dis-
pensations that  have  existed  upon
ihe  earth,  and  that  as  the  Gods  in
the  eternal  worlds  and  the  Priest-
hood that  officiated  in  time  and
eternity  had  declared  that  it  was
time  tor  the  issuing  forth  of  all
these  things,  they  all  combined  to-
gether to  impart  to  him  the  keys  of
their  several  missions,  that  he  might
be  fully  competent,  through  the  in-
telligence and  Bid  afforded  him
through  theso  several  parties,  to
introduce  the  Gospel  in  all  its
fullness,  namely,  the  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times,  when,  say  a
the  Apostle  Paul,  "He  might  gather
all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are
in  heaven  and  which  are  in  earth,
even  in  him/'  Consequently  he
,  stood  in  .that  position,  and  hence
his  familiarity  with  all  these  various
dispensations  and  the  men  who  ad-
ministered in  them.  If  you  were
to  ask  Joseph  what  sort  of  a  looking
m;m  Adam  was?,  he  would  tell  you
at  once  ;  he  would  tell  you  his  size
and  appearance  and  ail  about  him*
You  might  have  asked  him  what
sort  of  men  Peter,  James  and  John
were,  and  he  could  have  told  you.
Wh)'  ?  Because  he  had  seen  them.
We  are  living  in  this  dispensation,
which  is  pregnant  with  greater
]  events  than  any  other  dispensation
that  has  ever  existed  on  the  earth,


BURIAL  SERVICES,  ETC.


327


because  in  it  is  embraced  all  that
ever  existed  any  where  among  any
people  of  the  earth.  Hence  why
we  look  upon  Joseph  Smith  as  so
great  and  important  a  character  in
the  world's  history.  I  think  he  was
one  of  the  greatest  Prophets  that
ever  lived,  Jesus  himself  excepted,
Enoch  was  a  great  man,  a  mighty
Prophet,  he  had  a  great  many  sa-
cred and  heavenly  tin  rigs  commit-
ted to  him.  He  performed  a  great
work  in  his  day — he  walked  and
talked  with  God,  he  preached  the
Gospel  and  gathered  the  people  as
we  do,  and  then  he  and  his  city  were
caught  up  to  heaven,  to  return  to
earth  in  the  latter  days*  He  per-
formed his  work  and  after  wards  (Jod
took  him,  How  Joseph  Smith  will
compare  with  him  will  he  better  an*
der stood  when  Zion  is  built  up  arid
redeemed,  and  Enoch's  Zion  comes
down  to  meet  it.  Thev  both  held
important  positions  and  both  will
stand  in  their  lot  as  decreed  by
Jehovah.

Enoch  received  many  revelations
and  obtained  great  power  from  (iud,
and  unquestionably  the  influence  of
that  power  was  felt  by  the  surround-
ing peoples.  tor  when  certain  peo-
ples gathered  themselves  together
against  bun  and  his  people  in  a
belligerent  attitude,  Enoch  stood
forth  and  prophesied,  and  the  ear  th
shook  and  trembled,  and  the  people
stood  alar  olf  and  tied  from  his  pre-
sence. Of  the  [tower  he  possessed,
and  the  heavenly  manifestations  he
had,  we  have  very  little  account.

When  speaking  of  these  various
dispensations,  ideas  altogether  dif-
ferent present  themselves  to  our
minds.  Aly  mind  lias  been  always
more  or  less  engaged  contemplating
the  wonderful  works  of  God,  Even
at  an  early  age,  before'  I  became  ac-
quainted with  ihe  principles  of  our
revealed religion,  I  frequently  u^ed


to  ask  myself,  **  Who  ami?  What
am  I  ?  What  am  I  doing  here  ?
What  is  the  object  of  my  earthly
being  ?  Where  did  I  come  from,
and  where  am  I  going  to  ?"  I  have
since  had  the  same  reflections;  but
now  I  have  a  better  method  of  ar-
riving at  conclusions,  the  Gospel
having1  enlightened  me  in  regard  to
a  great  many  of  these  principles.
When  we  entertain  and  speak  of
the  things  of  God  and  his  dealings
with  humanity,  we  do  not  deal  with
things  small  and  insignificant  in
their  character,  but  with  things  great
and  stupendous,  things  that  are
worthy  the  care  and  supervision  of
ttie  great  God,  When  the  Gods
created  the  earth,  they  did  it  for
certain  purposes.  Having  organized
it  according  to  the  eternal  purposes
of  God,  they  separated  the  waters
from  the  dry  land,  so  that  the  laud
appeared.  They  next  caused  light
to  shine  upon  it  before  the  sun  ap-
peared in  the  firmament  ;  for  God  is
light,  and  in  him  there  is  no  dar  k*
ness.  He  is  the  light  ot  tin*  sun
and  the  power  thereof  by  which  it
was  made;  he  is  also  the  light  of
ihe  moon  and  the  power  by  which  it
was  made;  be  is  the  light  of  the
stars  and  the  power  by  which  they
were  made.  He  says  it  is  the  same
light  that  enlightens  the  understand-
ing of  men.  What,  have  we  a  men-
tal light  and  a  visual  light,  all  pro-
ceeding from  the  same  source  V  Yes,
so  says  the  scripture,  and  so  says
science  when  rightly  comprehended.
All  these  things  wer**  urguu  zed  ac-
cording to  the  eternal  purposes  of
God  in  relation  to  the  eirthon  which
we  IiVl,  and  then  man  was  placed
upon  it  ;  and  alter  wards  the  beasts,
birds  and  fishes  and  seeds  of  every
kind,  everything  hearing  seed  after
its  kind,  having  power  lo  propagate
its  own  species  and  perpetuate  itself
on  the  earth. I  do  not  wish  now  to


*


328  JOURNAL  OF

deal  with  details,  for  that  would  lead
us  from  the  subject.

What  next  ?  Man  is  placed  upon
the  earth.  For  what  ?  The  very
first  command  given  to  him  was  to
be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  replen-
ish the  earth.  Or  iu  other  words,
u  ]  have  put  you  in  possession  of
certain  faculties  for  a  certain  purpose,
I  have  prepoed  the  earth  for  yon-  1
have  my  spints  living  with  me  iu
the  eternal  heavens,  and  in  the  pro-
per time  it  is  my  will  that  they  shall
come  forth  to  inhabit  tabernacles. 11
He  organizes  every  thing  according
to  these  principles.  Then  man  ap-
pears in  a  certain  condition,  and  there
is  but  a  shadow  between  him  and  the
Leavens  that  nothing  but  the  light  of
the  Gospel  crti  remove;  a  forgetful-
ness,  as  if  we  were  puzzled  over  an
uncertain  dream;  a  curtain  is  spread
over  the  whole  human  family,  and
they  are  thruwu  upon  the  world  to
struggle  along  at*  best  ihey  can,  hav-
ing to  contend  against  great  powers
and  unseen  influences  thit  exist  and
whose  object  is  to  w  ar  against  human-
ity. For  Satan  had  already  been
struct, ling  iu  the  heavens  among  the
sons  of  God,  from  whom  he  dissented,
and  thus  he  became  the  devil,  and
they  that  took  sides  with  him  bee- 1 me
his  angels.  We  are  told  they  num-
bered a  third  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,
and  whilst  i\u  v  fought  and  struggled
with  the  Gods  for  the  power  and  su-
premacy, they  were  cast  out  from
heaven  and  they  came  here,  where
Satan  became  the  prince  and  power
of  the  air.  What  to  do  ?  To  tempt
and  try  fallen  man.  They  wander
up  and  down  the  earth  for  this  pur-
pose, thus  man  is  placed  in  a  position
to  be  tried,  combatting  as  he  has  to
do  with  all  manner  of  influences
which  seek  his  overthrow.

While  in  this  condition  it  was  ne-
cessary that  man  should  receive  addi-
tional power  and  intelligence  to  en-


DISCOURSES.

able  him  to  combat  successfully  these
evil  influences ;  hence  the  Gospel  was
revealed  to  him.  If  after  receiving
tli is  light  and  knowledge  he  should
fall  a  prey  to  the  enemy  of  his  soul,
he  would  become  more  or  lesssulject
to  the  rule  of  this  evil  power,  and
thus  suffer  according  to  the  extent
of  hia  fall.  But  if  he  should  contend
against  these  powers  and  spirits  and
against  every  weakness  his  flesh
might  be  heir  to  and  come  off  victo-
rious, he  is  promised  celestial  glory
in  the  eternal  worlds  and  eventually
to  become  as  a  God.

What  next  ?  We  find  the  powers
of  darkness  beginning  to  prevail  in
the  hearts  of  fallen  man.  For  in-
stance, the  first  two  living  sons,  one
of  them  kilted  the  other  and  was  a
murderer.  What  a  prospect  ;  how
the  devil  would  laugh,  saying,  "Since
Cain  has  slain  his  brother  A bel,  there
is  no  sun  remaining  but  a  murderer,
so  what  becomes  of  your  kingdom  ?
But  God  tihve  unto  Adam  another
son  named  Seth,  who  represented  the
interests  oJ  his  father  and  the  inter-
es-Sof  God.  And  in  order  thai  they
should  not  be  led  down  to  the  gates
of  death,  Jesus  was  provided  as  a
Savior,  as  a  lamb  slain  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  earth.  And
hence  Job  said,  "  Deliver  him  from
going  down  to  the  pit  :  I  have  found
a  ransom,1'  God  made  this  provision
in  the  beginning;  he  knew  that  man
would  tall  and  would  pass  through
these  ordeals,  for  known  to  God  are
all  things  from  the  commencement
of  the  world.  It,  is  written  here  iu
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
that  the  planet  on  which  he  lives  is  a
great  Urim  and  Thummirn,  which
reveals  everything  pertaining  to  this
lower  world  and  its  inhabitants.  And
the  holy  beings  who  reside  there  can
gaze  upon  ns  mortals  whenever  they
please,  looking  also  into  the  future  or
the  past;  hence  they  know  it  as  it  is.


BURIAL  SERVICES,  ETC,


329


But  he  provided  n  Savior,  and  in
the  early  ages  of  rime  they  looked
forward  to  the  coming  of  the  Mes-
siah, as  we  now  look  bark  to  it.  Of
the  multitudes  on  the  continent  or
Asia  who  comprehended  these  things,
we  have  very  little  knowledge,  the
accounts  of  what  transpired  among
them  aie  very  ine^rl  On  this  con-
tinent 1 1  ley  spoke  very  plainly  about
tilts  Gospel  and  the  Coming  of  the
Redeemer,  and  although  very  plain
are  quite  limited.  Then  a  great  j
ninny  plain  und  precious  parts  have
been  taken  away  from  the.su  Scrip-
tures.

Do  yon  think  the  Jews  to-day
would  want  to  publish  things  per*
tnining  to  Jesus,  describing  the  man-
ner in  which  he  would  come  r  I
should  think  not.  In  a  conversation
1  once  had  with  Baron  Rothschild  he
asked  me  if  I  believed  in  the  Christ  ?
I  answered  him,  *4  Yes,  (J  ml  has  re-
veidcd  to  ua  that  he  13  the  true  Mes-
siah, and  we  believe  in  him."  I
further  remarked,  *  M  Your  Prophets*
hiive  said,  '  They  shall  look  upon
him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and
they  si  tail  mourn  for  him,  as  une
mourneth  for  his  only  Son.  and  shall
be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that
is  in  bitterness  for  his*  first-born,5
*  And  one  shall  say  unto  him,  What
are  these  wounds  in  t  hy  hands  ?
Then  he  shall  answer,  Those  with
which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house
ot  ray  iricudg.*  "  Do  you  think  the
Jewish  Rubbies  would  refer  vou  to
such  scripture  as  thai?  Said  Mr.
Rothschild,  "  Is  that  in  our  Bible  ?"
*'  That  is  in  your  Bible,  sir."

The  Book  of  Mormon  and  the
Bible  refer  to  many  other  similar
passages  referring  to  tlie  same  event,
as  well  as  passages  referring  to  the
Savior's  birth.  "Behold,"  says
Isaiah,  44  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and
bear1  a  son,  and  shall  Oil  I  his  name
Immanueh" Again  the  Savior  says,


"  Abraham  saw  my  day  and  was
glad.  Ancient  people  of  God,  in
whose  hearts  was  enkindled  the  flame
of  inspiration,  looked  forward  to
that,  memorable  event  when  the
Lamb  slain  from  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world  woul  I  offer  himself
as  a  sacrifice,  whilst  we  look  buck  to
the  pa  me  thing.  We  break  bread
and  eat,  and  we  drink  water  in  the
presence  of  each  other  every  Saohath
day,  and  we  do  it  in  remembrance
of  the  broken  body  and  shed  blood
of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ  ;
and  this  we  will  continue  to  do  until
he  comes  again.  When  he  does
come,  the  Latter  day  Saints  expect
to  be  among  that  favored  number
that  will  eat  arid  drink  with  him  at
his  own  table  in  our  Fathers  king*
dom,  I  expect  this  just  as  much  as
I  expect  to  eat  my  supper  to-
night

There  is  something  truly  grand
in  the  n fleet  ion  of  the  Savior's  re-
turn to  the  earth,  and  man  and  his
fill  and  redemption.  We  read  of
certain  men  that  lived  at  various
times,  who,  by  virtue  of  the  Priest*
hood  they  held,  identified  them  selves*
with  the  cause  of  God,  and  interested
themselves  in  the  redemption  of  the
world.  The  Priesthood  they  had  is
everlasting,  it  administers  in  time
and  eternity;  and  the  men  who
held  it  live  forever,  and  they  con-
tinue to  operate  in  their  several  po-
sitions and  Priesthoods.  Just  as
the  angel  who  appeared  to  John  on
the  island  of  Pat m 03.  The  Apostle
fell  at  the  feet  of  this  heavenly  mes-
senger to  worship  him.  But  tho
angel  said  unto  him,  *'  See  thou  do
it  not;  I  am  thy  fellow  servant,  and
of  tLy  brethren  that  have  the  testi-
mony  of  Jesus:  worship  God/1  And
as  Moses  and  E.ias  who  appeared
to  Jesus  and  to  Peter,  James  and
John  on  the  Mount;  and  as  Moroni,
John  the  Baptist,  Peter,  James  and


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


John  and  others  appeared  to  Joseph
Smith.

1:j  speaking  wit  h  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph once  on  this  subject,  he  traced
it  from  tfit;  tirst  down  to  the  last,
until  he  got  to  the  Ancient  of  Days.
He  wished  me  to  write  something  fur
him  on  this  subject,  but  I  found  it  a
very  difficult  tiling  to  do*  He  had
to  correct  me  several  times.  We  are
told  that  the  "judgment  shall  sit
and  the  books  be  opened."  He  spoke
of  the  various  dispensations  mid  of
those  holding  the  keys  thereof,  and
said  there  would  then  be  a  general
giving  up  or  accounting  tor,  I  wrote
that  each  one  holding  the  keys  of
tie  several  dispensations  would  de-
liver them  up  to  his  predecessor,  from
one  to  another,  uutil  the  whole  king-
dom should  be  delivered  up  to  the
Father,  and  then  God  would  be  "all
in  all."  Said  he,  "  That  is  not
right."  I  wrote  it  ag;iiu,  and  a^ain
he  said  it  was  not  right.  It  is  very
difficult  to  find  language  suitable  to
convey  the  meaning  of  spiritual
things.  The  idea  whs  that  they
should  deliver  up  or  give  an  account
ot  their  administrations,  io  their
several  dispensations,  but  that  the?
would  all  retain  their  several  posi-
tions and  Priesthood.  The  Bible
and  Doctrine  and  Covenants  speaks
about  certain  books  which  should  be
opened;  and  another  book  would  be
opened,  called  t  he  Buok  of  Life,  and
out  of  the  tilings  written  in  these
books  would  men  be  judged  at  the
last  day.

To  continue.  We  Hi  id  Satan  get-
ting great  power.  Enoch  there  ap-
pears, who  is  commissioned  to  go
forth  and  preach  the  Gospel,  as  we
are  doing  in  this  our  age.  He
succeeded  in  converting  people,  and
they  gathered  together  and  built  up
a  city,  and  they  were  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  years  in  becoming
fully  established  in  the  tiuth.  By


the  time  we  shall  have  had  a  little
more  experience  we  perhaps  shall
have*  become  a  little  more  prudent,
realizing  the  position  we  occupy  to
the  authority  of  the  Priesthood  and
power  of  God,  and  our  dependence
upon  Jehovah,  realizing  too  our
own  failings  and  weaknesses,  and
learning  tu  lean  upon  God  and  go
forth  as  his  servants  in  his  holy  fear,
and  developing  within  us  those
nobler  attributes  that  exalt  mail  to
t lie  presence  and  image  of  his  Crear
tor.  This  the  Gospel  will  do  for  us
if  we  will  only  let  it  It  will  bring
us  into  coin municat ion  with  God,
and  through  it  we  shall  know  and
understand  him  and  his  laws,  and
the  principles  of  eternal  truth.

What  next  ?  God  had  to  destroy
the  world.  People  then  were  like
the  corrupt  of  our  age  ;  they  are
crumbling  to  pieces,  and  they  will
continue  to  decay,  for  the  seeds  of
dissolution  are  rooted  in  them,  and
they  in  their  present  condition  can
no  more  be  united  than  you  can
make  a  rope  out  of  sand — the  ma-
terials are  not  cohesive  and  this
nation  will  go  down.  Not  only  our
nation  but  other  nations  will  crum-
ble. Thrones  will  be  cast  down  and
empires  will  be  no  more.  The  w  hole
earth  will  be  shaken  and  men's
hearts  will  fail  them,  in  consequence
of  the  things  that  are  coming  upon
the  earth.  Why  ?  Because  of  all
their  sins  and  iniquities,  and  further
because  they  reject  God  in  rejecting
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  which
is  being  preached  among  them,  lov-
ing darkness  rather  than  light.

Did  God  punish  the  people  an*
ciently  who  thus  rejected  him  and
his  servants  1  Yes,  he  cut  them  off
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and
planted  another  .seed.  Why  i  Be-
cause it  was  just  and  proper  and
right  that  he  should  do  so.  What,
just  to  destroy  a  whole  people?


BURIAL  SERVICES,  ETC


331


Certainly,  it  was  the  very  best  thing
that  he  could  do  for  them.  If  I
were  going  at  itt  I  do  not  know  that
I  could  do  things  any  better.  What,
kill  so  many  millions  of  people  1
Yes.  How  do  you  make  this  uut1
If  I  were  one  of  those  spirits — and
I  expert  I  was  there,  and  perhaps
we  had  a  hand  in  it  for  aught  I
know — if,  I  say,  I  were  one  of  those
spirits  in  the  eternal  world  and  saw
the  corruptions  of  their  hearts  when
the  Gospel  had  been  preached  to
them,  and  the  spirit  of  God  was
withdrawn  from  them,  and  they  left
to  themselves  to  indulge  their  wicked
desires  and  acts,  preparing  them-
selves for  perdition  and  teaching
their  children  iniquity,  I  should
have  felt  like  saying,  4t  0  Lord,  have
we  got  to  go  to  the  earth  and  receive
bodies  through  such  corrupt  men?
Is  it  rii:lit  and  just  that  we  should
endure  tin*  mils  that  they  would
entail  on  us  in  consequence  of  their
sinful  acts  with  which  we  have  had
nothing  to  dof  "  No,"  says  the
Lord,  "I  will  cut  them  off  and
raise  up  a  better  seed/'  He  did  so,
and  by  doing  so  he  prevented  these
wicked  people  f  rom  propagating  their
species.  They  were  all  cast  into
prison,  where  they  remained  until
the  Savior  appeared  among  them,
after  his  crucifixion.  He  opened
their  prison  doors  and  preached  to
them  the  same  Gospel  that  they  had
rejected  and  which  the  Jews  re-
jected. If  these  spirits  in  prison
receive  the  glad  tidings  of  givatjny
and  live  accordingly,  they  will,  as
we  are  informed  by  the  Lord  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
inherit  a  terrestrial  glory,  becau.se
they  were  found  not  worthy  of  pro-
pagating their  species,  they  were
not  worthy  to  become  fathers  and
mothers  of  lives,

Tue  Lord  then  commenced  the
race  again  with  Noai  ,  but  according


to  the  history  we  have  of  his  family r
the  Lnrd  had  to  bear  a  great  deal
with  th°m.  There  was  nothing  very
remarkable  about  them,  they  got
into  trouble  often  enough,  and  t he
prospect  even  then,  judging  after  the
manner  of  men,  was  not  very  flutter-
ing for  poor  humanity.

Since  then  there  lias  teen  a  con-
tinual struggle  between  the  powers
of  darkness  and  the  power  of  God
for  the  mastery.  In  the  days  of
Peleg  the  Lord  divided  the  earth,
hence  the  eastern  and  western  hemi-
sphere, doubtless  thinking  by  doing
so  he  would  have  a  better  opportu-
nity to  preserve  some  of  the  human
family  from  going  down  to  perdition.
But  still  the  devil  found  ready  access
to  the  hearts  of  the  people  generally,
and  many  became  so  corrupt  that
God  had  to  destroy  them.  But  be-
fore allowing  his  justice  to  overtake
them,  he  saved  unto  himself  certain
good  .seed  arid  planted  it  in  different
parts  of  his  vineyard.  He  took  away
the  ten  tribes.  We  do  not  hear  any-
thing  about  them  now,  hut.  we  shall
by  ami  by.  He  brought  the  J  a  red-
its  here,  and  afterwards  the  Nephites
and  Lamanites,  and  placed  others  id
in  other  places.

Next  comes  the  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times,  when  Uod  is  to
gather  together  all  things  in  one,  for
the  Guds  have  decreed,  and  the  an-
cient Prophets  and  Apostles  have
witnessed  to  it,  that  in  the  last  days
thes-e  things  shall  be  accomplished*
It  is  for  this  purpose  the  (jospcl  is
restoied,  nuki  man  placed  again  in
communication  with  Uod,  and  hence
we  have  received  the  Bo^k  of  Mor-
mon as  one  ot  the  events  which  were
to  transpire  in  our  day,  as  it  is
written,  *' The  Jews  shall  hear  the
words  of  the  Nephites,  and  the  Neph-
ites shall  hear  the  words  of  the  Je^s,
and  the  Nephites  and  the  Jews  >hali
heai  the  woidsot'  the  len  tribes/'  He


will  gather  his  word  in  one,  and  will
gather  liis  people  in  one,  even  all
thugs  he  will  gather  together  in
one,  whether  they  be  things  that  are
in  heaven  or  things  on  the  earth;
and  the  powers  and  priesthood  of
Leaven  will  unite  with  the  priest-
loud  on  the  earth  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  purpose.  This  accounts
for  our  coming  to  this  western  land.
We  have  been  influenced  to  pat  her
here  for  a  purpose  which  is  known
to  <  ir  d,  but  hidden  from  the  world.
It  is  said,  "  I  will  take  you  one  of  a
city,  and  two  of  a  family,  and  I  will
bring  von  to  Zion.  And  I  will  give
yon  pastors  according  to  mine  heart,
which  shail  feed  you  with  knowledge
and  understanding."

What  next  ?  When  the  people
shall  have  been  gathered  in  fulfill-
ment of  this  propbecyt  judgments
will  again  be  visited  upon  the  wicked,
as  a  necessary  consequence.  Will
such  visitations  really  take  place?
Yes,  I  know  that  this  part,  too,  of
the  Lord's  designs  will  be  fulfilled,
for  God  revealed  it  to  me  long,  long
ago.  We  need  not  be  too  anxious  for
the  destruction  of  the  wicked,  for  it
will  be  indeed  terrible  when  it  comes;
it  will  make  every  feeling  man  weep
for  sorrow  over  the  trouble  and
affliction  that  will  come,

What  next  ?  Then  we  commence
to  talk  about  the  future,  something
in  which  we  are  all  interested,  and
to  which  our  minds  are  more  imme-
diately drawn  on  such  solemn  occa-
sions as  this.  Savs  Job,  H  If  a  man
die,  shall  he  live  again  ?  All  the
days  of  ray  appointed  time  will  I
wait  till  my  change  come."  All
these  people  who  have  lived  have
died,  and  live  again;  they  have
passed  away,  forgotten  as  a  dream,
or  as  night  at  the  approach  of  the
opening  day.  That  is  so  in  one  sense,
according  to  human  ken;  yet  there
is  a reality associated with  tins


matter,  pregnant  with  importance  to
the  human  family.  We  have  read
here  some  remarks  in  relation  to
these  matters,  and  the  Gospel  un.
folds  these  things  to  onr  view.  We
are  told  that  there  is  a  natural  body,
and  there  is  a  spiritual  body.  The
natural  body  is  sown  in  corruption,
and  it  is  raided  in  ineorruption,  etc.
We  shall  all  puss  away  by  and  by,  as
these  our  friends  have;  they  have
gone  to  sleep  for  a  little  while,  to
rise  again,  and  to  bear  their  part
among  the  sons  and  daughters  of
God  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  we
shall  have  to  follow  and  puss  through
the  same  ordeah  'Mr  is  sown  in
dishonor,  it  is  raised  in  glory  ;  it
is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in
power  j  it  is  sown  a  natural  b  » ly,  it
is  raised  a  spiritual  body."  We,  as
Latterday  Sunts,  comprehend  in
part  these  things,  as  relating  to  the
designs  of  God  pertaining  to  the
human  family.  We  get  a  glimpse
at  some  of  them,  but  we  only  see  in
part,  and  know  in  part ;  this  im-
pcrfcci  state  of  things  will  remain
until  that  which  is  perfect  shall
come,  when  that  which  is  in  part
will  be  done  away.  But  it  is  oar
privilege  now,  through  obedience  to
the  principles  of  t he  Gospel,  to  be
full  of  light  and  life  and  intelligence,
and  t  he  power  of  God,  to  comprehend
correct  principles,  to  walk  in  the
light  as  he  is  in  the  light,  and  to
have  fellowship  with  God  the  P  it  her,
and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  real-
izing aiul  knowing  that  the  atoning
blood  of  Christ  cleanses  from  sin,
and  that  we  are  his  sons  and  daugh-
ters, and  have  a  right  to  the  eternal
glories  that  God  has  prepared  for
those  who  love  him  and  keep  his
Command  ments.

The  Apostle  Paul  in  answer  to
the  question,  M  How  are  the  deal
raised  up,  and  with  what  body  do
they  come?  said,  *'  Thou  fool,  that


BU1UAL  SERVICES,  ETC,


333


which  tboo  sowest  is  not  quickened
except  it  die.  And  that  which  thou
sowest,  thou  sowest  not  that  body
that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain,  it  may
chance  of  wheat,  or  some  other
grain."  I  remember  reading  a  re-
mark made  by  Torn  Payne.  He
said,  "  Thou  fool,  Paul,  that  which
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except
it  die  not.**  Both  of  these  perhaps
are  true.  The  Savior  said,  w  The
maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth
also,  "He  that  believeth  on  me,
though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he
live.  And  whosoever  li veth  and  be-
lieveth in  me  shall  never  die."  Have
theae  oar  friends  gone  to  sleep  ?
Yes ;  but  when  he  who  says,  "  I  am
the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  shall
speak,  the  bodies  we  now  see  lying
lifeless  and  inanimate,  will  be  quick-
ened, bone  shall  come  to  its  bone,
and  sinews  and  flesh  will  cover  them,
until  the  whole  being  will  be  resusci-
tated, and  the  dead,  as  has  been  said,
will  stand  unou  their  feet,  an  ex-
ceeding  great  army.  So  all  man-
kind, the  righteous  and  ili«k  unrighte-
ous, shall  st  stid  before  God,  having
been  quickened  in  the  flash.  "  As
in  Adam  all  died,  so  in  Christ  shall
all  be  made  alive."

What,  will  every  body  be  resur-
rected ?  Yes,  every  living  being  •
"  but  every  man  in  his  owu  order,
Christ  the  first  fruits;  afterward
they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming.
Then  cometh  the  end/'  That  is,
the  Saints  shall  live  and  reign  with
Christ  a  thousand  vears. One  of

M

the  Apostles  says,  "But  the  rest  of
the  dead  live  not  again  until  the
thousand  years  are  expired,"  But
all  must  come  forth  from  the  grave,
some  time  or  other,  in  the  self-same
tabernacles  that  they  possessed  while
living  on  the  earth.  It  will  be  just
as  Ezekiel  lias  described,  it — bone
will  come  to  its  bone,  and  flesh  and
sinew  will  cover  the  skeleton,  and  at


the  Lord's  bidding  breath  will  enter
the  body,  and  we  shall  appear,  many
of  us,  a  marvel  to  ourselves.

I  heard  Joseph  Smith  say,  at  the
time  he  was  making  a  tomb  at  Nau-
voo,  that  he  expected,  when  the  time
came  when  the  grave  would  be  rent
asunder,  that  he  would  arise  and
embrace  his  father  and  mother,  and
strike  hands  with  his  friends.  It
was  his  written  request  that  when  he
died,  some  kind  friends  would  see
that  he  was  buried  near  his  bosom
friends,  so  that  when  he  and  they
arose  in  the  morning  of  the  first
resurrection,  he  could  embrace  them,
saying,  "My  father!  rny  mother,"  etc.

How  consoling  it  is  to  those  who
are  called  upon  to  mourn  the  loss  of
dear  friends  in  death,  to  know  that
we  will  again  be  associated  with
them  !  How  encouraging  to  all  who
live  according  to  the  revealed  princi-
ples of  truth,  perhaps  more  especially
to  those  whose  lives  are  pretty  well
spent,  who  have  borne  the  heat  and
burden  of  the  day,  to  know  that  era
long  we  shall  burst  the  barriers  of
the  tomb,  and  come  forth  living  and
immortal  souls,  to  enjoy  the  society
of  our  tried  and  trusted  friends,  no
more  to  be  afflicted  with  tbo  seeds  of
death,  and  to  finish  the  work  the
Father  has  given  us  to  do  !

I  know  that  some  people  of  very
limited  comprehension  will  say  that
all  the  parts  of  body  cannot  bo
brought  together,  for,  say  th^y,  the
fish  probably  have  eaten  them  upf
or  the  whole  may  have  been  blown
to  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  etc.  It
is  true  the  body,  or  the  organization,
may  be  destroyed  in  various  waysf
but  it  is  not  true  that  the  particles
out  of  which  it  was  created  can  be
destroyed.  They  are  eternal ;  they
never  were  created.  This  is  not
only  a  principle  associated  wirh  our
religion,  or  in  other  words,  with  tho
great  science  of  life, but  it  is  in


354


JuL'KNAL  UK  DISCO UUSfcX


accordance  with  acknowledged  sci-
ence. You  may  take,  for  instance,  a
handful  of  fine  gold,  and  scatter  it
in  the  street  among  the  dust;  again,
gather  together  the  materials  among
which  you  have  thrown  the  gold,
and  you  can  separate  one  from  the
other  ho  thoroughly,  that  your  hand-
ful of  gold  c  m  lie  returned  to  you  ;
yes,  every  grain  of  it.  Yuu  may
take  particles  of  silver,  iron,  copper,
lead,  etc.,  and  mix  them  together
with  any  other  ingredients,  and  there
are  certain  princii  les  connected  with
them  by  which  these  d iff  rent  mate-
rials can  he  eliminated,  every  particle
cleaving  (o  that  of  its  own  element.

Our  text  says,  -  All  flesh  is  not
the  same  flesh:  but  there  is  one  kind
of  flesh  of  men,  another  of  beasts,
another  of  fishes,  and  another  of
birds/1  As  the  gold  and  the  silver
and  other  minerals  can  be  mixed
together  and  again  separated,  so  the
different  kin* Is  or  particles  of  flesh
may  be  united,  one  going  into  the
other  through  natural  processes,  but
the  same  God  by  whose  wisdom  the
laws  were  made  which  so  govern  the
mineral  bodies,  separating  them  one
from  another,  has  also  framed  and
made  laws  by  which  the  various
particles  of  the  different  kinds  of
flesh  can  be  separated,  each  return-
ing and  cleaving  to  its  respective
element  The  component  parts  of
man  can  no  more  become  the  flesh
of  beasts  or  fishes  than  gold  can
become  silver,  lead  turn  to  iron,  or
copper  to  gold.  Each  is  separate
and  distinct  from  the  other

These  things  are  strictly  scriptu-
ral, they  are  strictly  scientific  and
philosophical,  and  are  in  accordance
with  the  laws  God  has  revealed  to
us,  and  who  can  refute  them  ?

What  about  our  deceased  friends  ?
Our  kingdom  and  Priesthood  are
organized  according  to  the  order  God
has  given  us,  and  we  expect,  every


I  one  of  us,  to  stand  in  our  proper
place  in  the  eternal  worlds,  according
to  the  order  of  the  Priesthood  which
we  represent.

We  then  come  to  the  sealing
power  Here,  say,  is  a  man  and
woman  who  have  been  sealed  tose-
ther  for  time  and  eternity.  Does  it
mean  anything?  If  it  means  any-
thing,  which  it  certainly  does,  it
means  just  what  it  says.  If  the
husband  of  this  our  departed  sister
continues  faithful  to  the  end,  main-
tains his  integrity  to  God,  and  fights
the  good  fight  of  faith,  he  will  claim
her  in  eternity,  and  they  twain  will
be  one  flesh.  This  young  man,
some  one  will  have  to  act  for  him
over  the  marriage  altar  in  having
some  one  sealed  to  him.  He  and
his  wife,  through  their  faithfulness,
will  by  and  by  become  the  father
and  mother  of  lives,  and  in  this  way
the  eternal  purposes  of  God  will  be
consummated,  and  his  work  he  per-
petuated.

The  first  command  of  Jehovah
was  for  man  to  multiply*  and  reple-
nish the  earth.  Now  the  command
is  to  build  Temples.  For  what  pur-
pose %  That  they  over  whom  Satan
has  had  power  may  be  administered
for,  reaching  back,  back  to  the  be-
ginning of  time,  that  they  may  be
brought  forth  and  inherit  the  bles-
sings and  privileges  of  the  kingdom
oi  God,  ami  that  we,  ourselves,  may
be  prepared  to  live  and  reign  with
him  for  ever.  Let  us  continue  to
live  in  humility  and  meekness  before
God,  seeking  in  faith  and  good  works
to  get  an  increased  portion  of  His
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  compre-
hend the  laws  of  God  and  live  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  eternal
truth.

I  would  say  to  the  friends  of  the
departed  dead,  be  comforted,  all  is
right,  all  is  well,  and  all  will  continue
to  be  well  with  us,  if  we  will  onlj


DANIEL'  V

fear  Clod  and  keep  his  command-
ments. It  is  far  better  to  die  in  the
fear  of  God,  than  to  live  without
God.  When  I  see  people  die  who
are  prepared,  having  a  claim  on
eternal  life,  do  1  feel  sorry?  No,  I
do  not.  I  would  a  thousand  times
rather  have  my  children  to  be  laid
in  the  silent  tomb,  as  thousands  of
our  youth  are,  than  I  would  see  them
depart  from  God  and  his  ways.  My
earnest  desire  is  that  I  and  my  chil-
dren may  live  to  serve  God,  and  that
lie  will  take  us  hence  before  we
should  he  permitted  to  violate  his


ISION,  ETC.  335

commands  or  forsake  his  law.  Let
me  live  the  life  of  righteousness  and
may  my  last  days  be  spent  in  doing
good  to  my  fellow  man  and  honor
to  my  God*

May  tin*  Lord  bless  and  sustain
these  our  friends  who  are  called  upon
to  mourn  for  a  short  season,  and
may  the  Lord  bless  the  Saints  in
Zion,  and  his  servant  llrighain,  and
those  who  stand  sho abler  to  shoulder
with  him,  and  all  good  men,  now
and  forever,  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDKR  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  is  the  Eighteenth  Ward  Meeting  House,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Aftervoon,  Feb  25,  1877,  t

(Reported  by  Geo.  jR  Gibbs.)

D ANIEL*S  VISION — N FJJUOH AD NEZZAIt's  DREAM  — ITS  I NTERPR ETATIO N —
THE  COMING  OF  THE  ANCIENT  OF  DAYS — JOSEPH  SMITH'S  PROPHECY
— THINGS  YET  TG  BE  FULFILLED— THK  VALLEY  OF  GOD  WHERE  ADAM
DWELT — THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD— THE  COMING
MILLENNIUM  AND  TRIUMPH  OF  THE  SAINTS.


I  will  read  a  few  passages  from
the  book  of  the  Prophet  Daniel,
which  he  received  from  the  Lord
through  vision,  and  which  relate  to
the  latter  days — a  prophecy  which
has  not  yet  been  fulfilled.  It  will
be  found  in  the  /th  chapter  com-
mencing with  the  9th  verse —

**  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  cast
down,  and  the  Ancient  of  Days  did  sit,
whose  garment  was  white  as  snow,  and


the  hair  of  hit  head  lik<*  the  pure  wool :
his  throne  wan  like  the  fiery  dame,  and
his  wheels  as  burning  fire.

M  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth
from  before  him  :  thousand  thousands
ministered  auto  him,  and  ten  thousand
times  ten  thousand  stood  before  him  :  the
judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were
opened.

"  I  beheld  then  because  of  the  voice  of
the  ^reat  words  which  the  horn  spake,  I
beheld  even  till  the  beast  was  slain,  and
his  body  destroyed,  and  given  to  the
burning  flame.


336


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


4i  As  concerning  the  rest  of  the  .1>easts,
thcv  h;vd  tlieir  dominion  taken  away  :  yet
their  Lives  were  prolonged  for  a  reason  ana
time,

41 1  saw  in  the  ni^ht  visions,  and,  behold,
one  like  the  Son  of  rn.oi  enmn  with  the
clouds  of  heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient
of  Days,  and  they  brought  him  near  before
him.

**  And  there  was  given  hira  dominion,
and  glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,
nations,  and  languages,  should  serve  him:
his  dominion  it*  an  everlasting  dominion,
which  shall  not  pass  away,  and  bis  king-
dom that  which  shall  not  be  destroyed."

This  prophecy  relates  to  a  period
of  time  ia  the  history  of  our  nice,
when  thrones  are  to  be  cast  down,
when  kingdoms  and  the  various
governments  which  exist  upon  the
face  of  the  earth  are  to  be  over-
thrown ;  to  a  peri  oil  when  only  one
kingdom  ur  one  government  shall
have  dominion,  and  its  dominion
will  extend  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  j
a  kingdom  too  which  we  are  told,
in  the  second  chapter  of  Daniel's
prophecy,  is  to  be  everlasting  in  its
nature,  and  not  like  those  other
kingdo  ms  which  Daniel  says  are  to
be  overthrown.  This  divine  king
dom  is  to  have  a  universal  dominion,
so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned.
It  *is  represented,  in  its  beginning,
as  being  very  small,  compared  to  a
stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  with-
out hands,  but  which  rolls  forth
gathering  strength  as  it  rolled,  until
all  other  kingdoms,  of  human  in-
vention and  human  authority,  should
cease  to  exist,  should  be  broken  to
pieces  and  become,  as  is  plainly  de-
clared, like  the  chaff  of  a  summer's
threshing  floor,  which  the  wind  car-
ried away  and  no  place  was  found
for  it

I  presume  there  is  no  person  in
this  congregation,  but  what  will,
with  me,  admit,  that  no  such  pe-
riod has  ever  arrived,  since  that
prophecy  was  uttered*  But  such  a
period  will  arrive  in  the  history  of
our  earth* The  Prophet  Daniel


clearly  saw  that  the  stone,  winch
was  to  be  cut  out  of  the  mountain
without  hands,  which  should  smite
upon  the  toes  of  the  image— the
great  image  which  represented  the
kingdoms  of  this  world — should  be
a  divine  work,  a  work  that  the  Lord
himself  would  accomplish  among
men.  In  other  words,  the  Lord
condescended  to  give  to  one  of  the
most  powerful  kings  who  has  ever
dwelt  upon  the  earth,  so  far  as
hmi inn  power  is  concerned,  a  dream

which  represented  to  him  all  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  ;  but  when
he  awoke  he  could  not  even  re-
member  the  dream.  It  however
made  a  deep  impression  on  his
mind,  and  he  knew  there  was  some-
thing very  important  attached  to
the  dream.  So  exercised  was  lie,
that  he  issued  a  proclamation  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  city  of  great
Babylon,  requesting  all  the  wise  men
to  tell  him  the  dream,  and  then  to
give  him  the  interpretation  thereof,
if  they  could  tell  him  the  dream,
he,  of  course,  would  have  confi-
dence in  the  truth  of  the  interpre-
tation ;  but  if  he  himself  were  to
tell  the  dream,  if  it  were  possible
to  remember  it,  he  would  not  know
whether  the  interpretation  would  bo
correct  or  not.  Being  a  monarch
of  absolute  power,  he  threatened
death  to  the  wise  men,  if  they  faile<l
to  tell  him  the  dream,  and  also
to  give  him  the  interpretation.
Daniel,  with  his  three  friends  who
were  Jews,  besought  the  Lnrd  in
the  matter,  and  the  Lord  revealed
to  Daniel  the  dream  and  the  inter-
pretation thereof.  The  dream
Daniel  related  it  to  king  Nebueha
nezzar  was  as  follows —

"Thou,  0  King,  sawest,  and  be-
held a  great  image.  This  great
image,  whose  brightness  was  excel-
lent, stood  before  thee ;  and  the
form  thereof  was terrible.  This


DANIEL'S  VISION,  ETC


337


image's  head  was  of  fine  gold,  his
breast  and  his  arras  of  silver,  his
belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass,  his
legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and
part  of  clay.  Thou  sawest  till  that
a  stone  was  cut  without  hands,
which  smote  the  image  upon  his
feet  that  were  of  irou  and  clay,  and
brake  them  to  pieces*  Then  was  the
iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver,
and  the  gold,  broken  to  pieces  toge-
ther, and  became  like  the  chaff  of
the  summer  threshing  Honrs  ;  Mini
the  wind  carried  them  away,  that
no  place  was  found  for  them  :  and
the  stone  that  smote  the  image  be-
came a  great  mountain,  and  filled
the  whole  earth/'

The  Prophet  then  interprets  the
dream,  naming  every  particular  of
its  meaning.  *'  Thou  art  this  head
of  gold/1  Thlt  is,  his  dominion,
the  Babylonish  empire,  and  the
kingdoms  and  nations  round  about,
over  which  the  Lord  had  made  him
ruler,  represented  this  head  of  gold.
"And  after  thee,"  continued  the
Prophet,  "shall  arise  another  king-
dom inferior  to  thee,'*  represented
by  the  breast  and  the  arms  of  silver.
A  third  kingdom  was  to  arise  after
that,  represented  by  the  brass.  Then
a  fourth  kingdom  was  to  follow,
representing  the  iron  kingdom,  or  a
kingdom  of  great  strength.  But
it  divided,  represented  by  the  two
legs  of  iron.  This  iron  kingdom
represents  very  closely  the  Roman
empire,  in  all  its  strength  and  great-
ness. That  empire  was  divided  and
it  was  known  as  the  eastern  and
western  empire,  represented  by  the
t  wo  legs  of  iron,  one  having  its  seat
at  Rome,  the  other  at  Constantinople.
But  the  feet  and  toes  were  govern-
ments more  modern  to  grow  out  of
the  iron  kingdom,  after  it  should
lose  its  strength.  These  are  repre-
sented by  the  ten  toes  ur  ten  king-
doms which  should  be  partly  strong

No,  22.


and  partly  broken.  They  should
not  have  the  strength  of  the  legs
of  iron,  but  thev  should  be  mixed
with  miry  clay,  indicating  both
strength  and  weakness.  These  last
kingdoms  and  governments  (such
as  have  existed,  during  the  last  few
centuries,  on  the  eastern  and  west-
ern hemispheres)  complete  the  great
image, ,  yrvl  t

•  Tii  >  head  or  ^vlu  king  Nan,  hav-
ing lost  its  universal  dominion,  is
still  represented  by  its  descendants,
under  various  forms  of  governments
in  Asia*  r

The  descendants  of  the  silver
kingdom  are  still  existing  in  Persia,
and  in  the  western  parts  of  Asia

The  brass  kingdom  has  its  present
representatives  in  the  east  of  Eu-
rope, extending  into  Asia,

The  descendants  of  the  once  great
iron  kingdom  are  found  mostly  in
Europe,  extending  in  some  measure
into  Asia,  and  in  still  greater  measure
into  America*  i  ~

The  present  existing  nations  re-
present two  things — first,  in  a  gov-
ernmental capacity,  they  represent
the  feet  and  toes  of  the  great  image  ;
second,  in  the  capacity  of  lineal
descent,  they  represent  all  the  former
kingdoms  of  this  terrible  image.

The  image  being  now  completed,
another  government  of  divine  ori-
giu  is  to  be  set  up,  forming  no  part
of  this  great  image.  Being  entirely
separate  from  and  unconnected  with
this  great  image,  it  should  not  even
represent  a  toe  or  linger  of  the
image,  nor  any  other  part  or  por-
tion thereof,

"Thou  sawest  till  a  stone  was  cut
out  without  hands"  etc*  In  other
words,  all  these  other  government
have  been  formed  by  human  wi&-
dom  and  ingenuity  :  but,  by  and
by,  a  separate  arid  distinct  govern-
ment, represented  by  a  little  stone,
should  be  cut  out  without  hands.

Vol  XVIII.


338


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


What  I  understand  by  this  is  some- 1
thing  that  man  should  have  nothing
to  do  with,  so  tar  as  the  divinity  of
its  formation  was  concerned.  For
it  i*  interpreted  thus — 4t  And  in  the
days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God  of
Leaven  set  up  a  kingdom-"  It  is
God,  then,  who  organizes  it;  he
confers  the  power  and  authority
upon  those  who  shall  minister  in  its
government ;  human  wisdom  does
not  enter  as  a  constituent,  either  in
the  founding  or  government  of  the
game.

The  fifth  kingdom  is,  therefore,
to  be  peculiar  from  all  the  others  in
its  organization.  It  U  further  said,
that  "it  shall  never  he  destroyed,
and  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left
to  other  people."  The  four  king-
doms which  ]  r  eceded  it  were  trans-
ferred, first  to  one  nation,  and  then
to  another,  until  the  image  was
complete,  until  human  governments
had  nearly  fulfilled  their  destiny  ;
tli en  a  kingdom  or  government
should  be  set  up  on  the  earth  that
should  never  be  destroyed.  It  should
not  be  taken  from  one  people  and
given  to  another,  as  Babylon  was
taken  from  the  Babylonians  and
given  to  the  Medes  and  Persians ;
and  as  the  Medes  and  Persians  had
their  kingdom  transferred  and  given
to  the  Greeks  and  Macedonians ;
and  as  the  latter  had  their  kingdom
transferred  from  them  and  given  to
the  Romans ;  and  as  the  Romans,
in  turn,  lost  their  universal  dominion
and  great  power,  and  were  broken
up  into  little  petty  kingdoms,  such
as  now  exist.  But  this  latter  king-
dom was  not  to  be  thus  transferred;
it  was  to  be  permanent,  it  was  to  in-
crease in  greatness  and  strength,
until  it,  or  the  little  stone  which  re-
presented it,  became  as  a  great
mountain,  filling  the  whole  earth.
Or,  as  the  Prophet  Daniel  says,  that
"  the. Saints  of  the  Most  High  shall


take  the  kingdom  and  shall  possess
the  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for  ever
and  ever.11  "And  the  kingdom  and
dominion,  and  the  greatness  of  the
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven
shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the
Saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,
and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and
obey  him/'  This  portion  of  the
prophecy  has  not  yet  been  fulfilled,
only  far  as  the  setting  up  of  God's
kingdom  is  concerned*

The  four  beasts,  described  in  the
first  p*rt  of  the  7th  chapter,  are
those  four  kingdoms  represented  by
the  great  metallic  image  of  gold,
silver,  brass,  etc*  In  this  7th  chap-
ter, the  Lord  does  not  say  anything
about  the  stone  to  be  cut  out  of  the
mountain  without  hands,  and  the
rolling  of  that  s^one,  and  the  break-
ing in  pieces  of  the  various  kingdoms
and  governments ;  but  he  does  repre-
sent in  this  chapter  one  great  and
important  event  that  will  transpire
at  a  certain  time  in  the  history  of  our
race,  namely — UI  beheld  till  the
thrones  were  cast  down,"  eta  He
beheld,  too,  how  this  work  of  destruc-
tion should  be  done,  for  that  is  de-
scribed in  the  2nd  chapter.

After  the  earthly  thr  ones  were  cast
down,  Darnel  says,  "And  the  An-
cient  of  Days  did  sit,  whoso  gar-
ment was  white  as  snow,  and  the
hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure  wool :
his  throne  was  like  the  fiery  flame,
and  his  wheels  as  burning  tire.  A
fiery  stream  issued  aud  came  forth
from  before  him  :  thousand  thousands
ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thou-
sand times  ten  thousand  stood  before
unto  him.

How  much  is  ten  thousand  times
teu  thousand  ?  Only  a  hundred
millions,  but  that  would  make  quite
a  large  congregation.  All  the  in-
habitants  of  the  United  States  only
number  about  forty  millions,  counting


■


DANIfcXs  VISION,  Kir


men,  women  and  children.  If  they
were  assembled  in  one  place,  it  would
present  a  grand  spectacle;  but  sup-
pose we  double  thai  number,  making
it  eighty  millions,  what  a  vast  con-
gregation that  number  of  people
would  make,  we  can  hardly  grasp  in
our  comprehension  its  extent;  and
still  we  will  add  to  it  another  twenty
millions  so  as  to  equal  the  size  of  the
congregation  which  the  Prophet
Daniel  saw  standing  before  the  An*
cient  of  Days,  Such  a  bo  ly  of  peo-
ple must  extend  over  a  great  many
jniles  of  country,  however  closely
they  may  he  collected  together,  I
doubt  whether  the  extremes  of  such
a  contribution  could  be  seen  by  the
natural  eyes  of  mortals;  they  would
be  lost  in  the  distance.

Why  will  this  vast  assemblage  of
people  s'and  there  ?  What  will  be
the  ohj.»ct  of  the  Ancient  of  Days,
in  coining  with  this  vast  multitude,
and  what  is  to  be  accomplished  ?
We  read  that  the  four  beasts,  repre-
senting the  powers  of  the  earth,
will  exist  at  the  time  of  the  coming
of  the  Ancient  of  Days,  And  that
the  fourth  beast,  represented  by  the
Roman  Empire  and  the  kingdoms
that  have  grown  out  of  it,  will  be
"slain  arid  his  body  destroyed  and
given  to  the  burning  flame."  Here
then  we  eui  read  the  destiny  of  that
portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  constituting  the  fourth  beast:
or,  in  other  words,  the  destiny  of  the
kingdoms  of  Europe,  who  were  to
arisu  ami  grow  out  of  that  fourth
power.  We  can  read  the  tinal  des-
tiny of  the  kingdoms  of  Europe,
namely,  'iermany,  France,  Italy,
Spain,  Portugal,  Scandinavia,  and
the  great  northern  power,  Russia,
Austria  and  Prussia,  and  all  those
various  o  nions,  that  more  particu-
larly pertain  to  this  great  iron  power
that  once  eo  cruelly  oppressed  the
people ;  i's  "  body  shall  be  destroyed


and  given  to  the  burning  flame,*'
which  signifies  the  nature  of  the
judgment  that  will  befall  them.
According  to  other  prophecies,  con-
tained in  Daniel,  a  succession  of
judgments,  great  and  terrible  in
their  nature,  will  overtake  them,
before  the  tire  spokeu  of  comes,
Natiou  will  rise  against  nation  in
war,  kingdom  against  kingdom  :  or
in  the  language  of  Isaiah,  u  Behold,
the  Lord  will  come  with  6 re,  and
with  his  chariots  like  a  whirlwind,
to  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and
with  his  chariots  like  a  whirlwind,
io  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and
his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.  For
by  fire  and  by  his  sword  will  the
L  >rd  pi  end  with  all  flesh;  and  the
slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many."

It  seems  then  that  the  body  of  the
fourth  power  is  to  be  given  to  the
burning  flume,  that  signifies  the  utter
extinction  of  that  power  from  the
face  of  the  earth.  The  heathen
nations  representing  the  other  three
beasts,  will  not  then  be  destroyed:
but  their  lives  are  to  he  prolonged,
and  their  dominion  is  to  be  taken
away.  T^ou^h  their  lives  will  he
prolonged,  yet  they  will  not  have
power  to  rale  and  govern,  only  as
they  are  permitted.  It  yon  will  read
from  the  beginning  of  the  26th  to
the  end  of  the  39th  chapters  of
Ezekiel,  you  find  much  said,  in  re-
nurd  to  the  heathen  nations.  uAnd
the  heathen  shall  know  that  I  am  the
Lord,"  etc.  Bat  the  fourth  power
represents  the  nations  of  modern
Christendom,  They  have  not  the
privilege  of  the  heathen,  in  having
their  lives  prolonged,  Why  ?  Does
the  speaker  mean  to  say  that  modern
Christendom  is  more  wicked  than
the  heathen?  Yes;  the  people  of
Christendom  possess  more  light  and
knowledge  than  the  heathen,  and
therefore,  they  are  under  the  greater
condemnation ;  for  according  to  the


310


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


light  and  knowledge  they  severally
have,  will  they  be  judged.  The
more  enlightened  nations,  so  called,
are  rejecting  the  Gospel  message
which  is  being  sent  to  them  by  divine
authority;  and  for  that  reason  their
titter  destruction  is  inevitable,  and,
as  had  been  decreed,  they  must  pass
away.  Their  lives  will  not  be  pro-
longed. Not  only  the  kingdoms  and
governments  of  Europe,  and  the
western  portion  of  Asia  are  to  be  thus
visited,  but  also  those  who  have  grown
out  of  these  kingdoms,  that  have
emigrated  to  this  western  hemisphere,
and  elsewhere.  For  instance,  this
great  republic  must  pass  away  in  the
mariner  indicated  unless  the  people
repent.  There  is  only  one  condition
by  which  they  can  be  preserved  as  a
cation,  and  the  Lord  himself  has
decreed  it,  We  can  read  it  in  the
various  revelations  which  God  has
given,  respecting  this  land.  The
Book  of  Mormon,  for  instance,  speaks
in  many  places,  of  the  overthrow  of
the  government  that  should  exist  on
this  land  if  they  should  reject  the
divine  message  contained  therein.
Inasmuch  as  they  repent  not,  Use
Lord  has  said  that  he  would  visit
them  in  his  anger,  and  that  he  would
throw  down  all  thoir  strongholds.
And  he  further  says,  that  he  will  cut
off  their  horses  out  of  their  midst.
Tins  will  doubtless  be  done  through
some  great  calamity  or  disease.  He
also  says  that  he  will  cut  off  the
cities  ot  our  land,  that  all  manner  of
lying,  deceits,  hypocrisy,  murders,
prie*tcrafis,  whoredoms  and  secret
abominations  shall  be  done  away,
having  reference  particularly  to  this
nation.  He  says,  too,  "  I  will  exe-
cute vengeance  and  fury  upon  them,
even  as  upon  the  heathen,  such  as
they  have  not  heard. 11  We  ure  told,
too,  that  the  nature  of  these  judg-
ments is  to  be  swift  and  terrible,
corning  upon  them  like  a  fierce  wind,


when  they  expect  it  not  ;  when  they
are  crying  peace  and  safety,  behold
'  sudden  destruction  is  at  their  doors.

I  might  dwell  still  longer  on  the
judgments  to  come  upon  this  Ameri-
can nation,  according  to  modern
revel  at  ion.  In  1832  the  Lord  fore-
told to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
that  there  should  be  a  great  war  be-
tween the  Northern  and  Sour  hern
States.  This  revelation  is  published
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, a  standard  work  of  the  Church,
and  also  in  many  languages,  many
years  before  the  war  commenced.
At  that  early  period  we  were  told
that  the  Southern  Stat  s  would  rise
against  the  Northern  States,  and  the
Northern  against  the  Southern  States
in  war,  terminating  in  the  deaths
and  misery  of  mauy  souls,  We
were  told  also  that  this  war  would
begin  with  the  rebellion  of  South
Carolina,

When  I  was  a  boy,  a  little  over  20
years  of  age,  I  b  id  the  privilege  of
taking  a  copy  of  that  revelation,  and
I  carried  it  around  with  me,  often-
times reading  it  to  the  congregations
that  I  preached  to.  Its  subject  mat-
ter formed  a  text  from  which  I  many
times  preached,  as  well  as  a  topic  of
conversation  with  stranger*,  whose
acquaintance  I  would  Imp  pen  to
make  in  traveling  from  place  to
place,

II  ow  do  you  think  such  in  forma-
tion  was  received  by  the  people  to
whom  i t  was  i ra par tet  1  ?  Th ey
would  not  believe  it;  they  had  no
idea  of  its  being  a  revelation  from
God  to  them  ;  they  considered  it  one
of  the  impositions  that  the  "Mor-
mons" had  gotten  up  to  delude  the
people.  To  tell  them  that  this  great
government  would  be  divided  and
go  to  war  with  each  other,  was  some-
thing entirely  foreign  to  their  minds;
it  was  something  to  which  they  paid
heedless  regard,  ofttimes  treating  it


DANIEL'S  VISION,  ETC


341


with  rilicule  and  laughter.  I
p readied  iu  the  New  England  States,
and  in  various  portions  of  the  Union,
and  such  was  the  way  these  things
were  received.  The  shedding  of
blood  was  then  one  of  the  remotest
feelings  of  the  American  people  ;  yet
it  came  to  pass  precisely  as  predicted,
and  we  all  know  the  results  of  that
dreadful  wan  That  war,  we  must
remember,  was  only  one  solitary
judgment,  compared  with  what  will
come,  and  that,  too,  in  the  near
future.  It  has  been  revealel  that
the  time  will  cotne  in  the  history  of
oar  nation,  that  one  State  will  rise
against  another,  one  city  against
another,  even  every  man*s  hand  shall
be  agiiinst  his  neighbor,  until  the
whole  Republic  will  be  in  general
commotion  and  warfare.  How  and
when  this  will  take  place,  the  Lord,
in  his  wisdom,  has  not  told  us  ;  but
it  is  sufficient  for  us  to  say,  that  lie
has  told  us  of  the  facts  that  such  and
such  will  be  the  case.

For  aught  we  know,  the  fulfill-
ment of  this  prophecy  may  grow  out
of  politics.  If  the  people  are  very
nearly  equally  divided  iu  politics,
this  feeling  may  run  so  high,  in  years
to  come,  as  to  be  the  direct  cause  of
war.  And  if  this  should  be  tho  case,
it  would  very  naturally  spread  to
every  neighborhood  in  the  Union.
One  class  of  political  opponents  would
rise  up  against  the  other  class  in  the
aame  city  and  country,  and  thus
would  arise  a  war  of  mobocracy.

If  a  war  of  this  description  should
take  place,  who  could  carry  on  his
business  in  safety?  Who  would  feel
safe  to  put  his  crops  in  the  ground,
or  to  carry  on  any  enterprise  ?  There
won  Id  be  fleeing  from  one  State  to
another,  and  general  confusion  would
exist  throughout  the  whole  Republic,
Such  eventually  is  to  he  the  condi-
tion of  this  whole  nation,  if  the  peo*
pie  do  not  repent  of  their  wicked-


ness ;  and  such  a  state  of  affairs
means  no  more  or  less  than  the  c  mi-
plete  overthrow  of  the  nation,  uud
not  only  of  this  nation,  but  the  na-
tions of  Eta  rope,  which  form  the  feet
and  toes  of  that  great  image.  They
are  the  powers  to  ho  first  broken;  it
is  not  the  nation  representing  the
head  of  ifold,  the  remnant  of  the
Babylonish  Empire  that  still  exists
iu  Asia,  that  will  he  attacked  first,
neither  is  it  the  Persians  and  Medes,
whose  descendants  still  live;  but  the
Lord  will  first  break  up  those  king-
doms which  represent  the  feet  and
tors  of  the  linage,  of  which  I  have
been  speaking.  After  that,  he  will
proceed  to  break  in  pieces  the  king-
doms that  represent  the  brass,  the
silver,  and  the  gold.  Some  are  to
be  spared  for  a  little  season.  The
kingdom  of  God  is  to  roll  forth,  and
a  certain  person  is  to  come,  accom-
panied hy  a  great  host ;  the  name  of
this  person  is  the  Ancient  of  l>ays.
And  who  are  they  that,  compos*?  the
mighty  host?  Are  they  immortal
beings?  Doubtless  most  of  them
will  be  immortal  Saints,  but  there
may  be  some  mortals  among  them.
The  being  called  the  Ancient  -  f  Days
will  not  be  a  mortal  person,  his  2 lory
is  too  great,  he  has  passed  through
his  mortality,  and  he  will  have  the
oversight  ot  this  numerous  host,  at
least  a  hundred  million  of  people.

Who  would  be  the  most  likely
person  to  fill  this  important  posi'ion  ?
He  is  called  the  Ancient  of  Di}@.
Can  you  tell  me,  who  the  most  au-
cieut  person  is  that  live  !  on  the  earth,
during  the  most  ancient  days?  All,
all  will  acknowledge  that  it  is  Adam.
Inasmuch  as  he  has  proven  himself
a  righteous  man,  it  is  right  and  pro-
per that  he  should  by  divine  appoint*
tneut,  have  dominion  over  the  right-
eous of  his  posterity,  who  should
exist  from  his  day,  down  to  that
period,  when  he  comes  in  his  glory;


and  this  ten  thousand  times  ten  th on-  j
sand  spoken  of  will  be  the  faithful
of  his  own  posterity, They  shall
stand  before  him,  and  certain  books
are  then  to  be  opened. If  we  under-
stand the  nature  of  those  records,  we
should  doubtless  find  much  written
concerning  kingdoms,  nations  and
individuals, They  are  the  records
which  are  kept  in  heaven,  in  which
all  things  pertaining  to  the  peoples  j
of  the  earth  are  recorded. Or,  as
the  Bonk  of  Mormon  expresses  it,
giving  the  language  of  the  Savior
when  on  this  American  continent,
that  "all  things  are  written  by  the
Father;"  that  is,  by  his  authority,
by  his  direction  are  all  things  written.
The  records  of  the  nations — then
rise  and  decadence,  with  everything
pertaining  to  them,  in  a  national  ca-  ;
pacity,  will  be  written. Then  there
will  he  the  records  of  families  and
of  individuals,  even  of  all  people  and
tonguts  of  the  earth. The  books
will  be  opened,  and  the  judgment
will  sit. What  judgment  ?  Not
the  final  judgment,  because  that  is
to  take  phtce  more  than  a  thousand  |
years  after this. This  judgment
refers  to  the  nations  that  will  then
exist,  and  it  is  out  of  these  records
and  by  this  judgment  will  they  be
judged. The  calamities  spoken  of
will  take  place  in  fulfillment  of  the
Scriptures,  and  of  the  great  purposes
of  Jehovah.

It  may  he  asked,  Do  you  think
this  vast  congregation  will  actually
come,  and,  if  so,  to  what  place  will
they  come  ?  1  will  read  a  new  reve-
lation upon  the  subject  given  May
18,  1838,  almost  thirty-nine  years
ago.  It  was  given  when  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  and  the  Latter-day
Saints,  had  gathered  themselves
toother  in  Missouri,  about  forty  or
fifty  miles  north  of  Jacks  n  County,
They  had  assembled  at  a  place  that
they  cabled  Spring  Hill,  and  the  Lord


revealed  to  Joseph,  on  that  occasion,,
things  concerning  this  great  event*
This  place,  Spring  Hill,  is  alluded  to
by  the  Lord,  in  this  revelation,  as
being  anciently  called  Adan>  oudi-
Ahman,  because  it  is  the  place
|  where  Adam  shall  come  to  visit  his
children,  or  the  place  where  the  An-
cient of  Days  shall  sit,  as  spoken  of
by  Daniel  the  Prophet  Here,  then,
we  have  a  key  to  the  important  per-
sonage, called  the  Ancient  of  Days,
that  he  is  our  father  Adam,  and  that
he  is  to  sit  in  judgment,  among  cer-
tain numbers  of  his  children,  in  that
certain  region  of  country.

You  may  inquire  why  he  should
come  to  that  particular  place,  on
this  western  continent  ?  The  reason
is,  because  lie  once  dwelt  there.  You
may  say,  I  really  thought  that  Adam
lived  in  Asia,  and  it  he  did,  we  have
no  account  of  his  leaving  there.  I
will  read  another  revelation,  con-
tained in  this  13  ok  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  given  on  the  8tb  day  of
July,  1833,  wherein  it  is  represented
that  Adam  occupied  that  region  of
!  country.  The  revelation  was  given
in  Far  West,  Missouri.  I  will  only
read  a  few  verses —

"  Fur  have  1  nut  the  fowls  of  hea-
ven, and  also  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and
the  beasts  of  the  mountains?  Have
1  not  made  the  earth  r  Do  1  not
hold  the  destinies  ot  all  the  armies
of  the  nations  of  the  earth  ?  There-
fore will  I  not  make  solitary  places
to  hud  and  to  blossom,  and  to  bring
forth  in  abundance,  saith  the  Lord.
Is  there  not  room  enough  upon  the
mountains  of  Adam  -  oudi-  Ah  man,
and  upuii  the  plains  of  OUha  Shine-
hah,  or  the  land  where  Adam  dwelt,
that  you  should  covet  that  which  is
but  the  drop,  and  neglect  the  more
weighty  maiters?  Therefore  come
up  hither  unto  the  laud  of  my  people,
even  Zion."

We  have  then  an  understanding


DANIEL'S  VISION,  ETC.


that  it  was  the  place  where  Adam
dwelt.  Perhaps  you  may  be  anxious
to  know  what  "OndbAhman"  means.
It  means  the  phice  where  Adam
dwelt,  ^  Ah  man"  signifies  God,
The  whole  term  means  Valiey  of
God,  where  Adam  dwelt.  It  is  in
the  original  language  spoken  by
Adam,  as  revealed  to  the  Prophet
Joseph.

Next,  let  us  turn  to  another  pas-
sage, referring  to  the  same  subject,
Contained  in  the  Boo^  of  Duct  line
and  Covenants,  on  page  355,  verse
5 '3,  being  purr  of  a  revelation  given
on  the  28th  uf  March,  18H5—

u  Three  years  previous  to  the  death
of  Adam,  he  cilled  Seth,  Enos,
Cainaan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Enoch
and  Met  h  Lisa  let  i,  who  were  all  high
Piiests,  with  the  residue  of  his  pos-
ter] ty  who  were  righteous,  into  the
valley  of  Adara-ondi-Ahman,  and
there  bestowed  upon  them  his  last
blessing.  And  the  Lord  appeared
unto  them,  and  they  rose  up  and
blessed  Adam,  and  called  him  Michael,
the  Prince,  the  Archangel.  And  the
Lord  administered  com  fort  to  Adam,
and  said  unto  him,  I  have  set  thee
to  be  at  the  head — a  multitude  of
nut  ions  shall  come  of  thee,  and  thou
art  a  prince  over  them  for  ever*  And
Adam  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the
congregation,  and  not  withstanding
he  was  bowed  down  with  age,  being  '
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  predicted
whatever  shun  Id  befall  his  posterity
unto  the  latest  generation*  These
things  were  all  written  in  the  Book
of  Enoch,  and  are  to  be  testified  of
in  due  time."

Here  ihen  we  perceive  that  the
way  Adam  obtained  these  promises
was  in  this  Conference  held  by  the
great  Patriarch,  wherein  lie  called
his  ehildn  n  and  his  children!  chil-
dren together  for  eight  generations,
all  ol  whom  were  righteous  men,
hence  their  names  are  particularly


mentioned,  while  millions  of  his
children,  descendants  that  were
winked,  have  not  their  names  men-
tioned. The  righteous  of  all  his
posterity  were  assembled  wi;h  hiuif
in  that  place,  in  the  valley  called
Adam-oudi  Ahm  in.  What  a  glorious
Conference  that  would  be,  a  Confe-
rence wherein  the  Lord  himself  ap-
peared ?  I  think  if  the  Latter- day-
Saints  thought  thev  could  behold  the
f  ice  ift  the  Lord,  they  would  gather
together  at  our  Conferences,  and  let
nothing  hinder;  there  would  not
many  righteous  stop  back,  but  they
would  generally  come  together  from
all  parts  of  the  Territory.  I  do  not
know  that  those  holy  men  who  as-
sembled in  Conference  with  Adam
h  id  any  promise  beforehand  that  they
shoul  i  behold  the  face  ot  the  Lord;
but  they  went  in  faith,  in  obedience
to  the  call  of  their  aged  father;  they
no  doubt  exercised  much  earnestness
of  spirit,  in  order  to  obtain  a  blessing
from  the  hands  of  the  Lord.  The
Lord  answered  their  prayers,  and  he
appeared  to  them,  and  gave  them
much  consolation,  and  he  set  Adam
to  be  at  their  head,  to  be  a  prince
over  them  and  over  all  his  posterity
for  ever.  And  I  have  no  doubt,  if
we  hail  the  Book  of  Enoch  i  et erred
to  in  the  revelation,  in  whica  book
all  the  prophecies  predicted  by  tins
ajed  man  ate  written,  we  would  rind
something  predicted  about  his  pos-
terity now  living.  I  think  he  would
tell  about  his  corning  a*  fhe  Ancient
of  Days,  the  great  Ptince,  to  his
posterity.  He  told  his  children  in
that  grand  Conference  all  about  it,
and  they  understood  it,  an<i  it  was  a' 1
wrirten  in  the  Book  of  fcnoeh,  to  i*e
testified  to  in  due  time.  These  per-
haps are  some  uf  the  book*  that  aid
to  be  opened  on  that  grand  occasion*
You  may  astc,  Why  the  necessity
of  this  vast  mulutude  Horn  tho  b**h
I  vens  to  assemble  liere  on  tne  e^ith?


341  JOURNAL  QF  DISCOURSES.


It  is  to  fulfill  many  prophecies  besides
that  of  Daniel;  it  is  to  fulfill  pro-
phecies that  have  been  predicted  by
all  holy  men  that  understood  the
great  events  of  the  latter  days,  that
the  Saints  wlftt  are  in  heaven  are  io
C  nne  down  here  on the  earth,  and

ar  e  10  be  organized  here  on  the  eart  h,
unit  ;n-f  to  in-  united  with  the  Saints
on  the  i  :irtlv,  as  one  grand  company,  |
each  one  understanding  his  place*
I  do  not  think  there  will  be  any
contentions  or  jealousies,  as  for  in-
stanr*e,  whether  the  high  Priests  are
greater  than  the  Seventies,  but  all
will  understand  their  proper  place
and  position,  Iteeause  their  positions
will  be  pointed  out  to  ihpm  by  the
Ancient  of  Day*,  the  father  and
pnnee  of  all,  even  down  to  those
lust  ordained  to  the  Priesthood*  Pi  r-
haps  these  records  will  recall  the
positions  we  aie  all  to  occupy  ;  for  I
believe,  to  the  Lord  was  known  the
end  from  the  beginning.

But  why  all  thia  ?  Why  should
it  be  given  to  all  to  know  their  pro-
per places  ?  Why  should  the  books
be  opened,  and  why  sinaiM  the  fourth
beast  be  destroyed  and  the  body
given  to  the  burning  Hone?  It  is
explained  in  the  same  connection  —
**  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  be-
hold one  like  the  Son  of  Man  came
with  the  clouds  of  heaven."

To  whom  does  this  glorious  per-
sonage come  ?  He  comes  to  the
Ancient  of  Days.  What,  that  per-
sonage coming  in  fjory,  majesty  and
dominion,  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,
to  the  Ancient  of  Days !  What  for  t
In  order  that  be  might  receive  from
him  the  kingdom,  in  its  order,  every
person  standing  in  his  proj>ur  pjsition,
everything  organized  after  ihe  most
perfect  order.  The  Ancient  of  Days
delivers  up  the  kingdom,  thus  com-
pleted, to  the  Son  of  Man,  whose  ■
dominion  becomes  50  great  that  all
peoples,  nations  and  languages  serve  1


him  ;  and  his  dominion  is  everlasting
and  shall  have  no  end,

I  do  not  know  how  there  could  be
anything  more  perfect  for  the  coming
of  Christ  than  what  is  here  recorded.
It  is  certainly  a  great  and  grand  work;
and  without  such  a  work  everything
w-mld  be  in  confusion  at  his  ruining.
Mow  great  and  glorious  will  be  that
period  when  Jesus  will  come  in  the
clouds  of  heaven  !  He  makes  this
prcp&ratiofli  beforehand,  so  that  there
may  be  a  people  ready  to  receive  him.
People  ot  rnottality,  as  well  as  im-
mortal beings,  all  knowing  their
positions,  will  form  the  grand  Coun-
cil, and  they  will  be  organized  ready
to  receive  Jesus  when  he  comes  to
reign  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of
lords  upon  this  earth.
!  Do  you  think  there  will  then  be
any  quarrelling  about  political  or
other  matters  pertaining  u>  the  gov-
ernment ?  I  do  noi  think  there  will
!  then  exist,  in  that  grand  Council,  the
condition  of  atfahs  which  we  see
presented  here  in  our  own  nation.
There  will  be  no  quarrelling  about  a
hresi  Sent  or  .any  other  position.  All
things  t hen  will  be  regulated  by  the
law  of  God,  That  will  be  recognized
in  tho^e  days.  A  feeling  of  perfect
unanimity  will  exist  among  t  he  pe  pie,
and  division  and  dissension  will  be
i  unknown.  We  have  had  so  much
division  in  our  country,  and  among
the  nations,  torso  many  generations
that  it  has  become  a  common  thing
among  the  j>eople.  Iu  order  to  be
enlightened  and  independent  and
liberal,  it  is  thought  that  every  man
must  be  against  his  neighbor,  and
every  man  must  set  up  bis  judgment
in  relation  to  matters,  though  it  may
he  it i  contradistinction  to  that  of  his
neighbor's.  All  this,  in  a  govern-
ment like  our  republic,  is  acknow-
ledged as  legitimate.  Let  a  man
now  be  brought  forward  as  a  candi-
date for  the  presidency  of  the  United


Daniel's  vision,  etc.


ol5


States,  against  whose  private  charac-
ter not  a  syllable  has  been  uttered,
and  you  will  soon  see  even  the  most
respectable  of  oar  newspapers  turn
with  slander  against  him;  everything
thry  can  imagine  having  a  tendency
to  injure  him,  in  the  estimation  of
the  public,  will  be  said  of  him  ;  and
if  the  people  generally  believed  it,
be  would  be  considered  one  of  the
wickedest  of  men,  and  his  character
would  be  blackened  from  the  Atlantic
to  the  Pacific  This  cannot  be  a
system  of  true  republicanism;  it
must  be  the  result  of  the  ini perfec-
tions of  fallen  man,  and  consequently
it  must  pass  away  and  be  forgotten.
But  when  the  kingdom  of  heaven
shall  be  fully  established,  I  do  not
think  there  will  be  the  least  division;
everything  will  be  conducted  per-
fectly ;  and  hence  peace  and  union
will  exist.  Those  who  will  dictate
the  affairs  of  that  kingdom  will  be
one,  even  the  same  as  the  Fat  he  i  and
the  Son  are  one.  Do  you  suppose
the  Father  quarrels  with  the  Sun
about  matters  of  government  ?  Not
in  the  least;  they  are  perfectly  united.
Why  are  they  thus  united  V  Be*
cause  each  one  understands  that  the
other  is  in  possession  of  knowledge,
and  wisdom,  and  parity,  and  holiness,
and  both  being  intelligent  and  pure,
comprehending  the  end  from  the
beginning,  therefore  both  are  in  per*
feet  accord  with  each  other  in  all
things.  You  will  remember  the
prayer  of  the  Savior,  M  Neither  pray
I  lor  these  alone,  but  fur  them  also
which  shall  believe  on  me  through
their  word."  He  prayed  that  all
they  who  should  believe  might  be-
Cume  one,  even  as  he  and  the  Father
are  one*  But  was  he  not  mistaken  :
Would  be  not  do  away  with  our  lib-
erty and  independence,  if  all  who
believed  should  become'  one  ?  Such
a  condition  would  not  give  us  the
opportunity  of  quarrelling  with  each


other.  Unify  is  the  greatest  and
most  heavenly  principle  of  govern-
ment. If  we  cm  find  out  what  is
right,  would  it  not  promote  the  peace
and  welfare  of  all  to  carry  out  in  unity
every  principle  of  right,  and  dis-
courage that  which  is  wrong  ?

Another  prayer,  one  that  is  gen^
rally  used,  and  which  Jesus  gave  to
his  di>ciples,  was,  "Our  Father
which  art  in  heaven,  Hallowed  be  thy
name.  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy
will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  hea-
ven," etc.  His  government  must
be  established  here,  and  his  will  must
be  done  io  perfection,  as  it  is  in  hea-
venly worlds.  It  is  folly  in  the  ex-
treme for  man  to  argue  that  our  lib-
erty would  be  curtailed  were  this
prayer  to  be  answered  on  our  heads
to-day.  On  the  contrary  our  inde-
pendence would  be  enhanced ;  for  we
would  then,  as  a  matter  of  course,  be
more  like  unto  the  great  Captain  of
our  salvation.  If  the  will  of  God
were  really  done  on  earth  as  in  hea-
ven,  a  state  of  peace  and  happiness
would  exist,  there  would  be  little
complaining  or  murmuring,  and  the
people  would  have  entire  confidence
in  each  other.  On  going  to  I  heir
beds  at  night  they  would  have  no
need  to  go  to  the  trouble  of  locking
their  doors  and  seeing  that  everything
was  secure  from  theft,  for  there  would
be  Q49  thieving,  no  one  to  wrong  his
neighbor,  in  any  way  whatever*  If
you  had  anything  you  wished  left  in
the  open  air  daring  the  day  or  night,
it  would  not  matter  how  valuable  it
might  be,  you  could  do  so  without
entertaining  the  Last  fear  uf  any  body
taking  it  from  you.

This  will  be  the  order  of  things  to
exist  here  on  the  earth,  ami  winch
will  be  recognized  by  all  nations  that
will  then  exist,  and  it  will  continue
for  a  thousand  years.  And  at  the
expiration  of  that  time  this  kind  of
government  will  not  even  then  be


346


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


done  away,  although  as  many  as  can
be  influenced  by  Satan  to  apostatize
will  do  so,  at  that  time,  and  there
will  be  a  great  division  of  the  people,
at  the  end  of  the  thousand  years.
The  Saints  then,  will  have  become
very  numerous,  probably  more  nu-
merous tli an  ever  before  ;  and  they
will  be  obliged  to  gather  together  in
One  place,  as  we  now  do  from  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.  They  will
have  to  pitch  their  camps  round
about,  for  the  "  beloved  city"  will  not
fce  large  enough  for  them.  It  is
called  by  John  the  vela  tor,  the
canip  of  the  Saints,  a  beloved  ci  ty,
where  the  Saints  gather  to,  from  the
nations  of  the  earth.  Satan  will
gather  his  army,  consisting  of  all
those  angels  that  lell  and  left  the
courts  of  heaven,  when  he  did,  be-
sides all  those  that  will  apostatize
from  the  truth,  at  the  end  of  the
thousand  year.-:  they  too  will  mingle
with  the  immortal  ones  ot  Satan's
army,  all  being  of  the  same  spirit
and  mind.  He  with  his  army  will
come  against  the  Saints,  and  the  be-
loved city,  aud  encompass  them
round  about.  His  army  will  be  so
great  that  it  will  be  able  to  cone
upon  the  Saints  on  all  sides:  he  is
to  encompass  their  camp.  Because
of  the  favorable  position  he  is  to
hold,  in  that  great  last  battle,  and
because  ot  the  vast  number  of  his
army,  he  doubtless  believes  that  lie
will  get  the  mastery  and  subdue  the
earth  and  possess  it.  I  do  not  think
lie  fully  understands  all  about  the
designs  of  God  :  for  John  tells  us
when  this  great  army  shall  be  gath-
ered in  position,  around  the  camp  of
the  Saints,  that  "  fire  came  down
from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  de-
voured them  r"  Devoured  whom  ?
Not  those  who  are  fallen  angels,  for
they  have  no  bodies  to  be  devout  ed  ;
but  this  fire  from  heaven  will  devour
the  wicked  apostate  race  who  will


have  listened  to  them  and  who  will
have  joined  Satan's  army;  they  will
he  consumed,  cons  quently  the  king*
doin  of  Christ  will  not  be  overcome
bv  Satan  or  taken  awav  from  the
Saints.  Remember  the  words  of
Daniel — 4h  The  kingdom  shall  not  be
destroyed,  neither  shall  it  be  given
to  another  people."  Though  they
apostatize  at  the  end  of  the  thousand
years,  though  they  seek  every  pos-
sible plan  to  overthrow  the  kingdom,
though  they  may  gather  up  their
strength  and  have  Satan  and  his
fallen  angels  to  tight  with  them,  yet
that  kingdom  that  was  organized  at
the  beginning  of  the  thousand  years
will  still  exist  Fire  is  the  great
agency  that  will  devour  the  wicked,
alter  which  this  camp  and  beloved
city  and  all  the  inhabitants  belonging
to  it  will  be  caught  up  to  heaven.

Then  ernes  the  period  and  time
when  the  earth  must  undergo  its  final
change,  far  exceeding  any  former
changes.  For  at  the  beginning  of
the  Millennium,  the  mountains  will
melt,  and  fi>*v  down  like  wax  at  the
presence  of  the  Lord  ;  then  the  earth
is  to  be  moved  exceedingly  and
tossed  to  and  fro.  Though  the  ocean
is  to  roll  back  to  its  former  position  ;
although  these  and  many  other  won-
derful changes  will  take  place  when
Christ  comes,  they  are  nothing  com-
pared to  the  changes  that  are  to  take
place  after  the  thousand  years,  after
Satan's  array  is  destroyed.  Then  the
great  white  throne  appears.  Then,
alter  the  holy  city  aud  the  New  Jeru-
salem are  taken  np  to  heaven,  the
earth  vill  flee  away  from  before  the
presence  of  him  who  sits  upon  the
throne.  The  earth  itself  is  to  pa&J
through  a  similar  change  to  that
which  we  have  to  pass  through.  As
our  bodies  return  again  to  mother
dust,  forming  constituent  portions
thereof,  and  no  place  is  found  for
them  as  organized  bodies  ;  so  it  will


daniel's  vision,  etc.


347


be  with  this  earth.  Not  only  will
the  elements  melt  with  fervent  heat,
but  the  great  globe  itself  will  pass
away.  It  will  cease  to  exist  as  an
organized  world.  It  will  cease  to
exist  as  one  of  the  worlds  that  are
capable  of  being  inhabited.  Fire
devours  all  things,  converting  the
earth  into  its  original  elements;  it
passes  away  into  space.

But  not  one  particle  of  the  elements
which  compose  the  earth  will  be  de-
stroyed or  aim i hit  >ted.  They  will
all  exist  and  be  brought  together
again  by  a  greater  organ  in  tig  power
than  is  known  to  man.  The  earth
must  he  resurrected  again,  as  well
as  our  bodies;  its  elements  will  be
reunited,  and  they  will  be  brought
together  by  the  power  of  God's  word.
He  will  then  so  organize  these  ele-
ments now  constituted  upon  this
earth,  that  there  will  be  no  corse  at-
tached to  any  of  its  compound  thus
made.  Now  death  is  connected  with
them,  but  then  everything  will  be
organized  in  the  most  perfect  order,
just  the  same  as  it  was  when  the  bird
lirst  formed  it  He  then  pronouncrd
everything  as  *4  very  good."  It
could  not  be  otherwise;  a  being  that
is  infinite  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  ;
and  a  being  that  had  power  in  pro-
portion to  it,  could  organize  an  earth
into  a  must  perfect,  form  ;  and  he  did
so  and  pronounced  the  same  very  ;
good,  hut  man  brought  a  curse  on
the  earth.  Man  brought  a  change,
not  only  on  man,  but  upon  the  animal
creation,  and  not  only  upon  the  ani-
mal creation,  but  upon  all  the
elements  of  which  the  earth  was
formed.  This  curse  was,  as  it  were,
transfused  throughout  every  particle
of  the  creation,  so  that  wherever
you  turn  your  eyes  death,  and  des-
truction, and  sorrow  exist.  Hut  the
same  Being  that  organized  it,  and
pronounced  it  very  gopdy  will  organize
it  again, it  will  comu  foiih  again


from  its  condition  of  chaos,  by  the
power  of  his  w,>rd,  a  celestial  body,
prepared  for  the  abode  of  a  higher
order  of  beings,  those  who  have  kept
the  celestial  law,  those  who,  through
obedience  *o  the  laws  of  God,  become
exalted.  They  are  the  ones  who  will
have  the  privilege  of  inheriting  the
earth  for  ever  and  ever.  When  he
gets  it  all  prepared,  he  will  bring
down  the  inhabitants  thereof,  the
holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem.

I  propose  making  a  few  remarks
in  relation  to  that  city,  for  the  benefit
of  strangers,  should  there  be  any
present.  We  look  upon  the  New
Jerusalem,  separate  from  the  old
Jerusalem,  The  old  Jerusalem  will
be  re- built  by  the  Jews  upon  its  for-
mer site,  and  during  the  Millennium
it  will  become  a  very  glorious  city,
and  its  inhabitants  will  Im  a  blessed
and  honored  people.  We  are  told
by  the  Prophet  Ether,  that  the  Lord
will  build  a  city  on  this  American
continent,  which  will  be  called  the
New  Jerusalem.  The  reason  it  will
he  called  new  in  because  it  never  be-
fore existed  here.  Both  of  these
cities  will  be  caught  up,  when  the
earth  undergoes  its  final  dissolution,
and  when  made  new,  they  will  come
back  again,  the  New  Jerusalem  first,,
followed  by  the  old  Jerusalem.

A  great  many  have  supposed  that
the  description  of  the  glury  and
beauty  ot  the  city  that  comes  down
from  heaven  was  the  New  Jerusalem,
but  it  is  not  so.  That  description
given  by  John  in  relation  to  the  se-
cond city,  was  a  holy  city — old  Je-
rusalem. We  have  an  account  of  it  a
walls  and  the  height  of  them,  we
have,  too,  an  account  of  its  twelve
gate>,  its  houses  and  its  inhabitants,
and  also  of  the  glory  of  God  that
shall  be  in  the  city.  But  have  we
any  enlarged  description  of  the  New
Jerusalem  ?  No.  I  have  no  doubt,
however,  that  the  city  of  the  New


34S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Jerusalem  will  be  equally  jzlotious
with  the  one  that  John  saw  and  de-
scribed.

John  saw  the  New  Jerusalem  com-
ing down  from  heaven  and  speaks  of
its  inhabitants.  Then  erne  of  the
angels  took  hira  awav  to  a  high  mouiv
tain,  and  showed  him  the  second  city,
when  descending  to  the  earth.

The  Book  of  Mormon  speaks  very
plainly  upon  this  subject.  The  Pro
pht-t  Ether,  as  recorded  in  the  latter
part  of  the  book,  speaking  of  these
two  cities,  says,  that  both  are  built
by  man,  under  the  direction  of  the
Almighty ;  and  that  the  Lord  has
decreed  that  when  they  are  built,
they  shall  not  waste  away  nor  be
destroyed.  There  are  a  great  many
of  our  houses  that  are  wasting.  You
may  build  them  of  granite,  and  half
a  thousand  of  years  will  begin  to
waste  them  away.  Thus  it  is  with
whatever  material,  used  in  building
oar  cities;  while  mnn  is  under  the
curse  there  will  a  constant  wasting
away  of  his  habitations.  Butnotso,
willi  regard  to  the  old  Jerusalem,
which  is  to  be  re-built  ;  and  nut  so
with  regard  to  the  New  Jerusalem,
which  is  to  be  built  on  this  Continent,
Why  not  ?  Because  God  is  all-
powerful,  and  when  he  makes  a  decree
in  relation  to  anything,  it  must  be
fulfilled.  If  he  said  to  the  ancient
Ncphites,  Record  your  prophecies
and  writings  upon  plates  ot  gold,  and
I  will  preserve  them,  that  they  shall
not  wax  dim,  that  time  shall  not
have  power  to  waste  them ;  but  the
records  shall  be  preserved,  he  was
abundantly  able  to  preserve  them  by
his  power,  and  fulfill  his  promise.
The  same  Being,  who  is  able  to  pre-
serve the  sacred  records,  has  power


to  preserve  saered  and  holy  habita-
tions,

Therefore,  Latter-day  Saints,  when
yon  return  to  build  up  the  waste  places
of  Zion,  and  when  you  build  up  the
New  Jerusalem  upon  the  place  that
he  has  appointed,  whatever  materials
*Jiall  be  used,  by  the  blessing  of  the
Priesthood,  which  Ood  has  ordained,
these  materials  will  endure  forever :
they  will  continue  during  the  thou-
sand years,  without  waste,  and  when
they  shall  be  caught  up  to  heaven,
when  the  earth  flees  away,  they  will
still  endure  in  all  their  perfection  and
beauty.  When  these  cities  shall
descend  again  upon  the  new  earth,  in
its  immortal  and  eternal  state,  they
will  still  be  as  endnrable  as  the  earth
itself,  no  more  to  be  subject  to  the
curse,  and  therefore,  will  no  more
waste;  death  is  gone — everything
that  is  corruptible  in  its  nature  has
ceased,  su  far  as  this  habitable  globe
is  concerned,  and  all  sorrow  and
mourning  are  done  away.

May  God  bless  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  may  our  minds  he  kept
steadfast  upon  the  mature  and  glory
of  the  promises  to  the  righteous,  and
the  great  events  that  must  be  ful-
filled, looking  for  the  coming  of  the
Church  of  th*  First  Born,  looking
for  the  day  of  peace,  the  day  of  rest ,
when  Jesus  shall  reifjn  kiner  of  kin^s
as  he  now  reigns  in  heaven.

May  the  Lord  stir  up  the  minds  of
his  people  that  they  may  seek  for  those
tilings  in  the  future,  and  may  we  pat
away  from  our  minds  everything  cal-
culated in  its  nature  to  shut  out  the
spirit  of  the  living  God  from  our
hearts,  is  my  earnest  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Temple,  at  St.  George,  on  Wednesday  Morning,
appil  4,  1877,  at  the  first  of  the  two  hays*  meetings  held  by  the

St.  George  Stake  of  Zion.

(Reported  by  Geo.  i\  Gibbs.)

FEELINGS  IN  THE  TEMPLE— VALUE  OF  THE  SACRED  RECORDS — THE
GOSPEL  FINDS  TESTIMONY  IN  OITuSITIi iN—  THE  GOSPEL  ALWAYS  THE
SAME — MARTYRS  versus  HEROICS— ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  DEAD,


It  is  with  peculiar  feelings  I  arise
to  speak  to  you,  ray  brethren  and
sisters,  for  the  short  time  remaining,
in  this  holy  Temple.  If  I  were  to
describe  my  feelings  on  entering  and
worshiping  in  this  house,  I  would
occupy  more  time  than  remains  to
be  used,  and  I  do  not  kuow  if  I  were
to  attempt  to  do  so  I  could  succeed*
Each  one  present  can  the  better
estimate  the  feelings  of  bis  brother
from  those  entertained  by  himself,

I  was  here  last  fall,  and  then  my
emotions  upm  entering  this  room
were  of  the  most  peculiar  character.
I  felt  overpowered,  and  I  have  felt
so  each  time  I  have  entered  the
building.  It  is  a  holy  place,  and
all  those  who  come  here  should  be
holy;  they  should  examine  them-
selves, and  finding  themselves  guilty
of  wrong,  they  should  make  up  their
minds  in  the  strength  and  power  of
God  to  put  it  away,  I  do  not  think
that  any  person  who  has  any  of  the
love  of  the  truth,  the  love  of  righte-
ousness, or  the  fear  of  God  abiding
in  his  heart,  can  enter  this  building
without  being  impressed  with  the
sacred  ness  of  the  spirit  which  reigns
here,  and  that  seems  to 'pervade  even


the  atmosphere  we  breathe.  My
fervent  prayer  to  God  is  that  this
building  will  be  kept  clean  and  pure,
free  frota  evtry  act  and  spirit  anta-
gonistic to  the  holy  influences  that
God  has  promised  to  bestow  upon
t lie  pure  in  heart  who  enter  herein  j
and  that  this  building  will  stand  as
long  as  it  shall  be  necessary  to  fulfil
the  purposes  ot  God,

The  remarks  we  have  heard  from
President  Wells  are  very  true,  and
are  so  in  keeping  with  the  Scriptures,
that  every  Litter-day  Saint  who  has
heard  them,  must  be  satisfied  uf  their
truth.  It  is  always  a  eau*e  of  joy
to  me  that,  in  the  providences  of
God  our  heavenly  Father,  the  sacred
records  we  have,  which  have  come
down  through  so  many  ages,  and
which  r*re  recognized  by  Christen-
dom to  be  the  words  of  God  (at  least
acknowledged  by  all  Christians  to  be
ao,  whether  they  believe  it  or  not)  ;
I  say  that  in  the  providence  of  God
the*>e  records  have  come  down  to  us
in  as  pure  condition  as  we  find  them.
Because  it  is  a  comfort  to  a  people
like  we  ar>-,  whoso  names  are  cast
out  as  evit,  and  who  are  derided  and
visited  with  every  kind  of  contumely,


300  JOURNAL  Oi-

accused  of  every  conceivable  crime,
to  know  that  the  doctrine  and  ordi-
nances that  we  believe  in  have  a
similarity  to,  and  are  in  strict  accord-
ance with,  those  of  the  recognized
vrord  of  God.  We  need  not  go  to
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  alone,  for
the  proofs  of  the  truth  of  the  work
we  are  engaged  in  ;  for  in  appealing
to  thc^e  books  we  only  appeal  to  a
corroborative  testimony  showing  that
God's  words  and  dealings  with  the
children  of  men  are  the  same  in  all
ages  of  the  world.  While  he  gave
his  revealed  word  to  the  ancients  on
the  Eastern  Continent,  he  also  gave
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Western
Continent  his  word,  and  they  both
agree.  He  has  also  given  to  us,  his
people  in  the  last  days,  his  word.
By  these  three  witnesses,  or  these
three  divine  records,  his  word  is  cor-
roborated and  maintained.  Having
received  the  word  of  God  from  these
various  sources,  we  can  rejoice  this
day  in  the  great  truth  that  the  doc-
trines we  teach,  the  ordinances  we
have  sub  En  it  ted  to,  and  that  have
been  and  are  being  administered  to
ns,  and  that  our  lives  when  we  live
as  we  should,  are  in  strict  accord-
ance with  these  three  records,  which
we  know  to  be  the  word  of  God,  but
particularly  in  accordance  with  t he

Bible,  which  the  Christian  world
acknowledge  to  be  true,  This  has
always  been  a  great  cause  of  joy  to
me,  and  I  have  been  greatly  strength-
ened in  knowing  that  no  reference
could  be  made  to  any  part,  or  to  any
doctrine  or  principle  of  the  Bible,
which  was  not  believed  in  and  prac-
tised by  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  the
extent  of  their  ability,  that  is,  so  far
as  the  doctrine  or  requirement  was
applicable  to  them.  Ot  course,  where
distinct  revelations  were  given  to
people  under  peculiar  conditions  and
of  a  peculiar  character,  as  for  in.


DfSOOUftH£&.

stance,  Noah  or  Abraham,  or  the
disciples  when  they  were  commanded
to  flee  from  Jerusalem,  the  common
sense  of  all  men  would  suggest  that
such  requirements  were  not  appli-
cable to  us.  It  is  not  necessary  for
us  to  build  an  ark,  or  to  do  any  of
these  tilings,  especially  commanded
to  others  ;  but  where  general  revela-
tions, doctrines,  ordinances,  or  com-
mandments are  revealed  or  commu-
nicated to  the  people  of  God,  we  as
a  people  have  received  all  such,  and
they  form  part  of  our  faith  and  be-
lief, and  we,  to  some  extent  at  least,
are  engaged  in  carrying  them  oat.
In  conjunction  with  these  glorious
facts,  precisely  the  same  Consequences
or  results  flow  from  the  teachings  of
the  servants  of  God  in  these  days  as
in  the  days  of  old.  God  confirmed
the  word  by  signs  following.  The
adversary  in  the  same  spirit  of  hatred
that  characterized  his  attacks  upon
the  work  of  God  in  all  ages,  is  in
these  last  days  as  bitter  and  as  de-
termined to  cause  the  same  results  to
follow  the  preaching  of  the  servants
of  God,  and  the  administration  of
the  ordinances  of  life  and  salvation,
as  at  any  previous  time  in  the  world's
history,  thus  showing  that  the  old
antagonism  tl  at  existed  betweflU  God
and  Belial,  the  old  animosity  that
actuated  the  mind  of  those  whom  he
inflamed  to  crocify  the  Son  of  Man,
and  to  destroy  his  Apostles,  had  not
died  out,  but  was  as  determined  io
this  our  day  to  effect  the  ruin  of
those  who  believe  in  the  Gospel  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  have
submitted  to  its  ordinances,  as  at
any  previous  time  in  the  history  of
the  world.

If  we  had  believed  all  that  is
taught  in  the  Scriptures,  and  had
not  received  the  promised  blessings ;
or  if  we  had  believed  in  all  written
in  the  Scriptures,  and  had  received
the  promised  blessings,  and  had  not


received  the  hatred  and  animosity  of
the  wicked,  there  might  have  been
cause  for  doubt  as  to  our  having
obeyed  the  Gospel.  We  might  have
bee  a  assailed  with  a  fear  that  some
thing  was  lacking  in  the  system,  and
that,  therefore,  we  could  not  be  the
people  of  God  after  all.  But  when,
in  addition  to  the  doctrine  that  God
has  revealed,  and  the  ordinances  of
life  and  salvation  that  he  has  restored
and  commanded  us  to  obey,  that  is,
to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  repent
truly  and  sincerely  of  all  oar  sins,  to
be  baptized  for  remission  of  them,
by  one  holding  the  authority,  and
then  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  through
the  laying  on  of  hands,  and  its  gifts
and  blessings  and  its  powers,  for
our  names  to  be  cast  out  as  evil,  to
have  our  names  heralded  through  the
earth  as  the  most  nugodly  and  wicked
and  abominable  people  that  live  upon
the  earth,  to  have  men  think  that  in
destroying  us  they  would  be  doing
God's  service;  I  say  that  vh<m  these
characteristics  attend  the  administra-
tion and  ordinances  ut  the  House  of
Gcd,  we  can  rejoice  even  as  the  an-
cients did  in  the  knowledge  that  there
is  no  peculiarity  of  feature  pertaining
to  the  ancient  Gospel  from  the  days
of  Adam  to  John  the  Re  vela  tor,  or
from  the  days  of  Jared  and  his  bro-
ther to  Moroni,  or  from  the  days  of
Joseph  and  Hyrum  to  this  our  day,
that  does  not  attend  the  Gospel  now.
Not  only  is  there  no  feature,  char-
acteristic or  peculiarity  absent,  but
there  is  no  sign  or  evidence  lacking
of  its  being  the  same  work  of  God.
Precisely  the  same  signs  follow  now,
and  precisely  the  same  external  evi-
dences follow  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel  now,  as  anciently.  Having
these  signs  and  evidences  and  bless*
ings,  should  we  not,  as  a  people,  re-
joice exceedingly  ?  Should  not  our
hearts  be  full  of  thanksgiving  to
Almighty  God,  that,  however  humble


and  obscure  and  illiterate,  however
contemptible  in  the  minds  of  the
children  of  men,  our  doctrines,  lives
and  characters  may  bo,  our  names  are
numbered  with  the  holiest,  the  best
and  the  greatest  that  have  ever  trod
the  footstool  of  God,  th  it  our  names
are  numbered  with  Jesus  the  first-
born, the  Son  of  God,  and  with  Enoch,
Abraham,  the  friend  of  God  (dis-
tinguished above  all  the  sons  of  men
by  that  glorious  evidence  of  God's
nearness  to  him,  being  called  his
friend),  and  with  all  the  holy  Pro-
phets whose  lives  are  living  testimo-
nies to  the  divinity  of  their  calling  ?
If  we  would  enjoy  the  society  aud
glory  of  such  personages  we  must  be
willing  to  suffer  as  they  did  ;  and  if
not  so,  we  can  not  reasonably  expect
to  be  numbered  among  the  happy
throng  who  are  to  live  ami  reijn  with
Jesus,  When  we  shall  have  done  all
they  have  done,  pissed  through  and
experienced  the  same  blessings  that
they  have,  drunk  tho  same  cup,  aud
been  baptized  with  the  same  baptism,
and,  when  necessary,  laid  down  our
lives  as  they  have  in  testimony  of
the  truth,  then  we  can  reign  with
them. ,  .  -

It  is  easy  to  die  in  the  heat  of  bat-
tle, or  when  men  are  selected  for  some
heroic  duty,  and  the  eyes  of  the  world
are  upon  them  ;  but  this  is  uot  the
manner  in  which  the  servants  and
people  of  God  have  lost  their  lives*
Jesus  was  crucified  between  two
thieves,  the  most  ignominious  death
to  which  any  one  could  be  subjected,
and  those  who  crucified  him  believed
him  to  be  worthy  of  such  a  fate.
They  disseminated  among  the  people
such  slanders  and  misrepresentations
of  his  works  and  actions  that  many
felt  justified  in  taking  the  responsi-
bility of  shedding  his  blood  upon
themselves  and  their  posterity.

Thus  it  always  has  been  with  the
servauts  and  Saints  of  God. They  do


352


JOURNAL  OF  Dft


not  die  w]ien  their  lives  are  taken  by
violence  in  a  manner  which  the  world
calls  heroic  or  glorious  j  but  as  mule-
factors,  the  ignominious  death  admin-
is  tered  to  those  who  are  sbiin  for  the
testimony  of  Jesus,  and  thus  it  al-
ways has  been  with  God's  children,
the  brightest,  the  beet  and  noblest,
that  ever  lived.  Thev  have  had  to
lay  down  their  lives  a*  Joseph  did,
slain  in  the  prison  where  In*  was  con-
fined. The  same  self-sacrifice,  the
same  godlike  self-sacrifice  is  required
at  the  hands  of  the  servants  and
Saints  of  God  in  this  our  day,  as  was
required  of  those  in  ancient  days,
when  l hey  were  cast  into  dens  of
wild  beasts,  into  the  fiery  furnace,  or
when  sawn  asunder  and  subjected  to
every  kind  of  violent  death  because
of  their  supposed  wickedness.

I  thank  God  this  day  for  the  res  to-
ration  of  this  truth,  1  thauk  God
that  I  was  ever  counted  worthy  to  live
in  the  day  when  the  revelations  of
Jesus  are  restored.  I  thank  God,
with  all  my  heart,  that  I  am  a  mem-
ber of  this  Church;  I  think  it  the
most  glorious  honor  and  dignity  that
could  be  conferred  upon  me,  and
more  go  in  the  goodness  of  God  in
permitting  me  to  officiate  in  the
holy  Priesthood.  I  thank  hitn  too
that  he  has  inspired  his  servants  to
lead  forth  bis  people  and  bring  ns
here,  Piid  that  through  the  kind  pro-
vidences of  God  and  the  wise  conn-
sels  and  administrations  of  his  ser-
vants, we  are  blessed  with  those
glorious  privileges  in  being  permitted
to  rear  a  habitation  to  the  name  of
the  Most  High  in  which  we  worship
this  day  ;  this  chaste,  this  grand,  this
BkfttftiiKcent  house  of  God.

When  I  reflect  upon  what  God  has
done  for  us,  in  addition  to  that  which
I  have  alluded  to,  it  gives  me  de  per
gratitude  still  in  knowing  that  in  all
the  revelations  given  us  concerning
ourselves  and  our  future  glory,  there


has  been  no  concealment  concerning
the  destiny  of  our  dead  who  have
passed  away  without  a  knowledge  uf

]  the  Gospel.  There  would  have  been
something  lacking  in  our  joy  had
this  revelation  not  been  made,  for  we
con !d  not  have  contemplated  our  own
happiness  in  the  eternal  worlds  with
any  degree  of  satisfaction,  if  we  had
been  disturbed  by  the  thought  that
our  ancestors  could  not  partake  of
the  same  blessings  we  had  received*
But  God  in  his  mercy  has  revea'ed
his  pur  poises  to  us,  so  that  there  are
none  that  understand  the  Gospel  who
cannot  (  liter  into  this  house  and  glo-
rify God  in  his  heart  because  of  the
fullness  of  th**se  blessings;  and  be-
cause wc  know  the  Lord  possesses  all
t  he  glorious  attributes  we  have  as-
crihed  to  him.

You  enquire  of  the  enlightened
men  of  Christendom  respecting  their
dead,  and  they  readily  acknowledge
it  to  be  a  subject  they  know  nothing
about,  A  great  many  think  that  t4ie
heathen  nations  who  have  died  in
ignorance  are  consigned  to  the  mise-
ries of  a  never-ending  hell.  Who

1  with  such  feelings  and  belief  can  glo-
rify God  in  their  hearts  and  ascribe
to  him  the  glorious  attributes  of
mercy  and  justice,  and  recognize  him
as  a  just  and  mercif  d  being  ?

But  when  we  received  the  Gospel,

1  there  came  with  it  a  distinct  message
of  mercy,  a  message  of  glad  tilings
of  great  joy,  that  not  only  the  living
should  receive  the  testimony  of  Jesus,
not  only  should  the  living  rejoice  in
the  glorious  principles  of  life  and
salvation,  but  the  dead  themselves

i  should  hear  the  voice  of  the  servants
of  God,  and  the  glad  tidings  of  &  J-
v  at  ion  should  be  proclaimed  in  their
hearing,  and  through  the  exercising
of  their  agency  in  receiving  these
truths,  their  prison  doors  could  be
unlocked  and  they  come  forth  and
receive,  ns  though  in  the  flesh,  the


THE  UNITED

same  blessings,  exaltation  and  glory,
ac ior. ling  to  their  #ood  wishes  and
good  deeds.  Thus  has  ben  swept
from  our  minds  every  cause  of  doubt
respi  cting  our  dead,  and  our  hearts
W;irrueil  towards  them  with  joy  un-
epe  ikable,  and  consequently  we  com-
bine our  efforts  to  erect  such  a  build*
inir,  such  h  holy  house  as  this  is.
Thus  we,  in  our  hearts,  witness  to  Gftd
the  E  fern  til  Father,  that  we  have
received  indeed  of  a  truth  the  testi-
mony that  lie  has  given  to  U9,  that
we  btd i eve  the  same  to  be  true,  and
that  we  will,  with  the  aid  and  power
winch  lie  bestows  upon  us,  devote
oat  entire  lives  to  the  interests  of  his


ORDER,  ETC.  353

kingdom,  bequeathing  the  same  spirit
and  energy  to  our  children  after  as,
that  they  too  may  labor,  with  all  their
might,  mind  and  s'rength  and  the
ability  with  whieh  God  shall  endow
them,  to  carry  on  and  extend  the
great  work  of  redemption  and  salva-
tion until  every  son  and  daughter  of
Adam  shall  receive  the  glad  tidings
of  salvation,  and  shall  be  adminis-
tered for  in  the  holy  temples  which
shall  be  prepared  for  that  express
purpose.

That  God  may  help  us  to  do  this
with  all  our  might  and  strength  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT BRIGIIAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  at  thk  Semi-Annual  Conkkkrnce,  held  ls  the  Temple,  at

St.  George,  Friday  Murnkvo,  April  0,  1877,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gthhs.)


THE UNITED ORDER— TICK  DUTY
N  <  JT  CUM  M  U  N  ISM  — TEA  C 1 1 1  NO  THK
EN  UK  OF  BABYLON— THK  SAINTS
OF  PURPOSE  AND  ACTION,  WILL
CRITICISED — EDUCATIONAL  STATU

%  would  like  to  s:iy  a  great,  denl
during  this  Conference  to  the  Latter-
day  Snints,  bat  I  shall  be  able  to  talk
but  little,  und  therefore  when  1  do
speak  I  wish  you  to  listen,  and  thi.s
I  believe  all  nt  you  will  do.

I  think  that,  as  a  people,  we  are
nearer  alike  in  the  sentiments  and
feel i Tigs  of  our  hearts,  than  in  our
words. Prom  the  most  excellent

No.  23,


OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD— THE  GOSPFJ*
PEOPLE  BOW  TO  LIVE— IN  DEPEND*
WILL  CONTINUE  TO  SPREAD— UNITY
BRING  AGAIN  ZION— FREE  SCHOOLS
S  OF  OUR  CHILDREN,

discourse  which  we  have  heard  this
morning  from  brother  Cannon,  I
believe  th-it  the  people  might  gather
the  idea  that  we  shall  be  exacted  to
divide  our  property  equally  one  with
another,  and  that  this  will  constitute
the  United  Order,  I  will  give  yon
my  view,  in  as  few  words  as  possible
with  regard  to  this  subject,  which  t
will  promise  you  are  correct.

Vol  XVHL


354


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


The  Lord  wishes  and  requires  us
to  develop  the  ability  within  us,
and  to  utilize  the  ability  of  these
men ,  women  and  children  called
Latter-day  Saints.

The  most  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  are  incapable  of  dictating
and  devising  for  themselves.  In
many  instances  there  is  reason  for
this,  for  they  are  opposed  to  that
degree  that  for  the  lack  of  opportu-
nity they  are  not  able  to  develop  the
talents  and  ability  that  are  within  :
them.  This  is  the  condition  of  the
people  of  most  of  the  nations  of  the
earth.  All  those  who  come  oat  from  i
the  world,  espousing  the  Gospel  of
Jesus,  phice  themselves  in  a  condition
to  be  taught  of  him,  but  instead  of
teaching  them  personally,  be  has
raised  up  his  authorized  teachers  to
do  this  work,  and  what  does  he  ex-
pect of  us  to  do  ?  He  requires,
absolutely  requires,  of  us  to  take
these  people  who  have  named  his
name  through  baptism,  and  teach
them  how  to  live,  and  how  to  become
healthy,  wealthy  and  wise.  This  is  !
Our  duty.

Supposing  that  the  property  of>
the  whole  community  were  divided
to-day  equally  amongst  all,  what
might  we  expect  ?  Why  a  year '
from  to-day  we  should  need  another
division,  for  some  would  waste  and
squander  it  away,  while  others  would
add  to  their  portion.  The  skill  of
building  up  and  establishing  the  Zion
of  our  God  on  the  earth  is  to  take
the  people  and  teach  them  how  to
take  care  of  themselves  and  that
which  the  Lord  has  entrusted  to  their
care,  and  to  use  all  that  we  command
to  glorify  his  holy  name.  This  is
the  work  of  regenerating,  of  ele-
vating mankind  to  the  higher  plane
of  the  Gospel ;  in  other  words,  of
SLBiply  teaching  them  their  duty.

With  regard  to  our  property,  as  I
have  told  you  many  times,  the  pro-


perty whicli  we  inherit  from  our
Heavenly  Father  is  our  time,  and
the  power  to  choose  in  the  disposi-
tion of  the  same,  This  is  the  real
capital  that  is  bequeathe^  nnto  us
by  our  Heavenly  Father;  all  the
rest  is  what  he  may  be  pleased  to
add  unto  us.  To  direct,  to  counsel
and  to  advise  in  the  disposition  of
our  time,  pertains  to  our  calling  as
God's  servants,  according  to  the
wisdom  which  he  has  given  and
will  continue  to  give  unto  us  as  wo
seek  it

Now,  if  we  could  take  this  people,
in  their  present  condition,  and  teach
them  how  to  sustain  and  maintain
themselves  and  a  little  more,  we
would  add  to  that  which  we  already
have;  but  to  take  what  we  have  and
divide  amongst  or  give  to  people,
without  teaching  them  how  to  earn
and  produce,  would  be  no  more  nor
lt'Ss  than  to  introduce  the  means  of
reducing  them  to  a  state  of  poverty.

I  do  not  wish  for  one  moment  to
recognize  the  idea  that  in  order  to
establish  the  United  Order  our  pro-
perty h;ts  to  be  divided  equally
among  the  people,  to  let  them  do
what  they  please  with  it.  But  the
idea  is  to  get  the  people  into  the
same  state  of  unity  in  all  tilings
temporal,  that  we  find  ourselves  in
with  regard  to  things  spiritual.
Then  let  those  who  possess  the
ability  and  wisdom  direct  the  labors
of  those  not  so  endowed,  until  they
too  develop  the  talents  within  them
and  in  time  acquire  the  same  degree
of  ability.

What  do  yon  say  to  this  doctrine  ?
Is  it  right  or  wrong  ?  [The  congre-
gation answered,  **  It  is  right."]

We  want  to  get  at  a  correct  un-
derstanding respecting  all  these
matters  which  so  materially  con*
cern  us.  What  would  be  the  first
lesson  necessry  to  teach  the  peo-
ple, were  we  to  commence  to  direct


THE  UNITED

their  labors  to  the  great  end  of  be-
coming  of  one  heart  and  one  mind
in  the  Lord,  of  establishing  Zion
and  being  filled  with  the  power  of
God  ?  It  would  be  to  stop  expend-
ing and  lavishing  upon  oor  dear
selves  all  needless  adornments  and
to  atop  purchasing  the  importa-
tions of  Babylon.  We  can  ourselves
produce  every  thing  necessary  for
our  consumption,  our  wear,  our
convenience  and  comfort,  right
here  at  home.  We  can  produce
and  manufacture  the  material  ne-
cessary to  beautify  our  lands,  gar-
dens and  orchards ;  to  beautify  and
furnish  our  houses,  and  to  adorn
the  beautiful  bodies  which  we  in-
habit without  sending  oor  means
to  France,  to  England  and  other
countries  for  things  which  can  a
lit  fie  better  be  made  at  home
among  ourselves.  The  material  of
which  these  cushions  were  made,
which  adorn  the  pulpits,  were  pro-
duced here.  After  it  was  taken
from  the  sheep,  it  was  manufac-
tured at  our  Provo  factory  into
the  cloth  you  now  see ;  and  the
material  of  which  the  silk  trimmings
were  made,  was  raised,  spun,  and
made  up  by  some  of  our  sisters  in
this  Territory,  We  might  exhibit
to  you  handkerchiefs,  dress  patterns,
and  shawls,  all  of  silk,  made  by  our
sisters  out  of  the  raw  material  pro-
duced here  through  the  enterprise
and  industry  of  a  few.  These  are
only  simple  specimens  of  what
Can  be  done.  Suppose  I  were  to
say,  **  Ladies,  how  do  you  like
them  ? "  Do  you  not  think  they
would  say,  "  Pretty  well  ?  "  We
can  improve  on  what  has  been  done,
and  we  want  yon  to  do  so.  Plant
oat  the  mulberry  tree,  and  raise  the
silk,  and  let  your  dresses,  your
shawls,  your  bonnets  and  your
ribbons,  and  everything  <you  use  to
clothe  and  adorn  your  bodies,  be


ORDER,  ETC.  '  355

the  workmanship  of  your  own  bands.
Let  the  brethren  trike  hold  and
carry  out  in  every  department  the
same  prniciple  of  home  manufac-
ture until  we  shall  be  able  to  pro-
duce the  materials,  and  make  up
every  article  necessary  to  clothe
and  adorn  the  body,  from  the  crown
of  the  head  to  the  soles  of  the  feet.
Then  we  shall  become  a  self-sus-
taining  and  growing  people,  and  we
shall  have  to  do  it.  All  this  is  in
the  elements  in  which  we  live,  and
we  need  the  skill  to  utilize  the  ele-
ments to  our  growth  and  wealth,  and
this  is  true  financiering.

We  can  now  see  the  growth  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  it  is  mar-
velous to  us  to  SCO  the  multitude  of
little  towns  springing  up  here  and
there,  and  we  are  under  the  neces-
sity of  saying,  Give  us  more  room,
for  the  older  settlements  are  thick-
ening  up,  and  the  people  are  spread-
ing out  and  filling  up  new  valleys
continually.  You  can  see  the  shoots
putting  forth  and  taking  root;  still
the  old  stock  is  good,  is  alive  and
rapidly  increasing,

■  It  has  been  asked  if  we  intend  to
settle  more  valleys.  Why  certainly
we  expect  to  fill  the  next  valley  and
then  the  next,  and  the  next,  and  so
on,  It  has  been  the  cry  of  late,
through  the  columns  of  the  news-
papers, that  the 14  Mormons  *'  are

!  going  into  Mexico !  That  is  quite
right,  we  calculate  to  go  there.  Are
we  going  back  to  Jackson  County  ?
Yes,  When  ?  As  soon  as  the  way
opens  up.  Are  we  all  going  ?  0
no!  of  course  not.  The  country  is
not  large  enough  to  hold  our  present
numbers.  When  we  do  return  there,
will  there  be  any  less  remaining  in
these  mountains  than  we  number  to-
day ?  No,  there  may  be  a  hundred
then  for  every  single  one  that  there
is  now.  It  is  folly  in  men  to  sup-
pose that  we  are  going  to  break  np


356


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


these  onr  hard  earned  homes  to  make
others  in  a  new  country* We  intend
to  hulil  our  own  here,  and  also  pcne-  1
trate  the  north  and  the  south,  the  j
cast  and  the  west,  there  to  make
others  and  to  raise  the  ensign  of
truth* This  is  the  work  of  God,  that
marvelous  work  and  a  wonder  re-
ferred to  by  ancient  men  of  God,  who
saw  it  in  its  incipiency,  as  a  stone  I
cut  out  of  the  mountains  without
hands,  but  which  rolled  and  gathered
strength  and  magnitude  until  it  filled
the  whole  earth, We  will  continue
to grow, to  increase  and  spread
abroad,  and  the  powers  of  earth  and
hell  combined  cannot  hinder  it.  All
who  are  found  opposing  God  and  his
people  will  be  swept  away  and  the  ir
names  he  forgotten  in  the  earth.  As
the  Prophets  Joseph  and  Hyrum
were  murdered,  and  as  they  mas-
sacred  our  brethren  and  sisters  in
Missouri,  so  they  would  have  served
us  years  and  years  ago,  if  they  had
had  the  power  to  do  go.  But  the  Lord
Almighty  has  said,  Thus  fur  thou
si  in  It  go  and  no  farther,  and  hence
we  are  spared  to  carry  on  his  work.
We  are  in  his  hands,  the  nations  of
the  earth  are  in  his  hands  j  he  rules
in  the  midst  of  the  armies  of  hea-
ven and  executes  his  pleasure  on  the
earth* The  hearts  of  all  living  are
in  his  hands  and  he  mrna  them  as

#  4

the  rivers  of  water  are  turned.

We  have  no  business  here  other
than  to  build  up  and  establish  the
Zion of  God. It must  bo  done
according  to  the  will  and  law  of  God,
af  ter  that  pattern  and  order  by  which
Enoch  built  up  and  perfected  the
former- day  Zion,  which  was  taken
away  to  heaven,  hence  the  saying
went  abroad  that  Zion  had  fled. By  ,
and  by  it  will  come  back  again,  and
as  Enoch  prepared  his  people  to  be
worthy  of  translation,  so  we  through
onr  faithfulness  must  prepare  our-
selves to  meet  Zion  from  above  when  |


it  shall  return  to  earth,  and  to  abide
the brightness and glory of  its

coming.

My  brethren  and  sisters, I  do
really  delight  in  hearing  our  brethren
speak  on  this  holy  order  of  heaven.
Unity  of  purpose  and  action,  in  cur-
rying out  the  will  of  our  Father,  has
been  my  theme  all  the  day  long;  but
I have  continually  plead  with *  he
Saints  not  to  waste  their  substance
upon  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the
flesh,  for  that  is  contrary  to  the  will
and  commandments  of  God* I  wiah
to  say  that  whoever  have  faith  enough
to  inherit  the  celestial  kingdom  will
find  that  their  inheritances  will  be
upon  this  earth. This  earth  is  our
home; by  and  by  it  will  be  sanc-
tified and  glorified,  and  become  a  fit
dwelling  place  for  the  sanctified,  and
they  will  dwell  upon  it  for  ever  and
ever. I  will  further  say  I  labor  for
the  cart!),  I  never  mean  to  be  satisfied
nnlil  the  whole  earth  is  yielded  to
Christ  and  his  people. When  brother
George  Q.  tells  us  we  should  not  labor
for  the  earth  and  the  things  of  this
world,  he  means  we  should  not  labor
with  sinful  motives,  and  to  gratify
the  lusts  of  the  flesh. But  if  we
possessed  the  treasure  of  the  Gentile
world,  could  we  not  send  our  Elders
to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  bearing  the
precious  Gospel  to  all  living  ?  Could
we  not  sustain  their  families  during
their  absence  ? Ceuld  we  not  build
Temple  after  Temple  and  otherwise
hasten  on  the  work  of  redemption  ?
Yes. But  keep  the  people  in  pov-
erty and  how  are  we  to  accomplish
this  great work  ? I say, let  us
gather  find  accumulate  the  things  of
the  earth  in  the  manner  indicated  by
the  Lord,  and  then  devote  it  to  Gjd
and  the  building  up  of  his  kingdom.
What  do  you  say  to  this  doctrine,  is
it  right  or  wrong  ? [The  congrega-
tion said, "It  is  right"]  What
little  property  I  have  I  wish  it  to  be


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC,  357


devoted  to  the  building  up  of  Zion,
and  I  suppose  I  have  as  much  as  any
other  man  in  the  Church.  I  am
always  ready  to  receive  and  take  care
of  the  blessings  that  God  showers
upon  nic\  ami  am  always  ready  and
wilting  to  devote  the  same  to  the
building  up  of  his  kingdom.

Many  of  you  may  have  heard  what
certain  journalists  have  had  to  say
about  Brighafflk  Young  being  opposed
to  free  schools.  I  am  opposed  to  free
education  as  much  as  I  am  opposed
to  taking  away  property  from  one
man  and  giving  it  to  another  who
knows  not  how  to  take  care  of  it
But  when  you  come  to  the  fact,  I
will  venture  to  say  that  I  school  ten
children  to  every  one  that  those  do
who  complain  so  much  of  me.  L  now
pay  (lie  school  fees  of  a  number  of
Children  who  are  either  orphans  or
sons  and  daughters  of  poor  people-
But  in  aiding  and  blessing  the  poor
I  do  not  believe  in  allowing  my  chari-
ties to  go  through  the  hands  of  a  set
of  robber s  who  pocket  nine- tenths
themselves,  and  givtj  one- tenth  to  the
|Kior.  T.i  ere  in  is  the  difference  be-
tween us ;  I  am  for  the  teal  act  of


doiny  and  not  Baying.  Would  I
encourage  free  schools  by  taxation  ?
No !  That  is  not  in  keeping  with
the  nature  ot  our  work  ;  we  should
to  as  one  family,  our  hearts  and
hands  united  in  the  bonds  of  the
everlasting  covenant;  our  interests
:ilike,  our  children  receiving  equal
opportunities  in  the  school- room  and
the  college.

We  have  to-day,  more  children
between  the  ages  of  5  and  lO  years,
who  can  read  and  write,  than  any
S'ate  or  Territory  of  the  Union  of  a
corresponding  number  of  inhabitants.
Tins  is  not  exactly  sustained  by  the
statistics  published  of  a  fev  of  the
States,  but  from  what  we  know  of
the  n  we  believe  it  to  be  the  fact,

On  the  whole  we  have  as  good
school-houses  as  can  be  found,  and
it  is  our  right  to  have  better  ones,
and  to  excel  in  every  tiling  that  is

good.  riiM  t

As  to  my  health  I  feel  many  times
that  I  could  not  live  an  hour  longer,
I  but  I  mean  to  live  just  as  long  as  I
can.  I  know  not  how  soon  the  mes-
senger will  call  for  me,  but  I  calcu-
lute  to  die  in  the  harness.  Amen.


35S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


0


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  rx  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  After-
noon, May  6,  1877,  after  addresses  uy  Eldehs  Orson  Pratt  and  Geo.

Q.  Cannon.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  GUIs.)

THE  LORD  RULES— THE  HAND  OF  GOD  IN  PERSECUTION— THE  GOSPEL
EMBRACES  ALL  TRUTH — NO  NEED  OF  WORRY,  THE  LORD  WILL  DEAL
OUT  JUSTICE— JOSEPH  SLAIN  FOR  THE  GOSPEL— THE  DISSATISFIED
WrLL  BE  SATISFIED— FULL  OF  BLESSING.


I  take  the  liberty  of  saying  a  few
words  on  this  ocealion  to  both  Saints
and  sinners.  That  expression  brings
to  my  mind  at  once — Where  are  the
Saints  ?  and  who  are  they  ?  And
who  are  the  sinners  ?  We  are  all
sinners;  but  there  is  quite  a  portion
of  the  congregation  who  are  trying
to  be  Saints.  For  those  who  profess
to  be  Saints  I  have  a  few  texts  of
Scripture.  With  regard  to  those
who  believe  the  truth  and  desire  to  do
it;  to  all  who  wish  to  live  and  pre-
serve yourselves  in  the  truth,  in  the
love  of  God,  I  wish  to  say,  they
whom  God  loves  he  chastens.  This
is  so,  whether  we  believe  it  or  not.
If  we  have  not  received  chastise-
ment, we  receive  not  that  witness,
that  assurance,  to  testify  to  us  that
we  love  him*  Another  test  of
Scripture  :  The  wicked  are  a  rod  in
the  hand  of  God  to  chasten  his  peo-
ple. If  the  Lord  loves  us  and  we  love
him,  we  may  expect  to  be  chastened  ;
and  it  is  not  joyous  at  the  time  of
receiving  the  chastisement;  it  is
grievous;  but  if  we  are  exercised
by  grace  and  the  spirit  of  truth,


it  will  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of
righteousness.

I  wish  to  whisper  in  the  ears  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  I  mean  those
who  profess  to  be  Saints,  Know  ye
that  the  Lord  reigns,  and  that  the
hearts  of  all  living  are  in  his  hands.
He  turns  the  hearts  of  the  children
of  men  as  the  rivers  of  waters  are
turned*  He  rules  in  the  armies  of
heaven,  and  does  his  pleasure  upon
the  earth.  When  he  wills,  no  man
can  hinder  it  j  when  he  is  disposed
to  open  the  door,  it  is  not  in  the
power  of  man  to  shut  it ;  and  when
he  closes  the  door  it  is  not  in  the
power  of  man  to  open  it.  Remem-
ber this,  Latter-day  Saints,  and  all
the  Christian  worli,  the  Pagan,
Infidel  and  Jewish  world,  and  every-
body in  the  world ;  and  hearkent
0  ye  nations  of  the  earth,  and  know
ye  that  God  lives,  that,  he  has  spoken
from  the  heavens,  aud  has  sent  forth
his  everlasting  Gospel  to  the  children
of  men,  that  through  obedience  to
the  same  they  may  be  saved  ;  and  if
they  reject  this  message  they  will  be
damned. We  cannot  help  it,  it  is


EHE  LORD  RULES,  ETV


359


not  our  business,  it  is  not  our  doc-
trine, it  is  the  doctrine  of  him  whom
we  serve,  of  him  whom  we  obey,  of
him  who  holds  as  in  t  xistence,  who
gives  us  breath  and  being,  and  we
have  a  right  to  believe  in  Him,  to  love
and  serve  him  and  to  build  up  and
establish  his  kingdom;  and  we  are
doin<*  it.

If  I  were  to  tell  you  one  half  of
the  things  that  I  know  in  many
particulars  it  would  astonish  the
half  hearted  who  have  but  little  or
no  faith,  and  who  do  not  understand
the  workings  of  the  providences  of
God  among*  the  children  of  men.
Bat  as  to  the  persecution,  it  is
nothing  at  all,  neither  one  way  nor
another,  only  to  purify  the  Saints
and  prepare  the  nations  for  the
good  or  evil,  for  the  Lord  Almighty
to  send  forth  his  judgments  to
cleanse  the  earth,  to  sanctify  it,
and  to  justify  the  righteous  and
condemn  the  guilty,  and  to  prepare
the  way  for  the  coining  of  the  Son
of  Man.  I  wish  to  say  to  yon,  to
those  who  are  in  the  truth,  as  well
as  to  those  who  are  out  of  the  truth,
if  we  did  not  have  to  bear  the  iron
hand  of  persecution,  the  principles
we  believe  in,  which  attract  the  at-
tention of  the  good  and  the  evil
upon  the  earth  and  which  occupy
eo  many  tongues  and  circumscribe
their  philosophy,  would  be  em-
braced by  thousands  who  are  now
indifferent  to  them.  The  evil-doer
would  crowd  upon  our  borders;  and
we  have  plenty  of  them  now  with-
out receiving  any  more.  They
would  crowd  into  this  Church.  And
this  is  the  reason  why  brother  George
Q,  Cannon  says,  he  is  pleased  and
rejoiced  because  of  this  persecution.
We  should  be  satisfied  with  it,  we
should  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God
in  it,  and  say  :  The  will  of  the  Lord
be  done  and  not  ours/  By  closely
watching  the  Litter- day  Saints,  and


seeing  that  they  are  kept  in  the  line
of  their  duty  by  using  this  kind  01
a  rod,  it  prevents  others  from  coming
that  would  affect  us  more  than  thejr
can  who  are  outside  of  this  Church,
There  is  not  one  man  in  this  city
nor  in  the  Territory  who  hates  the
truth  and  the  Latter-day  Saints,
whose  influence  I  dread,  no,  not
even  the  hundreth  part,  as  I  do  a
smooth,  slick  hypocrite  who  professes
to  be  a  Latter  -  day  Saint.  Tho
former  cannot  sow  the  seeds  of  infi-
delity and  unbelief  in  the  hearts  of
the  people  j  but  the  latter  can,

I  wish  to  say  to  all  the  people,
The  principles  of  the  Gospel  that*
God  has  revealed  from  the  heavens
to  the  children  of  men  upon  the
earth  are  worthy  the  acceptation  of
the  wise,  the  pure  and  the  just.
There  is  no  true  philosophy  in  exis-
tence which  is  not  embraced  in  the
Gospel,  it  belongs  to  the  Gospel,  it
is  a  part  of  the  Gospel.  The  philo-
sophy of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
of  the  worlds  that  are,  that  were,
and  that  are  yet  to  come  into  ex-
istence, is  all  in  the  Gospel  that  we
have  embraced,  Everv  true  philo-
sopher,  so  far  as  he  understands  tha
principles  of  truth,  has  so  much  of  the
Gospel,  and  so  far  he  is  a  Latter-day
Saint,  whether  he  knows  it  or  not.
Our  Father,  the  great  God,  is  the  au-
thor of  the  sciences,  he  is  the  great
mechanic,  he  is  the  systematize  of
all  things,  he  plans  and  devises  all
things,  and  every  particle  of  know-
ledge which  man  has  in  his  possession
is  the  gift  of  God,  whether  they  con-
sider it  divine,  or  whether  it  is  tho
wisdom  of  man ;  it  belongs  to  God,
and  he  has  bestowed  it  upon  us,  his
children  dwelling  here  upon  the
earth.  %

We  take  up  the  principles  or  or-
dinances of  the  hou<e  of  God,  and
when  we  set  them  before  the  people,
who  would  like  to  believe  them  ?


$60


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Ask  the  world  of  mankind,  the
heathen  world,  if  there  is  one  doc-
trine or  principle  in  all  these  which
is  oot  good  for  man  to  receive.  It
we  could  find  such  a  place  as  an  nn-
gi  lie  world,  we  might  ask  its  inhabi-  j
tams  if  we  lj fid  embraced  in  our
faith  a  single  principle  not  good  for
them.  Even  they  would  not  find  an
idea,  a  doctrine  or  a  principle  but
what  every  person  would  say,  respect-
ing it:  ** 1 1  is  just  as  good  as  wo
could  ask  for,"  For  the  principles
of  the  Guspel  are  calculated  to  purify
the  heart,  the  hands,  the  mouth,  the
train,  and  every  act  of  (he  children
of  men,  and  to  prepare  them  to  live
with  } km  feet  and  holy  beings.  These
ure  principles  worth  seeking  for,  they
me  worth  living  for,  they  are  wort h
dying  for.  As  to  the  struggle  that
is  going  on  between  the  Latter-day
Sain  is  and  (he  world,  have  we  my
Struggle  with  them  No,  Have
we  any  contention  ?  No,  not  in
the  least.  Have  we  any  batllo  to
fight  r  No,  none  at  alb  Are  we  to
marshal  our  armies  to  contend
against  them  ?  No.  Here  are  the
Words  of  truth  ;  we  go  forth  and  de-
clare them  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;
it  is  our  mission  and  all  we  have  to
do.  They  may  war  against  us,  they
may  marshal  their  forces  and  their
armies,  God  rules,  I  fear  them  not.
If  I  preserve  myself  in  the  truth,  I
Bin  all  right.  With  the  principles
that  these  Latter-day  Saints  believe
in,  if  we  had  our  own  way,  and
were  not  followed  up  by  these
LI  es*cd  sen  a  m.l  re  Is,  would  we  have
auy  grog  shops?  No!  Would  we
permit  men  to  take  the  name  of
the  Lord  in  vain  >  No.  If  we
Could  use  that  moral  influence  we
would  stop  all  drinking,  swearing,
stealing,  and  Sabbath  breaking,  and
Speaking  evil  one  of  another;  and
we  wuuH  Inive  no  dishonest  men;
we  would ha?e all  men  do  that


which  is  right  before  the  Lord.  But
no,  we  must  be  followed  up.  That
is  all  right,  perfectly  right.  Every
step  we  take  and  every  move  we
make  must  be  scanned  by  the  devil
to  see  if  it  is  right.  You  will  ex-
cuse the  expression.  He  is  watch-
ing closely  to  see  if  we  live  our  re-
ligion. And  he  says:  "Now,  Lat-
ter-day SainLs,  are  you  not  a*h  uned
whenever  you  do  anything  that  is
naughty  V"  and  tries  to  discourage
them,  that  they  may  turn  away
from  the  truth.  What  should  this
do  (or  us?  Should  it  not  cause  us
to  refrain  from  all  wromr.  and  tench
us  to  do  better,  even  this  the  chas-
tisement of  the  devil  ?

We  need  not  worry  about  this,
that  or  the  other,  nor  in  the  least;
it  :s  for  us  to  serve  the  Ljrd,  and
see  that  we  do  his  will.  And  so
far  as  persecution  and  the  killing
of  the  Prophets  are  concerned,  whe-
ther of  ancient  or  of  modern  limes,
even  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith,  and
others  of  the  Saints,  men,  women  and
children,  as  they  have  done,  we  do  not
expect  that  the  perpetrators  of  these
deeds  will  be  brought  to  justice;  not
in  the  least,  until  the  Lord  sirs  upon
the  case  and  deals  out  justice  to
them.  The  cry  has  been  against  the
Prophets  of  every  age,  against  the
A  post  lets  and  against  Jesus  himself,
and  against  all  those  who  have  ever
preached  the  truth,  and  why  ?  Be-
cause the  systems  of  the  world  are
errors;  while  the  Gospel  is  true,
it  stands  alone,  it  is  as  linn  as  the
everlasting  mountains;  the  storms
may  beat  upon  it,  and  it  is  there*
But  huw  is  it  with  those  who  are
jealous  of  us  and  who  oppose  us?
We  hear  some^  of  them  who  pro-
fess Christianity  crying,  "Come  to
Jesus,"  "  Come  to  Jesus,"  etc.
What  is  there  of  it  ?  It  is  so  much
nonsense.  If  Je*us  were  in  their
midst  to-day,  they  would  kick  him


THE  LORD  RULES,  ETC


3G1


oat ;  for  they  did  so  to  his  servants.
Suppose  the  A post 'e  Paul,  or  Pe'er,
in  fact  any  of  the  A  post  Its  were
to  uet  into  their  chap  Is,  and  weie
to  preach  from  their  pulpits  their
doctrine  which  they  preached  when  ;
upfMi  t!ie  earth,  what  do  you  think
they  would  do  (o  tlie  u  ?  They
won!  1  take  them  and  lead  tin 'in  ,
oat  of  doors,  saving  "We  will  not
have  any  such  hypocrites  and  (Wise
Prophets  as  you  are  in  our  raids t,*1

There  is  once  in  a  while  a  good
honest  man  *  ho  profe*S"  s  to  preach
the  truth,  and  win  u  he  does  preach,
it  amounts  to  this  :  "My  brethren,
we  think  we  are  Christians,  vie  are
believers  in  the  word  uf  Uod  ;  bat  I
tell  you  if  the  A  pollen  wire  here
to-day  we  would  not  receive  them."
That  is  what  these  good,  honest
preachers  would  Mf,  and  a  lew  do
8;ty  if  to  their  cop&rre^atioris.

A  tal^e  principle,  a  false  theory,
whether  in  mechanism  or  philo-
sophy,  requires  much  argument  and
superior  talent  to  sustain  it,  but
when  the  truth  is  presented  it  com-
mends itself  to  the  understanding
ot  the  people  so  readily  thai  it  re- 1
quires  no  ^reat  amount  of  learning
to  substantiate  it,  nor  much  skill  to
declare  it-  to  the  honest  who  want
truth,  and  it  remains  firm  at  d  sound.

Forty-flve  ye;ns  ngo  they  were  de-
termined to  kill  the  Pn  phet  J<»>eph.
1  have  I  on  upon  the  tloor  scores  and  !
scon  s  of  nights  ready  to  receive  He
mob  who  sought  his  life.  This  per-
Stcution  commenced  with  a  little
neighborhood,  then  a  town,  then  a
county,  then  a  State,  and  then  the
people  of  the  United  Srates;  and  by
and  by  other  n  .lions  mil  he  ju^t  as
bitter  towards  us,  rani  t he  doctrines
V/e  preach  as  many  of  the  people  of
Our  own  nation  now  are.  They  will
£t niggle  and  strive,  and  plan  and
ftevtat*,  saying,  Let  us  take  tins  ;
course,  and  that  course;  and  they


will  struggle  until  they  will  come  to
a  stop  as  though  they  were  against  a
(  mountain  of  solid  rock.  They  will
do  all  they  can  to  break  us  np,  and
even  destroy  us;  this  has  been  the
case  now  for  the  last  forty- five  years.
Joseph  Smith  had  forty-seven  law
suits,  and  I  was  with  him  through
the  most  of  them,  and  never  was  the
lirst  tiling  proved  against  him;  he
wn-*  never  guilty  of  the  first  viola-
tion of  the  law  or  of  good  order.
And  when  Governor  Ford  asked  him
to  £o  to  prison,  as  the  mob  were  so
enraged  that  he  could  not  insure  his
life,  that  he  might  be  safe  until  he
returned  from  Nauvoo,  he  said :
*4 1.  will  pledge  you  the  faith  of  the
S'ate  ot  Illinois  for  yuiir  safety."
U  it  as  so  a i  as  he  was  gone,  the  mob
murdered  bjth  Joseph  and  his  brother
Hyrum,  in  the  jail.  That  was  to  be
mi.  I  heard  Joseph  say  many  a  time,
"  I  sh  Jl  nut  live  until  I  am  tofty
i  years  of  age  "  The  spring  before  he
!  was  killed—  Lis  death  occurred  t he
>7th  of  June,  1844 — he  hurried  off
the  first  aiders  of  tiie  Church.  All
right,  1  thought  then,  and  I  think  so
now.  It  is  ail  in  the  hands  of  Uod,
They  killed  Joseph,  and  what  for  ?
For  the.  Gospel's  sake.  It  was  for
DO  evil,  for  I  was  well  acquainted
widi  him.  He  test i tied  to  the  truth,
he  sealed  his  testimony  with  his  blood.
Whether  we  believe  in  blood  atone-
ment or  not,  i  he?  Lord  so  ordered  it,
that  Joseph,  as  well  as  others  of  the
Prophets,  sealed  their  testimony  with
their  blood.

I  said  hero  last  Sabbath,  that,  if
the  fteople  of  this  government  are  not
salaried  with  what  they  have  already
p  Essed  through  this  side  of  twenty
years  past,  "  Wait  a  little  longer,
and  they  will  he  perfectly  satisfied
with  blood,"  Tiiey  shed  the  blood
of  the  innocent;  if  they  are  not
satisfied  with  the  blood  they  have
shed  of  l ach  other,  wait  a  little  while


362  JOURNAL  OF

and  they  will  shed  each  others  blood
to  their  fall  satisfaction.  The  Lord
has  spoken  it,  and  we  have  nothing
to  do  with  it.  If  we  could,  we  would
hide  ourselves  away  from  the  scenes
that  will  take  place  ;  but  this  we  can-
not do.  But  wait  a  little  longer,  and
the  people  of  this  nation,  as  well  as
others,  will  have  blood  till  they  are
satisfied  with  shedding  the  blood  of
each  other.  This  is  the  prediction
of  the  ancient  Prophets,  and  has
been  confirmed  unto  us  through  his
servant  Joseph,  The  people  are  in
the  hands  ot  God,  he  will  rule  all
things  and  deal  justly  with  all  man-
kind; but  he  will  not  suffer  this,
wickedness  to  dwell  on  the  earth  ;
it  must  be  cleansed.  All  that  we
need  to  concern  ourselves  about  is  to
serve  the  Lord,  to  trust  in  him,  so


DISCOURSES.

that  we  may  be  ready  to  receive  his
dealings  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust,
in  all  his  chastisements.  Let  us  live
up  to  the  principles  of  the  just,  and
God  will  continue  to  bless  us  and  de-
liver us  with  the  just.
,  If  I  had  power,  I  certainly  would
bless  the  people  with  everything  their
hearts  could  wish  if  they  would  nob
sin.  I  would  do,  as  I  heard  the  mo-
thers of  some  of  my  children  say,
that  went  with  me  to  St,  George  this
winter,  that  I  indulged  them  in  every
thing  they  wanted.  Why  ?  Because
they  never  manifested  a  desire  for
anything  wrong.  And  if  it  were  in
my  power  I  would  bless  all  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth,  with  every-
thing in  which  they  could  glorify
God,  and  purify  their  own  hearts.
May  God  bless  you.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  May  13,  1877.

(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbc)


MELCHIZEDEK  AND  AARON  I C  PRIEM  JlouDS— THEIR  PECULIARITIES  AND
JURISDICTION— BUILDING  TEMPLES — GATHERING  TO  BE  SANCTIFIED —
UNION  AND  BLESSING  ITS  RESULTS.


I  will  read  a  few  passages  con-
tained in  a  modern  revelation,  given
through  the  prophet  Joseph  Smith,
on  the  22nd  and  the  2iird  days  of
September,  1832 —

And  the  Lord  confirmed  a  priesthood
also  upon  Aaron  and  \Jtd&  seed,  throughout


all  their  generations— which  priesthood  also
oontinueth  and  abideth  forever  with  the
priesthood  which  is  after  the  koik*&t  order
of  (J"d.

And  this  greater  priesthood  administereth
the  Gospel  and  huideth  the  key  of  the  mys-
teries of  the  kingdom,  even  the  key  ot  the
knowledge  of  God ;


THE  PRIESTHOODS,  ETC


363


Therefore,  hi  the  ordinance  thereof,  the
power  of  god  lines** manifested  ;

And  without  the  ordinance  thereof,  and
the  authority  of  the  priesthood,  the  power
of  godliness  is  not  manifest  unto  man  in  tlu-
flesh  ;

For  without  this  no  man  can  sec  the  face
of  God,  even  the  Father,  and  live.

Now  this  Moses  plainly  taught  to  the
children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and
sought  diligently  to  sanctify  his  people  that
they  might  behold  the  face  of  God  ;

But  they  hardened  their  hearts  and  could
not  endure  his  presence  ;  therefore  the  Lord
in  his  wrath  ( for  his  an^er  was  kindled
against  them  )  swore  that  they  should  not
entur  into  his  rest  while  in  the  wilderness,
which  rest  is  the  fullness  of  his  plory*

Therefore  he  took  Moses  out  of  their
midst,  and  the  holy  priesthood  ;

And  the  lesser  priesthood  con  tinned,  which
priesthood  hnldeth  the  key  of  the  mini-
ttterin^of  angels  and  the  preparatory  Gospel,

It  is  not  my  design  this  morning
to  speak  very  lengthily,  but  it  is  my
great  desire,  during  the  time  I  may
speak,  that  I  may  have  the  faith  and
prayers  of  all  the  Latter-day  Saints
present,  and  ot  every  person  who
desires  to  be  edified  and  instructed.
It  is  also  my  desire  that  I  may  have
a  portion  ot  the  Holy  Spirit  to  rest
upon  me,  that  the  words  which  I  may
speak  may  be  instructive  and  edify-  •
ing  to  those  who  hear.  That  is  the
object  of  speuking,  the  object  of
hearing — to  be  edified.

From  the  passages  I  have  read,  we
learn  that  God,  in  all  ages  of  the
world,  has  had  a  Priesthood  on  the
earth,  that  i*,  a  Priesthood  after  the
order  of  his  Sou,  sometimes  called
the  Priesthood  after  the  order  of
Welch i st -dec  ;  and  that  connected
with  this  Priesthood,  in  all  dispen-
sations, there  is  a  lesser  Priesthood,
called  sometimes  the  Priesthood
after  the  order  of  Aaron,  or  the
Aaronic  Priesthood,  which  is  merely
an  appendage  to  the  higher  Priest-
hood of  Melchisedec  ;  in  other  words,
it  is  includtd  in  the  Priesthood  of
Melchisedec,  It  id  more  especially
calkd  the  lesser  Priesthood,  because
those  ho  Ling  it,  and'  being  in
possession  of  no  higher  authority,


can  only  obtain  a  certain  portion
or  measure  of  the  blessings  that
the  Lord  has  in  store  for  his  people;
it  can  proceed  so  far  and  no  farther;
it  is  limited  in  its  nature,  its  power,
its  ordinances  and  its  ministry.  But
when  combined  with  the  higher
Priesthood  after  the  order  of  Mel-
,  chisedec,  it  then  can  receive  all  the
blessings  that  are  ordained  of  the
Almighty  to  be  bestowed  upon  his
people  in  any  dispensation.  Like
unto  the  Melchisedec  Priesthood,  it
is  everlasting  in  its  nature,  not  given
for  time  alone,  to  be  exercised  here
for  a  few  years  upon  the  earth  and
,  then  cease,  but  it  continues  forever,
with  the  Priesthood  which  is  after
the  holiest  order  of  God,

The  higher  Priesthood  after  the
order  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  are  told,
in  a  modern  revelation,  holds  the
power  to  commune  with  the  Church
of  the  First-born  that  are  in  heaven,
and  that  too  not  in  a  spiritual  sense"
alone ;  or,  as  some  would  infer,  to
commune  with  them  without  receiv-
ing any  revelation,  to  commune  with
them  without  beholding  their  per-
sonages; but  in  the  literal  sense,
even  the  same  as  one  man  communes
with  another.  It  holds  not  only  the
power  of  the  ministration  of  holy
angels  to  be  seen  personally,  but
also  the  power  of  beholding1  the
face  of  God  the  Father,  that  through
the  power  and  manifestations  of
the  spirit  of  God  and  of  his  angels
we  may  be  prepared  to  enter  into
the  presence  of  God  the  Father  in
the  world  to  come,  and  enjoy  con-
tinual communion  with  him,  and
be  crowned  with  the  glory  of  the
celestial  kingdom,  to  stand  in  our
place  and  calling  to  all  eternity,  in
connection  with  all  those  who  hold
the  Priesthood  in  the  eternal  worlds.

The  Priesthood  of  Aaron,  being
an  appendage  to  the  higher  Priest-
hood, has  power  to  administer  in


364  JOURNAL  OF

tempo  in  1  ordinances,  such  as  that 1
of  baptism  fur  remission  of  Fins,  the
administration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,
and  in  at  tending-  to  temporal  things
for  the  benefit  of  the  people  of  God.
Among  the  privileges  that  are
granted  to  this  lesser  Priest  hood  is
lo  hold  communion  with  holy  angels  j
that  may  Ixi  sent  down  from  heaven.

In  the  early  days  of  this  Church
the  Lord,  through  a  revelation,  set
furt h  tht1  various  appendages  oF  the
higher  Priesthood,  the  duties  of  its
several  offices  and  their  callings;
aUo  how  they  should  officiate,  audi
what  ordinances  they  were  permitted
to  administer,  and  what  was  not  per-  j
mi t ted  to  Le  administered  hy  tLose
holding  it4

It  seems  that  since  these  revcla-  j
tions  were  given,  the  Church,  da-  j
ring  its  history,  has  passed  throuuli
a  variety  oi  circumstances,  wherein
a  perfect  organization  according  to
the  rules  and  laws,  as  laid  do  vn  by  1
modern  revelation,  lias  not  been
entered  into.  Circumstances  always
did  more  or  less  to  alter  the  Gon-
dii ion  of  the  people.  Some,  by
virtue  of  their  Priesthood  have  ofti-  ,
ciated,  without  being  set  apart,  in
certain  callings  that  pertain  to  those
who  should  be  selected  and  set
apart  for  that  purpose.  Let  me
Leru  say,  for  the  benefit  of  those
%ho  have  not  studied  the  Ductrine
and  Covenants  or  the  Church,  that
it  wo  have  literal  descendants  of
A 'iron,  they  have  the  birthright,  |
through  their  obedience  to  the  Cms-
pel  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  the  bish-
<  prick,  which  pertains  to  the  lesser  [
Priesthood.  It  is  the  presiding  au-
thority over  the  lesser  Piiesthood;
they  have  the  right  to  claim  it,  and
to  all  the  keys  and  powers  pertaining
to  it,  they  have  the  right  to  be  or-
dained and  set  apart  to  that  calling
and  to  official  e  therein,  and  that  too
without  the  aid  of  two  counsel loiu


DISCOURSES.

That  is  what  we  Are  taught  in  mo-
dern revelation.  But  as  we  have
none  at  present,  to  our  knowledge,
< hut  belong  to  the  seed  of  Aaron,
I  that  has  the  right  to  this  by  line-
j  Hge,  the  Lord  has  pointed  oat  that
tho^e  who  are  ordained  to  the  higher
Priesthood  have  the  noht,  by  vir-
tue of  t hid  higher  authority,  to
administer,  when  set  apart  by  tho
First  PrcMMtnc-y,  or  under  their
direction  and  accord i tig  to  their
j  Instruction,  as  Bishops  to  officiate
!  in  I  he  Presidency  uf  the  lower  lViesU
hood.  This  order  has  bi en  followed
ever  since  the  Lord  revealed  these
ihings  to  this  Chinch-  A  Uiahup
most  be  ordained  to  the  high  Priest-
hood, and  by  authority  of  that
Priesthood  he  may  he  set  apart  as  a
Bishop  to  preside  over  the  leaser
Piiesliiod,  to  exercise  the  fu  no-
tions thereof,  wiih  the  exception  of
0O6  condition,  that  is,  he  must  havo
tsvu  counsel  has  ordained  from  annai^
the  high  Priests  of  the  Cduiclu
These  three  persons  must  officii ie  in
rehnioti  to  all  the  ordinances  that
pertain  to  the  lesser  Priesthood,
and  to  administer  in  temporal  things,
having  a  knowledge  of  ihem  by  i he
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  wo
are  taught  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants*

Now  what  I  wish  to  siy  in  relation
to  this  matter  is  this — In  some
portions  of  our  Territory,  instead
of  this  orgauiz  itiou  having  been
carried  out  in  all  ii*  perfection,  we
have  acted,  in  some  lew  instances,
for  the  time  being,  by  appointing  a
person  to  take  that  position,  when
lie  had  nofc  been  pr  viously  set  apart
to  that  special  calling.  We  mighb
refer  to  } eraons  in  some  few  of  our
settlements,  both  north  and  south,
whe  have  acted  as  Bishops  by  virtue
of  nppointuii  iit  only,  and  not.  ordi-
nation.

1  understand  now  that  the  Spirit


the  priesthood:^  etc.


of  the  Lord  has  manifested  mi  to  the
President  of  the  Church,  who  is  the  I
proper  authority,  fur  t ho  Twelve  to
go  forth  and  set  in  order  and  or-
gmlzri  more  perfectly  the  various
Brioches  that  are  located  through-
cut  all  the  Territory,  an  1  in  the  ad*
joining  Territories,  And  no  doubt
those  few  who  are  acting  x ti  the
Bisboprick  without  b**iii*f  ordained
wilt  receive  their  ordination,  and
there  may  he  many  changes,  in  order
to  introduce,  in  nil  its  perfection,  as
far  as  we  h?»ve  knowledge  and  um.er-
standing,  a  more  perfect  organizition
throughout  the  Church  in  these
mount  hhs.  I

Tue  object  of  this  perfect  organi-
z  it  ion  is  that  we  may  he  < -milled  to
greater  blessings  there  from  ;  that  we
may  he  entitled  to  a  greater  fullness

of  the  Holy  Spirit;  that  everything

mav  be  dictated  accoMin^  n>  the

i

mind  and  will  of  God,  not  onlv  in
spiritual  things,  but  also  in  regard
to  our  temporal  matter.*;  and  also
that  evnry  person  uny  k  \o#  his
place,  that  his  duties  may  he  as-
signed to  him,  and  hy  knowing
what  is  rtqiired,  that  all  may  the
more  diligently  seek  sifter  the  Holy
Ghost  to  direct  them  in  their  posi-
tions and  callings,  and  have  more
faith,  ra>re  assurance  before  God,
to  obtain  conii donee  before  t he*  hea-
vens, and  before  the  brethren,  in
order  that  their  ministry  may  b  riefir
the  people.  Y*u  are  well  aware
that  we  have  been  taught,  for  these
many  years,  the  great  necessity  of'
establishing  a  union  in  the  midst  of
this  people,  Although  we  are  the
most  united  people  upon  the  face  of
the  earth,  of  which  we  have  any
knowledge,  yet  we  are  f  ir  from  that
perfection  of  unity  which  should
characterize  the  Saints  of  the  Most
High  God.

I  can  see,  in  this  order  which  the
President  has  laid  before  us,  a  beauty,


a  consistency,  a  plan  which  the  Lord
I  lias  revealed  that  will  entitle  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  greater  blessings
and  privileges  through  which  that
union  will  be  brought  about  which
we  have  so  long  desired  in  our  hearts.

We  prc-ich  and  dec!  ire  to  all  peo-
ple that  God  has  laised  up  a  king-
dom to  prepare  the  way  before  tho
coming  of  Christ.  We  declare  to  all
men,  wherever  our  missionaries  i*of
that  this  is  the  grand  prepartion  for
the  coming  of  our  Lord  and  Sivior
to  refill  on  the  earth.  When  he  does
come,  that  part  of  the  prayer  which
he  taught  ns  to  titter  will  be  fulfilled,
namely,  "Thy  will  be  done  on  earth
as  it  is  done  in  heaven/ 1  Were  wo
1  permitted  to  have  the  veil  removed,
|  according  to  the  hy  mn  just  song,,
namely  that  "the  veil  should  be  rent
in  twain,"  and  were  we  to  behold  the
order  that  exists  in  yonder  heavecs
in  the  midst  of  celestial  hosts,  we
should  there  see  a  perfect  union — no
dissensions,  no  bitterness  of  feeling,
no  difference  of  ideas  or  opinion  in
rejird  to  their  duties,  bat  all  nnder-
standing  as  one,  and  all  moving  as
one  body  to  fulfill  and  accomplish  the
puj  poses  of  Jehovah,

Now,  his  will  must  be  done  on
the  earth  as  it  done  in  heaven,  in
order  that  that  prayer  which  has  been
offered  up  by  Ids  people  ever  since  it
was  revealed,  may  be  ftiUiiled  to  the
very  letter. Hence  t he  great  necessity
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  preparing
themselves  by  being  united,  even  as
I  the  hosts  of  heaven  are. For  remem-
ber that  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  "  that
;  in  the  disposition  of  the  fulness  of
times  he  mi^ht  pat  her  together  in
I  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are
in  heaven  and  which  are  on  the  earth;
even  in  him  " If  then  the  General
Assembly  and  Church  of  the  First-
born are  to  come  down  out  of  heaven
to  dwell  on  the  earth,  how  important
it  is  that  the  Latter-day  Saints  sl.ouH


-366  JOURNAL  OF

be  prepared  to  join  this  grand  rnm-
pruiy,  being  united  as  they  are,  having
no  feeling  of  dissension,  no  division
in  their  midst,  no  evil  or  corruption
of  any  nature  ;  no  covetousness,  no
feeling  of  individuality  in  regard  to
wealth,  hut  having  all  upon  the  nltar
ready  to  subserve  the  purposes  of  the
Most  high  in  building  up  his  king-
dom upon  tha  earth.

Tii is,  therefore,  is  the  purpose  of
this  more  perfect  organization  which
is  being  introduced  among  the  Bran-
dies throughout  the  Territory  of
Utah  ;  it  is  to  entitle  us  to  these
great  blessings  promised  in  the  word
of  God,  It  is  not  only  to  build  a
Temple,  but  many  Temples,  as  the
case  may  require.  This  is  not  the
only  duty  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
although  this  duty  is  one  of  great
importance.  But  then  is  it  not  of
still  greater  importance  that  we,  as
a  people,  when  these  Temples  are
built,  and  finished,  and  dedicated,
should  be  prepared  to  enter  into  the
courts  of  the  same,  to  go  in  there
with  a  perfect  oneness  and  union  of
feeling  f  Can  we  expect  in  these  j
holy  Temples,  which  are  to  be  dedi-
cated and  set  apart  to  the  name  of
the  Lord,  to  receive  the  blessings  j
promised  in  Temples,  unless  we  are
a  people  of  one  heart  and  one  mind?
I  think  not  I  read,  in  one  of  the
revelations  contained  in  this  book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  that
when  God  commanded  a  Temple  to
be  built  in  Jackson  County,  in  the
State  of  Missouri,  he  made  this  pro-
mise— "  Wherefore,"  said  the  Lord,
"I  commanded  the  people  of  that
county,  and  the  people  around
about  in  the  settlements,  to  build  a
Temple  unto  my  name,  and  inas-
much as  my  people  build  a  Temple
unto  my  name,  and  suffer  no  un-
clean thing  to  enter  into  it,  that  it 1
be  not  defiled,  behold  I  will  come
into  it ;  1  will  be  there,  and  my


DISCOURSES.

glory  shall  be  there.  And  it  shall
come  to  pass,  that  every  soul  that
shall  come  into  that  Temple,  who  is
pure  in  heart,  shall  see  my  face/*
This  is  one  of  the  promises  and  pri-
vileges pertaining  to  the  High
Priesthood,  after  the  order  of  the
Son  of  God.  This  is  one  of  the
blessings,  ordained  for  all  dispensa-
tions from  the  earliest  period  to  the
closing  up  of  the  last  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times  ;  that  is,  in
all  those  dispensations  the  righteous
were  to  be  blessed  with  the  powers,
and  keys,  and  blessings  of  the  High
Priesthood.  For  this  purpose,  they
were  to  build  Temples  to  his  name.
In  these  Temples,  if  they  were  pure
in  heart,  they  would  have  this  privi-
ledge  of  beholding  the  face  of  God  ;
and  without  this  Priesthood  and  the
ordinances  thereof,  no  man  in  the
flesh  could  behold  the  face  of  God
the  Father  and  live.

We  have  accomplished  a  great  work
thus  far.  I  fee),  in  connection  with
my  brethren,  to  rejoice  exceedingly
in  the  work  that  the  Lord  our  God
has  performed  in  the  earth,  through
us  his  people.  Truly  he  hath  fulfilled
that  prophecy  given  in  1830 — u  The
decree  hath  gone  forth  from  the  Fa-
ther, that  mine  elect  sh*dl  be  gath-
ered in  from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth  to  one  place  upon  the  face  of
the  land."  This  revelation  was  given
before  there  wan  any  gathering  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  You  are  my
witnesses,  and  you  are  also  witnesses
to  yourselves  that  the  Lord  has  ful-
filled this  to  the  very  letter.  His
elect  from  the  four  winds  have  come
by  thousands,  and  hy  tens  of  thou-
sands, and  have  gathered  to  one  place
upon  the  face  of  this  land.  What
has  been  the  object  of  this  gathering?
It  is  to  learn  more  perfectly  of  the
ways  of  God,  which  we  could  not
have  learned  in  a  scattered  condition ;
in  our  native  countries,  while  mixed


THE  PRIESTHOODS,  ETC.


267


up  with  the  wicked  and  self-right^
eous.  We  are  now  partly  isolated  ;
and  we  have  come  from  the  ends  of
the  earth,  that  by  oar  united  faith
we  may  accomplish  that  which  we
could  not  have  done  by  our  own  in-
dividual faith  alone*

By  and  by,  when  this  people  shall
have  sanctified  themselves  before  the
Lord,  and  organized  according  to
the  laws  and  commandments  of  God,
having  been  taught  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  his  ser-
vants that  minister  in  their  midst,
carrying  oat  the  counsels  and  teach-
ings  they  receive,  they  will  become
like  unto  one  body,  as  it  is  writteu
in  the  parable  contained  in  the  Book
of  Mormon,  that  the  Lord  will  prune
the  rineyard,  or  take  some  of  the
branches  away  and  graft  them  into
another  branch,  etc. ;  he  will  make  a
change  of  the  branches;  he  will
prune  the  trees  and  dig  about  them,
that  the  roots  and  the  tops  thereof
may  be  kept  equal.  Understand  that
the  roots  and  the  tops  thereof  shall
be  made  equal,  so  that  the  tops  and
branches  may  not  overcome  the  roots
by  taking  strength  unto  themselves.
Why? That  the  tree  may  bring


forth  that  fruit  which  is  the  most
precious  unto  the  Lord.

Therefore  he  is  gathering  us  here,
that  we  may  become  like  unto  one
body,  being  sanctified,  and  become,
as  another  revelation  says,  "  as  fair
as  the  sun,  as  clear  as  the  moon,  that
the  banners  of  my  people  may  be  ter-
rible unto  all  the  nations  of  the
earth."  Why  terrible  ?  Because  of
the  power  of  the  Lord  which  will  be
in  the  midst  of  his  people,  because
of  the  manifestations  of  heaven  unto
his  people,  because  the  nations  will
hear  that  God  is  indeed  in  the  midst
of  Zion.  They  will  hear  all  these
things,  and  the  wicked  will  fear  and
tremble.  They  will  fear  because  of
their  iniquity  ;  fear  and  tremble,  be-
cause of  their  wickedness ;  fear  and
tremble,  because  they  have  supported
all  manner  of  wickedness  and  cor-
ruption, division  and  strife,  and
abominations  of  every  kind  in  their
midst.  Therefore  fearful ness  will
seisse  upon  them,  and  they  will  know
of  a  surety  that  the  Lord  God  is  in
the  midst  of  the  people  of  Zion,  that
his  power  is  there,  that  his  spirit  is
there,  and  that  he  manifests  himself
there  in  great  glory.  Amen.


3G3  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Pit  AY  Eli  i:Y  PUESIDKNT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS


Dedicating  the  Tkmplh tub  Lpnu  at  St George,  ok  tub  sixth  day

of  April,  1S77»  at  10  o'clock  a,m.


(Reported  ly  Geo  Ft  Olbbs )


Almighty  and  Everlasting  God,
our  heaven  Iv  Eat  her,  thou  who  art
the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob  ;  the  God  of  Moses,  of  David,
of  Solomon  5  the  God  and  Father  of
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ ;
the  God  of  Joseph  and  of  Brigham,
even  the  God  or  Israel;  thou  who
art  the  Father  of  our  spirits ;  it  is  to
ther*  we  approach  this  morning  to
worship  and  to  offer  up  our  dedica-
tory prayer  in  thanksgiving  and
praise  for  this  offering,  even  a  Tem-
ple which  thou  hast  enabled  thy
people  to  rear  unto  thy  most  holy
name.

We  realize,  our  Father,  that  we
are  dependent  upon  thee,  and  that
although  we  are  shut  out  from  thy
presence,  inheriting  many  we:  ik-
nesses,  and  made  subject  to  many
temptations  and  sins,  we  are  thy
children,  and  as  such  we  come  be-
fore thee  in  the  depths  of  humility,
with  broken  hearts  and  contrite
spirits,  praying  that  thine  indul-
gence, thy  tender  morcy  and  coin-
passion  may  be  extended  toward
us,  and  that  thou  wilt  forgive
everything  that  thine  all-seeing  and
searching  eye  hath  beheld  amiss  in

We  thank  thee,  0  Lord,  that  thy
people,  whom  thou  hast  led  to
this  distant  land  and  whom  thou


hast  preserved  by  thine  own  right
arm,  have  been  permitted  to  es-
tablish themselves  in  the  homes
which  thou  hast  given  them,  and
that,  through  thy  continued*  bless-
ings, they  have  been  enabled  to
gather  together  the  materials  of
which  this  budding  is  composed,
to  put  together  and  erect  the  same,
even  a  Temple,  which  we  dedicate
and  now  consecrate  to  thee,  that  it
may  be  holy  unto  thee,  the  Lord
our  God,  fur  sacred  and  holy  pur-
poses, and  that  "  the  blessing,
even  life  forevennore,"  may  be
commanded  here,  from  heaven,  even
from  thy  presence,  and  may  flow
through  the  ordinance  which  ap*
pertain  unto  thy  holy  place,  unto
us  thy  children,  We  pray  that  the
blessings  pertaining  to  our  eternal
salvation  and  to  the  establishing  of
thy  kingdom  upon  this  thine  earth
may  be  poured  out  upon  thy  holy
Priesthood  and  thy  people,  who
shall  worship  and  officiate  dn  this
thy  holy  House.

We  dedicate  and  consecrate  the
foundation  of  this  building  unmi
which  it  stands.  Cause,  O  Lord,
that  it  may  not  give  way  nor  yield
in  consequence  of  any  destructive
elements  that  may  be  in  the  soil,
or  may  the  nature  of  those  ele-
ments be  changed  so  as  to  become
strengthening  instead  of  weakenings


PRAYER,  ETC,


that  the  same  may  always  remain
firm  and  sound.

We  dedicate  and  consecrate  the
lower  and  upper  walls  of  the  build-
ing and  the  buttresses  which  sup-
port the  same,  and  all  the  material
— the  stone,  the  lime  and  the  sand,
which  compose  the  mortar,  and  all
that  pertains  thereunto,  together
with  the  flagging,  the  timbers,  the
joists,  the  floors,  and  the  founda-
tions upon  which  they  rest,  that
the  same  may  be  protected  and  pre-
served, that  none  of  the  elements,
either  through  storms,  lire  or  earth-
quakes, may  have  power  to  destroy,
disturb  or  injure  this  thy  holy  \
House.  We  also  dedicate  and  con-
secrate  unto  thee  all  the  openings,
entrances,  doors  and  windows,  and
their  fastenings,  of  the  basement  ,
story.  We  also  present  to  thee  the
Baptismal  Font,  in  which  is  [Re-
formed the  ordinance  of  baptism
tor  the  Irving  and  the  dead ;  with
the  steps,  the  railing  around,  and
the  oxen  upon  which  it  rests,  the
foundations,  together  with  the  con*
nections  and  apparatus  for  furnish-
ing, conveying,  holding  and  heating
the  water,  with  all  that  pertains
to  it,  dedicating  and  consecrating
all  unto  thee,  the  Lord,  our  Fa*
ther  and  God,  that  they  may  be  holy
unto  thy  name.  We  pray  that  thy
blessing  may  attend  those  of  thy
servants  who  administer  and  who
may  officiate  in  the  ordinances  that
may  be  performed  therein,  in  behalf
of  thy  people,  and  in  behalf  of  those,
our  progenitors,  our  relatives  and
friends,  who  have  gone  before  us  to
the  spirit  world,  so  far  as  we  may
be  enabled  and  permitted  to  officiate
for  them.

We  dedicate  to  thee  also  the
rooms  of  this  building  in  the  first,
second  and  third  storifcs,  with  the
pillars  and  supports  thereof,  in-
cluding the  side  rooms,  with  the

No.  24,


partition  walls,  for  the  purposes  for
which  they  may  be  used  by  the
Priesthood,  for  prayer,  for  worship,
for  councils  or  meetings,  or  for  ad-
ministering the  holy  ordinances  of
thy  House,  that  they  may  be  holy
unto  thee,  the  Lord  our  God.  We
also  dedicate  the  roof  and  the  tower,
with  its  dome,  its  covering  and
walls,  and  the  walls  and  the  battle-
ments around  and  above  the  roof,
with  the  timbers  and  frames  apd
supports  upon  which  the  roof  apd
tower  rest,  and  are  made  permanent,
and  the  fastenings  and  all  that
appertains  thereunto,  and  the  mate-
rials of  which  they  are  composed.
We  dedicate  also  the  entrances,  the
steps  and  the  circular  stairs,  with
the  railings  and  bannisters  there-
unto attached.  Grant,  O  Lord,  that
the  roof  which  covers  all  may
shield  and  protect  this  building
from  the  storms  which  may  come
upon  it  We  dedicate  the  pipes
which  convey  the  water  from  the
roof,  with  their  fastenings  and  the
materials  of  which  they  are  com-
posed. We  also  dedicate  the  chim-
neys, flues,  conduits,  and  sewers,
and  openings  for  ventilation  ;  also
all  the  doors,  windows,  and  glass,
the  hinges  and  nails  and  screws,
the  door  locks  and  handles,  the
window  weights  and  cords  and
fastenings  of  every  kind ;  and  all
the  paint,  putty,  plaster,  white-
wash and  all  the  ornamental  work
within  and  without,  everything
used  in  the  construction  and  com-
pletion of  the  entire  building,  from
the  foundation  unto  the  top  thereof,
that  all  may  be  holy  unto  the  Lord
our  God.  -  ro

Holy  Father,  we  dedicate  unto
thee  the  furniture  and  uten>its
used  in  the  holy  washings,  anoints
iugs  and  ceremonies  of  this  thy
holy  House  ;  also  the  curtains  and
frames  for  partitions  ;  together  with

Vol  XVIIL


*


370  JOURNAL  OF

the  altars  and  their  cushions,  and  1
the  tables  and  the  chairs,  stools  and  i
desks,  that  all  may  be  sanctified  for
the  use  and  purposes  intended.  We
dedicate  also  the  tower  on  the  out-
side, containing  the  fountain,  also
the  aqueduct  and  pipes  conveying
the  water  thereunto*  We  dedicate
the  block  of  land  upon  which  this  .
Temple  is  situated,  and  the  fence
'which  encloses  it,  with  its  openings
and  gates,  the  hinges,  hangings  and
fastenings,  and  the  materials  of
which  they  are  composed  ;  also  the
roads  and  walks  leading  thereto  and
i  through  the  same.

We  dedicate  and  consecrate  the
pulpits,  with  the  cushions  thereon
and  the  ornamental  fringe  around,
together  with  the  steps,  railing  and
bannisters,  and  the  seats,  with  the
cushions  on  them  ;  and  the  floors
and  the  foundations  upon  which
they  stand.  May  nothing  unholy
or  impure  ever  enter  here,  but  may
the  same  be  holy  unto  the  Lord
our  God.  Especially  do  we  pray
that  thy  power  may  rest  upon  thy
servants  who  may  occupy  these
pulpits  when  they  shall  minister  by
virtue  of  their  holy  calling,  either
in  preaching,  in  counseling,  or  in
transacting  business  pertaining  to
the  welfare  of  thy  Church  and  king-
dom here  upon  the  earth.

We  implore  thy  blessings  up>n
the  various  congregations  of  thy
people  who  may  assemble  in  this
House  from  time  to  time,  both  in
their  incomings  and  outgoings,  and
may  thy  blessing  and  thy  spirit
dwell  herein  and  rest  upon  them,
for  their  comfort  and  edification,
and  abide  richly  in  their  hearts,  that
they  may  learn  further  of  thy  ways
and  walk  in  thy  paths.

We  desire  also  to  commend  these
thy  servants  and  people  to  thy  kind
care  and  keeping,  that  they  may
be  preserved  uuto  thee  from  the


DISCOURSES.

powers  of  fhe  wicked  and  ungodly,
and  from  the  powers  of  all  evil  and
opposing  influences,  from  whose
grasp  thou  hast  heretofore  delivered
us  in  bringing  us  here  to  these  val-
leys and  the  fastnesses  of  these
mountains.  We  acknowledge  thee
and  the  great  deliverance  thou  hast
wrought  out  for  us,  and  we  pray
thee,  O  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
to  accept  of  these  thy  servants  and
people,  and  preserve  and  keep  us
in  thy  most  holy  keeping.  Let  the
ministering  angels  from  thy  pre-
sence attend  us,  and  let  thy  grace
and  power  be  upon  us,  that  we  may
walk  in  the  paths  of  purity  and
holiness,  and  be  enabled  to  bring
forth  thy  purposes  and  establish  t  hy
kingdom  in  all  its  fullness,  admin-
j  istering  in  all  the  ordinances  per-
taining to  thy  House,  and  also  send
forth  salvation  to  all  the  children
I  of  men,  scattered  abroad  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth,  lor  their
redemption  from  sin  and  bondage,
even  from  gross  darkness.

We  now  ask,  our  Father,  that  we
thy  servants  and  people  may  be  ac-
ceptable unto  thee,  praying  thee  to
grant  that  thy  Holy  Spirit  may  per-
vade each  heart  before  thee,  that
our  worship  may  be  such  as  thou
detightest  to  behold,  and  that  the
revelations  of  thy  mind  and  will
may  continue  to  be  made  manifest
1  through  thy  servant  Brigham  and
all  of  thy  servants  upon  whom  thou
hast  conferred  the  authority  of  the
holy  Priesthood.

We  feel  not  to  multiply  words  be-
fore thee,  for  language  is  inadequate
to  express  the  fullness  of  the  feelings
and  emotions  of  our  souls  in  being
thus  privileged  to  meet  before  thee
in  this  sacred,  this  holy  place.

Accept,  0  God,  of  this  tribute  of
our  hearts,  and  let  thy  peace  and
blessing  dwell  and  abide  here  in
this  holy  Temple,  which  we  now


NECESSITY  FOR  EFFORT,  ETC,


371


with  uplifted  hearts  and  hands  pre- 1
sent  and  consecrate  and  dedicate
entire  as  a  sacred  offering  unto  thee,
far  thy  divine  acceptance.  May  it
stand  as  a  monument  of  purity  and
holiness  as  long  as  the  earth  shall
remain,  commemorative  of  thy  great
goodness  towards  us  thy  people,  and


thy  name  shall  have  the  honor,  the
praise  and  glory,  for  we  ask  all  in
Jesus*  name.  And  unto  thee  and
our  blessed  Lord  and  Savior  and  to
the  Holy  Spirit  be  all  power,  might
and  dominion,  worlds  without  end
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  at  a  two  days'  mbbtimi  held  by  the  St.  George  Stake  of
Ziox,  in  tue  Temple,  at  St.  George,  Thursday  Morning,

Afbil  5,  1877.


(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

NECESSITY  FOR  EFFORT — REGULATION  OF  TEMPORAL  AFFAIRS — CON-
SECRATION AND  STEWARDSHIP  —  PREPARATION  FOR  BUILDING  IN
JACKSON  COUNTY — RESPONSIBILITY  OF  PRESIDENTS — HOW  CONFIDENCE
IS  CREATED — THE  UNITED  ORDER — DESIRES  FOR  THE  FUTURE.


In  occupying  the  time  this  morn-
ing, I  wish  in  the  first  place  to  call
your  attention  to  the  fact  that  we
are  Latter-day  Saints,  or  at  least
ought  to  be,  and  that  as  such  we
are  dependent  upon  the  Lord  for
our  instruction ;  this  is  in  accord-
ance with  our  faith  that  we  have  to
look  to  him  for  assistance  under  all
circumstances,  in  all  places,  in  all
our  affairs  of  life,  and  in  all  matters
pertaining  to  furthering  us  on  in  the
principles  of  godliness.

Assembled  together  as  we  are
this  morning,  it  is  very  necessary
that  we  ask  the  Lord  for  his  spirit,
the  spirit  of  inspiration,  to  rest  upon
us  as  speakers  and  as'  hearers,  that
we  may  be  enabled  to  comprehend


tilings  that  may  be  spoken,  and  that
they  may  be  adapted  to  our  indivi-
dual needs.

It  is  impossible  to  advance  in
the  principles  of  truth,  to  increase
in  heavenly  knowledge,  except  we
exercise  our  reasoning  faculties  and
exert  ourselves  in  a  proper  manner.
We  have  an  instance  recorded  in
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants  of  a
misunderstanding  on  the  part  of
Oliver  Powdery,  touching  this  prin-
ciple. The  Lord  promised  him  the
gift  to  translate  ancient  records.
Like  many  of  us  to-day,  he  had
misconceptions  in  regard  to  the
exercise  of  the  gift.  He  thought
all  that  was  necessary  for  him  to  do,
inasmuch  as  this  gift  had  been  pro-


372  JOURNAL  OF

mised  him  of  God,  was  to  allow
his  mind  to  wait  in  idleness  with-
out effort  until  it  should  operate
spontaneously.  But  when  those
records  were  placed  before  him,
there  was  no  knowledge  communi-
cated, they  still  remained  sealed,  as
it  were,  for  no  power  to  translate
came  upon  him.

Although  the  gift  to  translate
had  been  conferred,  he  could  not
prosecute  the  work,  simply  because
he  failed  to  exert  himself  before
God  with  the  view  of  developing
the  gift  within  him  ;  and  he  became
greatly  disappointed,  and  the  Lord,
in  his  goodness  and  mercy,  informed
him  of  his  mistake,  using  the  fol-
lowing language —

4i  Behold,  you  have  not  under-
stood ;  you  have  supposed  that  I
would  give  it  unto  you  when  you
tood  no  thought,  save  it  was  to  ask
me  ;  but,  behold,  I  say  unto  you.
that  you  must  study  it  out  in  your
mind ;  then  yeu  must  ask  me  if  it
be  right,  and  if  it  is  right  I  will
cause  that  your  bosom  shall  burn
within  you/1  etc.

So  in  regard  to  us,  respecting  the
things  which  we  are  undertaking.
If  we  expect  to  improve,  to  advance
in  the  work  immediately  before  us,
and  finally  to  obtain  possession  of
those  gifts  and  glories,  coming  up
to  that  condition  of  exaltation  we
anticipate,  we  must  take  thought
and  reflect,  we  must  exert  ourselves,
and  that  too  to  the  utmost  of  our
ability.

The  text  given  us  by  President
Young  yesterday,  and  to  which  we,
in  our  prayer  this  morning,  asked
God  to  direct  our  remarks,  was  the
work  with  which  we  are  now  im-
mediately concerned,  pertaining  to
our  present  wants  and  necessities.
The  question  here  arises,  How
shall  we  regulate  our  temporal  af-
fairs so  as  to  qualify  us  to  perform


DISCOURSES.

the  duties  and  obligations  devolving
upon  us  to-day,  and  secure  to  our-
selves the  blessings  of  eternal  life?

To  this  subject,  so  far  as  the  Lord
will  give  me  his  Holy  Spirit,  through
the  exercise  of  your  faith,  I  wish  to
speak  this  morning.  I  desire,  how-
ever, to  confine  myself  more  par-
ticularly to  the  subject  relating  to
our  financial  union,  uniting  our-
selves together  as  brethren  who
have  entered  into  the  everlasting
covenant  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  expecting  to  dwell
together  in  the  presence  of  God  in
the  celestial  world.

We  have  been  told,  through  the
revelations  of  God,  and  to  which  our
attention  lias  often  been  called,  that
unless  we  became  one  in  temporal
!  as  well  as  spiritual  things,  it  were
useless  anticipating  the  fullness  of
celestial  glory,  or  a  state  of  oneness
in  the  spiritual  things  of  God*  But
what  course  we  are  to  take  in  order
to  arrive  at  this  most  desirable  con-
dition seems  to  remain  a  difficult,
unsolved  problem.  Doubtless  many
have  asked  themselves,  what  can  we
do,  and  how  shall  we  do  it  ?

Well,  let  our  minds  revert  for  a
few  minutes  to  the  time  when  we
received  the  fullness  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  in  the  countries
where  it  first  reached  us.  As  soon
as  we  became  convinced  of  the
truth  and  that  the  Elders  who
preached  the  Gospel  were  the  ser-
vants of  God,  we  offered  ourselves
as  candidates  for  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins,  receiving  the
Holy  Ghost  through  the  laying  on
of  their  hands,  and  then  felt  deter-
mined to  do  whatever  the  Lord
should  require  through  his  servants
and  continue  to  follow  their  coun-
sels in  all  things,  even  to  the  sacri-
fice of  all  we  possessed,  if  neeessary,
whether  pertaining  to  the  world' s
wealth  or  that  which  we  held  in


NECESSITY  FOR  EFFORT,  ETC.


373


higher  and  dearer  esteem.

We  learned  an  important  and  sig-  '
nificant  tact,  that  we  were  his  off-
spring, inheriting,  though  only  in
infantile  form,  the  same  attributes  '
he  himself  possessed,  and  that,
through  probationary  experience,
by  passing  the  ordeals  of  earth,
rejecting  the  evil  and  accepting  the
good,  these  attributes  could  be  de-
veloped until  eventually  we  might
receive  a  fullness  of  the  godhead,
and  dwell  in  the  presence  of  the
Father.  We  became  acquainted
with  this  fact,  and  were  convinced
in  our  hearts  that  the  object  which
now  appeared  before  us,  was  well
worthy  of  all  that  we  could  bestow
upon  it.  Hence  we  resolved  that
we  would  accomplish  the  undertak-
ing, though  at  the  sacrifice  of  our
all.  We  well  understood  that  in
order  to  attain  to  that  position  that
would  entitle  us  to  this  exaltation,
it  would  be  necessary  to  submit
ourselves  wholly  to  the  mind  and
will  of  God.  We  felt  in  our  hearts
to  consecrate  our  wives,  our  chil-
dren and  our  property,  if  we  had
any,  and  our  time  and  abilities,  to
the  service  of  God,  Hail  this  law
of  consecration  been  presented  at
that  time  it  no  doubt  would  have
been  hailed  with  joy,  as  it  was  in
exact  accordance  with  the  spirit  of
our  covenants.  I

According  to  the  order  of  the
celestial  world,  as  revealed  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  respecting  the
property  we  might  possess,  we  were
required  to  consecrate  all  to  the
Lord,  and  then  to  be  made  stew-
ards, as  pointed  out  by  revelation
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, and  wen?  to  continue  to  de-
vote that  which  might  he  entrusted
to  us  to  the  service  of  Got  I  ;  and  so
tar  as  we  increased  the  property  of
our  stewardship  we  were  to  devote  I
the  same  to  the  benefit  of  the  king- 1


dom  of  God,  which  would  be  used
for  the  building  of  Temples,  emi-
grating and  sustaining  the  poor,
and  for  carrying  on  the  great  work
of  redeeming  Israel.  This  feeling,
which  we  entertained  at  the  begin-
ning, was  to  continue  to  burn  in
our  bosoms,  and  we  were  to  be
faithful  and  honest  in  our  profes-
sions, ftfj  '*

I  know  that  many  of  us  when  we
i  came  to  the  valleys,  conformed  to
this  km  of  consecration,  wh-ch  is
now  published  in  the  Book  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants.  We  deeded
our  property,  and  many  were  wil-
ling, perhaps  not  all,  that,  if  neces-
sary, every  part  and  portion  of  it
should  have  been  used  as  the  ser-
vants of  God  should  have  directed.
This  was  the  kind  of  feeling  that
we  then  entertained,  and  just  as
long  as  we  maintained  this  condi-
tion of  mind,  of  willing  obedience,
it  was  all  that  was  required.  But  I
:  fear  that  this  feeling,  which  gave
us  so  much  joy,  which  tended  to  in-  .
crease  our  tnith  and  confidence  in
God  and  in  one  another,  has  not  -
continued  to  grow  correspondingly
with  our  general  prosperity,  ex-
perience and  knowledge  of  the  Gos-
pel. My  testimony  to  you  is  that,
so  far  as  this  is  the  case,  we  stand
I  this  day  not  wholly  approved  of
God,  although  we  have  the  privi-
lege of  worshipping  in  this  Temple,
reared  to  his  holy  name.  But  just
so  far  as  this  willingness  exists  in
!  our  hearts  to  appropriate  our  means
that  we  have  accumulated  tor  the
upbuilding  of  the  kingdom  of  God
ou  the  earth,  and  that  too  without
grudging,  even  as  the  former-day
Saints  laid  down  theirs  at  the  feet
of  the  Apostles,  s  >  far  are  we  ap-
proved and  accepted  of  God,  Who,
among  the  Latter-day  Saints  within
I  the  hearing  of  my  voice  this  daj?
I  could  fail  to  comprehend  this  ?


374


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


In  much  of  our  business  relations  one
with  another*  there  does  not  exist  that
spirit  of  union  and  brotherly  interest  that
should  be  maintained.  We  need  to  take
such  a  course  as  will  enable  us  to  acquire  it,
and  this  spirit  should  prevail  throughout
&U  our  settlements.

Who  cannot  perceive  the  hand  of  God  in
bringing  us  away  from  the  turmoil  and
strife  of  the  business  world  to  these  moun-
tain vales,  where  we  have  the  opportunity
ami  the*  privilege  of  building  up  villages
and  cities  upon  the  principle  of  unity  which
has  been  revealed  to  us,  thus  affording  that
neoe  *sary  discipline  which  we  could  not  have
obtained  among  the  cities  of  the  Gentiles?
This  training  cannot  be  acquired  in  one  year,
nor  in  five  years,  but  its  acquisition  is  en-
hanced in  ]jroportion  to  our  willingness  to
make  sacrifices  in  <&rder  to  obtain  it.  By
and  by  the  Lord  will  have  prepared  the  w  ay
for  some  to  return  to  J ackson  County,  there
to  build  up  the  Centre  Stake  of  Zion  How
easy  this  work  can  be  accomplished,  after
we  have  learned  to  build  up  cities  and  Tem-
ples here  to  his  divine  acceptance !  Our
present  experience  ia  a  very  needful  one.
Without  it,  we  should  be  totally  unfitted  for
the  performance  of  such  a  work.  We
read  that  the  Temple  which  Solomyn  built
was  erected  without  the  sound  of  a  hammer
being  heard.  There  had  been  a  previous
preparation  and  Pan  experience  gained  in
some  distant  locality,  and  a  proper  train-
ing* The  materials  were  accurately  pre-
pared elsewhere,  and  when  brought  toge-
ther were  ready  for  setting,  each  piece  to
its  proper  place.  As  knowledge  and  effici-
ency are  obtained  gradually,  we  may  ex-
pect that  the  experience  that  we  are  getting
now  in  learning  how  to  build  up  cities
in  our  present  condition,  conforming  as
near  as  possible  to  the  holy  order  of  God,
is,  it},  order  to  prepare  us  by  and  by  to  re-
turn to  Missouri,  whence  we  were  driven,
an  J  there  build  up  cities  and  Temples  to
the  name  of  the  Most  High,  upon  which  his
glory  will  defend.  A  condition  of  willing-
ness to  conform  our  will  to  the  divine  will
is  what  we  need.  It  might  not  bp  deemed
policy  to  enter  into  covenants  by  deed,  in
our  property  matters,  though  it  may  be
hereafter,  fent  so  long  as  the  emotions  of
our  souls  prompt  us  to  exclaim,  in  the  lan-
guage of  Joshua,  that  14 1  and  my  house*
bold  will  serve  the  Lord,"  so  long  as  this
willingness  dwells  in  our  hearts,  to  give
ourselves  up  entirely  to  the  service  of  God,
we  are  then  in  the  condition  to  ask  the
Father  to  hasten  the  day  when  his  will
shall  be  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven  ;  and
further,  when  the  proper  time  comes  to
require  the  use  of  our  property  in  the  in-
terests of  the  great  work  we  are  engaged
in,  the  bare  mention  of  it  will  be  sufficient.
But,  we  ask,  should  not  the  Bishop  who
operates  in  our  temporal  matters  be  a  very
wise  and  good  man  ? Certainly  he  should.,


and  a  man  of  honor  and  integrity,  full  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  loving  his  neighbor  as
himajalf,  and  loving  the  Lord  our  God  with
all  hi*  might,  mind  and  strength.  On  this,
we  are  told,  *'  hang  the  law  and  the
Prophets/*  Blessed  is  he  in  whom  these
two  principles  aiv  developed,  for  such  a
one  is  without  condemnation ;  he  stands
the  peer  of  him  referred  to  in  the  Scriptures
by  the  Savior  as  one  "without  ifiiile."
The  people  will  eoon  learn  to  confide  in  such
a  man,  as  be  can  establish  unmistakable
roof  before  God  and  before  his  brethren  that
e  obeys  these  commandments  in  which  are
involved  all  that  the  Prophets  ever  lived
for.

We  will  suppose,  further,  that  such  an
individual  as  I  have  described,  who  really
had  obeyed  these  commandments,  were
placed  to  preside  over  a  city  of  a  thousand
people,  all  of  whom  tot*  wrre  living  in  the
advanced  condition  referred  to.  H>  must
bear  in  mind  his  important  position,  high
responsibilities,  and  who  appointed  him  to
this  position,  he  or  they  in  whom  God  had
vested  the  authority.  Why  is  such  a  man
called  to  act  as  president  over  a  people  ?
Is  it  in  order  to  acquire  an  influence  and
then  to  use  that  influence  directly  for  his
own  aggrandisement?  No,  but  on  the  con-
trary, lie  is  called  to  act  in  such  a  position
on  the  same  principle  as  the  Priesthood  was
given  to  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  should
make  sacrifice*  For  himself?  No,  but  in
the  interests  of  the  people  over  whom  he
I  nvsit  l".  Would  he  be  required  t«  >  offer  him-
self up  on  the  cross  as  did  the  Savior  ?  Not
but  to  become  the  servant  of  his  brethren,
not  their  uiastrr,  and  to  work  in  their  in-
terest and  welfare.  Not  to  exercise  the  in-
fluence thus  obtained  to  benefit  himself f  his
family  and  relatives  and  personal  friends,
but  esteeming  all  as  his  brethren,  having
rights  in  common  with  himself  and,  there-
fore, seeking  to  blesa  and  benefit  all  equally
according  to  the talents and  worthiness

they  may  poasess,  and  thus  by  so  doing
develop  in  himself  that  fatherly  feeling
which  always  exists  in  the  bosom  of  the
Father,

At  the  present  time  it  i*  too  often  the
case  that  the  men  who  are  called  to  act  in
such  position^,  instead  of  thus  acting  ac-
cording to  their  holy  calling,  use  their
infl  uence,  their  Pries  thood<  the  sacred
powers  coferred  upon  them,  for  their  own
benefit  and  that  of  their  children  and  per-
sonal friends.  This  is  highly  improper*  it  is
wrong  and  displeasing  in  the  sight  of  God  ;
and  of  this  sin  we  are  called  upon  to  re-
pent, by  putting  it  away  from  u*,  and  be-
gi nning  to  Jive  the  lives  of  Latter-day
Saints,  according  to  the  sacred  covenants
we  have  entered  into.

Wh«n  you  find  a  man  who  takes  the
same  interest  in  those  over  whom  he  pre-
sides as  he  does  in  himself  and  family,  you
will  naturally  begin  to  have  confidence  in


NECESSITY  FOR  EFFORT,  ETC.


375


that  individual.  But  as  soon  as  ynu  fin- 1
that  his  feelings,  by  dav  and  by  night,  and
the  course  of  his  conduct  are  such  as  to
tend  directly  to  benefit  himself  and  his
family,  you  will  sav,  "  What  interest  has
he  fur  us.  We  must  look  out  for  our-
selves" But  where  a  man  works  for  the
interest  of  the  community,  he  becomes
truly  a  father  to  that  people,  working  for
them  with  the  same  feeling,  desire  and  in-
terest as  he  would  for  himself.  It  mijht
be  said  of  him,  as  it  should  be  said  of  all
men,  that  he  loves  his  brethren*  or  in
other  words,  41  his  neighbor,"  as  himself.
Now  let  the  man  who  acts  as  the  presiding
Elder  of  his  ward,  manifest  by  word  and
action  these  fatherly  feelings  towards  those
he  presides  over,  and  how  soon  we  would
begin  to  perceive  perfect  confidence  re-
stored !

Possibly  such  a  man  miirht  not  always
possess  financiering  abilities,  and  possibly
the  people  themselves  mi^ht  not  have  con-
fidence in  hi*  abilities  to  manage  or  direct
temporal  affairs.  This  is  quite  s opposable,
for  good  sound  principled  men  are  not  al-
ways endowed  with  great  financiering
abilities.  Yet  from  the  fact  of  his  having
established  himself  in  the  heart-  of  th  ■
people,  and  his  being  known  by  them  for
his  integrity  and  honesty,  ami  his  disposi-
tion to  work  for  the  interests  of  God  and
the  people,  willing  to  make  any  sacrifice
that  might  be  required  of  him,  he  possesses
their  confidence,  and  when  once  in  posses*
sion  of  so  sacred  a  trust,  what  then  mUjht
he  do  in  order  to  satisfy  the  minds  of  the
people,  which  are,  more  or  less,  inclined
to  be  progressive?  hit  such  a  man  call  t  .
his  aid  those  of  his  brethren  who  are  the
most  capable,  letting  them  share  his  re*
sponsihilicies.  Because  you  will  find,  as  a
general  thing,  that  talent  is  diffused
through  the  many  and  rarely  combined  in
single  individuals;  and  it  only  needs  op-
portunity in  order  to  be  developed*  He
might  say  to  one,  "  Here  Brother  So  and
so,  you  are  better  adapted  to  till  this  or
that  position  than  I  am:"  or,  to  another,
**  You  are  the  man  best  fitted  for  this  de-
partment; p*  and  so  on  until  he  gets  the
talents  of  all  brought  out,  and  instead  of
diminishing  the  public  confidence  in  him-
self, such  a  course  would  a  ll  to  it  Fur-
ther, he  would  be  doing  for  his  brethren
that  which  the  United  Order  designs  to
do  for  all,  namely,  to  afford  opportunity
to  develop  the  gift  that  Nature  has  en-
dowed us  with*  Therefore.  I  sav  that  all
these  matters  can  be  £  it  along  with,  pro-
vided we  have  the  sure  and  safe  founda-
tion, which  should  bo  based  on  honesty
and  integrity  to  God  and  the  true  inter-
ests of  his  kingdom  and  people.  With  a
people  of  one  heart  and  mind,  possessed
of  the  same  feelings  and  aspirations  as
we  were  when  we  first  embraced  the  Gos-
pel, in  connection  with  our  present  know-


ledge and  experience  in  the  practical  work-
ings of  building  up  the  kingdom,  how
easy  it  would  be  to  establish  our  home  in-
dustries or  mercantile  institution*  and
carry  them  on  successfully  !  Every  one
would  be  on  hand,  like  Israel  when,  in  the
desert,  and  journeying  to  the  land  of  Ca-
naan, they  were  required  to  build  a  mov-
able tabernacle  for  certain  sacred  purposes,
and  the  people  brought  their  offerings
etc,  even  more  than  were  sufficient,  and
Moses  had  to  cry  out  to  the  people  to  stop.
So  it  would  be  with  us,  as  far  as  willing-
ness on  the  part  of  the  people  was  con-
cerned to  take  an  active  part  in  any  gene-
ral movement  that  might  be  projected.
Whatever  means  or  property  or  time  might
be  devoted  by  the  community  for  the  es-
tablishing of  any  certain  enterprise,  would
be  done  in  ^nod  faith,  for  every  heart
would  be  inspired  with  confidence,  every-
one considering  his  interest  identified  with
that  of  the  whole*

But  it  takes  time  to  get  the  people  into
this  condition*  Here,  in  this  southern
country,  we  understand  that  the  people
have  been  endeavoring  to  work  together
in  the  United  Order,  meeting  with  more  or
less  disappointment.  Because  of  reverses
or  failures  in  our  attempt*  to  successfully
operate  our  temporal  affairs,  we  should
not  allow  such  disappointment  to  detract
from  the  principle  itself;  but  rather  let  us
attribute  our  misfortunes  to  human  weak-
nesses, regarding  the  principle  as  divine,
revealed  for  our  special  benefit  and  bless-
ing, and  In  every  instance  of  apparent
failure  let  us  ever  be  resolved  to  *'  try
ijg&in."  The  principles  of  Plural  Marriage
were  revealed  for  the  benefit  and  exaltation
of  the  children  of  men,  but  how  much
un  happiness  has  arisen  through  failure, ,  on
the  part  of  some  who  have  contracted
this  order  of  marriage,  to  eon  form  to  the
laws  that  govern  it !  But  does  it  arise
through  any  defect  ki  the  order  of  the
marriage  system?  (.)  no;  but  from  igno-
rance and  the  folly  and  wickedness  of
those  individuals  who  enter  into  it,  who
abuse,  rather  than  righteously  obey,  it.
So  in  regard  to  the  principles  of  the  United
Order.  Its  principles  too  are  sacred,  and
I  assure  you  we  will  never  go  back  to
Joelcsou  County,  Missouri,  there  to  build
up  the  new  Jerusalem  of  the  latter  days,
until  there  is  a  perfect  willingness  on  our
art  to  conform  to  its  rules  and  principles*
lany  years  have  transpired  since  we  re-
ceived the  revelation  of  the  United  Order,
and  in  one  sense  that  long  period  of  time
bespeaks  negligence  on  our  part  in  not
more  fully  obeying  it*  The  very  princi-
ples of  that  order,  in  my  estimation,  were
given  for  our  temporal  and  spiritual  salva-
tion. In  order  to  derive  the  benefit  that
God  designed  should  flow  from  them,  they
must  be  established  and  systematized  on
the  principle  of  righteousness,  each  per-


370


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


son  learning  to  love  his  neighbor  as  him*
self.  For  tis  to  undertake  to  deal  with
them  on  any  other  principle  would  virtu-
ally open  the  way  to  bitter  disappoint*
went

Then  allow  me  to  repeat,  let  me  find  a
community  that  is  willing  to  conform  to
this,  bringing  to  mind  the  covenants  made
in  the  beginning  when  we-  received  the  full-
ness of  the  Gospel,  willing  to  bring  to
mind  when  they  dedicated  all  they  pos-
sessed--their  property,  their  talents,  their
mental  and  physical  powers,  to  the  build-
ing up  of  his  kingdom  ;  remembering  the
time  when  we  did  this,  the  blessings*  of
God  were  upon  us,  and  his  Spirit  burned
within  us.  Then  let  those  who  preach  in
the  midst  of  that  community  of  Saints,
realize  what  the  Priesthood  was  placed
upon  them  for  ;  let  them  know  and  fully
8ense  why  they  were  appointed  to  fill  such
and  such  an  office,  viz..  that  they  should
act  in  the  spirit  of  nur  Master,  a  Servant
of  all,  that  they  learn  to  consider  and
esteem  in  the  same  affectionate  interest,
the  welfare  of  alt,  as  they  do  that  of  them-
selves, and  be  in  very  deed  fathers  to  the
people.  Then  will  they  enter  into  the
spirit  of  the  two  great  commands  upon
which,  said  the  Savior,  *  *  hang  the  law
and  the  Prophets,"  namely,  loving  the  Lord
with  all  our  imcrht,  mind  and  strength,
ami  our  neighbor  as  ourselves.  This,  in
my  opinion,  is  the  foundation  of  our  fu-
ture success,  temporal  I  v  and  spiritually,
in  this  United  Order.  Until  we  comedown
to  the  bedrock  of  honesty  and  sincerity  in
this  matter,  dealing  with  temporal  as  with
spiritual  things,  whole-heartedly,  holding
all  and  ourselves  sacred  to  the  service  of
God,  we  may  expect  more  or  less  failure.

Let  me  say  to  the  brethren  who  are  and
who  contemplate  connecting  themselves
actively  and  entirely  with  this  holy  Order,
that  the  Priesthood  was  bestowed  ujion
you,  as  upon  the  Son  of  God  himself,  for
no  other  purpose  than  that,  through  sac*
rifice,  you  might  be  proven,  that,  perad-
venture,  at  the  last  day,  you  might  stand
approved  before  God,  and  before  perfect
and  holy  beings:  and  that,  in  order  to
merit  this  divine  approval,  it  may  be  ne-
cessary to  forget  self  and  individual  ag-
grandisement and  seek  the  interest  of
your  brethren.  If  you  are  ready  ami  wil-
ling to  do  this,  ami  if  your  everyday  life
and  conduct,  and  the  spirit  within  yon
testify  the  fact,  you  will  establish  confi-
dence in  the  lie  arts  of  those  who  know
you  and  with  whom  vou  are  more  imme-
diately associated  in  temporal  matters.

Confidence  is  ofttimes  referred  to  by
our  brethren,  especially  when  speaking  on
the  subject  of  the  United  Order. It  is


spoken  of  and  written  on  by  the  religion^
the  political,  and  th'j  financial  world;  and
thfi  present  condition  of  the  whole  is  such
as  to  force  itself  upon  our  serious  atten-
tion. We  may  confidently  apprehend
that,  as  history  shall  chronicle  the  devel-
opments of  this  our  progressive  world,  we
shall  witness  more  and  more  the  heccMty
of  it.  For  as  palpable  and,  what  may  be
termed,  legitimate  jfcattd  increases,  and
the  whole  world  ripttf  iff  iniquity  gene-
rally, confidence  willifessen  and  uecome
more  priceless  and  precious.  This  is  quite
obvious  to  all  men  in  whose  hearts  dwell
a  spark  of  that  Spirit  by  which  |he  Pro-
phets foretold  the  destiny  of  t!)9tfMation&
Confidence  can  be  acquirrfftmly  mi  the
principle  of  righteousness*  Whether  it  be
applied  to  the  monarch  or  the  peasant,  the
religionist  or  the  nun-religionist;  merit
alone  commands  it.

Then  let  us  live  th^  lives  of  Latter-day
Saints  that  we  may  first  beget  confidence
in  ourselves  :  then  we  shall  begin  to  have
confidence  in  each  other,  in  God,  and  in  his
promises. A  people  in  this  condition  of
progress  would  know  no  failures,  every-
thing would  prosper  that  they  put  their
hands  to,  they  would  grow  in  faith  and  in
good  works. I  tell  you,  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  God,  that  the  time is  coming
when  there  will  be  no  safety  only  in  the
principles  of  union,  for  therein  lies  the  se-
cret of  our  temporal  and  spiritual  salva-
tion. We  have  been  enabled  to  establish
amis,  towns,  and  villages,  and  we
^en  abundantly  blessed  with  the
necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life,  not-
wi  ths  tan  (1  i  n  g  we  have  b  ee  u  si  o  w  to  1 1 «  ark  en
to  and  obey  the  commands  of  Jehovah.
I  would  to  God  that  every  Bishop  and  pre*
siding  officer  would  this  day,  in  this  holy
Temple,  covenant  and  swear  before  him,
the  Lord  our  God,  that  they  would  turn
and  serve  him  with  all  their  might,  mind
and  strength,  and  work  in  the  interest  of
the  people  as  they  would  for  themselves.
For  my  greatest  desire  is  to  see  Zion  esta-
blished according  to  the revelations  of
God,  to  see her  inhabitants  industrious
and  self-sustaining,  filled  with  wisdom  and
the  power  of  Goa,  that  around  us  may  be
built  a  wall  of  defence,  a  protection  against
the  mighty  powers  of  Babylon  ;  and  while
the  disobedient  of  our  Father's  family  are
contending,  and  filling  up  their  cup  of  ini-
quity, even  to  the  brim,  and  thus  prepar-
ing themselves  for  the  burning,  we,  who
are  the  acknowledged children of  the
kingdom,  being  filled  with  the  righteous-
ness and  knowledge  of  God,  may  be  like
the  wise  virgins,  clothed  in  our  wedding
garments,  and  properly  prepared  for  the
coming  of  our  Lord  and  Savior.
