JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
LiEUVEHED  ET
rBESIDKNT lllilfillAM  YO'ttG,;
HIS TWO  COUNSKLLOil^
TEE TWELVE  APOSTLES,
A  N  iJ  OTHERS,
HE  PlUiTE  D  EiV
G.  D.  WATT  AND  J.  V.  LONG,
AMD JtOlKLT  DEDICATED  TO  THE  LATTEIfc-EAY  SAIN* IS  IS  ALL  THE  1V0RLD,
AOL.  IX.
LIVERPOOL  a
EDITED  AXD  PUBLISHED  BY  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,  42,  ISLINGTON.
LONDON  :
JATTLji  -DAY  SAINTS'  BOOK  DEPOT,  30f  FLORENCE  STREET,  ISLINGTON,  N.
1862
EXT  KB  ED  AT  STATIONERS  HALL.
4
i
PREFACE.
After  a  long  night  of  darkness,  which  has  covered  Christendom  like  ap:dl,
II. r  .  f  Ih-nvrn  has  agsiin  liars*  IV li  1  >  cheer  find  bless  mankind.  The
keys  of  fcnnwltidge,  long  lost  from  among  men,  have  been,  with  the
Priesthood,  once  more  restored  to  the  earth.  For  centuries  there  has  been
no  man  in  Christendom  authorised  to  sny  **  Thus  saith  the  Lord  ;T1  and  men
have  had  i 1 1  In'  dependent  upon  the  k::.  .-\-:l?dge  and  experience  ;•!'  i  who
in  former  ;  rone  rations  received  the  revelations  of  Jesus.  But  now  this  has
el i  :i 1  '  j?  1 .  Through  the  Gospel  which  has  been  restored,  with  the  Priesthood,
in  its  fulness  and  purity,  the  mind  of  the  Lord  respecting  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  i>  L<  .  i -j-  r.nAv  kno'.vi:  unto  men.
The  Journal  of  J)i*conr$m  goes  forth  to  the  world  as  another  record
corroborating  those  already  extant,  bearing  the  same  testimony  to  the
immutable  principles  of  salvation  which  they  have  borne,  and  giving
■i.  \  A\\  iv.  I  lighi  .ii  ijiiiny  p  ■iob  i-  ■;.:  erning  i]ie  si  [vati  ;.  ■  ■;  \ !  "s-v.m  -i-ition
on  which  they  are  silent.  All  men  can  be  profited  by  perusing  its  pages
and  pondering  over  the  words  of  truth  and  salvation  as  they  flow  in  beautiful
simplicity  and  power  from  the  mouths  of  the  Living  Oracles.
Thai  this  Volume  may  go  forth  and  hi  I  its  defined  mission,  and  remain
an  imperishable  memento  of  God's  kindness  and  his  desire  to  save  His
erring  children,  is  the  prayer  of  the
EDITOR*
1  DEX.

Preface

111.

True  Testimony— Preparation  for  Coming  E rents — Corruption

of  the  Government,  ete. B.  Yl»ung

April

r>

1SG1  1

SpiriJ  of  fnity — Independence  of  Zion,  etc, H,  d  Kimball

■1

6

6

Union — Hum  ad  and  V>hine  Government,  etc* J,  TxtLOit

1 F

6

•

Sectarian  Rdigion— Democracy,  etc. G.  A.  Smith

it

8

15

I  in prorem en  t— "Restoration  of  the  Priesthood,  etc. L.  S«ow

n

7

Appreciation  of  Divine  Gifts  and  Blessings — Return  to  Jackson

County  —  Eucoi:i\i  foment of Home  Manufactures

11.  C,  Kl  M  HALL

IT

7

Home  Manufacture* rl.  You  no

n

7

The  Gifts  of  God — Home  Manufactures--- Word  of  Wisdom —

Happiness B,  Yon 71  b

1  p

7

31

Submission  to  Reproof,  etc. H.  C,  Kimball

Mar.

17

The  Gospel  of  Salvation,  etc.  1).  H .  Wells  April  11  „  43
Cultivation  of  the  Spirit  of  Truth— Trials  of  the  Church,  etc.

B*  C.  KlMTlALL  „ 14 n  51

Blessings  Ed  joyed  by  the  Saints  W.  WcumkuiT  May  12  „  55
Building  up  of  the  Kingdom  of  God— Home  Manufactures

1).  H.  Wslls  Sep,  10 H  Ml

Prosperity  of  Zion,  etc. G.  A*  Ssimi  Mar.  10 !f  m

Sal  vation  by  Works H.  C+  Kim  hall  June  21  18&0  75

IMbting  up  the  Kingdom  of  God,  etc, IX  H.  Welu  Sep.  1<j tf  79

Priesthood  B.  Youno  May  7  ISGl  BG
Privileges  and  Responsibilities  of  the  Saints — Building  up  the

Latter-day  Kingdom  D.  H.  Wells  Sep,  30  1860  94
Sufferings  of  the  Saiuti — Overcoming  Evil with  Good,  etc,

B,  Youno  Jan, 5  101
Difficulties  with  which  the  Church  has  had  to  Contend  in  its

Eilablisbment.  in  Utah G.  A.  Smith  Sep,  10  l*iH  109

Tlutia*  of  tbe  Maintain  Holllng  forth  the  Work  of  God  I).  If.  Weils  Oct.  7  1-^jU  1  IS
Varieties  of  Mind  and  Character — Chastisement — Freedom,  etc,

B*  Youno  Feb.  17  18G1  121

Observance  of  the  Commandments  of  God H.C.Kimball  Jan, <j >r  12  a

Living  o u r  1 1 clipion— O bed ience  to  Conn sel II.  C.  K 1  vl  j  1  a i . l  M ' ■  ■■■  ■  1  li H  1 33

Gathering  of  the  Saiirti — Herooiiring the  Priesthood,  etc.  11  Y-.lmi  July  28  „  1-J7
Facilities  lu  Utah  for  the  (Join fort  and  Prosperity  of  the  Saints

Ih  II.  Wells  June  9 „  144


INDEX.


Eternal  Punishment — M  Mormomsm,"  etc. B.  Yoi'Sf*  Jan.  12  1802  117

Obedience  to  the  Commandments  ami  Itevelations  of  God

H.  CKnin^i  Jan. Ifl  „  LM

Evil  iK^ds  and  Evil  Doers,  etc* B.  Yotwe  Jan.  19  „  154

Jib  ^iti-i  Iviioyed  by  tbe  Siiiuts  in  Ziont  etc. G.  A.  Smith  Feb. «  „  153

IV  n  ii./rc*  i it'  the  Saints,  etc. W,  WooDMjrs  Dec. I  1861  190

Net-ess i(y  of  Paying  foe  attention  to Temporal  1>ti I kst  etc.  B.  Yorv>  .Lin.  2<>  1^2  107

Salvation  of  the  House  of  Israel  to  come  through  the  Gentiles

0.  Pit  att  July  15  1853  17  i

Early  Persecution — Certain  Retribution IL  (\  Kemh.m  t,  July 7  1801  180

Political  Kcrn-miy D.  H.  WetLs  Sep.  29  1-2

Call  for  Teams  to  go  to  the  Frontiers — Encouragement  of  Home

Manufactures 6.  7on*4  Feb. 2  1862  186

Bobbing  the  Mead — Dancing  not  a  Fart  of  the  Saints*  Religion —

Kindness  in  <  i^vernment — More  Telegraphic  \\ ir,  n  3j.  Y<»i Feb. 9  1^1

Covetousness—  Labours  of  the  Elders — Mission  to  Form  a  Southern

Settlement— Grumbling U.  .VSmitii  Oct.  20  l*Gl  1?*7

The  First  Prim- pies  of  the  Gospel J\  P.  Puatt  Aug.  28  1855  204

Closing  of  Amusements — Indulging  in  Sifl  brings  Mental  Dark-
ness B,  Yoi-xo  Feb.  10  13G2  218

Prfju'hirsi;  i he  Gospel  to,  and  Keeping  the  Lam  an  i  tea — Obecli«nce

to  Counsel Wi  Wo.mm  n  July  ['>  Is,")  ^21

Bemarks  on  Behalf  of  tlui  Initio .1.  Yowi  July  13  „  22(j

Safety  of  the  Saints  At  Heme — Contrast  of  their  Position  witb  that

of  the  United  State* John  Taylor  April  28  1861  233

ftcccssitv  of  Temporal  Lab^iu-  Preparatory  to  Building  a  Temple

B.  Yov\h*  Mar.  2  1862  239

Propriety  of  Theatrical  Amusements — Instructions  Kelative  to

Gondii et in s  them B.  Young  ,. d  ,,  2  !2

Salvation  the  Result  of  Individual  Fx ert inn B.  YotNu  ., 2  \  M  216

EnciM.ir:u_v  m  -ii: ][■!•. u'  Manufactures—  Righteous and Unright-
eous Ambition 1».  H.  Weils  Tt 16  „  250

Power  (j3iven  to  Man  to  Create B.  Young  „ 10  tt  2">l

Asrncy  of  Man  to  Practice  ^,vhI  or  Fvil  PrtEunplcs  I>,  II.  Wkli  s  ,. <i  ft  i'-V.)

Corruption  amorur  Gnu-maum'  nd'n-suls G.  A,  Smith  Apr]] s  T.  202

Building  of  the  Temple— Necessity  of  Union H.  C,  Kim  hall  OcL 7  lS'U  201

Government  of  the  Tongue—  Impart iatity  in  J mlgmeut— Settling

li.  \Vu  m,  April (I  1*02  2tH5

Home  Manufactures— Certain  Destruction  of  the  Enemies  of  Truth

U.  YOL'M. || C ,i  271

Weakness  of  Unman  Governments — Potency  of  the  Kingdom  of

God  J*  Taylo*  1G tt  275

Duties  Conmuvlril  with  (he  Aaronlc  ami  Mclehisedec  IVu-hIm  his

B.  Viiixa „ 7 «  270
Building  up  ami  Ad-uvimenr  nf  /inn  by  I he  Saints 1'.  V..'  \.. I'eb,  „  -Si!

True  diameter  of  i.ti>d KiTum-mi*  lu\as  Kutcrtaint'd  Tmvards

Him  B.Yotw „ f|  M

Caution  against  Vain  Laughter— YalueofihcLifeof  Man  B*  Ym  v.; April  -7  „
Endless Variety  of  Orjynui/.at Ions  —Blessings  that Awa^i  -lu'

Faithful  1^  Ym  m; May  'J3 „  202

Necessily  of  the Saints  Possessing  the  Spirit  of  Revelation

li.  C.  Kimu.w.l April  7 „  -


INDEX.


Suit

Instruct  ion  on  Priesthood — Ncee*  ^iry  i  l  Diligence  among-  the

faints  D,  IL  Wells n  7

Counsel  on  Cattle  Herding  (1.  A.  .Smith t(  7

The  Love  of  Truth  and  Kkh'eousnws  Implanted  in  the  Natural

M  m Kindness  and  !"inanesi  (H  Gov  eminent B*  Young June  15

The  Kingdom  of  God  B.  Yocnu July  13

Contract  Between  the  Religion  of  Je  sus  Christ,  as  Enjoyed  by  the

Saint*,  and  that  of  Professed  Christianity  t  B.  Y<u-s<j >t  (J

Necessity  of  the  Living  Oracles  among- the  Saints — Exhortation

to  Obedience  to  Counsel  W.  Wuoijruff April  S

Prod  am  mi.  m  >^  the  Gospel  to  the  Dead — Exhortation  to  Im-
provements H,  C\  Kim hall June  7

A  Knowledge  of  God  Obtained  only  Thr  unrh  Obedience  to  the

Principles  of  Truth  B.  Yotm« Aug.  3

The  Course  the  Saint*  should  Pursue  and  the  Spirit  they  should

Cultivate  H,  C.  Kim  hall April  27

Knowledge  and  Power— Progress  of  the -Saints  in  Regard  to  those

Principles  J.  Ta  vi.oit April  13

Variety  of  Gifts — EifcoTtation  n  Culliva:e  a  Sprit  of  Contentment

6t  A.  Smith May  11

Responsibilities  Keating  upon  the  Saints — Increase  of  Power  and

hirlm-m-v  !>♦  It.  "\\" -■: 1 1  s May  1

Influeaet  of  Parents  in  Training  their  Children — Power  which
Accompanies  the  Elders  when  having  the  Faith  and  Prayers
of  the  People  D.  IL  Wellb May  *2o

Eternal  Salvation — Continued  Improvement  brings  Exaltation

D.  H.  Wblm Sen.  1 1

ApostJeship  of  Joseph  Smith — Destruction  Awaiting  the  Marions

B.  Young Aug.  31

(i*;i;-..'n\^  li;:-  P.v.j- P:-i»;ierity  of  the  Gathered  Saints lln  oe

Manufactures  II.  C.  KiMiiALr. Feb.  9


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


TRUE  TESTIMONY* — PREPARATION  FOR  COMING  EVENTS—

CORRUPTION  OF  THIS  GOVERNMENT,  ETC.

Uemarks  by  President Brigh am  Young,  made  in  the  Tabernacle^  Great  Salt

Lalce  City,  April  6,  1861.


HEFOIITED BY  G. D.  WATT.


Wc  have  always  had  larger  con-
gregations oa  such  occasions  as  this
than  we  have  had  buildings  to  ac-
commodate; and  had  it  not  been  that
I  requested  the  brethren  of  the  city
t )  tarry  at  home,  so  as  to  give  room
to  those  who  should  come,  from  a
distance,  the  hou.sc  would  have  been
crowded  to  overflowing,  and  there
would  have  been  a  large  congregation
outside,  I  do  not  know  that,  this
side  of  the  day  of  rest  that  we  are
looking-  for,  we  shall  ever  have  a
building  large  enough  to  accommo-
date our  congregations.  When  we
have  overcome  the  enemy  to  right-
eousness and  have  a  thousand  years
to  work  unmolested,  I  think  that  we
then  can  build  a  room  that  will  contain
as  many  people  as  can  hear  the  speaker's
voice.  We  have  the  privilege,  it  is
true,  of  assembling  in  the  open  air,
where  most  of  our  Conferences  have
been  held.

We  now  enjoy  the  anniversary  of
our  General  Conference.  The  Church
is  thirty-one  years  old  to-day.  It
seems  but  a  short  time — but  a  lew
days,  since  there  were  only  six  men.-

No.  I.


bers  in  this  Church.  It  seems  but  a
short  time  since  I  desired  most  fer-
vently to  see  some  one  who  was  a
foreigner  baptized  into  this  Church.
1  well  remember  how  anxious  I  was
that  an  English  preacher  belonging
to  the  Independents,  and  with  whom
I  was  acquainted,  should  come  into
the  Church,  that  he  could  go  to  his
native  laud  and  preach  the  Gospel
there.  What  were  the  feelings  of  the
few,  thirty-one  years  ago  to-day?

Brother  Kimball  observed  in  his
remarks,  that  he  could  recollect  the
history  of  this  Church  from  its  be-
ginning, and  understood  the  persecu-
tions against  this  people.  The  Book
of  Mormon  was  translated  near  where
we  then  resided,  as  we  might  say,  in
our  own  neighbourhood.  It  was
translated  about  as  far  from  where
brother  Kimball  then  lived  as  it  is
from  here  to  Little  Cottonwood  ;  and
where  Joseph  first  discovered  the
plates  was  about  as  far  from  where  I
then  lived  jus  it  is  from  here  to  Provo.
Here  we  would  have  considered  the
discoverer  of  those  plates  and  the
translator  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  as

Vol.  IX,


■


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


one  of  our  neighbours.  We  arc  in
the  habit  here  of  travelling  more  fre-
quently and  further  than  we  were
there.  From  the  time  that  Joseph
had  his  first  revelation,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood where  brother  Kimball  and
I  then  lived,  appears  but  a  few  days.
Since  then  this  people  have  passed
through,  experienced,  and  learned  a
great  deal

If  there  is  a  person  in  the  midst  of
the  Latter-day  Saints — one  who  has
named  the  name  of  Christ  I  US  It  Latter-
day  Saint,  that  can  ask  for  any  more
literal  testimony  than  we  have,  I  do
not  know  what  he  would  ask*  He
might  wish  to  see  some  person  that
had  power  to  bring  fire  down  from
heaven.  Should  such  a  person
appear,  the  exercise  of  that  power
would  by  no  means  prove  that  he  was
a  messenger  of  salvation.  Or  suppose
that  I  should  see  a  man  capable  of
raising  the  dead  every  hour  in  a  day,
could  I  merely  for  that  believe  he  was
sent  of  God  ?  No.  Some  may  think
it  strange,  but  should  I  see  a  man
come  along  here  and  cast  his  cane  on
the  floor,  and  it  became  a  serpent  and
ran  out  of  the  door,  would  I  any
more  believe  that  man  to  be  sent  of
God  ?  No,  I  would  not.  Were  I  to
see  a  person  fill  the  air  with  living
creatures,  turn  the  dust  into  life,  or
the  river  Jordan  into  blood,  do  yon
suppose  I  would  any  more  for  that
consider  that  man  sent  of  God  ?  Not
in  the  least.  There  is  but  one  wit-
ness— one  testimony,  pertaining  to
the  evidence  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  and  that  is  the  Spirit  that  he
diffused  among  his  disciples.  Do  his
will,  and  we  shall  know  whether  he
speaks  by  the  authority  of  the  Father
or  of  himself.  Do  as  he  commands
us  to  do,  and  we  shall  know  of  the
doctrine,  whether  it  is  of  God  or  not.
It  is  only  by  the  revelations  of  the
Spirit  that  we  can  know  the  things
of  God.

Suppose that we should  see


a  man  capable  of  raising  the  dead
and  he  should  say,  M  Consequently  I
ought  to  be  the  leader  of  the  Church
— the  legitimate  heir  that  God  h;;s
appointed  to  perform  his  wurk  in  the
last  clays,"  would  I  for  that  believe
him  ?  No.  I  have  never  sem  the
day,  since  I  arrived  at  the  years  of
discretion,  when  it  would  have  made
any  difference  in  my  feelings.  Almost
one  of  the  first  things  I  read  in  the
Bible  was  that  Saul  in  his  darkness
and  unbelief  called  on  the  Witch  flf
Endor  for  a  revelation,  and  she  had
power  to  raise  Samuel  from  the  dead.
What  proof  was  that  that  she  was  a
Saint  of  God?  If  the  people  want
any  more  witness  than  thoy  haw.  i
do  not  know  what  they  would  call
for.  Seek  for  the  Spirit  of  Truth,
and  that  will  brim;  nil  things  to  y
remembrance  that  Jesus  spake  and
performed, — all  that  has  been,  is,  and
that  which  is  to  come,  so  far  as
may  be  necessary.  That  is  the  Spirit
by  which  Joseph  spoke,

I  am  thankful  that  we  live  to  see
this  day,  and  have  the  privilege  of
assembling  ourselves  in  these  valleys.
We  are  not  now  mingling  in  the  tur-
moils of  strife,  warring,  and  con-
tention, that  we  would  have  been
obliged  to  have  mingled  in,  had  not
the  Lord  suikred  us  to  have  been
driven  to  these  mountains— one  of
the  greatest  blessings  that  could  have
been  visited  upon  us.  It  has  been
designed  for  many  generations  to  hide
up  the  Saints  in  the  last  days  until
the  indignation  of  the  Almighty  be

over.  His  wrath  will  be  poured  out
upon  the  nations  of  the  earth.  We
see  the  nations  steadily  driving  along
to  the  precipice.  The  Lord  has
spoken  from  the  heavens,  and  he  is
about  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  of  his
ancient  and  modem  Prophets,  He
will  bring  the  nations  into  judgment,
and  deal  with  them  and  make  a  full
end  of  them.  Do  you  wish  to  see  it
done  to-day  f Are  you  prepared  for


TRUE  TESTIMONY,  ETC,


the  crisis  that  will  eventually  come  ?
No.

I  have  frequently  thought  upon  the
preparation  that  is  necessary.  Sup-
pose the  word  should  come,  u  Return
and  build  up  the  centre  Stake  of  Zion,"
are  we  ready  for  it  ?  No.  I  have
often  alluded  to  our  mechanics.
We  have  not  a  mechanic  that  would
know  how  to  lay  the  first  stone  for
tbe  foundation  of  the  wall  around  the
New  Jerusalem,  to  say  nothing  about
the  temples  of  our  God.  Are  you
prepared  for  the  day  of  vengeance  to
come,  when  the  Lord  will  consume
the  wicked  by  the  brightness  of  his
comine  ?  No.  Then  do  not  be  too
anxious  for  the  Lord  to  hasten  his
work.  Let  our  anxiety  be  centrist
upon  this  one  thing,  the  sanctification
of  our  own  hearts,  the  purifying  of
our  own  affections,  the  preparing  of
ourselves  for  the  approach  of  the
events  that  are  hastening  upon  us.
This  should  be  our  concern,  this
should  be  our  study,  this  should  be
our  daily  prayer,  and  not  to  be  in  a
hurry  to  see  the  overthrow  of  the
wicked.  Be  careful ;  for  if  they  were
all  to  be  overthrown  at  once,  how
many  would  there  be  left  that  are
called  Saints  ?  Not  as  many  as  I
would  have  remain.  We  are  pre-
pared for  the  day  that  is  approach-
ing: let  ns  then  prepare  ourselves
for  the  presence  of  our  Master — for
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The
wicked  and  the  ungodly  are  pre-
paring for  their  own  utter  overthrow,
and  the  nation  in  which  we  live  is
doing  so  as  fast  as  the  wheels  of  time
can  roll,  and  ere  long  sudden  des-
truction will  come  upon  them.  Seek
not  to  hasten  it,  but  be  satisfied  to
let  the  Lord  have  his  own  time  and
way,  and  be  patient.  Seek  to  have
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  we  may
wait  patienily  the  time  of  the  Lord,
and  prepare  ourselves  for  the  times
that  are  coming. This  is  our  duty.

We  are  blessed  in  these  mountains.


This  is  the  best  place  on  the  earth  for
the  Latter-day  Saints-  Search  the  his-
tory of  all  the  nations,  and  every
geographical  position  on  the  face  of
the  earth,  and  you  cannot  find
another  situation  so  well  adapted  for
the  Soints  as  are  these  mountains.
Here  is  the  place  in  which  the  Lord
designed  to  hide  his  people.  Be
thankful  for  it ;  be  true  to  your  cove-
nants; be  faithful,  each  and  every  one.
How  frequently  we  hear  from  each
other,  "  Be  ready  to  receive  the  truth.
If  it  is  contrary  to  our  feelings — let  it
be  ever  so  opposite  to  oar  own  feelings
or  affections — receive  the  words. of
counsel  from  those  who  are  ap-
pointed to  lead  us."  How  my  heart;
longs  to  see  the  brethren  and  sisters
in  a  condition  that  when  the  words  of
truth  and  virtue — righteous  words  of
counsel — are  poured  upon  them,  they
will  meet  like  drops  of  water  meeting
each  other.  How  I  lung  to  see  the
brethren,  when  they  hear  the  words
of  truth  poured  upon  them,  ready  to
receive  those  words  because  they  are
perfectly  congenial  to  their  feelings,
and  every  soal  exclaim,  *c  Those  words
savour  of  the  Spirit  that  is  in  me ;
they  are  my  delight,  my  meat,  and
my  drink ;  they  are  the  streams  of
eternal  life.  How  congenial  they  are,
instead  of  their  being  contrary  to  my
feelings."

If  lor  any  other  man  give  coun-
sel that  meets  with  opposition,  that
intrudes  upon  the  affection*,  medita-
tions, and  feelings  of  the  ^eopley
and  is  harsh  to  their  ears,  bitter  to
their  souls,  it  is  either  not  the  words
of  truth,  or  they  have  not  the  foun-
tain of  life  within  them,  one  of  the
two.  If  the  Lord  speaks  from  the
heavens,  reveals  his  will,  and  it
comes  in  contact  with  our  feelings
and  notions  of  things,  or  with  our
judgments,  we  are  destitute  of  that
fountain  of  truth  which  we  should
possess.  If  our  hearts  are  filled  with
the  Spirit  of  truth,  with  the  Spirit  of


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES,


the  Lord,  bo  matter  what  the  true
words  from  heaven  are,  when  God
speaks,  all  his  subjects  shout  "Halle-
lujah !  praise  God!  We  are  ready  to
receivethose  words,  for  they  are  tnie."

Much  has  been  said  in  regard  to  the
Government  in  which  we  live.  We
sny  that  it  is  the  best  form  of  human
government  upon  the  earth.  The
laws  and  institutions  are  good,  but
how  can  a  republican  government
stand  ?  Did  you  ever  ask  yourselves
this  question  ?  I  wonder  whether
our  great  men  of  the  nation  have
ever  asked  themselves  this  question.
The  heads  of  different  departments —
governors,  judges,  cabinet  officers,
Senators,  representatives,  presidents,
— I  ^wonder  whether  they  ever  ask
themselves  the  question,  u  How  can
a  republican  government  stand  ? "
There  is  only  one  way  for  it  to  stand.
It  can  endure j  but  how  ?  It  can  en-
dure, as  the  government  of  heaven
endures,  upon  the  eternal  rock  of
truth  and  virtue;  and  that  is  the  only
basis  upon  which  any  government
can  endure.  Let  the  people  become
corrupt,  let  them  begin  to  deceive
each  other,  and  they  will  all  deceive
themselves,  as  our  Government  has*
When  we  made  application  to  the
Gereral  Government  for  a  restora-
tion of  our  property  and  rights  in
Missouri,  if  Martin  Van  Baren  had
said,  "  Yes,  I  will  restore  your  lands
to  you,  and  will  defend  you  in  the
possession  of  your  rights,  if  I  have
power;  and  if  I  have  not,  my
name  shall  not  remain  as  Pre- 1
sident  of  the '  United  States,"  he
could  have  reinstated  us  in  our  rights,
A  few  words  from  the  General  Govern-
ment to  the  Government  of  Missouri
would  have  restored  to  us  our  lands
and  stayed  the  operations  of  the  mob.
If  Van  Buren  had  said,  "  Be  still,  or  I
will  chasten  you  and  keep  sacred  the
oath  of  my  office/*  we  should  not
have  been  mobbed,  and  the  nation
would  not  have  been  as  it  is  to-day.  I


Our  present  President,  what  is  his
strength  f  It  is  like  a  rope  of  sand,
or  like  a  rope  made  of  water.  He  is
as  weak  as  water.  What  can  he  do  ?
Very  little.  Has  he  power  to  exe-
cute the  laws?  No*  I  am  an
American-born  citizen — born  under
the  Green  Mountains  in  Vermont,
from  whose  summits  you  can  look
down  upon  the  Atlantic  States;  and  I
feel  chagrined  and  mortified  when  I  re-
flect upon  the  condition  of  my  nation.
Of  late,  at  times,  I  have  almost
wished  that  I  had  been  born  in  a
foreign  nation.  I  feel  disgraced  in
having  been  born  under  a  govern-
ment that  has  so  little  power,  dispo-
sition, and  influence  for  truth  and
right ;  but  I  cannot  help  it.  What
is  the  cause  of  their  weakness  and
imbecility  ?  They  have  left  the  paths
of  truth  and  virtue,  they  have
joined  themselves  to  falsehood,  they
have  made  lies  their  refuge,  they
have  have  turned  aside  the  innocent
from  their  rights,  and  justified  the
iniquitous  doers.  They  have  justi-
fied thieving  and  lying  and  every
species  of  debauchery;  they  have
fostered  those  who  have  purloined
money  out  of  the  public  treasury —
those  who  have  plundered  the  cofiers
of  the  people,  and  have  said,  "  Let  it
be  so ;  you  secrete  my  faults,  you
assist  me  to  plunder  and  deceive,  and  I
am  with  you  to  cover  up  your  ini-
quity." Shame,  shame  on  the  rulers
of  the  nation !  I  feel  myself  disgraced
to  hail  such  men  as  my  countrymen,
though  I  think  I  shall  live  through
it,  I  will  endure  it  as  well  as  I  can ;
but  the  corruption,  the  iniquity,  and
the  deception  of  men  in  high  places
no  man  can  tell.

I  have  previously  related  one  little
circumstance,  which  occurred  not  long
ago,  illustrative  of  the  mode  in  which
payment  of  claims  against  the
Government  is  sometimes  secured.
A  certain  gentleman  had  attended
many  sessions  of  Congress,  trying  to


TRUE  TESTIMONY,  ETC


5


get  payment  of  a  claim  due  to  widows
and  orphans ;  but  could  not.  In  a
short  time,  the  claim  was  adjusted.
Brother  George  A.  Smith,  when  in
Washington,  saw  a  gentleman  who
had  been  years  in  endeavouring  to  get
a  claim  allowed  and  p.tid ;  one  thou-
sand dollars  more  to  grea.se  the
.wheels,  and  through  it  went — the
claim  was  paid,  We  have  long  been
trying  to  get  our  claims  paid  for  ex*
penditures  in  quelling  Indian  dis- 1
turbances  in  1853,  When  the  ap-
propriation had  reached  the  last  move  !
to  be  made,  it  could  not  go.  u  What
is  the  matter  ?  "  "  Somebody  is
throwing  sand  on  the  axletree,  and  the
wheel  is  stuck,"  "What  must  he
done?"  "  Thirteen  hundred  dollars
must  grease  it."  It  then  moved  through
— the  appropriation  was  made.  It  is
so  all  the  time— -every  day.  These
instances  are  comparatively  of  little
moment,  and  I  merely  allude  to  them
to  show  how  minutely  corruption  pre-  '
vails  where  justice  should  exist.

These  corruptions  flow  very
naturally  from  the  indebtedness  con-
tracted *to  attain  power.  In  elections,
the  successful  become  indebted  to  their
friends,  and  they  promise  them  the
patronage  of  the  President,  that  they
shall  be  sent  as  a  minister  to  such  or
such  a  country,  or  be  appointed  a  judge
here  or  there,  or  a  governor  yonder.
They  cannot  obtain  their  election
without  paying  largely  for  it,  both  in
promises  and  money ;  and  to  recover
the  means,  they  must  either  become
thieves  or  repudiate  their  debts.
**  Such  a  one  owes  me  so  much  for
conlributing  to  his  election,  and  he
will  not  pay  me."  It  often  happens
that  he  cannot,  miles  he  steals  it

The  whole  Government  is  gone;
it  is  as  weak  as  water.  I  heard
Joseph  Smith  say,  nearly  thirty  years
ago,  "  They  shall  have  mobbing  to
their  heart's  content,  if  they  do  not
redress  the  wrongs  of  the  Latter-day
Saints," Mobs  will  not  decrease,  but


wil]  increase  until  the  whole  Govern-
ment becomes  a  mob,  and  eventually
it  will  be  State  against  State,  city
against  city,  nei gh  bou rhood  agai :  ist
neighbourhood,  Methodists  against
Methodists,  and  so  on.  Probably
you  remember  reading,  not  a  week
ago,  an  account  of  a  Conference
being  held  in  Baltimore,  in  the
course  of  which  they  seceded  from
their  fellow  ch  torches  in  the  free
States.  It  will  be  the  same  with
other  denominations  of  professing
Christians,  and  it  will  be  Christian
against  Christian,  and  man  against
man;  and  those  who  will  not  take  up
the  sword  agrainst  their  neighbours
must  flee  to  Zion.

Where  is  Zion  ?  Let  us  be  pre-
pared to  receive  the  honourable  men
of  the  earth — those  who  are  good.
Are  there  any  good  people  ariu^g
them  ?  Yes,  hundreds  and  thou-
sands and  thousands  right  in  our
Government,  rotten  as  it  is  ;  but  they
are  so  priest-ridden  that  they  have  no
mind  of  their  own — they  have  not
strength  and  ^fortitude.  And  I  ask
you,  and  I  can  appeal  to  your  own
experience,  place  any  of  us  back  in  the
midst  of  our  old  neighbours,  would  it
not  be  hard  to  break  out  and  say,
"  We  are  Latter-day  Saints  and
followers  of  Joseph  Smith ;  we  believe
'.Mormomsm' :  good  bye  ?  "  There
are  hundreds  and  thousands  in  this
situation  in  the  States,  who  desire  to
see  truth,  righteousness,  and  rijht
prevail ;  but  they  have  not  strength
and  power  of  mind  to  break  loose  /
and  say,  "  We  will  be  for  Cod  and
none  else."  They  follow  the  customs  '
of  their  fathers,  and  more  or  less
cling  to  the  faith  and  religion  of  their
fathers.  They  are  bound  down  with
priestcraft.  i  look  forward  to  the
day  when  their  bands  will  be  broken*
I  pray  this  people  to  do  right.
J  Purify  yourselves,  sanctify  yourselves,
and  prepare  to  receive  those  persons
I  into  everlasting  habitations.


6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


It  is  time  to  close  our  forenoon
meeting.  This  afternoon,  probably,
we  will  take  up  the  business  of  the
Conference,  and  continue  our  meeting;
and  when  we  are  through  and  wish
to  adjourn,  we  will  do  so.  AVe  all
feel  like  praying  for  the  prosperity  of
the  kingdom.  The  whole  body  i.s
continally  seeking  the  welfare  of  each
individual  part. The  eye  wishes  the


foot  well,  the  foot  wishes  the  head
well,  and  will  walk  to  get  food  for  the
head  and  stomach,  and  they  are
united,  and  we  shall  become  more  and
more  united.  And  I  pray  that  the
Lord  will  pour  out  his  grace  on  his
sons  and  daughters,  and  I  pray  the
Saints  to  improve  upon  it  until  we
are  sanctified.  God  bless  you!
Amem


SPIRIT  OF  UNITY— INDEPENDENCE  OF  ZION,  <tc.

Et  marks  by  President  Heber  C.  Kimball,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  C 'ty,  April  6,  1861.

REPORT]  1 1  liY  <i. I),  WATT.


I  am  glad  to  see  yon,  and  the
feelings  within  me  are  God  bless  you,
peace  be  multiplied  upon  the  Saints;
and  those  that  are  not  Saints,  may
they  be  blessed  with  that  which  they
love  to  that  degree  that  they  cannot
stay  in  this  land.  (A  voice  in  the  stand
— And  T  say  amen/')

I  do  respect  and  love  good  men
and  women.  It  has  been  natural  to
me  all  the  days  of  my  life  to  do  this ;
and  the  more  of  the  Good  Spirit  that
dwells  in  a  man,  the  more  that  love
of  those  that  are  good  accumulates  in
him.  I  often  speak  by  figures,  and  so
did  Jesus  in  his  day.  He  said,  "  I  am
the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the
husbandman :  every  branch  in  me
that  beareth  not  fruit  he  taketh
away,  and  every  branch  that  beareth
fruit  he  purge tk  it,  that  it  may  bring
forth  more  fruit.  I  am  the  vine,  ye
are  the  branches.  He  that  abideth
in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bring-
eth  forth  much  fruit ;  for  without  me
ye  can  do  nothing," Again,  he  says,


"  If  a  man  abideth  not  in  me,  he  is
cast  forth  as  a  branch  that  is  with-
ered ;  and  men  gatker  them,  and  they
are  cast  into  the  fire,  and  they  are
burned/'  When  a  branch  withers
and  dies,  the  avenues  of  the  sap  and
nourishment  from  the  root  is  cut  off,
and  the  branch  is  cut  oft  after  it
ceases  to  live  and  draw  nourishment
from  the  roots.

No  branch  is  cut  off  from  the  tree
while  it  is  bearing'  fruit  and  cleaves
to  the  tree,  TTe  cleave  to  the  vine
by  our  works  of  righteousness,  and
by  our  works  of  unrighteousness  we
become  dead  and  unfruitful ;  then  it
is  necessary  that  the  unfruitful
branch  should  be  taken  away,  and
another  branch  that  is  more  fruitful
should  be  graft:  d  in.  We  should  all
oe  one,  like  unto  a  tree,  and  receive
intelligence  from  heaven  as  the  tree
receives  its  nourishment  from  the
roots.

ily  prayer  is  from  time  to  time,
Father,  baptize  the  Presidency  into


I


sriurr  or  unity,  etc.


one  spirit,  and  let  them  partake  of
x  i  i  c  same?  element;  and  then,  Father,
baptize  the  Twelve,  and  the  Seven-
ties, and  every  officer  in  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God,  and  also  every
Branch  connected  to  them,  that  we
may  all  be  baptized  into  one  spirit ;
then  we  need  not  fear  earth  or  hell.

Brother  Wells  was  speaking  of  the
extension  of  onr  settlements,  that
every  inch  of  ground  that  is  conse-
crated to  God  and  the  use  of  his  Saints
is  redeemed  from  the  power  of  Satan.
That  is  verily  true;  and  when  the
people  of  onr  settlements  act  like
one  man  in  all  things  that  are
revealed  unto  them,  it  will  truly  be
so*  But  I  presume,  brethren,  you  will
find  many  devils  in  all  these  places  j
and  they  will  be  there .  until  they  are
cast  into  hell  with  all  those  that
forget  God  and  turn  away  from  him.
It  is  for  us  to  keep  them  out  of  our
own  bodies.  If  we  do  that,  they  -will
not  trouble  us  much.  Resist  the
Devil,  *and  the  Scripture  says  he  will
flee  from  you  y  that  is,  he  will  stand
back  a  little  until  he  can  get  better
chance  at  some  future  time  to  make
an  attack  upon  you.  That  it  is  his
business,  and  it  is  onrs  to  avoid  him
and  keep  him  far  from  us.  Our
calling  is  to  do  right,  and  to  teach
righteousness  and  virtue,  industry  and
economy,  that  we  may  gain  power
over  the  world,  over  the  flesh,  and
over  the  Devil,  and  over  all  that  is
combined  to  overthrow  this  work.
Do  you  think  they  will  over-
throw it?  They  may  overthrow
many  of  you,  but  they  will  never
overthrow  this  Church  while  the
world  stands.  But  when  a  man
loses  that  Good  Spirit,  he  looks  upon
this  work  as  the  world  look  upon  it.
He  sees  no  beauty  in  it;  he  is  opposed
to  it  in  his  heart.

As  for  the  condition  of  the  nations
that  brother  Wells  has  been  speaking
of,  we  shall  never  secede  frome  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States.


7

We  shall  not  stop  on  the  way  of  pro-
gress, but  we  shall  make  preparations
for  future  events.  The  South  will
secede  from  the  North,  and  the  North
will  secede  from  us,  and  God  will
make  this  people  free  as  fast  as  we
are  able  to  bear  it.  They  send  their
poor  miserable  creatures  here  to  rule
us3  Why,  it  would  be  upon  the  same
principle  that  this  Church  and  au-
thority should  send  some  poor  curse
to  rule  me  and  my  family  in  my  own
house.  We  need  good  men  that  are
capable  of  ruling  us,  and  we  have
them  in  our  midst.  Take  any  man
there  is  here,  and  I  would  rather
have  him  come  and  rule  me  and  this
people  than  have  any  of  those  poor
creatures  that  come  here.  What  do
they  know  ?  Nothing,  only  to  come
here  and  undertake  to  lead  this  peo-
ple astray  and  pollute  thorn.  They
would  pollute  every  one,  if  they
had  the  power,  or  every  one  that
would  yield  to  them.  We  have  to
submit  to  this,  and  to  bear  it  with
patience.  But  let  me  teli  you,  the
yoke  is  now  off  our  neck.  ;ni'l  it  is  on
theirs,  and  the  bow  key  is  in.

The  day  is  not  far  distant  when  you
will  see  us  as  free  as  the  air  we
breathe,  and  we  will  be  ruled  by
those  men  whom  God  Almighty  ap-
points. I  live  above  the  law,  and  I
am  above  them,  and  mean  to  keep  so
by  doing  right,  as  the  Lord  requires
us  through  those  who  dictate  and  lead
us.

President  Young  is  our  leader,  and
has  been  all  the  time  since  the  death
of  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet.  He  can
govern  tbis  people  with  his  hands  in
his  pockets,  and  they  are  not  go-
verned one  whit  by  the  men  that  are
sent  here.  I  want  to  tell  it,  and  I
want  they  should  know  I  tell  it.  We
are  going  to  be  ruled  by  our  Father
in  heaven,  and  the  agents  he  sends
and  appoints  for  us,  from  this  day
henceforth  and  forever.

Let  us  all  go  to  work  and  culti-


8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


vate  the  earth,  beautify  and  adorn  it
with  trees  and  shrubs  and  plants  that
never  die.  Let  us  preserve  and  sus-
tain, and  make  ourselves  independent
both  for  clothing  and  for  food,  and
also  for  herds  and  flocks;  and  we
will  be  free,  and  our  enemies  will  not
trouble  us  much  mure.  I  am  a  wit-
ness to  what  the  nation  has  done  to
the  people  of  the  Saints  for  thirty
years  past.  They  have  killed  some
of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived,  and
the  whole  nation  sanctioned  it,  think-
ing they  had  got  rid  of  the  worst
men  that  ever  were  upon  the  earth.  I
know  this  to  be  true.  They  now
look  upon  President  Young  as  they
looked  upon  Joseph  Smith — as  one  of


the  greatest  curses  that  could  come
upon  the  earth.  They  have  driven
us,  robbed  and  plundered  us;  and
when  we  sought  for  redress,  they  said
our  cause  was  just,  but  they  could  do
nothing  for  us.  Let  a  man  como
into  my  house  or  into  yours,  and  serve
us  as  the  United  States  have  served
this  people,  and  would  there  not  bo  a
scrambling  ?  We  would  soon  decide
whether  the  cause  was  just  or  nut.  I
can  do  it  in  a  family  capacity;  but
Territories  and  States  have  not  got
as  much  governing  power  as  a  man
ought  to  have  iu  his  family.  I  do
not  wish  to  say  any  mora  at
time.  Amen.


UNION — HUMAN  AND  DIVINE  GOVERNMENT,  ETC,

Remarks  ly  Elder  John  Taylor,  made  in  tlie  Tabemaclef  Great  Salt  Lale

r,  April  6,  1861,


HEPOIlTED BY J. V.  LONG.


We  have  got  through  presenting
the  various  Quorums  comprising  the
authorities  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints-  It  has
seemed  to  be  a  little  difficult  to  get
some  of  the  names  right,  and  also  to
get  them  in  their  proper  places ;  but
we  have  now  got  them  straight,  and
I  believe  there  has  been  a  unanimous
feeling  to  sustain  all  those  officers
presented  in  their  respective  posi-
tions.

The  question  very  nat  urally  occurs
to  me,  Would  there  be  the  same
unanimity  of  feeling  in  sustaining  the
same  number  of  officers  anywhere  else
in  the  world  ?  I  do  not  think  there
would.  In  fact,  1  know  there  would


not  There  is  a  principle  of  union
with  us  :  at  least,  in  outside  show  we
are  united;  and  in  our  actions,  to  a
certain  extent,  far  more  so  than  any
other  people ;  for  other  communities
cannot  even  be  persuaded  to  vote  alike.
If  there  are  those  among  us  that  feel
a  little  crossways,  thinking  that  some
other  way  might  be  better ;  yet  there
is  so  much  of  the  feeling  to  the  con-
trary that  the  opposition  is  readily
brought  to  acquiesce  in  {he  popular
vote,  whether  they  really  loci  so  or
not ;  but  they  generally  ieel  like  it.
But  still  there  is  a  lesson  that  we
have  been  learning  that  none  of  us
are  perfect  in.  Our  judgment  is  not
perfect  j  and  as  we  are  not  perfect  in


UNION,  ETC.


9


our  sphere,  we  need  not  expect  to  find
others  perfect  in  theirs ;  imd  as  we  are
not  perfect  ourselves,  we  may  have
need  to  corae  to  the  throne  of  mercy
an  1  ask  for  wisdom  and  support,  and
we  can  come  to  the  Lord  with  faith
and  full  assurance.  If  we  have  need
to  come  to  the  Lord,  so  have  you.  Be
careful,  then,  how  you  judge.  We  can
say  to  all,  With  what  judgment  ye
judge,  ye  shall  be  judged;  and  with
what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be
measured  to  you  again.

In  regard  to  our  criticism  on  the
acts  of  public  men,  whatever  we  may
feel  in  regard  to  their  acts,  it  is  best
to  let  it  be  laid  aside  for  the  general
good  of  all ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  do
not  think,  or  should  not  think,  we

#  are  the  smartest  men  in  the  world.
It  appeal's  natural  to  us  to  think  that
we  are  as  competent  to  judge  as  any-
body else,  and  yet  we  think  that
those  who  dictate  matters  ought  to
have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  guide
them,  and  consequently  yield  our
judgment  to  theirs,  and  we  strive  to
cairy  out  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus,  Christ  in  our  actions.  We
do  it  to  a  great  extent,  bnt  not  so
fully  as  we  might  do.  It  is  all
voluntary  on  the  part  of  the  people  ;
but  generally,  out  of  respect  to  the
superior  intelligence  of  those  that  are
associated  with  the  dictation  of  affairs,
we  act  with  them.  Although  we
may  feel  an  uncertainty  in  icgard  to

<  the  views  of  some,  yet  with  those  '
feelings  we  act  in  unison  to  a  certain
extent,  and  we  yield  to  the  judgment
of  the  majority,  and  to  that  of  those
whose  right  it  is  to  nominate  and  dic-
tate in  the  kingdom  of  God*

So  far,  then,  as  we  have  made  pro-
gress in  those  things,  so  far  have  we
advanced  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ,  and  so  tar  have  we
Lecome  strong  and  powerful  as  a
people  upon  the  earth.

Ihere  is  a  little  difference  between
our  principles,  or,  I  should  say,  the


principles  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  what
are  called  democratic  principles*
Democracy  governs  by  the  people
alone ;  and,  as  was  stated  this  morning,
where  the  people  are  pure  a:ul  living
under  the  influence  of  correct  prin-
ciples, and  are  seeking  to  do  right,  it
is  one  of  the  best  governments  on  the
earth.  But  where  the  people  are
wicked  and  corrupt,  that  alters  the
case  very  materially-  It  is  not  with
us  as  it  is  with  democracy.  We  do
not  believe  that  any  people  are
capable  of  governing  themselves.
There  is  no  need  of  entering  into  an
argument  upon  the  iratter  before  this
congregation  ;  but  it  is  my  opinion
that  there  are  no  people  under  the
heavens  that  now  exist,  nor  are  there
any  that  ever  did  exist,  that  are
capable  of  governing  themselves*

There  have  been  a  variety  of  go-
vernments on  the  earth,  and  very
powerful  ones  too  have  existed  in
different  ages  of  the  world.  Those
governments  have  generally  been
established  and  maintained  by  force
of  arms — by  po  wer.  Thus  many  submit
to  the  few,  and  the  majority  have  had
very  little  to  say  in  the  matter.  We
have  generally  been  in  the  habit  of
supposing  that  our  republican  institu-
tions are  the  most  perfect  of  any-
thing can  exist  among  men — the  ne
plus  ultra  of  human  government ;  and
hence  we  have  had  a  very  favourite
motto  ready  always  upon  our  tongue's
end — Vox  populi,  vox  Dei.  I  do  not
believe  that  the  voice  of  the  people  is
the  voice  of  God,  but  would  ask,  Is  it
the  Northern  or  Southern  States  that
are  governed  by  the  Almighty?
We  have  one  of  the  best  human
Governments  upon  the  earth  governed
by  the  voice  of  the  people,  and
yet  we  are  divided,  torn  assunder,  and
confused,  and  apj  ear  to  be  on  the  eve
of  having  two  governments,  and  both
republican  in  their  form ;  but  which
of them is governed by  God?


I


10


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Neither  of  them  have  anything  to  do
with  the  Lord.  They  are  not  under
his  guidance  or  direction,  and  with-
out his  dictation  it  is  impossible  to
govern  correctly.  The  principles  of
human  government,  as  now  prac-
tised, are  wrong;  for  what  man  knows
the  things  of  God?  What  human
wisdom  can  dictate  to  the  inhabitants
of  a  world  ?  Human,  governments
have  always  been  fluctuating  and
changeable-  They  have  tbeir  rise,
their  progress,  and  fall,  and  have  al-
ways contained  within  themselves  the
elements  of  their  own  destruction.
The  proper  mode  of  government  is
this — God  first  speaks,  and  then  the
people  have  their  action.  It  is  for  [
them  to  say  whether  they  will  have
Ms  dictation  or  not.  They  are  free  :
they  are  independent  under  God.
The  government  of  God  is  not  a
species  of  priestcraft,  after  the  order
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  where  one
man  dictates  and  everybody  obeys
without  having  a  voice  in  it.  We
have  our  voice  and  agency,  and  act
with  the  most  perfect  freedom;  still
we  l.H'lirw  there  is  a  correct  order —
some  wisdom  and  knowledge  some-
where that  is  superior  to  ours :  that
wisdom  and  knowledge  proceeds  from
God  through  the  medium  of  the
holy  Priesthood.  We  believe  that
no  man  or  set  of  men,  of  their  own
wisdom  and  by  their  own  talents,  are
capable  of  governing  the  human
family  aright.

These  are  our  opinions.  We  be*
lieve  that  it  require s  the  same  wisdom
that  governs  the  planetary  system,
that  produces  seed  time  and
harvest,  day  and  night,  that  organised
our  system,  and  that  implanted  intel-
ligence in  finite  man, — that  it  needs
the  same  intelligence  to  govern  men
and  promote  their  happiness  upon
the  earth  that  it  does  to  control  and
keep  in  order  the  heavenly  bodies ;
and  we  believe  that  that  cannot  be
found  with  man  independently.  It


is  a  principle  that  exists  with  God,
and  he  will  not  confer  it  upon  the
wicked  and  ungodly,  neit  her  will  lie  sus-
tain those  that  trample  under  foot  his
authority  and  his  laws.  Hence  he  has
organised  his  kingdom  with  the  ex-
press intention  of  governing  his
children  himself  according  to  the
wisl  mi  that  dwells  with  him,  through
the  medium  that  he  has  appointed ;
and  hence,  having  appointed  a  medium,
he  brings  it  before  the  people,  that
they  may  have  an  opportunity  of  ex*
pressing  their  sentiments.  Then,  if
they  do  not  like  the  method  which  he
has  adopted,  or  any  plans  that  he
may  introduce, — if  they  do  not  like
his  officers,  they  have  a  voice  in  it,
and  can  say  so.  There  is  no  man  *
or  government  under  the  heavens
that  has  so  strict  a  scrutiny  as  we
have  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.
All  the  authorities  of  this  Church
have  to  be  acted  for  twice  a  year  by
all  the  Saints  throughout  all  the
world. .  This  is  very  rig-id  sentry,
more  searching  than  that  of  our
democratic  rulers  ;  but. these  Aenwith
whom  avc  associate  in  the  kingdom
of  God  do  not  take  it  upon  them-
selves alone  to  dictate  and  regulate
these  important  matters  pertaining
to  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  sal-
vation of  man,  because  they  do  not
consider  they  have  got  the  intelli-
gence. Hence  my  remarks  so  far,
and  hence  the  course  of  procedure
pursued  to-day  in  the  presentation  of
the  authorities  of  the  Church  in
bringing  all  leading  matters  before
the  people*

We  can  acquiesce  generally  in  the
guidance  of  the  Lord,  and  with
pleasure  obey  the  dictation  of  his
servants.  Have  we  by  doing  this
progressed  in  a  knowledge  of  the
law  of  God,  and  the  rule  and  govern-
ment of  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth  ?
If  we  have  any  intelligence,  we  shall
show  that  we  have  learned  a  great
and  important  lesson — one  that  we


UNION,  ETC.


11


might  have  learned  some  time  ago.
But  I  will  tell  you  what  it  is  :  When
God  dictates  through  the  channel
that  he  lias  placed  upon  the  earth,
he  directs  through  the  gift  and  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  this  way
manifests  his  will  to  those  whose  right
it  is  to  know  it.  In  tliis  way  he  makes
known  the  things  of  his  kingdom  and
the  principles  that  are  necessary  to
the  salvation  of  the  people.  Then
all  the  congregation  lift  up  their  hands
as  a  token  before  God  that  they  sanc-
tion what  is  presented,  and  then  the
voice  of  the  people  is  the  voice  of  God.
He  first  dictates,  and  then  we  sustain
his  nomination.  Thus  we  have  the
wisdom  of  God  associated  with  the
concurrence  of  man;  and  God  being
governed  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  and
the  Saints  possessing  and  being
guided  by  the  gift  of  the  Huly  Ghost,
it  is  the  voice  of  God  and  the  voice
of  his  people  under  his  direction,  and
God  and  his  people  are  one,  as  Jesus
said — "  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that
we  all  may  be  one  "  This  is  the  way
we  look  at  things,  and  by  pursuing
this  course  we  have  made  great  pro-
gress in  the  principles  of  eternal  life,
and  all  those  tilings  that  devolve
upon  us  to  attend  to.

What  is  it  that  we  are  after  ?  Is
it  to  revolutionize  these  States  of
America  by  force,  by  physical  power,
by  the  .sword,  and  by  treading  under-
foot their  rights?  No.  Are  we
striving  to  overthrow  the  nations,  and
to  put  our  feet  upon  the  necks  of
men  ?  No :  we  care  but  very  little
about  them  or  their  concerns.  But
is  there  not  a  kingdom  that  God
should  set  up  ?  Yea  Is  not  this  the
stone  hewn  out  of  the  mountain
without  hands,  that  is  to  grow  into  a
great  kingdom  and  fill  the  whole
earth?  It  is.  Then  how  are  you
going  to  accomplish  this  great  work  f
We  answer,  Precisely  as  the  Lord
tells  us.  We  have  existed  for  thirty
years,  and  we  have  used  a  great  deal


of  our  time  and  labour  for  the  pro-
motion  of  this  kingdom.  But  have
we  at  any  time  interfered  with  the
rights  of  others  ?  We  have  been  out-
laged  and  abused  in  Ohio,  Missouri,
and  Illinois  ;  but  whom  have  we  inter-
fered with  ?  We  are  at  the  defiance
of  the  world  to  point  out  a  single  in-
stance. Have  we  attempted  to  over-
run Texas  or  New  Mexico— to  trample
underfoot  the  people  of  Nebraska  and
Kansas,  and  make  everybody  tremble
aud  succumb  hy  the  power  of  the
sword  ?  Have  we  interfered  with
California,  Oregon,  or  Washington
Territory  ? No,  we  have  not*

Then  what  have  we  done  to  cause
people  to  be  so  jealous  of  us  ?  Why,
we  have  just  let  everybody  else  alone  ;
we  have  preached  peace  and  solvation,
built  up  Zion,  and  proclaimed  the
kingdom  of  God.  They  wrould  not,
however,  let  us  alone  ;  but  we  could
not  help  that.  The  very  move  that
they  have  made  and  all  the  steps
that  we  have  taken  have  brought  us
he  fore  the  nations,  and  manifested
the  power  of  God  in  a  way  that  never
could  have  been  done  otherwise*
They  may  say  what  they  will,  but
tli is  is  the  result  of  it*  We  did  not
kill  them  when  we  had  a  chance*
They  came  upon  us  and  sought  to
destroy  us,  and  why  did  they  do  this  ?
It  was  because  the  Lord  was  with  us.
We  could  not  help  them  doing  as  they
did,  and  I  suppose  they  could  not
resist  the  power  that  prompted  them
to  do  as  they  have  done.  However,
it  is  all  right  ;  the  hand  of  God  is  in
it  and  has  been  from  the  beginning.
Do  we  rejoice  at  the  present  time
over  the  difficulties  of  our  enemies  in
the  States?  No,  we  would  be  glad
to  do  them  good,  if  they  would  only
let  us;  but  they  are  unwilling  to
receive  the  truth.

Have  we  forsaken  our  covenants  ?
or  have  they  violated  the  law  in  their
treatment  to  us  ?  It  was  shown  very
clearly  this  morning,  by  President


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCUURSKS.


Wells,  that  they  hunted  us  like  the
wolves  in  the  desert.  They  came
with  their  armies  fully  bent  on  our
destruction,  but  a  barrier  stood  in  the
way.  The  Lord  said ,  "  Thus  far  shall
you  go,  and  no  further.  You  can
now  stop.  You  can  shiver  and  shake
out  there  in  the  mountains,  during
the  cold,  chilling  blasts  of  a  dreary
winter ;  but  touch  not  my  anointed,
and  do  my  Prophets  no  harm."

They  have  now  got  the  difficulties
at  home  which  they  intended  to
created  among  us,  We  have  not  in-
jured them — we  have  not  hurt  a  hair
of  their  heads,  and  we  still  feel  willing
to  assist  them.  We  feel  willing  to
help  to  preserve  the  nation ;  and  our
Elders  have  travelled  thousands  of
miles  to  bless  the  people.  Yes,  we
feel  to  bless  everybody;  and  wh at  will
we  not  do  to  benefit  our  fellow-beings  ?
Brethren,  let  us  try  to  conquer  our-
selves. Let  us  try  to  understand  our
own  position,  to  magnify  our  calling,
that,  we  may  be  prepared  to  act  in
that  sphere  in  which  ,God  may  call  us
to  operate.  The  Lord  has  chosen  his
servjiiils,  ]je  has  lifted  up  his  standard
in  Zion,  he  has  proclaimed  peace  and
happiness  on  earth,  he  It; is  taught  us
how  to  live  and  how  to  die;  the  way
is  pointed  out  whereby  we  can  obtain
salvation  in  his  kingdom.  He  has
made  manifest  unto  us  his  will,  and
we  feel  glad ;  we  rejoice  and  sing
Hallelujah!  the  Lord  God  omnipotent
reigneth !

Brethren  and  sisters,  we  have  a
great  mission  to  perform—  we  have
to  try  to  govern  ourselves  according
to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  we  find  it  one  of  the  most  diffi-
cviH  tasks  we  ever  undertook,  to  learn
to  govern  ourselves,  our  appetites,  our
dispositions,  our  habits,  our  feelings,
our  lives,  our  spirits,  our  judgment,
and  to  bring  all  our  desires  into  sub-
jection to  the  law  of  the  kingdom  of
God  and  to  the  Spirit  of  truth.  It
is  a  very  critical  thing  to  be  engaged


in  the  upbuilding  of  the  kingdom  of
God — a  nucleus  of  which  we  Lave
here.

Whatever  good  feelings  we  have
originate  from  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
and  from  the  light"  and  intelligence
that  come  from  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ.  For  all  we  owe  our  oblation  of
thanksgiving  to  the  great  Giver  of  all
good.

We  are  assembled  here  from  dif-
ferent nations,  having  a  variety  of
prejudices,  different  kinds  of  educa-
tion, having  imbibed  different  feel-
ings, notions,  and  ideas ;  and  we  have
now  come  together  to  learn  to  !  end
ourmindsjtoyiefcl  ouropiniujj: s?an l  not
to  follow  our  own  notions,  not  to  cling
to  our  peculiar  whims  and  caprices,
but  to  bow  to  the  holy  Priesthood,
which  is  the  rule  of  God  upon  the
earth*  You  should  understand  that
when  you  have  been  voting  hero  to
sustain  the  Presidency  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
the  Twelve  Apostles,  the  High  Coun-
cil, the  Bishops,  and  other  Quorums,
you  have  been  voting  to  sustain  the
legitimate  and  authorized  officers  of
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
whose  right  it  is  to  rule  and  govern
whenever  and  wherever  the  Almighty
has  a  people  upop  the  earth.

Now,  tli en j  brethren  and  sisters,  do
not  go  away  from  here,  and  run
against  those  very  parties  whom  you
have  covenanted  to  sustain ;  because,
the  very  moment  you  do,  every  k  ri-
sible man  will  set  you  down  as  hypo-
crites. You  have  a  free  opportunity
here  of  manifesting:  vour  choice,  and
1  will  here  say  that  so  far  you  have
manifested  good  sense  in  being  united
in  regard  to  those  principles  we  have
to  cany  out  Let  the  principles
of  union  and  faith  be  observed  at  your
homes;  and  if  you  are  men  having
families,  let  there  be  a  dailyr  incense
arise  from  your  family  altar,  and  let
your  constant  and  daily"  prayer  be,
"  God  bless  the  Presidency  of  the


UNION,  ETC.


13


Church,  God  bless  tbe  Twelve,  the
Bishops,  and  all  the  constituted
authorities  of  the  Church,  and  the
the  Lord  give  me  wisdom  to  act  ac-
cording to  their  dictation,  and  the
Lord  bless  all  those  that  believe  on
their  words,"  Then  there  will  he  a
feeling  of  union  in  all  our  small  dis-
tricts ;  and  instead  of  its  being,  "  Tom
wants  to  do  this,  and  Jim  wants  to
do  the  other,"  it  will  be,  "  I  don't
want  my  way,  but  I  want  the  mind
and  will  of  God.  I  want  to  know
what  my  duty  is,  and  then  T  will
pray  God  to  give  me  grace  and  power
to  do  it"  This  is  the  feel  incr  of
every  good,  intelligent,  Latter-day
Saint  at  the  present  time,  who  in
seeking  to  do  the  will  of  God  upm
the  earth.  Never  mind  if  somebody
is  trying  to  encroach;  never  mind
about  your  independence  and  your
rights.  '  ; fc

I  was  talking  to  a  man,  the  other
day,  who  said — "  I  must  have  my
rights/'  I  replied  to  him,  "  I  have
no  rights  only  those  that  God  gives
me"  But  I  have  been  imposed
upon,"  said  the  man.  Well,  what  if
you  have  ?  It  is  a  great  deal  better
than  if  you  had  imposed  upon  some-
body else.  Jast  say,  Why,  that  man
don*t  know  any  better ;  and  if  he  can
stand  it,  I  can.

These  are  our  feelings  in  regard  to
rights.  There  was  a  time  wheu  I
thought  I  had  a  great  many  rights  of
my  own,  but  now  I  have  got  to
understand  that  I  have  all  the  rights
that  God  will  gi^e  me,  and  I  don't
want  to  have  any  more,  I  wa::t  to  live
in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  to  ask
him  to  give  me  his  Spirit,  and  then
I  know  I  shall  prosper.  When  you
feel  like  talking  about  your  rights,
let  me  advise  you  to  go  into  your
closet,  forget  your  imaginary  rights,
and  ask  the  Lord  to  crive  you  wis-
dom  to  guide  you  aright,  that  you
may  act  before  him  as  children  of  the
light,  and  not  be  the  means  of  throw-


ing a  stnmblingblock  in  the  way  of
others.  By  pursuing  this  course,  you
will  get  along  much  easier,  and  there
will  not  be  near  so  much  of  that
spirit  of  grumbling  and  complaining.
It  would  be  firstrate  for  many  Lat-
ter-day Saints  to  consider  the  follow-
ing sentiment  of  the  poet : —

Were  half  our  time  in  reasoning  spent,
To  heaven  in  supplication  sent,
Our  cheerful  suiv^s  would  ofteuer  be,
Hear  what  the  Lord  has  <lune  fbr  me.

I  believe  what  he  has  done  for  me
and  for  this  people  to  lie  saving  in  its
nature,  and  to  be  the  best  that  could
have  been  done  for  us.  Let  us  all
seek  to  do  right,  get  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  and  allow  that  to  govern  and
dictate  us.

Suppose  there  are  some  who  do  not
do  exactly  right  in  some  places,
what  of  that?  There  are  many
things  that  are  not  right,  Never
mind  ;  everything  that  is  wrctag  will
in  due  time  be  righted.  Permit  me
to  bring  a  figure  before  you,  A
year  ago  last  winter  there  was  a  very
severe  frost,,  and  it  injured  the  fruit
trees.  Some  who  professed  to  be
judges  thought  it  best  to  cut  down
the  peach  trees;  some  thought  that  if
left  alone  they  would  still  grow,  and
therefore  they  left  them  alone  to  see
how  man j"  would  live.  There  was
quite  a  difference  of  opinion  upon  the
subject,  and  some  ad  >pte  1  one  plan,
and  some  another.  The  general  im-
pression was,  I  believe,  that  it  would
be  best  to  cut  off  those  limbs  4hat
were  frost-bitten  and  that  did  not
appear  to  have  muA  sap  in  them.

Now,  my  doctrine  is,  Prune  the
trees,  or,  in  other  words,  the  branches
of  the  great  tree  to  which  we  are  con-
nected, just  at  the  time  when  it  will
do  the  least  injury.  It  requires
great  wisdom,  however,  to  prune  and
regulate  the  Church  of  Christ  There
were  a  great  many  of  our  people  got
frost-bitten — a  kind  of  dead  in  their
spirits,  and  some  were  for  ffoinffrierht
to  work  and  pruning ;  but  hold  on.


14  JOURNAL  OF

Saul  Jesus,  cc  The  wlieat  and  tares
must  grow  together  until  harvest."
Perh ops  you  would  pull  up  the  wheat
with  the  tares,  if  you  were  to  do  it
when  you  think  best.  If  there  is
nothing1  good  in  a  mail,  he  will  by-
and-by  develop  the  evil  that  is  in
him,  and  then  everybody  will  agree
that  the  pruning  ought  to  bo  done,  and
the  branch  ought  to  be  cut  off ;  but  j
if  the  good  preponderates,  it  would  be
wrong,  because  of  prejudice  or  igno-
rance, to  destroy  the  good.  It  is  best
to  leave  it  to  the  husbandman,  and
then  all  the  congregation  will  say
Amen.

There  are  a  great  many  things  that
might  be  spoken  about  to  further
illustrate  this  subject,  but  the  same
principle  applies  everywhere.  For
instance,  there  were  two  or  three  of
us  went  up  to  Salt  Creek  a  few  days
ago  to  attend  to  some  business  ;  and  by
the  accounts  given  and  the  reports  cir-
culated, a  stranger  would  have  th.  night
that  we  had  got  one  of  the  most
mean  and  contemptible  of  men  for  a
Bishop  :  but  when  the  matter  came  up
for  investigation,  there  was  not  one
solitary  charge  that  could  be  sustained ;
the  man  was  innocent.  Now,  I
would  rather  be  found  at  some  other
business  than  to  be  finding  fault  with
and  accusing  my  brethren.  If  people
would  leave  such  things  alone  a  little
more  than  they  do,  and  leave  the
management  of  them  to  the  proper
authorities,  it  would  be  better  Sup-
pose a  corrupt  man  is  presiding  in  a
certain  place,  his  corruptions  are
soon  known.  Pqpple  need  not  strive
to  turn  good  into  evil  because  they
think  that  some  man  does  wron^.
They  need  not  turn  calumniators  and
defamers,  for  all  will  come  right  in
its  turn.  Then  attend  to  your  own  I
business,  work  the  works  of  righteous-
ness, sustain  the  constituted  authori-  |
ties  of  the  Church  until  God  removes
them,  and  he  will  do  it  in  his  own
time. Bishops, be after  such


DISCOURSE!.

r  men  as  speak  against  the  Lord's
anointed.  The  Priesthood  is  placed  in
the  Church  for  this  purpose,  to  digf
to  plant,  to  nourish,  to  teach  correct
principles,  and  to  develop  the  order
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  #fight  the
devils,  and  maintain  and  support  the
authorities  of  the  Church  of  Christ
upon  the  earth.  It  is  our  duty  all  to
'  act  together  to  form  one  great  unit —
one  great  united  phalanx,  having
sworn  allegiance  to  the  kingdom  of
God ;  then  everything  will  move  on
quietly,  peaceably,  and  easily,  and
then  there  will  be  very  little  trouble,
I  never  want  to  interfere  with  any-
body else's  business;  I  always  find
enough  to  attend  to  of  my  own.
I  There  was  a  man  came  to  me,  a
short  time  ago,  and  wanted  me  to  do
something  about  a  decision  of  High
Council,  I  told  him  I  would  have
nothing  to  do  with  it.  It  was  pre-
sumable to  me  that  they  had  done
ri^ht — that  twelve  disinterested  men
were  more  likely  to  judge  correctly
than  one  man  who  was  evidently  in-
terested, I  did  not  want  to  be  en-
tangled in  f:.ffiiirs  that  did  not  belong
to  me.  I  like  people  to  attend  to
their  own  affairs.

Am  I  an  Apostle  ?  I  would  like
to  magnify  ray  calling.  Am  I  an
Elder,  a  Bishop,  a  Priest,  a  Teacher  ?
If  I  am,  I  would  like  to  magnify  my
callinsf,  that  I  misdit  secure  the
honour  and  glory  of  God,  and  promote
the  welfare  of  his  kingdom,  and  be  a
co-worker  in  the  establishment  of  the
principles  of  righteousness,  and  be-
come a  blessing  to  my  neighbourhood.
What  do  we  see  our  President  at  ?
Is  he  sitting  down  at  rase,  allowing
the  time  to  pass  unimproved?  No:
he  is  stimulating  us  tc  good  works.
He  is  saying  to  the  Elders,  Go  forth
and  preach  the  Gospel,  gather  the
poor,  send  out  your  teams  and  your
young  men,  and  thus  show  that
you  can  do  something  for  the  gather-
ing of  scattered Israel, Get  the


tTNION,  ETC.


15


Spirit'of  life,  power,  and  energy
within  yon,  that  you  may  be  able  to
do  some  thing  to  make  you  feel  fit  to
hold  the  Priesthood  of  the  Most  High
God.  The  poor  Saints  are  watching
yon,  the  First  Presidency  and  other
authorities  are  watching  yon,  and
they  are  watching  with  Argus  eyes
over  the  interests  of  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,

Where  does  this  spirit  come  from  ?
It  comes  from  the  Lord.  Where  does
it  flow  to  ?  It  finds  access  to  every
man  that  has  the  spirit  of  honesty
within  him  ;  and  hence  when
the  teachings  come,  "Send  Your
waggons,  go  here,  go  there,"  the  reply
is,  "  Yes,"  we  are  all  one  in  the
Church  of  Christ;  we  have  dedicated
ourselves,  spirit  and  body,  to  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God;  we  are
on  hand  to  furnish  anything  for  its


advancement  This  is  the  leeimg
that  governs  the  Latter-day  Saints.
They  all  feel  to  say — "  Do  you  want
teams?  Do  you  want  waggons?
Do  you  want  men,  wheat,  or  corn  f "
The  response  is,  "  Yes,  we  are  all  on
hand."  Brethren,  this  is  the  way  to
make  ourselves  rich  and  strong,  and
secure  the  favour  of  God  and  of  the
holy  angels.  This  is  the  way  to  have
peace  in  our  own  bosoms,  to  preserve
ponce  and  happiness  in  our  own
families,  by  engaging  in  doing  the
work  of  the  Lord,  by  striving  to  ac-
complish his  purposes  upon  the  earth,
and  by  preparing,  as  President  Young
said,  for  the  events  that  are  ap-
proaching.

Let  us  be  prepared  to  become  co-
workers with  our  file  leaders,  and
then  all  will  be  well.  Brethren,  God
yon !  Amen,


SECTARIAN  RELIGION— DEMOCRACY,  ETC.

Eetnarks  by  Elder  Gkobge  A.  Smith,  made  in  the  Tabernacte,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  April  6,  1861.


BEPOETED  BY  O.  D.  WATT.


I  arise  before  you  to  offer  a  few  re-
marks,  and  to  preach  from  a  text.  I
do  not  know  that  you  will  find  it  re-
corded in  any  particular  volume,  and
it  is  not  exactly  possible  for  me  to
tell  the  chapter  and  verse,  but  it  will
be  found  in  the  Gospel  according  to
Saint  Brigham  : — Sectarian  religion,
sectarian  God,  and  the  democracy  of
our  country  compared  together.


We  find  in  the  Methodist  discipline
that  the  God  worshipped  by  John
Wesley's  followers  was  a  very  singu-
lar being,  without  body  or  parts.  In
the  platforms  of  the  Presbyterians,
Baptists,  and  other  denominations,  it
is  declared  that  he  has  neither  body,
parts,  nor  passions.  This  is  John
Knox's  old  platform.  I  never  was
very  much  posted  in  these  systems  of


16  JOURNAL  OP

piety,  but  I  remember,  when  quite
young,  looking  at  the  book  containing
the  articles  of  their  faith,  and  wonder-
ing what  sort  of  a  being  it  was  that
bad  neither  body,  parts,  nor  passions,
and  I  might  perhaps,  with  propriety,
aid  principles  or  power.

Lindley  Murray  says  a  substantive
13  the  name  of  anything  that  exists ;
but  if  a  being  had  no  body,  parts,  or
passions,  its  existence  could  only  be
imaginary.  I  suppose  it  would  be  a
noun,  but  not  really  a  substantive.  I
understand  a  substantive,  according  '
to  Kirkham,  to  be  the  name  of  a  sub-
stance.

The  God  that  Moses  saw  wrote
with  his  finger  upon  the  tables  of
stone,  (See  Ex.,  ch.  31,  v.  18,)  The
God  that  Jacob  saw  walked  with  him.
Jacob  was,  no  doubt,  an  expert  wrest-
ler, and  in  the  habit  of  throwing  any-
body that  came  along.  (See  Genesis,
chap.  32,  and  chap.  24  v.  2L)  He
was  wandering  about  one  night,  and
met  a  stranger,  with  whom  he  wrest-
led all  night ;  and  when  he  found  he
could  not  throw  him,  he  said,  You
are  something  more  than  n  man,  or  I
could  throw  you.  But  I  will  not  let
thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me  ;  for
thou  art  more  than  mortal,  or  I  could
throw  thee.  And  Jacob  said,  I
will  call  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel,
for  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and
my  life  is  preserved.  The  God  with
whom  Jacob  wrestled  had  some  body
and  some  parts.  I  need  not*  go  to
investigate  this  subject,  only  to  say
that  the  God  worshipped  by  the  sec-
tarian world  is  not  the  being  that
wrestled  with  Jacob.

We  also  learn  from  the  old  book
that  the  Lord  created  man  in  his  own
image  and  in  his  express  likeness,
Man  possesses  body  and  parts  :  the
result  is,  he  is  a  being  in  the  express
image  of  the  Father.  The  Father  of
the  God  that  the  sectarians  worship
is  not  the  being  who  created  man.
But  this  imaginary  deity,  or  myth  I


DISCOURSES.

of  nothing  at  all,  whose  centre  is  said
to  be  everywhere,  and  whose  circum-
ference is  nowhere,  (I  have  heard  it
described  in  that  language,)  which  is
worshipped  by  the  sectarian  world,
can  simply  be  expressed  by  using
the  words  of  the  Methodist  disci-
pline and  the  creeds  generally,  and
with  the  addition  of  two  or  three
other  words,  without  body,  part%  nr
passions;  then  add  principles  or
power.  What  is  the  result  of  wor-
shipping such  a  being  ?  It  is  a
'  most  indescribable  religions  confu-
sion — a  confusion  that  our  language
is  inadequate  to  express.  One  of
the  old  Prophets  says — "  Woe  to
the  multitude  of  many  people  that
make  a  noise."

I  once  went  to  a  Methodist  camp
meeting,  and  heard  some  thousands
of  men  and  women  praying,  shout-
ing,  screeching  all  afc  once.  At
that  time  I  looked  round,  and
thought  of  the  words  of  the  Pro-
phet— 11  Woe  to  the  multitude  of
many  people  that  make  a  noise
like  the  noise  of  a  sea/*  It  was
like  a  perfect  bedlam  of  confusion.
About  midnight  I  goi.  tired  of  the
noise,  ;tnd  thought  I  would  go  away.
I  had  tied  my  horse  about  a  quar-
ter of  a  mile  from  the  camp.  When
I  went  to  get  him,  he  had  broke
the  girth  of  the  saddle,  drawn  the
halter  so  tightly  that  I  had  to  cut
it  and  to  lead  him  some  distance
Jbefore  I  could  quiet  him  so  as  to
ride  him*

This  will  give  you  an  idea  of  the
confusion  that  can  be  created  by  a
thousand  voices  in  the  extreme  of
enthusiasm  and  confusion  of  a  Me-
thodist camp  meeting.  The  difierent
sects  differ  about  almost  everything
i  that  pertains  to  their  religion.

Harper's  Magazine  tells  the  fol-
lowing story : —

"A  Mormon Elder from  Salt
Lake,  by  the  name  of  Randall,  not
I  many  years  ago,  while  on  a  visit


SECTARIAN  RELIGION,  ETC.


17


to  his  friends  in  the  State  of  Ohio,
was  requested  to  attend  a  Campbell  ite
meeting — a  society  to  which  his  rela-
tives belonged,  He  went,  and
listened  to  an  eloquent  discourse.
The  preacher  was  more  charitable
than  many  of  the  clergy  of  other  de-
ominations ;  and,  in  the  course  of  his
marks,  said  that  each  denomination
r  branch  of  the  church  formed  a
ink  in  the  chain  with  which  Satan
will  be  bound,  and  thus  usher  in  the
reign  of  peace.  After  the  sermon
was  ended,  many  of  the  brethren  ex-
pressed their  approbation  of  tbe  dis-
course, and  bore  testimony  to  the
truth  of  what  the  preacher  had  said.
Finally,  the  friends  of  the  Mormon
Elder  requested  him  to  speak.  He
hesitated.  But,  alter  much  solici-
tat  ion,  he  arose  and  said  — "I  believe
what  your  preacher  has  said  in  regard  '
to  the  different  denominations — that j
they  each  form  a  link  in  the  chain  !
with  which  Satan  will  be  bound;  and  '
when  bound,  both  Satan  and  chain
will  !  cast  into  the  lake  that  burn-
etii with  fire  and  brimstone,  accord-
ing tn  the  testimony  oi  John  the  Rc-
vehikir;"  and  sat  down.  He  wag
not  c  ulled  on  again/1
r  But  now  for  the  second  part  of  my
text- — the  Democracy  of  our  country,
I  w;is  reading  the  remarks  of  ;i  gentle-
man,  who  was  insisting  that  the
young  men  of  our  country  should  learn
to  spout — that  is,  to  make  a  speech  on
politics,  and  be  prepared  to  take  the
stump.  A  gentleman  commenting
on  it  says  gold  will  ruin  the  country
and  destroy  the'tJnioD.  The  people
being  the  government,  having  no  re-
cognized  head,  and  having  to  express
itself  through  the  belly,  if  you  please,
it  takes  a  long  time;  and  by  the  time
the  testament  comes  to  the  head,  it  is
so  confused  and  divided  that  the  fact
is,  it  would  have  you  to  suppose  that
the  greater  portion  of  the  brains  were
in  the  boots !  Read  the  proceedings
of  Congress  for  the  last  year,  and  you  j
No.  2.


willseeonc  constantstew.  Everyman
that  could  get  the  opportunity  would
get  up  and  pronounce  a  solemn
speech,  or  have  it  .printed  at  the  pub-
lic expense — at  any  rate,  to  send  home
tp  his  constituents,  to  let  them  know
that  he  did  or  must  say  something  to
prevent  the  dissolution  of  the  Union,
without  ever  reflecting  upon  or  seeing
the  real  cause  of  the  difficulty.  It  is
a  species  of  maddening  fury  that  rolls
along  like  the  waves  of  the  sea — a
kind  of  universal  confusion.  Take*
for  instance,  those  who  have  been  the
most  devoted  to  the  Constitution  of
the  United  States,  and  tUpy,  like  the
ancients  who  shouted  "  Cjrfcat*  is  the
goddess  Diana  of  the  Ephe^ans  !5t
would  shout  "  Great  is  t£e  Consti-
tution !"  "  A  great  and  glorious
thing  is  the  Union  !"  And  every  step
they  would  take,  every  single  effort
they  would  make,  would  be  to  tread
on  the  rights  of  others.  What  is  the
matter  r  What  causes  all  this  con-
fusion ?  Why,  those  men  who  are
placed  in  authority,  from  the  Presi-
dent down,  looked  silently  on,  and
saw  the  laws  trampled  underfoot,  the
Constitution  violated,  the  rights  of
the  innocent  trilled  with,  the  blood
of  innocence  poured  upon  the  ground
like  water,  and  the  little  insignificant
body  of  people,  the  *'  damned  Mor-
mons/' as  they  pleased  to  call  them,
driven  from  their  homes  into  the
wilderness,  and  so  peace  was  taken
from  their  midst.  Suppose  you  get
the  Christians  now  together  and  fetch
them  up  here,  and  ask  them  to  tell  us
which  is  the  pure  religion  ;  take,  say
a  dozen  of  the  leading  sects,  find  let
each  one  tell  us  which  is  the  pure  re-
ligion of  Jesus  Christ,  and  they  would
get  up  such  a  quarrel,  such  a  confu-
sion, such  a  hubbub,  that  it  would  be
impossible  to  tell  anything  about  it.
(Jo  to  work  and  gather  up  the  dif-
ferent factions  of  our  country,  politi !
cally,  and  let  them  undertake  tp  tell
what  the  matter  is?  and  it  would  only

Vol.  IX.


*


13  JOTXItNAL  OP

have  a  tendency  to  show  a  specimen
of  that  ignorance,  stupidity,  weak-
ness, and  universal  coufusion  which
feigns  throughout  the  land,  When
i\  • I  ittoHay  Saints  were  driven

>m  Jackson  county,  in  1833,  Joseph
Smith  prophesied  that  if  the  people
V .»»  United  States  would  not  bring
to  justice  that  mob  and  protect  the
S  tints,  they  should  have  mob  upon
mob,  mob  upon  mob,  until  mob  and
T'!v;v  and  moo  rule  should  be  all
oyer  the  whole  land,  until  no  man's
life  or  property  should  be  safe.  This
prophecy  is  being  literally  fulfilled.

The  laws  of  the  country  are  tram-
pled upon  with  impunity,  and  there
is  nothing  but  a  general  and  universal
mob  rale*  There  is  really  a  combi-
nation of  corruption  which  exceeds
a>  ■  v  ( ! d ng  which  the  world  has  wiU
uc 1  for  generations.

Take,  for  instance,  the  officers  of
the  army ;  go  into  any  little  detach-
ment of  the  army,  and  they  get
together  in  solemn  conclave,  and  con-
demn a  whole  lot  of  provisions — sell
them  for  a  mere  trifle.  Some  of
i*iem  will  buy  them  in  again,  and  pay
twenty  times  as  much  as  they  sold
fi  r,  and  thus  bleed  Uncle  Sam,  Such
m  n  are  in  office  every  year.  Men  in
OI>?c6  think  it  a  fine  thing  to  swindle
the  Government,  which  is  only  a
r.vs.-rcible  goose  for  them  to  pluck.

Now  I  will  put  the  text  together.
Thtf  religious  and  political  organ  iza-
ti  Of  the  country,  Abe  Lincoln,
the  present  President  of#the  United
\  to**,  that  was — at  any  rate  he  oc-
cfepi<  fcl  e  seat  and  claims  the  title,
\ktA  presides  over  a  portion  of  the
Uj  "t  Washington  in  name, — this
man  is  the  representative  of  the  re-
ligious enthusiasm  of  the  country.
h\'T  the  last  thirty  years  there  has
boon  a  constant  stirring  up  and  firm
ion  on  the  part  of  the  North  to
<  >  a  crusade  against  slavery — to
the  men  who  live  in  the  South-
*  ! :»  States  turn  over  their  slaves.


DISCOURSED

I  was  raised  in  the  State  of  New
York,  and  recollect  the  early  move-
ments in  this  matter.  At  that  time
a  great  many  men  held  slaves.  A\  e
drove  our  slaves  to  Virginia  and  sold
them  for  the  money,  and  got  full  pay.
We  immediately  began  to  feel  sorry
for  them,  and  begran  to  feel  that  it
was  very  wicked  to  keep  negroes,
seeing  we  had  got  the  money  for  ours.
Our  State  was  free  from  slavery,  and
we  desired  all  the  Virginians  to  turn
their  negroes  loose.  We  grew  more
and  more  conscientious  about  it.  The
pulpit  took  the  lead — the  Sunday
schools  and  every  other  religious  in-
fluence that  could  be  brought  to  bear.
Mr.  Lincoln  now  is  put  into  power  by
that  priestly  influence ;  and  the  pre-
sumption is,  shoulA  he  not  find  his
hands  full  by  the  secession  of  the
Southern  States,  the  spirit  of  priest-
craft would  force  him,  in  spite  of  his
good  wishes  and  intentions,  to  put  to
death,  if  it  was  in  his  power,  eveiy
man  that  believes  in  the  divine  mis-
sion x>f  Joseph  Smith,  or  that  bears
testimony  of  the  doctrines  ho
preached*

There  is  no  spirit  more  intolerant,
cruel,  and  devilish  than  a  spirit  of  re-
ligious persecution.  It  carries  its
cruelties  to  a  greater  extent:  and
when  the  civil  authority  becomes
mingled  with  the  religious,  and  that
power  is  united,  and  the  sword  is
placed  in  their  hands,  it  is  the  most
bloody  weapon  that  was  ever  wielded.
Infidelity  is  almost  harmless,
compared  with  it.  %  The  bloodthirsty
power  that  has  been  exercised  under
such  influence  exceeds  anything  that
history  records;  It  is  a  union — a
combination  of  civil  and  religious
power  in  the  hands  of  corrupt  men,
and  that  brought  to  bear,  and  turned
loose  upon  us,  with  a  determination
to  annihilate  every  Latter-day  Saint.
But  God  is  our  shield  and  our  pro-
tector.

It  was  this  influence  that  brought


SECT  ART  AX RELIGION,  ETC.


10


u


us  trouble  daring  the  ntlministrat
of  Mr.  Buchanan.

The  Republican  organs  whipped  Mr.
Buchanan  into  the  Utah  war,  and
they  then  whipped  him  for  get-
ting into  it;  and  they  whipped  him
until  he  got  out  of  it  the  best  way  he
could,  and  then  they  whipped  him
awfully  forgetting  out.  They  meant
to  keep  him  there  until  the  work  of
destruction  was  done.  But,  thank
the  Lord  j  the  Latter-day  Saints  yet
live,  and  yet  have  an  influence,  and
they  are  yet  felt.

Now,  brethren,  this  is  the  word  of
the  Lor!  And  that  contention
which  exists  throughout  the  country,
and  which  by  its  actual  division  is
rendered  powerless  to  injure  ns,  is
really  our  protection ;  God  uses  it  to
protect  us.  He  has  said,  "  The
wicked  shall  slay  the  wicked."  The
time  shall  come  when  the  vengeance
of  the  Almighty  will  fall  upon  the
heads  of  those  that  have  persecuted,
slain,  driven,  and  rejoiced  over  the
destruction  and  affliction  of  the  Saints.
I  know  that  this  is  the  work  of  the
Lord  Almighty.  I  bear  my  testi-
mony  to  it.  And  I  say  that  if  we
were  as  we  ought  to  be,  if  we  would
listen  to  the  counsel  of  President
Young  as  we  ought  to  do,  if  we  would
obey  his  instructions  as  we  ought  to
obey  them,  we  should  be  the  wealthiest
people  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  I
suppose,  however,  so  far  as  the  neces-
saries of  life  are  concerned,  we  are  so
now.  I  presume  you  cannot  find  a
community  throughout  the  United
States  as  large  as  ours  but  what  the
present  distress,  growing  out  of  the
present  financial  panic,  from  political
disorganization,  the  failure  of  men  to
pay  their  debts,  the  refusal  of  the
South  to  continue  in  the  Union, —
among  these  influences  you  cannot
find  a  community  so  large  as  this  but
what  would  be  more  or  less  actually
in  a  state  of  suffering  for  want  of
bread. There  is  no  Latter-day  Saint


in  these  mountains  but  what  can  get
good  bread,  and  eat  that  which  is
good  and  wholesome.  Hence,  I-  may
say,  we  are  the  richest  people;  and  if  we
had  listened  as  we  ought  to  have' done
for  the  last  four  years  to  the  counsel
of  the  Presidency,  we  should  have  pos-
sessed millions  of  property  which  we
do  not  now.  The  fear  there  is  in  the
breasts  of  many  that  the  Presidency
will  exercise  an  influence  oyer  their
business  affairs,  that  would  not  give
them  as  good  a  chance  as  they  ought
to  have,  has  been  all  the  while  a  plan
to  entangle  our  own  feet,  and  has
caused  us  to  grope  like  bUnd  men  in
the  dark,  and  scramble  for  the  pica-
yunes when  we  might  as  well  have
picked  up  the  eagles.  I  have  been
sorry  for  this.  I  know  that  a  wise
head  to  guide  us  in  our  movements
in  our  different  settlements — to  tell  us
what  we  should  cultivate,  what  kind
of  things  we  should  improve  in,  and
the  advantages  to  be  taken  of  the
climate  and  productions  of  our  several
localities,  and  the  way  we  should  exer-
cise our  labour  to  produce  the  neces-
saries of  life,  is  of  va$t  importance  to
us.  We  have  our  brethren  scattered
all  over  the  world,  far  and  near,  and
<  many  of  them  have  been  struggling
for  years  to  come  to  Zion.  W#
should  be  awake  while  we  are  here,
and  try  to  release  them  from  their
bondage,  for  ere  long  the  terrible
storm  will  break  loose ;  every  man's
hand  will  be  let  loose  upon  his  neigh-
bour, and  blood  and  distress,  turmoil,
sorrow,  misery,  war,  and  destruction
will  sweep  the  whole  face  of  the  earth
as  with  the  besom  of  destruction*

Let  us,  then,  exert  ourselves  to
deliver  our  brethren,  that  they  may
flee  from  the  old  barn  like  rats  from
a  building  on  fire,  and  escape  in  i  ":ne,
and  escape  unhurt.  Be  wide-awake
and  diligent  in  these  things  •  and,
when  we  are  called  upon  to  go  after
the  poor,  regard  it  as  a  most  im-
portant  mission. I  do  not  want  to


r


20


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


see  the  Bishops,  in  selecting  men  to
go  as  teamsters,  select  some  that  are
of  no  account.  If  you  send  out  a
team  round  which  you  expect  to  have
gathered  fifteen  or  twenty  Saints  to
cross  the  Plains,  send  a  man  that  will
be  a  father  to  them,  and  teach  them
righteousness,  and  inspire  them  with
good  sentiments  and  exalted  feelings.
And  you  that  go  on  such  missions,
remember  you  are  sent  to  bring  home
the  sheaves :  therefore  take  care  uf
them ;  strengthen  and  encourage  them
in  regard  to  the  things  they  should


do  and  understand  ;  stir  up  in  their
hearts  a  spirit  of  obedience,  and  they
will  come  in  here  with  the  light  of
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  burning
brightly  within  them,  that  their
passage  over  the  Plains  may  be  a
school  to  them  of  principle  and  doc-
trine and  truth,  that  they  may  inherit
all  the  blessings  that  are  in  store  for
them — blessings  that  will  endure  for
ever.

I  believe  I  have  got  entirely  from
my  text.  Excuse  me,  and  may  the
Lord  i'i'  ->  y.u.  Amen.


IMPROVEMENT— RESTORATION  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.

Remarks  by  Elder  Lorenzo  Snow,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Cheat  Salt

Lake  City,  April  7, 1861,


RKf'ORTED  BY J.  V.  lX>ttC


It  is  a  matter  of  rejoicing  to  me,
brethren  and  sisters,  that  I  have  the
pri\  ill  Li'  "f  assembling  here  with  you
in  a  Conference  capacity,  contempla-
ting the  growth  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Almighty  which  has  been  upon  the
earth  for  the  past  thirty-one  years,
and  considering  the  progress  that  this
people  have  made  in  knowledge,
power,  and  intelligence.  We  meet
together  in  this  capacity  from  time
to  time.  Twice  in  a  year  we  have
always  the  same  privilege.

After  considering  the  past,  and
seeing  the  improvements  we  have
made,  as  a  people  and  as  individuals,
it  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  us  to
consider  ourselves,  to  see  whether  we
are  making  such  progress  as  is  required


of  us — to  learn  if  we  are  keeping
pace  with  the  times  and  the  im-
provements that  are  being  made  by
the  leading  men  of  the  Church — to
find  out  whether  we,  as  individuals,
are  improving  in  the  principles  of  the
Gospel,  whether  we  are  improving  in
the  practice  of  righteous  and  holy
principles,  and  whether  we  arc  gaining
knowledge,  wisdom,  virtue,  and
getting  a  more  full  understanding  of
how  to  make  ourselves  happy,  and
thus  prepare  ourselves  for  that  situa-
tion that  we  expect  to  occupy  in
future.

As  has  been  said  by  our  President,
we  can  clearly  see  the  rapid  improve-
ments and  advances  that  this  people
are  making  from  year  to  year. It  is


a  pleasure  to  us,  and  we  ought  to  feel
grateful  to  our  Heavenly  Father  for
the  strength  that  he  has  given  to  this
people  in  consequence  of  the  union,
the  knowledge,  and  wisdom  that  we
are  continually  gaining.  1

We  can  easily  see  the  improvements
that  the  people  are  making.  It  is
like  the  babe  that  passes  from  a  state
of  infancy  to  childhood,  and  thence
to  manhood.  You  cannot  tell  the
particular  moments  of  its  growth  and
increase  in  stature  ;  you  cannot  point
out  the  particular  day,  hour,  or  minute
in  which  it  increases ;  but  you  are  all
the  time  perfectly  aware  that  it  is
gaming,  growing,  becoming  greater
continually.  It  is  precisely  so  in
regard  to  ourselves  spiritually.  If
we  are  doing  our  duty,  though  we
cannot  point  out  the  moment,  the  day,
or  the  particular  time  when  we
receive  the  increase  of  knowledge,
wisdom,  or  power,  yet  we  know  and
feel  conscious,  as  we  reflect  back,  that
we  have  gained.  This  is  a  blessing,
and  for  this  we  should  feel  deeply
grateful  to  our  Heavenly  Father.
We  are  where  we  want  to  make  our-
selves  happy,  and  the  nature  cf  the
objects  around  us  are  such  as  to  cause
us  to  bear  some  fruit,  be  it  good  or
bad,  sweet  or  &cmr.

We  are  in  the  world,  but  we  are
ignorant-  We  do  not  know  what  will
make  us  happy,  or  whether  we  shall
receive  what  we  anticipate.  We
know  little  or  nothing  about  these
tilings.  We  seek  happiness  and  that
which  will  make  us  comfortable,  but
we  do  not  really  understand  what
will  make  us  happy  for  time  and
happy  for  eternity.

The  Priesthood  has  been  restored.
It  has  been  bestowed  upon  man,  that
through  that  medium  all  who  would
like  to  be  good  and  happy  might
have  the  privilege.  The  Gospel  tells
us  how  to  be  great,  good,  and  happy.
The  Spirit  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ
teaches all  things  that  are  neces-


sary for  our  present  and  future
welfare.

We  have  these  objects  in  view  to-
day, and  we  should  continually  keep
them  before  us.  Look  back  for
twenty-five  years,  or  look  back  ten
years  only,  ami  a  great  many  have
been  in  the  Church  that  length  of
time,  and  see  what  we  have  accom-
plished. We  see  farther  and  com-
prehend things  better;  hence  we  are
better  prepared  for  the  things  that
are  coming  on  the  earth  than  we
were  ten,  fifteeen,  twenty,  or  twenty,
five  years  ago  to  know  how  to  be
useful — to  know  how  to  do  things  as
thev  should  be  done.

A  man  may  be  a  very  good  man,  and
yet  not  have  wisdom  to  do  things
right ;  but  we  have  got  the  Spirit  that
will  enable  us  to  know  how  to  put
{hem  in  the  best  channel,  so  that  they
will  be  best  calculated  to  roll  on  the
kingdom  of  God,  to  make  us  happy,
and  prepare  us  for  the  scenes  that  lie
before  us.  Is  not  the  Gospel  a  good
thing?  Is  it  not  worthy  of  a  man
losiusr  his  substance  and  even  his  hie
to  gain  the  blessings  that  are  promised
to  the  faithful  in  Israel  f  The  man
who  has  the  priesthood,  who  is  tilled
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  to  Ik*  guided
and  dictated  by  it  in  the  way  of  hap-
piness and  life.  It  is  very  necessary
tor  us  to  have  these  things  laid  before
us  frequently,  that  we  may  be  put  in
remembrance  of  our  duties.

The  organised  spirit  which  God
gave  us  is  the  one  which  conceives
through  the  revelations  that  are  given
from  on  high.  The  nature  and  the.
character  of  those  teachings  that
come  from  the  Priesthood  are  such
that  we  comprehend  them:  the  Spirit
manifests  them  unto  us  as  they  are.
Bv  it  we  learn  our  duties  to  God  and
man*  We  are  taught  by  it  to  shun
the  evil  and  cleave  unto  that  which  is
good.  We  understand  this,  if  we  are
in  the  path  of  duty.  It  is  not
miracles  that  produce  within  us  that


22


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


living  faith  of  which  President
Young  so  frequently  speaks ;  but  we
learn  the  nature  and  character  of  our
religion.  We  learn  that  which  is
calculated  to  enable  ns  to  shun  all  evil
power  and  to  make  us  happy.

When  a  man  receives  knowledge,
lie  is  prompted  to  impart  it  to  others ;
when  a  man  becomes  happy,  the
Spirit  that  surrounds  him  teaches
him  to  strive  to  mpke  others  happy.
It  is  not  so  in  the  Gentile  world.  If
a  man  attains  to  any  important
position,  he  does  not  strive  to  elevate
others  to  participate  in  the  same
blessings.  In  this  respect  there  is  a
great  difference  between  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  the  world  of  mankind.
The  object  of  the  Priesthood  is  to
make  all  men  happy,  to  diffuse  in-
formation, to  make  all  partakers  of
the  same  blessings  in  their  turn.  Is
there  any  chance  of  a  man's  becoming
happy  without  a  knowledge  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ?  A  man  may
make  the?  thunders  roll,  the  light-
nings flash;  but  what  has  thai  to  do
with  making  a  man  happy  ?  Nothing.
Though  in  the  world  they  try  to  make
themselves  happy,  still  they  are  not
successful  in  what  they  strive  to
accomplish.  They  cannot  be  happy
except  upon  one  principle,  and  that  is
by  embracing  the  fulness  of  the
Gospel,  which  teaches  us  not  to  wait
till  we  get  into  eternity  before  we
begin  to  make  ourselves  happy  ;  but
it  teaches  us  to  strive  here  to  make
ourselves  and  these  around  us  rejoice
in  the  blessings  of  the  Almighty,

This,  then,  should  be  our  aim  and
object— to  learn  to  make  ourselves
useful — to  be  saviours  to  our  fellow-
men — to  learn  how  to  save  them — to
communicate  to  them  a  knowledge  of
the  principles  that  are  necessary  to
raise  them  to  the  same  degree  of  in-
telligence that  we  have  ourselves.

Men  may  be  very  good,  and  yet
they  may  not  be  very  wise,  nor  so
usefy  as  ihey  might  be ;  but  the  Gos-


pel is  given  to  make  us  wise,  and  to
enable  us  to  get  those  tilings  in  our
minds  that  are  calculated  to  make  us
happy.  The  time  that  we  have  to  meet
together  here  and  compare  ourselves
with  the  principles  of  our  profession
is  a  great  blessing.

We  are  a  Territory :  we  have  our
own  Government ;  we  have  our  own
dispenser  of  light  and  knowledge,  who
is  supported  by  our  united  faith;  and
the  Spirit  within  us  teaches  to  sanction
their  proceedings,  and  how  to  walk  in
the  path  of  life.

I  dare  say  that  some  of  us  do  not
sufficiently  reflect  upon  the  good
things  that  are  in  our  minds,  nor
do  we  have  that  gratitude  that  we
ought  to  have  to  our  Heavenly
Father.

I  bee  some  of  my  brethren  around
me  who  hold  the  holy  Priesthood
that  has  descended  out  of  the  heavens
in  these  last  days;  I  behold  their
faces  multiplied  around  me;  I  see
them  appointed  to  become  saviours
among  men — to  be  always  on  hand  to
officiate  in  the  Priesthood.  They  are
destined  to  become  saviours  on  the
earth — rulers  among  the  children  of
men,  to  teach  mankind  how  to  in-
crease in  the  principles  and  likeness
of  Deity — how  to  increase  in  those
principles  of  power  that  w  ill  enable
them  constantly  to  ascend  in  the  path
of  eternal  life — to  be  like  the  child
that  grows  when  in  infancy,  gradually
increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God.

This  is  the  condition  in  which  they
are  placed,  if  they  are  acting  in  their
proper  positions,  and  if  they  are  up-
holding and  sustaining  those  who  are

1  .  -

in  our  midst,  and  who  arc  appointed

to  lead  and  guide  this  people  to  eternal
life  and  exaltation.  We  may  increase
in  knowledge  and  power,  and  in  our
ability  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth,  and  that,  too,  by
our  diligence,  our  humility,  and  faith-
fulness to  the  covenants  we  have
made. We  do  not  requiie  miracles


APPRECIATION  OF  DIVINE GIFTS,  liTC.


2o


to  enable  us  to  perform  the  duties  of
fo-day.  We  know,  from  defending
the  teachings  of  the  servants  of  God,
that  wo  are  rigid — that  the  Spirit
from  on  high  accompanies  us*  We
know  that  we  are  right  as  well  as  the
Lord  does*  How  do  we  know  this  ?
Because  Deity  is  within  us,  and  that
Spirit  of  Deity  that  is  within  us
teaches  us  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God;
it  teaches  the  sisters  that  they  are  the
daughters  of  God,  and  by  it  we  are
all  taught  that  we  are  the  children  of
our  Father  in  heaven.  Therefore  we
know  if  we  are  in  the  line  of  our
duty;  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Gospel
teaches  every  man  who  lives  in  the
line  of  his  duty  that  he  is  in  the  path
of  right,  and  so  it  does  every  woman*
By  it  she  knows  she  is  walking  in  the
path  of  truth  and  life.  It  is  this  Spirit
which  teaches  the  sisters  as  well  as
the  brethren  the  right  from  the  wrong ;
and  she  has  a  perfect  right  to  know
the  truth  of  her  religion — to  have  a
knowledge  fur  herself  that  the  prin-
ciples of  her  profession  are  divine.
Is  there  anything  wrong  or  mysterious
in  this  ?  No.  It  is  because  she  is  a
child  of  God,  and  therefore  she  is
capacitated  to  know  as  he  knows — to
comprehend  the  principles  of  her
religion,  its  divine  origin,  and  its
tendency  onward  and  upward.

This  is  a  good  and  glorious  princi-
ple, and  we  are  uniting  ourselves
together,  and  continually  striving  to
form  a  nucleus  of  power,  and  getting
round  us  that  support  that  will  endure
forever  ,  and  we  will  stand  shoulder
to  shoulder,  and  break  in  pieces  and


subdue  that  which  would  strive  to
overcome  us,  and  then  plant  the
principles  of  righteousness  over  all
the  earth.  This  we  will  accomi  lish,
for  it  is  given  tons  to  do ;  and  this  : s
the  period  in  which  it  is  to  be  done,
and  we  will  do  it.  We  will  gird  np
our  loins  and  rejoice  in  the  work
given  to  us,  and  in  creating  constantly
around  us  that  which  will
enable  us  to  increase  in  wisdom,  in
experience,  and  in  the  knowledge  of
God.

Brethren  and  sisters,  short  sermons
is  the  doctrine  of  the  day ;  therefore  I
say,  The  Lord  bless  yon !  and  I  bless
you  with  all  the  power  that  I  possess.
President  Young  blesses  you,  his
Counsellors  bless  you,  the  Twelve
Apostles  bless  you,  the  Seventies  blesa
you,  the  High  Priests  bless  you,  and
we  all  bless  each  other;  and  hence  we
are  a  blessed  people,  inasmuch  as  we
live  for  each  other's  good,  and  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

Brethren,  who  can  overcome  us  ?
Who  can  place  a  stumblingblock  in
the  way  of  our  feet  as  we  are  wending
our  way  to  eelestial  glory  ?  Is  there
any  need  of  tears?  No,  not  much.
Need  we  have  any  fear  of  the  result?
No.  There  is  no  need  of  crying  and
mourning,  for  we  are  the  saviours  of
men,  appointed  to  be  the  kings  and
queens  of  the  earth.  We  cannot
always  do  what  we  would  like  to  db,
but  we  shall  have  the  power  to  do
that  which  we  should  do.  The  Lord
will  give  us  the  power  to  do  this.

The  Lord  bless  you !  Amen.


f

24


JOURNAL  OV  DI8COTJ11SKS.


APPRECIATION  OF  DIVINE  GIFTS  AND  BLESSINGS— RETURN
TO  JACKSON  COUNTY — ENCOUR A  G E ME N T  OF  HOME

MANUFACTURES.

Remarks  ly  President  Heber  C.  Kikbaix,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Cheat  Sait

Lake  City,  April  7,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  G.  D,  WATT.


The  remarks  of  brother  Snow  are
all  very  good  anil  brilliant  to  every
intelligent  mind.  Wc  have  to  in-
crease  the  same  as  a  child  that  goes
to  school  and  commences  with  his
A,  B,  C.  When  that  child  obtains
a  knowledge  of  the  letters  of  the
English  language,  he  can  then  put
them  together,  and  make  words  and
sentences.  He  then  wants  a  second
reader,  and  by-and-by  he  will  call  for
a  third,  and  a  fourth.  Upon  the
same  prnciple,  you  and  I  can  improve
by  degrees;  and  there  is  no  other  way
by  which  any  man  can  improve,  ex-
cept by  experience.  There  is  no  man
in  this  Church  who  has  lived  his  re-
ligion and  walked  in  the  light  of
truth  these  twenty-eight  years  past,
but  who  kno\ys  a  hundred  times  more
now  than  he  did  at  the  beginning  of
his  career ;  and  that  knowledge  comes
by  experience.

We  should  appreciate  our  bless-
ings and  the  gilts  that  God  has  con-
ferred upon  us,  and  our  affections
should  be  stronger  for  the  Giver  of
the  gifts  than  they  are  for  the  gift.
Is  it  my  duty  to  think  more  of  Jesus,
the  Son  of  the  living  God,  than  of
his  Father  who  gave  him  <is  a  sacri-
fice for  the  sins  of  the  world?
Which  is  the  greatest — the  Giver  of
that  gift,  or  the  gift  ?  Where  people
would  think  more  of  the  gift  than
the  Giver,  I  have  known  hundreds
of  times  of  those  gifts  being  taken
from  them  because  they  did  not  ap*
predate  the  Giver.  Remember  the
Father,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and
then  appreciate  those  men  God  has
given  you  to  be  your  servants,  and


you  will  prosper  from  this  time  forth
and  forever,  and  all  your  enemies
cannot  move  you.

Everyone  that  is  not  for  God  is
bound  for  destruction  ;  and  if  all  our
enemies  combine  and  come  against  us
with  all  their  armies  and  munitions
of  war,  they  cannot  hurt  us,  for  God
our  Father  will  fight  our  battles,  as
he  has  done  up  tot  his  day.  He
will  sustain  those  who  remember
the  originator  of  the  great  work
of  God  in  the  last  days. I  am  now


telling  what  I  know ;  I  am  telling
what  I  have  experienced.  Sometime
this  month,  it  will  be  twenty -nine
years  since  President  Young  and
myself  were  baptized.

1  have  been  all  the  time  in  the
midst  of  this  people  with  the
Prophet,  and  with  the  Apostles,  with
Patriarchs,  and  with  sinners;  and  I
know  all  about  the  persecutions  we
have  passed  through  as  a  people.  All
this  has  given  me  an  experience  that
has  proved  to  a  demonstration  that
the  world  and  all  hell  combined  can-
not budge  this  people  one  hair,  only
as  they  please  to  go.  God  dictates
them,  and  that  you  have  seen  more
particularly  within  a  few  years  past.

Did  that  army  hurt  us  ?  No,  not
as  a  people ;  but  there  are  some
persons  who  are  injured,  and  will  be
eternally.  Who  injured  them,  the
army  r  No :  they  did  it  themselves ;
they  fostered  the  enemy  that  would
have  destroyed  this  whole  people  and
laid  the  knife  to  President  Young's
throat,  and  to  the  throats  of  his
friends,  and  all  the  friends  of  God.
But  the  Lord  Almighty  will  make


APPRECIATION  OF  DIVINE GIFTS,  ETC.


25


them  pay  for  it.  You  will  feel  the
rod  for  this.  If  it  is  not  in  fifty  years,
it  will  surely  come,  and  you  need  not
think  you  will  escape  it.  You  may
do  good  works  enough  to  overbalance
it,  and  then  perhaps  you  will  not  be
found  wanting.

Those  in  the  days  of  Joseph  who
were  traitors  to  him  and  tampered
with  the  mob  are  guilty  of  his  death,
and  they  will  have  to  pay  the  debt
some  clay.  You  that  have  not  done
wrong,  happy  are  ye.  Do  not  do
any  wrong  in  the  future.  You  that
have  done  right,  continue  to  do  right.
You  that  have  not  betrayed  your
brethren,  see  you  do  not  do  it ;  and
you  that  have  not  turned  awray  from
the  Lord  and  from  your  covenants,  do
not  do  it,  but  hold  them  sacred  the
few  more  days  you  have  to  live  in
the  flesh,  and  the  Lord  will  let  you
live  many  days,  and  you  shall  be  the
ones  the  Scriptures  speak  of,  to  whom
the  Lord  will  grant  long  life,  even
that  child  that  shall  be  subject  to  his
father  and  to  his  mother.  That  is
the  blessing  promised  to  them.

I  will  say  to  you,  young  men,  you
children  of  the  Saints,  and  you,
young  women,  Repent  of  your  sins,
and  turn  to  your  fathers  and  mothers,
and  listen  to  their  counsel,  if  they
are  good  and  teach  you  good  princi-
ples ;  and  if  they  are  not  good,  but
teach  you  good  principles,  cleave
unto  those  principles.  When  my
son  turns  away  from  me,  he  turns
away  from  God  ;  and  if  he  does  not
turn  away  from  God,  he  will  not  turn
away  from  me*  I  am  a  son  of  God ;
I  came  from  him,  I  belong  to  the
family  of  Christ,  and  I  am  an  heir  to
all  the  promises  with  my  Saviour
Jesns,  If  I  am  faithful,  and  do  not
do  any  tiling  worse  than  I  have  done,
I  shall  come  off  victoriously.

A  great  many  may  condemn  me,
and  say,  I  am  not  as  affable  and  kind
as  I  should  be ;  I  do  not  kiss  you  and
pet  you  enough,  and  you  condemn  me


for  it,  and  you  would  condemn  me
if  I  did.

I  am  a  branch  of  the  vine  that
came  out  of  the  root  that  Jesus
dwells  in  ;  and  when  my  son  or  my
daughter  turns  away  from  me,  they
turn  away  from  God  j  and  if  they  do
not  turn  away  from  God,  they  will
not  turn  away  from  me;  aud  when
my  wife  turns  away  from  me,  if  I
am  a  righteous  man,  she  turns  from
the  tree  she  is  connected  to ;  and  if
she  has  done  it  unrighteously,  she
turns  from  God — she  transcends  her
bounds,  and  the  Spirit  of  the
Almighty  will  not  dwell  with  her ;
and  all  you  sympathetic  persons  will
fall  in  with  that  spirit  and  condemn
me.  Let  me  turn  away  from  Presi-
dent Young  and  this  Church,  should
I  not  turn  away  from  God  ?  Of
course  I  should.

It  should  be  with  a  family  as  it  is
with  this  Church.  As  this  Church  is
compared  to  a  vine  or  tree,  so  a
family  should  be  like  a  tree ;  they
should  be  one,  concentrating  their
feelings  in  '  their  head  from  whence
they  spring;  and  if  fchcy  eannot  respect
the  father  they  came  from,  how  can
they  respect  grandfather?  I  am
alluding  to  fathers  and  mothers — to
the  Elders  of  Israel — to  men  of  God
that  have  been  anointed  with  a  holy
anointing,  to  be  what?  To  be  Priests
of  God.  Inve  for  it,  and  honour
your  present  calling,  and  keep  your
election  sure.  If  you  were  not  elected
in  eternity,  here  is  the  place  to  be
elected,  and  to  enlist  under  the  banner
of  Christ;  and  finally  we  will  al)  be
elected,  if  we  will  only  take  a  course
that  is  proper.  It  is  going  to  be  a
difficult  thins:  for  the  elect  to  be
saved,  according  to  the  Scriptures,
and  there  will  not  any  of  them  be
saved  only  by  taking  a  course  to  do
right  and  by  hononring  their  calling
and  Priesthood,  No  man  will  become
a  king,  only  by  honouring  his  calling,
and  by  obtaining  a  crown  by  expe-


t


26  JOURNAL  OF

rience,  and  continuing  in  welldoing.
There  is  no  woman  that  will  ever  be
a  queen  except  she  is  a  good  woman
and  well  attached  to  a  good  king.

Now  honour  that  calling  and  Priest-
hood, and  that  sacred  endowment
that  will  bring  you  into  the  presence
of  God,  if  you  will  observe  it
How  unrighteously  many  act  that
have  received  a  holy  and  sacred  en-
dowment! They  will  many  of  them
violate  those  sacred  and  solemn  obli-
gations- They  have  gone  to  the
nations,  and  there  committed  adultery ;
and  those  who  have  been  led  astray
by  them  think  that  the  First  Presi-
dency of  this  Church  and  the  Twelve
Apostles  do  the  same  things,  and
they  go  down  to  the  pit ;  but  the  Lord
God  Almighty  will  raise  those  per-
sons yet,  and  he  will  make  those  men
do  it,  and  they  will  have  to  pay  the
debt.  They  are  not  going  to  get
through  with  it  in  this  time  any
more  thanthose  men  who  fostered  that
army,  They  have  committed  sin;
they  have  kept  men  and  women  out
of  this  Church  that  probably  would
have  been  in  it.  We  generally  con-
clude that  those  who  are  kept  out
ought  to  be  out,  I  tell  you  that  a
great  many  that  are  out  are  better
than  many  thai  are  in.  And  then
look  at  your  covenants,  ladies  !  Ye
mothers  in  Israel,  cleave  unto  your
husbands ;  love  them  more  than  your
lives.  If  you  have  a  kind,  benevolent
feeling,  bestow  it  on  them ;  and  then,
if  the  brethren  have  any  kind,  bene-
volent, sweet,  compassionate  feelings,
confer  them  upon  your  wives,  and  ap-
preciate your  Father  and  God,  who
gave  you  both,  more  than  all  the
rest.

I  can  recollect  a  circumstance  of
seeing  a  man  and  woman  who  had  a
very  fine  son  :  the  father  took  the  son
in  his  arms  and  wanted  to  embrace
him  and  carry  him  around  and  show
him,  he  delighted  so  much  in  his  son,
and  thought  everybody  else  delighted


DISCOURSES.

in  him.  Because  he  did  this,  the
mother  stepped  forward  and  pulled
the  child  out  of  the  arms  of  his
father.  I  said,  God  my  Father  will
take  that  child  from  your  arms
quicker  than  you  took  him  from  mine,
and  not  more  than  ten  days  afterwards
it  was  in  its  grave.

Let  us  put  everything  in  its  proper
place  and  nourish  it  properly.  And
a  good  man  that  is  inspired  of  the
Almighty,  a  good  calculator  and
financier,  knows  how  to  govera  and
minister  better  than  the  person  who
never  knew  anything,  and  never  will,
only  to  waste  and  destroy  all  a  man
has  got.  You  see  things,  and  I  do ;
but  you  say  in  your  hearts  you  do
not  care  for  anything,  only  my  dear

little  self.

Father  says,  in  this  book,  what  joy
has  a  man  in  bestowing  a  gift  upon
a  person,  when  the  receiver  of  the
gift  has  no  joy  in  the  giver  ?  The
joy  should  be  in  the  giver .  as  well  as
in  the  gift.  Take  the  gift  and  use  it
for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  de-
signed, and  do  not  worship  it,  but
worship  the  giver  find  the  proper
authority.  Now,  we  will  sny,  here  is
an  Elder ;  we  will  say  he  is  a  Teacher,
and  he  says,  I  respect  brother  Heber
above  all  other  men  on  the  earth,  and
I  will  not  submit  to  anybody  else  but
to  him  ;  and  here  are  scores  of  men
between  him  and  me  that  he  ought  to
submit  to  ;  but  he  runs  over  everyone
of  these  choice  gifts  to  get  to  me; —
what  will  become  of  bim  ?  He  will
go  down  to  the  pit,  as  sure  as  he
came  out  of  it.  "When  a  man  \$  at-
tached to  a  tree,  he  should  appreciate,
honour,  and  respect  every  branch
pertaining  to  that  tree  that  is
honouring  its  calling,  living  its  re-
ligion, and  receiving  the  true  nourish-
ment from  the  root.

If  you  can  draw  any  good  conclu-
sions from,  these  few  hints,  receive
them  and  reflect  upon  them,  if  they
do  come  from  brother  Heber. He  is


APPBECIATIOX  OF  DIVINE  GIFTS,  ETC,


just  as  capable  of  teaching  the
truth,  when  he  has  the  Spirit  of  truth,
as  any  man  in  the  world.  Supposing
I  communicate  truth  to  you  by  a
figure,  an  illustration,  or  a  representa-
tion, is  it  not  the  more  easily  under-
stood ?

Di  s.  Sprague,  Dunyan,  and  Hovey
are  Thomsonians,  and  I  like  them
the  best,  I  ask  them  why  they  put
Greek  names  on  their  medicines
which  lam  familiar  with  ?  Does  it
change  the  nature  of  those  herbs  by
coming  here  to  the  mountains  ?  No.
Then  what  do  yon  do  it  for  ?  They
reply,  People  will  appreciate  a  false
name  better  than  a  true  name ;  hence
we  give  to  one  man,  at  one  time,
powder-falbin  ;  at  another,  May-apple;
and  then  mandrake.  Why  do  they  not
call  May-apple  1  mandrake '  at  once  ?
The  doctor  gave  it  to  me  every  way.
It  is  mandrake,  May-apple,  and  then
it  is  powder- fal bin.  This  is  done
because  people  have  an  itching  for
something  new  all  the  time.

I  may  be  detaining  you  too  long ;
but,  brethren,  I  feel  kind  to  you.
As  for  blessing  yon,  there  is  not  ar
day  of  my  life  but  what  I  bow  before
my  Father  alone  and  before  my
family,  and  I  pray,  Father,  bless  all
Israel,  from  the  President  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  to  the  lust  member  con-
nected with  it,  and  that  tells  the
whole  story.  Let  us  do  right,  and
God  will  lead  us  off  victoriously.

We  are  richer  now  for  moving  to
the  south  than  we  should  have  been
if  we  had  not  moved.  What  did  we
save  by  it?  It  saved  that  difficulty
that  would  have  brought  you  into
sorrow,  probably,  all  the  days  of  your
life,  if  you  h : id  withstood  that  army
and  shed  blood.  But  by  that  move
yon  saved  your  blood  and  the  blood
of  your  enemies,  and  in  this  you  did
a  good  deed.  It  cost  considerable,
but  Father  booked  it  against  them,
and  he  will  make  them  pay  the  debt.


Wc  might  have  to  do  such  a  thing
again.  I  do  not  know  anything  about
it,  but  I  am  pretty  sure  of  one  thing
— we  shall  go  to  Jackson  county,
Missouri ;  that  is,  those  who  do  right
and  honour  their  calling,  doing
what  they  have  been  told  to  do.  You
will  be  blessed,  and  you  will  see  the
day  when  Presidents  Young,  Kim-
ball, and  Wells,  and  the  Twelve
Apostles  will  be  in  Jackson  comity,
Missouri, laying  out  your  inheritances.
In  the  flesh?  Of  course.  We
should  look  well  without  being  in  the
flesh !  We  shall  be  there  in  the  flesh,
and  all  our  enemies  cannot  prevent
it.  Brother  Wells,  you  may  write
that.  Yon  will  be  there,  and  Wil-
lard  will  be  there,  and  also  Jedediah,
and  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith,  and
David,  and  Parley;  and  the  day  will
be  when  I  will  see  those  men  in  the
general  assembly  of  the  Church  of
the  First-Burn,  in  the  great  council
of  God  in  Jerusalem,  too.  Will  we
want  you  to  be  along  ?

I  heard  Joseph  say  twice  that
brother  BrigHam  and  I  should  be  in
that  council  in  Jerusalem,  when  there
shonld  be  a  uniting  of  the  two  divi-
sions of  God's  government.  Now,
you  have  got  to  live  for  it.  "Wliat
would  you  not  d^  to  attain  to  those
blessings?  You  would  give  all  you
have  in  the  world.  You  may  givo
all  you  have  got,  and  then  keep  it ;
and  if  you  keep  the  commandments
of  God  and  live  faithful,  you  shall
every  one  see  it,  and  that  is  what
will  bring  you  to  it*

When  you  are  called  upon  to  do
a  thing,  do  it  with  all  your  heart,
and  God  will  add  a  hundredfold
to  your  glory  and  exaltation.
When  seed-wheat  is  sown,  if  it  is
not  too  thick,  one  seed  will-  produce
thirty  stalks,  and  a  head  on  every
stalk.  Like  the  mite  that  the  woman
gave,  it  will  increase  to  you  thou-
sands, and  much  more  to  them  that
have  more  in  proportion  to  the  kernel.


28


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


You  Elders  of  Israel  are  the  very
men  that  will  have  to  bring  the  sons
and  daughters  of  Israel  from  afar,  and
nurse  them  at  your  side  ;  and  you
mothers  will  have  to  be  those  very
queens  that  will  have  to  take  care  of
them  when  they  are  gathered,  if  you
will  honour  your  calling.  It  is  the
pride  of  my  heart  to  see  this  people
do  right,  and  to  do  right  myself.

There  was  a  man  came  into  the
mill  the  other  day — he  is  a  painter,
carpenter,  joiner,  and  everything
almost*  He  said  I  can  tell  you  how
to  reduce  that  oil  and  mis  water  with
it,  and  no  man  can  detect  it  ;  and,
says  he,  you  must  do  it  by  adding
lye  to  it.  I  said  I  would  ratEer  have
a  clear  conscience  than  all  the  lies  in
hell.  Said  I,  You  and  my  brethren
sli all  have  the  pure  oil  from  the  flax-
seed, and  it  shall  be  as  pure  and  as
holy  as  brother  Brigham's  gold.  You
need  to  be  a  pure  man  to  cry  holiness
to  the  Lord  God  Almighty*  Have
our  gold  pure,  without  adulteration,
have  our  silver  and  brass  pure,  and
you  shall  have  the  linseed  oil  pure
from  me,  as  pure  as  it  is  in  the  seed ;
and  I  will  undersell  our  merchants.
I  will  do  it,  if  I  come  down  to  a  dol-
lar a  gallon.  We  will  stop  that
leaching  out  of  our  gold,  and  kt  all
Israel  say  Amen.

Some  said  there  was  not  any  oil  in
the  flax-seed,  because  the  country  is
dry ;  but  I  can  get  over  a  gallon  of  oil
from  a  bushel  of  seed.  If  you  have
money,  I  want  it,  and  you  shall  have
the  oil.  I  will  supply  the  Public
Works  and  1st  brother  Brigham  have
what  he  wants;  and  if  theGen  tiles  bring
oil  here  and  sell  it  at  three  dollars
per  gallon,  I  will  undersell  them.  If
you  pay  me  money  for  oil,  I  will  pay
you  money  for  seed.  If  you  do  not
pay  me  money,  I  cannot  return  the
compliment,  but  I  will  give  you  oil


for  your  seed.  I  am  going  to  send
back  and  get  something  I  cannot
make.  I  will  tell  you  what  I  am
going  to  sell  the  oil  at — five  dollars
per  gallon,  and  pay  two  dollars  and  a
half  per  bushel  for  seed,  or  two  quarts
of  oil.  That  is  fair  and  honourable
— as  fair  for  vou  as  for  me.  If  I
make  a  gallon,  I  get  two  quarts,  and
you  two.  And  that  is  three  dollars
per  gallon  cheaper  than  that  which
comes  from  the  States.  -

I  believe  brother  Clements  is  sell-
ing linseed  oil  at  six  dollars  ;  but  he
cannot  sell  long,  for  lie  has  not  got  it-
Brother  Wells  has  established  a
nail  machinery,  and  God  has  blessed
him  in  the  operation.  He  has  intro-
duced the  nails  into  market,  and  he
is  now  making  them  by  the  ton,  and
has  put  them  at  twenty-live  dollars
per  hundred ;  and  at  the  same  time,
instead  of  paying  their  money  and
good  tilings  to  him,  some  men  are
carrying  their  money  to  the  States  to
buy  the  nails.  Why  do  you  not
patronize  brother  Wells  ?  Those  I
am  speaking  of  are  men  in  authority.
I  am  using  the  hydraulic  presses
brother  Taylor  brought  into  this
country,  and  they  are  performing
wonders.  They  will  each  press  equal
to  a  hundred  and  twelve  tons  weight.

Now,  you  go  to  work,  brethren  and
sisters,  and  get  out  something  of
home  manufacture,  and  be  as  faithful
as  President  Youn^  and  his  counsel
have  been  in  this  matter,  and  then
you  shall  be  blessed  more  th  an  you
are.  We  admit  you  are  a  good  peo-
ple, but  you  can  be  more  useful ;  and
the  more  useful  you  are  the  better
you  are.  If  you  can  feed  ten  men.,
you  are  better  than  the  man  that  can
only  feed  himself.  Would  you  not
rather  have  him  for  a  husband,  sisters,
than  the  man  that  could  not  feed
himself  ?


HOME  MA15TUFACTURES.


Remarks  by  President  Brigham  Young,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  Cilij^  April  7,  1SG1,

BEPOKTED  BY G*  D.  WATT.


I  have  no  objections  to  tlie  tenor  of
the  remarks  we  have  just  heard  per-
taining to  our  temporal  affivirs,  though
they  are  rather  more  appropriate,  ac-
cording to  custom,  in  such  a  meeting  as
we  had  last  evening  with  the  Bishops,
High  Priests,  &c.  I  wish  to  say  a
few  words  on  the  subject  last  spoken
of  by  brother  Kimball.  I  think  he
will  be  very  successful  in  obtaining
oil  from  flax  or  linseed.  For  a  be-
ginning, and  for  persons  that  never
saw  oil  made  before,  which  is  the  case
with  the  workmen  who  are  making
it — -they  knew  nothing  about  making
oil — I  think  they  have  done  extra-
ordinary well.  If  I  remember  cor-
rectly, in  the  States  five  quarts  of  oil
from  a  bushel  of  seed  was  considered
a  go<  >d  y  ield.  There  I  was  some  little
acquainted  with  making  oil,  and  very
much  acquainted  with  using  it.

Brother  Kimball  spoke  of  the  oil
that  is  imported  to  this  country.  I
am  doubtful  whether  there  has  ever
been  a  gallon  of  pure  linseed  oil  im-
ported into  this  Territory;  and  the
person  that  told  brother  Kimball  that
he  could  reduce  his  oil  so  that  the
adulteration  could  not  be  detected,  is
mistaken,  for  I  could  detect  it  by
rubbing  it  between  my  fingers.  Be-
fore I  knew  anything  of  "Mormon-
ism"  I  knew  how  to  adulterate  oil.
Brother  Kimball  says  that  alkali  is
often  mixed  with  linseed  oil.  In  my
young  days  I  had  to  quit  the  business


of  painting  purely  because  I  had
either  to  be  dishonest  or  quit ;  and  I
quit.  I  will  venture  to  say  that,  let
me  have  the  oil  that  is  made  at
brother  KirubaTs  mill,  and  have  pure
white  lead  of  our  own  manufacture,
and  I  will  put  a  coat  of  paint  on  to
the  outside  woodwork  of  buildings
that  will  last  twenty  years,  better  than
the  materials  we  import  and  now  u.so
for  painting  will  last  two  years.
When  you  buy  the  oil  that  is  im-
ported and  make  putty  with  it  and
what  is  commonly  called  Spanish
white, — if  you  set  glass  in  windows
with  that  putty,  in  a  year  or  two  the
u lass  will  be  falling  out;  but  when
you  use  the  pure  oil,  in  two  years  you
could  scarcely  get  the  glass  out  with-
out the  use  of  a  knife  or  chisel  to  first
cut  out  the  putty.  Let  it  stand  ten
years,  and  probably  you  would  have
to  cut  the  sash  to  pieces  to  let  the
glass  out.  The  oil  we  get  from  the
East  is  worth  but  little,  only  for  pre-
sent show.  That  which  we  make
here  will  last  in  this  climate*

Our  painters  tell  us  that  it  is  the
climate  that  destroys  the  paint.  I  do
not  think  there  is  a  painter  in  this
Territory  that  knows  what  pure  lin-
seed oil  is.  They  tell  us  that  the
climate  destroys  the  paint.  That  is  a
mistake;  the  paint  is  not  good.  Can
yon  tell  whether  there  is  alkali  mixed
with  the  linseed  ,oil  ?  I  can.  I  can
also  tell  whether  there  is  Spanish


30  JOURNAL  OF  ]

white  in  the  paint.  Haster  of  Paris
(by  some  called  Paris  white)  is  also
mixed  with  white  lead,  and  our  houses
are  painted  with  it.  Other  paints
are  adulterated.  I  pay  from  thirty
to  fifty  dollars  to  have  a  carriage
painted,  and  in  three  months  it  needs
painting  again.  Let  it  stand  six
months,  and  you  would  hardly  sup-
pose that  it  had  been  painted  in  six-
teen years.

We  ought  to  have  spoken  last
night  in  regard  to  raising  flax  in
this  Territory,  and  I  will  now  say  to
the  brethren  that  we  wish  them  to
return  the  flax  seed  they  have  bor-
rowed at  the  Tithing  Office*  We
also  wish  you  to  raise  flax  and  make
linen  cloth.  We  have  as  good
workmen  at  this  business  as  there  are
in  the  world.  The  American
brethren  do  not  generally  know  how
to  raise  flax  for  making  fine  linen,  but
they  can  easily  learn.  Instead  of
sowing  five  pecks  to  the  acre,  sow
five  or  more  bushels,  and  you  will
raise  flax  as  soft  ns  silk  ;  from  such
flax  fibres  can  be  hatcheled  as  fine  as
spinster's  webs.  Most  of  the  linen
we  import  is  more  than  half  cotton.
The  flax  is  put  into  machines  and  cut
and  torn  to  pieces;  it  then  goes
through  another  rotting  process  ,  is
then  mixed  with  cotton,  carded,  spun,
and  called  linen.  I  once  in  a  while
see  a  genuine  piece  of  linen,  which
will  as  well  last  six  years  as  the  most
we  buy  will  last  six  months,  if  it  is
not  washed  to  death.  This  you  know,
if  you  have  been  accustomed  to  using
tow  cloth*  In  clearing  out  brush,
cutting  down  trees,  logging,  and  all
kinds  of  rough  work,  one  or  two  pairs
of  genuine  tow  trousers  and  a  couple
of  tow  frocks  will  last  through  a
summer ;  but  put  on  that  heavy  so-
called  linen  you  buy  in  the  stores,
and  do  nothing  but  come  into  a  pul-
pit, and  before  you  have  had  it  three
months  it  is  cut  to  pieces  and  en-


tirely done.  But  I  will  not  detain
you  linger  upon  this  point.

Brother  Kimball  mentioned  about
some  of  the  brethren's  sending  to  the
States  for  nails.  Send  to  the  States,
go  to  the  stores,  buy  where  you
please,  and  do  you  think  that  you  can
get  better  nails  than  you  can  get  at
our  nail  factory  ?  I  know  what  nails
are;  I  have  driven  a  great  many.
There  is  not  a  better  nail  made  at
Boston  or  in  Germany  than  there  is
at  this  factory.  I  never  saw  a  better
nail,  nor  better  nail  machinery  than
that  which  we  have  running.

We  should  now  make  our  own
iron.  We  have  already  spent  about
one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dol-
lars to  make  iron  here,  but  we  have
failed,  not  for  want  of  ore  or  for  want
of  skill.  Where  is  the  difficulty?
There  has  not  been  union  enough  in
the  men  who  engaged  in  that  work.
After  we  had  spent  about  one
hundred  thousand  dollars,  ::n  in-
genious man,  named  Peter  Shirts,
wculd  have  brought  out  the  iron  as
good  as  ever  was  made,  and  that,  too,
by  means  of  a  small  furnace  of  trifling
cost ;  but  they  ran  him  out  'of  the
county.  The  citizens  pronounced
him  a  nuisance,  confiscated  his  pro-
perty, and  drove  him  out.  Every
man  said — "  I  will  have  the  name  and
honour  of  making  the  first  iro  i  made
in  this  Territory,  or  I  will  destroy
the  work/'  That  is  the  difficulty.
We  have  the  best  of  iron  ore,  and  we
have  coal  close  by  it ;  and  some  man
will  go  to  work,  by-and-by,  who  is
not  worth  fifty  dollars,  and  make  iron.
Go  into  Vermont  and  you  will  there
see  a  farmer,  when  he  has  a  little
leisure,  take  his  waggon,  get  the  ore,
smelt  it,  hammer  it  out,  and  make
two  or  three  hundred  pounds  of  iron
in  a  day.  He  takes  care  of  it,  and
by-and-by  some  one  comes  along  and
buys  it  of  him.  Tra,el  through  that
country,  and  you  will  find  hundreds


THE  GIFTS  OF  GOB,  ET<\


31


of  such  little  iron  forges.  Men  who
do  not  pretend  even  to  be  blacksmiths
get  some  person  to  teach  them  how
to  use  a  trip  hammer  to  draw  out  the
iron  after  they  have  put  on  their
blast  and  run  out  some  two  or  three
hundred  pounds.  On  a  rainy  day  a
farmer  has  hu  ore  ready  and  makes
iron  when  he  cannot  work  in  the
field.  We  have  shown  t  you  that  we
can  make  nails.  I  cannot  do  every-
thing. Who  has  brought  carding
machines  and  other  machinery  here?
Who  has  entered  into  every  kind  of


mechanism  that  has  been  started  in
this  Territory  ?  Twelve  thousand
dollars  we  have  spent  to  get  the
manufacture  of  pottery  under  weigh,
By-and-by  some  man  will  come  along,
not  worth  fifty  dollars,  and  take  the
felspar,  which  enters  so  largely  into
our  granite  rock,  and  make  the  best
of  chinaware.

We  want  glass.  Some  man  will
come  along,  by-and-by,  and  take  the
quartz  rock,  rig  up  a  little  furnace,
and  make  glass.


THE  GIFTS  OF  GOD — HOME  MANUFACTURES— WORD  OF

WISDOM — HAPPINESS.

Remarks  by  President  B&ighah  Young,  made  m  the  Tdbemadef  Great

Salt  Lake  City7  ApiU  7,  1861;

BEPOntKD  BY  O.  D.  "WATT*


I  wish  to  speak  upon  what
pertains  to  our  temporal  affairs,  which
1  would  very  well  have  liked  to  have
been  brought  before  the  Bishops'
meeting  without  detaining  a  congre-
gation like  this  on  such  matters.  I
wish  to  urge  upon  the  people  the
necessity  of  providing  for  themselves,
and  not  being  dependent  entirely
upon  others*

The  Lonl  lias  given  us  ability  to  do
a  great  many  things.  What  a  bless-
ing this  is  !  1  >o  you  ever  think  of  it  ?
A  man  has  ability  to  take  the  raw
materials  and  bnild  a  good,  com-
fortable  habitation  for  the  accommo-
dation  of  himself,  his  wives,  and
children.  The  wife  can  spread  a
table  with  wholesome  food,  and  in  a
manner  pleasant  to  the  eye,  while  the


food  is  gratifying  to  the  palate.
They  have  the  a  hi  lily  to  provide,  if
they  choose,  downy  beds  upon  which
to  rest  their  weary  bodies.  Do  you
ever  think  of  this  ?  I  presume  the
greater  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  have  lived  and  died  without
reflecting  much  upon  whence  they
derived  this  ability,  to  whom  they
were  indebted  for  the  ingenuity  they
possess,  or  the  capability  that  is  or-
ganized within  them  to  gather
around  them  the  comforts  of  life.
Do  you,  brethren,  think  of  it?

We  have  ability  to  cultivate  the
earth ;  we  know  how  to  raise  stock,
how  to  make  clothing,  and  are  not
obliged  to  go  naked  like  the  Indians.
We  are  not  obliged  to  lie  down  in  the
open  air  with  perhaps  a  few  sage


*


THE  GIFTS  OF  GOB,  ETC.


32

brush  around  us,  as  do  many  of  the
natives*  We  have  ability  to  make
oarselves  comfortable  as  to  the  physi-
cal wants  of  this  life.  Where  did  we
get  that  ability  ?  Are  your  hearts
lifted  to  the  Donor  of  those  blessings  ?
Do  you  remember  from  whence  your
ability  came?  Who  organised  these
tabernacles?  Who  put  into  them
these  thinking  powers?  Who  has
placed  the  spirit  in  the  body,  and  or-
ganised them  together,  and  made  us
capable  of  reflecting?  Where  did
you  get  this  ability  ?  A  well-read
historian  and  geographical  scholar
can  contemplate  his  antipodes,  and  in
his  mind  see  what  they  are  doing.
He  can  also  behold  the  various  ex-
hibitions of  human  skill  in  different
nations,  both  in  their  social  and
p olitical  capacity;  for  they  are  in  the
vision  of  his  mind.  Who  gave  the
ability  to  reflect  and  to  behold  the
earth  and  the  inhabitants  thereof?
Is  not  this  a  blessing  ? .  How  cheer-
ing, how  comforting,  how  consoling,
how  exalting !  I  would  be  glad  it
we  could  realise  the  blessings  we
possess.

The  Lord  has  placed  in  our  posses-
sion the  elements  pertaining  to  this
earth.  As  I  told  the  people,  when
we  first  came  into  this  Valley  in  1847,
there  is  plenty  of  silk  in  the  elements
here,  as  much  so  as  in  any  other
part  of  the  earth.  Here  is  also  the
fine  linen.  Were  there  any  sheep
here  when  we  came  first  here  ?  No,
Were  there  any  silk  raisers  then  here?
No.  Were  there  any  flax  raisers
here  ?  No  ;  neither  was  there  a  stalk
of  dax  growing,  except  what  was
growing  wild.  The  elements  are  here.
Bring  the  seeds,  the  eggs  of  the  silk-
worm, raise  the  trees  for  feeding  the
worms,  and  let  us  see  if  we  cannot
produce  silk  here.  It  is  in  the
elements.  We  have  the  elements  to
produce  as  good  wheat  as  grows.
The  elements  here  will  produce  the
apple,  the  peach,  the  pear,  the  plum,


the  apricoMhe  che.^,  th™,,f,

and  every  kind  of  fruit  in  abundance,
and  ever)"  variety  of  plant  and  vege-
table we  desire.  Have  yon  the  ability
tobringany  of  these  things  forth  from
the  native  element  ?  Yes ;  here  are  men
who  know-  how  to  raise  fruit,  and  here
are  the  women  who  know  how  to  dry
and  cook  it.  Here  are  the  men  who
know  how  to  raise  sheep,  and  how  to
take  their  fleeces  and  deliver  them
into  the  hands  of  their  families  to  be
manufactured.  Here  are  women  who
know  how  to  spin,  weave,  and  make
the  finest  of  cloth.  So  with  the  flax,
and  so  with  every  material  calculated
to  make  us  comfortable.  Where  did
we  get  this  ability  ?  We  got  it  from
our  Father  who  is  in  heaven-  Be
thank  Till  fur  these  precious  gifts.
As  brother  Kimball  justly  said,  "  Re-
member,  first  of  all,  the  Giver;"
worship  and  adore  the  Giver.  Some
will  lose  a  great  deal  by  neglecting
the  Giver  and  by  worshipping  the
gift.  Such  will  find  that  they  will
meet  with  losses.

I  look  forward  to  no  distant  period
when  this  people,  called  Latter-day
Saints,  will  be  obliged  to  sustain
themselves.  We  must  prepare  to  gather
around  us  every  necessary  of  life,  to
make  every  implement  we  may  wish  v
to  use,  and  to  produce  from  the  earth
every  grain,  vegetable,  and  fruit  that
we  need5  and  not  go  to  any  other
] dace  to  buy.  Produce  every  article
of  clothing  that  we  need,  and  stop
this  importation  that  we  are  now  en-
cumbered with.  We  must  produce
all  we  can  enjoy.  I  expect  tha:  <
soon  shall  do  so.

I  will  now  make  a  request  of  tl  1
sisters — one  which  I  wish  them  to
hear,  remember,  and  put  in  practice.
Carefully  save  all  cast-off  linen  and
cotton  articles  of  dress,  all  old  shirts,
waggon-covers,  sheets,  and  every
article  of  cotton  and  linen  fabric,
instead  of  letting  them  go  to  waste  in
your  door-yards  or  in  the  streets;  fo  1


THE  GIFTS  OF  GOD,  KTC.


we  want  those  rags  to  supply  the
paper  mill  we  are  now  putting  up.
We  have  as  good  machinery  for
making  paper  as  there  is  in  the
United  States  or  in  the  world.  We
have  brought  it  here  at  a  heavy  expense
— ithascost  us  some  twenty  or  twenty-
five  thousand  dollars.  We  are  now
putting  it  up,  and  we  want  the  sisters
to  save  rags,  and  we  want  the  brethren
to  raise  hemp,  flax,  &c.  We  want  to
make  our  own  paper-  The  inquiry
is,  "  Will  it  pay  cost  ?"  How  much
paper  do  we  want  to  use?  There  is
annually  imported  into  and  used  in
this  Territory  some  thirty  thousand
dollars*  worth  of  paper.  Were  we
makipg  our  own  paper,  much  more
would  be  used,  for  we  could  then  till
the  Territory  with  school-books
printed  here,  and  could  supply  all  the
paper  required  throughout  the  Terri-
tory, thereby  saving  a  great  many
thousand  dollars  now  paid  for  trans-
portation. We  are  not  able  to  print
a  book  for  want  of  paper.  Now  we
aro  prepared  to  go  to  work  and  make
our  own  paper.  As  I  have  remarked,
wc  have  most  excellent  machinery  ;
wo  also  have  good  paper-makers;  and
what  hinders  our  making  the  best  of
pnper,  and  all  the  paper  we  want  to
use  V  Then  we  can  print,  in  book
form,  the  History  of  Joseph  Smith,
and  do  it  in  a  respectable  manger.
Then  we  can  print  the  Diureh
History  for  ourselves  and  for  the
world,  and  every  book  we  need.  To
aid  in  accomplishing  so  laudable  an
object,  I  want  the  sisters  to  gather
the  rags  and  hand  them  over  to  the
Bishops,  and  we  will  pay  for  them
with  paper.  We  also  want  hemp,
fiax,  and  every  material  suitable  for
making  good  paper.

There  are  a  great  many  things  we
fvish  to  talk  about;  and  I  do  not
wish,  if  we  could  well  avoid  it,  to
bring  such  things  before  the  Con-
ference, especially  on  the  Sabbath.
The  sacrament  is  being  administered,
No.  3.


and  we  would  like  to  talk  about  the
spiritual  welfare  of  the  people ;  but  if
we  cannot  savg  ourselves  temporally,
we  may  despair  of  saving  ourselves
or  the  people  spiritually.  The  first
thing  is  to  save  our  natural  lives  and
devote  them  to  building  up  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.

Place  om^selves  back  ten  centuries,
read  the  prophecies,  and  behold  by
prophetic  vision  what  the  Lord  waa
going  to  do  in  the  latter  days.  "  The
time  is  coming  when  the  Saints  are
to  be  called,  and  they  will  assemble
themselves  together/'  u  Can  it  be
possible  ?  n  "  Yes ;  for  the  Prophets
have  foretold  it."  "The  time  is
coming  when  the  Lord  will  speak
from  the  heavens  and  send  his  angel
to  administer  to  men  on  earth,  when
the  Priesthood  will  be  restored  and
bestowed  upon  the  children  of  men.
Look  forth  in  vision  and  behold  these
events."  They  would  appear  for  more
beautiful  than  they  appear  to  the
natural  man  while  acting  in  them.
I  sometimes  think  that  we  are  far
beneath  our  privileges  in  a  spiritual
point  of  view,.  The  Prophets  and
other  undent  holy  men  saw  our  dav*
They  did  not  look  at  the  human
family  now  upon  the  stage  of  action
in  all  their  weaknesses;  they  did  not
see  every  little  trifling  atfair,  every
little  quarrel  that  more  or  less  em-
bitters life  ;  they  did  not  see  our  dark-
ness and  contentions,  sorrow,  pain,
anguish,  grief,  and  strife.  No;  they
beheld  the  glory  of  God  resting  upon
the  people,  as  we  now  enjoy  it.

Many  sects  and  societies  of  people
have  at  different  times  tried  to  as-
semble themselves  together,  because
it  was  in  the  prophecies  that  the
Saints  should  be  assembled  in  the
latter  days — that  the  Lord  God  would
gather  his  people.  They  have  tried
to  gather  their  societies,  but  what
have  they  effected  ?  Comparatively
nothing.  If  the  Lord  had  spoken
from  heaven  to  them  and  revealed

Vol  IX.


34


THE  0IFT8  OF  GOD,  ETC.


only  this^ne  privilege,  and  no  more,
that  Christians  might  assemble  them-
selves together,  and  live,  walk,  talk,
and  commune  with  each  other  un-
interruptedly, without  being  obliged
to  mingle  with  the  world,  they  would
have  esteemed  it  one  of  the  greatest
blessings  that  could  have  been  be-
stowed upon  them.

I  shall  repeat  my  request  to  these
my  sisters.  We  wish  you  to  save  every
article  about  your  house  that  will
make  paper,  instead  of  throwing  it
away.  Put  the  rags  in  a  way  that
they  will  get  to  Ihe  paper  mill,  which
is  four  miies  from  here.  We  have
taken  the  Svgar  House  and  converted
it  into  a  paper  mill,  and  we  will  try
to  make  paper,  if  we  did  not  make
sugar.  And  I  urge  it  upon  the
brethren  to  raise  sheep,  save  the  wool,
and  put  it  in  the  hands  of  their  wives
and  daughters.  And  I  enjoin  it  upon
the  sisters,  old  and  young,  to  make
clothing  for  their  husbands,  brothers,
children,  and  themselves,  and  stop
running  after  imported  goods.

In  regard  to  the  quality  and  utility
of  calico,  by  some  called  prints,  I
can  speak  from  actual  knowledge.
Take  a  good  seamstress  who  has  four
children,  and  let  her  sew  from  Mon-
day morning  until  Saturday  might,
and  she  can  scarcely  make  up  the
calicos  as  fast  as  those  four  children
will  wear  it  out;  and  let  her  do  her
washing  to  please  her,  and  she  will
want  help  in  the  house,  or  the  chil-
dren will  have  to  go  dirty  and
ragged.  What  are  these  imj>ortied
rags  good  for?  They  are  hardly
worth  making  up.  There  is  not  half
the  calico  that  comes  here  that  is
worth  making  up.  if  you  give  it  to
the  people  free  of  charge,  if  they
could  do  better.  Now  we  can  do
better.

Raise  flax,  brethren.  There  is  no
place  in  the  world  wl,  1  1  lax  and  hemp
will  grow  better  than  they  will  here,
though  they  will  not  do  well  in  every


locality.  Hunt  out  places  and  soil
most  suitable  for  flax  and  hemp,  and
there  let  them  be  grown :  also  raise
and  take  care  of  sheep.  It  is  thought
by  some  that  this  country  is  un-
healthy for  sheep,  but  it  is  not.
There  is  not  a  climate  or  soil  better
adapted  to  sheep  raising  than  are
these  mountains.  Some  may  think
that  other  countries  are  better,  but
they  are  not,  so  far  as  I  am  acquainted.
But  keep  hundreds  and  hundreds  of
sheep  in  a  small  pen,  shut  them  in
there  nights,  with  hardly  room  to  lie
down,  and  let  them  remain  there  un-
til ten  or  eleven  o'clock  in  the  day,
before  they  aie  turned  out  to  grass,
as  has  been  done  here  more  or  less,
and  it  would  kill  every  sheep  in
England  or  Scotland,  Let  them
have  plenty  of  room  by  day  and  by
night,  and  they  will  not  become  dis-
eased. Give  them  well- ventilated
pens,  proper  exercise,  and  proper  food,
and  you  will  not  see  them  diseased.
The  disease  that  is  among  our  sheep
is  not  natural  to  the  climate  ;  it  was
brought  here,  and  has  been  fostered
by  biul  management.

iWhcn  you  find  the  soil  that  will
produce  the  best  and  greatest  amount
of  sugar — that  best  adapted  to
raising  cane,  let  the  cane  be  raised
there,  and  there  let  the  molasses  and
suuar  lie  made.  Just  now  we  want
our  quarter-of-an-acre  of  cane,  our
quarter-of-an-acre  of  flax  and  hemp,
our  proportion  of  wheat,  com,  and
everything  else;  but  by-and-by  our
labours  will  be  systematized,  and  we
will  find  the  place  where  we  can  raise
the  best  cane,  and  let  that  place  be
devoted  to  raising  it,  and  make  sugar,
and  stop  importing  it.  The  English
brethren  and  the  brethren  from  the
Eastern  and  Northern  and  Western
States  and  from  the  Canadas  know
nothing  about  making  sugar  from  the
cane ;  and  when  they  see  newly-made
cane  sugar,  they  say  it  is  not  good,
I  have  never  seen  a  purer  article  of


THE  GIFTS  OF  GOD,  ETC,


35


sugar  made  than  is  made  here.  Eat
the  new  cane  sugar  that  is  made  in
the  Southern  States,  and  it  has  a
very  unpleasant  taste.  Take  our
sugar  and  cleanse  it  as.  they  do,  a  id
let  it  stand  until  it  is  ripe  for  the
market,  and  you  will  find  as  good  an
article  of  cane  sugar  as  ever  was
made.  The  Chinese  sugar  cane  is  a
better  plant  to  produce  sweet  than  is
the  cane  they  raise  in  the  South  and
on  the  West  India  Islands.  We  can
make  our  own  sugar.  We  send  out
a  large  amount  of  money  to  buy  sugar,
and  we  want  this  practice  stopped.
Now,  farmers,  raise  what  sugar  you
want  :  you  can  do  it  as  well  as  riot
Go  into  the  business  systematically.

You  know  that  we  all  profess  to
believe  the  "  Word  of  Wisdom."
There  has  been  a  great  deal  said
about  it,  more  in  former  than  in
latter  years.  We,  as  Latter-day
Saints, care  bat  little  about  tobacco;
but,  as  "  Mormons,"  we  use  a  vast
quantity  of  it.  As  Saints,  we  use
but  little;  as  "  Mormons,"  we  use  a
great  de*l.  How  much  do  you  sup-
pose <j  * "  s  annually  from  this  Territory,
and  has  fcr  ten  or  twelve  years  past,
in  gold  and  silver,  to  supply  the  people
with  tobacco  ?  I  will  say  $00,000.
Brother  William  H.  Hooper,  our
I  )elegate  in  Congress,  came  here  in
1819,  and  during  about  eight  years
he  was  selling  goods  his  sales  for
tobacco  alone  amounted  to  over
$28,000  a  year.  *At  the  same  time
there  were  other  stores  that  sold  their
share  and  drew  their  share  of  the
money  expended  yearly,  besides  what
has  been  brought  in  by  the  keg  and
by  the  half  keg.  The  traders  and
passing  emigration  have  sold  tons  of
tobacco,  besides  what  is  sold  here
regularly.  I  say  that  $60,000  annu-
ally is  the  smallest  figure  I  can  esti-
mate the  sales  at  Tobacco  can  be
Bused  here  as  well  as  it  can  be  raised
in  any  other  place.  It  wants  atten-
tion and  care. If  we  use  it,  let  us


raise  it  here,  I  recommend  for  some
man  to  go  to  raising  tobacco.  One  man,
who  came  here  last  fall,  is  going  to  do
so;  and  if  he  is  diligent,  he  will  raise
quite  a  quantity.  I  want  to  see  some
man  go  to  and  make  a  business  of
raising  tobacco  and  stop  sending  money
out  of  the  Territory  for  that  article.
Some  of  the  brethren  are  very
strenuous  upon  the  "Word  of
Wisdom,"  and  would  like  to  have  me
preach  upon  it,  and  urge  it  upon  the
brethren,  and  make  it  a  test  of  fellow-
ship. I  do  not  think  that  I  shall  do
so.  I  have  never  done  so.  We  an- i
nually  expend  only  $60,000  to  break
the  **  Word  of  Wisdom,"  and  we  can
save  the  rn<  <m  y  and  still  break  it,  if
we  will  break  it.  Some  would  ask
brother  BrJgham  whether  he  keeps
the  "  Word  of  Wisdom."  No  :  and
I  can  Hay  still  further,  as  T  told  one
of  the  teachers  in  Nanvoo,  I  come  as
near  doing  so  a*  any  man  in  this
generation.  Tt  is  not  using  tobacco
that  particularly  breaks  the  "  Won!
of  Wisdom,"  nor  is  that  the  only  bad
practice  if  corrects  ;  bat  it  is  profitable
in  every  path  of  lilV\  If  our  young
persons  were  manly  enough  to  govern
their  appetites  a  little,  they  would  not
contract  these  bad  habits;  but  th^y
must  have  some  weaknesses ;  they
must  not  be  perfect  and  exactly* right
in  everything.  It  is  a  loathsome
practice  to  use  tobacco  in  any  way. 1
A  doctor*  told  an  old  lady  in]  New
York,  when  she  insisted  upon  his
telling  her  whether  snufl  would
injure  her  brain,  "  It  will  not  hurt
the  brain  :  there  is  no  fear  of  snuffs
hurting  the  brain  of  anyone,  for  no
person  that  has  brains  will  take
snufL"  I  will  any  that  the  most
filthy  way  of  using  tobacco  is  to  -
smoke  it.  "  What  is  the  neat  way  ?
If  you  are  going  to  direct  any  course 1
for  the  people  to  use  tobacco,  let  us
know  what  it  is.  Cannot  you  who
have  used  it  \\>v  years  point  out  a  neat,
modest,  judicious  way  of  using  it  ? 9  *


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOUBSKS


The  "  Word  of  Wisdom  ?  says  that
tobacco  is  good  for  sick  cattle ;  and
tvhen  you  want  another  chew,  down
with  it  as  you  would  a  pill.  It  may
make  you  vomit  a  little,  but  that  is
IK>on  over,  and  it  is  good  for  sick  cattle.
Th^t  is  the  neatest  way  you  can  use
tobacco.

I  will  now  speak  a  little  in  regard
to  people's  making  themselves  happy.
We  heard  something  upon  that  sub-
ject to-day  and  yesterday;  and  we
frequently  hear  people  preaching
about  heaven,  paradise,  and  Zion ;  and
if  there  is  a  comfort,  a  felicity,  and
good  feeling,  I  want  to  say  a  few
words  about  them  ;  and  I  shall  begin
upon  the  doctrine  so  much  beloved  by
Baint  and  sinner,  and  that  is  the
plurality  of  women.  The  Saints  like
a  plurality  of  wives,  and  the  sinners
like  a  plurality  of  men  and  women.
I  will  say  to  the  sisters  that  I  have
her*rd  but  very  few  women,  and  not  a
great  many  men,  ever  talk  sensibly
upon  the  plurality  of  wives.  When
they  begin  to  talk  about  it,  they  exhibit,
almost  without  an  exception,  passion
instead  of  principle.  Were  we  to
appeal  to  passions  of  the  people,  we
ahuuld  promote  llje  doctrine  of  a
plurality  of  men  and  of  women.  But
•  fyhen  we  address  ourselves  to  the
fiaints  of  the  Most  High  God,  it  is
very  different  and  in  a  different  light.
It  is  for  my  sisters  to  be  mothers  of
boly  men  and  holy  women — to  receive
6nd  conceive  in  the  name  and  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost — to  bring
forth  their  fruits  to  the  praise  and
fconour  of  the  God  of  heaven.  But
%vhat  are  the  people  doing  here  ?
ftI,want  another  wife,"  and  almost
Universally  passion  is  exhibited  in-
stead of  principle.

If  the  plui*ality  of  wives  is  to
pander  to  the  low  passions  of  men
and  women,  the  sooner  it  is  abolished
the  better,  "  How  far  would  you  go
in  abolishing  it  ?  "  I  would  say,  if
the;  Lord  should  zweal  that  it  is  his


will  to  go  so  far  as  to  become  a
Shaking  Quaker,  Amen  to  it,  and  let
the  sexes  have  no  connection.  If  so
far  as  fir  a  man  to  have  but  one  wife,
let  it  be  so.  The  word  and  will  of  the
Lord  is  what  I  want — the  will
and  mind  of  God.  He  has  revealed
his  mind  and  will.  The  time  is
coming  when  the  Lord  is  going  to
raise  up  a  holy  nation.  He  will  bring
up  a  royal  Priesthood  upon  the  earth,
and  he  has  introduced  a  plurality  of
wives  for  that  express  purpose,  and
not  to  gratify  lustful  passion  in
the  least.  I  would  rather  take  my
valise  in  my  hand  to-day,  and  never
see  a  wife  or  a  child  again,  and  preach
the  Gospel  until  I  go  into  the  grave,
than  to  live  as  I  do,  unless  God  com-
mands it.  I  never  entered  into  the
order  of  plurality  of  wives  to  gratify
passion.  And  were  I  now  asked
whether  I  desired  and  wanted  another
wife,  my  repl y  would  be,  It  should  be
one  by  whom  the  Spirit  will  bring
forth  noble  children.  I  am  almost
sixty  years  old  ;  and  if  I  now  live  for
passion,  I  pray  the  Lord  Almighty
to  take  my  life  from  the  earth.  ■
I  know  the  Weaknesses  of  humanity,
and  I  understand  the  passions  of  men
and  women.  I  am  sorry  for  therm
I  wish  they  had  grace  according  to
their  day,  creating  such  fortitude  in
them  that  they  would  determine  to
suffer  unto  death  rather  than  violate
a  holy  command  of  the  Almighty,  or
transgress  the  bounds  God  lias  set
u  Is  that  the  way  you  have  lived  P1
It  is.  It  is  the  example  I  have  set
before  my  family  from  the  day  the
Lord  opened  my  mind  to  see  the  Gos-
pel. Ask  these  sisters  (many  of
them  have  known  me  for  years,)
what  my  life  has  been  in  private  and
in  public.  It  has  been  like  the  angel
Gabriel's,  if  he  had  visited  you  ;  and
I  can  live  so  still.  But  how  are  we
to  be  made  happy?  There  is  one
course— love  the  Giver  more  than  the
gift;  love Him  that has  placed


THE  GIFTS  OF  GpD,  ETC


passion  in  me  more  than  my  passions.
Le^  passion  lie  at  the  feet  of  judg-
ment, and  let  every  attribute  that
God  has  bestowed  on  me  be  de-
voted to  the  righteous  cause  he  has
commenced  upon  the  earth.  This,
and  this  alone,  produces  happiness.
He  has  brought  us  forth,  and  we  live
and  see  this  day  that  Prophets,  Hugs,
and  millions  of  great  and  good  men
have  prayed  to  see,  but  died  without
the  sight  When  they  looked  at  it
in  vision,  it  cast  a  halo,  around  which
was  like  the  dawning  of  heaven  to
their  souls,  and  they  shouted,  "  Halle-
lujah P*  beholdingthe  spirit  and  glory
of  these  times  that  we  now  live  in.  And
we  yield  to  passion  ?  I  say,  Shame
on  the  individual  that  says  passion
has  anything  to  do  with  his  life.  It
is  crucified.  It  lies,  as  it  were,  atth  e
foot  of  the  cross.  That  is  my  faith,
and  it  has  been  my  life.

How  will  you  be  happy  ?  Love
the  Giver  more  than  the  gift.  Delight
yourselves  in  your  duties,  mothers.
Here  are  the  middle-aged  and  the
young.  I  am  now  almost  daily  seal-
ing young  girls  to  men  of  age  and
experience.  Love  your  duties,  sis-
ters. Are  you  sealed  to  a  good  man  ?
Yes,  to  a  man  of  God,  It  is  for  you
to  bear  fruit  and  bring  forth,  to  the
praise  of  God,  the  spirits  that  are
born  in  yonder  heavens  and  are  to
take  tabernacles  on  the  earth.  You
have  the  privilege  of  forming  taber-
nacles for  those  spirits,  instead  of
their  being  brought  into  this  wicked
world,  that  God  may  have  a  royal
Priesthood,  a  royal  people,  on  the
earth.  That  is  what  plurality  of
wives  is  for,  and  noi  to  gratify  lustful
desires.  Sisters,  do  you  wish  to
make  yourselves  happy  ?  Then  what
is  your  duty  ?  It  is  for  you  to  bear
children,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
that  are  full  of  faith  and  the  power
of  Gud, — to  receive,  conceive,  bear,
and  bring  forth  in  the  name  of  Israel's
God,  that  you  may  have  the  honour


of  being  the  mothers  of  great  arid
good  men— of  kings,  princes,  anj
potentates  that  shall  yet  live  on  the
earth  and  govern  and  control  the
nations.  Do  you  look  forward  to
that  ?  or  are  you  tormenting  your-
selves by  thinking  that  your  husbands
do  not  love  you  ?  I  would  not  care
whether  they  loved  a  particle  or  not  j
but  I  would  cry  out,  like  one  of  oldt
in  the  joy  of  my  heart,  "  I  have  got
a  man  from  the  Lord !"  "  Hallelu-
jah! I  am  a  mother — I  have  borne  an
image  of  God  !"  Let  your  prayera
ascend  to  God,  and  that  continually,
that  he  will  overshadow  the  child  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  before
and  after  its  birth — that  the  Holy
Ghost  may  attend  it  continually.  The
mother  should  inquire  what  her  duty
is.  It  is  to  teach  her  children
holiness,  prayer  to  God,  and  to  trust
in  Him,  Teach  them  the  holy  reli-
gion and  the  commandments  that
are  calculated  to  sanctify  the  people
and  bring  them  into  the  presence  of
our  Father  and  God.  But  no ;  too
often  it  is  passion.  If  my  passion  ia
served,  I  am  in  heaven.  The  fire  will
have  to  burn  them  up.  We  must
live  by  principle;  and  if  we  do,  we
shall  attain  to  perfection — to  being
crowned  with  crowns  of  glory,  im-
mortality, and  eternal  lives.  I  would
rather  be  purified  here  than  to  live
ten  thousand  years  to  attain  the  s^ne
point  in  another  existence.  The  man
that  enters  into  this  order  by  the
prompting  of  passion,  and  not  with  a
view  to  honour  God  and  carry  out  his
purposes,  the  curse  of  God  will  rest
upon  him,  and  that  which  he  seems
to  have  will  be  taken  from  him  and
given  to  those  that  act  acccording  ta
principle. Remember  it.

The  world  cries  out  against  this
obnoxious  doctrine,  that  I  should  hove
more  wives  than  one.  And  whafe
would  they  do  ?  Destroy  the  virtue
of  every  woman  in  this  community
if  they  had  the  power. What  do


88 ^  JTOTTMf AI.  OF

they  care  about  virtue  ?  With  com-
par&tively  few  exceptions,  no  more
than  do  the  de%rils  in  hell.  Most  of
the*  officers  who  have  been  sent  here
would  have  defiled  every  bed  in  this
Tearitory,  had  they  have  had  the
power.  Toll  about  this  doctrine's
being  obnoxious  to  their  delicate
feelings ! Yes,  it  is,  in  one  sense.  It

t»k^psthematbay;iti8heUtothem;
it  is  burning  them  up ;  and  I  say
they  may  burn  up,  and  they  will.

Elders  of  Israel,  have  you  entered
into  the  doctrine  that  has  been  re-
vealed, through  passion  ?  If  you
have,  you  will  find  that  that  course
will  take  that  which:  you  seem  to

^have,  and  the  Lord  will  say — "  Let
this  man,  that  man,  or  the  other  man

vgo,  for  he  has  acted  on  passion,  and

i  not  on  principle.  Take  that  which
he  seems  to  have,  and  give  it  to  him
that  lias  been  faithful  with  the  five,
the  two,  the  three,  or  the  one  talent*"
That  is  the  way  it  will  be,  by-and-by*
Sisters,  do  not  ask  whether  you
can  make  yonrselTes  happy,  but
whether  you  can  do  your  husband's

J  will,  if  he  is  a  good  man.  Teach
your  children ;  for  you  are  their
guardians,  to  act  as  father  and  mother
to  them  until  they  are  out  of  your
care. The  teachings  and  examples

fof  our  mothers  have  formed,  to  a
great  extent,  our  characters  and
directed  our  lives.  This  is  their  right,
when  they  act  by  the  power  of  the
Priesthood,  to  direct  the  child  until

4  it  is  of  a  proper  age,  and  then  hand
it  over  to  the  husband  and  father,

/and  into  the  hands  of  God,  with  such
faith  and  such  love  of  virtue  and
truth,  and  with  such  love  of  God  and
its  parents,  that  that  child  can  never
suppose  that  it  is  out  of  the  hand  and
from  under  the  control  of  the  parent.
Do  not  call  it  "  mine/' Let  your

i  maxim  be,  "  This  is  not  mine,"
whether  you  have  one  child  or  a
dozen.  "  It  is  not  mine,  but  the  Lord
has  seen  fit  to  let  me  bear  the  souls


DiscormsE*.

of  the  children  of  men.  It  is  from
my  Father  and  God,  and  I  will  do
my  duty  and  hand  it  over  to  him/'
and  have  that  faith  that  the  child
can  never  wring  itself  out  of  the  hands
of  a  good  father  and  mother — can
never  stray  away, — no,  never.  That
is  the  privilege  of  mothers.  IHs  you
who  guide  the  afleetions  and  feelings
of  the  child.  It  is  the  mothers,  after
all,  that  rule  the  nations  of  the  earth.
They  form,  dictate,  and  direct  the
minds  of  statesmen,  and  the  feelings,
course,  life,  notions,  and  sentiments
of  the  great  and  the  small,  of  kings,
rulers,  governors,  and  of  the  people
in  general*

Now,  mothers,  act  upon  principle,
and  see  whether  you  can  do  anything
to  promote  happiness  in  your  families ;
see  whether  you  can  guide  the  minds
of  your  children,  teach  them  their
letters,  &c.  I  thought  to  speak  upon
the  last-named  point,  but  I  will  omit
it.  You  can,  at  least,  teach  your
children  faith,  and  pay  attention  to
j  knitting  their  stockings,  making  their
clothing,  &c. ;  see  that  the  chickens
are  taken  care  of,  that  the  milk  is
cleanly  milked  from  the  cow,  and
that  the  children  are  made  com-
fortable* And  if  your  husband  is
here  or  there,  do  not  fret  yourselves,
whether  he  leaves  you  or  not.  If  he
is  a  good  man,  he  can  take  care  of
himself,  and  will  safely  return  to  you
again.  The  mother  that  takes  this
course  will  be  a  happy  mother — a
happy  woman.  But  where  you  find
women  jealous  of  each  other,  and  **  I
am  watching  my  husband,"  I  would
ask,  Where  are  your  children  ?  They
are  nearly  all  the  time  in  the  mud,
or  in  some  mischief.  And  what  are
you  doing,  mother?  You  are
"  watching  that  man."  "  Who  is  he  ?"
"He  is  my  husband,"  I  used  to  tell
the  sisters  in  Nauvoo  that  they  did
not  care  where  their  children  were,  if
they  could  only  keep  in  sight  of  their
husbands.


GIFTS  OF

A  traveller  in  the  Eastern  country
overtook  an  old  gentleman  walking
towards  a  town,  and  asked  him,
"  Who  is  the  great  man  of  that  little
town  ?  Who  is  your  leading  man  ?
Who  is  the  governor  and  controlling
Bpirit  of  that  little  place  f n  The  old
gentleman  replied,  M  I  am  the  king  of
that  little  town/'  44  Really"  says
the  traveller,  "are  yon  the  leading
man  ?"  "  Yes,  sir,  I  am  king  in  that
place,  and  reign  as  king."  "  How  do
you  make  this  to  appear  ?  Are  you
in  affluent  circumstances?"  "No,  I
am  poor ;  but  in  that  little  village
there  are  so  many  children.  All
those  children  go  to  my  school;  I
rule  the  children,  and  they  rule  their
parents,  and  that  makes  me  king/'
I  frequently  think  of  this.  Let  the
children  rule  the  mother,  and  the
mother  the  father,  and  that  makes
the  children  kings.  How  frequently
yon  find  this.  How  is  it,  my
brethren  ?  When  you  call  your
families  together  for  prayers,  wuere
are  your  children  ?  Were  this  ques-
tion asked  me,  I  should  say,  4tI  do
not  know."  Mothers,  where  are  your
children  ?  "  We  do  not  know  ;  it  is
as  much  as  we  can  do  to  be  here."
Why  do  you  not  have  your  children
together?  It  is  your  duty  to  look
after  them ;  they  should  not  be  run-
ning at  random  in  the  streets.  Some
mothers  will  put  a  ten-dollar  frock
on  a  child  and  let  it  go  straight  into
the  mud,  while  they  are  watching
the  father  and  trying  to  keep  him  in
bounds.  Take  care  of  your  children,
clothe  them  comfortably,  and  avoid
all  extravagance.

I  am  ashamed,  not  only  in  my
own  family,  but  others,  to  see  the
gewgaws  that  are  so  often  put  upon
children,  when  an  antelope  skin  or  a
piece  of  blue  factory  would  make
much  more  suitable  clothing  for
them.  Dress  them  in  strong,  dura-
ble cloth,  and  that,  too,  made  by
your  own  hands.  But  no ;  the  finest
fabrics  must  be  put  upon  them  to


god,  etc.  39

play  in.  Some,  if  they  could  get  it,
would  put  fifty  dollars*  worth  on  a
child,  and  send  him  into  the  streets
to  ride  upon  rails,  climb  trees,  Ac.  *
And  when  prayer- time  cornea,  the
husband  inquires,  "  Where  are  your
children  ?"  "  I  don't  know."  It  is
your  duty,  mothers,  to  look  after
them ;  and  when  you  have  your
children  in  the  prayer-room,  tell  them
that  their  father  is  coming  to  pray
with  them.  Also,  let  it  be  your
delight  that  your  children  do  not
waste  bread  and  other  food.  If  you
have  bread  to  spare,  give  it  to  the
poor,  and  see  that  your  children  do
not  destroy  it  Do  not  let  them
destroy  valuable  clothing,  but  put
strong,  durable  cloth  upon  them,  and
save  where  you  can,  and  give  it  to
gathering  the  poor.  I  do  not  rule
my  family  with  an  iron  hand,  as  many
do,  but  in  kindness  and  with  pleasant
words  ;  and  if  soft  words  would  teach
them,  they  would  know  as  much  as
any  family  on  this  earth.  See  that
your  children  are  taught  every  prin-
ciple of  goodness  and  virtue,  and  do
not  let  them  run  uncontrolled  in  the
streets,  with  expensive  food  in  their
hands  t)  waste  and  expensive  cloth-
ing upon  their  backs  to  tear  and
destroy.  If  you  get  a  frock  worth
tbres  dollars  when  a  two-dollar  one
will  answer,  and  maybe  last  longer,
you  might  have  saved  a  dollar  to  give
for  gathering  the  poor.  Treat  your
children  like  children.

Some  mothers  try  to  make  father
believe  that  a  child  five  years  old
knows  as  much  as  the  father.
Another  great  cause  of  dissatisfaction
is  that  so  many  women  are  such  noble
women,  and  kuow  so  much  more  than
their  husbands.  They  say,  "  This
man  is  not  capable  of  leading  me,"
That  is  a  positive  proof  to  me
that  that  man  does  not  know  his
ability  and  calling.  I  will  acknow-
ledge that  many  women  are  smarter
than  their  husbands.  But  when
people  are  married,  instead  of  trying


40


JOURNAL  OP  DISCOURSES


to  get  rid  of  each  other,  reflect  that
you  have  made  your  choice,  and  strive
to  honour  and  keep  it.  Do  not  mani-
fest that  you  have  acted  unwisely,
and  say  that  you  have  made  a  bad
choice,  nor  let  anybody  know  that


you  think  yon  have.  You  made  your
choice ;  stick  to  it,  and  strive  to  com-
fort and  assist  each  other*

There  are  other  things  that  I  would
like  to  speak  about,  but  I  will  now
stop  speaking.  God  bless  you  !  Amen-


SUBMISSION  TO  REPROOF*  &c.

Remarks  by  President f  Hebre  C.  Kimbaix,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  March  17,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


The  brethren  and  sisters  may
think  that  it  is  no  trouble  for  me  to
speak.  It  is  not  any  trouble  for  me
to  speak  the  truth,  but  I  feel  quite
feeble  in  body,  and  hence  not  much
like  speaking.

We  are  all  very  apt  to  speak  of
what  we  have  heard,  and  I  am  happy
to  say  this  morning  that  what  has
been  said  to  us  is  strictly  true,  so  far
as  I  bave  understanding.  Now,  sup-
posing that  one  man  has  light  and
knowledge  that  will  circumscribe
certain  arts  and  sciences,  and  another
only  possessing  one-third  the  infor-
mation that  he  does,  can  this  other
one  be  of  the  same  service  to  the  peo-
ple as  he  can  who  has  more  under-
standing ?  The  Elders  that  will  un-
dertake to  judge  President  Young
and  his  Counsellors,  the  Twelve
Apostles,  and  all  those  men  that  the
Lord  our  God  has  given  to  guide  his
people,  they  will  stumble.  You  may
go  and  read  the  revelation,  for  you
cannot  know  the  importance  of  this
except  you  have  the  spirit  of  revela-
tion within  you.
^  I  can  tell  you,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  that  it  is  the  little  things
that  lead  to  great  ones  in  the  kingdom
of  God.  You  know  the  bid  proverb
says  that  it  is  the  little  foxes  that
spoil  the  vines.  It  takes  but  very
little  to  injure  the  fibres  and  the
small  roots  of  a  tree,  and  you  all
know  by  your  own  experience  that
fimall  branches  are  necessary  to  the


perfection  of  a  tree ;  so  also  are  small
members  necessary  for  the  complete
organization  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

If  a  Saint  will  corrupt  himself
with  the  wickedness  of  the  world,  it
is  very  rare  that  correction  and  chas-
tisement will  do  such  an  one  any
good.  We  do  net  call  upon  such
persons  to  be  watchmen  on  the  towers
of  Zion,  but  we  call  upon  those  that
are  endowed  with  power,  filled  with
light  and  knowledge:  upon  such  we
can  depend.  The  spirit  that  is  in  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God  will
repi  ove  and  correct  those  that  are  out
of  the  way.  There  are  a  great  many
men  who  profess  to  understand  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
They  are  like  George  W.  Harris —
he  professed  to  understand  clocks  and
watches,  but  he  did  not  understand
anything  about  them ;  and  if  a  man
took  a  watch  to  him  to  be  corrected,
he  would  cut  off  about  one- third  of
the  chain,  and  thus  render  the  watch
comparatively  useless.  It  is  just  so
with  many  of  the  Elders  in  this
Church  j  they  profess  to  understand
the  order  and  government  of  Godt
when  in  reality  they  have  great  need
to  be  taught  the  first  principles  of  the
doctrine  of  Christ.

What  we  have  bean!  this  morning
is  true,  and  I  am  now  striving  to  sus-
tain those  veiy  ideas.  When  I  see
the  course  that  things  are  taking  in
certain  places,  I  feel  surprised.  I
can  see  men  around  me  that  have  co-


SUBMISSION  TO  BE  PROOF.  ETC*


41


operated  together  to  carry  out  their
own  wishes  ;  and  in  order  to  do  this,
they  will  both  write  and  speak
against  the  authorities  of  this  Church ;
then  by-and-by,  when  they  disagree,
the  shrewdest  one  will  expose  the
others.  This  is  the  situation  of  the
world :  with  them  there  is  no  integrity ;
but  this  will  not  do  among:  the  Lat-
ter-day  Saints,  We  must  become
like  the  limbs  of  one  tree,  filled
with  the  fragrance  and  nourishment
that  arise  from  the  roots ;  then  we
shall  be  clothed  with  power  and
authority — then  we  shall  have  care
one  for  the  other.  If  we  do  not
unite  our  efforts  in  this  direction,  we
shall  never  pass  through  the  strait
gate  that  is  spoken  of  in  the  Scrip-
tures, or  what  I  will  call  the  narrow
gate.  It  is  the  gate  that  will  only
admit  one  man  at  a  time.  We  are
not  going  in  all  in  confusion,  as  the
sectarians  suppose.

This  brings  to  my  mind  the  vision
that  Joseph  Smith  had,  when  he  saw
Adam  open  the  gate  of  the  Celestial
City  and  admit  the  people  one  by
one.  He  then  saw  Father  Adam
conduct  them  to  the  throne  one  by
one,  when  they  were  crowned  Kings
and  Priests  of  GocL  I  merely  bring
this  up  to  impress  upon  your  mind
the  principles  of  order,  but  it  will
nevertheless  apply  to  every  member
of  the  Church.

When  any  of  you  receive  a  rebuke
or  a  correction,  acknowledge  it  at
once,  and  say  to  the  one  who  admin-
isters it,  Thank  you,  brother ;  God
bless  yon !  and  may  the  Almighty
nve  me  power  to  do  good  !  I  have
i card  men  say  that  it  was  one  of  the
greatest  things  in  a  man's  favour,
when  the  truth  was  told  to  him,  to  ac-
knowledge it;  and  I  consider  it  to  be
a  strong  proof  of  a  man's  honesty  and
of  his  desire  to  do  right,  I  have
heard  men  say  a  great  many  times
that  it  was  the  hardest  thing  they
ever  experienced,  to  have  to  acknow-


ledge the  truth  of  a  correction
that  was  given  to  them  by  a  servant
of  God.  In  regard  to  that,  I  will  say
that  those  who  will  not  do  it  will
have  that  light  taken  away  from
them  that  was  pi  eviously  given.  The
Lord  will  take  from  him  that  hath
not  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have,
and  he  will  give  it  to  him  that  is
more  worthy  and  more  desirous  to
improve  upon  it  Let  me  advise  you
to  be  like  the  honey  bee  which
gathers  honey  from  every  opening
flower,  but  does  not  destroy  the
flower  i  tsel  f.  I  have  heard  of  men
who  are  guilty  of  making  the  most
extravagant  assertions,  and  then
boasting  that  they  never  recant  or
take  anything  back.  All  I  have  to
say  of  such  men  is,  that,  as  the  Lord
God  lives,  he  will  make  them  take
back  everything  that  is  not  right  to
remain.  I  advise  you  to  take  reproof
and  correction  in  the  spirit  of  meek-
ness and  humility.

If  we  had  died  when  we  were
babes,  we  should  have  been  heirs  to
the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  since  we
have  attained  maturity,  we  are  sub*
ject  to  the  law,  liable  to  reproof  and
correction  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
I  am  striving  to  touch  upon  the  same
principles  that  brother  Brigham  was
speaking  of.  The  standard  that  you
and  I  have  come  to  in  this  Church  19
one  that  will  try  us,  that  will  sift
us,  and  penetrate  the  inmost  recesses
of  our  hearts.

There  is  much  said  by  the  brethren
about  authority.  Now,  I  do  not  con-
sider the  Seventies  any  better  than
the  High  Priests  or  the  Elders  ;  and
I  can  tell  you  that,  when  any  one  of
these  gets  out  of  his  place,  he  is  not
as  good  as  the  other  that  is  magnify-
ing his  calling.  If  a  man  makes  a
breach ,  he  must  repair  it  again,  just
the  same  as  a  smith  does  a  chain
when  one  of  the  links  is  broken.

If  you  do  not  listen  to  the  counsel
that  is  given,  and  get  within  you  the


42


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


good  word  of  God,  drawing  wine
from  the  pure  fountain,  you  will  soon
be  in  the  dark.  Then,  when  a  man
undertakes  to  disseminate  the  truth,
you  will  abut  up  your  ears,  and  re-
fuse to  drink  of  the  waters  of  life.
I  can  tell  you  that  such  a  person  will
not  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  God
any  more  than  the  limb  of  a  tree  will
grow  after  it  is  severed  from  the  main
trunk.

Now,  then,  I  have  a  few  words  to
say  to  you,  gentlemen — those  of  you
who  call  yourselves  gentlemen,  and
who  drink  whisky,  when  it  is  heavily
charged  with  arsenic  and  other
deadly  poisons,  and  never  find  any
fault  with  it ;  but  you  are  very  ready
to  find  fault  with  things  thatdon't  suit
you  in  this  kingdom.  If  you  will
observe  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  you  will  become  new  in  your
minds,  fresh  in  your  imaginations,
and  powerful  to  do  good  ;  then  God
will  bless  you  and  prosper  you  in  all
your  undertakings,  He  will  guide
you  by  his  wisdom,  that  you  may
perform  your  duties  acceptably.

I  know  that  God  will  reward  me
according  to  my  works,  for  the  Scrip-
tures say  each  one  shall  have  his
penny.  You  must  understand,  how-
ever, that  that  is  only  bounty  money,
and  the  wages  will  be  according  to
a  man's  works.  It  is  the  man  who
sticks  to  the  army— who  fights  the
good  fight  of  iaith,  that  will  get  the
reward.  We  have  all  enlisted  under
the  banner  of  King  Emanuel,  and  we
invite  all  the  wurld  to  join  it.  Some
people  have  got  an  idea  that  the  man
who  receives  the  Gospel  at  the
eleventh  hour  is  going  to  be  put  on  an
equal  footing  with  the  man  that  en-
gaged in  the  work  in  the  first  hour
of  the  day ;  but  I  can  tell  you  that  we
shall  only  be  rewarded  for  the  labour
we  perform,

God  bless  this  people,  and  give
them  strength  accoi-ding  to  their  day,
that  they  may  be  led  ott  victoriously


over  all  their  enemies.  Joseph  Smith
could  tell  the  plans  that  were  laid
for  his  destruction,  many  times  when
he  could  not  prove  it  by  any  natural
means.  There  have  been  a  great  many
trying  to  injure  me,  but  I  stand  bet-
ter to-day  than  ever  before,  and  I
shall  continue  to  increase  in  the
favour  of  God,  if  I  keep  on  the  race-
course. That  man  who  Uvea  his
religion  will,  despite  his  enemies,  re-
ceive nourishment  from  God,  and
eventually  triumph  over  every  foe.

Those  who  defile  themselves  will
not  prosper ;  they  have  i  nj  ured  them-
selves by  their  own  conduct  They  are
like  Samson  when  he  was  shorn  of
his  locks  by  Delilah.  With  that
measure  that  ye  mete,  it  shall  bo
measured  back  to  you  again,  in  all
circumstances  of  lite.

Now,  look  at  the  United  States*
Government.  Did  they  not  send  an
army  here  to  kill  and  waste  away
this  people?  Yes.  Almost  every
priest  in  the  pulpi  t  and  every  poli-
tician in  the  land  had  fanned  the
flame  of  persecution  against  us ;  but
the  Lord  caused  them  to  stay  out  in
the  mountains  till  they  got  the  chills
instead  of  the  fever,  and  then  he  led
them  as  a  man  leadeth  a  horse  with  a
bridle.  Now,  what  will  be  next?
Why,  you  will  find  the  judgment  of
God  coming  upon  those  who  blas-
phemed his  name,  and  the  United
States  will  suffer,  for  they  will  be
afflicteJ  with  wars  and  with  trouble
at  home.  While  this  is  going  on,
the  man  who  lives  his  religion  and
honours  his  calling  will  be  prospered
and  go  back  to  Jackson  county,  Mis-
souri, with  the  faithful  Elders,  where
they  will  receive  their  inheritances.
They  will  then  have  to  fulfil  their
covenants  which  they  have  made
with  the  Lord  their  God,  for  these
things  will  be  required  at  our  hands.
None  will  be  permitted  to  dwell
there  who  will  not  observe  the  laws
of  the  kingdom  of  God. And  re-


GOSPEL  OF SALVATION,  ETC.


member,  there  is  no  other  way  to  go
to  Jackson  Count)*  but  through  Great
Salt  Lake  City.

It  is  very  gratifying  to  me  to  apeak
to  the  Saints,  especially  when  I  can


speak  to  their  understanding.  I
feel  that  I  have  spoken  long
enough  at  this  time;  and  may  God
bless  you,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name
of  Jesus*  Amen.


THE  GOSPEL  OP  SALVATION,  Ac.

Discourse  by  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  the  TabernaeUt  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  April  14,  1861.

BEPOBTED  BY  J. V,  LONG.


The  Gospel  of  salvation  is  rich
in  instruction,  and  it  is  calculated  in
its  nature  to  elevate  and  to  strengthen
the  human  race.  We  see  in  our  ex-
perience, in  passing  along  through
life,  errors,  weaknesses,  degradation,
and  every  species  of  evil.  As  the
Gospel  opens  our  eyes,  the  more
light  and  intelligence  we  get,  the
more  we  see,  and  the  more  we  reform
in  ourselves.

There  is  nothing,  perhaps,  within
our  knowledge  that  is  so  well  calcu-
lated to  elevate  our  minds,  to  bring
□s  up  out  of  the  low,  degraded  con-
dition in  which  we  are  placed.  Al-
most all  mankind  are  grovelling  in
the  dark,  and  are  unwilling  to  receive
the  light  of  revelation  that  comes
from  heaven.  The  Gospel  which  we
have  embraced  is  holy  in  its  nature
and  in  its  tendency.  It  has  caused
us  to  discover  turpitude  in  our  own
bosoms  and  lives,  and  it  inclines  us
to  reform,  to  reject  the  evil,  and
cleave  unto  that  which  is  good.  It


is  calculated  to  reform  every  Saint
— every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam.
The  message  which  has  gone  forth
is  comforting  to  all  the  world,  if  they
will  receive  it — comply  with  and
abide  by  its  requirements.  It  is  free
to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.
They  can  choose  or  reject  it — they  can
receive  or  turn  away  from  it.  It  is  a
matter  of  agency,  left  with  them  to
do  as  they  please,  either  to  love  the
right  or  the  wrong — to  do  good  or  to
do  evil.  Herein  is  the  economy  of
heaven  illustrated  in  the  human  soul,
sent  forth  upon  the  earth  to  perform
its  work  either  for  good  or  ill  as  it
seemeth  them  good.  If  the  people
adhere  to  the  message  which  is  sent
and  the  Gospel  which  is  being  pro-
claimed, they  lay  a  foundation  for
eternal  exaltation,  for  association  with
the  Gods  of  eternity.  If  they  reject
the  good  and  cleave  unto  that  which
is  evil,  the  result  will  be  the  opposite;
the  consequences  will  be  diminishing
and  wasting  away  of  life  and  its


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


4


blessings.  There  is  no  increase  to
the  wicked  and  disobedient;  they  will
come  to  a  full  stop ;  whereas  to  the
increase  of  the  righteous  there  shall
be  no  end.  The  righteous  will  con-
tinue to  increase  and  multiply  in  this
present  life,  and  also  in  that  which  is
to  come.  That  person  who  is
wicked  does  not  live,  according  to
the  proper  definition  of  the  term.
We  may  say  that  he  exists,  but
scarcely  lives,  except  as  he  lives  in
wickedness,  which  is  only  a  tempo-
rary existence.  The  channel  of  com-
munication is  closed  up  to  the  human
soul  that  is  wicked,  while  it  is  ex-
tended to  him  that  follows  in  the
footsteps  of  virtue.  The  enjoyment
of  the  righteous  is  increase.  The
attributes  of  our  Heavenly  Father's
nature  are  only  partially  learned  by
us :  we  are  but  babes  in  the  science
of  the  Gospel.

The  pure-minded  man  is  more
capable  of  receiving  these  great  and
glorious  principles  which  are  calcu-  ,
lated  to  enliven  the  human  mind,  and
to  er large  the  capacity  of  man,  and
prepare  him  for  receiving  those  things
which  are  so  beautiful  and  glorious.
These  are  truths  which  every  one
will  admit  who  reflects  upon  the  prin-
ciples of  the  holy  Gospel.  We  all
know  them  to  be  true,  and  yet  there
appears  to  be  a  predisposition  in  the
hearts  of  some  to  do  evil  and  not
pursue  that  path  of  life  and  live  their
holy  religion  as  they  have  been
taught.  They  do  not  feel  to  pursue
the  holy  path  of  righteousness  so  as
to  receive  the  blessings,  the  enjoy-
ment, and  the  felicity  promised  to  the
faithful  Saints.  It  is  the  privilege  of
the  Saints  to  progress  in  the  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  eternal  life,
and  the  greatest  gift  that  can  be
bestowed  upon  man  is  the  gift  of  eter-
nal life.  It  is  our  privilege  to  pro-
gress in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and
to  become  more  instrumental  of  doing
good in  the  service  of  our  Great


Master  as  we  increase  in  years,  and
also  that  we  may  increase  in  wisdom
and  in  intelligence,  and  lay  a  founda-
tion for  otbers  to  build  upon  that
come  after  us,  that  our  children  may
benefit  by  our  experience,  and  not
have  to  travel  over  the  same  ground
that  we  have  travelled.  They  will  bo
measurably  free  from  the  prejudices,
traditions,  and  superstitions  under
which  we  have  been  raised,  and  they
will  be  enabled  thereby  more  easily
to  throw  off  the  shackles  which  ai*e
calculated  to  trammel  their  minds  in
the  path  in  which  we  have  attempted
to  tread  :  therefore  still  greater  glory
will  attend  their  footsteps,  if  faithful,
because  of  the  greater  knowledge
which  they  will  be  capable  of  receiv-
ing* And  yet  we  look  around  and
see  ourselves  and  others  to  a  greater
or  less  degree  prone  to  do  evil.  Not
heeding  the  whisperings  of  the  Spirit
which  are  calculated  to  shield  us  from
those  evil  tendencies  and  ways — cal-
culated to  preserve  us  and  attend
upon  our  footsteps,  we  get  into  trouble
and  difficulty ;  but  if  we  strive  to  do
as  well  as  we  can,  and  submit  to  those
influences  which  are  calculated  to
shut  out  evil,  we  shall  then  increase
in  knowledge  and  in  all  the  gifts  and
graces  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.

The  only  way  to  preserve  ourselves
in  the  faith  is  to  be  diligent  in  prayer
and  in  all  those  duties  required  of  us
as  Saints — to  be  faithful  in  those
things  that  we  have  received,  and  not
to  be  dilatory  in  anything  that  we
have  to  perform,  but  be  diligent  and
energetic  in  everything  that  is  re-
quired. It  is  not  a  sacrifice  of  our
time,  but  it  is  an  increase  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Living  God  to  the  honest
in  heart.  If  they  have  order,  they
will  have  more  of  it :  in  fact,  attention
to  duty  brings  an  increase  of  every
good  thing  that  heart  can  wish  or
desire  in  righteousness*  It  is  our
duty  to  strive  to  be  actuated  by  the
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  it  id


THE  GOSPEL  OF

for  us  to  encourage  within  us  a  love
of  those  principles  which  are  being
revealed — to  let  the  love  of  these
principles  be  the  delight  of  our
bosoms  continually,  to  think  upon,
to  act  upon  in  onr  daily  lives.  Obe-
dience brings  with  it  its  own  rich
reward,  and  an  increase  of  every  good
thing,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual;
and  then  we  should  discard  the  evil
and  everything  which  has  a  downward
tendency,  that  we  may  receive  edifi-
cation, and  thus  cause  union  to  spring
up  amongst  us,  and  encourage  a  feeling
in  our  hearts  to  do  good,  and  strive
in  faith  to  bring  down  the  blessings
of  heaven.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God ;
and  if  we  will  promote  that  in  our
bosoms,  we  shall  increase  in  the
knowledge  of  the  truth  anid  in  the
power  of  God.  If  we  will  promote
faith  and  confidence  in  our  bosoms,
which  is  said  to  be  the  basis  of  power,
then  what  is  there  that  we  desire  that
we  cannot  acconi{ni>Ii  i  Our  faith
and  affections  once  united,  then  see
the  strength  and  power  that  we  should
wield  in  promoting  tho  principles
which  we  so  much  rejoice  to  see
spreading  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the
earth.

How  is  it  that  we  are  compelled  to
pray  that  our  Father  in  heaven  will
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  the  un-
godly ?  Is  it  that  the  sinner  in
Zion  may  be  afraid  and  the  hypocrite
flee  away  ?  We  are ;  and  I  expect  we
eh  nil  be  compelled  to  make  this
prayer  to  our  Father  in  heaven  so
long  as  there  are  hypocrites  in  the
midst  of  the  people  of  the  Most
High  God — those  who  call  themselves
Saints.

We  seethe  young  people,  oft  times,
walking  in  the  ways  of  evil,  practising
dishonesty,  practising  drinking,
stealing,  and  other  vices,  and  those,
too,  who  have  been  born  in  this
kingdom — born  of  parents  who  loved
and  received  this  Gospel  before  their
birth,  many  of  whom  may  be  dis-


SALVATIOIT,  ETC. '  45

tinguished  by  their  names  having
been  taken  from  the  Book  of  Mormon —
young  men  who  should  have  known
nothing  but  righteous  principles,
I  say  it  is  grievous  to  see  one  of  these,
in  whom  we  have  placed  such  strong
hopes,  turn  away  from  the  truth  and
go  into  sin  and  iniquity.

It  may  be  considered  by  many  a
wonder  that  we  should  fail  in  our
judgment;  but  I  do  not  consider  it  is
a  wonder  at  all  that  we  should  some-
times choose  men  who  afterwards
prove  unfaithful,  for  the  Almighty
will  prove  his  servants  who  are  called
as  well  as  those  who  call  them ;
and  although  the  Lord  may  foreknow
a  great  many  things,  yet  he  is  willing
that  all  should  have  an  opportunity
of  proving  themselves.

Although  those  wTho  have  been
born  in  the  Church  have  greater
opportunities  than  we  have  had  in
our  infancy  in  regard  to  the  princi-
ples of  life  and  salvation,  yet  they
are  subject  to  temptation  and  to  be
led  astray  as  we  are.  This  our  ex-
perience teaches  us,  and  it  is  not  so
wonderful  that  we  should  see  this  in
our  youth.  The  spirit  that  is  in
man  needs  continual  watchfulness.
We  must  watch  ourselves — watch  our
footsteps.  The  young  and  inexperi-
enced do  not  understand  this  as  we
do  who  have  passed  further  along  in
life's  dreary  path.  But  they  will  im-
prove when  they  feel  by  experience
the  smart  for  walking  in  the  ways  of
evil,  when  they  see  that  it  does  not
afford  that  happiness  which  they  ex-
pected, especially  if  their  parents,  who
seek  their  welfare,  continue  to  walk
in  the  path  of  right,  of  justice,  and
equity.

We  look  upon  the  world  from  which
we  have  come,  from  the  lowest  state
of  degradation,  perhaps ;  and  we  are
placed  here  upon  a  platform  which  is
calculated  to  lift  us  above  every  other
portion  of  the  human  race.  This  is
the  destiny  of  this  people  and  of


46  JOURNAL  OF

. W  ^ ffl  V  %  "

f  v.

their  children,  and  all  those  who  shall
come  into  this  kingdom,  to  exercise  an
influence  over  the  whole  world — to
exercise  that  power  which  will
emanate  from  heaven  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  human  family.

We  are  progressing;  and  this  is
truly  a  glorious  work  and  mission
which  this  people  have  engaged  in,
and  upon  which  they  have  been  sent.
It  is  to  redeem  the  earth  from  sin  and
iniquity,  to  establish  the  principles  of
righteousness  upon  a  basis  never
more  tube  thrrwndown,  to  establish
them  upon  a  firm  and  righteous  basis,
— principles  which  nil  the  world  may
learn,  and  by  which  they  may  be
saved,  if  they  will  obey  them.  And
it  is  the  only  nucleus  of  power  that  will
do  to  tie  to.  There  is  no  nucleus  that
can  be  compared  with  the  power  of
this  people.  So  long  as  they  will  re-
main united,  so  lung  will  they  pro-
gress and  increase  in  the  knowledge
of  the  truth.  I  am  proud  to  own
this  people  an  my  friends.

Brethren,  if  this  our  holy  religion
be  lived  and  acted  up  to.  then  it  is  a
great,  high,  aud  holy  mission  which
we  have  to  perform.  Then  act  up  to
it  nobly.  Let  us  instil  into  the  minds
of  our  children  that  nice  sense  of
honour  which  will  prove  a  shield  to
them  in  after  life.  Mothers  can
prove  of  great,  service  to  the  children
in  instilling  into  their  mind*  the  prin-
ciples that  will  lead  to  life  and  salva-
tion, and  that  will  keep  their  feet
from  unholy  footsteps.  It  is  a  mission
that  mothers  can  act  in.  It  is  a  con-
solation to  parents  to  see  their  chil-
dren become  great,  good,  and  holy
men  and  women.  Then  they  will
never  forget  those  things  that  are  in-
stilled into  their  minds  in  their
infancy*  I  feel  that  there  is  not  pains
enough  taken  to  instil  that  nice  sense
of  honour  into  the  mind  which  will
shield  the  children  in  after  life.  I  do
not  care  how  wicked  they  may  be-
come,  the wholesome  instruction


DISCOURSES.

given  in  their  youth  will  be  like  a
shield — like  cords  that  will  draw
them  and  keep  them  from  many  an
evil  thing  in  future  life;  and  when
they  become  fathers  and  mothers,
they  will  reflect  upon  the  teachings
of  their  childhood — of  how  they  were
trained  up  in  the  nurture  and  admo-
nition of  the  Lord.  The  conscience
restrains  many  persons  from  evil,
when  made  to  understand  and  know
that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  upon*
them,  whether  any  other  person  sees
them  or  not.

It  should  cause  us  to  be  more  care-
ful and  particular  than  any  other  in-
fluence that  can  be  brought  to  bear
upon  us,  seeing  and  knowing  what  we
can  do.  and  how  we  would  feel  to  have
the  Lord  bphold  an  evil  in  our  con-
duct When  we  consider  that  the
Lord  is  cognizant  of  our  acts,  should
we  not  be  raoie  careful  that  we  do
nothing  to  displease  Him  than  we  are
of  displeasing  any  other  being  ?  Is
it  not  a  joy  to  feel  that  we  have  the
approbation  of  our  Father  in  heaven
in  all  that  we  do,  and  to  have  that
peace  of  mind  which  this  knowledge
instils  into  our  bosoms  ?  Then  how
careful  we  ought  to  be  for  our  own
satisfaction,  to  see  that  we  are  circum-
spect in  regard  to  our  daily  lives.

I  also  think  it  is  our  duty,  upon
the  principles  of  righteousness,  to
please  each  other  as  lar  as  we  can.
Hut  I  would  not  wish  to  inculcate
that  we  should  always  strive  to  gratify
each  other,  but,  as  far  as  is  consis-
tent with  the  principles  of  truth,
strive  to  please  each  other,  instead  of
pursuing  an  opposite  course,  or  one
that  is  calculated  to  harass  and  injure
each  other's  feelings.  I  recommend
this  course  myself,  as  being  productive
of  more  good*  We  should  not
strive  to  hedge  up  each  other's  way
in  the  work  of  righteousness  and
truth ;  but  as  we  were  taught  by  our
President  the  duties  of  the  Elders
I  of Israel, so, let us  correct


>


THE  GOSPEL  OP

an  evil,  not  through  any  particular
motives,  excepting  that  it  is  an  evil,
and  knowing  that  in  all  righteousness
we  should  seek  to  build  each  other  up.
We  should  seek  to  have  within  our-
selves that  spirit  and  feeling  which
will  produce  the  most  happiness  and

prosperity.

The  Gospel  if  we  will  let  it,  will
save  us,  old  and  young,  bond  and
free,  and  finally  exalt  us  in  the  king-
dom of  our  Father  and  God.  It  is
for  us,  then,  to  eschew  evil  and  set
worthy  examples,  strive  to  extend  this
influence  abroad  among  our  brethren,
so  far  as  we  are  able,  and  so  far  as  we
have  it  ourselves,  and  then  cause
them  to  extend  it  to  others,  and  so
continue ;  and  in  this  way  seek  to
redesm  the  earth,  as  well  as  in  our
labours  of  seeking  to  redeem  mankind
from  sin  and  iniquity,

We  offer  the  people  the  Gospel,
which  is  calculated  to  save  them  in
the  kingdom  of  God,  We  seek  also
to  make  the  desert  blossom  as  the
rose ;  and  herein  we  may  improve
ourselves  in  the  cultivation  of  the
earth.  We  can  ornament-and  adorn
the  earth  with  trees,  with  shrubs,  and
flowers;  and  while  it  is  bringing  forth
grain  of  all  kinds  for  the  sustenance
of  man,  it  will  also  be  beautified  by
our  industry  and  taste.

Israel  is  on  amission.  The  Elders
are  out  upon  a  mission.  The  good
seed  is  being  sown.  The  Lord  has
commenced  his  work  in  earnest,  and
thousands  will  flock  to  this  standard,
and  it  will  do  to  tie  to.  Yes,  thou-
sands will  do  this  for  safety.  Then
it  is  for  us  to  prepare  to  bring  forth
the  grain  and  the  other  products  of
the  earth  for  the  sustenance  of  the
people  of  God — to  ornament  the
earth  with  cities  and  temples,  with
grain,  with  shrubs,  with  trees,  with
fences,  and  every  good  thing  that
makes  it  delightful  to  the  eye  of  the
builder j  and  in  this  way  cause  our
homes  to  become  beautiful.  Like
■


SALVATION,  ETC,  47

every  other  principle  of  righteous-
ness, it  is  better  for  ourselves  to
do  things  is  this  way.  It  is  pleasing
to  God ;  it  is  also  pleasing  to  every  en-
lightened mind,  and  causes  the  faith-
ful in  after  life  to  look  back  to  their
childhood,  to  consider  certain  traits
in  their  character  and  the  counsel
and  admonitions  they  received.
When  children  grow  up,  they  are  very
apt  to  look  back  to  their  old  school-
houses,  and  to  certain  trees  that  sur-
rounded the  house,  and  other  haunts
of  their  childhood,  giving  early  and
pleasing  impressions.  These  things
are  calculated  to  inspire  the  young
minds  with  taste  for  that  which  is
beautiful  and  lovely.  It  is  elevating
to  the  mind  to  make  and  have  around
us  and  our  habitations  shade  trees,
flowers,  and  shrubs;  and  it  sets  a  good
example  before  the  young,  and  it  is
calculated  to  instil  into  their  bosoms
virtue,  holy  and  righteous  principles.
It  will  circulate  the  same  in  our
Wards  as  in  our  habitations.

Many  people  will  live  year  after
year — they  will  plow  and  sow,  reap  and
mow,  without  a  tree,  without  a  fence
about  their  premises ;  they  will  live  in
a  mud  hovel  ;  whereas  with  a  little
labour  an  hour  or  two  in  a  day,  in  set-
ting out  a  few  trees,  be  the  labour  ever
so  small,  it  beautifies  that  place  on
which  the  labour  is  bestowred.  When
you  look  at  a  place,  a  house,  an  home-
stead, it  seems  to  indicate  the  charac-
ter of  the  person  that  dwells  there*
Although  our  improvements  may
seem  to  be  very  small,  yet  every  little
does  so  much  towards  making  up  the
sum  of  human  happiness.  It  is  our
duty  to  improve  in  all  those  things
that  llflS  make  home  pleasant  and
desirable.  It  is,  as  I  said  before,  our
mission  to  redeem  the  earth,  by
adorning  it  in  every  possible  way.
Then  we  shall  wield  an  influence  that
in  time  will  enable  us  to  overcome
every  antagonistic  power  and  influence
on  the  earth  that  is  brought  i>?  bear


48  j  or una l op  i

upon  it.  There  is  no  doubt  about
this  in  my  mind,  for  I  know  that  this
kingdom  must  eventually  triumph.

The  work  of  the  Lord  is  progress-
ing as  fast  as  the  Saints  are  capable
of  standing  up  under  it.  Things  are
breaking  to  pieces  in  the  nations.
The  Lord  is  casting  down  and  setting
up  as  it  please  th  him.  We  can  plainly
see  his  hand  and  footsteps  in  the  midst
of  the  nation  the  confusion  which
reigns  and  predominates  among  the
wicked,  and  we  can  hear  the  sound
thereof  almost  from  day  to  day.
But  here  in  these  valleys  of  the
mountains  is  a  grand  contrast ;  here
is  peace  and  happiness,  and,  if  we
have  a  mind  to  make  it  so,  our
heaven ;  for  it  rests  with  ourselves.
We  can  have  just  as  good  a  heaven
as  we  have  mind  to,  if  we  go  about
it  in  the  right  way.  It  is  for  us  to
made  it  to  suit  ourselves.  If  we  have
any  happiness  here,  we  have  it  to  make.
It  is  our  privilege  to  have  peace — to
make  our  homes  happy  by  living  our
religion;  and  why  don't  we  do  it?
Many  of  us  will  say  we  will.

Here  is  the  greatest  heaven  of  any
place  upon  the  earth;  and,  God  being
our  helper,  we  will  extend  this  heaven
abroad,  increase  its  number  of  angels
of  peace,  its  usefulness,  and  extend
its  benefits  to  others;  fnr  as  many  as
choose  may  come  and  enjoy  it  with
their  hearts  and  souls.  It  is  my
daily  prayer  that  the  honest  in  heart
may  come  with  a  heart  and  mind  to
aid  in  reclaiming  the  desert,  and
causing  it  to  blossom  as  the  rose, —
come  to  aid  in  the  good  cause,  in  the
concentration  of  truth,  of  wisdom,  of
power,  and  of  every  good  thing,  to
aid  in  the  enlightenment  of  the
world  and  in  concentrating  all  that
is  worth  having  of  science,  of  know-
ledge, of  philosophy,  of  mechanism,
of  the  cultivation  of  the  earth, — to
aid  in  concentrating  into  one
focus  all  human  ingenuity,  and  all
human  strength  and  power  that  will


8  COURSES,

build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  estab-
lish the  principles  of  righteousness
and  peace  upon  the  earth,  and  thus
form  a  barrier  against  the  assailing
floods  of  wickedness  and  corruption
which  have  so  long  desolated  the
earth — a  barrier  which  they  can  in  no
way  overcome.  They  may  surge  up
against  the  kingdom,  but  the  barrier
will  be  greater  and  greater,  and  it  will
eventually  break  the  nations  in  pieces
and  grind  them  to  powder.  As  it  was
said  by  one  of  old,  upon  whomso-
ever that  stone  shall  fall,  it  will  grind
them  to  powder.

Here  is  a  concentration  of  power,
governed  by  righteous  principles,
governed  by  intelligence  ;  and  here  is
an  opportunity  of  knowing  all  thatia
worth  knowing  or  having  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  And  when
this  power  is  brougl-t  to  bear  upon
the  wicked  and  ungodly  nations,  will
it  not  crush  them,  and  they  be  as
chaff  before  the  wind  when  it  shall  fall
upon  them  ?  Yes ;  and  it  will  grind
them  to  dust*

It  is  for  us,  then,  if  we  seek  the
prosperity  of  Zion,  to  be  faithful,  to
be  diligent  in  our  own  duties,  to  live
our  holy  religion  day  by  day,  hour  by
hour.  Did  you  not  know  that  a  man
may  do  that  in  a  moment  which  he
cannot  redeem  himself  from  in  a
lifetime,  and  perhaps  not  in  an
eternity  ?  v

Let  us  shun  evil  and  put  it  under
our  feet — pnt  it  far  from  us, — yea,  even
the  very  appearance  of  evil,  that  our
pathway  may  be  strewn  with  the
blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  that  the  influence  of  the  Holy
Spirit  may  be  in  us  as  a  well  of  water
springing  up  into  everlasting  life.
Let  us  strive  to  do  good  for  our  own
sake,  and  then  peace,  happiness,  and
prosperity,  both  temporally  and
spiritually,  will  be  ours.

I  make  this  appeal  to  you,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  that  we  may  live
our  holy  religion,  eschew  all  evil,


GOSPEL  OP SALVATION,  ETC.


49


build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  that
we  may  participate  in  its  blessings.
What  greater  inducements  can  be
placed  before  us  than  those  presented
in  the  kingdom  of  our  God  ?  I  know
of  nothing  outside  of  the  kingdom  of
God  that  is  worth  having.  I  have
no  desire  for  anything  for  a  moment
that  I  cannot  obtain  in  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  that  lawfully,  legally,
and  rightfully,  and  that  it  will  be  not
only  my  privilege  to  attain  and  enjoy,
but  my  right.  And  I  am  not  very
particular  about  that,  if  I  can  only  be
faithful  and  walk  humbly  and  obedi-
ently before  my  Heavenly  Father,
and  endure  to  the  end ;  then  I  shall
be  satisfied,  and  then  I  shall  have  all
that  I  can  wish,

I  heard  a  person  remark  one  time,
when  travelling  through  our  settle-
ments^  that  if  he  had  to  raise  wheat  on
such  a  piece  of  land  as  that  which  we
were  passing,  he  would  go  to  some
other  country  rather  than  live  here,  I
told  him  that  he  did  not  feel  as  I  did;
for  I  felt  that,  rather  than  turn  away
from  the  kingdom  of  God,  I  would
prefer  being  chained  to  a  bare  rock
ali  the  days  of  my  life,  and  have
bread  and  water  for  my  food.  Yes,
confined,  persecuted,  or  any  fate  that
might  befal  me,  I  would  prefer  it  to
turning  away  from  the  kingdom.
That  is  the  way  I  feel,  and  it  is  the
feeling  of  all  true-hearted  Saints.
They  feel  that  they  have  everything
to  hold  them  in  .the  kingdom  of  God,
and  they  feel  that  there  is  nothing
worth  having  out  of  it.

Brethren,  many  go  into  darkness
by  giving  way  to  small  matters,  by
finding  fault,  by  supposing  that  they
see  something  that  does  not  meet
their  minds,  or  that  they  suppose  to
be  wrong.  I  believe  that,most  apos-
tates commence  in  that  way:  they  do
not  control  their  thoughts,  and  hence
things  sour  in  their  minds,  and  they
are  apt  to  indulge  in  and  to  encourage
those  thoughts  till  they  will  begin  to

No.  4.


express  them ;  and  then  the  way  and
manner  of  returning  into  the  favour
of  the  Spirit  of  God  begins  to  be
hedged  up,  and  they  cannot  return
so  easily  as  they  could  have  done
before  they  expressed  their  jealousies
to  some  one  else. After  men  begin
to  express  their  doubts and  fears
around, one to  another,  they  go
astray  fast. Their  unholy  sentiments
begin  to  be  established  in  their  dark-
ened minds  like  cardinal  or  funda-
mental principles. They  think  they
begin  to  see  that  they  have  been  in
error  in  embracing  that  Gospel  which
they  profess,  and  the  first  thing  they
know  they  are  landed  in  the  whirl-
pools of  apostacy  ;  they  suddenly  find
out  that  they  never  did  believe  in
"  Mormonism,"  and  that  if  they  did
believe  it  they  were  in  error,  for  they
now  find  out  that  it  i  all  a  humbug ;
and  thus  they  go  on  to  destruction.
If  such  persons  could  control  their
minds  in  the  commencing  stage  of
apostacy,  and  bo 'humble,  seek  wis-
dom, light,  and  knowledge  from  the
Lord,  th^y  could  be  saved.  Then
they  could  be  preserved,  and  not  go
in  the  way  which  many  who  were
our  brethren  have  gone,  who  have
sunk  themselves  in darkness  and
misery, and  finally  into  hell.  If
they  would remember  when  they
begin  to  see  things  which  they  dis-
like and  feel  inclined  to  find  fault —
if  they  would  then  remember  their
prayers  and  seek  unto  the  Lord,  ask
him  to  kepp  their  minds  enlightened
— to  give  them  freely  of  his  Spmt  to
guide  them  continually,  thej  would
be  safe. But  people  in  this  condition
invariably neglect their prayers ;
they  begin  to  see  faults  in  their
brethren — to  find fault  yfith  the
authorities.

Let  any  man  pursue  that  course,
and  he  will  find  out  when  it  is  too
late  to  walk  in  the  paths  of  righteous-
ness, when  the  Lord  has  left  him  to
himself  so  that  he  cannot,  return,  if

Vol  IX.


50  *  JOUKNAL  OF

he  would.  Let  me  caution  you,
brethren  and  sisters,  to  nip  this  sprig
and  sign  of  apostacy  in  the  bud.  It
Is  said  that  the  mind  that  will  re-
ceive will  have  a  knowledge  given  to
it  of  the  truth  after  which  it  searches.
The  reason  that  those  characters  do
not  have  intelligence  is  because  their
minds  are  closed  against  it.  I  say,
and  I  admonish  you  to  let  your
minds  be  open  continually,  r-U'cra  it
a  favour — one  of  the  greatest  bestowed
by  the  Almighty — the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  Live  so  as  to  let  it  be
in  each  of  your  bosoms,  to  inspire
your  hearts,  to  enable  you  to  receive
the  instructions  that  arc  from  time
to  time  given  unto  you,  that  yon  may
ever  be  inclined  to  do  good  and
eschew  evil  That  Spirit  will  inspire
you  in  every  good  thing;  it  will
teach  you  to  walk  humbly  and  faith-
fully  before  your  Father  and  God,

I  know  there  is  that  in  the  hearts
of  the  people  of  this  Church  and
kingdom  that  responds  to  righteous
principles  ;  for  no  one  that  hears  the
truth  but  knows,  as  a  general  thing,
what  is  right;  but  it  appears  that
they  are  sometimes  neglectful  of  what
they  do  know,  and  that  they  do  not
do  as  well  as  they  might  j  and  they
know  that  this  is  wrong.

Brethren,  I  feel  well.  I  feel  within
myself  a  peculiar  satisfaction  in  seeing
the  prosperity  of  the  people  of  God.
I  feel  well  in  witnessing  his  mighty


DISCOUBSEB*

hand  and  his  goings  forth  among  the
nations  of  the  earth,  as  I  see  the  day
approaching  when  the  power  of  the
Adversary  will  he  weakened  to  that
extent  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  dis-
turb the  happiness  of  the  Saints.
When  I  see  the  Lord  breaking  in
pieces  the  nations,  I  feel  wellj  When
I  see  the  Gospel  going  abroad,  and
its  principles  more  and  more  adhered
to  by  the  people  of  God,  and  in  seeing
the  people  cleave  to  righteous  princi-
ples and  forsake  all  that  is  evil.  I
pray  God  that  we  may  increase  in
these  things  that  are  calculated  to
enable  us  to  cariy  them  abroad,  that
we  may  have  power  with  our  Father
and  God,  to  maintain  our  faith  and
integrity  against  every  opposing
power  and  every  obstacle  that  is  put
in  our  way,  aud  be  enabled  to  draw
from  the  elements  for  our  support,
that  we  may  be  free  and  independent
from  this  wicked  and  untoward
generation,

I  pray  our  Father  to  bless  us  with
his  Spirit,  that  we  may  be  able  to
act  well  our  part,  in  connection  with
tho.se  that  rule  over  us,  that  we  may
sustain  them  by  our  faith  and  prayers,
and  through  our  diligent  efforts  be
instrumental  in  the  hands  of  our
Father  in  heaven  in  redeeming  the
earth  from  sin  and  iniquity.  I  pray-
my  Father  in  heaven  that  we  may  be
enabled  to  accomplish  these  things,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


CULTIVATION  OF  THB  SPIRIT  OF  TBUTH,  KTC


»


51


CULTIVATION  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  TRUTH—  TRIALS  OF  THE

CHURCH,  &c.  '

Discourse  ly  President  Hkbkb  C.  Kimball,  made  %>i  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  April  14,  1861.

BEPORTED  BY  J. T,  LONG,


There  is  scarcely  a  subject  in  re-
gard to  myself  or  this  people  that  is
of  any  importance  but  I  have  thought
of  it,  for  I  reflect  much.  I  wish  to
speak  by  the  dictation  of  the  Holy
Ulmht,  andl  know  that  will  be  in
proportion  to  the  faith  that  dwells  in
you.  It  is  a  pretty  hard  case  for  a
man  to  speak  to  this  congregation,
except  he  makes  up  his  mind  to
speak  according  to  the  light  that  is
in  the  people.

Many  of  the  people  have  eai^s  to
bear,  but  they  hear  not,  neither  do
they  conceive  the  things  of  the  king-
dom of  God.  For  instance,  when  the
people  come  together  on  a  Sunday
morning  and  hear  a  discourse,  go
home  to  dinner  and  come  together  in
the  afternoon,  and  they  can  scarcely
remember  a  word  that  has  been  said
in  the  forenoon ;  therefore  you  per-
ceive the  necessity  of  our  being  in-
structed from  day  to  day,  and  of  our
having  our  ears  cultivated  to  hear  the,
things  of  the  kingdom.  Then  we
shall  have  hearts  to  understand,  and
minds  to  comprehend  the  principles
of  eternal  life.  And  if  the  word  of
life  be  in  us,  it  will  be  like  a  well  of
water  springing  up  into  everlasting
fe,  and  we  shall  have  our  minds
stored  with  that  knowledge  which  is
promised  to  the  faithful.  It  is
necessary,  and  it  is  the  imperative
duty  of  the  Elders  in  Israel  to  strive
to  increase  in  knowledge,  in  wisdom,


in  virtue,  and  in  good  works;  for  if
we  have  good  works  we  are  bound  to
have  good  faith  :  then  aguhi  good
faith  produces  good  works.

Ever  since  I  embraced  the  Gospel
twenty-nine  years  ago,  I  have  felt  de-
termined to  draw  near  nnto  the  Lord
our  God,  knowing  that  he  had
promised  on  that  condition  t  >  draw
near  unto  his  children.  In  doing
this  I  have  been  blessed  and  com-
forted in  all  jay  labours.  It  is  Our
|  duty  to  learn' to  be  men  of  truth  in
all  our  acts,  our  words,  our  thoughts,
and  to  cultivate  the  apirit  of  truth.

I  have  frequently  thought  of  tlie
saying  that  somo  men  are  so  clever
that  they  can  turn  the  truth  into  a
He,  and  vice  versa.  Now,  I  would
like  to  know  how  it  is  possible  -to
turn  a  lie  into  truth.  I  contend  thai
there  is  no  such  thing;  buf  men  may
so  mystify  the  truth  as  to  make  it
appear  an  error  or  a  falsehood  ;  but
the  truth  still  remains  firm  and  un-
shaken, for  it  is  of  that  character
that  the  Scriptures  speak  ot :  it  is  like
a  two-edged  sword ;  yes,  it  will  cut
both  ways.  We  should  always  be
filled  with  the  truth,  and  not  only
filled  with  truth,  but  ever  be  ready  to
administer  it,  whether  we  are  moving
backward  or  forward.  We  should
ever  be  ready  to  administer  the  words
of  life  and  salvation,  and  let  the  error
alone.  Let  us  listen  to  the  counsel
that  we have heard  to-day  from


52


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCOUnSES.


brotlier  Wells  and  the  other  brethren,
I  did  not  hear  brother  Wells,  but  1
heard  brother  George  A,  and  Pi  esident
Young,  What  they  said  was  truth,
and  I  also  know  that  what  brother
Wells  said  was  truth,  for  he  cannot
gpeak  anything  else.  There  are  men
of  whom  I  could  not  say  that ;  but
brother  Wells'  mind  is  stored  with
knowledge  and  wisdom*  and  it  would
be  hard  for  a  man  like  hi  in  to  talk
anything1  else  than  the  truth.  We
often  4'  that  we  wish  to  speak  the
truth  to  the  people,  which  is  right
and  good  j  but  is  it  any  more  neces-
sary that  I  should  be  a  man  of  truth
here  than  I  am  in  my  garden  or  with
iny  family  r  No,  It  is  necessary
that  I  should  be  a  man  of  truth  where-
ever  I  am,  whatever  my  employment
may  be*  It  is  not  wisdom  for  us  to  he
as  the  old  Quaker,  who,  when  he  was
insulted,  pulled  off  his  eoat.  and  said
"  Lay  there,  religion,  till  I  Hog  this
man  I"  Xow  my  doctrine  is,  that  if
■I  cannot  flog  a  man  and  be  just  as
religious  as  I  am  in  this  pulpit,  I  had
better  let  him  alone.  But,  unlike  the
old  Quaker,  I  never  had  an  occasion  to
put  my  religion  to  the  test  in  this
way ;  in  fact,  I  never  had  much  diffi-
culty with  any  man  in  my  life.  I
have  had  more  difficulty  with  myself
than  with  anybody  else.  I  will  not
do  as  some  have  done,  whip  a  man
because  I  have  the  power  and  the
strength.  Lei  men  act  unjustly  with
me,  and  I  will  endure  it  until  that
spirit  which  I  enjoy  says,  Ycu  have
borne  enough ;  and  then  if  I  have  to
administer  chastisement  unto  that
man,  I  will  do  it  by  the  power  of
God.  Then  such  a  man  had  better  be
out  of  my  way  and  out  of  my  hands.

Do  not,  brethren,  follow  in  the
track  of  those  who  came  against
Jesus,  He  had  no  friends,  but  he
had  the  power  of  God  with  him,  and
his  enemies  were  struck  dumb  before
him.  This  is  the  position  we  should
be  in ;  and  then  what  are  the  nations


of  the  wicked,  or  the  armies  of  the
United  States,  or  of  all  the  world  ?
If  we  attend  to  our  business  and  let
ot^ier  things  alone,  the  Lord  will  sus-
tain us  in  all  circumstances  of  life.
Supposing  I  had  a  dozen  men  em-
ployed — men  who  were  devoted  to  the
truth  and  to  my  interest,  I  would
say,  Boys,  attend  to  your  business  ;
do  what  1  have  told  you,  and  I  will
attend  to  our  enen  i  ;  I  will  see  to
these  chaps  and  Hog  them  to  it;  I
will  teach  them  to  attend  to  their
duties,  or  stand  aside.  This  is  the
character  of  our  Father:  he  will  de-
fend his  own,  he  will  defend  his  peo-
ple, he  will  defend  our  wives  and
children,  these  mountains,  and  all
that  cleave  unto  righteousness.  This
is  the  way  I  view  the  subject,  and  I
presume  that  all  Israel  will  say
Amen.

It  is  our  duty  to  pursue  that  course
that  will  lead  and  guide  us  unto
eternal  life.  This  land  is  blessed
above  all  other  lands :  it  was  fore-
ordained  to  be  the  gathering- place  of
the  Saints,  where  the  Lord  would
hide  up  his  people  until  his  indigna-
tion should  pass  over  the  nations  of
the  earth.  You  have  heard  us  say
that  all  the  world  and  hell  combine.  1
cannot  get  us  out  from  these  moun-
tains, audi  say  the  same  to-day.

It  is  by  our  faith  and  works,  by
our  integrity  and  righteousness,  by
doing  to  others  as  we  would  wish
them  to  do  unto  us.  Jesus  soys —
"  With  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye
shall  be  judged ;  and  with  what
measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured
to  you  again/'  (Matt.  vii.  2.)  This
is  and  will  be  the  case  with  every  man
in  this  Church  and  kingdom,  from
first  to  last.  All  will  have  that  re-
ward which  their  works  merit,
whether  they  be  good  or  evil.

I  realize  that  I  am  a  feeble  man —
that  I  am  nothing  more  than  a  worm
that  crawls  upon  the  earth,  except
when  God  is  with  me. The  more  I


CULTIVATION  OF  THE

see  of  myself,  the  more  I  am  satisfied
that  I  am  a  poor,  weak,  frail  man.
We  are  all  poor  creatures  without
God,  If  you  do  not  believe  it,  look
back  into  the  world  and  see  the  con-
dition of  things.  They  have  no  re-
gard  for  honesty  among  them,  speak-
ing of  them  as  a  community ;  but  of
course  there  are  persons  among  them
that  are  honest — individuals  who  are
the  elect  of  God  :  they  will  eventually
be  gathered.

Those  who  have  been  sent  amor^
us  by  the  Federal  Government  as
officers  were  men  who  did  not  care
for  the  people.  They  have  always
manifested  a  great  anxiety  for  the
gold  and  silver,  but  none  iov  the  in-  i
terest  through  this  community.  Now,
this  should  not  be  so  with  us;  our
desire  and  labour  should  be  to  learn
the  principles  of  integrity — to  live  up
to  our  covenants  made  in  the  house  of
God.  If  we  do  this,  no  power  can
overcome  us,  but  we  shall  prevail

I  have  passed  through  a  great
many  trying  scenes.  I  have  been
driven  and  roott  !  up  every  time  that
this  Church  has  been  removed  from
its  gathering-place  by  its  enemies.
I  have  also  had  the  experience  of
seeing  armies  come  up  against  us  in
Caldwell  county,  Missouri,  when  we
could  not  raise  above  five  hundred
half-armed  men  to  defend  the  county,
and  the  Governor,  L.  W.  Boggs,
ordered  out  as  many  as  fourteen  thou-
sand troops  against  us.  At  that
time,  it  looked  as  though  we  should
be  destroyed  from  the  earth  ;  but  the
Almighty  was  on  our  side.  When  I
saw  the  condition  that  we  were  in,  I
concluded  that  it  would  be  hot  times;
so  I  put  a  heavy  charge  in  my  United
States  musket,  only  expecting  to  get
one  chance  to  fire,  and  felt  determined
that  it  should  be  a  dead  shot  to  some*
body.  We  all  felt  very  queer,  for  there
was  no  other  prospect  before  us  than  '
that  of  immediate  assassination ;  but  \
of  a  sudden,  as  by  a  shock  from  all  i


SPIRIT  OF  TRUTH,  ETC-  53

heaven,  our  enemies  were  panic
stricken,  and  retreated  in  confusion*
Brother  Wells  can  tell  you  about  the
Battle  of  Nauvoo,  for  he  was  there  and
took  an  active  part  in  it.

When  the  Church  was  thus  broken
up,  we  used  to  go  forth  from  State  to
Strife  preaching  the  Gospel  to  all  who
would  hear.  We  did  not  preach  the
gathering  at  those  times,  because
there  was  no  place  to  gather  to  :  the
Prophets  and  Apostles  themselves  had
to  flee  for  their  lives.  In  all  these
trying  scenes  the  Lord  sustained  us,
and  he  gave  us  favour  in  another
county  and  also  in  another  nation.
These  things  have  existed  from  the
organization  of  the  Church  ;  but  in
the  midst  of  all,  I  never  felt  dis*
couraged,  neither  did  I  feel  to  shrink
from  any  duty  that  was  imposed
upon  me,  I  knew  that  God  was  with
us.  that  he  was  with  his  Prophet,  and
with  all  good  men.  We  were  faith-
ful at  that  time,  and  those  that  con-
tinued faithful  through  those  trials
still  remain  with  us ;  and  my
Heavenly  Father  knows  that  I  respect
them,  and  I  ever  shall  respect  them
while  I  remain  in  the  body  and  con-
tinue in  the  spirit  of  my  calling.

Now,  you  all  know  pretty  well  how
the  Lord  worked  it  with  that  army
which  the  United  States  Government
sent  here  to  scatter  this  people  to  the
four  winds  of  heaven.  They  sent
their  minions  to  make  war  with  the
house  of  God,  and  he  took  the  battle
into  his  own  hands  and  kept  our
enemies  at  bay.  Some  of  you  make
remarks  about  our  having  no  temple ;
but  what  of  that  ?  Was  it  not  so  in
the  days  of  Moses  ?  Yes,  it  was.  The
Israelites  were  left  with  a  Tabernacle
and  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  but  still
the  Lord  fought  their  battles,  he
defended  them  against  their  enemies,
he  brought  them  off  victoriously,  he
severely  scourged  their  oppressors;
and  he  will  do  the  same  in  the
I  present  dispensation  ?  if  we  are  faith-


54  JOUHNAL  OF

ful  to  the  covenants  we  have  made.
Have  rot  the  ungodly  made  war  with
the  people  of  God  ?  And  was  not
that  equivalent  to  declaring  war  with
our  Father  in  heaven,  and  with  Jesus
Christ  his  Son,  and  with  his  king-
dom, with  a  design  to  overthrow  it,
kill  his  Prophets  and  Apostles,  and
put  to  death  his  anointed  ones,  and
also  every  Saint  that  would  not  sub-
mit to  then1  lasciviousness,  to  their
vices,  and  corrupting  and  damning
pi^actices  ?  Yes,  brethren,  the  United
States  have  done  all  this,  and  much
more  that  would  be  painful  to  recite.

Some  of  them  talk  sometimes
about  brother  Brigkam  crooking  his
liitle  linger,  and  have  told  that  if  he
were  to  do  that,  no  Gentile  would  be
permitted  to  live  any  longer  among
i?sL  When  the  enemies  of  righteous-  I
ne.ss  came  here,  they  became  so  afraid
of  the  Saints  that  thev  dared  not  let  a
man  out  of  their  ranks ;  they  were
almost  terrified  to  dentil  ;  they  went
down  among  the  cedars,  and  there
they  have  been  ever  since,  and  there
they  will  remain  until  they  go  away,
which  won  t  be  long.  How  awfully
they  weio  disappointed,  as  well  as
those  who  came  here  to  rale  us !  They
have  not  any  of  them  accomplished
what  they  designed,  lor  the  man  or  the
woman  that  falls  in  with  such  spirits
is  not  our  brother  or  our  sister.
Who  is  our  brother?  He  that
doe  tlx  the  will  of  our  Father  who  is
in  heaven,  and  none  else,  |
•  Now  think  of  these  things,  reflect
upon  them  ;  and  so  sure  as  you  have
seen  a  few  things,  so  surely  will  you,
in  the  Lord's  own  due  time,  see  many
more,  and  you  will  see  that  our
Father  will  deliver  his  people  every
time  their  enemies  come  upon  them.
Yes,  it  will  be  so  from  this  time  forth
and  forever.  Then,  in  addition  to
this,  you  will  find  that  '[this  Priest-
hood, through  those  who  hold  it  in
righteousness,  will  rule  the  nations  of
the  earth  forever  and  forever.  Will


DISCOURSES.

those  who  hold  the  Priesthood
govern  with  a  rod  of  tyranny?
No;  but  it  will  be  done  by  the  power
of  the  Priesthood  of  the  Almighty,
which  is  compared  to  an  iron  rod.
The  nations  will  eventually  have  to
come  and  bow  down  before  this
Priesthood  and  to  this  people,  and
they  will  be  willing  to  lick  the  very
dust  off  their  feet ;  yes,  and  they  will
be  perfectly  willing  to  lick  the  dust
from  the  feet  of  those  men  whom
they  slew  in  Carthage,  if  they  can
be  permitted  to  be  in  their  presence.

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  feel  very
comfortable,  generous,  and  kind  to-
day, and  1  feel  lhat  there  is  a  good
Spirit  here.  You  wi  1 1  all  feel  better
when  you  get  rid  of  your  contracted-
ness.  Let  the  womb  of  your  mind
I  be  expanded  to  receive  the  words  of
life,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God  will  be  in  you  as  a  well  of  water
springing  up  into  everlasting  life.

To  you,  sisters,  especially  the  young
ladies,  I  want  to  say,  Away  with  your
folly.  Put  away  far  from  you  all
pride  and  all  lightmindedness,  and
trust  in  the  Lord  your  God,  and  let
the  petition  of  your  heart  and  the
supplication  of  your  soul  be  life,
life — eternal  life  !

There  are  many  good  books  for
ynn  to  read,  and  that  are  full  of
good  instruction.  Here  are  the  Bible,
the  Book  of  Mormon,  and  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  You  will
see  many  revelations  in  the  last-
named  book  that  are  already  fulfilled,
and  there  are  others  that  are  still  in
the  future.  The  Almighty  through
his  Prophets  foretold  that  the  nation
would  make  war  upon  this  people,
and  that  he  would  come  out  of  his
hidiugplace,  and  pour  out  his  judg-
ments upon  those  that  rebel  against
him,  and  who  persecuted  his  people,
and  set  themselves  against  his  house.
Then  it  shall  go  forth  like  a  mighty
whirlwind  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
cfti'th.


BLESSINGS  ENJOYED  BY  THE  SAINTS.


In  this  country  the  North  and
the  South  will  exert  themselves
against  each  other,  and  ere  long  the
whole  face  of  the  United  States  will
be  in  commotion,  fighting  one  against
another,  and  they  will  destroy  their
nationality.  They  have  never  done
anything  for  this  people,  and  1  don't
Relieve  they  ever  will.  I  have  never
prayed  for  the  destruction  of  this
Government,  hut  I  know  that  disso-
lution, sorrow,  weeping,  and  distress
are  in  store  for  the  inhabitants  of  the
United  States,  because  of  their  con-
duct towards  the  people  of  God.
Then  the  judgments  will  go  forth  to
the  nations  of  the  earth.  I  have  an
understanding  of  these  tilings,  and  I
sincerely  hope  that  you  comprehend
as  clearly  as  I  do.  If  you  do,  you  j
will  strive  to  prepare  for  those  things
that  are  coming  upon  the  earth  in
these  last  days.

I  would  like  you  all  to  become  like
a  vine,  or  like  auto  a  tree,  every
limb,  branch,  twig,  fibre,  and  leaf  to
be  connected  one  with  the  other.

Now,  in  regard  to  the  Spirit  of
prophecy,  I  will  say  that  we  may  all  1


55

prophesy,  if  we  will  wait  till  we  are
sure  we  are  right.  Brethren,  God
bless  you  with  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,
and  may  peace  be  with  you  all,  and
may  the  blessings  of  heaven  rest
npon  these  mountains  and  valleys  for
the  benefit  of  the  faithful  Saints.

When  I  look  around,  I  see  many
fchi1  ;u'>  that  I  do  not  like:  I  do  not
like  to  think  of  circumstances  that
have  taken  place  within  the  last  few
days.  I  '1  •»  not  like  the  idea  of
having  thieves  in  our  midst,  but  we
certainly  have  them,  and  I  pray  God
Almighty  to  root  them  out  of  the
earth,  and  to  let  them  go  into  forget-
fulness,  and  let  all  Israel  say  Amen.
(The  congregation  responded  Amen.)

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  pray  our
Father  in  heaven  to  give  you  liberally
of  his  Spirit,  that  you  may  be  led
and  guided  thereby  in  the  way  of
righteousness  and  truth,  and  in  the
end  of  your  probation  be  exalted  in
the  presence  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,  which  I  ask  for  you  and  all  the
faithful,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
Amen.


•


BLESSINGS  ENJOYED  BY  THE  SAINTS.

Remark*  by  Elder  Wilfohd  Woodruff,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Grea

Salt  Lake  Ciiy,  May  12,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


Brethren  and  sisters,  after  the
congregation  receiving  so  much  in-
structions, I  feel  that  I  shall  make
my  remarks  wry  brief.  1 1  is  truly
good  to  sit  and  hear  the  word  of  the
Lord,  and  it  ia  truly  a  good  thing  to
believe  in  it ;  but  it  is  still  better  to
practise  it.


I  have  reflected  to-day,  as  I  fre-
quently do,  with  regard  to  the  mercy
of  God  and  his  loving-kindness  to  the
children  of  men.  The  positions  that
the  children  of  men  occupy  with
regard  to  the  difference  there  is  in
the  minds  of  men  on  the  subject  of
religion  and  the  character  of  God  is


56  JOUBNAL  OF

t  •*  *  *  *

an  important  one.  I  have  considered
the  responsibility  that  rests  upon  men
in  regard  to  these  things.  There
seems  to  be  very  few  that  really  have
faith  in  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers.
If  we  judge  them  by  their  works,  we
must  certainly  come  to  this  ronelu-
sion.  It  is  certainly  a  great  blessing
to  this  people  that  they  have  faith  in
God  and  in  the  promises  of  our
Heavenly  Father.  1

Truth  is  one  of  the  attributes  of
the  Almighty,  and  what  he  promises
he  will  fulfil.  Now,  if  the  children
of  men  believed  this,  they  could  save
themselves  a  great  deal  of  trouble.
If  those  who  embrace  the  Gospel
could  have  confidence  to  abide  in  the
truth,  they  would  escape  many  trying
scenes  through  which  the  wicked  will
have  to  pass.  The  trouble  that  awaits
this  nation,  and  that  other  nations
have  had  to  pass  through  in  various
ages  that  are  past,  has  been  because
they  have  had  no  confidence  in  the
Lord.  They  have  nut  obeyed  him,
but  have  turned  from  him — rejected
the  counsel  given  to  them.  It  will
be  precisely  so  with  this  nation  when
their  afflictions  begin  to  come  upon
them,  for  the  Lord  will  be  avenged.
We  can  now  see  the  words  of  the
Lord  and  his  Prophets  fulfilling
before  our  eyes.

This  is  a  peculiar  generation — a  i
singular  time  in  which  we  live.
There  seems  to  be  a  great  deal  of  the
word  of  the  Lord  fulfilling  in  our  day
and  age  of  the  world.  We  profess
to  acknowledge  the  hand  of  the  Lord
in  what  we  see  around  us,  and  I  trust
•TO  do  it  in  our  hearts.  We  have
read,  many  years  ago,  the  promise
contained  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants  concerning  the  nation
in  which  we  live.  The  Lord  said,  in
the  early  rise  of  this  Church,  in
speaking  of  this  land,  that  we  should
hear  of  wars  abroad  ;  but  at  the  same
time  we  should  not  know  the  hearts
of  the  children  of  men  in  our  own


DISCOURSES.

country.  And  the  commandment
was  to  his  people  to  prepare  them-
selves to  stand  in  holy  places  when
the  indignation  of  the  Almighty
should  be  passing  over  the  earth*
We  now  see  these  things  coming  to
pass.  They  are  plain  and  clear  before
our  eyes*  We  have  a  part  fulfilled  ;
and  as  truth  is  one  of  the  attributes
of  the  Almighty,  everything  that  ho
says  he  will  fulfil.  The  promise  is  to
the  whole  world — "  He  that  belie veth
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  and  ho
that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned. "
Tliis  promise  is  &ire ;  and  if  the  Lord
fulfils  in  one  instance,  he  will  in
another.  He  will  save  the  people  if
they  will  obey  him;  and  if  they  do
not  he  will  not  save  them,  but  they
will  have  to  reap  the  reward  that  is
due  them  for  their  works.

I  consider  that  it  is  a  blessing  that
I  have  the  opportunity  of  believing
in  the  Gospel  and  in  the  word  of  the
Lord.  I  believe  in  them,  and  rejoice
to  know  that  they  are  true,  and  that
they  will  be  fulfilled,  I  bear  my
testimony  to  the  truth  of  thi.s  (iospel.
I  also  testify  that  Joseph  Smith  was
a  Prophet  uf  the  Lord.  I  know  thig
as  well  as  I  do  that  I  exist.  I  know
by  inspiration  and  by  the  revelations
of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  manifesta-
tions of  the  Spirit  of  God  from  year
to  year  and  from  time  to  time.  I
likewise  see  around  me  the  fulfilment
of  prophecy,  and  this  tends  to
strengthen  me,  and  also  every  Latter,
day  Saint  The  Scriptures  tell  us
that  there  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  that
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
giveth  it  understanding.  It  is  upon
this  principle  that  we  become  ac-
quainted with  the  truth,  and  the
power  of  the  Gospel  which  we  have
received.  The  principles  of  eternal
life  are  manifested  unto  us  by  the  in-
spiration of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  for  that
Spirit  rests  upon  us — it  influences  our
minds ;  and  if  we  watch  those  teachings,
having  within  us  the  right  feeling,


ELESSIM,S KV JOYED  BY  THE  SAINTS,


we  shall  comprehend  things  clearly
as  they  are.  We  can  see  the  Lord
speaking  to  the  nations  and  vexing
them  in  his  hot  displeasure,  and  still
many  eat,  drink,  and  are  satisfied,
and  do  not  appear  to  be  as  energetic
and  active  as  they  might  be.  It  is
our  duty  to  be  alive  and  wide-awake
to  the  times,  for  the  things  that  are
tran  spiring  are  joyful,  because  in  them
we  see  the  accomplishment  and  fulfil-
ment of  the  predictions  of  the  Pro-
phets of  God  that  have  lived  in  this
generation.  The  things  we  are  ex*
periencing  now  are  attended  with
salvation,  and  are  preparing  us  to
magnify  our  callings  and  fulfilling
the  object  of  our  ereation  upon  the
earth.

I  always  rejoice  in  seeing  my
fellow-men  come  to  a  knowledge  of
the  truth  by  obedience  to  the  Gospel
as  taught  by  the  servants  of  the  Lord.
When  men  have  gone  forth  in  the
waters  of  baptism,  and  received  the
laying  on  of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  they  receive  the  same
truth,  the  same  light  as  we  have  re-
ceived ;  and  thus  we  become  of  one
heart  and  one  mind,  and  follow  out
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost
which  attend  his  Gospel.  In  preach-
ing the  Gospel  and  administering  the
ordinances  of  the  Lord's  house,  the
Spirit  of  inspiration  of  heaven  ac-
companies those  who  officiate,  that  it
will  remain  ever  with  them,  if  faith-
ful, in  all  the  duties  of  life.

When  I  hear  the  brethren  speak  of
the  dealings  of  God  with  the  present
generation,  I  perceive  that  their  minds
all  run  together.  The  record  which
they  bear  is  one ;  they  all  agree  in
their  testimony;  ihey  are  one  in
stating  that  the  work  of  the  Lord  our
God  will  prevail  over  all  its  enemies.
But  it  is  a  calamity,  as  we  look  at  it
naturally,  for  the  generation  in  which
we  live,  that  the  Gospel  is  pre<lched
fed  by  them  rejected ;  in  consequence
ot  which  the  Spirit  is  taken  from


them,  because  they  follow  the  devices
of  their  own  hearts  and  their  wicked
imaginations.  They  follow  the  de-
vices of  the  Evil  One,  and  they  spread
it  broadcast,  as  it  were,  the  cross
which  brings  death  and  destruction,
which  brings  sorrow  and  mourning ;
and  this  is  the  case  with  many  in  the
present  day  and  age  of  the  world-
There  is  not  a  man  to-day  that  has
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  that  is
faithful  in  his  calling,  but  what  can
see  the  state  of  things  both  in  and
out  of  the  Church.  He  can  see  them
with  his  eyes,  and  hear  them  with  his
ears,  and  they  can  see  the  hand  of
God  thrown  over  this  people  to-day.

I  rejoice  in  the  blessings  that  the
Lord  gives,  and  I  feel  that  we  ought
to  be  faithful.  If  there  are  anybody
who  are  blessed  of  the  Lord,  it  is  the
Latter-day  Saints ;  and  if  there  are
anybody  upon  the  earth  who  are  and
should  be  willing  to  obey  counsel,  it
is  the  Saints  of  the  living  God.  We
have  reaped  the  benefit  of  it  for  years,
and  we  know  that  it  brings  forth  joy,
peace,  and  consolation  to  the  souls  of
men ;  and  we  would  certainly  be  very
foolish  to  turn  away  from  the  only
source  that  will  bring  us  joy,  salva-
tion, and  eternal  life.  To  do  this,
we  should  have  to  turn  our  backs
upon  the  only  friends  we  have,  and
shut  up  the  only  source  from  which
we  draw  the  blessings  we  have  in
this  life.

The  world  really  do  not  know
what  they  are  doing;  they  don't
comprehend  what  lies  before  them;
they  judge  after  the  hearing  of  tho
ear,  and  while  calamities  will  over-
take the  wicked,  as  the  Lord  has
spoken,  we  have  something  to  hold
on  to  and  to  rely  upon.  We  have
seen  the  hand  dealings  of  the
Almighty  with  us ;  we  have  learned
his  promises.  Has  he  broken  his
promises  to  his  people  ?  He  has  not ;
he  has  been  faithful  and  time.  I
firmly  believe  that  we  shall  partake


58


JOtTBXAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


of  all  the  blessings  of  the  kingdom
of  God  by  obeying  the  counsel  of
those  set  over  us,  for  I  know  that
God  has  established  a  government
to  control,  to  guide,  and  to  dictate;
and  we  shall  not  find  so  peifect  a
government  as  this  in  any  part  of  the
earth,  for  it  is  the  government  of
heaven,

I  desire  that  we  may  have  power
and  a  disposition  to  live  faithful  to-
day, to  do  right,  to  obey  counsel,
that  whatever  we  are  told  to  do  we
may  unite  together  and  do  with  all
our  hearts.  If  there  is  strength  any-
where, it  is  here.  If  it  does  not  exist
here,  it  does  not  exist  anywhere.
There  is  no  spirit  of  friendship  in
the  world ;  it  has  taken  the  wings  of
the  morning  and  flown  away  from
many  of  the  nations,  and  the  blessings
of  the  Lord  are  being  withdrawn  in
a  great  measure  from  the  nations  of
the  earth.  The  people  have  no  dis-
position to  obey  that  which  is  right,
or  give  the  servants  of  God  an  op-
portunity of  preaching  the  truth  for
the  salvation  of  fallen  man.  Those
who  despise  those  blessings  and  pri-
vileges will  find  that  the  consequences
and  reward  will  follow.

I  feel  thankful  that  we  are  here  in
the  valleys  of  the  mountains ;  and  I
rejoice  that  we  are  at  peace,  and  not
obliged  to  fortify  Great  Salt  Lake
City,  as  the  people  are  obliged  to  do
in  Washington  ;  nor  is  our  President
compelled  to  flee  to  Canada  to  save


his  life*  We  are  safe  and  in  quietude.
The  enemies  of  this  kingdom  do  not
understand  the  spirit  and  power  of
the  Gospel.  It  is  a  spirit  and  a
power  that  they  cannot  cope  with,
and  it  is  so  with  all  the  sectarian
world.  We  have  the  privilege  of
lying  down  and  of  rising  up  in  peace  ;
we  have  the  privilege  of  bowing  in
our  families  in  peace,  and  getting  up
and  speaking  our  sentiments,  and
none  to  make  us  afraid.

These  are  great  blessings  that  we  as
a  people  enjoy.  I  bear  my  testimony
that  these  things  are  true  and  faith-
ful. You  know  these  things  as  well
as  I  do,  and  every  man  who  lives  his
religion  knows  it.  The  Lord  is  with
his  people,  and  this  kingdom  will
spread  abroad.  And  when  the  Lord
has  destroyed  the  wicked,  there  will
be  room  for  Zion  to  spread  herself
abroad,  and  to  rebuild  the  waste  places
thereof.  Then  all  things  spoken  of
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants will  be  fulfilled.  It  is  good  to
reflect  upon  these  principles,  for  the
promises  will  be  fulfilled,  whether  we
believe  them  or  not,

I  pray  God  to  guide  us,  that  we
may  be  prepared  to  partake  of  eternal
life  and  salvation,  and  share  in  all
the  benefits  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,
and  of  the  Holy  Priesthood  which
has  been  revealed  to  us  in  our  day
and  generation,  which  I  ask  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


BUILDING  UP  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC.


59


BUILDING  UP  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD— HOME  MANU-
FACTURES.

jDipCOiwse  ly  President  Daniel  H,  Wells,  made  at  Logan  C ihj ,  September

10th,  1861.


HEPOHTED  BY  G, I).  WATT.


I  appear  before  you  this^morning
with  grateful  feelings  to  our  Heavenly
Father  for  the  privilege  we  mutually
enjoy  in  beholding  the  dawning  light
of  so  good  a  day  for  Israel.

Brother  Kimball,  when  he  bade
me  good-bye,  as  I  started  from  the
city  un  this  visit,  wished  me  to  say  to
the  people  for  him,  *'  God  bless
them  !"  and  brother  Brigham  blesses
the  people  continually ;  our  t  at  her  m
heaven  blesses  them ;  the  heavens  are
full  of  blessings  for  them.  Why,
then,  should  we  not  be  the  most
happy  of  all  people?  While  the
earth  is  full  of  turmoil  and  strife,  the
people  in  these  mountains  dwell  in
peace,  and  are  blessed  with  unparal-
lelled  prosperity.  They  have  that
joy  and  peace,  that  satisfaction  and
quietness  that  proceeds  from  God,
which  could  not  be  enjoyed  in  any
other  part  of  the  world,  or  among  any
other  people  under  the  most  favour-
able circumstances.

We  have  been  called  together  from
different  parts  of  the  world  for  the
great  and  special  work  of  building  up
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
to  establish  a  nucleus  of  righteousness
from  which  shall  radiate  every  great,
good,  and  holy  principle  to  all  parts
of  the  habitable  world.  It  is  our
privilege  to  bear  an  important  part  in
this  great  work.  The  Gospel  of  sal-
vation has  been  promulgated — has
reached our  ears  where  we  dwelt


among  different  nations  and  coun-
tries, and  has  brought  us  to  these
mountain  regions.  And  now  what  is
our  duty?  Shall  we  be  like  the
world  from  which  we  have  been
gathered  out  ?  If  this  is  our  intention,
we  might  as  well  have  stayed  in  our
native  country,  where  we  could  have
ripened  for  destruction  as  well  as
here.  But  if  we  have  essayed  to  be  ser-
vants of  the  Most  High,  to  be  his
children,  to  be  his  chosen  and  pecu-
liar people,  and  for  which  purpose  we
are  gathered  out  from  among  the  Gen-
tile nations,  let  us  not  do  as  they  do,
but  let  us  do  according  to  the  high
behest  of  Heaven,  who  has  given  us
an  appointment,  and  called  us  forth
to  build  up  iiis  kingdom  in  these  last
days.  Let  us  follow  implicitly  the
instructions  of  those  whom  God  has
appointed  to  guide  our  minds  and
direct  our  steps ;  or,  to  use  other
words,  let  us  believe  our  religion  and
faithfully  live  it.  Do  we  believe
fully  that  God  our  Father  has  ap-
pointed men  whom  he  influences  day
by  day  to  lead  forth  his  people,  and
direct  them  in  all  their  spiritual  and
temporal  labours  ?  and  do  we  so
order  our  course  as  to  correspond  with
the  instructions  given  us  ?  Or  do  we
suppose  we  can  entirely  take  our  own
way  in  temporal  matters,  according
to  the  traditions  of  our  fathers  and
the  dictations  of  the  spirit  of  the
world,  and  at  the  same  time  please


t


GO


journal  of  DiscornsBg.


high  Heaven,  and  do  our  duty  faith-
fully in  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God  ?  We  think  in  spiritual
"  Mormonism  "  we  need  direction  and
constant  instruction  by  the  authorized
servants  of  God ;  but  we  think  wo
know  as  much  about  temporal  affairs
as  anybody.  We  rejoice  in  the  know-
ledge that  has  been  revealed  from  the
heavens  to  us ;  we  rejoice  in  the  word
of  the  Lord  that  has  gone  forth ;  we
rejoice  that  God  has  spoken  in  these
last  days,  and  that  we  have  received
these  most  valuable  instructions — that
we  have  receive: d  the  knowledge  that
leads  to  life  and  salvation,  and  to  ex-
altation in  his  kingdom.  But  do  we
realize  that  God's  kingdom  in  the  lat-
ter days  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes
a  temporal  kingdom  ?  And  do  we
realize  that  if  we  had  stayed  in  the
world  we  could  have  served  him
spiritually  there  as  well  as  here  ?
But  what  kind  of  a  kingdom  would
that  have  been  for  the  Saviour  to  rule
over  when  he  comes?  When  he
conies,  he  is  going  to  reign  over  a
temporal  kingdom,  composed  of  men
and  women  who  do  his  will  on  the
earth.  Everything  that  pertains  to
US  iii  our  life  is  temporal,  and  over  us  |
and  all  we  possess  our  Heavenly
Father  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  will
reign,  as  well  as  over  all  the  kingdoms
of  the  world  when  they  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his  Christ.

To  build  up  Zion  is  a  temporal
labour  ;  it  does  not  consist  simply  in
teaching  :  teaching  is  to  instruct  us
how  to  properly  apply  our  labour,  the
sooner  and  better  to  accomplish  the
end  in  view.  Bone  and  sinew  is  re-
quired to  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God  in  the  last  days.  When  Jesus
Christ  was  upon  the  earth,  he  said —
"  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  :
if  my  kingdom  were  of  this  world,
then  would  my  servants  fight,  that  I
should  not  be  delivered  to  the  Jews  :
but  now  is  my  kingdom  not  from
hence/* It  was  not  of  this  world.


then  ;  but  it  remained  to  be  in  the
latter  days,  and  then  his  servants  will
w  age  a  warfare  against  the  powers  of
Satan,  both  visible  and  invisible.
The  Saints  are  now  engaged  in  that
warfare ;  they  have  to  fight  against
the  evil  influences  that  attend  upon
their  footsteps  day  by  day,  and  tlion
have  to  fight  against  his  inclining
them  to  do  evil,  and  against  a]l  evil
powers,  and  to  root  them  out  from
their  midst.  They  have  also  to  con-
tend against  the  powers  of  darkness
whirh  apgpar  in  human  beings,
causing  them  to  come  up  in  the  shape
of  mobs  to  fight  against  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High.  This  is  a  temporal
warfare  as  well  in  which  we  are  en*
gaged.  The  Devil  has  held  the  con-
trol of  the  earth.  Under  his  influence
the  people  have  built  up  cities,  col-
leges, and  institutions  of  every  de-
scription, and  traverse  the  earth  and
seas  to  amass  money  to  sustain  them.
We  have  been  gathered  out  to  form  a
nucleus  of  power  to  take  the  kingdom,
overcome  evil  with  good,  tread
wickedness  under  our  feet,  and  exalt
righteousness  upon  the  mountain  tops,
that  the  power,  the  wealth,  and
earthly  prosperity  may  be  taken  from
the  powers  of  the  Devil  and  placed
within  the  power  and  control  of  a
righteous  people  where  it  belongs.
What  can  we  do  to  promote  this  great
cause,  to  redeem  the  earth  from  sin,
from  hell,  and  from  the  Devil,  and
make  it  a  habitation  for  Saints  and
angels  ?  This  is  a  question  that
comes  home  to  us  alL  The  best  an-
swer that  can  be  given  to  it  is,  Do  ac-
cording to  the  instructions  of  him
whom  the  Loid  has  appointed  to  lead
us.  He  says,  "  Go  to  with  your
might  and  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God,  by  quarrying  the  rock,  by  bring-
ing the  timber  from  the  kanyons  and
making  it  into  lumber,  by  making
adobies,  mixing  the  mortar,  burning
the  lime,  and  drawing  from  the  ele-
ments around  us  the  material  neces*


BUILDING  UP  OP  THE

sary  to  beautify  and  build  up,  and  to
exalt  in  every  way  those  principles
that  essay  to  establish  righteousness
over  the  whole  earth."  If  the  word
is  to  build  forts,  build  them ;  if  to
raise  grain,  raise  grain.  It  is  needful
to  do  these  things  because  our  society
is  composed  of  men,  women,  and
children,  the  same  as  other  commu-
nities of  people.  Like  other  people,
w  e  must  have  food  and  raiment,  houses
to  live  in,  and  the  common  creature
comforts.  We  have  come  to  these
distant  valleys  to  improve,  not  to  de-
base ourselves  to  the  level  of  the
savages  around  us  :  we  have  come
here  purposely  to  advance,  not  to  take
the  retrograde  path, — to  exalt  our-
selves in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and
seek  to  exalt  others  to  our  standard
of  holiness7  and  goodness.  It  is,  then,
for  us  to  aspire  constantly  to  a  *  still
higher  standard  in  the  scale  of  human
existence,  exalting  with  us  those  with
whom  we  are  associated.  We  need
everything  that  other  people  need,  ex-
cept sin,  and  no  people  need  that.
We  need  everything  else  that  is  ne-
cessary to  build  up  any  other  king-
dom, and  we  have  to  produce  it  from
the  elements  with  which  we  are  sur-
rounded. We  have  been  brought  far
from  the  wicked  world,  to  give  us  an
opportunity  to  show  that  we  will  do
it,  or  that  we  will  not  doit. — t  i  [>im\v
our  integrity  to  the  cause  of  right-
eousness and  to  God — to  prove  to  him
that  we  will  struggle  to  obtain  the
knowledge  and  the  ability  to  create
the  means  of  our  own  subsistence-* tli at
we  will  struggle  to  subdue  the  ele-
ments, to  sanctify  the  earth,  chase
nnholiness  from  it,  and  beautify  it  by
building  up  beautiful  places,  orna-
menting our  grounds,  cultivating
fruits  of  every  variety  that  will  flou-  j
rish  in  our  country,  and  thus  bless
ourselves  with  the  blessings  the  Al-
mighty has  placed  within  our  reach,
and  prove  to  him  that  we  are  w  illing
to  abide  his  high  behest,  acknow-  !


KINGDOM  OP  GOD,  ETC*  61

lodging  that  he  throws  in  our  way  all
these  advantages,  and  by  our  works
show  that  we  are  willing  to  make  all
our  efforts  point  to  the  building  up  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  prove  to  the
world  that  we  are  more  exalted  in  our
attainments  and  more  elevated  in  our
notions  than  they  are ;  and  finally  we
will  make  ourselves  independent  of
every  people  and  nation  upon  the
earth.

When  our  Father  in  heaven  finds
he  has  got  a  people  who  stand  as  a
unit  in  favour  of  his  kingdom,  and
have  made  themselves  free  and  inde-
pendent, will  he  not  he  pleased
with  that  people  :  It  is  a  long
time  since  he  has  had  such  a  people.
It  is  our  privilege  to  be  that  people,
and  be  acknowledged  of  God  as  his
people.  Then  it  becomes  us  to  be
watchful,  careful,  energetic,  and  dili-
gent in  endeavouring  to  bring  to  pass
Ins  purposes  according  to  his  mind
and  good  pleasure.

Here  are  the  fat  vallies  of  Ephraim.
From  the  elements  that  are  strewn
around  us  in  rich  profusion  we  can
gain  our  entire  support.  We  can
raise  the  fla\\  the  wool,  the1  cotton,
the  bread,  the  fruit,  and  sugar.  We
can  dig  out  the  iron  ore,  and  the  cop-
per, and  the  lead,  and  mould  these
minerals  to  our  wants,  and  make
them  administer  to  our  comfort  and
convenience.  One  can  accomplish
one  thing,  and  another  can  accomplish
something  else.  When  our  labour  is
properly  directed,  one  man  will  go  at
this  employment,  and  another  at  that,
to  bring  forth  the  things  necessary
for  our  mutual  convenience  and  com-
fort.  When  we  ace  willing  to  abide
the  instructions  &£onr  leaders,  and
bring  to  our  aid*tne  knowledge  we
have  received  in  the  countries  from
which  we  have  been  gathered,  all  will
then  conspire  to  one  end — namely,  for
the  building  up  of  the  kingdom  of
God.  In  the  northern  parts  of  this
Territory  we  can  produce  things  that


i;2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUHSKS-


they  cannot  so  well  produce  in  the
southern  portions.  Last  spring  wo
visited  the  son  them  settlements.
There  they  can  raise  choice  fruits
that  alone  will  flourish  in  southern
climates ;  thc*y  can  also  raise  cotton
better  than  we  can,  and  you  can
raise  wool  better  than  they.  In  this
way  we  can  create  an  exchange  of
commodities  between  the  north  and
the  south,  make  our  cotton  and  wool-
len cloth  at  home,  and  not  be  too
proud  to  wear  it  when  we  have  made
it  ,  I'

In  the  revelations  of  God  to
Joseph  Smith,  jun.,  we  read — "  And
again,  thou  shalt  not  be  proud  in  thy
heart.  Let  all  thy  garments  be  plain,
and  their  beauty  the  beauty  of  the
work  of  thine  own  hands ;  and  let  all
things  be  done  in  cleanliness  before
me,"  We  can  get  the  furs  in  these
mountains  to  make  the  most  beauti-
ful hats,  ami  the  most  durable.  From
the  countries  north- west  of  us  the
Hudson  Bay  Company  supplj'  nearly
all  Europe*  with  the  choicest  of  furs.
Shall  wo  first  send  the  furs  to  hell,
and  then  ha  ve  them  freighted  back  to
us  In*  (Jentile  speculators  at  a  great
expense,  in  the  shape  of  hats  for  us
to  wear?  Get  the  fur  and  make  our
own  hats.  And  so  with  our  leather,
and  our  , boots  and  shoes,  and  so  with
every^i:!^  {s  neecssriry  for  our
happiness  and  comfort.*

Heretofore  we  have  been  sorely
taxed  :  onr  life  blood  has  Ijeen  drawn
from  us — our  circulating  medium  is
continually  drawn  away  for  those
articles  which  we  can  produce -our-
selves. That  woman  that  makes  a
yard  of  cloth  accomplishes  a  good
work  towards  building  up  the  in-
dependence of  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  by  her  works  her  faith  is  made
manifest.

That  man  who  raises  a  small  patch
of  flax,  prepares  it  for  the  spinning-
wheel,  procures  the  wheel  and  loom,
and  is  diligent  in  having  his  wives


and  daughters  learn  to  convert  the
flax  into  thread  and  cloth,  is  labour-
ing in  the  right  way  to  permanently
establish  the  kingdom  of  God.  Thit
will  not  only  apply  to  flax,  but  wool,
and  every  other  production  natural  to
our  country.  In  this  way  both  men
and  women  and  children  are  accom-
plishing the  purpose  for  which  they
have  been  gathered  out  from  their
native  places  into  these  distant
valleys.  *

I  have  said  that  we  have  a  warfare:
to  wage.  Guns  and  pistols  are
brought  here,  and  can  be  had  some-
times at  low  prices.  Such  weapons
are  necessary  in  the  warfare  in  which
we  are  engaged.  We  have  attempted
to  make  powder,  and  with  perse-
verance and  skill  I  have  no  doubt  a
plentiful supply can be  produced


We  are  now  successfully  mo  kins
paper.  You  will  soon  receive  the
Deserit  News  printed  on  paper  made
here.  You  can  aid  and  assist  in  this
species  of  home  production  by  saving
carefully  your  rags  for  the  paper
manufactory.  In  the  manufacture  of
paper  we  check  the  outward  flow  of
one  stream  of  gold  that  has  hereto-
fore gone  to  enrich  the  Gentiles.

We  are  also  successfully  making
nails*  Our  machinery  is  of  the  most
approved  kind,  and  can  produce  them
in  great  quantities.  1

We  can  also  produce  our  linseed
oil  from  the  flax-seed.  The  oil  made
here  is  of  fine  quality.

•President  Young  has  imported
several  splendid  carding  machines
for  the  carding  of  wool.  He  has
taken  no  little  pains  in  importing  the
most  useful  machinery  to  meet  our
present  wants.  Is  it  not  better  to
spend  our  means  in  this  way  than  to
spend  it  for  imported  goods  of  an
inferior  quality  ?

I  wish  to  say  a  few  words  to  those
engaged in  the military in  this
There are  many  wdio  are


«


BUILDING  UP  OP THE  KINGDOM OF GOD,  ETC.


subject  to  perform  military  duty.
Many  of  them  are  ignorant  as  to  the
proper  care,  proper  handling,  and
proper  use  of  fire-arms.  They  should
be  taught  to  handle  fire-arms  in  a
way  not  to  accidentally  injure  them-
selves or  their  companions  in  arms.
I  care  more  about  their  knowing  how
to  handle  their  arms,  and  how  to
keep  them  in  good  condition  than  I
do  their  knowing  how  to  perform
*'E}*es  right,  eyes  left,"  &c.  Not
but  what  strict  discipline  and  a  main-
tenance of  perfect  order  in  military
ranks  is  essentially  necessary,  as  in
all  other  departments  of  the  com-
munity, though  I  would  rather  they
would  -learn  to  shoot  correctly.  And
it  would  not  be  amiss  to  secure  a
little  extra  supply  of  ammunition  to
practise  how  to  shoot,  rather  than
trade  off  the  arms  and  ammunition
that  is  put  into  their  hands  to  use
when  necessary.  Learn  how  to  clean
a  gun  well,  how  to  take  it  apart  and
put  it  together  again,  and  how  to
keep  it  in  good  condition.  Learn  how
to  load  a  gun  properly,  learn  what  is
a  proper  charge,  and  then  learn  to
throw  the  ball  to  the  spot  where  you
wish  it  should  be  lodged.  It  would
be  presumption  to  call  a  person  to  go
forth  bearing  arms  that  could  not  use
them  with  proper  ettect :  this  would
prove  an  injury  instead  of  a  benefit.
We  would  be  relying  in  vain  upon
that  person  to  perforin  for  us  an  im-
portant duty.  We  wish  the  military
officers  to  lend  their  instructions  in
this  way.  Teach  the  ignorant  how
to  use  and  take  care  of  their  fire-
arms, and  how  to  keep  them  safely,
that  they  may  be  in  continual  readi-
ness, and  that  their  families  and
friends  may  not  be  injured  by  them:
Let  your  military  organizations  be
kept  up,  and  enrole  new  comers  into
some  company,  that  they  may  know
their  officers  and  their  place  when
they  are  called  upon  to  act-  Let
your  oi'ganizations  be  perfected  as  far


63

as  possible,  that  every  man  may  be
ready  when  called  upon  to  go  on  foot
-or  on  horseback.

I  have  seen  your  little  girls  herding
cattle  and  sheep.  I  would  not  let
even  small  boys  do  it,  to  say  nothing
of  girls.  It  is  unwise,  for  the  sake
of  the  influence  it  has  over  their
minds.  In  one  sense  it  is  ;i  causa
of  idleness.  Our  boys  and  girls
would  be  better  at  school.  Men
should  herd  stock.  Those  bovs  who
are  now  about  on  horseback,  with
pistols  slung  to  their  sides,  who  are
butchering  your  cattle  and  stealing
your  horses,  were  many  of  them
herd-boys*  Herding  is  a  poor  school
for  your  boys  and  girls  to  attend.
They  arc  on  the  wild  plains,  and
among  the  swamps  and  brush,  away
from  the  influence  of  their  parents
and  school  teachers ;  and  there  they
receive  bad  impressions  upon  their
minds,  whereas  good  impressions
should  be  made.  Let  men  herd  your
stock*

The  building  up  of  this  kingdom
is  a  work  of  progress ;  and  where
some  things  are  necesssary  to  be
done,  other  things  must  not  be  neg-
lected. If  you  have  a  great  deal
of  work  on  your  hands  of  one  kind,
do  a  little  less  of  that  kind,  and  more
of  some  other  kind,  and  bring  all
things  together.  You  have  not  time,
you  think,  to  send  your  children  to
school,  you  have  so  much  work  to  do,
I  like  that  you  should  have  plenty  to
do ;  but  should  you  neglect  to  instruct
your  children  while  you  are  busily
engaged  in  other  pursuits  ?  It  is  not
wisdom  to  neglect  this  very  im-
portant part  of  our  duty,  while  at
the  same  time  it  is  good  to  be  diligent
in  every  other  duty  that  necessarily
devolves  upon  us  in  every  depart-
ment of  life.

We  raise  a  great  amount  of  wheat,
and  crop  our  land  year  after  year
with  the  same  crop.  This  is  a  per-
nicious practice  for  our Ipnd.  It


64


JOCENAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


would  be  much  better  to  introduce  a
rotation  of  crops  suited  to  the  land
and  the  climate.  Let  intelligent
farmers  pay  attention  to  this.  Let
crops  of  useful  routs  be  introduced
and  fed  to  sheep  and  other  stock.  It
is  as  necessary  and  as  profitable  to
raise  good  wool  and  plenty  of  it  as  it
is  to  raise  good  grain.

Do  not  run  into  an  extreme  in
raising  wheat,  but  let  there  be  an
equality  in  our  productions,  which
will  give  greater  scope  for  exchange
among  ourselves,  and  lass  encourage-
ment to  the  importation  of  foreign
productions.  These  are  a  few  of  my
ideas  with  regard  to  the  economy  of
living  and  building  up  the  kingdom
of  God.  This  is  a  life-time  matter,
and  we  must  take  it  in  hand  wisely
and  with  moderation,  so  as  to  bear,
up  and  carry  it  tlirougb.

We  are  now  in  our  probation,  and
the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged
will  reach  into  a  world  to  come.
Then  let  us  act  like  men  aud  women
who  are  determined  to  he  for  the
kingdom  of  God  or  nothing,  pro-
gressing steadily,  unitedly,  and  firmly,
day  by  day,  week  by  week,  month  by
month,  and  year  by  year,  as  long  as
we  shall  live,  and  never  falter  in  our
feeling,  in  our  faith,  and  good  works.
Never  strike  hands  with  the  Devil ;
never  seek  to  make  friends  of  Christ
and  Baal.  They  cannot  be  friends.
If  we  do  not  let  go  the  hand  of  the
Devil,  we  must  the  band  of  Christ.
Christ  has  long  ago  refused  to  hold
communion  with  Satan,  We  cannot
hold  one  with  one  hand,  and  the
other  with  the  other  hand.  If
we  try  this,  the  first  we  know  we
shall  find  ourselves  entirely  on  the
side  of  the  Devil.

What  are  our  children  given  unto
us  for?  To  raise  them  up  to  be
angels  to  the  Devil?  I  think  not
None  of  us  would  wish  that.  Still,
many  take  that  course  which  is  calcu-
lated to  lead  them  in  that  direction,


for  want  of  understanding.  We
would  not  do  this  intentionally*
Many  a  person  does  a  thing  that  will
lead  to  death  and  destruction  unin-
tentionally. They  do  not  pay  atten-
tion to  the  wise  counsels  and  excel-
lent instructions  that  are  almost
daily  given  to  them,  in  a  temporal
point  of  view,  but  think  they  are  of
no  particular  use  to  them.

It  is  a  temporal  kingdom  that  we
are  engaged  in  building  up  far  our
God  upon  the  earth  ;  and  it  becomes
essentially  necessary  that  wo  should
be  one  in  regard  to  temporal  matters,
as  well  as  in  spiritual.  There  is  no
disunion  of  feeling  upon  the  subject
of  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
in  all  the  valleys  of  the  mountains,  or
upon  the  subject  of  laying  on  of  hands
for  the  gift  of  the  lluly  Ghost.  We  all
believe  alike  on  these  subjects.  But
when  it  comes  to  using  your  surplus
property  for  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  instead  of  selling  it
to  the  Gentiles  for  almost  nothing,
when  it  is  advised  to  cease  trading
with  them — toceasegoingon  the  road
to  do  this  and  that  to  build  up
Gentile  interests,  you  consider  it
infringing  upon  your  liberties  and
rights  as  American  citizens.  You
say, i 'Have  I  not  a  right  to  dictate
my  own  property  that  I  have  worked
for?"

You  have  nothing  except  that  which
the  Lord  God  has  intrusted  to  your
care.  It  belongs  to  him.  The  earth
and  the  fulness  thereof  are  his,  and
we  are  his.  There  is  only  one
principle  that  may  be  consideitid  our
own,  and  that  is  our  will.  You  can
do  as  you  are  told,  or  you  can  refuse
to  do  it.  You  can  seek  good  and  do
it,  or  you  can  seek  evil  and  do  it.
In  this  you  are  left  to  be  your  own
judge.  You  can  show  to  God  that
you  are  for  him,  or  that  you  are  for
the  Devil.  You  can  become  elect  to  do
evil  and  be  an  angel  of  the  Devil,
or  you  can  become  elect  to  do  good


BUILDING  UP  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOB,  ETC.


and  be  a  Saint  of  the  Most  High*
For  your  own  sakes,  be  true  to
yourselves  and  live  your  religion
which  you  profess  to  believe,  and
train  up  your  children  in  the  prin-
ciples of  righteousness  which  the
Lord  God  has  revealed  to  yon,  and  in
which  the  faithful  so  delight,  and
which  is  so  great  a  comfort  and
consolation  to  them.  Bring  your
children  up  so  that  they  will  be  an
honour  and  a  credit  to  you  in  your
old  age — so  that  they  will  walk  in
your  footsteps,  inasmuch  as  you  walk
in  all  obedience  before  the  Lord*  The
Lord  made  great  promises  to  Abra-
ham. Why?  "For  I  know  him,
that  he  will  command  his  children
and  his  household  after  him;  and
they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the
Lord  to  do  justice  and  judgment/*  Ac*
You  can  do  your  duty  as  Abraham
did,  and  influence  your  children  in
every  possible  way  to  work  righteous-
ness in  all  their  days.  Every  person
has  his  agency ;  and  how  grand  the
idea,  when  the  strong  will  of  man  is
used  for  the  promotion  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  to  set  forth  as  first  and
foremost  the  principles  of  truth  and
righteousness,  and  thus  finally  lead  to
exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
with  power  to  preserve  in  it  to  all
eternity  our  identity,  walk  into  the
presence  of  God,  and  be  able  to  bear
the  scrutinizing  eyes  of  our  Father  in
heaven !

What  an  exceeding  great  blessing
to  be  able  to  do  all  this  if  we  will,
and  save  those  with  whom  we  are
associated,  and  go  forth  and  become
the  Gods  of  eternity.  Let  us  prove
to  God,  to  angels,  and  to  all  holy
beings  that  we  are  for  the  kingdom —
that  we  are  for  God  and  holiness.
Let  us  put  aside  our  contentions  and
bickerings  and  little  notions:  they
will  not  add  any  weight  in  the
balance  in  our  favour,  but  it  will
weigh  against  us,  and  will  continually
thwart  our  onward  progress.  You  say

No.  5,


a  person  has  done  you  an  injury.
Suppose  he  has,  what  of  it?  It
should  not  affect  you.  Overlook  it
and  pursue  steadily  the  upward  path
to  righteousness,  and  it  will  not  hurt
you  a  particle ;  but  will  hurt  the
person  that  has  inflicted  the  injury.
It  is  better  to  suffer  wrong  than  to  do
wrong-  If  a  person  steals  anything
from  me,  it  does  not  make  it  right
for  me  to  take  something  that  belongs
to  another*  If  a  person  gets  angry
with  me,  and  I  go  about  my  business
and  pay  no  attention  to  it,  but
rather  take  an  occasion  to  soothe  and
control  his  feelings,  and  finally  gain
the  mastery  over  them,  and  over  my-
self in  the  first  place,  it  gives  me  a
victoiy,  although  he  may  have  done
it  on  purpose  to  injure  me*

When  the  Almighty  is  blessing  us
with  bountiful  crops,  how  foolish  it  is
to  quarrel  with  our  neighbours  for  a
little  water.  Perhaps  it  may  be  we
have  some  reason  ;  but  if  we  cannot
obtain  the  water  with  good  feelings
aud#kind  words,  let  theta  have  the
water.

Let  us  go  forth  in  our  daily  tran-
sactions with  <n  enlightened  view  of
things,  and  ffc$l  that  wo  will  not  be
moved  fron#*the  path  of  righteous-
ness by  evfty  little  thing  that  may
cross  our  track.  Let  us  go  a  consider-
able distance  round  anything  that
would  annoy  us,  rather  than  make  a
fuss  about  it.  Let  us  suffer  a  great
deal  before  finding  fault  with  our
brother  or  -causing  him  to  do  wrong.
Try  and  cherish  courtesy  and  good
feelings  to  each  other,  that  you  may
attain  that  command  over  yourselvea
and  that  elevation  of  sentiment  and
feeling  that  is  worthy  of  you  as
Saints  of  the  Most  High.  When
your  Bishop  or  President  chooses  to
lead  out  in  a  certain  direction  in
righteousness,  follow  after^him  and
sustain  him.  If  he  is  nqt  doing  right
and  walking  in  the  path  of  his  duty^
let  your  faith  be  of  that  strength

VoL  IX,


JOFBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


66

that  will  cause  him  to  be  removed,
and  a  man  placed  there  that  will  do
right.  An  unfaithful  President
cannot  stand  in  his  place  long,  if
the  people  will  do  right. May  God


bless  us,  and  help  us  to  do  our  duty,
live  our  holy  religion,  and  build  up
his  kingdom,  is  my  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  Amen.


i


r

PROSPERITY OP ZION,  &c.


Discourse  delivered  by  Elder  George  A,  Smith,  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  March  10,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


I  arise  before  you,  brethren,  on  the
present  occasion,  with  a  heart  full  of
gratitude  to  our  Heavenly  Father  for
his  manifold  blessings  unto  us,  for
our  preservation  and  the  light  of  his
countenance  that  has  shone  upon  us
to  enable  us  to  understand  so  much
of  truth  as  has  been  taught  unto  us,
or  at  least  so  much  as  we  have  been
capacitated  to  receive;  that  while
the  storms  lour  upon  the  earth,
which  the  Lord  is  about  to  sweep
with  the  besom  of  destruction,  we  are
enabled  to  stand  in  the  chambers  of
the  mountains  while  the  indignation
of  the  Almighty  upon  the  wicked
passes  over.  From  the  time  that  we
entered  this  valley  to  the  present
moment,  I  have  never  contemplated
our  position  without  feeling  to  shout
Hosannah  for  the  place  that  the  Lord
had  preserved  for  his  Saints,  for  the
natural  fortresses  that  he  had  con-
structed, and  for  the  principles  that
he  had  revealed  to  enable  us  to  de-
velop and  to  bring  from  the
earth  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  more


abundantly  for  the  privilege  of  par-
ticipating in  the  enjoyment  of  the
principles  and  blessings  of  our  holy
religion,  uninterrupted  by  those  who
are  without*

Our  toilsome  journey  across  the
Plains,  the  difficulties  we  had  to  en-
counter in  making  a  settlement,  were
such  as  are  unparalleled  in  the  history
of  mankind,  rendered  so  by  the
necessity  of  conveying  our  provisions
over  a  desert  for  upwards  of  a  thou-
sand miles.  You  may  search  the
history  of  the  whole  habitable  globe
in  vain  to  find  a  parallel.  We  wore
guided  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord
from  the  beginning  of  this  great
work.  This  people  commenced  to
radiate  forth  from  this  place,  cities
began  to  rise  up,  Branches  were  or-
ganized, new  towns  sprang  up  into
being,  new  valleys  have  been  and
still  are  being  discovered,  and  other
advantages  gained  up  to  the  present
moment,  with  a  corresponding  ratio
of  increase  which  is  truly  astonish-
ing.


PROSPERITY  OF  ZIOXj  ETC.


67


The  winter  after  the  pioneers
arrived  here,  in  1847,  a  committee
was  appointed  to  examine  this
valley  and  to  ascertain  how  much
land  could  be  irrigated.  After  a
careful  examination,  they  reported
eight  hundred  acres  was  all  that  could
be  cultivated,  for  want  of  water ;  and
the  result  is,  as  many  thousands  are
now  cultivated.  You  might  inquire
into  the  condition  of  other  valleys,
and  you  would  be  invariabl}T  told  that
the  whole  country  was  a  barren
desert.  This  was  the  case  with
Spanish  Fork  and  various  other
places  that  are  now  the  most  fertile.
The  Lord  has  opened  our  eyes,  that
we  can  see  and  understand  the  nature
of  the  facilities  that  surround  us,  that
we  can  produce  the  finest  of  grain,  and
make  ourselves  happy.

In  the  earliest  days  of  the  Church
the  Elders  were  sent  forth  with  a
report  that  those  who  were  in  the
Eastern  lands  should  flee  to  the  West,
and  we  continued  to  tiee  f  rom  the
Eastern  lands  towards  the  mountains,
and  we  have  continued  to  do  so;  and
nt  tin*  p.r  <  nt  time  we,  above  all
other  people  upon  the  face  of  the
earth,  have  cause  to  rejoice.
While  turmoil,  discontent,  and  blood-
shed are  increasing  upon  tin;  onrtluwe
are  at  peace.  We  present  the  spec-
tacle of  a  people  inhabiting  a  country
flourishing  as  a  reward  for  our  in-
dustry, j

The  principles  of  the  everlasting
Gospel  being  established  in  the  minds
of  the  people*  and  the  people  being
united,  there  is  no  power  in  existence
that  is  able  to  interfere  with  or  mar
the  community.  I

It  has  been  my  privilege  for  the
last  six  weeks  to  spend  my  time  in
travelling  and  preaching  in  the
southern  settlements,  in  company
with  Elder  Joseph  A.  Young,  Now,
I  remember  the  time  when  all  the
Saints  in  Kirtland  could  have  as-
sembled in  one  of  those  little  school-


houses  that  I  have  been  preaching  in
of  late,  and  they  would  not  have
been  crowded  either.

During  our  absence  we  have
travelled  eight  hundred  and  fifty
miles,  that  is,  going  south  and  north,
visiting  all  the  settlements  south  of
Sanpete,  We  have  attended  some
forty-three  meetings.  To  aecompl  ish
this,  we  had  to  make  long  days,
travelling  eighteen  hours  in  a  day,  in
consequence  of  deep  snow ;  and  we  have
tasted  of  the  variety  of  temperature
with  which  the  Lord  has  blessed
Utah,  from  the  frigid  to  the  torrid
zone*

On  our  return* up  the  Riui  of  the
Basin,  from  the  settlements  of  the
.Rio  Virgin  and  Santa  Clara,  we  ap-
preciated the  change  more  than  we
did  in  going  down.  The  brethren
are  in  good  spirits,  with  few  excep-
tions. There  were  a  few  places  where
we  had  to  stay  and  settle  some  diffi-
culties. They  expressed  a  willing-
ness to  do  right,  and  they  were  very
glad  to  see  us  ;  and,  although  in  mid-
winter, they  would  crowd  together ;
and,  in  fact,  they  appeared  t  >  enjoy
our  visit  more,  than  if  they  had
known  we  were  coming

It  is  generally  understood  that  all
nations  are  desirous  of  getting  under
their  control  both  a  northern  and
a  southern  climate.  This  is  desirable
in  all  nations.  We  found  that  the
brethren  in  Washington  county  had
again  raised,  last  year,  a  good  quality
of  cotton,  which  would  be  highly
creditable  in  any  other  country.  We
have  also  soil  and  climate  that  will
produce  tobacco  as  fine  as  is  grown
in  Virginia  :  it  only  needs  to  be  culti-
vated.

Now,  were  we  to  take  a  man  from
the  broad  prairies  of  Missouri  or  Illi-
nois and  show  him  the  narrow  fiats
of  the  Rio  Virgin,  he  would  be  apt  to
describe  it  as  a  certain  member  of
Congress  described  the  Louisiana
purchase  made  by  Mr.  Jefferson.  He


t


68  JOURNAL  OF

said  that  it  was  not  a  belt  nor  a  gar-
ter, but  simply  a  mere  strip — a  mere
string  west  of  the  Mississippi  river.
That  shows  how  little  a  Congressman
in  Mr,  Jefferson's  time  knew  of  the
valley  of  the  Mississippi.  Such  is  the
feeling  in  relation  to  the  limited  ex-
tent  of  arable  land  in  the  southern
part  of  our  Territory.  The  field  of
operation  for  the  production  of  a  sup-
ply of  cotton  is  within  our  reach.

Many  of  us  choose  to  use  tobacco,
and  we  could  save  $G0,000  from
going  out  of  the  Territory  every  year,
if  we  would  raise  these  articles  within
ourselves.

I  am  well  known  as  one  who  is  in
favour  of  letting  this  article  of  to-
bacco alone.  It  is  said  that  many
suffered  more  from  the  want  of  it
than  they  did  for  bread  in  the  time
of  famine.  If  we  must  have  it,  I  am
in  favour  of  layiEg  plans  to  produce
it  within  ourselves,  seeing  that  the
Lord  has  given  us  the  climate,

Now  the  production  of  cotton  in
Washington  county  is  no  longer  a
matter  of  uncertainty.  It  can  be  pro-
duced ;  and  as  men  enter  into  the
business  they  will  gradually  learn
how  to  manage  it.  Experience  shows
that  as  we  plant  the  seed,  year  after
year,  it  becomes  naturalized  to  the
climate,  and  we  raise  a  better  article
and  more  of  it  every  year.  This  may
also  be  said  of  grain  in  this  Territory,
wheat  and  corn  in  particular.

Many  settlements  have  arisen
within  the  last  few  years  that  are  now
in  a  flourishing  condition.  I  visited
one,  DeseretCity,  on  the  Sevier,  where
thejr  are  raising  an  abundance  of
wheat  and  other  grain.  We  organ-
ized a  Branch  of  one  hundred  and
twelve  members,  and  a  good  feeling
appears  to  exist  there-  The  soil  is  of
the  best  quality,  and  there  is  a  pros-
pect of  its  being  one  of  the  granaries
of  the  mountains.  There  is  a  spirit
of  waking  up  among  the  people,  at
the  present  time,  to  their  own  in-


DISCOURSES,

terests  and  welfare  in  regard  to  home
productions.  During  the  last  two  or
three  years,  while  there  has  been  such
a  vast  influx  of  merchandise,  the
goods  in  market  being  easily  obtained,
that  has  had  a  tendency  to  cause  the
people  to  neglect  home  productions  ;
and  they  have  exerted  their  ingenuity
to  procure  means  to  buy  what  they
needed,  instead  of  producing  it.  This
feeling  is  now  dying  away  to  some  ex-
tent, and  we  find  the  people  busily  at
work  to  produce  those  things  which
they  need  for  their  own  use,  and  they
do  not  feel  to  depend  any  longer  upon
a  foreign  market.

Brethren  and  sisters,  the  work  that
is  before  us  requires  our  undivided
exertions  and  our  best  economy  and
industry.  And  when  we  undertake  to
do  a  work,  we  should  do  it  with  an
eye  single  to  the  glory  of  God  and  a
determined  zeal  to  do  his  will — to
live  in  accordance  with  his  ordi-
nances.

In  taking  up  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  and  looking  at  the
commandments  and  promises  given
through  Joseph  Smith,  I  am  led  to
rejoice.  With  some  there  has  evi-
dently been  a  doubt  of  their  fulfil-
ment ;  and  the  idea  that  there  was  a
possibility  of  the  Saints,  ever  going
to  live  in  Jackson  county  ! — why,  say
some,  it  is  full  of  Missourians,  many
of  them  possessing  the  most  hostile
feelings,  which  they  have  nourished
for  years  past.  The  driving
of  the  Saints  from  their  homes
by  the  people  of  Missouri  and  the
great  prosperity  that  has  attended
this  people  have  excited  a  kind  of
apprehension  that,  at  some  time  or
other,  the  "  Mormons 99  would  take  a
notion  to  go  back  to  root  them  out  of
their  homes.  Fear  occasionally  takes
hold  of  them,  but  still  there  is  that
same  deadly  hatred  among  them
towards  us  which  they  possessed  j
and  in  consequence  of  that,  many
have  considered  that  it  would  be  im-


f


PBOSPEBITY  OF  ZION  ETC,


69


possible  for  the  Saints  ever  to  go
back  to  that  land  and  inherit  it,  and
build  the  temple  that  has  been
promised  and  commanded  to  be  built
Notwithstanding  the  revelations  that
had  been  given  to  build  a  temple,  the
brethren  were  prevented  from  fulfil-
ling it,  in  consequence  of  the  opposi-
tion of  their  enemies,  or  foolishness,
or  carelessness  in  the  breasts  of
many  who  were  called  to  act  with  the
Prophet  Joseph,  when  the  Saints
were  driven.  When  the  Saints  were
driven  from  the  United  States,  we
could  not  see  why;  but  those  who
have  any  light  in  them  can  see  now.
If  we  were  in  Missouri,  we  should  be
obliged  to  take  sides  in  the  present
lamentable  strife  of  brother  against
brother.  If  we  were  there,  we  should
be  in  constant  trouble.  The  present
state  of  anarchy  should  show  us  that
it  is  impossible  to  settle  their  diffi-
culty peaceably.  They  may  strive  to
divide  and  make  an  amicable  division,
but  it  will  end  in  the  most  awful
bloodshed.  It  is  impossible  to  avoid
it.  Their  determined  will  and  their
hatred  to  each  other  are  such  that
they  cannot  be  reconciled.  The
hatred  with  which  they  hated  us
has  turned  upon  each  other,  and  it
will  continue  upon  them  in  such  a
manner  that  they  cannot  avoid  it
And  by-and-by  it  will  be  like  it  was
with  the  Jaredites  and  the  Nephites,
When  they  became  divided,  they
were  determined  to  exterminate  each
other :  they  resolved  on  the  exter-
mination of  one  party  or  the  other,
and  it  ended  in  the  extermination  of
both.  You  look  in  the  Book  of
Ether,  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and
you  will  find  it.  After  they  had
slain  two  millions  of  people,  the  king
of  one  of  the  contending  parties  tried
his  very  best  to  procure  peace  and
cease  the  shedding  of  blood.  Cori-
antumr  offered  Shiz,  if  he  would
give  peace  to  the  people,  he  would
give  his  kingdom  to  him ;  but  Shiz


would  not  consent  to  peace,  unless
Coriantumr  would  come  and  be  slain
by  the  hand  and  sword  of  Shiz.
Then  the  people  were  again  stirred  up
to  battle,  and  fought  until  all  were
slain,  except  him  whom  the  Prophet
of  God  had  said  should  not  die  by  the
sword.  From  the  spirit  that  is  now
manifest,  it  is  not  impossible  for  like
scenes  to  be  again  enacted  upon  this
continent.  It  is  just  as  easy,  I  con-
tend, for  the  Lord  to  cause  the
Saints  to  return  and  build  the  Temple
in  Jackson  County  as  it  was  for  the
Lord  to  bring  us  into  this  wilderness,
or  to  frustrate  the  powers  of  our
enemie  here  in  this  Territory,  as
most  you  have  seen.  When  this
people  shall  have  learned  to  do  the
will  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  and  to
be  united  in  all  things,  then  will  be
brought  about  the  prediction  that
the  wicked  shall  slay  the  wicked.
The  time  is  not  far  distant  when  the
distressed  of  all  nations  will  come
from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  from
the  north  and  from  the  south,  and
claim  protection  from  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High  God,

It  is  high  time  for  the  Saints  to  be
awake  and  on  hand  to  perform  their
duties,  and  live  up  to  their  calling
as  Saints  of  God,  doing  all  things  re-
quired at  their  hands,  that  the  light
of  truth  may  constantly  shine  in  our
minds.  The  only  thing  that  we
have  to  fear  is  that  the  Saints  do^iot
realize  the  importance  of  their  po-
sition, and  that  they  will  not  be
awake  to  the  duties  that  devolve
upon  them.

The  time  is  nigh  at  hand  when
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of
our  enemies  and  their  children  will
come  to  crave  protection  of  this
people.  There  are  many  persons  who
have  read  the  revelations  of  Joseph
Smith  that  have  had  misgivings  in
relation  to  them,  and  they  have  feared
that  they  were  true;  but  they  did  not
feel  quite  willing  to  believe  that


70


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


they  would  be  literally  fulfilled ;  or,
tfif  they  did,  they  dared  not  confess  it,
Any  persons  that  have  looked  at  the
accounts  published  in  our  papers  can
see  how  rapidly  and  how  easily  the
Lord  can  accomplish  his  work.  He
does  not  ish  us  to  go  and  slay  our
enemies,  but  he  wants  us  to  be  upon
the  watchtower.  He  wants  us  to
build  lowers,  temples,  houses,  and
everything  that  will  make  us  com-
fortable ;  also  to  plant  vineyards  and
oliveyards,  and  to  watch  over  them.
But  when  it  comes  to  the  wicked
slaying  the  wicked,  he  has  thus  far
caused  the  wicked  to  slay  the  wicked.
The  Saints  have  been  and  doubtless
always  will  be  spared  this  trouble,  but
they  will  have  to  face  dangers— in
many  instances  to  lay  down  their  lives
for  the  Gospel's  sake;  and  to  such  the
Lord  will  give  crowns  of  glory  and
endless  life,  even  to  all  those  that
live  according  to  the  principles  of
eternal  life.  But  we  need  not  expect
crowns  of  glory  in  this  life.  The
blessings  of  light  and  life  that  are  in
the  midst  of  the  Saints  are  only  to
be  had  by  living  for  them — by  living
our  religion.  There  are  hundreds
#nd  thousands  that  are  willing  to
fight,  for  their  religion.  The  things
that  are  required  are  for  us  to  live
our  religion,  walk  in  accordance  with
.  the  principles  of  honesty  and  justice,
that  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  may
continually  shine  upon  us,  and  that
our  religion  shall  be  the  uppermost
thing  in  our  minds  all  the  day  long.

We  frequently  suffer  ourselves  to
be  bound  by  earthly  considerations,  so
that  we  neglect  our  duties  and  attend
to  some  small  matters,  and  we
thereby  become  careless  and  indif-
ferent. But  of  this  we  should  be
veiy  careful.

When  I  first  settled  at  Parowfan,
in  the  county  of  Iron,  the  nearest
settlement  to  it  was  Payson ;  and  I
believe  there  were  only  some  three  or
four  families  in  Payson. There  were


also  a  few  in  Sanpete.  The  fall
after,  the  location  was  made  at  Cedar
City.  From  that  day  to  the  present
there  has  been  a  continual  increase
and  extension  of  our  settlements  in
that  direction ;  and  although  it  ap-
pears to  be  a  great  d  istance  from  here,
settlements  are  rising  up  so  fast  that
a  man  can  stop  at  a  settlement
every  night.

In  1858  I  was  told  at  Toquerville
that  it  was  impossible  to  make  a  road
to  the  valleys  up  the  Rio  Virgin,  and
they  were  calculating  that  they  would
have  to  carry  their  seed^grain  and
ploughs  over  the  mountains  upon
pack  animals.  I  told  them  that  in
a  few  years  I  would  ride  over  in  a
carriage-  Brother  Joseph  A.  Young
and  myself  visited  the  two  settle-
ments there,  and  passed  over  the
ground  I  am  speaking  of,  with  four
animals  to  our  carnage,  and  brother
Joseph  remarked  that  this  road,
whieh  is  very  steep  and  crooked,  was
so  crooked  that  it  was  difficult  to  see
the  lead  animals.  The  pass  has  the
name  of  Johnson's  Twist.
.  The  people  are  raising  cotton  and
grain  j  they  are  cultivating  the
earth  and  are  enjoying  excellent
health,  and  the  water  is  of  good
quality.  These  two  places  (Pocket-
ville  and  Grafton)  are  certainly  in  a
flourishing  condition.

We  also  visited  the  settlement  at
Minersville,  Beaver  county.  It  is
composed  of  some  twenty  families.
They  are  engaged  in  digging  for  lead,
and  they  are  trying  to  bring  it  into
use.  Evidence  exists  that  a  supply
may  be  had  from  that  quarter.

We  organized  a  few  families  that
live  on  Corn  Greek  into  a  Branch  of
the  Church.  We  also  foun4  &  small
company  of  men  on  Cove  Cffeek,  who
are  commencing  to  make  a  setttle-
ment  there.  Those  two  seetlements
obviate  the  necessity  of  camping  out
at  nights  between  Fillmore  and
Bearer,  and  the  settlements  in  Round


Valley  and  at  Cliicken  Creek  prevent
the  necessity  of  camping  out  between
the  cities  of  Nephi  and  Fillmore.
This  will  be  a  great  convenience  to

travellers.

Our  country  is  a  very  extraordinary
one,  indeed ;  and  if  the  Lord  should
see  fit  to  send  rain  to  prevent  or  do
away  with  the  necessity  of  irrigation,
it  is  capable  of  sustaining  a  dense
population ;  but  as  it  is,  the  people
are  obliged  to  live  in  cities  located
above  the  fields,  in  order  to  secure  to
themselves  pure  water,  and  then  go
out  and  farm  a  patch  of  land  with
much  labour  and  toil  in  the  shape  of
ploughing,  digging,  irrigating,  and
weeding ;  and  must  so  continue  until
the  springs  are  made  to  rise  up  in
the  deserts,  or  the  vapours  descend
from  the  clouds  to  aid  in  the  better
cultivation  of  the  soil,

When  I  was  at  Washington,  in  the
year  1856,  I  was  asked  by  Senator
Douglas  if  I  did  not  think  that,  if
skilful  farmers  were  out  in  Utah,  the
land  might  not  be  made  to  produce
abundantly  without  irrigation.  That
showed  me  how  ignorant  Congress-
men were  at  Washington  in  regard  to
this  country*  When  the  Lord  sees
proper  to  break  down  the  barriers
that  exist  and  cau>o  the  rain  to  de-
scend upon  the  land,  he  can  do  it ;
but  until  then,  he  has  very  wisely
provided  that  we  shall  take  the
streams  in  the  mountains  to  irrigate
the  soil.  If  the  mountains  were
covered  with  beautiful  timber,  and
plenty  of  grain  could  be  raised  with-
out  irrigation,  there  is  no  doubt  but
our  enemies  would  overrun  us,  or  at
least  make  us  a  great  deal  of  trouble ;
but  as  it  is,  we  inherit  the  chambers
of  the  mountains :  the  rocks  are  our
protection,  and  the  oases  of  the  desert
our  homes.  Here  we  learn  the  arts
of  cultivation  and  of  building ;  we
learn  to  irrigate  the  land  ;  we  also,  in
many  respects,  prepare  ourselves  for
a  day  when  we  shall  go  to  the  place


that  has  been  appointed  for  the
building  up  of  the  city  of  Zion  and
for  the  building  of  the  house  which
shall  be  a  great  and  glorious  temple,
on  which  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall
rest — a  temple  that  will  excel  all
others  in  magnificence  that  have  ever
been  built  upon  the  earth.  Who  ia
there  that  is  prepared  for  this  move-
ment back  to  the  centre  stake  of
Zion,  and  where  the  architects
amongst  us  that  are  qualified  to
erect  this  temple  and  the  city  that
will  surround  it  ?  We  have  to  learn
a  great  many  things,  in  my  opinion,
before  we  are  prepared  to  return  to
that  holy  land  ;  we  have  to  learn  to
practise  the  principles  that  we  have
been  taught ;  wc  have  to  study  to  fill
up  every  hour  of  our  time  in  indus-
trial pursuits  and  the  acquisition  of
knowledge,  and  by  economy  and
patience  prepare  ourselves  as  good
and  skilful  workmen,  as  builders  in
the  great  building  which  our  Father
has  prepared.  And  let  me  remind
you  that  it  is  predicted  that  this
generation  shall  not  pass  away  till  a
temple  shall ,  be  built,  and  the  glory
of  the  Lord  rest  upon  it,  according
to  the  promises.

There  is  nothing  in  this  country
that  is  very  prepossessing  or  en-  •
couraging  to  strangers,  ard  especially
to  those  who  come  with  a  bad  spirit.
When  a  man  loses  the  spirit  of  his
religion,  he  wants  to  leave  the
country.  In  a  moment  he  sees  it  is  a
hard  country — a  miserable,  barren,
God-forsaken  country.  I  h  ave  known
many  men  come  in  here  poor,  and
even  destitute  of  the  necessaries  of
life,  in  a  situation  to  need  help  in
order  to  enable  them  not  merely  to
stay  here,  but  to  get  food  sufficient  to
sustain  life.  In  three  or  four  years,
these  individuals  would,  by  industry
and  good  luck,  become  measurably
wealthy ;  they  wouid  become  disatis-
fied,  all  at  once  discover  that
"  Mormonism  "  was  a  hoax,  and  re-


72 '  JOUBNAL  OF

solve  to  leave  the  country  in  disgust.
Still  they  were  perfectly  independent
of  any  assistance,  and  they  were  only
leaving  the  country,  they  said,
because  they  were  so  oppressed.
Notwithstanding  they  had  risen  from
poverty  and  degradation  to  compara-
tive affluence,  wealth,  and  indepen-
dence, so  that  they  could  leave  the
country,  into  which  they  were
brought  by  the  Poor  Fund,  with
plenty  of  mules,  horses,  waggons,
carriages,  cows,  and  many  of  them
w  ith  money,  yet  they  say  that  such
oppression  they  could  not  endure !

I  heard  a  missionary  who  came
into  this  Territory  by  way  of  Cali-
fornia say  that  on  his  way  he  met
some  seven  families.  They  were  apos-
tates, of  course,  and  each  one  went  to
work  to  tell  him  what  they  had  apos-
tatized for.  They  gave  details  of
the  causes  and  the  reasons  they  had
for  apostatizing  from  the  Church.
Finally,  the  brother  turned  to  one  of
the  company  who  had  not  been
talking  at  all,  and  said  to  him,  What
did  you  leave  for  ?  He  replied  very
candidly — "I  have  been  trying  to
think,  and  I  have  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that  I  was  treated  too  well.
When  I  first  entered  the  Valley,  I
saw  Elder  Kimball,  and  he  gave  me  a
house  to  live  in,  rent  free.  He  sup-
plied me  wood  to  bum.  He  said  he
would  employ  me.  When  I  wanted
to  work,  he  told  me  to  make  myself
comfortable  until  I  had  rested,  and
then  he  would  employ  me.  I  went
to  wTork,  but  was  discontented.  I
went  to  work ;  but,  not  being  satisfied,
I  considered  the  matter  over  and  con-
cluded that  I  was  treated  far  too
well."  Now,  I  considerjthat  man  a
pretty  honest  apostate,  and  I  rather
think  that  he  will  come  back  again  to
the  Church.

I  have  heard  men  say  that  the  rea-
son why  they  apostatized  was  because
they  were  not  well  treated.  Now,  I
have  often  thought,  when  I  have  been


DISCOURSES.

reflecting  that  this  was  the  work  of
the  Lord — the  only  means  of  exalta-
tion, that  the  loss  of  such  individuals
would  be  felt  vastly  more  by  them*
selves  than  by  anybody  else.  What
a  gratification  it  would  be  for  such
persons,  when  they  lift  up  their  eyes
in  hell,  being  in  torment,  to  think
that  they  might  have  been  in  a  bet-
ter place,  if  they  had  oidy  been  well
treated  !  What  a  comfort,  what  a
consolation,  what  a  balm,  especially
to  one  who  is  lost  forever  !  To  over-
come such  temptations  was  not  an
impossibility.  But  so  far  as  we  are
concerned,  whether  our  brethren
treat  us  well  or  not,  if  we  keep  the
commandments  of  God,  keep  our-
selves in  the  path  of  rectitude,  and
our  feet  do  not  slip,  if  we  pursue  a
straightforward  course,  if  our  raiment
is  clean,  though  we  encounter
many  difficulties  in  getting  along
while  in  this  life,  yet  we  may  trust
in  the  Lord  our  God,  who  will  exalt
the  faithful  If  we  set  out  in  the
work  of  the  Lord  for  time  and  all
eternity,  we  set  out  for  everlasting
increase,  for  a  salvation  among  the
blessed,  and  for  an  eternal  exalta-
tion. If  the  principles  of  life  are
worth  anything,  they  are  worth  every-
thing that  man  can  possibly  sacrifice
or  suffer  to  attain  to  the  reward  that
is  promised.  I  remember,  wThen  in
Kirtland,  having  heard  Jared  Carter
say  that  he  had  sacrificed  everything
that  ever  would  be  required  of  him.
He  said,  I  have  sacrificed  all  my  pro-
perty once,  but  I  will  never  do  it
again.  Where  is  that  man  ?  He  is
numbered  in  the  long  catalogue  of
apostates*  If  a  man  should  sacrifice
all  that  he  has,  and  then  say  "I  will
do  no  more,"  it  is  equal  to  saying  I
will  stop  serving  the  Lord,  A  man
who  intends  to  attain  to  eternal  glory
must  be  constantly  awake  to  the  dis-
charge of  his  duty.  He  must  not  suf-
fer his  lust  for  gold,  his  thirst  for
wealth,  or  his  desire  for  gain  to  fill


his  heart  with  covetousness,  which  is
idolatry.  We  can  pass  over  the  pages
of  Church  history  and  see  the  inci-
dents that  have  transpired  during  the'
days  of  Joseph,  and  see  the  fate  of
every  Elder  who  suffered  lust  or  love
of  filthy  lucre  to  tempt  him  from  the
path  of  virtue.  Their  fate  should  be
a  warning  to  all  good  men.  We  can
see  the  career  of  many,  and  behold
their  conduct  and  its  results*  Men
took  him  by  the  hand,  saluted  him
with  a  kiss,  called  him  brother,  and
then  betrayed  him;  yet  I  can  see
their  career  of  hypocrisy,  their  apos-
taey,  and  their  consummate  villany.
I  can  mark  out  their  path.  They
were  men  who  did  not  live  their  re-
ligion ;  they  were  not  honest  with
God  and  their  brethren ;  they  were
hypocrites j  they  corrupted  themselves
and  became  traitors  to  that  man
whom  God  had  inspired  to  guide
Israel.  Some  of  them  we  regarded
as  very  smart  men  that  had  great
talents.  They  laboured  a  little  while
in  the  cause,  but  they  were  not  true
to  themselves ;  they  were  not  true  in
their  integrity  ;  they  were  dishonest
and  corrupt ;  and  in  consequence  of
this,  they  fell  into  darkness,  and
lifted  their  hands  for  the  destruction
of  the  Saints  of  God,  and  fell  from
that  exaltation  which  they  had  as-
pired to  attain  to.

The  blessings  of  Providence  have
been  over  us  from  the  commence-
ment of  this  Church ;  the  protecting
hand  of  the  Almighty  has  been
visible  over  us  all  the  day  long :  every
step  has  bean  guided  in  wisdom.  To
take  a  people  from  amongst  the  nations
of  the  earth  and  locate  them  in  the
midst  of  these  mountains  was  one  of
the  greatest  achievements  over  natu-
ral obstacles  ever  accomplished  upon
earth.  To  organize  a  State  in  the
midst  of  a  vast  desert— one  that
could  sustain  itself  and  bear  up
against  the  powers  that  endeavoured  to
destroy  it,  wad  a  feat  unequalled  by  any-


thing recorded  in  the  annals  of
history.

When  I  was  in  Washington  and  in
the  library  of  the  Capitol,  I  was
asked  if  the' "  Mormons  "  would  fight.
I  replied  that  the  people  that  would
have  the  energy  to  form  a  powerful
State  in  the  midst  of  a  desert  would
have  energy  to  defend  it.  To  take
persons,  of  various  habils,  possessing
education  of  different  kinds  and  de-
grees, men  and  women  speaking  dif-
ferent languages,  coming  from  almost
every  part  of  the  earth, — to  bring  them
here  and  organize  them  into  a  peace-
ful and  united  people,  loyal  to  the
Government  and  laws  of  our  country,
was  certainly  no  small  task.  Then
take  the  Saints  that  were  assembled
at  Nauvoo,  that  had  been  driven  from
their  possessions,  hurried  away  from
their  homes,  and  robbed  of  all  they
possessed,  driven  away  with  a  design
on  the  part  of  their  enemies  that  they
should  perish  in  the  wilderness, — to
take  this  remnant  that  was  left  and
bring  them  with  the  rest  to  this
land,  that  was  pronounced  uninhabi-
table,— to  make  it  produce  the  rich
provisions  of  the  earth,  and  to  orga-
nize a  powerful  State  in  the  midst  of
this  desert  country,  shows  the  power
and  wisdom  of  the  Almighty,  mani-
fested through  the  man  that  leads,
guides,  and  instructs  the  people.  It
is  of  such  a  character  that  the  leading
of  Israel  through  the  wilderness  by
Moses  bears  no  comparison.  You  go
to  the  Book  of  Exodus  and  you  find
the  children  of  Israel  made  the  most
crooked  paths,  whereas  we  find  that
we  came  straightforward  through  tke
mountains  right  into  the  land  of  pro-
mise. We  have  straightened  the
mountain  passes ;  we  have  made  the
the  rough  places  plain  and  smooth  :
the  mountains,  as  it  were,  are  melting
away  at  our  presence.  The  Prophet  of
the  Lord  shewed  all  this  beforehand
by  the  power  of  God  that  was  in  him.

After  a  few  years  in  these  moun-


74  JOURNAL  OF

tains,  we  hear  members  of  Congress
waking  up,  as  did  Mr.  John  Thomp-
son, of  New  York,  in  1858,  being
from  the  same  State  as  the  Prophet
Joseph,  and  was  probably  in  that
State  when  the  Church  was  organ-
ized. This  astonished  Congressman,
having  opened  his  eyes,  said — "  Mor-
monism  is  a  stern,  ugly  fact,  and  it  is
halfway  between  us  and  the  Pacific
Ocean,  and  it  stands  there  with  ten
thousand  bayonets  daring  you  to  the
contest."  He  had  suddenly  awaked
out  of  his  slumber  probably  by  the
remarks  of  Mr.  William  W.  Boyce,
of  South  Carolina,  who  said — "There
are  two  ways  of  settling  the  Mormon
imbroglio  ;  one  is  peace,  and  the
other  war :  the  first  is  the  most  hu-
mane, the  cheapest,  and  consequently
the  best.  If  we  choose  the  second,
we  make  a  hell  of  the  passes  in  the
mountains  between  the  Pacific  and
the  Atlantic  for  the  next  thousand
years.  I

They  were  just  opening  their  eye  to
behold  what  they  had  done  by  driving
the  Saints  from  the  United  States,  and
refusing  to  allow  them  to  lodge  upon
the  banks  of  the  Missouri.  They
drove  them  into  the  wilderness,  and
hoped  never  to  hear  of  them  again.

The  day  has  passed  for  us  to  submit
to  be  mobbed  and  driven  about
from  pillar  to  post  by  our  enemies :
they  have  now  got  something  else  to
do.  The  sword  is  now  passing  back
and  forth  amongst  them.  I  recollect,
when  I  was  a  school-boy  once,  the
master  gave  two  of  us  a  stick  and  set
us  to  whip  each  other:  the  master
was  compelled  to  stop  us  on  account
of  our  severity.  Our  enemies  would
not  take  the  advice  of  the  Prophet  j
this  nation  refused  to  listen  to  his
counsels  ;  they  would  not  hearken  to
the  word  of  the  Lord  which  he  pro-
claimed unto  them ;  they  killed  us
and  drove  us  away  from  our  posses-
sions ;  and  now  the  Lord  will  suffer
them  to  punish  each  other  for  their


DISCOtmSES,

sins,  even  as  the  schoolmaster  did  the
boys,  until  he  gets  ready  to  stop
them.

I  am  very  much  pleased  with  the
privilege  of  addrassing  you.  I  feel
that  I  am  awake  to  the  truth,  and  I
try  to  live  my  religion,  to  bear  my
testimony  to  the  work  of  God,  and
sustain  the  influence  of  my  brethren
in  rolling  on  this  great  and  glorious
work.  My  testimony  is  as  it  has
always  been.  It  is  the  work  of  the
Almighty,  and  his  hand  has  guided
it,  and  will  continue  so  to  do  hence-
forth and  forever,  and  no  power  can
stay  its  progress,  and  he  will  guide
it  until  it  will  overcome  all  opposing
forces.  It  is  the' little  stone  cut  out  of
the  mountains  without  human  hands,
and  it  will  roll  forth  and  grow  until  it
becomes  a  great  mountain  and  fills  the
whole  earth.

When  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
was  before  the  court  of  J udsje  Austin
A.  King  at  Richmond,  Missouri,  they
wanted  to  prove  the  charge  of  treason
against  him.  It  was  stated  in  evidence
that  he  had  preached  from  the  pro-
phecy of  Daniel,  where  it  speaks  of
the  great  image  and  the  little  stone,
and  had  stated  that  the  stone  would
strike  the  image  upon  the  toes  and
feet  and  break  it  to  pieces, — that  then
it  would  become  a  great  mountain
and  fill  the  whole  earth.  Judge  King
inquired  of  the  witness  if  Mr.  Smith
did  not  say  that  the  little  stone
spoken  of  was  the  Mormon  Church.
The  witness  answered  in  the  affirma-
tive. Judge  King,  turning  to  the
clerk,  said,  "Write  that  down  ;  that
is  treason."  According  to  this  de-
cision, the  doctrines  taught  in  the
Bible  were  actually  treason.  General
Doniphan  replied,  "  By  G — d,  Judge,
you  had  better  make  the  Bible  trea-
son, and  done  with  it."  They  of
course  believed  that  the  kingdom
spoken  of  is  a  figurative  kingdom  ■  but
wc  know  that  God  has  organized  that
kingdom,  and  it  will  roll  forth  with.  I


SALVATION


BY  W0BKS


power  and  might  until  it  overcomes
all  obstacles,  and  fills  the  whole  earth.
Then  it  will  grant  shelter  and  pro-
tection to  all  who  are  honest  and  up-
right, and  protect  them  in  their  re-
ligious sentiments,  whatever  they
may  be.  This  will  bring  about  a
reign  of  peace  and  happiness  that  the
world  has  long  looked  for.

Men  may  speculate  and  write  their
squibs ;  they  may  undertake  to  write
this  way  or  that ;  yet  the  Lord  has
commenced  his  work,  and  it  will
spread  itself  abroad  until  the  laws  of
Zion  are  sent  forth  among  all  nations ;
for  this  work  and  this  people  will


eventually  have  the  dominion,  and  no
arm  can  hinder  it.  Every  man  that
is  fool  enough  to  be  blinded  by  Satan
will  miss  the  honour,  the  glory,  and
the  exaltation  that  await  those  who
shall  be  sanctified  and  be  prepared  to
enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the
city,  while  those  who  adhere  faith-
fully  to  the  servants  of  God  that  are
always  on  band  to  build  up  Zion,
seeking  first  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God  and  to  learn  his  righteousness,
will  rise  in  majesty,  glory,  exaltation  s
and  dominion.

May  this  be  our  case,  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen,


SALVATION  BY  WORKS.

i  .

>  *;  ■ ■ '  0 •  p

Remarks  by  President  Heeeb  C.  Kimball,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  June  24,  1860.


II E PORTED  BY  J,  V.  LONG,


I  have  no  desire  to  detain  yon  here
and  weary  you,  for  there  has  been
more  said  now  than  you  can  retain
in  your  minds.  All  the  items  that
have  been  advanced  by  brother
young  are  very  good.  When  you
reflect  and  take  into  consideration  the
rel  igion  of  Jesus  Christ,  viewing  it  from
the  beginning  to  the  present  time,
you  can  easily  see  that  it  is  for  you
and  I  and  every  man  upon  the  face
of  the  earth  to  be  wide  awake  to  our
duties,  to  be  Sainted  to  be  righteous,
virtuous,  pure,  and  holy  men  and
women.  It  is  all  to  be  compre-
hended in  the  words  of  James  the


Apostle.  He  says,  "  Faith  without
works  is  dead,  being  alone."

Now,  our  position  is  such  that  we
are  required  to  manifest  that  which  is
in  us  by  our  works.  The  following
reasoning  by  the  Apostle  James  is
excellent  upon  this  subject : — **  What
doth  it  profit,  my  brethren,  though  a
man  say  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not
works  ?  Can  faith  save  him  ?  If  a
brother  or  sister  be  naked  and  desti-
tute of  daily  food,  and  one  of  you
say  unto  them,  Depart  in  peace,  be  ye
warmed  and  filled  ;  notwithstanding
ye  give  them  not  those  things  which
are  needful  to  the  body ;  what  doth  it


76  JOUBNAI.  OP

profit  ?  Even  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not
works,  is  dead,  being  alone*  Yea,  a
man  may  say,  Thou  hast  faith,  and  I
have  works.  Show  me  thy  faith  with-
out thy  works,  and  I  will  show  thee
my  faith  by  my  works.  Thou  be-
lievest  that  there  is  one  God;  thou
doest  well:  the  devil* also  believe,
and  tremble.  But  wilt  thou  know,
O  vain  man,  that  faith  without  works
is  dead  ?  Was  not  Abraham  our
father  justified  by  works  when  he  had
oflered  Isaac  his  son  upon  the  altar  ?
Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with
his  works,  and  by  works  was  faith
made  perfect?  And  the  Scripture
was  fulfilled  which  saith,  Abraham
believed  God,  and  it  was  imputed
unto  him  for  righteousness;  and  he
was  called  the  friend  of  God.  Ye  see,
then,  how  that  by  works  a  man  is  jus-
tified, and  not  by  faith  only.  Like-
wise also  was  not  Rabab  the  harlot
lustified  by  works  when  she  had  re-
reived  the  messengers  and  had  sent
them  out  another  way  ?  For  as  the
body  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so
faith  without  works  is  dead  also,"
(James,  chap.  2,  verses  14—26.)

Can  you  tell  me  about  anything
that  has  been  accomplished  without
works  ?  It  matters  not  how  much
faith  you  have  got,  except  you  have
works  with  it.  We  read  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  that  men
can  accomplish  much  by  faith ;  but
of  course  that  faith  must  be  ac-
companied by  works.  Whenever  a
man  of  God  undertakes  to  do  any-
thing, he  does  it  by  the  power  of
faith  and  works.  Upon  this  prin-
ciple the  Lord  brings  about  his  pur-
poses, and  there  never  was  anything
of  any  moment  accomplished  upon
any  other  principle.  The  Almighty
has  said  that  in  the  latter  days  he
will  send  forth  his  angels  to  inflict
punishment  upon  the  wicked,  and
that  a  certain  angel  shall  blow  his
trumpet,  proclaiming  that  time  shall
be  no  more. An  angel  will  also  be


DISCOURSES.

sent  forth  to  destroy  the  wicked,  or,
as  the  Scriptures  say,  to  reap  down
the  earth."

There  is  virtue  in  the  words  of  a
man  of  God ;  and  when  he  rises  to
address  the  people,  he  tells  them  his
message  plainly,  commands  them  to
repent  of  their  sins  and  to  be  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  them;
after  which  he  promises  them  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then,
when  persons  are  received  into  the
Church,  they  begin  their  lives  anew,
as  though  they  had  never  sinned,  and
thus  go  on  unto  perfection.

We  are  told  to  work  out  our  salva-
tion by  our  faith,  and  with  fear  and
trembling.  And  cannot  you  readily
see  that  works  are  required  at  the  be-
ginning of  our  career,  and  from  that
time  to  the  end  of  our  lives  ?  Where
is  there  a  man  in  the  world  that  ever
raised  a  crop  of  grain  witln  >ut  works  ?
If  a  man  wishes  to  raise  a  crop  of
wheat,  he  first  ploughs  the  ground,
then  he  drags  it ;  he  next  sows  the
wheat;  and  when  the  dry  season
comes  on  in  this  country,  he  irrigates
it ;  when  it  is  ripe  he  reaps  it,  hauls
it  home,  stacks  it ;  and  when  he  gets
ready,  thrashes  it,  takes  it  to  the  fan-
ning mill,  from  there  to  the  grist
mill,  where  it  passes  through  the
smutter;  it  is  then  ground,  bolted,
and  taken  home  ready  for  use.  And
every  process  that  the  wheat  passes
through  is  controlled  by  works*  And
it  is  so  with  us :  we  are  required  to
perform  works  of  righteousness  all
the  day  long.

Brethren,  you  are  required  to  be
very  diligent  and  cautious ;  and,  as
brother  Joseph  said,  Be  careful  not  to
put  in  anything  that  will  sour  and
destroy  the  good  that  you  do.  Take
good  care  of  all  the  good  you  get;
increase  in  faith  and  in  good  works ;
for,  as  James  says,  "Faith  without
works  is  dead,  being  alone."

Then  go  on  with  your  works  of
righteousness;  be  diligent  and  faith-


SALVATION

ful  in  all  things  committed  to  your
charge.  Let  the  Elders  be  at  their
posts,  and  be  ready  to  administer  in
the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  God
whenever  duty  requires  it  of  them.
If  the  Elders  will  be  faithful,  the
power  of  God  will  attend  them  in
their  administrations;  but  if  the
people  to  whom  they  administer  have
not  repented,  they  will  not  receive  the
remission  of  their  sins,  nor  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  that  Spirit  will
not  dwell  with  that  person  who  does
not  honour  his  calling,  and  who  is  not
sincere  and  truly  penitent  before  the
Almighty.  You  may  go  to  meeting
and  sit  ft  ora  one  day's  end  to  another,
and  it  will  not  profit  you  anything,  if
you  do  not  perform  the  works  of
righteousness  required  by  the  law  of
heaven.  J
I  can  live  my  religion,  whether  at
home  or  abroad,  whether  I  sit  here,
preach  to  the  people,  or  do  anything
else  that  pertains  to  my  calling  and
position.  If  it  is  necessary  for  me  to
preach,  I  rejoice  in  doing  it,  or  in  the
performance  of  any  other  duty.  If
I  do  not  confess,  I  shall  be  con-
demned.

I  have  noticed  that  there  are  not
many  of  those  "counter-jumpers"
come  to  meeting  :  the  saloon  keepers
are  not  much  better.  It  is  hard  times
with  them  ;  there  is  not  much  money
stirring  now  ;  the  business  is  almost
done  on  credit  now-a-days.  What  do
you  think  T  think  of  old  grey-headed
men  who  sell  whisky  all  the  week,
and  then  come  to  meeting  on  Sun-
day ?  I  do  not  fellowship  such  men,
be  they  young  or  old ;  I  disfellow-
ship  them  all.  I  cannot  fellowship
the  old  men  who  have  loved  it  from
their  youth,  and  then  go  and  give  it
to  young  men,  and  lead  them  to  de-
stroy their  bodies  and  defile  the  earth.
It  is  drunkenness  that  leads  to  whore-
dom and  abominations  of  every  kind,
and  brother  John  Alger,  senior,  who
sits  before  me,  knows  it  as  well  as  I


by  works.  77

do.  He  knew  me  when  I  was  a  mere
boy,  and  there  was  not  a  drunkard  in
all  that  district  of  country ;  but  now
they  are  nearly  all  drunkards  in  that
part  of  the  State;  yes,  men  and
women  are  leading  each  other  to  de-
struction. Then  who  can  have  any
feelings  against  me  for  talking
against  these  things?

I  wish  now  to  speak  of  works.
Let  us  consider  those  principles  and
ordinances  that  lead  to  life.  Tho
doctrines  we  teach  are  good  and
wholesome,  and  every  man  and
woman  that  will  observe  them  will
he  saved;  thej  will  be  at  peace  at
home  and  abroad.  Do  you  think  it
will  inspire  a  man  who  is  already
honest  to  become  a  Latter-day  Saint  ?
No;  I  am  just  the  same  in  that  re-
spect now  as  I  was  before  I  embraced
the  Gospel.  I  was  honest  then,  and
I  am  honest  now,  and  brother  Alger
knows  it.  The  man  that  will  be  dis-
honest with  what  we  call  Gentiles
will  rob  me,  if  I  give  him  an  oppor-
tunity. Ton  should  be  as  honest
with  those  comers  and  goers  as  you
are  with  me.  God  has  never  given
you  the  right  to  be  dishonest.  There
are  ioo  many  such  characters  in  our
midst.  Sometimes  I  am  sorry,  some-
times I  am  glad,  and  sometimes  I  am
ashamed  of  what  I  see  and  hear.
How  long  will  such  things  continue  ?
Not  many  years,  I  can  tell  you.  Our
Father  will  sweep  them  from  the
land,  and  that  man  who  is  honest,
although  he  does  not  profess  religion
at  all,  will  be  saved ;  but  those  who
profess  and  do  not  possess  the  spirit
of  their  profession,  and  who  do  not
live  np  to  their  privileges,  will  be  cast
out.  None  can  stand  or  endure  the
trying  day,  except  those  who  are  ac-
tive and  diligent  in  the  discharge  of
their  duties.

There  are  some  people  who  think  I
am  very  hard,  and  occasionally  pretty
rough  in  my  sayings ;  but  I  can  tell
yon  that  I  am  not  as  severe  as  I  ought


I


78  JOtBSAL  OF

to  be,  considering  the  persons  and
cases  I  have  got  to  deal  with.  "When
I  see  people  taking  a  coarse  to  lead
them  to  destruction,  I  feel  anxious  to
save  them  from  falling.  I  know  that
I  am  a  poor  frail  mortal, liable  to  err  ;
but  I  know  better  than  to  cheat  or
rob  a  neighlxmr,  and  so  does  every
man  that  has  been  baptized  into  this
Church  ;  but  men  give  way  to  temp-
tation. If  men  steal,  they  know
they  are  doing  wrong  and  sinning
against  God.

In  regard  to  trials  that  brother
Joseph  was  speaking  of,  I  consider
that  I  never  had  any  that  affected
me ;  and  if  anybody  ever  rejoiced  in
tribulation,  I  did  when  Iliad  to  break
up  and  go  and  make  a  new  home.
When  the  proper  time  comes,  we
shall  all  have  the  privilege  of  attend-
ing to  the  ordinance  necessary  for  the
salvation  of  our  dead.  My  brothers
and  sisters  and  all  my  relatives  almost
died  before  the  Gospel  was  revealed  ;
and  when  we  get  a  Temple  built,  I
will  go  forth  ai  d  be  baptized  for
them,  and  bring  them  to  enjoy  that
which  is  their  right.  At  present  I
have  to  say  to  you,  brethren  and
sisters,  Live  the  life  of  the  righteous,
do  that  which  is  required  for  the
benefit  of  the  living,  and  the  day
will  come  when  you  can  go  through
the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  God
for  the  dead.

I  am  free  to  acknowledge  that  a
great  majority  of  this  people  are  im-
proving, and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that
a  few  of  them  are  retrograding.
Some  have  become  contaminated  by
associating  with  this  array.  They
are  responsible  for  this  themselves,
for  God  never  suffered  an  army  to
come  here  to  corrupt  the  people,  but
to  try  them — to  prove  them  in  this
as  well  as  ha  other  things.  It  is  true
the  army  has  been  o  curse  to  many,
more  so  than  any  previous  influence


DISCOURSES.

with  which  they  have  come  in  contact.
We  have  to  be  tried,  and  this  has
been  suffered,  to  see  what  we  would
do.  Many  who  have  come  here  would,
if  they  had  an  opportunity,  debauch
our  families — seduce  our  wives  and
daughters.  There  are  some  honour-
able exceptions  to  this,  and  those  who
would  not  do  it  here  would  not  do  it
at  home.

There  are  many  enemies  of  ours
that  look  upon  us  as  the  outcasts  of
all  creation,  because  of  our  religion.
I  expect  to  see  the  day  when  they
will  have  to  come  and  be  our  servants,
and  they  can  not  avoid  this.

This  is  the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God,  and  the  religion  we  have  em*
braced  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  it  will  ere  long  prevail  over  the
whole  world,  and  the  wicked  cannot
prevent  it.  Do  you  think  they
believe  it  ?  Yes,  the  Congress  of
the  United  States  have  more  trouble
abbot  us  than  they  have  about  the
whole  world  besides.

This  is  a  day  of  judgment ;  hurri.
canes  are  passing  over  the  land  and
terrifying  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth;  and  this  is  not  the  end.
Many  persons  who  profess  to  know
have  been  predicting  that  in  the  year
1861  more  events  of  a  marvellous
character  would  take  place  than  in
any  previous  year ;  but  whether  this
is  the  case  or  not,  I  know  that  tho
judgments  of  God  will  pass  over  the
earth.

In  conclusion,  I  feel  to  bless  this
land,  these  valleys,  mountains,
waters,  also  our  herds  and  flocks ;  I
feel  to  bless  all  the  righteous,  and
predict  judgments  upon  the  wicked.
Let  the  Elders  who  meet  to  pray
after  the  holy  order  of  the  Priest-
hood ask  the  Father  to  hasten  the
consummation  of  his  work,  that  the
Saints  may  inherit  the  earth.
God  bless  you  all  forever !  Amen.


BUILDING  UP THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC.


79


BUILDING  UP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  Ac.

Discourse  by  President  Daxikl  II.  Wells, made  m  the  Bowery,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  September  1860.

BBPOBTEB  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


I  feel  to  rejoice  this  day  in  what  I
have  heard.  The  kingdom  of  God  is
independent,  and  so  are  the  servants
of  God.  They  should  act  so  always,
rmd  not  be  afraid  to  tell  the  truth.

I  rejoice  particularly  in  the  over-
turn of  affairs  suggested  by  our  Presi-
dent this  morning  in  regard  to  as-
sisting the  Elders  from  this  end  of
the  route.

This  is  a  good  day  for  Israel — the
very  best  day  they  have  ever  seen.
They  are  prospered ;  they  are  be-
coming wealthy  in  the  good  things  of
life;  they  are  comfortable,  and  they
have  peace  in  all  their  borders*  They
go  forth  upon  the  right  hand  and
upon  the  left,  and  they  are  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God.  They  did
more  yesterday  than  the  day  before,
find  they  are  continuing  to  do  so  every
day,  and  thus  the  kingdom  is
i  ncreasing.

How  fully  we  should  realize  (and
perhaps  many  of  us  do  partially  rea-
lize) the  greatness  of  the  work  in
which  wcare engaged — the  magnitude
of  the  work  of  this  last  dispensation.
What  else  should  occupy  our  atten-
tion equal  to  it  ?  There  are  scarcely
any,  be  they  rich  or  poor,  but  what
have  these  feelings,  and  they  have
come  here  in  consequence  of  them,
and  some  few  may  have  come  for
other  motives.  But  I  take  it  for
granted  that  those  who  come  here  do
so  because  their  hearts  have  been
touched  with  the  light  of  truth.

This  is  the  beauty  of  the  revelations
nnd  principles  that  have  been  re-


vealed  in  these  last  days.  They  that
have  embraced  thetn  desire  to  build
up  and  exalt  righteousness  upon  the
earth,  and  to  walk  wickedness  and
every  species  of  abomination  under
their  feet ;  and  for  this  cause  have
they  assembled  themselves  together
in  these  valleys  of  the  mountains.
There  is  less  of  wickedness  and  of
those  who  desire  unrighteousness  and
to  roll  it  as  a  sweet  morsel  under
their  tongues :  their  desire  is  to  exalt
the  principles  of  truth  with  which
they  have  fallen  in  love.  They  have
crossed  the  great  seas  and  plains,  and
many  of  them  liave  striven  for  years
to  come  to  these  mountains  to  associ-
ate with  those  that  have  pursued  the
same  course,  stimulated  by  the  same
influence.  We  have  great  reason  to
rejoice  that  there  is  a  nucleus  formed
here  that  we  can  gather  to.  It
should  be  the  feeling  of  every  heart,
not  to  build  up  ourselves,  but  to  build
up  the  kingdom  of  our  God.  How
is  this  to  be  accomplished  ?  We  arc
to  he  united  as  the  heart  of  one  man.
We  have  difficulties  to  contend  with,
as  the  people  of  God  always  had.  We
need  food  and  clothing,  but  we  do
not  need  the  wickedness  which  other
people  revel  in,  or  the  wastefulness
with  which  others  trample  under
their  feet  the  good  things  bestowed
upon  them  by  our  Heavenly  Father ;
but  we  require  that  wisdom  that  will
enable  us  to  live  and  accomplish  the
most  good,  in  the  test  way,  in  the
work  in  which  we  are  engfasred.  It  is
our  business  to  provide  for  ourselves


I


80


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUHSES.


and  our  households  those  things  that
are  necessary  to  make  them  comfort-
able. It  is  our  duty  to  teach  them
how  to  pray,  and  how  to  practise
economy,  and  do  all  things  for  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
How  shall  we  use  the  bounties  of
nature  so  as  to  build  up  this  king-
dom ?  We  must  go  to  work  with
spirit  and  energy  to  do  those  things
that  are  necessary  for  our  existence,
and  to  give  us  greater  ability  for  the
rolling  forth  of  the  work  of  the  Lord.
Let  virtue  and  truth  control  us  in  all
things.  Are  we  not  living  in  an  age
of  revelation  ?  Do  we  not  have  re-
velation day  by  day,  week  by  week,
and  month  by  month,  pertaining  to
our  salvation  ?  Suppose  that  one  of
you  were  living  in  some  dark  corner
of  the  earth,  and  the  litybt  of  revela-
tion  and  truth  should  reach  and  pene-
trate your  understanding,  and  leave  a
testimony  in  your  bosom  higher  in
value  and  more  to  be  coveted  than
gold  ;  would  it  not  be  more  appreci-
ated than  it  is  now  ?

If  we  cultivate  the  Spirit  and  influ-
ence that  was  spoken  of  to-day,  and
if  we  notice  and  observe  its  operations,
it  will  be  like  the  voice  of  the  true
shepherd  speaking  unto  us.  If  we
clothe  ourselves  with  that  Spirit,  we
shall  be  blest  with  its  guidance  and
inspirations  from  time  to  time  ;  we
Bhall  have  line  upon  line  and  precept
upon  precept.  If  this  influence  and
Spirit  were  to  control  us  continually,
we  should  see*  feel,  and  appreciate  it;
we  should  know  that  it  was  from
heaven — the  voice  of  the  Almighty
unto  us.  I  have  heard  many  say  that
they  required  not  u  Thus  saith  the
Lord,"  because  they  knew  the  words
of  the  servants  of  God  to  be  true,  by
the  Spirit  and  influence  that  accom-
panied them.  This  satisfies  any  one
who  has  the  light  of  truth  within
him.  And  this  is  what  we  all  can
have :  we  can  all  attain  to  it,  if  we
have  this  Spirit. When  this  is  our


guide,  we  know  what  is  the  true  voice
from  heaven :  we  can  then  tell  when
anything  emanates  from  the  right
source,  and  we  can  see  the  beauty
there  is  therein,  and  the  propriety  of
following  out  the  dictates  of  wisdom
and  the  instructions  which  we  receive
from  day  to  day.  We  should  strive
to  appreciate  and  undei-stand  the
things  we  hear,  and  then  go  and  prac-
tise upon  them.  We  should  love  the
truth  for  the  truth's  sake,  as  we  were
told  this  morning,  and  do  all  that
lies  in  our  power  for  the  advancement
of  the  cause  of  truth.  We  should
labour  for  the  attainment  of  this  ob-
ject with  perseverance  and  energy,
and  work  hnmbly  and  diligently,  that
hundreds  and  thousands  more  may
be  brought  to  an  understanding  of
the  same  glorious  principles  that  we
now  rejoice  in.  We  should  also  strive
to  learn  more  of  everything  that  is
necessary  for  our  benefit,  and  that  we
may  be  useful  in  the  kingdom  in
which  we  are  engaged  ;  and  thereby
we  shall  learn  to  be  diligent  in  the
work  of  the  Lord.

Have  we  any  need  to  see  any  idle
times  in  our  experience  in  this  Church
and  kingdom  ?  I  have  not  found  any
peace  in  my  experience  where  I  could
be  idle  for  one  moment ;  and  if  I
have  not  had  my  mind  and  hands  em-
ployed, I  have  always  felt  that  I  was
idle  and  unprofitable.  And  I  will
here  remark  that  I  think,  if  we  are
willing,  we  have  plenty  to  do;  and  I
think  it  would  be  so  with  all,  if  they
had  the  right  spirit.

Let  ps  all  strive  to  he  in  the  way
of  our  duty,  and  ready  to  jump  into
any  place  and  work.  No  matter
what  is  to  be  accomplished,  do  it
with  an  eye  single  to  the  glory  of
God  and  the  advancement  of  his  king-
dom. My  soul  delights  in  seeing
any  measure  adopted,  which  has  a
tendency  to  roll  on  the  great  work  of
the  Lord.  I  rejoice  that  the  means
of  the  Church  are  now  going  to  be


husbanded  and  kept  for  the  gathering
of  the  Saints,  instead  of  being  ex-
pended for  fine  clothing  and  other  un-
necessary articles,  which  is  almost
equal  to  squandering  the  money
away.  I  know  the  feelings  of  Presi-
dent Young  upon  this  subject,  and
have  for  years.  He  has  been  borne
down  under  this  for  some  time,  and  all
Israel  ought  to  rejoice  in  this  move-
ment ;  for  it  is  lifting  a  great  burden
from  the  people  abroad  as  well  as
from  the  Presidency ;  and  I  consider
that  the  Saints  in  these  valleys  ought
to  be  thankful  for  the  opportunity  of
doing  something  for  the  spread  of
the  Gospel.  Have  you  not  seen
many  precious  opportunities  for
doing  good,  and  neglected  them,  and
afterward  regretted  that  you  have  let
them  pass?  If  you  have,  remember
now,  and  consider  that  you  will  r  egret
more  if  you  let  the  present  redeeming
chance  pass  without  doing  something
to  aid  in  sending  forth  the  Gospel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth,  I  would
likewise  advise  you  to  make  your
deposits  towards  gathering  the  poor.
Remember  that  it  is  one  of  the  chief
duties  of  the  Saints  to  gather  Israel,
in  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  ;
and  everything  we  do  should  conspire
to  this  end.

It  is  for  this  purpose  that  we
gather  together,  and  that  we  may
have  greater  power  and  put  our
means  together  to  accomplish  it  in  a
greater  degree,  and  that  we  may  see
how  we  can  best  operate  to  bring
forth  more  fully  the  kingdom  of  God
and  the  gathering  of  Israel*

I  am  told  that  in  the  old  country
they  have  a  saving  fund,  into  which
they  cast  their  spare  pence  for  the
gathering  of  the  poor  Saints,  They
pray  and  watch;  they  also  fast,
believing  that  their  deliverance  will
come,  if  they  are  faithfdl  in  putting
by  a  little  every  week  for  the  purpose
of  bringing  the  poor  to  Zion.  You
that  have  been  there  and  passed

No.  6.


through  the  ordeal  know  about  this
better  than  I  do.  I  understand  how
anxious  they  feel  to  gather  with  the
Saints  to  these  mountain  fastnesses,
and  I  will  ask  how  you  feel,  who  have
left  brothers  and  sisters  in  those
lands.  Do  you  not  think  that  they
feel  to  long  for  the  hour  to  come
when  they  can  have  the  blessings
which  you  enjoy  in  these  valleys  of
the  mountains  ?  Do  they  not  long
to  contribute  to  the  building  up  of
the  kingdom  of  God.

It  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  this
generation  of  the  Saints  of  God  to
impart  freely  of  their  substance  for
the  gathering  of  scattered  Israel,  and
also  to  aid  in  dispensing  the  words  of
life  to  all  nations,  that  those  who  sit
in  darkness  may  have  an  opportunity
of  embracing  the  Gospel  of  salvation
that  has  been  revealed  in  this  dispen-
sation. This  Gospel  must  be  pro-
claimed to  every  creature,  that  they
may  receive  it,  if  they  see  proper;
and  if  they  do  not,  they  will  be  under
condemnation.  This  is  an  obligation
resting  upon  the  Saints  of  God.
Who  are  there  that  would  not  be  glad
to  gather  their  friends  together  and
encircle  them  around  them — I  mean
those  whom  they  know  to  be  as  honest
as  themselves  ?  They  would  certainly
like  to  have  their  relatives  participate
in  the  same  blessings  that  they  them-
selves enjoy.  We  all  wish  our  friends
to  have  the  privilege  of  exercising
their  own  agency  in  regard  to  the
Gospel,  as  well  as  in  any  other  matter,
I  suppose  there  are  none  )ynt  that
have  these  feelings  for  their  friends
and  acquaintances.

We  are  here  living  in  the  midst  of
the  Saints,  participating  in  all  the
blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
And  suppose  we  do  not  have  all  the
luxuries  we  desire,  what  of  that?
How  often  do  the  Saints  abroad  go
without  a  meal's  victuals  for  the  sake
of  saving  something  for  the  Mission
and  for  the  spread  of  truth  ? I  have

Vol.  IX.


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOTJItSES-


heard  the  Elders  say  when  they  were
gathering  money  to  assist  the
brethren  to  go  to  India,  that  many
of  the  poor  would  go  to  meeting
without  anything  to  eat  for  the  sake  of
contributing  something  to  help  forward
the  work  of  the  Lord.  AYho  is  there
here  that  has  dune  without  a  meal
of  victuals  for  the  sake  of  the  Gos-
pel ?  Let  us  think  of  these  things,
brethren  and  sisters,  and  do  all  we
can  for  this*  or  any  other  enterprise
that  may  be  suggested  by  our  Pre-
sident. Let  us  see  how  ready  we  can
be  to  man  the  ship  Zion,  and  to  push
on  any  enterprise  that  he  has  set  on
foot;  and  in  this  way  we  can  test
ourselves  and  see  if  we  are  as  ready
as  we  were  in  the  first  place  to  assist
in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  to  yield
of  the  things  of  the  world  and  every-
thing else  for  the  cause's  sake.

Economy  and  prudence  in  our  deal
and  management  is  a  thing  touched
upon  by  brother  Kimball  this  afternoon.
Now,  you  all  know  that  speculation  is  !
rife  in  our  midst.  What  do  specu-
lators care  about  our  principles  ?
Nothing  whatever.  They  run  here
to  line  their  pockets  with  the  golden
god  in  the  mountains.  Yes,  they
come  one  after  another  to  offer  their
worship  at  the  shrine  of  the  golden
god.  If  this  is  not  idolatry,  I  would
like  to  see  it,  and  to  know  where  it  is.
mere  does  this  idolatrous  worship
prevail  so  much  as  it  does  in  the
Christian  world  ?  Among  the
nations  it  seems  to  be  the  object  of
both  merchants  and  ministers  to  get
the  people's  money.

When  I  have  heard  that  some  of
the  Elders  of  this  Church  made  it
their  special  object  to  get  people's
money,  and  that  their  preaching  has
been  MONEY,  money,  money,  every
day  of  their  ministry,  I  have  been
grieved  in  my  spirit ;  and  then  they
would  come  upon  this  stand,  when
they  returned,  and  misrepresent  their
labours. I  have  been  ashamed  of


their  conduct.  Then,  again,  I  have
heard  the  Elders  tell  that  they  had
to  gather  money  for  such  and  such  a
fund,  and  that  half  their  preaching
was  about  money.  I  have  felt
anxious  to  see  some  change.  This
movement,  then,  I  hail  as  a  great
blessing  to  the  British  Saints.
What  a  blessing  it  will  be  when  they
are  relieved  from  this  great  burden !
I  rejoice  in  it,  and  I  trust  we  shall  all
feel  united  in  responding  to  the
calh

I  will  also  call  your  attention  to
something  else  in  addition  to  the
Mis^fonary  Fund,  Let  us  do  some-
thing towards  emigrating  the  poor
Saints  at  this  end  of  the  route.  I
feel  interested  in  it.  We  have  had  a
great  many  come  to  us  to  know  how
they  could  manage  to  get  their  friends
from  the  old  country.  Many  of  them
are  out  of  employment,  and  they  do
not  know  how  to  get  out  of  bondage.
The  friends  of  such  persons  come  to
us  and  want  us  to  help  them ;  but
what  have  we  to  assist  them  with  ?
Who  of  you  have  paid  your  Tithing

for  the  last  two  years  ?  (President

Young  :  u  They  do  not  know  what  it
means/')  You  have  almost  forgotten
the  meaning  of  the  word:  this  is
through  carelessness.  Let  us  rub  up
a  little,  and  see  if  we  cannot  learn
what  tithing  means.  Will  you  rob
the  Lord  of  tithes  and  of  offerings  ?

These  are  not  my  words,  but  they
are  in  the  Bible.  The  Prophet  said
to  the  Jews — "  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?
Yet  ye  have  robbed  me.  But  ye  say,
Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  In
In  tithes  and  offerings.  Ye  are
cursed  with  a  curse;  for  ye  have
robbed  me,  even  this  whole  nation.
Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  store-
house, that  there  may  be  meat  in
mine  house,  and  prove  me  now  here-
with, saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  if  I
will  not  open  you  the  windows  of
heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,
that  there  shall  not  be  room  enough


9

•r


BUILDING TP  THE  K

to  receive  it.  And  I  will  rebuke  the
devourer  for  your  sakes,  and  he  shall
not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  ground ;
neither  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit
before  the  time  in  the  field,  sa;th  the
Lord  of  hosts.  And  all  nations  shall
call  you  blessed ;  for  ye  shall  be  a
delightsome  land,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts."  (Malachi,  chap.  3?  verses  8
and  12.)  *. ,

Let  us  apply  these  things  to  our-
selves, ponder  over  them,  and  seek
to  do  better,  and  live  better  every
day,  and  strive  to  increase  in  our
ability  to  do  good.

I  have striven diligently  to  do
what  I  could  for  this  kingdom,  and  I
find  that  the  more  I  do  the  more
ability  the  Almighty  gives  me.  I
hope  ever  to  be  free  with  what  means
I  have,  and  the  Lord  knows  that  I
cherish  nothing  in  this  world  in  com-
parison with  the  success  and  pros-
perity of  this  kingdom. When  I
joined  the  Church,  I  joined  with  all
I  could  control,  and  I  rejoice  in  the
continuation  of  this  feeling  within
me. Let  ua  all  live  and  feel  that  it
is  a  duty  and  privilege  for  every  one
of  us  to  be  upon  the  altar,  and  to  do
all  we  can  to  promote  the  interests  of
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.
In  that  our  interests  are  combined
and  circumscribed. If  we  wish  to
appeal  to  a  selfish  motive,  we  shall
find  that  motive  fully  satisfied  in  pur-
suing that  course  in  which  I  have  en-
deavoured to direct  your  minds.
The  best  investments  and  bargains
that  you  can  make  and  the  best
thing  you  can  do  for  yourselves  here
while  in  time  and  for  eternity  is  to
let  the  kingdom  absorb  all  your  in-
terests and  all  that  pertains  to  you.
It  is  the  best  bargain  that  any  son  and
daughter  of  Adam  can  make,  to  con-
secrate their  time,  their  talents,  and
all  that  they  possess  to  the  advance-
ment of  the  cause  of  our  Redeemer ;
for  by  it  we  shall  obtain  all  that  is
good  for  us  here  and  all  we  desire  in


INGDOM OF GOD FTC,  83

the  future.  Through  that  channel
we  shall  attain  eternal  riches,  and
through  that  channel  we  shall  pre-
serve our  identity  before  our  Father
and  God,  and  insure  our  salvation  in
his  kingdom.

Let  us  be  obedient  and  humble,
and  listen  to  the  whisperings  of  the
Spirit  of  God.  There  are  not  many
people  in  the  world  but  who  hear  the
whisperings  of  the  Spirit  at  times,
and  you  Latter-day  Saints  have  a
claim  upon  it  constantly,  if  faithful.
I  have  remembered  the  whisperings
of  the  Spirit  to  me  for  years  after
they  were  given,  and  they  have  come
to  my  mind  at  times  and  seasons
when  they  liave  been  very  acceptable.
I  know  that  it  came  to  me  by  the
power  of  the  Spirit  with  regard  to
the  truth  of  this  work.

I  can  bear  the  same  kind  of  testi-
mony a.s  brother  Pratt,  who  addressed
you  this  morning,  although  he  has
been  an  Apostle  for  rmmy  years,  and
was  one  before  I  was  baptized.  This
causes  me  to  rejoice,  because  we  have
ail  the  privilege  of  receiving  a  testi-
mony for  ourselves.

"This  is  the  Gusprl  of  Jesua
Christ :  go  and  be  baptized  for  the
remission  of  your  sins,"  was
the  whispering  of  the  Spirit  to
me.  I  soon  went  forward  and
and  embraced  it,  and  I  have  been
thankful  ever  since  that  I  followed
the  dictates  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  It
is  true  I  did  not  think  as  much  of  it
at  that  time  as  I  have  done  since,  but
I  know  it  was  the  whispering  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  me.

If  any  times  when  I  heard  Presi-
dent Joseph  Smith  teaching  the
people  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,
I  have  had  this  same  influence  whis-
pering to  me  that  what  he  said  was
true,  and  I  often  desired  in  my  heart
that  the  time  might  come  when  I
could  go  forth  and  be  baptized  and
dwell  with  this  people;  and  the  Lord
has  answered my prayer. I  feel


BUILDING  UP  THE KINGDOM  OP GOD,  ETC.


85


perhaps  there  are  some  who  are  ac-
countable for  having  put  the  intoxi-
cating cup  to  their  neighbour's  lips,  and
more  especially  for  having  put  it  to
the  lips  of  their  sons.  It  seems  to
me  that  there  should  be  some  re-
straining influence  thrown  around  the
rising  generation,  as  well  as  on  this
practice  of  men  introducing  liquor  to
others.  I  suppose  that  a  man  is  re-
sponsible who  takes  liquor  into  his
system ;  but  I  would  rather  it  be  some
one  else  than  me  who  throws  the  first
temptation  in  the  way  of  any  man.
It  is  my  desire  to  throw  around  my
family  and  friends  p  good  influence —
to  instil  into  their  minds  something
better,  higher,  and  nobler.  Parents
can  do  this  whose  minds  are  steady,
and  who  have  the  light  of  truth  in
them  like  a  well  of  water  springing
up  unto  eternal  life.  Let  us  throw
around  those  that  have  a  wild  dispo-
sition a  salutary  influence,  and  en-
deavour to  cause  them  to  forsake  the
paths  of  vice — throw  something
around  them  that  will  be  calculated
to  exalt  them  and  bring  them  into
the  presence  of  their  Father  and  God,
How  joyful  that  family  would  be  if
they  could  save  a  soul !  How  joyful
would  they  be  if  they  could  see  their
sons  taking  a  wise  course,  being  moral
and  sober, — to  see  them  growing  up
in  this  kingdom  in  righteousness,  and
to  have  the  assurance  that  they  were
raising  up  families  imbued  with  righ-
teous and  holy  principles!  What
encouragement  it  would  be  to  press
on  in  the  paths  of  virtue,  and  to  shun
the  path  of  immorality  !  How  pleas-
ing would  it  be  to  see  our  sons  and
daughters  pursuing  the  path  that
leads  to  life,  and  avoiding  the  one  that
leads  to  degradation  and  death  !  I
hope  that  we  shall  see  an  improve-
ment in  this  respect  in  the  future.

I  will  not  occupy  your  time  any
longer.  I  feel  well,  and  I  rejoice  in
the  Gospel  of  salvation,  and  I  feel  to
bear  my  testimony  that  this  is  the


Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  and
that  the  servants  of  God  have  borne
a  faithful  testimony  all  the  day  long.
You  have  had  so  much  of  their
preaching  that  you  do  not  appreciate
it ;  you  have  had  it  like  a  surfeit ;
the  words  seem  to  bound  back  ;  they
are  like  the  tinkling  cymbals,  as  the
President  remarked,  And  it  will  be
so,  unless  you  have  the  spirit  to  ap-
preciate the  teachings  of  the  servants
of  God.  A  greater  blessing  could
not  be  poured  out  upon  you,  and  it
comes  in  such  a  way  that  you  cannot
appreciate  it.  For  instance,  it  is  a
common  thing  for  people  to  say,
"  Oh,  I  have  heard  that  befoi'e  !"  and
hence  the  people  pay  no  attention,
nor  do  they  give  heed  to  the  teach-
ings that  are  given  here.  This  is
because  they  are  blessed  with  them  so
frequently,  But  is  that  the  way  to
do  ?  It  is  the  way  you  do.  But  I
look  for  a  reformation  in  many
things,  The  work  is  not  going  to
stop ;  it  is  going  to  be  propelled  with
immense  force,  and  there  are  sufficient
people  to  make  it  roll  with  greater
rapidity.

This  people  have  been  prospered
and  blessed,  and  have  got  the  com-
forts of  life;  and  if  they  do  not
keep  them  in  their  possession,  it  is
their  own  fault.  It  is  within  the
power  of  every  one  to  get  them  r
they  are  oftered  for  labour  on  every
hand.  Those  who  can  lay  up  for
their  families  should  do  so,  and  their
is  no  necessity  for  any  one  going  short
of  bread.  It  is  offered  in  the  streets
for  sale  very  cheap,  and  the  supposed
surplus  is  going  out  of  the  Territory.
The  people  can  get  it  for  their  labour,
and  they  had  better  keep  it  and
treasure  it  up  against  a  time  of
need.

May  the  Lord  bless  us  all,  and
keep  us  faithful,  and  enable  us  to  be
useful  in  his  kingdom,  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


PIUESTHOOD.


87


mim  on  his  breast,  and  looked  into  it
like  looking  on  a  mirror,  and  the
information  he  needed  was  there
obtained.  This  earth,  when  it
becomes  purified  and  sanctified,  or
celestialized,  will  become  like  a  sea
of  glass ;  and  a  person,  by  looking
into  it,  can  know  things  past,  present,
and  to  come ;  though  none  but  celes-
tialized  beings  can  enjoy  this  privi-
lege. They  will  look  into  the  earth,
and  the  things  they  desire  to  know
will  be  exhibited  to  them,  the  same
as  the  face  is  seen  by  looking  into  a
mirror,  j
The  office  of  a  Bishop  belongs  to
the  lesser  Priesthood.  He  is  the
highest  officer  in  the  Aaronic  Priest-
liui.n.l,  and  lifts  the  privilege  of  using
the  Urim  and  Thummim — has  the
administration  of  angels,  if  he  has
faith,  and  lives  so  that  he  can  receive
and  enjoy  all  the  blessings  Aaron
enjoyed.  At  the  same  time,  could
Aaron  rise  up  and  say,  "  I  have  as
much  power  and  authority  as  you,
Moses  ?  "  No  ;  for  Moses  held  the
keys  and  authority  above  all  the  rest
upon  the  earth.  He  holds  the  keys  of
the  Priesthood  of  Melchisedek,  which
is  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God,
which  holds  the  keys  of  all  these
Priesthoods,  dispensing  the  blessings
and  privileges  of  both  Priesthoods  to
to  the  people,  as  he  did  in  the  days
of  the  children  of  Israel  when  he  led
them  out  of  Egypt.  This  Priest-
hood has  been  on  the  earth  at
various  times.  Adam  had  it,  Seth
had  it,  Enoch  had  it,  Noah  had  it,
Abraham  and  Lot  had  it,  and  it  was
handed  down  to  the  days  of  the
Prophets,  long  after  the  days  of  the
ancients.  But  the  people  would  not
receive  the  Prophets,  but  persecuted
them,  stoned  them  and  thrust  them
out  of  their  cities,  and  they  had  to
wander  in  the  wilderness  and  make  !
dens  and  caves  their  homes.  The
children  of  Israel  never  received  the
llelchisedek  Priesthood ;  they  went


into  bondage  to  enjoy  it  in  part,  but
all  its  privileges  and  blessings  they
never  would  receive  in  full,  until
Jesus  came,  and  then  but  a  few  of
thei^J  w°uld  receive  it.  This  High
Priesthood  rules,  directs,  governs,
and  controls  all  the  Priesthoods,
because  it  is  the  highest  of  alh

What  ordination  should  a  man
receive  to  possess  all  the  keys  and
powers  of  the  Holy  Priesthood  that
were  delivered  to  the  sons  of  Adam  ?
He  should  be  ordained  an  Apostle  of
Jesus  Christ.  That  office  puts  him
in  possession  of  every  key,  every
power,  every  authority,  communica-
tion, benefit,  blessing,  glory,  and
kingdom  that  was  ever  revealed  to
man.  That  pertains  to  the  office  of
an  Apostle  of  Jesus  Cfirist.  In  the
last  week's  Netrs  I  published  a  portion
of  a  revelation,  showing  the  authority
of  the  First  Presidency  of  the
Church,  composed  at  first  of  Joseph
Smith,  Sidney  Rigdon,  and  Frederick
G.  Williams.  When  this  revelation
was  given,  the  two  last-named
brethren  were  Joseph  Smith's  coun-
sellors, and  this  First  Presidency
possessed  the  power  and  authority  of
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  all  the  earth,  and  of  setting  the
Church  in  order  in  its  perfection.
You  read  in  the  revelation  alluded  to
that  when  the  Twelve  were  called
and  ordained,  they  possessed  the
same  power  and  authority  as  the
three  First  Presidents ;  and  in  read-
ing further  you  find  that  there  must
needs  be  appendages  and  helps  grow-
ing out  of  this  Priesthood.  The
Seventies  possess  the  same  power  and
authority ;  they  hold  the  keys  of
establishing,  building  up,  regulating,
ordaining,  and  setting  in  order  the
kingdom  of  God  in  all  its  perfections
upon  tha  earth.  We  have  a  Quorum
oFHigh  Priests,  and  there  are  a
great  many  of  them.  They  are  a
local  body — they  tarry  at  home ;  but
the  Seventies  travel  and  preach;  so


8S


JOUBNAL  OF  D1SCOUESE8.


also  do  the  High  Priests,  when  they
are  called  upon*  They  possess
precisely  the  same  Priesthood  that
the  Seventies  and  the  Twelve  and  the
First  Presidency  possess;  but  are
they  ordained  to  officiate  in  all  the
authority,  powers,  and  keys  of  this
Priesthood?  No,  they  are  not.
Still  they  are  High  Priests  of  God ;
and  if  they  magnify  their  Priest-
hood, they  will  receive  at  some  time
all  the  authority  and  'power  that  it
is  possible  for  man  to  receive.

Suppose  that  Sidney  ftigdon  and
Fx-ederick  G-  Williams  had  been
taken  away  or  had  apostatized,  as  one
of  them  did  soon  after  the  revelation
I  have  referred  to  was  given,  and
there  had  been  only  Joseph  Smith
left  of  the  First  Presidency,  would
he  alone  have  had  authority  to  set  in
order  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the
earth?  Yes.  Again:  Suppose
that  eleven  of  the  Twelve  had  been
taken  away  by  the  power  of  the
Adversary,  that  one  Apostle  has  the
same  power  that  Joseph  had,  and
co'pld  preach,  baptize,  and  set  in  order
the  whole  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  as  much  so  as  the  Twelve,
were  they  all  together.  Again  :  If
in  the  providence  of  God  he  should
permit  the  Enemy  to  destroy  these
two  fiist  Quorums,  and  then  destroy
the  Quorum  of  Seventy,  all  but  one
man,  what  is  his  power  ?  It  would
be  to  go  and  preach,  baptize,  confirm,
lay  on  hands,  ordain,  set  in  order,
build  up,  and  establish  the  whole
kingdom  of  God  as  it  is  now.  Can
we  go  any  further?  Yes;  and  I
think  you  will  see  the  reason  of  it,
and  how  easy  it  is  to  be  understood,
and  see  the  propriety  of  it,  I  really
believe,  and  it  is  my  doctrine,  that
if  I  speak  to  the  brethren  by  the
power  of  the  Spirit  of  my  calling,
ttie  evidences  are  commended  to  those
who  hear,  and  the  reasons  they  see  in
the  spirit  of  the  remarks  I  make.
Suppose  the  Enemy  had  power  to


destroy  all  but  one  of  the  High
Priests  from  the  face  of  the  earth,
what  would  that  one  possess  in  the
power  of  his  Priesthood  ?  He  would
have  power  and  authority  to  go  and
preach,  baptize,  confirm,  ordain,  and
set  in  order  the  kingdom  of  God  in
all  its  perfection  on  the  earth.  Could
he  do  this  without  revelation  ?  No.
Could  the  Seventies  ?  No,  Could
the  Twelve  ?  No.  And  we  ask,
Could  Joseph  Smith  or  the  First
Presidency  do  this  without  revela-
tion? No;  not  one  of  them  could
do  such  a-  work  without  revelation
direct  from  God.  I  can  go  still
further.  Whoever  is  ordained  to  the
office  of  an  Klder  to  a  certain  degree
possesses  the  keys  of  the  Jlelchise-
dek  Priesthood;  and  suppose  only  one
Elder  should  be  left  on  the  earth,
could  he  go  and  set  in  order  the
kingdom  of  God?  Yes,  by  reve-
lation.

How  came  these  Apostles,  theso
Seventies,  these  High  Priests,  and  all
this  organization  we  now  enjoy  ?  It
came  by  revelation.  Father  Cahoon,
who  lately  died  in  your  neighbour-
hood, was  one  of  the  first  men  or-
dained  to  the  office  of  High  Priest  in
this  kingdom.  In  the  year  1831  the
Prophet  Joseph  went  to  Ohio.  He
left  the  State  of  New  York  on  the
last  of  April,  if  my  memory  serves
me,  and  arrived  in  Kirtland  some-
time in  May,  They  held  a  General
Conference,  wThich  was  the  first
Genera]  Conference  ever  called  or  held
in  Ohio.  Joseph  then  received  a
revelation,  and  ordained  High
Priests.  You  read  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants  how  he  re-
ceived the  Priesthood  in  the  first
place.  It  is  there  stated  how  Joseph
received  the  Aaronic  Priesthood.  John
the  Baptist  came  to  Joseph  Smith
and  Oliver  Cowdery.  When  a  per-
son passes  behind  the  vail,  he  can
only  officiate  in  the  spirit-world ;  but
when  he  is  resurrected  he  officiates


PRIESTHOOD,


as  a  resurrected  being,  and  not  as  a
mortal  being.  You  read  in  the  reve-
lation that  Joseph  was  ordained,  as  it
is  written.  When  he  received  the
Melchisedek  Priesthood,  he  had
another  revelation,  Peter,  James,  and
John  came  to  him.  Yon  can  read  the
revelation  at  your  leisure.  When  he
received  this  revelation  in  Kirtland,
the  Lord  revealed  to  him  that  he
shonld  begin  and  ordain  High
Priests ;  and  he  then  ordained  quite
a  number,  all  whose  names  I  do  not
now  recollect  ;  but  Lyman  Wight  was
one;  Fathers  Cahoon  and  Morley,
John  Murdock,  Sidney  Rigdon,  and
others  were  also  then  ordained.
These  were  the  first  that  were  or-
dained to  this  office  in  the  Church.  I
relate  this  to  show  you  how  Joseph
proceeded  step  by  step  in  organizing
the  Church.  At  that  time  there
were  no  Seventies  nor  Twelve
Apostles.

Twenty-seven  years  ago,  on  the  5th
of  this  month,  in  the  year  183  A,  a
company  started  &r  Kirtland  to  re-
deem the  land  of  Zion.  Brother
Heber  C.  Kimball  and  my  brother
Joseph  were  in  that  camp,  There
had  not  then  been  ordained  any
Twelve  Apostles,  nor  any  Seventies,
although  there  was  a  revelation  per-
taining to  the  Apostles  and  Seventies.
There  were  High  Priests,  but  no
High  Priests1  Quorum.  I  am  re-
lating this  as  a  little  matter  of  his-
tory that  will  no  doubt  be  interesting
to  those  who  were  not  there.

After  we  returned  from  Missouri,
my  brother  Joseph  Young  and  myself
had  been  singing  after  preaching  in
a  meeting;  and  when  the  meeting
was  dismissed,  brother  Joseph  Smith
said,  u  Come,  go  down  to  my  house
with  me."  We  went  and  sung  to
him  a  long  time,  and  talked  with
him-  He  then  opened  the  subject  of
the  Twelve  and  Seventies  for  the  first
time  I  ever  thought  of  it.  He  said,
"Brethren,  I  am  going  to  call  out


Twelve  Apostles.  I  think  we  will  get
together,  by-and-by,  and  select
Twelve  Apostles,  and  select  a
Quorum  of  Seventies  from  those  who
have  been  up  to  Zion,  out  of  the
camp  boys."  In  1835,  the  last  of
January  or  in  February,  or  about
that  time,  we  held  our  meetings  from
day  to  day,  and  brother  Joseph  called
out  Twelve  Apostles  at  that  time.
He  had  a  revelation  when  we  were
singing  to  him.  Those  who  were
acquainted  with  him  knew  when  the
Spirit  of  revelation  was  upon  him,
for  his  countenance  wore  an  ex-
pression peculiar  to  himself  while
under  that  influence.  He  preached
by  the  Spirit  of  revelation,  and
taught  in  his  council  by  it,  and  those
who  were  acquainted  with  him  could
discover  it  at  once,  for  at  such
times  there  was  a  peouliar  clearness
and  transparency  in  his  face.  He  fol-
lowed  up  that  revelation  until  he  or-
ganized  the  Church,  and  so  along
until  the  baptism  of  the  dead  was
revealed*

I  relate  these  circumstances  to
show  you  that  a  person  who  is  or-
dained to  the  office  of  an  Elder  in
this  kingdom  has  the  same  Priest-
hood that  the  High  Priests,  that  the
Twelve  Apostles,  that  the  Seventies,
and  that  the  First  Presidency  hold ;
but  all  are  not  called  to  be  one  of  tho
Twelve  Apostles,  nor  are  all  called  to
be  one  of  the  First  Presidency,  nor
to  be  one  of  the  First  Presidents  of
all  the  Seventies,  nor  to  be  one  of  the
Presidents  of  a  Quorum  of  Seventies,
nor  to  preside  over  the  High  Priests'
Quorum ;  but  every  man  in  his  order
and  place,  possessing  a  portion  of
the  same  Priesthood,  according  to  the
gifts  and  callings  to  each.  Does  not
this  clear  up  the  subject  ?  [Voices :
"It  does/']  This  will  explain  it  to
you  so  that  you  can  understand  it*
When  we  find  where  our  callings  and
positions  are  in  the  midst  of  the
people  of  God,  and  every  person  wil-


AO


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


ling  to  act  in  the  discharge  of  his
duty,  there  is  enough  for  us  all  to
do.  All  persons  can  have  all  they
desire  to  do  to  promote  the  kingdom
of  God  on  the  earth ;  they  can  exer-
cise themselves  in  all  that  God  has
granted  to  them  to  prove  themselves
worthy  before  God  and  the  people.

I  will  again  refer  to  the  office  of  a
Bishop.  If  you  will  look  over  the
revelations  and  search  the  Scrip-
tures, you  will  find  that  the  office  of
Bishop  was  bestowed  upon  Aaron,
Hoses'  half-brother,  for  certain
services  he  had  performed,  which
Priesthood  was  to  continue  with
Aaron's  posterity.  We  have  not  the
literal  descendants  of  Aaron  in  the
Church  to  fill  the  Bishopric,  but  the
Church  is  mostly  composed  of  the
literal  descendants  of  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who  are  entitled  to
the  Melchizedek  Priesthood,  that
holds  ihe  keys  of  all  the  Priesthoods
ever  delivered  to  the  children  of  men.
But  we  want  Bishops  in  the  Church.
Here  are  brethren  settling  in  difler-
ent  neighbourhoods,  and  we  learn
that  the  office  of  a  Bishop  is  to  at-
tend to  the  temporal  affairs  of  the
Church — to  see  that  the  poor  are
taken  care  of — to  see  that  the
brethren  judiciously  and  wisely  con-
duct themselves  in  the  capacity  of  a
community.  The  President  of  the
Church  cannot  attend  to  these  tem-
poral affairs  in  all  the  different  settle-
ments, and  the  Twelve  Apostles  are
away  preaching,  and  the  Seventies
are  away  preaching,  and  the  High
Priests  are  scattered  here  and  there
in  their  local  capacity ;  and  we  want
men  who  are  literal  descendants  of
Aaron  to  act  in  the  Aaronic  Priests
hood,  to  which  pertains  the  Bishopric ;
but  we  have  not  got  them.  Under
these  circumstances,  we  take  a  High
Priest  and  ordain  him  to  the  office  of
a  Bishop,  to  which  he  is  not  entitled
by  lineage;  but  in  his  calling  he
possesses  the  keys  and  power  of  the  I


holy  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God
on  the  earth,  and  tliis  qualifies  him  to
officiate  in  all  the  lesser  office*.  We
take  this  man  and  set  him  apart  to  be
a  Bishop.  "  What !  ordain  a  High
Priest  to  the  lesser  Priesthood?"
No;  we  call  it  ordaining  a  Bishop;
and  though  we  say,  ;*  We  ordain  you
to  be  a  Bishop,  with  our  hands  upon
your  head,"  it  really  and  virtually
means,  We  set  you  apart  to  officiate
as  a  Bishop  in  the  midst  of  the
people  of  God,  by  virtue  of  your
holy  Priesthood,  which  is  after  the
order  of  Melchizedek,  which  is  after
the  order  of  the  Son  of  God.  We
set  you  apart  to  officiate  in  this  office
of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  blessing
you  with  all  the  keys  and  authority
of  the  same."  This  Bishop  can  call
two  men  to  be  his  Counsellors,  but  it
would  not  be  so  if  we  had  a  literal
descendant  of  Aaron.  When  we  find
such  a  man,  and  he  is  ordained  to  act
or  is  set  apart  to  act  in  his  lineal
Priesthood,  he  is  to  all  intents  and
purposes  a  Bishop,  and  needs  no
Counsellors.  This  seems  to  be  a
great  curiosity,  A  man  who  is  a
Priest,  and  cannot  hold  any  higher
office,  can  preside  as  a  Bishop  over  a
community  of  people  where  he  is  ap-
pointed to  preside,  and  dictate  the
tempoi*al  aftairs  of  the  people  of  God,
and  that  too  without  a  Counsellor
from  among  his  brethren ;  but  a  High
Priest  cannot  act  in  this  office  with-
out two  Counsellors,  Is  not  this  a
novel  thing — a  strange  peculiarity  ?
It  requires  three  High  Priests  to  per-
form the  duties,  fill  the  office,  and
attend  to  the  callings  of  a  literal
descendant  of  Aaron,  who  cannot  hold
a  higher  Priesthood,  That  is  the
order,  and  what  Joseph  did  is  accord-
ing to  the  revelation  he  received.

When  we  take  a  High  Priest  and
set  him  apart  to  officiate  in  the  office
of  a  Priest  as  a  Priest  or  as  a  Bishop,
while  he  is  acting  in  this  calling  do
we  expect  him  to  officiate  as  a  High


PRIESTHOOD.


91  v


Priest  ?  When  Bishop  Miller  finds
that  the  Seventies  in  his  Ward  are
teaching  doctrine  that  he  does  not
believe  in,  he  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  matter  while  acting  in  the  ca-
pacity of  a  Bishop,  He  would  say,
"  I  stand  here  as  your  Bishop,  and  I
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  doctrines
you  teach.  I  cannot  control  the
higher  Priesthood,  while  in  my
present  calling.  I  cannot  officiate  here
as  an  Apostle,  as  a  Revelator,  as  one
who  has  authority  to  say  (  Thus
saith  the  Lord*  to  the  people  con-
cerning spiritual  things."  The  Doc
trine  and  Covenants  teaches  us  whom
they  are  to  be  decided  by.  Though
brother  Miller,  as  a  Bishop,  should
pny  nothing  on  controverted  points  of
doctrine,  yet  he  can  meet  with  his
brethren  of  the  High  Priesthood  who
may  be  in  his  neigh bourhood.  Three
High  Priests  form  a  Quorum;  five
form  a  Quorum ;  seven  form  a
Quorum;  twelve  form  a  Quorum,
Let  a  Quorum  of  High  Priests  go
into  an  upper  room,  and  there  appear
before  the  Lord  in  the  garments  of
the  holy  Priesthood,  and  offer  up
before  the  Father,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  the  signs  of  the  holy  Priest-
hood, and  then  ask  God  to  give  a
revelation  concerning  that  doctrine,
and  they  have  a  right  to  receive  ii
If  you  cannot  get  the  information  in
any  other  way,  suppose  you  were
upon  the  islands  of  the  sea,  far  away
fi-om  the  main  body  of  the  Church,
you  are  entitled  to  the  administra-
tion of  angels  who  administer  in  the
terrestrial  kingdom;  and  they  have  a
right  to  receive  administrations  from
the  celestial.  In  this  capacity  you
could  ask  for  revelations  pertaining
to  doctrine.

In  the  capacity  of  a  Bishop,  has
any  person  a  right  to  direct  the
spiritual  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of
God?  No.  In  that  capacity  his
right  is  restricted  to  affairs  in  a  tem-
poral and  moral  point  of  view.  He


has  a  right  to  deal  with  the  trans-
gressor. I  do  not  care  what  office  a
transgressor  bears  in  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,  if  he  should  be  one
of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  and  come
into  a  Bishop's  neighbourhood,  and
purloin  his  neighbour's  goods,  defile
his  neighbour's  bed,  or  commit  any
breach  of  the  moral  law,  the  Bishop
has  a  right  to  take  that  man  before
himself  and  his  council,  and  there
hold  him  to  answer  for  the  crime  he
has  been  guilty  of,  and  deal  with  him
for  his  membership  in  the  Church,
and  cut  him  off  from  the  Church  to
all  intents  and  purposes,  to  all  time
and  eternity,  if  he  will  not  make
restitution  and  sincerely  repent.
"  What !  one  of  the  Seventies  ?  n
Yes.  "  One  of  the  High  Priests  ?  "
Yes.  "One  of  the  Twelve
Apostles  ? "  Yes,  anybody  that
happens  to  come  into  his  neigh-
bourhood and  transgresses  the  moral
law.  On  the  other  hand,  can  the
Seventies  try  a  Bishop  ?  No,  Can
the  High  Priests  try  him  ?  No,  un-
less they  call  twelve  High  Priests  in
the  capacity  of  &  High  Council ;  and
then  you  must  have  the  Presidency
of  the  Melchisedek  Priesthood  to
preside  over  the  council,  and  there
you  can  try  a  Bishop.  How
curiously  it  is  all  woven  together  to
make  the  fabric  so  strong  that  no
one  man  or  set  of  men  can  rend  it
asunder!  The  Lord  has  so  effectually
woven  it  for  the  salvation  of  the
people,  that  it  takes  tremendous
power  to  destroy  it  from  the  earth.
All  this  is  designed  to  guard  against
evil.  A  Bishop  can  try  a  man  for  a
breach  of  moral  conduct,  but  he  can-
not sit  in  judgment  on  controverted
points  of  doctrine,  for  they  are  to  be
referred  to  those  who  hold  the  keys
of  the  higher  Priesthood,  and  their
decision  is  the  end  of  all  strife.

In  trying  all  matters  of  doctrine,
to  make  a  decision  valid,  it  is  neces-
sary to  obtain  a  unanimous  voice,


92


JOI  KXAL  OF  I>ISCOlIiSKS,


faith,  and  decision.  In  the  capacity
of  a  Quorum,  the  three  First  Presi-
dents must  be  one  in  their  voice —
the  Twelve  Apostles  must  be  unani-
mous in  their  voice,  to  obtain  a
righteous  decision  upon  any  matter
that  may  come  before  them,  as  you
may  read  in  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants.  The  Seventies  may  decide
upon  the  same  principle.  Whenever
you  see  these  Quorums  unanimous  in
their  declaration,  you  may  set  it  down
as  true.  Let  the  Elders  get  together,
being  faithful  and  true  ;  and  when
they  agree  upon  any  point,  you  may
know  that  it  is  true.

I  will  now  say  a  few  words  upon
the  callings  of  men  in  a  neighbour-
hood or  Ward  capacity.  Some  of
the  High  Priests  may  be  ordained  to
officiate  in  callings  pertaining  to  the
Church  in  Ward  capacities,  Now  I
will  ask  the  Bishop  of  this  Ward  if
he  has  a  right  to  neglect  this  Ward  to
meet  with  the  High  Priests'  Quorum
in  their  meetings.  He  has  no  such
right — he  has  no  right  to  neglect
this  Ward  one  minute  for  the  sake  of
such  meeting.  That  is  not  his  right
and  calling  when  his  services  arc  re-
quired here  as  Bishop.  There  is  a
poor  widow,  a  sick  family,  business  is
going  at  random  here  and  there,  and
he  has  no  right  to  believe  that  he  has
the  piivilege  of  leaving  all  his  Ward
to  look  out  for  themselves,  and  say,
"  If  you  do  well,  it  is  well ;  and  if
you  do  ill,  I  cannot  help  it,  I  am
going  to  my  Quorum  meeting/'  It  is
his  duty  to  devote  his  time,  from
New  Year's  morning  to  New  Tear's
morning  again,  for  the  benefit  of  his
ward.  He  is  placed  to  preside  over
it,  and  he  will  dictate  all  in  his  Ward,
If  he  sees  a  Seventy  or  a  High  Priest
squandering  his  property,  or  if  he
sees  any  getting  drunk,  gambling,  or
loafing  about,  wasting  their  time,  he
has  a  perfect  right  to  call  them  to
account.

We  have  mass  Quorums  of  Seven-


ties in  most  of  the  settlements  in  the
Territory;  and  I  have  frequently
thought,  if  the  brethren  did  not  im-
prove pretty  fast,  the  title  would  have
to  be  altered  a  little ;  but  as  they  have
improved,  we  do  not  see  any  necessity
for  making  the  application  and  calling
them  muss  Quorums.  Joseph  Smith
never  would  permit  the  Seventies  to
get  together  and  believe  themselves  a
separate  body  from  the  rest  of  the
Church.  I  never  cared  much  about
this,  for  I  was  not  a  particle  afraid
that  they  would  get  any  power  that
truly  does  not  belong  to  them  ;  for,  if
they  did,  I  was  always  satisfied  that  it
would  be  blown  to  the  four  winds.  I
want  to  inform  the  Seventies  living  in
Bishop  Miller's  Ward,  (and  what  I
now  say  applies  to  all  the  other
Wards  and  Bishops,)  if  he  calls  on
them  to  act  as  Teachers,  it  is  their
imperative  duty  tu  act  as  Teachers,
seeking  to  benefit  and  bless  the  peo-
ple by  enlarging  their  understandings,
that  they  may  prove  themselves  be-
fore God  and  one  another.  There  is
a  world  of  intelligence  to  impart,  and
the  Priesthood  (in  its  various  call-
ings, appointments,  helps,  and  gov-
ernments,) is  the  means,  through  its
ministers,  of  imparting  it  to  the  peo-
ple. It  is  not  the  duty  of  a  Seventy
or  High  Priest,  who  is  appointed  a
Teacher  or  a  Bishop,  to  neglect  the
duties  of  those  callings  to  attend  ;i
Seventies'  or  High  Priests'  meeting.
Attend  to  the  wishes  of  your  Bishop,
and  never  ask  who  has  the  most
power.  The  man  who  has  the  most
power  with  God  will  wield  it,  and
earth  and  hell  cannot  hinder  it.  Talk
about  power,  and  £t  I  want  you  to  give
me  influence!7*  There  are  but  few
things  that  offend  me  more  than  to
have  men  come  to  me  and  say,
"  Brother  Brigham,  give  me  influence,
for  I  am  a  great  man  in  this  king-
dom," And  what  would  he  do  with
it  ?  He  would  take  himself  and  all
who  would  follow  him  to  the  Devil.


PRIESTHOOD.


03


Every  man.  who  has  true  influence  has  [any  of  their  brethren. When  the


obtained  it  before  God  through  faith
fulness,  and  in  all  such  cases  there  is
not  the  least  danger  but  what  he  will
have  it  before  the  Saints,  It  is  the
man  who  converses  with  tlie  heavens,
who  delights  in  doing  so,  and  knows
for  himself  that  this  is  the  kingdom  of
God,  who  has  true  influence.

As  I  said  last  Sabbath,  the  great-
est proof  and  the  least  to  prove  that
this  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  consists
in  its  embracing  every  truth  ai u  1  re  -
jecting every  error,  and  that  embraces
God  and  heaven  and  aU*  holy  beings.
Who,  then,  has  the  greatest  power  ?
Those  who  best  do  the  will  of  God.
When  a  Bishop  calls  upon  a  man  to
officiate  as  an  assistant  to  him,  he  does
not  call  upon  him  as  a  Seventy  or  as  a
High  Priest,  but  as  one  of  his  own
family — as  a  member  of  his  Ward.
You  know  what  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  teaches  me,  to  see  that  the
widows  go  not  hungry,  that  the
orphans  are  clothed,  and  every  able-
bodied  man  is  judiciously  and  profit-
ably employed,  and  that  every  man  is
doing  his  duty, — to  see  that  the  cattle
and  waggons  are  got  together  when
they  are  wanted ;  and  it  is  as  much
the  duty  of  the  Seventies  to  look
after  these  matters  as  it  is  the  duty  of


Bishops  say,  **  Go  and  drive  that  team,
do  this,  or  do  that/*  "  Oh  yes,"  says  a
Seventy, u  with  all  my  heart."  Bishop,
we  thought  we  would  meet  once  a
week  as  Seventies  or  High  Priests ;
can  we  have  your  permission  ? "
"Yes;  go  to  the  school-house  and
sound  life  eternal  to  the  people/'

Told  by  their  President  to  have  a
muss  Quorum  meeting  here !  No ;  no
such  power  is  vested  in  the  Seventies
anywhere.  No  man  gets  power  from
God  to  raise  disturbance  in  any
Branch  of  the  Church.  Such  power
is  obtained  from  an  evil  source.

Now,  High  Priests  and  Apostles,
go  to  with  yonr  might  and  assist  your
Bishops  in  providing  for  the  widows
and  fatherless.

If  Bishop  Miller  is  not  responsible
for  this  Ward,  to  dictate  all  this  Ward,
who  is  ?  He  is  the  man  that  is  ap-
pointed here  to  preside,  and  as  a  High
Priest  he  has  a  right  to  meet  with  his
brethren  of  that  Quorum,  and  to  bap-
tize, confirm,  bless  children,  admin-
ister to  the  sick,  and  perform  all  other
duties  pertaining  to  the  office  and  call-
ing of  a  High  Priest.  His  being  a
Bishop  does  not  take  away  any  of  his
Priesthood  or  power.

May  God  bless  you!  Amen.


94


JOURNAL  OP  DISCOfKSES.


•


PRIVILEGES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  SAINTS —
BUILDING  UP  THE  LATTER-DAY  KINGDOM.

Discourse  hy  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  fhe  Bon-try,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  September  30,  1800.

UK  PORT KD  BY J, V.  LONG.


I  arise,  my  brethren  and  sifters,
being  ever  willing  to  give  my  testi-  j
mony  in  behalf  of  the  goodness  of
God  and  the  work  in  which  we  are
engaged,  even  the  Latter-day  Work,
the  building  up  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth.  I  know  it  is
the  desire  of  my  heart  to  meet  every
engagement,  appointment,  and  duty
incumbent  upon  me  by  rea^n  of  my
calling,  and  in  undertaking  to  be-
come a  Latter-day  Saint.

When  I  made  my  covenant  by  bap-
tism, I  did  it  with  an  understanding,  »
and  with  a  desire  to  do  the  will  of
our  Heavenly  Father  in  this  genera-
tion. I  did  it  with  a  determination
that  I  would  from  that  time  forth  do
the  will  of  Him  whom  I  then  cove-
nanted to  serve,  and  that  I  would  do
all  those  things  that  should  be  re-
quired at  my  hands — that  I  would
perform  every  duty  according  to  the  >
best  understanding  I  had,  constantly
looking  to  the  Lord  to  give  me  bet-
ter understanding,  greater  light,  and
more  extended  knowledge  of  the
things  of  his  kingdom.  These  were
my  feelings  then ;  they  have  been
my  feelings  ever  since,  and  I  hope
and  trust  that  I  shall  ever  be  guided
by  the  same  Spirit.  I  have  ever  felt
that  it  was  good  to  have  the  testimony
of  Jesus  in  my  soul.  It  is  for  me,
and  I  consider  it  is  for  all  of  us,  to  re-
spond to  every  call  that  shall  be  made,
whether  temporal  or  spiritual ;  and  1
desire  that  we  may  feel  to  respond  to


and  do  whatever  we  shall  be  dictated
to  do  with  glad  hearts,  be  thankful
for  the  opportunity,  and  esteem  it  a
high  privilege  to  have  a  part  in  this
work.

We  should  strive  to  get  faith  in
everything  that  pertains  to  this  work,
and  feel  that  it  rests  upon  our  shoul-
ders to  perform,  and  that  it  behoves
each  one  of  us  to  live  in  that  way
that  wiU  promote  otlr  own  interests
therein,  and  give  us  light  and  know-
ledge, which  will  enable  us  to  culti-
vate that  Spirit  in  our  bosoms  which
I  has  been  promised,  as  a  well  of  water
springing  up  into  everlasting  life,  to
all  the  faithful  Saints-
There  is  a  consolation  in  our  re-
ligion  which  goes  to  every  heart,  and
by  it  every  man,  woman,  and  child
may  receive  joy  and  satisfaction,
while  acting  under  the  sweet  influ-
ences of  the  Holy  Spirit,  having  it
within  us  to  dictate  and  guide  us  in
the  path  of  virtue  and  truth.  When
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  influences  any
man,  especially  the  true  and  faithful
Saint,  it  fills  him  with  joy  and  peace,
and  makes  him  humble  in  the  per-
formance of  duties.  The  Spirit  of
the  Lord  carries  with  it  its  own  re-
ward. A  person  deprived  of  this
influence  meets  with  difficulties  upon
every  hand.  It  is  only  by  being
obedient  and  submitting  to  the  coun-
sel of  God  in  all  things,  that  we  can
fully  enjoy  that  good  Spirit.  By
acting  upon  this  principle  in  a  family


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


95


capacity  and  in  managing  our  indi-
vidual concerns,  (for  it  is  in  thus
acting  upon  the  principles  of  obedi-
ence that  families  are  united,)  that
Spirit  will  unite,  connect,  and  cause
the  Elders  to  see  eye*  to  eye,  and  ttms
promote  the  advancement  and  pros-
perity of  the  cause  we  have  all  es-
poused. We  cannot  fulfil  onr  engage-
ments with  the  Almighty  without  we
have  that  Spirit  with  us.  We  should
so  live  as  to  acknowledge  the  Good
Spirit  continually.  We  cannot  do  this
unless  we  let  the  Spirit  of  God  rule  in
temporalities  as  well  as  in  spiritual
matters.

When  he  whom  the  Lord  has  called
to  stand  at  the  head  of  his  Church  rt^
the  mouthpiece  of  the  Almighty
speaks  to  us,  let  us  find  out  the  spirit
that  leads  him  and  follow  its  dicta-
tion, and  then  we  shall  be  well  off
and  do  well.  How  often,  instead  of
cherishing  the  head  and  letting  that
dictate  the  whole  body — how  often,  I
say,  do  we  seek  to  avoid  it,  perhaps
for  the  purpose  of  having  it  some
other  way,  or  passing  off  in  some
other  direction.  This  is  not  right.
We  should  let  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
rule,  and  the  law  of  God  abide  in  onr
hearts.  If  we  have  the  law  of  God
dwelling  in  us,  and  if  we  practise
righteousness  and  live  by  correct
principles,  we  may  have  it,  and  will
increase  in  light  and  in  power  with
the  heavens  and  with  all  good  men.
We  should  cherish  that  law,  let  it
abide  in  us,  govern  and  control  us  in
all  we  do  and  say.  Let  us  square  our
ideas,  feelings,  and  spirits  to  it,  and
bear  in  mind  that  this  is  what  pre-
serves us  and  connects  us  together  in
the  strait  and  narrow  way  that  leads
unto  life  eternal.  Let  us  nourish
that  kind  Spirit  in  our  bosoms,  get
light  from  the  pure  fountain,  and  not
grieve  it  away  by  our  unwise  and
sinful  conduct  We  frequently  do
things  according  to  our  feelings  and
opinions,  until  we  in  a  great  degree


lose  the  light  of  the  Spirit  which
should  control,  and  which  would,  if
we  would  let  it,  be  a  guide  to  our
path  and  lead  us  in  all  that  we  do
and  say;  and  certainly  we  need  it
constantly  to  guide  us  and  to  enable
us  to  render  ourselves  useful,  and  be
the  means  of  doing  great  good  in  the
kingdom  of  God*  Offer  a  kind  word
to  them  that  are  cast  down,  buoy  up
the  drooping  spirits,  and  do  all  we
can  to  sustain  each  other  in  the  trials
and  difficulties  through  which  we
have  to  pass  in  this  state  of  existence.

It  is  a  consolation  and  a  great  as-
sistance to  a  man  who  tries  to  be  a
Saint  to  receive  a  word  of  encourage-
ment from  a  friend.  It  prepares  the
heart  for  the  warfare  of  life ;  it  makes
a  man  feel  stronger  in  the  Lord.  He
is  thereby  prepared  to  perform  his
duties  as  a  member  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth.  We  all  have  a
great  variety  of  duties  to  perform ;
some  are  required  to  act  in  one  way,
and  some  in  another.  None  can  say
that  they  have  no  part  or  lot  in  the
matters  in  this  kingdom.

The  Gospel  embraces  every  branch
of  business  that'  is  useful — every  de-
partment of  literature,  whether
science  or  classics, — every  tiling  that
is  useful  in  the  world.  All  is  necessary
to  its  accomplishment  and  the  bring*
ing  about  of  the  purposes  of  God  in
the  last  days.  All  that  is  good  and
true  is  necessary  to  the  completion  of
this  mighty  work.  In  this  kingdom
there  is  scope  for  the  mind  ;  there  is
room  for  the  exercise  of  all  the  physi-
cal powers  of  mankind.  There  is  some
labour  for  each  and  every  one  to  per-
form. The  people  may  have  to
change  from  their  old  customs ;  they
may  have  to  go  from  one  kind  of  la-
bour to  another,  by  reason  of  their
being  put  in  different  circumstances
and  coming  from  one  country  to
another.  This  with  the  faithful
Saint  makes  but  little  difference.  Let
us  all  do  the  things  that  are  before


*


96


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ns  with  an  eye  single  to  the  glory  of
God  and  the  building  up  of  his  king-
dom* By  pursuing  this  course  we
shall  be  able  to  accomplish  whatever
shall  be  appointed  unto  us  that  will
tend  to  the  gathering  of  Israel  and
the  bringing  about  of  the  great  Lat-
ter-day Work,

The  work  that  is  now  transpiring
is  in  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  in
this  we  should  hare  joy ;  and  if  we
need  anything  to  strengthen  us  in  our
holy  religion  and  to  buoy  up  our  feel-
ings, the  things  transpiring  around
us  should  be  sufficient  to  do  this  and
to  stimulate  us  to  further  action-
People  are  brought  from  every  nation,
kindred,  tongue,  and  people,  by  the
instrumentality  of  this  Priesthood  and
the  power  that  accompanies  the  testi-
mony of  the  servants  of  God.  We
have  as  great  a  testimony  as  any  of
the  ancients  in  regard  to  the  work  in
which  we  are  engaged,  and  we  have
increasing  testimony  day  by  day  that
should  convince  the  most  sceptical.
We  sec  the  hand-dealing  of  the  Al-
mighty from  time  to  time,  and  the
Spirit  is  bearing  witness  from  day  to
day  that  this  is  the  truth  of  heaven,
and  that  we  have  the  oracles  of  divine
truth  in  our  midst.  The  Lord  has
not  left  himself  without  a  witness.  If
there  had  been  nothing  written,  there
is  sufficient  manifested  to  prove  that
this  is  the  work  of  God  in  which  we
are  engaged  to  induce  us  to  learn  our
duties  and  perform  them,  and  to  be
ready  and  willing  to  turn  our  hands
to  this,  that,  and  the  other  purpose
as  shall  be  necessary  to  enable  us  to
obtain  our  sustenance,  to  cultivate  the
soil,  beautify  the  earth,  and  cause  the
wilderness  to  blossom  as  the  rose.  If
we  are  actuated  by  the  right  spirit,
we  shall  go  forth  building  up  the
the  kingdom,  having  our  eye  single
to  the  glory  of  God,  instead  of  gather-
ing together  for  our  own  particular
benefit  and  to  suit  our  natural  wants.

For  my  part,  when  I  embraced  this


Gospel,  I  felt  that  I  had  no  affairs  of
my  own  for  the  future.  I  felt  that  I
could  live  anywhere  and  anyhow,  if  I
had  the  society  of  the  Saints.  I  then
expected  to  have  a  rough  passage-  I
had  not  then  seen  u  Mormonism  "  as
we  have  since  seen  it.  For  a  few
years  previous  to  that  time,  I  had
seen  turmoil,  trouble,  and  strife.  I
had  witnessed  what  has  now  become
the  history  of  the  Saints,  and  I  have
seen  and  known  it  since  we  have  ar-
rived in  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains. Here  it  has  been  compara-
tively peace  and  prosperity  with  this
people.  This  came  the  more  accept-
ably to  me  because  I  had  looked  for
something  different.  I  embraced  the
Gospel  with  that  view,  and  felt  that  I
•was  determined  to  cling  to  the  rope,
feeling  satisfied  that  the  tighter  I
clung  to  it  the  less  it  would  burn  my
fingers.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  I  have
ever  felt  as  I  now  feel,  to  hold  fast  to
the  ship  Zion,

We  can  generally  see  other  people's
faults  much  quicker  than  we  can  our
own.  You  all  remember,  no  doubt,
the  account  which  Patriarch  John
Young  gave  of  the  Devil's  looking-
glass.  The  glass  was  represented  as
one  in  whir! j  w  man  could  see  his

neighbour's  faults  instead  of  his  own.
Now,  who  is  there  among  us  but  can
see  our  neighbours  failings  sooner
than  our*  own  ?  I  will  guarantee
that  we  can  all  see  the  follies  of
others,  and  at  the  same  time  be  blind
to  our  own  ;  but  we  should  be  a  great
deal  better  employed  in  looking  into
our  own  hearts,  in  governing  our-
selves, controlling  those  pernicious
feelings  and  notions  that  rise  in  our
bosoms,  and  in  eradicating  every  such
influence  from  our  hearts,  instead  of
busying  ourselves  with  looking  into
the  affairs  of  others.  I  know  from
experience  that  it  is  a  very  good  les-
son for  me  to  look  into  my  bosom.
There  is  the  flatterer,  and  by  studying
ourselves  we  can  easily  perceive  how


♦


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


07


liable  we  are  to  neglect  ourselves  and
look  into  affairs  with  which  we  have
nothing  to  do.  People  do  not  look
into  their  own  hearts  rigidly  fenough,
and  therefore  they  do  not  see  what
has  been  the  prompting  or  leading
motive  that  has  caused  them  to  judge
others  instead  of  themselves.  The
inward  monitor,  if  we  will  let  him
Lave  full  play,  will  teach  us  many
things  that  are  applicable  to  our-
selves* And  if  we  inquire  more  fully
into  ourselves,  we  shall  find  that  we
are  not  always  acting,  from  the  best  of
motives,  those  things  that  we  do  in
regard  to  others,  for  we  often  come
across  their  notions.

There  are  a  great  many  persons
who  consider  their  own  way  lie  best
— yes,  much  superior  to  any  other
person's.  If  we  will  compare  that  with
an  unprejudiced  mind  and  liberal  soul,
we  may  reject  our  own  bantling,  and
learn  that  there  are  others  whose
ways  are  preferable  to  our  own.  We
will  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are
actuated  by  the  best  of  motives.  Even
then,  some  would  go  to  work  in  one
way,  and  some  in  another,  to  build
up  the  kingdom  of  God;  but  we
should  all  feel  interested  in  taking
that  course  that  will  promote  our  in-
terests. If  each  one  is  to  have  his
own  way  and  carry  out  his  own
notion,  then  there  will  be  no  effort  to
concentrate ;  hence  no  union.  Every
one  should  seek  that  which  is  best,
and  be  submissive  to  the  will  of  God
in  all  things,  and  not  strive  to  follow
his  own  peculiar  notions.  We  live
to  learn,  and  should  so  conduct  our-
selves as  to  make  good  use  of  what
we  experience,

I  have  had  a  great  many  ideas  my*
self  upon  subjects  as  they  have  passed
before  me ;  but  after  they  are  con-
summated, I  always  find  that,  if  I
tad  had  my  way,  it  would  not  have
been  near  bo  well.  Those  who  have
more  light,  greater  comprehension,
and  who  are  appointed  to  do  those

No,  7.


things  which  are  required  of  this  peo-
ple, can  do  so  with  better  understand-
ing ;  hence  I  say  we  should  readily
yield  to  that  wisdom  and  strive  to  see
a  propriety  in  carrying  it  out.  In
this  way  we  can  soon  learn  to  sea
what  is  right  and  best  for  this  people.
We  cannot  possibly  believe  that  the
Almighty  will  suffer  those  whom  he
has  appointed  to  lead  his  people  to
go  astray.  We  have  all  confidence  in
this,  and  shall  have,  if  we  do  our
duty.  Then  let  that  Spirit,  which
we  so  much  desire  to  have  in  our
hearts,  control  and  govern  us  ;  per-
mit it  to  eradicate  every  vile  principle
and  influence  ;  and  do  not  let  our
notions  and  traditions  stand  in  the
way  of  our  yielding  a  ready  assent  to
the  rolling  forth  of  God's  kingdom  in
the  last  days,  The  law  of  God  should
be  our  joy.  The  study  and  the
knowledge  of  it  are  blessings  that  have
been  vouchsafed  unto  us  in  this  gene*
ration.  The  Lord  has  conferred  this
holy  Priesthood  upon  us ;  he  has
opened  up  a  communication  between
us  and  his  throne,  by  which  we  our-
selves can  open  and  find  out  in  regard
to  the  principles  which  have  been
taught  from  this  stand,  as  well  as
those  taught  by  the  Prophet  Joseph-
This  is  a  great  and  important  era
in  the  world's  history  :  it  is  a  great
privilege  given  in  the  experience  of
the  human  race.  God  has  shown
himself  no  respecter  of  persons.  The
other  portions  of  the  human  race
hare  or  will  have  this  Gospel  laid  be-
fore them.  It  has  already  been  pre-
sented to  a  great  extent,  and  the  peo-
ple might  have  embraced  it,  if  they
had  been  disposed  to  do  so.  If  their
minds  had  been  inclined,  they  could
have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth ;  for  it  has  not  been  an  ex-
clusive matter.  The  Lord  has  scat-
tered the  seed  upon  the  whole  earth.
In  communities  from  which  we  have
come,  our  neighbours  and  friends,  by
whom  we  have  been  surrounded  from

Vol.  IX.


98  JOUKNAL  OF

our  infancy,  Lave  had  the  same  oppor-
tunity that  we  have  had.  The  only
difference  is,  we  have  received  it,  and
they  have  rejected  it  ;  or,  in  other
words,  they  have  not  seen  proper  to
receive  it,  although  it  was  sent  as
much  for  their  benefit  and  for  their
salvation  a*  it  wasforours.  The  Lord,
I  repeat,  lias  conferred  this  great
blessing  upon  the  human  family  in
these  last  days,  aud  it  is  for  those
whose  hearts  are  touched  with  the
Spirit  of  the  Living  God,  who  can  see
that  this  is  the  kingdom  spoken  of  by
the  Prophets  in  olden  times,  too
have  gathered  together  for  the  pur-
pose of  establishing  the  principles  of
righteousness  permanently  upon  the
earth,  and  who  do  not  forget  those
things  committed  unto  them,  and
who  remember,  when  they  come  to-
gether before  the  Lord,  the  world
that  they  have  come  from.  It  be-
hoves them  not  to  forget  the  wicked-
ness by  which  they  were  surrounded,
nor  the  nio lives  that  brought  them
together.  If  you  do  not  bear  in
mind  these  things,  why  did  you  not
stay  where  you  were  ?  If  you  wish
to  serve  the  Devil  your  own  way,  why
did  not  you  stay  in  the  world  where
you  had  that  liberty,  which,  we
might  say,  is  the  least  desirable  upon
the  footstool  of  God  ?  There  are
many  in  the  world,  who  are  asso-
ciated with  this  Church,  who  think  it
would  be  the  greatest  privilege  they
could  enjoy  to  be  freed  from  the
wickedness  i  lint  stalks  abroad  at  noon-
day ;  but  when  such  come  to  Zion,
how  soon  do  they  forget  the  con-
dition of  others  whom  it  is  their
duty  to  remember,  because  they  are
in  circumstances  similar  to  those
which  surrounded  them  before  they
were  enabled  to  gather  home.

We  should  remember  that  we  have
been  collected  from  the  nations,
through  the  same  motives  which
now  inspire  our  brethren  and  sisters
in  other  lands,  to  establish  righteous-


DISCOUBSES,

ness  upon  the  earth,  to  put  down  ini-
quity, and  to  hate  the  report  thereof.
You  will  see  this  manifest  in  the
correspondence  of  our  brethren  who
are  still  among  the  nations.  It  was
formerly  manifest  in  ours,  and  each  of
us  was  accustomed  to  exclaim,  "  Oh
that  I  could  be  delivered  from
Babylon  !  "  We  were  finally  enabled
to  come  up  here,  and  to  get  deliver-
ance from  that  great  wickedness
which  was  an  eyesore  to  us  every
day.  Then  how  do  we  act  ?  Do  wo
hanker  for  the  wickedness  of  the
world  ?  Our  traditions  are  still
thick  upon  us  ;  and  if  we  do  not  re-
member our  covenants  and  strive  to  see
things  by  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
we  sludl  soon  be  led  to  find  fault
with  things  which  we  see  around  us.

Perhaps  the>e  who  thus  become
disaffected  may  not  say  anything
about  it  for  a  time  ;  but  they  will  say
in  their  hearts  and  souls  that  they  do
not  like  this,  they  disapprove  of  that,
and  they  despise  the  other.  They  do
not  at  first  speak  of  these  things, but
the  next  thing  they  do  in  the  path  to
ruin  is  to  neglect  their  prayers,  to
neglect  their  every  duty,  and  finally

,  they  are  led  captive  by  the  Devil.
They  ask  if  that  spirit  that  has  actu-
ated them  in  their  early  experience,
and  that  has  been  the  motive-spring
in  times  gone  by,  sanctions  what  they
see  around  tli  em .  Darkn<  ■  -  -  ^  \  id  u  ally
gets  into  their  minds,  and  the  first
thing  they  know  they  are  led  back  to
love  the  wickedness  of  the  world.

!  This  is  because  they  forget  that
upon  themselves  rests  the  responsi-
bility of  making  tliut  Zion  about
which  they  talked,  prayed,  and
preached.  It  is  because  they  forget
that  it  is  their  business  to  labour  for
the  establishment  of  righteous  prin-
ciples, and  to  walk  wickedness  under
their  feet.

This  is  the  duty,  and  this  should
be  the  labour  of  all  that  come
up  here. They  should  let  the  law  of


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


99


of  the  Lord  be  the  delight  of  their
souls  day  by  day.  They  should  let
the  principles  of  our  holy  religion
absorb  every  other  feeling.  If  this
comes  in  contact  with  their  pre-
viously-received opinions,  let  it  be
eradicated  from  their  souls  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Living  God ;  and  the
quicker  they  can  do  this  the  better
it  will  be  for  them.

The  work  in  which  you  have  thus
far  bc&n  engaged,  brethren  and
sisters,  is  worth  everything  you  pos-
sess: and  if  actuated  bv  righteous
motives,  you  will  seek  by  industry
and  economy  to  establish  good  prin-
ciples, to  promote  righteousness,  and
to  do  tbat  for  which  you  have  been
called  into  the  fold  of  Christ;  you
will  endeavour  to  do  that  which  is
necessary  to  amalgam  ate  your  senti-
ments and  efforts  for  vour  own  com-
fort  and  the  comfort  of  those  around
you ;  you  will  endeavour  to  build  up  ;
you  will  work  diligently  in  that
spheie  in  which  you  are  called  to  la-
bour, and  the  kingdom  of  God  and  its
righteousness  will  be  the  first  tiling
in  your  minds.  Whatever  you  may
have  to  mourn  about,  yon  will  have
a  joy  in  labouring  for  the  kingdom
of  God.

It  should  be  the  delight  of  every
man  and  woman  to  strive  to  accom-
plish the  greatest  amount  of  good  in
whatever  sphere  they  are  or  may  be
called  to  act.

We  are  exhorted  in  the  Scriptures
not  to  be  covetous;  therefore  we
should  not  let  covetousness  get  into
our  hearts,  for  that  will  drown  the
best  affections  of  our  nature ;  it  will
ruin  any  man  or  woman  that  en-
courages it.  It  is  idolatry  to  wor-
ship the  creature  instead  of  the  Crea-
tor ;  hence  covetousness  becomes
idolatry.  I  could  wish  there  was  not
any  of  it  with  us.

This,  you  must  remember,  is  no
argument  in  favour  of  wastefulness,
neither  does  it  authorize  us  to  neglect


the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  or  to
be  careless  with  the  things  which  the
Lord  puts  into  our  hands.  We  should
strive  to  make  the  soil  produce  for
the  benefit  of  nursi  Ives  and  the  ad-
vancement of  the  interests  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  The  mechanic  also
should  be  as  diligent  as  he  can ;  and
whatever  the  labour  appointed  shall
be,  all  should  be  diligent  therein,
and  not  say  that  because  they  are
not  to  be  covetous,  they  will  therefore
go  and  waste  away  that  which  the
Lord  k  has  given  them.  [President
Brigham  Young  :  They  will  be  cursed
if  they  do  it.]  It  is  displeasing  in
the  sight  of  God,  for  it  is  doing  a  dis-
credit to  him  who  has  created  these
bounties  of  nature  for  the  use  of  man
and  for  the  benefit  of  all  his  creatures.

Let  us  have  no  other  object  in
view  than  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  I  have  heard  per-
sons say  that  we  should  nut  give  our
means  away,  but  wo  should  go  and  do
this  or  that ;  and  in  fact  I  have  fre-
quently thought  such  persons  seem  to
be  extravagant  ami  wasteful  on  pur-
pose to  squander  their  means,  and
thus  prevent  those  who  are  appointed
to  take  charge  of  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth  from  controlling  it.  Who-
ever  does  this  scattering,  destroying,
ai.d  wasting  away  is  aetnated  by  the
spirit  of  the  Devil

The  Lord  Almighty  is  willing  tn
bless  the  Saints,  we  are  informed,  if
they  are  willing  to  fake  rire  of  and
and  use  that  which  he  puts  into  their
hands  in  that  way  that  will  best  pro-
mote the  interests  of  his  kingdom
upon  the  earth.  As  we  were  told
here  this  morning,  the  earth  is  full  of
good  things,  and  whom  will  they  be*
long  to  ?  We  are  here  now  ;  bat
everything:  we  have  is  borrowed — our
lives,  the  breath  that  is  in  our  nos-
trils, and  all  that  we  now  seem  to
possess.  This  is  not  our  abidingplaca
In  this  our  present  capacity  we  are  in
a  state  of  probation  or  mortality,  and


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSK3


we  have  borrowed  everything  that  I
we  possess.  Nothing  belongs  to  us
that  we  now  enjoy;  it  is  merely
loaned  to  us.  If  we  are  faithful  to
those  things  given  unto  us,  and  make
a  wise  use  of  them,  the  promise  is
that  we  shall  be  made  rulers  over
many  things.  We  are  nothing  here ;
we  are  as  it  were  lent  to  ourselves  for
a  season,  and  it  is^expected  of  us  that
we  will  make  ourselves  worthy  to  re-
ceive everlasting  habitations,  which
have  been  prepared  for  us  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  world.  The
Father  has  many  mansions,  as  Jesus
Baid — "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,
that  where  I  am  ye  may  be  also."

We  have  a  great  deal  to  do  to  de-
stroy wickedness  and  establish  right-
eousness upon  the  earth,  and  to  pre-
pare ourselves  for  the  establishment
of  Zion,  that  she  may  become  the
head  upon  the  earth.

Will  we  bear  correction  and  proper
tutorage  ?  Will  we  bear  chastisement
and  throw  aside  our  own  faults  and  fri-
volous actions  r  Will  we  live  our  re-
ligion, or  wIH  we  give  way  to  every
foolish  thins?  that  comes  in  our
path,  and  thus  let  our  minds  be
drawn  from  the  pure  stream  into  by-
ways, and  thus  bring  about  our  ruin?
Will  we  seek  to  hide  the  light  from
our  brethren  and  sisters  who  feel  an
ardent  desire  to  gather  with  the
Saints,  that  they  may  possess  the  same
blessings  that  we  this  day  enjoy?  Do
we  feel  that  we  will  do  right  and
hold  ourselves  and  all  that  we
possess  upon  the  altar  of  the  kingdom
of  God  ?  Do  we  feel  that  we  should
be  diligent  and  economical,  that  we
should  seek  unto  the  elements  that
we  are  surrounded  with,  and  take
that  course  that  will  make  us  the
most  independent  peopla  upon  the
earth  ?  If  we  should  bless  the  earth
and  ask  God  to  bless  it,  that  it  may
bring  forth  for  our  support  and  sus-
tenance, and  that  we  may  have  power
to  draw  forth  and  combine  the  ele-


ments, and  thus  make  us  independent
of  every  nation,  kindred,  tongue,  and
people*

It  is  my  faith  that  this  is  the  ru-
ling kingdom  upon  the  earth  ;  I  feel
satisfied  that  it  will  ere  long  be  so.
In  it  are  bound  up  my  hopes  of  salva-
tion and  of  success  in  this  world  and
that  which  is  to  come.  Besides  this,
I  know  that  every  other  nation  and
kingdom  will  be  broken  t<\  pieces,
and  this  will  become  the  head  of  the
nations.  If  ever  righteousness  is  es-
tablished, it  will  be  upon  this  footing;
and  so  far  from  dreading  it,  the  peo-
ple should  rejoice  that  it  will  be  so,
for  their  own  governments  and  king-
doms are  rotting  to  pieces  and  tum-
bling down.  When  this  kingdom  is
fully  established,  there  will  be  no  op-
pression, but  people  will  be  put  in
possession  of  a  full  enjoyment  of  their
own  principles,  and  be  left  to  act  ac-
cording to  the  dictates  of  their  own
consciences,  and  none  will  be  deprived
of  this  privilege*  Our  Father  and
God  will  never  force  a  man's  con-
science, but  every  man  will  have  this
power  and  privilege  of  receiving  or
rejecting.  But  there  is  one  thing
they  will  not  be  permitted  to  do,  ami
that  is  to  infringe  upon  each  other's
rights.

Man  is  an  independent  being  in  his
agency,  to  do  right  or  wrong,  and  has
the  liberty  of  doing  as  he  pleases ;  but
I  qualify  this  by  saying  that  he  has
not  the  right  to  do  wrong  or  to  in-
fringe  upon  the  rights  of  another  indi-
vidual. This  is  the  law  of  society,
and  it  is  also  the  law  of  heaven.  We
live  together,  we  have  been  brought
forth  upon  this  earth,  and  we  dwell
together  in  communities.  Men  must
respect  the  rights  of  each  other,  and
it  will  be  so  in  all  nations  upon  the
earth  under  the  government  of  God.
I  feel  as  though  I  want  to  see  this
kingdom  triumph,  and  I  feel  that  the
whole  world  will  see  it.  Wickedness
and  corruption  will  be  controlled,  and


SUFFERINGS  OF  THE SAINTS,  ETC.


101


eventually  be  eradicated  and  extin-
guished from  the  earth.  Many  will
yet  cling  to  righteousness,  and  it  will
finally  triumph.

If  we  have  been  enabled  to  form  a
nucleus  here,  we  ought  never  to  for-
get the  inestimable  privilege.  We
ought  to  let  those  little  foolish  things
that  have  transpired  with  us  pass
from  our  minds,  and  cling  to  the
principles  of  salvation.

This  is  the  way  I  feel,  and  I  pray
God  to  enable  us  to  hold  on ,  to  be
humble  and  faithful  all  the  days  of
our  lives — to  be  faithful  in  this  great
work  j  for  it  is  not  only  a  lifetime  for
us,  but  for  our  children  and  our  chil-


dren's children  for  ever,  so  far  as  we
can  control  and  instruct  them,  so  that
when  we  are  gone  down  into  our  graves,
they  may  have  a  foundation  to  build
upon.  I  pray  God  to  help  us  to  train
up  our  children  that  they  may  com-
mand their  children  after  them,  that
this  work  may  be  perpetuated  by
them.  I  have  no  fears  with  regard
to  its  being  accomplished  ;  but  I  have
a  desire  that  we  should  have  a  part
in  it,  and  our  children  also,  that  we
may  meet  again,  and,  after  having
been  faithful  over  a  few  things,  that
we  may  be  made  rulers  over  many ;
wjiieh  I  pray  the  Lord  may  grant,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS — OVERCOMING  EVIL  WITH

GOOD,  Ac.

Remarks  by  Pre&idetU  Bbioham  Young,  made  m  the  Tabernacle^  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  January  5,  1860.


HE  POSTED  BY  G. D.  WATT.


Referring  to  the  ideas  advanced  by
our  brother  who  has  just  sat  down,
in  regard  to  the  suffering  of  the
children  of  men  upon  the  earth,  I
will  say  it  is  a  subject  worthy  of  re-
flection. Have  the  enemies  of  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth  the
power  to  bring  suffering  upon  the
people  who  love  and  serve  him,  that
they  have  to  bring  suffering  upon
themselves  ?  I  answer,  They  have
not.  We  cannot  find,  in  all  the  his-
tory extant,  that  mankind  have  ever
exerted  themselves  more  to  destroy
the  kingdom  of  God  from  the  earth
than  they  have  to  destroy  themselves.
All  their  endeavours  to  overthrow  the


'  holy  Priesthood  of  heaven  and  its
righteous  rule  among  men  have
always  tended  a  hundredfold  more  to
their  own  overthrow  and  utter  de-
struction- Like  the  leaves  of  autumn,
they  have  fallen  to  the  ground  and
are  forgotten.  It  was  prophesied  by
Joseph  the  Prophet  that  the  bones  of
those  who  drove  the  Church  from
Missouri,  and  killed  men,  women,
and  children,  should  bleach  upon  the
Plains-  This  has  been  fulfilled.  Did
they  sufier  more  than  the  people  of
God  whom  they  drove  from  their
homes — from  their  firesides  in
winter — from  their  fathers  and
mothers  and  friends,  and  the  land


102


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCOUItSKS.


of  their  nativity?  Yes,  there  is
scarcely  ;i  couiji-'fis- >a.  Their  suf-
ferings in  crossing  the  Plains  to  the
gold  regions  of  California  have  been
greater  by  far  than  ever  the  suffer-
ings of  the  Saints  have  been  in  cross-
ing the  Plains  to  Utah.  These  nre
facts  that  are  present  with  us.  The
bones  of  those  who  droye  the  Saints
from  Independence,  from  Jackson
County,  then  from  Clay  and  Davis
Counties,  and  last  of  all  from  Cald-
well County,  from  whence  they  fled
into  Illinois,  have  been  scattered  over
the  Plains — gnawed  and  broken  by
wild  beasts,  and  are  there  bleaching  |
to  this  day,  while  the  Saints  who
have  died  on  the  Plains  have,  without
an  exception,  had  a  decent  burial
where  they  have  died, — have  had
friends  to  condole  with  and  comfort
them  in  their  dying  moments,  and  to
mourn  for  a  season  with  their  be-
reaved relatives*  These  comforts
and  blessings  were  denied  the
murderers  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum
Smith  and  of  scores  of  the  Saints,
and  they  were  left  in  the  bitterness
of  death  without  a  friend  and  with-
out mercy.  They  suffered  immensely
more  than  did  the  Saints  whom  they
persecuted  ;  they  received  that  which
they  sought  to  bring  upon  the  Saints,
and  that  too  in  good  measure,  pressed
down,  and  running  over.

I  have  said  and  will  say  that  there
never  was  a  colony  settled  on  this
continent,  since  its  discovery  by  Co-
lumbus, with  so  little  suffering  as
have  had  the  Latter-day  Saints  who
settled  these  valleys,

I  will  now  leave  these  ideas,  and
turn  my  attention  on  to  the  remarks
made  by  brother  Lorenzo  Snow  in  the
the  forenoon.  The  principles  and
doctrine  couched  in  those  remarks
are  of  great  interest  to  the  human
family,  I  will  take  the  liberty  to
treat  upon  the  same  principles,  but
shall  carry  the  ideas  still  further,
though  in  my  own  language  and


style  of  delivery.  I  will  use  a  few
words  of  Scripture  concerning  the
evil  that  now  exists  and  has  existed
upon  the  earth,  referring  to  certain
characters  who  have  always  been
upon  the  earth  and  are  si  ill  upon  it,
who  are  actually,  to  a  great  extent,
iL  larding  over  God's  heritage/*  I
would  plant  my  remarks  here;  and
then  for  the  context,  I  will  use  another
saying — u  For  it  is  God  which  worketh
in  vou  both  to  will  and  and  to  do
of  his  good  pleasure."  I  have  but
little  time  to  expound  and  explain
minutely,  but  will  start  at  the  l>egin-
ning.  God  has  created  man  in  his
own  image,  upright.  Man  in  his
creation  is  but  a  very  little  lower
than  the  angels.  In  what  degree
and  capacity  is  he  lower  than  the
angels  ?  Angels  are  those  beings
who  have  been  on  an  earth  like  this,
and  have  passed  through  the  same
ordeals  that  we  are  njw  passing
through.  They  have  kept  their  first
estate  far  enough  to  preserve  them-
selves in  the  Priesthood.  They  did
not  so  violate  the  law  of  the  Priest-
hood  and  condemn  themselves  to  the
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  as  to  be
finally  lost.^  They  are  not  crowned
with  the  celestial  ones.  They  are
persons  who  have  lived  upon  an  eartht
but  did  not  magnify  the  Priesthood
in  that  high  degree  that  many  others
have  done  who  have  become  Gods,
even  the  sons  of  God.  Human
beings  that  pertain  to  this  world,
who  do  not  magnify  or  are  not
capable  of  magnifying  their  high
calling  in  the  Priesthood  and  receive
crowns  of  glory,  immortality,  and
eternal  lives,  will  also,  when  they
again  receive  their  bodies,  become
angels  and  will  receive  a  glory.  They
are  single,  without  families  or  king-
doms to  reign  over.  All  the  difference
between  men  and  angels  is,  men  are
passing  through  the  day  of  trial  that
angels  have  already  passed  through.
They  belong  to  the  same  family  that


*


SUFFERINGS  OF  1

we  do ;  but  they  have  proven  them-
selves  worthy  only  of  an  exaltation
to  the  state  of  angels,  whereas  we
have  the  privilege  of  obtaining  not
only  the  same  exaltation  they  enjoy,
but  of  going  further  until  we  become
Gods,  even  the  sons  of  God.

My  next  reflections  are  upon  the
state  of  mankind,  their  position  be-
fore God  in  their  creation  and  beincr
upon  the  earth  in  the  connection  of
the  spirit  and  tabernacle,  and  the  in-
fluences that  surround  them*  There
are  certain  influences  that  we  have
no  control  over:  man  is  controlled  by
BOHBDundirig  influences  in  a  greater  or
less  degree.  For  instance,  we  cannot
avert  the  consequences  of  the  fall  as
it  is  called,  of  Adam,  which  came
through  his  transgressing  certain
words  or  laws  given  to  him  by  his
Father  and  God.  In  consequence  of
this,  gin  came  into  the  world,  and
death  by  sin.  Wc  are  more  or  less
controlled  by  the  influences  that  have
been  introduced  into  the  world  by
the  power  of  Satan  upon  the  children
of  men,  and  will  be  so  long  as  we  live
in  the  flesh.  |

Permit  rne  to  diverge  a  moment
from  the  legitimate  chain  of  the  sub-
ject before  us.  I  donofc  niy.M'lf  wish,
nor  do  I  ask  any  man  in  the  world  to
create  a  spirit  of  reformation  to  sing
and  shout  ourselves  "away  to  ever-
lasting bliss/*  There  never  was  any
Buch  reformation  desired  by  me.  All
I  have  ever  asked  for  or  contended
for  is  a  reformation  in  the  life  of  this
people;  that  the  thief  should  stop  his
stealing,  the  swearer  his  swearing,  the
liar  his  lying,  the  deceiver  his  de-
ceiving, and  the  man  who  loves  the
world  more  than  his  God  and  his
religion  wean  his  affections  from
those  objects  and  place  them  where
they  of  right  belong.  I  do  not  wish
anybody  to  cherish  a  wild  enthusiasm,
so  common  in  the  world,  which  is
produced  by  the  excitement  of  animal
passions,  and  makes  people  weep  and


THE  SAINTS,  ETC.  103

cry  out  in  an  insane  manner.  I  wish
the  people  to  make  themselves
acquainted  with  facts  pertaining  to
God,  to  heaven,  to  mankind  upon  the
earth,  their  errand  here,  for  what  they
are  created,  the  nature  of  their  or-
ganization, who  has  power  over  them,
who  controls  them,  h  >w  much  they
can  control  themselves,  Ac,  &c, ;  and
then  let  us  see  whether  we  can  be  men
and  conduct  ourselves  like  Saints,  or
live  and  act  like  the  wicked.

My  reflections  led  me  to  inquire
who  it  is  that  has  influence  over  us.
Can  you  inform  me  why  people  do
wrong  when  they  know  the  path  of
right  and  can  walk  in  it  a3  easily  as
we  can  walk  home  in  broad  daylight  ?
Is  the  cause  of  this  to  be  found
in  the  heavens  ?  Ho.  Is  it  to  be
found  in  the  spirit  God  has  placed  in
our  tabernacles?  No,  Where  is  it
to  be  found  ?  In  the  power  of  the
Enemy  of  all  righteousness,  who  holds
dominion  over  our  flesh,  which  flesh
is  intimately  connected  with  the
spirit  God  has  placed  within  it.
Herein  is  a  warfare.

Brother  Lorenzo  was  striving  to  lay
before  the  people  the  necessity  of  their
letting  good  overcome  evil,  instead  of
letting  evil  overcome  good,  His  re-
marks supplied  to  me  a  number  of
texts,  showing  the  precise  situation  of
mankind  before  the  Father  and  his
angels,  and  before  all  the  heavens.
Men  try  to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage.
I  understand  that  saying  in  this  wise:
The  spirits  that  are  in  men  are  as
pure  as  the  Gods  are ;  then  why  do
they  consent  to  do  evil  ?  Because  of
the  influences  of  evil  that  are  in  the
flesh.  Over  it  the  Enemy  of  all
righteousness  has  held  dominion,  has
exercised  a  right,  and  has  apparently
triumphed.  When  mankind  give
way  to  evil  and  suffer  the  flesh  to
rule  and  contaminate  the  pure  spirit
tabernacled  within  it,  they  lord  it  over
God's  heritage.  When  men  consen
to  evil,  the  spirit  within  them  doe


104


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


not  answer  approvingly.  Though
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  in
darkness  and  blindness,  yet  they  are
not  so  ignorant  as  they  represent
themselves  to  be.  There  is  a  spirit
in  them  that  reproves  them  con-
tinually when  they  do  wrong,  until
they  have  sinned  away  the  day  of
grace,  and  a  mantle  of  darkness  is
thrown  around  them  to  shut  out  for
ever  the  light  of  God.  Until  then,
they  are  checked  continually,  are
taught,  and  chastened  or  justified
as  the  case  may  be.

When  people  do  right,  they  rest
upon  their  beds,  sleep  sweetly,  and
rejoice  in  righteousness  in  their
secret  moments.  When  they  do  evil,
it  brings  sorrow  and  deep  pain  to  them
in  their  private  reflections.  "But
there  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  in-
spiration of  the  Almighty  giveth
them  understanding/*  In  every  man
there  is  a  candle  of  the  Lord  which
burns  with  a  clear  light;  and  if- by
the  wickedness  of  a  man  it  is  ex-
tinguished, then  farewell  for  ever  to
that  individual.  The  people  say  they
do  as  well  as  they  know  how.  This
may  be  true.  It  is  also  true  that
there  is  a  great  amount  of  ignorance.
But  who  among  this  people  does  an
evil  without  knowing  it  ?  Is  there  a
man  in  this  kingdom  who  betrays  his
God  and  his  brethren,  without  being
perfectly  conscious  that  he  does  an
evil  ?  I  think  not.  Is  there  one  who
treats  the  name  of  the  Deity  with
lightness,  using  his  name  in  vain,  that
believes  himself  justified  ?  I  think
not.  Is  there  one  who  takes  advantage
of  his  neighbour  or  a  fellow-being,
deceiving  and  wronging  him,  that  be-
lieves he  does  right  ?  I  think  not.
men  »»  do  wi*  they  W  that
they  do  wrong.  Is  there  a  person  in
this  community  that  can  lie,  and  feel
justified  in  the  belief  that  he  is  telling
the  truth  ?  Does  the  thief  feel  justified
in  doing  right  when  he  steals  his
neighbour's  goods  ?  No.  The  blackest


vagabond  and  renegade  that  walks  the
streets  of  this  city  or  Territory  is  con-
scious when  lie  does  right  and  when
he  does  wrong.  Notwithstanding  all
this,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  ignorance

Just  as  long  as  we  live  within  the
purview  of  the  reconciliation  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  that  visits  us  from
time  to  time,  revealing  the  truth  and
and  the  righteousness  of  our  Godf
and  yield  to  that  and  never  cast  it
from  us,  whether  we  live  or  die,  there
is  a  salvation  for  us.  There  is  a  sal-
vation for  all  the  sons  and  daughters
of  Adam  and  Eve,  no  matter  where
they  have  lived  or  when,  nor  whether
Christian,  Mussulman,  Jew,  bar-
barian, or  Gentile,  that  do  not  deny
the  power  of  God  and  sin  against  the
Holy  Ghost.  You  may  discover  that
I  am  a  Universal  ist.  I  am ;  and  I
am  also  a  Calvinist,  for  the  Almighty
decreed  all  this  before  the  worlds
w  ere.  As  I  progress  in  my  remarks
you  can  see  plainly  that  a  widely-
extended  field  opens  to  our  minds.

Is  every  man  and  woman  capable
of  receiving  the  highest  glory  of
God  ?  No.  We  are  surrounded
with  circumstances  that  control  us  to
a  certain  degree.  My  father  and
mother  moved  into  the  State  of  Ver-
mont^ and  it  happened  that  I  was
born  there.  I  cannot  help  that.
They  might  have  stayed  in  Massachu-
setts, close  to  Boston.  If  they  had,
I  should  have  been  born  there,  and  1
could  not  have  helped  that.  My
father's  name  was  John  Young,  and
my  mother's  maiden  name  was  Nabby
HowA*  I  cannot  help  that.  My
father  was  a  poor,  honest,  hard-work-
ing man ;  and  his  mind  seemingly
stretched  from  east  to  west,  from
north  to  south  ;  and  ttf  the  day  of  his
death  he  wanted  to  command  worlds;
but  the  Lord  would  never  permit  him
to  get  rich.  He  wanted  to  command
all,  and  that  too  in  righteousness.  I
cannot  help  all  this ;  I  have  no  power
to  control  such  circumstances.  When


SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


105


I  was  about  twenty  months  old,  my
father  moved  from  Vermont  into  the
State  of  New  York,  where  I  lived
with  him  until  I  became  a  man.  I
cannot  help  that.  There  are  a  thou-
sand circumstances  I  cannot  help  or
control  that  are  thrown  around  me
without  any  action  of  my  choice,

I  cannot  help  being  here.  We
might  have  gone  to  Vancouver's
Island  ;  and  if  we  had,  we  should
probably  have  been  driven  away  or
used  up  before  this  time.  But  here
we  are  in  the  valleys  of  the  moun-
,tains,  where  the  Lord  directed  me  to
lead  the  people.  The  brethren  who
are  in  foreign  countries  desire  to
gather  to  the  gathering-place  of  the
Saints,  and  they  have  for  the  present
to  come  to  Great  Salt  Lake  City.
They  cannot  help  that  Why  did  we
not  go  to  San  Francisco  ?  Because
the  Lord  told  me  not :  "  For  there  are
lions  in  the  way,  and  they  will
devour  the  lambs,  if  you  take  them
there."  What  now  can  we  do  ?
Why,  instead  of  being  merchants,  in-
stead of  going  to  St.  Louis  to  buy
goods,  we  can  go  down  to  our  Dixie
land,  the  southern  part  of  our  Ter-
ritory, and  raise  cotton  and  manu-
facture goods  for  ourselves.  These
are  circumstances  we  are  creating
with  which  to  Burround  our  children,
and  to  form  the  foundation  of
the  future  prosperity  of  this
community.  They  will  be  more
or  less  governed  by  the  circum-
stances wc  create  for  them.  They
will  make  their  own  bonnets,  ribbons,
hats,  cuats,  and  dresses  of  every  kind.
While  we  are  governed  and  controlled
by  circumstances  over  which  we  have
no  power,  still  we  possess  ability  and
power  in  our  different  spheres  of
action  to  call  into  existence  circum-
stances to  surround  ourselves  and
our  children,  which  will  more  or  less
control  them ;  and,  if  they  are
planned  in  righteousness,  will  tend  to
lead  us  and  our  children  to  heaven.


1 1  have  power  to  call  upon  the  brethren
to  go  south  and  raise  cotton  and  in-

•  digo,  the  olive,  and  the  grape.  I
have  done  it.  In  doing  this,  it
throws  them  under  the  influence  of
new  surroundings  $nd  new  circum-
stances. They  in  their  turn  can,  by  per-
severance and  faithfulness,  under  the
dictations  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,
bring  forth  a  train  of  happy  circum-
stances to  bless  them,  to  bless  their
wives,  to  bless  their  children,  and  to
bless  the  kingdom  of  God,

I  have  power  to  send  brethren  to
the  east  or  to  the  west  to  buy  our
goods.  I  have  power  to  say,  John,
William,  or  Thomas,  Go  and  find  a
gold  mine;  but  I  am  not  disposed  to
exercise  this  power  m  that  way.  God
has  given  this  power  to  me.  Let  the
brethren  who  have  been  called  to  go
south  go  willingly,  with  their  heads
up  and  glory,  hallelujah!  in  their
hearts;  for  they  are  pioneers  of
future  greatness,  power,  and  inde-
pendence to  Israel.  They  possess
power  to  do  this.  When  the  husband-
man goes  into  his  field,  he  has  power
to  plough  up  the  soil.  When  it  is
ready,  he  has  power  to  plant  corn  in
rows  or  otherwise  ;  he  has  power  to
sow  wheat  or  oats  in  drills  or  broad-
cast, and  harrow  in  or  cover  the  seeds,
that  they  may  grow.  What  we  sow
we  shall  also  reap.  We  have  great
power  committed  unto  us,  and  yet  we
are  confined  by  certain  laws  that  we
cannot  avert  or  control,

The  power  of  choice  all  intelligent
beings  inherit  from  the  Gods  of
eternity;  it  is  innate.  This  state-
ment might  even  be  applied  to  the
brute  creation ;  but  it  is  not  my  pur-
pose to  extend  my  remarks  in  that
channel  to-day.  The  Latter-day
Saints  can  take  the  road  that  leads  to
life  everlasting,  if  they  choose ;  or,
if  they  choose,  they  can  take  the
road  that  leads  to  apostacy.  As  in-
dividuals, we  must  guard  our  affec-
tions from  becoming  contaminated


K>G  JOUHNAL  OF

with  the  love  of  earthly  riches,  or
anything  that  is  of  earth,  whether
animate  or  inanimate.  Uncertainty
is  strewed  around  us,  and  disappoint-
ment is  the  constant  companion  of
those  who  worship  at  the  shrine  of
the  god  of  this  world.  If  we  centre
our  aflections  upon  any  earthly  object,
whether  within  our  reach  or  out  of
our  reach,  should  we  be  bereaved  of
that  object,  we  are  left  to  mourn  and
lament  in  darkness  because  of  our
ignorance  and  folly.  Let  crtir  love  be
for  God  and  truth,  righteousness  and
peace,  being  contented  and  happy
with  present  endowments ;  and  as  the
way  opens  to  farther  progression,
greater  possessions,  walk  forward  in
the  light  of  God  and  hold  what  we
obtain  for  hiin  and  his  cause,  coveting
not  what  we  possess,  and  not  with  an
avaricious  desire  reaching  after  what
we  cannot  possess.  If  we  do  opposite
to  this,  our  whole  existence  will  be
craped  with  disappointment  and
mourning.  Then  let  us  keep  the
world  and  its  allurements  aloof  from
our  affections.  We  may  have  the
ability  to  build  for  ourselves  beautiful
bouses,  to  plant  choice  orchards  and
vineyards,  to  adorn  our  grounds  with
flowers  and  sweet-scented  shrubs,  and
have  lovely  families,  and  possess
horses  and  chariots,  silver  and
gold,  this,  that,  and  the  other,
in  abundance.  But  if  our  affections
are  placed  upon  these  things,  we  shall
either  go  out  of  the  kingdom  of
Christ  and  miss  being  exalted  sons  of
God,  or  will  see  our  error,  repent  of
our  folly,  learn  to  control  our  affec-
tions, desires,  and  passions,  and
willingly  let  "  God  rule  within  us  to
will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure,"
having  no  mind  only  that  which  is  of
heaven.

Have  we  a  will  ?  Yes.  It  is  an
endowment,  a  trait  of  the  character
of  the  Gods,  with  which  all  intelli-
gence is  endowed,  in  heaven  and  on
earthy — the  power  to  accept  or  reject,  I


DISCOURSES.

Then,  wherever  the  wisdom  of  God
directs,  let  our  affections  and  the
labour  of  our  lives  be  centred  to
that  point,  and  not  set  our  hearts  on
going  east  or  west,  north  or  south,  on
living  here  or  there,  on  possessing
this  or  that;  but  let  our  will  be
swallowed  up  in  the  will  of  God,
allowing  him  to  rule  supremely
within  us  until  the  spirit  overcomes
the  flesh,  and  the  world,  Satan,  and
the  flesh  are  vanquished  and  lie
under  our  feei  Then  and  iu>t  till
then  will  the  righteousness  of  God
reign  triumphantly.  It  may  be  asked
whether  I  have  any  idols  ?  Yes,  I
have  most  darling  idols — my  God  and
my  religion,  and  they  are  all  the
idols  I  wish  to  have.  "  Have  you  no
wife  that  you  idolize  ?  "  If  I  have,
let  the  "Lord  take  her  and  give  her  to
somebody  else.  "Have  you  no
children  that  you  idolize  ?  "  If  I
have,  let  the  Lord  have  them.  I
possess  that  which  is  apparently
mine ;  but  why  should  I  call  them
mine,  until  I  have  passed  the  ordeals
mortals  must  pass,  and  they  are
sealed  to  me  by  the  authorities  of
the  Gods  in  a  way  that  they  cannot
be  taken  from  me  ?  They  are  now
in  my  possession,  and  I  hold  them  by
the  undisputed  right  of  that
possession.  Anything  we  have  upon
this  earth  we  only  seem  to  have,  for
in  reality  we  own  nothing,  No
person  on  the  earth  can  truly  call
anything  his  own,  and  never
until  he  has  passed  the  ordeals  we  are
all  now  passing,  and  has  received  his
body  again  in  a  glorious  resurrection,
to  be  crowned  by  him  who  will  be
ordained  and  set  apart  to  set  a  crown
upon  our  heads.  Then  will  be  given
to  us  that  which  we  now  only  seem  to
own,  and  we  will  be  forever  one  with
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  not
until  then.

There  is  a  great  difference  in  the
individual  capacity  of  people.  Some
can  receive  much  more  than  others


SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  #TC.


107


can  :  hence  we  read  of  different  de-
grees of  glory.  How  many  kingdoms
glory  of  there  are,  I  know  not ;  and
how  many  degrees  of  glory  there  are
in  these  kingdoms,  I  know  not ;  but
there  arc  multitudes  of  them.
Paul  speaks  of  three,  Joseph  Smith
and  Sidney  Rigdon  saw  three,  and
multitudes  more  have  we  seen  by  the
Spirit  of  revelation,  according  to  the
capacity  of  our  understandings.  Can
we  so  live  and  direct  ourselves  as  to
receive  glory,  immortality,  and  eter-
nal lives?  We  can.  Then  love  not
the  world,  nor  the  things  of  the
world.  Desire  not  that  which  is  not  for
us,  but  desire  only  that  which  God
has  ordained  for  our  benefit  and  ad-
vancement in  the  science  of  eternal
life;  then  can  we  advance  with
accelerated  speed  in  the  things  of
God.

But  is  it  not  visibly  manifest  that
the  great  majority  want  to  lord  it
over  God's  heritage.  Wicked  kings
lord  it  over  the  consciences  of  their
subjects,  priests  over  their  people,
and  masters  over  their  servants ;  and
wicked  dispositions  tell  us  to  do  this
and  to  desire  that  which  pertains  to
folly  :  they  prompt  almost  constantly
to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage.  Where
is  God's  heritage  ?  It  is  in  our  affec-
tions,  our  love,  delight,  glory,  and
happiness.  Let  us  honour  God's
heritage,  sanctify  it,  and  bring  all
into  subjection  that  surrounds  it  and
is  connected  with  it,  sanctifying  the
Lord  in  our  affections.  We  see  all
the  world  trying  to  lord  it  over  God's
heritage.  It  is  in  the  spirit  that  the
evil  principle  and  power  is  trying  to
overcome  and  rule  over  the  divine
principle  planted  there.  This  con-
stantly leads  the  children  of  men
astray.

What  power  is  legally  ours  ?  That
which  was  given  to  Adam  and  the
human  family  in  former  days.
Power  ?  Yes.  Dominion  ?  Yes.
Glory  ? Yes, Honour  ?  Yes,


That  which  pertains  to  this  world  ?
Yes.  That  which  pertains  to  the
next  ?  Yes.  Let  us  understand  this
power  and  this  privilege  that  God  has
guaranteed  to  the  human  family.  He
has  first  imparted  power  to  mankind
to  control  the  elements ;  and  when
,  this  is  employed  faithfully  to  magnify
righteousness,  then  excellence,  mag-
nificence, splendour,  beauty,  honour,
glory,  and  Godlike  power  will  follow
as  the  results.  This  power  must  be
guided  by  the  Almighty.  Let  the
people  be  led  by  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  finder  of  God
.will  be  made  manifest  before  them
day  by  day  in  their  progress  to  eter-
nal happiness;  for  this  is  the  privi-
lege of  the  faithful.

Shall  we  not  choose  for  ourselves  ?
Yes.  Have  we  not  rights  ?  Yes,
Have  we  not  power  ?  Yes.  Have
we  not  authority  bequeathed  to  us
from  the  heavens — a  legacy  from
God  to  hold  dominion  over  the  ele-
ments? Yes.  Then  go  to  like  men,
like  angels,  like  Him  we  read  of,
whom  we  love  and  serve  and  worship,
who  in  his  former  capacity  organized
the  elements  as  we  are  taught  to  do
for  our  own  benefit,  beauty,  comfort,
excellency,  and  glory,  and  beautify
the  earth  and  make  it  like  the  garden
of  Eden,  so  that  the  angels  will  de-
light to  come  and  dwell  here,  and
Jesus  Christ  will  delight  to  dwell
with  his  brethren  on  the  earth.  This
is  our  right.  We  are  not  destitute  of
rights  and  privileges.  We  have  the
right  of  choice.  We  have  the  right
to  dictate,  to  plough,  plant,  sow,  reap,
gather,  mow,  clothe  ourselves  and
families,  and  gather  around  us  in
abundance  all  the  comforts  and  bless-
ings of  life.  Have  we  a  right  to  in-
flict evil  upon  our  neighbour,  upon  the
divinity  within  him,  or  upon  the  divi-
nity within  ourselves  ?  Ho.  God
should  rule  in  the  way  and  manner
he  pleases  by  the  revelations  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  will  lead


the  Saints  to  victory  and  glory.
By-and-by  we  will  p<  ssess  more  rights
than  we  now  possess,  but  not  until
they  are  given  to  us.  God  has  de-
creed from  all  eternity  that  we  should
have  rights,  power,  and  authority  over
tbe  elements  to  organize  and  bring
them  into  use  ancKmake  them  bene-
ficial and  subserve  the  wants  of  the
human  family.

I  wish  to  see  this  people  manu-
facture their  own  clothing,  and  make
as  good  cloth  as  is  in  the  coat  I  now
have  on,  and  as  good  silk  as  is  in  the
handkerchief  around  my  neck,  and  as
good  linen  as  is  in  the  bosom  and
wristbands  of  my  shirt.  When  we
administer  the  sacrament  of  the
Lord's  Snpper,  I  wish  as  good  wine  as
can  be  made  in  any  conn  try,  and  that
too  made  by  ourselves  from  grapes
grown  in  our  own  mountain  valleys.
I  want  to  see  the  people  wear  hats,
boots,  coats,  etc.,  made  by  ourselves,
as  good  as  ever  was  made  in  any
country.

If  you  wTill  obey  my  counsel,  you
will  constantly  increase  in  the  riches
and  the  comforts  of  life;  though
every  time  I  speak  upon  this  subject
I  wish  to  keep  in  view  that  if  we
cannot  handle  the  things  of  this
world  without  unduly  placing  our
affections  upon  them,  I  pray  God  to
keep  them  out  of  our  possession.  I
would  rather  have  this  people  clad
with  sheep- skins  and  goat-skins  than
to  have  them  possess  the  wealth  of
this  world  without  feeling  that  they
could  trample  it  all  under  their  feet
at  any  moment.  Earthly  wealth  and
greatness  should  only  be  used  to  sub-
serve  the  purposes  of  God  upon  the


earth.  This  is  what  brother  Snow
was  speaking  upon  this  morning.  I
have  briefly  noticed  the  same  subject,
using  my  own  style  and  language.
Let  the  divinity  within  the  people
overcome  that  wicked,  corrupt
hellish  influence  the  Devil  has  power
to  introduce.

Do  not  imagine  that  I  am  in  the
least  finding  fault  with  the  Devil.  I
would  not  bring  a  railing  accusation
against  him,  for  he  is  fulfilling  his
office  and  calling  manfully;  he  is
more  faithful  in  his  calling  than  are
many  of  the  people.  God  is  not  yet
going  to  destroy  wickedness  from  tho
earth.  How  frequently  we  hear  it
reiterated  from  the  pulpit  that  he  is
going  to  destroy  all  wickedness.  No
such  thing.  He  wilt  destroy  the
power  of  sin.  When  we  have  lived
to  see  millions  of  worlds  created —
yea,  more  in  number  than  the
particles  of  matter  that  compose  this
earth  and  millions  of  earths  like  %is,
if  so  many  could  be  numerated  by
man,  and  people  live  on  them  to  pass
through  the  ordeals  we  are  passing
through,  you  will  never  see  one  of
them  without  a  devil.  The  work  the
Saviour  has  on  hand  is  to  reduce  the
power  of  the  Devil  to  perfect  sub-
jection; and  when  he  has  destroyed
death  and  him  that  has  the  power  of
it,  pertaining  to  this  world,  then  he
will  deliver  up  the  kingdom  spotless
to  the  Father.

I  have  not  told  the  Saints  my
feelings,  but  I  will  here  say  that  it  is
my  daily  prayer  that  God  will  change
the  power  and  authority  of  our  politi-
cal Government  into  the  hands  of  the
just.  Amen.


DIFFICULTIES,  ETC


109


DIFFICULTIES  WITH  WHICH  THE  CHURCH  HAS  HAD  TO
CONTEND  IN  ITS  ESTABLISHMENT  IN  UTAH.

Discourse  hj  Elder  George  A.  Smith,  <~!>l<vered  at  Logan^  Cache  County ^

September  10,  186  L

REPOBTKD  BY  G, D.  WATT.


I  love  to  hear  the  teachings  of  the
servants  of  God,  especially  those
whom  God  has  appointed  to  preside
over  his  people  in  all  the  world.  I
love  also  to  contribute  my  testimony,
or  to  speak  to  the  Saints  by  way  of
encouragement,  illustration,  and  in-
struction. For  twenty -eight  years
past,  it  has  been  the  feeling  of  my
heart  that  if  there  was  anything  on
the  earth  that  I  could  do  to  advance
the  work  of  the  Lord  in  the  last  days,
I  wished  to  do  it ;  and  if  I  have  let
anything  slip  that  I  ought  to  have
done,  it  has  been  for  want  of  under-
standing and  a  proper  knowledge  of
the  circumstances  at  the  time.  I  en-
tertain the  same  sentiments  and  de-
termination to-day  upon  this  subject
that  I  have  entertained  for  twenty-
eight  years  past

I  am  gratified  and  rejoice  exceed-
ingly in  beholding  the  faces  of  my
brethren  and  sisters  in  this  valley.
From  the  manner  winch  the  people
here  have'  received  the  President
and  his  escort,  it  is  plain  they  are
wide  awake. A  band  of  music  met

on  the  mountain  side,  and  they
played  with  a  free  goodwill.  The
drummer  seemed  as  though  he  was
determined  to  beat  the  head  of  his
drum  in  ;  and  when  the  brethren  un-
dertook to  sing  in  the  meetinghouse
at  Wellsville,  it  seemed  as  though  their
united  voices  would  tear  the  house  tu
pieces,  so  loud  were  their  rejoicings.
The  spirit  in  them  inspired  them  to
do  as  they  did.

We  do  not  realize  to  the  frill  ex-


tent what  we  are  doing,  We  are
actually  settling  a  portion  of  the
earth  that  has  been  considered  unin-
habitable. We  are  reclaiming  it  from
a  desert,  and  building  upon  it  a  foun-
dation for  an  immense  State;  and  that
State  is  composed  of  a  united  people,
who  are  almost  universally  of  harmo-
nious sentiments.  The  foundation  of
this  settlement  of  the  u  Mormon  "  peo-
ple in  the  mountains  really  attracted
the  notice  of  the  Federal  Government.
We  had  been  mobbed  and  persecuted
and  driven  from  place  to  place,  from
city  to  city.  On  that  kind  of  treat-
ment we  have  flourished ;  our  num-
bers have  increased,  although  many
of  our  brethren  have  laid  their  hones
in  the  grave  prematurely,  and  many
of  our  wives  and  children  have
perished  through  persecution  ;  yet
from  their  ashes  have  seemed  to
spring  thousands.

When  we  fled  into  the  wilderness,
our  enemies  said,  u  Now,  let  the  Mor-
mons alone ;  they  will  encounter  so
many  difficulties  and  so  many  natural
objections  to  their  growth,  they  must
come  to  naught;  they  will  quarrel
with  each  other,  and  they  will  soon
break  up,  and  we  shall  have  no  more
trouble  with  them,"

When  James  K.  Polk,  President  of
the  United  States,  was  told  that  the
"Mormons"  had  occupied  the  Great
Basin,  and  were  making  settlements  %
on  the  borders  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,
"  Why,"  said  he,  "  that  is  the  key  of
the  continent"  When  the  wisdom
of  the  venerable  Senator,  the  late  Sec-


110  JOUBNAL  OF

m

retary  Cass,  was  brought  into  requi-
sition on  the  subject,  "What shall  we
do  with  the  Mormons?"  said  he.
"Send  a  small  army  among  them,
under  the  command  of  an  intelligent
officer;  send  good-looking,  companion-
able, sociable  officers,  and  a  few  strong-
minded  wjmen ;  yes,  send  men  who
are  calculated  to  win  away  their
females,  and  thus  civilize  them,  by
introducing  among  them  habits  of
modern  Christian  civilization;  and  in
a  short  time  you  will  reduce  them  to
the  necessity  of  being  satisfied  with
one  wife/*  Colonel  Steptoe  was  sent
here  to  fulfil  that  mission  with  the
gentlemanly  officers  and  soldiers  who
composed  his  command.  The  object
of  their  errand,  however,  was  ne  t  ac-
complished-

In  a  short  time  afterwards  they
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was
necessary  to  take  a  step  that  should
make  an  utter  end  of  "  Mormonism  "
at  once,  by  a  decided  and  bold  st  roke
of  "  our  gallant  little  army/'  The
nation  was  proud  of  so  grand  an  un-
dertaking. The  press  lauded  the  pro-
ject, and  the  members  of  the  Govern-
ment were  proud  of  the  zeal  in  which
this  enterprising  war  was  undertaken.
The  delusion  passed  current  that  the
"  Mormons  "  would  now  be  broken  up.
Their  first  hope  was  that  famine
would  reduce  us  to  destruction ;  but
this  had  failed*  #

And  while  thev  wtre  looking  for
tidings  that  in  the  hard  winter  of  1 85n
the  "  Mormons  **  had  all  perished  of
starvation,  our  Delegates  suddenly
appeared  at  the  Capitol,  asking  for
admission  into  the  Union  as  a  State.
This  astonished  them.

Do  they  not  remember  that  from
the  earliest  period  of  our  history,  the
nation  and  the  different  States  have
recognized  us  as  a  separate  people  ?
In  1834  Daniel  Dunklin,  Governor  of
Missouri,  said  in  an  official  document
that  the  constitution  and  laws  of  the
State  of  Missouri  made  ample  pro-


DISCOUBSI-S.

visions  for  the  protection  of  the  Mor-
mons; but  the  prejudices  of  the  peo-
ple of  Missouri  were  so  great  against
them,  that  they  could  not  be  enforced,
and  consequently  the  Mormons  could
not  be  reinstated  in  the  possession  of
their  lands  and  protected  in  their  rights,

If  my  friend,  Attorney-General
Blair  here,  will  allow  me,  I  will  quote
Black  stone,  who  says  that  "  Allegiance
is  that  ligament  or  thread  which  ties
or  binds  the  subject  to  the  sovereign,
and  for  which  the  subject  is  entitled
to  protection  from  the  sovereign."
Xou\  the  very  minute  that  the  sove-
reign, king,  or  government,  republic,
or  whatever  form  of  government  it
may  be,  shall  cease  to  extend  protec-
tion to  their  subjects,  whether  they
be  many  or  few,  they  necess^ril}'  be-
come independent,  and  are  compelled
for  self-preservation  to  protect  them-
selves and  to  look  out  for  their  own
wants  and  prgvide  for  their  own  ne-
cessities. That  is  the  situation  we
were  in  in  Missouri  when  Governor
Dunklin  declared  that  the  constitution
and  laws  of  Missouri  could  not  be  en-
forced si  i  as  to  protect  this  people.  lit
was  virtually  declaring  us  independent
of  that  State,  and  acknowledging  our
right  to  protect  ourselves  in  that  ca-
pacity. The  truth  of  this  position
was  farther  illustrated  by  the  impo-
sition upon  us  of  a  treaty  by  Major-
General  Lucas  in  the  fall  of  1888,
which  treaty  was  approved  by  Major-
Oeneral  Clark,  and  subsequently  by
L.  W.  Boggs,  Governor  of  the  State ;
and  thus,  contrary  to  our  wnll.  and  at
the  point  of  thousands  of  bayonets,
were  we  compelled  to  be  one  of  the
high  contracting  parties  to  a  treaty —
an  exercise  *of  power  which  belongs
alone  to  independent  sovereignty.

From  that  day,  and  I  do  not  know
how  long  before,  so  far  as  allegiance
is  concerned,  we  were  cast  without
the  pale  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Go-
vernment in  which  we  lived.  It  was
not  we  that  did  this :  it  was  forced


DIFFICULTIES,  ETC,


111


upon  us.  We  were  law-abiding
citizens,  and  wanted  the  protection  of
the  laws,  the  constitution,  and  the
Government  df  Missouri  :  we  wished
to  remain  quietly  in  our  homes,  and
have  the  privilege  of  eating  the  bread
of  industry,  and  to  rear  our  children  in
virtue's  ways.  But  no,  "  these  insti-
tutions [constitution  and  laws]  are
not  for  you  Mormons."

We  found  the  same  doctrine  held
good  in  Illinois,  and  the  same  prin-
ciple has  been  carried  out  precisely  by
the  action  of  the  General  Government
towards  us,

I  was  told  at  Washington  that  if
we  were  not  Mormons,  we  should  be
hailed  with  generosity  and  friendship;
and  the  prestige  of  having  subdued
this  country  and  brought  it  into  use
would  have  placed  as  foremost  in  the
rank  of  Territories.  But  we  were
"  Mormons,"  These  are  the  senti-
ments, the  spirit,  and  the  feeling  all
over  the  country  and  with  the
Government.

Wo  look  at  this  matter  as  it  is.
The  General  Government  is  not  going
to  donate  land  to  us,  while  they  were
ready  to  give  the  settlers  in  Oregon
six  hundred  and  forty  acres  of  land
each,  half  as  much  for  their  wives,
and  a  quarter  as  much  for  each  one  of
their  children.  Oregon  is  located  on
thesealjoard,  possessing  the  advantage
of  large  navigable  rivers.  It  has  a
flourishing  commerce  growing  up,
providing  the  people  with  exchanges
at  comparatively  little  cost,

Utah  is  in  the  heart  of  the  desert.
It  requires  persons  of .  the  most  un-
daunted courage  and  energy  to  possess
it  at  all.  Then,  why  not  give  them  a
chance  to  occupy  the  land  ?  Why
not  encourage  the  settlers  of  Utah,  to
reward  them  for  their  energy  and  toil
in  reclaiming  a  desert,  by  giving  them
six  hundred  and  forty  acres  of  land
apiece  ?  Because  "  they  are  damned
Mormons  !"  That  is  the  reason  they
do  not  iri  ve  them  an  acre.


What  do  we  find  in  the  adminis-
tration of  Mr.  Buchanan  ?  The  very
first  step  he  took  was  to  gather  the
flower  of  the  American  army — the
finest  and  best  appointed  army  that
ever  the  United  States  fitted  out.
This  was  the  declaration  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  Cabinet  and  the  press
throughout  the  whole  country.  The
army  under  Washington  that  captured
Lord  Cornwallis  hardly  amounted  to
twelve  thousand  men ;  the  army  that
was  sent  to  Utah  and  actually
marched  for  this  Territory  numbered
over  thirteen  thousand  soldiers  ;  but
altogether,  with  the  attache*  they  em-
ployed, it  amounted  to  upwards  of
seventeen  thousand  men.  Even  this
vast  army  was  not  allowed  to  pass
through  the  inhabited  parts  of  the
Territory  until  the  High  Commission-
ers sent  by  the  President  of  the
United  States,  exercising,  though  dis-
claiming the  authority  of  the  treaty-
making  power,  negotiated  for  their
passage  into  the  settlements.  Many
attempts  were  made  to  violate  this
compact,  and  in  many  instances  they
did  so  to  a  limited  extent,  but  they
found  dangers  beset  them.  An  old
Frenchman  said  they  wo  uld  damn  the
"  Mormons"  when  they  would  get  up,
and  when  they  would  go  to  bed,  when
they  would  drink  T  smoke,  and  gam-
ble, and  they  would  say,  "  Why  not
go  to  work  and  destroy  them  r"  Then
they  would  reason,  "  We  are  here
right  in  the  midst  of  the  Mormons:
there  are  only  a  few  thousands  of  us;
and  if  we  commence  the  play,  we
shall  all  go  under:  then  the  people
will  come  from  the  States  and  kill  all
the  Mormons  ;  but  what  good  would
that  do  us  if  we  were  all  dead."  God
fought  our  battles.

To  conclude  the  argument  that  we
are  an  independent  people,  acknow-
ledged bv  the  United  States,  and  that
our  Territory  was  no  longer  tenable
to  their  armies,  but  must  be  evacu-
ated, orders  were  given  by  the  Presi-


i


112  JOURNAL  OF

dent  to  destroy  everything  that
could  be  of  use  to  us  here.  3  Burst
your  cannon,  blow  up  your  maga-
zines, and  waste  everything  you  can-
not carry  away  and  that  would  be  of
any  use  whatever  to  the  Mormon
people ;  for  in  vacuating  a  Territory
we  cannot  conquer.  We  must  let
nothing  go  into  tho  hands  of  our
enemies  that  will  in  any  way  benefit
them/*  The  destruction  of  property
in  this  way  is  an  evidence  of  hostili-
ties. This  is  the  practice  of  nations
that  are  at  war  with  each  other,  to
destroy  what  they  cannot  carry
away.

We  have  had  to  protect  ourselves
and  sustain  the  expense  of  Indian
wars,  make  our  own  laws,  regulate
ourselves  in  our  own  way,  and  no
nation,  kindred,  tongue,  or  people  has
the  right  to  say,  Why  do  you  so  ?
This  right  so  far  has  been  conceded  ;
the  army  has  Deen  withdrawn  from
our  country,  and  they  have  gone
away,  in  a  manner  acknowledging
their  defeat.  To  be  sure,  many  ofl
the  officers  went  away  saying,  44  We
will  come  by-and-by  and  w  ipe  you
out "  But  as  God  would  have  it,
they  are  employed  in  paying  such
compliments  to  each  other  as  they
had  designed  to  inflict  upon  us.  ,

I  have  friends  in  what  is  now  termed
the  Northern  and  Southern  Con-
federacies, for  now  the  Federal  Union  is
one  of  the  things  that  has  ceased  to  be.
Such  a  thing  as  the  Government  of
the  United  States  as  organized  by  our
fathers  has  ceased  to  exist.  The
North  claims  to  be  it ;  but  the  United
States  as  a  Government,  as  a  nation,
as  organized  by  our  fathers,  is  among
the  things  that  were.  Fragments  of
it,  in  the  shape  of  separate  govern-
ments or*teombinations,  may  be  able
to  inflict  national  chastisement  upon
each  other,  or  make  war  with  foreign
nations ;  but  it  is  only  as  a  fraction,
and  not  as  a  whole.  The  State  of
Kentucky  declares  that  neither  the


DISCOURSES.

North  nor  South  shall  march  armies
into  their  Territory.  You  find  in  the
history  of  the  wars  of  Europe  that  an
armed  neutrality  is  not  an  uncommon
thing.  Kentucky  is  observing  the
same.  She  is  a  powerful  State ;  she
may  be  drawn  into  the  great  vortex  of
warj  she  may  take  sides  with  the
North  or  with  the  South,  or  most
likely  be  divided  on  both  sides ;  but
she  is  no  more  in  connection  with  the
General  Government,  as  it  is  called,
than  with  Tennessee  tor  Virginia.

Turmoil  mmd  mob  power  rule.
They  are  destroying^each  other,  de-
molishing public/  improvements.:
printing  presses  have  been  destroyed
in  Missouri  and  most  other  States.
Blackstone  says  that  a  press  that  pub-
lishes falsehood  And  licentiousness  ie
a  nuisance,  and  that  all  corporations
should  have  powjrift  abate  it.  We
abated  the  Expimtt^  in  Nauvoo  ac-
cording to  law  on  this  groftnd.  Both
the  North  and  the  South  haye  been
doing  the  same  thing :  himtfreds  of
papers  have  been  suppressed.  Gov.
Ford  said  it  was  right  to  abate  the
Expositor,  but  it  would  have  been
better  by  mob  than  by.  municipal
authority;  and  now  mob  law  rules
thV  whole  country  and  destroys
printing  presses  without  let  or
hindrance.

We  will  now  speak  of  our
mountain  home.  The  Lord  has
smiled  upon  these  valleys.  Colonel
Fremont  was  in  the  Bear  River
Valley  Jn  August,  184-3,  when  the
mercury  stood  at  29  degrees,  showing
conclusively  that  grain  could  not  be
ripened  here.  People  in  the  States
would  pick  up  that  report  aid  say,
"Everything  will  freeze  to  death
there."  A  few  years  passed  away,
and  you  find  eight  or  nine  hundred
families  of  Saints  in  Cache  Valley,
and  they  can  raise  the  finest  wheat,
flax,  and  wool.  I  saw  yesterday  as
fine  a  specimen  of  tobacco  as  can  be
raised  in  Virginia- Eve^y  nation


DIFFICULTIES,  ETC.


113


feels  it  is  their  best  policy  and  their
duty  to  adopt  such  a  system  of  politi-
cal economy  as  will  provide  for  their
own  wants,  and  protect  themselves
against  the  exactions  of  other
nations.

We  need  not  expect  to  get  cotton
from  the  Southern  States,  for  they
are  fighting  ^ith  the  North,  and  have
not  time  to  raise  it,  and  communica-
tiopV  is  cut.  oft  by  a  blockade.  We
need  not  expect  to  get  tobacco  from
the  Sonth,  for  the  negroes  am  at
( work  digging  entrenchments  and
raising  corn  for  the  Southern  army.

We  have  got  to  provide  for  our-
selves  m  a  ^eat  family  and  as  a
nation.  All  enlightened  nations  have
endeavoured  to  get  control  of  a
northern  and  southern  climate.  The
God  of  heaven,  in  his  abundant  mercy,
has  given  ns  the  control,  in  these  ele-
vated valleys,  of  a  northern  and
southern  climate.

There  are  a  great  many  persons
among  us  triat  use  tobacco,  and  there
are  some  reasons  why  they  use  it.
For  instance,  our  young  men  see  a
Gentile  with  a  stove  pipe  hat  on,  a
pair  of  big  whiskers,  and  a  cigar  in
his  mouth.  Oh,  it  looks  so  pretty,
think  our  young  men;  and  if  they
cannot  get  a  cigar,  they  . must  have  a  j
pipe.  Many  of  our  boys  see  asi  old  man
that  lias  been  educated  among  the-
Gentiles,  and  has  contracted,  unfortu-
nately, a  habit  of  chewing  tobacco.
While  walking  along,  he  spits  upon  t  he
snow ;  it  colours  the  virgin  snow  as
though  a  calf  had  been  there*  The
boy  looks  at  it,  and  says  he,  "  That
looks  nice ;  "  so  he  gets  his  tobacco,
and  spits  on  the  snow  also.  "  There,"
says  he,  u  that  looks  as  though  a  man
had  been  along:  here."  This  habit  has
become  stubborn  with  many  people.
You  may  be  astonished  when  I  tell
you  that  it  takes  about  sixty  thousand
dollars  in  cash  out  of  our  Territory
every  year  for  the  article  of  tobace  >.
Within  the  last  ten  years  we  have

No.  8.


paid  in  the  neighbourhood  of  six
hundred  thousand  dollars  for  this  one
article.  ,

ft  is  entirely  against  our  interest
to  pay  out  this  yearly  sum  for  an
article  we  can  raise  in  our  own
country,  and  a  violation  of  the  true
principles  of  political  economy,  I
will  appeal  to  our  individual  pockets.
I  will  say  I  have  got  to  pay  for  me
and  my  boys  for  twenty-five  pounds  of
tobacco  in  a  year.  Suppose  a  tax-
gatherer  comes,  and  my  tax  is  twenty-
five  dollars,  I  say  I  have  not  a  red
cent,  and  I  canfidt  pay  it.  It  cannot
be  had;  I  cannot  raise  it;  but
twenty-five  dollars  in  tobacco  must  be
raised :  there  are  no  two  ways  about
that.

Now,  as  a  State,  in  this  item  of
political  economy,  let  us  raise  and
manufacture  our  own  tobacco,  and
learn  to  think  and  believe  that  tobacco
of  our  own  raising  is  just  as  good
and  a  little  better  than  that  brought
Irom  abroad.

We  sent  brethren  to  the  South  to
raise  cotton  in  1857.  Something
like  thirty -three  of  them  went,  and
the  next  year  many  mom  wdnt,  so
that  in  1858  the  vote  of  Washington
County  amounted  to  one  hundred
voters.  Many  of  them  were  South-
ern men,  who  had  been  gathered  from
Texas,  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and
other  parts  of  the  Southern  States.
They  were  accustomed  to  raising
cotton.  The  President  advised  them
to  go  there  and  supply  the  Territory
Hh  cotton.  It  had  the  appearance
of  a  barren  country  generally.  The
mountains  were  barren  and  bleak  in
their  appearance ;  red  sandstone,  tod
black  volcanic  rock,  and  a  variety  of
grey  coloured  clay  prevailing,  alto-
gether giving  it  a  kind  of  sombre,
deally  appearance.  The  brethren
went  to  raising  cotton  in  small
patches  as  they  could  find  the  land,
and  every  year  they  cultivated  it  they
found  the  cotton  improve  in  quality.

Vol.  IX


114  JOUftNAI,  OP

They  raised  belter  cotton  last  year
than  the  year  1  (  fore,  and  so  they  have
continued  until  it  has  become  a
certainty  that  cotton  can  be  raised
there.

I  have  seen  men  lo  rd  vp  their
cotton  and  start  this  way  to  trade  it
off  Say  they,  u  I  want  to  get  a  few
bushe-s  of  wheat,  and  pay  in  cotton."
The  answer  lias  been,  "  I  can  do
nothing  with  your  cotton  ;  but  if  it
was  spun,  I  would  buy  it."  So  the
cotton  raiser  has  considered  it  of
little  use  to  raise  cotton y  and  went  to
raising  wheat.  They  did  not  know
what  to  do  with  their  cotton  when  it
was  raised.  You  may  go  to  those
same  persons  that  would  not  buy
from  the  cotton  raiser,  and  their
women  say — "Husband  I  have  got
to  have  some  cut  ton  batting  from  the
store,  to  make  some  quilts  of  Now,
husband,  you  need  not  try  to  dodge;
the  batten  has  got  to  come."  It  costs
fifty  cents  a  pound,  and  one- third  of
it  is  paper  when  you  get  it.  Sister,
why  did  you  not  buy  that  broth or's
cotton  the  other  day  :  you  woul  1  have
got  two  dollars  for  your  wheat  you
sell  at  the  store  for  one  ?  44  Oh,  his
cotton  wjis  grown  at  home,  and  that
bought  in  the  stores  is  made  into  nice
sheets,  all  ready  for  spreading  in  the
quilt."  You  can  take  a  pmr  of  hand
cards  and  prepare  our  home-made
cotton  for  the  quilt  with  but  a  little
trouble,  and  you  would  have  the  clean
cotton  instead  of  one-third  brown
paper,  Eor  your  bushel  of  wheat,
after  hauling  it  to  the  store,  you* get
a  pound  and  a  half  of  cotton ;
whereas,  if  you  sell  your  wheat  to  the
home  producer  for  cotton,  you  have
laid  at  your  door  four  pounds  of  cot-
ton for  a  bushel  of  wheat.

To  buy  the  foreign  cotton  in  this
manner,  and  discourage  home  pro-
duction, is  very  far  from  good  politi-
cal economy.  Quite  an  amount  of  raw
cotton  is  wanted  in  this  Territory  for
filling  quilts  and  other  purposes  by


DISCOURSES.

eveiy  frmily.  The  wool  answers  a
good  purpose,  hut  it  is  not  plentiful
enough;  and  even  if  it  were,  there
are  many  kinds  of  quilts  and  com-
forters for  which  cotton  is  far
preferable.  Did  we  only  encourage
this  home  production  of  cotton  to
this  limited  extent,  it  would  save
thousands  of  dollars  of  money  that  is
now  thrown  needlessly  into  the
pockets  of  merchants  to  supply  this
article  from  abroad.  Let  us  stop  this
suicidal  ptactice  of  sending  away  our
money.  It  would  be  better  to  braid
our  bed  covering  from  oat  straw,  un-
til we  can  supply  our  wants  from  the
elements  and  soil  of  our  own  nioun-
tain  valleys.

In  1857  the  brethren  had  began  to
raise  flax,  I  speak  particularly  of
Provo*  In  1858  the  army  came,
and  there  was  a  chance  for  a  man  to
make  a  few  dollars  by  licking  the
dust  of  their  feet  and  bowing  down
to  them  ;  so  the  flax  w^ts  left  to  rot.
I  can  find  perhaps  a  hundred  places
now  in  (be  city  of  Provo  where  flax
is  suffered  to  go  again  into  the
ground,  while  the  owners  considered
they  ought  to  go  and  do  something
for  the  Gentiles  to  get  money  to  buy
clothes.

Some  man  says,  u  I  worked  up
some  flax,  and  it  was  worthless — it
was  rotten/*  It  is  known  in  all  flax
countries  that  if  you  get  flax  too
much  rotted  by  laying  it  up  a  year  or
two,  it  will  recover  its  strength.  In
Pennsylvania,  which  is  a  g^od  flax-
raising  country,  some  farmers  will
have  five  or  six  years'  flax  laid  up,  and
each  year  they  select  out  of  it' that
which  makes  the  best  thread.  When
you  find  your  flax  a  little  too  rotten,
you  are  at  once  discouraged,  and
straightway  make  up  your  minds  to
go  and  work  for  the  Gentiles  to  get
some  of  their  rotten  rags.

A  great  many  "  Mormors/'  when
they  become  wealthy,  want  to  go  back
to  show  their  former  comrades  and


DIFFICULTIKSj  ETC.


115


friends  what  an  amount  of  property
they  have  got.  But,  with  all  this
bombast  and  vain  show,  we  do  not
really  possess  any  tiling.  A  man
says,  "  I  came  into  Cache  Valley  two
years  ago,  I  got  forty  of  acres  land,
and  I  have  raised  a  good  deal  of
wheat  by  very  hard  labour,  and  that
wheat  is  mine."  You  ploughed  the
ground  and  watered  it  ;  but  who
made  the  seed  grow  that  you  throw
into  the  ground  ?  The  Lord.  Then
it  is  his  :  he  let  you  have  a  little  of
it,  to  see  what  you  would  do  with  it.
Have  you  a  right  to  abuse  the  Lord's
means  which  Ite  permits  you  to  use  P
No.  But,  as  a  member  in  the  king-
dom of  God  in  the  last  days,  you
have  a  right  to  use  it  for  the  advance-
ment of  that  kingdom,  and  the
triumph  of  righteousuess,  and  for
doing  good  in  every  possible  way.

I  have  heard  men  say  that  they
have  a  right  to  do  wrong.  In  one
sense,  a  man  has  such  a  right ;  and,
in  another  sense,  he  lias  no  such  right.
We  possess,  in  reality,  very  little;
and  that  little  the  Lord  has  given  us,
aud  that  is  the  power  of  choice.  "We
may  choose  to  do  good,  and,  if  we  do
good,  we  get  the  reward  of  good ;
we  may  also  choose  to  do  evil  and
reap  the  penalty.  A  man  may  knock
another  down  because  he  has  a  right
to,  and  have  to  pay  a  Que  of  fifty
dollars  because  he  is  obliged  to.  I
deny  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  make
thieves  of  his  children  and  prostitute
his  family..  If  he  does  this,  the  Lord  1
is  justified  in  cursing  him,  and  he
will  be  obliged  to  endure  it  This
power  of  choice  goes  a  great  way.
A  young  man  says,  I  have  a  notion
to  go  on  the  road  and  work  for  the
Gentiles,  cany  the  mail,  or  anything
else.  All  right.  But  your  friend
suggests  that  it  would  he  better  for
you  to  make  a  farm,  build  you  a  house,
raise  some  flax,  etc,  "  But  I  have  a
right  to  work  for  the  Gentiles,  if  I
choose ard  I  am  going  to."  You


go  and  build  them  up  with  your
labour.  This  young  man  conies  home
after  a  while,  he  sports  a  cigar  in  his
month  among  his  comrades,  he  has
made  thirty  dollars  per  month,  he  has
a  few  dollars  in  money  in  his  pocket;
it  has  seemed  to  come  easy,  and  his
soul  is  contaminated  with  wicked-
ness. In  a  little  while  his  money  is
gone,  and  he  has  nothing.  Then  he
must  go  again  among  the  Gentiles
and  make  a  raise.  I  hope  the
"Mormon"  girls  know  how  to  mea-
sure such  fellows.  A  sensible  trirl
would  much  rather  many  a  young
man,  dressed  in  home-spun,  who  will
stay  at  home  and  mind  his  business,
and  never  sailer  a  cigar  to  come  near
his  mouth,  but  seek  with  all  his
might  in  every  respect  to  bo  a  good,
faithful  Latter-day  Saint.

Speaking  of  cigar-smoking  makes
me  think  of  an  aueedote  of  a  sick
man  and  his  doctor.  The  doctor
asked  him  how  many  cigars  he
smoked  in  a  day ;  the  answer  was,
Six.  That  is  too  much;  v<i  must
quit  smoking.  You  will  allow  me  to
smoke  a  little.  Tesf  you  may  smoke
two  a  day  to  begin  with,  and  finally
quit  altogether.  The  next  day  the
doctor  called  to  see  his  patient,  and
found  him  smoking  a  cigar  two  feet
long.  Whatare  you  doing:  inquired
the  doctor.  Just  doing  as  you  told
me;  I  went  down  to  thu  cigar-maker
and  gotttvo  made  two  feet  long,  and
they  answer  first  rate.

When  a  man  begins  to  adopt
Gentile  habits,  a  cigar  two  feet  long
is  only  a  patching  to  the  extrava-
gance he will become  addicted

to. a.  ./ \i • . V  •

I  see  in  this  valley  large  tields
fenced  out.  In  some  places,  there
have  been  four  or  five  acres  ploughed  j
in  some,  ten  acres :  pass  on  a  little
further, and  there  area  few  acres  more.
How  is  this,  brother  Maughau  ?  Men
inclose  more  than  they  can  cultivate,
water,  and  improve}  and  a  very  large


*


116


J0T7BNAL  OF  DISCOmSES


portion  must  necessarily  be  vacant,
for  it  Vas  difficult  to  get  water  on  it.
Many  acres  of  grain  perish,  and  the
grasshoppers  devoured  much  that
remained  from  the  drought.  I  ad-
vise  you,  brethren,  to  stop  this  scatter-
ing method  of  cultivation,  and  gather
your  farms  together,  aod  make  fields
well  fenced,  plough,  and  put  in  your
grain  well,  and  give  it  a  sufficient
amount  of  water,  and  you  will  have
three  times  as  much  wheat  as  you  got
in  the  start  of  your  settlements  in
this  valley.

President  Youiiff  is  acknowledged
by  us  all  the  master-builder  in  Zion,
or,  if  jou  please,  the  master-work-
man. If  the  master-workman
walks  in  among  the  timber  laid  out
here  for  your  big  Tabernacle  as  the
grand  architect,  planning  and  as-
sorting the  different  sticks  of  timber
for  certain  places  and  purposes,  he
does  not  expect  to  meet  with  oppo-
sition from  the  material  out  of  which
he  designs  to  make  a  temple  of  wor-
ship. He  comes  to  a  stick  of  timber,
and  says,  I  will  make  a  post  of  this;
and  the  stick  rises  up  in  the  dignity
of  its  strength  and  will  not  be  made
a  post,  but  will  be  a  sleeper,  and  soon
with  all  the  timbers  of  the  building:
they  are  not  subject  to  the  will  of
the  master-builder.  AVill  not  this
comparison  represent  a  large  portion
of  this  people  ?  The  master-builder
points  to  the  South  and  says,  Go  and
raise  cotton  j  but  many  reply,  It  is  no
cotton  coun  try  j  i  t  is  the  must  wretched,
barren,  God-forsaken  country  in  the
world.  This  is  not  submitting  to  the
will  of  the  master-builder.

This  puts  me  in  mind  of  Jefleison
Thompson,  now  a  Brigadier-General
in  the  secession  army  in  Missouri.
After  he  had  been  in  this  country,
his  comrades  got  around  and  inquired,
Well,  Mr.  Thompson,  how  do  you
like  that  country  ?  Any  good  land
there  ?  He  replied,  It  is  the  most
God-forsaken  country  in  all  creation,  1


How  did  you  find  the  Mormons
living  there  ?  How  do  they  live  ?
Why,  they  raise  plenty  of  wheat,  and
the  best  wheat  I  ever  saw  in  my  life.
Can  they  raise  anything  else  ?  Yes.
The  finest  potatoes,  (I  never  saw
finer,)  and  every  kind  of  garden  stuff,
and  very  good  corn.  Any  fruit  ?
They  are  beginning  to  raise  some  fine
peaches  and  other  kinds  of  fruits.
But  you  said  it  was  the  most  desolate,
barren,  God- forsaken  country  iu
creation:  how  is  it,  then,  that  they  can
raise  such  good  stuff?  Well  I  cannot
account  fur  it  in  any  way,  only  it  is  a
damned  Mormon  mirajle  ?

That  is  the  correct  idea:  the  Lord
is  doing  it  I  have  learned  that  in
the  county  of  Harrison,  Western
Virginia,  they  have  nut  raised  ten
bushels  of  apples,  peaches,  plums,  or
a  pint  of  strawberries  in  the  whole
country,  although  I  dare  say  there
ai*e  a  thousand  orchards  in  it,  and
their  crops  have  failed ;  their  glory
has  departed.  The  Lord  blesses  the
land  in  proportion  as  they  willing  to
do  good.  Last  year,  the  word  of
the  Lord  came  to  this  people,  Send
down  two  hundred  teams  and  bring
home  the  Saints.  The  teams  were
sent  down.  Some  said  we  could
not  do  without  them  at  home  j  if  so
many  teams  went,  we  could  not  raise
crops  sufficient.  But  there  has  nut
been  such  a  crop  in  all  the  Territory
as  was  raised  this  year.  The  very
sending  of  the  teams  seemed  to  be
the  assurance  of  the  bountiful  bless-
ings of  God  on  our  crops.  As  the
President  remarked  this  forenoon,
we  say  all  we  have  is  upon  the  altar:
but  let  it  begin  to  burn,  and  they
begin  straightway  to  pull  it  off  We
are  all  united  in  our  faith ;  but  when
the  word  comes,  Brother,  you  have
a  good  farm  here ;  but  the  interests  of
Zion  seem  to  require  you  should  go  to
Santa  Clara  to  raise  cotton.  But, says
he,  it  is  no  cotton  country,  and  he  is
awfully  discouraged, What  does  it


DIFFICULTIES,  ETC


matter  in  what  part  of  the  building
the  master-builder  places  us  ?  Every
person  is  placed  in  a  position  he  is
the  best  qualified  to  fill,  and  which  he
will  enhance  the  most  the  interests
of  the  kindom  of  God,

As  the  President  and  his  company
were  going  down  south,  a  brother
wanted  us  to  go  and  breakfast  with
him :  he  said  he  could  not  do  very
well  by  us,  for  he  was  sent  on  a
mission,  and  he  was  not  as  rich  as
some  of  the  people.  When  we  went
to  breakfast,  it  was  not  ready.  An
apology  was  made  that  the  women
had  to  milk  twenty  cows :  he  had
ten  more  on  the  Plains  running
with  their  calves,  and  he  had  not
time  to  get  them  up.  He  said  he
wanted  to  accompany  the  President,
Iml  he  had  only  two  animals  up;  but
he  had  two  span  of  mules  on  the
Plains  that  he  thought  would  keep  up
with  the  President.  I  have  bad  a  hard
time  of  it  this  season,  and  had  but
little  time.  I  had  to  do  all  my  farm-
ing with  three-year-olds  and  four-
year-olds.  I  sent  four  yoke  of  catt  le
to  the  States  this  season  j  yet  I  have
thivty  acres  of  wheat — the  best
wheat  you  ever  saw.  What  a  poor
man  !  But  he  was  on  a  mission,  and
the  idea  of  being  on  a  mission  made
him  think  he  was  pooiv

If  a  man  feels  rich,  and  has  not  a
dime  in  his  pocket,  if  he  is  righteous,
he  is  rich  indeed ;  but  if  he  has  a
penurious  disposition  and  is  miserly,
though  his  hands  are  full  of  riches,
he  does  not  turn  it  to  a  good  account,
and  in  a  little  while  he  is  like  the
child  that  takes  an  apple  in  each
hand,  but  undertakes. to  hold  another  ;
he  is  apt  to  drop  the  two  to  secure
the  third.

Wl en  you  raise  flax,  hemp,  wheat,
cattle,  wool)  etc.,  let  everything  be
placed  in  the  best  position  to  increase
the  creature  com  forte  of  life.  Seek
the  means  to  manufacture  the  textile
productions  into  clothing,  etc.,  that


nothing  may  be  lost  or  wasted,  and
thus  learn  to  do  without  those  things
that  have  to  come  from  abroad.  Let
us  make  our  own  crockery.  Let  us
be  willing  to  drink  out  of  a  brown
mug  or  go  without.  We  want  to  see
every  man  and  woman  ready  to  do
that  which  is  for  the  general  welfare
more  than  fi  r  the  individual  in-
terest.

W  e  boast  about  being  one,  pray
about  it,  and  rejoice  about  it  every
minute;  but  let  the  Lord's  servants
try  to  dictate  us  how  to  manage  our
property  in  the  best  possible  manner
for  the  general  good  and  the  acceler-
ated growth  of  the  wealth  and  in-
fluence of  this  great  people,  we  de-
clare by  our  works  they  sludl  not
touch  a  dollar.  Zion  is  going  to  be  a
great  empire,  and  seeing  God  has
trusted  us  as  stewards  of  the  property
we  hold,  wfe  must  use  it  to  build  up
his  kingdom  and  cause.  And  when
the  authorities  advise  us  to  put  that
property  into  a  mill  or  carding-
machine,  into  this  or  that,  for  the
welfare  of  Israel,  do  it  cheerfully  with
a  good  heart  and  ready  hand,  and  not
With  fear  and  whining,

1  pray  the  Lord  continually  to  in-
spire President  Young  with  wisdom
and  knowledge,  and  judgment  above
all  men  upon  earth,  to  dictate  the
aflairs  of  Zion  in  a  manner  that  shall
be  the  most  approved  -by  his  heavenly
Master.  I  really  do  want  to  see  a
feeling  of  contentment  manifested  by
the  brethren  who  are  sent  into
Washington  County  to  raise  cotton
there,  and  make  the  mission  honour-
able, and  gain  fur  themselves  credit
and  the  blessings  of  God  and  his
servants.  If  a  man  is  instructed  to
raise  flax,  and  introduce  machinery
to  manufacture  it,  I  like  to  see  him  do
it  cheerfully.  In  all  our  works  and,
labour,  our  first  great  interest  should
be  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  be  so  gritty  that  we  will
actually  go  without  buying  a  paste-


118


JOl'BNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


board  bonnet  or  a  pair  of  paper  shoes,  |
when  we  can  have  something  we  can
produce  ourselves  that  will  answer  the
purpose.  All  these  articles  are  pro-
duced by  labour  and  ingenuity.  -  Let
the  knowledge  of  these  arts  be  com-
municated from  one  to  another,  and
be  the  property  of  the  whole  to  bene-
fit the  whole.  There  is  a  man  in
Pinto,  Washington  county,  that
makes  cheese  so  skilfully  that  he
never  has  any  trouble  with  it  in
summer ;  he  only  1ms  to  turn  it  once
in  a  while.  Well,  brother,  lmw  do
vou  make  that  cheese  ? "That  is  a

m

secret."

Now,  brethren,  if  you  know  any-
thing that  is  for  the  welfare  of  Israel,
instruct  others.  If  a  sister  knows
how  to  get  her  up  a  table-cloth,  let
her  show  it  to  her  sister,  and  let  the

¥

knowledge  pass  round.  If  she  under-
stands the  process  of  spinning  cotton


and  flax,  communicate  that  knowledge
to  others.  Let  us  learn  wisdom  from
our  leaders.

The  power  of  the  Almighty  has
been  manifested  in  gathering  this
people  out  of  the  midst  of  many
nations.  A  greater  miracle  never
existed.  It  has  been  done  by  his  wise
counsel  and  fatherly  care,  and  a  nation
has  been  established  without  the
shedding  of  blood.  Zion  has  been
travailing:  and  has  brought  forth.
I  have  travelled  this  season  to  preach
to  the  Saints  twenty-five  hundred
miles  and  stopped  with  the  Saints
every  night.  I  have  preached  to
hundreds  of  congregations,  large  and
small,  in  houses  and  out-of-doors.

May  the  blessing  of  Israel's  God
attend  you  and  your  crops,  and  herds
and  flocks  ;  and  everything  that  per-
tains to  you,  may  it  be  blessed  con-
tinually. Amen.


DUTIES  OF  THE  SAINTS  IN  ROLLING  FORTH  THE  WORK

OF  GOD,

Remark*  bij  President  Danikl  H.  Wells, made in  the  Bowery,  Great

Salt  Lake  C%,  Octohcr  7,  1860.

RKPORTKD  BY  J. V.  LONtt.


I  have  been  highly  gratified  during  J
this  Conference  in  hearing  the  teach-
ings which  we  have  heard,  I  felt
(as  I  always  do  when  hearing  of  the
greatness  and  goodness  of  God,  and
the  great  work  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged,)  to  rejoice  in  the  blessings  of
the  Almighty,  This  Gospel  is  meat
to  my  soul ;  it  affords  me  continual
pleasure ;  I  contemplate  it  with
delight.  If  I  had  the  tongue  of  an
angel,  or  of  the  most  eloquent  upon


the  earth  it  would  be  my  delight  to
speak  of  the  goodness  of  God  and  of
the  work  he  is  performing ;  for  it  ap-
pears *rcvy  glorious  to  me.  The
building  up  of  Zion  and  the  establish-
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  to
me  interesting  in  the  highest  degree :
the  work  in  which  we  are  all
engaged  is  a  constant  solace  to  my


I  was  well  pleased  with  what  I
heard  yesterday  afternoon  in  regard


DUTI ICS  OP  TIIK SAINTS,  KTC,


119


to  the  ox-train  telegraph,  or  whatever
you  may  choose  to  call  it.  Ls  this
the  Gospel  nf  Jesus  Christ  that  I  am
alluding  to?  It  is  because  it  is  in
relation  to  the  gathering  of  Israel,
and  that 'which  will  accomplish  the
gathering*  of  Israel  is  the  salvation  of
the  people;  aud  for  this  reason  I  was
pleased  with  what  I  heard  from  the
President,  ami  also  from  Bishop
Woolley  and  Elder  J.  W.  Young.
The  President  observed  that  he  did
not  often  make  a  requirement  of  the
people  without  giving  a  reason  for  it.
I  thought  yesterday  that  the  reasons
were  verytjood,  great,  and  numerous,
why  he  should  require  the  Saints  to
furnish  two  hundred  waggons  and
teams  to  go  to  the  States  and  bring
home  the  poor  and  meek  of  the  earth.

We  hear  of  the  great  and  glorious
things  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  when  we
go  home,  do  we  look  about  ourselves
and  look  after  the  interests  of  the
cause  of  our  Redeemer  ?  Will  we  re-
ceive the  teachings  which  we  hear  from
this  stand  ?  Will  we  put  forth  our
hands  to  enable  the  Presideni  to  roll
forth  this  great  work  ?  This  is  for
us  all  to  answer  and  act  upon.  Will
the  Bishops  bring  forth  those
waggons  and  teams,  three  or  four
yoke  of  oxen  to  each  waggon  ?  If
they  will,  we  can  then  accomplish
much  towards  bringing  the  poor  to
these  valleys  next  ye;u\  Will  the
Bishops  answer  this  call  from  Bishop
Hunter,  and  he  from  the  President?
The  President  is  the  Lord's  mouth-
piece, and  it  seems  to  me  that  he
should  only  have  to  say  to  Bishop
Hunter,  We  want  two  hundred
waggons  and  teams  to  go  to  the  Mis-
souri river,  and  it  should  be  done.  I
feel  in  my  heart  that  this  will  be
done.  I  believe  the  brethren  will
take  an  interest  in  the  matter.  I  feel
satisfied  that  there  is  cattle  enough  in
the  country,  and  we  can  easily  do
this.  We  only  need  to  be  united,  and
the  work  will  be  accomplished*


There  is  another  matter  of  vital
importance  for  us  to  consider.  The
Lord's  storehouse  is  almost  empty,
and  we  should  see  to  this,  for  the
President  says  he  wishes  to  begin  to
fill  up  that  house,  that  in  the  spring
he  may  begin  to  build  up  the  walls  of  '
the  Temple.  To  carry  on  this  work,
much  means  will  be  needed,  and  we
shall  expect  that  the  Lord's  store-
house will  be  filled  up  with  grain  and
provisions  for  the  sustenance  of  the
hands  that  will  be  called  to  work
upon  the  Temple.  We  shall  expect
this  to  be  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,
and  that  they  will  furnish  the  means
to  buy  cloth,  or  the  clothing  ready
made;  also  the  butter,  eggs,  cheese,
beef,  and  all  things  necessary  for  the
brethren  that  will  labour  upon  the
Temple.  Let  us  be  gathering  things
together  this  fall  and  winter,  for  these
are  things  that  are  necessary  to  help
in  sustaining  this  kingdom,  and
accomplishing  and  bringing  about  the
purposes  of  the  Lord.

It  is  meat  and  drink  to  me  to  see
the  wrork  of  £he  Lord  roll  forth  and
prosper.  I  have  no  doubtful  feelings
in  regard  to  the  glorious  future  of  the
kingdom  to  which  we  belong,  but  I
feel  assured  that  all  things  that  have
been  spoken  concerning  it  will  come
to  pass.  I  have  no  fears  in  regard  to
the  blessings  promised  to  the  Saints,
nor  anything  that  pertains  to  the  wel-
fare of  the  kingdom  of  our  God.  I
shall  get  all  the  blessings  I  deserve, and
in  all  probability  a  great  manj  more,
for  I  have  some  confidence  in  the
goodness  of  God,  and  I  think  that  he
will  not  only  give  me  all  that  I
deserve,  but  a  great  deal  more.

I  feel  to  be  active  and  energetic  in
the  discharge  of  the  duties  I  have  to
perform,  and  not  let  the  time  and
opportunity  pass  without  accomplish-
ing those  things  that  are  required  of
me.  If  we  omit  anything  that  we
can  do,  it  is  an  opportunity  let  slip
that  will  not  return. In  order  to  get


120


J OUBNAX.  OF  DISCOURSES


a  reward,  we  should  labour  to
accomplish  a  great  deal  of  good,  try
to  do  more,  and  to  increase  the  know-
ledge of  God ;  we  should  strive  to
increase  continually  and  to  be  faith-
ful in  all  things.  We  are  connected
and  bound  together  by  a  single
motive — by  the  principles  of  sal-
vation which  we  have  received  ;  and
why  not  manifest  this  in  the  building
up  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  thus
have  an  interest  in  all  that  pertains
to  the  faithful  in  Christ,  till  we  can
wield  an  influence  in  all  things  that
will  promote  the  prosperity  of  Zion  ?
By  doing  this,  the  nation^  \yill  feel
the  distant  tread  of  Israel;  the
nations  will  know  it  and  feel  it.
Israel  is  on  the  increase,  while  the
nations  are  crumbling.  We  can  see
it  and  feel  it.

Then  let  the  people  take  warning
and  make  friends  with  their  God  and
with  the  people  of  God.  It  is  for
their  interest  to  do  so.  We  should
have  no  fears  as  to  the  final  result.
It  is  as  the  President  said  this  morn-
ing, Zion  will  be  built  up,  and  the
laws  thereof  go  forth  to  all  people;
and  if  we  were  disposed,  we  could  not
hinder  it.  This  is  a  cause  of  offence
to  many.  They  are  angry  because
we  rejoice  in  the  things  which  the
Lord  reveals  unto  us.  It  is  for  this
cause  that  they  seek  to  destroy  us
from  the  earth,  because  the  Lord
through  us  forewarns  them  that  he
will  send  his  destroying  angels  to
speak  to  them  in  a  way  that  they
cannot  misunderstand.

We  kntftv  that  if  the  pdfeple  had
the  influence  and  power,  tney  would
dethrone  the  Almighty  and  crucify
Jesus  again,  and  that  without  a  cause ;
but  what  do  we  cry  to  them  about  i  t  ?


We  command  them  to  repent  of
their  sins,  and  turn  unto  God  writh
all  their  hearts,  might,  mind,  and
strength ;  but  they  will  not  hearken.

Brethren,  let  us  be  faithful  and
energetic  in  the  performance  of  our
duties;  let  us  go  forth,  conquering
and  to  conquer.  Let  us  draw  from
the  elements  those  things  that  are
necessary  for  our  support,  to  aid  in
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
doing  all  things  necessary  temporally
as  well  as  spiritually,  work  righteous-
ness, and  reject  evil  from  our  midst.

we  pursue  this  course,  those  that
seek  to  destroy  the  people  of  our
God/  who  seek  to  treaTTfapdn  the  wine
"and  life  oiL  will  have  no  influence  nor
power ;  but  we  shall  be  enabled  to
establish  the  true  principles  of
righteousness  upon  the  earth.

It  is  our  mission  and  duty  as
Saints  to  do  all  that  lies  in  our
power  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of
our  God  upon  the  earth,  to  over-
throw error,  destroy  wickedness  and
iniquity.  These  are  the  purposes
for  which  we  are  gathered  together,
and  let  us  be  diligent  therein*  In
our  own  sphere,  let  us  act  well  our
part  as  Saints  of  the  Most  High
God.

This  is  my  exhortation,  brethren
and  sisters,  and  these  are  my  feelings
upon  the  subject.  While  we  rejoice
in  the  great  and  glorious  work  of  our
Heavenly  Father,  let  us  be  active  in
the  performance  of  the  duties  re-
quired of  us.

r  pray  the  Almighty  to  give  us
heal  tlx  and  strength  to  enable  us  to
accomplish  the  work  we  h$ve  before
us  as  fast  as  it  shall  be  wisdom  for  us
to  do  so,  which  I  ask  in  the  name
of  Jesus*  Amen.


VARIETIES  OF  MIND  AND  CHARACTER— CHASTISEMENT-
FREEDOM,  Ac.

Remarks  by  President  Brigham  Young,  made  in  the  Tabernacle^  Great  Salt

Lake  City ,  February  17,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  O*  D.  WATT.


I  wish  to  address  myself  particu-
larly to  the  Elders  of  Israel,  for  their
instruction,  edification,  and  learning,
that  they  may  he  profitable  to  them-
selves and  others.  I  will  appeal  to
the  experience  of  every  individual,
when  we  do  as  well  as  we  know  how,
honour  our  God,  honour  our  calling,
honour  our  Priesthood,  honour  our
tabernacles,  our  being  upon  the  earth,
whether  it  is  not  the  feeling  of  every
heart  to  wish  all  persons  to  be  just
like  ourselves — to  wish  the  ideas  and
acts  of  our  brethren  to  be  precisely
like  ours  ;  and  yet  we  should  not  look
upon  ourselves  as  an  infallible  stan-
dard for  others.  It  is  no  more  natu-
ral for  your  lungs  to  expand  ai:d  con-
tract in  breathing  than  it  is  for  you
to  wish  others  to  be  like  yourselves.

I  wish  the  Elders  of  Israel  to  un-
derstand mankind  as  they  are — to  go
to  the  people  and  take  them  as  they
are.  Let  an  Elder  go  into  the  world
to  preach  the  Gospel  of  salvation,  and
he  will  find  some  individuals  possessed
of  a  great  deal  more  ability  than
others.  Stop  with  a  family,  when
yon  are  invited  to  tarry  over  night,
and  you  find  them  in  great  ignorance;
their  minds  are  low  and  grovelling,  as
were  the  minds  of  their  fathers  be-
fore them  ;  they  have  not  been  taught
to  cultivate  the  mental  faculty  that  is
within  them,  and  they  are  dull  and
stupid.  Step  into  another  house,  and
you  will  discern  that  the  minds  of
every  member  of  that  family  are  cul-
tivated to  the  best  of  their  ability  and


circumstances.  You  will  find  some
portions  of  a  community  diligently
studying  the  sciences  of  the  day,
others  cultivating  the  arts,  &c.,  each
according  to  their  tastes,  means,  or
circumstances,  while  others  seem  to
be  under  no  cultivation  of  the  mind  :
yet  in  all  the  various  classes  each
wants  his  neighbour  to  be  precisely
like  himself.

You  see  some  persons  who  appear
at  meetings  on  the  Sabbath  and  on
other  public  occasions  with  their  hair
uncombed  and  their  faces,  hands,  and
clothing  uncleanly*  Have  they  no
combs  nor  soap  ?  They  have,  or  can
get  them. ,  How  happens  it  that  we
behold  such  conduct  ?  Probably  the
parents  of  those  persons  taught  them
that  it  was  pride  that  prompted  peo-
ple to  appear  clean  and  decent.  Per-
haps their  mothers  taught  them  in
their  infancy  that  if  they  washed
their  faces,  and  combed  and  anointed
their  hair,  and  dressed  themselves  in
comely  apparel  to  appear  before  their
fellow  -  men,  "  Oh,  you  are  full  of
pride  !**  Sisters,  were  not  some  of
you  taught  in  your  youth  that  if  you
wore  a  silk  dress,  you  did  so  purely
through  pride  ?  Many  of  you  were.
I  knew  one  sister  in  this  Church  who
burned  up  several  dresses  when  she
became  a  Methodist,  because  she
thought  it  not  right  for  her  to  wear
rich  and  costly  clothing;  that  pride
prompted  costly  dress,  and  in  it  she
could  not  come  before  the  Lord  in
humility. She  also  thought  that  if


122


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCOUnSES


she  gave  her  rich  dresses  away,  others
would  commit  the  same  sin  that  she
would  commit  in  wearing  them  ;  so
she  destroyed  them,

To  return  to  the  Elders  of  Israel.
An  Elder  visits  a  Branch,  and,  an-
iens lie  is  on  his  guard,  he  will  begin
to  complain  that  the  Presiding  Elder
of  the  branch  is  not  as  he  is,  does
not  understand  as  he  does,  and  does
not  conceive  of  the  Gospel  as  he  does.
Jle  will  find  himself  saying  to  the
members  of  the  Branch — "  You  are
in  the  dark  ;  you  need  teaching  ;  you
ought  to  have  a  smart  Elder  here — a
man  of  understanding  —  to  teach
you."  "  Well,  brother,  will  you  stay
and  teach  us  ?"  Perhaps,  through
persuasion,  lie  will  stop,  and  what
will  he  do  ?  Break  that  Branch  to
pieces,  and  destroy  their  faith,  if  pos-
sible. Why?  "  You  are  not  as  I
am  P  Elders,  look  to  this,  and  think
of  it.  We  wish  you  to  reap  some
benefit  from  your  experience.

When  I  rise  here  and  tell  you
things  that  pertain  to  other  nations
and  generations,  and  when  others
teach  you  things  that  pertain  to  other
people,  it  does  not  profit  you  as  much
as  it  does  for  us  to  understand  our-
selves. Wherever  we  go,  wherever
our  lot  is  cast,  whoever  we  associate
with,  let  the  Elders  have  the  prin-
ciples of  truth  within  them  to  prompt
heavenly  and  holy  desires  to  do  good.
Is  it  wisdom  for  each  Elder  to  strive
to  mould  and  fashion  all  others  pre-
cisely according  to  himself  in  all  the
views  and  notions  ho  possesses  ?  Is
this  the  way  ?  No,  it  is  not.  It  is
wisdom  for  the  Elders  of  Israel  to
know  how  to  treat  others  accord  in  er
to  the  ability  they  possess,  and
to  treat  their  families  according
to  the  ability  they  possess.  In  visit-
ing neighbourhoods,  you  will  find
persons  intelligent  upon  some  points,
and  upon  other  points  they  may  be
ignorant.  They  may  be  very  well
informed  upon  certain  principles  per-


taining to  divinity,  and  upon  others
be  ignorant  Their  dispositio-.s  are
also  different  from  yours  and  others
37ou  associate  with.  What  will  you
make  of  them  ?  Good  people —
Saints,  so  far  as  in  your  power.

We  are  very  apf,  through  our  tradi-
tions, former  associations,  and  notion
of  things  and  ideas,  to  attribute  every
act  cf  man  and  every  manifestation
of  mankind  to  an  invisible  source
— the  good  or  the  evil.  God  is  the
author  of  all  good;  and  yet,  if  you
rightly  understood  yourselves,  you
would  not  directly  attribute  every  good
act  you  perform  to  our  Father  in
heaven,  nor  to  his  Son  Jesus  Clnist,
nor  to  the  Holy  Ghost;  neither
would  you  attribute  every  evil  act  of
a  man  or  woman  to  the  Devil  ov  his
spirits  or  influences  ;  for  man  is  or-
ganized by  his  Creator  to  act  perfectly
independently  of  all  influences  there
are  above  or  beneath.  Those  influ-
ences are  always  attending  him,  and
are  ready  to  dictate  and  direct — to
lead  him  into  truth  or  to  lead  him  to
destruction.  But  is  he  always
guided  by  those  influences  in  every
act  ?  He  is  not.  It  is  ordained  of
God  that  we  should  act  independently
in  and  of  ourselves,  and  the  good  is
present  when  we  need  it.  If  we  will
ask  for  it,  it  is  with  as.  If  we  yield
to  temptation,  the  evil  is  present,  and
nigh  enough  to  lead  every  son  and
daughter  of  Adam  to  destruction,  if
they  give  way  to  it.  But  it  is  the  de-
sign of  the  Almighty  that  we  should
act  independently.  Then,  when  you
see  a  person  endowed  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  you  need  not  expect  him  to
look  and  act  precisely  as  you  do.
Their  religious  sentiments  will  be
alike,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  in-
troduce foolish  traditions  and  the
varied  unwise  notions  that  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth  have.

A  man  will  say,  u  If  I  believed  that
such  a  man  or  woman  was  a  Saint,  I
I  should  despair  of  all  good." Why  ?


«


VARIETIES OF MIND,  ETC.


u  Because  their  acts  and  lives  are  BO
different  fro/n  mine.1'  Now,  if  yon
will  reflect  upon  the  traditions  of  the
world 7  with  which  we  are  more  or
less  encumbered,  you  will  see  mani-
fest the  trait  I  have  referred  to.  If  I
am  cashed  and  made  clean,  if  I  am
attired  in  comely  garments,  or  there
is  anything  extra  upon  me  to
beautify,  it  is  considered  by  some  as
the  height  of  folly  and  pride  ;  it  is
looked  upon  as  a  sin  of  the  deepest
dye  ;  and  the  feeling  arises,  "  If  I
eutiM  relieve  such  a  gentleman  or
lady  to  lie  a  Christian,  I  should  des-
pair of  the  good  that  is  with  me/'
Why  ?  "  Because  I  have  been  taught
that  all  this  is  pride,"  I  have  known
people  who  have  lived  in  1 1 1 i s  Church,
whom  I  should  suppose  had  concluded
it  to  be  an  unpardonable  sin  for  them
to  go  to  meeting  with  clean  faces  and
hands.  What  are  the  notions  of
most  of  the  Christian  world  in  regard
to  a  Prophet  ?  They  would  wish  to
see  a  man  with  his  hair  to  his  waist.
Combed  ?  No.  He  must  never  ap-
pear' to  use  that  frivolous,  sinful
article,  a  comb.  That  would  be  folly
in  the  extreme.  It  would  be  sin,
therefore,  if  he  appears  with  his  hair
long,  bushy,  snarled,  dirty,  and
hanging  carelessly  about  his  shoul-
ders. Are  his  hands  washed  ?  No.
His  finger  nails  trimmed  and  clean  ?
No ;  they  are  like  dirty  bird's  claws.
Is  he  cheerful?  No;  for  he  must
wear  a  long  face,  never  suffer  a  smile
to  pass  over  his  countenance,  but  go
monrning  all  the  day  long;  and  it  is,
t;  0  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  the  peo-
ple." Present  a  Prophet  to  suit  the
notions  of  many  of  the  sectarian
world,  and  you  have  such  a  man  as
this.  Will  he  have  on  a  decent  suit
of  clothes  ?  No  ;  he  must  have  a
sheep-skin  about  his  loins,  and  most
wear  a  girdle  as  dirty  and  filthy  as
the  rags  upon  our  natives.

Others  are  trained  and  tradition-
ated  to  appear  with  cleaa  faces  and


123

dressed  in  decent  attire — are  taught
to  appear  comely  and  beautiful
All  of  these  classes  act  according  to
their  faith  and  traditions,  and  each
one  of  them  says,  "If  you  are  not  as
I  am,  you  arc  not  right."  This  is
just  as  natural  us  it  is  to  breathe  vital
air,  I  wish  this  trait  in  the  S'tints  to
be  done  away,  I  want  the  Elders  of
Israel  to  learn  to  take  people  as  they
are.  How  many  do  you  see  who
have  no  influence  over  certain  spirits
in  this  Church  ?  Do  you  know  how
to  approach  a  man  that  is  full  of  sub-
tlety and  self-will — with  an  idea  that
every  man  on  earth  is  wrong  but
himself  ?  Do  you  know  how  to  ope-
rate to  gain  his  affections  and  good-
will ?  Do  you  know  how  to  attract
that  spirit  and  make  it  follow  you  ?
If  you  do  not,  you  do  not  fully  under-
stand your  duty,  calling,  and  Priest-
hood. I  wish  the  people  to  leara  to
have  influence  over  themselves,  and
then  learn  to  have  influence  with
your  fellow-beings,  that  you  may  bo
able  to  attract  the  spirits  in  the  intel-
ligent beings  around  you,  so  that
these  spirits 'will  follow  you  to  be
taught  of  you,  and  learn  of  you  doc-
trine to  lead  them  to  life  everlasting.

There  is  a  certain  trait  in  the
Elders  of  Israel  that  I  really  want
Lhem  to  get  rid  of,  for  they  are  better
off  without  than  with  it  .Not  that
they  are  so  veiy  much  to  blame,  or
that  I  would  condemn  them;  but,  ac-
cording to  their  traditions  and  nature,
they  think  everybody  ought  to  be  like
themselves,  And  when  they  chasten
faulty  brethren,  they  often  chasten
them,  perhaps,  beyond  bounds.  With
some  spirits  a  certain  amount  of  chas-
tisement is  sufficient ;  and  if  you  go
beyond  that,  you  may  drive  them  to
distraction — you  may  destroy  thern.
You  must  learn  to  know  when  you
have  chastised  enough.

Do  you  know  how  to  chastise  your
children  ?  When  they  do  wrong,
catch  them  in  the  act  of  doing  wrong


124  -  JOURNAL  OF

if  possible,  and  then  switch  them
nice] y,  and  tell  them  you  have  a  good
mind  to  whip  them;  tell  them  you
will  chasten  them,  if  they  do  not  stop
such, conduct.  Do  not  let  them  know
that  they  were  whipped ;  but  when
you  connect  them,  do  it  so  that  they
w  ill  remember  it  more  than  twenty,
four  hours  ;  and  tell  them  that  if  they
do  not  mind  you,  you  will  have  to
chasten  them  and  whip  them.  Tell
the  brethren  and  sisters,  uIf  you  do
not  behave  yourselves,  I  will  chasten
you  by-and-by,"  Never  try  to  de-
stroy a  man.  It  is  our  mission  to
save  the  people,  not  to  destroy  them.
The  least,  the  most  inferior  spirit  now
upon  the  earth,  in  our  capacity,  is
worth  worlds.

When  Oliver  Cowdery  felt  to  com-
plain, and  wanted  a  little  more  influ-
ence in  the  Church  than  Joseph,  the
Lord  spoke  to  hira  through  Joseph,
and  said  to  his  servant  Oliver,  Sup-
pose you  should  labour  all  your  life-
time faithfully,  and  be  the  means  of
saving  one  soul,  how* gn  at  would  be
your  joy  in  heaven  over  that  soul  that
you  were  the  means  of  saving !  If  to
all  eternity  you  could  praise  God,
through  being  the  means  of  saving
one  soul, — I  may  say  the  least  or
most  inferi fr  intelligence  upon  the
earth,  pertaining  to  the  human  family,
— if  you  could  be  the  means  of  saving
one  such  person,  how  great  would  be
your  joy  in  the  heavens!  Then  let
us  save  many,  and  our  joy  will  be  (
great  in  proportion  to  the  number  of
eon  Is  we  save. Let  us  destroy  none*

I  asked  some  brethren,  a  few  even-
ings  ago,  while  in  council,  if  they
would  not  do  themselves  the  kindness
from  that  time  forth  to  live  such  lives
that,  when  the  books  are  opened,
th  vve  is  one  source  ,  of  gratitude
to  them  to  know  that  their  debits
do  not  overbalance  their  credits.  I
then  asked  them  why  not  live  so
tli at  when  the  books  are  opened
there  are  no  debits  against  them.  It


D1SC0U11SFS.

will  be  a  pleasure  to  know  that  we
have  saved  all  the  Father  gave  into
our  power.  Jesus  saicl  that  he  lost
none  except  the  sons  of  perdition.
He  will  lose  none  of  his  brethren,
except  sons  of  perdition.  Let
us  save  all  the  Father  puts  in  our
power.  And  when  you  are  called  to
preside  as  Bishop,  or  to  preach  the
Gospel  on  foreign  missions,  are  called
to  tiavel  through  our  settlements  to
regulate  the  affairs  of  the  Saints,  take
a  course  to  save  every  person.  There
is  no  man  or  woman  within  the  pile
of  saving  grace  but  that  is  worth
saving.  There  is  no  intelligent  being,
except  those  who  have  sinned  against
the  Holy  Ghost,  but  that  is  worth,  I
may  say,  all  the  life  of  an  Elder  to
save  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  Then
let  us  take  a  course  to  understand
men  as  they  are,  and  not  endeavour
to  make  them  precisely  as  we  are,  for
this  you  cannot  do.  I  am  myself;
you  are  yourselves-  Let  us  learn
how  to  approach  each  other,  and  how
to  get  an  influence  over  that  intelli-
gent portion  that  is  within.

I  am  not  going  to  drive  a  man  or
a  woman  to  heaven.  A  great  many
think  that  they  will  be  able  "to  flog
people  into  heaven,  but  this  can  never
be  done,  for  the  intelligence  in  us  is
as  independent  as  the  Gods,  f.*eople
are  not  to  be  driven,  and  you  can  put
into  a  gnat's  eye  all  the  souls  of  the
children  of  men  that  are  driven  into
heaven  by  preaching  hell -fire.  So
learn  wisdom,  that  when  you  behold
your  brethren  in  the  depths  of
poverty,  but  striving  to  do  right,
they  are  as  beloved  as  they  would  be
it  they  were  dressed  in  purple  and
fine  linen.  Take  that  intelligent
course,  and  learn  to  instruct  people
until  they  increase  in  knowledge  and
understanding,  until  their  traditions
pass  away,  and  they  will  become  of
one  heart  and  mind  in  the  principles
of  godliness.

If  you are  ever  called  upon  to


VARIETIES OF MIND,  ETC,


125


chasten  a  person,  never  chasten  be-
yond the  balm  you  have  within  you  to
bind  up.  I  might  call  some  of  you  to
witness  that  I  chasten  you,  but  there
is  not  a  soul  that  T  chasten  but
what  I  feel  as  though  I  could
take  them  and  put  thein  in  my
bosom  and  carry  them  with  me
day  by  day.  They  deserve  chastise-
ment, but  God  forbid  that  I  should
chasten  beyond  the  healing  bairn  I
have  to  save  them  and  make  better
men  of  them.  It  is  not  my  daily
shuly  f  i  ►  know  what  a  Prophet  meant
in  relation  to  things  that  occur  ted  be-
fore the  flood,  or  will  occur  after  the
millennium,  how  Adam  set  out  his
currant  bushes,  and  in  what  part  of
the  garden  Eve  was  when  she  nurtonk
of  the  forbidden  fruit ;  but  I  want  to
know  how  to  lead  you  with  that  in-
telligence to  enable  you  to  live  to  an
everlasting  life,  that  you  may  be
saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  I  say
again,  Do  not  chasten  beyond  the
balm  you  have  within  you.  If  you
have  the  saving  influence  within  you,
it  is  well.  When  you  have  the  chas-
tening rod  in  your  hands,  ask  Mod  !.o
give  you  wisdom  to  use  it,  that  you
may  not  use  it  to  the  destruction  of
an  individual,  but  to  his  salvation.
Can  you  save  all  ?  Yes,  you  can  save
all  that  will  bo  saved.  If  people  are
not  saved,  it  is  because  they  are  not
disposed  to  be  saved.  They  act  for
themselves,  and  act  from  choice.

Would  I  compel  a  person  to  be
saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God  that
chose  to  go  to  hell  ?  No.  If  I  had
all  the  power  of  the  Gods  in  the  eter.
nities,  I  would  not  save  one  soul  in
the  kingdom  of  God  that  chose  to
stay  out,  neither  will  the  Gods.  All
who  wish  to  be  saved  and  desire  srood
I  wish  to  be  saved,  and  Jesus  will
lose  none  except  the  sons  of  perdition.
I  may  be  instrumental,  in  the  provi-
dences of  our  God,  of  saving  thou-
sands and  millions  in  the  celestial


kingdom  that  otherwise  perhaps
would  n.)t  get  there.  We  are  to  be
like  the  good  physician ;  and  if  we
see  the  sick — -those  afflictechwith  pain
and  distress  in  the  head,  eyes,  teeth,
or  in  any  of  the  limbs  or  other  portion
of  the  body,  it  is  our  duty  to  have  the
medicine — the  remedy  to  administer
to  that  pain,  to  heal,  to  cure,  to  re-
buke the  disease  and  save  the  sick
like  a  good  physicitB,  and  not  kill
them  by  dosing  dnwn  the  medicine  as
do  some  of  our  doctors.  Administer
the  medicine  in  all  mildness,  and  with
good  judgment  and  "discretion.  Seek
until  you  learn  the  medicine  to  ad-
minister to  each  patient,  and  how
much  to  give  to  each.  There  is  just
as  much  difference  in  the  spiritual  or-
ganization as  you  see  in  the  temporal
organization.  You  can  see  that  eter-
nal variety  in  both.  You  may  go  to
a  man  taken  with  a  fever,  and  if  you
treat  him  as  you  did  a  similar  case
last  week,  you  may  consign  him  to
the  grave.  You  ought  to  know
better.

I  could  preach  a  sermon  on  doctor-
ing the  body,  we  have  so  many  that
do  not  understand  it  among  those
who  profess  to;  but  it  is  of  no  use.
I  would  rather  have  the  sisters  wait
upon  me  in  sickness  than  many  of
those  who  profess  to  be  physicians.

Elders  of  Israel,  learn  to  be  spirit-
ual physicians.  Carry  the  medicine
with  you  to  deal  out  to  every  patient
as  he  needs  it.  If  a  patient  has  chills
and  fever  in  his  spirit,  you  must  carry
the  medicine  to  cure  it;  also  for  the
erysipelas,  or  the  dumb  ague,  or  the
rheumatism  in  the  spirit,  yon  must
carry  the  medicine  to  herd.  Thus
learn,  when  you  have  chastened
enough,  to  cease ;  and  be  sure  you
never  chasten  beyond  the  balm  yoa
carry  in  your  portmanteau.

I  will  bring  our  forenoon  meeting


to  a  close.
Amen.


May  God  bless  you


126  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


OBSERVANCE  OF  THE  COiLMAKBMENTS  OF  GOD.

Discourse  by  President  Heber  C.  Kimbaix,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  January  0,  1861.

RE  POUTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


It  would  bo  very  gratifying  to  me,
tli is  afternoon,  if  I  could  speak  freely
of  those  things  that  I  have  been
meditating  upon  for  the  last  few
days.  It  would  be  a  great  satisfaction
to  me,  and  doubtless  instructive  to
this  congregation,  if  I  could  lay  be-
fore them  those  thinjrs  that  are  re-
yolving  in  my  mind;  but  instructions
to  the  Saints  only  appear  to  be  given
a  word  or  two  at  a  time,  here  a  little
and  there  a  little,  and  I  do  not  under-
stand that  the  Lord  will  ever  mani-
fest his  will  in  any  other  way.  This
is  because  of  the  weakness  of
humanity  and  the  great  variety  in
the  minds  of  the  Saints.

I  can  say,  ns  T  have  said  for  years,
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  professed
by  the  Church  of  Latter-day  Saints,
which  Church  I  have  entered  into,
and  of  which  I  have  been  a  member
twenty-nine  years, — I  can  truly  say
that  it  is  a  hundredfold  mxre
precious  to  me  than  it  wjls  when  I
first  embraced  it.  My  mind  was  con-
tracted at  that  time,  and  I  knew  but
little  of  the  things  of  God,  I  will
here  remark  that  I  do  not  profess  to
know  nmch  now ;  still  I  understand
them  more  perfectly,  and  I  take  a
more  comprehensive  view  of  God  and
godliness  than  I  did,  or  was  capable
of  doing,  when  I  first  received  the
light  of  truth.  Instead  of  becoming
dark  in  my  mind  and  growing  stereo-
typed in  my  ways,  I  have  expanded
with  the  increase  of  my  experience ;
I feel more acutely,  I  see  more


clearly,  and  I  comprehend  more  per-
fectly the  principles  that  pertain  to
life.  The  older  I  grow  in  the  Church,
the  riper  I  become  in  my  mind,  and
the  more  I  discover  of  the  beauty  and
excellency  of  the  plan  of  salvation.

In  regard  to  treating  upon  the
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  and  what
are  commonly  called  the  great  things,
or,  in  other  words,  going  into  the  top
of  the  tree,  or  doing  as  some, do  who
take  the  tree  and  cram  it  down  the
people's  throats  top  foi-ernost,  I  do  not
believe  in  anything  of  the  kind,
neither  have  I  been  taught  so  to  treat
the  people.  I  consider  that  the
Elders  of  Lsrael  should  understand
well  and  thoroughly  digest  the  first
principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,
for  obedience  to  them  will  prove  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every
one,  that  believes  and  practises  them.
You  know  it  is  written  that  the
Gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  sal-
vation to  every  one  that  helieveth.
I  can  tell  you  something  in  connec-
tion with  tliis :  You  may  believe  what
you  please ;  it  will  do  you  no  good,
unless  you  practise  it.  We  are  re-
quired  to  manifest  eur  faith  by  our
works,  and  to  work  out  our  salvation
with  fear  and  trembling;  for  it  is  the
Lord  that  worketh  in  us  to  will  and
to  do  his  good  pleasure.  If  we  seek
him  with  all  our  hearts,  and  observe
those  things  that  pertain  to  righteous-
ness, working  diligently  in  his  king-
dom, he  will  feel  after  us  and  inspire
our  hearts  with  his  Holy  Spirit,  and


130


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


will  add  to  this  that  many  of  them
will  have  to  say,  We  have  stolen
hundreds  of  cattle  from  the  Mormons,
and  driven  them  from  their  homes,
because  they  preached  a  new  religion.
Still  the  Lord  will  say,  I  know  you
not.

Those  covenants  that  we  have
made  with  God  were  also  made  in
the  beginning  of  the  creation.  They
are  now  renewed  to  us,  and  revela-
tions of  this  kind  are  just  as  binding
upon  you  and  me  as  the  words  and
counsels  that  come  from  President
Young  and  others.  We  are  acting
in  the  same  capacity  that  the
Apostles  and  Prophets  of  former  dis-
pensations have  acted,  and  our  word
will  have  the  same  effect  upon  this
generation  that  theirs  had  upon  the
generations  in  which  they  lived.  We
have  the  same  God  to  worship;  the
same  Jesus  lives  to  save,  and  he  has
spoken  and  renewed  this  covenant  to
us  and  for  us,  and  to  remain  with  us
forever  and  forever.  1

Brethren,  reflect,  look  at  yourselves
and  see  what  you  are  about.  Consider
the  positions  you  occupy,  and  ascer-
tain if  you  are  acting  well  your  part —
if  you  are  speaking  the  truth  and
guarding  against  all  manner  of  evil.

The  Book  of  Mormon  informs  us
that  the  Devil  will  come  along  with
all  manner  of  deceitfulness,  and  per-
suade the  people  to  lie  a  little,  to  steal
a  little,  and  to  rob  your  neighbour  of
anything  that  lies  within  your  reach.
Such  a  course  leads  to  death  and  dis-
solution, and  will  cause  those  to  mourn
hereafter  who  follow  it

These  are  mysteries  that  are  worth
finding  out ;  and  although  you  may
have  read  them  from  your  childhood,
and  your  mother  may  have  taught
them  to  you  from  your  infancy,  yet
still  they  apply  to  you,  and  it  is  very
important  that  you  should  not  forget
these  small  things.  Some  people
come  to  this  country  who  have  been
taught  these  things  and  many  other


good  lessons,  and  when  they  get  into
these  mountains  they  foiget  all  their
claim  to  the  blessings  that  flow
through  obedience  to  the  require-
ments of  Heaven  and  the  require-
ments of  their  parents.  Men  who
hold  the  Priesthood  and  dishonour
their  fathers  and  mothers  and  the
servants  of  God  will  see  sorrow.  But
some  do  this  and  still  consider  them-
selves good  men,  and  they  claim  that
they  honour  their  calling  and  Priest-
hood. I  will  tell  you  how  I  feel.
When  my  son  turns  away  from  tho
truth  and  disregards  my  counsel,  he
turns  away  from  God.  Why  is  this
so  ?  It  is  because  I  am  a  branch  of
the  vine.  1  am  a  limb  that  is
attached  to  the  great  tree ;  and  when
my  son  disengages  himself  from  the
tree,  he  dishonours  me ;  and  by  dis-
honouring me  he  dishonours  the  God
whom  I  serve.  It  is  a  most  excellent
thing  to  find  children  listening  to  the
admonitions  of  their  parents,  and
especially  if  they  are  blest  with  good
ones.  Those  whose  parents  are  not
in  the  Church  should  strive  to  get
within  them  the  righteousness  of
Christ.

When  the  Adversary  begins  to
tempt  a  person,  he  persuades  him  to
do  a  little  thing  here  and  a  little
wrong  yonder,  and  persuades  him  to
walk  in  that  course  that  will  cause
the  disposition  to  do  wrong  to  in-
crease upon  him.  The  best  way  to  do
is  to  let  alone  that  which  is  wrong.

These  are  some  of  the  small  things,
I  am  down  among  the  little  roots  and
little  vines,  entering  minutely  into
the  subject  of  keeping  them  clean.  I
wish  all  to  understand,  who  believe
on  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  should
repent  of  all  their  evil  deeds;  and
the  only  way  that  a  man  can  prove
his  penitence  is  by  forsaking  his  evil
practices  and  being  baptized  for  the
remission  of  his  sins.  But  what
good  does  it  do  for  a  man  to  come
and  be  baptized — to  be  overwhelmed


OBSERVANCE  OP  THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  GOD


131


in  water  In  the  likeness  of  the  death  I
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  go  and
partake  of  those  cursed  old  sins  that
he  had  just  been  washed  clean  from?
I  tell  you  that  baptism,  in  such  cases,
brings  greater  condemnation.  When
people  are  baptized,  they  should  then
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying
on  of  hands.  He  will  show  them
things  to  come;  he  will  dwell  with
them,  and  comfort  their  hearts,  and
cheer  up  their  spirits.

There  never  should  be  a  limb  upon
a  fruit  tree  that  is  not  bearing  fruit.
But  you  will  see  a  great  many  mem-
bers in  this  Church  who  arc  not  bear-
ing much  fruit.  Where  is  there  an
Elder,  High  Priest,  Seventy,  Apostle,
or  Prophet  that  is  not  required  to
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  Christ,  A
those  that  will  redound  to  Ins  glory  ?
Let  us  pursue  that  course  of  life  that
will  make  us  the  friends  of  our  father
and  God,  friends  of  his  servants
Joseph,  Hyrnm,  Peter,  Paul,  Jesus,"
and  all  the  Apostles  of  Christ,  and
let  our  friendship  extend  back  to
those  who  are  in  the  spirit- world.

Do  not  you  suppose  that  the  Lord
will  send  his  angels  to  sustain  this
people  ?  Yes,  he  will ;  and  if  he  has
to  knock  these  mountains  by  which
we  are  surrounded  into  ten  thousand
pieces,  in  order  to  accomplish  his  pur-
poses, he  will  do  it

It  is  very  easy  to  be  seen  that  the
nation  that  has  oppressed  us  is  going
down.  The  Lord  revealed  to  Joseph
Smith  something  about  the  judg-
ments that  await  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  and  he  said  in  the  revela-
tions that  the  judgments  should  com-
mence at  the  house  of  God.  I  will  J
read  to  you  parts  of  the  revelations
which  speak  of  these  things  : —

"  But,  behold,  I  say  unto  you,  that
before  this  great  day  shall  come,  the
sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  moon
shall  be  turned  into  blood,  and  the
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  there
shall  be  great  signs  in  heaven  above


[  and  in  the  earth  beneath ;  and  there
shall  be  weeping  and  wailing  among
the  hosts  of  men,  and  there  shall  be
a  great  hailstorm  sent  forth  to  destroy
the  crops  of  the  earth :  and  it  shall
come  to  pass,  because  of  the  wicked-
ness of  the  world,  that  I  will  take
vengeance  upon  the  wicked,  for  they
will  not  repent;  for  the  cup  of  mine
indignation  is  full;  for,  behold,  my
blood  shall  not  cleanse  them,  if  they
hear  me  not.

Wherefore  I  the  Lord  God  will
send  forth  flies  upon  the  face  of  the
earth,  which  shall  take  hold  of  the
inhabitants  thereof,  and  shall  eat
their  flesh,  and  shall  cause  maggots
to  come  in  upon  them;  and  their
j  tongues  shall  he  stayed  that  they  shall
not  utter  against  me ;  and  their  flesh
shall  fall  from  off  their  bones,  and
their  eyes  from  their  sockets  ;  and  it
shall  come  to  pass  that  the  beasts  of
the  forest  and  the  fowls  of  the  air
shall  devour  them  up;  and  that  great
and  abominable  church,  which  is  the
whore  of  all  the  earth,  shall  be  cast
down  by  devouring  fire,  according  as
it  is  spoken  by  the  month  of  Ezekiel
the  Prophet,  which  spoke  of  these
things,  which  have  not  come  to  pass,
but  surely  must,  as  I  live;  for  al nomi-
nation shall  not  reign,"  (Doctrine
and  Covenants,  sec.  10,  par.  4 — 5.)

"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,
that  when  I  give  a  commandment  to
any  of  the  sons  of  men  boAo  a  work
unto  my  name,  and  those  sons  of  men
go  with  all  their  might  and  with  all
they  have  to  perform  that  work,  and
cease  not  their  diligence,  and  their
enemies  come  upon  them  and  hinder
|  them  from  performing  that  work,  be*
hold  it  behoveth  me  to  require  that
work  no  more  at  the  hands  of  those
sons  of  men,  but  to  accept  of  their
offerings  j  and  the  iniquity  and  trans-
gression of  my  holy  laws  and  com-
mandments I  will  visit  upon  the
heads  of  those  who  hindered  my
work, unto the  third  and  fourth


132  JOURNAL*  OF

generation,  bo  long  as  they  repent  not
and  hate  me,  saith  the  Lord  God,
Therefore  for  this  cause  have  I
accepted  the  offering  of  those  whom
I  commanded  to  build  up  a  city  and
a  house  unto  my  name,  in  Jackson
County,  Missouri,  and  were  hindered
by  their  enemies,  saith  the  Lord  your
God;  and  I  will  answer  judgment,
wrath,  and  indignation,  wailing,  and
anguish,  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  upon
their  heads,  unto  the  third  and  fourth
generation,  so  long  as  they  repent  not
and  hate  me,  saith  the  Lord  your
God."  (Doctrine  and  Covenants,
sec.  103,  par.  15.)

"Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,
darkness  eovereth  the  earth,  and  gross
darkness  the  minds  of  the  people,  and
all  flesh  has  become  corrupt  before
my  face.  Behold,  vengeance  cometh
speedily  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  burn-
ing, a  day  of  desolation,  of  weeping,
of  mourning,  and  of  lamentation;
and  as  a  whirlwind  it  shall  come
upon  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  saith
the  Lord,

And  upon  my  house  shall  it  begin,
and  from  my  house  shall  it  go  forth,
saith  the  Lord.  First,  among  those
among  you,  saith  the  Lord,  who  have
professed  to  know  my  name  and  have
not  known  me,  and  have  blasphemed
against  me  in  the  midst  of  my  house,
saith  the  Lord."  (Doctrine  and
Covenants,  sec.  104,  pars,  9 — 10.

"  Let  them  importune  at  the  feet
of  the  Judge  ;  and  if  he  heed  them
not,  let  them  importune  at  the  feet  of
the  Governor ;  and  if  the  Governor
heed  them  not,  let  them  importune
at  the  feet  of  the  President ;  and  if
the  President  heed  them  not,  then
will  the  Lord  arise  and  come  forth
out  of  his  hidingplace,  and  in  his
fury  vex  the  nation,  and  in  his  hot
displeasure  and  in  his  fierce  anger,  in
his  time,  will  cut  oft  those  wicked,
unfaithful,  and  unjust  stewards,  and
appoint  them  their  portion  among


DISCOURSES.

hypocrites  and  unbelievers,  even  in
outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weep-
ing and  wailing  and  gnashing  of
teeth.  Pray  ye,  then,  that  their  ears
may  be  opened  unto  your  cries,  that
I  may  be  merciful  unto  them,  that
these  things  may  not  come  upon  them.
What  I  have  said  unto  you  must
needs  be,  that  all  men  may  be  left
without  excuse ;  that  wise  men  and
rulers  mav  hear  and  know  that  which
they  have  never  considered;  that  I
may  proceed  to  bring  to  pass  my  act,
my  strSnge  act,  and  perform  ray  work,
my  strange  work,  that  men  may
discern  between  the  righteous  and
the  wicked,  saith  your  God."  (Doc-
trine and  Covenants,  sec.  98,  par.  12.)

And  do  you  hear  it,  0  Israel  ?  and
have  you  seen  it,  and  felt  the  pangs  of
war,  when  they  have  sent  their  army
to  this  Territory,  intending  to  drive  ■
us  from  our  homes  ?  As  they  com-
menced it  upon  the  House  of  God,  it
must  go  forth  upon  themselves  ;  for
as  they  measured  out  to  us,  it  must
be  measured  unto  them  fourfold*

The  nations  are  already  convulsed;
Not  only  the  United  States,  but
many  of  the  European  nations  are
feeling  the  eftect  of  the  judgments  of
the  Almighty;  and  they  will  con-
tinue to  be  afflicted  more  and  more,
until  the  above  revelations  are  ful-
filled. There  is  no  evading  the
judgments  of  the  Almighty;  their
only  escape  is  in  obedience  to  the
Gospel  we  have  to  preach.  But  do
they  believe  what  we  have  said  ?  No;
they  do  not  believe  a  word  of  it,  and
therefore  there  is  but  little  hope  in
their  case.

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  your
hearts  be  open  to  receive  the  word  of
truth,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Most
High  may  be  in  you  as  a  well  of
water,  springing  up  into  everlasting
life,  God  bless  you  forever,  and  all
those  that  hear  these  sayings  and
will  render  obedience  unto  the  law  of
God, Peace  be  upon  the  righteous,


LIVING  OUB  BELIGION,  ETC*


133


that  they  may  multiply  and  increase
in  wisdom  and  knowledge.  I  know,
as  well  as  I  know  that  I  am  here,
that  the  Priesthood  will  be  taken
from  those  who  dishonour  it,  for  they
have  no  power  to  hold  the  oracles  of
God  who  do  wickedly. They  may


not  all  be  cut  off  from  the  tree,  but
they  are  dead,  and  the  Spirit  of  God
does  not  dwell  with  them,  and  there-
fore there  is  no  life  in  them.

May  the  blessings  of  the  Lord  our
God  attend  you  all,  is  my  prayer.
Amen.


LIVING  OUR  RELIGION— OBEDIENCE  TO  COUNSEL.

Bemarhs  by  President  Heder  C.  Kimball,  made  in  tie  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

LaJce  C%,  May  12,  1861.

KKPOETKD  BY  J. V.  LONG,


I  feel  to-d^y,  as  I  do  a  great  many
times,  as  though  it  wras  considerable
of  a  task  for  me  to  attempt  to  speak.
There  are  thousands  of  things  to
speak  about  for  the  edification  of  this
people,  and  every  truth  is  like  the
root  of  a  tree  ;  it  has  many  branches.
Many  of  you  have  probably  observed
that  the  top  of  a  tree  is  much  like
the  root,  in  this  particular ;  it  has
many  branches,  and  from  those  spring
thousands  of  twigs  and  leaves ;  and  it
is  just  so  with  the  truth.  Then,
again,  it  is  a  good  deal  so  with  the
English  language.  Words  have  their
roots,  and  some  of  our  linguists  can
give  us  the  etymology  of  almost  all
the  words  used  in  the  English
language.

In  regard  to  the  ideas  that  were
advanced  by  Presideut  Young  this
forenoon,  they  are  just  as  true  as  it  is
that  you  are  all  here.  I  was  thinking
what  a  blessing  it  would  be  if  this


people  would  keep  these  things  in
view,  treasure  them  up  in  their  minds,
and  live,  so  that  their  conduct  will
correspond  with  the  religion  they
profess.  Then  they  would  honour
that  Priesthood  which  is  conferred
upon  them.  When  I  reflect  upon  this,
I  pray  that  we  may  all  so  live  that
God  our  Father  may  endow  us  with
every  necessary  qualification  to  pre-
pare us  to  honour  our  calling.  What
powerful,  what  mighty  men  the
Elders  would  be,  if  they  would  live
in  that  way  !  The  Almighty  is  wil-
ling to  bestow  upon  us  every  neces-
sary gift  to  enable  us  to  honour  our
high  callings  in  an  acceptable  man-
ner, and  to  qualify  us  to  magnify  the
holy  Apostleship  that  is  conterred
upon  us.

Although  you  do  not  consider
yourselvi  Apostles,  yet  there  is  not
a  soul  of  you  that  holds  the  Priest-
hood but  has  received  a  portion  of  the


/


Apostleship,  for  you  all  sprang  out  of
the  Apostleship.  This  Priesthood
comes  from  the  Father  to  the  Son,
from  Jesus  to  Peter,  James,  and  John,
and  from  them  to  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  and  fromJoM-ph  to  us;  and  it
still  continues  in  one  unbroken  chain
through  all  the  member!  of  the  body
of  Christ.  Now,  is  not  that  directly
from  our  Father  ?  Does  it  not  origi-
nate in  the  heavens  ?  It  certainly
does.  Then  is  it  not  necessary  that
we  should  all  be  like  one  man  or  one
tree  ?  Every  one  of  us  is  most  as-
suredly  connected  to  the  Gospel  tree,
and  we  are  branches  and  members
thereof.  I  merely  bring  up  this  figure
bo  as  to  bring  the  principle  more
forcibly  to  your  minds.  I  wish  you
to  understand  that  we  should  be  like
a  family  connected  to  their  head  or
benefactor.  We  also  should  be  one,
as  our  Father  and  his  Son  are  one —
all  that  have  received  the  Priesthood
from  the  beginning  of  creation  down
to  the  present  day.

Now,  the  Lord  has  said  that  all  old
covenants  have  I  caused  to  be  done
away  in  this  thing,  and  this  is  the
new  and  everlasting  covenant,  even
that  which  was  in  the  beginning.
Where  did  he  begin  this  covenant  ?
Why,  he  placed  it  upon  Adam  in  the
Garden  of  Eden.  Is  it  not  so  ?  This
is  the  new  covenant  that  is  ordained
and  sealed  upon  man  in  the  beginning
of  this  creation,  and  we  are  here  imi-
tating it,  or  should.

We  believe  with  all  Our  hearts ,
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  we
imitate  him  by  going  into  the  waters
of  baptism  and  being  buried  in  the
likeness  of  his  death,  and  then  being
entitled  to  come  forth  in  the  likeness
of  his  resurrection.  Then,  when  we
have  complied  with  this,  the  Holy
Ghost  is  bestowed  upon  us  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  by  one  having
authority.
^These  things  have  come  to  my
mind,  and  I  consider  that  they  are


very  good.  And  it  is  for  you  and
me,  when  we  rise  from  the  water,  to
lead  a  new  life — to  go  forth  walking  in
the  newness  of  life.  It  is  a  birth- —
a  baptism  for  the  remission  cf  sins — •
a  preparatory  work  to  the  receiving
of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  thati  t
may  bring  all  things  to  our  remem-
brance that  are  past,  and  show  us
things  to  come;  yea,  that  those  things
that  we  have  forgotten  may  be
brought  to  our  remembrance.  Now,
I  know  that,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is
upon  me,  all  things  look  natural  to
me,  and  as  if  I  had  been  familiar
with  them  before.

I  By  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  you  can
become  acquainted  with  things  to
come,  and  declare  them  to  the  Saints
by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
When  men  prophesy  with  this  Spirit
upon  them,  they  will  come  to  pass,
for  the  Holy  Ghost  cannot  lie.
Brethren,  let  us  take  a  course  to  live
that  we  need  not  commence  again  to
repenlj/rom  dead  works;  but  let  us  con-
tinue in  the  new  covenant,  and  be  faith-
ful in  all  our  duties,  and  increase  in
integrity  one  towards  another  and  to-
wards our  God.  This  should  be  up-
permost in  our  minds  continually.

j  You  all  remember  what  was  said
this  morning.  Strive  and  improve
upon  it.  The  world  hate  us,  and
hated  Jesus  before  us ;  and  wicked
men  have  killed  almost  every  Prophet
that  has  been  npon  the  earth.  Have
not  the  United  States  done  their  best
to  make  a  final  end  of  us  ?  They
have  tried  all  in  their  power  to  des-
troy this  people  from  the  earth.  The
only  reason  they  did  not  do  it  was
because  they  had  not  the  power :  the
Lord  was  on  our  side.

Brethren,  it  is  for  us  now  to  be  in-
dustrious, live  our  religion,  lay  up  our
grain,  and  prepare  for  the  times  that
are  coming  upon  the  earth.  Do  any
of  you  think  that  this  war  is  going  to
be  over  in  a  few  days  ?  If  you  do,
you  are  greatly  mistaken  ;  but  when


LIVIXG  OUR  RELIGION1,  ETC.


it  is  over,  they  will  be  ten  times  more
fierce  and  wicked  towards  this  people
than  ever  they  were  before.

By  fighting,  they  become  angry,
they  losj  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  they
then  take  pleasure  in  killing  and  slay-
ing each  other ;  and  when  they  be-
come hot  in  this  way,  they  will  com-
bine to  serve  us  the  same  way.

Do  not  dally  or  trifle  with  Presi-
dent Young's  words,  nor  with  the
words  of  his  brethren ;  for  those  who
do,  trifle  with  the  Almighty.  After
all  that  has  been  said  about  selling:
wheat,  flour,  and  grain  in  general  to
our  enemies,  does  it  stop  it  ?  No  s
they  are  still  at  it*  And  in  what  con-
dition does  it  place  them  that  do  it  ?
Why,  they  become  like  a  barren  tree —
they  bring  forth  nothing ;  whereas  it
is  their  duty  to  strive  to  bring  forth
fruits  of  righteousness.  I  know  that
some  will  be  read  v  to  say  that  brother
Heber  is  on  his  old  strain  again,  but
I  do  not  mind  that  If  you  trifle
with  brother  Brigham  and  with  his
words,  or  with  the  words  of  the  Apos-
tles, the  Seventies,  or  the  Bishops,  by-
and-by  you  will  feel  ft,  and  learn  the
effects  of  it  in  due  time.  Ton  may
not  feel  that  to-day,  but  you  will  ere
lung  suffer  for  slighting  the  words  nf
the  servants  of  God.  I  know  this
people  are  advancing  in  knowledge  ;
they  have  got  more  light  and  intelli-
gence than  they  ever  before  enjoyed.
They  are  a  blessed  people,  and  ought
to  appreciate  their  privileges  as  Saints
of  the  Most  High,  And  as  we  are
growing  in  light  and  knowledge,  the
wicked  are  growing  more  wicked
every  day  :  they  are  becoming  fero-
cious ;  they  are  full  of  death  and  de-
struction; they  are  becoming  just  as
the  Nephites  of  old.  They  got  so
desperate  that  they  would  sing  and
bowl  all  night  for  the  blood  of  their
brethren ;  and  it  will  be  just  as  bad  in
the  United  States,  When  our  ene-
mies seek  to  kill  us,  they  seek  the
destruction  of  their  saviours.


If  this  people  will  do  as  they  are
told,  we  shall  soon  be  independent  of
all  importations  from  foreign  markets.
To  do  this  effectually,  we  must  set
ourselves  to  work  to  make  everything
we  need  ourselves ;  then  we  shall  not
need  to  bring  goods  from  the  States,
from  Great  Britain,  or  any  other  na-
tion upon  the  earth,  excepting  perhaps
a  few  articles.  But  so  long  as  we  allow
ourselves  to  sustain  a  foreign  market
instead  of  our  own,  we  shall  be  poor
indeed, I  desire  with  all  my  heart
that  the  way  may  be  shut  up,  so  that
we  may  be  taught  by  experience  the
necessity  of  clothing  ourselves.  See
how  dependent  we  are,  when  we  have
got  no  bread,  clothing,  sugar,  tea,  or
coffee ;  and  those  who  possess  these
articles  hold  ns  in  servitude.  It  is  the
duty  of  every  man  to  go  to  work  and
raise  or  make  what  he  needs  for  his  own
consumption.  [This  is  one  thing  that
causes  President  Young  to  go  down
south,  so  that  he  may  ascertain  if  that
country  is  capable  of  producing  our
cotton,  sugar,  coffee,  and  grapes.  I
know  that  we  can  make  the  sugar  us
well  in  this  country  as  they  can  in  the
Southern  States. The  reason  it  is
not  done  is  because  we  have  got  men
here  who  are  so  anxious  to  get  a  large
quantity  of  molasses  from  their  sugar
cane. I  am  satisfied  that  we  can
make  good  sugar  here,  if  we  will
only  take  a  little  time  to  do  it  I  de-
sign to  do  it  myself,  if  nothing  hap-
pens to  prevent. We  make  our  flour,
we  saw  our  lumber,  card  our  wool,  we
spin  a  great  deal  of  yam,  and  make  a
great  deal  of  cloth ;  but  still  there
are  but  very  few  of  this  people  who
dress  in  home-made  cloth. We  are
dependent  upon  the  States  and  the
various nations  of  Europe  for  our
clothing.

Now,  you  all  see  these  things  just
as  I  do,  and  I  have  an  anxiety  for
you  as  a  people.  I  want  you  to  take
this  course,  for  I  know  it  to  be  neces-
sary for  our  salvation.


136


JOURNAL  OF  DISC0UB8ES.


When  I  go  to  my  Father  and  God,
and  to  Joseph,  he  will  say,  Come  in
here,  sit  down  with  us,  and  enjoy
yourself.  Would  not  this  be  a  happy
time  ?  Yes,  And  what  would  you
not  give  to  be  in  the  society  of  Jo*
seph  and  Hyrum  and  his  brethren  ?
You  would  all  give  everything  you
possess  in  the  world.  Then  see  that
you  live  for  this  day  by  day.

Not  a  man,  woman,  or  child  need
to  sufier  in  this  Territory,  if  they  will
do  just  as  they  are  told*  The  Lord
will  provide  for  his  people,  and  bring
them  ofi  victoriously.  Industry  and
perseverance  will  enable  us  to  manu-
facture the  most  of  what  we  want.
At  present  we  have  but  just  com-
menced in  home  manufactures ;  but
if  we  are  faithful  and  diligent,  we
shall  increase  rapidly  in  our  ability.

One  of  the  most  grievous  things  we
have  to  endure  is  the  evil  practices  of
some  who  profess  to  be  Saints  ;  but  I
feel  to  rejoice  that  these  are  only  the
few.  Brethren,  I  rejoice  in  spirit
and  in  speaking  to  you  this  day,  j
Although  I  am  feeble  in  body,  I  am
buoyant  and  strong  in  spirit,  and  I
feel  that  I  am  going  to  live  a  great
many  years  yet. But  if  I  am  called


to  pass  behind  the  vail,  all  will  be
right  with  me.  If  we  are  faithful
and  humble,  the  Lord  will  bring  us
off  conquerors.

I  feel  to  bless  this  people,  that
their  hearts  may  be  comforted  in  the
things  of  God.  I  rejoice  in  the  per-
formance of  all  my  duties,  and  I
never  feel  weary  in  doing  good,  in
blessing  and  comforting  my  brethren.
Some  seem  to  take  pleasure  in  find-
ing fault  with  everything  around
them  ;  but  they  would  not  do  this  if
they  had  done  right.  When  men
neglect  their  prayers  and  other  duties,
they  lose  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  and
get  into  the  dark.

You  have  the  privilege  of  saving
men  temporally  and  spiritually.  Into
your  hands  is  committed  the  power
to  become  saviours  of  men.  We  have
to  save  ourselves  and  others  tempo-
rally, and  then  spiritually.

I  feel  to  say,  God  bless  you !  Peace
be  with  you,  and  peace  be  multiplied
to  the  righteous,  and  to  their  seed
after  them  for  ever  !  This  is  my
blessing  upon  you,  brethren  and  sis-
ters, in  the  name  of  Jesns  Christ,
Amen,


GATHERING  OF  THB  SAINTS,  ETC


137


GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS— HONOURING  THE

PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.

Remarks  by  President  Bjligham  Young,  made  hi  the  Bowery,  Great  Salt

lake  City,  July  28,  1861.

REPORTED  BY  G.  D.  WATT.


When  I  came  into  this  Church,  I
started  right  out  as  a  missionary,  and
took  a  I  ext,  and  began  to  travel  on  a
circuit.  Truth  is  my  text,  the  Gospel
of  salvation  my  subject,  and  the
world  my  circuit.  I  presume  I  shall
not  soon  go  all  over  it,  but  I  am  still
preaching  and  travelling  occasion-
ally. I  expect  to  be  here  about  every
other  Sabbath,  as  I  have  been  for  a
few  weeks  or  months  past,  except
when  I  was  in  the  south.

While  I  am  here  with  you,  I  want
to  talk  to  the  Saints.  I  like  to  look
at  them ;  I  like  to  instruct  them,  and
to  be  instructed.  We  pray  contin-
ually for  the  redemption  of  Zion,  for
the  Lord  to  hasten  the  time  when  we
can  return  and  establish  the  centre
Stake  of  Zion,  and  build  up  the  great
temple  of  the  Lord  upon  which  his
glory  will  rest  as  a  cloud  by  day,  and
a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.  We  pray
that  we  may  be  sanctified,  that  we  may
be  made  pure  in  heart ;  and  we  pray
that  the  Lord  will  teach  us  his  will
continually,  and  reveal  unto  us  pre-
cisely his  mind,  so  that  we  may  have
the  mind  of  Christ,  and  know  pre-
cisely what  to  do.

When  will  Zion  be  redeemed  ?
When  will  the  Saviour  make  his  ap-
pearance in  the  midst  of  his  people  ?
When  will  the  vail  be  taken  away,
that  we  may  behold  the  glory  of  God  ?
Can  any  of  you  answer  these  qnes-
tions  ?  Yes,  readily,  when  I  tell  you.
The  redemption  of  Zion  is  the  first
step  preparatory  to  the  two  last-
named  events.  Just  as  soon  as  the
Latter-day  Saints  are ready  and


prepared  to  return  to  Independence,
Jackson  County,  in  the  State  of
Missouri,  North  America,  just  so  soon
will  the  voice  of  the  Lord  be  heard,
"  Arise  now,  Israel,  and  make  your
way  to  the  centre  Stake  of  Zion  "
Do  yon  think  there  is  any  danger  of
our  being  ready  before  the  Lord  pre-
pares the  other  end  of  the  route?
Do  you  believe  that  we,  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  are  preparing  our  own
hearts,  our  own  lives,  to  return  to
take  possession  of  the  centre  Stake  of
Zion,  as  fast  as  the  Lord  is  preparing
to  cleanse  the  land  from  those  un-
godly persons  who  dwell  there  ?  You
can  read,  reflect,  and  make  your  own
calculations.  If  we  are  not  very
careful,  the  earth  will  be  cleansed
from  wickedness  before  we  are  pre-
pared to- take  possession  of  it.  We
must  be  pure  to  be  prepared  to  build
up  Zion.  To  all  appearance,  the
Lord  is  preparing  that  end  of  the
route  faster  than  we  are  prepari ng
ourselves  to  go  there.

His  grace  is  here,  his  judgmenta
are  here,  his  wisdom  and  Spirit  are
here,  and  every  qualification  that
Saints  can  require  is  here  ready  to  be
poured  out  upon  the  people,  if  they
are  prepared  to  receive  them.  Are
we  prepared  to  receive  those  qualifi-
cations ?  Are  we  prepared  to  march
back  and  take  possession  of  the
centre  Stake  of  Zion,  build  up  the
great  Temple  of  the  Lord,  and
gather  in  the  nations  of  the  earth  ?  '

There  are  hundreds  and  thousands
coming  here  this  season.  We  are
gathering  the  people  as  fast  as  we


138  JTOTJENAL  OF

can.  We  are  gathering  them  to  make
Saints  of  them  and  of  ourselves.
Probably  many  of  them  will  aposta-
tize, though  some  will  not  apostatize
until  you  give  them  their  endow-
ments ;  and  then,  if  you  do  not
speak  out  of  the  right  corner  of  your
mouth,  they  will  apostatize ;  and  if
you  do  not  laugh  out  of  the  right
corner  of  your  mouth,  they  will  ir  >.
We  are  gathering  a  few  that  will  be
faithful  in  the  midst  of  this  people,
and  prepare  themselves  to  becrowued
kings  and  priests  unto  God.  By-and-
by  you  will  see  the  Saints  flock  to-
gether. Will  they  come  merely  by
one  or  two  shiploads?  No  ;  it  will
require  many  more  ships  than  we
have  heretofore  employed  to  bring
home  the  gathering  thousands  to
Zion.  Millions  of  people  that  now
sit  in  darkness — that  are  now,  to  all
appearance,  in  the  region  and  shadow
of  death,  will  come  to  Zion,

When  Joseph  first  revealed  the
land  wfhere  the  Saints  should  gather,
-  a  woman  in  Canada  asked  if  we
thought  that  Jackson  County  would
be  large  enough  to  gather  all  the
people  that  would  want  to  go  to
Zion.  I  will  answer  the  question
really  as  it  is.  Zion  will  extend,
eventual ly ,  all  over  th is  earth*  There
will  be  no  nook  or  corner  upon  the
earth  but  what  will  be  in  Zion.  It
will  all  be  Zion.  I  remember  that
the  lady  was  answered  by  asking  her
whether  she  thought  the  ark  was
large  enough  to  hold  those  that  were
to  go  into  it  in  the  days  of  Noah  ?
"Yes,"  was  the  reply.  Then  of
course  Zion  will  be  just  large  enough
to  receive  all  that  vyill  be  prepared  to
possess  it,  as  the  ark  was.

We  are  going  to  gather  as  many  as
we  can,  bless  tbem,  give  them  their
endowments,  etc.,  preach  to  them  the
truth,  lay  the  principles  of  eternal
life  before  them,  inform  their  minds
all  we  have  power  to  do,  and  lead
them  into  the  path  of  truth  and


DISCOURSES,

righteousness;  and  those  who  will
not  abide  the  truth  will  apostatize.
A  few  will  remain,  and  a  good  share
of  them  will  cleave  to  the  promises
of  the  Lord,  will  be  true  in  every
respect,  and  will  be  accounted  worthy
to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate.
Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the
path  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few
there  be  that  find  it.  Millions  will
come  and  live  in  Zion  when  the  laws
of  Zion  reign  predominant  over
creation ;  but  will  all  be  prepared  to
be  crowned  kings  and  priests  unto
God  ?  No.  '  You  cannot  imagine
anything  that  will  not  be  in  Zion,
except  sin  and  iniquity,  and  reviling
against  God  and  against  his  kingdom.
All  classes  of  people  will  dome  to
Zion.  Will  there  he  Methodists
there  ?  Yes ;  and  they  will  have  the
privilege  to  worship  a  God  without
body,  parts,  and  passions,  just  as  they
do  now,  if  they  choose  to.  Every
person  and  every  community  will  re-
ceive according  to  the  extent  of  their
capacity  and  ability.  Every  person  then H
will  be  blessed,  will  be  filled  with  joy,
will  be  filled  with  peace,  with  light,  and
intelligence  according  to  the  endow-
ments with  which  they  are  endowed.
Will  all  become  kings  and  priests  ?
No ;  not  even  all  that  will  embrace
the  fulness  of  the  Gospel,

There  are  only  a  few  shiploads  of
Saints  coming  this  season.  They
will  come  thicker  and  faster,  by-and-
by,  and  will  begin  to  inquire  after
the  wisdom  that  is  in  Zion,  The
Lord  is  coming  out  of  his  hiding-
place,  and  is  beginning  to  scourge
this  nation  with  a  sore  scourging,  and
vex  it  with  a  sore  vexation.  He  is
coming  forth,  and  the  sound  of  the
report  of  what  is  coming  on  the  earth
and  the  power  of  God  that  is  made
manifest  will  vex  the  wicked  and  the
ungodly,  and  will  bring  great  joy  and
rejoicing  to  the  Saints.  There  are
millions  of  people,  both  among  the
Christian  and  heathen  nations,  that


GATHERING  OF  THK SAINTS,  ETC


139


are  still  in  darkness,  and  exclaiming,
"  GIi,  how  glad  we  would  be  to  have
some  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  of
salvation  !  M  By-and-lrr,  when  the
Lord  sends  forth  li is  servants  and  his
angels  to  gather  them,  they  will  be
brought  home  to  Zion  and  bo  taught
the  peaceable  things  of  the  kingdom  ;
and  those  that  abide  a  celestial  law
will  receive  a  celestial  glory,  and
those  that  can  abide  the  next  law  in
order  can  abide  the  glory  pertaining
to,  it,  and  so  on.  Were  I  to  enumer-
ate thousands  of  different  des^rees  of
glory  and  kingdoms,  I  probably
should  over-enumerate  the  kingdoms
God  has  prepared  and  will  prepare
for  the  people  according  to  their
capacities,  endowments,  and  what
they  can  receive  and  arrive  to.

We  ought  to  be  careful  and  not  lay
down  our  Priesthood.  The  brethren
and  sisters  ought  to  hold  fast  to  their
covenants,  and  walk  in  that  way,  in
that  path,  which  is  pointed  out  by
the  Gospel.  Shall  we  love  the
world  ?  In  one  sense,  we  should.
Should  we  love  it  with  a  divine  love  ?
Not  yet.  Should  we  love  the  world
and  the  things  of  the  world  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  world  ?  We
should.  We  are  commanded  in  this
Bible  not  to  love  the  world  and  the
things  of  the  world  ;  and  then  you
read  a  little  further  in  the  same  book,
and  you  are  commanded  to  love  the
world  and  the  things  of  the  wot  Id.
How  shall  we  understand  these
things  ?  With  the  divinity  that  is
within  us  we  should  love  divine
things.  Our  spirits  are  born  of  our
Parents  in  heaven,  divine,  heavenly,
angelic.  Shall  these  spirits  con-
descend to  love  an  earthly  object,  to
worship  it  ?  If  they  do,  they  become
inferior  to  their  calling  and  station
before  God.  The  body  is  framed  for
the  tabernacle  or  house  in  which  the
spirit  has  to  dwell  This  tabernacle
is  formed  expressly  to  hold  its  spirit
and  shield  it. Should  we  love  this


tabernacle  ?  Yes,  enough  to  nourish
it,  cherish  it,  and  treat  it  kindly ,
and  foster  and  nourish  and  cherish  it
by  the  power  of  the  spirit,  and  make
this  body  divine.  The  spirit  must
overcome  the  body  in  the  flesh,  and
the  flesh  become  subject  to  the  spirit
in  all  things;  then  we  will  love  the
world  as  it  ought  to  be  loved, — not
with  a  divine  love,  but  with  a  humati
love,  a  moral  love,  loving  all  things
according  to  their  worth  and  ca-
pacity.

We  love  our  wives  and  children
— we  love  that  which  is  calculated  to
make  us  happy  and  comfortable  ;  but
the  divine  spirit  is  to  overcome  the
!  body  and  continue  so  to  do,  looking
forth  until  the  body  also  becomes
divine;  and  then,  when  all  ha*
become  divine,  we  may  love  all  witn
a  divine  affection,  but  not  till  then.
After  the  body  and  spirit  are  separ-
ated by  death,  wjiat,  pertaining  to  this
earth,  shall  we  receive  first  ?  The
body ;  that  is  the  first  object  of  a
divine  affection  beyond  the  grave.
We  first  come  in  p<  >^st>>:' <u  of  the
body.  The  spirit  has  overcome  the
body,  and  the  body  is  made  subject  in
every  respect  to  that  divire  principle
God  has  planted  in  the  person.  The
spirit  within  is  pure  and  holy,  and
goes  back  pure  and  holy  to  God,
dwells  in  the  spirit-world  pure  and
holy,  and,  by-and-by,  will  have  the
privilege  of  coming  and  taking  the
body  again.  Some  person  holding
the  keys  of  the  resurrection,  having
previously  passed  through  that  ordeal,
will  be  delegated  to  resurrect  our
bodies,  and  our  spirits  will  be  there
and  prepared  to  enter  into  their
bodies.  Then,  when  we  are  prepared
to  receive  our  bodies,  they  are  the
first  earthly  objects  that  bear  divinity
personified  in  the  capacity  of  the
man.  Only  the  body  dies;  the  spirit
is  looking  forth,  as  you  read  in  the
Bible  concerning  the  souls  or  spirits
of  those  who  lay  under  the  altar,  as


liO  J0T7BNAL  OP

John  saw  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  and
they  were  crying  to  God  to  know  how
long  it  would  be  before  they  would
again  have  their  bodies.  Were  we
turned  out-of-doors,  and  not  permitted
to  go  into  a  house  for  six  months  or
a  year,  we  would  look  forward  to  the
time  when  we  could  build  a  house,
and  reflect,  "  I  wish  I  had  a  good
house  wherein  I  could  be  free  from
the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  as  I
once  had."

When  the  body  comes  forth  again,
it  will  be  divine,  God-like,  according
to  the  capacity  and  ordinations  of  the
Lord.  Some  are  foreordained  to  one
station,  and  some  to  another.  We
want  a  house,  and  when  we  get  it  and
our  spirits  enter  into  it,  then  we  can
begin  to  look  forth,  for  what  ?  For
our  friends.  We  want  them  resur-
rected. Here  is  this  friend  and  that
friend,  until  by-and-by  all  are  resur-
rected .  And  the  earth  is  resurrected  ?
Yes,  and  every  living  thing  on  the
earth  that  has  abided  the  law  by
which  it  was  made.  Then  that  which
you  and  I  respect,  are  fond  of,  and
love  with  an  earthly  love,  will  become
divine,  and  we  can  then  love  it  with
that  affection  which  it  is  not  now
worthy  of.

Here  is  matter  we  see  organized
in  ourselves.  We  look  upon  each
other,  and  we  are  matter  organized*
Look  upon  the  brute  creation,  the
vegetable  creation,  and  both  are
matter  organized.  Who  knows  how
much  of  this  is  going  to  abide  the
law  of  its  creation  and  the  law  by
which  it  is  made  ?  Han  is  the  only
object  you  can  find  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  that  will  not  abide  the  law
by  which  he  is  made.  When  he
abides  this  law,  he  is  prepared  for  a
glorious  resurrection.  Are  my  wives
and  friends  going  to  be  prepared  to
receive  this  resurrection  ?  Are  my
children  going  to  be  prepared  to  re-
ceive this  resurrection  ?  They  all
have  the  power  of  choice,  the  same  as


DISCOURSES.

I  havo;  the  same  power  of  divinity
is  in  them  that  is  in  me  and  you,  I
cannot  love  them  with  that  sacred,
divine  love,  until  they  become  im-
mortal and  prove  themselves  worthy
of  such  a  supreme  affection.  I  do
not  suffer  myself  to  love  a  wife  or  a
child  with  that  divinity  that  is  within
me,  until  they,  with  myself,  are  im-
mortalized and  glorified,  and  they  are
given  to  me  as  my  own  in  that  future
state,  I  am  fond  of  them ;  I  will
nourish,  cherish,  and  guide  them,  and
do  all  I  can  for  them,  so  that  they  can
prove  themselves  worthy  to  receive
their  bodies  in  a  glorious  resurrected
!  state,  and  be  prepare  \  to  enter  into
the  joy  of  their  Lord  with  me:  then
they  are  worthy  of  my  supreme  love,
and  not  before.

When  I  tell  the  truth,  that  is
enough,  and  I  care  not  whether  those
who  hear  it  believe  it  or  not,  for  that  is
their  business.  If  yon  had  lived  in  the
days  of  Jesus,  Peter,  John,  etc.,  and
had  seen  men  called  to  be  Apostles
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  every  time  they
taught  the  people,  every  time  they
preached,  every  time  they  prayed,  and
every  time  they  administered  in  the
house  of  God,  if  they  did  not  do  it  by
the  Spirit  of  revelation  and  by  the
power  of  God,  they  did  not  magnify
their  calling.  There  are  not  many
who  know  this.  If  we  do  not  speak
to  you  by  the  Spirit  of  revelation  and
the  power  of  God,  we  do  not  magnify
our  calling.  I  think  that  I  tell  you
the  words  of  the  Lord  Almighty
every  time  I  rise  here  to  speak  to  you,
I  may  blunder  in  the  use  of  the  English
language ;  but  suppose  I  should  use
language  that  would  grate  on  the  ears
of  some  of  the  learned,  what  of  that  ?
God  can  understand  it,  and  so  could
you,  if  you  had  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,

I  had  brother  Kimball  ask  me  if
his  mode  of  communication  pleased
me.  Yes ;  for  I  know  what  he  means.
I  read  his  spirit  when  he  preaches ;


GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


141


and  if  he  preaches  by  the  power  of
God,  I  can  understand  it,  if  lie  speaks
it  back  end  forward,  as  well  as  if  he
spoko  it  straightforward  and  in
picked  and  choice  language.  The
Spirit  of  revelation  is  the  best  gram-
mar you  ever  studied.  As  I  was
telling  you  this  morning,  let  the  power
of  God  come  upon  this  congregation
and  open  the  vision  of  your  minds,
and  an  angel  of  God  appear  here,  and
you  would  1x3  in  the  light  of  eternity
and  in  vision  in  a  moment,  without  a
word  being  spoken,  and  volumes
would  be  revealed  to  this  people.
What  do  we  care  about  words?
Chiefly  to  speak  and  to  hear  others
speak  so  as  to  be  understood.  We
have  our  language;  but  if  a  man
speaks  by  the  power  of  God,  it  is
little  matter  to  me  what  his  words  are,
or  the  language  he  uses.  If  I  under-
stand the  spirit  of  it,  that  is  the  way
I  find  "  Mormonism "  to  be  true.
The  brethren  who  came  to  preach  the
Gospel  to  me,  I  could  easily  out-talk
them,  though  I  had  never  preached ;
but  their  testimony  was  like  fire  in
my  bones;  I  understood  the  spirit  of
their  preaching;  I  received  that
spirit ;  it  was  light,  intelligence,
power,  and  truth,  and  it  bore  witness
to  my  spirit,  and  that  was  enough  for
me*  I  have  received  it,  and  I  hate
tried  to  improve  upon  it.

If  I  do  not  speak  heiv  1  y  the  p<  »wer
of  God,  if  it  is  not  revelation  to  you
every  time  I  speak  to  you  here,  I  do
not  magnify  my  calling,  f  What  do
you  think  about  it  ?  I  neither  know
nor  care.  If  I  do  not  magnify  my
oalling,  I  shall  be  removed  from  the
place  I  occupy*  God  does  not  suffer
you  to  be  deceived.  \  Here  are  my
brethren  and  sisters  pouring  out  their
souls  to  God,  and  their  prayers  and
faith  are  like  one  solid  cloud  ascend-
ing to  the  heavens.  They  want  to  be
led  right  ;  they  want  the  truth  ;  they
want  to  know  how  to  serve  God  and
prepare  for  a  celestial  kingdom.  Do


you  think  the  Lord  will  allow  you  to
be  fooled  and  led  astray  ?  No*

Brother  Kimball  said,  to-day,
when  he  was  speaking,  if  you  sutler
yourselves  to  find  fault  with  your
Bishop,  you  condescend  to  the
spirit  of  apostacy.  Do  any  of  you
do  this  ?  If  you  do,  you  do  not
realize  that  you  expose  yourself  to
the  power  of  the  Enemy.  What
should  your  faith  and  position  be  be-
fore God?  Such  that,  if  a  Bishop
does  not  do  right,  the  Lord  will  re-
mo  vc  him  out  of  your  Ward.  You
are  not  to  find  fault.  As  brother
Wells  has  said,  speak  not  lightly  of
the  anointed  of  the  Lord.  But  you  say
they  are  out  of  the  way.  Who  has
made  any  of  my  brethren  a  judge
over  their  Bishop  ?  You  read  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  in  a
revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  (brother
Kimball  and  myself  were  present,)
that  it  takes  twelve  High  Priests  to
sit  in  council  upon  the  head  of  a
Bishop.  Can  they  judge  him  r  No;
for  they  must  then  have  the  Presi-
dency of  the  High  Priesthood  to  sit
at  their  head  and  preside  over  them.
Yet  many  rise  up  and  couJemn  their
Bishop.  Perhaps  that  Bishop  has
been  appointed  expressly  to  try  those
persons  and  cause  them  to  apostatize*
A  great  many  will  not  apostatize
until  they  arrive  here;  and  who  knows
but  what  the  Lord  has  prompted  a
Bishop  to  do  so-and-so  to  cause  some-
body to  apostat  ize,  Oneof  the  first  steps
to  apostacy  is  to  find  fault  with  your
Bishop ;  and  when  1 1  iat  is  dene,  unless
repented  of,  a  second  step  is  soon
taken,  and  by-and-hy  the  person  is  cut
off  from  the  Church,  and  that  is  the
end  of  it.  Will  you  allow  yourselves
to  find  fault  with  your  Bishop  r  No;
but  come  to  me,  go  to  the  High
Council,  or  to  the  President  of  the
Stake,  and  ascertain  whether  your
Bishop  is  doing  wrong,  before  you
find  fault  and  sufler  yourselves  to
speak  against  a  presiding  officer.


142


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUHSES.


I  want  yon  to  have  faith  enough
concerning  myself  and  my  Coun-
sellors for  the  Lord  to  remove  us  out
of  the  way,  if  we  do  not  magnify
our  calling,  and  put  men  in  our  places
that  will  do  right.  I  had  the  promise,
years  ago,  that  I  never  should  apos-
tatize and  bring  an  evil  upon  this
people.  God  revealed  that  through
Joseph,  long  before  he  died  ;  and  if  I
am  not  doing  right,  you  may  calcu-
late that  the  Lord  is  going  to  take  me
home-  He  will  not  send  rae  to  hell,
but  he  will  take  me  home  to  himself
u  I  will  take  you  up  here,  Brigham,
and  give  you  a  few  lessons."  I  am
going  where  He  is,  for  I  have  that
promise,  and  so  have  many  others.
I  am  tiling  yo:i  th-.-ie  things  for  your
comfort.  In  all  this  there  are  no
new  principles  and  doctrines,  though
it  is  new  to  many  of  you.  You  must
have  faith  in  Clod  that  lie  will  lead
his  people  right,  in  a  way  to  preserve
them  fiom  every  evil

You  can  read  in  the  writings  of  the
ancient  Prophets  that  the  Lord  is
going  to  bring  again  Zion.  The
Prophet  said  that  very  quickly  :  it
took  him  not  more  than  half  a
minute.  Let  me  ask  the  Latter-day
Saints,  How  long  will  it  t:ike  this
people  to  fulfil  that  short  sentence  ?
How  can  they,  unless  they  live  in  the
light  of  revelation,  and  God  leads
them  day  by  day  ?  Then  can  they
do  it  in  a  moment,  in  an  hour,  in  a
week,  in  a  month,  or  in  a  year  ?  !No.
It  will  take  years  to  perform  that
saying  of  the  Prophet  that  he  wrote
down  so  soon.  And  it  will  take  more
than  one  Prophet  or  person ;  it  will
take  hundreds  and  thousands  of  them
to  flfifil  that  saying;  and  they  cannot
begin  to  fulfil  one  part  of  it  without
the  power  of  revelation.

You  may  read  another  text — "  The
Lord  will  empty  the  earth,1' — I  will
not  say  whether  of  wickedness  or
righteousness.  How  is  this  to  be
understood  ?  and  how  are  the  people


going  to  fulfil  this  saying  of  the  Pro-
phet? How  is  the  Lord  going  to
empty  the  earth  ?  Will  it  be  done
in  a  week  or  a  year  ?  No,  He  has
begun  to  do  it.  President  Lincoln
called  out  soldiers  for  three  months,and
was  going  to  wipe  the  blot  of  secession
from  the  escutcheon  of  the  American
Republic.  The  three  months  are
gone,  and  the  labour  is  scarcely  be-
gun. Now  they  are  beginning  to  en-  *
list  men  for  three  years ;  soon  they
will  want  to  enlist  during  the  war ;
and  then,  I  was  going  to  say,  they
will  want  them  to  enlist  during  the
duration  of  hell.  Do  they  know  what
they  are  doing  ?  No  ;  but  they  have
begun  to  empty  the  earth,  to  cleanse
the  laud,  and  prepare  the  way  for  the
return  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  the
centre  Stake  of  Zion.

Have  we  inheritances  there?  "\V]ien
I  left  the  State  of  Missouri,  I  had  a
deed  for  five  pieces  of  as  good  land
as  any  in  the  State,  and  I  expect  to
go  buck  to  it.  Do  we  own  anything
in  Illinois  ?  Yes.  In  Ohio  ?  Yes.
The  Lord  will  call  back  the  Latter-
day  Saints*  although  it  is  written  in
the  revelations,  speaking  of  the  Saints
being  driven  from  Jackson  County,
that  they  should  be  driven  from  State
to  State,  frum  city  to  city,  and  but
few  would  remain  to  receive  their  in-
heritance.  I  did  not  receive  any  in*
heritanee  in  Jackson  county,  Mis-
souri, I  never  was  there,  and  I  do
not  think  of  any  one  present  who  was
there,  except  Judge  Phelps,  There
are  also  a  few  others  in  the  Territory
who  received  theirs.  A  few  will  re*
main  and  receive  their'  inheritance.
Will  we  return  and  receive  an  inherit-
ance there?  Many  of  the  Saints
will  return  to  Missouri,  and  there  re-
ceive an  inheritance.  This  is  not
worded  exactly  as  is  the  revelation,
but  it  is  according  to  the  nature  of
things.  The  earth  will  also  be
emptied  upon  natural  principles :  it
cannot  be  done  otherwise.


GATHERING  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


143


The  South  say,  "We  could  not
bear  the  insults  and  the  affliction
heaped  upon  us  by  the  North.  We
cannot  hrlp  revolting  from  the  rank
Abolition "ste  that  would  destroy  us
and  our  negroes;  we  will  not  hold
fellow h\ lip  with  the  North  any  longer,
but  wc  will  come  out  from  them  and
be  separate,"  The  Abolitionists
would  yet  free  the  negroes  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  lives  of  their  masters  ;
they  would  let  the  negroes  loose  to
"massacre  evjery  white  person :  that  is
the  spirit  of  many  of  the  Abolitionists
that  I  have  conversed  with.  Pro-
slavery  men  are  determined  to  hold
their  negroes,  and  the  N  orth  reply —
"  It  is  false  language  to  say  that  we
are  in  a  free  and  independent  govern-
ment that  holds  four  millions  of  per-
sons in  abject  slavery  :  we  do  not  be-
lieve in  it,  and  they  shall  be  free."
How  natural  it  is  for  the  two  parties
to  come  to  the  sword,  to  the  cannon's
mouth,  and  fight.  "  We  of  the  North
are  fighting  to  emancipate  four  mil-
lions of  people  that  are  in  bondage/'
and  "  we  of  the  South  are  fighting  for
our  liberties;"  and  the  fight  will  con-
tinue until  the  earth  is  empty.  Will
it  be  over  in  six  months  or  in  three
years  ?  No ;  it  will  take  years  and
years,  and  will  never  cease  until  the
work  is  accomplished.  There  may  be
seasons  that  the  fire  will  appear  to  be
extinguished,  and  the  first  you  know
it  will  break  out  in  another  portion,
and  all  is  on  fire  again,  and  it  will
spread  and  continue  tin  til  the  land  is
emptied .  Will  they  all  bekillcd  ?  No.

J.  shall  see  the  day  when  thou-
sands will  seek  succour  at  the  hands
of  this  people.  If  you  say,  "  Hus-
band, I  shall  leave  you,  if  you  take
another  wife,"  you  had  better  leave
now  when  you  may  stand  a  chance  of
getting  another  husband.  You  can-
not read  in  the  Bible  that  women
take  the  lead — that  the  responsibility
is  upon  the  women,  for  it  is  not  so.
What  was  the  saying  of  Jesus,  when


the  woman  caught  in  sin  was  brought
before  him  ?  That  publicans  and
harlots  should  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven  before  the  self-righteous
scribes  and  Pharisees.  I  do  not  like
to  associate  with  such  characters,  but
that  Scripture  will  be  fulfilled.

The  responsibility  is  upon  the  men,
and  they  will  be  used  up,  for  they  go
to  war,  and  will  fall  in  battle  by  hun-
dreds and  thousands,  until  the  earth
is  emptied.  Young  men,  prepare
yourselves;  for  a  greater  responsibility
will  come  upon  you  than  you  have
ever  dreamed  of.  Millions  will  seek  to
you  for  salvation.  Are  you  prepared
for  this  ?  No,  you  are  not.  There
are  bat  very  few  men,  old  or  young,
that  are  capable  of  taking  proper
charge  of  themselves,  to  say  nothing
of  a  Ward,  a  community,  or  a  nation.

It  is  said  that  woman  is  the  weaker
vessel,  and  that  an  Irishman  whipped
his  wife  because  she  carried  too  much
sail.  The  nations  have  been  led  by
the  weaker  vessel ;  but  by-and-by  it
will  not  be  so*  It  is  impossible  to
guide  ships  that  carry  too  much  sail,
and  have  too  little  ballast  in  propor-
tion to  their  hulls.  I  should  trim  off
some  of  the  spankers.  You  sisters  who
have  crossed  the  sea  know  what  I
mean.  You  must  also  cut  oft  part  of
the  jib,  and  then  you  can  guide  the
vessel  a  little  easier.  When  you
come  to  the  mainsail,  reef  it,  tie  it
up,  and  not  have  it  quite  so  large.

You  can  scarcely  find  a  man  that
knows  how  to  properly  treat  honp^lf,
and  it  is  worse  when  you  come  ;is
directing:  others.  You  will  see  the
time  when  thousands  will  seek  salva-
tion at  the  hands  of  this  people,  and
say, "  Guide  us  in  the  way  of  life;  th«
earth  is  emptied  of  wickedness,  an<d  it
has  come  to  an  end."  The  Lord
knows  whether  or  not  the  Elders  of
this  Church  will  be  ready  to  step  for-
ward and  take  upon  themselves  these
great  rebponsibilities.

Let  these  remarks  remain  with  you;


141


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


take  them  home  with  you,  and  wait
and  see  what  the  result  will  be.  The
Lord  is  building  up  Zion,  and  is
emptying  the  earth  of  wickedness,
gathering  his  people,  bringing  again
Zion,  redeeming  his  Israel,  sending
forth  his  work,  withdrawing  his
Spirit  from  the  wicked  world,  and
commencing  to  build  up  his  kingdom.


Can  this  be  done  without  revelation  ?
Ho,  You  will  not  make  a  move,  or  do
anything — plant  corn,  build  a  hall
or  a  temple,  make  a  farm,  or  go  to  the
States, — no,  not  a  thing  towards
building  up  Zion,  without  the  power
of  revelation*

May  the  Lord  bless  you,  brethren
and  sisters.  Amen.


FOR  THE  COMFORT
OF  THE  SAINTS.


Remarks  by  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  the  Bov:ery,  Great

Salt  Lake  Ciiy7  Jmie  9,  186L


REPORTED  BY  J. V.  LONG


Brethren  and  sisters,  I  feel  to  bear
my  testimony  to  what  we  have  heard
this  morning.  I  have  accompanied
the  President  upon  this  trip,  an
account  of  which  he  has  so  ably  laid
before  you ;  and  I  do  not  feel  that  I
could  add  anything  in  regard  to  the
description  which  he  has  given  of  our
journey  through  the  southern  settle-
ments. He  has  given  you  a  full
descriptive  account  of  the  journey
and  of  the  tilings  that  have  trans-
pired, and  I  can  truly  say  that  I
never  enjoyed  myself  better  upon  a
journey  or  pleasure  excursion  that
afforded  me  greater  satisfaction  than
this  has  done.  I  have  accompanied
him  many  times  on  trips  of  this
kind,  and  I  think  I  have  enjoyed  this
a  little  better  than  any  other.

It  seemed  that  new  ideas  and  new
scenes  arose  before  us  all  the  time;
it  seemed  that  the  Lord  was  multiply-
ing and  increasing  the  people  called
Latter-day  Saints,  They  were  scat-
tered th  rough  the  country  in  almost


every  nook  and  corner  where  they
could  take  advantage  of  a  few  acres
of  fertile  land.  There  they  were
busily  engaged  endeavouring  to  sub-
due it* This  was  pleasing  to  behold.

We  were  everywhere  met  with
kindness  and  hospitality,  and  all  the
people  seemed  glad  to  see  us  and  to
have  us  tarry  with  them.  When  we
left  one  place,  many  of  the  brethren
would  follow  us  to  the  next,  to  hear
of  the  word  of  the  Lord.  In  fact,  in
all  of  the  southern  settlements,  our
hearts  were  continually  rejoiced  in
seeing  the  thousands  that  flocked
around  us,  and  in  seeing  their  en-
deavours to  learn  what  would  best
promote  the  cause  and  kingdom  in
which  we  are  all  engaged.  It  seems
as  though  the  Territory  was  en-
larging and  the  places  fit  for  the
habitations  of  men  were  becoming
more  numerous,  and,  as  the  people
have  frequently  been  told,  that  when
they  began  to  crowd  together,  other
places  would  open  and  fountains  of


PACILITIES  IN UTAH FOB  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


145


water  spring  up,  sufficient  for  the  in-
creasing  wants  of  this  people.  We
now  feel  that  it  is  so — that  the  places
are  multiplied — that  fertile  spots  and
fountains  of  water  are  springing  up
and  being  discovered  in  these  valleys
of  the  mountains  for  the  habitations
of  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God.

This  land  is  choice  above  all  other
lands  for  the  Saints  of  God,  for  there
is  no  other  land  that  I  know  of  by
travel,  by  description,  or  by  report,
that  combines  so  many  and  such
great  facilities  and  advantages  to
benefit  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High.
Here  can  be  produced  the  things  that
are  necessary  for  the  comfort  and
benefit  of  man;  and  with  these
elements  that  have  lain  dormant  so
long  is  combined  the  blessings  of  the
most  secure  places  and  the  most
formidaLle  barriers  against  interrup-
tions from  any  foreign  foe.  I  feel
every  time  I  think  of  it,  as  1  stated
south,  that  every  mountain  ridge,  the
wide  and  extended  plains,  and  even
sage  brush,  I  look  upon  as  a  friend  to
the  Saints,  and  that  they  are  thrown
aroajiij^bem  as  an  insurmountable
barriepfl^gainst  those  who  desire  the
overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth*  But  here  we  are,
.where  can  we  draw  from  the  elements
flhose  things  that  we  need— where  we
are  protected  from  those  that  seek
our  overthrow  and  destruction.

The  Lord  our  God  has  dune  this,
and  has  brought  this  people  to  it.
Here  is  a  land  prepared  for  us,  where
we  can  build  and  inhabit,  multiply
and  increase,  and  become  a  great  and
a  mighty  people.  My  heart  has  re-
joiced when  I  have  reflected  upon
those  things — when  I  have  reflected
and  looked  at  the  facilities  put  into
our  hands  for  the  improvement  and
advancement  of  this  people.  The
olive,  th#  cotton,  and  all  those  things
which  come  from  warm  climates,  can
be  raised  in  abundance.  The  soil  is
very  rich,  light,  and  loose,  and  snit-

Kft  10.


able  for  the  growing  of  those  fine
provisions  and  commodities  of  life
that  are  grown  in  southern  localities,
such  as  indigo,  tobacco,  cotton,  and
many  other  articles  that  cannot  be
raised  in  this  northern  part  of  the
Territory  ^  they  can  be  cultivated  in
great  abundance  in  the  southern
portions  of  Utah.

It  will  not  do  to  abuse  it  like  we
do  heavier  soils  :  it  is  light  and  will
easily  waste  away;  but,  if  properly
cultivated,  it  will  produce  very
abundantly.  It  is  not  so  well  adapted
to  wheat  as  the  soil  in  this  and  the
other  northern  counties.  The  willow,
if  planted  alive  like  fence  stakes,  will
grow  like  a  hedge,  and  make  a
beautiful  appearance.  That  country
is  also  very  suitable  for  the  peach
culture.  True,  we  can  raise  very
good  ones  here,  but  the  climate  is  far
more  suitable  in  Washington  County,
Apricots  also  do  well  there,  and
apples  and  plums  come  to  maturity
very  early.  Take  that  in  connection
with  this  part  of  the  Territory,  and
see  what  we  can  do.  We  can  raise
the  flax,  the  pork,  the  beef,  and  the
sheep,  and  we  can  get  up  an  exchange
of  commodities  with  the  people  in
the  southern  settlements,  and  furnish
them  the  things  which  they  cannot
produce  so  easily,  and  in  exchange
receive  what  they  have  to  dispose  of,
and  thereby  establish  an  international
trade  between  the  people  of  the  north
and  south  in  this  Territory.

It  will  not  be  long  before  there  will
be  a  string  of  towns  and  villages  on
each  side  of  the  present  settlements
of  this  Territory,  from  Skull  Valley
on  the  west  to  the  Sevier  Lake,
Lower  Beaver,  and  the  sink  of  Coal
Creek  to  the  Mountain  Meadows ;  on
the  east,  from  the  head  waters  of  the
Rio  Virgin  to  the  head  waters  of  the
Sevier,  and  by  way  of  Sanpete  to  the
head  of  the  Frovo,  Weber,  and  Bear
Rivera,  and  to  Cache  Valley,

There  is  land  and  locations,  with

Vol.  IX,


14G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES-


water  privileges  in  abundance,  and
then  we  are  finding  more  continually :
tbe  people  are  extending  their  settle*
mcnts  on  all  sides,  making  a  com-
plete cord  of  settlements  on  the  cast
and  west  of  our  present  locations.

It  rejoices  my  heart  to  see  Zion
spread  herself  abroad  in  these  valleys
of  the  mountains — to  see  her  lengthen-
ing her  cords  and  strengthening  her
stakes.  What  else  rejoices  me  ?  It
rejoices  and  makes  glad  my  heart  to
see  that  righteousness  predominates
in  the  midst  of  the  Saints  of  Un-
living God.  This,  I  am  happy  to  say,
is  the  case,  although  there  are  some
who  do  very  little  towards  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God,  while  there
are  many  that  do  things  towards
building  up  the  Devil's  kingdom ;  but
this  is  not  as  it  should  be.  We  have
come  here  to  get  rid  of  doing  that ;
we  have  come  to  establish  peace  and
righteousness  upon  the  earth;  we
have  come  here  because  the  Lord
wanted  us  and  all  his  people  to  form
a  nucleus  where  his  chosen  ones  could
rally  round  and  build  up  a  kingdom.

All  nations  are  in  darkness  and  are
corrupt  before  the  Lord,  and  he  has
set  his  hand  to  establish  a  kingdom
that  shall  be  righteous — to  esiablish
the  principles  of  truth  and  virtue,
that  will  form  a  nucleus  for  his  king-
dom, which  we  have  so  much  desired
to  see  in  our  day  and  generation.
This  is  the  nucleus  in  these  valleys
of  these  mountains. The  Lord  has


done  everything  upon  his  part  that
seems  to  be  necessary.  I  do  not
know  what  more  he  could  have  done,
but  he  is  willing  all  the  time  to
help  us.  '  ■

Those  who  profess  to  he  Saints  of
the  Most  High  God — those  whom  he
has  chosen  to  guide  and  dictate  his
people  are  the  men  that  we  should
uphold  by  our  faith,  prayers,  and
means.  The  Lord  has  said,  "  Here  is
the  land  which  I  have  preserved  for
my  Saints,  and  here  is  my  servant
Brigham  whom  1  have  appointed:  he
will  preside  over  you;  he  will  lead
you.**  Therefore  let  us  abide  the
counsels  he  imparts  unto  us,  and  go
to  and  develop  the  resources  of  this
land ;  and  in  doing  this  in  righteous-
ness before  the  Lord  we  build  our-
selves up  temporally  and  spiritually,
and  the  principles  we  have  so  dearly
loved  will  be  sustained.

Let  us  be  united  arid  go  forth  at
the  word  as  we  shall  be  dictated  to  do,
and  let  us  drop  everything  that  js  tho
least  displeasing  at  the  sound  of  our
President's  voice.  Inasmuch  as  we
have  done  wrong  heretofore,  let  us  do
it  no  more,  but  let  ns  get  hold  of  the
same  spirit  by  which  he  is  actuated.
Let  us,  then,  follow  our  leader,  and  not
pursue  any  other  path ;  for  he  that
followeth  nut  with  us  scattcreth
abroad.

May  the  Lord  bless  us  and  enable
us  to  live  our  religion,  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


ETERNAL  PUNISHMENT  "  MORMONISM,"  ETC-  147


ETERNAL  P17XISHME2TT — "  MORMONISM,"  Ac.


Remarks  by  President  Brig  ham  Young,  made  in  the  Tah&rnacle,  Great  St

Lake  City,  January  12,  1862.


in:i>m?n:h  nv  o,  i\  watt.


In  the  early  history  of  this  Church,
our  public  speakers,  through  their
traditions,  did  not  like  to  have  their
errors  in  doctrine  corrected.  It  hurt
their  feelings  to  be  instructed  and
enlightened  for  the  furtherance  of
knowledge  and  wisdom,  I  am  happy
to  say  that  now  the  Elders,  almost
universally,  are  willing  to  be  in-
structed in  the  truth.  It  is  their
delight  to  receive  intelligence  and
knowledge  that  pertain  to  the  heftvena
and  the  earth — the  plan  of  salvation.

Many  of  the  Elders  say  that  they
are  timid  and  embarrassed  when  they
attempt  to  speak  before  the  congre-
gated people,  and  are  unable  to
express  the  rich  ideas  and  glorious
principles  suggested  to  their  minds.
I  frequently  feel  anxious  to  help
them,  and  tell  for  them  what  they
would  communicate.  When  they  are
at:  work  in  their  shops  or  in  their
fields,  or  when  going  up  the  kanyons
for  wood,  (if  their  cattle  behave
well,)  in  their  reflections,  they  preach
many  excellent  sermons ;  but  when
they  try  to  make  their  secret  thoughts
audible  before  a  congregation,  their
thoughts  desert  them  and  they  are  left
a  blank.

Brother  Jackman's  mind  led  him
to  praise  and  thank  the  Lord
Almighty  for  one  principle  he  re-
vealed through  Joseph  the  Prophet,
different  from  that  generally  believed
and  taught  among  religionists.  They,
you  understand,  condemn all  who


Ml

differ  from  their  "flews  to  hell,  there


to  remain  in  a  state  of  the  most
acute  consciousness  of  the  most
extreme  suffering  throughout  endless
eternities,  without  one  single  ray  of
hope  that  will  ever  be  delivered.
Brother  Jackman  wished  to  apeak  on
this  point,  but  his  heart  failed  him.
The  Lord  says,  through  Joseph
Smith,  "  Again,  it  is  written  eternal
damnation;  wherefore  it  is  more
express  than  other  scriptures,  that  it
might  work  upon  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men,  altogether  for  my
name's  glory ;  wherefore  I  will
explain  unto  you  this  mystery,  for  it
is  mete  unto  you  to  know  even  as
mine  Apostles,  I  speak  unto  you
that  are  chosen  in  this  thing,  even  as
one,  that  you  may  enter  into  my  rest ;
for,  behold,  the  mystery  of  godliness,
how  great  is  it  ?  for,  behold,  I  am
endless,  and  the  punishment  which  is
given  from  my  hand  is  endless
punishment,  for  Endless  is  my  name ;
wherefore —

Eternal  punishment  is  GocTs  punishment ;
Endleas  punishment  ia  GodT*  punishment."

The  punishment  of  God  is  God-
like. It  endures  forever,  because
there  never  will  be  a  time  when
people  ought  not  to  be  damned,  and
there  must  always  be  a  hell  to  send
them  to,  How  long  the  damned
remain  in  hell,  I  know  not,  nor  what
degree  of  suffering  they  endure.  If
we  could  by  any  means  compute  how
much  wickedness  they  are  guilty  of,  it
might  be  possible  to  ascertain  the
amount  of  suffering  they  will  receive


They  will  receive  according  as  their
deeds  have  been  while  in  the  body.
God's  punishment  is  eternal,  but  that
does  not  prove  that  a  wicked  person
will  remain  eternally  iu  a  state  of
punishment.  !

All  the  doctrines  of  life  and  sal-
vation are  as  plain  to  the  understand-
ing as  the  geographical  lines  of  a
correctly  executed  map.  This  doc-
trine, revealed  in  these  latter  times,  is
worthy  the  attention  of  all  men.  It
gives  the  positive  situation  in  which
they  will  stand  before  the  Heavens
when  they  have  finished  their  earthly  ;
career.  Generation  after  generation
is  constantly  coming  and  passing
away.  They  all  possess  more  or  less
intelligence,  which  forms  the  founda-
tion within  them  fur  the  reception  of
an  eternal  increase  of  intelligence.
The  endowments  that  human  beings
have  received  from  their  Great
Creator  are  to  them  inestimable
blessings.  How  wonderful  and  how
excellent  they  are!  What  priceless
blessings  and  exquisite  enjoyments
they  secure  to  man,  if  by  truth  and
righteousness  they  are  made  honour-
able in  the  sight  of  God*  By  the
means  of  his  wonderful  and  Godlike
endowments,  man  cmi  drink  at  the
fountain  of  eternal  wisdom  and  busk
in  everlasting  felicity,

But  hundreds  of  millions  of  human
beings  have  been  bom,  lived  out  their
short  earthly  span,  and  passed  away,
ignorant  alike  of  themselves  and  of
the  plan  of  salvation  provided  for
them.  It  gives  great  consolation,
however,  to  know  that  this  glorious
plan  devised  by  Heaven  follows  them
into  the  next  existence,  offering  for
their  acceptance  eternal  life  and
exaltation  to  thrones,  dominions,
principalities,  and  powers  in  the
presence  of  their  Father  and  God,
through  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  How
glorious — how  ample  is  the  Gospel
plan  in  its  saving  properties  and
merciful  designs.  This  one  revela-j
tion, containing  this  principle,  is  |


worth  worlds  on  worlds  to  mankind.
It  is  worth  forsaking  fathers  and
mothers,  sisters  and  brothers,  wives
and  children,  houses  and  lands,  for
the  knowledge  it  reveals ;  and  this  is
but  one  item  in  the  great  plan  of
human  redemption.

I  will  notice  ar: other  idea.  We
frequently  say  M  Mormonism,"  as  it  is
called,  must  be  true  because  there  are
so  many  evidences  in  its  favour.  We
say  we  do  positively  know  it  is  true
(using  the  words  of  brother  Jack-
man,)  u  in  fair  weather ;  but  when  it
is  foul  weather  and  the  storms  beat
upon  our  frail  bark,  some  may  con-
clude it  is  not  true/'  I  wish  you  all
to  understand  u  Uorinonism  M  as  it  is.
We  embraced  it  in  different  parts  of
the  world,  because  we  considered  it
the  best  zeligion  we  could  find.  Can

we  tell  how  much  better  "  Mor-
moiusm"  is  than  other  religions  and
isms*of  the  present  day  ?  More  or
less  truth  uniy  be  found  in  them  all,
both  in  civilized  and  barbarous
nations.  How  ha  ii  f  ran  spired  that
theological  truth  is  thus  so  widely
disseminated  :  ll  is  because  O  i  l  whs
once  known  on  theearth  among  his
children  of  mankind,  as  we  know  one
another,  Adam  was  as  conversant
with  his  Father  who  placed  him  upon
this  earth  as  we  are  conversant  with
our  earthly  parents.  The  Father  fre-
quently came  to  visit  his  son  Adam,
and  talked  and  walked  with  him  ;
and  the  children  of  Adam  were  more
or  less  acquainted  with  their  GbrancU
father,  and  their  children  were  more
or  less  acquainted  with  their  Great-
Grandfather;  and  the  things  that
pertain  to  God  and  to  heaven  were  as
familiar  among  mankind,  in  the  first
ages  of  their  existence  on  the  earth,
as  these  mountains  are  to  our  moun-
tain boys,  as  our  gardens  ate  to'  our
wives  and  children,  or  as  the  road  to
the  Western  Ocean  is  to  the  ex-
perienced traveller.  From  this
source  mankind^have  received  their
religious  traditions,


ETERNAL  PUNISHMENT  "  MORONISM,"  ETC.


I  will  tell  yon  in  a  few  words  what
I  understand  "  Mormonism "  to  be.
Our  religion  is  called  "  Mormonism "
because  the  ancient  records  revealed
to  Joseph  Smith  were  entitled  the
Book  of  Mormon,  according  to  the
instructions  given  to  him  by  the
Lord ;  but  I  will  call  it  the  plan  of
salvation  devised  in  the  heavens  for
the  redemption  of  mankind  from  sin,
and  their  restoration  to  the  presence
of  God,  It  is  contained  in  the  New
Testament,  Book  of  Mormon,  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and  in
all  the  revelations  that  God  lias
hitherto  given  and  will  give  in  the
future.

It  embraces  every  fact  there  is  in
the  heavens  and  in  the  heaven  of
heavens — every  fact  there  is  upon  the
surface  of  the  earth,  in  the  bowels  of
the  earth,  and  in  the  starry  heavens  ;
in  fine,  it  embraces  all  truth  there  is
in  all  the  eternities  of  the  Gods,
How,  then,  can  we  deny  it?  We
cannot .  Were  we  arraigned  face  to
face  with  the  terrors  of  death,  and
called  upon  to  deny  our  religion  or
die,  we  might  speak  a  lie  and  say
"  Mormonism  "  is  untrue,  and  might
continue  the  same  testimony  all  the
time  we  were  in  hell ;  but  that  would
make  no  difference  with  the  truth.
The  devils  and  damned  spirits  in  hell
cannot  deny  the  truth  of  "Mor-
monism" and  speak  thg  truth.  I
wish*  all  those  who  profess  to  believe
it  did  as  much  as  the  devils  in
hell  do. #  ,

"  Mormonism  "  embraces  all  truth
that. is  revealed  and  that  is  nn-
revealed,  whether  religious,  political,
scientific,  or  philosophical.

No  matter  how  many  deny  their
God  and  their  ^religion,  God  is  the
same,  his  holy  religion  is  the  same,
and  all  the  truth  is  the  same.  There
is  no  plan,  no  device,  no  possible  way
in  which  we  can  get  rid  of  "  Mormon-
ism," only  by  taking  the  downward
road which leads to  hell,  until


149

spiritually  and  temporally  the  whole
organized  being  is  dissolved  and  the
particles  thereof  have  returned  again
to  native  elements.  We  read  in  the
Scriptures  of  the  second  death
not  having  power  over  certain  ones*
The  first  death  is  the  separation  of
the  spirit  from  the  body ;  the  second
death  is,  as  I  have  stated,  the  disso-
lution of  the  organized  particles
which  compose  the  spirit,  and  their
return  to  their  native  element.  The
wicked  spirit  will  have  to  endure  the
wrath  of  the  Almighty,  until  it  has
paid  the  uttermost  farthing  where  the
u  worm  dieth  not  and  the  fire  is  not
quenched,"  Every  debt  that  has
been  contracted  by  it  must  be
cancelled,"

I  will  say  a  few  words  in  regard  to
your  belief  in  being  led,  guided,  and
directed  by  one  man.  Brother  Jack-
man  has  said  that  our  enemies  hate
the  fact  of  our  being  led  by  one  man.
Thousands  of  times  my  soul  has  been
lifted  to  God  the  Father,  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  to  make  that  verily  true  in
every  sense  of  the  word,  that  we  may
be  led  by  the  man  Jesus  Christ,
through  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet.
You  may  inquire  how  we  are  to  know
that  we  are  so  led.  I  refer  you  to
the  exhortation  you  have  heard  so
frequently  from  me.  Do  not  be
deceived,  any  of  you;  if  you  are
deceived,  it  is  because  vou  deceive
yourselves.  You  may  know  whether
you  are  led  right  or  wrong,  as  well
as  you  know  the  way  home;  for  every
principle  God  has  revealed  carries  its
own  convictions  of  its  truth  to  the
human  mind,  and  there  is  no  calling
of  God  to  man  on  earth  but  what
brings  with  it  the  evidences  of  its
authenticity Let  us  take  a  course
that  leads  to  the  perpetuity  of  the
natural  life  which  God  has  given  us,
and  honour  it.  Should  we  pursue
this  course  faithfully,  and  never
bestow  one  thought  for  the  life  that
is  to  come,  we  are  just  as  sure  of  that


150  JOURNAL  OF

immortal  life  a:->  we  are  of  tin*  life  we
now  possess.  This,  in  fact,  is  the
only  way  in  which  we  can  be  pre-
pared to  inherit  that  more  glorious
Hfe,

What  a  pity  it  would  be  if  we
were  led  by  one  man  to  ntter  de-
st ruction !  Are  you  afraid  of  this  ?
I  am  more  afraid  that  this  people
hare  so  much  confidence  in  their
leaders  that  they  will  not  inquire  for
themselves  of  God  whether  they  are
led  by  Him.  I  am  fearful  they  settle
down  in  a  state  of  blind  self-security,
trusting  their  eternal  destiny  in  the
hands  of  their  leaders  with  a  reckless
confidence  that  in  itself  would
thwart,  the  purposes  of  God  in  their
salvation,  and  weaken  that  influence
they  could  give  to  their  leaders,  did
they  know  for  themselves,  by  "the
revelations  of  Jesus,  that  they  are  led
in  the  right  way.  Let  every  man  and
woman  know,  by  the  whispering  of
the  Spirit  of  God  to  themselves,
,  whether  their  leaders  are  walking  in
the  path  the  Lord  dictates,  or  not.
This  has  been  my  exhortation  con-
tinually,

Brother  Joseph  W.  Young  re-
marked this  morning  that  he  wished
the  people  to  receive  the  word  of  the
Lord  through  his  servants,  be  dic-
tated by  them,  and  have  no  will  uf
their  own.  I  would  express  it  in
this  wise:  Gud  has  placed  within  us
a  will,  and  we  should  be  satisfied  to
have  it  controlled  by  the  will  of  the
Almightv.  Let  the  human  will  be
indomitable  for  right.  It  has  been
the  custom  of  parents  to  break  the
will  until  it  is  weakened,  and  the
noble,  Godlike  powers  of  the  child
are  reduced  to  a  comparative  state  of
imbecility  and  cowardice. Let  that


DISCOURSES.

heaven-born  property  of  human
agents  be  properly  tempered  and
wisely  directed,  instead  of  pursuing
the  opposite  course,  and  it  will
conquer  in  the  cause  of  light.
Break  not  the  spirit  of  any  person,
but  guide  it  to  feel  that  it  is  its
greatest  delight  and  highest  ambition
to  be  controlled  by  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ;  then  the  will  of  man
becomes  Godlike  in  overcoming  the
evil  that  is  sown  in  the  flesh,  until
God  si  tail  reign  within  us  to  will  and
do  of  his  good  pleasure.
;  Let  all  persons  be  fervent  in
prayer,  until  they  know  the  things  of
God  for  themselves  and  become
certain  that  they  are  walking  in  the
path  that  leads  to  everlasting  life;
then  will  envy,  the  child  of  ignorance,
vanish,  and  there  will  be  no  dis-
position in  any  man  to  place  himself
above  another;  for  such  a  feeling
meets  no  countenance  in  the  order  of
heaven*  Jesus  Christ  never  wanted
to  be  different  from  his  father:  they
were  and  are  one.  If  a  people  are
led  by  the  revelations  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  they  are  cognizant  of  the
fact  through  their  faithfulness,  there
is  no  fear  but  they  will  be  one  in
Christ  Jesus,  and  see  eye  to  eye.

We  shall  not  be  entirely  free  from
sin  for  some  time  yet ;  but  so  long  as
it  is  in  a  state  of  perfect  subjection,
we  are  so  far  sanctified  to  keep  up
tin's  warfare  against  the  power  of  sin
until  we  have  obtained  a  per  lee  t
mastery  over  the  evil  that  is  within
our  organisms,  and  are  able  to  con-
trol it  constantly  until  death  shall
end  the  struggle :  then  shall  we  be
prepared  for  a  glorious  resurrection.
Amen.


OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  COMMANDMENTS  AND  REVELATIONS


Discourse  by  President  Hebeii  C.  Kimball,  made  in  the  Tabernacle ,  Great

Salt  Lake  City*  /otic  19,  1862.

It E POUTED  BY  J. V.  LONG.


Brethren  and  sisters,  you  have  all
heard  what  has  been  said  by  Presi-
dent Young  and  others.  I  can  say
that  I  ncrree  with  them  in  all  those
things  of  which  they  have  spoken.  I
have  been  very  much  annoyed,  ever
since  I  came  into  these  mountains,  by
those  thieves  that  have  been  prowling
around  and  stealing  our  property.  I
cannot  think  what  fathers  are  doing
to  allow  their  children  to  mingle  with
those  who  are  known  to  be  thieves,
thereby  creating  a  propensity  to  in-
terfere with  other  men's  property.
My  father  was  not  a  religious  man,
but  he  always  taught  his  children
good  morals  and  strict  honesty  :  he
also  paid  due  respect  to  the  religions
of  the  day.  He  instructed  them
against  lying,  stealing,  and  every
species  of  vice ;  and  I  presume  that
there  are  not  manv  who  have  been
more  strictly  educated  in  the  prin-
ciples of  morality  than  I  have.

When  people  sent  their  children  to
school  in  those  days,  they  were  taught,
among  other  things,  the  Ten  Com-
mandments. Ther  principles  incul-
cated in  those  commandments  wore
impressed  upon  their  young  and  ten-
der minds,  such  as,  "  Thou  shalt  not
steal.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  any  of
thy  neighbour's  property.  Thou
shalt  not  bear  false  witness/'  These
and  many  other  good  principles  were
strongly  enforced  upon  the  children's
minds,  and  this  prevented  them  from
being  led  astray.  In  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants we  have


these  things  set  forth  in  great  plain-
ness. Read  the  0,  7,  and  S  para-
graphs of  a  revelation,  given  Feb-
ruary, 1831,  which  is  as  follows: —

"And  again,  the  Elders,  Priests,
and  Teachers  of  this  Church  shall
teach  the  principles  of  my  Gospel,
which  are  in  the  Bible  and  the  Book
of  Mormon,  in  the  which  is  the  ful-
ness of  the  Gospel  ;  and  they  shall
observe  the  covenants  and  Church  ar-
ticles to  do  them  ;  and  these  shall  bo
their  teachings,  as  they  shall  be  di-
rected by  the  Spirit;  and  the  Spirit
shall  he  given  unto  you  by  the  power
of  faith  ;  and  if  ye  receive  not  the
Spirit,  ye  shall  not  teach.  And  all
this  ye  .shall  observe  to  do  as  I  have
commanded  concerning  your  teaching,
until  the  fulness  of  my  Scriptures  1x3
given.  And  as  ye  shall  lift  up  your
voices  by  the  Comforter,  ye  shall
speak  and  prophesy  as  seemeth  me
good ;  for,  behold,  the  Comforter
knoweth  all  things,  and  beareth  re-
cord of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.

And  now,  behold,  I  speak  unto  the
Church.  Thou  shalt  not  kill;  and
he  that  kills  shall  not  have  forgive-
ness in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world
to  come.

And  again,  I  say,  Thou  shalt  not
kill ;  but  he  that  killeth  shall  die.
Thou  shalt  not  steal  ;  and  he  that
stealeth  and  will  not  repent  shall  be
cast  out.  Thou  shalt  not  lie  ;  ho
that  lieth  and  will  not  repent  shall  ho
cast  out.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  wife
with  all  thy  heart,  and  shall  cleave


152  jouknal  of

unto  her  and  none  else;  and  he  that
looketh  upon  a  woman  to  lust  alter
her'  shall  deny  the  faith,  and  shall
not  have  the  Spirit;  and  if  lie  repents
not,  he  shall  be  cast  out.  Thou  shalt
Bot  commit  adultery;  and  lie  that
eommitteih  adultery  and  repent eth
not  shall  cast  out ;  but  he  that  has
committed  adultery  and  repents  with
all  his  heart,  and  forsaketh  it,  and
doeth  it  no  more,  thou  shalt  forgive  ;
but  if  he  doeth  it  again,  he  shall  not
be  forgiven,  but  shall  be  cast  out.
Tli on  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  thy
neighbour,  nor  do  him  any  harm.
Thou  knowcst  my  lawn  concerning
these  things  are  given  in  my  Scrip-
tures :  he  that  sinneth  and  repenteth
not  shall  be  cast  out.

If  thou  lovest  me,  thou  shalt  serve
T.ye  and  keep  all  my  commandments.
And  behold,  thou  wilt  remember  the
poor,  and  consecrate  of  thy  properties
for  their  support  that  which  thou  hast
to  impart,  unto  them  with  a  covenant
and  a  deed  which  cannot  be  broken:
and  inasmuch  as  yc  impart  of  your
substance  unto  the  poor,  ye  will  doit
nnto  me  ;  and  they  shall  be  hud  be-
fore the  Bishop  of  my  Church  and
his  Counsellors,  two  of  the  Elders,  or
High  Priests,  such  as  he  shall  or  has
appointed"  and  set  apart  for  that
purpose."  i

In  these  days  people  act  with  their
children  as  if  they  thought  those
wholesome  doctrines  were  done  away,
and  they  are  very  ready  in  their  igno-
rance to  refer  to  Paul's  saying  about
leaving  certain  principles  and  going
on  to  perfection  ;  but  the  true  doc-
trine is  not  to  leave  those  principles
which  we  first  learned,  hut  to  bear
them  in  mind,  day  by  day,  to  do  unto
our  neighbour  as  we  would  wish  him
,  to  do  unto  us,  and  thus  go  on  to  per-
fection. This  is  the  *  law  and  the
prophets.  These  principles  arc  in
force  upon  us  as  much  as  they  are
upon  others.

You  may  go  and  read  the  revela-


DISCOritSES*

I  tions  which  God  gave  through  Joseph
Smith,  and  you  will  there  Snd  re-
peated in  each  of  them  some  of  those
good  old  principles.  From  the  first
organization  of  this  Church  until  to-
day, virtue,  honesty,  and  the  strictest
morality  have  been  taught  in  all  the
revelations  given  through  Joseph
Smith  and  his  successor.  Then,  for
men  to  introduce  those  hateful  prac-
tices of  lying,  stealing,  drunkenness,
and  other  vices  into  uur  midst,  at  the
same  time  professing  to  be  Saints,  I
cannot  but  feel  to  despise  thejr  con-
duet,  if  I  do  not  hate  them.  It  is
taking  a  course  to  defile  this  commu-
nity. The  tabernacles  of  men  be-
come corrupted  by  these  wicked  acts
which  they  perform  while  under  the
control  of  the  evil  spirits  which  dic-
tate them,  and  that  tabernacle  that  is
defiled  I  will  destroy,  saith  the  Lord
God:

These  are  my  feelings  upon  the
subjects  treated  upon  by  President
Young  and  Bishop  Woolley.  As  was
remarked,  I  may  also  ask,  Do  we  fear
our  enemies  in  the  world  :  T  answer,
No.  I  have  more  fear  about  those
corrapt  individuals  who  dwell  in  our
midst.

Let  us  endeavour  to  live  up  to  our
privileges  ;  then  the  world  have
nothing  more  to  do  with  ns  than  they
have  with  the  angel  of  God  whom
they  never  saw.  Know  ye  not,
brethren  and  sisters,  that  vou  are
angels  to  the  present  generation  as
well  as  those  behind  the  vail  ?  You
can  read  in  the  Scriptures  that  the
Lord  promised  to  make  Peter  and
James  ministers  to  his  servant  John,
whom  the  Lord  appointed  to  tarry  on
the  earth  until  Jesus  shuuld  come
again.  If  Jlichael  the  archangel
were  to  come,  he  would  appear  as  did
Peter,  James,  and  John  when  they
appeared  to.  Joseph  Smith,  If  we
are  the  elect  of  God,  we  should  be
among  that  number  who  will  assist
to  gather  the  Saints  in  the  last  days.


OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  COMMANDMENTS,  ETC


153


It  won't  be  done  again  by  angels  that
are  said  to  have  wings,  but  it  will  be
accomplished  by  those  that  have
hands  and  feet,  and  who  travel  about
upon  this  earth.  It  is  for  us  who  are
chosen  to  administer  in  the  flesh,  and
men  behind  the  vail  minister  to  us.

I  feel  really  glad  in  regard  to  what
has  taken  place  of  late — that  those
characters  that  have  been  prowling
around,  annoying  their  neighbours
and  stealing  from  their  best  friends,
have  been  removed  out  of  our  midst,
and  placed  where  they  can  no  longer
afflict  the  righteous.  This  people
know  enough  to  be  righteous,  honest,
pure,  and  virtuous  ;  and  those  who
will  not  practise  that  which  they
know  to  be  good  will  become  habitu-
ated to  folly  and  vice,  just  in  the
same  way  that  men  become  habitu-
ated to  using  tobacuo,  to  stealing,
drinking,  and  tying.

Some  have  tried  to  hide  their
iniquities  by  saying  they  only  stole
from  the  Gentiles  ;  but  I  contend  that
a  man  who  will  steal  from  a  Gentile
will  steal  from  me,  if  he  ever  gets  an
opportunity.  When  the  time  comes
that  the  Lord  says,  44  Arise,  and  to
your  tents,  O  Israel then  men  must
be  pine  inside  and  out  ;  they  must  be
for  God,  or  they  will  have  no  part  in
the  blessings  conferred  upon  the
righteous.  We  sometimes  talk  about
cutting  men  off  from  the  Church-
Now,  I  want  to  know  what  is  the  use
of  retaining  dead  limbs  upon  a  tree.
If  such  limbs  are  allowed  to  continue,
they  impart  death  to  the  branches.
Brother  Brigham  illustrated  this  sub-
ject very  clearly.

We  are  all  connected  with  the  one
tree  ;  and  if  one  member  suffers,  the
others  are  affected.  When  we  get  in-
telligence, it  is  through  the  Father
having  revealed  himself  to  Jesus,  and
Jesus  to  his  chosen  ones  upon  the
earth.  (*  •-a  *  »*'  .

In  the  beginning  of  this  Church,
Jesus  sent  Peter,  James,  and  John,


who  committal  the  power  unto
Joseph ;  and  then  he  engrafted  it  into
us.  Hut  suppose  the  graft  die,  like
many  which  we  put  inio  trees,  then
we  have  to  cut  out  the  graft  and  put
in  a  new  one,  that  the  tree  may  thrive
and  prosper.

When  I  see  dishonesty  among  this
le,  I  feel  sorrowful.  If  I  find
men  out  once,  I  will  have  nothing  to
do  with  them  afterward  ;  and  there  is
no  law  in  heaven  or  on  the  earth  that
requires  me  to  mingle  with  them  ;  but
I  am  required  to  cleave  to  every
honest,  virtuous,  and  truthful  man*
This  is  the  nature  of  the  religion  of
Jesus  Christ,  which  is  the  power  of
God  unto  salvation.  *

Brethren,  if  any  of  us  have  erred
in  the  past,  let  us  do  better  in  tho
future.  Let  those  who  have  done
wrong  do  wrong  no  more.  Let  us
cast  out  all  hatred,  malice,  and  bad
feelings  from  our  hearts.  We  are
very  subject  to  be  charged  with  false-
hood— to  get  wrong  impressions  con-
cerning our  brethren.  Although  we
may  be  men  of  <  it .■  1,  judges  in  Israel,
and  have  a  right  to  the  power  which
will  enable  us  to  judge  between  truth
and  error,  the  man  that  tells  the
truth  and  him  that  striveth  to  deceive,
still  we  are  apt  and  liable  to  be  mis-
taken and  to  receive  false  impulsions.
For  instance,  we  think  a  great  deal  of
our  children  and  of  our  wives,  and  we
are  apt  to  believe  them  in  preference
to  men  of  God  ;  and  in  this  way  we
become  charged  with  false  impressions
concerning  our  brethren.  We  should
be  very  careful  how  we  receive  the
report  of  one  person  concerning
another,  especially  if  that  report  Iks
unfavourable.  Brethren  and  sisters,
it  is  our  duty  to  tell  the  truth  and  to
let  laisehood  and  misrepresentation
alone.  These  are  my  sentiments  and
feelings ;  and  if  ever  I  have  gone  con-
trary to  this,  I  have  gone  wrong.

This  is  a  doctrine  you  all  believe
in,  as  well  as  L You  came  here


154  „  J0UBNAL  OF

with  the  feeling  in  jour  hearts,  "  If  I
can  see  a  people  living  thus  and  so,
all  will  be  right"  Bat  I  want  to
know  what  it  is  to  you  or  me  whether
another  person  does  right  or  wrong.
It  is  for  as  to  do  right,  and  never  to
goffer  ourselves  to  be  caught  in  a
snare,  or  walking  in  the  path  of  the
ungodly*  It  matters  not  whnt  an  other
does,  we  should  honour  the  Priesthood
and  work  righteousness  all  the  day
long.  This  is  the  duty  of  every  man
in  the  Priesthood  and  every  member
in  this  kingdom;  then  all  will  go  well


DISCOURSES*

with  Israel,  and  our  enemies  will  have
no  power  over  us.  The  world  may
combine  against  us,  but  the  unalter-
able decree  of  the  Almighty  has  gone
forth — "  I  will  fight  your  battles/'
Have  we  not  proven  this  r  Yes,  we
have ;  and  we  shall  prove  it  again  and
agaim

God  bless  the  upright,  ihe  humble,
the  pure,  the  poor,  and  the  meek  of
his  people  j  and  may  the  time  soon
come  when  his  kingdom  shall
triumph,  and  Jesus  reign  Iving  of
kings xand  Lord  of  lords.  Amen.


EVIL  DEEDS  AND  EVIL  DOERS,  &c.

Remarks  by  President  Brioham  Young  made  in  tlie  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  January  19,  1862,


UK  POUTED  BY G.  D,  WATT.


I  was  sorry  for  an  ex]  ssion  made
by  one  of  our  officials  in  relation  to
the  late  killing  of  three  thieves.  He
considered  that  they  were  dealt  with
by  mob  violence.  Our  officers  of  the
law  are  provided  with  means  to  de-
fend themselves  against  those  who
would  slay  them.  The  three  persons
that  were  lately  killed  were  notorious
thieves,  and  resisted  the  officers  in  the
discharge  of  their  duty.  I  thank  God
that  our  officers  will  not  sutfer  them-
selves to  be  shot  down  by  notorious
scoundrels-  [The  congregation  said
"Amen."]  If  there  are  any  who
sympathize  with  thieves,  I  want  to
know  who  they  are,  and  let  them  be
cut  off  from  the  Church,  There  has
been  enough  said  to  such  characters,
and  they  must  quit  such  practices.
I  say,  If  they  will  not  reform,  I  wish


they  would  resist  the  officers,  and
then  there  is  an  end  of  them  and  of
their  depredations  upon  the  honest
citizens  of  Utah.

The  best  people-  in  the  world  are  in
this  Terr  itory,  and  yet  there  is  not
another  community,  according  to  our
numbers,  so  infested  by  thieves  as  we
are.  Their  depredations  are  perpe-
trated with  such  impunity  and  bare*
faced  effrontery  that  it  is  almost  im-
possible for  me  to  kiep  a  decent
handkerchief.  Some  women,  when
they  come  into  my  house  to  work,  if
they  can  steal  a  few  handkerchiefs  or
pillow-cases,  or  this  or  that,  and  make
up  a  small  bundle,  they  sack  it  and
go.  If  you  should  leave  an  axe,  a
waggon-wheel,  a  spade,  or  anything
of  that  kind  in  the  kanyon,  when  you
go  for  it,  it  has  been  stolen.


EVIL  DEEDS  AND  EVIL  DOERS,  ETC


155


I  have  no  fellowship  for  a  man
that  will  bail  out  a  thief,  for  he  will
go  to  stealing  as  soon  as  he  is  out.
Talk  about  a  thief  s  keeping  company
with  a  girl !  If  there  is  a  woman  in
this  Territory  that  would  keep  com-
pany with  such  an  infernal  scoundrel,
I  hope  she  will  speedily  make  her
exit  to  some  other  country.

Let  the  people  in  this  Territory  be
righteous,  and  we  are  safe  from  all
the  powers  of  Satan  and  from  all  the
evil  powers  of  this  earth.  But  for
thieves,  cut-throats,  liars,  adulterers,
and  every  foul  and  wicked  person
that  can  be  brought  out  to  mingle
with  this  community,  I  am  sick  and
tired  of  it.  It  is  time  to  cleanse  the
inside  of  the  platter ;  and  "if  a  United
States'  official  says  it  is  mob  law,  let
him  say  so  until  he  is  tired.  We  will
teach  men  not  to  resist  the. officers  in
this  Territory  while  they  are  in  the
discharge  of  their  duty ;  and  let  me
here  say  to  the  Presiding  Bishop,  If
he  knows  of  any  Bishop  who  sym-
pathizes with  those  thieves  who  have
infested  our  community,  report  him,
and  we  will  remove  him.  And  I  say
to  the  Bishops,  If  you  find  any  in
your  Wards  who  sympathize  with  a
person  who  has  been  guilty  of  high-
way robbery,  and  has  fallen  by  the
hand  of  justice,  try  them  for  their

fellowship,}

I  mourn  not  that  a  thief  is  killed,
but  that  any  human  being  would
so  far  debase  himself  as  to  become  a
mean,  low,  degraded  thief.  No  mat.
ter  if  it  is  your  husband,  your  father,
your  brother,  your  ch  ild, — if  he  sho  uld
fall  by  the  hand  of  justice  for  steal-
ing and  resisting  the  officers  of  the
law  tii  persist  in  wickedness,  have  no
sympathy  for  the  fivil-doer.  If  any
of  my  Amily  should  be  guilty  of
stealing,  I  shall  request  them  to  leave
my  house,  never  to  enter  it  again.  I
would  not  cover  over  their  iniquity,
but  I  would  expose  it  and  deal  with
the  sympathizer,  should  they  by  the


strong  arm  of  justice  be  levelled  to
the  dust.  I  would  disown  them.  If
a  child  or  relative  of  mine  forsakes
the  Gospel,  the  holy  Priesthood,  his
God,  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  fare-
well to  that  child  or  relative,
whether  near  or  distant.  I  own
none  as  relatives,  only  those  who  love
and  serve  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus
Christ.  All  that  belong  to  my
Fatlier's  house  J  own.  I  love  them,
I  delight  in  their  society,  no  matter
whethei  they  are  poor  or  rich,  learned
or  unlearned,  if  they  observe  the  laws
of  the  kingdom  of  God  and  live
according  to  it.

As  brother  Cox  observed  this
morning,  let  us  be  sure  to  build  up
the  kingdom  of  God,  for  in  doing
this  we  build  up  ourselves.  L  In  the
early  history  of  this  Church,  Joseph
Smith  was  accused  of  being  a  specu-
lator. So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I
never  denied  being  a  speculator;  for,
in  one  sense  of  the  word,  it  is  one  of
the  greatest  speculations  ever  entered
into  by  man.  In  building  up  the
kingdom  of  God,  I  am  decidedly  for
self,  and  so  are  you.  If  you  wish  to
obtain  wealth,  power,  glory,  excel-
lency, and  exaltation  of  every  kind,
be  for  God  and  truth,  and  he  will
give  to  you  more  than  your  hearts  can
conceive  of.  We  are  not  going  to  be
satisfied  with  a  few  paltry  picayunes.
flYe  are  not  going  to  be  satisfied  with
a  mere  pre-emption  right  on  the  soil
in  this  Territory,  Should  the
Government  grant  to  every  head  of  a
xuimi\  six  hundred  and  forty  acres  of
land,  and  to  eaoh  wife  and  child  their
portion,  as  was  done  in  Oregon
Territory,  that  would  give  to  me  and
to  my  sons  and  daughters  quite  a
scope  of  country,  and  the  whole  people
would  swallow  up  all  the  land  in  this
Territory.  But  shall  we  be  satisfied
with  that  ?  I  am  going  to  have  a
larger  pre-emption  than  the  Territory
of  Utah.  In  a  few  years  this  Terri-
tory will  not  contain  my  own  posterity.


156


JOUHXAi  OF  DISCOURSES.


In  twenty  years  from  now  this  spa-
cious hall  will  not  hold  them,  and  in
twenty  years  more  they  will  more
than  fill  this  Territory.  I  cannot  put
up  with  this  small  possession,

I  have  always  said  to  the  thieves,

  tf  ___

Wait  tmtil  I  U 11  you  to  steah  The  first
thing  I  mean  to  take  is  the  State  of
Missouri,  and  then  I  shall  not  be
satisfied.  Next,  I  shall  want  the
S  rate  of  111  All  this  Territory,

Missouri,  and  Illinois  are  not  going
to  be  sufficient  territory  for  Heber
and  me,  to  say  nothing  of  brothers
"Weils,  Taylor,  Woodmfl,  and  all  the
faithful  brethren,  "  Fur  thy  waste
and  thy  desolate  places  and  the  land
of  thy  destruction  shall  even  now  be
too  narrow,  by  reason  of  the  inhabit-
ants; and  fiiey  that  swallowed  thee
up  shall  be  far  away.  And  the  chil-
dren which  thou  shalt  have,  after
thou  hast  lost  the  other,  shall  say
again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too
strait  for  me:  give  place  to  me  that
I  may  dwell.  Enlarge  the  place  of
thy  tent,  and  let  them  stretch  forth
the  curtains  of  thine  habitations;
spare  not,  lengthen  thy  cords,  and
strengthen  thy  stakes  ;  for  thou  shalt
break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on
the  left,  and  thy  seed  si  mil  inherit  the
Gentiles  and  make  the  desolate  cities
to  be  inhabited."  In  fine,  I  am  not
going  to  be  satisfied  until  the  Saints
possess  the  whole  earth  to  the  glory  of
God.  There  is  no  way  to  glorify  our
God  and  Father  but  to  glorify  our-
selves ;  and  there  is  no  way  to  hap-
pify  and  glorify  ourselves,  only  by
keeping  his  commandments.  Let  lis
be  one  wit  h  the  Father,  with  the  Son,
and  with  one  another,  being  of  one
heart  and  of  one  mind.

Do  not  steal  a  horse,  for  it  costs
more  to  hide  it  than  it  is  worth.  Do
riot  steal  Governor  Dawson's  blankets
and  beaver  robe.  I  understand  that
the  officers  have  found  the  stolen
blankets  and  robe.  Those  thieves
also  stole  some  eight  hundred  dollars


in  money  from  a  hard-working  man.
I  hope  the  officers  will  also  find  that.
The  officers  have  been  diligent  in  ar-
resting the  marauders  and  in  re-
covering the  stolen  property ;  but  I
wish  it  distinctly  understood  that  this
has  been  done  solely  to  magrify  the
law  in  the  preservation  of  rights.

One  of  our  friends  tells  us  that  he
is  afraid  we  shall  have  trouble.  I  told
him  that  we  were  not  afraid  of  it  in
the  least,  so  long  as  we  serve  God  and
and  keep  his  commandments.  The
Lord  has  already  once  overruled  the
great  power  and  supreme  excellency
of  the  military  skill  of  those  who
were  enemies,  aisd  caused  them  to
waste  their  strength  in  walking  up
and  down  Hani's  Fork,  and  to  eat
mule  meat  to  sustain  their  lives,  and
and  placed  them  in  a  constant  state
of  fear  and  dread.  They  saw  a  few
men  in  the  mountains  cutting  fence
poles,  or  firewood,  and  they  dared  not
send  out  a  company  to  guard  in  the
money  that  was  sent  to  pay  them.
14  Come  in,"  cried  the  officer,  M  for
God's  sake;  for  the  Mormons  are
around."  J  .

It  is  said  that  one  of  the  members
of  Congress,  confident  of  the  great
military  ability  of  the  officers  arid  the
bravery  of  the  army  they  commanded
at  Bull's  Run,  rode  out  in  his  buggy,
expecting  to  shout  with  the  rest  in
the  exultations  of  victory.  Accord-
ing to  report,  this  member  of  Con-
gress was  a  brave  man,  tied  his  horse
at  a  respectable  distance,  and  re-
paired to  an  eminence  to  see  the  fight.
When  the  "  Booby  Run  "  commenced,
he  made  for  his  buggy,  but,  to  his
consternation,  found  it  appropriated.
Now  this  member  of  Congress  was
not  only  brave,  but  fleet  on  foot ;  for  it
is  said  that  he  arrived  in  the  city  of
Washington  an  hour  and  thirty
minutes  before  his  horse  and  buggy.
He  won  laurels  at  what  I  call  the
u  Booby  Run."

I  cannot  be  intimidated  by  saying


EVIL  DEEDS  AND

that  there  is  trouble  ahead  for  us
from  the  Government  of  the  United
States,  so  long  as  righteousness  shall
prevail  amuug  the  people  of  God,
even  if  they  should  be  so  unwise  as
to  again  attempt  to  oppress  us.

Let  every  man  in  thitf  Territory  be
a  vigilant  officer,  and,  when  a  thief  is
fonnd  in  the  act  of  stealing,  take  him,
dead  or  alive.  There  is  one  trait  in
our  officers  that  I  delight  in,  and  that
.is,  they  will  not  stand  to  be  shot
down  by  a  set  of  scoundrels.  Let
every  man  be  vigilnnt  to  frown  down
iniquity  wherever  it  shows  itself,  and
sutler  it  not  to  gain  a  foothold  in  our
country.

We  :u-e  about  to  ^institutionally
organize  a  State  Government,  and  to
egaitt  petition  for  admission  into  the
family  of  States,  to  secure  to  our-
selves the  inalienable  rights  of
America.)  ei'izens.  This  we  do  to
please  ourselves  and  our  God.  If  we
can  please  our  I  leavcnly  Path*  r,  our
Elder  Brother  Jesus  Christ,  and  the
holy  angels,  and  the  Saints  that  have
lived  and  died,  aud  please  ourselves
in  righteousness,  we  then  ask  no  odds
of  all  hdll  and  their  abettors.  And  if
armies  are  again  sent  here,  they  will
find  the  road  up  Jordan  a  hard  road
to  travel.  As  for  us,  we  will  honour
and  preserve  inviolate  the  Constitu-
tion of  our  country,  as  we  ever  have.

I  was  lately  looking  over  the  Con-
stitution we  framed  for  a  State  Go-
vernment six  years  ago.  It  is  very
near  as  we  want  it  now.  We  wish  a
Constitution  that  is  Republican,  In
it  treason  is  stated  to  be  one  of  the
highest  crimes  in  any  government,
and  to  consist  in  levying  war  on  this
Stale.  Who  has  done  this?  James
Buchanan  has,  and  so  have  those  who
associated  with  him,  in  sending  an
army  here ;  and  the  very  great
majority  of  the  priests  and  people
said  Amen,  They  are  as  much
treasoners  as  ever  lived  on  this  earth,
and  the  day  will  come  when  justice


EVIL  DOEES,  ETC.  157

will  be  meted  out  to  them.  They
made  war  on  the  loyal  citizens  of  this
Territory;  and  if  they  again  make
war  upon  us,  I  know  not  what  the
Lord  may  do.  We  will  try  to  do
what  the  Lord  wants  us  to  do.

I  am  for  scourging  out  the  ungodly  '
and  all  who  work  iniquity  among
this  people.  If  our  laws  are  not
stringent  enough  to  do  this,  we  will
put  a  little  bayberry  into  the  compo-
sition, or  a  little  oak-root  bark,  to
make  it  a  little  more  stringent.
Those  who  are  against  the  kingdom
of  ( !od  must  sufler.  Those  who  give
way  to  unhallowed  practices  would
destroy  the  kingdom  of  God  from  the
earth,  and  I  disown  all  such,  whether
they  are  of  my  family  or  not  ;  and  I
will  declare,  by-and-by,  that  I  never
knew  them,  as  Jesus  will  also  say.
They  do  not  belong  to  me;  they
are  not  of  my  blood  and  kin.  "  But,
father,  do  vou  not  remember  that  we
w  i  re  born  at  such  a  time  and  in  such
a  place  ?"  No  matter  ;  you  belong
to  another  kingdom;  vou  cannot
come  here;  we  do  not  wish  your
society,7

I  can  toll  all  the  world  that  we
mean  to  sustain  the  Constitution  of
the  United  States  and  ail  righteous
laws.  We  are  not  by  any  means
treasoners,  secessionists,  or  abolition-
ists. We  are  neithfer  negro-drivers
nor  negro-worshippers.  We  belong
to  the  family  of  heaven,  and  we  in-
tend to  walk  ever  every  unrighteous
and  unholy  principle,  and  vipw  every,
body  and  everything  as  it  is  before
God,  and  put  everything  in  its  place.

A  good  housewife,  whether  she
possesses  much  or  little,  will  have  a
place  for  everything  she  has  in  the
house,  and  make  her  house  orderly  „
and  comfortable,  and  ever}* thing
when  wanted  oan  be  found  in  its
place.  So  we  will  adjust  ourselves
according  to  the  lawful  doings  of  the
nation,  and  will  not  secede  from  our
Government  ; neither  will we  bo


158  JOURNAL  OF

traitors  to  Jesus  Christ,  through  un-
godly rulers,  but  will  take  the  privi-
lege to  chasten  them  and  guide  them
into  the  path  of  right,  if  they  will  be
led  therein.  This  we  will  do  fear-
lessly and  perfectly  regardless  of  con-
sequences ;  for,  if  God  is  for  us,  it
matters  little  who  are  against  us.  I
It  seems  that  the  people  ought  to
see  that  the  Lord  dictates,  guides,
and  directs  ;  that  if  a  people  are
blessed,  they  are  blessed  of  the  Lord ;
.and  that  if  we  exalt  him  and  his
kingdom,  love  him,  serve  him,  and
build  up  Zion  upon  the  earth,  we  are
sure  to  be  exalted  and  possess  the
thing  we  desire,  if  our  affections  are
centred  in  God  and  truth.  i;  There-
fore let  no  man  glory  in  man,  for  all
things  are  yours,  whether  Paul,  or
A  polios,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  ot0
life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or


discourses,

things  to  come ;  all  are  yours,  and  yo
are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."

God  bless  the  humble  and  the
righteous,  and  may  ho  have  com-
passion upon  us  because'  of  the  weak-
ness that  is  in  our  nature.  And  con-
sidering the  great  weakness  and  ig-
norance of  mortals,  let  us  have  mercy
upon  each  other.  H^w  it  would  re-
joice my  heart  to  see  the  most  fro  ward,
young  and  old,  in  this  community,
forsake  their  evil  doings  and  seek  to
do  right !  But  if  they  will  not  do
this,  1  cannot  fellowship  them.  My
constant  prayer  is  for  the  Lord  to  in-
crease the  righteous  and .  righteous-
ness in  the  land,  and  waste  away  the
ungodly,  that  the  power  of  the
government  may  pass  into  the  hands
I  of  the  just.  May  God  soon  giant
I  this  sight  to  our  eyes.  Amen.

i


BLESSINGS  EX  JOYED  BY  THE  SAINTS  IN  ZION,  Ac

Discourse  delivered  by  Elder  George  A*  Smith,  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  February  6,  1862.


RETORTED  BY  G. I>.  WATT.


I  desire  to  ofier  a  few  reflections
that  are  now  suggested  to  me  by  the
abundant  blessings  which  surround
us,  I  need  not  say  that  I  have  been
delighted  with  the  remarks  of  our
brethren  that  have  spoken  to-day;
but  I  will  say  that  while  we  enjoy
the  multiplicity  of  blessings  which
now  surround  us,  we  should  remem-
ber the  poor  Saints  that  are  scattered
abroad  in  distant  lands.

It  is  only  a  few  days  since  I  re-


ceived a  letter  from  Bishop  Jacob  G*
Bigler,  who  is  now  on  a  mission  in
Ireland,  He  writes  that  the  brethren
and  sisters  are  very  kind  to  him,  and
feed  him  a  great  deal  better  than  they
are  able  to  feed  themselves.  He
says  they  give  him  meat  twice  a
week,  while  they  cannot  get  it  at  all ;
and  he  feels  thankful  for  the  kindness
manifested  by  the  people  to  him  under
such  extreme  poverty,  and  wishes  me
to  importune  with  the  brethren  here


BLESSINGS  ENJOYED  BY  THE  SAINTS  IN  ZION,  ETC.


159


that  they  mav  be  delivered  from  the
poverty  and  bondage  with  which
they  are  environed.

Not  long  since,  a  letter  was  received  in
Provo  from  Elder  William  ClnfF,  who
isnowlabourinsf  in  Denmark,  He  inci-
dentally  remarked  that  a  sister  sheared
thirty-seven  head  of  sheep  to  get  money
to  pay  the  postage  of  that  letter.

A  few  days  since,  I  received  a  let-
ter from  my  brother  Joh^  L.,  who  is
labouring  in  Switzerland.  It  is
rather  a  hard  country  to  labour  in,
in  consequence  of  the  oppressive  laws
and  variety  of  institutions  of  the
twenty-two  cantons  composing  that
Confederation.  He  says  that  there
are  a  great  many  of  the  brethren  in
that  a  untrv  who  labour  for  ten  cents
per  week  and  their  board,  and  there
is  no  earthly  prospect  of  their  con-
dition being  improved ;  but  every
year  the  oppressive  bonds  that  grow
upon  them  become  tighter  and
tighter.  I  merely  refer  to  these  inci-
dents that  we  may  compare  the  situa-
tion of  he  Saints  in  the  old  world
with  our  own  in  the  fertile  vales  of
IT  tali,  j  Will  we  exert  ourselves  to
relieve  those  brethren  that  are  scat-
tered abroad  ?  We  believe,  ere  long,
that  the  vengeance  of  the  Almighty
will  he  poured  out  upon  the  inhabit-
ants of  t  he  whole  earth .  Peace  h a vi 1 1  g
been  taken  from  the  earth,  men  thirst
for  each  other's  destruction  ;  and  in
their  conflicts  and  destructive  wars,
our  brethren  and  sisters  who  desire
to  emi  lo  these  peaceful  vales

may  be  i  whelmed,  and  have  to  suf-
fer with  the  multitude  of  the  wicked,
unless  we  stretch  forth  our  hand  and
use  our  means  for  their  deliverance.

We  uie  exhorted  this  morning  by
our  President  to  send  back  teams  and
waggons,  and  to  go  ourselves  to  aid
in  bringing  the  poor  and  worthy
Saints  home.  Are  we  on  hand?  Are
we  fully  awake  to  this  important
matter  ?  I  recollect,  last  season,  pas-
sing through  the  settlements  south,


when  I  was  told  repeatedlv  that  the
number  of  teams  called  for  would
paralyze  the  farming  interests.  In
the  same  region,  only  a  few  months
after,  while  passing  through,  they
said,  "  We  have  more  grain  than  we
can  actually  harvest  and  secure  :  we
never  had  such  a  crop  before,"  There
are  thousands  of  our  brethren  abroad
who  are  reduced  to  the  greatest  ex-
tremities, and  as  a  wise  and  provident
people  it  is  our  duty  to  provide  for
ourselves,  and  as  far  as  possible  to  pro-
vide  an  asylum  for  the  oppressed  of
all  nations.

Great  Britain,  *  so  famous  for  po-
litical economists  and  statesmen,  has
planned  so  unwisely,  that,  through  a
family  quarrel  between  the  Northern
and  Southern  States  of  America,  five
millions  of  her  subjects  are  in  danger
of  starvation.  Some  of  them  are
members  of  this  Church.  We  must
plan  differently,  and  combine  the
talent,  enterprise,  and  ingenuity  in
our  midst  to  develop  the  resources  of
our  country,  so  that  outside  compli-
cations cannot  reduce  us  to  starvation
or  deprive  us  of  the  comforts  of  life.
11  The^  wisdom  of  the  wise  shall
perish-  in  the  last  days."  True  wis-
dom in  the  niters  of  a  nation  would
dictate  a  system  of  political  economy
that  would  provide  the  means  of
living  and  sustaining  the  nation
within  itself  as  one  common  family.
When  a  nation  fails  to  do  this,  it
lacks  the  exercise  of  that  prudent
policy  which  makes  the  country  self-
preserving.

We  talk  about  going  to  the  States
to  procure  a  few  articles  which  we
cannot  at  present  produce.  But,  sup-
pose the  people  of  the  States  should
become  as  infuriated  as  tlte  Jaredites,
or  the  Nephites  and  Lamanites  of  old
were,  and  should  fight  and  slay  each
other  as  they  did,  whom  would  yoju  get
your  supplies  from  ?  Who  would
grow  or  manufacture  cotton  for  you,
or  supply  you  with  mill-saws,  scythes,


100


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


axes,  cotton  or  wool  cards,  steel,  or
silks  an  1  satins  ?  We  should  have
to  supply  ourselves  or  go  without
Think  of  these  things,  and  realize
that  the  Lord  has  taken  peace  from
the  earth,  and  is  suffering  the  wicked
to  nlay  the  wicked,  and  that  the  Pro-
phet  Brighani  has  this  day  Mown  the
trumpet  and  warned  us  to  prepare  to
supply  our  own  wants.  "Hut,"  says  a
brother,  "  I  want  to  follow  that  busi-
ness I  can  make  the  most  at."  I  would
manufacture  Qombs,  but  I  can  make
more  by  raising  wheat.  Suppose  all
the  tradesmen  in  the  country  should


do  the  same,  what  would  you  do  ?
No  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  tanners,
or  shoemakers,  but  all  farmers,  and
farming  without  ploughs,  hoes,  and
going  barefoot,  would  soon  be  the
inevitable  result  of  this  policy.  We
must  all  act  our  part,  and  act  it  pru-
dently and  wisely.

I  wished  to  add  my  testimony  to
the  things  you  have  listened  to*  May
the  blessings  of  God  rest  upon  us,  and
give  unto  us  wisdom  and  ability  to
contribute  our  aid  to  make  the  people
of  Zion  self-sustaining.  Amen.


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  he.

Discourse  hj  Wilforh  Woodruff,  deli  wed  in  the  T^hernadc,  Great  Salt
*  Lake  Citij,  Vsmnbcr  1,  l^fJl.

REPORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


I


■FT  *

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  have  been
called  upon  and  requested  to  occupy
a  portion  of  the  time  this  morning,
and  I  can  truly  say  that  I  always  take
pleasure,  when  I  have  an  opportunity,
to  bear  my  testimony  of  the  work  <>f
the  Lord  in  which  we  are  engaged.
I  hope  that  what  little  time  I  may
speak  I  may  be  blessed  with  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  that  I  may  speak
of  such  things  as  will  be  edityii.g  to
you  5  for  there  is  certainly  not  much
advantage  in  talking  to  the  people
for  the  sake  of  occupying  the  time,
unless  it  will  be  beneficial  to  us.

I  know  that  it  is  our  duty  in  this
Church  and  kingdom  to  live  in  such


a  maimer  that  we  may  feel  interested
in  the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  our
Gt:d.  I  reflect  a  great  deal  upon  the
blessings  which  we  are  enjoying  here
in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains/  and
I  often  think  that  I  do  not  fully  prize
the  blessings  the  Lord  has  imparted
unto  me.  When  I  bring  these  things
to  bear  upon  my  mind,  I  realize  to  a
great  extent  the  necessity  of  prizing
the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  bestowed
upon  ine?  and  the  same  duty  devolves
upon  all  the  Saints  of  God.  If  we
can  be  made  to  rightly  value  the
gifts  which  the  Almighty  bestows
upon  usT  we  shall  certainly  r  !  d  ■  -.my
thing  that  is  wrong  ;  we  shall  not


i


walk  where  we  ought  not  to  walk,  but
we  shall  be  devoted  to  the  building
up  of  the  kingdom  of  our  God.  If
our  eyes  were  opened  to  see  things
as  they  are,  we  should  live  and  act
as  men  of  God,  When  my  mind  is
quickened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to
comprehend  the  things  of  God,  I  feel
very  thankful  for  the  light  and  in-
telligence bestowed  upon  me  by  the
Almighty,  I  feel  satisfied  that  our
President  and  leader  would  not  be
inspired  to  reprove  and  correct  us  as
a  people,  as  he  is  often  moved  upon
to  do,  if  we  were  living  to  our  privi-
leges* We  should  not  be  exhorted
to  turn  from  the  course  that  we  are
in  to  some  other,  if  we  were  all  doing
just  right.  But  I  can  say  truly,
brethren  and  sisters,  that  we  are  a
blessed  people;  yes,  we  are  blessed
above  all  other  people  upon  the  earth.
We  have  the  kingdom  of  God  here
with  us ;  we  live  in  a  dispensation
and  generation  in  which  the  kingdom
Las  been  built  up,  and  it  will  be  per-
manently established,  never  more  to
be  thrown  down.  In  this  dispensa-
tion the  Lord  has  anointed  men  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.
In  every  other  dispensation  the
powers  of  darkness  have  in  a  great
measure  overcome  the  kingdom  of
God,  or,  in  other  words,  have  had
dominion, — so  much  so  that  the
kingdom  could  not  live  but  a  little
while.  It  could  not  grow  and  spread
itself  upon  the  earth;  and  finally
that  power  which  was  acting  through
the  agency  of  the  children  of  men,
even  the  holy  priesthood,  was  taken
home  to  God,  and  it  has  remained
there  from  generation  to  generation,
and  the  world  have  been  without
these  blessings  for  many  hundreds  of
years.  This  has  been  the  difficulty
ever  since  the  creation  of  the  world.
Evetn  when  Christ  came  and  estab-
lished the  Gospel  upon  the  earth,  it
was  here  but  a  little  season  before
the  Devil,  the  arch-enemy  of  the
No.  11.


kingdom  of  God,  overcame  those  who
held  the  Priesthood,  so  that  the  Priest*
hood  and  authority  of  the  kingdom
was  taken  from  the  earth,  and  the
Church  went  into  the  wilderness,
leaving  the  people  without  any  in-
spired men  to  say,  This  is  the  way ;
walk  ye  in  it  From  that  time  until
the  introduction  of  the  fulness  of  the
Gospel  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
in  our  own  day  and  age  of  the  world,
there  has  been  no  Peter  gv  Philip  or
any  other  man  to  teach  the  people
the  way  of  life  and  salvation;  but
they  have  had  to  live  by  the  bestf
laws  of  morality  which  they  knew.
Hence  the  division  and  contention
that  has  existed  in  the  sectarian
world.

But  we  have  had  the  privilege  of
living  in  the  dispensation  in  which
the  Lord  has  promised  that  he  would
establish  his  kingdom,  and  perfect  it
ready  for  the  appearance  of  the  Great
Bridegroom.

This  is  the  privilege  that  we  enjoy
as  Latter-day  Saints.  When  the
time  had  come,  according  to  the
decree  of  the  Almighty,  an  angel
visited  the  earth  and  committed  the
Priesthood  to  Joseph  Smith  and
Oliver  Cowdery,  and  gave  them  in-
structions and  a  promise  that  they
should  be  inspired  to  lay  it  before
the  people.  We  have  embraced  this
Gospel,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  en-
lightens our  minds,  so  that  we  com-
prehend,  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty,  those  principles  that  are
necessary  for  our  present  and  eternal
salvation;  and  by  receiving  the
principles  of  life  in  our  minds,  we
were  led  to  come  to  the  Valleys  of
the  Mountains*  We  can  all  now
comprehend  that  this  is  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  our  God  that  he  has
established,  to  remain  forever*  There*
fore,  instead  of  being  given  up  to
those  evil  principles  and  practices
that  reign  in  the  hearta  of  the  children

Vol  IX


162


JOTTBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  men,  we  are  walking  in  the  path
of  life,  and  those  truths  are  now
uppermost  in  our  minds.  We  are
constantly  striving  to  spread  abroad
this  truth,  that  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men  may  be  inspired  to
take  hold  and  help  this  kingdom  to
take  root  and  spread  abroad  until  it
shall  entirely  overcome  that  power
which  has  always  in  past  ages  over-
come the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  a
blessing  to  us,  to  the  whole  house  of
Israel,  and  to  the  Gentile  nations ;
it  is  a  blessing  that  the  world  never
before  have  enjoyed*  It  is  true  that
other  dispensations  have  had  their
Prophets  and  Apostles,  but  they  never
enjoyed  the  privilege  that  we  do  of
having  the  kingdom  of  God  continue
upon  the  earth  until  it  triumphs  over
all  other  kingdoms  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  and  stands  forever.  For-
mer Apostles  and  Prophets  had  the
unpleasant  reflection  that  the  Church
which  they  had  built  up  would  fall
away,  or  be  overcome  by  the  power
of  the  Devil  and  wicked  men,  and
that  when  they  passed  off  the  earth
and  went  behind  the  vail,  they  would
have  to  take  the  Priesthood  with
them,  because  there  would  be  none
living  worthy  to  receive  it  from
under  their  hands.  They  -will  be
crowned  with  the  Saviour  according
to  the  promises,  but  in  their  lifetime
they  never  had  the  opportunity  of
planting  on  the  earth  a  kingdom  that
should  remain  until  Jesus  should
reign  as  King  of  kings  and  £jord  of
lords.  Lucifer  has  gained  possession
of  the  earth  by  overcoming  the
children  of  men;  but  it  does  not
belong  to  him,  although  he  has  had
possession  of  it  for  a  great  many
generations.  I  rejoice  that  the  day
is  dawning  when  the  principles  of
righteousness  and  truih  will  bear  rule
and  bring  forth  fruit,  until  the  king-
dom and  the  dominion  shall  be  given
to  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,  and
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  become


the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  his
Christ.

The  very  idea  of  our  becoming  co-
workers with  Jesus  Christ  ought  to
inspire  every  one  of  us  with  a  de-
termination to  aid  all  we  can  in  the
dissemination  of  those  great  and
glorious  principles  that  are  calculated
to  exalt  the  human  family  from  their
low  and  degraded  positions  to  the
favour  of  God,  angels,  and  men.
This  is  the  way  I  feel  in  relation  to
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  which
we  are  members.

These  blessings  are  above  the
blessings  of  the  riches  and  comforts
of  life  that  we  are  all  seeking  after;
they  are  far  more  valuable  and  more
lasting  than  any  other  blessing  in
this  life.  Man  may  have  earthly
wealth  and  honour,  but  his  life  is  not
his  own  ;  he  has  not  the  power  to
prolong  his  life  one  day ;  and  when
he  dies,  his  honour,  his  wealth,  and
all  that  he  possesses  in  this  life  passes
away.  He  receives  nothing  in  this
world  of  riches  or  honour  that  he  can
cany  with  him;  and,  #±cept  he
stores  his  mind  with  knowledge  and
obeys  the  fulness  of  the  Gospel,  he
cannot  have  the  blessings  of  a  clear
conscience  and  the  comforts  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  The  rich  man,  the
rulers  of  the  land,  the  kings  and
potentates  of  the  earth,  no  matter
what  they  possess,  when  they  die,
they  can  take  nothing  with  them.
They  came  into  the  world  naked,  and
they  go  into  the  spirit-world  as  poor
as  the  poor  man  who  lives  and  dies
in  rags.  Then  all  their  acts  of  great-
ness and  affluence  sink  into  oblivion;
bat  still  the  Lord  may  hold  the
kings,  rulers,  and  potentates  of  the
earth  responsible  for  their  official
acts.

When  an  Apostle,  or  President^
Bishop,  or  any  man  holding  the
Priesthood  officiates,  he  administers
by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ; then  that Priesthood  has


PRIVILEGES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


163


effect-,  and  all  the  blessings  that  a
servant  of  God  bestows  upon  the
children  of  men  will  take  effect  both
in  this  life  and  in  that  which  is  to
come.  If  I  have  a  blessing  given
to  me  by  the  holy  Priesthood,  or  if  I
receive  a  blessing  from  a  Patriarch,
those  gifts  and  blessings  will  reach
into  the  other  world ;  and  if  I  am
true  to  my  covenants  through  this
life,  I  can  claim  every  blessing  that
has  been  conferred  upon  me,  because
that  authority  by  which  they  were
conferred  is  ordained  of  God  ;  and  it
is  that  by  which  the  sons  of  the  Most
High  administer  unto  the  children
of  men  the  ordinances  of  life  and
salvation ;  and  those  official  acts  will
have  their  effect  upun  those  persons
beyond  the  grave  as  well  as  in  this
1 1  fe*  l.'hcfeC

are  the  true  riches:
they  are  riches  that  will  last  to  all
eternity,  and  we  have  power  through
these  blessings,  conferred  by  the
Gospel,  to  receive  oar  bodies  again,
and  to  preserve  our  identity  in
eternity.  Yes,  we  can  clai  n  this  by
virtue  of  the  holy  Priesthood  ;  but
it  is  not  so  in  the  world.  There  is
not  a  priest  in  the  world  that  has
administered  one  of  the  ordinances
of  the  Gospel  since  the  Priesthood
was  taken  away,  because,  properly
speaking,  there  can  be  no  ordinance
of  the  Gospel  administered  without
the  authority  of  the  Priesthood.
Hence  I  say  that,  from  the  time  the
Priesthood  was  taken  from  the  earth
until  Joseph  received  it  again  from
the  angel  of  the  Lord,  there  were  no
Gospel  ordinances  legally  adminis-
tered. I  admit,  however,  that  all
men  will  be  rewarded  according  to
the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  they
will  be  judged  according  to  the  light
which  was  given  to  them.  This  will
be  the  condition  of  all  who  are  not
called  and  ordained  of  God,  notwith-
standing they  may  have  administered
what  they  believe  to  be  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel ;  yet  their  ad-


ministrations will  have  no  effect
beyond  the  vail,

I  When  we  bring  this  subject  home
and  consider  the  difference  between
the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  as  revealed
in  its  fulness  and  purity,  and  being
shut  out  from  the  light  of  heaven,
from  the  revelations  of  the  Almighty,
from  the  administration  of  angels,
and  from  the  voice  of  God,  we  ought
to  prize  our  privileges  and  blessings
as  Saints  far  more  than  we  have  done
heretofore  Mankind  in  all  ages
search  for  happiness;  they  desire
social  and  domestic  peace ;  and  when
they  think  of  the  vast  future,  they
desire  to  participate  in  the  blessings
that  are  spoken  of  as  pertaining  to
that  state  of  existence;  but  they
know  not  how  to  obtain  them,  except
a  servant  of  God  comes  along  and
points  out  the  way  of  life.  We  have
the  way  open  before  us,  and  the  gift
of  eternal  life,  which  is  the  greatest
gift  of  God,  is  promised  unto  us  on
condition  that  we  will  continue  in
well-doing;  but  we  can  attain  to
that  through  no  other  means  than
strict  obedience  to  the  commandments
of  God,

!  I  refer  to  these  things,  brethren
and  sisters,  because  I  think  we  do  not
sufficiently  prize  the  great  responsi-
bility that  we  are  under  to  God  and
to  this  generation*  It  is  indeed  a
great  responsibility  which  the  Lord
lays  upon  a  man  when  he  calls  him
to  the  ministry  and  sends  him  to
declare  to  the  people  that  he  is  com-
missioned to  preach  the  Gospel  and
administer  the  ordinances  by  which
they  can  be  saved,  secure  a  part  in
the  first  resurrection,  and  inherit
thrones  and  dominions  in  the  presence
of  God  and  the  Lamb,  We  have  re-
ceived this  Gospel,  and  many  of  the
Elders  have  gone  forth,  having  been
called  of  God  as  was  Aaron,  and
■  they  have  offered  the  truth  to  the
nations  of  the  earth,  A  few  have
received  the  message,  but  the  vast


164  JOUBTfAL  OP

majority  have  rejected  it#  and  they
are  condemned.  The  Lord  told  Oliver
Cowdery  that  if  he  laboured  in  the
vineyard  and  brought  in  but  one
soul,  his  reward  should  be  great.
Then  consider  how  great  our  reward
will  be  when  you  see  hundreds  and
thousands  gathering  into  these  valleys
every  year — people  who  have  been
brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth
by  the  labours  of  the  Elders  that  are
bow  before  me.  Our  brethren  have
preached  the  words  of  life  to  millions
of  people,  and  many  thousands  have
given  heed  to  their  warning  voice ;
still  they  are  but  few,  compared  with
the  vast  multitudes  who  have  been
commanded  to  repent  of  all  their
Bins,  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
them,  and  have  hands  laid  upon
them  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
We  are  truly  blest  in  the  agency
which  God  has  given  us  to  receive
or  reject  whatever  is  presented  to
us,  but  we  should  remember  that  we
shall  be  held  responsible  for  the  use
we  n^ake  of  the  teachings  of  the  ser-
vants of  God.

It  does  not  make  any  difference
how  the  Lord  makes  known  his  will,
whether  by  the  whisperings  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  the  administration  of
angels,  or  by  his  own  voice ;  it  is  all
the  same ;  and  he  has  told  us  em-
phatically that  his  words  shall  not
pass  away,  but  all  shall  be  fulfilled
which  has  been  spoken  of  by  the
Prophets  since  the  world  began.

We  have  but  a  little  time  to  labour
and  to  exert  ourselves  in  this  king-
dom. Thirty  years  have  already
passed  away  since  the  organization
of  this  Church,  and  we  see  a  numerous
generation  rising  up  before  us  that
have  been  born  in  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.
It  is  almost  a  generation,  according
to  the  usual  reckoning  of  mankind,
since  John  the  Baptist  came  and
conferred  the  Aaronic  Priesthood
upon Joseph  Smith and  Oliver


DISCOURSES*

Cowdery ;  and  the  kingdom  has  kept
growing  from  that  time  to  the  pre-
sent,— perhaps  not  as  fast  as  it  might
have  done  if  all  the  Elders  had  been
as  faithful  as  our  President  has  been;
but  still  it  is  pi ogressing  rapidly,  and
it  is  where  the  Prophet  had  his  eye
upon  when  he  said — "  0  Zion,  that
brin gest  good  tidings,  get  thee  up
into  the  high  mountain ;  0  Jerusalem,
that  bringest  good  tidings,  lift  up
thy  voice  with  strength ;  lift  it  up,
be  not  afraid  ;  say  unto  the  cities  of
Judah,  Behold  your  God!"  How
much  the  Elders  have  talked  of  this
and  of  the  little  stone  cat  out  of  the
mountain  without  hands,  that  was  to
roll  forth  until  it  filled  the  whole
earth. We  are  now  fulfilling  those

  o

predictions.  We  are  planted  here
in  the  mountains  in  fulfilment  of  the
promise  of  the  Almighty.

In  the  early  days  of  this  Church
the  Lord  tc/d  those  who  were  first
called  to  the  ministry  that  they  were
laying  the  foundation  of  a  great
wurk,  but  they  knew  it  not  They
did  not  then  understand  the  nature
of  the  work  to  which  they  were
called ;  still  they  felt,  by  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Almighty,  and  their  minds
were  opened  to  see  that  they  were
called  to  take  part  in  a  great  work —
called  to  a  high  and  holy  calling;
but  still  there  was  a  vail  over  their
eyes,*  so  that  they  could  not  compre-
hend it  in  its  magnitude  and  great-
ness, as  we  now  do.  If  the  Pxophet
Joseph  had  arisen  up  in  1831,  2,  3f
or  even  183 when  we  went  up  to
Jackson  county  in  the  State  of  Mis*
souri, — had  he  then  told  the  people
that  this  Church  would  be  built  up,
and  that  this  people  would  become  a
great  kingdom,  and  that  the  United
States  would,  in  less  than  one  genera-
tion, be  in  the  lamentable  position
that  we  now  find  them,  it  would  have
required  a  stretch  of  our  faith  to  have
believed  him.  Our  minds  were  not
then  open  to  that  extent  that  we


could  fully  comprehend  the  future*
But  we  can  now  see  that  the  words
of  ancient  and  modern  Prophets  are
being  fulfilled,  This  kingdom  is
rising  in  these  Valleys  of  the  Moun-
tains, and  it  will  eventually  spread
itself  abroad  through  the  length  and
breadth  of  North  and  South  America,
We  may  now  look  forward  into  the
great  future  that  lies  before  us,  and
it  will  require  just  as  much  of  a
stretch  of  faith  now  as  it  did  in  the
beginning  to  look  at  the  kingdom  ot
God  upon  the  earth  as  it  is  to  be  built
up  in  this  dispensation,  so  that  the
word  of  the  Lord  may  go  forth  fi  otn
Zion,  the  servants  of  God  be  clothed
with  the  power  of  the  Prieshood,  to
give  counsel  and  to  preside  over  the
nations  of  the  earth,  when  the  king-
doms of  this  world  shall  become  the
kingdom  of  our  God  and  his  Christ.
It  is  our  duty  to  live  in  that  way  that
we  can  have  power  to  unlock  and
comprehend  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  God ;  and  we  have  got
this  to  do  in  order  that  we  may  see
that  the  Lord  is  at  work  among  the
nations  for  his  own  glory  and  for  the
permanent  establishment  of  his  own
kingdom.

We  ought  to  be  enabled  to  under*
stand  that  there  is  not  a  single  law
ihat  has  ever  been  issued  from  the
great  Eloheim  but  what  will  be  ful-
filled to  the  letter,  and  that  not  one
of  those  Prophets  who  have  spoken
concerning  the  kingdom  of  God  in
the  latter  days  and  the  overthrow  of
wickedness  and  establishment  of
righteousness  will  fail  in  their  pre-
dictions in  reference  to  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fulness  of  times.  When
we  look  back  for  thirty  years,  we  can
Foe  the  vast  change  that  has  taken
place.

With  regard  to  Babylon  and  the
wicked  nations  of  the  Gentiles,  I  will
say  that  all  those  things  that  have
been  spoken  concerning  them  will  be
fulfilled. We  profess  to  be  the


165

children  of  God,  the  friends  of  God ;
and  if  the  Lord  has  not  got  some
friends  in  these  the  Valleys  of  the
Mountains,  I  would  like  to  know
where  his  friends  are,  I  have  spoken
upon  these  things,  and  in  reference  to
the  position  we  occupy  before  the
heavens  and  before  this  generation,
that  we  may  be  stirred  up  in  our
minds  and  be  awake  to  our  duties.
If  we  can  be  made  sensible  of  that
which  is  required  of  us  by  our  leaders,
we  shall  go  to  work  and  do  those
things  that  we  know  will  be  for  our
benefit  and  good,  and  for  the  advance-
ment of  the  cause  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth*  If  we  are  faith-
ful through  this  warfare  in  which  we
are  engaged,  we  shall  be  satisfied
with  the  reward  and  with  the  crown
that  will  be  bestowed  upon  us,  and
also  with  the  place  that  we  shall
occupy  when  we  pass  from  this  stage
of  existence.

I  will  say  then,  brethren  and
sisters,  with  regard  to  those  things
we  have  been  exhorted  to  attend  to
by  President  Young  from  day  to  day
and  from  time  to  time,  Let  us  attend
to  them.  He  has  a  desire  to  see  the
people  in  such  a  position  that  will
secure  to  them  the  favour  and  appro-
bation of  the  Almighty.  We  ought
to  strive  to  understand  our  high
destiny — to  learn  the  mind  and  will
of  our  Father  in  heaven,  that  the
heavens  may  be  opened  to  us,  that
we  may  he  filled  with  light,  with
truth,  and  be  clothed  with  the  power
of  God.  It  is  with  this  desire  and
design  that  our  President  calls  upon
us  to  lay  aside  everything  that  has  a
tendency  to  prevent  us  enjoying  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  and  CTr^F^h end-
ing those  great  and  glorious  principles
that  we  are  seeking  after.  We  all
ought  to  make  an  exertion,  when  he
makes  a  request  upon  us,  and  strive
to  lay  aside  all  those  things  that  are
contrary  to  the  principles  of  our  holy
religion;  and  then  we  ought  to  take


PRIVILEGES  OP  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


166


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


hold  with  him  and  back  him  up,  and
sustain  with  him  all  the  authorities
of  the  Church,  striving  at  all  times
to  do  whatever  the  Lord  requires  at
our  hands.  If  we  do  this,  we  shall
be  blest ;  and  if  we  do  not,  we  shall
meet  with  a  loss.  Let  us  strive  to
be  more  attentive  to  our  duties  and
to  listen  to  the  words  of  the  Lord,
remembering  that  if  we  have  not  got
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  with  us,  we
have  not  got  the  power  of  God  with
us.

Let  us  lay  aside  all  evil  practices —
all  those  habits  which  will  prevent
our  communing  with  God.  We  have
not  yet  got  power  to  occupy  a  throue
and  to  govern  according  to  the  laws
of  heaven.  Of  this  we  are  all  .sensible.
Then  if  these  little  things  have  a
tendency  to  hinder  our  enjoyments
and  debase  us  in  the  eyes  of  the
Lord,  we  ought  to  lay  them  f&ide,
and  manifest  a  determination  t<#  do
the  will  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  and
to  accomplish  that  work  which  is  laid
upon  us  to  perform.  When  we  have
any  exhortation  from  those  who  lead
us,  we  should  ever  be  ready  to  carry
it  out,  remembering  that  the  Lord
holds  President  Young  responsible
for  the  way  in  which  he  manages
and  directs  this  kingdom  ;  and  if  we
obey  him,  we  shall  be  blest  and  pros-
pered. But  if  he  gives  us  command-
ments and  we  do  not  listen  to  them,
the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  responsible
for  our  acts.  I  think  upon  these
things  when  T  hear  our  leader  giving
us  commandments  to  do  thus  and  so,
and  I  feel  that  1  shall  lose  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  if  I  do  not  comply.  We
have  got  to  rise  up,  as  a  people,  and
have  the  power  of  God  constantly
w  ith  us,  or  we  shall  not  accomplish
that  which  is  required  at  our  hands;
for  it  requires  faith,  temperance,
purity,  holiness,  and  the  power  of
God  to  be  with  this  people,  in  order


to  fulfil  our  mission  and  perform  the
work  of  God.  When  our  Prophets
and  leaders  command  us  to  do  a
thing,  let  us  obey,  and  then  we  shall
gain  the  victory.

I  have  often  heard  it  remarked,
when  we  have  had  preaching  against
merchandizing,  that  the  next  day  the
merchants  have  taken  three  dollars
to  where  they  had  previously  only
taken  one.  I  hope  this  will  not  be
the  case  with  those  who  make  a
practice  of  drinking  whisky,  and
have  been  counselled  by  President
Young  to  let  it  alone.

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  do  not  feel
that  I  want  to  occupy  much  more  of
your  time ;  but,  before  I  conclude,  I
will  say  that  when  I  do  anything
that  prevents  me  from  enjoying  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  as  soon  as  1  as-
certain that,  I  immediately  throw  it
aside,  so  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may
govern  and  control  me  in  every  act
of  my  life.  We  came  here  to  build
up  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  we
should  feel  the  responsibility  that  is
upon  us.  This  is  our  home ;  and
who  of  us  appreciates  the  blessings
bestowed  upon  us  ?  We  should  ap-
preciate them  a  great  deal  more  than
we  do.  If  we  weie  set  down  in  New
York  or  South  Carolina  for  awhile,
we  should  appreciate  our  home ;  for
here  we  are  not  troubled  with  any  of
the  difficulties  which  they  experience
in  the  States.  We  can  meet  together
and  worship  God  in  peace.  It  is
truly  a  great  blessing  to  be  assembled
in  these  chambers  of  the  mountains.

Let  us  try  to  prove  ourselves
worthy  of  our  high  calling  as  Saints
of  God,  I  pray  that  the  Lord  will
give  us  power  to  lay  aside  every
thing  that  is  wrong,  to  magnify  our
callings,  and  build  up  the  kingdom  of
God.  I  feel  to  ask  this  blessing  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen*


ATTENTION  TO  TEMPORAL  DUTIES, ETC,  167


*


NECESSITY  OF  PAYING  DUE  ATTENTION  TO  TEMPORAL

DUTIES,  &c.

Remarks  made by  President  Brigham Young,  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  January  26,  1862.

REPORTED BY G. D.  WATT.


I  do  not  know  that  I  have  ever
spoken  to  the  Saints  upon  any  prin-
ciple of  the  Gospel  of  salvation  when
I  could  do  more  than  offer  a  few
opening  remarks,  there  is  so  much  to
learn.  The  oldest  and  most  ex-
perienced  persons  in  this  Church  are
satisfied  that  they  have  by  no  means
learned  all  that  is  to  be  learned  con-
cerning things  that  pertain  to  this
world.  To  even  thoroughly  learn  all
the  different  branches  of  mechanism
is  move  than  one  man  can  du  in  this
mortal  life.  The  object  of  this  ex-
istence is  to  learn,  which  we  can  only
do  a  little  at  a  time.  "  Whom  shall
he  teach  knowledge  ?  And  whom
shall  he  make  to  understand  doctrine  ?
Those  that  are  weaned  from  the  milk
and  drawn  from  the  breasts.  For
precept  must  be  upon  precept,  precept
upon  precept;  line  upon  line,  line
upon  line  j  here  a  little  and  there  a
little/'

How  gladly  would  we  understand
every  principle  pertaining  to  science
and  art,  and  become  thoroughly
acquainted  with  every  intricate
operation  of  nature,  and  with  all  the
chemical  changes  that  are  constantly
going  on  around  us !  How  delight-
ful this  would  be,  and  what  a  bound-
less field  of  truth  and  power  is  open
for  us  to  explore !  We  are  only  just
approaching  the  shores  of  the  vast
ocean  of  information  that  pertains  to
this  physical  world,  to  say  nothing  of
that  which  pertains  to  the  heavens,


to  angels  and  celestial  beings,  to  the
place  of  their  habitation,  to  the  man*
ner  of  their  life,  and  their  progress  to
still  higher  degrees  of  perfection.

We  hear  many  glorious  truths  in
the  discourses  delivered  by  our  Elders
here  and  in  other  places,  but  we  re-
turn to  our  homes  and  to-morrow  we
are  about  as  we  were  yesterday.  It
is  our  privilege  to  improve  each  day
of  our  lives,  but  can  we  improve  fast
enough  to  even  gain  all  the  know-
ledge that  pertains  to  this  world  in
the  life  we  now  possess  ?  No  5  but
we  can  gain  knowledge  faster  than
we  now  do,  by  exercising  still  greater
diligence,

When  we  meet  in  a  worshipping
capacity,  we  are  apt  to  feel  anxious  to
hear  something  new  concerning  the
Deity  or  the  place  of  his  habitation.
How  delightful  it  is  to  hear  a  man
expound  the  prophecies — to  hear  the
revelations  of  God  and  things  which
pertain  to  the  celestial  kingdom  of
God  delineated!  How  joyful,  how
pleasing,  how  glorious  this  is  to  both
male  and  female,  old  and  young,  who
seem  to  know  all  about  these  matters,
butwho  at  home  do  not  know  enough
to  make  a  hoe-handle  so  that  yoa
could  tell  whether  it  was  designed  for
an  ox-bow,  plough-handle,  or  hoe-
handle.  And  the  sister  that  rejoices
so  much  in  the  glories  of  the  upper
world,  when  she  is  at  home,  very
likely,  does  not  know  enough  to  pur-
sue  her  daily  avocations  as  she  ought.


168  JOUBNAL  OF

Can  she  teach  her  little  girls  so  much
as  to  knit  a  stocking  tie  ?  No;  but
when  there  is  plenty  of  wool  and
yarn  in  (ho  house,  she  calls  npon  her
husband  to  buy  garters,  suspenders,
Ac.,  from  the  store,  while  her  child-
ren are  running  in  the  streets  with
their  heels  and  toes  naked ;  she  can-
not even  mend  a  stocking  decently*
Can  she  cut  her  little  boy  a  pair  of
pantaloons  ?  No;  a  tailor  must  do  it.
Can  she  make  him  a  cap  out  of  some
old  cloth  that  has  been  worn  in  a
coat,  but  is  good  enough  for  that
purpose,  and  thereby  save  a  few  dol-
lars ?  No;  she  must  plague  her  hus-
band to  spend  means  at  the  store,
when  perhaps  he  cannot  well  spare  it.
Can  she  make  little  shoes  for  her
infant  ?  No,  pa,  buys  all  the  shoes.
She  seems  of  no  manner  of  earthly
use  as  an  helpmeet  to  her  husband ;
yet  it  is  her  greatest  delight  to  know
how  the  funis  live  and  how  the
heavens  and  all  things  are  sustained,
hut  at  the  same  time  is  not  willing  to
move  a  finger  to  sustain  herself.

When  Adam  found  himself  in  a
state  of  nudity,  he  hid  himself;  and
when  he  heard  the  footsteps  of  the
Lord  in  the  garden,  he  quaked  and
trembled  with  fear.  The  Lord  could
do  nothing  more  for  him  than  take
soine  fig-leaves  and  probably  some
grass  to  stitch  them  together  for  an
apron  to  cover  Adam's  nakedness.
The  Lord  could  not  in  a  few  minutes
teach  Adam  how  to  make  broadcloth
and  a  pair  of  pantaloons,  &c, ;  fur  he
had  forgotteu  all  he  formerly  knew,
and  had  to  gain  knowledge  by
degrees.  Can  we  learn  in  a  day  how
to  make  broadcloth  or  satin  and
clothing  or  dresses  ?  No ;  for  it  is  as
much  as  some  persons  can  do  to  learn
hi  one  day  how  to  knit  so  much  as  a
stocking  tie  or  a  pair  of  suspenders.

The  people  are  striving  with  all
their  might  to  learn  the  things  of
God ;  but  if  I  could  only  get  them  to
understand  the  work  and  the  worth


DISCOURSES.

of  their  present  life,  I  should  feel  well
satisfied.  We  talk  and  thhik  a  great
deal  about  the  life  that  is  to  come,
and  the  life-labour  of  the  Christian
part  of  the  world  is  to  prepare  for
that.  The  time  we  now  occupy  is  in
eternity  ;  it  is  a  portion  of  eternity.
Our  present  life  is  just  as  much  a  life
in  eternity  as  the  life  of  any  being
can  possibly  be.  Could  we  all  live
so  as  to  honour  the  life  that  we  now
possess,  I  should  not  have  one
anxious  thought  with  regan!  m  being
folly  prepared  for  the  life  wine' *  is  to
come.  I  wish  to  urge  upon  the  peo-
ple the  necessity  of  knowing  what
to  do^  with  their  present  life,  which
pertains  more  particularly  to  tem-
poralities. The  very  object  of  our
existence  here  is  to  handle  the  tem-
poral elements  of  this  world  and
subdue  the  earth,  multiplying  those
organisms  qf  plants  and  animals  God
has  designed  shall  dwell  upon  it.
When  we  have  learned  to  live  accord-
ing to  the  full  value  of  the  life  we
now  possess,  we  are  prepared  for
further  advancement  in  the  scale  of
eternal  progression — for  a  more
glorious  and  exalted  sphere.

One  of  the  speakers  this  morning
exhorted  us  to  take  care  of  that
which  we  produce.  All  the  energies
of  a  farmer  appear  to  be  drawn  ont  to
raise  wheat ;  but  when  it  is  matured,
he  seems  to  retire  in  satisfaction  that
he  has  accomplished  what  he  sought;
his  energies  flag  and  the  crop  is  not
cared  for,  but  is  left  to  return  again
to  the  earth ;  or,  if  he  gathers  it,  he
either  has  not  the  ability  to  properly
save  and  husband,  it,  or  he  cares  not  to
exert  himself  to  do  so.  It  is  the
same  in  his  stock  raising ;  he  values
his  calves  and  lambs — labours  hard  to
raise  them;  but  when  they  have  at-
tained to  that  stage  of  existence  to
do  good  to  himself  or  the  community,
he  suffers  them  to  die  by  starvation
in  the  winter,  or  to  be  destroyed  by
the  Indians  or  by  somebody  else  who


s


ATTENTION  TO  TEMPORAL  DUTIES,  ETC,


169


gets  his  living  by  stealing  cattle  on
the  ran  fifes.  The  wheat  wasted  this
year,  for  want  of  proper  care,  would
feed  this  whole  community  for  a  con-
siderable length  of  time.  Farmers
do  not  seem  to  think  that  every
kernel  of  grain  should  be  gathered
and  saved  as  far  as  possible.  The
atmosphere  that  presses  upon  the  face
of  our  fields  imparts  nourishment  to
the  soil,  and  the  rains  from  the
heavens  and  the  waters  that  come
dancing  from  the  mountains  and  are
led  over  our  fields  are  laden  with
plant  food,  so  that  we  can  gather
from  this  bench-land  —  from  this
gravelly  soil — thirty  bushels  of  wheat
to  the  acre,  which  does  not  answer
the  end  in  the  economy  of  nature  for
which  it  is  created,  if  it  is  suffered
again  to  return  to  the  ground  unap-
propriated in  the  way  designed  by  the
Almighty*  If  it  is  distributed  in
another  shape  than  that  designed,  the
wheat  element  may  be  entirely  re-
moved to  another  portion  of  the
earth  ;  and  after  a  few  years  you  may
not  be  able  to  raise  wheat  in  this
country.  If  a  single  constituent  part
of  any  plant  be  exhausted  from  the
soil,  the  plant  cannot  be  produced
until  the  wanting  element  is  restored.
Our  Father  in  heaven  wishes  us  to
preserve  that  which  he  gives  to  us.
If  we  are  prodigal  and  wasteful  of  his
blessings,  it  will  be  said — "Take
from  them  that  which  they  seem  to
have;  and  give  it  to  another  people."
We  wish  to  gain  all  that  is  to  be
gained;  we  wish  to  enrich  ourselves;
but,  as  a  people,  in  a  great  many
instances,  we  take  a  course  to  make
ourselves  poor.  If  we  could  only
learn  enough  to  be  self-preserving
and  self-sustaining,  we  should  then
have  learned  what  the  Gods  have
learned  before  us,  and  what  we  must
eventually  learn  before  we  can  be
exalted.  Trace  the  history  of  the
favoured  people  of  God  in  any  age  of
the  world  and  on  any  portion  of  the


earth,  and  you  will  find  that  the  Lord
has  poured  out  great  abundance  upon
them,  he  has  blessed  them  as  in-
dividuals, as  communities,  and  as
nations.  We  have  also  been  greatly
blessed,  but  we  have  treated  lightly
our  blessings  in  neglecting  to
properly  and  frugally  use  them.

That  individual,  neighbourhood,
people,  or  nation  that  will  not
acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  all
things,  but  will  squander  their  bless-
ings, and  thus  pour  contempt  upon
his  kind  favours,  will  become  deso-
late and  be  wasted  away.  So  long
as  any  people  live  up  to  the  best  light
they  have,  the  Almighty  will  multi-
ply blessings  upon  them  by  blessing
the  earth  and  causing  it  to  bring
forth  in  its  strength  to  fill  their  store-
houses with  plenty ;  but  if  they  be-
come fat,  and  are  lofty,  and  kick
against  the  Lord,  and  trample  hig
blessings  under  their  feet  in  reckless
wastefulness,  he  will  cause  them  to
inherit  barrenness,  and  he  will  give
them  "  cleanness  of  teeth  in  all  their
cities,  and  want  of  bread  in  all  their
places."  The  Lord  needs  only  to  say
to  his  angel,  u  Pass  over  the  lard  and
take  away  the  elements  of  wheat "  and
that  crop  ceases  to  be  produced.  This
very  thing  has  transpired  in  the
lands  from  whence  we  hare  been
driven,  and  their  fruit  is  blasted;  in
fact,  nothing  grows  there  in  the  same
abundance  and  perfection  that  it  once
did.  Desolation  is  in  the  path  of  the
wicked.  It  won  Id  have  been  so  with
us,  if  we  had  remained  in  our  former
homes,  and  had  not  lived  to  honour
the  life  God  has  given  us.  In  conse*
quence  of  the  hatred,  malice,  and  dis-
position in  the  hearts  of  the  wicked
to  persecute  his  people,  God  has  so
cursed  the  land  and  blasted  the  ele-
ments that  they  are  not  fruitful.

I  do  not  think  that  T  ever  beheld
anything  in  my  life  more  painful  to
my  heart  and  mnre  distressing  to  my
feelings  than  I  saw  manifested  in  the


4


170  JOXTRNAli  OF

spirit  and  actions  of  this  community
in  the  years  1819,  50,  51,  and  52,  in
the  way  they  trampled  npon  the
blessings  of  God  so  bountifully  be-
stowed upon  them.  Wheat  was  suf-
fered to  go  to  waste  in  a  shameful
manner.  It  was  fed  to  horses,  thrown
to  hogs,  and  trampled  in  the  mud.  I
told  them  they  would  want  bread,  and
they  did.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the
kind  hand  of  God  in  his  merciful
providences  to  us,  we  should  have
suffered  much  more  than  we  did ;  our
sufferings  would  have  been  extreme.
The  Lord  has  poured  out  his  bless-
ings on  the  atmosphere,  on  the  water,
and  on  the  soil  of  this  country.  No
other  people  but  the  people  of  the
Saints  could  have  sustained  them-
selves here.  If  we  abuse  these  choice
blessings,  the  Lord  will  blast  the
fertilizing  elements  with  his  wither-
ing touch,  and  leave  us  desolate.
Let  us  be  thankful  for  what  we  have
in  possession,  and  use  it  exclusively
for  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
the  establishment  of  Zion,  and  the
triumph  of  righteousness  and  truth.
Let  every  penny,  every  dollar,  every
sum  of  money,  large  or  small,  be  de-
voted to  this  all-absorbing  interest,
as  also  every  moment  of  time.  These
are  matters  with  which  we  are  all
acquainted;  they  are  not  l  lysteries
that  are  far  beyond  our  compre-
hension.

Twenty-Sve,  twenty-eight,  and
thirty  years  ago,  our  influence  and
national  character  were  but  small
indeed.  The  image  which  now  pre-
sents itself  is  still  small,  we  admit;
nevertheless  it  presents  a  bold  front
to  the  nations,  and  has  become
worthy  of  their  notice.  We  are  try-  '
ing  to  be  the  image  of  those  who  live
in  heaven ;  we  are  trying  to  pattern
after  them,  to  look  like  them,  to  walk
and  talk  like  them,  to  deal  like  them,
and  build  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven
as  they  have  done.  I  think  that
after  awhile  we  shall  attain  to  the


DISCOURSES.

very  image  and  likeness  of  the  chi1 1-
ren  of  God  who  have  lived  before
us.  This  image  will  increase,  and
grow,  and  spread  abroad,  and  still
expand  in  its  proportions,  stretching
to  the  right  hand  and  to  the  left,
struggling  for  room  on  all  sides,  in
proportion  as  we  are  faithful  and
learn  to  appreciate  the  blessings  we
have  already  received.

Do  we  appreciate  the  blessings  of
this  our  mountain  home,  far  removed
from  the  war,  blood,  carnage,  and
death  that  are  laying  low  in  the  dust
thousands  of  our  fellow-creatures  in
the  very  streets  where  we  have
walked  and  in  the  cities  and  towns
where  we  hare  lived?  If  we  con-
stantly live  under  a  proper  sense  of
the  greatness  of  our  blessings,  the
stone  in  the  mountains  will  soon
begin  to  attain  colossal  proportions
and  roll  with  crushing  weight  upon
the  toes  of  the  u  great  image."

We  have  often  heard  it  said  by  our
Elders  that  all  the  heaven  we  shall
ever  have  is  the  one  we  make  for  our-
selves- How  vast  the  meaning  of
this  simple  sentence!  This  one  say-
ing is  a  text  worthy  for  all  the  holy
beings  in  heaven  and  on  earth  to
I  preach  upon;  it  embraces  a  subject
vast  as  eternity.  We  are  exhorted  t  j
make  our  own  heaven,  our  own  para-
dise, our  own  Zion.  How  is  this  to
be  done  ?  By  hearkening  diligently
to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
that  entices  to  righteousness,  applauds
truth,  and  exults  continually  in  good-
ness. This  Spirit  is  the  companion
of  every  faithful  person  !  Listen  to
its  whisperings,  and  pursue  with
alacrity  the  path  it  points  out.  In
this  way  we  may  all  grow  in  grace
and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,
and  by  so  doing  we  shall  honour  the
life  we  now  possess,  while  by  pur-
suing an  opposite  course  we  disgrace
it  Thib  life  is  worth  as  much  to  us  as
any  life  in  the  eterni  ties  of  the  Gods.
In  that  helpless  infant  upon  its


ATTENTION  TO  TEMPOBAX  DUTIES,  ETC,


mother's  breast  we  see  a  man,  an
Apostle,  a  Saint, — yea  generations  of
men  with  kingdoms,  thrones,  and  do-
minions. Then  the  life  of  that  little
frail  mortal  is  fraught  with  great  and
mighty  results,  and  its  value  is  in-
estimable.

If  this  be  true  of  an  infant,  what
may  we  expect  to  grow  ont  of  this
infant  kingdom  ?  We  may  look  for-
ward to  all  that  belongs  to  greatness
and  goodness,  to  might  and  power,  to
dominion  and  glory.  Then  how
jealously  we  ought  to  guard  the
rights  of  this  infant  power!  How
zealous  and  constant  we  should  be  in
maintaining  its  interests  and  support-
ing its  laws  and  sacred  institutions !
Ko  less  vigilant  should  we  be  in  per-
serving  the  lives  of  our  children,  for
they  are  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
No  pains  should  be  spared,  no  care
omitted,  in  guarding  the  tender  infant
through  the  perilous  hours  of  child-
hood to  maturer  years.  Through  the
inattention  and  ignorance  of  parents,
death  makes  many  victims  among  our
children,  and  they  are  deprived  of
magnifying  their  mortal  life  accord-
ing to  the  designs  of  the  All-wise
Creator*  Numbers  of  our  children
are  earned  off  by  death,  through
want  of  sufficient  promptitude  in
battling  the  destroyer  when  its  in-
sidious approaches  are  first  discovered,
We  have  power  in  a  great  measure  to
prevent  disease ;  and  when  it  fastens
upon  the  vitals  of  our  little  ones,  we
have  power,  faith,  and  means  at
hand,  if  promptly  applied,  to  restore
our  children  to  life  and  health,  to
boyhood,  then  to  manhood,  and  to
honour  and  power  in  Israel.  Yet
we  neglect  our  children,  and  let  them
run  out  in  the  cold  and  wet  They
are  sick  at  night;  nothing  is  done  for
them ;  but  they  are  sent  to  bed  to  lie
all  night  with  a  burning  fever,  and
so  they  are  suffered  to  linger  on  day
after  day,  while  the  Destroyer  is
busily  at  work  consuming  their  lives.


At  length  the  parents  become
alarmed  and  send  for  a  doctor,  who
is  just  as  apt  to  destroy  the  life  of
the  child  as  to  restore  it  again  to
good  health.  We  mourn  over  the
little  fragile  remains  as  we  lay  them
in  the  tomb,  and  comfort  ourselves
by  saying,  "  Thy  will  be  done,  0
Lord;  thou  givest  and  thou  takes t
away  at  thy  pleasure,"  &e.,  when  by
our  ignorance  and  carelessness  we
have  destroyed  the  life  God  gave  to
us  for  a  kingdom  of  glory  and  power,
which  can  only  be  obtained  through
our  posterity.  Prom  this  one  child,
this  Isaac,  could  his  life  have  been
preserved,  nations  would  have  sprung
into  existence,  until  the  multitudes  of
people  through  him  would  have  be-
come as  the  sands  upon  the  sea  shore
for  number.  But  he  is  gone,  and  his
spirit  has  returned  back  to  God,  and
that  is  the  end  of  his  life  upon  the
earth ;  your  posterity  is  cut  off,  and
from  whence  will  you  receive  your
kingdom  and  glory  ?

It  is  to  our  advantage  to  take  good
care  of  the  blessings  God  bestows
upon  us  ;  if  we  pursue  the  opposite
course,  we  cut  off  the  power  and
glory  Go#  designs  we  should  inherit.
It  is  through  our  own  carefulness,
frugality,  and  judgment  which  God
has  given  us,  that  we  are  enabled  to
preserve  our  grain,  our  flocks  and
herds,  wives  and  children,  houses  and
lands,  and  increase  them  around  US.
continually  gaining  power  and  in-
fluence for  ourselves  as  individuals
and  for  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a
whole.  People  lose  their  property.
Why  ?  Because  they  do  not  take  care
of  it.  Once  in  a  while  we  hear  of
property  being  destroyed  by  fire,
though  this  does  not  often  occur
among  this  people.  What  did  you
do  with  the  fire  when  you  retired  fco
rest  ?  All  such  occurrences  happen
through  carelessness,  want  of  judg-
ment, or  ignorance.  For  instance,
on  a  very  dry,  windy  day,  with  a  foul


172


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


chimney,  a  wife  wishes  to  prepare  a
chicken  for  supper,  and  she  must
burn  off  the  pin  feathers ;  she  gathers
tip  an  armful  of  shavings,  sets  fire  to
them,  and  the  flame  that  is  singeing
ofi  the  pin  feathers  is  also  firing  the
chimney ;  from  that  it  spreads  to  the
roof,  and  from  the  roof  to  the  stack-
yard. A  thousand  dollars'  worth  of
property  is  destroyed  by  carelessly
singeing  the  pin  feathers  off  a
chicken.  Our  wives  are  not  apt  to
think  of  this,  any  more  than  they  do
when  they  suffer  their  little  children
to  get  cold,  and  the  croup,  and  then
death.

This  pet  pie,  in  their  notions  concern-
ing life,  are  similar  to  the  whole  world.
We  have  brought  our  traditions  from
the  world,  but  we  wish  to  learn  better,
and  get  rid  of  every  false  notion  and
practice.  As  I  told  you  the  other
day,  it  is  impossible  to  Relieve  a  truth
that  is  not  embraced  in  "  Mormon-
ism,'*  whether  it  is  found  iu  the
mental  education  or  physical  pursuits
of  mortals,  in  the  spiritual  refine-
ment of  the  Gods,  or  in  culling  im-
mortal fruits  from  trees  that  grow  in
the  Elysian  fields  of  Paradise.  u  The  !
life  that  now  is"  more  immediately
demands  *bur  attention,  and  I  am  fear-
ful that  many  spend  their  lives  for
naught.  There  are  persons  in  this
community  who,  if  they  conld  have
their  own  will  gratified  and  be
possessed  of  plenty  of  means,  would
not  do  another  day's  work  in  their
lives,  unless  they  were  urged  to  it.
Such  persons  are  told  that  they
should  devote  their  lifetime  they  now
have  to  usefulness;  but  they  have
sufficient,  they  say,  and  have  no  need
to  be  useful  in  performing  any  kind
of  labour.  This  is  a  mistake.
Though  I  possessed  millions  of  money
and  property,  that  does  not  excuse
me  from  performing  the  labour  that
it  is  my  calling  to  perform,  so  far  as
I  have  strength  and  ability,  any  more
than  the  poorest  man  in  the  com-


munity is  excused.  The  more  we
are  blessed  with  means,  the  more  we
are  blessed  with  responsibility;  the
more  we  are  blessed  with  wisdom  and
ability,  the  more  we  are  placed  under
the  necessity  of  using  that  wisdom
and  ability  in  the  spread  of  righteous-
ness, the  subjugation  of  sin  and
misery,  and  the  amelioration  of  the
condition  of  mankind.  The  man
that  has  only  one  talent  and  the  man
that  has  five  talents  have  respon-
sibility accordingly.  If  we  have  a
world  of  means,  we  have  a  world  of
responsibility.  If  we  have  an  eternity
of  knowledge,  we  shall  have  an
eternity  of  business  to  transact  and
to  occupy  every  particle  of  the
knowledge  bestowed  upon  us.

Then,  instead  ot  searching  after
what  the  Lord  is  going  to  do  for  us,
let  us  inquire  what  we  can  do  for  our-
selves, and  the  answer  will  be,  We
can  make  our  own  hats,  bonnets,
shoes,  and  clothing,  and  \\ «  an  make
our  own  heaven  here  below ;  and  if
there  is  anything  that  we  cannot
make  now,  we  will  wear  what  we
have  until  we  can  make  more.  I
have  a  word  of  praise  for  our  sisters.
I  have  seen  the  handsomest  home-
made plaid  in  this  city  that  I  ever  saw
in  any  country.  I  would  like  to  see
them  wear  it  when  they  go  to  parties,
instead  of  donning  silks  and  satins.
Their  home-made  plaid  will  look
better  to  me  than  all  the  silk  and
satin  they  can  put  on.  But  when
sister  Susan  gets  a  fine  dress,  then
Betsy  will  not  go  to  the  party  unless
she  has  as  good  a  frock  as  Susan's ;
and  Sarah  must  have  as  good  a  one
as  either  of  the  others,  or  a  little
better.  Perhaps  she  wants  a  little
more  gimp,  a  little  extra  braid,  some
insertion,  or  something  to  make  a
better  dress  than  has  either  of  her
sisters ;  and  so  we  waste  for  a  thing
of  naught  the  blessings  we  should
otherwise  improve.

Be  careftil  of  the  clothing  you


ATTENTION  TO  TEMPOBAL  DUTIES,  ETC,


173


cai

cU upon  us ;


have.  Do  not  let  your  children's
clothing  lie  underfoot  when  you  un-
dress them  at  night,  but  teach  your
boys  and  girls,  when  they  come  into
the  house,  to  find  a  place  for  their
hats,  cloaks,  and  bonnets,  that,  when
they  want  them,  they  can  put  their
hands  upon  them  in  a  moment.
When  they  take  off  their  boots  and
shoes,  let  them  be  deposited  where
they  can  be  found  in  the  dark,  that,
if  the  children  are  obliged  to  get  up
at  night,  perhaps  in  case  of  fire,  they
can  find  their  clothing,  and  not  be
under  the  necessity  of  being  turned
out  naked.  If  a  person  can  put  his
hand  on  his  clothing,  he  can  dress  in
the  dark.  I  couple  the  necessity  with
the  convenience,  I  hope  we  shall
never  be  under  the  necessity  of  flee-
ing from  under  a  burning  roof,  either
in  the  night  or  day.  Let  there  be  *  a
place  for  every  thing,  and  every
thing  in  its  place/*

I  believe  in  indulging  children,  in

blessings  God  besto


Book  of  Mormon,  or  any  other  use-
ful print.  Such  women  are  not  worth
their  room.  It  would  do  no  good
for  me  to  say,  Don't  read  them;
read  on,  and  get  the  spirit  of  lying
in  which  they  are  written,  and  then
lie  on  until  you  find  yourselves  in
hell.  If  it  would  do  any  good,  I
would  advise  you  to  read  books  that
are  worth  reading;  read  reliable
history,  and  search  wisdom  out  of  the
best  books  you  can  proem  p.  How  I
would  be  delighted  if  our  young  men
would  do  this,  instead  of  continually
studying  nonsense.  And  in  addition
to  this,  let  the  boys  from  ten  to
twenty  years  of  age  get  up  schools  to
learn  sword  exercise,  musket  and
rifle  exercise,  and,  in  short,  every  ait
of  war.  Shall  we  need  this  know*
ledge  ?  No  matter;  it  is  good  to  be
acquainted  with  this  kind  of  exercise,
Let  a  few  schools  be  started  by  those
who  are  capable  of  teaching  the
sciences.  The  science  of  a^piutecture.


pursue


ren  |  glory  GojJ  designs  we  should  inherit
agh  It  is  through  our  own  carefulness.


children,  and  they  are  deprived  c
masnifving  their  mortr I1 -'VS ■  u<:cor

g  w  1  me 1  designs  oi^rauj 4  K  n-
Creator. Numbers  of  our  chili


!  i  -a

JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


174

and  New  York,  What  will  be  the
price  by-and-by,  as  circumstances  are
now  shaping  themselves  in  the
nation  ?

If  what  I  have  now  said  about


temporal  things  is  faithfully  carried
out,  it  will  lead  to  our  independence
as  a  people,  and  to  our  comfort  and
happiness  as  individuals.

May  God  bless  you!  Amen.


SALVATION  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ISRAEL  TO  COME  THROUGH

THE  GENTILES.

Remarks  by  Elder  On  son  Pratt,  made  in  tlve  Bowery \  at  Prow,

July  15,  1855,

BEPORTED  BY  J,  V.  LONG.


It  is  with  a  great  degree  of  satis-
faction that  I  arise  to  bear  my  humble
testimony  before  the  Saints  here  in
Provo,  in  connection  with  the  testi-
monies that  have  been  borne  to  yon  by
the  servants  of  God  who  have  ad-
dressed you  heretofore.  We  have
had  some  great  and  good  instructions
imparted  to  us  since  our  meetings  com-
menced here  the  day  before  yester-
day. We  have  had  instructions
which  are  of  the  greatest  importance
— instructions  that  pertain  both  to
our  temporal  and  future  prosperity.
The  teachings  imparted  have  been
clothed  with  wisdom,  and  the  gift
and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent
down  from  heaven,  which  ha$  inspired
the  hearts  of  the  servants  of  God
who  have  addressed  us  from  this
Stand 5and  more  especially  has  this  been
the  case  with  regard  to  the  instruc-
tions that  have  been  imparted  to  us
this  forenoon,  setting  forth  our  rela-
tions, as  Gentile  Saints,  (or  Saints
that  have  received  the  Gospel  from


among  the  Gentiles,)  with  the  house
of  Israel,  Perhaps  there  is  no  subject
that  could  be  presented  at  the  present
time  that  is  of  so  much  importance,
and  that  has  so  great  a  bearing  upon
the  human  family,  as  the  one  set
before  us  this  forenoon.  It  is  one  on
which  the  salvation  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  depends.  It  is  one,  also,  on
which  the  salvation  of  the  remnants
of  the  tribe  of  Joseph  upon  this
American  continent  depends.  It  is
one  that  we  must  not  only  under-
stand, or  reason  about,  or  think  of,
but  one  in  which  we  must  engage
every  fr  oulty  and  power  of  our  minds,
if  we  would  be  blessed  as  a  people.
It  is  for  this  object,  as  has  been  plairly
shown  to  you  this  forenoon,  that  the
angels  of  God  descended  from  the
eternal  world  and  spoke  in  the  ears  of
mortal  man.  It  is  for  this  object
that  the  heavens  have  been  opened,
and  the  everlasting  Priesthood  sent
down  and  conferred  upon  chosen
vessels.  It  is  for  this  object — namely,


SALVATION  OP  THE  HoUSK  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC


175


the  salvation  and  redemption  of  the
poor,  lost,  degraded  sons  of  the  forest,
that  God  has  given  the  Urim  nnd
ummim,  and  caused  to  be  tr  *  s-
lated  one  of  the  most  glorious  suced
record,  or  histories  that  was  ever
introduced  into  the  world  by  mortal
man.  It  is  for  this  object  that  we
have  been  permitted  to  leave  the  land
of  our  forefathers,  to  traverse  the
sandy  deserts  and  arid  plains  of  Ne-
braska, and  to  locate  ourselves  here
in  the  midst  of  these  lonely  and
peaceful  vales ;  it  is  that  we  might
fulfil  and  accomplish  the  purposes  of
the  tfreat  Jehovah,  in  the  redemption
of  the  remnant  of  Joseph  who  dwelt
here  before  us.  I  shall  not,  perhaps,
make  a  great  many  remarks  this
afternoon,  as  there  are  others  present
who  no  doubt  desire  to  bear  their
testimony  before  the  Saints ;  ^efc  I
feel  to  make  a  few  observations  in
relation  to  that  degraded  people,  and
in  relation  to  ourselves,  and  our
duties  in  regard  to  them ;  not  that  I
expect  my  feeble  abilities  will  impart
anything  that  is  of  much  consequence
or  importance,  more  than  what  has
already  been  clearly  portrayed  before
your  minds  this  forenoon.

With  thcjse  prelLninary  remarks,  I
will  select  a  pas  rige  of  Scripture  as
a  text  It  reads  as  follows: — "Woe
be  unto  them  that  are  at  ease  in
Zion."  I  think  we  will  find  this
text  in  the  predictions  of  Isaiah.  We
shall  also  find  it  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  I  will  repeat  the  words : —
"Woe  be  unto  them  that  are  at  ease
in  Zion."  Do  you  think,  brethren
and  sisters,  while  so  much  depends
upon  o  ir  exertions  and  conduct,  that
we  can  come  to  these  valleys,  or  go
anywhere  else  on  this  American  con-
tinent, and  settle  down  upon  our
farms,  or  engage  in  our  merchandize
or  in  our  business  transactions,  and
be  at  ease  in  Zion  ?  It  is  of  no  use
thinking  of  this  for  a  moment;  for
tho  day,  even  the  time  of  the  re-


demption of  Israel,  is  now  nigh  at
hand  j  and  Zion,  instead  of  being  at
ease,  must  travail in pain  to  be
delivered. When  the  Saints  first
began to  assemble  themselves  to-
gether in  Jackson  comity,  Missouri,
and  began  to  build  fine  houses  and
open  rich  farms,  and  were  surrounded
with  every  facility  for  becoming  rich
in  this  world's  goods — when  they
were  thus  inclined  to  settle  down  in
pleasant  places,  with  their  affections
placed  upon  the  things  of  the  earth —
upon  their  houses  and  their  lands,
upon  their  grain,  their  flocks  and
their  herds,  and  when  the  great  and
important  duties  required  of  them
as  Latter-day  Saints  were  laid  aside,
or,  at  least,  placed on  the  back-
ground —  when  they  thus  settled
down,  and  were  determined  to  enjoy
their  own  Zion  at  perfect  ease,  did
the  Lord  suffer  them  to  reiiain  at
ease? No. He  suffered  their  to
be  uprooted,  to  be  driven  from  their
houses  and  inheritances,  and  t->  be
afflicted,  tormented,  and  oppressed.
Why did the Lord suffer  this?
Because  the  people  felt  a  disposition
to  be  at  ease  in  the  land  of  Zion,  and
to  neglect  - the  important  duties  re-
quired at  their  hands. This  has
been  more  or  less  the  case  from  the
day  that  we  settled  in  the  western
part  of  Missouri  until  the  present
time. We  have  forgotten  who  we
are;  we  have  forgotten  in  a  measure
what  God  has  been  doing  with  us  as
a  people; we  have forgotten  his
purposes  that  he  has  determined  to
accomplish  in  our  day  and  genera-
tion; we  have  forgotten  the  dcgni  led,
forlorn condition  of  the sons  of
Joseph;  we  have  forgotten  the  pre-
dictions of  the  holy  Prophets  among
their  fathers,  who  so  earnestly  prayed
to  the  Most  High  for  themselve s  and
their  children  to  the  latest  generationf  -
whose  prayers  have  been  record  1  in
the  records  of  eternity  and  preserved
in  the  archives  of  heaven,  to  be


176  JOURNAL  OP

answered  upon  the  beads  of  their
posterity  in  the  last  days.  We  have
forgotten  these  things  to  a  great
extent,  and  are  dwelling  at  ease  in
Zion,  and  neglecting  the  great  re-
demption of  Israel.

It  almost  seems  sometimes  that
the  people  are  determined  to  take
their  rest  and  be  at  ease  before  their
great  labour  is  accomplished  or  their
day  of  rest  comes.  They  build
houses,  they  plant  vineyards,  they
sow  their  fields,  they  gather  together
large  flocks  and  herds,  they  multiply
their  goods  and  substance,  they  sur-
round themselves  with  the  comforts
and  luxuries  of  this  life,  and  say  to
themselves,  "We  will  enjoy  our*
selves  and  be  at  ease  in  Zion;  we
will  remain  upon  our  farms  and  in
oar  fine  houses ;  we  will  engage  in
our  merchandize  and  in  various  occu-
pations ;  we  wjH  let  the  Lamanites
take  care  of  themselves,  and  we  will
let  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty  roll  |
round  without  our  help.'*  And  after
all  these  things,  they  will  pray  every
day  that  the  Lord  will  roll  round
events,  accomplish  his  purposes,  and
fulfil  the  covenants  made  with  the
house  of  Israel,  and  yet  not  lift  one
solitary  finger  to  facilitate  the  answer
to  their  prayers.

As  it  was  said  this  forenoon,  God
is  not  going  to  do  this  without  our
agency  and  exertions.  What  says
the  Apostle  Paul  concerning  the
Gentiles  ?  "  For  as  ye  in  times  past ,
have  not  believed  God,  yet  now  have
obtained  mercy  through  their  un-
belief, even  so  have  these  (that  is  the
house  of  Israel)  also  now  not  believed,
that  through  your  mercy  they  also
may  obtain  mercy/1

The  Apostle  shows  plainly  that
blindness  in  part  happened  to  Israel,
and  that  you  Gentiles,  as  a  conse-
quence, obtained  mercy.  Has  not
the  light  of  truth  shone  upon  our
minds,  that  these  Lamanites,  who
are  of  the  house  of  Israel,  might,


DISCOURSES.

through  the  mercy  of  us  Gentiles,
obtain  mercy  ?  &

[Elder  Pratt  then  asked  a  blessing
upon  the  bread,]

Through  the  mercy  of  the  Gentiles,
it  is  decreed  that  the  house  of  Israel
in  the  last  days  shall  obtain  mercy ;
that  is,  through  the  believing  of  the
Gentiles,  or,  in  other  words,  through
the  Saints  of  the  living  God  who
have  embraced  the  covenant  of  peace
from  among  the  Gentiles,  and  have
separated  themselves  from  the  wicked
Gentile  nations.  It  is  through  their
mercy,  through  their  long-suffering,
!  patience,  and  forbearance,  that  the
house  of  Israel  are  to  find  salvation
and  mercy.  And  if  we  do  not
accomplish  this  work,  we  shall  suffer;
and  I  just  as  much  believe  this  as  I
believe  hat  the  sun  shines  in  the
firmament  of  heaven.  Without  this
1  people  become  the  saviours  of  Israel,
we  shall  be  accounted  as  salt  that
has  lost  its  savour,  and  therefore
no  longer  good  for  anything  but  to
be  trodden  under  the  feet  of  Israel,
or  of  our  enemies.  Whosoever  will
not  extend  the  hand  of  mercy  to
redeei^  this  people  will  go  down,  and
lose  their  influence  with  God  and  all
good  men.  We  are  placed  here  as
saviours  upon  the  mountains,  and
God  has  placed  us  here  because  we
understand  principles  that  they  are
ignorant  of  We  know  about  God ;
we  have  learned  something  of  Jesus
Christ  and  of  the  redemption  wrought
out  by  him;  we  have  also  learned
some  little  of  the  fut^zre  state  of  man.
We  axe  in  possession  of  knowledge
i  which  is  hid  from  all  the  rest  of  the
world.  Shall  we,  therefore,  dwell  at
ease  upon  our  farms  and  in  our
habitations,  and  suffer  these  sons  of
the  forest  to  remain  in  eternal  ie*no-
ranee  of  the  great  truths  thfit  we  are
in  possession  of?  If  so,  woe  be  unto
this  people,  or  any  other  people  that
are  in  tins  ted  with  the  sacred  things
committed  to  our  charge,  and  who


SALTATION  OT  THE  H0U9E  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC,


17T


do  not  use  them  according  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God ;  for  it  is  his
mind  that  they  should  be  used  for
the  redemption  of  those  that  are
unacquainted  with  these  principles
by  which  alone  salvation  can  be
obtained.

But  how  can  we  save  this  fallen
remnant  of  Israel?  Can  the  re-
demption of  this  widely-scattered
and  degraded  race  be  brought  about
in  a  moment  ?  It  cannot  We  have
heard  from  the  lips  of  our  President,
who  spake  by  the  wisdom  of  the
Most  High  and  by  the  power  of  the
Spirit  which  rested  upon  him.  He
has  pointed  out  the  way,  and  shall
we  not  walk  in  it  ?  Shall  we  not
give  heed  to  his  sayings  ?  We  are
commanded  to  be  of  one  heart  and  of
one  mind ;  and  in  this  case  in  parti-
cular  we  are  required  to  be  united  in
all  our  exertions,  and  to  use  all  the
power  and  faculties  of  our  minds  for
the  salvation  of  the  nations  of  Joseph.
Will  the  brethren  reach  forth  the
helping  hand,  and  try  to  re^em  the
eons  of  the  forest  with  whom  we  are
surrounded  ?  I  believe  they  will ;
for  the  purposes  of  God  must  be
fulfilled ;  and  we  are  the  people  who
have  to  do  the  work ;  and  to  those
who  do  not  take  part  in  it,  I  will
apply  the  words  of  my  text — "  Woe
to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion."
And  this  woe  will  Snd  them  out ;  it
will  surely  come  upon  them,  and
sorely  afflict  them  from  the  rising  of
the  sun  unto  the  going  down  thereof;
and  when  the  night  cometh,  it  will
not  cease ;  it  will  follow  them  day  by
day,  until  they  learn  by  sad  experience
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  being
at  ease  in  Zion  until  Zion  has  travailed
in  pain  and  brought  forth  her  children,
and  especially  when  the  work  is  of
the  importance  of  the  one  now  before
ns,  and  required  at  our  hands.  Here
are  numbers  of  the  Lamanites  before
me.  How  much  good  it  would  do
them,  if  they  could  only  sit  down  and

No,  12.


read  as  we  can  concerning  their
fathers!  Place  yourselves  in  the
same  position,  and  imagine  that  you
had  lost  all  that  was  good  and  great,
and  suppose  that  you  were  among  a
people  who  understood  all  this  know-
ledge, and  suppose  that  they  were  not
willing  to  put  forth  their  hands  to
impart  the  blessings  they  enjoyed  to
you,  how  would  yon  feel  3?  Yon
would  feel  as  God  feels,  and  the  same
as  the  old  Prophets  and  Patriarch  of
the  Nephites  feel,  who  are  now  in  the
heavens,  and  who  are  acquainted  with
the  purposes  of  God  that  are  now
transpiring  upon  the  earth.  How  do
you  think  they  would  feel,  if  they
were  to  come  down  and  look  upon
their  descendants,  and  see  them
wandering  in  darkness,  without  the
knowledge  of  God  or  their  ancestors,
and  then  turn  and  see  a  people  in
their  midst  who  were  in  possession  of
the  sacred  records  and  prophecies  of
their  fathers,  and  yet  that  people  so
careless,  and  so  much  at  ease,  that
they  used  scarcely  any  exertion  to
impart  the  heavenly  knowledge  to
them?  Perhaps  some  may  inquire,
How  are  you  going  to  impart  informa-
tion to  so  dark  and  degraded  a  people
as  our  red  neighbours  ?  Do  as  brother
Young  has  counselled,  instead  of
driving  them  out  from  your  midst  to
some  desolate  region*  Cultivate  their
friendship ;  be  forbearing  and  kind,
and  show  a  sympathetic  spirit  for
them.  Build  for  them  a  good  school-
house,  and  let  the  people  be  engaged
in  teaching  them  the  English
language,  both  old  and  young,  as  far
as  they  are  willing  to  be  taught.
Teach  them  concerning  their  fore-
fathers, the  carrying  forth  of  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  plan  of
salvation  which  is  revealed  to  us,
with  the  promise  of  eternal  life  to  all
those  who  believe  and  obey.  They
require  to  be  taught  in  order  that
they  may  have  faith ;  for  how  can
they  believe  without  being  taught  by

Vol  .  IX.


178  JOtfBNAL  OP

those  whose  right  it  is  to  teach  ?
Teach  them  to  read ;  and  if  you  can
persuade  them  to  be  attentive,  it  will
not  take  them  long  to  acquire  a
knowledge  of  oar  language*  If  you
can  possibly  afford  it,  feed  them  and
keep  them  from  perishing  with
hunger.  Just  as  long  as  they  have  to
hunt  in  the  mountains  and  kanyons
for  food,  and  to  eat  snails,  snakes,
and  crickets,  in  order  to  keep  them-
selves alive, — I  say,  so  long  as  they
have  to  do  this,  yon  cannot  make
them  think  of  God-  They  will  think
of  their  hunting,  and  of  procuring
something  to  prevent  starvation ;
for  they  must  procure  something  to
subsist  upon,  even  if  it  is  by  stealing.
Then  if  you  Want  them  to  learn
knowledge,  and  to  acquire  it  in  the
best  way,  and  with  the  least  expense
to  yourselves,  feed  and  clothe  them,
and  then  instruct  them ;  and  if  you
can  get  their  minds  bent  down  to
study  our  language,  it  will  be  but  a
very  short  time  before  they  will  read
18  well  as  the  best  of  us.  Get  them
so  that  they  can  read  the  record  of
their  forefathers — the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  they  will  soon  learn  what
God  intends  to  do  for  them  ;  and  then
the  Holy  Spirit  will  be  poured  out
upon  them,  according  to  the  intelli-
gence and  capacities  they  have  for
receiving  the  light  of  truth.  In  this
way  they  may  soon  be  fitted  and  pre-
pared for  a  greater  amount  of  know-
ledge, and  receive  the  eternal  Priest-
hood upon  their  heads,  and  then  they
will  go  forth  to  the  surrounding
nations,  tongues,  and  tribes  of  their
own  people,  and  bring  them  to  a
knowledge  of  the  truth.  And  this
is  the  place  for  us  to  work ;  and  we
have  the  liberty  and  the  means  to
first  begin  directly  here  at  home ;
and  when  we  have  instructed  and
taught  those  directly  in  our  midst,
not  merely  by  our  theories,  but  by
our  precepts  and  examples,  then  will
be  the  time  to  go  and  convert  those


nrscoxmsES.

in  South  America  and  in  the  distant
regions  of  our  continent.  But  if  we
cannot  convert  those  whom  we  have
around  us,  and  persuade  them  "to
hearken  to  the  Priesthood,  it  is  hut
very  little  use  to  go  to  others  at  a
greater  distance;  for  here  is  the
place.  God  has  not  sent  us  as  a
neonle  to  dwell  in  the  southern  ex—
tremities  of  South  America ;  but  he
has  caused  us  to  be  located  here;
and  hence  here  is  the  place  where  he
intends  us  to  work.  We  are  called
upon  to  begin  here  in  the  city  of
Provo,  on  the  lands  that  these  Laman-
ites  call  their  own,  and  where  they
have  chosen  their  homes.  You  may  ■
say  in  your  hearts  that  "it  would  be
so  much  labour  and  trouble — it
would  cost  us  so  much  of  our  time
and  means  to  convert  those  around
us,  that  we  have  not  courage  to  per-
form the  great  undertaking."  But
what  were  we  sent  here  for  ?  The
Lord  has  caused  us  to  come  here  for
this  very  purpose — that  we  might
accomplish  the  redemption  of  these
suffering,  degraded  Israelites,  as  pre-
dicted in  the  sacred  records  of  their
forefathers,  and  this  is  what  we  are
told  by  our  President ;  and  therefore
we  can  have  no  excuse,  for  our  duty
has  been  plainly  told  us.  This  work
is  of  the  greatest  importance  of  any
work  of  the  present  day.  I  believe
with  all  my  heart,  as  expressed  by
our  President,  that  this  people  will
be  our  shield  in  days  to  come ;  and  I
believe  that  if  we  lose  this  shield  by
our  carelessness,  or  by  settling  down
at  ease  in  Zion,  it  will  be  woe  to  us
that  call  ourselves  Latter-day  Saints.
Yes,  it  will  be  woe  to  us  if  we  do  not
accomplish  this  work  that  is  given
us  to  do.  Do  you  not  know  that
they  will  be  the  principal  actors  in
some  of  the  grand  events  of  times  to
come?  What  says  the  Book  of
Mormon  in  relation  to  the  building
up  of  the  New  Jerusalem  on  this
continent — one  of  the  most  splendid


SALVATION  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  ISRAEL,  ETC.


179


cities  that  ever  was  or  ever  will  be
built  on  this  land  ?  Does  not  that
book  say  that  the  Lamanites  are  to
be  the  principal  operators  in  that
important  work,  and  that  those  who
embrace  t£e  Gospel  from  among  the
Gentiles  are  to  have  the  privilege  of
assisting  the  Lamanites  to  build  np
the  city  called  the  New  Jerusalem  ?
This  remnant  of  Joseph,  who  are  now
degraded,  will  then  be  filled  with  the
wisdom  of  God  ;  and  by  that  wisdom
they  will  build  that  city ;  by  the  aid
of  the  Priesthood  already  given,  and
by  the  aid  of  Prophets  that  God  will
raise  up  in  their  midst,  they  will
beautify  and  ornament  its  dwellings ;
and  we  have  the  privilege  of  being
numbered  with  them,  instead  of  their
being  numbered  with  us.  It  is  a
great  privilege  indeed  (and  we  are
indebted  to  their  fathers  for  it,)  that
we  enjoy  of  being  associated  with
them  in  the  accomplishment  of  so
great  a  work.  It  is  to  their  fathers
and  to  God  that  we  are  indebted  for
the  enjoyment  of  such  great  blessings
in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies.  Their
ancient  Prophets  among  their
ancestry  looked  with  interest  upon
their  children,  and  they  interceded
day  and  night  for  their  redemption.
In  answer  to  their  prayers,  an  angel
has  flown  through  the  midst  of
heaven  to  preach  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  the  nations ;  and  it  is  there-
fore to  them  that  we  are  indebted  for
many  of  the  privileges  that  we  now
enjoy.  If  we  are  thus  indebted  as  a
people, — woe  be  unto  us  who  are
gathered  from  among  the  Gentiles,
if  we  neglect  to  pay  the  debt  by  our
exertions  to  save  them  !  Woe  to  us
who  have  contracted  the  debt !  for  a
day  of  judgment  and  retribution  will
come,  and  there  will  be  no  escape !
No  lawyers  will  be  there  to  quibble
and  bring  up  technicalities  of  law ;


but  the  debt  will  have  to  be  paid,  for
to  their  forefathers  are  we  indebted
for  the  light  and  knowledge  that  we
possess.  Therefore,  let  us  bestir
ourselves,  and  perform  those  duties
incumbent  upon  us,  and  then  we  shall
receive  our  reward.  I  do  not  wish
to  take  up  the  time  when  there  are
others  of  our  brethren  that  have  not
had  the  privilege  of  speaking  ;  but  I
did  feel  to  say  these  words,  I  felt  to
shout  glory  to  God  this  morning
when  I  heard  our  President  speak  of
these  things.  My  advice  to  you,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  is  the  same  as  to
myself — Let  us  wake  up  to  a  sense
of  these  things;  let  us  sacrifice
whatever  is  requii^ed  of  us  for  the
salvation  of  this  people.  With  re-
gard to  going  to  foreign  nations  to
preach  the  Gospel  among  the  idola-
trous heathen,  I  will  say,  for  my  own
part,  that  I  would  prefer  going  and
labouring  for  years  in  those  mountains
to  save  Israel ;  yes,  for  years,  if  that
should  be  required  by  the  first  Presi-
dency, though  I  stand  ready  to  go  to
China,  or  to  the  islands  and  nations
of  the  Pacific,  or  to  any  other  part  of
the  world,  when  counselled  so  to  do.
What  are  these  sacrifices  to  the  glory
that  is  to  follow  ?

[Elder  Pratt  asked  a  blessing  upon
the  cup,]

Brethren  and  sisters,  may  God
bless  you,  and  may  his  Spirit  inspire
you  when  you  lie  down  at  night,  and  in
your  dreams  of  the  night,  when  you
rise  up  in  the  morning,  and  when  you
go  about  your  temporal  labours.
May  He  inspire  you  continually  to
search  and  find  out  what  your  duties
are  to  the  remnants  of  Israel  that  are
in  your  midst.  I  ask  that  God  will
give  you  this  spirit  of  inquiry  and
earnestness  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  Amen.


180


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


EARLY  PERSECUTIONS— CERTAIN  RETRIBUTION.
Remarks  by  President  Hebeb  C.  Kimball,  made  in  the  Bowery,  Jxdy  7, 1861.

w

EKPOETED  BY  J.  V.  L0HG«


The  ideas  that  have  been  advanced
by  President  Young  are  strictly  true,
and  they  will  so  appear  to  every  one
who  has  a  knowledge  of  the  condition
of  this  world,and  they  will  especially  ap-
pear so  to  those  who  have  a  knowledge
of  the  kingdom  of  God  as  it  has  been
established  in  these  last  days.  In
regard  to  the  United  States,  Great
Britain,  and  European  nations  gene-
rally, they  have  a  knowledge  or  a
history  of  this  people.

I  was  in  England  and  commenced
preaching  the  Gospel  twenty-four
years  ago  hist  June,  and  of  course
there  were  only  a  few  Saints  in  that
land;  but  the  Gospel  has  spread
among  most  of  the  nations  of  Europe.
It  has  also  been  sounded  in  Asia,
Africa,  Australasia,  and  in  hundreds
of  the  islands  of  the  sea.  The  people
generally  look  upon  us  as  a  set  of
fanatics,  and  they  do  not  consider  us
worthy  of  their  attention ;  still  there
are  some  who  occasionally  become
convinced  and  embrace  the  truth.
When  the  Church  was  first  organized
in  Manchester,  in  the  State  of  New
York,  the  people  rose  up  against  us,
and  were  determined  that  we  should
not  stay  there,  and  consequently  we
went  to  Kirtland,  in  the  State  of
Ohio,  where  we  had  peace  for  a  little
season*  And  then  we  went  to  Jack-
eon  county,  Missouri;  but  the
brethren  found  we  could  not  stay
there,  and  hence  we  had  to  move
over  into  Clay  County .  We  stayed
there  a  short  time,  and  afterwards
went  into  Caldwell  County, We  re-


mained in  those  counties  but  a  short
time  before  the  spirit  of  mobocracy
raged  to  such  a  degree  that  the  peo-
ple considered  we  were  not  fit  to  live
upon  the  earth.  Fourteen  thousand
troops  were  called  out,  and  took  a
few  of  us  prisoners,  and  made  us  sign
a  deed  transferring  all  our  property
to  our  persecutors  in  the  State  of
Missouri,  to  pay  the  expense  of  our
persecutors.  They  commenced  their
cruelties,  and  perpetrated  the  most
diabolical  outrages  upon  our  people
that  were  ever  known  among  civilized
nations :  men,  women,  and  children
were  indiscriminately  despoiled  of  all
they  possessed ;  tin  y  were  mobbed
and  whipped ;  some  were  tarred  and
feathered,  and  those  who  could  not
readily  escape,  were  massacred,  irre-
spective of  age  or  sex ;  and  if  the
Almighty  had  not  interfered,  they
would  have  killed  us  all.  We  then
went  into  Illinois,  and  had  not  been
there  long  before  they  began  to  serve
us  in  like  manner.  They  gave  us  a
city  charter,  and  then  took  it  from
us  again,  and  that  too  without  any
just  cause.  They  gave  us  a  charter
for  a  Masonic  Lodge,  and  then  went
to  work  and  killed  some  of  the  men
to  whom  the  charter  was  given.
The  rage  and  ferocity  of  our  enemies
did  not  cease  there,  but  it  soon  mani-
fested itself  in  mobs  assembling  by
thousands,  who  finally  succeeded  in
driving  us  out  of  that  State  also,
leaving  us  in  the  wilderness  to  perish.
Bat  the  Lord  assisted  us;  his  pro-
tecting hand  was  over  us  for  good


EAHLY  PERSECUTIONS


CERTAIN  BETRIBT7TI0N


181


and  by  his  power  we  were  pre-
served.

After  all  these  hardships  and  trials
we  started  for  this  country,  and  what
did  the  Government  then  require  of
us  ?  Five  hundred  men  were  called
to  go  and  take  part  in  the  Mexican
war,  and  that  too  at  a  time  when  we
were  all  living  in  our  waggons:
many  were  sick,  and  some  were  dying ;
and  in  fact  hundreds  and  thousands
have  died  in  consequence  of  the  hard-
ships and  privations  brought  upon
them  by  our  ruthless  persecutors,
Joseph  Smith  lost  his  life  by  the
hands  of  assassins,  and  he  was  one
of  the  best  men  that  ever  trod  the
footstool  of  the  Almighty.  He  was
the  man  called  to  open  up  this  last
dispensation,  but  the  world  at  large
would  not  receive  him.

We  have  passed  through  many
grievions  trials;  but  I  do  not  feel
that  I  want  to  say  much  about  our
eufierings  this  morning,  but  simply
to  remind  you  of  some  of  the  promi-
nent acts  of  our  enemies,  that  you
may  know  that  we  have  nothing  to
expect  from  them  in  the  future  but
persecution  and  misrepresentation.
Many  of  you  are  strangers  to  these
things,  both  members  and  Elders,
because  you  were  not  baptized  into
the  Church  until  afterwards;  but
still  you  can  see  what  the  world  have
done  to  us ;  and  everything  in  the
shape  of  persecution  or  affliction
which  the  world  have  brought  upon
us,  will  come  back  upon  their  own
heads  ten-fold,  and  this  nation  in
particular  will  reap  what  they  have
sown,  and  their  troubles  have  already
commenced;  but  I  shall  live  to  see
them  broken  to  pieces  a  great  deal
worse  than  they  are  now,  and  so  will
thousands  of  you.  Our  sons  and
daughters  will  live  to  see  the  com-
plete overthrow  of  the  nation,  and
they  will  avenge  our  wrongs.  Many
of  them  were  born  while  we  were
undergoing  those  afflictions,  and  the


blood  of  retributive  justice  is  in
them,  and  I  know  this  as  well  as  I
know  that  I  live  and  dwell  upon  this
earth.

Our  enemies  know  not  what  they
are  doing  when  they  persecute  and
mob  this  people.  It  is  true  they  are
doing  no  more  than  was  done  by  the
wicked  Lamamtes  who  once  lived
upon  this  continent,  and  who  were  a
flourishing  and  prosperous  people.
They  persecuted  the  people  composing
the  Church  of  Christ,  the  Nepbitea
departed  from  the  faith,  and  the  two
parties  wasted  each  other  away  until
only  a  remnant  was  left,  and  as  such
we  now  see  them  wandering  about
in  filth,  darkness,  and  the  very  lowest
state  of  degradation.  The  Jaredites,
who  preceded  the  Israelites  upon  this
continent,  did  the  same  things.  They
fought  and  contended  with  each  other
until  the  whole  people  were  destroyed,
and  we  are  going  to  live  to  see  similar
things  befal  this  nation.  Although
many  may  fall  away  from  the  truth,
and  others  may  embrace  it,  yet  the
destruction  of  this  nation  is  sealed,
except  they  repent,  which  is  not  very
probable.  Notwithstanding  this  na-
tion has  been  favoured  with  the
revelations  of  heaven,  yet  they  never
knew  God,  they  never  knew  that
Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  the
Most  High,  and  they  do  not  now
know  that  the  leaders  of  this  people
are  inspired  from  on  high.

Now,  I  will  say  one  thing  that  id
in  this  good  old  book,  the  book  that
they  won't  have  in  the  Congress  of
the  United  States,  for  you  remember
it  is  only  a  short  time  ago  that  they
would  neither  have  a  priest  to  pray
for  them,  nor  receive  the  Bible  as
evidence.  This  book,  the  Bible,  says :
"  For  with  what  judgment  ye  judge,
ye  shall  be  judged,  and  with  what
measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured
to  you  again/5  The  nation  of  the
United  States  have  got  to  reap  that
which  they  have  sown,  and  to  receive


182  JOURNAL  OP

that  measure  which  they  meted  ont
to  us,  pressed  down  and  running
over;  and  as  they  designed  to  wipe
us  out  of  existence  "  with  the  flower
of  the  army"  which  they  sent  here,
that  destruction  shall  come  upon
themselves,  I  am  perfectly  willing
that  they  should  know  what  I  think
of  them.  That  army  was  sent  here
by  James  Buchanan  to  wipe  us  out,
but  they  might  as  well  try  to  move
the  sun  out  of  his  place ;  still  we
know  that  that  was  their  desim,  and
brother  Brigham  declared  it  at  the
time.  Yet,  although  you  know  that
those  poor  creatures  came  here  for
the  purpose  of  cutting  our  throats,
yon  will  feed  them  at  their  own  price,
instead  of  making  them  pay  hand-
somely for  all  they  get.  If  the
brethren  had  acted  wisely,  they
might  have  helped  themselves  a  great
deal,  and  have  got  together  means
for  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth;  but  some
were  determined  not  to  take  counsel-
Now,  as  feeble  and  poor  a  creature  as


DISCOTTESES.

I  am,  I  would  like  to  know  where
there  is  a  man  who  could  bring  up
one  circumstance  to  show  that  I  have
ever  violated  the  law  of  the  land.
I  know  that  I  have  been  true  to  my
country,  to  my  Masonic  brethren,
and  also  to  my  brethren  in  this
Church.  Are  there  any  of  my  country-
men who  would  injure  me?  Yes,
scores,  hundreds  and  thousands  of
them.

They  have  now  got  Masonic  insti-
tutions against  Masonic  institutions,
and  Presbyterians  operate  against
Presbyterians,  and  Episcopalians
against  Episcopalians,  and,  finally,  it
will  be  every  man  against  his  neigh-
bour. But  while  they  are  being
divided  one  against  another,  this
people  are  raising  the  standard  of
King  Emmanuelj  and  we  will  sustain
the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  also  all  good  and  whole-
some laws.  You  may  tell  it  to  the
nations,  for  as  God  lives  this  poeple
will  do  it,  and  I  say,  Amen.


POLITICAL  ECONOMY.

Remarks  by  President  Daniel  H«  Wells,  made  in  the  Bowery^  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  September  29,  18G1.

BKPORTED  BY  J,  V,  LONG.


It  will  be  remembered  by  the
brethren  that,  about  a  year  ago,  there
was  a  Missionary  fund  started  in
this  city,  which  was  very  liberally
subscribed  to.  This  fund  was  com-
menced^  for  the  purpose  of  sustain-
ing the  families  of  the  Missionaries


who  have  gone  on  Missions.  The
calls  upon  the  secretary  of  that  fund
are  now  very  numerous*  The  sub-
scriptions are  not  all  paid,  but  many
of  them  have  been  partially  paid*
It  is  now  proposed  to  replenish  this
fund ;  and  as  this  is  a  good  time  for


POLITICAL

getting  wood,  it  is  a  good  time  to
bring  some  in  for  this  object.  Those
who  feel  to  subscribe  and  donate,  can
report  to  brother  John  T.  Came  at
the  President's  office.  This  invita-
tion has  also  been  extended  to  others
who  have  not  contributed;  and
we  now  wish  to  give  an  opportunity
to  those  who  live  in  the  adjoining
settlements.  We  wish  to  give  all  an
opportunity  and  a  privilege  of  assist-
ing the  families  of  those  who  are
appointed  to  go  on  Missions.  Brethren,
let  us  pay  up  and  continue  our  sub-
✓  scriptions  to  the  fund,  that  the  poor
may  be  provided  for,  and  the  hearts
of  the  Saints  made  glad.

The  instructions  given  seem  to
turn  upon  political  economy,  and  the
pecuniary  and  temporal  circumstances
of  this  community.  It  is  the  burden
of  the  instructions  from  time  to  time,
and  it  seems  not  so  much  by  way  of
gaining  political  advancement  or
influence,  but  those  who  have
laboured,  and  still  are  labouring  to
lay  the  foundation  for  a  great  and
mighty  nation,  are  looking  and  stri-
ving for  the  improvement  of  this
people,  to  teach  them  how  to  be  self-
sustaining.  It  is  the  wish  and  desire
of  those  who  stand  at  the  head  of
this  people,  to  pursue  that  course
which  will  be  the  most  profitable  to
the  kingdom  of  God,  for  that  will  be
for  their  benefit,  and  that  is  the
burden  of  the  instructions  day  by
day.  We  are  counselled  and  taught
by  our  brethren  to  prepare  ourselves
for  self-existence,  to  look  after  those
things  which  ore  calculated  to  make
us  free  and  independent  It  appears
by  the  great  commotion  in  the  world
that  we  are  liable  to  be  cut  off  at  any
time  from  foreign  trade,  for  we  are  so
situated  in  these  distant  valleys,  that
we  may  be  cut  off  at  any  time  from
all  distant  markets ;  and  it  seems  to
be  in  the  economy  of  Heaven  that
this  should  be  so  in  order  that  we
may  become  free,  and  also  that  we


ECONOMY-  183

may  develop  the  resources  of  this  our
mountain  home.  By  our  united
efforts  we  can  produce  from  the  ele-
ments those  things  that  will  be  for
our  best  good,  and  for  the  general
interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
The  burden  of  the  instructions  given
by  the  servants  of  God  from  day  to
day,  is  for  us  to  labour  to  draw  from
the  elements  for  our  support.  Here
are  the  richest  elements  that  are  to
be  found  upon  the  face  of  the  globe.
There  is  no  grain,  no  vegetables,
neither  anything  that  grows  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  that  contains  that
sweetness  or  nourishment  in  a  greater
degree  than  it  does  here  in  this
mountain  country.  The  fruit,  the
vegetables,  and  all  we  grow,  are  of
the  sweetest  and  richest  kind,  and
the  most  nourishing  in  quality.  The
fabrics  made  here  will  likewise  be  of
the  most  refined  and  durable  kind.
If  we  labour  for  it,  the  finest  flaxt
hemp,  and  wool,  can  be  produced  in
this  Territory.  It  is  our  duty  to
strive  to  raise  every  thing  we  need
for  our  own  consumption.  The  tea,
the  coffee,  the  tobacco,  and  the
whisky,  (if  we  must  have  such
articles,)  can  all  be  produced  and
manufactured  here.  I  am  willing  to
make  a  bargain  with  this  people  to
leave  off  all  those  things  that  I  have
mentioned,  if  all  the  people  will
agree  to  do  likewise.  These  are
things  that  we  can  do  without ;  in
fact,  we  are  better  without  them  than
with  them;  we  are  better  in  our
bodies  as  well  as  in  our  purses.  The
sugar  that  is  needed,  and  other
sweetening,  grow  here  in  these  valleys
of  the  mountains,  and  it  only  needs
a  little  skill  and  labour  to  bring  it
into  a  more  refined  state  than  we  have
yet  been  able  to  produce.  Hundreds
of  waggons  and  teams  would  not  bo
able  to  bring  the  amount  of  sweet-
ening from  the  States  that  will  be
raised  and  manufactured  here  this
season,  and  the  quantity  and  quality


•


184  JOUHNAL  OP

can  be  increased  and  improved  every
year.

It  is  a  measure  of  political  econo-
my for  us  to  strive  to  promote  the
general  interest,  and  to  study  to  do
the  most  good  for  the  community
we  live  in.  If  we  cannot  abide  the
appeal  to  our  consciences,  let  us  abide
the  appeal  to  our  pockets.  (Voice :
Tou  have  caught  us  now.)  We
must  not  suit  our  ways  to  strangers,
but  we  must  look  to  the  welfare  of
Israel.

Brethren,  there  is  a  glorious  work
before  us,  and  great  and  glorious
blessings  will  be  poured  out  upon  us.
Peace  and  plenty  surround  us,  and
we  are  far  from  the  power  and  cor-
ruptions which  are  now  disturbing
the  enemies  of  God's  people.  The
Almighty  has  wisely  placed  barriers
in  the  way  of  his  enemies,  and  by
them  they  are  now  kept  back,  other-
wise they  would  endeavour  to  swallow
us  up  in  their  anger  and  rage.

We  are  now  in  a  position  that  we
can  do  those  things  of  which  I  have
been  speaking.  We  can  provide  for
our  future  necessities.  We  can  raise
up  a  great  and  mighty  people,  who
will  be  led  and  governed  by  the
principles  of  righteousness,  and  we
have  now  an  opportunity  of  doing  it
in  these  valleys.  The  nucleus  is
formed,  the  people  are  here,  and  we
can  do  everything  that  is  required  if
we  have  the  disposition  to  labour  for
its  accomplishment.  Let  us  take
hold  like  men  and  women  of  God,
like  those  who  are  filled  with  his
Holy  Spirit,  in  order  that  we  may
accomplish  the  important  work  re-
quired at  our  hands.  It  is  a  work
that  should  engage  our  most  earnest
attention.  It  is  not  a  thing  of  a
moment,  and  then  to  pass  away  ;  but
it  is  the  kingdom  of  God  that  shall
remain  forever  and  forever.  This  is
what  we  are  striving  to  build  up ;
and  let  us  take  hold  of  it  in  such  a
manner  as  we  can  carry  it  on,  and  at


DISCOURSES.

the  same  time  sustain  ourselves.  To
do  this,  we  must  produce  those  things
that  are  necessary  for  our  temporal
existence ;  and  let  us  be  careful  not
to  destroy  what  the  Lord  has  given
us  before  we  produce  another  supply
from  the  elements  around  us.  It  is
our  business,  and  duty,  too,  to  take
care  of  all  that  the  Lord  has  put  into
our  hands,  and  not  because  a  word  has
been  said  about  tea,  to  go  and  burn
it  up  or  throw  it  away;  but  we
should  put  all  we  are  made  stewards
over  to  the  best  possible  use.

Now,  I  have  no  objection  to  our
keeping  things  in  our  possession  that
are  necessary  for  sickness,  but  let  the
whisky  and  the  tobacco  be  put  to
their  legitimate  uses,  then  all  will  be
right.  Where  coffee  is  produced,  the
people  do  not  use  it,  but  they  raise  it
for  the  barbarians.  In  the  East
Indies  and  wherever  coffee  is  grown,
the  inhabitants  consider  it  poison  and
wonder  that  it  does  not  poison  the
outside  barbarians,  as  they  term  all
those  whom  we  consider  the  civilized
and  enlightened  nations. Some  of

o  4

our  physicians  will,  however,  say  and
contend  that  it  is  perfectly  harmless,
when  the  facts  before  us  show  the
effect  of  coffee,  tea,  opium,  tobacco
and  other  stimulants,  and  various
other  foolish  and  expensive  in-
digencies to  be  the  cause  of  reducing
the  average  of  human  life,  so  that  not
oue  half  of  those  born  into  the  world
live  to  attain  the  age  of  seventeen
years.  Apart  from  this,  it  would
be  a  great  saving  to  this  people,  for
they  have  to  bring  these  things  from
abroad.  Every  thing  that  we  cannot
produce  within  ourselves,  it  would  be
best  for  us  to  do  generally  without, then
we  would  have  means  to  aid  us  in  pro-
ducing those  things  that  are  necessary
to  more  fully  develop  the  resources
of  the  mountains  and  valleys  of
Utah.  I  mean  that  we  could  then
use  our  means  to  bring  the  machinery
here  that  we  cannot  so  well  manu-


POLITICAL

facture,  but  which,  by  bringing  in  a
a  little,  we  will  be  able  to  manu-
facture after  a  while.

While  we  are  professing  to  be
righteous,  let  ns  take  a  course  to
prove  to  God  j  angels  and  men  that
we  are  in  earnest,  and  will  live  and
produce  those  things  that  are
needed  for  our  own  sustenance,  and
build  up  cities  and  make  Zion  the
joy  of  the  whole  earth.  It  is  not  a
mere  theory  that  we  have  to  do  with,
but  it  is  the  building  up  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  and  it  is  for  those  who
have  the  principles  of  the  kingdom
in  their  hearts  to  seek  to  per-
manently establish  the  Zion  of  God
upon  the  earth,  whether  they  will  be
able  to  maintain  the  kingdom  or  not
is  the  Lord's  business.  We  know
that  the  Devil  seeks  to  thwart  and
overthrow  the  kingdom,  and  in  all
the  enterprizes  that  this  people  en*
gage  in,  they  may  expect  his  op-
position*

We  often  see  that  people  are
frustrated  and  afflicted ;  and  we  fre-
quently suffer  in  our  health,  and  in
things  which  we  seek  to  accomplish,
we  meet  with  such  opposition  that


economt.  185

we  have  to  give  them  up,  but  still  we
should  try  again  and  strive  to  bring
stronger  influences  to  bear  and  thus
succeed  in  the  accomplishment  of  the
object  we  have  in  view.  There  is  a
contention  here  among  the  influences
we  have  around  us  which  is — whether
the  Latter-day  Saints  will  maintain
themselves  independent  of  the  Devil
and  his  co-adjutors,  or  whether  they
will  for  ever  be  dependent  upon  their
enemies,

I  firmly  believe  that,  with  the
blessings  of  the  Almighty,  we  can
produce  in  a  short  time  every  thing
we  need,  if  we  will  use  the  proper
exertions.  The  thing  now  is  to  com-
mence and  go  ahead  with  an  earnest-
ness, and  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  easily
thwarted  or  frustrated.  If  we  fail  at
one  time,  let  us  try  again,  and  bring
greater  influences  and  more  union,
strength  and  power  to  bear,  that  we
may  succeed  the  next  time.  We
have  the  Devil,  as  well  as  every
natural  obstacle  to  contend  with,  but
we  will  finally  triumph,  which  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen.


0


186


JOUENAL  OF  DISCOURSES


CULL  FOR  TEAMS  TO  GO  TO  THE  FRONTIERS. — ENCOURAGE-

MENT  OF  HOME  MANUFACTURES.


Remarks  made  by  President  Brigham  Young,  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  February  2,  1862.


REPORTED  BY  G.  D.  WATT*


I  have  a  few  items  of  business  that
I  wish  to  lay  before  you  this  morn-
ing, and  the  first  is  a  call  upon  the
brethren  for  teams  to  haul  the  granite
blocks  from  Little  Cottonwood  to  the
Temple  Block.  The  road  became  so
mucjdy  that  the  teams  were  sent
home,  but  we  understand  that  the
road  is  now  very  good.  This  county,
Davis,  Tooele,  and  the  northern  part
of  Utah  counties  can  forward  teams
in  a  day  or  two,  and  if  the  road  again
becomes  bad,  they  are  not  so  far  from
their  homes  but  what  they  can  easily
return.  I  wish  to  have  ail  the  teams
that  can  be  gathered  from  this  city
and  the  adjoining  neighbourhoods
and  Wards  go  to  work  immediately,
so  that  our  stone-cutters  may  have
constant  work.  Some  of  them  are
from  a  distance,  and  we  do  not  like  to
have  them  out  of  work  through  want
of  rough  blocks.  It  requires  a  large
quantity  of  rock  for  the  first  story  of
the  Temple,  and  we  would  like  to
complete  the  walls  of  that  story,  and
as  much  more  as  possible  during  the
present  season.

I  have  another  call  to  make  upon
the  people  now,  which  I  wish  to  go
out  from  this  place.  You  will  re-
collect that  a  year  ago  this  coming
spring  we  sent  some  two  hundred
teams  to  the  Frontiers  to  bring  the
Saints  to  this  Territory.  We  wish
to  send  three  hundred  this  year,  and
they  are  as  few  as  will  answer  to
accomplish  the  purpose.  Last  season
I  think  there  were  rising  of  sixty
teams  went  from  this  city. I  shall


propose  that  we  make  the  dividend  as
we  did  last  year,  and  let  this  city  take
the  lead;  and  if  we  are  not  over  one
quarter  in  number,  we  ought  to  be  in
faith  and  good  works.  We  know
that  the  people  in  this  city  and  in  the
regions  round  about  are  wealthy  in
cattle,  and  you  know  very  well  that
it  is  against  my  doctrine  and  feelings
for  men  to  scrape  together  the  wealth
of  the  world  and  let  it  waste  and  do
no  good.  We  have  more  stock  than
we  well  take  care  of.  We  want  to
send  some  twelve  hundred  yoke  of
cattle  to  the  States  for  freight  and
people,  and  we  want  to  send  some
cattle  to  sell  and  purchase  things  that
are  needed  for  families  when  crossing
the  Plains,  for  we  wish  to  bring  all
the  poor  that  can  get  to  the  Frontiers
in  time  to  come  on  this  season.

Now  I  have  a  particular  request  to
make  of  all  our  capitalists,  and  that
is,  for  them  to  send  and  procure
machinery  to  aid  in  supplying  all  our
reasonable  wants  in  manufactured
articles,  that  we  may  have  every-
thing within  ourselves  for  houses,  for
goods,  for  chattels,  for  chariots,  for
ribbons,  and  for  ruffles,  yes,  every-
thing that  we  require  to  clothe  our-
selves with  from  the  stockings  on  our
feet  to  the  articles  worn  on  our
heads.  Tou  who  have  money  and
other  available  means,  send  and  get
such  machinery  as  is  really  necessary
for  manufacturing  those  things  that
we  require  to  make  us  comfortable.
It  is  our  duty  to  do  this,  and  it  is  not
your  duty  neither  is  it  mine  to  send


CALL  FOR  TEAMS,  ETC,


187


and  get  ten  thousand  dollars  worth
of  ribbons.

It  may  be  asked ,  "  Does  not
brother  Brigham  buy  as  many  store
goods  for  his  wives  and  children  as
any  man  in  the  Territory  of  Utah  ?  n
I  bny  more.  Probably  I  bestow
more,  according  to  the  number  I  have
to  sustain,  than  any  other  man.
"  Why  do  you  do  so  ?  Shall  I  say,
to  keep  peace  out  of  the  family,
or  to  keep  peace  in  the  family?
Which  is  it  ?  I  will  leave  that  for
you  to  answer.  Such  buying  is  no
part  of  the  duty  of  any  man  in  this
community  ;  neither  is  it  the  duty  of
any  man  to  be  a  merchant  in  this
community,  in  the  manner  that  many
are  and  have  been,  I  frequently  tell
the  people  that  it  is  no  part  of  my
religion  or  dnty  to  dance,  but  it  is  as
much  a  part  of  my  religious  duty
to  dance  as  it  is  to  buy  ribbons  and
other  useless  articles  of  clothing.  We
are  permitted  to  do  such  things  be-
cause of  our  ignorance,  and  the  sin
that  is  in  the  world ;  because  of  the
want  of  the  knowledge  possessed  by
heavenly  beings;  the  want  of  true
knowledge  concerning  the  earth  and
the  inhabitants  thereon.  Were  it
not  for  this  ignorance  and  darkness
we  should  not  be  pardoned  as  we  are
now.  When  we  become  weaned  from
the  love  of  the  world,  become  humble,
penitent,  contrite  in  spirit,  and  begin
to  love  the  Lord  a  little,  it  almost
distracts  us — some  almost  go  crazy.

At  no  distant  period  merchan-
dizing in  imported  goods  will  cease
in  this  Territory,  and  the  fabrics  we
wear  will  be  manufactured  by  our-
selves— imported  fabrics  will  not  be
here.  The  inquiry  may  arise,  "  What
will  be  done  with  the  money  that
will  accumulate  ?  "  for  we  have  paid
merchants  here  during  eleven  to
twelve  years  past  not  less  than  from
six  to  ten  hundred  thousand  dollars
annually.  If  any  should  be  fearful
that  they  will  be  cumbered  with  sur-


plus means,  1  will  promise  them  to
provide  a  way  in  which  they  may
expend  their  means  for  the  up-build-
ing of  the  kingdom  of  God,  I  do
not  feel  to  find  fault,  complain,  or
cast  reflections  upon  myself,  upon
my  family,  or  upon  my  brethren
and  sisters  for  what  we  have  hitherto  *
done  and  still  are  doing  in  the
capacity  of  merchants,  or  purchasers,
or  consumers.  I  look  forward  to  the
time  when  this  people  will  possess
what  is  called  the  wealth  of  the  earth,
that  is,  those  articles  which  are
accounted  very  valuable,  but  many  of
which  are  in  reality  of  very  little
worth.  The  diamond  is  considered
of  the  most  value,  still  its  intrinsic
value  is  but  trifling ;  by  heat  it  can
be  burned  like  other  coal ;  I  esteem
gold  as  more  valuable,  for  it  cannot
be  consumed  by  fire.  We  would  like
to  have  a  little  of  this  metal,  for  how
much  better  would  it  be  to  drink  out
of  a  gold  cnp  than  out  of  an  old  rusty
tin  basin.  We  expect  to  have  earthen
ware,  it  is  true,  when  we  get  men
here  that  know  how  to  put  the
material  together  to  make  it,  but  if
you  accidentally  let  a  piece  of  fine
expensive  earthenware  drop,  it
breaks  and  that  is  the  end  of  it;
should  a  child  or  a  grown  person
make  a  misstep  and  fall,  when  carry-
ing a  gold  or  silver  cup  or  vessel,  it
cannot  lx?  broken.  But  this  will  be
hereafter,  it  is  not  yet.  When  we
see  the  time  that  the  people  will
possess  the  true  riches  of  the  earth
and  the  heavens,  we  can  preserve  that
which  we  have,  it  will  not  be  stolen
by  thieves.

Apparently  the  merchandizing  in-
terest in  this  community  is  coming  to
a  close,  and  I  feel  like  urging  upon
the  people  the  necessity  of  preparing
to  grow  and  man u facture  that  which
they  consume,  It  is  my  indispensable
duty  to  urge  this  important  item
upon  them  and  to  warn  them  of
coming  evil  to  themselves,  unless  they


188


JOUBNAL  OF  DISCOUBSES,


attend  to  it.  We  want,  in  view  of
this,  a  liberal  turn  out  of  teams  to
bring  machinery  from  the  East  this
coming  summer.  It  may  be  asked
what  we  need  here.  Why  are  your
wives  unable  to  card  a  little  wool
into  rolls  to  spin  and  knit  yon  and
your  children  some  stockings?  Be-
cause they  have  no  cards.  Suppose
there  was  not  a  carding  machine  in
this  Territory  or  a  single  pair  of
hand  cards,  and  they  were  not  to  be
had,  how  could  we  make  ourselves
comfortable  without  them?  We
might  possibly  manage  to  make  cloth
in  a  rude  way,  but  the  demand  would
be  far  beyond  the  supply — it  could
not  possibly  keep  pace  with  the  wants
of  our  growing  community.  We
need  a  card-making  machine  here,
one  that  will  draw  the  wire,  per-
forate the  leather,  and  cut,  bend,  and
insert  the  teeth.  We  could  make  one
here,  but  it  would  cost  much  more
than  to  import  one.  I  want  some
of  the  brethren  to  send  and  get  one
or  more  machines  of  this  kind,  for
we  do  not  need  many ;  but  when  we
come  to  cotton  and  wollen  fabrics
that  we  need  to  wear  every  lay,  and
without  which  we  can  not  be  so  com-
fortable as  we  now  are,  we  need  much
machinery to manufacture  them.

e  now  need  twenty  times  more
carding  machines  in  this  Territory
than  we  have.  Wool  now  lies  in  the
mill  month  after  month  before  it  can
be  carded,  which  injures  it  Will
our  capitalists  send  and  bring  in
carding  machines  and  other  machi-
nery? I  want  to  see  fifty  or  one
hundred  cotton  spinning-jennies,  in-
troduced into  the  country,  they  will
cost  about  one  hundred  dollars  each,
and  with  one  of  them  a  child  twelve
or  fifteen  years  old  can  in  a  day  gin,
card,  and  spin  cotton  enough  to  make
twelve  yards  of  cloth.

These  are  matters  that  pertain  to
our  present  life,  to  us  at  this  time  and
in  our  present  circumstances. I  am


anxious  that  the  people  should  fully
understand  the  vital  importance  of
maintaining  their  present  lives  to
make  them  useful,  hence  I  speak
much  in  this  strain.  There  is  great
credit  due  the  female  portion  of  our
community  for  the  things  they  try
to  teach  their  children ;  still  I  would
like  to  see  a  closer  application  in
giving  their  daughters  a  good  sound
practical  moral  education.  I  feel
gratified  when  I  look  around  upon
the  congregation  and  see  many  of  the
mothers  wearing  dresses  they  have
made  themselves  of  wool  grown  in
this  Territory ;  and  I  have  not  seen
in  any  new  country  a  better  article  of
cloth  than  our  sisters  make  here ;  it
will  bear  the  inspection  of  the  most
fastidious  votaries  of  pride  and
fashion ;  in  that  class  of  goods  it  can-
not be  excelled.  Great  credit  is  due
to  this  people  for  the  progress  they
have  made.  We  have  not  in  our
society  an  aristocratic  circle.  Whether
a  brother  wears  a  coon  skin  cap  or  a
fine  beaver  hat  is  all  the  same  to  us.
If  a  person  is  a  faithful  servant  of
God  we  do  not  object  to  his  coming
to  meeting,  though  he  has  only  but  a
piece  of  buffalo  skin  to  wear  on  his
head.  We  partake  of  the  sacrament
with  him,  hail  him  in  the  street  as  a
brother  and  a  friend,  ride  with  him,
converse  with  him,  meet  with  him  in
Bocial  parties,  and  greet  him  as  an
equal.  I  also  see  brethren  walk  into
meeting  with  overcoats  on  which
their  wives  and  daughters  have  made,
but  suppose  you  had  not  the  means
for  getting  your  wool  carded,  nor  the
means  for  carding  it  yourselves,  could
you  have  produced  the  excellent
cloth  you  now  wear?  Ton  could
not.

I  delight  to  see  the  mother  learn
her  daugthers  to  be  housekeepers ;  to
be  particular,  clean,  and  neat;  to
sew,  spin,  and  weave ;  to  make  butter
and  cheese ;  and  I  have  no  objection
to  their  learning  to  cultivate  flowers


CAH,  FOR  TKAMSj  ETC


189


herbs,  and  useful  shrubs  in  the
gardens.  It  is  good  for  their  health
to  rise  early  in  the  morning  and  work
in  the  soil  an  hour  or  two  before
breakfast ;  this  practice  is  especially
beneficial  to  those  who  have  weak
lungs.  And  while  you  delight  in
raising  flowers,  &e.,  do  not  neglect  to
learn  how  to  take  care  of  the  cream,
and  how  to  make  of  it  good  whole-
Bome  butter,  and  of  the  milk  good
healthy  nutritious  cheese;  neither
forget  your  sewing,  spinning,  and
weaving ;  and  I  would  not  have  them
neglect  to  learn  music  and  would  en-
courage them  to  read  history  and  the
Scriptures,  to  take  up  a  newspaper,
geography,  and  other  publications,
and  make  themselves  acquainted  with
the  manners  and  customs  of  distant
kingdoms  and  nations,  with  their
laws,  religion,  geographical  location
on  the  face  of  the  world,  their  cli-
mate, natural  productions,  the  extent
of  their  commerce,  and  the  nature  of
w  their  political  organization ;  in  fine,
let  our  boys  and  girls  be  thoroughly
instructed  in  every  useful  branch  of
physical  and  mental  education.  Let
this  education  begin  early.  Teach
little  children  the  principles  of  order;
the  little  girl  to  put  the  broom  in  its
right  place,  to  arrange  the  stove
furniture  in  the  neatest  possible  way,
and  everything  in  its  own  place.
Teach  them  to  lay  away  their
clothing  neatly,  and  where  it  can  be
found;  and  when  they  tear  their
frocks  and  aprons  teach  them  how  to
mend  the  rent  so  neatly  that  the
place  cannot  be  seen  at  a  short  dis-
tance; and  instead  of  asking  your
husbands  to  buy  them  ribbons  and
frills,  learn  them  to  make  them  of
the  material  we  can  produce.  Teach
the  little  boys  to  lay  away  the  garden
hoe,  the  spade,  &a,  where  they
will  not  be  destroyed  by  rust ;  and
let  them  have  access  to  tools  that
they  may  learn  their  use,  and
develop  their  mechanical  skill  while


young ;  and  see  that  they  gather  up
the  tools  when  they  have  done  with
them,  and  deposit  them  in  the  proper
place.  Let  both  males  and  females
encourage  within  them  mechanical
ingenuity,  and  seek  constantly  to  un-
derstand the  world  they  are  in,  and
what  use  to  make  of  their  existence.

Ifc  is  unnecessary  to  send  to
England,  to  France,  to  the  East
Indies,  to  China,  or  to  any  other
country  for  a  little  crockery  ware,
silk,  calico,  muslin,  <fcc.,  for  we  can
make  those  articles  here.  We  need
the  machinery ;  let  us  unite  and  get
it.  Last  fall  brother  A,  R.  Wright
brought  in  an  excellent  piece  of
machinery  for  manufacturing  flax;
it  now  belongs  to  brother  Pyper,  I
woidd  like  to  see  some  man  manifest
interest  enough  to  take  that
machinery  and  put  it  to  work.
Thousands  of  pounds  of  flax  could
be  worked  up  by  it  this  coming  fall
and  next  winter.  Who  will  do  this  ?
I  know  not.

This  people  are  dilatory  in  some
things.  What  are  many  of  them
thinking  about  ?  The  kingdom  of
God,  sometimes.  They  want  to  pray
and  have  faith  just  sufficient  to  keep
in  the  path  of  the  angel  that  is  going
round  to  gather  up  the  righteous,  and
the  rest  of  the  time  their  minds  are
upon  a  gold  mine,  or  upon  going  to
the  States  to  buy  goods,  and  they  see
themselves  behind  a  counter,  "  Ah/'
think  they,  w  Won't  I  look  a  gentle-
manly looking  man  when  I  am  deal-
ing out  the  calico  ?  ,1  I  never  could,
the  poorest  day  I  ever  saw  in  my
life,  descend  so  low  as  to  stand  be-
hind a  counter.  Taking  that  class  of
men  as  a  whole,  I  think  they  are  of
extremely  small  calibre.

Women  and  children  can  deal  out
pins,  and  needles,  and  ribbons ;  this
is  too  trifling  a  business  for  men.  Their
business  is  to  organize  the  elements
and  draw  from  them  the  raw  material
in  abundance,  and  then  manufacture


190  joitbnal  or

it  into  those  things  which  are  calcu-
lated to  make  comfortable,  beautiful,
lovely,  healthy,  and  happy  God's
people.  Our  brethren  calculate  on
the  increase  of  Iheir  stock,  and  are
keen  to  gather  around  them  the
riches  of  this  life,  but  they  do  not
make  judicious  calculations  how  to
dispose  of  those  riches  to  the  best
advantage.  They  will  fill  the  whole
country  with  stock  of  every  kind,
but  can  see  no  way  how  ii  should  be
put  to  proper  use.  The  merchant
calculates  that  he  will  make  fifty  or
a  hundred  thousand  dollars  in  so
many  years,  but  if  you  ask  him  what
he  is  going  to  do  with  it  he  is
astonished  at  the  question,  for  he
never  thought  of  that.  All  he  thought
of  was  piling  up  the  riches.  Did  you
ever  think  it  was  your  privilege  to
place  those  riches  out  to  usury  in
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  ?
Do  you  not  belong  to  the  Church  of
God  ?  Do  you  not  pray  ?  What  do
you  pray  for  ?  One  says,  "  I  pray  the
Loitl  to  keep  and  preserve  me,  to
sanctify  me  and  prepare  nie  for  his
kingdom  and  glory ;  I  just  want  to
slip  inside  the  gate,  I  am  not  very
ambitious."  Do  you  think  anything
about  preparing  for  it  Lore  ?  "  Only
in  heart,  or  in  spirit.

My  doctrine  is,  to  put  every  dollar
to  usury  for  building  up  the
kingdom  of  God,  whether  it  be  much
or  little.  I  want  the  brethren  to
man  out  their  teams,  and  send  down
three  hundred  this  season,  and  four
or  five  hundred  when  required.  And
then  I  want  to  see  the  brethren  join
together  their  teams  and  money  and
send  for  machineiy,  besides  sending
teams  for  the  poor ;  and  thus  we  will
fill  the  Territory  with  the  necessary
articles  of  machinery  for  a  self-sus-
taining people.  It  is  necessary  for
us  to  sustain  ourselves,  or  we  wQl  be
left  in  poverty,  nakedness,  and  dis-
tress, as  a  consequence  of  war  and  the
breaking  up  of  the  general  govern-


DISCOTTRSES.

ment.  We  now  meet  men  who
seemingly  have  very  little  clotliing —
they  wear  patch  upon  patch,  I
would  not  by  this  remark  have  it
understood  that  clothing  onghf  not
to  be  neatly  and  somewhat  extensively
mended,  but  I  have  seen  men  wear
pantaloons  so  patched  that  it  would
puzzle  you  to  place  your  finger  upon
a  piece  of  the  original.  They  have
wives  and  daughthers,  but  they  lo
not  spin.  In  Exodus  we  read,  "  And
all  the  women  that  were  wise-hearted
did  spin  with  their  hands,"  If,  in-
stead of  our  wives  and  daughters
passing  their  hours  in  idleness,  fold-
ing their  hands,  and  rocking  them-
selves in  their  easy  chairs,  they  would
spin  a  little  wool,  and  a  little  cotton
from  our  Dixie,  or  that  grown  in  their
own  gardens  and  fields,  and  make
some  good  warm  clothing  for  the
men  and  boys,  and  some  linsey
frocks  for  the  women  and  girls,  they
could  with  propriety  be  called  wise
women  in  Israel.  If  you  happen  to
be  in  a  party  where  I  am  and  wear-
ing dresses  made  with  your  own
hands,  I  shall  take  pleasure  in
dancing  with  you  in  preference  to  the
lady  dressed  in  silks  and  satins.  We
can  do  this,  but  we  need  to  be  taught
day  after  day,  month  after  month,
and  year  after  year.

Human  beings  are  expected  by
their  Creator  to  be  actively  employed
in  doing  good  every  day  of  their
lives,  either  in  improving  their  own
mental  and  physical  condition  or  that
of  their  neighbours.  But  there  are
thousands  whose  days,  months,  and
years  are  nothing  more  than  a  blank ;
there  is  not  a  single  trace  upon  their
life's  pages  that  might  be  construed
as  useful  to  the  cause  of  humanity*
This  people  have  embraced  the
philosophy  of  eternal  lives,  and  in
view  of  this  we  should  cease  to  be
children  and  become  philosophers,
understanding  our  own  existence,  its
purpose  and  ultimate  design,  then  our


days  will  not  become  a  blank  through
ignorance,  but  every  day  will  bring
with  it  its  useful  and  profitable  em-
ployment, God  has  placed  us  here,
given  us  the  ability  we  possess,  and
supplied  the  means  upon  which  we
can  operate  to  produce  social,
national,  and  eternal  happiness.

Seeing  we  are  so  wonderfully  en*
dowed  with  priceless  gifts  by  our
Heavenly  Father,  will  he  not  require
usury  at  our  hands  ?  He  will.  But
he  has  made  us  agents  to  ourselves,
which  makes  us  responsible  for  the
way  in  which  we  use  the  talents  he
has  given  us,  for  the  manner  we  ex-
pend the  gold  and  silver,  the  wheat
and  fine  flour,  the  cattle  upon  a  thou-
sand hills,  and  the  wine  and  oil,  for
they  all  belong  to  Him ;  and  we  too
belong  to  Him,  but  he  has  created
man  after  His  own  image,  and  en-
dowed him  with  a  germ  of  independ-
ence that  will  crown  him  a  God


through  his  faithfulness.  He  requirea
us  to  devote  these  godlike  powers  to
our  own  advantage,  life,  wealth,
beauty,  comfort,  and  exaltation  by
giving  to  His  cause — the  cause  of
righteousness  —  universal  triumph
over  sin.  Then  do  not  hoard  up
your  gold ;  if  you  do,  it  will  canker,
but  put  out  every  dollar  to  usury.
Instead  of  your  souls  being  bound  up
in  your  cattle  and  other  property,
put  it  all  where  it  should  be  placed
for  the  benefit  of  the  kingdom  of
God  on  earth  and  for  his  glory.

I  have  merely  touched  this  subject.
I  wish  the  Elders,  and  we  have  many
talented  Elders,  to  verbally  follow
out  this  subject  in  the  afternoon,  and
then  physically  follow  it  out  by
rightly  using  your  cattle  and
waggons,  your  silver  and  gold,  and
your  time  and  talents,  then  God  will
bless  us.  Amen.


BOBBING  THE  DEAD-  —  DANCING,  NOT  A  PART  OF  THE
SAINTS*  RELIGION.— KINDNESS  IN  GOVERNMENT. — MORE
TELEGRAPHIC  WIRES,

Remarks  by  President  Bbigham  Young  made  in  the  Tabernadef  Great

Salt  Lake February  9,  1862,

BBPOBTEP  BY  G.  D.  WATT.


I  have  four  sermons  that  I  wish  to
preach  this  morning,  and  I  wish
about  thirty-five  minutes  in  which  to
preach  them*

The  first  subject  I  shall  notice  this
morning  is  robbing  the  dead.  Many
have  desired  me  to  express  myself  in
public  relative  to  what  has  transpired


in  our  grave  yard  during  four  or  five
years  past.  Robbing  the  dead  is  not  a
new  thing.  Robbing  dead  people  of
their  jewelry  and  clothing  is  cus-
tomary in  the  cities  of  Europe ;  and
it  has  been  and  is  customary  in  many
places  to  steal  the  body  for  the  pur*
pose  of  dissection. I  have,  in  the


t


192  JOURNAL  OJ

course  of  my  life,  been  under  the
necessity  of  watching  graves  to  keep
them  from  being  robbed.

It  appears  that  a  man  named  John
Baptiste  has  practised  robbing  the
dead  of  their  clothing  in  our  grave
yard  during  some  five  years  past.  If
you  wish  to  know  what  I  think  about
it,  I  answer,  I  am  unable  to  think  so
low  as  to  fully  get  at  such  a  mean,
contemptible,  damnable  trick.  To
hang  a  man  for  such  a  deed  would
not  begin  to  satisfy  my  feelicgs.
What  shall  we  do  with  him  ?  Shoot
him  ?  No,  that  would  do  no  good  to
anybody  but  himself-  Would  you
imprison  him  during  life?  That
would  do  nobody  any  good.  What  I
would  Jo  with  him  came  to  me
quickly,  after  I  heard  of  the  circum-
stance ;  this  I  will  mention,  before  I
make  other  remarks.  If  it  was  left
to  me,  I  would  make  him  a  fugitive
and  a  vagabond  upon  the  earth.  This
would  be  my  sentence,  but  probably
the  people  will  not  want  this  done.

Many  are  anxious  to  know  what
effect  it  will  have  upon  their  dead
who  have  been  robbed.  I  have  three
sisters  in  the  grave  yard  in  this  city,
and  two  wives,  and  several  children,
besides  other  connections  and  near
relatives.  I  have  not  been  to  open
any  of  their  graves  to  see  whether
they  were  robbed,  and  do  not  mean  to
do  so.  I  gave  them  as  good  a  burial
as  I  could  ;  and  in  burying  our  dead,
we  all  h&ve  made  everything  as  agree-
able and  as  comfortable  as  we  could
to  the  eye  and  taste  of  the  people  in
their  various  capacities,  according  to
the  best  of  our  j  udgments ;  we  have
done  our  duty  in  this  particular,  and
I  for  one  am  satisfied.  I  will  defy
any  thief  there  is  on  the  earth  or  in
hell  to  rob  a  Saint  of  one  blessing.
A  thief  may  dig  up  dead  bodies  and
Bell  them  for  the  dissecting  knife,  or
may  take  their  raiment  from  them,
but  when  the  resurrection  takes  place,
the  Saints  will  come  forth  with  all


DiscornsES.

the  glory,  beauty,  and  excellency  of
resurrected  Saints  clothed  as  they
were  when  they  were  laid  away.

Some  may  inquire  whether  it  is
necessary  to  put  fresh  linen  into  the
coffins  of  those  who  have  been  robbed
of  their  clothing.  As  to  this  you  can  -
pursue  the  course  that  will  give  you
the  most  contentment  and  satisfac-
tion ;  but  if  the  dead  are  laid  away  as
well  as  they  can  be,  I  will  promise
you  that  they  will  be  well  clothed  in
the  resurrection,  for  the  earth  and
the  elements  around  it  are  full  of
these  things.  All  that  is  needed  is
power  to  bring  forth  those  things
necessary,  as  Jesus  did  when  he  fed
the  multitude  with  a  few  loaves  and
fishes,  perhaps  no  more  than  would
on  ordinary  occasions  feed  six  men  ;
he  organized  the  elements  around,
and  fed  five  thousand,  In  the
resurrection  everything  that  is
necessary  will  be  brought  from  the
elements  to  clothe  and  to  beautify
the  resurrected  Saints,  who  will  re-
ceive their  reward.  I  do  not  trouble
myself  about  my  dead.  If  they  are
stripped  of  their  clothing,  I  do  not
want  to  know  it.

Some,  I  have  been  informed,  can
now  remember  having  had  singular
dreams,  and  others  have  heard  rap-
pings  on  the  floor,  on  the  bedstead,
on  the  door,  on  the  table,  Ac.,  and
have  imagined  that  they  might  have
proceeded  from  the  spirits  of  the
dead  calling  on  theii  friends  to  give
them  clothing,  for  they  were  naked.
My  dead  friends  have  not  been  to  me
to  tell  me  that  they  were  naked,  cold,
&c. ;  and  if  any  such  rappings  should
come  to  me,  I  should  tell  them  to  go
to  their  own  place,  I  have  little  faith
in  those  rappings.  If  I  felt  that  I
ought  to  pay  attention  to  such  things,
I  would  not,  so  to  speak,  let  my  right
hand  know  what  my  left  did ;  and  it
would  require  a  greater  power  than
John  Baptiste  to  make  me  believe
either  a  truth  or  a  lie.


BOBBING  THE  DEAD,  ETC.


193


I  thought  the  remark  made  hy  a
lad  to  a  group  of  weeping  women
was  very  appropriate,  though  I  do  cot
blame  them  for  weeping  when  they
saw  the  clothing  they  had  put  upon
their  departed  darlings;  said  he,
**  supposing  the  linen  was  all  burnt
up  and  the  ashes  scattered  to  the  four
winds,  could  not  the  angel  Gabriel
call  those  particles  together  as  easily
as  he  could  call  together  the  particles
of  the  body  ?  "  The  elements  are  all
here,  and  they  will  be  called  forth  in
their  proper  time  and  place.  Let  the
mind 3  of  the  people  be  at  rest  upon
this  matter.  What  has  been  done
they  cannot  help.  If  any  wish  to
open  the  graves  of  their  dead  and
put  clothing  in  the  coffins  to  satisfy
their  feelings,  all  right;  I  am  satis-
fied. I  am  also  satisfied  that  had  we
been  brought  up  and  traditionated  to
burn  a  wife  upon  the  funeral  pile,  we
should  not  be  satisfied  unless  this
practice  was  followed  out;  we  would
have  the  same  grief  and  sorrow  that
we  now  have  whea  we  find  that  our
drad  have  been  robbed  of  their
clothing  0:*  if  we  had  been  brought
up  as  our  natives  are,  when  a  chief
died  if  we  did  not  kill  a  wife  or  two,
a  few  horses,  or  a  few  prisoners,  <fcc.t
as  soon  as  the  darkness  of  night  set
in  we  very  likely  should  fancy  our-
selves haunted  with  the  spirits  of  the
dead,  dissatisfied  at  our  not  giving
them  proper  burial  rites,  and
company  to  pass  with  them  through
the  dark  shadows  of  the  grave  to  the
good  land  where  there  are  better
hunting  grounds-  ♦The  power  and
influence  of  tradition  has  a  great  deal
to  do  with  the  way  we  feel  about  this
matter  of  our  dead  being  robbed.

We  are  here  in  circumstances
to  bury  our  dead  according  to  the
order  of  the  Pries tood.  But  some  of
our  brethren  die  upon  the  ocean  ;  they
cannot  be  buried  in  a  burying  ground,
but  they  are  sewed  up  in  canvas  and
cast  into  the  sea,  and  perhaps  in  two

No.  13.


minutes  after  they  are  in  the  bowels
of  the  shark,  yet  those  persons  will
come  forth  in  the  resurrection,  and
receive  all  the  glory  of  which  they
are  worthy,  and  be  clothed  upon  with
all  the  beauty  of  resurrected  Saints,
as  much  so  as  if  they  had  been  laid
away  in  a  gold  or  silver  coffin,  and  in
a  place  expressly  for  burying  the
dead.  If  you  think  opposite  to  this
your  thoughts  are  in  vain.  "  And  I
saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  be-
fore God  ;  and  the  books  were  opened,
and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is
the  book  of  life :  and  the  dead  were
judged  out  of  these  things  which  were
written  in  the  books,  according  to  their
works.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead
which  were  in  it;  and  death  and  hell
delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in
them;  and  they  were  judged  every
man  according  to  their  works."  If
the  particles  of  which  the  body  is  com-
posed are  distributed  to  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  at  the  sound  of
the  trumpet,  when  the  dead  are  to
come  forth  the  dost  that  composed
their  bodies,  that  portion  which  is
suffered  to- endure,  will  come  from
the  ends  of  the  earth,  mote  by  mote,
particle  by  particle,  atom  to  atom,
bone  to  bone,  sinew  to  sinew,  and
flesh  will  cover  them,  and  the  same
body  will  come  forth  in  the  resur-
rection, as  much  so  as  the  body  of
Jesus  came  forth  from  the  tomb.

Do  as  yon  please  with  regard  to
taking  up  your  friends.  If  I  should
undertake  to  do  anything  of  the  kind,
I  should  clothe  them  completely  and
then  lay  them  away  again.  And  if
you  are  afraid  of  their  being  robbed
again,  put  them  into  yonr  gardens,
where  you  can  watch  them  by  day
and  night  until  you  are  pretty  sure  that
the  clothing  is  rotted,  and  then  lay
them  away  in  the  burying  ground.  I
would  let  my  friends  lay  and  sleep  in
peace.  I  am  aware  of  the  excited  state
of  the  feelings  of  the  conimuhity  ;  I
have  little  to  say  about  the  cause  of  it  ;

Vol.  IX.


194  JOUBNAL  OF

The  meanness  of  the  act  is  so  far
beneath  my  comprehension  that  I  have
not  ventured  to  think  much  about  it,

I  will  now  proceed  to  my  next  text,
I  have  lately  preached  a  short  sermon
to  the  Bishops,  in  a  Bishops'  meeting,
and  I  now  wish  to  present  the  subject
of  those  remarks  to  this  congregation ;
they  were  in  relation  to  the  Bishops
building  dancing  -  rooms  for  their
school-houses  and  ward  meetings.  In
my  heart,  soul,  affections,  feelings,
and  judgment,  I  am  opposed  to
making  a  cotillion  hall  a  place  of
worship.  All  men  have  their  agency,
and  should  be  permitted  to  act  as
freely  as  consistent,  that  they  may
manifest  by  their  acts  whether  they
are  controlled  by  the  pure  principle
of  righteousness.  Many  of  you  remem-
ber that  at  first  we  asssembled  in  a
bowery  on  the  south-east  corner  of
this  block,  where  we  met  lor  some
time  under  its  shade,  and  held
ptfeachii  g  meetings,  sacrament  meet-
ings, political  meetings,  and  every
kind  of  public  gathering,  because  it
was  the  only  place  that  would  then
accommodate  the  people.  Soon  after
that  we  built  this  Tabernacle,  We
probably  had  not  the  first  stick  of
timber  on  the  ground  before  I  was
besought  to  build  it  for  dancing  in
and  for  theatrical  purposes.  I  said
no,  to  every  one  that  requested  me  to
do  that.  I  told  them  that  dancing  and
theatrical  performances  were  no  part  of
our  religion  ;  we  are  merely  permitted
to  occupy  a  portion  of  the  time  in
those  amusements,  being  very  careful
not  to  grieve  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
More  or  less  amusement  of  that  kind
suits  our  organization,  but  when  we
come  to  the  things  of  God,  I  had  rather
not  have  them  mixed  up  with  amuse-
ment like  a  dish  of  sucotash.

I  like  to  dance,  but  do  I  want  to
sin  ?  No ;  rather  than  sin  I  would
wish  never  to  dance  or  hear  a  fiddle
again  while  I  live.  Let  that  which  I
would  sin  in  be  taken  from  me,  and


DI8C0UE8E.

let  me  be  kept  from  it  from  this  time
henceforth  and  for  ever,  no  matter
what  it  is.  I  like  my  pastitue3  and
enjoy  myself  as  you  do,  in  amuse-
ments wherein  we  do  not  siri.  Brother
E.  D.  Woolley  and  myself  had  some
conversation  on  this  subject,  and  he
thought  that  he  would  build  a  house  to
accommodate  social  gatherings  but
could  not  at  that  time  very  well  do
it,  sol  built  the  hall  which  is  called
the  Social  HalL  In  it  arc  combined
a  dancing-roora  and  a  small  stage  for
theatrical  performances.  That  is  our
fun  hall,  and  not  a  place  in  which  to
administer  the  sacrament.  We  dedi-
cated it  to  the  purpose  for  which  it
was  built,  and  from  the  day  we  fir6t
met  there  until  now,  I  would  rather
see  it  laid  in  ashes  in  a  moment  than
to  see  it  possessed  by  the  wicked.
We  prayed  that  the  Lord  would  pre-
serve it  to  the  Sainta ;  and  if  it  could
not  thus  be  preserved,  let  it  be  destroyed
and  not  be  occupied  by  the  wicked.
You  know  what  spirit  attends  that
room.  There  we  have  had  g«.  vernors,
judges,  doctors,  lawyers,  merchants,
passers-by,  &e.,  who  did  not  belong
to  our  Church,  and  what  has  been  the
universal  declaration  of  each  and
every  one  ?  "  I  never  felt  so  well
before  in  all  my  life  at  any  party  as
I  do  here;"  and  the  Saints  do  not
feel  as  well  in  any  other  place  of
amusement.  We  have  a  beautiful
assembly  room  in  the  13th  Ward,
but  you  cannot  feel  as  well  in  a  party
there  as  y  1  1  in  the  hall  that  was
built  and  cu-Oicated  to  that  purpose.
Every  thing  in  its  time,  and  every
thing  in  its  place.

In  the  year  1849, 1  think  it  was,
I  was  called  upon  to  give  a  draft  for
a  school-house,  that  would  be  com-
modious and  suitable  for  each  ward.
I  gave  that  draft,  and  I  do  not  think
that  I  could  now  alter  it  for  the
better.  Has  there  been  a  school-
house  built  according  to  the  draft  ?
There  have  been  a  few  wings  built.


and  the  main  body  of  the  building
I  drafted  was  not  intended  for  a
dancing-hall.  By  referri??g  to  the
plan  I  gave,  you  can  see  my  idea  of  a
Ward  school-house,  but  n  has  not
been  carried  out.  It  is  now  whispered
around  that  we  are  opposed  to  dancing
in  the  14th  Ward  School-room.  This
is  not  so,  I  have  been  there  several
times,  and  enjoyed  myself  well,  as
also  in  the  13th  Ward  house,  which
is  called  the  Assembly  Rooms,  though
I  would  call  it  a  cotillion  hall.  I  am
opposed  to  making  the  youth  of  our
land  believe  that  dancing  and  frolick-
ing are  a  part  of  our  religion,  when  in
truth  they  are  not  any  part  of  it,
though  I  Lear  from  every  quarter
that  the  Gentiles  say,  "I  like  this
part  of  your  religion,  for  I  understand
that  this  is  one  branch  of  your
religion,  and  I  like  this  dancing  very
much."  It  is  no  part  of  our  religion,
and  I  am  opposed  to  devoting  to  a
cotillion  room,  a  house  set  apart  for
the  worship  of  God.  I  am  opposed
to  having  cotillions  or  theatrical  per-
formances in  this  Tabernacle.  I  am
opposed  to  making  this  a  fun  hall,
I  do  not  mean  for  wickedness,  I  mean
for  the  recuperation  of  our  spirits  and
bodies,  T  shall  not  be  opposed  to  the
brethren's  building  a  meeting-house
somewhere  else,  and  keeping  their
cotillions  halls  for  parties,  but  I  am
not  willing  that  they  should  convert
the  house  that  has  been  set  apart  for
religious  meetings  into  a  dancing
hall.

I  will  now  pass  to  my  third  text
I  can  say  with  confidence,  that  there
is  no  people  on  the  face  of  this  earth
that  pay  more  respect  to  females  than
do  this  people.  I  know  of  no  com-
munity where  females  enjoy  the
privileges  they  do  here.  If  any  one
of  them  is  old  and  withered  and  so
dried  up  that  you  have  to  put  weights
on  her  skirts  to  keep  her  from  blowing
away,  she  is  so  privileged  that  she  is
in  every  body 's  dish  or  pi  att  cr — her  nose


is  everywhere  present— and  still  she
will  go  home  and  tell  her  husband  that
she  is  slighted.  Jlere  we  see  the
marked  effect  of  the  curse  that  was  in
the  beginning  placed  upon  woman,
their  desire  is  to  their  husbands  all
the  time.  It  is  also  written,  "  and  he
shall  rule  over  you."  Now  put  the
two  together.  Nobody  else  must  be
spoken  to,  no  other  body  must  be
danced  with,  no  other  lady  must  sit
at  the  head  of  the  table  with  her
husband.

A  few  years  ago  one  of  my  wives,
when  talking  about  wives  leaving
their  husbands  said,  "I  wish  my
husband's  wives  would  leave  him,
every  soul  of  them  except  my-
self,,"  That  is  the  way  they  all
feel,  more  or  less,  at  times,  both  old
and  young.  The  ladies  of  seventy,
seventy-five,  eighty,  and  eighty-five
years  of  age  are  greeted  here  with
the  same  cheerfulness  as  are  the  rest.
All  are  greeted  with  kindness,  respect^
and  gentleness,  no  matter  whether
they  wear  linsey  or  silks  and  satin,
they  are  all  alike  respected  and
beloved  according  to  their  behaviour ;
at  least  they  are  so  far  as  I  am
concerned.

It  may  be  all  well  enough  if  a
woman  can  attain  faith  to  throw  oft
the  curse,  bat  there  is  one  thing  she
cannot  away  with,  at  least  not  so  far
as  I  am  concerned,  and  that  is,  "and
he  shall  rule  over  thee/'  I  can  do
that  by  causing  my  women  to  do  as
they  have  a  mind  t<  >,  and  at  the  same
time  they  do  not  know  what  is  going
on.  When  I  say  rule,  I  do  not  mean
with  an  iron  hand,  but  merely  to  take
the  lead — to  lead  them  in  the  path  I
wish  them  to  walk  in.  They  may  be
determined  not  to  answer  my  will,
but  they  are  doing  it  all  the  time
without  knowing  it.  Kindness,  love,
and  affection  are  the  best  rod  to
use  upon  the  refractory.  Solomon  is
said  to  have  been  the  wisest  man  that
ever  lived,  and  he  is  said  to  have


190  JOURNAL  OF

recommended  another  kind  of  rod,  I
have  tried  both  kinds  on  children*  I
can  pick  out  scores  of  men  in  this
congregation  who  have  driven  their
children  from  them  by  using  the  ■
wooden  rod.  Where  there  is  severity
there  is  no  affection  or  filial  feeling  in
the  hearts  of  either  party ;  the  children
would  rather  be  away  from  father
than  be  with  him.

In  some  families  the  children  are
afraid  to  see  father — they  will  run
and  hide  as  from  a  tyrant.  My
children  are  not  afraid  of  my  foot-
fidl ;  except  in  the  case  of  their  having
done  something  wrong  they  are  not
afraid  to  approach  me.  I  could  break
the  wills  of  my  little  children,  and
whip  them  to  this,  that,  and  the
other,  but  this  I  do  not  do.  Let  the
child  have  a  mild  training  until  it  has
judgment  and  sense  to  guide  it  I
differ  with  Solomon's  recorded  saying
as  to  spoiling  the  child  by  sparing  the
rod.  True  it  is  written  in  the  New
Testament  that  "whom  the  Lord
loveth  he  ehasteneth,"  It  is  necessary
to  try  the  faith  of  children  as  well  as
of  grown  people,  but  there  are  ways
of  doing  so  besides  taking  a  club  and
knocking  them  down  with  it  "  If
you  love  me  keep  my  command- 1
ments,"  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you
and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and
lowly  in  heart ;  and  ye  shall  find  rest
to  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy
and  my  burden  is  light/*  There  is
nothing  consistent  in  abusing  your
wives  and  children.  There  is  quite
a  portion  of  the  Elders  of  Israel  who
do  not  know  how  to  use  one  wife  well.
I  love  my  wives,  respect  them,  and
honour  them,  but  to  make  a  queen
of  one  and  peasants  of  the  rest  I  have
no  such  disposition,  neither  do  I
expect  to  do  it.


DISCOURSES.

I  will  now  pass  to  my  fourth  text,
and  the  sermon  will  be  quite  brief  It
t$  well  known  that  we  now  receive
news  from  the  west  and  east  by  the
telegraphic  wire  that  is  stretched
across  the  Continent,  Last  night  we
read  a  manuscript  telegram,  contain-
ing yesterday's  news  from  New  York
City  and  Chicago.  There  are  a  great
many  in  this  Territory,  who  want
that  news  while  it  is  fresh,  but  it
goes  into  our  printing-office,  and  there
remains  from  two  to  five  days  before
the  people  can  get  it  I  want  a
company  raised  to  stretch  a  wire
through  our  settlements  in  this  Terri-
tory, that  information  may  be  com-
municated to  all  parts  with  lightning
speed.

I  am  now  constantly  annoyed  with
"  What  is  the  news  ?  Have  you
received  it  ?"  Yes,  we  have  received
it,  M  When"  Three  or  four  days
ago,  but  it  is  not  yet  set  up  ;  when,
at  the  same  time,  if  there  is  a  particle
of  manuscript  telegram  in  my  office,
they  never  rest  until  they  get  it;
and  when  they  have  got  it  they  seem
to  care  no  more  about  it.

T  wish  some  kind  of  arrangements
entered  into  whereby  we  can  have  the
news  before  us  in  some  reasonable
time.  We  have  been  put  ofi  with
printers'  excuses  until  I  am  tired.
We  send  down  to  the  printing-office,
and  inquire  if  the  extra  is  out.
Answer — 44  It  will  be  out  in  a  few
minutes.5*  We  wait  until  morning
and  send  again,  "  It  will  be  out  in  a
few  minutes ;  we  are  now  working  at
it;  when,  perhaps,  it  has  never  been
touched.  This  I  do  not  like.  Thus
endeth  my  fourth  and  last  sermon.

May  the  Lord  bless  you  all,  brethren.
Amen.


COVBTOUSNESS,  ETC


LU7


COVETOUSNESS. — LABOURS  OF  THE  ELDERS. — MISSION  TO
FORM  A  SOUTHERN  SETTLEMENT.— GRUMBLING.

Discourse  delivered  hj  Elder  George  A.  Smith,  in  the  Bowery,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  October  20,  1861,


H>] TOUTED  BY  J.  V,  XOXG-


I  regard  it  a  distinguished  privilege
conferred  upon  me,  whenever  I  have
the  opportunity  of  arising  in  this
congmgation  and  speaking  to  my
brethren  and  sisters*  The  Priesthood
which  the  Lord  has  conferred  upon
my  head  through  his  servant,  and
which  in  his  abundant  mercy  he  has
enabled  me  thus  far  to  magnify,  is
my  joy,  my  theme,  and  the  thoughts
and  reflections  of  my  soul  are  how
and  by  what  means  I  may  in  the  best
possible  manner  make  honourable  all
those  blessings  and  ordinations  which
have  been  conferred  upon  my  head.
It  is  and  ever  has  been,  since  I
entered  into  this  Church,  my  desire
to  be  found  among  those  who  are
valiant  for  the  truth.

The  light  of  the  fulness  of  the
everlasting  Gospel  which,  through
tbo  voice  of  the  servants  of  God  in
the  last  days,  called  through  the
instrumentality  of  Joseph  Smith  the
Prophet,  has  been  caused  to  shine  or
to  glimmer  in  every  part  of  the  earth,
gives  me  joy.  It  is  still  shining
forth,  and  has  caught  I  he  attention  of
thousands  that  are  now  here  in  this
Territory,  and  caused  them  to  come
to  Zion  for  the  purpose  of  worshipping
God  under  the  instruction  of  the
Prophets,  that  they  might  learn  niore  |
fully  the  mind  and  will  of  Heaven,
and^the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  that
are  necessary  for  the  living  and  the
dead,

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the
last  days,''  saith  the  Prophet,  u  that
the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house


shall  be  established  in  the  tops  of  the
mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above
the  hills;  and  all  nations  shall  flow
unto  it.  And  many  peopley&lm*!  go
and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up
to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  U>  the
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  he
wilt  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  \w  will
walk  in  his  paths :  for  out  of  Zion
shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word
of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem/' — Isaiah,
chap.  ii.  verses  2  and  3.

It  is  for  this  purpose  that  we  may
be  taught  of  the  ways  of  the  Lord,
and  that  we  may  walk  in  his  paths
that  we  have  gathered  from  almost
every  nation  under  heaven.

It  is  well  understood  that  the
human  race  have  been  traditioned  to
the  utmost  extreme  that  tradition
could  possibly  be  impressed  in  the
human  breast,  in  the  practice  of
covetousness,  the  worship  of  money,
the  love  of  earthly  goods,  the  desire
to  possess  property,  to  control  wealth,
has  been  planted  in  the  breast,  soul
and  heart  of  almost  every  man  in
the  world  from  generation  to  genera-
tion. It  has  been  the  great  ruling
Deity,  and  the  object  worshipped  by
the  whole  Christian  world.  It  has
found  its  way  into  the  pulpit,  into
the  monastery,  into  the  cloister,  and
into  every  department  of  life.  No
man  seems  to  desire  an  office,  or  is
called  upon  to  fulfil  an  office  for  the
public  good,  but  the  first  thing  to  be
considered  is,  What  will  it  pay  ?
How  much  can  we  make  ?  "  Is  there
money  in  it  ?" The  god  of  this  world


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


198

has  dominion  over  the  souls  of  men
to  an  unlimited  extent.  Let  an  Elder
go  among  them  to  preach  without
purse  or  scrip,  and  tell  them  so,  and
they  will  immediately  say,  "  We  can
believe  your  religion  a  great  deal
better  than  we  can  believe  that  you
come  to  preach  without  having  your
salary  paid.  Why,  the  assumption  is
ridiculous ;  do  not  think  to  stuff  us
with  such  a  doctrine  as  that."

With  these  traditions  firmly  im-
printed upon  our  minds  we  have  been
gathered,  and  have  brought  along  our
schooling  and  notions  that  we  have
imbibed  while  at  school;  but  with
all  these  things  we  brought  along  a
feeling  in  our  souls  to  build  up  Zion,
and  to  be  faithful  in  all  things  so
long  as  we  remain  in  this  life,  that
we  may  inherit  blessings  in  the  life
which  is  to  come*  We  came  here
inspired  with  a  feeling  to  awaken  in
our  breasts  an  unlimited  desire  to
labour  for  the  building  up  of  Zion,
and  this  desire  exists  in  a  great  many
Elders.  Some  of  the  brethren  have  de-
sired to  go  to  different  parts  of  the  earth
to  preach  the  Gospel,  part  of  them  for
the  sake  of  making  it  a  matter  of
profit :  yes,  men  who  have  been
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  will  dare
to  ask  how  much  they  can  make  of  a
Mission,  when  their  busimss  is  to
labour  for  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  This  feeling  of
speculation  has  gone  so  far  as  to
engross  the  attention  of  men  in  the
ministry,  so  that  wherever  they  have
gene  they  have  levied  grievous  con-
tributions upon  the  people,  and  it
seems  to  have  been  the  first  thing
about  which  they  have  planned,  and
that  every  step  they  have  taken  has
been  with  a  view  to  a  reward  in  gold !
In  some  instances  the  poor  have  been
taxed,  those  to  whom  the  Gospel
should  have  been  preached  freely,
without  money  and  without  price,  to
furnish  money  to  gratify  the  ambition
that  reigned  in  the  breasts  of  certain


Elders;  I  hope  they  are  not  manyf
but  there  are  a  few  instances  no  doubt.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Elders  that
have  remained  at  home  ever  since  the
Church  was  driven  from  Jackson
county,  and  that  have  continued  to
farm  and  perform  different  services  at
their  business,  have  not  by  any  means
been  idle  spectators,  but  they  have
been  pillars  in  the  Church.  For  as
soon  as  the  Church  was  organized,
Bishops,  Councillors,  and  Teachers
were  necessary  to  give  counsel  and  to
preside  in  the  temporal  aftairs  of  the
Church,  thereby  sustaining  the  king-
dom; and  while  these  and  many
other  Elders  have  not  been  conspicu-
ous as  Elders  travelling  abroad,  they
have  yet  been  pillars  at  home  in
constructing  and  building  up  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.

While  we  take  this  into  considera-
tion we  will  again  review,  for  a
moment,  the  present  acts  of  the  Elders
generally,  for  very  few  of  the  whole
body  of  the  Elders  can  be  pointed  out
as  having  done  a  great  work  at  a
particular  place.  What  the  world
call  having  done  a  great  work,  or  big
things,  is  somewhat  difierent  from  the
kind  of  work  that  the  Elders  in  this
Church  are  expected  to  do  For
instance,  it  is  said  that  Saint  Patrick
went  to  Ireland  and  banished  all  the
toads  and  frogs,  and  then  converted
the  whole  of  Ireland,  and  that  he  not
only  converted  the  people,  but  the
best  of  it  is  that  the  greater  part  of
them  remain  firm  to  the  faith  of
Catholicism  until  the  present  day.

There  are  a  few  Elders  who  have
baptized  their  thousands,  and  an
account  may  be  found  in  the  records
of  the  Church  of  some  who  have
gone  on  Missions  and  baptized  their
hundreds ;  but  as  a  general  thing  it
is  hard  to  find  but  few  who  were  very
distinguished  in  this  respect.  Con-
stant  labour,  diligence  and  humility
may  and  does  gather  many,  they  are
baptized  and  receive  the  fulness  of


C0VET0USXE3S,  ETC.


199


the  Gospel.  But  only  a  portion  of
those  who  have  embraced  the  Gospel
under  the  auspices  of  those  successful
Elders,  have  had  faith  and  energy-
enough  to  gather  with  the  Saints  to
lake  part  in  helping  to  build  up  Zion,
By-and-byo  sub-division  takes  place,
and  the  people  spread  themselves
abroad  upon  the  right  and  upon  the
left,  forming  new  settlements  all
through  this  great  desert.  In  this
way  the  work  has  attained  its  present
position,  and  tlie  kingdom  is  being
built  up.  It  is  like  the  labourer  with
his  spade  and  wheelbarrow,  who  com-
mences on  a  large  hill  and  digs,  and
finally  wheels  it  away.  Well,  says
the  passer-by,  that  is  small  business ;
but  by-and-bye  you  pass  that  way
and  the  hill  is  removed,  and  a  fine
city  is  on  its  site*

The  Elders  are  steadily  and  quietly
operating  fcr  the  spread  of  truth  and
the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  before  the  world  are  aware
of  it,  their  rotten  dynasties  and
corrupt  governments  will  be  under-
mined and  crumble  to  dust.  You
notice  a  bee,  it  carries  a  little  honey
to  the  hive,  and  continues  to  do  so
from  week  to  week  and  from  month
to  month,  and  lays  up  a  store  of  the
most  delicious  of  earthly  substance
and  the  choicest  of  earth's  sweets,
and  this  is  the  result  of  the  little  busy
bee.  So  it  is,  and  so  it  should  be
with  the  Elders  in  Zion.  It  is  not
that  we  are  required  to  do  and  perform
everything  in  a  minute,  but  by  using
the  minutes  to  do  the  little  things
that  arc  within  our  reach,  and  striving
always  to  do  them  properly,  Zion
is  silently  spreading  her  curtains,
strengthening  her  stakes,  and  length-
ening uat  her  cords,  and  she  will  so
continue  until  her  wisdom,  her  influ-
ence and  her  power  circumscribe  the
globe,  Who  is  doing  this  ?  The
Lord  is  doing  it  and  it  is  marvellous
in  our  eyes.  But  in  all  this  we  have
to  contend  with  our  tradition,  we


have  to  contend  with  the  god  of  this
world — the  love  of  money, — with  our
covetousnes,  and  we  have  to  contend
above  all  with  our  ignorance.  Men
can  sit  in  the  congregation  and  bo
taught  by  the  Presidency ;  yes,  be
taught  to  the  easiest  lessons  ever
taught,  year  after  year,  and  these
teachings  seems  to  make  no  impres-
sion upon  them.  Those  valuable
instructions  are,  to  a  great  many,
like  pearls  cast  before  swine.  Again
there  are  numbers  of  our  brethren
who  have  had  to  go  to  the  States  and
to  California,  in  order  to  see  the
difference  between  the  kingdom  of
God  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  DeviL
Then  after  a  few  years  they  come
back  and  say,  well  I  declare  I  never
saw  things  in  such  a  condition  before,
how  wicked  the  world  is  becoming
now  to  what  it  was  before  I  came
into  the  Church.  We  have  another
class  of  men  who  can  go  to  ward
meetings  and  say  they  would  laljour
to  build  up  the  kingdom,  and  even  to
build  a  city  upon  a  rock,  and  farm
upon  naked  land,  and  settle  upon  the
highest  peaks,  if  counselled  to  do  so.
But  there  are  extremes  of  expression
and  thought  To  go  forth  and  preach
the  Gospel,  teaching  faith,  repentance,
and  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
and  to  contend  against  the  arguments
presented  by  the  Gentile  world,  has
been  and  still  continues  to  be  one  of
the  most  laudable  employments  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  but  a  comparatively-
ignorant  man  can  do  it  It  is  not
the  learned,  nor  the  wise  men  the
Lord  called  to  do  this,  but  it  is  the
reverse ;  he  calls  the  weak  things  of
this  world  to  confound  the  wise  and
the  mighty.  It  reminds  me  of  a
story  that  Bishop  Hardy  tells  about
Luke  Johnson.  When  he  went  to
preach  the  Gospel  in  Massachussetts,
he  was  plainly  dressed,  his  trowsers
were  strapped  down  to  his  cowhide
boots,  because  they  were  not  quite
long  enough. One  man  said,  have


yon  seen  the  Mormon  ?  No,  was  the  ,
reply,  have  you  ?  Yes,  said  the  man,
I  saw  one  and  heard  him  preach,  and
he  said  44  the  Lord  hath  called  the
weak  things  of  this  world  to  confound
the  wise  and  mighty ,  and  by  mighty
I  thought  so."  It  was  but  a  little
while  till  the  only  argument  used
against  this  doctrine  was  mobocracy,
a  row  at  the  meeting,  a  coat  of  tar
and  feathers,  a  sliower  of  mud  or  the
lighted  torch.

The  man  that  exerts  his  power,
his  influence  and  understanding  to
guide  Zion  at  home,  to  develope  our
resources,  to  shape,  bend,  and  make
useful  the  elements  and  facilities
which  lie  dormant  in  these  surround-
ing hills,  has  to  possess  superior
wisdom,  a  greater  degree  of  know-
ledge ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  influences
the  leaders  of  this  Church,  those  that
are  called  to  act  as  Trustees,  or  in
any  other  department  of  the  home
aflairs  of  Zion.  It  is  required  of  us
to  seek  wisdom  out  of  the  best  books,
that  a  foundation  may  be  laid  and  all
things  properly  prepared  for  the  great
future,  that  our  institutions  may  be
rendered  permanent  and  self-sustain-
ing, that  all  things  may  be  properly
carried  on,  according  to  the  mind  and
will  of  Heaven*  It  is  in  this  respect
that  the  leaders  <>f  the  people  called
Latter-day  Saints  have  shown  them-
selves to  be  the  wise  men  upon  the
earth,  and  it  is  in  this  respect,  too,
that  a  large  portion  of  the  people
have  failed  to  see  the  grandeur  and
magnificence  of  the  Counsels  of  the
First  Presidency,  but  have  suffered
themselves  to  remain  in  ignorance
and  stupidity.

I  presume  now  that  in  speaking  at
the  present  time,  I  am  addressing  a
considerable  portion  of  those  brethren
who  have  been  called  on  to  strengthen
the  stakes  of  Zion  on  the  southern
borders  of  our  Territory.  The  Twelve
being  called  to  act  a  part  in  organiz-
ing this  Mission,  has  caused  me  to


fall  in  company  with  a  considerable
number  of  those  brethren  who  are
counselled  to  go  south  and  raise
cotton,  and  I  can  realize  to  a  great
extent  the  feelings  which  exist  in  some
of  their  breasts.  A  man  who  has
come  into  this  Valley  to  make  Zion
his  home,  has  gone  to  work  and  by
untiring  industry  has  surrounded
himself  with  comforts,  and  probably
with  wealth  and  an  abundance  of  this
world's  goods;  he  can  proclaim
himself  an  Elder  in  Israel  who  is
ready  for  anything.  Such  a  man
would  go  into  the  mountains  to  hedge
up  the  way  of  our  enemies,  go  abroad
and  preach  the  Gospel,  and  in  fact  he
will  find  himself  constantly  called  to
assist  in  establishing  Zion.

The  word  of  the  Presidency  is,
brethren,  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen
the  southern  border  of  our  thriving
Territory,  and  this  is  for  the  general
good  of  all.  Now  you  go  down  south
and  raise  cotton  and  you  will  be
blessed  more  than  you  ever  have  been
heretofore,  and  know  that  in  doing
this  you  arc  doing  your  part  to  build
up  Zion,  But  some  do  not  feel  so.
Why,  I  have  seen  faces  look  a^  long
as  a  sectarian  parson's  face,  compai^a-
tively  speaking  j  I  have  seen  diseases
appear  in  men  that  had  heretofore
been  considered  healthy,  and  that  too
as  soon  at  they  heard  they  were
wanted  to  perform  any  unpleasant
mission.  I  have  sometimes  argued
the  case,  and  tried  to  persuade
them,  in  r;gard  to  this  mission
that  it  would  do  them  good.  Oh,
but  they  will  reply  I  have  always
been  sick  in  a  warm  country.  Well,
I  have  told  them,  we  can,  in  the
cotton  country,  in  a  few  hours  riding,
give  you  any  climate  from  the  torrid
to  the  frigid  zone.  But  this  is  not
the  difficulty.  This  cotton  mission
rouses  up  covetous  feelings,  for  it
must  be  remembered  that  the  pro-
spects for  a  large  farm  are  not  very
good  there. We  can  make  more


CJVET0USNF5S,  ETC


201


here ;  we  can  get  more  wealth  and
get  along  faster  if  we  stay  here,  than
we  can  raising  cotton  in  Washing-
ton county.  And  in  fact  a  few  of  the
brethren  feel  disheartened  about  going
south  to  raise  cotton,  indigo,  and  such
other  articles  as  we  cannot  raise  in
this  pait  of  the  Territory.  A  brother
came  into  the  office  the  other  day  and
volunteered  to  go  south  to  the  cotton
country,  then  he  came  in  the  next
day  and  said  he  had  been  too  fast  in
volunteering,  that  he  had  not  got
sufficient  clothes  to  wear.  I  told  him
that  it  was  a  great  deal  warmer  in
that  country  than  it  is  in  this,  and
consequently  he  cyuld  do  with  less
clothing.  But  he  felt  that  he  must
go  to  work  and  get  more  clothing
for  his  family  before  he  could  go.  I
replied  that  1  considered  the  best  thing
he  could  do  was  to  raise  a  quarter  of
an  acre  of  cotton.  I  showed  him
some  cloth  that  my  wife  had  been
spinning  and  weaving.  Then  he  said
his  wife  did  not  know  how.  I  told
him  mine  did  not  until  she  learned-
It  has  been  my  lot  to  take  part  in
the  starting  of  settlements  in  the
southern  portion  of  this  Territory  ;  I
have  assisted  in  settling  the  country
from  the  cotton  district  in  Washing-
ton county  to  Utah  mountain.  It
used  to  be  nearly  as  much  work  to
get  a  man  to  go  to  Iron  county  as  it
was  for  John  Banyan  in  the  Pilgrim's
Progress  to  get  poor  Christians  into
heaven.  When  I  got  them  started
*  south,  they  would  meet  at  every
settlement  on  the  road,  men  who
would  discourage  them  by  saying
u  you  are  going  to  a  poor  country,  Oh
how  I  pity  you,  you  will  starve  in
that  miserable  country,  here  is  a  good
piece  of  ground  close  by  me,  you  had
better  stop,  I  can  sell  you  all  the
grain  you  will  want  for  seed  and  to
eat ;  you  are  going  away  out  of  the
world,"  In  this  way  hundreds  of
those  who  were  counselled  to  go  to
the  far  south  were  stopped  in  Utah  j


county,  or  turned  aside  from  fulfilling
what  was  desired  of  them.  When  I
led  the  first  company  to  Parowan,
some  of  the  brethren  insisted  there
was  not  grass  enough  to  keep  their
cattle  through  the  winter,  when  in
reality  there  was  an  abundance  of  feed
for  thousands  of  stock,  and  in  a  few
weeks  they  hardly  knew  their  own
cattle,  they  had  improved  so  much.
These  incidents  have  been  a  lesson  to
me,  and  I  felt  that  I  wanted  to  preach
to  the  brethren  upon  the  subject  of
going  south.  We  are  going  down
there  to  raise  cotton,  and  the  Presi-
dency want  men  who  are  called  to  go
upon  this  Mission  to  let  it  have  their
undivided  attention.

There  are  a  few  that  have  always
allowed  themselves  the  indulgence  of  h
whining  and  finding  fault  whenever
they  pleased.  This  is  very  wrong.  A
spirit  to  find  fault  is  an  enemy  to  your
peace  and  comfort,  and  also  to  the
happiness  of  those  around  you.  It  is
a  key  to  your  destruction.  It  is  so
in  our  home  affairs,  when  you  go
abroad  and  exercise  this  influence
among  the  people  you  sow  a  spirit  of
dissension  in  the  midst  of  Israel.  If
you  have  a  portion  of  Priesthood
upon  you;  you  disgrace  it  in  doing  so.
If  you  have  been  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins  you  dishonour  that
baptism  in  doing  this.  Some  will
grumble  and  quarrel,  until  they  go
into  partnership  with  Satan  to  oppose
the  kingdom,  lose  the  spirit  and  deny
the  faith.  It  is  Satan's  business  to
oppose  the  Saints,  but  those  profess-
ing to  be  Saints  should  labour  for  the
good  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

The  southern  settlements  were  at
first  considered  jrather  orderly,  more
so  than  some  of  those  nearer  this
city,  but  in  the  spring  of  1858,  there
was  an  influx  from  California  of  a
large  number  of  persons,  who  had
gone  there  because  they  were  not  con-
tented to  live  in  this  country,  and
|  who  could  not  enjoy  the  liberty  that


202


JOUBNAI,  OF  DISCOUBSES,


was  here.  Many  of  them  went  to  i
California  to  get  rich,  bat  a  spirit
came  over  some  of  them  that  the  Lord
was  going  to  destroy  all  the  Gentiles,
and  that  if  they  came  up  here  for  a
while  they  could  go  back  after  the  |
Gentiles  were  killed  off,  and  find
better r  diggings,  and  many  others
thought  their  brethren  were  in
trouble,  and  if  they  could  not  live
Mormonism  they  would  fight  for  it
any  how.  Several  hundred  persons
came  into  the  southern  counties  under
these  and  similar  influences,  and
intended  to  stay,  no  doubt,  until  the
vengeance  was  over  and  the  Gentiles
swept  off  from  the  earth,  then  some
thought  they  could  go  back  and  keep
tavern.  A  man  who  had  been  amonjr
the  Gentiles  and  served  the  Devil  for
several  years,  would  come  up  to  this
Territory  and  expect  to  be  respected
as  much  as  those  who  stayed  at  home
and  attended  to  their  own  business
and  laboured  for  the  good  of  the
kingdom,  when  it  was  as  much
as  an  Elder  could  do  who  had
stayed  at  home  and  helped  to  build
up  Zion,  to  retain  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  and  magnify  his  calling.  In
B  this  way  there  was  grumbling,  and  a
kind  of  dare-devil  influence  scattered
all  through  the  settlements.  We  saw
much  of  it  here,  but  where  the  settle-
ments were  small  an  influence  of  this
kind  took  deeper  hold  and  had  a  far
more  powerful  effect.  The  spirit  of
avarice  was  not  gratified,  the  Lord
had  not  designed  to  cut  off  the  wicked
to  please  a  few  avaricious  Mormons.
He  designed  those  who  professed  to
be  Saints  to  live  good  and  upright
lives,  and  to  exercise  a  holy  influence
over  the  children  of  men,  that  all  who
loved  the  truth  might  be  converted
and  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  As
soon  as  this  was  ascertained  many
went  back  again.

Brethren,  you  who  are  going  from
here  have  been  in  the  habit  of  hearing
the  President,  Sunday  after  Sunday,


and  where  you  have  been  considered
examples,  here  you  have  acted  as
Bishops,  High  Priests,  Seventies,
Elders,  or  Teachers,  and  your  example
should  be  a  good  one  and  worthy  of
imitation.  A  great  many  Elders
have  been  called  to  go  on  this  Mission
to  raise  cotton,  and  they  should  con-
sider themselves  as  much  on  a  Mission
as  if  they  were  among  the  nations
preaching  the  Gospel.  I  advise  every
man  to  fortify  his  mind  against  be-
coming like  Satan  in  accusing  the
brethren,  or  in  grumbling,  in  fault-
finding in  word,  in  thought,  or  in
your  hearts.  If  the  Mission  was  to
go  and  build  a  gity  on  a  rock,  my
advice  would  be,  go  at  it,  for  if  you
did  not  choose  to  do  that  you  would
have  a  chance  to  choose  a  sandy
foundation  which  would  not  be  proper
nor  beneficial,

1  wish  to  talk  to  the  brethren  on
this  principle  of  fault-finding.  If  wo
are  disposed  to  find  fault  with  the
Bishop,  with  our  wives,  with  our
neighbours,  with  the  Priesthood,  and
the  general  authorities  of  the  Church,
we  shall  have  all  the  influences  of
Satan  necessary  to  help  us  to  carry
out  our  design.  Those  who  practice
these  things  will  soon  be  full  of  hell
and  have  plenty  of  devils  to  help
them  to  carry  it  on.  You  are  called
upon  to  go  and  build  up  a  city  and
villages  for  a  stake  of  Zion,

When  you  first  came  here  you
dropped  down  into  a  desert,  went  to
work  and  made  it  blossom  as  the  rose-
Then,  when  you  have  done  this,  you
have  to  go  to  other  places  and  make
them  blossom  also.  You  have  got  to
lay  out  the  streets,  make  fences,  and
build  houses,  and  do  everything  that
will  make  a  city  pleasant,  agreeable,
and  inviting.  We  can  get  up  in  our
meeting  and  sing : —

44  The  cities  of  Zion  soon  shall  rise,"

but  how  are  they  going  to  rise  ?  We
are  going  to  build  them,  so  that  they
will  rise  far  above  the  clouds ;  and  to


COVETOtfSNES*,  ETC


203


accomplish  this  we  are  going  to  build
them  on  the  high  mountains.  We
are  not  only  going  to  sing  about
building  them,  but  wo  are  going  to
do  the  labour  requisite  to  carry  out
our  designs.

Now,  I  do  not  wish  a  solitary  man
to  go  down  there  to  perform  this
service  that  can  not  go  with  his  whole
heart.  If  he  has  got  a  splendid
house,  a  mill,  or  farm,  or  carding
machine  in  this  part  of  the  Territory
and  his  heart  is  set  upon  it,  his  soul
will  be  here.  He  will  be  like  some
Elders  that  are  sent  to  England  on
missions;  they  say  "yes,  I  will  go
and  preach  "  but  when  they  get  there
it  is,  "  Oh  dear  if  I  was  but  at  home."
If  I  were  presiding  over  such  a  man
I  would  send  him  home,  so  that  I
might  get  rid  of  the  poisoning  influ-
ence of  his  company.  I  want  a  man
that  is  going  on  a  Mission  to  say  wife,
children,  the  Lord  gave  you  to  me,  I
will  go  and  do  my  duty,  and  hereby
show  to  him  and  to  all  men  that  I  am
worthy  of  you.

In  this  case  the  Mission  to  which
you,  brethren,  are  called  is  to  build  a
city  ;  it  calls  for  wives,  children,  for
machinery,  for  mechanics,  for  every
thing  that  is  calculated  to  add  to  the
comfort  and  happiness  of  the  citizens
of  a  city.  We  are  not  going  to  be  a
great  while  isolated  from  our  brethren,
but  we  are  going  to  assist  in  building
np  Zion.  We  want  all  necessary  and
important  improvements,  and  if  we
build  a  telegraphic  line  from  here  to
Santa  Clara,  it  won't  cost  more  than
fifty  thousand  dollars.  But  you  need
not  be  afraid  of  leaving  head-qnarters,
for  although  we  cannot  all  live  at  head-
quarters we  expect  that  head-quarters
will  be  connected  with  every  part  of


the  world,  and  when  Zion  is  not  big
enough  for  us,  the  Lord  will  be
willing  to  stretch  it  so  as  to  make
room  for  his  Saints.  Oh,  says  a
brother,  I  am  perfectly  willing  to  go,
but  I  understand  that  we  are  only  to
cultivate  three  acres  of  land  each  and
I  cultivate  thirty  at  home.  Remem-
ber the  Lord  has  said  that  it  his
business  to  provide  for  his  Saints,
therefore  if  we  cultivate  a  small  farm
when  we  are  required  to  do  so,  he
will  give  us  a  big  one,  for  there  is
plenty  of  land  in  the  hands  of  those
who  do  not  respect  him,  and  if  we
are  faithful  we  may  expect  to  be
made  rulers  over  many  things.

I  want  our  sisters  that  are  called
to  go  with  their  husbands,  to  culti-
vate a  spirit  of  joy,  cheerfulness  and
satisfaction,  and  feel  a  pleasure  in
going.  They  ought  to  feci  that  they
are  honoured  in  being  called  to  go
and  build  up  the  cities  of  Zion.  This
is  the  advice  that  I  give  to  the
brethren  and  sisters  upon  this  subject,
aud  I  do  not  want  the  Californians  in
the  southern  settlements  to  say,
brother  George  A.  is  this  a  specimen
of  Salt  Lake  City  grumblers  ?  They
can  beat  us,  who  have  been  to  Cali-
fornia, in  murmuring,  for  although  we
would  rather  live  here  than  anywhere
else,  we  should  discipline  our  minds
to  live  where  we  can  be  the  most
useful  to  the  cause  of  Zion,  We
should  manifest  our  joy  that  we  have
had  the  high  privilege  of  helping  to
enlarge  the  bonlers  of  Zion,  to  inspire
them  with  a  spirit  of  faith  fulness  and
industry,  I  was  pleased  when  brother
Spencer  asked  me  to  speak.

May  the  blessings  of  Israel's  God
rest  upon  you  alb  Amen.


204,


3  Ol'BNAL  OF  DI8COrBSE8


THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  GOSPEL.

i

Discourse  ly  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt,  delivered  in  Hie  Bmoery,  Great  Salt

Lake  CUyt  Sunday  Morning  ^  August  26,  1855,


R  K PORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


I  rise  before  you  this  morning,  my
friends  and  brethren,  to  preach  to  you
the  everlasting  Gospel,  for  as  my
calling  has  been  for  the  last  quarter
of  a  century  to  proclaim  Uiis  Gospel,
I  have  always  endeavoured  to  do  my
duty  both  before  you  and  others,  here
and  in  many  other  places.

Before  I  came  here  this  morning
I  was  thinking  what  shall  I  say  to
the  brethren  and  sisters,  if  culled
upon  to  speak,  and  after  a  moment's
reflection,  I  said,  I  *vill  preach  the
Gospel,  and  when  brother  Kimball
called  upon  me  to  address  you,  he
said,  "  Brother  Parley,  we  want  you
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  us."

The  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ,  is  the  only  system
whereby  man  can  be  saved,  and  his
being  the  only  name  whereby  we  can
approach  our  Father  in  Heaven  with
acceptance,  the  only  name  in  which
remissions  of  sins  can  be  obtained,
and  the  only  name  whereby  man  can
have  power  over  unclean  spirits,  over
Devils,  over  diseases,  over  the  ele-
ments, and  over  everything  this  side
the  celestial  kingdom  and  its  influ-
ences ;  it  is  of  the  highest  importance,
therefore,  that  this  message  of  life
should  be  declared  to  all  the  world.

This  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,
was  once  born  in  Bethlehem,  crucified
on  calvary,  risen  again  from  the  dead,
and  having  ascended  to  his  Father
and  to  our  Father  to  lead  captivity
captive  and  give  gifts  unto  men,  his
name  has  become  the  only  name


under  h-aven  through  which  man
may  be  saved,  receive  everlasting  life
and  exaltation  ;  it  is  the  only  name  by
which  man  can  get  remission  of  sins,
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  all  its
attendant  blessings;  it  is  the  only
name  by  which  we  may  approach  our
Father  in  heaven  and  invoke  his
blessings — the  only  name  by  which
we  may  control  disease  and  the  very
elements  by  the  power  of  his  Spirit
and  the  authority  of  his  Priesthood.

This  same  Jesus,  after  having  risen
from  the  dead,  after  having  received
all  power  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth,
gave  a  mission  to  his  Apostles,  Peter
and  others,  to  go  irto  all  the  world,
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,
baptize  them  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  gave  commandments  that  repent-
ance and  remission  of  sins  should  be
preached  in  his  name  in  all  the  world,
beginning  at  Jerusalem,

Having  given  these  commandments
and  instructed  his  Apostles  that  they
should  teach  all  things  whatsoever  he
commanded,  he  ascended  up  on  high
an  1  took  his  seat  upon  the  right  hand
of  God  his  father,  and  he  then  shed
forth  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
bestowed  gifts  upon  men.

Those  Apostles  began  at  Jerusalem
to  perform  the  duties  of  their  Mission,
for  it  had  been  said  that  they  should
tarry  there  until  they  were  endowed
with  power  from  on  high  ;  and  after
receiving  this  power  they  stood  forth
and  preached  to  the  people  on  the  day


i  HE FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  GOBVKL


205


of  Pentecost  the  crucified  and  risen
Redeemer,  and  when  the  people  were
convinced  of  the  death  and  resurrec-
tion of  the  Messiah,  and  wished  to
know  what  to  do  to  get  rid  of  their
sina  and  become  acceptable  in  the
sight  of  Heaven ,  Peter  told  them  to
repent  and  be  baptized  every  one  of
them  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  he  then
added,  for  the  promise  is  to  you  and
to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are
afar  off,  even  to  as  many  as  the  Lord
our  God  shall  calL

This  being  written  in  the  2nd  chap,
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  in  the
New  Testament,  as  the  tirst  instruct-
ions given  by  Peter  and  the  Apostles
at  the  place  appointed,  and  at  the
time  appointed,  and  under  the  cir-
cumstances appointed,  and  this  being
the  first  attempt  to  carry  out  the
great  mission  "  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  world,1'  hence  we  conclude  that
the  Gospel  there  preached,  was  the
same  Gospel  that  was  to  he  preached
in  all  the  world,  and  that  was  to  be
efficacious  to  all  the  world,  it  matters
not  what  colour  or  country,  what
nation  or  language,  learned  or  un-
learned, Hindoo  or  anything  else  ;  it
was  the  everlasting  Gospel  given  by
the  Saviour  at  the  place  appointed,
and  at  the  time  appointed,  when  they
were  endowed  with  power  from  on
high,  the  Holy  Ghost  descending
upon  them  agreeably  to  the  promise.

Consequently,  -at  that  time  and
under  those  circumstances  which  I
have  briefly  named,  the  Apostles
made  that  proclamation,  viz.,  that  all
should  repent  and  be  baptized  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  and  they  were  told  that
all  who  would  do  this  should  receive
the  remission  of  sins,  and  that  the
Gospel  with  its  promises  should  go  to
every  creature,  and  whether  in  some
distant  age  or  country  that  mankind
should  be  found,  it  matters  not ;  there
the  Lord  should  send  his  Gospel  with


the  promise  of  remission  of  sins,  and
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Gliost  thiough
obedience  to  the  Gospel ;  yes,  in  everv
place  and  among  all  people  the  pro-
mises should  hold  good  and  the  signs
follow  them  that  believe.

This  Gospel,  its  history  and  cha-
racteristics, are  clearly  recorded  in
the  New  Testament,  in  the  English
version,  translated  by  the  order  of
King  James,  and  handed  down  to  ils
by  our  fathers,  and  it  is  also  given  to
us  by  our  fathers  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  and  in  many  other  good
books,  and  in  the  words  of  many
other  good  men  who  lived  in  ancient
times,  and  in  the  woids  of  many
modern  men,  and  many  of  our  young
men  are  made  partakers  of  it  by
becoming  members  of  the  Church  of
Christ,  and  they  know  what  it  is  to
become  members  of  the  body  of
Christ,  and  to  be  justified,  freed  from
sin,  and  to  stand  bo  lure  God  with
clean  hearts  and  pure  minds.

We  have  to  know  these  things,
and  to  be  made  sensible  of  what  it  is
to  feel  the  satisfying  influence  of  his
Holy  Spirit.

Mind  you  do  not  forget  when  we
preach  this  Gospel  that  it  is  a  Gospel
of  repentance ;  do  not  slip  over  part
of  it,  but  while  summing  it  up,  look
at  it  item  by  item.  It  is  the  Gospel
of  repentance,  not  a  mere  Gospel  of
baptism,  but  ,t  Compel  of  repentance
and  remission  of  sins  to  be  preache  d
in  all  the  world.

Why  have  any  people  a  notion  or
disposition  to  obey  this  Gospel  ?  How
can  the  people  determine  whether
this  Gospel  is  good  ? — whether  it  is
of  any  value  to  them,  or  what  it  will
do  for  the  people  generally  if  com-
plied with  ?  What  would  this  Gospel
do  for  the  people  of  any  age  if  they
would  obey  it  as  a  people  ?  Whether
it  were  a  neigbourhood,  a  town,  a
city,  a  nation,  or  a  world,  or  a  million
of  worlds.  I  ask  what  would  it  do
for  that  neighbourhood,  that  people,


206


JOUBXAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  city,  that  nation ,  or  that  world  ?
I  will  tell  you.  There  would  be  do
thieving  there  any  longer,  there  would
be  no  lying  there  any  longer  no  cheating
no  deceiving,  no  intentional  breaking
of  promises,  no  wrong  dealing,  no
extortion,  no  hatred,  no  envy,  and  no
evil  speaking.  But  why  would  all
these  things  cease  ?  Simply  because
they  obeyed  the  Gospel ;  because  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel  implies  repentance,
wh  ich  means  no th  i n g  more  nor  lessthan
putting  away  all  our  evils  and  ceasing
to  do  them.  Among  the  people  that
obeyed  the  Gospel,  there  would  be  no
longer  adulterers,  nor  fornicators,  nor
any  other  evil  that  you  can  name.

Now  what  cause  of  objection  can
people  have  in  any  age,  among  any
nation  or  language — in  England  or
in  Texas,  or  any  where  else  to  a
Gospel  that  would  have  a  tendency
to  put  away  all  those  evils  from
among  men  ?  But  say  you — Are
there  no  evils  where  this  Gospel  is
obeyed  ?  No  sir ;  where  this  Gospel
prevails  in  the  heart  of  an  individual,
that  individual  ceases  from  those
things  which  are  evil,  for  he  is
cleansed  from  them  ;  he  refrains  from
all  that  tends  to  evil ;  as  the  Gospel
influences  a  man's  heart,  he  ceases  to
countenance  all  evil  practices,  and
where  the  Gospel  influences  his  family,
there  is  a  family  without  those  evils,
and  if  a  town  or  a  city  can  be  found
that  is  influenced  by  the  Gospel,  there
you  will  find  n  town  or  city  without
those  evils  win  .  I  have  named,  and
you  will  find  them  gradually  putting
away  those  which  may  be  amongst
them  as  fast  as  they  perceive  them.

But  really,  says  one,  in  Utah,  I
thought  the  Gospel  was  pretty  well
obeyed,  and  yet  we  are  not  without
those  evils,  we  are  not  entirely  free
from  those  sins.  Allowing  such  to  be
the  case,  that  does  not  make  these
words  false.  Show  me  a  man  that  is
guilty  of  false  swearing,  a  mau  that
is  found  traducing  his  brethren,  or


that  is  found  evil  speaking,  or  that  is
a  fornicator,  or  a  thief,  and  I  will
show  you  a  man  that  does  not  obe
the  Gospel ;  he  may  call  himself  a
Mormon,  a  Latter-day  Saint,  or  a
brother  in  Christ,  but  that  is  not  prov-
ing that  he  has  repented  of  his  sins,  but
as  repentance  is  a  part  and  parcel  of
the  everlasting  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  without  which  we  cannot  be
benefitted  by  his  atonement  and  his
mercy,  we  cannot  have  the  blessings
he  purchased  without  wre  associate
repentance  with  cur  faith.  I  say,
as  repentance  is  an  essential  part  of
the  Gospel,  that  the  man  who  has  not
put  away  his  sins  has  deceived  him-
self, because  this  repentance  is  one  of
the  first  principles  of  salvation.  If  I
have  other  sins,  and  then  add  the  sin
of  f  neglecting  repentance,  my  case  is
still  worse  than  it  wTas  before-

I  have  known  the  Gospel,  as  I
remarked,  for  25  years,  and  in  that
time  I  have  materially  altered  my
views  upon  some  points.  I  then
thought  that  they  came  into  the
Church  for  the  purpose  of  repenting
and  forsvking  their  evils,  and  receiv-
ing the  Gospel  wTith  all  their  hearts
and  a  resolution  to  do  right.  Well,
it  is  true,  that  their  is  a  oneness  as
far  as  repentance  and  faith  are  con-
cerned in  the  outward  acknowledg-
ment, but  do  all  who  in  word
acknowledge  the  Gospel  forsnke  their
sins  ?  We  would  all  like  to  >ce  such
a  state  of  things  in  the  world ;  we
would  like  to  see  our  neighbours  for-
saking their  sins,  even  if  we  could  not
forsake  and  overcome  our  own  dear
sins.  Suppose  we  happen  to  repent
and  leave  off  our  sins,  would  not  that
be  about  right?  Would  not  that
answer  for  us  without  waiting  for
others  ?— or  can  we  have  some  cere-
mony performed  that  will  do  as  well,
something  besides  leaving  off  our  sins
and  leading  a  new  life  ?

Perhaps  we  may  not  come  to  the
repentance  of  fear,  or  feel  afraid  of


THE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OP  THE  GOSPEL.


207


doing  wrong,  but  the  other  part  we
will  come  to  says  one,  for  instance,
the  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins
given  by  the  Savioor,  in  whose  name
we  can  receive  every  good  gift,  and
without  whose  name  we  cannot
receive  any  spiritual  gift.  Then  seeing
that  he,  with  all  this  power  in  his
hands,  and  lie  knowing  all  things  that
would  be  good  for  man,  not  only
ordered  that  repent" nice  should  be
preached  in  his  name,  but  that  the
Apostles  should  baptize  the  people  in
his  name,  and  to  fulfil  this  Mission
they  did  baptize  the  penitent  believer
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  they
exhorted  the  people  every  one  of
them  to  repent  and  obey  this  ordi-
nance for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
they  also  assured  them,  that  if  they
would  do  so  they  should  have  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Apostles
further  assured  them  that  this  pro-
mise wan  to  them  that  were  afar  off,
to  all  nations  and  countries,  it  ex-
tended  to  every  creature !

And,  now,  what  objection  can  a
man  have  to  obeying  one  part  more
than  another  part  of  the  Gospel?
Why  should  men  have  such  various
opinions  about  the  Gospel  when  it  is
so  plainly  set  forth  ?  One  man  says,
I  suppose  that  baptizing  or  sprinkling
me  when  I  was  an  infant  was  suffi-
cient, for  that  was  the  custom  in  those
days,  and  I  suppose  they  called  that
baptism.  Well,  have  we  not  shown
you  that  repentance  was  of  God,  and
therefore  that  all  men  must  repent  ?
Jesus  Christ  did  not  come  to  call  the
righteous  but  sinners  to  repentance,
and  he  also  commanded  his  servants
to  go  forth  testifying  to  those  that
were  seeking  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  gave  them  power  to  heal  the  sick
and  cast  out  Devils,

Can  little  children  commit  sins  ?
Can  they  hear  the  Gospel  and  receive
it  in  their  hearts?  Can  little  children
reason,  think,  repent,  and  bring  forth
finite  meet  for  the  kingdom  of  God  ?


Can  little  children  be  instructed  to  obey
the  Gospel  in  their  infancy  ?  To  all
these  questions  every  rational  man
would  answer — No,  Well,  then,
what  have  we  to  do  with  the  Gospel
as  it  pertains  to  little  children  ?  We
are  willing  to  carry  out  the  instruction
of  the  Saviour  where  we  are  told  to
bless  them,  and  this  we  are  willing
to  do  wherever  we  see  them,  and  to
pray  for  them,  but  to  sinners  that  are
sufficiently  grown  to  be  free  to  act
for  themselves ;  persons  who  are  suffi-
ciently grown  to  be  accountable  before
the  Almighty,  and  to  be  capable  of
conceiving  sin  in  their  hearts,  and  of
bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  it,  to
such  was  repentance  and  baptism,
and  therefore  the  Gospel  could  never
be  applied  to  little  infants  ;  it  was  a
Gospel  of  voluntary  obedience,  and
therefore  it  could  not  apply  to  the
infant  in  its  mother's  arms.

Go  and  "  teach"  all  nations,  and
baptize  the  people;  not  tho  teaching
to  "  follow"  baptism,  but  teach  them
to  observe  all  the  things  spoken  by
Jesus,  Well,  now,  if  you  baptize  a
little  infant,  then  remember  to  tell  it
all  the  things;  teach  it,  then  baptize,
after  which  you  must  teach  it  to
observe  all  things.

But  you  see  it  won't  require  a  dead
form  to  carry  out  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  but  an  infant  could  not  ask
what  is  the  Word  ?  Persons  have
been  used  to  trust  to  a  dead  form  and
have  their  childien  sprinkled,  but  if
any  of  you  were  sprinkled,  it  was  at  a
time  when  you  could  not  help  your-
self, and  hence  you  do  not  know
anything  about  it,  only  that  you  have
been  told  that  somebody  sprinkled
you  when  an  infant.

Then,  notwithstanding  your  infant
sprinkling  you  never  obeyed  the
Gospel,  because  it  was  a  Gospel  of
repentance,  and  is  to  be  so  when
carried  to  all  whom  the  Lord  our  God
shall  call.  The  Gospel  which  we
have  to  preach  is  a  Gospel  of  repent-


208


JOURXAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ance  and  of  remission  of  sins  to  every
one  that  will  obey  it,  including  a
baptism,  a  voluntary  baptism,  which
is  applicable  to  all  the  trnly  obedient,
in  every  nation,  who  are  determined
to  lead  a  new  life,  and  bring  forth
fruit  meet  for  repentance,  and  what
was  it?  The  Apostle  in  the  New
Testament,  informs  us  that  it  was  "  to
be  buried  with  Christ  by  baptism  into
his  death,  and  rise  to  newness  of  life
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection/1

In  my  travels  abroad,  I  sometimes
meet  among  many  others,  members
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  so  called ;
I  believe  they  call  themselves  such.  I
say  to  them — Are  you  sure  there  was
such  a  church  as  that  in  the  days  of
the  Apostles,  and  thai  you  are  mem*
bers  of  that  church  ?  If  th^re  was
such  a  church,  says  I,  it  is  spoken  of
in  the  New  Testament  Well,  are
you  sure  that  you  are  a  member  of
the  Church  of  Rome,  that  is  spoken
of  as  having  grown,  and  swelled,  and
perpetuated  itself  ?  How  have  you
become  such  ?  By  being  baptized
is  the  answer.  Then  you  would  think
an  unbaptized  person  was  not  a  mem-
ber of  that  church  ?  Yes,  we  would
consider  all  such  persons  aliens.

Well  then,  I  will  convinceyou  thatjrou
are  not  a  legal  member  in  the  Church
of  Rome,  baptism  being  the  initiatory
right  into  that  church.  How  will
you  do  it,  says  he?  Because  the
Apostle  in  his  epistle  gives  instruct-
ions and  directions,  how  every  mem-
ber was  initiated  into  the  Church  that
was  established  by  himself  at  Rome.
He  says  that,  "  As  many  of  you  as  have
been  baptized  into  Christ  have  put
on  Christ,  and  if  ye  have  put  on
Christ,  then  are  ye  Christ's."

He  also  says,  M  Know  ye  not,  that
so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into
Jesus  Christ  were  baptized  into  his
death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried
with  him  by  baptism  into  death :
that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from
the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,


even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  new-
ness  of  Hfe.  For,  if  we  have  been
planted  together  in  the  likeness  of
his  death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the
likeness  of  his  resurrection  :  knowing
this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified
with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might
be  destroyed,  that  henceforth  we
should  not  serve  sin,"  —  Romans,
chapter  6.

Now,  says  I,  remember  that  every
one  of  your  members  of  the  Church
of  Rome  have  been  buried  with
Christ  by  baptism  into  death,  and
hence  you  must  have  risen  to
newness  of  life  in  the  likeness  of  his
resurrection,  So  writes  the  Apostle
to  the  true  Church  of  Rome,  and  you
will  find  it  in  the  New  Testament  as
before  stated*

Now,  then,  says  I,  you  have
acknowledged  tliat  no  man  is  a
member  of  the  Church  of  Rime
unless  he  has  been  baptized,  and  the
Apostle  himself  says,  that  every  mem-
ber of  the  Church  of  Rome  has  been
buried  with  Christ  by  baptism,  and
has  risen  again  from  that  grave  into
the  likeness  of  his  resurrection.
Where,  sir,  were  you  buried  with  him,
and  when  did  you  rise  from  that
grave  in  the  likeness  of  his  death  and
resurrection  ?  And  have  you  ever
led  a  new  life,  avoiding  this  sin  and
the  other  which  you  before  were
guilty  of?

Well,  says  the  professor  of  Roman
religion,  you  have  got  us  in  a  curious
position,  I  must  acknowledge ;  I  will
have  to  give  it  up,  for  that  is  true ;
it  is  the  written  word  of  an  Apostle
of  God.

I  have  never  become  a  member  of
the  Church  of  Rome,  and  am  conse-
quently an  heathen,  according  to  the
views  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
I  have  conversed  with  men  who  have
come  out  as  honestly  as  men  could  in
their  positions.  Members  of  the
Catholic  Church  have  come  out  as
honest  as  I  have  stated,  and  said  that


fHE  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  tffR  GOSPEL.


209


they  must  give  up,  bat  the  Protest-
ants are  very  tenacious,  and  will  stick
to  their  creed  often  in  spite  of  reason,
I  presume  they  are  like  all  men  in
reference  to  tenacity,  they  would  stick
to  their  oath,  that,  if  possible,  they
might  gain^onverts  to  their  faith.

The  question  is  often  asked,  are
there  any  honest  people  among  this
sect  and  the  other  party ;  I  tell  you
there  are  honest  men  in  every  sect  of
religionists,  and  if  you  try  to  classify
men  you  will  have  a  difficult  job,
for  yoa  will  find  honest  men  in  this
class  and  the  other,  and,  in  fact,
among  all  classes  and  sects  of  men.

You  need  not  suppose  that  honesty
depends  upon  our  traditions,  or  upon
where  a  man  was  born  ;  but  there  are
honest  people  in  every  community,
avd  in  every  sect  under  heaven,  and
there  are  those  that  hate  the  truth,
and  that  would  not  aid  in  the  spread
of  light  and  truth,  nor  lend  their
influence  to  any  servant  of  God  under
the  heavens.

Well,  now,  I4ove  a  man  without
Tegard  to  his  country,  or  where  he
was  brought  up,  without  reference  to
colour  or  nation  ;  I  love  a  man  that
loves  the  truth,  and  I  do  not  blame
any  man  under  heaven  for  having
been  born  and  brought  up  in  any
particular  town,  city,  or  nation.  You
might  as  well  blame  a  man  for  being
brought  np  under  certain  traditions  in
countries  vim .they  Uvenothad the
opportunity  ofdiscoursingwith  others,
no  discussions,  no  free  press,  where
they  never  could  know  anything  else
but  tradition  through  life.

You  might  as  well  blame  them  for
their  country  as  for  their  traditions.
Circumstances  might  come  round,
and  so  order  the  course  of  a  man's
mind  and  his  mission  as  to  give  him
a  new  channel  of  thought,  and  pre-
vent his  making  any  distinction,  as
it  was  with  the  Apostle  Peter.

There  are  whole  nations,  and
generations  of  them  that  have  lived

Ko,  14.


and  died  with  the  same  knowledge
right  before  their  eyes,  and  that
without  the  opportunity  of  thinking
of  any  other  degrees  of  knowledge.
Well,  what  did  Peter  do  with  regard
to  those  he  was  called  to  visit  and
preach  to  ?  When  he  preached  the
Gospel  under  the  instructions  of  a  risen
Jesus,  when  he  undertook  to  preach
the  Gospel,  repentance,  baptism,  and
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  gifts
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  said  the  pro-
mise is  to  you,  meaning  that  present
generation ;  and  he  thought  a  little
more,  and  then  said  it  is  to  your'
children,  meaning  the  next  "genera-
tion ;  and  finally  his  heart  enlarged  a
little  further  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that
was  in  him,  and  he  uttered  his
dictation — to  all  that  are  afar  off;
and  then  he  happened  to  think  that
they  might  count  those  that  had  beeu
brought  up  in  some  other  country,
with  different  traditions,  and  he
limited  a  little — -and  said  to  as  many
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call.

Although  the  mind  of  Peter  was
liable  to  be  too  contracted  he  knew
one  thing,  viz. — that  the  Lord  theit
God  was  in  the  habit  of  communi-
cating -with  the  people,  and  he
understood  that  he  always  would  be^
for  he  knew  that  God  lived,  and  he
also  knew  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
was  alive  for  he  had  seen  and  talked
with  him,  and  had  handled  him,
and  he  had  seen  him  ascend  up  on
high;  and  he  had  heard  him  testify
that  he  had  all  power  given  him  in
heaven  and  in  earth,  and  he  knew
that  he  would  have  power  to  send
the  Gospel  to  every  creature  for  he  had
the  keys  to  send  the  Gospel  wherever
he  pleased,  to  all  tribes,  nations,  and
languages  in  worlds  without  end,  there-
fore when  he  made  the  promise  be  only
limited  it,  or  gave  it  a  certain  juris-
diction, recollecting  where  it  belonged.

The  promise  he  gave  of  the  Holy
Ghost  was  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  to
those  whom  the  Lord  our  God  shall

Vol  IX.


210  JOURNAL  OF

call.  To  express  it  in  language  more
appropriate  than  any  other,  perhaps,
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to
wherever  the  Lord  sends  forth  a
revelation,  wherever  he  makes  pro-
clamation of  the  Gospel,  wherever  he
commissions  men  and  sends  forth  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
authorizes  men  to  administer  those
ordinances  in  his  name;  it  matters
not  whether  in  Judea  or  America,  or
whether  it  he  in  Samaria  or  England,
whether  to  the  heathen,  the  Jew,  or
the  refined  philosopher,  it  matters  not
whether  we  apply  it  to  ancient  days
or  modern  times,  wherever  the
Almighty  God  or  Jesus  Christ,  his
son,  sees  fit  to  reveal  the  fulness  of
the  Gospel,  and  the  keys  of  the  eternal
Priesthood,  and  the  ministration  of
angels,  there  the  promise  contained
in  the  Gospel  was  to  hold  good,  and
the  nation  or  people  obeying  that  call
should  receive  i emission  of  sins  in
his  name,  in  obedience  to  his  GoFpel,
and  be  tilled  with  the  Holy  Spiiit  of
promise — the  Holy  Ghost  which  is
the  gift  of  proplucy  and  revelation,
and  also  includes  many  other  gifts.

Is  that  Gospel  any  less  true  because
it  was  revealed  to  Mormon,  and  was
preached  by  him  ?  Is  that  truUi  any
less  true  because  it  has  been  hid  up
in  the  earth,  inscribed  upon  plates,
and  has  come  forth  and  been  trans-
lated in  this  age  of  the  woi\,d  ?  Was
not  that  Gospel  as  good  when
pieached  to  the  Nephitesin  America,
as  if  was  when  preached  to  the  Jews
in  Palestine  ?

And  if  as  good  why  not  write  it  ?
And  if  good  enough  to  be  preached
and  written,  why  not  have  those
writings  and  read  them,  and  rejoice
in  the  spirit  and  truths  they  contain  ?

Rtjoice,  because  it  swells  the  heart,
expands  the  mind,  gives  a  more
enlarged  view  of  God's  dealings  and
meicies,  shows  them  to  be  extended
to  all  extent,  publi&hed  in  different
tountriea  and  upon  different  conti-


ncntf,  revealed  to  one  nation  as  well
as  another;  in  short,  it  gives  a  man
that  feeling  when  he  contemplates
the  l>earingand  extent  of  that  Gospel,
it  gives  a  man  a  feeling  w  hich  afiords
joy  aid  satisfaction  to  the  soul,  it  gives
a  u  an  that  feeling  which  angels  had
when  they  sung  in  the  ears  of  the
shepherds  of  Judea — u  We  bring  you
glad  tidings  of  great  joy  w  hich  shall
be  in  a  tew  countries,  and  to  a  few
people?"  No;  that  was  not  the
song,  though  they  were  singing  to
those  who  had  a  few  traditions  in
their  families,  which  they  had  received
from  their  forefathers.

The  phepheids  were  astonished,
and  well  they  might  be,  and  they
brought  ever}  body  to  this  text
throughout  the  whole  of  Judea,  Still
those  angels  weie  honest  enough  to
sii  g  the  whole  truth,  notwithstanding
the  Jews  looked  rpon  all  G< utiles  as
dogs,  and  I  think  1  hear  ihe  shep-
herds saying,  "  that  brought  glad  tid-
■  ings  to  everybody — to  these  dogs?"
Still  ihe  angels,  a  choir  of  them,
w  ere  bold  enough  to  sing — u  We  bring
you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy,  which
shall  be  to  all  people  !n

What  a  biu  baying  for  Jewish
shepherds!  Why,  they  must  have
enlarged  their  hearts,  and  wondered
at  this  very  strange  news-  Why
Peter  had  haidly  got  his  heart  suffi-
ciently ei  larged  to  believe  these
glad  tidings  many  years  after  they
were  proclain  ed,  although  lie  had
j  ire  ached  so  mneh.

It  swelled  by  degrees,  and  con*
traded  again  1  suppose,  and  at  last
he  had  to  have  a  vision,  and  a  sheet
let  down  from  heaven,  ai  d  things
shown  him,  and  explaiwd  to  him
over  and  over  again,  to  get  him  to
realize  the  truth  of  the  glad  tidings
sung  by  angels  at  the  birth  of  the
Saviour.

I  It  was  showirg  so  much  ;  it  was
too  broad  a  platform,  such  a  bound-
less ocean  of  mercy  ! It  was  making


THE FIRST PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPEL


211


such  a  provision  for  the  human
family  that  Peter  could  not  compre-
hend if.  If  the  angels  had  said  it
was  fur  the  Jews,  for  the  peculiar
people  of  God,  those  that  could
receive  the  new  revelation,  why  then
it  mi  "lit  have  done  ;  but  to  throw  off
their  traditions,  they  who  were  the
peculiar  few,  as  they  considered  them-
selves, to  believe  that  the  glad  tidings
of  the  Saviour  s  birth  was  for  those
Gentle  dogs,  they  could  not  endure
this  for  a  moment.  Thev  were  of  the
house  of  Israel,  the  seed  of  promise

This  was  indeed  a  peculiar  vision,
bringing  the  glad  tidings  of  the
Saviour's  birth,  for  that  was  the
peculiar  mission  of  those  angels,
hence  they  did  not  bring  the  Gospel,
they  did  not  say  anything  about
baptism,  nor  repentance,  nor  remis-
sion of  sins,  b'it  they  simply  brought
gl  id  tidings  of  it,  they  annonnced  the
fact  that  a  Saviour  was  bora  at  such
a  date  and  pi  ice,  told  the  birth-place
and  events  of  a  Saviour  being  born
at  Bethlehem,  under  th^  circum-
stances named  at  that  time,  and
declared  that  this  news,  this  glad
tidings  should  go  to  all  people.

What  was  the  result?  Why  it
went  fhrousdi  Jndea,  it  was  sounded
through  Samaria,  it  went  to  Rome
and  to  Greece,  it  went  to  Ethiopia,
it  went  to  the  utmost  parts  of  the
earth  ;  it  soon  bounded  over  the  sea  ;
the  angels  of  God  that  sing  that  song
could  never  contradict  their  words.
If,  then,  they  had  to  carry  it  over  the
seas  to  every  country  and  continent
where  the  seed  of  promise  was,  they
were  bound  to  fulfil  that  Mission,  and
they  swiftly  flew  to  America,  and
proclaimed  the  glad  tidings  there.

They  found  the  people  there  shut
out  by  a  cloud  of  darkness  from  the
light  of  truth.  They  found  a  people
there  called  the  Nephites  and  Luaan-
itcs  who  were  a  branch  of  the  house
of  Israel  that  were  cast  off,  or  rather
brought  over  the  great  waters  from


their  country,  and  they  bore  the  glad
tidings  to  them,  (you  have  read  it  in
the  Book  of  N<phi),  and  they  in-
formed them  that  at  such  a  time  and
place,  the  Saviour  was  born.

By-and-bye  the  Saviour  himself
came  over  here  and  told  it  to  the
people,  but  this  was  after  his  resur-
rection, for  the  work  was  too  much,
and  the  field  too  Jar^e  for  his  mortal
life,  for  he  had  but  a  few  yearn  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  Jews,  and
part  of  that  short  life  of  o*3  years  he  was
a  child,  a  boy.  and  hence,  he  had  to  be
limited  to  that  country  where  he  had
a  mortal  body,  and  could  be  borne  by
the  mountain  waves  that  might
separate  one  country  from  another;
but  after  his  resurrection,  he  was  as
independent  of  the  waves  and  moun-
tains as  he  was  of  those  who  crucified
him;  for  then  he  could  rise  above
their  power;  he  was  able  to  pass
from  planet  to  planet,  with  perfect
ease ;  he  was  able  to  ascend  up  and
go  from  continent  to  continent ;  he
was  as  able  to  ascend  to  his  God,  and
to  our  God,  as  he  was  to  appear  to

his  disciples*

I  any  Je^us  could  not  Ixi  held  in
Palestine,  the  mountains,  nor  the
rolling  seas  had  not  power  to  stay  his
progress,  for  be  had  told  his  disciples,
while  he  was  yet  living,  that  he  had
other  sheep  which  were  not  of  that
fold,  and  said  he,  4 ;  They  shall  hear
my  voice."

In  fulfilment  of  this,  and  according
to  the  nature  of  b  s  sjra^d  commis-
sion,  the  Saviour  of  the  vvh  >h  world,
not  half  ot  it,  in  his  glorified  body,
showed  himself  to  the  Nephites  in
America,  and  bestowed  upon  them  the
Priesthood,  with  all  its  gifts  and
qualifications,  that  same  glorious
Gospel  that  he  h  id  just  before  givt  n
to  his  Prophets  and  Apostles  at
Jerusalem  ;  and  he  told  those  whom
he  had  selected  to  hold  the  Priesthood
upon  this  continent  to  go  forth  and
preach  the  same  glad  tidings  of  sal-


JOUBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


212

vat  ion  to  all  their  world,  fulfilling  in
part  the  words  of  Peter,  "  For  the
promise  is  to  all  that  are  afar  off"

And  Jesus  called  to  those  Nephites,
when  he  descended,  and  they  fell  at
his  feet,  as  many  as  could  get  near
him,  and  they  bathed  his  feet  in  their
tears,  and  they  examined  his  wounds,
and  heard  the  gracious  words  of  his
mouth,  and  they  saw  him  ascending
and  descend  again,  aud  they  felt  so
large  in  their  charity  and  affections,
and  the  light  of  truth  was  so  large
and  extended  in  its  benefits  and  bene-
volence, and  the  testimony  so  strong,
that  they  feasted  upon  the  blessings
that  were  bestowed,  and  he  theneom-
manded  them  to  write  his  sayings,
and  an  account  of  the  miracles  he
wrought  among  them.

Thev  did  as  lie  commanded,  and
thev  liked  the  writings  so  well  that
they  handed  them  down  to  each  suc-
ceding  Prophet  until  Mormon,  who
was  born  three  or  four  ages  after-
wards, and  he  could  not  hand  those
records  down  any  further  because  of
apostacy,  and  the  blasphemy  and
wickedness  of  the  people,  and  because
of  the  wars  and  troubles  that  spread
among  the  people;  so  he  made  a
secret  deposit  of  those  writings,  and
put  them  in  the  earth,  and  he  also
wrote  a  book  and  called  it  the  "  Book
of  Mormon/*  which  was  an  abridge-
ment of  the  other  records,  and  this
was  hid  up  to  the  Lord,  and  through
the  interference  of  the  Almighty,  a
young  man,  Joseph  Smith,  by  the
gift  and  power  of  God,  I  say,  through
that  young  man  and  the  ministration
of  holy  angels  to  him,  that  book  came
forth  to  the  world,  and  it  has  since
that  time  been  preached  and  read  in
our  language,  and  many  others,  and
we  rejoice  in  it,  and  have  borne
testimony  of  it  in  the  world.

It  is  through  that  blessed  Book  of
Mormon,  with  that  blessed  Gospel  in
it,  that  we  have  the  testimony  whieli
we  have  in  reference  to  the  death


and  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  of
men,  *

It  is  true  as  recorded  in  the  Book
of  Mormon,  and  as  preached  upon
this  continent,  and  it  in  true  as  written
in  the  New  Testament,  and  as  it  was
preached  to  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem,
and  as  preached  to  the  ten  tribes,
though  we  have  not  got  their  record
yet,  but  we  will  have  it,,  and  we  shall
find  that  the  blessed  Jesus  revealed  •
to  them  the  Gospel,  and  that  they
rejoiced  in  it.

And  their  record  will  come,  so  that
we  will  know  of  a  surety  and  of  a
truth,  that  they  had  the  everlasting
Gospel  as  well  as  their  brethren  in
Jerusalem,  and  upon  this  continent.

When  these  things  come  to  pass
we  will  have  three  ancient  records,
delivered  in  three  different  countries.
We  have  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ments, and  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and
other  good  books  all  we  at  present
require.

We  shall  eventually  have  the
history  of  the  ten  tribes  in  the  north,
of  the  Nephites  in  America,  and  of
the  Jews  in  Jerusalem,  and  their
written  testimony  will  become  one,
and  their  words  will  become  one,  and
the  people  of  God  will  be  gathered
under  testimony,  into  one  body,  and
the  testimony  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
will  become  one  with  that  of  the
former  day  Saints,  (and  it  is  now,  so
far  as  it  goes)  and  the  testimonies  of
those  shall  sweep  the  earth  as  with  a
flood,  and  by  the  voice  of  men  and
angels,  and  eventually  by  the  great
sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  none  ¥  shall
escape.

Prior  to  this  great  destruction,  the  *
everlasting  Gospel  will  be  taught  to
them  by  the  servants  of  God,  by  the
testimony  of  men  and  angels,  and  by
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  by
the  testimony  of  ancient  ancJ  modern
Prophets ;  by  the  testimony  of  Joseph
Smith,  aud  of  the  Apostles  ordained
by  him,  and  by  the testimony  of


THE  TiaST  PMNCIPLES  OF  THB  QOSFRL.


ancient  and  modern  Saints ;  by  the
testimony  of  the  ten  tribes;  by  the
testimony  of  heaven  and  the  testi-
mony of  earth  ;  then  shall  the  wicked
be  sent  to  their  own  place,  and  truth
shall  be  established  in  the  earth  ;  and
the  voice  of  joy  and  gladness  shall  be
heard  with  the  meek  of  the  earth.

Those  that  forsake  their  sins  ahall
have  abundant  cause  to  rejoice  with
those  that  love  the  truth,  and  are
made  pure  in  heart  by  it.

Joy  and  gladness  shall  be  heard,
and  there  shall  be  glad  tidings  to  all
the  meek,  and  to  all  the  pure  in
heart ;  to  all  that  love  instruction,  to
all  that  will  not  harden  their  hearts ;
to  all  the  sinners  that  will  be  obedi-
ent and  refrain  from  their  sins,  and
live  a  holy  life.

The  cry  will  no  longer  go  forth,
41  they  will  not  repent  and  be  con-
verted, that  I  may  heal  them ;"  for
the  Lord  God,  the  blessed  Saviour,
who  is  full  of  virtue,  power  and  love,
and  healing,  with  his  Priesthood  will
bless  them,  and  they  will  find  comfort
for  he  will  heal  them.

From  the  fact  that  Jesus  complains
of  a  people  that  will  not  be  converted,
lest  he  might  heal  them,  we  would
conclude  from  that  that  conversion
was  a  condition  of  the  healing  power.
Why,  says  he,  they  will  not  turn
from  their  sins  and  be  converted,
that  I  may  heal  them.  But  when
they  are  converted  and  grown  up
into  one,  the  day  of  his  power  comes,
and  then  says  he,  they  are  converted,
and  I  will  heal  them.

Don't  you  see  that  he  came  to  the
Nephites  (you  have  read  it  in  the
Book  of  Mormon),  and  he  said,  bring
forth  your  halt,  and  blind,  and  dumb,
and  I  will  heal  them,  for  I  see  your
faith  is  sufficient  and  I  will  heal  them
all ;  and  he  healed  them  every  one
as  they  were  brought  to  him.  That
day  of  general  healing  came  to  them,
for  the  more  wicked  part  of  the
inhabitants  had  been  cut  off,  and  I


woul  1  to  God  that  that  day  would
come  among  us.

Well,  let  us  be  converted,  and  those
that  have  been  converted  and  have
held  on  to  it,  be  converted  a  little
more,  for  I  tell  you  I  like  conversion
pretty  often.  I  don't  mean  that  I  like
people  to  turn  round  from  the  truth,
and  then  repent,  and  say,  I  am  sorry  •
but  I  mean  that  a  man  needs  con-
verting to-day,  and  the  next  day,  and
the  day  after,  because  a  man  that  is
progressing  learns  by  degiees ;  to- day
h^gets  to  understand  that  a  certain
principle  or  practice  of  his  is  i\  mg,
and  learns  his  error,  he  turm  :  rom
it ;  but  even  then  he  does  not  under-
stand all  things  pertaining  to  right
and  wrong.  He  has  not  learned  all
things  that  might  stand  in  the  way
of  building  np  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  hence  he  wants  or  needs  to  be
converted  to-day,  and  the  next  day,
and  the  next,  and  so  on  until  he  is
converted  from  all  his  bad  habits,  and
from  his  impurities,  and  he  becomes
just  such  a  man  as  the  Lord  de-
lights in.

And  Jesus  said,  "  Be  ye  as  I  am,
and  I  am  as  the  Father.1'  He  con-
trasts himself  and  them  with  the
Father,  and  then  says,  "  What
manner  of  men  ought  ye  to  be  ?"
M  Verily  I  say  unto  you  such  as  I  am,
and  I  am  as  the  Father  is."

It  is  for  this  purpose  that  we  came
into  the  world,  that  we  might  become
like  the  Father;  and  that  we  may
become  like  him,  we  need  converting
every  day,  or  at  least  until  we  are
free  from  all  evil,  even  if  it  be  five
hundred  times;  not  to  turn  away
from  the  truth,  but  keep  going  on  to
perfection.

We  need  converting  until  we
feel  that  indeed  the  promise  of  the
Holy  Ghost  is  "  to  all  that  are  afar
off,  even  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our
God  shall  call."  The  Lord  calls  the
Jews,  the  Christians,  the  Mormons,
the  Gentiles;  he  calls  the  ten  tribes;


*


214


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  he  called  us  also  ;  God  has  called
brother  Joseph,  brother  Hyrum,  and
brother  Brigham,  and  lvs  Apostles,
and  the  Elders  who  hold  the  Priest-
hood in  this  age,  and  lie  calls  the
people  of  America  and  of  Europe,  and
the  whole  human  family.  Some  he
calls  by  his  angels,  and  by  his  own
voice  uut  of  the  heavens.  In  this
way  he  called  Joseph  and  his  asso-
ciates, and  revealed  to  them  the
fulness  of  the  Gospel,  put  upon  him  the
powers  of  the  eternal  Priesthood  after
the  same  order  as  himself,  and  told
thera  to  go  forth  and  call  others  to
assist  them.

They  did  so,  and  others  obeyed
the  Gospel ;  they  laid  their  hands
upon  them,  after  they  had  baptized
them,  and  confirmed  them  ;  and  they
ordained  them  to  bear  testimony  of
their  calling,  and  the  restoration  of
the  Gospel  in  its  fulness — that  a  new
call  had  been  made  to  the  nations  of
the  earth.

And  it  required  another  call  in  our
day,  for  Peter  had  gone  the  way  of
all  the  earth,  and  also  his  brethren
who  were  his  contemporaries;  and
the  brethren  among  the  Nephites  had
gone,  or  had  been  taken  away ;  and
those  holding  the  authority  among  the
ten  tribes  had  gone  the  way  of  all  the
earth.

And  it  was  this  that  brought  those
glad  tidings  and  those  messengers  to
us;  and  those  were  the  ones  that
brought  the  light  of  heaven  to  our
beloved  brother  Joseph  Smith.
,  Well,  if  I  have  been  made  a  high
witness  of  these  things,  what  brought
the  truth  to  me?  It  was  through
the  ministration  of  angels,  under
whose  hands  these  my  brethren  have
been  ordained  to  the  holy  Priesthood,
and  it  brought  down  with  it  the
blessings  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
for  it  could  not  be  in  the  world
without  a  call ;  for  those  who  pre-
viously held  it  had  gone  to  another
sphere.


The  Gospel  was  revealed  to  ancient
men  in  different  climes  and  countries,
whenever  there  were  men  to  be  saved,
and  it  was  revealed  to  modern  men
because  there  were  modern  men  to  bo
saved  by  it.  The  Gospel  was  to  all
whom  the  Lord  our  God  should  call
in  every  age  and  country,  and  but  for
this  call  we  would  have  been  as
blind  as  bats  in  the  traditions  of  our
fathers,  led  away  by  divers  creeds  and
by  the  cunning  of  men  who  lie  in
wait  to  deceive.  Where  would  we
have  been  if  it  had  not  been  for  this
call  ?  We  might  have  been  good
men  enough  perhaps,  but  where
would  wu  have  been  *t

The  introduction  of  the  Gospel  was
worthy  of  an  angel,  yes,  the  errand
was  worthy  of  a  corps  of  them ;  it
was  worthy  of  a  host  of  them  !  It
was  worthy  of  a  God!  It  was  an
object  of  importance  that  called  Jesus
from  the  bosom  of  his  Father  in  the
eternal  world.  A  call  was  necessary
then  ;  faith  was  necessary,  and  faith
comes  by  hearing  the  wotd  of  God;
and  how  could  you  have  heard  it,  if
nobody  had  been  called  to  deliver  it  ?
We  were  in  the  midst  of  daikness,
and  the  darkness  comprehended  it
not.  We  could  see  revelations  given
in  other  ages,  but  we  wrant  them  in
our  age  ;  but  we  wanted  a  call.

I  am  aware  that  some  will  be
thinking  of  their  grandmothers  or
grandfathers  who  died  in  the  middle
ages,  and  who  died  in  hope,  as  far  as
they  could  get  at  it.  I  know  they  will
be  querying  all  the  while  to  know
what  has  become  of  them.

Well,  it  is  no  matter ;  it  is  for  us
to  attend  to  our  own  business,  and
see  to  our  own  salvation ;  if  we  do
this  we  shall  have  no  condemnation.
We  do  not  know  but  as  we  progress
in  righteousness,  that  in  the  pro*
visions  made  by  our  great  Father  we
may  have  to  serve  them,  and  to  do
for  those  good  old  fathers  and  mothers
of  oars,  who  did  see  the  light  afar  ofl^


THK  PIIIST  PRINCIPLES  OF  TUB  GOSPEL


bat  could  not  come  at  it  for  want  of
a  call,  for  want  of  a  Pi  iesthood,  which
is  without  beginning  of  days,  and
men  holding  the  authority  of  Heaven ;
yes,  we  ra.iy  have  to  do  for  them  what
they  have  not  had  the  privilege  of
doing*  for  themselves.

Well,  what  is  the  provision  ?  Why
did  I  not  just  name  to  you,  that  this
eternal  Priesthood  13  without  begin-
ing  of  days  or  end  of  life,  after  the
order  ^f  the  Sou  of  God  ?  Do  you
suppose  that  when  a  man  passes
beyond  the  veil,  he  is  any  less  a
Priest  ?  If  angels,  or  men  by  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  have  laid  their
hands  upon  him  and  ordained  him  to
an  office  in  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son
of  God,  and  have  given  htm  a  call  in  the
name  of  the  Lord  to  give  salvation  to
others,  do  you  suppose  that  by  pass-
ing the  .eil  lie  becomes  un  ordained  ?

What  did  Jesus  say  to  the  Jews  ?
Says  he,  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob,  is  the  God  you  profess  to
worship ;  but  says  he,  I  want  you  to
understand  that  he  is  not  the  God  of
the  dead,  for  what  glory  would  there
be  in  that  ?  but,  says  he,  "  He  is  the
God  of  the  living."  He  was  spe  iking
to  the  children  of  Abraham  who  were
dead,  as  much  as  to  say  that  Abraham
was  living  then.

Well,  then,  when  a  man  holding
the  eternal  Priesthood  passes  the  veil,
he  still  holla  his  authority,  and  his
heart  is  full  of  aflection  and  love
towards  God's  creatures,  and  he  is
clothed  with  the  power  of  God.  and
he  is  his  Prophet,  Ap>stle,  and  Elder.
It  is  impossible  to  keep  a  man  silent
who  is  filled  with  the  testimony  of
Jesus.  I  would  as  soon  undertake  to
shut  up  fire  in  dry  shavings,  as  to
shut  up  in  that  man's  heart  the  good
news,  for  he  has  his  Mission,  which  is
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  those  that
were  and  are  in  darkness.

The  good  old  fathers  and  mothers
who  had  not  the  privileges  and
blessings  of  the  Gospel,  for  instance,


go  to  deliver  your  message  to  them,
that  they  may  come  to  the  light  of
truth,  and  be  saved.

The  Apostle,  when  addressing  the
Saints,  says,  "  But  ye  have  obeyed
from  the  heart  that  form  of  doctrine
which  was  delivered  to  you;  being
then  made  free  from  sin,  ye  became
the  servants  of  righteousness." —
Romans  vi,  17  and  18.

There  was  the  freedom  of  obedience
to  that  form  of  doctrine  delivered  to
them.  Obedience  to  that  form  of
doctrine  made  them  free,  but  it  did
not  prevent  them  from  acting  as  men
in  a  temporal  point  of  view.

The  Apostle  also  speaks  of  passing
from  death  unto  life,  because  they
loved  the  brethren.  Passing  the  veil
does  not  alter  a  man  ;  it  certainly
takes  him  from  the  eyes  of  flesh,  but
the  capacity,  the  intelligence,  the
thinking  powers,  are  all  alive  and
quick;  and  if  they  hear  the  Gospel ,
they  will  be  glad,  and  the  promises
are  made  to  them,  and  they  will  rejoice
in  them.

Let  a  man  pass  the  veil  with  the
everlasting  Priesthood,  having  magni-
fied it  to  the  day  of  his  death,  and
you  cannot  get  it  off  him  ;  it  will
remain  with  him  in  the  world  of
spirits ;  and  when  he  wakes  np  in
that  world  among  the  spirits,  he  has
that  power  and  that  obligation  on
him,  that  if  he  can  find  a  person
worthy  of  salvation,  why,  as  soon  as
he  ascertains  that,  and  he  remembers
what  he  may  teach  and  who  he  may
teach,  he  then  discovers  that  he  has1
got  a  Mission,  and  that  Mission  is  to
those  souls  who  had  not  the  privilege
which  we  have  in  this  world,  that
they  may  be  partakers  of  the  Gospel
as  well  as  we*  1

And  herein,  when  fully  carried  out,
are  the  keys  of  the  u  baptism  for  the
dead,"  and  the  salvation  of  those  not
on  the  earth,  a  subject  into  which  I
need  not  now  enter,  although  it  is
I  among  t^e  first  principles  of  salvation


218  JOURNAL  OF

but  they  are  so  lengthy  that  we
cannot  dwell  upon  them  all  at  one
time.

But  suffice  it  to  say,  that  when  the
Lord  made  provision  that  there  should
be  one  name  by  which  man  should
be  saved ;  and  when  he  planned  glad
tidings  of  great  joy  to  go  over  the
islands  and  continents,  and  to  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth,  he  also
remembered  the  spirits  in  prison,  and
he  made  provision  wide  as  eternity,
that  it  might  reach  the  case  of  u  every
creature,"  under  every  circumstance
that  could  arise  within  the  reach  of
mercy.

He  sp  ordered  it,  that  "  all  manner
of  sins  and  blasphemies,  in  due  time,
might  be  forgiven,  except  that  which
could  not  be  justly  forgiven,  in  this
world,  iii  r  in  that  which  is  to  come/'

The  plan  was  so  devised  that  every
man  might,  have  repentance  and  re-
mission of  sins,  and  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  in  his  time  and  in  his
place,  if  he  would ;  but  if  he  would
not,  very  well  then,  he  might  do  as
he  pleased,  whether  in  this  world  or
any  other,  recording  to  the  clear
freedom  that  he  lives  under.

You  know  you  cannot  compel  one
of  the  dumb  animals  to  drink;  you
can  lead  him  to  the  water,  direct  his
attention  to  the  clear,  crystal,  pure
stream,  but  still  he  may  die  of  thirst.
And  men  may  die  because  they  will
not  leave  off  their  sins,  and  lay  hold
of  the  cross  ;  and  if  they  will  die  of
thirst,  and  will  not  lay  hold  of
the  salvation  offered  by  a  bleeding
Saviour,  they  may  die  the  death  of
the  wicked.

And  if,  because  they  will  not  give
np  their  freedom  to  do  right,  they
can  go  ;  they  will  die  to  all  eternity,
and  never  be  compelled  to  obey  the
truth.

Well,  friends,  here  is  the  Gospel  j
and  where  is  the  man's  heart  so  hard
that  he  will  not  see  and  embrace  it  ?
A  man  must  be  hardened  in  wicked-


D18COUELSE.

ness,  thnt  will  not  abide  the  law  of
the  Gospel.  And  that  portion  of  you
who  have  not  obeyed,  my  invitation
is  to  you  all ;  and  all  of  you  in  the
Church  who  have  not  obeyed  the
Gospel  in  its  fulness,  see  that  you
obey  it  in  its  fulness  ;  I  mean  to  every
day  attend  to  the  repentance  part  of
it— the  leaving  off  part,  forsaking
your  evils — the  conversion  part,  and
bring  forth  fruite  suited  to  a  new  life.
'  I  will  have  to  be  judged  for  my
preaching,  and  you  for  your  hearing.
I  shall  be  pretty  careful  for  myself;
I  can  do  that  I  think,  I  shall  look
into  things,  prepare  my  mind  to  dis-
cern between  the  right  and  the  wro^g,
otherwise  I  might  neglect ;  and  it
will  keep  a  man  pretty  busy  to  repent
and  bring  forth  fruits  for  a  new  life.
There  will  be  a  good  deal  of  watching
and  praying,  and  he  will  have  to  be
pretty  careful  to  live  so  as  to  get  the
Holy  Spirit,  so  that  it  will  not  leave
him,  and  he  will  be  without  it,
like  a  fish  out  of  water,  or  like  a
person  in  hot  weather  destitute  of
pure  air.  If  he  once  loses  the  Spirit,
after  having  received  it,  it  will  keep
him  pretty  busy  to  get  it  again.

That  repentance,  and  that  burial  in
the  name  of  the  risen  Jesus,  wants  a
a  good  deal  of  humility  and  perse-
verance, for  there  is  the  old  man  with
his  deeds  to  put  off,  and  lay  aside,
and  to  walk  a  new  life.

It  Oi  ^es  not  only  mean  something,
but  it  is  shown  forth  in  the  actions  of
the  man.  Well  won't  that  keep  a
man  pretty  busy  ?  I  think  it  will  in
such  a  world  as  this.  Well  in  this
sense  of  the  word  the  Saints  are
called  upon  to  obey  the  Gospel  and
repent  all  the  wThile,  but  we  talk  of
dying  unto  sin  and  of  walking  in
newness  of  life.  The  dying  unto  sin
and  rising  in  the  new  life,  and  the
baptism  were  to  be  for  a  moment,  but
the  stream  that  flows  from  obedience
is  perpetual.

Well,  those  out  of  the  Church  ft  re


THB  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPEL


217


certainly  called  upon  to  obey  the
Gospel ;  and  when  people  are  careless
and  indifferent  respecting  their  duties,
then  it  is  that  wicked  people  rise  up
amongst  us,  and  we  are  then  called
upon  to  repent  and  obey  the  Gospel.
I  will  clear  my  garments  as  far  as
one  day  will  do  it  before  I  sit  down.
The  little  children  are  called  upon  to
obey  the  Gospel,  such  as  are  cap;*!  Je  of
being  taught,  and  they  ought  to  be
taught  by  their  parents,  so  that  they
may  understand  it  by  the  time  they
are  eight  years  of  age.  Then  (hey
are  called  upon  to  repent,  to  under-
stand and  bring  forth  the  fruits  meet
for  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  be  buried
in  the  likeness  of  death  as  Jesus  was,
arid  then  leave  oft'  all  their  foolish  and
sinful  ways,  and  rise  out  of  their
watery  grave,  understanding  that
Jesus  rose  again  from  the  dead,  from
his  grave,  and  knowing  this  they
should  then  take  up  their  cross.  This
is  a  figure  to  show  us  that  then  com-
mences a  new  life.

Now  you  folks  that  have  been
brought  up  in  the  Gospel,  in  the  light
of  heaven,  but  have  been  careless  or
wicked,  rise  up  and  obey  the  Gospel,
and  don't  you  be  baptized  withuut
you  repent,  for  all  you  hear  of  the
Gospel  and  attend  to,  unless  you  are
as  humble  as  a  little  child  it  won't  do
you  any  good  ;  and  reraemher  that  it
is  through  the  name,  and  the  atoning
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  that  you  can
have  remission  of  sins  through  the
ordinance  of  baptism  which  represents
the  burial  And  those  people  that
have  not  been  brought  up  within  this
call  and  influence,  I  say  come  and
obey  it  and  do  not  call  yourselves
outsiders  and  aliens,  but  fellow  heirs
to  the  promises  made  to  Abraham,
and  which  were  established  by  him
and  given  to  him  for  an  everlasting
covenant,

Yuu  may  suppose  that  it  was  a  part


of  the  law  given  to  Moses,  and  there-
fore done  away  in  Christ.  Let  me
tell  you  that  the  everlasting  covenant
made  with  Abraham  and  mentioned
in  the  Scriptures,  was  made  four
hundred  and  fifty  years  before  the
law  was  thundered  from  Mount  Sinai.
Separate  and  apart  from  the  Gospel
the  law  was  given  to  Moses,  but  not
to  disannul  that  covenant,  and  when
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  ha  never
disannuled  it,  but  commanded  his
Apostles  to  preach  it.  It  is  much
older  than  the  law  for  it  applied
before  Moses  was  born  and  also  after-
wards, and  all  we  have  to  do  is  to
come  into  it  and  be  faithful  as
Abraham  was  faithful,  and  then
we  shall  become  sons,  and  if  sens  the
sons  of  Abraham,  and  if  daughters,
the  daughters  of  Sarah,  because  we
have  embraced  the  same  Gospel  and
principles.  And  then,  when  we  get
into  heaven  with  Rachel  and  Leah
they  will  not  be  ashamed  of  us.  and
what  is  more,  we  will  not  be  ashamed
of  them.  Then  we  shall  be  hail
fellows  well  met,  and  we  shall  sit
down  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  go
no  more  out  for  ever.  "  And  many
will  come  from  the  east  and  from  the
west  and  will  sit  down  in  the  king-
dom of  God/1  And  unless  we  am
faithfal  we  shall  be  shut  out.  There-
fore I  wish  you  to  understand  that
the  promises  that  are  special  will  not
apply  to  us,  and  wheie  they  go  we  can-
not come  except  by  adoption.

May  the  Lord  bless  you.  Amen.

I  like  preaching  the  Gospel  this
morning.  Befure  I  came  here,  I
thought  what  shall  I  say  if  they  call
on  me  to  speak  to-day,  and  the
thought  came  into  my  mind,  1  will
preach  the  Gospel,  and  the  moment  I
came  brother  Kimball  said,  brother
Parley,  come  preach  the  Gospel  to  us.
I  replied,  that  is  just  what  I  was
thinking  of.


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


CLOSING  OF  AMUSEMENTS.— INDULGING  IN  SIN  BRINGS

MENTAL  DARKNESS.

Remarks  m&Ie by  President  Briouam Young,  Tabernaclef  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  February  J  6,  18(J2.

UK  PORT  KD  BY  G. D.  WATT.


I  have  only  a  few  remarks  that  I
wish  to  make  this  morning,  and  they
will  chiefly  relate  to  our  practical  ami
immediate  duties.

We  amuse  and  enjoy  ourselves  a
great  deal  in  this  Territory,  in  dancing
and  in  other  amusements.  I  am  as
fond  of  amusement  as  any  per-
eon,  and  love  to  see  others  enjoy
rational  amusement  in  its  season.  I
have  this  to  comfort  me  ;  in  all  our
assemblies  for  amusement  this  winter,
I  have  not  seen  or  heard  anything
th  a  t  h  as  seriously  an  noy ed  my  feel  i n gs.
The  ]>eople  have  been  very  civil,  and
have  conducted  themselves  discreetly
and  as  Saints,  as  far  as  I  know.

I  have  now  a  request  to  make  of
the  people,  through  their  Bishops,
that  during  the  coming  week  we
bring  our  dancing  parties  to  a  close
and  prepare  to  attend  to  matters  of
greater  importance,  as  the  winter  is
drawing  to  a  close,  and  the  season  for
business  is  approaching.  In  a  few
weeks  from  nowf  we  intend  to  give
the  people  a  few  evenings  entertain-
ment in  our  new  theatre,  which  will
not  be  entirely  finished;  after  which,
as  the  sprirg  opens,  we  shall  attend
to  preparing  material  for  building  our
Temple,  to  gathering  the  poor,  to
farming  and  gardening,  to  building
and  fencing,  Ac.

The  exhortation  we  have  heard
this  morning  is  good,  just,  and  true.
We  can  gather  much  from  it,  touching
the  evidences  of  the  Gospel.  Upon
this  point  the  people,  in  many  in-


stances,  do  not  understand  themselves,
they  forsake  the  Gospel,  turn  away
from  the  holy  commandments,  and
turn  to  fables.  It  is  very  remarkable,
though  true,  that  some  persons  who
profess  to  be  intelligent  beings  are
never  easy  unless  they  are  in  pun,
nor  happy  unless  they  are  miserable.
When  they  are  comfortable,  well  fed,
and  clothed,  have  g  >od  health,  and
the  society  of  the  just,  comparatively
speaking  they  must  pinch  themselves,
or  stick  pins  and  needles  into  them-
selves, in  order  to  feel  happier  when
the  pain  has  ceased.  This  is  marvel-
lous to  me.

It  is  disgraceful  for  a  member  of
this  community  to  turn  away  from
the  truth.  When  a  person  receives
the  truth,  has  a  knowledge  of  the
things  of  God,  is  instructed  with
regard  to  his  position  relative  to  the
heavens,  he  knows  a  great  deal ;  and
it  is  astonishing  to  me  that  there  is
power  enough  among  the  wicked  on
earth  and  among  Devils  in  hell  to
turn  such  a  soul  away  from  righteous-
ness. A  few  in  our  community  seem
to  be  in  their  glory  when  they  are
doing  wrong,  though  this  portion  ia
comparatively  very  small.  We  do
not  see  in  our  community  quite  so
much  drunkenness  as  heretofore,  nor
so  many  gambling  shops,  but  how
long  this  improved  state  of  things
will  remain  I  know  not.  For  a  few-
weeks  we  have  also  had  a  respite  from
marauding  thieves.

Are  the  people  righteous  and  pure


CLOSING  OF  AMUSKMKNTS,  KTC,


219


enough  in  heart  not  to  turn  to  fables
when  they  are  presented  to  them?
nut  to  commit  iniquity  vhcn  they  are
tempted  ?  not  to  join  hands  with  the
ungodly  when  the  ungodly  are  here
to  take  them  by  the  hand  ?  If  we
have  attained  to  that  power,  that
Satan  and  all  his  forces  will  fail  to
turn  us  away  from  the  holy  command-
ments of  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  never
again  will  be  afflicted  through  the
power  of  the  wicked.  When  we  are
tried  by  afflictions  we  are  apt  to
forsake  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  then
the  wicked  are  permitted  to  bear  rule
over  us  ;  then  unrighteousness  sur-
rounds us,  and  the  influence  of  Satan
and  of  hell  prevails  in  our  midst.

Have  we  yet  to  endure  affliction  as
we  have  at  the  hands  of  our  enemies
the  ungo  Uy  Gentiles  ?  Have  we
again  to  see  armies  here  *t  and
strain  be  driven  from  our  homes  ?
Have  we  to  be  visited  with  pestilence,
famine,  and  earthquake  ?  Is  all  this
necessary  ?  If  our  hearts  are  pure
we  shall  never  see  any  of  those
afflictions  poured  out  upon  this  people,
from  this  time  henceforth ;  on  the
contrary,  the  Lord  delights  to  bless
such  a  people  until  there  is  not  room
to  receive  more.  Still  in  our  afflic-
tions we  will  not  complain,  for  the
Lord  has  his  own  way  of  training  his
people.  How  joyful  my  heart  would
be  if  the  people  would  receive  the
Gospel,  If  they  would  understand  it
as  they  understand  their  daily  avoca-
tions.

Yet,  when  I  realize  that  God
dwells  in  the  midst  of  eternal
burnings,  that  everything  must  be
pure  and  holy  that  comes  into  his
presence ;  that  he  has  marked  out  in
the  Gospel  the  path  for  the  believer
to  walk  in  to  attain  to  holiness,  and
that  no  man  or  woman  can  receive
the  Gospel  without  humbling  them-
selves before  the  Lord,  forsaking
their  sins,  and  receiving  the  Holy
Spirit,  it  is  a  matter  of  joy  to  me  that


unholy  brings  are  thereby  prohibited
from  entering  into  his  presence.  No
unhallowed  or  unclean  tiling  can
enter  the  heavenly  abode  of  the
righteous;  and  it  is  beyond  the
capacity  of  man  to  make  a  safer  place
than  that  which  God  has  prepared
for  the  righteous.  Jesus,  in  considera-
tion of  this,  said,  "  Lay  not  up  for
yourselves  treasures  upon  earth,  where
moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  a  .
where  thieves  break  through  and
steal:  but  lay  up  for  yourselves
treasures  in  heaven,  where  neither
moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and
where  thieves  do  not  break  through
and  steal."  Let  us  bind  to  heaven
all  that  is  near  and  dear  unto  ns,  and
if  our  treasures  are  there,  theic  also
will  our  affections  be.

It  is  th  irty  years  the  1 5  th  day  of  next
April  (though  it  has  accidentally  been
recorded  and  printed  the  fourteenth)
since  I  was  baptized  into  this  Church,
and  in  that  time  I  have  gained  quite
an  experience,  I  will  tell  jo  i  a  lit  Ho
of  it,  though  I  will  first  make  a  few
remarks  touching  ourselves  as  a
people*  We  are  prone  to  do  wrong,
or,  as  the  preacher  has  recorded  : —
"  Yea,  also  the  heart  of  the  sons  of
men  is  full  of  evil,  and  madness  is
in  their  heart  while  they  live,  and
after  that  they  go  to  the  dead."  We
are  merchants,  speculators,  traders,
and  love  the  best  end  of  a  bargain.
We  delight  to  talk  about  our  neigh-
bours. "  Oh,  how  I  delight  to  go
over  to  such  a  house  to  see  that  sister,
she  is  so  sociable,  so  full  of  chit-chat,
and  knows  everything  that  is  going
on."  And  thus  they  meet  to  bereave
the  characters  of  their  neighbours,
aud  there  is  not  an  evil  that  can  be
imagined  but  what  will  be  told.  After
they  have  finished  their  chatting,
backbiting,  and  slandering,  they  con-
clude it  all  by  apologizing  : — "  Really,
sister,  I  do  not  know,  but  I  have  said
more  than  I  ought,  but  let  us  pass  it
over,  you  know  we  are  all  brethren


220


JOURNAL  OF  DiscornsES


and  sisters."  Again,  says  one  brother
in  the  Church  to  another,  **  Well,  we
had  a  good  time  last  evening,  we
enjoyed  ourselves  pretty  well.  It  is
true  we  got  drunk,  and  it  is  not  quite
right  to  get  drunk.  My  head  ached
this  morning,  and-I  feel  a  little  sorry
that  we  indulged  so  far."  Another
lias  indulged  too  much  in  making
liquor,  and  in  putting  the  deadly
draught  to  his  neighbour's  lips.
Another  has  indulged  too  much  in
swearing.  Another  is  troubled  be-
cause he  has  indulged  in  taking  the
advantage  of  his  neighbour  in  a  trade,
and,  to  make  a  cent,  has  cheated  the
simple  and  good-hearted  who  trusted
in  him.  Another  has  stolen  a  litile,
or  done  this  and  that  wrong;  and  all
are  apt  to  excuse  themselves  under
the  plea  of  the  weaknesses  of  human
nature.

Now,  1  come  to  my  own  experience
and  say — there  is  not  an  individual
here  but  what  has  power,  and  God
has  given  it  to  him,  to  drink  whisky
or  tat  it  alone,  to  swear  or  not  swear,
to  lie  or  not  lie,  deceive  or  not  deceive,
cheat  and  take  advantage  of  a  neigh-
bour or  not  do  so,  slander  and
backbite  a  brother  or  a  sister  or  not.
This  power  is  our  own  individual
property,  and  we  shall  be  brought
into  judgment  for  the  man  er  in
which  we  use  it,  and  for  all  our
actions  in  the  flesh.  Thirty  year's
experience  has  taught  me  that  every
moment  of  ray  life  must  be  holiness
to  the  Lord,  resulting  from  equity,
justice,  mercy,  and  uprightness  in  alt
my  actions,  which  is  the  only  course
by  which  I  can  preserve  the  Spirit  of
the  Almighty  to  myself.  What  is
your  experience  ?  It  is  the  same  as
my  own.  You  cannot  constantly  be
sinning  a  little  and  repenting,  and
retain  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  as  your
constant  companion.  My  experience
up  to  this  time,  has  been  to  do  as  I
would  that  others  should  do  unto  me,
under  like  circumstances;  and,  if  I


understand  myself,  there  is  not  a  man
or  woman  on  the  face  of  this  earth

,  that  I  have  dealt  with  contrary  to
this  rule,  and  thia  practice  I  have
continued  each  day.

When  Monday  morning  breaks
upon  the  eyes  of  the  people,  they
must  be  as  faithful  to  God  and
righteousnes  as  they  are  here  when
partaking  of  the  sacrament,  or  lose
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  We  have  no
permission  to  sin  for  one  moment.
You  may  ask  me  if  I  ever  do  wrong,
I  answer-yes,  like  everybody  else,
owing  to  the  weakness  of  the  flesh ;
but  if  I  do  wrong  knowingly,  then  I
sin.  When  this  people  can  live  and
never  do  a  wrong  knowingly,  if  they
should  sin  in  their  ignorance,  God
will  freely  forgive  that  sin,  if  they
are  ready  to  repent  when  it  is  made
known  to  them  and  tefrainfrom  it  in
the  future*  Let  us  live  in  this  way
and  the  kingdom  is  ours.  It  is  the
kingdom  of  God  with  us,  or  nothing.
It  is  in  our  possession,  and  God  will
have  a  people  that  will  preserve  it
inviolate.  There  may  be  some  in  our
midst  who  do  not  honour  the  char-
acter of  our  religion,  yet  the  Lord
will  preserve  his  kingdom.

I  There  are  some  who  wish  to  regain
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  they  have  lost,
and  others  desire  to  go  on  a  Mission
to  get  that  Spirit.  My  advice  to  all
such  persons  is— so  live  daily  that
all  the  light  of  God's  Spirit  given  to
you  will  be  preserved  in  you  and
increase  from  day  to  day,  until  yon
become  perfect  in  your  sphere  as  our
Father  in  heaven  is  perfect.  This  is
my  experience.  We  cannot  believe
any  truth  that  exists  in  all  the
eternities  of  the  Gods  that  is  not
embraced  in  our  holy  religion,  com-
monly called  "Mormonism."  It  in-
corporates every  truth  that  has  been
known,  is  known,  and  will  be  known,
in  all  the  eternities  past,  and  in  a1!
the  eternities  to  come ;  in  short,  it  is

i  eternal  truth  upon  which  the  throne


<


of  God  is  founded  and  cannot  be
moved. May  the  Lord  help  us  to  be

faithful.

Again,  in  all  the  duties  and  labours
pertaining  to  our  mortal  existence,
let  us  remember  that  Paul  may  plant
and  Apollos  may  water,  but  it  is  God
alone  who  gives  the  increase.  And
how  long  will  it  be  before  we  shall
learn  to  take  good  care  of  the  increase
God  gives  us  ?  Our  labour  is  our
wealth  ;  it  is  the  best  capital  that  any
nation  can  possess*  We  have  an  im-
mense capital  that  will  bring  us  a


large  interest,  if  it  is  expended
judiciously  and  with  that  wisdom
which  cometh  from  Heaven,  Every
man  and  woman  capable  of  labour
have  their  stock  of  capital  on  hand  ;
dispose  of  it  wisely ;  let  everything
be  put  to  good  use  in  the
possibe  manner  to  build  up
kingdom  of  God,  and  to  make  our-
selves comfbr table  and  happy  on  this
earth,  and  the  Lord  will  preserve  us
and  give  us  all  we  ask  for,  The
kingdom  is  ours.  Amen.


PREACHING  THE  GOSPEL  TO,  AND  HELPING  THE  LAMAMTES

OBEDIENCE  TO  COUNSEL.

Remarks  by  Elder  Wilfobd  Woodruff,  in  the  Bowery  at  Ptovj9

July  15,  1855.

RKPORTKD  BY  J. V.  LONG.


I  have  sat  and  listened  with  a  great
deal  of  interest  to  the  teachings  of
the  Prophets  and  Apostles  of  the
Lord,  and  I  feel  it  to  be  a  privilege,
indeed,  to  enjoy  the  society  of  such
men,  to  hear  them  speak,  and  to  have
a  few  moments  with  the  rest  to
address  you.  In  the  subjects  and
items  that  have  been  presented  before
us,  there  is  a  great  amount  of  import-
ant matter,  I  have  felt,  and  did  in
the  commencement  of  this  Conference,
that  for  one  man  or  several  men  to
have  oil  enough  in  their  vessels  to
supply  one  thousand  men  was  a  very
difficult  thing,  but  it  seems  neces-
sary when  a  congregation  comes
together  for  all  to  have  oil  in  their


and  not  to  require  one  or
half-a-dozen  men  to  have  oil  with
them  for  the  whole  congregation.

Well,  brethren  and  sisters,  we  have
heard  a  great  deal  since  this  meeting
commenced,  on  various  ^tbjects,  and
we  have  had  good  teachings — prin-
ciples of  eternal  life  have  been  set
before  us  by  the  several  brethren  who
have  spoken.  The  proceedings  of
this  Conference  have  led  my  mind  to
reflection.  I  have  reflected  upon  what
I  have  heard,  and  considered  the  im-
portance of  those  teachings  we  have
received ;  and  there  is  one  thing  I
want  to  say  to  this  congregation,
when  the  servants  of  God  who  have
been  set  to  lead  us,  or  to  lead  the


222


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


people  of  God  In  all  the  word,  when
they  rise  up  to  testify,  and  when  they
stand  forth  to  teach  the  Saints,  and
to  present  principles  befure  them
that  are  calculated  to  save  them  if
adhered  to,  t  wish  the  Saints  to
understand  that  th^sc  teachings,  or
those  precepts  have  to  be  received  by
us  as  a  people,  for  thry  will  prove  a
savor  of  life  unto  life  or  death  unto
death.

I  thought  of  the  children  of  Israel
thla  niurning.  Now,  says  Moses  to
them,  I  have  set  life  and  death  befure
you,  choose  which  you  will  receives
and  it  is  just  so  with  us,  the  way
of  life  is  pointed  out  and  if  we
neglect  to  walk  therein,  there  is
nothing  but  death  stares  us  in  the
face.  Let  us  atop  and  reflect  a
moment — let  ns  sec  whether  it  is  best
for  us  to  receive  life  or  death.
Brethren,  you  have  heard  plain  truths,
and  they  have  been  dictated  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
by  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  BOW  Is  the  time  for  yon  to
decide  whom  ye  will  serve.  When
I  used  to  hear  the  Prophet  Joseph,
and  when  1  hear  H  rig  ham,  or
Heber,  or  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  or
the  Twelve  Apostles,  or  any  other
men,  if  they  speak  by  the  spirit  and
power  of  God,  and  they  tell  us  thus
saith  the  L  >rd:  so  and  so  will  come
to  pass,  for  instance  those  who  will
fe^.1  and  clothe  these  Unnanites  and
see  to  their  wants,  as  our  President
has  told  us,  they  shall  be  blessed  and
prosper,  while  those  who  despise
the  n  shall  go  down  and  slutll  not
stand  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  [
believe  that  what  they  say  will  be
fulfilled-  I  also  believe  that  which
was  said  here  to- day.  viz.  : — That  we
do  furget  what  we  are,  and  we  often
forget  who  we  are ;  we  forget,  as  a
people  iu  these,  mountains,  by  what
hand  we  have  been  led  here,  and  by
whom  we  have  been  governed  and
conlr  led  since  this  kingdom  has  been


organized  and  the  holy  Priesthood
committed  to  man  upon  the  earth.
We  become  so  overcome  by  the  cares
of  !He  that  we  neglect  and  forget
our  duties,  and  as  the  brethren  have
remarked  with  reference  to  our
brethren  and  sisters  in  this  place,
they  do  not  realize  the  responsibility
that  rests  upon  us.  Do  we  realize
the  salvation  that  is  to  be  given  to
this  people?  If  we  did  we  would
prize  our  privileges  far  more  than  we
do  at  the  present  time.  How  many  of
us  who  are  now  in  this  congregation  rea-
lize as  we  ought  the  salvation  and  the
privileges  which  are  Lrvanh/d  t-»  ns  ?
Do  you  appreciate  the  Priesthood  that
is  given  you,  and  that  the  keys  of  the
kingdom  are  given  to  you,  and  that
the  world  of  mankind  are  dependent
upon  you  for  sal  vatic  n  ?  No,  not  as
you  ought.  We  forget  onr  God  and
our  prayers,  we  forget  to  call  upon
God  for  his  Holy  Spirit  to  rest  upon
us,  that  we  may  live  to  his  honour
and  glory*  Truly,  if  the  Elders  in
this  Church  and  kingdom  realized
what  is  put  into  their  possession,  and
that  the  God  of  heaven  will  actually
require  an  account  of  our  stewardship,
an  account  of  what  we  have  been
domcr.  and  what  use  we  have  been
making  of  the  gifts  and  blessings
which  he  has  bestowed  upon  us,  we
should  he  more  diligent  in  the  per*
formance  of  all  our  duties,  and  we
should  often  act  differently  to  what
wc  do,  and  pursue  a  different  course,
and  especially  concerning  our  red
brethren.  And  I  will  say  to  yoa
brethren  who  reside  in  Provo,  for
God's  sake  listen  to  counsel,  and  for
the  sake  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and
for  your  own  sake  listen  to  the  in-
structions of  President  Young  and
carry  them  into  practice.  Do  not  go
away  from  this  stand  and  let  those
things  escape  your  minds,  and  be
like  water  spilled  upon  the  ground
which  cannot  be  gathered  again,  but
receive  them  as  the  revelations  of


PREACHING  THE OOSPKL,  ETC.


Jesus  Christ  to  us. Tt  has  been
remarked  that  it  costs  a  great  deal
to  keep  the  Lamanites,  and  who  dues
not  know  that  everything  costs  a
a  good  deal  in  this  kingdom  ?  Have
you  no!  tithed  your  whole  substance,
your  flocks  and  herds  and  all  your
possessions  ? Have  not  the  Gentiles
ml  1  ed  you  and  spoiled  you  of  every
thing  you  }  obsessed  ?  and  have  you
not  had  to  make  your  beds  in  the
mud  upon  the  hanks  of  the  Missis-
sippi river. Yon  have  experienced
all  thisand  a  great  deal  more.  Does  it
requite  the  san  e  to  pay  your  Tithing  ?
Does  it  n  quire  the  same  affliction,  the
ean  e  suffering  to  keep  the  command-
xi  ents  of  Cod,  as  it  did  in  thoM-  days  o!
persecution  and  trial? No,  it  does
not. Will  it  cost  as  much  to  farm
for  them,  to  feed  and  clothe  them,  as
it  cost  us  in  those  times  of  trouble
aid  perplexity? AA  will  acknow-
ledge that  it  is  better  to  give  a  part
than  to  lose  the  whole,  and  have  to
flee  to  thejiu-ks  and  mountains,  and
be  driven  from  our  homes  by  the
Gentile  world.  You  will  find.  Irethien
and  sisters, that  the  trials  will  be
heavier  ai:d  more  6e\  ere  everv  time,
and  \ou  will  also  find,  (hat,  when  the
duties  of  our  calling  are  light  upon  us,
it  will  Le  then  Unit  we  will  require  to
be  stirred  up  to  diligence  and  to  the
performance  of  our  duty. The  people
aie  always  the  best  when  tliey  are
busily  engaged, When  I  have  heard
brother  Kin. tall  declare,  that  if  this
people  did  not  save  their  wheat,  and
the  necessaries  of  life  they  would  see
hard  tin  es  and  famine  in  the  land.
I  say  these  things  sink  like  lead  into
my  feelings,  and  they  always  did
fiom  the  very  fii-st  that  1  heard  them.
Whenever  I  hear  things  set  forth  by
the  servants  ot  God,  I  always  know
that  there  is  a  rneanir  g  to  them,  and
they  always  weigh  heavily  upon  my
mind, Tl  e Lord foreshows  us
through  his  servants  what  is  coming
to  pass,  and  in  this  way  wo  have  I


223

j  been  led  by  the  band  of  God  ;  and  it
I  has  heen  by  his  mercies  that  we
have  been  guided  until  the  present
time.  The  blessings  of  God  have  been
multiplied  upon  our  heads  year  afier
year,  and  we  have  had  mure  than  we
deserve  bestowed  upon  us,  and  the
counsel  and  instructions  given  us  have
been  good,  I  hope  that  we  will  be
wise,  and  not  let  those  things  pass
away  ns  idle  tales,  but  foil  nv  them  up
and  be  on  hand  for  every  thing  that
is  lequired  at  our  hands.  I  hope  that
brother  Snow  will  lead  up  in  these
matters,  respecting  your  meeting-
In -use  and  farming  operations  for  the
natives,  and  1  hope  that  they  will
carry  out  the  instructions  given  them,
and  if  the  brethren  will  attend  to
these  things  and  do  them  in  faith  and
in  tl  e  name  of  the  Lord,  I  will  tell
you  how  it  will  Le,  all  you  take  in
hand  will  prosper,  the  Loid  will  I, less
your  crops,  and  your  cattle,  and  all
that  you  possess.  Lut  if  you  neglect
your  labour  this  year,  why  next  year
your  labours  will  he  double ;  and  so  it
will  be  year  after  year  until  all  your
blessings  will  te  taken  away,  ai  d  you
will  be  left  to  yourselves.  Then  do
what  is  requiit?d  at  your  hands,  and
your  yoke  will  be  easy  and  your
1  urden  light,  because  you  will  do  each
day  that  which  belongs  to  that  day.

I  know  that  what  has  teen  said
here  is  true,  and  the  Spirit  bears
ncv:d  to  you  and  to  every  honest
heart — to  everv  man  and  wi  man.
that  these  things  are  correct.  These
Lamanites  have  a  right  to  tie  holy
Priesthood,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  carry
the  Gospel  unto  them  that  they
may  attain  to  all  its  privileges  and
blessings.

We  have  for  the  If  si  twenty  years
been  preachingit  in  theUuited  states,
in  Europe,  and  distant  nations  of  the
earth,  and  thousands  have  embraced
it;  but  in  accomplishing  this  the
Elders  of  Israel  have  had  to  make  all
kinds  of  sacrifices,  and  Le  absent  from


224


JOUliNAL  OF  DISCOURSED


their  families  for  several  years  at  a
time,  but  now  the  key  is  turned  to
the  seed  of  Israel,  they  are  right  here
in  our  midst  scattered  abroad  among
these  mountains.  "  What,"  says  one,
"  preach  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to
these  nati  ves  ?"  Yes,  God  has  deter-
mined that  seeing  the  Gentiles  count
themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life,
he  will  through  the  instrumentality
of  his  servants  cause  salvation  to  go
to  Israel  in  the  mountains,  andfuifil  the
promises  which  were  made  to  their
fathers  hundreds  of  years  ago.  When
you  see  the  servitude  in  which  the
poor  of  mankind  are  kept  in  the
various  nations,  and  the  privations,
abominations >  and  oppression  that
grind  down  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  dues  it  not  make  us  feel  for
t  hem  ?  And  to  whom  can  they  look
fur  deliverance  ?  They  never  will
find  it  but  through  the  instrumental-
ity of  this  people,  for  into  their  hand
the  kingdom  is  given  neve*  more  to
be  destroyed,  but  it  will  spread  and
increase  until  all  have  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  receiving  the  truth  in  all
nations.  And  those  that  will  not
keep  the  Commandments  of  God  will
feel  his  chastening  rod,  for  he  will
purify  and  cleanse  the  ear%  that  it
may  be  prepared  for  the  cfftriing  of
Christ.

The  kingdom  of  God  wi|l  remain
upon  the  earth,  and  the  holgr  Priest-
hood will  rest  down  upon  these  our
neighbours  as  well  as  we,  aud  the
keys  of  power  will  remain  &i$h  this
people  for  ever  and  be  used  fop  tl^eir
redemption,  for  this  is  the  decree  .of
the  Almighty.  If  we  do  not  4o  our
duty  as  a  people  we  shall  be  chastened
and  whipped  until  we  learn  obedience.
Then,  I  say,  that  it  is  for  us  to.  work
to  build  up  his  kingdom,  whatever
We  are  instructed  to  do,  that  we
should  perform  at  all  times  ad4  listen
to  the  counsels  of  his  servants  what-
ever  may  be  the  consequences.  Yes,
brethren,  the  time  is  at  hand  when


we  are  and  shall  be  required  to  put
forth  our  hands  and  do  a  great  work
upon  the  earth,  and  the  dead  branches
must  be  cut  off  in  order  that  there
may  be  rosm  for  the  kingdom  of  God
to  grow.  We  see  the  judments  of
God  spreading  among  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  what  are  our  feelings  ?
My  feelings  are,  that  it  is  according
to  the  prophecies  of  those  men  who
were  inspired  in  days  that  are  gone.
Well,  do  I  delight  in  seeing  the
wicked  destroyed  ?  No,  I  do  not ;  but
I  delight  in  seeing  the  righteous  get
what  they  look  for,  happiness  and
eternal  life.  Is  it  a  benefit  for  the
wicked  portion  of  mankind  to  live  or
to  die  and  go  down  to  the  grave  ?  It
is  better  for  the  people  to  go  down  to
the  gravp  than  to  live  upon  the  earth ;
when  the  principles  of  salvation  are
offered  to  the  world,  it  is  better  that
they  should  cease  to  live  than  bring
thousands  of  posterity  into  the  world
who  will  like  themselves  do  wiekedlyy
for  the  wicked  and  thp  ungodly
of  the  earth  will  mot  receive  the
Gospel  of  Christ,  apd  the  earth  is
bound  to  be  cleansed  that  there  may
be  room  for  the  righteous  to  live,  for
a  holy  and  righteous  generation  to  be
raised  up  and  the  name  pf  God
honoured  among  men.  These  ate  my
feelings  upon  that  subject.  And  it
will  be  just  so  with  us,  we  will  be
under  greater  condemnat  ion  than  any
other  people  if  we  neglect  our  duties,
because  we  have  received  the  Priests
hood  of  God,  and  have  learned  what
19  right  and  what  is  wrong.  Ho
many  of  our  brethren  now  presen
before  the  light  of  revelation  cam
felt  as  we  do  now  ?  Would  we  not
have  given  anything  in  the  world
that  we  possessed  to  har<*  had  the
privilege  of  listening  tathe  teachings
we  have  had  this  day  ?  W#  were
then  like  the  blind  groping  for  tha
wall,  and  all  we  had  to  do  was  to
walk  by  the  little  light  we  cotfld  get
We  were  then  filled  with  traditions


PREACHING  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


225


our  fathers  wlio  had  inherited  vanity,  f
lies,  and  things  in  which  there  was
no  profit.  Things  are  different  now,
we  know  for  ourselves,  we  understand
the  things  of  God,  then  let  us  obey
for  ourselves  that  we  may  prosper.
I  feel  an  anxiety  for  the  welfare  of
this  people,  and  I  pray  that  we  may
Hot  neglect  the  blessings  that  are
given  to  us,  for  this  is  an  important
time.  While  we  are  in  this  proba-
tion we  should  make  the  best  possible
use  of  our  time,  for  this  is  the  time
to  receive  life  and  knowledge  and  to
lay  up  treasures  in  heaven,  that  where
our  heart  is,  there  oar  treasures  may
be  also*  There  are  many  things  in
my  mind  to  speak  upon  for  the
benefit  of  this  people,  but  I  do  not
feel  to  occupy  your  time  longer.  I
do  feel  though  that  the  subject  before
us  is  of  all  importance  to  the  house  of
Israel,  and  I  believe  that  the  Lord
does  intend  that  we  should  speak  to
them,  and  bring  them  to  understand
the  light  of  truth.  They  are  in
darkms.-s  because  their  fathers  had
the  truth  and  turned  away  and  forsook
the  Lord  their  God.  The  Prophets
among  them  wrote  records,  and  in
those  records  they  promised  blessings
to  their  children  who  should  live  in
the  hist  days.  They  promised  that
after  the  cursing  and  afflictions  should
come  the  blessings,  and  if  the  Lord
has  taken  us  from  the  midst  of  the
Gentiles  and  has  enlightened  our
minds  so  that  we  can  comprehend
life  and  death  in  a  great  measure,
and  the  principles  of  truth  that  are
being  revealed,  we  should  feel  satis-
fied with  the  blessings  God  has  given,
and  we  should  be  as  ready  to  preach
to  these  Lamanites  as  we  are  to  the
Gentiles.  Are  they  not  of  the  seed
of  Israel?  Are  they  not  all  our
brethren  and  of  the  house  of  Joseph  ?
Then,  brethren,  let  us  take  heed,  and
when  we  look  upon  them  and  see
their  conditions  deal  with  them
wisely,  and  the  Lord  will  acknowledge
Ho.  15.


our  labours,  I  will  tell  you  what
F  believe  about  this  matter — the
redemption  of  these  natives — had  this
people  come  here  under  the  same
impressions  that  they  had  in  New
York,  in  Ohio,  in  Kentucky,  or  in
Maine,  or  in  any  other  State,  had  they
come  when  they  first  received  the
Gospel  and  the  Spirit  of  it,  for  then
their  hearts  were  touched  with  the
Spirit  of  the  Gospel  of  salvation,  and
they  felt  well,  and  had  they  have
come  here  under  those  impressions
and  continued  to  live  under  those
impressions  which  they  first  received
in  relation  to  these  scattered  tribes;
I  say  long  before  this,  had  the  people
who  first  settled  in  Utah  Valley  lived
up  to  the  first  impressions  first  made
upon  their  minds,  these  Utes  would
have  felt  to  be  our  brethren  and
sisters.  They  would  have  been  one
with  us,  and  they  would  have  been
in  this  Church  long  ago,  and  their
children  would  have  been  reading
and  writing,  and  you  would  have  seen
some  of  the  young  men  busily  engaged
preaching  to  the  tribes  the  fulness  of
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  If  the
Latter-day  Saints  had  come  here
when  they  first  received  the  irapres ,
sion,  and  the  Book  of  Mormon  from
Joseph  Smith,  this  wild  degraded
race  of  men  might  have  been,  to  a
great  extent,  civilized  and  acquainted
with  the  Gospel.  What  do  you  say
brethren,  is  not  that  correct  ?  (L  jud
cries  of  "  Yes.")  I  know  it  is,  I
have  heard  the  brethren  and  sisters
speak  in  tongues  and  give  interpre-
tations about  this  very  people,  and
they  would  say  that  they  would  teach
the  Lamanites  to  spin  and  sew,  and
also  to  be  clean:  do  thev  feel  so
now  ?  No ;  I  tell  you  they  are  back-
sliders from  that  faith  which  they
then  imbibed ;  they  are  lukewarm
and  cold  to  those  things  which  God
has  taught  us  respecting  this  people
with  whom  we  now  live.  Well,  nowf
again,  if  you  will  reflect  and  look

Vol  IX


220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


back  a  little  you  will  see  that  we
have  been  for  several  years  past
calling  for  the  Elders  to  go  forth  and
preach  t  lie  Gospel,  and  we  have
almost  preached  to  all  nations.  There
may  be  some  nations  that  we  have
not  preached  to,  but  we  have  preached
it  in  France,  Italy,  Germany,  and  the
States  of  the  German  Confederacy ;
and  it  has  been  preached  in  the
British  Isles,  in  North  and  South
America,  and  the  Society  and  Sand-
wich Islands,  and  to  China,  and  we
have  even  sent  them  to  the  dark
regions  of  Asia  and  Africa  to  preach
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  There  were
two  of  our  brethren  past  through
here  last  night  who  have  been  to
those  countries.  Chauncey  West  has
been  through  that  country  and  can
tell  how  it  is  there.  Could  he  get
any  converts  there  ?  Yes,  if  he  could
get  them  plenty  to  eat,  but  if  he
could  not  feed  them  and  keep  them
they  would  not  stay  with  him.  Now
Chauncey  West  has  done  as  much  as
lie  could,  and  not  only  preached  and
travelled,  but  he  has  cleared  his
skirts  of  those  people  among  whom
be  has  travelled,  and  he  has  cleared
this  people,  for  they  have  been
commanded  to  preach  this  Gospel  to
all  the  nations  of  the  earth.

Do  we  want  to  save  the  Lamanites  ?
Yes,  we  do,  and  they  are  here  by
thousands  and  hundreds  of  thousands,
right  upon  this  continent ;  we  have
them  all  around  us  and  they  want
saving.  Supposing  we  were  to  take
those  Elders  that  we  have  in  the
various  nations  and  send  them  i::
among  these  Indians,  these  natives
of  the  mountains,  what  would  be  the
result?  Our  Elders  go  and  leave
their  families  for  two,  three,  five
and  seven  years,  they  leave  all
and  travel  by  land  and  sea,  they
get  shipwrecked,  go  almost  naked,
and  be  gone  for  years,  preach-
ing and  labouring  year  after  year,
and  what do they  accomplish  ?


Not  as  much  as  they  could  do  at
home  in  one  month,  but  still  they  go,
and  positively  don't  do  as  much  good
as  they  could do  at  home  in  one
fourth  the  time. Now,  suppose  I
were  to  call  for  Missionaries  to  go
and  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  nations
that  are  termed  the  civilized  nations,  I
could  get  hundreds  of  volunteers.  Why
are  you  not  willing  to  make  sacrifices
here?  Why  should  not  men  be  willing
to  go  and  spend  their  time  and  talents
among  these  Lamanites  and  save  time,
money,  and  hundreds  and  thousands  of
dollars? Let  a  man  till  his  garden,
attend  to  the  cows,  get  his  living  and
devote  the  spare  portion  of  his  time
to  preaching  to  these  Lamanites,  and
and  he  will  be  right  at  home  all  the
time.  But  men  will  prefer  going  and
spending  their  time  jear  after  year
among  the Gentile nations,  and
accomplish  a  mere  nothing. And  I
can  find  men  in  this  congregation
who  will  do  this,  and  do  it  freely,
but  say  to  them  set  your  own  time
and  go  to  the  kanyon  and  get  a  load  of
wood  for  these  Lainanite  squaws  and
will  they  do  it? No,  they  will  not
Is  it  not  strange  that  men  will  act
so,  go  from  home  and  spend  hundreds
and  thousands  of  dollars  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  somebody of  noted
civilization,  away  off  yonder  (pointing
east,)  but  will  we  go  to  the  Laman-
ites? No,  but  we  try  to  get  awaj
otF*  from  them. We  are  treating
them  just  as  the  Latter-day  Sainii
have  been  treated  by  the  Gentiles.  If
any  of  them  come  about  begging,  tha
Latter-day  Saints  instead  of  serving
them  and  thereby  kindling  a  good
spirit  within  them  say  "here,  get
out  of  the  way,  let  this  alone,  and
don't  you  meddle  with  that, 1  don't
like  you,  go  away  from  my  house.'1
This  is  the  way  the  Saints  talk  to
these  natives. Now,  where  shall  we
go — to  the  nations  that  have  rejected
the  fulness  of  the  Gospel,  or  shall  we
stay  at  home  and  preach  to  these


PREACHING  THE GOSPEL,  ETC,


natives  ?  I  tell  you,  if  we  send  this
people  off  from  us  and  treat  them
with  contempt  we  shall  regret  it,  and
mourn  because  of  it.  I  am  going  to
tell  yoo  what  to  do  with  these  natives,
you  Bishops  and  Presidents  of  Provo
and  Springville,  call  out  those  teams
which  you  have  about  you,  all  of
them,  and  if  these  Indians  want
wood,  haul  it  fur  thera  for  you  have
burned  theirs,  and  they  need  a  little
wood  as  well  as  you.  Let  them  have
feed  on  the  range  for  their  horses,
wood  to  burn,  and  then  they  will  let
you  alone  You  will  eat  their  fish
too,  on  which  they  depend  for  a
living  one  part  of  the  year,  and
every  service  berry  that  you  can
find  in  the  mountains,  and  still
you  grumble  to  let  them  have
a  little  with  you.  Yon  don't  want
the  crickets,  and  therefore  they
can  have  the  whole  of  them,  but
you  have  secured  the  antelope  and
everything  else  that  you  could  make
any  kind  of  use  of.  Before  the  whites
came,  there  was  plenty  offish  and  ante-
lope, plenty  of  game  of  almost  every
description  ;  but  now  the  whites  have
killed  off  these  things,  and  there  is
scarcely  anything  left  for  the  poor
natives  to  live  upon.  Brethren  what
are  you  going  to  do  with  them  ?
Kick  them  out  of  doors  when  they
come  in  and  let  them  starve  to
death  ?  If  we  do  this,  we  shall  most
assuredly  regret  it.  Well,  what  will
you  do  brother  Brigham  ?  I  will
tell  you  what  I  will  dp ;  there  is
brother  Armstrong  here,  and  he  is  an
agent,  and  I  want  him  to  set  off  a
piece  of  land  for  the  natives  and
make  a  division  line,  and  have  it
clearly  understood  that  they  are  not
to  intrude  upon  your  ground,  nor  you
upon  theirs.  In  addition  to  this,  make
a  road  from  their  land,  so  that  when
they  want  to  come  to  the  city  they
can  do  it  without  breaking  down
fences  or  intruding  upon'  anybody's
land. Then  teach  them  to  wofk,  to


227

fence  in  their  land,  to  plough,  to  raise
wheat  and  com,  and  potatoes,  and
every  thing  they  need ;  teach  them  to
be  c  leanly  and  industrious,  and  prevail
on  them  to  send  their  children  to
school  to  learn  to  read  and  write  the
English  language,  and  let  some  of
those  men  that  used  to  talk  of
teaching  the  Lamanites,  and  of  con-
verting them,  let  them  go  down  and
build  a  nice  school-house  in  their
settlement,  and  there  teach  them  the
principles  of  civilization.  And  instead
of  you  wasting  your  hundreds  and
thousands  worth  of  time,  and  of  grain,
ard  clothing,  do  as  they  did  iu  Salt
Lake  City  last  year ;  they  formed  a
society  for  the  benefit  of  these
Indians,  and  put  their  means  together
and  made  them  clothing  of  various
kinds,i  and  distributed  those  articles
which  they  were  enabled  to  obtain
among  the  Lamanites,  and  do  you  go
and  do  likewise.  Gather  up  the  yarn,
and  the  cotton  yarn,  and  woollen
yarn,  and  make  them  up  into
clothes  to  make  them  comfort*
able.  But  they  must  work  for
those  things;  teach  them  to  work
for  all  they  have  and  don't  encourage
the  idle,  those  who  refuse  to  work.
In  this  wTay  yon  will  gradually  bring
them  in  to  civilization,  and  they  will
be  convinced  that  you  are  their  friends,
and  that  you  intend  to  do  them  good,
and  these  things  will  lead  them  to
give  ear  to  the  Gospel  and  be  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  their  sins.
Now  are  we  going  to  try  to  make
them  one,  and  encourage  them  to
abide  here  in  peace,  or  are  we
determined  to  drive  them  from  us  ?
I  can  tell  you  the  Lamanites  of  these
mountains  will  yet  be  a  shield  to  this
people  if  we  do  right,  and  if  we  will
not  do  our  duty,  our  necks  are  ready
for  the  halter  or  the  knife  ;  yes,  you
will  find  that  our  necks  will  be  ready
for  the  knives  of  oar  enemies,  if  we
do  not  look  to  these  poor  degraded
natives*


228


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCOUItSES,


l  wan  t  to  know  now,  if  the  brethren
can  really  and  truly  realize  our  true
position  with  regard  to  the  Lamanites,
or  do  you  consider  them  a  poor,  lost,
sunken  race  of  beings  that  are  not
worth  saving  ?  Do  you  ever  read
the  Book  of  Mormon  ?  If  you  do,
do  you  believe  and  realize  the
truth  of  its  sayings,  and  also  what
the  Lord  revealed  to  the  Prophet
Joseph  ?  These  are  things  that
we  have  in  our  possession;  we
have  them  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants  and  in  the  History  of
Joseph  Smith.  Do  you  look  them
over  ?  If  you  do,  and  if  you  lay
them  to  heart  as  the  things  of  God,
you  will  feel  that  it  is  actually  our
duty  to  do  all  we  possibly  can
to  benefit,  enlighten  and  save  this
dark  and  ignorant  people.  Do  you
feel  like  killing  off  the  Laman-
ites  ?  I  tell  you  there  is  no  man
that  will  ever  feel  like  killing
them  if  he  possesses  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord,  Well,  says  one,
"do  you  ever  feel  like  chastising
them  brother  Brigham  ?"  Yes,  I  do,
but  I  let  the  Spirit  of  the  Holy
Gospel  direct  me;  but  until  the
light  of  the  Holy  Gospel  shone
upon  me  I  felt  like  other  men.
When  the  Priesthood  was  restored,
and  the  light  of  truth  burst  in
upon  my  mind,  I  knew  then  that
if  it  were  not  for  the  Israel-
ites the  Gentiles  might  go  to  hell
and  be  damned.  The  Lord  would
not  take  much  pains  with  us  any*
how,  were  it  not  for  the  pro-
mised seed.  Instead  of  them  being
inferior  to  us  in  birth  right,  they
are  [superior,  and  they  stand  first
in  many  instances,  with  regard  to
the  promises  in  particular.  Well,
but  says  one,  "  how  will  you
prove  this  ?"  I  will  tell  you,
if  we  had  been  of  the  house  of  Israel
and  forsaken  our  God  as  much  as  we
have,  and  despised  his  ordinances
and  trampled  them  under  our  feet,  we


would  have  been  cursed  like  these
Lamanites  are,  this  is  my  proof.  If
the  Gentiles  had  been  of  the  house  of
Israel,  legal  heirs  to  the  Priestho-  d,
and  had  received  their  oracles  as  the
house  of  Israel  did,  you  would  have
found  that  the  same  curse  would  have
come  upon  the  Gentiles  that  you  now
see  upon  these  Lamanites,  but  inas-
much as  they  were  not  of  the  pro-
mised seed,  to  them  the  blessings
did  not  pertain,  and  they  had  no
part  nor  lot  in  them,  only  as  they
were  afterward  granted  on  condition
of  obedience.  The  Son  of  God  came
through  Israel,  but  we  Gentiles  being
strangers,  and  foreigners,  and  aliens,
in  a  national  point,  we  had  nothing
to  do  with  putting  Chiist  to  death,
and  hence  the  curse  did  not  come
upon  the  Gentiles.  When  they  are
restored,  will  they  not  stand  before
the  Gentiles?  Will  they  not  be
numbered  with  the  Sons  of  God
and  be  adorned  with  the  gifts
and  graces  of  the  Gospel,  and  stand
before  the  Gentiles?  Yes,  thej
will !  Now,  what  do  the  people
think  ?  1  should  like  to  know
what  this  congregation  think  about  it
There  are  a  good  many  brethren
and  sisters  here  from  Springvillt
Palmyra,  and  Payson,  what
you  all  think  about  it?  Had
better  drive  them  away  out  of  ti
country  ?  Or,  had  we  best  tal
hold  and  bring  them  into  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ?  Now,  i
this  people,  male  and  female,  fed
to  school  tli em,  spend  time  and
pains  to  instil  into  their  mini
correct  principles,  to  divide  laud
with  them,  and  clothe  them,  dm
their  wood  for  them  until  the;
learn  to  draw  their  own,  and  farm
for  them  until  they  learn  to  fara
for  themselves,  and  if  they  will
no  mere  slay  them,  no  mom  secladf
fch  em  from  their  houses  and  hospi
tality,  and  will  go  to  work  and
restore  them  to  the  knowledge  of


REMARKS  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  INDIANS,


the  truth  the  Lord  God  will  bless
them,  and  they  have  nothing  to
fear.  If  you  will  live  up  to  this
you  will  rise,  while  ihose  who  do
not  will  go  down.  If  this  people  will
observe  this  covenant,  and  follow
it  one  and  all,  (and  here  are  the
leading  men  in  these  mountains  be-
longing to  several  of  the  tribes,  and
they  feel  well),  thousands  and  hun-
dreds of  thousands  will  embrace
this  Gospel,  and  for  ought  I  know
scores  of  thousands  will  become
members  of  this  Church.

Now,  if  you  will  take  hold  of  the
wheel  and  lift,  it  may  bo  granted
unto  us  to  accomplish  this  great
work,  and  I  tell  you  that  you  will
receive  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,
such  as  you  never  received  before,  if
you  will  make  up  your  minds  to  be
favourable  and  merciful  unto  them
in  their  filthiness,  and  in  their
ignorance,  these  blessings  are  yours.


But  if  you  get  angry  and  kill
them,  you  will  not  obtain  them.
Say  to  them,  "  if  you  steal  and
destroy  our  property  we  will  bear
wit! i  you,  and  while  you  are  ignor-
ant we  will  bear  with  you,"  and
if  this  people  will  take  this  course
from  this  time  forth,  they  will
feel  the  power  of  God  more  than
they  ever  did  in  these  last  days
before,  (The  congregation  here
united  in  a  loud  "Amen,")  And
you  are  finding  it  so,  too.

Just  give  them  what  they  v,  ant;
I  tell  you  it  is  the  cheapest  way
to  fight  them.  You  can  'Iraw
them  to  you  and  make  them  bend
to  anything  if  you  use  them  well.
And  if  any  man  abuses  them,
let  him  be  dealt  with  by  the
civil  authorities,  and  in  this  way
you  will  succeed  in  the  work  you
have  in  view*

May  God  bless  you  all  Amen.


REMARKS  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  INDIANS.

By  President  Joseph  Youno,  made  in  tlx  Bowery  at  Provo,

July  13,  1855.


BEPORTKD  BY  J. V.  LONG,


I  arise,  brethren  and  sisters,  to
make  a  very  few  remarks,  particu-
larly upon  one  point,  that  is  the
subject  of  the  Lamanites,  I  am
aware  that  in  all  the  teaching  that  the
brightest  intelligence  can  receive  upon
any  subject,  that  theie  is  a  balance
wheel  in  the  inside  of  man — the
heart — that  should  be  consulted  in


carrying  ont  any  or  every  instruction
that  we  hear.  The  Lord  has  put  into
every  man  a  portion  of  instruction
that  he  is  required  to  use,  independent
of  any  oral  instruction  that  he  may
receive.  This  natural  intelligence  is
given  to  balance  things  in  the  human
mind.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is
given  to  men  to  profit  thereby.  It


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


is  according  to  good  sense  and  reason
that  these  natives  should  be  looked
to  and  sought  after,  for  they  are  the
seed  of  promise ;  they  act  according
to  the  light  they  have  pertaining  to
all  matter's  that  have  come  within
the  reach  of  their  minds,  and  it  is  the
dfity  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  treat
them  kindly,  and  try  to  save  thera,
and  if  they  do  not  they  may  miss  the
mark;  and  although  they  may  offer
many  good  teachings  which  do  not
seem  to  be  appreciated,  yet  there  is
a  common  law  that  is  written  upon
every  man's  heart,  and  the  hearts  of
those  poor  natives  can  be  penetrated,
and  if  this  power  is  not  exercised,  or
if  we  allow  it  to  lie  dormant  we  miss
the  figure.  And,  I  feel  that  we  do  not
appreciate  our  privileges,  we  let
the  spirit  that  is  in  us  lie  dormant,
and  hence  it  is  that  our  treatment  to
the  Lamanites  has  been  so  different
in  the  various  parts  and  settlements
of  this  Territory,  There  is  a  splitting
of  hairs  about  this  important  matter,
and  if  the  Latter-day  Saints  cannot
split  hairs  I  do  not  know  who  can,
yes,  this  people  can  split  hairs  if  any
body  in  the  world  can  about  any-
thing.  I  am  aware  that  we  are  a
peculiar  people,  that  our  circumstan-
ces have  been  trying  and  vexatious  all
the  way  through ;  I  am  sensible  that
our  treatment  has  been  rather  extrava-
gant, and  it  has  been  a  matter  of
serious  reflection  with  many,  to  know
to  what  extent  we  ought  to  mingle  with
these  wild  natives  around  us.  Before
I  was  a  member  of  this  kingdom,  I
believed  in  converting  the  inhabitants
of  these  mountains,  I  foresaw  that  it
could  be  done,  or  in  other  words  I
saw  them  in  a  condition  and  in
circumstances  where  they  were  all
passive  and  filled  with  the  Holy
Spirit ;  I  saw  that  it  was  the  spirit  of
truth  that  dwelt  with  them,  and  when
I  became  acquainted  with  the  Gospel
in  the  early  part  of  this  Church,  I
then  learnt  that  it  was  the  spirit  of


the  Saints  of  Latter-days,  and  that  it
would  bring  them  to  the  knowledge
of  their  fathers  and  their  friends,  and
also  to  the  knowledge  of  the  covenants
made  with  their  fathers  ages  ago-  In
this  thing,  the  Latter-day  Saints  were
as  much  deceived  as  they  ever  were
upon  any  other  subject,  this  I  am
satisfied  of.  How  was  this  ?  They
were  deceived  in  relation  to  these
tribes,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  brought
many  things  close  to  their  minds — they
appeared  right  by,  and  hence  many
were  deceived,  and  run  into  a  mistake
respecting  them.  They  (the  Saints)
undertook  to  jnake  calculations  for
to  establish  the  kingdom  and  restore
Israel,  and  many  were  so  excited,
that  they  wanted  to  take  the  Gospel
from  the  Gentiles  immediately.  They
were  for  taking  the  Gospel  clear
away  at  once,  and  of  course  for  sealing
them  all  up  to  destruction.  Many
good  men  made  great  blunders  upon
the  subject  Gf  "redeeming  Israel  ;**  it
was  a  great  mystery,  and  perhaps  I
made  as  great  mistakes  as  others  in
forming  my  opinions,  but  I  had  the
caution  not  to  utter  my  views  to  any
one,  I  knew  that  faith  and  the  Holy
Ghost  brought  the  designs  of  Provi*
dence  close  by,  and  by  that  means
we  were  enabled  to  scan  them,  and
find  out  what  they  would  produce
when  carried  into  effect,  but  we  had
not  knowledge  enough  to  digest  and
fully  comprehend  those  things,  and
therefore  it  was  a  mark  of  wisdom
for  any  man  to  keep  his  spirit  and
feelings  to  himself.

I  mention  this  to  show  you  how
ready  the  Saints  were  to  say  that  the
Lamanites  should  be  before  thera  in
,the  Church,  yet  they  would  be  willing
to  do  anything  for  the  salvation  of
Israel ;  but  our  long  experience  has
proved,  together  with  our  faith  and
practice,  the  folly  of  making  great  cal-
culations beforehand.  I  have  asked
frequently  when  is  that  time  coming,
which  I  have  heard  talked  about  and


BKMARKS  OH  BBHAI.F  OF  THE  INDIANS,


231


prophesied  of  in  tongues  years  ago
when  in  the  meetings  of  the  Saints;
even  the  sisters  used  to  predict  that
their  husbands  would  go  and  instruct
the  Lamanites  in  all  the  habits  and
customs  of  civiiiz  ition  that  we  as  at
people  understand.  These  things
used  to  be  talked  of  years  ago,  and
bow  we  are  here  right  amongst  them,
the  Lord  has  thrown  us  into  their
society,  and  they  are  a  dark,  loath-
some and  forbidding  people,  and  they
live  around  us  in  a  wild  unculti-
vated state,  in  these  mountains  and
valleys,  and  I  have  proved  them,
some  of  them  to  have  partaken  of  the
proper  spirit,  and  many  of  them
begun  to  feel  well.  I  have  heard  men
prophecy  in  the  early  part  of  this
Church,  that  in  26  years  Jesus  would
come  to  reign  upoa  the  earth,  and  that
in  that  time  all  would  be  wound  up,
.  and  hence  they  were  going  to  redeem
Israel  in  the  mountains  and  wind  all
up  in  a  short  time,  but  1  have  desired
to  have  our  Limanite  brethren
brought  to  understanding,  and  come
and  be  united  with  us  in  the  covenant
of  peace  and  salvation — to  see  them
learn  the  arts  of  civilization  and  quit
their  habits  of  blood  and  murder;
I  wish  to  see  them  learn  the  truth,
come  and  be  a  white  and  delight-
some people.  All  these  ideas  and
feelings  seemed  to  be  given  up
years  ago,  but  by-and-bye  the  Lord
threw  us  into  a  position  where  we
could  be  tested  and  proved,  and  how
do  we  feel  and  act  ?  I  ought  to  touch
a  few  points  which  I  consider  most
extravagant  in  the  conduct  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  Some  people,  for
instance,  when  the  Larnanites  come
to  their  houses  will  call  out,  41  here,
be  off,  we  do  not  want  to  see  you,  go
away."  These  natives  come  to  their
houses,  dark,  dirty,  and  miserable  it
is  true,  but  they  come  like  little
children,  but  the  brethren  and  sisteis
order  them  oft,  literally  throw  them
away. And  I  have  seen  them  go  to


other  places  and  the  people  would
commence  their  jokes  upon  them,  and
making  a  good  deal  of  freedom  with
them.  Well,  both  these  things  I
have  laid  aside  as  being  spurious  and
not  good.  According  to  our  faith,
there  is  a  right  way  and  one  only,
and  if  any  people  can  split  hairs  th;s
people  can,  and  do  most  assuredly
about  the  right  way  to  deal  with
these  poor  loathsome  creatures.  Oh,
says  one  family,  i:we  do  not  want
them  in  here,  we  cannot  do  with
them  in  our  houses,  upon  our  beds,
or  on  our  floors  which  have  been
cleaned."  There  have  been  times
that  1  have  had  them  with  me  in  my
house  and  have  made  a  good  fire  to
warm  them,  and  I  would  shake  hands
with  them  and  tell  them  that  I  liked
them,  and  that  the  great  Spirit  liked
them  as  well  as  I  did.  They  will
come  to  beg  and  say,  "  we  want  to
get  wheat  to  feed  upon,"  then  I  would
reply  that  44  I  wanted  it  for  my
1  papooses,'  I  would  be  glad  to  do  it,
but  I  have  many 4  papooses1  and  cannot
spare  any."  Treat  them  courteously,
and  do  not  let  any  kind  of  remarks
fall  from  your  lips  that  will  make
them  believe  that  you  want  to  saace
them,  and  on  the  other  hand,  do  not
use  any  freedom  with  them,  take  no
step  to  make  them  believe  that  yon
are  their  enemy,  but  show  that  you
are  their  friend  by  your  kindness  and
liberality  to  them,  I  have  always
treated  them  well,  and  now  many  of
them  come  into  my  house,  and  they
make  no  particular  ado,  neither  do  I
with  them,  but  I  am  strict,  I  use  no
freedom ;  I  forbid  my  boys  scuffling
or  joking  with  them,  and  if  they  ask
for  a  thing  that  I  have  not  got,  I  tell
them  kindly,  and  then  they  will  walk
away,  bat  they  will  come  again
another  day*  By  acting  in  this  way
when  they  ask  for  anything  and  I  tell
them  that  I  have  not  got  it,  they
believe  me,  because  they  have  had
no  occasion  to  disbelieve  me. I  do


232  J0UBNAL  OF

not  say  to  them  that  they  have  taken
liberties  in  my  house  which  I  cannot
submit  to,  for  I  never  give  them  the
opportunity,  I  cannot  see,  for  my  part
that  it  is  the  privilege  of  people  to
abuse  them,  I  believe  that  we  have
to  jjreat  them  with  respect  and  the
spirit  of  uprightness.  We  will  exa-
mine  the  law  which  our  Father,  the
Great  Spirit,  and  Great  Chief,  has
delivered  to  us  to  obey.  Teach  them
the  law  of  God,  do  it  mildly  and
kindly,  and  it  will  take  an  e  ffect  upon
them,  but  harsh  measures  will  not.
These  are  my  views  with  regard  to
the  Lamanites,  and  I  believe  in  being
good-tempered  with  those  men;  I
believe  in  teaching  them  to  cultivate
the  land  and  raise  grain  for  them- 1
selves,  and  in  teaching  them  our
language,  and  I  tell  my  second  son
that  he  ftmst  leain  to  talk  their*.
Squash ead  olten  comes  to  my  house
and  he  will  hollow  out  when  at  a
distance — "  Joseph  Young,  Joseph
Youne,  give  me  meat  ai.d  bread."  I
give  him  some,  and  then  he  will  ask
for  some  wheat,  and  I  tell  him  I
cannot  spare  it  Once  when  he  came,
he  asked  if  I  had  any  hay ;  "  yes,  got
hay  he  wanted  to  He  down,  "  Well"
said  I,  "lie  down  on  the  hay,"  He
came  to  me  one  day  and  put  his
hand  upon  my  shoulder,  and  pointed
with  the  other,  and  said — **  Joseph
Young,  got  one  heart,  one  tongue,  one
ear — I  want  something  to  eat,"  and
then  his  brother  came,  and  I  always
respond  in  feeding  them,  and  I  have
this  faith  that  if  treated  properly
they  will  ere  long  see  the  truth,  and  1
tell  you  brethren,  when  brother
Benson  was  speaking  of  his  views
and  feelings  I  felt  to  say,  that  is  by
the  power  of  God,  and  there  is
nothing  that  is  more  of  the  power  of
God  to  me  that  when  men  are
speaking  of  this  mean,  poor,  low,
miserable,  dejected  people,  for  they
have  been  in  favour  with  God  as  we
now  are,  and  we  should  be  delighted


DISCOURSE,

to  have  them  brought  to  the  light,
and  we  shall  endeavour  to  have  them
made  clean.  What  has  been  the
cause  of  their  filth incss  ?  The  same
as  would  befal  us  if  we  were  to  rebel
and  do  the  same  things  which  they
have  done.  They  are  a  poor  miser-
able set  of  people,  and  they  have  been
abused  and  trampled  upon  by  their
enemies,  and  when  I  talk  about  them
I  think  of  the  vision  I  had  some
time  ago,  when  I  saw  them  in  their
redeemed  state,  and  they  looked  so
bright,  and  clean,  and  glorious,  and
this  people  are  the  individuals  who
have  to  bring  this  about,  and  as  I
said,  just  because  God's  ways  are  not
as  ours*  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  of
the  God  of  Israel,  brings  tilings  in
their  time  and  place,  God's  work  is
not  like  man's :  the  Lord  shows
things  to  come,  perhaps  in  dreams  or
by  visions  of  the  night,  and  we  should
learn  what  is  mingled  and  connected
in  his  designs.  We  should  observe
so  as  to  know  what  is  intended,  so
that  we  may  not  run  into  a  snag.
We  have  not  a  great  many  incon-
veniences to  contend  with,  and  hence
we  should  feel  for  Israel,  and  I  just
know  that  there  is  a  material  change
in  the  feelings  of  that  people  in  these
mountains  and  valleys.  How  do  you
know  it  says  one  ?  I  know  it  by  the
spirit  of  their  chiefs,  and  I  know  it
by  the  spirit  that  rules  in  the  breasts
of  a  great  many  of  them-  "  You
must  not  kill  the  Mormons"  they
say,  M  they  are  our  friends,  and  they
want  to  do  us  good."  Theie  has  been
a  material,  a  radical  change,  and  I
say  that  it  is  the  power  of  God  that
has  done  it,  and  only  let  us  be  of  one
heart  and  of  one  mind,  and  the  thing
will  be  brought  about  in  the  due  time
of  the  Lord.

I  thought  I  would  say  so  much  in
favour  of  the  red  men,  and  here  let
me  advise  you  to  mark  your  feelings
fiom  this  time,  and  see  if  you  do  not
1  feci  better  when  you  feed  them,  than


SAFETY  OP  THE  SAINTS  AT  HOME,  ETC,


233


when  yon  take  up  the  sword  to  fight
them.  Be  liberal,  and  be  just  as  kind
as  yen  can  be,  and  then  see  if  you  will
not  feel  better  than  when  you  took  up
the  guns  to  shoot  thern.  There  is  the
touchstone  and  the  balance-wheel !
Keep  a  good  spirit  within  you  to-
wards that  people  and  it  will  be  well
I  am  not  afraid,  neither  should  be  if
I  were  in  the  wilderness.  The  spirit
of  intelligence  which  I  carry  with  me,
and  which  is  in  them  would  clear  my
way,  and  those  men  would  never  hurt
a  hair  of  my  head,  and  why  ?  Be-
cause I  would  treat  them  kindly  and
manifest  a  good  spirit,  ,

Brother  Francis  Durphy  tells  an
anecdote  about  some  Indians;  he
says,  u  that  as  he  was  coming  from
California  with  a  few  others  they  saw
a  large  band  of  Indians,  and  they  went


right  up  and  met  them,  and  as  they
went  up  the  old  chief  came  as  by
some  unseen  influence,  and  held  his
hands  up  and  seemed  quite  pleased  to
have  a  talk  with  them.  The  chiefs
kept  turning  back  to  talk  to  the
brethren ;  they  were  so  pleased  that
they  dismounted  and  conversed,  and
they  seemed  to  be  filled  with  the
Spirit  of  God,  they  felt  well ;  they
could  not  stay,  they  said  they  must
go  to  their  squaws  and  papooses ;  the
brethren  gave  them  some  fish,  and
they  went  ofi  in  the  best  of  spirits/*
This  shows  that  there  is  a  power
that  controls  them,  and  will  continue
to  their  salvation.  I  know  this  is
true ;  I  cling  to  them  and  intend  to
do  so  through.

May  God  bless  you.  Amen,


SAFETY  OF  THE  SAINTS  AT  HOME, — CONTRAST  OF  THEIR
POSITION  WITH  THAT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.

Discourse  by  Elder  John  Taylob,  made  in  the  Tabei-nacle,  Great  Salt  Lake

City,  April  28,  1861.

BKP0KTEI>  BY  J.  V,  LONO,


There  is  a  saying  that  was  used  by
the  oid  Prophets  in  ancient  times,
which  is  to  the  following  effect : —
<£  Report,  say  they,  and  we  will  report
it/1 — Jeremiah.  And  there  is  another
saying  which  is  as  follows : — "  And
your  covenant  with  death  shall  be
disannulled,  and  your  agreement  with
hell  shall  not  stand ;  when  the  over-
flowing scourge  shall  pass  through,
then  ye  shall  be  trodden  down  by  it.


From  the  time  that  it  goeth  forth  it
shall  take  you  ;  for  morning  by  morn-
ing shall  it  pass  over,  by  day  and  by
night;  and  it  shall  be  a  vexation
only  to  understand  the  report."—
Isaiah,  chap,  xxviii,

A  great  many  things  have  been
circulated  about  us ;  now  things  begin
to  be  reported  about  others,  and  from
those  reports  we  hear  that  they  have
about  as  much  as  they  can  get  along


234  JOURNAL  OP

-  #

with  comfortably.  We  have  had  our
share  of  trouble  in  times  past,  and  I
think  the  Scriptures  say  that  judg-
ment shall  begin  at  the  house  of  God,
and  if  so  where  will  the  wicked  and
ungodly  appear  ?

When  we  think  of  the  trouble  that
is  likely  to  overtake  this  nation,  as
well  as  others,  it  is  calculated  to
create  a  sympathetic  feeling  in  the
bosoms  of  all  who  reflect.  For  some
weeks  past  I  have  been  reviewing  the
events  current  in  the  nation,  and  I
have  felt  a  great  deal  of  commisera-
tion, and  especially  latterly.  I  have
thought  that  I  have  discovered  a
disposition  not  to  yield  to  the  truth,
nor  to  admit  anything  more  than
circumstances  actually  compel  them
to,  at  least  there  is  a  disposition  to
withhold  what  would  be  called  justice
and  equity  to  us  as  a  people.  If
there  is  a  cessation  of  open  hostilities
against  ns,  it  is  not  for  want  of  a
disposition,  but  owing  to  the  peculiar
situation  in  which  they  are  placed
relative  to  each  other,  and  the  bitter
animosity  and  feeling  that  have
sprung  up  among  themselves,  which
for  the  time  being  divert  their
attention  from  us.

Under  these  circumstances,  seeing
that  justice  and  judgment  have  to  go
forth,  if  trouble  must  come,  I  would  a
great  deal  rather  that  they  should  war
with  one  another  than  with  us,  and
see  them  spend  their  strength  one
against  another  than  to  see  them
engaged  in  exhausting  and  wasting
their  strength  upon  this  people.
Looking  upon  things  in  this  point  of
view,  I  feel  perfectly  satisfied  with
the  events  that  are  transpiring ;  and
if  I  did  not,  I  could  not  help  it.

The  people  of  this  nation  are
evidently  bent  upon  their  own  de-
struction, and  they  are  full  of  enmity,
hatred,  war,  and  bloodshed.  To  all
human  appearance,  it  would  seem  that
they  will  not  stop  short  of  the  entire
destruction  of  this  great  nation.  In


DISCOURSES.

the  language  of  one  of  old  who  uttered
this  singular  prophetic  declaration  I
will  say,  "  They  are  drunken,  but  not
with  wine ;  they  stagger,  but  not
with  strong  drink."  They  have
neglected  righteousness,  justice,  and
truth  for  years  that  are  past  and
gone  ;  they  have  allowed  the  honest,
the  virtuous,  the  just,  and  the  true-
hearted  to  be  abused  and  afflicted,  and
they  have  winked  and  mocked  at
their  sufferings;  nnd  not  only  so,  but
they  have  unblushinply  used  their
force  and  strength  to  bring  about  the
destruction  of  God's  people.  They
have,  however,  failed  in  all  their
attempts  to  crush  out  the  kingdom  of
God,  because  the  Almighty  has  pro-
tected his  people ;  but  they  will  not
fail  when  they  make  their  attacks
upon  one  another.  When  the  pot-
sherds of  the  earth  strive  with  the
potsherds  of  the  earth,  and  God  does
not  interfere,  they  will  be  more
likely  to  accomplish  the  destruction
of  each  other.  They  have  been  using
their  energies  against  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High;  they  have  cast  us
out,  sought  to  destroy  and  root  us
out  from  the  earth ;  but  there  was  a
God  who  was  watching  over  the
interests  of  his  people.  There  was  a
Being  that  their  philosophy  and
theology  knew  nothing  about,  a  Being
whose  eyes  were  open  to  see,  and
whose  ears  listened  to  the  cries  of  his
people.  When  the  full  time  for
deliverance  arrives,  he  stretches  forth
his  hand  and  we  are  preserved,  and  we
come  out  from  the  difficulties  and
trials  unscathed.  This  we  have  done,
supported  by  the  hand  of  Jehovah;
and  this  will  be  done  again  should  we
be  placed  in  circumstances  to  re-
quire it.

But  now  things  with  us  are  assum-
ing a  different  aspect,  and  our  friends
also  in  the  east  are  being  placed  in  a
different  condition  from  that  which
they  had  anticipated.  They  have  the
same  God  to  apply  to  in  the  North


SAFETY  OF  THE  SAINTS  AT  HOME,  ETC


235


as  in  the  South,  the  same  kind  of
religion;  but  their  religion  does  not
teach  them  to  have  any  confidence  in
the  all-protecting  arm  of  Jehovah,  for
their  God  has  no  eyes,  no  ears,  no
arms,  no  power;  he  is  without  body
or  parts.  If  we  were  to  go  to  that
country,  we  should  find  that  they  are
all  very  religious;  good  Baptists,  good
Methodists,  good  Quakers,  good  Ca-
tholics, good  Episcopalians;  in  fact,
they  think  that  they  are  all  good,
pious  souls,  attending  meeting-houses
and  appointing  fasts  all  through  the
land.  Both  the  North  and  the  South
aro  praying  fervently  to  the  same
God,  that  they  may  have  power  to
destroy  their  enemies.  Who  are
their  enemies  ?  All  good  Christians*
Therefore,  if  their  God  shonld  hear
and  answer  them,  they  would  all  be
utterly  annihilated*

Our  God  heard  our  prayers  and
delivered  us  from  the  power  of  our
enemies,  and  he  brought  the  most
signal  confusion  upon  those  who  had
plotted  the  destruction  of  his  people.
In  relation  to  the  events  that  may
take  place,  the  atmosphere  certainly
looks  heavy  and  black,  and  the  tokens
of  war  and  bloodshed  are  formidable
enough.  And  I  think  by  appearances
in  the  lower  world,  they  have  got  a
large  hell,  and  devils  enough  to  carry
it  on  ;  they  have  at  the  present  plenty
of  business  to  attend  to  at  home.

I  feel  thankful  to  the  God  of  Israel
that  we  occupy  the  position  we  do
in  these  mountains.  Do  we  now  feel
very  sorry  that  Illinois  drove  us  from
our  homes  ?  What  say  you?  The
Lord  has  preserved  us  thus  far ;  he
has  aiso  controlled  our  destinies  and
managed  our  affairs  so  that  we  are
this  day  the  manifest  monuments  of
his  mercy  and  care;  yes,  we  are
living  monuments  of  the  regard  and
favour  of  that  Great  God  who  has  set
his  hand  to  redeem  Israel  and  to  roll
on  his  own  work.  But  do  we  feel
like  boasting  of  this  ? No,  only  in


God.  Would  our  enemies  have  gloried
over  us  if  they  had  succeeded  in
scattering  us  according  to  their  inten-
tions, so  that  we  never  could  have
gathered  together  again  ?  Yes ;  and
if  they  had  heard  that  the  army  sent
against  us  had  swept  us  off  from  this
stage  of  action,  there  would  have  been
loud  hosaimahs  by  Priests  and  people.
How  was  it  when  Joseph  Smith  was
killed  ?  There  wns  r\  general  rejoicing
through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
whole  land ;  and  if  they  could  have
accomplished  our  destruction,  the  same
feeling  would  have  been  manifested  in
this  and  in  other  countries;  and  as
the  kingdom  of  God  advances,  this
spirit  will  increase.  The  Spirit  of
light  and  truth  will  be  opposed  by
the  spirit  of  darkness  and  error.  They
are  two  antagonistic  powers  which
will  strive  fur  the  mastery  until  error
is  vanquished  and  overcome,  John
speaks  of  two  Prophets  that  will  pro-
phesy in  Jerusalem,  and  that  will
have  power  to  cause  that  it  rain  not
in  the  days  of  their  prophecy,  to
turn  the  waters  into  blond,  and  to
smite  the  earth  with  plagues  as  often
as  they  will.  The  nations  of  the
earth  will  be  gathered  against  them,
and  they  will  be  overcome  by  their
enemies;  and  hence  it  is  said  their
dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the  streets  of
Jerusalem  for  three  days  and  three
nights.  The  wicked  will  so  rejoice
in  their  success  and  gloat  over  the
destruction  of  those  Prophets  that
they  will  indulge  in  feasting  and
sending  gifts  one  to  another,  because
of  the  destruction  of  those  men  of
God.  But  by-and-bye,  we  read  the
spirit  of  life  sent  from  the  Great  God
shall  again  enter  their  tabernacles,
and  they  shall  be  received  up  into
heaven  in  the  sight  of  their  enemies,
who  shrill  then  experience  the
fury  of  the  Almighty.  The  Pro-
phet Zechariah  gives  an  interesting
account  of  what  shall  take  place
in Jerusalem about the  time  of


238  JOURNAL  OF

the  appearance  of  these  two  great
Prophets.

Such  is  the  feeling  that  has  been
manifested  by  this  generation  ever
since  the  commencement  of  this  great
work  with  which  we  are  associated ;
the  Saints  of  God,  the  work  of  God,
the  revelations  of  Jesns  Christ  and
the  holy  Priesthood  have  been  mis-
represented, lied  about  and  slandered.
God's  people  have  been  persecuted,
robbed ,  pi  u  ndered ,  m  obbed ,  ai  i  d  d  ri  ven ,
the  Prophets  and  Apostles  have  been
imprisoned  and  put  to  death  under
false  pretences,  by  irresponsible,  ruth-
less gangs  of  ruffians.  We  have  never
been  in  any  place,  as  yet,  from  the
commencement  of  this  work  to  the
present  time,  but  that  feeling  and
spirit  have  prevailed  against  us.  It
commenced  against  Joseph  Smith
when  he  first  received  the  plates,  and
continued  in  Ohio,  in  Missouri,  in
Illinois,  and  in  the  various  cities,
towns,  counties,  and  states  that  we
have  occupied.  It  is  a  feeling  that  is
opposed  to  the  Word  of  God,  to  the
Spirit  of  truth,  and  to  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth,  A  great
many  men  have  not  known  by  what
spirit  or  feeling  they  have  been  actu-
ated ;  neither  do  they  now  know.
When  they  array  themselves  against
the  Saints  of  God,  they  are  actuated
by  a  foul,  wicked  spirit.  By-and-bye
they  will  be  arrayed  against  each
other,  and  not  knowing  the  revela-
tions of  God  the  destruction  will  be
terrible.  One  of  the  old  Prophets
said  .when  speaking  of  the  wicked,
that  they  know  nothing  but  what  they
know  naturally,  as  brute  beasts  which
are  made  to  be  taken  and  destroyed.

Do  you  think  that  this  state  of
things  would  have  been  in  existence  at
the  present  time  in  the  United  States,
if  they  had  been  under  the  direction
of  the  Saints  and  servants  of  the
Most  High  ?  If  they  had  been  under
the  rule  and  dictation  of  a  Prophet,
governed  by  the  principle  of  light  and


DISCOURSES,

I  intelligence,  as  he  receives  it  from
heaven ;  does  it  appear  to  you  they
would  have  been  in  the  present
lamentable  condition?  No,  with  the
light  of  Heaven,  this  could  not  pos-
si  bly  have  been.  But  as  things  at  the
present  stand,  they  have  no  inspira-
tion, no  revelation  from  God,  no
Prophet's  voice  to  point  out  the  path
of  safety  (at  least  there  is  none  they
will  listen  to),  and  consequently  they
are  led  captive  by  the  Devil,  and  are
in  a  great  measure  controlled  by  hint.
This  is  truly  a  lamentable  post  ticm,  but
the  picture  is  not  overdrawn.  Do  we
rejoice  over  them  ?  No,  we  do  not ;
we  have  frequently  offered  to  them
the  principles  of  life;  we  had  much
rather  they  would  have  drunk  of  the
waters  of  life,  and  been  in  a  different
condition,  but  at  the  same  time  we
would  a  great  deal  prefer  to  have
them  use  their  armies  upon  them-
selves than  upon  us.  They  are  all
very  loyal ;  they  profess  to  be  very
patriotic,  and  they  all  believe  they  are
fighting  for  their  own,  and  they  pray
to  the  God  of  battles  to  give  them
success;  and  it  is  quite  common  to
hear  them  boast,  "  We  will  regulate
matters  in  a  short  time."  But  who  is
this  God  of  battles  ?  Why,  the
Devil,  the  prince  and  power  of  the  air,
who  rules  in  the  hearts  of  the  children
of  disobedience ;  he  is  the  god  they
risk  their  cause  with,  and  it  is  for
him  to  handle  them  as  he  sees  fit.
What  shall  we  do  in  the  midst  of
these  things  that  are  now  transpiring  ?
Why,  lean  npon  the  Lord  our  God,
purify  ourselves,  look  back  "to  the
pit  from  whence  we  were  dug,  and  to
the  rock  from  whence  we  were  hewn.**
A  short  time  ago  we  were  in  the
bonds  of  itiqaity  and  the  gall  of  bitter-
ness. Let  us  also  look  at  our  position
as  Elders  in  Israel,  clothed  with  the
power  of  the  holy  Priesthood,  as  men
who  hold  the  ministry  of  reconcilia-
tion/and  who  have  been  selected  and
chosen  by  the  Great  Eloheim  to  warn


safety  of  the  saints  at  home,  etc


237


the  world,  and  pray  that  he  may  give
us  a  knowledge  of  the  plan  of  salva-
tion that  we  may  become  saviours  to
our  fellow  beings.  This  is  the  position
that  we  ought  to  occupy  in  relation
to  these  matters,  standing  in  holy
places,  full  of  the  light  and  intelli-
gence that  flows  from  the  throne  of
God,  seeking  to  cultivate  every  noble
and  exalted  principle  that  has  been
made  known  unto  us,  and  striving  to
walk  worthy  of  tbat  high  vocation
wherewith  we  are  called.

I  will  tell  you  how  T  feel — I  feel
thankful  to  the  God  of  Israel  that  he
has  granted  nve  the  privilege  of  being
associated  with  this  people,  and  with
tins  Priesthood.  I  do  not  fret  myself
much  about  North  or  South,  or  any
other  nation,  they  are  all  in  the  hands
of  God  ;  I  care  nothing  for  the  gh>ry
and  pomp  of  the  world,  it  is  all  as  so
many  bubbles,  and  it  is  destined  to
destruction.  But  I  do  care  about
principles  that  reach  back,  and  that
reach  forward  to  eternity,  that  give
me  the  privilege  of  drawing  light,'
truth  and  intelligence  from  1hat  Being
who  gives  this  and  all  other  worlds
all  the  light  and  intelligence  they
enjoy,  and  who  is  prepared  to
give  and  impart  it  to  his  people  as
fast  as  they  are  capable  of  receiving
and  improving  upon  it.  I  feel  a
strong  desire  also  to  bring  my  body
into  subjection  to  the  law  of  God,
and  to  live  in  obedience  to  all  its
recjuiretrients,  for  I  ftel  that  I  am
called  to  a  high  and  holy  calling,  and
that  I  would  not  exchange  my
position  for  any  position  of  power,  or
emoluments  that  man  can  bestow
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  These
are  my  feelings  in  regard  to  my
position,  and  in  regard  to  the  great
blessings  that  God  has  conferred
upon  me,  and  upon  this  people*  What
has  he  done  for  us?  He  has  taken
us  from  the  darkness  with  which  the
world  are  enshrouded,  and  has  im-
parted to  us  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the


laying  on  of  hands;  he  has  given  us
the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  a  knowledge  of
ourselves,  a  knowledge  of  G  d,  a
knowledge  of  the  position  that  we
occupy  before  him,  a  knowledge  of
the  past  and  of  the  future,  so  that  we
can  look  back  and  see  the  designs  of
God  in  the  great  works  he  performed
in  the  remote  ages  of  the  world ;  wo
can  look  abroad  and  see  the  move-
ments of  the  Great  Jehovah  in  the
midst  of  the  nations,  and  if  we  are
enlightened  by  his  Spiiifc  and  culti-
vate the  blessings  he  has  conferred,
i  we  can  look  forward  to  the  unborn
future  and  see  the  purposes  of  God
unfolding  in  the  world,  not  only  on
the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  but  its  future  development  and
,  triumph.  And  while  we  see,  and  feel,
and  comprehend  in  part,  in  relation  to
these  matters  it  causes  joy  to  beam
upon  our  countenances  and  fills  our
hearts  with  rejoicing.  In  regard  to
the  events  that  are  transpiring,  they
are  only  just  the  kind  that  we  have
been  anticipating  for  many  years
past.  I  knew  as  much  as  twenty-five
years  ago  that  these  events  would
transpire,  and  I  had  just  as  much
assurance  of  it  as  I  have  to-day*  It
is  only  a  matter  of  time ;  then  I
foresaw  and  now  I  see  the  things
passing  along.  We  stand  here  as  the
representatives  of  God  upon  the
earth,  and  do  you  think  he  will
forsake  us  and  the  earth  on  which  we
dwell  ?  No.  What  has  he  been
doing  ?  He  has  been  planting  the
germ  of  truth  in  the  earth  for  the
last  thirty  years,  and  it  has  begun  to
sprout,  to  bud,  to  blossom,  and  to
extend  from  nation  to  nation;  it  has
taken  root  in  the  hearts  of  many
honest  men  and  women  who  have
within  them  a  strong  and  unwavering
desire  to  fulfil  their  destiny  upon  the
earth,  and  to  accomplish  the  work
which  the  Almighty  has  given  them
to  do.  What!  accomplish  the  work
of  God  with  all  our  weaknesses  and


\


238


JOURNAL  OF  DIBCOUItSKB*


infirm  if  ies  ?  Yes,  for  he  has  pro-
mised to  assist  us  by  the  power  of  his
Spirit,  to  reward  us  a  hundred-fold  in
this  world  and  give  us  life  everlasting
in  that  which  is  to  come.  The  same
gifts,  powers  and  qualifications  that
followed  the  Gospel  anciently  are
made  manifest  now,  through  obedi-
ence. It  is  for  ns  then  to  purify  our-
selves, yes,  every  man,  woman,  and
child,  to  seek  after  the  right  way,  to
feel  after  the  Lord  our  God,  to
humble  ourselves  before  him,  and  be
thankful  to  the  great  God  of  Israel
for  all  that  we  are  permitted  to  enjoy.

We  are  glad,  say  some,  that  we  are
not  in  the  States.  I  do  not  care
much  about  it,  for  if  I  am  called  upon
to  go  abroad  whether  in  peace  or  war,
if  that  be  my  calling  all  is  well;
although  in  the  world  we  ought  not
to  be  of  the  world.  We  have  some-
times to  dwell  among  wars,  famine,
and  pestilence,  but  whut  has  that  to
do  with  it  if  we  are  magnify ing  our
callings?  We  have  truly  reason  to
be  thankful  that  we  are  here,  that  we
dwell  in  peace,  that  our  families  are
here,  that  our  wives  and  children  are
here,  and  that  we  are  hid  up  for  a
little  season.  It  is  a  great  temporal
blessing  that  we  can  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  our  own
commences,  none  daring  to  make  us
afraid.  AVe  can  cultivate  our  farms
and  gardens,  and  at  the  same  time
enjoy  our  religion.  What  is  time  to
us  as  Elders  of  Israel  ?  What  differ-
ence does  it  make  to  us,  so  ling  ns
we  are  engaged  in  the  service  uf  Gud,
whether  there  be  peace  or  war  ?  We
are  in  possession  of  the  principles  of
eternal  life,  we  are  engaged  in  the
work  of  the  Lord  here  upon  the  earth,
and  whether  it  places  us  in  difficulty,
in  danger,  or  in  prosperity,  it  matters
but  very  little  if  we  understand
correct  principles,  for  we  have  com-
menced to  live  for  ever.  We  have,
or  ought  to  have,  drunk  of  the  well,
of  which  Jesus  spoke  when  conversing


with  the  woman  of  Samaria,  which
afloids  water  that  springs  up  into
everlasting  life.  These  are  about  my
feelings  in  reference  to  our  trials,
privations,  and  also  our  prosperity.
What  is  your  life?  What  does  it  matter
whether  we  die  to-dav,  this  week,  or
next  year,  so  long  as  we  are  engaged
in  the  work  of  God  ?  The  principles
we  have  laid  hold  of  are  principles  of
eternal  life,  and  whether  we  die  to-
day, or  next  week,  or  whether  it  is
forty  years  hence,  what  does  it
matter  so  long  as  we  are  faithful  to
the  callings  whereunto  the  Lord  has
called  us.

The  two  parties  in  the  States  are
mustering  their  forces,  each  party
believing  that  the  other  is  in  the
wrong.  We  have  given  ourselves  up
to  the  Lord,  and  have  been  mustered
into  the  service  of  the  Great  Jehovah.
We  have  engaged  to  assist  in  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  to  help  to  establish  the  prin-
ciples of  truth  and  righteousness  and
to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  law
of  God  in  every  circumstance  of  life.
This  is  the  position  that  we  occupy ;
we  are  minute  men,  if  you  please,
ready  for  anything  that  may  trans-
pire, and  as  to  the  future  result  it
does  not  tr juble  us  at  all,  that  is  in
the  hands  of  our  God.  If  we  are
called  to  lay  down  our  bodies  now,  or
in  thirty  or  forty  years,  it  makes  little
or  no  difference,  inasmuch  as  we  are
faithful  and  keep  the  commandments
of  God.  I  feel  like  putting  my  house
in  order  and  seeing  that  everything
is  right  there ;  then  I  can  say,  like
David  of  old,  who  exclaimed,  14  Search
me  and  prove  me  O  God,  and  see  if
there  is  any  wickedness  in  rae,"

If  I  am  clothed  with  the  spirit  of
my  office  and  calling,  filled  with  the
power  of  God,  and  am  ready  to
accomplish  the  Mission  which  the
Almighty  has  called  me  to  perform,
I  am  simply  doing  my  duty,  this  is
what  is  wanted  to-day,  to  be  on  hand,


NECESSITY  OF  TEMPORAL  LABOUR*


239


and  to  load  my  family  in  the  same
track,  to  humble  myself  before  the
Lord  and  seek  his  blessing,  have  my
wives  and  children  do  those  things
that  are  good,  that  his  Spirit  may  be
with  them  from  this  time  hencefoith
and  for  ever.

I  feel  to  recommend  this  course  of
conduct  to  the  Seventies,  to  the  High
Priests,  to  the  Bishops,  and  to  all  the
Saints,  that  they  may  be  filled  with
the  light  of  life,  that  they  may  rejoice


before  the  Lord  continually.  Then
let  the  storms  corae  and  the  thunders
roll,  the  lightnings  flash  and  the
nations  be  overturned  and  thrones  be
cast  down,  yet  all  will  be  right  with
us,  we  shall  feel  unshaken  in  the
tempest  and  know  that  we  are  right,
and  that  all  is  well  iu  Zion.

Brethren,  God  bless  you  and  guide
you  in  the  way  of  truth,  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen,


NECESSITY  OF  TEMPORAL  LABOUR,  PREPARATORY  TO

BUILDING  A  TEMPLE,

Remarks  made by  President  Brigham Young,  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  March  2,  1862.

BKPORTKD  BY  O.  1>.  WATT,


All  things  were  created  firstly
spiritual ;  then  it  seems  that  secondly,
all  things  were  created  temporal.  The
laws  and  principles  that  tie  together
spiritual  and  temporal  things  are  so
complicated,  are  so  interwoven  with
each  other,  so  inseparably  connected,
and  yet  in  the  minds  of  the  people
they  appear  so  distinct  one  from  the
other,  that  we  evidently  need  a  great
deal  of  experience  and  reflection  to
mvkv  this  subject  cleat1  to  our  under-
standings. I  shall  only  make  a  few
remarks,  and  leave  the  subject  I  shall
now  introduce  for  others  to  speak
upon.

This  building  is  set  apart  expressly
for  the  worship  of  the  Lord  our  God,
and  to  many  it  may  seem  to  infringe
upon  the  rights  of  our  religion  to


talk  about  temporal  matters  here.  In
the  beginning  things  were  created
first  spiritual,  then  temporal  ;  but  now
it  is  first  temporal  ard  then  spiritual.
We  cannot  attend  to  any  one  of  the
ordinances  of  the  Holy  Priesthood
without  a  temporal  act.  We  must
perform  a  temporal  labour — a  manual
labour — in  order  to  arrive  at  the  con-
dition which  fits  us  to  receive  the  fall
benefit  of  the  spiritual.  At  present
the  few  remarks  I  shall  make  will  be
upon  [the  matter  of  obtaining  rock
for  our  contemplated  temple,  which
we  intend  to  build  upon  this  block.
The  canal  that  we  started  from  Big
Cottonwood  creek  to  this  city  was
for  the  purpose  of  transporting  ma-
terial for  building  the  Temple.  We
have  learned  some  things  in  regard


240


JO  CRN  All  OF  DISCOURSES


to  the  nature  of  the  soil  in  which  the
bed  of  the  canal  is  made  that  we  did
not  know  before.  We  pretty  much
completed  the  canal,  or,  in  other
words,  we  hewed  out  the  cistern,  but,
behold,  it  would  not  hold  water.
We  have  not  the  time  now  to  make
that  canal  carry  water,  bo  we  will
continue  to  haul  rock  with  cattle;
and  when  an  opportunity  presents,
we  will  finish  the  canal.  We  now
contemplate  repairing  the  State  road,
so  that  we  can  haul  heavy  blocks  of
granite.  We  were  not  very  sucessful
the  last  winter  in  hauling  rock,  for
the  road  was  so  soaked  with  water
that  it  was  almost  impassible;  but  we
will  now  repair  that  road,  and  con-
time  our  hauling.

We  cannot  even  enter  the  Temple
when  it  is  built,  and  perform  those
ordinances  which  lead  to  spiritual
blessings,  without  performing  a  tem-
poral labour.  Temporal  ordinances
must  be  performed  to  secure  the
spiritual  blessings  the  Great  Supreme
has  in  store  for  his  faithful  children.
Every  act  is  first  a  temporal  act  The
Apostle  soys,  faith  comes  by  hearing.
What  should  be  heard  to  produce
faith  ?  The  preaching  of  the  Word.
For  that  we  must  have  a  preacher;
and  he  is  not  an  invisible  Spirit,  but  a
temporal,  ordinary  man  like  ourselves,
and  subject  to  the  same  regulations
and  rules  of  life.  To  preach  the
Gospel  is  a  temporal  labour,  and  to
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
the  result  of  a  temporal  labour.  To
be  baptized  is  a  temporal  labour,  both
to  the  person  administered  to  and  the  I
administrator.  I  am  a  living  witness  to
the  truth  ol  this  statement,  for  I  have
made  my  feet  sore  many  a  time,  and
tired  myself  out  travelling  and  preach-
ing, that  by  hearing  the  Gospel  the
people  might  have  faith.  The  blessings
we  so  earnestly  desire  will  come  to  us
by  performing  the  manual  labour
required,  and  thus  preparing  all
things  necessary  to  receive  the  invisi-


ble blessings  Jehovah  has  for  his
children.

Do  we  need  a  Temple  ?  We  do.
to  prepare  us  to  enter  in  through  the
gate  into  the  city  where  the  Saints
are  at  rest.  Ordinances  necessary  to
this  have  not  yet  been  performed  and
cannot  be  in  the  absence  of  a  suitable
place.  We  wish  a  Temple,  not  for
the  public  congregation,  but  for  the
Priesthood,  wherein  to  arrange  and
organize  fully  the  Priesthood  in  it$
order  and  degrees,  to  administer  the
ordinance  of  the  Priesthood  to  the
Saints  for  their  exaltations.  The
first  thing  to  be  done  is  a  temporal
labour  with  the  pick  and  the  spade,
to  prppare  a  good  solid  road  upon
wbi< '  to  haul  the  rock  ;  then  we  call
upon  the  quarrymen  to  get  the  rock
out  of  the  mountains  and  split  them
into  sizes  convenient  for  putting  upon  *
waggons.  Now  all  this  work  is  not
done  by  faith  alone,  but  nerve,  bone,
and  muscle  are  exceedingly  essential
with  faith,  also,  in  this  case,  the
strength  of  the  ox.  When  the  rock
is  on  the  ground,  it  must  then  be
hewn  and  prepared  for  the  waUs.
Wink)  this  work  is  progressing  on  a
still  morning,  you  may  hear  a  hundred
chisels  at  work,  and  we  want  to  hear
two  or  three  hundred  at  work.  Thus
we  will  rear  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,
and  when  it  is  completed  we  can
enter  therein  and  receive  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Holy  Priesthood,  and
our  spiritual  blessings ;  but  we  first
have  to  perform  our  manual  labour,
and  we  wish  the  people  to  fully
I  understand  this.  I  will  now  call  upon
Bishop  Hunter  to  make  some  remarks.

I  wish  to  preach  another  discourse.
At  a  Bishops'  meeting,  on  Thurs-
day evening  last,  it  was  concluded  to
cut  a  large  ditch  on  the  upper  side  of
the  State  road,  from  here  to  Gardner's
mill,  to  carry  off  the  water  from  the
surface  of  the  road,  which  would  then
soon  be  in  good  order  for  travel.  This


NECESSITY  OF  TEMPORAL  LABOTTB ,  ETC*


matter  T  wish  to  have  laid  before  the
people,  to  receive  an  expression  from
them  whether  they  will  sustain  their
Bishops  in  this  labour,  and  this  is  the
reason  why  we  speak  of  it  this
morning.  If  the  work  is  properly
taken  hold  of  anil  in  good  earnest,
with  strong  hands  and  willing  hearts,
it  will  soon  bo  accomplished.  The
Bishops  are  willing  to  have  the
ground  divided  among  them,  which
Bishop  Hunter  will  attend  to.

We  want  to  build  this  Temple  as
speedily  as  possible,  through  the
blessings  and  kind  providences  of
the  Almighty  in  whom  we  will  trust,
doing  the  labour  our  hands  find  to
do,  asking  no  questions  as  to  what
we  are  going  to  receive  when  the
Temple  is  done,  or  how  long  we
shall  bo  in  building  it,  but  we  will
build  it  as  fast  as  possible.  Some
care  nothing  about  building  a  Temple,
for,  say  tbew  as  sure  as  we  commence
we  shall  have  to  fight  the  enemy.
If  we  have  an  enemy  to  encounter
the  quicker  we  do  so  the  better,  for
we  are  able  to  do  whatever  the  Lord
requires.  Union  is  strength,  and!
th:s  terrifies  our  enemies.  Who  can
resist  the  power  possessed  by  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  their  union  ?
And  the  stronger  our  union,  the  more
mighty  are  the  bands  of  our  strength ;
while  disunion  is  weakening  our
enemies,  and  splitting  them  asunder;
they  will  be  left  in  weakness,  while
we  shall  grow  in  strength  in  our


union,  and  in  confidence  in  God  and
each  other.  And  let  us  take  a  course
to  create  confidence  in  ourselves  as
well  as  in  our  neighbours,  and  we
will  constantly  grow  strong.

We  can  all  help  a  little  in  repairing
the  road  I  have  mentioned,  so  I  will
ask  the  brethren  and  the  sisters  too,
will  you  sustain  your  Bishops  in
making  a  good  road  upon  which  to
haul  rock  for  the  Temple?  [The
vote  was  unanimous  in  favour.]  Let
Bishop  Hunter  and  other  Bishops,  as
far  south  as  Fort  Union,  proportion
to  each  ward  its  share  of  the  labour
to  be  done  on  the  road,

I  thought  well  of  ihc  discourse  this
morning;  I  like  a  great  deal  of  it.
Were  (  to  speak  what  is  now  in  my
mind,  I  should  say  that  succotash  is
the  best  dish  I  ever  partook  of;  ytm
get  that,  when  I  talk  to  you,  and  you
had  it  from  Bishop  Hunter  this
morning,  a  little  of  this,  and  a  little
of  that.  "  >  r.  I

The  kingdom  of  God  is  before  us  ;
we  have  it  to  buildup,  and  to  establish
the  Zion  of  our  God  upon  this  land.
And  if  I  am  right  in  my  views  and
feelings,  the  Latter-day  Saints  cannot
labour  too  fast  nor  too  dilligently  to
accomplish  the  work  they  are  exiled
to  do.  Then  let  us  go  to  with  our
might,  and  lafconr  faithfully  to  esta-
blish that  kingdom  which  is  all  and
in  all  to  us.  May  the  Lord  help
us.  Amen,


No.  16


Vol.  IX.


242 .  journal  of  discourses,


PROPRIETY  OF  THEATRICAL  AM  USEMENTS. — INSTRUCTIONS

RELATIVE  TO  CONDUCTING  THEM,


Remarks  by  President  BitmHAM  Young,  at  the  Dedication  of  the  New  Theatre

in  Great  Salt  Lake  0%,  March  6,  1862.


REPORTED  BY G. D.  WATT,


Man  is  organized  and  brought  forth
as  the  king  of  the  earth,  to  under-
stand, to  criticise,  examine,  improve,
manufacture,  arrange,  and  organize
the  crude  matter,  and  honour  and
glorify  the  works  of  Cud's  hands.
This  is  a  wide  field  for  the  operation
of  man,  that  reaches  into  eternity;
and  it  is  good  for  mortals  to  search
out  the  things  of  this  earth.

The  elements  are  to  be  brought
info  shape  and  operation  for  the
benefit,  happiness,  beauty,  excellency,
glory,  and  exaltation  of  the  children
of  men  that  dwell  upon  the  earth ;
though  we  cannot  produce  that  which
has  not  already  been  produced.  Are
we  capable,  by  our  most  critical  re-  1
searches,  of  finding  that  which  lias
not  already  been  found  ?  We  are
not.  We  are  capable  of  improving
upon  the  crude  elements,  until  we
understand  the  organization  of  this
earth,  and  the  power  by  which  it  is
sustained,  for  what  purpose  man  was
created,  and  the  immortality  that  will
crown  his  existence.  All  this  is
what  others  have  learned  before  us.

Were  we  capable  of  scanning  the
eternities  of  the  Gods,  we  should  find
works  and  exhibitions  of  wisdom,
knowledge, understanding,  and  power,
by  whom  ?  By  those  who  were  as
we  are.  It  is  the  privilege  of  man  to
search  out  the  wisdom  of  God  per.
taining  to  the  earth  and  the  heavens.

Professing  Christians  generally
would  not  consider  this  a  fit  position


for  those  who  profess  the  faith  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  occupy.  These
Saints  of  the  Most  High  appear  here
in  the  capacity  of  an  assembly  to
exercise  and  amuse  the  mind  of  the
natural  man.  This  idea  brings  at
once  to  my  mind  a  thousand  reflect-
i<  ms.  What  is  nature  ?  Everything
that  pertains  to  the  heavens  and  the
earth.  "  My  son,"  says  the  Christian
father,  'you  should  not  attend  a
theatre,  for  there  the  wicked  assemble ;
nor  a  ball-room,  for  there  the  wicked
assemble;  you  should  not  be  found
playing  a  ball,  for  the  sinner  does
thai."  Hundreds  of  likeiadmonitions
are  thus  given,  and  so  we  have  been
thus  traditioned  ;  but  it  is  our  privi-
lege and  our  duty  to  scan  all  the
works  of  man  from  the  days  of  Adam
until  now,  and  thereby  learn  what
man  was  made  for,  what  he  is  capable
of  performing,  and  how  fir  his
wisdom  can  reach  into  the  heavens,
and  to  know  the  evil  and  the  good.

It  is  written  in  the  Scriptures,
"  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the
city,  and  the  people  not  be  afraid  ?
Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the
Lord  hath  not  done  it?"  Is  there  an
evil  thing  upon  the  earth  that  he
does  not  fully  understand  ?  There  is
not.  The  Psalmist  very  beautifully
illustrates  this  idea  — u  Thou  com-
passest  my  path  and  my  lying  down,
and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  ways.
For  there  is  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,
but  lo,  O  Lord,  thou knowest  it


PROPRIETY  OF  THEATRICAL  AMUSEMENTS,  T,TCt


213


altogether.  Whether  shall  I  go  from
thy  spirit  ?  or  whither  shall  I  flee
from  thy  presence?  If  I  ascend  np
into  heaven,  thou  art  there ;  if  I
make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  thou  art
there.  If  1  take  the  wings  of  the
morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost
part  of  the  sea;  even  there  shall  thy
hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right  hand
shall  hold  me."  The  Lord  under-
stands the  evil  and  the  good ;  why
should  we  not  likewise  understand
them?  We  should.  Why?  To
know  how  to  choose  the  good  and
refuse  the  evil  j  which  we  cannot  do,
unless  we  undei\stand  the  evil  as  well
as  the  good.  I  do  not  wish  to  convey
the  idea  that  it  is  necessary  to  commit
evil  in  order  to  obtain  this  knowledge.

Upon  the  stage  of  a  theatre  can  lie
represented  in  character,  evil  and  its
consequences,  good  and  its  happy
results  and  rewards ;  the  weakness
and  the  follies  of  man,  the  magnani-
mity of  virtue  and  the  greatness  of
truth.  The  stage  can  be  made  to  aid
the  pulpit  in  impressing  upon  the
minds  of  a  community  an  enlightened
sense  of  a  virtuous  life,  also  a  proper
horror  of  the  enormity  of  sin  and  a
just  dreal  of  its  consequences.  The
path  of  sin  with  its  thorns  and  pit-
falls, its  gins  and  snares  can  be
revealed,  and  how  to  shun  it.

The  Lord  knows  all  things;  man
should  know  all  things  pertaining  (o
this  life,  and  to  obtain  this  knowledge
it  is  right  that  fa?  should  use  every
feasible  means  ;  and  I  do  not  hesitate
to  say  that  the  stage  can,  in  a  great
degree,  be  made  to  subserve  this  end.
It  is  written,  "  Prove  all  tilings,  hold
fast  that  which  is  good."  Refuse
evil,  choose  good,  hate  iniquity,  love
truth.  All  this  our  fathers  have  done
before  us ;  I  do  not  particularly  mean
father  Adam,  or  his  Father;  I  do  not
particularly  mean  Abraham,  or  Moses,
the  Prophets,  or  Apostles,  but  I  mean
our  fathers  who  have  been  exalted  for
millions  of  years  previous  to  Adam's


time.  They  have  all  passed  through
the  same  ordeals  we  are  now  passing
through,  and  have  searched  all  things,
even  to  the  depths  of  hell.

Is  there  evil  in  the  theatre  ?  in  the
ball-room  ?  in  the  place  of  worship  ?
in  the  dwelling?  in  the  world?  Yes,
when  men  are  inclined  to  do  evil  in
any  of  those  places.  There  is  evil
in  persons  meeting  simply  for  a  chit-
chat, if  they  will  allow  themselves  to
commit  evil  while  thus  engaged.  Can
we  not  sift  out  every  particle  of  wheat
from  the  vast  body  of  chaff  we  find
in  bonks  on  science  and  religion?
that  we  find  in  governmental  consti-
tutions and  judicial  rulings?  in  learned
commentaries  and  on  law  and  order  ?
and  in  the  rudiments  and  advanced
branches  of  education  ?  Can  we  not
even  make  the  stage  of  a  theatre  the
platform  upon  which  to  exhibit  truth
in  all  its  simple  beauty  ?  and  sift  out
from  the  theatrical  lore  of  ages  the
chaff  and  f  >lly  that  has  encumbered  it  ?
and  preserve  and  profit  by  that  which
is  truly  good  and  great?  This,
however,  is  not  the  work  of  a  day  or
a  vcar  ;  but,  as  the  chaft  is  protective
to  wheat  in  a  pile,  so  the  true  lore  of
ages  is  concealed  and  preserved  in
the  chaff  pile  of  folly  and  nonsense,
until  the  Saints  of  the  Most  Hififh
cause  a  separation.

We  shall  endeavour  to  make  our
theatrical  performances  a  source  of
g.  >.  nl,  and  not  <>f  evil.  Rather  than
the  latter,  and  rather  than  it  should
P  'ss  into  the  hands  of  the  ungodly,  I
ask  the  bord  to  let  the  whole  fabric
return  to  its  native  elements.  It  is
our  privilege  and  our  duty  to  search

w  —

all  things  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  le  r;i  what  there  is  for  man  to
enjoy,  what  God  has  ordained  for  the
benefit  and  happiness  of  mankind,
and  then  make  use  of  it  without
sinning  against  him.

Our  eyes  are  delighted  in  seeing,
our  ears  in  hearing.  We  behold  the
faces  of  our  friends,  we  sec  the  gems


JOUHNWL  OF


of  ini ell i g€ ncc spark  1  i Kg  t h rough  th  ose
outward  windows  of  the  soul ;  and
what  a  blessing  it  is  to  see  the  coun-
tenances of  our  friends  radiant  with
delight  Our  senses,  if  properly
educated,  are*  channels  of  endless
felicity  to  us,  but  we  can  devute  them
to  evil  or  to  good.  Let  us  devote  all
to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  building
up  of  his  kingdom,  for  in  this  there  is
lasting  joy.

Man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy  j  but
the  Spirit  is  pure  from  heaven.  This
mortal  existence  must  be  prolonged
by  the  use  of  food.  Food  that  is
good  for  the  use  of  man  is  abundant
in  the  elements,  and  God  has  endowed
us  with  the  ability  i  r.  niiLine  the
elements,  thr  ough  the  means  of  useful
plants  and  animals,  to  supply  our-
selves with  all  ire  need.  Should  we
refuse  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  means,
hunger  and  nakedness  must  be  our
portion.  Heaven  will  not  perform
the  labour  that  it  has  designed  us  to
perform.  We  must  sow,  reap,  clean,
and  grind  into  flour  our  wheat,  and
make  it  into  bread.  Were  we  not  to
do  this,  we  should  go  without  bread
until  doomsday,  and  without  clothing,
if  we  wait  for  the  Lord  to  make
clothes  for  us.  It  is  for  us  to  search
out  the  elements,  learn  how  to  com-
bine them  to  make  silk,  wool,  linen,
cotton,  and  every  other  textile  ma-
terial that  can  be  made  into  cloth,  for
the  comfort  and  convenience  of  man.

When  man  is  industrious  and
righteous,  then  is  he  happy.  Sin
blights  all  true  happiness,  and  throws
a  deep  gloom  over  man's  whole
existence.  Let  us  be  righteous,  and
then  learn  to  make  ourselves  comfort-
able and  joyful  in  the  possession  of
creature  comforts.  Man  is  always
happy  when  he  is  righteous.  The
Lord  will  nut  build  our  houses  and
temples,  after  he  has  given  us  the
elements  and  taught  us  how  to
build  comfortable  houses,  magnificent
temples,  and  commodious  places  of


worship.  Everything  that  is  joy-
ful, beautiful,  glorious,  comforting,
consoling,  lovely,  pleasing  to  the  eye,
good  to  the  taste,  pleasant  to  the
smell,  and  happify  ing  in  every  respect
i.s  for  the  Saints.

Tight  -  laced  religions  professors
of  the  present  generation  have
a  horror  at  the  sound  of  a  fiddle.
There  is  no  music  in  hell,  for  all  good
music  belongs  to  heaven.  Sweet
harmonious  sounds  give  exquisite  joy
to  human  beings  capable  of  appreci-
ating music.  I  delight  in  hearing
harmonious  tones  made  by  the  human
voice,  by  musical  instruments,  and  by
both  combined.  Every  sweet  musical
sound  that  can  be  made  belongs  to
the  Saints  and  is  for  the  Saints.
Every  flower,  shrub,  and  tree  to.
beautify,  and  to  gratify  the  fcasle  and
smell,  and  every  sensation  that  gives
to  man  joy  and  felicity  are  for  the
'  Saints  who  receive  them  from  the
Most  High.

There  are  many  of  our  aged
brethren  and  sisters,  who,  through
the  traditions  of  their  fathers  and
the  requirements  of  a  false  religion,
were  never  inside  a  ball-room  or  a
theatre  until  they  became  Latter-clay
Saints,  and  now  they  seem  more
anxious  for  this  kind  of  amusement
than  are  our  children.  This  arises
from  the  fact  they  have  been  starved
,  for  many  years  for  that  amusement
which  is  designed  to  buoy  up  their
spirits  and  make  their  bodies  vigor6us
and  strong,  anci  tens  of  thousands
have  sunk  into  untimely  graves  for
want  of  such  exercises  to  the  body  and
the  mind.  They  require  mutual
j  nourishment  to  make  them  sound  and
healthy.  Every  faculty  and  power  of
both  body  and  mind  is  a  gift  from
God,  Never  say  that  means  used  to
create  and  continue  healthy  action  of
body  and  mind  are  from  hell.  Such
means  never  originated  there.  Hell
is  a  ereat  distance  from  us,  and  we
can  never  arrive  there,  unless  we


PROPRIETY  OF  THEATRICAL AMUSEMENTS,  ETC.


245


change  our  path,  for  the  way  we  are
now  pursuing  leads  to  heaven  and
happiness.

When  the  Saints  come  into  this
building,  and  look  on  this  stage,  to
sec  our  brethren  and  sisters  per-
form to  satisfy  the  sight,  to  satisfy
the  ear,  and  the  desires  and  mind  of
the  people,  I  want  you  to  pray  for
them  that  the  Lord  Almighty  may
preserve  them  from  ever  having  one
wicked  thought  in  their  bosoms,  that
our  actors  may  be  just  as  virtuous,
truthful,  and  humble  before  God  and
each  other  as  though  they  were  on  a
Mission  to  preach  the  Gospel.

I  say  to  those  who  perform,  if
anything  is  discovered  contrary  to
the  strictest  virtue  and  decorum,  the
offenders  must  leave  this  bu  lding.  I
intend  this  remark  to  apply  also  to
the  musicians.  I  wish  the  dramatic
company  to  seek  diliigently  and  in
all  kindness  to  promote  the  happiness
of  all  concerned.

Unless  by  my  order  I  do  not  wish
a  drop  of  intoxicating  liquor  brought
into  this  house ;  I  want  the  actors
behind  the  curtain,  the  musicians  in
th  1  orchestra,  and  the  audience  to
hear  and  observe  this.

When  this  house  is  finished,  there
will  be  places  in  the  passages  where
cakes,  pies,  fruits,  &c,  can  be  bought  j
but  no  intoxicating  liquor will  be


allowed  in  these  saloons*  No  drunken
person  will  be  permitted  to  enter  this
house  ;  I  will  not  have  it  polluted  and
disgraced  by  the  presence  of  the
drunken,  nor  my  brethren  and  sisters,
who  strive  continually  to  do  right,
annoyed  bv  the  filthy  breath  of  a  poor,
miserHbWfilthy  loafer.

We  intend  to  preserve  the  strictest
order  here ;  we  do  expect  the  people
to  come  to  this  house  praying,  and
their  whole  souls  devoted  to  God,  and
to  their  religion.

Tragedy  is  favoured  by  the  outside
world  ;  I  am  not  in  favour  of  it.  I
do  not  wish  mmder  and  all  its  horrors
and  the  villany  leading  to  it  portrayed
before  our  women  and  children ;  I
want  no  child  to  carry  home  with  it
the  fear  of  the  fagot,  the  sword,  the
pistol,  or  the  dagger,  and  suffer  in  tho
night  from  frightful  dreams.  I  want
such  plays  performed  as  will  nmke
the  spectators  feel  well;  and  I  wish
those  who  perform  to  select  a  class  of
plays  that  will  improve  the  public
mind,  and  exalt  the  literary  taste  of
the  community.

If  we  wish  to  hold  a  Conference  in
this  hall,  we  shall  do  so,  and  shall
use  it  for  all  purposes  that  will  satisfy
our  feelings  in  doing  right,  and  no
evil./?

May  God  bless  you.  Amen.


246


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


SALVATION  THE  RESULT  OF  INDIVIDUAL  EXERTION.


RemarJcs  by  President  Brioham Yoitng  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  C  'dij,  March  23,  1862.


REPORTED  BY  G, D.  WATT,


I  am  now  looking  upon  the  best
people  on  the  earth,  that  we  have
any  knowledge  of.  There  is  not
another  community  that  presents  the
same  amount  of  honesty,  purity  of
heart  and  life,  and  integrity  to  God
and  to  one  another;  yet  much  can  be
said  upon  our  weaknesses,  short-
sightedness, and  proneness  to  wander
from  right  and  do  evil.  I  do  not
know  that  I  should  do  right  in  giving
full  vent  to  some  of  my  views  and
feelings  concerning  this  people-
While  conversing  with  some  brethren
the  other  day  upon  the  conduct  of
this  people  as  viewed  by  the  intelli-
gence of  Heaven,  I  said,  that  it  was
a  wonder  to  me  that  God  had  not
long  ago  destroyed  us  all.  His  mercy
and  long-suflering  are  truly  marvel-
lous. Again,  when  I  realize  the
object  of  our  creation,  the  day  of  our
trial  we  are  m>w  passing  through,  the
weaknesses  the  Lord  has  ordained  to
come  upon  the  children  of  men,  and
the  steps  to  be  taken  fur  the  exalta-
tion of  the  human  family  my  heart  is
filled  with  gratitude  to  God,  it  exults
in  his  great  beneficence.  I  glorify
his  name  that  he  has  spoken  from  the
heavens,  and  noticed  us  mortals.  I
am  exceedingly  rejoiced  that  we  have
the  privilege  of  living  in  the  day
when  the  Lord  has  spoken  to  the
children  of  men,  and  revealed  the
Priesthood  and  placed  it  upon  men,
giving  them  the  pi  ivilege  of  attaining
to  glory,  immortality,  and  eternal
lives. In  the  midst  of  our  great


weaknesses  and  manifold  failings,  we
have  abundant  cause  tor  exceeding
great  joy  in  the  Gospel  of  our  salva-
tion. Are  these  great  weaknesses  to
be  found  in  the  birds  of  the  air,  in
the  fishes  of  the  sea,  or  in  the  beasts
of  the  field?  No.  The  animal,
vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms
abide  the  law  of  their  Creator;  the
whole  earth  and  all  things  pertaining
to  it,  except  man,  abide  the  law  of
their  creation,

I  now  see  before  me  beings  who
are  in  the  image  of  those  heavenly
personages  who  are  enthroned  in
glory  and  crowned  with  eternal  lives,
in  the  very  image  of  those  beings  who
organized  the  earth  and  its  fulness,
and  who  constitute  the  Godhead —
still  here  is  the  evil,  and  we  are  the
ones  who  are  accountable ;  for  we  are
the  "  lords  of  creation/1  We  hold  in
subjection  the  creation;  we  avail
ourselves  of  the  great  truths  found  in
the  arts  and  sciences,  we  navigate  the
seas,  we  survey  the  land,  we  convey
intelligence  with  lightning  speed,  we
harness  steam  and  make  it  our
servant,  we  tame  the  animals  and
make  them  do  our  drudgery  and
administer  to  our  wants  in  many  ways,
yet  man  alone  is  not  tamed — he  is
not  subject  to  his  Great  Creator.  Our
ignorant  animals  are  faithful  to  us,
and  will  do  our  bidding  as  long  as
they  have  any  strength ;  yet  man
who  is  the  offspring  of  the  Gods,  will
not  become  subject  to  the  most  rea-
sonable and  self-exulting  principles


often  have  we  witnessed  a
faithful  animal  conveying  his  master
home  so  drunk  that  he  could  not  see
Lis  way  or  sit  up;  yet  his  faithful
animal  will  plod  through  mud,  shun
stumps,  trees,  and  bad  places,  and
land  him  safely  at  home.

Are  we  even  obedient  to  our  better
judgments  and  to  truth  that  is  self-
evident?  Many  of  us  have  been
taught  the  doctrine  of  total  depravity
— that  man  is  not  naturally  inclined
to  do  good,  I  am  satisfied  that  lie
is  more  inclined  to  do  right  than  to
do  wrong.  There  is  a  greater  power
within  him  to  shun  evil  and  perform
good,  than  to  do  the  opposite.  We
have  the  powers  of  darkness,  or  the
influences  opposite  to  good,  to  contend
with,  "For  we  wrestle  not  against
flesh  and  blood,  but  against  princi-
palities, against  powers,  against  the
rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,
against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high
places."  There  are  two  classes  of
influences,  one  tends  to  good  and  the
other  to  evil ;  one  to  truth  and  life,
the  other  to  falsehood  and  death.
Evil  is  sown  in  our  nature,  but  there
is  not  a  person  who  is  not  prompted
to  do  good  and  forsake  evil,  though
there  are  but  few  who,  from  their
own  volition,  will  subject  themselves
to  be  perfectly  obedient  to  the  law  of
Christ,  yet  there  are  dispositions  that
will  be  subject  io  the  truth  through
cruel  mockings  and  scourgings,  bonds
and  imprisonment.  Truth  is  for  us,
right  is  for  us,  life  is  ours.

Our  enemies  accuse  the  leaders  of
this  Church  of  having  too  much
influence  over  the  people.  How  much
influence  have  I,  or  any  other  man
that  ever  lived  in  this  kingdorrt,  over
an  apostate  ?  It  is  now  as  it  was  in
the  days  of  Joseph,  While  people
retained  the  spirit  of  their  religion,
they  looked  upon  him  as  one  of  the
best  men  on  the  earth  ;  but  wdien  they
gave  way  to  the  spirit  of  apostacy,
then  he  was  the  worst  of  men.  This


has  been  so[in  all  ages  with  every
Prophet,  Apostle,  and  righteous  man
and  woman ;  they  have  had  the
warmest  friends,  and  the  bitterest
enemies.  No  man  has  friends  like
those  who  are  righteous;  their  friend-
ship is  even  mi  to  death,  and  then  it
reaches  throughout  all  eternity.  The
friendship  of  the  wicked  must  fade
away,  sooner  or  later ;  while  the
friendship  of  the  righteous  will  last
for  ever  and  ever.  When  we  under-
stand the  truth  let  us  abide  by  it,  and
boast  not  in  our  own  strength,  but
glory  in  the  strength  of  the  Almighty.

The  Elders  often  tell  how  many
they  have  converted,  and  how  many
churches  they  have  built  up  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  world.  When  persona
apostatize  from  the  path  of  right,  I
think  some  of  them  are  man-made
converts;  as  a  Methodist  preacher
remarked  to  a  drunken  man  lying  by
the  way  side,  who  hailed  him  with
delight  saying,  "  You  are  my  father
in  Christ,  you  converted  me."  " 1
should  think  so,"  said  the  preacher,
"  for  it  is  very  clear  that  you  are  not
one  of  the  Lord's  converts."  We
cannot  make  Latter-day  Saints  of
anybody  on  this  earth  but  ourselves;
we  have  not  even  power  to  make  a
Saint  of  a  wife,  or  a  child,  a  brother,
or  sister,  in  the  least  degree,  unless
they  will  hearken  to  counsel  and  obey
the  principles  of  righteousness,  which
I  contend  they  are  naturally  inclined
to  do,  were  it  not  for  the  awful
apostacy  there  is  in  the  world.  All
persons  must  possess  their  intelli-
gence free  and  independent  before
God,

I  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints;  and  if  a  person  cornea
into  our  community  and  wishes  to
know  further  with  regard  to  life  and
salvation,  I  will  tell  him  as  freely  as
ever  I  breathed  the  mountain  air  ;  but
you  cannot  find  one  person  that  I  ever
crowed  my  religion  upon  either  in
or  out  of  the  Church. I  have  my


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


reasons  for  taking  thie  course.  I  never
preach  such  sermons  as,  "  Well,  Mr.
C,  or  D.,  have  you  heard  any  of  our
Elders  preach  ?  Do  you  know  any-
thing about  Mormonism  ?"  w  No/'
u  Why,  our  Gospel  is  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation,  it  is  the  only  true
plan  of  salvation  for  the  people;  and
you  must  be  a  1  Jlormon it  you  are
not  a  *  Mormon,'  you  must  expect  to
be  damned."  If  a  person  wishes  to
know  my  religion,  I  am  willing  that
he  should  know  the  whole  of  it.
There  is  nothing  secret  or  hidden  in
it;  the  whole  plan  of  salvation  is  for
the  human  family,  a  d  is  as  free  as
the  waters  that  flow  from  our  moun-
tains into  the  valleys.  If  you  thirst,
drink  until  you  are  satisfied,  for  you
are  truly  welcome.  This  is  the  nature
of  the  Gospel,  and  the  character  of
Him  who  has  sent  it.  It  is  free  for  alL
But  I  am  not  disposed  to  compel  any
person  to  partake  of  that  which  they
dislike,  or  have  an  aversion  for.

This  may  not  be  right  in  every
case.  Why  it  is  right  with  me  is,
that,  if  a  person  urges  upon  me  that
which  I  am  not  disposed  to  receive,
it  creates  in  me  an  alienation  of
feeling  toward  that  person.  I  am
naturally  opposed  to  being  crowded,
and  am  opposed  to  any  person  who
undertakes  to  force  me  to  do  this,  or
not  do  that.  In  my  youth  I  was
supposed  to  be  an  infidel,  and  perhaps
in  one  respect  I  was,  though  I  would
have  freely  given  all  the  gold  and
silver  I  ever  could  possess,  to  have
met  with  one  individual  who  could
show  mc  anything  about  God,  heaven,
or  the  plan  of  salvation,  so  that  I
could  pursue  the  path  that  leads  to
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  I  did
not  want  to  be  urged,  and  I  am  so
inclined  to  this  day.  Yet  T  am  con-
vinced that  it  would  not  do  for  every
man  to  pursue  this  course  in  every
circumstance.  We  can  guide,  direct,
and  prune  a  tender  sprout,  and  it
inclines  to  our  direction,  if  it  is  wisely


and  skilfully  applied.  So,  if  we  sur-
round a  child  with  hea^!.y  and
salutary  influences,  give  him  suitable
instructions,  and  store  his  mind  with
truthful  traditions,  may  be  that  will
direct  his  feet  in  the  way  of  life.

There  are  persons  of  twenty,  forty,
and  sixty  years  of  age,  who  never
saw  a  day  in  which  they  knew  their
own  minds.  They  seem  to  be  unde-
cided in  all  their  actions,  like  a  child
a  few  years  old,  and  need  some
person  to  direct  them.  I  am  some-
what different  from  this  class  of
persona  Should  I  1x3  told  that  it  is
time  to  wash  my  face  and  eat  my
1  "Rjukfast,  I  should  be  strongly  inclined
to  notify  my  informant  that  I  knew
that  as  well  as  he  did.  So  some  of
our  Elders  who  preach  in  the  world,
will  go  into  this  or  that  house,  begin
to  converse  with  the  members  of  the
family,  and  tell  them  they  must  be
baptized  or  be  damned.  This  will
turn  some  persons  against  them  and
the  truth,  simply  because  they  will
nut  be  compelled  to  do  anything;
while  there  aie  others  in  the  world
who  would  not  embrace  the  truth,
unless  they  were  ordered  to  do  it;
probably  they  arc  those  who  will  be
compelled  to  cpe  in.

There  is  a  class  of  people  that  will
not  move  to  do  themselves  good,  only
as  they  are  urged  and  commanded.
There  is  a  wide  difference  in  people
in  this  respect.  There  are  instances
in  this  community  that  if  a  wife  does
not  urge  her  husband  to  pray  in  his
family,  he  would  never  do  so.  And
again,  there  are  men  in  this  city  and
throughout  the  settlements  as  good
men  as  need  be,  who  are  driven  from
this  duty  by  the  teazing  of  a  wife.
"  Now,  pa,  come,  do  let  us  have
prayers;  I  have  got  all  the  children
here  and  the  Bible,  and  I  do  want  to
have  prayers."  He  cannot  bow  to
that  kind  of  compulsion,  tosa-'e  him;
and  if  he  should  be  damned  he  wil?
not  be  made  to  pray  in  such  a  manner,


SALVATION  THE  RFSTTLT  OT  INDIVIDUAL  EXFItTIOX.


for  when  he  prays  he  means  to  do  it
for  his  God,  and  not  because  a  woman
teases  him  to  do  it.  If  a  wife  of
mine  should  undertake  to  direct  me
in  such  a  manner,  I  should  give  her
to  understand  that  I  would  tell  her
and  the  children  when  to  come  to
prayers,  when  to  go  to  parties,  and
how  to  reverence  the  Holy  Priesthood
and  their  God;  I  should  never  pray  in
creation,  if  I  could  not  do  it  inde-
pendent of  the  dictation  of  a  woman.

I  know  that  the  people  need  more
or  less  teaching  and  urging  all  the
time,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  to  keep
them  in  the  path  of  safety.  How  easy
we  get  out  of  patience  !  We  get  a
little  hasty,  and  do  a  little  wrong,
because  we  do  not  train  ourselves —
do  not  conquer  ourselves,  and  subject
ourselves  to  the  law  of  Christ.  Sisters
speak  evil  of  sisters,  they  hear  of  it,
and  straightway  return  the  compli-
ment in  a  spirit  of  vindict  iveness.
Elders  have  contention  with  Elders;
they  do  not  understand  alike,  and  are
not  disposed  to  in  their  deal.  Elders
arc  agreed  on  the  way  and  manner
necessary  to  obtain  celestial  glory,
but  they  quarrel  about  a  dulhir.  When
principles  of  eternal  life  are  brought
before  them — God  and  the  things
pertaining  to  God  and  godliness —
they  apparently  carenot  half  so  much
about  them  as  they  do  about  five
cents,  "  We  want  the  dollars/1
What  are  they  good  for?  Dollars
will  do  good,  if  you  can  keep  them
until  they  will  do  good,  using  them
in  the  right  way.  Men  will  scramble
over  each  other  to  get  gold  and  silver,
and  when  they  have  it  they  waste  it ;
it  passes  from  them,  and  tlicy  know
not  how,  doing  them  no  good.

You  can  go  into  many  houses  in
this  Territory  and  find,  for  cooking
utensils,  an  old  skillet  in  which  they
cook  their  meat,  heat  their  dish-
water, wash  their  dishes,  mix  up  pig
feed,  <fcc. ;  and  when  they  set  their
table  it  is  in  keeping  with  the  old


249

skillet ;  you  find  little  to  eat,  and
that  is  half  burnt  and  half  cooked,
unpalatable  and  unhealthy.  The  wife
and  children  have  scarcely  a  decent
dress,  and  all  around,  in  the  house
and  out  of  it,  is  a  picture  of  misery.
Yet  if  you  ask  the  owner  of  the  house
whether  he  has  any  cattle  on  the
range,  "  Oh,  yes."  How  many  ?  "  I
do  not  know  ;  I  had  fifty  head  the
other  day,  but  I  am  not  sine  how
many  oxen  and  cows  I  have."  How
many  calves  have  you?  "  I  think  I
have  fifteen  or  twenty."  Do  yon
have  any  butter  for  breakfast  ?  u  No;"
and  when  they  have  any,  it  is  about
the  size  of  a  walnut  and  as  white  as
J  cheese  curd.  They  do  not  know  how
to  make  butter  and  cheese,  yarn  and
cloth,  nor  do  they  try  to  learn.  The
wool  is  wasting ;  the  flax,  if  any  is
grown,  is  left  to  rot ;  indolence,  dirt,
and  scarcity  reign  where  cleanliness,
beauty,  order,  and  plenty  could  he
produced  by  the  hand  of  industry,
economy,  frugality,  and  care.  There
is  a  wonderful  amount  of  ignorance
with  regard  to  our  temporal  life,  to
say  nothing  of  our  spiritual  life.

A  misunderstanding  of  five  dollars
in  a  settlement  will  sometimes  set
some  of  our  Elders  to  quarrelling  and
contending,  and  spending  the  time  of
the  High  Council  and  Bishop  Courts,
and  making  a  cost  of  a  hundred
dollars.  You  cannot  bring  up  any-
thing that  relates  to  Priesthood,  God,
heaven,  or  heavenly  things,  that  will
move  them  in  the  direction  of  a
quarrel,  and  yet  they  will  contend
about  a  little  filthy  lucre  which  they
ca  not  hold  ;  they  pass  by  the  tilings
of  God  as  naught  compared  with  it,
living  year  after  year-,  learning  little
or  nothing  that  pertains  to  life  eternal,
but  would  rake  earth  and  hell  to
secure  a  few  cents.  Money  is  not
wealth  ;  neither  can  you  subsist  upon
it,  in  the  absence  of  the  common
aliments  of  life*  It  is  the  love  of
money  that  is  a  mischief — that  is  the


root  of  all  evil.  Love  not  gold,  nor  |
silver,  nor  anything  of  the  kind,  but
gather  around  you  that  which  will
make  you  14  healthy,  wealthy,  and
wise  ;"  then  all  will  be  tight,  and  real
wealth  will  increase  around  you,  and
wisdom  from  God  will  illuminate  your
course  through  life.

We  pray  for  wisdom,  but  God  will
as  soon  put  bread  and  meat  in  our
cupboards  without  any  endeavour  of
ours,  as  he  will  give  us  wisdom
without  our  trying  to  get  it.  If  a
man  wants  a  farm,  let  him  make  it;
if  he  wishes  an  orchard  he  plants  it ;
if  he  wants  a  house  for  his  family  to
live  in,  he  must  gather  the  materials
and  build  it.  The  Lord  instructed
the  people  in  primitive  times  how  to
smelt  the  ores  and  work  in  the
different  metals,  how  to  hew  stone,
how  to  build  houses  and  temples.  He
will  give  ns  wisdom  in  these  ihings,
but  he  will  not  come  down  to  do  the
manual  labour-
As  we  prepare  materials  to  build  a
house  or  temple,  so  man  can  prepare


himself  for  the  reception  of  eternal
wisdom.  We  go  where  the  materials
for  a  house  are,  and  prepare  them
to  answer  our  purpose;  so  we  may
go  to  where  eternal  wisdom  dwells,
and  there  dilligently  seek  to  possess
it,  for  its  price  is  above  rubies,  I
have  frequently  said  that  the  greatest
endowment  God  ever  gave  to  man
is  good,  sound,  solid  sense  to  know
how  to  govern  ourselves,  how  to
choose  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil,
to  know  how  to  sever  the  light  from
the  wrong,  the  light  from  the  dark-
ness, and  gather  to  ourselves  that
wisdom  which  comes  from  God,  and
reject  that  which  comes  from  beneath.
Let  all  be  brought  into  subjection  to
the  will  of  God,  and  then  there  would
be^no  contention  about  a  trifle,  but
every  man  would  contend  lawfully
for  the  things  of  God,  and  more
earnestly  than  for  silver  and  gold.

May  the  Lord  bless  the  good  and
fill  the  earth  with  the  righteous.
Amen.


ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  HOME  MANUFACTURES. — RIGHTEOUS

AND  UNRIGHTEOUS  AMBITION.

Remarks  by  President  Daniel  H.  Well,  made m  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  March  10,  18G2.


It K POUTED  BY  J.  V.  LOXG.


I  feel  thankful  at  the  improved
appearance  of  our  Tabernacle  this
morning.  The  President  said,  "let
there  be  light,  and  there  was  light."
Brother  Taylor  said  if  he  was  going  to


preach  lie  should  take  that  for  a  text,
but  T  am  not  in  the  habit  of  taking
texts,  I  shall,  therefore,  make  such
remarks  as  may  come  into  my  mind.
Behold,  light  has  come  into  the


ENCOUHAGEMKXT  OF  HOME  MANUFACTURES,  ETC.


251


world,  and  the  Saints  are  the  evidence
of  it,  because  their  minds  have -been
enlightened  by  the  truth  which  they
have  received j  through  the  influence
of  which  they  have  been  gathered  out
from  the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the
earth,  that  they  might  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God,  a  kingdom  of  right-
eousness where  they  are  not  in  danger
of  being  overwhelmed  with  the  dark-
ness and  corruptions  of  the  world
from  whence  they  came.  We  have
come  out  from  Babylon  into  these
mountain  valleys  for  this  purpose.
We  have  been  brought  together  by
the  favour  of  the  Almighty,  that  we
might  form  a  nucleus  of  strength  and
power  on  the  earth  to  aid  and  assist
one  another,  to  strengthen  the  cause
and  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  to
establish  righteousness  so  that  this
kingdom  cannot  be  swallowed  up  by
the  wicked  and  ungodly.  Here,  also,
we  can  have  a  clearer  vision  and  view,
more  light  and  understanding  than
we  could  in  the  countries  that  we
came  from.  The  vision  is  less  obscured
by  surrounding  objects.

While  brother  Woolley  was  praying
that  we  might  have  light,  I  felt  to
add  one  sentence,  which  was.
that  we,  the  Latter-day  Saints,  might
do  as  well  as  we  know  how,  that  we
might  be  able  to  accomplish  the
work  assigned  us.  A  person  may
have  it  in  his  heart  to  do  so,  but  he
may  not  have  it  in  his  ability  to  do
as  well  as  he  knows  because  of  the  con-
trol ing  circumstances  which  surround
him  at  the  time*  This  doubtless,  is
frequently  owing  to  the  ignorance  of
those  associated  with  him,  and  if  the
people  cannot  do  as  well  as  they
would  at  first,  let  them  not  be  dis-
couraged, but  try  again,  and  continue
their  efforts,  perhaps  they  may  bring
greater  influences  to  bear  and  combine
more  power  as  they  proceed,  until,
finally  they  will  be  successful.  When
th  prayer  was  being  offered,  I  felt  to
say,  "  0  Lord,  enable  thy  people  to


do  as  well  as  they  know  how,"  and  I
doubt  not  but  this  is  the  feeling
in  'the  hearts  of  all  the  sincere  and
faithful.  And  they  ask,  what  can  I
do  ?  How  can  I  best  serve  my
Master's  cause  ?  With  the  large
majority  of  those  that  profess  to  bo
Saints,  to  know  how  to  be  the  most
useful  in  the  midst  of  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High  God  is  the  ever-
prevailing  desire;  it  is  a  constant
thought.  We  have  instructions  from
time  to  time,  line  upon  line,  precept
upon  precept  given  to  us  by  our
President,  informing  us  how  to  eradi-
cate evil  from  our  bosoms,  to  form  a
union  of  effort,  of  strength,  of  power,
of  faith  to  combine  the  elements
together  for  the  advancement  of  the
kingdom  and  cause  we  have  espoused,

©  /li  t

and  those  instructions  of  late  have
been,  in  a  measure,  upon  points  of  a
temporal  character  for  the  temporal
salvation  of  the  people.  We  should
depend  upon  ourselves  and  upon  our
own  resources  and  exertions  for  the
things  that  are  necessary  for  our
temporal  sustenance.

If  we  wish  to  do  anything  that
will  be  a  credit  to  ourselves,  let  us
now  in  the  days  of  peace  and  pros-
perity, show  our  faith  by  our  works,
and  labour  to  bring  about  for  our-
selves and  the  kingdom,  those  things
that  are  necessary  for  our  own  support
and  existence,  to  manufacture  our
own  clothing,  to  begin  to  lay  aside
those  things  that  are  unnecessary
while  they  are  within  our  reach,
provided  that  we  do  itcf  our  own
voluntary  act  for  the  sake  of  holy
and  righteous  principles,  for  the  sake
of  doing  right,  then  we  may  be
entitled  to  a  small  mead  of  praise ;
but  that  individual  who  only  reforms
when  he  is  obliged,  is  not  entitled  to
praise.  When  there  is  an  abundance
of  luxuries  here,  and  wre  show  that
we  can  abstain  from  them  and  lay
them  aside  to  depend  upon  our  own
exertions,  we  thus  gain  strength  and


252


JOURYAL  OF  DISCOURSES


power,  instead  of  waiting  till  the
tilings  are  entirely  shut  out  from  us.

We  desire  to  prove  our  integrity  to
ourselves  and  to  our  God.  This
perhaps  is  in  the  bosoms  of  all  the
Saints  ;  they  would  like  to  show  that
they  are  willing  to  abide  the  teachings
that  come  from  the  President  to
them,  and  to  lay  the  foundation  for
bringing  those  things  from  the  ele-
ments which  they  require.  Let  us
endeavour  to  make  a  little  calculation,
exercise  our  intellects,  be  active  and
energetic,  and  combine  together  the
ability  which  we  find  in  our  midst;
let  us  also  combine  our  efforts
and  means  as  well  as  our  faith.  We
are  frequently  in  difficulty  to  establish
some  mechanical  branch  of  business.
We  have  thus  far  been  frustrated  in
our  attempts  to  manufacture  iron,  not
so  much  for  want  of  the  mechanical
skill,  as  in  consequence  of  a  certain
n  h  t • ! g!  1 1 1  ko n s  am  bi  t  ion  which  some  have
had  to  be  the  first  to  bring  out  good
iron.  v  J

The  Adversary  is  opposed  to  our
progress,  and  he  will  strive  to  subvert
every  enterprize,  but  how  does  it
become  the  Saints  to  let  the  evil  influ-
ence and  the  power  of  the  Adversary
control  them  to  that  extent  that  if
one  brother  cannot  accomplish  what
is  wanted,  he  feels  in  his  heart  that
no  one  else  shall  ?  How  does  it  look
when  a  man  cannot  produce  iron,  for
him  to  feel  in  his  heart  to  operate  ior  \
the  purpose  of  thwarting  every  other
man,  and  for  this  purpose  get  up  a
division  and  a  contention  among  the
brethren  ?  This  is  the  spirit  that  has
been  in  Iron  County ;  it  is  a  kind  of
rivalry  that  is  engendered  in  helb
To  let  the  power  of  the  Devil  enter
in  and  produce  such  feelings  among
Saints  that  ought  to  know  better,  and
fiat  ought  to  do  better,  is  a  disgrace
t  )  a  people  calling  themselves  the
people  of  God.  '  '

I  speak  of  iron  to  illustrate  this
subject,  because it  is  a  case  with


which,  you  are  all  familiar,  and  because
it  is  an  article  of  which  we  stand  so
much  in  need.  There  are  other
things,  though  perhaps  of  less  moment,
in  which  this  kind  of  strife  does
exist.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a
commendable  rivalry,  a  desire  to  excel,
and  which  tends  to  build  up,  but  this
of  which  I  speak  is  a  design  to  tluvnrt
the  operations  and  to  keep  in  men's
own  bosoms  the  knowledge  which
would  do  others  good ;  yet  they
appear  to  delight  in  keeping  locked
up  in  their  own  bosoms  that  know-
ledge which  would  be  of  service  to
the  community.  Such  persons  fall
far  short  of  doing  as  well  as  they
know  how,  or  of  doing  all  they  can
for  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God ;  all  such  will  most  likely
become  darkened  in  their  counsel  and
lose  the  knowledge  which  they  pos-
sess, for  the  Lord  has  not  bestowed
that  light  and  intelligence  for  such  a
purpose.  If  I  understand  the  subject,
we  are  here  to  use  our  best  ability  to
aid  with  our  might  and  power  to
bring  about  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty  in  the  last  days.  Hence,
when  we  see  men  continue  to  be
actuated  by  such  unworthy  influences
which  we  find  to  be  both  disagreeable
and  disgraceful,  we  should  strive  to
help  them  in  overcoming  them.  Per-
haps we  do  not  all  think  of  it  in  this
light.  If  we  do  not,  let  us  search  out
and  see  where  we  do  give  the  Evil
One  power  over  us,  and  how  he  takes
the  advantage  and  causes  us  to  do
tilings  which  hedge  up  not  only  our
own  way,  but  the  way  of  others.  I
do  not  suppose  there  is  any  person,
even  the  most  feeble,  but  could  do
some  things  for  the  advancement  and
benefit  of  this  people,  if  they  could
and  would  do  as  well  as  they  know
how.  With  all  the  intelligence  which
the  President  possesses,  I  have  no
doubt  but  he  could  at  many  times  do
a  great  deal  better  for  the  benefit  of
Israel  if  the  people  around  him  pos-


scssed  more  of  the  disposition  to
exercise  and  bring  into  use  the  know-
k  ge  and  power  to  do  good  with  which
the  Almighty  lias  endowed  the  in  T  but
owing  to  their  lack  of  dilligencc,  and
command  over  themselves  they  let
the  Adversary  get  power  over  them,
aval  that  thwarts  him  in  his  purposes
which  he  would  otherwise  accomplish.
The  Lord  himself  cannot  accomplish
as  much  with  a  people  who  are  slow
to  comprehend,  who  do  not  resist  the
powers  of  darkness  and  who  do  not
overcome  the  power  of  the  Evil  One,
but  permit  Satan  to  i  ule  predominent
in  their  bosoms  and  throw  obstacles
in  their  way,  as  he  could  and  would
with  a  people  who  not  only  being
willing  and  obedient  !mt  who  exhibit
a  disposition  to  govern  and  control
their  evil  propensities,  subdue  and
eradicate  them  from  their  bosoms,
and  give  free  scope  and  power  to  the
intelligence,  light,  and  knowledge  1
with  which  they  are  so  graciously
endowed.

Well,  then,  we  see  that  here  is  a
labour  that  we  can  perform  ourselves,
if  we  will  be  careful  and  look  into  our
own  bosoms  and  eradicate  therefrom
the  evil  influences  which  we  permit  to
come  in  there  and  darken  our  own
counsel  and  minds,  and  be  a  clog  in
the  way  of  the  kingdom  in^Und  of
helping  it  along.

In  aU  measures  which  need  our
help,  we  should  strive  to  see  the
utility  of  them,  if  possible  as  soon  as
those  that  have  set  about  to  do  the  -
work,  and  1,  t  our  faith  be  to  go  about
the  labour  required  of  us ;  let  us  go
about  it  unitedly,  with  one  heart
and  one  voice. Then,  cannot  we  ac-


complish things  as  the  Lord  wants?
Yes,  we  can,  and  then  we  shall  soon
see  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  tremble
and  fall  to  pieces.  There  are  some
portions  of  this  com  muni  ty ,  I  am  aware,
that  feel  right  about  the  temporal
progress  of  this  kingdom.

1  am  speaking  of  these  mat  1 1  is  that
you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  may
lend  a  helping  hand  and  let  the  king-
dom increase,  that  we  may  all  see  the
work  ofour  God  roll  forth  and  increase
with  greater  power  and  magnitude.
Our  President  desires  it,  and  so  does
the  Almiuhtw  and  he  will  bestow  his
blessings  upon  his  people  and  cause
them  to  prosper  exceedingly.

I  presume  there  is  no  person  livihg,
who,  if  it  had  been  possible  twelve
years  ago  to  have  looked  forward  to
this  time,  and  seen  the  vast  increase
of  this  mighty  work  and  its  magni-
tude, but  would  have  considered  it
I  the  most  glorious  scenery  that  could
be  exhibited  to  their  view.  No
person  could  have  imagined  it,  unless
the  Lord  had  shown  it  to  him  by
opening  the  vision  of  his  mind  to
see  it.

,  We  have  truly  attained  to  great
blessings,  still  greater  are  before  us,
and  we  can  rejoice  more  abundantly
in  the  faith  as  we  witness  the  develop-
ment and  progress  of  the  great  work
in  which  we  are  engaged.  We  see
great  and  important  events  before  us,
and  duties  to  perform  that  aie  of
great  importance.  Let  us  take  hold
^vith  a  will  and  with  our  whole
heart,  that  we  may  progress  more
abundantly  than  we  have  hitherto
done,  which  is  my  ptaycr  and  exhorta-
tion in  the  nrirne  of  Jeans.  Amcm


251


JOURNAL  OF  DIsroUDSKS.


POWKR  GIVEN  TO  MAN  TO  CREATE


Remarks  made by  President  Brio  ham Young,  Tabernacle,  Great  SaU

Lake  C<itijy  March  1<$,  18(52.


BEPORTKD  BY O. J>.  WATT,


It  is  often  remarked  that  we  do  not
understand  tilings  alike,  but  I  am  of
the  opinion  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  understand  m  the  spirit,  or,  m
other  words,  in  the  intelligent  portion
of  their  organisms,  nearer  alike  than
they  have  power  to  communicate.

We  believe  we  are  entitled  to  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  extent
according  to  the  discretion  and  wisdom
of  God  and  our  faithfulness;  which
gift  brings  all  things  to  our  remem-
brance, past,  present,  and  to  come,
that  are  necessary  for  us  to  know,  and
as  far  as  our  minds  are  prepared  to
receive  the  knowledge  of  God  revealed
by  that  all-wi^e  Agent,  The  lb  Iy
Ghost  is  God's  minister,  and  is  dele-
gated to  visit  the  suns  and  daughters  of
men.  All  intelligent  beings  pertain-
ing to  this  earth  are  instructed  from
the  same  source.

In  the  New  Testament  and  Book
of  Mormon,  we  learn  that  when  the
Gospel  is  preached  the  people  are
taught  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  to  repent  of  their  sins,  be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  sin,  and
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying
on  of  hands;  the  Holy  Ghost  is  then
the  special  gift  of  the  Father,  and  is  his
minister.  He  also  gives  intelligence
by  angels,  well  as  by  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by
opening  the  minds  of  the  Saints  to
behold  in  vision  things  as  they  are  in
eternity.  When  true  doctrines  are
advanced,  though  they  may  be  new
to  the  he*arcrs,  yet  the  principles  con-


tained in  them  are  perfectly  natural

and  easy  to  be  understood,  so  much  so
that  the  hearers  often  imagine  that
they  had  always  known  them.  This
arises  from  the  influence  of  the  Spirit
of  Truth  upon  the  spirit  of  intelli-
gence that  is  within  each  person.
The  influence  that  comes  from  heaven
is  all  the  time  teaching  the  children
of  men-  M  There  is  a  spirit  in  man,
and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
giveth  them  undi  t  standing."  Again,
"  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of
the  Lord,  searching  all  the  inward
parte  of  the  belly."  Again,  "How
oft  is  the  candle  of  the  wicked  put
out"  We  have  nothing  independent
of  the  Almighty.  We  preach,  we
hear,  and  we  aie  instructed.  We  try
to  so  live  as  to  gain  more  information,
more  light,  more  command  over  our-
selves, and  more  influence  and  power
to  increase  the  good  and  discourage
the  evil,  until  we  can  comprehend  the
great  principles  of  existence  and
eternal  progression.

We  should  be  more  happy,  if  we
could  more  successfully  carry  into
effect  the  knowledge  we  now  have.
The  Lord  said,  "  let  there  be  light,
and  there  was  light."  The  Council
in  heaven  said  let  there  be  an  earth,
and  let  there  he  a  firmament  above
and  beneath  it,  and  it  was  so.  They
said  let  there  be  heat  and  cold,  and  it
I  was  so.  They  said  let  there  be
spring  and  summer,  autumn  and
winter,  and  it  was  so.  We  can  say
let  the  people  be  clothed,  and  they


POWER OIVRN  TO

are  clotbed ;  let  them  be  warmed,  and
they  are  warmed ;  let  them  l>e  boused,
and  they  are  housed.  If  we  put  forth
the  ability  God  has  given  us,  we  can
bring  forth  the  very  things  we  say
shall  come.  If  we  say  let  there  be
wool,  or  let  there  be  flax,  they  will
come;  if  we  say  let  there  be  iron,
steel,  brass,  or  any  other  metal  we
need,  it  will  come.  It'  we  say  let
there  be  cotton  and  woollen  yarn  and
let  them  be  made  into  cloth,  it  will
be  done.  The  Lord  said  let  there  be
an  earth,  let  there  be  light  to  light  it,
let  there  be  seas  and  dry  lan^,  air,  ;
rocks,  trees,  fruits,  and  shrubs  of  All
kinds,  grasses  and  flowers,  and  vines
that  yield  fruit  above  the  ground
and  in  the  ground,  for  the  use  of  man
ami  beasf,  and  it  was  so  ;  but  all  these
productions  come  according  to  natural
principles.  Man  is  surrounded  by
those  productive  principles,  and  is
endowed  with  power  to  act  upon
t  hem  ;  and  aceordixg  to  the  amount
of  intelligence  he  possesses*  and  the
labour  he  expends  are  the  productive
results,  »

This  people  are  increasing  in  the
wisdom  which  cometh  from  God,  and
their  power  to  organize  the  crude
ehat'ents  around  them  into  the  neces-
saries of  life  is  in  ratio  to  their  in-
crease of  intelligence  and  application
of  labour.  In  this  way  we  ought  to
understand  these  great  principles.
We  need  not  seek  for  a  revelation  tu
know  how*  to  make  cloth,  when  the
mode  is  plainly  marked  before  our
eyes.  Sheep  produce  a  textile  ma-
terial, and  how  to  make  it  into  cloth
has  been  known  time  out  of  mind ;
we  can  raise  sheep  in  abundance.  1
do  not  look  for  power  from  the  heavens
that  wjll  produce  for  us  wool,  cloth,
iron,  food,  or  anything  we  need,
without  being  made  with  hands.  We
should  understand  what  is  required  of

to  sustain  ourselves.

It  was  observed  this  morning,  that
the  teachings  the  people  are  con-


'  MAX  TO  CREATE,  255

I  stantly  receiving  are  of  a  temporal
character,  and  I  should  think  that,  if
such  teachings  were  carried  into
practice  by  them,  spiritual  blessings
would  be  attained  through  temporal
means.  It  is  all  of  God.  "  The  earth
is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof;
the  world  and  they  that  dwell
therein."  u  Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the
foundation  of  the  earih;  and  the
heavens  are  the  work  of  thy  hands."
The  mountains,  valleys,  and  plains,
all  the  wealth  of  precious  metals  hid
in  their  bosoms,  all  the  teeming  ful-
ness of  vegetable  productions,  and  all
animal  existences  in  their  endless
variety  are  the  Lord's,  All  that  can
be  produced  from  the  soil  by  the
ingenuity  and  industry  of  man  is
the  Lord's.  The  Lord  has  given
the  earth  to  the  children  of  men,
that  by  the  union  of  mind  and
matter,  inspired  and  directed  by  the
power  of  the  eternal  Priesthood,  all
may  be  made  subject  to  the  Great
Supreme  of  the  universe.  It  is  our
duty  individually  as  well  as  our  privi-
lege, to  learn  how  to  dispose  of  the
earthly  wealth  we  may  possess,  to  the
glory  of  him  who  has  permitted  us  to
hold  it,  for  iu  temporal  blessings
honestly  obtained  and  wisely  placed
to  their  legitimate  use  are  concealed
mines  of  spiritual  and  eternal  wealth.
If  we  magnify  and  make  honourable
t  his  temporal  existence,  by  t  he  practice
of  every  good  and  righteous  principle
that  comes  within  our  knowledge,  we
honour  and  magnify  that  spiritual
existence,  and  that  heavenly  intelli-
gence, which  the  Father  of  all  has
placed  within  us.  This  is  the  way  to
increase  in  temporal  and  spiritual
wealth.  If  we  pursue  dilligently  this
path,  there  is  not  the  least  danger  of
any  persons  being  lost,  but  they  will
be  prepared  to  inherit  after  death  a
more  glorious  and  heavenly  sphere
than  they  now  dwell  in.

I  know  that  the  great  majority  of
mankind,  who  are  created  for  a  noble


and  glorious  purpose,  are  ignorant  of
these  heavenly  principles;  and  they
cleave  to  their  ignorance,  and  love  dark-
ness rather  than  light.  They  will  not
be  taught  by  an  authorised  minister  of
heaven,  but  they  hire  men  who  are
as  blind  and  as  ignorant  as  themselves
to  guide  them  in  the  wily  they  choose
to  walk  in.  From  the  days  of  the
creation  until  now,  I  do  not  think
there  is  one  man  out  of  a  million  who
has  made  so  much  as  a  scratch  upon
the  world's  history,  to  show  that  he
was  entirely  devoted  to  God  and  truth  j
but  the  generations  of  mankind  hsive
sprung  up  and  decayed  like  the  grass
of  the  field.

When  the  Spirit  of  revelation  from
God  inspires  a  man,  his  mind  is  opened
to  behold  the  beauty,  order,  and  glory
of  the  creation  of  this  earth  and  its  in-
habitants, the  object  of  its  creation,
and  the  purpose  of  its  creator  in
peopling  it  with  his  children.  He
can  then  clearly  understand  that  our
existence  here  is  for  the  sola  purpose
of  exaltation  and  restoration  to  the
presence  of  our  Father  and  God,  where
we  may  progress  endlessly  in  the
power  of  godliness.  After  the  mind
has  thus  been  illuminated,  the  i*mor-
ancc  and  blindness  of  the  great  mass
of  mankind  are  more  apparent.  Yet
there  is  no  son  or  d:  lighter  of  Adam
and  Eve  but  what  h:»s  incorporated
in  their  organization  the  priceless
gem  of  endless  life,  for  the  endless
duration  and  endless  lives  which  they
are  approaching.

Are  the  people  glorifying  their
Father  who  is  in  heaven  t  Do  they
take  every  step  possible  to  do  the
will  of  God  on  earth,  and  magnify
their  calling  :  fs  every  net  of  their
lives  made  to  increase  their  intelli-
gence, to  add  to  their  faith,  virtue,
and  to  virtue,  knowledge,  and  to
knowledge,  temperance,  and  to  tem-
perance, patience,  and  to  patience,
godliness,  and  to  godliness,  brother
kindness,  and  to  brotherly-kindness,


charity,  and  to  improve  upon  every
gift  and  grace  which  God  has  bestowed
on  them  through  the  Gospel  ?  I  fear
not,  There  is  yet  to  be  seen  a  wilful
and  covetous  disposition  in  some  few
of  our  brethren  and  sisters.  "  I  want
a  ribbon/'  says  a  sister,  "and  I  will
have  it  whatever  the  consequence  may
be."  "  And/'  says  a  brother,  "  I
wai  t  a  horse,  and  I  will  have  it,  if  I
steal  it,  and  run  the  risk  of  being
damned  for  it.M  I  am  sorry  to  say
that  sfftne  few  of  the  Elders  of  Israel
have  such  feelings  and  desires.  One
of  Ihe  brethren  tins  morning  was
complaining  of  sins  rising  in  the
heart,  and  of  the  sell-will  of  fallen
man,  and  the  evil  which  the  Devil
had  power  to  engender  in  the  hearts
of  our  parents,  who  have  entailed  it
on  their  children.  How  shall  we
overcome  this  inclination  to  evil  ?  Let
the  will  of  God  predominate  over  the
will  of  the  creature.  Let  the  husband
and  father  learn  to  bend  his  will  to
the  will  of  his  God,  and  then  instruct
his  wives  and  children  in  this  lesson
of  self-government  by  his  example  as
well  as  by  precept,  and  his  neigh-
bours also,  showing  them  how  to  be
bravo  and  steadfast,  in  subduing  this
rebellious  and  sinful  disposition.  Such
a  course  as  this  will  eventually  subdue
thatunhallowedinfluenee  which  works
upon  the  human  heart*

We  are  all  endowed  with  the  reso-
lution, more  or  less,  to  deal  with
ourselves  as  we  would  deal  with  a
child  or  with  a  neighbour.  In  case  a
child  will  not  be  controlled  by  his
pa: cuts,  but  is  disobedient  and  re-
fractory to  a  hopeless  degree,  what
would  his  parents  be  apt  to  do?  I
can  answer  for  myself :  I  presume  I
should  say  to  such  a  child — leave  me.
But  I  have  no  such  children ;  and  it
is  hard  to  say  what  I  might  do,  were
I  tried*  If  a  child  of  mine,  who  has
come  to  years  of  discretion,  should
say  to  me,  UI  will  do  this,  and  I  will
not  do  what  you  ie  ]uiie  of  me/*  I


POWER  GIVEN  TO  KAN  TO  CREATE.


257


should  use  the  rod  of  correction  suffi-
ciently to  teach  that  child  better,]
Why  not  in  the  same  way,  institute  a
proper  and  salutary  correction  over
the  rebellious  spirit  that  at  times
arises  in  the  human  breast  ?  Why
not  govern  and  control  the  appetite,
that  it  may  be  subject  to  the  law  of
Christ?  But  how  is  it?  Why,  " I
must  have  some  tobacco,  if  I  am
damred  for  it."  Or,  "I  must  have  a
cup  of  tea,  if  I  am  damned  for  it"  Or,
**  I  must  have  this  or  that,  if  I  should
have  to  go  to  hell  for  it"  It  is  like
saying  to  our  Heavenly  Father,  "I  will
not  mind  you,  I  will  not  obey  your
commandments,  but  I  will  have  my
own  way  and  follow  the  bent  of  my
own  inclinations  j  my  appetite  shall  be
nursed  and  pampered,  though  it  be  at
the  expense  of  your  displeasure/'
Instead  of  pursuing  this  course,  listen
to  that  Spirit  God  has  given  to  all,
which  teaches  the  right  and  how  to
avoid  the  wrong,  and  say  to  appetite,
to  disposition,  to  temper,  to  the  whole
man,  you  must  do  as  I  command
you ;  I  am  an  officer,  a  general  in  the
army  of  Christ  and  I  will  be  obeyed.

Every  man  and  woman  is  called  to
the  same  office ;  let  us  magnify  it,  and
exert  a  mighty  influence  over  this
organization,  and  rise  up  in  the
strength  of  the  great  I  Am,  and  by
the  power  of  his  eternal  Priesthood,
command  every  power,  every  pulse  of
our  natures  to  be  subject  to  the  law
of  God  and  truth,  and  not  suffer  this
low,  sinful,  groveling,  dark,  benighted,
cursed  spirit  we  have  received  from
the  fall  to  bear  rule  in  us.  All  pei*sons
who  suffer  themselves  thus  to  be  ruled,
disgrace  themselves  and  do  not  honour
the  being  God  has  given  them*  If
men  are  ruled  by  the  power,  principles
and  righteousness  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood, they  will  find  themselves  in  pos-
session of  all  the  wisdom  they  need  to
meet  every  emergency  of  this  changing
existence,  and  all  they  require  to  con-
quer the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  Devil.

No.  17.


How  very  far  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  live  short  of  their  privileges !
How  far  they  live  beneath  the
blessings  the  Lord  has  in  store  for
them !  Is  it  not  more  or  less  so  with
us  as  individuals  and  as  a  community,
who  profess  to  be  the  friends  of  God  ?
We  live  far  short  of  the  blessings  the
Lord  has  in  store  for  us.  When  the
visions  of  our  minds  are  opened,  we
can  then  more  fully  realize  this  truth.
And  again,  when  the  vision  is  closed
up  we  are  found,  as  a  general  thing,
doing  the  best  we  know  how,  and  we
may  be  considered  pretty  good  men  and
women.  This  is  true,  yet  there  is  an
eternitj  of  knowledge  before  us  to  learn.

It  is  as  much  as  I  can  do  with  all
the  power  I  have  with  the  heavens
and  with  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  say,
let  there  be  a  carding  machine  in  this
Territory,  and  it  is  done ;  to  say,  let
there  be  a  nail  factory  in  this  Terri-
tory, and  it  is  here.  Again,  all  that
has  been  said,  and  all  the  praying
that  has  been  done,  and  all  the  faith
that  has  been  exercised,  and  all  the
combination  and  union  of  effort  among
the  Saints  have  not  brought  to  pass
one  say  of  the  President's  in  regard
to  iron ;  he  said,  let  there  be  iron,
but  there  is  no  iron  yet.  Brother
Wells  has  told  you  the  reason,  this
morning.  A  man  says,  "  I  am  going
to  make  iron,  and  I  will  have  the
credit  of  making  the  first  iron  in  the
Territory.  I  will  have  the  credit  of
knowing  how  to  flux  the  ore  that  is
found  in  these  regions,  and  bringing
out  the  metal  in  abundance,  or  no
other  man  shall."  Now,  the  beauty
and  glory  of  this  kind  of  proceeding
is  the  blackest  of  darkness,  and  its
comeliness  as  deformity.

We  have  said,  let  there  be  a  carding
machine,  and  it  is  here*  Let  there
be  sheep,  and  there  are  sheep ;  wool,
and  it  is  here ;  and  now  who  will  say
let  there  be  flax  and  then  produce  it  ?
Let  there  be  linen  cloth,  and  then  pro-
duce it  by  means  of  the  power  and

Vol.  IX.  A


ability  we  possess  ?  We  know  how
to  perform  this  labour,  and  how  to
produce  this  material.  There  are
brethren  before  me  who  know  how  to
make  as  good  linen  cloth  as  was  ever
manufactured  in  any  country.  It  is
bo  with  other  things,  By-and-bye,
somebody  will  say,  let  there  be  silk,
and  silk  will  be  produced  here.  All
we  have  to  do  is  to  grow  the  mul-
berry tree,  import  the  eggs  of  the
silkworm,  and  apply  the  skill  that  is
already  in  our  possession,  and  we  can
produce  an  abundance  of  sewing  silk,
eilk  dress  patterns,  silk  vesting,  and
anything  we  need  in  the  shape  of
silk  drapery.  Silk  is  in  the  elements
around  us,  and  not  only  silk,  but  all
things  which  pertain  to  the  earth  ;  and
again,  jill  things  which  pertain  to  the
heavens ;  all  things  which  pertain  to
time,  and  all  things  which  pertain  to
eternity,  which  is  the  same  w ith  God
to-day,  yesterday,  and  for  ever.  I
am  extremely  anxious  that  this  people
should  understand  the  value  of  their
existence  here,  and  the  great  worth
of  that  immortal  spirit  which  is
clothed  upon  with  an  earthly  house,
preparatory  to  an  eternal  exaltation
and  eternal  lives.  Honour  this  earthly
house,  for  in  it  are  concealed  the  rudi-
ments of  all  knowledge,  the  root  and
foundation  of  sciencethat  we  have  any
knowledge  of.  Mankind  are  capable
of  collecting  and  retaining  an  im-
mense amount  of  knowledge,  if  they
will  dilligently  apply  the  ability  God
has  given  them ;  in  fact,  they  are
made  to  travel  on  through  an  endless
progression  of  improvement.  I  have
only  time  to  give  a  few  hints  on  this
subject,  though  it  might  prove  very  in-
teresting to  you,  were  I  to  classify  these
great  truths  and  dwell  upon  them,  item
by  item,  through  a  course  of  lectures.

Do  you  know,  mother,  the  worth
of  that  child  in  your  lap?  There  is
not  a  mother  here,  I  presume,  that
knows  the  real  value  of  her  offspring.
We  say,  "  the  Lord  giveth  and  the


Lord  taketh  away/*  Ac,,  when  our
children  die.  The  truth  is,  the  Lord
has  given  and  we  do  not  know  the
value  of  the  gift  we  have  received,
and  it  is  taken  from  us ;  not  because
the  Lord  wants  the  child,  for  there
are  myriads  of  spirits  in  heaven,
and  more  coming  all  the  the  time.
They  do  not  want  the  spirit  back
again — they  do  not  need  it  in  the
spirit  world.  It  should  remain  here,
and  we  should  know  the  worth  of  it
sufficiently  to  take  care  of  it  and  pre-
serve it  on  earth,  until  it  has  fulfilled
the  measure  of  its  creation — brought
forth  all  the  fruits  of  its  existence,
and  become  ripe  to  go  home  to  a
higher  state  of  glory  to  rest  for  a
season,  until  it  is  time  again  to  unite
the  body  with  the  spirit

A  thousand  glorious  principles  open
up  to  my  mind,  that  I  cannot  now
dwell  upon  ;  but  there  is  one  subject
pertaining  to  our  temporal  existence
that  I  wish  to  present ;  the  news  we
receive  from  the  east  and  from  the
west  is  of  wars  and  floods,  trouble
and  sorrow.  Our  southern  settlements
have  suffered  by  floods ;  they  have
lost  their  farms,  gardens,  and  orchards*
The  water  has  risen  twenty-five  feet
higher  than  it  lias  ever  been  known
to  rise  before  in  8  an  Barnard ino  and
other  parts  of  California.  I  wish  to
warn  this  people,  that  they  be  not
caught  unprepared  when  spring  opens.
Make  the  best  provisions  in  your
power  to  ward  ofi  destruction  by  high
water  into  City  Creek  and  other
mountain  streams  running  through
our  settlements.  Particularly,  let  the
brethren  who  are  living  on  the  Cotton-
wood bottoms,  take  care,  or  we  may
hear  of  their  passing  down  Jordan ,
The  earth  is  now  saturated  with  rain
and  melted  snow,  and  if  the  snow  in
City  Creek  goes  away  with  a  warm
spring  rain,  the  first  we  know,  some
of  the  people  may  be  washed  down
into  the  river.

May  the  Lord  bless  us.  Amen.


AGENCY  OF  MAN  TO  PRACTICE  GOOD  OR  EVIL  PRINCIPLES.  259


AGENCY  OF  MAN  TO  PRACTICE  GOOD  OR  "EVIL

PRINCIPLES.

Remarks  by  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  March  6,  1862.

REPORTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG,


I  feel  thankful  to  be  with  you  to-
day, to  sit  and  listen  to  the  teachings
we  have  heard,  to  be  associated  with
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,  Like
our  brother  who  has  just  spoken,  I  do
feel  thankful  that  I  am  here  and  have
a  part  and  lot  in  this  great  work  in
which  we  are  all  engaged;  it  is  a
work  capable  of  filling  the  utmost
desire  and  capability  of  the  human
mind,  or  wish  or  thought  of  that  indi-
vidual whose  mind  has  been  ripened
into  an  understanding  of  the  princi-
ples which  lead  to  eternal  life  and
exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
Man,  in  this  kingdom,  is  placed  upon
a  basis,  upon  a  foundation  by  which
he  can  cultivate  himself  with  the
graces  and  the  attributes  of  a  God,
It  is  a  work  of  progression.  We  are
caught  in  the  world  by  the  Gospel
net  in  the  condition  in  which  people
of  all  other  communities  are  found.

We  are  found  in  the  world  in  sin,
ignorance,  and  degeneracy,  surrounded
by  all  the  influences  of  evil,  having
our  traditions  in  common  with  the
rest  of  mankind,  and  from  all  this  the
Gospel  is  capable  of  redeeming  us;
from  all  that  is  hateful,  such  as  strife,
discord,  dissension,  and  every  species
of  sin  and  iniquity:  our  religion  is
calculated  and  designed  to  save  and
redeem  us,  if  we  will  let  it,  by  availing
ourselves  of  its  power.

This  is  the  work  which  lies  before
each  and  every  one  of  us  as  Saints  of
the  Most  High  God.  We  have  this
privilege  within  ourselves  if  we  choose
to  cultivate  it.


It  has  been  said  by  some,  and  I
suppose  it  to  be  true  doctrine,  that
God  is  truth f  but  that  does  not  prove
that  truth  is  God  ;  for  truth  like  love,
wisdom,  and  goodness,  is  an  attribute
and  not  a  person.  All  these  attri-
butes of  Deity  lie  in  our  pathway,  and
they  are  strewn  around  us  to  be  laid
hold  of,  and  are  calculated  in  their
tendency  to  improve  and  exalt  us  as
well  as  the  Gods,  and  we  have  the
privilege  of  assuming  a  position  in
which  we  can  clothe  ourselves  with
the  blessings  which  lead  to  life  ever-
lasting, or  we  can  disgrace  ourselves
with  the  excesses  and  deformities  of
the  wicked,  and  all  those  things  that
lead  to  destruction,  and  which  do  not
continue.  The  principles  of  eternal
life  are  laid  before  us,  both  good  and
evil  are  present  with  us ;  we  have  the
power  of  rejecting  those  good  and
wholesome  principles,  or,  on  the  other
hand,  we  have  the  privilege  and  the
power  of  controlling  our  volition  and
directing  it  in  that  channel  which
will  clothe  the  mind  with  the  graces
and  beauties  of  the  Gospel,  which  are
calculated  to  bring  us  up  into  that?
position  where  we  shall  have  a  right
to  those  blessings  which  emanate
from  heaven,  and  which  will  make
the  society  where  we  dwell  beautiful
and  glorious,  and  ultimately  lead  on
to  exaltation  in  the  eternities  to  come.
Eternal  life  is  here  my  friends,  my
brethren  and  sisters ;  we  are  in
a  part  of  that  existence  which
is  eternal.  True,  we  are  passing
through  that  portion  which  Is  called


2<50  JOtTONAL  OF

time,  but  is  not  this  a  part  of
eternity  ?

We  have  nothing  in  our  possession
but  what  is  lent  or  given  to  us  to
iin  prove  upon  for  eternity,  no,  not
even  our  present  lives.  We  do  not
pay  sufficient  attention  to  the  life  that
we  at  present  enjoy,  or  we  should
understand  that  it  is  as  much  eternal
life  as  any  that  we  shall  ever  attain  to,
for  surely  at  tlie  present  time  we  have
no  existence  in  all  of  the  eternities
but  in  this.  We  may  not  have  to
pass  through  changes  in  the  life  which
is  to  come  as  we  do  here,  but  it  is  for
us,  while  here,  to  comprehend  and
appreciate  the  beauty  and  glory  which
lie  in  our  pathway.  We  may  have  to
labour  and  dig  anu  delve  in  the  earth,
but,  if  so,  we  should  remember  that
there  is  a  dignity  in  labour  when  that
is  directed  by  the  intellectual  power,
with  which,  in  all  the  creation  of  God,
only  man  is  endowed,  for  the  develop-
ment and  combination  of  the  elements
with  which  he  is  surrounded  for  the
use  and  the  benefit  of  the  world  in
w  hich  he  lives.

It  is  true  that  evil  is  strewn  in  our
pathway,  but  we  should  labour  to  got
all  evil  thoughts  from  our  minds,  and
strive  to  cultivate  those  graces  which
come  through  faith,  and  which  are
calculated  to  eradicate  from  our  being
those  things  which  lead  downward,
instead  of  leading  us  in  the  path
which  is  unto  eternal  lives  and  eternal
progression  while  here  as  well  as  in
the  world  to  come.

To  live  here  and  perform  the  duties
of  to-day  is  the  present  business  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  to  lay  a  founda-
tion that  will  carry  us  safely  through
this  and  prepare  us  for  that  life  which
is  to  come,  and  it  is  also  our  duty  to
obey  those  principles  which  are  re-
vealed through  obedience  to  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  If  we
will  continue  to  be  faithful  and  seek
after  those  principles  that  will  tend
to  exalt  *  us  here,  then  we  will  be


DISCOUBSES.

exalted  hereafter ;  but  it  is  of  no  use
thinking  of  being  exalted  in  the
eternal  worlds  unless  we  apply  those
principles  in  our  conduct  here.

If  we  suppose  that  we  can  go
through  this  life  straight  into  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  attain  to  exulta-
tion by  being  clothed  with  hypocrisy
and  falsehood,  we  are  simply  mis-
taken ;  such  a  course  of  life  is  not
calculated  to  lead  to  that  end.  If  we
are  exalted,  it  must  be  by  putting  in
practice  those  principles  which  are
exalting  in  their  tendency,  and  which
are  given  us  through  the  inspiration
of  the  Almighty.  Thus  will  be  formed
a  character  in  this  life  that  will  endure
in  that  which  is  to  come.

I  can  endorse  the  sentiment  ex-
pressed by  brother  Bayliss,  who  was
speaking  before  me,  that  it  is  our
duty  to  do  all  we  can  for  the  spread
of  truth,  and  to  ornament  our  minds
with  the  trtiths  of  the  Gospel,  that
we  may  combine  those  principles  to
form  that  character  and  connection
with  the  heavens  which  we  have  the
opportunity  of  doing  more  abundantly
here,  in  these  sequestered  vales  than
iu  the  scattered  condition  of  the
Saints  in  the  midst  oi  the  nations  of
the  earth.

Witness  the  power  that  we  can
wield  in  the  earth,  by  gradually
spreading  abroad  those  principles
which  we  have  received,  until  finally
righteousness  shall  spread  over  and
cover  the  whole  earth,  put  an  end  to
the  power  of  the  wicked,  bind  Satan
and  cast  him  from  the  earth,  as  has
been  spoken  by  the  inspired  winters,
|  I  suppose  it  will  be  accomplished
in  this  way,  by  filling  up  the  measure
of  our  creation  in  union,  truth,  and
oneness,  and  by  officiating  in  those
ordinances  of  the  Priesthood  which
shall  seem  good  unto  the  Almighty.
It  is  for  us  to  prepare  to  walk
in  that  way  which  shall  be  marked
out,  and  to  go  and  perform  every
act  as  we  shall  be  dictated  through


AGENCY  OF  MAN  TO  PRACTICE  GOOD  OB  EVIL  PRINCIPLES.  261


the  intstrumentality  of  the  servants
of  God,  whom  he  has  appointed  to
dictate  and  guide  in  order  that  his
purpose  may  be  accomplished  at  least
in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains,  where
he  has  provided  an  asylum  for  his
people.

This  kingdom  is  established  to  the
extent  of  the  power  that  is  now
wielded,  and  thoge  is  no  other  place
upon  the  face  of  the  earth  to  which
good  men  who  desire  to  promote
virtue  and  establish  justice  can  rally
except  to  this,  and  it  is  accomplished
through  the  instrumentality  of  the
Gospel  we  have  embraced.  Others
have  their  institutions,  some  of  which
are  very  good,  but  there  is  more  than
an  overbalancing  amount  of  corrupt-
ion, from  which  those  who  would  do
good,  have  not  the  power  to  disenthral
themselves.

There  is  such  unlimited  power  to
do  evil,  which  the  wicked  use  for  the
oppression  of  the  feeble,  to  oppress
the  poor,  the  honest  in  heart,  whom
they  rule  by  priestcraft,  kingcraft,  and
every  other  wicked  craft  that  man-
kind in  their  degeneracy  can  devise,
so  that  it  would  seem  almost  impos-
sible even  for  the  Almighty  to
establish  his  kingdom  and  save  his
people,  without  withdrawing  them
from  the  wicked  nations-
People  come  here  and  have  full
liberty  to  do  or  not  to  do ;  to  live
their  holy  religion  or  not  to  live  it ;
to  be  honest,  faithful,  and  true,  or  to
reject  those  principles  and  clothe
themselves  with  that  which  is  evil;
they  have  the  freest  volition  to  exer-
cise their  right  of  will.  We  expect,
however,  that  those  who  come  here
are  those  who  have  elected  and  chosen
for  themselves  to  do  the  will  of  God,
and  to  follow  the  counsel  of  him
whom  he  has  chosen  to  rule  in  his
Church  and  kingdom.  We  have
reason  to  believe  this,  but  then  when
we  reflect  upon  the  past,  we  are  satis-
fied that  others  must  have  come  with


a  diflerent  motive.  Some  of  us  are
apt  to  forget  that  we  should  furnish
and  adorn  our  own  minds,  with
a  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the
Gospel ;  that  we  should  furnish  the
material  rather  than  expect  that  some
greater  and  more  powerful  influence
will  do  it  for  us.  We  sometimes  find
that  people  are  careless  in  regard  to
their  duties  in  this  respect,  and  Satin
is  always  ready  to  step  in  and  take  the
advantage  of  such  an  opportunity.
Now  we  should  not  be  indifierent  and
lay  down  the  armour  of  the  Gospe^
and  say  this  is  no  advantage  to  me*
No,  my  dear  brethren,  it  will  be  an
advantage  and  a  blessing  to  all  of  us^
if  we  honour  the  kingdom  of  God  and
live  its  principles,  and  if  we  do  not,  it
will  still  roll  on,  whether  we  go  with
it  or  not.

We  have  no  right  to  be  indifferent
to  any  principles  revealed  in  this
kingdom,  but  we  should  feel  an
interest  in  everything  that  is  laid
before  us,  that  we  may  be  of  some
use  and  benefit  to  the  Church,  Sll  up
our  days  in  usefulness  in  any  depart-
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  which
we  may  be  called  to  act.  I  pray  God
to  help  ns  to  do  this;  to  help  us  by
giving  us  of  his  Spirit  to  strengthen
our  minds  that  we  may  overcome  the
evil ;  that  we  may  seek  to  do  every-
thing that  is  good  j  that  we  may
secure  that  aid  and  assistance  that  will
enable  us  to  bring  our  spirits  back
pure  and  holy,  into  the  presence  of
him  who  gave  them  unto  us,  that  we
may  not  give  Satan  the  power  over
us,  nor  strengthen  those  chains  which
he  has,  through  the  agency  of  the  fall,
obtained  over  the  human  family,  but
that  we  may  overcome  that  evil  as
far  as  possible,  even  to  the  obtaining
that  knowledge  and  intelligence  which
was  said  to  have  been  obtained  by  the
brother  of  Jared,  whose  faith  was  so
great  that  the  Lord  could  not  prevent
him  from  looking  within  the  vaiL
Why  ? Because  he  had  clothed  him-


262  JOURNAL  OF

self  with  those  principles  which  lead
to  exaltation,  so  that  he  could  see
beyond  the  vision  of  human  ken,  and
the  Lord  could  not  keep  him  from
penetrating  behind  the  vaih

If  we  are  going  to  have  anything
excellent  it  is  for  us  to  look  after  it,
and  not  let  the  Devil  rule  over  us,
but  ornament  our  minds  by  our  own
virtuous  acts  and  our  bodies  with  the
workmanship  of  our  own  hands.  If
we  take  this  course  the  Lord  will
"help  us  by  placing  the  elements  that
are  for  the  welfare  and  comfort  of
jEAjakind  within  our  reach.  During
,$he  travels  of  the  children  of  Israel,
he  showered  down  provisions  upon
them  that  they  might  not  have  to
labour  in  the  wilderness,  and  ordained
that  their  clothing  should  not  wear
out,  but  otherwise  than  that,  and  a
few  other  such  instances,  I  do  not  know


DJSCOUHSES.

that  he  ever  helped  a  human  being
except  by  placing  within  his  reach  the
elements  for  him  to  combine  there-
from for  his  support.  He  has  put
into  our  hands  the  power  to  combine
the  elements  and  to  provide  ourselves
with  those  things  that  we  need,  and
as  I  said  in  the  commencement  of
my  remarks,  there  is  a  dignity  in
labour,  in  drawing  from  those  ele-
ments things  necessary  for  our  own
benefit  and  advancement  as  intelligent
beings.  Let  us  therefore  endeavour
to  improve  the  earth  upon  which  we
live,  and  make  it  pleasant  to  the  sight
of  God  and  man.

May  God  help  us  to  comprehend
and  obtain  those  great  blessings  which
he  has  in  store  for  his  faithful  Saints,
is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


y


CORRUPTION  AMONG  GOVERNMENT  OFFICIALS.

Hem&rks  hy  Elder  Georok  A.  Smith,  made  in  the  Taberriade,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  April  8,  1862,


REPORTED  by  c.  d,  watt.


The  remarks  of  Elder  Orson  Pratt
are  founded  upon  Constitutional  prin-
ciples. I  have  long  been  aware  that
he  was  a  profound  mathematician,  but
I  was  not  aware  that  he  was  so
thoroughly  read  in  Constitutional  law,
as  his  remarks  this  forenoon  so  fully
evidence.

I  went  to  Washington  with  Elder
John  Taylor  in  1856;  we  were  the
bearers  of  the  Constitution  of  Deseret,


adopted  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the
whole  people,  and  a  memorial  to  the
great  men  of  the  nation  for  the
admission  of  Deseret  into  the  union
of  States  upon  an  equal  footing  with
the  original  States.

When  we  arrived  at  the  capitol  we
found  the  gates  closed  against  our
admission  by  the  acts  of  a  national
convention,  pledging  the  great  and
rising  party  of  the  country  united


264  JOUBNAL  OF

bat  in  her  temporal  welfare  she  was
not  equally  prosperous.  She  was
destitute  of  bread  and  had  nothing  to
sustain  life.  The  minister  kindly  told
her  to  exercise  faith  and  she  could
make  stones  into  bread.  She  thanked
him  for  his  timely  advice,  she  had
never  thought  of  that,  and  accord-
ingly went  and  procured  some  stones
of  suitable  size  for  loaves  of  bread,


DISCOURSES.

washed  them,  put  them  in  pans,  heated
her  oven  in  which  she  placed  them,
closed  the  door,  exclaimed  "  I  have  firm
faith,  that  when  these  stones  come  out
of  the  oven  they  will  be  good  bread/*
After  patiently  waiting  the  proper
time,  she  opened  the  oven  door  and  ;
looked  anxiously  in ;  u  there !"  she  de-
clared, they  are  stones  yet,  and  I
knew  they  would  be  all  the  time.


BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE.— NECESSITY  OF  UNION.


Remarks  by  President  Hebek  C,  Kimball,  made  in  the  Bowery ,  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  October  7,  136 1.


BEPOHTED  BY  J*  Y.  LONG.


The  matter  has  been  plainly  presented
before  us  in  regard  to  the  Temple,
and  the  question  for  us  to  consider  is,
*'  Does  this  people,  or  this  Conference
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints,  with  all  its  autho-
rities that  are  present  here  to-day,
want  to  build  the  Temple?  (The
congregation  responded,  14  Yes/?)  Is
it  your  feeling  and  desire  as  a  people
that  we  shall  go  to  work  and  build  a
Temple  ?  (All  the  Conference  with
one  united  voice  responded  in  the
affirmative,)  I  now  want  to  put
another  question,  for  I  do  not  under-
stand or  know  of  anything  that  lives
but  what  has  got  a  spirit  and  a  body,
and  I  know  that  to  separate  them
here  on  the  earth  is  death,  so  it  is
with  us  without  our  works,  our  faith
is  dead,  Now,  then,  I  am  coming  to
the  point ;  will  you  pay  your  Tithing  ?
(All  answered,  "Yes.") Will  you


attend  to  the  calls  of  the  First  Presi-
dency of  this  Church  ?  (One  simul-
taneous "  Yes"  burst  forth  in  answer
to  this  question.)

What  is  the  use  of  talking  abou6
things;  let  us  go  to  work  and  do
them*  We  as  a  people  must  go  to
work,  beginning  at  the  head  or  root  of
this  branch  of  the  house  of  Israel.
Wo  must  go  to  work  and  build  a
Temple,  and  everything  that  pertains
to  it  that  is  necessary  for  this  day
and  time  that  we  have  to  stay  in
these  mountains.  Is  there  any  lack
of  means?  No,  not  a  particle.
(President  Brigham  Young :  All  the
lack  is  the  will,  brother  Heber.)  If
we  say  we  will  do  it,  God  will  help  us
to  do.  There  is  no  other  way  for
this  people  to  prosper,  except  for  every
leading  man  holding  the  Priesthood
in  this  Church  and  kingdom  to  go  to
work  unitedly,  and  except  we  are  one


BUILDING  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  ETC.


265


in  purpose,  and  all  of  us  become  like
clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  we
can  do  nothing.  Every  vessel  has  to
be  turned  and  become  pliable  in  the
hands  of  the  potter.  Do  you  know
this,  brethren?  I  have  worked  at
the  potting  business,  and  I  have  made
twenty  dozen  milk  pans  in  a  day,  and
I  could  not  make  one  stand  for  the
other;  but  I  had  to  take  each  for
itself,  every  bowl  had  to  stand  for
itself.  It  is  so  with  us  in  the  king-
dom of  God  ;  if  we  are  saved  at  all,
it  must  be  by  subjecting  ourselves  to
the  principles  of  salvation  and  eternal
life,  by  observing  strictly  the  law  ot
Christ  ;  and  it  is  precisely  so  with
regard  to  this  people  and  the  building
of  that  Temple,  It  is  one  of  the
easiest  things  for  us  to  do,  if  we  will
only  go  to  work  and  do  it  in  the  way
that  we  are  commanded.  When  we
start  to  clo  it  in  good  earnest,  our
means  will  increase  in  proportion  to
what  we  do.  Some  will  turn  round
and  say,  if  by  building  that  Temple
we  shall  be  prospered,  we  are  ready ;
but  if  I  tell  you  that  by  going  at  it,
you  will  be  able  to  send  four  hundred
teams  next  year,  if  required,  you  will
think  this  is  extravagant;  but  I  see  it
just  as  it  is,  and  that  by  the  Spirit  of
the  living  God,  even  by  the  Spirit  of
revelation.  I  am  of  opinion  that  if
President  Young  had  not  started  that
theatre,  there  would  not  have  been
half  so  many  improvements  here  as
we  now  see.  Men  increase  their
efforts  frequently  because  of  the  ex-
amples of  others.  When  boys  lay
down  a  snow  ball,  if  it  is  not
rolled  it  does  not  increase  in  size;  but
when  it  is  rolled  then  it  is  the  time  ,
that  it  increases.  It  is  so  with  this
Church  and  kingdom,  the  progress  of
the  work  of  God  is  in  proportion  to
the  labour  performed  and  the  diligence
of  the  people  in  the  Church,  We  are
all  required  to  be  diligent  and  to
labour  faithfully  for  the  upbuilding  of
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  we  have  all  got


an  interest  alike  in  the  triumph  of
righteousness,  and  it  should  be  our
meat  and  drink  to  assist  all  we  can  in
this  great  work  of  human  redemption.

But  to  return  to  the  subject  of  the
building  of  the  Temple,  which  is
closely  connected  with  the  salvation
of  both  the  living  and  the  dead.
There  is  quite  a  quantity  of  rock  on
the  ground  now,  about  enough  to
make  one  tier  all  round  about  sixteen
inches  high.  Now,  if  you  will  go
and  look  at  the  quantity  of  rock
there  is  on  the  Temple  Block,  yon
will  think  there  is  iar  more  than
enough  to  build  one  tier,  for  it  looks
a  tremendous  pile.  We  have  to  carry
the  walls  a  little  over  eighty  feet  high
from  the  basement.  The  theatre  is
forty  feet  high  from  the  water  table,
so  you  can  readily  form  an  idea  of  the
height  of  the  Temple  when  completed,
and  you  can  also  imagine  the  immense
mass  of  stone  that  will  be  required  to
rear  it  ready  for  the  rooft  when  yon
consider  that  all  the  stone  we  have
got  on  hand  will  but  raise  the  build-
ing sixteen  inches.  Shall  Great  Salt
Lake  City  do  it  all  ?  No,  all  the
people  from  north  to  south,  and  from
east  to  west,  have  got  to  take  a  hand
in  the  work,  and  by  exerting  ourselves
we  shall  be  enriched  tenfold  in  our
property  and  in  our  righteousness,

By-and-bye  President  Young  will
call  upon  us  to  build  a  Tabernacle
that  will  hold  from  15,000  to  20,000
people,  and  it  will  be  so  constructed
that  the  congregation  will  be  able  to  sit
and  hear  full  as  well  as  they  can  in
the  Tabernacle  behind  us,  and  it  gives
us  a  good  idea  of  erecting  another  one,
for  the  people  can  hear  him  when  he
speaks  at  a  very  moderate  tone  of
voice ;  he  does  not  have  to  speak  one
third  as  loud  in  the  Tabernacle  as  he
does  here.  Speaking  here  feels  as  if
it  would  destroy  a  man's  lungs,  for
the  voice  is  scattered  or  wasted
through  the  bushes,  while  a  tight
room  will  hold  the  sound. We  shall


266


JOURNAIi  OP  DISCOURSES.


commence  that  large  Tabernacle  when
President  Young  says  so.  Can  we
build  that  Temple  by  building  that
Tabernacle,  of  which  I  have  been
speaking  ?  Yes,  I  say  we  can,  and
that  too  much  quicker  than  if  we  do
not  build  it.

I  know  these  things.  For  years  I
heard  Joseph  tell  the  people  to  put
in  their  means  to  help,  and  he,  under
the  direction  of  the  Almighty,  would
push  forward  the  work  and  make  the
people  rich.  But  Joseph  could  not
do  it,  for  the  people  were  not  filled
with  the  Spirit  of  revelation,  but  if
the  people  would  partake  of  the  same
attributes  as  the  man  who  stands  at
their  head,  which  they  can  do  by
living  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,
they  will  prosper  abundantly.  Brother
Brigham  may  talk  all  the  day  long,
expecting  that  we  have  got  the  same
spirit,  and  that  we  are  blessed  with
the  same  sap  and  nourishment  as  he
is,  which  comes  from  God  the  Father
and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ* You  must


be  alive  in  Christ  in  order  to  partake
of  his  Spirit,  power,  and  authority,
jrhe  principle  is  true  and  the  rule  is
good ;  just  let  us  hand  over  twice  as
many  teams  to  go  east  next  year  as
we  sent  this,  and  then  we  shall  be
able  to  do  more  work* than  we  have
ever  done  in  the  mountains  before,
and  we  will  be  better  off

Now,  remember,  we  shall  want  you
to  come  on  with  your  teams,  hauling
rock,  and  take  an  active  part  in  the
good  work.  The  people  in  the  country
must  remember  that  the  workmen
will  require  butter,  eggs,  meat,  cheese,
and  lots  of  strong  clothing.

Brethren  and  sisters,  remember  all
your  duties  and  perform  them,  and
the  Lord  Almighty  will  bless  you  and
prosper  you  in  all  things  which  you
set  your  hands  to  do.

May  the  choicest  of  our  Heavenly
Father's  blessings  attend  you,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.
Amen.


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  TONGUE. — IMPARTIALITY  IN

JUDGMENT, — SEALING.

Bemarks  made  by  Presidetit  Brigham Young,  Tabernacle^  Great  Salt

Lake  City,  April  6,  1862,

REPORTED  BY  G,  B,  WATT.


Instead  of  giving  a  text  to  be  dwelt
upon  by  those  who  may  address  us
during  this  Conference,  as  I  have
done  on  some  occasions,  I  say  to  the
Elders,  speak  upon  such  subjects  as
may  be  in  your  minds. Open  your


mouths,  and  have  faith  that  God
will  fill  them  with  useful  and  instruct-
ive information,  that  all  who  hear
may  be  blessed  and  built  up  in  the
strength  of  God,  If  we  meet  as  we
should,  conduct  ourselve*  as  we  should


GOVERNMENT  OP  THE  TONGUE,  ETC


267


while  we  are  assembled,  and  live  as
we  should  when  wcaie  separated,  our
meetings  will  certainly  advance  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  .

As  formerly,  I  present  myself  before
you  this  morning  in  the  capacity  Pro-
vidence has  lead  me  to  occupy,
acknowledged  and  sustained  by  you
as  the  dictator,  counsellor,  and  adviser
of  the  people  of  God.  Hundreds  and
thousands  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
exercise  faith  for  me,  and  pray  for  me
and  my  Counsellors,  and  for  the
Twelve  Apostles  and  others  who  are
leaders  and  dictators  in  this  Church
and  kingdom,  but  neglect  to  pray  for
themselves-  They  apparently  have
more  faith  for  me  than  they  have
for  themselves,  Apparently,  they  will
be  more  fervent  in  spirit  while  in
prayer  before  God  for  the  leaders  of
this  people,  than  they  will  be  for
themselves.  They  wish  their  leaders
to  be  far  more  holy,  to  he  filled  with
more  light,  more  intelligence,  more
faith,  more  compassion,  more  charity,
more  love,  more  humility  than  they
themselves  are.  They  wish  their
leaders  to  be  filled  with  the  patience
of  Job  and  the  integrity  of  the  angels,
while  they  themselves  neglect  to
attain  to  all  this  fulness.  They  do
not  sufficiently  control  themselves;
they  give  way  too  much  to  passion
and  the  idle  follies  of  life.

I  seek  as  dilligently  as  you  do  that
the  leaders  of  this  people  may  be  and
do  precisely  as  God  wishes  them  to.
I  pray  as  fervently  as  you  do  that
the  will  of  God  may  be  done  on  the
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  and  that  we
may  be  moulded  and  fashioned  in  all
goodness,  after  the  image  of  Christ,
I  have  the  same  faith  that  you  have
for  the  leaders  of  this  people,  and  I
have  all  the  fervency  of  desire  I  am
capable  of,  that  God  will  make  the
people  just  as  pure  as  they  want  their
leaders  to  be.

This  is  a  great  and  good  people,  I
am  well  acquainted  with  their  inmost


wishes  and  desires,  for  what  they
pray,  and  what  they  labour  and  toil
to  accomplish.  Is  their  labour  fully
effectual,  and  their  toil  altogether  cal-
culated to  bring  them  that  which  they
desire  ?  No  matter  what  our  exer-
cises may  be  before  the  Lord  for  the
advancement  of  truth  and  the  power
of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
if  our  every  day  life  does  not  accord
with  our  profession,  our  religious
exercises  are  all  in  vain.  We  may
have  all  faith  so  as  to  remove  moun-
tains, to  pluck  up  trees  by  the  roots
and  plant  them  in  the  sea,  and  be
enabled  to  perform  greater  wonders
than  have  ever  been  performed  by
man  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  with
his  Priesthood  upon  us,  yet  if  we  are
not  pure  in  our  affections,  true  and
fervent  in  our  love  for  God,  and  holy
in  our  spirits,  all  this  will  avail  us
but  little.  Our  spirits  should  reign
supreme  in  our  bodies,  to  bring  the
flesh  into  subjection  to  the  will  and
law  of  Christ,  until  the  carnal,  devilish
spirit  that  fills  the  heart  with  anger,
malice,  wrath,  strife,  contention,  bick-
ering, fault-finding,  bearing  false-wit-
aess,  and  with  every  evil  that  afflicts
men,  is  entirely  subdued.  If  this  evil
power  is  not  vanquished  by  the  power
and  love  of  God,  the  whole  course  of
nature  will  be  set  on  fire  with  the  fire
of  hell,  until  the  whole  body  and
spirit  arc  consumed.  This  is  the  way
I  read  the  order  of  God,  the  will  of
God,  the  law  of  God  and  his  holy
Priesthood,  the  love  of  God,  and  all
that  pertains  to  his  kindom  on  the
earth.

The  Apostle  Paul  says  we  are
nothing  without  charity,  whatever
else  we  may  possess.  Using  my  own
language  I  should  say,  without  the
pure  principle  of  the  love  of  God  in
the  heart  to  subdue,  control^  over-rule,
and  utterly  consume  every  vestige  of
the  consequences  of  the  fall,  the  fire
that  is  kindled  within  the  nature  of
every  person  by  the  fall  will  consume


268


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  whole  in  an  ntter  and  irretrievable
destruction.

We  meet  to  be  instructed ;  and  at
the  termination  of  our  Conference  we
should  be  a  little  farther  advanced
toward  the  holy  kingdom  of  our
Father  and  God,  and  be  better  prepared
to  build  up  his  kingdom  on  the  earth,
than  we  were  at  its  commencement.

In  speaking  of  the  tongue  the
Apostle  says,  "  But  the  tcngue  can
no  man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full
of  deadly  poison,"  If  the  tongue
cannot  be  tamed,  it  can  be  bridled,
"  If  any  man  among  you  seem  to  be
religious,  and  bridle  not  his  tongue,
but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this
man's  religion  is  vain.  If  any  man
ofiend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a
perfect  man,  and  able  also  to  bridle
the  whole  body."  If  this  unruly
member  is  not  held  in  subjection  it
will  work  our  ruin,  for  "  The  tongue
is  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  is  the
tongue  among  our  members,  and  it
defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth
on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  and  it  is
get  on  fire  of  hell."  If  the  tongue  is
unbridled  and  uncontrolled,  it  set3  in
motion  all  the  elements  of  the  devilish
disposition  engendered  in  man  through
the  fall.  The  Apostle  has  represented
it  well,  in  comparing  its  influence  to
the  fire  of  hell  which  will  eventually
consume  the  whole  man.

We  are  met  in  this  Conference,
expressly  for  the  purpose  of  enlarging
our  views  upon  the  importance  of  our
Priesthood  and  duties;  that  our  love
for  God,  truth  and  the  household  of
faith  may  be  increased;  that  our
sensibilities  may  be  sharpened  to  a
keen  relish  for  goodness  and  a
just  sense  of  right;  that  our  judg-
ments may  become  more  impar-
tial and  discreet  in  all  their  conclu
sions,  so  that  when  we  go  from  this
Conference  whether  as  Bishops,  Elders,
High  Priests,  High  Counsellors,  or
as  members  of  the  Church  and  king-
dom of  God  in  the  last  days,  we  may


find  ourselves  sensibly  improved,  our
aspirations  more  elevated,  our  natures
more  divested  of  low  selfishness,  and
in  every  way  better  prepared  to  judge
in  Israel,  and  to  lead  the  sheep  of  the
fold  of  Christ  in  a  manner  more
acceptable  to  the  Great  Shepherd,

It  would  be  a  matter  of  great
satisfaction  to  me  if  all  the  Bishops
were  perfectly  impartial  when  sitting
in  judgment  on  their  brethren,  and
completely  invulnerable  to  the  influ-
ence of  bribes  and  selfish  leanings  to
the  dictates  of  prejudices  formed  in
favour  of  this  or  that  person.  I  may
not  be  entirely  free  from  such  preju-
dices, but,  if  I  am  required  to  sit  in
judgment  upon  an  individual  against*
whom  I  have  entertained  a  prejudice,
it  has  ever  been  my  manner  to  inform
that  person  of  it  upon  the  first  oppor-
tunity that  presented  itself.  Will  you
do  this  Bishops,  and  frankly  acknow-
ledge that  you  are  unqualified  to  sit
in  judgment  upon  any  person  against
whom  you  are  strongly  prejudiced  ?

So  far  as  I  have  power,  and  with
all  the  understanding  God  has  given
me,  I  seek  to  base  all  my  conclusions
upon  facts  when  I  am  judging  my
brethren,  When  they  are  penurious,'
covetous,  and  for  a  trifling  gain  of
some  kind  will  overlook  right,  frown
upon  the  majesty  of  truth,  disregard
justice  and  in  all  their  actions  manifest  a
strong  preference  for  the  god  and  glory
of  this  world,  I  am  prejudiced  against
their  unrighteous  preferences,  but  not
against  them  as  individuals  j  for  if
all  the  good  and  the  evil,  the  strength
and  the  weakness  of  which  they  are
capable  will  range  within  the  limits
of  a  few  square  inches,  as  individuals
they  require  my  sympathy,  while  I
abominate  their  sh.s.

I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  weaknesses
of  mankind ;  and  in  many  instances
when  they  would  do  a  good  act,  the
Devil,  by  some  means,  takes  the
advantage  of  them  and  leads  them  to
commit  an  evil ;  as  die  Apostle  says,


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  TONGUE,  ETC.


269


"  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is
present  with  me."  There  is  a  number
of  people  in  this  Church,  who,  when
thev  would  correct  their  lives,  and
conclude  to  perform  the  greatest  good
in  their  power,  do  that  which  brings
disgrace  upon  them — the  very  thing
they  did  not  want  to  do.  This  weak-
ness we  should  struggle  bravely  to
overcome-  We  hold  them  in  full
fellowship  in  the  Church  of  Christ
because  they  design  in  their  hearts  to
do  right,  but  do  not  at  all  times
manage  to  perform  it.  All  men  are
not  equally  afflicted  with  these  weak-
nesses. We  have  Bishops,  Presidents,
men  of  standing  and  experience  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  who,  according  to
my  judgment,  do  very  wrong  in  many
instances,  but  they  may  be  blinded
through  selfishness.

1  will  here  refer  to  a  principle  that
has  not  been  named  by  me  for  years.
With  the  introduction  of  the  Priest-
hood upon  the  earth  was  also  intro-
duced the  sealing  ordinance,  that  the
chain  of  the  Priesthood  from  Adam
to  the  latest  generation  might  be
united  in  one  unbroken  continuance.
It  is  the  same  power  and  the  same
keys  that  Elijah  held,  and  was  to
exercise  in  the  last  days.  "Behold,
I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet
before  the  coming  of  the  great  and
dreadful  day  of  the  Lord:  and  he
shall  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to
the  children,  and  the  hearts  of  the
children  U)  their  fathers,  Ust  I  come
and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse."
By  this  power  men  will  be  sealed  to
men  back  lo  Adam,  completing  and
mukingperfect  the  chain  of  the  Priest-
hood from  his  day  to  the  winding  up
scene.  I  have  known  men  that  I
positively  think  would  fellowship  the
Devil,  if  he  would  agree  to  be  sealed
to  them.  "Oh,  be  sealed  to  me,
brother  ;  I  care  not  what  you  do,  you
may  He  and  steal,  or  anything  else,  I
can  put  up  with  all  your  meanness,  if
you  will  only  be  sealed  to  me,"  Now


this  is  not  so  much  weakness  as  it  is
selfishness.  It  is  a  great  and  glorious
doctrine,  but  the  reason  I  have  not
preached  it  in  the  midst  of  this  people,
is,  I  could  not  do  it  without  turning  so
many  of  them  to  the  Devil,  Some
would  go  to  hell  for  the  sake  of
getting  the  Devil  sealed  to  them.

I  have  had  visions  and  revelations
instructing  me  how  to  organize  this
people  so  that  they  can  live  like  the
family  of  heaven,  but  I  cannot  do  it
while  so  much  selfishness  and  wicked-
ness reign  in  the  Elders  of  Israel.
Many  would  make  of  the  greatest
blessings  a  curse  to  them,  as  they  do
now  the  plurality  of  waves — the  abuse
of  that  principle  will  send  thousands
to  hell.  There  are  many  great  and
glorious  privileges  for  the  people,
which  they  are  not  prepared  to  receive.
How  long  it  will  be  before  they  are
prepared  to  enjoy  the  blessings  God
has  in  store  for  them,  I  know  not — it
has  not  been  revealed  to  me.  I  know
the  Lord  wants  to  pour  blessings  upon
this  people,  but  where  he  to  do  so  in
their  present  ignorance,  they  would
not  know  what  to  do  with  them.
They  can  receive  only  a  very  little
and  that  must  be  administered  to
them  with  great  care.

A  portion  of  this  community  will
not  improve,  will  not  planet  out  a  fruit
tree  nor  a  shade  tree,  expecting  to  be
driven  from  their  homes.  Such
neglect  of  duty  is  the  very  way  to
bring  the  power  of  the  Devil  upon  us.
Let  every  man  go  to  with  his  might
and  build  a  good  house  for  his  family
to  live  in,  and  make  them  comfortable
and  happy,  and  gftther  around  them
an  abundance  of  the  blessings  and
comforts  of  life,  and  do  it  by  the
power  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  the
Holy  One,  in  all  diltigence  and  faith-
fulness, andilet  us  preach  the  Gospel,
send  the  Elders  to  gather  the  poor
and  the  meek  of  the  earth,  each  one
doing  all  the  time  all  he  can  to  accu-
mulate means  to  accelerate  this  irreat


270


jocrnal  or  DiacornsES-


and  glorious  work  in  the  name  of
Israel's  God,  being  full  of  faith,
humility,  and  charity ;  then  we  have
done  our  duty,  and  all  we  can  do  to
further  the  kingdom  of  God.

When  we  arc  doing  the  work  of
the  Lord  with  all  our  might,  and  the
evil  within  us  is  subdued  by  the
power  of  God,  and  the  light  of  Christ
so  shines  within  us  that  we  can  see
clearly  the  things  of  God  and  men
truly  as  they  are,  and  all  is  judged  by
a  righteous  judgment,  then  we  may
look  at  and  talk  about  the  faults  of
each  other  without  in  the  least  dis-
turbing our  peace.  When  we  do  this,
working  faithfully  for  the  building  up
of  God's  kingdom,  we  are  ready  to
acknowledge  all  things  we  possess  to
be  the  Lord's,  holding  them  for  him
in  time,  not  knowing  what  he  will  do
with  them  in  the  future.  Let  us
teach  our  families  the  principles  of
righteousness  by  our  conduct,  which
will  go  further  than  mere  words.  Let
our  private  life  be  worthy  the  imita-
tation  of  the  best  on  earth,  for  it
preaches  a  more  lasting  sermon  than
the  tongue  can  preach.  If  we  pursue
this  course  the  Lord  will  never  suffer
us  to  be  driven  from  our  homes.  u  I
always  thought/*  said  one,  "  that  you
w  ere  driven  from  Jackson  county  for
your  wickedness?"  Yes,  and  I  always,
acknowledge  it;  it  was  to  bring  us  to
our  senses.

The  Lord  wants  us  to  live  up  to
the  spirit  of  the  times,  and  in  the
ratio  the  wicked  nations  are  going
down,  he  wants  his  people  to  rise  in
intelligence  and  irnptntance  as  states-
men, noblemen,  and  rulers ;  first  learn-
ing to  govern  and  control  themselves.

I  will  recur  again  to  the  sealing
power  I  have  already  glanced  at.  If
men  are  sealed  to  me,  it  is  because
thev  want  to  be:  and  if  they  will  be
good,  and  hearken  to  my  counsel
and  live  a  righteous  life,  I  will  agree
to  dictate  and  counsel  them;  but
when  men  want  to  be  sealed  to  me


to  have  me  feed  and  clothe  them,
and  then  act  like  the  Devil,  I  have  no
more  feeling  and  affection  for  them
than  I  have  for  the.  greatest  stranger
in  the  world.  Beeause  a  man  is  sealed
to  me,  do  you  suppose  that  he  can
escape  being  judged  according  to  his
works  ?  No.  Were  he  sealed  to  the
Saviour,  it  would  make  no  difference;
he  would  be  judged  like  other  men.
Let  us  do  what  we  do  from  a  pure
and  holy  principle,  desiring  only  to
promote  the  kingdom  of  God  and  be  as
nigh  right  as  possible,  ihat  when  we
judge,  we  may  judge  in  righteousness.

One  great  blessing  the  Lord  wishes
to  pour  upon  this  people  is  that  they
may  return  to  Jackson  county  Mis-
souri, and  establish  the  centre-stake
of  Ziom  If  our  enemies  do  not  cease
their  oppression  upon  this  people,  as
sure  as  the  Lord  lives  it  will  not  be
many  days  before  we  will  occupy  that
land  and  there  build  up  a  Temple  to
the  Lord.  If  they  would  keep  us
from  accomplishing  this  work  very
soon,  they  had  better  let  us  alone.
"I  will  purge  the  land,"  saith  the
Lord,  u  cut  off  the  evil  doer,  and  pre-
pare a  way  for  the  return  of  my
people  to  their  inheritance/'  We
pray  for  this,  but  are  we  preparing
ourselves,  to  live  according  to  the  laws
of  Zion?  This  I  will  say,  to  the
praise  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  there
are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  them
who  have  been  in  the  Church,  some
longer  and  some  shorter,  who,  when
you  inquire  about  them,  are  paying
attention  to  their  own  business ;  this
proves  that  they  live  in  peace  with
their  God  and  their  neighbours,  doing,
as  well  as  they  know  how.  Bat  when
we  speak  of  the  officers  of  this  Church,
a  great  deal  is  required  of  them  hys
the  Lord  and  the  people,
i  I  wish  to  endure,  and  live  the  doc-
trine I  preach  to  the  people ;  to  live
with  them,  and  with  them  fight  the
Devil  until  we  kick  the  last  one  off
from  the  earth.


274


JOURNAL  OP  DISCOURSES*


influences  of  prest craft.  In  this
country  and  in  the  old  countries  poli-
ticians and  wealthy  men,  who  have
any  influence  whatever  over  their
neighbour**,  or  over  a  family,  or  dis-
trict, exert  that  influence  to  keep  the
people  from  embracing  the  Gospel
the  Lord  has  restored  again  to  the
world,  by  threatening  to  injure  them,
to  stop  their  wages,  turn  them  out  of
employment,  or  out  of  their  houses,  if
they  embrace  k"  Mormonisra,"  and  thus
the  musses  are  bound  down.

Will  we  still  continue  to  build  up
and  foster  our  enemies,  and  give  them
our  1  fes  blood?  It  we  intend  to
cease  doing  so,  we  will  cease  trading
with  them  in  the  way  and  manner  we
have  done  and  are  doing.  You  may
enquire  what  we  are  going  to  do,  I
will  tell  you  what  1  have  not  done  ;  1
have  not  sent  to  t  e  States  this  season
for  any  factory  cloth,  nor  for  any
calico,  and  I  shall  say  to  my  family
you  mnsu  make  Vour  own  clothing  or
go  without.  u  What  are  we  going  to
do  for  pins  and  needles  r"  Do  without
them,  or  use  thorns.  When  we  cease
importing  them,  necessity  may  become
the  mother  of  invention  in  this  as  well
as  in  many  other  cases.  I  have  often
wishe  1  there  was  not  such  a  thing  as
a  pin  or  a  needle  when  1  have  found
them  sticking  in  garments,  in  my
shirt,  on  my  pillow,  in  the  chairs,  on
the  door  rugs,  strewed  over  the  floors
and  passages,  and  in  the  .streets  1
will  venture  to  say  that  the  quantity
of  pins  and  needles  that  has  been
brought  into  this  Territory  has  not
done  one-tenth  part  of  the  service
they  would,  if  they  had  been  properly
taken  care and  not  wasted.  People


will  hardly  stoop  down  to  pick  np  a
needle  or  a  pin,  but  they  will  go  to
the  stores  and  buy  them.  Ladies  will
take  a  dollar  ivory  comb,  put  it  in
water,  and  then  comb  a  child's  hair
with  it;  it  is  never  dry,  the  ivory
softens,  and  the  comb  is  used  up  in  a
very  short  time,  when  a  good  comb
of  that  description  ought  to  last  five
years  in  a  common  family.  Mothers
have  not  learned  that  water  will  spoil
an  ivory  comb.  There  are  some
combs  made  of  gutta  pereha,  that
comb  the  hair  better  than  horn,  but
thev  are  brittle  and  require  to  be  used
with  care;  but  the  first  you  know,
one  is  on  Lhe  floor  and  the  rocker  of
the  rocking-chair  has  passed  over  it
and  rendered  it  useless.

Where  do  you  keep  your  nee Jles  ?
On  the  floor,  in  the  cradle,  on  the
bed,  up  stairs  and  down  stairs,  in
every  nook  and  corner  of  the  house.
Where  are  the  pins  ?  All  over  ;  you
can  pick  up  one  wherever  you  sire.
Do  we  answer  the  end  of  our  creation
in  thus  wasting,  with  a  prodigal  hand,
the  good  things  which  our  Heavenly
Father  has  bestowed  npon  us  ?  The
people  are  ignorant  and  careless
touching  these  matters,  and  in  them
do  not  answer  the  end  of  t  heir  creation,
and  will  not  without  prudently  making
the  best  possible  use  of  that  which

God  gives  us.

We  can  make  everything  we  want ;
and  that  is  not  all,  we  can,  if  we  ai\i
disposed  to,  cease  to  want  that  which
we  cannot  make.  The  moment  we
do  tli is,  and  are  satisfied  with  onr
productions,  we  are  an  independent
people.


i


WSAKXE8S  OF  HUMAN  GOVERNMENTS,  ETC


275


WEAKNESS  OP  HUMAN  GOVERNMENTS. — POTENCY  CP  THE

KINGDOM  CP  GOD.

Remarks  hy  Elder  Joun  Tavixu?,  wade  in  the  Tabernacle^  Grtat  Salt  Lake

City,  April  16,  13e&

RKPORTKD  13 Y  J.  V,  LONG-


I  have  felt  very  much  interested
in  the  remarks  we  have  hen  I'd  ill  s
morning.  Id  anything  that  I  may
advance  now,  I  piny  my  Heavenly
Father  that  I  may  be  inspired  by  the
game  spirit  that  I  may  lay  before  you
such  things  as  will  conduce  to  your
happiness  :.nd  well-being.  We  enjoy
privileges  here  that  are  not  enjoyed
by  any  other  people  under  the  face
of  the  heavens.  I  do  not  care  what
country  they  inhabit,  what  their
advantages  have  been  in  point  of
education,  or  what  facilities  they
may  have  possessed  in  position  and
wealth;  or  in  political,  scientific,
mechanical,  or  literary  acquirements.
There  are  no  people  under  the
heavens  that  are  situated  as  wo  are.
There  has  been  one  great  difficulty
always  in  the  world,  with  very  lew
exceptions,  and  that  is,  that  men
have  been  left  to  pursue  their  own
course,  to  follow  the  dictates  of  their
own  individual  feelings,  to  pursue  a
course  which  is  dictated  alone  by  a
false  philosophy,  a  false  religion,  and
false  politics.  These  persons  have
not  understood,  nor  have  they  been
able  to  understand,  neither  have  they
had  the  means  within  their  reach  to
comprehend  correct  principles.  A
great  many  very  sincere  men  in  the
world  have  prayed  earnestly  to  be
guided  by  the  Lord,  but  they  have
had  no  priesthood,  no  organization,
no  intelligence  communicated  to  them
from  on  high  further  than  that  which
would simply govern  their  mora!


actions.  Nutio  s  have  risen  up  and
kings  have  set  to  work  to  benefit  the
people  by  establishing  governments,
on  their  own  responsibility,  without
the  dictation  of  the  Lord,  without
priesthood  or  authority  from  Heaven.
They  have  not  professed  to  h^ve  any
legitimate  right  to  the  pries!  hood,
but  with  a  blind  fatal  it  v  to  the  ex-
ample  that  has  been  s  t  by  others,
they  have  followed  in  the  wake  of
tyrants  and  oppressors  or  adopted
the  notions  of  vain  philosophers  with-
out any  teachings  from  on  high.
Governed  hy  the  hist  of  conquest,
the  acquisition  of  territory,  the  fasci-
nations of  sceptres  and  dominion,  and
dictated  alunr  by  the  wild  chimeras
of  their  own  brain.  .

Men  have  also  risen  tip  as  religions
teachers  and  reformers;  many  who
have  eonc<  -  (1  thai  s  >mething  hflfl
been  wrong  in  the  world  socially,
morally,  and  religiously,  but  what
that  wroncr  has  been  thev  have  not
been  able  ttt  fi vilely  to  tell.  They
could  tell  something  about  a  crucified
and  risen  redeemer,  as  gleaned  from
the  scriptures,  but  thev  knew  nothing,
or  cornparitivcly  nothing  in  regard
to  the  relationship  that  exists  or  that
oivdit  to  exist  between  man  ant]  his
Father  in  heaven.  They  knew  nothing
in  re!. a  ion  to  the  procxistence  of
man  ;  or  his  future  destiny,  the
organization  of  the  world,  the  object
of  its  creation,  or  its  destiny.  The
designs  of  God  in  relation  to  the
redemption  of  man,  fuv.l  the  world's


1T1


II


i


w  nil


Jill  »  ..  ll


IIW


ii.


.r M  ii


in


urn..  «.


Mill.  II  II IIW  _.  W  M III  XBtt W  g  W  II.


II WSfi  1 1  >£":': WllOMA  :::  M


W.


II


WEAKNESS  OF  HITMAN

the  world,  but  they  have  always
believed  that  he  was  inaccessible.  Do
you  think  that  those  oM  professors
felt  about  Gcd  as  the  religious  pro-
fessors do  in  these  days?  Most
assuredly  they  did.  •  How  was  it  with
Daniel  when  the  King  Belshazzar  said
to  the  astrologers  and  soothsayers,
that  he  wanted  and  denanded  of  thern
to  find  out  the  dream  which  had
gone  from  him  and  then  to  give  the
interpretation  ?  The  astrologers  said,
"  why  no  man  can  tell  this  thing
which  the  king  demarnleth  but  that
being  wltose  dwellinj  is  twt  with  Jlesh"
But  Daniel  prayed  to  him  that  re-
vealeth  secrets  and  his  prayer  was
answered,  and  the  kin^s  dream  and
interpretation  were  revealed  to  him,
su  that  when  he  went  in  before  the
king  he  unfolded  that  which  the  king
had  dreamed  iind  then  forgotten.  How
was  it  with  the  old  G recians  ?  Among
other  things  they  had  an  unknown
God,  and  when  Paul  visited  them  he
saw  an  inscription  to  this  unknown
Deity  of  theirs,  hence  when  addressing
them  lie  said,  "  That  God  whom  ye
ignorant ly  worship,  him  declare  I
unto  you."  They  believed  in  the
Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe  and
bo  do  the  world  now,  but  still  they
worship  a  God  without  body,  parts,
or  passions.  We  can  say  the  same  of
kings,  princes,  rulers,  and  philoso-
phers, for  these  have  all  believed  in  n
Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe;  but
for  the  present,  suffice  it  to  say,  that
there  has  been  little  or  no  improve-
ment in  these  things.

You  go  into  the  United  States,  to
England,  and  if  you  please  go  through-
out the  European  nations  and  see  if
you  can  tind  anything  in  relation  to
God,  more  than  them  was  a  hundred
or  a  thousand  yeais  ago*  There  is  no
increase*  there  in  the  knowledge  of
God.  Then  how  is  it  possible  for
them  to  get  any  knowledge  of  the
future  ?  How  is  it  possible  that  they
can  understand  anything  pertaining


GOVERNMENT?,  ETC.  277

to  their  temporal  or  spiritual  existence,
either  past  or  future,  without  the
Spirit  of  revelation  from  on  high  ?
There  is  no  power  or  influence  that
can  reveal  these  things  in  their  proper
light,  but  that  God  "  whose  dwelling
is  not  with  flesh."  But  all  men  of
the  world,  politicians,  philosophers,
and  all  classes  and  grades  of  men
have  been  ignorant  of  these  teachings,
and  they  have  had  no  means  ot
obtaining  any  correct  knowledge  of
those  principles  of  which  I  have  been
speaking.  It  was  to  do  away  with
this  ignorance  that  has  existed  for
ages,  to  reveal  the  purposes  of  God
and  establish  correct  religion  and!
morality,  and  the  only  true  form  of
government  that  God  revealed  hia  will
to  the  human  family  through  Joseph
Smith  ;  it  was  for  this  that  he  opened
the  heavens  and  communed  with  man
upon  the  earth,  and  it  was  fur  this
that  he  drew  away  the  veil  that  had
obscured  the  world  forages,  fty  and
through  Joseph  Smith  he  revealed  the
law  of  life,  the  relationship  of  God  to
raan,  and  how  to  secure  individual
happiness  of  friends,  relations,  and
associations,  and  also  that  which
would  be  fur  the  well-being  and  reno-
vation of  a  world.  This  is  what  wo
are  after,  and  it  is  this,  as  I  under-
stand it,  that  G  >d  is  after.  It  is  to
introduce  correct  principles  among
the  human  family ;  it  is  to  do  away
with  these  abuses  that  have  so  long
existed  and  prevailed  in  the  world,
and  that  mankind  may  be  taught  the
ways  of  life  and  salvation,  to  qualify
thein  to  teach  correct  principles  to
their  progeny,  and  in  due  time  stand
forth  upon  Mount  Zion  as  saviours  in
these  last  days,  and  that  the  servants
of  God  may  be  able  by  his  aid  and
assistance  to  usher  in  a  new  era  of
life,  of  peace,  of  happiness,  glory  and
exaltation  to  the  inhabitants  of  a
fallen  world,  and  likewise  of  renova-
tion to  the  world  itself.

This,  to  us,  I  was  going  to  say  is


278


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


almost  new;  it  is  strange  at  least.
We  have  been  awakened  by  tlie  voice
of  inspiration,  an  !  glory  hits  tilled  our
hearts  when  we  have  been  saluted
with  the  message  which  the  great
Elohim  lias  revealed  fur  the  redemp-
tion of  the  sons  of  men.  And  we
have  felt  blessed  and  inspired,  yielding
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  and  our
souls  have  rejoiced  in  the  Holy  One  \
of  Israel ;  and  yet,  like  the  Israelites  1
who  left  their  homes  in  the  laud  ol


Israel  ?"  I  leave  you  to  answer  for
yourselves.

When  we  become  inspired  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  arid  the  truths  which
tiow  from  his  servants,  we  are  enabled
to  comprehend  our  position  and  re-
lationship to  the  Most  High.  It  is
no  small  aflair  that  wc  are  engaged
in  ;  we  are  striving  to  sweep  away  the
rubbish  and  error  of  ages.  Oar  }ieaco
with  God  is  what  we  are  trying  to
(eel  filter,  if,  perad venture,  we  may


&5


s

m

1  '''^j

u.


Wll


nrriRS  coxnbctkd  with  thk  priesthood,  etc,


279


and  feelings  and  notions  of  tilings,  we
must  recjllect  that  our  notions  are  not
correct,  And  that  our  wisdom  has
been  proved  to  be  folly,  therefore,
there  is  more  thai  is  correct  bnt  that
which  tt*ws  iro  n  the  Great  Elobimf
and  that  will  deliver  us  from  oar  folly
and  brinsr  us  out  of  the  labyrinth  of
mystery  into  the  light  of  truth.  And
the  Almighty  lias  commenced  to
gather  his  people  from  every  nation,
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  to  impart
wisdom  and  knowledge  for  his  Saints.
And,  if  we  are  governed  by  the


Almighty  and  walk  in  his  footsteps,
we  may  know  not  only  how  to  save
ourselves  but  the  Church  and  king-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth,  and
introduce  a  reign  of  righteousness,
and  do  that  wh'ch  philosophers,  kings,
governors  and  statesmen,  in  their  day
and  age  have  failed  to  accomplish.
The  Lord  will  do  this  by  having  a
people  that  will  be  obedient  to  his
law,  , ,  .

Brethren,  may  God  help  yon,  and
I  bless  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


-


»


DUTIES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  AAR0N1C  AND

MELCHISEDEK  PRIESTHOOD.

Remarks  by  President  But  oh  am  Youno,  wad*  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  Citify  April  7,  18G2.


ItKrOIiTED BY G. D.  WA^T,


Without  revelation  direct  from
heaver.,  it  is  impossible  for  any  person
to  fully  understand  the  plan  of  salta-
tion. We  often  hear  it  said  that  the
living  oracles  must  he  in  the  Church,
in  order  that  the  kingdom  of  God
may  be  established  and  prosper  on
the  earth.  I  will  give  another  version
of  this  sentiment.  I  say  that  the
living  oracles  of  God,  or  the  Spirit  of
revelation  must  be  in  each  and  every
individual,  to  know  the  plan  of  salva-
tion and  keep  in  the  path  that  leads
them  to  the  presence  of  God,

How  true  is  the  text  that  brother
George  A.  Smith  has  quoted.  There
are  thousands  of  our  Elders  who  ought
now  to  be  teachers,  and  to  know
enough  to  commence  the  kingdom  of


God  on  the  earth,  an  1  establish  it,
and  continue  to  lead,  guide,  and
direct  it,  leading  the  people  directly
through  the  grte  into  the  celestial
kingdom  of  our  Father  and  God,  and
yet  they  need  to  be  taught  like
children.

From  what  has  been  remarked  it
appears  that,  in  some  instances,  the
President  and  the  Bishop  of  a  Branch
infringe  upon  the  rights  of  each  other,
perhaps  honestly  ;  and  they  think  that
they  possess  this  power  and  that  autho-
rity, and  thereby  contention  arises
in  "the  midst  of  this  people,  creat-
ing alienation  of  feeling  and  apos-
tacy.  What  a  pity  it  is  that  such
circumstances  should  exist ;  they
create  sincere  regret  in  the  soul  of


280


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOtmSFB*


every  person  who  desires  to  see  the
kingdom  of  God  prosper  on  the  earth*
The  spiritual  and  the  temporal
cannot  be  separated,  and,  in  the
economy  of  the  Fratner  of  the  Uni-
verse, are  not  designed  to  be.  For
example,  were  we  a  congregation  who
had  not  heard  the  plan  of  salvation
and  knew  nothing  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  earth,  and  were  listening
patiently  to  a  stranger  opening  the
plan  of  salvation  to  ns,  our  hearts
would  be  touched  by  the  fire  in  the
speaker,  the  eyes  of  our  understand-
ings would  be  opened,  and  we  would
begin  to  comprehend,  admire,  and
rejoice  in  the  truth.  This  is  a  spiritual
work,  an  internal  work,  a  *vork  upon
the  heart  and  afieetions.  This  is
what  we  c:ill  spiritual  impressions.
The  speaker  has  portrayed  before
our  minds  the  beauties  of  the  king-
dom  of  God  on  earth  so  rationally,
and  in  a  manner  so  congenial  to  the
feelings  of  all  honest  persons,  that
they  are  all  influenced  to  believe  the
Gospel  What  is  the  next  step  ?
You  next  nsk  the  preacher  to  baptize
you,  and  here  you  commence  a  tem-
poral labour  with  both  body  and
spirit  The  preacher  has  been  labour-
ing with  his  body,  exercising  his
lungs,  and  his  whole  spiritual  and
temporal  system,  and  this  labour
produces  a  spiritual  and  temporal
benefit  on  those  who  believe  and
practice  his  teachings.  It  is  so  ex-
tremely nice  a  point  to  draw  the
line  of  demarcation  between  the
temporal  and  spiritual  acts  of  man,
that  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the
two.  There  is  a  class  of  men  who
do  not  believe  anything  in  religion  to
be  temporal  ;  they  are  baptized  in
their  hearts,  partake  of  the  sacrament
in  their  hearts,  preach  in  their  hearts,
and  worship  the  Lord  in  their  hearts,
while  tlieir  bodies  are  constantly
scrambling  after  the  dimes.  To  be
baptized,  change  your  wet  clothes  for
dry  ones j  go  to  meeting  to  worship


the  Lord,  and  to  bring  the  body  into
subjection  to  the  will  of  Christ,  is  all
a  temporal  labour  aided  by  the  Di  vine
Spirit.

I  will  say  a  few  words  with  regard
to  a  Bishop.  Except  we  find  a  literal
descendant  of  Aaron,  a  man  has  to  be
ordained  to  the  High  Priesthood  to
administer  as  did  Aaron  and  his  song*
Suppose  we  then  place  the  same  man
also  as  a  President  in  a  Branch,  how
are  we  going  to  divide  his  duties  and
labours  ?  I  said  a  few  words  in  this
subject  last  year,  and  can  s:ty  more
about  it.  Can  the  Bishop  baptize  the
people,  according  to  his  Bishopric?
He  can.  When  the  people  he  has
baptized  assemble  for  confirmation,
can  he  confirm  them  ?  He  cannot,
under  the  power  of  his  Bishopric;
but  as  he  has  been  ordained  to  the
office  of  a  High  Priest,  nfu.T  the  order
of  Melchisedek,  to  prepare  him  to  act
in  the  office  of  a  Bishop  in  the  Priest-
hood of  Aaron,  when  he  has  baptized
the  people  under  the  authority  of  his
Bishopric,  he  has  a  right  as  a  High
Priest  to  confirm  them  into  the
Church  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.
Bishops  begin  a  contention  in  their
Branch,  where  they  opemte  in  their
calling,  when  they  amalgamate  with
their  Bishop's  oftice  the  office  of  the
High  Priesthood,  when  they  try  to
bring  the  authority  of  the  High
Priesthood  in  the  kingdom  of  God
down  to  the  capacity  of  the  Priest-
hood that  belongs  to  the  office  of  an
acting  Bishop ;  here  they  make  a  grave
mistake,  and  fall  into  perplexing  errors.

What  are  the  duties  of  a  Priesident
and  a  Bishop?  We  will  first  notice
a  duty  that  belongs  to  a  President.
For  instance,  he  wishes  a  comfortable
place  prepared  for  the  people  to  meet
in,  and  he  calls  on  the  Bishop  to
marshal  his  forces  to  gather  the  ma-
terial to  build  a  house,  and  the  house  is
prepared  for  the  comfort  and  accom-
modation of  all. In  this  instance  von

mm

observe  the  duty  and  office  of  a  Bishop


DCTIKS  CONNECTED  \TITH  THK  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


281


is  attended  to.  In  his  capacity  the
liisliop  knows  nobody  only  as  a
member  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
in  the  performance  of  this  duty  he
calls  upon  the  President  and  everyone
else  to  aid  in  accomplishing  the
wishes  of  the  President,  to  go  to  the
kanyon  to  get  out  timber,  to  quarry
rock,  make  adobies,  &c.,  &c,  for
everybody  is  entitled  to  pay  Tithing.
When  the  house  is  put  up  according
to  the  President's  direction,  then  the
President  calls  on  the  Bishop  to  see
that  it  is  well  seated,  lighted  and
warmed,  for  the  convenience  and
comfort  of  the  congregation.  Then
in  like  manner  lie  sees  that  the  sacra-
ment is  prepared  and  administered,
for  it  is  the  right,  and  privilege,  and
duty  of  the  President  to  baptize,  and
confirm,  and  administer  the  sacra-
ment, and  do  all  tilings  for  the
spiritual  building  tip  of  the  kingdom
of  God  ;  and  also  it  is  the  right  of
the  Bishop  to  preach,  baptize,  and
administer  the  sacrament.

On  Monday  morning  the  Bishop
calls  upon  the  President  and  every-
body  it concerns, to send  their
Tithing  to  the  General  Tithing  Office.


The  President,  who  officiates  as  pre-
siding officer  on  Sunday,  is  as  subject
to  the  Bishop  on  Monday  as  anybody
else.  My  Bishop  has  just  as  good  a
right  to  come  to  my  house  and
demand  of  me  my  Tithing,  as  tie  has
to  demand  it  of  any  other  person  in
his  ward,  also  to  inquire  into  the
state  of  my  family,  whether  I  attend
to  my  prayers,  whether  I  have  con-
tention with  ray  neighbours,  &a,  in
his  capacity  as  a  Bishop.

So  these  callings  and  Priesthoods
are  interwoven  one  with  another,  for
the  convenience  and  furtherance  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  in  the  absence
of  a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron.  A
Bishop  sometimes  officiates  as  a  High
Priest,  and  sometimes  as  a  Bishop*
In  his  High  Priesthood  he  can  act,
when  called  upon  so  to  do  by  the
proper  authority  in  every  calling  in
the  Church,  except  that  of  an  Apostle;
there  are  still  keys  and  power,  that
can  be  conferred  upon  him  ;  but  when
a  man  is  ordained  to  the  office  of  an
Apostle,  he  is  ordained  to  the  fullest
extent  a  man  em  be  on  earth.

May  the  Lord  bless  you.  Amen.


282


JOUIIXAI-  OF  DISCOURSE.


BUILDING  UP  AND  ADORNMENT  OF  ZION  DT  THE

SAINTS.

Hem  arks  made by  FrrsuJnrt  Brig  ham Touko,  Tahcrnade%  Gnat  Salt

LaJce  City,  February  23,  18C2-


BEPOETED  BY  G. D,  WATT.


Those  who  arc  capable  of  contem-
plating ufon  and  realizing  the  re-
lationship ol  mankind  to  the  Heavens,
the  object  of  their  existence  here,  the
common  salvation  that  is  provided
for  all  who  have  lived,  now  live,  and
will  live  upon  the  earth,  and  the
power  that  is  given  to  each  person  to
preserve  his  identity  to  an  endless
duration,  must  be  aware  that  there  is
a  great  deal  to  be  said  and  done  by
those  to  whom  are  committed  the
Priesthood  of  tlie  Son  of  God  and  the
management  of  his  work  upon  the
earth  in  the  last  days.

It  is  written, fc*  Thy  watchman  shall
lift  up  the  voice;  with  tlie  voice
together  .shall  they  sing:  for  they
shall  see  eye  to  eye,  when  the  Lord
eh  all  bring  again  Zion"  Again,
*'Wheiens  thou  hast  been  forsaken
and  bated,  so  that  no  man  went
through  thee,  I  will  make  thee  an
eternal  excellency,  a  joy  of  many
generations."  Again,  "For,  behold,
I  say  unto  you  that  Zion  shall
flourish,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord
shall  be  upon  her,  and  she  shall  be  an
ens'gn  unto  the  people,  and  there
shall  come  unto  her  out  of  every
nation  under  heaven,"  And,  again,
•*  Zion  shail  flourish  upon  the  hills
and  rejoice  upon  the  mountains,  and
shall  he  assembled  together  unto  the
place  which  I  have  appointed,"  &c.
We  talk  and  read  about  Zion,  we
contemplate  upon  it,  and  in  our  imagi-
nations we  reach  forth  to  grasp  some-
thing that  is  transcendant  in  heavenly


beauty,  excellency  and  glory.  But
while  contemplating  the  future  great-
ness  of  Zion,  do  we  realize  that  we
are  the  pioneers  of  that  future  great-
ness and  glory  ?  Do  we  realize  that
if  wo  enjoy  a  Zion  in  time  or  in
eternity,  we  must  make  it  for  our*
selves  ?  That  all  who  have  a  Zion
in  the  eternities  of  the  gods  organized,
framed,  consolidated,  and  perfected  it
themselves,  and  consequently  am
entitled  to  enjoy  it.

Were  we  to  send  a  hundred  families
of  Saints  into  a  valley  not  yet  inhabi-
ted, being  acquainted  with  its  climate,
soil,  and  general  capabilities  for  pro-
ductiveness, in  the  vision  of  our  minds
we  could  see  in  the  future  comfortable
and  commodious  houses  for  the  people
to  dwell  in,  buildings  for  rel  gioua
worship  and  education ;  temples,  taber-
nacles, and  academies ;  also  houses
for  amusement  and  State  purposes,
barns,  and  stables,  yards,  for  the
accommodation  of  animals,  well-fenced
farms,  granaries  filled  with  grain,
orchards  and  gardens,  wine,  fruit,
meat,  silk,  woollen,  and  cotton  fabrics,
and  the  people  clothed  and  beautified
with  the  productions  of  the  woiks  of
their  own  hands,  and  entirely  sus-
tained by  their  industry  and  the
blessings  of  God  through  their  right-
eousness. The  Lord  brings  forth  all
those  temporal  blessings  precisely  in
the  same  way  in  which  he  will  build
up  Zion.  He  will  build  our  houses,
tabernacles,  and  temples,  make  our
farms,  raise  our  wheat,  meat,  and


BUILDING  UP  AND ADORNMENT  OF  ZION  BY  THE  SAINTS,


fj nit,  make  onr  spinning-wheels  and
looms,  and  weave  our  cloth,  wbib  we
remain  in  a  state  of  complete  inao
tivity,  just  as  much  as  he  will  bring
again  Zion  without  our  co-operation.
The  Lord  has  done  his  shave  of  i lie
woik;  lie  has  surrounded  us  with  the
elements  continuing  wheat,  meat,  flax,
wool,  silk,  fruit,  and  everything  with
which  to  build  up,  beautify  mid
glorify  the  Zion  of  the  last  days,  and
it  is  our  business  to  mould  these  ele-
menfs  to  our  wants  and  necessities,
according  to  the  knowledge  we  now
have  and  the  wisdom  we  can  obtain
from  the  Heavens  throrgh  onr  faith-
fulness. In  this  way  will  the  Lord
bring  again  Zion  upon  the  earth,  and
in  no  ether*

If  we  wish  to  make  linen,  we  must
prepare  the  soil  that  is  suitable  for
raising  flax,  cast  the  seed  into  the
ground,  cultivate  it,  gather  it,  and
prepare  it  to  be  spun  and  wove  into
linen.  The  Lord  will  not  do  this  for
us.  We  must  also  raise  our  bread  by
cowing  grain,  after  the  ground  is
prepared,  then  cultivating  and  watch-
ing it  until  it  is  ripened,  then  passing
it  through  all  the  different  pn  cesses
until  it  is  made  into  bread.  The  Lord
will  not  do  this  for  us  any  moie  than
he  will  bring;  again  Zion  without  our
co-operation.  He  lias  placed  within
our  reach  everything  necessary  for
food,  raiment,  houses,  and  possessions,
and  for  beauty,  goodness,  excellency,
exaltation,  life,  glory,  and  bliss,  The
Lord  would  clot  he  these  naked  Indians,
for  they  are  of  the  house  of  Israel,  if
lie  would  clothe  us.  He  will  build
up  Zion  upoirtbe  same  principle  that
he  raises  gtain,  flax,  silk,  wool  fruit,
<&c.,  &c.  There  is  not  one  thing
wanting  in  all  the  works  of  God's
hands  to  make  a  Zion  upon  the  eaith
when  the  people  conclude  to  make  it.

can  make  a  Zion  of  God  on  earth
at  our  pleasure,  upon  the  same  prin-
ciple that  we  can  raise  a  field  of
wheat,  or  build  and  inhabit  There


283

has  been  no  time  when  the  material
has  not  been  here  from  which  to
produce  corn,  wl  e  t,  &c.  ;  and  by  tho
judicious  management  and  arrange-
ment of  this  ever-existing  material  a
Zion  of  God  can  always  be  built  on
the  earth.

M  an  is  the  offspring  of  Go^,  Who
can  fully  realize  this  r  Our  He  venly
Father  oulers  all  things  that  pertain
to  this  earth  and  to  multitudes  of
worlds  of  which  we  are  ignorant.  We
are  as  much  the  children  of  this
great  Beii  g  as  we  are  the  children
of  our  mortal  prcgenitors.  We  arc
flesh  of  his  flesh,  hone  of  Ids  bone,
and  the  same  fluid  that  circulates  in
our  bodies,  called  blood,  once  circu-
lated in  his  veins  as  it  does  in  ours.
As  t  he  seeds  of  grains,  vegetables  and
fruits  produce  their  kind,  so  man  is
in  the  image  of  God*  We  hope  to  be
exalted.  Wg  hope  that  God  our
Father  will  make  us  noble  and  good,
but  he  wih  only  direct  and  aid  us  in
making  ourselves  rightedus.  He  has
formed  us,  and  in  his  providences
brought  ns  forth  upon  this  earth,  but
he  without  our  efluits  will  not  make
anything  of  us.  What  we  shall  be,
depends  upon  ourselves.  We  can  im-
prove this  organization  and  biing  ii
back  to  its  original  purity  and  good-
ness, by  faithfulness  to  the  will  of
Heaven,  and  by  dally  adding  to  the
intelligence  we  now  possess  until  we
ai  e  prepared  to  stand  in  the  presence
of  onr  Cieator.

When  we  conclude  to  make  a  Zion
we  will  make  it,  and  this  work  com-
mences in  the  heart  of  each  person.
When  the  father  of  a  family  wishes
to  make  a  Zion  in  his  own  house,  ho
must  take  the  lead  in  this  good  workf
which  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  do
unless  he  himself  possesses  the  Spirit
of  Zion.  Before  he  can  produce  the
work  of  salification  in  his  family*  ho
must  sanctify  himself,  and  by  this
means  God  can  help  him  to  sanctify
his  family. There  are  many  families


2se


j or jij: al  o?  discourses


TRUE CHARACTER  OF GOT)  —  ERRONEOUS  IDEAS

ENTERTAINED  TOWARDS  HIM.

Hemarks  by  Prcsithnf  Bhtgmam TorKO  incite  in  the  Tabernacle^  Great

Salt  Lake  Ciitf,  Febntary  23,  1802.

HEPOIITKD  UY  G, D.  WATT.


We  certainly  should  be  extremely
knowing  did  we  know  everything ;
but,  as  we  do  in  it,  we  will  be  satisfied
with  what  we  do  know  and  can  .still
learn.  This  people  know  much.
Their  experience  and  their  knowledge,
coupled  with  that  which  lias  been
revealed  to  them  from  the  Fountain
of  all  knowledge,  are  far  beyond  the
capacities  of  those  who  have  not  heard
and  received  the  Gospel,

I  have  a  lew  words  to  sav  touching
our  present  existence,  and  in  reference
t » the  remarks  m:de  to-dav  bv  brother
Kimball  perUiininjr  to  the  body.  Our
mortal  bodies  are  all  important  to  ns;
without  them  wn  r.'wer  can  be  glori-
lit  d  in  the  eternities  that  will  be.  \re
are  in  this  stale  of  being  for  the
express  purpose  of  obtaining  habita-
tions for  onr  sp  rits  to  dwell  in,  that
they  may  become  personages  of  taber-
nacle. Oar  former  religious  traditions
lias  taught  us  I  hat  our  Fa; her  in
heaven  has  no  laLernaele,  that  his
centre  is  everywhere  and  his  cirenm-
ference  nowhere.  Yet  we  rtad  that
••God  came  from  Toman,  and  the
Holy  One  from  Mount  Pa  ran."  "Be-
foie  him  went  the  pestilence,  ai  d
birninij  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet."
*And  the  ancient  of  days  did  sit.
whos^  garment  \\  as  white  as  snow,  and
the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pare
wool."  "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like
God  ?  Or  cau'st  tliou  thunder  with
a  voice  like  himV"  "And  I  will
take  a  vay  mine  hard  and  thou  shalt
see  my  back  parts ;  but  my  face  thou


shalt  not  see."  "The  eyes  of  the
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his
r;r>  are  njien  Lo  their  cry.*  The  i<ier>
that  the  Lord  our  God  is  n  )t  a  per-
sonage of  tabernacle  is  entirely  a
mistaken  notion.  He  was  once  a
man. :  *

Brother  Kimball  quoted  a  saying
of  Joseph  the  Prophet,  that  he  would
not  worship  a  God  who  had  not  a
Father;  anil  I  do  not  know  that  he
would  if  he  had  not  a  mother;  the
one  would  be  as  absurd  as  the  other.
If  he  had  a  Father,  he  was  made  in
his  likeness.  And  ifheisour  Father
we  are  made  after  bis  image  and
likeness.  He  once  \  ossessed  a  body,
a*  we  now  do  ;  and  our  bodies  are  as
much  to  us,  as  his  body  to  him*
Every  iota  of  this  organziation  is
necessary  to  accuse  for  us  an  exalta-
tion  with  tlte  Gods.  Our  mortal
tabernacle*  decline.  The  spirit  is
inst'^aiTiblv  connected  with  the  body
until  death,  and  it  is  so  designed;
I  nt  when  we  get  through  with  our
worship  in  this  Tabernacle  or  build-
im*  for  worship,  we  dispense  with  it
until  we  wUh  to  meet  again.  We
are  not  inseparably  connected  with
it ;  it  may  be  consumed  by  the  ele-
ment of  lire  and  pass  away  for  ever.
Hut  it  is  not  so  with  onr  bodies;  if
\vu  wilfully  loose  these,  we  loose  every-
thing that  God  has  provided  for  tho
faithful.

This  is  an  item  I  wished  to  explain,
fhoujrh  we  do  not  know  everything.
When  brother  Kimball  speaks,  I  am


so  well  acquainted  with  his  views  and
style  that  I  easily  understand  bis
meaning;  but  lie  docs  rmt  always
fully  explain  his  views  to  the  under-
M; aiding  of  the  people.  This  is  B
point  of  doctrine  that  is  all  and  in
all  to  ns,  consequently  it  is  essentially
necessary  that-we  should  understand
it  as  it  is,  and  not  carry  away  the
idea,  from  what  has  been  said  by
brother  Kimball,  that  this  is  a  spiri-
tual kingdom  and  the  body  is  nothing.
Brother  Kimball  understands  this
docMin*  as  I  do,  but  he  has  his
met  hud  of  expressing  his  ideas  and  1
have  mine;  and  1  am  extremely
anxious  to  so  convey  my  ideas  to  the
people  that  they  will  understand
them  as  I  do.  Our  language  is  defi-
cient, and  I  do  not  possess  in  this
particular  the  natural  endowment  that
gome  men  enjoy.  1  am  a  man  of  few
words,  and  u  learned  in  the  learning
of  thi.s  generation.  The  reason  why
brother  Kimball  has  not  language
as  perfectly  and  fully  as  some  other
men  is  not  in  consequence  of  a  lack
in  his  spirit,  for  he  never  has  preached
when  I  tru  e  heard  him,  that  I  did  not
know  what  he  was  about,  if  he  knew
himself.  I  know  that  his  ideas  are  as
clear  as  the  sun  that  is  now  shining,
and  I  eaie  net  what  the  woids  are
that  he  uses  to  express  them.

We  have  foolish  Elders,  and  I  have
had  to  contend,  time  after  time,
against  their  foolish  doctrines.  One
of  our  most  intelligent  Apostles  in  one
of  his  discourses  left  the  people
entirely  in  the  dark  with  regard  to
Jaenh  and  Es  iti,  and  he  never  under-
stood the  difference  between  fore*
knowledge  and  fore  ordination.  Fo!e*
knowledge  and  fore-ouli nation  aie
two  distinct  principles.  And  again,
I  have  had  to  contend  against  what
is  railed  the  "  baby  resurrection"
doctrine,  wiiieh,  as  has  been  taught
and  indulged  bv  some,  is  one  of  the
most  absurd  doctrines  that  can  be
thought  uf Having  had  these  foolish


doctrines  to  combat,  1  am  not  willing
that  the  idea  should  possess  your
minds  that  the  body  is  neither  hero
nor  there,  and  that  the  work  of  sal-
vation is  entirely  spiritual.  We  have
receiv*  d  these  1>  dies  for  an  exaltation,
to  he  crowned  with  those  who  have
been  crowned  with  crowns  of  glory
and  eternal  life.  Yes,  Joseph  Smith
said,  the  Lord  whispers  to  the  spirit
in  the  tabernacle  the  same  as  though
it  were  out  of  it  That  is  correct  aud
true  ' '  *  -  y

What  you  understand  with  regard
to  this  doctrine  and  religion,  and  with
regard  to  the  things  of  God  generally,
you  understand  in  the  Spirit  Take
the  spirit  from  (he  Uxly, and  the  body
is  lifeless;  but  in  the  resuneetion  tho
component  parts  of  our  bodies  will
again  be  called  together,  expresly
for  ii  glorious  resurrection  to  immor*
tality.  Our  bodies,  which  are  now
subject  to  death,  will  return  to  mother
earth  for  a  time,  to  bo  refined  from
that  which  nerta  ns  to  the  fall  of  man,
which  has  particularly  affected  the
body  hut  not  the  spirit.  When  the
spirit  enters  t lit?  body,  it  is  pure  and
holy  from  the  heavens  ;  and  could  it
reign  predomiuently  in  the  tabernacle,
ruling,  dictating,  and  directing  its
actions  without  an  opposing  f  ree,
man  nev  er  would  commit  a  pin  ;  but
the  tabernacle  has  To  suffer  the  effects
of  the  fall,  of  that  sin  which  Satan
has  introduced  into  the  world  and
hence  the  spirit  does  not  bear  rule  all
the  time.

When  we  receive  the  Gospel,  a
warfare  commences  immediately;  Paul
says,  "for  I  delight  in  the  law  of  Uod,
After  the  inward  man,"  but  I  see
another  law  in  my  members  warring
against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and
bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law
of  sin  which  is  in  my  members."  Wo
have  to  tight  continually,  as  it  w^ret
sword  in  hand  to  make  the  spirit
master  of  the  tulerna*  le,  or  the  tlesh
subject  to  the  h;W  of  the  sp.'rlt.  If


2S8  joritN'Ai*  op

this  warfare  is  not  diligently  prose-
cuted, then  the  law  of  sin  prevails,
and  in  consequence  of  this  some
apostatize  from  the  truth  when
crossing  the  plains,  learn  to  swear
instead  of  to  pray,  become  high-
minded  an  1  high  tempered  instead  of
learning  to  be  patient  and  bumble,
and  when  they  arrive  in  these  v allies
they  feel  so  self-sufficient  that  they
consider  themselves  the  only  ones
that  are  really  right ;  they  are  filled
with  darkness  the  authority  of  the
Spirit  is  not  listened  to,  and  the  law
of  sin  and  "-death  is  the  ruling  power
in  their  tabernacles.  They  could
once  testify,  by  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ  to  them  that  Morrnonism,
or  the  Gospel  is  true;  then  the  Spirit
triumphed  over  the  flesh,  tkey  walked
in  the  light  of  God,  and  great  was
their  joy,  and  brilliant  their  hope  of
immortality  and  eternal  life.  The
rule  of  the  flesh  brings  darkness  and
death,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the
role  of  the  Spirit  bring-  light-  and
life.  When  through  the  Gospel,  the
Spirit  in  man  has  po  subdued  (he
flesh  that  be  can  live  without
wilful  transgression,  the  Spirit  of
God  unites  with  his  spirit,  they
become  congenial  companions,  and
the  mind  and  will  of  the  Creator  is
thus  transmitted  to  the  creature.  Did
their  spirits  have  their  choice  there
is  not  a  son  or  daughter  of  Adam  and
Eve  on  the  earth  but  what  would  be
obedient  to  the  Gospel  of  salvation,
and  redeem  their  bodies  to  exhalta-
tion  and  glory.  But  there  is  a  con-
stant warfare  between  them,  still  they
must  remain  together,  be  saved  and
exalted  together,  or  neither  of  them
will  be  saved  and  exalted  with  the
salvation  and  the  exaltation  which
the  Gospel  otfei-s.

Our  bodies  are  all  important  to  us,
/  though  they  may  be  old  and  withered,
emaciated  with  toil,  pain,  and  sick-
ness, and  our  limbs  bent  with  rheu-
matism, all  uniting  to  hasten  dissolu-


discocksks.

tion,  for  death  is  sown  in  our  mortal
bodies.  The  food  and  drink  we
partake  of  are  contaminated  with  the
seeds  of  death,  yet  we  partake  of  them
to  extend  our  lives  until  our  allotted
work  is  finished,  when  our  tabernacle,
in  a  state  of  ripeness,  are  sown  in  the
earth  to  produce  immortal  fruit  Yet,  *
if  we  live  our  holy  religion  and  let
the  Spirit  reign,  it  will  not  become
dull  and  stupid,  but  as  the  body
approaches  dissolution  the  spirit  takes
a  firmer  hold  on  that  enduring  sub-
stance behind  the  vail,  drawing  from
the  depths  of  that  eternal  Fountain  of
Light  sparkling  gems  of  intelligence
which  surround  the  frail  and  sinking
tabernacle  with  a  halo  of  immortal
wisdom.  )>  rt

I  shall  soon  be  sixty -one  years  of
age,  arid  my  spirit  is  more  vigorous
and  powerful  to-day  than  it  has  been
in  any  day  I  ever  saw;  it  is  more
quick  to  comprehend,  more  ready  to
discern,  the  understanding  is  m^re
matured,  more  correct  in  judgment,
the  memory  more  vivid  and  enduring
and  discretion  more  circumspect,  and
whi  n  1  have  attained  eighty  years  I
sJmll  be  better  than  I  am  to-day,  God
being  my  helper.  I  am  better  now
than  I  was  twenty  years  ago.  Writa
it  down  and  read  it  twenty  yeaia
hence,  and  see  whether  my  spirit  is
not  better  and  brighter  than  it  is  to-
day. Need  we  in  spirit  how  down  to
(his  poor,  miserable,  decaying  body?
We  will  not.  Brother  Kimball's  side
has  hern  broken  by  a  fall  from  a
wagon,  but  he  will  be  mended  up,
and  his  life  will  not  be  shortened  on
that  account;  and  we  lire  going  to
live  until  we  are  satisfied.

The  Elders  of  Israel,  though  the
great  majority  of  them  are  moral
men,  and  as  clear  of  spot  and  blemish
as  men  well  can  be,  live  beneath  their
privilege;  they  live  continually  wjth*
out  enjoying  the  power  of  God.  I
want  to  see  men  and  women  breathe
the  Holy  Ghost  in  every  breath  of


TRUE  CHAltACTEB  OF  GOD,  ETC


289


their  lives,  living  constantly  in  tbe
liMit  of  God's  countenance.  Brother
Kimball  says  you  must  keep  alive,  and  (
give  nourishment  and  vitality  to  the
body,  comparing  the  Church  to  a  tree ;
that  you  must  help  your  Prophet  and
Revelator  and  keep  that  portion  of
the  tree  alive.  God  keeps  that  alive,
brethren  and  sisters,  I  thank  you  fur
your  prayers,  your  integrity,  &c.,  but
I  feel  to-day  as  I  did  in  Xauvoo,
when  Sidney  lligdon  and  others
intended  to  ride  the  Church  into  hell.
I  told  them  that  1  would  take  my  hat
and  the  few  that  would  go  with  me
and  boil4  tip  the  kingdom  of  God,
asking  no  odds  of  thcrn.  If  yon  sup-
port  me,  yon  support  yourselves;  if
yon  do  not  choose  to  do  this  you  will
dry  up.  Mow  away  and  be  damned.

A  tree  or  plant  of  any  kind  that
sends  its  1*00 ts  into  the  ground  does
not  gain  strength  and  vitality  from
the  ground  alone,  but  the  atmosphere
contributes  to  its  support  as  well  as
the  ground,  and  it  will  live  lunger  out
of  the  ground  with  air  than  in  the
gronnd  without  it,  J? n>m  the  atmos-
phere and  the  rays  of  the  sun  it
gathers  elements  that  we  do  not  see,
which  *  pirate  upon  the  sap  sent  up
through  the  roots  under  the  bark  into
the  branches  and  leaves  where  it  is
prepared  to  make  wood  and  fruit,  and
give  strength  and  growth  to  the
trunk,  roots,  and  the  whole  tree.
Then  you  may  cut  oft  all  the  limbs
and  roots  of  some  trees,  and  the
atmosphere  will  make  more  in  great
profusion.

I  du  not  expect  to  preach  a  lengthy


sermon  this  afternoon,  but  there  is  a
great  deal  to  be  said  and  done.  The
Lord  Almighty  leads  this  Church,  and
he  will  never  suifer  you  to  be  led
astray  if  you  are  found  doing  your
duty.  You  may  go  home  and  sleep
as  sweetly  as  a  babe  in  its  mother  s
arms,  as  to  any  danger  of  your  leaders
leading  you  astray,  for  if  they  should
try  to  do  so  the  Lord  would  quickly
sweep  thetn  from  the  earth.  Your
leaders  are  trying  to  live  their  religion
as  far  as  I  am  capable  of  doing  so  ?
Yes,  I  do.  The  power  of  Gad  is  with
me  continually,  and  I  never  mean  to
live  an  hour  without  it.

I  am  satisfied  that  we  do  not  realizo
to  the  fullest  extent  our  moral  and
intellectual  growth  as  a  people,  but
let  us  he  straightened  up  and  a  foun-
tain of  knowledge  is  opened,  a  rich
mine  of  intellectual  wen  it]  1  is  reveaieu.
and  in  time  we  shall  tind  that  heaven
and  earth  have  come  together,  for  the
earth  will  be  celestial ized  and  brought
back  to  the  presence  of  God,  who  dwells
in  eternal  burnings  in  the  midst  of
perfection.  Then  weshonld  be  prepared
10  enjoy  the  fullness  of  the  hUss:ngs
and  glory  God  has  in  store  for  us.  If
we  live  in  these  bodies  as  we  should
we  shall  he  prepared  to  receive  all  the
glory  he  has  for  the  faithful.  Let  us
continue  the  warfare,  fight  the  good
fight  of  faith,  sanctify  our  hearts
beford  the  Lord,  and  day  by  day  per-
form the  labour  he  has  for  us  to  do,
and  we  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to
receive  our  exaltation.

ilay  God  bless  you.  Amen.


No.  19


Vol.  IX


CAUTION  AGAINST  VAIN  LAUGHTER.— VALUE  OF  THE  LIFE

OF  MAN.


Remarks  by  President  Br


i giiam  Young,  made  in  the  Tabernacle^  Great  Salt
Lake  City,  April  27,  1862.


It  KPORTK  I) V.Y f',, 1) .  W  ATT.


I  have  been  highly  gratified  at  the
few  remaiks  I  have  heard  this  rncm-
ing  from  the  brethren  who.  are  about
to  leave  us  to  fulfil  their  Missions.
They  have  a  great  deal  of  talk  in
them,  and  t Ley  will  soon  be  in  their
fields  of  labour  where  they  can  free
their  minds.

Brother  George  Sims'  remarks
created  considerable  empty  levity.  I
like  to  be  pleased  myself ;  I  like  to  be
tilled  with  joy,  but  if  I  cannot  be
tilled  with  joy  and  gladness  that
is  full  of  meat  and  marrow,  or,  it
other  words,  full  of  meaning  and
sense,  1  would  rather  retain  my
gravity,  1

There  is  but  one  step  between  life
and  death,  between  faithfulness  and
apostacy,  between  the  sublime  and  the
ridiculous.  We  preach  the  Gospel
and  gather  the  Saints,  but  are  all
Saints  when  they  are  gathered  ?  No,
wo  pit  her  the  goats  with  the  sheep.
We  gather  people  here,  and  then  the
most  trifling  incidents  that  may  occur
in  their  lives,  contrary  to  their  wishes,
will  turn  them  aside,  and  they  will
forsake  their  religion  and  their  God.
I  am  sorry  for  this.

Never  give  way  to  vain  laugh-
ter. I  have  seldom  laughed  aloud
for  twenty  or  thirty  years  without
regretting  it,  and  I  always  blush  for
those  who  laugh  aloud  without  mean-
ing.

I  am  often  full  of  joy  and  gladness,
and  were  I  to  give  way  to  the
promptings  of  my  nature  at  such


times,  it  would  lead  to  unreasonable
levity  which  would  be  a  source  of
mortification  and  sorrow  to  me.  I
noticed  that  the  brethren  gave  way  to
that  laugh  which  I  choose  not  to  hear,
I  hope  they  will  accept  of  this  caution,
and  writch,  govern,  control  and  sub-
due their  passions.  I  am  satisfied
that  those  persons  who  stamp,  clap
hands,  whistle,  and  make  other  noisy
and  boisterous  demonstrations  in  the
theatres  su  vintimed  and  uncalled  for,
have  but  little  sense,  and  know  not
the  difference  between  a  happy  smile
of  satisfaction  tu  cheer  the  counte-
nance of  a  friend,  or  a  contemptuous
sneer  that  brings  the  curses  of  man
upon  man.

I  am  n  jo  iced,  my  brethren,  when  I
hear  the  Elders  of  Israel  speak  as  they
did  this  morning.  I  care  little  for  a
man's  language,  if  his  spirit  proves  to
me  that  he  has  the  love  of  God  within
him.  Brother  Erastus  Snow  re-
marked that  the  time  would  come
y\  hen  the  law  of  God  would  be  written
on  the  hearts  of  the  people.  A
phariyee  and  a  lawyer  asked  Jesus
Christ  a  question,  tempting  him,
saying,  u  Master,  which  is  the  great
commandment  in  the  law  ?  Jesus
said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  love  the
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great
commandment.  And  the  second  is
like  unto  it.  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neigbour  as  thyself.  On  these  two
commandments  hang  all  the  law  and


CATJTIOX  AGAINST  VAIN  LAUGHTKK,  E  rC.


the  prophets,"  When  we  can  keep
these  two  commandments,  do  you  not
think  that  the  law  of  God  will  be
written  in  otir  hearts  ?  Yes,  and  it
will  never  be  erased.  When  I  have
a  manifestation,  through  the  brethren
that  speak,  that  the  Jove  of  God  is
planted  in  their  souls,* that  God  rules
and  reigns  in  their  affections,  I  care
not  what  language  they  make  use
of  to  express  their  ideas,  there  is
joy,  peace,  and  solid  satisfaction  in
listening  to  the  words  of  their
mouths.

Brother  Erastcs  Snow  has  been
preaching  since  lie  was  fifteen  years
of  a^e,  and  has  been  a  faithful  Minister
to  preach  the  Gospel  from  that  day  to
this,  and  yet  he  is  troubled  with  the
same  diffidence  that  others  are  troubled
with.  When  we  look  upon  the  human
face  we  look  upor  the  image  of  our
Father  and  God ;  there  is  a  divinity  in
each  person  male  and  female:  there
is  the  heavenly,  there  is  the  divine

and  with  this  is  amalgamated  the
human,  the  earthly,  the  weaker  por-
tions of  our  nature,  and  it  is  the
human  that  shrinks  in  the  presence
of  the  divine,  and  this  accounts  for
our  mmifeftriug  spirit,  am!  it  in  all

is^y


passages  of  Scripture  can  be  pro-
duced showing  how  the  ancients  com-
plained  of  the  folly  and  wickedness  of
1  mankind,  but  they  never  undervalued
life.  The  first  life  must  he  magnified
as  a  preparatory  step  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  second.  Those  immortal
and  glorili  I  beings  that  inherit
higher  spheres  understood  this  prin-
ciple, have  magnified  their  mortal
existence  arid  passed  on  to  immor-
tality, to  possess  exaltations  in  eternal
1  life.  We  ought  not  to  speak  lightly
of  and  undervalue  the  life  we  now
enjoy,  but  so  dispose  of  each  passing
clay  that  the  hours  and  minutes  are
spent  in  doing  good,  or  at  h  ast  doing
no  harm,  in  making  ourselves  useful,
in  improving  our  talents  and  abilities
to  do  more  good,  cultivating  the  prin-
ciple of  kindness  to  every  being  per-
taining to  our  earthly  sphere,  learning
their  uses  and  how  to  apply  them  to
produce  the  greatest  possible  amount
of  good ;  learning  to  conduct  ourselves
towards  onr  families  and  friends  in  a
way  to  win  the  love  and  confidence  of
the  goad,  and  overcome  every  un-
governable passion  by  a  constant
pracl  fee  of  oool  radian nt  and  deliber-
|  ate  thoughts.


* 1


*  i


*


«4  i.i  "i.r


III


II


-  II  ,„ W  ^„  =  All


FXPLKSS VAUIKTV  OF


ORGAXTZATIG^S,  KTC.


belong  to  the  one  great  human  family,
have  sprung  from  one  source,  and  are
organized  to  inherit  eternal  lifeu
There  aro  no  two  faces  alike,  no  two
persons  tempered  alike;  we  have
come  from  different  nations  of  the
world,  and  have  been  raised  in  diffe-
rent climates,  educated  and  tradi-
tioned  in  different  and,  in  many  instan-
ces, in  opposite  directions,  hence  we
are  tried  with  each  other,  and  large
drafts  are  made  upon  onr  patience,
forbearance,  charity,  and  good  will —
in  short,  npon  all  the  higher  and  god-
like qualities  of  our  nature — for  we
arc  required  by  our  holy  religion  to  be
one  in  our  faith,  feelings,  and  senti-
ments pertaining  to  things  of  time  i
and  eternity,  and  in  all  onr  earthly
pursuits  and  works  to  keep  in  view
the  building  up  of  the  kingdom  of
Cud  in  the  last  days.  Our  work  is
to  bring  forth  Zion,  and  produce  the
Kingdom  of  God  in  its  perfection  and
beauty  upon  the  earth.

The  impulses  of  our  different  na-
tures present  an  almost  endless  variety
of  pursuit,  manner,  and  expression,
yet  al  1  this  under  a  wise  and  j  udicious
direction  will  accomplish  the  great
end  of  our  existence  and  calling  as
ministers  of  the  Most  High.  "Br.
Brigham  teaches  that  it  is  essentially
necessary  to  improve  every  moment
of  our  time  in  some  useful  and  profit-
able labour,  and  by  frugality  and
hone>t  care  obtain  property  by  culti-
vating the  earth,  raisiny  useful  an i-
mals,  &c,  and  thus  make  ourselves
wealthy  and  independent,  surround-
ing ourselves  with  everything  to
please  the  eye,  gratify  the  taste,  and
gladden  the  heart."  Now,  both  you
and  I  are  aware  that  there  are  per-
sons in  our  midst  who  do  not  under-
stand this  kind  of  religion  ;  but  we
hail  them  as  good  brethren.  When
they  address  us  they  are  full  of  faith
that  the  time  will  come  when  the
earth  and  its  fulness  will  he  given  to
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High,  yet,


should  the  Lord  hand  out  a  small
portion  of  it  now,  they  cannot  en-
dure it.

We  believe  the  earth  is  to  be  reno-
vated, purified,  glorified,  celestialized,
and  prepared  for  the  habitation  of
the  Saints,  who  will  posses*  not  only
the  silver  and  cold  now  he  LI  I>v  the
wicked  nations  of  the  world,  but  every
good  tiling,  for  "  The  young  lions  do
lack,  and  suffer  hunger:  but  they
that  seek  the  Lord  shall  nnf  w^nt
any  good  thing/*  This  **any  good
thing1  will  embrace  horses,  chariots,
houses  and  lands,  gardens  a  id  or-
chards, promenades  and  places  fop
recreation,  and  everything  to  amuse
and  deliofht  the  heart  of  man.  We
are  now  beginning  to  get  these  tilings
together  and  devote  them  to  God,
but,  as  I  have  remarked,  some  of  this
people  cannot  endure  this  kind  of
blessings.  It  is  wnt(e:t,  ''The  earth
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof;
the  world,  and  they  that  dwell
therein." Again,  "  And  one  cried

unto  another,  and  said.  Holy,  holy,
holy,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts :  his  glory
is  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth/1
He  wffl  give  tills  fulness  to  the  Saints
But  the  actions  of  some  of  this  people
speak  in  language  like  the  following:
u  If  yon  give  me  any  of  this  riches
and  glory.  Lord,  1  will  apostatize;
if  you  fill  my  lap  with  gold.  I  will
cease  serving  you,  and  go  to  the
Devil."

The  revelation  that  Br,  James
Cummings  read  is  true-  The  people,
at  the  time  that  revelation  was  given,
were  slow  to  remember  the  Lard  in
the  day  of  their  prosperity,  and  were
covetous.  I  was  not  there,  but  was
acquainted  with  many  who  were.  I
knew  them  before  they  went  there,
and  I  know  they  were  covetous  and
filled  with  greediness,  I  know,  if
the  Lord  had  blessed  them  with  the
good  things  of  this  earth,  which  he
had  prepared  for  the  Saints  at  that
day,  not  any  of  them  would  have


stood*  It  would  have  been  as  Joseph
said  to  me  in  Kirtland,  "  Brother
Urijrliam.  if  I  was  to  reveal  to  this

people  what  the  Lord  has  revealed  tu
me,  there  is  not  a  man  or  a  woman
would  stay  with  me."  fn  the  day  of
prosperity  now  the  people  are  slow  to
follow  the  Lord.  If  he  were  now  to
bless  this  people  with  gold  and  silver,
houses  and  lands,  with  everything  to
make  them  wealthy  and  comfortable
here  in  Deseret  or  Utah,  a  great  many
would  turn  away  from  him  to  worship
their  idols.

14  But,"  says  one,  "  this  will  not  do
'  for  us  :  if  wo  are  the  children  of  God
we  must  be  poor,  we  must  see  sorrow
and  affliction,  and  pass  through  much
tribulation."  I  have  no  fear  but  that
every  child  of  God  will  receive  all  the
puttering  he  can  bear  while  passing  to
his  exaltation.  Those  who  have
suffered  from  sore  eyes,  I  am  satisfied,
are  contented  nut  to  suffer  another
moment  with  that  dreadful  malady,
should  tliev  live  on  t lie*  earth  a
thousand  years.  The  sisters  who
have  been  afflicted  with  sick  head-
ache never  want  to  suffer  from  it
another  moment.  Do  vou  wish  to
have  any  more  toothache  ?  No,  you
think  that  you  have  suffered  enough
from  that  ache,  and  never  wish  to
have  it  again  while  you  live.  So
we  may  say  of  fevers,  pains,  aches,
and  diseases  of  every  kind  to  winch
the  human  body  is  subject  I  might
inquire  of  the  Nauvoo  Saints  whether
they  ever  want  to  endure  another
chill  and  fever  whileJrhey  live,  lam
satisfied  there  is  not  one  of  them  that
would  wish  to  pass  through  smother
da}-  of  their  Nauvoo  experience  in
sickness.  Again,  I  ask  the  brethren
who  have  come  from  the  different
nations  of  the  earth,  who  have  there
suffered  hunger,  nakedness,  cold,  and
oppression,  are  you  satisfied  with  what
you  have  suffered,  without  passing
through  the  sumo  in  this  laud  ?  1
think  you  are, I  have  seen  the  time


that  I  had  not  food  to  satisfy  the
craving  of  my  nature,  and  I  have

suffered  enough  in  this  line  of  suiler-
ing,  I  know  what  it  is  to  he  hungry,
and  need  not  suffer  hunger  sigain  to
give  mc  that  kind  of  experience.  I
know  what  it  is  to  be  in  poverty,  and
to  be  destitute  of  the  raiment  neces-
sary to  keep  any  body  warm.  Many
of  you  haVe  also  had  this  kind  of  ex-
perience, and  we  do  not  wish  to  pass
through  it  again. Many  of  us  know

it  It

what  it  is  to  be  in  the  midst  of  false
brethren,  which  is  the  most  hateful
thing  of  all.  Are  you  satisfied  with
what  you  have  su tiered  from  tattlers
and  busy  bodies  r  Yes,  Do  you
wish  any  person  to  bear  false  witness
against  you,  to  take  away  your
liberty,  and  turn  you  out  from  your
houses  and  possessions,  and  thirst  for
your  life  ?  Do  you  wish  to  see  the
Prophets  and  servants  of  God  im-
prisoned, bound  in  chains,  and  sacri-
ficed in  blood?  When  you  are
brought  face  to  face  with  suffering,
you  see  nothing  in  it  that  is  desir-
able, then  why  cultivate  a  morbid
desire  for  suffering  ?  You  will  find
all  you  can  bear,  though  you  surround
yourselves  with  all  the  comforts  and
conveniences  of  life,  and  enjoy  them
as  gifts  from  the  Lord,  acknowledging
his  1  mud,  offering  unto  him  constantly
the  incense  of  a  grateful  heart.  Leave
this  kingdom,  and  I  will  promise  you
more  suffering  than  the  tongue  of
man  can  utter,  until  you  are  con-
sumed soul  and  body — until  you  are
wasted  away — the  body  in  the  death
pronounced  upon  it,  and  the  spirit  in
the  awful  sufferings  and  torments
attending  the  second  death.  Then
stick  fn  inly  to  the  kingdom,  and  be
satisfied  with  the  pains,  aches,  and
afflictions  you  have  already  suffered.

The  time  has  come  for  us  to  begin
to  glorify  our  Father  in  Heaven  with
the  earth  and  its  fulness,  and  let  the
gold  and  the  silver,  and  the  fruits  of
1  the  earth,  and  all  precious  tilings


VAKIKTY OF  ORGANIZATIONS,  ETC,


295


produced  by  the  industry  of  man
praise  God,  and  let  all  men  acknow-
ledge his  name,  honour  his  character,
bow  to  his  divinity,  glory  in  his
supremacy,  and  admire  the  wonders
of  his  providence  over  the  earth  and
its  fulness.  The  time  has  come  for
us  to  put  forth  our  best  efforts  to  bring
forth  the  Zion  of  God  and  gather  all
things  in  one,  even  in  Christ  Jesus.

There  is  a  great  variety  uf  talent
among  this  people,  bat  as  a  people
they  know  but  little  as  to  the  uses
of  the  world  in  which  they  live,  and
the  design  of  God  in  its  creation.

  o

There  is  not  one  in  a  million  of  man-
kind that  is  filled  with  that  intelli-
gence that  an  intelligent  being  should
be  tilled  with,  but  they  pass  from
this  stage  of  action,  are  no  more,  and
are  apparently  forgotten.  This  is
decidedly  the  case  with  the  world
outside,  and  very  much  so  with  many
of  this  people  who  have  been  gathered
out  fr  )m  the  world.  Here  they  have
to  think  and  do  a  little  for  themselves,
which  gives  them  a  course  of  useful
experience.  This  is  not  so  much  so
with  I  he  uutsi'le  world,  fur  the  great
masses  of  the  people  neither  think
nor  act  for  themselves,  but  are  acted
upon,  and  act  accordingly ;  and  think
as  they  are  thought  for ;  it  is,  as  with
the  Priest  so  with  the  people.  I  see
too  much  of  this  gross  ignorance
among  this  chosen  people  of  God.

I  will  now  portray  a  little  of  the
feelings  and  conduct  of  the  labouring
classes.  When  a  man  caii  only  earn
a  dollar  a-day,  and  h;is  no  way  of  in-
creasing his  finances  only  by  his
labour,  he  is  obliged  to  be  frugal,  if
he  is  honest,  and  he  manages  to  keep
a  wife  and  a  few  children  compara-
tively comfortable.  By-and-byc  the
times  improve  and  wages  rise  so  that
he  can  earn  ten  dollars  per  week
instead  of  six.  "Now,  wife,  we  will
allow  a  little  more  for  the  bread,  and
more  for  the  meat,  and  more  for  the
tea,  the  coflee,  sugar,  fruit,  spices,


&i\  We  must  buv  our  daughter  a
pair  of  fine  shoes,  and  our  little  boy
must  have  a  whistle,  and  the  baby  a
doll,  and  you  shall  have  a  new  bonnet
by-and-bye,  and  I  must  have  a  pair  of
fine  boots,  and  a  new  coat  and  other
things  in  keeping,  for  you  know,  wife,
I  am  now  getting  ten  dollars  per
week,  and  by-and-bye  I  may  yet
double  or  tieble  that  amount  In
this  way  they  manage  to  live  out  all
their  means,  Thig  is  a  peculiarity  in
the  majority  of  the  old  cjuntrv
people,  and  you  can  see  the  same
thing  here.  You  say  you  would
rather  hear  something  else  than  this,
I  would  rather  hear  this,  I  am  as  far
ahead  in  the  Gospel  and  power  of  God
as  any  of  you,  I  know  as  much  about
it  as  any  man  in  the  Church,  yet  I
need  to  know  more.  I  think  it  is  neces-
sary, however,  that  you  should  learn
to  live  to-day,  and  to-morrow,  this  year,
and  next  year,  and  learn  to  honour
your  lives  continually.  We  must
prepare  for  that  which  is  coining,  and
DC  read}*  to  receive  that  which  the

Lord  lias  in  store  for  us.
*

I  know  how  you  live.  Do  we  see
poverty  here?  We  do.  How  many
are  there  who  declare  that  they
cannot  pay  their  emigration  expenses,
and  cannot  give  anything  to  bring
their  friends  ?  You  could,  if  you  had
a  disposition  to  try.  Use  just  enough
of  your  earnings  to  make  your  bodies
and  your  families  happy  and  com-
fortable, and  save  the  residue,  I
propably  support  more  than  any  ten
men  in  the  Territory  or  in  this  State,
1  feed  and  clothe  multitudes  of  men.
women  and  children — and  I  like  the
man  that  gets  me  in  debt  to  hi  in.  I
consider  that  such  a  man  has  calcula-
tion and  management,  and  is  pre-
paring  himself  to  be  useful,  and  to
have  something  in  his  hands  to  use
and  to  devote  to  noble  purposes.  But
I  pay  men  nine,  ten,  twelve,  and
twenty-five  dollars  per  week,  and
when  the  year  comes  to  a  close  they


JOntXAL  OP  DISCOURSES.


are  o\v;n;:: :or bundr-ds  of  dollars,

when,  if  they  had  managed  properly,
there  would  have  been  a  large  credit
in  their  favour.  There  is  a  class  of
men  here  who  do  not  know  but  what
they  will  apostatize  by-and-bve,  and
they  do  not  wish  anybody  in  debt  to
them,  nor  do  they  wish  to  owe  any-
body. You  had  better  be  about
square,  the  whole  of  you  that  wish  to
apostatize  and  go  off,  for  you  cannot
leave  tho  country  with  your  debts
unpaid.  The  better  way  is  to  keep  in
the  faith,  and  pay  your  debts.  When
soine  men  are  doing  well  (hey  will
become  anxious  for  a  change,  and  they
wart  to  Eft:?'*  stock,  or  possess  a  farm
in  Weber  or  Cache  Valley ;  they  go
and  stay  year  after  year  until  they
are  reduced  to  poverty  in  consequence
of  their  inexperience  in  that  class  of
industry,  and  by-and-bye  they  come
back  deploring  their  lack  of  sense  in
not  knowing  when  they  were  well  off.
I  have  such  persons  here  to  deal  with,
and  I  have  to  keep  along  with  my
brethren  at  this  slow  rate  of  progres-
sion, until  we  know  now  to  gather  the
heavens  and  the  earth.

If  there  was  impatience  in  heaven
they  would  be  impatient  with  the
&Iotbfulness  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
The  heavens  are  waiting  to  be  gra-
cious, and  are  ready  to  shed  forth  all
the  blessings  heaven  and  earth  can
bestow  on  the  Saints,  as  soon  as  we
can  receive  them  and  make  use  of
them  to  the  glory  of  God*  If  we  do
not  fiist  learn  the  little  things,  we
cannot  learn  the  greater  things.  u  He
that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,
is  faithful  also  in  much ;  and  he  thrit  is
unjust  in  the  least,  is  unjust  also  in
much.  If  therefore  ye  have  not  been
faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon
who  will  commit  to  your  trust  the
true  riches  ?  And  if  vou  have  not
been  faithful  in  that  which  is  another
man'?,  who  shall  give  you  that  which
is  your  own  ?"

Evciy  moment  of  human  life  should


be  cievoted  to  doing  good  somewhere
and  in  some  way.  We  are  all  de-
pendent upon  a  Being  greater  than
Ourselves,  and  we  owe,  uur  talent,
time,  and  every  poise  of  our  nature
to  the  Supreme  of  the  Universe.  We
have  nothing  of  pur  own,  and  ought
to  devote  ourselves  to  usefulness;  we
ought  to  learn  to  be  economical,
which,  coupled  with  industiy,  will
make  us  wealth  v.  And  while  we  are
handling  the  things  of  this  world,  let
us  not  neglect  to  become  rich  in  faith,
in  humility,  and  to  learn  the  ways  of
God,  and  be  constantly  and  actively
devoted  to  his  service  and  the  build-
ing up  of  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth,
or  the  riches  of  this  world  will  do  us
no  good.

I  heard  it  said  to  a  young  lad,  "  I
will  give  you  a  dollar  and  a  half  a-day
and  board  you.1'  After  a  little  reflec-
tion the  young  lad  said,  "  If  you  will
pay  me  three  dollars  a-day,  I  think  I
will  work  for  you  a  spell."  The  prin-
ciple of  the  thing  Hashed  before  me,
like  a  Hash  of  light,  that  such  a  course
would  be  ruinous  to  this  people.  I
could  see,  tinder  such  circumstances,
that  the  lad  could  not  live  here  two
years  before  he  wrould  not  know  how
to  secure  himself  a  pair  of  pantaloons ;
he  might  receive  great  wages,  and  yet
be  in  the  depths  of  poverty ;  he  might
be  paid  more  than  he  earned,  and
still  be  needy.  "  I  am  getting  three
dollars  a-day,"  says  a  brother.  What
next  ?  He  must  have  as  fine  a  pair
of  boots  as  any  man  wears  in  this  com-
munity, and  hewill  have  them.  When
I  was  a  boy  a  3romig  man  in  our  neigh-
bourhood went  into  a  hat  shop  to  buy
a  five  dollar  beaver.  He  said  to  51  r.
Merill.  11  Have  you  any  five  dollar
hats  ?"  w  Jfo,  but  I  have  some  very
nice  three  dollar  hats."  The  young  gent
did  not  want  such  a  hat ;  he  would  not
wear  such  a  hat,  but  said,  u  I  want  a  five
dollar  hat  r"  "  Can  you  make  me  a
a  five  dollar  hat  ?" "  Yes." "  When

shall  I  call  fo.  it  V" "  In  two  weeks."'


INSTIICCTI0N5 OX PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


299


power  of  God  will  preserve  us,
through  our  righteousness  against  an  v
power  that  may  come  against  us.  It
is  casv  fur  us  to  do  rirjht.  Let.  us
do  right  and  stop  doing  any  thing
wronir,  cease  tattling  a! id  lvin2\  a-^d
trying  to  injure  one  another  by
bearing  false  witness  against  our
neighbour,  Let  us  guard  ourselves
against  becoming  prejudiced  against
an  honest  person,  and  strive  to
become  honest,  upright  and  generous,
doing  as  we  would  wish  to  be  done


by,  for  we  are  sons  of  God  and  heirs
to  his  fulness  He  has  said  to  his
children  ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  seek
and  ye  shall  find,  knock  and  the  dour
shall  be  opened  unto  yon.  But
we  may  ask  as  much  as  we  please  if
our  works  do  not  correspond  with  our
petitions.  Let  us  be  guided  by  the
conclusions  of  one  mind  in  all  our
great  moveme&ts,  operating  constantly
together  on  the  square  of  righteous-
ness and  God  will  ble^s  us  for  ever.
Amen,


instructions  on  priesthood.  —  necessity  for

oil  licence  among  the  saints.


Jtfiwtr!:-*  hy  Vr^l-J  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  the  Tab

Salt  Lake  City,  April  7,  18G2.


Great


K  EI*  OUT  ED  HY  J.  T,  LONG,


I  hope  to  have  the  power  arid
ability  to  ppeak  loud  enough  for  all  to
hear  what  I  have  to  say,

I  have  been  very  much  instructed
daring  this  Conference.  I  have  been
enlightened  to  a  certain  extent  with
regard  to  the  authority  of  certain
persons  holding  office  in  this  king-
dom. I  have  reiiectcd  much  upon
the  Holy  Priesthood  and  its  various
offices,  but  I  feel  that  I  have  become
more  fully  educated  in  the  knowledge
of  the  rights  of  men  holding  the
Priesthood  during  this  Conference.  I
rejoice  in  being  where  wre  can  receive
a  correct  education  in  regard  to  the
things  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  I
might  truly  say  that  I  am  astonished
at  some  developments  which  are  made


before  the  people  at  different  times.
Brother  Joseph  Young  remarked  that
t  here  was  no  law  against  doing  good.

There  were  remarks  made  last  even-
ing in  regard  to  the  mass  Quorum*  of
Seventies  that  are  organized  in  the
diiFereiit  settlements,  and  also  in  refer-
ence to  the  High  Priests,  of  which
theie  are  Branch  Quorums  in  the
various  settlements.  It  has  been
found  that  where  there  h;;s  been  a
President  and  Bishop  in  a  Branch,
it  has  been  a  cause  of  difficulty,  and  it
was  considered  by  Elder  Hyde  and
others  that  this  practice  ought  to  be
abolished.  I  have  asked  mvself  the
quesliun  whether  when  we  have?  re-
ceived such  blessings  as  have  been
conferred  by  the  Priesthood  of  the


300


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Most  High,  we  should  come  down
from  our  exalted  position,  or  whether
we  should  not  have  the  spirit  of
forbearance,  the  enlightenment  of  the
Holy  Ghost  in  our  midst  to  expand
our  minds,  to  enable  us  to  understand
our  duties,  or  shall  we  take  a  course
to  deprive  ourselves  of  the  blessings
of  the  Melchisedeck  Priesthood,  as
did  ancient  Israel  ?  This  is  what
yon  are  virtually  doing  in  your  neigh-
bourly (Is  where  von  exclude  the
Presidents  of  Brunches.  We  are  a
people  who  expect  to  expand  in  our
minds,  to  establish  on  the  earth  the
kingdom  of  the  Great  God,  and  we
are  a  people  that  never  expect  to
retrograde,  but  to  have  all  the  keys  of
the  Priesthood;  to  go  forward  con-
quering and  to  conquer  until  the
whole  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
shall  be  redeemed  and  brought  into
subjection  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is
very  natural  that  the  Presidents  of
the  Severn  ies  >.hnuld  feel  itfLer  the
condition  of  their  members.  These
Quorums  are  divided  up  and  scattered
through  the  different  settlements;
one  man  belonging  to  one  Quorum —
another  to  another ;  therefore,  we  find
various  Quorums  represented  in  the
different  branches  of  the  Church
throughout  this  Territory,  and  it  is
right  and  proper  that  the  Presidency
of  these  Quorums  should  have  some
organization  by  which  they  can  feel
after  their  members  and  know  their
standing,  that  they  may  be  reported
up  to  head-quarters  from  time  to
time.  There  is  no  law  about  this ;
it  is  by  permission,  and  it  is  right.
Now  is  it  not  possible  that  these  !
organizations  can  be  kept  up  without
causing  friction  or  difficulty  between
the  brethren  ?  If  we  are  guided  by
the  right  spirit,  I  Think  they  can.

Is  it  impossible  to  have  a  Presi-
dent and  a  Bishop  in  the  same
Branch  without  there  being  strife  and
contention  among  the  people  ?  There
has  been  too  much  of  this,  but  with


the  instructions  that  we  are  receiving
we  can  improve*

I  would  not  bring  this  before  the
public,  if  it  had  not  been  brought
there  already,  for  I  am  ashamed  of
such  fhimrs.  and  1  dislike  to  see  them
exhibited  before  the  public,  only  as  it
becomes  necessary  for  their  correction.
It  appears  to  be  the  opinion  of  some
that  these  things  must  be  so,  but  I
contend  that  it  need  not  be  so,  and  it
is  only  the  ignorance  of  the  people
that  gives  rise  to  this  spirit  of  con-
tention in  certain  places.  And  I  feel
now  that  after  attending  a  Conference
of  this  kind  and  receiving  correct
instructions  upon  all  these  points,
there  need  be  no  more  contention.  It
has  been  necessary  to  bring  this
before  the  Conference  that  we  might
receive  instruction  in* reference  thereto.

Well,  brethren,  it  is  evident  to  me
that  we  have  not  progressed  as  far  as
I  thought  we  had  in  the  knowledge
of  the  Priesthood,  its  officers  and
their  respective  duties.  We  have
many  blessing3  bestowed  upon  us  by
our  Father  in  Heaven,  and  he  is
willing  to  bestow  more,  if  the  people
were  willing  and  capable  of  receiving
them.  I  feel  the  same  as  brother
Heber  said  that  there  is  a  great
majority  that  are  willing  to  do  right,
and  that  the  predominating  influence
is  for  God.  I  feel  it  is  so,  and  I  bear
my  testimony  to  it.  Then  let  us  step
forward  and  take  hold,  prove  to  God
and  angels  that  we  will  strive  to  over-
come this  spirit  of  contention  that  is
in  the  world,  and  each  and  all  magnify
our  callings,  get  together  and  consult
for  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  and
for  each  other's  welfare,  that  we  may
act  in  unison  in  all  things  that  there
may  be  union  throughout  the  house
of  Israel,  and  in  all  the  branches  and
settlements  of  Zion.

This  kingdom  is  a  school  to  all  of
us  ;  we  are  learning  our  duties,  and
we  should  strive  to  improve  ar.u  pro-
gress in  everything  that  is  gocd,  and


INSTRUCTIONS  ON  Tltl  rSTHOOD,  ETC,


301


I  think  the  grent  majority  are  im-
proving, and  it  should  Le  our  determi-
nation to  reduce  those  things  to
practice  that  are  for  our  bene  tit  and
salvation.

When  we  came  here  we  resolved
to  do  this,  and  let  us  now  carry  it
into  practice  in  our  daily  lives.  Jket
us  consult  the  general  welfare,  and  do
what  we  do  for  the  benefit  of  the  king-
dom of  God.  We  can  shutout  the  bless-
ings  of  the  Almighty  by  our  own  acts,
by  our  strife  for  power  and  t i-il n«  ik'<\
But  this  is  no  \va v  hi  gain  permanent
influence,  and  as  we  have  seen  to-day,
and  during  this  Conference,  by  the
instruction  that  has  been  given,  we
are  the  individuals  who  shut  out
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
the  blcssingfl  which  we  ini^ht  other-
wise  enjoy.

My  advice  is  to  have  no  contentions
about  who  holds  the  most  authority,
for  if  you  contend  about  your  Bishops
and  Presidents,  the  first  thing  you
know  is  th;:t  you  have  no  President
at  all,  and  instead  of  going  a-he;td  (it  is
as  bi  other  George  A.  Smith  .said)  you
have  to  come  down  to  a  wheelbarrow
an  ;o,Lv::ieut.  J  do  not  like  that  kind
of  doctrine  ;  it  is  contracting  instead
of  expanding.  I  want  to  see  Israel
expand  and  become  capable  of  re-
ceiving those  blessings  which  arc  in
store  for  the  faithful

We  have  to  commence  this  work  in
our  own  bosoms,  for  this  spiritual
warfare  is  liketho  temporal,  which  was
so  beautifully  illustrated  by  brother
Hytie  vesterdav,  The  first  fruit  he
tasted  in  the  orchard  he  thought  to
be  1 1  io  best,  but  it  got  better  and
better  as  he  tried  the  pipping  and
greening,  and  these  principles  are
like  the  fruit  trees  in  the  orchard,
they  require  digging  about  and  culti-
vating, i3i  order  that  those  principles
may  dwell  in  our  bosoms  continually
for  our  social  welfare.  Let  us  labour
to  eradicate  the  tares,  the  chatf  and

lii


-  5


our  nature  and  acts  to  a  great  degi
arid  let  ussee  if  we  cannot  get  a  little  of
the. Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in  our  minds,
to  enable  us  to  live  according  to  the
principles  of  our  holy  religion  ;  let  us
strive  to  expand  and  go  a-head  in
doing  those  things  that  are  necessary
to  enable  us  to  progress  in  the  way  of
intelligence,  to  gain  that  knowledge
of  the  truth  which  is  in  readiness  to
be  poured  out  upon  us  from  the
Almighty. 1  '  '

Shall  we  spend  our  time  like  the
world,  or  shall  we  live  and  labour  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  our  God  ?
Now  all  you  that  freight  for  the
Gentiles,  that  go  out  on  the  road  in
the  employ  of  the  Gentiles  driving
stage,  ur  trading  and  working  at  the
beck  of  the  Devil,  to  promote  the
Devil's  kingdom  ;  let  me  exhort  you
to  turn  about  and  not  continue  to
mingle  with  the  wicked.  You  had
better  never  see  a  dime  in  the  world.
Need  I  say  anything  else  when  there
is  the  pride  of  Israel,  of  those  who
have  enlisted  iu  the  cause  of  King
Emanuel  engaged  in  trading  and
doing  the  works  of  the  Devil,  and
thereby  encouraging  and  aiding  in  the
building  up  of  his  kingdom:  ?  Need
I  say  a  word  against  our  brethren
going  and  engaging  themselves  to  do
this  when  they  so  well  understand
that  it  is  not  the  Mission  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  labour  for  any-
thing but  the  upbuilding  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  ?  Here  is  the
Mission  of  the  Saints  to  go  nod  aid
in  the  gaithering  of  the  poor,  to
labour  here  for  the  building  of  the
Temple  wherein  we  can  officiate  for
the  dead  and  prepare  to  redeem  Zion
and  i"  build  up.  the  waste  places
thereof,  and  to  establish  the  princiT
pies  of  righteousness  and  truth  upon
the  earth.  Let  our  enemies  learn
their  true  position;  let  them  herd
their  own  cattle,  delve  in  the  earth
for  themselves,  gather  their  own
straw,  make  their  own  mortar,  build


jovii.-.u.  of  niscomsrs.


up  their  own  cities,  but  let  us  raise
our  own  cotton,  indigo,  tobacco,  build
up  our  own  cities — even  the  cities  of
Zion  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God  ;
if  all  our  labour  bo  in  the  right  place
we  shall  become  independent  of  our
enemies,  make  the  desert  become
fruitful  and  blossom  as  the  rose*
Here  is  work  enough  for  the  Smuts
without  woikincj  for  the  Devil  or  his
agents  or  imps.  The  Lord  has  com*
menced  his  work  and  has  planted  the
standard  of  Zion  and  there  is  plenty
of  business  to  do  suppose  that  all
I*racl  should  g<i  into  it. If  it  were


correct  for


cl  devote  their


;es  where  wou

bo  conl

time,  talents,  and  strength  in  working
to  build  up  Gentile  ci
be  the  interests  of  the  kingdom.  If
it  is  good  for  you  io  do  this  it  is  good
for  others,  and  if  it  is  good  for  yon


to si- 11


?y  it  is  £ood  fv


c.


The  truth  is  that  we  can  exercise  a


]


anv


better  influence  withon
thing  to  do  with  these  things,
have  no  desire  or  wish  to  do  any  i
thing.  But  some  will  put  the  cup  to
their  neighbour's  lip,  ruin  their  neigh-
bour s  children  by  si? eh  practices.  It
is  not  in  the  economy  of  Heaven
made  necessary  for  any  one  to  take
such  a  course.  There  is  plenty  to  do
to  occupy  all  the  talent,  ability  and
intelligence  of  all  Israel  without  taking
any  such  course  as  this,  and  of  that
Datura  too,  which  instead  of  promoting
evil  will  tend  to  virtue  and  righteous*
ness  and  finally  to  exaltation,  things
which  will  tend  to  the  enlightenment
of  the  mind  and  to  the  advancement
and  spreading  abroad  of  the  princi-
ples of  salvation  and  eternal  lives.  It
is  for  us  lobe  engaged  preparing  our-
selves for  those  ordinances  which  we
look  forward  to  with  such  earnest
anticipation,  and  anxious  desire  to
administer  and  officiate  for  our  dead,
that  they  may  come  forth  in  the  first
resurrection,  and  enjoy  the  blessings
purchased  by  the  Redeemer  of  the
world.


I  do  not  know  but  we  are  now
building  up  a  Temple  in  which  may
be  revealed  the  kevs  of  the  resurrect-
ion  of  the  dead.  We  are  building  up
a  Temple  to  the  name  of  the  Most
High,  and  there  is  plenty  of  business
for  every  individual  who  lists  to  do
bia  part  Bo  not  let  us  pander  to
the  Devil,  nor  strew  our  ways  to
strangers,  but  let  us  take  that  course
that  will  be  best  calculated  to  establish
the  principles  of  righteousness  upon
the  earth,  to  establish  the  reign  of  t  he
kingdom  of  God.

The  sceptre  of  this  Church  ana
kingdom  has  been  wielded  by  the
Almighty  power  of  God,  and  it  will
me,  for  the  time  has  come
when  the  Lord  has  commenced  to  get
a  foothold  in  the  earth,  and  we  have
been  called  from  the  midst  of  the
Gentiles  to  establish  a  nucleus  of
power  for  the  benefit  of  the  pure  in
hear*.  What  better  are  we  if  we  go
on  in  wickedness  encouraging  the
power  of  the  Devil,  than  those  who
know  not  God  ?  We  might  as  well
have  stayed  in  the  world.  Then  let
us  understand  our  high  and  holy
calling,  and  also  strive  to  understand
the  calling  of  the  servants  of  God,
and  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from
the  world  and  its  wickedness,  and
keep  in  our  possession  the  Spirit  of
the  living  God,  We  see  the  judg-
ments of  the  Almighty  spreading
through  the  land,  and  what  assurance
have  we  that  we  shall  not  be  afflicted
unless  we  live  so  as  to  be  without
condemnation  ?  Do  we  think  that
we  shall  he  shielded  from  the  judg-
ments of  the  Almighty  if  we  lay  our-
selves liable  by  the  same  acts  as  the
world  r If  we  do  we  are  mistaken,


we  are


same  crimes


and  wickedness  the  results  will  be
the  same  with  us  as  With  the  world,
with  the  exception  perhaps  that  the
judgments  will  overtake  us  a  little
quicker,  for  they  will  commence  with
us. For  it  would  thwart  the  purposes


COUNSEL  ON  CATTLE  HKHDIXG.


Jieni'trl-K  l>j  Khl  r


G  icon  ok
Salt  Lt


A.  Smith,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great
he  CitiL  April  7,  '1862.

• ■  A.  '


nv.vowvv.u  nv  J .  v.  long.


I  arise  simply  to  call  the  attention
of  the  brethren  of  the  Priesthood  now
present  to  an  item  of  counsel,  which
was  disserr.ir.-.i'ed  among  the  peoples
year  ago  by  the  Presidency,  and  while
they  travelled  through  the  Territory
north  and  soiuh  during  the  summer
and  fall.  It  was  enjoined  upon
the  people  and  Bishops  to  make  a
change  in  the  poliey  of  herding  cattle.

The  maimer  of  herding  cattle  has
been  to  gather  the  horses  and  cows
together  and  let  some  boys  drive  them
out:  then  the  boys  would  go  and
gamble,  or  get  into  some  kind  of
mischief  while  the  cattle  went  astray,
and  those  boys  would  plot  and  get  Bp
some  ill-conducted  scheme  po  that  our
herding  proved  to  be  a  nursery  for
thieves  to  be  planted  amongst  us  and
eat  up  our  vitals,  (he  vitals  of  the
whole  people.  The  counsel  was  given
to  have  the  system  of  herding  changed
and  put  into  the  hands  of  wise,
judicious  men,  and  have  the  boys  sent
to  school  or  kept  at  industrial  pur-
finite  under  the  control  of  the!  rfat  hers,
and  not  any  longer  make  this  system
of  herding  our  stock,  which  has  heen
adopted  in  the  different  wards  of  this
city  and  Territory,  a  school  of  helLJ

Thishas  been  impressed  forcibly  upon
our  minds,  not  only  here  hut  north  and
south,  and  in  some  instances  attempts
were  made  and  perhaps  in  a  few  in-


stances it  msiV  have  been  cairied  out,
but  as  a  general  thing,  so  fnoas  lastsea-
son  was  concerned,  proved  a  failure*
Perhaps  the  Bishops  would  announce
what  the  counsel  was,  but  did  not  see
that  it  was  carried  into  effect.  But


now


hat


1 1


people  have  got  the
counsel  and  we  are  now  opening  a
new  season  and  cettinj?  ready  fur  the
spring  and  summer's  operations,  I
therefore  feel  anxious  to  remind  the
brethren  in  regard  to  this  important
item,  for  I  tell  you  if  we  do  not  look
after  our  boys  and  lav  a  foundation
for  keeping  them  in  the  right  way
they  will  go  to  destruction.  It  is
therefore  important  that  all  the
brethren  should  unite  in  carrying  out
this*  instruction  according  to  the
advice  given.

I  felt  to  make  these  remarks,  nnd  I
will  further  say  that  I  am  delighted

to  hear  :t\d  s  e  *su  renv  together,  at
this  time,  and  I  consider  it  is  a  g^od
opportunity  of  disseminating  good
instruction  throughout  Deseret.
1  May  the  blessing  of  God  attend
you  and  id]  the  inhabitants  of  Deseret.

who  desire  to  do  ritjht.

There  is  a  proposition  that  we  put
it  to  vote,  and  that  we  carry  into  effect
this  counsel.  [The  motion  was  put
and  the  brethren  voted  unanimously
to  obey  this  counsel.]


HE  LOVE  OF  TRUTH  AND  RIGHTEOUSNESS  IMPLANTED
IN  THE  NATURAL  MAN. — KINDNESS  AND  FIRMNESS  IN
GOVERNMENTS.

Remarks  math ly  President BmnuAM Young,  Tabernacle,  Great  Salt

Lake  Cit-!/,  June  15,  1862,


HF-rOIlTKD BY G. I>.  WATT.


v  I  lore  to  speak  to  the  Saints,  when
I  am  blessed  with  ability  to  speak  in
a  manner  to  please  mysdf.  I  have
proved  that  when  I  can  become
fully  satisfied  with  my  own  actions,
and  am  well  pleased  with  myself,
then  I  please  and  satisfy  my  neigh-
bours. People  cught  always  to  be
pleased  with  themselves  when  they
do  the  best  they  can.

It  is  fully  prove  I  in  all  the  revela-
tions that  God  has  ever  gfiven  to
mankind  that  they  naturally  love  and
admire  righteousness,  justice  and  truth
more  than  thev  do  evil.  It  is,  how-
ever,  universally  received  by  pro-
fessors of  religion  as  a  Scriptural
doctrine  that  man  is  naturally  opposed
to  God,  This  is  not  so.  Paul  s&y$7
in  his  Eoistle  to  the  Corinthians,
u  But  the  natural  man  receive th  not
the  th  ings  of  God/'  but  I  say  i  t  is  the
unnatural  u  man  that  reeeiveth  not
the  things  of  God/'  Paul,  in  another
place,  says,  "  if  our  Gospel  be  hid,  it
is  hid  to  them  that  are  lost:  in
whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath
blinded  the  minds  of  them  which
believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the
glorious  Gospel  of  Christ,  who  is  the
image  of  God,  fjhould  shine  unto
them."  That  wlych  was,  is,  and  will
continue  to  endure  is  more  natural
than  that  which  will  pass  away  and
be^lo  mtfre,  'The  natural  man  is  of
God.  We  are  the  natural  sons  and
daughters  of*our  nuHiral  parents,  Wad
spiritually:  wear*  the  mt^iral  children

No.  20 \ v  ^


of  the  Father  of  light  and  natural
heirs  to  his  kingdom;  and  when  we
do  an  evil,  we  do  it  in  opposition  to
the  promptings  of  the  Spirit  of  Truth
that  is  within  us.  Man,  the  noblest
work  of  God,  was  in  his  creation  de-
signed for  an  endless  duration,  for
which  the  love  of  all  good  was  incor-
porated in  hid  nature.  Tt  was  never
designed  that  lie  should  naturally  do
and  love  evil.

When  our  first  parents  fell  from
their  paradisaical  state,  they  were
brought  in  contact  with  influences  and
powers-  of  evil  that  are  unnatural
and  stand  in  opposition  to  an  endless
life.  So  far  as  mankind  yield  to  these
influences,  they  are  ho  far  removed
from  a  natural  to  an  unnatural  state
—from  life  to  death.  Adam  and  Eve
did  not  sin  because  it  was  in  then*
nature  to  love  sin,  but,  as  Paul  says
in  his  Epistle  to  Timothy,  *£  Adam
was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman
being  deceived  was  in  the  transgres-
sion. Notwithstanding,  she  shall  be
saved  in  child  bearing,  if  they  con-
tinue in  faith,  and  charity,  and  holiness,
with  sobriety."  The  enemy  of  all
righteousness  deceived  the  woman,
and  Adam  went  with  her  that  man
might  be,  and  that  she  might  be
saved  in  child-bearing,

I  hold  that  it  is  easier  to  do  right
than  wrong,  and  that  it  gives  more
real  satisfaction,  more  sterling  happi-
ness, and  more  self-respect  to  any
person  to  do  a  good  deed  than  to  do

Tol.  IX.


306


joubxal  of  i>iscorB*i:s.


an  evil  deed.  "  Man  is  bora  in  to
trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward/*
and  that  in  consequence  of  sin's  being
in  the  world.

Brother  G«  D.  Watt  has  exhorted
us  to  let  truth  be  the  standard  to  all
our  sayings  and  actions.  While  he
was  so  fervent  for  the  truth  I  thought
of  the  harlot  Ralmb  who,  by  faith,

] X'iir-hed  not  with  them  that  believed
not,  when  she  had  received  the  spies
with  peace.  It  appears  that  this
ancient  harlot  told  the  king  of  Jericho
that  the  two  spies  went  out  of  the
city  when  it  was  dark,  about  the  time
of  the  shutting  of  the  gate,  while  at
the  same  time  she  had  hid  them  on
the  roof  of  her  house


how,  and  live  lives  they  need  not  be
ashamed  of.btfnre  God  and  the  hosts
of  heaven  and  hell.  A  great  many
wrongs  are  committed  more  from
mistake  and  ignorance  than  design  ;
and  in  judging  of  wrongs  done  it  is
more  just  to  judge  according  to  design
than  according  to  the  exterior  appear-
ance or  the  sight  o(  the  eye.

It  is  much  easier  to  live  the  life  of
a  Saint  than  to  live  the  life  of  a
sinner.  There  is  more  real  good
obtained  and  more  real  profit  gained
in  being  honest  and  in  telling  the
truth  as  it  is,  than  in  taking  the
opposite  course.  If  you  are  selling  an
animal  and  it  is  a  little  faulty,  deceive


tkf:  love  of  truth  and  iuchte jrsxESS,  etc.


307


purpose,  ho  will  follow  the  bent
of  his  own  inclination,  should  he  lose
his  life  in  so  doincr. This  is  human.

I  will  take  the  liberty  of  differing
with  many  of  my  brethren  with
regard  to  how  we  should  conduct
ourselves  towards  onr  wives*  I  am
a  great  lover  of  good  women.  I
understand  their  nature,  the  design  of
their  being,  and  their  worth,  1  have
been  acquainted  with  hundreds  of
men,  before  I  came  into  this  Church,
who  bellieved  that,  if  they  did  not
dictate  every  five  dollars  or  fifty  cents
that  they  had  in  their  pockets,  their
wive3  were  ruling  over  them.  On
this  point  I  shall  differ  wiili  all  who
differ  with  me.  If  I  have  five  dollars
and  I  can  spare  it,  and  ray  wife  wants
it,  I  tell  her  she  is  welcome  to  it.
What  do  von  want  to  get  with  it,
wife  ?  u  Oh,  something  that  pleases
jne."  I  do  not  believe  in  making  my
authority  as  a  husband  or  a  father
known  by  brute  force;  but  hy  a
superior  intelligence  —  by  show  i n g
them  that  I  am  capable  of  teaching
them.  If  I  have  a  wife  that  wants  to
be  humoured  with  five  dollars,  ves*
take  it ;  I  would  humour  her.  If  I
commit  wrong  towards  my  family,  it
is  because  I  let  them  use  what  they
should  not,  or  that  which  1  might
bestow  upon  the  poor.  I  may  humour
them  too  much.  I  will  humour  a
child  with  everything  I  consistently
can.  Docs  not  God,  in  his  provi-
dences, hear  and  IV  rbear  with  us  in
our  weaknesses  and  sins?  How
many  times  shall  I  forgive  a  brother,
and  bear  with  weaknesses  in  him  that
are  common  to  all  men  ?  So  long  as
he  doesnqt  intend  to  commit  wilful  sin.

When  our  little  children  handle
things  that  are  in  their  way.  the
knives,  forks,  pins,  rivdles,  r.ny thing,
and  scatter,  waste,  and  lose  them,  and
these  little  faults  are  committed  every
few  minutes  throughout  the  dav,  shall
we  forgive  the  children  or  whip  them  f
We  will  always  forgive  them  until


they  are  taught  better,  and  learn  to
know  good  from  evil,  right  from
wrong.  Our  Father  in  heaven  deals
with  us  his  children  upon  this  prin-
ciple. Do  I  helieve  in  humouring  too
far?  No.  My  Priesthood  and  calling
as  a  minister  of  salvation  must  La
honoured  ;  and  if  the  Lord  has  placed
me  to  be  the  head  of  a  family,  let  rae
be  so  in  all  humility  and  patience,  not
as  a  tyrannical  rttler,  but  as  a  faithful
companion,  an  indulgent  and  affect-
ionate father,  a  thoughtful  and  unas-
suming superior;  let  me  be  honoured,
in  mv  station  through  faithful  dill-
genee,  and  he  fully  capahle,  by  the
aid  of  God  s  Spirit,  of  filling  my
office  in  a  way  to  effect  the  salvation
of  all  who  are  committed  to  my
charge.

When  I  was  first  married  I  was  toH
that  my  wife  would  role  uver  me,
because  I  was  too  indulgent;  I  do
not  think  that  she  did.  Wife,  when
you  spin  you  may  set  the  wheel  where
you  please ;  and  when  I  come  in  to
sleep  if , yon  have  moved  the  bed  from
the  northeast  corner  of  the  room  to
the  southeast  corner  it.  is  all  right,  if
you  are  pleased.  This  course  is  much
more  manly  than  to  quarrel  with  her
because  she  has  moved  the  bed
without  your  permission,  or  has  pub
the  shovel  and  the  ton<rs  on  the  left
instead  of  on  the  ricfhfc  hand  side  of
the  fire  place,  at. the  same  time  giving
her  to  understand  that  you  are  the
master  of  the  house.  But  wife,  I
have  made  you  a  good  water  bench,
and  a  sink,  and  under  the  sink  have
made  a  place  for  the  swill  pail,  and  I
would  like  to  have  vou  to  keen  tho
pails  in  their  respective  places.  If
you  will  put  the  swill  pail  where  tho
water  pail  should  be,  I  must  go  some-
where else  to  drink  water,  and  not
run  the  risk  of  drinking  out  of  the
swill  pail  in  the  night.  I  can  show
you  wife,  where  to  put  everything  in
your  house.  If  she  wants  so  many
tucks  in  hir  dress,  yes,  put  in  as


308


JOURNAL  Or  DISCOURSES.


many  as  you  want,  for  you  have  to
spin  and  weave  the  doth ;  make  the
dress  as  you  please,  that  is  your  busi-
ness ;  and  if  I  have  live  dollars  that
is  not  otherwise  appropriated  you  are
welcome  to  ib.  But  if  1  have  five
dollars  in  my  pocket  that  I  owe  and
have  promised  to  pay  to-morrow
morning,  it  must  be  paid.

If  a  woman  can  rule  a  man  and  he
not  know  it,  praise  to  that  woman.
Tlay  are  few  who  know  well  the  cilice
of  a  woman  from  that  of  a  man,  Im-
becility is  marked  upon  the  people  of
the  present  age.  All  who  have  their
eyes  open  to  see  and  their  minds  en-
lightened  to  understand  things  as
they  are,  will  subscribe  readily  to  this
declaration.  When  the  servants  of
God  in  any  age  have  consented  to
follow  a  woman  for  a  leader,  either  in
a  public  or  a  family  capacity,  they
have  sunk  beneath  the  .standard  their


organization  has  St  ted  them  for;
when  a  people  of  God  submit  to  that,
their  Priesthood  is  taken  from  them,
and  they  become  as  any  other  people.

I  shall  humor  the  wife  as  far  as  I
can  consistently ;  and  if  you  have
any  crying  to  do,  wife,  you  can
do  that  along  with  the  children,  fori
have  none  of  that  kind  of  business  to
do.  Let  our  wives  be  the  weaker
vessels,  and  the  men  be  men,  and
show  the  women  by  their  superior
ability  that  God  gives  husbands  wis-
dom and  ability  lo  lead  their  wives
into  his  presence.  I  want  the  brethren
and  sisters  to  kindly  manage  their
gf&irs  in-duors  and  out,  taking  irood
care  of  that  which  belongs  to  them,
and  being  contented  in  their  lots  and
stations.

God  bless  the  righteous,  and  I  do
not  care  how  soon  the  wicked  are
overthrown.  Amen.


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

Item  arte  by  President  Bhimiam Yoing  made  in  the  Boirc-nfi Great  Salt

Lake  C%,  July  13,  1862.

11EF0BTED  BY  G. I>.  WATT.


T  will  use,  for  the  foundation  of  my
remarks,  words  found  in  Rev,  11th
chap.,  15th  verse — '*  And  the  seventh
angel  sounded,  and  there  were  great
voices  in  heaven,  saying,  The  king-
doms of  this  world  are  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  ot  his
Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever
and  ever."


How  near  to  this  text  I  shall
preach,  I  know  not ;  there  is  enough
in  it  to  answer  my  purpose,  and  it
is  one  upon  which  a  great  deal  can
be  said.

The  plan  of  salvation  cannot  be  told
in  one  discourse,  nor  in  one  day,  one
month,  or  one  year,  for  it  is  from
everlasting  to  everlasting,  like  the


TIT K  KIXGPOltt  OF  GOP.


309


Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God,  without
hctmminjr  of  days  or  end  of  life.  The
Gospel  we  declare  unto  yon  leads  to
eternal  life,  and  this  kingdom  is  the
kingdom  of  God  which  he  has  pro-
mised, by  the  months  of  his  Prophets,
that  he  would  set  np  in  the  last  days
— a  kingdom  that  must  triumph  over
all  the  ills  that  afflict  the  family  of  man,
and  usher  in  everlastingrighteousness.  I

Man  has  wandered  far  from  his
Maker — far  from  the  path  of  recti-
tude his  Heavenly  Father  1ms  marked
out  for  his  feet — and  is  walking  in  a
way  strewn  with  dangers;  he  has  left
the  true  lieht,  and  is  walking  in
darkness ;  rejected  the  wisdom  and
intelligence  that  is  from  Heaven,  and
has  become  benighted  in  ignorance
and  unbelief,  neither  knowing  God,  nor
the  object  of  his  own  existence  upon
the  earth.  This  darkness  and  ignor-
ance must  be  dispelled  by  the  preach-
ing of  the  Gospel,  and  as  many  as
will  believe  on  the  Lord  J esus  Christ
and  walk  in  all  the  ordinances  of  God
blameless,  will  be  numbered  with  his
Saints  and  be  gathered  into  his
kingdom,  to  be  further  taught  the
principles  of  eternal  life.

The  kingdom  of  God  in  the  latter
days  must  triumph  upon  all  the  earth,
subdue  every  species  of  sin,  and
destroy  every  source  of  sorrow  to  I
which  down-trodden  humanity  has
been  subject.  The  work  of  making
the  kingdoms  of  the  world  the  king-  |
dom  of  God  and  his  Christ  has  com-
menced, and  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  without  exception,  will  yet
acknowledge  Jesus  to  \  e  the  Christ,
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Fathfer.
All  mankind  are  individuallv  in-
tercsted  in  this  Latter-day  Work,  for
all  have  a  future,  whether  glorious  or
inglorious.

Man  is  created  for  a  glorious  pur-
pose— for  a  life  that  is  eternal,  A
great  deal  is  comprehended  in  the
two  words  "  eternal  life  they
enthely  exclude  death. We  have  no


death  to  preach,  for  we  should  never
practice  the  principles  of  death,  but
I  pursue  the  path  that  leads  to  the
I  contin nation  of  the  lives.  The  world
will  lie  revolutionized  by  the  preach -
of  the  Gospel  and  the  power  of  the
Priesthood,  and  this  work  we  are
called  to  do.  In  its  progress  every
foolish  and  unprofitable  custom,  every
unholy  passion,  every  foolish  notion
in  politics  and  religion,  every  unjust
and  oppressive  law,  and  whatever  else
that  is  oppressive  to  man,  and  that
would  impede  his  onward  progress  to
the  perfection  of  the  Holy  Ones  in
eternity,  will  b^  removed  until  ever-
lasting righteousness  prevails  over  the
whole  earth.  Such  was  the  design
of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  in  the
days  of  the  Apostles.

It  is  written  in  the  book  of  tho
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  "And  when
they  found  them  not,  they  drew
Jason  and  certain  brethren  unto  the
rulers  of  the  city,  crying,  These  thst
have  turned  the  world  upside  down,
are  come  hither  also,"  Using  the
same  tiinarejthe  Elders  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints
are  called  to  right  up  the  world.  To
turn  it  over  is  a  gigantic  work,  but  it
will  be  done,  for  both  the  righteous
on  earth,  and  the  sanctified  in  heaven
are  working  at  it,  and  all  power  both
in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  given  to
the  Saviour  by  his  Father.  It  5s  our
business  to  fully  comprehend  the
savings  and  doings  of  the  Saviour  in
his  mission  on  the  earth,  which  is  lifo
to  all  who  believe  and  endure  to  the
end  in  the  pursuit  of  life  eternal.

A  life  time  is  too  short  to  tell  the
extent  of  the  mission  of  the  Saviour
to  the  hunum  family,  but  I  will
venture  to  use  one  of  his  sayings,  in
connection  with  what  I  have  already
quoted  from  the  book  of  Revelations.
When  he  was  arraigned  before  Pilate
to  be  tried  for  his  life,  ho  said  to
Pilate,  11  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this
world :  if  my  kingdom  were  of  this


JOUttNAL  OF


r>i>sc::>rrtsi:s.


world,  then  would  my  servants  fight,
that  I  should  not  be  delivered  to  the
Jews:  but  now  is  my  kingdom  not
from  hence."  Connect  this  saying
v-ith  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,
for  they  shall  be  called  the  children
of  God,"  and  wo  can  understand  huw
the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  of  this
world,  because  it  is  established  in
peace,  unlike  all  worldly  kingdoms
which  are  established  in  war.  The  motto
of  his  kingdom  is  "  Peace  on  earth  and
good  will  towards  men,"  and  hence  not
after  the  order  of  worldly  kingdoms.

It  was  remarked  this  morning  that
the  Book  of  Mormon  in  no  case  con-
tradicts the  Bible.  It  has  many  words
like  thuko  in  the  Bible,  and  as  a  whole
is  a  strong  witness  to  the  Bible.  Reve-
lations, when  they  have  passed  from
God  to  man,  and  from  man  into  his
written  and  printed  language,  cannot
ho  said  to  be  entirely  perfect,  though
they  may  be  as  perfect  as  possible
Wider  the  circumstances;  they  are
perfect  enough  to  answer  the  purposes
of  Heaven  at  this  time.

The  saying,  "  Jly  kingdom  is  not
of  this  world,"  and  the  saying,  "The
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  be-
come the  kingdu?ns  of  Cod  and  his
Christ,'1  at  the  first  glance  would
appear  palpable  contradictions;  but
ift  hen  they  are  rend  with  their  proper
connections  and  by  a  person  whose
n 1  is  enlightened  by  the  power  of
flu  Holy  Ghost,  instead  of  contra-
diction between  them  there  is  seen  to
exist  a  perfect  harmony,  Joseph
Smith,  the  Prophet  of  the  last  days,
liad  a  happy  faculty  of  reducing  the
things  of  heaven  to  the  capacity  of
persons  of  common  understanding,
c!ten  in  a  single  sentence  throwing  a
flood  of  light  into  the  gloom  of  ages.
He  had  power  to  draw  the  spirits  of
the  people  who  listened  to  him  to  his
standard,  where  they  communed  with
heavenly  objects  and  heavenly  prin-
ciples, connecting  the  heavenly  and
the  earthly  together — in  one  blending


flood  of  heaven!}"  intelligence,  AYhen
the  mind  is  thus  lit  up  with  the
Spirit  of  revelation,  it  is  clearly  dis-
cerned that  the  heavens  and  the  earth
are  in  close  proximity — that  time  and
eternity  are  one.  We  can  then  under-
stand that  the  things  of  God  are
things  which  pertain  to  his  children,
and  that  the  expression,  form  and
sympathies  of  his  earthly  children  per-
tain to  their  Great  Father  and  Creator.

It  has  been  thought  by  some  that
the  kingdom  Jesus  established  on  the
earth,  when  he  was  here  in  the  flesh,
was  not  the  kingdom  Daniel  saw.
Pardon  me,  if  I  difter  from  this  view
and  say  that  it  was  the  very  kingdom
that  Daniel  saw,  but  it  was  not  then
the  time  to  establish  it  in  its  fullness,
it  was  not  then  the  time  for  the  king-
dom of  God  to  subdue  all  other  king-
doms as  it  would  in  the  latter  days.

Jesus  came  to  establish  his  spiritual
kingdom,  or  to  introduce  a  code  of
morals  that  would  exalt  the  spirits  of
the  people  to  godliness  and  to  God,
that  they  might  thereby  secure  to
themselves  a  glorious  resurrection
and  a  title  to  reign  on  the  earth  when
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  sliould
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and
his  Christ.  He  also  came  to  intro-
duce himself  as  the  Saviour  of  the
world,  to  shed  his  blood  upon  the
altar  of  atonement,  and  open  up  the
way  of  life  to  all  believers.  When
Jeeps  came  to  his  own  they  received
him  not,  but  said,  u  This  is  the  heir,
let  us  kill  him  and  seize  on  his  inheri-
tance and  they  caught  him  and  east
him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew
hhff  Had  the  Jews  received  him
as  the  heir,  and  treated  him  as  such,
he  would  have  established  his  king-
dom among  them  at  that  time,  both
spiritually  and  temporally;  and  they
would  have  gathered  the  lost  tribes
that  wandered  from  Jerusalem,  would
have  overcome  their  enemies,  pos-
sessed Palestine  in  peace,  and  spread
to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth


THE K1NUU0M OF  COB.


;U3


laws  of  the  Gospel  to  obtain  the  Spirit  |
of  truth  from  the  great  Fountain  of
truth,  when  ho  hoars  a  truth,  whether
moral,  religious,  scientific,  or  mechani-
cal, whether  it  pertains  to  God,  to
man,  to  the  heavens,  or  to  the  earth,
that  truth  is  congenial  to  his  feelings,
and  it  seems  to  him  that  he  had
known  it  all  his  life.  Notwithstand-
ing the  dreadful  effects  of  the  fall  of
man,  almost  all  men  delight  in  truth
mid  righteousness.  If  men  are  not
righteous  them  selves,  as  a  general
thing  they  honour  and  revere  a
righteous  person  more  than  they  do
the  wifked  and  fioward.  .V  low  in
these  latter  da\rs  have  ventured  to
stem  the  current  of  iniquity  ;  defying
the  finger  of  scorn  t  hey  have  raised
their  hands  to  Heaven  saying,  "  we
are  for  God."  They  repeat  a  glorious
text,  "  The  kingdom  of  God  or
nothing/1  It  is  with  them,  u  Heaven
or  nothing/*  The  Lord  must  reign
and  ride.

We  did  not  produce  ourselves.  We
did  not  make  the  earth,  nor  stretch
out  the  starry  heavens.  We  have
not  sought  out  the  wisdom  of  him
who  formed  the  foundations  of  the
great  deep,  nor  explored  the  vast  nest
of  his  skill  in  the  formation  of  the
tinny  tribes,  "Who  removeLh  the
mountains  and  they  knew  not ;
who  overturncth  them  in  his  anger;
who  shakcth  the  earth  out  of
her  place,  and  the  pillars  thereof
tremble;  who  commandeth  the  sun,
and  it  riseth  not ;  and  sealeth  up  the
stars ;  who  alone  spreadeth  out  the
heavens,  and  tread eth  upon  the  waves
of  the  sea ;  who  maketh  Aicturus,
Orion,  and  Pleiades  and  the  chambers
of  the  south  ;  who  doeth  great  things
past  finding  out,  yea,  and  wonders
without  number."

Philosophy  has  tried  to  search  out
God,  hut  it  stands  aghast  amid  the
great  and  wondrous  works  of  the
great  Supreme,  It  acknowledges  a
great  Designer  and  Framer  of  the


universe,  but  how  to  approach  him,
it  iindeth  not.  This  great  Being  is
the  God  of  the  Latter-day  Saints;  to
whom  we  accede  the  right  of  reigning
over  the  workmanship  of  his  own
hands.  It  is  his  right  to  control  tho
gold  and  the  silver,  the  wheat  and
the  fine  flour,  yea,  all  the  elements
that  have  been  enumerated  by  the
searching  eye  of  philosophy  and
science,  and  tlir.se  that  are  past
finding  out  by  mortals  in  their  present
state.  Has  an  unholy  principle,  a
wicked  influence  that  leads  to  death,
the  right  to  control  the  ability  and
power  to  do  good  which  God  hag
placed  in  man  ?  No.  God  alone
has  the  right  to  control  the  intelli-
gence that  is  in  the  human  family,  for
he  is  the  giver  of  it.

Religious  people  talk  a  great  deal
about  doing  wondrous  great  things
for  the  Lord — about  doing  this,  that
and  the  other  for  the  glory  of  God.
Every  good  that  man  performs  is,
firstly,  lor  his  own  benefit  and  eternal
welfare,  if  he  continues  in  well  doing,
and  secondly,  for  the  common  good
of  others,  so  far  as  his  example  and
the  influence  of  good  done  effects
others.  We  may,  for  comparison  s
sake,  imagine  a  great  king  who  has
many  kingdoms  to  dispose  of  and
many  sons  to  give  them  to,  but  one
of  his  sons  will  not  have  his  kingly
father  to  rule  over  him,  neither  will
he  accept  of  any  of  his  favours.  Now,
if  any  body  suffers  loss  in  this  case,  it
is  the  proud,  rebellious  son  ;  the  father
can  give  the  kingdom,  that  he  other-
wise would  have  given  to  his  wayward
son,  to  a  more  worthy  subject.  He
is  all  powerful,  and  bestows  ability  to
whom  he  will  to  become  powerful  like
himself.  t£  If  I  were  hungry,  I  would
not  tell  thee  :  for  the  world  is  mine,
and  the  fulness  thereof.  Will  I  eat
the  flesh  of  bulls  or  drink  the  blood
of  goats?  Offer  unto  God  thanks-
giving, and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the
Jffost  High."


314


JornxAi:  of  i>iscoiTi!SK$


The  generations  of  men  from  the
beginning  have  refused  to  pa}'  homage
to  their  God,  and  to  render  unto
him  that  which  belong  t<>  him.
If  men  serve  God,  it  is  to  their  advan-
tage ;  but  they  suppose  that  they
sacrifice  a  great  deal  for  God  a  tad  do
him  a  great  service,  and  are  enriching
him  and  impoverishing  themselves.
Render  unto  God  that  which  is  God?s,
I  care  not  whether  it  be  gold,  silver
or  copper.  When  men  extract  the
precious  metals  from  the  earth,  they
breathe  the  air,  drink  the  water  and
eat  the  food  that  belongs  to  God,

I  could  give  the  reasons  why  the
servants  of  God,  from  the  beginning,
have  not  been  able  to  establish  his
kingdom  on  the  earth,  but  I  have  not
time  to  do  so  to-day.  In  these  latter
days,  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will
become  "  the  kingdom*  of  our  God
and  his  Christ,"  and  those  who  have
gold  and  silver  and  wealth  of  other
descriptions,  and  refuse  to  devote  it
to  the  Lord,  are  blind  and  naked  and
destitute  of  that  wisdom  which  comes
from  above.  The  breath  that  is  in
their  nostrils  is  not  really  their  own.
All  people  live  upon  the  bounty  of
the  Almighty,  yet  they  say  that  the
precious  metals  are  theirs,  avid  they
will  devote  this  wealth  to  their  own
service,  revel  in  luxury,  and  do  as
they  please.  Those  who  possess  the
wealth  of  this  world,  possess  it  by  the
permission  of  the  Almighty,  and  then
they  go  heedlessly  on  in  the  way  to
destruction.  How  long  ?  Until
their  race  is  run.

All  must  have  the  privilege  of
proving  to  God  and  angels  what  they
will  do  with  the  talent  and  ability
God  has  given  them,  whether  they
will  waste  their  blessings  in  pandering
to  unholy  appetites  or  use  them  in  the
way  God  has  designed  they  should.
This  is  one  great  reason  why  men
are  permitted  to  do  as  they  do.  It  is
art  orthodox  doctrine  that  God  has
decreed  whatsoever  comes  to  pass,  1


He  has  decreed  many  things  to  come
to  pass,  but  not  all  things.  He  hf>s
not  decreed  that  one  man  si i all
blaspheme  his  name,  and  that  another
shall  often  be  found  on  his  knees
praying  to  him  ;  this  is  left  to  the
free  volition  of  the  creature.  All  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  had  the
privilege  of  proving  themselves  before
God  in  their  life  time  whether  they
delighted  in  that  which  was  right  or
that  which  was  wrong,  and  according
to  that,  those  who  have  been  without
law  will  be  judged  without  law.
AYhat  better,  in  the  sight  of  Heaven,
Hre  those  who  plafce  their  affections
upon  earthly  wealth,  than  the  children
of  Israel  who  worshipped  a  calf?

Those  who  wish  to  join  us  in  this
great  work,  must  do  as  we  have  done,
to  obtain  that  which  wehave  obtained.
It  is  not  our  business  to  question  the
validity  of  any  of  the  laws  and  ordi-
nances of  G©d.  It  is  no  matter  to  us
how  simple  the  ordinance  he  requires
us  to  submit  to,  :n  order  to  attain  a
certain  end.  He  has  said,  i;  he  that
belie  vet  h  and  is  baptized  shall  bo
saved."  If  he  has  instituted  baptism
in  water  for  the  remission  of  sins,  it
is  not  our  business  to  question  his
right,  to  do  this,  by  quarrelling  with
the  mode  of  this  ordinance.  If  he
had  told  us  to  di^  a  hole  in  the
ground  and  bury  ourselves  for  a
certain  length  of  time,  it  is  his  right
to  do  so,  and  our  advantage  to  obey.
Whenever  the  Gospel  has  been
preached  in  any  age  of  the  world,  the
ordinance  of  baptism  has  been  in  force.
It  had  the  same  validity  in  the  days
of  Adam,  Enoch,  and  Noah  as  in  the
days  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  Apostles,
or  as  it  has  now.

An  angel  of  the  Lord  visited  Adam,
when  Adam  was  offering  up  sacrifice.
The  angel  asked  him  why  he  was
offering  up  sacrifice.  Adam  replied,
I  know  not,  but  this  I  do  know,  the
Lord  has  commanded  me,  therefore  I
offer  up  sacrifice. It  may  be  said


318


JOURNAL  OF  MSCOUR8F.S.


of  the  vine  anew  wit  h  us  in  Lis  Father's
kingdom ,  when  he  comes  again  and
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  becomes
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and
his  Christ.  The  kingdoms  of  this
world  must  he  prepared  for  his  coming
by  the  proclamation  of  the  Gospel,  or

be  wiped  oot  of  existence.

The  whole  would  have  lost  con-
fidence in  themselves  and  in  their
God*  How  can  it  be  restored  ?  By
beginning  to  serve  God,  and  then
trying  to  induce  every  man  and
woman  to  join  heart  and  hand  in  this
moral  reformation.  By  associating
with  those  with  whom  you  can  trust
your  wealth,  honour,  good  name,
virtue  and  integrity,  and  inviting  all
to  join  you  who  are  full  of  integrity
and  honour,  and  who  will  treat  you  as
the  angels  of  God  would  if  they  were
here.  We  must  restore  the  integrity
and  confidence  which  have  been  lost
to  the  world  The  icings  upon  their
thrones  have  to  pay  for  their  positions,
for  they  cannot  trust  themselves  in
the  hands  of  their  attendants,  without
bribery.  Only  the  semblance  of
honour,  integrity  and  confidence  are
to  be  found  in  the  world,  and  even
that  brings  a  high  price;  however,
this  general  remark  has  iUt honour-
able exceptions.  We  must  find  men
and  women  that  we  can  trust  with
every fhing  that  is  sacred  to  us,  or
the  kingdom  of  God  can  never  be
established  upon  the  earth.  The
Lord  will  not  acknowledge  a  people
who  will  falsify  their  word  and  are
unvirtuousj  he  will  not  long  trust  a
man  of  that  kind  with  any  of  the  affairs
of  his  kingdom.  He  will  not  trust  an
nnvirtuous  people  with  his  Holy  Priest-
hood. He  will  not  trust  a  people  with
property — with  earthly  wealth — who
will  covet  the  same  and  use  it  to  pander
to  their  lusts,  and  otherwise  devote  it  to
the  power  of  the  enemy  <  God  and  man.

The  business  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  is  to  bring  for  th  the  kingdom
of  God  in  the  last  days,  morally,  rc-


|  ligiously,  and  politically.  Will  they
do  it  ?  I  rather  think  they  will,  with
the  help  of  God*  No  matter  what
the  enemies  of  God  and  his  cause  do
with  our  name,  or  with  our  means ;
no  matter  how  oft  on  they  hurl  us
from  our  habitations  and  drive  us
from  city  to  city,  and  from  county  to
county,  let  every  one  of  us  be  found
standing  upon  the  pedestal  of  truth
nod  virtue,  defiling  not  our  persons
by  sin  in  any  way.  Let  us  esteem
all  that  we  are  permitted  to  possess
as  given  to  us  of  the  Lord;  whether
it  be  gold,  silver,  goods,  houses,  lands,
or  wives  and  children,  they  are  all  the
Lord's  The^e  blessings  are  only  lent
to  US,  When  we  have  passed  this
earthly  ordeal  and  have  proven  to  the
Leavens  that  we  are  worthy  to  be
crowned  with  crowns  of  glory,  im-
mortality and  eternal  lives,  then  the
Lord  will  say  these  are  yours,  but
until  then  we  own  nothing,

Will  all  believe  as  we  believe  ?  I
know  not,  I  would  be  pleased  if  all
men  would  believe  the  truth  and
practice  righteousness.  If  they  have
truth  in  their  possession,  I  wish  them
to  be  as  generous  with  it  as  I  am,  I
freely  impart  to  my  fellow-beings  al!
the  truth  I  know  of,  and  all  the  rules  of
godliness  I  am  in  possession  of.  My
religion  tenches  me  to  embrace  all
truth  in  the  heavens,  on  the  earth,
under  the  earth,  and  in  the  bottomless
pit,  if  there  is  any  there.  My  creed
embraces  all  truth.  If  you  have
truth  that  I  have  not,  let  me  know
it,  and  it  will  come  to  were  it  belongs ;
and  if  I  have  truth  which  ymi
have  not  you  are  welcome  to  it.
There  is  no  need  of  debate  and  con-
tention in  regard  to  truth  and  error,
for  debate  tends  to  create  a  spirit  of
bitterness.

There  is  no  need  for  war  and
bloodshed,  for  the  earth  is  large
enough  for  all.  The  elements  of
which  this  earth  is  composed  are  all
around  it. Philosophers  say  the  at-


THE  KlXfiDOM  OF  GOD.


31


mosphere  is  forty  miles  deep.  Be
this  as  it  inav,  there  are  no  bounds
to  the  elements  that  compose  worlds
I;ke  this.  This  earthly  bstll.  this
little  opake  substance  thrown  otF  into
*p:'iee.  is  only  a  speck  iu  I  lie  great
universe ;  and  when  it  is  celestialized
it  will  go  back  into  the  presence  of
God,  where  it  was  first  framed.  All
belongs  to  God,  and  those  who  keep
his  celestial  law  will  return  to  him.

Many  inquiries  are  made  as  to
what  will  become  of  that  portion  of
the  world  of  mankind  who  have  died
without  law.  When  we  return  to
build  up  the  waste  places  of  Zion,
then  will  the  Scripture  be  fulfilled —
"Him  thai  overcome  th  will  I  make
a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and
he  shall  go  no  more  out:  and  I  will
write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,
and  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God,
which  is  New  Jerusalem,  which
cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my
God  :  and  I  will  write  upon  him  my
new  name."  The  servants  of  God
will  officiate  for  the  dead  in  the  tem-
ples of  God  which  will  bebttilfc.  The
Gospel  is  now  preached  to  the  spirits
in  prison,  and  when  the  time  comes
for  the  servants  of  God  to  officiate
for  them,  the  names  of  those  who
have  received  the  Guspel  in  the  spirit
will  be  revealed  by  the  angels  of  God
and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  per-


fect; also  the  places  of  their  birth,
the  age  in  which  they  lived,  and
everything  regarding  them  that  is
necessary  to  be  recorded  oq  earth,
and  they  will  then  be. saved  so  as  to
find  admittance  into  the  presence  of
God,  with  their  relatives  who  have
officiated  for  them.  The  wicked  will
be  cleansed  and  purified  as  by  fire ;
some  of  them  will  be  saved  as  by
fire.  Some  will  be  given  over  to  the
buifetting  of  Satan,  that  their  spirits
may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord
Jesus.  Others  will  receive  their
bodies,  but  cannot  be  saved  in  the
kingdoms  and  mansions  that  are  in
the  presence  of  God.  All  the  chil-
dren of  ifien  will  receive  a  glory  in
the  mansions  of  God  according  to
their  capacities,  and  rewards  accord-
ing to  their  acts  j 1 1  the  ilesh.

Brethren  and  friends,  do  you  na-
turally despise  such  a  doctrine  as  this,
or  does  it  find  a  response  of  welcome
in  your  bosuins?  My  soul  says,
Hallelujah,  every  moment  I  think  of
the  ample  provisions  God  has  made
tor  his  sons, and  daughters.  They
will  not  welter  in  hell  to  an  endless
eternity,  but  they  will  rise  higher
and  higher,  and  continue  to  increase
in  intelligence  and  love  of  truth  as
they  advance.  There  will  be  an  eter-
nal progress  in  the  knowledge  of  God,

May  God  bless  the  people.  Amen.


THE  KlXfiDOM  OF  GOD.


31


mosphere  is  forty  miles  deep.  Be
this  as  it  inav,  there  are  no  bounds
to  the  elements  that  compose  worlds
I;ke  this.  This  earthly  bstll.  this
little  opake  substance  thrown  otF  into
*p:'iee.  is  only  a  speck  iu  I  lie  great
universe ;  and  when  it  is  celestialized
it  will  go  back  into  the  presence  of
God,  where  it  was  first  framed.  All
belongs  to  God,  and  those  who  keep
his  celestial  law  will  return  to  him.

Many  inquiries  are  made  as  to
what  will  become  of  that  portion  of
the  world  of  mankind  who  have  died
without  law.  When  we  return  to
build  up  the  waste  places  of  Zion,
then  will  the  Scripture  be  fulfilled —
"Him  thai  overcome  th  will  I  make
a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and
he  shall  go  no  more  out:  and  I  will
write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,
and  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God,
which  is  New  Jerusalem,  which
cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my
God  :  and  I  will  write  upon  him  my
new  name."  The  servants  of  God
will  officiate  for  the  dead  in  the  tem-
ples of  God  which  will  bebttilfc.  The
Gospel  is  now  preached  to  the  spirits
in  prison,  and  when  the  time  comes
for  the  servants  of  God  to  officiate
for  them,  the  names  of  those  who
have  received  the  Guspel  in  the  spirit
will  be  revealed  by  the  angels  of  God
and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  per-


fect; also  the  places  of  their  birth,
the  age  in  which  they  lived,  and
everything  regarding  them  that  is
necessary  to  be  recorded  oq  earth,
and  they  will  then  be. saved  so  as  to
find  admittance  into  the  presence  of
God,  with  their  relatives  who  have
officiated  for  them.  The  wicked  will
be  cleansed  and  purified  as  by  fire ;
some  of  them  will  be  saved  as  by
fire.  Some  will  be  given  over  to  the
buifetting  of  Satan,  that  their  spirits
may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord
Jesus.  Others  will  receive  their
bodies,  but  cannot  be  saved  in  the
kingdoms  and  mansions  that  are  in
the  presence  of  God.  All  the  chil-
dren of  ifien  will  receive  a  glory  in
the  mansions  of  God  according  to
their  capacities,  and  rewards  accord-
ing to  their  acts  j 1 1  the  ilesh.

Brethren  and  friends,  do  you  na-
turally despise  such  a  doctrine  as  this,
or  does  it  find  a  response  of  welcome
in  your  bosuins?  My  soul  says,
Hallelujah,  every  moment  I  think  of
the  ample  provisions  God  has  made
tor  his  sons, and  daughters.  They
will  not  welter  in  hell  to  an  endless
eternity,  but  they  will  rise  higher
and  higher,  and  continue  to  increase
in  intelligence  and  love  of  truth  as
they  advance.  There  will  be  an  eter-
nal progress  in  the  knowledge  of  God,

May  God  bless  the  people.  Amen.


320


JOURNAL


or  DiscornsKs.


that  the  man  or  woman  who  believes
that  the  religion  of  Jesus  leads  into  a
thorny  path,  does  not  understand  nor
enjoy  t be  true  religion  of  heaven.

We  can  say  to  all  the  world  that
the  persecution  which  the  Latter-
day  Saints  have  received,  and  the
misery  tliev  mav  have  suffered  in
consequence  1 hereof,  will  not  begin
to  compare  with  the  misery  and  real


ring  they  are  now  receiving  in
the  United  States  in  consequence  of
war.  In  Missouri  our  bleeding  feet
stained  the  prairies,  but  now  they  arc
sheeding  each  cithers  blood  to  curdle
and  bake  in  the  sun,  or  to  be  lieked
up  by  dogs  and  wild  animals,  while
ibeir  flesh  is  given  to  vultures  and
wolves.  We  wore  invited  to  siiju
awry  our  property  to  pay  the  expenses
uf  our  persecutors,  and  we  were  per-
mitted, as  a  body,  to  take  away  as
much  of  our  moveable  property  as
we  could  :  but  now  the  Secessionists
are  robbed  and  pillaged  without
mercy,  their  houses  are  burned  over
their  heads,  their  barns  are  destroyed,
their  food  and  clothing  are  taken,
and  the  women  and  children  are  left
without  anything  to  eat,  drink,  or
wear,  while  their  husbands,  fathers,
and  brother  are  either  killed  or
taken  prisoners.  In  the  same  manner
the  Secession  party  foil  upon  the
Federals  or  Union-men,  and  whip
them,  rob  them,  and  hang  them  up
at  their  own  doors  and  in  the  presence
of  their  families.  Then  comes  a  third
party  who  are  called  May- walkers  or
J  ay  hawkers,  but  more  properly  they
are  bucanneers  or  land-pirates,  and
they  rob  everybody  that  is  left  after
the  Union  and  Secession  parties  have
done  their  worst.  Have  we  ever
Suffered  like  that?  I  think  not.
When  they  come  across  a  small  set-
tlement  of  Secessionists  they  plunder
and  destroy  it,  and  when  they  come
across  a  hamlet  of  Unionists  they
serve  it  in  the  same  manner.  Did
the  Latter-day  Saints  ever  see  Such


times  ?  They  never  did.  They  never
suffered  any  tiling  in  comparison  to
what  the  people  in  many  of  the  States
arc  now  suffering

It  is  right  the  brethren  and  sisters
should  have  grace  to  sustain  them  in
doing  right,  and  it  is  right  they
should  pray  for  it ^  but  I  would  rather
they  possessed  good  sound  common
sense  to  begin  with,  and  know  what
to  do  with  the  &rrace  of  God  when
they  received  it.

I  never  try  any  other  way  to  please
people  only  by  pleasing  myself  and
my  God.  If  I  can  please  God  [  can
please  mvself :  then  I  care  verv  little
whether  anybody  else  is  pleased  or
not,  because  if  they  are  pleased  with
God  and  godliness  they  will  be  pleased
With  me.  AY  hen  Elders  preach  or
lecture  among  the  Saints  or  to  the
world,  if  they  do  so  to  satisfy  them-
selves they  have  done  well  When
you  have  pleased  yourselves  it  is  very
probable  that  you  have  pleased  human
beuurs  like  yourselves.

When  journeying  the  Saints  orga-
nize as  perfectly  as  they  can  for  safe
and  comfortable  travelling.  We  ap-
point one  man  to  this  duty,  another
to  that,  :md  every  man  attends  to  his
duty.  If  a  wa^mm  is  broken  the
captain  at  once  arranges  to  have  it
put  into  travelling  order.  If  there  is
a  stck  person  in  the  camp,  he  either
goes  himself  or  details  somebody  to
administer  to  the  sick  by  anoint ing
with  oiL  lav  ins:  on  of  hand  s,  an  d
prayer.  Perhaps  a  sister  is  fainting
Uy  the  way;  she  is  worn  out;  the
journey  is  too  much  for  her.  The
captain  procures  for  her  such  nourish-
ment as  can  be  found  in  camp,  to
give  her  strength  and  ability  to  en-
dure the  further  fatigues  of  the  jour-
ney ;  doing  everything  he  can  to  re-
store the  sick  to  sound  health,  and
giving  them  all  possible  comfort  and
aid.  Is  there  the  same  care  and
fellow  feeling  manifested  in  the  trains
of  emigrants  who  are  passing  over


THK  LOVK  OF  TlUTTIi AND  IUSIITFOUfiNESS,  KTC.


321


the  comrtry  in  search  of  gold  ?  Each
person  is  seeking  to  better  his  con-
dition, and  they  have  no  interest  that
extends  further  than  self.  It  is
with  them  as  with  the  man  that
prayed,  "  O  Lord,  bless  me,  my
wife,  my  son  John  and  his  wife,  we
four,  no  mure.  AmenV  They  are
for  themselves,  and  not  for  the  king-
dom of  God.  They  know  that  the
world  is  going  to  destruction.  They
gee  the  whole  world  in  confusion —
one  party  seeking  to  destroy  another
in  tin1  vain  hope  of  bml  liny  them-
selves np.  The  present  Government
of  the  1  n-ted  States  is  self-destrovinGT,
as  tnev  are  n  >vv  proving


If


re  is  one  class


of


earth  who  need  condor:  more  ,ihfMfi


the  inspiration  of  God?  and  since  much
adulterated  by  uninspired  translators,
which  makes  it  necessary  for  one  to
have  the  Spirit  of  revelation  from
God  to  read  and  understand  them.  I
believe  the  doctrine  that  the  Lord
taught  to  Adam  in  the  garden,  and
that  Adam  taught  to  his  children,
that  Enoch  taught  to  his  city  three
hundred  and  sixty-five  years,  pre-
paring1  a  people  to  go  into  the  pre-
I  sence  of  God  the  Father.  I  believe
the  doctrine  taught  l>v  Noah,  who
was  instructed  ot  t  iud  build  an  ark
t)  save  himself  and  family  Irom
destruction  in  the  threat  flood.  I
believe  the  doctrine  Abraham  taught,
tliat  Isaac,  Jacob  and  the  Patriarchs


l  •  I  T\  C±


III


811.


Mill  ...»


II!


II.


in


ii


ii.


ii!


\\\\


■891


iii  =:=:=:■;■:  w  v,


mutter;  should  not  a  people  Ft  el;
unto  their  God  r"  They  would  not
receive  revelations  from  God,  but,  as
they  were  told,  God  suffered  them  to
have  revelations  that  they  would  be-
lieve,  that  they  might  believe  lies  :md
be  damned-  Moses  tried  to  give  the
children  of  Israel  the  law  of  the
Gospel,  hut  they  would  not  receive
if.  The  Gospel  was  revealed  in  those
davs.  as  much  so  as  in  the  days  of

J 7  mi

Chris  t  and  his  Apostles.  They  had
the  Melchisedec  Priesthood,  and  were
entitled  to  all  the  promises  and  bless-
ings then  as  in  the  days  of  the
Aposiles,

When  Jesus  came  to  preach  the
will  of  his  Father,  he  cause  to  liis
own,  but  they  would  not  receive  him.
IJc  said  tu  them,  "  I  speak  that  which
I  have  seen  with  my  Father;  and  ye
do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with  your
Father.  Thev  answered  and  said
unto  him,  Abraham  is  our  father.
Jesus  saith  unto  them,  if  ye  were
Abraham's  children,  ve  wotiid  do  the
works  of  Abraham,  ihn  now  ye  seek
to  kill  me,  a  man  that  hath  tuhl  wu
the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of
God  ;( this  did  not  Abraham/*  The
Jews  wanted  to  make  laws  to  guide
Gcd  and  his  children.  They  believed
many  of  the  doctrines  that  Abraham
believed  and  taught  They  practised
polygamy,  as  did  Abraham,  the
Patriarchs,  Closes,  David,  and  the
Prophets  down  to  the  days  of  the
Apostles.

Monogamy,  or  restrictions  by  law
to  one  wife,  is  no  pait  of  the  economy
of  Heaven  among  men.  Saeh  a  sys-
tem was  commenced  by  the  founders
of  the  Jtoinan  empire.  That  empire
was  founded  on  the  banks  of  the
Tiber  by  wandering  brigands.  When
these  robbers  founded  the  eitv  of
Rome,  it  was  evident  lo  thern  that
their  success  in  attaining  a  Valance  of
power  with  their  neighbours,  de-
pended upon  introducing  females  into
their Lody  politic, so they  stole


them  from  the  Sabines,  who  wgre


nea r  ne i ph  I xmrs.  The


itv  lof


.women  gave  existence  to  laws  restrict,
insr  one  wife  to  oiic  man.  Rome
became  the  mistress  of  the  world,  and
introduced  this  order  of  monogamy
wherever  her  sway  was  acknowledged.
Thus  this  monogamic  order  of  mar-
riage, so  esteemed  by  modern  Chris-
tian:* as  a  holy  sacrament  and  divine
institution,  is  nothing  but  a  system
established  by  n  set  of  robbers.

The  Congress  of  the  United  States
have  lately  passed  a  law  to  punish
polygamy  in  the  Territories  of  the
United  States  and  in  other  places
over  which  they  have  exclusive  juris-
diction. In  doing  this,  they  have
undertaken  to  dictate  the  Almighty
in  his  revelations  to  his  people,  and
those  who  handle  edged  tools,  unless
they  are  skillful,  are  apt  to  cut  their
finders:  and  tlio.se  who  hand  out
insult  to  the  Great  I  Am,  m  the  end,
are  apt  to  get  more  than  they  have
spoken  for.

Why  do  we  believe  in  and  practise
polviiamv  :  Because  the  Lord  intro-
duced  it  to  his  servants  in  a  revela-
tion given  to  Joseph  Smith,  and  the
Lord's  servants  have  always  practiced
it  "And  is  that  religion  popular  in
heaven  V  It  is  the  only  popular
religion  there,  for  this  is  the  religion
of  Abraham,  and.  unless  we  do  the
works  of  Abraham,  we  are  not  Abra-
ham's seed  and  heirs  according  to
promise.  W  e  believe  in  Jesus  Christ
the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,
who  has  introduced  the  Gospel  for
the  benefit  of  the  human  family,  to
happily,  exalt  and  glorify  them  intho
presence  of  the  Father,  not  to  make
them  miserable,  not  to  torture  them,
nor  cause  them  to  w  alk  in  the  gloomy
path  of  grief  all  their  days.  We
rejoice  in  this  Gospel,  it  is  all
glory,  hallelujah,  peace  and  com-
fort.' We  believe  in  following
the  admonitions  and  instructions  of
the  ancient  Prophets  and  Apostles,


THE  LOVE OF  TTtUTIT  AND li  IGHTEOUSNFSS,  ETC.


find  of  all  good  men  in  this  our
day-

I  do  not  make  these  remarks  to
.cast  reflections  upon  any  being,
but  we  should  strive  to  know  the
mind  and  will  of  God  and  to  be
filled  with  his  Spirit,*  I  vvihh  the
Saints  to  he  filled  with  the  Spirit  of
understanding  :  and  T  never  want  to
again  hear  a  Saint  say,  *bOh,  Low  we
suffer  for  the  religion  of  Jesus!  We
suffer  more  than  the  wicked,  while
fit  the  same  time,  we  are  Letter
clad,  better  fed  and  better  looking,
and  our  hearts  are  tilled  with  joy,
while  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  are
tilled  with  soitow  and  Monrninr*
All  the  cheerful? less,  gladness,  com-
fort, exuberance  of  spirit,  joy,  blits
pence  and  brightness  of  expression
that  can  be  bestowed  upon  indivi-


duals are  posse:


id


I


the  sanctified  in  heaven,  and  if  we
are  prepared  by  the J  iineiples  of
eternal  life,  the  same  halo  will  shine
through  our  countenance  and  m
our  faces  bright  with  Lrlov\\


nonsense  of  the  wicked  world.  There
are  men  in  this  kingdom  who  cannot
discriminate  bet  wee*  that  which  is  of
(J od  and  that  which  is  not  of  him,
and  who  are  at  a  loss  to  know  how
far  to  go  and  not  sin.  The  very  mo-
ment you  have  a  doubt  upon  your
mind  that  what  you  do  is  not  exactly
right,  then  stop  rind  pursue  that
course  which  you  know  is  right,  and
in  which  you  can  enjoy  the  clear,
warn?,  chcerirg,  pear*  Jul  inthienee
which  cometh  from  God  as  an  earnest
that  you  ate  doing  right,  then  shall
you  be  blessed  in  all  your  works  here
below,  a:  d  fill  up  your  cays  in  use-
fulness* I  heard  a  man  >n\\  the
other  day,  who  is  in  the  evening  of
his  davs,  that  if  he  had  never  done
much  good,  he  had  never  done  any
evil  that  he  knew  of  God  will  receive
rill  such  in  the  heavens,  when  they
put  off*  this  mortality.

I  fell  to  bless  and  not  curse.  Had
I  the  power  I  would  rather  avert
:e  |  en  eyil  that  I  saw  coming  upon  any
individual  or  people,  and  see  (hem


Whatever  leads  to  vanity,  li^ht- lead  into  the  path  of  hi


s,  though


ness,  and  world  1  v-mindedncss  is  not it  should  cause  mv  words  to  fail.

*  *

the  joy  of  heavenly  beings,  but  the  » May  God  bless  you.  Amen.


*


32 1


JOI  IlNAL  OF  MS^orBRKS.


SITY  OF  THE  LIVING  ORACLES  AMONG  THE  SAINTS.
EXHORTATION  TO  OBEDIENCE  TO  COUNSEL.


Rem&rJtf  by  Elder  WiLFmin  WoonnUFF,  jju^'  in  th>  Tahvm<td*\  Gn  <tf  S  df

5  Sale  City,  April  ts  1  802.


IllcroliTKD  BY  J.  V.  LOXG


The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  has
Lad  &  vast  amount  of  teaching,  espe-
cially of  lute.  We  haye  had  a  great
deal  of  good  cunriscl  and  instruction
in  xhis  Conference;  the  truth  has
Leen  StfDpluied,  doctrine  elucidated
and  made  plain  to  our  mule  s  tandings
through the  revelations  of  Jesus

Christ,  and  I  really  feel  that  we  have

greal  eause  to  njoice.  There  is  one
truth  that  becomes  still  more  -evident
to  mv  mind,  and  I  think  to  the  minds
of  this  people  generally,  and  that  is
the  importance  and  necessity  of  our
being  governed  and  eonti  oiled  dsiv
hy  day  hy  the  revelations  of  God.
Now,  ve  inwv  fake  ihe  liiMe,  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  we  may  read  them
throusrli./aid  every  other  revelation
that  has  been  gk'en  to  us,  and  they
would  scarcely  be  sufficient  to  guide

Ti5i  bm  n*v-ftfur  hours.  We  have  only
an  outline  of  our  duties  written  ;  we
are  1*  he  tuiided  bv  tin  livi?  0  <  •  .  -ch  s.
The  ten  command  men  is  are  voiy
good,  and  the  great  and  glorious
prh  e!ph  s  pertaining  to  the  redemp-
tion of  man,  the  revelations  pertain-
ing  to  events  that  are  past  and  to  the
things  of  the  mysterious  and  unborn
.jfhture,  and  there  are  also  many  choice
and  precious  things  relating  to  the
redemption  of  man,  to  the  present
and  future  greatness  of  the  Saints ;
but  where  can  we  find  one  revelation
that  tells  us  that  we  should  raise
three  hundred  teams,  or  twelve
hundred  yoke  of  cattle,  to  bring  up


the  pot.r  from  the  Missouri  river.  We
have  I  ten  informed  by  the  revelations
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  there
should  be  a  Temple  built  in  Jackson

County;  he:  has  tliere  been a  revela-
tion to  tell  us  how  long  or  how  high
it  should  be  ?  No,  „we  have  got  fo
be  governed  by  the  mind  and  will  of
God,  and  this  must  be  apparent  to
this  people;  it  shows  itself  more  and
moje.  President  Younir  tells  us  that
the  living  oracles  should  be  our  guide,
thai,  in  fact,  we  should  have  the
living  oracles  within  us  always.
Every  man  and  woman  hns  the  pri-
vilege of  being  baptized,  but  it  is  pot
the  jiivikge  of  every  ijian  to  lead
the  Church*  It  is  my  privilege  to
have  revelation  to  kopw  truth  from
en  or,  and  1  should  also  have  power
to  cast  out  Devils  and  to  heal  the  sick,
if  I  magnify  my  calling';  and  not  only
these  gilts,  i  ut  tongues,  interpreta-
tion of  tongues  f.nd  tlie  spirit  of
prophecy,  and  of  course  that  is  reve-
lation.

It  is  the  privilege  of  every  man
and  woman  in  this  kingdom  to  enjoy
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  which  is  the
Spirit  of  God ;  and  to  the  faithful  it
reveals  such  things  as  are  necessary
for  their  comfort  and  consolation,  and
to  guide  them  in  their  daily  duties.

1  can  say  that  I  rejoice  before  this
people  and  before  the  Lord  our  God,
in  the  great  blessiocs  which  he  has
poured  out  upon  us;  I  rejoice  that  he
is  carefully  watching  over  his  king-
dom and  people,  ai  d  it  is  manifest


PROCLAMATION'  OF  THH OUSI'KL  TO TUH DEAD,  F.TC.


327


eaten  his  last  sapper  with  his  dis-
ciples, which  we  commemorate  in  the
sacrament  on  the  Sabbath-day,  they
spilled  his  blood. On  the  third  day

lie  ruse  airaiu  from  the  dead,  showed

*t  *

himself  to  his  faithful  followers,  gave
them  further  instructions,  promised
thera  another  Comforter,  and  then
went  to  preach  to  the  spirits  in
prison,  opening  the  door  of  the  pro-
clamation of  the  Gospel  to  the  dead
as  well  as  to  the  living,  that  men  in
the  spirit  might  he  judged  according
to  men  in  i  he  Mesh,

The  present  American  war,  winch
brother  George  A.  Smith  has  dwvlt
Upon  this  af  ternoon,  has  disembodied
thousands  of  spirits,  who  are  gone  j
into  the  spirit  world  to  mingle  with
those  spirits  who  are  unprepared  to  !
enter  the  presence  of  God. Now  we  j
who  hold  the  same  Priesthood  that  j
Christ  and  his  Apostles  held,  who
fullow  him  in  the  regeneration,  will
also  become  the  saviours  of  men  on  !
earth  and  in  the  spirit  world  ;  there-
fore, the  thousands  slain  in  the  present  j
war  are  not  without  hope. It  is  our
calling  to  preach  life  and  salvation  to
them  e veu  in  another  existence  ;  and
it  is  our  dutv  so  to  live  that  we
honour  our  high  calling  in  this  world
to  be  prepared  to  labour  for  the  souls  j
of  men  in  the  next. We  should
forsake  the  world  and  its  pernicious
ways,  and  serve  thp  Lord  our  God
with  our  might,  soul  and  strenght.

The  word  of  the  Lord  to  ail  the
world,  and  to  all  Israel,  is  repent  i
and  turn  to  the  Lord  your  God  with
all  your  hearts. The  Lord  does  not
require  that  t»f  us  which  we  cannot
do.  We  can  forsake  every  unrighteous
principle  and  cleave  to  principles  of
truth,  wherein  is  the  power  of  God.
No  man  can  have  the  power  of  God
who  dishonours  the truth. Jesus  *
took  Peter,  James  arid  John  into  a
high  mountain,  and  there  gave  them  j
their  endowment,  and  placed  upon  J
them  authority  to  Ier.d  the  Church  uf


Gcid  in  all  the  world,  to  ordain  men
to  the  Priesthood,  to  set  in  order  the
Church  and  send  forth  the  Elders  of
Israel  to  preach  to  a  perishing  world.
For  the  same  purpose  lias  the  Lord
called  us  up  into  these  high  moun-
tains, that  we  may  become  endowed
[  with  power  from  on  high  in  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  and
become  kings  and  priests  unto  God,
which  we  never  can  be  lawfully  until
we  are  ordained  and  sealed  to  that
uowcr,  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  a
kingdom  of  kings  and  priests,  and  will
rise  in  mighty  power  in  the  last
days.

m

Some  people  are  taken  captive  by
the  adversary,  and  are  seduced  to
bring  themselves  under  obligations
never  to  raise  the  standard  of  King
Emanuel  again.  We  have  not  en-
listed in  the  cause  of  truth  for  a
limited  time,  but  for  time  and  all
eternity ;  we  are  not  to  be  taken
prisoners,  or  ever  lay  down  our  anus
to  submit  in  the  least  degree  to  the
enemy  of  all  righteousness,  and  the
Lord  helping  us,  we  never  will ;  the
world,  with  all  their  combinations  of
earthly  power,  and  earthly  cunning
and  wisdom  will  never  bring  us  into
subjection.  That  time  is  past,  if  wo
keep  the  covenants  and  vows  we  have
made  in  the  house  of  God.  I  know
that  as  well  as  I  know  that  this  is  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Sainls,  that  Joseph  Smith  was  sent  of
God  to  organize  it,  and  that  the  men
who  now  lead  it  on  earth  are  his
authorized  ministers.  If  we  follow
them  as  they  follow  Christ,  Go  1  will
give  us  the  victory.  But  we  must
act  as  one  man  ;  and  as  the  natural
body  is  dictated  by  the  conclusions  of
one  mind,  so  must  we  as  a  Church
and  people  act  under  the  dictation  of
one  head ;  yet,  "the  eye  cannot:  say
to  the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee;
nor  \\\z ain,  the  head  to  the  feet.  I  have
no  need  of  vou."

The  righteous  have  no  can  so  fo


.Inl'IlNAI.  or  MS<  m  I1SICS.


fear.  If  T  fear  anything,  it  is  that
this  people  are  becoming  wealthy,
becoming  fanciful,  :md  lull  of  love  for
the  vain  fashions  of  the  ungodly,
which,  if  indulged  in,  will  bring  them
troti hie  and  surruiv.

The  majority  of  this  people  are  a
righteous  people,  and  God  will  defend
the  righteous,  and  for  the  righteous*
sake  preserve  a  great  many  fur  the
time  being  that  arc  not  righteous:
for  he  has  great  respect  for  Ins
friends — for  his  anointed — for  the
elect  whose  lives  have  been  hid  with
Christ  in  God,  and  none  of  these  will
be  lost  because  Jesus  Christ  saves  all
whom  the  Father  has  put  in  his
power.  Then  let  us  be  cumforted
and  full  of  good  cheer ;  and  let  us,
with  a  good  will  as  a  people,  work
the  work  of  righteousness.  Let  every
person  be  filled  with  a  desire  to  excel
in  every  good  word  and  work,  and
strive  to  become  foremost  in  making
good  imprnvMnentsJayingtsidecvery-
thing  that  is  unnecessary,  and  cleaving
to  that  which  is  useful  and  necessary
to  give  us  power  and  independence
among  the  nations  of  the  world,  and
favour  with  God  and  angels  who  will
bear  i:s  off  victoriously.

Brother  George  A.  has  been  talking
about  our  driving.  In  this  1  have  an
ex t en s  1  ve  e x j >er  i e nee  d u r i  n  g  thirty
years  past  that  I  have  been  in  the
Church  ;  and  this  is  an  experience
that  no  man  can  obtain  only  by
passing  through  the  same  circum-
stances; but  nil  the  Saints  will  have
enough  of  trials  if  the v  are  faithful  to
their  God  and  themselves,  they  will
have  all  thev  can  possiblv  bear  in

*  IT  *

one  way  or  another.

Let  us  improve  our  homes,  our
city  and  our  country,  and  do  all  m
our  power  to  become  a  self  sustaining
people  by  making  at  home  everything  j
we  need  One  of  the  speakers  to-day
referred  to  the  ignorance  of  gardeners ;
it  made  me  think  of  a  gaidener  I  (
had. When  the  corn  was  in  the  sill:.


he  husked  it,  and  brought  if  into  my
family  to  feat;  he  said  he  thought
the  cob  was  the  part  to  eat.  He
pulled  the  water-melons  before  they
were  rip'"*,  and  divided  them  among
my  family.  Our  English  gardeners
are  cnacouainted  with  m.my  of  the
productions  °*  this  country,  and  hence
thev  make  Borne  little  mistakes-;  but
who  is  igno  ant  that  thev  cann-a
!earn  and  improve?

We  spend  a  great  deal  of  ready
monev  in the east and west  for
material  for  clothing  which  we  can
make  at  home,  i!  we  will  try-  We
can  make  laoe  and  silk,  and  different
kinds of  cloth, both cotton  and
woollen. We  have  as  good  weavers
(ns  can  be  found  in  any  country,  but  it
I  is  almost  impossible  to  get  any  of
j  them  into  a  loom ;  they  seem  to  love
;  rural  pursuits  better. When  they
were  in  England,  it  was  the  daily
business  of  manv  to  work  with  the

(lying  shuttle,  which  could  be  heard
all  over  the  land.

I  All  sane  persons,  old  said  young,
can  improve-  Some  say  they  are  too
old  to  improve,  but  there  is  no  person
too  old  to  be  damned  for  their  sins.
A  man  of  sixty  years  of  age,  if  be  has
improved  himself,  is  brighter  than  he
was  at  twenty  ;  he  is  filled  with  more
power,  energy  ar.d  life  ;  he  is  like  a
ripe  ear  of  corn  that  is  tilled  with  the
elements  of  life  more  than  a  green
car:  the old man will come  up

quicker  than  a  young  one.  There  is
brightness  in  old  men  r.nd  in  old
women  who  live  and  honour  God  and
their  own  existence.

What  brother  Ungham  has  said
in  relation  to  the  carelessness  of  hired
men  is  strictly  true.  I  have  had  a
man  in  my  employ  that  would  light
his  pipe  or  cigarette  and  smoke  in
the  hay  mow,  while  I  was  paying
him  twentv-five  dollars  a-month,  he-
sides  boarding  ami  washing,  which
altogether  would  amount  to  fifty
dollars  a  mo  , th  and  over;  and  then


would  wear  out  two  or  three  pairs  of
thin  boots  in  the  course  of  three
months,  for  which  ho  would  pay  fmm
eight  to  ten  dollars  a  pair,  and  then
r  m.pl am  he  had  not  wa^es  enough.
There  are  but  few  men  that  honest  ly
earn  their  wages.  Brother  Brigham
and  nivselT  u*cd  to  work  hard,  side
by  side,  for  fifty  cents  a  Hay  and  hoard
ourselves;  we  had  seventy- five  cents
a  day  when  we  worked  in  the  hay-
field  ;  we  would  work  from  sunrise  to
sunset,  and  until  nine  o'clock  at  night
if  there  was  si<m  of  rain.  We  would
rake  and  bind  after  a  cradler  for  a
bushel  of  wheat  a  day,  and  chop


wood,  with  snow  to  our  waist  for
eighteen  cents  a  cord,  and  take  our
pay  in  corn  at  seventy-five  cents  a
busbeh  : ,  '

There  is  an  impression  in  labourers
that  they  should  not  earn  their  em-
ployer anything  above  their  wage*,
What  man  would  keep  an  animal —
say  a  cow — that  never  made  any
increase  :  Such  an  animal  you  would
fat  and  eat.  These  are  a  few  things
which  we  sutler  from  one  another,
and  if  such  dishonesty  is  permitted  to
increase,  it  will  be  the  ruination  of
those  who  practise  it.

Afay  the  Lord  bless  you.  Amen.


A KNOWLEDGE  OF GOT)  OBTAINED  ONLY  THROUGH
OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  TRUTH.

lie-marls  by  President  Brigham  YouxO  wade  in  the  Bowery, Great  Sidt

Lake  City,  August  3,  1862.


Ii  KPORTKD  J\Y  (i. I).  WATT,


The  wav  of  life  and  salvation  is
mapped  out  so  plainly  in  the  Old  and
New  Testaments  that  any  man  may
read  and  understand,  yet  people  do
not  understand.  The  most  approved
geography  and  map  fail  to  give
a  description  and  delineation  of  any
people  or  country  so  perfectly  as  to
exclude  all  possibility  of  more  being
known  by  personally  visiting  and
examining  the  country  or  people
described.  A  mere  geographical
description  has  a  claim  only  upon  our
belief,  but  to  gain  a  perfect  knowledge
of  the  country  or  people  described  it
is  necessary  to  visit  that  country  and
people ;  having  obtained  this  know-


ledge, you  in  turn  become  a  witness
to  others  of  what  you  have  seen,
beard,  handled,  or  felt.  So  it  is  with
the  Gospel.
[  We  may  read  the  history  of  the
life  of  Christ,  admire  his  moral  and
religious  teachings,  he  impressed  with
awe  by  the  description  of  the  cha-
racter and  works  of  the  Father  and
God  of  the  universe,  be  made  ac-
quainted with  the  means  he  I?^s
devised  to  prepare  mankind  to  enter
his  presence,  but  it  is  necessary  that
we  should  follow  Christ,  put  into
actual  practice  the  lessons  of  Christ,
and  obey  the  ordinances  of  Christ,  to
know  for  ourselves  the  saving  effects


that  law,  and  it  provides  a  suitable  .
penalty. The  Latter-day  Saints  live
an d  always  have  lived  in  a  land  of
law,  and  if  they  hare  transgressed
the  law,  shame  on  a  community,  like  ,
the  people  that  lire  under  the  Govern-
ment of  the  United  States  to  perse-
cute  them  instead of  prosecuting ,
them. An  instance  cannot  be  found  j
upon  the  records  of  any  court  in  ihe
United  States  where  the  leaders  of
this  people  have  been  legally  con-
victed uf  a  breach  of  law  and  order.

Joseph  Smith  was  arraigned  before
Judge  Austin  A.  King,  on  a  charge
of  treason.  The  Judge  inquired  of
Mr,  Smith,  u  Do  you  believe  and  teach
the  doctrine  that  in  the  course  of  time
the  Saints  will  possess  the  earth
Joseph  replied  that  he  did,  "  Do  yes
believe  that  the  Lord  will  raise  up  a
kingdom  i hat  will  fill  the  whole  earth
and  rale  over  all  other  kingdoms,  as
the  Prophet  Daniel  has  said  ?"  "  Yes,
sir,  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  will
reign  king  of  nation  he  does  kirn*
of  Saints/'  u  Write  that  down,  clerk  ;  ,
we  want  to  fasten  upon  him  the  charge
of  treason,  for  if  he  believes  this,  he  !
must  believe  that  the  State  of  Mis-
souri  will  crumble  and  fall  to  rise  no
more/'  Lawyer  Doniphan  said  to
the  Judge,  "  damn  it,  Jude,  you  had
better  make  the  ISible  treason  and
have  done  with  it."  j

I  was  not  in  Missouri  at  the  first  of
our  people's  going  there,  but  I  have
searched  diligently  to  find  whether
any  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
ever  been  convicted  in  any  of  the
courts  of  Missouri  for  transgressing
the  law,  and,  so  far  as  I  could  learn,
such  an  instance  cannot  be  found  on
the  court  records  of  that  State,  *;  Then
why  are  you  persecuted  rv  Because
the  Lord  has  committed  unto  us  the
words  of  eternal  life  to  deliver  to  tho
world,  which,  if  they  will  obey,  will
bring  them  back  into  the  presence  of
the  Father  and  the  Son.

The  world  will  nut  receive  the


OF  god,  ftc,  39  1

Gospel,  unless  they  can  have  it  on
their  own  terms,  and  will  persecute
thefe  w  that  do  receive  it.  We  preach
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and
this  gives  offence  to  the  wicked  ;  they
become  anirrv  with  God,  with  Je>us
Christ,  and  with  his  Saints  ;  God  and
Christ  they  cannot  reach,  but  the
Saints  they  can  persecute  as  long  and
as  much  as  they  are  permitted.

"  But  were  you  not  persecuted  for
teaching  thai  odious  doctrine  called
polygamy  ?"  No,  We  were  planted
in  these  valleys  before  it  was  publicly
made  known  to  the  people.  Only  a
few  of  Joseph  Smith's  intimate  friends
knew  it  previous  to  its  being  pub-
lished to  the  world,  which  was  several
years  after  his  death.  We  have  not
been  driven  irom  our  homes  since  it
was  published.

M  Do  you  not  aggravate  your
enemies  by  your  close  communion
habits  r'1  I  s pe; \ k  for  mysel f ;  I
acknowledge  that  I  do  not  fellowship
much  of  their  conduct,  nor  do  I  expect
to,  unless  it  is  better  than  some  of  it
has  been;  and  I  will  say  further,  it  is
hard  for  me  to  fellowship  the  conduct
of  some  who  profess  to  be  Latter-day
Saints.

Polygamy  in  Utah  and  polygamy
among  the  Christian  nations  of  the
world  at  the  present  day  are  very
different.  Polygamy  in  Ctah  is  an
honourable  transaction  for  we  marry
our  wives,  and  openly  acknowledge
them  and  their  children.  It  is  a  very
different  matter  elsewhere ;  women
are  seduced  and  secretly  kept  as
mistresses  as  lung  as  they  please  their
unprincipled  seducers,  when  they  arc
east  off  to  meet,  if  it  were  possible,  a
worse  late;  their  children  are  not
acknowledged,  but  are  thrown  npon
the  world  unprotected,  and  left  ex-
posed to  be  carried  away  by  the  dark
and  torpid  stream  of  crime,  t.)  end
their  wretched  lives  in  prison,  upon
the  gallows,  or  in  some  other  violent
manner.


A KNOWLEPC.K  OF GOD,  ETC.


3:tt


"And  there was war  in  heaven:
Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against
the  draguii;  and  the  dragon  fought
and  his  singula,  and  prevailed  not;
neither  was  their  pla.ee  found  any
more  in  heaven. And  the  dragon
was  cast  out,  that  old  serpent,  called
the  Devil,,  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  i
the  whole  world;  he  was  cast  out  into  j
the  earth,  mid  his  angels  were  cast  I
oat w.th  him.'1 Thev  were  cast
€}ut ;  and  if  our  Government  had  cast
out  th&  Seceders,  the  war  would  soon
Lave  been  ended. This  placed  the
Soirit  of  iv.il  on  ih.e  earth.  These'
evil  spirits  are  not  permitted  to  re-  1
ceive  tabernacles  of  their  own,  and
that  is  their  condemnation  and  punish-
ment. Thev  have  been  known  to
take  possession  of  the  bodies  of  men
mid  women,  and  Hither  than  to  be
without  a  bodv,  thev  have  entered
the  bodies  of  brutes. AH  such  .spirits
and  all  embodied  spirits  who  violate  |
wholesome  laws  and  abuse  the  rights  '
and  privileges  guaranteed  unto  them
will  be  hurled  down  to  hell.

The  people  in  the  States  hare
violated  the  Constitution  in  closing
their  ears  against  the  cries  of  the
oppressed,  and  in  consenting  to  shed-
ding innocent  blood,  and  now  war.

death  and  gJoom  are  spread  like  a

pall  over  the  land,  which  state  of
things  will  sooner  or  later  spread  all
over  the  world.  The  world  is  at  war
sigainst  the  truth,  and  against  those
who  propagate  it.  Ave  they  opposed
to  canting  hypocrites  in  the  garb  of  j
parsons  ?  No.  Will  they  ridicule  a  J
black-attired  blackguard  and  pelt  him
with  mud  and  rotten  eggs,  even
though  he  should  lecture  against  God,
Christ,  and  the  Holy  Scriptures  ?
No,  1  \il  thev  will  fifflit  acjainst  the  ,
truth  whi<  li  has  been  revealed  fr  -m
heaven,  and  this  is  the  condemna-
tion that  light  has  come  into  the
world.  Mid  men  loved  darkness  rather
than  li<jhfc,  because  their  deeds  were
evil/' The  wicked  hate  the  light


because  it  maketh  manifest  their  evil
deeds,  and  they  love  to  dwell  in  dark-
ness, thinking  to  cover  their  sius
from  the  public  gaze  and  from  the
eve  of  God  ;  but  in  the  due  time  of
the  Almighty  their  deeds  will  be
exposed  upon  the  house  tops.  Tins
is  the  reason  whv  the  religions  and
political  factions  of  this  land  united
their  energi  s  to  slay  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  and  to  banish  the
religion  of  Jesus,  because  they  saw
that  it  would  instruct,  inform,  and
unite  the  people.

It  may  be  said  that  the  Roman
Catholics  are  as  much  united  as  the
Latter-day  Saints,  but  is  it  in  rii*ht-
eousness 't  No,  I  have  not  read  that
the  Roman  Catholics  of  latcyearshave
taken  patiently  the  spoiling  of  their
goods  and  suffered  the  loss  of  all
things  for  their  religion.  Though
this  may  not  lie  positive  proof  of  the
truth  of  anv  religion,  for  it  is  well
known  that  fanatics  will  suffer  horrible
torture  for  a  false  and  foolish  religion,
more  than  is  required  of  the  Lord  for
true  Christians  to  sidler  for  their
religion,  except  in  eases  when  his
providences  may  require  for  certain
wise  purposes.  Votaries  of  false
svstems  of  religion  will  at  times  court
persecution,  with  a  view  to  establish
their  religion  and  give  it  notoriety.
The  most  effectual  way  to  establish
the  religion  of  Heaven  is  to  live  it,
rather  than  to  die  fur  it :  I  think  I
am  safe  in  saying  that  there  are  many
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  who  are
more  willing1  to  die  fur  their  religion
than  to  fauhlullv  live  it. There  is  no

0

other  proof  can  be  adduced  to  God,
angels,  and  men,  that  a  people  faith-
fnl!y  live  their  religion,  than  that  they
repent  truly  of  their  sins,  obey  the
law  of  baptism  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  then  continue  to  do  the
works  of  righteousness  day  by  day.

Some  few  who  profess  to  be  Latter-
day  Saints  have  been  unruly  and  fro-
ward,  not  respecting  the  rights  and


334


jernxAr  op  msrorrtsEs.


property  of  others.  The  army  that
was  quartered  in  onr  vicinity  intro-
duced inure  corruption  and  iniquity
than  had  been  made  manifest  for
years.  Whether  to  he  thankful  or
sorrowful  for  this,  sometimes  I  am  at
a  loss  to  know.  The  kicked  that  were
among  us  have  heeu  made  manifest,
and  many  of  them  have  left  ;  this  is
a  result  we  have  no  cause  to  mourn
over.  Tli ere  are  still  a  few  who  arc
impatient  uf  control,  will  go  their  own
way,  will  steal,  lie,  swear,  get  drunk.
&v.  Their  works  make  J  hem  manifest,
and  we  know  them.  We  llfelli  know
upon  whom  we  can  depend  in  a  lime
of  trouble;  &  good  sailor  is  always
found  at  his  post,  both  in  calm  and
storm.  The  good  soldier  is  ready  to
resist  the  cnontw  and  not  to  shake
hands  with  him  and  be  tamely  taken
prisoner.  The  time  of  storm,  and
trouble  is  the  time  to  prove  ourselves
to  God  and  to  one  another.

Wl*  desire  to  lie  a  meat  deal  heller
than  we  are  as  individuals  and  as  a
people,  and  if  we  are  faithful,  we  shall
be*  Praise  to  the  faithful  Latter-day
Saints,  who  are  striving  to  servo  God
with  all  their  hearts.  Let  all  Latter-
day  Saints  learn  that  the  weaknesses
of  their  brethren  a**e  not  sins.  When
men  or  women  undesignedly  commit
a  wrong,  do  not  attribute  thai  to  them
as  a  sin.  Lotus  learn  to  be  compos*
sio:tate  one  with  another;  let  mercy


and  kindness  soften  every  angry  and
fretful  temper,  that  we  may  become
long  suffering  and  beneficent  in  all  our
communications  one  with  another.  No
man  can  ever  become  a  inter  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  until  he  can  perfectly
rule  himself:  then  is  he  capable  of
raising  a  family  of  children  who  will
rise  no  and  call  him  blessed.  On  the
other  hand,  if  the  Elders  of  Israel  do
not  pay  attention  to  this  and  improve
themselves  in  every  possible  way,  their
families  will  f^ee  their  weaknesses  and
follies,  can  have  no  confidence  in  tin  in
as  leaders,  and  will  scatter  awav  from
\  Iiem  and  join  themselves  to  mure  sub-
stantial, wise,  and  rel'able  fathers  and
leader*'.

Shall  we  as  a  people  ever  become
popular  in  the  world  r  Yes,  when
righteousness  reigns  triumphantly  on
the  earth.  In  the  end,  when  the  judg-
ment is  set  and  the  Judge  of  all  the
earth  makes  his  appearance,  he  will
place  upon  his  right  hand  Abraham,
and  Abraham's  seed,  and  all  those  who
have  obeyed  the  Gospel  of  his  Son,
and  they  will  inherit  the  earth  and  it$
fulness,  while  the  sinner  and  the
ungodly  will  be  cast  mto  prison  to
nay  the  fltteriuusfc  farthing.

May  the  Lord  help  us  to  live  so
that  we  may  be  accounted  worthy  of
all  the  glory  our  Heavenly  Father  has
in  su  re  for  us.  Auaii.


THE  COfliSE  TIIK  SAINTS  SHOULD  TURSCE.  ETC.


335


TJ-IK COURSE  THE  SAINTS  SHOI/L1)  IM  RSl'K  AND  THE

SPIRIT  THEY  SHOULD  CULTIVATE.

Remarks  by  President  Hebku  C  Kimball,  made  on  Snndtty  Morning,

. lT  • • April  27,  18t!2.


H  EI'OltTKP  II Y  J. V.  LOJfO.


Every  true  Saint  that  has  got  the
light  of  Heaven  in  him  can  realize
and  comprehend  in  a  degree  the  im-
portance of  what  President  Young  has
said  to  us.  Men  frequently  speak  of
good  seu-e,  but  the  question  may  he
asked,  wlint  is  good  sense  ?  I  con-
sider  that  that  man  or  unman  who
has  t!^e  lisrht  of  HttWitm  in  him  or  her,
whether  i4#is  %H«|J;e  natnral  or  the
spiritual  eyes,  that  is  the  light  of
{ lirist  and  that  is  trood  sense.  Now,
it  is  impossible  to  have  the  htrht  of
Christ .  except  yon  arealive  in  Christ.

We  are  like  a  limb  that  is  alive  in
a  tree;  vos,  every  one  thafcnre  Latter-
day  Saintff;  we  am  united  or  should
be  as  the  heart  of  one  man,  and  no
man  will  he  saved  and  Leathered  with
Christ  except  they  are  grafted  info

Iiim,  for  tliev  must  receive  the  1  fe
that  Hows  from  him  in  order  <o  lie
t-.valtcd  with  him.  It  is  open  tlie
same  principle  thai  the  graft  that  is
put  into  a  tree  receives  life  from  the
tree  into  which  it  is  engrafted.  It  is
nccessarv  that,  we  should  all  bo  alive
in  Christ,  and  we  ought  Hi  partake  of
his  attributes  and  also  of  the  uttri-
botes  of  his  Father  ;  then  we  become
one  with  Christ  as  he  is  one  with  the
Fa: her.  "We  never  can  enjoy  the
] •I'e-yiviisg'  influences  of  the  Spirit  of
God  except  we  live  and  practice  our
religion,  ahvavs  abiding  in  the  vine,
ti>r  as  the  branch  cannot  bring  f  »rth


or  produce


t  U


nin  connected


with  the  tree,  so  we  cannot  increase  in
light  and  knowledge  unless  we  keep
alive  in  Christ This  people- are  a


good  people  in  id  they  are  full  of  life,
they  are  alive  in  Christ*  and  they  live
their  religion  and  Cod  blesses  them*

I  am  aware  that  we  are  protected
and  shielded  by  the  Almighty;  he
baftlcs  the  world,  wards  oft  the  storms
and  tempests  for  the  sake  of  the
righteousness  th?<t  dwells  in  the  midst
of  this  people.  It  is  not  done  for  the
sake  of  the  liar,  the  thief,  and  other
abominable  characters^  but  his  pro-
tecting arm  is  expended  for  tlie  sake
of  the  righteous  :  thev  are  the  means
of  preserving  this  people,  and  them
is  enough  of  them  to  save  the  rest
from  destruction,  and  through  that
medium  Ave  as  a  people  are  protected.

It  is  a  common  thing  for  us  to  send
to  the  States  for  choice  fruit,  and  the
] nomologist  who  receives  our  *  rders
cuts  olf  scions  from  the  best  fruit
trees,  and  sends  to  us  the  summer,
the  fall  and  the  winter  apples,  and  we
also  get  the  pear,  the  plum,  the
cherry  and  the  peach.  We  graft
those  various  kinds  of  good  fruit  into
our  seedlings,  and  then  the  tree  pro-
duces fruit  according  to  the  kind  that
was  grafted  into  it,'  and  in  this  way
we  procure  good  fruit.  Ii  is  just  so
with  von,  unless  y<m  abide  in  Christ
after  being  grafted  in.  von  will  not
bear  any  good  fruit.  There  are  men
and  women  here  who  have  come  from
the  States,  who  seem  to  have  a  little
good  feeling  in  them,  but  were  they
ever  proper! v  grafted  into  the  true
vine  r  No.  thev  simrdv  trot  under  the
Ljood  influence,  but  thev  have  rot
borne  any  fruit. Where  have  you


330  JOl'RXAL  OF

seen  an  individual  that  Las  come
here  to  speculate  or  do  business  that
lias  ever  been  truly  favouiable  to
this  people  ?  There  have  been  very
few,  and  most  of  them  have  died,  but  .
there  are  quite  as  many  that  are
favourable  as  I  expect  to  see.  Men
come  here  and  get  good  impressions,  I
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  resting  with
them,  but  they  do  not  embrace  the
truth,  and  consequently  the  good
influence  leaves  them  and  the)T  turn
ni^uLH  the  eaii.se  of  Christ,  the  Devil
gets  power  over  them  and  they  begin
to  operate  against  the  kingdom  of  'our  ,
God  and  to  seek  the  lives  of  his
servants  and  anointed  ones.  Let
such  men  go  their  own  way  ;  I  have
got  now  so  that  I  cannot  have  con-
fidence in  anv  that  come  here  until
they  prove  themselves,  and  therefore
I  have  quit  the  practice  of  reposing
confidence  in  strangers,  and  I  place
my  confidence  in  God,  in  Ids  king-,
dam,  in  bis  servants  and  in  the  earth
that  is  made  fur  our  use,

Brother  Brigham  was  speaking  of
the  earth  and  telling  us  that  we
should  be  cautious  how  we  use  it,  for
it  is  our  mother,  and  ihc  man  that!
will  disgrace  his  mother  is  unworthy  j
of  her  fostering  care.  I  have  been  a
child  upon  this  earth  Tor  til  years,  and
there  is  not  anything  but  what  it
pi'oduces.  Are  you  not  required  to
be  just  as  faithful  as  I  am  ?  Why —
of  course;  we  shall  have  to  give  an
account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  bod  v,
and  so  will  all  mankind.  Look
at  the  animal  creation,  they  were  all
created  bv  law,  and  will  fulfill  that
law  by  which  they  weie  created.  But
see  the  feeling  and  disposition  that
we  have,  in  oar  hearts  to  be  cruel
towards  animals,  and  that  same  pas-
sion that  we  cultivate  towards  the
brute  creation,  mankind  by-and-bye
will  have  towards  one  another.  Re-
flect upon  the  experience  of  the  past
and  you  will  find  it  so,  I  perceive
that  the  older  I  grow  the  more  com-


m

DISCOURSKS.

passion  1  have  upon  the  brute,  but
young  and  unthuughtful  men  and
careless,  cruel  boys  will  drive  a  horse
at  the  rate  of  sixteen  miles  an  hour,
and  then  whip  him  all  the  way  up
every  hill  on  the  journey.  Is  this
the  spirit  of  Christ  and  of  our  holy
i elision  to  lie  cruel  to  animals  and
beat  them  in  tins  way?  I  say  no;
our  religion  and  the  spirit  of  Christ
would  teach  us  to  bo  kind  to  them,  to
encourage  them  by  bating  and  nourish-
ing them.  It  is  a  trood  deal  so  with
this  kingdom,  there  are  some  who  are
all  the  time  blocking  the  wheels  (>f
the  kingdom  in  place  of  helping  to
roll  it  forward.  If  these  brethren
who  are  so  wild  and  inconsiderate
would  but  learn  enough  to  bW'k  the
wheels  of  their  team  instead  of  being
so  severe  upon  their  *  animals  they
would  act  more  like  wise  men  and
Saints  of  Gou.

When  President  Young  says  to  the
Bishops  go  and  get  up  three  hundred
teams  ami  send  to  the  States  to  gather
the  poor  Saints,  they  should  go  at  it
with  spirit  ami  with  energy  as  men
of  God.  In  fact  we  should  all  take  a
course  to  comply  with  the  counsel
that  is  given.  We  should  cultivate
the  earth  that  it  may  yield  of  :is
increase,  Unit  we  may  have  an  abund-
ance V  wheal,  com,  potatoes,  apples,
peaches  and  every  cither  variety  of
grain,  fruit  and  vegetable.  We  should
always  look  forward  to  a  future  in-
crease, striving  to  make  everything
multiply  in  its  sphere  and  thus  fulfil
the  measure  of  its  creation.  If  we
sow  a  kernel  of  wheat  it  will  produce,
probably  a  thousand  fold,  then  you
sow  that  which  has  been  produced
from  the  one  kernel  and  it  will
increase  in  proportion  to  the  first.
This  is  the  principle  of  increase  in
nature,  and  each  of  ns  should  endea-
vour to  carry  out  nature's  laws.  In
the  beginning  God  commanded  Adam,
and  also  his  sons  and  daugh ers  to  fill
up  the  measure  of  their  creation,  to


THE  COURSE THE  SAINTS SHJULD  PURSUE,  ETC


337


multiply  and  replenish  the  earth,  and
he  also  commanded  the  earth  to
multiply  and  to  increase  her  pro-
ductions, vegetation,  fowli,  animals
and  all  manner  of  creeping  things,
How  do  you  think  it  looks  for  man  to
lie  down  and  be  an  idle  speculator,
while  he  makes  his  neighbour  a  slave  ?
I  believe  in  all  of  us  beinef  industri-
ous  from  day  to  day  and  from  year  to
year,  and  also  to  improve  and  teach
others  to  improve  in  all  that  is  good:
I  have  never  undertaken  to  do  any-
thing of  au  important  nature,  but  1
have  called  upon  tire  Almighty  to
assist  me,  realizing  that  I  required
his  aid  and  favour  and  he  has  invari-
ably prospered  me  in  what  I  have
commenced.  When  we  store  up
grain  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  the
poor  Saints  we  may  naturally  expect

to  have  i»j  feed  a  great  many  goats
while  we  are  feeding  sheep.

Brethren  let  us-  go  to  work  and
accumulate  means;  let  us  go  more
extensively  into  home  manufactures,
let  us  get  up  some  of  those  home  made
spinning  jinnys,  we  are  told  that  they
are  rav.bi?*  of  <ehmin^  t  wo  hundred
pounds  a  day,  but  supposing  we  couM
spin  twenty-live  pounds  u  day  should
we  not  fchipk  we  were  doing  a  goad
business  ?  We  should  feel  proud  of
such  a  business.  We  shall  have  to
go  into  this  kind  of  business,  for  we
have  every  prospect  of  being  shut  out
from  trading  with  the  cast.  Let  us
then  go  to  work,  inen,  women  and
children  and  make  ourselves  inde-
pendent of  the  world  and  especially
of  cur  enemies*  Can  we  do  it  ?  Yes
Ave  can,  because  we  can  raise  every
thing  Umt  we  require.  Now  we  have
not  cultivated  many  things  here  but
what  we  have  got  a  good  return.
When  speaking  upon  this  subject
the  other  day,  I  heard  President  Young
say  that  he  would  not  send  to  the
States  for  any  of  those  rotten  goods
this  year,  I  am  i:  >t  g  > 1 1 : to  send  for
anv,  f»>r  I  am  ^oinq:  to  send  for  a

No.  22


carding  machine  instead,  and  if  that
does  not  clothe  my  family  I  do  not
know  what  move  I  shall  make  next,
but  I  intend  that  whatever  I  do  shall
be  a  step  in  the  right  direction.

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  feel  to  bless
you  and  also  all  the  Presidency  of  this
Church,  and  all  the  Quorums  of  the
Priesthood;  I  likewise  feel  to  bless
every  man  that  puts  forth  his  hand
to  help  to  bless  Israel,  for  all  sucli
shall  be  blessed  by  the  God  of
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  their
blessings  shall  multiply  ten  fold  more
titan  the^  ever  did  before.  Then,
do  not  stop,  but  go  a-head,  and  all
our  blessings  will  multiply.  The
Lord  says,  do  my  will  and  let  the
world  alone,  and  I  will  defend  you
for  it  is  my  business  to  defend  you
and  all  my  people  in  these  latter  days,
and  he  will  do  it  to  the  extent  that  is
requisite  for  the  accomplishment  of
his  purposes.  I  know  it  just  as  well
as  I  know  that  I  am  standing  here.
Well,  do  not  be  discouraged,  but  lay
aside  your  scolding  and  fretting,  and
abide  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,
for  vou  must  remember  that  no
branch  can  bring  forth  except  it  h&
in  the  vine ;  no  more  can  we  except
we  abide  in  Christ.

Peace  be  upou  you  all,  brethren
a  ad  sisters,  wives  and  children,
you  all  that  are  good,  and  that
love  the  Cospel"  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  more  than  they  love  this
wicked  world  in  which  we  live.
These  are  some  of  my  feelings,  and
they  are  some  of  the  feelings  of  iny
heart.  We  are  labouring  for  eternal
lifo  end  exaltation  in  the  kingdom
of  our  God;  we  are  learning  to  live
for  ever;  and  I  am  going  to  stick
and  hang  to  the  goud  old  ship,
Zion,  for  ever  and  ever,  God  help-
iug  me.

The  Lord  has  put  a  spirit  in  ma
that  is  inclined  to  righteousness,
and  I  always  love  to  do  right.
My  faith  and  confidence  are  in  God

Yol.  IX.


JOURNAL  OP  TJlSCOrBSES.

%


33  S

and  in  his  servants  whom  lie,  has
chosen.  4  \/i

You  all  know  that  you  have my
blessing,  and  I  say  may  the  peace  and
fclessing  of  my  Heavenly  Father  he
with  this  people,  for  ever,  with  aU
that  pertains  unto  them;  their  habi*  ,


tations,  these  mountains  and  valleys,
their  flocks  and  herds,  and  fields  ard
gardens,  for  I  pray  these  peculiar  and
I  leaveifschoicesl  blessings  may  attend
the  Latter-day  Saints  henceforth  and
for  ever,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
our  Redeemer.  Amen.


*


KNOWLEDGE  AND  POWER.— PROGRESS  OF  THE  SAINTS  JN

REGARD  TO  THOSE  PRINCIPLES.


rushy  Elder  John  Taylor,  via^  iafhc  Taberuade9  Great  Salt  Lake

_  City,  Apil  13,  1862,


Hi:  PORTED  BY  J,  V,  LONG,


It  is  pleasant  to  ejyoy  an  oppor-
tunity of  coming  together  as  we  do
from  time  to  time  to  listen  to  the
words  of  eternal  truth  as  they  flow
from  the  lips  of  the  servants  of  God.
#nd  especially  as  they  have  been  com-
municated unto  us  during  the  Con-
ference that  is  past.  We  have  fill  of
us  teen  very  much  interested  and
edited,  and  the  only  thing  for  us  to
do  now  is  to  seek  to  improve  by
those  teachings  that  we  have  received,
that  they  may  not  be  lost  upon  us;
but  against  the  time  that  another
Conference  comes  round,  let  us  be  able
to  feel  that  we  have  very  much  pro-
gressed in  the  things  of  God.  The
work  of  God  is  one  of  continued
progress ;  it  has  been  from  the  time
of  its  commencement  until  *he  pre-
sent. Although  we  improve  we  have
not  always  been  enabled  to  discover
the  hand  of  God  in  regard  to  his
dealings  with  the  human  family ;  yet,


at  the  present  time,  there  is  nothing
move  Hear,  visible  and  easy  to  cojafc-
prehend.  Some  years  ago  we  used
to  preach  about  the  ushering  in  of
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth;
we  used  to  talk  about  God  having
revealed  himself  from  the  heavens,
and  that  he  had  restored  a  pure  re*
ligion  as  ithad  existed  in  ancient  days
with  Apostles,  Prophets,  Teachers,
Evangelists,  gifts,  healings  and  ad-
ministering angels,  and  the  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost  through  the  Priest-
hood;  we  felt  happy  and  rejoiced  in
the  things  communicated  unto  us,
n::  l  which  we  irhullv  made  known  to
others;  we  rejoiced  to  be  participators
in  those  things  that  God  has  revealed
for  the  salvation  of  fallen  man.  We,
at  the  same  time,  had  our  minds
inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
the  Elders  that  made  know  n  unto  us
tilings  that  would  transpire  in  the
latter  days  told  us  uf  judgments  to


KNOWLEDGE AMI I'OWJUi, 1-7  V.


come  upon  the  wicked,  and  of  salva-
tion to  he  extended  to  the  righteous;
that  God  had  undertaken  to  manage
the  affairs  of  his  people  and  of  the
world,  and  that  he  would  bless  his
fifikiwers  inasmuch  us  they  would
walk  in  obedience  to  his  laws  and  his
precepts,  not  Ofefy  with  the  blessings
of  this  world  but  with  salvation  in
the  celestial  kingdom  of  God.  We
can  now  see  that  at  that  time
we  beheld  only  in  part  the  glory
of  the  latter  day  beginning  to  dawn,
and  as  the  vision  of  our  mind  began
to  be  enlarged  and  expanded  we  were
enabled  to  look  forward  into  the
future,  and  we  now  rejoice  in  the
bright  prospect  that  is  being  de-
veloped from  time  to  time*  In  the
beginning  of  this  work  our  minds
were,  and  even  now  are  contracted
more  or  less,  bet  yet  we  have  a
more  general  view  of  the  events  that
have  been  spoken  of  concerning  the

last  dava. These  events  that  were
if*

foretold  by  the  Prophets  and  Seers
of  past  ages  are  now  transpiring  upon
the  earth,  and,  as  the  last  ten,  fifteen  or
twenlyyears  have  passed,  those  events
have  rolled  along  with  accelerated
speed,  and  we  have  seen  the  visible
hand  of  God,  The  persecutions  that
we  have  endured  from  time  to  time
have  shown  us  the  feeling  and  spirit
of  the  religious  world,  but  nut  of  all
these  tribulations  the  Almighty  has
delivered  us,  and  notwithstanding  the

*  try

opposition  that  we  have  had  to  combat,
he  has  now  brought  us  to  a  position
that  we  can  command  some  respect
in  this  and  other  nations  of  the  earth,
for  the  people  not  only  look  upon  us
as  a  religious  community,  but  as  a
great  people  politically,  occupying  a
desirable  position  npon  this  continent.
It  is  true  when  we  have  the  Spirit
upon  us  we  look  forward  to  the  lime
when  we  snail  have  the  litor'al  king-
dom  of  God  established,  and  when  we
shall  exercise  rule  and  dominion,  and
when  we  shall  increase,  and  so  con-


1  tinue  until  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
God  and  of  his  Christ  These  findings
occupied  our  breast  in  our  infancy,'  in
the  Church,  but  some  ideas  of  the
reality  of  the  vast  unborn  future  were
more  or  less  confused  ;  it  was  very

|  difficult  for  us  to  have  just  concep-
tions of  God's  dealings  with  us  and
with  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Tt  was
thought  bv  many  thit  when  Joseph

j  Smith  ottered  himself  as  a  candidate

I  for  President  of  the  'United  States
that  it  was  dangerous  and  foolish
policy,  and,  in  th.-r,  it  wm  quite  ififll-
cult  for  many  to  bring  their  feelings
up  to  tli at  point.

We  have  been  straggling  against
the  powers  cf  darkness,  so  far  as
religion  is  concerned,  from  the  year
1 830,  as  we  have  increased  in  num-
bers we  have'  naturally  assumed  a
social  and  political  status,  and  have
been  obliged  to  organize  a  govern-
ment, and  make  laws  in  accordance
with  those  of  that  nation  with  which
we  are  associated ;  we  are  now
struggling,  and  expect  to  have  to
struggle  for  our  religious,  social  and
political  rights.

Many  intelligent  men  have  long
understood  that  there  was  nothing  in
the  religious  systems  of  men;  jve
have  comprehended  then!,  weighed
tliem  in  the  balances  and  fuiind  them
wanting.  The  -general  feeling  has
been  for  a  long  time  that  there  was
no  argument  that  could  be  brought,
in  a  religious  point  of  view,  thai
could  stand  beforer our  Elders.  There
are  very  few  of  our  Elders  that  would
fear  combating  the  doctrines  of  the
ministers  of  the  world  ;  thev  all  feel
that  the  knowledge  which  God  has

|  communicated  unto  them  is  superior
to  everything  eke.  they  ieel  to  rely
upon  the  Almighty,  and  ask  no  odds
of  any  of  the  wicked  in  the  world.
These  have  been  the  feelings  of  the
Elders  of  this  Church  for  years.
Ikt  a  political  point  of  view  we  have


3K>


jornxAL  of  niseovnsxs.


had  doubts  whether  some  systems
were  not  as  good  as  ours,  and
whether  we  had  not  better  he  governed
by  the  powers  of  the  world  than
listen  to  the  teachings  of  God  ;  how-
ever, :?s  we  have  progressed  the  mist
lias  been  removed,  and  in  relation  to
these  matters,  the  Elders  of  Israel
liesrin  to  understand  that  they  have

r_i  J

something  to  do  with  the  world  poli-
tically as  well  as  religiously,  that  it
is  as  much  their  duty  to  study  correct
political  principles  as  well  as  religions,
and  to  seek  to  know  and  comprehend
the  social  and  political  interests  of
man,  and  to  learn  and  be  able  to  teach
that  which  would  be  best  calculated
to  promote  the  interests  of  the  world.
As  President  Young  says  frequently,
we  have  made  advancement,  and  now
begin  to  comprehend  many  things  of
which  we  were  before  ignorant.  We
have  been  striving,  to  a  certain  degree,
to  ffet  correct  information  in  relation
to  all  matters  necessary  for  our  future

m

advancement  and  understanding  of
things  in  connection  with  the  Saints
of  God,  we  have  Itk  -i  ciide;'ivourir^

*~'  m  ™

to  promote  the  righteousness,  the
pitting  away  and  overcoming  of
iniquity,  and  the  hand  of  God  has
bean  with  us  guiding  and  directing
US,  It  is  not  necessary  to  go  over  the
eMails  of  our  history,  but,  suffice  it  to
say,  that  many  circumstances  that

m *  at

were  of  a  critical  character,  and
trying  for  the  time  being,  have  turned
out  to  he  for  our  best  good  and  to  onr
future  advantage.  Many  of  the  Saints
thought  it  was  difficult  and  trvinsr  to
leave  Nauvoo,  but  should  we  like  to
go  pack  there  now  ?  There  is  not  a
man  but  would  say  that  he  is  better;
off  than  he  would  have  been  if  he  had
remained  in  the  State  of  Illinois,  mest
as  one  of  the  poet's  has  said  : —

V  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way

1  lis  wonder*  to  perform  ;
lie  plants  itis  footsteps  in  the  sea

And  rides  upon  the  storm.

Deep  in  unfathomable  mines
Of  never-failing  skill,


He  treasures  up  his  Mri^ht  designs
Ami  works  his  sovereign  will.

Ye  fearful  Saints  fresh  Courage  take
Tin*  rioudrt  ye  su  mueh  dread

Are  big  with  mercy,  and  Khali  break
In  h  essinses  on  your  head,

Jud^-e  not  (he  Lord  hy  feeble  sense*
But  trust  him  for  his  grace;

Behind  a  ft&wnirir \<h-:v v
1  [e  hides  a  smiling  face.

His  purposes  will  ripen  fast,

Unfolding  every  hour;
The  bud  may  have  a  bitter  taste.

But  sweet  will  be  the  flower."

We  have  proven  that  the  hand  of
God  has  directed  us,  and  by  it  we  are
sustained,  as  we  now  find  ourselves
here  on  the  present  occasion.  Well,
now,  if  the  Lord  has  blessed  us,  as  he
has  clone,  what  reason  have  we  to
fear  for  the  future*  Some  people  ask
what  will  1  e  the  result  of  our  acts  at
the  present  time  ?  I  don't  care  ;  God
has  dictated,  and  it  is  his  business  to
dictate  those  that  guide  us  and  direct
our  energies.  If  you  have  got  a
religion  that  is  different  from  that  of
other  people,  won't  they  persecute
you  ?  Yes  ;  but  what  of  th&t  ?  We
dare  to  have  a  religion  of  our  own.
Years  ago  we  dared  to  have  faith  for
ourselves,  and  to  come  forth  amongst
the  contumely  o!  the  world  and  to  say
wo  were  Saints,  and  that  we  hid
taken  upon  us  the  name  of  Jcsns
Christ,  and  were  resolved  to  fulfil  the
the  obligations  which  the  Church  of
Christ  had  imposed  upon  us.  This
we  felt  veors  and  years  ago.  Did  we
experience  it  ?  Certainly;  men  would
persecute  us,  laugh  at  us  and  deprive
us  of  our  happiness  if  they  could,  A
great  many  influences  were  brought
to  bear  against  us. Well;  now,  is  it

— ■  _

consistent  that  all  the  churches  that
are  spoken  of  in  the  Book  of  Mormon
as  well  as  in  the  Bible,  that  have
been  and  still  are  being  built  up  to
get  gain,  and  for  the  purpose  of
keeping  hordes  of  men  Jiving  upon
the  people  in  comparative  idleness ;
I  ask  is  it  reasonable  that  all
these  svktems  and  organizations  of


men  will  give  up  without  :i  struggle?
I  tell  you  nay.  If  such  be  the  position
of  the  religious  world,  I  would  further
ask,  is  it  reasonable  that  the  political
powers  of  the  earth  will  give  up
without  a  struggle  ?  It  would  be  at
variance  with  history,  with  Scripture
and  prophecy,  and  human  nature,  and
contrary  to  anything  we  ever  heard  of
The  question  may  be  asked,  then,
what  shall  we  do ;  yield  to  the  pre-
judices and  diction  of  men  or  to  the
laws  of  God  ?  The  poet  says : — "  Do
what  is  right,  let  the  consequence
follow."  This  is  the  duty  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  their  attempts
and  endeavours  to  build  up  Zion,  and
not  to  ask  any  questions  as  to  what
men  may  think  of  us  or  our  acts,  that
we,  as  a  people,  this  nation  and  the
world,  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  It
is  for  us  to  do  our  duty  and  fear  no
consequences,  the  result  of  our  acts
and  those  of  other  men  and  nations
the  A I  mighty  will  control,  but  let  us
seek  that  wisdom  which  conaeth  from
above,  and  let  us  pursue  that  course
that  will  keep  us  under  the  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  all  of  olir
doiuji's  before  the  Great  Klohoim,
Ate  you  not  afraid  that  the  President
of  the  United  States  will  operate
against  us,  and  send  an  army  here  ?
No;  I  am  not,  for  God  has  the
control  of  him  and  all  armies,  but  I
do  expect  that  influence  upon  influ-
ence, and  stratagem  upon  stratagem
will  be  brought  to  bear  until  this  king-
dom becomes  the  kingdom  of  our  God

CI

and  of  his  Christ,  and  the  Saints  take
it  and  possess  it  for  ever  and  for  ever*
We  have  been  talking  for  years
about  the  rule  and  government  of  the

kingdom  of  God  and  its  final  establish-
ment upon  the  earth,  in  peace  and
righteousness ;  and  also  about  the
time  when  every  creature  which  is  in
the  heavens  and  on  the  earth,  and
under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in
the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in  them,  will
be heard saying, *'  Blessing,  and


honour,  and  glory,  and  power  be  unto
him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and
unto  the  Lamb,  for  ever  and  ever."
We  have  been  talking  about  these
things,  but  there  is  much  to  be  dono
in  the  intermediate  space  between  the
present  and  that  impenetrable  period
in  the  great  future.  It  is  not  all  a
matter  of  faith,  but  there  is  some
action  required  ;  it  is  a  thing  that  we
have  got  to  engage  in  ourselves,  indi-
vidually and  collectively  as  i  people,
and  it  is  a  matter  of  no  small  eoncein.
This  cause  and  kingdom  is  attract-
ing the  attention  of  all  gocl  men
upon  the  earth  as  of  Prophets  and
Saints  that  have  passed  !»  d  the
veil.  Apostles  and  Prophets  have
desired  to  see  the  day  that  we  see,
and  to  participate  in  the  blessings
that  we  enjoy,  but  have  died  without

the  sight.  They  used  to  talk  of  the
kingdom  that  should  be  established;
they  also  talked  of  the  time  when  the
powers  of  darkness  should  be  destroyed,
and  when  God  would  organize  his
kingdom  upon  the  earth,  control  his
people  and  In  come  ruler  and  dictator
of  the  'world.  He  will  then  fully
deliver  them  from  the  mists  and
darkness  with  which  they  have  been
enveloped,  and  give  light,  life,  wisdom,
and  power  to  all  the  obedient  of  the
human  fatnilv.  Then  all  shall  be
taught  of  God  and  understand  correct
principle,  and  every  Saint  have  a
living  monitor  within  to  qualify  them
to  understand  the  great  blessings  with
which  they  are  endowed.  The  Saints
of  former  days  looked  forward  with
joy  to  the  lime  when  the  principles
of  truth  should  be  established  through-
out the  world,  and  so  do  we.

These  were  things  that  the  ancients
looked  forward  to;  but  they  did  not
have  the  privilege  to  look  at  them  as
|  we  do,  and  they  died  without  having
the  privilege  of  enjoying  the  blessings
promised.

The  world  has  been  full  of  darkness
and  wickedness,  and  has  not  under-


JOURNAL  OF  IllSCOUIiSttS


stood  the  things  of  God ;  but  manv
of  the  past  as  well  as  the  present
generations  have  been  full  of  blood-
thirstiness,  fraud  and  oppression,  with-
out any  rurrect  principles,  without
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  direct  ihem.
It  is  so  now.  and  hence  the  wars  and
turmoils  that  at  present  exist  in  these
United  States — a  war  of  brother
against  brother  to  destroy  each  mother,
and  to  bring  each  other  into  bondage.
This  is  the  condition  of  things  as  they
exist  in  this  country  at  the  present
time,  and  this  state  of  things  will
Increase  throughout  the  whole  world,
and  all  the  inhabitants  thereof  will
participate  in  the  very  things  that
are  now  transpiring  in  this  nation,
**  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead  ;  is  thei*e  I
no  physician  there  r"  There  seems
indeed  to  be  very  little  hope;  we
talk  about  conquests  and  victories;
but  we  talk  without  God,  his  decrees
must  be  accomplished.  Is  God's
work  to  stand  still  ?  No ;  for  the
salvation  of  the  people  depends  upon
its  progress.  The  Almighty  lias
established  this  kingdom  with  order
and  laws  and  every  thing  pertaining
thereto,  that  we  might  understand
his  will  and  operate  in  his  kingdom,
that  we  might  be  taught  of  God  j
and  understand  correct  principles,
that  when  the  nations  shall  be  con-
vulsed, we  may  stand  forth  as  saviours,
and  do  that  which  will  be  best  calcu-
lated to  produce  the  well-being  of  the
human  family  and  finally  redeem  a
mined  World,  not  only  in  a  religious
but  in  a  political  point  of  view.

We  have  commenced  in  this  im-
portant work,  we  have  laboured  dili-
gently with  a  hard-hearted  and  stiff-
necked  generation  ;  many  of  us  have
striven  for  years  to  do  mankind  good,
and  what  have  we  to  fear  in  relation
to  the  results  of  the  cause  in  which
we  are  engaged,  or  the  result  of  our
labours  for  the  salvation  of  men;  we
are  simply  agents;  we  did  not  start
it. Is  there  anv  of  us  capable  of


originating  this  work,  or  of  guiding
it  after  it  has  commenced  ?  No,  only
those  that  are  set  apart  and  inspired
and  dictated  by  the  Almighty,  and
who  rely  upon  the  arm  ot  Jehovah,
and  who  by  their  humility,  faith  and
obedience,  cnll  down  the  blessings  of
the  Lord.  True  there  fire  those  who
are  capable  of  understanding  political
principles  to  some  extent,  but  even
that  is  very  little  indeed,  when  we
consider  government  as  viewed  by
man  and  then  as  revealed  by  the
Almighty.  By  the  testimony  of  Jesus,
which  is  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  and
the  fostering  care  of  our  Father  in
heaven  we  get  an  understanding  of
correct  principles,  and  in  spite  of  all
the  powers  of  darkness  that  may  be
brought  in  army  against 'us,  we  can
carry  out  the  wishes  of  our  Heavenly
Father  in  aiding  in  the  establishing
of  righteousness  upon  the  earth.
What  are  we  looking  for?  To
establish  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  according  to  the  predictions
of  all  the  Prophets  that  have  spoken
since  the  world  began.

We  are  a  very  small  company  of
people  here,  but  God  is  with  us;  and,
if  he  were  not,  it  would  be  very  little
use  asking  or  thinking  of  doing  any-
thing for  the  amelioration  of  the  con-


dition  of  the  human  family.  There
18  one  of  two  things  true.  We  are
either  labouring  under  one  of  the
greatest  delusions  that  ever  afflicted
the  human  race,  or  we  are  under  the
direction  of  the  great  God.  There  is
no  half-way  business  about  it.  I  have
said  to  men  where  I  have  been
preaching,  when  they  professed  to
believe  me  to  be  honest,  but  de-
ceived, I  did  not  want  them  to  set
me  down  so,  fur  1  was  either  right  or
I  was  a  hypocrite  and  a  deceiver.  We
know  that  we  have  embraced  the
principles  of  eternal  truth,  and  we
also  know  that  we  cannot  get  i  id  of
them.  I  tested  them  thoroughly  at
the  commencement,  if  I  could  have


overthrown  them  by  truth,  I  would  ;
but  I  could  not ;  and  I  had  either  to
embrace  Mormonism  or  acknowlede
myself  dishgnest ;  I  believed,  obeyed
and  rejoiced  in  the  Gospel*  Since  I
received  and  obeyed  the  truth  I  have
never  seen  anything  to  cause  me  to
waver;  I  havO  examined  our  religion
closely  and  have  fouud  nothing  to  J
doubt;  neither  has  anything  cru>*  d
my  mind  in  regard  to  the  Saints
accomplishing  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty  upon  the  earth  or  that  has
caused  me  to  fear  and  tremble,  but  I
have  ever  felt  strong:  in  the  Lord  God
of  Israel,  and  I  feel  to-day,  as  I  have
felt  for  the  last  twenty  years,

Now  as  to  the  great  future  what
shall  we  say?  Why,  a  little  stone
has  been  cut  out  of  the  mountains
without  hands,  and  this  little  stone  is
becoming  a  great  nation,  and  it  will
eventually  till  the  whole  earth.  How
will  it  fill  it,  religiously  f  Yes,  anil
politically  tun,  for  if  will  have  the
rule,  the  power,  the  authority,  the
dominion  in  its  own  hands.  This  is
the  position  that  we  are  destined  to
occupy,  We  need  not  borrow  trouble
or  be  afraid  because  we  had  a  little
fuss  with  our  respected  Uncle  Sam
a  short  time  ago,  we  could  not  help
it,  we  did  not  originate  it,  it  was
forced  upon  us,  but  God  delivered  us*
Suppose  wo  should  have  a  difficulty
similar  to  the  one  which  we  then  had,
should  we  have  nothing  to  do  but
to  sing  ourselves  away  to  everlasting
bliss  ?  Yes,  we  should  find  plenty  to
do  as  we  did  then.  I  expect  one
nation  after  another  to  rise  against  us
until  they  will  all  be  broken  to  pieces.
We  have  a  great  many  things  to
accomplish  ;  we  need  not  think  thatVe
have  no  business  to  attend  to  uv  that
the  world  has  gone  through  its
regeneration,  for  it  has  got  to  be
struggle  after  struggle,  and  power
after  power  will  be  arrayed  against
us,  and  then,  if  we  have  not  learned
it  we  shall  learn  that  God  is  our


strength,  and  that  in  him  on!  v  can  we
trust*  If  we  think  we  are  going  to
get  through  this  probation  with  the
little  difficulty  we  have  had,  we  might
as  well  give  it  up.  How  I  think  that
it  will  he  a  struggle  all  the  time.
How  lurd  it  is  for  us  to  give  up  ouj
feelings,  to  resign  our  will.  How  hard
it  is  to  do  right  by  ourselves,  by  our
families,  by  our  neighbours  and  friends
and  to  do  right  by  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,  to  do  right  by  God
and  be  honest  with  ;h.l  men,  m,<l  how
difficult  it  seeing  to  have  our  hearts
right,  and  purged  from  iniquity  and
sin.  We  have  a  continued  struggle
to  manage  our  own  little  selves.
Don't  you  believe  that  it  will  be
harder  to  combat  the  powers  of  the
world  ?  I  think  it  will.  How  many
things  are  transpiring  among  us  as
Saints,  how  many  hard  speeches,  con-
tentions and  strifes  there  are,  and  how
much  we  are  desirous  of  enforcing
upon  other  men  our  own  views  and
feelings,  and  perhaps  we  have  a  very
imperfect  conception  of  what  is  right
and  what  is  wrong  ourselves.

This  is  what  the  world  have  been
after  so  long.  Now  I  do  not  want
that;  no,  I  want  to  know  the  will  of
God.  I  woyld  be  like  the  Lord,  I
would  say,  **  Search  me,  0  God,  and
know  my  heart :  try  me,  and  know
my  thoughts  :  and  see  if  there  be  any
wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the
way  everlasting/'  —  Psalm  exxxix,
verses  23  and  24?.  This  is  as  import-
ant as  anything  else,  for  us  to  know
ourselves,  to  understand  ourselves,  to
bring  ourselves  up  to  a  mark,  and  see
if  we  are  ready  and  know  whether  we
can  yield  our  stubborn  will  or  not,  and
if  we  can  yield  to  the  dictation  of  the
servants  of  God,  and  if  we  are  willing
to  he  subject  to  that  which  is  wanted.
If  we  are,  then  we  shall  understand
what  Jesus  says : — "  If  any  man  will  do
my  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine
whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I
speak  of  myself/'


311


jol'un.il  of  niscornsr.s


We  should  all  understand  that  that
kind  of  teaching  that  was  true  in  the
days  of  the  Apostles  is  true  now.  The
Saviour  said,  "  My  sheep  hear  my
voice,  and  1  know  them,  and  rhev
follovv  me  :  and  I  give  unto  them
eternal  life  :  and  a  stranger  they  will
not  follow,  but  will  flee  from  him  :  for
thev  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers.9*
One  of  the  Saints  said,  "Ye  have  an
unction  within  you,  and  have  no  need
that  any  teach  yon,  except  the  unction
that  is  within  you."  If  we  know
how  to  follow  the  dictation  of  the
Spirit  of  God.  then  we  shall  have  the
light  and  intelligence  of  Heaven  con-
tinually. Then  we  shall  have  that
Spirit  which  will  enable  us  to  know
for  ourselves  in  regard  to  correct
principles,  and  strive  to  improve  in
all  things,  and  not  be  inclined  to
follow  a  stranger.  There  is  a  kind
of  a  certainty  in  regard  to  our  prin-
ciples that  has  not  boon  found  any-
where else.  No  people  upon  the  foce
of  the  earth  are  blessed  to  the  same
extent  as  this  people.  It  is  our  pri-
vilege to  have  knowledge  of  all
doctrines  and  principles  that  are
taught,  and  if  we  do  not  have  this
knowledge  we  are  living  below  our
privileges.  It  is  said  in  one  of  the
revelations  that  the  voice  of  the
people  is  the  voice  of  God ;  this  is
because  they  are  taught  alike,  they
are  taught  correct  principles  and
when  they  are  united,  then  their
voice  in  regard  to  any  principle
becomes  the  voice  of  God,  for  it  brings
us  into  connection  with  him  and  his
Spirit.  You  remember  what  was  said
in  ancient  times,  by  J ohn  the  Apostle :
"And  there  are  three  that  bear
witness  in  earth,  the  spirit,  and  the
water,  and  the  blood :  and  these  three
agree  in  one/' — 1st  John,  v.  chap.,
8th  verse.

We  are  told  in  the  same  chapter
that  there  are  three  that  bear  record
in  heaven.  Now,  if  you  will  examine
these  things  carefully  you  will  find


something  that  is  interesting.  For
instance,  one  of  the  witnesses  in
heaven  is  one  that  is  a  witness  on  the
earth,  even  the  Spirit,  and  when  we
are  in  the  possession  of  this  witness,
having  received  it  by  the  laying  on
of  hands,  we  have  a  hope  and  a  con-
nection that  reaches  within  the  veil.
We  have  the  principles  of  eternal  life
made  known  unto  us  and  our  children,
and  we  are  heirs  of  God  and  of  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord.  When  this  Gospel
found  us  we  had  forsaken  God,  and
the  whole  of  the  religious  world  had
broken  off  from  the  truth,  and  they
had  formed  another  league,  got  in
possession  of  other  hopes,  of  another
spirit,  hence  the  feelings  the  servants
of  God  have  when  speaking  of  these
things.

Our  brethren  are  and  have  been
too  guilty  of  dabbling  with  the  wicked,
instead  of  feeling  that  they  are  KMers
of  Israel,  nobles  of  the  earth  and  that
they  are  above  those  little,  contracted,
narrowed-up  influences.  This  is  about
the  kind  of  feeling  that  we  ought  to
have.  What  is  there  in  the  world
that  should  attract  our  attention?
Their  gold  and  silver  and  clothing
are  all  well  enough,  but  have  we  not
got  them  here  r  Yes,  they  are  all
here,  we  are  here,  and  all  that  we
have  got  to  do  is  to  pursue  the  even
tenor  oi  our  way  as  the  Lord  wants
us,  and  instead  of  being  servants  of
the  world  let  us  be  servants  of  God,
and  instead  of  being  dictated  by  the
world,  let  us  be  dictated  by  the
Lord  and  be  under  the  influence  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  having  that  intelli-
gence, power  and  wisdom  in  our  pos-
session that  is  necessary  for  us  to
have  as  Saints  of  the  living  God  that
we  may  be  harmless  in  the  midst  of
a  perverse  generation,  and  that  we
as  Elders  of  Israel  may  demean  our-
selves aright,  and  preserve  ourselves
humble  and  faithful  in  the  sight  of
Heaven.  Let  us  ever  be  ready  to  do
anything  that  is  required  of  us,  that


the  Almighty  may  feel  towards  us  as
lie  did  towards  Abraham  of  old.  11  I
know  him,"  said  the  Lord,  w  he  will
command  his  house  and  his  children
after  him."  Then  what  have  we  to
do  ?  We  are  the  Saints  of  the  living
God,  and  let  us  bow  down  and
worship  him,  and  by  our  obedience
to  the  principles  of  life  show  that  we
are  the  servants  of  trod  without
rebuke.

How  is  the  world  going  to  be
redeemed  think  you  ?  If  the  king-
dom of  God  is  ever  built  up  the
Almighty  will  have  to  dictate  thing's
himself.  Through  what  medium  will
he  do  this?  Is  he  going  to  send  his
angels  to  gather  the  people  ?  He
lias  got  thousands  of  them  but  he
has  his  own  way  of  doing  things  and
that  is  through  the  Priesthood.  If
we  are  teachers  wc  think  faithful
people  ought  to  listen  to  us ;  if  we
are  Bishops  we  of  course  think  that
the  people  ought  to  respect  our
council,  and  if  Presidents  we  are
anxious  to  see  the  people  obedient,  if
so,  is  it  not  right  for  us  to  listen
to  those  that  are  over  us  ?  All  people
in  this  government  should  -listen  to
the  head,  for  that  is  the  order  of  God.
It  is  all  very  nice ;  it  is  a  beautiful
theory;  everybody  under  our  rule
must  submit,  our  wives  and  our


children  must  yield  obediences  we  all
admire  the  beauty  and  order  and
harmony  of  the  Church  of  God  until
it  comes  to  touch  us,  and  we  are  the
only  people  exempt.  We  are  very
:ipt  to  show  that  we  like  a  little  of
our  own  way,  and  that  although  God's
government  is  very  good  for  others
that  we  do  not  like  to  be  interfered
with  so  much.  If  this  be  our  feeling
why  do  we  act  hypoeritirrdlj*  r  Why
exact  of  others  that  which  we  will  not
do  or  yield  ourselves?  Why  not,
if  we  are  the  rich  men  we  profess  to
be.  be  on  hand,  show  our  willingness
at  all  times  to  do  what  is  required  of
u<,  seek  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  for
when  we  get  that  we  will  he  willing
to  yield  to  its  dictates.  It  is  very  easy
to  submit  to  law,  and  doubtless  we
should  all  be  ready  enough  to  submit
if  the  Almighty  should  eotne  and
speak  to  us  face  to  tare;  he  chooser
to  speak  by  his  messengers,  to  them
we  must  yield  obedience.  Jesus  said,
in  his  day,  what  is  true  in  this,
"  he  that  receiveth  you  receiveth  me,
and  receiveth  him  that  sent  me,  and
he  that  rejecteth  you  rejecteth  mo
and  rejecteth  him  that  sent  me/'

Brethren,  may  God  direct  us  and
help  us  to  keep  the  commandments
of  our  Father;  I  ask  it  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


journal  of  DJsrounsKe


V


VARIETY  OF  GIFTS, — EXHORTATION  TO  CULTIVATE  A

SPIRIT  OF  CONTENTMENT.

Hermrks  by  Elder  Georgk  A.  SanTH,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  City,  May  11,  1862,


It  K POUTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG.


It  appears  in  the  economy  of  Heaven
that  there  are  a  variety  of  gifts.  Gifts
differ,  as  described  by  the  Apostle
to  the  Corinthians,  in  the  12th  chapter
of  his  First  Epistle.  He  says : —
"  For  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit
the  word  of  wisdom  ;  to  another,  the
word  of  knowledge  hy  the  same
spirit;  to  another,  faith  by  the  same
spirit ;  to  another,  the  gift  of  healing
by  the  same  spirit  ;  to  another,  the
working  of  miracles;  to  another,
prophecy;  to  another,  discerning  of
spirits;  to  another,  divers  kinds  of
tongues;  to  another,  the  interpreta-
tion of  tongues ;  but  all  these  worketh
that  one  and  the  selfsame  spirit,
dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he
will."

These  gifts  are  very  apparent  in
the  organization  of  this  people.  We
possess  a  great  deal  of  zeal,  and  some-
times it  has  proved  to  be  not  accord-
ing to  knowledge.  For  instance,  the
third  number  of  the  Evening  and
Morning  Star,  which  was  published
in  Independence,  Jackson  county,
Missouri,  by  W.  W.  Phelps,  held  out
the  doctrine  rather  strongly  that
about  nine  or  ten  years  would  be
sufficient  to  wind  up  the  whole  matter
of  the  warning  of  the  wicked  nations
and  the  gathering  of  the  Saints  pre-
paratory to  the  corning  of  the  Messiah.
So  zealous  were  some  of  tho  Elders
at  that  time,  and  so  certain  that  the
Lord  would  shorten  his  work,  that  we
expected  long  before  this  to  seethe  mil-


lenium  in  full  blast ;  and  yet,  although
these  anticipations  have  been  fully
realized,  the  work  has  progressed  as
rapidly  as  .it  possibly  could  without
doing  injury  to  itself  In  order  that
this  may-  be  properly  understood  it
may  be  well  to  consider  the  material
of  which  this  Church  is  composed.
Its  doctrines  have  been  taught  to
"every  nation,  kindred  and  tongue,
where  the  Elders  have  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  preaching  to  the  people,  and
those  who  have  from  time  to  time
embraced  the  doctrines  of  the  Saints
Jiave  been  gathered  together,  bringing
with  them  all  manner  of  prejudices,
notions  and  whims,  and  if  too  great  a

body  of  such  material  had  been
hurriedly  brought  together  it  might
have  been  impossible,  (though  some
people  say  there  is  nothing  impos-
sible with  the  Almighty,)  but  still  I
think  that  it  might  have  been  impos-
sible to  hold  such  an  incongruous
mass  of  materials  together.

When  the  Eldqrs  were  scattered
among  the  Gentiles  to  preach  repent-
ance and  baptism  for  the  remission  of
sins,  many  would  say  how  wonder-
fully these  men  preached !  What
smart  men  they  were  considered  by
those  who  heard  them  !  These  men
acquired  the  ingenuity  and  the  tact
by  which  they  handled  the  Scriptures
with  such  ability  that  they  were
actually  considered  by  the  world  to
be  veiy  learned  and  talented  men  and
some  of  them  are  known  yet  by  the


VARIETY  OF GIFTS,  ETC


sobriquet  of  u  Walking  Bible  ?$  And
all  these  men  in  their  way  are  shining
and  brilliant  items  of  talent  and
wisdom ;  a  comparatively  ignorant
man,  if  he  is  hum  Me,  can  go  and
preach  the  Gospel,  and  proclaim  by
the  power1  of  the  good  Spirit  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation.  An
ignorant  man,  who  goes  forth  from
nation  to  nation  to  declare  the  truths
which  God  in  his  mercy  has  revealed,
generally  goes  forth  in  humility  and
faith,  and,  by  diligence  and  persever-
ance, he  picks  up  and  gathers  into
the  Cli  nvh  nun  of  every  '"mairinable

ft-  V

tradition,  of  every  habit,  of  every
custom  and  of  every  nation ;  after
which  they  go  and  make  each  man
throw  away  part  of  his  foolish  tradi-
tions jost  as  fast  as  possible,  and  teach
him  true  principles  instead  thereof;
make  the  people  Hve  together  in  a
city,  a  country  and  a  State,  and  all
pull  together,  as  one  well-organized
community..

Now,  I  know  really  that  we  ought
to  be  ashamed  of  our  ignorarce,  arid
yet  brother  Musser  has  told  us  that
we  are  a  great  deal  a-head  of  the
Western  States.  Really,  if  we  are
not  we  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  our-
selves. We  have  had  wiser  teachers,
and  not  only  have  we  had  good  tutors,
but  we  have  had  practical  lessons.

Mr.  Trumbull,  member  of  Congress
from  Illinois,  madearemark  at  a  meet-
ing during  the  Mormon  war,  to  this
eflect : — 14 1  have  been  to  Nuitvoo;  I.
was  there  when  the  Mormons  were
there,  and  if  the  inhabitants  and
citizens  of  the  United  States  were, as
intelligent  and  industrious  and  as
thrifty  as  the  Mormons  were  then,
they  would  be  a  long  way  a-head  of
what  they  are  now/'  Lyman  Trum-
bull is  considerahle  authority  upon
this  subject,  he  was  Secretary  of  State
in  Illinois  when  we  lived  in  Xauvoo,
and  no  particular  friend  of  oilrs.  If
we  have  not  advanced  hs  much  as  we
might  have  done  we  have  scattered


the  truth  abroad*  The  wisdom  of  our
President  has  taken  the  poor  from  the
distant  nations  of  the  earth,  brought

S  them  here  and  made  them  rich,  You
pass  through  this  Territory  to-day
and  you  strive  to  find  the  man  or
woman  that  cannot  get  bread  for
supper.  You  cannot  do  it.  You  find
the  man  or  woman  that  is  destitute
of  clothing,  if  you  can.  Such  desti-
tution docs  not  exist.  You  may
search  the  world  in  vain  for  a  similar
people,  and  you  will  find  that  a  people
so  universally  comfortably  situated
do  not  exist ;  and  yet,  these  are  the
people  who  were  so  poor,  who  have
been  several  times  robbed  and  plun-
dered of  all  they  possessed,  and  who
then  came  into  the  most  desert  country
in  the  world,  and  here  they  have
acquired  this  abundance  which  sur-
rounds everybody,  A  polity  has  been
introduced  that  benefits  everybody,
instead  of  leaving  us  to  lay  our  own
plans,  and  at  Hie  shrine  ef  wicked-
ness and  corruption. When  a  poor

|  man  comes  to  a  Bishop  and  says,  "  I
am  hungry,  I  want  some  bread/*  The
Bishop,  likp  a  father,  says  : — "  Well,
what  can  you  do  ?  We  must  find
you  some  work,  we  must  show  yon
how  to  manage  in  this  country  so  that
you  can  get  a  living,"  The  Bishop
might  take  the  old  Gentile  plan,  give
the  hungry  man  a  dollar,  which  he
would  spend  and  do  nothing  to  pfo-
vide  more,  and  thus  he  will  be  kept
eternally  poor,  but  instead  of  tin's  he
finds  him  work,  the  man's  way  is
opened,  and,  in  a  short  time,  he  is
rich,  for  he  is  able  to  live  from  hia
own  exertions.  Herein  is  manifested  K
the  wisdom  of  Heaven,  which  should
be  in  the  breast  of  every  man  in  Zion,
and  it  also  shows  the  wisdom  of  that
head  which  God  has  placed  to  guide
us  and  make  us  a  self-sustaining  inde-
pendent people.

If  we  go  down  into  the  States  now
we  find  them  engaged  in  u  war,  and  I
suppose  that  the  language  that  is


343  .  journal  or

generally  denominated  the  King's
English,  fails  to  tell  the  extremes  of
fully,  wickedness  corruption  and  de-
gradation that  brought  this  war  an.
Tongue  cannot  tell  it,  the  language
we  speak  has  not  got  words  enough
to  describe  it  accurately.  Friends
and  brothers  are  killing  each  other.
It  actually  seems  as  though  the
vengeance  of  God  was  poured  out
upon  them,  and  every  time  that  either
party  sutler  a  defeat  that  party  is
filled  with  increased  rage  and  ven-
geance, and  they  thirst  for  each  other's
blood.  Such  are  the  facts  in  the  case.

The  Prophet  said  the  Lord  was  j
about  to  sweep  the  earth  with  the
besom  of  destruction,  and  in  that  day
the  wicked  would  slay  the  wicked.  1
cannot  tell  how  fast  things  will  go,
but  I  feel  astonished  when  I  see  huw
the  work  1ms  progressed  since  its  com-
mencement in  the  year  1830.  You
go  into  a  corn  field  where  the  stalks
grow  too  rapidly  and  you  find  them
weak,  and  a  very  slight  wind  will
break  them  down.  You  look  at  the
progress  of  nations  when  they  grow
too  rapidly,  you  will  perceive  thjjt
they  immediately  fall  to  pieces.  It
was  so  with  the  Mahomedau  empire  ;
it  swelled  in  eighty  years  from  a
solitary  wanderer  to  an  empire  con-
stituting about  a  third  part  of  the
then  inhabited  globe.  It  is  not  so
with  us.  This  people  is  rising  gradu-
ally. You  can  find  men  who  have
gone  forth  and  baptized  their  hun-
dreds, but  fewT  who  have  baptized
their  thousands,  and  jf  all  the  numbers
that  have  been  baptized  into  this
Church  since  its  first  organization
were  added  together  I  do  not  suppose
that  there  would  be  less  than  a  million,
and  but  few  of  these  have  remained
to  the  present  time,  the  rest  have
built  up  cities  for  the  Gentiles,  and
have  populated  such  towns  as  St.
Louis,  Sau  Francisco,  and  in  fact
almost  all  of  the  cities  of  California
and  the  "Western  States. The  rest


niseounsKs.

are  still  labouring  to  build  up  Zion,
to  spread  abroad  the  fulness  of  the
everlasting  Gospel  and  to  save  all  who
will  give  heed  to  its  teachings  and
the  dictates  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  while
those  who  cannot  u  bear  the  sieve  of
variety"  are  occasionally  leaving  the
Church  and  going  again  to  wrullow  in
the  wickedness  of  the  world.  There
is  now  and  then,  one  will  go  off  and
come  back  again,  and  they  prcjfess  to
be  good  brethren. They  put  me  in
mind  of  an  anecdote. A  wealthy
parishioner  sent  his  negro  servant
Jack  to  carry  a  sucking  pig  to  his
parson  as  a  present  for  a  Christmas
must,  while  on  his  way,  Cnfiy  was
called  into  a  public  house  by  one  of
his  comrades  to  have  a  drink,  and
while  quaffing  his  ale,  some  of  his
mischievous  friends  took  the  pig  oufi
of  the  basket  and  placed  a  puppy  in
its  stead;  Cufiy  then  went  on  his
way  and  presented  the  basket  to  tho
parson,  saying,  "  Sir,  massa  has  sent
you  a  present  of  a  fine  pig  for  a
Christmas  roast,"  the  rev.  gentleman
pleased  with  the  prospect  of  a  fin©
dinner,  looked  in  the  basket,  nnd
exclaimed, pig,  you  black  rascal,  it
is  a  poppy ;  tell  your  master  not  to
insult  me  by  sending  me  a  puppy£*
Cuffy,  on  his  return  home,  called  at
the  ale  house  for  another  glass,  wiien
his  comrades  slyly  exchanged  the  pig»
for  the  puppy  :  when  Jack  got  home,
his  master  said,  "  what  did  the  parson
say  for  the  tine  present  I  sent,  him  r*'
"  Parson  said  the  pig  wTas  a  puppy,
that  you  insult  hira  to  send  him  a
puppy/' *£  Bring  the  basket  to  me.'*
He  opened  it,  and  exclaimed,  "  it  is  a
pig,  you  black  villain." Cuffy  in
astonishment,  and  unable  to  account
for  what  he  saw,  cried  out,  "  Massa,  I
believe  he  can  be  a  pig  or  a  puppy
just  as  he  likes," This  is  just  the
character  of  those  men  that  act  in
this  way,  they  can  be  pigs  or  puppies,
Saints  or  ap  ►states,  just  as  they  like,
and  I  do  feel  that  if  such  men  will


JOVItNAL  OF  DISCOI


shall  have  strength,  and  stand  a  good
chance  for  good  health  and  long  life.

There  was  a  United  States  Judge
died  here,  and  just  before  his  death
he  said  : — "  I  have  abused  everything
that  is  good,  and  know  nothing  that
is  good."  This  h  the  condition  of
the  world.  But  with  proper  exercise
and  care,  and  the  common  food  that
is  produced  within  ourselves,  is  suffi-
cient for  us,  and  it  is  calculated  to
develope  the  mind  and  body  of  mam
and  to  lav  a  foundation  for  a  race  of
men  that  shall  rule  the  world.  Now
this  ia  no  wild  chimera  of  the  brain,


for  we  are  laying  the  foundation  for
the  redemption  of  the  human  race;
we  are  laying  a  foundation  to  make  a
fraternity  of  brethren,  and  to  secure
to  each  and  all  happiness  and  peace.
The  Lord  himself  has  laid  the  foun-
dation ;  and  if  any  man  wants  to  go
away  from  here,  let  him  go,  but  let
him  remember  that  he  will  be  unhappy
wherever  he  is.

Mav  the  Lord  bless  us  and  enable
u.s  to  inherit  a  spirit  of  contentment,
that  v.  e  may  inherit  celestial  glory.
Amen.


RESPONSIBILITIES  RESTING  UPON  THE  SAINTS. — INCREASE

OF  POWER  AND  1NFLUI


R


ly  P:


t  Damkl  H.  *\Y*:li-*,  made  in  the  3

Soli  Zak$  t%,  Hay  4,  1862.


Great


liKronTED  by  j.  v.  long.


I  feel  gratified,  brethren  and  sisters,
at  the  testimony  which  we  have  heard
this  morning  from  our  brethren,  who
have  been  called  to  go  urxm  Missions.
I  realize  for  one  that  it  is  an  inesti-
mable privilege  which  the  Saints
enjoy,  to  meet  *  together  under  such
favourable  circumstances  as  we  do
here,  to  strengthen  each  other,  to  give
our  testimony  to  the  truth  of  what  we
know.

These  brethren  have  been  called
to  go  npon  foreign  missions,  and  it  is
a  high  and  honourable  calling  to  go
forth  as  ambassadors  of  salvation ;
and  thfv  will  be  blessed  in  this
calling,  if  they  will  keep  themselves


pure  and  spotless  befure  the  Lord
t!  ey  will  go  in  peace  and  return  in
safety.  This  blessfig  is  f<*r  those  who  go
and  have  to  mingle  among  the  wicked
nations  of  the  earth,  V/Iille  abscntfrotn
home  thtv  are  encircled  with  the
prayers  of  the  faithful  Saints,  and
thev  are  enshrouded  with  a  mantle,
so  long  as  they  preserve  themselves
pure  and  holy.  We  seal  these  bless-
ings upon  them  whenever  they  go
forth  upon  this  great  Mission.  1  say
I  feel  to  rejoice  that  we  have  the
ability,  the  poorer  and  authority  to
send  forth  these  messengers  of  salva-
tion  to  those  that  sit  in  darkness  and
in  the  shadow  of  death,  and  I  hope


BESPONSIMLITIES  KKSTINO rPON TITK  SAINTS,  KTC


351


ant]  trust  and  know  that  these  brethren
will  be  the  means  of  accomplishing  a
good  work  upon  the  earth,  and  of
establishing  those  principles  which
lend  to  life  and  salvation  in  the  king-
dom of  God* They  will  gather  the
people  together  in  these  Valleys,  for  the
Saints  have  no  desire  for  the  fellowship
of  the  world. Some  gather  up  here,  it
is  true,  for  other  objects than  the
worship  of  God,  but  they  are  not  the
right  kind* There  are  those  brethren
and  sisters  who  come  here  for  the  love
of  righteousness  and they  are  the
majority,  and  will  doubtless  remain
in  the  majority,  for  this  kingdom  will
never  be  thrown  down  nor  given  to
a  nother  people. There  are  those  who
otne  litre1  third  with  the  leaven  of
unrighteousness,  having  given  way  to
Mi!*  tempter  until  they  got  i;  pluntcd
in  their  own  bosoms;  they  do  not
feel  satisfies  when  they  get  here,  for
they  have  not  purged  out  sufficient  of
this  leaven  of  unrighteousness ;  they
soon  seem  to  prefer  another  kind  of
society  ;  they  feel  uneasy  unless  they
can  be  where  wickedness  abounds,
whore  in  secret,  they  can  wallow  in
the  wickedness  of  the  world* I  am
glad,  for  one,  that  they  have  to  go
somewhere  else  to  gratify  their  imh al-
lowed,  selfish propensities.  They
want  to  go  to  the  eastern  nations  where
they  can  wallow  in  the  filth  of  the
*  wicked. I  am  glad  and  rejoice  that
they  have  to  go  away,  if  they  cannot
be  satisfied  with  the  pure  principles  of
the  Gospel,  and  enjoy  themselves  in
the  fresh air  of  these  mountains.
Here  we  have  peace  and  enjoy  happi-
ness and  so  e;ui  all  the  right-minded.
We have contentment, and  take
pleasing  and  solid  comfort in  real
enjoyment  for  we  are  placed  upon  a
platform  where  we  shall  go  forth
conquering  and  to  conquer  j  and  here
we  can  hoist  the  banner  of  righteous-
ness and  all  can  be  shielded  and  pro*
tected  beneath i& folds; we  can
labour  to  redeem  the  earth,  and  cause


it  to  bring  forth  from  its  elements
and  draw  therefrom  those  things
needful  for  our  own  comfort,  and  we
can  thus  be  delivered  from  the  power
of  the  oppressor.

Our  brethren  and  sisters  have  been
shamefully  oppressed  in  their  native
countries ;  they  have  lived  where
their  fathers  before  them  lived,  and
so  long  as  they  continue  in  this  way
they  are  not  and  will  not  be  able  to
gain  one  iota,  nor  to  advance  in  the
scale  of  intelligence;  they  have  not
taken  one  step  to  improve  themselves
or  their  children  temporally  or  spiri-
tually j  they  are  bound  as  it  were
hand  and  foot,  in  these  old  countries.
But  when  the  *Gospel  goes  forth  and
they  receive  it  in  good  and  honest
hearts,  these  fetters  are  broken  off,
and  they  are  then  placed  upon  a  plat-
form upon  which  they  can  improve,
in  fact  there  is  then  nothing  to  pre-
vent them  improving  and  exalting
themselves  and  gaining  for  them-
selves an  influence  in  the  midst  of  this
people.  They  can  pit  her  up  to  Zion
where  they  can  gain  a  temporal  sup-
port, and  in  due  time  become  inde-
pendent :md  happy,  following  the
pursuits  of  truth  and  virtue.  This  is
one  great  blessing  which  the  Gospel
brings  to  many  poor  persons  in
foreign  countries  as  well  as  in  our
own  land.

Well,  brethren,  we  have  great  cause
to  rejoice  in  these  tilings,  and  in
all  the  blessings  which  flow  from
the  Gospel  of  salvation.  We  have  a
pleasant,  agreeable  country,  we  enjoy
freedom ;  we  have  communication
with  the  heavens,  iaA  through  that
medium  intelligence  flows  to  the
minds  of  the  children  of  men.  We
have  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood which  has  been  conferred  upon
the  children  of  men  from  our  Father
and  God.  How  it  becomes  us  then
I  to  appreciate  these  blessings.  We
have  no  time  for  carelessness,  but
everv  hour  and  moment  should  be


occupied  to  promote  the  interest  of
our  Father's  kingdom  nfxm  the  earth  ;
to  preserve  the  keys  and  power,  which
the  Almighty  has  conferred  upon  ns,
pure  and  holy  he  fore  him  :  to  pre*
serve  nursel  ves  and  our  influence  before  I
high  Heaven,  and  then  all  will  be
well  with  us.

It  is  a  new  era  in  which  we  are
living;  and  it  is  a  new  light  that  has
dawned  upon  this  people;  and  power
and  influence  is  increasing  and  will
continue  to  increase  among  the  people
of  God  continually,  for  this  is  their
destiny;  and  although  they  may  not
understand  the  growing  influence  and
power  of  this  mighty  work  in  which
we  are  engaged,  still  they  are  flowing
in  a  steady  stream  unto  this  people.
What  is  there  for  this people  to
accomplish  and  perform  ? It  is  their
business  to  preserve  this  Priesthood  j
untarnished,  that  wisdom  may  flow  f
unto  them  through  its  holy  influence,  |
that  thej"  may  know  how  to  wield  the
power  thereof  for  the  best  good  of  the
kingdom  of  God, It  becomes  us  well
to  understand  this,  that  we  may  not
unwisely  wield  the  power  that  i$  and
that  will  ere  long  be  put  into  our
hands. This  is  what  the  wicked
nations  have  done  with  their  power,,
but  it  will  not  do  for  us No,  for  if
we  were  to  use  it  in  this  way,  all  the
authority  and  power  ever  given  would
be  taken  away from  us,  as  i:  is  now
being  taken  from  them. Km,  if  we
are  faithful,  power  and  influence  will  ,
continue  to  flow  unto  us  until  the  I
kingdoms  i if  this  world  shall  become  ;
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  his  !
Christ Then  let  us  step  forth  to  do  I
good,  and  whenever we have  tile  |
opportunity  let  us  assist  in  the  great
work  which  lies  before  us;  and  let  us  I
labour  to  preserve  this  power  upon
the  earth,  that  there  may  be  ftp
ensiixu  to  the  nations,  and  an  emblem
of  righteousness  to  all  people.

It  is  the  inestimable  privilege  of
this  people,  if  they  will  receive  and


honour  it,  to  establish  the  principles
of  righteousness  and  truth,  and  to
establish  that  kingdom  which  shall
stand  for  ever  and  ever.  It  is  our
privilege  to  become  pillars  in  that
kingdom,  to  bring  it  forth,  to  honour
and  sustain  it.  It  is  a  temporal  work ;
everything  is  requisite  for  the  king-
dom of  God  that  is  needed  for  any
oilier  king' lorn,  except  wickedness.
We  want  to  build  up  cities,  and  to
cultivate  and  beautify  the  earth,  and
make  the  place  of  the  Lord's  feet

trio i ioii*v jjvei  >  eAceiieiiCL,  uu«er

and  blessing  belongs  to  the  Saints  of
the  Most  Jiigh  uou,  u  they  will  prove
themselves  worthv  to  receive  them.
We  have  means  to  perform  foreign
missions,  to  save  the  people  ;  we  have
also  means  at  home  to  bring  forth  the
grain  to  build  up  cities  and  temples,  and
to  go  forth  upon  the  right  and  upon
the  lo!t  to  protect  the  right,  and  to
develope  the  resources  of  the  land
into  which  the  Lord  has  brought  ns  ;
to  shield  ourselves  from  the  wicked
and  ungodly,  and  thwart  them  ih  al]
things.  All  these  things  have  to  be
done.  We  have  all  missions  to  per-
iorm,  some  one  kind  and  some  another.

We  have  now  hi  tore  ns  a  temporal
work  in  building  the  lemple;  ana  m
order  to  do  this,  we  have  to  make  the
State  road  passable  for  teams  ;  said  to
do  this,  ii  is  i.oee--:trv  to  raise  it  in
all  the  low  places,  to  open  the
ditches  and  allow  the  water  to  run
off.  This  is  a  tempo:  ;  1  Work  that
must  !.••  ^item/led  to.  dav  bv  dr.v,  until
it  is  completed**  I  he  stone-cutters
are  lying  idle  for  want  of  stone.  We
do  not  want  the  road  lost  now,
after  so  much  labour  has  been  bestowed
upon  it.

There  are  a,  great  many  rumours
afloat  about  the  expeditions  th&t  have
gone  out  from  here,  and  I  want  to
say  that  they  are  not  worthy/  of  your
credit.  And  I  want  to  say  that  it  is
all  right  with  regard  to  those  expedi-
tions going  forth,  and  will  result  for


bt:sfon«ibilities  besting  upon  THE  SAINTS,  ETC*


35  S


the  benefit  of  this  people.  The  people
of  this  kingdom  are  minute  men,  or
should  be,  and  they  should  be  pre-
pared to  go  as  circumstances  shall
direct,  and  in  this  way  we  prove
ourselves  before  God,  that  we  are
ready  to  do  hi*  will,  and  to  do  his
bidding.  The  requisition  was  made
by  the  proper  authority  at  Washing-
ton, and  was  readily  responded  to,
as  has  always  been  the  case  when  a
call  has  been  made  through  the
proper  channel,  and  the  compliance
with  this  call  will  result  in  good.
Our  brethren  will  perform  their  duties
and  do  honour  to  their  country.  It
is  our  country;  we  are  citizens  of  the
American  Government,  and  we  have
a  right  to  act  for  the  preservation  of
its  institutions,  and  we  have  always
done  it  whenever  called  upon,  and  we
have  shown  ourselves  ready  to  respond
to  our  duty  as  good  citizens,  no
matter  what  usage  we  have  received
in  return.  This  proves  a  weapon  in
the  hands  of  this  people  for  their
defence.  Let  us  feel  contented  to
respond  to  every  call  that  comes  from
the  proper  source,  let  us  do  it  with
full  faith  and  confidence  believing
that  it  is  right

If  there  are  those  amon?  us  who
want  to  go  to  the  world,  let  them  go
till  they  get  their  fill,  and  we  would
rather  they  would  clo  this  than  stay
here  and  contaminate  the  Saints  of  the
Host  High.

Let  our  brethren  who  are  going  on
missions  keep  themselves  pure  and
unspotted  from  the  worhh  We  know
that  we  can  perform  a  mission  in  the
world  and  mingle  with  them  as  far
as  shall  be  necessary,  without  par-
taking of  their  wickedness.  Our
Missionaries  are  obliged  to  mingle
with  them  more  or  less;  and,  in  fact,
*ve  are  all  in  the  world,  but  it  docs
not  prove  that  the  Saints  are  obliged
to  mingle  with  the  wicked  and  carry
the  wicked  in  their  bosoms,  but  they
can  keep  themselves  upon  the  plat-
No.  23


form  of  virtue  and  cleave  close  unto
the  Lord.

Our  brother,  who  was  speaking,  in
his  remarks  conveyed  the  idea  that
he  had  a  greater  degree  of  the  gifts
of  the  Spirit  and  happiness  therein
before  he  came  here  than  he  has  now.
This  is  a  mistake,  in  my  opinion,  for
the  power  of  God  is  manifest  more
strongly  by  contrast  in  the  world,
even  as  light  shines  in  darkness,,
Here  are  the  ordinances  of  the  Church
administered  continually  ;  and  the
healing  power  is  not  noticed  here  as
much  as  in  the  world  ;  if  there  is  one
case  of  healing  in  the  world,  it  is  a
marvel,  whereas,  here  it  is  so  common
an  occurence  that  a  case  of  healing  is
less  noticed  or  thought  about.  The
Spirit  of  light  penetrates  into  the
world,  where  the  darkness  is  such
that  it  'may  be  felt,  but  here  it  is
swallowed  up  in  the  greater  light.

This  people  are  gaining  influence
and  power  with  the  Heavens,  and
they  are  enjoying  more  of  the  bless-
ings of  the  Heavens  than  are  enjoyed
anywhere,  else  upon  the  earth.  I
know  when  clouds  spread  over  the
wicked  nations,  this  people  feel  itt
even  as  the  telegraphic  wire  is  affected
by  approaching  storms.  When  a
cloud  looms  up  over  the  people  in  the
Valleys,  it  is  felt  to  the  utmost
extremity  of  the  earth.  The  Elders
have  borne  this  testimony  time  and
again.  They  have  frequently,  when
any  grent  movement  has  been  about
to  be  made  against  us,  known  the
designs  of  the  enemies  of  this  people;
a  knowledge  of  what  they  purposed
doing  has  come  as  by  a  shock  of
electricity,  and  thus  by  the  inspira-
tion of  the  good  Spirit  they  have
known  the  intentions  of  those  that
concoct  in  secret  ngainst  the  welfare
of  the  people  of  God;  and,  by  the
eamo  »Spirit  of  revelation  have  the
Elders  abroad  known  of  any  great
and  important  movement  at  home.
Through  this  game  influence  at  home,

Yoi.  12.


354;  JOVRXAL  or

here  in  Zion,  has  the  President  seen
and  known,  even  as  he  has  understood
a  book  that  was  open  before  him,
what  were  the  intentions  of  our
enemies,  and  he  has  often  told  us
their  most  secret  combinations  and
devices;  and  the  very  extent  of  their
haute  has  been  revealed  to  him,  and,
at  the  same  time,  their  power  of
accomplishing  what  they  have  designed
has  been  shown  to  him,  and  to  what
extent  they  could  carry  out  their
plans.  He  has  always  seemed  to  be
forwamed,  to  enable  him,  I  suppose,
to  take  measures  to  thwart  their
unholy  plans  and  wicked  devices  ;
and  have  they  not  been  thwarted  ?
You,  yourselves,  are  witnesses  of  these
things,  and  as  this  people  improve
and  learn  to  preserve  themselves  pure
before  the  Heavens,  so  will  the  gifts
and  graces  of  the  kingdom  be  multi-
plied unto  them,  and  as  they  get
wisdom  to  operate  for  the  benefit  of
the  kingdom  and  for  their  own
Jbenetit,  so  fast  will  they  obtain  the
power  to  carry  out  their  righteous
intentions*  We  should  not  seek  to
have  power  any  foster  than  we  can
nge  it  for  good.


DISCOURSES.

Well,  brethren,  I  bear  my  testi-
mony, in  addition  to  the  testimony
which  has  been  borne  here  to-day,  of
,  Joseph  Smith  and  of  Brigham  Young,
that  I  know  them  to  be  good  ment
chosen  of  the  Lord  to  perform  a  great
work  in  the  last  days.  1  also  bean
my  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the
Gospel  which  we  have  embraced;  I
know  it  is  of  God,  and  it  will  lead
those  that  are  faithful  into  his  pre-
sence ;  and  that  they  will  ultimately
triumph  over  all  enemies  aad  reign
upon  the  earth  ;  I  know  it  will  exalt
all  who  are  humble  aud  faithful  unto
the  end  of  their  probation.  I  pray
God  to  preserve  you  and  me,  and  help
us  to  be  useful  in  our  day  and  genera-
tion, and  that  we  may  make  it  our  busi-
ness'to  seek  to  build  up  his  kingdom,
and  maintain  that  power  which  the
Almighty  is  establishing  upon  the
earth  ;  let  us  labour  to  lift  aloft  the
banner  of  peace  and  truth,  and  walk
woithily  before  the  Lord  that  we  may
receive  the  blessings  which  our  religion
will  bring  unto  us,  if  faithful.
!  ay  God  help  us  to  do  these  things,
is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


INFLUENCE  OF  PARENTS  IN  TRAINING  THEIR  CHILDREN.—
POWER  WHICH  ACCOMPANY  i:s  THE  ELDERS  WHEN  HAVING
THE  FAITH  AND  PRAYERS  OF  THE  PEOPLE,


HemarLs  by  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lalct  City,  May  25,  18G2.


HE  POUTED  BY  J,  V.  LONG.


I  certainly  feel  it  a  privilege  to
listen  to  such  instructions  as  we  have
had  this  morning.  I  feel  that  we  are
a  favoured  people ;  and  that  we  can
have  instructions  continually  poured
out  upon  us  day  by  day,  and  Sabbath
by  Sabbath,  tUat  are  calculated  in
their  nature  to  reform,  to  elevate  and
instruct  the  mind.  The  principles  of
our  religion  exercise  an  influence  over
the  minds  of  the  people  which  is  cal-
culated to  lead  them  in  the  paths  of
virtue,  truth  and  sobriety,  and  in  that
way  which  will  best  conduce  to  their
happiness  here  and  hereafter.  Many
reflections  pass  through  my  mind
when  I  look  abroad  throughout  the
length  and  breadth  of  this  Terri-
tory, and  view  the  position  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  who  are  gathered
in  these  valleys  of  the  mountains;
and  when  I  consider  the  object  and
purpose  that  have  brought  them  here
and  that  are  keeping  them  together,
view  the  vastness  of  their  desires
before  high  Heaven,  their  wishes  in
regard  to  themselves  and  posterity,
their  strong  faith  and  unison  of  pur-
pose which  have  caused  them  to  take
the  course  they  are  now  pursuing,  I
consider  it.  is  a  sublime  spectacle  to
behold.  Think  of  a  community  of
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands
actuated  by  one  and  the  same  purpose,
and  that  the  most  noble  in  its  nature,
and  that  they  are  using  their  exertions
for  the  establishment  of  peace  and
righteousness  upon  the  earth,  continu-


ally seeking  (o  produce  a  oneness  in
all  their  manifestations  towards  each
other,  in  their  public  instructions  and
in  their  daily  walk  and  conversation,
using  their  life  to  do  those  things
that  will  exalt  the  human  family  and
striving  to  walk  sin  and  iniquity
under  their  feet.  The  r  Moderation
of  this  subject  causes  very  strange
and  yet  good  reflect  ons  to  pasa
through  n»y  mind*  Wht.n  I  look
upon  this  people  and  consider  the
subject  of  their  present  and  future
progress,  when  I  view  the  matter  in
this  light,  I  conclude  that  ti  e  feeling
and  desire  with  the  great  majority  ia
to  have  righteousness  prevail ;  and  I
know  that  this  feeling  exists  to  a
greater  extent  here  than  it  does  any-
where else  upon  tlte  surface  of  this
globe.  As  was  remarked  last  Sunday,
by  brother  Taylor,  if  sin  and  iniquity
bear  sway,  although  the  people  may
have  here  and  there  good  principle,
something  among  them  that  is  calcu-
lated to  do  good,  here  and  there  an
item  of  essential  doctrine,  and  occa-
sionally a  few  good  men  who  seek
to  sustain  good  principles  to  exalt
virtue  and  truth,  yet  these  are  over-
balanced by  the  wicked  and  ungodly,
and  hence  that  people  cannot  enjoy
pure  and  unalloyed  happiness.

There  is  no  power  but  that  of  tho
Almighty  that  can  sustain  theso
Heavenly  principles  and  it  can  only

be accompli.  ]i«  d by dniwiry;  the

people  out livin  the  nations  and


356


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


placing  them  where  they  can  over-
balance all  wicked  influences  and
have  the  predominance  over  the  eviL
This  is  our  situation,  and  how  does  it
become  us  to  act  as  the  repositories
of  these  favours  ?  Should  we  sink
into  sin  and  iniquity,  or  should  we
continue  to  improve  in  the  knowledge
of  God  and  to  increase  in  those  prin-
ciples which  lead  to  exaltation  ?  We
should  endeavour  to  eradicate  evil
from  our  midst.  What  is  our  prayer  ?
Is  it  not  that  those  who  work  wicked-
ness may  be  rooted  out,  and  that  those
who  work  righteousness  may  be  left  to
inherit  thelaiid  ?  Hut  how  often  dr


but  if  parents  learn  their  children  to
do  that  which  is  not  right,  they  are
apt  to  grow  up  in  jin.  I  believe  that
the  child  is  naturally  honest,  but
when  this  feeling  to  do  wronc;  first
penetrates  the  mind  of  the  child  it
causes  it  to  look  and  wonder  in
astonishment,  and  it  can  scarcely
comprehend  what  the  parents  menu.
I  have  thought  frequently  upon  this
subject,  and  I  have  seen  circum-
stances where  the  child  could  not
comprehend  the  evil  or  the  cheat  that
was  intended,  when  it  would  appear
to  be  bereft  of  its  &qusq^  and  to  be


in


ii


ll


■Ti


fifi


3  >8  JOURNAL  OF

and  if  he  wants  to  consign  himself  to
oblivion  and  go  back  to  native  ele-
ment let  him  follow  in  the  path  of  the
ungodly  ;  but,  if,  on  tho  other  hand,  he
wants  to  endure  and  dwell  with  God
and  holy  angels,  to  have  knowledge
and  power  to  understand  all  intelli-
gence and  finally  become  one  of  the
Gods  of  eternity,  let  him  take  a
course  to  produce  that  effect,  and  let
him  use  Ins  influence  to  bring  to  pass
that  which  is  calculated  to  exalt  and
bring  him  up  finally  upon  the  plat-
form of  the  Gods  of  eternity.

We  are  here  upon  God's  footstool
and  we  have  all  the  privilege  and  the
power  to  take  either  course — -to  tnke
which  road  we  please.  Here  through
the  goodness  of  God  in  these  last  days
mankind  have  a  privilege  which  they
have  not  had  for  many  generations
that  are  past  and  gone.  Here  a  man-
can  live  and  pursue  the  pith  of
righteousness,  truth  and  virtue  and
none  dare  forceahly  drive  him  from
the  path  of  right,  but,  if,  on  the  other
hand,  a  man  is  not  honest  he  can  join
with  the  wicked  and  ungodly.  A
man  who  has  a  disposition  to  do  right
can  here  prove  his  integrity  in  all  the
relations  of  life,  in  all  the  intercourse
he  has  v.  ii  h  men  on  the  earth  he  can
increase  his  power  to  do  good,  and
none  will  attempt  to  hinder  him.
This  is  a  great  privilege,  and  one  that
does  not  belong  to  all  the  people  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  but  it  accrues
to  the  people  of  these  Valleys  because
they  have  been  gathered  out  from  the
nations  and  brought  under  the  influ-
ences which  prevail  here.  And  where
these  principles  are  cherished  and
taught  by  the  servants  of  God,  where
they  are  urged  continually  upon  the
attention  of  the  people,  where  the
people  practice  them  and  shun  the
evil  and  live  for  happiness  and  glory
there  is  present  peace ;  but  if  they
take  another  course  and  neglect  those
principles  of  light  and  intelligence
they  will  be  led  to  ruin  and  be  sub-  '


Discotmsrcs.

jected  to  all  kinds  of  disasters.  We
can  see  clearly  that  those  who  are
supposed  U>  !  '  righteous  can  be  so  in
the  nations  of  the  earth,  though  not
so  easily  as  they  can  here,  for  it  is
very  easily  to  be  seen  that  the
influence  of  the  good  Spirit  and  the
principles  of  eternal  life  cannot  be
used  to  the  same  extent  there  as  in
these  valleys  and  mountains.

When  Joseph  was  in  Egypt  he
could  preserve  his  integrity  before
Fotipher  and  Pharaoh,  and  so  it  is
with  our  Elders  who  go  out  from
here  to  perform  duties  that  may  be
assigned  them  among  the  nations  of
the  earth ;  they  can  preserve  their
Integrity,  and  by  cleaving  to  those
principles  which  they  have  learned
while  here  they  will  have  power  over
the  Tempter,  and  I  hoy  will  return  when
they  have  accomplished  their  missions
in  peace  and  safety,  for  the  Lord  will
preserve  them  from  those  evils  which
are  calculated  to  lead  them  into  dis-
grace. This  is  the  advantage  of  those
who  go  forth  from  the  midst  of  this
people;  they  have  the  faith  and
prayers  of  all  Israel  to  shield  them
from  the  powers  of  darkness  and  from
those  influences  which  would  other-
wise lead  them  to  commit  sin;  by
these  means  are  the  Elders  of  this
Church  preserved  when  in  the  midst
of  wickedness.  Tin's  is  a  great  power
that  is  upon  the  earth,  and  it  is  here
because  holy  and  righteous  principles
exist  and  are  practised  among  this
people.  These  are  some  of  the  benefits
derived  from  obedience  to  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel,  and  it  becomes  us  as
Saints  of  the  Most  High  to  strive  to
preserve  ourselves  pure  and  holy
before  him,  to  take  hold  of  good  and
righteous  principles  like  men  and
women  of  God,  to  labour  to  sustain
our  present  existence,  to  sustain  our-
selves by  drawing  from  the  elements
all  those  good  things  which  he  has
placed  within  our  reach,  and  thus
become  a  really  independent  people,


INFLUEDCe  OP

to  be  no  longer  dependent  upon  those  \
who  would  gladly  sell  us  for  the  cloth
we  have  to  wear.  It  becomes  an
experiment  for  us  to  sustain  ourselves,
though  not  exactly  one  that  is  liable
to  tail,  but  it  is  to  see  whether  a
righteous  and  holy  people,  coming
out  from  the  world,  can  draw  from  the
elements  that  have  been  previously
scattered  around  them  for  their  own
immediate  sustenance  and  suppor  t,  or
ivhether  they  will  for  ever  be  depend-
ent upon  those  who  would  destroy
them.

We  have  made  goes!  progress  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains,  and  it  is
truly  encouraging  (o  look  around  and
see  what  has  been  accomplished  within
fifteen  years.  Still  there  is  a  great
deal  more  to  be  done.  When  ancient
Israel  went  out  of  Egypt,  a  vast  host
of  them,  the  Lord  administered  to
their  mimed iate  necessities,  and  or-
dained that  their  clothing  should  not
wear  out,  and  in  this  way  ii  y  were
freed  from  labour  while  travelling  in
the  wilderness  ;  the  Lord  himself  com-
bined the  elements  for  the  benefit  and
support  of  that  people.  Now,  we  have
been  brought  a  far  greater  distance
than  they  were,  but  the  manna  from
heaven  lias  not  been  showered  out
upon  us  as  it  was  upon  them.  We
have  had  to  exert  our  intellect,  to
delve  in  the  earth,  and  to  a  great
extent  we  have  succeeded  in  bringing
from  the  elements  onr  food  and
clothing.  I  think  this  is  a  far  greater
work  than  that  which  Moses  brought
about,  and  we  sire  doing  it  without
that  mighty  interposition  which
seemed  to  he  necessary  in  the  days  of
Moses,  though  the  Lord  has  truly
been  prolific  in  blessing  the  earth
since  his  people  came  to  this  country.
What  have  the  servants  of  God  done
since  they  came  here  ?  The  first
thing  was  to  dedicate  the  earth,  the
air,  the  water  and  the  mountains,
and  this  blessing  has  been  ,  poured
out  upon  them  and  upon  the  people,


PARR  NTS,  ETC#  359

and  through  the  blessing  of  High
Heaven,  the  earth  has  brought  forth
to  the  sustenance  of  his  people.  Is
there  not  a  dignity  in  this,  tabonr
which  we  are  performing  ?  In  endea-
vouring to  bring  from  the  elements
things  necessary  for  our  support  ?  I
say  there  is,  and  there  is  an  honour
that  accrues  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
for  their  indefatigable  exertions  in
this  respect;  it  shows  that  they  are
alive  to  the  work  of  the  last  days,
that  they  are  exerting  themscves
to  build  up  a  city  and  a  kingdom
wherein  shall  dwell  righteousness,
to  the  defiance  of  the  Devil  and  his
hosts.  What  a  glorious  sight  it  would
he  to  see  the  united  hosts  of  Israel
present  one  mighty  and  unbroken
phalanx  against  the  wickedness  of  the
world.  If  this  were  the  ease  could
the  Devil  or  wicked  men  break  such
a  band  of  muted  brethren  ?  No  ;  they
would  say  come  on,  let  the  surges  of
opposition  roll  up  against  us,  and  still
we  will  stand  steadfast  being  of  one
heart  and  one  mind.  What  is  there
that  this  people  could  not  accomplish
if  they  would  preserve  inviolate  this
integrity,  and  stand  shoulder  to
shoulder  in  all  the  acts  of  their  lives,
to  sustain  one  another  and  those  that
are  placed  to  guide  and  dictate  in  the
kingdom  of  God  ?  There  is  nothing
but  what  could  be  done  by  a  union  of
this  kind,  for  it  is  your  privilege,  and
it  is  also  the  privilege  of  all  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  l^e  united  in  doing  that
which  is  good,  and  I  am  happy  to  say
that  this  is  the  case  to  a  great  extent,
but  still  the  people  might  do  moro
towards  concentrating  their  energies
for  the  welfare  of  IsraeL  There  are
a  great  many  mean  little  acts  manifest
themselves  jet,  at  this  advanced  day  ;
these  we  should  all  seek  to  reject  and
begin  anew  with  ourselves,  and  see
that  none  of  these  things  are  traced
to  our  bosom.

Brother  Camming??  does  not  pre*
tend  to  train  up  his  children  to  walk


360


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOl'IlSES.


in  these  bye  and  forbidden  paths  of
which  I  have  been  speaking,  neither
do  I  nor  brother  Brigham  nor  many
others,  still  there  are  others  that  turn
out  vile  and  do  those  things  that  are
wrong.  But  the  time  must  come  that
righteouness  must  prevail,  or  else  we
have  no  privilege,  no  promise  of  the
future,  and  in  fact  without  it  we  have
nothing  that  is  any  better  than  that
which  is  possessed  by  anybody  else,
and  we  had  better  have  stayed  in  the
world  and  served  the  Devil  at  the
places  where  we  came  from  than  to
have  come  here  for  such  a  purpose.
All  those  who  feel  like  continuing  in
this  way  had  a  great  deal  better  be
somewhere  else  striving  to  introduce
such  evil  practices  as  they  have
brought  from  the  old  world,  A
Gospel  of  salvation  would  reform
every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam,  if
they  would  let  it,  and  \t  would  bring
them  upon  the  platform  of  redemp-
tion, for  the  Gospel  is  redeeming  in
its  qualities ;  it  is  ennobling  in  its
nature,  and  it  leads  on  to  great  and
glorious  results,  and  if  we  wish  to  be
the  recipients  of  its  benefits  it  is  for
ns  to  turn  from  the  path  which  leads
to  destruction,  and  walk  continually
in  the  path  of  life.  I  truly  feel  an
interest  in  this  people,  because  they
are  of  the  class  who  are  striving  to
do  right ;  1  feel  proud  to  be  associated
with  such  a  people  as  this,  with  all
the  follies  which  I  cannot  fellowship
and  which,  in  connection  with  others,
I  shall  try  to  overcome,  and  to  redeem
tli is  people  from  all  evil.  I  say  that
we  are  a  good  people,  and  far  the  best
people  that  live  upon  the  earth,  and
let  us  try  to  get  rid  of  things  that  are
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel
as  fast  as  we  can,  and  try  to  induce
the  people  by  whom  we  are  sur-
rounded to  increase  in  the  love  of  God,
to  hate  that  which  is  evil,  and  by  the
love  which  they  have  for  the  princi-
ples of  holiness,  cause  them  to  hate
.niquity  and  love  righteousness.  The


presentation  of  these  things  to  the
minds  of  the  people  will  do  good,  it
will  be  a  means  of  imparting  to  them
the  influences  and  principles  by  which
we  are  inspired.  In  this  way,  perhaps,
we  may  redeem  some  of  them  and
brincr  them  back  to  where  thev  can
have  the  honour,  the  glory  and  the
peace  which  are  the  reward  of  the
righteous,  even  of  all  who  eschew  evil
and  do  good,

Let  each  and  every  one  exercise  their
influence  in  this  way,  to  promote  holy
and  righteous  principles  upon  the  earth.
Religion  is  glorious  where  it  brings
peace  to  the  soul  and  contentment  to
the  mind.  Let  us  abide  in  those
things  and  keep  ourselves  within  the
scope  of  those  holy  influences  that  do
predominate  and  prevail  in  the  midst
of  this  people,  and  do  not  let  us  run  here
and  there  after  things  which  do  not
concern  us.  If  we  want  to  be  blest
by  those  predominating  principles  and
influences  which  the  Lord  has  placed
here,  far  from  the  power  of  the  wicked,
let  us  not  by  any  act  of  our  own
throw  ourselves  outside  of  those
influences.  The  moment  we  do  it  of
our  own  volition  we  tread  upon
slippery  places.  Men  may  go  away
from  here  when  they  are  sent  by
proper  authority,  when  they  are
wanted  to  accomplish  a  certain  pur-
pose, and  they  can  retain  the  Spirit
of  the  Almighty,  but  when  they  go
without  being  sent,  of  their  own
volition,  then  they  have  no  assurance
that  their  feet  will  not  slip;  they
have  not  the  faith  of  the  people  to
help  them  ;  the  angels  have  no  charge
to  preserve  them,  and  particularly
those  that  leave  and  go  into  sin  and
iniquity,  and  are  finally  captivated  by
Satan.  And,  supposing  they  only  go
to  Salmon  river  or  California  and
return,  perhaps  having  a  little  of  the
leaven  of  life,  they  return  with  the
spirit  of  the  world  upon  them.  Have
we  any  examples  of  this  kind  ?  If
we  have  let  us  look  at  them,  and  from


INFLUENCE  OF  PABENT3,  ETC.


361


the  lessons  of  the  past  let  us  look  at
the  results  of  the  future. I  have  seen
them  comfe  back  with  a  little  gold,
and  it  has  almost  invariably  rained
them,  nine  eases  out  of  ten  this  has
been  the  result,  and  if  they  have  not
succeeded  as  well  as  they  thought
they  ought  to  have  done  in  the  midst
of  the  Saints,  they  are  found  with
curses  upon  their  lips,  such  as  the
inhabitants  where  they  have  been  are
accustomed  to  indulge  in:  they  do
not  respect  the  Sabbath,  they  do  not
meet in  the  Tabernacle  with  the
brethren  to  learn  the  word  of  the
Lord,  neither  do  they  meet  anywhere
else  for  any  good  purpose,  but  they
may  be  seen  in  the  streets  racing
their  horses,  or  cutting  up  some  kind
of  useless  folly,  wasting  their  time
till  their  money  is  gone,  and  then
they  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  go
back  and  get  more. They  go,  and
perhaps  get  a  less  sum  than  they  did
the  first  time,  but  no  matter  whether
they  do  or  not  they  are  never  con-
tented. This  has  been  my  experience,
and  this  is  the  best,  the  fairest  and
the  smoothest  light  in  which  I  can
view  such  cases  and  speak  of  them.
This  course  of  life,  so  far  as  it  has  an
influence,  disqualifies  the  young  man
from  making  a  good,  humble,  faithful
follower  of  Jesus  ;  it  disqualifies  him
from  becoming  a  Saint  of  the  Most
High. This  is  my  experience  ;  you
can  look  at  the  subject  with  your  own
eyes. # ! "  I
There  are quite  a  number,  and
gome  good  men  among  them,  that
want  to  know  if  it  is  counsel  to  go


out  on  the  road  to  trade.  I  tell  them
that  I  have  no  counsel  of  that  kind
to  give,  neither  have  I  heard  the
President  give  such  counsel  to  any
one.  If  I  want  to  go  out  on  the  road  to
trade,  taking  butter  and  eggs  and
such  like  things,  and  my  Bishop  and
President  want  me  to  go,  then  I
should  feel  that  I  could  be  preserved,
I  should  doubtless  feel  it  to  be  a  great
burden,  and  as  for  seeking  fur  such
an  opportunity  it  would  be  far  from
me,  for  I  certainly  would  not  wish  to
go  unless  I  was  wanted,

I  mention  this  matter  because  many
have  asked  me  about  it,  and  I  have
universally  told  them  that  I  have  no
such  counsel  to  give.  It  is  a  blessing
to  live  in  such  a  community  as  this,

ml  r

and  I  feel  that  it  is  not  safe  for  any
one  to  use  his  own  volition  to  <*o
outside  of  this  influence.  This  feeling
is  what  has  led  my  mind  in  this  way,
and  I  pray  God  to  help  us  to  stand
upon  this  platform  where  we  can  be
preserved  from  the  influences  of  the
wicked,  and  keep  ourselves  so  that
we  cannot  be  led  astray,  nor  be
swayed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  of
doctrine  or  example  that  comes  along,
but  tli at  we  may  seek  for  wisdom  and
knowledge,  that  our  minds  may  be
prepared  to  receive  the  teachings  we
hear  from  day  to  day.

May  God  help  us  to  do  right,  and
cause  truth  and  good  examples  to
sink  deep  into  our  hearts,  that  we
may  cultivate  every  virtuous  and  holy
principle,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen.


362


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUnSKS.


+


ETERNAL  SALVATION,— CONTINUED  IMPROVEMENT  BRINGS

EXALTATION-

Remarks  hj  President  Daniel  H.  Wells,  made  in  ihe  Bowery  ^  Great

Salt  Lake  Clin,  September  14,

RKPORTED  BY  G.  WATT.


The  subject  of  eternal  salvation  is
or  ought  to  be  interesting  to  all
people*  All  the  forms  of  religion
which  have  been  invented  by  the
ditlerent  sects  of  the  day  could  never
make  one  single  line  of  Scripture.
They  have  shut  np  the  door  of  imme-
diate revelation  between  God  and
man,  and  it  does  not  seem  to  occur  to
them  that  this  is  the  only  means
upon  which  the  world  can  ever  at  tain
to  1  lie  knowledge  of  God.  All  their
religion  and  piety  for  man}-  genera-
tions past  have  not  produced  one
word  of  Scripture  for  the  guidance  of
mankind  to  salvation  in  this  and  in
the  next  existence.  While  they  hold
up  the  Bible  as  the  all-sufficient  guide
to  the  possession  of  life  eternal,  they
at  the  same  time  inculcate  a  principle
which  would  never  have  given  them
a  Hible.  They  fasten  their  faith  and
hope  for  salvation  upon  revelations
given  to  another  people,  in  another
age  and  under  other  circumstances.  I

"When  God  has  a  people  upon  the
earth  he  gives  them  living  oracles,  |
and  communicates  his  mind  and  will
to  them  for  their  present  and  future
exaltation,  as  well  in  one  age  as  in
another.  The  Old  and  Testa-
ments, yea,  all  Scriptures  are  made  by
this  process-  Prophets  and  Apostles
are  the  mediums  through  which  the
Almighty  communicates  his  will  to
the  children  of  men.  Revelations
given  from  God  to  us  are  more
binding  upon  us  than  revelations
given  to  another  people,  because  they
are  in  accordance  with  our  wants  and


circumstances,  and  fit  our  case  mom
perfectly  than  revelations  given  to
another  people  many  generations  back.

This  generation  is  responsible  for
the  revelations  of  God  given  to  them ;
if  they  receive  them,  blessed  are
they ;  if  they  reject  them*  woe  is  their
doom*  The  words  of  God  sent  to
this  age  by  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet
of  the  Lord,  and  by  his  Apostles,  is  a
dispensation  of  good  will  to  all  men
now  living,  and  they  are  responsible
to  God  as  to  the  manner  in  which
they  receive  or  reject  it  These  words
are  for  their  salvation,  if  they  see
proper  to  accede  to  them.

We  talk  a  great  deal  about  exalte
tton.  We  look  for  exaltation  in  the
heavens — in  the  eternities  which  are
before  us.  We  expect  the  Gospel  of
salvation  to  exalt  us.  Where  and
w  hen  is  this  exaltation  to  commence  ?
Some  do  not  expect  exaltation  until
after  death.  This  is  a  mistake.  Our
exaltation  commences  in  this  world.
That  individual  who  lias  received  the
light  of  truth  in  his  own  bosom,  has
the  base  or  foundation  of  his  exalta-
tion formed  within  him,  and  if  he
progresses  in  the  knowledge  of  God —
in  the  things  which  pertain  to  eternal
life,  he  is  in  the  road  to  exaltation,
otherwise  he  is  not.  That  brother
who  redeems  himself  from  the  habit
of  drunkenness,  or  from  any  other
vicious  practice,  and  suffers  the  holy
principles  of  the  Gospel  to  work  in
him  for  his  redemption,  is  exalting
himself  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

The  work  of  exaltation  is  the  work


ETERNAL  SALVATION,  ETC*


863


of  this  probation,  and  has  to  do  with
every  duty  that  pertains  to  it.  That
sister  who  seeks  diligently  to  order
her  own  conduct  and  her  household  ;
who  seeks  to  bring  forth  from  the
elements  for  her  own  support,  com-
mences in  the  right  way  to  obtain
exaltation ;  she  exalts  herself  in  the
sight  of  her  husband  and  in  the  sight
of  all  good  men.  She  can  be  econo-
mical with  that  which  she  handles  for
the  use  of  her  household,  whereas,
before  she  has  perhaps  been  wasteful
and  prodigal  of  the  rich  blessings  of
God  bestowed  upon  her.  In  making
this  reformation  she  has  taken  an  im-
portant step  in  the  way  of  exalta-
tion in  this  world  for  exaltation
in  the  world  to  come.  That  man
who  improves  in  the  cultivation  of  his
farm,  in  the  cultivation  of  fruit,  who
plants  a  single  fruit  tree  if  he  does  no
more,  and  cultivates  it,  and  cause  it
to  bring  forth  more  fruit,  he  has  done
something  towards  his  exaltation —
has  made  one  step  towards  redeeming
the  earth  from  sin  and  iniquity,  and
from  the  curse  pronounced  against  it.
It  was  said  to  Adam  "Cursed  is  the
ground  for  thy  sake;  in  sorrow  shalt
thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ;
thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring
forth  to  thee :  and  thou  shalt  eat  the
herh  of  the  field."

That  man  who  commences  to  keep
himself  clean,  whereas  he  has  been
brought  up  in  filthiness  2nd  dirt,  is
engaged  in  the  good  work  of  exalta-
tion upon  his  own  person.  That
housekeeper  who  has  been  slatternly,
slothful  and  filthy  in  her  habits,  and
begins  to  be  thrifty,  industrious  and
cleanly  in  her  household  pursuits,
commences  the  work  of  exaltation  in
that  household.  Those  who  ornament
their  houses  and  tbeirgardens,  making
nice  tidy  fencei,  w  ho  ornament  their
fields,  making  everything  pleasant
and  agreeable  around  them,  com-
mence the  work  of  exaltation,  and
make  a  heaven  at  home for  their


wives  and  children ;  a  home  to  which
their  children  in  after  years  will  look
back  with  pleasant  reminiscences,
regard  in  ijthe  home  of  their  childhood
the  pleasantest  place  they  ever  saw.
A  pleasant  and  happy  home  lias  its
influence  in  creating  in  the  young
mind  a  love  of  ladder — a  love  of  all
that  is  beautiful,  cleanly,  virtuous
and  time.

We  can  commence  our  exaltation
upon  this  earth  by  trying  to  redeem
it  and  ourselves  from  the  effects  of
the  fall,  and  continuing  to  progress
in  everyT  good  word  and  work.  If
I  we  build  a  house  and  wish  to  build
another,  we  have  the  experience  of  the
one  we  have  built  to  improve  upon
in  building  another.  If  we  have
raised  one  crop  of  grain,  or  one  tree,
we  can  improve  upon  that  experience
in  raising  more.  Thus  we  progress
and  become  exalted  more  and  more.
This  same  principle  will  hold  good  in
any  pursuit  uf  life — rural,  mechanical,
scientific  or  philosophical ;  whatever
efforts  we  make  to  inform  our  minds,
we  have  it  in  our  power  to  do  better
still,  gaining  more  knowledge  and
intelligence  as  we  progress  in  life;

If  by  the  enlightening  aid  of  thd
Holv  Ghost,  that  leadetli  into  all
truth,  we  strive  constantly  to  improve
in  all  things  we  shall  set  ourselves
about,  we  can  improve  faster  than
those  who  are  not  blessed  with  its
influence,  because  our  actions  are
based  upon  a  principle  of  heavenly
light  and  intelligence,  giving  U3
power  to  excel  in  all  things  we  set
our  hands  to  do  in  riffhtemisnrss.

CD

Truth  will  prevail,  while  all  man-
made  systems,  on  which  the  whole
world  stands  convicted  'before  High
Heaven,  will  be  swept  away,  as  this
people  and  this  work  progresses,
because  truth  must  and  will  prevail.

Let  those  who  have  not  yet  com-
menced to  make  improvements  begin
the  good  work  at  once;  and  let  us  all
be  constantly  satisfied  that  we  are


504


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


doing  something  for  good  day  by
day.  Inasmuch  as  we  have  been
wicked,  let  us  no  longer  be  wicked.
We  have  a  standard  of  righteousness
in  our  own  bosoms ;  let  us  Le  actuated
by  it  in  all  that  we  do.  Let  us  be
righteous,  holy,  truthful  ;  walking
wickedness  under  our  feet,  exalting


righteousness  in  all  our  ways,  that  it
may  rale  in  os  until  sin  and  its  con-
sequences shall  he  subdued,  and  we
gain  a  victory  even  over  death  and
the  grave,  and  life  eternal  shall  reign
supreme  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth.  I  ask  God  to  add  his  blessing
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen*


APOSTLESHIP  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH. — DESTRUCTION  AWAITING

THE  NATIONS.

Remarks  by  President  Biuojiam  Yovxg,  made  in  the  Boicery, Great  Salt

Lake  City,  August  31,  1SG2.

REPORTED  BY  G.  D.  WATT.


We  have  just  been  listening  to  the
testimony  of  one  of  the  Apostles  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  also  an  Apostle
of  him  whom  the  Lord  has  called  in
our  day  to  establish  his  kingdom  no
more  to  be  overcome  by  wickedness
on  the  earth.  To  say  that  we  are
Apostles  of  Joseph  Smith  is  rather  a
dark  saying  to  many.  Jesus  Christ
being  sent  of  the  Father  to  perform  a
certain  work,  became  an  Apostle.  It
is  written  in  the  book  called  Hebrews,
"Wherefore,  holy  brethren, partakers
of  the  heavenly  calling,  consider  the
Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  pro-
fession, Christ  Jesus;  who  was  faith-
ful to  him  that  appointed  him,  as  also
Moses  was  faithful  and  all  his  house."
The  Saviour  called  upon  a  number  of
men  to  assist  him  in  the  work  h is  Father
had  sent  him  to  do,  and  sent  them
into  the  world  to  proclaim  his  mission
tod  Gospel,  instructing  them  to  bap-


tize all  believers.  In  this  way  they
became  the  Apostles  of  Jesus  Christy
and  at  the  day  of  his  coming  they
will  stand  at  his  right  hand  in  a
pillar  of  fire,  being  clothed  with  rubes
of  righteousness,  with  crowns  upon
their  heads,  in  glory  to  judge  the
whole  house  of  Israel.

Joseph  Smith  was  the  first  Apostle
of  this  Church,  and  was  commanded
of  Jesus  Christ  to  call  and  ordain
other  Apostles  and  send  them  into
all  the  world  with  a  message  to  all
people,  and  with  authority  to  baptize
all  who  should  believe  the  fulness  of
the  Gospel  and  sincerely  repent  of  all
their  sins.  These  other  Apostles  are
Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  Joseph
Smith  the  chief  Apostle  of  this  last
dispensation.

Joseph  Smith  has  laid  tlie  founda-
tion of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the
last  days;  others  will  rear  the  super-


APOSTLESHIP  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH,  ETC.


365


structure*  Its  laws  and  ordinances,
its  blessings  and  privileges  have  been
laid  before  all  people  who  would  hear ;
the  testimony  of  God's  servants  has
sounded  like  the  voice  of  a  trumpet
from  nation  to  nation,  and  from  people
to  people,  warning  the  honest  and
meek  of  the  earth  to  flee  from  Babylon
to  the  chambers  in  the  mountains  for
safety  until  the  indignation  shall  be
past.  If  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  had  been  as  diligent  in  searching
out  the  truth  and  as  willing  to  receive
it  ns  hundreds  in  this  congregation
have  been,  the  world  would  have  been
converted  long  ago.  But  few  people,
compared  with  the  masses,  have  ever
received  and  lived  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  any  age  of  the  world  in
which  it  has  been  preached.

Enoch  possessed  intelligence  and
wisdom  from  God  that  few  men  ever
enjoyed,  walking  and  talking  with
God  for  many  years;  yet,  according  to
the  history  written  by  Moses,  he  was
a  great;  length  of  time  in  establishing
his  kingdom  anions?  men.  The  few
that  followed  him  enjoyed  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel,  and  the  rest  of  the  1
world  rejected  it.  Enoch  and  his
party  were  taken  from  the  earth,  and
the  world  continued  to  ripen  in
iniquity  until  they  were  overthrown
by  the  great  flood  in  the  days  of
Noah;  and,  tfi  as  it  was  in  the  days  of
Noah,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  davs  of  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,"

So  sure  as  the  Lord  called  upon
Joseph  Smith,  jc/n.,  to  bring  forth  his
Gospel  and  establish  his  kingdom,
just  so  sure  will  he  hold  this  genera-
tion accountable  for  their  acts  in
relation  thereto.  If  any  people
reject  the  Gospel,  God  will  destroy
that  people  or  nation.  The  ma-
jority of  the  people  of  the  world
declare  that  Joseph  Smith  was  not
called  of  God.  If  they  know  that,
then  are  they  safe  in  rejecting  his
testimonv.  1  know  that  he  was  called
of  God,  and  this  I  know  by  the  reve-


lations of  Jesus  Christ  to  me,  and  by
the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Had  I  not  so  learned  this  truth,  I
should  never  have  been  what  is  called
a  "  Mormon,"  neither  should  I  have
been  here  to-day.  The  world  is  as
uncertain  of  the  calling  of  Joseph
Smith,  as  their  religious  ministers
are  that  they  are  called  of  God ;
they  hope  they  are  so  called ;  they
hope  they  have  experienced  a  change
of  heart ;  they  hope  they  are  re-
newed in  spirit;  they  hope  their  sins
are  forgiven ;  they  hope  the  Lord  is
gracious  to  them,  tic,  &cr  If  I  did
not  know  that  my  sins  were  forgiven,
my  ,voul/  do  me  belittle

good.

For  argument's  sake  1  will  say,  if
we  should  be  mistaken  as  to  the
legality  of  Joseph  Smith's  calling,  we
still  bear  the  same  relationship  towards
the  heavens  as  any  other  portion  of
mankind,  and  have  the  same  chance
of  salvation,  standing  on  equal  grounds
with  them.  Joseph  told  us  that  Jesus
was  the  Christ,  the  Mediator  between
God  and  man,  arid  the  Saviour  of  the
world.  He  told  us  that  there  was  no
other  name  in  the  heavens  nor  under
the  heavens,  neither  could  there  be,
by  which  mankind  could  be  saved  in
the  presence  of  the  Father,  but  by  and
through  the  name  and  ministry  of
Jesus  Christ,  anil  the  atonement  ho
made  on  Mount  Calvary.  Joseph  also
told  us  that  the  Saviour  requires  strict
obedience  te  all  the  commandments,
ordinances  nud  laws  pertaining  to  his
kingdom,  and  that  if  we  would  do
this  we  should  be  made  partakers  of
all  the  blessings  promised  in  his
Gospel.

We  have  already  been  made  par-
takers of  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel
which  he  promised  to  his  disciples.
One  in  particular  I  will  name,  and  that
is  peace,  Jesus  says,  "  these  things
I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me
ye  might  have  peace.  In  the  world
ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  be  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUnSES,


306

good  cheer :  I  have  overcome  the
world."  There  are  hundreds  now
before  me  who  can  testify  that  in  the
world  they  have  had  tribulation,  but
in  the  Gospel,  as  we  believe  it,  they
have  found  peace.  Again,  u  Blessed
are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you,  and
when  they  shall  separate  you  from
their  company,  and  shall  reproach
you,  and  east  out  your  name  as  evil
for  the  Son  of  Man's  sake.  Rejoice
yo  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy  :  for
behold  your  reward  is  great  in  heaven,
for  in  th^  like  manner  did  their
fathers  unto  the  Prophets.  Have  the
World  separated  the  Latter-day  Saints
from  their  company  ?  They  have.
For  wtuU  ?  F^r  d ♦sobering  the  laws
of  tho  laud  ?  No.  They  east  them
out  for  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  and
in  Joseph  Smith  as  his  Prophet.
This*  whole  people  were  cast  out  for
believing  that  dud  spake  to  Joseph
Smith  and  chose  him  to  be  his  mes-
senger—Ms  Apostle — to  this  genera-
tion. I  testify  to  you  that  we  were
HOt  cast  out  for  teaching  and  prac-
tising the  Patriarchal  doctrine,  as  oar
enemies  now  declare,  for  at  that  time
it  not  been  published  to  the  world,
but  it  was  fur  believing,  preaching
and  practising  the  doctrines  of  the
JScw  Testament;  for  believing  in  the
events  to  take  place  in  the  latter  days,
as  foretold  by  the  ancient  Prophets ;
and 3  for  believing  the  declarations  of
Joseph  Smith,  that  Jesus  was  indeed
the  Christ  and  the  Saviour  of  all  men,
but  especially  of  them  that  believe,
and  that  he  had  set  to  hi*  hand  the
second  time  to  gather  his  people,  to
establish  his  kingdom,  to  build  up
Zion,  redeem  Jerusalem,  empty  the
«Brth  of  wickedness  and  bring  in
everlasting  righteousness.

Joseph  Smith  testified  that  he  had
received  revelations  from  God,  that
holy  angels  had  administered  to  him,
that  he  had  seen  the  heavens  opened,
had  seen  Jesus  Christ  and  knew  that
he  lived,  and  that  all  the  people  must


acknowlede  him  to  be  the  Christ,
the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  to
obtain  salvation  through  him  must
obey  his  ordinances,  keep  inviolate
their  covenants  with  him  and  with
each  other,  and  try  with  all  their
might  to  restore  the  covenants  broken
by  the  fathers^  that  the  celestial  gates
leading  to  the  presence  of  God  may  be
opened  to  all  believers.  And  this  is
our  testimony,  last  of  all,  that  God
has  spoken  from  the  heavens,  com-
manding us  to  preach  repentance  to
this  generation,  giving  us  autho-
rity to  baptize  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  to  bestow  the  gift  of  the
I  loly  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  hands*
The  remission  of  sins,  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  favour  of  God
cannot  be  obtained  in  any  other  way.
These  are  God's  unchangeable  con-
ditions for  mankind  to  observe,  when
they  are  called  upon  to  enter  into  an
everlasting  covenant  with  him  to
serve  him  and  none  else.  For
preaching  this  Gospel  Joseph  Smith
was  cast  out  and  murdered ;  and  for
the  same  cause  this  people  have  been
persecuted  and  aillicted,  and  finally
cast  out  beyond  the  confines  of  so-
called  civilization.

What  do  we  now  see  abroad  ?
Confusion  in  all  the  ramifications  of
society.  In  the  days  of  the  great
tower  of  Babel  God  confounded  their
language,  and  spread  confusion  and
dismay  among  them,  and  ultimately
scattered  them  to  the  four  winds  of
heaven.  The  confusion  will  be  no
less  great  in  these  days,  and  the
destruction  of  human  life  will  be  so
great  that  but  few  men  will  be  left
With  the  people  in  Christendom  it  is
u  oh5  here,"  and  «  lo,  there"—44  Christ
is  here,  and  Christ  is  there/'  Some
say  "  observe  one  ordinance  and  no
more;"  others  say  "observe two  ordi-
nances and  no  more;"  some  say
"  observe  none  at  all ;"  and  so  on.
There  js  no  true  faith,  for  all  is
uncertainty — every  man  pursuing  his


APOSTLESHIP  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH,  ETC.


307


own  way-  They  have  no  light  of r
revelation  to  guide  them,  and  that
which  would  have  saved  this  nation
from  its  present  awful  chastisement
they  have  cast  out  from  them,  there-
fore "  Behold  the  Lord  maketh  the
earth  empty,  and  maketh  it  waste,
and  turncth  it  upside  down,  and
scattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants
thereof  The  land  shall  be  utterly
emptied,  and  utterly  spoiled  ;  for  the
Lord  hath  spoken  this  word."

When  Joseph  Smith  came  to  the
people  with  the  message  of  the
Gospel  in  its  fullness,  they  said  "let
us  kill  him,  or  he  will  change  our
customs,  overthrow  our  religions,
make  proselytes  in  foreign  hauls  and
flood  our  country  with  them,  expose
our  political  corruptions,  and  may
take  away  our  place  in  the  nation ;
come,  let  us  kill  him."  They  did
kill  him,  that  debt  is  upon  them,  and
they  have  it  to  pay.  The  Lord  pity
thera;  I  do.  I  pity  them  because
they  are  so  short-sighted,  so  wicked,
and  so  determined  to  tight  God  and
his  laws.  They  killed  Joseph  Smith,
and  cast  out  this  people  for  believing
in  hira.  Are  they  still  upon  our
track  ? They  are.  \

In  a  correspondence  between  Mr.
Greeluy,  of  New  York,  and  the  Presi-
dent, ]\!r.  Lincoln  declared  it.  was  his
intention  to  do  everything  in  his
power  that  he  thought  would  save  the
Union,  This  was  very  just  and
correct  In  him,  but  has  his  course
invariably  tended  to  save  the  Union  r
Time  will  show.  There  is  no  man
can  see,  unless  he  sees  by  the  gift  and
power  of  revelation,  that  every  move
that  has  been  made  by  the  Govern-
ment has  been  made  to  fulfil  the
sayings  of  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet,
and  all  earth  and  hell  cannot  help  it
The  wedge  to  divide  the  Union  was
entered  in  South  Carolina,  and  all  the
power  of  the  Government  could  not
prevent  it.  The  Lord  spoke  to
Joseph  Smith,  on  the  25th  day  of


December,  1832,as  follows: — "  Verily
thus  saith  the  Lord,  concerning  the
wars  that  will  shortly  come  to  pass,
beginning  at  the  rebellion  of  South
Carolina,  which  will  eventually  termi-
nate in  the  death  and  misery  of  many
souls.  The  days  will  come  that  war
will  be  poured  out  upon  all  nations,
beginning  at  that  place;  for,  behold,
the  Southern  States  shall  be  divided
against  the  Northern  States,  and  the
Southern  States  will  call  on  other
nations,  even  the  nation  of  Great
Britain,  as  it  is  called,  and  they  shall
also  call  upon  other  nations,  in  order  tor
defend  themselves  against  other  na-
tions; aud  thus  war  shall  be  poured?
out  upon  all  nations,"  <tc.  The
wickedness  of  the  wicked  is  onward
and  downward,  while  the  righteous*
ness  of  the  righteous  is  onward  and
upward.  Light  and  darkness,  or  in,
other  words,  right  and  wrong  are  with
us,  and  men  choose  darkness  rather
than  light,  wrong  rather  than  right*
This  is  their  condemnation.  They
despise  tliu  truth  and  those  who  will-
declare  it.

On  one  occasion,  in  the  wars  of  the
kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  with  the
King  of  Syria,  the  kings  of  Israel  and
Judah  sent  for  all  the  Prophets  they
could  find  to  prophecy  good  concern-
ing their  going  down  to  the  battle ;
and  a  lying  spirit  was  sent  to  speak
through  the  Prophets  to  lure  Ahab,
King  of  Israel,  to  the  battle-field*
Jehosaphat,  King  of  Judah,  inquired
whether  there  was  not  yet  another
Prophet  of  the  Lord  that  they  mighft
inquire  of.  "  And  the  King  of  Israel
said  unto  Jehosaphat  there  is  yet  one
man  Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah,  by
whom  we  may  inquire  of  the  Lord  ;
but  I  hate  him  for  he  does. not  pro-
phecy good  concerning  me,  but  evil/*
Micaiah  was  brought  before  the  king
,  and  said,  "  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered
upon  the  hills  as  sheep  that  have  not
a  shepherd."  Ahab  ordered  Micaiah
to  be  put  in  prison  and  fed  on  the


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES,


bread  of  affliction,  until  he  should
return  in  peace.  An  archer  drew  a
bow  at  a  venture  and  slew  Ahab,  who
went  to  the  field  of  battle  in  disguise,
and  the  words  of  the  Prophet  were
fulfilled.  It  is  so  in  this  day ;  the
man  who  will  speak  the  word  of  the
Lord  fearlessly  is  hated,  while  false
prophets  and  false  teachers,  who
pander  to  human  vanity  and  to  j
human  greatness  for  gain,  are  fostered
by  wicked  rulers  and  exalted  to  the
chief  seats  in  the  synagogues.

We  are  determined  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth  ;  to
bring  forth  Zion,  te>  promote  the  cause
of  righteousness  on  the  earth,  and  to
walk  under  foot  sin  and  wickedness.
There  is  an  opposing  party  who  are
determined  that  the  kingdom  of  God
shall  not  be  built  up,  and  who  do  all
in  their  power  to  destroy  it  and  its
supporters*  This  has  been  the  ease
from  the  beginning,  and  wickedness
has  triumphed,  because  the  measure*
of  the  earth  was  not  complete,  and
those  mighty  spirits  calculated  to
bring  to  pass  the  winding  up  scene
had  not  yet  been  born  in  the  ilesh.
The  time  has  now  come  when  this
work  will  be  consummated.  Satan's
rule  and  Satan's  kingdom  will  be
destroyed,  and  everlasting  righteous-
ness and  peace  will  be  brought  in
upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.

Joseph  Smith  knew  what  was
coming  upon  the  nation  of  the  United
States,  and  said,  "  If  they  will
let  me,  I  will  save  the  nation/'
They  would  not  let  him,  but  treated
him  as  a  traitor.  They  arrested  him  in
Missouri  for  treason,  when  he  had
not  said  a  word  with  regard  to
political  affairs,  but  preached  the
Gospel  to  his  brethren.  They  put  him
in  Carthage  Jail  in  Illinois,  under  the
same  false  allegation,  and  slew  him
without  a  trial  before  his  peers*  At
this  day,  if  they  had  the  power,  they
would  show  us  that  their  malignity
5s  txo  less  than  it  vyas  in  the  days  of


Joseph  Smith,  but  they  have  not  the
power  to  injure  the  kingdom  of  God
and  the  Lord's  anointed.  They  do
not  make  a  move  on  the  national
checker-board  without  my  knowing
their  designs.  They  may  send  men
here,  with  their  mouths  sealed  as  to
their  instructions,  to  dictate  and  guide
affairs  in  Utah  as  they  would  have
them,  but  all  their  deep  laid  plots  will
vanish  into  thin  air  and  their  fondly
anticipated  purposes  will  fail.

Our  course  is  onward  to  build  up
Zion,  and  the  nation  that  has  slain
the  Prophet  of  God  and  cast  out  his
people  will  have  to  pay  the  debt
They  will  be  broken  in  pieces  like  a
potter  s  vessel ;  yea  worse,  they  will  be
ground  to  powder.  "And  whoever
shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken :
but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it
shall  grind  him  to  powder."  If  there
is  a  people  within  the  pales  of  this
nation  that  is  worthy  of  the  constitu-
tion, good  laws  and  institutions  of  the
American  Government,  it  is  this
people  called  Latter-day  Saints.  It
is  the  best  earthly  Government  that
ever  was  framed  by  man,  and  the  true
and  righteous  are  alone  worthy  of  it.
It  cannot  long  be  administered  by
wicked  hands.  "  When  the  wicked
rule,  the  people  mourn/'

Hy  heart  is  filled  with  pain  for  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth.  We  desire
with  all  our  hearts  to  do  them  good.
Tli ere  are  scores  of  Elders  beneath  the
sound  of  my  voice  who  have  preached
enough  to  convert  the  world.  I  have
myself  travelled  many  thousands  of
miles,  carrying  my  valise  and  sus-
taining myself,  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  this  generation  and  to  bear  testi-
mony to  the  truth  as  I  do  to-day.  I
take  liberties  here,  in  referring  to  the
world  and  its  vanities,  that  I  wish  my
brethren  not  to  take.  It  is  our  duty
to  pray  for  them  and  place  before
them  the  holy  principles  of  the  Gospel
by  precept,  and  in  the  acts  of  our
lives,  rather  than  to  hold  prominently


AP05TLESHIP  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH,  ETC*


forward  their  manifold  corruptions.
They  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  so
are  we.  Great  and  mighty  empires
are  raised  to  the  summit  of  human
greatness  by  him,  to  bring  to  pass  his
inscrutable  purposes,  and  at  his  plea-
sure they  are  swept  from  existence
and  lost  in  the  oblivion  of  antiquity.
All  these  mighty  ohanges  are  pointing
to  and  preparing.* the  way  for  the
introduction  of  his  kingdom  in  the
latter  times,  that  [will  stand  for  ever
and  grow  in  greatness  and  power  until
a  holy,  lasting,  religious  and  political
peace  shall  make  the  hearts  of  the
poor  among  men  exult  with  joy  in  the
Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  that  his
kingdom  is  everywhere  triumphant.

The  Lord  is  willing  that  we  should
be  the  pioneers  of  this  work,  and  it  is
now  our  duty  to  prove  ourselves
worthy  ofh  is  confidence,  by  educating
ourselves  until  our  traditions  are  pre-
cisely according  to  the  Gospel  and
will  of  Go  J.  The  revelations  of  God
to  Joseph  Smith  instruct  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  live  their  religion  day
by  day,  and  to  meet  on  the  tirst  day
of  the  week  to  break  bread,  confess
their  faults  one  to  another  and  pray
with  and  for  each  other,  I  would
like  this  tradition  fastened  not  only
upon  the  people  generally,  but  par-
ticularly upon  the  Bishops  and  other
leaders  of  this  Church.

We  should  seek  substantial  infor-
mation, and  trust  little  to  that  kind
of  so- crilled  learning  that  is  based
entirely  upon  theory.  We  should
pluck  fruit  from  the  tree  of  knowledge,
and  taste,  then  shall  our  eyes  be  open
to  see,  our  cars  to  hear  and  our  hearts
to  understand.  I  would  recommend
the  same  course  to  those  who  have
not  embraced  and  tasted  the  sweets  of
"  Mormonism. "  We  should  get
wisdom  by  reading  and  by  study.
We  should  introduce  the  best  books
into  our  schools  for  the  education  and
improvement  of  our  children.  Let
our  school  teachers  seek  constantly  to

No.  24


369

fasten  upon  the  young  mind  useful
information,  and  banish  from  their
schools  every  study  that  only  tends
to  perplex  the  student  and  waste
his  valuable  time.  I  know*  of  no
branch  in  the  rudiments  of  English
education  that  is  more  difficult  to
conquer  than  its  orthography  ;  indeed,
very  few  men  have  ever  become  per-
fect in  it,  and  I  know  of  no  branch  of
learning  that  needs  more  reforming.

After  introducing  into  our  schools
every  useful  branch  of  education,  let
our  teachers  ask  the  Father,  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  to  bestow  upon  them
and  upon  their  scholars  the  Spirit  of
wisdom  and  intelligence  from  heaven ;
ask  for  skill  to  control  and  ability  to
teach  on  the  part  of  the  teacher,  and
willingness  to  be  controlled  and  apta-
bility  to  be  taught  on  the  part  of  the
scholars.  Let  parems  aid  the  teacher
in  his  labours,  by  seeing  that  their
children  attend  school  punctually,
with  a  proper  supply  of  books,  slates,
pencils,  <fcc.  ;  and  permit  not  a  good,
diligent,  faithful  school-teacher  to
sutFer  for  the  common  necessaries  of
life,  while  he  is  labouring  to  educate
and  bless  their  children.

Every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh
from  God.  Every  discovery  in  science
m\&  art,  that  is  really  true  and  useful
to  mankind,  has  been  given  by  direct
revelation  from  God,  though  but  few
acknowledge  it.  It  has  been  given
with  a  view  to  prepare  the  way  tor
the  ultimate  triumph  of  truth,  and
the  redemption  of  the  earth  from  tho
power  of  sin  and  Satan.  We  should
take  advantage  of  all  these  great  dis-
coveries, the  accumulated  wisdom  of
ages,  and  give  to  our  children  the
benefit  of  every  branch  of  useful
knowledge,  to  prepare  them  to  step
forward  and  efficiently  do  their  part
in  the  great  work*

Endless  variety  is  stamped  upon
the  works  of  God's  hands.  There
are  no  two  productions  of  nature,
whether  animal,  vegetable  or  mineral

Yol.  IX.


370


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOmSFS.


that  are  exactly  alike,  and  all  are
crowned  with  a  degree  of  polish  and
perfection  that  cannot  be  obtained  by
ignorant  man  in  his  most  exquisite
mechanical  »wod actions,  Man's  ma-
chinery  makes  things  alike;  God's
machinery  gives  to  things  which
appear  alike  a  pleasing  difference.
Fields  and  mountains,  trees  and
flowers,  and  all  that  fly,  swim  or
move  upon  the  ground  are  lessons  for
study  in  the  great  school  our  heavenly
Father  has  instituted  for  the  benefit
of  his  children-  Let  us  explore  this
great  field  of  iniunnation  that  is  open
before  us  in  good  books  and  in  the
great  laboratory  of  nature,  and  let
every  man  become  his  own  lawyer,
every  family  have  its  own  doctor,  and
every  person  be  his  own  accountant,
&c.  Let  even  the  female  portion  of
our  community  be  taught  how  to  do
business,  in  the  absence  of  their
guardians.  It  is  an  erroneous  idea
that  a  very  learned  man  should  not
work  with  his  hands,  and  is  better
than  other  people  because  he  is  learned.
Education  is  the  handmaid  to  honest
labour*  I  should  be  pleased  to  have  our
young  females  study  the  fine  arts,
music,  painting,  &c.,  for  which  there
is  fine  talent  here,  but  I  would  not
have  them  suppose  that  education  in
the  fine  arts  alone  constitutes  them
ladies,  or  will  fit  them  for  the  active
duties  of  life.  It  is  more  necessary
that  they  should  know  themselves  and
the  duties  that  will  be  required  of


when  they  are  wives  and
mothers ;  to  educate  them  thus,  is  a
duty  that  is  particularly  binding  upon
mothers.

Let  there  be  a  mutual  desire  in
every  man  to  disseminate  knowledge,
that  all  may  know,  I  have  always
followed  out  the  rule  of  dispensing
what  I  know  to  others,  and  been
blessed  in  so  doing.  After  all  our
endeavours  to  obtain  wisdom  from  the
best  books,  &e.,  there  still  remains
an  open  fountain  for  all ;  "  If  any
man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of  God;"
Let  every  Latter-day  Saint  constantly
practice  himself  in  the  performrmee  of
every  good  word  and  work,  to  acknow-
ledge God  to  be  God,  to  be  strict  in
keeping  his  laws  and  learning  to  love
mercy,  eschew  evil  and  delight  in
constantly  doing  that  which  is  pleasing
to  God,  This  is  the  only  sure  way
to  obtain  influence  with  God  and  all.
good  men,  I  want  the  fellowship  and
confidence  of  those  who  are  justified
before  the  heavens,  and  to  have  thA
I  must  walk  in  the  path  Christ  hast
marked  out,  and  let  all  the  rest  go
t  heir  own  way.  Let  all  who  arefor  God
and  his  laws,  walk  with  me  and  gain
influence  with  those  heavenly  pmvcrsf
and  there  is  no  danger  but  what  they
will  gain  influence  with  all  good
persons  who  labour  for  the  same
influence,  which  will  bear  us  off  con*
querers  over  all  our  enemies,  spiritual
and  temporal,  3Iav  the  Lord  bless
you.  Amen.


BATUEBIXG  THE  POOB,  ETC.


371

0-


GATHERING  THE  POOR.— PROSPERITY  OF  THE  GATHERED

SAINTS. — HOME  MANUFACTURES,

Htmarla  ly  President  Hebkr  C.  Kimball,  made  in  the  Tabernacle,  Great

Salt  Lake  ClUj,  February  9,  1862,  .

BEPOBTED  BY  J.  V.  LONG*


\Ye  liavc  had  a  few  r emarks  from
brother  Joseph  Fielding,  and  I  can
say,  with  the  best  of  feelings,  that
they  are  good  and  true,  I  am  witness
that  this  is  the  road  that  brother
Fielding  has  travelled  in  this  Church
and  kingdom,  striving  to  do  right  all
the  time.  It  was  in  the  spring  of
1S3S  that  he  was  ordained  a  High
Priest,  and  it  will  be  twenty-four
years  next  April  since  we  left  England,
after  performing  the  first  mission  that
was  ever  sent  out  to  England.  He
was  ordained  a  Priest,  I  think,  in
Canada,  and  he  travelled  with  me  on
that  mission  to  England.  His  life
has  been  an  upright  one,  and  I  know
that  he  has  made  a  statement  of  facts,
and  he  has  told  the  things  that  are  in
him,  and  his  determinations  are  good,
and  they  are  dictated  by  the  right
spirit,  I  take  pleasure  in  making
these  statements,  and  I  would  say  in
my  heart,  and  my  prayer  is,  that  every
man  here  may  live  in  the-  manner
that  he  has  done  and  be  as  good  a
man  as  he  is.  His  salvation  is  sure,
if  he  continues  in  well-doing,  and
everything  that  he  is  capable  of  pre-
siding over  will  be  given  to  him,  and
this  will  be  the  pQrtionof  every  other
good  man.  It  is  goodness  that  makes
about  all  the  difference  between  one
man  and  another.  You  find  one  man
a  little  better  than  another,  and  one
woman  a  little  better  than  her  neigh-
bour, What  is  it  that  makes  us


better  ?  It  is  the  righteous  acts  that
we  perform,  and  that  we  work  out
before  God,  Jesus  says,  "  Work  out
your  salvation  as  it  is  my  will  to
work  within  you."  Then,  again,  we
are  commanded  to  work  out  our  sal-
vation with  fear  and  trembling.  All
that  hinders  us  and  prevents  us  pro-
gressing faster,  and  going  on  from
one  step  to  another  even  as  it  wag
with  our  Father,  even  the  Father  and
God  pertaining  to  this  earth,  is  our
lack  of  confidence  in  the  Almighty,
and  our  slothfulness  in  the  things  of
God.  Joseph  the  Prophet  said  that
our  heavenly  Father  went  on  from
one  degree  of  knowledge  to  another
until  he  obtained  the  knowledge  that
made  him  God.  So  also  will  it  bo
with  us,  we  shall  havefto  advance  from
one  degree  of  faith  to  another  until
we  get  that  knowledge  that  will  pre-
pare us  for  exaltation  in  our  Father's
kingdom.  But  we  must  first  prove
ourselves  in  this  state  of  probation,
then  we  rise  from  step  to  step  till  wa
reach  that  position  that  is  promised
to  the  people  of  God,

Jesus  says,  u  I  am  the  way,  tho
truth  and  light ;  and  I  and  my
Father  are  one."  On  one  occasion
the  widow  came  and  begged  that  her
two  sons  who  were  with  Jesus  might
sit  one  at  his  right  hand  and  the  other
at  his  left,  and  Jesus  asked  her  if  they
could  walk  with  him  in  the  regenera-
tion, for  said  he,  "  Are  ye  able  to


drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of,
and  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism
that  I  am  baptized  with/'  Those  who
can  walk  with  Jesus  in  the  regenera-
tion now,  will  receive  the  great
blessings  that  are  promised  to  all  the
faithful  children  of  God.  AVhat  is
regeneration  ?  It  is  a  cleansing,
purifying  process,  by  winch  persons
are  enabled  to  advance  in  the  know-
ledge of  God  and  grow  stronger
in  the  principles  of  eternal  life,  to
become  better,  more  truthful,  more
worthy  of  a  benefactor's  blessing.
Then,  we  may  ask,  what  is  degenera-
tion P  It  is  departing  from  the  good
old  way,  imbibing  evil,  becoming  im-
pregnated with  falsehood  and  all  other
evils  that  are  calculated  to  produce  a
deterioration  in  both  the  body  and
spirit  of  man.

This  is  a  wicked  and  adulterous
generation  in  which  we  live,  and  but
few  of  them  know  what  they  are  doing
for  themselves.  To  me  it  appears
that  they  are  taking  every  possible
step  to  degenerate  themselves  and
those  around  them,  I  know  tvhat
the  world  is;  I  understood  it  to  a
great  extent  before  I  came  into  this
Church.  It  was  a  common  saying
among  the  good  people  where  I  lived,
that  it  was  impossible  for  a  man  to  be
honest  and  get  a  living.  How  did
they  get  a  living,  think  you,  where
they  did  not  believe  in  being  honest  ?
By  living  in  deceitfulness,  by  lying,
by  pilfering  from  their  neighbours.
That  was  the  way  they  managed,  and
it  is  so  managed  at  the  present  time-
There  are  but  few  things  but  it  is
possible  to  adulterate  in  this  age  of
the  world.  Our  tea  is  adulterated,
our  ginger  and  pepper,  and  almost
everything  that  we  have  to  purchase
is  treated  in  the  same  manner,  and  I
think  we  may  safely  conclude  that
this  is  an  adulterous  generation,  and
by  their  evil  practices  they  are  bring-
ing upon  themselves  swift  destruction.
They  have  commenced  the  work  of


their  own  extermination,  and  who  can
help  it  ?  No  one,  except  the  Almighty.
They  are  now  doing  that  upon  each
other  which  they  had  in  their
to  do  to  us ;  they  have  got  the  same
1  ^  at  red  towards  each  other  which  they
formerly  had  towards  us,  and  the
Lord  will  let  them  have  their  full
share.

I  noticed  -the  other  day  when
reading  about  the  war,  that  one  man
said  the  war  could  be  completed  and
wound  up  in  thirty  days,  everything
settled  and  the  South  entirely  subdued.
They  think  that  the  great  number  of
men  which  they  have  in  the  field  are
going  to  wind  it  up  quick.  But  I  can
tell  you  that  they  do  not  take  the
right  course  to  accomplish  that;  they
let  the  Devil  lead  them,  that  is  what
I  mean.  If  you  are  looking  forward
for  peace  and  thinking  that  peace  will
soon  be  made,  you  are  mistaken.
The  Lord  is  permitting  things  to  be
prolonged  as  they  are,  for  the  purpose
of  getting  his  people  out  from  Babylon,
just  as  he  did  with  Sodom  and
Goruorrab  and  the  cities  of  the  plains
that  were  round  about  them  ;  fur  he
kept  back  the  destruction  till  he  got
Lot  out,  and  so  it  is  now  in  these  days.

Well,  now,  what  course  shall  we
take  as  Saints?  It  is  for  us  to  do
our  duty  in  all  things;  to  do  our  best
for  the  spread  of  truth,  for  the
gathering  of  the  poor.  If  we  were  to
do  our  best  we  could  send  a  thousand
teams  this  season  to  gather  the  poor ;
but  I  can  say  that  we  shall  do  all  that
is  required  of  us,  and  that  will  be
satisfactory  and  pleasing  to  our  hea-
venly Father.

Some  say  it  is  rather  discou-
raging to  gather  this  people,  because
so  many  of  them  apostatize  and  deny
the  faith,  but  we  should  remember
that  Jesus  says : — "  Again,  the  king-
dom of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  net,  that
was  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of
every  kind  :  which,  when  it  was  full,
they  drew  to  shore,  and  sat  down,


GATHERING  THE  POOR,  ETC,


373


and  gathered  the  good  into  vessels,
but  east  the  bad  away.  So  shall  it
be  at  the  end  of  the  world :  the
angels  shall  come  forth,  and  sever  the
wicked  from  among  the  just,  and
shall  cast  therq  into  the  furnace  of
tire :  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnash-
ing of  teeth." — Matthew  xiii.,  47-50.

Now,  supposing  I  should  be  at  the
expense  of  gathering  ten  persons  and
bringing  them  home  to  Zion,  and  by
80  doing  I  save  one  righteous  man,
will  not  that  secure  me  a  reward
hereafter  ?  I  say  it  will.  What  did
the  Lord  say  to  Oliver  Cowdery
about  labouring  all  the  days  of  liis
life  in  preaching  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  to  a  dark  and  benighted  vn  #rld  ?
The  following  is  from  a  revelation
given  in  June  1^29,  to  Joseph  Smith,
jum,  Oliver  Cowdery,  and  David
Whitmer : —

"And  now,  Oliver  Cowdery,  I
speak  unto  you,  and  also  unto  David
Whitmer,  by  the  way  of  command-
ment ;  for,  behold,  I  command  ail
men  everywhere  to  repent,  and  I
speak  unto  you,  even  as  unto  Paul
mine  Apostle,  for  you  are  called  even
with  that  same  calling  with  which  he
was  called.  Remember  the  worth  of
souls  is  great  in  the  sight  of  God  ;
for,  behold,  the  Lord  your  Redeemer,
suffered  death  in  the  flesh ;  where-
fore he  suffered  the  pain  of  all  men,
that  all  men  might  repent  and  come
unto  him.  And  he  hath  risen  again
from  the  dead,  that  he  might  bring
all  men  unto  him  on  conditions  of
repentance ;  and  how  great  is  his  joy
in  the  soul  that  repenteth.  Where-
fore, you  are  called  to  cry  repentance
unto  this  people;  and  if  it  so  be  that
you  should  labour  all  your  days  in
crying  repentance  unto  this  people,
and  bring,  save  it  be  one  soul  unto
me,  how  great  shall  be  your  joy  with
him  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father  ?

"  And  now,  if  your  joy  will  be
great  with  one  soul  that  you  have
brought  unto  rae  into  the  kingdom


of  my  Father,  how  great  will  be  your
joy  if  you  should  bring  many  souls
untb  me  ?  Behold,  you  have  my
Gospel  before  yon,  and  my  rock  and
my  salvation.  Ask  the  Father  in  my
name,  in  faith  believing  that  yoa
shall  receive,  and  you  shall  have  the
Holy  Ghost,  which  manifesteth  all
things  which  are  expedient  unto  the
children  of  men.  And  if  you  have
not  faith,  hope  and  charity,  you  can
do  nothing;* [Doc.  &  Gov.,  s.,  xliti,

i  Those  arc  my  feelings  and  always
have  been  since  I  became  acquainted
with  the  principles  of  eternal  life;
and  I  know  that  this  is  the  spirit  that
rests  upon  President  Young,  and  also
upon  all  faithful  men  and  women  in
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints.  It  is  our  duty  to  feel
for  those  that  are  scattered  abroad  in
the  world,  and  that  are  poor,  but
who  desire  to  gather  to  the  promised
land.  We  used  to  pray,  0  Lord,  put
it  into  the  hearts  of  thy  people  to  do
unto  us  as  we  want  to  have  them  do.
Now  it  is  our  turn ;  we  are  gathered
home  to  Zion,  and  we  are  able  to
assist  our  poor  brethren  that  are  poor
and  unable  to  bring  themselves.
Whore  is  there  a  people  upon  the  face
of  the  earth  that  arc  blessed  like  unto
us ;  and  then,  again,  I  may  say  that  a
great  many  do  not  realize  nor  appre-
ciate the  blessings  they  enjoy,  but
they  consider  this  a  hard  country  to
live  in.  There  are  very  few  people
in  this  country  but  are  much  better
oft  than  they  were  in  the  country
where  they  came  from.  There  are
hundreds  and  thousands,  and  I  think
I  may  say  tens  of  theusand3  that
were  poor  and  penniless,  and  that
were  dependent  upon  their  every  day
labour  for  their  living,  and  if  they
did  not  labour  six  days  in  each  week
they  had  to  go  without  something
that  was  actually  necessary  to  make

*  The  quutaiioii  extends  to  the  end  of  par.  4,


374


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOmSES.


them  comfortable,  and  unless  they
were  at  their  work  every  day  they
could  not  get  enough  to  eat.  Scarcely
any  of  them  ever  owned  a  cow,  a
horse,  a  sheep,  pig  or  chicken  in  their
lives. Brother  George  D.  Watt  here
knows  this  to  be  true,  for  he  has  seen
enough  of  the  poverty  of  his  native
country  to  understand  exactly  how
it  is. Is  it  any  crime  to  be  poor  ?
No,  it  is  not ;  I  have  seen  the  day
when  I  was  just  as  poor  as  I  could
possibly  be  as  regards  the  comforts  of
this  life,  and  I  honestly  consider  that
it  would  be  a  pretty  hard  case  for  a
man  to  be  poorer  than  I  have  been*
Some  people  when  they  come  here
think  it  rather  shameful  to  speak  of
how  poor  the  people  are  over  in  the
old  country.  }  Bless  you  if  yon  had
not  been  poor  and  oppressed — down
in  the  depths  of  poverty :  you  would
not  have  heard  us  at  all  when  we
went  to  proclaim  the  Gospel.  That
is  the  case  with  those  who  are  well-
off  as  a  general  thing, But  if  you
were  not  all  poor  when  the  Gospel
found  you,  I  will  guarantee  that  you
have  been  since. I  never  knew  a  man
who  came  into  this  Church  rich  but
who  had  to  become  poor,  that  he
might  rise  np  with  the  rich  and  be
exalted  in  the  kingdom  of  God,

We  have  been  led  here  by  the  hand
of  the  Almighty,  and  settled  in  a
barren  wilderness  a  thousand  miles
from  everybody  that  arc  called  civil-
ized. We  came  here  because  we
were  driven  from  our  homes;  hence,
we  came  to  these  mountains  because
we  were  compelled  to,  for  we  could
not  live  in  the  United  States  any
longer,  aud  you  that  have  been
driven  from  the  davs  of  Kirtland  to
the  present  time  know  that  we  could
not  live  any  longer  among  the
enlightened  and  civilized  of  the  United
States.  After  Joseph  and  Hyrum
were  mobbed  and  slain  by  their  ene-
mies, there  was  no  longer  any  home
for  the  Saints  in  the  States.  We


I  could  not  stay  in  Kirtland  to  make  a
permanent  home  there,  although  we
succeeded  in  building  a  Temple,  and
in  it  received  our  blessings  from  the
Almighty.  Here  is  President  Young,
myself  and  others  that  used  to  lie"
upon  Joseph's  floor  every  night  to
preserve  his  life  from  his  enemies,*
and  that  too  among  the  Presbyterians,
Baptists,  Methodists  and  devils,  and
there  are  a  great  many  men  and
women  who  know  it. We  had  to  flee
|  and  leave  all  we  h:ul  behind  ;  brother
Joseph,  brother  Brigham  and  many
others,  father  Smith  among  the  num-
ber; and  some  of  us  had  to  watch
while  Luke  Johnson  helped  the  old
man  out  of  the  window. Then  how
much  safety  was  there  in  Missouri,
Illinois,  or  anywhere  else  in  the
Eastern  States  ?  Could  we  stay  there,
gentlemen? No,  no  tetter  than  we
could  be  in  a  smelting  furnace  without
burning1. Was  there  any  revelation
that  we  should  come  to  the  moun-
tains ? Yes,  and  there  were  pre-
dictions in  the  old  Bible  that  we
should  come  here,  and  now  we  are
here  we  are  comfortable  and  blessed
above  all  other  people  upon  the  face
of  the  earth,  I  do  not  care  where  you
look. You  may  look  to  the  east,  to
the  west,  to  the  north  and  to  the
south,  and  in  all  nations  you  will  find
them  ready  to  go  to  war  with  each
other. And  you  may  calculate  that
there  will  be  war  upon  war,  and  that
things  will  gradually  grow  worse ;
therefore  we  should  always  endeavour
to  do  right.

When  I  reflect  upon  the  instruct-
ions of  President  Young,  who  is  our
leader,  I  see  the  importance  of  our
sustaining  him  in  all  Ins  plans  and
designs,  for  he  is  God's  delegate,  and
he  represents  the  authority  of  Heaven;
and  we  Elders  and  Apostles  are  his
associates,  called  to  represent  Heaven,
to  preach  the  righteousness  of  Christ,
and  to  strive  to  do  here  on  the  earth
as  it  is  done  in  the  heavens,  and,


GATHERING TH1  POOH,  ETC,


37*


hence,  we  should  so  live  as  to  be  the
true  representatives  of  Heaven,  of
happiness,  glory,  immortality  and
eternal  lives,  for  we  have  those  prin-
ciples to  teach.  All  these  things  are
before  us,  and  one  man  can  go  for-
ward and  attain  these  things  just  as
well  as  another,  and  one  man  can
obtain  these  blessings  of  life,  of  peace
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  just  as
well  as  another.

Some  may  think  that  they  are
kings  and  priests,  others  that  they  are
queens  and  priestesses,  and  put  others
down  as  servants,  and  thus  make
themselves  judges  of  their  brethren,
But  I  am  now  speaking  more  particu-
larly of  men  that  are  unrighteous,  of
those  who  will  tread  the  poor  man
under  their  feet;  and  what  will  be
the  consequence  of  oppressing  the
poor?  I  would  rather  be  in  the
place  of  the  oppressed  a  hundred
times  than  in  that  of  the  oppressor,
u  For  with  what  measure  ye  mete,  it
shall  be  measured  to  you  again/*
These  are  the  words  of  Jesus,  and
although  uttered  many  years  ago  they
are  still  in  full  force,  and  I  know  it;
and  that  saying  will  be  fulfilled  to
the  very  letter,  I  have  seen  it  in  a
thousand  instances,  and  I  know  it
will  always  be  fulfilled,  I  never  knew
ii  man  get  a  prejudice  against  his
brother  unrighteously  but  went  the
downward  ro;*d,  and  the  other  against
whom  the  prejudice  existed  invariably
rises  up  above  his  enemies,  for  there
is  no  other  way  to  carry  out  the  prin-
ciples of  righteousness,  than  to  do
unto  others  as  we  want  others  to  do
unto  us,  and  thus  fulfil  the  law  of
Christ.

Now,  in  the  doctrine  and  practice
of  plurality,  one  woman  will  sometimes
think  that  she  is  queen,  and  that  the
others  have  no  right  to  speak  or  to  do
anything  without  her  consent.  If  I
had  a  ease  of  that  kind  to  adjudicate,
I  should  be  very  apt  to  say  to  the
woman,  "  Serve  her  faithfully,  bear


with  her  patiently,  and  the  clay  will
come  when  you  will  sit  above  her,  na
matter  where  she  is  now/'  And  so  it
is  with  the  Elders  of  Israel,  he  that
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.
The  Lord  will  rule  that  which  is
righteous,  and  if  he  does  not  give  you
your  rights  in  all  things  in  time  he
will  in  eternity.

If  you  will  look  in  the  revelations,
yon  will  find  the  principle  taught  just
as  I  teach,  and  I  can  say  further,
that  there  is  not  a  hymn  composed
by  the  Saints  but  teaches  some  prin-
ciple of  truth  just  as  clearly  as  the
Bible  teaches  truth.  Therefore,  let
us  be  alive  to  these  things,  and
remember  that  we  are  exhorted  to  be
one*  Jesus  prayed  that  his  disciples
might  all  be  one,  as  he  and  his  Father
were  one.  Then,  let  us  step  forward
and  do  this  without  waiting  to  bo
commanded,  without  any  compulsion,
otherwise  we  shall  be  considered
slothful  servants.

Well,  now,  this  is  the  course  for  ua»
to  take.  Let  us  be  one  in  all  things
that  the  blessings  of  the  heavens  and
of  the  earth  may  be  upon  us  continually.
.  _  If  you  want  to  know  my  views  in
reference  to  merchants  and  their  goods
coming  here,  I  will  tell  you  that  I  wish
there  could  not  any  more  goods  be
brought  here.  Why,  can  you  get
along  without  them,  brother  Kimball?
I  can,  by  the  help  of  God ;  I  want  but
little  to  be  independent  of  every  mer-
chant that  comes  into  this  city.  Whyf
this  last  year  my  family  have  made
over  eight  hundred  yards  of  cloth,
and  that  will  clothe  a  great  many
people  ;  aud  dresses  made  of  that  kind
of  cloth  are  as  far  ahead  of  those  yoa
buy  in  the  store  as  your  silks  are  of
the  Indian  blanket.  Then  consider
what  a  blessing  it  is  to  the  poor  of
this  community  to  be  able  to  sleep
in  nice,  comfortable,  warm  woollen
blankets;  how  much  better  than
either  the  cotton  or  linen  that  is
brought  from  the  States. Then  there


journal  or  DiecotmeEs.


3  To

are  the  coverlids,  the  bonnets,  and  !
many  other  necessary  articles  that
can  be  made  at  home  just  as  well  as
not  You  can  sue  ladles  with  the
neatest  kind  of  bonnets  on  of  their
own  make;  and  if  they  want  a  new
bonnet  for  the  baby,  they  know  how
to  make  it.  There  are  then*  under-
garments, worn  by  the  people  here
generally  j  they  are  made  of  wool,  and
that  is  produced  here.  What  a  bless-
ing it  is  to  bo  able  to  supply  ourselves
with  so  many  of  the  necessaries  and
comforts  of  life  here  in  these  moun-
tains !  Some  of  you  have  w>t  an  idea
that  wool  will  not  do ;  but  let  me
inform  you  that  when  Peter  came  and
sat  in  the  Temple  in  Kir  Hand,  he  had
on  a  neat  woollen  garment,  nicely
adjusted  round  the  neck.  What  do
sheep  wear  next  the  skin?  wool,  of
course.  What  do  goats  wear?  hair,
for  that  is  their  nature.  These  are
facts  that  are  apparent  to  all  who  will

look,  .  |

To  return  to  the  subject  of  the  gar-
ments of  the  Holy  Priesthood,  I  will
say  that  the  one  which  Jesus  had  on
when  he  appeared  to  <  the  Prophet
Joseph  was  neat  and  clean,  and  Peter
had  on  the  same  kind,  and  he  also
had  a  key  in  his  baud,  John  also
came  and  administered  unto  Joseph
Smith,  and  remember  that  Peter,
James  and  John  hold  the  keys  per-
taining to  their  dispensation  and  per-
taining to  this,  and  thev  came  and
conferred  their  Priesthood  and  autho-
rity upon  Joseph  the  Seer,  which  is
for  the  gathering  together  of  all  who
seek  the  way  of  life.  What  is  there
thatwecannot  make  within  ourselves  ?
There  are  but  few  things.  If  we  have
a  desire  to  be  released  from  bondage
and  oppression,  we  shall  labour  to
produce  what  we  need,  I  intend  to
have  cloth,  that  has  been  nis.Ie  here,


from  head  to  foot.  What  are  we  going
to  do  ?  A  great  many  may  say  that .
they  always  wish  to  have  their  carding,
spinning  and  weaving  done  so  as  to
be  ready  for  the  winter,  and  be  at
liberty  to  go  to  the  parties.  That  is
very  m>od.  But  there  is  one  other
matter  1  w^ish  to  speak  of  in  this  con-
nection, and  that  is  that  President
Young  wants  this  people  to  bring  up
some  carding  machines  from  the
States,  so  that  we  can  go  forward  and
be  in  a  short  time  perfectly  inde-
pendent of  the  world.  This  is  the
course  for  yon  and  I  to  take  ;  and,  also,
to  lay  aside  our  vanity  and  foolish-
ness, and  that  winch  destroys  the
body.  I  have  observed  a  great  deal
of  the  follies  of  people  in  my  experi-
ence. If  we  will  do  right,  our  chil-
dren wilt  be  a  great  dual  stronger
than  we  are  in  body,  limb,  joint  and
muscles,  for  many  of  us  have  been
weakened  by  folly,  just  as  the  present
generation  of  young  people  are  ruining
themselves  with  their  foolish  fashions.

I  have  often  had  my  feelings  hurt
when  I  have  seen  men  grunt  and
grumble  at  every  little  triid,  and  then
to  see  their  wives,  and  many  in  fact
that  are  not  wives,  murmur  and  find
fault  with  their  circumstances,  -  It  is
true  that  some  are  doing  all  they  can
for  the  good  of  the  community,  but  it
is  not  so  with  alb  Let  us  all  labour
and  strive  the  best  we  can  to  build  up
the  kingdom  of  our  God  here  on  the
earth.

May  God  Almighty  bless  you,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  may  the  blessing
of  pence  be  with  you  that  you  may
enjoy  the  good  Spirit,  a  spirit  of
integrity  and  faithfulness,  and  may
that  Spirit  rest  upon  all  the  Saints
in  the  mountains  and  throughout  the
world,  is  my  prayer.  Amen.


FEINTED  BY  GEQSGE  Q.  CANNON,  42,  ISLINGTON,  LIVERPOOL*
