33
I
JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
PRESIDENT BRIOHAM  YOUNG,
HIS  TWO  CO[JNSELLORST
AND THB TWELVE  APOSTLES-
REPORTED  V.\
]>.  W.  EVANS,  J.  Q.  GANNON  AND  MLSft  J  [.'LI  A  VOrNG.
AMJ  J£  ES  PECT  F  U  Ij  It  Y  DEDICATE £)  TO  THE  LATTER-  OA V  HAltfTS  IS  ALL  THE  WMRLD.
VOL.  XV.
UVKKPOOL:
PHINTliD  AND  PUBLISHED  \\Y  ALBERT  CA  KKINUTON,  41  ISLINGTON*
LONDON  :
H?TEK-1>A1 Si  I  NTS.'  BM*K  DZPGT,  20t  BlHHOP1*  flttfFl,  I8UNGTON,
eXTIJiED  AT  WTATI"SK!t<*  IMI.I,.
i
1'  K  8 FACE.
Wk  take  great  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  Saints  and  the  world
the  Fifteenth  Volume  of  the  Journal  hi  [Msior  rsi:st  which  they
\ti11  find  contains  rirh  treasures  of  information  concerning  the  glorious
print  ipl<- b  nf  1'it^nnil  Life,  as  revealed  through  God's  anointed  servants
in  these  last  days.
AH  who  read  the  discourses  contained  in  this  Volume  are  earnestly
recommended  to  adapt  them  to  their  lives  by  practice,  and  we  tan
confidently  assure  them  that,  in  doing  so,  they  aiv  laying  up  a  store
of  knowledge  that*  will  save  and  exalt  them  in  the  Celestial  kingdom.
THE  PUBLISHER
1  N  I)  EX.
I  > ;  tte.  Page-
Preface.  iii.
The  Lord's  Supper— Progress! on — Co-operation  — fiidepeudenee.
B.  YV»l\o,
Ilia  Teatimony^The  ful  rilling  of  Prophecy — Ad? ice  to  Mothers.
W.  WOODRUFF.
P
Persecutions — Missionaries^  Emigration,  A  Smith.
HisimpriflODment—EmigratiJig  the  Poor— Tbe  use  of  Kicbea —
Tithing.  B.  Young,

Revelation—  Former  and  Latter-day  Dispensation*— The  sure

triumph  of  the  cditse  of  Zion.  J>  Tailor.

Patriarchal  M.irriage — The  settlement  of  Utah. G.  A.  Smith.

■

Riches— Hurry— Fasti  ion — Helping  the  Poor — Mysteries.

K.  Youn<;.

The  Latter-day  kingdom— tin-  present  fulfillment  of  ancient

prophecy.  n  Pkam

Kecond  Coming  of  Christ—Preparatory  work  thereto.

O,  Paatt.

Con  tin  in  - 1  ti -.icIj  lag  necessary — ignont  n  ce  of  professors  of  mo-
dern C ii ri sti an Uy — Pray ert  etc.  11  Yotfifu.
The  setting  up  of  Mv&'h  kingdom  in  these  latter  days.

O.  Pa  A  IT*

Comprehensiveness  of  the  Letter  day  work,  W.  \Vwn>R\*rv.
Observe  the  Sabbath  day.  B.  Yor;sc;,

Th*  fii-sjH.-l  plan — it  must  be  obeyed  if  is  hles&io^a  he  secured

— God*8  kingdom  hu~  <  »me.  1),  H,  \V*:i  r.s.

SacTRRietit— Helf-ex  ami  nation — Recollections of  early  life —

Reflections  on  sceuea  of  childhood,  after  an  absence  of  forty

years.  G.  A,  Smith.


April

28,

1872.

1

April

7

April

-

ft

ia

April  28,

if

is

April

7,

if

M  ay

H

37

May

ii

April

44

Dec*

18,

1870.

53

J  uno

1-72.

f>2

Feb.

**

67

April

ti

77

June

ri

SI

June

8,

T1

July

7,

1  I

vi


ReveJaiion  from  heaven  and  its  continuance  necessary.

0.  Pit att* Aug.  4,

Those  who  hear  the  Gospel  must  obey  it,  or  they  cannot  be  wived

^  it  Q,  Cannon, J  uly  14^

The  Fullness  of  the  Gospel— it*  power  to  unite-its  comprehen -
siveness— Definition  of  its  Priesthood— Condi  I ion  ef  Apos-
tates. B-  Yocsu. Aug,  it,
Fault Fiiitiinff— Aiviee— Wholesale  Co-operative  Store  for
Lo^an— Dress— Marital  Relation— establishing  Zion.

B*  Yotrnu. Aug.  13,
increase  of  Saints  since  Joseph  Smith's  Death— Joseph  Smith's

was—Resurrection  and  millennial  work.  YurNtL Aug.  -24,

God  »  ways  arc  no*  as  man's  ways,  ft.  VouMG,  Jr. Aug.  25,

Tithing.  ^-  Cannon. Sept.  {*,

Saints  should  sustain  themselves— Keep  the  Commandments—
Abuses— Power  of  Righteous  combination  of  labor.

J3.  Voi  su. Oct. %  f
Things  of  God  revealed  only  by  the  Spirit  uf  God-r  Develop*

ment  of  the  work  of  God,  etc  J.  Taylor. May  g

Review  of  ij-nlVi  Dealing*  with  the  1'ppphet  J  riseph— Coming
forth  of  the  Book  of  Mormon— Gathering,  etc.

O.  PHATT. Sept.  |£
Testimony — Search  the  Scriptures  -Word  of  Wisdom*

li.  Vol- nci,  Jr. Oct. $#  #l
Zion— The  duty  of  its  citizens— Tt'sti ninny.  E.  Snow. Oct. 7,  f,

Gather  ipg—  its  spirit its  object — Duties  of  the  Gathered  Saints.

G.  <J.  Cannon. Oct  8,
Choice  of  [tillers— Headship— Une  Man  Power— the  Yoke  of

Jesus,  -I.  Taylor. Oct.  7,

The  Order  of  Kuoch.  lit  YnuNtt. Oct,  y

Spirit  of  Light  and  truth — its  value  —its  opposite  necessary—

Pinal  triumph  of  light  and  troth.  (f  Phati. Nov.  21,

Pre- existence  of  our  Spirits.  O.  Pratt. Uec,  |&

True  Chris*  mas  and  New  Year.  (>.  Pratt. Dee,  29,

God  the  source  of  :i]l  (Jowl— the  common  love  of  man  for  in-
crease—the  necessity  of  righteously  directing  our  powers.

J.  Taylor. Ja/j. 5,  1873
The  Signs  of  the  Cuming  of  the  -mi  ..f  Man— the  SatntsMuties.

W.  \Voui>hvvv\  Jan. 12,  „
The  spirit  and  principles  of  the  Gospel  the  same  as  of  old-
early  experiences  of  settlers  of  Utah— Religious  liberty—
modern  so-called  civilisation— Baptism  for  the  dead.

J.  Tailok.  Jan,  12,

rnfvmality  and  Eternity  of  the  Gospel.  G,  Q.  Cannon.  Jan,  i2j


■-
ft


tl
ii


INDEX,  VU

lit  wards  according  to  works— Tirh  in  O.  Hym^ Jan, 19t ft  #03

Different  decrees  of  reward  and  of  punishment  —Marriage  for

Eternity  necessary  to  a  fullness  of  celestial  glor}%

0.  P&att, Jan. 19, j,  |  312
The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord'*  Supper.  J.  F.  9mm. Feh 9, „  ??24

Latter  day  Judgments.  O.  Pratt. Jan, 2Gt .<  329

Hi*  aiTjciaittT.mcE?  with  the  it eccased— incidents  id  the  latter'a

life  since  he  joined  the  Church.  W.  Woodruff  * Feb* 2X ,t  341

Certainty  of  Death — By  the  Spirit  of  Hud  the  Stmts'  obtain  the

fullness  of  the  blessings  of  the  Oms pel — God  will  take  care

of  Hit  people,  J.  Taylor. Feb, *2X „  347

l-haracter  of  the  do  reaped— Manifestations  of  the  power  of  God

— the  Saints  have  no  interest  apart  from  the  kingdom  of  God

—the  fear  of  death,  U.  It.  M  i ;  n.s 4 I  ■el ». 23t „  350

Consecration— Temporal  Equality — Selfishness  to  \  «  overcome—

It  esurrect  ion— Return  to  Jackson  Co  ti  n  t  y— Gl  ory  o  f  Zi on.

O.  Pratt. March  9, „  354
Th* limes  of  our  Savior  com  pared  with  the  present — Revela-
tion— Duties  of  the  faints — Self  to  be  overcome — Coming-

of  Christ  G.  Q+  Cannox. March  23, „  3fffi


■


JOURNAL  OF  DIS  BURSES,


H KM  ARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  lOUSO*

T)rl\ vkiie  j»  rx  thj-  Xkvv  Taiu:::\  ii  i.k+  Salt  Lvkk  (.'ity,  St  noay  Afternoon,

April  2Rtji,


(}h- ported  hj  Thtvt'ti  W.  Evans.)


THE  LOUT*'*  SITPPKU — PROGRESSION' — CO-OpEtLVI  fr,X — J !N  hKPENIiENT K.


I  nm  very  happy  f  ir  the  privilesrp
of  meeting  with  the  L  iiier*dny  iS  linN,
and  1  have  reason  to  1*9  tlmnknd  f/iafc
I  u'm  ublf*  hi  speak  liuli*  to  them.
It  brings  many  tltfflffB  b>  "nr-  ii -rti/c*
tions  nrtH  emses  nvmy  tfi  u.^it-  to
arise.  When  vvj-  }nok  over  the  human
family  wki t  a  variety  we  see  and  cs-
peeiaHy  njxiu  tli"  s  iKji't-t  of  religion.
Wi  take  Christianity,  for  instance,
and  us  nations,  as  p<-ofi[-'  we  I rlirve
in  and  mi  ihti1  Jj> inl  -fesns  Clinch
Moat  of  Christian  professor  a  tali  eve
in  1 1  if  i  ordinances,  m- s  nne  p  irli  ms  of
the  ordinances:  of  the  homo  of  Go<l
Mo^t  i »f  ( "hristians  believe  in  llie
breaking  of  bread,  in  blessing  it  and
partaking  of  it  in  tvrrmihrurict*  of
tlM  broken  body  of  onr  Savior;  also
in  taking  Hie  cup,  Gtittftecrsttng  it  mrd
then  partM  king  of  it,  in  remembrance
of  his  blooj  that  wad  abed  for  the
Bins  of  the  world,  And  then  take  up
the  hundreds  of  d:\Y-irut  dfTioniina-
tions  and  whnt  a  motley  mass  wb  pre-
sent io  oor  faith,  feelings,  sympathies,
judgment,  fissions  nitd  conduct;  man

No  h


ajrninst  niftTt,  priest  against  priest,
people  against  people,  X  >w  let  the
Oh  risfc  in  u  denoro  motions  come  here:
41  Yes,  the  Litter  day  Srun»s  believe
in  taking  the  S  icraoumf ,  it  is  true,
hut  whnt  a  pity/'  say  they,  "They
profess  to  brieve  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ."  Oh  dear!  J  wbrii  they  Hi!
Yes,  they  soeoi  to  manifest  great  con-
(i  lence  in  the  atonement,  in  the  ordi-
nances and  commandments,  I  wish
they  were  a  better  people!  What  a
pity  it  is  that  they  are  such  an  out-
lawed, sinful  race  of  being*  ;is  they
nre!  What  a  pity!!"  **  H  >w  we
Christians  do  pily  the  Latter-day
S  lints/  Then  ftynin,  how  we  L  itter-
day  Saints  do  pity  the  Christians!
What  a  ppectacie !  And  see  us,  as
Christians,  warring  with  fttch  other!
What  for  r  For  our  pure  faith,  for
i  ii  huly  d>  -in.->,  i  >.v  •  >jyt  .1  el  fir  fcy
to  each  other,  for  the  tow  of  Christ,
for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  the
children  of  mm.

Now  is  not  this  a  speetaclc  to  present
to  angels  r Why  if  the  Lord  A.U

Vol.  XV.


JUl'KNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


mighty  was  not  beyond  the  conception
of  humanity  in  charity  and  love,  in
mercy  and  longsuifrring,  in  patience
and  kindness  to  his  ereatures,  whore
would  we  have  been  ere  this?  We
would  hav'e  been  weltering  in  his
wrath,  we  would  have  been  drinking
his  hot  displeasure;  But  lie  is  more
merciful  than  w<-  are.  I  have  thought
a  great  many  timet  I  whs  very  thankful
I  was  not  the  L  >nl  Almighty.  I
should  he  consuming  my  enemies.
How  I  should  eon teed  against  those
who  bate  me*  I  am  glad  I  am  not
the  Lord.  Am]  to  see  ilie  Latter-day
Saints  here  following  the  example  of
the  Savior  when  he  to*>k  his  disciples
into  an  upper  lo^m,  nil  I  hade  sniiie
of  them  go  and  piejare  to  p;u(ake
supper  with  him  the  last  time  before
his  crucifixion.  He  look  the  bread
and  blessed  and  brake.  "Take  and
eat  ye  all  of  this,  lor  this  is  tny  body
in  the  New  Testament.1*  He  took
the  cup  and  blessed  it;  14  Drink  ye
all  of  this,  fur  (his  is  my  blood  in  the
New  Testament,"  Here  we  are  duin^
the  same  to-day.  What  more?  Do
this  until  I  eo jue,  for  I  will  neither
eat  nor  think  any  more  with  voa  in
this  capacity  until  1  it  rink  at  jew  with
you  in  my  father's  kh.^lmn  on  this
earth.  Will  he  do  it?  Certainly  he
will.  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of
me  until  I  cune/'  We  a  re  doing  this
to-day,  Dj  not  oilier  Christians  do
the  same?  The?  do.  How  do  we
Latter-day  Saints  feel  towards  them  f
ere  we  to  yiel  1  to  the  carnal  pas-
sions of  I  he  natural  man  and  we  had
the  power  of  the  Almighty  we  would
spew  our  enemies  out  of  our  mouths,
yes,  we  would  hiss  them  from  the  face
of  human  society  foi  their  evils,  then
malice,  for  the  revenge  aud  wrath
they  have  tow  ids  u*.  But  we  are
not  the  Almighfy,  I  am  glad  of  it.
I  am  happy  in  t he  reflection  that  I
have  not  the  power,  and  1  hope  and
pray  I  may  never  possess  it  until  I


can  use  it  like  a  God,  until  I  can  wield
it  as  our  Father  in  heaven  wields  it,
with nil  that  eternity  of  majesty,
glory,  charity,  with  his  judgment,
discretion,  and  with  every  faculty  of
compassion. I  am  happy  in  ihe  re-
flection that  I  do  not  possess  the
power. I  am  glad  you  elders  do  not,
I  am  really  glad  you  do  not,  Will
he  ever  grant  power  to  his  Saints  on
the  eat tli  r Yes,  they  will  take  the
kingdom,  and  possess  it  for  ever  and
ever;  but  in  the  capacity  they  arev
now,  in  the  condition  that  they  now
present  themselves  before  God,  before
the  world  and  before  each  other?
Never,  never!  until  we  are  sanctified,
until  we  are  filled  with  the  wisdom  of
God,  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  will
he  bequeath  the  power  that  he  has  in
reserve  fur  his  Saints;  never  will  the
Saints  possess  it  until  they  are  pre-
pared to  wield  it  with  all  that  judg-
ment,  discretion,  wisdo  n and  for-
bearance that the Lord  Almighty
wields  in  his  own  capacity,  and  uses
at  his  pleasure? How  do  you  feel  *
about  it,  brethren? Do  not  you  wish
sometimes  you  had  power  to  pinch
their  ears  ? Do  not  you  wish  you
bad  power  to  stop  them  in  their  mad
career? Let  the  Lord  Almighty  do
this. You  tbiDk  his  eye  is  upou  the
work  of  bis  hands  ? It  is. His  ears
are  open  to  the  prayers  of  his  chil-
dren, he  will  hear  their  prayers,  he
will  answer  their  desires ;  and  when
we  as  a  people  possess  the  abundance
of  that  patience,  that  lungsuffering
and  forbearance that  we  need,  to
possess  the  privileges  and  the  power
that  the  L;rd  has  in  reserve  for  his
people,  we  will  receive  to  our  utmost
satisfaction. We  shall  not  have  it
now. The  Lord  says,  "  I  can  not

give  it  to  you  now,"  This  church
has  now  been  traveling  over  forty-two
years — forty. two  years  the  sixth  day
of  this  month  since  it  was  organized
with  six  members. Win  it  have  we


*


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER


3


learned  ?  We  assembled  in  Missouri,
at  the  place  of  gathering  on  the  bor-
ders of  the  Lamanites,  and  there  we
bought  oar  farms  and  built  our  houses;
but  could  we  stay  there  ?  Were  we
prepared  then  to  enter  into  Zion,  to
build  up  the  Zion  of  God  and  possess
it?  We  were  not,  we  must  suffer,
"Yo-.i  Latter-day  Saints,  you,  my
children,"  says  the  Lord,  "are  not
prepared  to  receive  Zion/'  Why,  we
have  heard  detailed  by  Elder  Car-
rington  tire  conduct  of  Elders  at  the
present  time,  dishonest  in  the  matter
of  a  few  shillings  or  dollars.  Dis-
honest, covetous,  selfish,  grasping  Far
that  which  is  not  our  own  ;  borrowing
and  not  paying;  taking  that  which
docs  not  belong  to  us;  dishonest  in
our  dual ;  oppressing  each  other*  Are
we  fi*  fur  Zion?  I  sav  nothing-  to
the  Christian  world  with  regard  to
this.  Let  them  Lite  ami  devour  as
much  as  they  please,  it  does  not  be-
long to  the  Latter-day  Saints  at  least.
Could  we  stay  in  Independence  ?  No,
we  could  not*  What  was  the  reason  ?
Here  are  some  hearing  me  talk  who
were  there — some  who  are  aged,  s^mc
here  who  were  then  children  and
infants,  some  who  were  born  there.
But  we  stayed  a  very  few  years — two
or  three — and  we  must  get  up  and
march.  Why  did  we  leave  ?  Why
the  enemy  is  upon  us,  our  enemies  are
gathered  around  us,  our  foe*  are  be-
setting us  on  every  hand*  There  goes
a  h-u-e  burred  up;  there  is  a  man
that  is  whipped;  there  is  a  family
turned  out  of  doors!  What  is  the
matter  with  all  you  Latter-day  Saints?
Can  the  wot  Id  see?  No.  Can  the
Saints  see  ?  No,  or  few  of  them  can ;
and  we  can  say  that  the  light  of  the
Spurt  upun  the  hearts  and  under-
standi ugs  of  some  Latter-day  Saints
is  like  t  lie  peeping  of  the  stais  hivugh
the  broken  shingles  of  the  roof  over
our  heads,  when  we  are  watching
through  the  silent  watches  of  the


night  and  behold  the  glimmer  of  a
twinkling  star. "  Oh  yes,  I  see,  I
see,  that  we  are  not  prepared  to  re-
ceive the  kingdom." Another  one
says,  "  Yes,  I  can  see,  we  were  too
selfish." Another  one  says,  "  I  seef
the  wicked  must  he  prepared  for  their
doom  as  well  as  the  Saints  for  their
exaltation,  and  that  the  wicked  are  a
rod  in  the  bands  of  God  to  chasten
the  Saints/*  Here  are  the  two  classes
— the  righteous  and  the  unrighteous,
and  the  righteous  must  be  prepared
by  suffering  and  by  rendering  strict
obedience  to  the  commandments  of
heaven. It  seems  to  be  absolutely
necessary  in  the  providence  of  Him
who  created  us,  and  who  organized
and  fashioned  all  things  according  t/>
his  wisdom,  that  man  must  descend
below  all  things. It  is  will  ten  of  the
Savior  in  the  Bible  that  he  descended
below  all  things  that  he  might  ascend
above  all. Is  it  not  so  with  every
man  ? Certainly  it  is. It  is  fit  then
that  we  should descend  below  all
things  and  come  up  gradually,  and
learn  a  little  now,  and  again,  receive
44  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  prec<  pfc,
here  a  little  and  there  a  little."  But
hark,  do  the  people  bear  it  ? Do  the
people understand it  ? Scarcely  1
scarcely! Do  the  Latter-day  Saints
understand  these  principles,  and  are
we  prepared  to  receive  Zion  ?  Are
we  prepared  to  receive  the  Kingdom
a'?d  are  we  prepared  for  the  blessings
that  God  has  in  reserve  for  his  chil-
dren ? Stop,  think,  consider,  look
around  us! How  is  it? Are  not
the  sordid  things  of  this  life  before
our  eyes,  and  have  they  not  thrown  a
mist  before  them  so  that  we  can  not
see  ? Are  we  not  of  the  earth,  and
^t;l!  earthy  ? Certainly  we  are  of  the
ea^th  and  still  earthy. What  do  we
knbw  of heavenly  things? It  is
very  true  we  have  the  Bible;  but
when  we  come  to  our  elders,  men  of
limited  education  and  moderate  read-*


4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


ing,  they  are  able  to  tench  the  whole
Christian  world  theology.  Take
them  from  the  -anvil,  from  the  plow,
from  the  carpenter's  bench,  or  from
any  occupation,  if  they  posses  good
common  ability  and  the  spirit  of  our
boly  religion  that  God  has  revealed
m  these  latter  days,  they  understand
more  of  the  Bible  and  the  building
up  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  than  all
tlie  world  besides  that  are  destitute
of  the  priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God.
And  yet  what  do  we  know?  Com-
paratively we  have  hardly  learned
the  first  lesson.

Could  our  brethren  stay  in  Jackson
County,  Missouri?  Jfo,  nr\  Why?
They  had  not  learned  fcia"  concerning
Zion;  and  we  hare  been  traveling
now  forty-two  years,  and  have  we
learned  our  a,  b,  c?  "Oh,"  say  a
good  many,  u  I  think  we  have."  Have
we  learned  our  a  b  ab  ?  Have  we  got
as  far  as  b  a  k  e  r,  baker  ?  Have  we
got  through  our  first  speller  ?  Have
ve  learned  multiplication?  Do  we
understand  anything  with  regard  to
the  building  tip  of  the  kingdom  ?  I
will  say,  scarcely.  Have  we  seen  it
as  a  people?  How  long  shall  we
travel,  how  long  shall  we  live,  how
long  shall  God  wait  for  us  to  sanctify
ourselves  and  become  one  in  the  Lord,
in  our  actions  and  in  oor  ways  for  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
that  he  can  bless  us?  He  defends
us,  it  is  very  true,  and  fights  our
battles.  When  we  were  driven  from
Missouri  and  had  to  leave  the  State,
I  recollect  very  well,  Gov.  Bo^gs
said,  "Yoa  must  leave;**  Gen.
Gark  said,  "  You  must  leave ;  "  the
mob  said,  "  You  must  leave,**  and  we
kad  to  leave.  And  after  we  had
signed  away  our  property,  I*d  see  a
widow  send  up  her  little  boy  to  bro*
ther  Such-a-one,  "Will  yoa  let  me
50  to  your  timber  land  and  get  a  load
cf  wood  for  my  mother?'*  "Tell
jonr  mother  that  I  have  got  no  more


timber  than  I  shall  want,  I  do  not
think  I  can  spare  her  a  load  of  wood.**
I  recollect  very  well  of  telling  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  there  and  then,  *'  I
hope  to  God  that  we  never  will  have
the  privilege  of  stopping  and  making
I  ourselves  rich  while  we  grind  the
ffice  of  the  poor;  but  let  us  be  driven
from  State  to  State  until  we  can  take
what  we  have  gut  and  dispose  of  it
according  to  the  dictation  of  the
spit  it  of  revelation  from  the  Lord.
Said  I,  "You  will  not  stay  here;"
but  long  faces  would  come  down,  you
know,  with  a  gentle,  mild  scrawl,  **T
can*t  spare  you  a  load  of  wood."
Excuse  me.  When  are  the  Latter-
day  Saints  going  to  be  prepared  to
receive  the  kingdom  ?  Are  we  now  ?
Nut  at  all !  We  are  prepared  for
some  things,  and  we  receive  just  as
fast  as  we  prepare  ourselves.  Well,
what  can  we  do,  what  more  can  we
do?  We  can  do  just  what  we  please  to
do.  It  is  in  our  power  to  do  just
what  we  please  to  do  with  regard  to
sanctifying  ourselves  before  the  Lord,
and  preparing  ourselves  to  build  up
his  kingdom :  Have  we  not  the
liberty  to  build  this  Temple  here?
We  have,  although  earth  and  hell  are
opposed  to  it,  and  arrayed  against  it.
Have  we  not  the  privilege  of  preach-
ing the  G<  spel  to  the  nations?  We
have.  Have  we  not  the  privilege  of
uniting  our  faith  and  our  efforts  for
the  benefit  of  the  whole  community  ?
Yes,  we  have,

Nuvr  come  down,  for  example,  to
our  present  circumstances  a::d  con-
dition. Year  after  year,  I  labored
with  oar  merchants  to  unite  theirt  Hurts
together  to  supply  the  wants  of  the
people  without  taking  from  them
everything  they  had  got;  and  when
1  assembled  these  merchants  some
'ye»r3  before  we  entered  into  o  /:
present  co-operative  institution  in
this  mercantile  trade,  said  I,  u  Will
tyou  unite  your  efforts  and  your


THE  LOIUi'S  SVPI'EH.


5


means,  and  start  a  business  here  that
we  can  put  goods  into  the  hands  of
the  people  that  we  will  not  tsike  their
last  sixpence  ?  Kavc  a  calico  dress
at  forty  cents  a  yard  when  ifc  should
lie  only  eighteen,  twenty  or  twenty-
two,  and  so  tjn  and  so  forth."  Afier
a  lonjj  con  fere:  j  ce  one  of  the  ir^nt  le-
HPM|  present  got  up,  walked  the  room
back  and  forward,  and  lin:illy  said,
44  President  Young,  if  you  will  furnish
the  money  wo  will  do  as  you  say/'  as
much  jus  to  say,  "  It  is  none  of  your
business  what  we  do  with  the  means
that  we  have,"  I  dropped  the  con-
versation and  said  to  myself.  rt  Well
then,  gull  the  people*  inke  what  they
have  got."

You  recollect  a  man  here  in  (ho
time  of  the  Buchanan  war  by  the
name  of  A,  B.  Miller.  He  was  a
merchant  here  for  Unwell  and  Ma-
jor*. Our  people  were  not  merchan-
dising much  then.  Well,  the  mer-
chants met  together  and  wanted  to
put  up  their  goods  to  a  certain  notch,
h  dollar  a  pound  for  sugar,  for  in-
stance. This  A.  B.  Miller — a  gamb-
ler, though  th'-re  were  a  great  many
good  things  .tbont  him,  he  just  turned
in  and  damned  them.  Saws  he,
"Gentlemen,  to  turn  in  and  cut  the
throats  of  the-*?  *  Mormons,1  and  take
what  they  have  got,  we  might  do,
hut  fur  bem"  so  damned  mean  as  to
ask  a  dollar  a  pound  fur  sugar,  I  will
not  do  it."

Now  then,  is  I  his  cooperative  in-
stitution one  step  towards  bringing
the  people  to  a  union  ?  Yes,  but  it  is
a  very  small  one,  and  there  is  danger
of  it  growing  into  a  condition  that
will  cease  to  be  one  step  in  t he  ri^ht
direction.  Let  men  say,  "Heie  is
what  Liud  has  given  me,  do  what  you
please  with  it,"  and  we  shall  be  in
the  path  of  progress.  But  how
is  it  now  ?  "  Brother,  have  you  paid
any  tithing?  You  have  made  tifry
thousand,  ten  thousand,  a  hundred


thousand,  enc  thousand  or  five  h un-
ci fed  dollars  as  the  case  may  be,  hare
you  paid  any  tithing?  "  "  Well,  no
I  have  not  yet,  bat  1  think  perhaps,  I
will  by  and  by;"  and  this  is  said  with
stammering  tongue,  faltering  voice,
and  co  vet  (jus  heart,  Who  Lrave  you
your  money  and  possessions?  Who
owns  this  earth  *r  Does  the  Devil?
No,  lie  does  not,  he  pretended  to  own
it  when  the  Savior  was  here,  and
promised  it  all  tohim  if  he  would  fall
down  a:. d  worship  him;  but  he  did
not  own  a  foot  of  laud,  he  only  had
possession  of  it.  He  was  an  intruder,
and  is  still :  tin's  earth  belongs  to  him
that  framed  and  organized  ir,  and  it
is  expressly  for  his  glory  ami  the
possession  of  those  who  love  and  serve
him  and  keep  his*  commandments;
bur  the  enemy  has  possession  of  it.

Now  then,  a  few  other  items,  breth-
ren and  histers.  Can  you  do  any-
thing for  the  pour  :  *4  Well  I  do  not
kno.v,  but  I  can  give  you  fitly  cents  to
gather  the  poor*"  "  Brother,  can
you  pay  that  debt?  You  recollect
you  borrowed  some  money  of  a
widow  woman  in  England,  Do  you
recollect  you  borrowed  a  little  monoy
of  such  u  brother  r  Can  you  pay
that  :"  41  Well  yes,  I  am  going  to."
You  heard  what  Brother  Car  ring  ton
said  about  if,  what  fellowship  dues  the
Lord  Aliiii^htv  lave  for  such  men?
1  think  not  the  least.  What  fellow-
ship do  angels  have  for  such  men?
I  should  think  not  much.  What
fellowship  do  I  have  for  them  ?  Not
one  particle.  What  ought  to  be  done
with  them  ?  I  will  answer  the  ques-
tion— they  ought  to  be  disfei low-
shipped  by  the  Saints:  th oy  are  not
fellows  hipped  in  the  heavens,  and  they
ou{*ht  not  to  be  here.

*•  Well,  now 'then,  Brother  Br igh am,
what  are  you  at,  what  do  you  want?"
I  waut  you  to  do  jjstthat  which  will
displease  the  enemies  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  that  which  will  please


6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  Lord  Almighty  and  the  heavenly
host  to  perfection.  What  is  that?
Do  as  you  are  counseled  to  do  by  the
Spirit  of  revelation  f  10:11  the  Lord.
What  is  the  cry  against  us ?  "  Brig-
ham  Young  has  too  much  influence!
All  the  people  hearken  to  Brigham
Young !  All  these  poor  deluded  Lat-
ter-day Saints  take  his  counsel !  "  1
wish  it  was  so.  If  this  wzre  the  fact
jnn  would  see  Zion  prosper  upon  the
h ills  and  upon  the  plains, in  the  valleys
and  in  the  knnyons,  nnd  upon  the
mountains*  Go  to  with  your  might,
seek  uato  the  Lord  your  God  until
yon  have  the  revelations  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  upon  you,  until  your

trinds  are  open,  and  *he  visions  of

heaven  are  plain  to  you.  Tnen  follow
the  dictations  of  the  spirit,  and  watvh
Brother  Brigham,  and  see  it  he  coun-
sels you  wr  >og,  1  hope  to  see  the
time  when  I  can  nay  to  the  Litter-
day  Saints,' if  1  preside  over  them,  go
and  do  this  or  that,  and  not  ask  a  six-
pence of  this  man  oi  a  dollar  from
that,  or  a  hundred  dollars  from  Jin-
other,  11  Here  is  what.  1  have,  it  is
the  Lord's,  He  has  given  ine  all
that  I  possess,  it  is  only  committed  to
my  charge  to  see  what  I  will  do  with
it.  The  heavens  are  his*  the  earth  is
hh;  the  gold  and  silver  are  his,  the
wheat  and  fine  flour  are  his,  the  wine

and  the  oil  are  his;  the  cattle  upuu  a
thousand  hills  are  his*  I  am  his,  I
am  his  servant,  let  the  Lord  say  what
he  wants.  Here  I  am,  with  all  thou
hast  given  me,"  How  displeasing
this  is  to  the  devil  is  it  not  ?  I  van
not  help  it,  this  is  the  n  ae  track  and
path  for  tin'  Latter-day  Saints  to
walk  in.  Walk  up(  O  ye  Latter-day
Saints,  nnd  wake  up!  Come  to  the
L  rd,  forsake  j*our  eovc  t^'isness,  your
back-slid  ings,  forsake  the  spirit  of
the  world,  and  ret arn  to  the  Lord
with  full  purpose  of  heart  until  von
get  the  spirit  of  Christ  within  vou,
that  you,  like  others,  can  cry,  *4  Abba


Father,  the  Lord  he  is  God  and, I  am
his  servant,"

Do  you  think  it  would  he  difficult
then  for  us  to  accomplish  anything
we  undertook  ?  No.  Very  true  the
enemy,  this  potent  foe  that  we  have
to  contend  with,  we  know  but  little
about  him,  very  little;  but  he  is
watching  every  avenue  of  the  heart,
rapping  at  every  door  and  every  win-
dow, and  if  there  is  a  crevice  between
the  clapboards,  through  the  roof,  or
the  briek  or  adobie  wall,  he  throws  ;i
dart  into  the  feelings  of  each  and
evi  ry  individual  "  Take  care,  think
for  yourselves,  judge  for  yourselves;
do  nor  be  led  astray,  do  not  you  wan-
der off  after  these  deluded  people,  and
their  delusion.  Be  careful, there  is  dan-
ger in  believing  in  the  I^ord,  there  is
diiuger  in  being  a  Saint ;  there  is  great
d  anger  in  you  yielding  your  judgment
in  another  man."  Oh,  what  a  pity  !
W  here  do  you  get  your  judgment  ?
Where  did  it  conic  from  f  What  is
\  our  judgment  r  I  tell  yuu  (hat  the
!  judgment  of  the  world  now  is  pretty
much  for  all  to  do  just  rs  they  please
if  they  possibly  can,  to  the  injury  of
|  their  neighbors,  for  their  own  aggran-
dizement

Can  I  not  use  my  judgment  in
j  doing  well  just  as  much  as  in  doing
i  evil?  Am  I  not  just  as  independent
in  performing  a  deed  of  charity  as  a
deed  of  cruelty?  I  contend  that  I
am,  what  do  you  say  ?  Have  I  not
got  rny  liberty  ju^t  as  much,  and
exercise  it  just  as  fieely,  in  feeding
the  poor  and  clothing  the  naked  as  I
have  in  turning  them  oat  of  doors,  or
in  lifting  myself  up  against  God  and
his  anointed  ?  Has  a  man  got  to
apostatize  from  this  kingdom,  from
the  faith  of  Christ,  to  be  indepen-
dent ?  Am  I  not  as  independent  in
believing  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as
I  am  in  denying  him  ?  Am  I  not  as
independent  in  believing  the  Gospel
as  I  am  id  believing  in  the  whisperings


HIS  TESTIMONY,  ETC.


7


and  multprinjrs  of  these  spirits  that  are
floating  through  the  air,  rapping  at
everybody's  door,  sometimes  tearing
the  clothes  off  their  beds,  rapping,
thundering  and  telling  this,  that
and  the  other?  You  hearken  to
that  still  small  voice  that  whis-
pers eternal  truth,  that  opens  tho
visions  of  eternity  to  you  that  you
can  discern,  understand  and  follow,
and  the  foul  spirits  that  throng  the


air,  and  that  fill  our  houses  if  we  let
them  in,  will  not  have  power  over  you.

Be  just  as  in  Impendent  as  a  God  to
do  good.  Low  mercy,  eschew  evil,
be  a  savior  to  yourselves  anil  to  your
families,  and  to  your  fellow  beings
just  as  much  as  yon  possibly  can, and
go  nn  with  your  independence  and  do
not  yield  yourselves  servants  to  obey
an  evil  principle  or  an  evil  b^ing,

God  bless  you.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,
Delivered  is  the Sew  Tabernacle, Salt  Lakj;  City,  April  6,  1872,

{Reported  by  David  \V.  Evans.)

HIS  TESTIMONY— THE  FULFILLING  OF  PROPHECY— ADVICE  TO  MOTHERS,


Through  the  mercy  and  loving
kindness  of  our  Father  in  the  heavens
we  are  again  permitted  to  meet  in  a
general  conference  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Litter-day  Stunts.
Forty -two  years  a^o  this  day  this
church  was  organized  with  six  rue  ru-
bers, by  a  prophet  of  the  living  God,
raised  up  in  these  last,  days  by  the
administration  of  angels  from  God,
and  ordained  unto  all  the  keys  and
powers  of  the  Melchizedec  priesthood
and  apostles!) ip,  and  of  the  kingdom
of  God  on  the  earth.  According  to
the  best  knowledge  we  have,  1812
years  ago  to-day,  t  he  L  ml  Jesus  was
crucified  on  Mount  Calvary  for  the
sins  of  the  world.  The  6th  day  of
April  is  a  very  important  day  iu  many
respects.  It  lias  certainly  been  very
interest ing  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
to  watch  the  history  and  progress  of
■this  Church  and  kingdom  during  the


tast  forty- t.vo  years.  This  is  one  of
the  most  important  generations  that
men,  or  God,  or  angels  hace  ever  seen
on  the  earth  :  it  is  a  dispensation  and
generation  when  the  whole  flood  of
prophecy  and  revelation  and  vision
tfiven  through  inspired  men  for  the
last  six  thousand  years  is  to  have  its
fulfillment,  an;l  especially  in  relation
to  the  establishment  of  the  great
kingdom  and  Ziou  of  God  on  the
earth*  Joseph  Smith  was  one  of  the
greatest  prophets  God  ever  raised  up
on  the  earth,  and  the  Lord  has  had
his  eye  upon  him  from  the  foundation
of  the  world.  Any  man  who  has
ever  read  the  book  of  Isaiah,  which
we  frequently  have  quoted  to  us,  can
see  that  he,  with  other  prophets,  had
his  eye  upon  the  latter-day  Ziou  of
God.  He  s:*ys  in  one  place,  **  Sing
0  heavens,  rejoice  O  earth,  break
forth  into  singing,  O  ye  mountains,


8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  peo-
ple, he  will  have  mercy  upon  his
afflicted.  But  Zion  said  :  The  Lord
hath  forsaken  me,  and  my  Lord  hath
forgotten  inc.*'  "  Ah/'  says  the
Lord,  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her
sucking  chili],  that  she  should  not
have  compassion  on  the  sun  of  her
womb?  Yea,  they  may  forget,  yet
will  not  I  forget  thee.  Behold,  I
have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of
my  hands;  thy  walls  arc  c >ntinu,iMy
before  me."

The  Lord  never  created  this  world
at  random  ;  he  has  never  dune  any  of
his  work  at  random.  The  earth  was
created  lor  certain  purposes;  and  one
of  these  purposes  was  its  final  re-
demption, and  the  establishment  of
his  government  and  kingdom  upon  it
in  the  lath*  days,  to  prep  ire  it  for  the
reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose
right  it  is  to  reign.  That  set  time
has  come,  tint  dispensation  is  before
us,  we  are  living  in  t he  midst  of  it.
It  is  before  the  Latter-day  Saints,  it
is  before  the  world  ;  whether  or  not
the  people  have  more  faith  in  the
promises  of  God  now  than  they  had
in  the  days  of  Nouh  makes  no  differ-
ence, J  he  unbelief  of  men  will  not
make  the  truth  of  God  without  effect.
The  great  and  mighty  events  that  the
Lord  Almighty  has  decreed  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
to  be  performed  in  the  latter  days  are
resting  upon  ns,  and  they  will  follow
each  other  in  quick  succession,  whether
men  believe  or  not,  for  no  prophecy
of  Scripture  is  of  any  private  inter-
pretation, but  holy  men  of  God  spake
as  they  were  moved  upon  by  t  lie  Holy
Ghost,  and  what  thev  said  will  come
to  pass;  though  the  heaven  and  the
earth  pass  away  net  one  jot  or  tittle
of  the  word  of  the  Lord  will  go  un-
fulfilled.

Some  of  us  have  lived  in  and  been
intimately  acquainted  with  this  church
for  the  last  forty  years,  a  very  few


[more  than  that,  and  some  less;  but
where  is  the  Latter-day  Saint  or  any
other  person  who  has  ever  seen  this
church  or  kingdom  go  backward  ?
Xo  matter  what  position  we  were  iur
whether  exterminated  by  the  order  of
Governor  Bogus  of  Missouri,  or  whe-
ther we  lay.  sick  and  afflicted,  on  the
j  muddy  banks  of  the  Missouri  river  ;
whether  \  l  was  Xioifs  Camp  goin^  up
for  her  redemption ;  whether  it  was
the  pioneers  coming  to  these  moun-
tain*, tnaAin^  the  roads,  building  the
bridges,  killing  the  snakes  and  open*
in^  the  way  for  *  lie  gathering  of  the
people,  no  matter  what  our  circum-
stances inav  h rive  been,  this  kingdom
has  been  onward  and  upward  all  the
day  Jong  until  the  present  hour.
Will  it  ever  no  backward?  No,  it
will  not.  This  Zion  of  the  Lord,  in
all  its  beauty,  power  and  glory  is*
engraven  upon  the  hands  of  Almighty
God,  and  it  is  before  his  face  con-
tinually; his  decrees  are  set  and  no
man  can  turn  them  aside.

There  never  ftftg  a  dispensation  on
the  earth  when  prophets  and  apostles,
the  inspiration,  revelation  and  power
of  God,  the  holy  priesthood  and  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  were  needed
more  than  they  are  in  thi*  generation.
There  never  has  been  a  dispensation
when  the  friends  of  God  and  right*
euusness  among  the  children  of  men
needed  more  laith  in  the  promises
and  prophecies  than  they  do  to-day;,
aud  there  certainly  never  has  been
a  generation  of  people  on  the  earth
that  has  had  a  greater  work  to  per-
form than  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  in  the  latter  davs.  That  is  one
reason  why  this  church  and  kingdom
has  progressed  from  its  commence-
ment until  to-day,  in  the  midst  of  all
the  opposition,  oppression  and  war-
fare which  have  been  waged  against
it  by  men  inspired  by  the  evil  one_
If  this  had  not  be-n  the  dispensation
1  of  the  f  ulness  of  times — the  dispen-


HIS  TESTIMONY,  ETC.


9


salion  in  which  God  has  declared
that  he  will  establish  his  kingdom  on
the  earth  never  more  to  be  thrown
down,  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
would  have  been  enabled  to  overcome
the  kingdom  ami  Zion  of  God  in  this
as  well  as  in  any  former  dispensation.
But  the  set  time  has  come  to  favor
Zion,  and  the  Lord  Almighty  1ms
decreed  in  the  heavens  that  every
weapon  formed  against  her  shall  be
broken.  And  if  we  take  the  history
of  any  man,  from  the  days  Joseph
Smith  received  the  plates  from  the
hill  Curnorah,  and  translated  the
Book  of  Mormon  by  the  Uiini  and
Thumrcum,  until  to-day,  whoever  has
raised  his  hand  against  this  work  has
felt  the  chastening  hand  of  Almighty
God  upon  him j  and  lam  at  the  de-
fiance of  the  world  to  show  me  a
president,  governor,  judge,  ruler,
priest  or  anybody  else  on  the  earth
who  has  t?i ken  a  stand  against  this
kingdom  who  is  an  exception,  and
you  may  search  their  whole  history.
We  have  outlived  several  generations
of  our  persecutors  Where  are  the
men  who  tarred  and  feathered  Joseph
Smith  in  Portage  Cotintv,  Ohio?
Where  are  the  men  who  drove  this
people  from  Kirtland?  Where  are
the  men  who  drove  the  Church  and
kingdom  fro  in  Jackson  County,  Mis-
souri ?  Where  are  the  men  who  un-
deit>'k  to  kidnap  the  prophet  while
in  Illinois?  Where  are  they  who
drove  the  Litter- day  Saints  from
Illinois  in»o  these  mountains  ?  Trace
their  whole  history  and  see  for  your-
selves. The  fact  is  many  of  them  are
in  their  graves,  awaiting  their  final
judgment.  And  in  the  whole  history
of  this  people  and  their  remarkable
preservation,  the  invisible  hand  of
God  is  as  plainly  to  be  seen  as  it  has
been  in  I  he  history  of  the  Jews  from  the
davs  of  Christ  until  now:  and  it  will
continue  until  this  scene  is  wound


We  are  led  by  men  who  are  filled
with  inspiration,  Joseph  Smith  was
a  man  of  God,  through  the  loins  of
the  ancient  Joseph  who,  through  the
wisdom  which  God  gave  him,  re-
deemed his  father's  house  after  having
been  sold  by  his  brethren  into  Egypt


All  the


blessings


that old  father


Jacob  pronounced  upon  Joseph  and
upon  the  .sons  of  Ephraim,  his  sou
and  grandsons  have  tested  upon  them
until  this  day.  Joseph  Smith  was
through  that  lineage.  In  his  youth
he  was  inspired  of  God,  and  was  ad-
ministered to  by  angels.  Under  their
guidance  and  counsel  he  hud  the
foundation  of  this  work,  and  lived
long  enough  to  receive  all  the  keys
necessary  for  Waring  off  this  dispen-
sation. He  lived  long  enough  to  have
these  individuals  administer  unto
him— John  the  Baptist,  Peter,  James
and  John  the  Apostles,  Elisha  and
Elijah,  who  held  the  leys  of  turning
the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  chil-
dren and  the  hearts  uf  the  children  to
the  fathers;  and  Moroni,  who  held
the  keys  of  the  slick  of  Joseph  in
the  hands  of  Ephraim  to  come  forth
in  the  latter  dav,  administered  in
person  to  Joseph  Smith,  and  gave
him  these  records  and  instructed  him
in  the  things  of  God  from  time  to
time  until  he  was  qualified-  and  pre-
pared to  lay  the  foundation  of  this
wor  k.  Tin*  Prophet  Joseph  lived  to
see  the  Church  organized  with  apos-
tles and  prophets,  patriarchs,  pastors,
teachers,  helps,  governments,  and  all
the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  spirit  of
God  ;  to  give  the  Twelve  Apostles
their  endowments  and  to  seal  upon
their  heads  all  the  authority  and
power  that  were  necessary  to  enable
them  to  fulfil  their  missions. '  Why
did  the  Lord  take  him  away?  He
laid  down  his  life,  and  sealed  his
testimony  with  his  blood  that  it  might
be  in  furce  upon  the  heads  of  this
generation,  and  that  he  might  b%


10  JOURNAL  OF

crowned  with  crowns  cf  glory,  immor-
tality and  eternal  life;  that  he  mi#ht
go  to  the  other  side  of  the  rail,  and
there  organize  the  Church  and  king-
dom in  this  last  dispensation.  He
and  his  two  brothers  were  taken  away
into  the  spirit  world,  and  they  are  at
work  there,  while  Bingham  Young
and  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve  were
preserved  on  the  enrth  for  a  special
purpose  in  the  hands  of  God.  These
things  are  true,  and  the  hand  of  the
Lord  has  been  over  Brigham  Young,
air  hough  now  he  is  under  bonds  and
a  prisoner,  and  has  his  privileges  cur-
tailed for  the  word  of  God  and  the
tesl  imony  of  Jesus.  Y^t  in  the  midst
of  nil  this  lie  is  calm  :md  composed
before  the  Lord,  and  I  ins  his  mini
open  to  the  things  of  God.  He  still
lives  in  the  midst  of  this  people  and
will  live  as  long  as  the  Lord  wishes
him  to  remain  in  the  flesh  to  guide
the  affairs  of  Zion.

I  will  s:iy  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
that  we  have  been  more  blessed  in  this
land  than  has  any  other  dispensation
or  generation  of  men.  The  Lord  has
been  at  work  for  the  last  three  hun-
dred years  preparing  this  land,  with
a  government  and  constitution  which
would  guarantee  equal  rights  and
privileges  to  the  inhabitants  thereof,
in  the  midst  of  which  lie  could  estah.
lish  his  kingdom.  The?  kingdom  is
established,  the  work  of  God  is  mani-
fest in  the  earth,  the  Saints  have
come  up  here  into  the  valleys  of  the
mountains,  and  they  are  erecting  the
house  of  God  in  the  tops  thereof,  tor
the  nations  to  flow  unto.  A  standard
of  truth  has  been  lifted  up  to  the
people,  and  from  the  commencement
of  this  work  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  fulfilling  that  flood  of
revelation  and  prophecy  which  was
given  formerly  concerning  this  great
work  in  the  last  days.  1  rejoice  in
this,  and  also  because  we  have  every
reason  to  expect  a  continuation  of


DISCOURSES,

these  blessings  unto  Zion.  We  have
alwavs  had  a  vail  over  ns,  we  have
had  to  walk  by  faith  all  the  day  long
until  the  present  time:  this  is  the
decree  of  God,  When  we  were  driven

I  from  Jackson  County,  Clay  County,
Caldwell  County,  Kirtland,  and  finally
from  Nauvoo  into  these  mountains,
we  did  not  see  and  understand  what
lay  before  us:  there  was  a  vail  over
our  faces,  in  a  measure*  It  has  been
the  same  with  the  people  of  God  in
all  ages.  At  that  time  we  could  not
see  this  tabernacle,  and  the  five  hun-
dred miles  of  villages,  towns,  cities,
gardens,  orchards,  fields,  or  the  desert
blossoming*  as  the  rose  as  we  see  them
to-day.  We  came  here  and  found  a
barren  desert:  we  were  led  hither  by
inspiration,  by  a  law-giver,  by  a  mat

!  of  God  ;  the  Lord  was  with  him,  he
was  with  the  pioneers.  If  we  had
not  come  here  we  could  not  have
fulfilled  the  prophecies  which  the
prophets  have  left  on  record  in  the
htirk  of  Judah  as  well  ns  in  the  stick
of  Kphraim — the  Bible  and  the  Book
of  Mormon,  *vYe  have  done  that,
and  we  enn  look  back  twenty-four
years  and  see  the  change  that  has
been  effected  since  onr  arrival ;  but
who  can  see  the  change  that  will  be
effected  in  the  next  twenty-fouryears?

,  No  man  can  see  it  unless  (he  vision
of  Ins  mind  is  opened  by  the  power
of  God.  The  Lord  told  Joseph  S?n ith
to  lay  the  fonndation  of  this  work  ;
he  told  him  that  the  day  had  come
when  the  harvest  was  ready,  and  to
thrust  in  the  sickle  and  reap ;  and
every  man  who  would  do  so  was  called
of  God  and  had  this  privilege.

'  The  Lord  has  sent  forth  the  Gos-
pel, and  it  is  offered  to  the  children

|  of  men  as  it  wa§  in  ancient  days;
men  are  required  to  have  faith  in
Jesus  Christ,  repent  ot  their  sins,
and  to  be  baptized  for  the  remission
of  them,  and  the  promise  is  that  they

!  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  which


HIS  TESTIMONY,  ETC.


f shall  teach  them  the  things  of  God,
bring  things  past  to  their  remem-

I brance,  and  show  them  things  to

{  come.

What  principle  has  sustained  the
Elders  uf  Israel  for  the  lust  forty
years  in  thuir  travels?  They  have
gone  forth  without  purse  or  scrip,
preached  without  money  or  price ;
they  have  swam  rivers,  waded  swamps,
and  traveled  hundreds  of  thousands
of  miles  on  foot  to  bear  record  of  this
work  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.
What  has  sustained  them  ?  It,  has
been  this  power  of  God,  this  Holy
Ghost,  the  spirit  of  inspiration  from
<  the  God  of  Israel  that  lias  been  given
to  his  friends  on  the  earth  in  these
latter  days  The  blood  of  Israel  has
flowed  in  the  veins  of  the  children  of
men,  mixed  among  the  Gentile  na-
tions, and  when  they  have  heard  the
sound  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  it,  has
been  like  vivid  lightning  to  them  ;
it  has  opened  their  understanding*,
enlarged  their  minds,  and  enabled
them  to  sue  the  things  of  God.  They
have  been  born  of  the  Spirit,  ami
then  they  could  behold  the  kingdom
of  God  ;  they  have  been  baptized  in
water  and  had  hands  laid  upon  them
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  they  have  received  that  Holy
Ghost  among  every  Gentile  nation

*  under  heaven  wherever  t tie  Gospel
has  been  permitted  to  be  preached  ;
and  here  they  are  to-day,  from  all
those  nations,  gathered  in  the  valleys
of  the  mountains.  And  this  is  but
the  beginning;  it  is  like  a  mustard
seed,  it  is  very  small;  but  the  little
one  is  to  become  a  thousand,  and
the  small  one  a  strong  nation.  The
Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  own  time.
Zion  shall  be  called  a  "  City  sought
out"  The  Lord  is  watching  over  us*
1  wish  tvj  siy  lo  the  Latter-day
,  Saints,  we  must  uot  forget  our  posi-
tion, nor  the  blessings  that  we  hope
for. All  that  we  expect,  we  have


got  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  for.  Some
of  our  brethren,  ns  has  been  said
here,  hive  suffered  a  little  through
the  spirit  of  bigotry  and  persreniiou
that  is  in  the  wot  Id.  I  wonder
many  times  there  is  not  a  great,  deal
more  of  it.  The  Lord  Almighty  is
going  to  make  a  short  work  in  the
earth  ;  lesfc  no  flesh  should  be  saved
he  will  cut  his  work  short  in  righte-
ousness, The  Lord  is  putting  his
hook  into  the  jaws  of  th'1  nations.
He  holds  Great  Babylon  in  his  hands
as  well  as  Zion.  He  will  control  the
children  of  men  ;  and,  as  the  Lord
God  lives,  if  the  Latter-da v  Saints  do
their  duty — live  their  religion  and
keep  their  covenants,  Zion  will  arise,
put  on  her  beautiful  garment n,  be
clothed  with  the  glory  of  God,  have
power  in  the  earth,  and  the  law  will
go  forth  from  Zion  and  the  word  of
the  Lord  from  Jerusalem,  Then  let
our  prayers  ascend  into  the  ear's  of
the  Lord  God  of  Sabhaoth,  fur  he
will  hear  them,  that  the  wisdom  of
the  wise  may  perish  and  the  under-
standing of  the  prudent  he  hid.  Our  r
weapons  are  faith,  prayer,  and  confi-
dence in  God,  for  he  is  our  friend  if
we  have  any,  and  we  are  his  if  he
has  any  on  the  face  of  tin.-  ear  (Ik
The  Lord  will  work  with  us,  and  wc
should  work  with  him ;  therefore,
brethren,  let  us  live  by  faith,  walk
by  faith,  overcome  by  faith,  so  that
we  mny  enjoy  the  Holy  Spirit  to
guide  and  direct  us.  All  the  institu-
tions pertaining  to  the  work  of  God
in  these  latter  days  are  going  to  pro-
gress, Zion  is  bound  to  arise,  and  to
arrive  at  that  position  in  our  great
future  that  the  Prophets  have  seen
by  prophecy  and  revelation.

I  want  to  say  a  few  words  to  the
sisters,  who  have  been  referred  to
j  this  morning — the  Female  Relief
Societies,  Our  mot  Iters,  sisters,  wives
and  daughters  occupy  a  very  import-
ant position  in  this  generation,  far


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


more  so  than  they  realize  or  under-
stand. Yon  Hie  raising  up  your  sons
and  daughters  as  plants  of  renown  in
the  house  of  Israel  in  these  latter-
day*-.  Upon  the  shoulders  of  you
mothers  rests,  in  a  ((feat  measure,
the  responsibility  of  correctly  de-
veloping the  mental  and  moral
powers  'if  the  rising  gi  tie ra lion,
whether  in  infancy,  childhood,  or
still  nper  year?;.  Your  husbands —
the  falhers  of  vour  children,  arc  mcs-
senders  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,
or  they  are  engaged  in  business,  and
can  not  be  at  home  to  attend  to  the
children.  No  mother  in  Isiael  should
let  a  day  pass  over  her  head  without
teaching  her  children  to  pray*  You
should  pray  yourselves,  and  teach
your  children  to  do  the  same,  and
you  should  bring  them  up  in  this
way,  that  when  you  have  passed  away
and  they  take  your  places  in  bearing
off  the  great  work  of  God,  they  may
have  principles  instilled  into  their
minds  that  will  sustain  them  in  time
and  in  eternity.  I  have  often  said
it  is  the  mother  who  forms  the  mind
of  the  child.  Take  men  anywhere,
ah  sea,  sinking  with  their  .ship,  dying
in  battle,  lying  down  in  death  almost
under  any  circumstances,  and  the  last
thing  they  think  of,  the  last  word
they  say,  is  "  mother*"  Such  is  the
influence  of  woman.  Our  children
should  not  be  neglected;  they  should
receive  a  proper  education  in  both
spiritual  and  temporal  things.  That
is  the  best  legacy  any  parents  can


leave  to  their  children.  We  should
teach  them  to  pray,  and  instil  into
their  mi  rids  while  young  every  correct

[principle.  Ninety-nine  out  of  every
hundred  children  who  arts  taught  by
their  parents  the  principles  of  honesty
and  integrity,  truth  and  virtue,  will
observe  them through life.  Such

|  principles  will  exalt  any  people  or
nation  who  make  them  the  rule  of
their  conduct.  Show  me  u  mother
who  prays,  who  has  passed  through
the  trials  of  life  by  prayer,  who  has
trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in
her  trials  and  difficulties,  and  her

I  children  will  follow  in  the  same  path-
These  things  will  not  forsake  them
when  they  come  to  act  in  the  king-
dom of  God.

I  want  to  say  to  our  mothers  in
Israel,  your  children  are  approaching
a  very  important  day  and  age  of  the
world.  In  a  few  mote  years  their
parents  will  pass  away.  We  will  go
where  our  brethren  have  gone — to
the  other  side  of  the  vail.  Our
children  will  remain  and  will  possess

I  this  kingdom  when  God's  judgments
await  the  nations  of  the  earth,  when
war,  calamity,  sword,  tire,  famine,,
pestilence  and  earthquake  will  stalk
abroad  and  distress  the  people.  Our
child  mi  should  be  prepared  to  build
up  the  kingdom  of  God.  Then  qua-
lily  them  in  the  days  of  childhood
for  the  great  duties  they  will  be
called  upon  to  perform ;  and  that
God  may  enable  us  to  do  so  is  my
prayer  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen.


PERSECUTION,  ETC.


13


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A,  SMITH,

Delivered  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Morning,  April  7,  1872,


{Reported  hy  David  IF.  Evans.)


PEKSm :  UT I  i  >  X — M ISSN >  N  A  r  I  es — EM  ig  R  AT  I  ON.


We  are  again  assembled  this  morn- 1
ing  to  continue  the  duties  and  services
of  onr  Conference,  and  I  am  requested
by  President  Young  to  state  that  he
is  in  the  enjoyment  of  coin  for  table
health  and  in  excellent  spirits.  He
regrets  very  much  the  circumstances
which  render  it  inexpedient  for  him
to  meet  with  you  this  morning,  and
hopes  the  Hme  may  soon  come  when
he  will  again  enjoy  that  privilege,
also  the  privilege  of  bearing  testimony
to  the  glorious  work  of  the  Inst  days,
in  the  public  congregation.  He  de-
sires and  appreciates  the  prayers  and
faith  of  the  Saints;  he  thinks  that
it  is  quife  proper  that  any  man  before
he  is  thoroughly  qualified  to  rule
shall  learn  to  be  ruled — that  he  shall
1  learn  to  obey  before  lie  learns  to  com-
mand. All  these  lessons  in  their  time
and  in  their  season  are  proper  fur  us
to  learn.

When  we  realize  the  malignity  of
the  spirit  of  persecution  which  is
aimed  fit  the  Latter-day  Saints  in

if

these  valleys,  we  need  not  wonder  that
we  have  to  contend  with  vexatious
lawsuits  and  with  illegal  and  unjus-
tifiable prosecutions,  fur  the  influence
of  the  pulpit  and  the  press  when  con-
trolled by  tlie  spirit  of  lying  is  very
great  for  evil,  but  God  is  greater —
his  power  is  more  omnipotent;  and
although  thousands  of  prophets,
priests  and  wiso  men  in  the  earth


have  been  compelled  to  lay  down
their  lives  for  the  cause  of  Zion,  and
for  the  sake  of  the  principles  of  the
gospel  of  peace,  and  in  doing  so  they
have  acquired  lienors  that  could  not
be  attained  in  any  other  way;  their
reward  is  certain,  eternal  and  sure.

I  wish  to  call  the  alien! ion  of  the
elders  who  have  been  in  years  past,  on
missions,  to  one  important  item  of
duty.  It  is  well  known  that  our
emigration  annually  brings  some
thousands  of  persons  among  whom
our  missionaries  have  labored  and
with  whom  they  are  acquainted,  and
among  whom  are  many  who  still  look
to  them  fur  fatherly  advice  and  en-
couragement, but  many  of  the  elders
who  return  immediately  forget,  that
they  have  been  missionaries.  When
they  reach  home  they  perhaps  find
their  affairs  a  little  deranged,  business
having  stopped  in  their  absence,
money  making  or  procuring  the
means  of  living  having  gone  rather
behind  hand,  they  drop  rip  lit  into  a
groove  as  it  were  to  catch  up,  and
they  forget  their  duties,  and  the  people
whom  they  have  been  acquainted
with  and  who  have  treated  them  with
kindness  and  generosity  are  also  fre-
quently forgotten  and  neglected.  Tho
emigrants  come  into  these  valleys
and  fall  perhaps  under  influences  that
are  wrong  and  wicked,  for  men  in-
spired with  a  spirit  of  hostility  to  tho


14  JOURNAL  OF  :

work  of  God  will  take  more  pains  to  |
poison  their  minds  than  those  who
Jeel  all  rt-jht  do  to  give  them  correct
information.  I  wish  to  say  to  all  Mich
elders  and  to  all  the  brethren,  that
when  they  get  home  their  mission  is
not  consummated,  and  that  when  new
coiners  arrive  we  should  take  put  us  to
look  after  their  welfare,  give  thorn
counsel  and  instruction,  aid  and  com*
fort,  and  realize  that  we  are  mission-
aries all  our  lives,  and  that  it  is  our
dut.  t  i  instruct  su<  h  in  the  things
of  the  kingdom,  fo  enc  >urage  them
and  net  before  them  principles  of  in-
telligence, su-di  as  will  be  for  their
benefit.

I  wish  further  to  pay  to  the  Elders
ami  to  the  brethren  who  have  emi-
grated, that  they  should  remember
their  friends  they  visited  before  they
came  hen-,  of  when  they  were  on  mis-
sions in  the  old  world.  Remember
the  poor  family  that  went  without
their  provision,  perhaps,  to  give  you  a
feast,  or  I  he  family  that  to  make  yon
wan**  a\d  comfortable  gave  up  their
beds  to  you,  themselves  enduring
cold,  discomfort  and  inconvenience  to
do  so;  or  the  family  that  opened  their
doors  to  shelter  you  from  the  storm
when  their  neighbors  hooted  and
scouted  them,  as  it  were,  for  enter-  .
taming  a  stranger.  Yon  missionaries
in  your*  expetience  have  all  met  with
such  families,  and  many  of  them  arc
there  yet  without  the  means  to  get
here.  Perhaps  they  have  said  to  you,
"Will  you  help  me  when  you  get
home  ? "  and  you  may  havj  given
them  a  look  of  encouragement,  a  half
promise,  or  expressed  a  hope  that  you
mL'ht  be  able  to  do  so.  Have  you
forgotten  it  ?  Perhaps  a  little  effort
on  your  patt  and  on  tie-  put  of  your
neighbors  might  bri::g  these  families
to  tins  country  and  place  them  in  a
position  to  acquire  lots,  farms,  and
homes  of  their  own,  redeem  them
from  thraldom  and  bondage  worse


DISCOURSES.

1  than  slavery,  and  place  them  in  a

position  of  independence  on  their  own
soil,  enjoy  t lie  fruits  of  their  own
labors  and  help  to  build  up  and  de-
velop the  rising,  spreading  glory  of
Ztou.

I  lutve  heard  there  is  an  Elder  who,
when  on  a  mission  borrowed  some
monev  of  a  widow  that  had  not  means
enough  to  get  away,  but  had  a  little
she  could  spare  until  she  could  acquire
enough  to  bring  her  family  here;  and
that  Elder,  peradventure,  has  forgot-
ten  to  pay  it.  I  have  heard  there  is
such  an  Elder  in  Utah,  Shame  on
him  if  there  is !  Under  such  circum-
stances we  should  not  only  pay
punctually  and  faithfully  what  we
owe,  with  good  and  reasonable  in-
terest, but  all  of  us  European  n  issiou-
ariefl  should  be  prepared  to  do
something  handsome  annually  to  help
those  from  the  bondage  and  thraldom
in  which  we  found  them,  an  1  whore
they  must  remain  until  means  are
obtained  to  deliver  them.  I  am
calling  now  for  the  donation  to  the
Perpetual  Emigration  Fund.  A  hun-
dred thousand  Latter-day  Saints  in
Utah,  and  can  we  not  help  a  few
thousand  that  yet  remain  in  the  old
missions,  and  bring  them  here  ?
"Well/1  some  may  sty,  iw  they  will
apostatize  if  they  come,"  That  is
all  right,  they  mus!  lure  the  privi-
lege, 1  understand  that  we  have
brought  Rome  men  here  with  the
Fund  that  have  apostatized,  betrayed
the  Saints  and  done  all  in  their  po^er
to  stain  their  garments  in  the  blood
of  the  prophets;  but  that  is  not  our
fault,  it  is  theirs.  We  should  gather
the  Saints  and  thev  themselves  arc
responsible  for  the  use  they  make  of
the  blessings  which  God  bestows
upon  them,  even  if  they  come  through
our  bauds  and  exertions.  Look  at
the  tens  of  thousands  of  families  now
in  Utah  in  comfortable  circumstances
with  houses,  farms,  wagons,  cattle


PERSECUTION,  ETC.


15


and  horses  of  their  own,  many  of
them  with  carriages,  and  these  fam-
ilies taken  hy  the  contributions  of  the
Latter- lay  Saints  from  the  most
abject  servitude  anrl  poverty  from  the
bowels  of  the  earth,  from  within  the
walU  of  factories,  where  but  for  this
fund  they  must  have  remained  for
their  lives;  bat  now  they  are  in  com-
parative independence  and  enjoying
the  blessings  of  freemen.

After  President  Young  returned
from  St.  George  for  the  purpose  of
voluntarily  placing  himself  in  the
custody  of  United  States  Officers,  as
is  well  know  it,  I  received  a  letter  from
an  eminent  gentleman  in  the  State  of
Massachusetts,  who  Raid  that  the
prosecution  against  him  could  be
nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  put  up
job,  and  that  the  people  of  the  coun-
try understood  it  as  such;  "  and  the
fact  is,"  said  lie,  "Brighum  Young
has  done  more  for  the  benefit  of  large
bodies  of  people  than  any  other
living  man  on  the  earth."  That  is
true.  By  the  inspiration  of  Almighty
God  through  his  servant  Btighatn
Young,  this  Fund  was  organized,  and
he  has  been  the  President  of  it,  an  I
through  his  energy  and  enterprise
and  the  aid  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
— his  friends — he  has  gathered  tens
of  thousands  that  could  never  have
owned  a  rod  of  ground  or  a  house  as
long  as  they  lived,  but  would  have
been  at  the  mercy  of  employers  who
looked  upon  them  only  ad  a  portion
of  their  property,  and  the  question
with  thetn  has  been  how  much  of  this
man's  labor  can  I  get  for  the  smallest
pittance;  but  through  the  exertions
and  counsels  of  President  Young  and
his  brethren  they  have  been  delivered
fiorn  this  bondage  and  placed  in
comparative  independence,  I  say
Gud  bless  such  a  tnun,  (Congregation
said  Amen)  and  God  bless  every  man
and  every  woman  who  wdl  contiibute
it}  carry  out  this  glorious  purpose.


I  am  very  anxious  to  wake  up  the
Elders  to  labor  at  home,  to  keep
;ilive  in  the  hearts  of  the  Saints  the
spirit  of  truth.  While  fill  those  who
so  desire  are  free  to  apostatize,  it
should  not  be  for  the  want  of  proper
information,  can;  and  instruction,  or
in  consequence  of  the  neglect  of  the
Elders  to  do  their  duty,  I  exhort
the  Latter-day  Saints  to  unite  in
earning  on  the  work  of  gathering.
A  few  years  ago  we  thought  that
we  would  gather  them  alb  When
we  had  raised  what  means  we  could,
and  had  expended  it,  we  found  the
EMe/s  were  baptizing  about  as  fast
as  we  were  bringing  the  Saints  away.
That  is  all  right.  Let  us  get  the  old
and  faithful  L  itter-day  Saints  awayf
and  keep  baptizing  all  that  desire  to
be  baptized.  In  the  Scandinavian
Mission  the  number  of  baptisms  keep
up,  and  some  years  a  little  more  than
keep  up,  with  the  emigration.  There
are  families  from  year  to  year  that
can  he  brought  away  by  a  link1  assist-
ance; they  have  part  means,  and
only  need  a  little  more  to  emigrate.
T  do  think  that  the  history  of  tho
Perpetual  Emigration  Fund  is  a  won-
dei  lid  one.  The  Latter-day  Saints
in  Utah  sent  from  here  two  hundred
wagons  one  ye*tr,  three  hundred  ano-
ther year,  four  hundred  the  next,
and  (or  two  years  five  hundred  wa-
gons each  \  ear,  each  wagon  having
four  yoke  of  oxen,  or  their  equiva-
lent in  mules  and  horses,  arid  bore
all  the  expenses  consequent  upon
bringing  people  across  the  Plains,
bringing  from  one  to  four  thousand
persons  a  season.  This  is  certainly
creditable,  an^i  it  bus  beet)  done
through  the  influence  of  Brigham
Young  and  the  united  efforts  uf  a
free-hearted  and  noble  people.  We
have  got  a  railroad  now  and  do  not
have  to  s end  the  wagons;  the  busi-
ness assumes  another  shape.  1  he
emigration  is  brought  here  with  less


1G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


labor  and  in  less  time,  but  with  more
outhiy.

I  have  now  laid  before  you  my
views  on  tbe  emigration  of  the  poor
Saints  from  abroad.  Consider  upon
and  think  about  them.  Make  your
calculations,  aud  fuel  in  your  pockets
and  contribute  to  help  on  the  work,


and  carry  with  you  to  all  the  settle-
ments of  the  Saints  a,  spirit  that
shall  bring  home  to  Zion  the  bre-
thren and  sisters  from  abroad.  In
that  way  the  work  can  continue.
May  God  bless  all  who  aid  in  this
glorious  work  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  tn  tiik  New  Tabernacle,  Saw  Lake  City,  Suxdav

Morn  j  no,  A pkil  28,  1872,


-o-


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

HIS  TMWU.SONMENT— EMIGRATING  THE  POOR— THE  USE  OF  KICHES-

TITHING,


A  word  to  the  Latter-day  Saints.
Good  morning.  (Congregation  re-
sponded ,  "  Good  moruiner.")  How
dn  vou  do?  (Congregation  replied,
**Very  well.")  How  is  your  faith
this  morning?  (**  Strong  in  tbe
Lord,"  was  the  response.)  How  do
you  think  I  look  after  my  long  con-
fine  meat  ?  (Congregation  replied,
**  First  rate/*)  I  do  not  rise  expect-
ing to  preach  a  discourse  or  sermon,
or  to  lengthen  out  remarks.  I  spoke  ,
a  lew  minutes  vefcterdav  in  the  school,
but  I  found  that  it  exhausted  me  very
goon.  I  will  say  a  few  words  to  yon.
The  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  Gud  is
moat  precious.  My  -faith  is  not
weakened  In  the  Gospel  in  the  least.
1  will  answer  a  few  of  the  questions
that  probably  many  would  like  to  ask
of  me.  Many  would  like  to  know
how  I  have  ft  it  the  past  winter,  and
so  much  of  the  spring  as  is  now  past,
I  hare  enjoyed  myself  exceedingly


well.  I  have  been  blessed  with  an
opportunity  to  rest;  and  you  who  are
acquainted  wilh  me  and  my  public
speaking  can  discern  at  once,  if  yon
listen  closely  to  my  voice,  it  is  weak
to  what  it  used  to  he,  and  I  required
rest  I  feel  well  in  body  and  better
in  mind,  I  have  no  complaint  to
make,  no  fault  to  find,  no  reflections
to  cast,  for  all  that  haft  been  done  lias
been  di reefed  and  overruled  by  the
wisdom  of  Him  who  knows  all  things.

As  to  my  treatment  through  the
winter,  it  lias  been  very  agreeable,
very  kind.  My  associate,  my  compan-
ion in  tribulation,  I  will  say,  has
acted  the  gentleman  as  much  as  any
man  could.  I  have  not  one  word,
one  ILsp  or  beat  ot  the  heart  to  mm-
pluin  of  him.  He  has  been  full  of
kindness,  thoughtful,  never  intruding,
always  ready  to  hearken  and,  I  think,
in  the  future,  will  be  perfectly  willing
to  take  the  counsel  of  his  prisoner.


HIS  IMPRISONMENT  ETC.


17


So  much  for  Captain  Isaac  Evans*  I
will  say  this  to  yon,  ladies  and  gen-
tlemen, yon  who  profess  to  under*
stand  true  etiquette,  I  have  not  seen
a  gentleman  in  my  acquaintance  that
possesses  more  of  the  real  spirit  of
gentility,  caution  and  of  true  etiquette
than  Captain  Evans,  He  has  passed
the  window  where  I  have  lodged
through  the  winter  every  morning  to
his  breakfast  and  every  afternoon ;
he  has  walked  in  the  street  in  front
of  my  office  and  on  the  opposite  side,
and  he  has  never  yet  been  seen  gazing
and  looking  at  my  buildings,  or  to
see  who  was  at  the  window,  or  even
look  at  my  window.  He  has  never
looked  into  the  second  room  in  my
office  unless  invited  there — never.
Can  you  say  that  fop  other  gentle-
men ?  They  are  *ery  scarce ;  there
are  very  few  of  them,

I  have  no  reflections  to  east  upon
these  courts.  How  much  power,
ability  or  opportunity  would  I  have
to  possess,  do  you  think,  if  all  were
combined,  to  disgrace  them  as  they
have  disgraced  themselves  ?  I  have
tieither  the  power  nor  the  ability,
consequently  I  have  nothing  to  say
with  regard  to  their  conduct*  It  is
before  the  world;  it  is  before  the
Heavens  continually.  The  Lord  ha&
known  the  thoughts  of  the  hearts  of
the  children  of  men,  and  he  has  over-
ruled all  for  his  glory,  and  for  the
benefit  of  those  who  believe  and  obey
the  truth  in  Christ.  I  will  say  this:
when  they  started  out  with  a  writ  for
your  humble  servant,  and  I  had  news
of  it  before  it  was  served,  I  told  my
brethren  that  all  their  efforts  would
avail  them  nothing,  and  that  they
would  end  in  a  grand  fizzle.  Dp  you
think  we  have  come  to  it  ?  I  think
we  have*

Have  you  nothing  to  say,  brother
Brigham  concerning  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  ?  A  few
words.  I  am  happy  to  learn  that  there
1 No.  2,


are  yet  men  in  our  government  who  are
too  high-minded,  too  pure  in  their
thoughts  and  feelings  to  bow  down  to
a  sectarian  prejudice,  an d  to  hearken
to  the  whinings  and  complaints  of
prejudiced  priests,  or  those  who  are
wrapped  np  in  the  nutshell  of  secta-
rianism; men  of  honor,  nobility,  judg-
ment and  discretion;  men  who  luokafc
things  as  they  are  find  judge  according
to  the  nature  thereof  without  any
discrimination  as  to  parties  or  people.
I  am  thankful  that  this  fact  does  exist.
Have  they  decided  in  favor  of  the
Latter-day  Saints?  Yes,  Why  ?  "Be-
cause the  Latter-day  Saints  are  on  the
track  of  truth  ;  they  are  for  la^for
ri^ht,  for  justice,  for  mercy ,ft»r  judg-
ment and  equity,  consequently  they
are  for  God.  Would  I  ad  mire  the
conduct  of  a  jurist  on  the  bench  who
won  Id  decide  for  a  Latter-day  Saint  it
he  were  guilty  ?  If  he  woold  justify
a  Latter-day  Saint  and  condemn  a
Methodist  ?  *  No,  I  would  despise  him
in  my  heart,  I  might  look  upon  him
with  pity,  it  is  very  true,  and  without
malice,  anger  or  bitterness,  and  pity
him  in  his  ignorance  ;  but  if  he  was  a
man  of  knowledge  and  understanding
T  would  condemn  him  as  quickly  for
justifying  a  Latter-day  Saint,  or  on©
called  a  Latter-day  Saint,  in  evil,  as  I
would  a  Methodist.  And  a  man  who
sits  as  President  ot  the  United  States,
as  a  Governor  of  a  State  or  Territory,
or  as  a  jodge  upon  the  bench,  or  a
member  of  a  legislative  assembly,  who
would  reduce  himself  to  the  feelings,
and  narrow  contracted  views  of  party-
ism,  is  not  fit  for  the  place.  As  I
said  before  a  gentleman  here,  I  think
it  was  last  summer,  who  was  stamp-
speeching  th rough  the  country  and
proclaiming  his  right  to  the  Presidency
"  He  that  most  desires  an  office  is  the
least  fit  for  it."  Perhaps  I  made  a
mistake  in  that  declaration,  for  though
on  general  principles  it  is  true,  it  may
not  be  true  in  every  case.  Some  may

Vol.  XV.


desire  an  office  for  the  sake  of  the
good  work  that  they  perform,  seeing
that  others  have  abused  it  This  is
as  much  as  I  wish  to  say  upon  these
subjects.

As  I  shall  probably  desire  to  speak
a  little  in  the  afternoon,  I  shall  soon
bring  my  remarks  to  a  close.  I  will
Bay  a  few  words  with  regard  to  the
Perpetual  Emigration  Fund.  Per-
haps you  have  bad  a  good  deal  said
to  you  in  the  course  of  this  Conference
concerning  gathering  the  ]x>or?  but  if
you  have  I  hare  not  learned  it.  I
have  not  heard  of  any  man  coming
forward  and  putting  down  his  name
for  a  thousand  or  two  thousand  dol-
lars. At  the  commencement  of  the
Conference  I  donated  two  thousand
dollars  for  the  gathering  of  tbe  poor,
but  I  have  not  heard  of  anybody  ad-
ding another  figure  to  mine  or  placing
one  under  it  How  is  it  ?  It  is  very
true  we  gather  the  Saints,  and  when
they  get  here  and  gather  around  them
the  comforts  of  lite,  and  become  the
possessors  of  a  little  wealth,  the  spirit
of  the  world  enters  into  a  few  of  them
to  that  degree  that  it  crowds  out  the
Spirit  of  the  Gospel,  They  forget
their  God  and  their  covenants,  and
turn  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  the
world,  seek  for  its  riches  and  finally
leave  the  faith.  But  we  had  better
gather  nine  that  are  unworthy  than
to  neglect  the  tenth  if  he  is  worthy.
If  they  come  here,  apostatize  and  turn
our  enemies,  they  are  in  the  hands  of
God,  and  what  they  do  will  be  to
them  everlasting  life  or  everlasting
condemnation.  For  the  good,  for  the
wise,  or  for  the  fro  ward  and  the  un-
godly, it  is  our  duty  to  do  all  we  can.
It  is  our  duty  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  gather  up
tbe  pure  in  heart,  and  to  lend  a  help*
ing  hand  to  the  poor  and  needy ;  to
instruct,  guide  and  direct  them,  and
when  they  are  gathered  together  to
teach  them  how  to  live,  how  to  serve


their  God,  how  to  gather  around  them
the  comforts  of  life,  and  glorify  their
Father  in  heaven  in  the  enjoyment  of
the  same.

When  I  cast  my  eyes  upon  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  and  see  the
weakness,  inability,  the  shortsighted-
ness, and  I  may  say,  the  height  of
folly  in  the  hearts  of  the  kings,  rulers,
and  the  great,  and  those  who  should
be  wise  and  good  and  noble  ;  when  I
m  o  tlx  ni  grovelling  in  the  dust;  long-
ing, craving,  desiring,  contending  for
the  tilings  of  this  life,  I  think,  0
foolish  men,  to  set  your  hearts  on  the
things  of  this  life  !  To-day  they  are
seeking  after  the  honors  and  glories  of
the  world,  and  by  the  time  the  sun  is
hidden  by  the  western  mountains  the
breath  is  gone  out  of  their  nostrils,
they  sink  to  their  mother  earth.  Where
are  their  riches  then  r  Gone  for  ever.
As  Job  says,  *'  Naked  I  came  into  the
world."  Destitute  and  forlorn,  they
have  to  travel  a  path  that  is  untried
and  unknown  to  them,  and  wend  their
way  into  the  spiiit  world.  They  know
not  where  they  are  going  nor  for  what.
The  designs  of  the  Creator  arc  hidden
from  their  eyes;  darkness,  ignorance,
muuming  and  groaning  take  hold  of
them  and  they  pass  into  eternity.  And
this  is  the  end  of  them  concerning  this
life  as  far  as  they  know.  A  man  or  a
woman  who  places  the  wealth  of  ttiis
world  and  the  things  of  time  in  the
scales  against  the  things  of  God  and
the  wisdom  of  eternity,  has  no  eyes  to
see,  no  ears  to  hear,  no  heart  to  under-
stand. What  are  riches  for  ?  For
blessings,  to  do  good.  Then  let  us
dispense  that  which  the  Lord  gives  us
to  the  best  possible  use  for  the  building
up  of  bis  kingdom,  for  the  promotion
of  the  truth  on  the  earth,  that  we  may
see  and  enjoy  the  blessings  of  the  Zion
of  God  here  upon  this  earth.  I  look
around  among  the  world  of  mankind
and  them  grabbing,  scrambling,
contending,  and  every  one  seeking  to


aggrandize  himself,  and  to  accomplish
his  own  individual  purposes,  passing  ;
the  community  by,  walking  upon  the
heads  of  his  neighbors — all  are  seek-
ing,  planning,  contriving  in  their
wakeful  hours, and  when  asleep  dream-
ing, "  How  can  I  get  the  advantage  of
my  neighbor  ?  How  can  I  spoil  him,
that  I  may  ascend  the  ladderof  fame?"
That  is  entirely  a  mistaken  idea.  You
see  that  nobleman  seeking  the  benefit
of  all  around  him,  trying  to  bring,  we
will  say,  his  servants,  if  you  please,
his  tenants,  to  his  knowledge,  to  like
blessings  that  he  enjoys,  to  dispense
his  wisdom  and  talents  among  them
and  to  make  them  equal  with  himself.
As  they  ascend  and  increase,  so  does
he,  and  he  is  in  the  advance.  All  eyes
are  upon  that  king  or  that  nobleman,
and  the  feelings  of  those  around  him
are:  "God  bless  him !  How  I  love
him  !  How  I  delight  in  him  !  He
seeks  to  bless  and  to  fill  me  with  joy,
to  crown  my  labors  with  success,  to  ,
give  me  comfort,  that  I  may  enjoy  the
world  as  well  as  himself."  But  the
man  who  seeks  honor  and  glory  at  the
expense  of  his  fellow- men  is  not  wor-
thy of  the  society  of  the  intelligent.

Now,  a  few  words  to  my  friends
here — my  colleagues  the  lawyers,  and
others.  I  gave  a  little  counsel  here,
I  think  it  is  a  year  ago  this  last  sixth
of  April,  for  the  people  of  this  Terri-
tory and  through  these  mountains  not
to  go  to  law,  but  to  arbitrate  their
cases.  I  will  ask  if  they  do  not  think
they  would  have  saved  a  good  deal  of
money  in  their  pockets  if  they  had
taken  this  counsel  ?  And  to  see  our
streets  lined  with  lawyers  as  they  are!
Why  they  are  as  thick  as  grogshops
used  to  be  in  California  What  is  the
business  of  a  lawyer  ?  It  is  the  case
with  too  many  to  keep  what  they  have
got,  and  to  gather  around  them  wealth,
to  heap  it  up,  but  to  do  as  little  as
possible  for  it ;  to  give  a  little  counsel
here,  and  a  little  counsel  there.  What


for?  To  keep  their  victims  in  bondage-
Say  they:  "Let  us  stick  to  him  as
long  as  he  has  a  dollar  in  his  pocket/1

I  will  tell  you  a  story.  A  man  was
going  to  market,  a  pretty  wicked
swearing  man,  with  his  cart  full  of
apples.  He  was  going  up  hill,  and  the
hindboard  as  the  Yankees  call  it — the
Westerners  call  it  the  hindgate,  slipped
out  of  his  cart,  and  his  apples  rolled
down  the  hill.  He  stopped  his  team
and  looked  at  the  apples  as  they  rolled
down  the  hill,  and  said  he,  u  I  would
swear  if  I  could  do  justice  to  the  case,
but  as  I  can  not  I  will  not  swear  a
word."  I  will  not  say  a  word  more
than  to  class  dishonorable  lawyers
with  other  dishonest  men.

Now  what  are  the  facts  ?  Why  this
world  is  before  us.  The  gold,  silver
and  precious  stones  are  in  the  moun-
tains, in  the  rivers,  in  the  plains,  in
the  sands  and  in  the  waters,  they  all
belong  to  this  world,  and  you  and  I
belong  to  this  world.  Is  there  enough
to  make  each  of  us  a  finger  ring  ?
Certainly  there  is.  Is  there  enough  to
make  us  a  breast  pin  ?  Certainly  there
is.  Is  there  enough  to  make  jewelry
for  the  ladies  to  set  their  diamonds  and
precious  stones  in  ?  Certainly  there
is.  Is  there  enough  to  make  the  silver
plate,  the  spoons,  platters,  plates  and
knives  and  forks  ?  There  is.  Is  there
enough  to  make  the  goblets  to  drink
out  of?  There  is.  There  is  plenty
if  we  want  to  make  the  wine  casks  of
gold,  there  is  plenty  of  it  in  the  earth
for  all  these  purposes.  Then  what  on
earth  are  you  and  I  quarrelling  about
it  for?  Go  to  work  systematically
and  take  it  from  the  mountains,  and
put  it  to  the  use  that  we  want  it,
without  contending  against  each  other,
and  filching  the  pockets  of  each  other*
The  world  is  full  of  it.  If  it  goes
from  my  pocket  it  is  still  in  the  world,
it  still  belongs  to  this  little  ball,  this
little  speck  in  God's  creation,  so  small
that  from  the  sun  I  expect  you  would


20


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


have  to  have  a  telescope  that  would
magnify  millions  of  times  almost  to
see  it;  and  from  any  of  the  fixed  stars
I  do  not  expect  that  it  hns  ever  been
seen  only  by  the  celestials — mortals
could  not  see  this  earth  at  that  dis-
tance. And  here  people  are  contend-
ing, quarrelling,  seeking  how  to  get
the  advantage  of  each  other,  and  how
to  get  all  the  wealth  there  is  in  the
world;  wanting  to  rule  nations,  want-
ing to  be  president,  king  or  ruler.
What  would  they  do  if  they  were?
ilost  of  them  would  mate  everybody
around  them  miserable,  that  is  what
they  would  do.  There  are  very  few
men  on  the  earth  who  try  to  make
people  happy.  Occasionally  there  have
been  emperors  andnionarchswho  have
made  their  people  happy  but  they
have  been  very  rare*  But  suppose  we
go  to  work  to  gather  up  all  that  there
is  in  the  bosom  and  upon  the  surface
of  our  mother  earth  and  bring  it  into
use,  is  there  any  lack  ?  There  is  not,
there  is  enough  for  all.  Then  do  look
at  these  things  as  they  are,  Latter-day
Saints,  and  you  who  are  not  Latter-day
Saints,  look  at  things  as  they  are.  And
I  do  hope  and  pray  for  your  sakes,
outsiders,  and  for  the  sakes  of  those
who  profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints,
that  we  shall  have  good  peace  for  a
timo  here,  so  that  we  can  build  our
furnaces,  open  our  mines,  make  our
railroads,  till  the  soil,  follow  our  mer-
cantile business  uninterrupted;  that
we  may  attend  to  the  business  of
beautifying  the  earth.  I  see  around
me  a  tew  of  my  neighbors  who  are
beautifying  their  gardens.  How  beau-
tiful !  There  is  one  here  in  the  Seventh
Ward — Mr,  llussey's,  I  never  drive
out  but  I  want  to  drive  by  it  How
much  better  that  looks  than  it  would
be  for  him  to  quarrel  with  his  neigh-
bors!  Beautify  your  gardens,  your
houses,  your  farms;  beautify  the  city.
This  will  make  us  happy,  and  produce
plenty.  'The  earth  is  a  good  earth,


the  elements  are  good  if  we  will  use
them  for  our  own  benefit,  in  truth  acd
righteousness.  Then  let  us  be  content,
and  go  to  with  our  mights  to  make
ourselves  healthy,  wealthy,  and  beau-
tiful, and  preserve  ourselves  in  the
best  possible  manner,  and  live  just  as
long  as  we  can,  and  do  all  the  good
we  can.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters  and
friends,  I  have  said  a  few  words  about
lawyers ;  but  I  could  pick  up  other
classes  of  men  just  as  bad,  and  we  can
find  fault  with  all.  Let  us  be  honest,
let  us  be  upright,  full  of  charity  one
toward  another;  and  live  as  agreeably
as  we  possibly  can  here  on  this  earth
that  the  Lord  has  given  to  man  to
cultivate  and  improve  for  his  own
benefit,  and  to  prepare  it  for  an  ever-
lasting inheritance.  There  is  a  great
deal  before  us,  and  it  is  for  us  to  live
so  that  we  will  be  able  to  perform  our
part  well  in  this  great  work.  And  I
say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  it  is  for
you  to  put  forth  your  hands  this  season
in  emigrating  the  poor.  We  will  re-
ceive any  amount.  If  it  is  not  more
than  a  hundred  dollars  or  so,  we  will
be  willing  to  receive  it.  Talk  about
this  people  being  poor,  why  we  will
get  so  rich  by  and  by  that  we  will  re-
fuse to  pay  our  taxes ;  we  have  got  so
rich  now  that  we  cannot  pay  our  tith-
ing. The  rich  do  not  pretend  to  pay
any  tithing,  or  but  very  few  of  them.
I  think  I  have  mentioned  one  fact  with
regard  to  our  merchants.  A  few  years
ago  in  the  other  tabernacle,  I  said  that
our  merchants  who  lived  on  the  busi-
ness part  of  East  Temple  street  and
professed  to  be  Latter-day  Saints,  if
they  were  not  very  careful,  would  deny
the  faith  and  be  damned,  and  it  would
be  by  the  skin  of  their  teeth  if  they
ever  got  into  heaven.  How  is  it  with
the  rest  of  us  ?  About  the  same.  No
matter  about  this.  But  here  is  one  of
our  merchants — William  Jennings —
about  whom  a  great  many  have  remarks


to  make*  Well,  it  is  no  matter  about
liig  trade.  I  want  to  say  to  the  rest
of  the  merchants  that  he  has  paid  a
good  many  thousand  dollars  tithing,
more  than  all  the  rest  of  them  pat
together.  That  is  for  William  Jen-
nings. We  are  paying  our  tithing  in
the  Co-operative,  I  would  not  consent
to  go  into  the  business  on  any  other
terms  only  that  the  tithing  should  be
paid  on  all  we  made.  But  the  other
merchants,  if  they  pay  tithing  on


what  they  make  it  has  to  come  here-
after, for  they  hare  never  done  it  yet;
and  I  think  the  more  they  make  the
less  tithing  they  pay*  But  you  are
welcome  to  give  something  to  the
poor;  if  you  will  help  us  a  little  with
regard  to  the  emigration  we  will  be
very  much  obliged  to  you,  but  you
will  have  to  trust  in  God  for  the  fu-
ture blessings,

God  bless  yon,  Amen,


*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN"  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  New  Taderxaclk,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Horning,  April  7,  3872.

{Reported  foj  David  W.  Evans,)

 o

REVELATION— FORMER  AND LATTER  DAY  DISPENSATIONS— THE  SURE

T1UUMPH  OF  THE  CAUSE  OF  ZION.


We  are  again  met,  in  our  Annual
Conference,  for  the  purpose  of  hear-
ing the  words  of  life,  and  of  being
instructed  in  the  various  duties  ant]
responsibilities  that  rest  upon  us,  and
that  we,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  may
be  taught  principles  pert  lining  to
our  holy  faith,  and  be  instructed  in
the  duties  devolving  up.m  us  in  the
various  positions  that  we  occupy ;
that  by  a  unity  of  faith,  purpose  and
action,  we  may  be  able  to  accomplish
something  that  will  promote  truth,
advance  the  interests  of  Zion  and  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.

We  are  told  that  it  is  not  in  man
to  direct  his  steps,  and  we  stand  here
in  a  peculiar  position  under  the  guid-
ance and  direction  of  the  Almighty,


The  Lird  has  seen  fit  to  reveal  unto
ns  the  everlasting  Gospel,  and  we
have  been  enabled,  by  the  grace  of
God,  to  appreciate  that  message  of
life  which  he  lias  communicated  unto
us,  and  we  have  been  gathered  from
the  nations  of  the  earth  under  the
influences  and  auspices  of  that  Gos-
pel We  are  gathered  here  for  the
accomplishment  of  certain  objects  re-
lative both  to  ourselves  and  others,
the  great  leading  principle  of  which
is — to  help  to  fulfil  the  designs  that
existed  in  the  mind  of  the  Almighty
before  the  world  was  relative  to  the
earth  and  humanity;  and  1  ptvsu  no
that  that  exhortation  which  was  made
eighteen  hundred  years  ago  to  certain
Saints,  would  be  just  as  applicable  to
U3  to-day  as^it  was  to  them.  Tuey


22


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


were  exhorted  to  "  contend  earnestly  >
for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the
Saints."  That,  no  doubt,  sounded
very  strange  to  them  in  that  day  and
age  of  the  wot  Id;  they  had  had
Jesus  among  them,  he  had  preached
his  Gospel  unto  them ;  the  light  of
eternal  truth  had  been  made  mani-
fest, and  they  had  participated  in  the
blessings  of  the  Gospel;  and  yet,
tinder  these  peculiar  circumstances,
blessed,  as  it  were,  with  the  light  of
revelation,  with  Apostles  in  their
midst,  with  a  complete  church  orga-
nization, with  everything  that  was
calculated  to  enlighten,  instruct  and
lead  them  on  in  the  path  of  righte-
ousness, they  were  told  to  contend
earnestly  for  that  faith  once  delivered
to  the  Saints.

It  seems  that  in  the  different  ages
of  the  world  in  the  past,  there  has
existed,  as  there  does  to-day,  a  species
ofself-righteousness}self-comphicence,
a  reliance  upon  the  wisdom,  intelli-
gence and  virtue  of  man.  In  that
day  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the
lawyers  and  doctors,  the  great  San-
hedrim, the  pious  men,  thought  they
were  the  peculiar  elect  of  God,  and
that  wisdom  would  die  with  them.
Jesus  came  among  them  and  told
them  very  many  unpalatable  truths ;
among  others,  that  they  were  "  whited
walls  and  painted  sepulchres;  that
they  appeared  fair  on  the  outside,  |
but  inwardly  there  was  nothing  but
rottenness  and  dead  men's  bones."
He  told  them  that  for  a  pretence
^  they  made  Jong  prayers;  not  that
they  had  any  reference  to  God  at  all,
for  God  had  very  little  to  do  with
them.  They  did  it,  he  told  them,  in
order  that  "  they  might  be  heard  of
men,"  They  made  broad  their  phi-
lacteries,  (that  is  a  species  of  writing
which  they  bound  on  all  their  gar-
ments,) with  certain  passages  ofi
Scripture*  They  made  them  very
broad,  that  they  might  be  considered  I


I  extra  pure,  virtuous  and  holy.  Jesus
I  called  these  very  pure,  holy,  virtuous
people,  painted  sepulchres.

But  there  is  something  else  associ-
a  ted  with  these  matters  very  peculiar.
Jesus  taught  the  principles  of  life
and  salvation- — the  everlasting  Gos-
pel* He  introduced  men  into  the
kingdom  of  God  ;  he  organized  a
pure  Church,  based  upon  correct
principles,  according  to  the  order  of
God.  Men  were  baptized  into  that
Church  ;  they  had  hands  laid  upon
them  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  they  received  it.  They
had  among  them  Apostles  and  Pro-
phets, Pastors  and  Teachers,  Evange-
lists and  inspired  men.  The  Church
enjoyed  among  themselves  the  gift
of  tongues,  visions,  prophecy ;  the
sick  were  healed,  the  blind  received
their  sight,  the  deaf  beard,  and  the
lame  leaped  for  joy  ;  the  visions  of
heaven  were  unfolded  to  their  view,
and  they  had  a  knowledge  of  many
things  pertainiug  to  eternity  ;  and
yet,  with  all  their  light,  intelligence
and  blessings,  with  all  their  Apostles,
with  the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  in  their
midst,  they  were  advised  to  contend
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered
to  the  Saints,  The  Lord  has  reveal-
ed to  us  many  blessings,  and  I  some-
times think  that  we  hardly  appreci-
ate the  light  of  truth  which  has  been
developed,  the  glory  that  is  connected
with  the  Gospel  which  has  been  re-
stored, the  light  of  revelation  which
has  been  communicated,  the  position
that  we  occupy  in  relation  to  God,
angels,  our  posterity  and  our  progeni-
j  tors,  the  hope  that  the  Gospel  has
implanted  in  the  bosom  of  every  faith-
ful Latter-dav  Saint,  which  blooms

if  *

with  immortality  and  eternal  life;
and  sometimes,  when  exposed  to  the
various  trials  with  which  we  are  en-
compassed, to  the  opprobrium  and
reproach  frequently  heaped  upon  us
I  by  ignorant  and  evil  disposed  persons,


some  of  us,  perhaps,  think  that  oar
religion  is  something  like  that  with
which  we  are  surrounded.  We  some-
times forget  our  prayers,  responsi-
bilities, duties  and  covenants,  and  we
give  way  in  many  instances  to  things
which  have  a  tendency  to  darken  the
mind,  becloud  the  understanding,
weaken  our  faith,  and  deprive  113  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  We  forget  the
pit  whence  we  were  dug,  and  the
rock  from  which  we  were  hewn,  and
it  is  necessarv  that  we  should  reflect
on  the  position  that  we  occupy,  upon
the  re]  ionship  we  sustain  to  God,
to  eac!  other  and  to  our  families,
that  our  minds  may  be  drawn  back
again  to  the  God  who  made  us — our
Father  in  the  heavens,  who  hears  our
prayers,  and  who  is  ready  at  all  times
to  supply  the  wants  of  his  faithful
Saints.  And  it  is  sometimes  neces-
sary that  we  should  reflect  upon  the
position  we  hold  in  relation  to  the
earth  on  which  we  live,  to  the  exist-
ence that  we  had  before  we  came
here,  and  to  the  eternities  to  come.
We  should  not  be  sluggish  and  dull
and  careless  and  indifferent ;  but  as
the  ancient  Saints  were  exhorted,  so
let  us  exhort  you  to-day — contend
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered
to  the  Saints.

The  religion  of  the  everlasting
gospel  did  not  originate  with  any
man  or  any  set  of  men.  It  is  wide
as  the  world  and  originated  with  the
Great  Eloheiin.  It  is  a  plan  ordained
by  him  before  the  world  wati  for  the
salvation  and  redemption  of  the  hu-
man family.  It  is  a  thing  that  men,
in  various  dispensations,  under  the
influence  aud  inspiration  of  the  Al-
mighty, have  possessed  more  or  less;
and  it  is  to  that  that  we  are  indebted
for  all  the  knowledge,  and  the  light,
and  all  the  intelligence  in  relation  to
eternity.  The  gospel  which  you  have
received  you  received  not  of  man,
neither  by  man,  but  on  the  same


principle  as  they  received  it  in  for-
mer days — by  the  revelation  of  Jesus
Christ,  by  the  communication  of  God
to  man,  and  any  religion  that  has  not
this  for  its  foundation  amounts  to
nothing,  and  any  superstructure  built
upon  any  other  foundation  will  fade
and  vanish  away  like  the  baseless
fabric  of  a  vision,  and  leave  not  a
wreck  behind.

One  of  old  in  speaking  of  theso
things  said :  If  any  man  build  with
wood,  or  hay,  or  stubble,  or  anything
perishable,  the  day  would  come  when
it  would  be  burned  up  and  there
would  be  left  neither  root  nor  branch.
But  we,  as  eternal  beings,  associated
with  an  eternal  God,  having  a  religion
that  leads  to  that  God,  are  desirous,
as  the  ancients  were,  to  know  some-
thing about  him,  to  be  brought  into
communication  with  him,  to  fulfil  the
measure  of  our  creation  and  our  des-
tiny on  the  earth,  and  to  help  the
Lord  to  bring  to  pass  those  things
that  he  designed  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world,  in  regard  to
the  human  family.  God  has  designed
to  redeem  the  earth  whereon  we  live.
Mankind  were  placed  on  this  earth
for  a  certain  purpose,  and  however
erratic,  foolish  and  visionary  the
course  of  man  may  have  been,  the
Almighty  has  never  altered  his  pur*
pose,  never  changed  his  designs  nor
abrogated  his  laws;  bat  with  ona
steady,  unde  via  ting  course  from  the
time  the  morning  stars  first  sing
together  for  joy,  until  the  earth  shall
be  redeemed  from  under  the  curse
and  every  creature  in  heaven  and  on
the  ear tli  shall  be  heard  to  say :
44  Blessing  and  glory,  honor  and
power,  might,  majesty  and  dominion
be  ascribed  unto  Him  who  sits  upon
the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever;'*
and  throughout  all  the  successive
asres  that  hjive  been  and  that  will  be,
bis  course  is  one  et3rn.1l  round,  fclo
has  had  one  object  in  view,  and  that


24  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


object  will  be  accomplished  in  regard
to  man  and  the  earth  whereon  he
lives,  The  only  question  with  us  is
whether  we  will  co-operate  with  God,
or  whether  we  will  individually  work
out  our  own  solvation  or  not ;  whe-
ther we  will  individually  fulHl  the
various  responsibilities  that  devolve
upon  us  or  not ;  whether  we  will
attend  to  the  ordinances  that  God
has  introduced  or  not ;  for  ourselves
to  begin  with,  for  our  families,  for
the  living  and  for  the  dead*  Whether
we  will  co-operate  in  building  tem-
ples and  administering  in  them ;
whether  we  will  unite  with  the  Al-
mighty, under  the  direction  of  his
holy  priesthood,  in  bringing  to  pass
things  that  have  been  spoken  of  by
the  holy  prophets  since  the  world
was;  whether  we  will  contend  earnestly
for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the
Saints.  These  things  rest  with  us  to
a  certain  extent.  God  has  commu-
nicated to  the  Latter-day  Saints
principles  that  the  world  are  ignorant
of,  and  being  ignorant  of  them  they
know  not  how  to  appreciate  our  feel-
ings. They  call  good  evil,  light
darkness,  error  truth,  aud  truth  error,
because  they  have  not  the  means  of
seeing  the  difference  between  one  and
the  other.  "  But  you  are  a  chosen
people,  a  royal  generation,  a  holy
priesthood,"  separate  aud  set  apart
by  the  Almighty  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  purposes*  God  has
ordained  among  you  presidents,  apos-
tles, prophets,  high  priest*,  seventies,
bishops  aud  other  authorities;  they
are  of  his  appointment,  empowered
and  directed  by  him,  under  his  influ-
ence, teaching  Ins  law,  unfolding  the
principles  of  life,  and  are  organized
and  ordained  expressly  to  lead  the
people  in  the  path  of  exaltation  and
eternal  tflory.  The  world  know  no*
thing  about  these  things — we  are  not
talking  to  them  to-day,  they  can  not
comprehend them. Their  religion


teaches  them  nothing  about  any  such
things — they  are  simply  a  phantasm
to  them. They  have  not  any  revela-
tion, they  do  not  profess  it All  that
they  have  is  their  Bible  given  by
ancient  men  of  God,  who  spoke  as
they  were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost. They  repudiate  the  Holy
Ghost,  not  in  name,  but  in  reality.
Many  of  them  are  very  sincere ;  we
give  them  credit  for  that* That  is
all  right,  but  they  do  not  understand
our  principles,  views,  or  ideas.  They
could  not  do  as  we  have  done;  they
could  not  trust  in  God  as  our  Elders
do. Their  ideas  are  more  material.
Ask  any  of  them  to  go  to  the  ends  of
the  earth,  as  these  Elders  have  done,
without  purse  or  scrip,  trusting  in
(J od,  would  they  do  it  ? No,  they
would  not,  they  would  see  the  gospel
damned  first,  and  then  they  would
not. They  do  not  understand  the
principle  by  which  we  are  actuated,
we  have  done  it  and  we  will  do  it
a^ain,  aud  we  will  keep  doing  it;  we
believe  in  a  living  God,  in  a  living
religion*  in  the  living,  vital,  eternal
ptiuuiples  which  God  has  communi-
cated ;  this  is  the  reason  why  we  act
as  we  do,  why  we  talk  and  believe  as
we  do. Men  are  not  supposed  to
understand  our  principles.  The  Scrip-
ture say?;  that  no  man  knows  the
tilings  of  God  but  by  the  Spirit  of
God. And  how  are  they  to  get  that?
Just  as  you  got  it. And  how  was
that  ? By  repenting  of  your  sins,
being  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus
for  their  remission;  by  having  hands
laid  upon  you  by  those  having  autho-
rity tor  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost  This  is  the  way  God  appointed
in  former  days,  this  is  the  way  he  has
appointed  in  our  day.

And  what  brough  t  you  here  r  Why
the  light  of  revelation — the  liijhfc  of
truth,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
the  power  of  God,  That  is  what
brought  you  here, The  Gospel  you


REVELATION,  ETC


25


received  yon  received  not  of  men,
bat  by  the  revelations  of  Jesus  Christ;
and  consequently  how  can  men  out-
side comprehend  these  things?  They
can  not  do  it,  it  is  beyond  their  reach.
They  can  reason  on  natural  principles;
they  have  their  own  peculiar  ideas,
but  they  cannot  comprehend  the
Latter-day  Saints.  "Mormonism"  is
an  enigma  to  the  world.  Why,  the
United  States  have  been  trying  to
solve  the  problem  of  l(  Mormonism  "
for  years  and  years ;  but  with  ail  their
sagacity  and  intelligence  they  have
not  made  it  out  yet;  and  they  never
will.  Philosophy  c:in  not  compre-
hend it  ;  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of
natural  philosophy.  It  is  the  philo-
sophy of  heaven,  it  is  the  revelation
of  God  to  man.  It  is  philosophical,
but  it  is  heavenly  philosophy,  and
beyond  the  ken  of  human  judgment,
beyond  the  reach  of  human  intelli-
gence. They  cannot  grasp  it,  it  is  as
high  as  heaven,  what  can  they  know
about  it  ?  It  is  deeper  than  hell,
they  cannot  fathom  it.  It  is  as  wide
as  the  universe,  it  extends  over  all
creation.  It  goes  back  into  eternity
and  forward  into  eternity.  It  asso-
ciates with  the  past,  present  and
future  ;  it  is  connected  with  time  and
eternity,  with  men,  angels,  and  Gods,
with  beings  that  were,  that  are  and
that  are  to  conic*

The  Saints  of  God  in  all  ages  had
the  kind  of  fuith  that  we  have  to-day.
You  Latter-day  Saints  know  it,  but
other  men  do  not.  They  will  talk
about  their  nonsence,  their  ideas  and
theories,  and  call  it  the  religion  of
God  and  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.
Well,  I  am  quite  willing  they  should
enjoy  their  notions.  It  is  all  right;
we  would  not  interfere  with  them  if
we  could.  Our  feelings  in  regard  to
that  are  just  the  same  as  the  Lord's.
And  what  are  his?  His  ideas  are
not  bound  in  a  nutshell,  there  is  no-
thing contracted  about  the  Almighty,


He  makes  his  son  shine  on  the  evil
and  on  the  good;  he  sends  his  rain
on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust  He
is  liberal,  free,  generous,  philanthro-
pic, full  of  benevolence  and  kindness
to  the  human  family,  and  he  hopes
and  desires  that  all  men  may  be  saved,
and  he  will  save  them  all  as  far  as
they  are  capabie  of  being  saved.  But
he  desires  that  his  people  shall  con-
tend earnestly  for  the  faith  once  de-
livered to  the  Saints,  that  as  immortal
beings  they  may  act  in  unison  with
the  Almighty,  that  they  may  be  in-
spired by  the  principle  of  revelation ;
that  they  should  comprehend  some-
thing of  their  dignity  and  manhood  ;
of  their  relationship  to  eternity,  to
the  world  that  we  live  in  as  it  is  and
as  it  will  be,  and  to  the  worlds  that
are  to  come.  The  Lord  has  no  such
idea  as  some  of  these  narrow,  con-
tracted sectarian  people  have  that  we
read  of.  They  remind  me  of  a
prayer  of  a  man  I  once  heard  of,  who
in  his  prayer  said  :  **  Lord  bless  me
and  my  wife,  my  son  John  and  his
wife,  us  four  and  no  more,  amen,"  I
do  not  believe  in  any  such  thing  as
that-  I  think  the  world  on  which  we
live  was  organized  for  a  certain  pur-
pose, I  think  that  man  was  made
for  a  certain  purpose,  and  so  do  you
as  Latter-day  Spirit s.  We  think  that
the  spirit  of  man,  possessing  a  body,
will  through  the  medium  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  be  exalted  ;  and  that
man,  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful,  will,
by  and  by,  be  associated  with  the
Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds;  and  while
we  plant  and  sow  and  reap,  and  pur-
sue the  common  avocations  of  life,  as
other  meu  do,  our  main  object  is
eternal  lives  and  exaltations;  our
main  object  is  to  prepare  ourselves,
our  posterity  and  our  progenitors  for
tb rones,  principalities  and  powers  in
the  eternal  worlds.

This  is  what  we  are  after,  and  what
the  ancient  Saints  were  after.  This


2C


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


is  what  Adam,  Noab,  Enoch,  Abra-
ham and  the  Prophets  were  after,
that  they  might  fulfil  their  destiny  on
the  earth,  and,  as  one  of  the  old  Pro-
phets said,  "  stand  in  their  lot  in  the
end  of  days/*  when  the  books  should
be  opened,  when  the  great  white
throne  should  appear  and  he  who  sits
upon  it,  before  whose  face  the  heavens
and  the  earth  fled  away;  that  we  and
they,  and  they  and  we  might  be  pre-
pared, having  fulfilled  the  measure  of
our  creation  on  the  earth,  to  associate
with  the  intelligences  that  exist  in
the  eternal  worlds;  be  admitted  again
to  the  presence  of  our  Father,  whence
we  came,  and  participate  in  those
eternal  realities  which  mankind,  with-
out revelation,  know  nothing  about.
We  are  here  for  that  purpose;  we
left  our  homes  for  that  purpose ;  we
came  here  fur  that  purpose;  we  are
building  temples  for  that  purpose;  we
are  receiving  endowments  for  that
purpose;  we  are  making  covenants  for
that  purpose;  we  are  administering
for  the  living  and  the  dead  for  that
purpose,  and  all  our  objects,  and  all
our  aims,  like  the  object  and  aim  of
inspired  men  in  former  days,  are
altogether  with  reference  to  eternal
realities  as  well  as  to  time.  We  have
a  Zion  to  build  up,  and  we  shall  build
it  We  shall  build  it.  Wm  shall
build  it.  No  power  can  stop  it,
God  has  established  his  kingdom,  it
is  in  his  hands,  and  no  influence,  no
power,  no  combination  of  whatever
kind  it  may  be  can  stop  the  progress
of  the  work  of  God,  You  Latter-day
Saints  know  very  well  that  you  have
not  received  a  cunningly  devised
faWe,  concocted  by  the  wisdom,  in-
genuity, talent  or  caprice  of  man.
All  of  you  who  comprehend  the
Gospel  comprehend  this;  you  all,
male  and  female,  if  you  are  living
your  religion,  know  this,  lien  of
old  knew  it  as  well  as  you ;  and  by
and  by  we  expect  to  live  and  associate


with  them,  with  Patriarchs,  Prophets
and  men  of  God,  who  had  faith  in
him,  the  accomplishment  of  his  pur-
poses in  former  times,  and  we  are
contending  for  the  faith  which  they
possessed.  For  instance  old  Moses
and  Eli  as,  you  know,  came  to  Peter,
James,  John  and  Jesus  while  they
were  on  the  mount.  They  did  not
think  they  were  very  old  fogies  that
it  was  not  worth  while  to  listen  to;
but  said  they,  "  Let  us  make  three
tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  one  for
Moses  and  and  one  for  Elias.  It  is
good  to  be  here,  why  here  is  old
Moses,  and  old  Elias."  Who  was
J I  oses?  A  man  who  had  the  ancient
Gospel  in  former  times.  Who  was
Eliaa?  A  man  who  had  the  ancient
Gospel  in  former  times-  They  came
and  administered  unto  Jesus,  and  his
Apostles  would  have  liked  to  stay
with  them  for  ever.  But  they  could
not  do  it  at  that  time.

Then  again  we  read  of  John  on
the  Isle  of  Patnioa,  You  know  he
was  in  vision,  and  the  Lord  revealed
unto  him  many  great  things,  and
tli ere  was  a  personage  appeared,  one
of  the  old  Prophets  that  used  to  be
led  around  probably  by  a  marshal.
John  thought  he  was  an  angel,  and
he  was  about  to  fall  down  and  wor-
ship him  after  be  had  unfolded  to
him  the  glories  of  eternity,  "  But,
says  he,  "  do  not  do  it,"  "  Why  ?
"  Because  I  am  one  of  thy  fellow-
servants,  the  Prophets;  I  am  one  of
those  old  fellows  that  used  to  have
to  wander  about  in  my  day  in  sheep-
skins and  goatskins.  The  priests,
hypocrites,  &c.,  of  that  duy  persecu-
ted me ;  but  now  I  am  exalted,  and
have  come  to  minister  unto  you
John."

While  the  world  was  wrapped  in
superstition,  ignorance  and  darkness,
the  angels  of  God  came  and  mini-
stered to  Joseph  Smith,  and  unfolded
to  him  the  purposes  of  God  and  made


tr


PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC


27


known  his  designs.  Joseph  told  it
to  the  people,  and  through  this  means
you  are  gathered  together  as  you  are
to-day.  What  did  men,  the  best  of
them,  know  about  the  Gospel,  or
about  Apostles  or  Prophets,  when
the  Prophet  Joseph  made  his  appear-
ance ?  Nothing  at  all,  and  yet  there
have  been  good  men.  Old  John
Wesley,  for  instance,  in  his  day,  was
yery  anxious  to  see  something  of  this
kind,  bat  he  could  not  see  it,  Says
he—

"  From  chosen  Abraham's  seed,

The  old  apostles  choose,
O'er  isles  and  continent*  to  spread

The  dead  reviving  news,"

He  would  have  been  glad  to  see
something  of  that  kind,  but  he  could
not.  It  was  reserved  for  Joseph
Smith  and  the  Latter-day  Saints  ;  it
was  reserved  for  our  day.  Well,
then,  what  will  we  do  r Fulfil  the


measure  of  our  creation,  go  to  work
and  redeem  those  men  who  had  not
the  Gospel,  be  baptized  for  them,  as
the  Scriptures  tell  us,  and  bring  them
up,  for  they  without  us  can  not  be
made  perfect,  neither  can  we  be  made
perfect  without  them.  And  we  will
fulfil  and  accomplish  the  purposes  of
God,  and  bring  to  pass  the  things
which  were  spoken  of  by  the  Pro-
phets.

This  is  what  we  are  after,  and  we
shall  accomplish  it,  and  no  man  can
stop  it,  no  organization,  no  power,  no
authority,  for  God  is  at  the  helm,  and
his  kingdom  is  onward,  onward,  on-
ward, and  it  will  continue,  and  grow
and  increase  until  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms
of  our  God  and  his  Christ.

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,

May  19,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE — THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  UTAH.


And  in  that  day  seven  women  shall  take
hold  of  one  man,  saying,  We  will  eat  our
own  bread  and  wear  our  own  apparel:  only
let  us  be  called  by  thy  name  to  take  away
our  reproach.

In  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  the  Lord
be  beautiful  and  glorious,  and  the  fruit  of
the  earth  shall  be  excellent  and  comely  for
them  that  are  escaped  of  Israel.

And  it  shall  come  to  pas:*  that  he  that  is
left  in  Ziont  and  he  that  remaineth  in
Jerusalem,  shall  be  called  holy,  even  every
one  that  is  written  among  the  living  in
Jerusalem.


The  portion  of  the  prophecy  of
Isaiah  which  I  have  read  indicates
that  at  a  certain  day  and  under  cer-
tain circumstances,  spoken  of  by  the
Prophet  as  being  holy,  seven  women
would  claim  to  be  called  by  the  name
of  one  man.  Most  of  us  have  a
different  opinion  with  regard  to  the
application  of  this  prophecy.  God
inspired  the  Prophet,  and  it  might  be
necessary,  perad  venture,  to  inquire
what  it  all  means. Seven  women


m


28


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


are  to  lay  bold  of  one  man,  saying,
"We  will  eat  our  own  bread  and  wear
our  own  apparel ;  only  let  us  be
called  by  thy  name,  to  take  away  our
reproach."  What  is  the  meaning  of
this  last  sentiment  ?  We  will  let  the
Bible  explain  it.  You  remember  that
when  Rachel,  the  second  wife  of
Jacob,  the  father  of  the  tribes  of
Israel,  found  herself  barren,  while
the  other  wives  of  her  husband  were
bearing  children,  she  prayed  to  the
Lord  that  he,  in  his  abundant  mercy,
would  give  her  children,  and  when
God  heard  her  prayer  and  worked  a
miracle  in  her  favor,  causing  her  who
was  barren  to  become  fruitful  and
bring  forth  a  child,  she  said,  God
had  taken  away  her  reproach.  This
illustrates  the  meaning  of  the  text  '
I  did  not  make  the  prophecy,  neither
had  I  anything  to  do  with  making
the  history  of  Rachel,  or  even  chron-
icling the  event  named.

In  relation  to  Father  Jacob,  it  is
true  be  had  four  wives,  and  they  bore
him  twelve  sons,  and  their  descend-
ants are  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel
We  are  told  by  the  Apostle  John  that
the  names  of  Jacob's  twelve  sons —
the  sons  of  a  polygamic  and  his  four
wives — will  be  written  upon  the  gates
of  the  holy  Jerusalem ;  and  there  are
none  of  us  who  expect  to  enter  in
through  (hose  gates  bat  will  have  to
acknowledge  the  truth  of  that  doc-
trine. It  is  true  that  the  principle
of  plurality  of  wives  was  adopted  by
the  Chorch  of  Latter-day  Saints  in
consequence  of  the  revelation  and
commandment  which  God  gave  to
Joseph  Smith,  and  which,  through
him,  were  laid  upon  the  heads  of  this
people;  and  we  quote  the  passages
thai  we  do  quote,  in  relation  to  the
principle  of  celestial  marriage  from
the  Old  aud  New  Testament,  to  prove
that  God  is  consistent  with  himself;
that  if  he  revealed  to  his  Saints  in
the  last  days,  the  doctrine  of  plurality


of  wives,  it  was  in  fulfillment  of  the
prophecy  of  Isaiah  and  others  of  the
Prophets,  and  in  accordance  with  the
example  which  was  set  by  Abraham,
Jacob,  Moses,  aud  by  holy  men  of
ancient  days.

In  relation  to  the  word  "reproach"
in  our  test,  I  will  make  another  re-
ference- In  the  first  chapter  of
Luke's  Gospel,  verses  23  and  2  i,  we
find  Elizabeth  rejoicing  because  God
had  taken  away  her  reproach.  She
though  she  had  been  barren,  became
the  mother  of  John  the  Baptist

These  passages  tell  in  so  many
plain  words  why  it  was  that  seven
women  wished  to  be  called  by  the
name  of  one  man — it  was  that  they
might  have  the  privilege  of  hearing
children*

Now,  if  God  brings  to  pass  this
prophecy  in  the  glorious  day  which
our  text  speaks  of,  when  holiness  and
righteousness  are  to  rule,  and  when
truth  is  to  have  dominion,  and  peace
dwell  in  tbe  esirth,  although  the
world  may  have  been  opposed  to  it,
we  can  not  be  responsible.  Until
some  person  can  find  a  passage  in
the  Old  or  New  Testament  that  defi-
nitely forbids  a  plurality  of  wives,
with  the  many  incidents  of  history,
items  of  law,  and  declarations  of
Prophets  in  relation  to  the  practice
by  the  ancient  Saints  of  that  doctrine,
we  are  fhle  to  assert  that  the  Bible
is  a  polygamous  book,  and  that  no
man  can  believe  it  without  believing
plurality  of  wives,  under  some  cir-
cumstances to  be  correct,  I  know  it
has  been  said  that  the  Old  Testament
permitted  plurality  of  wives,  but  the
New  forbids  it.  The  Savior  said  he
came  not  to  destroy  the  law  but  to
fulfil  it,  and  that  not  a  jot  or  tittle
of  the  law  or  Prophets  should  pass
away,  but  all  should  be  fulfilled.  The
new  dispensation  did  not  annihilate
the  principles  of  law  and  right,  as
revealed  in  tbe  Old. Both  John  the


PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC


29


Baptist  and  the  Savior  denounced  all
sins  with  an  unsparing  hand,  and
especially  adultery,  fornication  and
divorce ;  and  not  a  sentence  is  found
in  the  New  Testament  which  prohibits
plurality  of  wives,  though  the  Savior
and  his  Apostles  lived  in  a  country
where  it  was  practised;  and  it  is  im-
possible to  believe  that  if  it  were  a
sin  it  would  have  escaped  definite
rebuke  and  absolute  condemnation.

The  petition  to  Congress  which
has  been  read  here  to-day  is  a  perfect
wonder,  I  presume,  to  those  who
have  beard  it.  It  is  astonishing  to
me,  and  doubtless  to  all  who  listened
to  it,  and  especially  those  who  reside
here,  that  such  a  statement  could  be
got  up  by  any  individual  whatever,
that  any  imagination  could  be  so  tor-
tured as  to  manufacture  so  unmiti-
gated a  tissue  of  utter  and  absolute
falsehoods ;  and  much  more  that  per-
son* could  be  found  who  would  think
so  little  of  their  reputation  as  to  sign
such  a  statement  We  understand,
however,  that  many  of  the  persons
whose  names  are  on  that  petition  did
not  see  the  original.  Many  of  them
thought  they  were  simply  signing  a
petition  against  the  admission  of
Utah  as  a  State,  without  bringing
personal  charges  against  a  people
among  whom  they  have  lived  in  per-
fect safety,  and  in  a  country  where
peace  and  order  have  prevailed,  and
where  all  have  enjoyed  the  uniform
protection  which  our  Territorial  laws
and  the  general  organization  of  so-
ciety give.  I  regret  exceedingly  that
such  a  document  should  be  made
public ;  but  as  it  is,  with  the  list  of
names  attached  to  it,  was  published
by  order  of  the  United  States  Senate,
it  was  thought  proper  to  read  it  to
the  congregation  that  all  might  iave
a  chance  to  know  what  it  was  and
judge  for  themselves,

I  came  to  this  valley  in  1847,  being
one  of  the  143  pioneers  who  searched


out  and  made  the  roads  from  the
Missouri  river  here.  The  ample
property  we  possessed  in  Illinois  we
had  left  there;  and  we  made  the
roads,  about  IS 00  miles,  or  nearly
across  the  State  of  Iowa,  bridging
about  thirty  streams,  and  passing
through  a  wilderness  totally  unin-
habited save  by  a  few  scattered  In-
dians, That  was  as  far  as  we  could
get  the  first  year.  The  second  year —
1847 — we  made  the  roads  from  what
we  termed  Winter  Quarters,  about
five  miles  above  where  Omaha  is  now
situated-  We  traveled  on  the  north
side  of  the  river,  established  our  ferry
across  the  Elkhorn,  and  made  our
road,  striking  the  old  Oregon  trail,
as  it  was  called,  at  the  mouth  of  Ash
Hollow;  that  is,  we  went  up  on  the
north  side  of  the  Platte  to  the  north
fork ;  while  Independence  road  went
up  on  the  south  side,  and  struck  the
north  fork  at  Ash  Hollow,  probably
a  hundred  and  eighty  miles  below
Fort  Laramie.  We  thought  some  of
crossing  the  river  and  taking  the
trapper's  trail,  but  we  found  it  diffi-
cult, so  we  continued  making  a  new
road  on  the  north  side  until  we
reached  Fort  Laramie.  There  we
crossed  and  made  a  road  a  portion  of
the  way,  and  followed  the  old  trail  a
portion  of  the  way  through  to  Fort
Bridget  On  this  route  we  encoun-
tered some  companies  who  were  going
to  Oregon,  and  being  unable  to  get
across  the  Platte  and  Green  Rivera
we  got  up  the  means  of  ferrying,  and
ferried  them  across  both  these  rivers,
and  tbey  proceeded  on  the  route  to
Oregon,  while  we  worked  our  way
across  this  Wasatch  range  into  this
valley.

When  we  reached  here  we  found
the  place  very  barren ;  but  it  was  the
best  prospect  we  bad  seen  for  five
hundred  miles.  The  creek  we  now
call  City  Creek  came  out  of  tho
mountains,  and  divided  into  branches,


30


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  finally  sank  down  into  the  ground,
apparently  without  reaching  Jordan
river.  It  had  about  its  sinks  some
green  spots  of  rashes  and  grass,  but
except  that  the  country  was  very
naked  and  barren.  The  city  plot
here  did  not  even  bear  good  sage;
and  there  was  a  little  grass,  but  it
was  very  dry.  Along  the  stream
were  a  d  ozen  or  so  of  scrubby  cotton-
wood  a  and  a  few  willows.  The  rest
of  the  ground  was  naked,  except
being  nearly  covered  with  immense
numbers  of  large,  black  crickets,
which  had  devoured  most  of  the
leaves  of  the  cottonwoods  and  wil-
lows; and  when  we  went  to  work  to
cut  a  ditch  to  carry  the  water  down
to  the  place  known  as  Old  Fort  block,
where  we  first  built  our  fort,  so  dry
was  the  soil  of  the  ditch  that  it  took
the  whole  stream  two  and  a  half  days
to  reach  the  desired  point

It  was  in  this  desolate  place — 1031
miles  from  the  Missouri  river,  and
thirteen  or  fourteen  hundred  from
Nauvoo — the  place  whence  we  had
been  expelled,  that  we  commenced
our  location.  It  was  understood  that
a  party  had  undertaken  to  cross  west
here,  some  year  or  two  before,  and
had  perished.  The  name  of  the  man
who  led  the  party  was  Hastings,  and
the  route  west  is  called  Hastings'
cut  off  It  is  said  that  John  C.
Fremont  had  been  in  this  valley  the
fall  previous,  but  we  had  no  report
of  his  explorations.  We  had  an  ac-
count of  him  visiting  the  north  end
of  Great  Salt  Lake,  and  the  south
end  of  Utah  Lake  ;  but  so  ignorant
was  he  at  the  time  of  the  country
between  the  two  lakes  that  his  map,
published  after  his  return  from  his
exploration,  shows  Salt  Lake  and
Utah  Lake  to  be  one  body  of  water,
whereas  there  is  a  river  about  fiftv
miles  long  between  them.

In  a  few  days  after  we  reached
here  another  party  arrived,  increasing


I  our  numbers  to  about  four  hundred.
We  had  but  very  little  provisions,
which  we  had  brought  with  us.  The
;  country  was  destitute  of  game,  and
:  the  most  rigid  economy  was  neces-
sary in  order  to  subsist We  re-
mained about  a  month,  when  a  por-
tion of  the  pioneers,  myself  among
the  number,  started back  for  our
families,  who  were  still  encamped  at
!  Winter  Quarters,  on  the  Missouri
river;  and  on  our  way  back  we  met
about  seven  hundred  wagons  with  fami-
lies moving  on  for  this  place.  These
families  came  in  late,  and  enclosed
themselves  in  the  Old  Fort  block,
and  the  two  blocks  south  of  it,  where
they  lived  in  security  from  the  In-
dians, and  during  the  winter  they
succeeded,  partially,  in  enclosing  a
field,  making  preparations  for  irriga-
tion, and  sowing  several  thousand
acres  of  grain. They  found  it  neces-
sary to  ration  themselves  on  account
of  the  scarcity  of  their  provisions,
and  I  believe  that  almost  every  family
allowanced themselves to half  a
pound  of  flour  a  day,  that  is,  if  they
had  it,  many  to  less ;  and  they  went
over  these  hills  digging  the  sego— -a
wild,  bulbous  root,  sometimes  eaten
by  the  Indians,  and  everything  that
they  could  get  that  had  any  nutri-
ment in  it. In  those  days  the  ani-
mals that  were  killed,  having  crossed
the  plains,  were  generally  very  poor;
but  they  were  used  with  the  greatest
economy,  hides,  feet  and  tail,  all  being
eaten. I  believe  they  tell  a  story  of
a  certain  rule  among  the  Mahomed-
ans,  in  relation  to  eating  swine's  flesh.
Some  of  them  refuse  it,  but  as  a
general  thing  the  various  classes  of
them  only  refuse  certain  portions —
some  reject  the  snout,  some  the  ear,
others  the  feet,  others  the  tail,  and
so  on  ;  but  among  the  whole  Mussul-
man race  they  **  go  the  whole  hog/*
Among  the  earliest  settlers  in  this
valley  there  was  no  rejection;  and


PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC,


31


there  arc  some,  who  lived  here  the  j
firit  two  years  after  our  arrival,  who*
will  now  say  that  they  never  tasted
any  food  so  sweet  as  boiled  rawhide.
About  the  time  our  first  crop  began
to  head  out,  the  crickets  made  their
\  appearance,  and  devoured  the  greater
portion  of  it.  This  was  awfully  dis-
couraging. Our  nurserymen  had
collected  their  seeds,  and  planted
them,  and  gome  twenty  or  thirty
thousand  trees  had  got  up,  may  be
five  or  six  inches  high,  and  one  day,
while  the  nurserymen  had  gone  to
dinner,  a  swarm  of  crickets  came
down  and  destroyed  all  the  trees  bat
three.  That  was  the  commencement
of  our  nursery  business  in  this  city.
It  is  believed,  fully,  by  the  Latter-
day  Saints  of  that  time,  that  God
delivered  them  from  utter  starvation
by  sending  flocks  of  gulls  from  the
lake,  which  ate  up  the  crickets,  and
saved  a  portion  of  their  crop.  The
crickets  have  not  troubled  the  agri-
culturists in  the  valby,  materially,
since,  but  the  flying  grasshoppers
have  come  in  immense  numbers,  and
in  1855  reduced  all  the  families  in
the  Territory  to  half  the  allowance
of  food  they  needed  ;  and  for  several
years  back  this  plague  has  probably
destroyed  from  one- third  to  one-half
the  fruits  of  the  farmer's  labors.
These  are  very  material  drawbacks
to  our  prosperity  with  which  we
have  had  to  contend  here  in  Utah.
Persons  unacquainted  with  the  man-
ner and  difficulties  of  irrigation  can
not  realize  the  immense  labor,  care
and  attention  that  are  necessary  to
commence  this  work.  Friends  come
in  and  look  over  our  city,  and  say,
**  Why,  how  nice  this  water  is  that
runs  through  all  the  streets  !"  Bat
the  fact  is,  there  is  not  a  tree,  bush,
or  spear  of  grass  grows  in  these  low
valleys  without  being  irrigated  na-
turally or  artificially,  and  there  is
only  very  few  and  very  small  spots


where  natural  irrigation  is  attain-
able. By  natural  irrigation  1  mean

.tha^lke  water  is  so  near  the  surface
oSmfe  ground  as  to  moisten  it  suffici-
ently to  make  ifc  produce  vegetation,
and  these  places  are  only  found  about
the  sinks  of  creeks*  Just  turn  the
water  that  passes  through  these
streets  back  into  the  original  channel,
and  next  fall  would  see  most  of  the
trees  dead.  All  the  results  you  see
here,  in  the  way  of  agriculture,  were
made,  are  held  by  main  strength  and
constraint  and  continued  diligence.

During  the  days  of  our  early  set-
tlement, ifc  was  necessary  that  mea-
sures be  taken  to  supply  the  wants
of  those  who  were  without  food,  and
for  years  a  fast  was  held  every  month,
and  sometimes  every  week.  The
amount  of  food  that  would  have  been
consumed  by  a  family  during  that
fast  was  presented  to  the  needy,  and
in  this  way,  struggling  for  three
years  in  succession,  the  people  were

,  sustained,  and  nobody  perished.  When
we  did  finally  succeed  in  raising  the
necessaries  of  life,  thousands  of  stran-
gers came  pouring  in  here,  a  great
many  of  them  destitute  of  bread.
They  had  started  for  the  gold  mines
without  knowing  how  far  it  was,
what  outfit  to  take,  or  how  to  take
care  of  themselves ;  and  great  num-
bers of  them,  when  they  reached
here,  had  to  be  assisted  on  their
journey,  and  there  were  thousands
who  went  to  California  during  the
early  days  of  the  gold  excitement
there,  who  must  have  perished  had  it
not  been  for  the  assistance  they  ob-
tained from  the  settlements  of  these
valleys.

j  We  came  here  full  of  enterprise,
and  our  only  hope  for  subsistence  was
in  agriculture.  We  found  mines  of
lead,  and  minerals  of  various  kinds ;
but  we  could  do  nothing  with  them.
The  Legislative  Assembly  memorial-
ized Congress  for  a  railroad  and  a


32


JOURNAL  OF-  DISCOURSES.^


telegraph  line  across  the  oontinent,
and  they  set  forth  in  that  potion,  in
1£52,  that  the  #miueral  resources  of
these  mountains  could  never  E^J^-
,JHBj*»ped  without  a  railroad  ;  and  that
iT  they  would  build  a  railroad.*  or
irmke  the  necessary  arrangement  fc>r
one,  the  trade  of  China  and  th^Bnst
Indies  would  pass  through  the  heart
of  the  American  States,  We  have
lived  to  see  these  predictions  fulfil h  d.

You  may  pass,  friends,  over  the
Territory  at  your  leisure;  go  from
the  north  to  the  south,  and  you  will
find  the  inhabitants,  generally,  indus-
trious, temperate,  moral,  straight-
forward, diligent  and  honest,  very
few  spending  their  time  about  gam-
bling hells  or  drinking  saloons;  in
fact  very  few  villages  support  such
establishments,  and  wherever  you
find  them  you  may  be  sure  that  mo-
dern civilization  has  made  inroads
there,  When  you  see  a  gang  of  men
at  and  nag  round,  loafing  about  a  place,
smoking  cigars,  drinking  whisky,
and  looking  for  something  to  turn  up,
you  may  generally  set  it  down  tLere
18  no  Latter-day  Saint  there,  or  if
there  fe  a  "  Mormon"  mired  up  with
them  he  is  becoming  demoralized.
If  the  faith  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
be  adhered  to  as  it  should  be,  men
jrfruld  be  temperate  and  moral,  and
they  would  avoid  using  profane  lan-
guage; and  one  of  the  injunctions
of  their  religion  is  that  the  idler  I
shall  not  eat  the  bread  of  the  laborer*

We  have  fed  thousands  and  ifens
of  thousands  of  strangers  who  have
passed  through  here  without  means,
and  no  person  has  been  permitted  to
go  hungry  in  our  midst  if  we  knew
it,  admitting  at  the  same  time  that
our  means  of  subsistence  were  limited,
and  all  that  we  have  wrenched  from
the  soil  has  been  by  main  strength,

I  would  like  to  draw  a  little  com-
parison :  I  moved  my  family  in  f49,
I  came  out  in  '47,  and  went  back


again  and  made  arrangements  to  get
back  with  my  family,  the  earliest
possible,  which  was  in  '49,  I  brought
in  two  hundred  pounds  of  flour  a  head
for  the  family,  which  I  ran  out  in
short  allownnces  to  each  one  of  them,
and  I  divided  some  to  the  neighbors,
there  being  numbers  of  them  around
who  had  got  out  of  food,  and  we
eked  it  out  little  by  little,  little  by
little.  If  a  friend  called  and  had  his
dinner  with  us,  why,  we  had  to
shorten  our  allowance  of  bread.  There
was  no  place  wo  could  go  and  buy
a  little  flour  or  a  little  beef,  for  nobody
had  any  but  what  they  wanted  them-
selves, and  what  they  must  have
themselves,  and  if  we  divided  our
little  out  we,  ourselves,  must  go  hun-
gry. If  we  lived  fast  to-day,  we
must  starve,  to-morrow,  and  in  this
way  we  sir  etc  bed  the  matter  along,
God,  in  his  mercy,  btessed  us  with
good  health;  we  had  good  health,
hard  work  and  short  allowance
of  food*  There  was  one  thing
we  were  very  thankful  tor:  We
had  been  mobbed  a  number  of
times — five  times  driven  from  our
homes*  We  had  left  our  inheritances
in  Missouri  and  Illinois,  and  had  got
nothing  for  them,  and  here,  whatever
other  things  we  lacked,  we  had  the
privilege  of  worshiping  God  accord-
ing to  the  dictates  of  our  consciences,
and  we  could  vgo  to  meeting,  and
preach  and  pray  without  anybody
interrupting  us;  for  although  there
were  thousands  and  thousands  of
strangers  constantly  passing  through
our  territory,  they  generally  treated
us  with  kindness  and  consideration*
How  is  it  now  with  us  with  regard
to  the  necessaries  of  l?fe  ?  If  a  man
is  out  of  bread  he  can  hardly  find  a
house  but  what,  if  he  enters  and  says,
"  I  am  hungry,  give  me  something
to  eat,"  the  reply  will  be,  £*  Yes,  we
have  plenty/*  And  Were  are  thou-
sands of  men  and  women  who  have


PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC.


come  from  the  States  and  from  Eu-
ro fie.  We  have  contributed  im-
mense sums,  and  sent  our  teams  by
the  hundred  to  the  Missouri  river  to
bring  them  here;  and  when  they  got
here,  their  labor,  industry  and  econo-
my would  enable  them  at  once  to
obtain  food  and  the  necessaries  of
life,  plain, to  be  sure,  but  an  abundance
of  such  as  the  country  afforded*  No
one  that  in  hungry  cat*  go  to  a  house
ur  a  family  and  a>»k  for  bread  and
not  obtain  t.  Look  af  the  contrast ;
and  it  has  been  < Heeted  hy  years  of
fasting  and  united  industry,  poverty
and  toil,  by  the  pioneers  of  this
country.  To  be  sure  we  have  had
plenty  of  the  savings  of  the  Savior
up  hi  our  heads  to  satisfy  ns  that  we
were  ii(j]|t.  iu  one  particular.  He
says  :  u  B  essed  are  ye  when  men
shall  persecute  you,  and  say  ail  man-
ner of  evil  c  uieeruing  you,  falsely,
tur  my  sake,'1

We  hid  welcome  to  onr  friends.
T  ie  fie]  Is  are  wide  and  open,  and
t lie  mountains  are,  no  doubt,  full  ot
niiner.d.  At  any  rate,  every  man
has  his  chance,  d  he  wdl  dig  for  ii.
Dig  for  the  treasures,  and  open  the
h^l  Is  and  the  firms,  bnfc  do  not  tres-
pass  on  the  rights  of  your  neighbors.
Worship  Ciod  according  to  the  dic-
tates ol  f\ air  conscience*,  observe  the
la  v  of  heaven,  but  never,  under  any
ciieurnsntiices,  intrude  upon  the
rig. its  of  others  The-e  are  the  prin-
ciples which  rule  here,  Lo  k  at
I  lies**  things,  and  realize  that  it  is  t**
the  efforts  ot  the  inhabitants  of  this
con-, trv,  their  IhIhhs,  t  >ils  and  sacri*
fices,  that  we  owe  our  present  com-
fitrl.  We  commenced  by  hauling
c .ml ing  machines  and  printing  offices
across  the  mountains  ;  we  built  facto-
ries, and  und<  rt  ok  lo  nose  wool  ;
we  labored  to  produce  flax  and  hemp,
Hot  very  successfully ,  but  we  did  all
we  could.  Thousands  of  our  brethren
ditl  not  believe  it  possible  ever  to

No.  a,


33

raise  fruit;  bnfc  God  tempered  the
climate,  and,  although  in  the  tops  of
the  mountains,  we  have  raised*  abun-
dance of  fruit  in  many  of  our  settle-
ments. Our  sheep  have  become  pro-
ductive, our  herds  have  increased,
and  we  have  laid  a  foundation  for
plenty  ;  and  any  pilgrim  who  comes
alontr,  who  wishes  to  obtain  food
and  raiment,  can  obtain  it,  tor  it  is
here;  Hiid  he  can  go  into  the  mount-  *
tains,  and  if  fortune  favor  him  he
may  strike  something  which  he  may
ileaire,  though  I  must  honestly  con-
fess that,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,/
I  Ihlieve  the  plan  for  any  man  to  ♦1
pursue  who  wishes  to  lay  a  founda-
tion fur  in  tare  independence,  is  to
procure  a  piece  of  land  and  make  a
(arm.  He  might,  perad venture,
|  strike  an  "  Emma11  mine  ;  but  I
think  that  kind  of  luck  will  be  the
exception  instead  of  the  rule;  but,  as
i  general  thing,  the  man  who  labors
industriously  to  make  himself  a  farm,
i  creates  around  him  a  good,  comfort-
'  a  hie  home  iu  a  few  years.  Of  course,
if  men  go  prospecting  for  minerals,
rhey  know  ifc  is  a  good  de=d  like  a
loth  ry.  Our  railroad  is  going  south,
and  as  it  progresses,  new  mines  and
new  mining  interests  will,  without
doubt,  be  oprued  and  developed;
and  as  a  result  of  the  labors  of  de-
veloping the  resources  of  the  Terri-
tory, I  realize  that  millions  will  be
benefitted.

There  is  one  thing  that  our  frienda
do  not  realize.  When  they  come
here  they  make  up  their  minds  that
"  Mormouism"  is  a  humbug,  and
their  mistake  is,  it  is  true,  Joseph
Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  God,  and
the  plan  of  salvation  revealed  through
him  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesua  Christ  j
and  every  man  and  every  woman
who  rejects  it,  rejects  the  truth,  and
will  be  responsible  for  it;  and  every
man  and  every  woman  who  walks  in
obedience  to  its  precepts  will  receive  i

Vol  XV.


34  JOURNAL  OF

glory,  honor,  immortality  and  end-
less lives.  I  am  not  talking  some-
thing I  guess,  I  know  these  things
are  true;  and  it  is  the  wisdom  and
prudence,  the  light  and  the  intelli-
gence of  the  Almighty,  revealed
through  his  servants  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  that  have  gathered  a
hundred  thousand  people  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth  and  planted
them  down  in  comfortable  homes  in
Utah,  and  it  is  only  the  inspiration
of  the  father  of  lies  that  circulates


DISCOURSES.

the  false  reports  and  the  abuse  con-
cerning them.

May  God  bless  you  my  friends.
You  are  welcome  in  this  land.  Go
and  be  blessed ;  and  as  you  go  to
your  homes,  to  the  four  winds  of
heaven,  tell  the  truth  about  the
L utter* day  Saints.  May  God  enable
us  to  overcome  and  be  faithful  in  all
things,  that  we  may  finally  inherit
his  kingdom,  through  Jesus  our  Re-
deemer, Amen.


DISCOURSE  Br  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Taberxacle,  Codes  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

May  26th,  1872.


y  David  W.  Evans.)


RICHES—  ii  TK  Y — FAS  j  1 1  OX — 1 1 K  LP1N1;  THE  ]  'Go  H— M  YSTKR1 ES.


1  am  happy  for  the  privilege  of
standing  befure  this  congregation  and
speaking  to  them.  I  am  thankful  to
see  the  spirit  that  is  manifested  by
the  people  to  inquire  after  the  truth,
rto  learn  the  way  of  life,  I  rejoice  to
see  the  disposition  manifested  by  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  attend  places  of

*  worship.  But  this  is  a  small  part  of
oor  faith.  I  wish  to  .say  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  that  the  Gospel  of  life
and  salvation  is  the  best  institution
that  we,  as  mortal  beings,  can  invest
in.  Go  into  the  financial  citcles  of
the  world,  and  you  will  find  men
gather  and  project  their  plans  for
business,  for  rail  mads,  for  ship  com-
panies, for  merchandizing,  and  vari-
ous other  pursuits. You  will  see

i  those  engaged  in  these  companies


associate  together,  confer  with  eaeli
other,  lay  their  plans  before  each
other,  investigate  them,  scan  every
branch,  and  every  part  and  particle
of  their  business.  We  are  engaged
in  a  higher- toned  branch  of  business
th  an  any  merchants  or  railroad  men,
or  any  institution  of  an  earthly
nature,  and  it  is  pleasing  to  see  the
Latter-day  Saints  meet  together  to
talk  over  this  matter,  and  to  learn
the  course  they  should  pursue  to  gain
the  object  of  their  pursuit.  If  an
inquiry  arises  in  any  of  your  minds
with  regard  to  this,  I  will  answer  it
by  saying  that  we  are  in  pursuit  ot
all  there  is  before  us — life,  light,
wealth,  intelligence,  all  that  can  be
possessed  on  the  earth  by  mortal
man,  and  then  in  a  higher  state,


RICHES,  EH\


35


where  there  will  be  a  more  perfect
development  of  the  smattering  oi
knowledge  than  we  received  here,
and  all  that  can  be  enjoyed  by  intel-
ligent beings  in  the  celestial  king-
doms of  our  God.  Is  this  our
object?  Certainly  it  is.  We  are
not  in  the  same  attitude  that  the
people  were  a  tew  thousand  years
ago — they  were  depending  on  the
Prophet  or  Prophets,  or  on  having
immediate  revelation  for  themselves
to  know  the  will  of  the  Lord,  without
the  record  of  their  predecessors,
while  we  have  the  records  of  those
who  have  lived  before  11s,  also  the
testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and,  to
the  satisfaction  of  all  who  desire  a
tcstimoi])%  we  can  turn  to  this  book
and  read  that  which  we  believe,
learn  the  object  of  our  pursuit,  the
end  that  we  expect  to  accomplish —
the  end  of  the  race  as  fur  as  mortality
is  concerned — and  the  fullness  of  the
glory  that  is  beyond  this  vale  of
tears ;  consequently  we  have  the
advantage  of  those  who  lived  before
lis.  AVe  arc  in  pursuit  of  knowledge;
and  when  you  meet  together,  if  you
have  a  word  of  prophecy,  a  dream,
a  vision,  or  a  word  of  wisdom,  im-
part the  same  to  the  people.

Let  me  ask  you,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  Do  you  want  wealth  ?  If
you  do,  do  not  he  in  a  harry.  Do
yon  want  the  riches  pertaining  to  this
world?  Yes,  we  acknowledge  we
do.  Then,  be  calm,  contented,  com-
posed ;  keep  your  pulses  correct,  do
not  let  them  get  up  to  a  hundred
and  twenty,  but  kt.ep  the  in  as  nigh
as  you  can,  ranging  from  seventy  to
seventy-six;  and  when  there  is  an
appointment  for  a  meeting  be  sure  to
attend  that  meeting.  If  there  is  to
be  a  two-days'  meeting  in  Ogden,
come  to  it ;  spend  the  time  here  and
learn  what  isgoingon.  Watch  closely,
hear  every  word  that  is  spoken,  let
every  heart  be  lifted  to  God  for  wis-


dom, and  know  and  understand  every
word  of  prophecy,  every  revelation
that  may  be  given,  every  counsel
that  may  be  presented  to  the  people,
that  you  may  be  able  to  weigh,  mea-
sure, comprehend  and  decide  between
that  which  is  of  God  and  that  which
is  not  of  God.  Refuse  the  evil,
learn  wisdom,  and  grow  in  grace  and
in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  If
there  is  a  meeting  appointed  for  the
Seventies,  let  them  come  together,
and  let  no  man  say  "  I  am  in  a  hurry
in  my  work,  and  have  not  time  to
attend.'*  Every  man  that  belongs  to
these  quorums  should  be  on  hand  at
the  time  appointed}  and  not  say,  "I
will  work  to  the  last  minute,  before
I  start  for  the  meeting,"  Take  lime,
prepare  yourselves,  be  at  the  place  of
gathering  promptly,  to  the  minute,
that  you  may  hear  the  first  word,
then  you  will  hear  every  word  that  is
spoken  and  every  counsel  that  is
given.  '

If  there  is  a  Bishop's  meeting,  let
every  Bishop,  Priest,  Teacher  and
i  Deacon  atteud,  and  no  man  among
them  say,  " 1  must  go  and  water
my  grain,"  "  cut  my  hay,"  or  "  gather
my  harvest;"  but  attend  the  meet-
|  ing,  sit  until  it  is  out  and  hear  every
word.  If  you  have  to  speak,  speak  ;
if  you  are  to  hear  only,  hear  every
word  that  is  said.  If  there  is  a
prayer  meeting  appointed,  go  to
that  prayer  meeting;  go  to  the  ward
meetings,  attend  every  meeting  that
is  appointed.  I  am  telling  you  this,
so  that  you  can  get  rich,

I  will  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
there  can  not  that  community  be
found  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth
that,  as  a  community,  is  as  well  oft
as  we  are  here  in  these  mountains.
There  are  more  women  and  children,
with  their  husbands  and  fathers,
sleep  under  their  own  roof  in  the
midst  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  than
1 1  in  auy  other  community  on  the  face


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  this  earth,  in  civilization ;  and
Jess  women  and  children  go  without
food  and  clothing  than  in  any  other
community  in  Christendom.  Look-
ing around  among  the  Latter-day
Saints  I  will  ask,  How  many  are
there  who  have  been  taken  from  cel-
lars, trorn  pita  under  ground,  or  from
their  little  rooms,  where  one  pound,
or  five  dollars,  would  buy  everything
they  possessed  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  brought  10  this  country
and  taught  how  to  plant  their  pota-
toes, beans,  beets,  carrots,  how  to
raise  their  cucumbers  and  squashes,
th"ir  corn  and  their  wheat,  how  to
milk  a  cow,  feed  a  calf,  t=tke  eare  of
ti  t  elm-kins;  how  to  build  a  pigpen
and  put  a  pig  in  it ;  to  take  the  offals
ol  the  house  and  ^ive  to  tin*  pig,  and
bow  to  raise  a  calf  or  a  colt,  experi-
ence they  never  had  before  in  their
lives?  Ye  I  they  have  learned  this
economy,  and  Koine  of  them,  1  a  in
sorry  to  say,  lift  then  heel  against
the  Almighty  *md  his  anointed.  I
am  happy  to  say,  however,  that  the
large  per-mitage  of  those  who  have
been  thus  rescued  Irom  poverty,  and
iiluced  in  circumstances  of  comfort
and  independence,  aie  still  in  the
fair  Ik  How  many  are  there  here  to-
day who  never  owned  a  chicken  or  a
pig,  and  could  not  keep  a  cat  because
they  had  nothing  to  feed  one  on,  who
now  iide  in  their  wagons,  have  their
carriage*?,  hoises,  tij.e  harness,  line
stock  of  cows,  and  have  butter,  milk,
cheese  and  won!  at  iheir  command,
and  granaries  full  of  wheat,  and  their
barns,  it  they  have  them,  full  of
hay  ?  Do  not  the  tacts  which  present
themselves  before  us,  prove  that  this
very  desirable  change  lias  taken
p  ace  in  the  circumstances  of  many?
Then  come  to  meeting.  Appoint
your  meetings,  Elders,  and  call  the
Saints  together  and  instruct  them  in
the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
We  have  missionaries  that  are  travel-


ing through  our  settlements,  and  no
people  need  preaching  more  than  tho
Latter-day  Saints.  They  know  the
way,  but  they  are  forgetful,  and  they
want  somebody  or  other  to  come
along  and  holloa  to  them,  and  say,
comparatively,  "I  will  warm  your
ears,  my  Jady  ;**  "Brother,  I  will
warm  y^ur  ears,"  "Wake  up!"
"  What  are  you  doing  ?  Are  you
after  this  mine?  Are  you  after  that
job  ?  Are  yon  after  that  piece  of
work?  Did  you  pray  in  your  family
this  morning  ? *  "  No."  "  Why  ?  n
"  I  was  in  too  much  of  a  hurry."
Stop  !  Wait !  When  you  get  Dp  in
the  morning,  before  you  sutfer  your-
selves to  eat  one  mouthful  of  food,
call  your  wives  and  children  together,
bow  down  before  the  Lioid,  ask  him
to  forgive  your  sins,  and  protect  you
through  the  day,  to  preserve  you
from  temptation  and  all  evil,  to  guide
your  steps  aright,  that  you  may  do
something  that  day  that  shall  be
beneticial  to  the  kingdom  of  God  on
the  earth.  Have  you  time  to  do  this?
Elders,  sisters,  have  vou  time  to
pray?  This  is  the  counsel  I  have
tor  the  Latter-day  Saints  to-day.
Stop,  do  not  be  in  a  hurry.  I  do  not
know  that  I  Could  find  a  man  in  our
community  hut  what  wishes  wealth,
would  like  to  have  even  tiling  in  his
pi>5*  psioti  rlrnt  would  onduce  to  his
conhurt  and  convenience.  Do  you
know  how  to  get  it?  "Well,"
replies  one,  "  if  I  do  not,  I  wish  I
did ;  but  I  do  not  seem  to  be  exactly
fortunate  — -  fortune is  somewhat

against  me."  I  will  tell  you  the
reason  of  this — you  are  in  too  much
of  a  hurry  ;  you  do  not  go  to  meet-
ing enough,  you  do  not  pray  enough,
you  do  not  read  the  Scriptures
enough,  you  do  not  meditate  enough,
you  are  all  the  time  on  the  wing,
and  in  such  a  hurry  that  you  do  not
know  what  to  do  first.  This  is  not
the  way  to  get  rich. I  merely  use


the  term  ct  rich  "  to  lead  the  mind  1
along,  until  we  obtain  eternal  riches
in  the  celestial  kingdom  of  God*
Here  we  wish  for  riches  in  a  com-
parative sense,  we  wish  for  the  com-
forts of  life.  If  we  desire  them  let
us  take  a  coarse  to  get  them.  Let
me  reduce  this  to  a  simple  saying —
one  of  the  most  simple  and  homely
that  can  be  used — "  Keep  your  dish
right  side  up,"  so  that  when  the
shower  of  porridge  does  come,  you
can  catch  your  dish  full.

I  am  not  going  it] to  the  details,  to
instruct  my  brethren  particularly
how  to  get  wealth;  but  in  the  first
place,  do  not  be  in  a  hurry,,  I  make
that  as  a  general  remark.  Do  yon
want  your  house  neat  and  clean?
Do  you  want  to  kevp  your  children
neat  and  clean  ?  Do  you  wish  to  see
every  portion  of  your  dwelling,  from
the  cellar  to  the  garret,  from  the
wood-house  to  the  parlor,  neat  and
clean  ?  Certainly,  every  sister  wishes
this ;  then  do  not  be  in  a  hurry,  I
shall  tell  you  a  little  circumstance
that  occurred  some  eighteen  years
ago,  when  we  had  been  on  a  visit  to
the  Indians,  We  had  reached  Farm-
ing ton,  on  our  way  home,  and  stopped
at  a  certain  house,  I  think  there
were  twelve  of  us  in  company.  Our
teams  were  taken  care  of.  When  I
alighted  from  my  carriage  I  looked
at  my  watch  and  we  went  in,  sat
down,  and  chatted  with  the  master
of  the  house,  while  his  wife  prepared
dinner  for  us, I  noticed  this  lady.

he  whispered  to  a  little  girl  to  take
her  baby  out  of  doors  and  amuse  it ;
then,  when  her  baby  was  out  of  the
way,  she  moved  about  without  the
least  noise — not  a  word  was  heard
from  her.  She  brought  everything
she  needed  from  the  buttery  and
cellar  to  the  kitchen  where  she  spread
her  table,  and  she  mixed  and  baked
her  bread,  cooked  her  fruit  and  meat,
-and  from  the  time  we  alighted  from


the  carriage  until  she  came  and  whis-
pered in  the  ear  of  her  husband,
"  Dinner  is  ready,"  it  was  just  fifty-
five  minutes.  SaM  I  to  myself,
41  There  is  a  housekeeper."  1  could
not  help  but  see  this;  every  time  she
walked  back  and  forth  she  accom-
plished a  certain  amount  of  business,
I  saw  tins  and  was  gratified.  No'.v,
sisters,  yon  may  do  likewise,  if  you
are  not  in  too  bitf  a  hurry.  Instead
of  shouting,  41  Sally,  w here's  the
dish-cloth?"  "  Susan,  ^here's  the
broom  ? 3T  or,  "  Nancy,  have  yon
seen  the  holder?  I  want  the  holder,"
becalm  and  composed;  you  are  in
too  much  of  a  hurry.  Hold  on,  be
easy,  never  let  your  nervous  system
rige^  above  your  judgment  and  the
collection  of  your  thoughts,  and  have
a  place  for  everything,  aril  every
thing  in  its  place.  Let  your  judg-
ment be  master,  and  when  you  start
to  do  a  thing  you  will  know  exactly
what  you  want  to  do.  I  have  seen
hundreds  of  ladies  fly  to  the  cupboard,
and  then  say,  "  Well,  now,  [  doc  la  re
I  don't  know  what  I  came  for,"
They  were  in  too  much  of  a  hurry.
It  is  just  so  with  men.  I  see  them
through  the  world,  I  have  watched
their  progress  for  many  years,  and  E
see  that  many  of  them  are  too  much
in  a  hurry.  If  we  are  not  in  too
much  of  a  hurrv  we  can  attend  these
two-days*  meetings,  and  talk  to  each
other.  Are  you  full  of  faith  ?  You
can  tell  whether  I  am  or  not  by  look-
ing at  me.  You  can  tell  whether  the
brethren  who  have  beeu  speaking  to
yon  are  full  of  faith  in  the  Gospel
by  the  look  of  their  countenances.
Yuu  can  see  this  if  there  is  not  a
word  spoken ;  we  can  tell  by  our
feelings  when  we  look  at  a  congre-
gation whether  they  have  faith  or
not.  I  see  there  is  a  great  amotknt
of  faith  in  the  midst  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  I  wish  there  was  a
little  more  patience  and  obedience.


38


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Perhaps  I  have  said  enough  with
regard  to  these  meetings.  Elders,
appoint  your  meetings,  and  invite
the  people  to  come  to  them,  I  want
now  to  go  to  other  matters

I  will  tell  you,  my  brethren,  my
own  feelings  with  regard  to  the  con-
duct of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  Iu
the  first  place  I  will  say  that  we  are
governed  and  controlled  too  much  by
the  feelings  and  fashions  uf  the
world.  We  lust  after  the  leeks  and
onions;  we  yield  ourselves  to  the
spirit  of  the  wot  Id  too  much*  You
will  excuse  me,  for  I  must  say  a  few
words  with  regard  to  this*  It  is  true
we  are  bound,  and  it  seems  that  men's
bounds  are  set  by  each  other,  more
or  less.  If  I,  for  instance,  were  to
have  a  coat  made  to  suit  my  own
taste,  1  do  not  know  any  of  my  family
and  perhaps  my  friends,  and  espe-
cially the  tailors,  merchants  and
business  men,  but  what  wuuld  say,
"  You  are  an  oddity,"  and  they  would
think,  "  You  are  not  fit  for  society,
because  you  do  not  fashion  and  pat-
tern after  others-"  I  commence  here,
you  know,  at  myself  Well,  I  will
say  that  I  am  bound,  I  can  not  ac-
complish my  own  wishes  in  these
things  altogether.  Perhaps  others
can  not.  I  go  to  a  tailor  and  say,  HI
have  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  I  want  you
to  make  me  a  coat "  lie  cuts  that
coat  to  suit  himself.  I  do  not  see  a
fashion  that  suits  me.  What  use  or
comeliness  is  there  in  putting  the  le^s
of  the  pantaloons  on  my  com  ? "
Well,  perhaps  the  tailor  will  be  a
little  moderate,  and  will  cut  It  down
considerably;  but  if  I  were  my  own
tailor  I  certainly  should  leave  off —
what  shall  wo  call  them  ?  im  Bustles,"
"  Grecian  Bends,"  or  what  shall  we
call  them?  Though  these  coat  sleeves
are  not  exactly  like  the  sleeves  of  the
frocks  or  dresses  worn  by  the  ladies
forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  which  they
used  to  call  mutton -legged  sleeves,


shaped  just  like  the  ham  of  a  mut-
ton. I  recollect  there  used  to  be
considerable  said  about  them .  Some-
times  a  paper  would  come  out  and
tell  of  the  wreck  of  a  ship,  on  Ijoard
of  which  were  a  hundred  and  fifty
passengers;  ttit,  they  would  say,
"  Thanks  he  to  kind  Providence,  the
ladies  took  all  the  male  passengers
into  the  sleeves  of  their  dresses,  and
went  ashore."  Such  narrations  as
these,  you  know,  were  only  meant
as  a  satire  upon  the  fashions  of  the
day.  Now  1  am  coming  right  to  the
point,  and  I  wish  to  say  to  some  of
my  sisters,  not  to  all,  that  it  I  were
my  own  tailor  I  should  cut  my  own
coat  to  suit  myself.  11  What  would
be  your  fashion"  says  one  ?  I  will
tell  you,  I  have  a  coat  here  which
you  can  see — if  I  were  to  take  hold
uf  a  swill-pail,  this  part  of  the  skirt
must  drop  in ;  and  if  I  took  hold  of
a  mi  ilk- pail  I  must  take  the  coat
arc  Hind  by  the  other  end,  and  hold  it,
or  else  it  is  in  the  milk.  I  see  no
convenience  or  beauty  in  it.  That
which  is  convenient  should  be  beau-
tiful ;  and  I  want  my  coat  cut  so  that
when  I  lift  a  pail  of  water,  or  a  milk
or  swill  pail  the  skirts  shall  not  fall
into  it;  and  so  with  the  pockets,  I
would  have  them  convenient.  If  I
were  a  lady  and  had  a  piece  of  cloth
to  make  me  a  dress,  I  would  cut  it  so
as  to  cover  my  person  handsomely
and  neatly  ;  and  whether  it  was  cut
accord  i  Tig  to  the  fashion  or  not,  cus-
tom would  soon  make  it  beautiful.
I  would  not  have  eighteen  or  twenty
yards  to  drag  behind  me,  so  that  if
I  had  to  turn  round  I  would  have  to
pick  up  my  dress  and  throw  it  after
me,  or,  just  as  a  cow  does  when  she
kicks  over  the  milk  pail,  throw  out
one  foot  to  kick  the  dress  out  of  the
way.  That  is  not  becoming,  beau-
tiful or  convenient — all  such  fashions
are  inconvenient.  Take  that  cloth
and  cut  vou  a  skirt  that  will  be


RICHES,  ETC


39


modest  and  neat,  that  does  not  drag
in  the  dirt  nor  show  your  garters,
bnt  cut  it  so  that  it  will  clear  the
1  ground  when  you  walk,  when  you  are
passing  over  the  floor  it  will  not  drag
everything  on  the  floor,  or  in  the
street  asyon  pass  along.  Put  enough
into  the  skirt  to  look  well,  and  if  we
are  to  go  into  particulars,  of  course,
we  would  have  to  say,  we  must  use
enough  to  cover  the  person.  I  do  not
expect  mother  Eve  even  did  this.
We  could  relate  some  little  incidents
of  our  pst  experience,  that  perhaps
would  r  :  entertain  the  people,  and
still,  pe^aps,  they  might  learn  some-
thing from  them.  For  instance,  In
some  circles  it  has  been  fashionable
for  a  lady  to  wear,  perhaps,  twelve
yards  in  the  skirt  of  her  dress,  but
when  it  came  to  the  waist,  I  guess
three-quarters  of  a  yard  would  have
been  enough.  I  will  relate  a  ci  renin*
stance  of  which  I  heard,  that  took
place  in  the  metropolis  of  our  coun-
try. A  gentleman,  a  stranger,  was
invited  to  a  grand  dinner  party  there.
The  ladies  of  course  were  dressed  in
the  height  of  fashion,  their  trails
dragging  behind  them,  and  their  —
well,  I  suppose  there  was  a  band  !
over  the  shoulder  to  the  waist,  but  I  '
do  not  recollect  whether  the  gentle-
man said  there  was  or  not ;  but  one
gentleman  present,  who  knew  this
gentleman  was  a  stranger,  said  to
him,  with  all  the  loveliness  and  ele-
gance in  his  heart  that  one  could
imagine — "Is  not  this  beautiful?
Did  you  ever  see  the  like  of  this  ?  "
"  No  sir,"  said  the  party  questioned,
"  never  since  I  was  weaned."  Well,
all  this,  you  know,  is  custom  and
fashion*

Now,  I  wish  to  say  to  ray  sisters,
If  you  will  be  just  a  little  more
moderate,  I  should  like  it  very  much.
Some  of  you,  and  especially  the
young  sisters,  may  say,  "  Why,
Brother  Brigham,  how  do  yourdangli- '


ters  dress?"  I  will  s:*y,  to  ray
shame,  many  of  them,  and  many  do
not.  Then  I  must  have  a  great  many,
for  if  I  have  many  that  do  and  many
that  do  not,  that  will  amount  to  a
great  many.  But  I  guess  I  will  let
it  go.  Some  of  them  are  modest,
delicate,  neat,  and  look  beautiful,  and
do  not  want  twenty-four  yards  for  a
dress,  nor  seventeen.  But  this  is
uncomely,  uncouth  and  ill-looking.
What  shall  I  call  it  ?  A  camel's
back  ?  You  will  say  they  go  from
the  lady  to  the  camel,  and  from  the
camel  to  the  lady,  and  so  on  and  so
forth.  They  are  called,  I  believe,
u  Grecian  Bends,**  but  I  do  not  think
this  term  is  exactly  proper.  Are
they  comely  in  appearance?  No,
they  are  not  Then  I  should  like  my
daughters  and  my  sisters  to  lay  them
aside.  They  should  dress  neatly  and
comely,  and  to  suit,  themselves,  but
not  to  suit,  anybody  else.  We  have
the  ability  to  tell  what  looks  well,
just  as  well  as  anybody  else.  We
need  not  jrn  to  New  York,  London,  or
Paris  to  tell  whether  a  coat  looks  well
if  it  has  a  collar  half  an  inch  wide.
Do  vou  recollect  when  collars  were
not  more  than  that  ?  I  do,  and  I
recollect  when  they  were  about  six  or
seven  inches  in  width.  Now  we  need
not  go  to  Paris  to  ask  them  whether
a  coat  looks  just  right  with  a  half
inch  or  a  fire-inch  collar;  we  are  the
judged,  and  can  decide  that  just  as
well  as  anybody  else  on  the  face  of
the  earth,  I  wuut  I  not  swap  my  eyes
with  any  living  person  for  bt-aiuy
and  comelineas.  I  Would  rather  trust
to  my  eyes  for  beauty,  excellency  and
comeliness  in  dress,  than  any  other
person's  eves  i  know  of  We  should
be  our  own  judges.  Tins,  I  say,  to
my  sisters.  Pause,  reflect,  look  ufc
the  facts  in  the  case  as  regards  the
folly  and  expanse  uf  ..■■shiun.  Take
the  people  of  this  city,  and  if  yoa
can  form  a  correct  estimate  ot  the


40  JOURNAL  OF

cost  of  the  useless  articles  they  wear.
(I  think  I  brought  this  subject  up  a
year  ago  this  summer,  when  here.)
Just  take  these  useless  articles  that
do  no  good  to  the  body  of  the  per-
sons who  use  them,  and  we  would
find  that  the  means  expended  in  their
purchase  would  enable  us  to  relieve
many  poor,  suffering,  distressed  crea-
tures abroad  in  tho  nations  of  the
earth,  and  bring  them  here  and  put
them  in  a  situation  in  which  they
would  be  healthy,  wealthy  and  happy.
If  we  make  a  calculation  en  this  sub-
ject we  shall  find  that  the  waste  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  is  immense.
There  is  a  little  town,  south  of  here,
the  ladies  of  which  ■ —  the  F.  II.
Society,  took  it  into  their  minds,
nlong  in  the  latter  part  of  the  winter,
when  we  commenced  calling  upon
the  people  to  assist  the  emigration  of
the  poor  this  summer,  to  give  the
eggs  that  their  hens  hud  on  Sunday*
If  they  did  not  berve  the  Lord  them*
selves  they  resolved  to  make  tin  ir
hens  do  it  one- seventh  of  the  time ;
and  over  a  month  ago  I  heard  they
had  raised  by  this  method  about  eight
hundred  dollars.  Would  they  miss
this?  No,  they  could  do  without
these  eggs  very  well.  Suppose  the
ladies  of  Ogden,  who,  on  account  of
the  many  ribbons  and  needless  ar ti-
des they  require,  are  unable  to  give
anything  else  they  have,  should  give
one-seventh  part  o!  the  services  of
their  fowls  to  the  bringing  of  the  poor
here!  If  O^hn  had  commenced
this  last  January,  thousands  and
thousands  of  dollars  might  have  been
raised  by  this  time*  Can  you  think
of  such  a  trifling  thing  as  this  ?
Suppose  that  every  man  who  prac-
tices the  disgusting  habit ,  says  to
himself,  "  I  will  stop  eating  tobacco,
and  the  means  I  spend  in  buying  it
I  will  give  to  emigrate  the  poor;"
or,  that,  "  what  I  pay  out  for  liquor
I  will  give  tu  emigrate  the  poor;"


DISCOUKSES.

and  each  of  the  ladies  says,  "  What
money  I  pay  out  for  my  tea  or  c*  fi-V
(and  tobacco,  liquor,  tea  and  coffee
are  four  very  useless  article-)  ■*  I
will  give  to  emigrate  the  poor,"  hmv
much  could  be  saved,  do  you  think,
in  this  little  community?  Go  to
the  stores,  and  ask  them  how  much
tobacco  they  have  sold  for  twelve
months  past  Take  these  little  re-
tail stores,  ;tnd  then  go  into  the  retail
departments  of  the  whoksdc  stores,
and  we  shor.M  find  in  this  little  town,
I  will  ensure,  that  within  the  twelve
months  past,  more  than  twelve,  yes
twenty,  thousand  dollars  htive  bt-rn
paid  for  tobacco;  and  I  will  say  ten
or  twelve,  and  perhaps  twenty,  iln.u-
sand  more  for  liquor ;  and  then  I  \\  ill
say  twenty-five  or  thirty  thousand
more  for  tea  or  coffee,  and  1  guess  I
C'-uId  go  up  to  forty  thousand  dollars,
right  here  in  Ogden,  It  is  immense,
the  people  have  no  idea  of  it,  unless
they  go  and  look  for  themselves.  Get
the  statistics,  and  then  you  will  know

i  with  regard  to  the  facts  in  the
case. -33/  +J3L

Now  suppose  we  say  wo  will  take
the  means  we  are  spending  for  tea
and  coffee,  liquor  and  tobacco,  and
useless  articles  in  dressing.  ;o.d  we

I  will  give  this  to  the  poor,  we  would

.  soon  have  a  wealthy  purse.  Who
has  given  anything  this  season  ?
How  many  of  yuii  have  given  the

I  first  five  dollars  this  season  to  bring
the  poor  to  Zion?  If  there  is  a  nnui
or  woman  in  this  house  that  has
given  anything  for  this  purpose,  do
nie  the  favor  to  hold  up  your  hand  ?
(One  or  two  hands  were  held  up.)  I
have  given  a  very  little,  just  a  trifle.
Sometimes  I  give  a  thousand,  some-
times two  thousand,  mostly  two  thou-
sand, and  that  is  but  a  trifle,  I
suppose  many  would  sjiv,  t%  Why,
that  is  no  more  for  you  than  five
dollars  for  me/'  Well,  perhaps  it  is
not; I  have  nothing  but  what  the


»


ord  gave  me,  that  is  certain  ;  and
if  he  wanted  the  whole  of  it,  for  the
gathering  of  the  poor  this  year,  he
is  just  as  welcome  to  it  as  I  am  to
eat  with  you  when  you  invite  me  to
your  houses.  But  one  thing  I  can
say  of  a  truth,  I  have  not  been  in  a
harry,  I  have  taken  things  mode-
rately, kindly,  calmly,  and  have
*'  kept  my  dish  right  side  up,"

Well  eow,  you  who  want  to  give  a
little  to  help  the  poor,  please  hand
it  over  to  Bishop  Herrick.  Bishop
Herri  ck,  will  you  please  get  the
bishops  together,  and  request  them
to  ask  every  ward  in  this  county  to
give  something  for  the  gathering  of
the  poor,  and  see  who  will  assist  in
this  good  work  ?

If  we  will  not  be  in  a  hurry,  and
will  pray  in  our  families,  pray  in
secret,  attend  our  meetings,  be  pa~
tient  £iid  live  so  that  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  will  dwell  within  us,  and
witness  to  God  every  day  of  our  lives,
by  faithful  obedience  to  his  require-
ments, that  we  are  his,  I  will  say  we
are  bound  to  get  the  wealth  of  the
world.  We  read  in  this  good  book
(the  Bible)  that  "  the  earth  is  the
Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof."
Everything  belongs  to  him,  and  he
is  going  to  give  it  to  his  Saints;  and
all  our  concern  and  care  should  be,
to  be  Bare  that  we  are  Saints.  Then
it  is  all  right,  it  is  by  a  deed  of  war-
rant}'— a  warranty  deed,  and  he  will
warrant  and  defend  it,  if  we  will
serve  him,  and  he  satisfied  with  his
providences,  turning  neither  to  the
right  nor  to  the  left,  but  serving  him
with  an  undivided  heart  all  the  days
of  our  lives.  If  it  pleases  htrn,  and
he  wishes  ns  to  travel  and  preach,  go
to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  to  the  east
or  to  the  west,  to  the  north  or  to  the
sooth,  to  live  here  or  live  there,  to  do
this  or  to  do  that,  to  have  little  or
much  and  be  perfectly  satisfied  and
con  ten  ted  f  his  blessings  will  be  se-


cured to  us  by  a  warranty  deed,  and
he  will  warrant  and  defend  it.

If  we  are  not  Saints  it  is  a  great
pity.  We  have  the  experience  of
those  who  lived  before  us,  we  have
the  testimony  of  the  fathers,  we  have
the  sayings  of  Jesus  and  his  Apostles,
and  we  can  peruse  them  and  can
exercise  faith  in  the  name  of  Jesns,
and  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  by  which  these  testimonies
were  given  ;  and  we  can  know  whe-
ther we  are  Saints  or  whether  we
are  not.  It  has  been  proclaimed  that
there  is  a  great  difference  between
tvs  and  the  Christian  world.  There
is.  Is  the  difference  because  we  be-
lieve in  another  religion?  By  no
means.  The  difference  arises  from
the  fact  that  we  believe  this  Bible,
wide  open,  from  Genesis  to  Revela-
tions. They  believe  it,  sealed  up,
never  to  be  opened  again  to  ihe  hu-
man family.  They  believe  it  shut,
we  believe  it  open;  they  believe  it
in  silence,  we  believe  it  proclaimed
on  the  house  top;  and  when  we  scan
the  Bible  and  the  feelings  of  the
Christian  world,  we  find  that  it  is,
as  has  been  proclaimed  here — there
probably  never  was  a  day  on  the  face
of  the  earth  when  infidrlitv  reigned
more  completely  in  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men  than  it  does  now.
We,  as  Christians,  believe  in  God,  iu
Christ  and  in  his  atonement,  in  re-
pentance and  obedience,  and  in  re-
ceiving the  Spirit;  but  what  are  the
facts  in  the  ease?  We  are  perse-
cuted, our  names  are  cast  out  as  evil,
we  have  the  world  arrayed  against
us.  And  who  are  at  the  head  of
this?  The  Christians.  You  go  to
a  real  intidel — one  brought  up  to
|  disbelieve  in,  and  pay  no  attention
to,  this  book  as  the  word  of  God,  and
we  receive  little  persecution  from
him;  none  whatever  in  comparison
with  what  we  receive  from  those  who
profess  to  believe  it Where  are


42  JOURNAL  OF

their  witness  and  testimony  that  they
are  right  and  that  we  are  wrong  ?
We  h*ive  the  Scriptures  to  testify  to  I
the  riuht  and  righteousness  of  the  |
cause  we  have  espoused.  They  shut
up  i  he  Bible,  gay  they  are  Christians,
and  cry,  False  prophets,  false  teach-
ers, delusion,  delusion,  heresy,  out-
casts, kill  them  if  you  can  not  get
rid  uf  them  without,  they  must  leave,
we  cannot  endure  them  any  longer !"

Where  is  their  proof,  where  is  our
proof  ?  What  criterion  shall  we  go
by  ?  We  have  the  Scriptures,  we
have  the  Prophets,  Jesus  and  the
Apostles ;  we  have  the  revelations  of
the  Spirit  of  God  to  ourselves;  we
have  the  truth  within  our  hearts,
and  all  this  is  proof  to  us  of  the  vali-
dity of  the  faith  that  we  have  em-
braced j  and  if  it  is  correct,  and  the
Bible  is  correct ;  if  it  is  true,  and  the
Lord  has  spoken  through  his  ser-
vants, they  must  be  wrong,  and  their
own  mouths  shall  judge  them  in  the
latter  days;  and  if  they  are  to  be
judged  by  the  Saints  or  by  the  Al-
mighty you  will  find  the  secret,  and
that  will  be  out  of  their  own  mouths
they  will  be  judged.  We  have  the
testimony  of  all  this  for  ourselves.

How  are  you  going  to  know  whe-
ther this  work  is  true,  whether  the
Bible  is  true,  whether  Joseph  was  a
Prophet,  whether  Jesus  was  the
Savior,  and  his  Apostles  were  cor-
rect in  their  teachings?  There  is
no  way  for  you  and  me  to  know
these  things  but  by  the  Spirit  of
God;  and  if  we  live  so  as  to  enjoy
the  light  of  that  Spirit,  the  light  of
rev<  hit  ion,  it  will  be  in  us  like  a  well
of  water  springing  up  to  everlasting
life  If  we  do  not  live  thus,  we  are
in  the  dark  as  well  as  they,  |

All  religion  is  a  mystery.  Do  we
know  this  ?  Certainly.  1  have  an
experience  in  this,  and  so  have  the
elder  members  of  this  community  :
we  have  lived  with  the  Christians.


DISCOURSES.

What  have  been  the  declaration  and
the  sayiugs  of  the  wisest  of  the  wTise
among  them  ?  Is  God  a  personage
!  of  tabernacle ?  "I  know  not,"
Does  God  dwell  anywhere,  is  he  a
local  being,  or  is  he  a  traveling
being?  **  I  knew  not"  Does  he
possess  a  body,  parts  and  passions?
"  I  know  not"  What  of  his  Son
Jesua  ?  What  of  the  evil  ?  Acknow-
ledge there  is  evil  in  the  world —
that  character  that  fell  from  heaven
— the  Son  of  the  Morning,  has  he  a
located  place  where  he  dwells  ?  u  I
know  not**  That  is  the  answer.
What  do  you  understand  by  the
Scriptures  ?  "  We  do  not  know
what  to  understand,  they  are  a  mys-
tery, and  beyond  our  comprehension,
we  can  not  comprehend  them.  We
are  students  of  divinity,  but  the
Scriptures  are  a  mystery  to  us."  I
recollect  once,  in  my  early  career,
well  nigh  forty  years  ago,  conversing
about  two  hours  with  a  cousin  of
mine,  who  had  finished  his  studies  to
be  a  priest  As  I  left  him  he  said
to  me,  u  Cousin  Brigham,  I  have
learned  more  divinity  from  your
month  to-day  than  I  have  learned  in
my  four  years'  study.  You  have
told  me  things  tb;it  I  know  are  in
the  Scriptures,  and  I  know  they  are
correct,  for  I  feel  in  my  heart  and
can  testify  to  the  truth  of  them ;
but,"  said  he,  "  they  are  not  in  the
books,  neither  in  the  mouths  and
hearts  of  our  teachers ;  our  precepU
ors  do  not  understand  them,  and  I
have  learned  more  divinity  from  you
in  two  hours  than  in  all  my  life  be-
fore." This  is  their  experience.
Have  they  knowledge  ?  Go  after  it,
and  you  will  find  an  aching  void,  a
shadow  instead  of  a  substance,  words
which  are  wind,  instead  of  realities.

W  e  would  bike  the  world  of  man-
kind by  the  hand  and  lead  them  to
life  and  salvation,  if  they  would  let
us* It  was  said  in  my  office,  a  few


RIC1


43


days  ago,  by  a  pirty  of  railroad  men,
while  conversing  with  me  about  ns
as  a  people,  '*  President  Young,  yon
are  not  known,  your  people  are  not
known ;  we  shall  know  you  better
hereafter,  and  they  need  not  publish
about  you  as  they  have,  or,  if  they
do,  we  shall  know  better  than  to  be-
lieve them*  Why  do  they  publish
such  things  ?  We  are  glad  to  be-
come acquainted  with  you/'  I  re-
plied, "  For  over  forty  years  I  have
been  striving  with  all  my  might,  in
my  weak  capacity,  and  with  my
limited  knowledge,  to  make  the
world  acquainted  with  us  and  our
doctrines*  There  are  also  thousands
and  thousands  of  Elders  who  have
traversed  this  earth  over,  without
purse  or  scrip,  trying  to  get  people
to  learn  who  the  Latter-day  Saints
are,  and  what  they  believe  in,  and
why  have  you  not  known  us  ?  The
Bible,  Book  of  Mormon,  and  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  are
published  to  the  world  with  other
works,  giving  to  the  whole  reading
world  the  principles  we  are  proclaim-
ing1. Why  are  we  not  known  ?  I
will  tell  you  why  :  the  liars  are  in-
dustrious, and,  according  to  the  old
saying,  a  lie  will  creep  through  a
keyhole  and  travel  leagues  aud  leagues


while  truth  is  getting  up,  wiping  her
eyes  and  putting  her  shoes  on.  That
is  the  reason,  and  you  believe  lies
instead  of  truth.  And,"  said  I,
"  from  this  time  henceforth,  when
you  read  an  article  about  the  people
of  Utah,  read  it  candidly  and  honest-
ly, and  the  Spirit  will  tell  you  whe-
ther it  is  true  or  a  lie,  and  believe
the  truth  about  us."

I  will  say  again,  brethren  and  sis-
ter^ do  not  be  in  a  hurry.  Brethren,
if  you  want  to  get  rich  a  live  so  as  to
enjoy  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  You
will  then  know  exactly  what  to  do
in  all  matters.  You  want  the  spirit
of  wisdom  in  all  your  business  tran-
sactions, and  just  as  much  in  farm-
ing as  anything  else.  We  want  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  from  the  least
chore  of  labor  that  we  perform,  to
the  highest  spiritual  duty  devolving
upon  the  highest  man  in  the  king-
dom of  God.  We  w?mt  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  to  guide  and  direct  us
through  this  world,  to  teach  us  in
spiritual  tilings  and  in  temporal
things,  that  we  may  learn  how  to
gain  to  ourselves  the  riches  of  eter-
nity, and  secure  to  ourselves  eternal
lives*

God  bless  you*  Amen.


44


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


DISCOURSE  B5T  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  is  tee Xew  Tybekvaclb,  Salt  Lake  City,

Apkil  7,  1872.


(Reported  h;/  David  IF.  Evmisj

THE  LATTER-DAY  KINGDOM — THE  PRESENT  FULFILMENT  OF  ANCIENT

PROPHECY.  *


When  I  look  over  this  vast  CQOgre.
gat  ion,  assembled  in  the  body  of
this  house  as  well  as  in  the  gallery,
it  seems  to  be  an  impossibility  to
make  all  hear;  and  to  give  all  an
opportunity  to  do  so  it  will  tin  ne-
cessary that  the  closest  attention  be
given  and  that  shuffling  of  feet  and
whispering  cease.  I  suppose  there
iniist  be  congregated  here  something
in  the  neighborhood  of  twelve  thou-
sand  persons,  and  there  are  but  very
few  voices  or  lungs  that  are  able  to
reach  such  a  multitude,  and  edify
and  instruct  them.  I  ktunv  from
former  experience  in  speaking  from
this  stand,  that  it  requires  a  great
exertion  of  the  lungs  and  body  to
speak  so  as  to  be  understood,  and  this
great  exertion  of  the  ph }  meal  system
is  calculated  in  a  very  short  time  to
weary  also  the  mint],  therefore  I  may
not  be  able  to  ad  divas  you  for  any
great  length  of  time.

It  is  now  forty-two  years  since  the
organization  of  the  Church  uf  Jesus
Christ  on  the  earth.  Forty- t  wo  years
ago,  on  the  Gth  day  of  April,  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  whs  emi-
manded  by  the  Lord  Almighty  to
organize  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  the
earth  for  the  la*f  turn — t  »  srt  up
and  make  a  beginning — to  form  the
nucleus  of  a  Government  that  never
should  be  destroyed  from  the  earth,


or,  in  other  words,  that  should  stand
forever*  The  founding  of  govern-
ments, of  whatsoever  nature  they
may  be,  may  be  considered  in  the
estimation  of  some,  very  honorable;
but  there  is  no  special  honor  attached
to  a  man  who  is  called  upon  by  the
_  mighty  to  found  a  Government  on
the  earth,  for  it  is  the  Lord  who
works  by  him  as  an  instrument,  using
him  for  that  purpose.  That,  of
course,  is  honorable.  Perhaps  there
never  was  a  work  accomplished
among  men  of  so  great  and  important
a  nature  as  that  of  the  foundation  of
a  kingdom  that  never  is  to  be  de-
stroyed. About  six  thousand  years
have  passed  away  since  the  Govern,
meut  established  by  the  Patriarchs,
or  by  the  first  man,  was  commenced
lu  re  on  the  earth.  From  that  time
until  the  present  vast  numbers  and
descriptions  of  Governments,  some
Patriarchal  in  their  nature,  others
taking  the  form  of  kingdoms,  others
of  empires  and  so  forth,  have  been
organized  here  on  the  earth.  During
that  long  interval  of  time  whenever
a  man  has  founded  a  Government  he
has  been  greatly  honored,  not  only
by  the  generation  among  whom  he
lived,  and  in  which  he  formed  the
Government,  but  he  has  been  honored
generally  by  after  generations.  But
nearly  all  the  Governments  that  have


THE  LATTER-DAY  KINGDOM,  ETC.


45


been  established  have  been  thrown
down — they  have  been  only  tempo-
rary in  their  nature — exist  ing  for  a
few  centuries  perhaps,  and  then  over-
thrown. It  is  nor  my  intention  this
afternoon  to  examine  the  nature  and
forms  of  these  various  human  Gov-
ernment s,  but  to  state  in  a  few  words
that  there  is  now  organized  on  the
earth  a  Government  which  never  will
be  broken  as  former  Governments
have  been.  This  will  stand  for  ever.
It  began  very  small — only  six  mem-
bers were  organized  in  this  Govern-
ment on  Tuesday  the  Oth  d  iy  of
April,  1830,  that  is  according  fo  the
vulgar  era;  according  to  the  true  era
it  was  some  two  or  three  years  lon-
ger. The  Christian  era,  that  is  in
common  use  now  among  the  human
family  is  ail  led  the  vulgar  era,  be-
cause it  is  incorrect.  Jesus,  it  is
acknowledged  by  the  most  learned
men  at  the  present  day,  was  born  two
or  three  years  before  the  period  that
is  now  commonly  called  the  vulgar
Christian  era.  It  is  also  acknow-
ledged by  the  greater  portion  of  the
learned  men  of  the  day,  who  have
carefully  examined  the  subject,  that
Jesus  was  crucified  otl  the  tith  day
ol  April;  and  according  to  the  true
Christian  era  it  was  precisely  eighteen
hundred  years  from  the  day  of  hi*
crucifixion  until  ihe  day  that  this
Church  was  ot  gunized.  Why  the  L-  ird
chose  this  particular  period — the  anni-
versary of  the  day  ol  his  crucifixion  for
the  organization  of  his  kingdom  on
the  earth  1  do  not  know,  I  do  know
that  lie  has  a  set  time  in  his  own
mind  for  accomplishing  his  great
pur  poses ;  but  why  he  should  pur-
pose in  his  own  mind  that  precisely
eighteen  hundred  years  should  elapse
from  the  day  of  the  crucifixion  until
the  day  of  the  organization  of  his
church,  we  do  not  know.  Suffice  it
to  say  that  this  is  the  interval  that
elapsed. The  Book  of  Mormon  gives


the  exact  interval  from  the  day  of
his  birth  to  the  day  of  the  crucifixion,
and  by  putting  these  two  periods
together  we  can  ascertain  the  true
Christian  era.  There  is  a  great  dis-
pute, however,  anion j  chronologistfl
in  regard  to  this  matter;  many  of
them  say  Jesus  was  hunt  one  \  ear
before  the  vulg?ir  era,  others  that  he
was  burn  two  years  before  that.  Four
diti"  rent  clironnliv^ists,  menfioue  1  by
name  in  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary,
pLco  i  he  period  three  years  before
the  vulgir  era;  others  place  it  at
four  years  he  tore,  some  five,  and  some
have  placed  ir  seven  years  he  fore  the
pres-Mit  vulvar  era.  If  we  take  a
medium  between  t hese combined  >vitli
the  testimony  of  a  great  many  who
have  written  upon  the  subject,  we
find,  as  I  said  before,  that  it  makes
precisely  eighteen  hundred  ye;trs  he-
tweeu  the  two  great  events  that  took
place,  namely  the  crucifixion  and  the
building  up  of  Lis  kingdom  in  t  bests
latter  days.

Go  !  hiis  seen  proper  in  the  pro-
gress of  tnis  kingdom  to  restore  to
his  seivauls  hoMing  re  priesthood
1  every  key  and  power  pertaining  to
t lit;  restitution  of  all  things  ftpoitea
of  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  Holy
Prophets  since  the  wot  I  1  be^an.  (Joe
of  the  fii-st  things  that  he  conde-
scended to  restore  whs  the  fullness  of
the  everlasting  Gospel,  ju^t  acc  *rd-
ing  to  the  prediction  of  the  ancient
Propheis — by  the  coming  of  an  mm  gel
from  h "aven.  Mr.  Smith  fulfilled
that  prediction,  or  rather  it  was  ful-
filled to  turn.  He  declares,  in  language
most  pi  on  and  positive,  that  God
did  send  an  angel  thru  heaven  and
committed  to  him  the  everhisting
Gosp A  on  plates  of  gold;  or  in  other
words,  lie  had  it  revealed  to  hi  in
by  tiiis  angel,  where  the  plates  of
gold  were  deposited  containing  the
everlasting  Gospel,  as  it  was  preached
to  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  this


46


JOUUNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


American  continent,  by  tlie  personal
ministry  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ,  This  was  the  restora-
tion predicted  by  John  in  the  11th
chapter  of  [Revelations,  where  it  is
declared  that  such  an  event  should
take  place.  John  siys  that  he  saw,
in  vision,  an  angel  come  from  heaven
to  earth,  to  restore  the  everlasting
Gospel.  No  people  on  earth,  prior
to  the  advent  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  ever  testified  to  the  fulfilment
of  John's  prediction.  If  you  make
the  inquiry  of  the  various  Christian
denominations,  whether  Catholic,
Greek  or  Dissenters,  they  will  tell
you  unitedly  that  no  such  event
characterized  the  rise  of  their
churches;  we  have  therefore  their
testimony,  proving  that  God  never
fulfilled  this  portion  of  his  word
through  them  ;  but  on  the  contrary
the  united  voice  and  testimony  of  all
these  Christians,  from  one  end  of
the  earth  to  the  other  is  that  the
Bible  contains  the  Gospel,  "And
we  have  preached  the  Gospel,"  say
they,  "as  we  found  it  recorded  in
the  Bible,'*  and  no  angel  to  restore
the  authority  to  preaeh  the  Gospel,
to  baptize,  to  confirm  by  the  laying
on  of  hands,  to  administer  the  Lord**
Supper,  or  to  restore  or  give  autho-
rity to  organize  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth,  was  necessary."  To
this  we  reply,  the  history  of  the
Gospel  is  one  thing,  and  the  autho-
rity to  preach  it  and  administer  its
ordinances  is  another.  We  can  read
its  history  iu  the  New  Testament;
and  we  can  also  read  there  how  the
ancient  servants  of  God  organized
the  Church  in  their  day;  we  can  read
what  ordinances  they  performed  or
administered  among  the  children  of
men;  we  can  read  what  was  needful
for  the  organization  ot  the  Christian
Church  eighteen  hundred  y ears  ago.
We  have  the  history  of  all  these
things  in  the  Scriptures,  but  for


some  seventeen  centuries  past  prior
to  the  coming  of  this  angel,  there
has  been  no  authority  to  preach  it;
no  Apostles,  no  Prophets,  no  Revc
lators,  no  visions  from  heaven,  no
inspiration  from  heaven;  no  voice
of  the  Lord  has  been  heard  among
the  nations  during  the  long  interval
that  has  elapsed  since  the  putting  to
death  of  the  ancient  servants  of  God,
and  the  destruction  of  the  ancient
Christian  Church.  Joseph  Smith
came  to  this  generation  testifying  to
the  fulfillment  of  that  which  God
predicted  in  the  Revelations  of  Saint
John — the  restoration  of  the  Gospel.
J] ut  says  John  the  Revelator,  u  when
it  is  restored  it  shall  be  preached  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people."

Is  there  any  prospect  of  this  Gos-
pel being  thus  extensively  preached
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
in  this  generation?  We  need  not
refer  you  to  the  missions  that  have
been  taken  by  the  Elders  of  this
Church.  Their  works  speak  for
themselves.  Behold  this  vast  con-
gregation of  people  assembled  here,
and  nearly  all  who  inhabit  this  Ter-
ritory. Why  are  they  here?  Be-
cause the  angel  has  brought  the
everlasting  Gospel,  and  bi cause  the
servants  of  God  have  been  commis-
sioned and  sent  forth  with  the  sound
of  the  Gospel  among  the  various  na-
tions and  kingdoms  of  the  earth;
and  because  they  have  succeeded  in
preaching  it  among  vast  numbers  of
people,  and  gathering  them  out  from
the  midst  of  the  nations.  But  it  has
not  yet  gone  to  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues  and  people;  but  wait  a  little
longer,  it  will  shortly  go,  for  just  as
sure  as  it  has  already  been  preached
to  nearly  all  the  nations  of  Christen-
donij  so  will  it  go  to  every  other
people  —  heathen,  Jlahomedan,  and
every  class,  whether  in  Europe,  Asia,
Africa,  or  the  uttermost  parts  of


THE  LATTER-DAY  KINGDOM,  ETC,


South  America,  the  frozen  regions  in
the  north,  or  the  numerous  islands  in
the  great  western  and  eastern  oceans.
Every  people  must  he  warned  that
the  great  day  of  the  Lord  i>s  close  at
hand  ;  every  people  must  know  that
the  Lord  God  has  spoken  iu  these
latter  times;  every  people  must
know  something  concerning  the  pur-
poses of  the  Great  Jehovah  in  fulfil-
ling and  accomplishing  the  great
preparatory  work  for  the  second  ad-
vent of  the  Son  of  God  from  the
heavens.  Here  then  is  the  fufil-
ment  of  one  prophecy.  Let  us  now
come  to  another.

John,  who  saw  this  angel  restore
the  everlasting  Gospel  to  be  preached
to  all  the  nations,  declares  that  ano-
ther proclamation  was  closely  con-
nected with  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel.  What  was  it  ?  "  The  hour
of  his  judgment  has  come" — the
eleventh  hour,  the  last  time  that  God
will  warn  the  nations  of  the  earth,
"The  honr  of  God's  judgment  has
come,"  and  that  is  the  reason  why
the  Gospel  is  to  be  so  extensively
preached  among  all  people,  nations
and  tongues,  because  the  Lord  in-
tends through  this  warning  to  pre-
pare them,  if  they  will,  to  escape  the
hour  of  his  judgment,  which  must
come  upon  all  people  who  will  refuse  '
to  lvceive  the  divine  message  of  the
everlasting  Gospel.

We  will  now  pass  on  to  another
prophecy.  Another  angel  followed.
What  was  his  proclamation  ?  Ano-
ther angel  followed,  and  he  cried
with  a  loud  voice,  saying  :  "  Babylon
is  fallen,  is  fallen.  She  has  made
all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of  the
wrath  of  her  fornication,"  <fce.  Spi-
ritual Babylon  the  Great,  t;  the  mo-
ther of  harlots  and  abominations  of
the  earth."  "Mystery  Babylon" —
that  great  power  that  has  held  sway
over  the  nations  of  the  earth — that
great  ecclesiastical  power  which  has


ruled  over  the  consciences  of  the
children  of  men,  she  is  to  fall  and  is
to  be  destroyed  from  the  face  of  the
earth.  Will  the  righteous  fall  with
her?  No*  Why  not?  Because
there  is  a  way  for  their  escape.

Now  mark  another  prophecy.  "  I
heard  a  great  voice,"  says  John,
'*  from  heaven,  saying,  '  Come  out  of
her,  O  my  people !'"  Out  oi'  where  ?
"  Mystery  Babylon,  the  Great" — out
of  this  great  confusion  that  exists
throughout  all  the  nations  and  multi-
tudes of  Christendom.  "  Come  out
of  her,  O  my  people,  that  ye  partake
not  of  her  sins,  that  ye  receive  uot
of  her  plagues ;  for  her  sins  have
reached  to  the  heavens,  and  God
hath  remembered  her  iniquities !"
Is  this  being  fulfilled  ?  Do  you  see
any  indications  of  the  people  at  God
coming  out  from  "Mystery  Babylon
the  Great?"  Yes,  for  forty-two
years,  and  upwards,  God  has  com-
manded his  people,  not  by  something
devised  by  a  congregation  of  divines,
or  by  human  ingenuity,  but  by  a
voice  from  heaven  which  has  been
published  and  printed,  requiring  all
who  receive  the  everlasting  Gospel
to  come  out  from  the  midst  of  great
Babylon.  One  hundred  thousand
Latter-day  Saints,  approximately
speaking,  now  inherit  these  mountain
regions.  They  are  here  because  of
this  prediction  of  John,  because  of
its  being  fulfilled,  because  of  the  voice
that  has  come  from  heaven — the  pro-
clamation of  the  Almighty  for  his
people  to  flee  from  amongst  the  na-
tions of  the  earth.  I  need  not  say
any  more  in  regard  to  this  prophecy;
it  is  in  the  Bible,  and  is  being  ful-
filled before  the  eyes  of  all  people.

Let  me  refer  now  to  another  pro-
phecy. Daniel  the  Prophet  has  told
us  that  in  the  latter  days  after  the
great  image  that  was  seen  in  dream
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of
Babylon,  representing the  various


4S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


kingdoms  of  the  world,  should  he
destroyed,  and  those  nations  should
pass  away  and  bee  in e  like  the  ch^ff
of  the  summer  threshing  floor,  the
Lord  would  establish  an  everlasting
Government  here  upou  the  earth.
The  Lord  God  saw  proper  to  reveal
to  liis  servant  Daniel  the  nature  of
tli is  Government.  He  represented
it  hs  having  a  very  small  beginning
—  as  a  stone  cat  oat  of  the  mountain
without  bunds,  which  stone  should  fall
up  m  the  feet  of  the  image,  and  they
si  inn  Id  be  broken  in  pieces.  After
tin-  destruction  of  the  feet  all  the
inage.  should  full — the  legs  of  iron,
the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,  Mie
breast  and  arras  of  silver,  the  head
yr  yrold — represent  in  tie  renin  mts
of  all  those  ancient  nations  —  'he
Babylonians,  il.  des  and  P-  rdnis,
and  the  Greeks;  also  1 1  :e  renin  uiK
ot  tho.se  that  once  constituted  the
threat  Roman  empire — those  now  in
K\ in >pe  and  those  of  ISuropeoi  <  »r  10  in
Much  have  Come  across  t ho  ur*at
ocean  and  established  tnems  dvee
here  on  the  vast  continent  o(  the
we>f,  all,  all  were  to  lie  destroyed  by
the  foiee  of  this  little  kingdom  m  t »e
established  by  the  power  of  hunt,
roid  liy  the  authority  that  should
characterise  *  the  natnte  of  the  stone
cut  out  of  the  mountains.  "  hi  the
days  of  tlb  se  kings,"  says  the  Pro*
phi  t,  u  shall  the  God  of  heaven  set
up  a  kingdom  tint  sledl  never  be
destroyed,  neither  shall  it  be  lelt  to
a  iy  other  people,  but  it  shall  stand
for  ever,"  etc.  The  Prophet  Damt  1
uttered  the  prophecy;  Joseph  Smith,
by  authority  of*  the  Almighty,  ful-
filled it,  ^o  far  as  the  organization  *>r
set  ring  up  of  the  kingdom  was  con-
cerned.

Let  me  refer  now  to  some  other
prophecies.  I  do  not  want  to  dwell
long  upon  any  of  them,  We  are
told  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  that
before  the  time  of  the  second  advent,


when  the  trlory  of  the  Lord  should
h,3  revealed  and  all  flesh  should  see
it  together,  there  should  be  a  Zion
built  up  on  the  earth.  The  Prophet
gives  the  following  exhortation  to
that  Zion — "  O  Zion,  thoa  that
br  ingest  good  tidings,  get  thee  up
Into  the  high  mountain/'  Here  then
is  a  prophecy  that,  in  the  latter  days,
God  would  have  a  Zion  on  the  earth
before  he  shoal  I  reveal  himself  from
heaven  and  manifest  ins  trlory  to  all
people;  and  the  people  called  Zion
are  exhorted,  in  the  \ Oth  chapter  of
Isaiah,  to  get  up  inio  the  high  moun-
tain. Here  we  are  in  this  great
mountain  region,  in  a  Territory  called
the  mountain  Territory*  Here  we
are  on  (he  great  backbone,  us  it  were,
of  the  western  he  nisphere,  located
among  the  valleys  of  this  great  ridge
of  mountains,  which  extends  tor  thou-
sands of  miles- — Iron  the  frozen
regions  in  the  north  aim.  st  to  the
southern  extremity  of  Snutli  A  ueri  -a.

Heie  are  r In-  pe  pie  called  Zion,  gone
up  into  the  liitrh  mountain,  aeeordiug
to the prediction of the  Prophet

Isaiah.  Isaiah  attired  the  prophecy;
Joseph  Smith  also  prophecied  the
same  thing,  but  (tied  without  seeing
it  fulfilled  Mis  succe  sor,  B  igharn
Young,  lived  to  be  t  e  favored  I  stm-
raeut  in  the  hands  of  God,  of  taking
the  people  f  rom  those  countries  down
in  the  S-ates,  those  countries  upon
the  low  elevations  of  our  glohe,  and
bringing  them  up  here  into  this  vast
moumain  region.  Tnu*  the  prophecy
was  uttered — thus  it  has  been  lul-


We  wili  pass  on  to  ome  other
prophecies.  In  the  eighteenth  chap,
ter  of  the  prophecies  of  Isai  di  we
have  a  prediction  about  a  time  when
the  Lord  should  make  a  great  des-
truction upon  a  certain  portion  of
the  earth.  The  Prophet  begins  the
chapter  by  saying,  11  woe  to  the  land
shadowing  with  wings,  which  is  be-


THE  LATTER-DAY  KINGDOM,  ETC.


49


yond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  Re-
collect where  the  Prophet  dwelt  when
lie  uttered  this  prophecy — in  Pales-
tine, east  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.
Where  was  Ethiopia?  South-west
from  Palestine.  Where  was  there  a
land  located  beyond  the  rivers  of
Ethiopia,  Every  person  acquainted
with  the  geography  of  our  globe
knows  that  this  American  continent
was  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia
from  the  land  of  Palestine,  where  the
prophecy  was  uttered.  A  woe  was
pronounced  upon  that  land,  and  that
woe  is  this  :  u  For  afore  the  harvest,
when  the  bud  is  perfect  and  the  sour
grape  is  ripening  in  the  flower,  he
shall  both  cut  ofl  the  sprigs  with
pruning-hooks,  and  take  away  and
cut  down  the  branches.  They  shall
be  left  together  unto  the  fowls  of  the  [
mountains,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the
earth.  And  the  fowls  shall  summer
upon  them,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the
earth  shall  winter  upon  them."  But
first,  before  this  destruction,  there  is
a  remarkable  prophecy.  Says  the
Prophet:  "All  ye  inhabitants  of  the
world,  and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see
ye  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign  on
the  mountains,  and  when  he  bloweth
a  trumpet,  hear  ye."  Prom  this  we
learn  that,  before  this  great  destruc-
tion, there  is  to  be  an  ensign  lifted
up  on  the  mountains,  and  this,  too,
beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  from
Palestine,  This  is  the  reason  why
Zion  in  the  latter  days  goes  up  into
the  mountains,  in  order  that  an  en-
sign might  be  lifted  up  on  the  moun-
tains* This  prophecy  was  uttered
some  twenty- five  hundred  years  ago,
and  has  been  fulfilled  before  the  eyes
of  the  people  in  our  day.

But  more  in  regard  to  this  ensign;
we  find  that  it  was  not  an  ensign  to
be  lifted  up  in  Palestine,  for  in  the
fifth  chapter  of  his  prophecies,  Isaiah,
speaking  of  it  says — "The  Lord
shall  lift  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations

No.  4.


I  from  afar,"  What  does  this  mean?
It  means  a  land  far  distant  from
where  the  Prophet  Isaiah  lived— the
land  of  Palestine,  Now  there  is  no
land  of  magnitude  or  greatness  that
is  far  off  from  Palestine  that  would
answer  the  description  of  this  pro-
phecy any  better  than  this  great
western  hemisphere;  it  is  located
almost  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
globe  from  Palestine,  The  Lord,
then,  was  to  lift  the  ensign  on  a  land
that  was  far  off  from  where  the  Pro-
phet lived ;  and  that  ensign,  we  are
told,  should  be  set  up  on  the  moun-
tains, and  that,  too,  on  a  land  shad-
owing with  wings.  When  looking
on  the  map  of  North  and  South
America  it  has  oftentimes  suggested
to  my  own  mind  the  two  wings  of  a
great  bird.  No  doubt  the  Prophet
Isaiah  saw  this  great  western  conti-
nent in  vision,  and  recognized  the
resemblance  to  the  wings  of  a  bird
in  the  general  outline  of  the  two
branches  of  the  continent.  On  such
a  land,  on  the  mountains  afar  off
from  Palestine,  an  ensign  was  to  be
raised.  But  remember  another  thing
in  connection  with  this  ensign — See
60 w  extensive  the  proclamation  was
to  be— u  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the
world  and  dwellers  on  the  earth,  see
ye  when  he  lifts  up  an  ensign  on  the
mountains,"  It  was  to  be  a  work
that  was  to  attract  the  attention  of
all  people,  unto  the  ends  of  the  world.

"  But,"  enquires  one,  "  what  do
you  call  an  ensign  ?  "  Webster  gives
the  definition  of  an  ensign  or
standard — c<  Something  to  which  the
people  gather ;  a  notice  for  the  peo-
ple to  assemble,"  In  other  words  it
is  the  great  standard  df  the  Almighty
— the  great  ensign  that  he  is  lifting
up  in  the  shape  of  his  Church  and
kingdom,  on  the  mountains  in  the
latter  days,  with  all  the  order  and
form  of  his  ancient  system  of  church
government,  with  its  inspired  Apos*

Vol  XV.


50


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ties  and  Prophets  and  with  all  the
gifts,  powers  and  blessings  charac-
terizing the  Christian  Church  in
ancient  days.  That  is  an  ensign  that
should  attract  the  people  unto  the
very  ends  of  the  world.

With  the  establishment  of  this
ensign  God  has  not  only  restored  the
Gospel,  but  the  keys  of  gathering
the  people  together  and  building  up
Zion,  and  he  has  also  restored  other
keys  and  blessings  that  were  to  char-
acterize the  great  and  last  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times.  What
are  they?  The  same  as  predicted
in  the  last  chapter  of  the  prophecy
of  Malachi.  That  Prophet,  speak-
ing of  the  great  day  of  burning
says,  "  Behold  the  day  shall  come
that  shall  barn  as  an  oven,  and  all
the  proud  and  they  that  do  wickedly
shall  become  as  stubble,  and  the  day
that  co met h  shall  burn  them  up  saith
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  that  it  shall  leave
them  neither  root  nor  branch."
This  is  something  that  has  never
been  fulfilled  yet  But  mark !
Before  the  Lord  burns  all  the  proud
and  those  who  do  wickedly,  he  has
told  nrf  he  would  send  Elijah  the
Prophet,  He  says,  "  Behold,  I  will
send  unto  you  Elijah  the  Prophet,
he  shall  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children  and  the  hearts  of  the
children  to  the  fathers,  lest  I  come
and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse.' 7
Uncollect,  this  is  to  be  just  before
the  day  of  burning,  before  the  great
and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  should
come.

Elijah,  the  Prophet,  then,  must
come  from  heaven — that  same  man
who  was  translated  in  a  chariot  of
fire,  and  who  had  such  power  while
on  the  earth  that  he  could  fight,  as
it  were,  all  the  enemies  of  Israel
that  came  against  him;  he  could
call  down  fire  from  heaven  and  con-
sume the  fifties  as  they  came  by
companies  to  take  him. That  same


man  was  to  be  sent  in  the  last  days,
before  the  great  and  notable  day  of
the  Lord. What  for  ? To  restore  a
very  important  principle — a  prin-
ciple which  will  turn  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  fathers,  and  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children.
Has  that  Prophet  been  sent  to  the
earth,  according  to  the  prediction  ?
Yes. When  did  he  come,  and  to
whom  did  he  come  ? He  came  to
that  despised  young  man,  Joseph
Smith. According  to  the  testimony
of  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet  Elijah
stood  before  him,  in  the  presence
of  Oliver  Cowdery,  and  gave  them
these  keys. What  is  included  in
this  turning  of  the  hearts  of  the
children  to  the  fathers  and  the  hearts
of  the  fathers  to  the  children  ?  There
is  included  in  it  a  principle  for  the
salvation  of  the  fathers  that  are
dead,  as  well  as  for  the  children
who  are  living. You  have  heard,
Latter-day Saints, for  years  and
years,  that  God  has  given  keys,  by
which  the  living  in this  Church
might  do,  not  only  the  works  neces-
sary for  their  own  salvation,  but  also
certain  works  necessary  to  the  salva-
tion of  their  ancestors  as  far  back  as
they  could  obtain  their  genealogies.
What  can  be  done  by  us  for  our
fathers  who  have  lived  and  died  du-
ring  the last  seventeen  hundred
years,  without  hearing  the  Gospel
in  its  fullness  and  power?  Hun*
dreds  and  thousands,  and  millions
of  them  were  sincere  and  honest,
and  served  the  Lord  the  best  they
knew ;  but  they  lived  in  the  midst
of  apostate  Christendom,  and  never
heard  the  Gospel  preached  by  in-
spired men,  neither  had  they  the
chance  of  having  its  ordinances  ad-
ministered to  them  by  men  having
authority  from  God. Must  they  be
shut  out  from  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  be  deprived  of  the  glory,  joys
and  blessings  of  celestial  life  because


THE  LATTER* DAY  KINGDOM,  ETC.


51


of  this?  No,  God  is  an  impartial
being,  and  when  he  sent  Elijah  the
Prophet  to  confer  the  keys  I  have
referred  to  upon  Joseph  Smith,  he
intended  that  this  people  should
work  for  the  generations  of  the  dead,
as  well  as  for  the  generations  of  the
living;  that  these  ordinances  which
pertain  to  men  here  in  the  flesh
might  be  administered  in  their  behalf
by  those  of  their  kindred  living  in
this  day  and  generation.  In  this  wfty
the  Latter-day  Saints  will  be  bap-
tized and  receive  the  various  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God  for  their  forefathers,  as  far  as
they  can  trace  them ;  and  when  we
have  traced  them  as  far  back  as  we
can  possibly  go,  the  Lord  God  has
promised  that  he  will  reveal  our  an-
cestrv  back  until  it  shall  connect  with
the  ancient  priesthood,  so  that  there
will  be  no  link  wanting  in  the  great
chain  of  redemption.

Here  then  was  a  restoration  in
fulfillment  of  the  prediction  of
Malachi,  and  for  this  reason  Temples
are  being  bnilt.  The  Temple,  of
which  the  foundation  is  laid  on  this
block,  is  intended  for  that  purpose
among  others.  It  is  not  intended
for  the  assembling  of  vast  congre-
gations of  the  Saints,  but  it  is  in-
tended to  be  for  the  administration
of  sacred  and  holy  ordinances.  There
will  be  a  font  for  baptism,  in  its  pro-
per place,  built  according  to  the  pat
tern  that  God  shall  give  unto  his
servants.  It  is  intended  that,  in
these  sacred  and  holy  places,  ap-
pointed, set  apart  and  dedicated  by
the  command  of  the  Almighty,
genealogies  shall  be  revealed,  and
that  the  living  shall  officiate  for  the
dead,  that  those  who  have  not  had
the  opportunity  while  in  the  flesh  in
past  generations  to  obey  the  Gospel,
might  have  their  friends  now  living,
officiate  for  them.  This  does  not
destroy  their  agency,  for  although


they  laid  down  their  bodies  and  went
to  their  graves  in  a  day  of  darkness,
and  they  are  now  mingled  with  the
hosts  of  spirits  in  the  eternal  worlds,
their  agency  still  continues,  and  that
agency  gives  them  power  to  believe
in  Jesus  Christ  iJiere7  just  as  well  as
we  can  who  are  here.  Those  spirits
on  the  other  side  of  the  veil  can  re-
pent just  the  same  as  we,  in  the
flesh,  can  repent.  Faith  in  God  and
in  his  son  Jesus  Christ,  and  repen-
tance are  acts  of  the  mind — mental
operations — but  when  it  comes  to
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins
they  cannot  perform  that,  we  act  for
them,  that  having  been  ordained  to
be  performed  in  the  flesh.  They
can  receive  the  benefit  of  whatever  is
done  for  them  here,  and  whatever
the  Lord  God  commands  his  people
here  in  the  flesh  to  do  for  them  will
be  published  to  them  there  by  those
holding  the  everlasting  Priesthood  of
the  Son  of  God,  If,  when  the  Gos-
pel is  preached  to  them  there,  they
will  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
they  will  receive  the  bene6ts  of  the
ordinances  performed  on  their  behalf
here,  and  they  will  be  partakers,  with
their  kindred,  of  all  the  blessings  of
the  fullness  of  the  Gospel  of  the
Son  of  God ;  but  if  they  will  not  do
this  they  will  be  bound  over  in  chains
of  darkness  until  the  judgment  of
the  great  day,  when  they  will  be
judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh.
We  are  here  in  the  flesh,  and  the
same  Gospel  that  condemns  the  dis-
obedient and  the  sinner  here,  will,  by
the  same  law,  condemn  those  who
are  on  the  other  side  of  the  veil.

We  have  an  account  of  baptism
for  the  dead,  as  it  was  administered
among  the  ancient  Saints.  Paul
refers  to  it  in  his  epistle  to  the  Cor-
inthians, to  prove  to  them  that  the
resurrection  was  a  reality,  "else,11
says  he,  "what  shall  they  do  who
are  baptized  for  the  dead  ? If  the


52  JOURNAL  OF

dead  rise  not  at  all,  why  then  are
they  baptized  for  the  dead  ?"  It
was  a  strong  argument  that  Paul
brought  forward,  and  one  that  the
Corinthians  well  understood.  It  was
a  practice  among  them  to  be  bap-
tized for  their  dead,  and  Paul,  know-
ing that  they  understood  this  prin-
ciple, uses  an  argument  to  show  that
the  dead  would  have  a  resurrection,
and  that  baptism  or  immersion  in
water,  a  being  buried  in  and  the
coming  forth  out  of  the  water,  was  a
simile  of  the  resurrection  from  the
dead.  The  same  doctrine  is  taught
in  one  of  Peter's  epistles.  A  boat
preaching  to  those  who  are  dead,
Peter  says  that  "  Jesus  was  put  to
death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by
the  Spirit,  by  which  also  he  went
and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,  :
which  sometimes  were  disobedient,
when  once  the  long-suffering  of  God
waited  in  the  days  of  Noah  while  the
ark  was  preparing?"  Indeed!  Jesus
himself  go  to  the  dead  and  preach  to
them  ?  Yes,  Go  to  the  old  ante-
diluvian spirits,  and  preach  to  them?
Yes,  preach  to  spirits  who  had  lain
in  prison  over  two  thousand  years,
shut  up  and  deprived  of  entering  into
the  fulness  of  the  kingdom  of  God
because  of  their  disobedience*  Jesus
went  and  preached  to  them.  "  What
did  he  preach  ?"  He  did  not  preach
eternal  damnation,  for  that  would
have  been  no  use.  He  did  not  go
and  say  to  them,  "  You  ante  diluvian
spirits,  I  have  come  here  to  torment
you/'  He  did  not  declare  that  "  I
have  opened  your  prison  doors  to  tell
you  there  is  no  hope  for  you,  your
case  is  past  recovery,  you  must  be
damned  to  everlasting  despair/1  This
was  not  his  preaching.  He  went
there  to  declare  glad  tidings.  When
he  entered  the  prison  of  those  ante- ,
diluvians,  Peter  says  he  preached  the  j
Gospel.  **  For,  for  this  cause  was
the  Gospel  preached  to  them  that  are


DISCOURSES.

\  dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  ac-
cording to  men  in  the  flesh,  and  live
according  to  God  in  the  spirit/'
Yes,  the  inhabitants  of  the  spirit  world
— far  more  numerous  than  those  in
the  flesh — must  hear  the  glad  tidings
of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  that
all  may  be  judged  by  the  same  Gos-
pel and  the  same  law ;  and  if  they
will  receive  it  be  blessed,  exalted  from
their  prison  house,  and  brought  into
the  presence  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,  and  inherit  celestial  glory.

This,  therefore,  is  among  the  great-
est of  all  the  keys  that  God  has  re-
vealed in  the  last  dispensation — the
saving  of  the  generations  of  the  dead,
as  well  as  the  generations  of  the
living,  inasmuch  as  they  will  repent
Shall  we  stop  here?  Perhaps  I
have  spoken  sufficiently  long.  There
are  other  principles,  just  as  import-
ant in  their  nature,  that  must  be
restored  in  the  latter-days,  but  I  have
not  time  to  dwell  upon  them.  I
have  reference  now  to  the  restoration
of  that  eternal  principle — the  marri-
age covenant,  which  once  was  on  the
earth  in  the  days  of  our  first  parents,
the  eternal  union  of  husband  and
wife,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  in
the  first  pattern  of  marriage  that  is
given  to  the  children  of  men.  That
must  also  be  restored,  and  everything
in  its  time  and  in  its  season  must  be
restored,  in  order  that  all  things
spoken  of  by  the  mouth  of  all  the
holy  Prophets  since  the  world  began
may  be  fulfilled.  But  we  will  leave
this  subject  for  some  future  time.
There  must,  however,  be  a  restora-
tion of  the  eternal  covenant  of  marri-
age, and  also  of  that  order  of  marri-
age which  existed  among  the  old
Patriarchs,  before  the  prophecies  can
be  fulfilled,  wherein  seven  women
shall  take  hold  of  one  man,  saying,
"  we  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and
wear  our  own  apparel,  only  let  us  be
'  called  by  thy  name  to  take  away  our


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.

■


reproach/'  That  must  be  restored,
or  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  never  can
be  fulfilled.  A  great  many  other
things  might  be  named  which  most
be  restored  in  the  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times,  it  is  a  dispensation
to  restore  all  things,  it  is  the  dispen-
sation of  the  spirit  and  power  of
Elias  or  Elijah,  "  to  seal  all  things
unto  the  end  of  all  things"  prepara-
tory to  the  coming  of  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ.

The  wicked  as  well  as  the  righte-
ous will  feel  the  power  of  these  keys.
The  wicked  as  well  as  the  righteous
must  be  sealed  to  that  end  for  which
they  have  lived. Tbe  wicked,  who


have  disobeyed  the  law  of  God,  nmst
be  sealed  over  nnto  darkness,  until
they  have  been  punished  and  beaten
with  many  stripes,  until  the  last
resurrection,  until  the  last  trump  shall
sound.  Bat  the  righteous,  in  the
flesh  and  behind  the  veil,  will  come
forth  in  the  first  resurrection,  but
prior  to  that  great  event  they  will
co-operate  in  their  labors  for  the  con-
summation of  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty  so  far  as  necessary  to  pre-
pare the  way  for  the  second  coming
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  reign
here,  personally,  on  the  earth  for  the
space  of  one  thousand  years.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,


SI


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake  City,

December  18,  1870*

 o ♦

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans*)

 o

OND  COMING  OF  CHRIST— PREPARATORY  WORK  THERETO.


I  will  read  a  few  passages  of
Scripture,  which  will  be  found  in  the
50th  Psalm—


**  The  mighty  God,  even  the  Lord,  hath
spoken,  and  called  the  earth  from  the
rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  thereof,

"Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,
God  hath  shined,

"  Our  God  .shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep
silence— a  fire  shall  devour  before  him,  and
it  shall  be  very  tempeutuoua  round  about
him.

**  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above,
and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his
people,

"Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me  j
those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me
by  sacrifice."

This  congregation,  the  members


of  which  are  generally  speaking
Bible  believers,  have  no  doubt  in
their  minds  bat  the  ancient  servants
of  God  were  inspired  by  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost  to  utter  many  things
concerning  the  future,  to  deliver
many  predictions  concerning  events
which  should  take  place  among
mankind  down  to  the  latest  genera-
tions. David,  in  a  peculiar  man-
ner, was  inspired,  and  composed  his
psalms  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy;
he  foresaw,  by  that  spirit  that  knows
all  things,  some  of  the  grand  events
of  the  future,  pertaining  to  the  in-
habitants of this  world,  and  the


w


54


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


purposes  of  God  in  relation  to  this
creation.  These  passages  which  I
have  read  have  reference  to  some  of
these  great  events,  a  portion  of
which  have  already,  in  a  measure,
been  fulfilled ;  but  the  greater  por-
tion remains  yet  to  be  accomplished,
"The  mighty  God,  even  the  Lord,
hath  spoken,"  has  literally  been
fulfilled  so  far  as  this  present  genera-
tion is  concerned.  It  has  been  ful-
filled also  in  relation  to  past  genera-
tions; but  it  is  very  evident  from
the  meaning  of  the  context,  that
the  speaking  of  the  Lord  here  refer-
red to  was  a  work  of  latter  times
when  God  should  again  speak  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth ;  when  he
should  again  call  upon  all  people,
far  and  near,  "  from  the  rising  of
the  sun,"  as  he  expresses  here,  u  to
the  going  down  thereof"  To  show
more  fully  that  this  was  a  latter-day
work,  he  speaks  or  predicts  that  the
**  Lord  our  God  shall  come  and  not
keep  silence."  This  had  no  reference
to  his  first  coming;  for  though  he
did  then  come  and  utter  forth  his
doctrine  and  did  not  keep  silence,
yet  you  will  see  by  reading  a  little
further,  that  the  Psalmist  had  re-
ference to  another  coming  of  the
Son  of  God,  very  different  in  its
character  from  his  first  advent.  "Our
God  shall  come  and  shall  not  keep
silence"  Now  mark,  in  an  especial
manner,  the  following  sentence,  and
you  will  see  that  it  has  no  reference
to  his  first  coming — "A  fire  shall
devour  before  him,  and  it  shall  be
very  tempestuous  round  about  him/*
This  was  not  a  characteristic  of  his
first  coming ;  there  was  nothing
specially  connected  with  that  event
that  would  excite  the  attention  of
mankind  generally.  He  came  in  a
very  meek  and  humble  manner ;  his
birth  and  advent  into  this  world  were
in  the  most  humble  position.  Born,
as  it  were,  in  a  stable,  laid  down  in


a  manger.  Not  born  in  king's  palace
— not  born  among  the  great  and  no-
ble, but  in  a  very  obscure  manner*
He  grew  up  from  infancy  to  manhood
engaged  in  the  carpenter's  business.
Some  thirty  years  of  his  life  were
spent  at  home  with  his  reputed  father,
and  with  his  mother  Mary,  dwelling
comparatively  in  obscurity,  occa-
sionally breaking  forth  and  arguing
with  the  wise  and  the  great.  Nothing
characterizing  him  as  the  Great
Creator  of  this  world,  or  as  its  Re-
deemer, only  to  those  who  were  well
I  acquainted  with  the  predictions  of
the  Prophets*  But  this  last  coming,
or  the  coming  here  spoken  of  by  the
Psalmist,  represents  him  as  coming
with  power — £e  A  fire  shall  devour
before  him  and  it  shall  be  very  tem-
pestuous round  about  him*  He  shall
call  to  the  heavens  from  above,"  says
the  next  passage,  "and  to  the  earth
from  beneath."  What  object  had  he
in  view  in  calling  upon  the  heavens
above  and  upon  the  earth  beneath  ?
What  end  had  he  in  view  in  again
speaking  and  breaking  the  silence
of  ages,  and  "  in  giving  a  revelation
to  the  heavens  and  then  to  the  earth?
It  was  in  order  to  bring  about  a  pre-
paratory work  before  the  face  ot  his
coming  the  second  time,  when  he
should  come  in  flaming  fire.  A  pre-
paration was  needed,  and  tins  pre-
paration is  mentioned  in  part  in  the
last  verse  which  I  read,  which  de-
clares that  he  should  call  to  the  hea-
vens from  above  and  to  the  earth
from  beneath.

|  He  gives  us  some  insight  into  the
nature  of  that  call.  His  call  to  his
servants  was,  *'  Gather  ye  my  Saints
together  unto  me,  they  that  have
made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacri-
fice/1

I  This  seems,  then,  to  be  a  work
preparatory  to  ihe  coming  of  the
Lord  in  flaming  fire.  The  nature  of
the  fire  that  will  be  exhibited  at  his


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


55


second  coming  in  the  clouds  of  hea-
ven will  be  such  that  it  will  consume
the  wicked  and  ungodly,  and  those
who  repent  not  and  who  do  not
sanctify  themselves  before  the  Lord,
Oar  God  in  that  day  will  be  a  con-
suming fire ;  the  intensity  of  this
fire  will  be  so  great  that  the  very
hills,  the  Psalmist  David  informs
ns  in  another  place,  "  will  melt  like
wax  before  his  presence."  The  Pro-
phet Isaiah,  in  speaking  of  the  fire
or  heat  that  would  accompany  the
second  advent  of  the  Son  of  God,
dedans  that  the  mountains  shall
flow  cl  i  vn  at  his  presence.  The  ele-
ments that  now  constitute  these
rugged  mountains  which  we  see  here
on  this  continent  and  in  all  parts  of
the  earth  where  we  travel  will  melt
with  fervent  heat,  and  will  flow  down
before  the  presence  of  the  Lord*
The  brightness  of  this  fire  will  be
greater  than  that  of  the  sun  in  its
glory,  I  mean  our  temporal,  literal
sun,  from  which  we  receive  light  and
heat,  as  you  will  find  recorded  in
the  last  verse  of  the  24th  chapter
of  Isaiah,  which  flays  that  u  when
the  Lord  of  Hosts  shall  come  to
reign  in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusa-
lem, and  before  his  ancients  gloriously,
the  sun  shall  hide  his  face  in  shame
and  the  moon  shall  be  confounded."
With  all  the  brightness  of  that  lumi-
nary which  lights  this  creation  it  will
hide  its  face  in  shame;  and  the  bright
luminaries  of  heaven  will  be  con-
founded as  it  were,  so  gre  it  will  be
the  glory  of  his  presence — a  fire  de-
vouring before  him,  and  nil  nature
feeling  the  power  of  the  Almighty,
which  will  be  exerted  on  that  grand
occasion-
Will  the  wicked  be  able  to  endure
this  intense  heat  and  not  be  con-
sumed? I  now  have  reference  to
their  physical  tabernacles,  their  tem-
poral bodies.  Hear  what  prophecy
has  declared  in  relation  to  this.


Read  the  last  chapter  contained  in
the  Old  Testament;  that  wiU  answer
the  question.

41  For,  behold,  the  day  cometh,  that
shall  burn  as  an  oven ;  and  all  the  proud,
yea,  and  all  tlmt  do  wickedly,  ghall  be
stubble  ;  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall
burn  them  upt  aaith  the  Lord  of  Host*,
that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor
branch."

Notice,  now,  how  completely  it
will  sweep  the  proud  and  those  who
do  wickedly  from  the  face  of  this
creation.  The  fire  that  proceeds
forth  from  the  presence  of  God  at
his  second  coming  shall  bum  as  an
oven,  and  shall  not  only  affect  the
mountains  and  the  elements  so  as  to
melt  them,  but  it  will  also  consume
the  proud  and  them  that  do  wickedly
from  the  face  of  the  globe.  What
effect  will  this  intense  heat  have  upon
the  righteous?  No  more  than  the
heated  furnace  of  Nebuchadnezzar
had  upon  the  Hebrews  who  were  cast
therein ;  and  though  it  was  heated
seven  times  hotter  than  it  was  wont
to  be  heated  and  slew  those  who  cast
their  fellows  into  it,  yet  they  who
were  thrown  into  it  received  no  harm,
not  even  the  smell  of  fire  on  their
garments.  They  were  protected  hy
a  miracle,  and  the  fire  that  slew  their
enemies  was  their  preservation.  So
likewise  when  the  Son  of  God  shall
burn  up  the  wicked  and  consume
their  bodies  to  ashes,  both  root  and
branch,  leaving  no  remnants  of  them
among  ail  people,  nations  and
tongues,  the  righteous  will  be  pre-
pared to  enter  into  the  midst  of  this
fin  ruing  fire  without  receiving  any
harm ;  indeed  they  will  be  caught  up
into  the  very  presence  of  God,  and
they  will  be  surrounded  with  a  pillar
of  fire  as  Moses  was  when  he  came
down  from  Mount  Sinai,  only  to  a
far  greater  extent ;  but  it  will  have
no  power  over  them,  in  fact  it  will
be  their  protection  and  salvation,
their  glory,  happiness  and  joy.


56


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


To  prepare  the  people  for  tbat
great  day  it  is  necessary  that  the
Saints  should  be  gathered  together,
as  predicted  in  the  5th  verse,  when
he  should  give  this  great  and  grand
revelation  in  the*last  days,  when  the
mighty  God,  even  the  Lord,  shall
speak.  He  will  call  to  the  heavens
to  assist  in  the  great  latter-day  work;
and  all  the  angels  and  the  heavenly
host,  who  do  his  bidding,  will  go  forth
as  awift  messengers  to  execute  his
decrees  and  fulfil  his  purposes  in
bring! fig  about  this  grand  gathering
of  his  elect  from  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth.  Who  will  they  be?  Those
who  have  made  a  covenant  with  him
by  sacrifice*  What  kind  of  a  sacri-
fice ?  The  sacrifice  of  every  earthly
thing  required,  their  native  countries,
their  fathers  and  mothers,  for  in
many  instances  those  who  obey  the
Gospel  are  compelled  to  sever  the
nearest  earthly  ties — parents  from
their  children,  children  from  their
parents  and  kindred  from  their
kin,  in  order  that  they  may  come
forth  and  be  gathered  into  one  grand
body  preparatory  to  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  God  in  flaming  fire.

There  are  many  people  who  have
believed  that  the  coming  of  our  Lord
was  near  ut  hand* We  might  refer
to  many  persons  by  name  who  have
even  set  times  for  his  coming — cer-
tain particular  days, months  and
ycais  in  which  the  Lord  would  be
revealed from heaven. But  they
have  entirely  overlooked  the  prophe-
cies of  the  great  preparatory  work
for  his  coming. If  they  had  read
closely,  and  instead  of  studying  for
dates  had  carefully  looked  for  the
great  purposes  to  be  fulfilled  before
he  comes  they  would  have  known
that  their predictions  were  false.
There  is  to  be  a  grand  gathering  of  all
his  people  from  the  four  quarters  of  t  he
earth  into  one  body,  one  family  as  it
were;  one  people  consolidated  in  one


region  of  country,  before  he  shall  come.

Let  me  refer  to  tins  great  gather-
ing of  the  Saints  from  every  land
and  nation ;  we  find  it  predicted  in
various  portions  of  the  prophetic
writings.  I  will  first  refer  y<>u  to
the  prediction  recorded,  if  I  recol-
lect aright,  in  I  he  43d  chapter  of
Isaiah.  There  is  a  prediction  that
before  the  great  day  of  rest  the  Lord
will  again  speak  and  will  say  to  the
north  give  up,  to  the  south  keep  not
back  !  Bring  my  sons  from  afar  and
my  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the
earth — the  same  thing  that  David
has  reference  to.

This  is  not  a  work  to  be  accom-
plished by  the  wisdom  of  man  or  by
u  combination  of  the  wisest  men  that
are  uninspired,  among  the  nations;
but  the  Lord  is  to  speak,  and  will
s;iy  to  the  north  give  up.  A  new
revelation  is  to  be  given :  he  will  say
to  the  south  keep  not  back,  and  he
will  command  that  his  sons  and  his
daughters  be  brought  from  the  ends
of  the  earth.

Has  any  such  thing  happened  in
our  days  ? Has  the  mighty  God,
even  the  Lard,  spoken  in  our  days?
Yes,  and  connected  with  this  procla-
mation we  arc  informed  that  the  elect
tif  God  are  to  be  gathered  from  the
four  winds  of  heaven ;  and  we  have
been  called  upon  to  perform  this
work. How  much  have  we  accom-
plished during  the  forty  years  that
have  intervened  since  the  Lord  spoke?
In  the  year  1827,  '28,  '29  and  f30
the  Lord  spoke  and  gave  many  reve-
lations, among  which  was  this  record
called the  Book  of  Mormon,  un-
folding to  ns  not  only  the  everlast-
ing Gospel in all its  plainness,
simplicity  and  ancient  purity,  as  it
was taught  to  the  inhabitants  of
this  continent  eighteen  hundred  years
ago;  but  also  many  sacred  predic-
tions  relating  to  the great  work
which  God  would  accomplish  when


SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


57


he  should  bring  this  record  forth
in  the  latter  days. This  book  was
translated  by  a  mighty  Prophet  who
was  inspired  of  God  for  the  purpose ; ;
and  since  it  came  forth — in  the  short  •
space  of  forty  years — it  has  been
published  in  many  of  the  languages
of  the  earth. It  has  gone  forth  in
the  German,  Italian,  French,  Welsh
and Scandinavian languages,  and
also  in  the  tongue  spoken  by  the
Sandwich  Islanders ;  and  it  has  been
proclaimed,  as  it  were,  on  the  house-
tops, in  the  streets  and  highways,
upon  the  hills  and  mountains  and
in  all  public  places,  so  far  as  the
Missionaries and Elders of  this
Church  could  find  access  and  liberty
to  proclaim  it;  and  wherever  the
people  have  repented  and  turned
from  their  sins  and  have  desired  to
receive  the  everlasting  Gospel,  they
have  continued  to  gather  together  in
one, This  gathering  has  been  going
on  for  nearly  forty  years,  until  the
effects  can  now  be  seen  in  this  Ter-
ritory, by  any  person  who  will  travel
through  it,  in  the  towns  and  cities
which  have  been  bciilt,  the  settle-
ments which  have  been  formed,  the
meeting-houses  and  school-houses  and
public  halls  that  have  been  erected;
and  in  the  fencing  of  farms,  and  the
opening  of  water  canals  and  ditches
for  irrigating  the  soil, I  say  those
who  will  travel  through  this  Territory
may  see  some  of  the  effects  of  the
gathering  out  of  the  Saints  who  have
made  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  by
sacrifice. If  we  had  gathered  to-
gether  into  a  country  that  was  well
timbered,  where  we  could  go  out  and
get  a  load  of  fence  poles  or  firewood
before  breakfast;  it  we  had  settled
in  a  country  that  was  not,  compara-
tively a  desert,  and  that  was  blessed
with  the  rains  o£*  heaven,  we  could
no  doubt  have  accomplished  far  more
than  we  now  sec. Bat  the  Lord
purposely  led  us  iuto  this  deseit  to


fulfil  prophecy.  A  great  many  peo.
pie,  perhaps,  reflect  upon  and  wonder
at  our  coming  into  a  sterile,  barren
district  of  country,  inhabited  by
hostile  savages,  and  which,  to  all
natural  appearance,  would  not  sus-
tain a  farming  or  agricultural  popu-
lation. But  the  Lord  brought  us
into  a  country  of  this  description  in
order  that  he  might  fulfil  prophecies
that  must  come  to  pass  before  "  our
God  shall  come  in  flaming  fire."

In  proof  of  this  let  me  refer  you
to  the  nature  of  the  country,  the  re-
demption of  the  desert  and  so  forth,
that  is  to  take  place  before  the  Lord
comes.  I  will  refer  you  now  to  some
of  the  sayings  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,
In  the  last  two  verses  of  his  34th
chapter  he  says :

"Seek  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the  Lord,
and  read  ;  no  one  of  these  shall  fail,  none
shall  want  her  matt  ;  for  my  mouth  it  hath
commanded,  and  his  spirit  it  hath  gathered
them.

"  And  he  hath  cast  the  lot  for  them,  and
his  hand  hath  divided  it  unto  them  by  line;
they  shall  possess  it  for  ever,  from  genera-
tiun  to  generation  shall  they  dwell  therein."

In  the  35th  chapter,  first  and  se-
cond verses,  you  will  find  these  words :

"The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place
shall  he  glad  for  them  ;  and  the  desert  shall
rejoice,  and  blossom  as  the  rose.

"It  shall  blossom  abundantly,  and  re^
joice  even  with  joy  and  singing ;  the  tflnry
of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto  it,  the  ex*
celtency  of  Carniel  and  Sharon  ;  they  .shall
see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  the  excel-
lency of  our  God.*'

Notice  now  that  the  Lord,  by  his
Spirit,  is  to  have  a  great  gathering
in  the  latter  days  of  his  people,  and
we  are  advised  to  seek  out  of  the
book  of  the  Lord  and  learn  of  this
gathering,  and  how  his  Saints  should
inhabit  the  land*  It  should  be  divi-
ded unto  them  by  lot,  the  same  as
many  people  received  their  inheri-
tances when  they  came  into  this
desert.  They  cast  lots,  and  drew
their  lots  and  inheritances.  "And
the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  places
shall  be  glad  for  them."  If  you  can
find  a  country  that  answers  better


58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  description  here  given  anywhere
in  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  I
should  like  to  know  it.  When  we
came  here,  the  country  to  all  natural
appearance  was  so  barren  that  it
seemed  impossible  to  locate  a  people
upon  it.  But  you  see  what  we  have
accomplished.  Not  by  our  own  wis-
dom nor  by  our  own  strength,  but
by  being  gathered  by  the  voice  of
the  Lord  and  by  his  commandment,
and  being  guided  and  directed  by  the
spirit  of  inspiration.

After  we  are  gathered,  the  desert
is  to  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.
How  often  I  have  thought  of  this  in
the  spring  time,  when  all  of  this  city,
covering  some  four,  or  perhaps  five
square  miles  with  orchards  and  gar-
dens, is  in  bloom  !  Then  is  the  time
to  realize  how  literally  this  prophecv
has  been  fulfilled.  Every  one  knows
that  fruitful  as  it  now  is,  when  we
came  here  it  was  called  a  desert  If
you  do  not  believe  me,  go  to  the  old
maps,  and  you  will  find  this  section
of  the  country  laid  down  as  14  The
Great  American  Desert."  That  is
the  name  that  was  given  to  it  then.
People,  when  banded  together  in  a
numerous  company,  and  well  armed,
would  hardly  venture  to  pass  through
this  desert  country,  it  was  so  nn pro-
pitious and  forbidding,  the  rains  of
heaven  never  having  been,  apparent-
ly, shed  forth  upon  it  When  we
came  we  could  dig  down  some  eight-
een inches  or  two  feet,  and  in  other
places  there  was  no  moisture  at  all,
and  it  looked  as  though  there  never
had  been  any  rain  heie.  But  "  the
wilderness  and  the  solitary  place
shall  be  made  glad  for  them,  and  the
desert  shall  blossom  abundantly,  even
with  joy  and  singing."

"But,"  says  one,  "perhaps  this
had  reference  to  some  other  period,
and  not  to  the  preparatory  work  for
the  coming  of  the  Lord."  Let  us
read  a  few  verses  further  in  this  3£  th


chapter  of  Isaiah's  prophecies.  The
third  and  fourth  verses  read :

"Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and
confirm  the  feeble  kneen.

"Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart.
Be  strong,  fear  not;  behold,  your  (lud  will
come  with  vengeance,  even  God  vtith  a  re-
compense ;  he  will  come  and  save  you,"

Now  notice,  this  is  not  the  first
coming.  He  did  not  conie  with
vengeance  then ;  he  came  to  be  spit
upon,  to  be  raeek  and  lowly,  to  be
ridiculed  by  the  mob  if  they  felt  dis-
posed, and  finally  to  be  lifted  up
upon  the  cross  and  crucified  for  the
sins  of  the  world.  Hut  the  people
who  are  to  be  gathered  together,  and
fur  whom  the  desert  is  to  rejoice,  are
called  upon  not  to  fear — "  Don't  be
faint-hearted,  don't  be  discouraged."
Says  the  Prophet,  *'  Be  strong,  fear
i  not,  for  behold  your  God  will  come
with  vengeance;  he  will  come  with  a
recompence  and  he  will  save  you,"
that  is,  you  who  are  in  the  desert.
Then  there  will  be  splendid  miracles
wrought  again,  as  in  ancient  days.
Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  are  to  be
opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall
he  unstopped  ;  then  "  shall  the  lame
man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue
of  the  dumb  shall  sing,  for  in  the
wilderness  shall  waters  break  out
and  streams  in  the  desert."

Latter-day  Saints,  and  what  I  ask
of  yon  I  might  ask  of  the  whole  peo-
ple of  the  Territory,  have  you  seen  a
fulfilment  of  this  saying  of  the  Pro-
phet Isaiah  since  you  have  been  loca-
ted here  in  the  desert?  Has  there
been  any  such  things  as  springs
breaking  out  in  the  wilderness  and
I  ri valets  of  water  in  the  desert  ?  Yes,
not  in  one  or  two  isolated  instances,
bat  in  almost  every  settlement
throughout  this  Territory.  Many
places  in  which,  in  early  days,  there
was  not  water  enough  for  a  settle-
ment of  twenty  individuals,  now  sup-
port their  hundreds.  In  what  way  ?
By  the  great  increase  of  water-  How


SECOND  COMING

was  Salt  Lake  when  we  first  came
here  ?  We,  that  is,  a  few  of  the
Pioneers,  went  over  in  July  1817,  to
the  hanks  of  Salt  Lake,  to  what  is
called  the  Black  Rock.  Some  of  us
went  in  bathing,  and  we  could  walk
oat  to  Black  Rock,  and  look  down
on  the  water  on  each  side.  Bat  how
is  it  now  ?  The  waters  are  some
ten  feet  above  that  land  that  we  trod
upon  then.  What  is  the  matter?
Ought  not  the  waters  of  the  Lake  to
have  decreased,  seeing  that  the  waters
of  the  various  streams  that,  before
our  arrival,  emptied  their  contents
into  it,  are  turned  broadcast  over
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of
acres  of  land  ?  Certainly  one  would
think  so,  for  when  all  this  water  is
turned  on  the  land  it  evaporates  in-
stead of  going  to  increase  the  volume
of  the  Great  Salt  Lake ;  but  instead
of  diminishing,  the  waters  of  the
Lake  have  risen  some  ten  or  twelve
feet  above  the  surface  as  it  existed  in
1847,  when  I  first  saw  it.  Hence
streams  have  broken  out  in  the  des-
ert, and  waters  in  the  wilderness,  as
it  is  prophecied,  not  only  in  this
chapter,  but  also  in  various  portions
of  the  Psalms.

—  When  speaking  of  the  great  day
of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  how  otteu
do  Isaiah  and  David  speak  of  the
desert,  and  the  waters,  rivers  and
springs  that  should  break  out  to
water  the  barren,  thirsty  land!  "The
parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool,
and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water."

We  might  go  on  and  speak  about
the- highway  that  the  Lord  would
have  there,  that  has  also  been  thrown
up  since  we  came  here.  It  is  even
called  a  highway  by  the  world,  that
know  nothing  of  these  prophecies.
I  believe  I  will  say,  as  I  pass  along,
something  about  the  highway,  for
the  same  Prophet  that  predicts  about
this  alteration  in  the  desert,  also  says
there  shall  be  a  highway  there.  Let


OF  CHRIST,  ETC.  59

me  refer  to  another  prophecy  about
this  highway,  by  the  same  Prophet.
It  reads  thus:  u  And  the  Lord  shall
proclaim  to  the  ends  of  the  world,
say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  be-
held thy  salvation  cometh ;  behold
his  reward  is  with  him  and  his  work
before  him."  But  in  the  sentence
preceding  this  the  Prophet  says :
"  Cast  up,  cast  op  a  highway,  gather
out  the  stones,  prepare  ye  the  way  of
the  people,  lift  up  a  standard  for  the
people."  Then  come  in  the  words  I
have  quoted*  How  was  the  great
highway  that  crosses  this  continent
constructed  ?  You  ought  to  know,
for  you  were  the  ones  who  constructed
it  through  these  mountains  j  you
were  the  ones  who  built  some  four
hundred  miles  of  this  railroad,  you
therefore  know  how  it  was  done.
Did  you  gather  out  the  stones  ?  Did
you  prepare  the  level  places  fur  this
great  highway  that  the  Prophet  had
predicted  ?  Did  you  cast  it  up  where
there  were  hollows  ?  Did  you  fill
up  the  hollows  and  gather  out  the
stones  in  order  to  make  it  level  and
convenient  ?  0,  yes.  Did  you  make
any  tunnels  and  gateways  ?  I  don't
suppose  that  the  ancient  Prophet
knew  what  a  tunnel  was,  hence  be
says,  "  go  through,  go  through  the
gates,  cast  up,  cast  up  a  high  way,"
No  doubt  he  saw  in  vision  how  the
railroad  looked,  saw  the  carriages
driving  along  with  almost  lightning
speed,  darting  into  the  mountains  on
one  side,  and  by  and  by  saw  them
coming  out  on  the  other  side ;  and
he  did  not  know  how  to  represent  it
any  better  than  to  speak  of  it  as  a
gate — "  go  through,  go  through  the
gates,"  &c.  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of
the  people,  cast  up,  cast  up  a  high-
way, and  lift  up  a  standard  for  the
people;"  and  then  come  in  those
notable  words,  showing  that  it  was  a
highway  to  be  cast  up  before  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  God.  "The


GO


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Lord  has  proclaimed  to  [the  ends  of
the  world,  say  ye  to  the  daughters
of  Zion,  behold  thy  salvation  comet h,
behold  his  reward  is  with  him  and
his  work  before  him."

Don't  yon  see  from  these  passnges
that  this  is  a  latter-day  work  ?  That
there  is  a  proclamation  connected
with  the  casting  up  of  this  high-
way ?  AtkI  that  it  is  a  proclama-
tion which  has  reference  to  every
nation,  kindred,  tongue  and  people  ?
God  was  to  speak,  deliver  a  message,
send  forth  his  servants  as  mission-
aries; they  were  to  publish  that
message  to  the  ends  of  the  world,
and  to  declare  to  all  people  that
the  Lord  was  to  come,  "behold  thv
salvation  cometh,  and  his  reward  is
with  him,  and  his  work  is  before
him/'  The  Prophet  further  says
41  They  shall  call  them/'  for  whom
this  high  way  was  built  that  their  way
might  be  prepared,  and  for  whom  a
standard  should  be  raised,  "the  re-
deemed of  the  Lord,  a  holy  people;
they  shall  be  called,  sought  out,  a
city  not  forsaken,"  Oh,  how  different
from  old  Jerusalem,  a  city  that  has
been  forsaken !  It  is  almost  two
thousand  years  since  the  Lord  for-
sook it,  and  the  Jews  have  been
forsaken,  and  scattered  among  all
people.

But  when  the  Lord  lifts  up  this
highway,  gathers  out  the  stones,
sends  forth  his  proclamation  and
gathers  out  his  Saints  who  have  made
a  covenant  by  sacrifice,  they  will
build  a  city,  one  that  shall  be  sought
out  Old  Jerusalem  was  not  sought
out;  it  was  built  before  the  Jews
we:it  to  inhabit  it.  It  was  one  of
the  early  cities  of  the  ancient  nations
of  Canaan-  But  this  latter-day  city,
that  is  called  Zion,  is  to  be  sought
out,  and  the  people  that  were  to
search  it  out  were  to  be  a  very  good
people.  "  They  shall  call  them  the
Redeemed  of  the  Lord;  they  shall


be  called,  sought  out,  a  city  not
forsaken,"

Now,  with  all  the  difficulties  we
have  encountered  here,  and  with  all
the  imaginations  of  our  enemies  in
regard  to  us,  I  humbly  trust  ant  I
hope  that  the  time  has  come  for  this
prophecy  to  be  literally  fulfilled  ;
when  this  city  of  the  Lord,  which  is
built  up  according  to  this  prophecy
will  not  be  forsaken.  I  hope  that
the  Lord  our  God  will  protect  his
people  and  guarantee  to  them  the
rights  already  guaranteed  by  4he
Constitution  of  our  Country  to  every
religious  denomination  in  the  land.

There  are  some  other  prophecies
about  the  gathering  of  the  Saints.
I  think  I  will  read  one  that  has
reference  to  our  coming  to  this  place.
You  will  find  it  in  the  107th  Psalm,
and  it  is  very  applicable  to  the  jour-
ney which  we  performed  when  we
came  here*

u  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  He
is  good  :  for  His  mercy  endure th  forever.

**  Let  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  nay  so,
whom  He  hath  redeemed  from  the  hand
of  the  enemy  :

44  And  gathered  th»;m  out  of  the  lands,
from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  from
the  north,  and  from  the  south,

"They  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a
solitary  way  ;  they  found  no  city  to  dwell
in.

"  Hungry  and  thirsty  their  soul  fainted
in  them.

•'  Then  they  cried  tmto  the  Lord  in
their  trouble,  and  He  delivered  them  out
of  their  distresses.

"And  he  led  them  forth  by  the  right
way.  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habi-
tation*

**  Oh  that  m€n  would  praise  the  I#ord
for  His  goodness,  and  for  Hi>  wonderful
works  to  the  children  of  men/*

This  has  been  fulfilled  since  the
day  that  David  uttered  it,  "  Let
the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  say  so  !  "
What  redeemed  of  the  Lard  ?  Not
those  who  were  gathered  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt  before  the  days  of
David,  but  those  who  are  gathered
out  of  all  lands,  says  the  Prophet,
u  from  the  East  and  from  the  West.


SECOND  COMING

and  from  the  North  and  from  the
South."  From  tho  four  points  of  the
compass,  from  every  nation  and  every
clime,  "  Let  them  praise  the  Lord
and  give  thanks  to  his  holy  name,
because  of  his  mercy  and  his  good-
ness to  them."  They  were  not  to
find  it  at  first  all  to  their  satisfaction;
their  journey  was  to  be  iti  a  solitary
way  ;  they  were  to  find  no  city  to
dwell  in,  I  can  bear  testimony  to
this,  for  I  was  among  the  pioneers,
and  when  we  came  here  we  didn't
find  any  great  city,  with  houses  al-
ready built  to  go  into,  We  had  to
live  in  our  wagons,  and  had  to  build
a  little  fort  to  defend  ourselves  against
the  half-naked  Indians.  And  thus
we  located  in  the  midst  of  adried*np
and  thirsty  land- — a  desert;  and  here
in  this  region,  where  the  solitude  was
so  great  that  it  was  only  broken  by
the  yells  of  savages  and  the  howl-
ing of  wild  beasts,  we  had  to  go  to
work  to  prepare  a  city  for  habitation.
We  had  some  afflictions — hunger  and
thirst;  "  and  their  souls  fainted  with-
in them,"  says  David,  "but  they
cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  afflic-
tion ss  and  he  had  mercy  upon  them
and  delivered  them  out  of  their  dis-
tresses," '  i
In  the  31st  and  32d  verses  the
Psalmist  says —  ,

**  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord
for  hi*  goodness,  and  for  hi,s  wonderful
works  to  the  children  or  men  !"

*"Lot  them  exalt  him  also  in  the  con*
frreg-ation  of  the  people,  and  praise  him  in
the  assembly  of  the  Elder*."

Why  should  they  be  so  glad  to
praise  him  ?  He  tells  as  in  the  next
verses —

"  He  turaeth  rivers  into  a  wilderness,
and  the  water  springs  into  dry  ground."

4iA  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for
the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein."

This  has  reference  to  what  will
take  place  in  the  fruitful  lands  of  the
Gentiles  by  and  by;  but  he  is  going


OF  CHRIST,  ETC,  61

to  reverse  this  so  far  as  his  people  in
the  desert  are  concerned ,  for  he  turns
the  wilderness  into  standing  water,
(  and  the  dry  ground  into  water
springs;  and  "there  he  makes  the
hungry  to  dwell  that  they  may  pre-
pare a  city  for  habitations."  Just  as
you  did,  brethren  and  sisters.  "And
sow  the  fields  and  plant  vineyards,
which  may  yield  fruits  of  increase.
He  blesseth  them  also  so  that  they
are  multiplied  greatly,  and  suffereth
not  their  cattle  to  decrease."

Has  this  been  fulfilled?  I  have
been  away  a  great  many  years,  and  I
do  not  know  so  much  about  it  as
sonic  of  these  old  farmers;  but  I
think  if  we  will  traverse  this  Ter-
ritory, we  will  find  that  our  cattle
h*ive  not  decreased  since  we  came

!  here. i  • j  ^  . , [  {l,

j  There  is  another  prophecy  in  this
Psalm  to  which  I  will  call  your  at-
'  tent  ion,  connected  with  this  people
that  was  to  be  gathered  out  from
all  lands  into  a  wilderness  and  solitary
place.  The  Prophet  says  —  "  Yet
|  setteth  he  the  poor  on  high  from
affliction  and  maketh  him  families
like  a  flock  "  Now,  is  that  trne?
I  would  ask  some  of  my  brethren
here,  as  I  have  been  gone  so  much,
Is  there  any  man  here  who  has  fam-
ilies like  a  flock  ?  If  you  have,  yon
are  fulfilling  this  prophecy  of  the
Psalmist.  I  think  I  heard  of  and
saw  in  my  travels  in  the  Territory
quite  a  number  of  such  men,  quite
poor  men,  just  such  men  as  David
refers  to.  What  wonderful  things
take  place  in  the  last  d:iys3  in  order
to  fulfil  prophecy  !  "The  righteous
shall  see  it  and  rejoice,  and  all
iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth."  This
latter  clause  has  yet  to  be  fulfilled,  it
has  not  yet  come  to  pass.  "Whoso
:  is  wise,  and  will  observe  these  things,
even  they  shall  understand  the  loving
kindness  of  the  Lord/*  Amen.


62


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,
Delivered  in  the  Boweky,  Brigham  City,  June  0}  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evam.)

CONTINUED  TEACHING  NECESSARY — IGNORANCE  OP  PROFESSORS  OF

MODERN  CHRISTIANITY— PRAYER,  ETC.


If  I  can  speak  so  as  to  be  heard,
I  will  talk  to  the  brethren  and  sisters
a  few  minutes.  It  requires  stillness
and  close  attention  to  hear  those  who
speak  in  this  bowery.  A  great  deal
has  been  said  with  regard  to  the
novation  of  the  human  family.  I
might  say  that  more  should  be  done,
then  we  could  talk  less.  Of  neces-
sity, through  the  weakness  of  human
nature,  a  great  deal  has  to  be  said ;
but  if  the  people  could  understand
the  principles  of  life  and  salvation,
and  would  act  accordingly,  it  would
require  a  great  deal  less  talking.
Words  are  wind,  they  go  into  the  ear
and  are  forgotten;  still  there  is  a
certain  portion  that  will  be  retained
by  a  few,  and  they  will  be  profited
thereby.  The  work  in  which  we  are
engaged  is  not  magnified  in  the  least
by  talking  about  it;  it  is  only  in
the  weak  capacity  of  man  that  these
principles  become  exalted  through
the  hearing  of  the  ear.  The  princi-
ples we  preach  are  the  gospel  of  life
and  salvation ;  and  we  have  entered
into  covenant  with  God  to  observe
the  rules,  ordinances  and  laws  per-
taining  to  this  life  and  salvation.
The  question  arises,  Do  we  perform
this  labor,  in  keeping  the  sayings  of
the  Lord  as  strictly  as  we  should  ?
No,  we  do  not.

Suppose  that  we  name  a  few  of  the
rules  and  regulations  by  which  we


are  to  live.  If  I  attempt  to  classify
them,  perhaps  1  shall  get  them  im-
perfectly in  the  science  of  the  law  of
God.  But  first,  to  me,  after  hearing
and  believing  that  there  is  such  a
character  as  the  Savior  of  mankind,
who  has  acted  his  part  well  and  per-
formed his  duty  in  purchasing  re-
demption for  the  human  family,  and

I  is  now  pleading  for  his  brethren,  I
at  once  inquired  what  he  requires  of
me.  This  is  the  inquiry  of  my  re-
flections, and  I  learn  that  faith  is
the  starting  point.  If  I  believe  sin-
cerely and  honestly,  I  must  obey,
and  the  next  step  in  the  plan  of  sal-
vation, as  laid  down  by  Jesus  and  his
disciples,  is  for  me  to  be  baptized
for  the  remission  of  my  sins.  To
the  Christian  world,  to  the  heathen

I  world  and  the  infidel  world,  we  can
say  that  all  things  are  spiritual,  all
things  are  temporal,  all  things  are
natural;  all  things  are  natural,  aU[
things  are  temporal,  all  things  are
spiritual ;  and  there  is  not  that  being

I  on  the  earth,  and  never  was,  that  I
have  any  knowledge  of,  that  can  di^j
vide  them.  3  Bnfc  in  the  act,  and  in
the  performance  of  the  duty  of  those
who  believe  in  this  plan  of  salvation,
we  can  define  our  faith  in  our  secret
closet  by  exercising  faith  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  and  seeking  unto  the  Fa-

;  ther  secretly  in  our  hearts.  Here

I  we  find  a  difference  and  a  distinc-


tion  between  this  and  the  actual
performance  of  rising  up  from  my
seat,  going  down  into  the  water  and
being  baptized  for  the  remission  of
my  sins.  Still  the  work  is  the  same,
consequently  it  is  spiritual,  it  is  tern*
poral,  it  is  natural ;  it  is  natural,  it
is  temporal,  it  is  spiritual*

Well,  now,  this  is  the  work  that
we  have  before  us  j  not  that  I  am
going  to  have  time  to  preach  on  these
points,  or  delineate  them  to  any
length ;  but  these  are  the  facts.  If
we  believe,  we  obey,  we  are  baptized
for  the  remission  of  our  si  us,  which
is  the  commencement  of  the  labor,
the  outward  performance  and  mani-
festation of  obedience  to  Goi,  through
faith  in  the  name  of  his  son  Jesus
Christ,  Then  comes  the  blessing  by  I
the  imposition  of  hands  upon  the
head  of  the  individual  who  has  re-
ceived baptism  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  he  receives  the  Holy  Ghost,
This  is  the  blessing  and  the  consola-
tion of  believing  in  the  truth ;  and
this  stimulates  the  individual  to  still
exercise  faith  and  to  continue  in  obe-
dience to  the  commandments  of  the
Lord,  to  pray  always,  without  ceasing,
and  in  everything  to  give  thanks;
his  heart  uplifted  to  God,  day  by
day,  from  morning  until  evening,
and  from  evening  until  morning,
for  the  blessings  of  heaven  to  be  with
him,  for  his  feefc  to  be  guided  in  the
path  of  rectitude,  and  that  he  may
be  preserved  from  speaking,  thinking,
and  doing  in  anywise,  that  which  is
wrong.  This  is  simple  and  plain,
and  can  b<;  understood  by  all  classes  ,
of  the  children  of  men  who  are  en-
dowed  with  the  common  sense  and
ability  that  are  given  to  man.

The  duty  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  j
is  to  pray  without  ceasing,  and  in
everything  to  give  thanks,  to  ac-
knowledge the  hand  of  the  Lord  in
all  things,  and  to  be  subject  to  his
requirements. We,  as  Latter-day


63

Saints,  can  say  that  our  duty  is  laid
before  us.  We  can  read  it,  not  only
,  in  the  faith  and  feelings  of  the  indi-
viduals of  the  community;  but  it  is
actually  printed,  it  lies  upon  the
pages  of  our  history,  and  we  can
read  at  our  pleasure.  We  meet
together  for  the  express  purpose  of
having  somebody  or  other  tell  us  that
which  we  know  and  have  known  all
the  time.  We  have  read  it  over  and
over;  we  have  thought  of  it  and
meditated  upon  it,  yet  we  meet  to*
gether  and  hear  our  brethren  speak
to  force  these  things  into  the  affec-
tions of  the  people;  and  if  we  can
persuade  them  to  hearken  to  every
requirement  of  heaven,  then  we  are
not  under  the  necessity  of  talkiug  so
much.  Wo  are  freed  from  this  task
and  toil.

What  is  our  duty?  To  pray.
Pray  always?  Yes,  To  pray  in
our  families?  Yea,  Let  no  man  be
in  a  hurry,  but  what  he  can  get  up
in  a  morning  and  pray  with  his  family
before  he  permits  himself  to  partake
of  refreshment.  Let  every  man  and
every  woman  call  upon  the  name  of
the  Lord,  and  that  too,  from  a  pure
heart,  while  they  are  at  work  as  well
as  in  their  closet ;  while  they  are  in
'  public  as  well  as  while  they  are  in
private,  asking  the  Father  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  to  bless  them,  and  to
preserve  and  guide  in,  and  to  teach
them,  the  way  of  life  and  salvation,
and  to  enable  them  so  to  live  that
they  will  obtain  this  eternal  salvation
that  we  are  after,

I  Now,  besides  being  our  duty  to
pray,  it  is  our  duty  to  live  in  peace
one  with  another.  It  is  also  our  duty
to  love  the  Gospel  and  tho  spirit  of
,  the  Gospel,  so  that  we  can  become
one  in  the  Lord,  not  out  of  him,
that  our  faith,  our  affections  for  the
truth,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  otir
acts,  all  our  labor  will  be  concen-
trated in  the  salvation  of  the  children


of  men,  and  the  establishment  of  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  This
is  qo- operation  on  a  very  large  scale,
This  is  the  work  of  redemption  that
is  entered  into  by  the  Latter-day
Saints.  Unitedly  we  perform  these
duties,  we  stand,  we  endure,  we  in-
crease and  multiply,  we  strengthen
and  spread  abroad,  and  shall  con*
tinuc  so  to  do  until  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  are  the  kingdoms  of  our
God  and  bis  Christ

We  can  read  that  these  are  our
duties  in  the  Bible,  Book  of  Mormon,
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
and  many  other  sayings  that  we  have
from  the  Elders,  which  are  just  as
true  as  any  in  these  three  books;  and
all  combined  area  way-mark  pointing
us  to  life  and  salvation,  and  we  can
read  for  ourselves.

#

We  might  say,  if  one  man  has  a
difficulty  with  another,  let  him,  in
the  first  place,  go  to  him  privately
and  talk  with  him,  and  see  if  he  will
be  reconciled,  or  take  another,  and
so  on.  We  can  say  of  a  truth,  that
if  there  be  hard  feelings  in  the  midst
of  the  Saints,  they  should  be  eradi-
cated from  our  bosoms  by  taking  the
proper  course  io  enjoy  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  instead  of  the  spirit  of  ani-
mosity and  strife.  AH  these  things
you  can  define  and  enlarge  upon  at
your  leisure.  It  is  our  duty  to  ob-
serve our  sacraments,  to  observe  our
fast-days  and  offerings;  it  is  our
duty  to  observe  our  tithings  and  to
pay  them.  There  is  a  great  deal
said  by  our  enemies  with  regard  to
the  members  of  this  Church  paying
tithing.  We  are  as  free  from  taxa-
tion as  any  other  church  on  the  earth,
right  or  wrong,  true  or  untrue,  and
we  pay  as  little  as  any  otlier  people,
and  if  my  tithing  is  required  let  it
be  paid.  That  is  the  way  to  get
rich.  We  have  entered  upon  a  great
system  of  co-operation  for  the  build-
ing Dp  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and,


when  it  is  built  up,  it  is  ours,  we
own  it-  If  tip  are  Saints  of  God,
and  sanctify  ourselves  through  his
Gospel,  then  we  shall  be  worthy  to
possess  all.  things.  The  kingdoms  of
this  world  will  be  ours,  all  will  be
ours,  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and
the  fulness  thereof  will  be  ours,  and
we  are  the  Lord's,  we  are  his  ser-
vants, and  we  possess  all  things  in
common  with  him.  That  word
,  M  all,"  perhaps,  conveys  too  much  to
the  minds  of  some;  but  that  is  no
matter.  With  regard  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  in  the  performance  of
their  duties,  we  could  tell  them  what
to  do  to  be  saved.  The  path  is  as
,  clear  and  plain  as  this  highway  is
here  for  the  travel  of  teams  aud  the
people.  But  when  we  inquire  about
'  the  character  of  our  Father,  there
|  are  some  things  connected  therewith
I  that  men  do  not  understand,  neither
should  they  understand  them.  It  is
not  in  accordance  with  the  mind  and
will  of  him  we  worship  as  our  God,
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  in
their  weak  and  wicked  capacity,  and
in  ignorance, should  understand  them.
It  was  mentioned  here  yesterday,
aud  is  frequently  mentioned  by  my-
self and  others,  that  those  who  pro-
fess Christianity  are  in  the  dark,  and
why?  They  mystify  everything;
they  read  the  Bible  as  a  sealed  book,
and  they  believe  it  when  it  is  closed
and  laid  upon  the  shelf  They  do
not  know  how  to  read  it  any  other-
way,  they  do  not  know  how  to  be-
lieve it  any  other  way,  and  it  is  right
and  reasonable  that  they  should  not;
but  as  for  detailing  the  reasons  why
this  is  so,  we  have  not  time.  Suffice
it  to  say,  all  things  are  done  in  the-
wisdom  of  him  who  knows  all  things*
It  is  not  right,  I  will  say,  for  people
to  know  the  truth  and  live  in  dis-
obedience to  it;  it  is  not  right  for
them  to  understand  the  ways  and
providences  of  God  as  they  are  dealt


CONTINUED  TEACHING  NECESSARY,  ETC


65


out  to  the  people  on  the  earth,  when
they  live  and  are  determined  to  live
in  violation  of  every  commandment
and  law  of  God ;  and  because  they
do  so  live,  ignorance  covers  them  as
with  a  mantle,  shuts  out  the  light  of
truth  from  them,  and  keeps  them
in  darkness ;  and  if  the  light  were
to  shine  upon  them,  as  it  does  now
and  as  it  did  in  the  days  of  the
Apostles,  would  they  receive  it  ?  No,
they  would  not.  Light  has  come
into  the  world,  but  the  wicked  choose
darkness  rather  than  light  ?  Why  ?
It  was  told  in  days  of  old  that  their
deeds  were  evil.  That  is  the  fact  I
to-day — u  they  choose  darkness  rather
than  light,  because  their  deeds  are
evil,"  and  their  hearts  are  fully  set  i
in  them  to  do  evil;  and  here  I  might
venture  to  say  to  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth,  high  and  low,  rich  and
poor,  to  the  king  upon  his  throne  and  j
to  the  beggar  in  the  street,  if  they
had  the  troth  and  loved  it  they  would
rejoice  in  it.  But  they  will  not  re- 1
ceive  it.  Is  not  this  lamentable?
It  is;  but  we  can  not  help  it.  We
can  declare  the  truth  to  the  people,
but  we  can  not  force  them  to  receive
it  If  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
were  honest,  they  would  receive  the
truth ;  and  there  is  not  a  man  or
woman  now  living  on  the  earth,  or
ever  did  live  on  it,  who  would  apeak,
write,  think  or  act  against  the  Gospel
of  life  and  salvation  as  they  do,  were
they  not  in  dnrkness;  but  they  are
kept  in  ignorance  through  their
own  wickedness  and  unbelief,  and ;
they  nourish  and  cherish  the  spirit
of  evil,  and  that  prompts  them  to
reject  the  words  of  life.  We  can
say  this  to  all  the  human  family;
bat  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  you
believe,  now  obey;  and  if  we  obey,
all  will  be  right,  and  we  shall  gain
the  salvation  that  we  are  after.  J

I  am  happy,  brethren,  for  the  pri- 1
vilege  of  being  in  your  midst,  I

No.  5,


frequently  shake  hands  with  my
brethren  and  sisters,  and  they  rejoice,
they  congratulate  me  on  my  freedom.
I  have  been  free-  I  do  not  feel,  and
have  not  felt,  that  I  was  bound  in
the  least.  The  question  can  be  asked,
Were  you  not  a  prisoner  for  some
:  five  months  through  the  indiscreet,
unmanly,  inhuman,  disloyal  and  re-
bellious decision  and  doings  of  our
officials?  It  seemed  so;  it  had  the
appearance  that  I  was  confined,  and
had  not  my  liberty,  through  the  ill-
treatment,  mistaken  ideas,  selfishness
and  prejudice  of  the  ungodly.  But
I  did  not  feel  that  I  was  in  prison,  or
that  I  was  confined.  I  will  say  to
the  Latter-day  Saints,  my  heart  has
i  rejoiced  for  the  privilege  of  resting,
I  have  rejoiced  for  the  privilege,  as
it  was  observed  here,  by  Elder  Hyde,
yesterday,  of  entering  into  my  closet,
j  that  is,  I  entered  into  my  closet  just
as  he  did  into  his.  He  kept  himself
where  he  had  a  mind  to,  and  I  did
the  same.  He  entered  his  closet,
and  I  into  mine,  or  into  my  house,
and  there  I  abode,  and  continued  to
abide,  for  a  time,  and  was  thankful
for  the  privilege.  Now  I  have  the
privilege  of  going  here  and  there
without  having  anyone  to  accompany
me  only  those  I  invite.  I  was  very
I  happy  for  the  privilege  of  being  quiet,
still  and  retired  in  my  own  house
last  winter.  My  companion,  not  my
sleeping  companion,  bat  my  com-
panion in  tribulation  and  confinement,
for  the  gentleman  who  was  with  me,
I  really  think  was,  in  his  feelings,
confined  more  than  I,  a  great  deal,
and  felt  so,  would  urge  me  to  ride,
or  to  go  to  this  party  or  that,  or  to
the  theater,  I  kindly  declined  and
thanked  him  for  his  kindness  in
offering  to  accompany  me;  and  I
would  say,  "You" go  and  enjoy  your-
self, and  I  will  stay  here,"  and  I  got
him  to  go  occasionally.

I  say  this  with  regard  to  myself,

Vol  XV.


66  JOURNAL  OF

that  you  may  know  my  own  feelings.
But  I  can  say  still  more — the  Lord
Almighty  has  guided  and  directed
the  ship  of  state  in  our  behalf  and
for  the  deliverance  and  protection  of
the  innocent  and  the  honest.  Vic-
tory has  perched  on  Zion's  banner.
We  have  obtained  that  that  we  could
not  have  obtained  had  it  not  been  for
the  persecuting  spirit  that  has  fol-
lowed on  the  heels  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  within  the  two  years  that  are
past.  How  could  we,  without  this
very  conduct  of  our  enemies,  have,
ever  approached  the  highest  tribunal
in  this  government  to  have  it  give  its
decision  with  regard  to  right  and
wrong,  law,  legality,  that  that  is
equitable  and  according  to  the  spirit
of  our  government,  and  that  which
is  contrary  thereto  ?  How  could  we
have  approached  that  body  ?  How
could  we  have  had  our  cause  before
it,  had  it  not  been  for  the  acts  of  our
enemies,  with  which  they  designed
to  bring  us  to  death  ?  for  there  is
no  question  that,  in  their  own  feel-
ings, the  knot  was  tied  around  the
neck  of  your  humble  servant,  and  he
hung  dangling  in  the  air.  But
God  designed  this  for  good,  for  the
deliverance  of  the  humble  and  the
meek,  What  have  we  to  say  ?  We
acknowledge  his  hand  in  these  things
as  well  as  everything  else,  and  say,
God  be  praised !

I  will  not  occupy  more  time,  I
want  others  to  talk.  I  will  close  by
saying  a  few  things  to  you  with  re*
gard  to  your  duties.  Attend  to  your
meetings,  attend  to  your  prayers;
attend  to  your  daily  labor.  Be  honest
and  upright  with  one  another;  be
punctual,  keep  your  word,  preserve
yourselves  inviolate  in  all  things.
Be  chaste,  preserve  your  faith  before
God,  do  not  demoralize  or  prostitute


DISCOURSES.

yourselves,  and  all  ttill  be  tight*  1
can  say  that  when  a  man  comes  along
and  turns  his  cattle  into  his  neigh-
bor's field  without  liberty,  he  prosti*
tutes  his  own  feelings — his  virtue,
truthfulness,  honesty  and  uprightness
before  God  and  angels.  If  we  will
preserve  ourselves  in  purity,  in  the
integrity  of  our  hearts,  it  will  be  well
with  us.

We  have  quite  a  number  of  the
people  present  from  the  settlements
of  this  county  generally,  and  from
Cache  Valley.  I  see  you  have  a  little
railroad  here,  and  the  people  are
building  it.  I  am  thank! ul  to  see
this  enterprise.  Go  ahead,  brethren,
build  this  road  and  own  it,  and  do
what  you  please  with  it  It  will  be
a  fine  piece  of  improvement ;  it  will
open  up  this  northern  country,  and
give  you  facilities  that  you  could  not
otherwise  enjoy  here.  How  beautiful
that  is  !  How  comfortable,  yes,  that
is  the  word — how  comfortable  and
easy  it  is  for  me  to  get  into  a  coach,
or  a  good  carriage,  and  run  over  this
railroad,  from  Salt  Lake  City  to  this
place  in  less  than  three  hours,  as
we  did  yesterday  morning.  In  less
-  than  three  hours  from  the  time  we
left  the  depot  of  the  Utah  Central
in  Salt  Lake  City,  we  were  in  this
bowery;  and,  this  evening,  we  ex-
pect,  in  less  than  three  hours  from
the  time  we  leave  this  bowery,  to  be
in  Salt  Lake  City — a  distance  of  over
sixty  miles.  It  is  very  comfortable,
very  consoling  !  And  if  we  can  see
these  things  as  they  are,  they  open  up
a  field  for  the  contemplation  of  the
wise  to  improve  upon,  that  we  may
shape  our  lives  for  the  benefit  of  our-
selves and  the  human  family  and  to
promote  truth  and  righteousness  upon
the  earth.

\ God  bless  you.  Amen.


THE  SETTING  UP  OF  GOD*S  KINGDOM,  ETC.


C7


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

February  4,  1872,

.  r ' '  f  ' 0 ' 1

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

 o

THE  SETTING  UP  OF  GOD'S  KINGDOM  IN  THESE  LATTER  DAYS.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  this
congregation  to  a  portion  of  prophecy
which  will  be  found  in  the  44th  and
45th  verses  of  the  2nd  chapter  of  the
book  of  Daniel :  1

And  in  t  he  days  of  these  kings  shall  the
God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom,  which
shall  never  be  destroyed  :  and  the  kingdom
shall  not  be  left  to  other  people,  but  it  shall
break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these  king-
doms, and  it  shall  stand  forever.

Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  that  the  stone
was  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands
and  that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron,  the
brass,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  gold ;  the
great  God  hath  made  known  to  the  king
what  shall  come  to  pass  hereafter ;  and  the
dream  is  certain,  and  the  interpretation
thereof  sum  £

I  have  often,  in  my  remarks  in

former  times,  addressed  the  Latter-
day  Saints  upon  these  passages  ;  but
as  there  are  some  strangers  in  our
midst  who  have  not,  perhaps,  heard
our  views  in  regard  to  setting  up  the
kingdom  of  God  in  the  latter  times,
it  may  not  be  amiss  for  us  to  set
forth  before  them  the  views  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  regard  to  this
prediction.  We  have,  daring  the
last  six  thousand  years,  or  nearly  so,
had  a  very  great  variety  of  human
governments  established  on  the  earth*
Governments  began  to  be  established
in  the  days  of  our  first  parents.  As
they  lived  to  be  very  aged— or  al-
most a  thousand  years  before  they
were  taken  from  the  earth,  they  saw
their  children  multiplying  around


them  in  vast  numbers,  and  govern-
ments began  to  be  es tab]  ished.  Among
those  governments,  however,  was
maintained  also  the  government  of
God — a  patriarchal  government,  that
continued  with  the  righteous  from
the  days  of  Adam  down  till  the  days
of  Enoch,  and  for  a  short  period  after
his  days.  This  government  was
patriarchal  in  its  nature,  or,  in  other
words,  directed  and  dictated  by  the
Creator  of  man  —  the  great  Law-
giver. He  directed  and  counseled
his  servants,  and  they  obeyed  his
counsels.  In  other  words,  a  divine
government  existed  on  the  earth  in
those  ancient  times ;  but  at  length,

i  about  the  period  of  the  death  of
Adam,  or  a  little  after,  human  gov-
ernments rooted  out  of  the  earth  the

!  government  of  God,  mankind  aposta-
tized  from  the  great  principles  which
were  revealed  from  heaven,  and  all
flesh  corrupted  its  way  in  the  sight
of  God  to  that  degree,  that  the  just
anger  of  their  Creator  was  kindled
against  them,  and  he  decreed  that
they  should  be  swept  off  from  the
face  of  the  earth  by  a  flood  of  waters.
Again,  after  this  great  destruction,  a
divine  government  was  organized  on
the  earth,  Noah  being  the  great  Patri-
arch, Revelator,  and  Prophet,  to
whom  was  given  laws  and  institu-
tions for  the  government  of  his  poste-


68  JOURNAL  OF

rity. Tins  order,  however,  continued  i
only  for  a  short  period  of  time,  and
human  governments  again  prevailed.
The  Lord  sought,  from  time  to  time,
in  the  midst  of  these  human  govern-
ments, to  select  a  people  who  would
give  heed  to  his  law  and  be  governed
by  him  as  the  Being  who  had  the
right  to  govern ;  inasmuch  as  he  had
created  (he  earth  and  the  inhabitants
thereof,  he  had  the  right  to  give  laws
aud  institutions  for  the  government
of  man. But  few,  indeed,  there  were
that  gave  heed  to  these  divine  insti-
tut  ions. The  Lord,  at  length,  called
out  a  peoplfe  from  Egypt,  and  took  !
upon  himself  the  power,  and  gave
revelntion  to  them  in  a  very  conspi-
cuous and  wonderful  manner.  He
came  down in the  sight  of  some
twenty-five  hundred  thousand  people,
and  gave  thera  laws ; they  heard
those  laws  proclaimed  from  Mount
Sinai, Male  and  female,  old  and  j
young,  throughout  all  the  hosts  of 1
Israel,  had  the  opportunity  of  learn-
ing something  in  regard  to  the  laws
of  heaven. However,  they  quickly
corrupted  themselves  in  the  sight  of
God,  and  while  Moses  yet  tarried  in
the  mount,  not  being  satisfied  with
the  laws  which  God  had  revealed,
and  which  he  intended  to  give  unto
them,  they  devised  institutions  of
their  own, They  gathered  together
their  jewels,  their  gold  and  their  sil-
ver, and  so  forth,  and  began  to  make
gods  of  their  own  for  the  people  to
worship,  among  which  we  have  an
account  of  two  calves  that  were  made
by  Aaron,  while  Moses  was  yet  in
the  mount  talking  with  the  Lord  and  ,
receiving  oracles  and  laws  for  the
government  of  that  people.  Having
received  these  laws,  written  upon
tables  of  stone,  Moses  departed  out
of  the  mount,  by  the  command  of
God,  to  go  down  and  visit  the  peo-
ple. The  Lord  had  told  Moses  that
they  had  corrupted  themselves,  and


DISCOURSES,

he  went  down,  being  filled  with  the
justice  of  the  Almighty,  or,  as  it  is
written,  his  anger  was  kindled  against
the  people,  which  I  interpret  aa  a
spirit  of  justice.  He  found  that  they
had  made  gods  and  bowed  down  be-
fore them,  and  said — "  These  be  the
gods,  oh  Israel,  that  brought  thee  up
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt"  How-
ever, a  revolution  was  performed  in
the  midst  of  the  people,  and  Moses
succeeded  in  bringing  most  of  the
people  to  their  senses  again,  that  they
were  willing  to  receive  the  divine
law.  Their  sin  however  was  so
great,  that  the  first  law  which  the
Lord  intended  to  bestow  upon  them,
namely,  the  law  of  the  Gospel,  was
withheld.

Now  here  is  something,  perhaps,
that  may  be  a  little  new  to  strangers,
to  hear  the  Latter-day  Saints  say
that  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God
was  withheld  from  the  people  of
Israel*  But  in  proof  of  my  assert  ion,
I  will  refer  you  to  Paul's  declaration
to  the  Hebrews,  wherein  he  says —
"  The  Gospel  was  preached  unto
them  in  the  wilderness  as  well  as
unto  us;  but  the  word  preached  did
not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with
faith  in  them  that  heard  it."  From
th  is  we  learn  that  the  children  of
Israel,  at  first,  were  not  placed  under
the  law  of  carnal  commandments.
They  were  not  placed  under  the  law
which  exacts  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a
tooth  for  a  tooth,  and  if  a  man  smite
thee  on  the  cheek,  turn  and  resist
the  evil.  This  was  not  the  first  law
that  was  given  to  Israel.  The  law
of  the  Gospel,  the  same  Gospel  that
was  taught  in  the  days  of  Christ,  was
given  to  them  first,  with  this  one  ex-
ception— the  children  of  Israel  were
required  to  look  forward  to  the  com-
ing of  their  Messiah,  and  to  the
atonement  that  he  should  make  upon
the  cross,  that  they,  by  faith  in  the
future  atonement  that  was  to  be  made,


THE  SETTING  UP  OF  GOD'S  KINGDOM,  ETC.


60


might  be  partakers  of  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel.  But  having  hardened
their  hearts  against  Moses  and  against
God,  the  Lord  determined  to  take
away  this  higher  law  from  the  midst
of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  give
them  a  law  which  is  termed  by  the
Apostles  the  law  of  carnal  command-
ments— a  law  by  which  they  should
not  live.  They  could  have  lived  by
the  law  of  the  Gospel;  they  could
have  entered  into  the  Lord's  rest  by
that  law,  even  into  the  fulness  of  his
glory;  but  having  transgressed  the
higher  law,  God  gave  them  an  in-
ferior law  adapted  to  their  carnal
capacity.  This  law  is  mentioned  in
the  20th  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  in  these
words  —  "  Wherefore  I  gave  them
also  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and
judgments  whereby  they  should  not
live/*  Why  is  it  that  the  Lord  gave
to  Israel  statutes,  and  judgments,
and  laws  that  were  not  good  ?  Be*
cause  they  were  incapable  of  receiving
anything  greater  or  higher.  He
gave  them  this  law  as  a  schoolmaster,
to  school  them  and  bring  them  to
the  higher  law,  nuraely,  the  law  of
Christ,  and  they  continued  under  this
law,  under  this  condemnation  tor  a
loner  time,  and  the  Lord  swore  in  his
wrath  that  they  should  not  enter  into
his  rest  in  consequence  of  having
broken  the  higher  law.

Moses  again  went  up  into  Mount
Sinai,  and  was  gone  a  second  time
forty  days  and  forty  nights,  without
eating  and  drinking,  and  received
this  law,  this  carnal  law  that  is  gene-
rally denominated  the  law  of  Moses,
upon  second  tables  of  stone,  the  first
covenant  having  been  dashed  to
pieces,  or  in  other  words  the  tirst
law,  the  higher  law  of  the  Gospel
contained  on  the  first  tables,  was
destroyed  and  the  covenant  broken,
and  a  new  law  was  introduced.  In-
corporated on  the  second  tables  of
stone  were  the  Ten  Commandments,


which  pertain  to  the  Gospel,  which
were  also  on  the  first  tables,  In
addition  to  these  Ten  Command-
ments which  pertain  to  the  Gospel,
were  many  of  those  carnal  laws  that
I  have  been  speaking  of.  By  this
second  code  of  laws  it  was  impossible
for  Israel  to  enter  into  the  fulness  of
celestial  glory,  in  other  words,  they
could  not  be  redeemed  and  brought
into  the  presence  of  the  Father  and
the  Son  ;  they  could  not  enter  into
the  fulness  of  that  rest  that  was  in-
tended to  be  given  to  such  only  as
obeyed  the  higher  law  of  the  Gospel.

After  the  days  of  Moses  the  chil-
dren of  Israel,  from  tiine  to  time,
corrupted  themselves  before  the  Most
High ;  they  would  not  abide  even  in
the  lower  law  ;  but  there  were  a  few
individuals  in  the  various  generations
of  Israel,  such  as  Prophets,  Schools
of  Prophets,  &c«,  which  received  the
higher  law,  and  obtained  the  higher
priesthood,  and  were  blessed  of  the
Lord,  and  had  the  privilege  of  enter-
ing into  his  rest,  being  tilled  with  the
spirit  of  prophecy  and  revelation,
having  the  power  not  only  to  pro-
phecy and  to  obtain  revelation,  but  to
come  up  by  virtue  of  the  higher  law,
into  near  communion  with  the  Father
and  the  Son,  having  the  pri  vilege  to
behuld,  by  vision,  the  face  of  the
Lord.

About  six  hundred  years  before
Christ  the  children  of  Israel,  or
rather  the  house  of  Judah,  that  wag
still  left  remaining  in  the  laud  of
Palestine,  had  again  so  far  aposta-
tized from  the  Lord  their  Go  J,  that
the  Lord  threatened,  by  the  mouth
of  the  Prophets,  that  he  would  de-
stroy that  great  city  Jerusalem,  and
that  the  people  should  be  led  away
captive  into  great  Babylon.  We
find  this  was  fulfilled.  But  eleven
years  previous  to  this  great  captivity,
the  Lord  led  one  of  the  Prophets,
whose  name  was  Lehi  and  his  sons,


70


JOURNAL  OF  MSCOURBES,


and  one  or  two  other  families  from
the  land  of  Jerusalem  to  this  Ameri-
can continent.  That  was  about  six:
hundred  years  before  Christ;  of
these  families  the  American  Indians
are  the  descendants.  But  we  will
leave  this  branch  of  Israel  on  the
American  continent  and  retnrn  again
to  the  house  of  Judah,  While  they
were  in  captivity  in  Babylon  the  Lord
raised  up  Daniel,  the  Prophet,  from
whose  words  I  h&ve  taken  my  text
Daniel  had  the  great  privilege  given
unto  him  of  knowing  concerning  the
rise  and  fall  of  kingdoms  and  em-
pires, of  beholding  the  kingdoms  of
the  earth,  from  his  day,  down  until
that  universal  kingdom  of  God  should
be  established  on  the  earth  never
more  to  be  destroyed.

First,  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  heathen
king,  was  visited  by  the  Almighty  in
a  heavenly  dream,  but  his  dream  was
taken  from  him?  and  he  could  not
remember  it  when  he  awoke.  He
called  for  the  wise  men  of  Babylon- —
the  astrologers,  soothsayers,  magi-
cians and  the  wisest  men  that  could
be  found,  requesting  them  to  tell
him  his  dream,  and  then  give  him
the  interpretation  of  it.  The  dream
left  a  deep  impression  on  the  mind
of  this  great  heathen  king,  and  he
believed  that  it  was  something  of
great  importance,  but  still  it  could
not  be  remembered,

I  will  here  remark,  by  the  way,
that  the  heathen  nations  in  those  days
were  not  so  far  corrupted,  and  had
not  so  far  apostatized  from  the  reli-
gion of  heaven  but  what  they  be-
lieved in  dreams  and  in  revelations,
and  thought  there  might  be  some-
thing contained  within  them  that
related  to  the  future  that  would  be
advantageous  to  understand,  What
man,  at  this  day,  at  this  enlightened
era,  among  the  Christian  nations,  is
so  near  to  the  Lord  as  to  acknowledge
new  revelation as did  Nebuchad-


nezzar? Far  have  they  fallen  be-
neath the  standard  of  heathen  idola-
ters!

King  Nebuchadnezzar  was  so  earn-
est in  regard  to  this  matter  that  he
sent  forth  a  decree  that  unless  the
wise  men  of  Babylon  would  interpret
to  him  his  dream  and  also  tell  the
dream  itself,  he  would  destroy  the
whole  of  them.  I  suppose  he  had
not  much  cuiifidence  in  them,  and
consequently  concluded  that  if  they
could  not  tell  the  dream  he  could  not
put  confidence  in  their  interpreta-
tions. When  Daniel  heard  of  the
decree  of  the  king,  to  destroy  all  the
wise  men,  he  sent  in  a  request  that
the  king  would  not  be  quite  so  hasty
in  his  measures,  but  give  him  a  little
time,  during  which  lie  and  his  fellows
besought  the  God  of  heaven  that
they  might  know  concerning  the
dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof.
The  Lord  heard  the  prayers  of  his
servants  and  revealed  to  Daniel  con-
cerning the  dream,  and  also  gave  him
the  interpretation,  Daniel  requested
to  be  brought  before  his  majesty  the
king,  and  he  promised  to  give  the
dream  and  the  interpretation.  He
was  brought  in  before  him,  and  ad-
dressed  him  in  language  something
like  the  following — u  The  wise  men,
astrologers,  soothsayers,  magicians,
&c.,  can  not  interpret  the  dream,  O
king,  neither  is  there  any  wisdom  in
me  that  I  can ;  but  there  is  a  God  in
heaven  who  is  able  to  give  the  inter-
pretation thereof  Thou,  0  king,  art
a  king  of  kings,  and  the  God  of
heaven  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom,
and  dominion  over  all  the  nations.
Thou  art  a  part  and  portion  of  the
dream;  or,  in  other  words,  you  re-
present a  portion  of  the  dream  you
had.  Thou,  0  king,  sawest  and  be-
held a  great  image.  This  image's
head  was  of  fine  ^old,  the  breast  and
the  arms  of  silver,  the  belly  and  the
thighs  of  brass,  the  legs  were  of  iron,


THE  SETTING  UP  OF  GOD'S  KINGDOM,  ETC.


71


the  feet  were  part  of  iron  and  part
of  potter's  clay.  Thou  sawesfc  until
that  a  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  moun-
tain without  hands,  which  smote  the
image  upon  the  feet  that  was  part
of  iron  and  part  of  clay,  and  brake
them  to  pieces,  then  was  the  iron,  the
clay,  the  silver,  the  brass  and  the
gold  all  broken  to  pieces  together,
and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the
summer  threshing  floor,  and  the  wind
carried  them  away,  and  there  was  no
place  found  for  them,  but  the  stone
that  sr-iote  the  image  became  a  great
mount  ti  and  filled  the  whole  earth.
This  v  3  the  dream — he  then  gives
the  interpretation.  "  Thou,  0  king,
art  this  head  of  gold."  That  is,  the
kingdom  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  that
bore  rule  over  all  the  earth,  was  con-
sidered the  head  of  gold.  "  After
thee  shall  come  another  kingdom
represented  by  the  breast  and  the
arms  of  silver."  That  is  the  Medo-
Persian  kingdom.  After  that  ano-
ther kingdom  still  inferior,  called  the
kingdom  of  brass,  forasmuch  as  gold
is  better  than  silver,  silver  more  pre-
cious than  brnss,  so  these  kingdoms
that  were  to  arise,  to  succeed  each
other,  were  to  be  inferior  as  time
should  pass  along.  The  third  king-
dom, of  brass,  represented  the  Mace-
donian empire;  then  after  that
another  kingdom,  great  and  terrible,
whose  legs  were  of  iron,  strong  and
powerful  The  fourth  kingdom  bore
rule  over  the  earth  ;  that  is  admitted,
by  all  commentators,  to  be  the  great
Roman  Empire,  and  by  the  division
of  the  Roman  empire  into  two  di-
visions, representing  the  legs,  and
afterwards  into  the  feet  and  toes.
I  shall  not  go  through  and  bring  up
historical  facts  to  show  the  particular
divisions  that  grew  out  of  the  Roman
empire,  but  will  merely  state  tbat
the  present  modern  kingdoms  ot  Eu-
rope that  have  grown  out  from  the
Roman empire  represent  the  last


vestiges  of  that  great  and  powerful
empire  of  Rome ;  that  is,  it  fills  up
and  makes  the  image  complete.  First
the  head  of  gold — the  Babylonian
empire ;  second,  the  breast  and  arms
of  silver — the  Medo- Persian  empire  ;
third,  the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,
the  Macedonian  kingdom ;  fourth,
the  great  Roman  empire  represented
by  the  two  legs  of  iron,  the  eastern
and  the  western  empires  of  Rome.
Afterwards  a  division  of  the  Roman
empire  into  feet  and  toes,  constituting
all  the  modern  European  governments
and  those  governments  that  have
grown  out  of  the  European  govern-
ments located  in  North  and  South
America*

Do  we  wish  to  understand  the
geographical  position  of  the  great
image  ?  If  we  do,  we  must  con*
sider  the  head  located  in  Asia ;  the
breast  and  the  arms  of  silver  a  little
west  of  the  great  Babylonian  Empire,
tke  belly  and  thighs  of  brass  still
westward;  the  legs  of  iron  and  the
modern  kingdoms  composing  the  fret
and  toes,  part  of  iron  and  part  of
clay,  as  extending  throughout  Eu-
rope and  branching  across  the  Atlan-
tic Ocean,  and  extending  from  the
East  Sea  even  to  the  West,  from  the
Atlantic  unto  the  Pacific,  This  will
constitute  the  location  of  the  great
image,  running  westward,

Tne  image  being  now  com  pi  u  to,  nil
that  we  need  now  is  to  find  some-*
thing  that  will  represent  the  atuno
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands,  something  distinct  entirely
from  the  image,  having  no  fellowship
with  it,  that  has  not  gro  vu  ant  of
it,  and  that  has  no  authority  that
comes  from  it,  hut  a  distinct  and  en-
tirely separate  govern  :nent  that  should
be  established  in  some  mountain,
"  Thou  sawest  until  that  a  stone  was
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands.1*  What  shall  that  stone  do  ?
It  shall  smite  the  image  upon  the


72  JOURNAL  OF

feet  and  toe?.  Not  upon  the  head,
at  first,  not  upon  the  breast  and  arms
of  silver,  not  upon  the  belly  and
thighs  of  brass,  not  upon  the  modern
kingdoms  of  Europe  that  have  grown
out  of  the  legs  of  iron,  but  shall
smite  upon  the  feet  and  toes  of  the
great  image  ;  there  is  where  it  is  to
commence  its  attack.

Now  let  us  inquire,  for  a  few  mo-
ment?, how  or  in  what  manner  this
kingdom,  called  the  stone  cut  out  of
the  mountain,  commences  this  severe
attack,  "  Is  it  to  be  with  weapons  of
a  carnal  nature,  with  sword  in  hand  |
and  weapons  of  warfare  to  wage  a
war  against  the  kingdoms  or  gov-
ernments of  the  earth  ?  No,  indeed!  j
Connected  with  the  kingdom  or  stone
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands  is  a  power  superior  to  that  of
carnal  weapons — the  power  of  truth,
for  the  kingdom  of  God  cannot  be
organized  on  the  earth  without  truth
being  sent  down  from  hear  en,  without
authority  being  given  from  the  Most
High;  without  men  again  being
called  to  the  holy  Priesthood  and
Apostleship,  and  sent  forth  to  pub-
lish the  truth  in  its  naked  simplicity
and  plain nesH  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth.  This  truth  will  be  the
Weapon  of  warfare,  this  authority  and
power  sent  down  from  heaven  will
go  forth  and  will  proclaim  the  mes-
sage of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  the
Gospel  of  the  latter-day  kingdom,
publishing  it  first  among  the  nations
that  compose  the  feet  and  toes  of  the
great  image.  Will  they  be  broken  j
to  pieces?  Yes,  when  this  message
is  published  to  them.  When  they
are  sufficiently  warned,  when  the
servants  of  God  have  gone  forth  in
obedience  to  his  commandments,  and
published  in  their  towns,  villages,
cities,  States  and  governments  these
sacred  and  holy  principles  that  God
Almighty  has  sent  down  from  heaven
in  the  latter  times,  it  will  leave  all


DISCOURSES.

people,  nations  and  tongues  that  hear
the  Gospel,  and  the  principles  and
message  pertaining  to  that  kingdom,
without  rmy  excuse.  It  will  be  a
warning  that  'will  be  everlasting  on
the  one  hand,  or  on  the  other,  either
to  the  bringing  of  the  people  to  re-
pentance, reformation  and  obedience
to  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom,  or  the
judgments  which  are  predicted  in
tin's  prophecy  of  Daniel  will  be  poured
out  upon  the  heads  of  those  nations
and  kingdoms,  and  they  will  become
like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing
floor,  even  ail  those  kingdoms  that
compose  the  great  image;  for  be  it
known  that  the  remnants  of  the  Ba-
bylonish kingdom,  represented  by
the  head  of  gold,  still  exist  in  Asia;
the  remnants  of  the  silver  kingdom,
of  the  brass  kingdom,  and  the  king-
dom  of  iron  still  have  their  exist-
ence ;  but  when  the  I#ord  Almighty
shall  fulfil  this  prophecy,  the  toes
and  feet  and  legs  of  iron  of  that  great
image,  or  all  these  kingdoms,  will  be
broken  in  pieces,  and  they  will  be-
come like  the  chaff  of  the  summer
threshing  floor ;  the  wind  will  carry
them  away  and  no  place  will  be  found
for  them.

This  prophecy  of  Daniel  will  give
a  true  understanding  of  the  matter
to  our  wise  men  and  statesmen,  and
<ill  who  desire, to  know  the  future
destiny  of  the  American  government,
the  European  governments,  and  all
the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Their
destiny  is  total  destruction  from  our
earth,  no  matter  how  great  or  power-
ful they  may  become.  Though  onr
nation  may  grasp  on  the  right  hand
and  on  the  left ;  though  it  may  an-
nex the  British  possessions,  and  ex-
tend its  dominions  to  the  south  and
grasp  the  whole  of  this  great  western
hemisphere,  and  although  our  nation
shall  become  as  powerful  in  popula-
tion as  in  extent  of  terra  or \\  its  des-
tiny is  foretold  in  the  saying  of  the


9


THE  SETTING  UP  OF


GOD'S  KINGDOM,  ETC.


73


Prophet  Daniel,  "  They  shall  become
like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  thresh-
ing floor,  the  wind  shall  carry  them
away  and  no  place  shall  be  found  for
them."  So  with  the  kingdoms  of
Europe,  so  with  the  kingdoms  of
Western  Asia  and  Eastern  Europe,  |
Let  us  now  say  a  few  words  in  re-
gard to  this  stone  which  shall  be  cut
out  of  the  mountain  without  hands.
Now  there  must  be  something  very
peculiar  in  regard  to  the  organization
of  the  latter-day  kingdom  that  is
never  to  be  destroyed.  All  these
other  governments  that  I  have  named
have  been  the  production  of  human
hands,  that  is,  of  human  ingenuity,
human  wisdom ;  the  power  of  unin-
spired men  has  been  exerted  to  the
uttermost  in  the  establishment  of
human  governments,  consequently  all
has  been  done  by  human  ingenuity
and  power,  Not  so  with  the  little
stone.  Man  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  organization  of  that  kingdom.
Hear  what  the  Prophet  has  said:
"In  the  days  of  these  kings  the  God
of  heaven  shall  set  up  a  kingdom."
It  is  not  to  be  done  by  human  means
or  power,  or  by  the  wisdom  of  man,
neither  by  mighty  conquests  by  the
sword ;  but  it  is  to  be  done  by  him
that  rules  on  high,  who  is  King  of
kings  and  Lord  of  lords ;  by  him
that  suffered  and  died  upon  the  cross
that  we  might  live ;  by  him  whose
right  it  is  to  reign  and  govern  the  ;
nations  of  the  earth.  He  it  is  that
will  give  laws;  he  it  is  that  will
give  commandment;  he  it  is  that
will  organize  that  kingdom,  and  it
will  be  done  according  to  the  pattern
in  all  things.  Has  there  been  any
such  kingdom  organized  since  the
day  that  the  Prophet  Daniel  deli-
vered this  prophecy  ?  i  know  that
there  are  some  who  believe  that  the
kingdom  spoken  of  under  the  name
of  the  "little  stone"  was  organized
1800  years  ago  by  oar  Savior  and


his  Apostles*  I  do  not  know  why
they  believe  this,  unless  because  it  is
fashionable.  There  is  no  evidence  to
prove  any  such  thing.  Indeed  that
kingdom  that  was  organized  1800
years  ago  was  organized  altogether
too  soon  to  accomplish  the  pro-
phecies that  arc  here  given.  The
two  legs  of  iron,  and  the  feet  and
toes  were  not  yet  formed,  and  re-
member that  the  stone  is  not  cut  out
of  the  mountain  without  hands,  until
this  great  image  is  complete,  not
only  the  head,  breast,  arms  and  the
legs,  but  the  feet  and  the  tofs  also;
they  ail  become  complete  before  the
kingdom  called  the  tl  stone"  is  made
manifest. Now the feet did  not

;  exist,  and  did  not  begin  to  exist  until
many  centuries  after  the  days  of
Christ  What  did  that  kingdom  do
that  was  built  up  by  our  Savior  and

i  his  Apostles  ?  Did  it  break  in  pieces
any  part  of  that  great  image  r  No.
What  did  that  image  do  to  that  king-
dom ?  It  accomplished  the  prophe-
cies of  Daniel — made  war  with  the
Saints  and  overcame  them.  Very
different  from  the  latter-day  kingdom!
The  powers  of  this  world,  under  the
name  of  the 'great  image,  made  war
with  Jesus,  with  the  Apostles,  with

|  the  former-day  Saints,  with  the  king-
dom that  was  then  established  and
overcame  then:,  not  only  in  fulfil-
ment of  what  is  declared  by  the  Pro-
phet Daniel,  hut  also  what  is  declared
by  John  the  Revelator ;  and  those
powers  obtained  dominion  over  all
people,  nations  and  tongues,  and
made  them  drink  of  the  wine  of  the
wrath  of  the  fornication  of  Great
Babylon,  and  they  became  drunken
with  her  abominations.  Instead  of
the  kingdom  of  God  then  being  built
up  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of
Daniel  1800  years  ago,  the  nations
of  the  earth  overcame  it  and  rooted
it  out  of  the  earth.  But  mark  the
words  of  the  text :  <fc  And  in  the  days


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  these  kings  shall  the  God  of  hea-
ven set  up  a  kingdom  that  shall
never  be  destroyed,"  Very  different
from  the  former* day  kingdom  ;  "  and
the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to
other  people."  All  these  human  gov-
ernments have  been  changing  hands,
and  have  been  left  to  some  other
people.  The  Babylonish  kingdom
was  left  to  the  Medes  and  Persians,
the  Medo- Persian  kingdom  to  the
Macedonian t  the  Macedonian  to  the
Roman ;  but  the  latter-day  kingdom
shall  not  be  left  to  another  people,
but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  con-
sume all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall
stand  forever.  "  Forasmuch  as  thou
sawest  that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of
the  mountains  without  hands,  and
that  it  brake  in  pieces  tlio  iron,  the
brass,  the  da}-,  the  silver  and  the
gold ;  and  the  great  God  hath  made
known  unto  thee  what  shall  come  to
pass  hereafter,  and  the  d renin  is  cer-
tain and  the  interpretation  thereof
sure,"

Having  learned,  then,  that  the
kingdom  built  up  by  our  Savior  and
his  Apostles  did  not  fulfil  this  pro-
phecy; that  that  kingdom  itself  was
rooted  out  of  the  earth,  and  every
vestige  of  its  authority  destroyed,
and  that  nothing  in  the  shape  or
appearance  of  the  kingdom  of  God
has  existed  for  some  sixteen  or  seven-
teen centuries  past,  inasmuch  as  this
is  the  case  and  all  nations  without
any  such  Church,  without  any  such
kingdom,  without  any  authority  to
baptize  or  lay  on  bauds  for  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost;  without  autho-
rity to  administer  the  Lord's  supper;
without  the  authority  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God :  without  Prophets,
without  Revelators,  without  inspired
Apostles,  without  angels,  without
visions,  without  the  revelations  and
prophecies  of  heaven,  which  always
characterize  the  kingdom  of  God ;  I
say  inasmuch  as  this  is  the  case,  and


darkness  has  covered  the  earth  and
gross  darkness  the  people  for  so
many  generations,  no  wonder  that,
in  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  time
should  at  length  arrive  to  send  ano-
ther messenger  from  heaven.  No
wonder  that  an  angel  should  be  com-
missioned from  the  eternal  heavens
from  the  throne  of  the  Almighty
with  another  message  to  the  inhabi-
tants of  our  globe!  For  do  you
suppose  that  this  latter-day  kingdom
that  is  to  be  set  up  without  hands
will  be  set  up  without  any  commu-
nication from  heaven,  without  any
new  revelation,  without  any  Prophets,
without  any  Apostles,  or  inspired
men?  Do  you  suppose  that  God
will  accomplish  a  work  of  this  nature
and  yet  the  heavens  be  veiled  over
our  heads  like  brass?  Oh  no.  When
the  glad  time  shall  come  for  God
Almighty  to  organize  and  set  up  the
latter-day  kingdom  on  the  earth,  he
will  make  it  known  by  sending  an
angel — and  in  no  other  way,  for  that
is  the  way  pointed  out  in  prophecy*
If  a  man  rises  up,  like  John  Wes-
ley, Martin  Luther,  John  Calvin,  or
Henry  the  Eighth,  and  undertakes  to
organize  a  new  church  and  new
creeds,  &c.,  without  receiving  the
ministration  of  an  angel,  you  may
know  that  the  ecclesiastical  govern-
ments that  they  may  form  on  the
earth,  are  not  the  kingdom  of  God.
But  when  a  people  shall  rise  on  our
earth,  testifying  that  the  Lord  God
has  sent  an  angel  from  heaven,  with
the  everlasting  Gospel  to  be  preached
to  every  people,  kindred,  nation  and
tongue,  on  our  globe,  with  the  procla-
mation that  the  hour  of  God's  judg-
ment is  at  hand,  that  people  are
worthy  of  being  listened  to,  at  least
it  should  call  forth  the  most  careful
investigation  of  all  people,  nations
and  kindreds  under  the  whole  hea-
ven. But  when  they  do  not  come  in
tli is  way,  they  are  not  even  worthy  of


E  SETTING  UP  OP  GoD'S  KINGDOM,  ETC.


being  listened  to,  for  we  know
that  they  are  not  the  kingdom  of
God.

John  the  Re  vela  tor  tells  us  that
when  the  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be
established  on  the  earth,  before  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  man,  before
he  should  unveil  his  face  in  the  clouds
of  heaven,  he  would  send  an  angel
with  that  Gospel.  Now,  query,  has
he  done  so  ?  Go  make  the  enquiry
if  yon  are  not  satisfied.  Ask  the
Roman  Catholics  if  God  has  sent  that
angel  predicted  in  the  14th  chapter
of  the  revelations  of  St.  John  to
re-establish  his  kingdom  on  the
earth,  and  they  will  tell  you  no;  they
will  tell  you  that  the  kingdom  of
God  has  continued  on  the  earth,  that  !
it  needs  no  re-establishing,  that  they
have  maintained  in  unbroken  succes-
sion the  authority  of  the  apostleship
from  the  days  of  Peter  down  until
the  present  time,  and  that  they  will
retain  it  while  the  earth  shall  stand ;
that  there  will  be  no  angel  sent  with
the  everlasting  Guspel  to  organize
the  kingdom  anew.  Well,  then,  we
have  their  testimony  that  they  are
not  the  kingdom  oi  God,  for  they
have  denied  many  of  the  great
characteristics  belonging  to  the  king-
dom, such  as  the  gift  of  new  revela-
tion, the  gift  of  prophecy,  which  was
always  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
have  bound  up  a  tew  books  and  called
them  the  full  canon  of  Scripture.
And  if  a  Prophet  should  arise  among
them  and  under  lake  to  give  more
Scripture,  they  would  exclude  his
Scripture  and  him  with  it,  as  being  a
heretic  and  fanatic.  They  are  not
the  kingdom  of  God  then.

Go  then  to  the  Greek  Church  and
make  the  same  inquiry  of  them.
Has  God  sent  an  angel  to  you  Greeks?
I  mean  the  millions  in  Russia  who
profess  the  Greek  religion,  and  they
will  tell  you  about  the  same  thing  as
the  Catholics — that  God  has  said  '


nothing  since  the  days  of  the  Apos-
tles.

No  inspired  men  among  them  and
no  additional  Scriptures  by  Prophets
and  Revclators.

Theu  go  to  the  G66  different  Pro-
testant denominations  that  have  come
out  from  these  ecclesiastical  powers
and  inquire  of  them  if  God  did  send
an  angel  to  those  who  founded  their
several  denominations,  and  they  will
tell  you  nay.  Most  of  them  will  say
that  God  does  not  send  angels  in  the
latter  times,  that  he  has  no  Prophets,
no  Revelators,  and  that  there  is  no
need  of  any  further  light  from  heaven.
Go  through  all  the  ranks  of  Chris-
tendom and  make  diligent  inquiry
for  a  people  that  answer  the  descrip-
tion of  John's  prophecy,  namely  a
people  that  bear  testimony  that  an
angel  has  come  with  the  everlasting
Gospel.  By  and  by,  in  your  inquiry
you  will  get  away  up  here  into  the
heights  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  or
as  some  term  it  the  backbone  of  the
American  continent;  inquire  of  the
people  you  find  here,  ask  of  them  at
their  great  headquarters,  Salt  Lake
City,  whether  they  believe  that  God
has  established  his  kingdom  by  send-
ing an  angel  in  fulfillment  of  the
revelations  of  St.  John,  and  you  will
hear  one  united  voice  throughout  all
this  city  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
saying  that  God  has  sent  an  Angel
from  heaven  with  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  be  preached  to  every  na-
tion, kindred,  tongue  and  people.
Slake  the  same  inquiry  in  the
hundred  towns,  cities  and  villages
throughout  this  Territory,  and  there
will  be  a  united  voice  of  all  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  to  this  one  same  great
fact.  We  therefore  contend,  and
rightfully  too,  that  we  are  the  only
people  in  America,  in  Europe,  in
Asia,  in  Africa  and  in  the  islands  of
the  sea  that  are  testifying  to  the  ful-
fillment of  the  prophecy  that  was


7C


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


uttered  by  John  the  Re  relator.  We
have  no  need,  then,  to  inquire  whe-
ther all  these  contending  sects  are
the  kingdom  of  God  or  not,  for  this
is  the  only  people  that  bear  a  testi-
mony^  to  the  coming  of  the  angel
with  the  Gospel*  Consequently  this
is  the  only  people  that  need  engage
our  attention  or  investigations  in  re-
gard to  setting  up  the  latter-day
kingdom ;  and  if  we,  by  our  investi-
gation, Gnd  that  this  people  answer
the  description,  not  only  of  John's
prophecy,  but  of  Daniel's  prophecy
and  all  the  prophecies  throughout
the  Old  Testament  in  regard  to  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  then  certainly  the  doctrines
and  principles  of  this  kingdom  are
worthy  the  attention  and  obedience
of  every  good  person.

If  we  had  time  we  would  examine
the  doctrines  of  the  kingdom,  to  see
whether  the  doctrines  that  were
brought  by  the  angel  in  these  latter
times  agree  with  the  doctrines  that
were  taught  1  SOU  years  ago;  but  we
have  not  time  to  do  that  on  this  oc-
casion. Suffice  it  to  say  that  if  the
former-day  Saints  taught  faith  in
God,  repentance,  baptism  for  the  re-
mission of  sins,  the  reception  of  the
iloly  Ghost  by  the  laying  on:  of
hands ;  if  they  taught  these  things
in  former  days,  be  it  known  untq  all
people,  nations,  and  tongues  that  the
angel  lias  commissioned  his  servants
to  preael^  the  same  things  in  these

the  former-day  S  ui  1 1  ( s
Necessity  of  having  the
s  of  the  Gospel,  such  as
f  vision,  the  ministration


day&  '

tkuMit  t


various  g
the  -gifts


of  angels,  prophecy,  revelation,  heal-
ing the  sick,  speaking  with  tongues,
the  interpretation  of  tongues,  and
all  the  various  gifts  mentioned  in  the
New  Testament ;  if  the}T  taught
these  things  in  former  days,  the
Latter-day  Saints  have  been  commis-
sioned to  teach  the  same  tilings  in
our  day,  consequently  there  is  no
difference  so  far  as  doctrines,  ordi-
nances and  the  gifts  are  concerned.

Did  the  Prophets  in  ancient  times
testify  that  when  the  kingdom  of
God  should  be  organized,  the  Saints
should  be  gathered  from  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  that  all  that
were  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lrjrd
should  be  brought  out  from  the
north  and  from  the  south,  find  from
the  east  and  from  tbe  west,  even  the
sons  and  daughters  of  God  should
be  brought  from  all  nations?  The
Latter-day  Saints  teach  that  the
same  angel  which  brought  the  Gos-
pel, the  same  God  that  has  set  up  his
kingdom  on  the  earth  in  the  latter
days  has  commanded  his  servants
that  go  forth  with  these  doctrines,  to
gatherout  his  elect  from  the  four  winds
of  heaven.  Did  the  ancient  Pro-
phets testify  that  another  book  should
come  forth,  another  revelation  to
accomplish  the  great  preparatory
work  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God
in  the  last  days  ?  The  Latter-day
Saints  testify  that  the  angel  that  has
brought  the  Gospel  has  delivered  to
them  another  buok  containing  that
Gospel  in  all  its  fullness  and  plain-
ness, fulfilling  these  prophecies.

May  God  bless  you.  Amen,


.  COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  WORK.  77


REMARKS BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  it*  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,

Apeil  8,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  WORK,


We  have  had  a  very  good  Confer-
ence ;  we  have  heard  a  great  deal  of
testimony  from  the  servants  of  the
Lord,  and  that  testimony  has  been
troe.  The  building  up  of  the  Zion
of  God  in  these  latter  days  includes,
I  may  say  of  a  truth,  every  branch
of  business,  both  temporal  and
spiritual,  in  which  we  are  engaged.
We  can  not  touch  upon  any  subject
which  is  lawful  in  the  sight  of  God
and  man,  that  is  not  embraced  in  our
religion.  The  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
which  we  have  embraced,  and  which
we  preach,  includes  all  truth,  and
every  lawful  calling  and  occupation
of  man.  One  subject  that  we  are
deeply  interested  in  I  wish  to  say  a
few  words  upon.  In  the  first  place
I  wish  to  give  notice  in  this  stage  of
my  remarks  to  the  members  of  the
Deseret  Agricultural  and  Manufac-
turing Society,  that  they  are  re-
quested to  meet,  at  the  close  of  this
meeting,  at  the  Historian's  Office,  to
appoint  their  president  and  board  of
directors  for  the  coming  season,  for
the  times  demand  that  we  should
hold  a  State  fair  in  this  city  this  fall.

Strangers  may  think  this  a  very
strange  subject  to  present  in  a  reli-
gious meeting,  but  we  are  building
up  the  literal  kingdom  of  God  on  the
earth,  and  we  have  temporal  duties
to  perform.  We  inhabit  temporal
bodies,  we  eat  temporal  food,  we


'  build  temporal  houses,  we  raise  tem-
poral cattle  and  temporal  wheat;  we
contend  with  temporal  weeds,  and
with  temporal  enemies  in  our  soil,
and  thene  things  naturally  give  rise
to  the  necessity  of  attending  to  and
performing  many  duties  of  a  tempo-
ral and  arduous  nature,  and  they,

i  of  course,  are  embraced  in  our  reli-
gion. In  building  up  the  Zion  and
kingdom  of  God  in  these  latter  days,
our  agricultural  and  manufacturing
interests  are  of  the  most  vital  im-
portance ;  in  fact  manufacturing  and
agricultural  pursuits  are  of  vital
importance  to  any  nation  under  hea-
ven. Show  me  a  nation  whose  people
cultivate  the  earth,  and  manufacture
what  they  need,  and  I  will  show  you
a  rich  and  independent  nation.
Show  me  a  nation  that  lives  entirely
by  mining  and  I  will  show  you  a
poor  nation — one  that  is  ready  to
run  out  and  become  obsolete.  You
see  this  manifest  in  the  history  of  all
nations  under  heaven.  WJtlfc  -gives
England  her  wealth  to-d ay  r  Her
coal,  iron,  and  the  produaw  of  her
soil,  in  connection  with  her  jflbdigions
manufactures;  and  it  is  so' with  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.  What
makes  the  United  States  what  she  is
to-day  ?  Her  products  and  the  cul-
tivation of  her  soil,  and  the  constant
efforts  she  has  made  to  supply  the
wan|s  of  her  people. Not  but  what


7s


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


mining  is  all  right,  there  is  no  fault
with  the  development  of  the  re-
sources of  the  earth  under  favorable
circumstances.  When  we  came  here
our  position  demanded  that  the  very
first  thing  we  did  was  to  plant  our
potatoes  and  sow  oar  wheat,  or  we
had  starvation  before  us  ;  and  I  will
here  say  that  the  Saints  and  the  El-
ders of  Israel  have  gone  before  the
Lord  day  after  day  and  week  after
week,  and  prayed  the  Almighty  to
hide  up  the  treasures  of  these  moun-
tains, lest  even  the  Latter-day  Saints,
with  all  the  faith  they  had,  should  be
tempted  to  turn  away  from  the  culti-
vation of  the  earth  and  the  manu-
facture of  what  they  needed ;  and  the
Lord  heard  our  prayers,  and  we
dwelt  here  many  years  and  filled
these  valleys  for  six  hundred  miles
with  cities,  towns,  villages,  gardens,
orchards,  fields,  vineyards,  hundreds
of  school- houses,  and  places  of  wor-
ship, until  we  made  the  desert  blos-
som as  the  rose,  and  had  a  supply  of
wheat,  bread  and  clothing  upon  our
hands.  Then,  I  do  not  know  but  the
Elders  ceased  praying  for  the  Lord
to  hide  up  the  treasures  of  the  earth
— I  guess  they  did,  for  very  soon
after  mines  began  to  be  opened,  and
now  silver  mines  are  being  worked  in
many  parts  of  the  Territory*  A  few
years  ago  General  Connor  and  others,
who  dwelt  here,  with  soldiers  under
them,  spent  very  many  days  in
prospecting  these  mountains  from  one
end  to  the  other  for  gold  and  silver,
but  they  could  find  none;  to-day  you
may  go  over  the  same  places,  and  if
yon  dig  into  the  earth  you  may  find
plenty  of  silver,  and  you  may  find  it
almost  anywhere  in  these  mountains.
I  suppose  this  is  all  right,  I  have  no
fault  to  find  with  it ;  but  I  still  say
that  the  interest  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  in  these  mountains  is  to  culti-
vate the  soil  and  to  manufacture  what
hey  use.


Through  the  influence  of  President
Young  we  have  many  manufactories
for  wool  and  cotton  already  estab-
lished in  this  Territory,  He  has
done  more  than  any  man  living  in
these  last  days,  according  to  the
means  he  has  had  at  his  command,
to  establish  these  branches  of  busi-
ness in  the  mid*t  of  these  mountains.
We  have  now  many  large  factories  in
this  Territory  that  have  to  stand  still
for  want  of  wool.  I  want  to  say  a
few  words  on  this  subject  to  the  wool
growers  of  Deseret.  Instead  of
sending  our  wool  out  of  the  Territory,
to  eastern  States  to  be  manufactured
into  cloth,  and  purchasing  it  and
paying  eastern  manufacturers  a  large
per  centage  for  it  when  brought  here
by  railroad,  I  feel  that  it  is  our  duty,
and  it  would  be  far  wiser  for  us,  to
sell  our  wool  to  those  who  own  fac-
tories in  this  Territory,  and  to  sustain
ourselves  by  sustaining  home  manu-
factures.

One  of  the  first  commands  given
to  Adam,  after  being  placed  in  Eden,
was  to  dress  the  garden ;  and  he  was
permitted  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  every
tree  except  one.  After  a  while  Adam
and  his  wife,  Eve,  partook  of  the
fruit  of  this  tree,  and  the  history  of
the  Fall  is  before  us  and  the  world.
After  Adam  was  cast  out  of  the  gar-
den the  Lord  told  him  that  there
should  be  a  curse  on  the  earth,  and
instead  of  bringing  forth  beautiful
flowers,  fruit  and  grain  spontaneously,
as  before  the  Fall,  it  should  bring
forth  thorns,  briers,  thistles  and
noxious  weeds,  and  that  man  should
earn  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his
brow;  and  from  that  time  to  the
present  mankind  has  had  this  curse
to  contend  with  in  the  cultivation  of
the  earth.  In  consequence  of  this
the  inhabitants  of  Utah,  in  their
agricultural  operations  have  to  fight
against  the  cockle  burr,  the  black
seed  and  sunflower,  as  well  as  thorns


COMPREHENSIVENESS  OF


THE  LATTER-DAY  WORK.


79


and  thistles  and  many  other  noxious
weeds,  which ,  if  not  eradicated,
speedily  take  advantage  of  us,  and
to  a  great  extent,  mar  the  result  of
our  labors.  It  will  pay  us  to  pay
attention  to  these  things;  it  will  pay
us  to  dress  the  earth,  to  till  it,  to
take  care  of  and  spend  time  and
means  in  manuring  and  feeding  it ;
it  will  pay  us  to  gather  out  these
noxious  weeds,  for  the  earth  will  then
have  a  chance  to  bring  forth  in  its
strength.  This,  with  the  blessing  of
God  upon  our  labors,  has  made  the
soil  of  Utah  as  productive  as  it  is
to-day.  I  wish  to  see  this  interest
increase  in  our  midst;  and  I  hope,  in
addition  to  this,  that  those  who  are
raising  sheep — our  wool  growers —
will  pay  attention  to  and  carry  on
that  branch  of  business  systemati-
cally, and  that  we  will  sell  our  wool
to  those  who  manufacture  it  at  home,
instead  of  sending  it  out  of  the
Territory  to  be  manufactured.  I  feel
that  this  is  our  duty,  and  the  course
which  will  promote  our  best  interests,
and  it  is  a  principle  which  is  true,
independent  of  religion,  in  any  com-
munity or  nation;  it  is  a  self-sus-
taining principle,

God  has  blessed  us,  he  has  blessed
the  earth,  and  our  labors  in  the  tilling
of  the  soil  have  been  greatly  pros-
pered. As  has  been  said  by  some  of
our  brethren  in  their  remarks,  when
the  pioneers  came  here,  no  mark  of
civilisation  or  of  the  white  man,  was
found.  If  those  who  are  now  so
anxious  to  obtain  the  homes  we  have
made,  had  seen  Utah  as  we  saw  it,
they  would  never  have  desired  a
habitation  here,  but  they  would  have
got  out  of  it  as  soon  as  they  could.
It  was  barren,  desolate,  abounding
with  grasshoppers,  crickets  and  kiote
wolves,  and  these  things  seemed  to
be  the  only  natural  productions  of
the  soil.  We  went  to  work  by  faith,
not  much  by  sight,  to  cultivate  the


earth.  We  broke  almost  all  the
plows  we  had  the  first  day.  We  had
to  let  streams  of  water  out  to  moisten
the  earth,  and  by  experience  we  had
to  learn  to  raise  anything.  The
stranger  comes  into  Salt  Lake  City
and  sees  our  orchards,  and  the  trees
in  our  streets,  and  he  thinks,  what  a
fruitful  and  delightful  place  it  is.
He  does  not  think  that>  for  twenty
or  tvventy-four  years,  almost  every
tree  he  beholds,  according  to  its  age,
has  had  to  be  watered  twice  a  week
through  the  whole  summer  season,  or
they  would  all  have  been  dead  long
since.  We  have  had  to  unite  upon
these  things,  the  Lord  has  blessed
our  labors,  and  his  mercies  have  been
over  this  people.

If  we  had  not  cultivated  the  earth,
but  had  turned  our  attention  to  min-
ing, we  should  not  only  have  starved
to  death  ourselves,  but  thousands  of
strangers,  who  have  passed  through,
would  have  shared  the  same  fate.
Utah  Territory  has  been  the  great
highway  to  California,  Nevada,  and
all  the  western  States  and  Territories,
and  they  have  all  looked,  in  a  mea-
sure, to  Utah  for  their  bread,  No-
body but  Latter-day  Saints  would
have  lived  here,  and  endured  the
trials  and  afflictions  that  we  endured
in  the  beginning ;  none  others  would
have  stayed  and  fought  the  crickets
one  year,  as  we  had  to  do  year  after
year.  Any  people  but  the  Latter-
day  Saints  would  have  left  this  coun-
try long  ago*  Not  only  so,  on
account  of  the  things  I  have  already
named,  but  I  will  here  say  that  no
other  people  could  have  lived  here —
no,  they  would  have  knocked  each
others'  brains  out  on  account  of  the
little  water  they  would  have  had  in
their  irrigating  operations.  When
men  saw  their  crops  and  trees  wither-
ing and  perishing  for  fhe  want  of
water,  the  selfishness  so  general  in
1  the  world  would  have  worked  up  to


80


JOURNAL  OF  UISCUl'KSES


such  an  extent,  that  they  would  have
killed  one  another,  and  hence  I  say
that  none  but  Latter-day  Saints
would  have  stood  it;  but  thej-,  by
the  training  and  experience  they
had  before  received,  were  prepared
for  the  hardships  and  trials  they  had
to  encounter  in  this  country,  i

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  con-
tinue our  efforts  in  cultivating  the
earth,  and  in  manufacturing  what
we  want  And  I  still  urge  upon
our  Female  Relief  Societies,  in  this
city  and  throughout  the  Territory,  to
carry  out  the  counsel  President
Young  gave  us  years  and  years  ago,
and  try,  as  far  as  possible,  within
ourselves,  to  make  our  own  bonnets,
hats  and  clothing,  and  to  let  the
beauty  of  what  we  wear  be  the  work-
manship of  our  own  hands.  It  is
true  that  our  religion  is  not  in  our
coat  or  bonnet,  or  it  should  not  be.
If  a  man's  religion  is  there  it  is
not  generally  very  deep  anywhere
else.  But  God  has  blessed  us  with
the  products  of  ear  tlx  and  the  bles-
sings of  heaven,  and  his  Spirit  has
been  with  us;  we  have  been  pre-
served, and  the  Lord  has  turned
awav  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and
he  has  protected  us  during  many
years  past  and  gone,  and  we  all
have  to  acknowledge  bis  hand  in
these  things.

I  do  not  wish  to  detain  this  Con-  .
ference. I  felt  as  though  I  wanted
to  make  a  few  remarks  on  these  sub*
jects, I  hope, brethren,  that  we  j
will  not  slacken our  hands  with
regard  to  the cultivation of  the
earth. In  the  prosecution  of  our
labors  in  that  respect  we  have  every-
thing to  contend  with  that  man  has
been  cursed  with  for  five  thousand
years. We  should  clean  our  fields,
as  far  as  we  can,  of  the  noxious
weeds,  and  our  streets  of  sunflowers.
These  things  encumber  the  earth.  ;
We  have  one  difficulty  to  contend


with,  unknown  save  in  those  por-
tions of  the  earth  where  irrigation
is  practiced.  It  is  true  that  a  man
may  clean  his  fields  of  sunflowers,
cockle  buns,  blackseed  and  every
other  noxious  weed  that  grows,  and
the  very  first  time  he  waters  his  land
here  will  come  a  peck  or  a  bushel  of
foul  seed  from  the  mountains,  and
fill  every  field  through  which  the
stream  flows.  These  difficulties  wo
have  to  fight  against,  but  we  must
do  the  best  we  can.  As  farmers,
we  should  clean  our  seed,  and  not
sow  the  foul  along  with  the  good.
One  man,  in  a  few  hours,  with  a
pood  wire  sieve,  can  sift  enough  seed
for  ten  acres  of  land,  and  perhaps
for  twenty;  while,  to  pull  that  bad
seed  out  when  grown  will  cost  from
one  to  five  hundred  dollars,  for  it
will  take  a  score  of  men  days  to  da
it  We  should  use  our  time,  judg-
ment and  the  wisdom  God  has
given  us  to  the  best  advantage  in
all  these  things.

I  want  the  brethren  to  come  toge-
ther this  afternoon  and  elect  their
officers,  for  we  desire  to  hold  a  fair
this  fall,  in  which  the  agricultural
and  manufacturing  interests  of  the
Territory  may  be  represented  aud
interested.  Let  us  not  be  weary  in
well  doing;  let  us  not  slacken  our
hands,  either  in  cultivating  the  earth
or  in  the  manufacturing  of  what  we
need.  Co-operate  in  agricultural
and  mercantile  matters,  also  in  our
tanneries,  and  in  the  ^making  of
butter  and  cheese.  One  man  may
engage  in  these  branches  of  busi-
ness with  advantage  if  he  have  skill
and  experience  to  guide  him;  but  in
co-operation  the  wisdom  of  all  is
combined  for  the  general  good.  This
plan  has  been  adopted  with  advantage
in  other  communities,  cities,  States,
Territories  and  countries,  and  it  can
be  in  this  more  extensively  than  it
has  been  hitherto.


I  pray  that  God  will  bless  us,  and
bless  this  whole  people;  and  I  pray
that  the  testimony  which  we  have
received  here  daring  this  Conference,
which  is  true,  may  not  be  forgotten
by  us.  I  can  bear  the  same  testi-
mony. I  know  this  work  is  of  God,
I  know  Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet
of  God,  I  have  heard  two  or  three
of  the  brethren  testify  about  brother
Young  in  Nauvoo.  Every  man  and
every  woman  in  that  assembly,  which
perhaps  might  number  thousands,
could  bear  the  same  testimony.  I
was  there,  the  Twelve  were  there,
and  a  good  many  others,  and  all  can
bear  the  same  testimony,  The  ques*
tion  might  be  asked,  why  was  the
appearance  of  Joseph  Smith  given  to
Brigham  Young?  Because  here  was
Sidney  Eigdon  and  other  men  rising
tip  and  claiming  to  be  the  leaders  of
the  Church,  and  men  stood,  as  it
were,  on  a  pivot,  not  knowing  which


way  to  turn.  But  just  as  quick  as
Brigham  Young  rose  in  that  assem-
bly, his  -face  was  that  of  Joseph
Smith — the  mantle  of  Joseph  had
fallen  upon  him,  the  power  of  God
that  was  upon  Joseph  Smith  was
upon  him,  he  had  the  voice  of  Joseph,
and  it  was  the  voice  of  the  shepherd.
There  was  not  a  person  in  that  as-
sembly, RigdoD,  himself,  not  ex-
cepted, but  was  satisfied  in  his  own
mind  that  Brighum  was  the  proper
leader  of  the  people,  for  he  would
not  have  his  name  presented,  by  his
own  consent,  after  that  sermon  was
delivered.  There  was  a  reason  for
this  in  the  mind  of  God ;  it  con-
vinced the  people.  They  saw  and
heard  for  themselves,  aud  it  was  by
the  power  of  God.

May  God  bless  you.  May  he  give
us  wisdom  to  direct  as  in  all  things,
and  promote  all  the  interests  of  Zion
for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen,


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sex  day,

June  2,  1872, #  "


[Reported  hy  David  W.  Evam.}


OBSERVE  THE  SABBATH  DAY,


I  have  a  request  to  make  of  the
Bishops  and  Elders,  of  fathers  and
mothers,  and  of  the  brethren  and  sis-
ters in  general.  There  are  a  few
points  upon  which  I  feel  that  I  shonld
like  the  people  to  receive  a  little
counsel-  One  is,  I  would  be  very
much  pleased,  and  I  do  not  think  I
would  be  any  more  satisfied  than  the

No-  6.  *  -


Spirit  of  the  Lord  would,  to  have
the  Latter-day  Saints  pay  a  little
more  attention  to  the  Sabbath  day,
instead  of  riding  about,  visiting,  and
going  on  excursions.  There  has
been  a  great  deal  said  upon  this  sub-
ject. We  are  continually  teaching}
the  people  how  to  be  saved,  but  they
seem  to  forget  the  responsibilities

Vol.  XV.


82  JOURNAL  OF

tbat  are  upon  them,  I  am  as  liberal
in  my  feelings  with  regard  to  using
the  Sab ! jai  ii  for  anything  and  every-
thing, where  duty  demands  it,  as  any
person  living,  and  believe  that  the
Sabbath  was  made  lor  man,  instead
of  man  for  the  Sabbath,  ljut  it  is  a
day  of  rest.  The  bord  lias  directed
his  people  to  rest  one-seventh  pari  of
the  time,  and  we  take  the  first  day
of  the  week,  and  call  it  oar  Sabbath,
This  is  according  to  the  order  of  the
Christians,  We  should  observe  this
for  our  own  temporal  good  and  spirit*
nal  we  I  lit  re.  When  we  see  a  farmer
in  such  a  hurry,  that  he  has  to  attend
to  his  harvest,  and  to  haying,  fence-
making,  or  to  gathering  his  cattle  on
the  Sabbath  day,  tt  far  as  I  am  con-
cerned, I  count  him  weak  in  the  faith.
He  has  lost  the  spirit  of  his  religion,
more  or  less.  Six  days  are  enough
for  us  to  work,  and  if  we  wish  to
play,  play  within  the  six  days;  if  we
wish  to  go  on  excursions,  take  one  of
those  sis  days,  but  on  the  seventh
day,  come  to  the  place  of  worship,
attend  to  the  Sacrament,  confess  your
faults  one  to  an  tit  her  and  to  our  God,
and  pay  attention  to  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  God.

How  many  ears  will  hear  this,  and
how  many  hearts  will  receive  it  and
treasure  it  up? That  is  the  ques-
tion. Words  go  into  the  ear  and  are  >
forgotten ;  but  I  say  to  you,  Latter-  j
diy  Saints,  it  is  your  duty  and  my
duty  to  pay  attention  to  the  Sabbath  ,
day.  When  my  brethren,  my  friends,
and  my  family  have  business  on  hand,
and  manage  to  start  it  on  a  Sunday
morning,  1  head  them  off  if  I  pos-
sibly can,  by  throwing  some  obstacle  .
or  other  in  the  way,  or  by  persuasion  \
get  them  to  omit  it  on  that  day.  As
far  as  1  can,  I  also  persuade  my  own
family  to  observe  the  hours  of  meet-
ing- Not  that  I  can  say  that  my
family  is  as  fond  of  meeting  as  I  am
myself. I  like  to  meet  with  the


DISCOURSES,

brethren,  and  I  like  to  go  to  a  place
of  worship;  I  like  to  hear,  and  learn
and  pay  attention  t6  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  God,  I  teach  my
family  in  these  respects,  and  I  do  not
know  that  I  have  any  more  fault  to
find  with  my  own  family  than  others
have  with  theirs;  perhaps  there  may
be  some  credit  due  to  them.  But  I
say  to  the  brethren  and  sisters,  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,  it  is  our  duty  and
it  is  required  of  us  by  our  father  in
heaven,  by  the  spirit  of  our  religion,
by  our  covenants  with  God  and  each
other,  that  we  observe  the  ordinances
of  the  house  of  God,  and  especially
on  the  Sabbath  day,  to  attend  to  the
Sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper.
Then  attend  the  Ward  meetings  and
the  quorum  meetings.

Another  tiling:  I  do  wish  that
parents  would  urge  upon  their  chil-
dren to  cease  playing  in  the  streets
as  much  as  they  do.  There  are  suf-
ficient places  of  resort  in  various
parts  of  the  city  without  the  toys
being  compelled  to  play  in  the  raid-
die  uf  the  streets.  Every  time  I
travel  through  the  streets  I  see  chil-
dren playing  in  them,  And  will
they  turn  out  of  the  way  for  a  car-
riage ?  No,  they  will  not,  and  some
of  them  will  sometimes  even  dare
you  to  drive  over  them ;  and  some-
times people  have  to  stop  their  car-
I  riages  to  save  the  lives  of  children.
We  have  been  more  fortunate,  here,
I  presume  than  in  any  other  city  in
Christendom  where  they  drive  as
many  carriages  as  we  drive  in  our
city,  in  having  so  few  accidents;  but
this  I  attribute  to  the  kind  hand  of
Providence.  But  we  see  children  in
the  street,  daring  teamsters  to  run
over  Ihejii,  and  whether  they  are  in
a  carriage,  wagon,  buggy,  or  cart  it
is  no  matter,  they  will  not  give  the
road  for  a  horse  team.  I  will  say
this  to  all  Israel,  to  every  man  that
carries  himself  discreetly — as  a  gen-


OBSERVE  THE  SABBATH  DAY.


83


tleman,  if  otic  of  my  boys  attempts
to  obstruct  the  highway,  so  that  yon
cannot  drive  along  and  attend  to  your
business,  leave  your  carriage,  take
your  whip  and  give  him  a  good  sound
horse- whipping,  and  tell  him  you  will
do  it  every  time  you  6nd  him  in  the
street  trying  to  obstruct  the  highway.
I  will  not  complain  of  you,  although
I  can  say  this,  I  think,  of  a  truth,
that  a  boy  of  mine  never  did  this,
never,  I  have  no  knowledge  of  it  at
least.  Look  upon  a  community  like
ours,  see  the  conduct  of  the  youth
in  this  respect,  it  is  a  disgrace  to
civilization  ;  it  is  a  disgrace  to  any
people  that  profess  good  morals.
Well,  I  wish  to  say  this  to  the  Saints,
keep  your  boys  from  the  streets,  and
from  playing  ball  there.  There  are
plenty  of  grounds  for  them  to  play
upon  and  use  at  their  pleasure,  with-
out going  into  the  streets ;  and  when
we  are  so  numerous  that  we  have  no
place  of  resort  for  our  boys  to  pitch
quoits  and  play  ball,  there  is  plenty
of  ground  on  the  earth,  and  we  will
thin  out  a  little  here  and  go  where
we  can  have  a  little  more  room.  But
we  have  plenty  here  at  present.

Now,  remember,  my  brethren,
those  who  go  skating,  buggy  riding
or  on  excursions  on  the  Sabbath  day
— and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  this
practiced — are  weak  in  the  faith.
Gradually,  little  by  little,  little  by
-little,  the  spirit  of  their  religion  leaks
out  of  their  hearts  and  their  affec-
tions, and  by  and  by  they  begin  to  see
faults  in  their  brethren,  faults  in  the
doctrines  of  the  Church,  faults  in  the
organization,  and  at  last  they  leave
the  kingdom  of  God  and  go  to  des-
truction. I  really  wish  you  would
remember  this,  and  tell  it  to  your
neighbors.

And  furthermore,  how  many  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  who  live  in  this  city,
and  are  perfectly  able  to  go  to  meet-
ing, are  away  to  day  ? We  have


people  enough  in  this  city  to  fill  this
small  building  to  overflowing  every
Sabbath,  if  they  liked  to  hear  the
words  of  life.  In  the  morning,  it  is
true,  there  are  many  in  the  Sunday
school,  and  that  we  recommend  ;  but
in  the  afterpart  of  the  day,  where  are
these  school  children  ?  Are  they
playing  in  the  streets,  or  are  they
visiting  ?  In  going  to  Sunday  school
they  have  done  their  duty  so  far  ;  but
they  ought  to  be  here.  In  their
youth  they  ought  to  learn  the  prin-
ciples and  doctrines  of  their  faith,
the  arguments  for  truth,  and  the  ad-
vantages of  truth,  for  we  can  say  with
one  of  old,  "Bring  up  a  child  in  the
way  it  should  go,  and  when  it  is  old
it  will  not  depart  from  it."  If  we
are  capable  of  bringing  up  a  child  iu
the  way  it  should  go,  I  will  assure
you  that  it  will  never  depart  from
that  way.  Many  persons  think  they
do  bring  up  their  children  in  the  way
they  should  go,  but  in  my  lifetime  I
have  seen  very  few,  if  any,  parents,
perfectly  capable  of  bringing  up  a
child  in  the  way  it  should  go ;  still
most  of  us  know  better  than  we  do,
and  if  we  will  bring  up  our  children
according  to  tho  best  of  our  know-
ledge,  very  few  of  them  will  ever
forsake  the  truth,  #
Now,  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  old  and  young,  parents
and  children,  all  of  yon,  try  and  ob-
serve good,  wholesome  rules !  Be
moral,  be  upright,  be  honest  in  your
deal.  I  do  not  wish  to  6nd  fault
with  the  Latter-day  Saints,  but  I
assure  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
we  take  too  much  liberty  with  each
other  ;  we  do  not  observe  the  strict
order  of  right  and  honesty  in  many
instances,  as  much  as  we  should,  and
we  have  got  to  improve  in  these
things.  We  have  been  hearing,  to-
day, how  the  kingdom  of  God  is
going  to  prosper  on  the  earth.  So  it
is,  that  is  very  true. Do  we  think


JOURNAL  OF


DISOOUliSKS.


that  we  will  prosper  and  abide  in  it,
Is  unholiness  and  unrighteousness  ?
If  we  do,  we  are  mistaken.  If  we
do  not  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  our
hearts  and  live  by  every  word  that
pioceeds  out  of  his  mouth,  and  shape
our  lives  according  to  the  rules  laid
down  in  Holy  Writ,  and  by  what  the
Lord  has  revealed  in  latter  days,  we
will  come  short  of  being  members  of
this  kingdom,  and  we  will  be  cast  out
and  others  will  take  our  place.  We
need  not  flatter  ourselves  that  we  are


going  to  prosper  in  anything  that  is
evil,  and  have  the  Lord  still  own  us*
It  is  very  true  that  he  is  merciful  to
us  and  bears  with  us.  "  Wait  ano-
ther day,"  he  says ;  u  Wait  another
year,  wait  a  little  longer,  and  see  if
my  people  will  not  be  righteous ;  "
and  those  who  will  not,  will  be  gath-
ered to  their  own  place;  but  those
who  will  sanctify  themselves  before
the  Lord  will  inherit  everlasting  life.
God  bless  you,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Delivered  ix  the  Bowery,  Brig  ham  City,  Sat  ck  day,  June  8,  1872.

 o

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

 o

THE  GOSPEL  PLAN — IT  MUST  BE  OBEYED  IF  ITS  BLESSINGS  BE

SECURED— GOD'S  KINGDOM  HAS  COME.


I  feel  glad  of  the  opportunity  of
bearing  my  testimony  once  again  to
the  principles  of  salvation  that  have
been  revealed  in  the  day  in  which
we  live,  to  the  children  of  men.
There  is  an  impression  resting  upon
the  people  of  every  nation  on  the
face  of  the  earth,  that  some  great
events  in  human  history  are  about  to
take  place. In  the  Christian  world
there  is  a  general  belief  that  the  time
is  approaching  when the  God  of
heaven  will assume  the  reins  of
power. They  talk  about  the  reign
of  Christ,  the  great  millennial  day,
when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
will  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
Lard  and  his  Christ,

It  is  hardly  possible  for  any  per-  j
son  to  live  to  the  years  of  maturity


||  without having  some  impression,
some  anxiety  concerning  his  future
state ;  all  persons,  at  some  period  of
their  existence,  have  saeh  impres-
sions. They  come  from  the  Lord,
and  their  effect  on  the  mind  is  as
plain  as  the  mark  of  the  type  on  the
paper ;  and  the  reason  we  experience
them  is  because  we  are  the  children
of  God. There  is  a  link  existing
between  God  and  his  children  here
on  the  earth,  and  that  draws  them
towards  him,  and  enables  all  who
listen  to  the  promptings  of  his  good
Spirit  to  increase  in  good,  and  to
overcome  that  which  is  evil.  This
is  natural,  and  exists  to  a  greater  or
less  extent  in  the  hearts  of  all  tile
children  of  men.

There  is  evil  in  the  world — evil


influences  that  strive  against  and
destroy  tbat  which  is  good.  Men's
names  are  written  in  the  Book  of
Life,  and  will  forever  remain  writ-
ten there  unless  they  do  so  met  lung
to  cut  the  thread  and  to  blot  them
oat.  Men  are  naturally  religious  in
their  feelings,  and  it  is  a  perversion
of  their  nature  to  go  into  wicked  and
by  and  forbidden  paths*  The  prac-
tice of  evil  brings  with  it  no  peace  or
true  happiness.  It  destroys  the  vital
thread  of  life  that  reaches  into  the
eternal  bowers  of  peace  and  salvation.
The  Lord  our  God  has  never  given  a
commandment  to  the  children  of
men  but  that  would,  if  observed,  be
for  their  happiness  and  well- being
here  on  the  earth,  and  it  is  for  our-
selves that  wc  serve  God  and  keep
his  commandments.  Ail  that  he  has
done,  all  the  commandments  he  has
given,  are  for  our  benefit,  not  for  his.
It  would  be  well  for  us,  as  the  Presi-
dent has  just  observed,  if  we  would
walk  in  the  channels  of  troth  and
virtue,  and  in  strict  obedience  to  the
commands  of  God,  for  thereby  we
promote  our  own  welfare  and  secure
to  ourselves  an  eternal  inheritance  in
the  realms  of  joy  and  happiness.
The  kingdom  is  ours  if  we  will  live
for  it.  We  nmy  come  to  an  inheri-
tance of  all  that  is  worth  desiring  or
possessing,  of  all  that  will  be  of  any
benefit  to  us  either  here  or  hereafter,
if  we  will  live  for  it.

God,  our  heavenly  Father,  has  re-
stored the  authority  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  through  the  channel  of
which  a  communication  has  been
opened  up  between  the  heavens  and
the  earth ;  and  through  that  chan-
nel we  can  learn  to  know  God,  whom
to  know  is  life  eternal  The  way  to
this  is  opened  to  all  the  children  of
men,  and  the  invitation  has  gone
forth  unto  all  people  to  repent  of
their  sins,  and  return  to  Gud  and  re-
ceive the  blessings. There  is  no  true


enjoyment  but  what  can  be  obtained
through  this  channel,  and  it  is  within
the  purview  of  the  kingdom  of  God
here  upon  the  earth.  The  people
should  not  be  afraid  of  the  govern-
ment of  God;  it  is  only  calculated
for  their  benefit,  and  it  will  be  a
blessed  day  when  it  can  take  the
place  of  the  wicked  governments  that
now  exist  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  its  establishment  should  be  hailed
as  the  grandest  and  best  event  that
could  take  place  among  the  children
of  men.  In  the  kingdom  and  gov-
ernment of  God  is  every  blessing"  that
is  enduring,  and  it  will  confer  upon
those  who  abide  its  laws  all  the  peace,
joy  and  happiness  they  can  conceive
of  Outside  of  it  there  is  nothing
worth  having;  all  real  true  happi-
ness, all  that  can  serve  our  best  in-
terests comes  within  its  purview*

Are  we  obliged,  in  order  to  secure
present  happiness  and  enjoyment,  to
go  outside  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  By
no  manner  of  means,  although  it  is
so  esteemed  in  the  religious  world.
A  great  many  so-called  religious  pea-
pie  feel  that  they  are  restrained  of
their  liberty  and  enjoyment  by  being
members  of  their  churches.  This  is
a  wrong  view.  Our  Father  in  hea*
ven  does  not  wish  to  restrain  his
children  in  anything  that  is  right,
and  it  is  right  for  people  to  enjoy
themselves,  and  the  very  acme  of
happiness  is  to  be  obtained  by  obey-
ing the  behests  and  commands  of  our
Father  in  heaven.  Men  may  indulge
in  things  they  call  happiness,  but
there  is  often  no  real  happiness  in
them,  for  they  bring  punishment
along  in  the  sting  they  leave  behind.
It  is  not  so  with  proper  enjoyments
— enjoyments  within  the  scope  of
reason  and  right,  where  there  is  no
infringement  upon  each  other.  The
great  law  of  demarcation  between
that  which  is  wrong  and  that  which
is  right  is  not  to  infringe  upon  the


SG  JOURNAL  OF

rights  of  another*  No  man  lias  a
right  to  infringe  upon  another.  Vie
serve  ourselves,  then,  by  serving
God  and  keeping  his  commandments,
and  the  way  is  so  plain  that  no  per.
son  can  err  therein.  Our  boys  who
have  been  properly  raised  and  tutored
in  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
who  have  attended  Sunday  school,
learned  the  catechism  and  become
conversant  with  the  principles  set
forth  in  the  Scriptures,  in  the  Book
of  Mormon,  and  in  the  bock  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants,  and  have  been
endowed  with  the  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood,  can  teach  men  the
way  of  life  and  salvation;  and  if
they  will  follow  their  teachings  they
will  bring  them  back  into  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God,  they  are  so  simple
and  so  easy  to  be  comprehended.

There  arc  a  good  many  ways
pointed  out  by  the  children  of  men,
which  they  call  the  ways  of  life  ami
salvation,  but  the  end  thereof  is
death.  The  Lord  is  not  the  author
of  the  confusion  that  exists  in  the
religious  world.  Satan  stands  there,
ready,  and  lias  religion  at  his  finger*/
ends,  already  manufactured,  to  suit
the  notions  of  men.  Men  get  no-
tions and  ideas  foreign  to  the  truth,
and  they  find  religion  manufactured
to  their  order,  and  can  get  any  kind
that  they  have  a  mind  to  order,  just
as  one  who  goes  to  a  huckster's  shop
can  purchase  anything  he  has  a  mind
to  pay  for.  They  have  their  manu-
factured religion  to  pay  for,  for  Satan
does  not  work  for  nothing.

There  is  but  one  way,  one  faith,
one  baptism,  one  God,  one  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ,  the  mediator
between  God  and  man ;  he  has  made
it  manifest  unto  the  children  of  men
in  the  day  and  age  in  which  we  live.
It  has  been  told  to  us  here,  to-day,
and  is  frequently  reiterated  in  our
hearing,  that  God  is  full  of  mercy,
and  would  rather  that  all  men  should


DISCOURSES.

turn  from  evil  and  live.  He  begs
people  to  turn  from  their  evil  ways.
He  says  "  Take  upon  you  my  yoke,
for  it  is  easy,  and  my  burden,  for  it
is  light;  and  come,  partake  of  the
waters  of  life  freely,  without  money
and  without  price."  These  words
are  sounded  in  our  ears  continually,
for  the  Lord  would  rather  that  all
men  would  tarn  and  live  and  come  to
him.  Why  so  ?  He  is  merciful,
and  the  invitation  is  as  widespread
as  the  vast  domains  of  the  world  :  it
reaches  every  human  being,  every
son  and  daughter  of  Adam  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth.  Holy  mes-
sengers of  salvation  are  sent  forth  by
the  direction  of  the  God  of  heaven,
through  the  channel  of  the  holy
priesthood  that  he  has  revealed  and
instituted  again  among  men,  warning
the  people  to  turn  from  their  evil
ways,  and  to  become  partakers  of  this
great  happiness  and  glory  and  to

■  sustain  his  government  npon  the
earth.  It  is  true  the  impression  has
gone  forth  in  the  midst  of  the  na-
tions, and  it  is  a  true  impression,  that
he  will  establish  his  government
npon  the  earth.  This  earth  belongs
to  God,  he  has  a  right  to  rule  and
govern  it,  and  it  is  his  intention  to
do  so.  Prophets,  in  ages  gone  by,
have  disclosed  this,  and  modern  pro-
phets have  done  the  same  in  our  day
through  the  channel  of  the  Holy
Priesthood.  That  Priesthood  has
been  organized  according  to  the  an-

'  cient  pattern,  for  God  set  in  his
Church,  first  Apostles,  second  Pro-
phets, and  so  on.  It  has  been  reor-
ganized according  to  this  pattern,
and  the  proclamation  has  gone  forth
— u  Repent  and  give  glory  to  God."
The  Gospel  has  been  restored  by  the

I  angel  which  John  saw  flying  through
the  midst  of  heaven  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  pi  each  to  those  who
dwell  on  the  earth,  saying,  "  Fear
God  and  give  glory  to  him,  for  the


THE  GOSPEL  PLAN,  ETC


87


hour  of  his  judgment  is  come/'  This
message  1ms  been  sonnded  in  the
midst  of  the  nations,  and  the  greater
portion  of  the  people  who  have  gath-
ered to  these  valleys  have  listened  to
this  proclamation*  It  reached  their
ears  and  made  an  impression  upon
thenis  and  they  gathered  up  fro'U  the
midst  of  the  nations  of  the  earth  to
these  valleys  of  the  moan  tains  to  be
taught  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  that
they  might  walk  in  his  paths,  in-
stead of  walking  in  the  vain  imagi-
nations of  their  own  hearts  and  in
ways  of  error,  because,  as  the  ancient
prophet  says,  "  They  have  inherited
error  and  lies  from  their  fathers/'
Behold,  this  has  been  fulfilled  in  the
day  in  which  the  angel  has  brought
forth  and  revealed  the  Gospel.  Now
we  can  see  wherein  we  and  our  fa-
thers  have  been  in  error.  We  have
been  taught  the  precepts  of  men
instead  of  the  commandments  of
God  ;  but  in  our  day  we  have  been
touched  with  the  light  of  truth  and
with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,
tli rough  obedience  to  the  principles
of  the  Gospel.  The  Saints  of  the
Most  High,  having  heard  these  prin-
ciples proclaimed  in  their  ears,  had
faith  in  them  and  in  God,  and  they
repented  of  their  sins  and  went  forth
into  the  waters  of  baptism,  according
to  the  words  of  our  Savior — "  Except
a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the
Spirit,  hs  cannot  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  God."

Having  been  obeli  eat  to  these
principles  and  having  had  han.U  hi  id
upon  them  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  it  has  been  given  unto
us,  and  we  kndw,  onrselves,  c incom-
ing these  things,  and  bear  testimony
this  day  that  they  are  true.  It  has
come  from  God,  it  is  not  any  H  guess
so;  "  it  is  not  a  hope  within  a  hope,
that  we  have  a  hope,  but  we  bear  tes-
timony tliat  we  verily  do  know  that
God  has  pp^ken,  and  we  warn  all


people  to  repent  and  turn  to  God,
and  partake  of  the  waters  of  life
freely,  without  money  and  without
price. ;  >.  r

Thi>  is  what  has  brought  this  peo-
ple together  in  the  valleys  of  the
mountains;  and  they  are  laboring
now  to  bring  forth  and  establish  thu
Zi'm  of  Go  J  upon  the  earth,  accord-
ing to  the  words  of  his  Holy  Pro-
phets, whose  prophecies  have  been
and  are  being  fulfilled  in  the  history
of  this  people.  The  kingdom  of  God
is  actually  transpiring  right  before
OQr  face  and  eyes,  bat  the  world  can-
not see  it,  because  they  are  not  born
again.  They  can  not  enter  this
kingdom,  because  they  are  not  born
of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  and
because  they  do  not  comply  with  the
requirements  of  the  Gospel  and  ren-
der obedience  to  the  great  plan  of'
salvation  devised  in  the  heavens  be-
fore the  foundation  of  the  world.
This  plan  was  understood  aud  was
in  the  programme  before  the  mora*
i ng  stars  together  sanir  for  joy,  and
who  can  better  it?  Puny  men  un-
dertake to  do  so,  but  their  efforts  are
vain,  an  I  they  only  betray  their  own
folly  and  presumption*  Our  Father
in  heaveu  knew  better  than  any  of
us  what  was  for  our  Lest  interests,
and  he  has  condescended  to  make  it
manifest  to  his  children  here,  an  1  if
they  would  walk  in  accordance  there-
with they  would  lay  the  foundation
for  eternal  power,  dominion  and
glory-
It  is  the  duty  of  the  Lntrer-day
Saints  to  live  by  every  word  proceed-
ing from  the  mouth  of  God.

He  has  told  ih  to  k^  kp  the  words

■

of  wisdom,  and  has  s-ti  1  that  they
are  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  all
who  can  be  called  Stints,  even  the
weakest.  But,  see  toe  frailty  of  hu-
inanity !  We  think  we  know  and
understand  better  than  the  Lord,
what  is  best  for  us. We  say  this  by


88  *  JOURNAL  OF

our  acts  a  great  many  times  ;  but  we
might  as  welt  learn,  first  as  last,  that
the  Lord  knows  best*  and  that  his
way  is  better  than  ours,  as  much  so
as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the
earth,  He  has  trodden  the  path,  and
has  it  ad  the  experience  that  we  have
not  had,  and  has  kindly  condescended
to  make  known  a  little  of  his  expe-
rience in  regard  to  these  things.  He
has  tnld  us  that  it  is  not  good  for  us
1  o  i  akv  spirituous  liquors ;  bat  a  great
many  of  us  think  a  little  will  do  us
no  harm,  and  it  is  better  for  us  to
have  it  than  not  to  have  it. He  has

told  us  not  to  swear,  not  to  take  the
mmeof  the  Lord  in  vain,  not  to  give
way  to  our  evi!  passions.  Our  pas-
sions are  good,  and  planted  within  us
for  a  good  and  wise  purpose,  to  give
us  strength  and  energy  of  character;
but  they  should  be  governed  and
controlled  by  that  heaven-inspired
intellect  and  reason  with  which
every  person  is  endowed;  in  other
Words,  our  passions  should  be  our
servants  and  not  our  masters.

If  we  are  thus  governed  and  in-
fluenced kindness,  love  and  charity
will  till  every  heart ;  but  depart  from
that,  Jet  passion  bear  sway,  then  the
evil  influences  that  attend  us  take
possession  and  cause  us  to  go  astray
into  by  and  forbidden  paths*  When
paSM  11  rules  it  dethrones  reason  awl
intellect,  and  makes  a  beast  of  a  man;
and  he  who  has  no  mote  command  of
himself  than  to  be  governed  by  pas*
sion  baa  fallen  far  beneath  the  dignity
of  true  manhood,  and  the  end  of
j&ueh  a  course  is  death.

These  are  some  of  the  things  that
we  have  to  he  told  pf  so  often,  be-
cause we  are  so  forgetful,  and  we
oftentimes  let  the  cares  of  the  world
choke  the  word  of  life.  The  latter
is  sown  in  the  hearts  of  the  children
of  meru  and  sometimes  it  takes  root
and  grows  (airly  for  a  little  while,
*vnd  then  withers  and  dries  up.  Some*  j


DISCOURSES.

times  it  falls  into  good  ground,  takes
root  downward  and  bears  fruit  up-
ward  ;  and  where  it  does  not  do  this
it  is  owing  to  the  frailties  of  humnn
nature,  and  to  its  proneness  to  wan-
der from  the  way  of  life  and  to  dis-
regard the  truths  of  heaven.

One  of  the  greatest  boons  that
could  be  conferred  upon  the  children
of  men  would  be  to  have  the  govern-
ment of  God  established  on  the
earth.  Can  they  see  it  ?  No,  they
stand  in  fear  of  it.  What  makes
men  fear  it?  What  makes  them
afraid  of  the  Lord,  or  of  his  govern-
ment being  established  on  the  earth  ?
Is  it  not  because  their  deeds  are  evil,
and  because  they  are  afraid  of  re-
ceiving the  punishment  due  for  the
same?  The  word  has  gone  forth,
and  most  men  believe  it,  that  every
man  will  be  judged  according  to  the
deeds  dune  in  the  body,  whether
they  be  good  or  evil  And  when  men
are  conscious  of  evil  deeds,  and
know  they  do  not  pay  allegiance  to
the  kingdom  and  government  of  God,
they  have  reason  to  fear  and  dread
the  future  ;  and  let  me  say  here,  the
time  will  come  when  they  wil!  call
upon  the  rocks  and  mountains  to  fall
upon  them  to  hide  them  from  his
presence.  But  it  should  not  be  so.
We  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  rule
and  government  of  God,  it  is  only
calculated  to  benefit  the  children  of
men,  and  it  will  be  a  glorious  happy
day  when  it  shall  be  established  on
the  earth  in  its  fulness.  Men  should
fear  to  do  wrong,  to  commit  iniquity;
they  should  do  themselves  the  kind-
ness to  honor  the  principles  that  per-
tain to  their  well-being,  and  to  eternal
life  and  exaltation.  Such  principles
should  be  hailed  with  joy,  gladness
and  delight  by  all  the  children  of
men.  The  time  will  come  when  the
government  of  God  will  prevail  over
the  whole  face  of  the  earth,  notwith-
standing all  that  mankind,  and  all


#


THE  GOSPEL  PLAN,  ETC


89


that  the  powers  of  evil  cau  do  against
it  The  principles  which  underlie
the  kingdom  and  government  of  God
are  those  of  truth  and  virtue,  and
they  will  endure;  while  sin,  iniquity,
disobedience  and  unbelief  will  be
swept  away,  and  the  man  who  builds
his  house  or  castle  on  snch  a  founda-
tion will  find  that  it  will  not  stand
in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Almighty.
When  the  storms  come  and  the  winds
beat  upon  that  house  it  will  be  swept
away;  in  that  day  too,  men  will  be
stripped  of  all  their  hypocrisy  and
iniquity,  and  they  will  stand  forth
in  all  their  naked  deformity,  then
they  will  call  upon  the  rocks  to  fall
upon  and  hide  tlieui  from  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord,  Men  should  live
so  that  they  can  bear  the  scrutinizing
eye  of  the  Almighty.  Persons  may
think  they  can  commit  this  or  that
evil,  and  lo  one  will  know  it;  they
ruay  he  very  secretive  in  doing  wrong,
and  think  they  will  never  be  found
out.  But  if  I  commit, evil  I  know
it,  and  when  I  know  it,  one  too  many
knows  it;  and  the  Lord  knows  it  as
well  as  I  know  it  We  can  not  hide
it  from  him,  and  we  had  better  not
commit  ourselves  in  any  such  a  way,
for  i ri  the  great  day  of  the  Lord
these  things  will  be  revealed ;  man
will  stand  forth  in  his  naked  defor-
mity, and  the  wickedness  of  wicked
men  will  be  made  to  appear,  and  it
will  be  written  where  it  can  be  read
by  all  people  when  the  vail  shall  be
taken  from  before  the  eyes.  Then
let  us  repent  arid  turn  to  God  with
full  purpose  of  heart,  and  the  promise
to  every  one  who  will  do  this  in  sin-
cerity is  that  their  sins  shall  be  for-
given, and  that  they  shall  receive  the
testimony  which  we  bear  this  day —
namely  that  the  Gospel  we  preach,  is
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  and
has  been  revealed  for  the  salvation  of
the  human  family.

This  promise  is  certain  and  sure,


there  need  be  no  doubt  about  it ;  it
will  be  fulfilled  to  all  whom  the  Lord
our  God  shall  call — to  every  one  who
repents  of  his  evil  ways  and  renders
obedience  to  its  mandates.  The  min-
ister in  the  pulpit  needs  it  as  much
as  anybody  else.  Why  ?  Because
he  has  taught  error  ;  he  has  assumed
to  himself  the  authority  of  high
heaven,  which  has  never  been  given
to  him.  He  has  run  before  he  was
sent,  and  has  taught  the  traditions  of
the  fathers  instead  of  the  command-
ments of  God,  He  needs  to  repent
of  his  evil  ways,  and  not  only  to  re*
pent  of  but  to  turn  from  them.

No  man  can  get  a  greater  testi-
mony ot  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins
by  the  Lord,  than  a  knowledge  within
himself  that  he  has  turned  away
from  his  evil  deed?.  He  knows  it
then,  for  God  has  promised  to  forgive
every  one  who  will  comply  with  the
requirements  of  the  Gospel  and  turn
from  evil ;  and  the  man  who  forsakes
evil  knows  it,  and  if  he  has  no  other
testimony  of  his  forgiveness,  this  is
as  great  a  one  as  he  can  possess.

I  know  that  this  is  different  kind
of  preaching  from  what  people  get
in  the  world,  but  that  makes  no  dif-
ference. We  are  a  different  people
from  any  other,  God  has  made  us  so
by  the  instructions  that  he  lias  im-
parted unto  us  through  his  servants,
lie  has  taught  us  another  and  a  bet-
ter way — the  true  way,  the  way  that
leads  back  to  him,  the  way  of  life,
truth  and  salvation.  The  Scriptures
— the  history  of  God's  dealings  with
his  children  in  past  ages  when  the
authority  of  the  Holy  Priesthood
was  on  the  earth,  also  bear  testimony
that  this  is  the  work  of  God,  and
that  all  who  receive  it,  and  remain
true  and  faithful,  may  become  co-
workers with  our  heavenly  Father  in
bringing  to  pass  his  purposes  and
establishing  his  kingdom  upon  the
earth,  if  we  will  only  let  him  work


*


90


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


with  us;  but  wo  must  do  this.  He
will  establish  his  work  any  how,  in-
dependent of  us,  if  we  do  not  see
proper  to  aid  him  in  this  great  enter-
prise. If  wo  do  not  do  it,  he  will
find  somebody  who  will,  for  the  day
of  redemption,  the  set  time  has  come
for  the  commencement  of  this  great
work An  impression  has  gone  forth
among  all  the  children  of  men  that
the  time  is  rapidly  approaching  to
prepare  the  way  for  the  corning  of
the  Lord,  and  the  establish  merit  of
his  kingdom  on  the  earth. No  mat-
ter whether  it  be  Gentile,  Jew,  bond
or  free,  heathen  or  Christian,  this
impression has  been  made  on  the
minds  of  all  classes  of  the  children
of  men  in  all  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  it  is  true. The  set  time
has  come  when  God  will  put  forth
his  hand  to  establish  his  kingdom,
and  every  body  knows  it *We  pro-
claim in  the  ears  of  the  people*  that
the  ar.get  has  come  and  brought  again
the  everlasting.  Gospel  to  preach  to
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth — to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people. Let  those,  then,  who  have
not  received  it,  make  some  inquiry  1
concerning  this  work. It  is  not  a
thing  done  up  in  a  corner,  but  it  is
like  a  city  set  on  a  hill,  that  can  not
be  hid. The  kingdom  of  God  is
transpiring  before  the  eyes  of  the
children  of  men. Let  them  take
heed  and  not  raise  their  heel  against
it,  because  if  they  do,  it  will  only
redound  to  their  own  discomfiture.
Then  they  had  better  not  do  it,  they
had  better  receive  it,  or  at  least  in-
vestigate, and  then!  if  they  do  not
receive  it,  they  had  better  withhold
their  hands  instead  of  seeking  to
destroy  and  overthrow  the  work  and
kingdom  of  God. All  efforts  to  do
so  will  be  futile,  they  will  do  the
kingdom  no  harm,  for  nothing  can
prevent  its  increase  and  triumph  iti
the  earth, God  will  not  be  thwarted


in  his  purposes  and  designs,  The
set  time  has  come  for  him  to  favor
his  people,  and  to  establish  his  king-
dom, and  the  puny  arm  of  man  will

be  powerless  to  prevent  it.  Have
they  not  been  trying  for  forty  years  ?
Are  the  lessons  of  the  past  of  no
benefit  to  the  world  ?  It  would
seem  so,  indeed.  They  are  slow  to
learn  this  lesson,  perad venture  they
may  learn  it  after  awhile,  but  not  so
long  ms  evil  predominates  as  it  does
at  present  in  the  hearts  of  the  great
majority  of  the  children  of  men*  We
may  be  scattered  and  driven  and
have  many  afflictions  to  endure,  but
will  that  stay  the  work  of  God  ?  No,
How  has  it  boen  ?  Let  our  past
experience  teach  ua  and  the  world  at
the  same  time.  It  has  onlv  increased
and  given  greater  velocity  to  the  work
of  God.  Phoenix  like,  it  has  risen
from  its  ashes  and,  if  there  is  any-
thing about  it  formidable,  it  has  pre-
sented a  more  formidable  face  than
ever  before,  notwithstanding  the  most
strenuous  exertions  of  its  adversaries.
My  testimony  is  that  the  experience
of  the  past  will  be  renewed  in  the
future,  if  the  enemies  of  Zion  work
for  its  overthrow.  They  may  suc-
ceed in  taking  the  lives  of  some  of
the  servants  of  God  ;  they  have  done
that  in  the  past,  but  it  never  ob-
structed the  work,  and  all  their  efforts
in  the  future  will  be  as  powerless  as
in  the  past

It  is  for  the  Saints  to  ponder  these
things  in  their  hearts,  and  with  re-
newed confidence  and  greater  faith
to  press  forward  in  their  high  rid  ling.
Their  past  observation  and  experience
have  proved  to  them  the  necessity
of  continual  diligence.  Many  who
have  borne  faithful  testimonies  to  the
truth  of  this  work  have  apostatized
and  forsaken  the  truth  because  they
have  neglected  some  duty  and  have
gradually  f(iven  way  to  evil,  and  the
counsels  of  their  mind  have  become


i


•  THE  GOSPEL

darkened  to  the  principles  of  troth,
and  they  have  finally  forgotten  that
they  ever  knew  them  to  be  true.

Then  let  us  take  heed  to  our  steps.
"  Let  him  who  standeth  take  heed
lest  he  fall,"  is  a  very  good  exhorta-
tion. We  are  none  of  us  indepen-
dent, and  none  have  got  so  far  along
but  we  find  it  necessary  to  live  hum-
bly before  the  Lord.  We  should
pray  without  ceasing,  and  let  our
hearts  be  drawn  towards  the  Lord
continually,  never  forgetting  him,  or
the  principles  that  he  has  revealed
unto  us;  but  we  should  be  actuated
by  them  in  all  we  say  and  all  we  do.
If  we  do  this,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
will  be  within  us  like  a  well  of  water
springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.
It  is  necessary  that  every  one  should
live  thus  humbly  before  the  Lord,  in
order  to  have  full  possession  of  this
Spirit  This  will  bring  peace,  joy
and  comfort  under  all  difficulties  that
may  assail  us  and  seek  to  prevent  our
progress  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

What  is  a  man  good  for  who  flies
the  track  the  very  moment  obstruc-
tion or  difficulty  presents  itself  before
him?  Nothing.  He  has  not  proven
his  integrity,  and  he  cannot  prove  it
in  this  way.  We  have  undertaken
to  follow  the  Lord  through  evil  as
well  as  good  report ;  and  the  Lord,
and  his  ways,  his  teachings  and  gov-
ernment are  in  evil  report  in  the
world;  and  he  who  has  independence
and  courage  enough  to  strip  himself
of  his  surroundings  in  the  world,
and  seeks  to  establish  the  kingdom  of
God,  has  to  meet  these  difficulties
which  present  themselves  before  him.
He  has  to  stem  his  ear  to  the  popular
stream.  It  is  easy  to  float  with  the
stream ;  but  it  requires  more  courage,  [
and  independence  of  character  and
greater  nerve  to  stem  the  tide  of
corruption  in  the  world  than  to  go
down  with  the  current;  and  the  man
who  takes  this  course  is  far  more  in-


PLAN,  ETC.  91

dependent  than  he  who  has  not  the
courage  to  do  so.

Then  let  us  take  courage  and  press
onward  if  we  have  received  the  truth,
as  we  know  we  have;  if  we  have  re-
ceived the  testimony  of  Jesus — the
spirit  of  prophecy,  as  we  know  we
have,  let  us  take  heed  to  our  steps
and  continue  faithful,  never  swerving
to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  for
of  all  people  in  the  world,  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  the  people  who  cannot
afford  to  lay  off1  the  armor  of  right-
eousness for  a  moment,  The  tempter
the  evil  one,  is  at  our  elbow,  ready  to
enter  in  and  take  possession  and  blind
our  understandings  and  cnuse  us  to
make  shipwreck  of  our  faith  if  pos-
sible* *

The  Saints  should  live  humble,  be
courteous,  he  civil  and  live  for  God
and  his  kingdom.  That  is  the  only
job  we  have  on  hand.  Let  us  work
on  that  job  as  long  as  we  live  on  the
earth.  Our  religion  is  not  a  matter
of  enthusiasm,  to  last  a  day  or  a  week,
and  then  evaporate  into  thin  air,  like
the  religions  of  the  world  ;  but  every
hour,  every  day,  every  week,  every
year,  as  long  as  we  live  on  the  earth,
it  should  be  first  with  us,  for  it  is
only  he  who  endures  faithful  and
true  to  the  end  that  will  be  saved,
and  will  inherit  everlastirg  habita-
tions. We  need  not  lay  to  our  souls
the  flattering  unction  that  wt*  can  go
hand  in  hand  with  the  devil  all  our
lives  and  inherit  celestial  glory.
That  is  not  in  the  programme.  We
can  do  as  we  please  about  receiving
or  rejecting  the  principles  of  life  and
salvation  as  they  have  been  revealed.
We  have  this  power,  because  we  are
free  agents,  to  act  as  we  please  in  this
matter ;  but  we  can  not  go  back  into
celestial  abodes  and  inherit  celestial
glory  unless  we  keep  the  law  pertain-
ing to  that  kingdom-  And  so  with
every  other  kingdom,  even  a  telestial
kingdom ;  we  must  abide  a  telestial


law  or  we  can  not  participate  in  the
glory  appertaining  to  it,

I  do  not  wish  to  continue,  I  feel
thankful  for  the  privilege  of  bearing
my  testimony,  although  I  do  not  count
myself  a  preacher.  But  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel  make  preachers
of  us  all,  for  they  make  us  bear  tes-
timony of  the  sarite  to  the  children
of  men.  They  impel  every  heart  to
say  something,  to  bear  testimony!  if
nothing  more,  to  the  truth  of  the
principles  we  have  received.  This
life-giving  power,  the  Holy  Ghost,  I
say,  impels  every  person  who  has
received  it  to  bear  this  testimony
according  to  the  sphere  and  position
he  lilis,  and  the  duties  he  is  called
upon  to  perform*  A  person  may  be
called  to  plough,  sow,  reap,  build  a
railroad,  work  in  the  canyon  or  to  go
and  preach  to  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  one  calling  is  as  legitimate
as  another,  inasmuch  as  he  who  is
filling  it  is  working  in  the  legitimate
channel,  and  aiding  to  build  up  the


kingdom  of  God.

Every  person  who  has  obeyed  the
Gospel  has  a  share  of  responsibility
to  bring  forth  and  establish  this  work
upon  the  earth.  None  can  shirk  this
responsibility,  but  it  is  shared  by  all
according  to  their  spheres  and  posi-
tions* Those  engaged  in  raising
families  are  doing  their  part  to  estab-
lish the  Zion  of  God,  just  as  much
as  in  the  performance  of  any  other
labor.

Let  us  ponder  these  things  in  our
hearts,  receive  the  impressions  made
from  the  heavens  above.  This  will
exalt  above  the  grovelling  tinners
of  earth  and  cause  us  to  attain  those
which  tire  before  us  with  cheerful
hearts  and  willing  minds.

May  God  preserve  ns  in  the  purity
of  our  most  holy  faith,  and  enable  us
to  endure  to  the  end,  that  we  may
inherit  everlasting  habitations  pre-
pared for  the  righteous,  is  my  prayer
tor  Jesus'  sake.  Amen.


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT GEORGE A.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday,  July  7,  1872.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


SACRAMENT — SELF-EXAMINATION — RECOLLEi !TIOXS  OF  EARLY LIFE — RE-
FLECTIONS  ON  SCENES  OF  CHILDHOOD,  AFTER  AN  ABSENCE  OF  FORTY

It  EARS*


The  administration  of  the  Sacra-
ment  is  an  occasion  which  calls  us,
one  and  all,  to  reflection,  to  inquire
of  ourselves  in  relation  to  our  course


of  conduct  iii  life— whether  the  jour*
ney  we  have  pursued,  the  paths  that
we  are  traveling,  are  in  accordance
with  the  holy  principles  of  that  reli-


SACRAMENT — SELF-

gion  which  has  been  revealed  for  our
salvation,  and  which  we  have  re-
ceived. While  I  have  visited  the
cities  of  the  East,  I  have  observed
that  a  great  amount  of  means  has
been  expended  in  the  construction
and  ornamenting  of  churches  and
edifices  for  public  worship.  Every
city,  every  village  is  beautified  with
magnificent  buildings,  stately  domes,
elegant  spires,  erected  in  honor  and
for  the  purpose  of  religion,  and  I
have  reflected  upon  the  influence  of
this  religion  upon  the  minds  of  a
community.  Tn  visiting  friends  I
found  many  who  are  professors  of
religion,  who  seem  to  have  an  utter
disregard  lor  any  forms  of  worship
whatever,  and  who  totally  neglect
prayer  in  the  family  and  grace  at
the  table.  I  am  not  aware,  of  course,
whether  or  not  this  is  general  among
Christians ;  but  I  notice  among  the
Latter-day  Saints,  that  it  seems  to
be  very  natural  to  bo  slothful  and
negligent  and  careless  in  relation  to
our  every- day,  simple  duties.  We
may  build  temples,  erect  stately
domes,  magnificent  spires,  grand
towers,  in  honor  of  our  religion,  but
if  we  fail  to  live  the  principles  of
that  religion  at  home,  and  to  ac-  ;
knowledge  God  in  all  our  thoughts,
we  shall  fall  short  of  the  blessings
which  its  practical  exercise  would  !
ensure.

While  the  Sacrament  is  passed
around,  and  wc  take  the  emblems  of
our  Savior's  death  and  suflering,  and
realize  the  sacrifice  which  he  made
for  our  salvation,  we  should  ask  our-
selves, Do  we  remember  him  in  all
things?  Do  we  acknowledge  his
hand  in  the  providences  with  which  ,
we  are  surrounded  ?  Do  we  call
upon  him  in  our  families  and  in
secret  ?  Or  do  we  neglect  our  duties,
do  we  miss  praying  with  our  families
in  the  morning,  and  have  not  time
to  do  so  in  the  evening,  and  are  in  1


EXAMINATION,  ETi1.  93

such  a  hurry  that  we  cannot  even
ask  his  blessing  upon  our  food,  and
cannot  take  time  to  attend  meeting
on  the  Sabbath,  nor  afford  to  devote
the  day  to  rest,  meditation  and  study?
Let  us  also  ask  these  questions  of
ourselves,  Are  we  honorable  in  our
relations  with  each  other?  Do  we
do  by  our  neighbor  as  we  would  that
he  should  do  unto  us  ?  Are  we  just
in  our  dealings  ?  Are  we  honoring
those  principles  of  morality  which
alone  can  prepare  us  to  inherit  celes-
tial giory  ?  Brethren  and  sisters,  if
we  ask  ourselves  these  questions,  and,
after  examining  our  conduct  and
career,  can  answer  them  honestly  and
truthfully  in  the  affirmative,  then  we
may  partake  of  the  bread  and  water
in  the  presence  of  our  heavenly  Fa-
ther worthily.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  we  have  been  negligent  and
careless,  we  should  repent,  for  repent-
ance is  our  first  duty.

Since  I  last  saw  you,  I  have  visited
the  scenes  of  my  childhood,  and  the
place  of  my  birth,  after  an  absence
of  about  forty  years.  My  ideas  of
right  and  wrong  were  formed  there  j
my  associations  with  the  people,  up
to  fifteen  years  of  age,  were  such  as
to  give  deep  and  strong  impressions
of  their  character,  and  of  the  princi-
ples by  which  they  were  governed.
I  cannot  say  that  my  visit  was  with-
out its  painful  character.  Forty
years  sweep  from  the  face  of  the
earth  more  than  a  generation.  I
understand  statisticians  to  estimate
that  thirty-three  years  carry  as  many
souls  from  the  earth  as  dwell  on  it
at  one  time.  I  went  into  my  native
town  after  forty  years*  absence,  and
inquired  for  those  who  were  the
business  men  in  my  boyhood,  for  the
magistrates,  ministers,  merchants,
farmers  and  mechanics  with  whom  I
was  acquainted  then.  Where  were
they  ?  Nearly  all  dead ;  a  very  few
of  the  old  faces,  like  ancient  oaksf


remain.  On  my  father's  form  there
was  a  beautiful  grove  of  maple — some
two  hundred  trees,  standing  when  I
was  there  before,  with  no  other  timber
among  them,  the  ground  sown  with
white  clover — it  was  one  of  the  most
beautiful  lawns  I  ever  saw  when  I
left  it.  I  drove  up  before  the  house
in  which  I  was  born,  and  said  to  the
man  who  was  residing  there,  u  Is
that  grove  standing  f "  "  Not  a  ma-
pie  tree  on  the  farm,"  was  the  reply.
"  Not  a  single  one  ?"  said  L  "  No,"
said  he,  "  not  a  maple  on  the  farm."
I  had  not  even  the  cariosity  to  drive
across  the  farm,  for  in  my  mind  that
grove  was  the  feature  of  all  others,  it
was  the  place  of  my  dreams.

Many  of  you  know  that  in  1  S3  J
we  had  difficulty  with  the  Indians  in
Southern  Utah*  At  that  time  I  was
military  commander  of  the  Southern
Department.  Previous  to  every  at-
tack on  the  settlement,  my  dreams
would  carry  me  back  to  that  grove,
and  there  I  would  see,  or  get  some
intimation  of,  the  coining  trouble
with  the  Indians.  Now  there  is  not
a  tree  left  It  would  have  been  about
so  with  the  people  if  I  had  staid
away  a  few  years  longer.

I  went  into  the  school  district
where  I  had  resided  some  six  years,
and  visited  Mn  Porter  Pattersuu,
with  whom  1  was  well  acquainted  in
my  boyhood,  and  began  inquiring
for  the  neighbors.  "  Why,"  said  he,
"  they  are  all  gone  but  four  :  myself
and  wife,  and  Mr.  John  Stafford  and
Mrs.  Garfield  are  all  the  married
people  that  remain  that  lived  here
when  you  went  away,  thirty-nine
years  and  two  months  ago/'  u  Then,"
said  I,  "  I  must  go  to  the  graveyard."

These  reflections  would  bring  to
my  mind  the  sermons  that  1  had
heard  in  my  youtb.  I  went  to  the
cemetery,  and  saw  the  graves  of  a
great  many  of  my  old  comrades.
There  were  headstones  with  inscrip-


tions to  many  whom  I  had  known,
and  some  whose  funerals  I  had  at-
tended, and  I  could  recite  texts,  and
a  portion  of  the  sermons  preached  at
those  funerals.  They  were  generally
pjissages  like  this — "  Be  ye  also  ready,
for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not
the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  Passages
of  this  kind  were  generally  selected
as  warnings  to  all  to  be  ready  for
death.  j

From  the  monuments  in  the  grave-
yard I  found  that  a  good  many  had
been  summoned  in  their  youth,  for
there  were  the  graves  of  boys  and
girls  with  whom  I  had  associated,
some  of  them  my  relatives,  I  visited
three  cemeteries  with  a  like  result —
the  one  in  our  own  neighborhood,
one  in  Colton  and  the  other  in  Pots-
dam village,  in  all  of  which  I  had
been  more  or  less  acquainted.

Latter* day  Saints,  in  their  preach-
ing, call  on  men  and  women  to  pre-
pare to  live,  and  they  teach  them  how
to  live,  believing  that  if  any  person
i^  prepared  to  live  as  he  ought  to,  he
will  certainly  be  prepared  to  die
whenever  the  summons  shall  come.
It  was  never  a  part  or  portion  of  our
teaching  to  attempt  to  scare  men  to
heaven.  I  went  to  the  meeting
house,  or  rather  to  the  site  ot  the
meeting  house,  for  the  old  frame
building  had  been  replaced  by  another
of  bricks,  and  it  converted  into  a
lecture  room  for  the  normal  school.
In  that  old  frame  building  I  had
been  most  solemnly  sentenced  to
eternal  damnation,  nine  times,  by  a
Cougregationalisfc  minister  forty  yeara
ago.  He  had  gone  to  his  grave,
and  nearly  all  the  persons  present  in
the  congregation  at  the  time,  had
followed,  or  preceded,  him.  The
object  of  this  sentence,  in  the  elo-
quent and  solemn  language  in  which
it  was  pronounced,  and  so  oft-re-
peated, was,  no  doubt,  to  stir  in  the
minds  of  impenitent  sinners,  and  of


SACRAMENT — SELF- EXAMINATION,  ETC.


95


me  particularly,  a  conviction  that
would  secure  conversion  to  Chris-
tianity, as  I  was  considered  impeni-
tent; and  I  do  not  know  but  the
proper  phrase  would  be,  to  scare  me
to  heaven.  Bat  it  did  not  have  that
effect  with  me,  I  never  could  under-
stand nor  realize  certain  portions  of
the  teachings  which  I  there  heard.
That  I  must  become  bo  thoroughly
In  love  with  the  justice  of  God  as
to  be  perfectly  willing  to  be  damned
to  nil  eternity  for  his  glory,  and  suf-
fer all  the  miseries  which  they  so
eloquently  described,  was  to  me  an
impossibility,  I  could  see  no  justice
in  such  doctrines.  But  those  were
times  of  great  religious  excitement,
when  revivals  and  protracted  meet-
ings were  commou  all  over  the  coun-
try, and  the  souls  of  many  were
stirred  to  the  very  core,  as  it  were,
by  the  idea,  then  so  strongly  advo-
cated, of  the  punishment  and  misery
which  were  t>  be  ett-ruallv  inflicted
upon  all  those  who  were  finally  im-
penitent Those  sermons  divided
the  Christian  world  into  two  classes,
one  was  made  celestial,  inheriting
all  the  blessings  and  glory  which  a
God  could  bestow;  the  other  was
banished  to  eternal  misery.

When  the  doctrines  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  were  preached  to  me  I
could  understand  them,  I  could
believe  in  faith  and  repentance,  in
the  principle  of  obedience,  and  in
the  doctrines  of  baptism  for  the  re-
mission of  sins,  and  the  laying  on  of
hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  that  God  had  provided  for  all
beings  that,  he  ever  created,  a  glory,
honor  and  immortality  in  accordance
with  their  works,  whether  good  or
evil,  giving,  as  a  matter  of  course,
to  the  faithful  Latter  day  Saints,  the
reserved  seats;  or  to  use  the  language
of  the  Apost!e  Paul,  I  could  believe
that  there  was  a  glory  of  the  sun,  a
glorj  of  the  moon,  and  a  glory  of


the  stars,  and  that  the  glory  of  the

stars  differed  as  much  as  the  stars
differ  in  brilliancy;  and  tfcat  all
sects,  denominations  and  classes  of
people  would  receive  punishments
and  rewards  in  accordance  with  his
divine  justice.  Every  Latter-day
Saint  that  abides  in  the  truth,  faith-
ful to  the  end,  may  expect  the  glory
of  the  sun ;  and  every  man  that  acts
in  accordance  with  the  light  that  he
possesses  lays  a  foundation  tor  greater
glory  and  honor  than  eye  has  seen,
or  than  it  has  entered  into  the  heart
of  mortal  man  to  conceive.

I  did  not  visit  these  graves  with
the  feeling  that  some  of  the  ministers
of  orthodox  churches  sought  to  im-
press upon  my  mind  in  my  youth —
I  did  not  believe  that  they  were
consigned  to  eternal  punishment  be-
cause they  believed  differently  from
what  I  did.  I  went  there  feeling  a
confidence  that  honorable  men  and
women  would  receive  honorable  treat-
ment from  a  just  God.  In  speaking
on  this  subject,  I  designed  simply  to
wake  up  the  hearts  of  my  brethren
and  sisters  to  the  necessity  of  main-
taining this  honor,  and  to  the  fact
that,  as  we  advance  in  the  things  of
the  kingdom,  greater  sacrifices  and
more  faith  and  diligence  are  required
on  our  part

I  visited,  in  the  course  of  my  jour-
ney, the  place  where  Joseph  Smith's
father  was  born — TopsSeld,  Massa-
chusetts, I  was  in  the  house  be  was
born  in,  and  upon  the  farm  where  the
family  had  resided  three  generations
previous,  they  having  resided  in  that
county — Essex — as  early  as  1<J66*
One  object  of  my  visit  was  to  obtain
some  historical  information  in  rela-
tion to  the  family  of  Joseph  Smith.
It  was  about  eighty-one  years  sinoe
my  grandfather  moved  away  from
that  place,  at  which  time  my  father
was  eleven  years  old,  and  Josephs
father  twenty*one,  they  bijing  bro-


96  /  JOURNAL  OF

thers.  It  would  seem  strange  that,
after  the  lapse  of  eight y-one  years,  I
should  find  any  one  who  knew  my
grandfather,  yet  I  saw  several  persons
who  stated  that  they  were  personally
acquainted  with  him,  although  they
could  not  remember  when  he  moved
away;  but  after  doing  Bo,  he  returned
to  that  neighborhood,  and  visited
his  relatives  and  acquaintances,  and
they  had  distinct  recollections  of
him,  and  gave  me  reminiscences  of
his  history.

The  graveyard  at  Topsfield  con-
tained no  monuments  over  about
eighty  years  old.  I  do  not  recollect
the  exact  date.  Among  the  oldest
were  the  names  of  my  great  aunts
and  other  relatives.  Being;  a  firm
believer  in  the  doctrine  of  baptism
for  the  dead,  I  was  anxious  to  procure
the  names  of  those  departed  persons
wherever  our  records  might  be  defi-
cient, and  I  have,  I  believe,  a  pros-
pect of  obtaining  the  names  of  about
nine  hundred  of  the  kindred  of  my
great  grandmother — PriscUla  Gould,

The  old  portion  of  the  burying
ground  at  Topsfield,  used  by  the  early
inhabitants,  is  total! v  without  monn-
ments— no  gravestones  whatever,  so
that  I  presume  they  simply  used
headboards  or  monuments  of  wood  j
and  the  place  is  now  reserved  as  a
sacred  precinct  in  which,  we  were
told  that  any  of  the  kindred  of  those
ancient  worth  iefe  of  the  town  might
plan t  gravestones  if  they  choose,  but
no  person  is  allowed  to  be  buried
there.  The  cemetery  had  been  en-
larged, and  from  eighty  years  ago
down  to  the  present  time  there  hud
been  placed  there  many  gravestones
and  handsome  obelisks,  some  mani-
festing the  pride  and  aristocracy  of
those  who  placed  them  there,  I  no-
ticed one  particularly,  on  which  was
inscribed  a  notice  to  the  effect  that
the  person  buried  there  was  a  mil-
lionaire. It  did  i;ot  say  whether  he


DISCOURSES. I  r  1

obtained  money  honestly  or  by  some
other  means.

In  visiting  the  office  of  the  town
clerk,  I  examined  the  record  kept  by
my  great  grandfather  in  177(5-8,  at
which  time  he  was  the  clerk  of  that
town.  I  also  found,  by  examining
the  records  ten  years  before  then,
that  he  had  represented  the  town  in
the  Legislature  o!  the  Colony  of
Massachusetts,  and  was  a  very  firm
!  supporter  of  the  Revolution.  Just
as  I  was  about  leaving  the  office  to
go  to  the  railway  station,  I  was  told
by  the  clerk  that  he  had  a  list  of  the
names  of  the  children  of  Robert
Smith  in  the  town  record,  Robert
S  mi  tli  was  supposed  by  us  to  be  the
first  of  our  family  who  settle!  in
Massachusetts,  sometime  previous
the  year  ]  665,  I  there  ascertained
what  our  family  records  fail  to  show.
Our  records  show  that  he  had  a  son
Samuel,  and  that  Samuel  had  a  son
Samuel,  and  that  Samuel  had  a  son
Samuel  and  a  son  Asael,  and  Asael
was  our  grandfather;  but  I  ascer-
tained that  this  Robert  Smith  had  a
large  family,  and  their  names  are
contained  in  that  old  town  record.

The  Genealogical  Society  of  Mas-
sachusetts has  got  out  books  contain-
ing the  records  of  some  hundreds  of
the  families  of  the  oldest  settlers  of
the  colony.  If  our  friends  here,
whose  ancestors  were  buried  in  New
England,  would  unite  in  purchasing
an  eta  tire  set  of  these  works,  they
would  be  enabled  to  find  c.  Uateral,
if  not  direct,  branches  of  their  kin-
dred; and  so  obtain  a  key  to  help
them  in  making  the  necessary  records
to  attend  to  the  ordinances  for  their
dead.  But  our  faith  is,  brethren  and
sisters,  that  when  we  have  exhausted
all  the  powers  within  our  natural
reason  and  reach  to  obtain  a  know-
ledge of  our  dead,  and  the  Lord  is
satisfied  with  us,  revelations  will  be
opened  to  our  understandings  by


SACRAMENT— SELF-EXAMINATION,  ETC.


197


which  we  will  be  able  to  trace  back
our  genealogy  to  the  time  when  men
were  within  the  pale  of  the  princi-
pies  and  laws  of  the  Priesthood,  be-
fore these  ordinances  were  changed
and  the  everlasting  covenant  broken.

In  conversing  with  Mr.  Zaccbeus
Gould  and  his  wife,  of  Topsfield,  over
eighty  years  old,  and  Dr.  Humphrey
Gould,  of  Rowe,  who  were  cousins  of
my  father,  I  was  enabled  to  pick  up
many  very  satisfactory  items  of  in-
formation, I  am  also  under  obliga-
tion to  Mr.  John  H.  Gould,  of  Tops*
field,  and  to  the  town  clerk  of  that
place,  Mr.  Towne,  for  valuable  letters
and  papers  relating  to  the  history  uf
our  family,  all  of  which,  as  they  re-
late to  the  ancestry  of  Joseph  Smith,
will  form  an  interesting  page  in  con-
nection with  his  history  when  it
shall  be  published.

I  do  not  design,  in  conversing  with
you  at  the  present  time,  to  enumerate
the  visits  I  made,  though  they  re-
mind me  of  a  remark  made  concern-
ing me  by  my  grandfather  on  the
last  day  of  hia  life.  He  died  in  his
eighty-eighth  year,  I  being  then  in
my  fourteenth  year.  Said  he, 41  George
A*  is  a  rather  singular  bov.  When
he  comes  here,  instead  ot  going  to
play  as  the  rest  of  my  grandchildren
do,  he  comes  into  my  room  and  asks
me  questions  about  what  occurred
seventy  or  eighty  years  ago."  It
seemed  to  me,  while  I  was  absent,
that  I  was  pursuing  the  same  course
yet,  fur  although  I  had  got  pretty
well  along  in  years,  I  still  wanted  to
talk  with  the  old  folks,
„  At  Woonsoeket,  K.  L,  I  visited
Mrs,  Tryphena  Lyman,  a  cousin
of  my  mother,  in  her  94th  year,
who  was  living  with  her  unmar-
married  daughter,  an  agreeable  young
lady  in  her  70th  year,  I  had  a  very
pleasant  visit  with  them,  and  from
them  I  learned  some  interesting  in-
cidents of  my mother's  ancestors.

No,  7.  I--  :


From  my  cousins,  Mr.  and  Mrs,
Simon  D,  Butler,  of  South  Col  ton,
N.Y,,  1  obtained  a  copy  of  the  family
record  of  my  great-grandfather,  Dea-
con John  Lyman,  written  by  his  own
hand  in  his  family  Bible — now  200
years  old.  Mrs.  Butler  has  been  my
most  faithful  correspondent  among
all  my  relatives,  and  my  meeting
with  her  and  her  husband  was  more
like  meeting  a  brother  and  sister
than  cousins.  *
It  is  very  well  known  that,  by  the
election  of  a  convention  of  delegates
from  all  the  counties  of  this  Terri*
tory,  held  in  this  city,  Ex-Governor
Fuller  and  myself  went  to  attend  the
Republican  Convention  at  Philadel-
phia. Persons  appeared  there  and
objected  to  me  because  I  was  a
"  Mormon,"  and  the  committee  on
credentials  did  not  think  proper  to
allow  the  representatives  of  the  peo-
ple of  Utah  a  seat  in  that  convention,
consequently  we  retired,  believing,
fully,  that  the  time  would  com?  in
our  country  when  men  will  not  be
questioned  in  relation  to  their  reli-
gious faith  or  practice,  wken  called
upon  to  perform  the  duties  of  citi-
zens, but  that  if  they  are  firm  and
upright  supporters  of  the  Constitu-
tion and  laws  of  their  country,  that
will  be  all  that  will  be  required  of
them.  I  then  took  the  opportunity
to  make  these  visits,  which  1  had
designed  doing  ycrtrs  before,  and
which  I  believe  will  result  in  good.
I  did  not  seek  to  be  publicly  known )
I  made  no  attempts  to  preach,  though
invited  at  different  times  to  do  so;
and  I  must  say  for  the  credit  of  New
England,  that  I  had  the  offer  of  a
Christian  church  to  preach  in,  I
say  this  to  show  that  New  England
is  improving  in  its  religions  Jaith,
that  is,  there  is  less  bigotry  th6re
now  than  there  has  been  at  certain
periods.  I  could  have  had  nuhieroua
opportunities  to  preach,  but  I  wished

Vol.  XV.


to  make  my  journey  one  of  rest,  and
addressed  but  one  public  congrega-
tion, and  that  was  last  Sabbath  in
the  Latter  da>  Saints*  Hall,  Brooklyn,
While  at  Philadelphia  I  met  Mr.
E,  W,  Foster,  Supervisor  of  Puts-
dam,  my  unlive  towu,  he  being  a
member  of  the  convention,  and  one
of  the  commiltee  on  credentials  he-
fore  whom  our  claim  to  a  seat  was
Contested-  Alter  leaving  Philadel-
phia I  visited  Potsdam,  and  an  inci-
dent occurred  there  which  I  will
same.  On  landing  at  the  railway
Station,  Mr,  Foster  happened  to  he
there,  and  recognizing  me,  he  called
me  by  name,  and  bid  me  welcome  to
the  town.  A  very  respectable- looking
aged  lady,  hearing  the  name,  stepped
Gp  to  him  and  inquired  if  I  was
George  A,  Smith,  and  being  answered
in  the  affirmative,  she  seized  my
hand  and  said,  (t  I  want  to  thank
you,  your  father  saved  my  life,"
"  Why,  when  ?"  "  A  good  many
jears  ago.n  "  How  ?"  "  We  were
broken  through  the  ice  into  the  lake,
and  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life  he
saved  mine/'  The  cars  were  about
starting,  and  she  rushed  from  me
and  said,  "  My  name  was  Eliza
Courier/'  I  really  thought  the  inci-
dent worth  naming,  as  occurring  in
the  place  of  my  birth,  and  from
which  I  had  gone  nearly  forty  years
before*

By  the  courtesy  of  General  N.  S.
Elderkio,  I  had  the  privilege  of  visit-
ing the  State  Normal  School  at  Pots-
dam, and  was  very  much  pleased
with  the  institution.  The  vast  im-
provements which  have  been  made  in
buildings,  machinery,  roads,  tran-
sportation, and  telegraphs,  have  cer.
lainly  not  been  altogether  inappli-
cable to  the  progress  of  education.
When  I  received  my  education,  an
ordinary  school  master  received  nine
dollars  a  month,  and  twelve  if  he
was  a  first  cfoss  teacher; and  he


could  cut  blue  beech  switches  enough
in  a  day,  and  perhaps  less,  to  thrash
the  scholars  the  entire  winter,  and
they  were  applied  very  freely,  I
used  to  think  I  gufr  more  than  my
share.  I  thought  I  could  not  watch
the  schoolmaster  as  well  as  some
others,  my  eyes  were  not  quite  so
good.  But  I  noticed  on  my  visit  a
very  desirable  change  in  their  school
government;  the  cultivation  of  the
mind  is  the  object  sought  now,  and
the  teacher  has  become  the  friend  as
well  hs  the  preceptor  of  the  pupil.
The  bine  beech  seems  to  be  pretty
well  banished,  anfl  then*  is  a  murked
improvement  in  the  whole  system  of
education,  as  well  as  in  telegraphing,
railroading,  machinery,  and  archi-
tectural works  generally,

I  met  several  of  my  old  school-
fellows, who  were  glad  to  see  me,
and  treated  me  with  courtesy,  A-nong
these  I  should  mention  General  El-
derkin, a  man  of  influence  and  who
never,  in  the  darkest  hour  of  our
persecutions,  has  failed  to  recognize
me  as  an  old  schoolfellow  and  friend,
notwithstanding  he  had  high  reli-
gious notions,  I  met  other  gentle-
men of  this  kind.
|  We  are  all  passing  to  the  tomb,
and  we  want  to  leave  a  good  record,
that  is,  one  that  will  be  pleasing  to
the  Lord,  It  is  not  a  very  lofty
ambition  for  a  man  to  spend  his  life
so  as  to  have  it  recorded  on  his
tombstone  that  he  died  worth  a
million  dollars ;  but  if  he  spend  his
life  in  doing  good,  that  will  be  a  re-
cord that  will  be  to  his  everlasting
honor,  and  will  prove  to  him  treasure
in  heaven.  People  say,  "  You  Mor-
mons believe  all  will  be  damned  ex-
cept yourselves,"  We  know  for  our-
selves that  this  is  the  work  of  God,
and  we  know  that  every  Latter- day
Saint  that  is  faithful  to  his  profes-
sion and  calling  will  attain  to  celes-
tial glory. We  also  further  know


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


that  God  has  extended,  in  his  order,
to  all  the  human  race,  glory,  honor,
immortality  and  blessings  in  accord-
ance  with  their  works,  whether  good
or  evil.  Read  the  vision  in  the
Book  of  Covenants,  and  the  l^th
chapter  of  Paul's  epistle  to  the  Cor-
inthians, and  julge  for  yourselves;
and  while  we  should  struggle  to  ob-
tain the  greater  blessings,  we  should
never  disparage  those  who  m/iy  fall
short  i if  attaining  the  highest  glory.
There  is  a  glory  of  the  sun,  the  Apos-
tle informs  us,  also  a  glory  of  the
moon,  and  a  glory  of  the  stars,  and
as  one  star  differeth  -rom  another,  so
do  the.se  different  degrees  of  glory
differ.  Bat  in  these  various  glories
will  he  found  all  denominations  and
all  honorable  men — every  one  in  ste-
cordance  with  those  things  which  he
has  done  in  this  life ;  and,  says  the
Savior,  "  Suffer  little  children  to
come  unto  me,  for  of  such  is  the;


kingdom  of  heaven."

As  I  passed  by  the  site  of  the  old
academy,  I  said  to  General  Elderkin,
"  There  I  received  my  Presbyterian
baptis  n."  "So  did  I/'  said  he.  I
did  not  wish  to  raise  a  question  in
relation  to  the  subject  with  him  at
all.  He  is  now,  I  believe,  a  member
of  the  Episcopal  Church,  and  I,  of
course,  am  a  Latter-day  Saint ;  but
the  man  who  sprinkled  the  water  on
our  foreheads,  taught  that  hell  was
full  of  infants  not  a  span  long.  The
idea  was  horrible  to  me  from  the
time  I  first  heard  it  "  Suffer  little
children  to  come  unto  me,  for  of  such
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  says  the
Savior;  and  if  we  live  in  the  sight  of
God  as  innocent,  pure  and  holy  as
little  children,  we  shall  attain  to  the
glory  of  the  sun.  May  God  enable
us  to  do  so  through  Jesus  oor  Re-
deemer, Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT.


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sundav  Afternoon,

Ai  gcst  4,  1872,


(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans.)

REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN  AND  ITS  CONTINUANCE  NECESSARY.


Sometimes  I  am  in  the  habit  of
taking  a  text,  but  at  present  there  is
no  passage  of  Scripture  which  pre-
sents itself  to  my  mind  ;  I  therefore,
commence  speaking  and,  through
your  faith  and  prayers  before  the
Lord,  I  trust  that  something  may  be
given  to  me  that  will  edify,  and


benefit  the  congregation.  The  sub-
jects pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of
God  are  so  numerous  that,  sometimes
the  great  difficulty  in  the  mind  of  a
servant  of  God  who  attempts  to  ad-
dress the  people  is  to  know  the  mind
and  will  of  the  Spirit  in  regard  to
what  shall  be  said. If  I  know  my


100


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


own  heart,  I  have  no  desire  to  speak
my  own  words  or  to  impart  unto  you
my  own  natural  wisdom ;  but  it  is
the  earnest  desire  of  my  heart  that  I
may  impart  instruction  according  to
the  mind  and  the  will  of  the  living
Go  J.  This  I  can  not  do  unless  God
shall  grant  unto  me  the  inspiration
of  his  Spirit  at  the  very  moment,
and  this  will  depend  in  a  great  mea-
sure upon  the  hearers  as  well  as  upon
tin:  speaker.  If  the  people  have
faith  in  God,  and  pray  unto  him,
exercising  that  faith,  he  may  give
tfiem  something  that  will  be  instruc-
tive to  their  minds ;  but  if  they
have  not  faith  the  Lord  may  not  see
proper  thus  to  impart

We  are  permitted,  Latter-day
Saints,  to  live  in  a  very  peculiar  age
of  the  world*  It  is  called  by  us,  the
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times.
Many  dispensations  have  been  re-
vealed to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
in  past  ages,  and  God  has  given,
from  time  to  time,  since  the  creation,
much  instruction  to  the  people.
What  I  mean  by  a  dispensation,  is
power,  authority  and  revelation  given
from  Heaven  to  direct  and  counsel
men  here  on  the  earth.  This  has
been  given  at  different  ages  of  the
world,  and  the  instruction  which  God
has  given  has  been  in  accordance
with  the  circumstances  of  the  people,
the  revelations  and  instructions
which  he  has  given  being  different
at  one  period  from  those  given  at
another.  When  I  say  different,  do
not  misunderstand  me.  Many  of
the  revelations  of  God  are  unchange-
able  in  their  nature,  and  are  adnpted
fo  all  dispensations  ;  but  many  com*
i:t:uidments  have  been  given  that
were  adapted  only  to  the  dispensa-
tions in  which  they  were  revealed.  I
will  name  some  of  these.

For  instance,  when  some  sixteen
hundred  or  two  thousand  years  had
passed  away,  from  the  creation,  the


world  had  become  very  much  cor-
rupted in  the  sight  of  God,  so  much
so  that  what  little  history  we  have
on  the  subject  informs  us  that  all
flesh  had  corrupted  its  way  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.  God  gave  a  new
commandment  in  that  period,  differ-
ing entirely  from  all  former  com-
mandments. It  was  not  adapted  to
any  dispensation  that  had  preceded
it,  neither  would  it  be  suitable  for
any  future  dispensation :  it  was  in-
tended for  that  particular  period
only.  The  Lord  commanded  his
servant  Noah  to  build  an  ark,  ac-
cording to  certain  rules  and  dimen-
sions that  he  gave  unto  him,  for,  said
the  Lord,  "  I  intend  to  destroy  all
flesh  with  a  flood,  except  those  \vhr
shall  gather  together  into  the  ark
which  you  shall  build,"

This  was  a  new  commandment.
If  there  had  been  any  sectarian
preachers  who  then  lived,  and  per-
haps there  were — for  preachers  who
have  not  been  sent  of  God  seem  to
have  been  numerftus  in  all  dispensa-
tions—  they  would  p  or  haps  hav
reasoned  with  Noah  in  relation  to
this  new  revelation  and  command-
ment, and  said  to  him,  4t  What  is
the  nse  now,  of  getting  new  revela-
tion from  God  ?  You  will  not  dis-
pute, Noah,  but  what  Enoch  was
saved  and  translated  to  heaven.  He
had  enough  revelation  to  save  liimf
and  can  not  we  be  saved  in  the  same
manner  that  he  was,  without  having
any  new  revelation  communicated  to
us  ?"  I  mention  this,  because  such
arguments  are  used  at  the  present
day  in  reference  to  the  new  revela-
tions which  the  Latter-day  Saints
carry  forth  to  the  world.  The  people
say,  u  You  believe  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  as  a  new  revelation,  and
that  God  has  given  new  command-
ments. Have  we  not  enough  ?  Were
not  the  people  who  lived  in  the  days
of  Enoch,  Abraham,  Moses  and  the


V


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


101


Prophets,  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and
the  Apostles,  saved?  and  if  they
had  enough  to  save  them,  if  wo  fol-
low the  instructions  which  they
received,  what  is  the  use  of  obtaining
another  book,  called  the  Book  of
Mormon,  or  new  commandments  and
revelations  ?"  This  has  been  brought  i
forth  as  an  argument  ever  since  my
youth  to  my  certain  knowledge,  in
all  countries  where  I  have  traveled
and  attempted  to  communicate  to  the
world  our  ideas  about  now  revelation.
The  same  arguments  might  have
been  used  in  the  days  of  the  Hood —  i
m  Enough  has  been  given ;  Enoch
has  been  saved  and  translated,  and
if  we  follow  the  revelations  given  to
him,  why  may  we  not  be  saved  with*
ont  having  any  thing  new  ?"  But
Noah  would  have  answered,  and  very  \
properly  too,  "  God  designs  to  ac-
complish something  now  that  he  did
not  accomplish  in  the  days  of  Enoch,
nor  in  the  days  of  Abel  and  Seth,
nor  in  the  days  of  any  of  those  an-
cient  worthies — he  intends  to  bring
destruction  on  all  flesh  that  will  not
repent,  by  overwhelming  this  world
of  ours  in  a  flood  of "  water.  He  j
intends  to  pour  out  his  indignation
and  just  wrath  upon  those  who' cor-
rupt themselves  in  his  sight;  arid  he
has  provided  a  particular  way  of  es-
cape therefrom,  by  which  you  may,
if  yon  will,  be  saved  from  this  judg*
meat,  and  that  way  has  to  be  made
known  by  new  revelation/*  We  will  i
pass  on,  however.

Soon  after  the  days  of  Noah,  we
find  that  certain  men  lived  upon  the
earth,  whose  names  are  recorded  in  I
this  sacred  history  (the  Bible),  who
were  called  to  be  the  chosen  servants
of  God,  and  whom  the  Lord  blessed
in  a  peculiar  manner,  I  refer  now
to  the  Patriarchs,  and  more  espe*
cially  to  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,
three  very  worthy  men,  so  worthy
that  the  Lord  chose  them  as  repre-


sentatives of  the  faithful  in  all  future
ages,  and  declared  that  all  who
should  be  saved  in  futnre  nges
should  become  their  seed,  either
springing  directly  from  their  loins,
or  Wing  adopted,  through  the  Gos-
pel, into  the  family  of  Abraham,  who
was  to  be  called  the  father  of  the
faithful:  that  is  the  father  not  only
of  the  faithful  who  lived  from  his  An y
until  the  coming  of  Christ,  but  of  all
who  should  live  after  Christ  who
followed  in  the  footsteps  of  this  an-
cient Patriarch  and  embraced  the
same  Gospel  that  he  taught,  and  they
should  have  a  claim  on  the  promises
that  were  made  to  him.

Now,  did  the  Patriarch  Abraham
I  receive  anything  new  from  God,  or
was  there  enough  already  given?
Perhaps  many  may  cry,  "Enough  to
save  Noah,  Enoch,  Abel,  and  all  per-
sons who  would  walk  before  the  Lord
according  to  ancient  revelation,  with-
out anything  new/'  But  there  was
not  enough  adapted  to  the  circum-
stances by  which  Abraham  was  sur-
rounded. Why  3?  Bee
designed  to  call  Abraham  out  from
his  father's  house,  from  his  friends
and  country,  and  to  lead  h*m  mlo  a
strange  land.  Abraham  might  have
searched  all  former  records  nod
revelations,  but  here  was  a  duty  he
never  could  have  learned  therefrom  —
4<  Depart  from  thy  father's  house ! M
It  could  not  be  found  written  in
former  revelations,  hence  the  circum-
stances required  new  revelation,  and
God  gave  it  by  commanding  t  i is
|  great  man — the  father  nf  the  faithful
— to  leave  the  land  of  Chaldea  and
to  go  forth  into  a  country  where  he
never  had  been.  Abraham  was  nU--
dient,  he  went  forth  and  traveled  to
the  country  that  we  call  Palestine —
a  small  territory  east  of  the  Mediter-
ranean Sea,  And  having  arrived  in
that  land,  he  might  have  sen  re  I  ed
all  former  revelations  in  vain  to  havo


♦


102  JOURNAL  OF

learned  what  his  duty  was  then,  for
there  were  certain  duties  required  of
him  then  in  regard  to  which  the
revelation  given  to  him  in  his  native
land  did  not  enlighten  him.  One  of
these  duties  was  to  go  forth  upon  a
certain  eminence  or  moan  tain  in
Canaan.  He  did  as  he  was  taught.
It  was  a  peculiar  cammandinent.  I
have  never  been  commanded  to  do
so,  neither  has  any  other  permn  in
this  congregation  j  neither  was  any
person  who  livt  d  before  Abraham  ;
but  he,  and  he  alone  needed  new
revelation  to  find  out  that  he  was  to
go  to  the  top  of  a  certain  mountain.
When  he  got  there  another  new
revelation  was  given  to  him,  com-
manding him  to  look  to  the  east,
then  to  the  west;  and  then  to  cast
hid  eyes  to  the  north,  and  to  the
south,  and  then,  behold,  a  great  pro-
mii-e  was  made  to  him  by  new
revelation,  namely,  "All  the  land
which  thou  seest  shall  be  given  to
thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee  for  an
everlasting  possession."  No  such
promise  could  be  have  found  in  any
former  revelation  :  this  promise  was
adapted  to  that  peculiar  individual,
■nri  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he
was  placed.

We  would imagine that  Isaac,
having  bis  father's  revelations  li^bi
before his  eyes,  and  knowing  all
about  them,  would  say  in  his  heart,
*'  I  need  not  trouble  myself  about
inquiring  from  God  and  receiving
anything  new  from  the  heavens.  My
father  was  a  good  man  ;  he  was  saved,
and  I  shall  content  myself  by  giving
heed  to  the  old  revelations."  But
Isaac  did  not  reason  in  this  way;
and  the  Lord  had  some  new  revela-
tion to  communicate  to  the  son  of
Abraham,  and  one  of  them  was  to  j
confirm  the  promise  that  had  been
made  to  his  father. One  miffht  na-
turally suppose  that  the  revelation
made  to  his  father  was  broad  enough


DISCOURSES.

j  and  covered  the  case  without  being
confirmed,  for  it  declared  that  the
land  promised  to  Abraham  should  be
given  to  him  and  to  I) is  seed  after
him,  and  we  might  suppose  that  that

;  included  Isaac,  and  that  there  was  no
need  of  a  new  revelation  to  him  on
the  subject;  but  if  it  did  include
hiin,  Isaac  was  not  fully  satisfied,  he
would  not  place  his  dependence  on
something  that  had  been  said  to
some  other  man,  but  wanted  to  know
tor  himself  whether  God  intended
him  to  possess  that  land,  and  there
was  no  way  for  hini  to  obtain  this
knowledge  except  by  direct  corn-

1  mil  nidation  with  the  heavens.  He
obtained  it,  God  renewing  the  pro-
mise to  him  that  he  had  made  to  his
fattier  Abraham.

By  and  by  comes  along  the  grand-
son ot  Abraham — Jacob,  who,  not
hi  tinned  with  the  promises  made  to
his  grandfather  and  his  father-
Abraham  and  Isaac,  and  not  con-
sidering himself  safe  to  depend  on
promises  made  to  somebody  else,
came  before  the  Lord  and  plead  with
him,  and  the  angels  of  God  came
and  visited  this  lad,  and  he  saw  a
ladder  reaching  from  the  ground  on
which  he  slept  to  the  very  heavens,
upou  which  the  angels  were  ascend-
ing and  descending  j  aud  he,  on  that
occasion,  obtained  a  confirmation  of
the  promise  made  to  his  father  and
grandfather.

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  trace
the  history  of  these  patriarchs,  or  to
mention  the  various  times  when  God
thought  tit  to  communicate  a  new
revelation  unto  them,  according  to
the  circumstances  in  which  they  were
placed.  We  might  relate  the  reve-
lations given  to  Jacob  after  he  went
down  into  the  country  of  Laban,
where  he  married  his  four  wives.
We  might  relate  to  )ou  the  various
revelations  God  gave  to  him  during
his  sojourn  in  that  land. We  might


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


103


also  relate  to  you  the  revelations  he
received  after  he  left,  that  country
with  his  four  wives  and  his  children.
When  he  came  to  the  brook  Jabbok,
sending  over  all  his  family  before
hirn,  he  stopped  back,  and  the  Lord
condescended  to  give  him  a  new
revelation*  An  angel  came  down,
and  Jacob  and  this  person  laid  hold
of  each  other,  the  same  ay  men  do
occasionally  now,  to  try  each  other's
strength,  in  what  is  termed  wrestling.
These  two  persons  wrestle  J  together
all  ui-ht  long.  The  angel  did  not
see  proper  to  take  any  advantage  of
Jacob  by  miracle,  but  ne  wrestled
with  him  as  one  man  would  another;
and  it  seems  that  neither  of  them
overcame  the  other.  The  angel  did
not  succeed  in  throwing  Jacob  to  the
ground,  neither  did  Jacob  succeed  in
throwing  the  angel  to  the  ground;
but  after  contending  together  all
nitrht,  the  angel  at  last  pat  forth  hi*
finger  and  touched  the  hollow  of
Jacob's  thigh  and  lamed  him  a  little,
and  by  this  means  was  enabled  to
overcome  him  After  being  thus
lamed,  -Jacob  found  that  he  had  been
wrestling  with  an  angel  of  God,  and,
said  he,  "I  will  not  let  let  thee  go
unless  thou  blew  me,"  and  God.
through  the  month  ot  that  angel,  gave
to  him  the  same  great  and  glorious  j
promises  that  he  had  given  to  his
father,  arid  also  blessed  him  as  a
prince,  because  h#>  had  [tower  to  wrestle
with  an  angel  all  night  and  prevailed
with  him,

Some  suppose  that  this  was  the
first  conversion  of  Jacob; but,  be
this  as  it  may,  Jacob,  prior  to  this
time,  had  many  great  revelations  from
God. After  wrestling  in  this  manner  1
on  one  side  of  the  brook  J*bhokT  he
started  the  next  day  to  overtake  his
la  mil  j ,  and  he  placed  his  four  wives
and  their  children  in  a  certain  order,  j
preparatory  to  meeting  his  brother  i
Esau, By  and  by  Esan  comes  along  1


with  quite  an  array  of  men,  and  ho
meets  the  forward  company,  consist-
ing of  Bilhab  and  Zilpah  and  their
children — two  of  Jacob's  wives  and
their  polygamous  offspring.  He
continues  on  until  he  meets  Jacob's
third  wife,  and  finally  he  comes  to  the
fourth  and  her  children,  with  whom
Jacob  was,  and  turning  to  Jacob  ho
says,  "  Who  are  all  these  women  and
children  ?  "  Jacob  answered,  "  These
are  they  whom  God  hath  given  thy
servant,"  What !  God  give  to  Jacob
more  than  one  wife,  and  a  number  of
j  polygamous  children !  Is  that  so  ?
Well,  Jac -b  says  so,  and  we  are  in-
formed that  he  was  then  converted,
that  this  meeting  between  Jacob  and
Esau  took  place,  and  this  declaration
of  Jacob  was  made  after  his  conver-
sion at  the  brook  Jabbok.  Now.
would  you  suppose  that  a  converted
man  would  make  such  a  declaration
about  his  wives  and  children  as  Jacob
mnde  to  E^au,  if  it  had  not  been
true?  If  a  man  now-a-daysdeclareff
that  God  has  given  hirn  more  wives
than  one,  and  a  host  of  polygamoua
children,  he  is  accused  of  bla>pliemy,
yet  Jacob,  after  wrestling  with  an
ansel,  declared  that  such  was  the  case
with  him:  he  knew  it.  was  so  and  hg
acknowledged  the  hand  aff  God.
I  After  he  reached  the  laud  of  C  maafl
we  find  that  God  con  tin  tied  lo  *ii?fl
to  this  man  revelation  after  revela*
tion,  suited  to  the  circumstances ;  and
thus  we  may  trare  the  history  of  the
dispensations  of  God  to  man.

I  will  now  touch,  in  short,  upon  Mie
history  of  Muses,  who  lived  silver al
hundred  years  after  Jacob — it  a
period  when  circumstances  called  for
commandments  and  revelations  dif-
ferent to  any  that  had  ever  bee  a
given  before. After  having  slain  the
I  Egyptian,  Moses  tied  from  the  house
j  of  Pharaoh,  and  went  down  into  the
I  laud  of  Midmu,  and  dwelt  there  foi  ty
1  years. At  a  certain  time,  when  he


104  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


was  herding  the  flocks  of  his  father-
in-law,  Jethro,  ho  saw  a  bush  burning
with  a  verv  brilliant  ftame.  This
excited  his  curiosity,  and  he  drew
near,  and  snw  the  hnah  apparently
burning,  and  yet  not  consumed,  As
he  drew  nearer  God  spoke  to  him  uut

,  of  t!ic  burniiig  bush,  and  told  him  to
take  the  slices  from  his  feet  f  ,r  the

,  place  on  which  he  stood  was  holy
ground.  He  never  could  have  found
ont  by  former  revelation  thai  the
ground  whereon  he  stood  was  holy.
This  God,  who  appeared  in  the  burn-
ing bush,  or  the  angel,  as  the  case
may  be,  hud  something  for  Moses  to
do  lhat  be  could  not  possibly  learn
iroin former revelation, and  that

i  something  was  to  arise  and  go  down
into  Egypt  and  deliver  God's  people
—the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob — from  the  hands  of  their
enemies.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  re-
quired new  revelation  to  inform  him
of  this  fact?  He  was  obedient  to
the  commandment  for  taking  Aaron
with  him,  he  went  down  into  Egypt
and  stood  before  the  king,  imd  then
commenced  a  series  of  new  revela-
tions that  were  wonderful  and  mar-
velous in  their  nature.  The  re  ve-
la ions  of  to-day,  however,  would  not
suit  to-morrow,  and  those  of  to-mor-
row would  not  suit  the  nezt  day*
Why  ?  Because  God  had  something
new  to  perform  every  day,  and  that
wh  cli  was  given  yesterday  would  not
be  adapted  to  the  work  God  saw  tit
to  perform  to-day  or  to-morrcw,
hence,  as  often  as  the  day  rolled
round  new  revelation  had  to  be  given
to  Moses  to  make  known  to  him  what
the  Lord  required  at  his  hand,  what
his  mission  was,  what  he  was  to  do
in  the  house  of  Pharaoh  and  before
all  the  Egyptians.  Having  accom-
plished these  wonders,  by  new  reve-
lation, Moses  and  the  whole  house  of
Israel,  some  twenty -five  hundred
thousand  ia  number,  left  the  land  of


Egypt  and  came  forth  to  the  eastern

border  of  the  Red  Sea,

If  there  had  been  sectarians  in
that  large  company,  they  would
doubtless  have  reasoned  with  Moses
on  this  wise :  "  Moses,  what  an
abundance  of  revelation  God  has
given  in  former  times,  and  have  wo
not  enough  for  our  guidance  now  ?  "
I  say  if  there  had  been  Baptists,
Methodists,  Presbyterians,  members
of  the  Church  of  England,  or  of
any  of  the  several  hundred  different
sects  into  which  Christendom  is  now
Foparated,  this  would  have  been  their
argument,  for  their  argument  now  is
— "  We  have  enough,  and  do  not
need  any  more."  But  Moses  and  the
children  of  Israel  were  not  influenced
by  such  considerations,  for  they  were
placed  in  circumstances  that  re-
quired something  new.  The  Red
Sea  was  before  them,  and  there  were
mountains  on  the  south  and  on  the
north,  and  on  the  west  the  Egypt-
ians were  pursuing  them,  and  the
inquiry  with  them  was  41  What  shall
we  do  ? "  God  gave  thein  revela-
tion. Ke  did  not  tell  them  to  search
previous  revelations  fur  that  was  all
that  was  necessary,  but  he  gave  them
revelation  telling  them  what  to  do,
and  that  revelation  was,  "  Stand
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God?"
If  they  had  not  got  this  new  revela-
tion they  might  have  been  so  con-
fused that,  instead  of  standing  still,
some  would  have  run  for  one  moun-
tain, and  some  for  another,  some
this  way  and  some  that;  but  a  new
revelation  made  them  understand
that  their  duty,  instead  of  fleeing,
was  to  stand  still  and  ste  the  salva-
tion that  God  would  work  out  for
them.  Moses  was  commanded  to
smite  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,
and  he  did  so,  and  they  were  parted
asunder  by  the  power  of  the  Al-
mighty and,  as  we  are  informed  in
another  place,  they  stood  up  like


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC,


105


walls  on  either  side  of  the  path  on
which  the  children  of  Israel  traveled
through  the  midst  of  the  sea.  We
would  naturally  suppose  that  water
would  not  do  this,  but  it  was  a  mira-
cle wrought  by  the  power  of  the
Almighty,  He  placed  the  waters,
like  solid  walls  on  each  side  of  his
people,  and  they  walked  through
dry  shod,  while  the  Egyptian  army,
in  trying  to  pursue  them,  were
overthrown in  the  midst  of  the

Then  comes  another  new  revela-
tion— given  by  inspiration — to  sing
how  the  Lord  had  overthrown  the
enemies  of  his  people,  how  the  Lord
had  magnified  his  great  power  and
preserved  his  people  from  the  Egypt-
ian nation,  and  delivered  them  from
bondage.  The  hosts  of  Israel  tra-
veled along  from  the  shores  of  the
Bed  Sea  until  they  came  to  the  foot
of  Mount  Sinai,  where,  by  new  reve-
lation, they  camped  ;  and  at  a  certain
time,  the  Lord,  by  new  revelation,
called  Moses  up  into  the  mount;
and  when  he  got  there  the  Lord  saw
fit  to  write  a  certain  code  of  laws  on
tables  of  stone,  and,  after  keeping
Moses  in  the  mount  forty  days  and
forty  nights,  he  sent  him  down,  and
when  he  got  down  he  found  that  the
children  ot  Israel  had  corrupted
themselves  in  the  sight  of  the  Mo&t
High,  for  they  had  made  unto  them-
selves gods,  certain  golden  calves,
and  they  were  worshipping  them,
Aaron  had  caused  (lie  people  to  strip
themselves  naked,  and  they  were
dancing  around  the  calves.  Moses
was  very  angry,  not  with  that  kind  of
anger  which  fills  the  bosoms  of  foolish
men  and  women  ;  but  that  principle
of  justice  which  burns  in  the  bosom
of  the  Almighty,  burned  in  the  bosom
of  Moses,  and  he  threw  down  the
tables  of  the  covenant  which  he  had
brought  from  Mount  Sinai,  and  they
were  smashed  to  pieces. He  called


for  those  on  the  Lord's  side  to  come
out  from  the  midst  of  that  company
and  stand  with  him,  at  the  same  time
commanding  them  to  gird  on  their
swords  and  put  to  death  those  who
were  not  for  the  Lord,  That  was  a
new  revelation,  and  a  curious  one,
was  it  not?  After  ail  this  had
taken  place,  the  Lord  called  Moses  a
second  time  up  into  the  mount  by
new  revelation,  and  again  gave  him
tables  of  stone  and  laws  written
thereon.  He  kept  him  there  the
second  time  forty  days  and  forty
nights,  without  eating  or  drinking
anything.  One  would  suppose  that
be  could  not  have  stood  so  long  a
period  of  fasting — eighty  days  and
eighty  nights,  forty  each  time.  When
he  had  obtained  the  tables  the  second
time  he  came  down  and  stood  before
the  children  of  Israel,  and  his  coun-
tenance shone  with  such  brightness
thnt  they  were  filled  with  fear,  and
fled  from  before  t  he  presence  of  Moses.
Tliey  could  not  endure  the  glory  of
bis  countenance,  and  they  besought
Moses  that  the  presence  of  the  Lord
might  not  be  made  manifest  in  their
midst.  "  Do  you,  Moses,  go  and
talk  with  the  Lord.  You  can  con-
|  verse  with  him,  and  let  us  know
what  the  Lord  says,  but  do  not  let
the  Lord  come  and  converse  with  us,
lest  we  be  destroyed,"  We  find  that
they  had  so  corrupted  themselves  in
the  sight  of  God  that  he,  who  would
have  delighted  to  converse  with  all
the  people,  as  one  man  talks  with
another,  was  obliged  to  hide  his  pre-
sence from  them,  and  to  seud  Muses
to  teach  them.  Moreover  their  cor-
ruptions had  become  so  great  that
the  Lord,  in  his  wrath,  swore  that
they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest.
This  was  made  known  to  them  by
new  revelation  while  in  the  wilder-
ness, or  they  never  could  have  learned
it.  The  Lord  also  informed  them
that  he  would  not  go  up  in  the  midst


106  JOURNAL  OF

of  their  camps.  Said  he,  *'  I  will
not  go  up  in  the  midst  of  this  people,
because  they  have  corrupted  t hem-
ic] ves  in  my  sight,  lest  I  break  forth
and  consume  them  in  a  moment;"
ft  hut,"  said  he,  **I  will  send  an  an-
gel before  you,  and  you  must  hearken
to  his  voice,  but  my  presence  shall
not  go  with  yon,  you  are  Urn  corrupt."
By  and  by  we  find  that  an  angt'l  was
ltd  with  them,  and  a  cloud  by  day,
and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by
night,  guidtd  all  their  camps.  The
voice  and  presence  of  the  Lord  were
made  manifest  to  M  mi  Moses

conversed  with  the  Lord  as  one  man
talks  with  another,  and  daring  forty
years  in  the  wilderness  he  from  time
to  time  received  revelations  and
communications  to  guide  the  people.
Do  you  not  see  that  under  these  cir-
cumstances, during  the  whole  of  that,
forty  yeans,  there  was  not  one  year —
probably  not  one  month,  and  it  may
be,  not  one  day  but  what  new  reve-
lation was  necessary  ?  The  code
of  laws  given  on  Mount  Sinai  was
not  sufficient  without  new  revela-
tion.

We  might  trace  the  history  of  the
people  of  God,  if  we  bad  time,  but
I  see  we  have  not,  from  the  days  of
Moses  to  the  days  of  Joshua,  Gideon,
Samuel,  Barak  and  various  other
ancient  worthies,  all  of  whom  re-
ceived revelation.  If  we  come  to
the  days  of  Gideon  we  find  that  he
was  a  man  who  had  seventy  sous,
and  how  many  daughters,  I  do  not
know.  The  Loid  conversed  with
Gideon  and  sent  an  angel  to  him  to
tell  him  that  he  would  raise  him  up
as  a  mighty  man  of  valor,  to  go  forth  in
his  might  and  in  his  strength  to  deliver
his  people  Israel  from  bondage.  We
might  relate  ail  these  things  to  show
forth  that  the  bondage  or  the  children
of  Israel  called  forth  new  revelation
from  heaven,  and  that  because  of  it
tho  Lord  spoke  to  and  commanded


DISCOURSES.

his  servants  what  to  do  for  the  de-
liverance of  that  people;  and  if  he
called  upon  a  man  who  had  so  many
wives  and  children,  he  did  not  con-
sider that  that  man  was  a  criminal
and  unworthy  of  receiving  commu-
nication from  him,  but  on  the  con-
trary, it  is  clear  that  the  Lord
considered  him  the  most  worthy  man
in  all  Israel,  and  on  that  account  he
sent  his  angel  to  him.  And  this
noted  polyganTst,  of  all  the  thousands
of  Israel  was  entrusted  with  the
mission  uf  delivering  that  people
from  their  enemies.  God  wrought
special  miracles  by  his  hand  in  order
to  accomplish  this  great  work,  though
he  was  a  polygaraist.

But  we  will  pass  on,  and  come
down  for  some  two  thousand  years  to
the  days  of  our  Savior.  One  would
naturally  suppose  that  when  the  Son
of  God  himself  came  from  his  father's
glory  to  dwell  here  on  the  earth  in
the  flesh,  and  be^an  to  teach  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  things
of  his  Father,  that  during  the  three
and  a  halt  years  of  Jus  ministry
among  the  people,  they,  of  course,
could  say,  "  Now  we  do  not  need  any
more  revelation,  we  have  enough ;
the  Son  of  God,  of  whom  our  law,
its  ordinances  and  sacrifices  were
typical,  has  at  lust  come  and  has
offered  himself  on  the  cross,  and
having  finished  the  work  given  him
to  do,  is  there  any  more  need  lor  new
revelation?"  The  conduct  of  tho
Apostles  is  t lie  best  answer  that  can
be  given  to  this,  lor  Wf  hud  them,
like  all  their  predecessors,  from  the
days  of  Adam  until  their  day,  seek-
ing from  time  to  time  for  guidance
by  new  revelation,  We  read  of
Philip  going  to  the  city  of  Samaria,
preaching  there  a*hile  and  bap-
tizing meti  and  women ;  but  not
having  the  authority  to  administer  in
the  higher  ordinance  of  the  laying
on  of  hands,  the  Christians  at  Jeru-


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC.


107


Salem,  hearing  that  Samaria  had
received  the  Word  of  God,  sect  Pete r
and  John  to  administer  the  ordinance
of  the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  i
higher  baptism  of  fire  and  the  Holy  j
Ghost.  When  Peter  and  John
reached  Samaria  they  found  there
was  great  joy  among  the  people,  for
many  of  them  had  been  cm  verted  ;
but  their  joy  was  nut  because  of  the
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  tor  the
next  verse  says,  **  For  as  yet  he  was
fallen  on  none  of  |hem  "  only  they
}nd  been  baptizfd  in  the  name  ot  the
Lord  Jesus,  but  neither  man  nor  wo*
man  bad  received  the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  Apos-
tles laid  their  hands  on  them  and  the
Holy  Ghost  fell  on  them.

Now,  here  was  Philip  in  the  city  of
Samaria.  He  had  preached  the  Gos-
pel there,  where  should  he  go  next  ?
He  had  probably  -fulfilled  all  the
duties  required  of  him  there.  He
was  not  hired  to  preach  in  that  city
for  so  much  a  year,
to  the  end  of  his  days.  No,  he
needed  a  new  revelation.  All  the
revelations  that  Jesus  had  given
were  not  sufficient  to  guide  Philip  in
regard  to  his  next  duty,  the  Lord,
therefore  sent  an  angel  to  him  to  tell
him  to  go  down  into  the  south  conn*
try,  He  never  would  have  learned
this  fact  by  any  former  revelation.
While  Philip  was  on  his  way  to  the
south  he  saw  a  chariot  before  him,
and  here  again  a  new  revelation  was
given  to  him— "  Draw  thyself  near
to  that  chariot,"  He  did  so,  and
having  taught  the  Gospel  to  its  occu-
pant, as  they  rode  along,  they  came
to  some  water  and,  the  man  having
belie  veil  what  Philip  had  said,  wanted
to  be  baptized.  The  chariot  stood
still,  and  Philip  and  the  eunuch  both
went  down  into  the  water,  and  the
eunuch  was  baptized,  and  they  came
forth  out  of  the  water.  NuW  then,
how  could  Philip  know  but  what  it


was  his  duty  on  that  occasion  to  still
speak  with  the  eunuch,  get  i"fo  the
carriage  and  ride  along  with  him
and  give  him  further  instructions?
But  no,  the  Lord  had  something  else
for  him  to  do,  and  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  caught  away  Philip,  and  he
'found  himself  at  Azutus.  I  do  not
!  know  whether  or  not  this  Spirit
actually  caught  up  Philip,  body  and
spirit,  and  wafted  him  quickly  from
the  place  where  the  eunuch  was  bap-
tized to  the  city  of  Azutus. 1  should

■I

not  be  surprised,  however,  if  this
was  the  case,  for  we  have  some-
thing very  similar  in  the  Old  Tes-
tament Scriptures,  and  the  promise
is  that  they  who  wait  on  the  Lord
shall  mount  as  it  were  on  eagle's
wings,  and  they  shall  run  and  not  be
weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint,  I
do  not  know  but  this  was  the  case
\>ith  Philip,  At  any  rate,  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  carries  peopte,
by  new  revelation,  whithersoever  he
will.

i  On  another  occasion  we  find  that
Barnabas  and  Saul,  not  having  in-
quired of  the  Lord  concerning  their
duties,  but  they  probably  had  been
reading  the  Old  Scriptures,  which
were  sufficient  for  instruction  for
righteousness,  and  to  make  the  man
of  God  thoroughly  perfect  to  #»vp*y
good  work.  I  say  that  probably
Barnabas  and  Saul  had  been  reading
these,  and  having  failed  to  inquire  of
the  Lord,  and  to  get  new  revelation,
they  started  out  with  the  design  of
going  to  a  certain  city,  but  the  Lord
checked  them.  Said  he,  "  Do  not
go  there  !"  How  important  it  was
to  get  new  revelation  !  "  Do  notyuu
go  to  that  city,  I  have  another  work
for  you  to  perforin  j*  and  they  were
'  then  told  where  to  go.  Talk  to  the
Christian  ministers  to-day,  or  to  any
that  have  lived  for  centuries  past,
and  if  they  had  made  up  their  mn:ds
to  go  to  any  place,  they  would  never


108


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


think  of  the  Lord  checking  them,  or
forbidding  them  to  go,  by  new  reve-
lation, for  they  all  say  that  the  canon
of  Scripture  is  full,  and  that  no  more
new  revelation  is  needed.

Many  other  instances  of  a  similar
character  might  be  named,  bat  time
will  not  permit.  We  find,  however,
that,  after  all  that  God  revealed
through  Jesus,  and  to  (he  Apo^Hes,
for  ninety-six  years  in  the  first
century  of  the  Christ  inn  era,  th^y
had  not  enough,  and  the  Lord  then
gave  the  book  of  John's  prophecy  on
the  Isle  of  Pat m 08.  John  was  com-
manded  to  write  it  on  parchment,
and  in  this  book  a  great  mauy  now
revelations  were  promised  to  be  given
in  the  latter  times.  One  of  tbeee
was  that  an  angel  should  come  from
heaven  having  the  everlasting  Gospel


this  very  book,  which  prove  that  God
would  again  make  known  his  will  to
the  children  of  men  in  latter  times;
that  he  would  again  give  new  reve-
lation, not  lor  the  benefit  of  one  or
two  individuals,  but  lor  the  benefit
of  his  creatures  universally*

Notwithstanding  we  have  the  Gos-
ptl  written  here  in  this  book,  yet
that  Gospel,  without  the  power  and
authority  to  administer  its  ordinances,
ifl  a  dead  letter.  We  miu'ht  believe
the  Gospel,  we  might  believe  that
Jesus  is  the  Christ  by  reading  this
book,  we  could  repent  of  our  sins  by
reading  the  proclamation  of  repent-
ance here  recorded ;  but  we  could
not  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
uur  sins,  neither  could  we  have  hands
Irt i  l  upon  us  for  the  baptism  of  the

IT m  m  >i  #  .  m  —  *  _


  — .  Holy  Ghost  by  reading,  and  that  is

to  preach  to  all  people,  nations,  kin-  I  part  and  portion  of  the  Gospel  of  the
dreds  and  tongues,  declaring  that  Son  of  God,  just  as  much  as  the
the  hour  of  God's  judgment  had  ;  written  word  that  proclaims  these
come. Here  was  a  promise  or  pre- things  to  the  children  of  men.  Take


7


diction  that  a  new  revelation  should
be  given  by  an  angel  from  heaven,
and  so  important  should  it  be  that
it  should  be  proclaimed  to  every
creature  under  heaven.  A  great
many  people  say,  "  We  have  the
everlasting  Gospel  in  this  book — the
Bible — called  the  canon  of  Scripture,
collected  together  by  the  monks,
cardinals,  bishops  and  great  men  of
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  some
Umr  centuries  after  Christ.  They
bound  together  in  this  volume  all
the  books  they  had  that  they  did  not
condemn,  and  they  declared  that
this  was  enough,  and  there  was  no
need  of  the  Lord  saying  anything
more.  But  these  very  Scriptures
themselves  contradict  their  compilers
—those  wicked  men  who  sat  in  judg-
ment on  the  word  of  God,  setting
aside  tli is  book  and  that  book,  this
manuscript  and  that  manuscript,  and
binding  the  remainder  together.  ^1
say  that  they  put  some  things  into


away  the  power  and  authority  to
administer  that  word,  and  you  at
once  leave  the  dead  letter  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  it  would  benefit  none  ot  the
children  of  men,  so  far  as  obeying  it
is  concerned.  They  might  be  bene-
fited by  repenting  and  believing,  and
so  on,  but  they  could  not  embrace
the  Gospel,  they  could  not  get  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  for  "except  a
man  is  born  of  the  water  and  ot"  the
Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom
of  God."  You  could  not  be  born  of
the  water  unless  there  was  a  man
authorized  by  new  revelation  to  ad-
minister the  baptism  of  water,  nei-
ther could  you  receive  the  baptism
of  the  Holy  Ghost  only  by  the  ordi-
nance God  has  instituted  ;  heuce  the
necessity  of  the  restoration  of  the
authority  to  administer  the  ordinan-
ces of  the  Guspel,  and  this  is  why
God  has  restored  it  after  the  e  irth
has  been  without  it  for  seventeen
hundred  years. No  man  among  all


REVELATION  FROM  HEAVEN,  ETC


109


the  nations,  kindreds  and  tongues  of
the  earth,  daring  that  time,  has  had
this  authority,  neither  the  authority
to  administer  the  Lord's  supper,
which  is  a  part  of  the  Gospel,  neither
in  any  other  ordinance.

God  having  foreseen  this  long
period  of  darkness,  foretold  by  the
mouth  of  the  Revelator,  St.  John,
that  he  would  send  an  angel  from
heaven  with  the  everlasting  Gospel,
and  when  that  angel  came  and  com-
mitted that  Gospel  to  man  on  the
earth,  it  should  be  proclaimed  to  all
people  under  heaven,  the  same  as  the
Elders  of  this  Church  are  now  doing
it.  The  Book  of  Mormon,  contain-
ing the  everlasting  Gospel  as  it  was
published  to  the  ancient  inhabitants
of  America,  has  been  brought  forth
by  the  power  of  God,  and  his  ser-
vants have  been  sent  forth  to  preach
it,  and,  not  only  to  preach  it,  hut,
having  authority  to  administer  its
ordinances;  yet  the  world  tell  us  we
need  no  more  revelation,  we  have
enough  if  we  only  follow  the  Scrip-
tares,  which  Paul  said  to  Timothy
were  sufficient  to  save  him.  But  in
the  Christian  world  yon  can  not  be
saved  by  following  the  Scriptures,
from  the  fact  that  you  cannot  follow
them  without  authority  from  God  to
administer  the  ordinances.  You  be
baptized  by  a  man  having  no  autho-
rity by  new  revelation  from  heaven,
and  your  baptism  is  illegal,  and  your
pretended  adoption  into  the  kingdom
of  God  is  not  acknowledged  in  hea-
ven, for  God  has  not  authorized  the
administrator,  and  what  he  has  done
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Ghost,  cannot  be  sealed  and  re-
corded in  heaven  for  your  benefit*  J
No  wonder,  then,  that  the  world  has
dwelt  in  darkness  for  so  many  centu-
ries, for  the  earth  has  become  so  cor-
rupt, and  the  heavens  have  ap- ,
parently  become  as  brass  over
the  heads  of  the  nations. No  Pro-


phet, no  angel,  no  inspiration,  no
Revelator,  no  man  of  God  to  say,
u  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God1'  unto  the
people.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the
Lord,  before  the  great  day  of  the
coming  of  his  beloved  Son  from  the
heavens,  should  send  an  angel  to  pre-
pare the  way  before  his  face !  This
he  has  done,  and  the  proclamation  is
going  forth,  saying  to  all  people,
nations  and  tongues,  "  God  has  sent
an  angel,  and  he  has  sent  him  to  pre-
pare you  and  us  for  the  great  day  of
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  J  Ian,  where-
in there  will  be  more  revelations
given  than  have  ever  been  given  in
all  former  dispensations."

Tell  about  the  canon  of  Scripture
being  complete*  what  nonsense !
What  absurdity  !  Where  is  there
any  proof  of  any  such  thing  ?  God
lias  yet  to  give  revelation  enough  to
fill  the  earth  with  his  knowledge  as
the  waters  cover  the  great  deep.  He
,  has  yet  to  pour  out  his  spirit  upon
all  flesh  that  dwells  on  the  fane  of
the  earth,  and  make  a  revelator,
prophet,  or  prophetess  of  every  man
and  woman  living,  and  if  all  their
revelations  are  written,  this  book,
i  the  Bible,  will  be  like  a  primer  com-
pared  with  them.  "  In  t  he  last  days,"
saith  God,  by  the  mouth  of  the  Pro-
phet Joel,  UI  will  pour  out  my  spirit
upon  all  flesh.  Your  son£  and  your
daughters  shall  prophecy,  and  upon
my  servants  and  my  handmaidens  in
those  days  will  1  pour  out  of  my
Spirit,  and  they  shall  prophecy*
Your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams
and  your  young  men  shall  see
visions.'*  Supposing  they  write  their
dreams  as  Daniel  wrote  his,  and  sup-
pose they  write  their  visions  as  Isaiah
wrote  his*  and  suppose  they  write
their  propherics  as  all  the  Prophets
have  written  theirs,  would  they
not  be  just  as  sacred  as  this  can-
on of  Scripture  ?  I  say  they  would.
I  would  be  bound  just  as  much  to


110  JOURNAL  OF

receive  the  revelations  of  each  man
and  woman  among  all  flesh  as  I
would  those  of  a  person  who  lived
two  or  three  thousand  years  ago.  A
revelation  given  to  a  living  man  in
my  day  is  just  as  sacred  as  one  given
to  a  man  who  has  been  d  ad  some  I
tli rue  thousand  years.  Gud  is  a  con-
sistent  being,  find  he  reveals  himself
according  to  hia  own  mind  arid  will,
and  in  the  last  dispensation  he  will
coir  in ue  to  reveal  line  upon  line,
precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little
an  i  there  a  little,  bringing  forth  a
record  here,  unfolding  the  history  of
another  people  there,  bringing  to
light  the  hi  hie  of  the  ten  tribes  who
have  been  absent  from  the  land  of  |
Canaan  for  almost  three  thousand
years.  Their  bible  has  got  to  be
brought  to  light,  and  when  they  re-
turn they  will  bring  their  written
revelations,  prophecies,  visions  and
dreams  with  them,  and  we  shall  have
the  bible  of  the  ten  t rites,  as  well  as
the  bible  of  the  ancient  Israelites
who  lived  on  this  continent,  and  the
bible  of  the  Jews  on  the  eastern  con*
tinent,  and  these  bibles  will  be  united
in  one,  and  even  then  the  people  will
not  have  enough  revelation.  No,
every  man  and  every  woman  will
have  to  be  a  re  vela  tor  and  prophet,
and  the  knowledge  and  glory  of  God
will  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters
cover  the  bosom  of  the  great  deep.
And  by  and  by,  as  a  kind  of  climax
to  all  this,  the  revelation  of  the  Lord
Jesus  himself  will  take  place  from
heaven  in  flaming  fire,  to  take  ven-
geance on  them  that  know  not  God,
and  that  obey  not  the  Gospel.  That
will  be  a  revelation  that  the  wicked
can  not  abide,  a  revelation  too  great


DISCOURSES,

for  them,  and  that  will  pierce  them
to  their  inmost  soul.  That  will  be  a
revelation  that  will  consurne  them  in
their  wickedness,  as  stubble  is  con-
sumed before  the  devouring  flame,
and  he  will  reign  here,  king  of  kings
and  lord  of  lords  for  a  thousand
years.

Do  you  suppose  that  he  will  give
no  new  revelation  < luring  that  time,
but  that  he  will  sit  on  his  throne  like
the  idols  in  some  of  the  heathen  na-
tions? Do  you  suppose  that  the
Lord  Jesus,  that  intelligent  beirg,
by  whom  the  Father  made  the  worlds,
is  coming  her.3  to  reign  king  of  kings,
and  to  sit  down  on  Ids  throne  in  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  upon  his
throne  in  his  temple  in  Zion,  and
ahi  le  there  as  a  statue  from  genera-
tion  to  generation,  for  a  thousand
years,  and  when  the  people  come  op
to  ask  him  a  question  that  he  will
not  say  a  word,  only  to  tell  them  they
have  enough  ?  Do  you  suppose  this
will  be  the  case?  On  no,  my  friends,
the  Lord  Jesus  will  converse  the
whole  thousand  years  with  his  peo-
ple, and  give  them  instruction.  He
will  reign  over  the  house  of  David,
over  the  children  of  Israel,  over  the
twelve  tribes,  over  Zion  and  over
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  that
is  over  all  who  are  spared  in  that
day,  giving  counsel  here,  instruc-
tions yonder,  revealing  something
there,  and  so  on,  and  the  amount
of  revelation  that  will  l>e  given  du-
ring the  thousand  years  will  no
doubt  be  ten  thousand  times  more
than  is  contained  in  this  Bible,  and
yet  say  the  world  "  No  more  reve-
lation !  "


THOSE  WHO  HEAR  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  HI


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the Sew  T^berna^le, Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon Iuly  14,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evam.)

THOSE  WHO  HEAR  THE  GOSPEL  MUST  OBEY  IT,  OR  THEY  CANNOT  EE

SAVED  BY  IT.


I  will  read  a  portion  of  the  3rd
chaplvr  of  St.  John  : —

*'  There  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees,
named  Niccxlemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews  :

The  same  came  to  Jesus  by  ni^ht,  and
naiil  unto  hirat.  Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou
art  a  teacher  come  from  Gt*d  :  for  no  man
can  Jo  theae  miracles  that  thou  doest,  ex-
cept God  be  with  hiin.

Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a
man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  king-
dom of  God.

Nicoderous  saith  unto  him,  How  can  a
man  be  l*om  when  he  is  old  ?  can  he  enter
the  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb,
and  be  born  ?

Jesus  answered,  Verily,  verily,  I  say
unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water
and  0/  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  God.

That  which  is  born  of  the  fleah  is  flesh  ;
and  that  which  is  l>orn  of  the  Spirit  is
spirit.

Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye
must  be  born  ajjain.

The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and
thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst
not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it
goeth  :  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the
Spirit*

Nicodemus  answered  and  said  unto  him,
How  can  these  things  be!

Jesus  answered  and  aaid  unto  him,  Art
thou  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not
these  things  ?

Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  We  speak
that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have
seen  ;  and  ye  receive  not  our  witness.

If  I  have  toid  you  earthly  things,  and  ye
believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell
you  0/  heavenly  things  T9

iii  listening  this  morning  to  the
remarks  of  Elder  Schonfeldt,  on  the
everlasting  Gospel  as  preached  by  the
Elders  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ


of  Latter-day  Saints,  he  stated  in
substance  that  none  could  receive
salvation  outside  this  Church,  jmd
outside  the  Priesthood  which  God
Ltd  restored  to  the  Church,  He  did
not  explain — had  not  time,  probably,
or  his  mind  was  carried  away  on
some  other  points,  how,  or  why  it  is
that  salvation  can  only  be  obtained
in  the  way  that  God,  our  heavenly
Father,  has  prescribed.  Many,  doubt-
less, who  listen  to  the  Elders  of  this
Church,  when  speaking  upon  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation,  have
corne  to  the  conclusion,  wheu  they
have  not  thoroughly  understood  the
principles  and  the  system  as  they  are
sot  forth,  that  we  are  an  exceedingly
exclusive  and  uncharitable  people  for
believing  that  only  a  very  few  out  of
the  large  mass  of  human  beings  who
have  puupled  the  earth  will  be  saved,
while  the  great  majority — those  who
are  outside  the  pale  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints —
will  go  down  to  an  endless  hell.

The  reason,  probably,  that  these
ideas  are  entertained  by  many  who
have  heard  our  Elders  preach,  is  be
cause  they  have  drawn  deductions
from  the  preaching  they  have  heard,
imagining  that  our  views  of  the  say-
ings of  the  Scriptures  corresponded
with  theirs,  and  that  it  necessarily
followed  that  all  who  failed  to  render


obedience  to  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel,  as  we  preach  them,  would  go
down  to  that  endless  hell  in  which
so  many  of  the  sects  believe.  But
any  person  entertaining  such  ideas  j
does  as,  or  rather  the  Gospel  that  we
preach,  great  injustice.  We  believe
that  God,  our  heavenly  Father,  is  a
God  of  perfect  justice,  a  God  of
mercy,  a  God  tilled  with  long-suffering
and  tinder  compassion  towards  all
the  works  of  his  hands.  We  could
not,  with  our  views  respecting  the
character  of  God,  believe  as  our
friends  imagine  with  regard  to  the
destiny  of  those  who  die  outside  of
this  Church,  for  that  would  be  in-
compatible  with  and  contiary  to  all
that  we  understand  concerning  the
character  of  our  God — the*  God  who
is  revealed  in  the  Bible,  and  the
Father  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ.

We  believe,  as  Jesus  said,  that
"this  is  condemnation,  that  light
has  come  into  the  world,  and  men
love  darkness  rather  than  light  be-
cause their  deeds  are  evil."  This
is  the  condemnation  under  which
mankind  will  suffer — the  condemna-
tion will  follow  the  rejection  of  light
by  those  to  whom  ilLy  be  -fin
every  nation  and  age  of  the  world ;
in  other  words,  we  believe  that  where
there  is  no  law,  there  is  no  trans-
gression— where  men  and  women
have  not  had  the  Gospel,  or  the  prin-
ciples of  salvation,  communicated
unto  them,  they  cannot  be  held  ac-
countable for  disobeying  the  same
It  is  a  truth  that  has  been  enforced
by  all  who  have  understood  the  Gos-
pel, that  those  to  whom  the  Gospel
is  revealed  mast  obey  it,  or  con-
dom nut  ion  follows.  Condemnation
did  nut  fall  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  antediluvian  world  until  Noah
had  taught  unto  them  the  will  of
God  Moah,  commanded  of  Gods
went  forth  as  a  preacher  of  right-


eousness, declaring  to  the  people  the
judgments  that  were  about  to  come
upon  them;  and  God  so  inspired,
directed  and  strengthened  him  that
he  was  enabled  to  warn  the  people
to  such  an  extent  that  they  were
left  without  excuse,  so  much  so  that
God  felt  justified  in  sending  the  flood
upon  the  earth.

This  has  been  the  course  the  Al-
mighty has  pursued  in  every  age
when  his  judgments  have  been
poured  out  upon  the  people — he  has
sent  Prophets  to  warn  them  and  to
tell  them  how  they  might  escape  the
calamities  threatened,  This  was  so
with  the  Jews,  unto  whom  the  Son
of  God  came.  He  proclaimed  the
Gospel  unto  them,  and  warned  them
of  coming  judgments,  and  he  sent
his  disciples  through  all  Jewry,  doing
the  same*  Yon  all  remember  the
Saviors  pathetic  lament  over  Jeru-
salem, when  he  s^id  he  would  have
gathered  her  people  as  a  hen  gather-
eth  her  chickens  under  her  wing,  but
they  would  not  receive  him  as  a
messenger  of  salvation,  as  the  heir
and  Son  of  God,  empowered  to  im-
part unto  them  principles,  obedience
to  which  would  have  secured  them
life  here  and  hereafter.  He  also
pronounced  a  woe  upon  many  cities
of  that  land,  and  said  that  if  the
mighty  works  which  had  been  done
in  them  had  been  done  in  Sodom
and  Gomorrah,  their  people  would
have  repented.  But  the  Jews  hard-
ened their  hearts,  and  not  onlv  re-
jected  his  testimony,  but  they  shed
his  blood,  and  invoked  condemna-
tion on  their  own  heads  for  doing  so.
History  tells  us  that  the  judgments
which  Christ  and  his  Apostles  had
declared  did  descend  upon  the  Jew-
ish nation,  Jerusalem  was  taken,
the  temple  thrown  down,  and  the
people  carried  into  captivity,  and  the
desolation  and  dreadful  woes  that  had
been  predicted  by  the  Son  of  God


THOSE  WHO  HEAR


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


were  all  fulfilled  upon  that  genera-
tion of  Jews,

In  these  instances  we  see  that  God
sent  messengers  to  warn  the  people
before  his  judgments  were  poured
out  upon  them  ;  and  we  also  learn
that  when  the  Gospel  is  proclaimed
by  those  having  authority,  if  the
people  reject  it  they  are  held  to  a
strict  accountability  therefor,  aud
condemnation  inevitably  follows —
there  is  no  escape  from  it,  but  it
falls  in  all  its  severity  upon  those
who  reject  the  message  of  life  and
salvation  when  proclaimed  by  those
having  authority  to  proclaim  it.  A
perusal  of  this  book  (the  Bible)  will
convince  all  who  believe  in  it,  that  it
is  a  most  dangerous  thin?,  and  at-
tended with  the  moat  terrible  conse-
quences, to  reject  the  message  that
God  gives  to  his  authorized  servants
to  proclaim  to  their  fellow-creatures.
There  is  no  instance  of  which  we
read,  from  the  beginning  of  the  book
to  the  close  thereof,  where  judgments
did  not  fall  upon  a  people  if  they  did
not  repent  of  their  sins  and  obey  the
message  sent  unto  them  by  God.
VbJ  I  saj  repent,  I  mean  .  com-
plete  forsaking  of  sin,  and  turning
from  it  truly  and  sincerely ;  in  no
other  way  can  mankind  escape  the
judgments  and  calamities  threatened,
and  of  which  they  are  warned,

lu  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  there  were  certain  conditions
revealed.  Mankind  were  required  to
obey  a  certain  form  of  doctrine  de-
clared unto  them,  and  when  they  did
obey  they  received  the  blessings.
But  I  have  often  thought  when  tra-
veling abroad  in  the  nations,  how
different  it  is  in  our  day  from  what
it  was  anciently.  In  our  day  we  see
countless  numbers  of  elegant  spires
pointing  to  heaven,  and  legions  of
men  preaching  what  they  call  the
Gospel,  but  the  wickedness  of  the
people is  unchecked.  Anciently,

No.  8.


|  when  God  sent  his  authorized  ser-
vants to  proclaim  his  Gospel  to  tho
people,  salvation,  on  the  one  hand,
followed  obedience,  or,  on  the  other,
condemnation  followed  rejection.  And
these  effects  did  not  linger,  they  were
not  deferred  for  centuries,  but  if  the
people  did  not  repent  after  hearing
the  message  of  the  servants  of  God,
great  calamities  quickly  followed.
They  could  not  listen  to  the  autho-
rized servants  of  God  for  any  length
of  time,  and  harden  their  hearts
against  their  testimony  and  warn-
ings, without  speedy  judgment  fol-
lowing. This  was  the  case  from  the
days  of  Noah  to  the  days  of  John
the  Revelator,  and  it  will  he  the  case
in  every  generation  when  the  Gospel
of  the  Son  of  God,  in  its  purity  and
fallness,  i8  proclaimed  to  the  people,
and  when  God  has  a  Church  and
Priesthood  upon  the  earth  which  he
recognizes.  He  is  the  King  of  the
earth,  he  is  the  Creator  of  all  its
inhabitants,  and  when  he  calls  upon
the  people,  and  requires  them  to  do
anything,  they  must  promptly  com-
ply, or  suffer  the  terrible  consequences
of  their  disobedience.

In  the  Gospel  of  Jesos  Christ,  as  I
have  already  remarked,  there  are
certain  conditions  with  which  the
people  are  expected  to  comply;  if
they  do  they  receive  the  blessings,
if  they  do  not  they  receive  condem-
nation. Jesus  and his  Apostles

|  taught  that  it  was  essential  that  man-
kind should  believe  in  him  as  the
Son  of  God — as  the  only  name  given
under  heaven  by  which  men  could  be
saved.  All  mankind  were  therefore
required  to  believe  and  to  have  faith
in  him,  and  to  approach  the  Father
in  his  name.  That  was  the  first  con-
dition of  the  Gospel  as  taught  by
Jesus  and  his  Apostles.

The  next  condition  was  repentance.
All  who  had  committed  sin  and  were
guilty  of  wrong  of  any  kind,  were

Vol.  XV.


114


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


required  to  repent  of  that  wrong  and
to  live  pure  and  holy  lives.  They
were  not  only  required  to  be  sorry —
to  have  coiuyuijctionfcf  of  conscience
for  the  commisMon  of  evil?  but  they
were  required  to  forsake  it  entirely
and  to  become  new  creatures.  If
they  had  been  dishonest,  untruthful,
un  virtuous,  profane;  if  they  had
taken  advantage  of  their  neighbor,
borne  false  witness  against  him,  or
encroached  upon  his  rights;  if,  in
fact,  they  bad  done  anything  con-
trary to  the  dictates  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  or  of  their  consciences  when
enlightened  by  that  Spirit,  they
were  required  to  repent  of  and  for-
sake the  same.

The  third  condition  of  the  Gospel
was,  that  parties  who  had  believed  in
Jesus,  and  had  repented  of  their  sins,
should  take  some  step  for  the  re-
mission of  them.  Sow  the  penalty
of  the  sin  th  if  our  father  Adam  com-
mitted was  death — "  In  the  day  that
thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely
die"  was  the  proclamation  of  the
Creator;  nil  1  wheb  Adam  sinned  he
paid  the  pemdty  and  died,  and  en*
tailed  death  upon  every  generation
of  his  posterity,  and  that  sleep  of
death  would  have  been  eternal  had  it
not  been  for  the  death  of  the  Son  of
God.  He  cin.e  as  the  Redeemer  of
the  world,  lie  died  for  the  sin  that
had  beeu  committed  by  Adam,  he
atoned  for  it,  and  thus  ensured  to  all
the  family  of  man  redemption  from
the  grave  or  a  resurrection  of  their
mortal  bodies.  .But  he  gave  unto  his
disciples  a  commandment  that  they
should  preach  remission  of  sins,  and
that  they  should  administer  an  ordi-
nance by  which  all  obedient  believers
could  obtain  remission  of  sins,  and
that  ordinance  was  baptism,  "  Not
the  putting  away/  as  the  Apostle
Faul  says, 11  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,
but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience
<  towards  God," They  were  required


to  submit  to  this  ordinance,  Jesus
taught  it,  and  he,  himself,  although
admittedly  a  pure  being,  set  the  ex-
ample  of  obedience  to  it.  When
John  was  baptizing  in  the  river  Jor-
dan, Jesus  went  to  him  and  requested
baptism  at  his  hand.  John  remon-
strated with  him,  saying,  "  I  have
need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and  com-
es t  thou  to  mer"  But  Jesus  said,
"Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,  for  thus  it
beeometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteous-
ness/' and  he  went  down  into  the
water  and  was  baptized  by  John,  and
the  tirst  evidence  that  we  have  in  the
Scriptures  of  his  recognition  by  the
Father  was  on  that  occasion,  for  after
he  had  been  baptized  the  Holy  Spirit
descended  upon  him,  and  a  voice  was
heard  bearing  testimony  to  the  as-
sembled multitude  that  Jesus  was
the  beloved  Son  of  the  Father.  He
therefore  set  the  example  himself,  so
that  it  could  not  be  said,  though  sin-
less, that  he  had  not  complied  with
the  ordinance  which  he  required  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  parth  to  sub-
mit to,  and  which  the  disciples  ad-
ministered to  all  repentant  believers.

This  prepared  them  for  another
ordinance  which,  we  find  in  the  Scrip-
tures, was  administered  to  all  who
had  complied  with  the  conditions  of
the  Gospel  which  I  have  named « —
namely,  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  have
been  told  repeatedly  that  this  ordi-
nance was  to  be  administered  only  to
those  who  were  intended  for  the
ministry — it  was  not  designed  for
the  members  of  the  Church  called
laymen.  A  careful  perusal  of  the
Scriptures,  however,  does  not  sustain
this  idea ;  but  on  the  contrary,  it
very  clearly  sustains  the  idea  that
this  ordinance  had  to  be  administered
to  every  one  who  joined  the  Church,
and  that  without  it  the  Holy  Ghost
was  not  bestowed  as  a  gift*  To  prove
■  that  this  is  correct,  you  have  only  to


THOSE  WHO  HEAIl


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


115


read  the  8th  chapter  of  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  where  yon  will  find  an
account  of  the  labors  of  Philip  in  the
city  of  Samni  ia+  It  seems  that  Philip
had  power  and  authority  to  preach
the  Gospel  and  to  baptize  men  and
■women,  but  not  to  administer  all  the
ordinances,  1  have  the  idea  that  lie
had  the  same  authority  as  John  the
Baptist — the  authority  to  baptize,
but  not  to  confer  the  Holy  Ghost.
We  find  that  when  John  was  preach-
ing, he  said  that  there'  would  one
come  after  him,  whose  shoes  he  was
not  worthy  to  bear,  who  would  bap*
tize  them  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
with  fire.  John  baptized  with  water,
but  he  did  not  confer  any  further
gift  or  bless  in*: — he  had  not  the  au-
thority so  to  do,  Philip  seemed  to
have  the  same  authority,  for  the  sa-
cred writer  says  that  when  the  Apos-
tles of  Jerusalem  heard  that  Samaria
had  received  the  Gospel  at  the  bands
of  Philip,  they  sent  unto  them  two
Apostles,  for  as  yet,  although  the
Samaritans  had  l>een  baptized  with
water,  the  Holy  Ghost  had  not  de-
cended  upon  any  of  them;  and  we
are  told  that  when  the  Apostles  came
unto  them,  they  prayed  with  them,
and  laid  their  hands  upon  them,  and
they  received  the  Holy  Ghost  No-
thing is  said  about  the  hands  of  the
Apostles  beinpf  laid  upon  those  only
who  were  intended  for  the  ministry,
but  the  ordinance  was  administered
to  all  who  had  received  baptism  at
the  hands  oi  Philip,  without  distinc-
tion of  sex  or  station.

Another  instance  in  support  of
this  view  we  Hi  id  in  the  19th  of  the
Acts.  We  retfd  there  that  when
Paul  was  passing  through  the  upper
coasts  he  came  to  Ephesus  and  he
found  there  certain  disciples  who  said
they  had  been  baptized  unto  John's
baptism,  but  when  he  asked  them  if
they  bad  received  the  Holy  Ghost
they  said  they  had  not  so  much  as


heard  of  it  Then,  we  are  informed,
they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of
the  Lord,  and  when  Paul,  who  had
the  necessary  authority,  had  laid  his
hands  upon  thern  they  received  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  spake  with  tongues
and  prophesied.  Many  other  proofs
on  this  point  might  be  adduced,  but
these  are  sufficient.  From  what  has
been  said  we  learn  that  the  first
principle  of  the  Gospel  is  belief  in
Jesus  Christ;  the  second  principle  is
repentance  of  sin,  and  the  third,
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins.

**  Ah  1 "  says  one,  a  Cannot  I  come
to  the  foot  of  the  cross  and,  through
the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus,  have  my
sins  washed  away  without  baptism  p"
I  doubt  not  that  hundreds,  in  vari-
ous nations  and  generations,  who  have
been  in  ignorance  of  the  true  Gospel,
and  far  removed  from  those  who  had
authority  to  administer  its  ordinances,
have  had  their  sins  blotted  out.  God
has  looked  in  mercy  upon  them,  and
on  account  of  their  sincerity  has
witnessed  unto  them  that  he  accepted
the  broken  spirits  and  contrite  hearts
which  they  offered  unto  him,  I  can-
not doubt  this;  but  wherever  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  preached
in  its  fullness,  none  can  obtain  the
remission  of  sins  only  in  the  way
that  God  has  pointed  out,  and  that
is  by  baptism  by  one  having  the  au-
thority from  God  to  administer  that
ordinance.

Supposing  that  I,  with  the  views
which  1  have  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  were  to-day  outside  of  the
church  of  God,  and  I  were  to  say,
"  I  will  not  be  baptized  for  the  re-
missions of  sins.  My  father  or  my
grandfather  was  a  good  Methodist,
or  a  good  Presby  terian  or  Baptist,  or
a  good  sectarian  of  some  other  de-
nomination, and  he  told  me  that  he
had  experienced  a  change  of  1  eart
and  1  believe  that  he  had  his  sins
washed  away  through  the  atoning


] .16  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  on  this
account  I  will  not  submit  to  the  or-
dinance of  baptism  which  is  preached
to  me  as  necessary  to  salvation,  but
I  will  seek  for  the  remission  of  my
sins  the  way  my  father  or  grand-
father did,"  how  do  you  think  it
would  he  with  me?  Should  I  obtain
the  remission  of  my  sins  at  the  hands
of  God  ?  There  would  be  no  remis-
sion of  sins  Tor  such  an  individual  in
this  life.  Light  has  come  into  the
world,  God  has  revealed  to  men  the
true  principle  by  which  remission  of
sins  can  be  obtained,  namely,  bap-
tism, anu  when  that  is  taught  to
them  and  they  refuse  to  obey  it,  con-
demnation follows,  and  the  blessings
will  be  withheld  which  were  granted
in  days  when,  in  ignorance,  men
taught  the  Lord  in  faith  and  humil-
ity and  with  broken  and  contrite
spirits.

We  now  come  to  the  fourth  and
last  initiatory  principle  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  Christ — the  laying  on  of
hands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  "Is  it  not  possible,"  says
one,  "  for  a  man  to  receive  the  Holy
Gho^t  without  being  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  having  hands
laid  upon  him?"  Says  the  reader
of  Scripture,  "I  recollect  that  Cor-
nelius, the  history  of  whose  conver-
sion is  contained  in  the  10th  chapter
of  the  Acts,  received  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  yet  he  was  not  baptized ;  and  if
he  did,  is  it  not  possible  fur  others
to  do  the  same?"  Let  those  who
think  so  read  the  history  very  care-
fully, and  they  will  find  that  in
bestowing  the  Holy  Ghost  upon
Cornelius  without  baptism,  God  had
a  purpose  in  view,  Cornelius  was
the  first  Gentile  unto  whom  the
Gospel  was  preached.  The  prevalent
U-]  oT  ;  niong  the  disciples,  and  one
vvhicij  Uiej%  being  Jews,  had  inheri-
ted through  the  traditions  of  their
fa!  hers,  was  that  the  Gentiles  were


not  to  have  the  privilege  of  enjoying
the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,  they
were  not  for  them,  and  the  disciples
were  not  disposed  to  administer  its
ordinances  to  them.  You  recollect
what  Peter  said  when  the  Holy  Ghost
descended  upon  Cornelius — this  un-
ci reii  incised  man — and  his  house,
whom  they  had  supposed  were  with-
out the  pale  of  the  Gospel — "  Who
can  forbid  water,  seeing  that  they
have  received  tbe  Holy  Ghost  a^  well
as  we  ?  "  Peter  cited  this  bestowal
of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  Cornelius
and  his  house,  as  a  proof  that  the
ordinance  of  baptism  should  bo  ad-
ministered to  them,  and  to  all
believing  repentant  Gentiles  as  well
as  to  the  house  of  Israel.  This,  in
connection  with  the  vision  which
Peter  had,  you  recollect  it,  wherein
he  saw  a  sheet  let  down  from  heaven,
containing  all  maimer  of  beasts,
clean  and  unclean,  he  being  com-
manded to  arise,  kill  and  eat  thereof,
had  dispossessed  his  mind  of  the
prejudice  which  he  had  entertained,
in  common  with  his  fellow  believers,
that  the  Gospel  was  for  the  Jews
only.  And  when  ke  saw  Cornelius
and  his  house  thus  blessed,  he  in-
quired of  his  brethren  what  there
was  to  prevent  the  ordinance  of
baptism  being  administered  to  them,
and  they  were  baptized  by  Peter,

Cornelius  did  not  say,  as  many,
doubtless,  would  say  to-day,  "We
have  received  the  Holy  Ghust,  and
having  obtained  this  evidence  of  our
acceptance  with  God,  what  is  the  use
of  our  being  baptized  ?  Is  it  likely
that  God  would  have  given  us  i\.c
Holy  Ghost  if  he  had  not  forgiven
our  sins  ?  These  inquiries,  I  think,
weaild  be  made  by  hundreds  in  our
day  under  such  circumstances.  But
not  so  with  Cornelius :  he  had  heard
the  Gospel  preached  to  him  by  Peter,
and  though  he  had  received  the  Holy
Gbo-t,  he  believed  :t  was  still  neces-


THOSE  WHO  HEAR  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC,


sary  for  him  to  be  baptized  in  water
for  the  re  tussion  of  hia  sins,  and  he
complied  with  that  ordinance,  and
then  doubtless  the  hands  of  the  ser-
vants o*  God  were  laid  upon  him  to
confirm  him  a  member  of  the  Church
and  to  seal  nnnn  him  the  blessing  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  might  be
led  and  guided  by  it  into  all  truth,

This,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  is
the  only  plan  of  solvation  taught  in
the  Scriptures.  There  is  no  other
way  given  by  which  men  can  be  saved.
It  is  the  way  that  Jesns  trod,  the
way  that  his  Apostles  walked  in,  it
is  i he  doctrine  they  taught,  and  when
it  is  taught  by  those  having  authority
from  God  to  teach  it,  the  Holy  Ghost
will  follow  the  administration  of
these  ordinances.  The  ancient  gifts
and  blessings  will  be  bestowed,  and
men  will  be  led  into  al:  truth,  the
power  of  God  will  be  with  them,  and
they  will  know  God  for  themselves,
for  he  33  the  same  God  now  that  he
was  yesterday,  the  same  in  the  year
1^72  that  he  was  in  the  year  33,  or
fifteen  or  eighteen  h  nod  red  years
before  the  birl.h  of  Christ,  and  if  we
obey  the  same  form  of  doctrine
obeyed  by  those  who  lived  anciently,
and  it  is  administered  by  those  who
hold  authority  from  God,  the  gifts
and  powers  will  most  assuredly  fol-
low, for  God  loves  bis  children  now
a**  mnch  as  he  loved  them  in  any  past
age  of  the  world.

Says  Jesus,  when  speaking  to
Nicodemus,  in  the  words  I  have
quoted,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again
he  cud  not  see  the  kingdom  of  God.11
This  puzzled  Nicodemus,  he  could
not  understand  it,  and  he  asked  the
Savior  another  question,  to  which
Jesus  answereJ,  "Verily,  verily  I
say  unto  thee,  except  a  man  be  born
of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"
Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  how
can  a  man  be  born  of  water  ?  We


know  a  birth  to  bo  a  passage  from
one  element  into  another;  hence  if
he  be  born  of  the  water  he  must  be
completely  immersed  therein,  and
pass  from  that  element  into  another.
The  same  with  the  birth  of  the  Spirit
— he  or  she  who  is  born  of  ir,  must
be  completely  enveloped  in  it.  Jesus
says  a  man  can  not  see  the  kingdom
of  God  unless  he  is  bora  again,  and
he  farther  says,  a  man  cannot  enter
the  kingdom  of  God  unless  he  is  born
of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  not
only  of  the  Spirit,  but  also  ol  the
water*

What  does  this  birth  of  the  water
and  of  the  Spirit  consist  of?  Of
that  which  I  have  been  endeavoring
to  describe  to  you — baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins,  being  buried  with
Christ  by  baptism,  whereby  we  are
resurrected,  as  it  were,  from  the
dead,  in  the  likeness  of  his  burial
and  resurrection,  entombed  in  the
water,  and  being  I  urn  of,  or  coming
forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  water  ;
and  then  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost
by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  which  is
the  birth  of  the  Spirit  And  let  roe
say  unto  you,  as  Brother  Schonfeldt
said  this  morning,  that  unless  a  man
does  obey  this  form  of  doctrine  he
can  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of

God,  ^

This  is  strong  language,  and  men
may  say  it  is  uncharitable,  I  can
not  help  that.  These  words  a.e  the
words  the  Savior — ►the  Son  of
God,  They  are  the  words  of  truth
and  righteousness,  they  can  not  fail.
1  have  not  the  right  to  say  that  a
man  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
God  by  any  other  means  than  this;
on  the  contrary,  I  must  affirm  and
reaffirm,  and  I  must  bear  testimony
to  the  words  of  Jesus,  when  he  says,
"  Except  a  man  be  born  of  the  water
and  of  the  Spirit  he  can  riot  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God/*

The  inquiry  then  arises  in  the


JOCRNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


mind,  What  is  to  become  of  the  mil-
lions who  have  died  without  ever
hearing  the  name  of  Christ  ?  Says
one,  "  What  Is  to  become  of  my
ancestors  and  ancestresses  who  have
not  been  born  of  the  water  and  of
the  Spirit  ?  "  I  know  how  this  in*
quiry  enters  the  hearts  of  men  and
women,  and  when  they  become  ac-
quainted with  this  Gospel,  how
strongly  it  appeals  to  their  affections.
They  think,  then,  of  beloved  rela-
tives and  friends  who  have  died  with-
out a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  and
they  would  do  a  great  deal  for  their
salvation;  in  fact  it  would  embitter
all  their  lives  to  think  that  they
could  not  be  saved.  Could  we  be
happy,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  in
thinking  that  we  had  received  a  form
of  doctrine  which  would  exalt  us
into  the  presence  of  God  and  the
Lamb,  there  to  bask  fur  ever  in  hap-
piness and  bliss  so  great  that  the
Apostle  says,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,
ear  hath  not  heard,  neither  hath  it
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to
conceive?"  Do  you  think  we  could
be  happy  in  the  contemplation  and
assurance  of  sucli  a  future,  if  no
means  were  provided  whereby  our
parents  and  relatives,  who  had  died
in  ignorance  of  the  Gospel,  could  be
made  par  takers  of  the  same  blessing
and  glory,  but  because  they  had  nut
had  the  privilege  of  being  born  of
the  water  and  of  the  Spirit  they
must  be  consigned  to  endless  perdi-
tion ?  I  could  not  be  happy  under
such  circumstances.  I  would  rather,
it  seems  to  me,  have  much  less  hap-
piness and  have  them  share  it  with
me,  than  to  be  eternally  separated,
and  them  condemned  to  that  never-
ending  hell  about  which  the  sectarian
world  preach  so  much.  But  we  are
happy  in  the  knowledge  that  this  is
no  part  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.
That  teaches  that  all  will  be  judged
according  to  the  law  that  has  been


taught  unto  them.  As  I  have  al-
ready said,  I  again  repeat,  "  This  is
condemnation,  that  light  has  come
into  the  world,  and  men  loved  dark-
ness rather  than  liirht,"  "Where
there  is  no  law,"  the  Apostle  says,
"there  is  no  transgression."  Men
cannot  be  held  accountable  for  that
which  they  never  knew.  God  will
'  never  consign  his  creatures  to  a
never-ending  misery  for  not  obeying
the  Gospel  of  his  Son,  when  they
never  hnd  it  taught  unto  them,  and
it  is  as  great  a  fallacy,  and  as  great
a  libel  on  our  God,  as  ever  was  pro-
pagated about  any  being  to  make
such  an  assertion.  To  say  that  these
heathen,  who  roamed  over  these
mountains  and  through  these  valleys,
before  we  came  here,  who  never  heard
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  count-
less myriads  of  heathen  in  other
lands  who  have  died  in  ignorance  of
the  Gospel,  will  be  consigned  to
eternal  damnation,  to  a  never-ending
hell,  there  to  welter  in  and  to  suffer
unspeakable  and  indescribable  misery
throughout  the  countless  ages  of
eternity,  because  they  did  not  obey
the  Gospel  they  never  heard,  is  one
of  the  greatest  libels  on  the  character
of  our  God  that  ever  was  enunciated
by  man,  I  do  not  believe  in  such  a
God ;  he  is  not  the  God  of  the  Bible;
he  is  not  the  God  I  worship,  I  wor-
ship a  God  of  mercy  and  of  lovef
whose  heart  is  full  of  compassion,
The  Bible  teaches  that  God  is  love,
and  I  can  not  conceive  that  a  God
would  be  possessed  of  the  attributes
of  love  and  mercy  who  would  take
such  a  course  with  his  own  ignorant
offspring.  No,  there  is  something
different  from  this  taught  in  the  Gos-
pel. We  are  taught  there  that  God's
salvation  is  not  con  lined  to  this  brief
space  which  we  call  time,  but  that,
as  he  is  eternal,  so  are  his  mercy,
lore  and  compassion  eternal  towards
his  creatpres. I  have  not  time  this


THOSE  WHO  HEAR

afternoon  to  explain  our  views  on  this
point.  Suffice  it  to  say  thats  in  the
Scriptures  is  found,  plainly  written,
the  plan  of  salvation  which  God  has
devised.  j

Who  are  they  who  arc  under  con-
dem  nation,  and  who  need  fear  at  the  ,
prospect  of  the  same  ?  Men  and
women  who,  living  in  the  day  when
the  Gospel  is  preached  in  its  fullness
and  purity,  hear  it  and  reject  it.
Against  such  the  anger  of  God  is
enkindled,  and  they  are  in  a  far  worse
condition  than  those  who  die  and
never  hear  it  Says  Jesus,  "It
would  be  better  for  a  man  to  have  a  |
millstone  tied  to  his  neck,  and  for
him  to  be  thrown  into  the  depths  of
the  sea,"  than  to  do  such  and  such
things ;  and  in  another  place  he  says,
"  It  woold  be  better  for  a  man  never
to  be  born."  Why  ?  Because  light
having  been  presented  to  him,  and
truth  proclaimed  in  his  hearing,  he
rejects  the  same.

The  Latter-day  Saints,  I  hold,  will  j
be  held  to  stricter  accountability  than
any  other  people  on  the  face  of  the
earth.  Men  wonder  why  we  have
suffered  and  been  persecuted  so  much
in  the  past  I  think  it  was  partly  !
because  of  our  hardness  of  heart.
Not  that  the  men  who  persecuted  us
were  justified  in  so  doing*  They
were  tested  and  tried,  the  Lord  left
them  their  agency  and  they  brought
themselves  under  condemnation  be-
cause of  their  conduct.  Bat  we  never
had  anything  descend  apon  us  as  a
persecution  or  scourge  that  hns  not
been  intended  for  our  good ;  and  we
arc  held  to  a  stricter  accountability
than  any  other  people  because  we
have  the  Gospel  taught  unto  us.  The
thousands  who  live  throughout  these
valleys  testify  that  they  have  received
the  Holy  Ghost;  they  testify  that
they  received  it  in  the  lauds  where
they  embraced  the  Gospel ;  they  say
that  this  love  which  they  have  for


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  119

one  another,  and  the  disposition  they
have  to  dwell  together  in  peace  and
unity  are  the  fruits  of  this  Holy  Spirit
that  they  have  received.  They  tes-
tify that  the  Lord  has  revealed  unto
them  that  this  is  the  Gospel  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  do  not  know
but  there  are  thousands  here  to-day
who,  if  they  had  time  and  opportu-
nity, would  arise  and  testify  that  this
is  the  truth,  and  that  God  has  taught
it  unto  them,  and  they  know  it  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  When
a  people  reach  this  condition  they
are  held  to  stricter  accountability
than  they  are  who  have  not  this
knowledge.  On  this  account  we
must  walk  circumspectly,  with  the
fear  of  God  before  our  eyes.  We
must  be  a  pure  people  or  we  will  be
scourged ;  we  must  be  a  holy  people,
or  God's  anger  will  be  kindled  against
us.  We  must  not  be  guilty  of  dis-
honesty or  take  advantage  one  of
another-  we  must  not  bear  false
witness ;  we  must  not  neglect  our
duties  one  to  another  or  towards  God,
for  we  can  not  do  these  things  with
impunity,  for  God's  anger  will  be
kindled  against  us;  and  in  proportion
to  the  light  which  men  have  will
they  be  judged,  and  God  will  reward
them  according  to  the  deeds  done  in
the  body.  An  enlightened  American
will  be  held  to  stricter  accountability
than  an  ignorant  In  : ian  ;  and  the
man  who  has  heard  the  sound  of  the
everlasting  Gospel  and  the  testimony
of  the  servants  of  God  is  held  to
stricter  accountability  than  he  who
has  never  heard  them,

I  said  that  time  would  not. permit
me  to  dwell  on  points  connected  with
the  salvation  of  trie  ignorant  dead ;
but  there  is  a  way  provided  in  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  by  which
even  they  can  have  its  ordinances
administered  unto  them.  I  will  just
refer  to  one  passage,  which  you  can
read  at  your  leisure. In  the  15th


chapter  of  the  first  of  Corinthians,
Paul,  in  reasoning  upon  the  resurrec-
tion of  the  dead,  says,  among  other
tilings,  "Else  what  shall  they  do  who
are  baptized  for  the  dead? If  the
dead  rise  not  at  all,  why  then  are
they  baptized  for  the  dead  ?  "  This
is  a  little  key  given  to  a  very  im-
portant principle. Paul  evidently
understood a principle by  which
vicarious  baptism  could  be  performed,
that  is,  one  person  could  l>e  baptized
for  another,  the  same  as  Jesus  made
a  vicarious  offering  for  us. He  died
on  the cross for  us — he  was  our
Savior, Paul, substantiating  the
idea  that  there  is  a  resurrection,  re-
ferred to  this  ordinance,  which  seemed
to  exist  in  the  Church  and  to  be  un-
derstood  by  the  Saints  in  ancient
days. There  would have  been  no
Heed  to  be  baptized  for  the  dead  if
the  dead  rise  not  at  all. This  is  the
gist  of  his  argument;  and  there  are
other  passages  which  go  to  prove
that  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  is  sill  suffi-
cient to  reach  and  save  those  who
have  died  without  hearing  and  obey-
ing it Peter  says, referring  to
Jesus,  "He  went  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison  who  were  disobe-
dient when  once  the  long-suffering  of
God  waifed  in  the  days  of  Noah/*  I
will  give  you  another passage  to
show  that  he  did  not  go  direct  to  his
Father  after  his  death  on  the  cross.
Ton  Latter-day  Saints  understand,  or
Ought  to  understand,  that  lie  did  not
go  immediately  to  his  Father,  as
many suppose, because, after  his
resurrection,  when  Mary  had  been
seeking  for  the  body  of  her  Lord,  and
supposed  that  someboJy  had  .stolen
it,  she  saw  a  personage  in  the  garden
who  she  imagined  was  the  gardener.


She  went  to  him  and  asked  who  had
taken  away  the  body  of  her  Lord.
Tli is  personage  spoke  to  her,  calling
her  by  name. She  immediately  re-
cognized the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  her
eagerness, anxiety and love  she
rushed  forward  as  if  to  grasp  him.
But  he  forbade  her,  told  her  not  to
do  so,  saying,  "  Touch  me  not,  for  I
am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father,
but  go  to  my  brethren  and  say  unto
them, I ascend unto iny  Father
and  your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and
your  God," This  was  on  the  Sun-
day, after  his  body  had  lain  in  the
tnrnh  from  the  preceding  Friday —
the  third  day,  ami  he  said  he  bad  not
yet  ascended  to  his  Father, This  is
explained  by  Peter,  in  the  passage  I
have  already  quoted,  wherein  the
Apostle  says,  "  By  which  also  he
went  to  preach  to  the  spirits  in  prison,
[  who  were  disobedient  when  once  the
long-siitfering  of  God  waited  in  the
days  of  Nonh  " There  is  another
passage  in  Peter,  which  goes  to  prove
the  same  thing,  hut  I  will  not  touch
upon  it I  have  sail  sufficient  to
relieve,  or  it  ought  to  relieve,  us
Latter-day  Saints  ^rora  any  fears  for
those  who  have  died  in  ignorance  of
the  Gospel But  we  can  say,  truly,
that  salvation  can  only  be  obtained
in  the  way  God  has  prescribed — 1  y
obeying  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ;  and  this  is  the  way  that  he
marked  and  the  way  we  muiit  wa]k
in  to  obtain  it.

That  God  may  help  us  to  be  faith-
ful and  to  cleave  to  the  truth  all  our
days,  regardless  of  all  consequences,
I  and  eventually  save  us  in  his  king-
dom, is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


THE  FULLNESS  OF  TJIE  GOSPEL,  ETC


121


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  11  AM  YOUNG,


Delivered  tnt  the  X?w  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake  City,
Sunday  Afternoon,  August  11,  1872,


(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans.)


THE  FULLNESS OF  THE  GOSPEL — ITS  POWER  TO  UNITE — ITS  COUTH  E.
HENSIVENESS — DEFINITION  OF  ITS  PRIESTHOOD — CONDITION  OF

APOSTATES,


I  have  an  anxiety  to  bear  testi-
mony to  the  truth,  though  it  is  well
known  to  many  of  my  friends  and
acquaintances  that  it  is  not  prudent
for  me  to  exercise  myself  in  this
large  hall,  as  I  have  in  days  past.
But  I  feel  very  anxious  to  speak  to
my  brethren  and  sifters  and  to  their
families,  to  my  friends  and  neighbors,
and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  con-
cerning the  Christian  religion,  I
feel  thus  many  times  when  I  ara  not
able  to  do  so,  bnt  I  desire  at  this
time  to  bear  testimony  to  the  Gospel
— the  plan  of  salvation,  to  the  holy
Priesthood,  that  the  Lord  has  re-
vealed in  the  latter  days,  I  admit
at  once,  without  any  argument  at
all,  that  the  whole  human  family  are
possessed  more  or  less  of  truth  ;  they
have  a  great  many  very  excellent  and
pure  ideas,  beliefs,  faiths  and  senti-
ments, the  adoption  of  which  in  their
lives  would  promote  truth  and  over*
come  error,  sin  and  iniquity  in  their
midst,  and  cause  joy  and  peace  to
fill  the  hearts  of  individuals,  families,
neighborhoods, cities and  nations.

Sometimes  we  take  the  liberty  of
defining  the  religions  of  the  day,
known  under  the  general  name  of
Christianity,  We  have  heard  some-
thing of  this,  this  afternoon;  and


with  regard  to  the  philosophy  of
that  religion,  we  admit  the  truth  of
it  All  have  truth,  all  have  good
desires — that  is  to  say,  as  people  and
as  communities.  There  may  be  indi-
viduals who  do  not  possess  these
principles,  but  there  are  many  in  ail
communities  of  the  earth  professing
Christianity  who  wish,  in  reality,  to
know  the  truth,  and  to  embrace  it  in
their  creeds,  and  most  of  them  desire
most  fervently  that  the  professors  of
this  Christianitv  should  live  accord-
ing  to  pure  and  holy  principles.
This  we  admit,  and  a  tew  of  this
number  have  received  the  Gospel,

When  I  speak  of  the  Gospel  in
this  sense,  T  mean  the  fullness  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  as  it  has
been  revealed  in  our  day.  I  do  not
refer  to  the  Gospel  as  a  mere  histori-
cal knowledge  of  the  Savior  and  his
Apostles,  and  their  doings  upon  the
earth,  but  of  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation.  And  when  I  contemplate
the  human  family  in  their  present
condition,  and  especially  Christen-
dom, I  think  what  a  pity  it  is  that
we  Christians  cannot  see  far  enough
and  understand  enough  to  be  willing
that  every  truth  should  take  effect
on  the  minds  of  the  people,  for  every
truth  that  is  taught,  believed  and


122  JOURNAL  OF

practiced,  is  good  for  mankind.  It
is  good  for  the  living,  good  for  tho
dying,  good  for  the  dead  ;  and  if  we
Christians  would  accept  and  embrace
all  truth  in  our  lives,  instead  of  con-
tending so  much  about  what  are
called  "  non-essentials,"  it  would  be
much  more  to  our  advantage,  and
would  vastly  increase  peace  and  union
in  our  midst.

When  we  take  up  the  religion  that
has  been  revealed — the  Gospel  in  its
fullness,  we  find  that  it  is  simply  a
code  of  laws,  ordinances,  gifts  and
graces  which  are  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation.  The  laws  and  ordi-
nances which  the  Lord  has  revealed
in  these  latter  days,  are  calculated
to  save  all  the  sons  arid  daughters  of
Adam  and  Eve  who  have  not  sinned
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  all  will
be  saved  in  a  kingdom  of  glory,
though  it  may  not  be  in  the  celestial
kingdom,  for  there  are  many  man-
sions. These  ordinances  reach  after
every  one  of  the  children  of  our  Fa-
ther in  heaven,  and  not  only  them,
but  after  all  the  earth,  the  fullness  of
the  earth,  all  things  that  dwell  upon
it,  to  bring  them  back  into  the  pre-
sence of  God,  or  into  some  kingdom
or  place  prepared  for  them,  that  they
may  be  exalted  to  a  higher  state  of
intelligence  than  they  now  dwell  in.  |

This  may  seem  strange  to  many,
but  these  are  the  ordinances  and  laws
that  the  Lord  has  instituted  for  the
salvation  of  the  children  of  men  :
and  when  we  compare  the  doctrines
that  we  have  preached  to  the  Christ-
ian world,  with  the  doctrines  of  the 1
Christian  world,  we  find  that  ours
incorporate  every  truth,  no  matter
what  it  is.  If  it  belong  to  the  arts
and  sciences  of  the  day,  all  the  same,
for  every  truth  in  existence  is  em-
braced in  that  system  of  laws  and
ordinances  taught  by  the  Latter-day
Saints — the  Gospel  that  God  has  re-


DISCOURSES,

veiled  for  the  salvation  of  the  human
family.

We  want  a  little  proof,  a  little  evi-
dence, a  little  testimony.  This  is
the  testimony  that  we  are  in  posses-
sion of  this  Gospel.  Our  witness  is
upon  the  stand,  before  God  and  the
people,  testifying  that  the  Latter-day
I  Saints  have  got  something  that  no
I  other  people  on  earth  have.  What
is  it?  The  oneness  which  we  pos-
sess, according  to  the  prayer  of  the
Savior.

We  send  an  Elder  from  here  to  the
East  Indies ; we  send  one  or  two  to
Africa,  and  to  the  Asiatic  continent,
and  distribute  them  to  the  different
nations,  to  Japan,  tj  China,  and  so
on. They  preach  the  Gospel  to  the
Pagans,  say  to  the  Chinese.  We
will  suppose  that  these  Elders  learn
the  Ch  inese  language  so  far  as  to  be
able  to  make  themselves  understood
by  the  people,  and  they  preach  to
them  the  same  doctrines  as  are  be-
lieved in  by  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  they  are  teceived  into  the  hearts
of  honest  Chinese — God  reveals  and
manifests  to  them  that  these  doc-
trines and  principles,  this  plan  of
salvation,  is  true,  and  these  Chinese
would  not  differ  with  us  on  any  point
of  doctrine. They  would  say,  "  The
proper  mode  ol  baptism  is  by  immer-
sion, the  Scriptures  are  plain  upon
this  point" Here  let  me  take  the
liberty  of  saying,  that  if  the  whole
Christian  world  were  to  adopt  the
method  of  baptism  by  immersion,
you  would  never  hear  a  person  raise
an  argument about sprinkling  or
pouring. B'jt  leaving  my  witness,  I
say  these  latter  ideas  are  the  cisterns
which  men  hew  out  to  themselves,
which  will  hold  no  water,  for  some-
body or  other  is  eternally  scuttling
their  vessels,  and  they  ate  sinking.
If  every Christian  denomination
would  come  to  the  house  of  worship
on  the  Sabbath,  and  break  bread  and


THE  FULLNESS  OF


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


123


partake  of  the  bread  and  wine  in
testimony  of  their  faith  in  Jesus
Christ,  there  would  l>e  no  differences,
contentions  or  arguments,  and  no  per-
son could  sink  their  vessel ;  but  now,
comparatively  speaking,  they  are
sinking  each  other's  vessels  continu-
al!)', lint  again  to  my  testimony,  to
my  witness.

When  the  Chinese  receives  the
Gospel  he  is  one  with  us.  He  does
not  want  six  months'  teaching  or
trial ;  he  does  not  need  to  go  to  an
academy  or  a  seminary  five  or  seven
years  to  learn  that  this  mode  of  bap-
tism is  correct;  but  taking  the  Bible
be  reads  it,  and,  says  he, "  The  Holy
Ghost  bears  witness  to  me  that  bap-
tism by  immersion  is  the  correct
mode,  and  that  it  is  right  to  break
bread  and  drink  wine  in  remem-
brance of,  and  to  testify  our  faith  in
him  whose  body  was  broken  and
whose  blood  was  shed  for  the  salva-
tion of  the  human  family."  There
is  no  contention,  and  though  only
one  Elder  may  have  gone  there,  and
he  has  baptized  but  one,  or  ten,  a
hundred,  a  thousand,  or  thousands,
they  are  all  of  one  heart  and  one
mind  ;  and  if  we  were  to  charge  this
Elder  not  to  tell  these  Chinese  that
they  must  gather  to  America,  for
that  was  the  land  of  Zion — and  Ame-
rica is  the  land  of  Zion — the  first
this  Elder  would  know,  somebody  or
other  would  be  up  in  a  meeting  and
telling  that  Zion  was  in  America,
and  they  had  got  to  emigrate  there.
The  Elder  might  inquire  why,  and
he  would  be  told,  41  It  is  revealed  to
me,  and  I  do  know  by  the  manifesta-
tions of  the  Spirit  within  me,  through
your  preaching,  that  we  are  to  as-
semble on  the  continent  of  America,
for  that  is  the  land  of  Zion,"  And
if  they  come  here,  they  will  not  ask
how  many  methods  of  baptism  we
have,  or  how  many  of  administering
the  Sacrament,  or  of  dispensing  the


ordinances  of  the  house  of  God,  for
the  Spirit  makes  them  of  one  heart
and  one  mind  with  those  on  this  con-
tinent, and  from  whatever  nation  they
come,  they  all  see  alike  in  reference
to  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of
God.

From  China  let  us  go  directly  to
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  there
an  Elder  is  preaching  and  baptizing

:  people  into  the  kingdom  of  Clod,  and
when  they  get  into  this  kingdom
they  begin  to  read  and  understand,
and  to  prophesy,  und  if  they  are  not
checked  in  the  gifts,  you  will  hear
them  sp^ak  in  tongues.  Let  me  say
here,  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  it  is
frequently  asked  by  our  brethren,
•'Why  do  not  the  people  speak  with
tongues  ?"  We  do,  and  we  speak
with  tongues  that  you  can  under-
stand, and  Paul  says  he  would  rather
speak  five  or  ten  words  in  a  language
that  can  be  understood,  than  many
in  a  language  that  can  not  be.  This
is  what  he  conveyed. We  speak

I  with  tongues  that  can  be  understood;
but  the  reason  that  we  do  not  en-
courage this  little,  particular,  pecu-
liar gift,  which  is  for  the  edifying  of
some  few  in  the  Church,  I  have  not
time  to  explain.  But  to  my  witness
again,  who  is  on  the  stand.

!  You  take  men,  women  and  fami-
lies from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
from  the  northern  seas,  China,  the

'East  Indies,  or  the  islands  of  the
sea,  and  let  them  receive  the  Gospel
and  come  here,  and,  just  as  long  as
they  live  so  as  to  enjoy  the  Spirit  of
the  holy  Gospel  they  have  obeyed,
there  are  no  quest  ions  asked  with
regard  to  doctrine.  We  will  now  go
a  step  further.

Here  is  a  great  bone  of  contention
with  regard  to  political  affairs.  The
world  say,  "  Why  do  not  these  Lat-
ter day  Saints  get  up  their  mass
meetings,  and  sustain  this,  that  or
the  other  one,  and  be  like  other  peo-


12  i


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


pie  in  a  political  point  of  view  ? "
Why  do  we  not  sustain  these  advo-
cates who  are  now  in  the  fields  and

join,  and  be  one  with,  some  one  or
other  of  the  political  parties  of  the
country  ?  We  have  no  desire  to  do
so,  that  13  the  reason.  If  we  had
the  privilege  of  voting  in,  indepen-
dent  of  all  other  people  on  this  hind
of  America,  or  in  the  United  States,
the  man  who  should  serve  as  presi-
dent, we  should  cast  about  to  find
the  most  suitable  man,  and  he  would
be  the  nominee,  and  when  his  name
came  before  the  people,  every  man
and  woman  who  had  the  privilege  of
putting  their  vote  in  the  ballot  box

would  vote  fur  that  man,  asking  no
questions.  Oar  friends  in  the  poli-
tical world  say,  "We  do  not  like  this
oneness/'  The  ministers  in  the
pulpit,  the  politicians  in  the  bar
room,  on  the  steam  boat,  in  the  rail
cars,  in  the  halls  of  Congress  or  in
the  legislatures,  say,  "  We  do  not
like  this  oneuess,"  and  still  the  priest
and  the  deacon  are  praying  con t inn-
ally,  accord ing  to  the  Scripture  tes-
timony, that  the  Saints  may  be  one.
Well,  where  will  you  have  them  one  ?
Just  name  those  particular  points
wherein  and  how  ihis  people  who
profess  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  sdfill  be  one.  How  far  shall
we  go  ?  If  we  had  the  privilege  of
voting  for  the  presidential  nominees
to* day,  General  Grant  would  solicit
the  vote  of  every  "  Mormon n  man
and  woman,  and  the  cry  would  be,
"Vote  for  me*  Be  one  and  vote
unitedly*  Do  not  be  divided  in  your
votes,  but  vote  for  me/*  Mr.  Greeley
would  preach  the  same  doctrine —
4£  Do  not  vote  for  Grant,  vote  for  me."
And  when  a  governor,  ibember  of
Congress,  or  any  other  officer  was  in
the  field  they  would  all  contend  for
this  oneness,  but  each  one  would  say,
"  I  want  you  should  be  one  with  me."
*'  Well,  hut  your  neighbor,  your  com-


petitor, is  perhaps  quite  as  good  a
man  as  you  are,"  "  That  is  no  dif-
ference, he  is  my  enemy,  my  oppo-
nent, and  I  wish  to  beat  him  if  I
possibly  can,  I  want  this  place."
But  when  you  come  to  the  Latter-
day  S lints,  if  they  can  got  the  right
man,  the  best  man  they  can  find,
they  unitedly  cast  their  ballots  into
the  ballot-box  to  make  that  man
president,  governor,  representative,
or  any  other  officer  ;  and  if  we  learn
that  he  is  not  as  talented  as  some
other  man,  perhaps  not  so  capable  of
filling  the  oflSce  as  his  neighbor,  bet-
ter be  united  on  and  with  him,  and
give  him  your  faith  and  your  prayers,
and  he  will  answer  every  purpose,
and  will  fulfil  his  mission  to  your
satisfaction,  and  far  better  than  if
you  were  to  quarrel,  contend  and
argue  over  the  matter,  for  where  they
do  this  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
if  they  did  but  know  it,  have  an
internal  influence  to  contend  against.
Take  for  instance,  the  financial  cir-
cles, the  commerce  of  the  world,
those  business  men,  where  thev  have
their  opponents  they  have  an  internal
influence  to  contend  against,  whether
they  know  it  or  not;  and  that  power,
with  all  the  secrecy  of  the  grave,  I
might  say,  will  seek  to  carry  out
their  schemes  unknown  to  their  oppo-
nents, in  order  that  they  in;iy  win.
Like  the  man  at  the  table  with  the
cards  in  his  hands,  unseen  by  any  but
himself,  he  will  take  the  advantage
as  far  as  he  can.  So  says  the  poli-
tician. So  say  the  world  of  Chris-
tendom, so  say  the  world  of  the
heathens,  and  it  is  party  upon  party,
sect  after  sect,  division  upon  division,
and  we  are  all  for  ourselves,  and  each
one  ifc  willing  that  we  should  be  one
in  our  faith,  feelings  and  actions,  if
we  will  be  one  with  him.

Well,  this  witness  that  is  on  the
stand  can  not  be  set  aside  or  over-
come ;  it  is  a  witness  that  the  world


THE  FULLNESS  OF

of  mankind  can  not  impeach,  neither
the  testimony  which  ifc  imparts.  Take
people  from  China,  India,  Africa,
Europe,  the  North  Pole  or  the  South
Pule,  give  them  the  Gospel  and  they
are  one.  It  was  not  Joseph  Smith,
neither  is  it  Brigham  Yoong  thiU
makes  them  one;  it  is  neither  the
hiph  council  nor  the  First  Presidency
that  makes  them  one,  but  it  is  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation  that
makes  the  Latter-day  Saints  one  in
heart,  in  spirit,  in  action,  in  their
religious  faith  and  ordinances,  and  in
their  dealings,  where  they  are  honest
and  live  their  religion.  That  makes
them  one,  no  matter  who  they  are,
wheie  they  are,  or  upon  what  subject,
if  it  be  a  subject  worthy  the  at >en-
tion  of  the  people.  Our  religion
descends  to  the  whole  life  of  man,
although  some,  sometimes,  say,  there
is  divine  law,  there  is  human  law,
and  there  are  principles  which  per-
tain to  our  religion  and  there  are
principles  which  pertain  to  the  philo-
sophy of  the  world.  But  let  me
here  say  to  you,  that  the  philosophy
of  the  religion  of  heaven  incorpo-
rates every  truth  that  there  is  in
heaven,  on  earth,  or  in  hell.

Now,  we  wish  to  be  one  and  to
understand  the  Gospel.  Receive  the
Gospel  and  the  spirit  of  it  and  we
will  be  one.  All  Christendom  would
say,  **  Come  go  with  us,  come  go
with  us  and  we  will  do  you  good."
We  can  say  the  same — "  Come  go
with  us,  and  we  will  do  you  good."
We  will  tell  you  how  to  be  saved.
How  far  does  the  Christian  religion
go  ?  Let  every  man  look  at  it,  read,
pray,  meditate,  call  upon  the  Lord,
and  judge  for  himself.  I  say  that
that  which  is  commonly  called  the
Chris tiata  religion  is  far  from  civil-
izing the  world,  and  far  from  making
the  Christian  world  one,  for  from
bringing  the  disciples  to  be  of  one
heart  and  one  mint!. They  say  that


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  125

there  are  a  great  many  of  these  non-
essentials that  we  difier  about.  Very
true,  they  are  non-essentials,  and
tbey  are  pretty  much  all  of  them
non-essentials.  Believing  in  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  is  very  essential ;  believ-
ing in  God,  his  Father,  and  our
Father,  is  very  essential;  having
faith  in  the  name  of  Jesas  is  very
essential.  On  these  points  they  all
agree,  and  we  agree  with  them,  and
they  with  us ;  but  it  is  very  different
when  we  come  to  the  laws  and  ordi-
nances of  the  kingdom  of  God,
It  has  been  read  to  vou  here  what

■

Jesus  said  to  his  disciples — "  I  will
drink  no  more  with  you  of  this  wine
— the  juice  of  tho  vine- — until  I  drink
with  you  anew  in  my  Father's  king-
dom." Jesus  undertook  to  establish
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.
He  introduced  the  laws  ^nd  ordi-
nances of  the  kingdom.  What  was
the  result  ?  After  killing  the  Son  of
God,  they  could  not  even  let  the
Apostles  live;  they  could  not  let
Paul  live,  who  was  not  a  believer  in
the  days  of  Jesus,  but  an  opposer,
and  who,  after  the  death  of  the  Savior,
hunted  and  sought  all  who  believed
on  him,  for  the  purpose  of  imprison-
ing and  punishing  them,  and  he  was
the  very  man  who  held  the  clothes  of
the  young  men  who  stoned  Stephen
to  death,

What  did  they  do  with  the  rest  of
them  ?  Crucified  them,  stoned  them,
mangled  them,  and  so  on,  with  the
exception,  I  suppose,  of  John.  As
long  as  any  of  the  disciples  of  the
Savior  was  on  the  earth  the^r  were
hunted  and  persecuted,  and  the  cry
of  their  enemies  was,  "  Do  not  leave
their  track  until  they  are  exter rui-
nated," just  as  it  is  now  with  regard
to  the  Latter-day  Saints — *'  Do  not
leave  their  track,  go  where  th?y  go,
introduce  every  iniquity  you  can,
and  do  as  they  did  in  ancient  days."
How  did  they  do  then  ? You  can


126


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


read  the  account  given  of  our  first
parents.  Along  came  a  certain
character  and  said  to  Eve — y<ju
know  women  are  of  tender  heart,
and  he  could  operate  on  this  tender
heart — "  The  Lord  knows  that  in  the
day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt
not  surely  die,  hut  if  thou  wilt  take
of  this  fruit  and  eat  thereof  thine
eyes  will  be  opened  and  thou  wilt  see
as  the  Gods  see ; "  and  he  worked
upon  the  tender  heart  of  mother  Eve
until  she  partook  of  the  fruit,  and
her  eyes  were  opened.  He  told  the
truth.  And  they  say  now,  "Do
this  that  your  eyes  may  be  opened,
that  you  may  see ;  do  this  that  you
may  know  thus  and  so."  In  the  days
of  Jesus  and  his  Apostles  the  same
power  >vas  operating,  and,  actuated
by  that,  men  hunted  them  until  the
last  one  was  banished  from  human
society,  and  until  the  Christian  reli-
gion was  so  pt*r verted  that  the  people
received  it  with  open  hands,  arms,
mouth  and  heart  It  was  adulterated
until  it  was  congenial  to  the  wicked
heart,  and  they  received  the  Gospel
as  they  supposed.  But  that  was  the
time  they  commenced  little  by  little
to  transgress  the  laws,  change  the
ordinances,  and  break  the  everlasting
covenant,  and  the  Gospel  of  the
kingdom  that  Jesus  undertook  to
establish  in  his  day  and  the  priest*
hood  were  taken  from  the  earth.
But  the  Lord  has  again  set  his  hand
to  gather  Israel,  to  redeem  his  people
and  to  establish  his  kingdom  on  the
earth,  and  the  enemy  of  all  righteous-
ness says,  "  We  have  got  plenty  of
religion,  we  have  got  plenty  of  fol-
lowers, we  have  plenty  of  money,
we  have  plenty  of  influence,  never
leave  the  track  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  until  they  are  used  up."  Well,
it  is  God  and  them  for  it,  as  far  as
that  is  concerned  ;  that  is  not  for  me
to  say  anything  about.  We  are  here,
and  the  Gospel  we  have  got  makes


us  of  one  heart  and  mind  in  all  the
affairs  of  life;  and  the  philosophy  of
our  religion  embraces  all  the  true
philosophy,  every  art  and  every
science  there  is  on  the  face  of  the
whole  earth,  and  when  they  step  out-
side the  pale  of  the  Christian  religion,
the  power  of  God  and  the  priesthood
of  the  Son  of  God,  they  step  out  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  they
then  have  cisterns  thfit  will  hold  no
water/  systems  that  will  not  bear
scrutinizing.  I  know  that  a  great
many  of  the  scientific  men  of  the
world  philosophize  upon  this,  that
and  the  other  thing*  Geologists  will
tell  us  the  earth  has  stood  so  many
millions  of  years.  Why  ?  Because
the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi  fcould
not  have  washed  out  under  about  so
many  years,  or  so  long  a  time.  The
Valley  of  Western  Colorado,  here,
could  not  have  washed  out  without
taking  such  a  length  of  time.  What
do  they  know  about  it  ?  Nothing  in
comparison.  They  also  reason  about
the  age  of  the  world  by  the  marvelous
specimens  of  petrifaction  that  are
sometimes  discovered.  Now  we  can
show  them  plenty  x>f  places  where
there  are  trees,  perfect  stone,  running
into  the  solid  rock,  and  perhaps  the
rock  is  forty,  fifty,  or  a  hundred  feet
above  the  tree.  Yet  it  is  a  perfect
tree.  There  is  the  bark,  there  is  the
heart,  and  there  is  the  outer-coating
between  the  heart  and  the  bark,  all
perfect  rock.  How  long  did  it  take
to  make  this  tree  into  rock  ?  We
do  not  know.  I  can  tell  them,
simply  this — when  the  Lord  Al-
mighty brings  forth  the  power  of  his
chemistrv,  he  can  combine  the  ele-
ments  and  make  a  tree  into  rock  in
one  night  or  one  day,  if  he  chooses,
or  be  can  let  it  lie  until  it  pulverises
and  blows  to  the  four  winds,  without
petrifying,  just  as  he  pleases.  He
brings  together  these  elements  as  he
sees  proper,  for  he  is  the  greatest


THE  FULLNESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


127


chemist  there  is.  He  knows  more
about  chemistry  and  about  the  for-
mation of  the  earth  and  about  divid-
ing the  earth,  and  more  about  the
mountains,  valleys,  rocks,  hills,
plains,  and  the  sands  than  all  the
scientific  men  that  we  have.  This
we  can  say  of  a  truth.  Well,  if  it
takes  a  million  years  to  make  a  per-
fect rock  of  one  kind  of  a  tree,  say
a  cedar  tree,  how  long  would  it  take
to  make  a  perfect  rock  of  a  cotton-
wood  tree  ?  Let  the  chemists  tell
this,  if  they  can,  but  they  can  not
tell  it

Our  religion  embraces  chemistry;
it  embraces  all  the  knowledge  of  the
geologist,  and  then  it  goes  n  little  (
further  than  their  systems  of  argu-
ment, for  the  Lord  Almighty,  its
author,  is  the  greatest  chemist  there
is.  Will  any  of  the  chemists  tell  us
what  the  Lord  did  with  the  elements
in  Wisconsin,  and  in  Chicago,  Illinois,
last  Fall  ?  They  made  a  flaming
fire  of  the  heavens,  the  elements
were  melted  with  fervent  heat.  This
was  a  chemical  process,  but  can  any
of  our  chemists  tell  how  it  was
brought  about  ?  I  think  not  But
there  were  certain  elements  which
lost  their  cohesive  properties,  and  a
change  occurred,  and  the  result  was
this  terrible  fire.  So  it  will  be  when,
as  the  Scriptures  foretell,  "  the  ele-
ments shall  melt  with  fervent  heat"
The  Lord  Almighty  will  send  forth
his  angels,  who  are  well  instructed
in  chemistry,  and  they  will  separate
the  elements  and  make  new  combi-
nations thereof,  and  the  whole  hea-
vens will  be  a  sheet  of  fire.  Well,
our  religion  embraces  this;  and  we
know  of  no  laws,  no  ordinances,  no
gifts,  no  principles,  no  arts,  no  sci-
ences that  are  true,  but  what  are
embraced  in  the  religion  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  this  Priesthood,  which
is  a  perfect  system  of  govern,
ment.


If  anybody  wants  to  know  what
the  priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God  is,
it  is  the  law  by  which  the  worlds  are,
were,  and  will  continue  for  ever  and
ever.  It  is  that  system  which  brings
worlds  into  existence  and  peoples
them,  gives  them  their  revolutions —
their  days,  weeks,  months,  years,
their  seasons  and  times  and  by  which
they  are  rolled  up  as  a  .scroll,  as  it
were,  and  go  into  a  higher  state  of
existence;  and  they  who  believe  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  maker,
framer,  governor,  dictator  and  con-
troller of  this  earth — they  who  live
according  to  his  law  and  priesthood
will  be  prepared  to  dwell  on  this
earth  when  it  is  brought  into  the
presence  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.
This  is  the  habitation  of  the  Saints ;
this  is  the  earth  that  will  be  given
to  the  Saints,  when  they  and  it  are
sanctified  and  glorified,  and  brought
back  into  the  presence  of  the  Father
and  the  Son.  This  is  our  religion,
and  I  bear  testimony  to  it;  and  this
oneness  which  the  Latter-day  Saints
possess,  which  is  now  so  much  con-
tended against  and  hated  by  the
Christian  world,  in  a  political,  finan-
cial, philosophical,  aud  every  other
respect  and  capacity,  is  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation,  and  is  not
produced  by  the  influence  or  power
of  man,  and  this  witness  cannot  be
impeached — it  is  impossible  to  im-
peach it  This  is  our  testimony,  and
this  is  one  witness,  one  testimony
that  the  Gospel  which  we  preach  is
the  Gospel  that  God  has  revealed  for
the  salvation  of  the  children  of  men,
and  it  will  bring  all  the  sons  and
daughters  of  Adam  and  Eve  into  a
state  of  glory  and  happiness  that  is
far  beyond  their  conception,  or  any
ideas  that  thy  have  ever  received
while  in  this  wicked  world ;  aud  this
glory  the  Lord  has  prepared  in  his
mansion  for  his  children.


128  JOURNAL  OF

"  Well,"  says  one,  if  I  am  pretty
sure  to  get  a  slate  of  glory  better  »
than  this,  I  guess  I  will  not  take  the
trouble  to  inherit  anything  more/*
Well,  run  the  risk  of  it,  every  man
on  the  earth  has  that  privilege.  The  j
Gospel  is  preached,  sin  revives,  some
die  and  some  eomend  against  it —
some  receive  it  and  some  do  not;
but  this  is  the  sin  of  the  people —
truih  is  told  them  and  they  reject
it.  This  is  the  sin  of  the  world,
£t  Lrght  has  come  into  the  world,
but  men  love  darkness  rather  than
light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil."  ,
So  said  Jesus  in  his  day.  We  say,
Here  is  the  Gospel  of  life  and  sal-
vation, and  every  one  that  will
receive  it,  glory,  honor,  immortality
and  eternal  life  are  theirs;  if  they
reject  it,  they  take  their  chance.  I
hope  and  pray  that  we  may  all  be
wise  and  receive  the  good  part,  that  ]
we  may  have  the  benefit  thereof

I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
Vfill  you  live  your  religion  ?  You
can  see  people  apostatizing  from  the
Church,  but  what  is  the  result?
Ask  every  apostate  who  ever  received
the  spirit  of  this  work,  "Can  you
go  ai  d  enjoy  any  other  religion  ?"
Not.  one  of  them.  Have  you  never  :
known  persons  leave  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
and  join  any  other  church  ?  Cer-
tainly I  have,  and  pretty  good  peo-
ple. I  recollect  one  old  lady  that
we  left  in  the  States,  She  said  she
was  too  old  to  gather  up  with  the
Saints,  Her  friends  were  Baptists,
she  lived  in  the  midst  of  them  and
joined  their  church.  Sit  down  and
talk  with  her  —  "  Sister,  how  do
you  feel  r"  "  Just  as  I  have  al-
ways felt."  "  Are  you  satisfied  with
this  religion  you  have  joined  ?  "  "I
believe  in  the  work  I  embraced
years  ago.  *  Mormon  ism  *  is  true,
and  I  believe  it  just  as  I  always
have. But  here  are  my  borne  and


DISCOURSES,

my  friends,  and  I  fellowship  them
as  far  as  they  do  right — as  far  as
they  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
Thev  want  I  should  be  a  member
of  their  church  and  I  do  not  know
that  it  hurts  me  to  be  so/'  "  Are
you  satisfied  to  accept  their  religion
and  none  else  ?  "  Says  she,  "  I
care  no  more  abont  it  than  I  did
while  in  the  midst  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints ;  but  here  are  my  friends
and  home.  By  and  by  I  shall  sleep
in  the  grave;"  and  there  she  is  to-
day, sleeping  with  those  who  have
laid  their  bodies  down  to  rest  This
is  one  instance.  But  you  take  men
and  women  with  youth  and  vigor,
who  apostatize  from  the  truth,  and
are  they  satisfied  with  anything  else?
No,  and  they  are  not  satisfied  with
themselves.  They  are  not  beloved
by  God  nor  by  Angels,  nor  by  their
families.  Are  they  beloved  by  the
enemy  of  all  righteousness  and,  his
;  fellow  associates  ?  No.  They  say
to  the  apostate,  t£  You  are  a  hypo-
crite, a  traitor,  a  deceiver,  and  if
you  are  not  a  false  witness  we  ask
who  is,  fur  you  have  testified  hun-
dreds and  thousands  of  times,  that,
by  the  power  of  God  and  the  revela-
tions of  Jesus  Christ,  you  knew
Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet,  and
that  this  latter-day  work  was  true,
and  now  you  say  it  is  not  true."
"  When  did  you  tell  the  truth  ? "
says  Mr,  Devil,  "  then  or  now  ? ?>
Says  he,  4£I  despise  yon;"  and
they  hate  tkemselves  and  everybody
else.  They  have  no  fellowship  for
their  neighbors,  for  the  Latter-day
Saints  nor  for  any  Christian  deno-
mination, and  I  do  not  know  where
in  the  world  they  can  be  placed.
This  is  the  condition  of  an  apostate.
But  while  this  is  the  condition  of
f  those  who  apostatize  from  oar  Church ,
how  is  it  with  those  who  leave  any
of  the  sectarian  churches,  after  hav-
ing been  a  Methodist,  Presby tena*


»

FAULT  FINDING,  $TC.


\


129


Baptist,  or  Congregational  is  t  ?  Why
they  go  from  church  to  church,  and
feel  just  the  same  as  before  ?  Is  not
this  trae  ?  Yes,  I  know  it  is ;  not
that  I  have  passed  from  one  to  ano-
ther myself,  but  I  have  been  ac-
quainted with  those  who  have.  Did
I  fellowship  them  ?  I  fellowshipped
them  no  more  than  I  do  now,  I
fellowship  everything  that  is  good
and  virtuous,  everything  that  is
truthful  and  good ;  but  sin  I  do  not
fellowship  in  them,  nor  in  a  Latter-
day  Saint,  or  one  who  professes  to  be


so.  I  fellowship  all  good,  and  we
have  it.  It  is  all  right,  and  if  we
have  error,  it  is  because  we  do  not
live  according  to  the  Gospel  that  we
have  embraced.  If  we  have  em-
braced error  in  our  faith,  it  is  be-
cause we  do  not  understand  our  own
doctrine;  if  we  have  error  in  our
lives,  it  is  because  we  deviate  from
the  path  of  rectitude  that  God  has
marked  out  for  us  to  walk  in.

May  the  Lord  help  us  to  do  right.
Amen,


REMABKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Logan  City,  Sunday  Morning,

Auwst  18,  1872,


(Reported  by  David IK  Evans.)


FAULT  FINDING— ADVICE — WHOLESALE  CO-OPERATIVE  STORE  FOR  LOGAN

— DRESS — JLARITAL  RELATION — ESTABLISHING  ZION.


There  is  just  about  time  for  a  ten
minutes'  sermon,  I  have  several
little  sermons  for  the  people,  and  I
will  begin  by  taking  up  the  case  of
brother  Samuel  Roskelly,  Bishop  up
here  in  Smithfield,  I  have  been
hearing  for  a  year  or  two  about  bro-
ther Roskelly  being  wonderfully  dis-
honest, oppressing  the  people,  over-
bearing  with  his  brethren,  treating
them  with  contempt  and  abusing
them,  taking  their  means  and  so  on.
Last  Friday,  about  five  o'clock,  we
assembled  in  this  hall,  that  is,  all
who  were  disposed  to  come  together,
to  have  these  matters  brought  before  (
us* We  sat  and  heard  them  as  pa- |

No.  9.


tiently  as  we  could.  We1  had  not
time  to  hear  all  speak  and  say  all
they  wanted  to.  We  found,  as  vve
generally  find  these  conplaints — they
have  their  origin  in  selfishness,  in
greediness,  in  a  complaining  heart,
destitute  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
imagining  to  themselves  that  they
know  just  what  is  right,  and  they
want  to  get  everybody  in  the  world
to  feel  as  they  feel.  But  we  find  that
almost  all  complaints  that  arise  are
sown  by  the  enemy;  they  grow  in
this  soil,  they  take  root,  spring  up
and  bear  seed,  and  when  the  stalk  is
shaken  then  the  seed  makes  its  ap-
pearance We  examined  these  mat*

Vol.  XV.


ters  far  enough.  I -think  there  were
eight  complaints  against  Bishop Ros^
kelly,  and  when  we  had  got  th rough
I  did  not  stop  to  ask  the  brethren
how  they  felt,  fur  I  did  not  see  any-
thing to  talk  about*  1  did  not  learn
that  there  was  anything  of  sufficient
importance  to  spend  time  about,  or
to  ask  my  counselor,  or  to  ask  any  of
the  Twelve,  any  of  the  Bishops,  or
any  of  the  brethren  present,  to  give
their  opinion  on  the  subject.  I  did
not  see  that  there  was  any  opinion  to
be  formed,  I  learned  nothing,  only
that  these  little  roots — this  seed  of
bitterness — had  grown  up  and  borne
fruit

Just  about  the  same  complaints
eame  to  me  year  after  year  against
brother  Maughan  and  brother  Ben-
son, and  of  other  Bishops  in  this
valley  very  few  have  been  excused.
If  we  were  to  hear  thein  all  and  trace
them  to  their  origin,  we  would  find
they  all  are  the  fruits  of  jealousy,
covetousness — which  is  idolatry,  dis-
content and  greediness.  Those  with
whom  they  originate  are  very  anxious
to  have  everybody  look  through  the
glasses  they  look  through,  to  feel  as
they  feel,  and  to  be  dictated  by  them.
I  want  to  say  this  to  the  brethren
and  to  the  sisters,  that  they  may
know  how  we  feel  about  this  matter.
We  did  not  chasten  Bishop  Ros-
feelly  nor  any  of  the  brethren  of  his
ward,  but  we  talked  to  them  a  little,
and  gave  them  same  good  counsel ;
and  we  do  not  feel  like  chastening
them,  but  just  say  to  them,  Try  and
live  so  that  the  Spirit  of  the  jJord
wtfjl  live  within  you,  and  you  will  do
\  wqU  enough,

I  gave  brother  Roskelly  some
i  counsel  with  regard  to  keeping  ac-
oouuts.  I  learned,  years  and  years
ago,  the  benefit  of  having  my  busi-
ness transactions  well  written  out  in
black  and  white,  and  when  I  have
any  dealings  with  a  man,  put  that


down.  If  I  have  paid  him,  say  I
have  paid  him,  how  much  and  what
for,  which  makes  a  proper  account
and  history,  I  learned  this  by  ex-
perience, and  I  got  this  little  item
when  I  first  started  in  business  in
my  youth.  We  were  building  up  a
little  town.  A  few  merchants,  a  few
mechanics,  and  a  few  others  had
come  in,  and  we  were  together  one
evening  talking  about  keeping  ac-
count books,  and  bringing  up  the
different  authors.  One  gentleman  in
the  company,  named  David  Smith,
said — "Gentlemen,  I  have  studied
every  author  in  America  on  book-
keeping, and  some  of  the  European
issues,  and  I  have  learned  that  there
is  no  rule  or  method  so  good  as  to
write  down  facts  just  as  they  occur.
That  is  the  best  book-keeping  I  have
learned  yet/*  This  I  have  observed
in  my  life;  J  adopted  this  principle
as  soon  as  I  heard  it.  I  say,  then,
to  brother  Roskelly,  instead  of  keep-
ing his  own  books,  have  somebody  or
otber  that  will  know  his  accounts
and  understand  his  dealings  to  keep
a  faithful  record  of  the  same ;  and  I
say  this  to  all  the  Bishops  and  to
men  of  business,  not  only  to  those  in
the  tithing  department,  but  mer-
chants, mechanics  and  farmers,  Most
of  our  iarmers  that  I  have  been  ac-
quainted with  never  keep  any  books
at  all ;  they  depend  on  memory,  and
I  have  known  some  men  to  do  quite  a
business  in  this  way.  We  have  a
considerable  number  of  tradesmen  in
our  community,  some  of  whom  never
keep  any  books  or  accounts.  This
class  are  liable  at  'any  time  to  be  im-
posed upon.  A  person  comes  up,
and,  says  he,  "  Yon  owe  me,  and  I
want  my  pay."  The  man  knows  he
has  paid  him,  but  he  forgets  when,
where  and  how,  but  it  is  settled  in
his  feelings  that  he  does  not  owe  him
anything.  This  brings  contention,
discord  and  strife,  even  among  pretty


FAULT  FINDING,  ETC.


131


good  Elders;  but  if  we  keep  a  strict
account  of  everything,  we  can  tell  a
man  then  whether  we  have  paid  him
or  not,  or  whether  we  owe  him  or
not.  This  13  the  way  for  brother
Samuel  Roskelly  and  all  the  Bishops
to  do.  I  wanted  to  say  this,  and
also  that  there  is  no  particular  ftult
to  be  found  with  brother  Roskelly,
and  no  particular  fault  to  lie  found
with  the  people,  only  they  do  not
live  their  religion  quite  ns  they  should,
and  the  spirit  of  contention  creeps  in
instead  of  the  spirit  of  prayer.  My
counsel,  brethren  and  sisters*  is  to
pray,  keep  the  law  of  God,  observe
the  Sabbath  day,  partake  of  the  Sac-
rament, observe  your  tithes  and
offerings,  and  fill  up  your  lives  with
doing  good.  This  accomplishes  my
ten  minutes,  and  now  I  leave  the
ground.  We  will  close  our  meeting
until  2  o'clock,  then  I  have  a  few
other  discourses  to  deliver.

[When  the  congregation  re-assem-
bled, after  singing  and  prayer,  Pre-
sident Young  again  took  the  stand,
and  spoke  as  follows: — ]

Now  for  my  second  lecture.  This
is  upon  financial  affairs  entirely.  It
is  merely  a  question  I  am  going  to
propound  to  the  people,  and  I  desire
an  answer  from  them.  Suppose  that
the  Wholesale  Co-operative  Store  in
Salt  Lake  City  should  be  pleased  to
extend  its  operations  to  this  valley
and  establish  a  wholesale  store  here,
I  want  to  know  what  the  disposition
and  action  of  the  people  would  be
with  regard  to  sustaining  it  ?  I  SCO
there  is  a  necessity  for  it,  for  there
are  a  good  many  settlements  in  this
valley  and  Bear  Lake  Valley  that  now
go  to  Salt  Lake  City  to  do  their
trading.  We  have  proposed  placing
a  wholesale  store  here,  and  whatever
is  kept  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  the
wholesale  department,  duplicate  the
same  for  this  place,  and  keep  a  perfect
assortment  here  the  same  as  is  done


in  the  city — farming  implements
wagons,  carriages  and  everything
necessary  to  supply  the  wants  of  the
people.  This  will  be  a  short  lecture.
Suppose  that  we  undertake  this,  what
will  be  the  action  of  the  people  ?  I
expect  every  settlement  is  represented
here  to-day,  probably  by  the  Bishops
and  leading  men,  who  know  the  feel-
ings of  the  people  and  who,  more  or
less,  control  the  business  portions  of
their  settlements.  Perhaps  a  good
many  have  not  thought  of  it,  then
a  train  a  good  many  have,  and  they
have  matured  this  pretty  well  in  their
feelings  and  understandings.  If  we
do  this,  onrplan  will  be  to  supply  the
people  with  everything  they  want,
and  all  their  products  that  can  be
disposed  of  to  buy  them.  We  will
take  the  products  of  the  country  that
we  can  sell,  ship  them  off  and  dis-
pose of  them,  and  in  return  supply
you  with  goods.  Will  the  Bishops,
High  Priests,  Seventies,  Elders,
Priests,  Teachers,  Deacons,  and  their
fathers,  mothers,  sons,  daughters  and
the  brothers  sustain  this  institution
if  we  place  one  here  ?  We  shall  give
you  the  goods  just  about  as  cheap  as
we  can  sell  them  in  Salt  Lake  City,
very  little  difference,  so  little  you
would  not  know ;  for  the  additional
expense  in  bringing  them  from  Ogden
to  this  place,  over  conveying  them
from  there  to  Salt  Lake  City,  would
be  very  trifling.  If  this  would  be  the
feelings  of  the  different  settlements,
I  would  like  to  have  you  manifest  it
by  showing  your  right  hands.  (Hands
up.)  Now  let  us  have  the  opposition
vote. (No  opposition*)

While  I  am  on  this  subject  let  me
say  a  few  words  with  regard  to  dress,
though  I  have  not  as  much  reason  to
do  so  here  as  I  have  in  Salt  Lake
City  and  Ogden*  Yon  know  that
we  are  creatures  subject  to  all  the
vanities  of  the  world,  and  very  sub-
ject to  admiring  its  fashions.  We


132  JOURNAL  OF

have  left  Babylon,  and  instead  of
introducing  it  bore  we  want  it  to  stay
yonder,  and  just  as  much  as  we  can,
no,  that  is  the  wrong  word — just  as
much  as  we  will,  we  want  to  make
our  own  head  dresses  here,  especially
for  the  ladies,  and  for  the  gentlemen
through  the  summer  season.  We
would  like  to  see  all  through  our
country  what  we  see  here  in  a  mea-
sure— a  decent  dress  on  a  lady.
Instead  of  having  four,  five  or  six
yards  of  cloth  drawing  through  the
street  to  raise  dust  on  the  people,
that  she  can  go  along  decently  and
you  would  not  think  there  was  a  six
horse  team  traveling  there,  with  a
dozen  dogs  under  the  wagon.  This
is  what  we  would  like,  but  when  we
come  to  the  ornaments,  I  feel  like
blackguarding.  I  am  going  to  speak
about  a  little  ornament  they  get  up,
I  believe  it  is  called  a  "  bender,"  and
I  do  not  know  but  there  is  a  Grecian
or  a  Greek  to  it — a  "  Grecian  bend."
You  have  seen  this  ridiculed  enough
without  my  doing  it.  I  want  to  say
to  you,  ladies,  just  take  off  this  orna-
ment If  my  sisters  will  take  the
hint,  they  will  leave  off  these  little
articles.  Some  of  them,  after  they
have  got  half  a  dozen  yards  on  it
are  not  satisfied  until  they  go  and
get  a  dozen  yards  of  ribbon  several
inches  wide  to  make  bows  to  put  on
the  top  of  that.  It  is  ridiculous  !  I
do  not  see  much  of  it  in  this  place,
to  what  I  do  in  some  others.  I  would
really  like  to  see  the  ladies  dress
decent  and  comely.  This  will  do  on
this  subject,  for  a  hint  to  the  wise  is
sufficient,  and  enough  has  been  said
if  the  sisters  will  take  counsel.

I  will  now  say  a  little  with  regard
to  our  young  people — a  subject  in-
troduced here  yesterday,  very  mo-
destly and  very  nicely.  Suppose  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  the  world  at
large  were  to  carry  out  the  principles
that  are  received  in  the  faith  of  a


DISCOURSES,

society  called  the  Shaking  Quakers,
how  long  do  you  suppose  it  would  be
before  there  would  not  be  a  human
being  left  on  the  earth,  unless  there
was  some  necromancy  or  stealthful
conduct  going  on  ?  About  one  hun-
dred and  twenty  years  would  take
the  last  man  and  woman  from  the
earth.  But  this  is  not  what  is
required  of  us,  it  was  not  required
of  Adam  and  Eve.  They  were  re-
quired to  multiply  and  replenish  the
earth,  and  I  will  here  say  a  word  to
the  ladies — Do  not  marvel,  do  not
wonder  at  it,  do  not  complain  at
Providence,  do  not  find  fault  with
mother  Eve  because  your  desire  is  to
your  husbands.  Bear  this  with  pa-
tience and  fortitude !  Be  reconciled
to  it,  meet  yom  afflictions  and  these
little, — well,  we  might  say,  not
very  trifling,  but  still  they  are  wants,
for  if  we  desire  only  that  that  is
necessary,  and  can  govern  and  control
ourselves  to  be  satisfied  with  that,
it  is  a  great  deal  better  than  to  want
a  thousand  things  that  are  unneces-
sary, and  especially  to  the  female
portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth*  But  there  is  a  curse  upon
them,  and  I  can  not  take  it  off,  can
you?  No.  yon  can  not — it  never
will  be  taken  from  the  human  family
until  the  mission  is  fulfilled,  and
our  Master  and  our  Lord  is  perfectly
satisfied  with  our  work.  It  will  then
be  taken  from  this  portion  of  the
community,  and  will  afflict  them  no
more;  hut  for  the  present  it  will
afflict  them.  And  almost  every  lady
I  ever  saw  in  my  life  is  just  as  bad
as  a  certain  lady  lecturer  who,  after
lecturing  and  extolling  her  sex,  and
trying  to  impress  upon  them  the  idea
that  it  would  have  been  much  better
for  the  world  if  there  had  never  been
a  man  upon  the  earth,  said,  "  Yet
you  know  our  weakness  is  such  that
we  turn  round  and  grab  the  first  man
we  come  to." How  natural  it  is!


FAULT  FINDING,  ETC.


133


Well,  ladies,  just  be  recanciled  to
your  condition,  and  if  there  is  a
principle  here  or  elsewhere  that
wishes  to  override  the  principle  of
celestial  marriage,  take  heed  to  your-
selves, for  I  can  promise  you  one
thing — If  you  ever  had  any  faith  in
the  Gospel  and  in  celestial  marriage,
and  you  renounce  or  disbelieve  and
deny  this  doctrine,  you  will  be
damned.  I  promise  you  that,  no
matter  who  it  is.  Now  take  heed  to
yourselves !  Look  at  the  world.
We  might  show  up  this  matter  here,
but  we  do  not  wish  to  do  so.  Those
who  travel  through  the  world  can
understand  these  tilings,  and  see  the
millions  of  the  human  family  who
are  trodden  under  foot.  I  will  refer
you  to  the  great  cities  of  the  world.
Get  their  statistics  and  see  how  many
young  females  perish  in  them  yearly.
Why  ?  Because  some  good  men
have  taken  them  and  made  second
wives  of  them  ?  No.  It  is  because
wicked  men  have  seduced  and  ruined
them,  and  have  made  them  so  reck*
less  in  their  feelings  that  rather  than
see  father,  mother,  brother,  sister  or
friends  again,  they  would  die  in  a
ditch.  Those  who  are  acquainted
with  the  world  know  these  things  are
true,  and  they  are  trying  to  introduce
this  practice  into  Salt  L  ike  City.  I
will  say  no  more  on  this  subject,  but
let  this  little  lecture  or  sermon
suffice.

I  will  now  ask  a  question  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  I  can  ask  it  of
the  aged,  middle-aged  and  the  youth,
for  it  is  a  matter  that  comes  within
the  range  of  the  understanding  of
the  entire  community7,  even  the
children — How  long  will  it  take  us
to  establish  Zion,  the  way  we  are
going  on  now  ?  You  can  answer
this  question  as  the  girl  did  the
schoolmaster,  I  suppose,  and  say,
"If  forty  years  has  brought  a  large
percentage  of  Babylon  into  the  midst


of  this  people,  how  long  will  it  take
to  get  Babylon  out  and  actually  to
establish  Zion  ?  The  schoolmaster
boasted  of  his  aptness  at  figures  and
told  the  girl  that  no  question  in
mathematics  could  be  asked  him
that  he  could  not  readily  answer.
Said  the  girl,  "I  think  I  can  ask
you  a  question  you  cannot  answer  ?"
"Well,"  said  he,  "let's  have  it."
"  Well/  said  she,  "  if  by  eating  one
apple  .Mother  Eve  rained  the  Whole
humau  family,  what  would  an  or-
chard full  of  apples  do  ?"  You  will
be  as  puzzled  to  answer  my  question
as  the  schoolmaster  was  his  pupil's
question.  You  can  say,  "  I  do  not
know,"  and  it  is  true,  you  do  not
know ;  but  I  can  inform  yon  on  that
subject — Until  the  father,  the  mother,
the  son  and  the  daughter  take  the
counsel  that  is  given  them  by  those
who  lead  and  direct  them  in  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God,  they  will
never  establish  Zion,  no  never,  worlds
without  end.  When  they  learn  to  do
this,  I  do  not  think  there  will  be
much  complaining  or  grumbling,  or
much  of  what  we  have  heard  about
to-day* — improper  language  to  man
or  beast.  I  do  not  think  there  will
be  much  pilfering,  purloining,  bad
dealing,  covetonsuess  or  anything  of
the  kind;  not  much  of  this  unruly
spirit  that  wants  everybody  to  sustain
its  possessor  and  let  him  get  rich,
whether  anybody  else  does  or  not  I
think  when  we  have  learned  that
lesson,  we  will  be  willing  to  take
the  counsel  of  those  who  rtre  set  to
direct  us,  the  officers  who  are  over  us;
and  if  they  are  not  just,  true,  holy,
upright  and  men  of  God  in  every
respect,  just  have  faith  enough  so
that  the  Lord  Almighty  will  remove
them  out  of  the  way,  and  do  not
undertake  to  remove  them  yourselves.
Tins  is  the  way  we  should  live.
There  should  be  faith  enough  in  the
midst  o(  this  people  that  if  your


134


journal  op  discourses.


humble  servants  were  to  attempt  to
guide  them  iu  the  ways  of  error,
false  doctrine,  wickedness  or  corrup-
tion of  any  kind,  he  would  be  stopped
in  his  career  in  twenty-lour  hours  so
that  he  would  not  be  able  to  speak  to
them,  and  if  he  were  nut  hud  in  the
grave,  he  would  have  no  power  nor
influence  whatever*  There  ought  to
faith  enough  in  a  Ward,  if  the  Bishop
ii  wicked,  if  he  is  doing-  wrong  and
serving  himself  and  the  enemy  in-
stead of  the  Lord  and  his  kingdom,
to  stop  him  in  his  career,  so  that  the
Lord  would  remove  him  out  of  the
way.  This  has  been  the  case  in  some
few  instances,  and  it  ought  to  be
every  time  and  in  every  place.

When  shall  wc  establish  the  prin-
ciples of  Zion  ?  You  can  say,  t£  I  do
not  know."  If  we  had  power  to  do
it,  we  should  do  it;  but  we  are  just
in  the  position  and  condition,  and
upon  precisely  the  fearae  ground  that
God  our  Father  is — He  cannot  force
his  children  to  do  this,  that  or  the
other  against  their  will — the  eternal
laws  by  which  he  and  all  others  exist
in  the  eternities  of  the  Gods,  decree
that  the  consent  of  the  creature  must
be  obtained  before  the  Creator  can
rule  perfectly.  It  is  just  as  im pos-
sible for  the  principles  of  heaven  to
rule  in  the  hearts  oi  the  wicked  and
ungodly  as  anything  you  can  well
imagine;  you  might  as  well  throw
powder  into  a  flaming  fire  and  say  it
should  not  burn,  or  burst  a  cask  of
water  in  the  air  and  say  it  should  not
fall  to  the  ground.  The  consent  of
the  creature  must  be  had  in  these
things,  and  until  you  and  I  do  con-
sent in  our  feelings  and  understand
that  it  is  a  necessity  that  we  establish
Zion,  we  shall  have  Babylon  mixed
with  us.

I  know  the  faith  of  the  people,  in
a  great  measure,  is,  "  We  would  like
to  see  Zion."  M  Would  you  ?  "  "  Yes,
but  I  would  like  to  see  it  enjoyed  by


others.  I  do  not  want  to  be  there
myself,  I  want  to  see  how  it  looks/*
This  is  the  feeling,  these  are  the
ideas  that  puss  through  the  miuds  of
many.  "  We  would  just  like  to  see
the  people  live  according  to  the  prin-
ciples of  heaven,  to  see  how  they
would  look  and  act,  to  learn  their
ways;  but  we  would  not  be  bound  to
live  there  until  we  had  seen  enough
to  be  able  to  judge  whether  we  would
like  it  or  not.  Maybe  we  would  like
it,  maybe  not;  it  might  deprive  us
of  some  little  privileges  we  have  now.
We  might  not  be  permitted  to  wear
what  we  wear  now,  or  to  act,  think
and  feel  as  we  do  now\  We
might  be  crippled  or  curtailed  in  our
views  or  operations,  consequently  we
do  not  want  to  enter  into  this
order  ourselves,  but  we  would  like
some  others  to  do  so  that  we  may  see
how  it  looks/'  This  is  the  way  they
feel  about  Zion.

Well,  brethren,  I  have  talked  all
I  ought  to,  and  perhaps  more.  I
say,  as  I  always  do,  God  bless  you  !
Peace  be  with  you,  and  love  be  mul-
tiplied upon  the  people.  I  pray  for
the  good  all  over  the  earth.  My  desire  is
to  see  the  kingdom  of  God  prosper.
We  are  prospering  in  many  things,
but  we  are  not  prospering  iu  the
orace  of  God  and  in  the  spirit  of  our
holy  religion  as  much  as  we  should.
Herein  we  come  short.  But  if  we
will  try  and  improve  our  minds,
school  and  train  ourselves  to  over-
come every  evil  within  us,  every
passion,  every  unruly  thought,  I  do
know  by  experience,  by  a  close  appli-
cation of  any  individual  to  himself
tn  schooling  and  training  his  mind,
he  can  cease  to  think  evil  thoughts
and  he  will  be  able  to  think  good,
that  is,  his  mind  will  be  filled  with
pleasant  reflections.  This  I  know
by  experience.  I  heard  Brother
Taylor  preach  a  sermon  once  on  the
principle  of  revelation,  which  con-


INCREASE  OF  SAINTS,  ETC.


tamed  the  most  pleasant  ideas*  Still  ]
it  is  in  the  Bible — all  this  is  taughi
there — but  he  illast rated  the  prin-
ciple of  lining  for  God  perfectly  day
hy  day,  showing  that  we  could  do  so
until  God  lived  within  us,  and  nntil
we,  ourselves,  became  a  fountain  of
revelation ;  instead  of  having  to  ask,
plead  and  pray  the  Lord  to  give  as  a
vision  and  to  open  our  minds,  wc
could  live  for  God  until  a  fountain  of
light  and  intelligence  was  with  in  use,
from  morning  until  evening,  and
from  evening  nntil  morning,  week


135

after  week,  month  after  month  and
year  after  year.  This  is  tbe  fact.
Then  let  us  live  so  that  the  spirit  of
our  religion  will  live  within  us,  then
we  have  pence,  joy,  happiness  and
contentment,  which  mnkes  such
pleasant  fathers,  pleasant  mothers,
pleasant  children,  pleasant  house-
holds, neighbors,  communities  and
cities*  That  is  worth  living  for,  and
I  do  think  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
ought  to  strive  for  this.
May  God  help  us !


REMARKS B? PRESIDENT BRIGHAM  YOUNG,
Delivered  at  Farminuton,  Saturday  AftkrxooK,  Aug.  24,  1872,

[Reported  by  David  IF.  Evans.)

 o

INCREASE  OF  SAINTS  SINCE  JOSEPH  SMITH  S  DEATH — JOSEPH  SMITH'S

SONS — RESURRKiTIOX  AND  MILLENNIAL  WORK.


There  are  a  few  minutes  to  spare
before  we  dismiss,  and  there  are  quite
a  number  of  items  that  could  be
talked  about  that  would  be  very  in-
teres  ting  to  the  people,  especially  in
regard  to  the  first  experience  of  the
Church.  When  I  hear  brethren  re-
late their  experience  of  those  days  it
brings  to  my  mind  many  things  per-
taining to  the  establishment  of  the
kingdom  in  the  beginning.  Not  that
I  was  a  member  of  the  Church  at  its
organization,  but  I  was  near  by  and
knew  something  of  the  doings  of  the
Saints.  I  recollect  very  well  the
night  that  Joseph  found  the  plates  :
the  recollection  of  that  event  is  as
yividly  impressed  on  my  mind  as
though  it  were  last  night But,  to


change  my  remarks  to  another  sub-
ject referred  to,  let  me  ask  you,
brethren  and  sisters,  How  many  do
you  suppose  there  are  in  rhe  Church
now  who  were  in  twenty-eight  years
ago?  Some  nre  disposed  to  imagine
that  the  people  we  now  call  Latter-
day  Saints  Lmve  been  brought  into
the  Church  through  the  labors  of  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  If  we  were
to  ask  this  congregation  how  many
of  them  were  in  the  Church  twenty-
eight  years  ago,  we  should  find  only
a  small  portion  of  thcMii.  I  will  say
that,  probably,  two-thirds,  yes,  three-
foutths,  and  even  more  than  that,
have  come  into  the  Church  through
the  administration  of  what  is  called
the  First  Presidency  at  the  present


1 30


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


time;  consequently  our  work  shows
for  itself.  We  need  not  ask  persons
to  give  their  opinion  about  the  theory
that  we  have  placed  before  them,  but
what  do  you  think  of  the  work  itself?
What  do  you  think  of  this  great
kingdom,  this  little  empire,  we  might
say,  as  it  now  appear*  to  the  world  ?
It  is  twenty-eight  years  since  Brother
Joseph  was  killed,  aud  the  work  has
gone  forth  steadily  and  rapidly,  and
through  the  providences  of  God  we
have  apparently  advanced  faster  since
then,  than  in  the  fourteen  years  be-
fore, so  far  as  bringing  the  people
into  note,  and  giving  them  a  name
and  fame  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.
The  work  is  still  onward  and  it  is
upward.

I  simply  ask  the  question  about
what  the  people  think  of  these  things,
I  do  not  wish  to  dwell  on  the  prin-
ciple of  parties  denying  the  faith,  or
remaining  in  the  faith,  they  can  do
just  as  they  please  about  that ;  but
while  Brother  Levi  Hancock  was
talking  about  sticking  to  the  Church,
and  declaring  that  he  meant  to  hang
on  to  it,  I  thought,  and  say  now,
what  in  the  name  of  common  sense
is  there  to  hang  on  to,  if  he  does  not
Lang  on  to  the  Churcb  ?  I  do  not
know  of  anything.  LYon  might  as
well  take  a  lone  straw  in  the  midst
of  the  ocean  to  save  yourselves  as  to
think  of  doing  so  by  (he  knowledge,
power,  authority,  faith  and  priesthood
of  the  Christian  world,  and  the
heathen  world  into  the  bargain.
There  is  nothing  but  the  Gospel  to
hang  on  to !  Those  who  leave  the
Church  are  like  a  feather  blown  to
and  fro  in  the  air.  They  know  not
whither  they  are  going;  they  do  not
understand  anything  about  their  own
existence  ;  their  faith,  judgment  and
the  operations  of  their  minds  are  as
unstable  as  the  movements  of  the
feather  floating  in  the  air.  We
have not anything to cling  to


only  faith  in  the  Gospel,

As  for  the  doctrine  that  is  pro-
mulgated by  the  sons  of  Joseph,  it  is
nothing  more  than  any  other  false
religion.  We  would  be  very  glad  to
have  the  privilege  of  saying  that  the
children  of  Joseph  Smith,  Junior,
the  Prophet  of  God,  were  firm  in  the
faith  of  the  Gospel,  and  following
in  rhe  footsteps  of  their  father.  But
what  are  they  doing  ?  Trying  to
blot  out  every  vestige  of  the  work
their  father  performed  on  the  earth.
Their  mission  is  to  endeavor  to  ob*
literate  every  particle  of  his  doctrine,
his  faith  and  doings.  These  boys  are
not  following  Joseph  Smith,  but
Km  ma  Bideman.  Every  person  who
hearkens  to  what  they  say,  hearkens
to  the  will  and  wishes  of  Emma  Bide-
man.  The  boys,  themselves,  have
no  will,  no  mind,  no  judgment  inde-
pendent of  their  mother.  I  do  not
want  to  talk  about  them.  I  am
sorry  for  them,  and  I  have  my  own
faith  in  regard  to  them,  I  think  the
Lord  will  find  them  by  and  by — not
Joseph,  I  have  told  the  people  times
enough, they  never  may  depend  on
Joseph  Smith  who  is  now  living;
but  David,  who  was  born  after  the
death  of  his  father,  I  still  look  for
the  day  to  come  when  the  Lord  will
touch  his  eyes-  But  I  do  not  look
for  it  while  his  mother  lives.  The
Lord  would  do  it  now  if  David  were
willing;  but  he  is  not,  he  places  his
mother  first  and  foremost,  and  would
take  her  counsel  sooner  than  he
would  the  counsel  of  the  Almighty,
consequently  he  can  do  nothing,  he
knows  nothing,  he  has  no  faith,  and
we  have  to  let  the  matter  rest  in  the
hands  of  God  for  the  present.

Now  a  few  words  to  the  brethren
and  sisters  upon  the  doctrine  and
ordinances  of  the  house  of  God.  All
who  have  lived  on  the  earth  accord-
ing to  the  best  light  they  had,  and
I  would  have  received  the  fullness  of


INCREASE  OF

the  Gospel  had  it  been  preached  to
them,  are  worthy  of  a  glorious  resur-
rection, and  will  attain  to  this  by
being  administered  for  in  the  flesh  by
those  who  have  the  authority.  All
others  will  have  a  resurrection,  and
receive  a  glory,  except  those  who
have  sinned  ngninst  the  Holy  Ghost.
It  is  suppoaed  by  this  people  that  we
have  all  the  ordinances  in  our  posses-
sion for  life  and  salvation,  and  exaU
tat  ion,  and  that  we  ate  administering
in  these  ordinances-  This  is  not  the
case*  We  are  in  possession  of  all
the  ordinances  that  can  be  admin-
istered in  the  flesh  ;  but  there  are
other  ordinances  and  administrations
that  must  be  administered  beyond
this  world.  I  know  you  would  ask
what  they  are.  I  will  mention  one.
We  have  not,  neither  can  we  receive
here,  the  ordinance  and  the  keys  of
the  resurrection.  They  will  be  given
to  those  who  have  passed  ofi"  this
stage  of  action  and  have  received
their  bodies  again,  as  many  have
already  done  and  many  more  will.
They  will  he  ordained,  by  those  who
hold  the  keys  of  the  resurrection,  to
go  forth  and  resurrect  the  Saints,
just  as  . we  receive  the  ordinance  of
baptism,  then  the  keys  of  authority
to  baptize  others  for  the  remission  of
their  sins.  This  is  one  of  the  ordi-
nances we  can  not  receive  here,  and
there  are  many  more.  W  e  hold  the
authority  to  dispose  of,  alter  and
change  the  elements;  but  we  have
not  received  authority  to  organize
native  element  to  even  make  a  spear
of  grass  grow*  We  have  no  such
ordinance  here.  We  organize  ac
cording  to  men  in  the  flesh.  By
combining  the  elements  and  planting
the  seed,  we  cause  vegetables,  trees,
grains,  &c.,  to  come  forth.  We  are
organizing  a  kingdom  here  according
to  the  pattern  that  the  Lord  has
given  for  people  in  the  flesh,  but  not
for  those  who  have  received  the  re


SAINTS,  ETC.  137

surrection,  although  it  is  a  similitude.
Another  item :  We  have  not  the
power  in  the  flesh  to  create  and  bring
forth  or  produce  a  spirit;  but  we
have  the  power  to  produce  a  tem-
poral body.  The  germ  of  this,  God
has  placed  within  us.  And  when  our
spirits  receive  our  bodies,  and  through
our  faithfulness  we  are  worthy  to  be
crowned,  we  will  then  receive  autho-
rity to  produce  both  spirit  and  body.
But  these  keys  we  cannot  receive  in
the  flesh.  Herein,  brethren,  you  can
perceive  that  we  have  not  finished,
and  cannot  finish  our  work,  while  we
live  here,  no  more  than  Jesus  did
while  he  was  in  the  flesh.

We  can  not  receive,  while  in  the
flesh,  the  keys  to  form  and  fashion
kingdoms  and  to  organize  matter,
for  they  are  beyond  our  capacity  and
calling,  beyond  this  world.  In  the
resurrection,  men  who  have  been
faithful  and  diligent  in  all  things  in
the  flesh,  have  kept  their  firat  and
second  estate,  and  worthy  to  be
crowned  Gods,  even  the  sons  of  God,
will  be  ordained  to  organize  matter.
How  much  matter  do  you  suppose
there  is  between  here  and  some  of
the  fixed  stars  which  wc  can  see?
Enough  to  frame  many,  very  many
millions  of  such  earths  as  this,  yet
it  is  now  so  diffused,  clea**  and  pure,
that  we  look  through  it  and  behold
the  stars.  Yet  the  matter  is  there.
Can  you  form  any  conception  of  this?
Can  you  form  am-  idea  of  the  mi-
nuteness of  matter'?  Let  me  give
you  a  comparison,  for  instance,  with
regard  to  mathematics.  You  take  a
child  that  is  born  to  day,  say  at
twelve  o'clock,  precisely  at  high
noon.  One  year  from  to-day  there
is  another  child  born.  The  one
born  to-day  will  be  just  one  year
older  than  the  other.  The  second
one  is  perhaps  not  a  minute  old,  it
has  just  commenced  to  breathe  the
vital  air. Now  the  one  born  first


138


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


is  a  great  many  times  older  than
the  second,  we  would  hare  to  get
some  of  these  mathematicians  to  tell
how  many  times. It  would  be  over
21  millions  of  seconds,  a  great  many
minutes,  many  hours,  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  days,  and  one  year.
When  these  two  children  have  lived
just  one  year  longer  the  elder  of  the
two  is  two  years  old,  the  other  one,
the  former,  being  just  as  old  again
as  the  latter. In  one  year  more  the
first  one  will  be  only  one- third  older,
the  fourth  year  he  will  be  one-fourth
older,  and  so  on. Now  then,  how
long  must  these  two  children  live
to  be  exactly  of  an  age?  They
never will be; never, no  never,
through  all  the  eternities  there  are,
and  that  is  for  ever  and  ever.  They
will  always  differ  in  age,  and  when
countless millions  and  myriads  of
ages  have  passed  away  there  is  still,
do  you  not  see,  a  difference,  these
children  are  not  yet  of  the  same
age. It  is just so  with  matter.
Take,  for  ins  a  nee,  a  grain  of  sand.
You  can  not  divide  it  so  small  that
it  can  not  be  divided  again — it  is
capable of infinite division.  We
know  nothing  about  how  many  times
it  can  be  divided,  and  it  is  just  so
with  regard  to  the  lives  in  us,  in
animals,  in  vegetation,  in  shrubbery.
They are  countless. To  illustrate,
you  take  a  perfectly  ripe  kernel  of
corn — you  will  have  some  here  per-
haps in  a  few  days — and  if  you  get
a  glass,  it  does  not  require  a  very
powerful  one,  and  you  take  the  chit
of  this  corn  and  open  it,  yon  behold
distinctly  a  stalk  of  corn,  in  that
chit,  a  perfectly  grown  stalk  of  corn,
with  ears  and  leaves  on  it,  matured,
out  in  blossom, — there  is  the  tassel,
there  are  the  ears  and  there  js  the
corn! Well,  you  get  a  stronger
glass  and  divide  again,  and  you  can
see  that  this  very  chit  is  the  grand-
father of  corn  ! We  take  the  scien-


tific world  for  this,  Well,  how  many
lives  are  there  in  this  grain  of  corn?
They  are  innumerable,  and  this  same
infinity  is  manifest  through  all  the
creations  of  God.

We  will  operate  here,  in  all  the
ordinances  of  the  house  of  God
which  pertain  to  this  side  the  vail,
and  those  who  pass  beyond  and
sec  urn  to  themselves  a  resurrection
pertaining  to  the  lives  will  go  on  and
receive  more  and  more,  more  and
more,  and  will  receive  one  after  ano-
ther ontil  they  are  crowned  Gods,
even  the  sons  of  God,  This  idea  is
very  consoling.  We  are  now  bap-
tizing for  the  dead,  and  we  are  sealing
for  the  dead,  and  if  we  had  a  tem-
ple prepared  we  should  be  giving
endowments  for  the  dea  l — for  our
fathers,  mothers,  grandfathers,  grand-
mothers, uncles,  aunts,  relatives,
friends  and  old  associates,  the  his-
tory of  whom  we  are  now  getting
from  oar  friends  in  the  east  The
Lord  is  stirring  up  the  hearts  of
many  there,  and  there  is  a  perfect
mania  with  some  to  trace  their  gene-
alogies and  to  get  up  printed  records
of  their  ancestors.  They  do  not
know  what  they  are  doing  it  for,  but
the  Lord  is  prompting  them  ;  and  it
will  continue  and  ran  on  from  father
to  father,  father  to  father,  until  they
get  the  genealogy  of  their  forefathers
as  far  as  they  possibly  can.

I  am  going  to  stop  my  talking  by
saying  that,  in  the  millennium,  when
the  kingdom  of  God  is  established
on  the  earth  in  power,  glory  and  per-
fection, and  the  reign  of  wickedness
that  I j as  so  long  prevailed  is  subdued,
the  Saints  of  God  will  have  the  pri-
vilege of  building  their  temples,  and
of  entering  into  them,  becoming,  as
it  were,  pillars  in  the  temples  of  God,
and  they  will  officiate  for  their  dead.
Then  we  will  see  our  friends  come
up,  and  perhaps  some  that  we  have
been  acquainted  with  here. If  we


god's  ways  not

ask  who  will  stand  at  the  head  of  the
resurrection  in  this  last  dispensation,
the  answer  is — Joseph  Smith,  Junior,
the  Prophet  of  God.  He  is  the  man
who  will  be  resurrected  and  receive
the  keys  of  the  resurrection,  and  be
will  seal  this  authority  upon  others,
and  they  will  hunt  up  their  friends
and  resurrect  them  when  they  shall
have  been  officiated  for,  and  bring
them  up.  And  we  will  have  revela-
tions to  know  our  forefathers  clear
back  to  Father  Adam  and  Mother
Eve,  and  we  will  enter  into  the  teni-


as  man's  ways,  139

pies  of  God  and  officiate  for  them.
Then  man  will  be  sealed  to  man
until  the  chain  is  made  perFect  back
,  to  Adam,  so  that  there  will  be  a  per*
feet  chain  of  priesthood  from  Adam
to  the  winding-up  scene.
1  This  will  be  the  work  of  the  Lat-
ter day  Saints  in  the  millennium.
How  much  time  do  you  suppose  we
have  to  attend  to  and  footer  Babylon  ?
I  leave  this  question  for  you  to  an-
swer at  your  pleasure.  I  have  no
time  at  a!l  for  that,  I  say,  and  stop
my  sayings.


REMARKS BY BRIGHAM YOLNG,  JUN.,
Delivered  jit  Farmixgtgn,  Sunday  Mokning,  August  20th,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)
GOD'S  WAYS  NOT  AS  man's  WAYS.


I  have  a  testimony,  brethren  and
sisters,  as  to  the  truth  of  the  work  of
God,  that  it  is  a  pleasure  to  me  to
bear  to  you,  and  to  strangers  when
opportunity  offers,  I  have  no  parti-
cular text  to  speak  upon  at  the  pre-
sent time,  save  the  one  that  should
be  at  all  times  in  the  mind  of  every
Latter-day  Saint,  and  that  is,  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  its  growth  and
development  upon  the  earth,  This ,
is  a  subject  that  should  be  ever  pre-
sent with  us;  and  when  an  indivi-
dual whose  interests  are  professedly
identified  with  that  kingdom,  forgets
the  duties  devolving  upun  him  in
connection  with  it,  we  may  infer
that  he  has  ceased  to  be  useful  therein  .


We  know,  brethren,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  please  the  Lord  by  follow-
ing the  counsels  of  our  own  minds,
unless  they  are  enlightened  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Almighty.  The  wis-
dom of  man  is  not  the  wisdom  of
God,  and  to  be  successful  in  extend-
ing and  strengthening  the  cause  of
God  on  the  earth,  we  must  have  his
Spirit  to  guide  us.  If  our  ways  were
as  God's  ways,  we  would  do  as  he
would  have  us  do;  but  it  is  evident
to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  the
actions  of  the  human  family,  not  ex-
cluding the  Latter-day  Saints,  that
the  mind  of  man  is  not  as  God's
mind.  A  verse  of  Scripture,  which
now  occurs  to  my  mind,  will  illustrate


140  JOURNAL  OF

this.  It  will  be  found  in  tie  11th
Terse  of  the  2nd  chapter  of  the  1st
epistle  to  the  Corinthians: — "  For
what  man  knoweth  the  things  of
man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  j
in  him  ?  even  so  the  things  of  God
knoweth  no  man,  but,  the  Spirit  of
God."

The  experience  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  had  has  taught  them  that
this  is  true,  and  we  know  that  when
a  man  deems  himself  capable  of  act-
ing solely  on  his  own  intelligence,
and  neglects  to  seek  for  the  wisdom  !
of  Heaven  to  guide  him,  he  is  very
apt  to  go  astray.  This  feeling  of  in- ,
dependence  of  the  Almighty  has
caused  the  apostacy  of  some,  whom
we,  perhaps,  have  thought  it  would
be  almost  impossible  to  blind  to  the
truths  they  once  advocated  so  well ;
but  it  is  the  ease.  Men  do  not  look  1
at  things  as  God  looks  at  them,
therefore  it  is  indispensably  neces-
sary for  each  individual  Latter-day
Saint  to  have  the  Spirit  of  God  within
kim,  that  he  may  do  His  will  and
not  carry  out  his  own  views.

Look  over  the  nations  of  the  earth,
and  where  is  there  a  government
established  on  correct  principles,  that
is,  in  accordance  with  the  command-
ments of  God  ?  There  is  not  one,  for
they  are  all  established  by  the  wis-
dom of  men,  and  men's  wavs  are  so
different  from  the  ways  of  God  that
it  is  impossible,  with  all  their  intelli-
gence and  knowledge — and  we  know
they  possess  a  great  deal — for  men
to  establish  a  government  after  the
order  of  God,  In  some  minor  parti-
culars such  a  government  might  not
be  far  out  of  the  way,  but  in  all  the
essentials  it  would  be  dissimilar.  It
is  the  same  with  us,  the  Latter-day
Saints,  without  the  inspiration  and
wisdom  ot  Heaven  to  guide  us,  we
can  not  hope  to  carry  out  and  accom-
plish God's  purposes*  Many  of  us
have  not  had  the  educational  advan-


DISCOURSES,

tages  enjoyed  by  the  wealthy  in  the
outside  world,  having  belonged  to
the  laboring  classes — to  what  is
termed  the  down-trodden  portions  of
the  population  of  Europe  and  Ame-
rica, and  I  say  thank  God  for  it,  for
as  a  general  thing  the  educated  classes
are  fast  becoming  unbelievers  in  the
Old  and  New  Testament.  We,  hav-
ing been  taken  from  the  lowly  walks
of  life,  have  not,  according  to  the
ideas  of  the  world,  the  intelligence
necessary  to  establish  a  form  of  gov-
ernment equal  to  that  which  other
men  have  established  who  have  been
more  learned,  better  educated  than
we  are,  and  who  have  had  more  wis-
dom than  we  seem  to  have,  in  a  tem-
poral point  of  view.  But  God,  in
his  intinitc  mercy,  has  inspired  our
leaders,  he  has  endowed  them  with
I  wisdom  and  understanding  to  take
the  course  and  perform  the  work  that
he  desired,  I  have  heard  men  of
the  world  point  out  to  President
Young  and  other  leading  men  in  this
Church  the  coarse  they  should  pur-
sue under  certain  circumstances,  to
ensure  the  approval  and  friendship
of,  and  to  give  satisfaction  to,  the
leading  men  of  our  nation  and  the
nations  abroad  ;  and  to  my  certain
knowledge  their  counsel  was  diame-
trically opposed  to  the  course  taken
under  those  circumstances,  I  have
noticed  these  things,  and  I  know  it
is  true  that  God's  ways  are  not  as
men's  ways ;  and  fur  a  man  to  under-
take to  be  a  Latter-day  Saint  while
groping  in  the  dark  by  trusting
wholly  to  the  intelligence  of  his  own
mind,  is  the  hardest  work  imagin-
able; it  is  the  most  laborious  task
that  can  be,  for  any  individual  on  the
earth  to  try  to  be  what  he  ought  to
be  before  his  God  without  the  Holy
Spirit  to  assist  and  guide  him.  We
know  that  naturally  our  hearts  are
far  removed  from  God  ;  and,  speak-
ing to  the  ancient  Saints,  one  of  the


god's  ways  not


AS  MAN'S  WAYS


HI


Apostles  told  them  they  were  blinded
in  part,  and  saw  through  a  glass
darkly.  This  is  our  condition,  then
how  necessary  it  is  for _»  to  seek

continually  for  that  Spirit  which  will
enable  us  to  live  as  Saints  of  the
Most  High  should  live,  and  to  labor
so  that  we  may  establish  a  kingdom
on  the  earth  which  God  will  delight
in,  and  which,  when  the  great  men
of  the  earth  see,  they  will  be  willing
to  acknowledge  the  wisdom  mani-
fested therein,  and  to  glorify  God  for
the  same.  To-day,  if  a  stranger  were
to  come  into  this  congregation,  for
instance,  he  would  be  very  likely  to
think,  **  These  are  the  Latter-day
Saints — the  people  who  have  gathered
out  from  the  nations  of  the  earth  to
worship  God  !  Well,  I  do  not  see  a
great  amount  of  intellect  manifested,
there  is  no  great  intellectual  ability,
not  so  much  as  among  the  people  of
other  congregations  where  I  have
been."  That  may  be  true,  and
hence  the  proof  is  more  striking  that
the  work  we  have  done  has  been
directed  and  dictated  by  the  wisdom
of  the  Almighty,  and  in  its  accom-
plishment the  very  spirit,  energy
and  determination  which  our  leaders
have  exhibited  were  required*  You
might  have  ransacked  the  world  from
one  end  to  the  other,  and  you  could
not  have  found  educated  men — men
brought  up  in  colleges — who  would
have  come  out  and  taken  the  axe  and
the  plow,  driven  the  teams,  made
the  roads,  led  the  people  and  located
them  as  our  leaders  have  done.  They
might  have  done  these  things  if  they
had  been  willing  to  bow  in  obedience
to  God;  but  they  are  too  highly
educated,  they  are  too  full  of  the  wis-
dom of  the  world  to  seek  unto  God,
in  lowliness  of  heart,  for  his  Spirit  to
guide  them,  as  our  leaders  have  done.
Such  men  as  those  I  am  referring  to,
could  not  have  trusted  implicitly  in
the  arm  of  Jehovah,  when  on  the


plains,  to  protect  them  from  the
savages,  the  storms,  and  all  the  dan-
gers incident  to  such  a  journey  ;  they
could  not  understand  and  compre-
hend the  necessity  of  faith  in  God
under  such  circumstances,  their  edu-
cation and  worldly  wisdom  would
have  rendered  it  next  to  impossible,
and  it  required  the  very  men  who
have  been  our  leaders  to  do  the  work
that  has  been  done,  and  it  needs
them  still  They  are  perfectly  willing
that  God  should  guide  this  great
ship  Zion,  they  are  willing  to  act
under  his  direction ;  and  no  matter
who  the  man  is,  nor  where  he  comes
from,  if  he  identifies  himself  with
this  people,  he  must  be  willing  that
God  should  lead  and  guide  him,  and
to  obey  every  word  that  proceeds
from  His  mouth,  jar  he  is  not  the
man  to  help  to  carry  on  this  work.

To  say  that  we  are  a  perfect  peo-
ple, I  can  not  do  it,  neither  can  I  say
that  I  am  a  perfect  man.  I  am  just
as  full  of  weaknesses  as  any  other
man,  and  so  are  my  brethren  with
whom  I  associate;  bat  the  Elder  of
Israel,  no  matter  how  great  his
weaknesses,  who  humbly  trusts  in
God  and  continually  strives  to  over-
come evil  and  to  do  only  that  which
is  right,  will  be  enabled  to  triumph
and  be  faithful  to  the  end.  What
matteri  it  if  a  man  likes  whisky,  if  he
does  not  drink  it  ?  I  do  not  care
how  much  a  man  in  this  Church  likes
it,  if  he  does  not  drink  it,  it  makes
no  difference.  I  do  not  caro  how
much  he  loves  tobacco,  or  this,  that
or  the  other,  that  is  not  good,  if  he
brings  his  actions  and  feelings  into
subjection  to  the  dictates  of  the  Spirit
of  God-  I  do  not  care  how  much  a
man  loves  property,  it  will  not  harm
him  if  he  does  not  set  his  heart  upon
it  so  that  he  could  not  sacrifice  it,  if
required  to  do  so,  to  promote  the  in-
terests of  God's  kingdom  upon  the
earth. I  remember  once,  when  a


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


boy,  Jedediah  Iff.  Grant  saw  me
chewing  tobacco,  and  said  he,  "  Yoa
chew  tobacco,  do  you  ?  "  u  Yes,  sir,"
u  Well,  I  never  had  any  taste  for  It ;
It  is  no  virtue  in  me  that  I  do  not  use
it,  I  tried  hard  enough,  but  it  made
me  sick."  The  virtue,  biethren,  is
in  putting  away  or  overcoming  habits
which  yoa  know  would  impede  your
progress  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It
was  not  a  virtue  in  Bro.  Grant  that
lie  did  not  chew  tobacco,  he  tried  to
learn  how,  but  could  not  do  it  I
tried,  and* succeeded.  But,  brethren
and  sisters,  the  idea  is,  to  bring  our
actions,  thoughts  and  feelings  into
complete  subjection  to  the  dictates  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  be  on  hand
at  all  times  to  labor  as  we  are  directed
for  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth ;  that  should
be  the  object  with  us.  It  is  no  use
for  a  man  to  say,  "  I  am  a  Latter-
day  Saint,  and  they  have  not  cut  me
off  yet.  I  have  almost  feared  it
sometimes,  because  I  did  not  do  that
which  I  knew  to  be  right  j  but  I  am
still  within  the  pale  of  the  kingdom,
and  I  hope  to  slip  along  with  the
balance."  This  is  just  as  great  folly
as  for  a  man  to  claim  the  right  to  go
a  journey  by  railway  when  he  has
no  ticket  and  no  means  to  pay  his
fire.  He  may  hung  around,  and
declare  that  he  is  one  of  the  crowd,
and  that  he  is  going  along  with  them
on  that  train ;  but,  ignorant  of  the
time  it  starts,  and  destitute  of  the
means  to  pay  his  way,  he  strays  off
for  a  short  time,  and  .  in  the  mean-
while the  train  starts  and  leaves  him
behind.  It  is  just  so  with  an  un-
faithful Elder  in  this  kingdom — he
is  not  prepared  for  events  as  they
transpire,  and,  lacking  the  spirit  of
the  Gospel,  is  liable  to  be  left  be-


I  am  talking  to  people  who  under-
stand me,  to  people  who  have  the
word  of  God.  'The  Elders  testify


that  God  has  spoken  from  the  hea-
vens, and,  that  he  revealed  principles
to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and
others,  for  the  salvation  of  the  hu-
man family;  they  declare  that  the
principles  revealed  to  them  will  save
the  people  if  they  will  practice  them
in  their  lives.  I  am  talking  to  peo-
ple who  have  received  a  testimony  of
these  things  for  themselves,  who  kave
stood  before,  and  lifted  up  their
voices  to,  the  nations  of  the  earth,
and  declared  that  they  knew  Jesus
was  the  Christ,  that  he  had  estab-
lished his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  that
he  had  revealed  principles  which
would  save  us  and  return  us  back
into  the  presence  of  God,  if  we  would
practice  the  in.  These  are  the  men
and  women  I  am  talking  to;  you
know  as  well  as  I  do  that  the  Gospel
is  true,  and  ray  talk  is  to  inspire  your
hearts  and  my  heart  to  be  more
faithful  to  that  which  we  know  to  be
true.  It  ia  not  anything  new  to  you
and  to  me  to  be  told  that  the  king
dom  of  God  is  on  the  earth,  or  to
hear  the  principles  of  salvation  pro-
claimed by  the  Elders;  but  it  is  good
to  have  our  hearts  warmed  and  in-
spired, and  our  desires  to  be  diligent
and  faithful  renewed  and  strength-
ened. I  do  not  want  the  train  to
start  without  me,  I  want  to  be  on
board  the  good  ship  Z  ion,  with  my
brethren.  So  does  every  soul  pre-
sent, I  have  no  doubt  of  it.  I
believe  that  the  atheist — the  man
who  has  no  belief  in  God,  or  faith  in
any  religion,  would  like  the  best
berth  to  be  had,  either  on  a  sailing
vessel  or  steamer,  if  he  saw  any
chance  to  obtain  it.  The  Latter-day
Saints  have  good  berths  in  view.
You  can  testify  with  me  that  the
Spirit  of  God  has  enlightened  our
minds;  yon  can  testify  with  me  that
the  power  of  God  led  us  to  these
valleys;  that  prophecies  have  been
uttered  in  our  hearing,  and  we  have


seen  them  fulfilled,  and  we  know
that  God  hag  spoken  in  our  day.

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  be
faithful,  let  us  be  true  to  the  cove-
nants we  have  made,  for  if  we  are,  we
insure  to  ourselves  life  and  salvation  j
but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  are
recreant,  we  shall  go  to  destruction.
This  is  the  testimony  of  modern  as
well  as  ancient  revelation;  and  we
need  not  take  oar  own  works  to  con-  j
vince  the  people  of  the  error  of  their
ways;  there  is  principle  enough
bound  will] in  the  lids  of  this  book
— the  Bible — to  convince  all  mankind
of  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  to
lead  them  from  darkness  to  the  Lord
Almighty,  if  they  felt  as  humble
before  God  as  I  suppose  my  brethren
and  sisters  do  to-day.  But  it  seem3
that,  in  the  providence  of  God,  tilings
have  been  ordered  as  they  are,  that
isf  he  has  suffered  the  wickedness  of
men  to  transpire  in  the  nations  of
the  eat  th,  and  he  has  suffered  priests
to  be  raised  up  to  blind  the  minds  of
men.  Why  ?  Because  men  have
their  agency  to  do  as  their  hearts
prompt  them,  and  there  is  no  power
that  can  prevent  them  doing  this,
that  or  the  other;  but  their  acts  will
be  over- ruled  by  a  superior  power.
We  have  our  free  agency,  to  think
and  act  just  as  men  think  and  act,
independent  of  the  promptings  of;
the  Spirit  of  God;  but  that  is  not
our  object,  our  aim  is  to  do  the  will
of  God ;  and  brethren,  if  we  could  .
only  see  the  labor  and  toil  that  we
have  to  perform  before  we  accom-
plish our  salvation,  we  would  bow  in  1
humility  before  God  and  pray  him
to  give  us  strength  as  our  day.  1

Look  at  the  immense  number  of
people  who  have  lived  on  the  earth
since  its  creation !  In  what  relation-
ship do  we  stand  to  them  ?  Who
are  they?  Our  progenitors,  and
millions  of  them  have  died  without
the  Gospel, What  an  immense  labor


opens  up  before  us  when  we  think  of
these  things!  Millions  and  hundreds
of  millions  of  men  and  women,  just
as  good  as  we  are,  according  to  the
knowledge  they  had,  must  be  admin-
istered for  by  us,  and  we  have  to
birild  temples  in  which  the  work  for
their  redemption  may  be  performed,
We  have  not  only  to  build  temples,
but  cities;  we  have  to  redeem  the
earth,  and  we  have  a  vast  amount  of
physical  labor  to  do,  that  our  progeni-
tors did  not  have  the  privilege  of
doing,  it  was  never  offered  to  them,
but  it  has  been  laid  before  us  in  plain-
ness and  simplicity.  We  can  under-
stand the  principle  of  baptism  for  the
dead,  it  has  been  made  plain  to  us,
and  administering  it,  and  performing
the  various  duties  that  will  arise  in
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
will  give  us  labor  for  centuries.  Can
we,  in  view  of  these  duties  and  re-
sponsibilities, be  idle  ?  Can  we  fail
to  seek  after  the  Spirit  of  God  to
guide  us,  that  we  may  accomplish
these  hihors?  If  we  do,  we  shall
not  only  deprive  ourselves  of  a  great
privilege  and  of  great  glory,  but  we
shall  deprive  others,  perhaps,  to
some  extent,  of  receiving  that  which

,  is  theirs  by  right ;  they  have  lived
for  it,  and  they  are  entitled  to  it  at
oar  handa  J

What  can  injure  the  Latter-day
Saints?  I  will  ask  Brother  Hulse
here.  Does  it  injure  a  man  to  be
tarred  and  feathered  ?  I  understand
that  while  he  was  east  he  was  tarred
and  feathered,  or  ducked,  or  some-
thing of  that  kind,  and  I  have  no
doubt  he  feels  glad  of  the  persecu-
tion. Still,  I  would  not  like  it  just
now.  Our  Elders  have  been  tarred
and  feathered,  and  they  have  suf-
fered a  good  deal  in  their  efforts  to
spread  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom ;
but  what  have  they  suffered  in  com-
parison with  the  blessings  they  have

;  received  ? What  is  there  that  would


144  JOURNAL  OF

induce  a  man  to  sacrifice  that  feeling
of  joy  which  he  experiences  when
preaching  the  Gospel  in  the  nations?
I  have  heard  Elders  testify,  and  it  is
their  general  experience,  that  when
abroad  preaching,  depending  for  their
food  upon  strangers,  unsustained  and
unsupported,  save  as  the  providences
of  God  opened  the  way  before  them
that  they  have  had  a  feeling  of  peace
and  joy  such  as  they  never  experi-
enced before  in  their  lives,  and  which
they  would  not  lose  for  all  the  wealth
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  What  is
that  feeling  and  where  does  it  conic
from  ?  It  is  the  peace  of  God,  and
when  a  man  possesses  it,  his  thoughts
are  not  as  man's  thoughts,  and,  in-
spired from  on  high,  he  goes  forth
freely,  ready  to  endure  any  trial  and
to  make  any  sacrifice  to  declare  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation  to  the
people.  This  is  the  way  that  all  ,
Latter-day  Saints  should  always  feel,
and  they  who  take  this  course  are  |
continually  in  possession  of  the  spirit
of  peace;  they  are  worthy  the  name
of  Saints,  and  the  Scriptures  inform
us,  that  from  such  no  good  thing  will
be  withheld,  and  if  a  man  wants
anything  that  is  bad  he  is  not  a  ;
Saint,  he  does  not  belong  to  that
catalogue*

My  exhortation  to  you  is  to  be
faithful.  You  know  the  truth,  honor
it  by  walking  uprightly ;  serve  God
and  you  will  be  the  most  independent
men  and  women  on  the  face  of  the
earth  People  come  amongst  us ,
Bometimes  and  declare  that  there  is
no  independence  of  character  amongst
the  Latter-day  Saints,  because  they
do  the  bidding  of  one  man — do  just
as  one  man  says;  but  I  heard  a  re-
mark made  last  night,  that  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  are  the  most  indepen-
dent  people  on  earth,  and  I  be£ve
it.  If  it  does  not  manifest  indepen-
dence of  character  for  men  and
women,  who  have  been  honest  and


DISCOURSES.

upright  all  their  days,  to  leave
their  relatives,  neighbors,  friends  and
associates,  by  whom  they  have  always
been  respected,  to  join  the  Latter-day
Saints  and  be  called  everything:  that
is  mean,  where  will  you  find  it  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  Such  men  have
joined  the  Church  in  the  States,  and
Bishop  Hunter  is  an  instance.  He
was  respected  and  honored  by  his
neighbors,  and  was  known  to  have
been  an  honest,  upright,  God-fearing
man  all  his  davs  ;  and  when  such  men
have  joined  the  Church  they  have
been  talked  of  in  the  most  scanda-
lous manner.  Vituperation  has  been
heaped  upon  them,  the  papers  have
slandered  them,  their  neighbors  have
turned  against  them,  and  called  them
thieves,  robbers,  murderers,  and
everything  mean,  contemptible  and
bad.  But  this  treatment  never
changed  the  character  of  Bishop
Hunter,  He  came  to  Xauvoo,  and
was  a  good  Latter-day  Saint,  a  good,
honest  man,  faithful  and  true  to  his
covenants,  and  he  has  proved  so  op
to  the  present  day.  This  has  been
the  treatment  and  the  course  of  very
many  of  the  members  of  this  Church,
and  in  enduring  and  pursuing  it,
they  have  shown  an  independence  of
character  that  is  rarely  equalled.
They  have  also  shown  themselves
possessed  of  inspiration  from  the
Almighty,  and  when  men  enjoy  this,
their  ways  are  not  as  men's  ways,  but
as  God's  ways  and  they  are  willing
to  come  out  and  acknowledge  God,
and  to  enter  into  covenant  to  do  his
will  as  he  makes  it  known  to  them.
This  is  the  position  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints — when  God's  will  is  made
known  to  them,  the  spirit  within
them  testifies  to  the  truth  thereof,
and  they  know  it  is  their  business  to
perform  their  part  of  the  contract*
Who  can  blame  them  for  doing  it  ?

As  far  as  independence  is  con-
cerned, we  are  a  little  too  indepen-


dent  of  God,  sometimes*  I  know
that  this  is  the  feeling  I  have  to  con-
tend  With*  Brethren,  let  our  hearts
be  uplifted  to  the  Almighty  !  Re-
member the  covenants  you  have
made  ;  they  are  pare.  Keep  them
so. They  are  holy; keep  them  so  !


Do  not  disgrace  them !  Brethren
and  sisters,  if  we  value  onr  salvation,
temporal  and  spiritual,  let  us  be  true
to  our  covenants,  and  to  the  God  we
have  engaged  to  serve.

May  God  bless  yon.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  ix  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept,  8?  1872.


(Reported  hij  David  W.  Evans-*)


TITHING.


**  Moreover  he  commanded  the  people
that  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  to  give  the  portion
of  the  priests  ami  the  Levites,  that  they
LQiLcht  be  encouraged  in  the  law  of  the  Lord.

"  Anil  as  soon  a*  the  commandment
came  abroad,  the  children  of  Israel  brought
in  abundance  the  first  f raits  of  corn,  wine,
and  oil,  and  honey,  and  of  all  the  increase
of  the  field  ;  and  the  tdthe  of  all  th  ings
brought  they  in  abundantly.

44  And  concerning  the  children  of  Israel
and  Judah.  that  d  welt  in  the  cities  of  Judah,
they  also  brought  in  the  tithe  of  oxen  and
sheep,  and  the  tithe  of  holy  things  which
were  consecrated  unto  the  Lord  their  God,
and  laid  them  by  heaps.

"  In  the.  third  month  they  began  to  lay
the  foundation  of  the  heaps,  and  finished
thtm  in  the  seventh  month.

"  And  when  Hezekiah  and  the  princes
came  and  saw  the  heaps,  they  blessed  the
Lord,  and  his  people  Israel.

''Then  Hezekiah  questioned  with  the

Sri  est  s  and  the  Levites  concerning  the
eap*.

44  And  Azariah,  the  chief  priest  of  the
house  of  Zadok,  answered  him,  and  said,
Since  the  people  began  to  bring  the  offer-
ings into  tne  houae  of  the  Lord,  we  have  had
enough  to  eat,  and  have  left  plenty  :  for
the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  people  ;  and  that
which  is  left  is  this  great  a  tore."

No.  10.


I  have  read  this  portion  of  Scrip-
ture, it  having  suggested  itself  to
my  mind  in  view  of  oar  condition,
and  the  circumstances  which  sur-
round us  as  a  people.  The  law  of
tithing  is  of  very  ancient  origin.
How  early  it  was  observed  by  the
people  of  God  is  not  clearly  set  forth
in  the  Scriptures,  but  we  have  an
account  of  its  observance  as  early  as
the  days  of  Abraham  and  Melchize-*
dec.  We  have  also,  anterior  to  that,
an  account  given  us  in  the  Scriptures
of  the  bringing  forward  of  offerings
by  Cain  and  Abel,  one  bringing  the
first  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  the  other
the  first  fruits  of  his  tiocks,  as  offer-
ings unto  the  Lord  their  God.  From
the  days  of  Abraham  down  to  the
days  of  Jesus  the  law  of  tithing  was
observed  by  the  people  of  God.  It
was  made  a  perpetual  ordinance ;  in
fact,  the  Lord  promised  unto  Aaron
and  his  children  that  it  should  be  an

Vol  XV.


146


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ordinance  forever.  And  there  is  this
remarkable  f?ict  connected  with  this
law — whenever  it  was  strictly  oh-
served,  the  blessings  of  God  rested
upon  the  people,  and  when  it  was
neglected  the  anger  of  God  was
kindled  against  them;  and  si  careful
perusal  of  the  Bible  reveals  to  as
that  neglect  on  the  part  of  the  child-
ren of  Israel  to  pay  tithing  was  one
of  the  most  fruitful  causes  of  unbelief,
darkness  of  mind,  departure  from  the
ways  of  God,  stud  falling  into  idola-
trous practices.

I  may  he  asked,  why  was  this  the
case?  Had  the  Lord  need  of  the
fruits  of  the  om  th  r  Had  he  need  of
the  cattle  ?  Had  lie  need  of  the  first-
born children  ?  Had  be  need  of  a
tenth  of  their  gold  and  silver  ?  Was
there  any  necessity  for  these  things
to  be  devoted  to  him  because  of  any
wanton  his  part?  Of  course  imt
The  fruits  of  the  earth  pre  his,  the
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  are  his,
and  the  gold  and  silver  are  his,  he
created  them,  and  he  c;m  cover  or
uncover  them  at  hrs  will.  The  hea-
ven o!  heavens  is  his  dwelling  place,
and  lie  has  no  need  of  a  temple  built
with  hands;  yet  in  the  economy  of
heaven,  in  the  dealings  of  God  with
his  children,  he  reveals  unto  them
laws,  ordinances  and  institutions
which  he  requires  them  to  observe,
and  which,  when  observed,  bring
blessings,  but  a  disregard  of  which
brings  down  his  anger  and  indigna-
tion upon  them.  There  is  nothing
plainer  in  Scripture  than  this.

God  com  mauds  his  children  to  be-
lieve in  biro,  and  to  render  obedi-
ence to  his  laws ;  he  commands  them
to  call  upon  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  or
lather,  to  call  upon  him  in  the  name
of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  com-
mands them  to  pray  unto  him;  he
commands  them  to  repent  of  their
sins  and  to  be  baptized  for  their  re-
mission, to  have  hands  laid  upon


them  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  to  observe  other  ordinan-
ces that  he  has  revealed.  What  for?
Does  prayer  to  him  advance  him  ?
Does  belief  in  him  contribute  par-
ticularly to  his  happiness?  Does
repentance  of  sin  on  the  part  of  the
creature  add  anything  particularly  to
God's  glory  ?  Does  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins  have  any  saving
effect  upon  hirn  ?  Does  the  laying
on  of  hands  for  the  reception  of  the
1  Inly  Ghost  have  the  effect  to  increase
his  light,  knowledge,  wisdom  or
power  ?  We  all  recognize  the  fact
that  these  commandments  are  given
for  mac***  benefit,  to  increase  his
happit-ess,  and  to  prepare  him  for
salvation  and  exaltation  in  God's
kingdom.  So  also  with  the  law  of
tithing:  it  does  not,  when  obeyed  by
man,  add  to  God's  comfort,  contribute
to  his  Health,  increase  his  happiness,
or  furnish  him  with  that  of  which  he
would  be  destitute  if  it  were  not
obeyed ;  but  it  is  given  to  man  and
he  is  required  to  obey  it  that  he  may
receive  the  reward,  and  that  he  may
acknowledge  by  this  act — by  this
payment  of  the  tenth  of  his  increase
— that  all  he  obtains  is  the  gift,  and
comes  from  the  beneficent  hand  of
God,  and  that  he  is  dependent  upon
God,  Hence  Abraham,  after  return-
ing from  the  conquest  of  the  king.s,
when  he  vras  met  by  ilelcliisedecf
paid  to  him  the  tithes  of  all,  acknow-
ledging by  this  act  the  divinity  of
the  law,  and  the  necessity  of  obedi-
ence thereunto.  So  strict  was  the
Lord  upon  this  point  in  his  dealings
with  the  children  of  Israel  in  the
wilderness,  that  he  gave  very  strict
commandment  unto  Moses  and
Aaron,  and  to  those  who  presided
over  and  officiated  among  the  people
that  they  were  to  be  very  careful  to
collect,  and  the  people  were  to  be  very
careful  to  pay  their  tithing.

One  object  of  enforcing  this  law


TITHING


147


among  Israel  in  ancient  days  was  to
sushi  in  the  service  of  the  house  of
God.  The  tribe  of  Levi  was  se-
lected from  amongst  all  the  other
tribes — as  the  Lord's  peculiar  inheri-
tance. In  the  division  of  the  land
of  Caiman  among  the  different  trihes,
the  trihe  of  Levi  was  left  without
an  inheritance.  The  eleven  tribes
had  their  portions  of  Canaan  set
apart  lo  them  under  the  direction  of
the  servant  uf  God,  but  the  tribe  of
Levi  had  no  inheritance  given  onto
them.  They  were  told  by  the  Lord
that  thev  were  his  inheritance,  anl
that  which  they  should  have  as  an
inheritance  should  be  the  tenth  of
the  product  of  all  Israel  :  the  tenth
of  the  labor,  the  tenth  of  the  cattle,
the  tenth  of  rhe  gold  and  silver,  the
tenth  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and
of  everything-  that  was  produced  in
the  land.  And  so  strict  was  this
law,  that  when  an  animal  passed
under  the  rod,  to  use  the  expression
of  Scripture,  and  thereby  became  a
proper  an  i  mid  to  be  devoted  to  the
service  of  God,  though  it  were  a
choice  animal,  and  one  which  the
owner  of  it  desired  to  retain,  the  law
provided  that  it  could  not  be  re-
tained :  it  was  devoted  to  the  Lord,
and  was  holy  on  that  account.  And
if  the  owner  it  were  to  substitute
another  animal  instead  uf  it,  they
both  became  holy  unto  the  Lord,  and
both  became  tithing  animals  and  had
to  be  dedicated  unto  him,  so  strict
was  the  Lord  in  enforcing  this  law  of
tithing  upoti  Israel.  I  often  think
of  the  pract  ice  which  prevails  among
us  in  tliis  respect,  how  differently  we
act  to  what  ancient  Israel  did,  and
how  it  wool  i  pinch  some  of  us  if  the
law  of  tithing  were  enforced  among
us  as  strictly  as  it  was  among  them.
Not  only  wjis  this  the  law  of  tithing,
as  I  have  rehearsed  it,  with  regard  to
substitution  ;  but  if  a  man  wanted
to  redeem  that  which  was  devoted


for  tithing,  a  certain  valuation  was
put  upon  it,  an  1  in  addition  to  this
valuation  a  certain  sum  of  money
had  to  be  paid  before  it  could  be  re-
deemed. In  other  words  tithing  had
to  bo  paid  in  jkind,  and  if  a  mau
wanted  to  redeem  his  tithing  ho  had
to  pay  not  only  the  money  valu  it  ion
of  it,  but  an  additional  sum  lies  ides,
before  tli e  redem  ption  could  be  effected.

You  can  readily  see,  with  a  little
reflection,  the  object  the  Lord  had  in
being  thus  strict  with  his  people:  it
was  to  prevent  violations  of  that  law,
and  to  enforce  the  strictness  in  ob*
serving  it  which  was  necessary  to
secure  the  promised  blessings

I  have  said  that  a  tenth  uf  all  the
produce  of  Israel  went  to  the  tribe
of  Ltfvi ;  the  Levites  also  had  to  pay
a  tenth  o!  that  which  they  received,
and  that  tenth  was  oriven  to  the
priests,  those  who  ministered  in  the
priesthood  in  the  midst  of  the  people,
so  that  there  was  in  Israel  a  standing
ministry — a  tribe  chosen  from  all  the
tribes  uf  Israel,  whose  office  it  was
to  minister  in  the  things  of  God,
having  been  called  specially  by  God
to  this  service.

You  doubtless  recollect  that  the
Lo rd  also  i\  qi i i red  h is  c! u I d  re n —
the  people  of  Israel — to  set  apart  the
first* born  male  in  every  family  to  be
his.  They  had  been  redeemed  in
Egypt,  or  rather  they  had  been  saved
from  the  scourge  which  fell  upon  all
the  families  of  Egypt.  When  God
plead  with  Pharaoh,  through  Moses,
to  let  the  people  go,  destruction  fell
on  all  the  households  of  Egypt,  the
firstborn  in  every  one  being  slaiu.
But  among  the  children  of  Israel  the
firstborn  were  spared,  and  the  Lord
claimed  them  as  his;  but  it  was  in-
convenient  for  them  to  be  used  in  the
service  of  the  Lord  and  he,  therefore,
after  Israel  had  left  Egypt,  com-
manded that  all  their  firstborn  should
be  numbered ;  and  after  all  of  a  cer-


148


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


tain  age  had  been  numbered,  he
commanded  that  the  tribe  of  Levi
should  he  numbered,  and  upon  num.
bering  them  it  was  found  that  the
firstborn  of  Israel  outnumbered  the
Levites  by  two  hundred  and  seventy-
three,  if  J  remember  aright.  The
Lord  had  already  stated  that  it  was
his  intention  to  take  the  tribe  of  Levi
instead  of  the  firstborn  of  Israel,  and
when  it  was  found  that  the  firstborn
outnumbered  the  Levites  by  two  hun-
dred and  seventy-three  be  commanded
that  they  should  be  redeemed,  and
that  the  redemption  money  .should  be
handed  over  to  t lie  tribe  of  Levi.

These  were  very  singular  laws  and
ordinances,  but  God  had  a  design  in
view  in  enforcing  them.  Everything
he  does  is  dictated  by  infinite  wisdom,
and  when  the  people  strictly  com-
plied with  these  laws  and  ordinances
I  have  mentioned  the  Lord  blessed
them  in  all  things,  so  much  so  that
it  became  a  proverb  in  the  midst  of
Israel — "Honor  the  Lord  with  thy
substance  and  with  the  first  fruits  of
thy  increase,  so  shall  thy  barns  be
filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses
burst  forth  with  new  wine."  When
the  people  honored  the  Lord  with
their  substance  his  blessings  rested
upon  them  and  they  were  prospered.
The  palmer  worm,  blight,  grasshop-
per and  other  evils  which  afflicted
the  land  under  some  circumstances,
were  removed  tar  from  them.  Their
trees  did  not  cast  their  fruit  untimely,
and  they  produced  in  abundance,  and
Israel  prospered  and  waxed  fat  in  the
land.  They  spread  abroad  on  the
right  hand  and  un  the  left,  and  the
land  teemed  with  fertility.  There
were  times  when  Israel  neglected  this
law,  when  they  fell  into  idolatry,
became  careless  and  indifferent  con-
cerning the  requirements  of  the  Lord;
when  the  tribe  of  Levi  forsook  the
service  of  God  and  became  idolaters ;
when  the  priests  quit  the  service  of


Jehovah,  and  the  temples  became
desecrated  and  filled  with  rubbish.
It  was  during  one  of  these  periods
that  Hezekiah  came  to  the  throne  of
ins  father  Abaz,  who  had  allowed  the
ordinances  of  God  to  fall  into  disuse-
He  put  aside  the  service  of  God  and
instituted  in  its  stead  idolatrous  ser-
vice. Tithing  had  been  neglected,
and  when  Hezekiah  came  to  the
throne,  his  heart  being  set  in  him  to
do  right,  he  commenced  to  cleanse
the  temple,  and  to  restore  the  ordi-
nances of  the  house  of  God,  and  the
ministers  who  had  been  set  apart  to
this  service  he  called  back  to  its  per-
formance, and  the  people  brought  in
their  cattle,  wine,  oil,  honey,  and  in
fact  a  tithe  of  all  their  substance  as
well  as  freewill  offerings  unto  the
Lord ;  and  when  the  king  looked
upon  it,  we  are  told,  in  the  words
which  I  have  read,  that  he  blessed
the  Lord  and  his  people  Israel,  and
upon  inquiry  of  the  chief  piic&t  he
was  told  that  "  since  the  people  be-
gan to  bring  in  the  offerings  into  the
house  of  the  Lord,  we  have  had
enough  to  eat,  and  have  left  plenty,
for  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  people."
The  Lord  blessed  them  because  they
had  complied  with  his  requirements,
and  they  were  prospered.  The  land
prospered  under  their  cultivation,
and  it  yielded  its  strength  in  abund-
ance,

In  connection  with  this  1  would
like  to  read  to  you,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  the  remarks  of  Maluchi.  You
are  doubtless  familiar  with  them,  but
they  are  words  which  can  be  read
and  pondered  on  time  and  time  again,
without  any  loss  of  interest  in  the
subject. Says  Malachi —

"  Even  from  the  days  of  your  fa-
thers ye  are  gone  away  from  mine
ordinances,  and  have  not  kept  them*
Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return
unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.
But  ye  said,  wherein  shall  we  return?


"  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?  Yet  ye
have  robbed  me.  But  ye  say,  Wherein
have  we  robbed  thee  ?  In  tithes
and  offerings,

*'  Ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse  :  for
ye  have  robbed  me,  eve/t  this  whole
nation.

"  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the
storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat
in  mine  house,  and  prove  me  now
herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  if
I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of
heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,
that  there  will  not  be  room  enough  to
receive  them.

"  And  I  will  rebuke  the  devourer
for  your  sakes,  and  he  shall  not  des-
troy the  fruits  of  your  ground,  nei-
ther shall  your  vine  east  her  fruit
before  the  time  in  the  field,  saith  the
Lord  of  hosts.

"And  all  nations  shall  call  you
blessed  :  for  ye  shall  be  a  delight-
some land,  s  ixth  the  Lord  of  hosts/'
.  We  see  here  portrayed,  in  the  most
graphic  and  striking  language,  the
blessings  that  God  promised  unto
his  people  Israel  when  they  observed
this  law,  which  he  had  given  them
in  the  beginning ;  and  we  can  also
understand  from  the  statements  of
Malachi,  the  curses  that  would  des-
cend upon  Israel  if  they  did  not  ob-
serve this  law.  "  Ye  are  cursed  with
a  curse,"  says  he,  14  for  ye  have  rub-
bed me,  even  this  whole  people,"
Strange  language  for  God  to  use  to
his  people,  it  may  be  thought,  that
they  should  be  accused  ot  mblx-iy,
that  he  should  look  upon  them  as
thieves,  as  appropriating  that  which
was  not  theirs,  because  they  did  not
render  unto  him  that  which  he  had
commanded  thern.  They  had  refused
their  tithes,  they  had  withheld  their
offerings,  and  consequently  they  were
cursed,  u  But/*  says  he  "  bring  in
your  tithes  into  the  storehouse,  that
there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,
and  prove  me  now,  herewith,  saith


the  Lord  of  hosts,  if  I  will  not  open
you  the  windows  of  heaven,  and  pour
you  out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall
not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it"  eta
What  great  promises  are  herein  con-
veyed to  God's  people !

I  have  drawn  your  attention  to
this  law,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  to
1  show  you  what  it  was  in  the  days  of
Israel,  when  Uod  communicated  his
mind  and  will  unto  his  people,  I
wish  to  impress  upon  you  this  fact,
which  you  can  all  realize  and  under-
stand for  yourselves  if  you  will  read,
that  when  Israel  served  God,  and
were  strict  in  observing-  this  law,  he
blessed  and  prospered  them,  and  his
favor  was  shown  towards  them  ;  but
when  they  neglected  this  law,  his
answer  and  indignation  were  kindled
against  them,  and  one  of  the  most
fruitful  causes  of  disaster  to  Israel
was  their  neglect  in  this  particular.
There  were  two  things  connected  with
Israel's  disasters  s  one  was  neglecting
to  observe  the  laws  of  God,  promi-
nent among  which  was  the  Lw  of
tithing;  and  the  other  was  their
intermarriages  with  the  heathen  na-
tions— those  who  wfere  idolaters.  This
proved  the  destruction  of  the  wisest
king  t licit  ever  reigned  in  Israel.  It
proved  the  destruction  of  the  nation
itself,  for  it  brought  disaster  and  ruin
upon  it.

There  is  something  connected  with
the  law  of  tithing  that,  when  men  do
not  have  faith  in  God,  appeals  to
their  selfishness j  and  for  a  people  t>
be  wholehearted  in  its  observance,
they  need  faith  in  God.  When
Israel  began  to  decline  in  faith  in
God,  their  selfishness  increased,  atid
their  determination  became  stronger
and  stronger  to  grasp  everything
within  their  reach  and  to  retain
everything  they  gained  possession  of;
and  as  this  feeling  grew,  tithing  and
freewill  offerings  were  withheld  from
the  house  of  God,  and  in  consequence


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


uf  this  the  blessing  of  God  was  also
withheld.  There  is  a  passage  in  the
book  of  Amos  on  this  subject,  which
shows  the  Lord  pleading  with  Israel,
to  bring  them  back  to  the  considera-
tion of  this*  law,  as  wet  I  as  others
that  he  had  given  them.  Ttie  Lord
says  through  the  Prophet  Arnos —

"And  also  I  have  withholden  the
rain  from  you,  when  there  were  jet
thtee  months  to  the  harvest;  and  I
caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city  and
caused  it  riot  to  rain  upon  another
city  :  one  piece  was  rained  upon,  and
the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not
withered*

**  So  two  or  three  cities  wandered
into  one  city,  to  drink  waier;  hut
they  were  not  satisfied  :  yet  have  ve
not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord.

"  I  have  smitten  you  with  blasting
and  mildew  :  when  your  gardens  and
your  vineyards  and  your  fig  trees  and
your  olive  trees  increased,  the  palmer-
worm  devoured  them :  yet  hnve  ye
not  returned  unto  tne,  saith  the  Lord/*

These  are  the  calamities  winch
God  sent  upon  Israel  with  the  inten-
tion to  have  them  return  to  him  ;
but  notwithstanding  they  were
poured  out  aud  pestilence  visited
the  land,  the  people  hardened  their
hearts  against  him,  broke  his  laws
and  violated  his  ordinances,  and  his
anger  was  enkindled  against  them,
and  they  were  driven  out  from  the
face  of  the  land.

Tins  I  aw  of  ti  thing  has  been  re-
vealed to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  If
I  remember  aright,  the  last  revelation
in  the  Book  uf  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, given  as  a  revelation,  is  one
iu  which  this  people  are  commanded
to  observe  this  law  of  tithing  forever.
With  the  restoration  of  the  Gospel  in
its  fullness  and  purity  there  has  also
been  restored  this  law,  and  I  am
thankful  to  God  for  its  revelation,  I
am  thankful  for  the  restoration  of
every  principle  of  truth,  of  every


law  that  pertains  unto  salvation,  for
they  are  all  for  the  benefit  of  the  hu-
man family;  and  as  long  as  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  have  observed  this  law
they  have  been  blessed;  and  we  know
by  our  own  experience  with  grass-
hoppers— the  Lord's  great  army-
how  easily  he  could  collect  hi*  dues
from  ancient  Israel  if  they  robbed
him  by  neglecting  or  ivfu*iug  to  pay
their  tithes.

When  men have come  to  this
desert  land  and  have  s*'en  the  changes
that  have  been  wrought  in  such  a
brief  space  of  time,  they  have  won-
dered what  has  been  the  reason  of  it.
The  promise  of  God  has  been  given
to  this  people  as  it  was  to  ancient
Israel  upon  this  point,  and  when  the
Latter-day  Saints  have  observed  the
law  of  tithing  they  have  been  favored
of  God,  and  his  Spirit  has  rested
upon  them,  and  not  only  upon  them
hut  also  upon  the  laud,  aud  where
it  was  once  so  barren.  On  fruitful  and
forbidding  that  it  looked  as  though
no  human  being  could  live  by  culti-
vating it,  it  has  been  converted  into
a  fruitful  field. Men  *>ay,  m  What
wonderful results  water has  pro-
duced ! " "  What  a  great  system
this  irrigation  is  which  you  practice  !"
True,  it  is  a  wonderful  system,  it  is
pioduetiveof  wonderful  results;  but
to  my  way  of  thinking,  or  according
to  my  views,  these  results  are  due  to
the  blessing  of  God  on  the  labors  <  f
the  Latter-day  Saints,  because  they
have  honored  him  by  observing  the
law  of  tithing. We have  looked
upon this  land  as  the  Lord's,  and
have  viewed  ourselves  as  his  tenants,
lie  could  rot  come  down  here  in  per-
son and receive  from  us  the  first
fruits  of  tbe  soil,  or  take  our  cattle,
our  gold  and  silver,  or  any  of  our
manufactures. Hence  there  must  be
somebody  to  do  it  for  him. In  an-
cient days  the  children  of  Levi  acted
in  this  capacity :  they  received  the


TITHING,


151


tithes  and  offerings,  but  in  these
last  days,  there  being  none  of  the
descendants  of  Aaron  that  we  know
of  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints,  to  act  in  this  capa-
city, we  have  been  under  the  neces-
sity of  choosing  other  men  to  hold
the  authority  which  his  seed  would
hold  if  they  were  here  in  our  midst,
and  they  have  heen  set  Rp^rt  for  the
purpose  of  looking  after  temporal
thing*,  and  to  take  or  collect  the
tithing,  and  see  that  it  is  properly
managed  and  appropriated  to  the
uses  for  which  it  is  designed.

I  know  how  quickly  men,  in  look-
ing at  "  Mor monism/'  come  to  the
conclusion  that  it  is  a  system  by
which  a  certain  class  will  be  benefited
and  built  up,  I  have  heard  men  say
that  the  "Mormon"  Elders  had  a
pretty  good  thing  of  it;  that  Brig-
ham  Young,  as  President  of  the
Church,  had  a  very  nice  arrangement,
and  that  those  who  were  leaders  in
the  Church  had  every  reason  for  de-
siring to  retain  their  position,  im-
agining, of  course — though  I  do  nut
know  why  such  an  imagination  should
be  prompted  unless  it  was  beemse
they  judged  us  as  they  judged  one
another — that  all  the  means  that  is
devoted  by  the  people  for  the  pay-
ment of  tithing  is  appropriated  by
President  Young  and  t  hose  associated
with  him  in  conducting  the  affairs  of
the  Church.

Now*  I  would  not,  as  a  speculation,
endure  for  one  month,  that  which
President  Young  has  to  pass  through
— the  cue,  responsibility,  obloquy,
and  the  weight  that  rests  upon  him
continually,  for  the  sike  of  the  fir  1 1 *
ing  alone,  if  I  could  have  it  all.  He
would  not,  no  other  man  who  is  con.
nected  with  this  people  would.  Why
do  they  enduru  that  which  they  pass
through  ?  Because,  by  the  revela-
tions of  God,  they  know  that  God
has  established  his  Church  once  more


in  its  fullness  upon  the  earth,  because
they  know  that  angels  have  come
from  heaven  to  earth,  because  they
know  that  the  holy  priesthood  has
been  a^ain  bestowed  upon  man,  with,
the  authority  to  administer  in  the
ordinances  of  God's  house,  as  in  an-
cient *lavs;  and  because  this  work  \§
established  by  the  commandment  of
God,  and  they  are  filler!  hy  Ins  com-
mand to  labor  in  it*  But  there  is
one  advantage  which  this  unbelieving
generation  have  over  those  which
have  preceded  us,  and  I  think,  in
view  of  the  selfishness  which  pie  vails
to-day  in  the  midst  of  mankind,  it  is
a  wise  provision.  If  there  had  been
a  tribe  ser  apart  in  this  generation  to
receive  the  tithing,  I  do  not  know
bat  what  the  people,  universally
almost,  would  have  rebelled  against
it.  It'  there  had  been  a  ptivileged
class  to  receive  the  tithing,  the  un-
belief and  selfishness  of  man  would
h:ivo  prompted  them  to  find  great
fault  with  it.  But  there  is  this  pecu-
liarity about  the  work  in  these  days
— not  only  do  the  people  pav  their
tithing,  but  the  Ministers  of  life  'Old
salvation  pay  theirs — if  thev  do  not
they  should  do,  anil  t  believe  they
do — as  punctually  as  the  humblest
member  of  the  Onurch,  from  Presi-
dent Young  down — his  Counsellor*,
the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve,  the  Bish-
ops of  the  Church,  every  faithful
man  pays  his  tithing,  the  highest  ia
the  Church  as  well  as  he  whose  name
is  scarcely  known  beyond  the  narrow
ciicle  iii  which  he  moves;  and,  in-
stead  of  the  trhing  uoing  to  sustain
a  class,  as  it  did  in  ancient  days  the
tribe  of  Levi,  or  the  piiests,  it  goes
to  build  up  the  work  of  God — to
erect  temples  and  in  various  other
ways,  Tiiuusatals  and  thousan  Is  of
dollars  have  Ueen  spent  in  sustaining
the  poor,  and  there  is  no  class  of  men
j  sustained  in  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints  by  the


152  JOURNAL  OF

tithing.  There  is  this  difference
between  ministers  in  this  Church
and  ministers  in  other  churches;
ministers  in  this  church  have  to
labor  for  their  own  support  ;  but  in
other  churches  they  are  supported
wholly  by  the  people.  On  this
account  —  in  Massachusetts,  if  1
remember  aright — ministers  are  not
allowed  to  be  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture; they  are  regarded  as  men  unfit
for  the  practical  duties  of  life,  Men
who  devote  themselves  exclusively  to
the  service  of  their  churches  go  into
their  studies,  read  and  fix  up  their
sermons,  and,  on  the  Sabbath  day,
they  deliver  their  written,  prepared
discourses  to  their  congregations,
and  they  are  the  most  impractical
men  connected  with  their  churches.
The  ministry  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  is  in
direct  and  striking  contrast  with
this.  The  leaders  of  this  Church
ift  the  most  practical  men  in  it
The  President  of  this  Church  is  the
most  practical  man  connected  with
the  body.  His  Counselors,  the
Twelve  Apostles  and  the  leading
Elders  and  Bishops  are  all  d  is  tin-
tfiiished  for  being  practical  men —
men  perfectly  capable  of  doing  every-
thing  connected  with  a  life  in  these
mountains — men  who  are  able  to
sustain  themselves  and  to  help  to
sustain  others.  Our  theory  is  that  a
man  who  can  not  sustain  himself  and
itl so  teach  others  how  to  sustain
themselves  is  unfit  for  a  leading  posi-
tion, and  he  becomes  a  drone  in  the
great  hive.  On  that  account  we
compel  or  require  every  minister  in
this  Church  to  sustain  himself.  Jesus
said  that  he  who  is  greatest  among
you  let  hira  be  the  servant  of  all,
and  we  have  carried  this  into  effect —
the  servant  of  the  whole  people  m  the
President  of  the  Church.  The  man
who  is  the  greatest  servant  in  a  set-  I
tlement is the  President  of  the


DISCOURSES.

settlement,  or  the  Bishop  of  a  ward.
He  lives  for  the  people,  his  time  is
devoted  to  their  service,  looking
after  their  interests,  that  is,  if  he
does  right  and  magnifies  his  calling,
Is  there  a  helpless  man  in  a  ward  ?
He  Incomes  the  object  of  the  Bishop's
solicitude  and  care.  Is  there  a
family  in  indigence?  Then  they
are  the  wards  of  the  Bishop,  and  he
looks  after  them,  and  visits  them  or
sees  that  his  teachers  do,  and  that
their  wants  are  supplied.  By  this
means  the  ministry  in  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  is
an  active  one,  carrying  the  blessings
of  spiritual  and  temporal  salvation
into  the  midst  of  the  people.

It  has  been  by  the  labors  of  such
men  that  this  community  has  been
founded,  and  this  once  barren  desert
I  changed  into  a  fruitful  field  and  made
to  blossom  as  the  rose.  Through
the  labors  of  the  Apostles,  Elders
and  Bishops  of  this  Church,  settle-
ments have  been  extended  to  the
remotest  bounds  of  the  Territory,
north,  south,  ea*t  and  west.  They
have  been  the  pioneers  in  all  great
tabors,  not  saying  to  the  people,
"  Give  us  of  your  wealth  and  sub-
stance, we  want  to  be  sustained  in
idleness,  that  we  may  rule  over  you ; **
but  on  the  contrary  they  have  said,
H  Come,  brethren,  let  us  go  and  ac-
complish this  labor  that  God  has  laid
upon  us."  They  have  'been  the
pioneers  in  all  these  labors — these
Apostles,  Presidents,  Bishops,  Dig-
nitaries, these  men  who  are  supposed
to  fatten  on  the  labors  of  the  people.
Instead  of  doing  that,  they  have
been  the  creators  of  the  wealth  that
the  people  now  enjoy;  they  have
been  the  fathers  of  the  people,  the
people  have  been  the  objects  of  their
paternal  care  from  the  beginning
until  to-day.  I  would  not  give  a  fig
for  a  leading  man  who  would  not  act
in  this  capacity;  he  is  worth  nothing,


■


TITHING.


153


and  deserves  no  place  in  the  midst
of  the  people  of  God,  Men  to  save  ]
their  fellow-men  and  to  be  ministers
of  Jesus  Christ  mast  have  the  spirit
of  Jesus.  His  spirit  was  one  of
self-sacrifice,  one  that  prompted  him
to  go  forth  and  save  the  people,  not
to  he  a  burden  upon  them,  not  to
crush  them.  That  is  priestcraft;
and  wherever  that  system  prevnils  a
system  of  despicable  priestcraft  pre-
vails, and  God  is  angry  with  it  and
with  those  who  practice  it.

I  have  said  that  I  thank  God  for
the  revelation  of  this  principle.  I
do,  for  this  reason — it  appeals  directly
to  man's  selfishness.  It  makes  men
sacrifice  their  selfish  feelings,  and
causes  them  to  show  faith  in  God.
If  a  man  has  not  faith  in  God  he  is
not  very  likely  to  pay  tithing,  or  make
many  offerings.  To  u*e  a  omraon
expression,  he  looks  after  "  number
one/1  and  self-interest  rules  him*
Such  a  man  is  an  unworthy  member
of  the  Church  of  Christ,  But  when
every  man  pays  his  tithing  and  wit-
Besses  unto  God  that  that  law  is
honorable  in  his  sight,  what  is  the
result?  Is  anybody  impoverished
by  it?  No,  Are  we  as  Latter-day
Saints  any  poorer  because  of  the
tithing  we  have  paid  ?  Not  one
cent.  When  that  tithing  is  properly
appropriated  it  is  expended  in  works
which  add  to  the  wealth  of  the  entire
community.  It  contributes  to  the
erection  of  public  edifices;  it  adorns
those  edifices,  and  creates  a  fund
that  is  exclusively  devoted  to  the
work  of  God,  and  that  helps  to  build
np  and  to  make  the  community  pros-
perous and  respectable  in  the  earth.
It  is  a  mighty  engine,  or  would  be  if
properly  wielded,  in  establishing
righteousness  and  truth  in  the  earth,
for  let  rae  say,  brethren  and  sisters,
that  a  warfare  has  been  commenced
in  the  earth,  and  it  has  been  waged
for  a  long  series  of  years,  speaking


according  to  the  length  of  a  man's
life;  and  that  warfare  or  contest  is
for  this  earth,  and  it  is  between  God
and  Satan.

Men  wonder  why  it  is  that  the
"  Mormon "  communitv,  with  their
good  qualities,  their  love  of  temper-
ance and  good  order,  and  whoso  mem-
bers conduct  themselves  with  such
propriety,  are  so  hated.  It  has  been
frequently  remarked  to  our  Elders —
"  You  are  a  pretty  good  man,  I  would
not  take  you  to  be  a  1  Mormon/  I
would  think  you  are  a  man  of  too
much  intelligence  to  be  a  Latter-day
Saint/1  as  though,  to  be  a  member  of
this  Church  a  man  must  be  an  igno-
ramus, stupid  blockhead,  knave  or
fool  in  the  estimation  of  those  not  of
our  faith.  God  has  not  chosen  that
kind  of  a  people,  he  has  chosen  intel-
ligent people,  and  he  will  give  them
greater  intelligence.  But  the  reason
we  are  hated  is  this< — and  it  is  the
same  reason  that  Jesus  and  his  Apos-
tles were  hated — we  have  the  truth,
because  we  have  received  the  revela-
tions of  God,  and  because,  in  single-
ness of  purpose,  we  are  endeavoring
to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God.
Let  any  other  people  do  what  we
have  done  and  they  would  be  lauded
to  the  skies.  Let  any  other  man  do
what  our  leader  lias  done  and  his
fame,  as  a  benefactor  ot  Iris  race,

I  would  be  worldwide.  But  our  labors
are  only  an  additional  reason  for  hat-
ing us  and  for  warring  against  us.
It  is,  as  1  have  said,  because  there  is
a  warfare  in  the  world,  and  it  will
not  end  until  God  is  victorious  and
the  earth  is  redeemed  from  sin.
I  will  revert  now  to  the  contrast

1  there  is  between  our  desert  land  and
the  landa  from  which  we  came.  Our
people  were  organized  in  the  State
of  New  York — a  most  fruitful  State.
From  New  York  they  moved  to
Ohio,  another  most  fruitful  State.
From  Ohio  they  moved  to  Missouri,


154


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


tbe  garden,  it  miuht  he  said,  of  the
United  States;  and  from  Missouri  to
III  inois — all  rich  and  productive
States.  What  is  the  result  of  our
removals?  We  came  to  a  hind  that
was  a  barren,  uninviting  desert,  and
what  are  the  remarks  of  visitors  who
come  here  now  from  the  lands  we
formerly  lived  in?  They  wonder
how  it  is  that  our  fruit  trees  are  so
healthy,  and  that  our  land  is  so  in-
viting. I  honestly  believe,  if  the
pecple  of  the  United  States  would
observe  this  law  of  tithing,  devoting
a  tenth  of  their  substance  to  the  ser-
vice of  the  Most  High,  that  instead
of  this  land  being  in  many  Tv>pects
so  superior,  the  fertility  which  for-
'  merly  prevailed  I  he  re  would  be
restored.  And  when  tbe  day  shall
come,  as  come  it  will,  when  we  shall
go  back — and  we  expect  to  go  back
to  Jackson  County,  Missouri,  and  to
lay  the  foundation  of  a  temple,  and
to  build  a  great  city  to  bj  called  the
centre  st;:ke  of  Zion,  as  much  as  we
expect  to  see  tbe  sun  rise  to-morrow  ;
I  eay  when  that  day  shall  come  it  will
be  found  that  that  country  will  have
its  old  fertility  restored,  and  that
and  all  the  lauds  that  the  people  of
God  will  occupy  will  be  healthy  and
fruitful;  and  the  land  of  any  people
who  will  honor  God  by  obeying  this
law  of  tithing  will  be  made  fruitful
to  them,  God  will  bless  their  indus-
try, anil  they  will  rejoice  and  prosper
therein.

There  are  many  things  connected
with  this  subject  that  might  be
touched  upon.  One  thing  I  will
mention  before  I  sit  down,  and  thai
is  the  growing  tendency  among  this
people  to  look  alitor  their  own  inter-
ests and  to  neglect  the  interests  of
the  work  of  God.  This  remark  has
often  been  made  to  us  :  "  When  you
Latter-day  Saints  increase  in  wealth,
art-  surrounded  by  the  fashions  of  the
world,  and  the  waves  of  civilization


surge  against  your  walls  of  barbarism,
nil  your  peculiarities  will  recede  and
melt  away,  and  you  will  become  like
other  people.  Xoor  plural  system
will  disappear,  for  no  man  can  sus-
tain half  a  dozen  wives  if  they  are
fashionable  women,  and  no  more  than
one."  I  have  heard  this  time  and
time  again  ;  and  it  is  true  that  young
men  in  the  east  will  not  marry  be-
cause of  the  expanse,  they  do  not
want  to  take  a  wife  because  they  can
not  sustiin  her  according  to  the  re-
quire men*  s  of  modern  society.  Now,
there  is  a  good  deal  of  truth  in  this
statement.  If  I  thought  we  would
become  subject  to  tlie  follies  that  now
prevail  L  would  have  fears  concerning
the  work  of  God  and  its  perpetuity
on  the  earth,  i!  I  thought  that  this
people  would  h  >\  after  wealth,  and
that  they  would  allow  their  feelings
and  their  hearts  to  become  set  on  the
accumulation  of  money,  and  that
they  would  think  more  of  that  than
they  do  of  Gud  and  his  work,  I  would
fear  tor  its  perpetuity.  But  God  has
said  this  work  shall  stand  for  ever,
and  that  it  shall  not  be  given  into
the  hands  of  another  people,  and  on
that  account  I  do  not  entertain  any
fears  as  to  the  result.  But  there
are  individuals  in  this  commu  ity
who  have  given  way  to  these  feelings
about  tithing.  When  men  are  poor,
it  is  noticed  that  they  are  punctual
in  paying  it,  but  when  they  increase
in  weal  ill  it  is  less  so.  For  instance,
when  a  man  has  fen  thous  .nd  dollars
it  looks  a  biur  pile  to  give  one  thou-
sand as  tithing.  If  a  man's  tithing
amounted  to  no  more  than  five,  ten,
twenty,  or  even  a  hundred  dollars,
says  he,  **  I  can  give  that,  but  a  thou-
sand is  a  great  amount,"  and*  when
called  upon  to  give  a  thousand,  no,
I  will  not  say  "  called  upon,"  the
difficulty  i?i  we  aie  not  called  upon
enough,  there  has  been  neglect  m
calling  upon  us  ;  but  when  it  comes


to  this,  why  a  thousand  dollars  looks
like  a  very  large  sum,  and  the  party
whose  duty  it  is  to  pay  it  is  *jpt  to
hesitate  and  feel  reluctance,  and  he
perhaps  says,  H  I  can  invest  this
thousand  dollars  in  such  and  such  a
way,  and  it  will  produce  so  much
interest,  and  I  will  pay  it  then;"
and  he  allows  himself  to  be  satisfied
with  this  course*

There  is  tins  remarkable  fact  con-
nected with  tithing  in  our  midst.
You  arc  all  familiar  with  theapostacy
of  some  of  our  leading  merchants —
men  who  dealt  in  merchandize  and
who,  tor  years,  by  their  exorbitant
prices  literally  fleeced  the  people  of
their  means.  This  wns  before  the
construction  of  the  railroads.  Well,
it  was  predicted  yeais  before,  that
sooner  or  later  they  would  deny  the
faith  and  leave  the  Church.  It  w;is
easily  understood  that  no  man  could
remain  in  the  Church,  if  it  was  a
pure  Church,  and  practice  a  system
of  extortion  on  his  brethren,  and  the
prediction  was  made,  and  strange  as
it  may  seem — though  it  is  not  strange
to  those  who  understand  the  working
of  these  things — it  was  fullfiHed  to
the  very  letter,  and  those  men  did
deny  the  faith,  and  they  are  now
opponents  of  that  work  which  they
oncL-  testified  they  knew  to  be  true;
and  an  examination  of  the  tithing
records  would  show  this  remarkable
fact — that  some  of  them  did  not  pay
their  tithing  as  they  should  have
done.  Those  who  have  prospered
most  are  they  who  paid  their  tithing
honestly.  And  I  have  noticed  it,  as
an  individual,  that  when  men  close
up  their  hearts  in  this  direction,  and
neglect  their  tithing,  and  their
offerings  on  fast  davs  tor  the  benefit
of  the  poor,  they  lose  their  faith.
This  is  one  evidence  of  the  loss  of
faith  and  confidence  in  the  work.

I  will  tell  you  how  I  feel  now,  if  I
were  to  be  tempted  in  this  direction,


I  would  say,  "Mr.  Devil,  [  have  no
lot  or  part  with  you.  I  will  pay  my
tithing,  and  if  you  say  any  tiling  I
will  double  it*  I  know  that  (here  is
a  blessing  attending  this.  I  know
God  prospers  those  who  are  strict
and  punctual  in  attending  to  this.  I
know  he  blesses  those  who  feed  the
poor,  clothe  the  naked  and  attend  to
the  wants  of  their  indigent  brethren
and  sisters.  I  should  deplore  the
increase  of  wealth  in  our  midst  if  it
created  class  distinctions,  if  it  should
create  a  feeling  that,  "I  am  better
than  thou,  because  1  wear  a  finer  coat,
dwell  in  a  better  house,  ride  in  a  finer
carriage  and  have  finer  horses,  or
because  my  children  are  better
schooled  and  better  dressed  than
yours.1*  I  should  deplore  the  in-
crease of  wealth  among  us  if  such
results  were  witnessed,  I  should
expect  the  anger  of  God  would  bo
kindled  against  us,  and  that  we  should
be  scourged  as  a  people  until  we
repented  in  deep  humility  before
hira.  *

God  has  bestowed  upon  us  the
e  n  th  and  the  elements  in  and  around
it,  and  he  has  given  us  them  for  our
good.  There  is  no  sin  in  taking  the
wool  from  the  sheep's  back  and  spin-
ning and  manufacturing  it  into  fine
broadcloth.  There  is  no  sin  in  plant-
ing mulberry  trees  and  feeding  silk*
worms  and  making  fine  dresses  and
ribbons  with  the  silk  which  they
produce  There  is  no  sin  in  spinning
the  flax  and  making  fine  linen  of  it.
There  is  no  sin  in  taking  the  dyes
that  abound  in  nature  and  dying
these  silks  and  other  fabrics  in  the
most  beautiful  manner*  There  is  no
sin  in  digging  gold  and  ornamenting
oar  service  with  it,  and  in  covering
our  tables  in  the  L-rd's  house  there-
with. There  is  no  sin  in  taking
silver  and  making  furniture  for  the
Lord's  house.  There  is  no  sin  in
making  fine  carriages,  and  in  paint-


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


iug  and  fitting  them  up  in  the  most
exquisite  manner.  There  is  no  sin
in  having  a  noble  race  of  horses,  or  a
fine  breed  of  cattle.  There  is  no  sin
in  building  houses  and  decorating
them,  having  fine  furniture,  carpets,
mirrors,  baths,  heating  apparatus
and  every  appliance  and  convenience
of  modern  civilization  therein.  There
is  no  sin  in  all  this,  or  in  any  blessing
God  has  given  us,  but  there  is  sin  in
abusing  these  things.  There  is  sin
in  being  lifted  up  in  pride  because
God  has  bestowed  them  upon  us.
There  is  sin  in  thinking,  "  I  am
better  than  another  man  who  is
created  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,
as  I  am ;  who  is  a  child  of  God,  as
I  am ;  who  came  from  God,  as  I
did,  aud  who  will  go  to  God  as  I
hope  to  do,"  Brethren  and  sisters, '
there  is  no  sin  in  having  what  I  have
named.  We  may  have  tine  houses,
fine  gardens  or  orchards,  glorious
temples,  a  fine  land,  and  we  may
make  our  homes  heavenly  places,  and
fit  for  angels  to  visit,  and  there  is
nothing  wrong  in  all  this,  neither  in
adorning  the  bjdies  God  has  given
unto  us,  if  our  hearts  are  humble
before  him,  and  we  glorify  him  in  our
lives.  But  this  is  the  great  difficulty
and  has  been  from  the  beginning.
When  wealth  multiplies  the  people
get  lifted  up  in  the  pride  of  their
hearts,  and  they  look  down  on  their
poor  brethren  and  despise  them,  be-
cause they  are  better  educated,  have
better  manners,  and  speak  better
language— in  a  word,  because  they
have  advantages  which  their  poor
brethren  and  sifters  have  not.  There
is  sin  in  this,  and  God  is  angry  with
a  people  who  take  this  course.  He
wants  us  to  be  equal  in  earthly  things,
as  we  are  in  heavenly.  He  wants  no  i
poor  among  his  people ;  he  does  not
want  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  to
ascend  from  the  midst  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  God  fur  bid  that  it


ever  should !  God  forbid  that  the
cry  of  any  should  ever  ascend  from
the  midst  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
because  of  oppression  or  because  of
the  lack  of  any  blessing  necessary
for  comfort!  God  wants  us  to  feed
the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  and
impart  our  substance  tor  their  sup-
port. But  he  does  not  want  the  poor
to  envy  the  rich.  That  is  just  as
great  a  sin  on  their  part  as  lor  the
rich  to  oppress  them.  They  must
not  envy  the  rich;  they  mast  not
look  on  their  brethren  and  sisters
and  euvy  them  that  which  they  have.
That  is  sinful,  that  is  wrong,  and  the
man  or  woman  who  indulges  in  it,
indulges  in  a  wrong  spirit.  God
wants  us  to  build  each  other  up  in
righteousness.  He  wants  us  to  love
one  another  and  to  seek'me  another's
benefit.  This  is  the  spirit  of  fche
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  has
revealed  it  unto  us,  and  we  must  cul-
tivate it.

I  look  upon  this  law  of  tithing  as
an  equitable  law:  it  comes  alike  upon
the  rich  and  the  poor.  The  poor
person  who  pays  his  ten  dollars  tith-
ing gives  as  much  in  proportion  as
the  richest  man  in  the  community.
The  rich  gives  no  more  than  a  tenth,
and  the  poorest  gives  no  less.  We
are  all  alike,  then,  in  tins  respect
when  we  observe  this  law  of  tithing  -
and  it  should  be  strictly  observed  by
ns,  if  we  want  the  blessings  of  God  to
1  rest  upon  us,

I  have  thought,  I  do  not  know
how  truly,  that  of  late  there  has
been  a  disposition  among  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  be  penurious  in  this
respect.  It  has  seemed  to  me  that
with  the  increase  of  God's  blessings
around  us,  a  disposition  bus  been
manifest  to  be  stingy,  to  withhold
our  substance,  and  to  tie  up  the  hands
of  those  who  have  the  great  work  to
perform.  We  want  to  build  this
templef  and  other  temples  in  other


parts  of  our  land.  We  want  to  fill
the  land  with  temples — houses  that
shall  be  dedicated  to  the  Most  High
God.  At  the  present  time  people  in
St,  George  and  other  settlements  in
that  region — from  350  to  400  miles
from  this  city  who  wish  to  be
married  according  to  the  order  and
ordinances  that  we  believe  in  and
view  as  necessary,  have  to  make  this
long  journey  one  way,  and  the  same
the  other,  making  700  or  800  miles
travel,  to  have  the  ordinances  of
God's  house  solemnized  as  we  believe
they  ought  to  be.  What  alibor  this
is  ! This  has  to  be  obviated.

We  are  building  a  temple  in  Salt
Lake  City ;  but  this  is  only  one.
Th  ere  will  be  doubtless  a  temple
built  in  St.  George,  and  probably
others  in  the  north,  east,  west,  and
throughout  the  land.  Do  you  think
the  tithing  is  all  going  to  be  spent
in  Suit  Lake  City?  Do  you  think
that  the  remote  settlements  are  all
going  to  contribute  ot  their  strength
and  their  increase  to  build  up  this
city  alone?  No,  this  would  not  be
right :  this  would  be  filling  the  heart
and  letting  the  extremities  suffer.
The  extremities  must  be  sustained.


Tithing  must  be  devoted  to  the
uilding  of  temples  and  places  of
worship,  so  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  in  every  section  of  the  Terri-
tory may  go  and  attend  to  the  ordi-
nances for  the  living  and  the  dead.
We  have  a  mighty  work  to  do  in  this
connection*  God  has  revealed  this
law,  and,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  a  law
that  works  alike  upon  all.  It  is  not
oppressive  on  any  class,  but  it  is
distributed  equally  upon  all  classes.
Let  us  observe  it,  and  all  the  laws  of
God,  that  we  may  become  a  blessed
people;  that  we  may  increase  in
wealth,  and  use  that  wealth  to  the
glory  of  God ;  that  there  may  be
neither  pauperism,  want,  nor  ignor-
ance throughout  our  entire  land,  and
that  the  grateful  prayers  of  a  blessed
and  happy  people  may  ascend  from
every  habitation  throughout  all  these
valleys  unto  the  Lord  of  hosts,
praising  his  holy  name  for  the  nu-
merous blessings  which  he  has  be-
stowed  upon  us,  for  the  peace,  good
order,  union  and  every  other  blessing
we  have  received  from  him,

That  this  may  be  the  case  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


158


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE  BY  PKKMDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  at  the  42xd  Semi- Annual  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,

October  9,  1872.


(Reported  hj  David IV.  Evans.)


SAINTS  SHOULD  SUSTAIN  THEMSELVES — KEEP  THE  COMMANDMENTS-
ABUSES — POWER  OF  RIGHTEUUS  COMBINATION  OF  LABOR.


I  want  to  express  my  feelings  to
the  Latter-day  Saints  upon  certain
points  of  business  which  pertain  to
our  welfare,  and  I  wish  fco  do  it  with-
out, being  obliged  to  raiaie  my  voice
so  high  and  so  loud  as  to  infringe
upon  tlit1  organs  of  speech  to  that
degree  that  I  shall  have  to  stop,  If
the  people  will  be  still,  they  can  hear
me  in  my  common  voice  perfectly
easy,  I  will  not  go  into  all  the  de-
tails with  regard  to  the  duties  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  their  desires,
as  they  have  manifested  them  by
gathering  out  from  the  world,  and
assembling  themselves  together.
They  generally  understand  them,  and
they  can  read  for  themselves  tin?
doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  the
reasons  why  we  are  gathered  toge-
ther. But  I  wish  now  to  impress  on
the  minds  of  the  people  the  necessity
of  our  taking  a  course  to  be  able  to
exist  and  to  sustain  ourselves — to
have  something  to  eat  and  wdar—
hats  to  put  on  our  heads,  and  coats,
mantles,  blankets,  vests,  shirts,  gar-
ments and  other  things  suitable  to
wear  and  to  make  our  bodies  com-
fortable, provided  that  the  Lord
should  knock  the  underpinning  from
under  Babvlon.  The  time  will  come
when  Babylon  will  fall.  If  it  should
fall  now,  it  would  leave  us  pretty
destitute. We  would  soon  wear  out


our  head  dresses  and  fine  clothing,
and  what  should  we  do  ?  Why,  we
should  be  as  badly  off  as  the  Saints
were  when  they  came  into  this  val-
ley, twenty -five  years  ago.  They
picked  up  a  few  back  skins,  antelope
skins,  sheepskins,  buffalo  skins,  and
made  leggings  and  moccasins  of
them,  and  wrapped  the  buffalo  robes
around  them.  Some  had  blankets
and  some  had  not ;  some  had  shirts,
and  I  guess  some  had  not.  One  man
told  nie  that  he  had  not  a  shirt  for
himself  or  family.  If  Babylon  should
happen  to  tip  over,  so  that  we  could
not  reach  out  and  gather  the  neces-
saries of  life,  we  should  be  in  a  bad
condition.  I  want  to  put  you  in
mind  of  these  things,  and  it  is  my
duty  to  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
that  they  should  take  measures  to
sustain  themselves — they  should  lay
a  foundation  for  feeding  and  clothing
themselves.

You  are  well  aware  that  there  has
been  a  great  deal  of  money  spent  in
this  Territory  to  get  machinery  for
the  purpose  of  working  up  the  wool
and  cotton,  and  I  think  you  are
pretty  well  aware  that  there  have
been  a  great  many  thousand  words
spoken  to  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
these  valleys,  upon  the  necessity  of
raising  sheep,  though  we  have  had  a
tide  of  opposition  against  this.  Still,


SAINTS  SHOULD  SUSTAIN  THEMSELVES,  ETC


159


wooLraising  is  now  proven  to  l>e  a
success  in  these  mount a  ins,  any  and
all  of  the  Bishops  to  the  contrary
notwithstanding.  This  is  a  tine  wool
growing  country,  no  better  in  the
world.  We  have  proved  this ;  and
we  have  got  a  great  deal  of  machinery
here  to  work  np  the  wool,  most  of
which  is  now  standing  still  for  the
want  of  wool.  Many  of  those  who
have  been  prevailed  upon  to  raise
sheep,  have  got  so  covetous  and  love
money  ro  well  that  they  must  sell
their  wool  fur  money,  and  send  it  out
of  the  country,  in  consequence  of
which  the  factories  are  now  standing
still.  I  think  there  are  a  few  who
will  recollect  that,  in  the  excitement
of  purchasing  wool  here  last  Hay,
June  and  July*  in  many  instances  I
refused  to  buy  their  wool.  If  I  won  Id
have  paid  a  little  more  than  agents
from  the  east,  I  could  have  got  it;
in  some  instances  I  got  it  for  a  little
less.  I  bought  some  and  let  a  good
deal  go,  and  told  the  people  with
whom  I  conversed  upon  the  subject,
that  I  would  let  the  buying  of  wool
alone  until  Fall,  then  I  thought  I
could  send  ea^t,  buy  my  wool  and
ship  it  back  here,  and  I  believe  I
could  get  it  cheaper  than  I  could  get
it  then*  And  it  is  now  verily  so,  for
I  can  send  to  Philadelphia,  New
York,  Boston,  or  anywhere  in  the
eastern  country,  and  buy  wool  and
ship  it  back  here  from  10  to  30  per
cent,  cheaper  than  I  could  buy  it
here  last  spring,  I  can  send  west
and  buy  wool  and  ship  it  here  and
save  a  still  higher  per  centage.  This
is  the  difference  in  the  price  of  wool
last  spring  and  the  fore  part  of  the
summer,  and  now  what  our  friends
and  brethren  who  own  factories  will
do  vvith  regard  to  purchasing  wool,
I  am  not  able  to  say.  Some  of  them,
probably,  are  able  to  buy  wool,  and
quite  a  number  are  not,  and  they  who
are  not  will,  in  all  probability,  let
their  factories  stand  still.


I  want  the  brethren  and  sisters  to
tnke  an  interest  in  sustaining  our-
selves  here  in  these  mountains.  It
is  the  duty  of  the  Bishops  to  see  that
the  members  of  their  Wards  take  a
course  that  will  build  up  thi  kingdom
of  God,  not  only  in  providing  food
and  raruent,  hot  see  that  the  people
do  their  duty  with  regard  to  the  law
of  God  in  preserving  themselves  in
purity.  My  mind  is  now  upon  those
things  which  some  people  call  tempo-
ral, and  I  wisli  to  urge  them  upon
the  Latter-day  Saints.  I  want,  them
to  save  their  wool  and  to  keep  it  in
this  Territory.  If  we  have  not
factories  sufficient  to  work  up  all  the
wool  that  grows  in  this  Territory,
and  in  these  mountains,  we  will  send
and  jret  more  machinery,  and  build
more  factories,  and  work  np  the  wool
for  the  people.  It  is  the  duty  of
those  who  grow  wool  to  keep  it  here*
It  is  the  duty  of  the  wife  of  the  man
who  owns  sheep  to  look  to  it,  and
see  that  that  wool  is  not  sold  and
carried  out  of  the  country.  It  is  the
duty  of  the  Bishops  to  see  these  men,
and  urge  upon  them  the  necessity  of
keeping  the  wool  in  the  mountains
where  it  can  be  worked  up;  and  the
Bishops  should  set  the  example  them-
selves. We  expect  they  do;  if  they
do  not,  they  are  not  fit  for  Bishops.
It  is  the  duty  of  the  Bishops  to  see
the  wives  of  these  men  and  their
children,  that  they  may  prevail  on
their  greedy,  covetous  fathers  or  hus-
bands, who  would  saeriHce  the  pros-
perity of  the  kingdom  of  God  for  a
little  worldly  wealth,  and  see  that
they  do  not  run  distracted  or  go  crazy
over  a  little  money.  I  say  the
Bishops  should  see  to  it,  that  these
men  who  have  sheep  act  like  rational,
reasonable  men.  What  are  you  here
for?  What  did  you  come  for?
Virtually  you  all  say  you  left  Baby-
lon and  came  here  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God  ;  but  onr  acts  speak
as  loud,  and  a  little  louder  than  our


IGO  JUIKNAL  OF

words  can.  We  witness  to  one  ano-
ther and  to  the  Heavens,  and  to  all
people,  that  we  believe  in  building  up
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.
There  is  an  item  that  ought  to  be  h<-
fore  the  butter-day  Saints  with  re-
gard to  the  kingdom  as  it  will  be
built  up.  They  ought  to  teach  them-
selves— reJJd  the  Scriptures,  the  Old
and  New  Testament,  the  prophecies,
what  the  Sarior  and  his  Apostles
have  said,  and  what  has  been  de-
livered to  us  in  the  latter  days,  and
compare  thera,  and  then  draw  their
own  conclusions,  and  see  if  they  are  j
under  the  necessity  of  working  tern*
po rally,  literally,  manually,  physi-
cally for  the  building  up  of  the  king-
dom of  heaven.  I  say  that  we  are
or  it  never  will  be  built  up.  With
regard  to  the  fundamental  facts  of
our  doctrines,  we  can  not  show  to
any  person  that  we  have  faith  there*
in,  except  by  our  works.  If  I  were
now  in  the  world,  and  an  Elder  was
to  come  along  and  preach,  and  I  were
to  go  and  hear  him,  the  act  of  walk-
ing to  the  meeting  house  or  to  the
private  dwelling  house,  would  be
manual  labor,  I  might  believe  every
word  such  an  Elder  said  in  pleaching
the  Gospel,  but  if  I  never  took  any
steps  towards  fulfilling  his  require-
ments who  would  know  anything
about  it?  Nobody  on  the  face  of,
the  earth.  Would  there  be  any
manifestation  that  I  had  faith  ?  Not
the  least  in  the  world,  and  if  it
started  to  grow  in  my  heart  while
listening  to  the  Elder,  without  works
on  my  part  it  would  soon  die  out  and
cease  to  exist.  If  I  do  believe,  it  is
a  manual  labor  to  get  up  and  say  to
the  people,  "  I  believe  that  what  this
man  has  said  is  true.1'  That  is  an
exercise  of  the  body,  and  a  temporal
labor.  Well,  this  Elder  says,  we
should  repent  of  our  sins.  I  do
repent.  He  says  we  should  obey  the
Gospel,  and  the first thiug  after


DISCOURSES.

having  faith  or  believing  it,  is  to
go  down  into  the  waters  of  baptism,
and  to  do  that  is  a  temporal  act,
physical  labor;  and  the  act  of  bap-
tism by  him  is  also  a  temporal  act  or
labor  And  so  in  everything  else
with  regard  to  the  Gospel  and  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth — we  must  have  works
or  we  can  not  have  faith,  I  can  not
divide  between  the  two.  The  Elder
is  preaching,  I  believe,  I  confess
ami  obey,  and  I  can  not,  for  uiy  soul,
divide  the  temporal,  the  manual,  the
physical  labor  from  the  internal  faith
ond  hope  and  joy  which  the  spirit
gives,  and  which  cause  obedience  in
my  acts,

I  wish  to  make  this  application
right  here  to  the  Latter-day  Saints.
If  we  believe  that  God  is  about  to
establish  his  kingdom  upon  the  earth,
we  believe  firmly  that  we  have  got  to
perform  a  manual,  temporal  labor  to
bring  this  ab  ut.  It  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  ever  become  the  king-
doms of  our  God  and  his  Christ,  it
will  be  by  his  people  conforming  to
the  plans  instituted  for  the  establish-
ment of  a  kingdom  here  on  the  earth.
You  may  call  it  temporal,  no  matter
what  it  is  called,  it  is  territory,  it  is
dominion*  In  the  first  place  we  must
have  territory,  then  we  must  have
people;  and  in  order  to  organize
this  kingdom,  we  must  have  officers
and  laws  to  govern  or  control  the
subjects.  To  make  the  organization
of  a  kingdom  perfect,  we  must  have
every  appendage  necessary  and  pro-
per, so  that  the  Savior  can  come  and
reign  king  of  nations  as  he  does  king
of  Saints,  We  shall  be  uuder  the
necessity  of  raising  breadstuff,  and
then  we  shall  want  to  eat  it.  We
shall  have  to  rai*e  our  fruit  as  well
as  eat  it;  we  shall  have  to  rai&e  our
vegetables  as  well  as  eat  them.  We
shall  be  under  the  necessity  then  of
making  hats,  or  of  going  without


I


SAINTS  SHOULD  SUSTAIN  THEMSELVES,  ETC.  161


them  ;  we  shall  be  tmder  the  neces-
sity of  making  clothing — coats,  Tests,
pants,  shirts  and  so  on,  or  else  go
without  them.  We  shall  be  under
the  necessity  of  having  courts  orga- 1
nized,  unless  all  are  in  the  Lord  and
all  walk  in  his  way;  if  that  were  the
case,  I  do  not  know  that  we  should
want  any  sheriff,  marshals,  consta-
bles, magistrates,  jurors,  judges  or
governors,  because  the  word  of  the
Lord  would  govern  and  control  every
person;  but  until  that  time  arrive*
we  shall  want  officers,  so  that  we  will
be  prepared  to  reckon  with  the  trans-
gressor, and  we  shall  have  transgres-
sors in  building  this  kingdom,  for  it
will  be  some  time  vet  before  all  are
in  the  Lord.  The  law  is  for  the
transgressor,  consequently  we  must
have  officers,  and  we  already  have  in
this  kingdom  as  now  organized  all
the  officers  necessary,  every  quorum,
every  organization,  every  court  and
authority  necessary  to  rule  all  the
nations  that  ever  were  or  ever  wilt
be  upon  the  earth,  if  they  serve  God,
or  try  to  do  so.  But  if  we  must
have  an  organization  after  the  order
an  1  wishes  of  those  who  are  igno- !
rant  of  Vie  things  of  God,  we  must
have  political  and  municipal  organi-
zations. Kingdoms  are  organized  to
suit  ttie  conditions  of  the  people,
whether  the  government  is  that  of
the  people,  in  the  hands  of  a  few  in-
dividuals, or  centred  in  one.  But
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  when  orga-
nized upon  the  earth,  will  have  every
officer,  law  and  ordinance  necessary
for  ihe  managing  of  those  who  are
unruly,  or  who  transgress  its  laws,
and  to  govern  those  who  desire  to  do
righr,  nut  can  not  quite  walk  to  the
line ;  and  all  these  powers  and  an- 1
thnriHes  are  in  existence  in  the  midst
of  thia  people.

Now,  we  have  this  kiagdom  orga-
nized here  upon  the  earth,  and  we
shall  be  under  the  necessity,  by  and

Ho.  11*


by,  of  understanding  this,  or  we  will
be  left  in  a  very  destitute  condition.
It  is  my  duty  to  say  to  the  people
that  it  is  their  duty  to  make  their
clothing;  and  permit  me  to  say,  still
further,  upon  the  subject  of  the
I  fashion  of  cutting  cloth  and  putting
it  together  agam,  that  it  is  most
useless,  unbecoming  and  ridiculous*
The  present  custom  of  many  is  such
that  I  would  as  soon  see  a  squaw  go
through  the  streets  with  a  very  little
1  on,  as  to  see  clothing  piled  up  until
it  reaches,  perhaps,  the  top  of  the
hedge  or  fence  its  wearer  is  passing*
If  I  do  not  say  much  about  such  cus-
.  turns  and  fashions,  I  shall  probably
skip  over  some  naughty  words-  In
my  feelings  they  are  positively  ridi-
culous, they  are  so  useless  and  un-
becoming. Do  you  recollect  a  fashion
there  was  a  few  years  ago,  that  has
now  nearly  ceased,  when  a  woman
could  not  walk  through  the  streets
without  holding  her  clothes  two  feet
in  front  of  her  if  her  arm  was  long
enough  P  I  shall  not  say  what  I
thought  of  those  who  followed  this
fashion.  Now  it  is  on  the  other
side,  and  I  do  not  know  but  they  will
get  two  humps  on  their  backs,  they
I  have  one  now,  and  if  they  get  to  be
dromedaries  it  will  be  no  wonder,
not  the  least  in  the  world.  I  recol-
lect a  fashion  of  cutting  up  cloth
some  forty  years  ago,  that  was  very
,  peculiar,  A  lady  would  go  into  a
store  and  say  to  a  merchant,  "  I
would  like  to  get  a  dress  pattern  this
morning."  **  Very  well,  what  will
you  have  ?"  "  Oh,  bring  down  your
goods  and  show  them.  This  suits
pretty  well!  I  think  I  will  take
this/1  "Madame,"  says  the  mer-
chant, "  If  you  will  buy  the  sleeves,
I  will  give  you  the  dress."  This,  of
course,  is  jocosely  said.  I  refer  now
to  what  was  called  the  "  mutton*
legged"  sleeve — by  comparison  it
took  seven  yards  for  the  sleeves,  and

Vol  XV,


162


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


three  for  the  dress.  That  was  the
way  they  dressed  then.  How  un-
becoming! How  unbecoming  it  is
to  sea  ladies  dress  as  they  do  in  some
places  at  the  present  day.  Then
another  fashion  is  to  wear  their
dresses  short  in  front,  walking
through  the  streets,  and  a  long  train
dragging  in  the  dirt  behind.  How
unbecoming  !  This  is  not  modesty,
gentility,  or  good  taste;  it  does  not
belong  to  a  lady  at  all,  but  to  an
iernorant,  extravagant,  or  vain-minded
person,  who  knows  not  true  principle,
I  take  the  libertv  of  saving  that
these  fashions  are  displeasing  in  the
sight  of  truth,  mercy  and  justice.  It
is  displeasing  to  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  for  persons  to  array  themselves
in  any  way  whatever  that  is  disgust-
ing to  the  eye  of  the  pure  and  the
prudent  There  is  not  a  Latter-day
Saint  nor  a  Former-day  Saint  that
ever  did,  or  ever  will  expect  to  see
any  such  customs  or  fashions  when
they  get  into  heaven.  If  they  were
to  see  an  angel,  they  would  see  a
being  beautifully  but  modestly  dres-
sed, white,  comely  and  nice  to  look
upon.

I  would  like  to  advise  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  avoid  these  foolish  cus-
toms and  habits.  Let  them  pass  by
and  not  follow  them  ;  they  do  not
belong  to  us,  I  would  like  to  repeat
to  the  ladies  what  we  have  said  hun-
dreds and  thousands  of  times — they
should .  make  their  own  head-dresses
and  fashions,  independent  of  all  the
rest  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.
Pay  no  attention  to  what  others  do,  it
is  no  matter  what  they  do,  or  how
they  dress.  Latter-day  Saints  should
dress  in  that  plain,  neat,  comely
manner  that  will  be  pleasing  and
prudent,  in  every  sense  of  the  word,
before  the  Lord,  and  try  and  please
him  that  we  serve,  the  Being  that
we  acknowledge  as  our  God.  Not
flaunting,  flirting  and  gossiping,  as  a


great  many  are,  and  thinking  con-
tinually of  their  dresses,  and  of  this,
that  and  the  other  that  will  minister
to  and  gratify  their  vanity;  Such
women  seldom  think  of  their  prayers*

I  am  extending  my  remarks  much
longer  than  I  intended.  But  how  is
it  about  the  Word  of  Wisdom  ?  Do
we  observe  it  ?  We  should  do,  and
preserve  ourselves  in  all  things  holy
before  the  Lord,  How  is  it  about
keeping  the  Sabbath  day  ?  We  have
some  articles  that  we  would  like  to
read  here,  but  the  people  have  them
to  read  at  their  leisure.  We  should
observe  the  Ten  Commandments,  for
instance,  that  were  given  to  Moses.
If  we  do  that,  we  shall  be  a  pretty
good  people.  But  there  is  nothing
in  those  commandments  about  build-
ing factories  and  raising  wool,  for
the  children  of  Israel,  at  the  time
they  were  given,  were  in  a  condition
that  tbey  did  not  need  factories,  they
did  not  need  to  raise  wool.  If  they
bad  goats  and  sheep  with  them,  they
made  mutton,  and  tanned  the  skins
probably,  but  I  do  not  know  what
they  did  with  them.  It  appears  that
their  clothing  did  not  wax  old,  and
they  probably  had  no  need  to  spin  or
weave.  But  we  have  need  to,  we
have  got  to  make  our  own  clothing,
or  to  get  it  some  other  way — buy  it
or  else  go  without  it ;  and  we  ought
to  keep  the  Word  of  Wisdom,  and
keep  the  Sabbath  day  holy,  and
preserve  ourselves  in  the  integrity  of
our  hearts  before  God,

I  want  to  ask  if  the  people  pay
their  tithing  ?  Bishops,  do  the  people
of  your  wards  pay  their  tithing  ?  I
will  answer  the  question  for  you  and
say,  No,  they  do  not.  Some  people
in  modern  times  shudder  at  the  word
tithing — it  is  a  term  they  are  not
used  to.  They  are  used  to  sustaining
Priests,  to  donating  for  building
meeting  houses,  and  administering
to  those  who  wait  at  the  table  of  the


SAINTS  SHOULD  SUSTAIN  THEMSELVES,  ETC.


163


Lord,  or  that  do  their  preaching  and
praying  for  them. And  this  is  done
by  subscription,  donation,  and  passing
the  plate,  hat  or  basket,  but  the  word
"tithing"  is  frightful  to  them.  I
like  the  term,  because  it  is  scriptural,
and  I  would  rather  use  it  than  any
other. The  Lord  instituted  tithing,
it  was  practiced  in  the  days  of  Abra-
ham, and  Enoch  and  Adam  and  his
children  did  nol  forget  their  tithes
and  offerings, You  can read  for
yourselves  with  regard  to  what  the
Lord  requires. Now  do  the  Latter-
day  Saints  pay  their  tithing?  They
do  not. I  want  to  say  this  much  to
those  who  profess  to  be  Latter-day
Saints — If  we  neglect  our  tithes  and
offerings  we  will  receive  the  chasten-
ing hand  of  the  Lord We  may
just  as  well  count  on  this  first  as  last
If  we  neglect  to  pay  our  tithes  and
offerings  we  will  neglect  other  things,
and  this  will  grow  upon  us  until  the
Spirit  of  the  Gospel  is  entirely  gone
from  us,  and  we  are  in  the  dark,  and
know  not  whither  we  are  going.

It  is  the  duty  of  the  Bishops  to
see  that  their  wards  pay  titbing.
But  we  have  Bishops  who  are  not
reliable — men,  for  instance,  who  will
take  tithing  grain  when  it  brings  a
good  price  in  cash,  and  when  good
beef  is  bringing  cash  they  are  so
kind  to  their  wards,  and  especially  to
their  sons,  that  if  a  son  has  got  a
parcel  of  wild  horses  ou  the  prairies
that  are  not  worth  a  yearling  calf  a
head,  they  will  *>ay  to  bim,  "Drive
np  your  wild  horses,  my  boy,  I  will
trade  with  you,  and  let  you  have  neat
stock,  yearlings,  or  two  years  or  three
years  old,  or  wheat  fchat  is  in  the
tithing  bin,  I  will  take  your  horses.
I  will  send  down  word  to  the  General
Tithing  office,  that  there  are  so  many
horses  here  belonging  to  the  tithing
office/"  Such  horses  are  a  curse  to
lis,  or  I  can  say  they  have  been  to  me
as  an  individual. I  have  raised  stock


enough  to  supply  this  whole  Territory,
if  they  had  been  taken  care  of.  Bat
they  were  like  the  Indian's  boy.  The
missionary  had  been  telling  him  that
if  he  brought  up  a  child  in  the  way
he  should  go,  when  he  was  old  he
would  not  depart  from  it,  But  the
old  chief  has  got  it+  just  about  as  it
is,  and  said  lie,  "  Yes,  brin<*  up  a
child,  and  away  he  goes;"  and  this
is  the  way  the  horses  go.  And  as  for
the  neat  stock,  if  any  of  it  ever  gets
out  of  my  sight  that  I  do  not  know
where  it  is,  and  can  not  send  and  get
it,  I  always  calculate  that  a  thief  will
have  it.  I  never  trouble  myself  to
look  after  it,  there  are  too  many  men
riding  on  the  prairies  with  their
blankets  behind  them,  and  their  din-
ner in  their  blanket,  and  their  lassoea
with  them  to  hunt  up  all  the  stock
there  is.  This  wild  stock  that  is
turned  in  on  tithing  is  a  curse  to  us.
And  where  does  the  wheat  go  to  ?
I  am  not  disposed  to,  but  I  could  tell
names  of  Bishops  who  have  taken
our  tithing  wheat  out  of  the  bins
and  it  has  been  sold  by  them  or  their
families.  And  they  have  taken  our
stock  that  we  wanted  here  for  beef  to
feed  the  public  lands,  and  traded  it
off  for  wild  horses.  This  is  a  pretty
hard  saying,  but  it  is  true,  and  I
could  tell  their  names  if  I  were
obliged  to.

If  the  people  will  pay  their  tithing,
we  will  go  and  do  the  work  that  is
required  of  us.  It  is  very  true  that
the  poor  pay  their  tithing  better  than
the  rich  do.  If  the  rich  would  pay
their  tithing  we  should  have  plenty.
The  poor  are  faithful  and  piompt
in  paying  their  tithing,  but  the  rich
can  hardly  afford  to  pay  theirs — they
have  too  much.  If  a  man  is  worth
enough  that  he  would  have  a  thou-
sand dollars  to  pay,  it  pinches  him.
If  he  has  only  ten  dollars  he  can  pay
one  ;  if  he  has  only  one  dollar  he
can  pay  ten  cents ;  it  does  not  hurt


164  JOURNAL  OF

him  at  all  If  be  has  a  hundred
dollars  he  can  possibly  pay  ten.  If
he  has  a  thousand  dollars  he  looks
over  it  a  little  and  says,  "  I  guess  I
will  pay  it;  it  ought  to  be  paid  any
how  ;  "  and  he  manages  to  pay  his
ten  dollars  or  his  hundred  dollars.
But  suppose  a  man  is  wealthy  enough
to  pay  ten  thousand,  he  looks  tbat
over  a  good  many  times,  and  says,
"  I  guess  I  will  wait  until  I  get  a
little  more,  aad  then  I  will  pay  a
good  deal."  And  they  wait  and
wait,  like  an  old  gentleman  in  the
east;  he  waited  and  waited  and
waited  to  pay  his  tithing  until  he
went  down,  I  guess,  to  hell,  I  do  not
know  exactly  ;  but  he  went  to  hades,
which  we  call  bell.  He  went  out
of  the  world,  and  tbis  is  the  way  with
a  great  many.  They  wait  and  con-
tinue waiting,  until,  finally,  the
character  comes  along  who  is  called
Death,  and  be  slips  up  to  them  and
takes  away  their  breath,  then  they
are  gone  and  cannot  pay  their  tithing,
they  are  too  late,  and  so  it  goes.

Now  this  is  finding  fault  with  the
rich,  and  I  am  going  to  find  fault
with  the  poor  by  and  by,  But  if  we
will  pay  our  tithing  we  will  be
blessed ;  if  we  refuse  to  do  so  the
chastening  hand  of  the  Lord  will  be
upon  this  people,  just  as  sure  as  we
are  here.  You  may  say  I  am  threat-
ening yon  Take  it  just  as  you
please,  I  do  not  care.  You  may
grease  it  and  swallow  it,  or  swallow
it  without  greasing,  just  as  yon  hare
a  mind  to.  It  is  true,  and  we  will
find  it  so.

.  Will  the  Latter-day  Saints  pay
their  tithing  ?  Will  they  keep  the
Sabbal  h  day  holy  ?  Will  they  deal
justly  with  their  neighbors?  In  my
own  feelings  I  excuse  a  great  many
naughty  things  that  are  done  in  our
midst.  1  know  that  men  and  women
brought  up  in  different  countries
come  here  with  their  prejudices,  and


DISCOURSES.

with  the  instincts  which  they  have
had  bred  in  and  bom  with  them,  and
which  have  grown  up  with  them;
and  many  of  these  traits  of  character
are  obnoxious  to  others  brought  up
under  other  circumstances.  These
traditions  cling  to  the  people,  and
cause  them  to  do  many  things  which
they  would  not  do  if  they  had  been
differently  taught.  Their  morals
have  not  been  looked  after  in  their
youth  and  as  prudently  preserved  as
tbey  should  have  been,  Children
should  be  taught  honesty,  and  they
should  grow  up  with  the  feeling
within  them  that  they  should  never
take  a  pin  that  is  not  their  own;
never  displace  anything,  but  always
put  everything  in  its  place.  If  they
find  anything  seek  for  the  owner.
If  there  is  anything  of  their  neigh-
bor's going  to  waste,  put  it  where
it  will  not  waste,  and  be  perfectly
honest  one  with  another,  Take  the
I  woi4d  of  mankind  and  they  are  not
overstocked  with  honesty.  I  have
proved  that.  In  my  youth  I  have
seen  men,  who  were  considered  good,
clever,  honest  men,  who  would  take
the  advantage  of  their  neighbors  or
workmen  if  they  could.  I  have  seen
deacons,  Baptists,  Presbyterian*,
members  of  the  Methodist  church,
with  long,  solid,  sturdy  faces  and
a  poor  brother  would  come  along
and  say  to  one  of  them,  "  Brother,
such-a-one,  I  have  come  to  see  if  I
could  get  a  bushel  of  wheat,  rye  or
corn  of  you.  I  have  no  money,  but
I  will  come  and  work  for  you  in  har-
vest," and  their  faces  would  be  drawn
down  so  mournful,  and  they  would
say,  "  I  have  none  to  spare,"  "Well,
deacon,  if  you  can  let  me  have  one
bushel,  I  understand  you  have  con-
siderable, I  will  come  and  work  for
you  just  as  long  as  you  say,  until
you  are  satisfied,  in  your  harvest
field,  or  haying  or  anything  you  want
done."


SAINTS  SHOULD  SUSTAIN  THEMSELVES,  ETC.


165


After  much  talk  this  longfaced
character  would  get  it  out,  "If
you  will  come  and  work  for  me
two  days  in  harvest,  I  do  not  know
but  I  will  spare  yon  a  bushel  of
rye/'

When  the  harvest  time  comes  the
man  could  have  got  two  bushels  of
rye  for  one  day's  work;  but  the
deacon  sticks  him  to  his  bargain,
and  makes  him  work  two  days  for  a
bushel  of  wheat  or  rye.  I  used  to
think  a  good  deal,  but  seldom  spoke
about  any  such  thing,  for  I  was
brought  up  to  treat  everybody  with
that  respect  and  courtesy  that  I  could
hardly  allow  myself  to  think  alond,
and  consequently  very  seldom  did  so.
I  thought  enough  of  such  religion,
at  any  rate,  that  such  Chrisjiaos
called  me  an  infidel,  because  I  could
not  swallow  such  thinsrs,  but  I  could
not  if  they  had  been  greased  over
with  fresh  batter,  I  did  not  read
the  Bible  as  they  read  it ;  and  as  for
there  being  Bible  Christians,  1  knew
there  were  nonej  and  if  their  religion
was  the  religion  they  liked,  said  I,
"Just  go  your  own  way,  I  want  none
of  it"  I  wanted  no  relgion  that  '
produced  such  morals.

If  we  pay  our  tithing,  and  begin
to  live  a  little  stricter  than  we  have
heretofore,  in  our  faith,  cease  to  break
the  Sabbath,  cease  to  spend  our  time
in  idleness,  cease  to  he  dishonest  and
to  meddle  with  that  which  is  not
our  own,  cease  to  deceive  and  to
speak  evil  of  one  another,  and  learn
the  commandments  of  the  Lord,
and  do  them,  we  shall  be  blessed.

S oppose  we  should  say  to  a  few
of  the  t  jut ter  day  Saints,  if  we  could
find  those  who  would  answer  the
purpose,  "How  would  you  like  to
build  up  a  stake  of  Ziou,  a  little  city
of  Enuch  ?  How  would  vou  like
this  ?  Would  you  like  to  enter  into
a  covenant,  and  into  bonds,  according
tp  the  *aw  of  our  land,  and  let  us


bind  ourselves  together  to  go  into  a
svstematic  co-operative  system,  not
only  in  merchandizing,  but  in  farm-
ing  and  in  all  mechanical  work,  and
in  every  trade  and  business  there  is ;
and  we  will  classify  the  business
throughout,  and  we  will  gather
together  a  few  hundred  families,  and
commence  and  keep  the  law  of  (rod,
and  preserve  ourselves  in  parity.
How  would  the  Latter-day  Saints
like  it  ?  Do  you  think  there  could
any  be  found  who  would  be  willing
to  do  this  ? "  Let  me  say  to  you,
my  brethren,  I  have  a  very  fine
place  to  start  such  a  society  as  this
that  would  probably  sustain  from
five  to  ten  thousand  persons.  1  would
like  to  make  a  deed  of  this  property
to  such  a  society,  aud  enter  into  a
covenant  with  men  of  God  and  wo-
men of  God  that  we  would  go  m  and
show  the  world  and  show  the  Latter-
day  Saints  how  to  build  up  a  city  of
Zion,  and  how  to  increase  intelligence
among  the  people,  how  to  walk  cir-
cumspectly before  our  God  and  before
one  another,  and  classify  every
branch  of  labor,  taking  advantage  of
every  improvement,  and  of  all  the
learning  in  the  world,  and  direct  the
labor  of  men  and  women,  and  see
what  it  would  produce;  fbl'ow  it  out
for  ten  years,  and  then  look  at  the
result.  Our  friends  who  visit  us
here  say  that  we  have  done  a  good
work,  and  we  bear  testimony  that  we
have  been  greatly  prospered-  It  is
true  that  most  of  the  people  in  rhis
house  came  here  like  myself  com-
paratively naked  and  barefoot.  I  left
all  1  had  in  the  States,  I  say  all —
no*  I  had  some  wives  and  children
whom  I  brought  along  with  me.
Some  of  them  had  shoes  to  their  feet,
some  had  not;  some  had  bonnets,
some  had  none.  Some  of  my  chil-
dren had  clothing,  and  some  had  very
little;  and  we  took  up  our  line  of
march  and  left  alh 1 believe  for


some  four  pretty  nice  brick  houses,
and  a  nice  large  farm,  timber  land
and  so  on,  I  got  one  span  of  little
horses  and  a  carriage  worth  about  a
hundred  flollars,  the  horses  were
worth  about  sixty  dollars  apiece,, the
harness  about  twenty.  I  think  that
was  everything  I  got  for  my  pro-
perty. We  came  here  and  we  have
been  prospered  and  blessed.  If  I
had  the  privilege  of  living  with  a
community  that  would  do  as  I  say  for
ten  years,  I  would  show  them  that
oar  blessings  now,  in  a  temporal
point  of  view,  have  been  but  as  a
*  drop  to  the  bucketful.  Hut  would
we  bear  this  ?  Would  our  feelings
submit  to  this  ?  Would  we  not  want
to  go  and  serve  the  devil  if  the  Lord
were  to  heap  riches  upon  us  ?  We
see  that  what  he  does  now  makes
men  covetous,  they  can  not  even  pay
their  tithing.  Well,  do  we  get  all
that  we  want  ?  No,  each  man  wants
it  all,  and  as  long  as  this  is  the  case
with  us,  I  think  the  saying  common
among  the  boys  in  my  youth  will  be
good — il  Every  man  for  himself,  the
devil  for  us  all"  Just  as  long  as
every  man  works  for  himself  we  are
not  the  Lord's ;  we  are  not  Christ's,
we  are  not  his  disciples  in  this  point
of  view,  at  any  rate*  If  we  hud
faith  to  be  baptized,  we  do  not  carry
out  the  principles  of  the  salvation
that  he  has  wrought  out  for  us.  He
is  going  to  set  up  his  kingdom — a
literal,  temporal  kingdom.  It  will
be  a  kingdom  of  priests  by  arid  by.
If  we  had  been  willing  to  fully  cairy
out  the  rules  of  the  kingdom,  fol-
lowed counsel,  and  worked  together,
for  twenty -five  years  past,  the  blass-
ings  we  have  received  are  nut  a  drop
in  the  bucket  to  what  we  wouid  have
received.

Some  twelve  or  fifteen  years  I
labored  faithfully  with  our  merchants
here,  before  I  could  get  them  to
break  through  that  evei  lasting  covet-


ous crust  that  was  over  them,  and
consent  to  operate  together  in  mer-
chandizing so  as  to  give  the  people  a
chance  with  us.  And  it  was  the
design  and  the  filing  of  men  here,
belonging  to  the  Church,  to  aggran-
dize themselves  and  to  monopolise  to
themselves  the  wealth  of  the  commu-
nity. And  if  another  one  sprang  up
and  had  good  luck  they  would  take
him  into  the  corps,  into  their  fellow-
ship, and  he  would  belong  to  tha
order,  and  that  was  to  make  a  few
rich,  and  grind  down  and  make  every
other  mau  poor.  That  was  the  de-
sign, no  question  of  it.  13 ut  I  deter-
mined with  God  and  the  good  to
help  me  that  I  would  break  that
everlasting  covetous  crust  aud  I
succeeded  at  last.  Are  we  making
enough  in  our  mercuntilj  business
here  now  ?  Yes,  we  are  making  all
we  should  make.  I  suppose  a  great
many  would  like  to  know  how  we  are
doing.  It  would  be  no  harm  for  me
to  tell  you  perhaps  that,  the  last  six
months,  the  Board  of  Directors  of
Ziou's  Co-operative  Mercantile  In-
stitution are  able  to  declare  a  divi-
dend of  ten  per  cent.,  with  five  per
cent,  in  reserve,  which  is  added  to
the  capital  stock,  and  is  as  good  as
money.  That  is  goad  enough  for  me,
it  yields  some  thirty  per  cent  per
annum.

If  we  would  work  together  in  our
farming,  in  our  mechanism,  be  obe-
dient and  work  as  a  family  for  the
gCK»d  of  all,  it  would  be  almost  im-
possible for  anybody  tu  guess  the
success  we  would  have.  But  we  have
gijt  to  do  it  in  the  Lord,  We  must
nut  do  it  with  a  covetous  heart.  Al-
ways be  ready  and  willing  that  the
Lord  should  have  it  all,  and  do  what
he  pleases  with  it,  I  have  asked  a
favor  of  the  Lord  in  this  thing,  and
that  is  not  to  place  me  in  such  cir-
cumstances that  what  he  has  given
me  shall  go  into  the  hands  of  our


THINGS  OF  GOD

"  f

enemies.  God  forbid  that!  Bat  let
it  go  lor  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,
to  sustain  and  to  gather  the  poor,  to
build  factories,  make  farms,  and  set
the  poor  to  work,  as  I  hare  hundreds
and  thousands  that  had  not  anything
to  do. I  have  fed  and  clothed  them  i


REVEALED,  ETC.  167

and  taken  care  of  them  until  they
have  become  comparatively  indepen-
dent, I  have  made  no  man  poor,  but
thousands  and  thousands  rich,  that
is,  the  Lord  has,  through  your  hum-
ble servant.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  Tabkhnacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  May  26,  1872,

(Reported  Ifj  David  W*  Evans.)


THINGS  OF  GOD  REVEALED  ONLY  BY"  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD — DEVELOP-
MENT OF  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC,


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  privilege
of  meeting  with  the  Saints  in  this
place,  and  of  speaking  to  them  such
things  as  the  Lord  may  place  in  my
mind  to  com municate,  L  am  well
aware  that  L  do  not  know  how  to
speak,  and  that  you  do  not  know  how
to  bear,  unless  we  are  all  under  the
influence  and  guidance  of  the  Spirit
of  t he  living  God.  We  are  spiritual
beings,  and  literal  and  temporal
beings  ;  we  have  to  do  with  time  find
eternity,  and,  as  we  can  know  no-
thing about  eternity  and  nothing
about  God  only  as  he  shall  reveal  it
unto  as,  it  follows  as  a  necessary  eon-
sequence  that  all  the  theories,  ideas
and  dogmas  of  men  can  be  of  no
avail  in  instructing  the  human  family
in  things  pertaining  to  God  and
eternity.  This  holds  good  in  regard
to  all  of  oar  affairs  in  life,  whether  it
be  the  life  that  now  is  or  the  life  that
is  to  come. We  know  very  little


about  the  world  we  live  in,  We
know  very  little  a  boat  ourselves,
about  our  own  bodies,  about  the
spirit  and  mind  of  man,  nr  the  opera-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  that,
spirit  and  mind,  and  much  less  about
eternity,  about  God  and  heaven,  and
about  t tie  designs  and  pnr poses  of
the  Almighty;  and  it  is  fullv  for
man,  unaided  and  undirected  by  the
Almighty,  to  attempt  to  teach  things
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God  or
to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the
human  farnilv.  We,  as  human  be-
ings,  and  especially  as  Uirter-day
Saints,  who  have  given  some  atten-
tion to  these  matters,  and  ft  el  our-
selves identified  with  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  (*od  upon  the  earth,  have
ideas  that  differ  ve?y  materially  from
those  of  the  world,  and  that  differ-
ence may  be  traced  to  the  influence
and  o i >cration  of  the  Spirit  of  0**1
upon  our  minds  through  obedience  to


168


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  first  principles  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ ;  for,  while  the  world  of  man-
kind generally  have  repudiated  the
order  of  God  and  the  institutions  of
his  house,  we,  as  believers  in  him
and  in  the  establishment  of  his  king-
dom upon  the  earth  in  these  latter
days,  occupy  a  very  different  position
from  that  of  the  rest  of  the  world.

The  Scriptures  definitely  inform
us  that  no  man  knoweth  the  thiugs
of  God  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.
The  Gospel  teaches  us  how  we  may
obtain  a  knowledge  of  that  Spirit,
and  that  is,  by  repenting  of  our  sins,
being  baptized  in  the  name  of  Je^us
for  their  remission,  and  having  hands
laid  upon  us  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost  And  as  we  have  com-
plied with  the  first  principles  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ  and  partaken  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  we  have  had  some  slight
manifestations  of  the  will,  designs
and  purposes  of  the  Almighty  in  re-
lation to  us,  to  those  who  have  lived
before  us,  and  those  who  shall  come
after  us;  in  relation  to  the  worlds
that  are  and  that  are  to  come.  I
say  that  we  have  had  some  slight
idea  uf  these  things,  and  that  it  lias
originated  from  the  peculiar  position
that  we  occupy  through  our  obedi-
ence to  the  first  principles  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ.  Other  men  do  not
— can  not — comprehend  things  as  we
do ;  they  have  not  the  means  of
demonstrating  the  truth  of  the  Gos-
pel as  we  have,  not  having  complied
with  its  first  principles.  That  which
is  light,  intelligence,  intelligent,  hap-
pi tying  and  glorious  to  us,  is  confu-
sion and  darkness  to  them.  They
can  not  conceive  of  it  j  they  can  not
comprehend  the  laws  of  life,  nor
understand  anything  pertaining  to
the  kingdom  of  God.  I  do  not  care
what  intelligence  they  may  possess
in  regard  to  other  matters;  I  do  not
care  how  profoundly  learned  they
Tray  be  in  the  arts  and  sciences  of


the  world;  they  may  have  studied
mathematics,  examined  the  physio-
logy of  the  human  system,  and  may
have  made  themselves  acquainted
with  geology,  mineralogy,  and  the
structure  of  the  earth  on  which  we
live,  and  of  the  planetary  system  and
the  motion  of  worlds  with  which  we
are  surrounded  ;  they  may  have  made
themselves  acquainted  with  history,
geology,  botany,  law,  physics,  litera-
ture and  theology,  and  all  this  know-
ledge, and  much  more  than  this,  and
if  they  are  not  in  possession  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  the  principle  of  revela-
tion, the  light  of  eternal  truth,  they
can  not  comprehend  the  kingdom  of
God.

Yuu  have  all  read  about  Nicode-
mus  coming  to  Jesus  by  night
Nicodemus  thought  there  was  some-
thing good  about  Jesus,  but  there
was  not  enough  manhood  about  him-
self. He  was  something  of  a  sneak,
the  snme  as  you  sometimes  see  some
men  now.  He  wanted  to  come  to
Jesus,  but  he  had  not  manhood  to  do
so  by  daylight,  so  he  came  by  night
— under  cover  of  darkness,  and  said
he,  "  Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art
a  teacher  come  from  God,  for  no
man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou
doest,  except  God  be  with  him.
Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,
Except  a  man  he  born  again,  he  can
not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  2sico-
demus  did  not  understand  this,  and
he  said  unto  Jesus,  "  How  can  a  man
be  born  when  he  is  old  ?  Can  he
enter  the  second  time  into  his  mo-
ther's womb  and  be  born  ?  Jesus
answered,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water
and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  could
not  even  see  the  kingdom  of  God
unless  be  was  born  of  water,  and  he
could  not  enter  into  it  unless  he
was  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.


THINGS  OF  GOD  REVEALED,  ETC.


169


This  was  the  statement  of  Jesus,
and  it  may  account  lor  the  singular
feeling  we  see  manifested  among  the
children  of  men  towards  us  as  a
people.  Men  of  ability  ancl  learning
will  come  into  our  midst  and  say,
**  You  have  a  remavkably  fine  country
here,  and  you  have  exhibited  a  large
amount  of  intelligence,  industry  and
perseverance.  Wc  do  not  know  any-
thing about  your  religion,  nor  about
its  principles.  We  were  inclined  to
think  unfavorably  of  it  from  the
many  reports  we  heard  abroad  con-
cerning you ;  but  now  that  we  see
your  order,  diligence,  perseverance,
improvements,  your  beautiful  cities
and  villages,  your  railroads  and  the
various  enterprises  you  have  engaged
in;  when  we  see  your  freedom  from
the  vices  which  generally  prevail  in
the  world,  we  think  there  is  some-
thing peculiar  about  it,  but  what  it  is
we  do  not  know."  They  can  not  see
the  kingdom  of  God — they  have  not
been  born  of  water,  that  is  the  trou-
ble with  them.  I  frequently  talk
with  ministers  of  various  denomina-
tions on  these  subjects,  but  they  are
as  blind  as  bats — they  do  not  know
anything  about  them.  They  can
talk  about  politics  and  history,  and
they  can  discourse  philosophically  on
various  branches  of  art  and  science,
but  when  yon  come  to  the  kingdom
of  God  they  are  cgregiously  igno-
rant, and  they  fulfill  the  words  of
Jesus,  that  no  man  can  see  that  king-
dom unless  he  is  born  again.

Take  a  retrospective  view  of  the
history  of  this  people.  See  their
position  and  the  position  of  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  yeais
ago  and  now,  and  then  'ook  at  the
things  to  come;  talk  of  the  kingdom
as  it  was,  as  it  is,  and  as  it  will  be.
There  is  something  great,  magnifi-
cent, and  glorious  to  reflect  upon —
something  which  every  Latter-day
Saint,  who  has  his  mind  lit  up  with


the  Spirit,  intelligence  and  revelation
which  flow  from  God,  admires ;  and
he  feels  to  say  in  his  heart,  as  one
said  in  former  days : "  Let  this  people
be  my  people,  let  their  God  be  my
Go 3 ;  where  they  live  let  me  live
also,  and  where  they  die  let  me  be
buried ;  and  let  me  be  their  associate
and  mingle  with  them  in  time  and
in  eternity.  This  is  the  kin  J  of
feeling  that  the  Spirit  of  God  im-
parts to  every  Latter-day  Saint  who
lives  his  religion  and  keeps  the  com-
mandments of  God.

We  are  engaged  in  a  work  that
God  has  set  his  hand  to  accomplish,
and  he  ha*  made  use  of  us  as  instru-
ments, and  he  will  also  use  others  who
shall  yet  be  gathered,  to  build  up  his
kingdom,  and  to  in  trod  ace  correct
principles  of  every  kind — principles
of  morality,  social  principles,  good
political  principles;  principles  tela-
tive  to  the  government  of  the  earth  we
live  in ;  principles  of  salvation  per-
taining t j  ourselves  and  our  progeni-
tors and  to  our  posterity,  and  per-
taining to  the  world  that  was,  that
is  and  that  is  to  come;  and  as
I  said,  he  is  using  us  as  instruments*
It  is  true  that  we  blunder  and  stum-
ble; it  is  true  that  we  are  surrounded
with  all  the  weaknesses  and  infirmities
of  human  nature,  but  with  all  our
weaknesses  and  foibles  clinging  to  us
the  Lord  has  called  us  from  the
nations  of  the  earth  to  be  his  co-adju-
tors  and  co-laborers,  his  fellow-work-
men and  assistants,  in  rolling  forth
his  purposes  and  bringing  to  pass
those  things  that  he  designed  before
the  world  was*  It  is  true  that  the
Lord  made  man  perfect,  fou  man  has
found  out  many  inventions,  and  he  is
very  much  degenerated,  and  is  all  the
time  prone  to  weakness,  corruption,
folly  and  vanity,  and  God  knows  it,
and  he  knew  it  when  he  selected  us.
But  what  could  he  do  ?  He  could
not  select  angels  to  associate  with


170  JOURNAL  OF

him  in  regenerating  the  earth  and  its
inhabitants,  for  they  were  not  very
proper  associates*  He  had  to  select
just  such  beings  as  there  were,  and  in
the  first  place  he  revealed  himself
from  the  heavens  to  Joseph  Smith,
He  made  known  to  him  some  of  the
first  principles  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  and  then  unfolded  unto  him
certain  things  pertaining  to  the
organization  of  the  Church  of  God
upon  the  earth,  the  Church  in  its  i
organization,  with  Presidents,  Apos-
tles, High  Priests,  Seventies,  Bishops
and  their  councils,  high  councils,
for  their  instruction  and  guidance,
and  with  teachers,  priests  and  dea-
cons, and  so  forth.  He  organized
his  Church  here  upon  the  earth,  and
revealed  unto  these  various  quorums
their  several  duties,  and  placed  upon
them  certain  responsibilities,  told
them  what  they  were,  and  revealed
unto  Joseph  Smith  all  things  per-  '
taining  to  the  first  organization  of
his  kiDgdom  upon  the  earth.  He
told  his  disciples,  as  Jesus  told  his,
to  go  forth  without  purse  or  scrip,  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  nation
and  kindred  and  people  and  tongue —
to  call  upon  them  to  repent  of  their
sins,  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus  for  the  remission  of  their  sit  is,
to  have  hands  laid  upon  them  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Li  host;  to  lay
hands  upon  the  sick  and  to  cast  out
devils,  just  as  Jesus  told  his  disci-
ples to  do ;  and  said  he  :  M  Freely  you
have  received,  freely  give."  "  Go
without  purse  or  scrip,  trust  in  me,  I
am  yuur  father,  I  am  the  G  >d  and
father  of  all  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.
I  have  you  under  my  special  control,
I  will  stand  by,  J  will  sustain  you,
my  spirit  shall  go  with  you,  mine
angeLs  shall  go  before  you  to  prepare
the  way  for  you."  This  is  what  he
told  Joseph  Smith,  and  the  Elders
went  forth,  according  to  the  word  that
God  had  given  them,  aud  they  told


DISCOURSES.

you  and  told  others  to  repent  of  your
sins  and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus  for  the  remission  of  them.
And  what  then  ?  You  should  re-
ceive the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  should  take  of  the  things  of
God  and  show  them  unto  you;  it
should  unveil  the  heavens  to  one,
give  the  spirit  of  prophecy  to  ano-
ther, the  gift  of  interpretation  to
another,  the  gift  of  healing  to  ano-
ther, and  so  forth,  the  Spirit
dividing  to  each  man  severally  as
he  saw  fit.

These  Elders  went  forth  and
preached  to  you  Latter-day  Saints
now  before  me,  this  very  Gospel  I
have  been  laying  before  you,  and
there  was  something  in  your  spirit
ready  to  receive  it.  You  could  not
tell  why  or  wherefore,  but  you  be-
lieved it  to  be  a  message  sent  from
God,  and  you  went  forth  into  the
waters  of  baptism  and  were  baptized,
and  you  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  you  then  knew  for  your-
selves of  the  truth  of  that  doctrine
which  God  had  committed  unto
them ;  and  you,  in  turn,  were  or-
dained, and  you  also  went  forth  to
preach  the  same  Gospel,  with  the
same  results,  for  yon  saw  the  power  of
God  manifested,  You  saw  the  sick
healed,  and  the  power  of  God  attend
your  ministrations*  You  saw  the
same  leap  for  joy,  those  who  were
downcast,  inspired  and  led  to  rejoice
through  the  principles  of  eternal  life,
and  thus  the  Lord  has  perpetuated
the  same  thing  until  the  present  day.
Mixed  up  with  that  have  been  other
things*  We  have  been  gathered  here.
What  for  ?  What  did  we  come  here
for?  Who  knows?  We  came  here
because  God  said  he  would  build  up
his  Zion  in  the  latter  days,  _

Under  the  teachings  of  Joseph
Smith  and  President  Young,  the
Elders  of  the  Church  have  preached
the  gathering,  and  this  is  a  gathering


THINGS  OF  GOD  REVEALED,  ETC,


171


dispensation.  But  there  is  something
else  to  be  done  besides  simply  being
introduced  into  the  spiritual  ordi-
nances of  the  Church  of  God :  there
is  a  kingdom  to  be  established.  We
have  gathered  from  the  east  and  the
west,  from  the  north  and  the  south,
for  a  spirit  rested  upon  the  people  to
gather  together,  and  no  man  could
prevent  them.  All  of  you  know
how  this  feeling  operated  upon  you,
just  as  much  as  when  it  operated
upon  you  by  baptism — wheu  you  had
the  Spirit  of  God  upon  you  you
could  not  resist  it.  I  remember  a
circumstance  that  transpired  in  Liv-
erpool some  thirty  years  ago.  We
were  told  at  that  time  by  Joseph
Smith  not  to  preach  the  gathering,
for  we  had  been  driven  from  Mis-
souri, and  as  there  was  no  particular
specific  place,  he  thought  it  was  not
well  to  say  anything  about  gathering
until  a  place  should  be  prepared,
then  we  should  have  instructions
and  could  teach  it  That  was  all
well  enough,  but  we  could  not  keep
it  from  the  people.  Why  ?  They
had  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
that  took  of  the  things  of  God  and
showed  them  to  the  people,  and  you
could  not  hide  the  gathering  from
them.  I  remember  a  sister  coming
to  me  on  one  occasion  and  saying,
"Brother  Taylor,  I  had  a  curious
kind  of  a  dream  the  other  night."
"  What  was  it  ?  "  N  Well,"  said  she,
*'  I  dreamed  there  was  a  whole  lot  of
Saints  standing  at  the  pier  head
down  below  here,  in  Liverpool ;  and
there  was  a  vessel  there  and  it  was
going  off  to  America,  and  we  were
going  to  some  place  they  called  Zion.
I  was  going,  you  were  going,  and  the
Saints  were  all  going.  I  thought  I
would  ask  you  the  meaning  of  it."
I  told  her  1  would  tell  her  one  of
these  times.  We  could  not  keep  it
away  from  the  people.  If  we  bad
been  told  not  to  baptize  and  lay


hands  on  them  we  could  have  kept  it
from  them,  but  when  they  had  been
baptized  and  had  hands  laid  upon
them  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  that  Spirit  showed  the  things  of
God  to  them  and  we  could  not  hide
them  from  them,  hence  from  the
time  the  people  in  the  nations  began
to  obey  the  Gospel  to  the  present
there  has  been  a  feeling  in  their
hearts  to  gather  up  to  Zion,  The
Saints  abroad  have  desired  to  come
here,  and  the  Saints  here  have  de-
sired that  they  should  come,  and  this
is  why  we  have  sent  as  many  as  five
hundred  teams  in  a  year  to  fetch  our
brethren  from  the  Missouri  river  who
were  unable  to  come  without  assist-
ance. What  have  we  done  this  for  ?
Well,  some  people  may  say  it  is  a
grand  emigration  scheme  j  but  we  say
it  is  a  scheme  of  the  Lord  to  build
up  his  kingdom  and  to  gather  the
people  together,  according  to  the
saying  of  the  old  prophets — "  I  will
take  one  of  a  city  and  two  of  a
family  and  bring  them  to  Zion,"
"  What  will  you  do  with  them  ?  "
"  I  will  give  them  pastors  after  my
own  heart,  who  shall  feed  them  with
knowledge  and  understanding,"  that
is  what  I  will  do  with  them  when  I
get  them  to  Zion.

Well,  we  have  gathered  from  the
nations  year  after  year,  until  to-day
we  find  ourselves  a  large  people,
actually  occupying  a  Territory  some
five  hundred  miles  in  length.  What
is  the  result  of  this  ?  Why  we  have
got  to  have  a  political  organization —
we  cannot  avoid  it.  The  Church  has
gathered  us  together,  the  Spirit  of
God  has  operated  on  our  minds,  and
we  are  here  an  integral  part  of  the
United  States  of  America,  and  we
cannot  help  ourselves.  If  we  wished
to  do  so  we  could  not  annihilate  our*
selves  or  blot  ourselves  out  of  exis-
tence, and  we  do  not  want  to  if  we
could. But  the  necessities  of  the


172  JOURNAL  OF

case  have  forced  us  into  the  very
position  that  we  now  occupy —
namely,  a  Territory  in  the  United
States  of  America;  and  as  we  are
here,  we  like  other  people,  have  to
eat, drink,  wear  clothing,  build  houses,
make  farms,  and  so  on.  God  has
ordained  all  these  things  before,  and
we,  as  part  of  his  creatures,  have  to
do  our  part  towards  beautifying  his
footstool.

Finding  ourselves  in  this  capacity, 1
we  most  have  our  courts.  It  is  true
that,  formerly,  our  individual  mat-
ters were  regulated  by  out  High
Councils,  Bishops'  Councils,  teachers,
and  so  forth :  but  in  some  of  the
revelations  it  says,  "Let  him  that
steals  be  delivered  op  to  the  laws  of
the  land/*  Well,  here  we  are,  and
we  occupy  a  political  position,  and
we  cannot  help  it,  and  nobody  else
can  help  it  You  who  live  here,
form  a  city,  and  you  must  have  city
regulations.  You  want  police  to
guard  you  from  the  inroads  of
wicked  men,  either  among  ourselves  ,
or  outsiders,  no  matter  who,  to  pro-
tect the  peaceable,  industrious,  honest
and  virtuous,  and  you  must  have
some  kind  of  government  to  do  it.
In  a  church  capacity,  whether  here
or  abroad,  we  could  cut  the  thief  or
drunkard  from  the  Church  if  we  had
a  mind  to,  bat  bere,  if  we  cut  a  man
from  the  Church,  we  can  not  cat  him
from  the  State,  he  is  still  a  citizen
of  the  United  States,  and  in  the
United  States.  In  other  places  they
make  laws  to  punish  theft,  licen-
tiousness and  other  crimes.  It  is
true  they  do  not  carry  them  out;
tuey  do  not  care  to  do  it,  but  they
have  such  laws,  and  a  variety  of
others  to  regulate  property  matters,
and  so  forth.  And  we  are  compelled
to  enact  such  laws  for  safeguards
around  the  whole  community,  for
among  other  things  we  are  beginning
to  possess  property. We  have  farms,


DISCOURSES.

and  they  are  in  the  United  States,
and  we  have  to  apply  for  patents  for
them,  just  as  they  do  anywhere  else,
and  we  have  to  conform  to  the  pro*
cesses  of  law  in  all  these  matters,  the
same  as  any  other  people  have.  We
have  also  to  plow  the  ground,  and  to
fence  it,  and  to  have  our  neighbor-
hood, city  and  county  regulations  in
Utah  among  the  Saints,  jast  as  the
people  do  elsewhere,  for,  as  I  Iiave
already  said,  we  are  part  of  the  body
politic  of  the  United  States.

It  has  been  thought  good  to  apply
for  a  State  government  for  us  Here
is  Brother  George  A,  Smith  going
down  for  that  purpose.  Why  so  ?
Why  do  you  do  that  ?  Is  not  that
of  the  world  ?  Yes,  aud  we  are  of
the  world  and  in  the  world,  and  we
can  not  get  out  of  it  until  we  are
called  out  of  it  by  old  age  or  some
accidental  death.  We  are  here  and
we  have  got  to  act,  and  we  live,
move  and  have  our  being,  like  other
people.  We  are  not  here  to  interfere
with  the  rights  of  anybody.  People
may  want  to  rob  us,  but  we  do  not
want  to  rob  anybody.  We  want  to
protect  ourselves  in  every  legal  and
|  equitable  way  from  the  aggressions
of  those  who  would  seek  our  over-
throw,  and  the  overthrow  of  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.
Well,  finding  ourselves - thus  or-
I  ganized,  what  have  we  to  do?  Vfhy,
we  have  our  bodies  an!  our  spirits,
we  are  temporal  beings,  we  are  im-
mortal beings;  we  have  to  do  with
time  and  with  eternity.  We  had
very  little  to  do  with  coming  here,
we  came  by  some  manner  of  means,
we  hardly  know  how,  and  we  have  to
leave  when  ihe  time  comes,  and  we
can  not  help  ourselves.  Then  the
f  only  thing  vv«  ought  to  do  is  to  act
as  wise,  intelligent  beings  before  God,
The  world  have  no  idea  ol  God,  and
they  do  not  acknowledge  him.  He
may  develop,  through  oim  person,

3

I  *


THINGS  OF  GOD  REVEALED,  LTC.


17$


the  principle  of  electricity,  but  the
world  will  say  ifc  is  some  wise  man
that  did  it.  He  may,  through  ano-
ther, develop  the  power  of  steam,
but  tliey  say,  Some  wise  man  did  it.
Through  another,  God  may  make
known  the  light-giving  power  of  gas,
to  another  the  tapping  of  tbe  earth
to  bring  forth  oils  for  illuminating
purposes ;  but  the  world  say, ft  Some
wise  man  has  done  this/*  Men  do
not  like  to  acknowledge  God;  it  is
just  as  the  Scriptures  say :  they  will
not  acknowledge  him  in  all  their
thoughts.  They  want  to  get  rid  of
him,  and  they  give  the  glory  to  men
for  doing  this,  that  and  the  other*
Fools  that  they  are !  What  do  they
know  about  these  principles  ?  Who
organized  the  principles  which  they
found  out  ?  Did  man  ?  Did  be
organize  the  principle  of  electricity
or  give  it  its  vitality  and  power?
Did  any  of  our  savans  ?  No,  they
could  not.  Who  placed  the  principle
of  power  in  steam  ?  Did  man  ?
No,  he  could  not  do  it.  They  want
to  throw  off  God  where  they  can,
while  we  want  to  bring  him  in  and
have  him  oae  of  our  crowd;  that  is
the  difference  between  us  and  them.
They  find  out  something  which  God
has  made,  just  as  the  little  child
when  it  discovers  its  fingers  for  the
first  time.  It  had  them  long  before,
bat  when  they  first  attracted  its
attention  it  seemed  to  fancy  it  had
made  a  great  discovery.  God  organ-
ized the  child  and  placed  its  spirit
within  its  body,  and  it  at  last  found
out  that  it  had  a  hand.  And  the
scientific  babies  of  the  world  just
disoover  some  of  the  properties  of
matter,  some  of  nature's  laws  created
by  God  long  before,  and  like  Nebu-
chadnezzar they  cry,  in  the  pride  of
their  hearts,  "  Is  not  this  great  Baby-
lon which  I  have  built  ?  "  Yes  it  is,
and  it  is  as  much  of  a  Babylon  or
Babel  as  the  other  was.


Well,  God  has  commenced  to  do  a
work,  and  he  began,  in  the  first  place,
with  the  very  first  principles  of  the
Gospel,  and  he  has  led  us  on  gradu-
ally, until  we  find  ourselves  in  our
present  position,  and  we  have  got  a
beautiful  land  here,  haven't  we?  And
yet  ttiey  call  our  leader  a  murderer,
and  those  who  are  his  co-laborers  the
most  infamous  blackhearted  scoun-
drels that  ever  existed.  Are  these
tlie  works  of  murderers  that  you  see
around  here  ?  Excuse  me  for  refer-
ring to  these  things,  but  I  do  it  to
contrast  between  one  thing  and  ano-
ther. We  always  knew  they  were
liars,  and  do  to-day.

What  are  we  after?  What  are
the  world  after  ?  Say  they,  '*  Is  nob
this  great  Bahylou  that  we  have
built  ?"  They  tell  us  what  magnifi-
cent stripes  and  stars,  and  what
glorious  freedom  we  have  got  here  in
this  land  of  liberty;  and  in  our
Fourth  of  July  orations  we  talk
about  the  great  blessings  that  we  en-
joy, and  how  we  have  got  bigger
flagd,  higher  mo  an  taint,  taller  trees
and  deeper  rivers  than  anybody  else,
and  we  are  the  most  magnificent
people  in  existence*  AH  over  the
land  this  is  tbe  kind  of  talk  and  feel-
ing that  prevails,  and  men  boast  of
their  wisdom,  intelligence  and  prow-
ess. But  they  are  in  the  hands  of
God — this  nation  and  all  others  are
in  his  hand,  and  he  will  deal  with
them  just  as  he  sees  proper.  By  and
by  he  will  cause  the  nations  to  trem-
ble to  their  foundations.  Empires
will  be  overthrown,  kingdoms  des-
troyed, and  the  powers  that  be  will
fade  away  like  "  the  baseless  fabric
of  a  vision  and  he  will  exalt  and
ennoble  those  who  put  their  trust  in
him,  and  work  the  works  of  righte-
ousness. We  are  here  to  do  a  work ;
not  a  small  one,  but  a  large  one.
We  are  here  to  help  the  Lord  to
build  up  his  kingdom,  and  if  we  have


174  JOURNAL  OF

any  knowledge  of  electricity,  we  I
thank  God  for  it.  If  we  have  any  j
knowledge  of  the  power  of  steam,  we
will  say  it  came  from  God,  If  we
possess  any  other  scientific  informa-
tion about  the  earth  whereon  we
stand,  or  of  the  elements  with  which
we  are  surrounded,  we  will  thank
God  for  the  information,  and  say  he
has  inspired  men  from  time  to  time
to  understand  them,  and  we  will  go
on  and  grasp  more  intelligence,  light
and  information,  until  we  compre-
hend as  we  are  comprehended  of  God.
Tins  is  what  we  are  after.  We  are
here  to  introduce  correct  principles
upon  the  earth  on  which  we  live;
but  we  cannot  do  it  any  more  than
any  of  these  men  can  understand  the
laws  of  nature,  unless  God  reveals
them  to  us.  The  world  is  all  con-
fusion, and  men  need  the  illuminating
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,

We  talk  sometimes  about  our  poli-
tical status,  and  think  that  we  have
been  dreadfully  oppressed  and  crowd-  [
ed  here.  Why,  there  are  millions
and  millions  worse  off  in  the  United
States  than  we  are  to-day.  We  need
not  grunt  much.  Besides,  we  expect 1
that  the  wicked  will  grow  worse,
deceiving  and  being  deceived.  You
Elders  of  Israel,  have  you  not  pro-
phecied  about  it?  And  if  you  have,
are  you  surprised  that  men  begin  to
expose  themselves,  and  to  manifest
the  works  of  the  devil  in  every  form
— religiously,  socially  and  politically,
trampling  under  foot  every  principle
of  honor  and  integrity  ?  Are  you
surprised  at  it  ?  Iam  not,  I  expect
it,  and  I  expect  it  to  grow  worse  and
worse.  But  don* t  vou  think  we  have
got  over  all  our  difficulties.  Not
quite;  not  by  a  long  way.  I  ex-
pect things  will  grow  worse  and
worse.  As  we  increase  in  power,  the
power  of  Satan  and  his  emissaries
will  increase  also.  I  expect  that  all
the  time;  but  in  the  future  God  will


DISCOURSES,

!  put  the  opposers  of  his  cause  and  peo-
ple to  shame,  as  he  has  done  the
wretches  now  in  our  midst.  I  ex-
pect that  he  will  stand  by  Israel,
maintain  his  kingdom,  uphold  his
people,  and  lead  them  on  from  victory
I  to  victory,  from  strength  to  strengh,
from  power  to  power,  from  intelli-
gence to  intelligence,  until  "  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become
the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his
Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  forever
and  ever,"  until  a  universal  hosannah
shall  go  up  from  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  "  blessing,  and  glory,  and
1  honor,  and  power,  and  might,  majesty
and  dominion  shall  be  ascribed  to
hira  who  sits  on  the  throne  and  unto
the  Lamb  forever."

We  are  associated  with  these  prin-
ciples to-day,  God  is  our  God  and
our  Father.  We  approach  him  and
we  say :  u  We  thank  thee,  O  God,
our  Father,  for  the  mercies  thou  hast
vouchsafed  to  thy  people,  We  hum-
ble ourselves  before  thee,  because
thou  art  our  Father,  and  thy  mercy
endures  forever*"  This  is  the  kind
I  of  feeling  we  have  when  we  feel  right*
Well,  we  are  here,  and  God  is
going  to  build  up  his  kingdom.  He
will  do  it,  and  we  need  not  trouble
ourselves  about  outsiders  and  their
notions,  or  about  foolish  men  or  their
,  thoughts,  practices  and  calculations,
It  is  a  matter  of  very  little  difference
to  us.  God  is  at  the  helm — he
manages,  he  guides,  he  directs  and
controls,  he  influences  his  people,  and
he  will  continue  to  influence  them.
Well,  we  are  here,  in  the  capacity,
say,  of  a  kingdom,  and  people  tell  us
that  we  are  different  from  anybody
else.  Of  course  we  are ;  we  do  not
expect  to  be  like  others.  It  is  true
that  smoke  goes  out  of  our  chimneys,
as  out  of  the  chimneys  of  others,  be-
cause it  is  a  law  of  nature.  It  is
true  that  potatoes,  wheat  and  com
grow  here  as  elsewhere. It  is  true


THINGS  OF  GOD  REVEALED,  ETC


175


we  have  to  attend  to  the  common
affairs  of  life — eat,  drink,  sustain
ourselves,  clothe  and  keep  ourselves
warm,  as  others  do,  and  we  have  to
take  care  of  and  protect  ourselves
from  the  incursions  and  machinations
of  those  who  seek  to  destroy  us.  In
all  these  respects  we  have  to  take  the
same  course  that  other  people  do ;
but  the  difference  between  us  is — we
have  an  organization,  a  Church  orga-
nization, given  by  revelation  from
God,  and  which  does  not  exist  any-
where else  in  this  little  world.

Bat  what  about  other  things  rela-
tive to  temporal  affairs  ?  If  God
can  organize  us  as  a  Church,  if  he
can  unveil  the  heavens  to  us,  draw
aside  the  curtain  of  futurity,  and
enable  us  to  penetrate  the  veil  and
gain  a  certain  knowledge  in  regard
to  the  future,  certainly  he  can  make
known  or  reveal  something  about  a
few  temporal  things,  such  as  plowing,
sowing,  building,  planting,  trading,
manufacturing,  making  railroads,  and
a  thousand  other  little  things  that
have  to  be  attended  to  in  this  world.
If  he  can  do  the  bigger  things,  I
think  he  can  do  the  less.

"  Well,  we  are  capable  of  doing
that  ourselves/1  say  some  people,
some  of  these  philosophers  I  have
referred  to — they  are  all  wise  men,
and  you  would  think  wisdom  would
die  with  them,  but  it  will  not  be
entirely  extinguished  when  they  are
gone,  not  quite.  God  will  still  lead,
govern  and  direct  his  people.  "  But,"
say  they,  **  we  think  we  could  do
things  so  much  better  than  somebody
else.  Well  then,  go  at  it  and  try;
there  is  plenty  of  room  in  the  world
for  you  to  exhibit  your  intelligence.

We  are  in  the  hands  of  God.  We
have  come  here.  What  for?  The
Lord  says,  *  I  will  take  them  one  of
a  city  and  two  of  a  family,  and  bring
them  to  Zion/'  What  will  you  do
with  them  ? "  Give  them  pastors


after  my  own  heart,  who  shall  feed
them  with  knowledge  and  under-
standing," It  is  a  fact,  to-day,  that
the  wise  men  and  great  men,  and
statesmen,  and  men  in  position  in
various  parts  of  the  world,  as  they
come  here  to  visit  us  with  all  our
failings  and  infirmities,  tell  us  that
we  are  the  best  and  most  orderly
people  they  have  ever  seen.  And
they  say  we  have  a  beautiful  country,
and  that  we  are  governed  by  wisdom,
by  sage  counsels,  and  by  a  high  order
of  intelligence.  That  is  the  opinion
of  the  leading  statesmen  of  this  day
who  pass  through  our  midst,  and
many  of  them  come  through  here.
The  question  naturally  arises,  Where
does  this  wisdom  come  from  ?  Why,
God  inspired  Joseph  Smith;  then  he
inspired  President  Young  with  the
same  kind  of  spirit  and  teeling.
Then  he  inspired  the  devil,  or  the
devil  inspired  his  imps — one  of  the
two — and  drove  us  from  our  former
possessions,  and  it  all  worked  toge-
ther, the  Lord  inspired  on  the  one
hand,  and  the  devil  on  the  other,  and
by  hook  or  by  crook,  we  got  here,  just
as  we  are  to-day.

We  commenced  to  build  a  temple
in  Kirtland,  and  we  built  it.  We
built  another  in  Nauvoo,  and  we  are
building  another  here.  We  are  at-
tending to  the  ordinances  pertaining
to  the  Church  of  God,  temporal  and
spiritual,  ordinances  pertaining  to
the  body,  and  ordinances  pertaining
to  the  spirit.  And  then,  as  men
having  to  do  with  the  world  on  which
■  we  live,  with  the  Territory  that  we
possess,  we  have  to  enact  laws,  and
we  have  to  conduct  ourselves  pro-
!  perly,  and  seek  the  assistance  of  the
Almighty  to  direct  us  in  all  our
affairs,  and  the  Lord  has  promised
if  we  would  do  that,  he  would  show
us  that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  greater
than  the  cunning  of  the  devil  Well,
he  does  keep  showing  that  from  time


17G  JOURNAL  OF

to  time,  and  if  we  do  right  he  will
keep  on  doing  it  Bat  to  ensure
this  there  is  something  devolving
upon  as.

Says  one,  "  If  I  could  have  so
much  money,  such  a  farm,  or  this,
that,  and  the  other,  I  wonld  feel  satis-
fied." I  say,  get  the  Spirit  of  God
in  your  hearts!  Let  the  light  of
revelation  burn  in  your  bosoms  like
living  fire,  then  you  will  know  some-
thing about  God,  something  about
the  blessings  of  salvation,  something
about  the  benefits  that  will  accrue  to
Zion,  "  But,  sometimes,  I  have  to
make  a  little  sacrifice  if  I  carrv  out
the  counsel  given/'  Wei?,  make  it
then*  If  it  is  a  sacrifice,  it  ought  to
be  a  pleasure  to  help  bui  d  up  the
kingdom  of  God,  establish  right-
eousness, plant  the  standard  of  truth,
and  to  be  on  the  side  of  God,  angels
and  eternal  realities,  to  be  saviors
of  men.  To  be  thus  situated  is  the
most  honorable  position  in  this  world
or  the  world  to  come.  Now,  God
could  not  get  the  wor'd  to  do  any-
thing towards  building  up  his  king-
dom, they  would  not  do  5t,  they  could
not  see  it,  and  he  had  to  get  yon
baptized  before  von  could  see  it ;  an  !
seeing  it  now,  will  you  barter  ttaway
for  the  follies  of  this  word,  for  the
smiles  and  promises  of  the  ungodly?
Or  are  you  going  to  cleave  to  the
truth,  live  by  it,  and,  if  necessary,
die  by  it  P  What  are  yon  going  to
do?

I '[am  glad  we  have  come  here.  I
am  pleased  that  these  meetings  have
been  instituted,  that  the  people  get
together,  and  that  we  have  a  chance
to  talk  with  them,  in  their  assemblies,
about  the  things  of  God.  We  are
God's  people,  God  is  our  Father,  and
we  should  spend  a  little  time  in  these
things.  This  is  our  duty,  and  we
should  feel  an  interest  in  them.  That
is  what  we  set  out  for,  and  we  mean
to  go  forward,  and  we  will  go  on  and


DISCOURSES,

on,  for  our  motto  is  eternal  progress.
This  kingdom  will  advance,  the  pur-
poses of  God  will  roll  forward,  and
no  power  on  this  side  of  lie!',  or  the
other  either,  can  stop  it.  God  will
sustain  his  people,  and  Israel  will
rejoice  and  be  triumphant

Now  then,  we  come  to  the  man-
agement of  our  affairs.  Talking  of
the  wise  men  of  the  world,  why  we
have  had  many  of  them  ever  sine©
the  world  was.  And  what  have  they
accomplished  in  the  nations  of  the
earth  ?  They  have  built  cities,  and
some  have  raised  themselves  to  fame
by  trampling  under  foot  thousands  of
others.  Tbey  have  waded  through
seas  of  blood  sometimes  to  get  upon
the  throne  of  power.  What  to  do  ?
That  they  might  trample  still  lower
pogr  humanity,  and  bring  men  down^
as  it  were,  to  the  dust  of  death,  and
make  serfs  of  them.  What  else
have  they  done  ?  They  have  estab*
lished  every  kind  of  government,  as
they  have  every  kind  of  religion^
Do  yoi  not  think  that  we  need  reve-
lation about  government  as  much  as
anything  ehe?  I  think  we  do.  I
think  we  need  God  to  dictate  to  us  as
much  in  our  national  a  d  social  affairs
&h  in  ch  arch  matters.  Some  people
are  willing  to  have  I  heir  souls  looked
after,  but  they  think  they  are  smart
enough  to  look  after  temporal  affairs
themselves. In  the  world  thev  want

if

a  doctor  to  look  after  their  bodies,  a
parson  to  look  after  their  souls,  and  a
lawyer  to  take  care  of  their  property.
In  these  respects  we  differ  from  them.
We  begin  with  God.  Our  light
comes  from  him,  our  religion  is  from
him,  and  we  need  his  guidance  and
instruction  in  all  these  other  matters.
Is  not  that  simple,  plain  and  reason-
able ?  They  are  in  confusion  in  the
world  about  their  religion,  because
,  there  is  no  God  in  it.  That  i& what's
the  matter.  The  Scriptures  say,
i  u  There  is  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one


THINGS  OF  GUI)  REVEALED,  ETC


177


baptism,  one  God,  who  is  in  all  and
through  you  all."  They  have  a  reli-
gion without  God,  and  they  are  going
to  heaven  without  God,  and  when
they  get  there  they  will  find  no  God,
and  they  will  still  have  a  chance  to
have  their  own  way  inasmuch  as  the
Lord  will  let  them.

Well,  as  I  said,  we  begin  first  with
God,  religiously,  spiritually  if  you
please — teaching  first,  the  first  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel.  Then  we  go
on  to  other  matters — to  temporal
matters,  A  Bishop,  yon  know,  in
the  wTorld,  is  a  kind  of  being  who  has
nothing  to  do  but  to  attend  to  spirit-
ua!  matters,  and  he  does  very  little
of  that  Oar  Bishops  have  to  take
care  of  the  poor,  and  see  that  they
are  provided  for,  that  is,  see  they
have  something  to  eat,  and  they  have
also  to  attend  to  many  secular  affairs
that  are  naturally  connected  with
common  humanity.  Well,  what  then?
We  build  churches  and  temples,  and
we  administer  in  those  temples,
according  to  the  revelations  which
God  has  given  to  us.  And  they
would  like  to  know  something  about
that,  but  they  can  not,  for  that  be-
longs to  the  Saints  only.  Then,
what  next  ?  We  find  ourselves,  as  I
said  before,  in  a  governmental  ca-
pacity, and  perform  our  duties  as
good  citizens  and  attend  to  all  the
duties  and  responsibilities  thereof.
But  then  it  is  no  trouble  for  us  to
keep  the  laws  of  the  land.  What
difficulty  is  there  for  other  people?
Can  they  live  then  ?  I  am  sure  we
can.  No  law  ot  any  land  will  inter-
fere with  or  molest  the  man  who
does  not  cheat  or  defraud  his  neigh-
bor, but  pursues  an  honorable,
honest,  upright  course.  Laws  are
made  for  the  unruly  and  turbulent,
for  lawbreakers  and  for  men  who
violate  right,  Then  there  are  many
other  things  besides  these  in  which
we  differ  from  the  world,  in  their

No.  12.


social,  political  and  religious  affairs.
I  will  refer  to  one — their  method  of
treating  the  acknowledged  head  of
the  Government,  the  President  of
the  United  States.  At  one  time  it
was  41  Hurrah  for  General  Grant,"
he  was  almost  a  de mi-god .  What  do
they  say  now  ?  If  you  can  believe
the  papers,  he  is  one  of  the  biggest
rascals  that  was  ever  unhung.  I  do
not  know  whether  they  told  the  truth
before  or  now,  but  they  do  talk  these
things,  and  who  would  stand  by  him
if  he  were  thrown  out?  Tery  few.
Here  is  President  Young,  whom  his
enemies  have  been  calling  a  mur-
derer j  did  anybody  forsake  him?
No,  oh  no  !  Did  any  of  your  knees
tremble  ?  Perhaps  a  little,  not  much  ;
but  still  vou  had  faith  in  him,  and
you  would  as  soon  see  him  to-day  as
any  other  man  on  God's  footstool,
wouldn't  you  ?  (Congregation  an-
swered "Yes.")  There  is  the  dif-
ference* There  is  a  principle  im-
planted in  the  hearts  of  men,  that
no  man  can  tear  therefrom ;  the
Spirit  of  God  plants  it  there,  and
there  it  dwells  and  will  remain,  and
it  can  not  be  rooted  out.  It  is  true
you  act  foolishly  about  here,  some-
times.  I  know  you  do,  because  we
do  among  us  yonder,  and  you  are
just  as  we  are,  and  you  act  very
foolishly  sometimes ;  but  when  we  let
the  Spirit  of  God  operate  upon  our
minds,  it  is  u  Hurrah  for  Brigham
Young,"  "  Hurrah  for  the  Twelve,"
"  Hurrah  for  the  kingdom  of  God  ! n
That  is  the  feeling,  isn't  it  ?  Well,
now  let  us  carry  it  out,  and  live  it,
and  do  what  is  right  and  God  will
bless  us.  Don't  be  particular  about
having  your  own  way,  for  it  is  not
always  the  right  way,  and  that
which  seems  pleasing  in  oar  eyes  is
not  always  right,  and  that  which
looks  the  most  profitable  is  not
always  right  It  is  the  most  pro6t-
able  and  right  tor  the  Saints  of  God

Vol.  XV.


178


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


to  keep  the  commandments  and  be
governed  by  the  counsels  of  God  ;
and  if  you  are  governed  by  tba'  he
will  lead  you  on  from  light  to  light,
from  strength  tn  strength,  from  in-
telligence to  intelligence  until  you
will  be  exalted  atnuiig  the  Gods,
there  to  rejoice  for  ever  and  ever.


We  have  commenced  the  race  and  we
will  go  on  and  win  it;  we  have
commenced  a  battle,  and  we  shall
triumph,  for  the  kingdom  of  God
will  go  on,  and  no  power  can  slop  it.

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful  in
the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  t»hk  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afteknoon,  Sept,  22,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans*)

REVIEW  OF  (SOU'S  DEALINGS  WITH  THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH — COMING
FORTH  OK  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON — GATHERING,  ETC.


Having  been  n  q nested  to  address
the  congregation  this  afternoon,  I  do
so  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness.
There  is  one  passage  of  Scripture  I
would  like  very  much  to  take  as  a
text,  if  I  knew  where  to  find  it.  It
is  somewhere  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah
or  EzekieL  I  have  not  time  now  to
look  it  up,  and  perhaps  it  would  be
better  to  take  some  other  test  having
a  bearing  on  the  same  subject.  The
text  to  which  I  would  like  to  direct
the  attention  of  the  people  has  refer-
ence to  the  colonization  of  this  coun-
try by  one  of  the  descendants  of
Zedekiah,  king  of  J udab.  It  reads
something  like  this  :  li  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God,  I  will  also  take  of  the
highest  branch  of  the  high  cedar,
and  will  set  it;  1  will  crop  off  from
the  top  of  his  young  twigs  a  tender
one,  and  will  plant  it  upon  an  high  I


mountain  and  eminent :  in  the  moun-
tain of  the  height  of  Israel,  will  I
plant  it :  and  it  shall  bring  forth
boughs,  and  bear  fruit,  and  be  a
goodly  cedar;  and  under  it  shall
dwell  all  fowl  of  every  wing;  in  the
shadow  of  the  branches  thereof  shall
they  dwell."

We  read  of  the  fulfillment  of  this
prophecy  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,;
i  but  because  I  cannot  direct  your  at-
tention to  the  passage,  I  will  read
another  text,  which  will  be  found  in
the  lith  verse  of  the  8.5th  Psalm  :
"  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  eartht
and  righteousness  shall  look  down
from  heaven.1*

^Forty-five  years  ago  this  morning
this  prophecy,  so  far  as  it  relates  to
u  truth  springing  out  of  the  earth,"
was  fulfilled. Forty* five  years  ago,
!  early  this  morning,  plates  resembling


REVIEW  OF  GOD'S  DEALINGS,  ETC.


179


gold  were  taken  from  the  earth,  the
morning,  if  I  recollect  right,  of  the
22nd  of  September,  1827. J  Owing
to  that  great  event  the  Territory  of
Utah  is  now  settled  by  the  people
called  Latter- day  Saints.  Owing  to
the  fulfillment  of  this  prophecy  this
Tabernacle  has  been  built  here  in
these  mountains;  and  had  it  not
been  for  that  event,  it  is  probable
that  Utah  Territory  would  still  have
been  a  desert,  a  barren,  solitary,  un-
inhabited district  of  country.  Some-
times great  things  are  accomplished
and  grow  out  of  things  that  appear
very  small  in  their  nature.  It  has
been  so  in  relation  to  this  prophecy —
"  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the
earth."

In  order  that  the  meaning  of  these
words  may  be  more  fully  understood,
it  may  not  be  amiss  to  read  the  con-
text or  the  passages  preceding.  The
Psalmist  commences: —

Lord,  thou  hast  been  favorable  unto
thy  land  r  thou  hast  brought  back  the  capti-
vity of  Jacob.

Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy
people :  thou  hast  covered  all  their  sin.
Selah*

Thou  hast  taken  away  all  thy  wrath  :
thou  hast  turned  thyself  from  the  fierceness
of  thine  anger.

Turn  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation ,  and
cause  thine  anger  toward  us  to  cease.

Wilt  thou  tats  angry  with  ua  for  ever?
wilt  tlmu  draw  out  thine  anger  to  all  gene-
rations ?

Wilt  thou  not  revive  us  again,  that  thy
people  ii jay  rejoice  in  thee  ?

Shew  us  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  and  grant  us
thy  salvation,

I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak:
for  he  will  apeak  peace  unto  his  people,  and
to  his*  saints  ;  but  let  them  not  turn  again
to  folly.

Surely  his  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  fear
him  ;  that  glory  may  dwell  in  our  land,

Mercy  and  truth  are  met  totrether ;
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each
other.

^  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth  ;  and
righteousness  shall  look  down  from  heaven.

Yeat  the  Lord  shall  give  that  which  is
good  ;  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  increase.

Righteousness  shall  go  before  him,  and
^hall  set  us  in  the  way  of  his  steps,

,  Thus  reads  the  85th  Psalm, It  is


very  evident  that  the  Psalmist  David,
being  filled  with  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, saw  the  condition  of  the  peo-
ple of  Israel,  saw  also  that  they  would
be  under  the  displeasure  of  the  Al-
mighty for  many  generations,  and  he
prays  that  the  Lord  would  look  upon
thera  in  compassion,  and  turn  him-
self from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger,
that  it  might  not  be  drawn  ont  to-
wards them  to  all  generations,  and
he  titters  this  prayer :  **  Turn  us,  0
God  of  our  salvation,  and  show  unto
us  thy  mercy,"  etc.  The  Lord,  in
answer  to  this  prayer,  promised  to
speak  peace  to  his  people,  bat  said
he,  "  Let  them  not  turn  again  unto
folly/'  And  then  he  informs  them
how  he  would  speak  peace  unto  them,
and  how  be  would  turn  himself  from
the  fierceness  of  his  anger,  that  Ins
anger  might  not  be  drawn  out  unto
them  to  all  generations.  He  informs
them  that  he  would  commence  this
great  work,  that  should  result  in
peace  and  salvation  to  Israel,  by
causing  truth  to  spring  out  of  the
earth,  at  which  time  righteousness
should  look  down  from  heaven.
Righteousness  and  truth  and  peace
should  kiss  one  another,  and  the
Lord  should  cause  the  land  of  Israel
again  to  yield  its  increase.  We
know  how  barren,  sterile  and  uninha-
bitable is  the  land  that  was  once  pro-
mised to  that  chosen  people.  The
Lord  has  not  only  cursed  the  people
and  made  them  a  hiss  and  a  byword
among  all  the  nations  whither  they
have  been  driven,  but  his  anger  has
also  been  upon  their  land*  He  has
withheld  the  rains  of  heaven,  and  has
cursed  it  with  barrenness  and  steri-
lity; and  the  cities  which  once
covered  its  face  and  reared  their
lofty  spires  to  heaven,  now  lie  in
ruins,  and  scarcely  a  vestige  of  some
of  them  can  be  found.  But  when
the  Lord  should  cause  truth  to  spring
forth  out  of  the  earth,  he  would  speak


t


180  JOURNAL  OF

peace  to  his  people  and  to  their  land,
ani  it  should  yield  its  increase;  and
trutb  should  go  before  him  and
should  set  them  in  the  way  of  his

steps.

We  have  been  proclaiming  for
forty- two  yearn  this  Bouk  of  Mor-
mun,  which  we  have  declared  has
sf>rmi£  forth  from  the  earth  by  the
power  uf  the  Altuighty,  for  the  bene-
fit, tirst  of  the  Gentile  nations.  The
proclamation,  accord  in  g  to  the  word  8
of  the  book,  mast  go  forth  to  all  peo-
ple, nations  and  tongues  under  the
whole  heavens,  called  the  Gentile
nations,  after  which  the  Lord  has
promised  in  numerous  places  in  this
record  that  it  should  go  to  the  rem-
nants of  the  house  of  Israel-  But
that  which  the  Lord  intends  to  ac-
complish first  by  the  bringing  forth
of  this  book,  is  the  redemption  of  as
many  as  will  hearken  to  its  words  in
all  the  Gentile  nations  of  the  earth,
and  to  gather  them  together  in  one;
for  not  only  are  the  house  of  Israel
and  the  house  of  Judah  to  be  gather-
ed back  to  their  own  lands,  but  all
Christians  throughout  the  whole
earth  are  to  be  gathered  in  one  in
the  latter  days,  according  to  a  pro-
phecy which  you  will  find  in  the
43rd  chapter  of  Isaiah  :  "  I  will  bring
them  from  the  east,  aud  gather  them
from  the  west  I  will  say  to  the
no* th,  Give  up;  and  to  the  south,
Keep  not  back:  bring  my  sons  from
far,  and  my  daughters  from  the  ends
of  the  earth ;  even  every  one  that  is
called  by  my  name/'  This  has  re-
ference to  the  sons  and  daughters  of
the  living  God,  to  the  people  called
Saints ;  not  particularly  to  the  literal
seed  of  the  house  of  Israel,  but  to  all
those  who  believe  in  him,  and  who
are  called  by  his  name.  All  must  be
gathered;  all  must  come  from  the
ends  of  the  earth.  No  Christians
will  be  left,  scattered  abroad  over  the
nations,  as  many  suppose  will  be  the


DISCOURSES.

case  so  long  as  time  lasts.  A  com-
plete and  full  gathering  together  of
the  people  of  God  must  take  place
in  the  latter  days,  called,  by  Paul,  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times.

,  You  will  find  this  prediction  in  the
first  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the
Ephesians.  Paul  there  declares  that
a  new  dispensation  must  come  in,
and  he  denominates  it  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times.  He
tells  us  that  in  that  dispensation  the
Lord  will  gather  together  in  one  all
things  in  Christ  Every  person  that
believes  in,  and  has  put  on  Christ
by  baptism  and  by  repentance  of
sin,  must  be  gathered  in  one  in  that
dispensation ;  not  only  those  on  earth,
but  those  in  heaven — all  the  congre-
gations who  are  in  Christ,  who  have
dwelt  oil  the  earth  in  former  ages,
are  to  be  united  with  those  « ho  are
in  the  flesh  on  the  earth.  One  great,
vast,  general  assembly  of  all  that  are
in  Christ — the  dead  as  well  as  the
living — from  the  days  of  Adam  down
until  the  work  is  completed.

In  order  to  commence  this  great
work  the  Lord  has  brought  forth
truth  out  of  the  earth.  He  will
speak  peace  to  his  people,  and  they
are  requested  by  the  Psalmist,  when
the  Lord  undertakes  to  do  this  work,
never  to  turn  again  unto  folly.

Now  I  will  attempt  to  give  a  brief
account  to  ray  hearers  of  how  Joseph
Smith  obtained  the  plates  of  the
Book  of  Mormon  from  the  earth.
He  was  but  a  lad,  a  farmer's  boy,

I  when  the  Lord  began  to  speak  to
him  and  send  his  angels  to  him,
being  not  quite  fifteen  years  of  age.
He  was  almost  too  young  to  be  a
brazen-faced  impostor,  was  he  not  ?
Cast  your  eyes  around  on  this  con-
gregation for  the  youth  of  fifteen,
and  see  if  you  think  it  would  be  pos-
sible for  one  of  that  early  age  to
become  one  of  the  most  barefaced  im-
postors that  the  world  ever  heard  of^


■


KEVIEW  OF  GOPft  DEALING'S,  ETC,


181


for  Joseph  Smith  was  thus  regarded
by  the  world  at  large  with  few  ex-
ceptions ;  and  he  must  have  been  so,
at  a  very  early  age,  if  this  work  be
not  true,  for  he  could  not  be  deceived,
himself,  in  relation  to  it.  There  was
210  possible  chance  for  any  deception,
so  far  as  he  himself  was  concerned.
Why?  Because  the  circumstances
were  of  such  a  nature  that  he  could
not  be  deceived,  God  revealed  to
him  that  there  were  certain  plates
deposited  about  three  miles  from  his
father's  house.  He  saw,  in  vision,
the  place  of  their  deposit.  He  heard
the  holy  angel  declare  to  him  in
relation  to  these  records.  But  first,
about  four  years  prior  to  this,  the
first  vision  that  he  had  was  in  answer
to  prayer.  Being  but  a  youth,  and
anxious  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul,
he  secretly  prayed,  in  the  wilderness,
that  the  Lord  would  show  unto  him
what  he  should  do,  what  church  he
should  join.  The  Lord  heard  and
answered  this  prayer.  Do  not  be
astonished,  good  Christians,  because
the  Lord  hears  prayer  in  the  19th
century.  1  kuo^v  it  is  very  popular
to  pray  to  the  Lord  in  Christendom ;
but  when  you  talk  about  the  Lord
answering  prayers,  by  giving  re  vela-
tions,  visions,  or  sending  angels,  it  is
very  unpopular.  But  unpopular  as
it  was,  this  youth  ventured  to  go  and
ask  the  Lord  for  wisdom,  having,  in
the  first  place,  read  a  passage  in  the
New  Testament,  which  says,  "  If
any  man  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of
God,  who  giveth  to  all  liberally  and
opbraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given
onto  him,"  Joseph  Smith  was  not
so  toll  of  tradition  that  lie  could  not
lay  hold  of  this  promise.  I  do  not
know  that  he  hud  been  taught  long
enough,  the  idea  that  the  Lord  would
not  hear  prayer.  At  any  rate,  hav-
ing read  this  passage,  he  prayed,
really  believing  in  his  heart  that  the
Lord would answer him, for  he


wanted  wisdom,  he  wanted  to  know
which  was  the  true  Christian  Church,
that  he  might  be  united  with  it;  and
while  pleading  with  and  praying  to
the  Lord  for  this  information,  which
was  a  matter  of  great  concern  to
him,  the  heavens  were  opened,  and
two  personages  clothed  in  light  or
fire  descended  and  stood  before  him.
As  soon  as  this  light  surrounded  him,
and  he  was  enclosed  or  enveloped  in
it,  his  mind  was  caught  away  'roin
earthly  objects  and  things,  and  he
saw  these  two  glorious  personages,
their  countenances  shining  with
exceeding  great  brilliancy.  One  of
them,  while  pointing  to  the  other,
addressed  him  in  this  language,
4i  Behold  my  beloved  son,  hear  ye
him,"  All  fear  was  taken  from  this
boy  during  the  progress  of  this  won-
derful event,  and  he  felt  happy,  but
anxious  to  know  concerning  the
things  about  which  be  had  been
praying,  and  he  repeated  his  request,
that  he  might  be  told  which  was
the  true  Christian  church,  lie  was
informed  that  there  was  no  true
Christian  church  on  the  earth,  that
there  was  no  people  established  or
organized  according  to  the  Apostolic
order ;  that  all  had  gone  out.  of  the
way  and  had  departed  from  the  an-
cient order  of  things;  that  they  had
denied  the  power  of  Godliness,  the
gifts,  miracles,  the  spirit  of  revela-
tion and  prophecy,  visions,  that  all
these  things  had  been  done  away  with
by  the  unbelief  of  the  children  of
men,  and  that  there  were  no  prophets
or  inspired  men  on  the  earth,  as  there
always  had  been  when  there  was  a
true  Church  upon  tiie  earth.  He
wax  strictly  commanded  to  join  none
of  them.  The  Lord  also  informed
him  that,  at  some  future  period  of
time,  if  he  would  be  faithful  in  giving
heed  to  the  instructions  winch  wer.?
then  imparted  to  him,  and  in  his
prayers  to  the  Lord,  he  would  iinpa-t


182


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


to  him  his  own  doctrine  in  plainness
and  simplicity.

Some  four  years  passed  away  from
this  time,  making  this  boy  not  quite
nineteen  years  of  age,  and  on  one
Sunday  evening  he  returned  to  his
bed-room,  pondering  upon  the  pro*
inise  that  had  been  given  to  him,  arid
he  began  praying  earnestly  again  that
the  Lord  would  show  hirn  the  true
Gospel  of  his  son,  according  to  the
promise;  and  while  he  was  thus
praying  in  his  fathers  house  in  his
chamber,  a  light  burst  into  the  room,
becoming  brighter  by  degrees,  shin-
ing and  then  partially  withdrawing,
so  that  fear  did  not  take  possession
of  his  bosom  to  any  great  degree.
As  he  continued  praying  the  light
became  brighter  and  brighter,  and
finally  a  personage  clothed  in  a  white
robe  stood  before  him.  This  person-
age was  a  little  above  the  size  of
common  men  at  the  present  day,
and  his  arms  and  feet  were  partially
bare.  His  feet  did  not  stand  on  the
floor  of  the  room,  but  a  certain  dis-
tance above,  and  his  countenance
shone  like  lightning.  This  Angel
appeared  so  pleasant,  beautiful  and
glorious,  and  his  countenance  radiated
such  happiness  on  the  mind  of  this
young1  lad  that  all  fear  was  taken
from  him  as  on  the  former  occasion.
Tli is  personage  told  him  that  he  was
an  Angel  of  God,  and  that  he  had
been  sent,  in  answer  to  his  prayer,
with  a  very  important  message  to
deliver  to  him:  that  God  designed
to  accomplish  a  great  work  on  the
earth,  and  that  he  was  to  be  a  chosen
instrument  in  laying  the  foundation
of,  and  establishing  this  work.  He
commenced  telling  him  about  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  this  continent.
He  told  him  that  the  present  Ameri-
can Indians  were  the  descendants  of
Israel ;  that  their  forefathers  were
brought  here  from  Jerusalem  about
ix  centuries  before  Christ ;  that  when


they  came  they  were  a  righteous
people  and  had  Prophets  among
them ; that  when  they  landed  on

I  this  continent  they  commenced,  by

|  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,
keeping  a  record  of  their  history,
their  prophecies  and  sacred  doings
upon  metallic  plates ;  that  that  na-
tion, after  having  dwelt  here  about  a
thousand  years,  fell  into  great  wicked
ness;  that  they  divided  themselves
into  two  great  nations ;  that  the
portion  that  had  These  plates,  the
Nepbites,  h:td  so  far  apostatized  from
the  Lord,  that  he  threatened  their
overthrow,  and  to  destroy  them  if
they  did  not  lepent;  that  the  Pro-
phets went  forth  among  them  prophe-
sying that  if  they  did  not  repent,
the  other  nation,  called  Lainanitcs,
would  destroy  them  from  the  face  of
the  land.  But  they  would  not  re-
pent, and  Mormon,  a  Prophet  who
lived  at  that  time,  was  commanded

j  of  the  Lord  to  take  all  the  plates
that  were  kept  of  the  records  of  his
fathers,  and  make  an  abridgment  of
them  upon  a  new  set  of  plates.  So
he  commenced  and  abridged  their
history,  from  the  time  they  left
Jerusalem  until  thai  period,  incor-
porating therein  many  of  the  pro-

I  phesies  and  revelations  £iven  during
that  thousand  years.  After  having
made  this  abridgment  he  committed
it  into  the  hands  of  his  son  Moroni,

,  knowing  that  his  n-tion  would  be
destroyed,  and  that  Moroni,  accord-
ing to  the  revelations  God  had  given
him,  would  he  spared  to  keep  the
records,  and  to  behold  the  downfall
of  his  nation  Mormon  hid  the
records  from  which  lie  made  this
abridgment  in  a  hill,  called  the  hill
Cumorah,  that  being  its  ancient  name,
and  this  hill  was  about  three  miles
from  where  this  young  man  resided,
in  the  town  of  Manchester,  Ontario
County,  State  of  New  York.  There
all  the  records  were  deposited,  and


REVIEW  OF  GOD'S  DEALINGS,  ETC.


183


accoiding  to  the  Book  of  Mormon
they  must  have  been  very  numerous
indeed.  The  history  of  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  land  was  kept  by
their  kings,  and  the  records  became
very  voluminous;  and  they  were  all
deposited  by  the  Prophet  Mormon  in
that  hill ;  bat  the  abridgment  from
which  the  Book  of  Mormon  was
taken  was  given  into  the  hands  of
his  son  Moroni,  to  finish  out  the  re-
cord. The  last  date  given  on  these
records  was  420  years  after  Christ.

Yon  may  inquire  how  the  people
on  this  land  knew  about  the  birth  of
Christ,  I  will  say  that  they  under-
stood Christianity  on  this  western
hemisphere  as  well  as  on  the  eastern
hemisphere.  They  were  not  left  in
darkness  here  concerning  the  Savior
of  the  world  and  his  atonement
They  knew  all  about  it  How?
Jesus,  who  is  the  God  of  the  whole
earth,  appeared 1  to  them  after  his
crucifixion,  and  resurrection  from  the
dead.  He  showed  them  the  wounds
in  his  hands,  feet  and  side,  and  de-
livered to  them  his  Gospel  in  its
plainness  and  fullness,  and  they  were
commanded  to  write  it  on  phites.
They  knew  also,  of  lus  birth,  in  the
land  of  their  forefathers,  by  the  signs
which  God  gave  to  them  on  this  htnd.
They  were  told  that  at  the  time  of
the  birth  of  Jesus  there  should  be
two  days  and  one  night  without  any
darkness  at  all ;  they  should  see  the
sun  go  down  at  night  and  rise  in  the
morning,  and  that  during  the  whole
of  that  time  it  should  be  light  nsday.
They  commenced  the  reckoning  of
their  time  from  that,  period.  Pre-
vious to  that  time  they  had  reckoned
their  time  from  the  date  of  their
leaving  Jerusalem,  precisely  six  hun-
dred years  before  the  birth  of  Christ.
Four  hundred  and  twenty  years  after
that  great  event  the  Prophet  Moroni
informs  us  that  he  also  was  com-
manded to  hide  up  this  abridgment


in  the  same  hill,  but  in  another  part
of  it,  in  which  his  father  Mormon
hid  op  the  sacred  records.  And  the
Lord  made  a  promise  to  Moroni,  also
to  Mormon,  and  to  many  other  Pro-
phets who  dwelt  on  this  land  in  pre-
vious generations,  that  these  plates
should  never  be  destroyed,  but  that
they  should  be  preserved  by  his
hand,  and  that  they  should  be
brought  forth  r\¥  of  the  earth  in  the
latter  days,  for  the  purpose  of  bring-
ing about  the  leathering  of  his  people
from  the  ends  ol  the  earth,  and  the
bringing  in  of  the  fullness  of  the
Gentiles  and  f:i Hilling  their  times,
after  which  the  translation  of  these
records  should  <*o  to  all  the  remnants
of  the  ho nst1  of  Israel,  scattered
abroad  on  the  face  of  the  whole
earth  ;  and  that  thtse  records  should
be  instrumental  in  the  hands  of  God
in  gathering  Israel  fro^n  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth.

These  were  the  promises  of  God
to  the  ancient  Prophets  ot  this  con-
tinent, and  the  angel  told  Joseph
Smith  concerning  these  plates,  and
where  they  were  deposited.  At  the
same  time,  the  vision  of  the  Al-
mighty iv as  open  to  the  mind  of
Joseph,  and  he  saw  the  very  spot.
After  the  angel  had  conversed  with
him  sometime  on  this  subject,  and
had  o;»ened  un  to  him  the  prophecies
ut  the  holy  Prophets  concerning  the
great  work  that  was  to  be  accom-
plished in  i  lie  'acter  uaya,  he  with*
drew,  and  Joseph  continued  praying-
Some,  perhaps,  might  think  that
this  was  ;i  dream;  but  it  was  not,  lid
was  wide  a.vukc.  As  he  continued
praying,  the  uiigel  came  again  the
second  time,  and  i^ave  him  still  fur-
ther information  Concerning  the  rise
of  the  latter-d:iy  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  and  the  great  work
the  Almighty  intended  to  aceom-
plUh  preparatory  to  the  coming  of
his  Son  trom  the  heavens  with  all


184


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Lis  Saints.  The  angel  then  again
withdrew,  but  in  answer  to  Joseph's
prayers  lie  came  the  third  time,  and
imparted  to  him  still  more  informa-
tion. After  his  withdrawal  the  third
time  Joseph  arose,  and  it  was  early
in  the  morning,  he  having  been
awake  all  night  receiving  instruction
from  the  angel  of  God.  In  the  morn-
ing he  went  out  into  the  field  to  work
with  his  father.  He  had  not  yet
told  his  father  of  the  remarkable
things  that  he  had  seen  during  the
night ;  hut  his  father  noticed  that  lie
looked  weak  and  feeble,  and  advised
him  to  go  to  the  house.  He  started
to  do  .so,  and  while  on  the  way,  the
angel  "again  appeared  to  hi  in,  and
commanded  him  to  return  to  I  lis  fa-
ther and  tell  him  all  about  it  He
did  so,  and  his  father,  on  hearing  it,
burst  into  tears,  and  said,  "  AJy  son,
be  not  disobedient  to  this  heavenly
vision!"  The  angel,  when  he  ap-
peared to  him  in  ilayli^hr,  Lull  him
nut  only  to  tell  his  father,  but  also
to  go  to  the  place  shown  him  in
vision  the  night  previous,  and  see
the  plate*.  His  father  told  him. by
nil  means  to  be  obedient  and  faithful.
He  went  according  to  the  instruction
of  the  angel  and  visited  this  hill.
The  hill  runs  north  and  sduth  some
three  quarters  of  a  mile,  and  oa  one
end  of  it,  or  near  the  end  of  it,  was
where  he  saw  the  plates.  The  sur-
face of  the  stone  which  covered  the
plates  was  bare ;  around  its  edges
was  a  thick  greensward  of  grass  or
turf.  He  knew  the  place  as  soon  as
be  saw  it,  and  procuring  a  lever  he
lifted  off  this  principal  or  crowning
£tone,  and  found  that  it  was  cemented
on  the  top  of  four  stones  that  sal  on
edge,  forming  a  stone  box.  After
having  lifted  off  the  stone  he  saw  the
plates,  just  as  he  had  seen  them  in
Vision  the  night  before.  These  plates
rested  upon  three  little  cement  pillars
that  ran  up  from  the  bottom,  and  the  I


stones  that  formed  the  sides  of  the
box  were  cemented  together  at  the
corners.

With  the  plates  was  an  instru-
ment, called  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  used  by  Seers  in  ancient  times,
and  which  enabled  them  to  under-
stand the  things  of  God.  The  great
Hiifh  Priest  used  such  an  instrument
in  the  midst  of  Israel  on  the  other
continent,  and  inquired  of  the  Lord
to  receive  sentence  of  judgment  in
difficult  cases  that  were  brought  be-
fore him  to  be  judged.  Aaron  had  a
Urim  and  Thnmmiua  in  the  centre
of  his  breastplate;  and  when  the
cases  were  brought  before  him,  the
breastplate  of  judgment,  containing
the  Urim  and  Thummim,  was  con-
sulted, and  whatever  sentence^  the
Lord  gave,  Aaron  tjave  to  the  people
of  Israel  The  Prophets  who  de-
posited these  plates  in  the  hill  Curno-
rah  were  commanded  of  the  Lord  to
deposit  the  Urim  and  Thummim
with  them,  so  that  when  the  time
en  me  for  them  to  be  brought  forth,
the  individual  who  was  entrusted
with  them  might  be  able  to  translate
them  by  the  gift  and  power  oi  God,
Joseph  put  forth  his  hands  to  take
the  plates,  but  upon  doing  so  the
angel  immediately  appeared  to  him
and  said,  "Joseph,  the  time  has  not
yet  come  for  you  t-j  take  the  plates  ;
you  must  be  taught  and  instructed,
and  you  must  give  heed  to  my  com-
mandments and  to  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord  until  you  are  fully
prepared  to  be  entrusted  with  them,
tor  the  Lord  promised  his  ancient
servants  on  this  land  that  no  one
should  have  them  for  the  purpose  of
speculation,  and  that  they  should  be
brought  forth  with  an  eye  single  to
the  glory  of  God;  and  now,  if  you
will  keep  the  commandments  of  God
in  all  tilings,  and  prepare  yourself,
you  will  in  due  time  be  permitted  to
take  these  plates  from  their  place  of


REVIEW  OF  GOD'S  DEALINGS,  ETC


185


deposit."  He  would  not  suffer  him
to  take  them  at  that  time.  Four
years  from  that  day — on  the  morn-
ing of  the  22nd  of  September,  1827
— having  been  commanded  of  the
Lord  to  come  to  that  place  at  that
special  time,  he  went  and  was  met
by  the  angel.  I  will  state,  however,
that  during  these  four  years  he  was
often  ministered  to  by  the  angels  of
God,  and  received  instruction  con-
cerning the  work  that  was  to  bo
performed  in  the  latter  days,  hut
when  the  time  had  fully  arrived  he
went  to  the  hill  Cnmorah,  according
to  appointment,  and  took  the  plates,
and  the  Urim  and  Thummim  with
them,  and  took  them  to  his  fathers
house  in  a  wagon,  which  he  had
brought  near  to  the  hill  for  that  pur-
pose. He  was  then  nearly  twenty-
two  years  old — twenty- two  the  fol-
lowing Decembers

Soon  after  this  a  certain  portion  of
the  characters  on  these  plates  were
copied  off  by  tbe  Prophet,  and  the
manuscript  sent,  by  the  hands  of
Martin  Harris,  a  farmer  who  lived
in  that  neighborhood,  to  the  city  of
New  York,  to  show  them  to  the
learned,  to  see  if  they  could  translate
them.  Among  those  to  whom  they
were  presented  was  Fro  feasor  Anthon
— a  man  noted  for  his  learning  in
languages — but  he  could  not  tran-
slate them.

You  may  here  inquire,  What  was
the  particular  character  in  which
these  plates  were  written  ?  They
inform  us  that  they  wrote  in  two
separate  characters.  Some  of  their  ,
plates  were  written  in  Hebrew  and
soi we  in  the  Egyptian  ;  but  both  the
Hebrew  and  the  Egyptian,  after  they
came  from  Jerusalem,  were  reformed
by  them.  I  mean  the  alphabets
were  altered  or  changed-  If  they
had  not  done  this  by  design,  we
know  that  in  the  course  of  a  thou-
sand years languages  will  greatly


change,  and  sometimes  new  characters
will  be  added  to  alphabets*  We
know  that  none  of  them,  at  the  pre-
sent time,  are  precisely  as  they  were
anciently ;  they  have  been  added  to
from  time  to  time.  The  Hebrew,  on
the  eastern  continent,  had  the  points
representing  the  vowels  added  to  it
after  the  Nephites  left  Jerusalem ;
and  no  doubt  the  Egyptian,  under-
stood when  they  left,  has  been  greatly
changed  since.  They  wrote,  there-
fore, in  the  reformed  Egyptian— a
Iancjuasre  that  the  learned  Professor
Anthon  did  not  understand.  He
requested  Martin  Harris,  however,  to
i  bring  the  plates  to  him,  telling  him,
if  he  would,  that  he  could  perhaps
assist  him  in  the  translation,  Joseph
translated  the  few  characters  that
were  sent  to  Professor  Anthon,  ami
when  the  translation  and  the  original
were  shown  to  him,  and  he  had  com-
pared them,  he  expressed  the  opinion
that  the  translation  was  correct,  and
he  gave  a  paper  to  that  effect  to
i  Martin  Harris.  As  Mr,  Harris  was
leaving  the  r.ora,  Mr.  Anthon  said,
'*  How  did  this  young  lad  obtain  the
plates ?"  Said  Martin  Harris,  "He
obtained  them  by  the  ministration  of
an  holy  angel/1  Professor  Anthon
immediately  requested  him  to  return
the  paper  that  he  had  given -him,  and
as  soon  as  Mr.  Harris  had  done  so,
he  tore  it  to  pieces,  saying,  "Angels
do  not  appear  in  our  day."

1  do  not  know  that  Joseph  Smith,
at  the  time  that  he  sent  these  words
to  the  learned,  knew  anything  about
the  prophecy  that  is  contained  in  the
2^ th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  a  few  words
of  which  I  will  read  ;  but  at  any  rate,
whether  he  knew  it  or  not,  it  was  a
literal  fulfillment  of  it  Isaiah  speaks
of  a  time  when  deep  sleep  should  be
poured  out  upou  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  they  should  be  drunken,
but  not  with  wine;  they  should  stag-
ger, but  not  with  strong  drink;  and


*


186


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES

■j


the  Prophets  and  the  Seers,  &c.,
should  be  covered ;  in  other  wards,
they  would  not  hare  any  Prophets
or  Seers.  Every  one  will  bear  me
witness  that  that  was  the  case  at  the
time  these  plates  were  brought  forth.
Where  was  there  a  people  who  re-
ceived revelation  ?  Where  were
their  Prophets  and  Seers?  Gone,
covered,  "  and  the  vision  of  all  lias
become  to  you  as  the  words  ot  a
book  that  is  sealed,  which  men  deli-
ver to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,
'  Bead  this  I  pray  you  ;f  and  he  saitb,
*  I  can  not,  for  the  book  is  sealed  *
And  the  book  is  delivered  to  him
that  is  not  learned,  saying,  1  Read
this  I  pray  thee/  and  he  saith,  *  I
am  not  learned,1  Wherefore  the
Lord  says,  *  Inasmuch  as  this  people*
— the  people  to  whom  these  words
should  be  delivered — 'draw  near  to
me  with  their  mouths  and  with  their
lips  do  honor  me,  but  remove  their
hearts  far  from  me,  and  their  fear
towards  me  is  taught  by  t lie  precepts
of  men,  therefore  I  will  proceed  to
do  a  marvelous  work  among  this
people,  even  a  marvelous  work  and  a
wonder.  For  the  wisdom  ot  their
wise  men  shall  perish,  and  the  under-
standing of  their  prudent  men  shall
be  hid/  "

This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the
transaction  I  have  already  related.
The  words  of  the  book,  Isaiah  says,
are  to  be  delivered  to  the  learned,
not  the  book  itself.  I  have  had  peo-
ple rise  up  and  say,  "Why  did  not
Joseph  Smith  send  the  plates  to  t lie
learned  r"  Because  that  would  have
been  a  violation  of  this  prophecy.
The  words  of  the  book,  not  the  book
itself,  were  to  be  delivered  to  the
learned,  requesting  him  to  read  them
— "Read  this  I  pray  thee."  But
he  says,  "  I  can  not,  for  it  is  sealed."
Martin  Harris  told  him  a  portion  of
these  plates  were  sealed  and  were  not
to  be  translated  during  the  present


generation;  but  the  portion  that  were
unsealed  were  to  be  translated.  He
replied,  4*  I  can  not  read  a  sealed
book,"  thus  fulfilling  the  words  of
Isaiah;

The  book  itself,  we  ate  informed  in
the  next  verse,  is  to  be  delivered  to  him
that  is  not  learned*  Xow  in  regard  to
Joseph  Smith's  qualifications  or  at*
tainments  in  learning,  they  were  very
ordinary.  He  had  reed ved  a  little
education  in  the  common  country
schools  in  the  vicinity  in  which  he
had  lived.  He  con  Id  read  a  little,
and  could  write,  but  it  was  in  such
an  ordinary  hand  that  he  did  not
venture  to  act  as  his  own  scribe,  but
had  to  employ  sometimes  one  and
sometimes  another  to  write  as  he
translated.  This  unlearned  man  did
not  make  the  same  reply  that  the
learned  man  did.  For  when  the  book
was  delivered  to  this  unlearned  youth
and  he  was  requested  to  read  it,  he
replied,  u  I  am  not  learned."  I  sup*
pose  he  felt  his  weakness  when  the
Lxrd  told  him  to  read  this  book;  for
he  thought  it.  was  a  sjreat  work.  But
the  Lord  replied  to  Joseph  in  the  very
language  of  this  prophecy — "Inas-
much as  this  people" — meaning  the
present  generation — "  draw  near  to
me  with  their  lips,  &o ,  therefore  I
will  proceed  to  do  a  marvellous  work,
even  a  marvellous  work  and  a  won-
der."

Kow,  did  the  unlearned  man  read
the  book  ?  Some  might  suppose,  if
they  were  to  read  no  further,  that  the
book  was  not  read  at  ftlL  Let  us  read
what  is  prophesied  in  the  1 8th  verse :
4t  And  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear
the  words  of  the  book."  Indeed!
Then  it  seems  that  the  book  must
have  been  read,  or  they  could  not
have  heard  its  words,  £t  And  the
eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  oat  of  ob-
scurity and  out  of  darkness."  Does
this  mean  those  who  are  spiritually
deaf,  and  those  who  are  spiritually


blind  ?  Or  does  it  mean  literally,
those  who  are  blind  and  can  not  see,
and  those  who  are  deaf  and  can  not
hear  ?  It  may  mean  either  way,  for
it  is  well  known  by  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands  now  on  the  earth
that  the  eyes  of  tho  blind— those
who  have  been  born  blind — have
been  opened,  and  that  the  ears  of  the
deaf  have  been  opened  by  the  power
of  God,  through  the  preaching  of
this  book,  so  that  the  prophecy  has
had  a  literal  fulfillment,  for  those  who
were  physically  and  spiritually  blind
and  deaf  have  been  made  to  see  and
hear  by  the  power  of  God,  and  they
have  gathered  themselves  from  the
nations.

Now  let  ns  read  a  little  further  in
this  prophecy,  and  see  whether  this
corresponds  with  the  words  of  our
text.  You  recollect  it  refers  particu-
larly to  the  ingathering  of  the  house
of  Israel,  and  when  the  Lord  would
cause  the  land  of  Palestine  to  yield
its  increase,  that  he  would  cause  truth
to  spring  out  of  the  earth,"  and  so
on.  Does  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah
correspond  with  David;  so  far  as  the
events  predicted  to  transpire  in  the
days  when  the  book  corny n  forth  ?
We  will  see.  "  Therefore  thus  saith
the  Lord,  who  redeemed  Abraham,
concerning  the  house  of  Jucob ;  Ja-
cob shall  not  now  be  ashamed,  nei-
ther shall  his  face  now  wax  pale/'
Why  should  they  no  longer  be
ashamed  ?  Why  should  not  their
faces  still  wax  pale  ?  The  reply  is,
"But  when  he  seeth  his  children, the
work  of  my  hands  in  the  midst  of
him,  they  shall  sanctify  the  Holy  One
of  Jacob,  and  fear  the  God  of  Israel."

Do  you  not  see  bow  these  two  Pro-
phets harmonize  in  their  prophecies  ?
One  says,  "  Wilt  thou  not  turn  to  us
again,  0  Lord,  and  bring  back  again
the  captivity  of  thy  people,  Jacob,  that
we  may  rejoice  in  thee  ?  How  long,
O  Lord,  will  the  fierceness  of  thy


wrath  continue?  Will  it  continue
to  all  generations  ?  "  And  the  an-
swer is  that  he  wilt  bring  truth  out
of  the  earth,  that  it  should  set  them
in  the  way  of  his  steps ;  and  the
land  of  Israel  or  Jacob  should  again
yield  its  increase.  While  the  other
says  Jacob  shall  not  be  ashamed,
neither  shall  his  face  wax  pale.  It
seems  then,  that  both  these  Prophets
beheld  that  truth  out  of  the  earth,
or  a  certain  book,  would  bring  about
the  gathering  of  that  long-dispersed
people.

We  find  also,  other  events  de-
scribed, of  a  very  remarkable  charac-
ter. One  is  that  the  meek  should
increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord.  There
have  been  a  great,  man}'  meek  people
among  all  the  religious  denomina-
tions, who  have  no  doubt  lived,  with
all  the  desire  of  faithfulness  that  we
Latter-day  Saints  have,  and  some
perhaps  have  been  more  faithful  than
some  of  us,  "  The  meek,  also,  shall
increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord."
When  will  thev  do  this?  In  the
day  that  the  deaf  should  hear  the
words  of  the  book,  For  what  rea-
son ?  Because  of  the  instructions,
counsel  perfect  doctrine,  and  pro-
phecies contained  (herein ;  because
of  the  knowledge  it  gives  to  the
children  of  men  concerning  the  great
work  which  is  to  be  accomplished
before  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  All  this  knowledge  would
cause  the  meek  of  the  earth  to  have
their  joy  increased.

"  The  poor  among  men  shall  re-
joice in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.'*
This  is  a  very  important  item.  When
we  wander  over  the  nations  of  the
earth,  at  the  present  day,  what  do  we
behold  ?  Millions  on  millions  groan-
ing in  worse  than  African  slavery.
Our  American  slavery  here,  never
compared  with  the  slavery  of  those
millions  in  the  old  countries.  They
were  very  pointed  there,  against  what


188


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


they  termed  African  slavery,  but
they  did  not  look  at  the  slaves  at
home — the  millions  of  people  who
were  obliged  to  work  fourteen  or
sixteen  hours  a  day  for  a  sixpence,
their  bones  sticking  out  of  their
skin,  as  it  were,  and  they  having  the
appearance  as  if  famine  had  been
grmwing  at  their  vitals.  This  is  the
condition  of  millions  now.  But
here  is  a  book,  the  cnning  forth  of
which  should  make  the  poor  among
men  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of
Israel*

I  would  call  upon  this  congrega-
tion, and  upon  the  inhabitants  of
Utah  Territory,  I  mean  that  portion
called  Latter-day  Saints,  and  ask  of
them,  Have  you  experienced  the
fulfillment  of  this  prophecy,  in  the
deliverance  of  yourselves  and  chil-
dren from  the  oppressions  that  you
endured  in  the  mother  country  ?  If
a  response  were  £iven  to  this  it  would
be  a  united  affirmative  from  scores
of  thousands  that  this  prophecy  has
been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter  in
their  deliverance  from  the  bondage
which  they  and  their  fathers  before  i
them  had  been  compelled  to  endure  jj
by  the  cruel  hand  of  the  oppressor.

Another  event  is  spoken  o!  in  con-
nectiou  with  the  bringing  forth  uf
this  book — "F<>r  the  terrible  one  is
brought  to  naught,  the  scorner  is
consumed,  and  all  that  watch  for
iniquity  are  cut  off."  Has  that  ever
been  fulfilled  ?  No,  but  it  will  be  in
its  time  and  in  its  season;  but  not
until  they  have  heard  the  words  of
the  book,  and  have  been  thoroughly
warned  by  the  coming  forth  of  truth
out  of  the  earth.  When  that  has
been  sounded  in  their  ears,  if  they
hardened  their  hearts  against  it  the
decree  of  the  Almighty  is  that  all
that  watch  for  iniquity  shall  be  cut
off.  All  who  persecute  the  Saints
of  the  living  Godt  all  who  would
make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word,


that  will  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  re-
pro  veth  in  the  gate,  that  will  turn
aside  the  just  f  >r  a  thing  of  naught,
are  to  be  con  same  J,

Another  very  pleasing  thing  is
mentioned,  which  yoa  can  bear  me
witness  has  been  fulfilled*  "  They
also  who  erred  in  spirit  shall  come
|  to  understanding,  and  they  that  mur-
mured shall  learn  doctrine."  Oh,
how  my  heart  has  been  pained  within
me  when  1  have  seen  the  blindness  of
r  the  Christian  world,  and  1  knew  that
many  of  them  were  sincere  !  1  knew
they  desired  to  know  tiie  truth,  but
t  h  ey  scarcely  k  new  wh  e  t  h  er  i  o  turn
to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  so  great
were  the  errors  that  were  taught  va
their  midst,  and  so  strong  the  tradi-
tions which  they  had  imbibed,  the
fear  of  the  Lord  bing  taught  them
by  the  precepts  of  men  instead  of
by  inspiration  and  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  "  They  also  that  erred
in  spirit  shall  come  to  understanding"
when  this  book  comes  forth,  and
"  they  that  murmur  shall  leara  doc-
trine."

It  would  seem,  then,  that  there  is
something  connected  with  doctrine
in  the  contents  of  this  book,  or  the
people  could  not  le  sru  doctrine  there-
from and  have  their  errors  done  away.
But  those  who  have  read  this  book
will  bear  me  record  that  their  minds
have  been  forever  set  at  rest  in  regard
to  doctrine,  so  far  as  the  ordinances
of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  concerned.
Those  who  erred,  and  did  not  know
whether  sprinkling,  pouring  or  im-
mersion was  the  true  method  of
baptism,  now  know  ?  Why  ?  Be-
cause the  Book  of  Mormon  reveals
the  mode  as  it  was  given  to  the  an-
cient Nephites  on  this  continent.
|  So  in  regard  to  every  other  principle
of  the  doctrine  of  Christ — it  is  set
forth  in  such  great  plainness  that  it
is  impossible  for  any  two  persons  to
form  different  ideas  in  relation  to  it,


REVIEW  OF  GOD'S  DEALINGS,  ETC


1«9


after  reading  the  Book  of  Mormon,
Yon  may  ask,  Why  this  plainness?
Becuuse  it  was  translated  by  the
power  and  gift  ot  God;  because  it
came  from  a  proper  source — from
him  who  is  truth  itsdf.  God  has
brought  it  forth  from  the  earth,  and
as  the  Psalmist  David  says,  "  It  will
set  us  in  the  way  of  his  steps."  If
we  have  murmured  because  we  did
not  understand  doctrine,  we  now
have  a  revelation  that  will  show  us
the  true  Gospel,  with  all  its  ordinan-
ces, principles,  gifts  and  blessings,
and  we  may  enjoy  them  inasmuch  as
we  will  seek  them  according  to  the
promises  of  the  Almighty,

I  know  that  I  am  sometimes
lengthy  in  my  teachings,  and  may  be
tedious  to  some,  but  bear  with  me  a
few  moments  longer,  for  there  are
some  ether  prophecies  connected
with  the  cominor  forth  of  this  book
that  it  seems  to  me  should  be  under-
stood by  the  people.  I  will  refer
yoo  to  one  now,  which  will  be  found
in  the  37th  chapter  of  the  prophecies
of  Ezekiel.  We  there  have  a  decla-
ration of  the  means  that  God  will
use  to  gather  the  house  of  Israel
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth
I  have  not  time  to  turn  to  it,  but  I
will  repeat  it.  Speaking  to  the
Prophet,  the  Lord  says — "  Therefore,
son  of  man,  take  one  stick  and  write
upon  it  for  Joseph,  the  stick  of
Ephraim ;  and  then  take  another
stick  and  write  upon  it  for  Judah,
and  join  these  two  sticks  together  in
thine  hand,  and  hold  them  up  before
the  Children  of  Israel  in  thine
hands."  Now  here  were  two  sticks.
I  have  no  doubt  that  they  were  literal
sticks  in  Ezekiel's  hands.  The  ques-
tion is  what  did  they  mean  ?  Two
sticks  written  upon,  one  for  Judah,
and  the  other  for  Joseph,  the  stick
of  Ephraim,  And  after  they  were
written  upon,  Ezekiel  was  to  take  the
two  sticks  and  join  them  into  one,


and  then  hold  them  up  before  the
children  of  Israel  as  one  stick.  Then
the  Lord  proceeds,  "  And  when  the
children  of  thy  people  shall  speak
onto  thfee,  saying,  What  doest  thou
mean  by  this?"  Now,  notice  the
interpretation — "  What  dost  thoa
mean  by  these  two  sticks  that  are
written  upon  for  Judah  and  for
Joseph?  14  Say  unto  them,  Thus
saith  the  Lord  God,  behold  I  will
take  the  stick  of  Joseph,  written
upon  for  Joseph,  and  I  will  put  it
with  the  stick  of  Judah,  written
upon  for  Judah,  and  they  shall  be  one
in  mine  hand."  The  two  sticks  in
Ezekiel's  hands  were  a  representation
of  what  the  Lord  was  going  to  do,
when  he  would  do  it  and  what  events
should  follow  the  joining  of  these
two  sticks  together.  In  reading  the
next  verse  we  see  how  it  harmonizes
with  what  David  aijd  Is?iiah  have
said  on  the  subject.  "  The  sticks
whereon  thou  writest  shall  be  in
thine  hand  before  their  eyes;  and  say
unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,
Behold  I  will  take  the  children  of
Israel  from  among  the  heathen
whither  they  be  gone.  I  will  gather
them  on  every  side,  and  bring  them
into  their  own  land  upon  the  moun-
tains of  Israel.  They  shall  no  more
be  two  nations,  neither  shall  they  be
divided  into  two  kingdoms  any  more
at  all  But  they  shall  dwell  in  the
land  which  I  have  given  to  Jacob  my
servant,  wherein  your  fathers  have
dwelt,  and  they  shall  dwell  therein,,
even  they  and  their  children  and
their  children's  children  for  ever,
saith  the  Lord,"

Has  that  been  fulfilled?  No,
When  will  the  work  commence  that
will  bring  it  about?  When  the
Lord  takes  the  stick  of  Joseph,  writ-
ten upon  for  Joseph,  and  puts  it  with
the  Jewish  record,  written  upon  for
Judah,  and  makes  them  one  in  his
own  hand,  and  not  until  then.  You


190


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


might  raise  millions  of  dollars,  and
form  missionary  societies  for  the
amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the
Jews;  you  might  form  Christian
societies  and  raise  funds  until  they
are  ever  so  great,  and  go  to  the  na-
tions of  the  earth  and  try  to  convert
Israel,  but  you  can  not  do  it.  Why  ?
Because  God  Almighty  has  decreed
that  that  work  shall  be  brought
about  after  the  union  of  the  two  re-
cords, and  not  till  then.  When  he
brings  forth  the  record  of  the  tribe
of  Joseph — his  sacred  writing  and
puts  it  with  the  record  of  the  Jews
— the  Bible  then  and  not  till  then
may  we  look  for  the  restitution  of
the  house  of  Israel ;  and  not  even
then,  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles
are  fulfilled.

Now  let  me  say  a  few  words  about
the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  You
know  that  Jesus  predicted,  in  the
21st  chapter  of  Luke,  that  Jerusalem
should  be  trodden  down  by  the  Gen-
tiles until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles
should  be  fulfilled,  and  from  the  day
of  the  dispersion  of  the  Jew,  sev-
enty years  after  Christ,  until  the
present  year — 1872 — that  land  has
been  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles,
and  the  house  of  Israel  have  not
enjoyed  their  former  location,  their
beautiful  city  nor  their  land  of  pro-
mise, and  they  can  not  enjoy  it —
God  will  not  permit  them  nntil  the
times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled.

The  question  is,  How  will  he  bring
about  the  fulfillment  of  the  times  of
the  Gentiles  ?  I  answer,  by  sending
forth  to  them  the  stick  of  Joseph,
written  upon  for  Joseph,  in  connec-
tion with  the  Bible,  by  his  servants
who  go  forth  to  the  nations  of  the
earth.  They  will  proclaim  to  all
people,  nations  and  tongues,  to  the
Gentiles  first,  the  fullness  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  contained
in  these  two  records.  The  testimony
of  two  nations  running  together  and

o  3


I  growing  into  one  is  stronger  than  the
testimony  of  one  nation;  and  when

.  the  Lord  makes  the  ancient  continent
of  America  bear  record  to  (he  same
great  truths;  when  he  unites  the
Bible  of  the  Western  hemisphere,
with  the  Bible  of  the  East,  and  sends
it  forth  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,
it  will  be  a  witness,  an  evidence  and
a  testimony  sufficient  to  bring  about
what  is  termed  the  fullness  of  the
Gentiles,  or  to  fulfill  their  times.

This  is  the  reason  why,  during
forty* two  years,  God  has  restricted
us  to  the  Gentile  nations,  and  would
not  suffer  os  to  go  with  the  Book  of
Mormon  to  the  house  of  Israel  until
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  were  ful-
filled. How  much  longer  the  Lord
will  bear  with  the  Gentile  nations  I
know  not ;  but  I  do  know  that  when
they  count  themselves  unworthy  of
eternal  life,  when  the  servants  of  God
have  thoroughly  warned  them  by
preaching  to  them  the  fullness  of  the
Gospel  of  his  Son,  then  the  com-
mandment will  go  forth  from  the
Almighty  to  his  servants — '*  Turn
from  the  Gentile  nations  and  go  to

|  the dispersed of Israel. Go,  ye

i  fishers  and  ye  hunters,  and  fulfill  that
which  I  spake  by  the  mouth  of  mine
ancient  Prophets,  that  Jacob  may  no
longer  be  made  ashamed,  that  his  face
may  no  longer  wax  pale.  Go  and
say  to  the  house  of  Israel  in  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth  that  the  God
of  Jacob  has  again  spoken.  Go  and
tell  them  that  that  which  he  spake
by  the  mouths  of  their  ancient  Pro-
phets is  being  fulfilled,"  And  they
will  go,  and  their  proclamation  will
be  to  Israel  the  same  as  to  the  Gen-
tiles, with  the  exception  of  gathering
the  J ews  to  old  Jerusalem,  instead  of
to  the  land  of  Ziom

I  might  quote  many  other  passages
that  have  a  bearing  on  this  subject,
but  let  this  suffice.  The  work  is  be-
fore the  nations,  and  they  can  examine


TESTIMONY,  ETC


191


It*  It  has  received  its  foundation
and  start,  and  there  is  no  power  be-
neath the  heavens  that  can  stay  the
hand  of  the  Almighty,  His  work
will  roll  forth,  whatever  the  conduct
of  the  unfaithful  may  be.  The  work
of  the  Almighty  is  onwaid,  and  will
progress  in  its  majesty  and  power


until  every  prophecy  is  fulfilled  that
has  been  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  his
ancient  servants.  It  will  come  to
pass,  and  the  people  will  be  gathered,
for  the  powers  of  the  earth  can  not
|  stay  the  hand  ot  the  Almighty,
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER BRIGHAM YOUNG,  JXJN.,

Delivered  at  the  42nd  Semi- Annual  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,

October  8,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

TESTIMONY — SEARCH  THE  SCRIPTURES — WORD  OF  WfSDOM.


I  believe  it  is  pleasing,  generally,
for  an  Elder  in  this  Church  to  have
the  privilege  of  bearing  his  testi-
mony, though  it  may  be  done  with
fear  and  trembling,  before  the  peo-
ple; yet  the  knowledge  which  God
has  given  to  the  Elders  of  Israel  in*
spires  them  to  declare  it  unto  the
world.  Although  I  am  considerably
afflicted,  as  well  as  my  brethren,  with
this  manfearing  spirit,  yet  it  is  a
pleasure  to  me,  and  I  hope  it  ever
will  be,  to  stand  bofore  the  congre-
gations, and  tell  them  that  I  know,
by  the  revelations  of  Jesus  Christ,
that  this  is  the  people  of  God.  I
may  not  be  able  to  instruct  the  peo-
ple to  that  extent  which  others
might,  but  with  the  help  of  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  I  can  testify  to  that
which  I  do  know,  which  I  have  expe-
rienced in  my  life,  and  which  has
been  brought  home  to  my  under-


standing. I  think  that  it  strengthens
me  in  the  principles  of  the  everlast-
ing Gospel  every  time  I  have  the
privilege  of  testifying  to  their  truth.

It  is  almost  impossible  for  this
people  to  realize  that  they  are  called
by  the  power  and  authority  of  the
Almighty,  and  that  they  are  the
Saints  of  God,  nevertheless  it  is  true
if  we  are  living  that  religion  which
we  profess  to  believe  in.  Let  those
who  have  not  received  a  testimony  to
I  that  effect  go  before  their  Maker,
seek  him  in  all  diligence,  be  faithful
to  that  which  they  know,  and  he  will
reveal  it  unto  their  minds.  We  have
not  come  to  this  earth  to  idle  away
our  time,  or  to  thro?v  away  that  pre-
cious gift  which  is  within  the  reach
of  all  whom  God  has  created.  Eter-
nal life  is  extended  unto  us  by  a
merciful  Creator,  and  we  have  the
opportunity  of  gaining  an  exaltation


102


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


in  the  kingdom  of  God  if  we  have
a  mind  to  improve  it  We  have
come  here  without  a  knowledge  of  a
former  existence,  we  are  like  stran-
gers in  a  strange  land,  The  know-
ledge that  we  have  acquired  guides
us  to  some  extent,  enables  ua  to  gain
a  Jiving,  and  in  part  to  understand
the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God*
Brethren  and  sisters,  we  are  here  as
strangers  in  a  strange  land,  and  a
guide  is  what  we  want — a  guide  for
our  actions  on  the  earth.  God  has
given  us  one — he  revealed  a  guide
through  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet,
and  others  who  have  lived  in  modern
times,  and  they  have  revealed  the
will  of  the  Almighty  unto  the  peo-
ple. We  are  not  left  destitute,  so
that  we  can  be  led  away  by  every
manner  of  doctrine ;  when  we  hear
people  say,  '*  Lo !  here  is  Christ,  lo  !
there  is  Christ/'  we  are  not  left  to
ourselves,  neither  have  we  to  seek
the  advice  of  men  to  know  whether
these  expressions  are  true  or  not,  be-
cause the  Spirit  of  the  Almighty
has  testified  unto  us  that  the  revela-
tions contained  in  those  books — the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  and
the  Bojk  of  Mormon,  which  we  re-
ceived through  Joseph  Smith,  are
true,  and  they  are  given  unto  us  for
our  guidance.

Is  it  necessary  to  ask  this  people
if  they  are  acquainted  with  the  reve-
lations contained  in  these  books,
which  have  been  given  unto  us  as  a
guide  to  eternal  life  in  the  presence
of  God  ?  Do  we  understand  the
revelations  contained  within  the  lids
of  these  books  ?  They  contain
blessings  and  truths  inestimable,  for
they  point  the  way  back  into  the
presence  of  our  God*  Do  we  study
and  understand  them,  or  are  our
minds  taken  up  with  such  light  read-
ing as  naturally  tends  to  distract  the
attention  from  the  principles  of  the
Gospel? There  is  too  much  fault-


finding and  confusion,  and  too  much
:  of  the  world  in  the  midst  of  this
people,  and  especially  in  the  midst  of
the  batter-day  Saints  who  dwell  in
Salt  Lake  City,  It  is  true  that
temptations  are  broadcast  in  our
.  midst,  and  we  meet  them  on  every
hand.  But  is  that  any  reason  that
we  should  give  way  to  them  ?  Ts  it
any  reason  that  we  should  adopt  the
follies  and  fashions  of  the  world  be-
cause they  have  been  introduced  into
our  midst?  Well  do  I  remember
the  time  when,  in  this  city,  it  was
customary  for  the  Saints  to  retire  to
rest  without  locking  their  doors.
There  was  no  necessity  to  lock
granaries,  or  stables,  or  to  guard
property  as  we  are  compelled  to  da
now.  But  times  have  changed,  the
temptations  which  the  Lord  said
should  overtake  his  people  have  come,
and  they  have  come  for  our  salvation,
for  without  thern  it  would  he  impos-
sible for  us  to  show  to  God  that  we
are  for  him  and  his  kingdom  and
that,  under  any  and  all  circumstan-
ces, we  are  determined  to  work
righteousness  upon  the  earth.  I  do-
not  complain  because  these  tempta-
tions have  been  introduced  into  our
midst,  for  they  are  necessary.  If
the  Lord  pees  fit  to  permit  them,  I
have  nothing  to  say  only  by  way  of
counsel,  and  to  exhort  the  Saints
not  to  indulge  !n  those  things  which
would  have  a  tendency  to  grieve  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord.  I  am  aware  that
these  evils  are  not  pleasant,  and
probably  if  we  could  understand  and
comprehend  evil  without  coming  in
contact  with  it,  God  would  never
have  placed  us  on  this  earth,  so  far
from  our  home,  so  far  from  those
with  whom  we  dwelt  in  the  eternal
worlds*  He  never  would  have  placed
us  here  but  for  our  own  good.

Here  are  the  books — the  Bible,
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants — which  are


TESTIMONY,  ETC.


193


given  for  a  guide  to  the  people  of  all  |
the  earth,  if  they  will  but  listen  to
them  ;  but  they  will  not  listen  trf  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  the  Book  of
Doctrine  find  Covenants,  and  yet  I
have  failed  to  discover  a  learned  man
who  could  take  those  books  and  tell
where  they  differed  in  doctrine  in
the  least.  They  can  not  do  this,  be-
cause the  doctrines  of  all  are  the
same,  for  they  all  proceed  from  God,
and  they  contain  his  plan  for  the  snt-
vatioTi  uf  his  children  upon  the  earth.
Shall  we  obey  the  revelations  which
have  been  given  ?  If  I  could  have
an  answer  from  each  individual  here
to-day,  professing  to  he  a  Saint,  I
have  no  doubt  it  would  be  "  Yes."
And  if  str;  rigors,  and  the  nations  of
the  enrth  knew  that  wo  believe  in
them  as  firmly  as  we  believe  in  any-
thing on  the  earth,  they  would  say,
"  If  you  believe  in  them,  practice
and  obey  them  in  every  particular,
and  live1  according  to  your  conscience
and  the  law  which  jSod  has  given
you."  I,  by  the  reve^iota  of  the
Almighty,  understand  these  Droks  to
be  true,  I  know  that  Jesus  is  tne
Christ.  Not  because  I  have  read  it
in  the  books  which  1  have  named,  or
because  I  have  heird  Joseph  Smith
or  others  testify  to  it,  but  I  know  it
by  the  revelations  of  (jiod,  just  as
otheie  have  known  it  in  former  dis-
pensations of  the  Gospel,  and  just  as
others  know  it  in  this  dispensation.
Saints  should  live  their  religion;
they  should  obey  the  principles
which  have  been  revealed  and  which
are  contained  in  these  books.  But
there  is  too  much  ignorance  concern-
ing these  revelations;  they  are  not
sufficiently  studied ;  or  if  studied
they  are  not  remembered,  if  I  am  to
judge  from  what  I  see  around  me.
In  traveling  and  preaching  among
the  people,  there  is  one  revelation
which  presses  itself  particularly  on
my  mind,  and  which  1  think  the  peo-  1
'No.  13.


pie  would  obey  if  they  considered
1  that  it  came  from  the  Almighty.  But
as  they  do  not  obey  it,  I  suppose  they
do  not  consider  that  it  came  from
'  God.  I  refer  to  a  revelation  given
in  the  year  called  the  Word  of

Wisdom.  We  fail  to  obey  it  to-day,
and  we  shall  fail  to-morrow  unless  we
make  a  short  turn  and  determine  in
our  own  "minds  that  we  will  obey  it
How  many  of  us  have  disregarded
that  revelation,  in  every  particular  ?
It  is  to  be  found  on  page  2i0  of  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and  it
shadows  to  me  that  a  time  will  come
in  the  midst  of  this  people  when  a
desolating  scourge  will  pass  through  .
our  ranks,  and  the  destroying  angel
will  be  in  our  midst  as  he  was  in
Egypt  when  he  slew  all  the  firstborn
of  the  Egyptians.  God  says  "  the
destroying  angel  shall  pass  by"  and
shall  not  harm  you  if  you  will  ob-
serve to  do  th^se  tilings.  Now  if  we
believe  this  revelation,  and  I  take  it
for  granted  that  we  do,  though  I  may
choose  to  doubt  in  my  own  case  and
some  others,  yet  I  assume  that  as  a
f>gople  we  believe  it;  but  what  as-
surance hare  we  that  that  ang-1  will
pass  us  by  unless  we  do  observe  it  ?
No  more  than  the  children  of  Israel
would  have  had  if  they  had  failtad  to
maik  their  doors  and  lintels  with  the
blood  of  a  lamb,  as  Moses  had  com-
manded them.  What  effect  would  a
failure  to  comply  with  this  command-
ment have  had  on  them  ?  Would
the  Destroyer  have  passed  by  the
firstborn  of  Israel  ?  I  trow  not ;  I
'  think  the  firstborn  of  Israel  would
have  been  plain  as  well  as  the  first-
born of  Egypt.  That  was  a  revela-
tion given  by  the  Lord  to  Moses  far
the  salvation  of  Israel  j  the  Word  of
Wisdom  is  a  revelation  given  by  the
L;>rd  to  Joseph  Smith  for  the  salva-
tion of  this  people,  and  if  we  disobey
I  we  have  no  more  assurance  than
Israel  had  that  the  destroying  angel

Vol.  XV.


will  pass  through  our  ranks  and  leave

os  unscathed.  There  is  not  a  father
or  mother  before  me  to-day  who
would  like  to  see  a  child  home  away
to  the  graveyard  because  of  their
disobedience.  Wull,  light  is  given,
it  has  come  to  us,  and  it  is  for  us  to
obey  it,  and  to  put  into  practice  the
coram a ndm en ts  which  God, has  given
us.  It  is  true  that  the  Word  of  Wis-
dom does  not  any  any  tiling  about
drinking  tea  and  coffee,  but  our
leaders — men  inspired  of  the  Al-
mighty, in  whom  we  have  full  confi-
dence, have  told  us  that  it  includes
these  things,  and  that  should  be  suf-
ficient for  us.  The  Word  of  Wisdom
says  that  in  those  times,  through  the
wickedness  which  is  in  the  hearts  of
men,  they  would  seek  to  destroy  this
people,  by  introducing  into  their
midst  something  deleterious  to  health.
If  these  are  not  the  ex  net  words,
they  are  tantamount*  Now  is  it  ne-
cessary for  us  to  observe  the  Word  of
Wisdom  with  regard  to  tea  and  cof-
fee? Just  as  much  as  with  regard
to  tobacco  and  liquor,  because  it  has
been  so  define  1  to  us,  and  I  so  under
stand  it

When  I  think  of  these  tilings,  I
think  of  what  I  have  seen  among  the
men  who  have  heen  called  particu-
larly to  labor  on  our  railroads  and  in
our  co-operative  institutions*  What
is  the  situation  of  some  of  the  young
men  who  labor  in  these  institutions
and  upon  our  railroads  ?  If  they  do
not  follow  the  examples  set  by  those
who  travel  and  labor  on  other  roads,
then  I  do  not  understand  it.  I  find
that  our  young  men  are  copying  after
.the  young  men  who  travel  on  other
roads — they  smoke  and  they  drink,
with  as  much  assurance  as  though
they  had  followed  it  all  their  lives;
and  I  doubt  not,  if  thev  continue  in
the  pursuit  of  such  practices,  they
will  become  as  proficient  in  other  sins
as  some  I  have  seen  elsewhere.  If


young  men  wish  to  continue  habits  of
this  kind  I  have  no  objections,  so  far
as  I  am  concerned,  but  I  do  not  wish
them  to  invade  my  household,  I  do
not  wish  my  children  to  keep  the
company  of  men  of  this  class.  I  do
not  wish  my  daughters  to  go  into  the
society  of  men,  even  though  they
profess  to  belong  to  this  Church,  who
will  smoke,  drink  and  swear,  and  who
aie  ready  to  commit  all  the  other  sins
Contained  in  the  catalogue  if  they  had
the  opportunity,  and  were  from  under
the  eye  of  those  who  would  condemn
them.  I  know  these  things  exist
upon  our  railroads,  and  also  in  our
co-operative  institutions  more  or  less,
throughout  this  country,  Now  what
course  shall  we  pursue  with  regard
to  these  things  ?  Shall  we  foster
them  ?  If  you  see  a  young  man  in
a  co-operative  store  he  dresses  better
and  has  a  little  more  means  and  in-
fluence than  other  young  men  of  his
own  age  in  Hie  community*  He  ex-
ercises that  influence  for  good  or  for
evil  over  the  miuds  of  younger  mem-
bers of  the  community.  My  sons  see
such  young  men  smoking  and  drink-
ing, and  they  say  "  Why  should  not
we  ?  **  And  they  will  be  likely  to,
until  they  arrive  at  years  of  discre-
tion, and  get  sense  to  know  better.
Some  may  say,  "  Oh,  they  will  turn
round  by  and  by,  and  do  better/'  We
have  no  business  to  hope  that,  when
once  these  evil  habits  are  acquired  by
our  children,  they  will  turn  round
and  do  better  when  they  arrive  at
years  of  maturity;  at  least  I  have  no
right  to  hope  it  on  behalf  of  my  own
children  I  hope  to  prevent  it  in
their  youth,  I  could  not  hope  to  stop
it  after  they  had  commenced  and
become  confirmed  in  it,  although  in
some  cases  I  might  succeed.  But  I
wish  to  prevent  it,  for  I  believe  that
prevention  is  better  than  cure.

It  is  our  business,  brethren  and
sisters,  to  put  our  foot  upon  these


TESTIMONY,  ETC


195


practices,  and  to  discountenance  and
condemn  them  whenever  we  see  our
youth  practicing  them. This  people
are  not,  gathered  here  b>  practice  the
sins  which  are  prevalent  in  Babylon,
at  lea*t  I  do  not  go  understand  it.
The  Scriptures  teach  me,  and  the
Spirit  ot  the  Lord  bears  testimony,
to  cry  unto  the  people  to  come  out
of  Babylon,  and  not  to  drag  Babylon
or  its  sins  into  our  midst. They  are
not  necessary  for  onr  happiness*  It
is  astonishing  to  me  when  I  look  over
the  people  in  this  and  other  coun-
tries, to  see  the  immense  number  who
use  tobacco  and  liquor. I  sometimes
wonder  how  the  world  lived  so  long
without  tobacco  before  the  discovery
of  America! Now  nearly  everybody
smokes  or  chews. They  did  without
it  before  America  was  discovered,
and  they  could  now  if  they  were  so
disposed. This  people  could  if  they
would,  and  yet  they  are  importing
perhaps  more  tobacco,  tea,  coffee  and
liquor  than  ever  before  during  their
existence  as  a  Church. I  believe
this  is  the  case,  from  all  I  can  hear
and  learn  on  the  subject. This  is
wrong. We  can  go  into  our  settle-
ments in  the  north,  south,  east  and
west,  and  it  is  just  as  necessary  to
have  tea,  coffee  and  tobacco  now,  as
ever. I  can  also  find  that  where
there  is  an  almost  boundless  range,
and  the  people  can  have  an  unlimited
number  of  stock,  all  their  cheese  is
imported  —  they  eat  States  cheese
there  as  they  do  in  the  city.  Home
manufacture  is neglected,  and  our
cows  are  left  to  die  on  the  range,
and  we  are  expending  the  very  bone
and  sinew  of  this  community  to  get
means  to  import  articles  which  wo
can  raise  in  abundance  here.  This
will  ruin  us  as  a  community  if  it  is
practiced  long  enough. These  things
may  not  be  quite  so  prevalent  as  my
words  may  imply. I  do  not  mean  to
say  that  all  the  people  disregard  the


Word  of  Wisdom ;  but  I  fear  that
the  great  majority  do.  If  the  bre-
thren who  have  been  called  to  occupy
responsible  positions  in  the  midst  of
the  people  fail  to  observe  the  Word
of  Wisdom,  it  will  grieve  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord,  and  if  they  do  not  turn
and  repent  they  will  leave  this
Church.  That  is  my  faith — if  they
continue  to  use  these  things,  and  to
impress  the  minds  of  the  people  with
the  idea  that  it  is  utterly  unnecessary
to  observe  the  Word  of  Wisdom,  they
will  lose  the  spirit  of  this  work  and
will  eventually  turn  from  it.  The
presiding  Elders  of  this  Church  arc
called  to  observe  the  Word  of  Wis-
dom, and  in  all  things  to  set  a  good
example  before  the  people.  That  is
their  business,  and  that  is  their
mission,  and  as  long  as  they  live
they  will  never  have  a  greater.

Brethren,  let  us  seek  to  understand
and  practise  these  things,  and  also
endeavor  to  instruct  the  minds  of
our  wives  and  children  with  regard
to  the  principles  contained  in  these
books*  Endeavor,  brethren,  to  build
up  Zion,  and  not  Babylon,  I  think
very  often,  when  I  am  speaking  to
the  people,  of  a  remark  to  President
Young.  He  has  been  in  the  Church
a  great  many  years.  On  one  occa-
sion only  a  very  few  years  after  the
Church  was  organized,  the  Prophet
Joseph  counseled  him  and  others
never  to  do  another  day's  work  to
build  up  Babylon,  atid  he  has  obeyed
that  counsel.  I  know  he  has  for
twenty -five  years  past,  and  I  am
satisfied  he  has  from  the  time  the
counsel  was  given.

Do  we  need  to  go  away  from  home
to  build  up  Babylon  ?  Do  we  need
to  leave  this  city  to  build  up  Baby-
lon? No,  continue  to  indulge  our
fancies  for  fashion  and  for  the  prao*
tice  of  those  habfU  and  customs
which  a  corrupt  civilization  has  in-
troduced into  our  midst,  and  we  are


19G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


building  up  Babylon  in  the  most
approved  style*  That  is  my  belief-
Our  uutside  friends  have  brought  a
great  many  good  things  here ;  tliey
have  in] proved  our  city,  they  are
building  fine  buildings,  and  are  ex-
pending their  capital  liberally.  I  do
nut  object  to  this,  but  I  do  net  want
it  to  lead  us  from  the  path  of  truth
and  to  bring  us  into  bondage,  to  sin
and  iniquity.  There  is  no  necessity
for  this  if  we  wiselv  use  that  which

m

God  1ms  jjiven  us.  You  remember
the  time,  brethren,  after  we  had  been
in  this  valley  a  year  or  so,  we  were,
in  a  manner,  naked  and  barefooted,
and  were  a  thousand  miles  from  any
supply  of  clothing,  and  it  was  impos-
sible for  us  to  manufacture  it,  for
there  were  no  sheep  in  the  country,
nuthing  to  manufacture  cloth  with,
a j id  no  means  to  obtain  it.  You  re-
member the  piophecy  delivered  here
upon  this  block  by  the  late  Heber  C.
Kimball,  that  within  a  certain  time —
a  very  brief  period — clothing  would
be  as  cheap  in  Salt  Lake  City  as  in
New  York.  'What  prospect  had  we
at  that  time  that  his  prophecy  would
be  iullilied,  fur  a  journey  to  the
States  and  back  again  then  required
months  to  perform,  and  there  was
seemingly  no  chance  of  a  supply  of
clothing  from  outside  importation?
Yet  within  the  time  specified,  the
prophecy  was  literally  fulfilled,  and
clothing  was  far  cheaper  in  the  streets
of  this  city  than  in  the  streets  of
New  York.  This  is  only  one  among
the  many  prophecies  which  have
been  delivered  and  fulfilled.  Some
of  you  remember,  and  others  of  you
have  heard  it  spoken  of,  when  Piesi*
dent  Young,  in  July  164-7,  while
walking  on  tins  block,  about  where
rife  Temple  now  stands,  said  to  the
brethren  who  were  around  him,  "if
our  enemies  ^ill  let  us  alone  for  ten
years  we  will  ask  no  odds  of  them/*
ieu  \  ears  that  day,  brethren,  we  got


news  that  an  army  had  left  the  con-
fines of  the  States  at  that  time,  for
Utah!]  What  for?  Their  boast
was,  to  destroy  the  "  Mormons."
Did  we  ask  any  odds  of  them  ?  No,
Did  we  ask  anything  of  them  ?  No-
We  attempted  to  give  them  supplies,
but  they  would  not  receive  them.
Brethren,  this  is  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,  and  we  are  led  by
holy  men,  men  inspired  by  the  Al-
mighty. They  give  us  a  little  now
and  a  little  then;  we  receive  line
upon  line  and  precept  upon  precept,
and  if  we  give  heed  thereto,  God  will
strengthen  us*,  and  the  kingdom  will
grow  and  increase  beneath  our  watch-
care,

Is  it  necessary  for  us  to  remember
the  prophecies  and  the  revelations
which  have  been  given  for  our  salva-
tion ?  If  we  have  the  truth — the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God — and  we
testify  that  we  have,  it  is  just  as  ne-
cessary for  us  to  remember  t i  esc
tilings  as  it  is  for  us  to  be  saved  in
the  kingdom  of  God.  That  is  onr
position  to-day  ;  and  it  is  impossible
for  any  human  being  who  has  made
covenant  with  the  Almighty  to  be
saved  in  his  kingdom  if  he  disregards
the  revelations  and  counsels  that  are
given  by  the  servants  of  God.  I  do
not  expect  strangers  to  understand
and  believe  this  as  we  do.  Strangers
have  not  come  here  for  the  purpose
of  identifying  themselves  with  the
Church  oC  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter*
day  Saints,  but  the  people  to  whom  I
am  talking  came  here  for  that  express
purpose.  They  came  here  for  their
souls'  salvation,  they  want  to  be  saved
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  They  had
the  testimony  in  the  old  countries,  in
the  States,  or  wherever  they  received
the  Gospel,  that  God  had  revealed
himself  to  the  children  of  men  and
that  his  kingdom  was  established  on
the  earth,  and  they  received  light  and
intelligence  which  they  never  before


ZIOX— THE  DUTY  OF  ITS  CITIZENS — TESTIMONY*  197


possessed.  They  came  here  to  build
tip  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  that
kingdom  is  rolling  forth  and  increas-
ing and  will  continue  to  do.  But
are  we  giving  *vay  to  fully  and  fashion
to  such  an  extent  as  to  blind  our
minds  to  the  great  purpose  we  had  in
coming  here  ?  I  hope  not  I  hope
that  we  are  living  our  religion.

Brethren,  I  testify  to  you  that  this
is  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  that  yon


are  in  a  faith  that  will  lead  you  back
into  the  presence  of  your  Father  and
God,  I  also  testify  that  if  the  people
of  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  obey
the  Gospel  they  will  receive  salvation
at  the  hands  of  the  Almighty^  and  if
they  reject  it  they  will  receive  con-
demnation at  his  hands  at  the  Inst
day.

itay  God  bless  you,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ERAS  T  US  SNOW,
Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  October  7,  1372-

(Reported  hj  David  TF.  Evans.)


ZION — THE  hi  IT  OF  ITS  UITfZKXS— TESTIMONY,


God  has  said  that  Zion  shall  be  as
a  city  set  upon  a  hill,  whose  light  can
not  be  hid.  We  are  called  to  be  the
children  of  Zion,  The  Lord  has
declared  that  Zion  consists  of  the
pure  in  heart.  He  lias  said,  further,
that  the  nations  of  the  earth  have
corrupted  their  way  befot*  him,  and,
referring  to  Babylon,  his  command
to  his  faints  is — "  Come  ant  of  her,
O  my  people,  that  ye  be  nut  partakers
of  her  sins,  that  ye  receive  not  of
her  plagued."  Tiie  Bible  is  full  of
prophecies  delivered  by  the  Prophets
and  Patiiarchs,  and  by  the  Savior
and  his  Apostles,  concerning  the  day
and  age  in  which  we  live.  The  end
draweth  nigh  and  the  time  approach  -
eth  speedily  when  the  Lord  will  make
a  full  end  of  all  nations  who  fight
-against  Zion,  who  reject  his  law  and


harden  their  hearts  against  him,  his
precepts  and  his  government.  It  is
our  high  privilege  to  bear  this  testi-
mony, and  the  testimony  we  have  to
bear  unto  the  people  of  the  19th
century  is  but  a  renewal  of  that  which
was  borne  by  Prophets  and  Saints  in
days  days  past  and  gone.  They  spoke
of  the  time  in  which  we  live  by  the
spirit  of  prophecy  and  revelation,
which  was  like  one  looking  through
a  glass  darkly,  yet  it  is  our  privilege
to  behold  with  our  eyes  and  to  hear
with  our  ears  those  things  which  Pro-
phets and  Patriarchs  long  desired  to
see,  hut  died  without  the  sight.  The
duty  especially  enjoined  upou  us  to-
day is  to  awake  to  righteousness,  jmd
consider  the  calling  wherewith  God
has  called  os.  We  should  consider
that  God  has  separated  us  by  the


198


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


preaching  of  his  word  and  by  the
testimony  of  Jesus;  and  has  called
us  to  be  a  distinct  people,  distinct  in
this  particular,  that  we  separate  oar-
selves  from  sin  and  wickedness,  and,
as  far  as  possible,  from  the  company
of  sinners  and  from  all  those  customs
and  habits  that  tend  to  darken,  de-
grade and  abase  the  human  mindt
and  cultivate  those  which  will  sanctity
the  affections,  purify  the  heart  anil  j
ennoble  the  whole  being  of  man,  and
fit  us,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  regene-
rate ourselves  and  our  race.  In  short,
God  desires,  and  has  put  forth  his
hand,  to  exalt  his  people  from  their
low  degree,  and  to  lift  them  up  and
make  of  them  a  peculiar  people,  a
holy  nation,  a  kingdom  of  Priests
unto  the  Most  High  God  and  the
Lamb.

in  all  this,  is  there  anything  that
can  hurt,  destroy  or  injure,  in  any
wise,  any  portion  of  our  fellow-men
who  do  not  feel  disposed  to  join  us
in  this  glorious  work,  or  engage  with
us  in  this  noble  enterprise  ?  Not  at
all.  The  salvation  of  God  is  re-
vealed for  the  good  of  all  men  who
will  receive  it  The  Gospel  is  of-
fered without  money  and  without
price  to  all  flesh,  and  the  testimony
that  we  bear  to  the  world  is  that  Jesus
died  for  all,  and  that  through  the
shedding  of  his  blood,  salvation  may
come  unto  all  men  who  will  believe
and  yield  obedience  unto  the  require-
ments of  his  Gospel  The  govern-
ment which  is  inaugurated  and  estab-
lished  among  men  by  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel,  and  the  administration
of  its  holy  ordinances,  is  a  govern-
ment of  peace,  love  and  goodwill  to
men,  prompting  those  who  receive  it
to  do  good  unto  all,  but  especially
unto  the  household  of  faith.

The  duties  which  are  enjoined
upon  us  are,  first,  to  our  own  house-
hold— the  household  of  God,  those
who  have  been  baptized  into  Christ


by  being  born  again  of  the  water  and
of  the  Spirit,  and  become  the  chil-
dren of  God  by  adoption.  Next,  to
all  men  who  have  not  thus  been
translated  from  the  kingdom  of  dark-
ness into  the  kingdom  of  Gods  dear
Sun  ;  and  that  love  which  is  wrought
in  the  Saints  of  God  hy  the  fire  of
the  Huly  Ghost  through  faith  in  and
obedience  to  the  Gospel,  prompts  all
who  are  brought  under  its  influence
to  yield  obedience  to  its  requirements
and  to  labor  for  the  well-being  of
every  creature  that  beard  the  furm  of
God.

There  is  nothing  in  the  constitu*
tion  ot  the  Gospel,  or  the  organ iza*
tion  of  the  Church  of  Christ  and  the
kingdom  of  God  among  men,  and  the
precepts  that  are  taught  of  God  and
his  servants,  that  would  in  the  least
degree  inflict  injury  or  withhold  bles-
sings from  any  member  ot  the  family
of  man,  inasmuch  as  they  place  them-
selves in  a  condition  to  receive  them,
and  are  willing  to  accept  them.  But
God  has  ordained  certaiu  everlasting
principles  of  truth  by  which  his  peo-
1  pie  may  be  exalted,  and  without  which
they  can  not  be  exalted  into  his  pre-
sence and  to  the  enjoyment  of  his
glory.  All  things  are  governed  by
law,  and  all  good  and  wholesome
laws,  which  are  ordained  and  enacted
by  men,  designed  for  the  peace,  pros-
perit  v  and  well  bei  ng  of  their  fellow-
|  creatures,  should  be  respected,  main-
tained and  honored  by  all  people,  and
this  is  one  of  the  duties  enjoined
upon  all  Saints  in  all  the  command*
ments  and  revelations  of  Gud  to  his
people.

It  is,  further,  the  duty  of  all  who
are  entrusted  with  the  administration
of  law,  in  any  department  whatever,
to  act  in  good  faith,  in  all  purity  and
integrity,  and  in  good  conscience  for
the  wellbeiug  and  happiness  ot  their
fellow-creatures  in  the  administration
of  justice,  truth  and  judgment;  and


ZIOX — THE  DUTY  OF  ITS  CITIZENS — TESTIMONY,


199


it  should  be  the  aim  of  all  law-makers
to  consult  the  best  interests  of  the
people  from  whom  they  derive  autho-
rity, or  in  whose  behalf  they  are
called  to  act.  It  is  the  duty  of  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  of  all  good  people
to  honor  all  laws  and  regulations  that
are  ordered  for  the  freedom  of  all
flesh.  And  if  there  are  people  who
do  not  feel  disposed  to,  or  who  can
not,  receive  the  testimony  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  they  are  left  with  as  much
freedom  to  enjoy  the  rights  and  privi-
leges which  are  accorded  to  them,  as
the  children  of  God  on  the  earth,  as
though  they  did  believe,  taking  and
suffering  the  consequences  of  their
own  unbelief,  which  consequence
will  be  a  failure  to  attain  to  the  bles-
sings which  are  revealed,  and  which
God  deigns  to  bestow  upon  the  obe-
dient and  faithful.

The  word  of  the  Lord  unto  all
flesh  is,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  ends
of  the  earth,  and  be  ye  saved.  Take
my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,
for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,
and  yu  shall  tied  re»t  to  your  souls,
for  oiy  yoke  is  easy  and  my  burden  is
light,"  If  any  doubt  the  yoke  of
Christ  being  easy  and  his  burden
being  light,  let  thetn  try  the  experi-
ment, and  demonstrate  for  themselves.
If  there  are  any  either,  within  or
without  the  Church  uf  Christ,  who
feel  his  yoke  to  be  heavy  and  galling,
and  his  burden  not  to  be  easy,  I  can
inform  them  that  they  have  not  taken
upon  themselves  the  yoke  of  Christ,
they  are  not  bearing  his  burden,  fur
they  are  not  meek  and  lowly  of  he  trt,
they  have  not  learned  their  lessons
correctly — how  to  govern  and  control
their  own  spirits  by  the  principles
and  spirit  of  the  everlasting  Gospel.
There  is  nothing  in  its  nature  that
is  oppressive,  galling  or  hard  to  bear,
In  saying  this  I  give  the  experience
of  my  life,  for  it  has  been  devoted
from  my  childhood  to  the  contempla-


tion uf  these  glorious  truths,  with  an
earnest  endeavor  to  apply  them  prac-
tically nnto  myself,  and  I  have  de-
monstrated them,  a iid  1  speak  that
which  I  know  and  have  experienced,
and  most  assuredly  believe  and  tes-
tify of  them.  And  many  there  are
who  believe  this  testimony  and  are
able  to  corroborate  it ;  and  those  who
are  not,  and  have  not  experienced  it
in  their  lives  have  the  privilege  of
doing  so.

It  is  our  duty  to  sanctify  the  Lord
in  this  land  that  he  has  given  us  for
an  inheritance,  by  observing,  not
only  the  law  of  tithing,  which  is  one
means  which  he  has  given  us  for  that
purpose,  but  by  observing  every  pre-
cept that  emanates  from  him,  and
living  by  every  word  that  proceeds
fro: ii  his  mouth,  not  forgetting  the
words  of  wisdom,  which  are  designed
to  improve  as  in  a  physical  point  of
view,  to  add  strength  to  our  bodies,
lengthen  our  lives,  to  increase  our
powers  of  endurance,  and  to  increase
the  strength,  efficiency  and  power  of
the  rising generation.  Every  institu-
tion which  God  has  establishe  1  in  our
midst — social,  political  and  religious
— is  designed  for  our  improvement,
individually  and  collectively,  as  a
people  und  as  families,  to  prolong  our
lives  and  to  increase  our  usefulness
and  our  ability  for  good  in  the  earth;
and  if  we  observe  the>e  principles
and  apply  th^rn  dihy  jntlv  in  <nir  lives,
praying  earnestly  with  our  hum  lies
and  in  secret  to  the  Lord  tor  wisdom
in  doing  so,  our  light  will  continue  to
shine,  our  strength  t  *  increase  mid
our  influence  both  at  ho  ne  an  1  abroad,
on  the  earth  and  in  thu  heaven**,  be*
tore  God,  angels  and  good  men,  and
the  strength,  union,  faith,  light  and
purity  of  the  lives  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  will  be  a  terror  to  evil-
doers*

What  can  men  do  against  the  Lord,
and  against  the  peoplt*  who  tear  him


200


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  arc  united  in  goad  works?  What
can  the  arm  of  flush  accomplish  bat
its  own  discomfiture  ?  The  weapons
of  thtfc  people  of  God  are  not  carnal,
but  they  are  mighty  through  faith.
We  war  not  against  flesh  and  blood,
but  against  .spiritual  wickedness  in
high  places,  and  against  corruption
wherever  it  is  found,  reproving  sin,
folly,  deception,  dishonesty  and  wick-
edness of  every  kind.  And  if  there
are  those  who  profess  to  be  Saints,
and  who  do  not  live  the  life  of  Saints,
whose  light  is  not  shining,  whose
lamps  pre  not  trimmed  and  burning,
whose  lives  and  characters,  precepts
and  examples  do  not  correspond  with
the  principles  of  the  Gospr-1,  this  only
testifies  to  the  weakness  of  men  and
is  nothing  against  the  truth,  the  tes-
timony of  Jesus,  or  against  the  testi-
mony of  those  who  do  live  their
religion  and  magnify  their  calling  as
Saints,  and  whose  precepts  and  ex*
arn pies  correspond.  If  some  do  not
believe,  will  that  make  the  truth  of
God  of  none-t fleet  or  less  valuable?
And  what  if  some  do  not  make  their
lives  correspond  with  their  doctrines
and  precepts,  it  will  but  show  more
vividly  and  clearly  the  character  of
those  who  are  clean  and  pure,  and
who  do  love  the  truth  and  delight
to  honor  it.

I  am  a  witness  of  the  truth  which
God  lias  revealed  untu  man  pertain-
ing to  the  fullness  of  the  Gospel:
that.  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  the
Savior  of  those  who  will  receive
him,  and  that  he  has  hi  id  the  foun-
dation for  a  more  glorious  aud
extended  salvation  than  the  majority
of  us  are  capable  of  conceiving  and
properly  comprehending;  and  his
work  is  onward  in  the  earth,  and  it
will  continue  onward  and  upward,
until  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall
be  warned,  and  all  people  who  will
hear  may  hear  and  recei  ve  the  Gospel,
Ve  numbered  with  his  children,  be


gathered  into  his  fold,  become  the
children  of  Zion,  and  prepared  for  his
coming,  for  at  the  appointed  time,
which  he  has  foretold,  and  which
time  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,
the  Son  will  surely  come  in  the
clouds  of  heaven  and  the  holy  Angels
with  him,  to  assume  the  reins  of
government  on  the  earth,  and  to  reign
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.
Then,  all  those  who  will  not  bow  to
his  sceptre,  yield  obedience  to  his
rule,  and  accept  of  his  government
and  of  his  dominion  will  be  cut  off
Then  comes  the  time  spoken  of  when
every  knee  that  remains  shall  bow,
and  every  tongue  confess,  to  the  glory
of  God  the  Father,  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ

It  is  to  lay  the  foundation  of  this
work,  and  to  prepare  a  people  for  this
era  that  the  Lord  called  his  servant
Joseph  Smith,  jyid  revealed  unto
him  the  fullness  of  the  Gospel  in  this,
the  1 9th  century.  Elder  Rich  tes-
tified that  he  knew,  by  the  revela-
tions of  God  to  himself,  that  Joseph
Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  God.  The
question  will  arise  in  the  minds  of
the  unbelieving,  How  can  this  be?
They  marvel,  like  Nicodemus  mar-
velled when  Jesus  told  him  he  must
bo  born  again.  He  wondered  within
himself  how  a  man  could  be  born
again — how,  when  he  was  old,  he
could  enter  a  second  time  into  his
mother's  womb  and  be  born.  The
marvel  rises  in  the  minds  of  many,
How  can  a  man  know  for  himself
that  Joseph  Smith  was  truly  called
to  be  u  Prophet,  seer  and  re  vela  tor  to
tins  generation?  That  God  did
reveal  to  him  the  fullness  of  the  Gos-
pel? That  the  Book  of  Mormon
contains  the  fullness  of  the  Gospel
— the  same  that  was  taught  and
revealed  by  the  Savior  and  his  dis-
ciples, as  recorded  in  the  New  Tes-
tament ?  How  can  a  man  know  that
Angels  administered  to  him  ?  That


210 X — THE  DUTY  OF  ITS  CITIZENS — TESTIMONY,


201


God  opened  the  visions  of  heavpn  to  I
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  V  I  an-
swer, They  may  know  it  precisely  as
the  Aposrte  Peter  knew  that  Jesus
was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living
God.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  Elder
Rich  knows  that  Joseph  Smith  was
a  Prophet;  it  is  in  this  manner  that
I  know  he  was  a  Prophet  and  a  ser-
vant of  God  raised  up  to  commence
this  work  in  the  earth,  and  to  lay  the
foundation  of  the  Church  and  king.  I
dorn  of  God  on  the  earth.  When
Jesus  asked  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the
Apostles,  "Whom  do  men  say  that
I,  the  Son  of  Man  am  ?"  They  an-
swered, "Some  think  thou  art  ^lias;
others  that  thou  art  John  the  Baptist
risen  from  the  dead;  others  that  thou
art  Jeremiah  or  one  of  the  Prophets,"
u  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"
Peter  answered — "Thou  art  the
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."
•* Blessed  art  thou  Simon  Barjonah,
flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  this
unto  thee,  but  my  Father  who  is  in
heaven  ;  and  verily  I  say  uuto  thee,
upon  this  ruck  I  will  build  ray  Church,
and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail
against  it."  Not  upon  Peter,  not  his
person,  for  he  was  flesh,  and  must
pass  away  like  the  flower  of  the  field*
It  was  not  on  Peter,  or  his  successors
in  uflice,  as  is  taught  by  the  Romish
church  Then  who  and  what  was
this  rock  Christ  referred  to  ? It  was


the  rock  of  revelation,  revelation
from  the  living  God.  "On  this
rock,"  said  the  Savior,  "  I  will  build
my  church,  and  the  gates  of  hell
shall  not  prevail  against  iu"  And  I
repent  that  I  know  the  truth  of  the
Gospel,  as  Peter  knew  that  Jesus  was
the  Christ,  by  revelation  uuto  me
from  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven,
and  I  bear  this  testimony  unto
you.

I  know  that  there  are  many/ very
many,  whose  testimony  has  been
proclaimed  in  the  ears  of  this  genera-
tion, and  is  recorded  in  heaven.  Their
wot ds  are  like  the  precious  things
that  John  saw  in  the  vials  that  were
before  the  throne  of  God,  and  their
testimony  will  remain,  and  blessed
are  all  those  who  receive  it.  Blessed
be  the  Lord  God  who  revealed  these
things  unto  Peter  and  uuto  his  servant
Joseph,  aud  who  has  revealed  it  unto
many  more  who  have  sought  him
with  an  earnest  desire  to  know  his
1  ways !  Blessed  are  those  who  fear
him  and  keep  his  commandments!

May  God  help  us  to  live  as  Saints,
and  let  our  light  shine !  May  God
seal  the  testimony  of  the  Twelve
upon  the  hearts  of  those  who  de-
sire it,  that  they  may  come  unto
and  walk  in  the  light,  be  saved
through  the  truth,  and  inherit  exal-
tation with  the  sanctified,  is  my
prayer,  for  Christ's  sake*  Amen.


202


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  at  the  42nd  Semi- Ann  cal  Conference,  Salt  Lake  CiTTt

October  8,  1872.


(Reported  btj  David  IV.  Evans.)


GATHERING— ITS  SPIRIT— ITS  OPJKiT— DUTIES  or  THE  GATHERED

'  SAINTS.


Since  the  commencement  of  our
Conference  we  have  heard  very  much
valuable  instruction,  and  testimonies
which  have  been  very  cheering  to
the  hearts  of  those  who  have  hoard
them;  and  no  doubt  every  person
who  has  attended  Conference  from
its  commencement  until  the  present
time,  and  who  will  continue  until  the
Conference  shall  terminate,  will  feel
amply  rewarded  for  the  time  spent,
and  will  go  away  feeling  tetter  pre-
pared to  perform  the  duties  which
may  devolve  upon  him  or  her.

There  is  bo  much  to  talk  about
connected  with  our  circumstances
and  condition,  that  it  requires  a  por-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to
enable  a  person,  in  :*peaking,  to  dwell
upon  those  points  which  are  be^t
adapted  to  our  present  requirements.
We  are  not  situated  as  any  other
people,  that  is,  in  many  respects,  and
instructions  adapted  to  our  circum-
stances would  differ  probably  from
those  which  would  be  required  by
others,  We  have  been,  from  the
commencement,  a  peculiar  people;
our  religion  is  in  many  respects  at
the  present  time  a  peculiar  one ;  yet,
if  there  be  any  distinctive  peculiarity
about  the  religion  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  it  is  that  they  believe  and
receive  the  Scriptures  as  they  aie,
and  do  not  attempt  to  put  double


meanings  to  their  teachings.  Our
religion  being  peculiar,  the  effect  of
it  is  somewhat  peculiar.  The  message
which  the  Elders  of  this  Church  de-
clare « hen  they  go  forth  to  preach
the  Gospel  has  a  different  effect,  upon
people  who  listen  to  it,  to  that  which
is  declared  by  any  other  denomina-
tion Not  because  faith  in  Jesus
Christ,  repentance  of  sin,  baptism  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  laying  on
nf  hands  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost  are  taught,  but  because,
following  these  principles,  there  is
declared  unto  the  people  the  pro-
priety and  the  necessity  of  gathering
out  from  the  various  nations  where
they  dwell,  from  the  midst  of  their
kindred  and  their  former  associates,
and  concentrating  at  the  place  which
God,  as  the  Elders  testify,  has  selected
as  the  place  for  his  people  to  reside
in*  This  it*  a  strange  doctrine,  and
one  that  is  peculiar  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and,  as  I  have  said,  the
effects  upon  the  people  are  peculiar.
No  sooner  do  they  hear  the  procla-
mation of  tins  doctrine,  and  in  some
instances  before,  than  there  springs
up  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  have
received  the  testimony  of  the  Elders
a  desire  to  gather  out,  and  be  associ-
ated with  the  people  with  whom  they
have  joined,  and  whose  faith  they
have  received. I  suppose  that  among


GATHERING — ITS  SPIRIT,  ETC.


203


the  thousands  who  lire  in  this  Terri-  I
tory,  who  have  been  gathered  from  I
the  various  States  of  this  country,
and  from  the  various  countries  of
Europe,  of  Asia  and  the  islands  of
the  sea,  there  is  scarcely  one  to  be
found  who  did  not,  as  soon  as  he  or
she  embraced  the  Gospel,  have  an
intense  desire  to  gather  with  the
people  of  God,  and  to  become  closely
associated  with  them,  to  believe  as
they  believed,  to  live  as  they  lived,
to  share  their  trials,  to  partake  of
their  prosperity  or  adversity,  as  the
case  might  be ;  to  receive  instructions
from  the  man  whom  they  believed
God  had  chosen  to  preside  over  his
Church  upon  the  earth.  And  the
effect  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
every  land  is  the  same  in  this  respect.
You  may  travel  to  the  most  inhospi-
table climate — to  the  bleak  regions
of  the  noith,  or  to  the  sunny  climes
of  the  south  ;  to  the  lands  of  sterility
and  barrenness,  where  hardship  seems
to  be  the  lot  of  the  people,  where
privation  is  one  of  the  incidents  of
their  existence;  or  to  the  lands  of
fertility,  where  the  inhabitants  ac-
quire a  livelihood  with  ease ;  in  fact,
no  matter  where  you  go,  nor  what-
ever the  circumstances  rnny  be  which
surround  the  people*  when  they  hear
the  testimony  of  the  servants  of  God,
and  receive  and  act  upon  it,  the
same  spirit  takes  possession  of  the
people,  and  they  gladly  forsake  the
lands  of  their  nativity,  and  the  asso-
ciations of  life — of  early  life  and
mature  age,  the  homes  of  their  child-
hood and  the  graves  of  their  ancestors,
and  wend  their  way  with  joy  and
gladness  to  this  strange  land,  which
God,  as  they  verily  believe  and
know,  by  the  testimony  of  his  Holy
Spirit,  has  prepared  as  a  resting  place
for  them.  This  is  the  universal
effect  wherever  the  Gospel  has  been
preached,  and  in  this  respect  the
Latter-day  Saints  area  pecu  liar  people.


But  though  we  have  gathered  to-
gether, as  we  have,  in  this  country,
there  seems  to  be  in  the  minds  of  a
great  many  people  a  disposition  to
overlook  the  reasons  winch  God  our
heavenly  Father  has  had  in  view  in
gathering  us  out,  and  collecting  us
together,  and  making  us  one  people.
The  prophecies  which  were  recorded
in  ancient  days,  as  well  as  those
which  have  been  given  ns  in  the  day
in  which  we  live,  all  point  forward  to
this  great  dispensation,  as  a  time
when  God  should  do  a  great  and
;  mighty  work  in  the  midst  of  the
earth,  and  when  a  great  revolution
should  be  effected  and  a  great  re-
formation accomplished  among  the
children  of  men  ;  when  he  should
have  a  peculiar  people — a  people  who
should  be  gathered  out  from  all  na-
tions, a  people  who  should  be  free
from  the  vices  and  the  evils  of  all
nations,  a  people  upon  whom  he
should  place  his  name,  and  whom  he
should  recognize  as  his.  We  are
told  by  the  Revelator  John,  that  a
!  time  would  come  when  the  people  of
God  should  be  commanded  to  come
out  of  Babylon,  out  of  confusion,
when  they  should  be  gathered  out
from  every  nation,  from  the  remotest
parts  of  the  earth,  and  when  he  should
make  of  them  a  great  and  mighty
people*

We  see  a  partial  fulfil  linen  t  of  this
prediction  in  this  Territory —  this
1  people  are  gathered  from  various
lands,  and  are  dwelling  together  in
peace  and  in  union,  without  litiga-
tion, animosity  or  strife,  all  harmo-
\  nizing  together  —  their  interests
blended  in  one.  To  my  mind  this
is  one  of  the  must  remarkable  pheno-
mena to  be  witnessed  on  the  face  of
the  earth.  It  strikes  me  as  such,
and  although  familiar  with  it  from
my  childhood,  I  look  with  wonder
and  astonishment  at  the  great  work
that  has  been  done  in  gathering  this


204  JOURNAL  OF

people  together.  Visitors  come  herp,
and  they  are  full  of  admiration  for  ,
the  great  labors  that  have  been  ac-
complished by  the  Latter-day  Saints
in  transforming  this  wilderness  land
into  a  fruitful  field  in  creating  these
gardens,  in  erecting  these  houses,  in
adorning  this  land  with  beautiful
habitations  and  with  groves,  and
making  this  soil,  once  so  barren  and
sterile,  teem  with  fertility,  They
admire  the  physical  works  which  we
have  accomplished  ;  but  to  my  mind
there  is  ho  me  tiling  greater  than  this
to  be  admired.  There  are  works
which  far  surpass  the  work  accom-
plished on  the  face  of  nature.  When
I  contemplate  the  work  that  has
been  accomplished  in  gathering  the
people  from  the  various  nations;
when  I  see  men  of  various  languages
and,  originally,  of  various  creeds,
born  under  various  forms  of  govern-
ment, spread  throughout  this  land,
dwelling  together  in  peace,  union
vnd  love,  worshiping  together  in  the
one  Tabernacle,  or  in  the  same  places
of  worship  throughout  the  length
and  breadth  of  this  Territory,  I  see
something  which  to  my  mind  is  far,
far  more  surprising  than  anything
wrought  by  our  physical  labors,  i
see  a  power  wonderful  in  its  effect —
a  power  which  lias  moulded  the  hearts
and  blended  the  feelings  of  the  child-
ren of  men,  and  created  a  oneness  bp
their  midst,  the  effects  of  which  are
witnessed  all  around  us.  God  has
done  this,  and  to  his  name  the  glory
must  be  ascribed,  Man  cannot  do
these  things,  he  cannot  thus  affect
and  operate  upon  the  minds  of  his
fellow  men.  He  niaj-  produce  some
effect,  may  accomplish  some  results,
but  that  union,  love  and  harmony
which  we  witness  among  ourselves  is  !
beyond  the  power  of  man  to  bring
about — it  is  the  power  of  God  which  (
he  has  manifested  ;  and  <or  wise  and
great  ends  has  this  wonderful  God-  !


DISCOURSES,

like  power  been  restored,  which  binds
,  the  hearts  of  men  to  their  fellow  men,
and  causes  them  to  co-operate,  as
|  they  have  done  in  this  hmd,  in  ac-
complishing the  labois  which  have
devolved  upon  us.

But  yet,  though  I  can  admire  these
things,  brethren  and  sisters,  there
are  many  things  which  we  have  neg-
lected to  do,  which  devolve  upon  us.
God  has  given  unto  us  a  great  mis-
sion in  the  earth,  and  whether  we
realize  it  or  not  it  is  a  fact  He  has
entrusted  to  us,  as  a  people,  a  great
and  mighty  work  to  perform.  We
look  around  us  in  the  various  nations
as  well  as  in  onr  own  nation,  and  we
see  a  great  many  evils  existing,  we
see  these  evils  increasing  in  magnitude,
and  becoming  more  formidable  and
threaten  mg  every  year  that  parses
over  our  heads.  Probably  we  who
reside  in  these  mountains,  and  have
done  so  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,
can  realize  the  evidence  of  these  evils
better  than  they  who  live  in  the  midst
of  them  and  witness  their  gradual
growth  without  noticing  the  great
changes  which  have  been  effected.
But  we  see  extravagance,  corruption,
and  a  lack  of  virtue  and  public  mo-
rality; we  see  the  breaking  down  of
|  those  barriers  which  formerly  existed,
and  a  sapping  and  demoralize  tinn  of
public  sentiment  and  of  private  mo-
rality throughout  the  nation  of  which
we  form  |  part,  as  well  as  in  other
nations.

Now  there  is  laid  upon  us,  as  a
people,  the  labor  ot  establishing
righteousness  in  the  earth.  There  is
laid  upon  us  the  duty  of  building  up
in  purity  and  power  a  system  which
God  has  revealed  unto  us.  N*ot  a
system  of  theocracy  to  be  exclusive
in  its  effects,  not  to  build  up  a  class,
j  a  priesthood  that  should  domineer
and  wield  unjust  and  oppressive
power  over  the  hearts  and  minds  of
the  children  of  men. Our  mission


GATHERING — ITS  SPlllI ETC


205


is  to  lay  the  foundation  and  to  build
up  a  system  under  which  all  the  in-
habitants of  the  land  can  dwell  in
peace  and  safety.  But  I  notice  a
difficulty  in  oar  own  midst,  and  that
is  that  we  yield,  to  a  great  extent,  to
the  tendencies  of  the  age,  to  the  in-
fluences which  surround  us  on  every
hand.  We  must  refrain  from  this,
ire  must  set  our  faces  like  flint  against
every  species  of  corruption,  against
eveiy  kind  of  wrong,  in  whatever
form  it  may  approach  us.  We  must
seek  with  all  the  energy  that  we  have,
to  build  op  in  truth  and  righteous-
ness that  which  God  has  committed
unto  us,  ami  establish  impregnably
the  system  of  reformation  with  which
we  are  entrusted.  Theie  can  be  no
better  way  for  us  to  commence  than
by  listening  to  the  counsels  that  have
been  given  unto  us  in  the  past,  and
which  have  been  the  means  of  pro-
ducing the  pence,  happiness  and
prosperity  which  we  witucss  among
us.  :u  <1'

There  are  tendencies  to  be  wit-
nessed in  this  city,  and  among  oar
own  people  here,  that  we  have  to
guard  against.  We  well  know  that,
of  late,  there  has  been  an  increase  of
wealth,  and  of  the  means  of  acquir-
ing luxuries  and  comforts.  God  has
bestowed  these  upon  us,  and  the
question  now  is  with  us,  Will  we  use
these,  means  aright,  with  an  eye  sin-
gle to  his  glory  ?  Will  we,  with  our
increased  prosperity,  devote  ourselves
in  the  future,  as  we  have  in  the  past,
to  the  building  Dp  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  as  our  paramount  duty  ?
Not  for  our  own  aggrandisement,  but
for  the  benefit  of  our  fellow -men  in
every  land,  as  well  as  for  the  beuetit
of  those  who  reside  in  this  Territory.
It"  we  do  this,  God  will  bless  us.  But
yon  know  what  the  fate  of  nil  people
has  been  who  have  been  similarly
situated  to  us  in  the  beginning.  In
their  early  days  t!iey  were  pure,  they


were  not  extravagant,  they  were  sim-
ple in  their  tastes,  habits  and  dress.
They  did  not  allow  their  minds  to  go
out  after  earthly  things,  or  to  be
placed  upon  them.  Hut  means  and
wealth  will  always  increase  among
frugal,  economical,  virtuous  and  in-
dustrious people,  for  it  is  one  of  the
natural  consequences  which  follow
industry  and  well-directed  labor,  and
we  are  no  exceptions  to  this  rule.  We
live  in  a  land  that  has  been  bar-
ren and  sterile  above  all  lands  on  this
continent,  and  by  well-directed  en-
ergy and  industry,  by  perseverance
temperance  and  frugality,  we  have
been  blessed,  and  now  the  fruits  of
our  long-continued  abstemiousness
and  industry  are  beginning  to  flow  in
upon  us,  and  we  are  becoming  wealthy.
Our  lands  are  becoming  valuable,
our  surroundings  are  becoming,  if
not  luxurious,  at  least  comfortable,
wealth  is  pouring  into  our  laps,  and
the  prospect  is  that  ere  long  we  will
be  as  wealthy  a  community,  probably,
as  cm  be  found  between  the  two
oceans.  This  seems  to  be  the  natural
tendency  of  events  at  the  present

time.  '  ?  wl  -

Now  the  question  arises — and  I
deem  it  an  important  one  fur  this
Conference — it  has  rested  on  my
mind,  as  1  doubt  not  it  has  on  the
minds  of  the  brethren — will  we  aa  a
people  devote  the  means  that  God  is
giving  unto  us,  for  the  preservation
and  continuation  of  that  system  that
he  has  revealed  unto  us  ?  Or  will  we
scatter  it  abroad,  destroy  ourselves,
and  spoil  the  fa  (are  which  God  has
in  store  for  us  ?  We  must  be  a  dif-
ferent people  from  every  other  that
has  preceded  us,  if  we.  fulfill  the  pre-
dictions of  the  holy  Priesthood,  for
God  has  said,  through  the  mouth  of
his  prophet  Daniel,  thousands  of  years
ago,  that  this  kingdom  should  not  be
given  into  the  hands  of  another  peo-
ple, but  it  should  stand  for  ever.  It


200


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


should  not  share  the  fate  of  previous
attempts  of  the  same  character,  and
be  overthrown  in  consequence  of  the
weakness  of  the  people,  and  the
abandonment  by  them  of  the  princi-
ples of  truth  and  righteousness.
There  is  nothing  plainer  to  my  mind
than  this,  that  if  the  Latter-day
Saints  become  luxurious  and  extra-
vagant ;  if  they  love  the  world  and
forsake  their  former  purity  ;  if  they
forsake  their  frugality  and  temper-
ance, and  the  principles  which  GoCi
has  revealed  aula  them,  and  by  the
practice  of  which  they  are  to-day  the
people  that  they  are;  we  shall  be
overthrown  as  others  have  been  over-
thrown. But  I  do  not  look  for  any
such  result,  for  I  believe  firmly  in  the
prediction  of  Daniel,  that  this  work,
when  established,  shall  not  be  given
into  the  hands  of  another  people,  but
it  shall  stand  for  ever,  and  there  will
be  means  and  agencies  used  and
brought  to  bear  on  the  minds  of  the
people,  to  prevent  such  a  catastrophe
as  that  to  which  I  have  alluded — to
prevent  the  downfall  of  the  system
and  the  overthrow  of  those  connected
with  it,  and  to  prevent  the  victory
of  that  w  hi  oh  is  evil  over  that  which
is  good,  holy  and  pure.

These  means  have  been  indicated
in  revelations  which  have  been  given
unto  us,  We  are  not  living  as  we
should  live.  As  a  people  we  follow
the  systems  of  our  fathers  in  regard
to  the  management  of  wealth.  We
follow  in  the  footsteps  of  those  who
have  preceded  us.  We  are  innova-
tors so  far  as  religious  thought  and
doctrines  are  concerned,  and  we  have
been  bold  innovators.  We  have  not
hesitated  to  adopt  great  reforms,  and
to  proclaim  them,  and  we  have  sought,
with  all  the  energies  God  has  bestowed
upon  us,  to  make  them  facts  in  the
earth.  We  have  proclaimed  this
doctrine  of  gathering,  and  the  people
have  been  gathered  together.  This


is  a  great  innovation,  it  is  a  bold  step,
and  it  has  resulted  in  success  thus
far.  It  is  not  now  a  novelty,  or  a
new  and  untried  experiment,  for  the
gathering  of  the  people  together  has
been  going  on  for  forty  years  a?id  up-
wards. But  it  was  a  great  innova-
tion when  introduced.  It  is  so  with
other  doctrines  which  the  Elders  of
this  Church  have  taught.  God  in-
spired their  hearts,  and  they,  regard-
less of  all  consequences,  fearlessly
proclaimed  the  truth  which  he  im-
parted unto  them.  We  have  made  a
great  revolution  in  our  domestic  re-
lations, and  in  our  social  system.  We
have  taken  a  bold  stand,  and  have
been  fearless  of  the  consequences,
because  God,  as  we  testify,  has  re-
vealed unto  us  a  principle  that  should
be  practiced,  and  which  we  shonld
c-irry  out,  and  be  the  pioneers  in  in-
itugnrating  for  the  redemption  of
men  and  women,  and  that  should
check,  and,  in  fact,  effectually  cure,
the  evils  under  which  Christendom
has  groaned  for  centuries.  The  Elders
of  this  Church  did  this,  and  have
risked  all  the  consequences,  from  the
time  the  system  was  inaugurated
until  the  present  time.  The  results
of  this  we  can  all  see,  in  the  purity
and  chastity  of  our  community  ;  for
strange  as  it  may  seem,  in  no  other
land  are  the  chastity  and  virtue  of
women  so  highly  respected  as  in
Utah.  Throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  this  Territory  public  sen-
timent is  utterly  opposed  to  anything
that  would  violate  that  chastity  and
virtue.

In  these  directions,  then,  we  have
been  bold  and  fearless  innovators.
But  so  far  as  financial  matters  are
concerned,  so  far  as  the  accumulation
and  management  of  wealth  are  con*
cerued,  we  have  not  followed  in  the
path  which  God  has  marked  out.
Yet  the  time  must  come,  and  we  may
as  well  prepare  our  minds  for  it,  when


GATHER  I  NT, — ITS  SPIRIT,  ETC.


207


we  shall  have  to  take  a  great  step  in
this  direction,  and  when  we  shall  have
to  follow  the  path  indicated  by  God
in  order  to  escape  the  evils  that  are
inevitable,  find  th fit  will  otherwise
most  assuredly  cume  upon,  and  over-
whelm US*

I  have  told  vou  that  others  who
have  preceded  us  have  fallen  a  prey
to  evils.  Tlie  increase  of  wealth  in
every  nation  has  bteti  attended  with
fatal  consequences.  We  have  but  to
read  the  history  of  our  race  from  the
beginning  until  the  present  time  to
rest  assured  of  that.  Men  have  said,
probably,  to  all  of  you  who  have
been  out  and  mingled  with  the  world,
"  It  is  very  well  tor  you  Latter-day
Saints  to  talk  about  your  condition
now,  because  you  are  a  primitive
people,  you  are  a  young  community,
you  have  not  been  tempted  aud  tried.
Wait  till  you  increase  in  wealth,  and
until  you  become  familiar  with  the
sins  which  surround  the  wealthy.
Wait  until  you  are  brought  in  con-
tact with  luxury ;  wait  until  the
spirit  of  reform  which  animated  your
pioneers  dies  out,  and  a  generation
rises  up  who  will  think  more  of  the
world,  then  there  will  be  a  different
feeling  and  spirit,  and  you  will  not  be
persecuted,  hated  or  despised.  You
will  become  more  popular,  because
the  world  will  become  familiarized
with  yoar  ideas.  Then  *  Mormon-
ism'  and  the  Latter-dav  Saints  will
become  like  every  other  people  that
have  preceded  them — overcome  by
the  luxuries  of  the  world,  and  by  the
love  of  riches/*  Have  you  not  heard
remarks  of  this  kind  time  and  time
again  ?  Doubtless  they  have  been
made  to  you  or  iu  your  hearing.

Now,  how  shall  we  avert  these
evils  ?  It  is  very  well  to  say  that
God  has  established  this  kingdom ;
it  is  very  well  to  say  that  this  is  his
Church.  Did  he  never  have  a  Church
or  kingdom  on  the  earth  before?


Bid  he  never  have  a  people  on  the
earth  before?  Why,  most  certainly
he  did.  He  had  churches  before
this;  he  had  people  before  he  chose
the  Latter-day  Saints.  He  had  com-
munities that  he  owned  and  recog-
nized before  we  were  organized.  Yet
they  went  the  way  of  all  the  earth,
and  the  Church  of  God  disappeared
from  the  midst  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  Luxury,  corruption,  vice,
extravagance,  the  love  of  wealth  and
the  allurements  of  bin  prevailed  in
all  the  earth,  and  the  devil — his
satauic  majesty — held  high  carnival
throughout  the  earth  because  of  the
influence  and  power  of  the.se  things
over  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
men.  It  is  true  that  God  established
his  work  before ;  we  know  it  to  be
true^  and  because  he  has  established
it  in  our  day,  we  need  not  think  that
he  is  going  to  preserve  it  without
using  means  to  do  so.  He  has  re-
vealed, and  will  continue  to  reveal,
law,  and  that  law  must  be  obeyed  by
us,  or  we  can  not  be  preserved,  Tim
time  must  come  when  we  must  obey
that  which  has  been  revealed  to  us
as  the  Order  of  Enoch,  when  there
shall  be  no  rich  and  no  pour  among
the  Latter-day  Saints;  when  wealth
will  not  be  a  temptation  ;  when  every
man  will  love  his  neighbor  as  he
does  himself;  when  every  man  and
woman  will  labor  for  the  good  of  all
as  much  as  for  self.  That  day  must
come,  and  we  may  as  well  prepare
our  hearts  for  it,  brethren,  for  as
wealth  increases  I  see  more  and  more
a  necessity  for  the  institution  of  such
an  order.  As  wealth  increases,  lux-
ury and  extravagance  have  more
power  over  us.  The  necessity  for
such  an  order  is  very  great,  and  God,
undoubtedly,  iu  his  own  time  and
way,  will  inspire  his  servant  to  intro-
duce it  among  the  people.  I  do  not
wish  to  foreshadow  when  it  will  be
done,  or  what  the  circumstances  will


203


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


be  that  will  call  it  forth,  for  this  is
not  my  province ;  but  I  feel  led  to
talk  upon  it,  and  to  prepare  my  own
heart,  and  to  seek,  with  all  the  faith
and  influence  I  have,  to  prepare  the
hearts  of  my  brethren  and  listers  for
the  introduction  of  this  order.  It
will  doubtless  be  a  lime  of  trial,  and
will  be  attended  with  many  things
that  will  test  our  feelings;  but  when
we  view  the  great  results  that  will
follow  its  introduction  and  its  p.  1  ft  et
establishment  upon  the  earth,  we
should  be  filled  with  thanksgiving
and  praise  that  God  has  devised  a
scheme  of  this  kind.  You  can  see
already  the  effects  of  the  ptrtial  in-
troduction of  something  akin  to  it  in
co-operation.  We  have  had  that
established  in  our  midst,  ai  d  what
are  its  effects  ?  We  witness  a  gra-
dual diffusion  of  means  thro  ^bout
the  community,  greatly  benefiting
all  its  members.  One  of  the  effects
of  this  which  we  witness  is  that
wealth  does  not  increase  jso  rapidly
in  the  hands  of  the  few,  and  that  the
poor  are  not  kept  in  poverty  so
much* '  4

Before  co-operation  started,  you
doubtless  saw  and  deplored  the  in-
crease of  wealth  in  some  few  hands.
There  was  rapidly  growing  in  our
midst  a  cla?*s  of  monetary  men  com-
posing an  aristocracy  of  wealth.  Our
community  was  menaced  by  serious
d nngers  th rough  this,  because  if  a
community  is  separated  into  two
classes,  one  poor  and  the  other  r'ch,
their  interests  are  diverse.  Poverty
and  wealth  do  not  work  together
well — one  lords  it  over  the  other j
one  becomes  the  prey  of  the  other.
This  is  apt  to  be  the  case  in  all
societies,  in  ours  as  well  as  others;
probably  not  to  so  great  an  extent,
but  still  it  was  sufficiently  serious  to
menace  us  asa  people  with  danger.
God  inspired  his  servant  to  counsel
the  people  to  enter  into  co-operation,


and  it  has  now  been  practiced  for
some  years  in  our  midst  with  the
best  results.  Those  who  have  pot  in
a  little  means  have  had  that  more
than  doubled  since  Z.  C.  M,  I,  started
— three  rears  last  March.  And  so
it  is  with  co-operative  herds,  co-
operative factories,  and  co-operative
institutions  of  all  kinds  which  have
been  established  in  our  midst,  and  all
the  people  can  partake  of  the  benefits
of  this  system.  You  can  see  the
effect  of  co-operation  on  the  people.
But  this  is  only  a  limited  system,  it
docs  not  extend  as  far  as  needed,
although  it  required  faith  to  enter
into  this j  yet  it  will  require  more
to  enter  upon  the  other  ol  which  I
have  spoken.

While  upon  co-operation,  let  me
here  sny  that  we  enn  witness  the
good  effects  of  this  to  the  Church,
and  we  shall  feel  them  in  days  to
come.  President  Young,  the  other
day,  paid  into  the  co-operative  esta-
blishment— Xiorus  Co-operative  Mer-
cantile Institution — a  hundred  thou-
sand dollars  tithino  —  the  lithinjj  of
his  own  personal  means — and  it  is
now  where  it  will  yield  profits  for
the  benefit  of  the  whole  Church,
Now,  ir  this  amount  had  been  used
to  pay  the  hands  on  the  public  works
and  those  laboring  for  the  Church,
how  Ion?  do  you  think  it  would  have
lasted?  It  would  very  soon  have
been  used  up.  But  I  have  admired
the  wisdom,  and  have  felt  thankful
that  there  was  a  sum  placed  where  it
coi -Id  be  used  for  the  benefit  of  the
work,  and  at  the  same  time  yield  a
handsome  return  for  the  investment.
I  do  not  think  it  will  take  more  than
three  years,  if  the  Co-operative  Insti-
tuuun  prospers  as  well  in  the  future
as  in  the  past,  for  this  sum  to  double
itself  in  the  shape  of  dividends,  I
refer  to  this  in  passing,  because  it  is
a  testimony  to-day ,  after  three  years
and  a  half  have  elapsed,  to  the  wisdom


%


GATHERING — ITS  SPiEI  ,  ETC.


209


that  prompted  the  establish  men  t  of  J
this  institution;  hut  notwithstanding  1
this  you  are  aware  that  many  cried  j
out  against  it,  and  denounced  it  as
very  unwise,  and  likely  to  end  disas-
trously, and several  apostatized
through its inauguration  because
they  wanted all  the  profits  them-
selves, and  were  unwilling  the  people
should  have  any. But  we  have  the  |
facts before  us. The  people  who
entered  into  it  have  been  blessed  ex-
ceedingly, and  I  hey  will  continue  to
be  so  if  they  persevere.

But  I  have  saicl  (hut  this  is  only
a  stepping  stone  to  something  beyond
that  is  more  perfect,  awl  ih.U  will
result  in  the  diffusion  of  the  blessings
of  God  to  a  greater  extent  among
us.  In  other  lands  yon  see  the  people  j
divided  into  classes.  You  see  beg-
gars in  the  street,  and  men  and
women  who  are  short  of  foci,  dwell-
ing in  hovels  and  in  the  poo i est  ot  ;
tenements.  At  the  same  time,  others
revel  in  luxury,  they  Uave  everything
they  need,  and  more  than  they  need  i
to  Satisfy  a)!  tbeh  wants.  Every
philanthropist  who  ctmtem plates  this,
does  so  with  sadness,  an  1  measure
after  measure  has  been  devised  to
remedy  this  state  of  things.  Our
community  is  not  a  prey  to  these
evils.  Beggary  and  waiit  are  un-
knrtwu  :n  this  Territory  j  at  the  same
time  we  have  no  very  rich  men  among
us.  Like  other  new  communities  we
are  more  oo  an  equality  than  we
would  be  if  v:e  were  older,  and  if  we
were  to  become  vn  old  community  ■
under  the  system  which  prevailed
before  co-operation  was  established,
then  it  is  very  probable  that  some  of
the  class  distinctions  to  be  seen  in
other  communities  would  be  seen  in
ours.  It  is  to  avoid  this  that  God  i
has  *PVf*ated  that  whic^  I  have
alined  to,  and  \m  desijj  :  is  to  bring
to  p?isd  a  better  cond:ticn  of  affairs,
by  making  men  equal  in  earthly

No,  14,


things.  He  has  given  this  earth  t<  i
all  his  children  ;  and  he  hns  given  to
us  air,  light,  water  and  soil ;  he  has
given  to  us  the  animals  that  are  upon
the  earth,  and  all  the  elements  by
which  it  is  surrounded.  They  are
not  given  to  one  or  to  some,  to  the
exclusion  of  others;  not  to  one  class,
or  to  one  nation  to  the  exclusion  of
other  classes  or  other  nations.  But
he  has  given  theni  to  his  children  in
all  nations  alike,  Han,  however,
abuses  the  ageucy  tha*  God  has  giver*
him,  and  he  transgresses  his  laws  by
oppressing  his  fellow* men.  There  is
selfishness  in  the  rich,  and  there  is
c.ivetousness  iii  the  poor,  There  L*a
clashing  of  interests,  and  there  k
not  that  feeling  among  men  whicL
we  vre  told  the  Gospel  should  bring
— a  feeling  to  love  our  neighbor  as
we  love  ourselves.  Thfs  does  no*
exist  on  the  earth  now,  it  is  reserved
fur  God  to  restore  it.  We  pray  thai
God's  will  may  be  done  on  earth  as
it  is  in  heaven,  and  when  it  shall,
then  the  order  which  exists  in  heaven
will  be  practiced  and  enjoyed  by  men
on  the  earth.  I  lo  not  expect  wheii
we  get  to  heaven,  that  we  shall  see
some  riding  in  their  chariots,  enjoy-
ing every  luxury,  and  crowned  witu
crowns  of  v]qtv,  while  the  rest  are  in
poverty.

I  have  spoken  longer  than  I  in-
tended, bat  there  are  some  few
t hough ts  on  my  mind  to  which  1  will
allude  in  this  connection  before  I  siu
down,  and  that  is,  brethren  and  sis-
ters, that  we  should,  to  the  extent  of
our  ability,  f^ter  tlie<*e  institutions
th°t  hav^  been  esh.Mish  >d  :  mons  W\
We  should  do  all  that  we  can  to  aub-
*ain  ourselves — sustain  our  own  fac-
tories, do  all  in  our  power  to  raaiL-
tain  these  things  th;it  we  have
established,  an^l  seek  with  all  our
eaei^v  in  foster  them*  We  hare
factories  here  tha*  can  n;ik^  as  good
cloth  as  any  of  their  siz<\  probably,

Vol  XV.


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


in  the  nation.  They  ought  to  be
trust  ained  by  us.  Brother  Erastus
Snow  related  an  incident  a  day  or
two  ago  in  relation  to  their  opera-
tions at  St  George.  They  received
quite  a  quantity  of  cloth  from  the
factory  ot  President  Young.  He
told  the  store- keeper  at  St.  George
not  to  say  anything  about  where  it
was  manufactured.  At  the  same
time  they  received  a  consignment  of
eastern  manufactured  goods.  They
were  put  side  by  side  on  the  shelves
of  the  store  and  sold  to  the  people.
There  were  very  few — some  two  or
three  persons — who  knew  that  any
of  these  goods  were  manufactured
in  the  Territory.  They  sold  very
readily  to  the  people,  who  said  they
were  the  best  goods  they  had  bought
They  wore  them,  and  they  wore  well.
Several  lots  were  received  from  the
President's  factory,  and  sold  in  the
same  way,  the  people  remaining  til
ignorance  a  good  while  as  to  the
place  of  their  manufacture,  and  im-
agining that  they  were  brought  from
the  east.  There  is  an  idea  prevailing
among  many  of  us  that  seme  thing
manutactured  abroad  is  better  than
that  manufactured  at  home.  Presi-
dent George  A.  Smith,  Elder  Wood-
ruff and  myself,  on  our  recent  visit
to  California,  examined  the  Oregon
and California  goods. We  went


through  a  woollen  factory  there,
where  very  excellent  goods  were
made.  We  saw  some  blankets  and
some  other  things  which  were  manu-
factured there,  which  can  not  be  sur
passed.  I  recollected  that  I  had
heard  parties  here,  who  had  purchased
Oregon  cloth,  praise  it  very  highly  ;
but  in  examining  that  class  of  goods
in  California,  I  found  that  the  cloth
manufactured  in  this  Territory  com-
pared very  favorably  with  it,  and  had
they  been  put  side  by  side,  bolt  by
bolt,  it  would  have  been  very  difficult
to  tell  which  was  Utah  and  which
was  Oregon  manufacture.  Indeed
if  there  was  any  preference  I  was
inclined  to  give  it  to  our  own
cloth*

We  have  factories  that  can  make
straw  hats,  stnw  bonnets  and  every
thing  of  this  kind.  We  have  good
tanners'  and  shoe  shops,  and  harness
shops.  We  have  a  great  many  manu-
factories in  our  Territory  that  should
be  fostered  by  us  as  a  people.  We
should  guard  against  luxury  and
extravagance,  and  use  that  which  is
manufactured  at  home-
That  God  may  bless  us,  that  he
may  pour  out  his  Holy  Spirit  upon
this  Conference |  upon  those  who
speak  and  those  who  hear,  is  rny
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


*


T


CHOICE  OF  RULERS,  ETC


211


DISCOURSE BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  42nd  Semi  Annoal  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,

October  7,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

CHOICE  OF  RULERS — HEADSHIP— ONE  MAX  POWER — THE YOKE  OF

JESUS,


I  am  happy  to  have  the  privilege
of  meeting  with  and  speaking  to  the
Saints  on  the  present  occasion.  If
I  were  inclined  to  take  a  text  1  would
repeat  a  passage  made  use  of  by  Jesus,
which  is  something  like  this — 44  Take
my  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  me,
for  I  am  meek  and  lowlv  of  heart

If

and  you  shall  find  rest  to  your  souls."
Perhaps  I  may  not  have  got  it  ver-
batim, however  the  principle  is  there,
and  you  can  correct  it  from  the  writ*
ten  word.  The  ideas  contained  in
the  saying  of  the  Redeemer  are
rather  peculiar.  The  yoke  that  is
there  referred  to  would  seem  to  im-
ply a  degree  of  servitude  of  some
kind  or  other,  and  men  generally
look  upon  such  expressions  in  that
point  of  view,  The  nations  of  the
earth,  generally,  are  under  some
kind  of  rple  and  tjovernment.  The
religious  portion  of  mankind  are  also
under  a  species  of  government  and
rule,  and  no  matter  where  you  go,
you  find  an  influence  of  this  kind
more  or  less  prevailing  among  men.
We  stand  here  in  rather  an  anoma-
lous position.  We  have  a  church
with  its  government  or  laws,  and  we
have  also  a  government  and  laws
according  to  the  organization  of  the
United  State? »  Hence  our  obliga-
tions are  twofold,  one  as  subjects  of


the  United  States,  the  other  as  sub-
jects  of  the  Church  of  God.  And
then,  were  we  to  go  a  little  farther,
we  might  also  add,  of  the  kingdom
of  God*  Now,  in  every  government
of  men  that  exists  anywhere  on  the
face  of  the  earth,  there  is  a  species
of  rale  associated  with  and  founded
on  authority  voluntarily  given  by  the
people  or  usurped  by  the  rulers,  ac-
cording to  circumstances;  but  all
mankind,  everywhere,  are  under
some  form  of  dominion,  government
or  rule.  The  same  thing  applies
also  to  churches  and  the  worship  of
God,  There  are  various  systems  in
j  existence  on  the  earth,  including
Judaism,  Mahomedanism,  Panthe-
ism, and  heathenism  of  many  kinds,
as  it  has  existed  for  generations  in
many  parts  of  the  earth  ;  and  there
is  Christianity  with  the  multifarious
ideas,  rule,  and  authority  of  the
Christian  churches  as  they  exist,
scattered  abroad  in  the  earth,  prin-
cipally in  Europe  and  America  as
well  as  in  some  parts  of  Africa  and
Asia,  But  whether  we  refer  to  the
Pagan,  Jewish,  Christian,  or  any
other  form  of  religion,  its  followers
are  expected  to  submit  to  some  kind
of  authority ;  to  subscribe  to  certain
,  articles  of  faith,  and  to  submit  to
certain  forms,  laws  and  ordinances,


\


212


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


according  to  their  several  theories.

The  same  thing  precisely,  exists
among  the  nations ;  they  hare  their
various  forms  of  rule,  government
and  dominion,  and  they  exact  certain
conditions  from  their  subjects.  No
matter  what  kind  of  government,  it
requires  a  species  of  obedience  from
all  persons  Uviu?  under  it ;  for  gov-
ernment, ot  course,  necessarily  im-
plies rule,  authority,  do  million,  gov-
ernors  and  governed,  or  law  and  the
execution  of  that  law.  All  these
principles  exist  in  one  form  or  ano-
ther over  all  the  face  of  the  wide
earth  whereon  we  live.  We  can  not
separate  ourselves  from  that,  go  where
we  will.  In  a  despotic  government
the  power  to  dictate  and  control  all
its  affairs  is  vested  in  the  emperor,
according  to  bis  own  will  and  plea-
sui'e,  sometimes,  perhaps,  modified
by  counsel,  which  he  can  receive  or
reject  pleasure.  In  other  kinds  of
government, such  as  are  called  limited
monarchies,  the  people  hold  a  certain
part  of  the  power  or  authority  in
their  own  hundn,  and  ^ive  a  certain
part  to  the  government.  The  gov-
eminent  of  England  belongs  to  this
class.  There  they  have  a  king  or
queen,  as  the  case  may  be,  at  the
bead  of  the  government,  and  two
houses  called  the  Lords  and  Com-
mons, the  latter  are  elected  by  and
repiesent  the  people.  It  is  what  is
calk-d  a  |>opular  government,  the
people  having  a  voice,  but  at  the
same  time  they  concede  a  certain
am  unt  of  < heir  power  to  their  legis-
lator, who  manage  tneir  affairs  ac-
eondiiig  to  heir  ideas  of  what  would
be  most  beneficial  for  the  nation.

The  government  of  the  United
States  is  what  is  caiied  a  republic.
In  a  form  of  government  of  this
kind  foundation of  all  law,

power  fttwl  anfbovitv  is  the  voice  or
will  of  the  people;  that  is  the  genius
of  the  government  It  is  based  upon


a  written  constitution  granting  unto
the  legislature  power  to  do  thus  and
so,  and  to  go  no  further ;  and  while
tbey  who  make  nnd  administer  the
laws  confine  themselves  within  the
limits  of  that  constitution,  their  acts
are  what  is  caller]  constitutional.
When  they  g**  beyond  thai,  their  acts
are  called  unconstitutional,  n*at  is,
they  deprive  the  people  of  certain
rights  guaranteed  to  them  by  the
written  compact  that  they  have  en*
tered  into,  I  speak  of  these  things
simply  to  elucidate  certai  >  ideas  that
I  wish  to  communicate.

But  to  proceed  further.  If  we —
the  people  in  this  Territory,  or  in
other  Territories  or  in  the  States,
confer  certain  powers  on  the  General
Government,  we  no  longer  retain
them,  they  are  ceded  away  by  us  to
others*  If  we  give  to  our  legislators
certain  authority,  they  ho  1<!  that  an*
thority,  anu  it  is  for  us  to  submit
to  the  laws  which  may  be  enacted  by
them.  This  is  what  is  called  repub-
licanism, and  it  is  also  m  agreement
with  the  theory  of  a  limited  monar-
chy.  Whenever  a  people  give  up
certain  rights  they  ought  to  honor
the  parties  into  whose  hands  they
place  them.  The  President  of  the
United  States  ought  to  be  sustained;
so  ought  the  ministers  of  the  gov-
ernment of  England,  by  the  people
over  whom  they  preside,  because
they  are  acting  for  and  on  their  be-
half and  according  to  their  dictates.
If  you  go  to  some  other  governments
they  ask  no  odds  of  the  people,  ^ay
they,  "  We  wi'l  be  sustained,  if  we
have  to  sustain  ourselves  by  the
sword,"

We  come  now  to  religious  matters,
and  here  in  our  own  co^n  ry  are
Methodists,  Presbyterians,  Baptists,
and  a  host  of  ot  tiers.  I  nee;  i  not  go
to  foreign  countries  uvxl  examine
their  religions.  I  wish  to  arrive* at
certain  conclusion^,  and  to  uo  so  I


have  no  need  to  go  beyond  the  con-
fines of  the  United  States.  Here  we
have  the  Methodists,  Presbyterians,
Baptists,  Episcopalians,  Roman  Ca-
tholics, Quakers,  tinkers  and  so
forth.  Very  well,  all  these  sects
have  their  own  peculiar  ideas  of
chnrch  government.  The  Methodist
has  his  Disciplinc—n  system  got  up
bv  the  ministers  of  that  church  that
all  its  members  have  to  be  governed
by.  They  must  come  within  the
purview  and  be  under  the  influence
thereof  If  you  ask  ft-ilethodist  t3
become  a  waiter- day  Saint,  he  might
say,  mid  truly,  Jt  I  have  not  the  pri-
vilege of  being  Methodist  and  Lat-
ter-day Saint  at  the  same  time."  A
man  can  not  -e  a  Baptist  ami  a  Me-
thodist at  the  same  time,  neither  can
he  be  a  Methodist  and  a  shaking
Quaker.  Why  ?  Because  he  is
"uound  by  the  articles  of  the  Disci-
pline of  his  church,  and  he  must
submit  to  that.  So  it  is  in  regard  to
the  Catholics.  Many  of  you  have
no  doubt  ic.id  recently  of  Pere  Hya-
cinthe,  who,  a  short  time  agro,  was
very  popular  among  the  Roman
Catholics*  Bat  lie  dissented  from
their  views;  and  among  other  things
he  took  to  himse  f  a  wife,  which  was
contrary  to  their  ideas  and  creed,  and
probably  ii is  own  views,  the  result
was  that  they  excommunicated  hira,
and  they  treated  him  as  if  he  had
been  dead,  and  had  a  funeral,  follow-
ing him  to  his  grave  while  he  was
yet  living.  This  is  according  to  their
ideas,  aud  he,  being  a  Catholic,  had
no  right  to  expect  anything  else.  A
Catholic  priest  mast  submit  to  the
laws  of  the  priesthood,  and  they
have  excommunicated  him  for  de-
parting therefrom,  and  he  had  no
cause  to  complain.  We  may  have
our  own  peculiar  ideas  about  the  pro-
priety of  this,  that  and  the  other
religious  faith,  ceremonies  and  forms
of  worship,  but  I  am  now  speaking


of  law,  and  of  governments,  and  of
the  arrangements  ih  it  peoples,  na-
tions, churches,  and  the  members  of
churches  bind  themselves  to  be  gov-
erned by.

The  same  thing  applies  to  any  of
the  various  sects  that  exist  in  Chris-
tendom. The  Baptist  commences  a
church,  and  he  believes  in  baptism
by  immersion,  but  he  could  not  be  a
Latter-day  Saint.  Why  ?  Because
he  can  be  baptized  by  anybody  not
having  authority  Iroui  God,  and  he
does  not  believe  that  baptism  is  for
the  rem  i  s*  i  o  n  o  f  si  1 :  **.  Accord  i  n  £  to
his  ideas  he  must  have  his  sins  for-
given first,  and  then  be  baptized
after  a  while.  He  could  not  be  a
Latter-day  Saint,  because  his  ideas
aud  ours  are  at  variance.  If  a  man  is  a
Baptist,  as  long  as  he  remains  so,  he
must  submit  to  their  law.  If  hu  is  a
Methodist,  and  remains  so,  he  must
submit  to  their  discipline,  be  it  right
or  wrong,  ttia  question  of  their  Uws
being  Scriptural  or  not  has  to  be  de-
cided in  and  of  itself.  It  is  the  same
way  with  a  nation.  If  I  were  in
Russia,  and  did  not  like  the  govern-
ment, I  might,  if  they  would  allow
me,  go  to  En  ii  land,  come  to  the
United  States,  or  go  to  oae  of  the
Southern  republics,  and  become  a
citizen  thereof,  but  I  could  not  be  a
republican  in  Russia,  if  I  went  to
England,  I  should  have  to  be  subject
to  the  laws  of  England,  and  the  same
if  I  came  to  the  United  States,  hence
the  principle  that  I  mentioned  before
is  applicable  all  the  way  thrangu,  no
matter  which  way  you  look  it  it.  I
am  not  saying  at  present  which  of
these  governments,  whether  religious
or  political,  is  right,  1  am  merely
trying  to  elucidate  a  principle  that
exists  among  aud  i;s  acknowledged
by  men.  If  I  go  to  live  in  any
country  on  the  tace  of  the  earth,  I
have  bo  be  subject  to  its  la^s,  and  if
1  am  a  reasonable,  intelligent  man,  I


214  JOURNAL  OF

acknowledge  the  propriety  of  my
being  so.  If  I  join  the  Methodist
church  I  have  a  right  to  be  a  good
Methodist,  and  to  submit  to  their
discipline.  If  I  join  the  Baptist
church  I  have  a  right  to  be  a  good
Baptist,  and  to  submit  to  their  disci-
pline, creed,  laws  and  so  on,  for  I
join  them  knowing  that  I  ought  to
submit  to  them,  and  as  an  honorable
man  I  do  so  or  leave  it.

Well,  we  stand  here  in  a  peculiar
position,  as  before  stated.  We  are
here  in  a  religious  capacity,  and  we
nre  here  in  a  political  capacity,  As
religionists  our  faith  is  that  God  has
spoken,  and  that  angels  have  mini-
stered to  men ;  that  the  everlasting
Gospel  has  been  restored  in  its  full-
ness, simplicity  and  purity,  as  it  ex-
isted in  Jesus's  day.  We  believe  in
Apostles  and  Prophets,  and  in  the
principle  of  revelation — in  God  com-
municating with  the  human  family.
These  things  were  taught  to  us  be-
fore we  became  members  of  this
Church,  and  we  received  them  as
part  and  parcel  of  our  faith,  and
having  faith  in  this  system  we  obeyed
it  We  believed  in  being  baptized
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  having
hands  laid  upon  us  for  the  reception
of  the  Holy  Ghost  That  is  our
faith,  it  has  been  communicated  to
us  by  revelation,  by  the  opening  hea-
vens, by  the  voice  of  God,  by  the
ministering  of  holy  angels,  and  by  the
testimony  of  God's  servants,  as  they
have  gone  forth  through  the  world.

We  also  believe  in  having  a  Priest-
hood—a ruling  power  to  regulate  and
dictate,  under  the  guidance  of  the
Almighty,  the  affairs  of  his  Church
and  kingdom  upon  the  earth.  That
is  our  faith,  and  it  was  taught  to  us
when  we  first  listened  to  "  Mor mon-
ism." Before  we  were  baptized  into
this  Church  we  believed  the  men
whom  we  heard  proclaim  its  princi-
ples were  inspired  by  the  Almighty,


DISCOURSES,

and  we  pray  to  God  for  them  daily
now,  that  the  revelations  of  Heaven
may  be  unfolded  to  their  view,  and
that  the  purposes  of  God  may  be
made  plain  to  their  understanding,
that  they  may  be  able  to  instruct  the
people  and  lead  them  in  the  way  of
life.  This  is  our  faith,  and  when  we
talk  about  these  things  we  do  so
understand ingly,  there  is  no  halfway
business  about  it

We  meet  here  to-day  in  Conference,
believing  in  these  principles.  When
we  talk  about  paying  our  tithing,  we
believe  that  it  is  the  duty  of  all  who
ever  obeyed  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  to  contribute  one- tenth  of
their  increase  to  the  Lord.  As  Lat-
ter-day Saints  we  subscribe  to  this,
and  we  believe  it  is  right  to  be  honest,
and  to  show  integiity  in  this  as  in
everything  else.  We  believe  in  being
truthful,  virtuous,  pure  and  holy,  and
we  believe  in  keeping  the  command-
ments of  God  in  all  things.  This  is
part  and  parcel  of  our  religious  faith
and  belief,  and  we  have,  from  time  to
time,  of  our  own  free  will,  subscribed
to  these  very  principles  of  which  I
have  spoken  ;  and  we  have  held  up
our  hands  time  and  time  agfaiu  to
sustain  the  authorities  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  Gad  upon  the  earth.
Having  said  so  much  in  regard  to
these  things*,  I  desire,  very  briefly,  to
compare  the  position  that  we  occupy
with  that  which  others  occupy.

I  have  already  told  you  that  there
exists  a  variety  of  governments  on
the  earth,  and  that  all  men  are  ex-
pected to  be  in  subjection  to  the  laws
and  usages  of  the  governments  under
which  they  live.  I  have  told  you
that  in  England  they  have  a  limited
monarchy.  At  the  present  time  a
queen  presides  over  their  destinies.
How  did  she  come  to  that  office  ?
She  was  born  of  royalty,  and  inherit-
ed it  by  lineal  descent.  The  people
had  no  choice  in  the  matter.  She


CHOICE  OF  RULERS,  ETC.


215


•III!


has  been,  I  believe,  a  very  g
virtuous,  exemplary  woman,  and  has
ruled  with  mildness,  generosity  and
kindness  among  her  people ;  but  if
she  had  done  otherwise,  she  was  still
their  queen.  Now  I  want  to  talk
about  what  people  call  equal  rights,
and  to  examine  a  certain  principle
in  relation  to  these  things*  What
say  had  the  people  of  England  in
/  regard  to  their  queen  ?  None  at  all.
The  President  of  the  United  States
is  elected  by  the  people,  therefore  he
is  what  may  be  termed  the  people's
candidate.  How  often  do  they  elect
a  President  of  the  United  States  ?
Once  every  four  years,  and  conse-
quently there  is  great  excitement
now  on  account  of  the  coming  PresU
dential  election.  The  people  are
ranging  themselves  into  parties,  and
each  party  using  all  the  influence
they  possess  to  elect  their  own  special
and  peculiar  favorites.  Besides  the
President,  there  are  Legislators  and
Governors,  Governors  generally
hold  their  office  for  four  years  ;  Sena-
tors of  the  United  States  from  four
to  six  years,  according  to  circum-
stances; members  of  the  House  of
Representatives  for  two  years.  In
many  of  the  States  and  Territories
the  Legislators  are  elected  for  two
years,  and  hence,  during  the  time
for  which  they  are  elected,  they  have
a  perfect  right  to  use  their  own
judgment  in  enacting  laws  for  the
benefit  of  the  people,  being  sworn  not
to  transcend  certain  bounds  laid
down  as  their  guide,  if  they  should
be  ever  so  bad  during  their  term  of
office,  and  should  enact  oppressive
laws,  the  people  have  no  right  to '
change  them  until  their  time  expires,  |
unless,  from  some  flagrant  violation
of  their  trust,  they  should  be  im-
peached.

How  is  it  in  the  churches  ?  With
the  Catholics  it  is  once  a  priest  al-
ways a  priest,  except  in  such  cases  as


that  of  Pere  Hyacinthe,  and  then
they  bury  them.  In  some  churches
the  bishops  and  other  authorities
hold  office  during  tjood  behavior,  or
for  lifetime ;  in  some  churches  they
are  voted  for  by  a  certain  conclave
according  to  circumstances  and  their
own  peculiar  notions  and  dogmas,
and  in  very  many  instances  these
officers  hold  their  offices  for  life  with*
out  any  counteraction  whatever,  uu-
less  they  violate  their  own  constitu-
tions, laws  or  discipline,  when  they
are  liable  to  be  dealt  with  according
to  the  laws  and  regulations  of  their
several  churches.  Now  nobody
thinks  they  are  very  badly  oppressed
in  all  this.  They  enter  these  churches
voluntarily,  they  are  not  bound  to
stay  in  them,  and  they  leave  them
when  they  like.

Now  let  us  contrast  our  position
with  that  of  other  people  in  these
rospects.  We  hear  a  good  deal  about
one  man  power,  I  want  to  examine
that  power  a  little,  and  see  how  it
exists,  and  how  far  it  extends.  We
believe  in  two  principles — one  is  the
voice  of  God,  the  other  is  the  voice
of  the  people.  For  instance,  we  be-
lieve that  nobody  bat  God  could  set
the  religious  world  right,  we  believe
that  none  but  God  could  have  given
any  man  correct  in  formation  in  regard
to  doctrine  and  ordinances.  We  bn-
lieve  that  God  did  instruct  Joseph
Smith  in  relation  to  both,  and  also
pertaining  to  the  government  of  his
people  here  on  the  earth.  How  are
this  people  selected  and  set  a  parr  ?
Joseph  Sm  ith  was  select^  by  the
Lord,  and  set  ap^rt,  and  ordained  by
holy  angels.  How  with  the  others  'i
By  the  authority  which  God  con-
ferred on  Joseph  he  selected,  set
apart,  and  ordained  others  to  the
various  orders  and  organizations  of
the  Priesthood.  We  know  that  the
Liord,  in  former  times,  c  died  some
men  who  did  not  magnify  their  call-


21G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ing,  and  who  were  set  aside  as  unfit
for  the  Master's  use.  Jesus,  for  in-
►stance,  called  Judas  to  be  one  of  the
Twelve,  and  Judas  betrayed  him, and
lie  was  cut  off  from  the  Twelve,  We
have  had  many  instances  in  our
Church  of  a  similar  nature,  men
have  been  found  unfaithful,  and  they
Lave  been  cut  off.  By  whom  ?  By
the  authority  of  that  Priesthood  of
which  they  formed  a  part.  That
Priesthood  has  the  same  power  now
that  it  had  formerly — to  bind  on
earth  and  it  iR  bound  in  heaven,  to
loose  on  earlh  find  it  is  loosed  in  he:*-
ven.  How  does  this  Priesthood
bland  in  relation  to  the  people?  #t
is  not  thrust  upon  Jiem  as  the
queens  of  Englaud,  the  kings  of
France,  the  emperor  of  Austria,  or
as  the  former  king,  but  now  emperor
of  Prussia,  are;  no,  it  is  not  thrust
upon  the  people  in  any  such  way.  It
is  precisely  in  the  same  way  that  the
Israelites  were  organized  in  former
times — God  gave  them  certain  laws,
and  all  the  people  sari  "Amen,"
then  the  laws  became  binding  upon
Isi-ael,  The  position  we  occupy  is
this:  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  has
been  given  to  all  who  have  obeyed
the  Gospel,  and  have  lived  faithful
tu  its  piecepts,  take*  of  the  things  of
God,  and  shows  them  forth  through
a  living  Priesthood  to  a  people  en-
lightened and  instructed  by  t life  Spirit
ol  revelation  lrom  God,  and  the  peo-
ple thus  enlightened,  instructed  and
blessed  by  the  spirit  of  light,  volun-
tarily and  gladly  sustain  the  Priest-
hood who  minister  unto  them.  When
Joseph  imiih  was  upon  the  earth,
he  did  not  force  himself  upon  the
people  as  these  kings  and  emperors
do,  but  he  presented  himself  before
them  every  six  months,  at  the  An-
nual or  Semi-Annual  Conference,  and
the  people  had  a  chance  to  lift  up
their  hands  to  receive  or  reject  him.
That  was  the  position  occupied  by


Joseph  fvnitli,  and  those  associated
with  him,  in  guiding  the  affairs  of  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  and  it  is  precisely  m  with
President  Young.  He  stands  here  as
the  representative  of  God  to  the  peo-
ple, .as  the  President  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
He  is,  «>r  ought  to  be,  full  of  light,
life,  revelation  and  the  jjower  of  God,
and  he  is,  and  bears  testimony  to  it
He  ought  to  be  able  to  lead  the  peo-
ple in  the  p  ths  of  life,  and  he  is.
He  is  the  choice  of  God,  and  what
more?  He  is  the  choice  cf  the  peo-
ple of  God.  Has  be  a  right,  to  say,
14 1  am  chosen,  I  am  elected,  I  am
President,  and  I  will  do  as  1  darned
please,  and  heH  yourselves?"  No,
he  presents  himself  before  you,  and  if
there  is  any  man  who  has  aught
against,  him,  he  has  the  privilege  of
hold'ug  np  his  hand  to  signify  the
same.  That  is  the  position  of  our
President — he  is  brought  to  a  test
every  six  months,  as  it  rolls  around,
before  tiie  assembled  Conference  of
the  Cbuich  ol  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints*  It  is  the  same  with  the
welve,  the  President  uf  the  Stake,
the  Hiyh  Council,  the  Presidents  of
Seventies  and  with  ail  the  leading
officers  of  the  Church — they  are  all
put  lo  this  test  twice  a  year,  and  the
people  have  the  privilege  of  voting
for  or  against  them,  just  as  they
please.

Hee  ilen,  on  the  one  hand,  there
is  u:e  vo  ce  o:  Goo,  ^ball  we  object
to  i?  Who  ivade  u.^  ?  Vs'lo  ov-
ganJzed  us,  aid  tue  e'en: cut,  with
which  we  are  surronm^d  and  that  we
inhale?  Who  orgarrzeu  the  ptane-
wy  sysrem  that  we  see  around  us?
Who  provides  jprea*'a-t,  d'nner  and
supper  for  the  mibkms  that  dwe-1  on
the  face  o**  the  earth  ?  Wno  c'othes
tbem,  as  he  does  the  iA'^a  ot  the
Held  Y  Who  imparts  mto  man  h»s
breach,  life,  health,  uis  GflMMH  of


CHOICE  OF  RULERS,  ETC-


217


loeomotV], thought, and all  the
godlike  attributes  with  which  be  is
endowed  ? Where  did  tbey  come
from? Who has controlled  and
mann^e  I  the  affairs  of  the  world
from  its  creation  until  the  present  :
time? The  Great  I  Am,  the  Great
Eloheim,  the  Great  God  who  is  our
Fa'her. We  bow  before  him. Is  it
a  hardship  to  reverence  the  Lard  oar
God  ? Is  it  a  hardship  to  have  him
for  oar  instructor  ? And  shall  we
follow  the  notions,  theories,  ideas
and  folly  of  men,  who  seek  to  super-
sede the  wisdom,  light  find  p:tteroal
care  of  G*>ii  our  heavenly  Father?
No,  we  w»ll  not God  ia  onr  God,
w  the  Loru  is  our  Gou,  t  ie  Liord  Is
our JuJge  the  Ijord  is  oar  King,  ind
he  shall  ru*e  over  us." We  do  not
object  to  bow  the  knee  to  God  and
say,  "  Our  Father,  who  ait  in  hea-
ven, Inhumed be thy  name,  thy
kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done  on
earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven  :  "  and
vte  pray  that  ii  may  be  hastened.  We
acknowledge,  we  bow  before,  we  reve-
rence tut?  name of  onr  heavenly
Father That  is  one  thing  that  we
do  for  God,  who  causes  seed-time
and  hsrvest,  summer  and  winter,  day
and  right,  the  God  who  has  watched
over  ia  and  all  the  myriads  of  the
inhalitants  of  the  earth  from  the
tira*  of  creation  until  the  present
tiro ;  the  God  in  whose  hands  are
the  destinies  of  the  human  family
pet aining  to  this  world  and  the  worlds
tccome. If  God  will  deign  to  teach,
lad  and  dictate  ns,  we  bow  with
jjverence  before  him,  and  say,  "  It  ■
i  the  Lord,  let  him  do  as  seems  him
jjood." We  ask  the  guidance  of  the
Almighty,  we  reverentially  present
ourselves  before  him  and  we  submit
to  his  authority  j  for  his  yoke  is  easy
and  bis  burden  is  light.  \  ,

What  next  ?  Then  comes  the
freedom  of  man.  On  the  one  hand
the  guidance  of  God,  on  the  other  1


the  freedom  of  man,  Wp  ask  God
to  dictate  us  and  he  does.  He  has
o;iven  us  a  President,  Apostles,
Prophets,  Bishops  ;  he  has  organized!
his  Church  in  the  most  perfect  and
harmonions  manner.  We  see  these
things  before  us.  I  need  not  talk
about  the  c  mntry  that  we  inhabit,
nor  abr^ut  the  blessings  that  have
been  shed  abroad  among  ns,  rich  in
com  parison  m  i  t  h  t  h  ose  en j  oyed  by
others  by  w horn  we  fcro  surrounded.
These  things  are  narenfc  to  all  in  tell  i-
gent  men  and  surprise  is  frequently
expressed  at  our  implements  and
at  the  wisdom  and  IijteUigenre  that
have  governed,  managed  and  con-
trolled our  liffairs:  ihev  do  n« it  know
where  they  came  from.  We  do —
they  come  from  Go  t  throng  the
medium  of  his  servants

What  next?  God  having  given
ns  a  President  inspired  by  his  Holy
Spirit,  we  are  required  to  vote  for
him — will  we  have  him  or  will  we
reject  him  ?  We  lift  up  >nr  hands
and  say,  '*  Yes,  we  will  receive  him."
I  The  world  say  this  is  despotism,
being  governed  by  one  man.  Is  it
I  despotism  for  every  man  and  every
woman  to  have  a  voice  in  the  selec-
tion oi  those  who  rule  over  them  ?
Is  that  despotism,  tyranny  or  oppres-
sion ?  If  it  is  I  do  not  know  what
the  terms  raeamjf  There  are  no  peo-
ple on  the  face  of  the  earth  to*day
!  who  have  to  undergo  su  severe  a  criti-
cism as  the  President  and  Pr  iesthood
of  this  Church  before  the  people,
and  why  is  it  that  the  people  vote
unanimously  for  them?  "Well,"
say  the  world,  "  there  is  a  kind  of
influence,  we  hardly  know  what,  we
wish  it  did  not  exmt,  for  we  do  not
like  this  one  man  power."  I  know
you  do  not,  for  it  is  one  thousand
men,  ten  thousand  men  power,  it  is
the  power  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on
the  earth,  and  the  power  of  God
united  with  it,  that  is  what  it  is*  As


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


I  have  already  said,  it  is  not  only  1
the  President  of  the  Church  who  h*s
to  undergo  this  test,  hut  the  Twelve,
the  Seventies,  and  at  I  the  presiding
officers  of  the  Church  have  to  go
through  the  same  ordeal,

I  will  now  go  back  to  my  text,  I
have  been  a  long  way  from  it,  but  you
know  it  is  usual  to  preach  from  the
text.  I  have  been  from  mine  awhile,
now  I  am  coming  back  to  it.  Jesus
says,  u  Take  my  yoke  upon  you  and
learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly
of  heart,  and  you  shall  find  rest  to
your  souls."  What  was  the  yoke
placed  upon  the  followers  of  Jesus  ?
Precisely  the  same  as  that  placed
upon  yqu  What  did  he  tell  his  dis-
ciples to  do  ?  To  go  forth  and  bap-
tize the  people  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  it
was  promised  that  certain  signs
should  follow  tliem  that  believed.
In  his  name  they  should  cast  out
devil?,  speak  with  new  tongues,  if
they  drank  any  deadly  thing  it  should
not  hurt  them,  and  if  they  laid  hands
on  the  sick  they  should  recover.  The
word  was — "  Go  forth  in  my  name
and  with  my  authority,  and  my  Spirit
shall  accompany  you.  And  it  did,
and  the  people  became  one  in  faith,
doctrine  and  principle,  just  as  the
Scriptures  say.  "  Take  my  yuke
upon  you."  What  was  it  ?  Said  he,
"Blessed  are  the  meet,  for  they
shall  inherit  the  earth  ;  blessed  are
the  pure  in  heart  tor  they  shall  see
God ;  blessed  are  they  that  hunger
and  thirst  after  righteousness  for
they  shall  be  filled."  This  was  the
kind  of  yoke  Jesus  put  upon  them,
and  this  is  the  kind  that  is  put  upun
you — to  love  righteousness,  keep  the
commands  of  God,  live  your  religion
and  obey  the  principles  of  truth,  is
this  a  hard  yoke?  This  is  what  is
required  of  Latter-day  Saints.  Take
my  yoke  upon  you  and  learu  of  me!"
And  how  did  he  do  it  ? He  obeyed


the  will  of  his  Father,  and  then  he
expected  his  di^i pies  to  obey  his  will.
Said  he,  "  Father,  I  pray  for  them,
that  they  may  be  one" — a  good  deal
of  this  one-man  power  there,  was
there  not  ?  "  I  pray  for  them,  that
they  may  be  one,  even  as  the  Father
and  Fare  one,  that  they  may  be  ooe
in  us  ;  "  and  in  his  mind,  looking  to
the  universal  expansion  of  this  hea-
venly principle,  said  be,  "  Neither
pray  I  fur  these  alone,  but  for  all
them  that  shall  believe  on  me  through
their  word,  that  they  all  may  be  one,
even  as  I  and  the  Father  are  one,
that  the  world  may  know  that  thou
hast  sunt  mp."  This  was  the  kind
of  principle  the  Savior  taught  to  hia
followers,  and  this  is  the  kind  that  is
taught  to  us.  I

I Now  let  me  ask  is  it  right  for  a
Methodist  to  obey the  Methodist
discipline  ? Yes,  or  else  leave  '.hem,
he  has  the  privilege  to  do  whbh  he
pleases. Is  it  right  for  a  Presbyte-
rian to  obey  the  Presbyterian  doctrine
and  principles  ? Yes,  or  leave  tliem.
Id  it  right  for  a  Roman  Catholic  b  obey
their  principles? Yes,  or  leavethem.
Is  it  right  for  a  Latter-clay  Sa'nt  to
obey  their  principles  ? Yes,  or'eave
them,  one  of  the  two. Do  no.  try
to  dnig  in  something  else,  do  not
make  Methodists  of  us  for  instaice,
nor  Presbyterians. Do  not  try  to
make  Catholics  of  us,  if  you  do  sot
like  "  Mormonisra"  leave  it.  Tlat
is  honest,  straightforward  and  uu
'  right,  and  good  doctrine,  and  accoru
ing  to  the  principles  which  are  ac
kuo fledged  to  be  correct  everywhere
u  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  think  that
things  cuuld  be  improved  a  little."
Well  then,  go  out  somewhere  and
make  your  improvements,  here  is  a
big  continent,  go  north  or  south,  or
where  you  please. Get  as  many  to
follow  you  as  you  can,  and  teach
them  what  principles  you  please,  and
if  you  can  build  up  a  better  system


than  ours  all  right,  bat  do  not  start  |
it  here.  This  is  the  kind  of  faith
that  Paul  spoke  of  when  he  said,
"  If  thou  hast  faith  have  it  to  thy-
self/1 If  you  do  not  have  it  to  jour-
selves  take  as  many  with  yoo  as  you
can  get.  That  is  right,  the  world  is
open,  plenty  of  room  in  every  direc-
tion, go  and  try  your  hand  and  see
how  yoo  will  succeed.

The  same  principle  is  true  in  rela-
tion to  other  things  as  well  as  to  reli-
gion. I  might  apply  it  to  things
political.  Some  people  say,  "  You
folks  always  vote  together,"  we  would
be  poor  coote  it  we  did  not,  and  just
as  bad  as  the  rest  of  yon.  Some
folks  here,  a  short  time  ago,  got  up  a
little  political  operation,  and  tried
how  it  would  answer  to  run  one
against  another;  but  it  did  not  work
well  and  they  had  to  quit.  We  be-
lieve in  oneness,  and  our  outside
friends  say,  "  We  do  not,"  Yes  you
do,  y-e-s  y-o-u  d*o.  Now  all  you
gentlemen  who  go  in  for  General
Grant  would  you  not  like  to  elect-
him  ?  Yes  you  would,  and  you  will
use  all  the  influence  that  you  have  to
do  so,  and  if  he  is  not  elected  it  will
be  because  you  can  not  do  it,  because
you  have  not  influence  enough  to  elect
him.  On  the  other  hand,  you  who
are  in  favor  of  Horace  Greeley,  how
you  would  like  to  have  him  elected,
would  you  not?  Yes,  you  would.
And  will  you  not  get  all  to  vote  for
him  that  you  possibly  can  ?  Yes,
and  if  all  do  not  vote  for  him  it  will
not  be  your  fault  Well*  if  the  peo-
ple do  not  vote  as  we  want  them  it
will  not  be  our  fault,  and  the  only
difference,  in  this  respect,  between
you  and  President  Young  is,  that  he


has  a  little  more  influence  than  you,
therefore  do  not  grunt  about  it,  these
things  are  fair  and  straightforward.
When  men  talk  about  oppression
they  talk  about  what  they  do  not  un-
derstand, and  the  same  when  they
talk  about  the  one-man  power  and
the  bondage  of  the  people.  Is  it  not
horrible  bondage  for  the  whole  people
to  have  the  privilege  of  voting  for
whom  they  please  ?  Terrible,  let  us
get  out  of  it,  shall  we  not,  and  go
somewhere  where  they  will  not  let  us
do  as  we  please,  and  have  some  of
that  liberty  that  would  put  shackles
upon  us,  and  bind  us  down  ?  But
we  Latter-day  Saints  do  not  want
that,  we  want  to  be  delivered  from
that,  and  to  walk  according  to  the
light  of  truth.  Well,  let  us  take  the
yoke  of  Christ  upon  us,  and  learn  of
him,  and  keep  the  commandments  of
God*  And  if  we  vote  for  a  Bishop
somewhere  over  yonder,  let  us  sustain
him  as  long  as  he  is  in  office,  and  if
he  does  not  do  what  is  right  we  will
vote  him  out.  And  if  we  have  Pre-
sidents or  Apostles  or  anybody  that
we  do  not  like,  let  us  vote  them  out,
and  be  free  men,  and  cultivate  and
cherish  in  our  bosoms  the  principles
of  liberty.  But  let  us  be  careful  that
we  do  not  grieve  the  Spirit  of  ihe
Lord,  and  while  we  are  looking  at  these
things  let  us  look  at  our  own  eternal
interests,  and  lean  upon  God  for
wisdom  and  instruction,  that  his
Spirit  may  lead  us  in  the  paths  of
life,  that  we  may  comprehend  true
principles,  and  be  one  as  Jesus  was
and  is  one  with  the  Father.

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


220  JOURNAL  07  DTSC'OTJRSES.


DJSUOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRiGttJiM  YOUXG,

Demversd  at  the  42-sd  Sem-ANffUAL  Conference.  Sa'<t  Laks  Ci  :y,

Oltuekk  9.  3S72.

{Reported  by  David  W.  Evans  )

THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH.


£  oppose  we  should  examine  a  c-ty  1
in  a  Make  of  Z:un  conducted  after  '
the-  order  n"  Knueh  !  We  would  like
to  look.  *br  a  few  moments  upon  the
facts  as  they  ttuuld  exist.  If  a  peo-  1
pie  were  aatbered  together,  were  they
many  or  lew,  who  would  follow  out
the  instructions  given  them  in  the
Bible  and  in  the  other  revelations
that  we  have,  they  would  have  to  be  ,
very  obedient,  and  probably  many
would  feel  to  say,  "  I  wish  to  manage
my  own  affairs,  I  wish  to  dictate  my-
self, I  wish  to  govern  and  control  my
labor,  I  can  not  submit  to  have  any-
body else  dictate  me*  This  is  servi-
tude, and  is  nothing  more  nor  less
than  slavery  !  "  I  suppose  there  are
some  who  would  feel  thus.  When  I
look  at  the  Latter-day  Saints  I  think
liow  independent  they  are.  They  have
been  very  independent,  there  is  no  |
question  of  it*  When  they  have
heard  the  Gospel,  though,  peihaps,
in  the  flood  of  persecution,  and  the
finger  of  scorn  pointed  towards  them,
they  have  said,  "  The  Gospel  is  true,
and  if  my  friends  will  not  believe  it,
it  makes  no  difference  to  me,  I  am
independent  enough  to  embrace  the
truth,  and  to  gather  oat  from  the
midst  of  Babylon  and  to  make  my
home  with  the  Saints.  There  are
plenty  of  such  people  here  in  this
house — men  and  women,  old  and
young, here  are  young  people  here


who  have  left  their  parents  and  every
thing  they  had  on  the  face  of  the
earth  for  the  sake  of  the  Gospel
Middle-aged  men  have  left  their
wives  and  their  children,  saying,  "I
am  going  to  live  according  to  the
plan  that  has  beeu  laid  down  in  the
Scriptures  for  the  salvation  of  the
human  family."  This  certainly  ex-
hibits as  much  independence  as  mor-
tal beings  can  manifest,  and  vet  we
have  said  we  will  yield  strict  obedt-
;  ence  to  these  requirements,  prepara-
tory to  enjoying  the  glory  that  the
Lord  has  for  the  Saints.  1  will  ask,
Is  there  liberty  in  this  obedience?
Yes,  and  the  only  plan  on  the  face  of
the  earth  for  the  people  to  gain  real
liberty  is  to  yield  obedience  to  these
simple  principles.  Not  but  that  we
should  fiud  a  great  many  who  do  not
i  exactly  understand  how  to  yield  obe-
l  dience,  strictly,  to  the  requirements
of  heaven  for  their  own  salvation  and
exaltation;  but  uu  person  can  be  ex-
alted in  the  kingdom  ot  heaven  with-
out first  submitting  hi  nisei  f  to  the
rules,  regulations,  laws  and  ordinances
of  that  kingdom,  ana  being  perfectly
subject  to  them  in  every  respect.  Is
th's  the  fact?  It  is  even  so.  Con-
sequently,  no  person  is  6 L  to  be  a  ruler
until  he  can  be  ruled  ;  no  one  is  fit
to  be  the  Lord  of  alt  until  he  has
submitted  Ijimself  to  be  servant  of
all. Does  £h  s  give  the  people  lioer-


THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH.


221


ty?  Ic  Is  .lie  otuy  thing  in  t!ie
heafreos  o**  on  tue  earth  .hat  can  uo
so  Where  i*  Ji^  l'berfy  in  subject
ing  ourselves  Ovi'jJy  to  the  require-
ments of  heavon  i\iiJ  becoming  one
in  all  our  operations  Lo  jjilJ  u  i  the
kingdom  oc  Cod  uoo<i  ^he  eurtn  ?
By  st'ict  oue«iience  to  these  ^qu>3-
men:^  we  prove  uj<  selves  faichfu.  *o
our  God;  a  «d  w«-eo  we  \*ave  v<>a^d
through  i  a  l  t'-e  urd^s  necessax,
and  have  proved  oe*.  ejl  y  sa^ir  &si*e
to  aii  the  r ii  ^  anu  legu  at'oas  wu'ch
give  life  etc;  r».\l,  ti;i  ibea  sbjb  us  free
and  crowns  us  h  ;.  i  glory  immor-
tal iry  and  ete.^al  It  yea;  and  Joete  in
uo  otbtr  path  lua*  w<*  cat  walk  jq9
no  otiier  sy^.on,  no  o,Le*'  l.  w;  or
ordinances  b/  wnch  we  can  gain


on  y  b^  submijtiu^  ^nr-


selves  per^fei'^  y  ^  t  u  i\qa  ements
of  heaven.

Nuwaupy*o*e  e  i.iu  a  tittle  >oj  ecy
organized  on  the  n'aa  I  menUOu*a  a*
the  e jmmot>je.n-uf  » <niy  re  ia  -k, —
after  iao  C*vfe>  i*£  Eoucil — Would  we
buitu  <-ur  boasts  ajl  niike  ?  l*o.
Ho*.-  toiio^lu  we  l*ve  ?  I  wij  ten
you  how  I  wuuL  a:  \inge  for  a  little
family,  say  about  a  thousand  persons.
I  would  bm&  houses  expressly  ^br
their  convenience  .o  cooking,  tvas*^
ing  auu  W§*.*y  detriment  o'  uheir
domes  tie  ar^ngements,  la? bead  of
having  every  tjomaa  get  Ing  up  ia
the  mprnin^  and  fussing  arouna  a
cookswe  or  >ver  ibe  fi-'e,  couking  a
little  food  .or  two  or  Lnee  or  iialf  a
dozen  person,  or  a  dozeo,  a*  In^c^e
may  be,  e.  e  w.#ul  ,  4».,vt;  ujLL.jag  to  Jo
but  cogoiuiitv  w^k.  Le  metavo  iny
arrangeuieau  feeA  a  huh  in  tfthteU  1
can  seai  five  hunOreu  persons  lu  eat;
and  I  have  my  cooking  apparatus —
lartgc^  a  i-'  overs— -r  II  prepareq.  A  id

kiall  a  iitiudfud  feel
iong  *>n,u  v  J/  cm  outing  i'uiJxu  tiftaclnd
to  tuia  iicdi  ;  *sUu  ^netc  is  u  pefton  at

the  fanner  end  o^  the  tr.oio  ana  he
»hou7d  telegmph  t Via  t  he  wauted  a


warm  beefsfeak ;  and  this  Is  conveyed
to  him  by  a  Hule  railway,  perhaps
under -the  table,  and  he  ok  sue  may
Sake  hev  beefsteak.  4  What  do  you
want  *b  take  with  it  ?  "  *  A  cin  of
tea.  a  cup  of  coffee,  a  cup  of  m!lk,
pJefc  of  toast*"  or  so  m  eta  ing  or  uther,
no  uiiUer  what  they  call  for,  it  is
conveyed  io  them  and-  tii<v  take  ii,
an<^  w€^c  u  seat  fiv^*  hundred  at  >nce,
and  ^ew^ihem  all  m  a  vei'y  few  min-
utes. And  when  they  tave  all  t-aten,
the  dishes  ave  piled  togetjer,  clipped
umie  *  the  cable,  atvd  run  back  to  the
Oflfra  who  w^h  them.  We  ooald
bave  ta  few  Cblnamea  to  do  Aiat  if
we  d^ci  not  w:ut  to  do  *f  ourselves.
Un^ev  such  a  s/s  em  tne  women
coul</  go  to  wo  k  making  theit  bon-
nets, ha  s  and  clot-hiug,  ur  in  tho
factories.  [  have  not  ttaie  to  map  it
out  ieibre  ynu  as  I  wish  to.  But
oece  is  oar  diulug  room,  oaul  anjoin-
*ng^is  *s  our  prayer  j\.om,  where
we  would  as  enable  ^rftaps  five.  bun.
dfed  persiJU^  one  lime,  aw  el  Luive
Oiyj  jj<aycirti  in  the  eveu'iig  auu  hi  bhe
liioi niiig,  Whe*i  we  uao  our  praye/3
tide  on i"  breals.ast,  tken  each  ana
every  erne  to  bis  business  BiU  the
inquiry  ia%  in  a  momenf,  liow  are  you
going  to  ^et  Litem  together  ?  Uulld
your  blouses  ju&-t  iha  a?zc  y^t  want
tnem,  whether  i\  buadr'ed  feet,  fifty
feet  or  five,  aod  have  them  so  ar-
ranged that  you  can  walk  directly
from  work  to  d-nner.  "  Would  yon
build  the  houses  all  alike? "  Oh  no,
*f  tnpfe  as  aoy  one  oers^tt  vvho  nas
beiU?y'4AS^"in  butUin-  LUafi  o^ers,
and  t  an  gtn  uj  iiiure'la^ieiut  hoases,
make  yuuvplms  uau.  yle  whl  put*
-fiftem  up,  and  huve  ;he  greatestVa-
riuty  we  can  imagine.

What  \v;tl  weqo4h*v^h-iT:e  ^y?
Et*c*.  one  ij  u.^  watL,  'Jc  <.  ftre
il^e  herd.^eH — itu)^e  wlio
iutik  a/te*  we  diieep^fecic  acfc  iuo.se
vvho  m^ko  ,.,e  V/uctur  and  tne  cheeae,
all  at  their  wo^k  by  themselves.  Some


222


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


for  the  kanyon,  perhaps,  or  for  the
plow  or  harvest,  no  difference  what,
each  and  every  class  is  organized,
and  all  labor  and  perform  their
part.

Will  we  have  the  cows  in  the  city?
No,  Will  we  have  the  pip  pens  in
the  city  ?  No.  Will  we  have  any
of  our  outhouses  in  the  city  ?  No.
We  will  have  our  railways  to  convey
the  food  to  the  pig  pens,  and  some-
body to  take  care  of  them.  Some-
body to  gather  up  the  scraps  at  the
table,  and  take  them  away.  Some-
body to  take  the  feed  and  feed  the
cows,  and  take  care  of  thera  out  of  j
the  city,  Allow  any  nuisance  in  the
city?  No,  not  any,  but  everything
kept  as  clean  and  as  nice  as  it  is  in
this  tabernacle.  Gravel  our  streets,
pave  our  walks,  water  them,  keep
them  clean  and  nicely  swept,  and
everything  neat,  nice  and  sweet  Our
houses  built  high,  sleep  up  stairs,
have  large  lodging  rooms,  keep  every,
body  in  fresh  air,  pure  and  healthy.
Work  through  the  day,  and  when  it  «
comes  evening,  instead  of  going  to  a
theatre,  walking  the  streets,  riding,
or  reading  novels — these  falsehoods
got  up  expressly  to  excite  the  minds
of  youth,  repair  to  our  room,  and
have  our  historians,  and  our  different
teachers  to  teach  classes  of  old  and  i
young,  to  read  the  Scriptures  to  i
them  5  to  teach  thera  history,  arith-
metic, reading,  writing  and  painting;
and  have  the  best  teachers  that  can  j
be  got  to  teach  our  day  schools*  Half
the  labor  necessary  to  make  a  people
moderately  comfortable  now,  would  j
make  them  independently  rich  under
such  a  system*  Now  we  toil  and
work  and  labor,  and  some  of  us  are
so  anxious  that  we  are  sure  to  start
after  a  load  of  wood  on  Saturday  so
as  to  occupy  Sunday  in  getting  home.
This  would  be  stopped  in  our  commu-
nity, and  when  Sunday  morning
came  every  child  would  be  required


to  go  to  the  school  room,  and  parents
to  go  to  meeting  or  Sunday  school ;
and  not  get  into  their  wagons  or  car-
riages, or  on  the  railroads,  or  lounge
around  reading  novels;  they  would
be  required  to  go  to  meeting,  to  read
the  Scriptures,  to  pray  and  cultivate
their  minds.  The  youth  would  have
a  good  education,  they  would  receive
all  the  learning  that  could  be  given
to  mortal  beings;  and  after  they  had
studied  the  best  books  that  could  be
got  liold  of,  they  would  still  have  the
advantage  of  the  rest  of  the  world,
for  they  would  be  taught  in  and  have
a  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God.

Bring  up  our  children  in  this  way
and  they  would  be  trained  to  love  the
truth.  Teach  them  honest  v,  virtue
and  prudence,  and  we  should  riot  see
the  waste  around  that  now  is  wit-
nessed. The  Latter-day  Saints  waste
enough  to  make  a  poor  people  com-
fortable. Shall  I  mention  one  or  two
instances?  I  will  mention  this  one
thing  any  way,  with  regard  to  our
paper  mill.  Can  you  get  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  save  their  rags  ?  No,
they  will  make  them  and  throw  them
out  of  doors.  Is  there  a  family  in
this  community  but  what  are  too  well
off  in  their  own  estimation  to  take
care  of  paper  rags  ?  I  think  a  good
many  of  them  would  rather  steal
their  beef  and  what  they  want  than
stoop  to  pick  up  paper  rags  to  make
paper  to  print  our  paper  on.  Not  all
would  do  this,  but  a  few;  and  the
majority  are  so  well  off  that  they
have  not  that  prudence  which  belongs
to  Saints;  and  I  feel  sometimes  a
little  irritated,  and  inclined  to  scold
about  it,  when  I  see  women  who  were
brought  up  without  a  shoe  to  their
foot,  or  a  second  frock  to  their  back
perhaps,  and  who  lived  until  they
were  young  women  in  this  style,  with-
out ever  stepping  on  to  an  inch  of
carpet  in  their  lives,  and  they  know
no  more  how  to  treat  a  carpet  than


THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH.


223


pigs  do.  Do  they  know  bow  to  treat
fine  furniture?  No,  they  do  not;
but  they  will  waste,  wnste — their
clothing,  their  carpets  and  their  fur-
niture. I  hear  them  any  sometimes,
"  Why,  I  have  had  this  three  years,
or  five  years."  If  my  grandmother
could  have  got  an  article  such  as  you
wear,  she  would  have  kept  it  for  her
daughters  from  generation  to  genera-
tion, and  it  would  have  been  good,
But  now,  our  young  women  waste,
waste.

This  is  finding  fault,  and  I  wish  I
could  hurt  your  feelings  enough  to
make  yon  think  of  it  when  you  get
home*  If  I  could  make  you  a  little
mad,  when  you  get  home  if  yon  see
a  pretty  good  piece  of  carpet  thrown
out  of  dpors  yon  will  go,  perhaps,
and  shake  it  and  lay  it  up,  thinking
that  it  may  be  serviceable  to  some-
body  or  other ;  and  if  you  cannot  do
anything  else  with  it,  give  it  to  some-
body who  has  not  a  bed  to  lie  upon,
to  put  under  them  to  help  to  make  a
bed*

If  we  could  see  such  a  society  or-
ganized as  I  have  mentioned,  you
would  see  none  of  this  waste,  You
would  see  a  people  all  attending  to
their  business,  having  the  most  im-
proved machinery  for  making  cloth,
and  doing  every  kind  of  housework,
farming,  all  mechanical  operations,  in
our  factories,  dairies,  orchards  and
vineyards ;  and  possessing  every  com-
fort and  convenience  of  life.  A
society  like  this  would  never  have  to
buy  anything;  they  would  make  and
raise  all  they  would  eat,  drink  and
wear,  and  always  have  something  to
sell  and  bring  money,  to  help  to  in*
crease  their  comfort  and  indepen-
dence, ,  |

"Well,  but,"  one  would  say,  "  I
shall  never  have  the  privilege  of
riding  again  in  a  carriage  in  my
life."  Oh  what  a  pity  I  Did  you
ever  ride  in  one  when  you  had  your


own  way  ?  Nof  you  never  thought
of  such  a  thing.  Thousands  and
thousands  of  Latter-day  Saints  never
expect  to  own  a  carriage  or  to  ride  in
one.  Would  we  ride  in  carriages  ?
Yes,  we  would ;  we  would  have  them
suitable  for  the  community,  and  give
them  their  proper  exercise ;  and  if  I
were  with  you,  I  would  be  willing  to
give  others  just  as  ranch  as  I  have
myself.  And  if  we  have  sick,  would
they  want  a  carriage  to  ride  in?
Yes,  and  they  would  have  it  too,  we
would  have  nice  ones  to  carry  out
the  sick,  aged  and  infirm,  and  give
them  exercise,  and  give  them  a  good
place  to  sleep  in,  good  foud  to  eat,
good  company  to  be  with  them  and
take  care  of  them.

Would  not  this  be  hard  ?  Yes,  I
should  hope  so.  If  I  had  the  privi-
lege and  the  power,  I  would  not  in-
troduce a  system  for  my  brethren
and  myself  to  live  under  unless  it
would  try  our  faith.  I  do  not  want
to  live  without  having  my  faith  and
patience  tried.  They  are  pretty  well
tried,  I  do  not  know  how  many
there  are  who  would  endure  what  I
endure  with  regard  to  faith  and
patience,  and  then  be  persevering  in
the  midst  of  it  all.  But  I  would  not
form  a  society,  nor  ask  an  individual
to  go  to  heaven  by  breaking  all  the
bones  in  his  body,  and  putting  him
in  a  silver  basket,  and  then,  hitching
him  to  a  kite,  send  him  up  there.  I
would  not  do  it  if  I  had  the  power,
for  if  his  bones  were  not  broken  he
would  jump  out  of  the  basket,  that
is  the  idea.  I  see  a  great  many  who
profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints,  who
would  not  be  contented  in  heaven
unless  their  feelings  undergo  a  great
change,  and  if  they  were  there  and
you  wanted  to  keep  them  there,  you
would  have  to  break  their  backs,  or
they  would  get  out  But  we  want
to  see  nothing  of  this  in  this  little
society.


224


JOURNAL  0?  DISCOURSES.


If  I  ha  J  cia.'ge  of  such  a  society
as  this  to  which  I  refer,  I  would  not
allow  novel  rending;  yet  it  is  in  my
house,  in  the  houses  of  ray  coiinsei
ors,  ia  the  bouses  of  these  Apostle*,
thebe  Seventies  and  Hi^h  Priests,  in
the  houses  of  the  High  Council  in
this  city,  and  in  other  cities,  and  in
the*  nooses  of  the  Bishops,  and  we
permit  it;  yet  it  is  ten  thousand
times  worse  than  it  is  for  men  to
come  here  and  teach  our  children  the
a  b  c,  good  morals,  and  how  to  be-
have themselves,  ten  thousand  times
worse!  You  let  your  children  read
novels  until  they  run  away,  until
they  get  so  that  they  do  not  care —
they  are  reckless,  and  their  mothers
are  reckless,  and  some  of  their  fathers
are  reckless,  and  if  you  do  not  break
their  backs  and  tie  them  up  they  will
go  to  hell  That  is  rough,  is  it  not  ?
Well,  it  ib  a  comparison.  You  have
got  to  check  them  some  way  or  other,
or  they  will  go  to  destruction.  They
are  perieofiy  crazy.  Their  actions
sa,,  ul  waut  Babylon  stuck  on  to
me;  I  svani  to  revel  in  Babylon;  I
waul  everything  I  can  think  of  or
desire."  If  I  had  ihe  power  to  do
so,  T  would  not  lake  such  people  to
heaven,  God  will  not  take  them
there,  that  I  am  sure  of.  He  wi'l
try  the  faith  and  patience  of  this  peo-
ple. J  would  uot  like  to  get  into  a
society  wliere  there  were  no  trials;
bu:  I  would  like  to  see  a  society  orga-
nized Pj  snow  the  Latter-day  Saints
how  lo  hmiu  up  the  kingdom  orGod.

Do  yuc  ;h'iik  we  sha1!  wa.it  tmy
lawy^s  In  oar  bGcieiy  ?  No,  I  tbiok
iioi.  Do  yor.  not  tUnk  Uiey  wll
howl  arouiiu?  Yes,  you  will  hear
their  howls  going  up  morning  and
ever*  i  I  jew  ail  lug  <Tie  an  o  the  -  \
Thev  wi  1  howl,  '  VV  cm  sretno  law-
su^ts  Vk  v  ;  we  cr.mrrt  find  anybody
Ji&t  will  quarrel  w^L  Lia  neighbor.
Wha-  shall  we  ilo?'1  I  feel  about
the:n  as  Peter  of  Russia  is  said  to


have  felt  when  he  was  in  England*

He  saw  and  heard  ihe  lawyers  p! ead-
Mg  a:  Li  great  trial  there 3  and  be  was
asked  hih  opinion  conceding  them.
He  replied  th*1  he  Had  two  lawyers
in  his  empire,  an4  when  he  got  home
he  intended  to  hang  one  of  ihera.
That  is  about  the  love  I  have  for
some  lawyers  who  are  always  stirring
up  strife.  Not  but  that  lawyers  are
^ood  in  their  place;  but  where  is
their  place  ?  I  cannot  find  it.  It
makes  me  think  of  whftt  Bissef  said
to  Paine  in  Kirtland,  In  a  lawsuit
that  had  been  got  up,  Biased  was
pleading  for  Joseph,  and  Paine  was
pleading  for  an  apostate.  Paine  had
blackguarded  Bissell  a  good  deal.
In  his  plea  Bissell  stopped  all  at
once,  and,  turning  to  Sir.  Paine,  said
he  :  "  Mr.  Paine,  do  you  believe  in  a
devil?"  "Yes,"  said  Mr.  Paine,
who  was  a  keen,  smart  lawyer*  Said
Bissell,  "  WWe  do  you  think  he
is?"  "J  do  not  know"  "  u0  you
not  think  he  is  in  hell  r"  said  Bi.ssel.
"  I  suppose  he  is."  "  Well,"  said
Bissell,  1  do  you  not  think  he  is  in
pain  [Paine]  ?,f  ':  hey  almost  act  to
me  as  if  they  were  in  pain.  They
most  excuse  me  if  there  are  any  of
them  here  to*day.  I  cannot  s^e  the
least  use  on  the  face  of  the  earth  for
these  wicked  lawyers  who  stir  up
strife.  If  they  would  turn  merchant^
cattle  breeders,  farmers  or  mechanics,
or  would  build  factories,  (hey  would
be  useful ;  but  to  stir  up  strife  and
quarrels,  to  alienate  the  feelings  of
neigh  bo /s,  and  to  destroy  the  ;eace
of  communities,  seems  to  be  their
only  business.  For  r  man  to  under-
stand the  law  is  veiy  excellent,  but
who  is  there  that  understands  it  ?
They  that  do  and  are  peacemakers,
they  are  legitimate  lawyers.  There
ai-e  many  lawyers  rrro  ar?  wry  cx-
cellent  men.  Wh.  t  is  t..e  advice  of
an  honorable  gentlemen  In  the  pro-
fession of  the  law  ? u  Do  not  20  to


THE  OliDER  OF  ENOCH.


225


law  with  your  neighbor ;  do  not  be
coaxed  into  a  lawsuit,  for  you  will
not  be  beneflted  by  it.  If  you  do  go
to  law ,  you  will  hate  your  neighbor,
and  you  will  finally  have  to  pick  some  of
your  neighbors  who  hoe  potatoes  and
corn,  who  work  in  the  cabinet  shop,
at  the  carpenters  bench,  or  at  the
blacksmith's  forge,  to  settle  it  for
you.  You  will  have  to  pick  ten,
twelve,  eighteen  or  twenty-four  of
th-  n,  as  the  case  may  he,  to  act  as  a
jury,  and  your  case  goes  before  them
to  decide.  They  are  not  lawyers,  but
they  understand  truth  and  justice,
and  they  have  got  to  judge  the  case
at  Inst,"  Why  not  do  this  at  first,
and  say  we  will  arbitrate  this  case,
and  we  will  have  no  lawsuit,  and  no
difficult v  with  our  neighbor,  to  alien-
ate  our  feelings  one  from  another?
This  is  the  way  we  should  do  as  a
community.

Would  you  want  doctors  ?  Yes,
to  set  bones.  We  should  want  a
good  surgeon  for  that,  or  to  cut  off  a
limb.  But  do  you  want  doctors?
^Cor  not  much  of  any  tiling  else,  let
•i*  fell  vou,  onlv  the  traditions  of
ihe  people  lead  them  to  think  so;
tmd  here  is  a  giving  evil  in  uur
midst.  It  will  be  so  in  a  little  time
that  not  a  wuman  in  all  Israel  will
dare  to  have  a  baby  unless  she  can
have  a  doctor  by  her,  I  will  tell  you
what  to  do,  you  ladies,  when  you  find
you  are  yoing  to  have  an  increase,  go
off  into  some  country  where  you  can-
not call  fur  a  doctor,  and  if  you
can  keep  it.  I  guess  you  will  have
it,  and  I  guess  it  will  be  all  right,
too.  Now  the  cry  is,  41  Send  for  a
doctor."  If  you  have  a  pain  in  the
head,  "Send  for  a  doctor;"  if  your
heel  aches,  "  I  want  a  doctor  ;n  u  my
back  aches,  and  I  want  a  doctor/'
The  study  and  practice  of  anatomy
and  surgery  are  very  good ;  they  are
mechanical,  and  are  frequently  need-
ed. Do  yoa  not  think  it  is  necessary
No.  15,


5.


tfjtedicine  sometimes?  Tes,
uld  rather  have  a  wife  of
knows  what  medicine  to
en  I  am  sick,  than  all
the  professional  doctors  in  the  world.
Now  let  me  tell  you  Sbout  doctoring,
because  I  am  acquainted  with  it,  and
know  just  exactly  what  constitutes
a  good  doctor  in  physic,  It  is  that
man  or  woman  who,  by  revelation,
or  we  may  call  it  intuitive  inspira-
tion, is  capable  of  administering
medicine  to  assist  the  human  system
when  it  is  besieged  by  the  enemy
called  Disease;  but  if  they  have  not
tint  manifestation,  they  had  better
let  the  sick  person  alone.  I  will  tell
you  why  :  I  can  see  the  faces  of  this
congregation,  but  I  do  not  see  two
•dike;  imd  if  I  could  look  into  your
nervous  systems  and  behold  the
operations  of  disease,  from  the  crowns
of  your  heads  to  the  soles  of  your
tWt,  I  should  behold  the  same  differ-
ence that  I  see  in  your  physiognomy
— there  would  be  no  two  precisely
alike.  Doctors  mako  experiments,
and  if  they  find  a  medicine  that  will
have  the  desired  effect  on  one  pur  son,
they  set  it  down  that  it  is  good  fur
every  body ,  but  it  is  not*  so,  fur  upon
the  second  person  that  medicine  is
administered  to,  seemingly  with  the
same  disease,  it  might  produce  death.
If  yon  do  not  know  this,  yoa  have
,  not  had  the  experience  that  I  have,
I  ^ay  that  unless  a  man  or  woman
who  administers  medicine  to  assist
the  human  system  to  overcome  dis-
ease, understands,  and  has  that  intui-
tive knowledge,  by  tl.e  Spirit,  that
such  an  article  is  good  for  that  indi-
vidual at  that  very  time,  they  had
better  let  him  alone.  Let  the  sick
do  without  eatmg,  take  a  little  of
something  to  cleanse  the  stomach,
bowels  and  blood,  and  wait  patiently,
and  let  Nature  have  time  to  gain  the
advantage  over  the  disease.  Sup-
pose, for  illustration,  we  draw  a  line

Vol.  XV.


22G  JOURNAL  OF

through  this  congregation,  and  place
those  on  this  side  where  they  cannot
get  a  doctor,  without  it  is  a  surgeon,
for  thirty  or  fifty  ye<irs  to  come;
and  put  the  other  side  in  a  country
fall  of  doctors,  and  they  think  they
ought  to  have  them,  and  this  side  of
the  house  that  has  no  doctor  will  be
able  to  bay  the  inheritance  of  those
who  have  doctors,  and  overrun  them,
outreach  them,  and  buy  them  up,  and  |
finally  obliterate  them,  and  they  will
be  lost  in  the  masses  of  those  who
have  no  doctors.  I  know  what  some
say  when  they  look  at  such  things,
but  that  is  the  fact.  Ladies  and
gentlemen,  you  may  take  any  coun-
try in  the  world,  I  do  not  care  where
you  go,  and  if  they  do  not  employ
doctors,  you  will  End  they  will  beat
communities  that  employ  thera,  all
the  time*  Who  is  the  real  doctor?
That  man  who  knows  by  the  Spirit
of  revelation  what  ails  an  individual,
and  by  the  same  Spirit  knows  what
medicine  to  administer.  That  is  the
real  doctor,  the  others  are  quacks.

But  to  the  text.  We  want  to  see  a
community  organized  in  which  every
person  will  be  industrious,  faithful
and  prudent.  What  will  you  do  with
the  children  ?  We  will  bring  them  j
up  until  lhey  are  of  legal  age,  then
say,  11  Go  where  you  please.  We
have  given  you  a  splendid  education,
the  advantage  of  all  the  learning  of
the  day,  and  if  you  do  not  wish  to
stay  with  the  Saints,  go  where  you
please."  What  will  you  do  with
those  who  apostatize  after  having
entered  into  covenant  and  agreement
with  others  that  their  property  shall
be  one,  and  be  in  the  bands  of  trust-
ees, and  shall  never  be  taken  out  ?
If  any  of  these  parties  apostatize,  and
say  we  wish  to  withdraw  from  this
community,  what  will  you  do  with
them  ?  We  will  say  to  them,  u  Go,
and  welcome,"  and  if  we  are  disposed
to  give  them  anything,  it  is  all  right


\

DISCOURSES.

Where  are  we  going  to  find  the
greatest  difficulty  and  obstruction
with  regard  to  this  organization?
In  the  purse  of  the  rich  ?  No,  not
by  any  means.  I  have  got  some
brethren  who  are  just  as  close,  tight
and  penurious  as  I  am  myself,  but  I
would  rather  take  any  monej  ed  man
in  this  community,  and  undertake  to
manage  him,  than  some  men  who
are  not  worth  a  dollar  in  the  world.
Some  of  this  class  are  too  independ-
ent. They  would  say,  "  I'll  go  a
fishing,"  or  "  I  suess  Til  go  a  riding,
where  I  please."  Well,  if  I  were  to
give  out  word,  and  say  to  the  com-
munity, Send  in  your  names,  I  want
to  see  who  are  willing  to  go  into  an
organization  of  this  kind,  who  do
j  you  suppose  would  write  to  me  first  ?
The  biggest  thieves  in  the  commu-
nity. Do  not  be  shocked  at  that,
any  of  you,  whether  you  are  strangers
or  not,  for  we  have  some  of  the
meanest  men  that  ever  disgraced
God's  footstool  right  in  the  midst  of
the  Latter-day  Saints.  Do  not  be
startled  at  that,  because  it  is  true.
I  have  told  the  people  many  a  time,
if  they  want  anything  done,  no  matter
how  mean,  they  can  find  men  here
who  can  do  it,  if  they  are  to  be  found
on  the  earth.  I  can  not  help  this.
You  recollect  that  Jesus  compared
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  a  net
which  gathered  all  kinds.  If  our
net  has  not  gathered  all  kinds,  I
wonder  where  the  kinds  are  that  we
have  not  got.  I  say  that  some  of
the  worst  men  in  the  community
would  be  the  first  ones  to  proffer
their  names  to  go  into  such  an  asso-
ciation. I  do  not  want  them  there.
Is  this  the  fact  ?  Yes  it  is.  I  un.
derstand  it  exactly.  But  if  such  a
community  could  be  organized,  to
show  the  Latter-day  Saints  how  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on
the  earth,  I  would  be  glad  to  see  it —
would  not  you  ?


THE  OKDER  OF  ENOCH


227


If  this  could  be  done  I  want  to
say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  that  I
have  a  splendid  place,  large  enough
for  about  6ve  hundred  or  a  thousand
persons  to  settle  upon,  and  I  would
like  to  be  the  one  to  make  a  donation
of  it,  with  a  good  deal  more,  to  start
the  business,  to  see  if  we  can  actually
accomplish  the  affair,  and  show  the
Latter-day  Saints  how  to  build  up
2 ion.  Not  to  make  a  mock  of  it.
Not  go  and  preach  the  Gospel  without
purse  and  scrip,  and  gather  up  the
poor  and  needy,  and  have  them  bring
Babylon  with  them.  Leave  Babylon
out  of  the  question,  Make  our  own
clothing,  but  do  not  put  seventeen
or  twenty -one  yards  in  a  single  dress,
neither  be  attired  so  as  to  look  like
a  camel.  It  is  not  comely,  it  does
not  belong  to  sensible  people,  nor  to
any  people  who  wish  to  carry  them-
selves justly  and  correctly,  before
the  heavens  and  intelligent  men.

If  the  ladies  want  silks,  we  have
the  mulberry  here,  of  all  kinds;  we
have  the  silkworm  eggs  here,  and  we
have  made  the  silk*  Go  to  work
now  and  rai?e  worms,  and  wind  the
silk,  and  weave  it  and  make  all  the
satin  ribbons  you  wish  for.  We
have  men  and  women  here,  who  did
nothing  all  their  lives  before  they
came  here  but  weave  satin  ribbons
and  satin  cloth.  This  is  their  busi-
ness, they  know  how  to  get  it  up.  If
you  will  raise  the  silk,  dress  your-
selves just  as  beautifully  asyou  please.

By  and  by  when  this  people  learn
the  value  of  the  mulberry  and  the
silkworm,  you  will  see  the  women
with  their  few  trees  in  their  yards
and  around  their  lots,  and  for  shade
trees  in  the  streets ;  and  the  children
will  be  picking  the  leaves  and  feeding
the  worms,  and  they  will  get  up  silk
dresses  here  like  those  in  the  East
Indies.  The  silk  dresses  they  make
there  you  can  put  them  on  and  wear
them  until  you  are  tired  of  them,  and


almost  from  generation  to  generation*
We  can  make  thera  here  just  as  good,
And  we  can  have  coats  and  vests  and
pants  made  of  our  home-grown  ma-
teria],  which  a  man  would  wear  for
his  best  suit,  and  hand  down  to  his
posterity.  When  we  have  learned
the  worth  of  silk  we  will  make  it
and  use  it  instead  of  linen.  We
have  a  splendid  coantry  for  raising
silk,  but  not  a  good  country  to  raise
flax  in  ;  splendid  for  raising  wool,
grain,  fruit,  vegetables,  cattle,  milk,
butter  and  cheese,  and  here  we  are
importing  our  cheese.  We  ought
to  be  making  cheese  by  the  hundreds
of  tons.  We  ought  to  export  it  in
quantities;  but  instead  of  that  we
are  sending  to  the  States  for  it.

Wh  ere  are  your  cows  ?  Have  yon
taken  care  of  them  ?  If  vou  see  a
community  organized  a9  they  should
be,  they  will  take  care  of  their  calves;
they  will  have  something  to  feed
them  on  in  the  winter,  and  they  will
take  care  of  their  stock  and  not  let
it  perish.  What  a  sin  it  is  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  if  they  did  but
know  it,  to  abuse  their  stock — their
cattle,  milch  cows  and  horses !
Through  the  summer  they  will  work
and  use  them,  and  in  the  winter  turn
them  out  to  live  or  die  as  they  can,
taking  no  care  of  that  which  God
has  given  them.  Were  it  not  for  the
ignorance  of  the  people,  the  Lord
would  curse  them  for  such  things.

We  ought  to  learn  some  of  these
facts,  and  try  to  shape  our  lives  so
as  to  be  useful.  Let  the  men  make
their  lives  useful.  Let  the  women
make  their  lives  useful.  Mothers,  teach
your  daughters  how  to  keep  house,
and  not  how  to  spend  everything
they  can  get  hold  of  I  will  just
say  a  few  words  on  this  subject.  We
have  hundreds  of  young  men  heie
who  dare  not  take  girls  for  wives.
Why  ?  Because  the  very  first  thing,
they  want  a  horse  and  buggy,  and


238


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


a  piano;  they  want  somebody  to
come  every  day  to  give  them  lessons
on  the  piano ;  they  want  two  hired
girls  and  a  mansion,  so  that  they  can
entertain  eompan;,  and  the  hoys  aie
afraid  to  marry  them.  Now  mothers,
teach  yonr  girls  better  things  than
these.  What  are  the  facts  in  the
case  ?  If  yon  hud  been  brought  tip
to  know  what  property  —  fine  furni-
ture, carpets,  and  so  on,  was  worth,
you  would  t  ke  care  of  it,  aud  be
prudent  in  the  use  of  it,  and  teach
your  piils  to  take  care,  instead  of
wasting  it.  Do  you  believe  it  ?  This
does  not  hit  all,  but  too  many.  I
wish  yon  would  hearken  to  these
things,  I  am  taking  up  the  time,
and  not  giving  to  others  an  opportu-
nity to  address  you,  We  have  not
said  what  we  want  to  say  to  the  Lat-
ter-dny  S ninK  We  onght  to  have
a  house  four  times  as  large  as  this,
and  we  ought  to  fill  it;  and  we  ought
to  sit  together  not  only  four  days,
but  a  week  and  perhaps  two  weeks,
and  leave  home  at  home,  leave  Baby-
lon in  Babyloi' — leave  everything
and  come  here  to  worship  the  living
God,  and  learn  ov  his  ways,  that  we
may  walk  in  ins  paths.  This  is  our
duty,  and  what  we  should  do.  But
the>e  nre  so  many  who  can  hardly
spend  time  to  go  *o  meeting  on  the
Sal-ba;  h  day ;  and  they  can  hardly
spend  time  to  goto  Conference.  They
have  so  much  bn  sin  ess  on  hand,  so  i
many  cntHe  to  take  care  of;  they
have  money  to  let  out,  or  money
borrmv;  they  have  men  to  see  to,  or
something  or  other,  and  it  seems  as
if  the  affections  of  the  people  are
h  an  k  < 1  r i  n g  af  t er  t  h  e  t  h  i  ngs  of  th  is  world
too  much,  too  much !  Stop,  Latter-day
Saints,  md  reckon  with  yourselves,
and  find  whether  you  are  actually  in
the  p:uh  of  obedience  to  the  require-
ments of  heaven  or  not.  Some  sup-
pose that  (hey  aie  serving  God  and
are  on  the  road  to  eternal  life,  but


to


many  will  find  they  are  mistaken  if
they  are  not  careful.  We  had  better
reckon  with  ourselves  and  look  over
onr  accounts,  and  see  how  we  stand
before  the  Lord.  Sec  if  we  are  doing
good,  if  we  are  bestowing  our  sub-
stance on  the  poor,  that  they  may
have  fond  to  eat  and  habitations  to
dwell  in,  and  be  made  comfortable :
see  if  we  are  sending  our  means  for
the  poor  in  foreign  'ands,  and  aiding
to  send  the  Elders  to  preach  to  the
nations  and  gather  up  the  people  and
make  them  happy  and  comfortable.
Instead  of  doing  this  I  fear  that
many  are  wandering  away  from  the
commandments  of  the  Lord.  "O
fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  !  *
We  can  get  rich  a  great  deal  quicker
by  serving  God  than  by  serving  our-
selves, do  a  great  deal  better,  and  do
a  great  deal  more  good.  The  earth
is  the  Lord's  a  id  the  fullness  thereof.
He  is  anxious,  and  is  wailing  with
extended  arms  and  hands,  compara-
tively, to  pour  the  wealth  of  the
world  into  the  laps  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  if  they  will  not  give  it  away
to  their  enemies.  But  now,  just  as
soon  as  anything  is  given  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saiiits  they  are  looking  from
east  to  west,  and  from  north  to  south,
to  see  where  they  can  strew  that  that
God  gives  them  among  their  enemies
— those  who  spurn  the  things  of  God,
and  would  destroy  his  kingdom  from
the  earih,  I  say,  let  the  Lord  keep
us  poor  rather  than  forsake  our  reli-
gion and  turn  away  from  it !  Why
can  not  a  man  serve  God  with  his
pockets  full  of  greenbacks,  and  not
lost  after  them  one  particle  ?  If  he
can  not  do  it,  he  is  lacking  in  wisdom,
faith,  and  knowledge,  and  does  not
understand  God  and  his  ways.  The
heavens  and  the  earth  are  full  of
blessings  for  the  people,  To  whom
do  they  belong?  To  our  Father  in
heaven,  and  he  wishes  to  bestow
them  upon  his  children  when  they


SPIRIT  OF  LIGHT


AND  TRUTH,  ETC.


229


can  receive  and  dispose  of  them  to
his  name's  glory.

We  shall  have  to  stop  here.  We
are  going  to  adjourn  our  Conference,
though  we  have  not  said  half  what
we  wish  to  say  to  you  and  to  ourselves,
for  we  want  to  be  co-  workers  together.
Now  let  me  say  to  the  First  Presi-
dency, to  the  Apostles,  to  all  the
Bishops in Israel, and to  every


quorum,  and  especially  to  those  who
are  presiding  officers,  Set  that  exam-
pie  before  your  wives  and  your  child-
ren, before  your  neighbors  and  this
people,  that  you  can  say  :  ik  Follow
me,  as  I  fallow  Christ,"  When  we
do  this,  all  is  right,  an  J  our  con-
sciences are  clear.
God  bless  you.


DISCOURSE  BT  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Hth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Nov,  24,  1872.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

SPIRIT  OF  LIOHT  AND  TRU.'H— ITS  VALUE— ITS  OPPOSITE  NECESSARY-

FHAL  TRIUMPH  OF  LIGHY  A_\Y  TRUTH.


I  have,  through  upwards  of  forty
years*  experience  in  the  public  minis-
try, learned  some  few  lessons  in  regard
to  public  speaking.  In  the  first
place  I  know  that  the  wisdom  of
man  avails  but  vei*y  little,  and  that
onr  own  judgment,  thoughts  and
reflections  are  not  what  the  Lord
requires;  but  he  does  require,  and
has  required,  ever  since  the  rise  of
this  Church,  that  his  servants  should
speak  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  A  revelation  given  to  the
Eiders  of  this  Church  in  the  year
1831,  says,  "My  servants  shall  be
sent  forth  to  the  east  and  to  the  west,
and  to  the  north  and  to  the  south,
and  they  shall  lift  up  their  voices  and
speak  and  prophecy,  as  seemeth  rae
good;  but  if  you  receive  not  the
Spirit  you  shall  not  teach."  This


is  a  commandment  that  the  Lord
gave  to  his  servants  over  forty  years
ago.  I  have  seen  a  few  time-*  from
the  commencement  of  my  ministry,
when  my  mind  seemed  to  be  entirely
closed  up,  and  when  what  few  words
I  could  stammer  forth  l>efore  a  con-
gregation, were  altogether  unsatis-
factory to  my  own  mind,  and  I  pre-
sume to  those  who  heard  me.  But  I
do  feel  thankful  to  God  that  tam-rlv*
from  year  to  year,  be  has  favored  me
with  a  liberty  of  utterance  and  with
the  power  and  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.,
I  acknowledge  his  hand  in  t h is,  lor
I  know  it  has  come  from  h\m%  and
having  experienced  the  two  condi-
tions of  mind  I  know  the  differ-
ence, know  that,  no^  onlv  as
public  speakers,  but  as  individual
members  of  the  Church  o'  the  living


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


God,  there  are  many  things  pertain-
ing to  our  everyday  duties,  which
if  we  clearly  understood  by  the  light
of  the  Spirit,  we  would  escape  many
things  which  cause  unhappiness.  It
is  the  want  of  clearly  understand-
ing the  will  of  the  Lord  under  all
circumstances  that  causes  us  to  fall
into  many  of  the  evils  that  we  pass
through  in  life.  I  can  look  back  on
my  past  life  and  can  speak  from
experience  in  these  matters.  I  can
remember  many  times  when,  if  I  had
been  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
in  regard  to  temporal  matters,  it  I
would  have  been  well  with  me  ;  but
not  altogether  understanding  what
i})6  mind  of  the  Spirit  was,  the  course
I  have  taken  at  times  has  been  very
disadvantageous  to  me.  I  will  relate
one  circumstance  of  this  kind  as  a
sample.  Some  few  years  ago,  I  had
a  few  hundred  dollars  in  goods  and
property,  and  I  expended  all  that  I
had  in  a  store.  Not  one  of  these
co-operative  stores,  but  in  a  store
kept  at  Fillmore.  Being  requested
by  the  merchants  in  that  place  to
purchase  a  bill  of  goods  fur  them,
and  to  give  my  own  note  until  they
could  settle  it;  and  being  anxious
that  their  business  should  g->  on  and
prosper,  I  was  foolish  enough  to  do
as  they  wished,  by  which  I  brought
myself  into  great  difficulties,  and
lost  over  two  thousand  dollars  by  the
transaction.  1  had  the  bill  of  goods
to  pay  for,  and  lost  all  1  put  in  be-
sides. If  I  had  understood  the
teachings  of  the  Spirit — and  I  did
have  some  impressions  in  relation  bo
the  matter,  but  if  I  had  fully  under-
stood  them  I  should  not  have  fallen
into  these  unpleasant  circumstances.
I  have  no  doubt  that  there  are  many
others  among  the  people  of  God,  who
can  see  where  they  have  erred,  be-
cause they  did  not  have  the  Spirit  of
God  upon  them  at  the  time.

I  can  see,  also,  many  times  when


the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  whispered  to
me,  and  1  scarcely  knew  whether  it
was  my  own  thoughts  and  imagina-
tions or  whether  it  was  the  revela-
tions of  the  Spirit ;  yet  it  seemed  to
be  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  I  fol-
lowed the  teachings,  and  was  pros-
pered in  so  doing,

If  we,  as  a  people,  would  live  up
to  owr  privileges,  how  many  difficul-
ties might  be  avoided !  How  many
Latter-day  Saints  would  constantly
live  in  the  light  of  revelation  !  This
puts  me  in  mind  of  a  text  which  I
have  often  heard  quoted,  but  I  do  not
know  that  I  have  S  lid  much  in  rela-
tion to  it.  Neither  do  1  know  where
it  is  recorded,  but  I  think  it  is  some-
where in  the  writings  of  Solomon.
The  passage  I  refer  to  s  iys  that  there
is  a  spirit  in  man  and  the  Spirit  or
candle  of  the  Lord,  I  du  not  remem-
ber which,  giveth  it  understanding.
The  idea  is  that  in  these  tabernacles
of  ouis  we  have  an  intelligent  spirit
which  God  has  placed  there,  and  he
has  ordained  that  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  shall  light  up  these  human
spirits  of  ours,  that  we  may  follow
in  the  paths  of  light,  truth  and
righteousness  and  obtain  eternal
life.

This  text  also  puts  me  in  mind  of
one  that  is  recorded  somewhere  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  aud  Covenants,  in
which  the  Lord,  speaking  directly  to
this  people,  says  that  the  word  of
the  Lord  is  truth,  and  whatsoever  is
truth  is  light,  and  whatsoever  is  light
is  Spirit,  even  the  Spirit  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  the  spirit  giveth  light  to
every  man  that  cometh  into  the
world  ;  and  the  Spirit  enlighteneth
every  man  through  the  world  that
hearkeneth  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit.
I  can  not  tell  you  on  what  page  nor
in  what  section  of  the  Book  of  Cove-
nants this  can  be  found ;  but  you
who  are  in  the  habit  of  reading  that
book  will  find  these  words,  as  I  have


SPIRIT  OF  LIGHT  AND  TRUTH,  ETC,  231


quoted  them.  "  Whatsoever  is  truth
is  light,  whatsoever  is  light  is  spirit/'
consequently ,  if  we  could  always
follow  in  the  light,  instead  of  follow-
ing  in  the  channel  of  darkness,  we
would  always  follow  in  the  path  that  !
would  lead  to  peace  and  happiness,
and  we  would  avoid  ten  thousand
difficulties  which  beset  our  path-
tv  ay.

Another  revelation  that  agrees
with  this  will  be  found  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  in  a  very
lengthy  communication  made  by  the
Lord  to  this  Church,  which  shows
very  plainly  that  light  is  the  prin-
ciple and  law  by  which  everything  is
governed.  I  will  quote  Hie  revelation
as  near  as  I  can  remember  it.  Speak-
ing of  his  presence,  he  says,  "As  he
is  in  the  sun,  and  is  the  ligfat
thereof,  and  the  power  thereof  by
which  it  is  governed  j  and  as  he
is  also  in  the  moon,  and  is  the  light
and  the  power  thereof ;  and  in  the  j
stars;  and  the  light  which  shiueth
is  the  same  light  which  quickeneth
your  eyes,  which  is  the  same  light
which  quickeneth  your  understand-
ings, the  light  which  is  in  all  things,
and  which  giveth  life  to  all  things,
and  which  is  the  law  by  which  all
things  are  governed,  even  the  power
of  God  who  sits  upon  his  throne,
who  is  in  the  bosom  of  eternity,  who
is  in  the  midst  of  all  things,  which
light  proceedeth  forth  from  his  pre-
sence to  fill  the  immensity  of  spice."
When  we  put  all  these  texts  together,
we  find  that  this  great  principle  of
light  which  should  enlighten  the
mind  of  man,  and  by  which  he  should
be  led  continually,  is  something  that
is  not  confined  to  one  little  part  uf
space;  it  not  only  lights  the  sun,
moon  and  starg  and  all  the  heavenly  I
bodies,  but  it  is  in  and  surrounds  all
things,  and  gives  life  to  all  things*

Here  is  something  that  we  do  not
perfectly  understand. The  principle


of  life  by  which  we  are  able  to  move,
think  and  reason;  the  principle  of
motion  and  of  power  is  a  principle  of
light  And  there  seems  to  be  a  con-
nection or  relation  between  these
principles  that  govern  the  motion
of  living  beings  and  the  light  that
proceeds  forth  from  the  sun.  But
we  do  not  understand  that  relation.
Gad  has  told  us  that  it  is  the  law  by
which  everything  is  governed ;  and
we  can  not  find  a  law  throughout
universal  space,  but  what  light  has
something  to  do  with  it.  But  we  do
not  know  in  all  cases  how  it  operates.
We  do  not  know,  for  instance,  how
light  operates  in  making  a  blade  of
grass  grow  out  of  the  earth.  We  can
not  understand  how  particle  comes
to  its  particle,  how  it  is  organized  in
a  certain  form,  and  finally  produces
the  complete  blade  of  grass.  We  do
not  know  how  this  is  carried  on,  but
the  Lord  has  told  us  that  it  is  done
by  the  principle  of  light  We  do
not  know,  either,  how  it  ia  that  we
can  communicate  with  different  and
distinct  parts  of  the  earth  almost
instantaneously  through  the  medium
of  the  electric  wires.  We  under-
stand that  this  phenomenon  exists,
but  we  do  not  know  the  cause  of  it;
if  we  did  we  should  find,  according
to  the  revelation  which  God  has
given,  that  it  is  accomplished  through
the  medium  of  light.  How  that
light  operates  we  do  not  know,  Go.t
has  nut  revealed  that.  He  has  only
told  us  that  light  is  the  cause  and  the
power  by  which  everything  is  gov-
erned.

*  We  see  a  stone,  and  when  we  hold
it  in  our  hands  and  let  go  of  if,  it
does  not  stand  still,  neither  does  it
tall  upwards,  neither  does  it  go  hori-
zontally, but  it  falls  downwards  to
the  surface  of  the  earth.  We  have
named  this  gravitation.  But  what  it
the  cause  ?  No  one  knows.  No
person  can  tell  why  that  stone  does


232


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


not  stand  still.  We  see  it  fall  and
we  see  all  terrestrial  bodies  fall  to  the
surface  of  the  earth,  but  we  cannot
te^l  why  tli is  is  so.  Tbe  canst-,  how-
evtr,  is  light,  out.  how  that  light
operates  we  do  not  know.

We  see  tbe  sun  shine,  and  we  know
that  it  illuminates  tbe  face  of  this
world  and  of  many  other  worlds.  Its
light  proceeds  forth  from  that  centre
and  radiates  to  immense  distances.
We  see  all  this,  but  what  connection
is  th pre  between  this  and  the  under-
standing or  light  that  is  in  man,  that
assists  him  iu  his  power  of  thought
and  motion  ?  What  connection  is
there  between  the  shining  of  that
light  find  the  light  that  is  within  us?
We  do  not  know,  and  yet  God  has
said  that  the  light  which  proceeds
forth  from  these  heaveuly  bodies  is
the  same  li^ht  that  quickens  tbe  un-
derstanding of  man  and  that  trives
life  to  ail  things.  We  do  not  under-
stand all  these  things  which  God  has
spoken  and  given.  For  instance  we
see  a  candle  set  on  a  table ;  we  apply
a  match  to  that,  and  immediately
there  is  light  where  before  existed
darkness,  Chumi^ls  tell  us  that  this
is  a  .ciiemical  operation ;  that  the
light  proceeds  not  from  the  i allow,
but  from  a  principle  called  oxygen —
acertiin  portion  ot  the  atmospheric
air  which  we  breathe;  that  that
principle  ha=i  a  great  tendency  to
unite  with  the  materials  of  the  candle,
and  in  so  doing  it  gives  out  its  light.
But  how  this  light  is  produced  and
Bust aiiied  by  a  combination  of  the
elements  of  the  candle  and  the  oxygen
of  the  atmosphere  we  do  not  know,
only  we  know  that  it  is  tbe  power  of
God,  we  know  that  it  is  the  light
which  is  in  all  things.  But  what  I
term  knoivledge,  and  what  we  should
all  term  knowledge,  is  to  understand
not  only  the  phenomena  but  the
cause  of  these  things*  We  endeavor
to  distinguish  between  the  natural


and  the  spiritual  light,  but  is  there
any  such  thing  as  drawing  a  line  of
distinction  between  the  two  ?  Who
can  do  it  ?  Where  is  the  man  or
philosopher  that  can  tell  the  distinc-
tion, and  where  one  ends  and  the
other  begins  ?  They  can  not  do  it.
If  we  take  the  revelation  which  God
has  given  we  learn  that  there  is  no
difference;  it  is  the  same  light  that
produces  both  effects,  and  the  light
which  darts  along  the  electric  wire  is
the  same  as  that  which  comes  from
the  distant  bodies  of  the  universe,
only  it  has  a  different  name,  and  ope-
rates a  little  differently.  The  time
will  come  when  the  Latter-day  Saints,
if  faithful,  will  have  an  understand-
ing of  all  these  things.  We  have
made  a  commencement  in  the  right
channel  j  we  have  placed  ourselves  in
an  attitude  to  learn  the  first  princi-
ples in  this  great  divine  university
called  the  kingdom  of  God.  God
has  given  us  his  Holy  Spirit,  which
is  the  commencement  of  knowledge,
light  and  intelligence.  But  unless
we  walk  according  to  the  light  and
the  mind  of  that  Spirit,  wherein  are
we  benefited  ?  We  are  not  bench  ted
at  all,  u  If  my  words  abide  in  you,"
.says  Jesus,  u  you  shall  ask  whatever
you  will,  and  it  bhall  be  given  unto
j on."  This  promise  is  given  unto
every  Latter-day  Saint  The  Book
of  Mormon,  however,  qualifies  this
saying  a  little.  It  says,  u  Whatso-
ever we  atk  in  faith,  which  is  right,
believing  that  we  shall  receive,  it
shall  be  given  unto  us.,T  These  words
— "  which  is  right" — greatly  qualify
the  promise.  The  Lord  has  not
bound  himself  by  promise  to  give  to
the  children  of  men  whatsoever  they
ask  for,  unless  it  is  absolutely  right
that  they  should  ask* for  that  thing.
If  what  we  ask  for  in  faith  is  right
then  he  is  bound.

This  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  passage
in  the  revelations  contained  in  the


SPIRIT  OF  LiGHT  AND  TRUTH,  ETC


233


Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  in
relation  to  prayer.  He  says,  "  You
shall  receive  whatever  yon  ask  for  in
prayer  which  it  is  expedient  for  you
to  receive ;  but  if  any  among  you
shall  ask  for  that  which  it  is  not  ex-
pedient for  him  to  receive.it  shall
turn  to  his  condemnation/'  We
most,  in  the  first  pkee,  try  to  have
light  enough  to  discern  wh>t  is  right
or  expedient  for  us;  in  the  second
place,  to  nsk  God  the  Eternal  Father
in  the  name  of  his  son  Jesus  Christ,
for  the  things  which  we  know  he  is
willing  to  bestow  upon  us.  Then  we
can  ask  iu  faith,  for  we  have  the  pro-
mise that  we  shall  receive*

The  great  difficulty  with  me,  and
I  presume  it  is  also  the  experience  of
almost  every  man  and  woman  in  the
Church  of  the  living  God,  is,  we  are
not  so  faithful  as  some  of  the  ser-
vants of  God  have  been  in  former
da  vs.  Some  of  them  were  so  faith-
ful  that  they  lived  constantly  in  the
light  of  revelation.  Their  minds
were  opened  to  it,  and  scarcely  a
tiling  could  transpire  but  what  they
undei  stood  it  beforehand*  They  did
not  need  the  news  or  intelligence  to
be  brought  to  them  from  a  distance,
but  there  was  a  spirit  within  them
and  the  candle  of  the  Lord  gave  that
spirit  understanding  in  regard  to
things  that  were  transpiring  thou-
sands of  miles  distant  They  lived
for  this;  they  walked  before  the
Lord  so  faithfully  that  they  were
entitled  to  know,  not  only  things
that  were  present  with  and  that  would
benefit  themselves  and  the  people
among  whom  they  dwelt,  but  also
things  in  the  future — ages  and  ages
to  come  were  opened  up  to  their
minds,  and  their  minds  compre-
hended them  by  permitting  this
candle  of  the  Lord  to  shine  upon  and
illuminate  them.

It  is  my  most  earnest  deshe  to  live
so  as  to  discern  under  every  condition


and  circumstance  in  life  precisely
what  would  be  most  pleasing  in  the
sight  of  God  for  me  to  do,  and  when
I  comprehend  this  I  can  act  as  a  per-
son who  does  not  grope  in  the  dark,
like  the  blind  man  who  gropes  for  the
wall ,  but  if  I  live  for  it,  the  path  in
which  I  should  walk  will  be  plain,
the  Spirit  of  God  boing  as  it  were  a
lamp  to  my  feet,  and  my  guide  and
instructor  by  day  and  by  night.  Do
you  not  desire  Latter-day  Saints  to
be  instructed  in  this  way  ?  Every
honest-hearted  person  will  answer
yes.  Every  one  who  hungt-rs  and
thirsts  after  righteousness,  and  who
desires  eternal  life  will  acknowledge
that  he  does  desire  to  be  thus  gui  led
and  led.

But  now  having  spoken  so  much
about  the  benefits  of  this  light,  and
how  good  it  would  be  to  be  continu-
ally guided  and  instructed  by  the
spirit  of  revelation,  there  is  another
thing  connected  with  it  which  we
perhaps  do  not  all  fully  understand.
Supposing  a  person  were  thus  guided
all  the  time,  from  waking  iu  the
morning  until  they  retired  to  rest  at
night;  and  then  when  asleep  if  his
dreams  were  given  by  the  same  spirit,
and  this  should  be  the  uninterrupted
condition  of  fin  individual,  I  ask,
where  would  be  his  trials  ?  This
would  lead  ua  to  ask,  Is  it  not  abso-
lutely necessary  that  God  should  in
some  measure,  withhold  f*ven  from
those  who  walk  before  him  in  purity
and  integrity,  a  portion  of  his  Spirit,
that  they  may  prove  to  themselves,
their  families  and  neighbors,  and  to
the  heavens  whether  they  are  full  of
integrity  even  in  times  when  they
have  not  so  much  of  the  Spirit  to
guide  and  influence  them  ?  1  think
that  this  is  really  necessary,  conse-
quently I  do  not  know  that  we  have
any  reason  to  complain  of  the  dark-
ness which  occasionally  hovers  over
the  mind* I  recollect  that  Lehi  had


234


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


a  very  great  and  important  dream
communicated  to  him,  and  his  son
Nephi  liad  the  same  renewed  to
him.  While  Lehiwason  his  way  to
this  country  he  dreamed  that  he  wan-
dered many  hours  in  darkness;  that
there  was  a  certain  rod  of  iron,  not-
withstanding tli  is  darkness  that
seemed  to  gather  around  him,  on
which  the  old  mnn  leaned  stead-
fastly. So  great  was  the  darkness
that  he  was  fearful  he  should  lose  his
way  if  he  let  go  the  rod  of  iron  ;
but  he  clung  to  it,  and  continued  to
wander  on  until,  by  and  by,  he  was
brought  out  into  a  large  and  spacious
field,  and  he  also  was  brought  out  to
a  place  where  it  was  lighter,  and  he
saw  a  certain  tree  which  bore  very
precious  fruit.  And  he  went  forth
and  paitook  of  the  fruit  of  this  trees
which  was  the  most  precious  and
desirable  of  any  iruit  that  he  had
ever  tasted ;  aud  it  seemed  to  en-
lighten him  and  fill  hirn  wit!)  joy  and
happiness.  Lehi  was  a  good  old  man
— a  man  who  had  been  raised  up  as  a
great  prophet  in  the  midst  of  Jeru-
salem, He  had  prophesied  in  the
midst  of  all  that  wickedness  which
surrounded  the  Jews;  and  they  sought
to  take  awav  his  life,  because  of  his
prophecy.  But  notwithstanding  this
gift  of  prophecy,  and  the  gifla  of  the
Spirit  which  he  enjoyed,  the  Lord
showed  him  by  this  dream  that  there
would  be  seasons  of  darkness  through
which  he  would  have  to  pass,  and
that  even  then  there  was  a  guide.  If
he  did  not  all  the  time  have  the
Spirit  of  God  upon  him  to  any  great
extent,  there  was  the  word  of  God,  I
represented  by  an  iron  rod,  to  guide
him  *  and  if  he  would  hold  fast  to
that  in  his  hours  of  darkness  and  trial,
when  everything  seemed  to  go  against
him,  and  not  sever  himself  therefrom,
it  would  finally  bring  him  where  he
could  partake  of  the  fruit  of  the  pre-
cious tree — the  Tree  of  Life.  Con-


sequently I  am  not  so  sure,  that  it  is
intended  for  men  of  God  to  enjoy  all
the  time  a  great  measure  of  his
Spirit

I  will  refer  to  another  example —
one  that  I  have  often  quoted.  It  will
be  found  in  the  *'  Pearl  of  Greit
Price.**  It  is  a  revelation  that  was
given  renewed Iy  to  Joseph  Smith,
concerning  what  God  revealed  to
Moses,  before  he  was  permitted  to  go
down  and  be  a  deliverer  to  the  chil-
dren of  Israel,  The  Lord  severely
tried  Moses,  as  well  as  enlightened
him.  He  had  to  p<*ss  through  both
conditions  of  experience — a  condition
of  great  light,  truth,  knowledge  and
understanding  in  the  ways  of  God,
and  a  condition  of  darkness  and
great  temptation.  Hence  we  find
that  on  a  certain  occasion  God  called
Moses  up  into  a  very  high  mount,
where  he  bowed  down  befor  e  the  Lord
and  cried  mighUly  unto  hirn,  and  the
Lord  heard  his  prayer,  and  the  glory
of  God  descended  and  rested  upon
him,  and  be  beheld  many  great  and
wonderful  things.  His  rmnd  was
opened  to  things  that  he  never  had
understood  before — things  that  were
great  and  marvellous.  Yet  the  Lord
showed  him  but  very  few  of  his  works,
for  he  told  Moses  on  that  occasion
that  no  man  could  behold  all  his
works  except  he  beheld  all  his  glory;
and  no  man  could  behuld  aU  his  glory
and  afterwards  remain  in  the  flesh.
To  behold  all  the  works  of  God  was
more  than  any  mortal  man  could
endure.

Moses,  after  receiving  this  remark-
able vision,  had  such  great  know-
ledge and  intelligence  unfolded  unto
hirn  that  he  marveled  exceedingly,
and  while  gazing  upon  the  works  of
God  the  Spirit  of  God  withdrew  from
him,  and  he  was  left  unto  himself,
and  he  fell  to  the  earth,  for  his  na-
tural strength  departed  from  him,
"  Now,"  said  Moses,  "  I  know  for


SPIRIT  OF  LIGHT

this  once  that  man  is  nothing,  which
thing  I  never  had  supposed/*  Bat
he  had  learned  by  the  contrast  that
man,  in  and  of  himself,  was  as  no-
thing, and  comparatively  speaking,
less  than  the  dust  of  the  earth,  which
moves  hither  and  thither  by  the  com-
mand of  the  great  God ;  but  that
man,  being  an  agent  an  to  himself,
and  God  not  having  a  disposition  to
control  this  agent  contrary  to  certain
laws  and  principles,  when  this  agent
was  left  to  himself  he  found  that  he
was  nothing.  The  Lord  then  per.
mitted  Satan  to  appear  in  a  persoual
lurm  and  visit  this  great  man  uf
God,  Here,  now,  was.  a  contest
Satan  came  up  before  Moses,  not  in
all  his  ugliness  and  maliciousness,
but  assuming  the  form  of  an  angel
of  light,  Satan  said,  "  Moses,  son  of
man,  worship  me!"  Moses  looked
upon  Satan  and  said,  (t  Who  art  thou,
that  I  should  worship  thee  ?  For  I
could  not  look  upon  God  except  his
glory  should  come  upon  me,  but  I  i
can  look  upon  thee  as  a  natural
man/1  Here  was  the  difference.  He
could  look  upon  this  individual  who
came  to  him  pretending  to  be  an
angel  of  goodness  a;*d  light,  and  have
none  of  the  glorious  feelings  that  he
had  before.  Hence  said  Moses,  u  I
can  discern  the  difference  between
God  and  thee.  Get  thee  hence,  Sa
tan!"  Satan  did  not  feel  disposed
to  give  up  the  attack,  and  he  com-
manded him  again  to  worship  him,
and  he  exerted  a  great  power  and
the  earth  shook  and  trembled,  and
Mos-.'S  was  tilled  with  fear  and  trem-
bling, but  he  nevertheless  called  upon
God#  for  he  was  convinced  in  his  own
mind  that  his  visitor  wa-j  one  from  |
the  infernal  regions,  a  personage  ot  ,
darkness,  and  he  felt  to  rebuke  himt
and  in  his  fear  he  saw  the  bitterness
of  hell,  that  is,  the  fear  and  trem-
bling that  came  upon  him,  and  the
darkness  that  surrounded  him,  gave


AND  TRUTH,  ETC-  235

him  an  experience  of  the  bitterness
and  misery  of  those  who  are  in  tor-
ment. After  a  certain  period  of  time
in  which  Satan  tried  to  overpower
him,  Moses  gained  strength  from
God,  and  commanded  Satan,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  depart,  and
he  departed,  Moses  then  received
strength,  and  he  continued  to  call
upon  God,  and  the  glory  of  God
again  rested  upon  him,  so  that  he
beheld  the  works  of  the  Creator,  and
he  began  to  inquire  very  diligently
concerning  the  earth  upon  which  he
dwelt.  The  Lord  saw  proper  on
that  occasion,  after  severely  testing
Moses  with  the  opposite  power,  to
show  to  him  the  whole  earth.  Not
merely  portions  of  its  surface,  but  he
showed  the  whole  of  the  inside  as
well  as  the  outside,  for  the  revelation
Bays, <l  There  was  not  a  particle  of  it
which  he  did  not  behold,  discerning
it  by  the  Spirit  of  God-"  If  we  go
to  the  top  of  a  very  high  mountain,
we  can  only  behold  a  very  limited
landscape,  for  the  most  distant  por-
tions of  our  view  are  generally  ob-
scured by  the  vapors  of  the  earth  or
by  smoke,  so  that  we  only  see  a  dim
outline.  But,  here  was  a  man  of
God,  having  the  Spirit  of  God  light-
ing up  his  mind  to  that  degree  that
he  could  see  every  particle  of  the
earth.  This  was  a  wonderful  de-
velopment of  the  mind  and  powers
of  man.  I  do  not  suppose  that  the
mind  of  Moses  was  constituted  any
different  from  the  minds  of  the  con-
gregation now  before  me ;  every  one
of  us  has  the  same  kind  of  human
spirit  that  he  had.  Though  not
called  with  the  same  calling,  yet  we
have  the  same  kind  of  spirit,  and  are
the  thildren  of  the  same  Father,
Now  if  Moses  had  within  him  a  cer-
tain undeveloped  principle,  which
for  the  space  of  some  eighty  years  he
did  not  know  that  he  possessed,  until
God  on  that  occasion  lighted  it  up>


236


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  brought  it  forth,  so  that  he  was
capable  not  only  of  looking  upon  the
surface  of  our  globe,  bat  of  looking
into  its  interior,  I  ao  not  know  why
each  and  every  one  of  those  now  pre-
sent before  me  have  not  the  same
faculty  and  gift,  If  it  were  only  de-
veloped.

I  bring;  up  these  tilings  to  show
how  God  deals  with  his  children —
his  sons  and  daughters — by  lighting
up  the  mind,  and  then  leaving  them
awhile  in  darkness.  It  is  not  likely
that  many  of  us,  with  the  little  ex-
perience that  we  have,  could  resist
such  great  temptatioua  as  Moses  did.
If  such  powers  were  brought  to  bear
on  our  minds  they  might  overthrow
and  destroy  us,  but  he  was  prepared
befor  ehand  -  he  had  beheld  the  glory
of  God,  and  Ijad  received  strength
from  the  heavens,  consequently  when
the  opposite  powers  a:ss*iled  him,  his
previous  experience  strengthened  him,
and  he  held  fast  to  the  rod  of  iron
notwithstanding  the  darkness  he  had
to  contend  with.

When  Muses  received  this  great
light  and  saw  the  whole  earth,  he
felt  a  very  great  anxiety  to  know
how  the  earth  was  formed.  It
would  be  very  natural  for  a  man
suddenly  endowed  with  the  power
to  behold  every  particle  of  the  earth,
to  ask,  u  How  was  this  made  *r"  and
Moses  said,  "  Be  merciful  unto  thy
servant,  0  God,  and  show  me  con-
cerning ihe  heavens  and  hi e  earth,
and  then  thy  servant  will  be  con-
tent" The  Lord  told  Moses  that
there  were  many  Leavens,  and  many
worlds  that  hud  passed  away  by  his
power,  and  that  as  one  heaven  and
one  earth  should  pass  away,  even  so
should  another  come,  and  there  was
no  end  to  his  works  and  to  his  words.
Then  Moses  limited  his  desires.

Here  we  see  something  asked  of
the  Lord  by  Moses  that  was  not  ex-
pedient, it  was  not  wisdom  in  the


Lord  to  revoal  it  to  him,  he  could
not  know  all  about  the  man}  hea-
ven?. Then  he  ;»sked  the  Lord,  say-
ing, "Show  unto  thy  servant  con-
cerning this  earth  and  this  heaven,
then  will  thy  servant  be  content"
The  Lord  then  gave  him  what  we
term  the  Book  of  Genesis,  one  of  the
first  hooks  of  Moses,  telling  him.  in
answer  to  his  prayer,  how  he  formed
and  created  this  earth  and  this  hea-
ven, and  the  various  stages  thereof,
aj  performed  in  the  several  days,
until  on  the  sixth  and  seventh  it  was
completed.  This,  according  to  new
revelation  contained  in  the  "  Pearl  of
Great  Price,"  is  the  way  Moses  ob-
tained a  knowledge  of  the  history  of
this  creation.  Other  men,  before  his
day,  also  obtained  it.  Abraham,
who  lived  several  hundred  years  be-
fore Moses,  had  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  which  the  Lord  God  gave  unto
him  in  the  laud  of  Chaldea,  and  by
the  aid  of  this  instrument  he  also
obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  history
of  this  creation,  and  not  only  of  this,
but  of  many  others,  God  also  giving
the  names  of  many  of  them,  such  as
Kolob  and  others,  which  it  is  not
necessary  for  me  to  repeat.  But
the  Lord,  in  various  ages,  lias  mani-
fested these  great  things  to  the  child-
ren of  men.  But  all  these  grett
Prophets,  Seers  and  Revelators  had
to  experience  their  seasons  of  dark-
ness and  trial,  and  had  t*  show  their
integrity  before  God  in  the  midst  of
the  difficulties  they  had  to  encounter.
Shall  the  Latter-day  Saints  despond,
then,  because  they  may  have  seasons
of  darkness,  and  may  be  brought
into  trials  and  difficulties?  No!
Let  us  be  steadfast,  holding  fast  to
the  rod  of  iron— the  word  of  God —
and  to  our  honesty,  integrity  and  up-
rightness, that  God  may  be  well
pleased  with  us  whether  we  have
much  or  little  of  the  Spirit  I  do
not  know  how  we  could  have  many


i


SPIRIT  OF  LIGHT  AX  J)  TttUiK,  ETC.


237


trials,  if  we  were  all  the  time  filled
with  the  Spirit  and  continually  hav-
ing revelations.

This  puts  me  in  oiind  of  the  ex-
perience of  our  Prophet  Joseph,  and
of  David  Whitmer,  Oliver  Cowdery
and  others.  You  are  familiar  with
many  things  contained  in  the  history
of  Joseph,  about  his  hours  of  trial.
He  had  some  before  the  Lord  per-
mitted nim  to  take  the  plates  from
the  HiU  Cumorah.  God  showed
him  where  those  plates  were,  and  he
was  commanded  by  the  angel  to  go
and  view  them.  He  did  so,  and
when  he  first  saw  them  he  put  forth
his  hand  to  btke  them.  But  was  he
suffered  to  do  so  ?  No.  What  was
the  reason?  He  had  not  had  the
trials  necessary  to  prove  his  inte-
grity, and  this  must  be  proved  before
he  could  be  entrusted  with  so  sacred
a  treasure.  Hence  he  was  told  to  go
and  he  obedient  to  the  Lord,  and  to
come  there  from  time  to  time,  as  he
was  commanded  by  the  angel  of  the
Lord  j  and  when  the  time  had  fully
come  he  was  permitted  to  take  them.

Do  yon  unpuse,  from  the  time  he
saw  the  plitcs  fit  st,  to  the  day  when
he  was  permitted  to  take  them,  being
some  four  years,  that  he  had  no
temptations,  trials,  darkness  or  diffi-
culties to  grapple  with  ?  We  are
told  id  his  history  that,  I  esides  the
glories  of  heaven  that  were  opened  to
his  mi  ad,  the  powers  of  rWkue.ss
were  also  portrayed  before  him.  The
Lord  showed  him  the  two  powers.
What  for?  T  -  give  him  the  experi-
ence necesaory  to  enable  him  to  dis-
cern  between  that  which  came  from
God  and  that  which  came  from  the
opposite  so'Ulw  He  saw,  as  Moses
did,  these  evil  beings  personally.
Th  ev  were  manifested  before  him  in
their  rage,  malice  and  wickedness.
He  had  also  many  seasons  of  sorrow,
tribulation,  difficulty  and  temptation;
and  when  lie  had  proved  himself  be-


fore the  Heavens,  and  before  the
Saints  in  Paradise  who  once  dwelt
on  this  continent,  and  hud  shown  that
he  was  full  of  integrity,  God  permit-
ted him  to  take  the  plates,  and  he
translated  the  record  thereon  into  the
English  language.

Perhaps  I  have  spoken  sufficient
in  relation  to  these  two  powers.
What  I  have  said  has  been  with  the
design  to  comfort  and  encourage  the
Snints,  that  they  may  not  think,  be-
cause some  are  tried  thi<*  way,  and
some  that  way,  and  some  another,
that  something  has  beffiHtm  them
different  to  what  has  taken  place
upon  the  human  family  before,  and
that  they  are  more  tried  than  any
other  individual  that  has  ever  been
upon  the  earth.  Do  not  think  this,
Latter-day  Saints,  but  strengthen
yourselves  in  God,  and  in  the  hour
of  your  trial  call  upon  him,  and  he
will  impart  strength  and  faith  to  yon,
lipfht  up  your  understandings,  and
br  mg  you  through  victoriously,  and
your  blessings  will  be  still  greater
than  before  your  temptations  came
upon  you.

By  and  by  the  time  wiil  come  when
the  vaii,  which  hides  this  earth,  and
shuts  out  its  inhabitants  from  the
presence  of  God,  will  be  removed.
We  read  this  in  the  Book  of  Cove-
nants. The  earth  is  now  shut  out
from  the  presence  of  God,  and  all  the
inhabitants,  aud  the  animal  creation,
the  fowls  uf  the  air  and  the  fishes  of
the  sea,  and  everything  wherein  there
is  life,  all  are  shut  out  from  the  pre-
sence of  God.  Because  of  the  fall
of  \  he  great  head  and  being  who  was
to  have  dominion  over  this  creation,
it  is  banished,  a  vail  is  let  down
which  hides  us  from  the  presence  of
God.  This  vail  or  covering  will  soon
be  taken  away,  and  the  earth  will  roll
back  again  imo  the  presence  of  God.
When  I  speak  of  the  earth's  rolling
back  again,  I  do  not  mean  that  the


238


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Lord  is  going  to  translate  it  from  its
present  orbit  around  the  sun ;  I  do
not  mean  that  it  is  going  to  be  moved
from  its  present  position,  which  it  has
occupied  for  six  thousand  years ;  but
1  mean  that  the  rail  which  shuts  us
out  from  the  presence  of  God  will  be
removed.

Those  who  are  sufficiently  pure  to
abide  that  day  have  great  promises
made  to  them.  You  will  find  these
promises  recorded  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  We  are
told  that  when  that  day  arrives,  God's
people,  whether  those  who  have  died
and  are  resurrected,  or  those  who  are
living  on  the  earth,  shall  know  all
these  things  that  I  have  spoken  of.
They  shall  know  about  the  earth,  and
all  things  in,  under  or  around  about
it,  and  all  the  power  thereof  and  the
materials  that  enter  into  its  constitu-
tion. All  these  things  will  be  open
to  the  mind  of  man,  and  it  will  be
one  of  his  natural  gifts  apparently*
I  say  natural,  because  it  will  be  so  fre-
quent. That  which  we  call  natural
is  something,  generally  speaking,  that
takes  place  all  the  time,  and  the  fre-
quency of  the  thing  makes  it  to  us
natural.  Well,  when  this  covering
of  which  I  have  spoken  is  removed,
the  knowledge  that  the  people  will
then  have  of  the  mysteries  and  won-
ders  of  creation  will  be  such  that
they  will  many  times  be  in  about  the
same  condition  that  Moses  was  in
during  the  short  interval  of  light  and
glory  that  was  manifested  to  bim.
If  that  man  of  God  could  retain  his
existence  as  a  mortal  being  after  that
great  manifestation  of  the  power  of
God  unto  him  on  that  occasion,  I  do
not  know  why  the  minds  of  all  who
are  counted  worthy  to  live,  when  the
Lord  removes  the  vail,  can  not  be
developed  the  same  as  the  mind  of
Moses  was,  that  they  may  grasp  and
comprehend  the  things  of  God  the
same  as  he  did. I  can  not,  in  my


own  mind,  see  so  much  difference,  'as
many  people  suppose,  between  the
ancients  and  the  moderns,  I  believe
that  God  is  willing  to  bless  all  his
children,  ancient  or  modern,  if  they
live  before  him  worthily.

We  read  in  Isaiah  of  a  time  when
a  certain  people  called  Ziou  should
be  clothed  upon  with  the  glory  of
God,  and  their  city  be  lighted  up  with
a  cloud  by  day  and  the  light  of  a
flaming  fire  by  night,  and  they  should
be  so  highly  favored  that,  so  far  as
light  was  concerned,  they  should  not
need  the  light  of  the  sun  by  day,  nor
the  moon  by  night,  for  the  Lord  their
God  would  be  their  everlasting  light,
and  the  days  of  their  mourning  would
be  ended. We  also read  in  the
same  connection  that  when  that  day
comes,  "  thy  children,"  speaking  of
Zion  M  shall  all  be  righteous; "  that
is,  they  would  be  a  people  upon  whom
and  to  whom  God  could  manifest
himself  as  he  did  to  Moses  and  others ;
that  the  knowledge  of  God  would  cover
the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the
great  deep. Jeremiah  has  said  that
the  time  would  come  when  the  new
covenant  should  take  its  full  effect
here  upon  the  earth  ;  that  there  would
be  no  more  need  of  ministers  and
priests  to  teach  the  people,  although
there  would  be  need  for  ordinances
to  be  administered, and for  the
priesthood  to  administer  in  other
capacities-  but  so  far  as  teaching  the
people  to  know  the  Lord  was  con-
cerned it  would  be  unnecessary.  In
that  day  no  man  would  need  to- say  to
his  neighbor,  "  Know  ye  the  Lord,"
Why  ? Because all  would  know
him,  from  the  least  unto  the  greatest,
for  Isaiah  says  they  should  all  be
taught  of  the  Lord,  all  be  righteous,
all  receive  revelation  and  visions,  all
prophecy  and  dream. That  is,  God
would  reveal  by  his  Spirit  in  different
ways,  at  different  times  and  by  differ-
ent methods  to  bis  people  those


SPIRIT  OF  LIGHT  AXD  TRUTH,  ETC*


230


things  that  would  comfort  and  build
them  up  in  their  most  holy  faith.

When  we  see  the  great  necessity
there  is  at  the  present  time  to  teach,
and  see  how  prone  men  are  to  forget
that  which  they  are  taught,  we  say,
they  are  like  him  who  beholds  his
natural  face  in  a  glass  and  turns
away,  and  straightway  forgets  what
manner  of  man  he  is.  It  is  just  so
with  regard  to  teaching  the  people;
they  need  to  bestirred  up  continually,
because  of  the  weakness  of  their
minds  and  memories;  and  naturally
viewing  this  weakness,  it  seems
almost  impossible  to  believe  that  it
will  ever  be  different,  as  long  as  men
are  in  a  mortal  stare.  Yet  1  do  not
look  at  it  in  this  light  I  look  for  a
great  change  and  revolution  among
the  inhabitants  of  our  globe.  I  look
for  the  vail  to  be  taken  not  ouly  from
the  earth,  but  from  every  creature
of  all  flesh  that  dwells  upon  the  face
thereof ;  and  all  will  be  in  the  pre-
sence of  God.  God  himself  will
be  their  God,  and  they  will  be  his
people.  God  himself  will  wipe  away
all  tears  from  their  eyes,  and  there
will  be  no  more  death,  no  more  sor-
row nor  crying,  for  all  things  will
become  new,  and  God  will  be  with
his  people  from  that  time  henceforth
and  forever.

Does  this  mean  that  God  will  all
the  time  dwell  upon  the  earth  ?  No,
There  will  be  a  connection,  an  open-
ing between  man  and  God,  that  will
bring  us  into  his  presence,  and
whether  he  shall  be  far  distant  or
near  it  will  make  no  difference.  Here
is  a  principle  that  none  of  us  fully
comprehend.  We  speak  oftentimes
of  going  to  and  returning  from  God,
of  going  to  heaven,  and  so  on.  I  have
no  doubt  that  many  of  ns  will  be
counted  worthy  to  approach  near  to
him  so  far  as  distance  is  concerned.
But  then,  when  we  come  to  reflect
that  distance  will  be  comparatively


annihilated,  between  God  and  the
worlds  he  has  made,  so  that  it  will
make  no  difference,  as  far  as  his
presence  is  concerned,  whether  he
is  close  by  or  millions  of  miles  dis-
tant— there  will  be  a  mutual  commu-
nication between  the  Creator  and  his
children  all  the  time,  consequently
there  will  be  union  and  fellowship
with  him,  and  rejoicing  in  his  pre-
sence, though  he  be  in  a  world  far  be-
yond Kolob,  of  which  Abraham  speaks.

As  an  illustration  of  this  principle,
let  me  bring  up  some  temporal  phe-
nomena here  on  the  earth.  A  few
years  ago,  when  I  was  a  boy,  no  such
thing  was  dreamed  of  as  conversing
with  our  neighbors  two  or  three  hun-
dred miles  distant.  And  if  such  a
thing  had  been  thought  of  and  it  had
been  mentioned,  the  dreamer  would
have  been  at  once  set  down  as  a  fana-
tic or  enthusiast,  or  as  one  beside
himself,  crazy  or  weak  minded*  That
was  the  idea  our  fathers  had,  and  the
idea  that  some  of  us  old  men  had
when  we  were  boys.  But  since  that
period  God  has  seen  proper  to  inspire
certain  individuals  with  information
and  knowledge,  to  erect  telegraph
poles,  and  through  the  medium  of
wires  attached  to  these  poles,  placed
upon  non-conductors  of  electricity,
we  are  enabled  to  converse  instan-
taneously, almost,  with  the  most
distant  parts  of  the  earth;  and  if
there  is  proper  wire  connection  we
can  send  our  message  to  the  other
side  of  the  globe  in  one  or  two  seconds
and  get  a  return  as  quickly.  Is  not
this  making  neighbors  of  the  nations?
So  far  as  this  one  means  of  commu-
nication is  concerned,  it  is  quite
neighborly.  We  in  Salt  Lake  City
can  sit  down  by  the  side  of  our  warm
fires  and  converse  with  persons  sit*
ting  by  their  fires.  The  people  of
these  two  cities  can  talk  together,
though  it  is  quite  expensive  as  yet

to  do  80.


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Supposing  now  that  it  were  possi-
ble to  invent  something  still  fort  her,
by  which  we  could  see  our  neighbors
in  London,  and  the  people  in  London
could  see  us  in  Salt  Luke  City,  then
we  could  both  converse  and  see.  And
if  we  could  do  this,  do  you  not  see
that,  su  far,  distance  would  be  almost
annihilated  ?

Again,  suppose  that  by  some  me-
dium now  unknown  to  us,  we  could
absolutely  be  able  to  hear,  not  by  the
vibrations  of  this  coarse  atmosphere
of  ours,  but  by  the  vibrations  of  some
fluid  spread  through  space,  more  re-
fined, operating  upon  the  organs  of
the  immortal  ear,  transferring  sounds
at  an  immeu.se  distance,  say  millions
and  millions  of  miles,  conveying
them  vvIiL  the  rapidity  of  the  electric
fluid  itsel'^md  perhaps  with  a  velocity
a  thousand  times  greater,  then  we
could  both  set  and  heitr,  and  also
converse  with  our  neighbors  at  long
distances  from  us;  and  if  such  means
of  communicate  u  w  ere  opened  among
the  different  nations  of  the  earth,
they  would  all  be  neighbors.

Now  extend  tfjis  principle,  and  let
us  suppose  that  there  was  a  medium
of  communication  by  which  immortal
beings  could  see,  hear  an*:  communi-
cate from  the  earth  to  the  sun,  and
from  the  sun  to  the  earth  ;  from  the
earth  to  Jupiter,  and  from  Jupi  er
back  again  to  the  earth;  from  the
sun  to  the  most  distant  planetary
bodies  of  our  system,  and  back  again
from  those  bodies  to  the  sun;  and
then  from  the  solar  system  itself  to
some  of  those  starry  spheres,  and
from  one  sphere  to  another,  taking
in  whole  groups  of  systems,  until
tin  Lil  ly  we  had  means  of  communica-
tion with  all  the  different  worlds  of
the  universe,  as  we  have  now  between
Salt  Lake  and  London,  only  through
a  more  lefiued  and  perfect  medium,
would  it  be  necessary  under  these  cir-
cumstances that  our  Father  and  God


should  be  directly  here  oa  the  earth
in  order  for  us  to  be  with  him  ?  Not
at  alh  He  could  be  sit nn ted  on  a
world  as  far  distant  as  some  of  the
fixed  stars  from  us,  and  there  he
could  sway  his  sceptre  over  millions
of  worlds  and  systems,  and  all  of
them  be  in  his  presence,  the  vail
having  been  removed  ;  while  those
powers  that  are  latent,  now  as  it
were,  in  the  mind  of  fallen  Ijeings
like  man,  being  developed  amo'ig  all
1  he  i n h >\b\ tan t s  of  tb ese  worl ds,  t h ey
ejuld  communicate  with  him  and  he
with  them.  Would  it  not  be  said,
under  these  circumstances,  that  they
were  all  in  the  presence  of  God  ?
Yes,  aid  :t  would  obviate  the  neces-
sity nf  travelling  and  spending  mil-
lions of  years  on  long  journeys  th  rough
space  in  order  to  get  into  his  pre-
sence, u .  ^ j  >

I  expect  that  in  future  ayes  all
these  things  will  be  made  manifest
to  the  children  of  God.  If  we  are  to
gruw  up  in  light,  intelligence  and
truth,  and  become  gods,  even  the
Sons  of  G  >d  ;  if  we  are  to  <e  filled
with  light,  understanding  and  know-
ledge; if  we  are  to  understand  all
things  pertaining  to  our  earth  and
to  other  worlds,  then  it  seems  to  me
that  we  must  approximate  very  nearly
to  the  fullness  of  the  blessings  ihat
are  now  enjoyed  by  him  who  is  our
Father  and  our  God.  I  do  not  con-
sider t  at  man  has  all  of  his  senses
developed  here,  and  because  we  have
not  yet  exercised  some  of  our  senses
that  have  slept  unknown  to  us  ever
since  our  birth,  that  is  no  argument
that  we  do  not  possess  such  senses,
no  evidence  at  all.  You  might  take
a  man  that  had  the  faculty  of  seeing
in  perfection,  and  if  he  was  born
where  not  a  glimmer  of  light  ever
entered  his  eye,  he  would  not  know
that  he  had  such  a  faculty,  and  you
could  not  by  talking  instill  the  idea  into
his  mind,  he  could  not  comprehend  it.


PRE-EXISTENCE  <

He  would  sav,  "  I  have  the  sense  of
feeling,  and  the  sense  of  smelling,
and  the  sense  of  hearing,  bnt  this
sense  of  seeing  tint  yon  talk  about  I
have  no  idea  of,  what  is  it  ?"  He
would  have  to  experience  it  in  order
to  find  out  what  was  meant  by  see-
ing objects  at  a  distance,  defining
their  colors,  and  so  on.  But  when  j
he  looked  on  the  surface  of  nature  by
the  aid  of  light,  when  it  was  once
brought  to  bear  upon  him,  what  a
world  of  knowledge  would  rush  into
his  mind,  not  all  at  once,  but  by  de-
grees. So  it  will  be  with  the  Saints
of  God,  when  their  latent  faculties
begin  to  be  developed  and  brought


OF  OUR  SPrRITS.  241

forth,  so  that  they  can  gaze  upon  the
works  of  God.

This  great  future  reward  is  worth
living  for,  and  this  is  what  we  should
seek  for,  even  for  the  enlightenment
of  the  Spirit.  This  is  what  we
should  endeavor  to  cultivate  in  all
our  business  transactions,  and  in  all
i  our  concerns  here  in  life.  If  we  culti-
vate this  Spirit,  it  will  increase  upon
us,  and  it  will  grow  brighter  and
brighter,  until  the  perfect  dav,  nnd
we  shall  rise  by  degrees  into  that
high  position  that  God  intends  for
his  children,  to  make  them  gods,  to
dwel!  in  his  presence  for  ever  aud
ever.  Amen.


- DISCOURSE  BT  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

DELIVERED  IN  TitE  14tH  WaRD  ASSEMBLY  ROOMS,  SUNDAY  AFTERNOON,

Dec.  15,  1872,
(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

*

PRE- EXISTENCE  OF  OUR  SPIRITS,


It  would  ha?e  been  my  choice  this  i
afternoon  to  sit  and  listen  to  others,  1
but  having  been  requested  to  address
the  congregation  I  cheerfully  comply,  j
liaviftg  a  desire  in  my  heart  that  Gud
will  pour  out  his  Holy  Spirit  upon
me  and  upon  the  hearers,  bo  that  we
may  be  mutually  editied. We  call
ourselves  the  children  of  the  Most
High  God, It  is  a  term  that  is
Scriptural  in  its  nature,  and  that  has
been  applied  to  the  people  of  God  in  j
all  ages: In  the  hymn  that  was  \
sungf  at  the  opening  of  this  meeting,

No.  16.


this  subject  was  more  fully  portrayed,
!  according  to  the  views  of  the  Latter-
day  Stnnts,  than  is  generally  expressed
by  religiwus  people  in  the  world,  for
I  believe  that  all  religions  people
claim  to  be,  and  term  themselves,  the
children  of  God.  It  may  not  be
amiss  to  investigate,  for  a  little  while,
the  reality  of  this  title,  and  see  if  we
can  come  to  some  kind  of  an  under-
standing in  regard  to  our  being  the
sons  and  daughters  of  the  Mj>st  High
God.  It  is  said  by  some  that  we  are
his  soob  and  daughters  only  bv  adop-

Vol.'XV.


242


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


tion,  or  through  obedience  to  the
Gospel ;  that  we  become  his  sons  and
his  daughters,  through  hein<?  horn  of
the  water  and  of  the  Spirit.  Now  I
admit  that  it  is  necessary  for  the
human  family  to  be  thus  udupted;
there  would,  however,  have  been  no
need  of  this  Adoption  it  ma?  kind  Imd
never  become  wicked  hi  id  corrupt.
If  there  had  never  been  any  sin  in
the  world,  I  do  not  think  that  adop-
tion would  have  been  necessary.
According  to  my  views,  and  I  belie  ve,
according  to  the  views  ot  tU*  Latter*
day  Saints,  and  also  nl  the  ancient

,  Saints,  we  were  at  one  peril  d  legiti-
mately his  sons  and  daughters  inde-
pendent of  adoption,  ami  this  will
carry  us  to  the  first  ideas  manifested
by  revelation,  in  regard  to  the  origin
of  man.  Many  people  suppose,  when
Ad  am  was  placed  in  ti-e  garden  of
Eden,  that  then  the  li i of  the
human  family  originated  I  admit
that  that  was  the  origin  as  far  a.s

f  man's  temporal  existence  hate  on  the
earth  is  concerned  ;  hut  had  we  no
prior  existence1?  \V«s  ihar  the  be-
ginning of  man  ?  Was  it,  in  reality,
his  origin  ?  This  is  a  very  important
question,  and  a  correct  an swer  thereto
would  certainly  be  calculate  !  to  cheer
the  hearts  of  the  child  ten  ot,  men.
That  maa  had  a  secondary  origin
here  on  this  earth,  and  wa«>  placed
im  the  Garden  of  Eden,  are  Seriptural
facts,  which  we  all  believe;  but  did
not  our  first  parents,  and  all  tluir
descendants  have  an  exigence,  before
there  was  auy  Garden  uf  Ed  en  on  this
earth  ?  I  think  it  is  admitted  by  the
whole  Christian  world,  that  man  is
a  being  compounded  of  bndy  and
spirit,  at  least  all  the  Christian  socie-
ties with  which  I  am  acquainted
believe  this.  They  all  believe  that
within  man's  body  or  tabernacle  of
fleah  and  bones  there  dwells  an  im-
mortal spirit.  AH  Christian  societies,
with  perhaps  very  tew  exceptions,


believe  that  this  human  spirit,  which
dwells  within  the  tabernacle,  will
exist  after  the  dissolution  of  the  body.
There  may  be  some  few  Christians
who  believe  that  the  spirit  is  disor-
ganized or  dies  betsveen  the  time  of
death  and  the  resurrection.  I  think
this  view  is  entertained  by  some  few
individuals,  but  the  great  mass  of
the  human  family  believe  that  when
this  body  falls  asleep  and  crumbles
back  again  to  its  mother  earth,  the
spirit  still  survives  as  an  organized
being  or  personage.  Some,  however,
do  not  believe  that  the  spirit  is  a
personage.  They  think  it  is  some-
thing which  can  not  be  defined,  some-
thing that  has  neither  the  shape  nor
the  properties  which  we  give  to  any
kind  of  material  substance.  The
views  of  the  immaterialist  are  that
the  spirit  occupies  no  space,  and
has  no  relation  to  matter,  something
entirely  separate  and  distinct  from
matter.  There  are  however,  but  few
in  the  Christian  world  who  have
worked  themselves  so  far  into  the
depths  of  these  mysteries,  as  they
term  them,  as  to  believe  in  such  ab-
r*urditirs  as  these.  I  could  not  believe
it  for  one  moment — I  never  did.  Tu
suppose  that  there  is  a  spirit  in  mau
and  that  that  spirit  has  no  shape,  no
likeness  and  occupies  no  space,  as  the
im  materialists  inform  us  in  their
writings,  is  something  that  I  do  not
believe,  and  never  could  believe,  un-
less  I  became  perfectly  beside  myself,
and  deranged  in  my  mind.

We,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  believe
that  the  spirits  that  occupy  these
tabernacles  have  form  and  likeness
similar  to  the  human  tabernacle,  Of
course  there  may  be  deformities  ex-
isting in  connection  with  the  outward
tabernacle  which  do  not  exist  in  con-
nection with  the  spirit  that  inhabits
it  These  tabernacles  become  de-
formed by  accident  in  various  ways,
sometimes  at  birth,  but  this  may  not


1


PEE-EXISTENCE  OF  OUIL  SPIRITS


altogether  or  in  any  degree  deform
the  spirits  that  dwell  within  them,
therefore  we  believe  that  the  spirits
which  occupy  the  bodies  of  the  hu-
man family  are  more  or  less  in  the
resemblance  of  the  tabernacles.

Now  a  question  arises,  If  this  spirit
can  exist  separate  and  independent
of  the  tabernacle,  when  the  tabernacle
dies  is  it  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  it  could  ex*st  before  the  taber-
nacle was  formed  r  Thij  is  an  im-
portant question  mid  in  my  estimation
there  is  nothing  uhsnrd  or  unreason-
able in  the  legist  decree,  in  believing
that  that  personage  that  we  call  the
intelligent  spirit,  which  can  exist
between  death  and  the  resurrection,
separate  and  distinct  from  the  body,
could  also  have  had  an  existence  be-
fore the  body  was  formed,  that  is,  a
pre-exisfence.  This  is  a  Scriptural
doctrine,  for  there  are  many  passages
in  Scripture  which,  in  my  estimation,
prove  that  man  had  a  pre-existeuce.
If  we  turn  to  the  first  and  second
chapters  of  Genesis,  we  shall  find  it
clearly  indicar«*d  that  man  had  an
existence  before  be  was  placed  in  the
Garden  ot*  E:rn.  In  the  first  chap-
ter of  Genesis  we  are  told  that  God
made  the  earth,  mid  the  seas,  and  the
grass,  and  the  her  bs  and  the  trees  in
about  six  das*  of  time.  We  also
redd  that  ou  tl.e  tifth  day  of  the  crea-
tion hp,  made  the  fish  and  fowls;  that
on  the  sixth  ds»y  he  made  the  ani-
mal f,  and  hi st  of  all  that  he  made
man,  male  and  female  created  he
them.  This*  apenlfe  to  have  been  the
last  work  ut  creation  on  the  sixth
day-  Read  on  still  fprther,  in  the
second  chapter  of  Genesis,  and  we  are
informed  that  on  the  seventh  day
there  was  not  jet  a  man  to  till  the
ground,  Now  huw  are  we  going  to
reconcile  this  with  that  which  is
stated  in  the  preceding  chapter— on
the  fifth  day  he  made  the  fowls  and
the  fish,  and  on  the  sixth  day  he


made  the  animals  before  he  made
man,  and  on  the  seventh  day  there
was  not  yet  a  man  to  till  the  ground,
And  then  we  are  informed  about"
man's  being  placed  in  the  garden  ou
the  seventh  day;  and  also  that  on
that  day  the  beasts  were  formed  and
brought  to  the  man  to  see  what  he
would  call  them.  This  seems  to  have
been  another  department  of  work
that  the  Lord  accomplished  on  the
morning  of  the  seventh  day.  He
planted  a  garden  on  the  seventh  day
in  Eden,  he  placed  the  man  in  that
garden  on  the  seventh  day ;  and  then
we  are  informed  that  he  brought  the
beasts  of  the  field  and  the  various
animals  that  he  had  made  before  the
man,  and  man  gave  names  to  them
on  the  Sabbath  day ;  but  on  the  sixth
day  they  were  made  male  and  female.
I  reconcile  this  by  giving  a  pre-exis-
tencetoman;  such  is  my  faith.  I
believe  that  man  had  an  existence
before  the  Lord  commenced  the  great
temporal  work  of  creation,  so  far  as
this  planet  is  concerned.  How  lori£
he  had  exi^  ted  prior  to  the  forma-
tion of  this  planet  I  do  ;iot  know,
but  it  is  certain  God  seems  to  have
formed  the  spiritual  part  of  it  in  the
six  days,  and  when  it  comes  to  the
temporal  part  that  seems  to  have
been  the  work  of  the  seventh  day.
On  the  seventh  day  the  Bible  says  that
God  efcded  his  work*  He  did  not
allogether  end  it  on  the  sixth,
but he  ended it  on  the  seventh

When  we  come  to  new  revelation
which  God  has  vouchsafed  to  give  to
bis  people  in  these  latter  times,  this
subject  is  made  very  plain ;  and  on
these  new  revelations  in  connection
with  the  old,  what  little  light  we  can
gain  through  the  hymn  that  was  sung
at  the  opening  of  the  meeting,  was
founded,  u  When  shall  I  regain  thy
presence/1  as  expressed  in  tile  first
I  verse,  showing  that  we  ouce  were  in


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


his  presence  and  existed  where  he  is,
but  for  some  reason  we  have  been
banished  therefrom,  and  that  when
we  are  redeemed  we  shall  return
again,  or  as  one  of  the  inspired  writers
lias  it— "the  spirit  shall  return  to
God  «i  ho  gave  it"

Tliis  returning  of  the  spirit  to  God
who  f^ave  it,  clearly  shows  to  my  mind
that  the  spirit  once  existed  with  God
and  dwelt  in  his  presence,  otherwise
the  word  "return"  would  be  inap-
plicable* If  I  were  going  to  China
it  would  be  inapplicable  for  me  to  say
I  am  returning  to  China.  Why?
Because  I  never  have  been  there,
consequently  the  word  u  return "
would  be  an  improper  word.  So  in
regard  to  the  saying  of  the  prophet,
it  would  be  entirely  improper  to  say
that,  after  the  body  crumbles  to  dust
the  spirit  would  "  return "  to  God
who  gave  it,  if  it  never  had  been
there.

Jesus  t?eems  to  have  been  a  pattern
in  all  things  pertaining  to  his  breth-
ren, and  wo  find  that  he  had  a  pre-
vious existence — his  spirit  existed
before  he  came  and  tabernacled  in
the  flesh.  This  is  abundantly  proved
in  the  Scriptures,  In  the  prayer
which  he  offered  to  his  heavenly
Father  beseeching  him  to  make  his
disciples  one,  he  says,  "  Father,  glo-
rify thou  me  with  that  glory  which  I
had  with  thee  before  the  world  was*"
Now  if  Jesus  dwelt  with  the  Father
before  the  world  was,  why  not  the
rest  of  the  family,  or  in  other  words,
the  rest  of  the  spirits  ?  It  certainly
was  not  his  tabernacle  which  dwelt
there  before  the  world  was,  for  he
came  in  the  meridian  of  time,  and
his  spirit  entered  a  tabernacle  of
flesh  and  bones,  and  was  born  of  a
woman,  just  the  same  as  all  the  rest
of  the  human  family.  What  then  is
the  meaning  of  that  Scripture  which
speaks  of  Jesus  being  the  elder
brother? It  certainly could  not


have  reference  to  him  being  the  eldest
so  far  as  bis  natural  birth  on  this
earth  was  concerned,  for  he  certainly
was  not  the  eldest,  for  generation
after  generation  had  preceded  him
during  the  four  thousand  years  which
had  passed  away,  from  the  time  of
creation  until  he  was  born;  but  yet
he  is  called  the  u  elder  brother."  In
another  Scripture  it  is  aaid  of  him
that  he  was  "  the  first-born  of  every
creature."  This  would  imply,  then,
that  Jesus,  so  far  as  the  great  family
of  man  is  concerned*  was  the  first-
born of  the  whole  of  them.  How
and  when  was  he  born?  He  was
born  in  the  eternal  world,  not  his
flesh  and  bones,  but  that  intelligent
spirit  which  dwelt  within  his  taber-
nacle was  born  before  this  world  was
made,  and  he  seems  to  have  been  the
first  spirit  that  was /born,  and  for  this
reason  he  became  the  elder  brother ;
and  we  are  told  in  many  Scriptures
in  the  New  Testament,  that  we  are
his  brethren,  and  that  he  is  not
ashamed  to  call  us  his  brethren.  I
look  upon  him  as  having  the  same
origin  as  we  had,  only  he  was  the
eldest;  and  if  he  was  born  in  the
eternal  world  thousands  of  years  ago,
why  not  all  the  rest  of  his  brethren,
so  far  as  their  spirits  are  concerned  ?
I  know  that  the  objection  will  imme-
diately arise  in  the  minds  of  individ-
uals who  have  not  reflected  on  this
subject,  if  we  were  intelligent  per-
sonages thousands  of  years  ago,  and
dwelling  in  the  presence  of  God,  and
of  Jesus,  our  elder  brother,  how  is  it
that  we  have  no  remembrance  of  any-
thing that  transpired  in  our  pre-exis-
tenceP  I  answer  this  question  by
saying,  that  when  we  came  into  this
world  from  our  former  state  of  exis-
tence, and  had  our  spirits  enclosed
within  these  mortal  tabernacles,  it
had  a  tendency  to  take  away  our
memories  00  far  as  the  past  was
concerned. It  did  so  in  relation  to


PRE-EXISTEXCE  <

Jesss,  He  had  great  knowledge  be-  I
fore  he  was  born  into  this  world —
sufficient  to  create  the  heavens  and
the  earth,  hence  we  read  ia  the  He-
brews that  God,  by  his  Son,  made  the
worlds.  This  was  before  Jesus  came
here,  and  he  must  then  have  been  the
possessor  of  great  knowledge  to  have
been  able  to  do  that;  but  when  he
took  upon  himself  flesh  and  bones
did  he  forget  this  knowledge  ?  We
read  in  the  Scriptures,  speaking  of
Jesus  coming  here  and  taking  a  body
of  flesh  and  bones,  t  hat  **  in  his  hu-
miliation his  judgment  was  taken
away."  What  humiliation  ?  His
descending  from  the  presence  of  God
his  Father  and  descending  below  all
things,  his  judgment  was  taken  away,
that  is,  his  remembrance  of  things
that  were  past,  and  that  knowledge
which,  while  in  the  presence  of  his
Father,  enabled  him  to  make  worlds,
and  he  had  to  be^in  at  the  first
principles  of  knowledge,  just  the
same  as  nil  his  brethren  who  came
here  in  the  flesh.  We  read  that  Jesus,
as  ho  grew  in  >t  iture,  grew  also  in
wisdom  and  knowledge.  If  he  had
possessed  fill  wisdom,  and  had  not
forgotten  that  which  he  formerly
possessed,  how  was  it  that  he  could
increase  in  wisdom  as  he  increased  in
statnre  ?  It  shows  clearly  that  the
wisdom  which  lie  had  possessed  thou-
sands of  years  before,  had  for  a  wise
purpose  been  taken  from  him,  "His
judgment  was  taken  away,'1  and  he
left,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  depth  of
humility,  beginning  at  the  very  first1
principles  of  knowledge  and  growing
up  from  grace  to  fzrace,  as  the  Scrip-
tures say,  from  one  degree  to  anorher,
until  he  received  a  fullness  from  his
Father.  Then  when  lie  did  regain
all  his  previous  knowledge  and  wis-
dom, he  had  the  fullness  of  the  Father
within  him,  in  other  words,  "in  him
dwelt  all  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead
bodily."


OF  OTJR  SPIRITS.  245

Now  if  his  knowledge  wns  forgot-
ten,  and  his  judgment  taken  awav,
why  not  ours  ?  We  find  this  to  be
the  case.  What  person  among  all
the  human  family  can  comprehend
what  took  place  in  his  first  existence?
No  one,  it  is  blotted  from  the  memo-
ry, and  I  think  there  is  great  wisdom
manifested  in  withholding  the  know-
ledge of  our  previous  existence.  Why?
Because  we  could  not,  if  we  had  all *
our  pre-existent  knowledge  accom-
panying us  into  this  world,  show  to
our  Father  in  the  heavens  and  to  the
heavenly  host  that  we  would  be  in
all  things  obedient ;  in  other  words,
we  could  not  be  tried  93  the  Lord
desii^ns  to  try  us  here  in  thi^  sfate  of
existence,  to  qualify  us  for  a  higher
state  hereafter.  In  order  to  try  the
children  of  men,  there  must  be  a  de-
gree of  knowledge  withheld  from
them,  for  it  would  be  no  temptation
to  them  if  they  could'  understand
from  the  beginning  the  consequences
of  their  acts,  and  the  nature  and  re.
suits  of  this  and  that  temptation.
But  in  order  that  we  may  prove  our-
selves before  the  heavens  obedient
and  faithful  iti  all  things,  wo  have
to  be^in  at  the  very  first  principles
of  knowledge,  and  be  tried  from
knowledge  to  knowledge,  and  from
grace  to  grace,  until,  like  our  ehler
brother,  we  finally  overcome  and
triumph  over  all  our  imperfections,
and  receive  with  him  the  same  glory
that  he  inherits,  which  glory  he  had
before  the  world  was.
I  This  is  the  way  that  we  as  a  peo-
ple look  upon  our  previous  existence.
There  is  something  truly  cheering  in
contemplating  the  previous  existence
of  man,  much  more  so  than  in  the
old  idea  of  the  sectarian  world — that
God  is  constantly  creating,  that  he
did  not  firttsh  his  work  suine  five  or
six  thousand  years  ago,  but  that  he
I  is  creating  all  (he  time.  They  will
tell  you  that  they  have  spirits  in


24G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


their  bodies  capable  of  existing  after
Ibe  bodies  have  crumbled  back  to
mother  earth.  Ask  them  the  origin
of  these  spirits,  and  they  will  tell  you
they  originated  about  the  time  the
infant  tabernacles  of  flesh  and  bone
originated.  Hence,  according  to
their  ideas,  God  has  all  the  time
boen  creating  about  one  person  every
twenty  seconds,  which  I  believe  is
&  bout  the  average  rote  that  persons
are  born  into  the  world ;  in  other
words,  about  three  a  minute,  and  ac-
cording to  their  ideas  the  Lord  is
engaged  iu  making  spirits  with  this
rapidity,  and  sending  them  here  to
this  world.

I  cannot,  for  my  part,  see  that
there  is  any  more  absurdity  in  be-
lieving" that  he  made  them  thousands
of  years  before  they  came  here,  than
to  suppose  that  he  made  them  just
before  they  came  here,  and  entered
into  the  tabernacle.  One  can  cer-
tainly not  be  more  unreasonable  than
the  other.

Because  we  can  not  recollect  our
former  existence  is  no  proof  whatever
that  we  did  not  have  one,  1  can
prove  this.  In  regard  to  this  present
existence,  what  person  is  there  in
this  congregation  who  enn  remember
the  first  six  months  of  his  or  her  in-
faney  ?  There  is  not  a  mm  nor  a
wuman  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  I
presume,  who  can  remember  this;
but  no  person  will  argue,  on  that
account,  that  he  did  not  exist  at  tbat
time.  Oh  no,  says  the  objector,  that
would  be  an  improper  method  of
arguing.  Our  memories  have  no-
thing to  do  with  a  previous  existence.
If  we  remember  it,  all  good  ;  if  we
do  not,  it  does  not  alrer  that  exist-
ence.

If  we  wierc  born  in  heaven  before
this  world  was  made,  the  question
might  arise  as  to  the  nature  of  that
birth.  Was  it  by  command  that  the
spiritual  substance,  scattered  through


space,  was  miraculously  brought  to-
gether, and  organized  into  a  spiritual
form,  and  called  a  spirit  ?  Is  that  I
the  way  we  were  born  ?  Is  that  the
way  that  Jesus,  »he  firstborn  of  every
creature,  was  brought  info  existence?1
Oh  no;  we  were  all  bain  there  after
the  same  manner  that  \.e  are  here,
that  is  to  say,  every  person  that  had
an  existence  before  he  came  here  had
a  literal  father  and  n  literal  mother,
a  persona!  f  it  her  and  a  ptvsomd  mo-
ther; hence  the  Apostle  Paul,  in
speaking  to  the  heathen  at  EphcSUS,.
says,  "  We  are  his  officii  ing."  Now
I  look  upon  every  man  and  woman
that  have  ever  comu  Here  on  this
globe,  or  th*\t  ev^r  will  come,  as
having  a  father  and  mother  in  the
heavens  by  whom  their  spiiits  were
brought  into  existence  Bat  how
I  mg  they  resided  in  r he  heavens  be-
fore they  came  here  is  not  revealed.

We  will  re'tT  n  v  to  the  19th
chapter  of  Job,  to  show  that  there
were  sons  of  God  before  this  world
was  made.  The  Lmd  a  ked  Jub  a
question  in  relation  t6  Lis  pre-exist-
ence,  saying,  11  Where  wast  thon
when  I  laid  the  corner  stone  of  the
earth  ?"  Where  were  you,  Job,  when
all  the  morning  star*  swng  together,
and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for
joy;  when  the  nuc!  13  of  this  crea-
tion  was  00  m  me  need  :  If  Jub  had
been  indoctrinated  iu:.'  all  the  mys-
teries of  modern  religionists,  he  would
have  answered  this  question  by  say-*
ing,  "  Lord,  why  do  you  ask  rae  such
a  question  ?  I  had  no  existence  at
that  time."  But  the  very  question
implies  the  existence  of  Job,  but  he
bad  forgotten  where  be  was,  and  the
Lord  put  the  qu  stion  as  though  he
did  exist,  showing  to  him  in  the
declaration,  that,  when  hi  laid  the
corner  stone  of  the  earth,  there  were
a  great  many  sons  of  there,  and
that  they  all  shouted  together  for
joy. Who  were  these  sons  ot  God  ?


PRE  EXISTENCE  OF  OUR  SPIRITS


247


They  certainly  were  not  the  fleshly  j
descendants  of  Adam,  for  he  had  not
then  been  placed  in  the  Garden  of  j
Eden. Who  were  they  then  ? They  I
were  Jesns,  the  elder  brother,  and  a! I
the  family  that  have  come  from  that
day  until  now — millions  on  millions
— and  all  who  will  come  hereafter,  j
and take  tabernacles  of  flesh  and
bones  until  the  closing  up  scene  uc
this  creation. All  these  were  pre-
sent when  God  commenced  this  crea-  1
tion. Jesns  wis  also  there  and  super-
intended the  work,  for  by  him  G  J
made  the  worlds,  consequently*  he
must  have  been  there,  and  all  fell
jo v fill,  and  shouted  for  joy.  What
produced  their  joy  ? It  was  fore-
knowledge. They knew  that  the
creation  then  being  formed  was  for  j
their  abiding  place,  where  their  spi-  1
Tits  would  go  and  take  npon  the  n
tabernacles  of  flesh  and  bones,  an  1  i
they  rejoiced  at  tne  prospect  They
had  mure  knowledge  then  than  the
world  of  mankind  have  no.v,  Thev
sa  w  I  hut  it  was  absolutely  mcessary
fjr  their  advancement  in  'he  scde  ot  l
bein^  to  go  and  tafce  tabernacles  of
i\  s'l  rind  bone; they  saw  that  their
spirits without tabernacle*  BOTOf
could  be  made  perfect,  never  c  *utd
be  placed  in  a  position  to  at  rain  t  *
great  power,  dominion  and  glory  like  j
their  Father;  and  understanding  that
the  earth  was  being  created  to  give
them  the  Opportunity  of  reaching  his
position,  they  sang  together  for  joy.
They  composed  a  hymn,  and  if  we
c  lild  have  a  copy  of  it,  we  >;.  uld  ■  ^
doubt  find  that  it  was  a  hymn  in  re-
lation to  the  construction  tjf  the  earth
and its  future habit  itiun  bv  thuan
spirits  in  the  form  oi  mum. i  snomd
like  to  see  that  hymn  myself,  and  if
we  had  it  we  would  gee  our  choir
here  to  sing  it. I  think  it  would
impart  a  good  deal  of  in  format  i  m  to
ns,  and  perhaps  we  would  shout  fur
joy  again.


It  is  very  evident  that  this  was  the
belief  of  the  people  in  the  days  of  the
Savior  Kven  the  Apostles  and  those
with  Jesns  evidently  believed  in  the  '
pre- existence  of  man.  This  is  mani-
fest fr  im  a  certain  question  which
they  put  to  Jesus  un  the  occasion  of
a  blind  man  making  his  appearance
before  him.  Thev  s<ud  to  him,
Master,  wliu  did  sin,  this  manor
his  parents,  that  he  was  born  bliud?"
In  other  words,  did  this  man  sin
before  he  was  born,  and  in  conse-
quence of  his  sin  was  he  burn  blind?
Oi  was  it  that  his  father  sinned  that
he  was  born  blind?  This  question
would  have  Iwn  very  foolish  to  put
to  the  Savior,  unless  they  had  be-
li-'vel  in  tne  pre-exishm^e  of  man.
But  thf*y  not  only  did  believe  it,  they
also  believed  it  possible  for  man  to
sin  in  that  pre-exist  en  ce, and  that  the
penalty  of  tbrtfc  sin  rn*ght  be  carried
down  to  this  state  Hf  existence,  and
bn  the  eius-"  of  blindness  at  birth,
and  with  that  belief  they  put  the
question  to  the  Savior.  That  would
nuve  been  a  very  fav  »r,ihle  opportu-
nity tor  in  it  t>  Imve  corrocted  t  <em.
if  tneir  ideas  about  pre- existence  had
he**n  false,  He  could  ha  e  turned  to
them  au  I  smd,  lip  cmld  not  h  ive
sinned  before  he  van  h  *rn,  and  that
be  tlwf  cause  that  he  was  born  bhnd,
because  lie  had  no  previous  exis'ence.
But  he  said  no  aut-h  thing,  he  replied,
"X  h1rt  this  man  nor  his  parents
sinned,  b-*t  that  the  tjiory  ot  God
ruig^ht  tie  rtride  minif^st"

In  the  rirst  smd  second  chapier  of
Genesis,  in  the  new  hand  ition  giveu
b)  lospitMtiou  through  Joseph  Smith
tl.e  Pr  *ptiet,  this  subject  is  nia«le
Vi*ry  plain.  AtW  Jo^pu  ha  1  tr^n-
slaM^t  rhe  B  >«»k  uf  At  »s  uou  Srorn  tne
gold  ptatfg,  the  Lord  commanded
him  to  tra  sl  ite  the  Bible.  Now  you
know  that  we  have  uo  inspired  tnm-
*iaiar  at  the  present  d  y  a  mo  g  any
of  i nation*. *\  e  have  translations


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


of  the  Bible  made  by  the  wisdom
and  learning  of  men,  but  as  each
translator  has  differed  in  his  views,
no  two  of  them  agree.  Indeed,  when
we  go  back  in  the  hisiory  of  the
Bible,  we  find  that  about  four  hun-
dred and  fifty  years  before  Christ
Ezra  compiled  iuto  one  volume  the
different  books  of  the  Old  Testament
so  far  as  they  were  givea.  Previous  |
to  that  they  had  been  in  scattered
manuscripts.  The  five  books  of
Moses  were  kept  in  the  Ark  of  the
Testament  The  writings  ot  Joshua
and  others  who  followed  Moses  wete
kept  here  and  there,  and  hut  very
lew  copies  were  to  be  had  in  those
early  days.  Indeed,  so  scarce  were
the  copies  of  the  Bible,  that  in  the
days  of  the  kings  of  Israel  they  had
lost  almost  nil  knowledge  ot  any
written  copy  uf  the  Bible.  The}7  re-
tained many  of  their  ordinances,  their
Temple  worship,  and  so  on,  but  v%  r i t*
ten  copies  of  the  Bible  had  so  nearly
disappeared,  that  on  repairing  the
Temple  at  a  certain  time  they  found
a  copy  of  it  bid  up,  hut  they  did  not
know  whether  it  was  true  or  not.
They  had  nothing  to  compare  it
with,  arid  the  only  way  they  could
ascertain  whether  it  was  a  true  copy
of  the  Bible  was  to  send  for  a  man  of
God— a  Prophet — and  get  him  to
inquire  of  the  Lord  whether  it  was
genuine  or  not.  Thus  we  see  that
the  people  in  those  early  ages  were
not  favored  as  we  are  in  these  days
with  copies  of  the  Bible.  But  Ezra,
according  to  the  history,  gathered  np
these  fragments  ;*s  far  as  he  could.

Two  hundred  years  before  Christ
there  were  seventy* two  Israelites,
said  to  be  sis  out  of  each  tribe,  met
together  in  the  city  of  Alexandria  in
Egypt,  and  they  translated  the  law  of
Moses,  the  prophets  and  the  psalms
from  such  Hebrew  copies  as  they
happened  to  have  possession  of,  into
the  Greek. This  was  called  the


Septuagint  translation.  Jerome,  a
staunch  Roman  Catholic,  translated
this  Greek  version  called  the  Septua-
gint into  what  was  termed  the  Vul-
gate— a  Lai  in  translation.  That,
and  copies  of  it  made  by  scribes  for
many  generations,  became  the  Bible
of  the  Roman  Catholics;  and  even
to  this  day,  so  far  as  they  use  Latin
they  appeal  to  that  edition  of  the
Scriptures  called  the  Vulgate.

In  the  year  1610  the  Vulgate
edition  was  translated  into  English.
This  was  called  the  Douay  Bible,  be-
cause it  was  published  at  the  town  of
Douay  in  France,  and  it  is  the  Roman
Catholic  Bible,  so  far  as  the  English
translation  is  concerned,  to  the  pre-
sent day*  It  di filers  materially  from
the  Protestant  Bible.

About  the  same  time  that  the  Douay
translation  was  published — in  160  7,
King  James  the  First  appointed
fifty- four  men,  some  six  or  seven  of
whom  did  not  serve,  to  translate  the
Bihle  from  the  original  Hebrew,  and
they  gave  us  that  version  called  King
Ja:nei>'  translation.

All  these  translators  that  1  have
spoken  of  translated  by  their  own
wisdom,  according  to  the  best  under-
standing they  had.  None  of  them
were  prophets  or  revelators,  and  not
one  of  them  understood  the  meaning
of  the  original  text  like  a  man  of  God
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  But
they  have  made  a  very  f>ood  transla-
tion notwithstanding,  especially  the
forty- seven  who  labored  under  the
appointment  of  King  James.  Dif-
ferent parts  of  the  Scriptures  were
portioned  out  among  six  different
classes  of  translators,  and  they,  1
believe,  have  given  us  the  very  best
copy  of  the  Bible  in  existence,  so  far
as  translations  by  human  wisdom  are
concerned.

But  to  come  back  again,  as  I  said
before,  after  having  translated  the
Book  of  Mormon,  this  young  man,


PRE- EXISTENCE  OF  OUR  SriRiTS*  ■


249


Joseph  Smith,  a  man  of  no  education
or  learning,  comparatively  speaking,
was  commanded  to  translate  the  Bible

  I

by  inspiration.  He  commenced  the  i
work,  and  the  first  and  second  chap-
ters of  Genesis  containing  the  history  1
of  the  creation  are  very  plain  and  j
full.  In  the  first  chapter  the  Lord  !
speaks  about  the  spiritual  creation  of
all  things  before  they  were  marie
temporally.  In  the  second  chapter
he  goes  on  to  state  that  there  was  not
yet  a  man  to  till  the  ground,  "  for  in
heaven  created  I  them/'  That  ex-
plains the  mystery  about  the  work
previously  spoken  of  in  the  first  chap-
ter, and  shows  that  it  had  reference
to  the  great  work  which  God  had
performed  in  the  heavens  before  he  i
made  this  earth  temporally.  This
same  doctrine  is  inculcated  in  some
small  degree  in  the  Book  of  ilormon.
However,  I  do  not  think  that  1  should
have  ever  discerned  it  in  that  book
had  it  not  been  for  the  new  transla-
tion of  the  Scriptures,  that  throwing
so  much  light  and  information  on  the
subject,  I  searched  the  Book  of
Mormon  to  see  if  there  were  indica-
tions in  it  that  related  to  the  pre-
existence  of  man,  I  found  them  in
a  great  revelation  that  was  given  to
the  prophet  who  led  the  first  colony
to  this  country  from  the  Tower  of
Babel  at  the  time  the  language  wjis
confounded.  This  great  prophet  had
a  remarkable  vision  before  he  arrived
on  this  continent.  In  this  vision  he
saw  the  spiritual  personage  of  our
Savior  as  he  existed  before  he  came
to  take  upon  him  flesh  and  bones;
and  Jesus,  in  talking  to  this  great
man  of  God,  informed  him  that  as
he  appeared  to  him  in  the  spirit  so
would  he  appear  to  his  brethren  in
the  flesh  in  future  generations,  and  j
said  he,  "  I  am  be  that  was  prepared
from  before  the  foundation  of  the
word,  to  redeem  my  people."  He
furthermore addressed himself  to


tins  great  man  saying,  "  Seest  thou
that  thou  art  created  in  mine  own
image?  "  That  is,  man  here  on  the
earth  is  in  the  image  of  that  spiritual
body  or  personage  of  Jesus,  so  far  as
we  are  not  deformed.  "  Seest  thou
that  thou  art  created  in  mine  own
image,  yea  even  in  the  beginning
created  I  all  men  after  mine  own
image."  This  is  about  the  only  place
that  refers  pointedly  to  the  pre-exis-
tence  of  man  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.
I  think  there  are  one  or  two  other
passages  in  which  it  is  just  referred
to- *  '  iy  i  'I  - n  ,t

Now  admit,  as  the  Latter-day
Saints  do,  that  we  had  a  previous  ex-
istence, and  that  when  we  die  wu
shall  return  to  God  and  our  former
habitation,  where  we  shall  behold  the
face  of  our  Father,  and  the  question
immediately  arises,  shall  we  have  our
memories  so  increased  by  the  ^Spirit
of  the  living  God  that  we  shall  ever
remember  our  previous  existence?
I  think  we  shall.  Jesus  seems  to
have  gained  this  even  here  in  this
world,  otherwise  lie  would  not  have
prayed,  saying,  "  Father,  glorify  thou
me'with  that  glory  which  I  had  with
thee  before  the  world  was,"  showing
plainly  that  he  had  obtained  by  reve-
lation a  knowledge  (rum  his  Fa! her
of  something  about  the  glory  that  he
had  before  the  world  was.  This
being  the  case  with  Jtsus,  why  not
his  younger  brethren  mIso  obtain  this
information  by  revelation  r  And
when  we  do  return  back  into  the  pre-
sence of  our  Father,  will  we  not  there
also  have  our  memories  so  quickened
that  we  will  remember  his  face,
having  dwelt  in  his  presence  for
thousands  of  years  ?  It  will  not  be
like  going  to  visit  strangers  that  we
have  never  seen  before.  Is  not  this
a  comfort  to  persons  who  expect  to
depart  this  life,  like  all  the  rest  of
the  human  family?  They  have  a
consolation that  they are  going


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


not  among  strangers,  not  to  a  being
whose  face  they  never  saw,  but  to  one
whom  they  will  recognize,  and  will
remember,  having  dwelt  with  him  for
ages  before  the  world  was.  Looking
upon  it  in  the  light  of  reason,  inde-
pendent of  revelation,  if  a  person
were  to  form  a  system  of  religion
according  to  the  best  light  that  he
had,  would  it  not  be  more  happi  tying
and  calculated  more  in  its  nature  to  I
give  joy  and  peace  to  the  mind  to
suppose  that  we  were  going  back  to
a  personage  we  were  well  acquainted
with,  rather  than  to  one  we  had  no
idea  of?  I  think  I  should  prefer,  so
far  as  reason  is  concerned,  to  be  well
acquainted  with  people  1  am  going
among*  unit

These  are  the  expectations  of  the
Latter-day  Saints;  we  do  not  expect
to  go  among  strangers*  When  we
get  back  there  we  expect  this  place
to  he  familiar  to  us,  and  when  we  I
meet  this,  that  and  the  other  one  of
all  the  hum  sin  family  that  have  been
here  on  the  earth,  we  shall  recognize
them  as  those  with  whom  we  have
dwelt  thousands  uf  years  in  the  pre-
sence of  our  Father  and  God,  This
renewing  of  old  friendships  and  ac-
quaintances, and  again  cn/oying  all
the  glory  we  once  possessed,  will  be  a
great  satisfaction  to  all  who  are  pri-
vileged to  do  so.

If  we  ever  dwelt  there,  it  is  alto*  1
gether  likely  that  God  made  some
promises  to us when there. He  i
would  converse  with  us,  and  cheer  us
up. Being  his  offspring — his  sous
and  daughters,  he  would not  be
austere  and unwilling  to  converse
with  his  own  chilJien,  but  he  would  |
teach  them  a  great many  tilings.
And  all  this  will  be  familiar  to  us.
We  read  in  the  New  Testament  that
God  did  make  promises  to  ns  before
this  world  was  made. I  recollect  one
passage  in  one  of  the  epistles  ul  Paul,
either  to  Timothy  or  Titus,  the  Apos-


tle siys,  "  Tn  hope  of  eternal  life,
which  God,  who  c  m  not  lie,  prom'sed
before  the  world  began/'  To  whom
did  he  make  that  promise  ?  I  con-
tend th  it  we  had  the  promise  of
eternal  life  before  the  world  began  on
certain  conditions  —  it  we  would
comply  with  the  gospel  of  live  Son
of  God,  by  repenting  of  our  sins  and
being  faithful  in  keep:ng  the  com-
mandments of  Go  1.

There  aro  many  Scriptures  in  the
New  Testament  that  have  relation  to
the  previous  existence  of  man,  which
I  do  not  at  this  time  I  eel  disposed  to
quote.  Th  y  em  be  searched  up  by
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  by  al!  who
are  curious  enough  to  enquire  into
these  things.  There  are  some  other
things  however,  which  1  teel
anxious  To  brinir  forth  in  connection
with  the  pre-  xUtenee  of  man.  One
thing  is  our  origin  more  full}.  1
have  already  stated  that  the  spirits
of  the  children  of  men  were  horn  unto
their  patents  Now  who  are  the
parents  of  these  children  ?  *
There  art*  certain  promises  made  to
the  tjatrer-day  Saints,  one  of  them
being  that  when  we  take  a  wife  here
in  this  world,  it  is  our  privilege  by
obedience  to  the  ordinances  of  he  iven,
I  to  have  t hat  wife  married  to  nw  for
i  time  and  for  all  eternity.  This  is  a
promise  which  God  has  made  by
revelation  to  his  Church,  hence  the
Later-day  Saims  believe  in  the
eternity  of  1 1 le  marriage  covenant.
This  is  one  of  our  fundamental  doc-
trines We  consider  that  a  marriage
fur  time  alone  is  after  the  old  Gentile
order,  and  they  have  lost  all  know-
ledge  of  the  true  ordinances  and
i  nier  uf  heaven,  'J' hey  marry  until
death  separates  them.  I  believe  that
almost  every  religious  society,  in
I  their  marriage  ceremony,  use  this
phrase,  44  1  pronounce  you  man  and
wite  until  death  shall  part  you!"
This  sort  uf  a  marriage  never  origi-


iiated  with  God;  the  marriage  that
originated  with  him  is  the  same  as
that  of  which  we  had  ati  example  in
the  beginning — the  first  marriage
that  was  ever  celebrated  here  on  the
earth.  Do  you  erquire  what  was  the
form  of  that  first  marriage  between
Adam  and  Eve?  I  will  explain  it
in  a  few  words*  They  were  united
as  h unhand  and  wife  by  the  Lord
himself;  when  they  were  united  they
did  not  know  anything  about  death,
for  they  had  not  partaken  of  the  fruit
of  the  tree  that  was  forbidden,  and
they  were  then  immortal  beings.
Here  were  two  beings  united  whoweie
as  imfnortal  as  you  will  be  when  you
come  forth  from  your  graves  in  the
morning  of  the  first  resurrection.
Under  these  conditions  Adam  and
Ere  were  married,  I  do  not  believe
that  the  Lord  used  the  ceremony  that
is  now  used — I  marry  you  until  death
shall  separate  you,  "  By  what  means
did  death  come  into  the  world  ?
After  this  marriage  by  partaking  of
the  forbidden  fruit,  they  brought
death  on  both  male  and  female,  or  as  ,
the  Apostle  Paul  says,  u  By  one  man
sin  and  death  entered  into  the  worli,
even  so  shall  all  be  made  alive,  and
every  man  in  his  own  order.  j
It  seems  then,  that  if  there  h**d
been  no  sin  death  never  would  have
come  npon  Adam  and  Eve,  and  they  ■
would  have  been  living  to-day,  im-
mortal, nearly  six  thousand  years
after  being  placed  in  the  Garden  of
Eden,  and  would  they  not  still  be
husband  and  wife  ?  Certainly,  and
so  they  would  continue  if  millions
and  millions  of  Mges  should  pass  away,
and  you  cuuld  not  point  out  any
period  in  the  future,  when  this  rela-
tion would  cease;  no  matter  how
many  myriads  of  ages  might  pass
away,  unless  they  by  sin  brought
death  into  the  world.  All  will  admit,
who  reflect  on  the  subject,  that  this
marriage  was  for  eternity,  and  that


death  interfered  with  it  only  for  the
time  being,  until  the  resurrect  ion
should  bring  them  forth  and  re-unite
them.

The  "  Mormons,"  or  Latter-day
Saints,  believe  in  this  kind  of  mar-
riage, and  the  first  one  ever  per-
formed on  the  earth  is  a  pattern  for
us.  Moreover  God  has  revealed  to
us  the  nature  of  marriage,  and  that
its  relationships  are  to  exist  after  the
resurrection,  and  that  it  must  be
attended  to  in  this  life  in  order  to
secure  it  fur  the  next  life.  For  in-
stance, if  you  wish  to  obtain  a  great
many  blessings  pertaining  to  the
future  world,  you  have  to  secure
these  blessings  here.  You  cannot  be
baptized  in  the  next  state  of  exis-
tence for  the  remission  of  sins;  that
is  an  ordinance  pertaining  to  the
flesh,  which  you  must  attend  to  here.
And  so  with  all  other  ordinances
which  God  has  ordained,  yon  have  to
nartake  of  them  here  in  order  to
have  a  claim  on  the  promises  here-
after. It  is  so  Willi  regard  to  mar-
riage; and  this  agrees  with  what
Jesus  h*s  said  in  relation  to  their  not
marrying  nor  giving  in  marriage  in
that  world.  There  will  be  no  such
thing  there.  Why  ?  Because  this
is  the  world  for  all  these  ordinances
to  be  attended  to.  Here  is  the  place
to  secure  all  the  blessings  for  the  next
world.  We  have  to  show  in  this
probation  that  we  will* be  obedient  in
obeying  the  commandments  of  hea-
ven so  that  we  may  have  a  claim  on
every  blessing  peitaining  to  the  next
life.  Consequently,  we  have  to  se-
cure this  marriage  for  eternity  while
in  tli is  world.  When  a  female  in  the
Latter-day  Saint  Church  marries  a
person  outside  the  Church  it  is  not  a
marriage  in  our  estimation,  in  the
scriptural  sense  of  the  word,  it  is
only  a  union  until  death  shall  part
them-  When  a  person  does  this  we
really  consider  them  weak  in  the


252


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


faith ;  indeed  it  is  equivalent  in  my  and  their  God.  He  has  power  to
estimation  not  only  to  being  weak  in  beget  and  bring  forth  sons  and
the  faith,  but  since  these  revelations  daughters  in  the  spirit  world;  and
were  given  on  the  subject,  if  people  after  he  has  brought  forth  millions
with  their  eyes  wide  open  will  still
reject  these  important  things,  and
marry  a  pet  son  outside  the  Church,
it  shows  to  me  very  clearly  that  he  or
she  has  no  regard  for  the  word  of
God,  nor  lor  their  own  salvation.
They  are  lacking  not  only  in  faith
but  in  the  principle  of  obedience.
They  have  no  hops  whe*i  they  marry
outside  the  Church,  but  when  they
marry  in  the  Church  according  to
this  order,  and  the  persons  who  offi-
ciate in  declaring  them  husband  and
wife,  bting  commissioned  of  GoJ  an  1
having  authority  to  administer  in  all
the  ordinances  of  his  kingdom,  that
marriage  is  not  only  for  time,  hut  for
all  eternity.

Another  question.  Having  been
married  for  eternity,  we  die  and  our
spirits  go  into  celestial  paradise.  We
come  forth  in  the  morning  of  the
first  resurrection  as  immortal  males
and  immortal  females.  Our  wives,
married  to  us  for  eternity,  come  forth,
and  they  are  ours  by  virtue  of  that
which  God  has  pronounced  upon  them
through  those  whom  he  has  appointed,
and  to  whom  he  has  given  authority.
We  have  a  le^ul  claim  upon  them  at
the  resurrection.  But  litre  comes
forth  a  person  that  is  married  outside.
She  comes  up  without  a  husband,  he
without  a  wife,  or  any  claim  upon  any
of  the  blessings.  Here  is  the  dif-
ference between  these  two  classes  of
beings.  One  dwells  as  an  angel,
without  any  power  to  increase  their
species,  family  or  dominions,  without
the  power  to  beg ot  sons  and  daugh-
ters. This  class  will  be  angels.
Perhaps  many  of  them  will  be  worthy
of  obtaining  a  degree  of  power,  glory,
and  happiness,  but  not  a  fullness.
Why  ?  Because  they  have  not  come
up  to  that  position  of  their  Father


and  millions  of  spirits,  he  has  power
to  organize  worlds,  and  send  these
spirits  into  these  worlds  to  take  tem-
poral bodies  to  prepare  them  in  turn
to  be  redeemed  and  become  Gods,  or
in  other  words,  the  sons  of  God,
growing  up  like  their  father,  possess-
ing all  his  attributes,  and  propagating
their  species  through  all  eternity.
Hena  then  is  the  difference  between
these  two  classes  of  beings — one
having  lost  what  they  might  have
obtained  and  enjoyed  if  they  had
had  faith  in  God  and  been  willing  to
obey  his  commandments.  But  the
others  are  worthy,  as  the  Apostle
Paul  has  said,  to  obtain  a  far  more
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,
while  the  others  will  be  angels  or
servants,  to  go  and  come  at  the
bidding  of  thoso  who  are  more  px*
altetl.

This  is  what  Paul  meant  when  he
said  that  in  the  Lord  the  man  is  not
without  the  woman,  neither  is  the
woman  without  the  man ;  as  much
as  to  say  that  in  order  to  be  in  the
Lord  and  to  obtain  a  fullness  of  bis
glory  and  exaltation,  you  can  not  be
separated ;  or  in  other  words,  to
speak  according  to  the  common
phrase,  you  can  not  live  old  bache-
lors or  old  maids  and  lto  down  to
your  graves  in  this  condition.  That
is  not  the  order  of  heaven,  why  ?
Because  marriage  is  essentially  ne-
cessary to  quaiiiy  them  to  propagate
their  species  throughout  all  eternity,
that  they  in  their  turn  may  have
worlds  created  on  which  these  sons
and  daughters  of  their  own  begetting
may  receive  tabernacles  of  flesh  and
bones  as  we  have  done.  This  is  the
order  by  which  all  worlds  are  peopled,
by  spirits  that  have  been  born  in  the
,  eternal  worlds ;  and  these  worlds  are


TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAH.


253


organized  expressly  for  them  that
they  may  go  and  have  another  change,
another  state  of  being  different  from
their  spiritual  state,  where  they  may
possess  bodies  of  flesh  and  bones,
which  are  essentially  necessary  to  the
begetting  of  their  own  species.
Spirits  can  not  bring  forth,  multiply


and  increase.  They  must  have
1  bodies.

We  have  said  this  much  on  the
hymn  that  was  sung  in  the  morning,
and  these  ideas  are  fully  inculcated
therein,  and  they  are  established  and
founded  on  the  revelations  God  has
given  in  different  ages.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  13th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lark  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  Deo,  20,  1872.

(Reported  hj  David  W.  Uvans.)

TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR,


We  are,  this  afternoon,  com  mem*  \
orating  according  to  our  usual  eas-
tern, one  of  the  most  important
events  that  has  ever  transpired  in  our
world,  and  one  which  most  concerns
the  whole  human  family,  namely,  the
death  and  sufferings  of  the  Lard  Jesus
Christ  for  the  redemption  of  the
ha  man  family*  No  other  event  can
be  compared  with  this  in  its  impor-
tance, and  in  its  bearings  upon  the
human  family.  Everything  else  is
but  of  a  secondary  consideration,
when  compared  with  the  atonement
lhat  has  been  wrought  out  in  behalf
of  man  by  the  great  Redeemer,  yet,
strange  to  say,  there  are  those  in  the
Christian  world,  so  called,  who  pro*
less  to  believe  in  Christianity  and  yet
deny  the  efficacy  of  the  atoning  blood
that  was  shed  by  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ.  More  especially  has
this  been  the  case  for  a  few  years  past


I  suppose  there  are  many  thousands
who  deny  this  now,  where  there  were
but  few  at  the  time  of  the  rise  of  this
Church.  This  has  arisen,  probably,
from  the  multiplication  of  spiritual
influences,  which  now  prevail  to  a
very  great  extent  in  the  Christian
world — influences  that  are  evil,  reve-
lations, false  visions,  spirit  rappings
and  mediums.  Almost  without  ex*
ception  these  false  spirits  have  taught
those  who  have  listened  to  them,  that
there  is  no  efficacy  in  the  Atone-
ment.

There  is  no  subject  more  fully  de-
veloped and  made  manifest  to  the
children  of  men  in  modern  revelation
than  that  of  the  atonement.  Much
is  said  in  relation  to  other  doctrines,
all  of  which  have  a  bearing  on  the
atonement,  that  lying  at  the  founda-
tion of  the  whole.  If  the  evil  ono
can  prevail  over  the  human  family  so


2o4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


as  to  get  them  to  deny  this  funda-
mental doctrine,  he  knows  that  they
are  safe,  so  far  as  serving  him  and
failing  of  their  salvation  are  con-
cerned. If  they  can  only  be  wrought
upon  and  deluded  so  as  to  disbelieve
in  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement,  it
does  not.  matter  to  S*t-ati  what  else
they  may  believe.  It  is  not  ray  in-
tent  it  in,  however,  tins  afternoon,
unless  so  led  by  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  to  dwell  much  on  this  subject.
It  is  one  that  h  is  been  so  thoroughly
taught  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  that
I  esteem  it  almost  unnecessary  to
repeat  that  with  which  they  are  so
familiar.  By  partaking  of  the  ordi-
nance of  the  Lord's  Supper  every
Sabbath  day,  we  commemorate  that
great  event.  If  we  do  not  preach  so
much  about  it  by  word  of  mouth  we
certainly  fulfill  the  commandment
which  God  has  given  requiring  us  to
remember  unto  the  Father  the  cru-
cified body  and  shed  blood  of  his  Son,
without  which  there  would  have  been
no  remission  of  sin,  and  no  redemp-
tion, and  mankind  would  have  re-
mained in  their  fallen  state.  No
light  could  have  penetrated  the  hearts
of  the  children  of  men,  and  there
would  have  been  no  resurrect  ion  >  no
exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of  God
without  the  atonement.  When  we
speak  of  total  depravity,  it  has  refer-
ence to  certain  conditions.  Man  is
not  totally  depraved  now,  and  the
reason  is,  there  has  been  an  atone-
ment ;  but  do  away  that,  as  many  do,
and  total  depravity  would  reign,  aud
men  would  live  and  die  totally  de-
graded beings.  All  the  light  that
has  come  into  the  world,  and  that
lights  every  man  that  comes  into  the
world,  has  come  by  reason  of  the
atonement.  It  is  an  event  that  all
Christian  societies  commemorate  more
or  less,  or  at  least  they  did  in  former
times.  They  are  getting  more  lax
now  since  the  devil  and  his  angels


1


have  given  so  many  revelations
against  the  atonement.

The  Roman  Catholics,  about  532
years  after  Christ,  set  apart  a  day
called  Christmas,  which  they  no
doubt  believed  at  that  time  was  the
day  of  the  birth  of  our  Loid  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ.  The  reason
why  they  set  apart  Christmas  and
have  kept  up  its  commemoration
from  that  day  until  the  present  time,
whs  because  a  certain  monk,  a  mem-
ber of  their  church,  named  Dionsy-
sius  commenced  a  calculation  to  as-
certain, if  possible,  the  period  of  time
from  the  birth  of  Christ  to  the  time
the  calculation  was  made;  and  from
all  the  information  that  he  could
glean  he  set  it  down  at  532  years.
They  had  not  printed  works  in  those
days  as  we  have  now  ♦  they  had  not
access  to  the  abundance  ot  historical
and  chronological  information  then
that  we  have  ;  but  from  ail  the  in-
formation that  Dionysius  could  glean,
and  making  a  calculation  thereon,  he
came  to  the  above  result.

He  also  made  a  calculation  in  re-
gard to  the  day  on  which  he  supposed
the  Savior  to  have  been  born,  and
that  was  set  down  as  a  day  to  be  cele-
brated by  the  Roman  Catholics
church.  They  have  certain  ordinan-
ces iu  regard  to  that  d  y,  which  you
may  see  observed  in  their  church  in
this  city.  People,  prior  to  this  time,
did  not  date  their  documents  from
the  birth  of  Christ  If  they  were
writing  a  letter  they  did  not  say,  in
the  year  of  our  Lord  520,  in  the
year  of  our  Lord  416,  and  so  on  ;  this
was  never  done  until  the  calculation
of  Dionysius  was  made,  then  it  wai
adopted  by  the  Roman  Catholics  and
by  all  nations  among  whom  they  had
power  and  influence.  By  and  by
other  chronologists  made  calculation!
as  to  the  time  of  Christ's  birth,  and
from  the  information  they  could
gather  together,  they  discovered  that


TRUE  CHlilSTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAH,


253


Diouysius  had  made  a  mistake,  and
that  Christ  was  born  about  one  year
before  the  time  set  by  him.  Bat  by
this  time  there  were  great  numbers  of
important  State  ami  other  documents
and  papers  in  existence,  all  dated
according  to  the  incorrect  calculation
of  this  Romish  monk.  How  to  re-
medy this  the  people  did  not  know,
for  it  would  not  do  to  alter  all  these
dates.

Another  set  of  chronologies  made
calculations,  and  they  discovered  that
Dionysius  had  made  a  mistake  of  two
years  in  regard  to  the  time  of  the
Savior's  birth-  Four  others,  very
learned  men,  sought  diligently,  and
from  the  information  they  obtained
they  found  that  Jesus  was  born  three
years  before  the  time  published  by
Dionysius.  Five  others  made  it  four
years ;  some  few  made  it  five  years
before,  and  some  seven  years  before
the  time  specified  by  this  Romish
monk*  All  modern  chronologies
who  have  taken  up  the  subject,  agree
that  Dionysius  was  incorrect,  at  least
several  years.  But  did  the  people
alter  the  dates  of  their  documents
and  manuscripts  when  his  error  was
fully  made  manifest?  Not  at  all;
they  have  continued  that  <dd,  erro-
neous reckoning  dowu  to  this  present
year.  But  they  have  attached  the
name  of  vulgar  era  to  it,  in  order  to
indicate  that  it  is  incorrect.  Vulgar
era !  I  think  the  name  is  inappropri-
ate, for  there  are  thousands  of  people
at  the  present  day,  including  the
youth  of  our  laud,  and  perhaps  many
who  have  had  a  collegiate  education,
who  never  knew  or  inquired  into  the
meaning  of  vulgar  era,  or  why  the
term  was  introduced.  Its  real  mean-
ing is,  incorrect  era  or  date.  For
instance,  we  write  a  letter  to-day,
and  we  call  it  the  29  th  day  of  De-
cember, 1872.  This  is  according  to
the  vulgar  era,  or  erroneous  date,  or
the  reckoning  of  Dionysius ;  but  this


is  not  the  true  date.  The  probability
is,  independent  of  the  Bible  or  B  >ok
ot  Mormon,  from  the  great  mass  of
testimony  that  has  been  accumulated
for  generations  past,  that  Jesus  was
born  nearly  four  years  prior  to  the
commencement  of  ibis  vulgar  era,  so
that  nur  present  year,  1872,  should
be  1876,  You  will  find  a  full  ac-
count of  these  matters  in  the  writings

El

of  the  learned,  in  encycloptelias,  and
in  various  works  touching  upon  chro-
nology, so  that  you  have  no  need  to
take  my  testimony  alone  on  this  sub*
ject,  for  you  have  access  to  our
library  here  in  this  city,  and  you  can
examine  works  on  chronology  and  see
that  I  am  correct.  There  may  be
those  here  who  would  like  me  to  cite
some  works  on  this  subject  I  will
cite  one  that  I  read  while  I  was  in
England,  a  Bible  dictionary,  by  a
very  learned  author  named  Smith.
This  subject  is  treated  very  plainly
and  fully  in  that  work,  I  think
that  Mr.  John  W.  Young  of  this  city
has  this  work  in  his  private  library.
The  reason  why  I  make  these  re-
marks is,  that  this  is  the  first  Sab-
bath after  Christmas,  and  the  day  on
which  I  believe  the  Romas  Catholics
in  this  city  are  celebrating  certain
ordinances  in  their  church  in  com-
memoration of  this  event.

Having  found  out.  that  there  is  an
error  in  regard  to  the  year  of  Chris t  d
birth,  now  let  us  inquire  if  the  day
observed  by  the  Christian  world  as
the  day  of  his  birth,  the  25th  of  De-
cember, is  or  is  not  the  real  Christmas
Day  ?  A  great  many  authors  have
found  out  from  their  researches  that
it  is  not.  1  think  that  there  is
scarcely  an  author  at  the  present  day
that  believes  that  the  2-Hh  day  of
December  was  the  day  that  Christ
was  born  on.  Still  it  is  observed  by
certain  classes,  and  we,  whether  wo
make  any  profession  or  not,  are  just
foolish  enough  to  observe  this  old


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Roman  Catholic  festival*  The  boys
and  girls  all  look  forward  with  great
anticipation*  to  Christmas,  M«ny
of  them,  it  is  true,  do  not  know  the
meaning  of  it,  or  why  it  is  celebrated;
but  when  we  come  to  reflect  on  the
matter,  it  is  all  nonsense  to  celebrate
the  25th  day  of  Decern her  as  the
birthday  of  Jesus.  It  will  do  for  a
holiday,  so  you  might  select  any  other
day  for  that  purpose.  It  is  generally
believed  and  conceded  by  the  learned,
who  have  investigated  the  matter,
that  Christ  was  bom  in  April,  I
have  seen  several  accounts — some  of
them  published  in  our  periodicals —
ot  learned  men  in  different  nations,
in  which  it  is  stated  that,  according
to  the  best  of  their  judgment  from
the  reseaiches  they  have  made,  Christ
vvns  crucified  on  tin*  ^ih  of  April.
That  is,  the  day  on  which  this  church
was  organized.  But  when  these
learned  men  go  back  from  the  day  of
his  ciucifixion  to  the  day  of  his  birth,
they  are  at  a  loss,  having  no  certain
evidence  or  testimony  by  which  they
can  determine  it-  I  intend  this  af-
ternoon to  give  light  on  this  subject
from  new  revelation,  which  we,  as
Latter-day  Saint?,  can  depend  upon.
I  will  read  to  you  from  the  Book  uS
Mormon,  some  things  that  tmppei  ted.
at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion,  on  this
great  western  hemisphere,  and  I  will
say  we  have  a  date  given  there  in
connection  with  these  events,  shnw-
ing  how  old  Jesus  was  at  the  time  of
his  crucifixion.  It  may  not  be  amis*,
however,  fjr  rae  to  make  a  few  re-
marks before  I  commence  reading,  to
inform  strangers  who  may  be  present,
that  the  inhabitants  of  ancient
America,  and  those  who  wrote  the
Buuk  of  Mormon  were  Israelites !
that  when  they  came  from  the  city  of
Jerusalem }  600  years  before  Christ,
they  were  a  righteous  people,  and  had
prophets  among  them,  and  that  they
kept  tie  law  of  Moses. Now  the


|  sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings  of  that
law  were  typical  of  the  great  offering
that  was  to  be  made  by  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ.  The  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  continent,  to  whom
I  have  referred,  understood  the  na-
ture of  these  ordinances,  and  they
looked  forward  to  the  coming  of  the
true  Messiah  and  celebrated  it  by
t  hese  ordinances,  the  same  as  we  look
backward  and  celebrate  his  death  and
pufferings  by  partaking  of  the  sym-
bols of,  as  we  have  done  this  after-
noon. .  !  -  (  i
Now  if  God  led  a  company  of  Is-
h  raelites  from  Palestine  to  colonize
this  continent,  and  taught  them  to
keep  the  law  of  Moses  with  its  sacri-
fices and  burnt  offerings,  typical  of
the  great  sacrifice  that  was  to  be
made  at  Jerupalem,  it  would  not  be
at  all  strange  for  him  to  give  to  them
a  sign  concerning  Jesus,  when  he
should  be  born,  and  when  he  should
die.  He  did  this  by  the  months  of
prophets.  Numerous  prophets  were
raised  up  on  this  l*nd,  and  they  pro-
phesied to  the  inhabitants  thereof,
and  taught  them  about,  the  coming
of  Jesns,  and  what  signs  should  be
given  at  the  time  he  should  come.
They  taught  them  that  the  night  be-
fore Je^us  should  be  born  there  would
be  no  darkness  on  this  land,  but  that
it  would  be  perfectly  light.  They
would  see  the  sun  set  in  the*  evening,
and  that,  during  the  night,  until  it
sbou)d  rise  the  next  morning,  there
would  be  uo  darkness ;  tbat  great
signs  and  lights  would  appear  in  the
heavens,  and  that  they  were  to  be  to
them  indications  of  the  birth  of  our
Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  These
sigus  were  given,  and  by  them  the
people  on  this  continent  knew  the
very  day  that  Jesus  was  born.

Some  years  after  this,  before  the
crucifixion  of  Jesus,  they  fell  into
great,  wickedness.  They  persecuted
the  prophets,  shed  their  blood,  stoned


TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR.


„  1  —  —


them  to  death,  and  cast  them  out  of
their  midst,  and  they  were  full  of
wrath  and  indignation  and  sinned
against  great  light,  so  that  the  Lord
was  under  the  necessity  of  sending
other  Prophets  to  them,  telling  them
that  at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion,  if
they  did  not  repent,  many  of  their
cities  should  be  burned  with  tin1,
many  destroyed  with  tempests,  and
that  they  should  be  visited  with  sore
judgments  and  calamities;  and  that
during  the  time  Jesus  should  be  lifted
up  ou  the  cross,  there  should  be  tre-
mendous earthquakes  upon  all  the
face  of  this  continent,  and  that  after
that  there  would  he  three  days  and
three  nights  of  darkness,  and  that
this  darkness  should  come  tmmedi-
ately  after  the  execution  of  the  Sa-
vior, Now  lei  us  read  what  the  Pro-
phet says  on  page  450  of  the  Book
of  Mormon  concerning  these  events,
which  transpired  just  as  they  had
been  predicted.

"  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  thirty
rind  fourth  year,  in  the  rirst  month,
in  the  fourth  day  of  the  month,  there
arose  a  great  storm,  such  an  one  as
had  never  been  known  in  all  the
land.**  From  what  period  was  this
date  reckoned?  We  are  informed
on  page  435  of^this  buok,  that  the
Nephites  betrau  reckoning  the  begin-
ning of  their  year  from  the  sign
given  them  at  the  birth  of  the  Savior
— the  night  without  darkness.  Pre-
vious t<j  (hat  they  had  reckoned  from
the  time  of  their  leaving  Jerusalem,
600  years  before  Christ,  and  they
continued  this  some  'five  centuries,
until  they  changed  the  form  of  their
government  on  this  continent,  and
introduced  judges;  then  they  reckon-
ed  their  time  from  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  the  judges.  This  mode
of  reckoning  lasted  ninety-one  years.
Five  burn  1  red  and  nine  years  having
passed  away  before  the  reign  of  the
judges  commenced,  and  ninety-one

No,  17,


added  to  that  made  600  years  from
the  time  that  Lehi  and  the  colony
came  out  of  Jerusalem,  Then  they
changed  their  mode  of  reckoning,
and  reckoned  from  the  time  this
great  sign  was  given  in  the  heavens,
so  that  we  know  what  this  date
means — "  in  the  thirty  and  fourth
ye itr,  in  ttu>  lUrst  month,  and  in  the
fourth  day  of  the  month/'  Now  I
think  this  gives  ua  a  clue  to  the  age
of  Jesus  when  he  vvns  crucified,  but
we  will  read  on,  and  sec  about  the
storm,

C£  There  arose  a  great  storm,  such
an  one  as  never  had  been  known  in
all  the  land;  and  there  was  also  a
great  and  terrible  tempest,  and  there
was  terrible  thunder,  insomuch  that
it  did  shake  the  whole  earth  as  if  it
was  about  to  divide  asunder ;  and
there  were  exceeding  sharp  light-
nings, such  as  never  had  been  known
in  all  the  land.  And  the  city  of
Zarahemla  did  take  fire."

Zarahemla  was  their  great  capita
city.  It  was  located  iu  the  north
part  of  South  America,  on  one  branch
of  that  rivi.T  that  we  call  the  river
Mngdalena,  that  runs  down  from  the
mountains  to  the  northward,  and
empties  into  the  Carribbean  Sea,  Ga
the  west  side  of  that  river  was  located
the  great  city  of  ZarahemlA.  We
will  now  read  further:

"  And  the  city  Zarahemla  did  tfi ke
tire;  and  the  city  Moroni  did  sink
into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  the
inhabitants  thereof  were  drowned;
and  the  earth  was  carried  up  upon
the  city  of  Moronihah,  that  in  the
place  of  theci^y  thereof  there  became
a  great  mountain."

Now  if  our  miners,  those  who  go
into  South  America,  should  happen
to  dig  in  a  few  thousand  feet,  and
should  come  across  old  buildings,
they  need  not  be  astonished,  fur  the
i  Lord  made  a  terrible  revolution  in
the  land* There  came a  grtat

Vol.  XV,


258


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


mountain  in  the  place  where  this
city  stood  ;  "  and  (here  was  a  great
and  ter  rible  di-si  ruction  in  t lie  land
south  ward1' — what  we  term  South
America.

"  But  behold,  there  was  a  more
great  and  terrible  destruction  in  the
land  north  ward" — Ninth  America —
"for  behold  the  whole  face  of  the
land  was  changed  because  of  the  tem-
pest, and  the  whirlwinds,  and  the
thunderings,  and  ihe  lightnings,  and
the  exceeding  great  quH kings  of  the
whole  earth  ;  and  the  highways  were
broken  up,  and  the  level  roads  were
spoiled,  and  nnmy  smooth  (laces  be-
came rough,  and  many  great  and
notable  cities  were  punk,  and  ninny
were  burned,  and  many  were  shook
till  the  buildings  thereof  had  fallen
to  the  ear  tli,  and  the  inhabit  ante
thereof  were  slain,  and  tlte  places
weie  left  desolate  ;  and  there  were
some  cities  which  remained;  but  the
damage  thereof  whs  exceeding  great,
and  there  were  imny  in  them  who
were  stain  ;  aud  there  were  some  who
were  carried  away  in  the  whirlwind,
ynd  whither  they  w  ent  no  man  know,
etb,  save  they  know  that  they  were
carried  away  ;  and  thus  the  face  of
the  whole  earth  became  deformed"
because  of  the  tempests,  aud  the
thunderings,.  and  the  lightnings,  aud
the  quaking  of  the  earth.  And  be.
hold,  the  locks  were  rent  in  twain;
they  were  broken  up  upon  the  face  of
the  whole  earth,  insomuch  that  they
were  found  in  broken  fragments,  and
in  seams  and  in  cracks,  upon  all  the
fa«e  of  the  land/1

You  can  see  from  this,  what  terri-
ble convulsions  have  taken  place  on
this  continent,  even  here  in  these
mountains.  In  the  mouutains  west
of  this  valley,  y in  will  find  the  strata
of  fock  set  up  almost  perpendicular ;
,tbmt  was  not  the  way  they  were  first
formed*  You  will  also  find  there,  as
elwwhere,  strata  dipping  at  a  greater


or  less  angle  into  the  earth.  The
cause  of  all  this  has  been  the  terrible
convulsions  that  our  globe  has  under-
gone, and  mure  especially  at  the  time
of  the  crucifixion,

"And  it  came  to  pass  that  when
the  thundering^  and  the  lightnings,
and  the  storm,  and  the  tempest,  and
the  quakings  of  the  earth  did  cease —
for  behold  they  did  last  fur  about
the  space  of  three  hour?  ;  and  it  was
said  by  some  that  the  time  (  was
greater;  nevertheless,  all  the.se  great
and  terrible  things  were  done  in
about  the  space  of  three  hours;  and
th*m  behold  there  was  darkness  upon
the  face  of  the  kind/1

I  might  go  on  rending,  if  it  were
necessary,  in  regard  to  the  weeping,
wailing  and  mourning  of  the  people
during  these  three  days  of  intense
darkness — no  sun,  moon,  nor  stars
were  to  be  seen,  and  the  vapor  was
so  trreat  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
land  could  feel  it,  the  same  as  the
darkness  was  felt  in  the  land  of
Egypt.  It  was  not,  of  course,  the
darkness  that  was  felt,  but  the  vapor
that  was  so  thick.  There  is  one
thing,  however,  to  which  I  w  ish  to
call  your  special  attention,  before  I
make  *my  further  remarks  in  regard
to  the  date  that  is  here  given.  When
this  darkness  dispersed,  it  is  said  to
have  been  morning.  You  will  find
it  ou  page  454.  "And  it  came  to
pass  that  thus  did  the  three  days
pass  away  j  and  it  was  m  the  morn-
ing, and  the  darkness  dispersed  from
off  the  face  of  land,  and  the  earth  did
cease  to  tremble,  and  the  rocks  did
cease  to  rend."

You  might  say  that  this  was  not
three  days  and  three  nights,  for  Jesos
was  crucified  and  died  on  the  cross  at
3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  at  Jeru-
salem, and  consequently  for  it  to
have  been  just  three  days  and  three
nights,  you  might  suppose  that  the
darkness  must  have  dispersed  in  the


TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR.


afternoon.  Bat  this  book  tells  us
that  when  the  three  days  and  three
nights  of  darkness  had  passed  away
it  was  morning.  Now  why  this  dis-
crepancy— for  it  seems  to  be  one —
between  the  Bible  and  the  Book  of
Mormon  ?  Can  yon  account  for  it,
and  tell  why  it  should  have  been
morning  in  America  ?  The  reason
is  because  of  the  difference  in  longi^
tude.  The  writer  of  the  account  in
the  Book  of  Mormon  resided  in  the
northwestern  portion  of  South  Ame-
rica. Now  you  take  a  map  of  the
world,  and  see  the  difference  in
longitude  between  the  pi  nee  where
Jesus  was  crucified,  and  that  where
the  writer  of  the  Book  of  Mormon
lived,  and  you  will  find  that  it  is
about  seven  and  a  half  hours.  Now
you  subtract  seven  and  a  half  hours
from  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and
what  time  would  it  be  when  the
three  houis  of  quaking  and  the  des-
truction of  cities  expired,  or  when
the  darkness  commenced  ?  Would
It  not  be  in  the  morning?  Take
away  seven  and  a  half  hours  longitude
from  6  o'clock — the  time  that  Jesus
expired — and  would  it  not  be  half
past  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning
with  thu  in-babiiants  of  this  landf
while  it  was  afternoon  with  the  inha-
bitants in  Jerusalem  ?

I  presume  that  Joseph  Smith,
being  an  unlearned  man,  never  saw
this  to  t  lie  day  of  his  death  ;  that  is,
he  never  understood  it.  I  never
heard  him,  or  any  learned  man  refer
to  it  until  after  his  death  ;  but  read-
ing it  over  myself,  I  saw,  at  first,
there  was  an  apparent  discrepancy
between  this  book  and  the  New
Testament;  one  placing  it  in  the
morning,  and  the  other  in  the  after-
noon.  When  thinking  of  this  seem-
ing discrepancy,  the  difference  in
longitutde  occurred  to  my  mind,  and
that  is  just  what  it  should  be  to  ac-
count for  the  difference  in  time  given


in  the  two  books;  and  this,  though
not  direct,  is  incidental  proof  that
the  man  who  translated  this  book
was  inspired  of  God.  1  do  not  think:
that  Joseph  Smith,  to  the  day  of  his
deith,  knew  that  a  difference  in  time
at  different  places  on  the  earth  was
caused  by  their  difference  of  longi-
tude.

We  will  now  go  back  to  the  date,
at  the  commencement  of  the  extract
I  have  been  reading — "it:  the  thirty
and  fourth  year,  in  the  first  m»>nth,
and  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  month"
— that  would  make  him  thirtv- three
years,  three  days  and  part  of  another
flay  old,  at  the  time  of  his  cruciHx-
ion,  according  to  the  account  given
in  the  Book  of  Mormon.  But  this
does  not  decide  his  age  exactly,  un-
less we  can  learn  what  kind  of  years
the^Nephites  reckoned.  Did  they
reckon  their  years  as  the  English

w  CP

and  Americans  do  ?  No,  I  presume
not.  How  can  we  learn  the  length
of  their  years  ?  I  do  not  know  of
any  better  method  than  going  back
to  the  early  Spanish  historians  who
lived  co temporary  with  Columbus,
the  discoverer  of  America,  When
they  penetrated  into  Mexico,  mil
conquered  that  country,  they  found
that  the  Mexicans  were  partially
civilized,  so  that  they  had  many  re-
cords, although  their  mode  of  keep-
ing thwn  was  very  different  from
those  of  other  nations.  The  Mexi-
can calendar  gave  their  views  and
ideas  with  regard  to  the  length  of  the
year,  and  their  mode  of  reckoning
them.  This  was  about  the  close  of
the  fifteenth  century,  for  Columbus
discovered  America  in  1402.  Soon
afterwards  these  Spanish  historians
became  extensively  acquainted  with
Mexican  literature,  their  form  of
writing,  and  the  half  civilization  that
existed  among  them.  I  hava  in  my
possession  nine  large  volumes,  got  up
soon  after  the  Book  of  Mormon  was


translated,  by  Lord  Kingsborougb,on
Mexican  antiquities.  The  nine  vol-
nu  will  probably  weigh  over  two
hundred  pounds*  Five  of  them  con-
tain nothing  but  plates  of  antiquities,
the  other  four  contain  translations,  in
English,  Spanish  aud  French,  of  the
declarations  of  historians  concerning
Mexican  literature  and  their  know-
ledge concerning  the  length  of  the
year.  They  reckoned  365  days  to
the  year,  but  did  not  add  what  is  ter-
med the  intercalary  day  every  four
years,  to  make  what  we  call  leap  year.
They  did  this  only  once  in  fifty-two
years,  and  then  they  added  thirteen
days,  which  made  one  day  for  every
four  years.  This  shows  that  they
had  a  very  good  idea  of  the  length  of
the  year.

When  Jesus  was  crucified,  at  the
age  of  about  thirty- three  years,  if
the  Nephites  reckoned  according  to
the  Mexican  portion  of  the  Israelites,
they  had  not  added  the  eight  days
that  we  would  add  for  leap  year,  con-
sequently this  would  shorten  their
years,  and  instead  of  being  thirty-
three  years,  three  days  and  part  of
the  fourth  day,  it  would  bring  it,
according  to  our  reckoning,  eight
days  less  than  the  Book  of  Mormon
date,  or  thirty  two  years,  three  hun-
dred and  sixty  days  and  fifteen  hours.
This,  then,  it  is  highly  probable,
must  have  been  the  real  period  that
existed  between  the  birth  and  the
crucifixion  ot  our  Savior.

]Now  we  have  a  clue  in  the  New
Testament  to  the  time  of  his  cruci-
fixiou,  but  not  of  his  birth  ;  that  is,
we  know  that  he  was  crucified  on
Friday,  for  all  of  the  Evangelists
testify  that  Saturday  was  the  Jewish
Sabbath,  and  that  on  Friday  Jesus
was  hung  on  the  cross,  and  according
to  the  testimony  of  the  leaded,  that
was  on  the  6th  of  April,  consequently
by  going  back  from  the  crucifixion
32  years,  360  days  and  15  hours.


making  allowance  for  the  longitude,,
it  gives  Thursday  for  his  birthday*
Agaiu,  making  allowance  ior  the
errors  of  Dionysius  the  monk,  adding
four  years  or  nearly  so  to  the  vulgar
or  incorrect  era,  it  would  make  the
organization  of  this  Church  take
place  precisely,  to  the  very  day,  1800
years  from  the  day  that  be  was  lifted
up  on  the  cross.

This  is  something  very  marvelous
in  my  mind,  Joseph  Smith  did  not
choose  the  6th  of  April  upon  which
to  organize  this  Church  s  he  received
a  commandment  from  God,  which  is
contained  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  setting  apart  that
day  as  the  one  upon  which  the  Church
should  be  organized.  Why  did  he
set  up  his  kingdom  precisely  1800
years  from  the  day  on  which  he  was
lifted  up  on  the  cross?  I  do  not
know  why.  The  Lord  has  his  own
set  time  to  bring  to  pass  j)is  great
purposes.  If  Joseph  Smith  had
been  learned  in  chronology  and  in  the
writings  of  the  world  j  if  he  had
been  a  middle-aged  or  an  old  man  of
experience,  or  a  man  who  had  access
to  libraries,  instead  of  a  farmer's
boy,  then  we  might  hare  supposed
that  perhaps  he  had  studied  chrono-
logy, sought  out  the  true  era,  found
out  how  to  distinguish  between  the
true  and  the  vulgar,  and  then  find
out  the  true  date  of  the  birth  of
Christ  and  his  crucifixion,  and  got
it  all  arranged  together  nicely  and
harmoniously,  and  then  have  pre-
,  tended  that  he  had  had  a  revelation
1  to  organize  the  Church  precisely  1800
i  years  from  that  great  event.  This  is
what  we  should  have  to  concede  if
we  wanted  to  make  out  the  work  an
imposition:  but  the  very  fact  that
God  commanded  that  boy  to  organise
the  Church  on  that  day,  ought  to  be
regarded  as  strong  collateral  evidence
of  the  divine  authenticity  of  the
Book  of  Mormon.


■


TRITE  CHIRSTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR,


2G1


Perhaps  I  have  said  all  that  is
needful  on  tbis  matter.  If  I  were  to
celebrate  Christmas,  or  the  birthday
of  Christ,  I  should  go  back  a  little
less  than  thirty-three  years  from  his
crucifixion,  and  it  would  bring  it  to
Thursday,  the  11th  clay  of  April,
as  the  tirst  day  of  the  first  year  of
the  true  Christian  era;  and  reckoning
on  thirty- two  years,  360  days  and
fifteen  hours  from  that,  it  would
bring  it  to  the  cruciGxion,  and  bring
it  on  Friday  also.

In  saying  thai  LL  it  was  the  thirty-
fourth  year,  first  month  and  fourth
day  of  the  month'1  on  which  the  great
storm  and  earthquakes  took  place,
there  is  another  thing  to  be  noted —
that  it  must  hare  taken  place  on
Friday,  according  to  the  Nephite
reckoning  in  order  to  bring  his  cru-
cifixion on  Friday.  If  Tuesday  was
the  first  day  of  the  34th  jeai,  the
second  day  would  be  Wednesday,  the
third  Thnrsday,  and  Friday  would
have  been  the  fourth  day  of  the
month,  just  as  the  Book  of  Mormon
says,  bringing  it  correct  according
to  the  reckoning  of  the  days  of  the
week.

There  is  another  thins:
perhaps,  a  great  many  of  the
ter-day  Saints  and  many  of
world  have  not  reflected  upon  ;
is,  that  the  beginning  of  our  pr
New  Year  is  incorrect,  reckoning  the
years  from  the  birth  of  Christ,  for
the  first  day  of  January  was  not  the
day  of  his  birth.  We  call  it  the  first
day  of  the  year,  but  it  has  no  refer-
ence to  the  day  of  Christ's  birth.
The  tirst  day  of  the  year  of  the  true


that,
hat-
the
that
esent


had  been  the  first  day  of  the  year  for
many  generations* How  came  it  to
be  changed  to  the  first  day  of  Jano-
ary? In  1751 the  Parliament  of
Great  Britain  passed  a  law  that  the
year should be moved  backwards
from  the  25th  day  of  March  to  the
1st  day  of  January,  making  the  year
1751  some  eighty- four  days  shorter
than  all  the  other  years  had  been.
Why  did  they  do  this? In  order  to
place  New  Year  in  connection  with  a
certain  event  in  astronomy.  Those
who  are  acquainted  with  the  earth
going  round  the  sun,  know  that  the
path  in  which  it  moves  is  not  a  circle
but  an  ellipse,  or  elongated  circle.
You  make  a  wire  into  the  form  of  a
circle  and  then  puil  it  out,  and  that
is  the  form  of  an  ellipse. The  sun
is  situated  in  one  of  the  foci  of  this
ellipse,  and  is  nearer  to  the  earth  on
the  1st  day  of  January  or  the  31st
day  oi  Decern  her, by  about  th  ree
millions  of  miles,  than  it  is  on  the
1st  day  of  July. The object  of
placing  the  year  back  was  to  have  the
year  begin  when  the  earth  was  ia  its
perihelion  in  guiug  around  the  sun,
Tbis  was  not  the  only  alteration  that
has  been  made,  but  this  accounts  for
the  phrases  "new  style"  and  "old
style,"  with  which  you  occasionally
meet in  historical  documents,  the
former  having  reference  to  the  new
mode  of  reckoning,  the  latter  to  the
old  mode.

1  have  said  that  this  was  not  the
only. change  made  in  time.  In  the
year  17*>- — when  the  second  day  of
September  had  arrived,  in  order  to
bring  the  year  to  correspond  with  the


Christ  inn  era  should  be  the  day  of  seasons,  it  was  found  necessary  to  set
the  Savior's  birth — the  11th  day  of  the  time  forward  a  >  that  the  3rd  day


April,  About  112  years  ago  we
did  not  have  the  first  day  of  January
for  New  Year.  At  that  time,  or
thereabouts,  everybody  in  America
and  England  reckoned  New  Year's
Day  on  the  25th  of  March.  That


of  September  should  be  called  the
1  i-th,  eleven  days  being  dropped  out
of  the  calendar.  This  was  also
established  by  parliamentary  law;
and  in  this  way  the  seasons  have  been
brought  to  correspond,  in  some  mea*


2G2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


sure,  with  the  length  of  the  year.  Is  this  to  be  depended  upon  ?  Not
All  these  things  should  be  taken  into  at  all.  Many  chronologiste  equally
consideration  in  onr  dates;  and  when  as  learned,  and  who  have  made  deeper


1


we  read  the  saying  in  the  Book  of
Covenants  that  the  Lord  organized
his  Church  in  the  year  of  our  Lord
1830,  in  the  fourth  month,  and  cn
the  sixth  day  of  the  month,  the  Lord
made his language  to  correspond
with  our  present  mode  of  reckoning,
that  is,  he  adopted  the  reckoning  of
the  English,  established  by  parlia-
mentary law. Instead  of  reckoning
the  year  to  begin  on  the  25th  of
March,  he  says,  u  It  being  in  the
year  of  our  Lord  183C,  the  iourth
month,  and  the  sixth  day  of  the
month  that  the  Church  was  organ-
ized/* We  are  not  on  this  account
to  take  this  as  the  re;il  date,  but  it  is
adapted  to  our  present  mode  of  reck-
oning, I  have  made  these  remarks,
that  no  persons,  if  they  should  feel  j
disposed  to  search  into  chronology,
might  be  misled  in  relation  to  this  i
matter. Being so  near  Christ  mas
and  Niiw  Year,  I  have  deemed  it
appropriate  to  dwell  on  this  subject,
fur  the  purpose  of  enlightening  the
minds  of  all  who  may  be  present,  so
tar  as  I  have  information  in  regard  toil.
Now,  if  I  have  not  already  occupied
too  much  time,  I  desire  to  dwell  a
little  upon  the  subject  of  the  chrono-
logy of  our  world. We  have  no
dates  on  which  we  can  depend  as  to
the  period  or  history  of  our  globe
from  the  creation  down  to  the  present
time* Chionologists  differ  in  regard
to  the  history  and  age  of  the  world,
Some  make  the  age  of  the  world,
from  the  creation  to  the  coming  of
Christ,  to  be  four  thousand  years
Archbishop  Usher  has  introduced
this  chronology  into  King  James*
Bible ;  and  in  that  you  will  find  all
the  dates  adapted  to  that  particular
reckoning ; and according to  his
reckoning  you  will  find  that  Christ
came  in  the  year  of  the  world  4004.


researches  than  he  has  on  this  subject,
differ  with  him  materially.  There
are  many  who  place  the  birth  of
Christ  at  5500  years  from  the  crea-
tion; others  place  it  at  5490,  others
at  5508  or  9  years.  There  are
about  two  hundred  chronologists  who
all  differ  in  regard  to  this  matter,
JIany  Jewish  chronologists  make  it
over  six  thousand  years  from  the
creation  till  the  birth  of  Christ,  so
that  you  see  when  we  attempt  to  take
up  the  aulgeot  on  the  learning  of  the
world,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  con*
fusion — no  person  knows  anything
about  it  It  is  not  really  necessary
that  we  should  know,  but  we  have
some  little  light  on  this  subject

We  know  that  it  was  not  six  thou-
sand years  from  the  creation  to  the
birth  of  Christ; How  do  we  know
this? God  has  told  us  in  new  reve-
lation that  this  earth  is  destined  to
continue  its  temporal  existence  for
seven thousand  years,  and  that  at
the  commencement  of  the  seventh
thousand,  he  will  cause  seven  angels
to  sound  their  trumpets. In  other
words,  we  may  call  it  the  Millennium,
for  the  meaning  of  the  word  millen-
niuin  is  a  thousand  years* Six  thou-
sand years  must  pass  away  from  the
creation  till  the time that  Jesus
comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and
he  will  not  come  exactly  at  the  expi-
ration of  six  thousand  years.  When
the  Prophet  Joseph  a&ked  the  Lord
what  was  meant  by  the  sounding  of
the seven trumpets,  he  was  told,
*fc  That  as  God  made  the  world  in  six
days,  and  on  the  seventh  day  he
finished  his  work  and  sanctified  it,
and  also  formed  man  out  of  the  dust
of  the  earth;  even  so  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  seventh  thousand  years,
will  the  Lord  God  sanctify  the  earth,
and  complete  the  salvation  of  manr


TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR.


263


and  judge  all  things  and  shall  redeem
all  things,  except  that  which  he  hath
not  put  into  his  power  when  he  shall
have  sealed  all  things  unto  the  end  of
all  things,  and  the  sounding  of  the
trumpets  of  the  seven  angels  is  the
preparing  and  finishing  of  his  work,
in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh
thousand  years;  to  prepare  the  way
before  the  time  of  his  coming."  This
quotation  will  be  found  in  the  Pearl
of  Great  Price,  p.  34.

Neither  of  these  trumpets  have
sounded  yet,  hut  they  shortly  will ;
and  this  gives  us  a  little  clue  to  the
period  and  age  of  onr  world.  We
know  that  six  thousand  years  have
not  yet  elapsed  since  the  creation,
but  we  know  that  they  have  ve ry  nearly
expired.  We  know  that  God  set  up  and
established  this  kingdom  1S00  years
from  the  date  of  his  crucifixion,  pre-
paratory to  his  coming  in  the  clouds
of  heaven  to  receive  the  kingdom
that  he  sets  up  here  on  the  earth,  and
to  rule  and  reign  over  all  people,  na-
tions and  tongues  that  are  spared
alive.  Perhaps  this  is  sufficient  un
the  history  and  chronology  of  the
world  ;  but  for  the  benefit  of  the
Saints,  and  it  will  not  hurt  the  stran-
gers, although  they  do  not  believe  in
our  revelations,  I  will  refer  to  some
further  evidence  and  testimony  on  this
subject.

In  the  new  translation  which  Joseph
Smith  was  commanded  to  make  of
the  OH  and  New  Testament,  we  find
that  some  of  the  dates  given  in  King
James'  translation  of  events  before
the  flood  are  incorrect,  but  they  are
corrected  in  the  new  translation.
For  instance,  the  agf*  of  Enoch,  as
given  in  King  James*  Bible,  is  incor-
rect. The  new  translation  gives  a
lengthy  prophecy  which  was  delivered
to  bim  before  the  flood,  and  this  pro-
phecy relates  to  generations  in  the
future  as  well  as  to  things  that  were
past. Enoch,  in  his  vision,  saw  the


great  work  that  he  was  destined  to
perform  on  the  earth,  in  preaching
the  Gospel  among  the  nations,  and
gathering  out  a  people  and  building
up  a  city  called  Zion.  He  saw  that
in  process  of  time  the  people  of  Zion
would  become  sanctified  before  the
Lord,  that  the  Lord  would  come  and
dwell  in  their  midst  and  that  by  and
by,  after  the  city  had  existed  365
years,  it  with  all  its  people,  would
be  tak^n  up  to  heaven.  And  all  the
days  of  Zion  in  the  days  of  Enoch,
says  the  new  translation,  was  365
years,  making  Enoch  120  years  old
when  he  and  his  people  were  trans-
lated, which  is  older  than  the  a^e
given  him  in  the  uninspired  transla-
tion.

In  this  new  translation  we  have
also  a  much  greater  history  of  the
creation  of  the  world  than  is  given
in  the  uninspired  translation  made  by
the  forty-seven  men  employed  by
King  James.  In  that  book  we  have
a  very  short  history  of  that  great
event ;  but  the  inspired  translation
shows  that  the  periods  of  time  called
days,  in  which  the  several  portions
of  the  work  of  creation  were  per-
formed, were  not  by  any  means  of
such  limited  duration  as  the  days  we
speak  of,  but  from  what  is  revealed
in  the  Book  of  Abraham,  they  were
probably  periods  of  one  thousand
years  each,  God  might  have  been
for  the  space  of  a  thuus-md  years  in
organizing  a  certain  portion  of  this
creation,  and  that  was  called  the
evening  and  the  morning  of  the  first
day,  according  to  the  Lord's  reckon-
ing, one  day  being  with  him  as  a
thousand  years  and  a  thousand  years
as  one  day.  By  and  by  another  day's
work  was  per  for  me  J,  which  I  do  not
suppose  was  a  day  of  twenty* f oar
hours,  but  an  indefinite  period  of
time,  called  the  second  day — the
evening  and  the  morning  of  the  se-
cond day. By  and  by  the  third  day's


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSJX


*2U

work  was  done,  and  then  there  was
the  evening  and  the  morning  of  the
third day* Three  thousand  years

pn  l>:d)ly,  passed  away  in  the  per-
formance of  these  three  days*  work  I
In  the  fourth  day  the  Lord  permitted
the  sun  and  moon  to  shine  to  give
light  to  the  earth.  What  regulated
the  evening  and  the  morning  the  first
three  days  we  do  not  know,  for  neither
sun  Tior  moon  were  permitted  to  shine
until  the  fourth  day.  I  have  no
doubt  the  Lord  has  ft  variety  of  me-
thods of  producing  light  ?  The  new
translation  «ives  us  some  information
fin  tins  subject,  for  there  wp  rend  that,
*  L  the  Lord  created  darkness  on  the
face  of  the  tk  great  deep."  In  King
JnniesT  translation  it  savs  daikness

m

was  on  the  tace  of  the  great  deep,
«nd  I,  the  Lord,  said,  "Let  there  be
light,  and  there  was  Hghr,"  Now  how
did  t lie  Lord  create  this  darkness  ?
He  ha*  a  power,  the  same  as  he  had
in  causing  darkness  three  oays  and
nights  uvei  this  American  land.  But
before  that  dar  kness  was  created  what  j
j  roduced  lights  Jt  must  have  been
liyhl.  heieon  thU  earth,  and  probably
w  ax  so  ihouhunds  of  years  before  the  ;
Lord  created  darkness;  and  then  he
had  the  means  of  producing  daikness,
tmd  afterwards  of  clearing  it  away,
and  then  calkd  it  morning.  But
Low  lony  that  morning  had  existed
we  do  Dot  know,  unless  we  appeal  to
the  Book  of  Abraham,  translated  by
Joseph  Smith  from  Egyptian  papyrus.
That  tells  us  in  plainness  that  the
way  I  he  Lord  and  the"  celestial  host
reckoned  time,  was  by  the  revolutions  ,
of  a  certaiu  great  central  body  called
Kolbb,  which  had  one  revolution  on
its  axis  in  a  thousand  of  our  years,
and  that  was  one  day  with  the  Lord,
and  when  the  Lord  said  to  Adam,
u  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou
shalt  surely  die;1  the  Book  of  Abra-
ham says  it  was  not  yet  given  unto
man  the  true  reckoning  of  time,  and


that  it  was  reckoned  after  the  Lord's
time  that  is  one  thousand  years  with
us  was  a  day  with  him,  and  that
Adam,  if  he  partook  of  the  forbidden
fruit,  was  to  die  before  that  day  of  a
thousand  years  should  expire.  Hence
i  when  we  go  back  to  the  history  of
the  creation,  we  find  that  the  Lord
was  not  in  such  a  great  hurry  as
many  suppose,  but  that  he  took  inde-
,  finite  periods  of  long  duration  to
construct  this  world,  and  to  gather
together  the  elements  by  the  laws  of
gravitation  to  lay  the  foundation  and
form  the  nucleus  thereof,  and  when
he  saw  that  all  things  were  ready
and  properly  prepared,  he  ,then
placed  the  man  in  the  Garden  of
tiden  to  rule  over  ail  animals,  ti*h
-  and  fowls,  and  to  have  dominion  over
the  whole  face  of  the  earth.

There  is  another  verv  curious  thins
re  waled  in  Joseph  Smith's  transla-
tion, and  one  that  explains  some  mys-
terious passages  in  the  tirst  and
second  chapter  of  Genesis,  in  the
|  tirst  chapter  of  Genesis  in  Kiug
Jame.V  ttau&luiiou  we  read  that  on
the  fifth  day  toe  Loid  made  the
w  ha  lis,  the  fi*h  and  the  fowls  of  the
air.  On  the  sixlh  day  lie  made  the
animals,  beasts  and  creeping  things,
and  la*t  of  all  lie  made  man,  male
and  female.  Now  read  t\\oug  in  King
James*  translation  to  the  seventh
day,  and  we  ?*ie  told  that  there  was
not  a  man  to  till  the  ground,  yet  he
had  made  them  male  and  female  on
the  sixth  day.  Now,  where  were
they  in  fide  ?  They  were  made  in
heaven  first,  AH  the  children  of
men,  male  and  female,  all  the  spirits
of  beasts,  fowls,  tisli  and  creeping
things  were  made  spiritualty  in  hea-
ven before  they  were  placed  tempo-
rally here  on  the  earth,  and  the
spiritual  creation  differs  from  t he
temporal  creation.  The  new  trans-
lation says  that  mnn  was  the  very
first  flesh  made  here  on  the  earth  ;


TRUE  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR.


2Go


whereas,  according  to  the  account  in
King  James'  translation,  the  flesh
of  beasts,  fowls  and  fish  was  made  on
the  fifth  day ,  before  man  was  made.
But  in  the  great  temporal  work  of
placing  man  on  the  earth,  he  was  the
first  flesh  formed  and  placed  here
among  fill  the  works  of  God.  He
had  made  the  spirits  of  fish,  fowls
and  beast,  but  none  of  them  were
permitted  to  come  to  the  earth  in
their  fleshy  tabernacles  until  man,
the  great  masterpiece,  was  placed
here — then  they  were  brought  before
him — fur  him  to  give  names  to
them.

In  the  work  of  creation  the  first  is
last  and  the  last  first,  Gud  made  the
spiritual  part  of  this  creation  during
these  six  days  work  that  we  read  of;
then  he  commenced  the  temporal
work  on  the  seventh  day;  He  planted
the  garden  on  the  seventh  day ;  he
placed  man  in  that  garden  on  the
seventh  day  ;  formed  the  beasts  and
brought  them  before  the  man  on  the
seventh  day,  all  this  being  the  tem-
poral woik,  the  first  being  spiritual.
Not  so  in  the  last  uf  his  work — the
great  work  that  is  to  come.  When
the  seven fli  millennium  shall  arrive
the  Lord  will  redeem  man  and  bring
him  forth  from  the  grave,  and  lie
will  be^ in  to  redeem  this  creation
not  making  it  entirely  i  I  mortal  and
spiritual,  like  a  sea  of  glass.  It  will
exist  for  a  thousand  years  in  a  tem-
poral condition,  as  it  was  before  the
Fall  This  will  be  the  first  of  his
temporal  work  in  the  last  days.  By
and  by  when  the  millennium  has
passed,  antl  the  earth  passes  away
and  dies  and  its  elements  are  melted
with  fervent  heat,  and  there  is  no


place  found  for  it  as  an  organized
body,  he  will  again  speak  and  there
will  be  another  creation — a  creation
of  this  earth  out  of  the  old  materials;
in  other  words  a  resurrection  of  the
earth,  a  literal  resurrection.  That
will  be  the  last  of  his  work.  In  the
morning  of  creation  spiritual  first,
and lastly  temporal. But  in  the

1  ending  temporal  first  in  the  redemp-
tion, and  lastly  spiritual,  which  will
be  the  perfection  or  ending  of  his
work;  '  -y ,  ■

j  There  are  a  great  many  things  that'
God  has  revealed  to  us  as  Latter-day
Saints,  and  it  would  be  well  for  usr
fur  our  Elders  and  for  all,  to  search
these  revelation*,  to  prepare  their
minds  to  understand  what  God  in-
tends to  do  with  oar  creation,  and
those  who  are  prepared  to  inherit  it,
when  it  is  made  new.  We,  if  faith-
ful, shall  inherit  it  in  its  temporal
condition before the  millennium

j  passes  away.  Though  our  bodies
may  go  down  to  the  grave,  God  will
bring  us  forth.  He  will  redeem  us
and  bring  together  bone  to  its  bone,
organize  the  flesh,  sinews,  muscles
and  every  part  of  the  body  in  its  pro-
per place,  cover  it  with  skin,  cause
the  breath  to  enter  into  us,  and  the
Spirit  from  on  high  to  quicken  us,
and  the  human  spirit,  that  will  dwell
in  a  celestial  paradise,  to  return  and
take  possession  of  the  body,  Then
we  shall  inhabit  the  earth,  not  at  first
in  its  glorified  state — that  state
which  eventually  awaits  it,  but  in  the
beginning  of  its  redemption  in  its
temporal  condition  d  su  ing  the  thou-
sand years,  of  which  iho  work  1  efore
the  Fall  was  typical.

I God  bless  you. Amen.  (


206


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUR


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN  TAVLOR,

Delivered  in  the  13th  Ward  Assembly  Ptosis,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afteknoox,  Jan.  5,  1873+

(Reported  hj  JJavld  W.  Ec  ins.)

GOD  THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  GOOD — THE  COMMON"  LOVE  OF  MAN  FOR
IN'CREASE— THE  NECESSITY  OF  RIGHTEOUSLY  DIKECTIXG  OUR  POWERS.


I  take  pleasure  in  meeting  with
the  S -lints*  I  like  to  break  bread
with  them  in  commemoration  of  the
broken  body  of  our  L^rd  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ,  and  also  to  partake  of
the  cup  in  remembrance  of  his  shed
blood,  and  then  to  reflect  upon  the
associations  connected  therewith  :
oar  relations! ii p  to  God  through  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  our  relationship
to  each  other  as  members  of  the  body
of  Christ,  and  our  hopes  concerning
the  future;  the  second  appearing  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when,  we  are
given  to  understand,  he  will  gird
himself  and  wait  upon  us,  and  we
shall  eat  bread  and  drink  wine  with
him  in  his  Father's  kingdom,  I  like
to  reflect  upon  all  these  and  a  thou-
sand other  things  connected  with  the
salvation,  happineyss  and  exaltation  of
the  Saints  of  God  in  this  world,  and
in  the  world  to  come.

We  hare  one  da}"  set  apart  in
seven  tor  the  worship  of  God,  and  I
think  it  a  very  great  mercy  we  have,
for  we  can  thus  draw  aside  from  the
world,  its  cares,  perplexities  and
anxieties,  and,  as  rational,  intelligent,
imm>rtal  beings,  reflect  upon  some-
thing pertaining  to  the  future*  We
are  very  much  engaged,  generally,  in
relation  to  things  of  time  and  sense.
Our  hearts,  feelings  and  affections
seem  to  be  drawn  out  in  this  direc-


tion, and  these  are  the  only  things
which  a  greit  many  people  have  iu
view,  Jesus,  in  speaking  to  his  dis-
ciples, tells  them  not  to  take  any
thought  about  what  they  shall  eat  or
drink,  ur  wherewithal  they  shall  be
clothed,  for,  said  he,  after  all  these
things  the  Gentiles  seek.  We,  of
course,  must  take  this  us  being  speci-
fic illy  addressed  to  his  discipfes  under
the  circumstances  in  which  they  were
then  placed ;  the  principle  involved
iu  his  words  is  nevertheless  true.
Says  he,  u  Consider  the  lilies  of  the
field,  they  toil  n  >r,  neither  do  they
spin,  a: id  yet  Solomon  in  all  hifl  glory
was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these/*
Again,  he  says,  reflect  up.u  the  fowls
of  the  air,  they  do  not  sow,  nor  reap,
nor  gather  into  barns,  yet  your  hea-
venly Father  tikes  care  of  them,  and
will  he  nut  also  tnke  care  of  you,  O
ye  of  little  faith  ?

There  is  something  beautiful  in
reflecting  upon  many  of  these  sub-
jects, and  something,  very  frequently,
that  is  quite  in  harmony  with  our
feelings  when  they  are  in  accord  with
the  Spirit  of  truth  and  the  light  of
revelation.  We  feel,  then*  that  we
live  iu  God,"  and  as  the  Scriptures
say,  that  in  him  we  move  and  have
our  being.  If  we  have  life,  or  health,
or  possessions ;  if  we  have  children,
and  friends,  and  homes ;  if  we  have


GOD  THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  GOOD,  ETC


2'J7


the  light  of  truth,  the  blessings  of
the  everlasting  Gospel,  the  revela-
tions of  God,  the  Holy  Priesthood,
with  all  its  blessings  and  government
and  rule,  all  these  and  every  true
enjoyment  that  we  possess  come  from
God.  We  do  not  always  realize  this,
but  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  to
God  we  are  indebted  for  every  good
and  perfect  gift.  He  organized  our
bodies  as  they  exist  in  nil  their  per-
fection, symmetry  and  beauty.  He,
as  the  poet  has  expressed  it,

**  Makes  the  grnat  the  hill*  adorn,
And  clothes  the  smiling  fields  with  corn.
The  beasta  with  food  his  hands  supply,
And  the  youny  ravens  when  they  cry. "

He  is  merciful  and  kind  and  bene*
volent  towards  all  his  creatures,  and  if
is  well  for  us  to  reflect  upon  these
things  sometimes,  for  we  thus  realize
our  dependence  upon  the  Almighty*

In  speaking  of  the  affairs  of  this
world,  it  is  often  asked  by  many —
"  Why,  should  we  not  attend  to
them?1  Of  course  we  should.  Do
we  not  talk  of  building  up  Zion  ?
Of  course  we  do.  Do  we  not  talk  of
building  cities  and  of  making  beau-
tiful habitations,  gardens  and  or-
chards, and  placing  ourselves  in  such
a  position  that  we  and  our  families
can  enjoy  the  blessings  of  life?  Of
course  we  do,  God  has  given  us  the
land  and  all  the  necessary  elements
for  this  purpose,  and  he  has  given
us  intelligence  to  use  them.  But  the
great  thing  he  has  had  in  view  is,
that  whilst  we  use  the  intelligence
that  he  gives  us  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  various  objects  that  are
desirable  fur  our  well-being  and  hap-
piness, we  should  not  forget  him  who
is  the  source  of  all  our  blessings,
whether  pertaining  to  the  present  or
the  future.  Mankind  everywhere
and  in  all  ages  have  universally
manifested  a  desire  to  obtain  the
things  of  this  world — gold,  silver,
houses,  lands,  possessions,  &c.  This
desire  is  inherent  iu  man ; it  was


planted  in  our  bosoms  by  the  Al-
mighty, and  is  as  correct  as  any  other
principle  if  we  can  only  understand
it,  control  it,  and  rightly  appreciate
the  possessions  and  blessings  we  en-
joy* The  earth  was  made  for  our
possession.  The  lands,  waters,
mountains,  valleys,  the  trees,  the
minerals,  vegetation  of  all  kinds,
plants,  shrubs  and  flowers — all  these
things  were  made  for  the  use  of  man,
and  it  is  for  us  to  appropriate  them
to  their  proper  use,  to  estimate  them
at  their  proper  value,  and  as  rational,
intelligent,  immortal  beings,  to  com-
prehend the  object  of  the  creation  of
tin  se  things,  as  well  as  the  object  of
our  creation,  and  why  and  how,  and
under  what  circumstanc  s  we  can
enjoy  tliera,  and  how  long  we  can
retain  possession  of  them.  In  exa-
mining the  human  mind  you  will
find  many  correct  feelings  and  in-
stincts planted  there,  if  men  would
be  governed  by  them.  I  do  not
know  but  it  is  this  the  Prophet  has
reference  to  when  he  says,  *fc  There  is
a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration
of  the  Almighty  givcth  it  under-
standing." Another  Scripture  says
that  "God  has  given  to  every  man
a  portion  of  his  Spirit  to  profit  withal;**
but  then,  many  men  do  not  profit  by
it;  and  although  they  have  this  li^ht
or  intuition  within  themselves,  they
are  not  governed  by  it.  There  is  a
party  of  religionists  in  the  world,
called  Quakers,  so  strongly  impreg-
nated with  this  idea,  that  they  think
that  this  inward  monitor  is  sufficient
to  guide  men  in  ail  their  nets  in  life-
There  are  certain  politic*]  princi-
ples (I  am  referring  to  the  freedom
of  the  human  mind,)  that  are  very
pertinent  on  this  point.  When  the
framers  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence assembled  on  this  continent,
far  away  from  other  nations  and
peoples,  in  reflecting  upon  govern-
ments and  man,  the  very  first  thing


268


JOURN  AL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  they* struck  upon  was  this-


"  We  hold  these  truths  to  be  self
evident,  that  all  men  are  created
equal,  aud  they  are  endowed  hy  their
Creator  with  certain  inalienable  rights,
among  which  are  life,  liberty,  and
the  pursuit  of  happiness."  Almost
simultaneously  with  them,  or  I  be-
lieve a  very  little  after,  I  will  not  be
positive  as  to  the  date,  a  number  of
gentlemen  got  together  in  Paris,
France,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a
government  which  they  thought
would  be  a  government  of  the  people,
and  they  expressed  themselves  in
almost  similar  words  to  those  which
were  expressed  here*  And  yon  will
find,  in  examining  the  history  of  the
world,  that  whenever  mankind  have
been  oppressed  or  bound  down,  there
has  generally  been  a  reaction,  a  con-
tinual striving  among  the  people  to
liberate  themselves  from  their  bon-
dage, to  gain  freedom  and  the  exer
cise  of  those  inalienable  rights  of
which  I  have  spoken.

One  great  principle  which  has  ex-
isted anions  men  from  the  beginning
of  creation  until  now,  is  a  desire,
planted  within  them  by  the  Al-
mighty, to  possess  property — lands,
bouses,  farms,  &a,  and  in  a  national
capacity,  to  possess  territory,  to  in~
crease  their  boundaries,  and  to  extend
their  rule  aud  dominion.  As  I  said
before,  this  principle  is  correct,  only
it  wants  control ing  according  to  the
revelations  of  God.

Our  time  on  the  earth  is  very  short
and  transitory.  No  matter  what  we
acquire  it  amounts  to  but  very  little,
and  we  soon  leave  it  T  lie  re  is  no
great  statesman,  warrior,  king,  em-
peror or  general,  who  has  acquired
extensive  territory,  but  who  has  had
to  leave  it  soon.  This  is  the  univer-
sal history  of  mankind.  You  may
go  baek  to  the  old  Assyrian  empires,
or  examine  the  history  of  the  kings
of  Babylon  and  Ninevuh,  and  the


mightiest  among  them  have  passed
away  alter  a  brief  exercise  of  power;
no  matter  how  extensive  their  pos-
sessions were.  Head  their  history  in
the  Bible  and,  although  some  affect
to  despise  that  book,  it  is  the  best
history  we  have,  and  contains  a  hun-
dred times  more  information  in  rela-
tion to  those  old  nations  than  you
can  find  an v where  else,  When  the
Medes  and  Persians  dispossessed  the
Assyrians,  they  had  just  the  same
ideas  as  the  Assyrians  had — they
wanted  to  extend  their  territory,  and
they  did  it,  but  what  did  it  amount
to  ?  Not  very  much  when  we  speak
of  it  as  immortal  beings  j  when  we
speak  of  it  as  mortal  beings,  as
butterflies  that  flutter  around  for  a
short  time,  and  then  die,  it  might  be
a  sort  of  transient,  passing  glory,
like  a  sunbeam  when  the  sun  shines
from  behind  a  cloud — it  appears  very
brilliant,  but  it  soon  passes  away.
So  it  was  with  their  glory,  and  where
is  it  now  ?  Why  you  can  scarcely
find  where  their  mightiest  cities
btood.  People  think  they  can,  but
there  is  nothing  definite  about  it,
and  their  glory,  pomp  and  majesty
have  no  more  existence  now  than
their  cities.  They  hfid  a  correct
principle  planted  in  their  bosoms,
but  it  was  perverted  and  corrupted,
and  they  sought  by  fraud,  strategy,
war,  robbery  and  plunder  to  possess
themselves  of  dominion,  empire  and
authority,  and  when  they  got  through,
they  had  to  lie  down  among  the  silent
dear! ;  and  could  neither  move  a
hand,  stir  an  arm,  move  a  leg  nor
open  an  eye,  but  had  to  be  devoured
by  worms.

That  is  the  history  also  of  the
Grecian  and  Roman  kingdoms.  It
was  said  of  Alexander  that  after  he
had  conquered  the  world  he  sat  down
and  wept  because  there  was  nothing
more  for  him  to  subdue,  and  I  have
heard  it  said  frequently,  in  regard  to


GOB  THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  GOOD,  ETC.


269


individuals,  that  they  wanted  every*
thing  in  their  own  grasp;  and  if  they
had  had  a  world,  it  would  not  have
been  big  enough,  they  would  have
wanted  a  little  piece  outside  to  make
a  garden  patch.  We  see  man  here
striving  anxiously  for  the  possession
of  lands,  houses  and  so  forth.  That
is  all  right  enough,  but  it  wants  to
be  corrected,  I  will  refer  you  to
some  Scripture  about  Abraham.  We
read  that  God  took  him  upon  a  cer-
tain hill,  and  told  him  to  lift  up  his
eyes  eastward,  westward,  northward
and  southward,  and  s:iid  to  him,  "  To
thee  anil  to  thy  seed  after  thee  will  I
give  this  land,"  Here  was  a  promise
made  by  God,  Of  course  Abraham
ought  to  have  felt  interested  iu  it
But  was  it  pertaining  to  this  world
only  ?  No,  certainly  not,  I  mean
was  the  promise  confined  to  Abra-
ham's lifetime?  No,  certainly  not.
Then  what  had  it  reference  to  ?
These  are  questions  that  demand  our
serious  attention  and  consideration.
We  find  also  that  there  was  a  promise
made  to  Joseph,  that  he  should  pos-
sess a  land,  rich  and  fruitful,  abound-
ing in  the  precious  things  of  the
earth,  and  the  precious  things  of  the
mountains,  and  of  the  everlasting
hills  ;  that  should  abound  in  corn,
wine  and  oil,  and  the  rich  blessings
of  life,  and  that  he  should  become  a
in  altitude  of  nations  in  the  midst  of
the  e  rth.  These  blessings  were
spoken  by  men  who  were  just,  as  it
were,  tottering  on  the  brink  of  the
grave,  by  Hoses  and  Jacob,  for  in-
stance, who  put  their  hands  on  the
heads  of  their  descendants  and
blessed  them  previous  to  their  depar-
ture. How  was  ifc  in  regard  to  the
promise  made  to  Abraham  ?  Did  he
really  possess  that  which  was  pro-
mised him?  Certainly  not.  Yet
God  promised.  Then  why  did  not
Abraham  possess  that  which  was
promised  ? Because  it  was  not  ne-


cessary at  that  time,  Stephen,  in
talking  about  it,  I  suppose  about
eighteen  hundred  years  after,  says
that  "  God  promised  these  things  to
Abraham,  but  nevertheless  he  gave
liim  none  inheritance  in  it,  no  not  so
much  as  to  set  his  foot  on  ;  "  but,  says
he,  he  will  give  it  to  him  and  his  seed.
That  is,  they  shall  by  and  by  inherit*
This  was  the  idea  and  feeling  they
had  in  relation  to  tti is  matter.  They
did  not  consider  the  world  at  that
time  iu  a  perfect  state,  and  men  who
understand  themselves  do  not  con-
sider it  in  a  perfect  state  to-day.
Abraham  and  his  seed  hud  that  land
given  to  them  Rnd  they  will  possess
it,  redeemed  and  renewed,  when  it
will  be  worth  having.  Well,  then,
how  is  it  ?  A  good  deal  as  it  was
with  the  rich  man  that  Jesus  spoke
of  in  his  day,  He  bad  gathered
around  him  a  great  quantity  of  pro-
perty, and  said  he,  u  Soul,  sit  down
and  be  at  rest,  do  not  trouble  thyself
any  more,  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink
and  be  meriy,  for  thou  hast  much
goods  laid  up  fur  many  years."  Jesus
says,  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  shall  thy
soul  be  required  of  thee,"  and  then
whose  shall  these  things  be  which
thou possessed  ? Would  lie  have

'  them  ?  No.  Who  would  r  Per-
haps  his  children  and  wife,  perhaps
nots  just  as  it  happened  ;  there  was
no  dependence  then  any  more  than
now  about  such  things.  All  that  the
rich  man  knew  was  that  his  soul
would  depart,  and  that  his  body
wou  ld  be  placed  in  the  ground  to  feed
the  worms.  These  things  ought  to
lead  us  to  reflection.  As  1  said  before,
the  principle  or  desire  to  acquire  the
goods  of  this  world  is  in  itself  good,
but  it  has  been  perverted  by  man ;
and  when  Gentiles  and  "  Mormons'*

I  seek  for  nothing  but  what  they  shall
eat  and  drink,  and  wherewithal  they
shall  be  clothed,  they  are  both  fools,
for  they  do  not  know  at  what  time


270


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


their  souls  will  be  required  of  tbera.

If  man  were  to  live  up  to  the  privi-
leges with  which  he  is  surrounded ;
if  he  followed  the  light  of  revelation
and  sought  for  and  became  acquainted
with  God,  and  correct  principles  in
relation  to  the  future,  he  would  not
want  to  lay  up  ho  much  the  treasures
of  the  ear  Hi  as  the  treasures  of  eter-
nal life.  But  you  are  Vow  talking  of
spiritual  things?  No,  I  am  not,  I
am  talking  about  temporal  things,
and  I  will  go  back,  and  examine
some  men  who  have  lived  here  on  the
earth,  Job,  for  instance.  He  said,
4tI  know  that  mv  Redeemer  li vet h,
and  that  he  shall  stand  in  the  latter
day  upon  the  earthy  and  that  I  shrill
see  him  ;  and  though  worms  feed  on
my  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  I  shall  see
God."  Job,  when  he  was  resurrected,
expected  to  stand  upon  and  to  inherit
the  earth  in  the  latter  days,  when  the
earth  should  be  redeemed.

Another  prophet,  speaking  of  the
same  things,  says,  "I  shall  s  and  in
my  lot  in  the  end  of  the  days."  He
also  expected  an  inheritance  upon
the  earth.  And  then,  the  ancient
apostles,  in  talking  about  these  things,
said  that  the  Saints  should  live  and
reign  on  the  earth  after  the  resurrec-
tion, when  the  earth  should  have
become  purified.  Hence  it  is  very
natural  for  a  feeling  of  this  kind  to
be  planted  in  the  bosoms  of  men,
that  is,  an  attachment  to  the  earth,
for  it  is  man's  eternal  inheritance,
but  that  feeling  must  be  sauctified.

Who  is  it  that  will  possess  the
earth  ?  Is  it  those  ancient  mouarchs
who  fought,  conquered,  subdued  and
slew  their  thousands,  waded  through
seas  of  blood  to  gain  empire  ?  No,
not  at  all*  Is  it  the  man,  who,  by
fraud,  deception,  trickery,  dishonesty
and  chicanery,  took  advantage  of
those  around  him,  and  so  amassed
large  wealth  and  possessions  ?  Verily
no* Who  will,  then  ? L*et  Jesus


speak.  Says  he,  "Blessed  are  the
meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the
earth/1  They  are  the  ones  who  will
rejoice  before  God  in  the  possession
of  the  blessings  of  earth,  and  not  the
kings  and  other  characters  to  whom
I  have  referred.  One  of  the  prophets
saw  the  end  of  these  kings  and
rulers,  and  he  says,  "  They  were
gathered  together,  as  prisoners  are
gathered  together,  into  a  pit,  and
they  were  shut  up  for  many  days,  and
after  many  Hays  they  will  be  visited."
They  will  have  some  chance  of  salva-
tion antl  of  an  exaltation,  but  they
have  to  remain  in  prison  for  many
days,  like  the  antediluvians  had,  be-
fore Jesus  went  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison,  who  were  sometimes
disobedient  in  the  days  of  Noah.

We  have  a  great  many  principles
innate  in  our  natures  that  are  correct,
but  they  want  sanctifying.  God  said
to  man,  "Be  fruitful  and  multiply,
and  replenish  the  earth  and  subdue
it,  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish
of  the  sea,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and
the  creeping  things  that  creep  on  the
face  of  che  earth  "  Well,  he  has
planted,  in  accordance  with  this,  a
natural  desire  in  woman  towards  man,
and  in  man  towards  woman,  and  a
feeling  of  affection,  regard  and  sym-
pathy exists  between  the  sexes.  We
bring  it  into  the  world  with  us,  but
that,  like  everything  else,  has  to  be
sanctified.  An  unlawful  gratification
of  these  feelings  and  sympathies  is
wrong  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  leads
down  to  death,  while  a  proper  exer-
cise of  our  functions  lends  to  life,
happiness  and  exaltation  in  this  world
and  the  world  to  come-  And  so  it  ia
in  regard  to  a  thousand  other  things.

We  like^enjoymeut  here.  That  is
right,  God  designs  that  we  should
enjoy  ourselves.  I  do  not  believe  in
a  religion  that  makes  people  gloomy,
melancholy,  miserable  and  ascetic.  I
would  not  want  to  spend  my  life  in  a


GOD  THE  SUUUCE  OF  ALL  GOOD,  ETC*


271


nunnery,  if  I  were  a  woman,  or  in  a
monastery  if  I  were  a  man ;  and  I
would  not  think  it  very  exalting  to  be
a  hermit,  and  to  live  by  myself  in  a
poor  miserable  way. I  should  not .
think  there  was  anything  great  or
good associated with that,  while
everything  around,  the  trees,  birds,
flowers  and green fields,  were  so
pleasing,  the  insects  and  bees  buzzing
and  fluttering,  Hie  lambs  frolicking
and  playing. While  everything  else
enjoyed  life,  why  should  not  v  e  ?  •
But  we  want  to  do  it  correctly  and
not  pervert  any  of  these  principles
that  God  has  planted  in  the  human
family. Why,  there  are  some  people
who  think  that  the  fiddle,  fur  in-
stance, is  an  instrument  of  the  devil
and  it  is  quite  wrong  to  use  it-  Tdo
not  think  so,  I  think  it  is  a  splendid
thing  to  dance  by. But  some  folks
think  that  we  should  not  dance.  Yes,
we  should  enjoy  life  in  any  way  we
can. Some  people  object  to  music.
Why  music  prevails  in  the  heavens,
and among the birds ! God  has
filled  them  with  it.  There  is  nothing
more  pleasing  and  delightful  than  it
is  to  go  into  the  woods  or  among  the
bushes  early  in  the  morning  and  listen
to  the  warbling  and  rich  melody  of
the  birds,  and  it  is  strictly  in  accord-
ance with the  sympathies  of  our
nature. We  have  no  idea  of  the
excellence  of  the  music  we  shall  have
in  heaven. It  may  be  said  of  that,
as  one  of  the  Apostles  has  said  in  re-
lation to  something  else — li  Eve  hath
not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath
it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to
conceive  of  those  things  which  aje
prepared  for  those  who  love  and  fear
God," We  have  no  idea  of  the  ex-
cellency, beauty,  harmony  and  sym-
phony of  the  music  in  the  heavens.

Our  object  is  to  get  and  cleave  to
everything  that  is  good,  and  to  reject
everything  that  is  bad.  One  reason
why  religious  people  in  the  world  are


opposed  to  music  and  theatres  is  be-
cause of  the  corruption  that  is  mixed
up  with  them.  Wicked  and  corrupt
men  associate  themselves  with  these
things,  and  degrade  them ;  but  is
this  any  reason  that  the  Saints  should
not  enjoy  the  gifts  of  God  ?  Is  that
a  correct  principle  ?  Certainly  not*
It  is  for  theru  to  grasp  at  everything
that  is  good,  and  calculated  to  pro-
mote the  happiness  of  the  human
family,  .

I  remember  the  time  very  well,
and  many  of  you  do,  when  we  used
to  commence  our  theatrical  amuse-
ments here  by  prayer. We  do  not
do  so  much  of  it  now. This  practice
is  put  to  one  side. I  suppose  one
was  right  and  the  other  is  right.  I
merely  speak  of  these  tilings.  All
our  acts  should  be  sanctified  to  God.
Yuu  know  that  we  are  in  the  habit
of  having  parties  occasionally.  I
will  give  you  my  ideas  about  some  of
them. I  have  attended  one  or  two
lately,  and  I  think  we  are  running
rather  wild,  and  that  we  do  not  act
as  much  like  gentlemen  and  ladies  as
we  should,  nor  quite  as  much  like
Saints  as  we  ought  to  do, I  think
there  is  a  great  deal  of  impudence
and  pertness,  a  great  amount  of  in-
terfering with  other  people's  rights
in  these  places,  and  I  think  that  we
need  correcting,  that  is,  in  our  Ward.
I  do  not  know  how  it  is  here  in
yours. Perhaps  you  do  better  here.
I  am  speaking  of  things  as  I  see
them. I  think  we  ought  to  elevate
everything  of  this  kind  to  its  proper
standard. We  ought  not  to  intrude
upon  or  take  advantage  of  anybody,
even  in  amusements. When  this  is
not  observed,  I  will  tell  you  what  it
leads  to  i  it  leads  to  a  reparation  in
society,  inducing men  and  women
who  desire  to  b3  polite,  refined  and
courteous,  to  keep  out  of  the  com-
pany of  those  who  do  not  take  this
course,  and  produces,  if  you  please


272


JOt


XL  OF  DI


URSES.


something  like  an  aristocracy,  which
is  very  repagnant  to  the  wishes  of
good  feeling  men  and  women.  Bat
thev  have  either  to  do  this  or  to  be
ran  over  in  many  instances*

I  speak  of  these  things  for  your
information.  I  do  not  know  that  you
need  any  information  of  this  kind
here,  I  suppose  I  ought  to  have  de-
livered this  lecture  in  oar  Ward,  In
all  onr  amusements  we  should  see
that  things  are  conducted  right,  and
we  should  never  forget  to  act  the
part  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  we
should  do  away  with  frowardness
and  impudence,  and  treat  everybody
with  kindness,  courtesy  and  respect,
I  maetk  of  these  things  because  they
strike  my  attention.  But  perhaps  I
have  said  enough  on  this  subject

We  nre  here — a  number  of  Saints.
Well j  you  have  outsiders  among  you.
That  is  none  of  oar  business,  they
are  not  us,  1  am  now  talking  to
Saints.  We  have  come  here  to  fear
God  and  keep  his  commandments.
I  do  not  exjieet  to  frame  my  religion,
ideas  or  amusements  to  suit  the  feel-
ings of  any  man  under  the  heavens.
I  want  to  get  my  inspiration  from
God,, and  Lie  led  by  him,  and  I  want
to  honor  him  in  all  my  acts,  I  do
not  care  what  t!iis,  that,  or  the  other
man  does.  Know  ye  not  that  God
lias  called  us  from  the  world  to  plant
among  us  the  principles  of  eternal
truth,  to  teach  ns  correct  principles,
and  to  show  ns  how  to  conduct  our-
selves towards  one  another,  and  to-
wards all  men  ?  To  show  us  also
how  to  enjoy  life,  what  course  to
pursue  to  elevate  ourselves  in  the
world,  and  to  bring  op  others  to  our
standard  ?  We  should  never  descend
to  other*.  That  is  my  feeling,  but
I  hart*  seen  some  do  it.  Go  out
among  the  Indians  here,  and  you  will
see  traders  among  them  who,  instead
of  lifting  up  the  Indians,  go  right
down  to  them. I  do  not  object,  my-


self, to  have  good,  decent,  respectable,
honorable  men  associated  with  ns
more  or  less ;  but  I  do  object  to  des-
cending  to  the  morality  of  the  wicked
and  corrupt.  I  do  not  believe  in
drinking,  or  in  the  lasciviousness  and
dishonesty  that  are  practiced  by
many  who  call  themselves  honorable
men.  I  want  nothing  to  do  with
theni,  and  I  say,  u  My  soul,  enter  not
thou  into  their  secrets ;  and  mine
honor*  with  them  be  not  thon  united."

We  have  came  here  for  the  pur-
pose of  elevating  ourselves,  aid  of
elevating  the  people  that  we  are
among.  We  have  come  here  to
build  up  Zion,  to  be  taught  of  the
Lord,  to  ettiblish  righteousness,  and
to  prepare  a  people  for  his  coming.
What  is  there  in  the  world  that  we
do  not  know  ?  We  knew  their  re-
ligion, philosophy  and  morality  be-
fore we  came  here.  We  came  here
in  order  that  we  might  prepare  a
people  for  the  time  when  the  barst-
ing  heavens  shall  reveal  the  Son  of
God,  when  creation  shall  feel  his
power  and  erase  to  groan,  and  when
all  people  under  the  heavens  shall
say,  **  Blessing,  glory,  honor,  power,
might,  majesty  and  dominion  be  as-
cribed to  him  that  sists  on  the  throne
and  the  Lamb  forever  ".  We  came
here  to  introduce  principles  in  regard
to  our  religion,  morals,  social  stitfuSj
the  covenants  that  we  make  with
God,  and  all  things  pertaining  to  this
world  ai id  the  world  to  come.  And
because  of  this,  heavy  responsibilities
devolve  upon  us  us  parents,  Elders
in  Israel,  Bishops,  Presidents,  High
Priests,  Seventies,  and  in  every  office
in  the  Priesthood  and  all  the  various
avocations  in  life,  that  we  may  be
able  to  say,  finally,  "  I  have  fought
the  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my
course,  1  have  kept  the  faith,  I  have
done  that  which  is  right,  I  have  been
full  of  integrity,  virtue,  holiness  and
purity,  and  hence  is  laid  up  ior  me  a


GOD  THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  GOOD,  ETC


273


crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  j
Lord,  the  Righteous  Judge,  shall  1
give  unto  me,  and  not  unto  me  only,
but  to  all  those  who  love  the  appear-
ing of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ/1  These  are  some  things  we
are  after,  the  attainment  of  which
ought  to  be  the  olject  of  our  exist-
ence, N  ; '  #  V  !

Well,  but  is  it  not  right  for  us  to
have  hinds  ?  Certainly,  we  have
come  here  for  the  purpose  of  building
tip  a  ZtoB,  and  we  ought  to  use  all
d i  1  igenee  tor  its  accor n  \  \ is h  men  t.
You  Saints  possess  facilities  here
that  people  never  possessed  before.
Di>  yoij  realize  i his  r  Perhau*  that
is  stretched  a  little.  I  expert  that
in  the  days  ol  Enoch  they  hid  a
splendi  t  time  and  that  they  lived  in
a  very  happy  manner.  13  at  we  are  j
living  in  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  tiroes,  when  God  is  gath-
ering all  things  together  in  one,  and
he  has  brought  us  from  d diet  en  t  nu-
tinns,  countries,  climes  and  peoples.
What  to  do?  To  make  fools  oi
ourselves  ?  Is  our  ol  je>-t  to  live  as  ■
the  wicked  do — to  be  "eove'ous,
boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,  disobe-
diet  t  to  parents,  heady,  hiuhminded,
(ii.'>[»ist*r&  of  those  who  are  good,  to
have  a  form  of  godliness  without  the
powrr  r1?  No,  we  came  here  that  we
might  learn  the  laws  of  1  lie  Almighty,
and  prepare  ourselves  and  our  pus-  J
ferity  for  thrones,  pri  uci  p^ili  t  left,
powers  and  dominions  in  the  celestial
kingdom  of  our  God.  We  talk
Sometimes  about1  Zion,  that  lists  gut
to  be  built  up  in  J  tck-ou  County ;
also  about  a  New  Jerusalem  that  has
to  he  built  and  prepared  to  meet  a
Jerusalem  that  shall  descend  hoot
the  heavens,  How  do  oar  lives  and
aptions  compare  with  these  things?
Are  our  hearts,  feelings  and  atf  c-
tions  drawn  out  alter  them,  or  are
we  forgetful  and  our  minds  swallowed
up with the  afiftitfl  of  ti  ue  and

No,  18.


sense?  An1  we  preparing  our  chil-
dren for  this  time,  and  spreading  an
influence  around  us  wherever  we  go
to  lead  people  in  the  paths  uf  life
and  lift  them  up  to  Gov!  ?  Or  are
we  taking  a  downward  Course — come
day,  go  day,  just  as  it  happens?  I
think  we  ought  to  w  ike  up  and  be
alive,  and  endeavor  to  pursue  a  Course
that  will  secure  the  smite  and  appro-
bation of  the  Almighty.  Every  one
of  us,  as  fathers,  mothers  and  Eiders
o!  Israel,  ought  to  cultivate  tht?  Holy
Ghost  in  our  hearts,  and  let  it  burn
thete  like  a  living  fire.  We  ought
to  draw  near  to  God,  and  receive
from  hi iu  light  and  life  and  in-
telligence. We  ought  to  seek  for
wisdom  to  manage  our  youthf
tint  they  may  grow  up  in  the
tear  of  God.  Well,  we  are  doing
this,  more  or  less?  Yes,  very  well
indeed,  in  many  respects,  and  in
many  respectfi  very  pooily*  I  feel
led  to  talk  of  these  things,  and  what
I  «m  led  to  refer  to,  I  npeak  about.
We  ought  to  be  preparing  «>ur  youth
to  tread  in  our  footsteps,  if  they  are
right,  that  they  may  be  honorable
members  in  soeiety,  that  when  we  get
through  in  this  world  and  go  into
the  other,  w e  may  leave  behind  those
who  are  full  of  integrity,  and  who
will  keep  tlie  Commandment^  of  God.
We  ought  to  teach  our  -chiidreu
meekness  and  humility,  integrity,
viitue  and  the  fear  ot  Grid,  that  they
may  teach  thu>e  principles  to  their
children.  No  matter  about  many  of
these  fnrbelows,  or  whether  they  can
dance  round  dances  or  tiotj  that  is
not  of  very  great  importance.  No
matter  whether  they  are  in  the  tip-
top of  lashion,  oi  whether  their
ie-ithers  and  ribbons  are  all  right,
only  get  the  spirit,  heart  and  feelings
i  ight.  Let  the  heart  be  drawn  oui
to  God.  Let  there  be  an  altar  iu
every  house,  and  let  the  saw-d  fire
bum  on  that  altar. Seek  otmplank

Vol  XV,


274


JOt'RKAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


in  the  hearts  of  your  youth  principles
that  will  be  Herniated  to  make  tliem
honorable,  high  minded,  intelligent,
virtuous,  mode.-t,  pure  men  and  wo-
men, full  of  integrity  and  truth,  who
will  represent  yuu  correctly  that  is,
if  you  walk  correctly,  and  if  not,
that  will  represent,  at  any  rate,  the
principles  of  tru'h  wl  ich  you  pro*
fess  to  be  lieve  in,  that  they  with  you
may  have  mi  Inheritance  ii  the  king-
dom of  God,  and  in  her  if.  the  earth,
for  Jesus  sajh  it  is  the  meek  that « ill
inheiit  the  earth.

There  are  mane  things  that  we
may  hear  that  we  do  not  fully  com*
prehend  ;  and  we  perhaps  many
things  that  are  distasteful.  But
never  mind  t he  actions  of  men,  es-
pecially the  leaders  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God,  Y<  u  are  not
their  judges.  God  is  You  follow
their  counsel,  and  if"  they  and  you
have  the  Spirit  of  God,  yuu  will  see
eye  to  eye.  The  Scripture  says,
11  The  watchmen  will  see  eye  to  eye
when  Gud  brings  again  Z ton,"  perfect
in  holiness.  II  von  have  committed
sin,  pray  that  God  may  forgive  it
If  your  family  has  sinned,  pray  that
God  may  forgive  them,  and  lead  them


in  the  right  path,  and  do  not  be  too
censorious  about  others.  We  are  none
of  us  perfect,  we  nil  need  mercy,  and
if  we  exercise  judgment  without
mercy,  perhaps  judgment  without
mercy  may  be  meted  to  us.  Let  us
be  merciful  Jesus  says,  4<  Blessed
are  the  merciful  for  they  shall  obtain
me  rev.  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,
for  they  shall  see  God.''  Let  us  have
our  hearts  right,  our  spirits  pure  and
our  affections  sanctified,  and  let  us
seek  to  promote  a  love  of  those  prin-
ciples among  our  youth  everywhere
where  we  gr>,  that  wTe  may  be  blessed
nf  the  Lord  and  our  offspring  with
us.  Then  when  Zion  shall  be  re-
deemed and  the  purposes  of  God  shall
be  accomplished,  no  matter  whether
we  possess  much  or  possess  little,  God
will  be  with  us,  and  he  will  bring  us
off  victorious,  and  wTe  shall  join  in
singing,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that
was  slain,  and  has  risen  again,  to  re-
ceive glory  and  honor,  and  power,
and  might  and  majesty  and  domin
ion;"  and  if  we  are  faithful,  we
shall  live  and  reign  with  Christ  on
the  earth,

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful
the  name  at  Jesus.  Amen.


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  CuMINO  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAS,  ETC.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  lv  the  13th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

January  12,  1873.


(Reported  hj  David W.  Evans,)


THE  SIGNS  <>[■■  THE  COMING  OF  THE  SON  i>F  MAN — THE  SAINTS'  IUT1EK


My  address  thn  afternoon  will  be
in  tender!  for  those  who  profess  to  be
Latter-Hay  S-ntits — those  who  ha\e
entered  into  c  i  rnant  with  the  Lord
our  God.  I  tun  surrounded  with
those  who  know  by  experience  that
we  are  dependent  upon  the  influence
and  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to
enable  us  to  teach  the  things  of  the
kingdom  of  (rod.  My  faith  is  that
no  man,  in  this  or  any  other  genera-
tion, is  able  to  teach  and  edify  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  without  the
inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  As
a  people  we  have  been  placed  in
positions  the  last  forty  years  which
have  taught,  in  nil  our  administra-
tions and  lsibors,  the  necessity  of
acknowledging  t he  hand  of  God  in
all  tilings.  We  feel  this  necessity
to-day,  I  know  that  I  am  not  quali-
fied to  teach  either  the  Latter-day
Saints  or  the  world  without  the
Spirit  of  God.  1  desire  this  this
afternoon,  and  also  your  faith  and
prayers,  that  my  mind  may  be  led  in
a  channel  which  may  be  beneficial  to
yoa,  In  my  p  bite  teaching  I  never
permit  my  mind  to  follow  in  any
channel  except  fuat  which  the  Spirit
dictates  to  m«%  and  this  is  the  posi-
tion we  all  occupy  when  we  meet
with  the  Saints,  or  when  we  go  forth
to  preach  the  Gospel.  As  Jesus  told
his  Apostles,  Take  no  thought  what
ye  shall  say,  it  is  told  us,  Take  no


thought  what  we  shall  >ay  ;  but  we
treasure  up  in  our  minds  words  of
wisdom  by  the  blessing  of  God  and
studying  t he  bijst  books.

We  are  told  in  the  2  tth  chapter
of  Matthew  that  Jesus,  on  a  certain
occasion,  taught  his  disciples  many
things  concerning  his  Gospel,  the
Temple,  the  Jews,  his  second  com-
ing and  I  he  end  of  the  world  ;  and
they  asked  him  —  Master,  what  shall
he  tte  sign  of  these  things?  The
S  svior  answered  them,  but  in  a  very
brief  manner.  As  my  mind  runs  a
little  in  that  channel,  I  feel  disposed
to  read  a  portion  of  the  word  of  the
Lord  unto  us,  which  explains  this
matter  more  fully  than  the  Savior
explained  it  to  his  disciples.  That
portion  of  the  word  of  the  Lord
which  I  shall  read,  is  a  revelation
given  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
March  7 \  1831.  forty- two  years  ago
next  March.  It  commences  on  thn
1 33rd  page  of  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants.

[The  speaker  read  the  revelation,
and  then  resumed  his  remarks  aa
follows]  :

I  want  to  ask  who  are  looking  for
the  fulfillment  of  these  events,  and
who  upon  the  earth  are  preparing
themselves  for  the  fulfillment  of  ihe
word  of  the  Ijord  through  the  months

of  Prophets,  Patriarchs  and  Apostles
for the  last six  thousand  yeari  ?


i


Nobody  that  I  have  any  knowledge
of,  without  it  is  the  Latter-day  Sainls,
and  I  for  one  ft  el  that  we  are  not
half  so  much  awnke  as  we  ou^ht  to
be,  and  not  half  as  well  prepared  as
we  ought  to  be  fur  t  he  tremendous
events  which  are  coming  upon  the
earth  in  quick  succession  in  these
latter  days.  Who  can  t he  Lord  ex-
pect to  prepare  for  his  second  coining
bat  lus  Saints?  None.  Why?
Because,  ;ts  is  said  in  this  revelation,
light  htiscome  forth  to  the  inhabitant
of  the  earth,  and  they  have  njVeied
it,  because  their  deeds  are  evil.  This
message  has  been  proclaimed  among
t lie  Christian  nations  ot  Kurope  and
America,  and  in  many  other  n  itions,
for  l  Ik*  past  loity  years  Inspired


men  —  the  Elders  of  Israel  —  have
gone  forth  without  purse  or  scrip
declaring  the  Gospel  of  life  acid  sol-
vation to  i lie  nations  of  ihe  world,
but  they  have  njtcted  their  testi-
mony, and  condemnation  rests  upon
t  LLJi  therefor."  As  the  Prophet
said,  *'  Darkness  covers  the  earth,
and  gross  d;irku«>s  the  minds  of  the
people."  Who  believes  in  the  fulfill-
merit  of  prophecy  and  revelation  ?
Who,  among  priests  and  people  to-
day, has  any  faith  in  the  sayings  of
Jesus  Christ?  If  there  be  any  peo-
ple besides  the  Saints  whose  eyes  are
open  to  the  great  events  whieh  will
soon  overtake  the  nations,  I  would
like  to  know  and  visit  them.  I
would  to  God  that  Ihe  eyes  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  were  open  far  more
than  they  are  to  those  things  t!  at
rest  up.  n  them  !  The  Lord  is  look-
ing to  them  alone  to  build  up  his
Zum  here  in  the  mountains  of  Israel,
and  to  prepare  the  bride,  t lie  Lamb's
wife,  lor  the  coming  of  the  Great
Bridegroom.  1  btlieve  in  t  he  ful-
fillment of  the  revelations  which  the
lord  lias  given  to  us,  as  much  as  1
believe  ihai  I  h  ive  a  soul  to  save  or
lose,  or  as  muc  »  as  i  Leheve  in  the


shining  of  the  sun  in  the  firmament
of  heaven.  Why  ?  Because  every
word  that  God  1ms  ever  spoken,  whe-
ther bv  his  own  vu-ce  out  of  the  hea-

■P

vens,  by  the  ministration  of  angels,
or  by  the  mou  tlis  of  inspired  men,
I. as  been  ful tilled  to  the  vety  letter  as
far  as  time  has  permitted.  We  have
fulfilled  many  of  the  sayings  of  the
Prophe's  of  God.  The  Tevelation  I
have  read  this  afternoon  was  given
forty-two  j  ears  ago.  Ha-  ihere  Ucri
any  sound  of  war  since  then  ?  Has
there  been  any  Bound  of  war  in  our
land  since  that  period?  Has  there
been  any  standard  lifted  up  to  the
nations,  any  gathering  together  of
the  people  intu  these  mountains  of
Israel  from  nearly  all  nations?  There
has  We  have  had  a  beginning,  the
ti^  tree  is  leaving,  putting  foith  its
leaves  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  and
t tie  signs  in  both  heaven  and  earth
all  indicate  the  coming  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,

When  my  mind,  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  open  to
compiehend  these  things,  I  many
times  marvel  and  wonder,  not  only
at  the  world  but  also  at  ourselves,
that  we  are  not  more  anxious  and
diligent  in  preparing  ourselves  and
our  'm  milks  for  the  events  now  at
our  doors,  for  though  the  heavens
and  the  earth  pass  away,  not  one
jot  or  tittle  of  the  word  of  the  Lord
will  go  unfulfilled.  There  is  no  pro-
phecy of  Scripture  that  is  of  any
private  interpretation,  but  holy  men
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved
upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  their
words  will  he  fulfilled  on  the  edrth.

We  are  approaching  an  important
time.  As  Je*us  once  said,  The
world  hate  1113,  and  without  a  cause,
therefore  I  have  chosen  you  out  of
the  world,  and  the  wuild  hate  you
also.  The  servant  is  not  above  nis
ma&ter,  you  are  not  above  me,  they
have  hated  me  and  they  will  hate


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  COMING


OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN,  ETC.  277


you.  The  Lord  has  chosen  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  through  them
has  sent  a  message  to  all  nations
under  heaven.  The  Zion  of  God  is
Opposed  by  priest  and  people  in  every
Seet,  parry  and  denomination  in
Christendom.  The  Elders  of  Israel
have  been  called  from  the  p'ow,
plane,  ha  turner  and  the  various  oc-
cupations of  life,  to  go  forth  and
boar  record  of  the<=e  things  to  the
world.  We  have  followed  this  up
until  the  present  time  for  more  than
forty- two  years — forty -three  years
next  April.  The  kingdom  has  stead-
ily gr^wu,  and  while  we  have  la-
bored we  have  seen  the  fulfillment
of  the  word  of  the  Lord.  The  sea
has  gone  beyond  its  bounds,  there
have  been  earthquakes  in  divers
places,  and  there  have  also  been
wars  and  rumors  of  wars.  These  are
oidy  a  beginning,  their  fullness  has
not  yet  opened  upon  the  sons  of
men,  hut  it  is  at  their  doors;  it  is  at
the  doors  of  this  generation  and
of  this  nation.  And  when  'he
world  rise  up  against  the  kingdom
of  God  in  these  latter  days,  should
the  iSaints  have  any  fear's  ?  Should
we  fear  because  men,  in  their  secret
chambers,  concoct  plans  to  aver*
throw  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  We
should  not*  There  is  one  thing  we
should  do,  and  that  is,  pray  to  Hod.
Every  righteous  man  has  done  this,
even  Jesus  the  Savior,  the  Oulv  B^-
gotten  of  the  Fattier  in  the  flesh,
had  to  pray,  from  the  manger  to
the  cross,  all  the  w;iy  through  ;  every
day  he  had  to  c  dl  upon  his  Father
to  give  him  grace  to  sustain  him
in  his  hour  of  affliction  and  to  enable
hi  in  to  drink  the  bitter  cup.  So  *vith
his  disciples.  They  were  baptized
with  the  same  baptism  that  he  was
baptized  with  ;  they  suffered  the
same  death  that  he  died,  being  cru-
cified as  he  was*  They  sealed  r heir
testimony  with  their  blood.  Never-


theless all  that  Jesus  ^aid  concerning
the  Jews  has  had  its  fulfillment  to
the  present  day.  This  should  be  a
strong  testimony  to  the  whole  infidel
world  of  the  truth  of  Chr  ist's  mission
and  divinity.  L*t  them  look  at  the
Jewish  nation  and  the  state  of  the
world,  in  ful  si  I  [merit  of  the  words  of
the  Savior  eighteen  hundred  years
a^o  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  one  of  the
strongest  testimonies  in  the  world  of
the  fulfillment  of  relation,  the  truth
of  the  BH»le  and  the  mission  o"  Jesus
Christ  The  Jews  have  fulfilled  the
worls  of  Moses,  the  prophets  and
Jesus,  up  to  the  present  day.  They
hare  been  dispersed  and  trampled
under  the  feet  of  the  Gentile  world
now  for  eighteen  hundred  years.
When  Pontius  Pilate  wished  to  re-
lease Jesus  Carist,  saying  that  he
found  no  fault  in  that  just  man,  the
high  priests,  scribes,  pharisees  and
other  Jews  present  on  that  occasion
cried,  "Crucify  him,  and  let  his  blood
be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children  "
Has  it  not  followed  them  to  this
day,  and  been  manifest  in  their  dis-
pel si  on,  persecution  and  oppression
through  the  whole  Gentile  world
for  eighteen  hundred  years  r  Ir  has.
And  they  have  to  fulfill  the  words
of  the  Lord  still  further.  As  I  have
been  readitrg  to  you  to-day,  the
Jews  have  got  to  gather  to  their
own  lund in unbelief. Thev  will

if

^o  and  reh  nil  Jerusalem  anil  their
temple.  They  will  take  their  gold
a i ni  silver  from  the  nations  and  will
gather  to  the  Holy  Lmd,  and  when
they  have  done  this  and  rebuilt  their
eny,  the  Gentiles,  in  fulfillment  of
the  words  of  Kxekiel,  Jeremiah  and
other  prophets,  wdl  gO  up  against
Jerusalem  to  battle  and  to  take  a
spoil  and  a  prey;  and  then,  when
they  have  taken  one-half  of  Jeru-
salem captive  and  distressed  the
Je-vs  for  the  last  time  on  the  earrltt
their  Great  Deliverer,  Shduh,  svill


278


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


come.  They  do  not  believe  in  Jesus
of  Nazareth  now,  nor  ever  will  an  til
he  comes  and  sets  his  foot  on
Mount  Olivet  and  it  cleaves  in  twain,
one  part  going  towards  the  cast,  and
the  other  towards  the  west  Then,
when  they  behold  the  wounds  in  his
hands  and  in  his  feet,  they  will  say,
h  re  did  you  get  them  r  "  And
he  will  reply,  "I  am  Jesus  of  Naza-
reth, King  of  the  Jews,  your  Shiloh,
him  whom  you  crucified."  Then,  for
the  tirst  time  will  the  eyes  of  Judah
be  opened.  They  will  remain  in  un-
belief until  that  day*  This  is  one  of
the  events  that  will  transpire  in  the
latter  day.

The  Gospel  of  Christ  has  to  *ro  to
the  Gentiles  until  the  Lord  my  a
"  enough,"  until  their  timus  are  ful-
filled, and  it  will  be  in  this  generation.
Forty  years  have  passed  since  the
revelation  I  have  read  was  given  to
the  sons  of  men.  We  are  living  in
a  late  age,  although  it  is  true  there
are  a  great  many  vrst  and  important
events  to  transpire  in  these  days.
But  one  thing  is  certain,  though  the
Lord  has  Got  revealed  the  day  nor
the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  Mm
shall  come,  he  has  pointed  out  the
generation,  and  thes  jarns  predicted  as
the  fore-runners  of  that  great  event
have  begun  to  appear  in  the  heavens
and  on  the  earth,  and  they  will
continue  until  ail  is  consummated.
If  we,  as  Latter-day  Sam  is,  want
anything  to  stir  us  up,  let  os  read
the  Bible,  Book  of  Mormon  and  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
they  contain  enough  to  edify  and
instruct  us  in  the  things  of  God*
Treasure  up  the  revelations  of  God
and  the  Gospel  of  Christ  contained
therein.

As  an  individual,  I  will  say  that
I  feel  a  great  responsibility  resting
upon  me,  and  it  also  rests  upon  you.
Joseph  Smith  and  Brig  ham  Young
alone  have  not  been  called  to  build


up  in  the  latter  day  thai  great  and
mighty  kingdom  of  God  which  Dan-
iel foretold,  and  which  he  said
should  be  thrown  down  no  more
tor  ever,  I  say,  they  were  not  called
to  be  the  only  ones  to  labor  in
building  up  that  groat  and  glorious
Zion,  which  was  to  become  terrible
to  all  nations;  nor  their  counselors,
nor  the  Twelve  Apo>f  |es  f  but  this
responsibility  rests  upon  every  one
of  the  Lord's  anointed  upon  the  face
of  rhe  earth,  I  do  not  care  who  they
are,  whether  male  or  female,  and
the  Lord  will  require  this  at  the
bands  of  all  the  L>r  er-day  Saints,
1  therefore  desire  that  we  may  be
awake  to  these  snhjerts,  and  to  the
position  we  occupy  before  God  and  in
the  world.  *  ^ ,  J

ie  inhabitants  of  the  earth  may
hate  and  oppose  us,  as  they  did
Jesus  Christ,  and  a*  they  have  all
inspired  men,  as  they  did  Noah,
Enoch,  Abraham,  l*aaf%  Jacob,
Isaiah,  Jeremidi,  and  all  the  pro-
phets who  ever  lived-  They  have
always  been  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  to
the  world.  Why  ?  Because  they
had  enough  independence  of  mind
to  rebuke  sin,  to  maintain  the
promises  of  God  unto  man,  and  to
proclaim  tbe  declarations  of  the  Al-
mighty unto  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  fearless  of  consequences*  The
last  song  sung  here  was,  '*  Do  what
is  right,  let  the  Consequence  fol-
low/1 That  is  what  1  say  to  the
Latter  day  Saints,  Let  us  de  what
is  right,  maintain  our  religion  be-
fore Got!,  be  valiant  in  the  testimony
uf  Jesus  Christ,  and  prepare  our-
selves for  his  coming,  for  it  is  near,
and  this  is  what  God  requires  at  our
bands.  He  leans  upon  no  other
peoph*;  he  expects  from  no  people
but  those  who  have  obeved  his  Gos-
pel  and  gathered  here,  the  accom-
plish meat  of  his  great  work,  the
building  up  of  his  latter-day  Zion


■


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  COMING  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN,  ETC,


279


and  kingdom. And,  as  I  have  said,
this  responsibility  rests  uot  only  upon
Prophets  and Apostles, but  upon
every  man  and  woman  who  has  en-  j
tered  into  covenant  with  him. I  |
say  that  we  are  too  near  asleep,  we
are  not  half  awake  to  the  position  \
that  we  occupy  before  God,  and  the
responsibilities  we  are  under  to  him.
We  should  be  on  the  watch  tower.

Who  is  going  to  be  prepared  for
the  coming  of  the  Messiah  ?  These
men  who  enjoy  the  Holy  Ghost  and
live  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Al-
mighty, who  abide  in  Jesus  Christ
and  bring  forth  fruit  to  the  honor
and  glory  of  God,  No  other  people
will  be.  There  never  was  a  more  |
infidel  generation  of  Christians  on
the  face  of  the  earth  than  there  is
to-day.  They  do  not  expect  that
God  will  do  anything  in  a  temporal
point  of  view  towards  the  fulfill-
ment of  his  promises;  they  are  nut
looking  forward  tor  the  establish-
ment  of  his  kingdom,  or  for  the
building  up  of  his  Zion  on  the  earth
The:r  eyes  are  closed  to  these
things,  because  they  have  rejected
the  bght.  When  Joseph  Smith
brought  this  Gospel  to  the  world,
there  was  a  great  deal  more  faith  in
God,  a  great  deal  more  faith  in  his
revelations,  and,  according  to  the
light  they  had,  a  great  deal  mure  ^
pure  and  undefiled  religion  than  |
there  is  now.  We  have  carried  the
Gospel  to  all  Christian  nations  who
would  permit  us,  and  they  have
rejected  it,  and  they  are  under  con-
demnation. Our  own  nation  is  un-
der condemnation  on  this  account.
This  land,  North  and  South  America,
is  ihe  land  of  Zion,  it  ls  a  choice
land — the  land  that  was  given  by
promise  from  old  father  Jacob  t  >  his
grandson  and  his  descendants,  the  1
land  on  which  the  Zion  of  God
should  be  established  in  the  latter
days. We  have  been  fulfilling  the


prophecies  concerning  it,  for  the
last  forty  years.  We  have  come  up
here  and  established  the  kingdom;
True,  it  is  small  t^day,  it  may  be
compared  to  a  mustard  seed,  but  as
the  Lord  our  God  lives,  the  littlo
one  will  become  a  thousand,  and
the  small  one  a  strong  nation,  and
the  Lord  Almighty  will  hasten  it
ill  his  own  time,  and  the  world  will
learo  one  thing  in  this  generation,
and  that  is,  that  when  they  tight
against  Mount  Zion,  they  tight  against
the  decrees  of  the  Almighty  and  the
principles  of  eternal  life.

I  rejoice  before  God  that  I  have
lived  to  hear  the  principles  of  eter-
nal life  proclaimed  to  the  sons  of
men  ;  I  rejoice  that  I  have  lived  to
see  this  people  gathered  together,  I
rejoice  in  coming  to  the  land  of
Zion  with  the  Saints  ot  God.  When
we  came  here  twenty- four  years  ago,
we  were  a  little  handful  of  men,
pioneers;  we  came  tu  a  patched  and
barren  desert.  Since  then  we  have
built  up  six  hundred  miles  of  cities,
towns,  villages,  gar  tens,  farms  and
orchards ;  and  while  doing  this  we
have  had  to  co.iteud  with  the  opposi-
tion of  both  priest  and  people.  Have
they  prevailed  r  They  have  not,  and
they  will  not.  Why?  Because  he
who  sits  in  the  heavens,  the  L  id  our
God,  hus  decreed  certain  things  and
Ifbey  will  come  to  p^ss;  because  the
Lord  is  watch  in"  over  the  interests
of  this  people.  He  requires  us  to
work  with  him,  he  is  at  work  for  us.
It  is  our  duty  to  build  these  temples
here — this  in  Salt  Luke  City,  another
in  St.  George,  in  L  >gaa  or  wherever
they  may  be  needrd  lor  the  benefit  uff
tne  Saints  of  God  in  the  latter  days.
I  think  many  times  that  many  of
us  will  get  to  heaven  he  tore  we  shall
want  to  go  there  If  we  were  to  go
there  to-day,  many  would  meet
their  trienda  in  the  spirit- world  andv
it  would  be  a  rcproueu  to  them,  for


i


S8U


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


you,  Latter-day  Saints,  in  one  sense
of  the  word,  hold  in  your  hands  the
sal  vj  it  ion  of  your  dead,  for  we  cm
d)  much  for  them.  Btr  I  think
many  tiroes  that  our  hearts  are  too
much  set  on  the  vain  things  of  the
world  to  attend  to  ninny  important
duties  devolving  upon  ns  connected
with  the  Gospel.  We  are  too  much
after  gold  anil  silver,  and  we  give
cm*  heart*  and  attention  to  temporal
matters  at  the  expense  of  the  lisrht
And  truth  of  th<*  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,

We  have  not  much  ti rue  to  spare
M  a  people,  tor  a  ^re  tk  work  is  re-
quired hi  our  I  an  is.  i  know  that,
without  the*  power  of  liod,  we  should
Xii>t  imve  been  ;ihle  to  do  what  has
bi  to  done;  and  I  ala»o  know  that  we
nev.r  should  he  aide  to  bin  I J  up  the
Zion  of  God  in  power,  beauty  and
glory  were  it  not  that  our  prayers
ascends  into  the  ears  ol  the  Lord  G'd
of  SaLiao'h,  and  he  hears  a^d  answers
them.  The  world  lias  sought  out
overthrow  from  the  beginning,  ami
the  devil  does  not  like  us  very  well,
Lucifer,  flie  Son  of  the  M  »rning,
does  not  like  H  e  idea  of  ren  lation  to
the  Saints  of  God,  and  he  has  in-
Hpired the  lii-arts  i«f  a  gic-it  many

men,  sine*  the  Gospel  was  restored  to
the  earth,  to  make  war  against  us,
lint  11  >t  one  of  th**m  1;:js  marie  any-
thin.:  nnt  ■  (  it  y  it— ■  *  ither  glory,
itnmortali'v.  eternal  li-e  n  >r  money.
TCo  m  »n  -a  people  ever  di'1  roake  any-
thing hv  fiiditinjj  against  God  in  Hie
pMSt,  an  1  no  man  or  people  will  ever
11  -a We  :mvt  hints  hv  taking  t hnr  coarse
in  t  lie  tut  are.

Tins  is  Hie  work  and  kingdom  of
God;  this  is  theZiou  of  God  and  the
Church  ut  Christ,  and  we  are  called
by  his  name.  The  Lath  r-day  Stints
hare  to  abide  in  Christ,  and  we  can
not  do  that  unless  we  briny  forth
fruit,  any  more  than  the  branch  of  the
Fine  can  unless  it  abide  in  the  vine.


Ti>  abide  in  Christ  we  must  enjoy  the
Spirit  of  God,  that  our  minds  may  be
enlightened  to  comprehend  f  he  things
of  God.  When  I  look  at  the  history
uf  tlie  Church  of  God  in  these  latter-
days  1  many  times  marvel  at  what
has  been  done  and  how  wo  have
progressed,  considering  the  traditions,
utiUdief,  failings,  tollies  an  1  nonsense
that  man  is  heir  to  in  the  flesh.  We
have  had  a  preat  many  traditions  to
overcome  and  the  opposition  of  the
world  to  contend  with  from  the
beginning  until  to-day.  Brethren  and
sisters,  %e  shonl  1  he  faithful.  The
Lord  has  put  into  our  hands  the  power
to  build  up  Ids  Zson  ami  kingdom  on
theearlli,  and  we  have  more  to  encon*
i age  us  than  was  ever  posbessed  by
i  any  gem  ration  that  has  preceded
us.  We  have  the  privilege  of  build-
in-  up  a  kingdom  that  will  stand  lor
i  ever.  Xoali  and  the  Antediluvian
world  did  not  have  this  privilege.
Enoch  built  up  the  Zion  of  God  a
little  while,  and  the  Lord  took  it
away.  Jesus  and  the  Apostles  came
here,  J  &us  fulfilled  his  mission,
I  preached  the  Gospel,  was  rejected  by
the  Jews,  and was  crucified.  His

i

disciples  had  a  similar  fute,  ami  the
Gospel  whs  taken  to  the  Gentile
nation,  with  frtl  its  gifts  and  blessings
And  jiower,  and  Paul  the  Apostle  of
the  Gentiles  warned*  them  to  take
heed  lest  they,  in  turn,  should  lose  it
through  iheir  unbelief.

Von  know  how  it  has  been  with
them  — that  there  has  been  u  falling

awav,  and  that  for  seventeen  hun-
dred  years  the  voice  of  a  Prophet  or
Apostle  1ms  not  been  heard  in  the
world  ;  and  now  again,  in  these  lat-
ter day r,  the  Lord  Almighty,  re-
membering his  promises  made  f  ro  n
generation  to  gener  ihon.  has  sent
Angels  from  heav*  u  to  restore  to
man  (lie  Gospel  and  lias  driven  au*
I  hoi  it  v  to  administer  the  same,
i  The  Re  vela  tor  John, says  he  saw


*


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  COMING  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN,  ETC,


2S1


an  angel  flying  through  the
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  to  them
that  dwell  <m  the  earth,  to  even*
nation,  kindr  d,  tongue  and  people,
say i tig  with  a  loud  voice,  "  F*  ar
God  and  give  glory  to  him  who
made  t lie  heavens,  the  earth,  the
seas  and  the  fountains  of  water,  for  Hie
hour  of  God's  judgment  h:\n  enrne."

Oh  !  ye  Gentile  nations,  wake  up
and  prepare  yourselves  for  that
which  is  tn  come,  for  as  God  lives
his  judgments  are  at  your  door.
They  are  at  the  door  of  our  nation,
and  the  thrones  and  kingdoms  of
the  whole  woild  will  fall,  and  all
the  efforts  of  men"  combined  cannot
save  them.  It  is  a  day  of  warning;
bur  not  of  many  words,  to  tne  na-
tions. The  uord  is  truing  to  make  a
slit >f  L  work,  or  uo  fle&h  could  be
saved,  II  it  wen;  not  ior  the  mani-
festation of  the  power  of  God  what
wuuld  bo  the  fate  of  his  Zion  and
people  ?  The  same  as  in  the  days  of
Christ  and  his  Apostles.  The  Lord
has  had  Zion  before  bis  face  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
anil  he  is  going  to  build  it  up.
"  WIilj  am  I,'*  isailh  the  Lord,  "  that
I  promise  and  do  not  fulfill  ?  "  The
Lord  never  made  a  promise  to  the
sons  of  men  which  he  has  not  ful-
filled, therefore  battel -day  Saints,
yon  have  all  the  encouragement  in
the  w^rld  to  sustain  you  in  the  faith
that  the  Zion  of  God  will  remain  on
the  earth.  The  work  is  in  out
hauls  to  perform,  the  God  of  hen*
Ten  requires  it  ol  us  and  if  we  fail
to  bnilii  it  up  we  shall  he  under  con-
demnation, and  the  Lord  would
remove  os  out  of  the  way  and  he
would  raise  up  another  people  who
would  do  it.  Why  ?  Because  t lie
Al  nighty  has  decreed  that  this  work
shall  he  pei formed  on  the  earth,  and
no  power  on  earth  or  in  hell  cm  hin-
der it.


1  would  here  say  to  our  delegate
to  Congress,  when  you  go  to  Wash-
ington, have  no  fears  with  regard  to
the  opposition  of  men.  Yi>u  have
every  reason  to  go  in  confidence,
and  do  your  duty,  knowing-  that
the  Lord  will  stand  by  you,  and  so
has  every  man  in  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  Gnd,  I  care  not.  where
we  are  placed  or  what  God  requires
at  our  hands.  He  is  at  the  helm,
and  he  has  protected  113  until  to-
day.  Where  should  we  have  been  a
few  years  ago  when  the  army  was
seat  to  destroy  us,  if  it  bad  not  been
for  the  protection  of  the  Almighty  ?
We  should  not  have  been  here.
And  so  ir  will  he  in  days  to  come.
The  world  hate  us  because  the  .Al-
mighty lias  called  us  out  from  the
world  to  procl  dm  his  Gospel  and
build  u;>  his  kingdom,  L^t  ns  bo
faithful,  for  the  L  id  us  tfoing  to
protect  us,  and  build  up  Zion,  He
will  also  gather  Israel,  rebuild  Je-
rusalem and  prepare  ( he  way  fur  his
second  co  ning,  in  the  el  aids  of
heaven.  Then  let  us.  Latter  day
Saints,  w  ike  up  to  our  duty.  T  link
nothing  too  hard  that  the  Lord  re-
quires of  ns.  Let  ns  build  this
Temple  that  we  may  attend  to  the
ordinances  for  the  living  and  the
dead.  If  we  not  do  this  we  shall  be
sorry.  When  I  s-  e  men  who  have
received  the  word  of  God,  atid  tasted
the  powers  of  ihe  woild  to  come,  and
then  turn  away1  I  think  of  the  par-
able of  the  five  wise  and  five  foolish
virgins.  It  will  pay  ns  to  be  wise
and  to  have  oil  hi  <  uv  lamps,  to  ha  vo
fellowship  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and
to  live  our  religion  and  keep  the
commandments  of  God  day  by  day.
Brethren  are  passing  away,  1  have
been  away  thiee  or  four  weeks  on  a
visit  to  the  pe*  pie  in  the  upper  settle-
ments, and  siice  my  return  1  hear  of
this  man  and  ibat  man  dead,  whom  I
saw  well  aud  hide  before  I  went  awiiy.


282


1UURXAL  OF  DISCOURSES


So  it  will  be  with  us  in  a  little  while.
We  shall  pass  away  and  go  to  the
other  side  of  the  vail,  aid  the  burden
of  the  buildii.g  up  of  Zion  will  rest
up  ui  our  sons  and  daughters.  Then
re  joice  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Re-
joice iti  the  principles  of  eternal  life.
I  am  looking  for  the  fulfillment  of  nil
things  that  the  Lord  has  spoken,  and
they  will  come  to  piss  as  the  Lord
God  lives.  Zion  is  bound  to  rise  and
flourish.  The  Lamani'es  will  blos-
som as  the  rose  on  the  mountains.  I
am  willing  to  say  here  that,  though  I
believe  this,  when  I  seethe  power  of
the  nation  destroying  them  from  the
face  of  the  earth,  the  fulfillment  of
that  prophecy  is  perhaps  harder  tor
Tne  to  believe  than  any  revelation  of
God  that  I  evt-r  rend.  It  looks  as
though  there  would  not  Le  enough
left  to  receive  the  Gospel;  hut  not-
withstanding this  daik  picture,  every
word  that  God  has  ever  said  ot  ihem
will  have  its  fulfillment,  and  they,  hy
and  by,  will  receive  the  Gospe  l.  Ir
will  be  a  day  of  God's  power  amnnir
them,  at  d  a  nation  will  he  born  in  a
day.  Their  chiefs  will  be  fi  led  with
the  power  of  Gud  and  receive  the
Gos|>el,  and  they  will  go  forth  and
build  the  new  Jerusalem,  and  we  shall
help  them.  They  are  brandies  of
the  house  of  Israel,  and  when  the
fullness  of  the  Gentiles  has  come  in
and  the  work  ceasts  among  ihem,  then
it  will  go  in  power  to  the  seed  of
Abraham,

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  remem-
ber out  position  before  the  Lord  !  Let
bs  try  and  keep  the  faith,  let  us  labur
for  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  our  hearts,
minds  and  eyes  tuny  he  opened,  that
we  may  live  by  inspiration,  that  when
we  see  dark  clouds  rising  and  evils
strewing  our  path,  we  may  be  able  to
overcome  The  Savior  was  tempted,
so  were  his  Apostles,  and  if  we  have
not  been  we  shall  be.  As  the  Lord
told  Joseph  Smith,  *•  I  will  try  and


prove  you  in  nil  things,  even  unfo
death.  If  yon  are  not  willing  to  abide
my  covenants  unto  death,  you  are
not  worthy  of  me,"  Did  Joseph
abide  unto  death  ?  I  think  he  did,
and  h<j  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  will  sit  at  the  right  hand  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  will  re-
ceive his  glory  and  crown.  He  was
trm*  and  faithful  unto  death,  and  his
testimony  is  in  force  to-day,  in  lan-
guage as  loud  as  ten  thousand  thun-
ders. Whether  it  is  believed  or  re-
jected it  will  have  its  fulfillment  on
the  heads  of  this  generation.

By  an  I  hy  ^reat  Babylon  will  fall
and  there  will  be  wailing,  mourning
and  *ore  affliction  in  her  midst.  The
sons  of  Ziou  have  got  to  stand  in  holy
places  to  be  preserved  in  the  midst  of
the  judgments  that  will  shortly  over-
take the  wiir  Id.  We  can  see  how  fully
the  re  velar  ion,  calling  us  to  go  to
the  wesb  rn  countries,  has  been  ful-
filled. In  less  than  forty  years,  a
standard  has  been  lifted  up,  and  peo*
pie  gathered  he  re  from  France,  Eng-
land, Scot  hind,  Walt  s,  Denmark,
Norway,  Sweden,  at.d  almost  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  in  fulfillment  of
that  revelation.  When  it  was  given
no  man  among  us  knew  anything
about  Salt  Lake  or  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains; but  it  has  been  fulfilled  before
our  eyes  We  have  come  up  here,
and  in  so  doinyr  have  fulfilled  Uie  re-
vel  a  ions  of  God,  so  far.  Let  us
cunt  in  ue,  I  pray  God  my  heavenly
Father  that  he  will  bless  the  Latter*
day  Saints  ;  that  he  will  give  U3  his
Holy  Spirit  and  wisdom,  that  our
eyes  may  be  opened,  that  we  may
have  faith  in  the  things  of  God.  Let
a  man  lose  the  Holy  Spirit  and  what
faith  has  he?  None,  either  iu  God
or  in  Ins  revelations,  and  that  is  what
is  the  matter  to-day.  You  may  take
the  best  friends  we  have  outside  of
of  this  kingdom,  and  you  can  hardly
get  ti.em  to  btdieve  that  God  has  any-


THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  COMING  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAX,


thing  to  do  with  the  affairs  of  men,
or  that  he  has  power  to  do  anything
for  them,  either  as  individuals  or  na-
tions If  their  eyes  were  open  one
moment  they  would  understand  that
God  holds  them  all  in  the  hollow  of
his  hand,  weighs  them  in  the  balance
and  that  they  cannot  make  a  move
without  his  permission.  They  would
no  longer  wonder  why  the  L  itter-day
Saints  have  faith  in  God  if  their  eyes
were  open  so  that  they  could  under-
stand the  work  and  things  of  God.
They  can  not  understand  it,  they
cannot  even  see  the  kingdom  of  God
unless  they  are  born  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  and  they  cannot  enter  into  it
unless  they  are  born  of  the  water  and
the  Spirit,  according  to  the  words  of
Jesus  to  Nioodemus.

I  have  a  desire  that  we  may  be
faithful  in  our  mission  and  ministry,
as  Elders  of  Israel  and  as  Saints  of
God,  that  we  may  do  our  duty,  and
maintain  our  position  before  the  Lord.
Let  our  prayers  go  up  be  tore  htm.  It
I  have  any  fade  it  is  prayer  to  God,
We  are  not  called  to  build  up  Zion
by  preaching,  singing  and  praying
alone;  we  have  to  perform  hard
labor,  labor  of  bone  and  isinew,  in
building  towns,  ciries,  villages;  and
we  have  to  continue  to  do  this;  but
while  we  are  fo  engaged,  we  should


not  sin.  We  have  no  right  to  sin,
whether  we  are  in  the  kanyon  draw-
ing wood,  or  performing  any  other
hard  labor,  and  we  should  have  the
Spirit  of  God  to  direct  us  then  as
much  as  when  preaching,  praying,
singing  and  attending  to  the  ordinan-
ces of  the  house  of  God.  if  we  do
this  as  a  people  we  shall  grow  in  the
fitVur  and  power  of  God.  We  should
be  united  together,  it  is  our  duty  to
be  so.  Our  prayers  should  ascend
before  God,  and  I  know  they  do.  I
know  that  President  Young  is  prayed
for — I  know  that  his  counselors  and
the  Twelve  are  prayed  for,  at  id  that
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  is
prayed  for.  We  should  continue  this,
and  if  we  pray  in  faith  we  shall  have
what  we  ask  for.  The  Lend  has
taught  us  to  pray,  and  I  rejoice  that
I  have  learned  to  pray  according  to
the  order  of  God,  for  in  this  we  have
a  promise — that  where  two  or  three
agree  in  a>king  for  any  thing  that  is
just  and  right,  it  shall  be  granted
unto  them.

May  God  bless  you !  May  he  give
us  wisdom,  and  his  Holy  Spirit  to
guide  us,  that  we  may  be  enabled  to
be  true  and  faithful  to  our  covenants,
and  be  prepared  to  inherit  eternal
life,  for  Jesus*  sake, A  men.


284


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  13th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  E vexing,  Jaw  12,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  SPIRIT  AND  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPI'L  THE SAME AS nE  OLD*
EAJvLY  EXPERIENCE  t » F  SETTLE  lis  OF  UTAH  —  1M  LIGIOUS  LIBERTY —
MODERN  SO-CALLED  CIVILIZATION — BAPTISM  FOR  THE  DEAD.


It  was  Announced  this  after  no-  >n
tbat  I  should  speak  here  thU  even-
ing Brother  Ge>roe  Q  C  union  is
here,  hoAtvi-r,  or  will  be  I  expect,
and  when  he  c*iin«*s  I  would  tnucn
sooner  listen  to  him  than  speak  my-
self, and  I  presume  you  would  «lso;
therefore  when  be  comes  I  shall  he
pleased  to  give  \\i\y  that  you  may
have  the  pleasure  of  listening  to
him.  He  is  only  here  to«day  and
will  be  going  away  ag:un;  I  am  here
frequently,

I  ft] whys  tsike  pleasure  in  speak-
ing  ot  the  things  pertaining  to  I  he
kingdom  of  God  to  ?ny  fellow  men,
and  especially  to  the  Saints,  I  feel
that  mv  lot  is  identified  wi»li  theirs.

w

and  I  expect  to  be  associated  with
them,  iv »t  only  in  time  hut  in  eter-
nity. Tlie  Gospel  that  we  have  re-
ceived hits  unfolded  nr. to  us  prinei-
pies  pertaining  to  eternal  life  that
we  w  ere  entirely  ignorant  of  hereto-
fore. It  has  put  us  in  possession
of  certainty  in  relation  to  the  fu-
ture, and  we  always  have  confi-
dence so  I  >n<r  as  we  are  keeping  the
commandments  of  God.  We  know
for  ourselves  of  the  truth  of  the  doc-
trim  s  that  we  believe  in,  because,
having  obeyed  the  Gospel,  the  Spirit,
which  in  Scripture  is  called  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  h  us  hi  en  imparted
unto  us,  and  that  Spirit  docs  in  the


1-ttter  days  just  as  it  did  in  for  uer
days — it  unfolds  the  things  of  God
to  those  who  receive  it  and  reveals
to  them  the  relations  they  bold  to
each  other  and  to  God  and  his  Church
and  kingdom,  not  only  in  this  lift*  but
in  tbat  which  is  to  come;  for  we
have  entered  into  eternal  cove  .ants*
The  covenants  which  men  enier  into
generally  are  of  a  transitory  nature,
and  pertain  only  to  time,  and  when
time  ceases  with  them  these  obli-
gations terminate.  Our  Covenants,
however,  are  of  another  character*
We  enter  into  eternal  covenants  with
God  to  serve  him  faithfully  here  on
the  earth,  and  then  we  expect  to  be
|  associated  with  him  in  the  heaven*.

Having  rfifered  into  covenants  of
!  this  kit  id  we  feel  that  there  are  cer-
tain responsibilities  and  obligations
resting  upon  us,  which  it  is  our
bound  en  'duty  to  perform.  And
then  we  consider  that  there  are  cer-
tain duties  which  God  has  laid  upon
us  in  relation  to  ourselves,  to  those
who  have  existed  be' on;  us  and  to
those  who  shall  come  after  us.  Our
ivligi  n  is  not  something  in  which
we  alone  are  personally  concerned,
hut  the  moment  people  are  put  in
possession  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ihey
begin  to  feel  interested  about  the  wel-
fare of  others.

It  would  he  a  very  hard  ihing  for


THE  SPIRIT  AND  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


285


many  people  in  this  day  to  do  as  the
Apostles  diil  in  former  days,  that  is
to  go  without  purse  or  scrip,  trust-
ing  in  God  for  their  sustenance,  to
preach  the  principles  of  lite  to  man-  j
kind. It  has  never  been  considered
a  hard  thing  by  the  Elders  of  this
ChuTch  to  pursue  that  course.  In-
spired by  the  Spirit  of  God  tiny  feel
as  ( ii  id  fd  Is  towards the hum  An
family — a  dt  sire  to  bless,  comfort,
and  instruct  and  to  lead  rhem  in  the
paths  of  life. God  places  this  prin-
ciple in  the  hearts  of  his  servants —  j
it  e in, mates  from  him  and  is  part  of
his  nature;  and  inasmuch  as  the  El-
ders  are  dictated  bv  tins  spirit  in
their  acts  insomuch  do  they  resemble
their  heavenly  Father,  who  is  full  of
benevolence  and causes  his  sun  to
rise  on  t l*e  evil  and  on  the  good,  and
makes  the  rain  to  descend  on  the  f
ju*r  Mid  uu  the  unjusi and  hence
whenever we become  acquainted
with  the  principles  of  life  ourselves
we  I  eel  a  desire  to  communicate  the  '
same  unto  others,  find  I  see  those
all  around  me,  here  in  this  assembly, ,
who,  as  well  as  myself,  have  trav-
eled thousands ut miles — I  have
traveled  hundreds  of  thousands — on
the  same  principle  as  the  ancient  dis-
ciples did,  trusting  in  God  for  suste-
nance -thilt:  proclaiming  the  princi-
ples of  life  to  the  people Men  do
not  always  appreciate  this;  bat  that
niakvs  no  difference,  the  principle  is  I
the  sanie*

God  is  kind,  benevolent  and  mer-
ciful to  the  human  family.  He
feeds  and  clothes  them  as  he  does
the  lilies  of  the  field,  or  the  birds,
He  takes  care  of  them,  hat  they  do
not  appreciate  this.  Thousands  and
millions  of  the  human  family  seem
hardly  to  comprehend  that  God  has
anything  to  do  with  them,  or  that
they  are  under  any  responsibilities  or  •
obligation*  to  him.  Still  as  a  father,
full  of  kindness, benevolence  and


love,  he  feels  after  the  human  family
and  he  seeks  to  promote  their  happi-
ness and  well- being,  and  he  would
save  and  exalt  them  in  his  kingdom,
if  they  would  be  obedient  unto  his
laws. We  understand  this  principle,
and  t her-  fore  are  governed  and  actu-
ated hy  it,  and  no  matter  what  the
thoughts  and  feelings  of  others  may
be  in  relation  to  us,  we  know  tor
ourselves  that  G«jd  has  spoken,  I
know  lor myself, if nobody  else
dues,  that  God  live*-,  and  I  obtained
this  knowledge through  obedience
to  the  Gospel  that  he  has  revealed
onto  os  in  these  last  days. I  know
that  it  is  t,he  privilege  of  all  men  to
have  this  knowledge  if  they  will
obey  the  Gosprl  and  be  governed  by
its  piinciplesj  and hence  when  I
and  my  brethren  have  gone  out  to
preach  the  Gospel,  we  have  told  the
people  precisely  the  same  things  as
were  taught,  hi  former  times,  by
the  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
lie  told  his  disciples  to  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature,  the  promise
being  that  he  that  believed  and  was
baptized  should  be  saved,  b  it  he  that
believed  not  should  be  damned;  and
said  he: 4*  These  signs  shall  follow
i hem that believe: In my  name
they  shall  cast  out  devils,  they  shall
speak  with  n  w  tongues,  if  ti.ey  drink
any  dea  My  thing  it  shall  not  harm
them,  f  hey  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick
and  they  s  all  recover/' They,  in
or  her  words,  .should  receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  that  Spirit  would  take  of
the  things  of  God,  and  show  them
unto  them,  u  "  <

I  have  g  me  forth  and  I  have  told
the  people  as  the  disciples  did  for*

merly.  When  they  have  u.sked  rue
what  to  do  to  be  saved,  I  have  said,
41 R -pent,  and  be  baptized  in  the
name  of  Je*us  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  you  shall  receive  the  Holy
Ghost:*  "What  IS  that?"  "If  is
the  same that it  was  in  former


286  1  JOURNAL  01'

time?,  or  it  is  nothing  fit  all.  It
produces  the  same  results  as  it  did
in  the  days  when  Jesus  and  his
Apostles  were  upon  the  earth,  or  it
is  nut  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  a
phantasy,  or  I  am  a  false  teacher."
That  is  the  position  that  I  have  as-
sumed alwavs,  whciever  I  have
gone;  there  is  no  mincing  this  mat-
ter* I  felt  I tke  Moses  did  when  he
was  lending  the  children  uf  Israel
to  the  Ian  I  of  i  Janaan,  as  we  beard
Brother  Pratt,  talking  a  hunt  this  af-
tenmon.  The  Lord  said  ho  would
not  go  with  Moses  and  the  people
because  the  people  were  rebellious
and  stiff  necked,  hut  Moses  plead
with  him,  saying,  %t  Oh  God,  if  thou
goest  not  with  us,  carry  us  not  up
hence;"  and  if  I  em  not  have  a  re-
ligion that  God  will  sustain  with
the  Holy  Ghost,  T  want  nothing  to
do  with  it,  and  I  will  have  nothing
to  do  wish  it.  Feeling  these  senti-
ments and  principles,  I  have  always
had  confidence  in  God.  I  know  in
whom  1  have  believed,  and  under-
stand that  God  is  at  the  helm,  lead
ing,  guiding,  control  I itig  and  govern-
ing the  affairs  of  his  people.

What  is  it  that  has  brought  you
Latter- Jay  Saints  here  ?  It  is  the
principles  of  the  Gospel.  You  iieard
them  perhaps  in  England,  Scotland,
Ireland,  Wales,  France,  Denmark,
Sweden,  Norway,  tier  many  or  some
other  parts  ot  the  earth;  no  matter
where  you  heard  them,  when  you
did  hear  you  believed  them.  You
had  the  same  teachings  that  I  have
Hpoken  of  to-day.  And  I  have  Iieard
men  praising  God  in  these  .different
languages  lor  sending  the  Gospel
unto  them,  and  fur  communicating
unto  them  the  principles  of  eternal
truth.  They  knew  by  the  same  prin-
ciple that  we  knew  it,  that  the  Gos-
pel which  they  had  Iieard  was  true,
and  they  could  bear  testimony  to  it.
And  it  was  in  consequence  of  this


DISCOURSES*

that  you  Stints  came  here.  You

:  heard  Brother  Pratt  talking  to-day

j  about  the  gathering,  about  the  Lord
taking  one  of  a  city  and  two  of  a
family,  and  bringing  them  to  Zion.
Did  von  come  here  because  you  con-
sidered that  this  was  a  better  laud  ?
No,  Was  it  because  yon  had  friends
ami  associations  here  ?  No,  you  left
your  friends  and  associations.  Was
it  because  there  was  somerhing  very

|  desirable  for  you  here  ?  No,  it  was
because  Go  I  had  dictated  it,  and
because  the  Holy  Ghost  which  you
had  received  planted  a  desire  in
your  bosoms  to  come  and  mingle
with  your  brethren. As  the  Scrip*

|  tare  says,  14  I  will  take  them,  one  of
a  city  and  two  of  a  family,  and  1  will

i  bring  them  to  Zion,  aid  1  will
give  them  pastors  after  my  own
heart  that  shall  feed  them  with  know-
ledge  and  understanding."  You
hardly  knew,  in  many  instances,  how
or  why  on  earth  you  struggled  and
toiled  a «id  obtained  the  means  to  come
to  this  lan  1  Your  brethren,  here,
operated  upon by  the  same  spirit,

|  sent  forth  their  means  to  assist  you ;

i  and  before  railroads  were  built  here,
as  many  as  Hve  hundred  teams  were
.sent  year  after  year  to  the  frontiers,
to  bring  from  there  those  who  were
desirous  of  coming.  Those  who  were
scattered  did  what  they  could,  and

;  those  who  were  here  did  what  they

i  could,  and  the  result  of  these  united
operations  is  that  thousands  of  you

1  are  now  here  who  would  not  have
been  hud  it  not  been  for  this.

The  question  then  arises,  What
are  we  here  for  ?  "  Oh,"  say  some,
M  we  have  a  pretty  good  country
here,"  Yes,  but  what  about  tht
country  ?  We  did  not  come  hera
after  gold  or  silver ;  most  of  us
came  before  that  was  discovered.
I  came  to  this  city  before  it  wai
known  that  there  was  any  gold  im
California. We  did  not  come  lier#


THE  SrifilT  AND  PRINCIPLES  OF  TilK  GOSPEL  "ETC  287


because  it  was  a  beautiful  place,  fur
when  we  arrived  it  was  inhabited
by  Digger  Indians,  wolves,  Ix-ars
and  coyotes — a  desolate,  arid  plain,
a  howling  wilderness.  That  was
the  position  in  which  we  found  the
country.  And  to  get  here  we  had
to  make  the  roods  and  build  t lit*
bridges,  and  when  we  got  here  \\e
did  not  have  orchards  and  vine*
yards,  and  kautilul  pleasant  places
ready  for  us,  we  hud  to  make  them*
We  had  to  n*H  up  our  .sleeves  and
take  our  learns  and  go  into  the  kan-
vons  and  drag  down  the  togs,  and
saw  our  boards  by  hand.  I  have
sawed  many  a  one  by  hand  and
(jeorge  Q.  Cannon  has*  assisted  me.
"  What,"  say  some,  "do  yon  minis-
ters saw  ?"  Yes,  we  ministers  saw
and  we  work,  and  I  would  be  asham-
ed to  be  dependent  upon  anybody
bat  myself  for  a  living,  f  hope  that
God  will  ever  preserve  me  from
that,  and  I  shall  feel  grateful  to  my
Heavenly  Father  if  he  will  always
enable  me  to  obtain  my  own.  I
remember  being  over  in  Tooele  a
number  of  years  ago,  and  a  party
said  to  me,  "Brother  Taylor,  I  wibh
you  would  come  here  and  preach/' —

am  here,  am  1
we  would  like
Said  I,  "  Per-
I get  ready."
will  come  here.


Well,"  said  I,  "  I
not?"  "Yes,  but
yoa  to  come  again.1'
Imps  I  will,  when
"  Well,  but  if  yoa
wo  will  make  you  up  something,  we
will  get  you  some  chickens,  a  little
flour  and  some  pork/'  and  I  do  not
no w  remember  what  else.  Said  1,
11  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you,
very  much  indeed,  fur  your  proffered
kindness,  but  I  always  prefer  to  dig
my  own  potatoes,  and  I  would  just
as  soon  plant  them  as  not,  and  then
dig  them."  These  are  my  sentiments,
and  a  I  so  those  of  my  brethren.  Here
is  Brother  Woodruff,  he  has  traveled
hundreds  and  thousand  of  miles,  as  I
have,  and  he  generally  digs  his  own


potatoes  and  he  knows  how  to  plant
them,  and  on  these  points,  for  dili-
gent labor.  I  will  set  him  against  any
man  in  this  Territory.

We  did  not  come  here  then,  for
any  tiling  of  that  kind.  There  were
no  houses  b  re  when  Brother  Wood-
ruff and  I  first  came  here,  and  before
we  had  any  we  had  to  make  them.
Before  we  had  anv  gardens  we  had
to  make  them;  before  there  were  any
flowers  we  had  to  plant  them,  and  we
Mad  to  plant  the  seeds  before  any  trees
grew  [  have  got  trees  in  my  orchard
now  that  grew  from  seeds  planted  by
my  6rst  wife,  which  she  brought
from  the  East  when  I  came  here.
People  come  here  now,  and  many
of  them  say,  "You  have  a  very
beautiful  city  here."  Yes,  our  city
is  well  enough.  "And  yon  have  a
very  pleasant  place,  and  nic*1  streams
of  water/*  Yes,  hut  we  had  to  make
the  ditches  for  them  to  run  in,  they
did  not  run  as  they  now  do  when  we
first  came,  we  have  had  to  do  every-
thing that  has  been  done.

Well,  what  do  you  gather  together
for?  What  is  your  object?  Just
precisely  what  the  Prophet  told  of
thousands  of  years  ago.  Yt>a  know
that  Brother  Pratt  was  talking  about
fleeing  "as  doves  to  the  windows/'aod
while  I  was  listening  to  him  I  was
very  much  interested,  and  thought
we  had  been  fulfilling  the  words  of
the  Prophets.  I  think  that  some  of
our  folks,  both  young  and  old,  some-
times forget  "  the  pit  whence  they
were  dug,  and  the  rock  whence  they
were  hewn  ;  "  ami  I  think  they  .spend
a  great  deal  of  their  tine  in  frivolity
and  nonsense.  This  is  not  the  case
generally,  and  1  do  not  care,  this
evening,  to  make  accusations,  for  I
delight  to  see  that  many  are  engaged
in  Sunday  Schools,  and  in  acts  of
benevolence  and  kindness  and  many
of  our  young  brethren  and  sisters  are
engaged  in  labors  uf  a  similar  kind.


283


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


But  a  large  number  are  thoughtless
forgetful,  careless  imd  indifferent  in
relalion  to  the  things  of  Gk*d,  Wftd  to
the  duties  and  responsibilities  de-
V  lviijir  upon  them,  mid  I  fear  arc
forget  ul  in  many  instances  of  the
object  of  Hieir  existence.

Many  sti  angers  are  now  amongst
us,  parties  whom  we  term 41  G*m-


tiles."  They  have  their  ideas,  feel-
ings, syslCMiis,  and  modes  of  worship,
an  I  we  have  ours.  Do  we  wish  to
interfere  with  them  f  No,  no,  and
1  wtruld  protect,  to  the  extent  of  my
ability,  any  religious  denomination
in  this  Territory,  and  no  man  should
inter  ft*  re  with  them.  What,  the
EprVcopal  charch  ? Yes. The  Me-

tlio  li  t  ?  Yes,  The  Presbyterian
and  (he  Caiholses  V  Yes,  no  matter
who  or  what  they  are,  I  will  protect
them.  If  Uod  lias  a  mind  to  bear
with people,  I will, Tlie^  you

would  not  percent e  anyb  >dy  for  the
s;;ke  of  their  t  elision  ?  No,  not  at
all,  that  is  a  matter  between  them
and  their  God,  and  they  have  a  per-
fect right  to  worship  as  they  please,
or  not  to  worship  at  all,  and  t  ey
oujjht  to  he  protected  in  all  their
rights  to  the  tallest  extent,  No  man
ou^ht  to  interfere  with  them,  and  no
gentleman,  no  Luttet-day  Saint  vvho
understands  himself  would  do  so.
They  have  a  right  to  worship  as  they
please,  or  not  at  all  if  it  suits  them*
Then  we  have  our  rights,  and  one  of
them  is  to  protie»  the  people — -every-
body, socially,  morally,  religiously
and  politically — in  every  position,
and  to  preserve  a  good,  wholesome
state  of  atfairs  in  our  midst,  and  not
to  be  interfered  with  by  amb>dy,
outsiders  or  insiders.  Ministers  and
editors  preach  and  write  and  tell  us
that  when  the  waves  of  "civiliza-
tion  "  sit  ill  roll  over  Utah,  things
will  he  changed,  and  Siy  they,
"The  p  nple  w.ll  lewne  elevated
and  refined  in  their  feelings  and  they


will  he  like  us."  Some  of  their
"ayes  are  not  very  pleasant,  they
have  brought  a  lot  of  scum  with
them,  and  it  bjbhles  and  stews  and
friths  and  foams,  and  exhibits  any-
thing but  that  which  is  pleasant
;oid  enticing,  or  that  is  calculated  to
promote  the  happiness  and  we  11- be-
ing1 of  man.  We  do  not  have  any
«y  n  i  pa  f  h  y  with  gat \  \  b  I  i  n  lt,  d  ni  \  i  ken-
nens  and  prostitution,  for  instance,
and  these  are  among  the  waves  they
have  brought. They  find  fault  with

us  f«»r  having  more  wiv»  and  children
than  they,  and  for  preserving  purity
and  chastity  in  our  midst,  and
thev  would  introduce  their  infamies
amongst  as,  Gentlemen,  we  hope
yon  wiM  keep  your  waves  hack,  where
they  belong,  put  them  in  your  own
cesspools,  keep  them  where  ihey  ori-
ginated. No  such  tilings  have  been
or igi anted  hy  us,  we  came  here  to
get  rid  of  them,  and  th.it  we  might
fear  God,  and  worship  him  in  spirit
and  in  truth,  accord intr  lo  the  prin-
ciples that  he  has  revealed.  The
Scriptures  say,  in  speaking  of  the
last  days,  that  perilous  times  shall
come — men  shad  l  e  lovers  of  their
own  selves,  covetous,  boasters,  proud,
blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents,
unthankful,  unholy,  truce  breakers,
having  a  form  of  Godliness  but  de-
living  the  power  thereof/'  This  is  a
verv  singular  statement,  hut  I  do
not  think  you  would  have  to  travel
very  f»r  among  our  ivfonneis — those
who  have  come  to  reform  an  1  regene-
rate us — to  find  this  pattern  fully
exemplified.  Are  they  lovers  of  their
ow  n  selves?  There  are  a  great  many
here  who  would  not  object  to  take
our  possessions,  and  give  us  nothing
f  >r  them.  Covetous,  the  Scriptures
say.  Why,  at  the  time  Buchanan
commenced  his  raid  up  m  us,  they
had  it  all  planned,  and  had  our  pos-
sessions apportioned,  and  had  agreed


who  should  nave  this  c


i  *


■tl  1X1


ent,


THE  SPIRIT  AND  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


289


that  and  the  other.  Bat  it  did  not
exactly  work,  and  they  did  wot  get
them,  but  that  did  not  alter  the
feeling  or  principle  that  existed.
Covetous,  boasters  and  proud !  I  am
quoting  from  your  own  Bible — King
James'  translation — and  one  of  your
own  Prophets^  predicted  these  very
things  of  you,  Boasting!  How
much  swaggering  do  we  see  around
everywhere  ?  No  matter  where  you
fr>  you  see  little  boys  growing  up  full
of  pride,  impudence  and  imperti-
nence. They  are  called  "  Young
America."  Beautiful  specimens,  and
fine  men  they  will  make  when  they
are  full  grown !  Plenty  of  them
come  along  here/  We  know  all  about
them.  What  is  the  feeling  abroad
in  the  world  in  relation  to  disobedi-
ence to  parents?  Who  the  devil
cares  about  father  or  mother  ?  Say
the  youg  folks,  il  I  am  of  age  and  [

will  do  as  I  d  d  please,"  and  off

they  go,  and  do  as  they  pleise.  The
Prophets  have  testified  that  these
things  would  be,  and  what  we  see  arid
hear  is  only  fulfilling  their  words.

What  kind  of  people  should  these
be  ?  They  should  have  a  form  of
godliness,  many  of  them  be  very
pious,  have  long  faces,  and  for  a
pretence  make  long  prayers*  Jos  us
in  his  day  accused  some  of  being
men  of  this  kind,  and  said  he,  *' These
shall  receive  the  greater  condemna-
tion," They  shall  be  truce  and  cove-
nant breakers.  Have  we  anv  such
now-a-davs?  Why  if  a  man  bor-
rows  five  dollars  he  niustgivea  mort-
gage on  something,  because  the  lender
tears  he  will  be  cheated  out  of  it.
Men  have  no  confidence  in  each
others  word.  I  would  not  give  a
straw  for  a  man  if  I  could  not  trust
his  word.  There  is  nothing  of  him,
no  foundation,  nothing  to  tie  to.  Yet
these  are  the  very  people  that  the
Prophet  said  should  exist  in  the  last
days. They  enter  into  covenant  and

No.  19.


never  think  of  fulfilling  .  Their
word  amounts  to  nothing,  tlietr  i%
tegrity  has  no  foundation.

I  speak  of  these  things  for  your-
in formation,  for  tins  is  the  condition
of  the  world.  And  are  we  free  from
it  ?  Not  by  a  long  way — I  wish  we
were,  I  wish  there  were  more  hon-
esty, virtue,  integrity  and  truthful-
ness, and  more  of  every  principle
among  us  that  is  calculated  to  exalt
and  ennoble  humanity,  I  speak  of
these  things  as  a  shame  to  the  hu-
man family ;  and  if  they  exist  among
the  Saints  it  is  a  crying,  burning
shame,  and  we  all  ought  to  be  dis-
gusted  ;  for  if  anybody  in  the  world
ought  to  be  men  of  integrity,  truth
and  honesty,  we  should  be,  every-
where and  under  all  circumstances.
And  if  we  say  a  thing  it  ought  to  be
as  worthy  of  belief  as  if  we  had  sworn
to  it,  and  a.s  if  we  were  bound  by  ten
thousand  ties  to  accomplish  it  Bat
if  a  Tii an  has  not  the  principle  of  in-
tegrity in  his  own  self  you  cannot
pur  it  there.  The  Latter-day  Saints
should  be  ashamed  to  mix  up  with
these  things,  and  to  prostitute  the
principles  which  God  has  revealed
unto  them.  I  «speak  of  these  things
to  warn  you  against  them.

The  Lord  has  brought  m  here,
that  we  may  be  taught  and  instructed
in  correct  principles  and  led  in  the
paths  of  life.  Did  we  gather  here  to
get  religion  and  to  prepare  to  die  ?
Nothing  of  the  kind.  I  do  not  care
one  particle  about  death,  I  have
had  him  grin  at  me  numbers  of,
times,  but  I  care  nothing  about  him,
and  1  ask  no  odds  of  him,  I  know
something  beyond  death.  We  are
here  to  prepare  to  live,  and  to  teach
our  children  how  to  live  after  us ;  and
to  teach  the  world  the  same  lesson  if
they  will  only  receive  it.  We  know
that  our  spirits  existed  with  the
Father  before  we  came  here.  We
know  that  we  are  immortal  as  well

Vol.  XV.


290


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


as  mortal  beings,  and  that  we  have
had  to  do  with  another  world  as  well
as  this.  We  know  that  the  world
abounds  with  corruption;  but  it  is
our  business  to  keep  ourselves  from
it,  and  to  progress  in  virtue,  truth,
integrity  and  holiness.  We  came
here  to  be  saviors.  u  What,  saviors  r"
*'  Yes."  "  Why,  we  thought  there
was  only  one  Savior."  "Oh,  yes,
there  are  a  groat  many.  What  do
the  Scriptures  say  about  it  ?"  One
of  the  old  Prophets,  in  apt  aking  of
these  things,  says  that  saviors  shall
come  up  upon  Mount  Zion.  Saviors?
Yes.  Whom  shall  they  save  ?  In
the  first  place  themselves,  then  their
families,  then  their  neighbors,  friends
and  associations,  then  their  fore-
fathers, then  pour  blessings  on  their
posterity.  Is  that  so  ?  Yes.  This
reminds  me  of  some  remarks  I  heard
a  short  time  ago.  There  was  a  num-
ber of  gentlemen,  travelers,  passing
around  the  world,  and  on  their  way
they  stayed  here  awhile.  They
wanted  to  obtain  some  information
from  me  upon  certain  subjects,  and  I
took  thetn  around  a  little,  and  among
other  places  I  took  them  to  see  the
Tabernacle  and  the  foundation  of  the
Temple.  S  id  one,  "  When  you  get
that  Temple  built  you  will  have  ano-
ther place  to  meet  and  preach  in,"
**  Oh  no,"  said  I,  "  that  is  not  lor
preaching,"  All  the  idea  that  most
men  have  about  a  Temple  of  the  Lord
is  that  it  is  for  preaching,  "  Well,"
aid  these  gentlemen,  "  what  is  it
for  if  not  to  preach  in  ?"  I  answered,
fi  The  Christian  world  have  no  know-
ledge of  what  Temples  are  for,  but
we  build  them  fur  the  same  purpose
as  they  were  built  for  anciently — to
perform  ordinances  in  them."  "To
perform  ordinances?  "  '*  Yes,  among
•there,  baptism  for  the  dead  ?"
*  Baptism  for  the  dead?"  "Yea,
fckptism  for  the  dead,  that  those  who
Save  lived  before  us,  and  have  not


been  in  possession  of  the  light  that
we  have,  may  be  placed  in  a  position
in  which  they  can  receive  intelligence
from  God,  and  salvation  at  his  hands;
that  all  God's  creatures  who  have
lived  may  have  an  opportunity  to
have  the  Gospel  preached  to  the  in,
ar.d  to  participate  in  its  blessings.
As  Paul  says,  *  If  the  dead  rise  not
at  all,  why,  then,  are  ye  baptized  for
the  dead?1  "  Said  I,  "The  Chris-
tian world  know  nothing  about  these
things,  but  God  has  revealed  them
to  us,  hence  we  are  baptized  for  our
dead,  that  they  may  partake  of  the
Gospel  and  have  the  opportunity  of
being  exalted  in  the  kingdom  of
God.  Hence,  as  the  Scriptures  say,
"  saviors  shall  come  up  on  Mount
Zion,"

There  are  a  great  man)*  more  rea-
sons why  we  engage  in  these  opera-
tions, which  it  is  uot  necessary  to
talk  about  to  you  Saints;  you  under-
stand them  in  part,  but  not  much  ;
hut  you  will  understand  more  when
it  is  developed.  Well  then,  we  are
desirous  of  blessing  our  posterity  ?
We  read  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  before  they  left  the  world,
calling  their  families  together,  and
under  the  inspiration  of  the  spirit  of
prophecy  and  revelation,  putting
their  hands  upon  their  heads  and
pronouncing  certain  blessings  upon
them,  which  should  rest  upon  their
posterity  through  every  subsequent
period  of  time.  We  have  the  same
Gospel  and  Priesthood,  and  the  saraa
light  and  intelligence,  and  we  are
after  the  salvation  and  exaltation  of
our  families  that  shall  come  after  us,
as  they  were,  and  we  are  seeking  for
Godfs  blessings  to  be  poured  upon
their  heads  as  they  were.  And  if  our
fathers  have  died  in  ignorance  of  the
Gospel,  not  having  had  an  opportu-
nity to  listen  to  it,  we  feel  after  them,
and  we  go  forth  and  are  baptized  tor
them,  that  they  may  be  saved  and


UNVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


exalted  in  the  kingdom  of  God  with

Is  this  the  Gospel  ?  Yes,  the  vety
Gospel  that  Jesus  taught,  and  when
he  was  pat  to  death  in  the  flesh,  and
was  quickened  by  the  Spirit,  he  went
and  preached  it  to  the  spirits  in
prison  who  sometimes  were  disobe-
dient in  thu  days  of  Noah.  Did  he
preach  to  them  that  they  should
stop  there  ?  No,  not  at  all  What
did  he  come  here  for  ?  Tj  open  the
eyes  of  the  blind,  to  unstop  the  ears
of  the  deaf,  to  preach  glad  tidings
to  the  poor,  to  open  the  prison  doors
to  those  that  were  bound,  and  to
preach  the  acceptable  year  of  the
Lord,  That  is  what  he  came  to  do;
and  when  he  got  through  preaching
to  the  living  he  went  and  preached  to


the  spirits  in  prison,  and  "  opened
their  prison  doors/'  as  the  Prophets
said  he  would  do,  "  to  those  that
were  bound."

We  are  after  these  things.  God
has  shed  upon  us  the  light  of  eternal
truth,  he  has  revealed  to  us  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  and  that  Gospel
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light.
We  are  seeking  to  walk  in  that
light,  to  enjoy  these  privileges  our-
selves and  to  impart  them  to  others,
that  others  with  us — the  living  and
the  dead,  those  who  have  been,  those
who  are  and  those  who  are  to  corae,
may  rejoice  with  us,  that  we  and  they
may  obtain  exaltation  in  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God,

May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful,  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  14th  Wakd  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

StfNDAY  Evening,  Jan.  12,  1873,

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


The  subjects  that  have  been
touched  upon  by  Elder  Taylor  are
the  most  delightful  that  the  human
mind  can  contemplate.  It  is  true
that  men  can  find  employment  and
considerable  enjoyment  in  the  acqui-
lition  of  wealth,  and  in  expending
the  same  in  the  busy  scenes  of  life,
but  after  all,  there  is  something  un-
substantial and  unreal  about  every-


thing of  this  character.  Decay  is
written  upon  everything  that  is
human,  death  is  written  upon  every-
thing that  we  put  our  hands  to  and
upon  ourselves  We  know  that  we
are  here  bat  for  a  short  time;  we
know  that  everything  we  possess  will,
like  ourselves,  perish  and  pass  away;
that  our  existence  here  is  an  epheme-
ral one — shortlived,  therefore  when


292


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


we  can  contemplate  the  future  and
the  life  fhat  is  to  come,  and  can  un-
derstand anything  connected  with  it
that  we  can  rely  upon,  there  is  some-
thing in  the  contemplation  that  lifts
us  above  everything  of  a  sublunary
or  perishable  character.  We  are
brought  nearer  to  God,  we  feel  that
there  is  a  spark  of  immortality  within
us,  that  we  are  indeed  immortal  and
partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,
through  our  inheritance  as  the  chil-
dren of  God.  And  this  is  the  effect
that  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,
when  properly  understood,  have  upon
m a n k i nd .  They  had  this  effec t  u pon
them  in  ancient  days;  they  have  this
effect  upon  them  in  these  days.  It
is  on  this  account  that  men  are  capa-
ble of  making  sacrifices;  and  that
men  in  ancient  days  could  face  every
danger  and  could  submit  to  the  most
ignominious  tortures  and  death.  It
is  knowledge  concerning  the  future,
which  God  has  given  to  the  Latter*
day  Saints,  that  lias  sustained  them
in  their  persecutions  and  trials  in  the
past,  and  which  sustains  them  at  the
present  time  ;  and  it  is  this  which  has
sustained  thousands  of  other  people
who  have  not  been  Latter-day  Saints,
and  who  have  not  had  a  fullness  of
the  Gospel,  but  only  understood  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  to  a  partial
extent.  What  is  there  that  is  calcu-
lated to  fill  the  heart  of  man  with
greater  joy  than  the  knowledge  that
God  has  revealed  the  plan  of  salva-
tion— a  plan  which  not  only  compre-
hends within  its  scope  man's  individ-
ual salvation,  but  the  salvation  of  his
ancestors  and  his  posterity,  and  gives
unto  him,  to  a  ceitain  extent,  the
power  to  be  a  savior  of  men,  t<>  l?cs
a  progenitor  in  the  earth,  as  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob  were ;  to  be  the
means  in  the  hands  of  God  of  bring-
ing to  pass  aKo  the  salvation  of  those
who  have  passed  away  in  ignorance.
It has been a  matter  which  hos


puzzled  thousands  of  well-meaning,
honest  people  who  believed  in  God
and  in  the  Gospel  as  far  as  they  knew
it, — to  understand  what  disposition
would  be  made  of  those  who  died  in
ignorance  of  the  Gospel For  in-
stance, the  millions  of  heathen  who
have  died  without  having  heard  the
name of the Lord Jesus  Christ.
Many  men,  including  ministers,  have
entertained  the  iden  that  they  go  to  a
place  of  punishment  from  which  there
is  no  escape,  but  that  they  welter
there in torment throughout  the
endless ages of  eternity.  Others,
more  charitable,  have  scarcely  any
idea  what  will  become  of  them,  and
they  therefore  do  not  venture  an
opinion respecting the *  abject.  —
Others  still,  have  an  idea  that  this
can  not  be  the  fate  of  the  heathen,  or,
if  so,  that  God  mu*t  be  unjust.  There
is  something  revolting  to  the  merciful
mind  in  the  idea that God,  our
Heavenly Father  would  condemn
millions  of  people  to  endless  pain
because  of  their  ignorance  of  some
great  principle  or  truth,  which  he
might  have  communicated  to  them
l»nt  did  not-. For  instance,  millions
of  people  have  lived  in  Polynesia
and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  for
unnumbered generations  —  history
does  not  tell  us  how  many,  their  tra-
ditions scarcely  number  them — and
they  never  heard,  until  quite  recently,
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  never  knew
that  he  was  the  Son  of  God  and  the
Savior  of  the  world. They  have
died  by  millions  in  total  ignorance  of
the  plan  of  salvation  as  taught  in  the
Scriptures. Millions  died on  this
great  continent  before  the  landing  of
the  whites  on  American  soil — count-
less tribes  of  Indians  wandered  to  and
fro  from  the  polar  regions  of  the
north  to  the  equator,  and  from  the
equator  to  the  polar  regions  of  the
south,  and  not  one  amongst  them  all
knew  anything  about  God,  his  Son


*


UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


293


Jesus  Christ,  or  the  plan  of  salvation.
They  lived  and  died,  generation  after
generation,  in  ignorance  of  these  im-
portant truths,  and  many  of  them
were  doubtless  just  and  upright  men,
bo  far  as  their  traditions  enabled  them
to  act  and  walk  uprightly.

Certain  religious  denominations
entertain  the  belief  that  these  people
have  all  been  consigned  to  endless
torment  ;  and  not  only  those  who
have  inhabited  this  land,  but  those
who  have  inhabited  Polynesia  and
Australasia,  the  groups  of  Islands  iu
the  Indian  Archipelago  and  through-
out Asia  and  Africa.  Who  can  con-
template such  a  plan  of  salvation,  or
rather  condemnation,  and  admire  the
author  of  it,  and  worship  him  as  a
just,  pure  and  holy  being?  Is  there
any  wonder  when  such  theories  are
propounded  and  advocated  by  the
professed  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ,
the  Prince  of  Peace,  that  men  have
revolted  at  such  a  belief  and  would
not  exercise  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  ?
The  wonder  to  me  is  that  so  many
have  received  teachings  from  men
who.  professing  to  be  ministers  of
Christ,  have  entertained  such  views
as  these.  To  think  that  God  would
consign  to  endless  torment  millions
of  his  creatures  who  died  in  ijno*
ranee,  of  which  they  might  have  been
relieved  if  he  had  revealed  his  will
and  sent  his  ministers  unto  them !

This  is  not  the  faith  of  the  Litter-
day  Saints.  The  Gospel  that  vm
have  heard  brings  to  us  peace  and
joy.  There  is  no  feature  in  it  from
the  contemplation  of  which  we  recoil.
There  is  no  feature  connected  with  it
that  we  can  not  sit  down  and  con-
template with  pleasure  and  joy,  and
the  more  we  contemplate  and  inves-
tigate it,  the  higher  our  admiration
rises  for  the  author  of  it — the  great
and  good  Creator  who  has  revealed
it,  80  far  as  I  understand  this  plan
of  salvation,  which  is  the  one  taught


I  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles  in  undent
days,  and  which  is  left  on  record  iu
the  Scriptures,  there  is  nothing  con-
nected with  it  but  what,  excites  my
I  admiration  and  calls  forth  my  un-
bounded gratitude  to  God  for  having
revealed  it,  and  for  having  given  me
the  privilege  of  understanding  it,  so
far  as  I  have  learned  it.  Instead  of
a  Gospel  filled  with  woe,  sorrow  and
condemnation,  it  is  a  Gospel  of  peace,
joy  and  happiness  to  those  who  re-
ceived it.

We  as  a  people,  brethren  and  sis-
ters, and  we  should  always  bear  this
in  mind,  do  not  believe  that  God  our
Heavenly  Father  will  condemn  any
human  b^ing  unless  he  has  been  mads
acquainted  with  the  law  which  he  has
revealed;  in  other  words,  to  use  the
expression  of  one  of  the  Apostles,
?  Where  there  is  no  law,  there  is  no
transgression/'  Unless  a  law  is  pro-
claimed unto  men,  that  they  may
understand  it,  there  can  be  uo  trans-
gression of  that  law,  and  consequently
no  condemnation  following  its  trans-
gression ;  and  if  condemnation  fol-
low, there  must  be  a  knowledge  of
law.  There  must  be  a  comprehen-
sion of  a  law  and  wilful  violation  of
it,  before  condemnation  can  come.
There  is  no  room  for  the  exercise  of
pity  to  a  person  who,  knowing  a  law,
violates  it.  We  do  not  have  any
fee li tigs  of  pity  to  men  who  violate
our  laws  when  they  understand  tbera.
We  may  regret  their  course,  but  when
we  know  that  they  understood  the
law,  and  had  power  to  live  above  it,
and  that  through  yielding  tj  their
weaknesses  and  to  their  propensities
fchey  have  violated  the  law,  wc  feel  to
say,  Let  justice  take  its  course,  the
punishment  is  a  just  one,  and  they
must  abide  by  it."  So  it  is  in  the
Gospel — yon  will  not  be  condemned
for  that  which  you  do  not  understand,
;  neither  will  any  other  people  that  ever
lived — that  now  live — or  ever  will


294


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


live  in  the  future.  They  will  be  con-
demned according  to  their  knowledge:
every  man  will  be  judged  according
to  the  deeds  done  in  the  bod\ .  Then
what  shall  be  done  with  the  millions
who  have  died  in  ignorance  ?  If  I
thought  that  the  plan  of  God's  sal-
vation was  confined  to  this  earth,  and
this  limited  space  of  time,  I  should
have  different  ideas  of  God  to  what  I
have.  But  God  is  eternal,  and  his
salvation  is  an  eternal  plan  of  salva-
tion. This  earth,  or  the  elements  of
which  it  is  composed,  is  cternnb  We
who  live  on  the  earth  are  eternal  in
one  sense — our  spirits  are  eternal;
and  the  elements  of  which  our  bodies
or  tabernacles  are  created  are  also
eternal.  They  can  be  changed,  dis-
solved and  reconstructed,  recreated
and  reorganized,  but  they  are  eternal,
and  so  are  we,  and  we  shall  live  eter-
nally. God's  providences  and  God*s
salvation  are  not  confined  to  this
space  of  time,4  which  we  call  life  ;  but
they  extend  throughout  eternity  .and
when  individuals  die  in  ignorance  of
the  Gospel  they  will  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  hearing  that  Gospel  else-
where. As  has  been  said,  "If  the
dead  rise  not  at  all,  then  why  are  ye
baptized  for  the  dead  ?"  This  was
the  remark  of  Paul.  Peter  also  tells
as  that  Jesus  went  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison  which  sometime
were  disobedient  when  once  the  lunsj-
suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  da)  s
of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  a  pre-
paring, wherein  few,  that  is,  eight
sou's,  were  saved  by  water.  They
had  been  in  prison  for  nearly  2,5C0
years,  according  to  our  chronology;
but  Jesus,  having  the  power  to  preach
the  Gospel,  went  and  preached  to
them  while  his  body  lay  in  the  tomb.
I  know  that  this  doctrine  is  strange
to  many  persons,  I  recollect  on  one
occasion  preaching  on  the  Sandwich
Islands  to  a  large  congregation,  en-
deavoring to  prove  that  baptism  for


the  remission  of  sins  was  necessary ,
anil  that,  according  to  the  words  of
Jesus  to  Nicodemus,  unless  a  man
was  born  of  the  water  and  of  the
Spirit  he  could  in  no  wise  enter  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  Af  ter  I  had  got
through,  a  gentleman  came  forward
from  the  congregation  and  commen-
ced inteirogaling  me  on  the  state-
ment which  I  had  made;  and  in  his
remarks  lie  dwelt  particularly  on  the
case  of  the  thief  on  the  cross.  Said
he.  u  You  have  toM  us  that  no  man
cm  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven
unless  he  is  born  of  the  \vater  and  of
the  Spirit."  I  told  him  that  I  had
quoted  the  words  of  the  Savior.  He
w kited  to  know  how  I  disposed  of
the  repentant  thief  on  the  cross,  who
died  at  the  same  time  that  the  Savior
did.  Said  he,  "  You  recollect  that
Jesus  said,  '  This  day  shall  thou  be
with  me  in  Paradise ;'  but  your  doc-
trine conveys  the  idea  that  the  thief
did  not  and  could  not  gu  to  Paradise
unless  he  was  born  of  the  water,"  I
remarked  to  him  that  I  supposed  our
views  with  regard  to  Paradise  dif-
fered. He  said  that  he  believed  that
Paradise  was  heaven — the  presence
of  God,  and  that  the  thief  went  there
immediately  after  death.  I  said  to
him,  The  Scriptures  tell  us  that  he
did  not."  The  assertion  startled  him,
and  said  he,  44  Do  you  mean  to  say
that  Jesus  did  not  go  to  heaven  ?" —
I  replied,  "  Jesus  certainly  did  not  go
into  the  presence  of  his  Father  when
he  died,  and  to  prove  to  you  that
what  I  say  is  correct,  I  have  only  to
refer  j uu  to  the  20th  chapter  of  John,
which  contains  the  account  of  Alary
and  Jesus,  after  his  resurrection.
Mary  went  to  the  sepulchre  on  the
morning  of  the  Sabbath,  and  she
found  that  the  stone  had  been  rolled
away  and  that  the  Savior's  body  was
gone.  She  was  startled  at  the  oc-
currence, and  turning  round  she  saw
somebody  standing  beside  her  whom


UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


295


she  supposed  to  be  the  gardener,  ami
she  inquire;!  of  him  what  had  become
of  the  body  of  her  Lord.  Instead
of  the  gardener,  it  was  Jesus,  find  he
called  her  by  name,  and  as  soon  as
she  heard  her  name  she  knew  it  was
Jesus,  and  stepped  forward  to  em-
brace him.  Bat  Jesus  said,  4  Touch
me  not,  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to
my  Flit  her,  but  go  to  my  brethren,
and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto
my  Father  and  your  Father  ;  and  fo
my  God  and  your  God.'  Now,  -aid
1,  "here  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus
himself  that,  on  the  Sabbath  after
his  crucifixion,  during  which  time  his
body  bad  lain  in  the  tomb,  he  had
not  vet  ascended  to  his  Father,"  Said
I,  u  P>  ter  tells  us  that  during  this
time,  he  had  been  to  preach  to  the
spirits  in  prison,  who  were  disobe-
dient in  the  days  of  Noah  ;  and  he
also  says— For  this  cause  whs  the
Gospel  preached  to  them  that  are
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  by
that  Gospel,  just  the  sa  ne  as  they
who  are  living,"  From  this  we  can
learn  how  proper  was  the  remark  of
Jesus  to  the  thief.  He  did  not  saw
"Thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  my  king-
dom this  day/1  The  thief  said,
"  Lord,  remember  me  wh*m  th  m
comcst  into  thy  kingdom."  RutJeaus,
who  was  then  undergoing  the  pantrs
of  death,  and  had  not  time  to  explain
the  plan  of  salvation  to  him,  said,
"  This  day  shalt  thou  be  wiih  me  in
Paradise."  And  he  no  doubt  was
with  him,  and  heard  him  explain  the
Gospel  in  its  fullm-ss,  plainness  and
simplicity,  and  he  had  an  opportunity
of  receiving  or  rejecting  it.

These  are  the  views  entertained  Ov
the  Latter-day  8 Hints  on  this  im-
portant subject.  We  believe  Hi  it
every  being  that  ever  has  lived  —
that  does  live  now  or  ever  will  live —
will  sooner  or  later  be  brought  to  a
knowledge  of  the  eternal  phiu  of
salvation,  and  that  none  will  be  con-


demned to  endless  torment  only
those  who  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,
for  Jesus  says  every  sin  shall  be  for-
given except  the  sin  against  the  Holy
Ghost  ;  that  shall  not  be  forgiven  in
this  world  or  the  world  to  come*
Every  human  being  will  be  brought
to  a  knowledge  of  the  Redeemer  s
jrnce;  every  human  being  wdl  have
truth  and  emu1  placed  before  him  or
her,  and  will  have  the  opportunity  of
embracing  truth  and  rejecting  error.

God has  phiCed ns  here,  we  are  his

children,  and  he  loves  us  alb  We
can  not  begin  to  understand  the  love
that  God  our  Father  has  for  his
children,  fie  loves  all  that  dwell  on
t he  face  of  the  earth  —  the  dark  sons
of  Gain  that  dwell  in  Africa  and  in
America,  in  Asia  and  throughout  the
islands  of  the  sea,  as  well  us  those
who  live  in  Euro[>e  and  America  who
are  of  the  white  race.  All  are  the
objects  of  fiis  care.  His  providence
is  over  all  mid  his  salvation  is  ex-
tended to  nil.  But  upon  whom  will
condemnation  rest?  This  i:i  con-
demnation, says  Jesus,  that  light  lias
come  into  the  world,  mid  men  are
made  to  understand  n  .oid  rejee!  it.
But  will  all  be  saved  ?  Yea,  every
human  being  will  be  saved  except
those  win*  commit  the  unpardoimUie
sin,  But  wdl  they  all  receive  the
same  sal  varum  ? Ne  :  everv  man

will be i e warded according  to  the

deeds  done  m  the  body, W  J  t  tose
who  lire  lived  of  ease  =md  pleasure,
consulting  their  o.vn  inclinations  and
giatil^ i them,  be  sivel  with  those
who  enduir  all  thing*  hir  the  truth  "a
sake  ? We  rend  in  the  scriptures  of
men  and  aomen  who  ^spired  to  serve
God  with  all  their  uii^hrs,  and  to  do
everything  Hiet  was  required  of  them.
Tiny  were  they  who  wandered  about
Lin  sheepskiua  and goatskins,  who
i  dwelt  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth.
They  were  willing1  to  take  upon  them
the  obloquy  and  shame;  to  be  sawu


29  G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


asunder,  to  have  their  beads  cut  off,
to  be  crucified,  to  be  thrown  into  the
dens  of  wild  beasts,  and  to  suffer
any  thing  and  everything,  every  kind
of  dt-ath,  for  the  sake  of  the  Gospt  1
that  they  had  embraced,  and  they
endured  these  tilings  unflinchingly.
Will  they  receive  only  the  same  glory
as  those  who  pass  along  without  any
affliction  and  suffering,  and  who  have
pleasure  all  their  days?  No,  the
Apostle  Paul,  in  the  chapter  that  has
been  quoted  from — 15th  chapter  of
the  1st  of  Corinthians,  makes  it
ptain  that  there  is  a  difference  in  the
degrees  of  glorv  that,  men  will  ro-
ceive  after  death.  He  says  that
there  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  another
ot*  the  moon  and  another  of  the  stat*
This  shows  that  different  degrees  of
glory  will  be  awarded  men  and  wo-
men in  the  resurrection  according  to
their  faithfulness  here  Some  will
receive  the  glory  of  the  sun,  which
t&  called  the  celestial  glory ;  others
will  ieceive  a  glory  typified  by  the
n.onn,  called  the  terrestrial  glory ;
and  others  a  glory  typified  by  the
stars,  which  is  called  the  telestial

T'ie  Latter-day  Saints,  as  a  people,
3i  e  seeking  to  obtain  celestial  glory.
They  want  to  go  where  the  Father
and  Sou  are,  and  to  dwell  eternally
in  their  presence.  They  want  to
receive  blessings  similar  to  those
which  Jesus  has  received.  On  this
account  they  h  ive  been  as  willing  as
the  former-day  Saints  to  suffer  all
tinners  f  r  the  sake  uf  the  Gospd  of
Christ.

Many  men  wonder  why  we  left  the
States  as  and  when  we  did,  and  came
into  this  wilderness,  and  why  we
endured  persecutions.  This  is  a  mat-
ter of  constant  wonder  to  those  who
investigate  our  history  and  who  do
ii ot  understand  the  reasons  which
have  prompted  us  to  cling  to  our  re-
ligion. They  say, u  If  you  will


abandon  this  principle  or  that,  we
w  ill  fellowship  you.  If  yoa  reject
the  Book  of  Harmon,  that  is  not
much,  you  have  the  Bible.  If  you
would  reject  Joseph  Smith  as  a  Pro-
phet, we  won  Id  receive  you.  Tour
doctrine  is  not  so  unpalatable.  If
yoa  did  not  have  so  much  confidence
in  Brigham  Young,  and  did  Dot  take
him  as  your  counselor  in  all  things,
there  would  not  be  anything  particu-
larly objectionable  in  your  doctrines.
Yon  believe  in  the  Bible,  the  Old  and
New  Testaments;  bat  there  are  some
principles  of  your  religion  which  yoa
might  as  well  abandon."  Some  men
who  call  themselves  good  friends  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  reason  like  this,
Ther  do  not  seem  to  understand  that

-

every  principle  connected  with  the
Gospel  is  vital  to  salvation,  and  that
if  we  reject  the  Book  of  Mormon  we
reject  the  Bible;  if  we  reject  Joseph
Smith,  we  reject  Jesus  Christ  who
inspired  and  sent  him;  if  we  reject
Brigham  Young  as  an  Apostle,  we
might  as  well  reject  Peter,  James  and
John  and  the  other  Apostles  who
lived  in  ancient  days;  and  that,  in
fact,  to  reject  any  of  these  would  be
to  reject  the  whole,  and  tbat  to  be
Latter-day  Saints  we  have  to  believe
every  principle  connected  with  onr
religion,  or  we  have  to  be  complete
apostates  to  the  whole  of  it.  We
can  not  say  we  will  receive  this  and
reject  that  principle.  We  cannot  say,
We  will  receive  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,
repentance  of  sin,  baptis  n  and  the
laying  on  of  hands  and  rejecte  very  thing
ehe.  We  will  not  gather  with  the  peo-
ple we  will  not  pay  tithing,  we  will  not
believe  in  BrighamYi  m  i  j  g  as  an  Apostle
or  Prophet,  We  can  not  lie  Lattt-r-day
S:iints  and  feel  thus,  we  must  either
receive,  or  be  Apostate  to,  the  whole
of  the  Gospel  of  Jesns  Christ

We  are  fighting  for  great  truths,
not with carnal  weapons — swords,
!  gnns,  or  weapons  of  war ;  but  we  are


UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


257


engaged  in  a  great  and  mighty  spirit-
ual contest,  we  are  seeking  to  estab-
lish or  rather  to  re-establish  the
principles  of  truth  and  righteousness  .
on  the  earth.  We  are  endeavoring
to  erect  a  standard  of  parity  higher
than  that  which  now  prevails  and  is
recognized  by  men,  and  to  elevate  the
people  to  that  standard.  That  is  the
aim  and  labor  of  the  Saints.  We
a  r  j  :  n  is  n  nd  *  ts  to o  d  — so  w  e re  Jesus
and  his  Apostles,  and  the  Prophets  '
of  (I'll  in  ancient  days.  Wc  stun!
in  goodly  company.  We  are  arrayed,
in  this  respect,  with  the  noblest  of
earth's  sous.  Oar  names  arc  cast  out
as  evil,  and  everything  we  do  ifl  mis-
represented and  misunderstood,  but
this  does  not  change  our  disposition
or  the  character  of  the  work  we  are
engaged  in.  We  are  resolved ,  not-
withstanding this,  to  stand  firm  to
the  principles  which  God  has  revealed
unto  us.  This  is  the  duty  of  every
Latter-day  Saint,  come  life  or  come
death,  or  whatever  may  be  the  con-
sequences.  If  God  has  entrusted  us
with  the  revelations  of  his  will,  if  he
has  taught  us  holy  and  pure  doc-
trines, as  we  testify  that  he  has,  we
would  be  recreant  to  God  and  to  the  i
duties  and  obligations  he  has  placed
upon  us  if  we  did  not  stand  op  and
face  the  world  in  arms,  if  necessary,
to  maintain  Ins  great  truths  in  the
earth.

It  is  so  with  everything  connected
with  our  religion.  There  is  nothing
impure  about  it — it  is  God's.  There  >
may  be  impurity  in  men,  and  they
may  fail  in  carrying  out  the  doctrines
which  Gud  has  entrusted  to  them,
but  this  does  not  alter  the  doctrines.
They  are  true  and  good  from  begin-
ning to  end,  from  the  first  to  tbe  last
that  has  been  commit  led  to  us,  and
their  practice  among  the  people  will
exalt  them.  "What?"  says  one,
**  will  plural  marriage,  that  we  have
been  taught  to  look  upon  a.s  so  de-


grading, elevate  people  r"  \res,  even
that  principle,  much  abused  as  it  is,
when  it  is  understood  by  the  people,
will  be  viewed  in  a  very  different
light  from  what  it  is  now.  And  so
with  every  other  principle  of  the
Gospel.  There  is  nothing  that  we
teach  or  practice  but  what  is  con-
tained in  the  Bible,  and  for  which  we
do  not  have  the  example  of  Prophets
mid  Ap^' sties,  and  that  was  not  em-
bodied  in  the  plan  of  salvation  re-
vealed to  the  ancients.  We  are  wili-
ng t'i  be  tested  by  the  word  of  Hod.
Not  by  man's  traditions  and  mis-
conceptions; but  we  are  willing  to
go  to  and  be  tested  by  that  book  upon
which  Christendom  relies — the  tran-
slation of  the  Scriptures  made  by
King  James  the  First,  of  England,
If  we  hava  embraced  error,  we  are
willing  to  renounce  it  whenever  it  is
proved  to  us.

Tin1  re  are  about  a  hundred  and
!  twenty- five  thousand  people  in  these
valleys"  in  Utah  Territory,  We  are
but  a  small  handful  of  people,  and
.re  are  surrounded  by  the  foremost
civilization  of  the  ;ige,  which  is  be-
lieved  in  and  upheld  by  forty  mil-
lions of  people,  who  have  in  their
possession  all  the  agencies  of  the
pulpit  and  the  press — the  most  ad-
vanced agencies  of  civilization  ;  and
|  our  barbarism,  as  it  is  called,  is
brought  face  to  face  with  their  ad-
vanced civilization.  We  do  not
shrink  from  the  contest,  but  are  will-
ing to  abide  the  issue  and  to  submit
to  the  results.  We  are  not  afraid  of
this  Gospel,  It  is  reported  of  Presi-
dent Young  that  he  once  said,  It  was
a  very  poor  religion  that  would  not
stand  one  railroad.  I  do  not  know
!  whether  he  ever  did  make  the  re-
mark, but  whether  he  did  or  not,  it
is  true.  It  is  a  poor  religion  that
will  not  stand  one,  two,  three,  or
half  a  dozen  railroads,  or  that  will
1  not  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  hottest


298


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


persecution,  and  triumph  when  in  We  have  endured  |>ersecutions  which
contact  with  everything  that  can  be  have  driven  us  from  oer  homes,
brought  against  it.  I  would  not  give  Mobs  have  burned  our  houses,  des-
a  fig  for  my  religion  if  it  would  not  fcroyed  our  corn  and  wheat  fields,  and
do  this,  so  long  as  its  believers  are  '  torn  down  our  fences;  our  men  have
Dot  extirpated,  as  were  the  believers  been  slain,  and  in  some  instances  our
in  the  Gospel  in  ancient  days.  If  I  women  ravished.  We  have  been
they  will  only  let  ns  live  and  enjoy


our  natural  and  heaven- bestowed
rights,  I  have  no  fears  as  to  the  re-
sult. It  is  true  that  the  wicked  could
turn  in  and  kill  us  off  in  detail,  as
they  killed  our  ancient  predecessors
—  the  Apostles  and  followers  of
Christ.  In  that  day  they  killed
every  man  that  professed  to  have


driven  as  wild  beasts  are  driven  from
the  habitations  of  men,  and  com  pel  It  d
to  flee  to  ihe  wilderness.  We  have
endured  thia,  and  we  know  that  we
can  endure  it,  and  live  in  the  midst
of  it,  for  we  have  been  Jested.  But
we  have  not  yet  enduied  prosperity,
we  have  not  yet  been  tested  in  tins
crucible,  which  is  one  of  the  severest


revelation  from  God.  They  searched  to  which  a  people  can  be  subjected,
and  hunted  until  not  a  man  could  he  !  We  have  not  been  tested  with  abun-
found  among  the  sops  of  men  who  dance  of  property  and  wealtli  lavished
could  say  unto  the  people,  "Thus  upon  us;  and  here,  my  brethren  and
saith  the  Lord,"  until  not  a  man  i  sisters,  is  tin-  point  against  which  we
could  be  found  who  could  say  that  I  have  to  gnu  i  d  more  than  all  others,
an  angel  had  appeared  to  him;  until  1  for  there  is  more  danger  to-day  to


not  a  man  could  he  found  among  all
the  children  of  earth  who  could  say,
"  God  has  revealed  this  to  me,'1  It


the  Zion  of  God  in  trie  wealth  that
is  pouring  into  and  increasing  in  the
hands  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  than


God  would  permit  it,  we  might  be in  all  the  armies  that  have  ever  been


hunted,  shun  and  driven  until  all
were  finally  extirpated  from  the  face


mustered  against  us,  or  all  the  mobs
that  have  been  fur  mud  for  our  over-


of  the  earth,  and  in  this  way,  pro-  j  throw,  from  the  organization  of  the
bably,  our  religion  would  not  stand  j  Church  until  Ui-day. There  is  dan-


and  endure  the  contest  or  contact
with  what  is  called  a  superior  civili-
zation. But  so  long  as  wc  are  allowed
to  live,  and  to  enjoy  the  exercise  of


ger  not  in  mines  alone,  not  in  the
increase  of  strangers  in  our  midst,
nut  in  the  seducing  influences  which
attend  the  presence  of  some  of  them.


our  opinion  in  this great nation, bat  in  the  fact  that  we  ourselves  are


whose  boast  it  is  that  it  is  the  land
of  untrammeled  liberty,  1  do  not  tear
the  contest  or  its  result,  and  in  spy
ing  this  I  believe  I  speak  the  senti-
ments of  everv  man  and  woman  who
belongs  to  the  Church  in  this  Terri-
tory, We  know  that  we  have  re-
ceived the  truth,  that  it  will  be  tri-
umphant in  the  end,  and  that  it  will
live  through  and  survive  all  kinds  of
persecution  that  may  be  brought  to
bear  against  it.

But  there  is  something  that  I
dread  more  than  active  persecution.


growing  wealthy,  and  that  it  is  na
tural  for  us  to  become  attached  to
wealth,  and  for  t lie  mind  of  man  to
be  allured  hy  it,  and  by  the  influence
which  it  brings.  There  is  danger  in
this,  and  I  look  for  the  same  results
to  follow  this  condition  of  affairs  that
for  inert  y  fol  1  o  w  el  mob*  >cracy .  T  he
mobs  came  opon  us,  and  they  cleansed
from  among  us  the  hypocrites  and
cowards,  and  those  who  could  not
endure.  The  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
which  brought  persecutions,  and
called  upon  men  to  forsake  houses


r


UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL


299


and  lands  and  everything  that  was
dear  to  them,  and  to  push  out  into
the  wilderness,  had  no  attraction  for
the  classes  I  have  named,  in  the  early
history  of  the  Church;  and  I  expect
that  there  will  be  attractions  stronger
than  the  Gospel  to  hypocrites  and
those  weak  in  the  faith  in  the  present
phase  of  our  history,  and  that  influ-
ences now  operating  will  produce  the
same  res  tilts  as  we  have  witnessed,
that  is,  to  cleanse  the  people  of  Clod,
We  have,  therefore,  at  the  present
time,  that  at  oar  doors,  which  mena-
ces us  with  greater  danger  than  mobs.
I  do  not  dread  the  results,  but  doubt-
less many,  unless  they  are  very  care-
ful, will  have  their  hearts  hardened
and  their  eyes  blinded  by,  and  they
will  fall  a  prey  to  a! id  be  overcome
by,  these  evils,  which  the  adversary
is  seeking  to  pour  upon  us.

It  has  been  truly  said  by  many,
"Introduce  fashions  into  Salt  Lake,
increase  wealth  among  the  people
and  induce  them  to  follow  fashion
and  be  surrounded  by  influences
that  will  win  them  from  their  primi-
tive habits,  then  you  have  solved  the
Mormon  problem."  There  is  great
truth  in  this  statement.  1  recognize
it  and  warn  you  of  it.  I  know  that
if  we  would  allow  ourselves  to  be
thus  influenced,  there  is  really  more
danger  in  this  than  in  anything  else.
1  stand  here  to-night  in  the  presence
of  God  and  before  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  and  I  declare  that  I  fully
believe  that  we  shall  stand  this  trial,
as  we  have  others.  I  have  no  fear  as
to  the  result,  so  far  as  the  entire  peo-
ple is  concerned.  But  as  a  people
we  had  better  be  warned.  We  had
better  watch  well  our  ways,  luuk  well
to  our  hearts,  keep  our  minds  well  on
the  principles  that  God  has  revealed,
and  love  our  religion  more  than  any*
thing  else  on  the  face  of  the  earth.
We  must  preserve  our  We  for  the
principles  of  our  faith  intact  and  in-


violate, free  from  every  impurity"
What  could  be  offered  to  us  that  we
have  not  got  in  our  religion  ?  Is  it
wealth  ?  I  expect  to  have  boundless
wealth  and  boundless  dominion,  if
faithful  to  God  ;  and  I  expect  that
every  faithful  man  and  woman  in  the
Church  will  have  everything  that  his
or  her  heart  can  desire  in  this  Gospel
which  God  has  revealed.  The  Prophet
Isaiah,  speaking  of  Jesus,  says,  To
the  increase  of  his  kingdom  there
shall  be  no  end.  That  promise  is  also
made  to  us— to  the  increase  of  our
kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end.  What
did  the  Lord  say  to  Abraham  when
he  had  blessed  him  ?  He  told  him
to  look  upon  the  stars  of  heaven  and
promised  that  as  they  were  countless
and  innumerable  .so  should  his  seed
be.  Tbat  promise,  made  to  Abraham,
the  Father  of  the  Faithful,  is  couched
in  the  words  of  Isaiah  to  Jesus.
There  was  to  be  no  end  to  the  king-
dom of  Abraham,  he  was  to  ha?e
thrones,  principalities  and  dominion*;
to  be  crowned  not  with  a  barren,
empty  crown,  not  a  crown  without  a
kingdom,  but  a  real  one,  emblemati-
cal of  endless  and  boundless  rule,
power,  dominion  and  glory.  The
Lord  has  promised  the  same  glory  to
every  being  who  attains  to  the  glory
of  the  sun,  who  gains  a  fullness  of
glory  in  his  celestial  kingdom.  They
all  will  be  heirs  of  Cod  and  joint
heirs  with  Jesus  Christ  Recollect
the  words — joint  heirs  with  Jesus
Christ,  nnd  as  he  has  dominion  and
rule  so  will  they.  He  that  has  been
faithful  over  a  few  things  shall  be
made  ruler  over  many,  says  Jesus;
and  in  another  place  he  says  that  all
who  have  forsaken  fathers,  mothers,
houses  or  lands  for  my  sake  shall  re-
ceive a  hundred  fold  in  this  life,  and
in  the  life  to  come  life  everlasting.
We  are  promised,  then,  a  hundred
fold  for  all  we  forsake  in  tins  life,  and
life  everlasting  hereaf  ter. What  was


300


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  song  winch  John  says  was  sung
by  the  saved  in  heaven?  "Thou
hast  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto
God,  m ud  we  shall  reign  on  (he  earth,"
This  is  the  promise  made  to  the
faithful  by  Cod,  the  King  of  king.s.
It  is  natural  for  man  to  seek  to  exer-
cise rule  wherever  he  can ;  and  it  is
perfectly  ritjht  when  bounded  and
controlled  by  principle.

In  the  Gospel  there  is  open  to  us
room  for  the  exercise  of  this  feeling
without  any  evil  results  following  it.
We  can,  if  we  choose,  in  this  life  lay
a  foundation  for  eternal  riches,  do-
minion and  rule,  and  the  possession
of  all  blessings  which  God  has  pro-
raised  to  the  faithful.  We  therefore
look  for  a  heaven  cf  this  kind.  The
Latter-day  Saint  does  not  look  for
an  empty  heaven,  where  he  has  got
to  sing  continually  to  the  thrumming
of  the  harp.  The  Saints  look  for  a
tangible  heaven,  the  same  as  we  have
here,  only  glorithd  immensely.  We
expect  to  be  like  God,  our  heavenly
Father — to  take  p?irt  in  creation,  in
the  creation  and  peopling  of  new
worlds,  and  in  doing  things  similar  to
what  God  has  done.  This  is  a  sub-
ject of  such  magnitude  that  I  can
only  briefly  allude  to  it  in  passing.

Do  you  understand,  can  you  un-
derstand, brethren  and  sisters,  why
the  ancients  were  willing  to  suffer
and  endure  all  things  ?  They  knev*
that  God  had  in  store  for  them  every-
thing that  their  hearts  could  desire;
and  that  the  joys  of  which  they  had
a  slight  foretaste  here  they  would
receive  a  fullness  of  hereafter.  If
they  had  wives  they  knew  they  would
be  theirs  for  eternity.  If  they  had
families  they  knew  they  would  be
theirs  for  eternity.  They  knew  that
Jesus  meant  what  he  said  to  Peter
when  he  said,  Thou  art  Peter,  tu  thee
T  give  the  keys  of  the  kingdom,  and
whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth
shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ?  What


ordinances  were  there  that  Peter  had
to  perform  on  earth  that  should  be
bound  in  heaven?  The  Latter-day
Saints  understand  it,  God  lias  res*
tored  the  same  authority  to  the  earth,
and  has  bestowed  it  upon  the  man
who  occupies  the  same  position  in  the
Church  in  this  day  that  Peter  held
in  his,  Peter  was  the  senior  Apostle
— the  President  of  the  Twelve,  and
he,  therefore,  had  the  right  to  hold
the  keys,  and  to  seal  a  wife  to  her
husband,  and  the  ordinance  would  be
bound  in  heaven  as  he  bound  it  on
the  earth-  The  Latter-da v  Saints
claim  to  have  received  the  same  au-
thority. We  believe  when  we  marry
that  we  marry  for  eternity,  and  that
our  wives  and  children  will  dwell
with  us  in  eternity.  This  is  our
faith.  It  was  over  his  posterity  th^t
Abraham  was  to  reign.  What  bene-
fit would  it  be  to  him  to  have  pos-
terity as  numerous  as  the  sands  on
the  sea-shore,  or  as  the  stare  of  hea-
ven, if  he  did  not  rule  over  them  ?
But  embody  the  idea  of  rule  and  do-
minion,  and  of  his  being  a  prince
over  his  posterity,  the  progenitor  of
a  great  and  mighty  race,  over  whom
be  should  eventually  reign  and  rule,
and  then  we  see  the  precious  nature
of  the  promise  which  the  Lard  made
to  him.  The  Lard  gave  him  Canaan
as  an  everlasting  possession,  yet
Stephen,  the  martyr,  when  he
preached  his  last  discourse  to  the
Jews,  told  them  that  Abraham  had
not  had  so  much  as  a  foot  of  it,  but
the  time  would  come  to  which  I  have
referred,  when  he  and  his  seed  would
sing,  li  Thou  hast  made  us  kings  and
priests  unto  God,  and  we  shall  reign
on  the  earth.  This  reigning  on  the
ear tii  was  embodied  in  their  ideas  of
heaven.  This  is  the  kind  of  heaven
tj  which  the  ancients  looked,  and  it
is  the  kind  of  heaven  to  which  the
Latter-day  Saints  look,  and  this  is
in  consequence  of  the  great  and


UNIVERSALITY  AND  ETERNITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


301


glorious  principles  which  God  lias  re-
vealed  to  them.  Because  of  this
they  have  been  willing  in  the  past
to  endure  what  they  have  endured.

There  is  much  more  connected
with  these  points  than  any  human
being  can  say  with  regard  to  them.
They  are  immense  in  their  magni-
tude, and  cannot  he  grasped  at  once.
But  the  more  the  truth  which  God
has  revealed  is  investigated  the  more
beautiful  it  appears,  I  often  remark,
There  is  something  beautiful  to  me
in  the  idea  of  a  people  heinjr  gathered
together  as  the  Latter-day  Saints
have,  and  dwelling  in  lore  and  bar*
mony.  By  this,  says  John,  you  may
know  that  you  have  passed  from
death  unto  life,  been  use  ye  love  one
another.  We,  with  all  our  faults,  do
love  one  another.  The  Latter-day
S  i> .*>  dwell  together  in  unity,  no
matter  where  they  come  from.  They
come  here  by  hundreds  and  thousands
from  foreign  lands,  but  here  they  are
in  the  midst  of  their  friends.  They
may  not  speak  the  same  language,
and  may  have  different  habits  and
ways  of  living,  bat  when  they  reach
here  they  are  at  home.  This  is  one
of  the  results  of  the  Gospel,  It  is
strange,  but  how  beautiful  and  God-
like, an  1  how  much  it  on^ht  to  fill
our  hearts  with  gratitude  thht  we
live  at  a  time  and  are  associated  with
a  people  who  are  thus  blessed.

The  world  would  give  everything
they  possess,  and  there  have  been
those  who  would  have  given  their
lives,  to  partake  of  the  blessings  that
we  enjoy  and  that  are  so  common  in
our  midst.  I  have  just  made  a  hasty
trip  through  the  length  of  the  Terri-
tory. Before  starting,  I  telegraphed
to  different  points  that  I  wanted
horses  at  such  a  time.  I  promised
no  remuneration  whatever,  but  they
supposed  that  my  business  was  of
importance,  and  at  the  time  needed
the  horses were  at  hand  and  men


ready  to  accompany  them.  When  I
thanked  them,  they  would  say,
"  There  is  no  need,  brother  Cannon,
we  have  as  much  interest  in  this
work  as  you  have"  Wherever  we
went  there  were  friends,  ami  tables
spread  to  give  us  all  we  wanted.
Can  ir  be  doie  in  any  other  country?
1  believe  that  we  have  made  a  jour-
ney that  could  not  be  made  in  any
other  country,  unless  in  Russia,  where
a  despot  rules.  He  could  order  the
people  as  he  pleased  ;  but  this  lias
been  done  by  simply  inquiring  by
telegraph,  "  Can  you  do  so  and  so?"
The  response  came,  14  Yes,  anythiug
you  want."  What  caused  this?
Was  it  despotism  ?  No,  it  was  love.
Their  interest  in  this  work  is  as
great  as  mine  or  any  man's,
and  it  was  a  pleasure  to  them  to  do
it  The  result  whs  that  we  went  to
St  Georgia  and  returned  in  a  little
over  nine  days,  and  staid  there  four,
traveling  seven  hundred  miles.  It
has  filled  me  with  peculiar  feelings,
and  1  have  rejoiced  to  think  that  I
have  been  associated  with  such  a
people  as  the  Latter-day  Saints.  J
saiil  to  them,  "  You  know,  [  would
do  the  same/'  **  Yes,  we  know  that."
The  majority  of  this  people  feel  that
they  cannot  do  too  much  for  this
work.  It  is  the  work  of  God,  and
we  leel  that  we  cannot  do  too  much
for  the  salvation  of  our  fellow-men.
We  have  shown  this  time  and  time
again.  To  illustrate  it :  the  Latter-
day  Saints  have  sent  year  after  year
five  hundred  teams  clear  to  the  Mis-
souri river,  with  four  yoke  of  cattle
to  the  team,  and  over  tive  hundred
men  to  drive  these  teams,  and  a  great
number  of  men  to  guard  and  watch
them.  These  teams  were  loaded
with  provisions  to  feed  the  returning
emigrants  for  upwards  of  a  thousand
miles.  This  was  done  willingly.
Men  spenl  their  entire  summer,  and
in  this  country  that  means  the  entire


year,  for  when  a  man  and  his  team
lose  the  summer,  they  lose  the  bene-
fits of  the  entire  year's  labor.  Wheie
can  you  see  anything  like  this,  ex-
cept io  Utah  ?  What  was  it  done
fur  ?  To  build  up  some  man  or  des-
potism, or  to  gratify  some  impostor  ?
No,  it  was  because  the  people  loved
their  fellow* creatures — their  brethren
and  sisters.  This  was  missionary
labor  on  a  large  scale.  It  was  not
like  putting  a  few  cents  into  a  mis-
sionary box,  and  then  publishing
each  mail's  name,  and  the  amount  he
contributed,  in  a  magazine,  to  show
the  world  how  much  he  had  done  for
the  salvation  of  the  poor  heathen.
There  was  nothing  of  tin's  kind  here ;
there  were  no  trumpets  blown  on  the
corners,  Pharisee*! ike,  to  show  the
amount  of  donations  made,  bat
quietly  and  unobtrusively  the  people
of  this  Territory  sent  their  young
men  and  teams,  two  thousand  yoke
of  cattle,  sometimes  more — twenty-
five  hundred — with  horses  and  pro-
visions and  everything  necessary  to
equip  large  companies  and  bring,  a
thousand  miles  over  land  to  this  city,
men  and  women  they  had  never  seen,
and  whose  names  they  had  never
heard.  This  is  done  all  the  time,
the  people  paying  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  dollars  for  the  emigration  of


their  poor  brethren  and  sisters  in
foreign  lands,  A  great  deal  is  pub-
lished in  foreign  lands  about  mission-
ary efforts,  I  recollect  when  a  child
how  anxious  my  parents  were  that  1
should  save  a  little  to  send  the  Gos*
pel  to  the  heathen.  That  was  before
they  joined  this  Church.  I  thought
it  a  very  great  thing  to  do  as  they
desired.  But  the  Latter* day  Saints
are  doing  this  all  the  time.  They
send  missionaries  over  the  earth.
Men  leave  their  families  and  comfort-
able homes  to  preach  the  Gospel  in
foreign  lands  without  purse  and  scrip.
What  for?  For  the  salvation  of
their  fellow-creatures.  It  is  the  re-
sult of  the  teachings  of  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ.  And  we  have  to  do
more  of  it,  and  to  feel  greater  inter-
est in  our  fellow-creatures  than  we
do,  until  the  time  shall  come  when
we  shall  love  our  neighbors  as  we  do
ourselves.  That  time  must  come  tor
us  as  a  people.

May  God  bless  you,  by  brethren
and  sisters  and  friends,  and  pour  out
his  Holy  Spirit  upon  you,  enlighten
your  minds  and  strengthen  you  in
doing  right,  regardless  of  conse-
quences, that  you  may  be  able  to
endure  to  the  end,  which  I  pray  in
the  name  of  Jesus. A  moo.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  'ORSON  HYDE,


Delivered  is  the  14th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City.

Sunday  Afteuxoox,  January  11),  1873.

(BepoHed  by  David \V.  Evans.)


REWARDS  ACCORDING  TO  WORKS — TlTHIMi,


It  is  some  time  since  I  had  the
pleasure  of  meeting  with  the  Saints
in  the  Fourteen tli  Ward  of  Salt  Lake
City,  I  only  regret,  this  afternoon,
a  severe  cold  that  I  have  taken  since
I  arrived  in  the  city,  which,  I  fear,
may  disqualify  me,  at  least  in  part,
from  doing  justice  to  any  subject  that
may  engage  my  attention.

I  discern  but  a  small  portion  of
the  people  of  this  ward  collected
together  on  the  present  occasion.  I
do -not  express  myself  thus  with  the
idea  of  finding  fault  with  them  for
their  no  u- at  tendance  at  meeting.  I
only  wonder  how  so  many  of  you
were  enabled  to  come  together  at  this
time  and  I  almost  wonder  how  I  got
here  myself  without  being  stuck  in
the  mud.  However,  we  are  here  to
wait  upon  the  Lord,  that  we  may  re-
new our  strength,  and  certainly  in
these  times  of  wonders  we  have  as
much  occasion  for  food  adapted  to
our  immortal  spirits,  to  strengthen
and  invigorate  them,  as  we  have  for
food  to  nourish  and  strengthen  the
body.  We  may  be  more  sensible  of
the  want  of  food  for  the  body  than
we  are  of  the  want  of  food  for  the
mind,  but  still  a  lack  of  the  latter
preys  upon  the  interior  man  as  much
as  a  lack  of  the  former  disqualifies
vs  for  the  discharge  of  those  arduous
duties  which  pertain  to  our  mortal
•rganizatiou.


I  hardly  know,  my  brethren  and
sisters  what  to  speak  to  you  about
this  afternoon.  I  have  ,no  sermon
prepared,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I
should  have  prepared  one  it  I  had
had  time,  for  a  discourse  delivered
by  any  individual  that  is  not  the  out-
burst of  inspiration  by  a  higher
power  can  not  b*  productive  of  any
lasting  good,  though  good  moral
principles  may  be  set  forth,  and  that
too  in  an  engaging  and  interesting
point  of  light.

In  the  course  of  my  life  I  have
traveled  over  a  considerable  portion
of  the  world,  and  have  had  opportu-
nities to  mark  the  different  customs,
fashions  and  styles  of  people,  and  not
only  people,  but  the  different  styles
of  architecture  which  prevail  among
them — every  variety  which  the  mind
is  capable  of  imagining,  from  the
princely  mansion  down  to  the  mean-
est hovel.  I  have  found  that  all
classes  have  some  kind  of  shelter  or
home.  It  is  rarely  that  I  have  met
with  one  who  has  said  to  me,  **  I
have  no  home,  no  shelter,  nowhere  to
go."  Even  the  insects  and  most  of
the  wild  animals  have  some  kind  of
refuge,  some  place  to  flee  to  in  the
time  of  storm.  Our  Utes  who  roam
over  the  mountains  here  have  their
wickiups,  not  very  desirable  to  us,
but  they  serve  them  a  purpose — they
shield,  or  at  least  partially  shield,


304


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


them  from  the  inclemency  of  the
storm.  All  classes  of  people  then,
we  say,  have  some  place  of  resort  or
refuse,  and  the  presumption  is  rh -it
all  have  built  according  to  their  taste,
coupled  with  their  ability.  This  is
about  the  idea  that  I  have  formal

Whence  came  the  idea  of  these
forms  and  structures?  Where  did
they  originate  ?  I  believe  that  every-
thing that  is  of  .service  to  and  that
is  designed  for  a  blessing  to  man,
came  in  some  way  by  the  revelations
of  God,  I  co  not  say  that  they  have
all  been  revealed  through  a  Prophet
or  tn rough  an  Apostle,  God  has
organized  every  hum  m  being  oo  the
earth,  and  has  given  to  him  a  tem-
perament and  a  disposition  suscep-
tible of  impressions;  and  though  he
may  not  know  their  origin,  still  they
play  upon  his  imagination,  and  dis-
close to  him  many  important  matters
connected  with  his  earthly  existence.
A  carpenter  has  many  tools  in  his
box.  They  are  not  all  the  same
kind,  vet  in  the  execution  of  the
several  branches  uf  his  art  he  finds
a  use  for  them,  they  are  not  to  be  1
thrown  away ;  arid  so  it  seems  to  me
that  in  the  great  family  of  man  there  ,
is  not  one  to  be  thrown  away,  but  all
may  be  used  by  him  who  created

them. f \  \  .  ; ;  f  i  J

The  art  of  printing  was  no  dotfbt  j
revealed  from  on  high,  the  matter  or
fac-simile  being  imparted  to  some  |
instrument— some  vessel  chosen  ior  j
that  peculiar  purp  jse,  not  necessarily
an  Apostle  or  Prophet — by  which  to
open  a  door  to  flood  the  world  with
intelligence,  to  organize  and  establish
the  kingdom  of  God.  But  whoever
it  may  be  through  whom  such  reve-
lations  ar^jmade,  his  own  individual
organization  is  played  upon  by  the
light  of  revelation,  though  he  may
not  understand  it  and  give  God  the
glory,  to  whom,  in  reality,  it  belongs.
It  wa*  ujt  necessary  that  the  power


of  steam  to  facilitate  business  and
journeys  by  land  and  sea  throughout
the  world,  should  be  revealed  to
Joseph  Smith,  Brigham  Young,
Isaiah  or  Jeremiah  ;  but  there  was
an  organization  prepared  to  receive
that  communication;  nnd  so  I  might
say  in  relation  to  all  the  arts  and
sciences  that  exist  on  the  earth.  If
i  might  be  allowed  the  expression,  I
would  say  that  the  celestial  kingdom
is  ii  eentr«]  college  where  all  true
sciences  exist.  We  have  them  here,
not  in  their  pure  and  refined  state,
bat  merely  the  coarse  and  shadowy
outlines.  No  doubt  many  of  you
have  had  your  portraits  pencilled
upon  tlie  canvas  by  the  artist,  and
after  lie  had  drawn  the  outlines,
without  filling  up  or  embellishing  at
all,  you  looked  at  if  and  said,  "  That
is  not  myself,  it  does  not  look  like
me,  it  beltmgs  to  some  one  else."
But  «hen  it  came  to  lie  filled  up  and
embellished,  perhaps  you  were  ready
to  own  it.  We  have  the  shadows  of
things  that  are,  and  not  tie  real
things  themselves,  in  many  respecis.
The  question  arises  in  my  mind,  whe-
ther or  not  there  uie-tuaosious  pre-
pared, the  other  side  the  vail,  adapted
to  every  human  being  who  ever  did
or  ever  will  live  upon  the  earth*
Jesus  &aid  to  his  disciples  on  a  cer-
tain occasion,  "I  am  going  to  leave
you.  In  my  Father's  house  are  many
mansions,  if  it  were  not  so  I  would
have  told  you.  1  go  to  prepare  a
place  for  you."  It  seems  that,  at
this  time,  there  was  no  place  pre-
pared for  them ;  that  those  that  were
already  constructed  were  designed
for  others,  and  not  for  them,  hence
said  he,  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for
you,  and  if  I  go  I  will  come  again
and  receive  you  to  myself,  that  where
I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."  It  is
very  natural  for  every  person  who
dwells  on  earth,  when  weary,  or  when
his  task  is  done  or  his  journey  ended


REWARDS  ACCORDING

to  seek  his  home*  I  will  venture  to
say  that  when  yoa  go  from  this  as-
sembly you  will  naturally  seek  your
own  abiding  places.  Yoa  nifty  per-
haps call  in  at  a  sick  neighbor's ;  but
your  ultimate  purpose  is  to  retire  to
your  own  homes,  and  you  are  not
content  until  you  arrive  them  The
question  with  me  is  whether  all  peo-
ple will  not  naturally  seek  the  place
designed  ftnd  prepared  for  them  on
thn  o'her  side  of  the  vail — whether
there  does  not  exist  a  sympathy  be-
tween the  moral  qualifications  of  the
human  heart  and  the  character  of
that  mansion  which  its  owner  is
destined  to  occupy — a  kind  of  attrac-
tive  power  that  will  lead  each  one  to
his  respective  abode.  Brethren  and
sisters,  we  are  all  forming  characters
wMch  will  entitle  us  to  the  different
styles  of  mansions  in  our  Father's
house.  If  I  seek  and  do  obtain  a
superior  degree  of  intelligence — if  I
do  labor  to  acquire  purity  of  heart
and  uprightness  of  conduct  in  all
things,  no  mutter  how  hi^h  my  stand-
ard, 13  there  not  a  in  at  i  si  on,  corres-
ponding with  the  exertions  which  I
make,  that  I  am  heir  to  and  destined
to  inherit?  I  am  inclined  to  the
idea  that  this  is  so.

I  have  heard  some  say,  "  I  would
like  to  know  what  my  condition  and
situation  will  be  the  other  side  of
the  grave."  We  are  solving  that
problem  in  oar  present  state  of  ex-
istence, we  are  determining  the  mat-
ter by  our  actions  in  e very-day  life.
I  recollect  once,  in  my  travels,  stand-
ing on  the  deserts  of  S.thara,  where
I  could  view  the  wide  expanse  and
motion  of  sand,  filling  the  air  as  the
drifting  snows  do  the  atmosphere
here  many  times.  I  saw  the  sirocco
fill  the  air  with  i|md  so  that  it  was
with  difficulty  we  could  open  our
eyrsT  without  endangering  our  sight.
I  saw  neither  plant  nor  flower  of  any
kin  !  there,  nor  even  a  shrub  on  which

No.  20.


TO  WORKS— TITHING.  3 05

a  camel  conic?  browse,  There  are
places,  I  suppose,  in  the  desert,
where  springs  of  water  burst  forth,
th*t  are  green,  breaking  the  mono-
tony that  reigns  over  that  wide  ex-
panse, but  I  did  not  see  them.  And
yet  I  considered,  11  You  will  drink
every  drop  of  moisture  and  every
drop  of  dew  that  distils  from  heaven,
and  in  return  you  send  forth  no  plant
or  flower,  ungrateful  soil !  Come
northward  a  little,  or  northwest,  and
land  on%ie  sou t hern  borders  of  Eu-
rope, say  Italy,  and  there  is  a  beau-
tiful country,  delightful  fruits  of  a
very  fine  grade  grow  there  almost
spontaneously ;  the  weather  ur  climate
is  adapted  to  almost  every  one,  but
pnrficntarly  to  those  who  are  natives
of  t  be  country.  Come  further  north,
into  Germany,  for  instance,  or  to
England,  There  it  is  much  bolder;
more  hardy  fraits  grow  there.  Well,
continue  on  northward  to  Denmark.

I  *

(  Norway,  Sweden,  Lapland  and  indeed
|  into  the  Arctic  regions. What  do
we  find  there? Hardy  races  of  men,
\  adapted to  the  climate,  and  they
i  seemingly  prefer  that  as  a  residence
to  any  other  portion  of  the  earth.
There  is  the  Esquimaux  dwelling  in
his  habitation  of  ice — ice  forming
the  walls  of  his  dwelling. He  is
i  wrapped  in  the  skins  of  animals,  and
he  lives  to  »  great  extent  on  the  blub-
ber of  whales. Would  he  like  to
exchange  situations  with  the  inhabit-
ants of  warmer  countries  ? He  has
no  disposi' ion  to  emigrate,  that  seems
to  be  the  place  he  is  attached  to.  All
this,  for  aught  I  know,  may  reflect
something  of  the  climate  of  those
regions  that  vve  may  hereafter  inhabit
I  do  not  know  but  the  very  heavens
n  fleet  their  existence  upon  earth.  I
1  do  not  know  but  that,  in  a  shadowy
form,  the  earth  itself  is  a  facsimile
of  the  heavens.

j  Now,  on  another  subject,  what
I  would  you  think,  brethren  and  sistera,

Vol,  XV.


30G


JOfRNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  that  man  who  would  refuse  to  pay
bis  taxes  to  the  government  under
which  lie  lives.  There  are  some  who
decline  to  pay  their  taxes  in  this
country  as  if  the  origin*]  inhabitants
were  exercisi  g  a  jurisdiction  which
the  dignity  of  modern  civil ization
affects  to  despise  and  repel!  What
du  we  think  of  any  man  who  declines
to  pay  his  taxes?  We  think  him
not  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the
liiws,  I  believe  there  is  one  stature
in  Utah  which  says  that  every  man
shall  have  the  privilege  of  voting  at
the  polls  after  a  residence  of  six
months,  provided  he  be  a  taxpayer
within  its  boundaries.  This  is  an
important  clause,  I  do  not  speak  of
this  because  I  want  to  urge  the  col-
lection of  taxes,  I  care  nothing  about
that  in  comparison,  I  use  this  as  an
illustration,  in  reference  to  some
other  matters  which  I  wish  to  un;«-
upon  your  attention.  Go  where  we
will  we  tind  we  have  to  pay  our  taxes
to  political  organizations  and  gov-
ernments The  Savior  of  the  world,
poor  as  he  w  as,  whs  not  exempt  from
this  obi  1  »r at  ion  or  liability,  hence  he
■aid  to  Peter,  u  Pay  taxes.*'  14  Oh,
we  have  no  money."  4*  Well,  go  and
east  your  hook  into  t lie  sea,  and  you
will  take  a  fish,  and  in  that  fish  you
will  find  money,  take  that  atid  pay
the  taxed  for  thee  and  me."  Thus
we  see  that  he  who  made  all  things
discharged  this  liability.  We  also
•hnuld  pay  our  taxes  to  the  govern-
ments and  powers  of  this  world.  If
we  never  should  pay  our  tuxes  with
what  kind  ot  a  grace  could  we  appeal
to  the  Count v  Court  tor  aid  to  con-
•truer  a  road  here,  a  bridge  there,  or
mi  improvement  yonder  ?  **  You
lave  not  paid  your  taxes,  bow  can
jou  expect  anything  to  revert  to  you
when  you  have  not  aided  to  replenish
flie  treasury  or  to  keep  the  fountain
^11  t  Tou  have  no  right  to  expect
fee  share  in  the  advantages  enjoyed


by  loyal  citizens."  Again,  if  I  refuse
to  pay  my  taxes  to  the  government  is
it  not  pretty  conclusive  evidence  that
I  am  nn  enemy  o  that  government
and  its  ttiends  r  It  seems  to  me  that
the  tide  beats  it)  that  direction,  and
shows  thai  I  am  disloyal.  If  I  pay
all  my  taxed  and  discharge  all  my  ob-
ligations to  the  government  under
which  I  live,  I  should  be  called  a
loynl  citizen.

Says  one,  u  1  do  m>t  know  what  is
done  with  the  taxes,  I  would  like  to
know  how  l hey  are  applied,  and  what
use  is  made  of  the  n  onev,  and  before
I  pay  I  think  I  will  ascertain,"  If
you  undertake  this  I  think  you  will
have  a  heavy  and  difficult  job  on
vour  hands.  I  would  not  like  to
ferret  ir  out.  When  I  get  my  receipt
for  tax  s  paid  I  put  it  in  my  pocket,
and  say,  t4L!ood  bye,  sir,"  till  he  calls
again.  That  is  all  the  care  1  have.
If  Hie  collector  u takes  a  bad  use  of
the  money  he  collects,  or  appropriates
it  fur  other  than  legirimate  purposes,
somebody  else  will  see  to  him,  not  L
I  have  got  his  receipt,  I*  have  done
my  duty,  1  have  discharged  the  obli-
gation devolving  upon  me.

We  all  look,  brethren  and  sisters,
for  the  kingdom  of  God  to  be  esta-
blished at  some  time,  if  it  is  not  al-
ready done,  and  yet  some  of  us
complain  veiy  much  about  paying
our  tithing.  The  very  word  grates
on  the  ears  of  some  !  Well,  as  taxes
are  to  the  governments  of  the  poli-
tical world,  so  is  tithing  to  the  king-
dom of  God,  That  is  my  under-
standing, and  if  I  pay  my  tithing  I
come  within  the  promises  and  protec-
tion of  Heaven's  laws,  and  I  am
considered  a  loyal  subject  of  and  a
friend  to  that  government,  I  will
notice  here  a  little  peculiarity  witk
regard  to  tithing.  There  is  not  muck
said  about  it  in  the  New  Testament
Scriptures,  except  mere  allusions;  it
is  the  same  with  regard  to  polygamy;


R ! : WA R I >S  M  VO RDIN G


TO  WORKS — TITHING.


but  you  torn  to  the  Old  Testament
and  you  will  find  that  these  two  sub-
jects run  parallel  one  with  the  other,
and  where  one  exists  the  other  fol-
lows as  a  matter  of  course.  I  might
ask  a  question  here  as  to  what  onr
Savior  meant  when  he  said,  "The
first  shall  he  hist,  and  the  last  shall
be  first."  If  the  first  order  of  things
is  to  lap  over  on  to  us  who  are  en-
gaged in  forming  the  last  and  closing
scenes  of  God's  work  on  earth  per-
taining to  this  dispensation,  the  last
may  tarn  hack;  and  if  the  former
dispensation  forms  the  field  of  our
last  labors  or  under  its  shadows  we
bring  things  to  a  close,  by  and  by  the
reality,  the  substance  may  come*  1
do  not  know  that  we  can  charge  the
Savior  with  fully  when  he  said,  "The
first  shall  be  last  and  tin*  last  shall
be  first,"

Do  I  want  a  mansion  in  vonder
world  that  is  glorious  ?  Then  I  must
Comply  with  the  law  of  Heaven  and
pay  my  tithea  and  bring  my  off -rings
and  prove  to  the  Heavens  that  I  am
a  friend  of  his  government ;  and  that
I  am  willing  to  sacrifice  any  thing  to
please  him  and  to  secure  the  desired
treasure.  You  no  doubt  recollect
reading  in  the  New  Testament  of  a
certain  man  who  found  a  treasure
which  was  hid  in  a  field,  and  he  went
and  sold  all  ho  had  to  purchase  the
entire  field.  It  was  but  a  little  por-
tion of  ground  that  contained  the
treasure,  but  he  was  so  bent  on  se-
curing it  that  he  purchased  the
entire  field.  What  was  that  treasure?
It  was  the  kingdom  of  God.  Some
say  the  gifts  of  God  are  not  pur-
chased with  money,  and  a^ain  some
will  contend  that  they  are.  I  will
■peak  a  word  or  two  upon  this  subject
by  way  of  illustration.  I  suppose
that  in  former  days  they  had  specu-
lators among  them,  somewnatsimilar
to  those  we  have  in  these  days.  Once
»n  a  time  the  inspired  Apostle  laid


his  hands  upon  some  who  had  been
baptized  for  the  remission  of  their
sins,  and  they  received  the  Holy
Ghost. One  Simon  Magus  saw  the

0  per  it ion  and  he  asked  the  Apostle
to  give  him  that  gift,  saying  to  him,
14 1  will  give  you  money  for  it "  Pro-
bably Simon  said  to  himself,  "  I  see
money  in  it,"  as  much  as  some  of  von
do  in  that  mine  ;  "just  give  me  that
gift,  that  upon  whomsoever  I  lay  my
hands  they  may  receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  thus  I  will  accumulate  a
fortune."  Said  Peter,  "Be  it  known
unto  you  that  the  gilts  of  God  are
not.  purchased  with  money,  thy  mo-
ney perish  with  thee,"  etc.  I3u^  then
a^ain,  read  in  another  part  of  the
Scriptures  about  a  certain  steward
who  had  charge  of  his  master1*  goods.
He  was  accused  unto  his  lord  of
wasting  these  goods,  or  of  making
an  improper  use  of  them,  and  he  was
called  to  an  account,  and  informed  by
his  master  that  he  could  no  longer  he
steward.  Said  the  steward,  "  What
shall  I  do  ?  I  am  bound  to  lose  my
place,  and  to  dig  I  can  not,  I  am  not
used  to  it,  and  to  beg  I  am  ashamed;
what  shall  I  do  to  sustain  myself  ?"
This  happy  thought  occurred  to  his
mind — I  will  go  round  now  to  all  mv
lord's  debtors,  and  I  will  say  to  this
one,  "  How  much  owest  thou  to  my
lord?"  u  One  hundred  measures  <»f
wheat/1  Said  the  steward,  "  I  will
forgive  you  fifty. I  am  yet  in  power,

1  am  not  yet  displaced,  take  thy  h  11
and  hit  down  quickly  and  write  fifty."
So  lie  went  and  did  to  all  his  lord's
debtors.  His  lord  saw  what  he  waa
doing  and  called  him  to  account,  and
he  commended  the  unjust  steward  for
his  wisdom  and  shrewdness — he  had
acted  wisely  for  himself.  At  id  no\r
says  the  Savior,  as  if  predicating  a
principle  upon  this  transaction,  "  I
say  unto  you,  make  unto  yourself
friends  with  the  mammon  of  unright-
eousness, that  when  you  fail  you  may


308


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


be  received  into  everlasting  habita-
tions," While  it  is  the  suggestion
of  one  spirit, ,  which  is  the  spirit  of
falsehood,  although  the  truth  may  be
spoken  by  that,  spirit,  yet  God  will
not  own  it,  and  yet  the  same  prin-
ciple spoken  of  by  another  spirit,
which  is  of  God  Heaven  will  own.
What  are  all  the  riches  of  this  world
given  unto  us  for,  but  to  secure  some
mansion  in  yonder  world  that  will  be
glorious,  and  grand  and  worthy  the
noble  and  sacrificing  spirit  that
sought  it?

Well,  we  pay  our  tithing.  What
does  it  consist  of?  One- tenth  of  all
we  posst  ss  at  the  start,  and  then  ever
alter  one-tenth  of  our  annual  income.
If  that  be  one  thousand  dollars  per
annum  you  pay  one  hundred  of  that
in  taxes  to  the  kingdom  of  God.
Say  some,  u  If  it  be  God's  kingdom
we  should  think  it  could  stand  and
roll  nn  without  this  kind  of  backing
or  aid."  I  will  tell  you  that  the  Lord
Almighty  wishes  to  provo  our  fidelity
to  him,  It  is  not  for  his  sake  that
we  pay  tithing,  it  is  for  ours.  Hence
he  says,  "If  I  were  bunry  or  thirsty,
1  would  not  call  upon  them  for  meat
or  drink,  but  I  want  to  prove  you
and  see  whether  you  are  loyal  to  me
or  whether  you  are  rebellious  Hence
bring  your  tithes  and  your  offerings
into  my  storehouse  and  prove  me
now,  herewith,  and  see  if  I  will  not
open  to  you  the  windows  of  heaven
and  pour  you  out  a  blessing  that
there  shall  not  be  room  to  receive,"
We  are  told  by  some  of  the  unbe-
lie  vers  that  we  pay  tithing  and  we
are  dupes  to  fanaticism,  that  we  are
priest-ridden,  and  bound  down  with
galling  chains  of  oppression.  That
same  class  of  persona  will  boast  that
they  pay  no  tithing.  They  are  not
priest-ridden,  they  are  free-born
Ameiican  citizens  and  are  not  subject
to  this  priestly  rule.  Ahem  !  By
and  by  perhaps  these  individuals  go


hence  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail,
and  they  inquire  the  way  to  their
home  or  mans  inn,  and  yonder  t  per-
haps, one  represented  by  the  deserts
of  Sahara  is  pointed  out  to  them,  and
they  are  told — "  There  is  your  home.
You  have  been  eriger  to  grasp  every
blessing  that  flowed  from  the  benefi-
cent hand  of  the  Creator,  but  what
have  you  given  in  return  ?  No  more
than  that  sandy  desert  has  givenf
and  there  is  the  placu  of  your  home.
An  American  citizen,  eh !  Not
priest-ridden,  not  oppressed  so  that
you  have  to  p'iy  tithes  or  taxes  to  the
kingdom  of  Gud  ?"  11  No,  we  do  not
know  any  such  kingdom,"  Well,
brethren  and  sisters,  I  almost  shrink
at  the  task  of  following  this  subject
up.  It  is  a  little  sensational,  but
perhaps  it  might  as  well  be  told,  if
not  in  whole,  at  least  in  part.

We  find  that  there  are  many
worlds  surrounding  us,  revolving  in
their  sphere  and  orbit.  Some  learn,
ed  men  have  pretended  to  say  that
some  of  the  planets  in  our  own  solar
system  are  nothing  but  a  mass  of
liquid  fire,  I  do  not  know  how  true
this  is,  I  can  not  vouch  for  it.  It  is
a  long  time  since  I  wa3  there,  and  I
have  forgotten  much  that  may,  at
some  future  day,  be  brought  to  my
recollection,  when  the  vail  shall  be
parted  from  all  eyes,  and  we  see  as
we  are  seen  and  know  as  we  are
known.  Here  is  my  friend  and  bro-
ther Pratt,  he  is  more  skilled  in
astronomy  than  I  am,  and  if  I  am
guilty  of  an  error,  he  can  correct  me
if  he  sees  fit.  But  some  learned  men
say  that  there  are  worlds  which  roll
in  eternal  night,  not  one  ray  of  light
from  the  grand  central  luminary
penetrating  or  dawning  upon  their
orbit,  but  they  move  in  an  eternal
eclipse — always  dark,  .  1  do  not  know
how  this  is,  but  I  know  that  some
will  come  up  and  want  an  inheri-
tance, and  it  will  be  said  to  them,


REWARDS  ACCORDING  TO  WORKS — TITHING.


309


*'  Depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of
iniquity,  into  everlasting  fire  pre-
pared tor  the  devil  and  bis  angels/1
There  are  some  now  who  love  dark*
ness  rather  than  light  because  their
deeds  are  evil.  I  will  venture  to  say
that  if  some  of  the  zealous  opposers
of  what  is  sometimes  called  **  Mor-
mon ism/1  who  were  once  united  with
us,  could  see  an  improper  step  ma  1c
by  your  humble  servants,  they  would
seize  upon  it  with  the  greatest  avi-
dity, l\  there  was  a  dark  spot  in
my  moral  character,  that  would  be
food  for  them,  I,  or  tny  friend  bro-
ther Pratt,  or  President  Young,  may
have  achieved  worthy  exploits  and
done  great  good>  but  they  pass  by
this,  they  have  no  relish  or  appetite
for  it;  but  the  moment  there  is  a
dark  spot,  either  red  or  imuinary,
they  are  ready  to  sieze  upon  it  with
the  greatest  avidity,  and  roll  it  as  a
sweet  morsel  under  their  tongue,  be-
cause they  are  children  of  darkness
and  love  darkness  rather  than  li^ht.
Now  the  .sun,  the  great  fountain  of
light  of  our  system,  is  said  to  have
dark  spots  on  bis  disc-  I  believe  it
is  So,  but  there  is  orach  light  there,
and  he  throws  his  rays  to  an  immense
distance.  Now,  because  he  has  some
dark  spots  on  him,  shall  we  dispense
with  and  refuse  to  receive  his  light  ?
No,  with  all  the  darkness  he  has  we
love  the  sun,  and  whether  on  sea  or
on  laud  his  rays  are  cheering  an  I
welcome,  n»twiths:anding  the  daik
spoU  that  may  exist  ou  his  tace.  So
in  relation  to  the  servants  of  Go<h
We  may  be  men  of  like  passions  with
others,  but  if  an  additional  halo  of
light  and  glory  burst  upon  us,  and
we  as  reflectors  send  that  abroad
for  the  benefit  of  others,  the  dark  [
spots,  real  or  imaginary,  in  our  char-
acters, should  bo  overlooked,  as  those
of  the  sun  are  overlooked.

Well,  others  besides  those  I  have
referred  to,  come  np and  want


il


mansion.  They  are  asked — "  Have
you  showed  yourselves  friends  to  the
kingdom  of  God  ?"  "No,  we  have
sought  to  hedge  up  its  progress  in
every  way  we  could.  We  have  told
all  the  lies  we  c<>uld  manufacture,  and
sent  them  abroad  on  the  wires  to
create  a  storm  of  indignation  against
it — anything  was  justifiable  to  sup-
press 'M  ^monism.'  We  have  even
twisted  plain,  straightforward  com-
mon sense  law  into  a  ram's  horn,  and
made  it  so  complex  that  neither  we
nor  anyone  else  could  understand  it,
for  the  sole  purpose  of  ensnaring  the
feet  of  the  defenders  of  this  latter-
day  kingdom."  4t  Well,  you  want  a
mansion,  and  you  love  darkness  ra-
ther than  light  because  your  deeds
are  evil  ?"  "  Yes."  f  Well,  yonder
is  your  home,  in  that  world  that  rolls
in  eternal  eclipse."  "And  the>e
tihall  go  away,*'  says  the  Bible,  *•  into
outer  darkness,  where  there  shall  be
weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of
teeth."  D^ell  in  eternal  night!
Oh,  ye  sons  of  rebellion,  ye  d  aughters
of  departure,  contemplate  the  char-
acter of  your  future  home!  Turn
from  your  ways,  seek  unto  the  Lord
God  of  Israel,  and  know  ye  that
mortal  man  here  on  earth  is  nob  per-
fect I  do  not  know  that  the  nrrgels
of  God  are  perfect,  I  rather  quesiioa
it,  You  question  the  perfection  of
the  angels  of  God  ?  A  little,  for
the  Bible  says  that  God  charges  his
angels  will)  lolly.  If  the  angels  are
charged  with  folly  by  him  who  sits
on  the  throne,  with  much  more  pro-
priety may  mortals  who  are  at  a
greater  distance  from  the  central
government  be  charged  with  the
SHine.  1  will  tell  you  that  this  is  a
singular  kin  1  of  a  world,  and  the
machinery  of  man  is  very  singular
ami  c  duplex,  an  i  il  rei[  i i res  i  he  wis-

dom  of  God  to  know  and  understand
everything  in  relation  to  it,  or  even
a  small  portion  of  it.


310  JOURNAL  OF

I  might  go  on  and  point  out  the
different  characters,  bat  having  given
you  two  or  three  examples,  you  must
diftw  your  own  inference  in  relation
to  the  condition  hereafter  ot  every
living  being,  "  Why,"  says  one,  ia  I
expect  to  go  into  the  celestial  king-
dom." You  do  ?  That  is  the  high-
est  grade  ot  glory  that  we  have  any
knowledge  of.  Put  you  or  me  into
a  place  that  we  are  not  qualified  to
fill,  and  is  it  a  heaven  or  a  hell  to  usr
For  instance,  there  are  many  heavy
mercantile  firms  in  this  city.  An
upright  man,  full  of  charity  and
good  works,  applies  at  the  counting
house  of  one  of  these  large  establish-
ments for  a  berth  as  chief  clerk,  to
keep  their  financial  affairs  properly
posted  up.  He  knows  nothing  about
figures  or  about  wielding  the  pen,
but  he  is  a  good  man.  lift  the
weight  of  responsibility  gradually
descend  and  fall  upon  him,  and  he
•ays,  "I  am  crushed,  I  can  not  do
anything  with  this  position,  Oh  deli-
ver me  from  this  place!'*  Huw
often  do  we  hear  men  say,  11 1  am
going  to  be  a  ruler  in  the  kingdom
of  God."  The  presumption  is  that
such  men  po^ess  certain  necessary
qualifications.  To  be  a  ruler  without
the  qualifications  for  one,  is  to  re-
ceive an  exalted  position  to  become  a
mark  of  ridicule  for  all  beholders.  I
will  tell  you  that  to  put  you  or  me
in  a  place  that  we  ate  not  qualified
to  fill,  it  is  a  bell  tor  us,  instead  of  a
place  of  honor  and  exaltation,  and  1
feel  that  I  have  no  time  to  lo>e  in
preparing  and  qualifying  myself  to
lea ru  first  to  be  a  suljecf.  It  1  can
not  submit  to  be  a  subject,  huw  can
I  ever  expect  to  be  a  ruler  ?  If  I
have  not  regard  enough  for  the  king-
dom of  Cud  to  comply  with  its  re*
qunerrunfs  and  laws  and  to  pay  my
tithing,  but  show  myself  disloyal  all
my  lite,  how  can  1  expect  to  be
elevated  us  a  ruler  in  that  kingdom


DISCOURSES,

that  has  no  end  ? I  can  not  expect

I  will  now  repeat  what  I  said  be-
fore—  the  celestial  kingdom  is  the
seat  of  all  science,  and  like  a  great
tree  whose  shadow  reaches  our  earth,
true  science  emanates  thence,  where
it  exists  in  its  most  refined  and  pure
state,  down  here  to  our  earth.  Now,
unless  we  go  to  and  establish  schools
to  educate  ourselves  and  our  children
in  all  the  shadows  that  are  reflected
upon  our  earth,  bow  can  we  manage
the  substance  ?  As  it  is  said,  u  He
that  is  unfaithful  in  the  unrighteous
mammon,  who  shall  commit  to  his
trust  the  true  riches?"  And  if  we
are  unfaithful  to  the  shadows,  who
will  commit  to  us  the  golden  beams
of  purity,  intelligence  and  love,  even
the  sciences  as  they  exist  in  the
celestial  kingdom  ?  It  is  for  us  to
look  at  and  reflect  upon  these  things,
and  to  devote  ourselves  to  the  acqui-
sition of  knowledge.

This  city  is  becoming  a  fashionable
city,  I  see  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  copying  the  fashions  of  the
out  bide  woild.  I  love  to  See  inno-
cence, purity,  cleanliness  and  all  this,
and  I  would  rather  have  disclosed  to
me,  in  the  visions  of  one  night's
sleep,  the  true  principles  of  godliness
as  they  exist  on  the  other  side  uf  the
vail,  than  to  have  all  the  pride  and
fashion  that  decorate  these  poor
mortal  bodies,  fe*r  one  view  of  eternal
things  throws  into  the  shade  all
earthly  grandeur  and  glory.  This  is
what  I  delight  in.  Brethren  and
sisters,  let  us  pay  our  tithing,  that
we  may  earn  an  inheritance  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  we  shall  find
that  our  loyalty  in  this  shape  will
actually  purchase  us  an  everlasting
inheritance.

Says  one,  u  What  becomes  of
tithing?  I  would  like  to  know
whether  these  Priests,  Apostles,
Bishops  and  Presidents  use  it  all  up


REWARDS  ACCORDING


TO  WORKS — TlTHINCi.


311


in  extravagance  ?"  I  will  tell  yoo
where  it  goes,  though  I  am  tinder  no
obligation  to  do  so,  any  more  than  I
am  to  tell  what  is  done  with  the
money  I  pay  to  the  tax  collector,  or
the  internal  revenue  man.  When
yon  go  to  the  marriage  altar,  or  to
be  baptized  for  yourselves  or  for  your
dead  relatives,  or  to  get  your  sealings
and  anointings,  or  anything  of  this
kind,  do  yon  have  to  pay  five  shillings
or  five  dollars  for  officiating  for  your
father  or  mother  who  is  dead  and
gone,  that  they  may  share  the  bene-
fits of  the  everlasting  Gospel  with
yon,  or  are  those  ordinances  free  to
you  ?  You  do  not  hare  to  pay  for
them,  do  you  ?  Do  you  find  beggars
in  the  streets  of  Zion  ?  I  have  tra-
veled through  many  countries  in  the
old  world,  and  1  could  hardly  pass  a
corner,  without  hearing  the  petition
— u  A  penny  if  you  please,  a  penny,
a  penny.  My  mother  is  at  home
sick,  got  a  little  baby  and  c  mnot  get
out,  and  they  are  afflicted.  Oh,
please  sir,  a  penny,  a  sixpence  to
help  the  n  !"  No  such  scenes  in  this
country.  I  have  seen  nothing  of  the
kind,  and  I  question  very  much  whe-
ther you  have.  In  those  old  coun-
tries beggary  is  going  on  in  five
hundred  different  ways,  but  you  do
not  see  any  of  it  here.  What  stops
np  all  these  channels  of  distress?'
Tithing — the  taxes  you  pay  to  the
kingdom  of  God.  The  tittle  child's
mother  is  provided  for,  if  her  Bishop
looks  after  her,  and  the  presumption
is  that  he  does.  These  lit  tie  children
are  cared  for.  Is  there  any  real
poveity  in  our  land  ?  There  may
be,  but  really  the  cases  are  tew  and
far  between.  Al!  are  well  fed,  all
comfortably  clad,  and  wherein  they
are  unable  to  do  it  themselves,  t tie
tithing  department  pays.

We  may  think  that  we  are  going
to  get  atl  our  sea  lings,  anointings  ,
our  marriages  and  every  tiling  of  that


kind  free,  but  we  are  mistaken  about
that — we  have  got  to  pay  for  them
all.  How  do  you  pay  ?  Tithing
and  offerings  to  the  kingdom  of  God
pay  for  it  all.  Then  when  you  come
up  to  have  accounts  adjusted,  and  the
books  are  opened,  and  another  book
is  opened  and  the  dead  are  judged
out  of  those  things  written  in  the
books  according  to  their  works,  they
have  paid  the  charges,  and  that
which  they  claim  is  their  own,  it  is
given  to  them  of  God.  Nut  so  with
the  world,  they  oidy  marry  for  time.
I  have  married  a  great  many  couples
in  the  ways  of  the  world,  but  I  never
married  any  of  them  for  time  and  for
all  eternity,  my  mind  did  not  stretch
so  far  then — I  married  them  until
death  should  separate  then.  Those
who  have  piid  no  tithing  and  have
not  enlisted  under  the  law  and  com-
mand men  ts  of  God,  those  who  have
had  no  faith  i:i  Jehovah  and  in  the
resurrection,  are  parted  when  they  go
down  to  the  grave.  Farewell  to  nil
alliance  then!  They  have  raised
families  of  lovely  children,  they  have
passed  tli rough  sorrow,  tribulation
and  joy,  tasted  the  sweet  and  the
bitter  together,  but  when  they  renob
the  grave  fatewell  forever,  an  eter-
nal separation  takes  place.  Not  so
with  the  Latter-day  Sain  s*  We  are
administered  to  by  the  authority  of
that  priesthood  that  is  wit  lion t  be-
ginning of  days  or  end  of  life,  whose
ministration  is  just  as  efficient  the
other  side  of  the  vail  as  this  side,  for
what  it  binds  on  earth  is  bound  in
heaven,  and  what  it  looses  on  earth
is  loosed  in  heaven.  If  we  have  not
a  priesthood  possessing  this  power
and  authority  we  have  none  at  all.
We  chum  that  we  have,  and  it  cannot
he  found  anywhere  tlse.  If  we  s<o
to  the  Presbyterian  church,  with  all
respect  to  its  ministers  and  people,
and  ask,  "  Do  your  ministrations
reach  beyond  the  vad  r Can  you


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


marry  for  time  and  for  all  eternity?"
We  urc  told,  *'  No,"  And  every
other  sect  in  Christendom  will  my
the  >  \me.  They  could  just  as  easily
argue  me  out  of  my  existence  as  to
convince  mo  that  the  mmistra!  ions
of  cay  ptiesthood  do  not  reach  within
the  vail  of  eternity,  and  run  parallel
with  the  great  God  himself,  because
that  priesthood  comes  from  Gor1,  and
Heaven  can  not  destroy  his  own
power,  unless  he  destroy  himself,  and


that  he  will  not  do,  he  will  not  be
guilty  of  suicide.  This  is  the  supe-
riority of  the  Priesthood  that  is  con-
ferred upm  the  Latter-day  Saints;
and  although  we  have  this  treasure
in  earthen  vessels,  and  are  despised
and  rejected,  there  is  a  purity  and  an
eternal  principle  embraced  therein
which- will  last  until  the  heavens  are
no  mote.

God  bless  you,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON Pit  ATT,

Delivered  rs  the  14th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Evening,  Jaw.  10,  1873,

(Repotted  by  David  IF,  Evans.)


DIFFERENT  DEGKEES  OF  REWARD  AND  OF  PUNISHMENT— MARRIAGE  FOR
ETERNITY  NEC  ESS  Alt  V  TO  A  FULLNESS  OF  CELESTIAL  GLORY,

I  do  not  know  when  I  was  more  |  there  is  a  great  variety  of  gifts  and
eddied  and  instructed  than  I  was  this  talents,  and  it  gives  rne  great  pleasure
afternoon  in  listening  to  (hu  discourse  ,  to  listen  to  them,  and  it  would  be  with
of  Elder  Hyde,  According  to  my  \  great  satisfaction  that  I  would  li^tea
judgment  it  was  certainly  calculates  i  more  than  I  do*  But  I  am  frequently
in  its  nature  to  edi'y  find  instruct  ,  called  upon  to  address  the  people
every  person  who  listened  t)  it  with  when  I  would  prefer  to  listen  to
attention. It  was  delivered  in  c!u  ut!jer.$.

qaent  language,  was  plain  and  aim-  What  sdject  I  may  present  before
pie,  pointed  and  definite,  and,  if  you  to-night  I  do  n  *t  know.  Some-
obeyed,  was  calculated  to  do  good  to  j  times  a  su; ject  wil!  opt*u  to  my  mind
all-  while  I  am  listening  to  the  singers,

The  L  »rd  has  appointed  a  ruriety  and  sometimes  I  ris  *  with  rat  having
of  gifts  in  his  kingdom,  aomfelftving  .  the  first  tiling  before  my  min  i  to
one  and  some  another,  and  especially  ;  speak  to  the  peopV,  an  I  I  trns*  in
in  the  Quorum  »>f  the  Twelve,  of  God  to  give  ma  what  is  needful  at
which  Brother  Hyde  is  the  President,  I  the  very  moment. T!i»s  is  the  c  tse


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  REWARD,  ETC*


with  me  this  evening  and  I  do  hum-
bly pray  to  my  Father  in  heaven,  in
the  name  of  his  beloved  Son,  that
he  will  grant  unto  me  the  Spirit  to
discern  what  to  say  and  what  would
be  most  adapted  to  the  wants  oF
those  who  are  present.  There  is  such
a  vast  riell  of  light  and  truth  which
God  has  revealed  in  different  atres  of
the  world,  and  more  especially  in  our
times,  that  the  great  difficulty  wi>h
the  servant  of  God,  1  have  often
thought,  is  to  distinguish  and  discern
what  portion  c;f  the  great  variety
would  be  most  pleasing  in  the  sight
of  the  Lord  to  lay  before  the  people.

There  are  a  great  many  peculiar-  1
ities  in  oar  religion,  but  the  gene-
ral Ify  of  the  Latter*day  Saints  are
well  acquainted  witli  them.  Some-
times strangers  attend  our  meetings  ■
who  would  be  glad  to  have  us  dwell
upon  certain  subjects,  which  they
think  would  greatly  interest  them.
We  are  willing  to  do  so,  but  stdl  we
study  to  have  the  Spirit  to  edify  all,
whether  they  he  in  the  Church,  or
whether  they  be  strangers  who  are
here  on  a  visiL  '

Among  the  peculiar  ities  which  God
has  revealed  directly  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints  may  be  mentioned  the
various  degrees  of  happiness  and
glory  which  oxUt  in  the  eternal  world,
alsii  the  various  degrees  of  punish-'
merit  upon  the  different  classes  of  j
individuals.  Formerly,  before  we
became  Latter-d  y  Saints,  we  were
instructed  by  our  fathers  and  mothers,
and  by  the  ministers  whom  we  heard,
that  there  were  but  two  places  in  the
eternal  wot  Ids,  one  or  the  ot  her  of
which  was  intended  tor  all  the  hu-
man  family ;  that  ail  that  happened
to  miss  heaven  would  be  sent  to  the
other  place,  which  they  called  hell.
This  subject  was  dwelt  upon  very
lengthily  and  very  interestingly  by
Brother  Hyde  this  afternooft,  and
during  his  remarks  he  told  about !


the  different  mansions  that  God  had
in  reserve  for  all  the  human  family,
some  of  which  are  glorious,  and
others  intended  as  places  of  punish-
ment. These  things  were  dwelt  upon
very  fully  by  Brother  Hyde,  iu  some
respects,  but  there  were  some  items
connected  with  (hern  that  were  not
fn  11  v  investigated  and  laid  before  the
people.  *I  r'

The  way  that  we  obtained  a  more
perfect  knowledge  of  the  future  con-
dition of  the  children  of  men  was  by
revelation ;  indeed  all  the  knowledge
that  ever  mankind  did  obtain  iu  rela-
tion to  this  matter  was  by  revelation^
We  read  in  Paul's  first  epistle  to  the
Corinthians  something  about  the  dif-
ferent glories  connected  with  the
resurrection  of  the  dead.  We  are
told  in  the  reasoning  of  Paul  that
when  people  come  forth  Irom  the
dead,  same  wil!  inherit  one  glory  and
some  another;  and  these  glories  are
ty  pitied  by  the  various  creations
which  the  Lord  had  made.  Paul
says,  *'  there  is  one  glory  of  the  son,
another  gloiy  of  the  mo<  n,  and  an-
other glory  of  the  stars,  and  that  as
one  star  d.ffers  from  another  star  iu
glory,  so  also  is  the  resurrection  of
the  dead."

We  are  also  told  in  the  Scriptures
that  there  is  a  great  variety  of  pun-
ishments as  well  as  glories — these
punishments  di tiering  in  nature  ac-
cording to  the  works  of  the  children
of  men.  For  instance  we  read  of
some  persons  who  are  to  be  punished
for  sins  they  have  committed  with-
out any  chance  of  forgiveness  either
in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to
come.  This  phi  inly  indicates  to  ns
that  cettain  classes  of  sins  can  not
be  forgiven  in  that  world,  while
other  classes  of  sins  may  be  forgiven
on  certain  conditions.  He  that  sins
against  the  Holy  Ghost%  we  are  told,
shall  not  receive  forgiveness.  Men
can  sin  against  God  the  Father,  and


3U


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


if  they  repent  in  this  world,  they
may  be  forgiven  ;  if  they  sin  against
Jesus  his  Son,  and  repent  and  work
the  works  of  righteousness,  these
sins  may  bo  blotted  out;  but  if  they
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  after  hav-
ing received  the  same  and  been
baptised  by  him,  there  is  no  for-
giveness for  that  sin,  neither  in
this  world  nor  in  the  world  to  come.

Now  if  there  is  to  be  a  variety  of
punishments  as  well  as  ;t  variety  of
glories,  there  must  be  a  variety  of
places  of  punishment  It  would
look  inconsistent  to  us,  even  here  in
this  life,  to  Bee  a  person  guilty  of  hut
a  small  crime  against  the  laws  of  our
country  thrust  into  the  same  dungeon
with  the  murderer.  It  would  he
unjust,  for  instance,  according  to  our
notions,  for  a  person  who  has  com-
mitted but  a  t lifting  offence  against
the  law  to  be  thrust  into  the  darkest
and  deepest  dungeon  along  with  hi  no
who  has  shed  innocent  blood.  We
have  sufficient  justice  in  our  own
bosoms  to  classify  these  individuals
and  to  point  out  to  each  (he  apart-
ment in  which  he  is  to  dwell.  Is  the
Lord  less  just  than  man  ?  Is  he
not  filled  with  the  great  principles
of  justice  far  beyond  that  which  any
man  ever  did  receive?  From  him
have  emanated  all  our  ideas  of  jus-
tice, consequently  we  cannot  look
upon  him  as  a  being  who  *vould  con-
sign the  poor  he  athen  who  died  with-
out a  knowledge  of  the  law,  and
Others  who  have  led  moral  lives  but
who  have  not  obeyed  the  Gospel  of

the  Son  of  God,  to  the  same  puuith-
inent  as  the  murderer  and  him  who
sheds  innocent  blood.  We  should
regard  it  as  unjust  if  all  these  classes
were  to  be  thrust  into  one  place,  there
to  welter  under  the  same  conditions
of  punishment  throughout  the  end-
lese  ages  of  eternity  without  any
hope  of  redemption.  I  could  not
look  upon  this  as  just,  and  I  pre-


sume that  no  other  reflecting  being
could,  especially  if  he  was  acquain-
ted with  the  Scriptures.  Jesus,  in
speaking  upon  this  subject,  says —
"  He  that  knows  his  masters  will
and  does  it  not  shall  be  beaten  with
many  stripes  ;  "  while  he  who  is  ig-
norant of  his  master's  will  arid  does
things  that  are  worthy  of  stripes,
shall  be  beaten  with  few,  I  have
not  quoted  the  saying  of  Jesus,  word
for  word,  but  I  have  given  you  the
sentiment ;  the  Lord,  therefore,  in
judging  man,  judges  not  by  the  act
in  all  cases,  but  according  to  the
understanding  and  knowledge  of
the  individual  wh  »  performs  that
act  If  two  persons  were  each  to
commit  a  murder — shed  innocent
blood — and  one  had  a  full  know-
ledge of  the  revealed  law  of  God,  and
the  other  was  in  entire  ignorance  of
it,  there  would  be  a  distinction  in
judging  these  two  characters.  We
would  say  at  once  that  he  who  bad
sinne  l  uu  dnst  knowledge  should
receive  a  heavier  punishment  than  he
who  had  not  this  knowledge.

Suppose  that  Saints,  who  have
not  only  heard  the  law  of  God,  but
have  embiaced  the  Gospel  of  the
Son  of  God,  have  been  renewed  in
their  minds  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost  and  have  tasted  the
good  word  of  God  and  the  powers  of
the  world  to  come,  should  be  so  far
overcome  as  to  shed  innocent  blood,

would  there  be  any  forgiveness  for

t  hem  ?  Not  at  all.  Would  it  be  our
duty,  if  such  a  person  were  judged,
and  condemned  by  the  laws  of  our
country  to  be  hanged  by  the  neck
until  dead,  U»  visit  him  and  pray
that  Go  i  would  forgive  his  sins  ?
No,  we  would  be  sinning  against
God  in  doing  so.  Why  ?  Because
God  has  revealed  to  us  that  persons
who  have  this  light  and  knowledge,
and  she  J  innocent  blood,  cannot  be
forgiven  in  this  world  nor  in  the


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  REWARD,  ETC


315


world  to  come,  and  we  ahould  not
ask  him  to  do  that  which  he  has  de-

creed  that  he  will  not  do.  Such  a
person  commits  the  unpardonable
sin — he  sheds  innocent  blood  after
having  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
knowing  that  in  so  doing  he  is  not
only  sinning  against  God  the  Father
and  against  his  Son,  but  against  the
convictions  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

Supposing,  again,  that  persons
outside  of  this  Church,  that  have
heard  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
but  have  refused  to  obey  it,  should
murder,  they  sin  against  great  light
and  knowledge,  but  not  against  the
Holy  Ghost.  Here  is  the  diflVrer.ce
between  the  two  classes  of  murderers;
the  Latter-day  Saint  would  never  be
forgiven,  but  he  would  become  a  son
of  perdition,

Now  let  me  bring  up  some  in-
stances  from  Scripture  in  regard  to
these  different  classes  of  individuals
and  the  light  and  knowledge  which
they  had.  Some  may  be  forgive  r.,
as  I  have  already  stated,  in  the
world  to  come.  Let  me  refer  you  to
a  certain  class  that  are  named  in
the  Scriptures  that  will  be  forgiven
on  certain  conditions.  You  recol-
lect that  the  Apostle  Peter,  having
gathered  around  him  a  Wge  con-
gregation of  Jews,  the  murderers  of
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
who  had  shed  innocent  blood,  de-
livered to  them  a  discourse,  but  it
was  a  very  different  one  to  that
which  he  preached  to  the  mixed
multitude  who  hnd  gathered  from
the  different  nations  on  the  Day  of
Pentecost.  When  he  preached  to
the  latter  be  said,  *l  Repent,  every
one  of  you,  and  be  baptized  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  re  mis-
sion  of  your  sins,  and  you  shall
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,

for  the  promise  is  unto  you  and  your
children,  and  unto  all  that  are  afar
off,  even  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our


Cnd  shall  call."  That  was  a  true
Gospel  sermon,  preached  to  individ-
uals that  were  not  guilty  of  murder.
They  were  all  required  to  repent,

I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  bap-
tized in  water  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  they  and  all  who  were  afar
off,  who  would  receive  the  Gospel,
were  premised  the  forgiveness  of  sins
and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
But  come  to  the  other  sermon  to
which  I  have  referred,  the  one
preached  to  the  wicked  and  corrupt
Jews  who  crucified  Jesus.  Peter
said,  we  wot  not  but  what  yon  have
done  it  through  your  ignorance  -
in  other  words,  you  have  not  re:

\  ceived  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  because
you  have  not  had  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  resting  upon  you,  you  have

I  shed  the  blood  of  the  Innocent  One,
you  have  murdered  the  Son  of  God,
the  Messiah  ;  but  you  have  done  it
through  ignorance. Nu\v  the  ques-

|  tmn  is,  was  there  any  hope  for  them?

•  Could  they  have  their  sins  forgiven

j  in  this  life?  No,  Peter,  afrer  first
telling  them  that  they  had  >hed  the
fell ><id  of  the  Just  One  in  their  igno-
rance, then  tells  them  how  and  when
they  may  obtain  forgiveness,  I  will
repeat  the  words  :  *L  Repent  }e,  there-
fore, and  be  converted" — no  bap*
tism  here — **  repent  ye,  therefore,
and  be  converted  that  your  sins
may  be  blotted  out,  when  he  shall
send  Jesus  Christ,  which  before  was
preached  unto  you,  whom  the  hea-
vens must  rece  ve  until  the  times
of  the  restitution  of  all  things  spo-
ken of  by  the  month  of  all  the
Holy  Prophets  since  the  world  be-
gan/' He  did  not  tell  them  to  be
baptized  f  >r  the  remission  of  their
sins.  Why  ?  Because  he  understood
too  well  the  nature  of  their  sin  to
tell  them  to  be  baptized  for  the  re-
mission thereof-  He  knew  they
had  lost  that  privilege  in  this  world,

I  becouse  they  had  shed  the  blood  of


316


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  Holy  and  Just  One,  He  said  to
them,  If  you  will  repent  now,  you
murderers,  you  who  have  killed
Jesus,  the  Just  and  Hoi}  Que,  there
is  one  hope  that  even  your  sins  nny
be  blotted  out.  "Nut  in  this  life,  not
by  baptism  for  the  remission  of
sin?,  but  when  th«  time  of  refresh-
ing shall  come  from  the  presence  of
tbe  Lord  and  lie  shall  send  Jesus
Christ,  whom  the  heavens  will  re-
ceive until  rhen,  and  not  even
then  unless  they  repent  while'  here


phet  and  Revelator,  he  was  filled
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  spoke  as
he  was  moved  upon  by  that  Spirit.
God  loved  him,  and  said  that  he
was  a  man  after  his  own  heart.  God
also  blessed  him,  while  but  a  ruddy
youth,  fleeing  from  cave  to  cave,  and
from  mountain  to  moon  tain  to  es-
cape from  tlm  persecutions  of  S  iulf
who  sought  to  take  his  life,  with
eight  wives.  This  was  before  be  was
placed  upon  the  throna  But  afier
Saul  had been cut  off  and  David


in  this  life. This  must  have  been  had  been  elevated  to  the  throne  of


sorrowful  news  to  those  to  whom  it
was  communicated,  if  they  believed

u  Repent  and  be  converted/'  No-
tice now  what  this  sentence  means*


9  the  Lord  also  gave  hi  in  all
the  wives  of  Saul  his  master  So
says  N  it  ban  the  Prophet,  and  he
was  sent  to  reprove  Divid.  What
had he dorse to need  reproof?


ihe  word "converted" has been  j  Why  he  had  taken  bis  neighbor's


construed  to  be  born  of  God/'  or  to
become  a  new  creature;  but  the  true
meaning  of  the  word  is  to  reform
our  lives,  converted  from  doing  that
which  is  evil  to  do  that  which  is
good — turning  from  sin  and  trans-
gression to  that  which  is  righteous
before  God,  if  those  Jews  would
repent  and  turn  or  be  converted  from
their  sins  to  do  that  whic'i  was  right
they  had  a  hope  of  having  their  sins
blotted  out  when  Jesus  should  be
sent  from  the  presence  of  the  Father
in  the  times  of  restitution;  but  until
then  they  must  remain  in  torment,
suffering  (or  their  sins.

Let  me  bring  up  another  instance.
There  was  a  man  in  ancient  times,
named  David,  and  because  he  was


man


God'i


I  own  heart  the


wifi*,  a person he  had no  claim
upon,  and he  not  only  committed
adultery  by  thiis  taking  the  wife  of
another,  bnt  by  his  order  her  law.
Jul  husband  was  placed  in  front  of
the  battle  that  he  mi  j  lit  be  destroy,
ed,  and he  was  destroyed,  hence,
{hough  he  himself  did  nut  thrust  a
dagger  to  his  heart,  he  became  a
murderer  in  the  bight  of  heaven  by
having  this  man  placed  where  his
blood  would  be  shed. After  all  his
goodness,  and after  all the  light
and knowledge which God  had
given  to  this  man,  be  committed
these two great crimes,  Nathan
the  Prophet  was  sent  to  reprove
him  for  them,  and  he  did  so  by
means  of  a  parable. He  told  Divid,
the  king,  that  a  certain  poor  mau


J  l , * ' HI ,W  JjrvjTJj  WflU

L  >rd  chose  him to  be  king  over had  but  one  ewe  lamb,  and  his  rich


Israel  The  L  ad  also  givatly  Lles^«
this  man, and poured  out  richly

upon  him  the  spirit of  prophecy  j  and  the  rich  man  went
and revelation, and  many  of  his  |  man's  fold  and  took  t
psalms, which we  now  sins  with
so  much  pleasure  in  our  meetings, make  a  sumpiun
contain  prophecies  relating  to  the
most  remote  generations  of  the  hu-
man family. This  man  was  a  Pro-


neigh b  r,  close  by,  had  a  great  Hock,
and  there  came  along  a  stranger,

to  this  poor
the  only  sheep
he  had  and  dressed  it  in  order  to

tor  the


stranger.


This  kindled  David's
wrath,  for  though  he  had  trans-
gressed, the  principle  of  justice  was


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  REWARP,  LTt\


317


not  extinct  in  his  bosom,  and  be
said,  ifc  He  who  hath  done  this  thing
■li'il  I  surely  die.'*  Nathan  said,
"  Thou  art  the  man."  God  hath
given  to  thee  a  great  number  of
wiws,  among  the  rest  all  the  wives
of  tb j  master  Saul.  All  this  great
fiuck  of  sheep*  as  it  were,  has  been
given  unto  you  from  the  Lord,  yet
yon  bate  gone  and  taken  the  only
one  that  a  pour  man  had,  and  com-
mitted adultery  with  her,  therefore
Bfii  1  the  Lord,  I  will  punish  you.
With  what  kind  of  punishment  was
this  man  punished  ?  Amongst  them
was  that  of  fciuffeiing  in  the  eternal
worlds.  How  long?  J  ca  .  not  say
exactly,  but  a  good  many  centuries,
a  thousand  years  at  least ;  this  man,
once  righteous,  now  wicked,  had  to
suffer  the  penalty  of  that  crime*
Did  he  repent?  He  did.  Did
he  cry  unto  the  Lord  ?  He  did
Was  he  sorely  troubled  ?  He  was,
and  he  was  perhaps  as  repentant
as  any  one  could  be ;  but  the  decree
had  gone  forth,  and  hence  that  man
had  to  endure  the  penalty  of  his
crime*  Peter,  when  referring  to  this
subject  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  as
recorded  in  the  second  chapter  of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  quotes  from
the  Psalms  of  David,  and  says,
**  Thou  hast  not  lefl  my  soul  in  hell,
neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy
One  to  see  corruption."  It  seems  that
after  .:.!,  though  David's  repentance
could  not  wipe  away  his  sin,  yet  he
had  a  hope,  and  he  looked  tor  ward
to  the  time  when  he  would  be  libe-
rated from  hell;  when  that  time
arrived  he  would  come  forth  and
receive  some  kind  of  a  glory,  how
much  I  do  not  know,  for  it  is  not
repealed;  but  suffice  it  to  say,  he
sinned  against  great  light  and  know-
ledge  and  because  of  his  sin  he  fell
from  a  very  high  position.  That  be
had  received  many  of  the  principles
that  are  now  understood  by  the  Lat-


ter-day Saints  under  the  new  and
everlasting  covenant,  I  doubt;  for  if
he  had  he  never  could  have  been  re-
deemed, he  never  could  have  said,
M  Thou  wilt  redeem  my  soul  from
hell,"  etc.

Let  as  refer  to  some  other  instan-
ces. There  were  the  Lamanites,  a
people  who,  according  to  the  Book  of
Mormon,  had  dwindled  in  ignorance
on  this  American  continent  before
Christ  came.  They  had  dwelt  here
for  centuries,  and  before  the  coming
of  our  Savior  they  were  sunk  in  the
depths  of  ignorance.  They  had  lost
the  knowledge  ot  the  principles  of
salvation,  and  they  had  become  a
very  ignorant,  wicked,  idolatrous  peo-
ple The  Nephites,  an  enlightened
nation  which  dwelt  on  this  continent
at  the  same  time,  sent  missionaries
to  the  Lamanites  to  convert  them,
if  possible,  from  their  sins.  .They
went  amongst  them  and  had  much
success,  bringing  a  event  many  thou-
sands of  them  to  a  knowledge  of  the
truth.  This  nation  had  heen  taught,
in  their  ignorance  and  wickedness,
that  there  was  no  harm  in  murdering
the  Nephites,  and  they  had  murdered
them  while  in  ignorance  of  the  law  of
God  ;  but  when  the  Gospel  was  laid
before  them,  could  they  obtain  for-
giveness for  these  murders?  On
certaio  conditions,  and  one  of  them
was  that  they  would  lay  down  their
weapons  of  war,  and  they  did  so,
burying  them  deep  in  the  earth  as  a
testimony  before  God  that  they
would  no  more  shed  innocent  blood;
and  through  their  great  sorrow  and
repentance  the  Lord  had  compassion
upon  them,  and  he  forgave  in  this
life  the  sins  they  had  committed  in
ignorance.  That  showed  that  mur-
derers, under  certain  conditions,  could
be  forgiven  here;  but  there  are  other
classes  of  murderers  for  whose  for-
giveness in  this  life  it  would  be  very
wrong  to  pray,  even  if  tiiey  never


318


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


had  received  the  Holy  Ghost — I  mean
those  who  have  read  and  understood
the  revested  law. To  pray  for  pre-
sent forgiveness  would  be  contrary  to
the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and  hence
it  would  be  sinning  against  him.  I
believe  I  have  said  sufficient  to  show
the  principle  upon  which  the  Lord
acts  in  punishing  the  sins  of  the
children  of  men. Now  let  me  say  a
few  words  in  relation  to  their  coming  I
forth  and  redemption.

I  will  her*1  ask,  will  many  of  these
individuals  who  have  sinned  against
Odd  come forth and  inherit  (hat
high  degree  of  exaltation  in  the  celes-
tial world  ? This  is  a  great  question.  I
Can  they  inherit  the  same  glory  that
will  be  enjoyed  by  the  Saints  who
have  lived  in  different  ages  of  the
world  and  endured  faithful to  the
end  ? Can  they  receive  that  fu*I  ex-
alt at  inn  and  shine  forth  in  the  king-
dom of  God? No. Why  not?  Be-
cause they  are  not  prepared  for  it,  I
do  not  say  but  wh:it  they  may  in
some  future  age,  according  to  the
purposes  of  God,  ho  led  along  from
one  step  to  anothet,  until,  finally,
some  of  them  attain  to  celestial  glory.
We  Latter- day  Saints  believe  that
when  the  Lord  comes  he  will  redeem
the  heathen nations, not  into  his
presence, into  celestial glory,  but
they will come forth from  their
graves  ;  not  with  celestial  bodies  and
prepared  to  wear  a  celestial  crown,  to
ibine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom
of  their  Father. No;  such  a  glory
they  cannot  have,  but  they  will  have
a  glory  adapted  to  the  light  and
knowledge  which  they  have  bad,  and
that  glory  is  typified  by  the  moon.
c<  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  ano-
ther glory  of  the  moon,  and  another
glory  of  the  stars,  and  as  one  star
differeth  from  another  star  in  glory,
ao  also  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."
Vow,  there  is  quite  a  difference  among
these  celestial  bodies  that  shine  in  the


firmament.  The  sun  is  far  more
glorious  than  the  moon,  so  much  so
that  astronomers  tell  us  it  would  take
several  hundred  thousand  full  moons
to  make  a  light  equal  to  the  lii/ht  of
the  sun;  in  other  words,  if  all  our
visible  firmament  from  the  horizon
was  just  one  glare  of  moons,  all  this
would  not  be  equal  to  the  light  of
the  sun,  consequently  you  can  form
an  idea  of  the  difference  between  the
glory  of  the  sun  and  the  glory  of  the
moon. '  i f  t

Again,  when  we  look  upon  those
twinkling  stars  in  the  firmament  of
heaven,  we  see  some  shining  with
a  much  greater  brilliancy  than  others,
and  they  are  divided  into  cl  »sses  by
astronomers,  and  ranked  according
to  their  magnitude,  or  according  to
the  intensity  of  the  light  they  shed
forth  upon  our  world,  not  according
to  the  real  nature  of  the  stars,  be-
cause they  are  too  far  off  for  us  to
judge  of  that,  only  we  know  that
they  are  suns,  the  centres  of  system?,
and  that  they  shine  by  their  omi
radiance ;  and  if  we  were  as  near  to
them  as  we  are  to  our  sun,  tnanj  of
them  would  be  far  more  resplendent
in  their  glory,  and  would  shed  forth
more  light  than  our  sun  does.  But
the  Apostle  Paul  in  speaking  on  this
.subject  had  reference  to  the  glory  of
the  stars  as  they  appear  to  us,  and
to  the  amount  of  light  which  they
seem  to  send  forth.

Now  those  persons  who  receive  a
glory  like  that  of  the  stars,  or  as  the
light  of  the  stars  appears  to  us,  will
not  come  up  to  that  glory  enjoyed
by  the  heathen/  for  their  glory  will
be  like  that  of  the  moon,  and  all  the
stars  put  together  do  not  shed  fortk
as  much  light  npon  our  world  as  one
moon,  and  hence  the  glory  of  that
class  of  beings  whose  glory  differs  as
the  stars  will  be  lower  than  that  of
the  heathen,  for  they  will  receive  the
glory  of  the  moon. Bat  all  who  g#


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  11 E  WARD,  ETC,


31!)


into  the  glory  typified  by  the  sun
will  have  to  obey  cer  tain  pinciples  of
law,  and  that  law  is  a  celestial  law.
What  is  that  law  ?  It  is  the  law  of
the  Gospel.  All  persons  in  these
days  who  enter  celestial  glory  must
not  only  be  acquainted  with  the  Gos-
pel as  taught  in  ancient  times,  bur
the}1  must  be  acquainted  with  it  as  it
is  taught  and  administered  by  men
having  authority  to  administer  it
now.  If  they  do  this,  they  will  be
entitled  to  the  blessings  of  the  Gos-
pel, to  the  forgiveness  of  sins  in  tins
world,  and  being  thus  made  the  sons
and  daughters  of  God,  they  will  be
ent  itled  to  all  the  fullness  of  the  glory
of  that  plan  of  salvation,  and  -Jesus
says  that  they  shall  shine  forth  as
the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father,

As  we  have  not  time  to  enter  fully
into  the  investigation  of  all  these
different  glories,  I  wish  more  parti-
cularly to  inquire  concerning  the
nature  of  this  higher  state  of  glory
called  celestial,  Will  there  be  any
difference  among  those  who  are  re-
deemed into  that  glory  ?  There  will,
in  some  respects.  They  will  all  be
equal  in  the  enjoyment  of  some  hi  ca-
sings, and  so  for  their  glory  will  be
the  same,  but  yet  in  some  respects
then*  will  be  a  difference,  Some  who
will  inherit  a  portion  of  that  glory
will  have  no  families,  they  will  be
deprived  of  that  blessing  to  all  ages
•f  eternity,  while  others  will  receive
an  exaltation  and  kingdom,  and  will
have  wives,  children,  dominion,  great-
ness and  power  far  above  those  I  first
referred  to*

Now  why  should  there  be  this
distinction  in  the  clestial  kingdom,
and  what  is  the  cause  of  it  ?  It
is  because  certain  persons  who  have
•beyed  the  Gospel  have  become
careless  and  indifferent  in  regard
to  securing  that  high  exaltation
which  was  within  their  reach,  God
Ras  revealed  to  this  people  what


is  needful  for  an  exaltation  in  his
kingdom.  He  has  revealed  to  us,
as  we  heard  from  EMer  Hyde  this
afternoon,  that  marriage  is  destined
for  eternity  as  well  as  time, — that
the  marriage  covenant  between  male
and  female  must  be  entered  into
in  this  life,  and  the  ordinance  per-
formed here  by  those  whom  God
has  appointed  and  ordained  to  hold
the  keys  and  authority  to  seal  on
earth  that  it  may  be  sealed  in  hea-
ven j  for  in  heaven  there  is  neither
marrying  nor  giving  in  marriage;
no  such  thing  can  be  attended  to
there.  Now  persons  among  the
Latter-day  Saints  who  do  not  enter
into  this  covenant  of  marriage  but
prefer  to  lead  a  single  life  can  not
enjoy  all  that  fullness  of  exaltation
which  will  be  possessed  by  those
who  have  had  this  covenant  sealed
upon  them.  They  might,  not  have
forfeited  the  blessing  of  celestial
glory  altogether,  but  they  have  for-
feited the  right  to  have  wives  by
which  only  they  could  have  a  pos-
ter it)"  in  the  eternal  worlds.  Who
will  be  the  subjects  in  the  kingdom
which  they  will  rule  who  are  ex-
alted in  the  celestial  kingdom  of
our  God  ?  Will  they  reign  over
their  neighbors'  children  ?  Oh  no.
Over  whom  then  will  they  reign  ?
Their  own  children,  their  own  pos-
terity will  be  the  citizens  of  their
kingdoms;  in  other  words,  the  pat-

l  riarchal  order  wdl  prevail  there  to
the  endless  ages  et  eternity,  and
the  children  of  each  patriarch  will
be  his  while  eternal  ages  roll  on.
This  is  not  according  to  present
customs,  for- now  when  a  young  mai
reaches  the  age  of  twenty-one  year*
he  is  tree  from  his  parents,  and  con-
siders that  he  is  no  longer  under
the  necessity  of  being  controlled  by
his  father. That  ij  according  u

I  our  customs,  and  the  laws  of  omr
country. It  is  a  very  good  law  aW


S20  JOURNAL  OF

adapted  to  the  imperfections  that
now  exist;  bat  it  will  not  be  so  in
the  eternal  worlds.  There  will
never  be  any  such  tiling  there  as
beio.!  from  under  their  father's  rule,
no  matter  whether  twenty-one  or
twenty -one  thousand  years  of  age,
it  will  make  no  difference,  they
will  still  be  sulject  to  the  laws  of
their  Patriarch  or  Father,  and  thev
must  'observe  and  obev  them
throughout  all  eternity.  There  is
only  one  way  by  which  children
Ciin  be  lived  from  that  celestial  law
and  order  of  things,  and  that  is  by
rebellion.  They  are  agents,  and
they  can  rebel  again bt  God  and
against  ihe  order  of  things  lie  has
instituted  there,  just  as  Satan  and
the  fallen  angels  rebelled  and  turned
away.  The  increase  of  those  who
are  exalted  in  that  kingdom  will
endure  lor  ever;  and  the  bringing
forth  ol  children  will  not  be  at-
tended wiln  sorrow,  pain  and  dis-
tress as  it  is  here:  these  evils  have
come  in  consequence  of  the  fall  of
man  and  the  transgression 'by  him  of
God's  holy  laws.  But  when  men
are  redeemed  to  immortality  and
eternal  life  there  will  he  no  pain,
sorrow  or  affliction  of  body,  and  yet
children  will  le  brought  forth,  and
to  their  increase  there  will  be  no
end.  Hence  the  promise  of  God  to
the  patriarchs  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  that  their  seed  should  be  as
numerous  as  the  stars  of  heaven,
or  as  the  sands  upon  the  sea  shore.
We  all  know  that  the  sand  on  the
sea  shore  is  innumerable  to  us.  If
we  take  a  handful  it  numbers  its
tens  of  thousands  of  grains,  and  if
Abraham's  seed  are  to  become  as
numerous  as  the  sands  on  the  sea
shore  they  will  fill  a  great  many
worlds  like  this  of  ours.  There  is
to  he  no  end  to  the  increase  of  the
old  Patriarch,  and,  as  his  posterity
increases,  world  on  world  will  be


DISCOURSES.

created  and  brought  into  existence,
and  thoee  children  will  be  sent  forth
from  the  presence  of  the  Patriarch
to  take  upon  themselves  bodies,  as
we  have  done  here  in  this  world.  I
mean  their  spirits.  Understand  me
now,  resurrected  parents  are  the
parents  nut  of  bodies  of  flesh  aud
bones,  but  of  spirits  the  sa?ne  as  we
were  before  we  came  and  took  these
mortal  bodies,  that  is,  when  we  lived
up  in  yonder  world  in  the  presence
of  our  Father,  and  in  the  company
o!  the  thousands  of  millions  of  our
brother  and  sister  spirits.  They
will  be  of  the  *ame  class  and  nature,
and  they  will  have  to  take  their
position  in  worlds  that  will  be  cre-
ated foi  them  the  smie  as  we  came
-from  heaven  to  this  world,  that  we
might  gain  knowledge  and  experi-
ence that  we  could  not  gain  in  any*
Other  way.  Thus  will  the  Lord  con-
tinue his  work  and  purposes,  and
their  will  be  one  eternal  round  in
creation,  and  redemption,  in  the
formation  and  redemption  of  worlds,
and  bringing  them  back  into  his  pre-
sence, „

We  read  that  God  is  the  Father  of
our  spirits,  the  Father  of  the  spirits
of  all  flesh  Moses  calls  him.  The
Apostie  James  tells  the  Saints  in  his
day  that  we  have  lathers  in  the  flesh
who  have  corrected  us,  how  much
more  ought  we  to  be  obedient  to  the
Father  of  our  spirits  and  live?

What  will  become  of  the  old
bachelor  who  ret  uses  to  obey  the  or-
dinance of  marriage  ?  We  have
preached  to  the  young  men  of  this
Territory,  and  laid  before  them  the
sacred ness  of  the  marriage  covenant.
We  have  told  them  and  the  young
women  that  it  is  their  duty  to  enter
into  this  covenant  as  much  as  it  is
their  duty  to  be  baptized  for  the  re-
mission of  their  sins.  The  same  God
that  commanded  the  latter  gave  the
revelation  concerning  the  marriage


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  UF  REWAUIi,  ETC


321


covenant,  yet  there  are  some  who  will
give  heed  to  one  ordinance — bap-
tism — bat  will  be  careless  and  indif*
ferent  about  the  other.  By  taking
this  coarse  they  do  not  altogether
forfeit  their  right  find  title  to  enter
that  kingdom,  but  they  du  forfeit
their  right  and  tit to  be  kin £9  there-
in. What  will  be  their  condition
there? They  will  be  Angels.

There  are  many  different  classes
of  lie:rigs  in*  the  eternal  worlds,  and
arii  Hivr  them  are  angels. Who  are

KM

these  angels?  Same  of  them  have
never  yet  come  to  take  upon  them
bodies  of  flesh  and  bones,  bnt  they
will  ei) me  in  t heir  times,  seasons  and
generations  and  teceive  their  taber-
nacles the  same  as  we  have  done.
Then  there  are  others  who  were  re-
surrected when  Jesus  was,  when  the
graves  of  the  Saints  were  opened
and  manv  enne  forth  and  showed
themselves  to  those  who  were  then
living  in  the  flesh.  Besides  these
tin  re  fire  angels  who  have  been  to
this  world  awl  hive  never  yet  re
ceived  a  resurrection,  whose  spirits
have  gone  hence  into  celestial  para-
dise, mid  there  await  the  resurrec-
tion, We  have  ihia  mentioned  fchred
clauses  of  angels.  There  are  others,
among  them  some  redeemed  from
former  creaHoi  s  before  this  world
was  made,  one  ,of  whom  ad  minis-
tered  to  our  tirst  parents  after  they
st  oat  of  the  garden  as  they
v.vie  offering  sacri flees  and  burnt
idlerinys,  according  to  the  command-
ments which  they  received  from  God
when  they  were  driven  from  the
garden,  After  they  had  done  this
many  days  an  Angel  came  and  min-
istered to  them  and  inquired  of  them,
why  they  offered  sacrifices  and  burnt
offerings  unto  ftie  Lord.  The  ap-
swer  was,  "i  know  not,  save  it  be
that  the  Lnrd  commanded  me."
Then  this  angel  wAf  on  to  explain
to  our  first  p-iienfs  why  these  offer-
No.  jft.  {  &


ings  were  made  and  why  they  were
commanded  to  shed  the  blood  of
beasts,  telling  them  that  all  these
things  were  typical  ot  the  great  and
last  sacrifice  that  should  be  offered
up  for  all  mankind,  namely  the  Son
of  the  living  God,  These  angels
that  dime  to  Ada>n  were  not  men
vviiu  had  bevD  redeemed  from  this
earth — not  men  who  had  been  trans-
lated from  this  earth — but  thf*v  per-
tained i  j  former  wtirids.  They  tin*
tier- 1 ood  : i bout  the  coming  of  JesOH,
the  nature  of  these  sacrifices,  &e.

Some  of  these  angels  have  received
their  exaltation,  and  still  are  called
angels.  Fur  instance  Michael  has
received  his  exaltation.  He  is  not
Wthoul  his  kingdom  anil  crown,  wife'
or  wive-s  and  posterity^  because  he
lived  faithful  to  the  end.  Who  is
he  ?  Our  first,  great  prugenitorr
Adam,  is  called  Michael,  the  Prince*
I  am  mentioning  now  things  that
the  Latter-day  Samts  are  acquainted
with.  Many  of  these  things  X  have
just  been  quoting  are  revelations
given  to  us,  as  those  who  are  readers
will  recollect.  Some  of  thrae  annuls
have  received  lueir  exaltation.  Tbey
are  kings,  they  are  priests,  they  have
entered  into  their  glory  and  sir  upon
thrones — they  h  »1  I  the  secotre  over
their  posterity.  Those  other  classes
I  have  mentioned  have  neglected  the
new  and  everlasting  covenant  of
marriage:  They  can  not  inherit  this
glory  and  these  kingdoms — they  can
not  be  crowned  in  the  celestial  world.
What  purpose  will  they  serve?  Thej
will  be  sent  on  errands — be  &ent  to
ot  her  wot  Ids  as  missionar  ies  to  min*
later,  they  will  be  sent  on  whatever
business  the  Lord  sees  proper;  is
other  words,  they  will  be  servant*
To  whom  will  they  be  servants?  To
those  Tjfio  have  obeyed  and  remained
faithful  to  the  new  and  everlasting
covenant,  and  have  been  exalted  to
thrones;  to  those  who  have  mve-

f  >  Vol.  XV.  "


*22


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


can  ted  before  God  with  wives  so  that
they  may  raise  up  ni.d  multiply  im-
mortal intelligent  brings  through  all
the  ages  of  ^ternitv.  Here  is  the
distinction  of  Hawses,  but  all  of  the
same  glory,  cdled  rrlestial  y lory.

But  how  ahoiU  tlnw  terrestrials,
can  they  come  up  into  the  celet?*  ml  ?
No,  their  inte  I  licence  and  knowledge
have  not  prepared  *uid  ad  up  ted  them
to  dwell  with  those  who  reign  in
celestial  gh»ry,  eon  sequent  ly  they
can  not.  even  lje  angels  in  that  glory.
They  have  ir  t  oIkm^  tin*  law  thnt
pertains  to  that  gl  iry,  and  hencethey
eould  not  abide  it.  But  will  there
be  blessings  administered  to  them  by
those  who  dwell  in  celestial  tflory  ?
Yes,  angels  will  l>e  sent  forth  from
the  celestial  world  to  minister  to
those  who  inherit  the  glory  of  the
moon,  bearing  iiu  ssm^'B  of  joy  and
peace  and  of  all  thai  which  is  calcu-
lated to  exalt,  to  reuivm  and  ennoble
those  who  have  been  resurrected  into
&  terrestrial  sflnrv.  They  can  re-
ceive  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  there,
and  the  ministration  of  angels
there,

Now  let  us  u  ime  to  still  inferior
glories*  I  have  mentioned  those
who  inherit  the  glory  uf  the  stars.
Who  are  they  ?  They  are  not  the
keathen,  for  they  come  up  higher —
into  the  terrestrial  glory.  Who  are
they*  then,  who  are  permitted  only
to  inherit  a  glory  typified  by  the
•tars?  Tney  are  tlw  general  world
•f  mankind,  those  wlio  have  heard
Ihe  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  bat
kave  not  obeyed  it.  They  are  to  be
■vanished.  How  l*ng?  UntilJesus
■as  reigned  here  on  the  earth  u  thou-
sand years.  How  much  longer  ?
Vntil  the  *4  little  season"  has  passed
sway  after  the  end  of  the  thousand
rears,  and  then  when  the  final  end
mail  come  and  the  trump  of  God
rfiall  sound,  and  the  great  white
A  rone  aha  II  appear  and  the  heaven


and  the  earth  shall  flee  away  ;  when
that  time  shall  come,  the  sound  of
the  tru'np  shall  call  forth  those  sleep-
ing millionsof  all  a^ea,  generation!  and
nations  who  have  heard  the  sound  of
the  Gospel  and  have  not  obeyed  it,
but  until  then  their  bodies  must
sleep.  They  are  not  worthy  of  the
first  resurrection,"  **  Blessed  and
holy  is  he  who  has  part  in  the  first
resurrection,  for  on  such  the  second
death  has  no  power."  But  those
who  will  not  hf-ed  to  the  law  of
the  Gospel  have  no  claim  on  this
resurrection,  anri  their  bodies
sleep  thrjush  all the*e  lung


centuries  that  are  to  intervene  be-
tween the  time  ot  their  death  and
the  end  of  the  earth.  Where  will
their  spirits  be  all  that  time  ?  Not
in  any  glory  ;  they  cannot  inherit  a
glory  until  their  punishment  is  past.
They  are  not  permitted  to  enter  into
prison.  A  great  many  people,  and
perhaps  some  of  the  Latter-day
Stints,  have  supposed  that  these
characters  will  go  into  prison.  I  do
not  know  of  any  revelation  anywhere
intimating  that  any  one  of  this  class
of  persons  will  ever  be  put  in  prison.
Where  do  they  uo  ?  To  another
place  altogether  different  from  a  pri-
son, A  prison  is  designed  for  those
who  never  heard  the  Gospel  here  in
the  flesh,  but  yet  have  committed  a
few  sins  without  the  knowledge  of
the  revealed  law,  and  who  have  to
be  beaten  with  few  stripes  in  prison.
But  those  persons  who  hear  the  Gos-
pel, as  the  nations  of  the  present
dispensation  are  doing,  can  not  go  tm
prison,  it  is  not  their  place*  They
fall  below  a  prison,  into  outer  dark-
ness or  hell,  where  there  will  be  weep-
ing and  wailing  and  gnashing  of
teeth.  There  they  have  to  remai*
with  the  devil  and  his  angels  in  tor-
ment and  misery  until  the  final  endv
then  they  come  forth.  Can  they
come  where  God  and  Christ  dwell  ?


DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  REWARD,  ETC.


No,  worlds  without  end  they  cannot  couse;  and  will  bring  my  remarks  to


s  without;  end  they  cann
come  there.  Can  they  go  into  the
presence  of  the  heathen  where  the
glory  is  that  of  the  moon  ?  No,
they  cannot  even  come  there.  When
they  are  delivered  from  the  power  of
Sat  tin  and  endless  death  and  brought
forth,  where  do  they  go  ?  If  they
do  not  go  into  the  presence  of  Go  1
the  Father,  if  they  are  not  counted
worthy  to  enter  into  the  terrestrial
world  among  the  heathen,  where  will
they  go  ?  God  has  provided  man-
sions for  the  in  according  to  tleir
works  here  in  this  world.  Having
suffered  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire
for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years  and
upwards, -and  suffered  the  extreme
penalty  of  the  law  of  God,  they  cm
now  be  brought  furth  to  inherit  a
place  where  they  can  he  administered
unto  by  ten  est  rial  beings  and  by
Angels  holding  the  Priesthood,  and
where  they  can  receive the  Holy

Ghost.

Those  in  t^e  terrestrial  world  have
the  privilege  of  beholding  Jestis
sometimes — they  can  receive  the  pre-
sence of  the  Son,  but  not  of  the
fullness  of  the  Father;  but  those  in
the  teles  tin  I  world,  still  lower,  re-
ceive only  tin:  Holy  Ghost,  adminis-
tered to  them  by  messengers  ordained
and  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them
for  glory  and  exaltation,  providing
they  will  obey  the  law  that  is  given
unto  them,  which  law  will  be  telestial
law,  That  will  Hually  exalt  them.
How  far  I  know  not,,  but  where  God
and  Christ  are  they  can  not  come,
worlds  without  end*

Now  I  think  I  have  set  forth  these
glories  and  these  different  degrees  of
punishment,  and  the  different  classes
of  people  that  are  to  be  judged  ac-
cording to  the  knowledge  that  they
have  here  m  this  world,  I  have  set
these  things  forth  as  plainly  as  I  am
capable  of  doing  in  one  short  dis-


a  close  in  a  few  moments.

We  are  what  the  Lord  calls  Lat-
ter-day  Saints — we have  received
ligrht  and  knowledge  to  that  degree
from  the  heavens  that  will,  if  obeyed,
exalt  us  to  these  high  privileges  of
which  I  have  been  speaking.  On
the  other  hand,  if  not  obeyed,  that
very  light  and  know  ledge  are  suffi-
cient to  sink  as below  all  things.
Hence  we  stand  on  dangerous  u round
in  some  respects,  and  we  have  need
to  fear  lest  we  *in  against  this  light
and  have  not  the  privilege  of  even
the  telestial  world. He  that  rejects
this  covenant,  (let  me  quote  the  word
of  the  Lord  given  in  these  last  days)
— "  He  that  rejecteth  this  covenant
and  altogether  turns  therefrom,  shall
not  have  forgiveness  of  sins  in  this
world  nor  in  the  world  to  come 11  i
Do  you  hear  it,  Latter-day  Saints  ?
If  you  do,  then  strive  with  all  your
hearts  to  be  faithful Strive  to  abide
in  the  covenant  that  you  have  re-
ceived.  There  is  no  halfway  business
with  uh — we  have got  to  remain
faith  fid  to  this  covenant,  for  if  we
turn  away  from  it  we  can  not  even
claim  the  glory  that  the  world  will
have  when  the  last  resurrection  shall
come,  but  our  doom  is  fixed — we
have  to  dwell  with  the  devil  and  his
angels  to  all  eternity. Why  ? B  -
cause  they  once  had  light  and  know-
ledge,  dwelt  in  the  presence  of  Godt
and  knew  about  the  glories  of  hi*
kingdom. But they  rebelled,  and
kept  not  the  la*v  that  was  given  to
them — they  sinned  against  light  and
knowledge  and  were  thrust  down  ia
chains  of  darknpsa,  there  to  remaia
until  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.
If  we  do  not  wish  to  be  placed  in
their  society  for  all  eternity  we  must
abide  in  the  covenant  that  we  have
made. If  we  do  this,  Latter-day
Saints,  glory  and  honor  and  immor-
tality and  eternal  lives,  and  thrones


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  kingdoms  and  dominions  and
creations  and  worlds  will  be  given  to
us,  and  our  posterity  will  increase


until,  like  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore,
they  cannot  be  numbered.

Arisen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOSEPH P.  SMITH,

Dkliverei*  in  the  13th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms.  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Afternoon,  Feb,  9,  1873.


(Reported  h\j  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  SACRAMENT  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.


While  preparing  the  Sacrament,
the  thought  was  impressed  upon  my
mind  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the
subject,  although  I  will  not  promise
to  confine  my  self  to  it  I  desire  to
ho  led  by  the  Spirit  ol  the  Lord.

The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Sup-
per is  a  very  important  and  sacred
ordinance;  however  simple  it  may
appear  to  our  minds  it  is  one  which
will  add  to  our  acceptance  before
God,  or  to  our  condemnation.

It  was  instituted  by  the  Sflvior  in
the  place  of  the  law  of  sacrifice
which  was  given  to  Adam,  and  which
continued  with  his  children  down  to
the  days  of  Chiist,  bnt  which  was
fulfilled  in  his  death,  he  being  the
great,  sacrifice  for  sin,  of  which  the
sacrifices  enjoined  in  the  law  given
to  Adam  were  ft  similitude.

The  Lord  designed  in  the  begin-
ning to  place  before  man  the  know-
ledge of  good  and  evil,  and  gave
him  a  commandment  to  cleave  to
good  and  abstain  from  evil*  But  if
he  should  fa  J,  hu  would  give  to  him


tlm  law  of  sacrifice  and  provide  a
Savior  for  him,  that  he  might  be
brought  back  again  into  the  presence
ar.d  favor  of  God  and  partake  of
eternal  life  with  him.  This  was  the
plan  of  redemption  chosen  and  insti-
tuted by  the  Almighty  before  man
was  placed  on  the  earth,  And  when
man  did  fall  by  transgressing  the  law
which  was  given  him,  the  Lord  gave
to  him  the  law  of  sacrifice,  and  made
it  clear  to  his  understanding,  that  it
was  for  the  purpose  of  reminding
him  of  that  great  event  that  should
transpire  in  the  meridian  of  time,
whereby  he  and  all  his  posterity
might  be  brought  forth  by  the  power
of  redemption  and  the  resurrection
f  rom  the  dead,  and  partake  of  eternal
life  with  God  in  his  kingdom.  For
this  reason  Adam  and  his  posterity,
fr  <m  generation  to  generation,  ob-
served this  law,  and  continually
looked  forward  to  a  time  when  there
should  be  provided  for  them  a  means
of  redemption  from  the  fall  and  res-
toration from  death  to  life,  for  death


THE  SACRAMENT  OF  THE  LORD'S*  SUPPER


32o


"was  the  penalty  of  the  law  trans-
gressed, which  man  was  powerless
to  avert,  the  fiat  of  God  being,  "  In
the  day  that  thou  eat  est  thereof  thou
si i filt  surely  die,"  and  this  penalty
was  to  follow  upon  all  flesh,  all  being
a@  helpless  and  dependent  as  he  was
in  this  matter.  Their  only  hope  of
redemption  from  the  grave  and  the
power  of  death  was  in  the  Savior
whom  God  had  promised,  who  should
suffer  death,  but  being  mthoufc  sin,
having  himself  never  transgressed
any  law,  being  without  blemish,  pure
ami  holy,  he  should  have  power  to
break  the  bands  of  death  and  from
the  grave  rise  to  immortal  life,  t  here-
by opening  the  way  for  all  who
should  follow  him  in  the  regenera-
tion to  come  forth  to  life  again,  re-
deemed from  the  penalty  of  the  law,
and  from  the  sin  of  transgression  to
eternal  life.  In  anticipation,  there-
fore, of  this  great  sacrifice  which  was
to  be  offered  for  Adam  arid  his  seed,
they  offered  sacrifices,  more  or  less
acceptably,  and  in  conformity  to  the
pattern  given,  in  proportion  to  the
knowledge  of  God  and  of  the  Gospel
which  they  had,  and  their  faithful-
ness from  generation  to  generation,
to  the  days  uf  Jesus.

They  would  take  the  firstlings  of
their  flocks,  the  best  fruits  of  their
fields,  and  those  things  which  were
emblematic  of  purity,  innocence,  and
perfection,  symbolical  of  him  who
was  without  sin,  «nd  as  **  B  lamb
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the
world,"  and  offer  sacrifices  unto  God  |
in  memory  of  him,  and  the  matchless
and  wonderful  deliverance  to  be
wrought  out  for  them  by  him.  '

Undoubtedly  the  knowledge  of
this  law  and  of  other  rites  and  cere-
monies was  carried  by  the  posterity  ;
of  Adam  into  all  lands,  uml  contin-
ued with  them,  more  or  less  pure,
to  the  flood,  and  through  Noah,  who
was  a  M  preacher  of  righteousness,"


to  those  who  succeeded  him,  e plead-
ing out  into  all  nations  and  coun-
tries, Adam  and  Noah  being  the
first  of  their  dispensations  to  re-
ceive them  from  God.  What  won-
der, then,  that  we  should  find
relics  of  Christianity,  so  to  speak,
among  the  heathens  and  nations
who  know  not  Christ,  an  1  whoso
histories  date  back  -beyond  the
days  of  Moses,  and  even  beyond  the
Hood,  independent  of  ami  apart
from  the  records  of  the  Bible*"  The
ground  taken  bv  infidels,  that
"Christianity"  sprang  from  the
heathen,  it  being  found  that  they
have  many  rites  similar  to  those
recorded  in  the  Bible,  &a.,  is  only
a  vain  and  foolish  attempt  fu  blind
the  eyes  of  men  and  dissuade  them
from  their  faith  in  the  Redeemer  of
the  world,  and  from  their  belief  in
the  Scriptures  of  divine  truth,  for
if  the  heathen  have  doctrines  and
ceremonies  resembling  to  some  ex-
tent those  which  are  recorded  in
the  Scriptures,  it  only  proves,  what
is  plain  to  the  Saints,  that  these
are  the  traditions  of  the  fathers
handed  down  from  generation  to
generation,  from  Adam,  through
Noah,  and  that  they  will  cleave  to
the  children  to  the  latest  generation,
though  they  may  wander  into  dark-
ness and  perversion,  until  but  a
slight  resemblance  to  their  origin,
which  was  divine,  can  be  seen*
Yvt  this  is  a  stumbling  block  to
some  and  there  are  those  who  en-
deavor to  make  progress  on  tins
foundation  against,  the  work  of  Go  !,
but  it  is  absolute  folly.  How  do
we  know  that  the  Bible  accounts  of
Adam  and  the  succeeding  genera-
tions are  correct  ?  How  do  we
know  anything  pertaining  to  find
and  bis  dealings  with  men  ancient!  v  ?
We  know  m:-my  tilings  by  tradition,
naturally,  by  intuition*  *fc  There  is
a  spitit.  in  man,  and the,  iii^m m;o.i


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


of  tine  Almighty  giveth  it  under-
stnitiititr." There is an  inherent
principle  in  man  that  leads  him  to
faith  in  a  superior  or  a  Supreme
Being,  who  has  designed  and  created
all  things. The  Bible  account,  being
the  must  rational  and  indeed  only
historical  one  of  the  creation  arid  the
dealings  of  God  with  men,  we  are
constrained  to  accept  it,  in  the  main,
a*  t  rat  Ik Then  we  behold  the  won-
derful works  of  God  spread  out  be*
fore  us,  the  starry  heavens,  the  sun
and  moon,  the  earth  on  which  we
dwell,  and its times  and  seasons,
its  fruits  and  grains,  its  herbs  and
varied  productions,  it**  fountains  and
livers,  mountains,  valleys  and  plains,
and  the  mighty  deep,  all  teeming
with life  and  animation;  rImj  the
laws  that  govern  these  vast  creations,
and  man,  the  crowning  work  of  God,
on  this  earth,  the  masterpiece,  if  yon
please,  w lion i  inspiration  teaches  us,
m  the  offspring  of  that  eternal  being
who  is  the  Creator  of  all  things,  he
being  the  most  perfect  in  his  organi-
zation, possessing  greater  attributes,
powers  of  reason,  and  intelligence
than  all  uther  beings,  constituting
him  the  "lord  of  creation,"  and  the
nearest  in  resemblance  to  the  Creator.
We  look  at  these  things  and  we  can-
not but  come  to  the  conclusion  that
this  is  not  the  work  of  chance,  but
the  result  of  matured  omniscient  de-
signs and  purposes,  that  man  is  the
son  of  God,  possessing  the  attributes


and  true,  and  we  are  convinced
that  they  are  true,  that,  the  Scrip-
tures, the  Bible  and  Book  of  Mor-
mon, are  of  divine  origin.

But  is  this  all  we  have  to  convince
us  of  the  truth  of  the.se  things,  and
to  confirm  upon  our  minus  the  prin-
ciples  laid  down  as  the  (jus pel  of
Christ,  which  is  called  "  Mormon-
ism  ?"  These  are  the  only  means  of
knowing  in  regard  to  the  truth  of
r«  ligiun  that  the  world  claim  to  have,
or  that  we  hud  prior  to  becoming  ac-
quainted with  the  doctrines  of  this
Church,  and  v\e  were  in  a  measure
satisfied  because  it  was  the  best  light
we  possessed.  There  are  thousand*
of  the  most  intelligent  and  best  edu-
cated men  that  live,  and  some  of  the
greatest and brightest mi  lids  in


many  nations  no*  engaged


in


the


dissemination  of  what  they  believe
to  be  the  Gospel of  Jesus  Christ,
claiming  no  uther  means  of  knowing
the  t  ruth,  than  t  radii  ion  and  reason,
and  they  appear  to  be  satisfied  with
their  convict  inns and faith.  Mil-
lions  of dollars  are  expended  an-
nually in  promulgating  their  religion,
they  "compass  land  and  sea  to  make
proselytes,"  with  no  other  acknow-
ledged evidence  oi  the  truth  of  the
Bible,  or  of  the  divine  mission  of
Jesus  Christ,  than  that  I  have  cited.

But  we  go  farther  than  this,  al-
though to  my  mind  this  mode  of
reasoning  is  conclusive  so  far  as  it
goes,  and  no  doubt  is  left  as  to  the


and  image  of  his  Father,  and  in  the  existence  of  our  Father  and  God,  or


beginning  much  of  this  intelligence,
insomuch  that  be  was  the  companion
and  associate  of  God  and  dwelt  with
him,  and  knew  no  sin.  The  Lord
gave  him  the  earth  as  a  possession
and  an  inheritance,  and  laws  for  his
govern  nent,  that  he  might  fill  the
measure  of  his  creation  and  have  joy
therein.

We  look  at  these  things  in  this
manner,  and they  appear  rational


that  he  created  all  tilings  fot  a  wise
purpose,  for  his  glory,  and  for  the
glory  and  happiness  of  his  children,
that  the  earth  and  the  fullness  thereof
are  God's,  although  designed  for  man
and  his  use,  and  finally  to  be  given
to  him  as  an  everlasting  inheritance,
when  he  shall,  through  obedience,
prove  wor  thy  of  it.  Bat,  as  I  said
tie  fore,  we  go  farther  than  this- —
there  is  14  a  more  sure  word  of  pro.


THE  SACRAMENT  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER


327


phecy,  whereanto  we  do  well  to  take  [  confirmed  upon  our  understandings


heed."  There  is  revelation,  a  means
of  direct  communication  from  God  to
man,  a  power  which  can  rend  the
veil  between  us  and  God,  open  (he
eyes  of  our  understanding  and  bring
us  into  proximity  to  him,  so  that  we
may  know  him  as  he  is,  and  learn
from  his  own  mouth  and  from  the
mouths  of  his  holy  messengers  his
laws  and  will  concerning  us,  as
anciently.  This  is  the  principle  by
which  Adam  knew  God  in  the  gar.
den  where  he  was  placed  in  the  be-
ginning, God  came  to  him  day  by
day,  and  conversed  with  him  an  one
man  converses  with  another,  giving
him  instructions  and  counsel,  for
man  was  pure.  And  when  he  was
cast  out,  God  did  not  forsake  him,
but  appeared  to  him,  sent  his  angels
to  communicate  with  him  concern-


by  inspiration  and  revelation  from
God,  *  line  upon  line,  and  precept
upon  precept,"  until  we  have  ob-
tained a  knowledge  of  God,  u  whom
to  know  is  life  eternal."

The  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  have
been  restored  in  their  purity.  We
know  why  the  law  of  sacrifice  was
given  to  Adam,  and  ho#  it  is  that
relics  of  the  Gospel  are  found  among
the  heathen.

When  Jesus  came  arid  suffered,
41  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  he  that
wis  without  sin  for  him  that  had
.sinned,  and  was  subject  to  the  penalty
of  the  law  which  the  sinner  had
transgressed,  the  Jaw  of  sacrifice  was
ful tilled,  and  in  the  stead  thereof  he
gave  another  law,  which  we  call  the
4t  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,"
by  which  his  life  and  mission,  his


ing  the  plan  of  salvation,  and  gave  death  and  resurrection,  the  great
him  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  a  light  in sacrifice  he  ha  I  offered  for  the  re


his  path  through  the  world,  made
dreary  to  hi  in  by  being  banished
from  the  immediate  presence  of  God.

Men  have  enjoyed  privileges  from
that  day  to  this,  in  proportion  to
their  worthiness,  through  every  Gos-
pel dispensation,  thereby  obtaining
a  knowledge  of  God  for  themselves,
not  being  left  to  the  tradition  of
the  fathers  and  to  reason  alone.
From  time  to  time  the  Lord  raised
up  Prophets,  to  whom  he  has  ap-
peared, either  himself  or  by  frs  mes-
sengers, as  to  Abraham,  Jacob.  Moses,
Samuel,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,
and  all  the  Prophets  from  the  begin-
ning, revealing  his  will  and  making
known  hia  requirements,  so  that  they
have  had  a  positive  knowledge  given
to  them  of  God  himself

We  claim  that  in  this  dispensation
this  key  of  knowledge  has  been  re-
stored to  man,  and  we  stand  upon
the  same  footing  with  the  ancients,
and  are  not  left  in  uncertainty  ur
doubt,  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  being


demptiun  of  man,  should  be  kept  in
everlasting  remembrance,  for  said
he,  fcl  Tnis  do  tu  tvmeru branch  of  me,
for  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and
drink  of  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the
Lord's  dear h  till  he  come."  There-
fore this  la  v  is  to  us,  what  ttie  law
of  saciifice  was  to  those  who  lived
prior  to  the  first  coming  of  the  Son
of  Man,  until  he  shall  come  again.
Therefore  we  must  honor  ami  keep  it
sacredly,  tor  there  is  a  penalty  at-
tached to  its  violation,  as  we  shall
see  by  reading  the  words  of  Paul  :
1  Cor.  xi,  27,  ^0.

**  Wherefore  wbo*iK;v**r  shall  eat  this
bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord,  un-
worthily, .shall  he  guilty  of  the  body  and
blond  i if  th<_*  Lord.

*'  But  let  a  man  exau.ine  himself,  and  so
let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  uf  that
cup,

*fc  For  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  un-
worthily, eateth  and  drinketh  damnation
to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's
body.

"  For  tins*  cause  many  are  weak  and
sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep,"

And  it  is  even  more  plainly  given  in


lis


JOURNAL  of  MSCOUKSES.


the  Book  of  Mormon,  which  I  will
read,  Nephi,  Sth  chapter,  9th  verse,
page  471.

"  And  now  it  ca:i.t*  t<>  jias*  that  whin
Ju.Mi;i  had  hjinken  ik&w  words,  he  turned
his  eyes  again  upon  the  disciples  whom  be
hud  chosen,  and  s;iid  unto  timni,  behold
verily,  viwily  1  say  unto  you,  1  £ivt-  unto
you  another  commandment,  and  then  I
mu^t  l-t>  unto  my  Father,  that  I  may  ful-
fill other  commandments  which  he  hath
given  lue.  And  now  behold,  thin  is  the
commandment  which  I  give  mi  to  you,
that  ye  rdiall  not  suffer  any  one  knowingly,
to  partake  of  my  tle^h  and  blood  unwor-
thily, when  ye  shall  minister  it,  for  who*/
eateth  and  driiiketli  my  fiV>h  mid  Mood
unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  damna-
tion to  liis  soul;  therefore  if  ye  know
*hat  a  man  is  unworthy  to  eat  and  drink
of  mv  flesh  and  Ido. .,1,  \t-  shall  forhid
him/'

Tueae  art5  suiiie  ui  the  injunctions
and  cum  maud  men  ts  that  art;  given  in
relation  to  the  partaking  of  the  ,
Lords  Supper,  Now  let  us  he  care-  |
ful  what  we  do,  that  we  may  not
incur  the  penalty  affixed  lu  the  trans-
gression of  this  law,  remembering
that  the  ordinances  which  God  has
given  are  sacred  ami  binding,  that


his  laws  are  in  force,  especially  upon
all  that  have  covenanted  with  hi™  in
baptism,  and  upon  all  unto  whom
they  come,  whether  they  embrace
them  ur  nor,  r&  Jesus  said,  Li  This  is
the  condemnation  of  the  world  that
light  hfis  cotne  into  the  world,  but  ye
l*ive  darkness  rather  than  li^ht1'
Therefore  all  men  will  be  held  ac-
countable  fur  the  use  they  make  of
the  light  which  they  possess.  For
this  reason  wc  are  commanded  to
preach  tko  Gospel  nnto  every  crea-
ture, that  those  who  obey  and  are
baotized  may  be  saved,  nnd  those

1  M  r

who  reject  it  may  be  condemned.

I  bear  my  test  inn  my  to  these
tilings.  I  know  thai  Joseph  Smith
was  mid  is  a  Prophet  of  the  living
God,  and  President  Young  is  also  a
Prophet  of  God,  and  that  by  inspira-
tion and  revelation,  and  not  ut  man,
Gitfi  bless  yon  and  help  us  to  lie
fiii'hfui,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


LATTER-DAY  J  V  D(  i  MENTS.


329


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

DiaivEiifii*  tn  thi:  13th  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Saw  Lake  City,

Sunday  Aftsekoox,  January  2G,  1873.


(Reported  by  David W.  Evans  J)


LATTER  - 1 )  AY  J  V  D<  i  M  ENTS.


If  I  feel  the  liberty  of  the  Spirit
to  do  so,  I  shall  read  a  number  of
quotations,  this  afternoon,  from  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants
and  from  the  Bible,  and  perhaps
from  the  Book  of  M  >rmnn  in  rela-
tion to  sor'it!  i if  the  great  events
which  are  about  to  take  place  on
the  earth,  mure  especially  the  judg-
ments! that  arc  comity  to  pass  speed-
ily. The  first  that  I  will  read  will
be  the  9th  and  10th  paragraphs  of
a  revelation  given  through  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith,  July  23rd,
1637—

Verily,  verily,  I  nay  unto  you,  T>arkness
cove  re  th  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the
minds  of  the  people,  and  all  flesh  has  be*
come  corrupt  before  my  face.  Behold,
vengeance  cometh  speedily  upon  the  inhab-
itants of  the  earth,  a  day  of  wrath,  a  day
of  burning,  a  day  of  desolation,  of  weeping,
of  mourning,  and  of  lauiexat&tion,  and  a*  a
whirlwind  it  shall  come  upon  all  the  face  of
the  earth,  saith  the  Lord*

And  u[>on  my  house  shall  it  bogin,  and
from  my  house  *haLl  it  go  forth,  saith  the
Lord.  First  among  those  among  you,  saith
the  Lord,  who  have  professed  to  know  my
name,  and  have  not  known  m**,  und  have
blasphemed  against  me  in  the  midst  of  my
house,  saith  the  Lord.

I  will  make  a  few  remarks  upon
these  pa^sa^s  as  I  read  them.  It
seems  that  this  is  a  dispensation  pe*
culiar  in  its  nature,  differing  from
former  dispensations.  It  is  a  diss-
pensatitn  of  mercy  a::d  of  judg-
ment— of  mercy  to  those  who  receive


the  message  of  mercy,  but  of  judg-
ment to  those  who  reject  that  mes-
sage. In  other  words  it  is  a  dispen-
sation in  which  the  Gospel  baa  been
revealed  from  heaven,  the  servants
of  God  called  to  labor  in  the  vine-
yard for  the  last  time*  and  in  which
the  Lord  intends  to  pour  out  great
and  terrible  judgments  upon  the
nations  of  the  wicked  after  they
have  been  warned  by  the  sound  of
the  everlasting  Gospel.  We  are  told
in  the  revelation  I  have  just  read,
that  vengeance  cometh  speedily  upon
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;  that  it
is  a  day  of  wrath,  burning,  desola-
tion, weeping,  mourning  and  lamen-
tation, and  that  as  a  whirlwind  these
things  shall  come  upon  the  inhabi-
tants of  all  the  earth.

Where  shall  these  great  and  se-
vere judgments  begin?  Upon  what
people  does  the  Lord  iutend  to  com-
mence this  great  work  of  vengeance  ?
Upon  the  people  who  profess  to  know
his  name  :\iu\  still  blaspheme  it  in
the  midst  of  his  house.  They  are
the  ones  designated  for  some  of  the
most  terrible  judgments  of  the  latter
d;iys.  This  should  be  jx  warning  to
the  :  Jitter-day  Saints  ;  and  not  only
those  who  are  parents,  hut  those  who
are  children  should  diligently  consi-
der whether  they  are  numbered  among
those  who  are  mentioned  in  the  lUth


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


paragraph,  which  I  have  read.  Upon
my  house,  saith  the  Lord,  shall  it
begin,  first  upon  tho.se  among  you
who  have  professed  my  name  and
have  not  known  me  arid  have  bias-
phemed  against  me  in  the  midst  of
uiy  house.

There  are  some  who  have  been
baptized  into  this  Church,  baptized,
perhaps,  when  they  were  eight  years
of  aye,  entered  into  a  covenant  with
the  L  rd  to  keep  his  commandments
according  to  the  best  of  their  ability


eight  years  old,  and  l>e  confirmed  by
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  lloly  Ghost,  t lie  sins  of
the  children  shall  he  upon  the  heads
of  the  patents.  Again  he  says,
"  You  shall  leach  your  children  to
walk  uptight ly  before  the  Lord,  and
teach  the  in  to  pray  to  and  have  faith
in  God,  and  if  you  do  not  these
things,  the  sins  of  yonr  children  shall
rest  upon  your  heads.  And  this
shall  he  a  law  unto  my  people  in
Zion,  and  in  all  the  stakes  of  Zion
and  understanding,  si»me  of  whom,  thai  shall  he  established.11
w  hen  they  have  been  brought  into  Do  we  teach  our  children  to  walk
temptation,  have  turned  a  vay  from  j  uprightly  ana  keep  the  command*
that  covenant.  Have  they  bias-  merits  ot  the  M  »st  High  ?  Do  we
phemed  t  lie  name  of  the  Lord:  1  read  to  them  the  revelations  of  God,
do  know  that  as  1  walk  along  the  and  shu.v  them  how  wicked  if  is  to
streets  of  Salt  Lake  City,  I  often  see  t  ike  his  name  in  vain?  Do  we
boss  from  six  or  eight  up  to  fifteen, point  out  to  the  n how that  we

should  not  curse  ourselves,  nor  one


sixteen,  eighteen,  and  perhaps  twenty
years  of  age  collected  together,  and
so  far  as  my  ears  are  concerned,  I  can
bear  testimony  that  they  have  no
regard  nor  tespect  for  the  word  of
the  Lord  nor  for  the  covenants  into
winch  they  have  entered,  for  they
blaspheme  his  name  in  the  rnid&t  uf
his  house  or  kingdom.  Will  the
Lord  hold  them  guiltless  ?  Can
they  escape  hifl  wrath  and  indigna-
tion ? Can  their  parents  escape  the


another,  nor  anything  thai  is  about
us?  Do  we  not  often  hear  children
in  the  streets  of  our  city  heaping
curses  upon  the  heads  of  their  fel-
lows: "  U — n  your  soul,"  is  oitcn
used by them  ; tfc  d — u my  eyes,"

anu  d  n  this  thing,  and  d  n

that  thing,  as  though  they  had  no
fear  of  God  before  them.  Is  this
wicked  or  ia  it  not  ?  Every  person
who  reads  the  word  ot the  Lord,


tion  ?  Can  their  parents  escape  the  who  reads  the  wotd  ot  the  Lord,
judgments  of  the  Almighty  if  they  knows  that  it  is  wicked;  and  these
have  neglected to  teach thern the  children growing up thus in  our


wickedness  ot  taking the  name  of
the  Lord  in  vain: if  the  parents
have  not  done  this  the  sins  of  their
young and  inexperienced  offspring
will  rest  more  or  less  upon  (hen
heads. If  the  children  are  lost  the
parents  who  ha?©  not  properly  in-
structed them  may  be  lobt  also,  for
the  Lord  has  said  in  one  ot  the  reve-
lations which  this  book  contains  that
inasmuch  as  they  who  are  parents  do
not  teach  their  children  the  doctrine
of  repentance,  and  faith  iu  Christ,
and  the  doctrine  of  baptism,  ihat
they  may  be  baptized  wheu  they  are


midst  go  from  one  degree  of  sin  to
another  until  they  finally  lose,  al-
together, the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
I  What  w  ill  be  the  consequences  ?
T i 1 1  re  is  a  1 1  ay  of  reckon i ng  and
judgment  coming,  and  it  shall  begin
I  at  the  Loid's  house,  aud  from  there
it  shall  go  forth  among  all  the  na-
tions of  the  earth.  L  t  parents
awake  and  see  to  it  lest  the  same
destruction  that  will  overtake  their
children  because  of  their  apostacy
come  upon  them  also.

To  show  what  the  Lord  has  said
further  in  relation  to  some  of  the


LATTER-DAY  JUDGMENTS.


judgments  which  are  coming  upon
the  earth,  I  will  read  the  third  para-
graph of  a  revelation  given  to  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  in  March,
1829,  before  this  Church  was  organ-
ized. It  will  he  found  on  page  173
of  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nant, and  is  as  follows —

**  Behold,  verily  I  say  nnto  you,  I
have  reserved  those  things  which  1
have  entrusted  unto  you,  my  servant
Joseph,  for  a  wise  purpose  in  me,
and  it  shall  he  made  known  unto  fu-
ture generations  ;  but  this  generation
shall  have  my  word  through  you;
and  in  addition  to  your  testimony,
the  testimony  of  three  of  my  ser-
vants, whom  I  shall  call  and  ordain,
unto  whom  I  will  show  these  thing*,
and  they  shall  go  tortli  with  my
words  that  are  given  through  you  ;
yea,  they  shall  know  of  a  surety  that
these  things  are  true,  for  from  hea-
ven will  I  declare  it  onto  them.  I
will  (five  them  power  that  they  may
behold  and  view  these  things  as  they
are;  and  to  none  else  will  I  grant
this  power,  to  receive  this  same  tes-
timony among  this  generation,  in
this  the  beghmipg  of  the  rising  np
and  the  coming  forth  of  my  Church
out  of  the  wilderness;  clear  as  the
xnuon,  and  fair  as  the  sun,  and  ter-
rible as  an  army  with  banners.  And
the  testimony  of  three  witnesses  will
1  scud  forth  of  my  won  I  ;  and  behold
whosoever  believeth  on  my  words,
them  will  I  vi>it  with  the  man i tes-
tation of  my  Spirit,  and  they  shall
be  born  of  me,  even  of  water  and
of  the  Spii  it*  And  you  must  wait  yet
a  little  while,  for  ye  are  not  yet  or-
dained ;  and  their  testimony  shall
also  tfo  forth  unto  the  condemnation
of  this  generation  if  they  harden
their  hearts  against  them  ;  for  a  deso-
lating scourge  shall  go  forth  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  and  shall
continue  to  ha  poured  out  from  time
to  time,  if  they  repent  not,  until  the


earth  is  empty,  and  the  inhabitants
thereof  are  consumed  away  and  ut-
terly  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of
my  coming.  Behold,  I  tell  you  these
things,  even  as  1  also  told  the  people
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and
my  word  shall  he  verified  at  this  time
as  it  hath  hitherto  been  verified/*

Here  we  see  what  the  Lord  pro-
mised unto  his  servant  Joseph  con-
cerning the  testimony  that  should
go  forth  unto  this  iteration.  Those
things  which  the  Lord  had  entrusted
Joseph  Smith  with  were  the  plates
from  which  the  Book  of  Mormon  was
translated,  Joseph  being  then  en-
gaged in  that  work.  The  Lord  gave
him  a  promise  Mint  there  should  be
three  witnesses  raised  up  who  should
know  from  hen-en  of  the  tru  h  of
those  plates.  Joseph,  at  that  time,
had  no  knowledge  who  these  wit-
nesses should  he,  but  a  promise  was
made  that  they  should  be  raised  np.
Before  that  year  expired — the  year
1829 — there  were  three  witnesses
raiaed  up,  namely  Martin  Harris,
Oliver  Cowdery  and  David  Whit met\
They  saw  the  plates  from  which
the  Book  of  Mormon  *-as  translated,
and  they  were  commanded  to  bear
record  of  them  to  all  peoples,  nations
and  tongues  to  n  hum  the  work
i  should  be  sent.  These  three  wit-
?  n esses  saw  the  Angel  of  the  Most
High  God,  and  after  the  work  had
ken  pub! i> bed  with  their  names
contained  therein,  the  Lord  began
to  raise  up  his  Church  and  to  bring
it  out  of  the  wilderness.  It  was  in
April,  18  *0,  thai  the  Chorda  was

organised,  a  little  over  a  year  after
this  revelation  was  given,  and  thoae
who  believed  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon and  in  the  things  here  spoken,
were  visited  by  the  manifestations
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord — they
were  born  of  the  water  and  of  the
Spirit — and  their  testimony  went
forth  in  connection  with  that  of  the


332


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


three  witnesses,  and  the  Lord  says
that  through  the  united  testimo-
nies of  those  why  believed  iu  this
work  he  would  condemn  this  gene-
ration, tlntf  he  would  send  forth  a
desolating  scourge,  mid  it  should  be
poured  out  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  until  liie  earth  should  be
empty  and  de.su  lute  inasmuch  as
its  inhabitants  would  not  repent  of
their  sina.  The  L  >rd  informed  us
on  that  occasion  that  it  should  be
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  whole
earth  as  it  was  with  the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem  in  ancient  times,  that
ie,  a^s  he  spoke  concerning  their  des-
truction and  his  Word  was  verified,
60  should  they  he  verified  at  this
time  in  relation  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  in  bbe  latter  days
Consequently  we  ace  from  these  re*
velalious,  that  the  judgments  of
the  Almighty  are  to  be  universal —
upon  all  the  earth  desolation  and
destruction,  a  day  ot  vengeance  and
burning  and  SOre  calamity  until  the  1
inhabitants  are  wasted  away  and
the  ear tii  made  eaipty  and  deso-
late.

We  will  now  rend  other  revelations
confirmatory  of  the  same  thing,  so
that  we  can  judge  a  little  concerning
the  nature  of  the  judgments  which
will  be  poured  out.  In  a  revelation
given  in  February,  I  Sil,  the  Lord
thus  speaks  of  Ins  servants,  in  the
filth  paragraph,  near  the  middle —

Lift  up  your  voices  And  spare  not  Call
upon  the  nations  to  repeat ;  both  old  and
young,  both  )>ond  and  free,  Baying,  prepare
yourselves  for  the  groat  day  of  the  Lord  ;
for  if  I,  who  ani  a  man,  do  lift  up  iny  voice
and  cail  upon  you  to  repent,  and  ye  hate
me,  what  will  ye  say  when  the  day  coiueth
when  the  thunders  shall  utter  their  voices
from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  speaking  to  the
ear*  uf  all  that  live,  saying,  repent,  ami
prepare  fir  the  -real  ilav  ut  the  Lord:  yea,
ana  again,  whan  the  lightnhiga  shall  streak
forth  iniiri  the  ea^t  utrto  the  weat,  and  .shall
utter  forth  their  voice*  unto  nil  that  live,
and  make  the  ear**  of  all  tingle  that  hear,
laying  th^si*  words,  rejxmt  for  the  great
-day  of  the  Lfird  fa  c  >uv*


And  again,  the  Lord  shall  utter  his
voice  out  ot  heaven,  Haying,  hearken,  O  ye
nations  of  the  earth,  and  hear  the  word*  of
that  God  who  made  you.  O,  ye  nations  of
the  earth,  how  often  wnuld  I  have  gathered
you  together  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chick-
ens under  her  wings,  but  ye  would  not  ?
How  oft  have  I  called  afoft  you  by  the
mouth  of  my  servants,  and  by  the  mini-
statin?  of  angels,  and  by  mine  own  voice,
and  by  the  voice  of  thundering*,  and  hy  the
voice  of  lightnings*,  and  by  the  voice  of
tempest*,  and  by  the  voice  of  earthquakes,
and  great  hailstorms,  and  by  the  voice  of
famines  and  pestilences  of  every  kind,  and
by  the  great  sound  of  a  trump,  and  by  the
voice  of  judgment,  and  hy  the  voice  of
mercy  all  the  day  long,  and  by  the  voice  of
glory  and  honor,  and  the  riches  of  eternal
fife,  and  would  have  saved  you  with  an
everlasting  salvation,  but  ye  would  not?
Behold  the  day  has  come,  when  the  cup  of
the  wrath  of  mine  indignation  is  fulL

I  Here  we  perceive  how  long  the
Lord  will  bear  with  the  people — all
the  daj  long,  stretching  forth  his
hand,  pleading  with  them  by  the
voice  of  lioditnintrs,  thunders,  earth-
quakes,  great  hailstorms,  famines,
pestilences  of  every  kind,  mid  by  the
voice  of  mercy  nnd  judgment,  yet
I  hey  will  not  repent,  but  will  harden
their  hearts  when  all  these  things  go
forth  among  them,  from  nation  to
nation,  people  to  people,  and  from
kingdom  to  kingdom,  and  they  will
refuse  the  message  of  sal  vat  ion  *  It
is  true  that  the  Lord  has  not  yet
spoken  by  the  voice  of  thunders,  call-
ing upon  the  people  hum  the  ends  of
the  earth,  saving,  "  Repent  and  pre-
pare for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord,"
but  such  nn  event  will  cmne;  and
when  it  dues  come  it  will  not  be  a
mere  ordinary,  common  thunder-
storm, such  as  we  experience  oco*.
sionally,  extending  only  over  a  small
extent  of  country,  but  the  Lord  will
capse  the  thunders  to  otter  their
voices  from  the  ends  of  the  earth
until  they  sound  in  the  ears  of  all

!  that  live,  and  these  thunders  shall

1  ns*e  the  very  words  lu  re  predicted —
u  Repent O  ye  inhabitants  of  the

1  earth,  and  prep 're  t  *e  wny  of  (he
Lord, pr  p  ire vno'  -^lvp^ for  the


LATTiill-DAY  J  UDGMENTS


333


great  day  of  the  Lor d."  These  )
words  will  be  distinclly  heard  by
every  soul  that  lives,  whether  in
America,  Asia,  Africa,  Europe,  or
upon  the  islands  of  the  sea.  And
not  only  the  thunders,  but  the  light-
nings will  utter  forth  tbejr  voices  in
the  ears  of  all  that  live,  saying,  "  He-
pent,  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord
is  come."  Besides  the  voices  of
thunder  and  Hghinmg,  the  Lord  biro-
self,  before  he  comes  in  his  glory,
will  speak  by  his  own  voice  out  ot
heaven  in  the  ears  of  all  that  live,
commanding  them  to  repent  and  to
prepare  for  his  coming,  I  do  not
know  how  the  Lord  will  send  forth
his  voice  so  as  to  make  all  the  people
on  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe
hear  it,  for  the  loudest  sound  that  we
can  produce  only  extends  over  a
small  area,  a  'ew  miles  at  most;  but
the  Lord  has  power  tn  make  h is  voice
heard  by  all  that  live  on  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  and  when  he
fulfills  this  prediction,  all  that  live
will  literally  hear  the  words  that
are  heru  named;  and  the  wicked
will  perifh  nut  ot  the  eurtb  as  they
did  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and  so  far
as  they  are  concern*  d  the  earth  will
be  made  empty  and  desolate.

I  will  no*  read  a  paragraph,  testi-
fying in  different  words  to  the  same
thingfs  in  a  revelation  given  id  Au-
gust 183it.  Speaking  of  Zion  that
is  to  be  built  up  in  Jackson  County,
Mo,,  and  of  the  Temple  that  ia  to  be
leared  there  unto  his  name,  the  Lord
gays  : —

And  inasmuch  as  my  people  build  an
house  unto  nie  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and
do  not  suffer  any  unclean  thing  to  come
into  it  that  it  be  not  defiled,  my  glory  shall
rest  upon  it ;  yea,  and  my  prudence  shall  be
there,  for  I  will  come  into  it,  and  all  the
pure  in  heart  that  shall  come  into  it  shall
see  God  ;  but  if  it  bu  defiled  I  will  not  come
into  it,  and  my  glory  shall  not  be  there,  for
I  will  not  comu  into  milmly  temples.

And  now,  behold,  if  Zion  do  these  things
she  shall  prosper,  and  spread  herself  and
become  very  glorious,  very  great  and  very


terrible,  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall
honor  her,  and  shall  suy.  Surely*  Zion  is  the
city  of  our  God,  and  surely  Zion  cannot
fall,  neither  be  moved  out  of  her  place,  for
God  is  there,  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  ia
there,  and  he  hath  sworn  by  the  power  of
his  might  to  be  her  salvation  anrt  her  high
tower :  therefore,  verily,  thus  saith  the
Lord,  let  Zion  rejoice,  for  this  is  Zion — THE
PUKE  in  heart  ;  therefore,  let  Zion  rejoice
while  all  the  wicked  shul!  moitm  ;  for  be-
hold, and  lo,  vengeance  cometh  speedily
upon  the  ungodly  as  the  whirl  wind,  and
who  shall  escape  it?  Tin-  L< mi's  scourge
shall  pass  over  by  nii^it  and  by  day,  and
the  report  thereof  shall  vex  all  people  ;  yet
it  shall  not  be  stayed  until  the  Lord  come  :
fur  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  is  kindled
against  their  abominations  and  all  their
wicked  works ;  nevertheless  Zion  shall  es-
cape if  she  observe  to  do  all  things  whatso-
ever I  have  commanded  her,  but  if  she  ob-
serve not  to  do  whatsoever  T  have  com-
manded her,  I  will  visit  her  according  to  all
her  works,  with  sore  affliction,  with  pesti-
lence, with  plague,  with  sword,  with  ven-
geance, with  devouring  tire  ;  nevertheless,
let  it  be  read  this  once  in  their  ears,  that  I,
the  Lord,  have  accepted  of  their  offering,
and  if  she  sin  no  more,  none  of  these  things
shall  come  upon  her,  and  J  will  bless  her
with  blessings,  and  multiply  a  multiplicity
of  blessings  upon  her,  and  upon  her  gene-
rations for  ever  and  ever,  saith  the  Lord
your  God.  Amen.

Here  we  perceive  what  the  Lord
intends  to  do  both  lor  Zion  and  for
the  wicked,  Zion  shall  spread  her-
self if  she  will  only  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  rtml  she  will
become  great,  glorious  and  terrible;
or  as  one  oi  old  said — The  church
will  come  forth  our  of  tli*>  wilder-
ness, leaning1  upon  rbu  arm  of  her
beloved,  arid  she*  will  be  as  fair  as
the  sun,  as  clear  as  t 1  it ?  moon,  and
terrible  as  an  army  wilh  banners.
So  will  Zion  be  clothed  upon  with
the  glory  of  her  Go  I  find  armed
with  the  panoply  ot  Heaven,  and  the
nations  will  fear  tit  id  tremble  because
of  her,  for  God  will  be  in  the  midst
of  Zion,  and  he  hath  sworn  by  the
power  of  his  might  that  he  will  be
her  refuge,  her  hijjh  lower  and  her
strength,  and  he  will  uphold  and
sustain  her,  if  she  keep  his  com-
mand ments  in  nil  things;  but  if  not,
here  is  a  not  her  declaration  to  all —


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


fathers  and  mothers,  middle  aged,
old  and  young — who  transgress  the
command  meats  of  God,  "If  Zion
does  not  observe  to  do  ail  tilings
whatsoever  that  f  have  commanded
her,  I  will  visit  her  according  to  all
her  works,  I  will  visit  her  wiih  sore
tribulations — with  pestilence,  plague,
vengeance,  sword,  with  the  flame  of
devouring  fire/1  &

The  Lord  means  hat  he  says.
He  has  told  us  in  one  of  the  first
revelations  published  in  this  book,
that  though  the  heavens  and  the
earth  should  piss  away,  not  one  of
the  prophecies  and  predictions  con-
tained in  these  revelations  should
go  unfulfilled  ;  th  refore  if  Zion  sins,
if  her  people  suffer  pr  ide  to  arise  in
their  hearts,  and  follow  after  the
foolish  fashions  of  the  Gentiles  who
come  into  their  midst,  and  are  lifted
up  one  above  another,  the  rich  and
wealthy  looking  down  npon  the
poor  with  scorn  and  derisiou  because
they  cannot  clothe  themselves  in
the  same  costly  apparel  as  the  rich,
and  begin  to  make  distinctions  of
classes  among  themselves,  behold
the  Lord  Will  visit  Zion  according  to
all  hi  r  works,  and  he  will  purge  her
and  pour  forth  his  judgments  upon
her,  according  to  that  which  he  has
spoken,

I  hope  that  we  shall  take  a  course


and  for
afflicted
lengthy


may  it  come  from  thine  hands,"
When  the  Lord  through  the  Prophet
gave  David  the  choice  of  one  of
three  terrible  judgment? — first  to
fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,
the  people  of  Israel  to  be
many  years ;  second,  a
fa  ij  line,  and  third,  three
days1  pestilence,  he  chose  the  three
days'  pestilence,  for  he  said  it  was
better  to  fall  into  the  hands  ol  the
Lord,  who  was  full  of  tender  mercy,
and  who  might  repent  and  with-
draw the  chastisement,  than  to  fall
into  the  hands  of  the  wicked  who
have  no  mercy,  I  would  say  the
same  so  far  as  my  feelings  are  con-
cerned, and  if  it  he  needful  let  the
Lord  chasten  those  who  need  it,  and
not  suffer  us  to  continue  in  our  sin,
and  to  tftow  and  flourish  like  the
green  bay  tree,  as  the  wicked  do
until  we  are  cut  off  finally  from  the
earth  and  cast  away  in  the  eternal
worlds.  It  is  better  for  i:s  to  be
save  !  there  if  we  are  punished  here.

The  scourge  of  the  Lord,  we  are
told  in  this  revelation,  shall  go  forth
by  day  and  by  night,  and  the  re-
poit  thereof  shall  vex  all  people.
Among  all  those  revelations  con-
cerning the  scourges  that  were  to
go  forth,  the  one  which  I  have  read
was  given  long  before  the  cholera
broke  out. The  first  year  that  w*


to  prevent  these  things  coming  upon have  any  knowledge  of  that  terrible


us.  It  is  better  to  be  chastened
and  receive  judgment  in  this  world,
even  if  it  be  sword,  pestilence,  fam-
ine and  the  flame  of  a  devouring
fire,  if  we  can  be  brought  to  repent-
ance thereby,  than  to  remain  un-
chastised  and  go  down  swiftly  to
the  pit  If  we,  because  of  our  sins,
need  chastising  by  the  Almighty,
let  the  chastisement  come  while  we
are  in  the  flesh,  that  we  may  repent;
and  I  would  say  still  further,  and
pray  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  "  Oh
Lord,  if  chastisement  must  come,


plague,  if  I  mistake  not,  was  1833,
some  lour  years  after  this  reeelatio*
was  given  that  the  Lord  would  send
forth  scourges.  He  did  rend  forth  a
scourge  that  seemed  to  sweep  over
all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Did  it
come  among  the  Latter-day  Saints  ?
It  did.  Why  ?  Because  they  did
not  keep  his  commandments,  and
as  the  Destroyer  was  abroad  laying
waste  the  nations,  the  Latter-day
Saints  bad  to  receive  their  share,  I
mean  those  among  us  who  did  not
keep  the  commandments of  the


LATTKR-DAY

Lord,  When  we  were  journeying
between  Ohio  and  the  State  of  Mis-
souri, Joseoh  told  us  if  we  did  not
keep  the  commandments  of  God  and
hearken  to  his  counsel  we  should  die
off  like  rotten  sheep  in  that  camp.
There  w;is  no  sickness  among  us  |
at  that  time,  and  probably  some  [
in  the  camp  did  not  believe  that
the  words  of  the  Prophet  Would
be  fulfilled  ;  but  after  we  had  tra-
veled a  few  weeks,  and  did  not  do
that  which  we  were  told,  we  learned
to  our  sorrow  that  the  hand  of  the
Lord  was  upon  us,  and  found  the
words  of  the  Prophet  verified  to  the
very  letter,  and  numbers  were  laid
low  by  cholera.

The  Lord  has  told  us  in  this  book
that  he  would  scourge  this  people,
and  would  not  suffer  them  to  go  on
in  wickedness  as  he  does  the  world.
He  will  make  a  difference  in  this j
respect  between  those  who  profess  j
his  name  and  the  world.  The  world
may  prosper.  They  have  not  the
religion  of  Heaven  among  them;
they  have  no  revel  a  tors  and  prophets
among  them ;  they  have  not  the
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  nor  the
gifts  and  blessings  of  God  among
them,  and  consequently  though  they
transgress  the  revealed  word  of  God,
he  suffers  them  to  go  on,  apparently
without  checking  them,  until  they
are  fully  ripened  in  iniquity,  then
he  sends  forth  judgment  and  cuts
tbem  off,  instead  of  chastening  them
from  time  to  time.  Not  so  with
the  Saints.  God  has  decreed,  from
the  early  rise  of  the  Church,  that
we  should  be  afflicted  by  our  en-
emies, and  by  various  afflictions,
and  he  would  contend  with  this
people  and  chasten  them  from
time  to  time  until  Zion  should  be
dean  before  him.  He  has  done  this,
and  more  especially  while  we  were
in  the  States.  We  were  inexpe-
rienced,  and did  not  then  under-  i


JUDGMENTS.  335

stand  the  necessity  of  strictly  obey-
in  ff  every  word  spoken  by  the  month  ■
of  God,  and  we  had  to  suffer  be-
cause of  this.  We  were  first  driven
from  Kirtland,  in  the  State  of  Ohio;
driven  again  from  Jackson  County,
in  the  State  of  Missouri ;  again  from
Clay  County  into  other  counties  in
Missouri ;  a^ain  from  Far  West  and
Caldwell  County ;  driven  from  the
State  of  Illinois,  though  we  were
prospered  there  until  the  people
wax^d  wealth v  through  their  indus-
try,  then  we  were  driven  again.  We
have  been  literally  fulfilling  the
prophecies  contained  in  this  good
old  hook,  the  Bihle,  Zion  lias  been
tnssed  to  and  fro  and  not  comforted.
Site  has  been  driven  from  place  to
placo  and  from  State  to  State,  until
finally  she  was  driven  into  the  wil-
derness. What  have  all  these  afflic-
tions been  for?  To  fulfill  the  word
of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  the
Prophets.  Joseph  Smith  told  us,
or  the  Lord  did  through  him,  and
it  is  printed  here  in  this  book,  that
when  he  first  planted  this  people  in
Jackson  County,  in  the  State  of
Missouri,  if  we  did  not  take  such
and  such  a  course,  our  enemies  would
come  upon  us,  our  blood  would  be
shed  by  them,  and  we  should  l»e  *
scattered  and  driven  from  place  to
place,  and  tins  has  been  literacy  ful-
filled upon  our  he  :ds.

I  do  not  know  that  it  is  necessary
to  say  any  more  about  the  new  reve-
lations, let  us  turn  now  to  some  of
the  old  ones.  I  might  refer  you  to
many  prophecies  contained  in  tht
Book  of  Mormon,  as  well  as  those
contained  in  the  Book  of  Covenants
relative  to  the  great  judgments  of
the  latter  days,  but  I  perceive  that
I  shall  not  have  time  to  do  so,  and
also  to  refer  to  some  that  are  in  th«
Bible.  I  will  turn  now  to  the  reve-
lations of  St.  John,  and  will  refer
first  to  a  few  sayings  contained  m


JOURNAL  OF  DE800URSK8


the  14th  chapter,  commencing  at  the
6 til  verse: —

And  T  naw  another  anurel  fly  in  the  midst
of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting  (Gospel  to
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,
and  tfi  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people.

Saying  with  a  loud  voice*  Fear  Hod,  and
give  ylory  to  him  ;  for  the  hour  of  his  judg-
ment is  cuiiie.

it  seems  that  the  dispensation  in
which  the  Angel  should  fly  was  to
be  characterized  as  a  dispensation
of  judgment.  Immediately  aft^r
the  Ahl^I  brou^hr  the  (Jospel  judsf-
nit  nt  w;is  to  be  poun  d  nut  on
the  unions  of  the  earth  la  the
8th  ver&u  we  read,  "And  there  fol-
lowed another  Angel,  saying,  '  Baby-
lon is  fallen,  is  fallen,  that  great
city,  because  she  made  all  nations
drink  pf  1  lie  wine  of  the  wmfh  of
her  fornication.'  And  a  third  An-
gel loll  >ued,  saying  with  a  loud
voice,  'If  any  man  worship  the
beast  and  his  image,  and  receive
his  mark  in  Ins  forehead  or  in  his
hand,  the  same  shall  drink  of  the
wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is
pou  red  #  out  wit  hoot  mixture  into
the  nip  of  Ins  indignation  and  he
shall  be  tormented  with  tire  and  brim-
stone  in  the  presence  of  the  holy
Au-jels  and  in  the  presence  of  the
Lamb/  '*

To  show  that  tins  preaching  of  the
Gospel  and  the  pouring  out  of  these
judgments  upon  spiritual  liabylun
the  Great,  was  a  work  which  should
precede  the  coining  of  the  Sun  of
Man,  I  will  read  the  14?th  verse  and
to  the  end  of  the  chapter

And  I  looked,  and  behold  a  white  cloud,
and  upon  the  cloud  one  sat  like  unto  the
Son  of  man,  having  on  his  head  a  golden
crown,  and  in  Lin  hand  a  sharp  sickle.

And  another  Angel  came  out  of  the
Temple,  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him
that  sat  on  the  cloud,  Thrust  in  thy  sickle
ami  reap  ;  for  the  time  is  come  for  thee  to
reap,  for  the,  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe.

And  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  in
his  .sickle  nn  the  earth  ;  and  the  earth  was
reaped.

And  anotaer  A:i^>1 came  out  of  the


Temple  which  is  in  heaven,  he  also  having
a  sharp  sickle.

And  another  An^el  eauie  out  from  the
ah^r,  which  had  power  over  fire,  and  cried
with  a  loud  cry  to  htm  that  had  the  sharp
sickle,  saying  Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,
and  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the
earth,  fur  her  grapes  are  fully  ripe.

And  the  Au^el  thrust  in  his  sickle  into
the  earth,  ami  gathered  the  vine  of  the
earth,  and  cast  it  into  the  great  wine-
press of  the  wrath  of  God.

And  the  winepress  was  trodden  without
the  eitv.  and  blood  catne  out  of  the  wine-
press,  even  unto  the  horse  bridles,  by  the
>pace  of  a  thousand  and  six  hundred  fur-

It'll  J*

You  sen  then  frmi  this  what  is  to
follow  the*  coining  of  that  Angel
with  the  Gospel.  The  one  repre-
senting ti  e  Son  of  man  is  to  thrust
in  his  sickle  find  reap  the  earth,
then  the  Angels  rm»  snnt  forth  to
thru^r  in  their  siekhs  and  also  to
reap.  Those  Angels  are  to  gather
the  clusters  of  I  be  vine  of  the  earth
into  one  place  that  they  may  be
punished  iind  the  judgment  which
will  m'erhike  them  who  are  thus
gathered  together  will  ho  so  severe
as  to  cause  the  blood  that  is  shed  to
reach  to  the  hoises  bridles.  That
is  called  the  winepress  of  the  Lord,
Would  you  like-  tu  know  where  that
spot  is,  Find  why  the  people  are
gathered  there  ?  The  Lord  will  suf-
fer three  unclean  spirits,  John  tells
us  in  another  place,  to  go  forth
about  that  time,  spirits  of  devils
working  in i rades,  and  they  shall
gather  together  the  kings  and
guat  meti  of  the  earth  and  their
armies  to  a  place  called  iu  the  He-
Drew  tongue j Armageddon,  the  Lord
calls  it  a  gf£!t  wine  press.  Where
is  this  Armageddon?  It  is  a  little
enst  of  the  old  cit  v  of  Jerusalem.

'  In  order  to  show  you  that  that  is
the  wine  press  where  the  Lord  will
pour  out  these  judgments,  let  ine
call  your  attention  to  the  third  chap-
ter of  the  prophecies  of  Joel,  where
this  same  thing  is  alluded  to,  the
valley  of  Jehoshaphat  mentioned  by


Joel,  ntic]  the  valley  of  Armageddon

spoken  of  by  John,"  being  very  near
together,  in  the  same  neighborhood.

Joel  says —

Fi»:\  behold,  in  those  days,  and  in  that
time,  when  I  shall  firing  again  the  captivity
of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,

I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  will
bring'  them  down  into  the  valley  of  Jeho-
tthaphat,  and  will  plead  with  them  then*
for  my  people  and  for  my  heritage  Israel,
whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  na-
tion?* and  parted  my  land.

In  tins  Or 1 1  verse  ha  says —
Proclaim  ye  this  anions  the  Gentiles,
Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men,
let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near  ;  let  them

come  up ;

'  Beat  your  plowshares  into  swords,  and
your  pruning  hooks  into  spears  ;  let  the
weak  say,  1  am  strong.

Assemble  yourselves,  and  come,  all  ye
heathen,  and  irather  j'ourselves  together
round  about :  thither  cause  thy  mighty
onen  to  come  down,  O  Lord.

The  Lord  will  come  with  all  his
Stints  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  just
about  the  time  this  army  gets  into
the  valley  of  Jehoshaphnt.  _

Let  the  heathen  be  wakened,  and  come
up  to  the  valley  of  JehosKaphat ;  for  there
will  I  lit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  round
alxmt,

4fc  Put  ye  in  the  sickle,  for  the  har-
vest is  ripe" — the  same  harvest
mentioned  in  the  14th  chapter  tif

John.  * . ri  i  v  ♦

Put  ye  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is
ripe :  come,  get  you  down,  for  the  press  is
full,  the  fats  overflow  ;  for  their  wicked-
iie**  is  great

Multitudes,  multitudes  in  the  valley  of
decision :  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  i$  near
in  the  valley  of  decision.

The  sun  anil  the  moon  shall  be  dark-
ened, and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their
shining.

If  you  want  to  know  about;  the
time  whe:i  the  sun  and  moon  are  to
be  darkened,  and  when  the  stars
will  no  longer  give  any  light,  and
when  there  will  be  total  darkness
over  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  here
is  an  event  predicted  so  that  you
can  not  mis*<ab\  When  you  see
the  nations  of  the  earth,  especially
the  heathen  nations,  and  also  those
north  of  Jerusalem — the  great  na-
tion of  Russia  and  other  nations  on

No,  22.


flic  continent  of  Asia,  together  with
many  in  Barone,  Gather  up  against
Jerusalem  after  the  Jews  have  re-
turned and  rebuilt  their  chy  and
Temple,  and  when  their  amies  be*
come  exceeding  o;re:U  multitudes  ia
the  valley  of  decision,  then  you
may  loofc  for  the  Lord  to  come
down  with  his  mighty  ones,  and  fop
the  constellations  of  heaven  to  be
darkened.  •

The  L'j-d  aluo  fthall  roar  out  of  Zion*
ami  utter  his  voice  from  JerumleKi  ;  and
the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  Miake :  but
the  Loud  wilt  be  the  hope  m  his  people,
and  the  strength  of  the  children  of  Israel*

The  children  of  Israel  as  well  as
J ud ah  will  put  their  trust  in  the
Lord  God  of  their  fathers  in  that
xlay,  and  they  will  look  for  deliver-
ance from  his  band.  They  will
know  that  they  can  not  stand  with-
out the  aid  of  the  L  *rd  against  all
those  from  the  north  quarters — Gog
and  Magog,  all  the  hosts  of  Russia
and  of  the  various  nations  round
ahont  that  come  up  there  and  cover
the  land  like  a  cloud.  They  will
know  that  unless  (!ud  helps  them
they  can  not  obtain  a  victory  over
thin  mighty  ho=>r ;  but  they  will  pat
their  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  he  will
"  roar  out  of  Zion  and  utter  his  voice
from  Jerusalem/'  sind  he  will  be  the
hope  of  his  people  and  the  strength
of  the  children  of  Israel.

So  shall  ye  know  that  I  nm  the  Lord
your  God  dwelling  in  Zion,  my  holy  moun-
tain :  then  shall  Jerusalem  he  holy,  and
there  shall  no  w trails'  rs  pass  through  her
any  more.

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,
that  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new
wine,  and  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milkt
arid  all  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall  Hnwwitn
waters,  and  the  fountain  shall  come  forth
of  the  house  of  the  Loud,  and  shall  water
the  valley  of  Shittim.

Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation,  and  Edom
shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  for  the  vio-
lence again-it  the  children  of  Judah,  be-*
cause  they  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their
land,

But  Judah  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and
Jerusalem  from  generation  to  generation.
For  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have

Vol.  XV.


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES.


not  cleansed:  for  the  f^'HD  ciwelletH  in

^  on*  » ^liSi  «tf3

Let  me  make  a  f*-w  remarks  here

hi  illation  to  the  difference  between
Ziou  and  Jerusalem- Zion  will  be
favored with the  presence  of  the
Jjord  before  the  Jews  are  permitted
behold  him. The  Lord  will  come
tp  the  Temple  of  Zion  before  he
ponies  to  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,
Before  lie  conies  in the  clouds  of
heaven  with  power  and  great  glory,
be  will  manifest  himself  in  the  city
And  Temple  of  Zion ;  or  in  other
<rordi?  all  the  pure  in  heart  who  are
permitted  in  those  days  to  enter  into
jthe  Lords  Temple  in  Zion,  which
)vill  be  built  on  this  continent,  the
Lord  will  reveal  his  face  unto  them,
|hey  will  see  him  and  he  will  dwell
in  the  midst  of  Zion. His  throne
pill  be  there. This  land — the  land
iven  to  the  children  of  ancient  Jo-
sph,  now  culled  the  American  con-
tinent— will  be  the  land  of  Zion,
#nd  the  great  central  capital  on  this
laud  will  be  the  New  Jerusalem;  and
Hie  inhabitants  of  that city  and
Leir  habitations  and  Temple  will
overshadowed by  the  glory  of
|Bod, But  after  he  has  come  to  and
soared  out  of  Zion,  after  he  has
r"  suddenly  come to his  Temple,"  j
and  visited  his  people  there  in  the
character  of  a  Shepherd,  and  dwelt
Ju  their midst  for  a  long  space  of.
-time,  he  then  goes  with all  his
•Saints  lo  visit  old  Jernsalem,  the
last  work  before  the  day  of  rest  i
,#hall  come  being  to  visit  those  na-  ;
^tions  that  are  gathered  together  in  1
*ihe  great  winepress  to  be  trodden  i
/Without  the  city  on  the  east  side  of
vthe  citv, and  there  the  blood  of
fhorses, camels  and  men  will  be
-mingled  together,  and  in  those  small
galleys,  so  great  will  be  the  number
alain  that  the  blood  will  reach  to  the
^horses'  bridles,  for  a  certain  distance,
^ppoording  to  the  words  of  the  Lord.


I  do  not  know  that  I  have  time  to
enter  into  a  full  investigation  of
some  other  terrible  judgments  that
are  to  come,  but  I  will  refer  to  a  few
of  them  mentioned  in  the  revelations
of  St.  John. Before  doing  so,  how-
ever, let  me  say  for  vour  information
that  the  Lord  gave  through  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith  what  is  termed  a
key  to  John's  revelation. The  Pro-
phet on  one  occasion  asked  the  Lord
what  was  meant  by  the  sounding  of
the  trumpets  of  the  seven  angels,  and
the  Lord  answered  him  in  this  Ian
guage,  as  near  as  I  can recollect :
"As  the  Lord  made  the  earth  and
the  heavens  in  six  days,  and  on  the
seventh  day  finished his  work  and
made  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the
earth, so in  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  thousand  years  will  the  Lord
God  sanctity  the  earth  and  redeem
man,  even all that  is  within  his
power,  and  shall  seal  all  things  unto
the  end of  all  things. And  the
sounding  of  the  seven  trumps  is  the
preparing  and  finishing  of  his  work
in  the  morning  of  the  seventh  thou-
sand yearn*"  n  <\n n\  Jfcev
This  gives  a  clue  to  the  time  when
the  seven  angels  will  sound.  They
will not  sound  their  trumpets  in
the  evening  of  the  sixth  thousand
years,  but  when  the  six  thousand
years  shall  have  passed  away  from
the  creation,  and  the  morning  of  the
seventh  has  commenced,  then  these
great  events  will happen.  Jesus
does  not  come  immediately  at  the
commencement  of  the  seventh  thou-
sand years,  but  as  there  was  a  work
in  the  beginning  which  he  performed
on  the  seventh  day,  such  as  planting
the  garden  and  placing  men  therein,
so  there  will  be  a  certain  work  to  be
performed  in  the  beginnki^  of  the
seventh  thousand  years,  namely,  the
resurrection  and  redemption  of  man,
including  the  heathen  nations  and
those  people  in  prison  who  have  died


LATTER-DAY

without  the  law  and  have  been  pun-
ished for  their  sins.  When  the  Lord
has  caused  these  seven  angels  to  sound
their  trumps,  he  will  bring  about  all
these  purposes  which  he  has  ordained,

*and  which  must  be  accomplished  in
that  morning.  Before  Jesus  appears
in  the  clouds  of  heaven  they  are  to
sound  to  prepare  the  way  of  the
Lord  before  his  coming.  What  will
take  place  when  they  sound  ?  I  will
tell  you  some  few  things.

When  the  first  angel  sounds  there
will  come  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  a  great  hailstorm  mingled
with  fire  and  blood,  and  so  severe
will  be  this  storm  of  tire  and  blood,
that  one-third  of  the  trees  will  be

-j destroyed,  and  all  the  green  grass

| will  be  burned  up.  The  second
ang<.  I  will  sound  his  trump,  and  the
J  Lord  will  pour  out  his  judgments
upon  the  water,  and  a  third  part  of
the  sea  will  become  blood,  and  in
consequence  of  the  corruption  thereof
one-third  part of  all,  the  animals

[  living  in  the  sea  will  die.

When  the  third  angel  sounds  his

%  trump,  John  says  he  saw  a  star  fall
from  heaven  to  earth,  burning  as  it

Jwere  like  a  lamp,  and  it  fell  upon
the  fountains  and rivers  of  water,

wJand  they  were  turned  into  bitter-
ness, and  the  name  of  the  star  was
called  "  Wormwood,"  and  great  were

^ihe numbers  of  the people  who

^.perished  and died because  of  the

I  bitterness  of  the  waters.

The  fourth  angel  will  sound  his
trump  and  certain  judgments  will
follow.  By  and  by  the  fifth  angel
will  sound  his  trump,  and  an  angel
will  descend  holding  the  key  of  what
is  termed  the  bottomless  pit,  and  he
will  open  the  door  of  this  pit,  and
there  shall  issue  therefrom  certain
04terrible  creatures  called  locusts.  And
it  will  be  given  unto  them  to  torment
men  five  months — the  time  which  is
to  intervene  between  the  sounding  of

Mnhh  of  i  s


JUDGMENTS- •  339

the  fifth  and  sixth  trumpets,  and
during  that  time  these  awful  crea-
tures, such  as  neither  we  nor  our
forefathers,  in  all  the  generations
before  us,  have  ever  seen  on  the
earth,  will  torment  the  wicked.  These
creatures  have  wings,  hair  like  wo-
men, teeth  like  lions,  tails  like  scor-
pions, and  with  their  stings  they  will
torment  the  wicked  for  five  months.
But  it  will  not  be  given  unto  them
to  destroy  men,  only  to  torment  them.
That  will  be  a  terrible  judgment.
They  will  have  a  king  over  them,
whose  name  in  the  Greek  tongue  is
"  Apollyon,"  in  other  words  the
devil.  He  has  power  over  them  and
with  them,  and  commands  these
aw ful  beings,  and  they  go  forth  and
torment  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
but  are  not  permitted  to  kill  them.
Men  in  those  days  will  seek  for  death,
but  it  will  flee  from  them,  although
they  will  greatly  desire  it  on  account
of  the  terrible  torment  they  endure.

When  the  Lord  permits  the  devil
to  go  forth  and  torment  people  he
has  considerable  power.  You  can
see  this  in  the  case  of  Job,  When
the  devil  stirred  up  the  Lord  to  tor-
ment Job,  the  devil  was  permitted
to  go  and  strike  Job  with  pestilence,
with  sore  boils,  and  to  make  him
feel  sorrow,  pain  and  distress.  Said
the  devil  to  the  Lord,  11  He  will  curse
you  to  your  face,"  and  to  prove  whe-
ther he  would  or  not  Job  was  sorely
smitten  and  afflicted  j  and  so  will
men  be  afflicted  by  these  awful  crea*
tures  which  will  issue  from  the  bot-
tomless pit,  and  are  under  his  com-
mand. '

By  and  by  the  sixth  angel  sounds
his  trumpet,  and  what  will  take
place  ?  The  powers  around  the  great
river  Euphrates  in  Asia  will  be
loosed,  and  they  will  come  forth
riding  on  horses,  and  the  number  of
them  is  two  hundred  thousand  thou-
sand, that  is  two  hundred  millions—


240


JUL  UN  A  L  OF  DISCUlVRSES.


a  great  and  tremendous  ft rroy,  greater
than  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
evei-  mia-  before.  Who  will  be  with
them  ?  This  same  class  of  beings
with  animuls  such  as  I  lie  earth  never
saw  nor  heard  of,  only  as  they  heard
of  them  in  the  revelations  of  St.
John.  Animals  with  brimstone  and
fire  issuing  from  their  mouths,  having
tails  like  serpents,  and  heady  to  their
tads,  and  with  these  one* third  part
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  to
be  destroyed.  How  long  will  it  be
before  they  are  destroyed?  There
will  !  e  sit  least  h  year  pass  away  be-
tween the  sounding  of  the  sixth  and
s\-vt:::lh  trumpets.  This  great  army
is  prepared  fur  a  day,  and  an  hour,  a
month  and  a  year.  Now  I  have
named  some  of  the  judgments,  not
all,  vhut  will  transpire  before  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Let  me
teler  in  a  few  words  to  some  of  the
last  opes  that  will  come  before  Jesus
makes  his  uppcHrauce,  called  the
seven  last  plagues.  I  shall  only
refer  to  a  few  of  them.

One  of  the  four  beasts  gives  seven
vials  filled  with  the  wrath  of  God
tu  Use  s-even  Angels,  that  came  nut.
of  the  Temple  and  Tabernacle  in
heaven,  and  these  vials  are  to  be
poured  out  upon  the  earth.  We
find  that  the  inhabitants  are  to  be
visited  with  greater  judgments  than
what  they  have  been  heretofore,  so
much  so  that  when  the  second  An-
gel pours  out  bis  vial  upon  the
great  waters,  instead  of  a  third  part
of  them  becoming  blood,  they  all
become  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  man ;
and  then;  shall  not  any  living  thing
be  preserved  in  the  great  mass  of
waters  on  our  globe,  but  everything
living  in  the  sea  will  perish,  the
whole  ocean  becoming  as  the  blood
of  a  dead  man.  Quite  a  difference
between  the  blood  of  a  dead  man
aod  the  blood  that  comes  from  a
living  man— one  is  very  nauseous


when  compared  with  i he  other.  No
wonder  then  that  everything  having
life  in  the  sea  shuul  :  p"ri.-h.

A  third  Angel  pours  out  his  vial
on  the  fountains  and  i i vets,  and
they  also  become  blood,  Tola  have
already  learned  that  when  the  third
Angel  sounded  his  trump  the  third
part  of  the  waters  berime  Htter
with  wormwood,  and  it  was  accom-
panied by  certain  judgments  not
universal,  but  when  the  la-i  p!  igues
are  poured  out  the  fountains  and
rivers  of  water,  and  the  ocean
become  blood.  Does  this  cause  the
people  tt>  repent  f  One  would  im-
agine that  aU  the  e-rfh  would  re-
pent when  they  see  judgments  of
tmw  kind  ;  yet  we  are  told  that  for  all
this  the  people  will  blaspheme  God,
because  of  their  plagues,  sores  and*
pains,  find  the  calamities  they  have
to  endure.  They  are  given  up  to
h:mlntss  of  heart,  the  Spirit  <<t  Uod
is  withdrawn  from  the-::,  and  in-
st-  ad  of  repenting  of  their  evil
deeds,  their  murders,  sorceries,  whore-
doms, idolatries,  thefts  nud  various
crimes  that  tire  menu  >ned,  they
continue  in  their  wickeduesss,  and
judgment  after  judgment  is  poured
upon  thc:n  until  they  arc  con-
sumed. J\  .  ;  1

When  the  rivers  and  fountains
an*  turned  into  blood,  a  cert  an  An^
gel  cries  out  saying,  "Thoti  art
righteous,  0  Lord,  which  art  and
wast  *md  shall  bet  because  thou  hast
judged  thus-  For  they  have  shed
the  blood  of  Saints  and  Prophets,
and  thou  hast  given  them  blood  to
drink,  for  they  are  worthy/1  This
shows  that  there  will  be  Prophets
iii  those  days  and  that  these  people
will  shed  their  blood.  A  great
many  people  think  there  are  to  be  no
more  Prophets;  but  the  Prophets
have  their  blood  shed  in  those  days,
and  find  will  give  the  wicked  blood
to  drink.


HIS  ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  THE  DECEASED,  ETC.


341


There  are  many  other  things  on
my  mind  that  I  woald  be  glad  to
lay  before  yo::  concerning  the  terri-
rible  judgments  of  the  last  days,
bat  I  have  already  occupied  too
much  of  your  time.  We  are  living
in  this  Territory,  comparatively  at
peace,  but  unless  the  Latter-day
Saints  live  according  to  the  light
which  God  1ms  revealed  to  them,
they  (Mimot  escape.  If  Go  1  wends
judgments  upon  the  nations,  he  will
send  them  upon  us.  If  he  cub*  off
the  horses  of  the  nations,  as  he  has
said  in  the  Book  of  Mormon  i  lint
he  will,  up.ui  the  face  of  this  land,
unless  we  keep  his  commandments
he  will  cut  off  oura.  If  lie  visits
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  with
pestilence  and  blood,  he  will  visit
ug  in  a  similar  manner  unless  we
keep  his  commandraeptfl.  If  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  who  know


not  God  are  to  perish  because  of  *\
thetr  wickedness,  how  much  more
will  he  visit  those  who  have  greater
light  and  knowledge  if  they  will
not  keep  his  commandments  ?  The
Lord  seat  forth  the  destroyer  in  an-
cient times  to  lav  waste  the  first-
born  of  the  Egyptians,  pointing  out
the  mean!*  by  which  his  people
might  escape,  and  those  who  f' tiled
to  do  as  they  were  e  mirnandrd  had
no  promise  <d  being  preserved;  so
in  these  dtys  when  judgments
come,  t hey  will  begin  among  his
Saints,  and  those  who  ha^'e  not
attended  to  the  word  of  wisd  m  and
the  laws  of  life  that  he  has  pointed
out  and  Imve  no  claim  to  mercy  and
favor,  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.
They  who  have  great  li^ht  :»ud  yet
sin  will  endure  tribal \M-m  and  m  hg-
natiou  from  his  hand  unless  they
repent.  ,  Amen*  *


R K \ I A HKS BY EL DE it W 1 LFOR  D  WOODRUFF,


At  Tin;  Ki  nkral  Services  of  Kliu;u  Wii  mam  Pitt,  in  tiik  Uth  Wakd
(J  Askembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  <  itv,  Sunday  Mornjno,  Fkb.  23,  1873.

(Reported  h\f  David  W.  Evans.)


*L3


HIS V  \0  .'AINTAXi'K-  WITH  THE  I  >Kf  KASKlJ — IN(T1>KNTS IN  TIIK  LATTKKS

LI FK  SIM'K  HE  JOINED  TIIK  HIUUCH.


My  friends  here  kindly  granted
me  the  privilege  of  making  some
opening  remarks  on  this  occasion.
I  had  an  appointment  m  Qgdett  to-
dav\  but  when  I  heard  of  the  death
of  brother  Pitt  1  felt  as  though  I


wanted  to  attend  his  funeral.  If  I
had  heard  that  one  of  my.  own  family
had  dropped  dead  I  should  not  have
been  more  surprised  than  I  was  when
I  heard  of  the  death  ot  brother  Pitt
i  was  conversing  with  him  in  the


342


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


street,  I  think  the  day  before  he  was  ,
hurt,  'and  he  was  then,  apparently,
cheerful,  comfortable,  well  and  happy.
When  1  heard  that  ho  was  dead,  I
immediately  went  to  his  house,  visited
his  family  and  saw  his  body.  I  will
say  that  I  seldom  or  ever  give  way.
to  weeping,  either  for  the  living  or
the  dead,  but  upon  this  occasion,
when  I  saw  his  body  lie  cold  in
death,  all  the  early  scenes  of  ray
acquaintance  with  hiin  in  the  Here-
fordshire mission  rushed  upon  me
like  a  whirlwind,  and  I  confess  that
[  manifested  a  good  deal  of  weak-*
ness  in  giving  way  to  weeping  before
the  family.  Solomon  says  there  is  a
time  to  weep  and  a  time  to  laugh,  a
time  to  mourn  and  a  time  to  rejoice ;
and  there  are  times  when  reason  wilj
excuse  weeping,  Anthony  said,  "  I
come  to  bnry  Csasar,  not  to  praise  j
him,"  yet  Anthony  did,  on  that  occa-
sion, portray  before  the  Senate  and
citizens  of  Rome  the  virtues  of  Co93ar
in  his  public  life.  We  have  come  to
bury  brother  Pitt,  and  I  do  not  con*
sider  it  wrong  to  speak  of  the  virtues
and  good  deeds  of  the  dead  any  more
than  of  those  of  the  living.

My  first  acquaintance  with  bro-
ther Pitt  was  of  such  a  character  as
to  cause  the  formation  of  ties  be*
tween  us  of  no  ordinary  nature,  as  it
is,  I  may  say,  with  all  the  associa-  j
tions  of  the  Eiders  of  Israel  The
world  know  nothing  about  these
ties.  The  ties  they  form  together
are  very  different  from  those  formed
between  the  servants  of  God,  who
are  associated  together  in  the  Holy
Priesthood  and  bg  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost  and  the  inspiration  of
the  Lord  our  God.  These  are  ties
that  no  men  comprehend  unless  they
occupy  the  same  position  that  we
occupy.  I  have  found  this  in  my
whole  career  with  this  Church  and
kingdom.  1  love  the  brethren  and
the  Saints  of  God,  because  we  are


associated  together  in  a  great,  noble
and  Godlike  cause  ;  and  these  associ-
ations are  to  ourselves,  and  what
more  can  a  man  do  than  lay  down
his  life  for  his  friend  ?  How  many
are  there  in  this  room  and  in  this
Church  and  kingdom,  who,  in  case  of
necessity,  would  be  willing  to  lay
down  their  lives  to  save  'their  bre-
thren ?  There  are  thousands  of
them, \  if  tut***  u  u[

I  wish,  and  feel  that  it  is  my  pri-
vilege, to  refer  to  my  first  acquaint-
ance with  brother  Pitt,  whose  body
lies  before  us  to-day.  The  history
of  the  Herefordshire  mission  is  before
the  world  and  before  the  Church,
and  I  wish  in  a  few  words  to  refer  to
that  mission,  for  it  was  there  that  I
became  acquainted  with  brother  Pitt.
Brother  Taylor  and  1  were  the  first
two  of  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve
who  arrived  in  England  in  1840.
Brother  Taylor  went  to  Liverpool,
and  I  went  to  the  Staffordshire  pot-
teries, I  labored  there  with  brother
Alfred  Cordon,  wh3  is  now  in  the
spirit  world.  We  were  preaching
almost  every  night,  and  we  baptized
some  nearly  every  meeting.  It  was
,  a  very  good  mission.

Some  eighty  miles  from  there,
in  Herefordshire,  there  were  people
who  had  never  seen  a  Latter-day
I  Saint,  and  never  heard  the  Gospel.
Some  six  hundred  of  them  had  bro-
ken  off  from  the  Wesley  an  Metho-
dists, and  called  themselves  the
**  United  Brethren/*  They  were
under  the  presidency  of  Elder  Thos.
Kington.  Shey  were  searching  for
light  and  truth.  As  a  body  they
had  called  upon  the  Lord,  and  had
advanced  just  as  far  as  they  could
with  what  light  they  had.9  :They
prayed  to  the  Lord  that  he  would
open  the  way  before  them,  th&t
they  might  advance  in  the  things
of  his  kingdom.  While  in  tms
position  I  went  one  evening  to  fill


HIS  AOiUAINTAXCE  WITH  THE  T)E''KASKI>,  ETV.


an  appointment  in  the  Town  Hall,
at  the  town  of  Han  ley. There  was
a  very  large  congregation, and I  i
had  appointments  nut  fur  two  or
three weeks in that town  and
adjacent villages. As  I went  to
take  my  seat  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
came upon me and said to  me,
41  This  is  the  last  meeting  you  will
hold with tli  is  peo
days." I  vvas  surprised,  because  1
did  not  know,  of  course  what,  the
Lord  wanted  me  to  do. I  told  the
assembly  when  I  rose,  "This  is  the
last  meeting  I  shall  hold  with  yon
for  many  days." They  asked  me
after  meeting  where  I  was  going.
I told  them  I  did  not know.  I
went  before  the  Lord  in  my  closet
and  asked  him  where  he  wished  me
to  go,  and  all  the  answer  I  could
get  was  to  go  to  the  South. I  got
into  a  stage  and  rode  eighty  mites
south,  as  I  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord. The  first  man's  house  [
went into was John  Beribjw's.
He  lives  now  down  here  at  Cotton-
wood. I had  '  some  conversation
witli  Brother  Ben  bow, and I  told
him  that  the  Lord  had  sent  me  to
that  place. But  without  wishing  to
dwell  on  this subject  particularly
I  will  say  that  I  learned  that  there
were  six  hundred  people  there,  under
Elder  Kington,  called  United  Breth-
ren, and  that  they  h;id  been  praying
to  the  L6rd  for  guidance in  th§
wav  of  life  and  salvation.  Then
I  knew  why  the  Lord  had  sent  me
to  that  place — he  had  sent  them
what they had teen praying  for,
I  commenced  preaching  the  Gospel
to  them, and I also  commenced
baptizing,  Elder  Pitt  being  among
the  first  who  was  biptized  by  me
into this Church and  kingdom.
The  first  thirty  days  after  1  arrived
^there I had baptized  foity-flve
preachers,  which  fling  nearly  fifty
preaching  places,  licensed  by  law,


into  my  hands;  and  out  of  the  sit
hundred  belongs?  to  EMer  Kings-
ton's body  all  were  buptized  but  one
in  seven  months  labor. I  brought
eighteen  hundred into  the  Chnrcfc
in  that  mission,  and  1  will  say  that
the  power  of  God  restdd  upon  me
and  up  m  tht_*  p  ople There  was
a  spirit to  convince  and  a  peopte
whose  hearts  were  open  and  ready
to  receive  the  Gospel. And  as  desttd
said  in  reference  tu  John,  that  all
Judea  and  Jerusalem  went  out  to
John's  baptism  I  felt  as  if  id i  Here-
fordshire was  &i ruing  to  be  baptized.
The  third meeting  that  :I  held  at
Brother  Hen  bow's,  the  rector  of  the
place  sent  a  constable  to  take  me  up.
I  was  just  about  to  begin  when  be
entered. I  said  to  him,  "Take  a
chair  until  after  meeting  and  I  will
attend  to  you/1" He  sat  down  and
when  I  £ot  thr*i«!rh  lie  cunip  forward
and  I  baptized  hrm  with  others.  He
Went  back  and  told  the  lector,  "  If
'  you  want  to  take  up  that  man  you
must  go  yourself,  I  have  heard  him
preach the  titst.  Gospel sermon  ^1
'  ever  heard  in  ihe  world,"  Almost
!  every  man  that  came  to  meeting  was

baptized.  ;f*  4

| I  did  not  see  Elder  Kington  for
'some  little  time  after  going  there;
and  when  I  di  i  »ee  him  he  came  to
me  as  the  leader  of  the  people.  I
laid before him  the  Gospel.  He
said,  *'If  it  is  true,  I  wish  to  cm-
brace  it;  if  not,  i  shall  oppose  it,"
I  said, 44  That is right/* But  I
made  a  covenant  with  him. i  said
to  him,  "If  yoti  will  go  before -the
1  Lord  and  ask  him  if  this  work  is
true,  I  promise  you  in  the  name  of
the  Lord Jesus  Christ that  yoa
shall  receive  a  testimony  for  yourself
!  if  yoa  will  promise to obey  it."
'{He  said  he  would, and he  went
'1  away  to  attend  to  his  appointments.
;  The  next  time  he  came  to  Brother
Benbow's ;  a  lew  day's  afterwards,  I


34  J  JOliKNAL  OF  DJsrutntSEK.


asked  ],im  if  he  hud  enquired  i  f
the  Lord.  Me  sod  he  bad.  *fc  What
ditl  tlic  Lord  ii -II  yon."  "He  told
mo  it  wis  true;*1  and  he  then  sunt
he  wis  ready  to  obey  the  Gospel,
ati'f  I  haplizcd  Inn i,  I  mime  ibis
becuise  as  soon  as  Br  oilier  Pit  I  heard
this  < Jos pel  he  nU*veJ  it,  and  Ik*  was
one  of  (he  leading  mu  m  in  tin-  eft -ir

of  die  Church  of  England  m  Dhnork.
1  now  wish  to  relate  a  circumstance
ooncrrnii:^  him.  The  firs'  ine-iir^
I  held  in  Elder  Kington s  house
brother  Pitt  was  present.  I  will  say
first,  however,  that  Mary  Pitt,
brol  he  r  1 1  ""j*  sisl<  r,  was  somet  hint:
like  the  lame  imm  who  laynl  I  hi  jjafe
of  ti  e  Temple  mt led  u  Beam  ii itl"  ;it
Jerusalem — -she  hud  tint  been  able
to  walk  a  step  for  fourteen  Verms,
and  e  mlined  to  ber  hod  nearly  half
that  time.  She  had  no  sirength  m
her  feet  anil  ankles  mid  eon  Id  ofllj
move  aliout  a  hille  with  a  crutt;h
or  h'ddinej  nu  to  a  chair.  She
wished  to  be  hap  tiled.  Brother
Pitt,  aiul  myself  tot  K  Jut  in  our
arms,  ami  curried  her  i n I < »  i  k*i  ^ndr
ami  J  unitized  ber,  Whin  she
came  out  of  the  water  1  continued
her.  £>he  said  hho  wanted  io  W*
healed  ami  she  believed  as h . ■  hud  fairh
emmjlj  l-j  ite  healed.  I  leid  huii
experience  enough  in  this  Ubureh
to  know  t J j ttt  it  ;<e]mrid  a  goo  I  ded
of  failh  to  herd  a  person  who  had
not  walked  a  step  fur  turn  men  years.
1  told  c  i  i  i  •  l . t r  nee  M\liii^  to  her  latin
it  should  be  uu!o  her.  It  n>  Imp
pened  thai  on  tin*  day  after  she  was
baptized,  Brother  Etichatvis  and  Pre*
sident  Hn^hani  Young  came  down
to  see  nie  We  met  at  brother
Ktngton'a,  Sis  ■  Mary  Pi  it  was
there  also.  1  lold  President  Vmin^
what  Sister  Pitt  wished,  and  that
aim  beiievfd  hud  faith  enouyb  to
be  healed.  We  prayed  lor  her  and
hii  I  hands  upouhct,  Brother  Vu,1MLr
was  i uou I bf  and  commanded  her  to


be  a » ride  whole.  Sha  laid  dfiwlp  her
L'nileh  rend  newr  used  it  after/%u4
iln^  next  d  iv  she  walked  three  miles.
Tb is  eretited  a  jjieat  deal  ol  ati^er
ftttd  madue>s  in  I  fie  feelings  of  die
rector  of  that  t^wn. We  had  bap.

Biol  her  Pitt,  an!  I  his  look
one  frwn  bis  choir  of  binder.-*,  mid
lie  felt  nn^iy.  We  were  holding  a
men  i ni;  !*t  Klder  Km^im/a  I  muse
1 1 tie  evreiuy,  wte-u  these  ihiuga  were
Inking  place.  The  house  h  «d  Very
heavy  shutters  on  the  windows  of
the  lirst  story,  Wohni]  these  shut-
ters closed,  n:id  I  lose  to  j trench".
The  rector  cariie  at  the  head  of  about
fifty  men  armed  « ith  rocks  about
the  aiz« of  a  man's  ti.sl,  or  larger

(ban that. They  wrrounded  the

bouse,  Jiiul  t'tr  about  bnlf  rm  limir
tho  1 1  usse  was  bait  end  Willi  roeks
like  a  had  storm,  the  whole  of  the
wind-As  of  I  he  sreond  story  being
stove  in  and  tin*  ^his*  all  broken.
1  told  brother  Put  that  [  would  on
anil  see  these  men.  He  attid,  u  Not
1  will  poT  ynu  ii  ill  lx*  irijunHl  if  yott
go/'  Ho  went  out  into  the  milat
of  ih.s  moll,  of  atxiut  fifty,  i  should
j'id-e— i  iio  urn  kn-»w  sin-  tomdier.
He  took  i  In  ir  naotes,  and  Urn  rector
wns  the  Ira  h  r,  Tney  atoned  brother
Pill  Iwek  to  ihe  hon>e,  but  us  wo
Intd  tinished  meeting  they  left.  W'o
h  id  to  tlenr  I  be  honse^f  bt-uken  L'hisa
and  ruokl  before  we  oou'd  retire  to
lied,  1  nunu?  this  heein>i  i  \\  mio
ol  Broriier  Pitl^a  liisi  labor*  wilh  me,
.ii hi  1  viill  say  that  'rtmi  that  lime
until  t:  e  present  he  has  been  a  true
arid  far  lb  fill  servant  of  (iod,  and  of
this  Church.

Associations  of  this  kind  have
been  lornied  3 ay  all  the  J'il  lei*,  of
Uriel  who  iuive  pme  abroad  into
the  vineyard  to  ptearh  the  (<.  >pel.
We  go  forth  ami  ^nUn-r  strangers  to
us  in  the  flesh,  but  they  embrace
I  he  same  testimony  ami  t  iospel  with
ourselves. This  was  thenar  with


f US  ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  THE  DECEASKD,  ET


brother  Pitt.  I  do  not  mourn  for
hioi,  I  did  not  when  I  was  at  his
house  ;  but  all  these  scenes  and  early
associations  rushed  on  iny  mind,  and
as  I  gazed  upon  him,  and  thought  of
the  way  he  hud  been  stricken  down,
taken  away  from  us,  when  to  all
bum  a  n  appearance  he  was  but  an
hoar  before,  as  it  were,  enjoying
health  and  strength  and  attending  to
the  duties  of  life.  I  realized  that  in
the  midst  of  life  wo  are  in  death.

In  his  associations  with  this
Charcli  and  kingdom  brother  Pitt
was  leader  ol  the  Nauvoo  brass  band
for  a  long  time;  he  lias  also  been
associated  with  the  various  hands
here;  and  in  his  associations  with
the  people1  lie  made  a  great  many
friends,  to  whom  he  was  endeared
b; cause  of  his  rnanv  virtues  and  trood
deeds,  and  his  disposition  and  desire
to  serve  God.  I  am  certainly  glad
to  see  so  many  friends  gaiheied  to-
gether to  honor  his  remains.  When
I  realize  that  a  man  like  him  hss
lived,  heard  the  Gospel,  embraced  it
and  has  fulfilled  the  measure  of  his
day,  what  etn  we  say  ahoit  him?
Can  we  mourn  because  he  is  gone?
Bless  your  soul,  he  is  with  Joseph
to-day,  and  with  others  of  the  Elders
of  Israel,  and  he  rejoices  with  them.
\\  he t her  his  spirit  is  here  witnessing
his  funeral  services  I  c^n  not  say,  it
is  not  revealed  to  me;  but  suffice  it
to  say  that  he  is  happy,  and  blessed
are  the  dead  that  dre  in  the  Lord,
from  henceforth  saith  the  Spirit,  for
they  rest  from  their  labors  and  their
works  do  follow  them.

I  do  not  know  whether  brother
Pitt  has  preached  much  in  the  world,
but'i  do  know  that  he  has  labored
for  the  benefit  of  the  Saints  of  God,
13 ut  he  will  preach  now.  He  lias
gone  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail,
and  he  will  preach  there  to  large
assemblies  of  spirits.  He  has  been
faithful  and  he  will  receive  a  crown


of  life.  His  body  will  He  in  the
tomb  a  few  years,  and  but  a  few*
His  death  is  a  loss  to  his  wife  and
childrn,  and  the  parting  is  grievous.
But  how  glorious  is  the  thought  that
there  is  a  victory  over  the  grave  !  Ia
Adam  all  died,  but  in  Christ  all  are
made  alive.  Christ  was  the  first
fruits  of  tBe  resurrection.  Tins  is
*a  glorious  Uioutrht  to  me  when  1  see
a  Latter-day  Saint  lie  down  with  the
harness  on,  true  and  faithful  until  he
has  wound  up  his  work.

Out  of  that  1806  Which  we  bap-
tized in  Herefordshire  in  seven
months,  I  hardly  know  one  that
has  turned  against  this  Church.
There  has  been  less  apo>tacy  out  of
that  branch  of  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God  than  out  of  the
same  n timber  from  any  part  of  the
world  that  I  am  acquainted  with.

We  are  called  every  day  or  two  to
bury  sonic  of  them.  A  good  many
of  them  are  still  living.  Some  of
them  are  Bishops — bro.  Clark,  oro.
Row  berry,  and  a  good  many  of
them  scattered  all  through  this
Territory.  Old  father  Kington  is
still  living  or  was  the  last  1  heard
of  him,  though  near  the  prave.
They  are  passing  away,  and  when
I  went  to  see  brother  Pitt's  body,
the  thought  came  to  me,  Whose  turn
to  go  next  ?  May  l>e  mine,  may  be
ymrs,  we  ran  not  tell  am  thing
about  it  These  tilings  should  be
an  ail  monition  to  us  to  be  true  and
faithful  while  we  dwell  here.  The
thought  that,  we  can  obey  and  be
sanctified  by  the  Gospel,  and  be
prepared  thereby  to  inherit  eternal
life,  is  one  of  the  most  glorious
principles  ever  revealed  to  man.  I
thank  God  that  I  live  in  this  day
and  age  of  the  world.  I  thank
God  that  I  Ivive  been  associated
with  such  a  class  of  men  and  women
as  those  who  are  gathered  to-day
in  the  valleys  of the  mountains.


They  are  the  people  whom  the  Lord
has  chosen.  We  have  a  hope  that
the  world  knows  not  of,  and  it
can  not  enter  into  their  thoughts.
Unless  they  are  barn  of  the  JSpirit
of  God,  they  can  not  even  see  the
kingdom  of  God,  ;ind  they  can  not
get  into  it  unless  they  *ire  born  of
the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  hence
they  can  not  share  in  the  joyous
anticipations  and  hopes  that  we
possess.  Their  eyes,  ears  and  hearts
are  not  opened  to  see  and  hear  and
feel  the  power  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ  Ht{ j  ^rijuorn

Brother  Pitt  has  gone  before  his
family  to  prepare  a  place  for  them,
I  say  to  them,  let  yoar  hearts  re-
joice before  the  Lord,  You  are  loft
alone,  he  has  gone  before  yon,  bat
he  will  prepare  the  way;  He  is  not
going  to  lie  in  th*1  spirit  world  with-
out having  Something  to  do.  There
those  who  have  gone  before  us  have
something  to  do  as  well  as  we  have
here.  They  are  laboring*  to  prepare
the  inhabitants  of  the  Spirit  world
for  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  same
as  we  are  trying  to  prepare  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  for  the  same
great  event;  «T


down  as  he  has — die  the  death  of  the
righteous — and  have  as  good  a  ref-
ward,  J  shall  think  myself  very  well
off,  I  consider  that  when  a  man
has  embraced  the  Gospel,  continued
faithful,  received  his  endow  merits
and  the  sealing  blessing*  of  God
upon  his  head,  as  brother  Pitt  has,
he  has  accomplished  the  object  for
which  he  was  crqaiajl<[  *}0  esiiob  si  fa

In  closing  mv  remark*  I  will  sav
that  I  am  thankful  for  the  associa-
tions I  have  had  with  brother  Pitt,
and  with  the  rest  of  mv  brethren
and  the  Saints.  This  is  the  Gospel
of  Christ;  this  is  the  Zion  and  king-
dom  of  (rod.  The  hand  of  G<xl  is
stretched  oat  for  the  salvation  of
this  people,  and  however  dark  the
clouds  may  appear ;  however  strong
persecution,  oppression  and  opposi-
tion mav  become  to  this  work,  the
L>rd  has,  from  its  commencement,
until  to-day  watched  over  its  inter-
ests, and  has  sustained  and  pre-
served it,  and  he  will  continue  to
do  so  until  its  consummation  ;  nntil
Zion  arises  and  puts  on  her  beau-
tiful garments,  and  all  the  great
events  of  the  last  davs  are  accom-
plished. Then,  in  the  morning  of


*  I  do  not  wish  to  occupy  a  great "  tbo  first  resurrection,  brother  Pitt
deal  of  time,  but  I  will  say  to  my  '  wil1  COme  fortll>  and  he  and  his
brethren  and  sisters  this  morning 1  farnily  wiU  te  re-united,  and  they
It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  1  and  nI1  the  farthful  will  receive  their
mourning  than  to  the  house  of  feast.  1  saltation.  This  is  a  glorious
ing.  Death  is  the  end  of  all  men.  I  thought !  We  should  prize  our
The  living  should  laj  this  to  heart. )  families,  and  the  associations  we  have

nth
mo

consoling  character. We  associated  1  mortality  and  eternal  life,  and  this


e

9


xne  living  suouia  lay  tins  to  heart.  —  ...v. — ...^..^  ..^  .....^

My  associations  with  brother  Pitt 1  together,  remembering  that  if  we  are
hare  been  of  the  most  joyful  and  \  faithful  we  shall  inherit  glory,  im-

J  mortality  and  eternal  life,  and  this


j  together  a  good  while  in  that  land, ; the  greatest  of  all  the  gifts  of  God
while  1  dwelt  Jhere;  and  we  have  5  *^  rMa"- r** **'  1  *>  *


man.


been  since,  both  in  Nauvoo  and  this  I  pray  that  God  will  bless  yont
place.  I  was  always  glad  to  meet  !  that  he  will  comfort  the  hearts  of
him,  I  met  him  often  in  the  streets, !  the  family  of  brother  Pitt,  that  he
and  we  scarcely  ever  met  without  re-  will  feed  and  clothe  them,  and
ferring  to  former  times,  and  if  I  can  '  unite  thefn  together,  and  preserve
only  have  as  good  a  glory,  and  lie  them  in  the  faith,  that  when  they


CERTAINTY  OF  DEATH ,  ETC*


347


get  through  with  this  world,  they
may  meet  their  companion  and  be
prepared  with  him  to  receive  exal-


tation and  glory,  which  may  God
grant  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  our  Re*
deemer,  amen.  <tj%


a


":rf, REMARKS  Ry  ELDER JOHN TAYLOR,  l?^0

At  the  Funeral  Service*  of  Eloer  Wm.  Pitt,  Delivered  lv  tuk  14th
Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lakk  City,  Slkday  Mornixu,


icI  eiri)  flJnr  (Reported  hy  David  W.  Evam.)  Uimd  orfi  vat"  3
friotl  oiU *o  JiifciK  aiji  iisd) f.-_,,| .tj:  ' i  ff9/ vT i *  * f  f  *

CERTAINTY OF DEATH — BY TILE SPIRIT OK GOD THE  SAINTS  OBTAIN
THE  FULLNESS  OF  THE  BLESSINGS  OF  THE  GOSPEL — COD  WILL  TAKE

jd  nodw  n  f)i  :M  j;b  CjJ CARE  OF  HIS  PSOFLBtifN  nl  ultanhlJiUnl  **JLa


fen  J  have  been  very  much  interested
in  the  remarks  made  by  Elder
Woodruff  in  regard  to  his  mission
to  Herefordshire,  and  more  particu-
larly in  regard  to  brother  Pitt,
whom  I  have  always  regarded  as  a
high-minded,  honorable  man,  one
who  fefired  God  and  worked  right-
eousness, and  a  man  from  whom,
in  all  my  acquaintance  with  him,  I
never  beard  one  remark  that  was
inimical  to  his  character  or  reputa-
tion as  a  man,  as  a  Saint  or  in  any
capacity. We  have  often  been  very


said,  that  I  monra  the  loss  of  a
good  man  when  he  has  gone.  I  do
not,  I  have  not  the  slightest  feel-
ing of  this  kind ;  bnt  when  I  reflect
upon  the  position  of  the  world
that  we  live  in,  and  of  humanity
in  general,  look  back  through  the
dark  lapse  of  ages  that  have  trans-
pired and  contemplate  the  millions
upon  millions,  and  hundreds  of
thousands  of  millions  who  have  in-
habited  this  earth,  and  that  they
have  all  of  them  gone,  we  see  that
there  is  no  staying  of  these  things,


much  delighted  with  the  music  no  attesting  the  course  of  destiny,
that  he  made  for;  us,  both  in  this  no  stopping  the  hand  of  fate,  or  the
town  and  in  other  places  where  we  ,  power  of  the  destroyer, An  eternal


have  sojourned.  Now  he  has  gone,
and  has  taken  the  same  course  as
every  person  that  ever  lived,  with
.  the  exception  of  two  or  three  indi-
viduals, There  is  something  pecu-
liar about  these  things  that  always
creates  with  me  a  solemnity  of  feel-


decree  has  gone  forth,  and  it  is
appointed  for  all  men  once  to  die.
It  is  impossible  for  us  to  evade  this,
and  with  the  exception  of  the  very
few  to  whom  I  have  before  referred,
all  men  have  paid  the  great  debt  of
Nature* The  human  body  may  be


ing. Not, as brother Woodruff  propped  up  through  the  ingenuity,


34*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


nursing  and  care  of  man  for  pome
time,  but  lik»>  a  sweeping  tl  kkI,  aU
though  you  may  cl a p 1 1  up  the  wafer
from  its  natural  course  and  arrest  it
in  its  progress  and  keep  o  buck,
back,  b;iek,  for  a  while,  yet  by  and
by  it  will  rush  over  its  barriers,  seek
its  natural  channel,  pursue  its  own
course;  and  find  its  own  resting
place.  So  it  is  with  the  human
familv.  We  cooje  into  the  world,
we  exist  for  a  short  time,  then  we
are  taken  away,  no  matter  what  oar
feelings,  ideas  or  faith  tuny  he,  they
have  nothing  to  do  with  thisgreit
universal  law  which  pervades  all
nature.

We  are  here  to  exhibit  oar  sym-
pathy and  affection  for  our  brother
whom  we  respect  and  esteem,  that
is  all  we  can  do.  Who  is  there  that
chu  *t?iy  the  hand  of  death  ?  What
talent,  what  ingenuity,  what  philo-
sophy, religion,  science  or  power  of
any  kind?  Who  possesses  that
power,  individually  in  this  assembly
or  combined  to  say  to  the  great  mon-
ster (lentli,  Stand  back,  thou  slmlr
not  lake  thy  victims?  There  is  no
such  person,  there  is  no  such  power,
no  sueh  influence,  such  a  principal
does  not  exist,  and  it  never  will  exist
until  the  last  enemy  is  destroyed,
which  the  Scriptures  tell  us  is
death.  But  death  sh^ll  he  destroyed,
and  ?*  1 1  then,  even  all  the  human
family,  shall  burst  the  harriers  of
the  tomb  and  come  forth — those
wln>  have  done  good  to  the  resur-
rection of  tho  just.  Then  and  not
till  then  will  that  influence'  that
fell  tyrant  he  destroyed.  There  is
something  about  that  interesting  to
us,  while  the  ^ ot Id  of  mankind  an*
thoughtless  and  careless,  and  desiie
not  to  retain  God  in  their  know-
ledge, and  wish  to  put  away  from
them  everything  pertaining  to  him
and  eternity.  We,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  if  our  hearts,  feelings,  affec-


tions and  desires  are  placed  upon
those  things  that  pertain  to  the  fu-
ture, look  buck  to  our  associations,
as  brother  Woo  I  ruff  looked  back  to
his  first  associations  with  bro.  Pitt
when  first  the  li^ht  of  eternal  truth
l>eamed  upon  his  mind.  We  look
back  to  the  feelings  that  influenced
brother  WooJrutf  when  inspired  by
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  to  go  to
that  place  where  tho$t  people  had
been  calling  upon  the  same  God  for
light  and  truth,  intelligence  and
revelation  and  a  knowledge  of  his
liw  and  of  his  purposes,  anil  while
( iod  was  leading  them  forth,  he  was
leading  brother  Woolruff  by  the
same  Spirit  and  power.  We  reflect
upon  these  things  with  pleasure.  It
is  satisfactory  to  know  that  the  hand
of  God  has  been  with  us,  that  his
power  has  been  with  this  Priest*
hood,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
God  h;ts  been  associated  with  them,
and  that  the  promises  of  God  have
been  fulfilled  to  the  Elders  when  he
said  he  would  send  his  Angels  and
Spirit  before  them.  I  hav>  rejoiced
tluussnds  ot  timet  with  brother
Woodruff  over  these  things,  and  I
was  talking  with  bi other  Pitt  about
them  not  long  ago,  and  his  coun-
tenance lighted  up,  his  eye  was
bright  and  brilliant,  and  his  soul
seemed  to  rejoice  at  the  reool lection.
It  is  pleasant  to  reflect  upon  these
principles  of  the  Gospel,  and  there  is
something  in  relation  to  the  future
that  ani unites  our  feelings  and  de-
sires. /»  i  :m\

We  nre  gathered  here,  a  peculiar
people  under  the  direction  and
Spirit  of  the  living  God;  and  our
gathering  has  been  effected  by  the
revelations  of  the  Lord,  Some  of
ns  have  been  gathered  in  one  way,
some  in  another,  operated  upon  and
influenced  in  a  variety  of  ways.
And  what  is  our  idea  in  gathering  ?
Is  it  simply  to  plant,  sow,  neap  and


to  Accumulate  a  tittle  wot  Idly  goods
around  us  and  then  lie  down  in  the
dust  and  occupy  a  small  space  of  two
feet  by  six?  Is  this  this  object
of  our  patherinii  ■*  Verily  no.
S  ^  lift  Si  inir  higher  than  this  dwells  m
the  bosoms  of  tin*  Lutjrday  Saints;
chey  are  actuated  by  another  spirit  [
and  influence.  The  Spirit  of  the  j
living  God  has  beamed  upon  their
minds,  drawn  back  the  d;irk  viata
of  the  future  and  unfolded  unto
them  principle*  of  eternal  lives,
and  they  are  looking  forward  to
honor,  immortality  an  1  eternal  lives
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  These
are  the  feelings  and  influences  and
this  the  npirit  by  which  we  are  sic-
t tinted.  We  have  obtained  a  know*
ledge  of  our  Father  who  dwells  in
the  heavens.  We  have  partaken  ot*
the  Spirit  of  the  tiffing  Hoi,  which  |
lias  flowed  unto  us  through  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.
Our  minds  have  been,  as  it  were,
torn  from  the  grovelling"  things  of
time  and  sense,  and  we  feel  as
though  we  are  eternal  beings,  asso*  j
ciated  with  an  eternal  religion,  with
everlasting  principles,  sustained  by
an  eternal  God  who  governs,  Con*
trols  and  manages  all  the  affairs  of
the  human  family  on  the  face  of
the  earth,  and  will  in  the  world  to
come.  Feeling  thus  we  rejoice  in
the  fullness  of  the  blessings  of  the  j
Gospel  of  peace.  This  is  the  Spirit
that,  the  living  God  has  imparted
unto  us;  and  though  the  world  are
thoughtless,  careless  and  forgetful,
and  sometimes  in  their  ignorance
seek  to  oppose  us,  we  care  nothing  \
about  that.  Why,  our  life  is  bid
with  Christ  in  God.  Do  you  know  j
it?  Do  the  world  know  it?  No,
they  can  not  perceive  it,  they  know
nothing  aboot  it,  it  is  out  of  their
ken,  They  can  not  comprehend
the  principles,  feelings,  spirit,  light,
intelligence,  visions  and  manifesta-


tions of  the  Spirit  of  Go  I  that
dwell  in  the  hearts  of  men  when
they  are  umler  the  influence  of  the
Spirit  of  God.  They  neither  know
their  peace  nor  the  prospects  which
lie  he  fore  them.  They  are  like  the
brute  beasts,  which  the  Scriptures
say  are  made  to  be  taken  and  des-
troyed, just  like  the  ox  that  yon
feed  until  he  is  fat — he  does  not
know  that  the  knife  is  goin^  to
pierce  him  by  an  I  by.  But  the
Saints  understand  something  about
the  fuEu».  Thee  nave  hej/nsi  to
live  for  ever.  They  have  obtained
the  Spirit  of  life  and  truth  and
intelligence.  They  have  a  hope
that  blooms  with  immortalitv  and
eternal  life.  They  know  that  if  the
earthly  house  of  tli  is  tabernacle
di -solves  they  .have  a  building  of
Goi,  a  house  not  made  with  Lauds,
eternal  in  the  heavens.  Knowing
this  they  feel  that  all  is  right.
They  fee!  just  as  Jesus  said  to  his
disciples — Don't  care  anything  about
these  fellows  who  em  onlv kill  the

body,  and  when  they  have  done  that
there  is  an  end  of  their  rope,  the
exteut  of  their  power,  they  can  go  no
further,  but  like  the  other  worms  of
the  earth  they  have  got  to  fall  down,
and  crumble  and  be  preyed  upon  by
worms;  but  fear  him  who,  affer  he
has  killed  has  power  to  cast  into  helL
*■  Yea,"  said  he,  "  I  say  unto  yon,  fear
him.'1  You  Latter-day  Saints,  fear
riot  any*  outside  influences,  fear  no
power  or  spirit  that  may  be  arrayed
against  you.  Put  your  trust  in  the
living  God  and  all  will  he  right  in
time  and  in  eternitv.  God  will
take  care  of  his  people-  He  hag
commenced  a  work  and  he  will  roll
that  forth,  and  woe  to  the  man
that  tights  against  Jehovah — he  will
move  him  out  uf  the  way.  Like  the
gra  s  or  flowers  of  the  held  all  such
will  pass  away,  but  God's  kingdom
and  people will live  and  extend,


15(1


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


crow  and  increaee  until  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  shall  become  the  king-
doms of  our  God  and  his  Christ
Then  that  man  whose  remains  now
He  before  us,  and  millions  of  others,
shall  be  heard  to  say,  "  Glory  and
honor  and  power,  and  mi#ht  and
majesty  and  dominion  be  ascribed  to
him  that  sits  on  the  throne  and  unto
the  Lamb  <br  ever."

God  bless  you.  It  is  all  right
with  brother  Pitt. Is  it  right  with


us  ?  Let  us  live  our  religion,  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  walk
according  to  the  light  of  truth,  fol-
low, as  brother  Woodruff  said  he
did,  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  and  that  will  lead  us  into  all
truth,  and  by  and  by,  to  thrones,
principalities,  and  powers  in  the
eternal  worlds.  May  God  help  us
to  be  faithful,  in  the  name  of  Jesus :
Amen,


in
h

01
a!


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

^Delivered  at  the  Funeral  Services  ok  Elder  Wm.  Pitt,  in  the  I4th


e

#4
0

0


Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,

February  2U,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


CHARACTER OF i  ll  B DECEASED — MANIFESTATIONS OF  THJ5 POWER  OF
UOP — THE  SAINTS  HAVE  NO  INTEREST  APART  FROM  THE  KINGDOM  OF


OOP — THE  FEAR  OF  DEATH*


J  J
If


I  have  been  associated  with  bro-
ther Pitt  a  good  many  years.  He
taught  music  in  my  family  as  early,
I  think,  as  1842,  and  I  have  been
very  intimately  associated  with  him
[in  the  public  works,  in  the  Legion,
and  in  the  band  that  he  has  led,  and
I  have  never  seen  that  man  when  he
was  not  cheerful  and  full  of  life,  in-
deed I  have  thought  he  had  more
music  in  him  than  any  man  I  have
ever  known.  If  there  was  a  musical
instrument  he  could  not  play,  I  do
not  know  what  it  is. He  was  al-


ways faithful  and  cheerful  under  the
most  trying  circumstances,  and  no
matter  what  blast  blew  of  difficulty
or  persecution,  brother  Pitt  was
there  on  hand  at  a  moment's  notice
full  of  life  and  music,  ready  to  cheer
the  hearts  of  the  people.  He  was  a
beautiful  painter,  and  followed  that
trade  for  his  subsistence.  He  was
always  industrious,  and  ready  to  do
a  j  ob  of  work  whether  he  could  get
anything  for  it  or  not.  It  made  no
difference,  it  was  for  the  kingdom,
I  and  it  was  all  right* He  was  one  of


CHARACTER  OK  THE  1>EI  'EASED,  ETC.


351


the  best  of  men  in  my  opinion,  and  as
has  been  said,  it  is  all  well  with  him.

I  .suppose  there  are  a  great  many
here  who  would  like  to  bear  testi-
mony and  speak  a  good  word  for
brut  her  Pitt  ;  but,  brethren,  he  does
not  nerd  it — his  whole  life  has  spo-
ken for  itself,  and  will  speak  eter-
nally. That  mission  that  brother
Woodruff  has  mentioned  was  just
as  remarkable  in  my  estimation,  if
not  more  so,  than  the  account  con-
tained in  the  New  Testament,  of  the
way  in  which  Cornelius  received  the
Gospel.  He  was  told  where  to  go  to
make  inquiry  about  what  he  should
do;  and  if  the  circumstance  brother
Woodruff  mentioned  had  been  put  in
the  same  language  and  had  the  anti-
quity tli at  the  baptism  of  Cornelius
has,  we  would  consider  it  one  of  the
most  remarkable  manifestations  of
God's  power  ever  given  to  the  child-
ren of  men.  In  the  Herefordshire
mission  there  was  not  only  one  man
and  his  house  ready  to  receive  the
Gospel,  but  six  hundred  received  it
and  were  baptized,  and  it  was  by  the
same  power  and  influence — the  power
of  God  atid  the  Holy  Ghost  resting
upon  them,  a  revelation  being  also
given  to  the  servant  of  God  to  carry
the  Gospel  to  them ;  and  he  was  sent
of  God  just  as  much  as  Peter  was
ever  authorized  to  go  and  tell  Corne-
lius, just  exactly.  And  this  is  only
one  instance  of  tke  kind  among  many
thousands  that  are  ocean  ing  and
lave  occurred  almost  daily  ever  since
this  work  commenced  in  these  last
days  ;  and  it  is  as  remarkable  as  any
we  read  of  in  the  Bible  ;  but  because
we  live  in  them  and  they  are  com-
mon things  with  us,  we  do  not  es-
teem them.  The  healing  of  sister
Mary  Pitt,  after  having  been  unable
to  walk  for  fourteen  years,  was  a  re-
markable manifestation  of  the  power
of  God.  And  such  things  have  been
transpiring  many  years  right  before


the  face  and  eyes  of  the  children  of
mem  throughout  the  nations  of  the
earth,  but  what  heed  do  they  give  to
thera  ?  They  read  over  in  the  Bible
about  the  great  blessings  that  were
poured  out  on  the  people  in  the  days
of  the  Apostles,  and  yet  see  tilings
equally  remarkable  transpiring  right
under  their  eyes  and  in  their  midst
continually,  and  take  no  notice  of  it.
The  work  of  God  is  growing  and  in-
creasing, and  the  God  of  heaven  will
not  go  back  upon  it;  his  work  will
spread  and  increase  until  his  pur-
poses are  all  fulfilled.

It  has  been  said  of  brother  Pitt
that  he  did  not  preach  much,  but
his  whole  life  has  been  a  continual
sermon  to  this  generation  since  he
received  the  Gospel,  and  before  for
aught  1  know,  I  think  that  he  has
performed  two  or  three  missions,
and  I  do  know  that  he  bore  a  faith-
ful testimony  to  the  truth  of  this
work,  not  only  by  his  words  but  by
his  acts*  He  -  was  on  a  mission  all
the  time.  He  did  not  hold  himself
to  himself  at  any  time,  but  he  was
continually  on  the  altar,  ready  to  go
and  to  come  as  he  was  directed  by
the  servants  of  God.  A  man  is  as
much  on  a  mission  at  home,  build-
ing up  Zion,  as  he  is  when  abroad
preaching  the  Gospel,  and  he  should
esteem  his  labors  under  the  direction
and  dictation  of  the  servants  of  God
just  the  same.  Here  is  where  a  good
many  make  mistakes.  They  think
that  unless  they  are  called  to  go  on
a  mission  to  preach  the  Gospel  they
are  not  on  a  mission  at  all,  but  their
only  business  is  to  look  after  their
own  individual  interests.  Why,  a
Latter-day  Saint  has  no  individual
interest  separate  and  apart  from  the
kingdom  of  God,  any  where,  at  any
time  and  in  any  place,  and  all  he
does  should  be  with  an  eye  to  advance
the  interests  of  that  kingdom  upon
the  earth.


352


JOURNAL  OF  IHSCof  HSKS


We  have  the  blessed  privilege  of
being  co-workers  with  the  Almighty
in  building  up  his  kingdom,  briny-  j
ing  to  puss  his  purpose*  and  in
sustaining  and  spreading  abroad  the
institutions  of  high  heaven  and  tin*
principles  of  the  evei listing  Gospel
in  the  earth  if  we  will  uidy  let  him
work  with  oh.  But  in  order  to  do
so  we  must  be  submissive  and  work
in  iicc ordance  with  bis  plan.  We
have  CO'; ;e  here  from  the  nations  o!
the  earth  to  be  t  night  in  his  ways,
not  that  we  may  miko  a  path  for
ourselves,  and  that  we  nmv  be  in-
structed  in  the  things  of  eternal  life,

and  learn  (o  know  God  and  Jesus
Christ  whom  he  has  sent,  for  this  is
eternal  life.  "

This  is  Scripture,  and  we  have
often  heard  it  drop  upon  our  earn
with  little  effect,  and  it  is  unnoticed
by  the  world.  Hut  if  to  know  the
only  true  and  wise  (iod  and  Jesus
Christ  wlio ni  he  has  sent  is  eternal
life,  unless  we  have  that  knowledge
we  have  iwft  eternal  life.  What  do
the  world  know  of  the  relationship
between  God  and  his  children  here
on  tlwi  earth.  Nothing  at  alL  The
world  is  without  the  knowledge  of
God,  hence  they  are  without  eternal
life.  He  has  revealed  himself  in
these  last  days,  and  is  begging  and
beseeching  his  children  here  on  the
earth  to  turn  from  their  evil  ways*
He  has  said  through  his  Prophets
long  ago,  44  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  for
why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?
Tyke  upon  you  my  yoke,  for  it  is
easy,  and  my  burden,  for  it,  is  light.
Come  and  partake  of  the  waters  ofj
life  freely,  without  money  and  with-
out price/'  This  is  the  invitation
from  God  to  his  children,  but  they
are  a  good  deal  like  the  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem  when  Jesus  mourned
over  them  and  said,  "Oh  Jerusalem,
Jerusalem,  how  often  would  I  have
gathered  you  as  a  hen  gathers  her


chickens  under  her  wing.*,  but  y&
would  not.  Now  your  house  is  left
unto  you  desnhiUs."  Let  this  gen-
eration In  >k  jo  it,  or  their  house  will
be  left  desola'e,  and  they  will  be
without  hope  of  reaching  to  that
within  the  vail  unless  they  receive
the  invitation  which  has  been  re-
newed in  our  day  and  generation
to  the  children  of  men,  to  repent
and  be  baptized,  and  to  turn  to
God  and  live.  It  seems  as  if  man-
kind  have  eais  and  hear  not,  eves
and  see  not,  hearts  and  do  not  com-
prehend the  things  of  God.  It  is
true,  as  was  observed  by  brother
Tiylor,  the  life  of  the  Chris'ian —
the  true  Latter  day  Saint,  is  hid  in
God,  and  the  wurld  cannot  see  it.
Tins  work  is  i  inns  pi  ring  and  these
remarkable  even's  are  taking  place
right  before  their  eyes  in  the  build*,
ing  up  of  this  kingdom,  and  nothing
pertaining  thereto  is  hidden,  but  it  is
like  a  city  set  on  a  hill  for  everybody
to  look  at,  still  it  seems  as  though
they  cannot  see  it.

There  are  a  great  many  Latter-
day  8 'tints  who  do  not  see  more
than  half  of  it.  They  cannot  see
the  kingdom  of  Cod  in  this  thmg
and  in  that  thing  and  in  the  other
thing  that  is  presented  before  them.
This  is  for  the  want  of  a  little  faith-
fulness, a  little  more  of  the  Spirit
of  t lie  Lord,  There  is  some  obstacle
in  the  way  which  prevents  a  tree
flow  of  the  Spirit  to  enlighten  their
minds  and  be  to  them  as  a  well  of
water  springing  up  to  eternal  life.

Meet  brother  Pitt  when  you  might,
you  would  find  that  feeling  in  his
heart  y  welling  up  continually  to
eternal  life.  That  was  the  kind  of
man  he  way,  I  know  it,  because
1  was  well  acquainted  with  him,  and
associated  with  him  frequently,  and
1  never  saw  him  without  it.  I  saw
him  almost  every  day  tor  years,  and
I  hope  it  will  be  as  well  with  us  as  it


CHARACTER


THK  I


D,  EIV


353


is  with  him  when  we  pass  the  ordeal
of  death.  We  all  have  to  pass  it*
In  and  of  itself  it  is  nothing  to  htm
who  is  prepared.  Brother  Pitt  might
have  done  a  great  many  things  per*
haps  that  some  people  thought  cari-
ous, for  he  was  a  cheerful  man,  not
one  of  those  long- drawn-down,  pious
souls  who  never  smiled.  A  person
unacquainted  with  him  might  have
supposed  that  he  nrver  had  a  serious
thought,  still  his  heart  was  full  of
love  to  God.  If  a  man  goes  about
with  a  Ii  and  kerchief  tied  aver  his
head,  and  his  head  bowed  down  with
sorrow  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  that
is  bo  evidence  to  me  of  love  to  God
shed  abroad  in  his  heart,  not  a  par-
ticle- I  would  sooner  risk  a  man
like  brother  Pitt,  who  was  always
cheerful  and  on  hand,  ready  to  go
and  come  and  to  do  his  duty,  whether
in  the  paint  shop,  in  the  dance  hall
or  anywhere  else  among  the  Saints
of  God.  His  delight  was  to  be  with
them  and  cheer  and  encourage  them
in  the  faith  ;  and  he  never  swerved
to  the  right  or  to  the  left  He  was
full  of  integrity.  Did  he  ever  have
a  doubt  concerning  the  work  ?  He
never  showed  the  least  symptom  of
it  to  me,  and  I  do  not  think  it  ever
occurred  to  him ;  I  do  not  believe  a
shadow  of  a  doubt  concerning  its
truth  ever  crossed  his  mind.  He
was  ready,  on  hand,  and  full  of  fun,
and  that  is  the  kind  of  a  man  I  like
to  see.  I  should  like  for  him  to
have  lived  a  hundred  years,  because
good  men  are  scarce,  and  they  are
needed  to  build  up  the  kingdom.
Nut  that  it  would  have  been  any
better  for  him  to  live,  he  is  ail  right,
but  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom,  and
for  my  sake  and  your  sake,  and  for
the  sake  of  his  family,  and  for  the
sake  of  all  with  whom  he  was  asso-
ciated in  this  stake  of  Zion  it  is  a
loss  to  lose  such  a  man,  but  it  is  no
loss  to  himself  He  has  laid  a  foun-
No.  23.


dation  that  will  eternally  endure.  No
person  can  rob  him  of  his  crown.
Hf*  is  safe,  and  ca;i  do  nothing  him-
self  that  will  bar  the  same.  It  is
not  so  with  you  and  me,  We  may
live  to  do  things  that  will  clip  our
glory.  It  would  be  better  that  we
should  he  taken  away  than  to  live
and  do  anything  of  that  kind.  Not
that  1  think  there  would  have  been
any  danger  of  any  such  thing  with
him.  But  he  has  gone,  and  we  will
soon  follow.  As  it  has  been  ex-
pressed to-day,  death  is  passed  upon
all  men,  and  we  oijy  wait  our  turn
to  pay  the  debt  of  nature.  Brother
Pitt  has  paid  that  debt,  and  that
very  self-same  body  will  come  forth
again,  and  when  we  grasp  his  hand
we  shall  know  that  it  is  brother
Pitt,  for  he  will  maintain  his  iden-
tity in  the  eternal  worlds.  Do  you
not  think  that  is  glorious  ?  When
the  spirit  and  body  are  re-united  in
immortality  they  will  never  be  sep-
arated again.  We  need  not  fear
death,  that  is  if  we  are  numbered
among  those  who  will  have  the
privilege  of  coming  forth  in  the
morning  of  the  first  resurrection,
for  upon  all  such  the  second  death
will  have  no  power.  It  is  the  se-
cond death  that  people  may  be
afraid  of  Fear  him  who  has  power
to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in
hell  This  is  the  second  death,  but
this  will  have  no  power  upon  those
who  have  part  in  the  first  resurrec-
tion. All  manner  of  sin  will  be
forgiven  to  men  except  the  aiu
against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that  will
never  be  forgiveu  neither  in  this
world  nor  the  world  ito  come.  If
men  will  only  be  obedient  to  the
Gospel,  and  avail  theiaselves  of  the
plan  of  salvation  devised  by  oar
Father  and  God  in  heaven  before
the  world  was,  they  may  obtain  for-
giveness of  their  sins  by  being  obe-
dient to  the  Gospel. The  plan  o

Vol  XV.


2:>  l


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


salvation  is  ample  to  save  to  the
uttermost  God,  in  his  mercy,  de-
signed it  to  save  his  children,  be-
cause he  delights  to  {jive  pgotoA  gifts
to  his  children  fur  more  than  an
earthly  parent  does.  The  Almighty
has  hent  forih  his  servants  to  plead
with  the  cliiMren  of  men,  to  de-
clare the  acceptable  year  of  the
Lord,  and  to  call  upon  them  to  re
pi  nt  h'St  the  end  come  when  no  man
c;m  work. Some  lew  will  listen  and


be  prepared,  because  some  are  honest
enough  to  receive  the  Gospel,  others
are  not,

I  pray  God  the  Eternal  Father  to
bless  us  all,  tint  we  may  cleave  to
that  which  is  good,  reject  evil,  fill
the  measure  of  our  creation  in  our
probation  as  our  brother  has  done,
that  we  way  lay  up  a  crown  and  an
inheritance  in  everlasting  habitations,
for  Christ's  sake*  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  is  the  IGth  Ward  Assembly  Ruoms,  Salt  Lake  City,

Sunday  Ai-tkrnoon,  March  9,  1873.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


CONSEt  RATION — TEMPORAL EQUALITY — SELFISHNESS TO BE  OVERCOME
— RESURRECTION — RETURN  Tu  -JACKSON  COUNTY — GLORY  OF  ZION,


On  page  235  of  the  Book  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants  there  is  a  reve-
lation given  to  this  Church  on  March

9,  183ii,  which  contains  these  words  :

'  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  time  has
coioe,  and  is  now  at  ltaml ;  anil  behold,  anil

10,  it  must  needs  be,  that  there  be  an  or-
ganization of  my  people,  in  regulating  and
establishing  the  affairn  of  the  storehouse
for  the  poor  of  my  people,  both  in  this
place  and  in  the  land  of  Zion,  or  in  other
words,  the  city  of  Enoch,  for  a  permanent
and  everlasting  establishment  and  order
unto  my  Church,  to  advance  the  cause,
which  ye  have  asgoused  to  the  salvation  of
man,  and  to  the  glory  of  your  Father  who
is  in  heaven,  that  you  may  be  equal  in  the
Vanda  of  heavenly  things  ;  yea,  and  earthly
things  also,  for  the  obtaining  of  heavenly
things ;  for  if  ye  are  not  equal  in  earthly
things,  ye  cannot  be  equal  in  obtaining


heavenly  things  ;  for  if  you  will  that  I  give
unto  vou  a  place  in  the  celestial  world,  you
must  prepare  yourselves  by  doing  th«
things  which  I  hav*)  commanded  you  and
required  of  you*

We  will  next  read  a  passage  which
is  contained  in  the  latter  part  of  the
3rd  paragraph  of  a  revelation  given
in  March,  1831.  It  will  be  found  on
page  213  of  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,

But  it  is  not  givuii  that  one  man  should
possess  that  which  is  above  another,  where-
fore the  world  lieth  in  sin.

I  will  now  read  a  portion  of  a  re-
velation given  on  the  22nd  of  June,
1834.  It  will  be  found  in  paragraph
2,  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,


CONSECRATION,  ETC


355


page  295.  Speaking  of  the  Church,
it  reads  as  follows —

But  behold,  they  have not  learned  to  be
obedient  to  the  things  which  I  required  at
their  hand*,  but  are  full  of  all  manner  of
evil,  and  do  not  impart  of  their  substance,
m  becometh  Saints,  to  the  poor  and  afflicted
anion lt  them,  and  are  not  united  according
to  the  union  required  by  the  law  of  the
celestial  kingdom  ;  and  Zion  cannot  be  built
up  unless  it  is  by  the  principles  of  the  law
Mf  the  celestial  kingdom,  otherwise  I  cannot
receive  her  unto  myself  :  and  my  people
must  needs  be  chastened  until  they  learn
obedience,  if  it  must  needs  be,  by  the  things
which  they  suffer,

I  have  read  these  passages  of  new
revelation  for  the  benefit  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  who  are  here  this
afternoon,  and  it  is  well  enough  for
ns  to  examine  ourselves,  to  see
whether  we  are  living  in  strict  ac-
cordance with  them,  and  if  we  are
not,  to  see  whether  there  are  anv
persons  throughout  all  the  Territory
of  Utah  who  are  comply  ins  with
them.  In  one  of  these  revelations,
given  in  March,  18;tt,  before  the
Lord  bad  led  this  people  to  Jackson
Countv  and  before  we  knew  where

If

the  New  Jerusalem  was  to  be  built,
or  where  the  great  central  gathering
place  for  the  Latter-day  Saints  was
to  be,  the  Lord  informed  us  "That
it  is  not  given  that  one  man  should
possess  that  which  is  above  anjo-
thcr,  wherefore  the  world  lieth  in
sin.11  Now  let  me  inquire  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  Are  we  fill  equal
in  the  bands  of  earthly  tilings,  or
have  we  rich  and  poor  in  our  midst  ?
The  answer  that  all  would  give
to  this  question  is,  Every  person
and  every  family  has  accumulated
just  as  much  wealth,  ns  he  or  they
could,  for  his  or  their  own  use  only,
and  this  order  of  thing*  has  existed
amongst  us  since  the  Church  was
organized,  nearly  forty- three  years.
How  much  longer  will  this  continue?
How  long  will  every  family  be  for
themselves,  every  man's  energy  and
ability  be  exerted  only  for  himself


and  his  family,  every  man  grasping
to  enrich  himself?  He  does  not  care
a  boat  his  neighbor,  i u  I  if  he  thinks
about  him  at  all,  the  inquiry  rises  in
his  mind,  u  Have  I  got  as  much
weal tli  as  my  neighbor,  or  as  this
or  that  person  ?  If  I  have  not  I
must  strive  to  obtain  as  much  ;  for  if
I  have  not  as  much  as  my  neighbors
1  can  hardly  think  to  crowd  myself
into  their  society;  for  I  have  no-
ticed that  our  wealthy  citizens  are
creating  distinctions  of  classes  among
us.  If  they  get  up  a  party  in  their
own  private  dwellings,  or  a  nice  luxu-
rious supper,  for  instance,  it  is  gen-
erally only  those  who  are  wealthy  in
appearance  who  are  invited,  and  un-
less I  can  accumulate  as  much  wealth
as  they  have,  I  shall  be  cast  out  and
fall  below  into  some  other  class."

I  am  now  talking  of  facts  as  they
really  exist.  When  do  you  set?  a
rich  man  among  the  Latter-day
Saints  who,  when  be  makes  a  great
feast,  invites  the  poor  and  the  lame,
the  halt  and  blind,  ami  those  who
are  in  destitute  circumstances?  Such
events  are  few  and  far  between.  The
Savior  has  strictly  commanded  us
that  when  we  make  our  feasts,  in
stead  of  inyiting  those  who  have
abundance  and  roll  in  the  good  things
and  luxuries  of  life,  we  should  invite
the  poorest  among  us,  the  lame,
blind  and  infirm,  and  those  who  per-
haps have  not  enough  food  to  eat
Do  you  Latter-day  Saints  do  this  ?
No,  I  fear  not.  There  may  be  per-
sons who  ate  doing  these  things ;  if
so,  blessed  are  they  if  they  observe
this  and  all  the  other  commandments
of  the  Lord.

What  kind  of  a  revolution  would
it  work  among  the  Latter-day
Saints  if  the  revelation  given  in
March,  1831,  were  carried  out  by
them — "  It  is  not  given  that  one
man  should  possess  that  which  is
above  another,  wherefore  the  world


35<;


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


lieih  in  sin  ?"  How  much  of  a  re-
volution would  it  accomplish  in  Salt
Lake  City  it  this  order  of  things
should  he  brought  about  ?  I  think
it  would  work  a  greater  revolution
among  this  people  than  has  ever
been  witnessed  amongst  them  since
they  had  an  existence  as  a  Church.

Again,  in  another  revelation, given
in  1  832,  soon  after  the  place  of  loca-
tion fur  the  city  of  Zion  was  made
known,  the  Lord  declared  that  the
time  had  come  to  establish  an  order
among  his  people  requiring  certain
persons,  whose  names  were  men*
tioned,  to  consecrate  a  portion  of
their  property.  They  were  to  put
so  many  dollars  into  the  treasury,
and  that  was  to  be  a  common  pro-
perty among  those  individuals,  for
their  own  benefit,  and  for  the  benetit
of  the  Church.  Among  the  persons
called  to  enter  into  this  order  was  the
great  Prophet  and  seer  of  the  last

day&  ,  i

This  order  was  entered  into  par-
tially by  the  individuals  who  were
named,  but  even  they  were  not  all
prepared  for  this  partial  order  per-
taining to  the  celestial  kingdom  of
God.  It  was  too  sacred,  too  much
in  opposition  to  the  traditions  of
the  age,  and  which  bad  existed  for
many  generations.  We  all  know
that,  since  the  days  of  the  Apostles,
the  whole  world,  except  the  Ne-
phites  and  La  man  it es  on  this  con*
tinent,  have  been  divided  in  regard
to  their  wealth  and  property.
Among  whatever  nation  you  might
travel  on  the  eastern  hemisphere,
and  on  this  hemisphere  too,  since  it
was  discovered  by  Columbus  and
settled  by  Europeans,  this  individ-
ualism has  existed  among  all  classes
of  people,  with  a  very  few  excep-
tions. Among  these  exceptions  we
may  mention  the  Shaking  Quakers.
This  sect  is  in  great  error  in  many
respects,  but  its  members  did  enter


into  a  community  of  property.
Their  properties  were  consecrated
and  put  in  to  a  store  house,  and  were
controlled  by  certain  men  who  were
chosen  for  that  purpose.  How
wisely  they  used  this  property  or
how  they  lived  on  this  common
stock  principle  is  not  for  me  to  say  ;
but  suffice  it  to  say,  that  so  far  as
consecration  and  a  community  of
property  were  concerned  they  car-
ried them  out.  But  the  great  mass
of  the  human  family  have  sought
for  ages  past,  and  are  still  seeking,
to  accumulate  dollars  and  dimes,
houses  and  lands  for  themselves,  to
bequeath  to  their  heirs  or  to  whom-
soever they  see  proper.  This  indi-
vidualism that  has  existed  all  over
the  world  has  been  one  of  the  prin-
cipal means  of  introducing  almost
all  the  crimes  that  exist  among  men,
for  as  the  Apostle  Paul  has  said — >
u  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of
all  evil."

The  Apostles  endeavored  to  intro-
duce the  common  stock  principle  in
their  day  among  the  Saints,  but  the
people,  even  then,  had  been  so
long  accustomed  to  accumulating
wealth  for  themselves  and  their
families  instead  of  having  it  in
common,  that  the  Apostles  found
it  impossible  to  establish  this  prin-
ciple on  a  permanent  foundation,  and
it  did  not  continue.  It  might  have
been  carried  out  a  year  or  two  and
perhaps  a  little  longer ;  but  according
to  the  writings  of  the  Apostles  to  the
early  Christians,  this  principle  seems
to  have  been  done  away  with,  and
individualism  prevailed  amongst
them.

Let  me  inquire  now,  how  this  sel-
fish principle  produces  the  great
variety  of  evils  that  exist  in  the
world  ?  I  will  refer  to  some  that
have  sprung  from  it,  and  have
made  their  appearance  among  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  which  will


CONSECRATION,  ETC,


357


increase  unless  we  reform  in  this
respect.  For  instance,  wealthy  per-
sons have  the  power  to  educate  their
children  more  thoroughly  than  the
poor  man  can.  They  can  send  them
to  the  very  best  schools  and  institu-
tions of  learning,  and  they  can  keep
them  there  year  after  year  until  they
have  acquired  what  is  termed  a
thorough  education.  Then,  their
fathers  think,  u  Our  sous  have  been
trained  in  various  branches  of  learn-
ing and  business,  they  understand
book-keeping  and  other  branches
necessary  in  following  mercantile
pursuits;  they  know  how  to  accumu-
late means  and  how  to  keep  every-
thing straight.  We  can  therefore
entrust  them  with  the  means  we
shall  leave  them,  and  knowing  how
to  make  good  use  of  it,  they  will  be
able  to  keep  themselves  at  the  head
of  the  heap,"  or  in  other  words,  they
will  be  above  the  poor  who  have
not  had  the  education  they  have
had.

A  rich  man  can  educate  his  daugh-
ters, and  have  them  taught  music
and  everything  calculated  to  make
them  refined,  polite  and  gen  tee].
This  enables  these  daughters  to  fas-
eiuate  the  rich,  and  should  a  poor
mau  come  along,  and  knock  at  the
rich  man's  door  and  tell  him  he  de-
sires to  keep  company  with  his
daughters,  he  is  told  that  he  has  no
business  there.  Says  the  rich  man,
*'  My  daughters  must  marry  wealthy
men,  they  must  be  exalted  and  be
with  the  upper  class  among  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints/'

The  pjorer  classes,  seeing  that
they  have  neither  the- means  nor  the
business  education  and  information
to  compete  with  the  ri:h  ones,  grovel
along  in  poverty  and  ignorance,  and
a  distinction  of  classes  arises.  By
and  by  these  rich  young  men  come
along  with  their  fine  carriages  and  if
a  poor  man  happens  to  be  crossing


the  street,  they  look  down  with  scorn
and  contempt  upon  him,  and  cry,
"Out  of  my  way  there,"  when  if  it
had  been  a  wealthy  man  they  would
have  turned  their  carriage  out  of  the
way  unlil  he  had  passed;  but  the
upoor  scrub/'  as  they  term  the  poor
mau,  must  be  blackguarded  and
ridiculed,  and  treated  as  u  slave  or  as
a  person  who  has  no  right  to  be  seen
in  the  society  of  the  wealthy.

What  kind  of  feelings  does  this
produce  in  the  hearts  of  the  hum-
ble poor  who  desire  and  are  striving
to  serve  the  Lord  ?  They  feel  in
their  hearts  that  they  do  not  fellow-
ship these  rich  persons,  and  this
causes  hard  feelings  between  these
classes.  Is  this  right  or  is  it  wrong?
It  is  wrong,  materially  wrong,  and
we  have  continued  in  this  wrong
over  furty  years,  When  shall  it
come  to  an  end  ?  When  will  we
learn  to  keep  the  commandments  of
God  and  become  one,  not  only  in
doctrine  but  in  "  the  bands  of
earthly  things  ?"  Such  a  time  must
come,  and  if  we  do  not  comply
with  it,  we  shall  fall  behind,  I
will  prophesy  to  this  people  on  this
subject.  The  Lord  commanded  mo
to  prophesy  when  I  was  :ibout  nine-
teen years  old,  but  I  seldom  do  it,  for
fear  I  should  prophesy  wrong.  Hut
I  will  prophesy  concerning  this
Church  and  people,  that  all  who
will  not  come  into  that  order  of
things,  when  God,  by  his  servants,
counsels  them  .so  to  do,  will  cense
growing  m  the  knowledge  uf  God,
they  will  cease  having  the  Spirit  of
the  L>rd  to  rest  upon  them,  an  J  they
will  gradually  grow  darker  and
darker  in  their  minds,  until  they  l,»se
the  Spirit  and  power  of  Go1,  and
their  names  will  not  be  numbered
with  the  n^raes  of  the  righteous.
You  may  put  that  down  and  re-
cord it.

We  find,  a  few  years  after  thess


358  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


revelations  that  I  have  read  were
given,  the  Lord  saw  that  we  were
so  covetous  and  filled  with  the  selfish
principle  instilled  into  our  minds  by
our  forefathers,  that  we  would  not
give  heed  to  the  law  whic  i  lie  gave
concerning  the  consecrations  that
were  to  be  made  in  Jackson  County,
Mo.,  and  he  determined  in  his  own
mi ihI  that  that  should  not  be  a  hind
of  Zion  unto  the  present  generation
of  people,  take  them  as  a  people;
and  he  made  this  decree,  after  giving
thern  revelation  upon  revelation,
warning  them  by  the  mouth  of  his
servant  Joseph,  who  went  in  person
and  warned  them,  and  sent  up  his
revelations  a  thousand  miles  from
Kirtland  and  warned  them.  After
they  had  been  sufficiently  warned,  for
gome  two  years  and  upwards,  after
their  commencement  of  the  settle-
ment of  Jackson  County,  Missouri,
the  Lord  fulfilled  that  which  he
had  spoken  concerning  them — that
they  should  be  driven  out  of  the
land  of  Zion.  This  was  literally
fulfilled.  Why?  Because  of  covet-
ousness.  You  will  recollect  my
reading,  I  think  last  Conference,  a
letter  written  by  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith.  I  think  it  is  in  the  14th
volume  of  the  Star,  in  connec-
tion with  the  history  of  this  Church
published  in  that  periodical  That
letter  was  written  to  one  of  the
brethren  in  Zion  in  relation  to  the
consecrations  of  the  properties  of
the  people.  The  Lord  said  in  that
revelation  that  the  principle  which
he  had  revealed  in  relation  to  the*
properties  of  his  Church  must  be
carried  oat  to  the  very  letter  upon
the  land  of  Zion;  and  those  individ-
uals who  would  not  give  heed  to  it,
but  sought  to  obtain  their  inheri-
tances in  an  individual  way  by  pur-
chasing it  themselves  from  the  Gov-
ernment, should  have  their  names
blotted  out  from  the  book  of  the


names  of  the  righteous,  and  if  their
children  pursued  the  same  course
their  names  should  be  blotted  out
too,  they  and  their  children  should,
not  be  known  in  the  book  of  the  law
of  the  Lord  as  being  entitled  to  an
inheritance  among  the  Saints  in
Zion.  .  •

We  fi  id,  therefore,  that  the  Lord
drove  out  this  people  because  we
wi  re  unworthy  to  receive  our  in-
heritances by  consecration,  As  a
people,  we  did  not  strict |y  comply
with  that  which  the  Lord  required.
Neither  did  they  comply  in  Kirt-
land.  Mr  my  of  those  persons  were
called  bv  name  to  enter  into  an
inferior  order,  afterwards  cm  I  led  The
Order  ot  Enoch,  in  which  only  a
portion  of  their  property  was  con-
secrated, and  even  they  did  not
comply,  but  some  of  them  broke  the
most  sacred  and  solemn  covenants
made  before  high  Heaven  in  relation
to  that  order.  The  Lord  said  con-
cerning them  that  they  should  be
delivered  over  to  the  bufferings  of
Satan  in  this  world,  as  well  as  be
punished  in  the  world  to  come.  He
also  told  them  tbab-^hat  soul  that
sinned  and  would  not  comply  with
the  covenant  and  promise  which
they  made  before  him  in  relation  •
to  their  properties,  should  have  his
former  sh,s  returned  to  him,  which
had  been  before  remitted  in  bap-
tism.

This  ought  to  be  an  example  for
us  who  are  living  at  a  later  period
in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  the
living  God,  and  who  ought,  by  this
time,  to  have  become  thorougly
experienced  in  the  law  of  God,  It
is  true  we  are  not  now  required  to
consecrate  all  that  we  have;  this
law  has  not  been  binding  upon  us
since  we  were  driven  from  the  land
of  Zion  The  reason  why  this  law
was  revoked  was  because  the  Lord
saw  we  would  all  go  to  destruction


f'UX  SEC' RATION.  ETC,


350


in  consequence  of  our  former  tra*
ditiou  in  relation  to  property  if  this
law  had  continued  to  be  enforced  af-
ter we  were  driven  oui,  hence  he  re-
voiced  it  for  the  time  being,  as  yoa
will  find  recorded  in  one  of  the  reve-


people  complied  with  this  ?  I  think
not.  Can  yoa  find  one  out  t>f  a  hun-
dred persons  i;i  Sik  Lake  City  who
has  carried  out  this  law  ?  Have  you
done  it  ?  The  Bishops,  whose  doty
it  is  to  collect  f he  tithing  can  an-


lations  given  June  22nd,  18^4,  after  \  swer  this  quest: on  tetter  thau  I  can,


we  were  driven  from  Jackson  County.
]  will  repeat  the  words  — "  Let
those  commandments  which  I  have
given  concerning  Zion  and  her  law,
be  executed  and  fulfilled  after  her
redemption."  Here  you  perceive
that,  for  the  salvation  ot  this  peo-
ple and  of  the  nations  of  the  earth
among  the  Gentiles,  God  saw  pro-
per to  revoke this  commandment


but  I  very  much  doubt  whether
the  records  of  the  Bishops  would
show  that  the  people  have  com-
plied with  the  hitter  clause  of  this
law — namely  to  pay  one-tenth  of
their  annual  income,  to  say  nothing
nbout  their  surplus  property.  Are
we  under  condemnation  or  are  we
not  ?  J  u  1  ge  y  e  i  o  v  y  o  u  rsel  ves,  W  h  a  t
will  become  of  this  people  unless  we


and  to  lay  it  over  for  a  future  period,  1  reform,  and  repent  of  our  sins  in
or  until after the redemption of  these  respects? That  which  I  have

already  spoken  will  he  fulfilled  upon


iempt

Zion.  Zion  is  not  yet  redeemed,  find
hence  we  are  not  under  the  law  of
full  consecration*  But  is  that  any
reason  why  we  should  not  be  under
some  other  law  differing  from  the
one  we  were  formerly  required  t">
practice  ?  Do  we  live  up  to  the  law
called  the  Order  ot  Enoch,  which
is  inferior  to  that  law  requiring  full
consecrations  ?  No  we  do  not.  Let
us  go  down  another  scale  in  the
ladder  of  obedience,  and  inquire  if
we  are  carrying  out  a  law  inferior  to
the  Order  of  Enoch,  that  is,  the  law
of  Tithing  ?  Do  the  Litter-day
Saints  comply  with  that,  arid,  to
begin  ^itd,  when  they  come  from
the  nations  of  the  earth,  do  they
consecrate  their  surplus  property  to
the  Lord,  placing  it  in  the  hands  of
the  Bishop  of  his  Church,  and  alter
thai  pay  one- tenth  of  their  annual
income  into  the  treasury  of  the
Lord  ?  Where  is  there  a  person
carrying  out  this  law  which  wa>  re-
vealed in  the  year  183S  and  which
has  never  been  revoked  ?J|  It  is  one
ot  the  most  simple  and  interior
laws,  far  below  the  order  of  full
consecrations  and  far  below  the  Or-
der of  Enoch, but  have  we  as  a


their  heads — they  will  lose  the  spirit
of  the  Gospel.

We  are  looking  for  the  redemp-
tion of  Zion, What  would  be  our
condition  if  the  Lord  were  to  say
unto  us  this  season, 11  Arise,  my
Saints,  arise,  go  back  to  the  land
which  I  promised  to  give  to  you
and to  your  children  for  an  ever-
lasting  possession; go back  and
build  up  the  New  Jerusalem  accord-
ing to  the  law  of  the  celestial  king-
dom," as  reeorde  1  in  the  revelation
in  which  the  L  irJ  says  unless  she
he  built  according  to  that  law  he
can  not  receive  her  unto  himself.
What  kind of  a  Z  oo would  we
build  it  called  this  present  season  to
go  back  to  Jackson  County?  We
would  have  to  begin  altogether  a
new  order  of  things. Are  we  pre-
pared for  it  r I  think  not. If  the
people  had  faithfully  complied  with
these  inferior  laws they  would  be
better  prepared  :  but  when  I  see  the
backwardness  of  many  of  the  peo-
ple ot  this  Territory  calling  them-
selves Latter-day  Saints,  about  pay-
ing their  tolling,  refusing  to  do  so
or  being  careless  abotit  itf  I  say  in


3G0


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


my  heart,  "  Oh  Lord,  when  will
thy  people  he  prepared  to  go  back
and  build  mp  lite  waste  places  of  Zion
according  to  celestial  law  ?"

The  Lord  has  said  in  this  book,
(B.  D.  CO  that  the  time  is  to  come
when  Zion  shall  be  redeemed,  I
will  rend  the  passage.  It  com-
mences on  page  292,  and  is  as  fol-
lows:—  I

Behold,  this  ia  the  blessing  which  I  have
promised  after  your  tribulations,  ami  the
tribulations  of  your  brethren  ;  your  redemp-
tion, and  the  redemption  of  your  brethren,
even  their  restoration  to  the  land  of  Zion,
to  be  established  no  more  to  be  thrown
down  ;  nevertheless,  if  they  pollute  their
inheritance,  they«hall  be  thrown  down,  for
I  will  not  spare  them  if  they  pollute  their
inheritances.  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  the
redemption  of  Zion  must  needs  come  by
power  ;  therefore,  I  will  raise  up  unto  my
people  a  man,  who  shall  lead  them  like  as
Moses  led  the  children  of  Israel,  for  ye  are
the  children  of  Israel,  and  of  the  seed  of
Abraham,  and  ye  must  needs  be  led  out  of
bondage  by  power,  and  with  a  stretched  out
arm  ;  and  as  your  fathers;  were  led  at  the
first,  even  so  shall  the  redemption  of  Zion
be.  Therefore,  let  not  your  hearts  faint,
for  I  say  not  unto  yon  as  I  said  unto  your
fathers,  mine  angel  shall  go  up  before  you,
but  not  my  presence  ;  but  I  say  unto  yott,
mine  angels  shall  go  before  you,  and  also
my  presence,  ..nd  in  time  ye  shall  possess
the  goodly  land*

In  a  revelation  given  June  2^nd,
1834,  the  Lord  tells  us  that  before*
the  people  of  Zion  shall  be  redeemed
the  army  of  Israel  must  become  very
great.  What  he  meant  by  this,  was
"  great"  cornpired  with  the  few  in*
dividuuls  to  whom  this  revelation
was  given.  It  will  be  recollected
that  a  certain  nil  ruber  were  required
as  the  strength  ot  the  Lord's  hou*e
to  go  up  to  redeem  Zion,  us  they
supposed.  They  gathered  together,
some  one  or  two  hundred  and  went
nil  for  this  purpose;  and  the  Lnrd
said  that  the  strength  uf  his  house
did  not  hearken  to  his  voice,  and  did
not  come  up  according  to  his  com-
mandfiHMji  :md  revelation,  hut  had
said  in  their  hearts,  u  If  this  be  the
work  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  will  re-
deem Zion,  and  we  will  stay  at  home


upon  our  inheritances." They  made
excuses  and  would  not  go  up.  The
little  handful  that  did  go  up  were
called  the  Camp  uf  Zion, Some  few
of  them  are  still  living. When  we
arrived  in  the  neighborhood  of  the
Land  of  Zion,  the  strength  of  the
Lord's  house  not  having  hearkened
to  his  voice,  the  Lord  pave  a  revela-
tion and  said  first,  "  I  jet  my  army
become  very  great,  and  let  it  be  sanc-
tified before  me,  that  it  may  become
fair  as  the  sun,  and  clear  as  the
mo jii,  and  that  her  banners  may  be
terrible  tin  to  all  nations." How  do
you  suppose  we  are  going  to  fulfill
tli is,  preparatory  to  the  tcdemption
uf  Zion  ? Are  we  now  taking  a
course,  to  sanctify  ourselves  before
the  Heavens? It  is  true  that  the
army  of  Israel  is  very  great  even
now  when  compared  with  that  little
handful  that  went  np  with  the  Camp
of  Zion, but  though blessed  with
numbers,  we  are  not  blessed  with
that  sane  tificat  ion  which the  Lord
has spoken of  in  that  revelation.
How much faith  have?  we  now,  in
our  disobedience  to  the  law  of  tithing,
and  to  ms my  other  principles?  Bles-
sed are  they  who  have  faith  tally  paid
their  tithing  all  the  time,  and  blessed
are  their  children,  they  will  receive
their  inheritance  in the Land  of
Zion, when  the  Lord  shall  come.
Toe  Lord  will  bless  them  andB  their
^eueniiions  for  ever. But  those  who
hare  not  complied  with  this  law  are
not sanctifying themselves  bv-fore
God,  neither are I  hey  preparing
themselves for tire  redemption  of
Zion, Their  hearts  are  set  upon  the
foolish  things  of  this  world,  they  are
grasping  after  riches  to  aggrandize
themselves.

This  is  plain  preaching,  and  per-
haps some  of  you  will  not  like  it.
1  can  not  help  it,  these  are  the  things
that  present  themselves  before  my
mind. There  must  be  a  reformation


CONSECRATION,  ETC


361


there  will  be  a  reformation  among
this  people,  for  God  will  not  cast  off
this  kingdom  and  this  people,  bat  he
will  plead  with  the  strong  ones  of
Zion,  he  will  plead  with  this  people,
he  will  plead  with  those  in  high
places,  he  will  plead  with  the  Priest-
hood of  this  Church,  until  Zion  shall
become  clean  before  him,  I  do  not
know  but  that  it  would  be  an  utter
impossibility  to  commence  and  carry
out  some  principles  pertaining  to
Zion  right  in  the  midst  of  fehia  peo-
ple. They  have  strayed  so  far  that
to  get  a  people  who  would  conform
to  heavenly  laws  it  may  be  needful
to  lead  some  from  the  midst  of  this
people  and  commence  anew  some-
where in  the  regions  round  about  in
these  mountains.  Ask  this  people  if
they  are  willing  to  abide  by  the  law
of  God,  and  how  would  they  vote  ?
The  hands  of  every  one  would  be  up
almost  without  exception,  but  when
it  comes  to  the  very  point,  when  con-
secration in  part  might  be  required
at  their  hands,  that  is  the  time  to
prove  them  and  to  see  whether  they
would  or  would  not  be  obedient.
"Qh,  I  have  such  a  fine  house,  and
such  a  fine  carriage  and  horses,  such
an  abundance  of  merchandize  and
good  things*  It  has  taken  me  years
and  years  to  get  tliestf  things,  and
it  is  hard  to  give  onc-hti!f,  three-
fourths  or  nine-tenths  of  them  to
establish  another  order  of  tilings,  and
I  rather  think  I  had  better  keep  on
the  background,  and  see  how  the
order  flourishes.  Let  others  try  it
first,  and  it  they  get  on  very  well
and  become  wealthy,  then  perhaps  I
will  venture  to  inve  a  little  of  mv
property,"  These  are  the  feelings
that  exist  in  the  hearts  of  some  indi-
viduals among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
but  they  have  got  to  be  routed  out,
or  those  v\hu  give  way  tj  them  will
lose  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,

I  do  not  know  how  m  my  will  stand


up  and  obey  the  law  of  the  Lord
unto  the  sacrifice  of  all  their  earthly
goods,  or  how  long  it  will  be  h  i  .re
people  will  be  called  upon  to  make
this  sacrifice.  I  do  not  know  how
long  it  will  be  before  this  people  are
brought  to  the  trying  point  to  see
who  is  and  who  is  not  for  the  Lord  ;
but  I  would  advise  the  Litter-day
Saints  to  prepare  for  this,  for  it  may
come  sooner  than  some  of  you  ex-
pect. If  the  Lord  should  undertake
to  bring  about  an  order  of  things
different  from  that  which  now  exists,
and  establish  it  not  exactly  in  the
midst  of  this  people,  but  in  some
place  where  they  can  commence
anew,  I  hope  the  people  will  begin  to
pray  to  the  Lord,  reckon  up  with
themselves  and  examine  their  own
hearts,  and  see  whether  they  are
willing  and  prepared,  if  culled  upon,
to  place  all  that  they  have,  or  as
much  as  they  are  required  in  that
order  of  things,  and  carry  it  out.

When  we  go  back  to  Jackson
County,  we  are  to  go  back  with  power.
Do  you  suppose  that  God  will  re  Veal
his  power  among  an  urisanctified  peo-
ple, who  have  no  regard  nor  respect
for  his  laws  and  institutions,  but  who
are  fihed  with  covetousness  ?  Xo.
When  God  shows  forth  his  power
among  the  Latter-diy  Saints,  it  will
be  because  there  is  a  union  of  feeling
in  regard  to  doctrine,  and  in  regard
to  everything  that  God  has  placed
in  t heir  hands;  and  not  only  a
union,  but  a  sanctitication  on  their
part,  that  there  shall  not  be  a  snot
or  wrtnklo  as  it  were,  but  everything
shall  be  as  fair  as  the  sun  that  shines
in  the  heavens.

In  order  to  bring  about  this,  who
knows  how  many  chastisements  God
may  yet  have  to  pour  out  upon  the
people  calling  themselves  Latter-day
Saints  :  I  do  not  know.  Sometimes
I  fear,  when  1  read  certain  revela-
tions contained  in  this  book. In  one


302


JoriiNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  tliMLthe  Lord  says,  "  If  (his  peo-
ple \$ill!be  obedient  to  nil  of  my
Commandments,  they  shall  begin  to
prevail  against  their  enemies  from
this  very  hour,  and  shall  not  cease  to
prevail  until  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ." That  pro-
mise was  given  almost  forty  years
ago. In  the  same  paragraph  it  says
— "Inasmuch  as  this  people  will  not
be  obedient  to  my  commandments
and  live  by  every  word  that  I  have
spoken,  I  will  visit  the tn  with  sore
afflictions, with pestilence,  with
plague,  with sword and  with  the
flame  of  devouring  tire." Is  it  not
enough  to  make  a  person  fear  when
God  has  spoken  this  concerning  the
Latter-day  Saints? I  do  not  know
all  things which await  us.  One
thing  I  do  know — that  the  righteous
need  not  lear. The  Book  ol  Mormon
is  very  express  upon  this  subject.  In
the  Ust  chapter  of  the  first  book  of
Nephi,  the  Lord,  through  the  Pro-
phet, speaks  concerning  the  building
up  of  Zion  in  the  hitter  days  on  the
earth. He  says  his  people  should
be,  as  it  weu\  in  great  straits,  at
certain  times,  but  said  the  Prophet,
"  The  righteous  need  not  fear,  for  I
will  preserve  them,  if  it  must  needs
be  that  I  send  down  fire  from  hea-
ven unto the destruction  of  their
enemies." This  will  be  fulfil  led  if
necessary. Let  the  righteous  among
this  people  abide  in  their  righteous*
i) ess,  and  let  them  cleave  unto  the
Lord  their  God ; nnd  if  there  are
those  among  them  who  will  not  keep
his commandments, they will  he
cleansed  out by  the  judgments  of
which  I  have  spoken. But  if  the
majority  of  this  people  will  be  faith-
ful, the  Lord  will  preserve  them  from
their  enemies,  from  sword,  pestilence
and  plague,  and  from  every  weapon
that  is  lifted  against  them.  God
will  shield  us  by  his  power,  if  we  are


to  be  led  forth  out  of  bondage  as  our
fathers  were  led,  at  the  first.  This
indicates  that  there  may  be  bondage
ahead,  and  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
may  sec*  severe  times,  and  that  un-
less we  keep  the  commandments  of
God,  we  may  be  brought  into  cir-
cumstances that  will  cause  our  hearts
to  tremble  within  i\s,  that  is,  those
who  are  not  upright  before  God.
But  if  this  people  should  be  brought
into  bondage,  as  the  Israelites  were
in  ancient  days,  Zion  must  be  led
forth  out  of  bondage,  as  Israel  was
at  the  first.  In  order  to  do  tins  God
lias  prophesied  that  lie  will  raise  up
a  man  like  unto  Moses,  who  shall
lead  his  people  therefrom.

Whether  that  man  is  now  in  ex-
istence, or  whether  it  is  some  one
yet  to  be  born  ;  or  whether  it  is  our
present  leader  who  h  <s  led  us  forth
into  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains, whether  God  will  grant  unto
us  the  great  blessing  to  have  ids
life  spared  to  lead  forth  bis  people
like  a  Moses,  we  perhaps  may  not
all  know.  He  has  done  a  great  and
wonderful  work  in  leading  forth
this  people  into  this  land  and  build-


ing up


these


in this  desert


country;  and  I  feel  in  my  heart  to
say,  Would  to  God  that  his  life  may
be  prolonged  like  Moses,  in  days  of
old,  who,  when  he  was  eighty  years
old,  was  sent  forth  to  redeem  the
people  of  Israel  from  bondage,  God
is  not  under  the  necessity  of  choos-
ing a  young  man,  he  can  make  a
man  eighty  years  of  age  full  of
vigor,  strength  and  health,  and  he
may  spare  our  present  leader  to
lead  this  people  on  our  return  to
Jackson  County*  But  whether  it
be  h^  or  some  other  person,  God
will  surely  fulfill  this  promise.
This  was  given  before  our  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  was  taken  out  of  our
midst.  Many  of  us  no  doubt
thought  when that  revelation  was


CONSECRATION,  ETC


363


given  thai  Joseph  would  be  the
man.  I  was  in  hopes  it  would  be
Joseph,  for  I  had  no  idea  that  he
was  going  to  be  slain,  although  I
might  have  known  from  certain  re-
velations that  such  would  probably
be  the  case,  for  the  Lord  had  said
unto  him,  before  the  rise  of  this
Church,  that  he  would  jjrant  unto
him  eternal  life  even  though  he
should  be  slaiu,  which  certainly  was
an  indication  that  he  might  be
slain.  But  we  still  were  in  hopes
that  he  would  live  and  that  he
would  he  the  man  who,  like  Moses,
would  lead  this  people  from  bon-
dage. I  do  not  know  but  he  will
yet.  God's  arm  is  not  shortened
that  he  cannot  raise  him  up  even
from  the  tomb.  We  are  living  in
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times,  the  dispensation  of  the  resur-
rection, and  there  may  be  some
who  will  wake  from  their  tombs  for
certain  purposes  and  to  bring  to
pass  certain  transactions  on  the
earth  decreed  bv  the  Great  Jehovah  ;
and  if  the  Lord  sees  proper  to  bring
forth  that  man  just  before  the  wind-
ing up  scene  to  lead  forth  the  army
of  Israel,  he  will  do  so.  And  if  he
feels  disposed  to  send  him  forth  as  a
spiritual  personage  to  lend  the  camp
of  Israel  to  the  land  of  their  inherit-
ance, all  right  But  be  this  as  it
may,  whether  he  is  the  man,  whe-
ther President  Young  is  the  man,  or
whether  the  Lord  shall  hereafter
raise  up  a  man  for  that  purpose,  we
do  know  that  when  that  day  comes
the  Lord  will  not  only  send  his  an-
gels before  the  army  of  Israel,  but
his  presence  will  also  be  there.

Do  you  suppose  that  the  Lord  will
suffer  any  unclean  thing  to  be  in  that
army  ?  Not  at  all,  for  his  angels
and  he  himself  are  to  go  before  us.
God  will  not  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a
people  who  will  not  sanctify  them-
selves before  him. That  is  the  rea-


son why  he  withdrew  his  pretax
from  ancient  Israel,  Moses  sobdht
diligently  to  sanctify  that  numerous
people  and  to  bring  them  into  sub-
jection to  the  law  of  God  ;  he  en-
deavored to  teach  them  the  higher
Gospel  ordinances  and  law,  which
would  have  exalted  them  into  the
celestial  kingdom  of  God,  but  he
could  not  do  it;  they  were  a  hard-
hearted, stiffuecked  people  and  they
would  "not  give  heed  to  his  words  or
to  the  words  of  the  Lord  ;  and  in  the
ahsence  of  Moses  they  made  to  them-
selves a  golden  calf  and  worshipped
it  as  the  God  who  brought  them  forth
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  If  we
follow  in  the  same  track  and  make
to  ourselves  golden  gods,  and  heap
up  the  treasures  of  the  earth  and
worship  and  think  more  of  them
than  of  the  laws  of  heaven,  we  may
fall  under  the  same  example  of  un-
belief and  transgression,  and  under
the  same  judgment  that  came  upon
ancient  Israel.  But  Moses  was  not
to  blame,  for  he  sought  diligently  to
sanctify  them,  but  when  they  trans-
gressed time  after  time,  God  became
so  anyry  with  them  that  he  finally
swore  in  his  wrath  that  he  w»»uld  not
go  up  in  the  midst  of  that  people,
lest  he  should  breitk  forth  in  his  an-
^er  and  fury  and  consume  them  in  a
moment.  That  was  the  way  he  felt
towards  them  because  of  their  sin-
fulness, and  in  order  that  they  might
not  be  consumed,  but  that  a  rem-
nant might  be  spared,  and  that  seed
might  be  raided  up  to  old  father
Abraham  and  to  Isaac  and  to  Jacob,
he  withdrew  his  presence  from  the
midst  of  the  camp  of  Israel.  But
he  did  not  forsake  them  entirely.
Said  he,  "  Mine  angel  may  go  be-
fore you.  Yon  may  have  an  angel
and  you  may  have  Moses  for  a  sea-
son, but  I  will  not  go  with  you/'  He
swore  that  that  people,  in  the  wilder-
ness, should  not  enter  into  his  rest,


364


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


wluchttje.st  is  tlie  fullness  of  liis


It  is  to  be  hoped  that  there  will  be
nothing  of  this  kind  among  the  ar-
mies of  Israel  in  the  latter  days.
We  have  the  promise  of  the  Al-
mighty, and  I  hope  that  it  will  never
be  revoked,  that  "  I  say  not  unto
you  as  I  said  to  your  lathers,  my
angel  shall  go  before  you,  but  not
my  presence,  but  I  say  unto  you  that
my  angel  si  mil  go  before  you  and
also  my  presence  "  In  order  for  the
presence  of  God  to  #o  with  us  we
must  retain  the  higher  Priesthood,
for  without  that  and  the  ordinances
tiipreuuto  pertaining,  no  man  can
whold  the  face  of  God  and  live;
therefore  if  we  would  retain  this
higher  Priesthood  we  must,  sanctify
ourselves  through  obedience  to  the
higher  laws.  If  we  do  this,  we
can  then  claim  the  fulfillment  of  this
promise  which  the  Lord  has  made
and  which  I  have  repeated,  that  his
presence  shall  gi  with  us.

I  expect  that  when  the  Lord  leads
forth  his  people  to  build  up  the  city
of  Zion,  his  presence  will  be  visible,
When  we  speak  of  the  presence  of
the  Lord  wo  speak  of  an  exhibition
of  power.  His  presence  was  with
the  children  of  Israel  as  a  cloud  by
day,  and  as  the  shining  of  a  flaming
fire  by  night.  Though  Israel  were
not  worthy  to  enter  the  tabernacle
and  behold  the  personage  of  the  Lord
and  to  talk  with  him,  yet  Hoses,  not
having  lorfeited  that  rigat,  could
enter  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord
while  his  glory  rested  upon  it,  and
ho  could  talk  to  tl.e  L  >rd  tare  to
face.  Why  ?  Because  he  held  the
higher  Priesthood  and  had  been
obedient  to  the  higher  law  and  had
attended  to  the  higher  ordinances.
Ho  was  not  subjected  to  the  law  of
carnal  commandments,  he  had  sauc-
tilied  himself  so  that  he  cuul  J  endure


the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  not  be
consumed.

We  shall  go  back''  to  Jackson
County,  Not  that  all* this  people
will  leave  these  mountains,  or  all  be
gathered  together  in  a  camp,  but
when  we  go  back  there  will  be  a  very
large  organization  consisting  of  thou-
sands, and  tens  of  thousands,  and
they  will  march  forward,  the  glory
of  God  overshadowing  their  camp
by  day  in  the  form  of  a  clou  J,  and  a
pillar  of  flaming  fire  by  night,  the
Lord's  voice  being  uttered  forth  be-
fore hU  army.  Such  a  period  will
come  in  the  history  of  this  people,
and  when  it  arrives  the  mountains
and  the  hills  will  be  ready  to  break
forth  with  a  loud  voice  before  the
Lords  army,  and  the  very  trees  of
the  field  will  wave  to  and  fro  by  ihe
power  of  God,  and  clap  like  hands.
The  everlasting  hills  will  rejoice,  and
they  will  tremble  before  the  presence
of  the  Lord;  and  his  people  will  go
forth  and  build  up  Zion  according  to
celestial  law.  *

Will  nut  this  produce  terror  upm
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  ?  Will
not  armies  of  this  description,  though
they  may  not  l>e  as  numerous  as  the
armies  of  the  world,  cause  a  terror
to  fall  upon  the  nations  ?  The  Lard
says  the  banners  of  Zion  shall  lie  ter-
rible. If  only  one  or  two  millions
of  this  people  were  to  go  down  and
build  the  waste  places  of  Zion,  would
it  strike  the  people  of  Asia  and  Eu-
rope with  terror  ?  Not  particularly,
unless  there  wns  some  supernatural
poA'er  made  manifest.  But  when
the  Lard's  presence  is  there,  when
his  voice  is  heard,  and  his  angels
go  before  the  camp,  it  will  be  tele-
graphed to  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  earth  and  fear  will  seize  upon
all  people,  especially  the  wicked,  and
the  knees  of  the  ungodly  will  tremble
in  that  day,  and  the  high  ones  that  are
on  high,  and  the  gre  it  men  of  the  earth.


CONSECRATION,  ETC


365


Wo  shall  ill  due  time  walk  forth
into  -liicksnn  County  and  build  up
the  waste  piaffes  of  Zion.  We  shall
erect  in  that 4 Jan 1 1 ty  a  beautiful  city
after  the  ovdet  and  pattern  that  the
Lord  shall  reveal,  part  of  which  has
already  been  revealed.  God  intends
to  ha?e  a  city  built  up  that  will
never  be  destroyed  nor  overcome,
but  that  will  exist  while  eternity
shall  endure  ;  and  he  will  point  out
the  pat* erTi  and  show  the  order  of
architecture;  he  will  show  unto  his
servants  the  nature  of  the  streets  and
the  pavement  thereof,  the  kind  of
precious  stones  that  shall  enter  into
the  buildings,  the  nature  of  the  rock
and  precious  stones  that  will  adorn
the  gates  and  the  walls  of  that  city  j
for  the  gates  will  be  open  continually
says  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  that  men
imy  bring  in  the  force  of  the  Gen-
tiles, ifrwjj  h

The  nature  of  the  city  of  Zion  is
nowhere  fully  described.  John  the
re  vela  tor  has  described,  in  his  21st
chapter,  two  cities  coming  down
from  God  but  of  heaven.  The  first
one  is  the  New  Jerusalem.  That
will  come  down  on  the  land  of  Joseph.
After  John  had  seen  that,  one  of  the
angels  who  had  one  of  the  vials  of
the  seven  last  plagues  came  to  him
and  said,  "  Come  hither,  John,  and
I  will  show  you  another  city,  that  is
that  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem."
He  took  him  to  the  summit  of  a  high
mountain  and  showed  him  that  irreat
city  descending  from  God  out  of
heaven,  and  John  describes  that  city,
the  height  of  its  walls,  the  number
of  its  gates,  the  names  that  are  to
be  upon  the  gates,  and  a  great  many
particulars  in  relation  to  that  city
are  clearly  revealed.  But  the  New
Jerusalem  is  nowhere  so  fully  des-
cribed,  only  as  the  Psalmist  David
says,  "Beautiful  for  situation,  the
joy  of  the  whole  earth  is  Mount
Zion,  on  the  sides  of  the  north,  the


city  of  the  great  King."  David  also
says,  in  speaking  of  this  same  city,
"Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of
beauty,  God  hath  shined."  _-J*0«»
these  declarations  we  can  nlHeast
believe  that  Zion  will  be  a  very  iu-
tiful  city — "the  perfection  of  beauty,'*
whether  it  is  constructed  after  the
order  of  the  old  Jerusalem  or  not.
Suffice  ir.  to  sny  that  God  by  revela-
tion will  inspire  his  servants  and  will
dictate  to  them  the  order  of  the
buildings  of  that  city — the  number
and  width  of  the  streets,  the  kind
of  houses,  the  character  of  the  Tem-
ple that  is  to  be  built  therein,  the
kind  of  rock,  timber  and  the  various
materials  that  will  have  to  he  brought
from  a  distance  to  enter  into  the
composition  of  that  beautiful  city.  *

When  the  Temple  is  built  the  sons
of  the  two  Priesthoods,  that  is,  those
who  are  ordained  to  the  Priesthood
ot  Melchizedec,  that  Priesthood
which  is  after  the  order  of  the  Son
of  God,  with  all  its  appendages  ;  and
those  who  have  been  ordained  to  the
Priesthood  of  Aaron  with  all  its  ap-
pendages, the  former  called  the  sons
of  Moses,  the  latter  the  sons  of  Aaron,
will  enter  into  that  Temple  in  this
generation,  or  in  the  generation  that
was  living  in  18131,  and  all  of  them
who  are  pure  in  heart  will  behold  the
face  of  the  Lord  and  that  too  before
he  comes  in  his  glory  in  the  clouds
of  heaven,  for  he  will  suddenly  come
to  his  Temple,  and  he  will  purify  the
sons  of  Closes  and  of  Aaron,  until
they  shall  be  prepared  to  offer  in  that
Temple  an  offering  that  shall  be  ac-
ceptable in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.
In  doing  this,  he  will  purify  not
only  the  minds  of  the  Priesthood  in
that  Temple,  but  he  will  purify  their
bodies  until  they  shall  be  quickened,
renewed  and  strengthened,  and  they
will  be  partially  changed,  not  to
immortality,  but  changed  in  part
that  tley  can  be  filled  with  the  power


3G6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


of  God,  and  they  can  stand  in  the
presence  of  Jesus,  and  behold  his  face
in  the  midst  of  that  Temple.
^^I|his  will  prepare  them  for  further
^^^■fet  rations  among  the  nations  of
^f^Hearth,  it  will  prepare  them  to  go
iTOi  iu  the  days  of  tribulation  and
vengeance  upon  the  nations  of  the
wicked,  when  God  will  smite  them
with  pestilence,  plague  and  earth-
quake, such  as  former  generations
never  knew.  Then  the  servants  of
God  will  need  to  be  aruied  with  the
power  of  God,  they  will  need  to  have
that  sealing  blessing  pronounced
upon  their  foreheads  that  they  can
stand  forth  in  the  midst  of  these  de-
solations and  plagues  and  not  1x3
overcome  by  them.  When  John  the
Uevelator  describes  this  scene  he  says
he  saw  four  angels  sent  forth,  ready
to  hold  the  four  winds  that  should
blow  from  the  four  quarters  of  hea-
ven. Another  angel  ascended  from
the  east  and  cried  to  the  four  angels,


and  said,  "  Smite  not  the  earth  now,
but  wait  a  little  while."  "  How
long  ?"  "  Until  the  servants  of  our
God  are  sealed  in  their  foreheads**'
What  for  ?  To  prepare  them  to
stand  forth  in  the  midst  of  these
desolations  and  plagues,  and  not  be
overcome-  When  thtfy  are  prepared,
when  they  have  received  a  renewal  of
their  bodies  in  the  Lord's  Temple,
and  have  been  filled  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  purified  as  gold  and  silver
in  a  furnace  of  fire,  then  they  will  be
prepared  to  stand  before  the  nations
of  the  earth  and  preach  glad  tidings
of  salvation  in  the  midst  of  judg-
ments that  are  to  come  like  a  whirl-
wind upon  the  wicked.

I  intended  to  lay  before  you  some
things  pertaining  to  the  order  of  full
consecration  that  will  be  observed
when  we  get  back  to  Jackson  County,
but  time  will  not  permit  to  enter  into
that  now.

May  God  bless  you,  Amen.


t


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

D&LlVEKKh  IN  THIS lliTH WaRT> ASSEMBLY  ROOMS,  SALT  LaKE  ClTV,

Sunday  Afternoon,  March  23,  1873,

[The  11th  chapter  of  Hebrews  was  reai.1  aa  a  text]

(Reported  by  David  IF.  Evans  J

THE  TIMES  OF  OUR  SAVIOR  COMPARED WITH THE PRESENT — REVELA-
TION— DUTIES UF THE SAINTS — SELF  TO  BE  OVERCOME — COMING  OF

A  VAdl  CHRIST,  h  -iU-


A  more  comprehensive  chapter  1  cised  by  the  children  of  men,  I  think
than  this,  in  its  description  of  the  is  not  contained  within  the  lids  of
effects  of  faith  when  properly  exer-  1  the  Bible, The  entire  history  of


Godrij  dealings  with  the  children  of
men,  so  far  as  the  Jewish  record  is
concerned,  is  epitomized  therein.  The
Apostle,  in  the  plainest  possible
language,  describes  the  leading  events
that  had  transpired  up  to  his  day
amontj  the  fathers  of  his  nation,  set-
ting  forth  with  unmistakable  clear*
ness  the  power that  they wielded  '


birth,  honored  their  memories,  and
declared  that  if  they  had  live!  in
the  days  of  their  fathers  they  w<iuld
not  have  been  guilty  of  puttjn^^m
Prop! lets  to  death.  But  thmm  UU  Ul
God  and  his  Apostles  were  tre^^^^B
them  precisely  as  their  fathmfiad
traced  the  Prophets  of  old.

It  is  a  good  thrng  for  us  who  live


through  faith  in  God,  in  accomplish- in  this  generation  that  we  have  this

record  in  our  midst,  It  is  an  en-
couraging tiling  to  read  the  history
of  the  past,  and  to  learn  about  the
treatment  that  men  of  God  received
in  ancient  days.  It  is  encouraging
for  t\\om  vvh  )  contend  fur  tlie  same
faith  to  know  that  slander,  persecu-
tion, ignominy  and  shame,  and  even
death  itself  are  »ot  evidences  of  the
falsity  of  a  system,  or  of  the  falsity
of  the  doctrines  taught  by  any  indi-
vidual^ because  we  have  the  history
of  the  Apostles* — some  of  the  best
men  ihat  have  ever  trod  the  earthy
and  of  Jesus,  the  holiest  aud  best
man  that  ever  trod  the  earth,  or  that


uig  the  work  that  was  assigned  unto
them  ;  and  he  tells  the  Hebrews,  in
writing  to  them  upon  this  subject,
that  it  is  impossible  to  please  God
without  faith,  for  those  who  come
unto  him  must  believe  that  lie  is  the
re  warder  of  them  that  diligently  seek
him.

I  expect  that  the  Apostle  Paul  had
a  generation  to  deal  with  that  were
not  dissimilar  to  the  generation  in
which  we  live — a  generation  who  hud
in  their  midst  the  Scriptures,  the
predictions  of  the  holy  Prophets,
ministers  who  professed  to  have,  re-
ceived the  authority  which  they  ex-
ercised in  ministering  to  the  people  ever  will,  and  we  find  that  he  and
from  a  high  source,  and  who  were,  they  were  persecuted,  hated  and  des-
in  their  own  opinion  at  least,  called  pised,  and  their  names  were  cast  out
of  God,  an  elect  people,  a  chosen  as  evil,  and  they  were  slain  by  a
generation,  who  rejoiced  in  the  power  generation  who  prbfessed  to  honor
that  had  been  made  manifest  to  and  j  God  and  be  very  righteous,  and  who
in  behalf  of  their  fathers,  and  which,  '  claimed  to  be  the  descendants  of  the


to  a  certain  extent,  they  had  received.
The  Apostle,  in  this  chapter,  pointed
out  the  power  which  their  fathers
exercised  through  faith,  and  to  the
mighty  works  that  had  been  wrought
thereby,  and  he  endeavored  to  stir
up  within  them  a  desire  to  exercise
the  same  faith.

At  the  time  that  Paul  wrote  this
epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  Jews  did
not  believe  in  living  revelation  ;  they
did  not  believe  that  God  spoke  to
his  people  by  any  manifestations
snch  as  their  fathers  had  received.
We  are  told  that  they  garnished  the
sepulchres  of  the  dead  Prophets,  that


Patriarchs  of  old,  who  were  called
the  friends  of  God.  If  this  story
were  told  to  us  without  our  knowing
anything  of  the  circumstances,  we
should  be  reluctant  to  believe  it.  It
would  be  a  difficult  thing  to  persuade
us  that  human  beings  could  have
been  so  base  and  degraded,  and  so
lost  to  every  feeling  of  humanity  as
to  persecute  and  crucify  a  pure  being
like  Jesus,  who  had  come  from  the
Father  for  the  express  purpose  of
laying  down  his  life  as  an  expiation
for  their  sins.  But  the  record  is
before  us.  We  have  been  familiar
with  it  from  our  infancy,  and  in  the


they  reverenced  the  places  of  their  1  minds  of  those  who  profess  to  have


368


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


any  faith  in  God,  there  is  no  roam  I  far  from  him.  They  made  a  great
to  doubt  it. It  is  most  fortunate  for  parade  of  their religion,  but  °they

dwelt  on  t  he  glories  of  the  past,  on
the  evidences  of  God's  favor  which
their  nation  and  religion  had  for-
merly received.  But  did  they  them-
selves possess  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
and  the  faith  which  Paul  describes  ?
If  they  had  they  would  have  recog-
nized Jesas  when  he  caine  amongst
them,  and  they  would  have  gladly


that  this  record  has  been  pre-
for  by  it  we  are  enabled  to
;and  what  kind  of  a  gent  ration
the  day  in  which  the  chapter
e  read  in  your  hearing  was
written.  They  were  a  people  who
spoke  highly  of  religion,  who  built
synagogues  and  places  of  worship,
who  honored  ttie  Sabbath  day,  who


wore  long  phylacteries,  od  which  ,  received  ban  and  his  teachings,  and
were written select  passages  from would  have  obeyed  and  practiced  in


Scripture,  who  had  the  word  of  God
written  on  their  very  doorposts,  who
prayed  at  the  corners  of  the  streets,
who  fasted,  and,  apparently,  sought
in  every  way  to  glorify  God.  They
believed  in  Abraham  and  Moses,  and
in  the  covenants  which  God  made
with  tli  em.  They  believed  and
practiced  the  law  which  Moses  had
revealed  unto  them,  and  so  strict
were  they  in  observing  many  of  its
principles,  that  they  were  ready  on
one  occasion  to  have  a  woman  slain
for  the  violation  of  the  command-
ment respecting  adultery;  and  at
another  time  their  wrath  was  kindled
against  the  disciples  because  they
plucked  some  ears  of  corn  on  the
Sabbath  day  to  appease  their  hunger.
They  considered  that  act  a  violation
of  the  Sabbath,  and  their  righteous
souls  were  shocked  thereat.  They
were  shocked  even  at*  the  idea  of
Jesus  eating  with  unwashed  hands,
and  at  him,  who  professed  to  be  a
teacher,  associating  with  publicans
and  sinners.  They  thought  it  was
beneath  the  dignity  of  a  man  of  God
to  condescend  to  associate  with  the
low  and  degraded.  This  was  the
kind  of  people  that  existed  when
Paul  wrote  this  chapter,  yet  with  all
their  professions  and  with  all  their
apparent  sanctity  they  were  utterly
destitute  of  the  knowledge  and  power
of  God.  They  drew  near  to  G
with  their  lips,  but  their  hearts  we


I


ocL^o
^re


their  lives  the  principles  of  his  Gos-
pel. But  as  I  have  said,  they  were
utterly  destitute  of  the  Spirit  of  God,
they  were  darkened  in  their  minds,
and  instead  of  receiving  Jesus  and
his  teachings,  they  hounded  him  un*
til  they  got  him  into  their  power  and
then  they  slew  him,  and  they  treated
his  Apostles  in  the  same  manner.

It  is  truly  said  that  history  repeats
itself. We  are  familiar  with  this  in
the  history  of  our  race* When  the
Prophets  who  preceded  Jesus  went
into  the  midst of  the  people  and
preached onto them  the  word  of
God,  they  found  them  believing  in
the  Prophets  who  had  gone  before.
They  were  willing  to receive  the
testimony  of  Moses,  and  of  some  who
succeeded  him, Samuel,  after  his
j  death, was recognized  as  a  great
;  Prophet  by  the  Jews,  and  so  were
I  some  others who  were  dead ;  but
i  while  they  lived  they  were  treated
1  much  the  same  as  Jesus  and  his
Apostles  were  treated. The  wicked
could  not  recognize  the  character  of
the  men  of  God  who  labored  among
them,  and  they  rejected  and  perse-
cuted them,  and  slew  many  of  them.
This  is  characteristic  of  the  human
family. One  of  the  most  unreliable
things  connected  with  mankind  is
popular  opinion. So  far  as  God's
dealings  with  the  children  of  men  are
mcerned,  and  the  sending  of  Pro-
phets and  Apostles  to  them,  those  wio


W


THE  TIMES  OF  OUR  SAVIOR,  ETC


369


have  been  guided  by  popular  opinion
have  always  erred.  The  opinions  of
the  great  majority  concerning  the
troth  have  in  almost  every  instance
been  unreliable.  Moses,  notwith-
standing the  mighty  miracles  he  per-
formed, was  not  appreciated  by  those
among  whom  he  lived,  and  narrowly
escaped  being  stoned  by  the  people
whom  he  led  across  the  Bed  Sea.
When  tbey  got  into  the  wilderness
they  murmured  at  him,  and  were
ready  to  choose  others  to  lead  them
back  to  Egypt.  It  was  so  with
Samuel.  Although  the  nation  was
comparatively  a  righteous  nation,
they  rejected  him.  They  were  not
content  with  the  power  and  authority
which  he  exercised  over  them,  and
they  wanted  a  king.  So  with  other
Prophets,  The  more  wicked  the
generation,  the  harder  they  were  to
convince  of  the  truth  of  the  predic-
tions that  were  uttered  among  them
by  the  servants  of  God  ;  and  so  much
was  this  the  case,  that  it  became  al-
most an  infallible  rule*  when  a  majo-
rity of  the  people  decided  against  a
man,  he  was  sure  to  be  a  servant  of
God. b  ti^iip-rt

It  may  be  asked,  why  has  this
been  the  case  ?  I  know  that  men
ray,  If  God  be  God,  and  is  the  being
that  he  is  described  to  be,  why  has
he  not  manifested  his  power  in  the
midst  of  his  children  to  such  an  ex-
tent that  they  are  compelled  to  re-
ceive the  testimony  of  his  servants  ?
There  is  a  class  of  people  who  can
not  understand  why  it  is  that  truth
can  not  be  made  so  plain  to  the  hu-
man understanding  that  men  can  not
reject  it.  Infidels  advance  this  as  an
evidence  that  there  is  no  such  thing
as  divine  power,  no  such  being  as
God,  and  that  there  is  no  Supreme
Providence  presiding  over  the  affairs
of  the  children  of  men.  They  say
that  if  God  be  the  kind  of  being  that
he  is  described  to  be  in  the  Scriptures,

No.  24.


;  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  his
character  to  withhold  from  the  child-
ren of  men  such  manifestations  of
power  as  would  convince  thorn  be-
yond all  controversy  that  the  men  ho
sends  to  declare  his  will  unto  them
are  his  divinely  appointed  servants.

It  is  very  plausible,  taking  one
view  of  the  subject,  for  men  to  ima-
gine that  this  ought  to  be  the  way
in  which  God  should  act;  but  there
is  one  saying,  written  in  ancient
days,  that  is  as  true  to-day  as  when
it  was  written,  that  is,  "  That  as  the
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,
so  are  God's  ways  higher  than  our
ways,  and  God's  thoughts  higher
than  our  thoughts."  In  our  degra-
dation and  ignorance  we  can  not
comprehend  the  purposes  and  plans
of  our  heavenly  Father.  No  man
can  do  this.  If  any  man  were  capa-
ble of  doing  this,  he  would  be  unfit
to  dwell  on  earth,  and  he  might  per-
haps be  translated,  as  Enoch  was

i  anciently.  No  man  can  rise  to  the
wisdom  of  Deity,  and  com  prebend
the  purposes  and  designs  of  him  who
created  the  earth  and  placed  us  upon
it,  and  who  regulates  the  movements
of  the  universe  of  which  we  form  a

i  part;  and  when  we  try  to  do  it,  it  is
like  a  child  just  beginning  to  talk,
seeking  to  dictate  and  comprehend
the  movements,  actions  and  thoughts
of  men  who  are  in  possession  of  the
wisdom  and  experience  of  mature
age.  In  fact  the  difference  is  greater.
Oar  Father  and  God  has  made  it

i  plain  to  us  that  he  has  placed  us
here  on  this  earth  in  order  that  we

|  may  be  tested  and  proved  in  the

;  exercise  of  the  agency  that  he  has
given  us ;  and  if,  when  he  sends  forth

:  his  Prophets,  he  were  to  manifest  his
power,  so  that  all  the  earth  would  be

!  compelled  to  receive  their  words,

I  there  would  be  no  room  then  for
men  to  exercise  their  agency,  for
they  would  be  compelled  to  adopt

Vol.  XV.


370


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE,


a  certain  course,  and  to  receive  cer-
tain teachings  and  doctrines  regard-
less of  their  own  wishes  and  will.
But  God  has  sent  us  here,  and  has
given  to  every  one  of  us  our  agency,
as  much  so  as  he  has  his.  I,  in  my
sphere,  have  my  agency,  as  much  as
God,  ray  Eternal  Father,  or  as  Jesus,
my  elder  brother,  has  in  his*  I  can
do  right  or  I  can  do  wrong;  lean
serve  God  or  reject  him ;  I  can  keep
his  commandments  or  violate  them  ;
I  can  receive  his  Spirit  or  reject  it.
This  agency  God  has  given  auto  man,
and  hence  it  is  that  when  he  sends
his  truth,  and  his  servants  to  declare
it  unto  the  people,  he  does  it  in  such
a  way  that  man  is  left  to  the  free
exercise  of  his  agency  in  receiving  or
rejecting  them ;  fit  the  same  time  we
are  assured  that  whoever  receives
that  truth  will  also  receive  the  con-
vincing power  of  the  Spirit  of  God
to  bear  testimony  to  him  that  it  is
divine ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why,
as  the  Apostle  says  in  the  chapter  I
read  to  you,  the  ancient  Saints,  though
they  were  stoned,  sawn  asunder,
tempted,  slain  with  the  sword;
though  they  wandered  about  in  sheep
skins  and  in  goat  skins,  being  desti-
tute, afflicted  and  tormented,  were
able  to  endure  to  the  end.  They
had  received  a  testimony  from  God
through  obedience  to  his  Gospel  in
the  exercise  of  their  agency  in  the
right  direction,  and  this  enabled  them
to  endure  all  these  things  cheerfully,
looking  forward,  as  Paul  says  Moses
did  when  he  fled  from  Egypt,  to  the
recompense  of  reward.

In  this  manner  the  servants  of
God  have  gone  forth  in  every  age
and  preached  the  Gospel.  To  bring
the  matter  down  to  our  own  day —
when  Joseph  Smith  commenced  to
preach  the  Gospel,  to  tell  the  people
that  God  had  once  more  spoken  from
the  heavens,  a  great  many  said,
'*  Where  are  the  signs,  or  evidences


that  God  has  done  this  ?  Can  you
not  show  some  sign  or  work  us  some
miracle  that  shall  convince  us  that
this  is  true  ?  If  you  will  work  us  a
miracle,  if  you  will  walk  on  the  water,
raise  the  dead,  or  do  some  other  niira-
culous  work,  then  we  will  believe
that  he  has  spoken  to  you,  and  that
the  words  you  testify  to  are  true."
They  wanted  signs,  and  yet  they  had
the  Bible  in  their  midst  The  posi-
tion of  those  to  whom  Joseph  taught
the  Gospel  was  very  similar  to  that
of  the  Jews  in  Paul's  day,  only  the
former  were  more  blessed  than  the
Jews  were  unto  whom  Jesus  came*
They  had  the  Prophets  and  Apostles,
that  is,  they  had  their  words.  They
had  the  record  of  the  Gospel  as
taught  by  Jesus  and  his  Apostles,
with  the  account  of  the  miracles
wrought  by  them  ;  they  had  a  form
of  godliness,  and  they  thought  they
w^ere  on  the  road  of  salvation.  But
they  did  not  believe  in  miracles,
they  did  not  believe  that  God  was
a  God  of  revelation,  hence  they  would
not  receive  the  testimony  of  the  Pro-
phet Joseph,  hut  they  wanted  mira*
cles  to  convince  them.  In  this  they
made  a  great  mistake,  as  many  others
have  done  in  other  ages  of  the  world
in  relation  to  this  matter.  It  is  writ-
ten of  Jesus  that  he  did  not  do  many
mighty  works  in  Galilee  because  of
the  unbelief  of  the  people ;  and  he
said  it  was  a  wicked  and  adulterous
generation  that  demanded  a  sign,  and
none  should  be  given  them.  When
the  people  demanded  miraculous
signs  of  Joseph  Smith  to  convince
them  of  the  truth  of  his  testimony,
they  would  not,  or  did  not  exercise
their  agency,  hut  wanted  some  over-
powering evidence  to  convince  them.

The  Lord  does  not  operate  in  that
way  among  the  children  of  men.
sends  forth  his  servants  with  the
truth,  and  he  makes  this  promise —
he  made  it  through  Joseph  Smith —


THE  TIMES  OF  THE  SAVIOR,  ETC.  371


If  they  will  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  I
repent  of  their  sins,  be  baptized  for
the  remission  thereof  by  one  having
authority,  they  shall  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  and  a  testimony  from
Him  as  to  the  character  of  the  work
in  which  they  have  engaged,  A  man
who  comes  to  God  must  believe  that
he  is  God,  that  he  has  power  to  do
as  he  says.  This  is  the  way  the  an-
cients received  their  faith.  The
difficulty  to-day  is,  that  the  people
do  not  believe  that  God  is  a  being  of
this  character.  Yon  talk  to  those
men  who  profess  to  be  ministers  of
the  Gospel,  and  ask  them,  "  Do  you
have  the  gifts,  powers  and  blessings
of  the  Gospel  as  they  were  enjoyed
by  the  Saints  in  ancient  days  ?"  and
the  reply  will  be,  invariably,  "  That
power  is  withdrawn,  those  gifts  and
blessings  are  no  longer  enjoyed  among
men,  God  does  not  reveal  his  will
unto  the  children  of  men  as  he  did
in  ancient  days,  and  it  is  in  vain  for
you  to  ask  God  for  those  blessings,
for  they  will  not  be  bestowed/'  This
is  the  teaching  of  the  ministers  in
the  religious  world  to-day.  Is  it  any
wonder  that  there  is  no  faith  among
men  ?  Is  it  any  wonder  that  the
blessings  which  Paul  describes  as
being  the  fruits  of  faith  are  not  real-
ized to-day  ?  Is  it  any  wonder  that
men  wander  in  darkness  and  error,
and  that  the  heavens  are  as  brass  over
their  heads  ?  Is  it  any  wonder  that
angels  do  not  come  to  earth  and  visit
men,  and  that  the  gifts  and  blessings
of  the  Gospel  are  not  enjoyed  ?  It  is
no  wonder  to  me;  on  the  contrary,
the  wonder  to  me  is  that  there  is  so
much  faith,  or  rather  that  there  is
any  faith  left  among  the  children  of
men,  and  to  tell  the  truth,  my  bre-
thren and  sisters,  there  is  but  very
little,  I  can  see  a  great  change  since
I  became  old  enough  to  comprehend
anything  about  religion,  I  can  see
an  absence  of  that  faith  which  reli-


gious people  once  had,  There  has
been  a  gradual  lapsing  into  unbelief,
and  infidelity  and  scepticism  are
growing  among  the  people,  and  to-
day there  is  very  little  of  that  old
fashioned  vital  religion  that  was  en-
joyed previous  to  the  revelation  of
the  Gospel.

Among  the  earliest  of  the  predic-
tions of  the  Elders  of  this  Church
that  I  can  remember,  were  those  fore-
telling, as  effects  which  should  fol-
low the  declaration  of  the  Gospel  in
these  days,  those  we  now  see.  They
declared  that  when  this  Gospel  was
proclaimed  unto  the  people,  if  they
rejected  it,  the  faith  which  they  then
enjoyed  and  the  light  they  then  pos-
sessed would  disappear,  and  they
would  be  left  in  darkness.  I  have
lived  to  see  the  fulfillment  of  this
prediction.  The  Apostle  Paul,  in
his  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,
says,  4C  For  this  cause  God  will  send
them  strong  delusions,  that  they
may  believe  a  lie  who  take  not  plea-
sure in  righteousness,"  &c.  "  For  this
cause** — because  they  rejected  the
truth  and  the  testimony  of  God's
servants,  strong  delusion  would  be
sent  unto  them,  which  would  cause
them  to  believe  a  lie.  I  have  lived
to  see  the  fulfillment  of  that  pre-
diction. The  first  time  I  heard  of
modern  revelation  outside  of  this
|  Church,  I  was  on  the  Sandwich
Islands*  I  had  been  from  home
then  several  years,  I  happened  to
call  at  the  house  of  a  friend  and
picked  up  a  book.  I  read  its  pre-
face ;  and  I  was  astonished  at  it.
I  had  never  heard  of  anything  of
the  kind  outside  of  our  Church  be-
fore then.  The  author  argued  that
it  was  right  to  expect  that  spirits
would  visit  and  make  communica-
tions to  men,  and  he  went  on  to
quote  from  the  Bible  in  support  of
his  argument.  I  have  since  seen
many  books  of  the  same  character,


372


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  it  is  now  as  common  to  believe
in  spiritual  revelation  as  it  was
formerly  uncommon.  It  is  as  rare
a  thing  now  to  meet  with  persons
who  do  not  believe  in  this  in  some
form  as  it  was  formerly  to  meet  with
those  who  did  believe  it  Up  to
the  time  of  mj  early  manhood  I
had  never  heard  of  anybody  believ-
ing in  this  but  Latter-day  Saints,
Now  you  will  find  ministers  of  re-
ligion —  Method  ists,  Presby  terians,
Episcopalians,  and  men  of  all  classes
and  degrees  who  believe  in  spiritual
communications.  But  have  they  any
organization,  or  any  point  upon
which  they  can  unite  together  ?
No,  each  man  receives  revelation  to
suit  himself,  until  to-day  there  is  no
faith  in  the  land  and  no  belief  in  the
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God.
The  adversary  has  captivated  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  he
has  fortified  their  miods  against  the
truth,  and  is  leading  them  to  des-
truction.

Formerly,  the  great  objection  to
the  Latter-day  Saints  was  that  they
believed  in  revelation.  That  was
one  of  the  great  charges  made
against  ns  in  Jackson  County,  Mo.
Another  was,  that  we  had  a  Pro-
phet, whose  words  we  hearkened
to,  and  that  we  believed  in  the
working  of  miracles.  These  were
among  the  charges  made  against
ns  by  the  mob  as  a  reason  why  we
should  be  expelled  from  our  lands.
But  after  a  few  years  had  elapsed,
our  cunning  adversary  began  to
give  revelations  and  manifestations
to  the  people,  and  he  spread  abroad
his  lying  signs  and  wonders,  and
now  they  are  far  more  numerous
than  tkose  contained  in  the  Bible.
People  everywhere  can  get  revela-
tion. Profane  men  and  women —
drunkards,  gamblers  and  wicked
people  of  every  decree  can  get  round
a  table  and  obtain  revelation.  What


necessity  is  there  for  them  to  obey
the  Gospel  ?  What  attractions  has
truth  for  such  persons  ?  They  can
get  all  the  revelation  they  need  with-
out having  recourse  to  the  Gospel  or
to  its  ordinances,  or  without  being
under  the  necessity  of  enduring  the
ignominy  of  being  the  servants  of
God,  for  it  has  always  been  consid-
ered ignominious  by  the  world  to
be  a  servant  of  God  since  Satan  had
power  in  the  earth.  Can  you  not
see  how  cunningly  the  adversary
has  worked,  and  how  difficult  it  ia
under  such  circumstances  to  snatch
people  from  the  error  of  their  ways  ?
The  trath  has  not  been  sweet  or  de-
sirable to  this  generation,  and  thev
have  rejected  it  The  truth  has  no
attractions  for  those  who  do  not  love
it  for  its  own  sake.  Connected  with
the  truth  there  is  a  love  such  as  Jesoa
said  his  followers  should  have,  which
should  induce  them  to  cleave  to  it
when  they  were  persecuted,  their
names  cast  out  as  evil,  and  when
they  should  be  hated  of  all  men  for
his  sake*  There  is  nothing  attractive
about  all  this  to  people  who  do  not
love  the  truth  for  its  own  sake,  but
they  who  do  are  willing  to  endure  all
things  for  the  sake  of  the  blessings
that  God  has  promised  to  bestow  upon
them.

Brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  our  duty
as  individuals  and  as  a  people  to
live  so  that  we  may  have  that  faith
that  was  once  delivered  to  the  Saints;
that  we  may  have  the  revelations
of  God  in  our  hearts,  that  we  may
know  for  ourselves  concerning  the
truth,  and  have  each  day  a  testi-
mony thereof.  You  know  that  the
idea  is  very  prevalent  that  we  are
led  by  one  man,  or  by  a  few  men.
It  is  thought  that  President  Young
leads  this  people  according  to  his
own  ideas,  and  that  he  and  his  coun-
sellors and  the  Twelve,  through  some
canning  era  ft  of  theirs,  are  able  to


THE  TIMES  OF  THE  SAVIOR,  ETC


373


influence  them  to  do  this  or  reject
that,  to  pursue  this  course  or  avoid  j
that. I  suppose  this  idea  will  be  pre-
valent as  long  as  there  are  people
who  do  not  understand  the  character
of  this  work* Bat  it  is  our  duty,  one
and  all,  to  live  so  that  we  shall  have
the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  a
continual  testimony  within  us  of  the
truth  of  the  work  that  God  has  es-
tablished, and  that  we  may  have
that  faith  that  will  enable  us  to
endure  all  things. If  women  had
their  dead  restored  in  ancient  days,
women  ought  to  have  faith  enough  in
these  davs  to  realize  the  same  bless-
ings* But  a  spirit  of  unbelief,  dark-
ness and  hardness  of  heart  h:is  gone
forth,  and  it  is  shared  to  some  extent
by  this  people* The  more  we  min-
gle with  the  world  the  more  ot  this
spirit  we  feel. It  permeates  the
literature  of  the  present  day.  You
can  not  take  up  a  book  that  has  not
been  written  by  a  servant  of  God,
that  does  not  bear  evidence  of  this
spirit  of  unbelief. You  can  not  take
up  a  newspaper,  but  something  is
said  therein  to  weaken  the  faith  of
those  who  have  any. Unbelief  per*
meatcs  the  world  at  large.  There
are  good  reasons  for  this. The  great
mass  of  the  people  ridicule  Jesus,
the  resurrection  and  life  beyond  the
grave. They  can  not  understand
why  men  should  deny  themselves
and  suffer  as  Jesus  and  bis  disciples
did. The  people  of  to-day  can  not
comprehend  anything  but  living  for
to-day,  enjoying  themselves  and  hav-
ing pleasure  to-day,  and  letting  to-
morrow take  care  of  itself  The
idea  of  laying  up  treasures  in  heaven
is  ridiculed,  even  by  some  who  call
themselves Latter-day Saints,  I
have  heard,  and  perhaps  you  have,
soma  amongst  us  say,  **  I  am  satis-
fied with  getting  the  best  I  can  here,
and  with  enjoying  myself  to  the
best  advantage  here,  and  let  the  fu-


ture take  care  of  itself  I  do  not
know  anything  about  the  life  to  come,
but  I  know  about  this,  and  I  want
my  enjoyment  here,  and  I  will  risk
the  future."

The  whole  tendency  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  is  to  the  effect  that  we  must
deny  ourselves,  and  be  willing  to  en-
dure and  suffer  even  to  death  itself.
It  is  right  that  we  should  dress  com-
fortably and  according  to  our  means;
it  is  right  that  we  should  take  care
of  our  bodies  and  have  suitable  food.
God  has  given  us  the  elements  of
food  and  ntiment  and  to  build  good
houses. He  has  given  us  horses  and
cattle,  and  the  materials  to  make
carriages,  and it  is  right  that  we
should  use  these  things. I  do  not
believe  in  any  religion  that  denies  to
man  the  use  of  the  blessings  wFiich
God  has  given,  but  I  deny  that  God
designs  that  we  should  abuse  or  wor-
ship these  things. If  you  or  I  have
wealth,  we  should  not  worship  it.
If  you  have  comforts,  your  heart
should  not  be  set  upon  them* If  you
have  pleasant  homes,  orchards,  gar-
dens and  fields  you  should  not  wor-
ship them,  but  hold  them  as  the  gifts
of  God,  and  be  as  ready  to  go  forth
and  leave  them  as  yon  would  to  leave
a  barren  wilderness,  or  as  these  In-
dians are  to  take  up  their  wick-i-ups
and  go  from  place  to  place.  As
Latter  day  Saints  we  should  be  ready
and  willing  to  move  in  any  direction
and  to  do  anything  that  our  Father
and  God  requires  of  us,  holding  the
religion  that  he  has  given  us  dearer
than  life  itself* Our  brethren  and
sisters  who  lived  anciently  aimed  for
the  same  glory  that  we  are  aiming
for,  and  they  were  willing  to  be  sawn
asunder,  to  be  stoned,  to  dress  in
sheepskins  and  goatskins,  to  dwell  in
dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  to  have
their  names  cast  out  as  evil,  and  to
do  all  things  for  the  righteousness  of
God, We  are  aiming  for  the  same


374  JOURNAL  OF

glory  they  have  received,  am  If  we
attain  to  it  we  must  be  willing  to  en-
dure all  the  afflictions  and  to  make
all  the  sacrifices  they  endured  and
made.

There  is  this  difference  between  us
and  the  work  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged, and  thetn  and  the  work  in
their  day — they  looked  forward  to
the  time  when  the  kingdom  of  God
would  be  withdrawn  from  the  earth
on  account  of  the  growth  of  unbe-
lief and  apostacy,  but  in  our  day
God  has  promised  that  this  king-
dom shall  stand  for  even  On  that
account  we  can  rejoice*  We  know
that  our  enemies'  attacks  upon  us  will
fail.  They  may  drive  us,  at  least
they  have  done  it,  but  I  do  not  think
they  will  again  if  we  are  faithful.
They  have  driven  and  persecuted  us;
they  have  slain  some  of  our  numbers,
they  have  cast  out  our  names  as  evil ;
they  have  called  us  everything  vile,
as  they  did  Jesus.  We  are  of  all
men  the  most  despised,  so  far  as  our
characters  are  concerned ;  and  yet
we  are  known  better  than  any  other
people.  The  adversary  has  spread
this  mist  of  darkness  over  the  minds
of  the  people  until  they  think  us  ca-
pable of  everything  evil.  But  cot-
withstanding  all  this,  the  course  of
this  work  is  onward  and  upward,  and
it  will  prevail.  Men  may  combine
and  form  plots  and  schemes  against
it,  and  do  everything  in  their  power
to  overthrow  it,  but  tbey  will  be
signally  defeated  every  time  in  the
future,  as  they  have  been  in  the  past
There  has  never  been  a  move  against
this  Church,  from  its  organization
until  the  present  time,  that  did  not
benefit  it  There  never  has  been  a
hostile  hand  stretched  forth  that  did
not  add  to  the  speed  and  strength  of
its  progress.  There  never  has  been
a  drop  of  the  blood  of  its  members
shed  by  the  ungodly  that  has  not
contributed  to  the  increase  of  our


DISCOURSES.

nambers,  and  that  has  not  added  to
the  strength of  the system  with

j  which  we  are  connected.  Let  your
minds  go  back  and  contemplate  his-
tory of  this  Church,  trace  the  course
of  this  people  from  the  inception  of
God's  work  to  the  present  time,  and
what  has  there  been  done  against  it

'  or  them  that  has  not  added  to  its
strength  and  to  the  certainty  of  its
perpetuity  ?  Think  of  all  the
schemes  concocted,  and  of  all  the
smart  men  that  have  been  engaged
in  fighting  this  work;  think  of  all
the  talented  men  in  the  Church  who
have  apostatized  and  have  preached
against  the  Gospel,  and  have  written
books  and  newspaper  articles,  and
everything  else  to  destroy  this  work.
Think  of  it,  and  then  think  how  this
people  have  gone  forth  increasing  in
strength,  numbers  and  everything
that  is  calculated  to  make  them  great
and  mighty.  God  has  preserved  us.
He  has  given  us  the  supremacy  of
the  land  and  to  Him  the  glory  is  to
be  ascribed  for  the  supremacy  we  still
maintain.  It  is  not  because  our  ene-
mies would  have  it  so. They  have

.  fought  us  step  by  step;  they  have
devised  mischief  and  evil  in  various
ways  against  us,  but  God,  through
His  providences,  has  overruled  all  for
our  good,  and  to  Him,  not  to  man,
be  the  glary  therefor.  Man  is  utterly
incapable  of  accomplishing  these  re-
sults. There  were  men  in  ancient
days  as  brave,  fearless,  honest  and
mighty  as  any  who  have  been  con-
nected with  this  work,  but  they  sank
beneath  the  blows  of  their  destroyers,
and  went  down  to  death.  Satan  and
his  emissaries  overcame  them.  But
God  has  now  set  to  his  hand  for  the
last  time  to  build  up  his  kingdom
and  to  send  his  Gospel  to  the  people,
and  he  has  declared  that  when  that
time  arrived  his  work  should  never
again  be  overcome.

Any  man  who  will  look  at  the  con


THE  TIMES  OF  THE  SAVIOR,  ETC


37o


dition  of  the  people  will  say  that  if
there  ever  was  a  time  in  the  history
of  the  world  when  God  should  speak
to  man  it  is  now.  The  people  every-
where are  gone  astray.  J  ten  and
women  are  filled  with  extravagance
and  foolish  notions,  and  they  are
corrupt  in  every  sense  of  the  word.
Tiie  churches  are  corrupted,  the  peo^
pie  are  divided,  and  the  humble  man
who  desires  to  serve  God  is  laughed
at,  ridiculed  and  crowded  to  the  wall,
while  the  man  who  is  bold  in  iniquity,
and  shrewd  in  taking  advantage  of
his  fellows,  lurds  it  over  them.
Honesty  is  far  below  par,  and  the
virtuous  are  the  butt  and  ridicule  of
the  wicked,  Mingle  among  men  of
the  world  and  talk  to  them  about
virtue,  and  they  will  laugh  at  you,
and  if  a  man  is  known  to  be  chaste
and  pure  in  his  thoughts  and  actions
he  is  ridiculed  and  sneered  at.  It  is
so  with  everything  else  that  God
values*  Think  of  it.  Where  do  yon
see  meek  and  humble  men  prospered  ?
You  see  bold,  defiant  men — those
shrewd  in  iniquity,  get  nil  the  advan-
tages, and  the  man  who  can  take
advantage  of  his  neighbor  best  flou-
rishes most.  Is  this  right?  No.
I  should  mourn  for  the  race  if  I
thought  so,  I  should  mourn  if  I
thought  that  this  condition  of  things
would  forever  prevail.  God  promised
in  ancient  days  that  in  the  latter  days
he  would  reveal  the  truth,  send  foith
his  servants  and  gather  out  his  peo-
ple. He  has  commenced  the  work
By  the  preaching  of  his  word,  he  has
gathered  thousands  of  honest- hearted
people  who  love  the  truth  and  who
are  willing  to  abide  by  it  He  has
given  unto  them  the  same  spirit  that
he  gave  to  his  servants  in  ancient
days.  He  has  given  them  the  same
faith,  but  they  do  not  always  exercise
it  as  they  should  do,  they  are  over-
come of  evil ;  and  there  are  some  who
call  themselves  Latter-day  Saints


who  have  almost  got  to  believe  that
there  is  nothing  particularly  special
in  this  work,  God  has  not  shown
himself  as  they  expected.  Such
pei .sons  will  sooner  or  later  leave  the
Church  if  they  do  not  repent.

There  is  this  about  unbelief,  bre-
thren and  sisters,  it  is  one  of  the  most
dreadful  feeling,  I  think,  that  can
assail  any  human  being.  I  have  seen
men  in  this  condition,  and  I  have
thought  while  beholding  them,  that  I
got  a  Detter  conception  of  hell  than  I
ever  did  from  any  other  exhibition.
How,  you  may  ask,  shall  we  guard
against  this  spirit  of  unbelief?  I
will  tell  you.  There  are  some  people
who,  when  assailed  by  doubt,  will
commence  a  controversy  with  the
devil,  they  will  argue  with  him,  and
give  room  to  him*  You  should  never
condescend  to  any  such  thing,  Just
tell  him  you  have  nothing  to  do  with
him,  bid  him  to  get  behind  you,  you
have  set  out  to  serve  God  and  to
keep  his  commandments,  and  you
are  going  to  do  it  regardless  of  iiim
or  any  of  his  temptations  or  snares,
lie  firm  and  steadfast,  and  close  your
ears  against  evil  influences  and  every-
thing of  that  kind.  I  will  tell  you  a
rule  by  which  you  may  know  the
Spirit  of  God  from  the  spirit  of  evil.
The  Spirit  of  God  always  produces
joy  and  satisfaction  of  mind.  When
you  have  that  Spirit  you  are  happy ;
when  you  have  another  spirit  you
are  not  happy.  The  spirit  of  doubt
is  the  spirit  of  the  evil  one ;  it  pro-
duces uneasiness  and  other  feelings
that  iuterfere  with  happiness  and
peace.

It  is  your  privilege,  and  it  ought
to  be  your  rule,  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters, to  always  have  peace  and  joy
in  your  hearts.  When  you  wake  in
the  morning  and  your  spirits  are  dis-
turbed, you  may  know  there  is  some
spirit  or  influence  that  is  not  right.
You  should  never  leave  your  bed


376


JOURNAL.  OF  DlSf  OUIISKS


chambers  until  you  can  get  that  calm,
serene  and  happy  influence  that  flows
from  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  and  that  is  the  fruit  of  that
Spirit  So  during  the  day  you  are
apt  to  get  disturbed,  angry  and  irri-
tated about  something.  You  should
stop,  and  not  allow  that  influence  to
prevail  or  have  place  in  your  heart,
"  Why,"  says  one,  "not  be  angry  ?"
No,  not  be  angry,  unless  righteously
io  at  some  great  wrong  that  ought
to  be  reproved.  That  is  not  the
anger  of  which  I  speak.  Some  peo-
ple will  get  angry  with  their  wives,
husband,  children  or  friends,  and  will
justify  themselves  and  think  they  are
perfectly  right  because  they  have
some  spirit  which  prompts  them  to
say  harsh  things.  I  have  known
people  give  themselves  great  credit
for  their  frankness  and  candor  for
speaking  angrily  and  improperly.
u  Why,"  said  they,  "  it  is  better  to
4  spit'  it  out  than  to  keep  it  in."  I
think  it  is  far  better  to  keep  it  in
than  to  let  it  out  If  you  do  not
speak  it,  nobody  knows  how  you  feel,
and  certainly  the  adversary  does  not
get  the  advantage  over  you.  You
do  not  make  a  wound.

We  of  all  people  should  be  happy
and  joyful.  When  the  clouds  seem
the  darkest  and  most  threatening,
and  as  though  the  storm  is  ready  to
burst  upon  us  with  all  its  fury,  we
should  be  calm,  serene  and  undis-
turbed, for  if  we  have  the  faith  we
profess  to  have  we  know  that  God  is
in  the  storm ;  in  the  cloud  or  in  the
threatened  danger,  and  that  he  will
not  let  it  come  upon  us  only  as  far  as
is  necessary  for  our  good  and  for  our
salvation,  and  we  should,  even  then,
be  calm  and  rejoice  before  God  and
praise  him.  Yes,  if  led  like  -the
three  Hebrew  children,  to  the  fiery
furnace  to  be  cast  therein }  or  as  Dan-


iel was,  into  the  lions*  den,  even  then
we  should  preserve  our  equanimity
and  oar  trustfulness  in  God.  I  know
that  some  will  say,  "This  is  folly
and  enthusiasm,"  but  notwithstand-
ing this  idea  I  know  that  there  is  a
power  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ
to  sustain  men  even  under  these  cir-
cumstances and  they  can  rejoice  in
them.  Yes,  if  we  had  to  take  our
flight  into  these  canons  and  moun-
tains to  hide  from  our  enemies  who
were  hunting  us  in  the  deserts  and
wilds  of  this  great  interior  country,
we  should  be  as  bappy  then  if  we
loved  our  religion  as  we  are  to*day»
I  know  that  when  the  Saints  crossed
these  plains  in  destitution,  driven  by
their  enemies  from  their  pleasant
places,  burying  their  dead  by  the
wayside,  I  know  that  God  bestowed
peace  upon  them,  and  that  they  re-
joiced to  as  great  an  extent  as  they
have  at  any  time  since*

Brethren  and  sisters,  seek  for  the
faith  once  delivered  to  the  Saints.
I  know  that  faith  will  grow  in  you,
and  it  should  grow  in  you  and  you
should  instill  it  into  your  children,
that  it  may  be  a  fixed  principle  with
them,  that  we  whom  God  has  called
from  the  nations  of  the  earth  may  be
the  nucleus  of  a  faith  that  shall  be
disseminated  until  there  shall  be
found  amongst  us  the  faith  once
given  to  the  Saints,  and  until  a  race
shall  spring  from  us  who,  like  the
mighty  of  ancient  days,  shall,  through
faith  stop  the  mouths  of  lions,  put  to
flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens,
quench  the  violence  of  fire  and  raisa
their  dead  to  life?  -until  the  darkness
that  enshroudedr jw  and  our  fathers
shall  be  known  no  more,  and  we  be
prepared  for  an  eternal  residence  in
his  presence.  This  is  my  prayer  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.
