JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.
BY
PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR
AND  OTHER MEMBERS OF  THE
QUORUM OF THE TWELVE  APOSTLES.
AIM,  '  '
REMARKS RV OTHER IMiOMlNKNT  ELDERS.
REPORTED  BY
GEO.  F.  GIBBS,  JOHN  IRVINE  AND  OTHERS.
»lBPECTnrLLT DEDICATED  TO  THl  LATTIK-DAY  SAINTS  IN  ALL  TUB  WOULD.
VOL,  XX
LIVERPOOL :
PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  WILLIAM  BtTD&K,  42,  ISLINGTON.
LONDON :
LATTER-DAT  SAINTS'  B  01  DEPOT,  30,  BMHOp'l  OlOVE, BALL'S FOND  BO  AD,  IUtf  OTQtf.
1  H  8  0 .
tSTrfci:i> AT ST  ATION  GKS I!  ALL,
i
V R  K V  A  OK
Wi:  t,ikr  pleasure  in  presenting  to  t!j^  lovers  (Jf  truth  the  Twentieth
Volume  of  the  Journal  OF  PischUksKs,
It  contains  lucid  explanations  of  the  laws  and  doctrines  of  the
true  Gospel  of  Christ,  ami  inspirational  teachings  suited  In  Lhi'  eiremn
stance*  of  the  people  to  whom  they  were  delivered*
Those  who  read  the  utterances  of  the  servants  of  ( rod,  rrm  tallied
in  tliU  hook,  under  the  same  influence  by  which  the  spe:iki«rs  urre
inspired,  ratmot  fail  to  receive  profit  from  the  perusal.  Therefore,
*'  lie  that  hatn  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  aaith  unto  the
rluireUr.s,"
THE  rUIiLlKHKU.
INDEX.
Date, l*n  ge
T<ic*»  heM  liy  the  lifttttr-iW  Saints  winning  (heir  way.. .Terri-
torial prosperity  "  Mormon  ism  "  nut  favored  by  the  t  Jov-
eminent Lattrr  d»v  Saints  In  asive  the  (lOYernmrnL.
4 Itr^ Camion. April  7,  lfl7&  1
1 1 1  t^r  y  r  e  t  at  i  n  n  o  r  Se  r  i  j»t  u  re.  « .  A  ppar  ent  to  iraclea  ea»H  v  per  for  to  r  d
when  TO^ssskrv  .  pMiiK'Lm^or  brin^n  eaUmitj+<  Fulfilment
of  ptopheey,  Urum  Pnitt June  23,  8
An  important  «i;e A  wor-il  with  the  ltUhops».Al&o  the  Seven-
tita...  Honor  the  Sabbath*  John  Taylor, July  7, „  19

Plural  in  arrive...  For  ihc  right eou*  only... Obedience  imperative

...Blestitigi  reuniting.  Joseph  F.  Smith. .July  7.  '2\

itrniify'tn^  polities]  ami  cener.il  material  i  r>i>i!ttit»i  of  ihe  Saujis
. Kmploy  ment  for  tho  poor. . .  Enemies  foiled. . .  Plural  mar-
riage* Geo. Cannon, July  Tf ,t  .12

(twi  n  power  in  all  thing*  k  indium  i»f  (imi  l'o -opera!  Urn,  a
ttepphig  Klourt  Jo  the  United  Ordor  .Yilihrnl  Keononiy...
*S  lit  ion*!  t  r  oubl  ea . , .  M  ias  jo  n  ary  1  abort. Sehoo  I  s  &  n  d  \  eaeher  h.

John  Taylor. Aug,  4, rt  39

The  Saints  papered...  Krai*  ration  of  the  I  lospfd...  Should  lisUn
to  i  nit  ruction  . .  God  i  <  ;  ifts  to  the  1 1i  u  rrh SaJ  v.thon  for  the

do  nd , . .  K  x am  pi  es  be  fore  ch  i  Idr  e  n+  A  cu?u  ■  M .  C a  n  n  o  n  - A  u  jr.  25 , H ,  49

The  i  1h ii  r ch  pa rt i al 1  y  i n  tho  t  ■  n  i  t  ed  O  rde  r .  1  Vr  pet  1 1  a  1  E  igral  ion
Fund...  Being  educated  to  a  fullntai  of  the  I'uiterf  (Inter...
Cu- operation  at  Brigham  City  „. Union  iti  Elections...  Edu-
cation of  the  Young.  John  Taylor* Sepi.  22t  53

The  Book  of  Mormon,.. Promise  t*  the  La-nanileft_0hjeL  ts  of
the  reeord . .  .The  B  ook  of  A  hr  ah  am .  .(lifts  to  (be  Ch  ureh . . .
Ben  efi  ts  of  i  rn  med  i  it  >  re  relation . . .  T  i .  e  re  a  <  e  r  things  to  be
shown  to  those  who  receive  the  record... The  vision  of  M  ses

..The  creation,  ate.  Orson  Pratt . Aug.  £5, „  G2


■v.


Tl  INDEX,

Labors  ind  experience  of  the  elderr .  .The  work  scarcely  begun
...The,*  power  of  Union,  ..Temporal  salvation  necessary  as
well  a*  spiritual,*, Co*  operation  And  the  United  Order.

(rea  Q+  Cannon. April  8, „  77

Consistency  imperative.. .The  Ct>i|*l  in  eon fl Let  with  man's
fallm  oon'lirion*.. Should  love  our  enemies. .  The  ** Golden
Rule  " Necessity  of  the  Holy  l\ host. ..Every  tree  known  by

its  fruits.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon. Sept.  I5t „  58

Government  of  the  Cnited  State*.. .The  corruption  of  the  admi-
uifil  ration...  Its  treatment  of  the  Latter-Hay  Wai tits... The
Jud^iuencs  of  God  upon  the  wicked.  ..Oppoxiinm  to  poly-
gamy... I'repjtratHUi  for  cmniuir  events.  Orson  Hyde, Nov.  3.  R)

The  perpetual  K  mitral  in#r  Fund  ..How  to  irttle  difficulties. ..
Should  lie-  governed  by  iho  law*  of  I  Soil..  Co- operation  and
brotherly  kind  new  ,,The  proper  training  of  children.

John  Taylor. l>ee.  B,  103

Wo  should  not  lwaj«r  of  superiority  over  our  fallow  creatures.,,
d»d  U  interestmt  in  the  welfare  of  nit  n lh.ii kind  The  rela-
tion and  amenability  of  all  men  to  the  laws  of  (Sod  ..We
should  he  courteous  t* i-  tlio^e  whose  views  differ  from  ours...
Tlnj  servants  iA  tioil  are  messengers  of  salvation.  ..The  rea&e*

raiion  of  the  prirathoorl.  „Thp  lml^  nt*  of  t lie  Almitfhy  .

Absurd  theories  of  burned  men...! inly  the  righteous  among
the  Saints  will  be  saved  in  the  Kingdom  of  God*

John  Taylor* Jan.  6, 1819.  109

ttrmark*  on  t'uion,  made  in  the  Ogden  Tabernacle.

C,W.  Penroie. Jan,  10, M  12*

All  tlnnps  governed  by  law,.  K\\  intelligence  and  blessings  have
emanated  from  (bid  ..Man1*  free  iiji?mcy  should  not  be  in-
terfered wittb„Tbe  opponents  of  the  kingilmn  of  iiod  should
nut  lie  allowe.l  1"  ir.t.!  r  children .  .  N.Mie^i  tv  nfakl  heiim

subject  to  legitimate  authority.  John 'ray hir, Pe<*  L,  123

It  em  arks  made  at  the  funeral  trrvieee  of  Hnuher  1>iuuck  IV
Huntington,  in  the  Mith  War.J  Mentiu^  House,  Salt  Like

Cily.  liah,  John  Tuylor. Feb,  %  1970.  ISS

Ditcoursr,  delivered  in  [he  N ■  ill ■  ttianch  Meeting  Homii,  of  the

London  Conference.  Orson  l*ralt. Maivh  A,  142

The  natUNLl  .veakuess  tif  men  The  nrrea»ity  *"f  Charity..  The
pur  pone  for  which  the  Cospol  was  revealed ..  The  spirit  that
should  prevail  regarding  Cooperative  L  tine  iluuona  .The

folly  of  (}i5.ietisitptt.  John  Taylor, March  2,  tp  15S

The  growth  of  Zion  ..Benefit*  of  seeking  counsel  from  the  more

experienced,  lbi^ham  Young. April  8,  „  171

Opening  *  f  the  I  Hit  ili^pennation,,  J>eveJopiiieiit  of  the  work  of
i  iint  Sending  forth  Nl  iHtionani,0..»L'*eftiliiri»s  «f  the  tintcr*
h  .Improvement  A  asocial  ion*..  .Education  .  .Co-ope  ration,

John  Taylor. April  e\ *»  174

Parable  of  the  ri^  tree,„The  rise  of  the  l«atti  r  day  wi»rk...nrtfji-
Tiization  t»r thi*  Church  Its  •uhseijnent  progress,  and  de-
velopments.The  manner  of  railing  Uod's  servants...  Otitics
of  Church  Uftirer*  Thi*  tnvinp:  jxiwer  of  tnilh. .  The  ilinobe-
il  lent  and  idle  ootid  em  nod.,  Liber  aJily  of  the  i  ioipel  plan,

ErLintu»  Snow, April  6, „  180


tvrHSX.


lUcasing-i  nf  (he  I  Jo&pel  only  obtai nnl  by  compliance  with  the

Uw,  1/iremo  Snow. April  7,  lp

Manifest  fclr*<ing*  of  l^otl  to  the  Kaints,..Proprr  education  of  the
to  n  n  ^ Infidelity  the  rosn  1 1  o  T  ignorance.

Moses  Thatcher. April  8*  u

Influence  of  the  Latter  day  Saint*,.. Their  miss  inn...  The  mirn-
relalion  .  t  'apiial  ami  labor. . .  Elcligious  I  liberty,

Geo.  Q.  Cannon. April  G,

Fate*  of  (hp  Ancient  apojtlea,.*  Worship  nf  the  true  (incL..Hi*cre+

ations  ami  ban ili work—  Pivphery.  C  W*  Staynrr. May  2.%,

Infinite  ideas  concerning  Ood,.How  (o  worship  him  acceptably
...Restoration  of  tliu  (iospeK.Jta  preparatory  minion,

0*  W.  Penroac. May  25t  „

All  intclliirpnce  come*  from  God*, .Life  ami  immortality  hrrmtzht
to  light  .through  the  Uospcl  .  Leathering  Temple  Ruilding
**<The  ehler*  messengers  of  solvation  to  thv  nations

Job n  Taylor, I>ec.  IS,  1878*

The  t{o«;pol  (if  L'hriat„Jtit  abject,  priuftiplrt  and  power.

Aurelin*  Miner. May  11,  1&79,

The  ( iofljw^  ,is  preached  by  the  Saint  a...  Opposition  by  the  world

to  the  dirTuiiion  of  truth,  ^  ■  ■  si  llywater. .lunc  -9,

Stain for  (he  testimony  nf  Jesus*.  .Funeral  rites  of  Joseph

Starnlini;..  I ieo.  Q  Cannon. Aul;.  3>

Slain  for  the  testimony  of  Jeau* .  Funeral  rites  of  Joseph

Standing.  John  Taylor, Aug,  3,

The  mtprvils  of  humanity  shun  1,1  be  siihsrrved.

John  Taylor. Mar.  Si  3t

Necessity  nf  revelation ..  Evidences  i*f  the  Church  of  Christ...
The  future  of  the  Saint*.,  .Plural  marriage

0ffc  H.  Cannon. July  litl,  „

ftestitiilioii  of  all  things.  .Pre -exiatenoe  of  man,.  .  Fli<.i  principles

of  th*  Gospel*  John  Morgau. Au£.  17*  „

l'r;v^iH*al  uMiiri-  of  [he  Gospd.  Geo.  ^*  Cannon, July  27,  ,i

The  work  of  restitution  of  all  thing*. .  Futility  of  the  effort*  of
its  opponents Should  not  cherish  animosity  to  enemies.

C*  W,  Penrose, Aug.  17,  lT

iWpr  *iTiil  Hhvt^  nf  the  Compel Antagonism  between  liicht  ami
jjarkueaa  ..Necessity  of  i j nJ ^meois  upon  (he  wicked.

John  Taylor. July  tiT

Futility  »f  the  machination*  of  the  wicked, . .The  work  of  God

cannot  be  stayed,  John  Taylor. Auj*.  24,

The  -work  of  God  cannot  be  hindered...  The  United  States  to  be

afttirU'd  by  judgment,  John  Taylor, Oct.  fi.

Progress  of  the  work  of  (lon\  .  Introduction  of  evils  by  the  world
..Unconstitutional  inimical  incisures.  .Plural  marriage  not
criminal,..  I  ntole  ran  re  denounced*  Orion  Pratt. Oct.  6f

The  Church  founded  upon  the  rock  of  re  relation  ...Faithful  Saints

ran  net  be  moved  hy  n  era  ecu  lion.  Lorenzo  Snow* Oct*  6f

Tlie  Righteous  Buffer  persecution.. .False  teachers  popular...
Saints  shfluld  not  retaliate  u|*on  their  enemies. .  The  Saints
will  have  power  to  rv»ot  out  «il„. Approaching  revolution
.tithe  etrth.  tico.  Q.  Cannon. Oct.  6,  „


II


11


It


Till  IXDKX.

DutHM  of  the  Samti  iu  teLiijoraliUea. . . Implicit  obedience  requi-
site.. A-hurch  interests  carefully  gnerdetL.. Gathering  the
poor.^Homt*  industries  Joseph  V.  Smith. ApriJ  8f „  ^

The  Temples  in  course  of  erection,., Political  position  nf  the
Saints. ..  Our  position  retrarJin^  Patriarchal  Marriage.  ..The
corruptions  cif  so  railed  Cht  jst^iLilom  How  the  Saint  a
should  live...  Sunday  Schools,  lie)  iff  and  Mutual  Improve-
ment Association*-  John  Taylor. Not,  30*  tl

The  spirit  ami  principles  of  the  United  Order,

Ijorp-iiio  Snow. Oct.  19.  lt

CUfave t"  Li^ht <*omiu£  of  Christ  ..Abominations  of  the

Wu'keil ...  Welfare  uf  the  Young.  Krastns  Snow, Oct* 3, lt  3^


wsrontsK  nv  ulmek  hko.  tj.  cannon;

StaiVKn.Kii  at  tub  Asnual  Con r BREMER,  Silt  Laki  City,  Scfsoat

MnftNlNO, AfKIL  7.  ]*C8.


(tirportfd  hj  Geo.  K  fl7Ww.J


D>K  \s  HELO  BY  TNK  LATTKU-hAY  SAINTS  WINNING  TMl  ll;  WAY — T£RK1
TORI  At  j  PROSPERITY — u  MORMON  1SMM  NOT  FaVOKED  OF  THE  fiOVKRN-
M8ST  —  LATTER- DA  Y SAINTS TO SAVE TUG GOVERNMENT  -  -  GOOD

COUNSEL  ON  HANI  VOlMX


It  is  sniiirwlm*(UHex|Wted  to  my-
self I  hat  1  ]i.iiYer  Uif  opportunity,
this  morning  of  ;i]  I  -  i  li.^:  in  your
midst.  1iti|'  ftiatjt.  buMiim  demand
ed  inv  ret ii mi  to  tWiVitv  for  a  short
time;  hut  in  eonsfi|i)*ure  of  certain
rrcpmudhiliti&t  devoting  upon  me  at
Wa^hiu'jton.  u  -siiiu.^1  iiiiprmt^rit
for  me  to  leave  and  route  here.  A
week  sijjo  last  Friday  morning  I
icareely  thought  it  possible  that  I
ronhl  g£t  away;  but  (hiring  the  day
1  wa*  favored  in  making  smh  ar-
rangements that  I  felt  I  ton  Id  leave
with  sufttv.  for  a  few  days  at  least.
And  I  in  i  H  it  <diat*ly  started  tor  this
city  l>y  way  nf  !  TiiladrlphiiL

I  am  Jad  to  have  the  opport unity
uf  meeting  with  so  many  of  my
brethren  aiul  sisters,  of  beholding
you  r  faces,  ol  listening  to  the  instruc-
tions whieli  have  byen  given,  and  in
si  taring  in  the  spirit  that  has  been


ami  will  he  [loured  out  upon  its,  It
is  ;i  j^rral  relief  to  Ctm  who  hag  been
absent  tor  any  length  nf  lime,
mingling  with  the  world,  to  have  the
opportunity  of  atsoeiatiag  with
you,  my  brethren  and  -inters  :  ;i;
loust  I  rsleiun  it  as  surh.  I  never
turn  my  face  lunne wards  without  eat
periencing  joy  and  gladness  at  tin1
thought  of  once  more  ln-niii  reunited
with  you.

1  never  in  my  life*  have  had  n
deeper  interest  in  tlie  welfare,  in  the
prosperity  ami  in  the  aneruieni
of  the  cause  with  which  we  are
identified,  than  at  tht  present  time*
This  feeliiiii  lias  rested  wilh  great
weight  upon  my  mind  ;  I  feel  we
are  living  in  a  most  import  ant  er*
of  time.  I  feel  that  the  mission
ai  signed  unto  us  is  one  that  wet  at
the  present  time,  scare  ft  ]y  ho  gin  te
comprehend. The  most  important

ToL  XX.


2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


results  that  are  to  flow  from  it  have
scarcely  begun  to  dawn  upon  our
minds.  At  least  personally  this  is
my  feeling.  When  I  contemplate
the  immensity  of  the  field  of  labor
that  lies  before  us,  the  evils  and
wrongs  that  have  to  be  corrected,
as  1  believe,  through  the  agency  of
this  people,  as  also  the  reforms  that
have  to  be  effected  and  to  be  carried
out  successfully,  it  seems  to  me  that
as  the  dayff  roll  around,  I  begrudge
the  passing  hours  ;  I  feel  as  though
the  days  are  entirely  too  short,  and
that  I  should  like  to  live  for  a  mil-
lennium to  help  those  with  whom
I  am  associated  to  bring  to  pass  the
great,  the  important,  the  soul-saving
as  well  as  body-redeeming  plans  that
are  to  be  carried  out  in  order  to
bring  to  pass  the  designs  of  Provi-
dence in  relation  to  man  and  the
earth. .  *.  1 ,  ,  ,  „ -  \

Already  *the  Latter-day  Saints  can
see  that  the  leavsn  that  has,  been
planted  by  the  Gospel  has  been  doing
a  gradual  work  in  effecting  import-
ant changes.  It  may  be  thought  of
a  people  confined  to  these  mountains,
PBinbtiring  no  more  than  we  do,
that  our  influence  must  be  neces-
sarily very  limited,  and  that  we  can
accomplish  but  very  little.  But  the
ideas  that  have  been  propagated  by
the  Latter-day  Saints,  though  they
have  not  converted  as  many  to  our
faith  as  Chey  should  have  done,  have
had  a  most  wonderful  influence  upon
the  religious,  the  philosophic  and
the  scientific  world  Ideas  that  men
now  believe  in  and  receive  readily,
Joseph  Smith  was  persecuted  and
denounced  for  proclaiming.  And
while  there  are  millions  who  do  not
believe  that  he  was  a  Prophet  of
God.  or  that  the  principles  he  taught
were  revealed  from  God,  there  is  no
mistaking  the  fact  that  his  teach-
ings, that  the  truths  he  advanced, .
and  the  ideas  which  he  dissemi-


nated, have  had  a  wonderful  effect
upon  the  human  mind  throughout
Christendom.  If  those  of  you  who
have  had  experience  in  the  world,
who  have  arrived  at  middle  age,  will
let  your  minds  revert  to  the  time
when  you  first  heard  these  princi-
ples, and  will  compare  the  condition
of  human  thought  at  t  hat  time  with
the  condition  of  human  thought  to-
day, I  doubt  not  you  will  agree  with
me  in  saying  that,  although  men
and  women  have  not  become  Latter-
day  Saints,  nor  have  the  mass  of
mankind  received  the  religious  truths
in  their  entirety,  as  they  were  taught
by  Joseph,  and  as  they  have  been
taught  by  those  who  succeeded  him,
yet  there  has  been  a  very  visible  and
a  marked  advancement  by  men  and
women  all  over  the  world  wherever
the  Elders  of  this  Church  have  tra*
Tided,  So  that  it  is  not  in  the  bap*
tism  of  people,  it  is  not  in  the  gather-
ing of  the  people  together  alone  that
we  are  accomplishing  great  results;
but  it  is  in  teaching  the  world  the
principles  that  God  has  revealed  to
us,  and  gradually  indoctrinating  the
mind  of  mankind,  to  some  extent
at  least,  uplifting  them  from  the
prejudices  and  the  darkness  and  the
ignorance  in  which  they  have  been
enshrouded  to  a  higher  plane,  to
breathe  a  purer  and  a  freer  spirit
of  inquiry  in  religious  and  scientific
thought  Much,  however,  remains
to  be  done,  and  it  devolves  upon  us,
as  a  people,  to  discharge  our  duty,
each  one  of  us,  as  though  the  entire
responsibility  devolved  upon  us.
And  herein,  probably,  there  is  as
much  fault  to  be  found  with  us  as
upon  any  other  point — a  non-recog-
11  it  ion  by  the  Latter-day  Saints  of
the  fact  that  God  holds  us,  each
one  of  us,  individually  responsible ;
for  there  is  assigned  unto  every  man
and  every  woman  an  individual
labor  which  he  and  she  must  per-


IDEAS  HELD,  ETC.


3


form.  For  myself,  I  know  that  the
influence  of  one  man  rightly  exer-
cised  is  potent  for  good ;  or?  if  im-
properly exercised,  for  evil,  upon
his  fellow  man.  Each  man's  lift,
<<aeh  man's  conversation,  each  man's
deportment  and  walk  before  his
fellow  man,  wields  an  influence  that
he  most  probably  does  not  begin  to
comprehend,  or  understand-  And
if  we  all  understood  this,  and  acted
accordingly,  living  up  to  the  light
and  knowledge  we  possess,  just  think
of  the  influence  that  we,  as  a  united
body,  could  wield  among  the  inhabi-
tants of  our  land,  and  in  fact  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  whole  earth.

I  look  upon  our  position,  politic
cally,  as  one  that  is  most  imports
ant,  far  more  important  than  that
of  any  other  community  with
which  I  am  acquainted*  To-day  it
is  conceded  upon  all  sides,  and  the
fact  is  not  disputed  by  intelligent
persons,  that  the  Latter-day  Saints,
or,  to  speak  more  properly,  the  peo-
ple of  Utah  Territory,  occupy  a  posi-
tion superior  to  that  of  any  other
Territory  within  the  confines  of
the  Union.  This  is  conceded.  And
for  temperance,  for  frugality,  for

economy,  for  good  government  and
for  submission  to  the  law  (if  I  may
except  that  relating  to  plural  marri-
age, which  is  in  violation  of  the  con-
stitution, and  which  was  passed  as  a
blow  at  oar  religion),  for  the  honest
administration  of  financial  and  gov-
ernmental affairs,  for  the  pseservation
of  good  order  and  the  maintenance
of  peace,  and  for  the  promotion  of
education ;  on  all  of  these  points,  it
is  conceded  if  we  are  not  superior,  at
least  we  are  the  equals,  of  any  other
people  of  our  Republic*  While  the
eastern  states  are  burdened  with  debt
and  groaning  under  local  taxation,
with  failures  of  no  mean  magnitude
occurring  continually,  and  men  not
knowing  what  to  do  to  redeem  them-


selves from  their  financial  difficulties,
Utah  Territory  occupies,  it  may  truly
be  said,  the  unique  position  of  being
out  of  debt :  no  Territorial  debt  to
speak  of,  no  county  debts.  Notwith-
standing the  innumerable  tempta-
tions that  have  existed,  and  that  our
officers  might  have  succumbed  to,  we
nre,  I  am  happy  to  say,  free  from
debt,  and  also  the  most  lightly  taxed
community  now  within  the  confines
of  the  government.  When  I  men-
tioned these  facts  to  President  Hayes,
he  remarked  :  w  Your  position  is  cer-
tainly an  enviable  and  unique  one  *
This  is  conceded  upon  all  hands.  In
our  own  neighboring  territories,  take,
for  instance,  Wyoming,  the  people  of
which  are  justly  proud  of  their  posi-
tion, because  they  have  comparatively
little  debt;  yet  their  taxes  are  8$
higher  than  ours;  and  so  witb  all  our
neighboring  territories.  Our  percent
age  of  illiteracy  is  lower  than  that
of  any  of  the  territories,  and  also
than  many  of  the  states;  not  but  that
the  illiteracy  of  Utah  ought  to  be
lower  still,  for  there  is  room  for  great
improvement  in  matters  of  education.
We  have  12C0  miles  of  telegraph  line
owned  in  this  Territory ;  we  have  up-
wards of  300  miles  of  local  railroad,
not  counting  the  Union  and  Central
Pacific  railroads.  This  is  the  condi-
tion of  this  Territory.  If  we  take
the  statement  of  the  last  Federal  cen-
sus respecting  our  population,  and
apply  the  ratio  of  increase  during  the
previous  decade — that  is  the  increase
from  1860  to  1870— to  the  last  eight
years,  it  will  be  seen  that  Utah  has  a
population  ef  at  least  150,000.  Bat
our  ratio  of  increase  has  been  greater
during  the  last  eight  yean  than  the
previous  ten.  The  States  are  diviJed
into  Congressional  district*,  at  the
present  time,  with  a  population  num-
bering about  135,000  ;  that  it  to  say,
a  district  having  a  population  of  that
number  is  entitled  to  a  member  of


J01HNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Congress.  In  this  Territory  our  pop-
ulation is  in  excess  of  that  number.
No  Territory  has  ever  applied  for  ad-
mission into  the  Union  with  so  many
advantages  as  ours.  In  1789  the
Federal  Constitution  was  adopted,
and  we  became  a  consolidated  Re*
public.  This  was  89  years  ago.  We
kare  lived  in  this  country  upwards
of  one-third  of  that  time.  It  might
be  thought,  then,  that  with  such  a
lengthened  experience  and  advan-
tages, with  such  capacity  for  self-gov-
ernment, with  such  a  developed  and
lightly  taxed  Territory,  with  such
good  order  and  freedom  from  debt,
that  Utah  would  be  welcomed  into
the  union  of  states.  Why  are  we
notl  Because  we  are  "Mormons."
That  embodies  the  whole  reason.  If
we  vvere  split  np  into  factions,  if  we
were  fighting,  party  against  party,  if
drinking  saloons  and  houses  of  ill-
fame  were  through  all  our  sett  lements,
and  if  we  were  heavily  in  debt,  not
having  even  the  requisite  population,
and  were  aot  a  Mormons,"  we  would
be  admitted  into  the  uniun  of  states.
What  is  the  reason  assigned  for  it  t
u  We  do  not  want  to  countenance
polygamy.  If  we  admit  Utah,  we
sanction,  to  a  certain  extent,  poly-
gamy." This  is  the  reason  assigned.
Suppose,  for  instance,  that  on©  man
of  every  ten  among  these  "Mormons"
is  a  polygamist,  are  ^  there  any  more
than  that  ?  If  there  are  I  do  aot
know  it  I  have  never  taken  the  cen-
sus, but  in  the  range  of  my  personal
acquaintance,  as  I  kave  scanned  thetn,
I  think  that  there  are  not  one-tenth
of  the  men  in  this  Territory  who
have  attained  their  majority  who  are
polygamists.  And  we  will  say  there
are  150,000  people  in  the  Territory,
how  many  of  them  are  men  ?  If  we
apply  the  same  rule  of  ascertaining
this  that  we  do  to  other  communities
— and  it  will  not  apply  to  ours  be-
cause our  children  are  in  excess;  but


as  it  is,  we  will  apply  the  same  rule
and  divide  150,000  by  five;  how
many  does  it  leave?  Thirty  thou-
sand. We  will  say  there  are  thirty
thousand  men  in  Utah  Territory  who
have  attained  their  majority,  and  one-
tenth  gf  this  number  are  polygam-
ists, What  do  we  have  left  ?  Three
thousand  men.  And  for  three  thou-
sand men  the  Congress  of  the  United
States  say  that  the  bulk  of  the  peo-
ple shall  not  have  their  political
rights.  Does  it  not  seem  as  t hough-
by  the  action  of  Congress  in  this  re,
sped,  that  they  are  uplifting  a
doctrine  comparatively  obscure,
when  you  take  into  consideration
the  forty  millions  of  people  that
live  under  the  flag  of  the  United
States — and  giving  it  national  im-
portance ?  This  is  one  of  the  most
extraordinary  instances  of  fatuity
that  I  ever  recollect  reading  of  in  any
history;  yet  such  a  thing  is  done,
and  this  is  the  only  reason  that  can
be  truthfully  and  correctly  assigned
for  the  refusal,  on  the  part  of  the  na-
tion, of  admitting  Utah  as  a  State.
In  spite  of  all  we  can  say  and  do,
there  seems  to  be  a  determination  to
give  this  doctFine  of  plural  marriage
a  national  and  a  world-wide  import-
ance, like  everything  else  connected
with  this  people.  It  has  been  adver-
tized and  talked  of  as  though  it
might  be  the  practice  of  twenty  mil-
lions of  people,  instead  of  that  of
three  or  four  thousand  men.

Now,  I  say  that  we  have  to  teach
the  world  a  lesson  in  this  direction.
A  people  patiently  pursuing  their
course,  without  murmuring,  without
rebelling,  without  riding  in  rio tings,
when  receiving  a  denial  of  their  legit-
imate and  constitutional  rights.  Such
a  spectacle  as  this  is  worthy  of  admi-
ration, especially  when  it  is  under-
stood that  not  an  officer  within  the
cou8Des  of  our  Territory  caa  hold  an
office  of  Federal  appointment,  if  it


IDEAS  HELD,  ETC.


be  known  that  be  is  a  "  Mormon,"  or
scarcely  if  it  be  known  that  be  is
eTen  favorable  to  the  "Mormons."
As  soon  as  the  office  of  Postmaster
becomes  worth  holding,  the  Mormon
Postmaster,  who  may  have  held  it
when  it  did  not  pay  him  for  his  la-
bor, is  turned  out  and  somebody
else  is  put  in.  The  Marshal,  the
Secretary,  the  Governor,  and  Judges
and  all  of  the  Federal  officials  were
appointed  during  the  last  adminis-
tration from  those  who  were  known
to  have  no  sympathy  with  the*1  Mor-
uons."  It  was  as  much  as  oar  pre-
sent Governor  coald  recently  do  to
retain  his  position,  because  he  was
accused  of  favoring  the  11  Mormons,"
because  it  was  believed  that  he  favored
a  people  he  was  sent  to  govern.  This
is  most  extraordinary  when  you  think
of  it ;  but  the  most  surprising  thing
connected  with  it  is,  that  the  people
thus  imposed  upon  should  bear  it
with  the  forbearance  and  equanimity
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  manifest
uader  these  circumstances-

You  remember  our  last  Governor.
He  started  out  thinking  he  had  been
sent  here  to  govern  this  Territory  and
the  people  of  the  Territory  ns  his  fe!-
low-citixens*  He  was  disposed  not
to  know  the  difference  betweeua  Mor-
mon and  a  non- Mormon  ;  he  was  dis-
posed to  travel  through  the  Territory
and  mingle  with  the  people,  attend
their  public  gatherings,  and  talk  to
them,  as  he  would  were  hi  in  any
other  place.  This  he  did,  and  it  was
brought  against  htm  as  a  crime,  as  a
reason  why  he  should  not  continue
to  hold  office.  And  an  important
official  no  less  a  person  then  the  As-
sistant Secretary  of  the  Interior,  was
sent  to  find  out  whether  these  things
were  really  trie.  And  this  officer
of  the  government,  a  gentlemen,  who
is  acknowledged  to  be  efficient,  and
who  had  served  three  terms  in  Con*
gress  with  credit  to  himself  and  his


constituency;  and  who  is  looked  upon
as  a  man  of  national  reputation,  and
who,  in  his  private  life,  is  considered
most  exemplary,  for  bo  other  reason
than  that  he  was  mingling  with  the
"  Mormon  "  people,  treating  them  as
his  fellow-citizens,  was  removed  from
office.

I  allude  to  these  things  not  to  find
fault  particularly,  not  to  embitter
your  feelings  because  of  treatment
yeu  have  received,  this  is  not  my
motive  ;  bit  to  call  to  your  attention
the  fact  that  among  other  things  we
have  to  teach  this  nation  and  show  to
the  whole  world  is,  that  although
largely  in  the  majority  in  this  Terri-
tory, we  have  learned  the  great  and
most  important  lesson  that  a  citizen
can  and  should  lean,  namely,  that  of
obedience.  I  am  glad  that  this  is  the
case.  I  am  glad  te  know  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  setting  an  ex-
ample to  their  fellow-citizens  all
through  the  union  in  this  respect.
Will  this  continue  ?  Shall  we  con-
tinue to  live  as  we  are  living  to-day —
denied  rights  to  which  we  are  en-
titled ?  We  shall,  doubtless,  for  a
time,  until,  in  the  Providence  of  the
Almighty,  we  shall  be  enabled  to  as-
sume the  position  that  rightfully  be-
longs to  ns,  and  receive  those  rights
to  which  we  are  filly  entitled.  The
time  will  come,  aud  it  is  not  far  dis-
tant— although  we  may  occasionally
get  tire!  waiting,  and  may  ask  our-
selves, how  long  will  it  be  delayed—
but  let  me  say  to  you  that  the  signs
of  the  times  portend  for  ns  a  much
greater  degree  of  liberty  than  we
possess  to-day,  or  even  than  we  have
dared  to  anticipate.  Aud  as  I  have
said  often — for  I  have  never  failed  to
deelare  it — that  the  Latter-day -Saints
or  w  Mormons  "  as  we  are  called,  ex-
pect it  to  be  their  destiny  to  uphold
constitutional  liberty  on  this  conti-
nent, and  to  preserve  our  go  varment
and  the  forms  thereof  from  overthrew


and  destruction.  I  have  been  taught
from  my  boyhood  that  this  was  t©  be
the  destiny  ©f  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  this  people  have  been  trained  iu  the
same  belief,  and  we  train  oar  children
to  look  forward  to  it,  and  to  cherish
the  love  of  civil  and  religious  liberty
in  their  hearts,  toleration  for  all  men
of  every  creed,  of  every  nation,  of
every  language  and  of  ©very  color,
that  all  the  sons  and  daughters  of
Adam,  without  exception,  who  dwell
upon  this  broad  land,  may  enjoy  the
inestimable  blessing  of  liberty,  and
that  it  will  be  eur  favored  and
honored  destiny,  in  the  course  of
human  events,  unlikely  as  it  may  ap-
pear to-day  to  be  the  case,  to  preserve
constitutional  liberty  in  this  land,
which  God  has  said  shall  be  a  land  of
liberty  to  all  those  who  are  righteous
who  dwell  thereon.  I  have  said,  and
I  firmly  believe,  that  the  day  will
most  assuredly  come  when  the  people
of  these  mountains  will  become  a
great  factor  in  the  settlement  ef  differ-
ences, in  the  preservation  of  human
rights  in  the  future,  in  the  great  con-
tests which  seem  ready  to  burst  upon
us  at  any  moment.  You  contemplate
the  condition  of  the  East  to-day  !  The
elemeate  of  destruction  are  wide-
spread in  society,  and  instead  of  being
smothered  and  allayed,  they  are  more
or  less  fostered  and  harbored,  and  are
fast  maturing;  and  when  certain  con-
tingencies arise,  they  are  likely  to
burst  forth, and  that,  loo,  to  the  death
and  misery  of  many  souls.  Think
of  the  feeling  that  existed  thirteen
months  ago,  when  it  was  not  known
who  would  be  the  President  of  the
United  States,  or  whether  we  would
have  another  President  or  not.  That
was  a  time  when  the  memories  of  the
late  war  were  forced  upon  the  atten-
tion of  earnest  and  thoughtful  men.
They  remembered  the  blood  and
sacrifices  and  dreadful  horrors  of  that
struggle,  and  they  shrank  from  the


bare  thought  of  their  repetition.  Hud
it  not  been  that  the  great  civil  war
had  been  so  recent,  and  the  recoiled-
tion  of  its  horrors  was  so  vivid,  es-
pecially among  the  Southern  people,
undoubtedly  there  would  have  been
a  conflict  of  arms  before  the  President
could  have  been  seated  in  the  presi-
dential chair.  But  men  shrank  from
the  dreadful  arbitrament  of  war  and
they  preferred  to  submit  even  to  what
they  believed  to  be  wrong,  agreeing
to  a  compromise  as  being  better  than
wan  :U  diif  ;:£'rsu'a-<H  y**  3  02
Our  position,  as  a  people,  in  many
respects,  is  one  for  which  we  can  bo
exceedingly  thankful.  We  can  con-
congratulate  ourselves  that  we  are  in
these  mountains,  a  land  of  liberty,  a
land  of  freedom.  No  man,  that  is  a
man,  can  breathe  this  air  and  be  a
slave.  When  he  looks  upon  these
towering  mountains,  lifting  their
grand  and  lofty  peaks  to  heaven,  and
he  breathes  the  pure  air  of  freedom,
and  bis  lungs  expand  with  it,  he  feels
as  though  he  never  could  bow  to
slavery,  nor  his  children  after  him.
There  is  a  race  springing  up  in  these
mountains  whose  influence  and  power,
sooner  or  later,  must  be  felt  in  shap-
ing the  future  of  this  nation.  There
need  be  no  fear  about  this.  Let  us
pursue  the  course  marked  out  for  us,
submitting,  if  necessary,  to  wrong,
but  never  failing  to  protest  and  con-
tend, nevertheless  agumst  it;  let  our
continued  protest  go  forth,  that  we
understand  our  rights,  and  that  we
are  disposed  to  maintain  them,  as  far
as  we  can  without  violence.  Let  us
continue  to  pursue  our  course  patiently
and  unitedly,  presenting  an  unbroken
front  to  the  enemy,  having  no  traitors
within,  no  factions,  no  strifes  or  bicker-
ings, burying  o«r  little  piques  and
feelings,  having  the  one  great  and
grand  object  to  accomplish,  namely,
the  establish  men  t  of  truth  and  right-
eousness upon  the  earth,  that  eventu-


ally  a  place  and  people  may  be  found
worthy  of  Him  who  will  come,  and
whose  right  it  is  to  reign.  And  in
pursuing  faithfully  and  diligently  the
course  which  God  has  marked  oat,
you  may  depend  upon  it  that  the  day-
star  will  arise,  and  the  dawn  of  that
glorious  day  will  be  witnessed  by  all
that  share  and  engago  in  this  labor.
But  how  many  labors  devolve  upon
us,  and  how  they  accumulate  and
crowd  upon  ns.  The  labor  of  lifting
up  the  people  and  uniting  them,  fur-
nishing suitable  work  for  the  unem-
ployed and  for  our  sous  and  daugh-
ters, that  there  may  be  no  idleness  in
our  land,  that  there  may  no  need  of
any  Union  societies  to  be  organized,
arraying  labor  aganist  capital.  How
necessary  it  is  that  we  should  listen
to  the  words  of  wisdom  and  instruc-
tion which  have  been  given,  counsel-
ing us  to  so  organize  ourselves  and
arrange  our  temporal  affairs,  that
there  may  not  be  a  single  individual
throughout  our  land,  who  desires  to
work,  go  unemployed,  but  that  all
may  have  this  blessed  privilege,  for
when  men  labor  they  keep  out  of
mischief.  You  remember  the  old
proverb — "An  idle  man's  brain  is
the  devil  s  workshop."  We  want  to
banish  idleness,  how  shall  we  do  if  ?
By  organizing,  and  every  President
of  Stake  and  every  Bishop  making  it
the  study  and  object  of  his  life  to  fur*
nish  employment  to  every  man  under
his  immediate  presidency  who  may
desire  it  And  thus  we  will  preserve
ourselves,  and  our  sons  will  tind  em-
ployment at  home,  instead  of  scatter-
ing abroad,  going  hither  and  thither  :
and  our  daughters,  too,  will  then  find
husbands  who  will  be  in  a  position  to
maintain  them  honorably  and  proper-
ly, and  thus  marriage  be  promoted  in
the  land.  Our  boys,  when  they  ar-
rive at  years  of  maturity  and  can  take
eare  of  a  wife,  should  get  married,
and  there  should  not  be  a  lot  of


young  men  growing  mp  in  our  midst
who  ought  to  be,  but  are  not  married.
While  I  do  not  make  the  remark  te
apply  to  individual  cases,  I  am  firmly
of  the  opinion  that  a  large  number  of
unmarried  men,  over  the  age  of
twenty-four  years,  is  a  dangerous  ele-
ment in  any  community,  and  an  ele-
ment upon  which  society  should  look
with  a  jealoui  eye.  For  every  man
knowing  himself,  knows  how  his  fcl-
low-man  is  constituted  j  and  if  men
do  not  marry,  they  are  too  apt  to  do
something  worse,  Then,  brethren,
encourage  onr  young  men  to  marry,
and  see  that  they  are  furnished  em-
ployment, 10  that  they  can  marry.

And  them  there  is  the  education  of
our  children.  0,  that  we  could  be-
stow upon  tnesa,  in  every  sensg  of  the
word,  a  proper  education,  so  that  they
might  hecome  the  peers  of  any  peo-
ple. Our  children  are  noted  for  their
brightness  of  intellect.  Teachers  say,
who  come  from  the  east  and  the  west,
they  never  saw  children  receive  know-
lodge  with  more  ease  than  the  child-
ren of  these  mountains  do*  We  should
take  all  the  pains  in  our  power  to  ed-
ucate our  children,  furnishing  them
the  best  facilities,  that  our  daughters
and  sons  maybe  educated  snd  accom-
plished. And  at  the  same  time  teach,
them  to  labor.  I  tell  my  daughters
that  I  want  the  en  to  learn  to  wash,
and  sew,  and  cook,  and  become  the
best  of  housewives ;  and  that  I  do
nut  care  thea  how  much  else  they
may  know  about  music  and  other  ac-
complishments, that  they  may  be  fit-
ted to  mingle  with  and  feel  at  home
in  the  best  society.  Girls  as  well  as
boys  ought  to  he  so  trained  as  to  con-
fer dignity  upon  labor;  and  the  idea,
prevalent  among  some  people,  that
because  girls  are  accomplished  they
are  spoiled  and  unfitted  for  labor,  or
to  do  housework,  ought  to  be  frowned
down.

Let  us  think  of  these  things  after


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


we  separate  and  go  to  oir  homes ;  and
let  us  endeavor  to  carry  in  oar  breasts
the  spirit  of  this  Conference,  tud  dif-
fuse the  same  among  the  people  not
present.  And  let  us  so  live  that  the
desire  may  continually  well  up  In  our
hearts,  not  how  can  we  aggrandize
ourselves,  but  how  can  we  enrich  this
community,  how  can  we  benefit  and


bleu  this  people,  how  can  we  elevate
them  and  make  these  multitudes  of
children  growing  up  in  our  midst
more  useful,  so  that  they  can  be  or-
naraeuts  to  society?

I  pray  the  Lord  to  bless  lis  and  pro-
serve  us  in  the  tnth,  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Deliver bd  in  the  Tabeknacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

June  23,  1878*


(Reptrttd  by  Geo,  F.  Gihbs.)


INTERPRETATION  OF  SCUIPTUBE  —  APPARENT  MIRACLES  EASILY  PER-
FORMED WHEN  NECESSARY — DISOBEDIENCE  BRINGS  CALAMITY  —  FUL-
FILMENT OF  PROPHECY.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the
congregation  to  a  portion  of  a  pro-
phecy by  Ifalachi,  which  will  he
found  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  Old
Testament

"  For  behold  the  day  cometh  that
shall  burn  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the
proud,  yea,  all  that  do  wickedly,
shall  be  stubble  ;  and  the  day  that
cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith
the  Lord  of  hosts,  tluit  it  shall  leave
them  neither  root  nor  branch*

"  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name
shall  the  Son  of  righteousness  arise
with  healing  in  his  wings ;  and  ye
shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves
of  the  stall

"And  ye  shall  tread  down  the
wicked;  for  they  shall  be  ashes  un-


der the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day
that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord
of  hosts.1'

On  arising,  and  on  opening  the
Bible,  I  happened  to  open  to  the
words  which  I  have  just  read,  whick
were  spoken  through  M&lachi,  one
of  the  last  of  the  ancient  Prophets,
They  are  words  very  familiar  \o  the
Latter-day  Saints,  for  their  attention
has  been  often  called  to  them.  In
reading  the  prophecies  of  the  holy
Prophets,  we  expect  that  that  por-
tion of  them  which  has  not  already
been  fulfilled,  wtfl  take  place  in  its
time  and  in  its  season.  We  do  not
read  the  Scriptures  as  most  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  do,  thinking
that  they  must  be  spiritualized


INTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE,  ETC-


There  are  scarcely  any  of  the  pro-
phecies but  what  this  generation,
as  well  as  some  of  the  past  generar
tions,  interpret  as  meaning  some-
thing altogether  different  from  the
reading  of  them.  They  look  mpon
inspired  men  as  saying  one  thing
and  meaning  another,  and  the  only
way  to  ascertain  what  meaning  they
really  wish  to  convey  is  to  get  an
uninspired  man  to  give  some  other
meaning  entirely  different  from  the
literal  construction  of  the  words  of
the  inspired  writer.  There  are  but
few  individuals,  comparatively  speak-
ing, among  the  nations  of  Christen-
dom, who  differ  from  the  prevalent
belief,  namely,  that  the  Bible  is  a
book  to  be  understood  only  by  the
learning  and  wisdom  of  man,  that
the  uninspired  preacher,  who  may
be  highly  educated  after  the  manner
of  men,  is  a  great  deal  better  quali-
fied tu  interpret  the  things  of  God,
than  he  or  they  through  whom  thty
were  spoken.  The  Latter-day  Saints,
who  may  have  been  similarly  trained,
were  more  or  less  disposed  to  enter-
tain such  views ;  but  when  they
embraced  the  everlasting  Gospel,
and  received  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
even  that  Spirit  by  which  the  Scrip-
tures were  written,  they  were  correct-
ed in  their  judgments,  and  learned
that  t  he  word  of  God  would  all  be
fulfilled,  which  have  not  already
come  to  pass,  and  that  they  are  to
be  understood  in  the  same  light,
and  in  the  same  sense  as  we  would
understand  the  writings  of  unin-
spired individuals,  when  plainly  and
dearly  written  upon  any  special
subject  This  is  something  that
every  ordinarily  intelligent  man,
without  any  book-learning  whatever,
is  abundautly  able  to  do,  especially
when  simple  language,  easy  of  com-
prehension, is  used  For  instance,
when  we  get  letters  and  communi-
cations from  our  friends  abroad,  we


never  think  of  putting  a  different
construction  upon  their  sentences,
and  claim  that  they  did  not  mean
what  they  had  written.  When,
therefore,  the  ancient  Prophets  pre-
dicted that  "  the  day  cometh,  that
shall  bum  as  an  oven/1  and  that
"the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do
wickedly,  shall  be  stubble  ;  and  the
day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them
up,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  that  it
shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor
branch" — we  must  believe  that  the
Prophet  meant  precisely  what  he
said.  When  wc  read  in  the  Book
of  Genesis  about  the  rains  which  fell
from  the  heavens,  causing  a  flood  of
waters  to  deluge  the  earth,  in  ful-
filment of  a  certain  warning  message
which  had  previously  been  preached
to  the  people  then  living,  by  which
they  were  swept  away  and  drowned,
we  must  believe  that  the  inspired
writer  who  penned  the  words,  de-
scribed, the  event  as  it  occurred,  so
far  at  least  as  the  general  facts  are
concerned,  and  that  the  flood  spoken
of  was  a  literal  body  of  water,  and
that  it  did  prevail  upon  all  portions
tf  the  earth,  I  do  not  say  that  the
flood  did  prevail,  at  the  same  mo-
ment, upon  all  the  face  of  the  earth;
but  before  the  floods  abated,  every
part  of  the  solid  portions  of  the
earth  that  were  habitable,  were
covered  by  the  waters,  How  this
was  accomplished  is  not  given  by
the  inspired  writer,  but  is  left  for
us  to  conjecture.  The  Lord  has  a
great  many  ways  and  means  by
which  he  eonld  bring  about  an  event
of  this  nature.  For  instance,  how
easy  it  would  be  to  drown  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  temperate  and
arctic  regions,  by  just  merely  stop-
ping the  earth  from  rotating  on  its
axis.  Unless  there  should  be  another
miracle  performed  to  prevent  the
waters  that  are  heaped  up  around
the  equatorial  regions  from  flowing


10  JOURNAL  OF

to  the  polar  regions,  they  would
necessarily,  at  the  earth  hetian  to
cease  or  rotate  more  slowly  in  its
axial  revolutions,  cause  the  waters
of  the  equatorial  region  to  flow
towards  the  t  wo  polar  regions.  It
is  an  easy  matter  for  a  mathemati-
cian to  demonstrate  the  depth  of
the  waters  in  any  part  or  latitude  of
our  globe,  should  such  an  event  take
place  or  happen.  The  waters  in  re-
ceding from  the  great  equatorial
region  would  cover  up  the  great
mountains  on  our  cast,  and  we,  in
this  altitude,  would  be  buried  under
water  at  least  over  a  mile  in  depth.
I  do  not  tar  that  this  was  the  man-
ner which  the  Lord  toot  in  u  break-
ing up  the  fountains  of  the  great
deep."  There  may  have  been  other
causes  unknown  to  us ;  but  to  say
there  never  was  such  an  event  is
something  entirely  unwarranted.
Still,  it  may  be  said,  this  would  not
cover  all  the  solid  portion  of  the
earth,  but  leave  the  equatorial  land
still  further  elevated  above  the  ocean,
and  if  all  the  lands  of  the  earth  were
to  be  under  water,  how  could  that
be  accounted  for  ?  Very  easily.
Cause  the  earth  to  rotate  on  its:
axis  more  swiftly  than  what  it  now
does,  say  for  instance,  in  one-half
the  time — in  12  hours  instead  of  24
— and  you  would  bury  up  all  the
equatorial  lands  of  our  globe.  How
easy  a  matter  it  would  be  for  the
Lord  to  cause  the  earth  to  rotate
more  swiftly,  and  then  again  to
rotate  more  tardily,  and  produce
the  effects  ascribed  to  the  Hood,
i  "When  therefore,  we  read  that  the
earth  was  once  depopulated,  except  a
few  individuals,  who  were  saved  in
the  ark,  why  should  it  be  thought  a
thing  incredible  that  the  Lord  should
again  depopulate  our  globe,  not  by  a
flood,  but  by  devouring  fire.  It  may
be  said  that  we  cannot  see  how  a  uni-
versal tire  can  prevail  over  all  the  face


DISCOURSES.

of  the  earth.  There  are  various  ways
by  which  this  could  be  accomplished.
How  did  the  Lord  cause  fire  in  an-
cient times  to  break  out  among  the
children  of  Israel,  when  they  trass-
gressed  his  holy  laws,  and  when  they
murmured  and  complained  against
God  ?  Fire  was  sent  forth  from  his
presence  we  are  told,  rested  upon  the
tabernacle ;  he  was  in  the  tabernacle,
and  his  cloud  was  over  the  tabernacle;
and  fire  weat  forth  from  this  centre,
or  the  place  where  the  Lord  chose  to
manifest  and  show  forth  his  glory,
and  it  destroyed  raaay  of  the  people.
You  may  say,  u  But  this  was  a  su  per-
natural fire  that  proceeded  from  the
presence  of  God,  from  the  tabernacle,
consuming  thousands  of  transgres-
sors." I  would  ask,  cannot  the  same
Being  who  was  able  to  produce  this
destruction  by  fire  upon  a  few  thou-
|  sand  individuals  cause  it  to  be  more
extensive  and  more  universal  in  its
operation  ?  Has  he  not  the  same
power  to  produce  a  supernatural  fire
over  all  the  earth ;  even  to  the  consu-
ming of  "all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all
that  do  wickedly ; ,T  burning  them  up
literally,  their  bodies  becomiag  as
u  ashes,"  as  a  farmer  would  set  fire  to
and  burn  up  the  stubble  of  bis  fields  ?
Well,  you  say, "  If  we  admit  that  the
first  was  supernatural,  that  God  did
act  u  illy  burn  the  transgressors  among
Israel  by  fire,  we  are  willing  to  admit
that  the  same  Being  that  could  do
this  upon  a  small  scale,  could  perform
a  similar  work  on  a  universal  scale."
That  is  very  reasonable  to  admit.
But  then,  perhaps  the  Lord  may  not
see  proper  to  da  this  work  of  burn-
ing in  the  latter-days  altogether  upon
a  supernatural  principle;  he  may,
perhaps,  bring  it  about  by  eertain
physical  forces  or  laws,  by  certain
changes  that  may  be  wrought  upon
oar  elements ;  for  the  Lord  holds  in
his  own  bands  all  the  elements,  aid
not  only  those  of  thii  little  globe  of


INTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE,  ETC


11


oars,  but  all  the  elements  that  com-
pose the  universe ;  they  are  in  his
hands,  he  can  give  instructions  and
they  are  made  subservient  in  the  ac-
complishing of  his  great  and  wise
purposes.  Now,  there  is  in  the  very
air  which  we  breathe,  and  which  all
animated  beings,  more  or  less,
breathe,  and  by  which  they  live — a
principle  of  beat ;  and  when  this  heat
in  its  latent  form  is  evolved,  or  comes
forth  from  the  constituents  of  the
atmosphere,  would  there  not  be  a  suf-
ficient amount  to  produce  this  revo-
lution upon  the  earth  ?  *  Is  there  not
sufficient  heat  not  only  to  burn  up  the
wicktd  amd  the  proud,  but  to  cause
the  very  elements  of  our  globe  to
melt  by  its  in  tensity?  thus  fulfilling
another  prophecy  which  says,  "  the
hills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence
of  the  Lord ; 11  and  yet  another
prophecy,  which  says,  the  mountains
shall  flow  down  at  His  presence  like
melted  substance  ;  run  like  rivers,  in
consequence  of  the  intensity  of  the
heat,  connected  with  the  elements  ot
which  our  atmosphere  and  mountains
are  composed,

Again,  independently  of  the  latent
heat  which  is  connected  with  the  at-
mosphere of  our  globe,  is  He  not  able
to  cause  the  great  centre  of  our  sys-
tem, the  sun,  to  give  forth  more  heat,
sofEcient  to  consume  the  wicked  and
melt  the  earth  by  its  intensity  ?  Yes.
I  recollect  reading  in  one  of  the  pro-
phecies of  Isaiah,  in  relation  to  this
mailer.  I  recollect  reading  too  in
the  revelations  of  St,  John  that  men
should  be  scorched  with  great  heat.
Rev.  chap*  10,  verse  8,  It  was  to  be
one  uf  the  great  judgments  of  the
latter  ~ days,  as  seen  by  that  inspired
man.  And  Isaiah,  in  speaking  on
this  subject,  says,  "Moreover  the
light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the
light  of  the  son,  and  the  light  ef  the
sun  si  mil  be  sevenfold,"  etc.  Sup-
pose the  heat  should  be  increased  in


the  same  proportion  that  the  light  is
increased  ;  or,  in  other  words,  sup-
posing that  our  thermometers,  when
standing  at  a  hundred  degrees  Fah-
renheit, should  be  increased  to  700
degrees  Fahrenheit,  what  would  be
the  effect  ?  A  general  conflagration
over  the  whole  face  of  the  globe  would
be  produced,  thereby  fulfilling  ancient
as  well  as  modern  prophecy.

Bat  we  will  pass  on.  It  is  not  for
os,  unless  we  have  some  definite  in-
structions by  the  word  of  God,  to  tell
how  He  is  going  to  accomplish  His
i  great  purposes.  It  is  sufficient  for  os
to  know  that  he  will  do  it.  We  are
told  this  burning  is  to  be  universal,
so  far  as  all  the  proud,  and  all  that
do  wickedly  are  concerned,  It  seems,
then,  it  is  to  be  one  of  the  last  d&
straetions  of  the  wicked,  Prior  to
this  there  will  be  numerous  destruc-
tions, by  way  of  earthquakes,  plagues,
hailstorms,  wars,  etc*,  that  will  pre-
vail and  that  will  sweep  away  millions
from  the  face  of  our  globe.  But  the
great  judgment  that  is  to  cleanse  the
earth  from  all  sin,  is  to  be  by  the
element  of  fire,  **  Bat,"  inquires  one,
"do  you  think  there  will  be  many  in
that  day,  that  will  be  proud  and
wicked?  Will  they  not  be  mostly
converted,  and  consequently  escape
this  great  conflagration,  as  Noak
escaped  being  drowned  ?"  I  will
answer  this  by  repeating  another  pro-
phecy, that  now  occurs  to  my  mind,
recorded  in  the  24th  chapter  of  Isaiah,
This  man  of  God  saw  the  period  of
time  when  the  earth  should  reel  to
and  fro  like  a  drunken  man  ;  and  he
saw  that  glorious  day  when  the  Lord
of  Hosts  shall  be  about  to  reign  in
Zion  and  Jerusalem.  And  among
other  things  he  saw  in  vision  was  that
the  earth  became  defiled  under  the
inhabitants  thereof;  "  because/'  says
the  Prophet,  "  they  hsve  transgressed
the  laws,  changed  the  ordinance,
broken the  everlasting  covenant."


■


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Plainly  showing  that  they  were  to  be  I
a  corrupt  people ;  a  people  who,  fer
instance,  would  change  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism,  from  immersion  to
sprinkling  or  pouring,  or  doing  it
away  altogether,  and  in  the  same
manner  changing  the  various  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel  from  the  origi-
nal form  in  which  the  Lord  revealed
them.  He  says,  through  the  mouth
of  His  Prophet,  that  the  people  who
should  be  guilty  of  this  great  wicked*
neas  sbonld  be  visited  with  fire;  "the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned
and  few  men  left."  This  is  a  little
more  definite.  We  learned  through
Malachi,  that  they  should  be  de-
stroyed both  root  and  branch  — -  no
branch  of  wickedness,  no  roots  of
wickedness  left ;  but  it  does  not  give
us  the  proportion,  between  the  righte-
ons  and  the  wicked.  But  Isaiah
gives  us  a  little  further  clue  to  this
matter.  To  the  query,  how  many
are  to  be  overtaken  by  this  last  great
and  over  whelming  judgment,  Isaiah
would  answer,  "the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  are  burned  and  few  men
left."  What,  only  a  few  persons  to
be  converted,  only  a  few  to  receive
the  true  Gospel,  and  bo  prepared  for
the  coming  of  the  Bridegroom  ;  only
a  few  people  to  escape  this  awful  de-
solation ?  So  says  the  Prophet
Isaiah  ;  that  is,  few  in  comparison  to
the  great  and  numerous  population  of
our  globe*  Even  tome  few  millions
would  be  few  compared  with  the
twelve  hundred  millions  that  inhabit
the  earth.  Isaiah,  in  the  same  chap-
ter,  in  describing  the  glory  of  his
personal  reign  on  the  earth,  says  that
44  Then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded
and  the  sun  ashamed,"  because  of  the
snperior  light  that  will  attend  the
presence  of  the  being  who  is  to  reign
in  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  The  Lord
causes  the  natural  light  of  the  sun
and  the  heat  thereof;  he  causes  the
natural  light  of  the  other  luminaries


that twinkle in  yonder  heavens,
and  also  the  heat  which  proceeds  from
their  bodies. Now, if  he  can  pro-
duce such  intense  heat  by  such  bodies
as  our  sen  ;  if  he  can  cause  the  sur-
sounding  worlds  to  be  heated  and  to
receive  a  certain  temperature  by  the
radiation  of  light  and  beat ;  if  the  sun
can  produce  such  a  high  temperature
upon  our  earth,  existing  some  90
millions  of  miles  away,  why  not  the
Lord  be  able  to  prodice  a  greater  light
and  heat  if  necessary,  to  sweep  off  the
wicked,  and  to  cause  the  earth  in  a
moment,  as  it  were,  to  feel  the  power
of  that  heat,  even  to  its  melting  like
wax  before  his  presence  ? But,  yom
may  ask,  why  not  this  heat  destroy
the  righteous,  as  well  as  the  wicked  ?
Have  not  the  righteous  often  times
been  burned  at  the  stake?  have  they
not  been  consumed  to  ashes,  by  the
power  of  the  wicked  ? And  why
should  this  intense  heat,  of  which
yon  are  speaking,  which  is  to  destroy
the  wicked  root  and  branch,  not  affect
the  righteous  as  well  ?" Let  us  ex-
plain. Before  this  day  of  burning,
there  will  be  no  righteous  on  the
earth. Not  one? No, not  one.
"What  is  to  become  of  them  ?"  The
Apostle  Panl  informs  ne  that,  "The
Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  hea-
ven with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of
the  Archangel,  and  with  the  trump
ef  God;  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall
rise  tirst Then  we,  which  are  alive
and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  to-
gether with  them  in  the  clouds  to
meet  the  Lord  in  the  air/' It  seems,
then,  that  the  righteous  that  sleep
in  their  graves  are  to  arise  at  this
time,  to  be  caught  np  with  those
living  on  the  earth,  who  will  be  suffi-
ciently righteous.  Now,  snppose  they
should  not  ascend  to  meet  the  Lord,
but  shonld  remain  on  the  earth,  and
he  saw  proper  to  preserve  them  from
this  devouring  fire,  could  he  do  it !
Certainly,  and  on  the  same  principle


INTERPRETATION  OF  ICKIPTURI,  ETC


as  he  preserved  the  tkree  Hebrew

children  in  the  midst  of  fire.  We
ire  told,  in  connection  with  this  re-  !
markable  preservation  of  lift,  that
there  was  not  so  much  as  the  smell
of  fire  on  their  garments,  neither  was
a  hair  of  their  head  a  injured,  while
some  of  the  wicked,  when  they  were
in  the  act  of  casting  these  young  men
into  the  furnaoe,  which  bad  been
heated  seven  times  hotter  than  was
usual  for  them,  were  devoured  them-
selves.  Yet  the  righteous  were  spared,
receiving  no  harm  whatever.  Now,
that  same  God  who  did  preserve  the
three  Hebrew  children  in  the  midst
of  the  most  terrible  ordeal  which  they
passed  through,  could  preserve  the
righteous  on  the  earth  if  he  saw  pro-
per to  do  so.  Bat  he  will  take  them
up  into  the  cloud,  and  they  will  be
with  him  when  he  comes.  But,  yoa
may  say,  "Have  you  not  said  that
when  he  comes  the  sun  will  hide  his
face  in  shame,  etc*,  therefore  will  not
that  glory  which  surrounds  the  per-
sonage of  the  Savior  consnme  the
righteous  after  they  are  taken  upT
Not  at  all  *  they  will  not  be  subject
to  the  devouring  element  of  fire,  even
though  they  have  not  as  yet  been
changed  to  immortality ;  for  th«  time
for  the  righteous  who  rpmnin  alive,
to  be  changed,  will  be  as  much  as  a
thousand  years  after  they  descend
upon  the  earth ;  after  there  shall
have  been  veneration  upon  generation
hereupon  the  earth  ;  the0,at  thesonud
of  the  last  trump  Hie  Apostle  Paul
iiforms  that  those  who  are  righ-
teous shall  be  changed  in  the  twink-
ling of  an  eye.  They  are  aot  to  un-
dtrgo  this  change,  when  Jesus  comes
at  the  beginning  of  the  thousand  years'
reign,  but  after  the  thousand  years
are  ended,  at  the  sound  of  the  last
trump,  which  shall  awaken  and  call
forth  the  sleeping  nations  of  the
wicked  from  their  graves,  then  the
righteous,  who  remaiu  in  the  fl-"sh,


will  bechanged  in  a  moment ;  and  after
that  time  there  will  be  no  more  mor-
tality upon  the  earth.  "But,"youmay
say  again, "  we  can  hardly  believe  these
great  miracles  will  take  place  as  yea
say,  according  to  prophecy/'  Sup-
posing you  cannot,  does  yoar  unbe-
lief make  the  predictions  of  the  ser-
vants of  God  without  effect  ?  Sup*
posing,  for  instance,  we  should  disbe-
lieve excepting  eight  souls,  as  was  the
case  with  the  antt-deluviau  world,
j  would  our  unbelief  subvert  the  word
of  God,  No.  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  .
miracles,  or  in  other  words,  he  is  a
God  of  power  and  he  operates  upon
the  materials  of  our  globe,  according
to  his  own  good  will  and  pleasure.
When  he  burns  up  the  wicked,  when
he  causes  the  elements  to  melt  with
fervent  heat,  whenhtcausts  tkemoun*
tains  to  flow  down  and  melt  like  wax
I  before  his  presence,  all  tkis  does  not
destroy  one  particle  of  matter,  but
;  only  changes  matter  from  one  condi-
tion to  another.  There  is  not  a  par-
ticle of  the  materials  of  our  globe  that
will  be  annihilated,  they  will  all  exist;
and  although  the  time. should  come  that
the  intense  heat  shomld  be  such  as  to
disperse  the  materials  of  oar  solid  globe
and  convert  the  great  and  mighty
deep  in/o  gaseous  substances,  and
seperate  the  elements,  and  the  water
should  cease  to  Mist  as  either  steam  or
water;  although  the  time  should  come
whtfo  the  hydrogen  and  the  oxygen,
which  possess  the  great  bulk  ot  the
water  upon  our  i?lobe,  should  become
gasses,  yet  the  Lurd  could  reorganize
these  elements,  so  scattered  in  space,
by  his  power,  bringing  them  together
again  by  his  law  and  by  his  word,
making  i  new  world,  and  creating  a
new  heaven,  and  a  new  earth,  wherein,
says  the  Apostle  Peter,  shall  dwell
righteousness.  This  new  earth,  which
is  to  be  created,  tg  not  to  be  inhabited
I  >y  the  disobedient  and  wicked,  as  is  now
the  case  with  the  present  world ;  there


14


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


will  be  in  entire  change  in  the  con-
ditio* of  the  earth,  and  also  in  the
condition  of  the  human  family,  tba
curses  of  the  fall  will  not  he  found  in
either,  and  consequently  there  will  be
no  more  mortality  upon  the  new  crea-
tion, neither  sorrow,  nor  weeping;
neither  will  there  be  any  more  death  ;
for  the  former  things  will  h.repn,sed
away,  and  all  things  will  become  new.
There  will  be  but  one  government,
not  several  hundred  different  forms  of
government,  but  one  form  will  pre-
vail upon  the  new  creation,  inhabited
by  immortal  beings.  All  these  changes
are  what  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
looking  for.  We  do  not  read  these
prophecies  and  then  undertake  to
change  them,  and  tell  our  hearers  that
they  must  be  understood  to  menu
something  else,  in  some  spiritual
sense.  We  do  not  tell  them  that  this
day  of  burning  is  a  day  m  which
wickedness  is  to  be  cleansed  from  the
earth  by  the  purifying  influence  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that  all  the
people  are  to  be  converted,  and  there-
fore, the  earth  will  be  inhabited  by
none  except  the  righteous;  and  that
that  portion  of  the  Scriptures  refer-
ring to  the  wicked  becoming  ashes
under  the  feet  of  the  righteous,  means
something  entirely  different  frem  the  |
literal  reading,  and  that  their  sins  will
all  be  consumed,  and  that  they  will
be  righteous  and  will  all  walk  upon
the  new  earth  free  from  sin,  No,
but  when  we  speak  of  devouring  fire
burning  as  an  oven,  we  expect  it  will
be  fire  ;  we  expect  if  will  be  interne
heat;  and  when  lie  says  it  will  con-
sume all  the  proud  and  all  that  do
wickedly,  we  do  not  expect  there  will
be  a  wicked  man  or  woman  left;  upon
the  whole  earth j  and  when  it  says
there  shall  neither  be  root  nor  branch
left  of  them,  we  do  not  expect  there
will  be  fouud  a  vestige  of  wicked  iaess
in  any  comer  of  the  earth  however
remote  ;  but  that  all  will  be  consumed


and  none  but  the  righteous  left.

Our  modern  Prophet,  Joseph  Smith,
when  he  delivered  his  prophecies  the
Lord  spoke  through  him,  and  we  do
not  need  any  uninspired  man  to  get
up  and  tell  what  the  Lord  meant,
when  He  spoke  through  him.  For
instance,  our  Prophet  spoke  of  this
same  day  of  burning  ;  it  is  referred
to  by  him  in  many  places  in  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  which  bouk
I  hold  in  my  hand.  Has  the  Lord
undertaken  te  spiritualize,  in  giving
these  new  revelations  ?  No ;  but  he
has  told  us  tho  facts  in  the  case.  For
instance,  in  one  place  speaking  of  the
Lord's  coming,  it  says  the  wicked
shall  be  destroyed  out  of  the  earth,
and  that  the  righteous  shall  be  caught
up,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  New
Testament  describes  it.  And  then  it
speaks  of  the  righteous  also  coming
down  after  the  wicked  are  destroyed.
There  is  a  promise  made  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saiot8,as  well  as  to  the  former-
day  Saints.  The  Lord  said,  in  1831,
to  the  Prophet  Joseph,  in  a  revela-
tion given  before  a  general  confer-
ence, and  written  by  a  scribe  io  pres-
ence of  the  conference,  that  among
other  great  things  that  should  take
place,  the  Saints  should  possess  the
earth  for  their  inheritance  in  this  our
day,  and  that  all  wickedness  should
cease.  I  make  a  promise,  saith  the
Lord,  and  this  is  my  covenant  with
you,  and  your  children  after  you,  that
you  ahfill  have  a  certain  land  that  I
will  give  uuto  you,  for  an  inheritance,
and  you  shall  possess  it  in  time,while
the  earth  shall  stand,  and  shall  pos-
sess it  again  in  eternity,  never  more
to  pass  away.  If  the  Latter-day
Saints  want  to  know  where  this  pro-
mise is  found,  let  them  read  the  reve-
lation given  on  the  2nd  of  January,
1^31.  It  was  a  revelit  ion  given  when
we  were  but  a  small  people,  before
there  was  any  gathering  of  the  Saints;
and  in  fact,  when  there  were  only  a


INTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURES,  ETC.


ew  individuals  gathered  in  the  house
of  Father  Whitmer,  the  place  where
the  Lord  first  organized  His  Church.
There,  we  were  informed,  that  the
Lord  intended  to  give  a  certain  portion
of  this  continent  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  to  their  children  after
them,  for  an  everlasting  inheritance.
Tbis  was  contrary  to  our  former  faith,
when  we  were  Methodists  and  Bap-
tists, and  when  we  were  Presbyterians
and  professors  of  the  different  denom-
inations, before  we  came  into  the
Church  of  Jesus  Chriit  of  Latter-day
Saints;  we  were  taught  then,  that
our  home  was  away  in  youder  heaTens,
away  in  some  distant  part  of  the  uni-
verse, beyond  the  bounds  of  apuee,  if
anybody  can  comprehend  where  that
is;  I  never  could.  And  yet  enlight-
ened Christians  sing  about  it.  Before
I  became  connected  with  the  Church
of  Jeans  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
I  often  attended  the  meetings  of  the
Methodists,  the  Baptists  and  the
Presbyterians  ;  and  I  well  remember
that  this  sentiment  was  embodied  in
one  of  the  favorite  hymB  sung  by  the
Methodists.  They  had  a  very  good
tune  to  the  words,  and  being  but  a
boy  at  the  time,  I  could  not  but  think
it  the  very  best  kind  of  religion.  I
never  mistrusted  the  truthfulness  of
the  sentiment,  because  T  too  had  en-
tertained the  belief  that  we  were  going
to  take  an  everlasting  farewell  to
'earth,  and  that  we  were  goingf  to  be
wafted  and  wafted  until  we  got  beyond
the  bounds  of  space,  there  to  find  a
heavenly  place,  adapted  to  our  hea-
venly condition.  Bat  when  I  com-
menced to  reflect  and  search  the
Scriptures  for  myself,  I  found  that
although  the  tune  was  sweet  and  the
.singing  was  beautiful,  yet  there  was
no  truth  in  it ;  I  found  that  the
"Saints'  secure  abode'1  was  not  beyond
space,  but  that  it  was  on  this  our
earth,  And  for  how  long  ?  For  all
eternity.  But  the  earth  has  to  under-


go numerous  changes,  A  partial
change  will  take  place  when  Jesus
comes,  at  the  beginning  of  the  thou-
sand years1  rest ;  then  a  still  further
change,  after  the  Millennium  should
pass,  when  the  great  last  trump  should
sound,  awaking  the  nations  of  the
wicked  from  their  sleeping  graves.  I
then  read  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth
that  God  would  create  a  new  heaven,
and  a  new  earth,  and  that  on  this
new  creation  should  dwell  righteous-
ness. I  also  read  of  a  holy  city,
called  the  New  Jerusalem,  which
should  come  down  upon  this  new
earth,  and  that  God  himself  should
be  among  those  righteous  people  who

;  should  inhabit  that  holy  city.  And
I  also  read  that  the  former  things
should  pass  away,  and  that  all  things
should  become  new.  I  read,  too,  that
not  only  the  New  Jerusalem  should
descend  on  this  earth,  but  another
city  called  the  Holy  Jerusalem,  whose

[  dimensions  and  architecture]  are  de-
scribed, and  that  because  of  the  glory
that  should  exist  there,  the  inhabi-
tants thereof  should  not  have  need  of
the  light  of  the  sun,  nor  of  that  of  the
moon,  nor  of  the  stars ;  for  God  him-
self should  dwell  there  with  them,
and  he  would  be  their  light  and  their
glory.  And  that  'hose  two  great
cities  which  are  to  descend  upon  this
new  earth  are  to  be  the  great  capitals
of  this  new  creation,  inhabited  by  im-
mortal beings — the  Saints  of  God  that
have  lived  in  the  various  dispensations
of  this  world.  This  was  something
new  to  us;  and  it  was  contrary  to  our

'  sectarian  notions  and  views,  and  the
sectarian  teachings  about  the  future
condition  of  man,  and  the  earth  we
live  in.  Yet,  when  we  eome  to  com-
pare the  new  doctrine  of  the  new
revelation,  with  that  laid  down  in  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  we  find  a
perfect  agreement.  For  instance,
let  our  minds  revert  back  to  the  days
of  the  Patriarchs,  and  we  find  Abra-


16


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ham,  after  leaving  his  native  country,
in  obedience  to  a  direct  command  of
God,  dwelling  im  a  new  land  called
Canaan,  now  known  as  Palestine  ;  and
while  there,  we  learn  of  the  Lord  con-
vening with  him,  and  promising  him
and  his  seed  u  the  land  of  Canaan  for
an  everlasting  possession/*  Whit
dou3  this  all  mean  ?  Did  Abraham
•vi  r  inherit  any  of  that  laud  ?  Not
a  foot  of  it.  l  ie  did  buy  a  place — a
burying  place  for  himself  and  kindred;
but  lie  did  not  realize  this  premisa,
the  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,
but  on  the  contrary,  he  counts  1  him-
self a  strangar  and  pilgrim  in  that
very  land*  And  not  only  Abraham,
but  his  descendants  have  failed  to
realize  this  promise.  The  martyr
Stephen,  who  lived  many  centuries
afterward,  just  prior  to  Ins  death,  in
bearing  testimony  to  the  people  who
stood  before  him,  concerning  Abra-
ham, said,  referring  to  thin  promise
of  the  Lord,  t  h  it  he  did  not  receive
bo  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on,  during
his  lift  time.  Nevertheless,  the  Lord
promised  him  the  whole  of  the  laud,
to  be  for  an  everlasting  inheritance,
for  himself  aid  his  seed  after  him.
The  Apostle  Paul,  speaking  of  the
same  thing,  says,  that  **  they  all  died
in  faith,  not  having  received  the  pro-
mises, bat  having  seen  them  afar  off."
Hovr  far  ?  Thousands  of  years  after
they  should  aWep  in  the  tomb.  They
looked  forward  in  faith  to  the  vast
futurity,  being  persuaded  of  the  truth
of  the  promise  ;  but  they  saw  that
before  they  could  inherit  the  pro-
mised land,  they  would  have  to
seek  a  city,  that  was  in  the  heavens,
and  there  to  dwell,  until  the  du*  time
of  the  Lord  should  bring  them  in
possession  of  their  inheritance.  The
Prophet  Ezekiel  saw  the  way  in  which
they  should  come  in  possession  of  it,
as  i «  recorded  in  the  37th  chapter  of
his  prophecy.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord
took  him  iuto  the  midst  of  a  valley —


a  great  cemetery,  as  it  were,  where
he  taw  a  vast  quantity  of  bones  which
were very dry, the flesh  having
crumbled  to  dust And  the  question
was  put  to  him,  no  doubt  to  try  hia
faith,  "Son  of  man  can  these  bonea
live  ?" Ezekiel  was  not  an  infidel,  lie
did  not  say  it,  was  impossible,  nor
that  there  could  be  no  such  miracle,
but  he  said, uO,  Lord  God,  thou
knowest'1 He  was  willing  the  Lord
should  know  ail  about  it,  and  that  he
should  display  his  power  provided  he
saw  proper  to  do  bo. Then  th«  Lord
co  nmanded  him  to  prophecy,  using
these  words :  "  Prophecy  unto  thesa
bones,  and  say  unto  thorn,  0  yt  dry
bones,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.
Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  these
bonea: Behold,  I  will  causo  breath
to  enter  into  you,  and  ye  shall  live.
And  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you,  and
will  brini;  no  flesh  upon  you,  aid
cover  you  with  skin,  and  put  breath
in  you,  and  ye  shall  live;  and  ye  shall
knovy  that  L  am  the  Lord."  And
nfUT  he  had  thus  spoken,  the  Prophet
tells  us  that  "  there  was  a  voice,  and
behold  a  shaking,  and  the  buries  came
together,  bone  to  his  bone."  They
did  not  make  any  mistake,  such  as
one  bone  belonging  to  a  certain  tab*
ernacle  uniting  with  that  of  another;
but  each  bone  joined  its  fallow  bone,
and  sinews  and  ilesh  and  akin  covered
them,  and  thus  the  tabernacles  wera
formed. But  there  was  as  j  et  no  life
in  them.  Therefore  he  was  command-
ed  to  prophecy  agan,  and  say  to  the
wind  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;
come  from  the  four  winds,  ( >  breath,
and  breathe  upon  these  slain,  that
they  may  live." He  did  so  "and
the  breath  came  into  them,  and  they
lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their  feet,
an  exceeding  great  array." This  was
a  vision  of  the  resurrection  —  the
resurrection  of  the  ancient  patriarchs
prophets  of  God,  and  all  the  righte-
ous of  Israel.


INTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURES,  ETC.


It  seems  from  the  record,  that  the
Jews,  in  the  days  of  Ezekiel,  had
formed  an  idea  very  similar  to  that
of  many  of  oar  Christian  friends  now
living — they  had  got  rather  infidel
in  their  views ;  they  had  began  to
say  in  their  hearts,  referring  to  their
fathers,  u  Oar  bones  are  dried,  and
our  hope  is  lost ;  we  are  cat  off  for
oar  parts ;"  or,  in  other  words,  oar
forefather,  whose  children  we  are,
and  whose  aames  are  held  in  sacred
remembrance  by  as,  are  all  dead.
The  promises  have  not  been  fulfilled
and  we  are  cut  off  from  the  part  of
our  inheritance,  and  how  is  it  pos-
sible now  that  they  can  come  to  passl
They  were  of  similar  mind  to  the
Sadducees — they  did  not  believe  in
the  resurrection.  But  the  Lord,  in
order  to  encourage  them  in  the  belief
that  it  would  be  fulfilled,  gives  the
interpretation  of  this  vision,  I  have
heard  the  Methodists  give  their  ver-
sion of  this  vision.  Whenever  there
was  a  revival  among  them,  I  have
seen  them  get  down  on  their  knees
and  exclaim,  0  Lord,  make  a  shaking
among  these  dry  bones;  believing
that  the  sinners  were  the  bones,  and
the  resurrection,  the  conversion  of
sinners.  The  same  interpretation  is
given  by  a  great  many  of  the  Christ-
ian sects  of  the  day.  But  hearken,
0  Latter-day  Saints,  to  the  Lords
interpretation,  and  judge  between
them :  M  Behold,  0  my  people,  I  will
open  your  graves,  and  cause  yea  to
come  up  out  of  your  graves
and  bring  you  into  the  land  of
Israel."  What  can  be  plainer  than
that  ?  And  whicn  is  the  better  of
the  two,  the  Lord's  interpretation  or
that  of  the  sects  of  the  day  ?

This  promise  will  most  assuredly
be  fulfilled,  the  patriarchs,  and  their
seed  who  are  worthy,  will  come  into
possession  of  the  inheritance.  Bat
when  ?  It  will  be  about  the  time,
or  a  little  after,  this  great  day  of
Ho.  2,


burning.  The  graves  of  the  Saints
will  be  open  just  before  the  fire  sweeps
over  the  nations  to  consume  the  proud,
and  all  they  that  do  wickedly ;  and
they  wilt  be  opened  at  the  sound  of
the  trump  by  the  Archangel,  And
the  Saints  will  come  forth  ;  for  then
the  face  of  the  Lord  will  be  unveiled,
then  the  heavens  will  be  parted  as
a  scroll,  then  will  be  seen  the  pro-
phets of  God,  and  all  the  righteous
who  have  not  yet  arisen  from  their
graves,  and  they  will  appear  in  the
clouds  of  heaven  with  the  Savior-
Abraham  will  be  there,  Isaac  and
Jacob  will  be  there,  and  all  the  an-
cients of  whom  the  children  of  Israel,
in  Ezekiel's  days,  said,  "Our  bones
are  dried,  and  oar  hope  is  lost,"  will
all  be  there,  ready  to  enter  into  th«
possession  of  the  earth  as  their  in-
heritance. 11  Blessed  are  the  meek,"
says  our  Lord  in  his  sermon  on  the
mount.  And  what  is  the  peculiar
blessing  of  the  meek  ?  "  For  they
shall  inherit  the  earth."  Did  they
formerly  inherit  the  earth  ?  5To ;
they  wandered  about,  in  the  days  of
the  Apostles,  in  sheep  skins  and  goat
skins,  finding  shelter  from  the  incle-
mency of  the  weather,  and  concealment
from  their  persecutors  in  the  solitary
dens  and  caves  of  the  mountains.  A
great  many  infldels  and  sectarians
cannot  believe  that  this  promise  can
ever  be  literally  ful61led,  because  they
did  not  realize  it  in  the  day  of  their
mortality.  But  Jesus  says,  they  shall
inherit  the  earth  this  includes  too,
all  the  Gentile  Saints  that  have,  and
that  will  embrace  the  gospel,  among
all  peoples,  and  nations,  and  kindreds
and  tongues,  for  all  such  become
Abraham's  seed  and  heirs  according
to  the  promise.  What  promise?
The  promise  made  to  Abraham.  To
inherit  the  earth.  Hence  all  people
who  are  baptized  into  Christ,  whether
Jew  or  Gentile,  bond  or  free,  male  or
female,  and  who  are  true  and  faithful

Vol.  XX,


18  JOURNAL  OF

to  him,  have  Abraham  for  their  father ;  i
and  thej  ,  with  him  and  the  patriarchs,
will  inherit  the  earth,  when  wicked-
ness censes  to  exist.  ,

It  is  then  that  the  enmity  of  the
beasts  of  the  field  as  well  as  that  of
all  flesh  will  cease  ;  no  more  one  beast
of  prej  devouring  and  feasting  upon
another  that  is  more  harmless  in  its
nature;  no  more  will  this  enmity  be
found  in  i  he  fish  of  the  sea,  or  in  the
birds  of  the  air.  This  change  will  be
wrought  upon  all  flesh  when  Jesus
comes;  not  a  change  to  immortality,
but  a  change  sufficient  to  alter  the
ferocious  nature  of  beasts,  birds  and
fishes-  In  those  days  the  lion  will
eat  straw  like  the  ox  ;  he  will  no  more
be  the  terror  of  the  forest,  but  will
bo  perfectly  harmless,  and  gentleness,
will  characterize  all  the  wild  and
ferocious  animals,  as  well  as  the  ven-
omous serpents,  so  much  so  that  the
the  little  child  might  lead  them  and  |
play  with  them,  and  nothing  should
hurt  or  destroy  in  all  the  holy  mountain
of  the  Lord  ;  all  things  becoming,  in
some  measure,  as  when  they  were
first  created.  For  it  will  be  remem-
bered that  animals  did  not  devour
one  another  until  after  the  fall,  neither  !
was  there  any  death,  until  after  the
fall  What  did  they  eat,  then  ?  The
Lord  said,  *'  To  every  beast  of  the
field,  and  to  every  thing  that  creep-
cth  upon  the  .earth,  wherein  there  is


DISCOURSES.

life,  I  have  given  every  green  herb
for  meat."  The  grass,  and  the  herbs,
and  every  green  tiling  were  their  food*
And  Adam  and  Eve  ate  fruits  and
vegetables,  not  animal  flesh.  The
whole  earth  will  be  restored  ;  and  man
will  be  restored  ;  and  not  only  upon
man,  but  upon  all  flesh  the  Spirit  of
God  will  be  poured  out  and  they  will
eventually  be  restored  to  all  that  w
lost  by  the  fall  of  our  first  parents.
Then  the  knowledge  of  God  will  cover
thu  whole  earth,  as  the  waters  cover
the  great  deep.  And  then  the  ani-
mal creation  will  manifest  more  intel-
ligence and  more  knowledge  than  they
do  nowf  in  their  fallen  condition.  In-
deed, we  have  a  declaration,  by  John
the  Hevelator,  that  when  this  time
shall  come,  they  will  even  know
how  to  praise  God.  He  says,  "  And
every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,
and  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth
and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all
that  are  in  them,  heard  I,  saying,
Blessing,  and  honor  and  glory,  and
power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon
the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  fo
ever  and  ever/'  What  r  The  an i Dial
creation  endowed  with  language  ?
Tea,  a  language  of  praise,  saying
something  concerning  the  Lamb  that
was  slain,  and  about  his  glory  and
excellency.  What  a  beautiful  crea-
tion this  will  be  when  all  these  things
are  fulfilled.  Amen,


AN  IMPORTANT  AGE,  ETC


19


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Deuvebed  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  July  7,  1878,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  QibbsJ

AN  IMPORTANT  AGE— CLOSE  QUESTIONS— A  WORD  WITH  THE  BISHOPS —

ALSO  THE  SEVENTIES — HONOR  THE  SABBATH.


I  have  been  very  much  interested,
a$  no  doubt  all  of  you  have  who
have  attended  this  Conference,  in
the  principles  that  have  been  taught
here.  It  is  true  a  very  great  many
have  not  been  present  to  hear  the
things  that  have  been  spoken  of  by
the  Elders  of  Israel,  and  the  Apos-
tles of  the  Lord,  during  this  Con-
ference. There  has  been  a  num-
ber of  reflections,  no  doubt,  in  rela-
tion to  principles  advanced  by  the
various  speakers ;  a  great  many  plain
truths  have  been  enumerated  ;  but
we  need,  as  has  been  stated,  con-
tinual awakening  up  to  a  sense  of
our  duty,  and  to  a  realization  of
those  great  responsibilities  which
devolve  upon  us.  j

We  are  living  in  a  very  import-
ant age  of  the  world,  when  great
events  are  about  to  transpire,  and
the  Lord  has  called  upon  us  to  per-
forin a  very  great  work  in  our  day
and  generation.  He  has  sent  forth
a  revelation  of  his  will ;  He  has  re-
stored the  ancient,  the  everlasting
Gospel ;  He  has  restored  the  Holy
Priesthood;  He  has  manifested
himself  by  the  opening  of  the  hea-
vens and  communicating  his  will,  by
the  ministration  of  angels,  by  the


organisation  of  his  Church  and
kingdom,  by  the  continuous  mani-
festation of  his  Holy  Spirit,  daily
imparting  faith  to  the  human  family
who  are  humbly  and  diligently  seek-
ing  to  observe  his  laws  and  to  keep
his  commandments.

The  Lord  has  a  work  to  perform
upon  the  earth ;  and  the  ancient
Priesthood  who  have  lived  upon  the
earth,  and  who  now  live  in  heaven,
have  also  a  work  to  perform.  And
this  Gospel  and  this  kingdom  has
been  introduced  that  there  might  be
a  Priesthood  upon  the  earth  to
operate  with  God  and  with  the
Priesthood  in  the  heavens,  for  the
accomplishment  of  his  purposes,  for
the  redemption  of  the  living,  even
all  who  desire  to  love  the  truth  and
work  righteousness,  and  for  the  sal-
vation and  redemption  of  the  dead  ;
that  the  purposes  of  God  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  world  may  be
carried  out,  and  that  the  laws,  prin-
ciples, rules  and  government  as  they
exist  in  heaven,  may  be  taught  to
man  upon  the  earth;  and  that
through  the  operation  and  co-opera-
tion of  the  heavenly  Priesthood  and
the  earthly  Priesthood,  and  God  the
Father,  and  Jesus  the  Mediator  of


20  JOURNAL  or

the  new  covenant,  an  organization
may  take  place,  a  union  be  formed,
truth  developed,  and  a  kingdom
established  that  the  will  of  God  may
be  done  upon  the  earth  as  it  is  done
in  heaven.  And  this  is  what  Jesus
taught  his  disciples  to  pray  for,
"  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be
done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven/'
But  we  cannot  do  the  will  of  God  as
it  is  done  in  heaven,  until  he  reveals
it ;  we  cannot  know  the  will  of  God
in  heaven,  until  he  reveals  it  to  man
on  the  earth*  And  then,  as  it  re-
quires the  powers  and  the  spirit  and
wisdom  of  God  to  manage  and  direct
and  eontrol  the  affairs  in  the  hea-
venly worlds,  and  to  regulate  his
kingdom  there,  so  it  requires  the
same  power,  the  same  wisdom,  the
same  light  and  intelligence  to  carry
on  his  purposes  here,  and  to  esta-
blish his  kingdom  on  the  earth.  And
hence,  for  this  very  purpose,  he  has
commenced  to  reveal  himself  to  the
human  family,  and  also  for  the  pur-
pose of  organizing  the  everlasting
Priesthood.  Do  we  know  what  that
means]  A  Priesthood  that  admini-
sters in  time  and  through  all  eter-
nity; a  Priesthood  that  is  under  the  i
guidance,  direction  and  control  of
the  Almighty;  a  Priesthood  to
whom  he  will  communicate  his  will,
make  known  his  designs,  through
whom  he  will  accomplish  his  pur-
poses, build  up  his  Zion  and  esta-
blish the  kingdom  of  God  on  the
earth.  And  it  is  for  this  purpose
that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  esta-
blished ;  it  is  for  this  purpose  that
the  various  organizations  of  the '
Priesthood  ate  put  in  order ;  it  is
for  this  purpose  that  men  are  or-
dained and  set  apart  to  fulfill  the  va-
rious duties  and  responsibilties  de-
volving upon  them,  at  home  or
abroad  as  the  case  may  be*  It  is  not
to  seek  after  our  own  gain,  or  inter*
est,  or  emolument,  or  to  satisfy  the


DISCOURSES.

devices  and  desires  of  our  hearts ;
we  are  here  as  Jesus  was  here,  not  to
do  our  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him
who  sent  us — not  to  speak  our  own
words,  but  the  words  of  life,  under
the  inspiration  of  the  Most  High,  so
that  Zion  may  be  instructed  in  the
principles  of  righteousness,  and  that
she  may  comprehend  the  laws  of  life,
and  be  able  to  fulfill  her  destiny  on
the  earth.

Ye  Latter-day  Saints,  this  is  why
this  Church  was  organized  ;  this  is
why  the  Priesthood  was  organised;
this  is  why  messengers  have  been
sent,  and  are  now  being  sent,  and
will  continue  to  be  sent  more  abun-
dantly to  tin*  nations  of  the  earth.
And  it  is  proper  and  right,  in  our
Conferences,  to  reflect  upon  these
things,  and  upon  the  duties  and  re-
sponsibilities devolving  upon  us,  and
to  ask  ourselves,  Are  we  fulfilling
the  requirements  of  the  great  Elo-
heim?  It  has  been  asked  here  by
brother  Brigham,  who  has  just
spoken,  whether  this  kingdom  will
fail.  I  tell  you  in  the  name  of  Israel's
God  it  will  not  fail  I  tell  you  in
the  name  of  Israel's  God  it  will  roll
forth,  and  that  the  things  spoken  of
by  the  holy  Prophets  in  relation  to
it  will  receive  their  fulfillment  But
in  connection  with  this  1  will  tell  you
another  thing  :  A  great  many  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  will  fail,  a  great
many  of  them  are  not  now  and  never
have  been  living  up  to  their  privi-
leges, and  magnifying  their  callings
and  their  Priesthood,  and  God  will
have  a  reckoning  with  such  people,
unless  they  speedily  repent  There
is  a  carelessness,  a  deadness,  an
apathy,  a  listlessness  that  exists  to  a
great  extent  among  the  Latter-day
baints,  and  there  never  was  a
stronger  proof  of  t  his  than  that  which
was  exhibited  here  yesterday.  I
asked  myself,  as  I  looked  over  the
empty  benches,  Where  are  all  tin*


AN  IMPORTANT  AGE,  ETC


21


Bishops  ?  Have  they  not  time  to
attend  the  Quarterly  Conference]
Oh,  shame  on  such  men  !  are  they
worthy  to  hold  a  place  in  the  Bishop-
ric, and  associate  with  the  Holy
Priesthood  of  God?  They  are  dese-
crating the  holy  principles  by  which
they  ought  to  be  governed,  Where
are  their  Counselors,  I  asked  myself,
and  where  are  the  Priests  and  Teach-
ers and  Deacons  ?  Is  there  no  in-
terest manifested  in  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God,  or  in  the  Zion  he
is  about  to  establish  1  Not  much  with
many  of  them.  Where  were  these
thousands  of  Seventies  and  High
Priests  and  Elders?  The  great
majority  of  them  were  not  here ;
but  to-day  they  are,  and  I  thought
I  would  talk  to  them  while  here,
and  not  when  absent  Are  the
things  of  God  of  so  small  import-  ,
anee — are  the  issues  of  life,  the  des-
tinies of  the  world,  and  the  salva- 1
tion  of  the  living  and  the  dead  of  so
small  importance,  that  we  can  not
afford  time  to  spend  a  day  once  a
quarter  in  attending  to  the  duties  of
our  office,  in  representing  our  differ-
ent districts,  and  in  fulfilling  the
duties  of  our  priesthood  and  the  ob-
ligations God  has  placed  upon  us  1
I  tell  you,  ye  Eiders  of  Israel,  who
neglect  these  things  and  who  shirk
your  duties,  God  will  remove  your
candlestick  out  of  its  place,  and  that
speedly,  unless  you  repent.  And  I
say  so  to  the  Bishops,  and  I  say  so  to
all  Israel  who  hold  the  Prieshood.
We  are  not  here  to  do  our  own
will,  but  the  will  of  our  Heavenly
Father  who  sent  us,  God  has
placed  an  important  mission  upon
us  j  he  expects  us  to  fulfill  it.  If
we  treat  it  lightly  and  neglect  our
duties,  he  will  remove  us  and
others  will  take  our  crown.  But
he  is  not  going  to  allow  His  king-
dom to  be  overthrown,  for  it  will
roll  "forth  and  spread  and  increase


until  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
God  and  His  Christ  and  he  will
rule  for  ever  and  ever.

I  was  reminded,  yesterday,  of  a
parable  made  use  of  by  the  Savior
in  his  day.

"Then  shall  the  kingdom  of
heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins
which  took  their  lamps,  and  went
forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom.

And  6ve  of  them  were  wise  and
five  were  foolish.

They  that  were  foolish  took  their
lamps,  and  tsok  no  oil  with  tbera  :

But  the  wise  took  oil  in  their
vessels  with  their  lamps.

While  the  bridegroom  tarried,
they  all  slumbered  and  slept."

I  thought  that  part  of  it  was
pretty  nearly  fulfilled ;  for  very
nearly  all  of  the  people  belonging
to  this  stake  were  caught  nappiug.
By  and  by,  or  to  quote  the  words
of  the  text :

"And  at  midnight  there  was  a
cry  made,  Behold,  the  bridegroom
eometh  :  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.

Then  all  those  virgins  arose  and
trimmed  their  lamps.

And  the  foolish  said  unto  the  wise,
Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for  our  lamps
are  gone  out

But  the  wise  answered,  saying,  Not
so ;  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us
and  you :  but  go  ye  rather  to  them
that  sell,  and  buy  for  yourselves.

And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the
bridegroom  came ;  and  they  that
were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the
marriage:  and  the  door  was  shut; "
and  the  others  did  not,  and — that's
all  And  there  is  another  Scripture
j  to  which  I  will  refer.  Jesus  says  :
11  Many  are  called,  but  few  are  cho-
sen.11 And  there  are  many  other  pe-
culiar Scriptures  in  relation  to  this
matter.  I  will  refer  to  another  one.
"  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,
Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied


22


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSKS


in  thy  name  ?  and  in  thy  name  have
cast  out  devils  ?  and  in  thy  name
done  many  wonderful  works?

w  And  then  will  I  profess  onto
them,  I  never  knew  you  ;  depart  from
me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  Or  in
other  words,  1  )epart  from  me,  I  never
approved  of  you.  Who,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters,  do  you  think  these
Scriptures  refer  to  ?  Some  will  say
to  the  Gentiles;  but  I  have  quite
another  opinion  about  it,  Tiiere  arc
men  before  me  to-day  who  have  pro-
phesied in  the  name  of  Go  J,  who
have  cast  out  devils  in  the  name  of
God,  who  have  healed  the  sick  in  the
name  of  God,  and  done  many  won-
derful works  in  the  name  of  God ;
but  they  are  not  keeping  his  com-
mandments, nor  magnifying  their
priesthood  ;  they  arc  tampering  with
sacred  things,  and  God  will  hold
them  to  ao  account  for  it;  and  if
they  expect  they  can  serve  mammon,
the  world  and  the  devil,  at  the  same
time,  they  are  making  a  grand  mis-
take. God  will  say  to  them,  u  I  never
knew  you."  Now  I  shall  be  there,
and  you  will  be  there  ;  and  I  warn
you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  to  repent
of  your  sins,  and  humble  yourselves,
and  from  henceforth  magnify  your
priesthood  and  honor  your  God.

How  is  it  with  our  various  quor-
ums and  authorities,  and  how  is  it
with  many  of  the  Bishops  ?  Thoy  do
not  care  much  about  things  which-
ever way  they  go.  They  have  time  to
attend  to  their  merchandizing  and
trading  and  business  operations  and
pleasures,  but  they  have  not  time  to
attend  to  the  cause  of  God  nor  the
interests  of  the  flock,  over  whom  he
has  placed  them.  But  if  they  can-
not find  time,  God  will  find  a  people
that  will  find  time  to  attend  to  his  af-
fairs. We  have  been  engaged  for
year*,  but  more  especially  of  late
years,  in  organizing  the  church  more
perfectly.  And  we  have  been  ordain-


ing men  in  the  various  quorums  for
the  last  40  years;  and  what  for?
Merely  n>  u'we  them  a  place  and
position  and  the  priesthood  ?  No,  I
tell  you  nay ;  but  that  holding  the
holy  priesthood  you  may  magnify  it
and  become  the  saviors  of  men.  But
is  it  not  the  case  with  a  great  many
of  our  Elders  and  Seventies,  that
that  they  are  trying  how  little  they
can  do  to  save  themselves  and  pre-
serve a  standing  in  the  church  ;  in-
stead of  how  much  they  can  do  ?
Why,  alt  the  heavens  are  waiting  for
our  operations;  the  Gods  in  the  eter-
nal worlds  and  the  fat  hers  of  the  de-
parted spirits — the  holy  priesthood
behind  the  vail,  are  all  waiting  for
onr  operations,  to  see  what  we  will  do.
And  we  are  found  slumbering  and
careless  and  indifferent,  willing  that
anybody  should  perform  the  work  of
the  Lord,  if  we  will  be  left  out  I
tell  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  that  he
will  give  you  your  wish ;  he  will
leave  you  out,  unless  you  speedily
repent.  '*  Be  not  deceived  ;  God  is
not  mocked  ;  for  whatsoever  a  man
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.  For
he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of
the  flesh  reap  corruption  ;  but  he  that
soweth  to  the  Spirit  Khali  of  the
Spirit  reap  life  everlasting/'  But
what  nre  the  duties  of  these  Seven*
ties,  so  many  of  whom  are  before  me
to-day  ?  As  I  read  it,  it  is  to  be  un-
der the  direction  of  the  Twelve,  and
to  be  on  hand  to  go  to  the  nations  of
the  earth,  as  messengers,  and  to  pre-
pare themselves  for  that  purpose.
We  sometimes  talk  about  the  work,
we  have  done.  A  very  few  men,
comparatively,  have  done  this  work,
and  the  great  majority  have  done
next  to  nothing.  How  many  nations
are  yet  unwarned,  and  know  nothing
about  the  principles  of  salvation  P
Our  fathers  are  anxious  about  them,
looking  to  us  to  carry  the  word  to
them. O  shame  upon  the  Elders  of


Israel,  especially  upon  the  Seventies
who  are  called  specially  to  this  work.
I  received  a  letter  from  one  of  our
Elders  a  abort  time  ago,  who  is  oat
laboring  in  the  ministry,  faith  folly
and  diligently,  in  which  be  writes
something  like  this:  "If  you  can
send  me  two  or  three  Elders  here,  I
shall  be  very  much  obliged  ;  if  the
Seventies  or  Eiders  would  not  consider
it  too  much  trouble  to  come  here."
What?  Too  much  trouble  for  the  El-
ders of  Israel  to  proclaim  the  words  of
life  and  salvation  to  their  fellowmen,
and  to  magnify  their  calling  and
priesthood  ?  0  shame  on  snch  Eldera
and  such  Seventies  and  such  High
Priests;  shame  on  them,  God,  I
tell  yon  in  the  name  of  God,  will
hold  you  responsible  for  these  things.
And  yet  that  man's  statement  was
pretty  nearly  true.  If  a  man  goes  on
a  mission,  he  thinks  he  is  accomplish-
ing a  wonderful  thing.  We  used,  in
former  years,  to  think  it  our  duty,  re-
garding it  as  one  of  the  things  which
God  required  at  our  hands,  We  held
ourselves  in  readiness  all  the  time.
And  some  of  as  who  have  never  been
abroad  will  begin  to  talk  of  the  great
work  we  have  performed.  How  we
apples  swim,  don't  we  ?  To  tell  what
wu  have  done,  when  perhaps  hundreds
and  thousands  of  brethren  who  have
never  been  abroad  on  a  mission  in
their  lifetime  would  consider  it  a  great
calamity  to  be  called  to  go  on  a  fbr^
eign  mission,

I  am  talking  plainly,  but  it  is  true
before  God,  and  you  know  it  is  true,
and  I  know  it  is  true.  And  I  s  ly  to
you  Seventies  and  you  Elders,  Awaken
up!  God  has  placed  the  priesthood
upon  j*ou,  and  he  expects  you  to
magnify  it,  and  not  be  all  the  day
long,  and  year  after  year,  singing,

'*  Lullaby  baby  on  the  tree  top,

AVhen  the  wind  blows  the  cradle  will  rock."

we  want  something  else;  we  want
some  manhood,  and  some  priesthood


and  power  of  God  to  be  manifested  in
Israel,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be
poured  out  upon  Israel  and  upon  the
Elders  thereof.  And  I  pray  God,  the
Eternal  Father,  to  waken  up  these
Elders,  that  the  spirit  of  their  mis-
sion may  rest  upon  them,  and  that
they  may  comprobend  their  true
position  before  God,

Now,  I  would  not  have  said  these
things  before  a  public  congregation,
if  I  had  not  said  them  before  you
frequently  in  your  priesthood  meet-
ings. But  it  is  time  we  were  waking
up  to  a  sense  of  the  position  we  occu-
py before  God  ;  for  the  day  is  not
far  distant  when  we  will  hear  of  wars
and  rumors  of  wars  ;  not  only  rumors
of  wars,  but  wars  themselves — nation
arrayed  against  nation  and  seizing
one  another  by  the  throat,  and  blood
will  flow,  and  general  carnage  will
spread  through  the  lanis,  and  if  you
do  not  magnify  your  callings,  God
will  hold  you  responsible  for  those
whom  you  might  have  saved  had  yon
done  your  duty.  How  many  of  you
can  say,  My  garments  are  clean  from
the  blood  of  this  generation  ?  I  speak
in  behalf  of  the  nations  and  the  peo-
ple thereof,  and  the  honest  in  heart;
who  are  ignorant  of  God  and  his  laws.
Ho  has  called  upon  us  to  enlighten
them,  and  to  spread  forth  the  truth,
and  send  forth  the  principles  of  the
Gospel,  and  point  out  the  way  of  life.
And  it  is  for  us  to  attend  to  these
things,  that  we  may  sccare  the  smiles
and  approbation  of  God.

But  we  are  careless  and  thought-
less; and,  as  has  been  already  re-
marked, wo  pay  very  little  attention
to  the  Sabbaih  day.  Some  would
rather  go  on  these  Sunday  excursions,
and  take  their  families  with  them,
lending  them  in  the  paths  that  lead
to  death,  then  they  would  bring  them
to  the  house  of  God.  But  let  me  say
to  all  such,  that  as  sure  as  you  do
these  things  you  will  have  to  teel,  and


24


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  keenly  too,  the  result  of  your
acta,  and  they  will  follow  you  iu  time
and  all  eternity.  And  I  call  upon
you,  ye  Latter-day  Saints,  to  repent
of  your  iniquities,  and  keep  the
Sabbath  day  holy,  set  it  aside  as  a  day
of  rest,  a  day  to  meet  together  to
perform  your  sacraments  and  listen
to  the  words  of  life,  and  thus  be
found  keeping  the  commandments,
and  setting  a  good  example  before
your  children.  Let  us  do  that  winch
is  right,  honor  our  God  and  magnify
our  calling,  aud  the  Spirit  and  bless-
ing of  God  will  rest  upon  us.  But  if
we  do  not  these  things,  his  Spirit  will
depart  from  us,  and  we  be  left  to
ourselves.  God  will  not  be  mocked
by  1 1 is  people,  or  by  any  other  people ;
but  we  shall  reap  the  reward  ot  our
doings,

Wo  talk  about  being  a  good  people.
Well,  we  are  when  compared  with
the  rest  of  the  world  ;  but  we  ought


to  be  twenty  times  better  than  we  ate
to-day*  Aud  if  we,  as  Latter-day
Saiutd,  were  to  strictly  observe  the
Sabbath  day,  and  pay  our  tithes  and
offerings,  and  meet  our  engagements,
and  be  less  worldly  minded,  be  united
in  temporal  and  spiritual  things,  Zion
would  arise  and  shine,  and  the  glory
of  God  would  rest  upon  her,  And  it
would  not  be  long  before  all  nations
would  call  us  blessed.  But  we  are
slothful  and  careless  and  in di ffe rent,
and  we  neglect  our  duty  and  the
responsibilities  that  devolve  upon  us.

I  pi  ny  that  God  may  enlighten  our
minds,  and  lead  ns  in  the  paths  of
life;  and  that  we  may  honor  our
calling  arid  our  God  ;  that  we  may
he  fouud  worthy  to  be  associated
with  the  just  on  the  earth,  aud  with
them  obtain  an  inheritance  iu  the
kingdom  of  God,  in  the  name  of  Je-
sus. Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOSEPH F.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,

July  7,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)


PLURAL  MARRIAGE  —  FUR THE  RIGHT  ROUS  ONLY  —  OBEDIENCE  IMPEBA-

TIVE — BLESSINGS  RESULTING.

I  naturally  shrink  from  the  task  [  ing  in  listening  to  the  remarks  of
of  addressing  a  congregation  in  this  Brother  Cannon.  We  cannot  but
honse,  feeling  as  I  do  my  inability be delighted with the  testimony


to  make  myself  beard.

I  have  been  interested  this  morn-


that  lias  been  given  in  our  hearing,
and  that  we  are  continually  receiv-


9


PLURAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC


35


iog  from  many  sources,  which  go  to
prove  that  the  world  can  do  noth-
ing against,  bat  for  us*  Even  their
attempts  to  slander  and  misrepresent
tls,  and  their  unrighteous  attacks
on  the  principles  of  our  relig-
ion have  ever  tended  to  excite  in-
quiry and  investigation  into  the
facts,  which  cannot  but  resalt  ben-
eficially to  us  as  a  people-  I  say*  the
efforts  of  our  enemies  against  ns  have
ever  had  a  tendency  to  cause  people
whe  desire  to  arrive  at  the  truth,  to
inquire  into  the  real  condition  of  things
The  more  people  interest  themselves
in  this  direction,  the  more  truth  they
will  learn,  and  we  court  such  investi-
gation, for  there  is  certainly  nothing
connected  with  us,  as  a  religious  com-
munity, in  consonance  with  the  gos-
pel we  preach,  that  we  should  be
ashamed  of,  or  that  should  not  be
known  by  all  men.  It  makes  no
difference  with  the  truth  how  much
we  are  wrougfully  accused  ;  nor  will
it  permanently  injure  us.  If  we
sustain  injury  or  suffer  loss  by  the
misrepresentations  and  evils  malici-
ously promulgated  about  us  by  our
entmies,  it  can  only  be  such  injury
and  loss  as  will  be  temporary,  for
when  the  facts  do  come  out,  and
people  learn  the  truth,  so  much  the
more  good  will  be  accomplished  in
our  favor,  and  so  much  greater  injury
to  those  who  are  the  authors  of  the
falsehoods  concerning  us.  We  want
nothing  hidden  or  covered  up  neither
can  we  respect  any  ptinciple  or  indi-
vidual that  will  not  bear  the  daylight
and  the  most  careful  investigation.
Since  1830  the  Elders  of  this  church
have  been  faithfully  endeavoring  to
promulgate  the  gospel  which  we  have
received  to  every  nation  and  people,
without  distinction  as  to  race  or  color
that  would  receive  them;  in  other
words  they  have  diligently  sought  to
11  expose  '  Mormonism 1 51  to  the
•world.


V!e  are  not  ashamed  of  our  do-
mestic relations,  so  far,  at  least,  as
they  exist  in  accordance  with  the
principles  of  the  Gospel,  nor  does
any  right-minded  man  or  woman
feel  in  his  or  her  heart  to  shrink  in
any  manner  from  the  most  rigid  ex-
position of  correct  views  in  relat  ion
thereto.  It  is  true  that  in  common
with  mankind  generally,  we  do  not
like  our  faults  made  public,  we  shrink
from  that,  and  it  is  natural  that  we
should.  It  is  very  proper  that  we
should  feel  a  reluctance  to  have  our
weaknesses  and  imperfections  exposed
to  the  world,  or  even  to  our  neigh-
bors. This  feeling  is  a  very  proper
incentive  to  us  to  conlinue  in  the  *
work  of  self-improvement,  until  we
shall  overcome  the  weaknesses  we
have  inherited,  living  nearer  to  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation  which
we  have  received.  But  the  errors  of
man  affect  not  in  the  least  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God.  Yon  show  me  a  man  who  has
embraced  the  Gosgel  in  its  entirety,
in  faith  and  practice,  and  I  can  then
point  to  a  man  who  has  overcome
the  follies  and  weaknesses  of  the
flesh ;  or  show  me  a  man  who  is  try-
iug  to  live  according  to  these  prin-
ciples, and  I  will  show  you  a  man
who  is  trying  to  overcome  his  weak-
nesses. Hence  there  can  be  no  blame
attached  to  the  doctrines  of  otfr  faith,
because  of  the  infirmities  and  short-
earnings  of  mankind  ;  but  we  should
rather  attribute  such  weaknesses  to
their  proper  source — the  defective-
ness of  man,  or  to  his  failure,  at  least,
to  comply  with  those  principles  which
are  calculated  to  correct  every  evil,
and  to  establish  man  in  righteous-
ness. It  is  perhaps  a  difficult  thing
for  us,  under  the  circumstances  in
which  we  are  placed,  the  traditions
of  the  fathers  clinging  to  us,  the
practices  of  the  world  before  ns,  and
the  temptations  to  evil  so  continually


26


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


surrounding  us,  at  all  times  to  live
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  as  per-
fectly as  we  should  or  otherwise
might.  It  is  no  doubt  difficult  for
us  to  overcome  our  follies,  to  forsnke
the  traditions  of  the  fathers,  to
eschew  tho  practice  of  sin,  to  be
patient  in  suffering*  to  endure  priva-
tions and  trials  of  our  feelings,  while
we  possess  so  little,  as  we  do,  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  the  know-
ledge of  the  truth.  But  we  need  not
be  discouraged  because  of  this,  nor
because  we  see  faults  in  each  other,
for  no  man  lie  perfect ;  all  men  have,
more  or  less,  the  shortcomings  inci-
dent to  humanity.  We  need  not
falter  or  be  discouraged  because  of
this,  for  perhaps  it  would  r.ot  he
possible  for  one  who  was  perfect  in
all  good  to  remain  in  the  midst  of
this  corrupt  and  perverse  generation.
Still  it  would  seem  good  if  we  had  a
few  among  us  who  were  really  per-
fect, whose  example  we  could  see,
whose  precept  we  could  learn,  and
whose  footsteps  we  might  follow.
We  might  then  be  the  better  able  to
perfect  ourselves.  Still  we  will  do
well  to  emulate  the  good  that  are  in
our  midst,  and  to  observe  those  great
truths  we  have  already  received  in
part,  which  in  their  fulness  are  able
to  siive  us  unto  the  uttermost,  Wo
shall  not  be  cast  off,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  for  those  sins  which  we
ignorantly  commit,  which  are  the
results  of  misunderstanding  in  all
honesty  before  the  Lord,  The  diffi-
culty does  not  lie  here  ;  the  danger
lies  in  our  foiling  to  live  up  to  that
which  we  do  know  to  be  right  and
proper  For  this  we  will  be  held
responsible  before  the  Lord  ;  for  this
we  will  be  judged  and  condemned
unless  we  repent  and  forsake  our
follies,  and  our  unwillingness  to  obey
the  light  and  the  knowledge  which
we  have  received.  There  are  some
plain,  simple truths  which  we  do


know,  but  which  we  do  not  observe.
Herein  lies  our  great  sin,  The  con-
demnation of  the  world,  when  the
Savior  commenced  his  mission  among
men,  was  that  light  had  come  into
the  world,  but  they  loved  darkness
rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds
were  ovil.  This  principle  applies
with  equal  force  to  us  in  this  dispell*
Ration.  If  wc  had  remained  without
the  Gospel,  we  would  not  be  under
condemnation.  But  now  that  li^hfc
has  come  into  the  world ;  now  that
truth  and  the  authority  of  God  have
been  restored,  we  cannot  longer  re-
main without  sin,  unless  we  obey
this  Gospel  so  revealed,  and  practice
our  profession.

There  is  a  great  deal  said  about  our
plural  marriage  by  tho  outside  world,
and  sometimes  it  is  referred  to  bv  the
Litter -day  Saints  at  home.  I  fancy
sometimes  that  not  only  is  the  world
without  knowledge  in  relation  to  this
principle,  but  many  of  those  who
profess  to  be  Latter-day  Saints  arc
far  from  possessing  a  correct  under-
standing of  it.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  principle
that  savors  of  life  unto  life,  or  of
death  unto  death  ;  therefore  it  is  well
for  those  who  have  embraced  the
Gospel  to  obtain  a  knowledge  in  rela-
tion to  this  matter.  It  is  a  principle
that  pertains  to  eternal  life,  in  other
words,  to  endless  lives,  or  eternal  in-
crease. It  is  a  law  of  the  Gospel
pertaining  to  the  celestial  kingdom,
applicable  to  all  gospel  dispensations,
when  commanded  and  not  otherwise,
and  neither  acceptable  to  God  or
binding  on  man  unless  given  by  com-
mand men  t,  not  only  so  given  in  this
dispensation,  but  particularly  adapted
to  the  conditions  and  necessities
thereof,  and  to  the  circumstances,  re-
sponsibilities, and  personal,  as  well
as  vicarious  duties  of  the  people  of
God  in  this  a^e  of  the  world.  God
has  revealed  it  as  a  principle  pavtica-


FLTTRAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC.


27


larly  suited  to  the  nature  of  the  work
we  are  called  to  perform,  that  it
might  be  hastened  to  its  consumma-
tion. It  is  a  righteous  principle  not
an  unrighteous  one.  It  is  a  pure  and
holy  principle ;  and,  therefore,  per-
sons, either  male  or  female,  who  have
not  the  desire  in  their  hearts  to  be-
come pure  and  righteous,  have  no
business  to  practice  it,  for  it  cannot
be  practiced  acceptably  before  God
on  any  other  principle  than  that  of
parity  and  righteousness,  therefore
no  wicked  unjust  or  impure  person
can  enter  into  the  law  of  celestial  or
plural  marriage  without  incurring  the
displeasure  of  the  Almighty  and  his
own  condemnation  before  the  Lord,
unless  he  speedily  repent  of  all  his
impure  motives  and  designs.  A  man
that  is  not  honest  in  his  heart,  who
does  not  desire  to  be  just  and  impar-
tial, even  as  God  isjust  and  impartial,
has  no  business  in  plural  marriage  ;
and  before  he  enters  into  the  practice
of  that  principle  he  needs  to  repent,
to  learn  wisdom  to  get  the  Spirit  of
God,  to  get  understanding  in  relation
to  the  purpose  God  has  in  view  in
regard  to  this  principle;  that  he  may
go  into  the  practise  of  it  understand-
iogly,  that  his  heart  and  mind  may
be  set  upon  practising  it  in  righteous-
ness.  It  is  a  difficult  matter,  I  am
aware,  to  distinguish  between  the
actions  of  a  man  and  the  principles
in  which  he  professess  to  believe.  A
corrupt  ungodly  hypocrite  can  do
more  injury  in  the  midst  of  a  ptople,
in  a  given  length  of  time,  correspond-
ingly, than  a  host  of  upright  men  can
do  good.  Send  an  Elder  to  preach
the  Gospel  among  the  nations,  and
let  him  degrade  himself,  dishonor  bis
priesthood  and  calling,  and  he  will
bring  more  reproach  upon  the  cause
misrepresented  by  him,  than  twenty
good  men  could  remove*  Because
people  generally  look  at  the  man.  To
judge  him  by  his  acts  would  be  right-


eous judgment :  but  to  condemn  the
Gospel  or  the  Saints,  because  of  his
acts,  would  be  unjust;  yet  the  cause
he  misrepresents  suffers  wrong  because
of  his  connection  with  it.  A  man's
acts  may  justly  be  considered  as
resulting  from  his  principles.  We
judge  a  tree  by  its  fruits.  The  fruits
of  the  Gospel  are  good  ;  he  that  has
actually  embraced  the  Gospel  will  do
good,  only  so  far  as  he  may  err,  or
depart  therefrom.  Hence,  it  is  diffi-
cult to  seperate  a  man's  actions  from
his  principles.

There  is  no  difficulty,  however,  in
this  matter  to  those  who  always  bear
in  mind,  that  evil  and  corrupt  prac-
tices are  not  the  results  of  obedience
to  the  Gospel,  but  of  disobedience,
and  of  the  pre  vers  ion  of  the  truth.
If  we  would  keep  this  in  our  minds
we  would  not  cast  blame  upon  the
principles  themselves  when  we  see  or
hear  of  men,  who  should  represent
them,  do  wrong;  but  we  would  ra-
ther say,  the  man  has  departed  from
his  principles  and  gone  into  error.  It
is  he  that  is  defective,  through  not
practising  whfit  he  professes;  the
principles  are  good  and  holy,  and  he
himself  would  become  so  too,  if  he
would  but  practise  them.

It  is  precisely  so  in  relation  to  our
domestic  relations.  We  see  trouble
in  families  occasionally,  not  any  more
so  in  plural  than  in  single  families-
There  is  no  reason  why  there  should
be  any  difference  between  the  husband
and  wife,  or  husband  and  wives,  in
the  midst  of  this  people,  if  all  are
disposed  to  obey  the  principles  and
docirines  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  only
by  the  practise  of  these  principles
that  we  can  avoid  the  disturbances
that  occur  in  families,  or  among  man-
kind. We  must  learn  and  obey
correct  principle,  or  we  will  ever  be
in  turmoil  and  confusion,  and  in
antagonism  one  towards  another.
Where  differences  exist  in  families


28


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


they  are  traceable  directly  to  some
cause.  I  want  to  impress  upon  the
minds  of  my  hearers  that  the  cause
of  such  evils  it  not  traceable  to  the
practice  of  any  principle  which  God
has  revealed  touching  these  matters,
but  to  the  non-observance  of  them;
and  this  is  true  in  relation  to  every
principle  of  the  Gospel  Sometimes
it  is  the  fault  of  the  man,  sometimes
of  the  woman,  and  oftener  of  both,
but  never  the  fault  of  the  principle.
The  principle  is  correct,  great,  en-
nobling and  calculated  to  bring  joy,
satisfaction  and  peace,  if  we  would
but  observe  and  practice  it  as  we
should.  Bat  in  order  to  do  this  we
must  get  wisdom  and  understanding.
These,  by  many,  are  acquired  only
through  long  experience.  We  begin
as  children,  we  have  to  learn  precept
by  precept,  line  after  line,  here  a  little
and  there  a  little,  which  is  good,  pro-
Tided  we  profit  by  that  which  we
learn.  Men  most  be  just,  so  also
must  women,  iu  relation  to  these
matters.  All  must  be  just  one  to-
wards another  ;  also  forbearing  and
patient,  cultivating  largely  that
Christian  attribute  called  Charity,
in  order  to  get  along  peaceably  with
our  neighbors,  our  brethren  aud
sisters,  as  well  as  with  our  wives,
husbands  and  children.  We  are  all
imperfect,  we  have  to  learn  by  littles
as  we  pass  along,  profiting  oft  times
"by  that  which  we  suffer,  yet  often  re-
peating the  same  errors.  When  we
find  ourselves  overcome  in  a  fault,
that  should  be  set  down  as  an  example
for  future  time,  if  pessible,  never
allowing  ourselves  to  be  caught  in
the  same  predicament  again.  Thus
profiting  by  the  experience  we  gain*
Some  people  have  supposed  that
the  doctrine  of  plural  marriage  was
a  sort  of  superfluity,  or  non-essential
to  the  salvation  or  exaltation  of
mankind.  In  other  words,  some
of  the  Saints  have  said,  and  believe,


that  a  man  with  one  wife,  sealed  to
him  by  the  authority  of  the  Priest-
hood for  time  and  eternity,  will  re-
ceive an  exaltation  as  great  and  glo-
rious, if  he  is  faithful,  as  he  possibly
could  with  more  than  one.  I  want
here  to  enter  my  solemn  protest
against  this  idea,  for  I  know  it  is
false.  There  is  no  blesssing  prom-
ised except  upon  conditions,  and  no
blessing  can  be  obtained  by  mankind
except  by  faithful  compliance  with
the  conditions,  or  law,  upon  which
the  same  is  promised.  The  marriage
of  one  woman  to  a  man  for  time  and
eternity  by  the  sealing  power,  accord-
ing  to  the  law  of  God,  is  a  fulfillment
of  the  celestial  law  of  marriage  in
part — and  is  good  so  far  as  it  goes —
and  so  far  as  a  man  abides  these  con-
ditions of  the  law,  he  will  receive  his
reward  t  lie  re  for,  and  this  reward,  or
blessing,  he  could  not  obtain  on  any
other  grounds  or  conditions.  But
this  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  lawf
not  the  whole  of  it.  Therefore,  who-
ever has  imagined  that  he  could  ob-
tain the  fullness  of  the  blessings  per-
taining to  this  celestial  law,  by  com-
plying with  only  a  portion  of  its  con-
ditions, has  deceived  himself.  He
cannot  do  it.  When  that  principle
was  revealed  to  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  he  very  naturally  shrank,  in
his  feelings,  from  the  responsibilities
thereby  imposed  upon  himj  foresee-
ing, as  he  did  in  part,  the  apparently
insurmountable  difficulties  in  the  way
of  establishing  it,  in  the  face  of  pop-
ular opinion,  the  traditions  and  cus-
toms of  many  genera  Lions, the  frowns,
ridicule,  slander,  opposition  and  per-
secution of  the  world,  Tes,  this  man
of  God,  who  dared  to  meet  the  oppo-
sition of  the  whole  world  withhold
and  fearless  front,  who  dared  to  dis-
pute the  religious  authority  and  ac-
cumulated learning  and  wisdom  of
the  age — who  dared  everything  for
the  truth,  and  shrank  not  even  from


PLURAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC.


29


the  sacrifice  of  his  own  life  in  testi-
mony of  hii  divine  mission,  shrank,
in  his  feelings,  from  the  weight  of
the  responsibility  of  inaugurating
and  establishing  this  new  innovation
npon  the  established  customs  of  the
world.  Bat  he  did  not  falter,  al-
though it  was  not  until  an  angel  of
God,  with  a  drawn  sword,  stood  be-
fore him  and  commanded  that  he
should  enter  into  the  practice  of  that
principle,  or  he  should  be  utterly  de-
stroyed, or  rejected,  that  he  moved
forward  to  reveal  and  establish  that
doctrine*

To  put  this  matter  more  correctly
before  yon,  I  here  declare  that  the
principle  of  plural  marriage  was  not
first  revealed  on  the  1 2th  day  of  July,
1843.  It  was  written  for  the  first
time  on  that  date,  but  it  had  been
revealed  to  the  Prophet  many  years
before  that,  perhaps  as  early  as  1832,
About  this  time,  or  subsequently,  Jo-
seph, the  Prophet,  intrusted  this  fact
to  Oliver  Cowdery;  he  abused  the
confidence  imposed  in  him,  and
brought  reproach  upon  himself,  and
thereby  upon  the  church  by  "  running
before  he  was  sent,"  and  "  taking
liberties  without  license,"  so  to  speak,
hence  the  publication,  by  O.  Cow-  j
dery,  about  this  time,  of  au  article
on  marriage,  which  was  carefully
worded,  and  afterwards  found  its  way
into  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants
without  authority.  This  article  ex-
plains itself  to  those  who  understand
the  facts,  and  is  an  indisputable  evi-
dence of  the  early  existence  of  the
knowledge  of  the  principle  of  patri-
archal marriage  by  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph, and  also  by  Oliver  Cowdery,

When  the  revelation  was  written,
in  1843,  it  was  for  a  special  purpose,
by  the  request  of  the  Patriarch  Hy-
rnm  Smith,  and  was  not  then  design-
ed to  go  forth  to  the  church  or  to  the
world.  It  is  most  probable  that  had
it  been  then  written  with  a  view  to


its  going  out  as  a  doctrine  of  the
church,  it  would  have  been  presented
in  a  somewhat  different  form.  There
are  personalities  contained  in  a  part
of  it  which  are  not  relevant  to  the
principle  itself,  but  rather  to  the  cir-
cumstances which  necessitated  its  be-
ing written  at  that  time.  Joseph
Smith,  on  the  day  it  was  written,  ex-
pressly declared  that  there  was  a
great  deal  more  connected  with  the
doctrine  which  would  be  revealed  in
due  time,  but  this  was  sufficient  for
the  occasion,  and  was  made  to  suffice
for  the  time.  And,  indeed,  I  think  ifc
much  more  than  many  are  prepared
to  live  up  to  even  now.  When  the
timecarae  to  introduce  this  doctrine
to  those  who  were  worthy  in  the
church,  God  commanded  the  Prophet
and  he  obeyed.  He  taught  it  as  he
Mfas  commanded  to  such  as  were  pre-
pared to  receive  and  obey  it,  and  they
were  commanded  to  enter  into  it,  or
they  were  threatened  that  the  keys
would  be  turned  against  them,  and
the^  would  be  cut  off  by  the  Al-
mighty. It  need  scarcely  be  said
that  the  Prophet  found  no  one  any
more  willing  to  lead  out  in  this  mat-
ter in  righteousness  than  he  was  him-
self. Many  could  see  it — neatly  all
to  whom  he  revealed  it  believed  it,
and  received  the  witness  of  the  Holy
Spirit  that  it  was  of  God;  but  none
excelled,  or  even  matched  the  courage
of  the  Prophet  himself.

If,  then,  this  principle  was  of  such
great  importance  that  the  Prophet
himself  was  threatened  with  destruc-
tion, and  the  best  men  in  the  Church
with  being  excluded  from  the  favor
of  the  Almighty,  if  tbey  did  not
enter  into  and  establish  the  practice
of  it  upon  the  earth,  it  is  useless  to
tell  me  that  there  is  no  blessing  at-
tached to  obedience  to  the  law,  or
that  a  man  with  only  one  wife  can
obtain  as  great  a  reward,  glory  or
kingdom  as  he  can  with  more  than


3D  JOURNAL  OF

one,  being  equally  faithful.

Patriaehal  marriage  involves  con-
ditions, responsibilities  and  obliga-
tions which  do  not  exist  in  monoga-
my, and  there  are  blessings  attached
to  the  faithful  observance  of  that  law,
if  viewed  only  upon  natural
principles,  which  must  so  far  exceed
those  of  monogamy  as  the  conditions
responsibilities  and  power  of  increase
are  greater.  This  is  my  view
and  testimony  in  relation  to  1 1  lis
matter.  I  believe  it  is  a  doctrine
that  should  be  taught  and  under-
stood.

The  benefits  derived  from  the
righteous  observance  of  this  order  of
marriage  do  not  accrue  solely  to  the
husband,  but  are  shared  equally  by
the  wives;  not  only  is  this  true  upon
the  grounds  of  obedience  to  a  divine
law,  bat  upon  physiological  and  |
scintific  principles.  In  the  latter
view,  the  wives  are  even  more  bene-
fitted, if  possible,  than  the  husband  ,
physically.  But,  indeed,  the  bene-
fits naturally  accruing  to  both  sexes,
and  particularly  to  their  offspring,
iu  time,  say  nothing  of  eternity,
are  immensely  greater  in  the  righte-
ous practice  of  patriarchal  marriage
than  in  monogamy,  eveu  admitting
the  eternity  of  the  monogamies  marri-
age covenant.

Man  may  receive  great  reward,  ex-
altation and  glory  by  entering  into
the  bond  of  the  new  and  everlasting
covenant,  if  he  continue  faithful  ac-
cording to  his  knowledge,  but  he
cannot  receive  the  fullness  of  the  bles-
sings unless  he  fulfills  the  law,  any
more  than  he  can  claim  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost  after  he  is  baptized
without  the  laying  on  of  hands  by
the  proper  authority,  or  the  remis-
sion of  sins  without  baptism,  though
he  may  repent  in  sack-cloth  and  ashes.

"  But/*  says  one,  ls  how  will  it  be
with  good  men  who  believe  the  doc-


DISCOURSES.

trine,  but  are  prevented,  or  cannot
enter  into  the  practice  of  it  ?,f  I  re-
ply that  every  man  and  worn  sin  will
receive  all  that  they  are  worthy  of,
and  something  thrown  in  perhaps,  on
the  score  of  the  boundless  charity  of
God.  But  who  can  justly  expect  to
obtain  more  than  they  merit?  All
the  judgments  of  God  are  not  given
unto  man.  What  we  do  not  learn
i  relative  to  the  salvation  of  our  souls
which  are  our  bodies  and  spirits,  in
this  probation  we  will  have  to  learn
in  the  eternity  which  lies  before  us,
for  we  cannot  be  saved  withoutknow-
ledge.  11  But  what  if  we  never  get
knowledge?"  Then  we  never  will
be  saved.

Suppose  we  Jive  and  die  without
knowledge  1  Then,  if  we  ever  ob-
tain salvation  we  will  have  to  get  it
[  in  the  next  world,  as  the  AntediluT-
,  ians  did,  who  rejected  the  Gospel  as
preached  unto  them  by  Noah  and
were  destroyed  by  the  flood,  sent  to
,  the  prison-house  to  be  punished  for
their  disobedience  and  other  wicked-
ness, and  in  the  meridian  of  time  re-
ceived knowledge  by  the  proclamation
of  the  Gospel,  as  preached  unto  them
by  the  Savior  while  his  body  slept  in
the  tomb,  without  which  they  would
forever  have  remained  ignorant  of
God,  bis  government  and  laws,  in  a
lost  condition.  All  men  must  obtain
salvation  upon  their  own  merits,  for
by  our  works  shall  we  be  judged,  and
by  them  justified  or  comdemncd.

It  is  a  glorious  privilege  to  be  per-
mitted to  go  into  a  Temple  of  God  to
be  united  as  man  and  wife  in  the  bonds
of  holy  wedlock  for  time  and  all
eternity  by  the  Authority  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  which  is  the  power  of
God,  for  they  who  are  thus  joined  to-
gether **  no  man  can  put  asunder,"
for  God  hath  joined  them.  It  is  an
additional  privilege  for  that  same
man  and  wife  to  re-enter  the  Temple


of  God  to  receive  another  wife  in  like
manner  if  they  are  worthy.  Bat  if
he  remain  faithful  with  only  the  one
wife,  observing  the  conditions  of  so
much  of  the  law  as  pertains  to  the
eternity  of  the  marriage  covenant,  he
will  receive  his  reward,  but  the  bene-
fits, blessings  and  power  appertaining
to  the  second  or  more  faithful  and
fuller  observance  of  the  law,  he  never
will  receive,  for  he  cannot.  As  be-
fore stated  no  man  can  obtain  the
bencBts  of  one  law  by  the  observance
of  another,  however  faithful  he  may
be  in  that  which  he  does,  uor  can  he
secure  to  himself  the  fullness  of  any
blessing  without  he  fulfills  the  law
upon  which  it  is  predicated,  but  he
will  receive  the  benefit  of  the  law  he
obeys.  This  is  just  and  righteous.
If  this  is  not  correct  doctrine  then  I
am  in  error,  and  if  I  am  in  error  I
want  to  be  corrected.

I  understand  the  law  of  celestial
marriage  to  mean  that  every  man  in
this  Church,  who  has  the  ability  to
obey  and  practice  it  in  righteousness
and  will  not,  shall  be  damned,  I  say
I  understand  it  to  mean  this  aud  no-
thing less,  and  I  testily  in  the  name
of  Jesus  that  it  does  mean  that  But
what  will  become  of  him  that  cannot
abide  it  ?  Says  the  Lord,  "  whoso  ^
having  knowledge  have  I  not  com-
manded tu  repent,  and  he  that  hath
not  understanding  it  re  ma  i  net  h  with
me  to  do  according  as  it  is  written."
In  other  words  ho  that  is  without
understanding  is  not  under  the  law,
and  it  remains  for  God  to  deal  with
him  according  to  his  own  wisdom.  If
a  man  acknowledges  that  he  irf  in-
capable, or  disqualified  by  a  lack  of
knowledge,  wisdom  or  understaudiog
to  obey  this  law,  when  it  remains
with  God  to  deal  with  him  according
to  those  principles  of  justice  which


are  written,  or  are  yet  to  be  revealed
it  is  not  likely  however,  that  he  will
take  his  seat  with  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob,  or  share  in  their  promised
blessings.

This  law  is  in  force  upon  the  in-
habitants of  Zion,  and  he  that  is
qualified  to  obey  it  cannot  neglect  or
disregard  it  with  impunity.  Bat
it  must  be  observed  in  righteousness.
The  commandment  is  u  be  ye  right-
eous as  your  Father  in  heaven  is
righteous;  be  ye  holy  as  he  is  holy.

Why  did  the  Son  of  God  make
this  requirement  of  his  disciples,  see-
ing that  it  is  so  universally  believed
by  the  world,  that  man  cannot  be
righteous  at  all  ?  Did  Jesus  re-
quire anything  inconsistent  or  im-
possible? No,  be  did  nothing  of
that  kind^  All  that  he  commanded
us  to  do,  we  can  accomplish  by  the
help  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  we  can-
not do  it  ourselves.  Therefore  if  we
will  seek  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  gift
of  wisdom  and  understanding  from
God,  we  may  practice  these  princip-
les of  righteousness,  and  they  will
make  us  righteous  even  as  God  is
righteous,  in  the  sphere  in  which  we
are  called  to  act.  We  will  fulfil  the
law,  and  receive  the  blessing,  exalta-
tion and  reward  which  will  follow  ;
if  we  do  not,  we  will  fail  of  the  re-
ward. } •  u  H  it

This  is  very  simple  reasoning,  I
admit.  Critics  would  say,  these  are
axioms  that  need  not  to  be  told.  If
we  do  wickedly  we  will  be  punished ;
if  we  do  righteously,  we  then  receive
blessings  at  the  bands  of  God.

May  God  bless  you,  and  keep  us
all  in  the  path  of  righteousness,
and  enable  us  to  live  the  religion
we  have  received  from  Him,  ia  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,

July  7,  1878,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibhs.)


GRATIFYING  POLITICAL  AND  GENERAL  MATERIAL  CONDITION  OF  THE
SAINTS — EMPLOYMENT  FOR  THE  POOR  —  ENEMIES  FOILED  —  PLURAL
MARRIAGE*


It  is  with  much  pleasure  I  meet
with  the  Latter-day  Saint  this  morn-
ing; it  was  a  great  pleasure  to  me
yesterday  to  sit  and  listen  to  the  re-
marks which  were  made  by  the  breth-
ren who  spoke,  and  to  the  testimonies
which  they  bore ;  and  I  trust  that
the  same  spirit  which  rested  upon
them  while  addressing  us  yesterday,
will  be  upon  as,  speakers  and  hearers,
today,  *

I  can  appreciate  the  privilege  we
enjoy  in  meeting  in  these  quarterly
conferences,  perhaps  more  so  because
of  my  lengthened  absence  from  home,
than  I  could  were  I  constantly  in
your  midst.  After  a  person  has  been
deprived  of  food,  many  of  you  know
how  good  it  is  to  sit  down  to  a  well-
spread  table.  I  do  not  know  that
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  exactly  in
this  condition.  There  are  privileges
we  need  and  which  we  can  enjoy,  even
when  away  from  the  body  of  the
Church,  which  enable  those  who  are
thus  separated  to  rejoice  in  their  re-
ligion and  its  blessings.  It  has  been
a  rule  of  my  life,  since  I  was  old
enough  to  comprehend  the  truth,  to
so  live  that  the  -Spirit  of  the  Lord
would  be  my  cdjn&nion,  and  thus


to  have  peace,  to  have  joy  and  to
have  satisfaction  of  mind  ;  and  this  I
can  testity  I  have  had.  But  still  ab-
sence from  the  society  of  the  Latter-
j  day  Saints  is  a  great  deprivation ;  at
least  it  is  to  me.

With  regard  to  our  condition  polit-
ically, I  do  not  think  it  would  be  in-
appropriate for  me  to  allude  to  it
casually,  although  it  is  Sunday,
There  probably  never  was  a  time  sinoe
►we  have  been  in  these  mountains
^hen  we  were  in  a  better  political
position  than  we  are  today.  Not-
withstanding all  the  efforts  which
are  being  made  against  us  to  destroy
our  liberties,  to  embarras  us  in  our
progress  and  to  malign  us,  the
people  who  reside  in  these  mount-
ains have  gained  and  are  gaining  a
credit  which  in  many  respects  is
▼ery'  gratify ihg  to  those  who  love
the  truth.  It  is  n  difficult  thing
to  condemn  an  entire  people,  and
make  the  world  believe  that  those
who  manage  a  Territory  such  as
ours,  the  affairs  of  which  are  80
well  managed,  and  are  in  so  healthy
and  thrifty  a  condition,  are  a
wicked  people.  And  so  far  as  my
observation  has  extended,  I  think


^ve  are  being  better  understood.  There
is  one  thing  particularly  that  I  have
noticed,  that  where  men  and  women
have  visited  this  Territory,  with
scarcely  any  exception,  they  speak
favorably  of  what  they  have  seen.  I
have  endeavored  to  urge  men  of  nat-
ional standing,  man  who  hold  high
positions  in  the  Government,  to  visit
Utah,  And  I  may  say  that  some  of
the  warmest  friends  we  have,  while  \
they  do  not  sympathize  particularly
with  our  religious  views,  but  are  tole-
rant and  desirous  that  we  should  have
our  rights  in  common  with  other
people,  are  those  who  have  visited
this  Territory  and  have  seen  ns  in
our  homes,  and  have  had  opportuni-
ties of  witnessing  the  changes  that
been  effected  in  this  desert  land  by
our  residence  and  labors*

As  to  the  time  when  we  shall  be-
come a  state,  concerning  which  con-
siderable is  said  by  outside  parties,
as  well  as  by  ourselves,  it  is  difficult
at  the  present  time  to  say  anything
definite  respecting  it  I  believe,  how-
ever, the  time  will  come,  and  that
too  before  long,  when  certain  exigen-
cies of  a  political  character  will  arise
that  will  make  the  vote  of  Utah  ne-
cessary in  deciding  national  questions,
and  under  thoseeircumstances  it  would
be  important  to  have  Utah  as  a  state.
In  fact  it  is  already  acknowledged
that  had  Utah  been  admitted  as  a
state  when  Colorado  was,  that  all
this  difficulty  which  has  occured  con-
nected with  the  presidential  election
would  have  been  entirely  settled ;
indeed  it  would  not  have  arisen.
This  is  now  conceded.  But  this  ex-
perience comes  too  late  to  be  of  any
benefit  in  correcting  the  injustice
which  we  suffered,  and  to  be  of  any
avail  in  the  presidential  contest  which
is  now  past;  but  it  may  have  some
effect  in  the  future.  There  are  many,
a  great  many  men  of  both  political
parties  who  have  said  to  me  that

No,  3.


they  would  vote  for  Utah's  admission
whenever  the  question  should  be
brought  up,  provided  they  had  a
voice  in  the  matter.  However,  as  far
as  this  is  concerned  I  think  some-
times it  is  a  matter  of  comparatively
small  moment  It  is  true  we  have
looked  to  our  admission  to  statehood
as  likely  to  greatly  relieve  us,  and  to
bring  about  a  better  condition  of
affairs  throughout  our  Territory.  But
the  conviction  has  grown  upon  me  in
watching  the  progress  of  events,  that
our  beino;  kept  in  a  territorial. condi-
tion to  the  present  time  has  been  at-
tended with  fjreat  advantage  to  us  as
a  people.  The  experience  we  have
gained  under  this  condition  of  affairs
is  an  experience  that  is  necessary  to
M,  and  without  which  we  could  not
so  well,  in  my  opinion,  fulfill  the  des-
tiny assigned  to  us.  I  believe  there
is  an  overruling  Providence  in  all
these  affairs;  I  believe  the  Lord  is
watching  over  this  people,  and  that
he  is  controlling  and  shaping  events
and  circumstances,  and  managing
everything  connected  with  the  affairs
of  this  nation,  and  our  affairs  as  part
of  the  nation,  with  a  view  to  accom-
plish his  great  designs  and  purpose?.
And  whenever  it  shall  be  wisdom  in
his  sight  that  we  should  have  our
political  condition  changed  and  our
Territory  become  a  State,  it  will  be
effected*  Aud  it  will  come,  too,  as
easily  as  other  changes  that  have
been  wrought  out  and  th.it  at  one
time  seemed  exceedingly  improbable*
So  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  we
should  become  excited  or  impatient  or
indulge  in  too  much  anxiety  concern-
isg  such  things,  but  leave  them  in  the
hands  of  Him  who  has  up  to  the
present  time  controlled  all  things  for
the  good  of  his  people  and  for  the
bringing  to  pass  of  his  own  purposes.

I  consider  our  condition  to-day  in
these  mountains  the  best  condition
that  we  can  occupy, When  I  travel

Vol.  XX.


34


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUIISKS.


through  the  States  and  converse  with  I  nature  of  things,  monopolize  large


gentlemen  who  are  familiar  with  the
affairs  of  the  nation  through  its  length
arid  breadth,  I  never  arise  from  such
conversation  without  feeling  impres-
sed mote  than  ever  with  the  excel-
lence of  the  circumstances  which  sur-
round u*. It  is  true  we  have  a  desert
land,  that  it  is  a  land  requiring  exces-
sive toil  to  make  it  fruitful  and  habit-
able for  those  who  live  in  it.  The
grass  does  cot  clothe  our  hills  spont-
aneously ;  our  territory  is  not  favored*
with  the  rains  of  heaven  to  make  it
green  with  verdure:  our  fields  would
be  barren  indeed,  if  it  were  not  for  the
labor  of  irrigation  and  the  constant
efforts  of  the  husbandman. In  this
respect  our  country  differs  very  much
from  every  other  place  east  of  us.  In


bodies  of  land  to  the  exclusion  of
their  poorer  neighbors.  This  is  an
advantage  to  the  people  of  this  coun-
try. The  nature  of  our  surroundings
compels  us  to  occupy  small  holdings
and  the  result  is  our  land  is  better
cultivated,  there  is  a  more  widespread
ownership  of  the  soil  than  you  will
find  in  any  part  of  these  United  Sta-
tes ;  that  is,  there  are  more  men  hold-
ing land  and  owning  and  occupying
it, in  this  country,  in  proportion  to  the
entire  population,  than  you  can  find
elsewhere.  The  result  is  a  condition
of  independence  you  cannot  find  else-
where. At  the  present  time,  iu  the
western  States  especially,  men  ate
greatly  concerned  about  the  clement
known  as  Communism,  which  has


travelling  through  the  broad  prairies taken  possession  of  the  minds  of  a


of  Illinois,  with  the  continuous  fields
of  grain  ;  and  through  Iowa  and  Ne-
braska, so  far  as  Nebraska  is  sett  led ,
&"d  contrasting  the  ease  with  which
those  lands  are  cultivated,  compared
with  the  toil  required  in  this  moun-
tain region,  I  could  not  help  think-
ing that  if  we  were  permitted  to  live
in  sd  goodly  a  land,  under  favorable


numerous  class  of  the  people.  The
working  classes  are  becoming  very
dissatisfied,  and  men  are  trembling
for  fear  of  what  will  come  upon  the
nation.  One  of  the  strongest  argu-
ments that  was  made  in  favor  of  keep-
ing up  the  United  States  army  up  to
its  present  numbers  was,  that  there
would  probably  be  riots  in  large  cities


circumstances,  we  would  soon  convert  [  and  in  populous  centres,  which  would


it  into  an  Eden.  But  in  the  provi-
dences of  the  Almighty  we  were  dri-
ven out  and  led  to  this  land,  and  the
Lord  has  showed  unto  us,  and  is
showing  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  that  when  a  people  will  do
that which  He requires  of  them.


require  the  presence  of  the  military
acting  as  police  to  quell  And  had
it  not  been  for  this  evil  the  army
would  have  been  cut  down.  Bat  a
good  many  men  were  anxious  to  have
it  increased,  deeming  it  necessary
for  the  preservation  of  life  and  pro-


that  he  is  abundantly  able  to  sustain  i  pcrty.  When  we  reflect  upon  this
themaud  make  their  labors  successful,  it  shows  how  changed  have  become
He  has  done  this  in  leading  us  to  this  the  affaire  of  our  nation,  when  it  is
country,  and  iu  sustaining  us  since  we  deemed  necessary  to  appeal  to  milU
came  here. Our  condition  in  many  \  tary  power  to  maintain  good  order  in


respects  is  far  superior  to  those  who
live  iu  those  favored  localities  to  which
I  have  referred.  We  have  a  healthy
land  ;  we  have  a  land  that  the  Lard
has  blessed  and  made  fruitful  as  the
result  of  our  labors.  It  is  a  land  in
which  men  cannot, from  the  very


the  Republic.  There  can  be  no
surer  sign  of  the  decay  of  a  republic
than  when  human  life  and  property
and  liberty  cannot  be  sustained  by
the  masses  of  the  people,  and  the
military  power,  the  ranks  of  which
are  filled  with  hired  soldiers,  has  to


GRATIFYING,  ETC


33


be  appealed  to  sustain  good  order  in
the  midst  of  the  people* Let  such
a  state  of  thing  continue  and  there
would  soon  be  an  end  of  true  republic
anism.

In  this  respect  we  also  have  our
difficulties.  The  business  of  furnish-
ing employment  for  our  poor  people,
so  that  our  streets  shall  not  be  filled
with  idle  men  and  boys,  has  no  doubt
pressed,  and  will  continue  to  press  it-
self upon  the  minds  of  the  leading
men  of  this  Territory.  Bat  in  com*
parisou  with  the  magnitude  of  this
question  elsewhere,  it  seems  to  sink
into  insignificance  here-  It  is  a  mat*
ter  of  small  moment,  comparatively
speaking,  in  this  Territory ;  because
the  great  balk  of  the  people  have  em*
ploy  men  t,  and  can  easily  furnish
themselves  with  employment.  How-
ever, this  is  a  matter  that  should  re-
ceive attention  and  from  those,  too,
who  care  for  the  people  and  have
their  welfare  at  heart.  No  doubt
everything  will  be  done  that  should
be  to  preserve  good  government
throughout  this  Territory,  and
throughout  all  these  valleys  which
are  inhabited  by  the  Latter-day  Saints.
The  fact  is,  the  time  will  come,  con-
cerning which  there  has  been  so  much
said  in  the  past,  when  it  will  devolve
upon  the  people  of  these  mountains
to  maintain  good  government,  to  up-
hold constitutional  rights  j  and  we
are  receiving  the  training  necessary
to  fit  and  prepare  us  for  that  great
and  glorious  destiny.  I  have  no
doubt  that  the  day  will  come,  and
come  speedily,  when  Utah  will  be
looked  to,  as  an  example  of  good  gov-
ernment, and  that  the  condition  of
affairs  in  this  Territory  will  be  point-
ed to  as  an  example  for  other  commu-
nities and  other  societies  to  imitate
with  advantage  to  themselves  and  the
country  at  large.  There  is  every  in-
ducement  therefore  for  us,  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  to  continue  to  persevere


in  the  direction  in  which  we  are
going,

I  have  no  doubt  many  of  you  would
be  surprised  if  you  knew  the  interest
that  is  being  taken,  outside  of  our
Territory,  in  our  affairs.  When  the
news  of  the  death  of  President  Young
reached  the  east,  there  was,  I  might
say,  a  general  expectation  that  rival
claimants  to  the  power  he  wielded
would  arise,  that  dissensions  would
ensue  and  that  the  work  of  disintegra*  '
tion  would  commence  and  the  speedy
overthrow  of  the  system  soon  follow,
I  suppose  t  have  been  spoken  ta
hundreds  of  timej  upon  this  point
and  men  seem  surprised  that  this  has
not  been  the  result.  Many  have  said
to  me,  "  Your  affairs  seem  to  go  on
prosperously,  notwithstanding  the
death  of  your  great  leaden"  Yes.
«  Well,  we  scarcely  expected  this
would  be  the  case ;  we  have  heard  so
much  said  through  the  newspapers
concerning  the  probability  of  dissen-
sions in  your  midst  and  quarrels  over
the  leadership,  that  we  were  expecting
yon  would  have  trouble."  I  have  told
them  invariably  that  President  Young
had  all  his  life-time  acknowledged  that
the  qualities  and  powers  ke  possessed
he  owed  to  what  the  world  call  "  Mor-
monism  that  he  was  not  the  crea-
tor of  w  Mormon  ism,"  but  he  himself
was  the  product  of  it,  and  that  this
would  continue  to  increase,  no  matter
how  many  leaders  might  die  or  pass
away.  The  results  which  have  fol-
lowed the  deeease  of  President  Young
have  given  to  thinking  men  a  higher
idea  of  the  strength  and  power  of
this  system.  It  assumes  a  different
position  in  their  minds.  The  idea
now  begins  to  prevail  that  it  is  not
entirely  dependent  upon  the  life  or
the  ability  of  any  single  individual ;
and  I  think  the  death  of  President
Young  has  had  the  effect  also  to  cause
men  to  pause,  and  to  look  upon  the
|  work  a  little  differently. He  was  the


target  at  which  every  arrow  wns  aimed
he  was  the  object  of  every  plot  and
scheme ;  every  combination  for  evil
had  for  its  object,  his  destruction  or
his  embarrassment  His  withdrawal
from  the  scene  spoiled  these  combina-
tions, and  brought  these  plots  to
naught.  To  this  I  attribute  the
quiet  of  the  past  season.  Although
I  have  often  been  at  Washington  for
the  past  20  years,  and  have  spent  a
considerable  portion  of  my  time  there
for  a  number  of  years  past,  I  have  never
seen  less  of  the  disposition  on  the  part
of  public  men  to  take  adverse  meas-
ures against  the  people  of  Utah
Territory  than  there  [has  been  this
season..  The  feeling  has  been  to  let
us  alone  for  the  present ;  and  although
there  were  emissaries  seutdown  from
here  who  labored  very  diligently  to
stir  np  feeling  and  to  secure  action
against  the  people  of  Utah,  their  ef-
forts scarcely  created  a  ripple  upon
the  surface  of  political  affairs,  and
they  attracted  no  attention  outside
of  the  committees,  to  whom  they
addressed  themselves.  Though  it
is  unpleasant  upon  some  accounts  to
have  men  there  who  are  circulating
all  manner  of  falsehood  about  the  peo-
ple of  Utah  to  gain  their  ends,
they  have  their  uses.  They  create
discussion.  They  stir  one  up,  and
their  presence  and  opposition  fur-
nish opportunities  to  talk  to  com-
mittees apd  members  about  Utah
affairs,  which  otherwise  the  Dele-
gate would  not  have.  Such  dis-
cussions made  things  lively  in  the
committee  rooms,  but.  outside  of  the
committees  there  was  not  a  feeling
that  I  could  discover  particularly
hostile  to  Utah.  This  is  a  remark-
able condition  of  affairs ;  ond  I  at-
tribute it  in  part  to  the  effect  that
the  death  of  President  Young  has
had  upon  the  public  mind  through-
out the  entire  country.

I  do  not  think  there  is  any  less


hostility  against  the  trnth  ;  I  do  not
i  think  that  Belial  has  lost  any  of
his  hatred  to  the  Lord ;  but  the
Lord  in  his  wisdom  has  permitted
a  feeling  of  this  kind  to  grow  up,
and  is  overruling  it  for  his  own
purpose,

I  have  said  the  eyes  of  the  people
are  upon  us;  they  are  watching  us
and  great  hopes  are  entertained
concerning  us  by  many  people  who
are  not  of  us.  We  are  looked  upon
as  the  pioneers  in  many  reforms.
The  ladies,  as  you  are  aware,  have
lately  been  agitating  in  Congress
their  question — Woman's  Bights.
Among  other  ladies  who  argued
their  cause  before  the  general  com-
mittees of  the  Senate  and  the  House,
was  a  sister  of  the  Rev.  Henry
Ward  Beecher — Mrs.  Isabella  Beech-
er  Hooker,  a  lady  of  character  and
great  ability.  It  was  most  gratify-
ing to  me  to  hear  the  tribute  that
these  ladies  paid  to  the  women  of
Utah;  not  that  they  sympathized
with  plural  marriage,  for  they  dis-
avowed their  sympathy  with  it;
but  they  begin  to  recognize,  as  they
never  have  until  quite  recently,
the  true  position  that  the  men  and
women  of  this  Territory  occupy
upon  this  question.  Indeed,  I
heard  more  than  one  say,  and
among  them  was  one  very  promi-
nent lady,  that  if  there  had  to  be  a
choice,  she  would  prefer  plural  mar-
riage than  to  have  the  condition  of
affairs  which  exists  in  their  commun-
ities. There  seems  to  have  been  a
good  deal  of  light  thrown  upon  this
subject :  and  our  sisters  here,  through
their  publication,  the  **  Woman's  Ex-
ponent,'* as  well  as  other  channels  of
communication,  have  greatly  aided
in  this  matter.  Their  efforts  are
commendable,  and  are  already  be-
ginning to  have  their  good  eflects  in
the  States  among  their  sisters;  and  I
am  pleased  to  be  able  to  bear  this


testimony.  When  the  question  of
legislation  for  Utah  was  argued,  the
committee  rooms  were  thronged  to
listen  to  my  argument  upon  the  sub-
ject ;  and  on  one  occasion  two  ladies
took  part  in  the  discussion  against
the  bills  urged  by  our  enemies  and  in
favor  of  the  rights  of  the  women  of
Utah.  A  knowledge  of  the  true  con-
dition of  affairs  in  this  Territory  is
gradually  growing,  and  although  it
may  bo  bat  slowly,  it  is  of  faster
growth  than  we  generally  imagine.
This  is  especially  true  of  that  much
abused  principle  called  plural  marri-
age. It  is  becoming  recognized  in
its  true  light,  and  people  are  beginn-
ing, as  I  nevar  heard  them  before  in
my  experience,  to  talk  about  it  and
reflect  upon  it,  often  alluding  to  it  in
a  way  that  shows  that  a  better  under-
standing of  the  subject  is  steadily
spreading  among  the  people.  And
there  is  a  reason  for  this:  this  ques-
tion has  been  so  much  agitated.  It
is  a  remarkable  fact  that  evei  y  public-
ation against  this  doctrine  of  theLat*
ter-day  Saints  has  the  effect  to  spread
the  knowledge  of  it  among  the  peoplfe
and  it  makes  men  and  women  reflect
upon  it.  Our  efforts  alone  would  not
be  attended  with  the  results  that  are
now  witnessed.  But  every  man  that
has  published  articles  against  it, or  lec-
tured or  written  books  or  made  any
effort  against  it,  has  helped  to  propa-
gate the  knowledge  of  it;  they  have
been  missionaries  in  its  favor.  And  no
true  doctrine  need  ever  fear  being  as-
sailed and  denounced;  for  it  will
emerge  from  the  conflict  brighter  and
better  understood  than  it  otherwise
would  appear-  Every  man  who  has
gone  down  to  Washington  from  here
to  tight  us  has  made  men  in  Congress
think  about  us  and  talk  about  us,  and
has  made  editors  write  about  us.  They
have,  without  designing  it,  helped  to
disseminate  a  knowledge  of  our  cause.
The  more  the  "  Mormon  "  question ,


as  it  is  termed,  is  agitated,  the  better
it  is  for  us ;  the  more  it  is  fought,  the
more  it  is  written  against  and  talked
about,  the  more  that  Congress  is
stirred  up  to  take  steps  against  it,
the  better  the  principles  of  our  faith
are  understood ;  because  there  are
some  men  and  some  women  who  re-
flect upon  these  things,  and  who  will
contrast  that  which  they  hear  of  us,
with  that  which  exists  in  their  midst.
And  when  they  see  a  man  stand  up
boldly  and  say,  "We  believe  in  plural
marriage  ;  we  do  not  believe  in  pro*
stitution  ;  we  do  not  suffer  women  to
become  the  slaves  of  men's  lusts ;
but  believe  they  ought  to  become
honored  wives  and  mothers,  and  that
children  ought  to  be  educated  and
provided  for  and  called  by  the  name
of  their  father,  and  at  their  fathers
death  his  property  be  equally  divided
among  them  even  though  their
mothers  should  be  plural  wives."
When  they  hear  this,  they  cannot  help
thinking  about  such  a  condition  of
affairs;  and  they  say,  there  is  a  moral
courage  which  these  people  evince
in  this  matter  that  is  admirable.  I
have  had  it  said  to  me  often  times,
by  both  sexes,  that  it  is  better  that
we  should  live  as  we  do,  than  such
practices  as  exist  elsewhere  should
come  in  our  midst.

So  that,  as  has  often  been  said,
everything  done  against  us  is  over-
ruled for  the  good  and  spread  of  the
work  of  God.

The  subject  of  plural  marriage  is
always  an  interesting  subject,  and  it
is  made  still  more  so  by  the  constant
attacks  made  upon  it,  and  the  misre-
presentations made  concerning  it-
Whenever  people  meet  with  a  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  it  is  almost  sure  to  be
the  first  topic  broached.  The  opinion
which  some  entertain  who  take  their
views  from  the  slanderous  report!
published  about  us,  is  that  wc  are
a  licentious  people,  who  take  wires


38  JOURNAL  OF

*o  gratify  Inst.  Such  persons,  if
reasonably  honest,  are  soon  made  to
reflect  and  to  modify  their  views  by
asking  them  a  few  questions.  A  pro-
minent gentleman  with  whom  I  re-
cently conversed,  entertained  ihat
opinion.  I  said  to  him,  after  con-
versing a  little  while :  Sir,  you  be-
lieve the  people  of  Utah  are  bad  and
licentious,  and  that  they  degrade
women  by  their  system  of  plural
marriage,  Let  me  ask  you,  if  their
purposes  were  only  sensual,  have  (hey
any  occasion  in  this  day  to  marry
women  ?  Could  they  not  accomplish
sensual  ends  much  easier,  cheaper,
and  without  creating  any  especial
remark  by  not  marrying  women  and
Dot  caring  for  and  educating  and  le-
gitimatizing their  children  ?  There
are  practices  which  prevail  in  society,
and  which  are  not  unpopular  if  a
certain  degree  of  secrecy  be  observed
which  a  licentious  people  could  avail
themselves  of,  without  the  trouble,
care,  expense  and  responsibility  of
marriage.  What  is  the  crime  of
which  ihe  people  of  Utah  are  accused  ?
It  is  that  of  marrying  women  !  It
is  not  that  of  seducing  or  debauching
them.  All  the  pains  and  penalties
inserted  in  bills  before  Congress  for
the  punishment  of  the  "Mormon"
people  are  affixed  to  the  marriage  of
women.  This  is  made  a  crime,  and
because  of  it,  it  is  proposed  to  punish
men.  Not  one  word  of  condemna-
tion, nor  penalty  of  any  character,  is
proposed  for  the  seducer,  or  the  vile
betrayer  of  female  innocence;  he  is
to  walk  up  to  the  polls  and  vote  un-
challenged ;  but  the  man  who  mar-
ries women,  aud  maintains  them
honorably  and  virtuously,  sustaining
family  and  parental  relations  in  all
purity  and  sacred  ness,  is  to  be  dis-
franchised and  visited  with  other
pains  and  penalties!  You  will  per-
ceive, therefore  that  the  **  Mormon  "
people  are  either rot  a  licentious


DISCOURSES.

people  or  they  are  the  most  foolish
in  the  world.  No  one  ever  charges
them  with  a  lack  of  shrewdness  or
prudence.  Such  a  charge  would  be
utterly  at  variance  with  all  their
known  characteristics.  If  they  were
not  a  conscientious  people,  with  strong
moral  and  religious  convictions,  they
would  not  risk  becoming  martyrs,  as
they  do,  for  the  sake  of  marrying
women,  when,  if  tliey  followed  the
usual  practice  of  the  age,  they  could
get  them  without  marrying.

He  frankly  acknowledged  that
what  I  had  said  had  given  him  a  new
view  of  the  case,  and  he  admitted
that  if  the  gratifaction  of  sensual  de-
sires were  our  object,  we  could  reach
that  withont  marriage  and  without
exciting  any  particular  odium.  The
fact  is,  illicit  connexions  are  winked
at  and  overlooked  by  very  many  people
in  the  world  while  they  are  kept  from
public  knowledge ;  they  only  excite
scandal  and  unfavorable  comment
when  the  parties  to  them  are  so  un-
fortunate as  to  become  known.

A  reply  of  Bro,  Hooper  and  my-
self, which  we  are  credited  as  having
made  to  inquirers  who  were  curious  to
know  respecting  our  domestic  rela-
!  tions,  is  often  quoted  and  created  some
amusement  in  Washington  City.
Both  of  us  have  doubtless  made  re-
marks similar  to  that  quoted  ;  the  re-
ply, however,  is  not  original  with  us,
hut  with  Bro.  Horace  S.  El  dredge.
Upon  one  occasion,  while  purchasing
machinery  in  the  East,  he  called  upon
a  firm  in  providence,  Rhode  Island,
to  whom  he  brought  a  letter  of  intro-
duction. One  of  the  members  of  the
firm,  after  carrying  him  in  his  carri-
age to  see  the  various  objects  of  inter-
est in  the  city,  brought  him  back  to
his  place  of  business  and  introduced
him  to  his  partner.  This  gentleman
had  a  number  of  inquires  to  make
respecting  Utah  and  its  people,  and
soon learned  that Bro,  Eldredgs


GOD'S  power,  etc


39


was n "  Mormon." After  stating  [
that  he  understood  that  the  "  Hor-  i
moos"  believed  in  marry insr  more
than  one  wife,  to  which  bro,  ESdredge  '
replied  in  the  affirmitive,  he  asked  if
he  himself  had  more  than  otie,  to  j
which  he  again  responded  affirmative-
ly. He  then  asked  how  many  he
had. To  this  bro.  Eldredge  replied  :  !
"  I  have  such  a  plenty  of  my  own
that  I  have  no  occasion  to  trouble  my
neighbors* ;  and  that  is  more  than  a
great  many  in  the  land  of  steady
habits  can  say/' This  was  a  home
shot. His  partner  laughed  heartily.
Knowing  the  other's  character,  he
could  appreciate  its  applicability  to
him. After  getting  his  reply,  the  ,
gentleman  had  no  more  questions  to
a^k,  and  soon  made  an  excuse  to  go
oat -Many  who  have  heard  of  this  i
reply}  think  the  idea  embodied  in  it  a
capital  one,  for  it  is  not  uncommon
in  many  places  for*other  men's  wives
to  receive  attentions  which  should
be  only  tendered  to  them  by  their
husbands,

I  desire  greatly  to  see  this  people
prosper  ami  increase  in  every  tiling
which  will  make  them  the  favored


people  of  God,  I  want  to  see  ns  be^
come  a  strong  people,  strong  iu  our
virtues;  looking  after  our  children,
and  bringing  them  up  in  the  fear  of
God,  and  teaching  them  good  morals
and  good  precepts  ;  whilst  we  endea-
vor to  put  down  those  evil  practices
that  are  creeping  in,  such  as  smoking
and  chewing  tobacco,  using  the  name
of  the  Lord  in  vain,  and  also  profane
and  improper  language,  and  to  see
that  our  boys  and  girls  are  educated
in  everythiug  that  will  make  them
great  and  noble.  It  is  the  great  de-
sire of  my  life  to  see  this  people
become  all  that  the  Lord  desires  u3
to  be.  Cut  when  I  saw  how  few
there  were  in  this  'Rabernacle  yester-
day, few  compared  to  the  attendanse
this  morning,  I  felt  the  reproofs  that
were  made  by  brothers  Pratt  and
Woodruff  were  well- timed,  and  ought
to  be  taken  to  heart  by  all  of  us,  and
the  disposition  be  encouraged  to  be
more  attentive  to  our  duties.

That  the  Lord  may  ble^s  you,  and
bless  all  who  belong  to  His  Israel,  is
my  prayer,  in  the  oame  ot  Jesus,
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  Logan,  Sunday  Afternoon*,  August  4th,  1878.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gtbbs.)

COlVs  POWER  IN  ALL  THINGS — KfNGDOM  OF  GOD — CO- OPERATION,  A
STEPPING  STONE  TO  THE  UNITED  ORDER  —  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  —
NATIONAL  TROUBLES — MISSIONARY LABORS — SCHOOLS  AND  TEACHERS.


I  have  been  a  good  deal  interested  am  very  much  pleased  to  see  you
in  the  remarks  made  by  my  breth-  meet  in  this  beautiful  house,  and  in
re:i  ;  and  in  connection  with  them,  I  ,  possession  of  the  privileges  you  enjoy;


40


JOURNAL QY  DISCOURSES.


and  you  have  a  right  to  enjoy  them,
because  you  have  made  them  your-
selves. And  then  again,  you  did  not
make  them  yourselves,  only  as  God
assisted  you.  I  think  there  is  a  mod-
ern Scripture  which  reads:  "Against
none  ia  His  wrath  kindled,  save  those
who  do  not  acknowledge  his  hand  in  all
things"  And  there  are  some  other
principles  connected  with  these  mat-
ters that  are  of  a  good  deal  of  import-
ance to  us,  One  of  the  old  prophets,
in  speaking1  of  the  people  and  there
relationship  to  God,  Buys:  *l  The
Lord  is  our  God,  the  Lord  is  our
king,  the  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord
is  our  law-giver,  and  he  shall  rule
over  us"  If  we  could  really  place
ourselves  in  this  position,  and  feel
that  we  live  in  God,  that  we  move  in

God,  and  that  from  him  we  derive
our  being,  and  that  lie  holds  the  issues
of  life,  and  every  blessing  we  enjoy
whether  of  a  tern  pond  or  spiritual
nature,  either  referring  to  this  world
or  the  world  to  come,  proceeds  from
God.  If  we,  as  a  community,  could
comprehend  our  position  in  regard  to
this  graud,  lending,  and  very  import-
ant feature  of  our  faith,  we  should  be
prepared  to  receive  greater  blessings
at  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,  and  be
prepared  also  to  magnify  that  great
and  holy  priesthood  which  he  has
placed  upon  us.  We  should  be  pre-
pared more  understand ingly  to  build
temples,  and  to  operate  in  them  ;  we
should  be  prepared  to  stand  as  saviors
upon  Mount Zion,  and  to  operate  with
God  and  the  holy  angels,  and  with
apostles  and  prophets  wno  have  lived
before,  and  with  the  holy  priesthood
in  the  eternal  worlds,  as  well  as  in
this  world,  for  the  accomplishment
of  the  purposes  of  God  tor  the  re-
demption and  salvation  of  the  living
and  the  dead  ;  tor  the  salvation  and
exaltation  of  ourselves,  our  progeni-
tors and  our  posterity.  But  we
ueed  to  realize  and  comprehend  our


position  and  relationship  to  the  Al-
mighty,

Some  of  the  brethren  who  have
addressed  you  have  spoken  upon  our
political  rights,  which  is  all  very
correct.  It  would  be  a  poor  tiling
indeed,  if,  after  God  has  gathered  us
from  among  the  nations  of  the  earth
to  place  His  name  upon  us,  and  to
establish  and  build  up  His  kiugdum
upon  the  earth,  we  should  be  under
the  necessity  of  calling  in  the  devil  to
help  us  to  do  the  Lord's  work.  It  is
one  of  those  incongruities  which  the
reasonably  intelligent  and  reflective
mind  will  necessarily  disown.  We
are  gathered  here,  not  in  the  interests
of  any  political  party  or  any  essential
organization,  other  than  that  which
God  dictated  and  ordained.  Why
are  we  here  to-day?  It  is  because
the  heavens  have  been  opened,  be-
cause angels  have  appeared,  because
the  revelations  of  God's  will  have
been  made  known  to  man,  it  is  be*
c>iuse  God  and  the  holy  angels,  with
the  eternal  priesthood,  have  thought
proper  to  manifest  in  these  last  days
the  f  ullness  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
which  Gospel  has  been  proclaimed
to  us  in  the  different  nations  from
whence  we  came.  And  having  yield-
ed obedience  to  its  first  principles  we
hare  gathered  here.  We  did  not
come  here  as  being  associated  particu-
larly with  any  colonization  scheme ;
we  did  not  come  here  because  of  the
richness  or  fertility  of  the  soil;  we
did  not  come  here  because  there  was
gold  and  silver  in  our  mountains.  We
had  no  such  idea*  We  came  here
because  we  believed  Unit  the  Lord
had  restored  the  everlasting  Gospel ;
because  he  had  renewed  the  everlast-
ing covenant;  and  because  he  had
sent  forth  the  proclamation,  "  Gather
my  people  together,  those  who  have
made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifice,"
and  because  we  had  been  baptized  into
Christ,  and  put  on  Christ. This  is


god's  power,  etc.


the  reason  of  our  being  here ;  and,
therefore,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  it  be-
comes our  first  and  most  paramount
duty  to  build  up  the  church  and  king-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth.

Now,  we  all  believe  this*  And
there  is  a  number  of  duties  that
seem  to  devolve  naturally  upon  us,
such  as  to  prepare  buildings  like  this,
that  we  may  meet  in  to  attend  to  the
worship  of  God  ;  and  to  build  temples
in  which  to  administer  the  ordinances
of  God  Who  for  ?  The  living  and
the  dead  :  for  ourselves,  our  progeni-
tors, and  our  posterity.  And  that
we  might  operate  and  co-op*:rafe  with
the  priesthood  behind  the  vail,  in
the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes
toward  the  human  family.  This  is
the  kind  of  labor  we  are  engaged  in.
But  I  occasionally  think  we  are
something  like  the  disciples  who
lived  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  on
the  Asiatic  Continent.  It  is  said  of
them,  that  they  saw  in  part,  and
prophesied  in  part,  and  of  course
comprehended  in  part.  But  they
thought  then,  and  we  think  now,
that  when  that  which  is  in  part  is
done  away,  and  that  which  is  perfect
is  come — and  which  the  Lord  is  try-
ing  to  introduce  as  fast  as  he  can —
then  shall  we  see  as  we  are  seen,  and
til  en  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known  ;
then  we  shall  comprehend  as  God
comprehends  in  relation  to  all  of  these
subjects  which  we  have  been  reflect-
ing upon  and  praying  about.  But
we  only  comprehend  in  part  art  the
present  time.  We  are  something
like  our  little  children — when  they
begin  to  walk  a  little,  they  make
awkward  stumbles,  oftentimes  falling
down  and  scratching  themselvos.
Oar  Father  watches  over  us,  the  same
as  our  mothers  did  when  we  were
babies.  You  all  know  what  watchful
care  a  fond  mother  bestows  upon  her
little  child  ;  how  anxious  she  is
about  it*  safety  and  welfare.  But


our  children  frequently  think  they
are  much  smarter  than  their  parents.
They  would  think  nothing  at  all  of
taking  hold  of  a  razor  and  cutting
their  fingers  with  it,  or  running  over
rough  and  dangerous  ground.  We
are,  in  many  respects,  a  good  deal
like  them.  We  see  in  part  and  com-
prehend in  part;  and  some  of  us  have
been  so  long  steeped  in  the  supersti-
tions tind  traditions  of  the  age,  and
are  imbued  with  false  leligions  and
political  ideas  and  notions,  and  so
inoculated  by  the  woild,  that  we
hardly  know  what  is  right  and  what
is  wrong.  We  want  a  little
of  God  in  the  kingdom  of  God,
a  little  of  man,  and,  I  am  sorry
to  say,  a  little  of  the  devil  in
the  kingdom  of  God,  so  that  we
might  all  mix  up  together  and  be
hail  fellows  well  met,  God  and  all
creation  together.  That  is  not  the
calculation  of  the  Almighty.  He
has  called  us  together ;  what  to  do  ?
Let  me  tell  you  what  the  prophet
said  :  "  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,
and  two  of  a  family,  and!  will  bring
you  to  Zion."  And  what  will  he  do
with  those  he  gets  there?  "And  I
will  give  you  pastors  according  to
mine  heart,  which  shall  feed  you  with
knowledge  and  understanding."  Who
would  give  them  pastors?  The  Lord.
One  of  the  prophets,  in  speaking  of
this  time,  when  people  should  be
very  much  better  than  we  are  to-day,
says  ;  %  And  they  shall  be  all  taught
of  God.,T  But  some  of  us  would  like
a  little  infidelity  with  it,  a  little  of
this  world's  politics,  a  little  ot  the
theories  of  men,  and  a  little  false  tra-
dition with  it ;  and  it  isdifiicult  for  us,
with  all  our  l  radii  ions  and  erroneous
training  which  we  have  inherited
from  our  forefathers,  and  which  we
have  been  brought  up  in  from  our
early  childhood,  to  divest  ourselves
from  them,  and  listen  to  the  pure
word  of  God,  and  be  governed  by


42


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  laws  of  life.

We  talk  sometimes  ahoutthe  thing:
we  call  the  kingdom  of  God*  Now,
if  it  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  is  not
the  kingdom  of  man  ;  it  is  not  our
kingdom  only  so  far  as  we  are  sub-
ject to  its  laws,  which  are  the  laws  of
God.  We  have  made  attempts  lately,
under  the  direction  of  our  venerable
and  respected  President  Young,  who
has  left  us  and  gone  behind  the  vail,
to  organize  the  church  of  God,  and
Ibis  organization  has  spread,  more  or
less,  through  the  Territory,  But  it
is  a  good  deal  with  us  as  it  was  with
the  boy  in  Salt  Lake  City.  A  stran-
ger, walking  along,  said,  «  Boy,  are
you  a  Mormon  ?"  The  boy  answered:
"  No,  sir,  I  am  not,  but  dad  is,"
"Gli,  he  is  ?"  "  Yes,  sir  ;  but  he  does
not  potter  much  at  it/'  It  is  a  good
deal  .so  with  many  of  us.  We  have
our  individual  affairs  and  our  own
operations,  which  occupy  our  atten-
tion, and  we  have  little  time  to  at-
tend to  the  things  ot  God.  We  have
an  organization  of  our  priesthood ;  we
have  our  stakes  organized  with  Pre-
si  dent,  with  High  Council,  with
Bishops  and  their  Counselors,  and
Priests,  Ten c hers  and  Deacons  ;  find
we  have  our  Seventies7  quorums,  our
High  Priests  Quorums,  andourElders*
Quorums;  all  of  which  are  in  accor*
darce  with  the  order  that  exists  in
heaven.  But  how  little  many  of  us
think  of  this.  Yet  we  fire  doing
pretty  well,  as  has  been  remarked
here.  I  have  no  feeling  of  complaint
in  my  mind  about  the  doings  of  the
people  generally.  I  think  that  yon
have  manifested  a  zeal,  liberality  and
generosity  in  the  building  of  this
house,  that  is  praiseworthy  and  com-
mendable ;  and  I  think  you  have 1
manifested  the  same  in  the  progress
that  is  exhibited  in  the  building  of
your  temple  here.  But  these  are
only  very  small  parts  of  the  duties
of  this  priesthood  which  we  have  taken  '


upon  us ;  very  little  parts  indeed.
How  manyof  our  Bishops  are  there
who  dn  not  comprehend  really  and
truly  that  they  hold  their  priesthood
from  God  ?  that  they  administer  in
the  cities  of  Zion,  or  ought  to,  by
virtue  of  that  priesthood  ;  and  there-
fore ought  to  be  fathers  over  tho
people  over  whom  they  preside,  hav-
ing self  and  its  interest  in  abeyance,
laboring  as  good  shepherds  in  the  in-
terests of  their  Hocks,  and  thus  oper-
ating in  it  according  to  their  ability;
but  a  great  many  do  not  comprehend
the  position  of  things  in  relation  to
these  matters.  If  a  man  is  appointed
a  Bishop,  is  it  that  he  may  aggrandize
himself  ?  No,  Is  it  that  through  his
position  he  nu\y  monopolize  certain
interests  ?  No.  It  is  expected  of
him  that  he  will  operate  in  the  inter-
est  of  the  church  of  God,  and  mora
especially  in  the  interests  of  the  com-
munity over  whom  tie  presides.  That
is  the  wav  I  nnderstand  this  matter,
and  these  are  some  leading  features,
by  which  a  Bishop  ought  to  Uk  g^ir-
erned.  And  in  our  Bishop's  Courts,
when  cases  are  brought  before  them,
they  ooght  to  he  as  free  from  partial-
ity in  their  judgments  as  the  Gods
in  the  Eternal  worlds  are,  and  feel  to
administer  justice  and  righteousness,
and  seek  for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  ac-
tuate and  govern  them  in  all  of  their
decisions.  And  the  same  spirit  and
feeling  ought  to  actuate  in  the  High
Council.  They  are  making  a  record
of  tyhich  there  is  a  record  kept  in
heaven  ;  and  so  are  the  Bishops.  And
when  you  arc  administering  in  any  of
these  offices,  God  will  hold  you  tu  an
account,  and  the  priesthood  on  the
earth  will  hold  you  to  an  account;
and  you  are  now  writing  a  history  in
indelible  characters  that  never  can  bo
erased.  If  for  every  word  and  secret
;.ct  all  men  shall  be  brought  to
judgment,  how  much  more  will  the
public  acts  of  pablic  men  be  brought


god's  power,  etc,


43


into  account  before  God  and  before
the  holy  priesthood.

Here,  for  instance,  is  tbe  President
and  his  Counselors,  who  preside  over
this  Stela.  They  ought  to  feel  inter-
ested in  the  welfare  of  every  man,
woman  and  child  in  the  Stake,  so  far
as  they  come  under  their  observation;
and  these  men,  by  virtue  of  their
high  calling,  ought  to  be  full  of  life
and  the  Spirit  and  revelations  of  God,
to  comprehend  things  asthey  are  pre-
sented to  them  and  that  they  may
administer  justice  in  righteousness,
and  rule  over  the  people  in  that  way
and  manner  that  will  secure  the  favor
and  approbation  of  the  Most  High ;
always  seeking  first  the  interests  of
the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  flock
that  God  has  given  them  the  over-
sight of.

Now  I  will  mention  some  things
here  that  my  attention  has  been
called  to,  in  regard  to  union,  and
union  of  effort.  We  have  had  a  great
deal  said  about  the  United  Order,
and  about  our  becoming  one.  And
some  people  would  wish — Oh,  how
they  do  wish,  they  could  get  around
that  principle,  if  they  could !  But  you
Latter-day  Saints,  yau  cannot  get
around  it;  you  cannot  dig  around  it;
it  will  rise  before  you  every  step  you
take,  for  God  is  determined  to  carry
out  his  purposes,  and  to  build  up  his
Zion  ;  and  those  who  will  not  walk
into  line  be  will  move  oat  of  the  way
and  no  place  will  be  found  for  them  in
Israel  Hear  it,  you  Latter-day  Saints
for  I  say  to  you  iu  the  name  of  Is-
rael's God  that  it  is  a  revelation  from
the  Most  High,  and  you  cannot  get
around  it  There  seems  to  be  diffi-
culties in  the  way  at  present ;  but  we
shall  surmount  these.  The  only  way
for  us  to  do  now,  in  consideration  of
the  weaknesses  and  infir mites  with
which  we  are  surrounded,  is  to  do  the
very  best  we  can,  and  advance  those
interests  as  near  as  we  can,  practi-


cally and  in  their  spirit  and  essence,
until  we  can  bring  about  the  thing
that  God  designs,  for  men  are  not
prepared  for  these  things  yet  in  full.
But  we  are  in  part,  as  they  of  old
prophesied  in  part,  and  understood  ia
part ;  and  by  and  by  that  which  ia
perfect  in  relation  to  these  matters
will  be  introduced.  Joseph  Smith
tried  to  introduce  this  order,  but  such
was  the  corruption,eovetousness,  fraud
and  injustice  of  men,  that  he  found
it  almost  impossible  to  do  i  t  This  was
the  idea  he  conveyed,  if  not  the  pre-
cise words  that  he  used  in  speaking
upon  this  subject.  We  have  made
various  attempts  to  do  what  the
Prophet  Joseph  tried  to  do.  In
some  places  they  are  doing  very  well,
and  in  other  places  very  poorly ;  I
can  tell  you  this  much  about  it,  it  is
pretty  hard  work  to  make  sheep  out
of  goats.  Did  any  of  you  ever  try  it?
Let  me  quote  yon  a  passage  of  our
Savior's :  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,
and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow
me/ — "A  stranger  will  they  not
follow,  but  will  flee  from  him ;  for
they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers.*
And  he  prayed  to  the  Father  concern*
ing  them:  "Holy  Father,  keep  through
thine  own  name  those  whom  thoa
hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one
as  we  are."  "  That  they  all  may  be
one,  as  thou,  Father*  art  in  me,  and  1
in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in
us  :  that  the  world  may  believe  that
thou  hast  sent  me."  Or,  in  other
words,  God  sent  him  and  his  people
knew  it  and  knew  him,  but  the  world
believed  it  not ;  but  when  this  oneness
should  be  brought  about,  the  world
would  know  it  And  when  we  be-
come one  in  all  thing?,  our  condition
will  be  a  spectacle  for  God,  angels
and  men  to  gaze  upon  with  delight :
and  the  world  then  will  know  that
God  is  with  us,at;d  that  we  are  his
Israel,  and  that  he  is  our  guide,  our
shield,  our  deliverer.


44


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


There  are  some  things  that  Brother  |
Lorenzo  Snow  is  doing  that  are  very
creditable  ;  but  it  13  not  the  United
Order.  He  ia  working  with  the  peo-
ple something  after  the  same  princi-
ple that  our  sisters  teach  the  little
ones  how  to  walk  ;  they  stand  them
in  a  sort  of  chair  which  rolls  along,
and  the  babies  appear  delighted,  they  ,
think  they  are  walking.  But  we  I
have  not  learned  how  to  walk  vet.  1
And  then  there  ^re  other  institutions
scattered  throughout  the  Territory,
having  the  same  laudable  object  in
yiew,  many  of  them  have  most  ex*
eel  lent  principles  among  them,  and
they  manifest  a  most  admirable
spirit;  but  they  only  see  in  part,  and
know  and  comprehend  in  part  And
you  here  are  doing  pretty  well  in
some  things  ;  but  some  of  you  are
like  it  was  said  by  President  Young
of  Brother  Snow,  that  he  had  gut
the  folks  into  the  United  Order  with-
out their  knowing  it.  You  hare
hardly  got  one  foot  in  yet;  but  you
are  aiming  at  progress,  and  are  n>a Ic-
ing some  little  advancement.  For
instance,  I  hear  you  have  a  kind  of
commercial  bu&iuess  here  in  connec-
tion with  some  other  interests  that
ycu  are  trying  to  unite  on.  This  is
very  proper,  and  it  is  proper  that
your  president  should  dictate  in  such
matters;  it  is  his  business  to  do  it,
and  it  is  your  duty  to  be  governed  by
such  principles  and  follow  such  in-
structions as  may  be  given  in  regard
to  these  things ;  and  keep  together,
and  let  this  individualism  be  held  in
abeyance,  and  let  us  feel  that  we  are
all  holding  the  holy  priesthood,  and
that  we  should,  as  brethren,operatein
the  interests  of  the  church  and  king-
dom of  God.  I  suppose  these  things
could  go  on  and  increase,  and  every-
thing in  regard  to  your  commercial
relations  could  be  operated  with  one
common  consent,  under  the  proper
authority  and  administration  of  the


priesthood,  and  you  all  labor  united-
ly, with  singleness  of  heart  before
God.  And  what  would  be  the  result?
You  could  not  be  preyed  upon  by
outsiders  ;  you  would  have  no  mid-
dle-men living  off  you,  and  what
speculations  might  be  entered  into
would  be  in  the  interest  of  the  com-
munity. And  then  you  could  ope-
rate in  reyard  to  your  farming  inter-
ests, and  the  disposing  of  your  grain,
and  cattle,  sheep,  etc.  And  operating
and  co-operating  together,  you  will  be
able  to  form  a  phalanx  in  this  valley
that  will  become  a  power  in  this  part
of  the  hind.  And  then  if  you  could
go  to  work  and  manufacture  your  own
leather  and  c!oth,and  make  your  own
boots  and  shoes  and  harness,  and
your  own  wearing  apparel,  men's  and
women's  wear,  as  they  are  doing  in
Brigham  City,  a  great  deal  of  reran-
| ,  iterative  employment  could  be  fur-
nished your  own  people,  and  it  would
be  the  means  af  putting  trades  in
the  hands  of  many  of  your  boys;
and  by  and  by  you  could  become  a
I  self-sustaining  people.  The  people  of
the  world  comprehend  this  principle
that  we  are  striving  to  accomplish
among  ourselves.  There  has  been
quite  a  talk  lately  about  something
i  that  has  existed  iu  France*  You  wilt
remember  that  in  the  hite  war  with
Germany,  the  French  nation  was  bad-
ly beaten,  and  an  enormous  debt  was
the  result,  which  the  French  Govern-
ment has  since  paid.  And  how?  The
first  Napoleon,  in  his  day,  introduced
what  was  called  at  that  time  the
41  Continental  System,"  which  meant
nothing  more  nor  less  thau  home
manufacture.  Every  encouragement
was  extended  to  the  people  of  that
nation  to  raise  and  manufacture
everything  possible,  that  they  might
become  independent  of  other  nations
for  their  sustenance*  And  this  was
the  secret  of  their  success  in  paying
their  indebtedness incurred  by  the


late  war.  We  have  had  enough  talk
about  these  things ;  the  only  thing
left  is  to  contrive  in  all  our  various
settle  men  ts,  to  introduce  such  things,
gradually  and  according  to  circum-
stances, as  will  subserve  the  interests
of  the  people  and  make  them  self-sus-
taining. And  then  let  the  people  '
throughout  the  Territory  do  the  same
thing,  and  we  shall  be  progressing  in
the  march  of  improvement,  and  get,
by  and  by,  to  what  is  called  the  Uni-
ted Order.  But  I  will  tell  you  one
thing  you  can  never  do — unless  you
can  get  the  United  Order  in  the
hearts  of  the  people,  you  can  never
plant  it  anywhere  else ;  articles  and
constitutions  amount  to  very  little;  we
must  have  this  law,  which  is  the  law
of  God,  written  in  our  hearts.  Many
men  associated  with  these  institutions
do  not  act  in  good  faith.  I  have  seen
men  unite  with  them,  thinking  that
they  could  get  a  very  easy  living  by
preying  upon  the  people  who  were
more  confiding  and  honorable  than
themselves.  Will  such  men  be  bles-
sed ?  No,  they  will  not  but  the  ifurse
of  God  will  rest  upon  them  for  try-
ing  to  pervert  his  purposes;  and  it
would  have  been  better  for  them
never  to  have  entered  into  such  con-
sections.  These  have  been  some  of
my  reflections  in  relation  to  these
matters.

We  have  here  Seventies  and  El-
ders. I  wish  to  talk  a  little  upon
some  things  associated  with  their
callings,  for  there  are  a  great  many
of  them  present  to-day.  I  suppose
the  great  majority  of  the  brethren
here  are  either  Seventies,  High
Priests,  or  Elders — three  prominent
quorums  in  the  church  and  kingdom
of  God,  Now  then,  what  are  we
called  to  do?  What,  for  an  instance,
is  the  duty  of  an  Apostle  ?  We  used
to  understand  it  to  be  our  duty  fo  go
to  the  ends  of  the  earth  and  preach
the  Gospel ;  and  I  may  say  we  have


traveled  hundreds  of  thousands  of
miles  to  accomplish  that  object.
But  some  of  us  are  getting  white-
headed.  As  I  was  saying  to  one  of
my  wives  a  little  while  ago,  Your
head  is  getting  a  little  grey,  but  mine
is  not  (it  is  white).  And  it  is  so
with  many  of  the  Twelve  ;  they  have
got  past  that  some  time  ago.  But
the  Twelve  went  out,  and  were  always
ready  to  go  out,  and  are  to-day  if
!  required.  And  I  will  say  of  my
brethren  who  are  ai'ound  me,  I  do  not
know  of  a  better  set  of  men  in  exis-
tence, nor  could  I  tell  where  they  can
be  found,  I  will  bear  this  testimony
concerning  my  brethren  of  the
Twelve.  They  are  ready  to  do  what
God  requires  of  them  at  any  time.
Now,  we  have  had  a  great  many
honorable  men  among  our  Seventies,
our  High  Priests  and  Elders,  who
have  gone  forth  with  alacrity,  as
have  the  Twelve,  filled  with  the  spirit
and  power  of  their  calling,  feeling  to
rejoice  all  the  day  long,  and  sing,
hallelujah,  the  Lord  is  our  God  ;  they
:  have  been  the  means  of  gathering  the
House  of  Israel,  as  they  are  to-day
in  these  mountains.  Shall  they  have
1  credit  among  Israel  ?  Yes,  and  so
will  they  have  credit  before  God  and
the  holy  angels.  Bat  the  Presidency
or  the  Twelve,  or  the  Seventies,  or
the  High  Priests,  or  the  Elders,  never
could  have  done  it,  unless  God  had
been  with  them.  They  went  forth
in  the  name  of  God,  bearing  precious
seed ;  and  they  returned  again  rejoic-
ing, bringing  many  sheaves  with  them.
And  God  will  hold  all  such  men  ia
honorable  remembrance  in  time  and
through  all  eternity.  But  a  great
many  are  getting  like  myself,  they
are  getting  old;  and  we  cannot  ex-
pect them  always  to  be  going.  But
then,  they  have  a  lot  of  boys  growing
up,  and  we  expect  the  boys  to  step
forward  and  take  the  place  of  their
fathers,  and  try  to  do  something  in


46  JOURNAL  OF

tbe  interests  of  the  church  and  king-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth.

Wo  have  been  passing  through
quite  a  scene  for  some  time  past,  and
the  world  generally  lias,  especially
the  European  nations,  since  about
1873.  There  was,  as  was  termed,  a
financial  panic,  and  it  has  grown
worse  and  worse  until  the  present
time ;  and  trouble  seems  to  be  spread-
ing and  growing  among  the  nations,
and  is  permeating  the  nation  with
which  we  are  associated.  It  is  now
workmen  against  employer — labor
versus  capital,  and  vice  versa,  instead
of  union,  harmony,  fellowship,  and
sympathy,  which  ought  always  to
exist  between  man  and  man.  And
we  have  felt  a  little  of  the  effects  of
the  monetary  crisis  here.  Then  the
grasshoppers  have  paid  us  a  visit  now
and  then;  and  the  codling  moth  is
among  us,  and  some  parts  of  our
valleys  have  suffered  considerably
from  winter  frosts.  And  1  have
thought  sometimes  that  if  the  people
did  not  understand  that  God  ruled,
they  would  find  out  by  and  by ;  for
I  believe  that  all  these  things  are
used  by  the  Lord  to  bring  the  people
to  reflection.  And  if  I  road  my  Bible
aright,  judgments  are  first  to  begin
at  the  house  of  God.  And  if  judg-
ments are  to  commence  at  the  house
of  God,  where  are  the  wicked  and
ungodly  to  appear  ?  There  is  a  terri-
ble time  approaching  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  also  this  nation,  worse
than  has  ever  entered  into  the  heart
of  man  to  conceive  of — war,  blood-
shed and  desolation,  mourning  and
misery,  pestilence,  famine,  and  earth-
quakes, aud  all  those  calamities  spo-
ken of  by  the  prophets  will  most
assuredly  be  fulfilled,  and  they  are
nearer  by  forty  years  than  they  were
forty  years  ago.  And  ifc  is  for  us,
Latter-day  Saints,  to  nnderstaud  the
position  we  occupy,  Among  the
honorable  men  I  have  referred  to,


DISCOURSES.

there  are  some  things  that  make  it
extremely  difficult  for  men  sometimes
to  perform  the  kind  of  missions  that
they  did  formerly,  owing  to  age,  in-
firmities, and  circumstances.  Yet  I
have  frequently  felt  ashamed  when  I
have  seen  the  acta  of  many  in  these
quorums  to  which  I  refer,  when
they  have  been  called  upon  to
go  on  missions.  One  has  one  ex-
cuse, and  another,  another.  It  was
easier  some  twenty  years  ago  to  raise
two  or  three  hundred  men  than  it  is
now  among  all  those  thousands  in
Israel.  How  do  yon  account  for
this?  Partly  in  consequence  of  an
apathy  that  exists  in  the  different  or-
ganisms of  the  priesthood  ;  and  part-
ly from  circumstances  with  which
we  have  been  surrounded.  We  have
been  grappling  with  these  difficulties
in  common  with  others;  and  the
Lord  has  placed  us  in  this  position  to
try  us  to  see  what  material  we  are
made  of.  Or,  to  use  a  common  say-
ing, to  see  who  would  be  found  at  the
rack,  hay  or  no  hay.  But  the  gene-
ral feeling  seems  to  be — and  I  sup-
pose it  is  so  with  us  in  Salt  Lake  and
other  places — that  we  would  rather
go  to  the  rack  when  there  was  plenty
of  hay.  But  there  is  such  a  thing  aa
having  faith  in  God,  I  will  tell  you
how  I  have  viewed  these  things.  A
great  many  have*  been  thrown  into
circumstances  that  without  distres-
sing their  families  it  would  be  ex-
tremely difficult  to  pick  themselves
up  and  go  on  missions.  We  did  not
;  use  to  think  about  this ;  but  there
should  be  in  this,  as  in  other  things,
a  co-operation,  a  united  order  if  you
please.  We  have  found,  in  look-
ing over  some  of  our  affairs,  that
these  pinching  times  have  reached
to  England.  And  lately  when  oar
Elders  have  returned  home  after  hav-
ing been  absent  two  or  three  years,
they  themselves  not  having  the  means
to  pay  their  way  home,  have  had  to


give  their  notes  for  the  money  ;  and
the  consequence  was  they  would  re-
turn with  a  load  of  debt  upon  their
shoulders.  The  Council  have  con*
sidered  this  matter,  and  decided  to
cancel  such  indebtedness  ;  it  amonnt-
ed  to  some  $50,000  ;  and  then  we
contrived  with  Brother  Staines  and
the  Presidency  in  Liverpool,  to  try  to
make  such  arrangements  that  when
our  brethren  returned  home  from  mis-
sions, they  shall  come  free.  How  do
you  feel  ?  All  who  arc  in  favor  say
aye.  [The  songregation  said  aye.]
We  do  not  want  Elders  to  feel  pres-
sed down  or  embarrassed,  but,  if  pos-
sible, to  be  relieved  ;  and  we  are  aim-
ing to  accomplish  this.  And  when
they  are  away,  it  is  not  proper  that
they  should  feel  worried  and  concern-
ed about  their  families  at  home;  and
therefore  we  will  call  upon  our
brethren  here  who  preside,  to  see  that
the  families  of  the  missionaries  are
looked  after,  that  they  may  not  suf-
fer. I  hear  men  sometimes  pray  God
to  bless  and  provide  for  the  families
of  those  on  missions,  and  iu  their
prayers  they  are  ever  mindful  of  the
poor.  This  is  all  very  well  so  far  as
it  goes,  but  it  does  not  go  very  far.
My  feelings  are,  never  to  ask  the
Lord  to  do  anything  I  would  not  do
myself.  If  I  were  a  woman — but
then  I  am  not,  yon  know,  and  I  do
not  know  much  about  it ;  but  if  I
were  a  woman,  the  wife  of  one  of
our  missionaries  abroad,  I  would
much  rather  have  a  sack  of  flour ;  a
little  meat,  some  butter  and  cheese,  a
littla  tire- wood  or  coal,  and  a  little
cloth  for  myself  and  family,  than  all
the  prayers  you  could  offer  up  for  me.
And  if  you  want  to  see  these  folks
taken  care  of,  you  mast  see  to  it  your-
selves* And  you  sisters  of  the  Re-
lief Society,  do  not  give  your  hus-
bands any  rest  until  these  families
are  all  provided  for.  And  do  not
spare  the  Bishop  if  they  are  not  pro-
vided for  but  go  after  him  and


"ding"  it  into  him  ;  and  perhaps  by
your  continued  teasing  and  worrying
him,  he  may  hearken  to  your  prayers.
And  I  will  risk  it,  if  the  sisters  o>et
after  htm.

Now  after  making  excuses  of  that
kind,  we  cannot  excuse  everybody*
There  are  lots  of  able-bodied  men
who,  if  they  could  only  have  a  little
more  faith  in  God,  and  could  realize
the  calamities  that  are  coming  upon
the  earth,  and  the  responsibilities  of
that  priesthood  that  God  hus  confer-
red upon  them,  they  would  be  ready
to  break  all  barriers  and  say,  Here  I  am,
send  me;  I  wish  to  benefit  the  human
family.  If  Jesus  came  to  seek  and
save  those  who  are  lost,  let  me  be
possessed  of  the  same  spirit  And  if
the  Twelve,  the  High  Priests  and
the  Seventies,  who  are  now  aged,have
done  these  things,  let  me  also  do  it;
I  am  willing  to  enter  into  the  harness
and  do  all  that  Gcd  [requires  at  my
hands.  I  tell  you,  my  brethren,  in
the  name  of  God,  that  right  among
the  nations  of  Europe,  where  many
of  you  have  come  from,  there  will
be  some  of  the  bloodiest  scenes  that
you  ever  read  of;  and  God  expects
you  to  assist  in  warning  the  nations,
and  in  gathering  out  the  honest  in
heart.  Then  when  you  come  back,
having  accomplished  a  good  mission,
you  can  say,  "My  garments  are  clean
from  the  blood  of  this  generation/'
Many  of  you  cannot  say  that  now,
therefore  I  wish  to  remind  you  of
these  things,  that  you  may  reflect
upon  them,  and  prepare  yourselves
for  the  work  that  is  before  you.

Another  thing  that  has  been  re-
ferred to  here — about  our  schools
and  education,  God  expects  Zion
to  become  the  praise  and  glory  of
the  whole  earth ;  so  that  kings,  hear-
ing of  her  fame,  will  come  and  gara
npon  her  glory.  God  is  not  niggardly
in  his  feelings  towards  us.  He
would  as  soon  we  all  lived  in  palaces
as  not ;  but  he  wants  us  to  observe


32


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


his  laws  and  fear  him,  and  standing
as  messengers  to  go  forth  to  the  na-
tions ;  clothed  upon  with  the  power
of  the  priesthood which has  been
conferred  upon  us; seeking  "first
the  king lorn  of  God  and  his  righto*
ousness ;" seeking  first  the  welfare
and happiness  of  our  fellow-men,
and God  will  add  unto  ns  all  the
gold  and  silver  and  possessions  and
everything  that  may  be  good  for  us
to  receive, I  was  going  to  say,  per-
haps more  than  would  be  pood  for
us. But  all  these  things  shnll  he  ad*
ded,  for  no  man  that  forsakes  father
and  mother,  houses  and  lands,  wi  ves
and  children  for  God  and  his  king-
dom, but  what  shall  receive  in  this
world  a  hundred  fold,  and in  the
world  to  come  life  everlasting.  Tins
was  true  anciently,  it  is  true  to-day.
This  being  the  case,  we  ought  to
foster  education  and  intelligence  of
every  kind;  cultivate  literary  tastes,
and  men  of  literary and  scientific
talent  should  improve  that  talent  and
all  should  magnify  the  gifts  which
God  has  L'iven  unto  them.  Educate
yoor  children,  and  seek  for  those  to
teach  them  who  have  faith  in  God
and  in  his  promises,  as  well  as  in-
telligence. I  was  talking  with  Pro.
Maeser, who is  principal of  the
Brigham  Young  Academy,  in  Provo.
I  saw  the  students  go  through  their
various  exercises  in  the  several
classes,  and  I  was  congratulating
him  upon  the  success,  when  he  re-
marked— "  There  is  one  thing,  Pres.
Taylor,  I  will  guarantee,  that  is,
that  no  infidels  will  go  from  my
school" He  would  teach  them  the
Gospel,  and  inculcate  its  principles,
which  are  so  far  advanced  of  infi-
delity, that  it  would  have  to  hide
its  hoarv  head  in  shame  before  the
light,  glory,  and  intelligence  that
comes  from  God,  and  that  exist  in
all  his  works,  and  that  fools  do  not
comprehend. I  am  pleased  to  know-
that  Pres. Young  made  arrange-


ments before  his  death  for  the  en-
dowment of  a  college  in  this  neigh-
borhood, and  the  brethren  acting  as
trustees  in  the  matter  are  feeling
interested,  and  are  taking  5t*>ps  f\*r
the  accomplishment  of  that  object
And  that  object  is,  as  I  understand
it,  to  afford  our  own  ehildren  greater
facilities  to  become  learned,  and
t  hat  they  also  have  the  privilege  to
learn  trades,  and  agriculture,  and
1 1 ort icul tu  re ,  and  become  p n  »g re? -
sive,  intellectual  and  informed  in
regard  to  all  these  things,  and  that
they  may  comprehend  the  earth  on
which  we  stand,  the  materials  of
which  it  is  composed,  and  the  ele-
ments with  which  we  are  surnnuKl-
ed.  And  then,  by  having  faith  in
God,  we  might  stand  as  far  above
the  nations  in  regard  to  the  arts
and  sciences,  politics,  and  every
species  of  intelligence,  as  we  now
do  in  regard  to  religious  matters.
This  is  what  we  are  aiming  at  :  and
if  there  is  anything  good  and  praise-
worthy in  morals,  religion,  science,
or  any  tiling  calculated  to  exalt  and
ennoble  man,  we  are  after  it.  But
with  all  our  getting,  we  want  to
get  understanding,  and  that  under-
standing which  flows  from  Grub

Bro.  Smith  said  his  time  was  up ;
mine  is  more  than  up,  t

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  Let  us  love  one  another ;  let
us  seek  to  promote  one  another's
welfare.  And  let  the  Bishop's  and
the  Relief  Societies,  and  the  Young
Men's  and  Y  oung  Women's  Associa-
tions, and  our  mechanics  and  manu-
facturers, and  also  our  merchants,
and  all  hands,  operate  in  the  inter-
ests of  the  whole  for  the  welfare  of
Zion  and  the  building  up  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth ;
and  the  blessings  of  God  will  begin
to  rest  upon  us,  Zion  will  begin  to
arise,  and  the  glory  of  God  will  rest
upon  her.  Amen.


DISCOUBSE  BY  PRESIDENT  ANGUS M.  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

August  25,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo*  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  SAINTS  PROSPERED — RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL — SHOULD  LISTEN
TO  INSTRUCTION — GOD'S  GIFTS  TO  THE  CHURCH — SALVATION  FOR  THE
DEAD — EXAMPLES  BEFORE  CHILDREN*


I  have  listened  with  deep  interest
to  the  instructions  we  have  received
through  Elder  Teasdale  this  after-
noon ;  and  rejoice  in  being  numbered
with  the  people  of  God.  I  have  just
returned  from  a  trip  through  the
south-eastern  portions  of  our  Terri-
tory, having  visited  localities  that,
five  years  ago,  were  barren  and  un-
fruitful, and  where  frosts  were  known
to  appear  every  month  in  the  year;
and  finding  these  places  cultivated  by
our  people,  and  their  crops  in  a  flour-
ishing condition,  and  the  crops  them-
selves  acknowledging  the  overruling
hand  of  God  in  tempering  the  ele-
ments for  their  good,  I  have  felt  to
magnify  God  in  my  soul ;  and  I
return  to  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
with  heartfelt  gratitude  to  our  hea-
venly Father,  in  thus  blessing  the
land  and  the  elements  for  the  good
of  his  Saints,  And  this  is  only  an
additional  testimony  to  me  that  God
lives  and  rules,  and  that  Jesus  is
indeed  the  Christ

AVe  have  been  called  out  from  the
world,  to  be  seperaled  from  the  world.
When  John  the  lievelator  was  on  the
Isle  of  Patmos,  he  beheld  the  darkness
that  the  churches  indulged  in,  and
realized  that  they  would  drive  the
Priesthood  from  the  earth  because  of
4 he  errors  that  had  crept  in  amongst

No.  4.  W7


them,  which  were  being  tolerated,
and  which  were  antagonistic  to  the
truth.  And  while  there  the  Lord
favored  him  with  heavenly  manifest-
ations, among  which  was  that  of  an
angel  flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,
the  bearer  of  the  everlasting  Gospel
to  every  nation  and  tongue  and  peo-
ple. And  after  this  he  sajs  he  heard
another  voice,  saying,  M  Come  out  of
her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  par-
takers of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive
not  of  her  plagues*

We  have  received  the  Gospel;  the
Angel  Moroni  brought  it,  and  with
faithfulness  he  delivered  it  to  the
Prophet  Joseph.  He  watched  the
record  for  centuries  with  increasing
care  that  he  might  reveal  unto  us  the
lost  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  in  its
purity.  God  has  taken  one  of  a  city
and  two  of  a  family,  and  brought  us
to  Zion,  and  he  htm,  taught  us  the
principles  of  his  Gospel,  and  the
testimony  of  his  servants,  who  were
instrumental  in  bis  hands  of  intro-
ducing those  principles  of  divine
truth  to  the  world,  was  sealed  by  the
blood  of  his  anointed.  When  our
enemies  have  expelled  us  from  our
homes,  and  deprived  us  of  the  susten-
ance we  had  provided,  God  has
blessed  the  endeavors  of  his  people
in  cultivating  the  soil,  and  he  has

Vol.  XX.


50  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


rebuked  the  destroyer,  and  where
sand  and  nridness  seemed  to  prevail,
the  earth  has  been  made  productive,
and  we  have  reaped  abundance.
When  our  enemies  have  sought  to
follow  us,  he  has  rebuked  tbem,  and
the  divisions  which  tbey  would  intro-
duce in  our  midst,  to  enfeeble  us,  he
has  caused  to  be  visited  upon  those
who  have  sought  to  destroy  us.  The
Lord  has  said  through  Isaiah,  "  The
ox  knoweth  bis  owner,  ami  the  ass  \
his  master's  crib,"  and  they  will  (
come  where  they  are  used  to  be  fed.
We  have  been  fed  by  the  hand  of
God,  we  have  been  succored  in  the
hour  of  our  deepest  distress  ;  he  has
made  us  strong  out  of  weakness,  he
has  blessed  us  beyond  our  most  san-  j
guine  expectations.  He  has  taught
us  the  principles  of  eternal  life;  and
hns  taught  us  to  turn  our  hearts  to
this  fathers,  as  our  fathers'  hearts
have  been  turned  towards  us,  lest  he
should  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse
arid  we  not  be  permitted  to  inherit

it  :

Lehi,  when  he  led  his  little  family
from  Jerusalem,  was  shown  of  the
Lord  that  he  would  lead  him  to  ft
land  of  promise,a  land  that  was  choice
above  all  other  lands.  The  Almighty
blessed  his  posterity,  and  they  en-
joyed peace  and  plenty  until  they
became  envious  toward  each  other,
and  their  hearts  were  filled  with
hntred  towards  God.  Lehi  was  told
that  this  land  should  be  consecrated
as  a  blessed  land  to  his  posterity  and
tbey  should  continue  to  enjoy  it  and
possess  it,  and  that  the  pure  in  heart
should  dwell  upon  it,  but  the  corrupt
in  heart  should  not  possess  this  land
in  peace  and  prosperity.  He  led  us
to  this  land  when  we  were  oppressed,
when  we  were  wounded  and  afflicted,
when  we  were  bleeding  and  hungry
and  naked ;  and  here  he  has  succored
us  and  fed  us,  promising  to  be  our
Father  and  Friend  if  we  would  con-


tinue  to  rely  upon  him.  Witness
the  extent  of  our  increasing  popu-
lation, and  the  multiplicity  of  our
settlements,  as  well  as  the  prosperity
that  has  attended  us  on  every  hand  ;
and  then  ask  ourselves  the  question  :
Are  we  possessed  of  the  same  humil-
ity, of  the  same  love,  and  of  the  same
undying  devotion,  as  when  our  ene-
mies were  driving  us  from  the  rear,
and  apparently  nothing  but  destitu-
tion unto  starvation  presented  our
front,  Jesus  once  said  to  bis  Apost-
les, when  he  saw  some  of  bis  discip-
les forsake  him,  "Will  ye  also  go
away?"  But  Peter  answered  him
and  said,  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we
go  ?  thou  hast  the  word,  of  eternal
life."  Then,  if  we  now  begin  to  idol-
ize our  possessions,  the  creations  of
our  own  hands,  under  the  blessings
of  God,  whst  profit  is  it  to  us  in  our
having  been  led  of  the  Lord  to  this
land  ?  Wherein,  I  ask,  are  we  pro-
fited, if  we  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  his  words.
Has  be  not  said  through  Paul,  as  re-
corded in  the  4th  chapter  of  Ephesi-
ans,  that  he  has  placed  in  his  church
apostles,  prophets  etc*  What  for  ?
u  For  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  for
the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the
edifying  oflhe  body  of  Christ,  till
we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,"
etc,  remaining  in  this  condition  un-
til that  which  is  perfect  is  come.  And
when  we  shall  have  arrived  at  that
state  of  perfection,  seeing  as  we  are
seen,  and  knowing  as  we  are  known,
we  shall  not  need  Prophets  to  teach
us,  for  we  will  then  see  alike,  dwell-
ing in  the  presence  of  God.  Then,
shall  we  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  voice
of  Prophets  before  we  become  united,
before  we  see  eye  to  eje  ?  If  we  do
we  shall  prove  ourselves  no  better
than  the  world  of  mankind  whom  we
have  left.  We  have  came  here  amd
demonstrated  that  the  Lord  has
blessed  us — for  he  has  demonstrated
this  to  our  heart's  contest ;  he  has


THE  SAINT'S  PROSPERED,  ETC,


51


given  us  wives  and  children,  pledges
of  an  eternal  union  that  is  to  exist
between  us  and  them  for  ever.  Our
children  are  the  offspring  of  the  Al-
mighty, they  are  placed  under  our
guardian  care  to  be  instructed  iu  the  j
principles  of  eternal  life  ;  they  should
be  taught  that  they  are  created  in
the  image  of  God,  that  they  owe  alle-
giance to  him,  and  that  they  have
not  come  .upon  the  earth  to  do  their
own  will,  but  the  will  of  their  Father  |
in  heaven.  It  is  said  and  understood
by  us  that  Jesus  will  come  and  lake
unto  himself  the  people  that  are  pre-
pared to  meet  him.  What  is  our
condition  ?  We  are  anxious  to  bless
the  earth  we  occupy  ;  we  are  anxious
to  nourish  and  cherish  our  flucks  and
our  herd  p.  We  say  our  prosperity
depends  upon  these  things,  and  that
they  are  created  for  our  sakes,  that
they  were  created  for  man,  to  be  sub-
ject to  him,  and  that  our  children  will
succeed  us  in  the  possession  of  them*
How  important  that  they  be  filled
with  intelligence  ;  how  important  it
is  that  we  endeavor  to  keep  open  com-
munication between  God  and  our
children,  how  important  it  is  that  we
see  that  they  receive  a  good  sound
education,  and  that  they  have  proper
associations,  and  that  they  are  early
impressed  with  truths  calculated  to
make  (hern  immortal  and  bring  them
everlasting  joy  and  happiness,  and
that  they  do  not  become  infidel  and
ungrateful  in  their  hearts,  Moses
was  raised  under  peculiar  circum-
stances, having  been  taught  in  all
the  learning  of  the  Egyptians — a
people  who  were  estranged  from  God,
and  received  the  best  education  that
the  Court  of  Pharaoh  could  aifurd.
Biu  did  his  heart  become  alienated
from  God,  his  kindred  and  people?
No,  he  learned  to  love  them.  And
as  he  saw  them  plodding  and  laboring
under  the  most  unpleasant  and  ad-
Terse  circumstances  to  make  brick,


his  heart  was  drawn  out  in  sympathy
towards  them ;  and  he  never  rested
until  he  prevailed  with  God  to
rescue  them  from  their  bondage.
And  when  his  mission  to  deliver  his
people  was  made  known  to  them,  and
when  he  had  obtained  their  confi-
dence, did  they  hearken  to  his  coun-
sels ?  And  xvhen  he  had  so  far  led
them  on  their  way  to  the  wilderness,
the  Red  Sea  before  them,  the  forces
of  Pharaoh  in  rear  of  them,  with  no
chance  of  escape  on  either  hand,  did
they  relent  and  want  to  retrace  their
steps,,  or  did  they  follow  their  le;  t,
he  acting  as  a  God  unto  them?  luej
followed  the  man  whom  it  has  pleased
God  to  place  at  their  head,  between
Him  and  them,  and  they  never  ques-
tioned him,  they  knew  there  was  no
salvation  for  them  only  through  him.
And  he  led  them  to  liberty;  he  led
them  to  prosperity;  he  led  them  to
the  favor  of  God,  and  with  uplifted
hands,  while  his  mortal  strength  en-
dured, he  plead  their  cause  with  the
Lord*

God  has  given  us  Apostles;  he  has
given  us  homes  that  are  beautiful  to
look  upon, and  landsthat  are  produc-
tive and  fruitful ;  and  he  has  made
us  gracious  and  precious  promises  in
that  eternal  union  with  our  wives  and
children,  restoring  us  to  the  society
of  our  fathers  in  favor  with  God.  He
has  placed  great  and  glorious  bles-
sings within  our  reach,  but  has  first
called  upon  us  to  erect  sacred  edifices
to  his  name  in  which  to  receive  them.
Shall  we,  my  brethren,  withhold  our
substance  and  the  labor  of  our  hands
necessary  to  complete  this  work  ?  If
we  do  we  shall  be  found  in  the  con-
dition of  those  that  Jesus  came  to.
What  did  he  say  to  them  on  a  cer-
tain occaRbn  ?  "  It  is  written,  my
house  shall  be  called  the  house  of
prayer  ;  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of
thieves."  And  he  further  said  ;  "  I
send  unto  you  Prophets,  and  wise  >


52


journal  or  discourses.


men,  and  scribes;  and  some  of  them
ye  shall  kill  and  crucify/1  Why?
"  That  upon  you  may  come  all  the
righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth,
from  the  blood  of  righteous
Able  unto  the  blood  of  Zacha-
rias,  son  of  Barachias,  whom
ye  slew  between  the  temple  and  the
altar"  Infidels  say, this  is  injustice,
why  should  they  he  condemned  and
held  answerable  for  the  blood  of  their
forefathers  who  were  slain  before  they
came  into  existence  ?  These  very
men  had  the  chance  to  redeem  them.
The  Messiah  himself  stood  before
them  inviting  them  to  be  taught  in
these  principles  of  salvation.  The
burden  of  his  soul  was  to  draw  men
to  him  that  they  might  be  fed  with
the  bread  of  life.  "  Come  unto  me,
all  ye  that  are  heavy  laden  and  I
will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I  am
meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  ye  shall
find  rest  unto  your  souls.  lor  my
yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light"
Would  they  do  it?  No,  Baton
the  contrary,  they  took  John  the
Baptist  and  slew  him  ;  and  they  took
Jesus  and  crucified  him.  Why  ?  said
they,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on
our  children  "  Part  of  the  Savior's
mission  was  "  to  preach  deliverance
to  the  captives,"  which  he  did  when
he  passed  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail.
They  rejected  the  Gospel,  and  there-
fore would  not  go  into  the  temple
to  administer  in  the  ordinances  on
behalf  of  their  fathers  who  had  not
the  opportunity  to  hear  the  Gospel
through  the  Savior,  and  could  not
pass  through  the  ordinances  of  His
house  ;  and  they  took  part  with  their
enemies  and  with  those  who  slew  the
Prophets,  and  consequently  they  were
under  this  condemnation.  The
work  that  was  required  at  their
hands  is  required  of  us,  namely  to
perform  ordinances  for  our  fathers
and  forefathers  which  they  were  not


permitted  to  do  for  themselves  while
living  in  the  flesh.  Let  us  lay  our
hand  to  and  never  cease  our  labors
until  the  Temples  of  our  God  are
erected,  and  our  fathers  hearts  are
warmed  into  their  knowing  that  their
children  are  laboring  for  their  redemp-
tion.

Our  fathers,  for  many  generations,
knew  not  the  Gospel.  Hireling
ministers  preach,  and  have  preached
for  years,  what  they  conceive  to  be
the  truth.  But  God  has,  in  our  day
spoken  trom  the  heavens ;  he  has  pro-
claimed the  regeneration  of  the  human
family,  the  redemption  of  Zion  and
the  establishment  of  His  kingdom  in
power.  And  he  has  told  us  that  he
would  make  us  instrumental  to  this
end.  Then  if  we  would  have  our
sons  be  faithful,  and  not  infidel  in
their  hearts,  let  our  acts  conform  with
our  doctrine,  let  them  understand
from  our  conduct  and  the  spirit  with-
in us,  that  we  love  God  more  than  we
love  anything  on  earth;  that  we  revere
His  Apostles,  from  the  fact  that  we
listen  to  their  counsels  and  carry  out
their  instructions.  And  I  will  tell
you,  my  brethren,  that  our  children
will  respect  and  honor  us  ;  and  when
we  sleep  we  will  be  numbered  among
the  blessed  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord;
we  will  rest  from  our  labors,  and  our
works  will  follow  us.  There  is  no
consistency  in  our  acts  when  we  say,
we  will  receive  this  principle  or  doc-
trine, and  reject  another.  If  we  have
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  within  us,  we
well  know,  as  has  been  said,  that
Jesus  is  the  Christ;  but  ifweloso
claim  to  the  Holy  Spirit  we  can  no
longer  testify  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ
and  that  His  Apostles  are  his  mini-
sters. And  when  once  bereft  of  this
we  enter  in  to]  temptation,  and  by  and
by  fall  into  darkness,  and  will  be
found  walking  in  bye  and  forbidden
paths,  and  our  eons  and  daughters
begin  to  view  us  with  distrust,  and


god's  power,  etc.


they  say  in  their  hearts,  "  Surely,
father  must  have  lost  faith,  for  he
does  not  practice  what  be  once  pro-
fessed/1

As  I  have  said,  we  have  left  our
homes;  for  what?  To  be  taught  to
be  instructed  by  the  servants  of  the
Lord,  in  other  words,  to  do  the  will
of  God,  and  not  of  man .  And  the
Lord's  manner  of  instruction  is  to
give  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  pre-
cept, here  a  little  and  there  a  little,
until  we  become  perfect  in  the
knowledge  of  his  laws.  Under  these
circumstances  we  will  not  refuse  to
go  and  proclaim  the  Gospel  to  the
world  of  mankind,  without  purse  or
scrip;  we  will  not  refuse  to  contri-
bute of  our  substance  to  build  temp-
les to  His  name,  neither  will  we  re-
ject any  of  the  counsels  of  the  Al-
mighty. Are  we  not  to  have  the
fall  liberty  of  our  agency?  Ye&\
and  we  are  to  be  reponsible  for  our
conduct,  just  as  much  as  Moses  was
when  he  undertook  to  rescue  his
brethren  from  bondage.  There  is  a
danger  of  becoming  fainuhrarted.
You  remember  what,  Jesus  said  :  41  As
the  days  of  Noah  were,  so  shall  also
the  coming  of  the  son  of  man  be.  For
as  in  the  days  that  were  before  the
flood  they  were  eating  and  drinking,
marrying  and  giving  iu  marriage,
until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into
the  ark,  and  knew  not  until  the  flood
came,  and  took  them  all  away  :  so
shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
man  be."  How  is  it  to-day  J  Only
a  few  consult  the  Spirit  Has  he  not
likewise  said,  the  kingdom  of  heaven
shall  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,
live  uf  them  wise  and  live  foolish.
Has  he  not  said  the  kingdom  of
heaven  is  like  unto  a  net  which  is
cast  into  the  sea,  it  gathers  of  all
kinds  of  tUhes,  and  that  when  the
net  is  brought  to  shore,  a  separation
takes  place  ?  1  would  ask  if  it  is
difficult  for  Latter-day  Saints  to  per-


ceive that  n  separation  must  sooner
or  later  take  place  among  us  ?  This
work  in  which  we  are  engaged  is  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  those  who  are
found  keeping  the  commandments
of  God  will  be  possessed  of  His  Holy
Spirit,  they  will  know  the  voice  of
the  good  shepherd,  and  the  place
where  they  have  been  fed,  and  them
he  will  seperate  from  the  ungodly,
the  disobedient  and  the  wicked  even
as  a  shepherd  divide* h  the  sheep
from  the  goats.  The  Holy  Spirit  is
given  to  men,  who  have  rendered
obedience  to  the  requirements  of  the
Gospel,  to  enable  them  tocomprehend
the  will  of  the  Father,  or  that  they
may  know  the  voice  of  the  true  shep-
herd ;  and  it  is  only  by  constant
watching,  living  the  lives  of  purity
and  uprightness  and  carefully  es-
chewiug  evil,  that  we  can  retain  it  in
our  heart?,  as  our  guide  and  revelator,
after  we  have  received  in  the  way
prescribed*  Peter  was  enabled  to
say,  in  answer  to  a  question  pat  to
him  by  the  Savior,  "Thou  art  the
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"
It  was  by  virtue  of  the  Spirit  of  God
which  he  possessed,  that  he  was  en-
abled to  say  this,  nothing  but  it  could
reveal  that  knowledge  to  him.  And
it  was  against  this  Spirit  he  said  the
gates  of  hell  should  not  prevail ;  and
it  is  this  same  Spirit  that  enabled
Peter  to  say  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ
enables  us  to  declare  that  these  men
who  preside  over  us  are  His  Apostlest
servants  of  the  living  God.  But  let
a  man,  possessing  this  Holy  Ghost,
indulge  in  drinking,  profane  the  name
of  Deity,  or  violate  in  any  way  his
covenants,  will  he  then  enjoy  its  light
and  influence?  No;  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  dwells  not  in  the  tabernacles
of  such  men.  What  is  their  condi-
tion ?  They  may  be  found  in  groups
and  on  street-corners,  idling  away
their  time,  and  assailing  the  charac-
ters of  those  God  has  called  to  lead


54


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


us,  ever  ready  to  cast  doubt  into  the ,
minds  of  the  honest;  while  their
children,  as  a  general  thing,  become
liko  unto  them — distrustful,  disobe-
dient, and  in  time  alienated  from
God.  There  is  only  one  way  by
which  we  can  ensure  eternal  life,  and
that  is  by  abiding  by  nil  thecousnels
of  God,  seek  in  g  to  cherish  in  our
bearts  the  quiet,  peaceable  influences
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  will  grow  !
within  us  until  we  become  fully  deve-
loped, perfect  men  and  women,  in  the
likeness  and  stature  of  the  Lord  Jons*
And  our  children  will  also  partake
of  this  influence.  Will  they  all  do
so?  They  will,  unless  they  are  in-
clined to  be  wilfully  wicked,  or  we
neglect  to  afford  them  such  care  and
attention  as  is  due  to  them.

We  know  it  is  essential  we  should  '
be  faithful  in  all  thing.-*  :  pay  our
tithes  and  offerings,  and  let  children
be  witnesses  of  our  faithfulness  to
God  and  His  kingdom,  and  although
they  may  wander  for  a  season  from
the  true  path,  their  hearts  will  warm
towards  us  in  days  to  come,  and  they
will  remember  the  examples  and  pre-


cepts of  their  fathers  and  mothers,
and  they  will  say,  I  will  return  to  the
God  of  my  fathers,  the  communion
of  whose  spirit  1  enjoyed  in  childhood
before  I  knew  sin.  And  they  will
repent  of  their  folly,  and  like  the
Prodigal  Son  of  the  Scriptures,  they
will  learn  to  appreciate  the  good  by
the  things  they  suffer.  Let  us  not
be  filled  with  jealousies,  and  vanities
and  strifes.  Let  us  cherish  in  our
hearts  the  peaceful  influences  of  God;
they  will  lead  us  to  be  good  fathers,
good  husbands,  to  be  good  sons  and
good  daughters,  and  to  be  good  wives
and  mothers;  and  the  blessings  of
the  Almighty  will  rest  upon  us,  and
peace  will  11  >\v  unto  us,  and  prosper-
ity will  attend  us,  and  our  children
will  inherit  these  blessings  after  us.
And  when  the  days  of  calamity  and
the  justice  of  God  overhangs  the
nations,  our  children  will  be  found
with  oil  in  their  lamps,  prepared  for
the  coming  of  the  Savior*

May  God  help  us  so  to  Hvo  that
this  may  be  our  happy  lot,  is  my
i  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


THE  CHURCH  PARTIALLY  IN  THE  UNITED  ORDER  ETC


55


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  Ogdex,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,  September  22,  1878.


(Beported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihhs.)


THE  CHURCH  PARTIALLY  IN  THE  UNITED  ORDER — PERPETUAL  EMIGRA-
TION FUND — BEING  EDUCATED  TO  A  FULLNESS  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER
— CO-OPERATION  AT  BRIGHA1I  CITY — UNION  IN  ELECTIONS— EDUCA-
TION OF  THE  YOUNG.


As  has  been  remarked,  by  others,
I  have  been  very  much  interested  in
the  remarks  which  have  been  made.
They  are  things  in  which  we  are  a] I
concerned.  They  are  part  of  our  re-
ligion, part  of  our  faith,  part  of  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  which  we
have  embraced  ;  and  as  I  stated  at  the
priesthood  meeting  yesterday,  so  I
repeat  now,  for  my  part  I  do  not
know  how  to  get  around  them  if  I
would*  I  cannot  find  any  loop-hole
whereby  I  can  be  excused.  It  is  true,
as  remarked  by  brother  Snow,  we  are
not  now  called  upon  to  enter  into
these  things  in  their  fullness  and  per-
fection, but  we  are  called  upon  to
make  steps  towards  it.  We  have
been  partly  in  the  United  Order,
many  of  us,  but  we  have  not  known
it.  For  instance,  I  remember  the
time,  and  many  of  you  do,  so  far  back
as  Far  West,  in  Missouri,  when  we
were  surrounded  with  difficulties  and
had  to  leave  the  State  in  consequence
of  persecutions  and  the  intolerant
feeling  and  persecution  that  existed
there.  We  agreed  among  ourselves
to  help  one  another,  to  use  all  the
means,  all  the  teams  and  all  the  pro*


perty  we  had  to  help  each  other  out
of  the  State,  until  there  should  cot
be  a  person  left  there,  that  wished  to
come  away.  We  fulfilled  it  ;  and
jet,  properly  and  technically  speak-
ing, we  were  not  in  tho  United  Order,
but  we  were  stimulated  by  the  prin-
ciples of  union,  liberality  and  com-
munion, if  you  please.  We  did  the
same  thing,  when  in  Nauvoo,  After
the  Prophet  Joseph  was  killed,  and
mob-violence  again  prevailed,  and
prosecution,  tyranny  and  persecution
were  rife.  We  had  to  leave  that
country.  Was  it  because  we  had  in-
jured any  one  ?  No.  Because  we
had  violated  any  law  ?  No.  Because
we  had  interfered  with  any  body's
right's?  No.  Because  we  were
troublesome  in  the  community  S  No;
but  because  we  were  Latter  day  Saints
and  because  we  chose  to  believe  in  a
religion  revealed  to  us  by  God,  and
which  the  people  would  not  let  us
do  and  lire  in  peace  among  them.
What  next  ?  We  met  in  the  Temple
of  the  Lord,  and  there,  with  uplifted
hands  before  God,  we  entered  into  a
covenant  that  we  would  help  one  an-
other out  with  our  means,  as  we  had


4


-


50


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


done  in  the  State  of  Missouri ;  and
as  we  were  coming  to  this  country
we  would  not  rest  until  there  should
not  be  a  Latter-day  Saint  there  who
desired  to  come  to  this  land.  Did
we  fulfill  that?  We  did  ;  we  carried
it  out  to  the  very  letter  ;  we  fulfilled
oar  covenants  and  sent  our  teams
back  year  after  year,  until  there  was
not  one  left  in  that  country  that  ue-
Ei red  to  come  to  Zion. Was  not
this  a  United  Order  ? Yes  it  was,
in  part,  and  we  have  done  a  great
deal  of  the  same  kind  of  thing  since
we  came  here. So  soon  as  we  fulfil-
led that  covenant, we  organized  a
Perpetual  EmigrationFundCompany,
under the  direction of  President
Young,  having  for  its  object  the
gathering  of  the  poor  from  distant
lands;  and  thousands  and  hundreds
of  thousands  of  dollars  were  subscri-
bed and  used  for  that  purpose.  It
was  organized  on  a  wise  principle,
cot  exactly what  you  would  call
the  United  Order ;  yet  it  was  an  order
calculated  to  benefit  our  poor  breth-
ren to  bring  them  from  their  distant
homes  to  unite  with  us  in  Zion.  Many
of  you  present  remember  when  we
sent  our  boys  with  our  teams,  loaded
with  provisions  to  bring  them  from
the  frontiers, I  am  very  sorry  to
say  that  a  great  many  of  them  have
not  lived  up  to  the  principles  of  that
order  in  making  good  their  indebted-
ness, as  it  was  calculated  they  would
do  in  order  to  make  the  fund  perpe-
tual in  its  operations,  using  the  same
means  to  bring  others  here  who  were
situated  in  a  condition  similar  to
that  of  themselves. I  say  again,
I  am  very  sorry  to  have  to  say  that
a  great  many  have  failed  thus  far  to
repay  the  amount  used  to  emigrate
them,  although  in  very  many  cases
they  are  abundantly  able  to  do  so.
Brother  Carringtou,  who  is  Presu
dent  of  the  Fund,  informs  me  that
there  is  now  due  the  Perpetual  Emi-


gration  Fund  the  sum  of  about  one
million  dollars,  without  interest ;  and
if  the  interest  were  added  it  would
be  about  double  that  amount.  That
is  one  thing  wherein  we  have  failed
in  part  to  make  good  our  agreement  *
but  a  great  many  have  met  their  ob-
ligations promptly  and  honorably.  I
wish  we  could  say  the  same  of  all
those  who  have  been  assisted  by  this
Fund,  I  hope  that  those  who  are
still  owing  for  their  emigration  will
be  led  to  reflect  upon  these  things,
and  consider  the  situation  of  the
brethren  who  are  now  in  the  same
position  as  they  themselves  were
some  years  ago.

This  is  a  principle  of  union  which
has  been  abused  ;  but  it  is  right,  and
shall  we  cease  our  endeavors  in  this
direction  because  it  has  been  abused
by  thoughtless  or  dishonest  men?
No,  we  will  try  and  do  what  we  can,
with  the  aid  of  the  Lord,  to  deliver
scattered  Israel  from  the  oppression
and  poverty  under  which  many  are
suffering.  I  would  remark  that  of
this  sum  now  due  to  the  Fund,  there
is  quite  a  large  amount  that  has
been  advanced  by  the  Church  to  help
out  the  poor.  And  if  you  were  to
hear  the  letters  that  I  receive,  if  you
were  addressed  and  supplicated  and
importuned  as  I  am  from  time  to
time  in  relation  to  these  things,  des-
cribing the  teirible  condition  and
poverty  under  which  the  people  are
laboring,  you  would  feel  that  if  com-
mon honesty  could  not  induce  you  to
meet  your  obligations,  that  at  least
the  sympathies  of  human  nature
would  prompt  you  to  extend  toothers
that  same  kindness  that  has  been
extended  to  you.  We  should  reflect
upon  these  things,  and  at  least  try
to  make  them  right.

But  to  return  to  the  United  Order;
wheo  the  Bishops  in  those  days
came  around  to  you  and  informed
you  that  so  many  men  and  teams,


THE  CHURCH  PARTIALLY  IN  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.

|


57


with  the  necessary  provisions,  were
needed  to  go  east  to  bring  in  the  poor
Sainis,  they  were  furnished.  The  Pre-
sidency and  Twelve  made  the  calcu-
lations and  apportionment  of  those
teams.  They  were  then  handed  to  the
Bishops,  and  they  called  upon  yon,  and
you  furnished  from  one  to  two  hun-
dred, and  as  many  as  five  hundred
started  out  in  one  season,  I  think
this  looked  very  much  like  the  United
Order  Many  of  you,  perhaps,  have
gone  yourselves,  or  else  you  have
sent  your  boys  to  perform  this  la-
bor; and  you  did  not  let  praying  for
them  suffice,  but  you  sent  them  food,
and  you  felt  as  we  ought  always  to
feel  for  one  another.  We  have  done
a  great  many  such  things.  Now  we
are  called  upon  to  build  temples*
Are  we  doing  it  ?  Yes.  I  suppose
there  are  to-day  upwards  of  500  men
engaged  in  building  temples  through-
out the  Territory,  So  taking  the
temple  at  Manti,  in  Sanpete  Valley,
the  temple  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  the
temple  in  Logan,  Cache  Valley,  all
these  things  are  going  on  just  about
as  well  as  we  could  reasonably  ex-
pect, and  the  people  are  contributing
of  their  means  and  their  substance
quite  as  liberally  as  we  could  expect.
Is  this  the  United  Order?  Why, yes*
What  are  we  doing  it  for  ?  For  our-
selves ?  Yes.  For  anybody  else  ?
Yes;  for  our  fathers  and  mothers,
uncles  and  aunts,  and  for  those  we  do
not  know  anything  about  We  are
building  them  because  God  has  com-
manded it,  and  because  the  ordinan-
ces of  God  will  be  performed  in  these
houses  ;  and  so  far  as  this  is  concern-
ed, we  are  in  the  United  Order.  Now,
then,  we  have  tried  to  introduce
home  manufactures,  a  combination  of
effort,  not,  as  has  been  remarked,
strictly  according  to  the  plan  laid
down  in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants;
we  have  not  got  to  that  yet,  we  are
not  prepared  for  it,  we  are  not  edu-


cated to  that  standard  yet;  but  we
are  aiming  at  it,  and  in  some  places
the  people  are  entering  into  it,  not
exactly  according  to  any  particular
law  laid  down  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  but  approaching  it  as  near
as  circumstances  will  admit  of  it,  in
the  present  state  of  society  and  with
our  present  surroundings.  The  great
majority  of  the  people  to-day  who
have  gone  into  Arizona  are  approach-
ing as  near  as  they  can  to  what  we
term  the  United  Order  Brother
Snow  has  been  operating  for  quite  a
while  in  that  way,  and  the  result  is
that  to-day  in  that  little  out-of-the-
way  settlement,  Brigham  City,  not-
withstanding the  many  difficulties  it
has  had  to  cope  with,  having  had  its
woolen  factory  barned  down  as  well
as  quite  a  number  of  other  damaging
misfortunes,  there  is  not  a  man,
woman  or  child  that  wants  labor
there  but  what  can  get  it,  I  wish
we  could  sav  the  same  of  all  the  set-
tlements  of  this  Territory,  I  think
we  should  be  in  a  better  position
than  we  are  to-day.  In  Brigham
City  the  people  make  their  own
cloth,  their  own  boots  and  shoes, and
almost  everything  they  need  to  sus-
tain themselves,  having  upwards  of
forty  industrial  departments  all  in
running  order.  Well,  but  you  say,
11  the  prices  they  have  to  pay  for
their  goods  are  altogether  to  high,
and  what  a  pity  that  is/'  Shall  I
tell  you  why  they  fix  their  prices  at
a  high  rate?  It  is  because  the  peo-
ple are  desirous  to  have  big  wages*  If
they  all  a.sree  among  themselves  to
fix  the  prices  of  their  goods  at  cer-
tain rates,  who  is  injured  by  it?  I
can  tell  you  how  it  is  with  them*
The  carpenter  says  to  the  shoemaker,
See  here,  you  have  charged  me  very
high  for  those  shoes,  and  the  shoe-
maker says,  Yes,  but  then  you  charged
me  very  high  for  my  doors  and  sash;
while  the  farmer  charges  very  high


$8  JOURNAL  OF  I

for  his  wheat  and  flour. It  makes  no
material difference whether  they
charge  fifty  cents  or  ten  dollars,  so
long  as  they  agree  among  themselves.  1
A  man  working  there  is  asked  how
much  he  gets  a  day;  Oh,  three  and
a  half  and  four  dollars  a  day.  That
is  pretty  good  wages  for  a  common
baud,  especially  for  these  times,  you
know. And  he  feels  pretty  well  in
telling  you  this  part  of  it;  but  he
does  not  tell  you  how  much  the  other
folks  get. Can  a  man  get  a  house
built? Yes. Why? Because  they
have  the  masons  and  carpenters,  etc.,
and the  expense  attending  it  is
charged  to  his  account. Then,  if  he
wants  to  get  butter,  he  does  not  put
his  hands  in  bis  pockets  to  feel  for
the  money,  for  perhaps  there  would
not  be  any  there  if  he  did  ;  but  he
puts  his  hand in  his  pocket  for  an
order,  which  procures  him  his  butter.
Then,  if  he  wants  a  bat,  he  can  get
it  ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  fur-
niture, and  so  on  all  through  the
chapter* I  think  this  is  a  pretty
good  united  order,  and  I  think  i!  we
could  have  these  things  all  over  the
Territory,  we  should  be  doing  much
better than  we  are. And I  cer-
tainly cannot  but  praise  the  course
that  Brother  Snow  has  pursued  in  re-
lation to  these  matters. In  a  place
called  Orderville,  too,  they  arc  doing
very  well;  they  have  things  pretty
much in  common,  and  there  is  a
good,  kind  and  a  generous  spirit  pre-
vailing among  them. I  remember
talking  to  a  sister,  who  was  quite  an
accomplished  lady,  and  on  seeing  an
old  man  there,  who  was  quite  infirm,
tottering  along,  I  said  to  her,  What
kind  of  employment  do  you  put  such
people  to. She  answered,  that  she
did  not  think  it  necessary  to  put  such
a  man  to  any  employment;  be  has
seen  a  great  many  years  of  hard  toil,
and  if  we  can  feed  him  and  clothe
him  and  take  care  of  him  in  his  de-


is  courses.

clining  years,  perhaps  somebody  with
the  same  spirit  will  take  care  of  as
when  we  get  old  and  infirm. Is  not
that  a  good  spirit  ? I  think  it  is;  I
think  it  a  right  kind  of  feeling,  a
feeling  we  should  all  have  one  to*
wards  another,  all  being  bound  to-
gether by  the  bonds  of  the  everlast-
ing gospel,  which  makes  us  love  one
another  as  God  loves  us;  and  feel  for
one  another's  welfare,  and  pursue
that  course  which  will  tend  to  bring
about  these  results.  In  Cache  County,
in  Davis  County,  in  Tooele  County,
and  other  places,  they  are  trying  to
establish  the  same  order  of  things  as
fast  as  they  c:m. Here  is  Brother
Parr,  he  went  to  work,  with  others,
and  built  a  factory  ;  ho  ought  to  be
sustained  by  the  Latter-day  Saints.
Thev  should  take  their  wool  to  him:
:uid  if  he  charges  you  a  big  price  for
his  cloth,  do  with  him  as  they  do  in
Brigham  City;  you  charge  him  a  big
price  for  your  wool. But  let  us  sus-
tain one  another,  and  place  things  on
a  proper  basis,  and  not  be  governed
by  the  rules  of  the  Gentiles.  Gen-
tilcism  and  Mormonism  do  not  fit
very  wTell ;  the  things  of  God  and  the
things  of  the  devil  never  did  and
never  will  fit  well.  Tanneries  are  be-
ing introduced  in  many  places  among
us  ;  and  a  very  good  ar  ticle  of  leather
is  being  manufactured,  from  which
boots  and shoes  and harness  are
made, The  first  thing  started  in
relation  to  these  things  was  co-op-
eration. President  Young  told  us
it  was the will  of  God  that  we
should  enter  into  it ; and  we  did,
but  we  made  awful  bungling  at  it,
the  same  as  we  have  with  a  great
many  other  things. But  is  it  right
to  co-operate? Yes, But  we  find
people  beginning  to  pull  off  in  their
own  interests. If  we  go  on  a  little
further  in  the  way  we  are  going,  we
shall  take  a  retrograde  path,  instead
of  going  forward. But  the  ship  of


THE  CHURCH  PARTIALLY  IN  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC


59


Zion  is  onward;  the  "  little  stone"
is  hewn  oat  of  the  mountain  without
hands,  and  will  roll  until  it  fills  the
whole  earth  ;  and  under  the  direction
of  God  we  have  a  duty  devolving
upon  us  as  his  Priesthood,  to  carry
out  his  will  upon  the  earth*  And
shall  we,  because  of  individual  inter*
eats  and  personalities  draw  off  from
things  that  God  has  ordained?  I
fiaj  no,  never!  No,  never!  But
let  us  unite  closer  together,  and  har-
monize our  temporal  interests,  until
we  shall  manufacture  everything  we
need  to  make  us  independent  of  the
world.

We  took  a  vote  at  the  Priesthood
meeting,  yesterday,  and  so  far  as  I
could  discern,  the  brethren  all  voted
io  sustain  eo-op^ratton,  and  that  those
in  the  merchandise  business  will  pur-
chase of  the  co  op.

But  some  may  say,  have  not  the
co-operative  organizations  made  many
blunders? Yes,  they  have,  and  in
many  instances  acted  very  foolishly.
But  shall  we  give  up  the  principle  of
co-operation  because  of  the  unwise
acts  of  a  few  individuals  ? We  do
not  act  thus  in  regard  to  other  mat-
ters. We baptize men  into  the
Church,  and  lay  our  hands  upon  them
that they may receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  after  they  have  thus  been
blessed  with the  light,  spirit  and
power  of  God,  many  of  them  act  very
foolishly,  violate  their  covenants,  and
transgress  the  laws  of  God.  Shall
we,  therefore,  repudiate  baptism  and
the  laying  on  of  hands  because  of
their  folly  and  wickedness  ?  Certain-
ly  not. The  Lord  has  provided  a
way  to  purge  the  Church,  and  those
men  are  dealt  with  according  to  the
laws  of  the  Church,  and  are  rooted
out. This  is  the  way  that  we  ought
to  manage  in  our  temporal  affairs.  If
the  people  do  wrong,  deal  with  them
according  to  the  laws  of  the  Church,
and  if  the  co-operatives  do  wrong,


professing  to  be  governed  by  correct
principle,  deal  with  thera  in  the  same
way,  and  let  those  wrongs  be  righted
and  evil  eradicated.

But  we  do  not  want  to  find  fault
nor  cist  reflections  on  our  brethren
in  the  Co-op.,  nor  on  those  out  of  it;
but  merely  to  touch  upon  some  im-
portant principles  necessary  for
building  ut>  of  the  kingdom  of  Gcd
upon  the  earth.  As  1  have  said,  we
took  a  vote  yesterday,  and  the  breth-
ren agreed  to  sustain  co  -operation,
and  I  would  like  to  know  from  this
congregation,  whether  you  will  sus-
tain co-operation  as  directed  by  the
Priesthood  or  not.  All  that  are  in
favor  of  doing  so,  hold  up  the  right
hand,  [The  congregation  voted
unanimously.]  Let  us  stick  to  our
covenants,  and  get  as  near  to  correct
principles  as  we  can,  and  God  will
help  us.  We  want  to  be  united  in
other  things  as  well — in  our  elections,
for  instance,  we  should  act  us  a  unit.
Other  men  are  not  ashamed  to  use
their  influence  and  operate  in  behalf
of  their  party  ;  why  should  we  ?  As
American  citizens,  have  we  not  the
same  right  ?  Yes,  we  have.  Then
let  as  be  one  and  operate  as  one,  for
God  and  his  kingdom.  And  let  us,
as  we  arc  told  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  select  the  wisest,  the  most
prudent,  intelligent  men,  and  put
them  in  office,  and  maintain  them  in
it.  That  is  the  way  for  us  to  do  ;  not
be  pulling  apart,  each  one  pursuing
the  devices  and  desires  of  his  own
heart,  The  members  of  the  Church
of  England  pray  to  the  Lord  every
Sunday  to  forgive  them  for  following
the  devices  and  desires  of  their  own
hearts.  Are  we  in  the  Church  and
Kingdom  of  God  ?  Are  we  instructed
of  God  ?  If  we  are  let  us  honor  our
calling,  and  show  to  God,  to  angels,
and  men,  that  we  are  true  to  our
trust  that  he  has  conferred  upon  us  ;
and  go  on  in  the  good  work  and  aim


at  more  union.  And  while  we  have
done  a  great  deal  of  good,  let  us  try
to  do  more.  And  in  regard  to  schools
and  the  education  of  the  young,  I
would  endorse  moat  emphatically
what  brother  Cannon  has  said  in  rela-
tion to  this  matter.  We  have  com*
mi t ted  to  our  care  pearls  of  great
price;  we  have  become  the  fathers
and  mothers  of  lives,  and  the  Gods
and  the  Holy  Priesthood  in  the  eternal
worlds  have  been  watching  us  and  :
our  movements  in  relation  to  these
things.  We  do  not  want  a  posterity
to  grow  up  that  will  be  ignorant,  de-
praved, corrupt,  and  fallen,  that  will
depart  from  every  principle  of  right;
but  one  that  will  be  intelligent  and
wise,  possessing  literary  and  scientific
attainra&nts,  and  a  knowledge  of
everything  that  is  good, praiseworthy,
intellectual  and  beneficial  in  the  world,
and  become  acquainted  with  the
earth  on  which  we  stand,  and  the
elements  of  which  it  is  composed,  and
by  which  we  are  surrounded,  and
know  l^aw  to  control  them  and  man-
age them,  and  how  to  put  to  the  best
use  everything  that  comes  within
our  reach.  And  above  all  other
things,  teach  our  children  the  fear  of
God.  Let  our  teachers  be  men  of
God,  imbued  with  the  Spirit  of  God,
that  they  may  lead  them  forth  in  the  !
paths  ol  life,  and  warn  them  against
the  various  evils  and  iniquities  that
prevail  in  the  world,  that  they  may
bear  off  this  kingdom  when  we  get
through,  and  be  valiant  in  the  truths
of  God.  Teach  them  how  to  approach
God,  that  they  may  call  upon  him
and  he  will  hear  them,  and  by  their
means  we  will  build  up  and  establish
Zion,  and  roll  forth  that  kingdom
which  God  has  designed  shall  rule
and  reign  over  the  rations  of  the
earth.  We  want  to  prepare  them
for  those  things;  and  to  study  from  :
the  best  books  as  well  as  by  faith,
and  become  acquainted  with  the  lawn


of  nations,  and  of  kingdoms  and  gov-
ernments, and  with  everything  calcu-
lated to  exalt,  ennoble,  and  dignify
the  human  family.  We  should  build
good  commodious  school-bouses,  and
furnish  them  well;  and  then  secure
the  services  of  the  best  teachers  you
can,  and  thus  "  train  up  your  child-
ren in  the  way  they  should  go"
Solomon  said,  if  you  do,u  when  they
are  old  they  will  not  depart  from

I  am  very  pleased  to  find  out  that
there  is  a  great  deal  of  interest  mani-
fested in  regard  to  our  youth,  I  see
three  of  our  brethren  here — brothers
Goddard, Evans  and  Willes;  they  have
been  oat  visiting  some  of  the  settle-
ments in  the  interests  of  the  Sunday
Schools;  I  wish  to  encourage  such
men  in  their  labors,  for  they  fully
realize  that  a  great  mission  has  been
committed  to  them,  to  teach  the
youth  of  this  people.  And  then,
there  is  our  Young  Men's  Mutual
1  Improvement  Associations  ;  they  are
very  good  institutions,  and  we  have
some  very  excellent  young  men,  that
are  rising  up  and  going  among  the
youth,  calling  upon  them  to  study
and  understand  the  laws  of  God.  And
all  the  Elders  of  Israel  ought  to  sus-
tain such  men  in  their  operations.
And  then  the  ladies  associated  with
the  Kelief  Societies  have  rendered
themselves  very  efficient*  Let  them
operate  for  the  good  of  all,  and  as
mothers  in  Israel,  let  them  be  united
and  lay  aside  every  petty  jealousy
and  little  feelings  that  are  wrong,,
and  be  one ;  and  let  the  Bishops  as-
sist them,  as  well  as  the  Young  La-
dies Mutual  Improvement  Associa-
tions, in  their  labors  in  the  interest
of  the  female  portion  of  society,  and
all  objects  of  mercy  and  charity,  or
anything  that  comes  within  their
reach.  And  I  say,  God  bless  you,
sisters,  and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life  that  you  may  prove  yourselves


THE  CHURCH  PARTIALLY  IN  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.  61


worthy  of  the  highest  trust  commit*
ted  to  your  care.  And  throughout  all
of  our  institutions,  let  us  sustain  the
right  and  put  down  the  wrong,  and
be  valiant  for  the  truth,  asking  no
odds  of  this  world,  for  God  is  on  the
side  of  Israel,  and  he  will  defend  us
if  we  obey  his  laws  and  keep  his  com-
mandments. Are  we  going  to  be
broken  up  I  Will  this  plan  of  our
enemies,  spoken  of  by  brother  Cannon,
be  accomplished?  No,  Will  this
people  fail  of  their  mission  ]  No,  bnt
many  of  them  will,  and  many  of  them
will  be  rooted  out.  But  the  work  of
God  will  go  on,  and  Zion  will  pro-
gress ;  and  if  we  can  put  ourselves
in  the  harness  to  fulfill  the  various
obligations  devolving  upon  us,  God
will  be  with  us  and  will  lead  us  in
the  right  path#  We  want  everybody
to  perform  their  duties,  in  all  the
various  branches  of  the  Priesthood,
every  man  to  operate  for  God,  and
not  in  his  individual  interests.  This
is  what  we  ought  to  strive  for,  and
to  be  on  the  side  of  Zion  and  operate
fur  the  welfare  of  Israel  and  for  the
establishment  of  righteousness.  We
want  our  Seventies  and  High  Priests
to  wake  up,  and  our  young  Elders
and  middle-aged  Elders  to  feel  the
responsibilities  of  the  mission  that
rests  upon  them*  The  world  has
to  be  evangelized,  the  Gospel  has  to
be  proclaimed  to  all  nations.  God
has  laid  it  especially  upon  the  Seven-
ties, with  the  others  to  assist  them.
And  we  call  upon  the  Seventies  and
High  Priests  to  wake  up,  to  assume
the  responsibilities  that  devolve  upon
them,  and  prepare  themselves  to  do
the  work  of  God.  For  instead  of
being  through  and  having  6nished
our  work  we  are  only  just  beginning
to  prepare  ourselves  for  the  conflict.
Wars  and  rumors  of  wars  are  begin-
ning to  sound  in  our  ears  ;  the  terrible
day  is  fast  approaching,  and  God  re-
quires it  at  our  hands  that  we  pre-


pare to  go  forth  to  the  nations  of  the
earth  to  proclaim  to  them  the  words
of  life.  Never  mind  what  people
can  do  among  us,  we  ask  no  odds
of  them.  God  is  with  Israel  if  Israel
will  only  be  with  God.  And  if  the
world  will  only  treat  us  fifty  per  cent
as  well  as  we  have  treated  them,  it  is
all  we  ask  of  them;  and  if  they  won't,
we  will  still  continue  to  do  them  good.
And  when  the  day  comes  that  all
men  will  be  brought  to  justice,  we
want  to  feel  conscientiously  free  from
the  blood  of  this  generation.  Do  we
want  the  aged  and  infirm  to  go  and
preach  the  Gospel.  No.  Had  there
been  time  yesterday,  I  would  have
very  much  liked  to  have  heard  the
brethren  of  the  priesthood  express
their  feelings;  but  1  would  say  to  you,
High  Priests,get  together  and  humble
yourselves  before  God,  seek  unto
Him  for  wisdom  to  guide  you  in  all
your  operations,  and  prepare  your-
selves to  magnify  your  offices  in  the
various  duties  of  your  calling,  which
is  really  that  of  presiding  that
when  changes  may  take  pjace  in  the
present  Stakes,  or  other  Stakes  may
be  organized,  you  may  be  prepared
as  President  and  council,  as  Bishops
and  council,  as  High  Councils,  or
whatever  office  you  may  be  called  to
fill.  And  I  would  say  the  same  to
the  Seventies  and  also  to  the  Elders,
prepare  to  magnify  your  callings.
Let  us  humble  ourselves  before  Godf
and  purify  ourselves  and  walk  in
uprightness  before  him  and  live  our
religion  and  magnify  our  calling,
and  be  quick  and  active  and  diligent
and  energetic  in  the  performance  of
our  duties,  and  the  power  of  God  will
rest  upon  the  Priesthood,  and  they  ■
will  be  prepared  to  go  to  the  nations
to  proclaim  the  Gospel  message  to
all  peoples.

I  do  not  know  how  many  we  will
want  to  call  at  our  approaching  con-
ference ; I  have  had  applications  for


G2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


twenty  to  fill  missions  in  the  Southern
States,  besides  a  great  many  other
places,  but  whether  few  or  many  be
needed,  we  must  be  in  readiness  tit
all  times  and  under  all  circumstances
to  magnify  our  Priesthood  and  to  do


everything  required  of  us.  Wc  will
build  our  Temples  find  be  Saviors  on
Mount  Zion,  and  the  kingdom  will
be  our  Land's.

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the
paths  of  life.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  Thirteenth  Wakh  Assembly  Rooms,  Sunday  Evenikg,

August  26,  1878,


(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibb$.)


THE  BOOK OF  MGHMON  PBOMZ8K8 TO  TUK LaMANITKS  OBJECTS  OP  THE

KhCORD  TUK BuoK OF  Aim s  HAM —  GIFTS TO TUK CHUllCH  BKNKFIT

OF  IMMK1/IATR  RKVXLATION—  THK  GRkaTkU  THINGS  SHOWN  TO  THOSE
WHO  RKCEIVK THE UKCORD  THE VISION OF MOSES  TUK  CREATION,


There  is  a  sentence  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  (p.  ftlO)  that  has  come  to
my  mind,  which  I  will  read,  u  And
whoso  receive th  this  record,  and  shall
rot  condemn  it  because  of  the  imper-
fections which  are  in  it,  the  same  shall
know  of  greater  things  than  these."
This  passage  from  the  Book  of  Mor-  [
mon  is  one  that  I  do  not  remember
having  chosen  as  a  foundation  of  any
special  remark?.  It  is  one  that  ap-
pliesdirectly  to  the  present  generation
—the  people  that  should  live  on  the
earth  tit  the  time  that  the  Lord  out-
God  should  bring  forth  this  record,
and  affording  them  the  opportunity
of  reading  its  contents.  They  were
written  by  the  Prophet  Moroni,  who
was  the  only  man  of  his  nation — the


Nephites,  who  was  righteous;  his
nation  having  been  destroyed  a  few
years  before  he  penned  this  sentence.
It  is  true  a  few  of  his  nation  had  de-
serted and  gone  fo  the  opposite  na-
tion— the  Lamanites,  and  a  few  had
fled  at  the  general  destruction  ;  but
they  were  hunted  by  the  La m an i tea,
and  were  destroyed  as  a  people,  Mo-
roni, being  a  Prophet  of  God,  would
not  join  that  nation  in  their  wicked-
ness and  idolatry,  and  the  only  way
he  could  preserve  his  life  was  to  keep
himself  secreted  and  hidden  from  the
knowledge  of  the  Lamanites.  While
concealing  himself  from  his  enemies,
he  finished  the  record  of  the  Book
of  Mormon.  The  latest  date  which
he  gives  in  the  record  is  420  years


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC.


63


after  the  birth  of  Christ,  according
to  the  signs  that  were  given  on  this
American  continent,  concerning  big
birth.  Thirty-six  years  prior  to  this
time  his  nation  was  destroyed  in
in  what  we  term  the  State  of  New
York,  aroand  about  a  hill,  called  by
that  people  the  Hill  of  Cumorah,
when  many  hundreds  of  thousands
of  the  Nephites — men,  women  and
children,  fell,  during  the  greatest
battle  that  they  had  had  with  the
Lamanites.  For  years  this  pro-
phet of  God  kept  himself  hid,  and
wrote  as  he  was  prompted  by  the
spirit  of  inspiration,  and  finally  hid
op  the  plates  of  gold,  containing  the
records  in  the  hill  of  Cumorab,  with
the  promise  which  the  Lord  gave  him
that  these  records  should  come  to
light  in  the  last  days,  that  lie  him-
self would  bring  them  forth  by  his
own  wisdom  and  power.  And  he
also  tells  us  his  object,  namely,  to
benefit  the  Gentiles  who  should  oc-
cupy this  American  continent — the
Promised  Land,  as  they  term  it:  and
also  for  the  benefit  of  other  nations
of  Gentiles  to  whom  the  book  should
afterwards  be  sent  ;  and  when  they
should  reject  it,  the  Lord  would  cause
it  to  be  published  to  the  remnants  of
the  Lamanites  inhabiting  this  coun-
try, whom  we  call  American  Indians,
which  shall  be  the  means  of  reveal-
ing  to  them  the  history  of  their  fore-
fathers, and  also  certain  promises
made  to  them  as  a  branch  of  the
house  of  Israel,  setting  forth  that
many  of  their  descendants  should  be-
lieve the  record  when  it  should  be
made  known  to  them,  and  that  they
should  be  instructed  in  the  things  of
God,  and  the  curse,  which  has  dege-
nerated them  to  their  present  low
condition,  should  be  removed,  and
that  they  should  lay  down  their
weapons  of  war,  and  that  they  should
cease  to  war  and  commit  murders,
and  thefts  and  robberies,  and  that


they  should  become  a  peaceable,  and
also  a  white  and  delightsome  people*
These  are  the  predictions  given  in
the  Book  of  Mormon  as  some  of  the
objects  of  the  bringing  forth  of  that
record  in  the  last  days.  And  among
r  other  objects  that  the  Lord  had  in
view  was,  that  he  might  enlighten
»  the  minds  of  the  people  in  regard  to
the  Gospel  in  all  its  plainness  and
fjlness,  with  all  its  promises,  bles-
sings, gitts  and  ordinances;  so  that
j  the  people,  the  Gentiles,  to  whom
this  record  should  be  sent,  might
have  no  excuse  for  rejecting  it,  and
also  that  the  Gospel  might  be  estab-
lished in  the  earth  in  its  purity,  ac*
cording  to  ancient  prophecies.  An-
other object  was,  that  he  might  build
up  his  church  among  the  Gentiles,
if  they  should  believe  in  this  record
and  in  the  preaching  of  His  servants
when  they  should  be  sent  forth  in
the  last  days  among  them,  testifying
to  its  truthfulness.  In  speaking  of
this  work  which  the  Lord  is  doing
in  the  earth,  we  sometimes  call  it  the
Church  of  God,  and  we  also
speak  of  it  as  the  kingdom  of  God.
It  is  both,  God  himself  being  the
King;  not  a  civil  power,  not  a  civil
government  in  the  earth,  for  we
already  have  established  here  upon
this  choice  land  a  government  where-
in all  classes  of  religious  people  may
worship  God  as  they  please;  but  the
Lord  intended  among  these  var-
ious religions  and  ecclesiastic  denom-
inations, to  have  a  peculiar  denomina*
tion,  a  peculiar  people,  a  peculiar
church,  which  he  denominates  his
kingdom,  and  himself  as  the  great
law-giver  in  this  kingdom.  Another
object  was  that  men  might  have  more
faith  than  what  they  had  been  in  pos-
session of  in  the  former  generations
of  apostacy  and  wickedness,  and  that
the  faith  which  the  ancient  Saints
exercised  might  again  dwell  in  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  For


»


■


64


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


instance,  a  power  of  faith,  through
our  repentance  and  through  our  obe-
dience to  the  ordinances  of  baptism,
to  receive  that  greater  and  miraculous
baptism  of  the  Holy  Gbo§t.  And
that  this  gift,  this  baptism  of  fire  and
the  Holy  Ghost  which  should  be  given
to  all  the  members  of  the  Church  of
God,  should  put  them  in  possession
of  certain  gifts,  which  no  other  people
on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  should
have  or  know  anything  about,  pro-
viding the  members  of  the  Church
were  worthy  to  jiossess  them.  I  will
name,  in  abort,  the  various  gifts  that
the  Lord  intended  to  be  given  to  this
people.  In  the  latter  days,  when  this
record  should  be  brought  forth,  he
intended,  in  the  first  place,  to  raise
up  a  great  and  mighty  Prophet,  to
translate  the  divine  book.  This  was
fulfilled  before  the  rise  of  the  Church
about  50  years  ago.  This  Prophet
who  was  raised  up  to  perform  this
work  was  permitted  to  take  these  re-
cords out  of  the  hill  where  Moroni
had  deposited  them  some  420  years
after  Christ.  This  Prophet  was  spo-
ken of  in  the  records,  and  the  work
that  he  should  perform  was  also  spo-
ken of.  And  notwithstanding  his
youth  and  inexperience  in  regard  to
the  learning  and  wisdom  of  the  world,
he  proved  himself  a  great  and  mighty
man  of  God ;  he  not  only  was  the
instrument  in  the  hands  of  God  of
bringing  to  light  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, but  also  received  numerous  other
revelations  which  are  contained  in
this  book  called  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  a  book  that  contains  near-
ly as  much  reading  matter  as  the
Book  of  Mormon ;  and  besides  these
you  will  find  that  many  of  the  reve-
lations were  given  by  him  which
are  found  in  what  is  called  the  new
edition  of  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price,
published  by  the  Dcseret  News  Office,
which  gives  a  knowledge  of  things
that  took  place  in  the  creation  much


more  fully  jHan  what  is  described  in
the  book  of  Genesis,  giving;  an  acopunt
of  a  great  many  occurences  and  i- vents

that  transpired  before  tpfe  flood,  Wso

giving  us  much  information  orythe
Gospel  that  was  taught  in  those  early
ages,  and  giving  us  some  very  im-
portant prophecies,  reaching  down  to
the  present  period  of  the  world,  and
also  prophecies  that  reach  down  still
further,  from  the  present  day  to  the
end  of  the  world.  These  are  not  the
only  revelations,  given  through  this
great  modern  Prophet,  The  Lord
brought  to  light  sacred  records  from
the  Catacombs  of  Egypt.  After
several  hundred  men  had  wrought
and  toiled  for  many  months  in  dig-
ging down  one  of  these  vast  struc-
tures, they  entered  into  its  interior  ;
they  found  a  great  number  of  mum-
mies— the  bodies  of  persons  that  had
been  preserved  since  the  catacomb
was  built,  and  some  eleven  of  these
mummies,  well  preserved,  were  taken
out  by  these  men,  and  they  finally  fell
into  the  hands  of  a  person  named  M.
H.  Chandler.  They  were  sent  from
Kgypt  to  Ireland,  where  it  was  sup-
posed he  resided,  but  learning  that
be  resided  in  America,  they  were  sent
to  him.  After  receiving  the  mum-
mies he  began  to  take  off  so  me  of  the
ancient  covering  or  wrapping,  and  to
his  astonishment  he  found  upon  the
breast  of  one  of  these  mummies  a  re-
cord written  upon  ancient  papyrus  in
plain  characters,  written  both  in  black
and  red  inks,  or  stains,  or  colors.
And  the  mummies  and  the  records
were  exhibited  by  Mr.  Chandler,  in
New  York ,  Philadelphia,  and  many
of  the  Eastern  States  of  our  Union  ;
and  thousands  of  people  saw  them,
and  among  them  mauy  learned  men;
and  these  characters  were  presented
to  them,  and  not  unfrequently  was
Mr,  Chandler  referred  to  uJoe,J  Smith
as  they  used  to  term  him,  who,  they
said,  pretended  to  have  translated


some  records  that  he  found  in  the
western  part  of  New- York,  and  that
if  Mr*  Chandler  would  go  and  see  him
perhaps  he  would  translate  those  an*
eient  characters.  Many  of  these  re-
ferences were  made  with  the  inten-
tion of  ridiculing  Mr.  Smith  ;  but  it
S3  happened  thai  in  traveling  through
the  country,  he  visited  Kirtlaud, Ohio,
where  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  re-
sided, bringing  the  mummies  and
the  ancient  papyrus  writings  with
him.  Mr.  C.  had  also  obtained  from
learned  men  the  best  translation  he
could  of  sonic  few  characters,  which
however,  was  not  a  translation,  but
more  in  the  shape  of  their  ideas  with
regard  to  it,  their  acquaintance  with
the  languages  rmC  beiiiLf  sufficient  to
enable  them  to  translate  it  literally.
After  some  con  versa  t  in  n  with  the
Prophet  Joseph,  Mr.  Chandler  pre-
sented to  him  the  ancient  characters,
asking  him  if  he  could  translate  them
The  prophet  took  them  and  repaired
to  his  room  and  inquired  of  the  Lord
concerning  them.  The  Lord  told
him  they  were  sacred  records,  con-
taining the  inspired  writings  of  Abra-
ham when  he  was  in  Egypt,  and  also
;hi>se  of  Joseph,  while  ho  was  in
Eff/pt ;  and  they  had  been  deposited,
with  these,  mummies,  which  hul
been  exhumed.  And  he  also  en-
quired of  the  L  »rd  concerning  some
fev  characters  which  Mr.  Chandler,
gave  him  by  way  of  a  test,  to  see  if
lie  co  lid  translate  them.  Tne  Pro-
phet Joseph  ti  an  slated  these  charac-
ters and  returned  them,  with  the
translation  to  Mr.  Chandler;  and
who,  in  comparing  it  with  the  trans-
lation of  i  he  same  few  characters  by
learnei  men,  that  he  had  before  ob*
twined,  found  the  two  to  agree,  The
Prophet  Joseph  having  learned  the
value  of  these  ancient  writings  was
very  anxious  to  obtain  them,  and  ex-
pressed himself  wishful  to  purchase
tfcem.  Hut  Mr,  Chandler  told  hiru
No.  5,


thathe  would  not  sell  the  writings,  un-
less he  coojd  sell  the  mummies,  for  it
would  detract  from  the  cariosity  of
his  exhibition;  Mr.  Smith  inquired
of  him  the  price  which  was  a  consid-
erable sura,  and  finally  purchased  the
mummies  and  the  writing,  all  of
which  he  retained  in  his  possession
tor  many  years;  and  they  were  seen
by  all  the  Church  that  saw  proper  to
visit  the  house  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
and  also  by  hundreds  of  strangers.

ft

The  Prophet  translated  the  part  of
these  writing*  which,  as  I  have  said
is  contained  in  the  Pearl  of  fire**1"
Price,  and  known  as  the  Book  01
Abraham.  Thus  you  see  one  of  tho
first  gifts  bestowed  by  the  Lord  for
the  btmeiit  of  His  people,  was  that
of  revelation — the  gift  to  translate,
by  the  aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thum-  i
mim,  the  gift  of  bringing  to  light  old
and  ancient  records.  Have  any  of
the  other  denominations  got  this  gift
among  them?  Go  and  inquire  through
all  of  C  hnstendom  and  do  not  miss
one  denomination.  Go  and  ask  the
oldest  Christian  associations  that
are  extant ;  go  to  Itnly,  headquarters,
and  ask  the  man  that  holds  the  great-
est power  and  authority  in  the
Romish  Church,  "  Can  you  translate
ancient  records  written  in  a  language
that  is  lost  to  the  knowledge  of  man  ?,?
"  No/'  he  would  say,  "  we  cannot,  it
is  out  of  my  power  to  do  it/'  Go  to
Rama  inquire  of  the  heads  of  the
church  of  the  Gre  ek  Catholics,  if  they
can  do  Ibis;  and  they  will  give  yout
tubs  tan titdly,  the  sariR*  answer.  Then
try  the  later,  the  pre? en t  d:iy  deno-
minations, inquire  of  every  one  of
them,  beginning  with  the  Lutherans
and  the  C:dvinists,  and  the  Church
of  England,  and  then  put  the  same
question  to  all  of  the  branches  that
have  sprung  from  thepa,  as  well  as  to
those  that  have  come  into  existence
by  other  means;  and  the  universal
reply  of  thu  Christi  an  denominations*

Vol.  XX.


66


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


numbering  some  400.000,000,  would
be  that  tliey  have  not  the  power  to
do  it. Ask  them  if  they  pretend  to
possess  supernatural  power  from  God,
to  accomplish  a  work  of  this  nature  ;
and  they  will  all  tell  you  ihat  God
has  never  bestowed  such  power  upon
any  of  their  ministers* And  then,
if  it were  possible, ask  t lie  4  on,
000,000 of Christians, scattered  1
throughout  Asia,  Kurope,  America
and  the  islands  of  the  seas,  if  a  man
can  be  found  among  them  endowed,  j
as  ancient  seers  were,  with  the  gift  |
to  see,  or  as  ancient  revelators  were
who  told  future  events,  what  should
befall  men  and  natiens  and  their  final
destiny  ;  and  the  universal  reply  will
be,  O,  no,  such  things  are  all  done
art  ay. Here  then  the  very  first  gift
that  the  Lord  set  in  his  church,  is  a
peculiar  gift  so  far  as  the  religions  of
the  world  are  concerned,  not  peculiar
so  far  as  the  Church  of  Christ  is  con-
cerned, but  so  far  as  the  religious
world  in  the  four  quarters  oft  lie  earth
iscuneerncd,  we  have  something  which
they  have  not  got,  and  something
that  is  in  accordance  with  the  Bible,
What  man, I  would  ask  further,
among  all  the  religions  of  the  earth,
fur  the  last  seventeen  centuries,  that
lias  possessed  the  Trim  and  Thum-
mim,  the  gilt  that  would  constitute
him  a  seer  and  a  revelator?  There
may  have  been  some  seventeen  thou-
■s*nd  million  of  people  that  have  passed
oil1  from  our  globe  without  such  gifts
byitig  among  them  ;  and  they  were
gifts  given  to  the  people  of  God  be-
fore the  advent  of  the  Savior,  and  that
were  enjoyed  by  his  servants  that
lived  contemporary  with  him  and
with  those  who  lived  after  he  had  per-
formed his  mission  to  the  earth,  and
ascended  to  heaven. Then,  in  speak-
ing to  strangers,  I  'would  say,  you
must  give  us  credit  of  at  least  profes-
sing to  have  these  great  and  impor-
tant gifts,  gilts  which  all  the  other


religions  of  the  world do  not  even
profess  to  be  in  possession  of.  Let
me  candidly  enquire,  which is  the
most  plea>ing  in  the  sight  of  God,
for  people  to  obtain  the  great  and
precious  things  which  come  through
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?
or  for  people  to  have  no  information,
no  instruction  for  some  seventeen
hundred  years,  only  what  they  could
glean  out  of  the  writings  of  some  of
the  ancient  Seers,  or  Prophets,  or
Kevelators,  or  Apostles,  who  have
lived  and  who  have  died  centuries  ago?
Perhaps  strangers  might  claim  that
they  have  the  writings  of  those  favor-
ed men  of  God,  and  that  they  need
no  more,  and  that  all  the  generations
of  men  since  the  days  that  such  men
of  God  fell  asleep  needed  no  further
instruction  thai*  that  which  was  given
to  former- day  Saints. The  strangers
present  will  readily  concede  this  to
be  the  sentiment,  the  belief  and  testi-
mony of  all,  or  nearly  all  the  religious
people  upon  the  lace  of  the  whole
earth.  You  also  know  if  youhave  read
the  history  of  Christendom  for  seven-
teen centuries  past,  that  their  belief
and  testimony  in  this  respect  have
been  similar  to  those  cntertair.ed  by
Christianity  of  to-day, Now,  I  ask
again,  which  is  the  more  Godlike,
which  is  the  more  in  accordance  with
the  Bible, for  a  people  to  enjoy  the
sirne  gifts  that  were  enjoyed  by  the
people  of  God  in  earlier  dispensations,
or  to  be  obliged  to  depend  upon  some
one  else's  gift  \vho  has  long  ago  pas-
sed away? Now, any  consistent
religious  man  will  give  his  testimony
on  religious  affairs  indepei  dent  of  the
traditions  of  his  fathers,  and  won  id
say  in  his  own  mind,  it  is  more  con-
sistent for  us to  have  Bevelators,
Prophets,  Seers  and  Translators  in-
spired from  heaven  in  our  Church,  it
is  more  in  accordance  with  the  Bible
to  be  in  possession of  those  gifts
ourselves  than  to  depend  upon  Reve-


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC.


lators  and  Seers  of  former  ages.  I
do  not  suppose  for  a  moment  that
there  is  any  consistent  person  bat
that,  if  left  to  his  own  reasoning,
would  say  that  this  is  certainly  the
more  reasonable  and  the  more  consist-
ent ;  and  especially  when  the  Bible
is  referred  to,  in  which  there  is  no-
thing limiting  the  generations  that
have  lived  upon  the  earth  for  seven-
teen centuries  in  regard  to  these  gifts.
It  is  more  consistent  then  when  God
should  raise  up  a  Church  he  should
have  Prophets,  Seers  and  Revelators
in  that  Church,  inspired  men,  men
that  can  receive  the  word  of  the  living
God,  upon  all  subjects  that  should
come  before  thern  which  might  con*
cern  the  people.  How  many  milli-
ons of  questions  and  matters  of  more
or  less  magnitude  might  be  cited  for
which  no  instruction  could  be  found
in  the  Hible  that  would  be  at  all  suit-
able to  the  circumstances.  Take
any  one  individual  among  the  many
of  the  human  family,  and  you  could
find  thousands  of  things,  pertaining
to  his  individual  welfare  and  tempo-
ral circumstances,  that  he  could  never
learn  out  of  the  Bible.  The  Lord
guides  and  directs  the  temporal  as
well  as  the  spiritual  n flairs  of  his
people ;  he  always  has  done  so.  How
many  thousands  of  things  does  a
single  head  of  a  family  need  to  know,
in  regard  to  his  own  temporal  cir-
cumstances, what  course  he  should
take  most  pleasing  to  the  Almighty,
whether  to  pursue  this  course  or  that
branch  of  business,  or  whether  to
pursue  some  other  branch  of  business,
wherein  he  might  do  the  roost  good  ;
and  wherein  he  could  glorify
God  most;  and  which  would
be  the  greatest  blessing  for  his  house-
hold and  family,  and  wherein  he  could
please  the  Lord  and  live  more  up-
rightly and  more  godly,  and  more
consistently  and  honestly,  by  pursu-
ing one  branch  of  business  rat  her  than


that  of  another.  All  these  things
concern  every  head  of  a  family ;
therefore,  if  be  had  the  spirit  of  reve-
lation, if  he  could  go  and  inquire  of
the  Lord,  if  he  found  it  to  be  the
whisperings  of  his  spirit  which  course
to  pursue  in  temporal  matters,  what
a  great  blessing  it  would  be  for  him ;
and  then  not  for  that  one  person
only,  but  for  all  his  sons  as  they  grow
up,  and  for  his  wivss,  if  he  have  a
number  of  wives.  The  Lord  used  to
give  revelation  not  only  to  the  head
of  a  family,  but  also  to  a  man's  wives.
Read,  for  instance,  what  the  Lord
revealed  to  the  wives  of  Jacob,  how
he  used  to  reveal  a  great  many
things  to  Rachel,  a  great  many  things
to  Leah,  a  great  many  things  to
Bilhah,  and  a  great  many  things
to  Zilpah.  These  four  wives  were
revelators ;  they  were  prophetesses ;
they  were  individuals  that  could  in-
quire of  the  Lord,  and  obtain  an  ans-
wer from  him;  and  we  have  their
revelations  recorded  in  the  Scriptures
We  call  their  revelations  the  Word  of
God  to  them.  What  a  benefit  it
would  be  for  a  man  who  had  three
or  four  or  half  a  dozen  wives,  who
could  receive  the  word  of  the  Lord  in
relation  to  their  several  duties;  how
calculated  it  would  be  to  produce
peace,  and  union,  and  salvation  in
the  family  and  household.  And
what  great  comfort  it  would  be  for  a
man  if  he  had  several  wives,  and
knew  by  the  spirit  of  revelation  how
to  deal  in  relation  to  all  his  domestic
and  temporal  affairs,  according  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God.  Again,  how
great  would  be  the  benefit  to  a  body
of  people — to  say  nothing  of  house-
holds and  families — located  fiur  in-
stance, in  one  region  of  the  country,
a  people  who  were  united  together
according  to  the  law  of  God,  desiring
to  advance  each  others  welfare  and
happiness,  and  each  man  was  required
to  love  his  neighbor  as  himself ;  a


people  wlio  knetf  liow  to  so  conduct
their  temporal  affairs  that  each  man's
neighbor  might  be  benefitted  as  well
as  himself;  and  each  one  looking  not
only  for  his  own  welfare  or  that  of
his  own  household,  but  for  the  wel-
fare  of  the  whole  community,  with
whom  ho  was  associated,  producing
at  last  that  unity  and  oneness  which
the  Lord  requires  in  the  numerous
revelations  which  he  has  given.

It  requires  revelation  then;  it  re-
quires revelation  for  one  single  branch
of  the  church  located  in  one  region
of  the  country ;  how  much  more  ne-
cessary, when  there  are  numerous
branches,  and  that  those  branches
should  know  their  duties  in  regard  to
one  another,  that  they  might  not
work  it  gainst  one  another's  interests
iu  any  way  or  manner,  but  on  the
contrary,  labor  for  the  mutual  bene-
fit of  all  the  branches  of  the  Church
and  Kingdom  of  God,  and  thus  pre-
serve means,  even  as  Joseph  did  in
Egypt.  Joseph  was  a  man  that  sought
after  riches,  he  ad  vised  King  Pharaoh
to  seek  after  riches,  by  building
storehouses,  and  procuring  as  much
of  the  surplus  grain  as  he  could,
during  the  seven;  years  of  plentiful
liar  vest  s  which  he  foretold,  and  to
store  it  away  for  future  use.  Some
people  might  have  supposed,  if  they
had  lived  in  that  day,  that  Joseph
was  a  great  speculator,  and  wanted
to  take  advantage  of  the  people,
gel  ting  rich  himself  at  their  expense.
Hut  the  Lord  directed  this  ;  he  gave
a  revelation,  clearly  showing  what
would  be  necessary  for  the  solvation
of  the  Egyptian  and  also  the  child
ren  of  Israel  who  were  sojourning  in
the  land.  Hence  we  perceive  it  was
necessary  to  get  revelation  in  regard
to  temporal  matters,  and  that  with-
out  it  the  famine  would  havecoraeupon
thcru  unawares  and  destroyed  hund-
reds of  thousands  of  people,  and  they
would  have  perished  over  all  the


land.  Hence  by  a  few  words  of  re-
velation given  through  a  Prophet  of
God,  that  lived  in  their  midst,  milli-
ons of  people  were  saved  alive.

If  wTe  trace  the  history  of  the  people
of  God  we  shall  find  it  a  history  of
revelations  of  God  to  man  given  for
the  purpose  of  directing  them  as  in-
dividuals, as  families,  as  neighbor-
hoods, as  tribes  and  as  peoples,  di-
recting them  in  regard  to  their  tern-
poral  affairs,  as  well  as  concerning
the  great  matters  that  pertain  to  a
future  state  of  existence.

1  mention  this  in  order  to  refer  to
the  text  which  I  have  taken.  Ho
that  receives  this  record,  and  shall
not  condemn  it  because  of  imperfec-
tions that  are  in  it,  the  same  shall
knew  ot  greater  things  than  these.
That  is,  they  shall  know  of  greater
things  than  what  are  contained  in
the  Book  of  Mormon.  The  Book  of
Morn ioti  contains  some  wonderful
tilings  about  the  colonization  of  this
country  soon  after  the  flood,  the  histo-
ry of  a  certain  nation  that  lived  here
some  sixteen  or  seventeen  centuries;
then  of  another  nation  that  succeeded
it,  and  that  lived  here  some  600  years
before  Christ,  unci  down  to  the  time
that  the  records  were  hid  up.  Great
tilings,  historically,  are  revealed  in
this  book  ;  great  things  are  revealed
in  it  concerning  prophecies  that  am
yet  to  take  place,  and  that  have  al-
ready taken  place — when  this  record
was  translated,  Not  only  this,  but
it  contains  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God.  1  mean  the  tirsfc  principles  of
the  Gospel — the  principles  of  faith
in  God  and  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ;
repentance — turning  away  from  sin,
from  all  unrighteousness;  baptism
by  immersion  in  water  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins;  the  gift  and  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  shed  forth
upon  those  who  should  receive  this
record — that  i^,  receive  its  truths  and
obey  them. It  does  not  mean  those


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC.


who  should  read  this  record  and  not
perform  the  things  that  are  contained
therein ;  the  promise  is  not  extended
to  them,  "  Whoso  receiveth  this  re-
cord/' That  is,  receives  the  Gospel
therein  contained,  will  assuredly  be-
lieve in  Christ ;  will  assuredly  repent
of  his  sins  ;  will  assuredly  be  baptized
for  the  remission  of  his  sins  ;  and
will  assuredly  be  confirmed  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  for  the  reception
of.  the  Holy  Ghost.  No  man  or
woman  that  fails  to  comply  with  thes*
things  that  I  have  named — believes
and  receives  the  record;  they  may
pretend  to  believe  the  record,  they
may  say  it  appears  to  be  a  very  good
record,  and  it  speaks  as  if  it  might
be  true ;  but  unless  they  do  receive
it,  by  obeying  its  ordinances,  and  its
institutions,  and  complying  with  the
principles  of  the  Gospel,}  they  would
not  be  entitled  to  the  promise  record-
ed in  the  words  of  my  text,  "  They
shall  know  of  greater  things  than
these/'  I  would  ask,  if  the  Latter-
day  S  iints  know  of  anything  greater
than  that,  which  is  contained  in  the
Book  of  Mormon*  What  a  wonder-
ful thine  the  Book  of  Mormon  is,  to
be  brought  forth  l>y  an  angel  sent
from  heaven  to  be  translated  from
the  ancient  languages  of  this  country
into  our  English  language,  to  have
the  Urim  and  Thumrnim  given  to  the
the  translator  by  which  the  words
were  translated.  What  a  great  and
wonderful  thing  the  Book  of  Mormon
is  so  far  asita  propheciesareconcerned,
so  far  as  its  history  and  its  doctrine
are  concerned  ;  and  so  far  as  its  pre-
dictions of  those  things  which  are  im-
mediately in  the  future  areconcerned,
what  a  great  benefit  it  has  been  to
us  Latter-day  Saints  to  read  our  own
history  before  it  comes  to  p;as<%

I  might  take  up  a  whole  discourse
in  showing  how  the  Book  of  Mormon
has  been  fulfilled  since  it  has  been
translated  up  to  the  present  time,  in


the  bringing  forth  of  the  Gospel  from
among  the  Gentiles  The  persecu-
tions that  they  should  endure  are  pre-
dicted in  the  Book  of  Mormon  .  It
is  a  great  thing,  it  isa  wonderful  thing.
In  fact  it  is  just  what  Isaiah  said
it  would  be  in  prophecy mg  of  the
Book ;  he  said  it  should  be  a  mar-
vellous work  and  a  wonder.  But
the  people  who  should  receive  this
record  should  know  of  greater  things.
What  greater  things  have  we  learned?
We  might  havo  searched  the  Book
of  Mormon  from  beginning  to  end,
and  we  never  could  have  learned  the
perfect  organization  of  the  Kingdom
of  God  upon  the  earth,  such  as  we
now  find  it  in  the  midst  of  this  people.
We  might  have  read  in  the  Bo.ik  of
Mormon  about  theMelchisedek  priest-
hood, as  it  existed  among  the  ph~
ites;  we  might  have  re*d  of  the
Aaronic  priesthood  such  as  also  exist-
ed in  this  land  ;  and  we  might,  too,
have  read  about  the  first  principles
of  the  Gospel  and  about  Twelve/
Apostles  chosen  among  the  ancient
Nephites;  but  do  we  read  of  the
manner  in  which  the  Nephites  were
organized  after  they  were  baptized
and  received  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Xo.
Why  ?  Because  the  Lord  saw  pro-
per to  withhold  this  from  m%  deeming
it  proper  to  reveal  it  through  the
patriarch  Joseph,  whom  he  would
raise  up,  as  something  greater  than
the  Book  of  Mormon  should  contain  ;
showing  that  there  were  to  be  Twelve
Apostles  in  our  day.  Did  the  Bosk
of  Mormon  inform  us  that  we  were
to  have  Twelve  Apostles  ?  No.  The
Lord  therefore  gave  greater  things  to
this  people  who  believed  the  record
that  had  come  unto  us,  by  revealing
directly  that  we  were  to  have  raited
up  in  this  dispensation  twelve  nun,
called  Apostles,  and  that  they  should
go  iorth  and  preach  his  Gospel,  first
to  the  Gentile  nations,  and,  when  the
times  of  the  Gentiles  should  be  ful-


70


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


filled,  they  should  go  forth  and  preach
His  Gospel  to  the  scattered  remnants
of  the  house  of  Israel.  This  was
taught  when  the  revelation  was  given
soon  after  the  last  part  of  the  Book  of
Mormon  was  translated  ;  that  the
Lord  would  raise  up  a  Church  ;  that
he  would  call  twelve  men  and  send
ttam  forth  as  Apostles,  that  he
would  build  up  his  Church  among
the  Gentiles  first  j  that  he  would,
when  their  times  were  fulfilled,,  send
them  to  the  house  of  Israel,  to  bring
that  people  back  to  a  knowledge  ot
the  Gospel.

Now  this  was  new  information  to
the  people.  They  at  first  learned  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  having  learned
it,  having  been  taught  concerning
what  God  taught  ancient  Israel  on
this  land,  then  the  Lord  revealed
unto  them  greater  things  according
to  the  promise  in  our  text  by  telling
them  what  should  be  done  directly  in

our  midst.

Then  again,  what  could  we  learn
from  either  the  Bible  or  Book  of
Mormon  in  regard  to  three  glories —
the  celestial,  the  terrestrial  and  the
telestial  glories?  What  did  we  know
concerning  those  that  should  inhabit
these  various  worlds  of  glory  ?  No-
thing at  all.  It  was  merely  referred
to  in  Paul's  writings,  that  there
were  three  glories,  "one  glory
of  the  sun,  and  another  glory  of  t Lie
moon,  and  another  glory  of  the
stars  :  for  one  star  di Beret h  from  an-
other  star  in  glory.  So  also  is  the
resurrection  of  the  dead;'  But  Paul
left  us  here ;  he  did  not  tell  us  any.
tiling  about  the  celestial,  or  anything
about  terrestrial,  or  telestial  glories;
he  told  us  nothing  about  the  inhabi-
tants of  these  worlds,  nor  anything
about  the  laws  by  which  these  diffe-
rent glorified  worlds  were  governed,
but  merely  referred  to  them  in  a  few


words  and  then  dropped  it.  The
people,  to  whom  he  was  writing  may
have  known  all  about  the  subject  lie  so
casually  referred  to,  if  they  did,
t  he  knowledge  they  possessed  was  not
handed  down  to  us.  But  the  Lord,
on  the  16th  day  of  February,  1832,
poured  out  His  Spirit  from  on  high
while  Joseph  was  engaged  in  the
work  of  translating  another  record,
and  also  upon  his  scribe,  and  they
saw  in  vision  the  celestial  world,  and
they  were  commanded  to  write  a
portion  of  the  things  which  they  saw;
to  write  about  the  greatness  and
power  and  majesty  and  the  know-
ledge of  the  people  who  inherit  the
celestial  world.  And  they  were  also
shown,  in  the  same  manner  the  ter-
restrial world  and  the  inhabitants
thereof  and  their  glory >  and  what
their  condition  would  be  in  the  eter-
nal worlds  •  and  then  thev  descended
also  in  their  vision  and  beheld  the
lesser  or  telestial  glory,  and  they
saw  the  inhabitants  that  dwelt  there
and  comprehended  the  laws  by  which
they  were  governed.  Some  of  these
tilings  they  were  commanded  to  writ
while  there  were  things  which  they
beheld  which  they  were  strictly  com-
manded not  to  write,  as  the  world
was  not  worthy  to  receive  them*
Neither  was  the  Church,  at  that  time,
prepared  to  receive  a  full  knowledge
concerning  these  things.  But  that
portion  which  they  were  permitted
to  write  they  wrote,  and  it  has  been
printed  now  some  40  years  for  the
Saints  and  for  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  to  learn  concerning  the  future
condition  of  all  those  that  shall  pass
out  of  1  his  state  of  existence  behind
the  vail.

Here,  then,  were  greater  tilings
made  manifest  than  those  in  the
Book  of  Mormon,  or  those  in  the
Bible, Whoso  receives  this  record


THC  BOOK  OF  MUllMJN,  ETC,


and  shall  not  condemn  it  because  of
imperfection?,  the  same  shall  know
of  greater  things.  u  Bat,"  says  one,
"what  imperfections  could  there  be  in
the  writings  of  an  inspired  man?"
I  will  tell  you.  Imperfections  may
creep  in  through  the  printing  press,
unless  there  was  some  expert  person
to  examine  tho  printing  of  the  Book.
There  might  be  imperfections  creep
in  through  the  persons  that  recorded
these  things — Moroni  and  the  vari-
ous  prophets  that  preceded  him  who
wrote  upon  the  plates.  Imperfections
might  occur  through  the  o  ni*sion  of
sumo  words.  But  one  of  the, Pro-
phets says,  he  knew  of  no  imperfec-
tion in  the  record ;  nevertheless,  the
Lord  knew  all,  therefore,  he  said,
judge  not,  lest  ye  be  judged  ;  judge
not  with  harsh  judgment,  lest  ye  be
judged  harshly —that  is  unrighteously.
Probably  the  individual  in  reading
the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon from  the  hands  of  the  printer,
knew  of  no  error  so  far  as  the  prin-
ting whs  concerned-  But  when  we
came  to  examine  the  first  edition,  and
even  all  the  editions,  we  found  borne
few  little  imperfections  that  were
introduced  chiefly  of  a  typographical
nature.  Well,  those  who  will  not
condemn  the  work  of  God  because  of
such  little  things,  have  the  promise
that  they  shall  know  of  greater  things
than  these.  The  Latter-chiy  Saints
are  witnesses.  You  have  upon  your
shelves  the  Bjotc  of  Covenants  and
Command  meiHs,  the  revelations  of
heaven  ;  you  also  are  in  pos-ession  of
the  Pearl  of  Great  Price,  containing
the  vision  of  Moses,  that  great  and
glorious  vision  which  he  received  on
the  mount,  re  veiling  to  him  the
history  of  the  creation  of  the  world.
The  Lord  saw  proper  to  descend  upon
a  certain  mountain  before  Moats,  and
showed  himself  to  him,  and  the  glory
of  God  rtsted  upon  Moses  so  that  nu
stood  in  the  preaeuce  uf  the  Lurd  ;


and  the  Lord  showed  unto  Moses  the
works  of  his  hands  in  relation  to  the
various  creations  that  he  had  made.
And  when  Mos^s  began  to  inquire  of
the  Lord,  the  Lord  said  unto  himr
No  man  can  behold  all  my  works,
except  he  behold  all  my  glory  ;  and
no  man  can  behold  all  my  glory  and
afterwards  remain  in  tho  flesh  upon
the  earth. Here,  then,  Moses  began
to  understand  that  it  was  not  for  him
as  a  mortal  personage  to  cast  his
eyes  forth  and  behold  all  the  infinite
creations  of  the  Almighty  dispersed
through  boundless space;  but  the
Lord  was  willing  that  he  should  know
in  part. And  Moses,  when  he  saw
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  things  witb
which  he  was  surrounded,  pertaining
to  the  planetary  system,  he  began  to
wonder  and  marvel,  as  you  and  I
would  do  if  we  had  the  privilege  of
gazing  in  vision  upon  the  works  of
God. And  while  he  was  marveling
at  what  he  had  seen,  the  Lord  for
some  reason, withdrew  from  him,
probably  to  try  him,  to  see  if  he  would
be  faithful  to  him. And  when  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  taken  from
him,  and  the  a  lory  of  God  had  with-
dr;twn  from  him  and  the  Lord  him*
self  had  departed  from  before  him,
Moses  wns  left  to  himself. O  how
weak!  He  fall  to  the  earth,  and  for
the  space  of  many  hours  he  did  not
receive  his  natural  strength.  And
when  in  thU  weak,  fallen  condition
he  exclaimed,  I  know  now  that  man
is  nothing;  and  he  began  tocall  upon
the  Lord to  restore  his  strength*
And  Siian,  we  learn,  took  advantage?
of  Moses  on  this  occasion,  while  thus,
left  to  himself,  and  came  and  stood
before  him,  and  said  Mosep,  son  of
man,  t  am  the  Only  Begotten,  wor-
ship rne. M  h^ea  looked  upon  Satan
and  petceivfd  the  difference  at  once,,
between  the  gloriuua  personage  that
had  appeared  to  him  a  short  time
befute,  and  the  personage  of  Satatu


72


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


And  Moses  in  looking  upon  this
strange  visitor  said,  Where  is  thy
glory  that  I  should  worship  thee  ?
Behold,  I  could  not  look  upon  God
save  his  glory  were  upon  me ;  but  I
can  look  upon  thee  in  my  natural
state.  Having  said  so  much  to  him,
lie  commanded  him  to  depart ;  but
l>eing  so  weak  his  faith  was  not  strong
enough  to  prevail  against  Satan,
hence  he  did  not  leave  at  his  bidding,
Moses  then  called  npon  God,  and
Satan  began  to  tremble  and  the  earth
began  to  shake;  and  Satan  went  upon
the  earth,  and  commanded  Moses,
saying,  I  am  the  Only  Begotten,  wor-
ship rne.  But  Moses  Ft  ill  called  upon
God  for  strength,  and  the  Lord  heard
and  answered  his  prayers  :  and  he
then  commanded  Satan,  in  t be  name
of  the  Only  Begotten  Son,  to  depart;
and  he  was  rebuked  from  his  presence.
And  again  Moses  lifted  up  hid  voice
to  heaven  and  cried  to  the  Lard,  and
the  glory  of  God  began  to  come  upon
him  ;  and  the  Lord  stood  in  his  pre-
sence again,  and  Moses  was  again
filler!  with  his  glory.  And  while  he
was  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord
he  beheld  all  the  earth  and  the  inha-
bit ants  thereof,  and  there  was  not  n
particle  of  the  earth  withheld  from
his  vision  ;  he  saw  every  particle  of
it  He  beheld  it  not  by  the  natural
-vision,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God.

Moses  not  only  saw  the  whole  of
this  beautiful  creation  in  its  entirety,
but  he  doubtless  beheld  the  laws  by
which  every  particle  is  governed  by
the  Jaw  of  gravitation  or  electricity
■or  heat,  Moses  comprehended  it.  He
was  then  desirous  to  know  how  the
Lord  created  the  earth,  as  well  as
other  heavenly  bodies;  but  would  the
Lord  grant  his  desires  in  full  ?  No;
because  it  was  iint  for  mortal  man  to
know  so  much. Bat  Moses  still  plead
with  the  Lord  in  this  language  :  "Be
merciful  unto  thy  servant,  0  God


and  tell  me  concerning  this  earth  and
the  inhabitants  then  of,  and  also  the
heavens,  and  then  thy  servant  will  be
content." He  thought  that  if  he
could  not  behold  other  worlds,  if  he
had  not  the  privilege  granted  to  him
of  looking  upon  more  glorious  crea-
tions, it  would  be  a  satisfaction  for
him  to  look  upon  this  earth  and  also
(he  heavens.  Bat  what  was  the  Lord's
answer  to  him  ? 14  The  heavens  !
they  are  many,  and  they  cannot  be
numbered  unto  man,  but  they  are
numbered  unto  me,  for  they  are  mine,
and  as  one  earth  Bhall  pn&s  away,  and
the  heavens  thereof,  even  so  shall
another  come ; and  there  is  no  end
to  my  works,  neither  to  my  words."
Bat,  said  the  Lord,  "I  will  reveal  to
you  concerning  this  earth  npon  which
thou  standest,  nnd  also  (he  heaven
belonging  to  the  earth,  and  you  shall
write  the  words  which  J  speak  to  you,"
This  is  the  way  that  Muses  obtained
what  is  now  called  the  book  of  Gene-
sis, which  gi\es  an  account  of  the
creation. How  did  we  learn  of  these
things  ?  By  way  ti£ fulfilment  of  this
promise,  contained  in  the  words  of
our  text: u  Whoso  shall  believe  n
this  record  and  shall  not  condemn  it
because  of  its  im  pet  feet  ion,  the  same
sh'ill  know  of  greater  things  than
these  " Here  then  we  have  come  to
a  knowledge  of  the  great  and  grand
vifion  given  to  the  Revelator  Moses.
God  communicated  In  Moses  concern-
ing the  creation  of  the  heavens  and
this  little  earth  upon  which  we  dwell.
He  tells  us  that  darkness  came  upon
the  face  of  the  great  deep,  after  the
earth  was  created. What  was  there
before  this  darkness  came  upon  the
hee  of  t lit?  great  deep, after  the
earth  was  created. What  was  there
before  this  darkness  came,  can  any
one  t*ll  us? A  great  many  religi-
ous people, without  any  rellectiun,
have  supposed there  was  no  light,
from  all  eternity, until about  six


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC


73


thousand  years  ago  ;  that  then  the
Lord  created  the  sun,  moon  and  stars,
they  really  think  that  that  was  the
first  time  from  all  the  endless  durations
of  pnst  eternity  that  there  was  any
light.  I  mean  a  great  many  ignorant
people.  But  according  to  the  revela-
tion given  to  Moses,  there  was  light
before  the  foundations  ot  this  wo  rid
were  laid,  before  God  caused  dark-
ness to  come  over  this  great  deep;
after  he  .created  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  then  God  spake  and  said,  let
there  be  light  and  ihere  was  light
And  as  we  are  told,  the  evening  and
t he  morning  was  the  first  day.  Why
does  it  begin  with  the  evening  and
not  with  the  morning?  Because
darkness  reigned,  the  Lord  having
caused  darkness  to  reign  over  the
whole  face  of  the  earth.  How  he  did
it,  in  what  way  he  produced  it  is  not
revealed.  At  any  rate,  it  is  not  said
in  the  book  of  Genesis  that  the  sun
was  permitted  to  shine  forth,  or  that
the  moon  gave  its  light  on  the  first
day;  but  that  was  something  which
was  permitted  to  take  place  on  the
fourth  day  instead  of  on  the  first  day.
What  then  was  it  that  existed  before
darkness  came  over  the  face  of  the
deep?  Was  it  sunshine  ?  I  think
not.  It  was  that  probably  which  is
connected  with  all  creations  in  their
first  formation — self-luminous  matter.
Darkness  was  then  made,  but  how
we  know  not;  it  might  have  been  by
causing  the  light  associated  with  those
materials  to  become  latent  in  the
substance — not  permitted  to  shine
forth.  How  long  this  darkness  con-
tinued is  not  revealed.  How  long
it  was  lie  fore  the  Lord  said  again,
tfc  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was
light/'  is  not  revealed.

Again,  we  find  that  the  solid  por-
tions of  the  earth  were  entirely  covered
with  water,  for  the  Lord  commanded
the  waters  to  be  gathered  together
to  one  place;  and  commanded  the


dry  land  to  appear.  The  dry  land
h\>  called  earth;  the  gathering  to-
gether of  the  waters  called  he  seas.
How  did  he  do  this?  He  may  have
done  it  by  a  direct  miracle,  or  he
may  have  done  it  according  to  cer-
tain laws  which  he  controlled,  and
which  were  always  under  his  con-
trol* How  easy  it  would  be  for  him
to  take  this  globe  of  ours  that  was
entirely  covered  by  water,  and  set
it  in  motion,  and  cause  it  to  rotate
upon  its  axis.  Would  not  this  cause
the  waters  to  be  gathered  together
from  the  equatorial  regions  to  the
two  polar  regions — the  Arctic  and  the
ant- Arctic  seas,  and  in  the  interme-
diate regions,  and  thus  leave  the
dry  land  in  the  equatorial  regions  ?

Then  again  how  easy  it  would  be
for  him  to  compress  the  solid  por-
tions of  the  earth  at  the  poles  and
cause  the  same  to  bulge  out  above
the  equator.  Or  in  other  words,  to
do  this  also  by  law,  by  causing  the
eirth  to  turn  more  swiltly  than  it
docs  at  the  present  time,  winch  would
give  a  greater  diameter  through  the
equator  than  at  the  poles.

There  fire  many  things  in  the  new
translation  besides  the  vision  and  re-
velation in  regard  to  the  creation,
written  by  Joseph  Smith,  which  are
far  greater  than  anything  contained
in  the  Bible,  or  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, or  in  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants. I  bring  up  these  things  in
order  to  show  you  that  God  has  ful-
filled his  promises  to  the  present
time,  by  giving  ns  greater  know-
ledge concerning  the  creation  of  our
globe.

The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  re-
vealed to  us  that  all  the  materials  of
our  globe,  and  all  the  materials  of  the
universe,  are  eternal  in  their
nature,  that  their  substance  is  eter-
nal, not  created  out  of  nothing,  accord-
ing to  the  vagaries  and  foolish  ideas
of  the  religious  world. The  Lord


74


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES.


told  fts  that  he  created  the  earth  out
of  materials  that  previously  existed  ;
he  told  rs  that  these  materials  were
eternal  in  their  mature,  and  of  ever-
lasting duration. In  what  condition
have  these  materials  been  for  the
last,  say  mi  11  ions  of  ages — for  instance,
as  many  millions  of  years  as  there
are  sands  upon  the  sea  shore  ?  Have
they  been  lying  dormant  without  any
control  of  law  ? Were  there  no  elec-
tric principles  or laws  to  govern
tbera,  was  there  no  heat  connected
with  them,  or  was  there  no  latent
principle  called  light,  neither  a  gravi-
tating power  in  connection  with  these
materials? I  have  no  doubt  in  my
own  mind  but  what  there  have  been
laws  from  all  eternity or  if  you  do
not  wish  to  call  them  laws,  chII  them
forces,  call  Ihem  powers,  call  them  by
any  name  which  may  suit  yoi: — that
have  controlled  these  materials;  and
then  again  these  laws  or  forces  have
also  been  under  the  control  of  a  wise,
supreme  intelligence  from  all  eterni-
ty to  the  present  time. How  many
organizations  the  materials  of  our
earth  have  undergone before  they
were  organized  according  to  the  rev-
elations given  to  Moses,  are  not  re-
vealed. How  many  wurlds  they  had
entered  into  prior  to  that  time  ;  how
many  conditions  existed  through  the
millions  of  ages  of  past  duration  are
nowhere  revealed. A  great  many
learned  men  are  beginning  to  see
that  the  materials  of  oor  globe  have
been  in  existence,  as  they  say,  for
millions  of  ages.  Some  of  them  have
made  calculations  in  regard  to  how
many  millions  of  years  si  nee  such  and
guch  phenomena  took  place,  in  regard
^to  certain  materials  of  which  our  earth
1B  composed  ;  and  because  they  have
discovered  some  of  these  things,  they
have,  in  the  weakness  and  foolishness
of  their  minds,  began  to  doubt  the
Mosaic  history,  concerning  the  crea-
tion. I  presume  if  I  had  never  heard


of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  or  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  or  the  revelations  of
which  I  am  speaking,  I  suppose  I
should  have  been  probably  an  infidel,
so  far  as  regards  the  religions  sects;.
I  could  not  have  believed  them,  if  I
had  suffered  my  mind  tort  fleet  But
when  I  come  to  learn  and  understand
that  God  has  nowhere  spoken  in  all
the  revelations  that  he  has  given,
that  he  ever  made  so  much  as  one
particle  of  this  earth  out  of  nothing
and  when  I  found  that  God  has  never
hinted  or  revealed  any  such  thing;
but,  on  the  contrary  that  he  oriran-
ized  the  world  out  of  pre-exist  en  t
materials  that  were  eternal  in  their
nature,  then  I  could  reflect  back  with
onr  learned  philosophers  and  sutler
my  ipincl  to  go  back  just  as  far  as
they  dare  go  in  their  theories,  and
then  go  back  to  all  eternity  beyond
that  which  they  go,  and  say,  these
materials  were  in  organization,  and
say worlds were  beirg  organized,
and  different  conditions  were  taking
place,  and  laws  were  being  given  for
all  these  vast  ages  of  the  past,  and
still  reconcile  it  with  the  revelations
God  has  given  in  these  latter  times.
Science  and  true  religion  never  can
possibly  contradict  each  other.  There
never  was  any  truth  in  science  that
would  contradict  any  principle  of
revelation  that  God  ever  revealed  to*
man. Why  ? Because  true  science
is  founded  upon  a  true  understanding
of  the  laws  and  forces  of  nature.
But  who  ordained  from  time  to  time
these  laws  of  nature  in  connection
with  the  universe  as  we  now  behold
them  ? It  was  the  Lord  whom  wTe-
gerve,  the  great  Supreme  Ruler  of
the universe, who  organizes  and
disorganizes  according  to  his  own-
will  and plea>uie. Ue  garnishes
the  heavens  in  bio  wisdom  and  builds
the  vast  superstructure  of  the  uni-
verse, as  a  very  handy  work.  He
brings  into  life  aud  being  new  worlds*


THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  ETC,


7<r>*


and  disorganizes  them,  scattering  the
elements,  and  again  brings  them  to-
gether by  his  power  or  by  the  laws
he  has  ordained,and  by  his  laws  makes
new  creations,  new  worlds,  and  new
universes,  and  inhabits  them  with
myriads  and  myriads  of  intelligent
beings  ?  This  is  the  work  of  the
great  Supreme  Ruler  of  all  things.

This  we  lind  out  by  reading  the
first  two  chapters  of  Genesis,  as  re-
vealed anew,  and  many  other  things,
of  which  we  were  profoundly  ignor-
ant, until  God  raised  up  this  youth,
this  unlearned  Prophet  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  to  bring  these  things
to  light.  By  revelations  given  in
ancient  days,  and  renewed  through
this  young  Propliet  of  God,  we  learn
that  we,  ourselves,  did  not  begin  to
exist  when  we  were  born  into  this
state  of  existence  j  we  learn  that  we
are  of  higher  origin  than  that  assgned
by  poor,  unbelieving  man.  Contrast
he  ideas  of  the  last  few  centuries
with  the  ideas  that  God  has  revealed
from  heaven*  They  would  make  man
look  for  his  origin  down  to  the  very
reptile  and  the  worm  that  crawls
upon  the  earth,  and  to  the  fish  of  the
sea — as  the  first  father,  the  first  ori*
gin,  the  first  oyster.  Such  is  the  reason
of  the  learned  of  the  last  few  centu-
rieo — the  evolution  theory;  in  other
words,  that  which  you  learn  from
books,  the  creation  of  man's  fo'ly
and  foolishness.  Hut  when  we  learn
through  the  revelations  of  God  that
instead  of  man's  coming  up  from  the
poor  worm  of  the  dirt,  lie  descended
from  that  being  who  controls  the
universe  by  his  power;  that  he  de-
scended from  that  being  who  is  the
fullness  of  all  knowledge,  and  who
sways  his  sceptre  over  more  planet-
ary systems  than  there  are  sands
upon  the  sea  shore.  We  are  his  off-
spring, we  are  his  sons  and  his  daugh-
ters, we  are  his  cfiildren,  he  has  be-
gotten as,  and  we  existed  before  the


foundation  of  the  world.  Who  among
the  wise,  and  the  great,  and  those
who  have  studied  as  far  as  human
wisdom  can  at  present  reach  ;  who
among  them  can  tell  the  origin  of
life  1  Who  among  them  can  tell  the
origin  of  this  intelligence  in  man,  this
reasoning  power,  and  this  perceptive
faculty,  that  enables  man  to  grasp  not
only  a  great  many  things  pertaining
to  the  laws  connected  with  their  own
little  earth,  but  enables  hitn  to  launch
out  into  the  regions  of  space  for  hund-
reds of  millions  of  miles  and  find  out
and  understand  many  tilings  that
govern  worlds  afar  off.  Is  there  no
man  that  can  tell  the  origin  of  this
Intelligence?  Let  the  trained  colle-
giate inind,  whose  lifetime  has  been
occupied  in  study,  come  forth  and  tell
us  how  man  obtains  the  first  principle
of  knowledge,  how  came  knowledge
to  be  connected  with  matter,  how
came  knowledge  connected  with  flesh
and  bones,  and  blood,  and  skin,  and
Mnew  ?  That  knowledge — that  in-
telligence is  Godlike;  God  is  the  au-
thor, he  is  father  of  our  spirits,  and
we  were  begotten  before  this  world
rolled  into  existence.  Once  we  dwelt
in  the  presence  of  our  Father;  once
we  were  enabled  to  lift  our  songs  of
praise  iti  the  celestial  world,  from
which  we  emigrated  ;  once  we  dwelt
in  the  society  of  an  innumerable  con-
vention of  angels,  upon  a  world  that
had  passed  through  its  stagey  its
ordeals,  the  same  as  this  world  is
passing  through  its  various  mutations.
That  celestial  world  from  whence  we
came,  is  more  perfect  than  this  earth,
it  is  organized  after  a  celestial  order,
a  higher  order  and  glorified  by  the
presence  of  immortal,  glorified,  cele-
stial beings.  Tnat  is  our  home,  Irom
that  world  we  came.  Here  is  our
dwelling  plnce  for  a  season  ;  to  that
world  we  will  return,  to  that  being
by  whom  we  were  begotten  we  will
render  an  account ;  he  who  is  our


76


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Father  will  require  us  to  give  an  ac-
count of  our  doings  in  this  probation.
We  must  meet  him,  and  behold  him,
in  all  his  glory,  in  all  his  power,  in
all  his  majesty,  and  greatness,  and
superior  excellency  and  with  that  in-
finite knowledge  of  which  he  is  in
posession;  we  must  appear  be  fore  him
to  give  an  acc  ount  of  our  doings
while  fell u t  out  from  his  presence  on
this  little  world

Here  then  is  another  thing  in  which
the  Lord  has  fulfilled  our  text.  lie
has  told  us  of  our  pre-existence ;  he
has  told  us  of  the  glory  and  the
greatness  of  our  ancestor,  even  the
■Supreme  Being;  he  has  told  us  when
we  existed,  that  it  was  before  this
world  was  brought  into  existence.
Are  not  these  greater  things  than
are  contained  and  explained  in  the
Book  of  Mormon  or  the  Bible?  It
is  true  the  Book  of  Mormou  barely
4t11udes  to  the  pre-existence  of  man,
without,  explaining  it.  Jesus,  before
he  appeared  in  the  flesh,  showed  his
spiritual  form  to  the  brother  of  -Tared;
it  was  not  a  body  of  flesh  and  bones;
but  a  spiritual  form,  like  the  image  of
man.  He  said  unto  the  brother  of
Jared,  Seest  thou,  that  thou  art  cre-
ated after  mine  image?  Antl  lie
further  says,  All  men  in  the  begin-
ning have  I  created  after  the  image  of
the  body  of  my  Spirit ;  that  is  the
spiritual  form  occupied  by  him.  All
men  and  women  in  the  beginning
were  created  by  Him.  and  there  never
was  a  person,  there  is  not  any  one
now  living,  and  there  never  will  be
a  man  or  woman,  but  what  was  in
the  beginning  created  in  his  image.

I  do  not  know  but  what  I  am  oc-
cupying too  much  time,  I  will  briefly
say,  however,  before  closing,  that
certain  records  which  God  has  pro-
mised \q  bring  to  light  in  his  own
due  time,  will  far  exceed  anything
that  has  been  revealed  through  the
Book  of  Mormon  or  the  Bible,  or


that  which  has  come  to  us  through
I  lie  Abraharnic  record  taken  from
Egyptian  papyrus,  or  that  which  is
contained  in  the  vision  of  If 0868,  re-
vealing  to  him  the  history  of  the  Cro-
at ion  of  the  world.  All  these  will  be
as  a  drop  in  the  bucket  in  comparison
with  the  eternal  knowledge  that  will
yet  flow  down  from  heaven  upon  the
heads  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  before
this  generation  shall  pass  away.  The
earth  will  be  filled  with  the  knowledge
of  God,  as  the  waters  cover  the  great
deep,  and  the  things  of  all  nations
will  be  revealed.  The  records  of  old
that  were  kept  by  the  people  of  Asia,
who  have  since  dwindled  into  savages
by  reason  of  the  transgressions  of
their  fathers;  and  those  that  have
been  kept  by  the  ten  tribes  of  the
north  countries,  where  they  have
lived  for  over  25  centuries;  and  those
records  that  have  been  kept  by  the
people  of  the  City  of  Enoch,  giving
an  account  of  the  dealings  of  God
with  ancient  Zion,  will  all  come  forth
to  help  611  the  earth  with  the  know-
ledge of  God,  as  the  waters  cover  the
great  deep.  And  John,  when  upon
the  Isle  of  Patmos,  saw  things  in
vision,  which  were  commanded  to  be
sealed  up,  and  they  are  yet  to  be  un-
sealed ;  and  in  this  way  we  shall  re-
ceive knowledge  upon  knowledge,
revelation  upon  revelation,  concerning
not  only  the  mx  or  seven  thousand
years  of  the  earth's  temporal  exist*
ence,  but  concerning  the  materials  of
the  earth  before  it  was  made,  and
the  elements  and  materials,  and  all
things  pertaining  to  the  future  earth
that  is  to  be  created  when  the  ele-
ments of  this  earth  shall  be  dissolved
and  pass  away  into  space.  There  is
nothing  too  great  to  be  withheld  from
t he  Saints  ot  God  in  the  last  dispen-
sation of  the  fulness  of  times,  Hear
what  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
said,  when  confined  in  Liberty  Jail.
As  well  may  the  puny  arm  of  man


LABORS  AND  EXPERIENCE,  ETC.


attempt  to  stop  the  waters  of  the
Missouri  River  as  to  try  to  prevent
the  Almighty  from  pouring  down
knowledge  upon  the  Latter-day
Saints,  It  will  come;  it  will  come
like  a  mighty  flood,  it  will  come  like
a  mighty  ocean,  and  there  will  be  no
mental  darkness  opon  the  whole  face
of  the  ear tli.  The  laws  by  which  the
earth  is  governed,  by  which  the  ma-
terials were  governed,  by  which  in*
telligence  produces  intelligence,  by
which  one  material  cleaves  to  another,
and  by  which  all  the  various  mechan-
isms are  performed,  will  be  revealed
in  their  times  and  in  their  seasons*
And  then  the  Lord  will  not  stop  there;
but  he  will  unfold  other  systems  and
heavens  that  shall  come  into  connec-


tion with  ours.  How,  I  know  not^
in  what  way,  I  know  not.  There
will  be  telescopes,  microscopes  a^d
other  instruments  discovered  in  these
systems,  that  will  so  far  outstretch
the  discoveries  made  at  the  present
time,  that  all  these  things  will  dwindle
into  'insignificance,  and  when  the
inhabitants  of  one  system  can  con-
verse with  those  of  another,  and  when
there  shall  be  communication  between
all  the  creations  that  God  has  made
with  the  present  creation  we  inhabit,,
and  when  the  Lord  shall  bring  forth
Zion  out  of  all  the  creations  he  has
made  ;  then,  I  think,  we  shall  begin
to  look  back  in  astonishment  at  the
littleness  of  the  discoveries  of  the
learned  of  the  19th  century.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER, GEO. Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  Semi-Annual  Conference,  on  Sunday  Afternoon

April  6,  1878.

(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gib  fa.)


Labors  and  expkbienck  op  tub  bldkbs — tmk  work  scarcely  begun  —

the powkh of  union  tk1cpokal salvation necessary  as  wkll

as  spiritual  co  ofkbation  and  the  united  ohdelt.

The  speaker  read  from  the  Doctrine  and  mako  him  feel  his  own  nothing-

and  Covenants  (new  edition),  com-  ness,  it  is  to  stand  up  before  such  an

meeting  at  the  2itb  paragraph,  and  audience  as  is  here  assembled,  to  at-

ending  at  the  33rd  paragraph,  of  sec-  tempt  t)  speak  to  them  and  to  instruct

tion  58. ,  them.  We  have,  however,  something

This  is  a  great  people,  and  if  any*  besides  our  own  strength  to  rely  on ;
thing  would  be  likely  (o  appall  a  man  |  if  it  were  not  so,  I  should  not  be  here.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


The  promise  of  the  Lord  is  that  when
we  assemble  together  as  we  have
this  day,  and  as  wo  are  now  assem-
bled, he  will  give  unto  us  that  por-
tion of  his  word  and  hi?*  counsel  as
shall  be  suited  to  our  circumstances,
«D  that  every  soul  shall  eat  of  the
bread  of  life  and  go  away  satisfied,
and  rejoice  in  the  privilege  he  may
have  had  of  coming  together  as  we
now  are.

This  work  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged embraces  more  and  more-  The
older  I  grow  the  more  I  become  ac-
quainted with  its  magnitude,  with
the  responsibilities  that  are  connec-
ted with  it,  and  especially  the  re-
sponsibilities which  rest  down  upon
those  who  are  the  chosen  leaders  of
the  people.

We  know,  as  was  testified  to  this
morning,  that  this  is  the  work  of
God,  that  God  has  laid  its  foundation,
that  God  has  chosen  the  men  who
are  associated  with  it  and  who  are  in
authority  connected  with  the  work,
to  fill  the  situations  which  they  occu-
py. We  know  also  that  he  has  re-
stored the  authority  that  was  once  en-
joyed by  man,  by  which  men  are  en-
abled to  act  in  the  midst  of  the  people
in  Christ's  stead.  And  knowing
these  things  we  are  encouraged  as  a
people  and  as  individuals  to  press
forward  and  to  help  establish  that
cause  which  lie  has  revealed  to  the
earth.  But  there  are  many  things
connected  with  this  work,  with  its
advancement,  with  the  binding  of  the
people  together,  with  the  carrying
out  of  the  great  designs  which  God
has  revealed  for  the  salvation  of  the
children  of  men  ;  which  press  upon
our  attention  and  cause  us  to  exercise
every  faculty  of  our  minds  in  think-
ing, in  pondering  upon  and  in  giving
shape  to  measures  that  shall  result
in  the  greatest  good  to  this  great
people.

The  principles  ofthe  Gospel  wcare


all  familiar  with,  as  a  people ;  we
have  studied  the  lesson  from  the  be-
ginning and  have  become  familiar
with  it  in  almost  all  it£  details.  We
have  traveled,  we  have  preached,  we
have  borne  testimony  to  this  work;
we  have  helped  f  o  gather  the  people
together,  organizing  them,  before
doing  so,  into  branches,  into  confe-
rences, into  missions,  and  then  have
organized  them  into  companies  to
travel  by  sea,  to  travel  by  laud,  to
bring  them  to  the  gathering  places
which  have  been  appointed.  With
these  labors  the  Elders  of  this  church
have  obtained  great  familiarity;  they
have  become  experts  in  preaching
spiritual  salvation,  in  preaching  the
first  principles  of  the  Gospel  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  in  telling  the
people  how  they  shall  be  saved  from
their  sins,  and  what  they  shall  do  to
obtain  t lie  promises  of  God  connec-
ted with  obedience  to  this  Gospel.
And  we  have,  in  com i tig  to  these
mountains,  obtained  considerable
knowledge  concern i ng  other  matters.
Probably  to-day  a  man  would  not  be
open  to  the  charge  of  egotism,  of
being  vain  concerning  the  people,
were  he  tosay  that,  to  take  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  the  men  of  this  church,
and  in  no  other  body  of  men  of  the
same  numbers  will  you  iind  men  of
such  experience  in  preaching,  in  tra-
veling, as  missionaries,  as  Elders,  in
organizing  the  people,  in  handling
companies  of  large  bodies  of  men  and
women  and  laying  the  foundation  of
settlements,  in  building  cities,  in  de-
veloping countries,  and  in  organizing
systems  of  government  in  those  coun-
tries. I  do  not  know  that  I  am  open
to  the  charge  of  being  vain  concern-
ing the  Latter-day  Saints  when  I
make  this  statement — that  in  all  the
earth,  among  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  you  cannot  find  so  large  a
body  of  principal  men  familiar  with
spiritual  things,  familiar  with  tern


i


m


cod's  powek,  etc


79


pornl  things,  familiar  with  the  hand-
lino:  of  large  bodies  of  people  a:,d
organizing  them  and  dictating  their
labors  and  planning  for  their  urnipo-
ral  salvation,  and  for  their  good  gov-
ern men t,  as  you  will  find  in  the  midst
of  these  mountains  and  numbered  in
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Litter-
day  Saints.

And  yet,  after  making  this  state*
ment,  we  stand,  as  it  were,  at  the
very  threshold  of  our  work,  just  at
the  door  of  it ;  we  have  scarcely  ac-
complished any  thing  compared  to  what
remains  to  be  done  connected  with  the
work  devolving  upon  us.  We  have  made
a  beginning,  it  is  true,  we  have  solved
some  problems  j  but  there  is  an  im-
mense amount  of  work  to  he  done
bv  us  as  a  people,  and  especially  by
those  who  act  in  our  midst  in  the  ca-
pacity  of  leaders.  The  highest  qua-
lities of  statesmanship  arc  needed  and
called  for;  the  highest  qualities  that  i
men  and  women  possess  that  make
them  capable  of  planning  for  nations
devising  schemes  and  plans  that  will
net  only  save  a  town  or  a  small  com-
munity of  people,  hut  that  will  ex-
tend to  nations  the  means  of  saving
them  from  national  peril  and  from
evils  that  menace  the  existence  of
every  power  that  now  exists  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.

You  look  abroad  to-day  among  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  and  see  their
condition,  see  the  evils  with  winch
they  are  afflicted  and  which  threaten
the  downfall  and  the  overthrow  of  na-
tions and  we  need  not  to  go  beyond  our
own  land  to  gain  experience  in  this
matter,  and  to  ascertain  the  danger
which  besets  this  republic,  the  most
glorious  nation,  and  the  most  glori-
ous form  of  government  that  exists
upon  the  habitable  globe.  How  many
times  it  is  said  that  this  republic  can-
not stand,  that  evils  are  working  and
undermining  the  fabric  of  govern*
raent,  and  which  threatens  its  speedy


overthrow.  You  can  scarcely  talk
with  a  thinking  man  upon  these  sub*
jects,  a  man  who  takes  in,  to  the  extent
of  his  vision,  all  the  evils  which  threa*
ten  our  nation,  without  having  him
acknow  ledge  that  the  future,  in  many
respects,  looks  exceedingly  dark,  and
that  it  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether
the  republic  can  be  preserved  as  it  is
at  the  present.

With  all  these  facts,  then,  before
us,  it  is  well  for  us  to-day,  assembled
as  we  are  ID  this  general  Conference,
to  take  into  some  consideration  our
own  condition,  the  circumstances
which  surround  us,  and  examine  them
in  the  light  of  intelligence  and  wis-
dom, as  He  has  given  it  to  us,  and
whether  we  should  not  take  steps  to
preserve  our  existence,  and  not  only
preserve,  but  perpetuate  it,  and  to
increase  our  power,  and  to  cause  that
work  with  which  we  are  identified  to
continue  to  progress  and  to  fulfil  its
high  and  glorious  destiny.

There  is  one  principle  which  I  think
in  mentioning  everyone  will  see  the
power  of,  and  that  is  union.  It  is  a
trite  saying,  often  repeated,  that
union  is  strength.  Certainly  we  have
proved  the  truth  of  thissay  ing  through
the  long  or  short  period,  as  it  may  be,
of  our  existence  us  a  people.  There
is  no  people  to  day  with  whom  I  am
acquainted  who  has  proved  so  satis-
factorily as  we  have  throughout  our
past  experience,  the  value  of  union.
It  is  that  which  makes  U3,  numeri-
cally n  weak  people,  a  strong  people;
it  is  that  which  makes  us  one  hun-
dred and  fifty  or  one  hundred  and
sixty  thousand,  or  perhaps  two  hun-
dred t  housand  people  throughout  these
mountains  north  and  south,  a  power
iu  the  land;  and  a  power  certainly
which  there  is  more  said  about  than
any  other  power,  probably,  in  exist-
ence. Divide  us  up,  segregate  us
into  denominations,  into  factions,  and
what  would  we  amount  to  ?  Nothing-


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


our  strength  would  be  dissipated,  we,
would  be  enfeebled,  and  nothing  par-
ticularly would  be  said  about  us  more
than  is  said  about  thousands  and  mil-
lions of  others  from  whom  we  are  se-
parated* it  was  the  union  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  which  in  the  be-
ginning created  oppomtiDii  Hgiiin&t
us,  brought  it  to  tbe  surface,  and
mada  it  moving  when  there  were
but  fifty  or  less  members  of  the
church.  The  wry  fact  that  a  new
principle  of  union,  had  been  brought-
to  light,  through  which  tbefc  iiffcjr
men  and  women  were  united  aslhe

heart  of  one,  was  sufficient  to  arouse
opposition  and  create  to  a  certain
extent,  fear.  Sectarian  influence
WM  brought  to  bear  against  us*
"Our  creed  is  in  danger,  ot.r  sect
is  in  danger,  our  placo  is  in  danger,
if  this  people  with  this  union  should
gain  a  foothold  among  ns."  Alarm
was  felt  in  the  ranks  of  the  various
sect*,  and  they  lelfc  that,  although
a  power  insignificant  and  wink,  as
it  weie,  it  .rthould  be  fought  and  its
existence  extirpated,  il  'possible  from  ;
off*  the  earth.  Hence  the  oppo-
sition it  inet  with  in  the  beginning

A  lew  weckriold,  like  a  lit  tic  tremb-
ling, puny  infant  not  able  t
iu>t  iible  to spev.k or make  itself
felt. Vet  the  very  existence  of  tin
infant  aroused  fear,  HB  great  feir  as
thai;  which  animated  Herod  of  old
when  he  issued  an  edict  lor  all  the
iirftt-born  male  childreu  of  Israel  to.
be  slain. It created  terror  in  the  |
land;  and  all  because  a  certain  babe
o!  liethlchem  had  born  born,  and
he  hoped,  in  issu'in;  this  cruel  edicr ,
to  destroy  this  man-child  and  with
him  i lie  power  which  he  feared.  So
it  was in the beginning of  this
work,  when  it  was  weak  and  feeble
it  created  in the minds  of  those
who  watched  its  birth  and  its  after-

growth  a  feeling  of  fear,  and  they
were  determined  id  destroy  it  from


off  the  earth,  if  they  could.

When  the  church  moved  to  Kirt-
land  and  the  people  began  to  gather
together  to  go  to  that  place  to  settle,
you  will  see  by  ^reading  the  history,
the  fear  that  was  produced.  And
you  read  the  lit&tory  of  the  settle-
inent  of  the  people  in  Jackson  County
and  you  will  see  the  same  manifest-
ations, Ottly  more  violent,  until
such  a  spirit  was  engendered  that
the  mob  succeeded  in  driving  the
people  from  the  county.  You  can
trace  it  through  all  the  history  ot
this  people  to  the  present  time.  t  It
has  been  the  union  of  the  tatter-
duv  Saints  that,  as  I  have  before


id,  i


)il  cry


]


i  t  aud  made  it  as  effeptave  as  it  has
been  against  us.  Had  we  been  a
divided  people,  had  we  been  quar-
relling among,  ourselves,  h&d  there
been  factions  among  us  aud  jealous-
ies among  our  leading  men,  you
would  not  have  seen  this  opposition
neither  would  you  have  seen  the
credit  that  has  been  given  to  us,  nnr
the  power  that  this  people  have
wielded  111  the  earth  to  the  present
time.  You  would  not  have  seen
this  spectacle — this  inspiriting  spec-
tacle of l-,0!Mi people  assembled

under  one  roof  to  worship  God  no
cording  to  the  dictates  of  their  own
consciences  and  the  revelations  of
(rod,  and  partaking  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  as  we  are  to-day.  Yon  would
not  have  seen  these  valleys  peopled

from  Idaho  iu  the  north  to  Mexico
in  the  south  with  settlements  of
people  of  one  faith,  of  one  belief,
worshipping.  God  in  the  same  man-
ner and  calling  upon  him  unitedly
to  bestow  upon  them  the  same  hies-
siuLrs,  and  laboring  for  the  same  oh-

jects.  The  value,  therefore*  of
union  we,  as  a  people^  have  demon-
strated as  110  other  people  now
living  have.  Ami  I  leave  you  to
vonr  own  reflections  to  irnadiie  what


we  would  be  without  it.  Everyone
can  think  for  himself,  or  herself,  upon
this  subject,  and  can  draw  bis  or  her
own  conclusions.  Bat  as  we  are
united  and  have  been  spiritually,  it
is  not  the  design  of  God,  as  is  clearly
manifest  in  his  revelations,  plainly
spoken  through  his  word,  and  deeply
impressed  by  his  Holy  Spirit  upon
every  heart  belonging  to  this  charch,
that  this  alone  is  not  the  object  of
our  organization  as  a  people.  It  was
not  for  spiritual  salvation  alone  that
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  us  to
gather  oo  t  of  Babylon  ;  it  was  not
for  spiritual  salvation  alone  that  the
Elders  of  this  Church  traversed  sea
and  land  for  so  long  a  period,  gather-
ing the  people  together  at  tuch  an
expense  of  time  and  means;  it  was
not  for  spiritual  salvation  alone  that
we  have  suffered  the  attacks  and  the
violence  of  mobs,  that  we  left  our
homes  in  the  east — the  pleasant  pla-
ces that  many  left,  and  crossed  these
dreary  wastes,  and  planted  ourselves
in  these  mountains.  There  was
something  more  than  this  embodied
in  the  idea;  there  was  something
more  than  thig  embodied  in  the  ef-
fort. There  was  temporal  salvation
also  connected  with  the  spiritual  sal-
vation that  had  been  extended  to  us.
I  use  the  lerm  M  temporal  salvation,"
because  it  is  better  understood  prob-
ably than  any  other  term  I  coold  use.
My  training  has  led  me  to  blend  the
two,  it  being  difficult  for  me  to  draw
the  line  of  demarcation  between  the
temporal  and  spiritual;  but  in  many
minds  there  is  a  destine tion.  I  use
the  phrase,  therefore,  that  those  who
are  familiar  with  it  will  understand
my  meaning.  Temporal  salvation  is
as  necessary,  according  to  the  faith
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in  its  time
and  season,  as  spiritual  salvation.  Of
course  spiritual  salvation  occupies  the
first,  and  ought  to  be  foremost  with-
in every  heart;  but  we  cannot  accom-
No.  6.


plish  our  spiritual  salvation  and  tho
destiny  of  our  Father  and  Creator
without  also  connecting  with  it  tem-
poral salvation,  temporal  acts,  the
performance  of  temporal  labor.  Hence,
as  I  have  said,  it  should  occupysome
portion  of  our  thoughts,  it  should  be
considered  by  us;  and  as  I  have  remark-
ed, we  have  nut  co me outofour  present
location  for  purely  spiritual  perfor-
mances, but  to  lay  the  foundation  of
a  system  that  should  stand  forever,  that
should  be  connected  with  mans  ex-
istence here  upon  the  earth,  both  bis
spiritual  and  his  temporal  existence,
a  work  that  should  affect  everything
connected  withmanand  his  relation-
ship to  his  fellow-man.  1

A  great  many  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  failed,  as  I  have  some-
times thought,  to  grasp  this  idea,  to
grasp  the  idea  that  the  Lord  was
founding  a  great  nationality— if  I
may  use  such  a  limited  phrase  as
that;  it  limits  the  idea  to  call  it  a
nationality.  The  Lord  is  gathering
out  from  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people  a  com  muni  tyf  out
of  which  he  intends  to  form  for  him-
self a  kingdom,  not  an  earthly  king-
dom, but  a  kingdom  over  which  b«
will  preside  in  the  heavens;  a  king-
dom that  should  be  based  upon  purely
republican  principles  upon  the  earth;
and  therefore  not  a  kingdom  in  the
strict  sense  of  the  word,  so  far  as  its
earthly  location  is  concerned;  but  a
republic.  And  for  this  purpose,  at
the  Latter-day  Saints  have  believed
from  the  beginning,  the  Lord  raised
up  the  founders  of  our  nation  and  in*
spired  them — Georuo  Washington
and  others — to  do  the  work  that  they
accomplished,  in  laying  the  foundation
of  a  form  of  government  upon  thig
land  under  which  that  kingdom  that
he  should  establish  should  grow  and
flourish  and  extend  itself  without  in-
terfering  in  the  least  degree  with  the
genius  of  the  government. And  this

Yd.  XX.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


is  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged;
this  is  the  labor  that  should  occupy
our  attention,  and  as  I  have  said,  we
should  take  warning by  that  which
we  see  around  us  on  every  hand —
the  decay,  the  desi  integration  of  the
various  governments and  powers,
and  organize  ourselves  so  that  wc  can
preserve  ourselves,  and  grow  and  in-
crease and  add  to  the  power  we  al-
ready possess. I  believe  our  people
are  beginning  to  take  higher  views
of  theorgauization  with  which  they  are
connected,  and  consequently  higher
views  of  their  own  individ  ual  responsi-
bility ami  the  labor  that  devolves  upon
each  one  as  an  individual. We  see
more  of  this  spirit  manifested.  The
Elders  have  ever  evinced  a  willing-
ness to  go  forth  at  the  call  of  the
proper  authorities  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel and  perform  labois  of  i  his  charac-
ter fur  the  public  good; but  it  has
been  a  difficult  lesson  for  us  to  learn
that  it  was  equally  binding  upon  us,
as  servants  of  God,  that  we  should
labor  in temporal  matters  with  the
same  devotion  and  t  he  spirit  of  self-
abnegation  that  we  did  ;u  laboring  to
preach  the  Gospel. There  seemed  to
be  h  higher  calling  in  the  mind  of
man  associated  with  spiritual  mat-
ters ;  it  seemed  to  be  mote  dignified  ;
it  lifts  seemed  to  be  more  worthy  of
men's  gratuitous  labor,  than  to  labor
with  their  bunds  or  brain  for  the  tem-
poral advancement  of  the  work  and
for  the  temporal .salvation  of  the
people. I  believe  that  you  will  all
have  noticed  that  there  is  a  change
taking  place  in  many  minds  in  regard
to  this,  and  many  men  are  beginning
to  take  a  different  view — -in  fact  they
have  done  for  years  ; probably  some
never  had  any  other  view,  but  a  great
mauy  who  have  had  different  views,
who have  imagined that  it  was
their  duty  to  look  at  these  temporal
matters,  are  beginning  to  take  diffe-
rent views,  to  take  a  higher  concep-


I  tion  of  their  responsibility  in  this
direction.  It  is  right  and  proper
that  we  should  do  so.  There  is  no
good  reason  why  a  man  should  ima-
gine that  he  has  fulfilled  the  acquire-
ments more  acceptably,  more  ap-
proved!}* in  preaching  this  Gospel,
than  in  laboring,  after  the  people
have  been  gathered  home,  for  their
salvation  in  temporal  things.

There  is  a  subject  that  lias  occu-
pied a  great  amount  of  thought,  and
has  been  dwelt  upon  very  frequently
in  our  public  assemblies  for  the  past
few  years;  I  refer  to  that  of  the
United  Order.  There  have  been
some  attempts,  in  fact  I  may  say
many  attempts  at  organization  with  a
view  to  its  more  complete  carrying
out  There  is  another  principle  con-
nected with  this  that  has  been  in
force  also  upon  our  at  tent  ion  for  many
years  past,  namely,  the  system  of  co-
operation in  temporal  matters.  We
have  felt  to  a  very  great  extent  the
importance  of  this  ;  I  believe  the
spit  it  of  it  has  rested  upon  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  When  you  look  back  a
few  years,  by  way  of  contrasting
our  condition  then  with  our  condi-
tion to-day,  you  will  perceive,  doubt-
less, there  has  been  a  great  change
effected  among  us  in  regatd  to  this
matter.  There  has  been  consider-
able thought  among  the  people  con-
cerning it  ;  a  great  many  have  rea-
soned upon  it  for  themselves,  and
have  become  thoroughly  convinced
of  the  importance  of  the  principle.
In  this  a  good  work  has  been  done,
because  it  is  an  exceedingly  difficult
thing  to  leaven  the  whole  mass  of
people,  like  this  people  who  inhabit
these  valleys,  to  leaven  them  with
correct  ideas  and  have  them  under-
stand thcqp.  If  the  First  Presidency
of  the  Church  comprehend  a  prin-
ciple, and  the  Twelve  comprehend
it,  but  the  people  fail  to  comprehend
it,  you  can  readily  understand  how


LABORS  AND  EXPERIENCE,  ETC,


difficult  it  would  be  to  make  that
principle  practical  and  operative.
The  leading  men,  then,  have  carried
the  whole  people  upon  their  shoul-
ders, so  to  speak  ;  if  under  those  cir-
cumstances anything  has  to  be  done
it  is  to  be  done  upon  their  faith  and
influence  alone.  But  when  you  can
get  the  thinking  men  and  women
throughout  our  community  to  under-
stand and  realize  the  importance  of
the  principle,  the  victory  is  won,  the
work  then  is  comparatively  easy  of
accomplish  merit.  And  this  has  been
a  subject  of  congratulation  to  me  in
my  feelings,  that  notwithstanding  the
many  errors,  notwithstanding  the
many  failures,  notwithstanding  the
lack  of  success  in  many  directions,
the  principle  of  co-operation,  the
principle  of  uniting  ourselves  together
in  the  United  Order  has  been  reflec-
ted upon,  has  been  cogitated  and  dig.
cussed  in  all  the  circles  of  this  people
and  at  their  firesides,  until  it  may  be
said  an  understanding  of  it  permeates
the  entire  mass  of  the  people,  as  a
people ;  and  there  is  scarcely  an  ar-
gument needed  in  talking  about  it
now  to  convince  those  who  are  the
moht  stubborn  and  reluctant  in  giv-
ing adherence  to  the  principle.  When
you  hear  any  opponent  to  the  prin-
ciple express  himself  novv-a-days,  it
is  in  this  way  :  "  It  is  an  excellent
principle,  if  we  could  only  carry  it
out  properly/'  The  principle  is  con-
ceded, its  correctness  is  assented  to;
it  only  remains  now  for  us  to  carry  it
out  properly,  in  order  for  us  to  gain  the
confidence  and  the  support  of  those
who  are  doubtful  upon  that  point.
And  I  think  this  a  great  work  ac-
complished. It  seems  to  me  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  to-day  are  in  this
position  :  Tell  us  what  to  do  and  how
to  do  it.  You  leading  menf  tell  us
how  we  can  operate,  how  we  can
unite  together.  Devise  the  plan,
suggest  how  it  can  be  carried  out


successfully,  and  we  are  on  hand  to
carry  it  out/  I  do  not  know  from
your  expressions,  whether  I  state
your  feelings  correctly  or  not  on  this
point;  but  I  state  that  which  I  be-
lieve, that  which  I  am  impressed  with
in  connection  with  my  brethren  and
sisters,  wherever  I  meet  them,  and
whenever  this  subject  or  topic  comes
up  for  discussion  or  mention.  There
is  one  thing,  brethren  and  sisters,
that  must  strike  ua  all  as  being  right
and  proper;  and  that  is  to  throw
our  efforts  in  one  channel,  to  make
our  influence  felt  as  an  entire  body
and  not  as  I  have  remarked,  to  divido
onr selves  and  scatter  our  influence
so  that  it  will  be  unfelt.

I  have  endeavored  to  describe  to
you  the  influence  we  wield  because
of  our  union  in  spiritual  matters.
The  same  remark  will  apply  exactly
to  onr  union  iu  temporal  matters.
Let  this  people  be  united  in  temporal
matters;  let  it  be  known  that  we
work  together  for  one  another's  good,
that  we  labor,  as  a  people  to  bent-fit
the  whole  and  not  the  individual,  and
that  our  influence  is  in  this  direction  ;
and  I  tell  you  that  the  same  influ-
ence, the  same  power,  that  wield
now  as  a  spiritual  organization  will
be  felt  in  our  temporal  affairs,  in  our
fin  uncial  affairs,  in  alt  the  affairs  in
fact  which  attract  our  attention.

One  great  object  we  should  aim  to
reach,  that  we  should  aim  to  accom-
plish, is  to  make  ourselves  indepen-
dent in  regard  to  manufactures.  We
have  had,  the  last  week,  considerable
conversation  with  leading  men  from
various  parts  of  this  Territory  enn-
cerning  this  principle  of  co-operation,
Notwithstanding  some  differencei  of
opinion  upon  some  points,  upon  this
one  point  that  I  have  endeavored  to
set  before  you  in  my  last  few  senten-
ces, there  has  been  an  unanimity  of
feeling  and  opinion,  that  is  of  the  im-
perative necessity  of  oar  being  united


84  JOURNAL  OF

in  our  business  matters,  in  our  finan-
cial mattery  and  work  to  sustain  each
other  and  build  each  other  op.  I  am
persuaded  that  a  great  amount  of
good  will  result  from  these  inter-
views and  from  the  measures  that
wil!  be  adopted.  I  have  felt  that  it
will  be  a  most  excellent  thing  for  us
to  have  a  permanent  organization  of
our  best  business  men,  and  t lie  most
practical  men,  from  all  parts  of  our
Territory,  acting  in  the  capacity  of  a
board  ol  trade,  whose  duty  shall  be
to  look  after  our  manufacturing,  mer-
cantile and  other  interests;  and  should
there  at  any  time  be  anything  wrong
in  our  systems  of  doing  business,  ten-
ding in  the  least  to  prevent  perfect
union,  that  the  necessary  measures
might  be  devised  to  remedy  these
things  and  bring  about  a  concert  of
action  upon  all  hands.  Now  you
have  heard  it  stated  frequently  thst
those  who  are  engaged  in  home  manu~
fact u res  do  not  receive  the  patronage
that  they  should  do,  that  our  home
manufactories  were  not  treated  pro-
perly, that  those  engaged  in  them  did
not  receive  the  sympathy  of  business
itk  n,  and  that  the  masses  of  the
people  were  not  disposed  to  patronize
them.  I  think  there  is  at  the  present
time  but  little  cause  for  statements
of  this  kind;  in  fact  I  have  not  heard
of  them  of  late.  But  if  we  had  such
an  organization  as  this — and  I  under-
stand that  Prei,  Taylor  is  thinking
seriously  of  having  it  a  permanent
organization — then  if  there  were  any-
thing of  this  character  that  needed
correction,  if  there  was  a  struggling
institution  that  needed  help,  by  mak-
ing a  requisition  to  this  Board  of
Trade,  it  perhaps  could  receive
the  support  it  needed,  and  be
placed  upon  a  firm  footing  in  our
midst,  and  perhaps  be  able  to  sustain
itself  and  live.

Already  the  stockholders  of  Z«  C.
M.  I.  as  it  is  called — Zions  Co-oper-
ative Mercantile  Institution,  met,  and


DISCOURSES.

a  report  was  made  by  the  President
and  Secretary  of  that  Institution,
which  I  think  was  most  gratifying  to
all  present  upon  that  occasion.  I
have  been  familiar  with  the  institu-
tion since  its  inception.  1  think  I
can  truly  say  that  at  no  period  since
its  organization  was  it  ever  in  so  good
condition,  having  so  few  liabilities  to
meet  as  it  has  to-day ,  It  is  in  a
sounder,  healthier  and  more  prosper-
ous condition  than  it  has  ever  been.
I  allude  to  this  because  it  is  called
the  Parent  Institution.  In  Bos  Klder
County  where  Brother  Snow  presides,
he  took  the  proBts  of  their  mercan-
tile business  to  start  the  branches  of
manufacture  that  are  now  in  success-
ful running  order.  Our  institution
has  done  much  in  a  similar  direction.
It  has  carried  many  a  struggling
enterprise  ;  it  has  been  the  beast  of
burden  for  almost  every  institution
and  every  establishment  and  railroad
almost  in  the  country.  It  has  ac-
complished an  immense  amout  of
good,  far  more  than  the  mere  paying
of  dividends,  although  it  has  done
this  to  a  surprising  extent.  Those
who  invested  their  means  seem  to
have  become  the  most  discouraged.
Therefore,  in  alluding  to  it  in  this
manner,  it  is  injustice  to  it,  and  in
justice  to  those  especially  who  have
all  the  time,  over  and  again,  kept
their  shoulders  to  the  Institution,
sustaining  it  and  bearing  it  up  to
the  best  of  their  ability.  You  all
know,  who  have  attended  conferences
in  past  times,  how  much  Prest.
Young  was  interested  in  this  matter;
not  so  much  in  the  sale  of  merchan-
dise as  in  the  principle  of  co-opera*
tion.  And  he  and  others  have  step-
ped forward  repeatedly,  and  have  sus-
tained it  in  the  midst  of  the  people,
when  otherwise  it  would  have  gone
down,  I  allude  to  this  because  it
comes  in  the  line  of  my  remarks,
in  the  thread  of  my  argument,  so
to  speak. To  be  successful  we  ought,


instead  of  dividing  asunder  and  draw-
ing one  from  another,  to  cling  closer
together ;  it  is  of  the  utmost  import-
ance that  all  our  financial  matters
should  be  conducted  in  away  to  con-
tribute to  the  influence  of  the  whole
people;  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance
that  we  should  take  steps  to  develop
in  our  midst  something  of  a  home
character.  Steps  have  already  been
taken,  as  some  of  you  know,  in  the
establishment  of  a  tannery,  and  in
connection  with  it  a  shoe  manufactory
I  wis  exceedingly  gratified  to  learn
from  the  report  that  nearly  $100,000
of  home  manufactured  goods,  besides
a  large  list  of  small  articles,  the  value
of  which  was  not  estimated,  bad  been
sold  daring  the  last  half  y*ar  by  the
Co-operative  Institution.  I  am  in-
formed that  this  was  the  purchase
price,  the  price  at  which  they  were
sold  would  of  course  amount  to  still
more.  This  speaks  well  for  home
manufactures,  sold  by  one  institution.

It  is  an  easy  thing  to  tear  down  ;
any  man  no  matter  what  his  know-
ledge, no  matter  what  his  experience
can  pull  down;  a  fool  could  set  fire  to
a  building ;  a  few  fools  could  set  fire  to
a  city  and  consume  the  works  of  man
that  had  cost  hundred  of  years  of
labor.  It  requires  no  wisdom  for  a  man
to  criticise  the  acts  of  another  man.
It  is  even  said  that  a  fool  can  ask
questions  that  could  not  be  answered
by  the  wisest  men,  Unwise  people
can  criticise  plans  and  schemes  the
creation  of  wise  and  experienced  heads;
that  is  a  comparatively  easy  matter
for  persons  to  do.  But  it  requires
great  wisdom  to  organize ;  it  requires
great  wisdom  to  create  measures  that
will  bind  a  people  of  diversified  inter-
ests together ;  of  varieties  of  views,
dissimilar  habits  and  to  some  extent
of  training,  and  to  bring  them  to-
gether, and  bind  them  together,  and
make  one  people  of  them,  requires
the  highest  qualities  of  wisdom,  and


it  is  this  we  are  endeavoring  to  do.
Can  it  be  found  fault  with  ?  Un-
doubtedly there  are  many  things  in
oar  organizations  that  are  defective ;
but  it  is  our  duty,  if  there  be  faults,
to  correct  them.  If  there  be  wise
men  among  us  let  them  come  for-
ward ;  let  us  see  their  wisdom,  and
not  retain  it  to  benefit  one,  but  let  it
be  used  to  benefit  the  whole.  There
was  not  any  more  obligation  upon
Presfc.  Young,  when  be  was  alive,  or
upon  the  Prophet  Joseph  when  he
lived,  than  there  is  upon  us  indivi-
dually ;  that  is  looking  at  it  in  one
light.  You  and  I  all  expect  to  share
if  faithful,  the  same  glory  that  they
will  attain  to.  Every  man  and  every
woman  in  this  audience  comprising
this  body  of  Latter-day  Saints,  ex-
pect, if  found  faithful,  to  share  with
those  who  have  gone  before — the
righteous  and  holy,  and  become  heirs
of  God,  and  joint  heir  with  Jesus
Christ  j  that  is,  attain  to  the  very
highest  glory.  If  this  be  our  aspira-
tion, our  hope  and  anticipation,  we
should  work  for  that,  we  should  labor
for  it.  In  the  words  of  the  revelation
I  have  read  in  your  hearing,  "  Hp  is
a  slothful  servant  that  waits  to  be
commanded,"  A  man  may  do,  and
he  should  do  many  things  of  his  own
free  will  in  the  exercise  of  his  agency.
And  if  there  be  wisdom  in  the  breast
of  any  man  that  has  not  been  brought
to  light,  let  it  come  forth  to  the  light
that  we  may  have  the  benefit  of  it  in
causing  to  be  effected  a  more  perfect
organization  of  this  people.  For  I  tell
you  we  have  a  perfect  organization  in
view,  and  nothing  short  of  it  will
satisfy  us.  The  Twelve  have  all
had  it  at  heart,  and  they  are  bound
by  the  covenants  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood and  by  the  responsibility  which
rests  upon  them,  and  upon  him,  who
is  the  President  of  the  Twelve  and  of
the  Church,  I  say  we  are  bound  by
these  covenants  and  these  signs  of  re-


SG f  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


sponsibility,and  tolabor  to-day,  and  la-
bor to-morrow,  and  labor  continuously  1
until  eternity  shall  dawn  upon  us  for
the  more  perfect  organization  of  this
people  in  their  temporal  affairs.  And
as  for  division,  we  wafft  it  not ;  dis-
union, we  want  it  not.  We  do  not
want  to  see  the  Elders  of  Israel  fall
asunder,  dividing  this  people  and
leading  them  away  from  the  union
tli at  should  characterize  us.  We  say
that  any  man  that  does  it  is  not  of
God  ;  the  man  that  does  it  is  not  in-
spired by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  has
not  the  love  and  prosperity  of  this
work  at  heart.

We  are  struggling  now,  the  ele-
ments are  chaotic.  In  some  respects
we  are  endeavoring  to  gather  together.
Dealing  in  merchandise  is  a  small
matter,  and  yefc  it  lies  to  a  certain
extent  at  the  foundation  of  our  busi-
ness; therefore  we  talk  about  it;  but
merchandizing  is  a  small  matter  com*
P'ired  with  the  work  of  organizing
the  people  to  get  them  to  manufac-
ture and  to  furnish  labor,  that  there
may  be  no  idle  among  us,  that  every
boy  and  every  girl,  and  every  man
and  every  woman  in  this  community
shall  find  employment;  and  that
measures  may  be  devied  to  use  their
labor  and  talent  and  ingenuity  for
the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  this
people  for  the  elevation  of  the  whole;
not  for  the  elevation  of  a  few  indivi-
duals, but  for  the  uplifting  of  the  en-
tire community,  and  the  whole  human
race  out  of  ignorance,  out  of  vice  and
from  vicious  habits,  and  everything
degrading,  lift  us  up,  until  we  shall
stand  as  man  and  woman  could  in  the
divine  presence,  Ailed  with  that  divi-
nity which  wc  inherit  from  our  Hea-
venly Father;  and  govern  and  control
the  elements  with  which  this  earth  is  so
abundantly  endowed,for  our  happiness,
for  the  happiness  of  our  posterity,  for
the  happiness  of  the  entire  human
family  as  far  as  they  reach — from  |


the  north  to  the  south,  from  east  to
west,  until  we  shall  comprehend  the
whole  family  of  God  our  Heavenly
Father,  gradually  diffusing  the  bles-
sings we  enjoy  in  these  valleys  through
out  the  entire  earth,  until  the  whole
earth  shall  be  benefitted  and  blessed
by  our  organization  and  by  our  ex-
istence upon  it.

These  are  some  of  the  responsibi-
lities that  devolve  upon  us  as  a  people.
Shall  I  live  for  myself  ?  God  forbid
that  I  should  live  to  spend  my  time
and  exercise  the  talent  I  may
possess  for  my  personal  benefit,  or
for  the  benefit  of  my  family  alone*
Why  ?  It  is  unworthy  of  any
man  or  any  woman  to  live  for
self  alose;  to  pile  up  our  benefits  and
comforts  for  our  own  luxury  and  ag-
grandisement. God  forbid  that  we
whom  God  has  chosen,  we  whom  he
has  called  and  inspired  by  his  Holy
Spirit,  and  blessed  with  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  and  upon  whom  he
has  placed  his  Holy  Priesthood,  and
called  us  to  be  saviors  of  men,  I  say
God  forbid  that  we  should  do  this,
that  we  should  settle  down  and  think
entirely  of  self  and  build  up  self,  and
let  our  sphere  of  usefulness  be  limited
to  our  own  family,  extend  not  an  inch
beyond  our  own  household  and  our
own  family  circle.  God  did  not
choose  us  for  any  such  purpose,  he
did  not  reveal  himself  to  us  for  any
such  object;  but  he  has  chosen  us  to
be  his  missionaries  in  the  earth,  to
be  the  pioneers  in  laying  the  founda-
tion of  that  great  work  that  shall
stand  forever,  that  shall  swallow
up  all  the  works  and  powers
of  man,  all  the  organiz  itions  of  man,
shall  swallow  all  up  and  comprehend
them  all  within  itself.  He  lias  called
us  to  this  high  and  holy  calling;  and
it  should  be  your  aim  and  it  ought  to
be  my  aim  to  labor  for  the  general
good.  To  starve  ourselves?  No-
Neglect  ourselves  ? No. Let  our


LABORS  AND  EXPERIENCE,  ETC


b7


families  go  uncared  for  ?  No.  This
is  not  necessary,  thai  is  the  other  ex-
treme. I  have  no  ricjht  to  have  a
family  and  neglect  them  ;  bat  on  the
other  hand  I  am  under  obligation  to
look  after  them,  to  treat  them  properly
and  give  them  every  advantage  in  my
power.  When  I  became  a  father  I
took  upon  myself  that  responsibility,
and  it  is  a  serious  one,  that  is,  I  should
educate  my  children  and  train  them
Dp  in  a  proper  manner,  and  see  that
they  do  not  go  hungry  or  naked.
But  I  have  another  duty,  a  duty  that
reaches  out  beyond  the  family  circle,
a  duty  I  owe  to  my  fellow  creatures.
It  is  my  duty  to  use  my  surplus
strength  and  surplus  means  for  their
good,  to  endeavor  to  make  them  bet-
ter for  rny  existence ;  because  I  have
been  born  that  the  earth  will  be  better
for  it,  that  men  and  women  will  be
better  because  I  have  lived.  And  it
should  be  that  the  world  will  be  bet-
ter, because  this  Church  has  been
organized,  that  the  world  will  be  bet-
ter for  our  existence  as  an  organ  izi-
tion.  And  it  should  be  the  aim  of
every  man  in  this  Church,  of  every
Bishop  and  every  President  of  Slake
and  every  Counselor  and  officer  of
whatever  name  or  calling ;  it  should
be  his  aim  to  labor  for  the  salvation
of  the  people.  And  the  Apostles
above  all,  it  devolves  upon  u^f  it  is
the  covenant,  as  I  have  said,  of  the
the  priesthood  we  have  received  ;  and
it  rests  upon  us,  and  it  requires  us  to
labor  to  combine  and  unite  the  inter-
ests of  this  people.  And  we  beseech
you,  in  Christ's  stead,  brethren  and
sisters,  be  ye  united,  put  away  bicker-
ings, put  away  strifes,  put  away  all
those  causes  of  division  whether  they
are  re?U  or  imaginary,  and  be  united
as  a  people,  and  I  tell  yon  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  as  one  ot  his  Aoostles  if
you  do  this,  the  heavens  will  be  open
to  you  and  the  blessings  of  God  will
descend  upon  you,  in  your  basket


and  in  your  store,  in  your  fields  and
in  your  flocks,  and  herds,  in  yonr
wives  and  children,  in  yonr  husbands,
in  3'our  fathers  and  mothers,  in  your
brothers  and  sisters  and  all  your  or-
ganizations ;  the  blessings  of  God
will  descend,  like  the  dew  distilled
from  heaven,  and  rest  upon  you,  and
all  that  bless  you  will  imbibe  and
cherish  the  same  spirit.  Now,  these
things  are  pressing  upon  us.  We
have  everything  against  us,  the  whole
world  it  may  be  said,  are  ready  to
pass  judgment  upon  up;  but.  yet  there
are  many  who  oppose  the  work  of
God  who  do  so  because  they  have
not  understood  it,  and  such  people,
many  of  them  will  yet  be  gathered
in  nnd  num hered  among  us.  This
work  is  not  for  this  little  handful  of
people,  it  is  for  ibe  whole  earth  and
all  the  inhabitants  thereof  and  the
day  will  come  when  the  lessons
taught  by  the  Latter-day  Saints  will
be  approved  by  those  who  are  not
Latter-aay  Saints.  When  the  good
government  maintained  in  the  midst
of  the  people  of  God  will  be  copied
after,  and  we  will  be  looked  to  as
exemplary.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you,  to  ponr
out  his  Spirit  upon  this  Conference
and  upon  all  who  shall  speak  and  all
who  shall  hear  and  all  who  are  kept
away  from  the  Conference  that  the
same  spirit  may  run  through  every
heart ;  for  I  tell  you,  ray  brethren
and  sisters,  it  is  in  vain  we  labor,  un-
less God  is  with  us,  in  vain  we  as-
semble unless  his  Spirit  is  poured
upon  the  people  to  make  them  to  com-
prehend and  to  soften  their  hearts.
It  is  a  need  greatly  to  be  desired  that
God's  Spirit  will  descend  upon  the
L  itter-day  Saints.  Oh,  that  it  might
be  poured  out  in  power  and  break
and  rend  a>under  the  darkness  that
beclouds  our  minds,  that  we  may  see
the  things  of  God  as  they  really  are,
and  sense  fully  the  responsibilities  we


88


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


are  under  as  individuals  before  bim.
And  I  believe  that  it  will  be  poured
out  more  and  more,  and  the  blessings
that  we  have  yearned  for  and  which
we  have  prayed  for  and  that  we  have
so  much  desired  in  our  hearty,  and
for  which  we  have  built  Temples,
these  blessings  will  descend  upon  us,
and  the  angels  will  be  nearer  to  ub,
and  the  heavens  will  be  more  open  to
our  cries  and  to  our  supplications  to
bestow  upon  119  the  blessings  there


of.  We  approach  nearer  to  heaven
correspondingly  as  we  live  the  Gos-
pel revealed  to  us.  It  is  a  precious
Gospel,  it  is  a  Gospel  in  which  there
is  contained  every  requisite  to  make
men  and  women  happy,  and  to  pro-
duce a  heaven  upon  earth  ;  and  if  we
will  obey  it  and  carry  it  out  there
will  be  more  blessings  conferred  upon
us.  And  that  this  may  be  the  case,
is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
I  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER GEO, Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,

September  15,  1878.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gills.)

CONSISTENCY IMPKIiATI  VK  THE GOSPEL IN CONFLICT  WITH MANS FA  LI,  KN

CONDITION  SMOVLU  LOVK  OUIi  ENKMlhS— THK  '*  GOLDEN  ItULB  "  NE-
CESSITY OF  THK  HOLY GHOST  EVE  BY Tit  K  K  KNOWN  BY  ITS  FiiUlTS.


The  speaker  commenced  by  read-
ing the  7th  chapter  of  St#  Matthew,
commencing  at  the  7th  verse;  there
are  many  important  principles  em-
bodied iu  these  few  verses  which  1  have
read  in  your  hearing,  and  they  are
especially  applicable  to  ss  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  a  people  professing  to  be
the  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
We  claim  the  holiest  of  names,  and
certainly  with  such  professions  as  we
make,  there  should  be  holiness  of  life
corresponding  to  those  professions.  If
we  are  called  the  disciples  of  Jesis,
the  followers  of  the  Son  of  God,  and
have  any  claim  to  that  name  or  title,
we  should  exemplify  in  our  lives  the
principles  which  he  taught;  if  we


do  not,  then  our  claim  to  his  name  is
baseless  and  may  be  treated  with
contempt

The  Lord  Jesus  has  caused  to  be
left  on  record  certain  principles,  cer-
tain doctrines,  a  plan  which  has  been
properly  called  the  plan  of  salvation;
and  He  required  in  ancient  days,
when  upon  the  earth  clothed  in  mor-
tality, that  those  who  professed  his
name  and  to  be  his  followers,  should
believe  in  and  practise  those  princip-
les and  doctrines.  If  they  did  not,
they  ceased  to  be  his  followers  and
they  soon  left  him.  His  doctrines
came  in  contact  with  many  things
that  were  popular  in  the  day  and  age
in  which  he  lived  ; his  teachings


came  in  contact  with  the  follies,  the
pride,  and  the  selfishuess  of  men,
then,  and  in  this  respect  they  have
not  changed  a  particle. They  come
in  contact  to-day  with  the  selfishness
of  men,  with  men  as  found  in  what
is  termed  their  natural  condition,  or
more  properly  speaking,  their  fallen
condition. And  this  is  one  reason
for  the  unpopularity  of  the  doctrines
of  Jesus. He  taught  mankind  a
higher  life,  the  means  of  attaining  to
a  better  condition  ;  and  to  require
the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit
which  he  promised  to  bestow  upon
those  who  kept  his  commandments
to  enable  them  to  carry  oat  in  a  pro-
per manner  the  principles  he  impart-
ed to  them. If  he  had  taught  man
to  gratify  all  his  inclinations  j  to
indulge  in  every  selfish  desire  j  that
self-denial  aud  self-abnegation  were
not  necessary,  it  is  probable  that  he
would  have  had  many  more  followers
than  he  did  have;  and  his  doctrines
doubtless  would  have  been  more  pop-
ular than  they  were, But  this  was
not  the  case. The  Savior  started
out  teaching  men  at  the  beginning
of  his  ministerial  career  the  most
pure  and  godlike  principles,  princi-
ples which  were  not  understood  aud
practised  by  men  generally,  which
were  more  heavenly,  which  seemed
to  be  more  fitted  for  a  more  exalted
race  of  beings ;  than  for  man  in  his
fallen condition. Hear what  he
says :

44 Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit:  for
theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

Blessed  are  they  that  mourn  :  fur
they  shall  be  comforted,

Blessed  are  the  meek  :  for  tliey
shall  inherit  the  earth.

Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger
and  thirst  after  righteousness;  for
they  shall  be  tilled*

Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  they
shrill  obtain  mercy.

Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for


they  shall  see  God,

Blessed  are  the  peacemakers :  for
they  shall  be  called  the  children  of
God.

Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  re-
vile you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall
say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you
falsely,  for  my  sake.

Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for
great  is  yoor  reward  in  heaven  j  for
so  persecuted  tbey  the  prophets  which
were  before  you."

And  in  another  place  in  the  same
chapter,  he  says :

"Let  your  communications  be  yea,
yea :  nay,  nay :  for  whatsoever  ia
more  than  these  cometh  of  evil,"

And  again  he  said ;  "  Resist  not
evil :  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee
on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the
other  also.  And  if  any  man  will  sue
thee  at  the  law,  and  take  away  thy
coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also,"
These  were  peculiar  doctrines.  Who
is  there  among  men  naturally  that
could  practice  them  ?  Why  if  a
man  were  struck  in  the  cheek  by
another  man,  the  natural  impulse
would  be  to  knock  him  down,  if  he
could;  to  return  evil  for  eviL  If  a
mfln  sued  another  at  the  law  aud
took  his  coat,  would  he  be  inclined
to  give  his  cloak  also  ?  No  he  would
[contend  for  his  coat.  And  again;
"  And  whosoever  shall  compel  thee
to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  twain"—
go  with  him  two  miles.  "  Give  to
him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from  him
that  would  borrow  of  thee  turn  not
thou  away,"  This  sort  of  teaching
came  directly  in  contact  with  man  s
fallen  nature.  It  is  the  same  to-day,
and  yet  they  are  the  teachings  of  the
Son  of  God,  they  are  the  principles
which  he  taught ;  their  practice  he
required  then,  and  he  requires  the
same  to-day,  "  But  I  say  unto  you,
love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that
curse  you,  'do  good  to  them  that  hate
you  and  pray  for  those  which  despite-


90  JOURNAL  OF

fully  use  yon,  and  persecute  yon  ;
that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your
father  which  is  in  heaven  :  for  he
makcth  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil
and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain
on  the  j  ust  and  on  the  oncost."

In  order  then  to  be  the  children
of  our  Father  in  heaven,  we  must
love  our  enemies,  we  must  bless  them
that  curse  us,  we  must  do  good  to
them  that  hate  us,  and  pray  for  them
who  despiteful  ly  use  and  persecute
ns.  Now  mark  how  pointedly  the
Savior  puts  this  to  those  who  are
listening  to  him:  "For  if  ye  love
them  which  love  you,  what  reward
have  ye  ?  do  not  even  the  publicans
the  snme  ?  and  if  ye  salute  y out-
brethren  only,  what  do  ye  more  than
others?  do  not  even  the  publicans
so  ?  The  wicked  love  one  another,
that  is  they  at  least  affect  to  do  so*
It  is  natural  for  man  to  love  those
who  love  him  ;  it  requires  no  effort,
it  comes  easy*  It  requires  no  parti*
eular  superiority  in  a  man  to  love  his
friend.  But  the  Savior  requires  more
than  this ;  the  requirement  is  that
he  shall  not  only  love  his  friends  and
brethren,  but  he  shall  love  his  ene-
mies He  shall  not  hate  his  enemies  ]
he  shall  not  hate  them  thut  despite-
fully  use  and  persecute  him,  but  shall
pray  for  them,  allowing  the  feeling  of
forgiveness  to  reach  afteV  them.  This
feature  yon  will  find  exemplified  in
the  Savior's  entire  life.  Up  to  his
last  moments  when  upon  the  cross
suffering  the  agonies  of  death,  and
although  possessing  all  power,  in-
stead of  using  that  power  by  way  of
revenge  upon  those  who  so  cruelly
treated  him,  he  submitted  himself
meekly  into  their  hands,  and  cried,  1
" Father  forgive  them;  for  they  know
not  what  they  do,"  He  thus  set  all
men  an  example  which  they  should
imitate.

It  is  common  now,  it  is  common
among  newspapers,  and  it  is  common


DISCOURSES.

in  our  city  to  publish  alms  doing
that  everybody  might  know  how  be-
nevolent wo  are;  t hat  it  might  be
carried  by  the  wingsof  lightning  and
published  to  the  world  what  generous,
people  we  are.  This  city  of  Salt
Lake  does  this  very  thing.  "  Take
heed/'  says  the  Savior,  "that  you  do
nnt  your  alms  before  nun  to  be  seen
of  them :  otherwise  ye  have  no  re-
ward of  your  Father  which  is  in  hea-
ven" You  get  your  reward  when
you  get  the  praise  of  men.  His
teaching  was  to  do  good  by  stealth,
that  it  might  not  be  known,  and  that
men  might  not  get  honor  from  their
fellow-men,  "  Therefore,  when  thoti
doest  thine  alms,  do  not  sound  a
trumpet  before  thee,  as  the  hypocrites
do  that  they  might  have  the  glory
of  men.  Verily  I  say  nnto  you,  they
have  their  reward*  But  when  thou
doest  alms,  let  not  thy  left  hand
know  w  hat  thy  right  hand  doeth ;
that  thine  alms  might  be  in  secret;
and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret
himself  shall  reward  thee  openly. *
The  whole  of  these  teachings  are  full
of  instruction,  and  indicate  the  char-
acter of  tho  Savior  and  the  nature  of
the  Gospel  which  he  preached.

Here  is  another  saying  :  14  Take  no
thought  for  your  life,  what  ye  shall
eat  ;  neither  for  the  body  what  ye
shall  put  on.  The  life  is  more  than
meat,  and  the  body  is  more  than  rai-
ment" This  hind  of  teaching  did
not  suit  mankind,  it  came  in  contact
with  their  ideas,  and  with  their  tra-
ditions, and  the  manner  in  which
they  bad  been  taught  It  was  the
praise  of  the  world  that  they  sought ;
it  was  to  be  seen  of  men  that  they
worshipped,  and  it  was  to  he  seen  of
men  that  they  gave  alms.  And  they
loved  those  that  bestowed  favors  upon
them,  that,  were  kind  t-j  them.  They
invited  the  rich  to  their  feasts  and
not  the  poor,  Jesus  commanded  his
disciples  to  invite  the  poor  and  not


the  rich,  as  they  could  invite  them-
selves. In  fact,  he  taught  doctrines
that  laid  the  axe  at  the  root  of  all
selfishness,  bud,  if  carried  out,  that
would  destroy  it  entirely,  leaving  no
vestige  of  it  in  the  human  bosom.

I  have  already  read  to  you  the
great  rnle  that  the  Savior  taught :
"  Therefore,  all  things  whatsoever  ye
would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do
ye  even  so  to  them  :  for  this  is  the
law  and  the  prophets."  Let  us  Latter-
day  Saints  ask  ourselves  this  after-
noon, partaking  as  we  are  of  the  Sac-
rament, eating  the  bread  and  drink-
ing of  the  cup  in  remembrance  of  the
body  and  the  blood  of  our  Lord  and
Savior  ;  let  us  ask  ourselves — and  I
include  myself  with  all  of  you,  for  I
preach  to  myself  as  much  as  I  do  to
any  one  of  this  congregation  upon
these  points — do  we  refnember  this
golden  rule  that  the  Savior  gave  ?
Do  we  endeavor,  when  dealing  in  any
way  or  manner  whatever  with  our
brother  or  our  sister,  put  ourselves  in
his  or  her  position  and  say  in  our
hearts,  that  which  I  do  to  my  brother
or  to  my  sister,  or  am  about  to  do,  is
just  what  I  would  that  he  or  &ho
should  do  to  me?  Do  we  think  of
this  ?  Do  we  carry  it  out  ?  Or  do
we  think  about  ourselves,  and  forget
about  our  brother  and  sister,  unmind-
ful of  their  interest  and  the  rights
and  the  claims  which  they  have  upon  us]

Well,  now,  I  know,  that  situated
as  we  are  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to
carry  out  these  principles  properly
in  their  perfection,  and  that  there  has
to  be  wisdom  used. But  neverthe-
less, here  is  the  standard  to  which
we  are  required,  as  Latter-day  Saints
and  as  disciples  of  Christ,  to  attain  to.
We  must  attain  to  it. Just  as  sure
as  we  live,  if  we  do  not  attain  to  it,
where  God  and  Christ  are  we  never
can  come;  we  could  not  dwell  in
their  presence  unless  we  have  the
same  spirit,  the  same  feelings  and  in-


clinations, having  conquered  the
weaknesses  of  our  fallen  natures
sufficiently,  so  that  the  Gospel  that
He  taught  shall  be  exemplified  in  us
as  it  was  in  him,  "Not  every  one
that  sayeth  unto  me  "Lord,  Lord,
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven it  is  not  all  those  who  will
say  unto  hini  in  that  day,  "Lord,
Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy
name  ?  and  in  thy  name  have  cast  out
defils?  and  in  thy  name  done  many
wonderful  works  ?"  It  is  not  all  of
these  whom  the  Savior  will  recognize
and  acknowledge,  and  whom  he  will
admit  into  his  presence  and  into  his
kingdom  ;  but  it  is  those  that  do  the
will  of  his  Father  in  heaven;  it  is
those  that  enter  into  the  strait  gate
and  that  walk  in  the  narrow  way,
and  that  persevere  unto  the  end,  deny-
ing themselves  and  overcoming  every
evil  inclination,  and  bringing  theirdis-
positions  into  complete  subjection  to
the  mind  and  will  of  God,  bringing
forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness  ;  for
every  tree  will  be  known  by  its
fruits.  No  corrupt  tree  can  bring
forth  good  fruit;  no  good  tree  can
bring  forth  evil  fruit.  No  Latter-
day  Saint,  that  is,  a  true  Latter-day
Saint,  will  bring  forth  the  fruirs  of
unrighteousness  or  wickedness.  No
professed  Latter-day  Saint  who  is  a
hyprocrite,  who  is  not  of  God,  can
bring  forth  fruit  that  will  be  accept-
able unto  him.  I  know  how  we  feel  as
a  people.  The  general  feeling  in  our
hearts  is  that  we  have  borne  witness
unto  the  Father  and  unto  the  Son  and
unto  angels  and  unto  all  the  earth,
by  the  course  nf  life  we  have  taken
in  joining  this  Church,  and  in  tak-
ing upon  us  the  name  that  has  beta
hitherto  so  ignominious,  in  taking  up
our  cross;  and  because  of  our  obedience
to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God
there  is  scarcely  doubt  in  our  minds
respecting  our  future  condition,  that
we  are  almost  sure  to  enter  into  the


92


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


celestial  kingdom  of  God  and  sit  down  i
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and
with  the  Prophets  and  Apostles  who
Lave  gone  before,  I  am  sensible  of
the  fact  that  this  feeling  is  general.
And  I  believe  there  is  no  people  of
the  same  number  who  are  en  tit  led  to
this  feeling,  than  the  Latter-day
Saints  are.  I  say  this  because  there
is  no  people  who  have  endured  so
much  for  their  religion  ;  and  they
have  witnessed  to  the  heavens  and
the  earth  their  willingness  to  forsake
al!  things  for  its  sake.  They  have
taken  no  thought  of  their  lives;  they
have  taken  no  thought  in  times  past
as  to  what  they  should  eat,  as  to  what
they  should  drink,  or  as  to  what  they
should  wear  and  they  have  held
themselves  ready  to  sacrifice  their
all  for  the  Gospel  of  the  Sun  of  God*
Hut  there  are  other  duties,  there  are
Oilter obligations  resting  upon  us  as  a
people  besides  these  to  which  1  have
referred.  And  it  is  necessary  we
should  live  a  Godly  life  after  we
have  done  all  these  things.  After
we  have  prophesied,  after  we  have
done  many  wonderful  works,  after  we
have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  and
cast  out  devils,  it  is  essentially  ne-
cessary we  should  do  other  things,
and  that  is  to  carry  out  in  onr  lives
the  principles  of  our  Lord  and  Mas*
ter.  And  upon  these  points  we  need
continued  instruction  and  reproof;
we  need  continued  warning  least  we
should  be  overcome  by  the  spirit  of
the  world  and  become  self-deluded
by  imagining  that  our  case  is  a  good
one,  our  condition  is  a  sure  one,  and
that  we  are  secure  of  eternal  life.
A\  e  should  always  remember  that
which  the  Apostle  Paul  says —
"Wherefore,  let  him  that  thinketh
he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."
There  are  none  of  us  in  so  secure  a
position  but  what  we  may  do  things
that  may  displease  the  Father,
It  is  necessary,  as  the  world  have


been  taught  by  the  Elders  of  this
Church  from  the  beginning,  that
men  should  have  faith  in  God  ;  and
it  is  as  true  to-day  as  it  was  anciently
that  faith  without  works  is  dead.  It
is  necessary  that  men  should  repent
of  their  sins,  and  it  is  not  only  neces-
sary to  repent  of,  but  to  forsake  those
sins  and  be  baptized  for  the  rem  is*
mom  of  them,  and  that  they  should
receive  the  laying  on  of  hands,  ac-
cording to  the  apostolic  pattern,  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
without  which  no  man  can  see  God,
nor  dwell  in  his  presence,  nor  prepare
himself  to  dwell  there.  Man  needs  it
all  the  time  to  be  with  him  to  assist,
to  guide  him,  acting  as  a  monitor  to
him.  The  Elders  of  this  Church
have  testified  that  these  things  are
necessary  and  essential  to  salvation
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  just  as
necessary  now  as  in  ancient  days
that  men  should  take  a  certain  course
in  order  to  receive  certain  blessings,
and  this  is  the  great  cause  of  the  dis-
union and  the  variety  of  opinions
which  exist  in  the  religious  world
to-day.  It  is  because  men  have  de-
parted from  the  truth  as  it  was  ori-
ginally ;  it  is  because  they  have
changed  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel
and  broken  the  everlasting  covenant
as  foretold  by  Isaiah,  And  hence,
when  you  travel  through  the  world
of  Christendom  to-day,  you  find  every
variety  of  religious  belief.  You  can
scarcely  conceive  of  a  doctrine  that  is
not  entertained.  There  is  but  one
Christ,  and  Christ  is  believed  in,  or
at  least  men  profess  to  believe  in  him.
But  they  have  some  three  different
kinds  of  baptism,  and  I  have  heard  of
more.  There  are  as  many  methods
of  approaching  the  Savior  and  obtain-
ing remission  of  sins,  almost,  as  there
are  sects  and  denominations ;  and  all
professing  to  be  followers  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  as  though  the  Lord  were
the  author  of  confusion,  as  though


CONSISTENCY  IMPERATIVE,  ETC,


93


the  Lord  were  the  author  of  strife.
Hence  it  is  that  there  is  so  much  in-
fidelity, so  much  atheism,  and  so  many
men  that  deny  God  ;  for  they  can  see
nothing  admirable  or  desirable  in  the
professions  of  Christianity,  as  it  is  cal-
led. And  why  so  ?  Because  men
have  strayed  from  the  troth  ;  it  is  be-
cause they  have  forsaken  the  faith  and
doctrine  taught  by  the  Savior;  ?tnd
having  departed  from  it,  of  course
they  are  left  to  themselves.  Every
reformer  that  has  arisen  lias  presen-
ted some  new  form  of  doctrine;  he
has  enunciated  some  new  ideas,  or
ideas  which  he  thought  were  new.  He
promulgated  some  new  teachings,
and  has  not  failed  to  draw  some  fol-
lowers, according  to  his  popularity,

The  Latter-day  Saints  believe  that
the  Lord  has  spoken  from  the  heavens.
And  this  appears  to  be  very  objec-
tionable. I  remember  the  time,  in
my  boyhood,  when  it  was  thought
the  worst  thing — that  is,  before  the
principle  of  plural  marriage  was
taught.  It  is  very  often  said  now,
u  If  you  were  not  polygamists,  and
did  not  believe  in  polygamy,  there
would  be  no  trouble.  You  are  a
pretty  good  people,  you  1  Mormons/
if  you  would  only  get  rid  of  your  pe-
culiar institutions  we  could  get  along
with  you  "  It  seems  to  be  but  a  few
years  ago  when  we  were  not  known
generally  as  believers  in  plural  mar-
riage, and  what  was  the  objection  to
us  then  ?  **  You  *  Mormons  '  believe
in  new  revelation,  and  we  do  not
know  what  kind  of  revelation  you
may  get :  you  may  profess  to  receive
a  revelation  and  get  a  false  one,  and
we  do  not  know  what  may  be  the
result;  it  is  a  dangerous  doctrine/'
Well,  it  is  a  dangerous  doctrine  for
the  wicked  world.  But  think  of  it
What  is  there  about  the  doctrine  of
revelation  — continuous  revelation
from  God,  that  conflicts  with  the
Gospel  as  taught  in  ancient  days  ?
Why,  we  are  taught  in  the  Bible


that  all  flesh  are  equal  in  the  sight  of
God  ;  that  he  that  works  righteous-
ness is  acceptable  to  God  in  every
feneration  among  every  people ;  that
God  does  not  confine  his  mercies  and
providences  and  blessing  to  one  gene-
ration, or  one  people,  or  one  nation,
but  that  he  is  God  over  the  whole
earth  ;  that  his  salvation  is  as  b«xmd-
less  as  eternity,  and  his  hand  is  over
all  his  handiwork — that  is,  over  all
his  creations.  That  he  was  the  God
of  Adam  and  those  who  lived  con-
temporary with  him  ;  was  the  God  of
Noah  and  was  mindful  of  him  and
those  who  lived  contemporary  with
him  who  feared  him  and  kept  his
command  men  If;  and  also  of  the  Savior
and  the  Apostles ;  and  he  is  the  same
God  to-day  as  he  was  yesterday,  the
same  God  in  this  year  of  our  Lord
one  thou3and,eight hundred  and  seven-
ty eight,  as  he  wai  in  the  first  year  of  our
era ;  and  that  he  has  not  changed  or
grownold,  that  his  eyes  have  not  grown
dim,  or  his  arm  less  powerful  to  save
to  day  than  it  ever  was.  And  this
doctrine  appeals  to  every  human
being  as  divine  truth,  as  the  revela-
tion of  nature  to  man — if  you  may
use  the  word  nature,  if  you  do  not
like  the  word  God — that  all  men  of
every  generation  are  equal  before
God  ;  and  it  is  a  doctrine  that  runs
through  ail  the  teachings  of  every  in-
spired man  through  all  the  ages.
And  I  would  not  give  a  fig  for  a  re-
ligion that  did  not  teach  it,  nor  a
system  that  did  not  recognize  it.  It
is  not  worthy  of  a  place  in  a  man's
belief.

We  believe,  then,  that  God  has  re-
vealed himself  to  man  again,  for  his
own  purpose,  to  accomplish  his  own
design  and  to  prepare  a  people  for
the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  For  we  believe  he  will  come
that  be  will  come  to  reign  upon  the
earth  and  to  establish  righteousness
and  uproot  inquity,  and  carry  out  the
doctrine  I  have  read  in  your  hearing;


94


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES


and  establish  an  order  of  society  that
shall  have  for  its  basis  eternal  truth,
some  of  the  principles  of  which  I
have  read  to  you.  We  believe  lie  is
coming  for  this  purpose  and  to  des-
troy all  those  man* made  systems,
and  this  inequality,  and  this  fraud,
and  all  wickedness  that  prevails.  He
will  do  it,  better  than  Kearney,  bet-
ter than  Labor  Unions  or  Working-
men's  Leagues.  He  will  do  it  better
than  any  man-made  institution.  In
fact  the  whole  of  them  will  be  over-
turned by  him  ;  and  he  will  intro-
duce a  plan  by  which  every  man  will
recognize  the  value  of  his  brother
man,  a  plan  by  which  the  poor  can
rejoice,  and  which  will  prevent  the
oppressor  and  the  evil-doer  and  the
strong  hand  of  Wealth  from  control-
ling and  governing  the  earth,  as  is
the  case  to-day.  And  it  is  for  this
purpose  that  the  Gospel  has  been  re-
stored ;  and  we  have  commenced  to
practice  some  of  the  principles  calcu-
lated to  bring  about  this  condition  of
affairs.  Imperfectly  we  admit,  very
imperfectly;  but  nevertheless  the
principles  themselves  are  true  and
are  perfect,  however  imperfectly  they
may  be  believed  in  and  carried  out
by  those  professing  to  be  the  follow-
ers of  them,  and,  as  I  have  said,  the
Lord  has  restored  the  ordinances  in
their  ancient  power  and  in  their  an-
cient purity  ;  and  the  results  we  see
before  us  to-day,  to  a  certain  extern,
in  this  Territory.  We  are  partially
united  ;  and  I  thank  God  for  it;  I
praise  him  every  day  of  my  life  that
my  lot  is  cast  among  this  people,  and
that  I  am  counted  worthy  to  be  a
member  of  this  Church.  However
humble  my  station  may  be,  I  still
feel  that  I  would  have  abundant
cause  for  thanksgiving  in  the  fact
that  I  am  a  member  of  this  Church
and  that  through  membership  I  have
*  claim  to  the  fellowship  of  this
people,  Imperfect  as  we  are,  I  never


thcless  feel  thankful  for  the  degree
of  union  that  we  have  attained  to
throughout  these  valleys.  I  am
thankful  for  these  my  brethren  and
these  my  sisters.  When  I  set  their
union  and  coune  of  life  and  the  dis-
position they  manifest  in  the  midst
uf  the  temptations  which  surround
them,  I  feel  thankful  that  the  Gospel
has  beer:  restored  and  for  the  power
it  has  upon  the  hearts  of  those  witk
whom  I  am  associated.  To  me  the
spectacle  is  one  that  fills  me  with
thankfulness  and  admiration  to  God,
when  I  see  these  elements  gathered
to  these  mountains  from  so  many
different  nations  and  peoples,  notwith-
standing our  peculiarities  and  original
differences  of  faith  and  of  language
education  and  training,  to  see  them
dwell  together  so  peacefully  aa  they
do,  loving  one  another  and  ever
ready  and  willing  to  do  good  to  each
other;  not  to  the  extent  probably  we
should  do  or  that  we  are  required  to
do,  for  in  too  many  instances  we  for-
get ourselves  and  partake  too  much
of  the  spirit  of  the  world.  But  I  am
thankful,  as  I  have  said,  for  that
which  I  do  witness,  for  the  union  and
love  and  disposition  to  deny  ourselves,
and  the  reverence  we  have  for  God
and  sacred  things  and  also  the  regard
we  have  for  bin  Priesthood.

This  Gospel  to  which  I  have  re-
ferred, if  taught  and  believed  in  and
practiced  by  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  would  revolutionize  the  face  of
society;  it  would  change  the  affairs
of  the  earth,  as  we  witness  them.  In*
stead  of  one  man  lauding  it  over  his
fellow  man,  as  though  he  were  made
of  better  clay,  as  though  he  were

n>ade  of  porcelain,  while  bis  neighbor
was  made  of  common  stuff,  aud  think-
ing himself  entitled  to  better  board
and  bed  and  finer  clothes,  and  to  live
in  greater  ease,  instead  of  feeling  that
way,  when  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel are  practiced  by  us  in  their  on-


CONSISTENCY  IMPERATIVE,  ETC,


93


tirety,  we  w  ill  get  rid  entirely  of  these
feelings,  and  we  will  seek  to  carry
out  that  which  he  has  commanded
his  servants,  namely  to  love  your
neighbor  as  yourselves  ;  and  not  to
profess  to  do  it ;  but  do  it.  And
when  we  trade  with  our  neighbor,
instead  of  taking  advantage  of  him
and  of  his  ignorance  and  necessities,
trado  with  him  as  we  would  want
him  to  trade  with  us  under  similar
circumstances,  and  mete  out  to  him
evenhamied  justice,  as  we  would  wish
him  to  do  to  us  were  our  positions
reversed.  These  are  lessons  required
of  us  in  the  Gospel;  to  learn  them
and  practice  them,  and  then  struggle
with  our  weakness — for  these  are
weaknesses  of  our  nature — and  they
come  in  contact  with  this  sort  of  doc-
trine, these  heavenly  and  advanced
principles  which  Jesus  taught  when
upon  the  earth.

It  is  an  easy  thing  to  tell  a  true
Latter-day  Saint  from  one  who  only
professes  the  religion  ;  it  is  an  easy
thing  to  tell  a  false  Prophet  from  a
true  Prophet;  it  is  easy  to  tell  where
a  man  gets  his  doctrines  from,  whe-
ther from  beneath  or  from  above,  by
the  fruits  that  r.hey  bring  forth.  The
doctrines  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
bring  peace;  they  benr  testimony  to
every  man's  soul  who  practises  them
that  they  are  true.  And  if  a  man
wants  to  know  whether  God  lives
and  whether  Jesus  is  his  Son,  and
had  a  right  to  teach  the  doctrines
accredited  to  him  in  the  Bible,  let
him  practice  those  doctrines,  and  he
will  find  out  for  himself  that  thej
are  true,  because  there  will  be  a
spirit  that  will  bear  testimony  to  him
-of  their  truthfulness.  He  will  have
the  spirit  of  heaven,  the  spirit  of
peace,the  spirit  of  love,  of  charity,  of
patience  and  forgivenesss,  and  the
spirit  of  joy  in  his  heart.  But  when
he  believes  them  and  comes  in  con
tact  with  them,  there is  another


spirit  takes  possession  of  him,
and  his  joy,  his  peace  and  happiness
take  their  flight.

Why,  brethren  and  sisters,  it  is
good  for  us  on  this  the  Lord  s  day  to
leave  our  business,  leave  our  work*
shop,  leave  our  counting  bosses,
leave  our  stores  and  our  fields  and
farms,  our  gardens  and  cattle,  and  the
other  things  that  engross  our  atten-
tion during  the  six  days  of  the  week,
and  come  here  on  the  Lord's  Day,
and  ponder  upon  his  Word  and  on
the  doctrines  given  unto  us,  and
treasure  them  up  in  our  hearts,  and
seek  them  a  practical  application  in
our  lives  as  fast  as  we  can.  And  the
more  a  man  seeks  to  do  this,  the  more
he  labors  in  his  own  individual  in-
terest. In  one  sense  it  makes  but
little  difference,  and  will  make  but;
little  difference  to  me  what  your  fate
may  be.  It  is  true  it  would  add  to
my  happiness  to  see  and  know  that
my  friends  were  saved  and  exalted
in  the  presence  of  our  Father  ;  but
the  great  duty  devolving  upon  you
and  rue,  is  to  see  that  we  are  indi-
vidually saved.  It  is  not  for  me  to
watch  and  scrutinize  and  comment
upon  you,  having  my  attention
directed  to  your  weaknesses,  and
then  say,  ;i  There  is  Brother  So-and-
So;  how  unworthy  he  is;"  or
t;  There  Is  Sister  So-and-So,  look  at
her  conduct,  and  what  poor  manage-
ment she  has  in  her  household ;
and  how  she  treats  her  household."
It  is  not  for  you  or  me  to  do  this
one  to  another,  but  it  is  for  each
one  of  us  to  look  at  ourselves  and
examine  our  own  hearts,  look  at
and  scrutinize  our  own  conduct
doing  that  which  is  right  in  the
sight  of  Got  I  ourselves.

Are  we  individually  complying
with  those  requirements  which  Jesus
gave  his  apostles?  If  we  are,  it  ia
well  with  us.  If  we  are  not  it  mat-
ters not  how  many  others  are  doing


96


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


wrong,  it  does  not  help  my  case  or
excuse  you  in  the  least  degree.  But
it  is  for  me  to  do  right  myself;  it  is
for  me  to  carry  out  and  practise  in
my  life  the  principles  revealed,  and
which  I  know  to  be  true;  and  then
whether  those  on  the  right  or  those
on  the  kft  do  wrong,  it  makes  no  dif-
ference so  tar  as  my  individual  salva-
tion is  concerned.  And  this  is  prac-
tical religion.  If  I  were  to  sit  down
and  begin  to  relate  to  some  of  my
neighbors  the  faults  of  another  neigh-
bor,  do  you  think  that  would  add  to
my  perfection  ?  No,  it  would  tend
to  make  me  more  contemptible  in  the
light  of  God,  and  in  the  sight  of  all
men  more  just  and  upright  than  my-
self. Therefore  it  is  our  duty  to
indulge  in  and  practice  self-exarni na-
tion, and  self-condemnation  if  neces-
sary. The  man  that  looks  at  himself
in  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
who  is  a  humble  man,  will  not  find
much  fault  wifh  his  fellow-man  ;  for
the  presence  of  his  own  faults  arise-
before  him  continually  when  be  sees
another  man's  weaknesses,  and  in-
stead of  filling  him  with  self-pride
and  self-justification  and  feeling  self-


righteous,  it  produces  a  feeling  within
him  of  commiseration  for  others,  and
the  spirit  of  charity  takes  possession
of  him,  and  undoubtedly  a  prayer
ascends  from  his  heart  to  God  in  be-
half of  him  who  had  given  way  to
weakness  desiring  the  Lard  to  deliver
him  that  he  might  not  be  left  to  be
overcome  by  the  adversary.  There
is  too  much  talking  among  us  about
one  another.  If  we  perceive  a  weak-
ness in  a  brother  or  a  sister,  instead
of  talking  about  it,  we  should  rather
pray  for  him  or  her;  it  would  be
much  better  for  us.  If  we  are  so
perfect  that  we  need  no  help  our-
selves, let  us  exercise  faith  for  those
who  are  not  in  so  good  condition,
and  pray  the  Lord  to  help  them,
that  they  may  be  enabled  to  over-
come.

The  Lord  bless  you,  brethren  and
sisters,  and  help  us  to  be  that  which
we  profess  to  be,  not  only  to  be  Lat-
ter-day Saisnts  in  name,  but  in  word
and  deed,  exemplifying  the  princi-
ples of  ougc  religion  in  our  lives  ;
which  I  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen*


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  ETC.  9T


SUBSTANCE OF  A
DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER ORSON  HYDE,

Delivered  at  Mount  Pleasant,  Sanpete  County,  Utah,  on  Sunday
Mornino,  November  3,  1878,  Said  to  have  been  the  las*

DELTVERHD  BY  VIM  WHILE  LIVING  IS  ffllK  frLISUI,

GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES — THE  CORRUPTION  OF  THE  ADMI-
NISTRATION—  ITS  TREATMENT  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — THE
JUDGMENTS1  OF  GOD  UPON  THE  WICKED — OPPOSITION  TO  POLYGAMY
PREPARATION  FOR  COMING  EVENTS.


I  am  much  gratified  this  morning,
my  brethren,  sisters  and  friends,  to
meet  with  you  in  this  Tabernacle  in
Mount  Pleasant,  in  the  capacity  of  a
two  day's  meeting.  From  the  num-
bers present  before  me,  I  am  led  to
conclude  that  a  deep  and  abiding
interest  dwells  in  your  hearts;  and
you  have  come  here  to  increase  your
zeal,  and  add  intelligence  to  your
preaent  stock  of  knowledge  pertaining
to  the  kingdom  of  God.

I  hop©  and  trust  that  you  may  not
be  disappointed ;  for  it  is,  bona  fide,
my  intention  to  lay  open  to  your
view,  in  plain,  simple,  and  unmistak-
able language,  the  facts  that  are  pre-
sented to  my  mind,  for  I  desire  all
to  hear  and  to  understand,  especially
those  who  may  not  be  fully  conversant
with  the  English  language*

The  government  of  the  United
States,  on  paper,  is  an  institution
approaching  as  near  perfection  as  any
government  ever  ordained  by  man  ;
but  when  its  administration  drifts  into
the  hands  of  unscrupulous  and  dis-
honest politicians,  it  becomes  an  en-
gine of  oppression  and  very  unequal

No,  7.


in  its  bearings.  Any  crack  or  deform-
ity  of  the  elegant  mirror  becomes  the
more  conspicuous  by  contrast — so  the
cracks,  splits,  and  crookedness  in  our
general  government  become  the  more
glaring  and  unwelcome  in  the  eyes  of
the  governed.

Great  effort  has  been  made  to  ferret
out  the  guilty  parties  and  bring  them
to  punishment  who  were  engaged  in
the  horrid  Mountain  Meadow  massa-
cre. Had  this  been  done  in  the  spirit
of  justice  and  truth,  free  from  that
animus  and  extreme  desire  to  crimi-
nate the  whole  Mormon  Church,  that
effort  would  have  been  praiseworthy
and  highly  commendable ;  but  con-
ducted as  h  has  been  thus  far,  it  will
go  down  to  the  shades, covering  with
odium  the  conductors  of  that  cam-
paign.

In  contrast  with  the  foregoing,  I
will  now  refer  to  the  horrid  massacre
at  Hawn*s  Mill,  in  Missouri,  wherein
seventeen  peaceable,  quiet,  and  unof-
fending citizens,  were  shot  down,  in
cold  blood,  and  their  bodies  thrown
into  an  old  well ;  and  for  what  ?  I
j  am  at  the  defiance  of  the  whole  world

Vol.  XX.  7


to  show  that  it  was  for  anything,  ex-
cept for  the  crime  of  being  **  Mormons/9
I  would  here  ask  this  government
how  much  military  and  judicial  inves-
tigation was  had  to  ferret  out  and
bring  to  punishment  the  perpetrators
of  that  bloody  deed,  to  say  nothing
of  the  wholesale  banishment  of  an
entire  community  by  force  of  arms,
and  the  sequestration  of  their  proper-
ty and  inheritances  ?  How  does  this
compare  with  the  claims  of  the  gov-
ernment to  justice  ami  equal  rights  ?

Again,  my  hearers,  I  will  refer  you
to  the  murderous  assault  made  on
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith,  John
Taylor  and  Willard  Richards,  in
Carthage  jail.  These  men  were  un-
tried and  uncondemnned,  incarcerated
within  the  walls  of  a  strong  prison,
and  no  danger  of  escape;  yet  a  band
of  disguised  men,  about  one  hundred
and  fifty  in  number,  assaulted  the
prison  and  slew  Joseph  and  Hyrum
Smith,  and  seriously  wounded  John
Taylor  with  musket  rifle  balls  ;  and
as  every  man  is  to  be  held  innocent
until  proven  guilty,  they  remain  inno-
cent, because  never  proven  guilty,  nor
com  Id  they  be  proven  guilty,  by  any
truthful  evidence.

'  It  was  said  that  some  kind  of  legal
proceedings  were  instituted  in  this
tragic  Eiffrfir,  yet  not  with  a  view  to
convict  and  punish,  but  with  the  in-
tention  to  place  a  bar  against  all
future  proceedings  that  might  be
undertaken  and  prosecuted  in  good
faith.  Thus  the  Prophet  of  God  and
Patriarch  of  the  Church  were  cruelly
murdered,  to  the  great  grief  of  their
nutneroui  friends,  and  to  the  joy  of  a
Christian  nation.

Popular  clamour  crucified  the
Savior,  aud  a  popular  outburst  of  in.
dignation  murdered  the  Prophet  of
God  and  his  brother,  and  amid  fire
and  storm,  cannon  balls,  swords  and
bayonets,  were  the  14  Mormon'1  people
compelled  to  flee  into  the  wilderness.


To  the  shame,  dishonor  and  disgrace
of  the  nation  be  it  spoken;  and  when
they  ask  the  cause  of  the  whirlwinds,
tornadoes  and  cyclones,  that  sweep
through  the  land,  they  are  respect-
folly  referred  to  Haun's  Mill,  Car-
thage Jail  and  to  the  treatment  gene-
rally of  the  "  Mormons"  in  Missouri
aud  Illinois  for  the  true  and  faithful
answer.

The  Prophet  Isaiah,  CO  lb  chapter,
12th  verse,  utters  this  strong  senti-
ment: **  For  the  nation  and  king-
dom that  will  not  serve  thee,  shall
perish  ;  Yea,  those  nations  shall  be
utterly  wasted."  They  may  ask,
Are  we  tobeso  humiliated  as  to  serve
the  **  Mormons"  whom  we  have  despi-
sed, persecuted  and  rejected?  They
can  take  the  other  horn  of  the  dilemma
if  they  choose,  and  be  utterly  wasted.
Wisdom  however  would  suggest  that
our  enemies  move  slowly  and  cau-
tiously.

For  one,  I  have  no  objection  to
any  and  all  federal  officers  coming
here  to  execute  the  laws,  impartially
in  the  spirit  of  justice  and  truth,  I
say,  they  have  ray  cordial  good  will
to  do  so.  But  when  they  come  full
of  wrath,  with  a  determination  to  im-
mortalize their  names  by  squelching
out  "Mormon  ism^  pandering  to  the
prejudices  of  an  ungodly  age,  lean
not  find  language  sufficiently  strong
to  express  my  disapproval  and  con-
tempt fur  their  ad  ministration — wrest-
ing laws  from  the  known  intention  of
the  Legislature,  and  applying  them
by  certain  technical  twists,  to  take
the  advantage  of  a  people  who  labor
day  and  night  to  conform  to  the  rev-
elations of  God.

Polygamy  is  a  subject  that  greatly
agitates  the  public  mind  at  the  pre-
sent day.  Some  men  in  their  de-
praved zeal  to  pry  into  every  secret
of  polygamy  with  a  view  to  expose
it,  know  no  limit  to  their  efforts  to
accomplish  their  hellish  purpose.  The


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  ETC,


Supreme  Baler  above  has  not  yet
relinquished  all  his  rights,  nor  indeed
any  of  them,  on  our  little  planet  to
the  sons  of  earth,  though  they  hold  a
very  precarious  dominion  by  suffer*
ance,  11  until  he  who  letteth  will  let,
^til  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way."
Pestilence  and  famine,  earthquake
and  wars,  whirlwinds  and  cyclones,
fires  and  floods,  besides  accidents  in-
numerable are  being  called  into  re-
quisition to  remove  all  obstacles;  "for
the  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not
serve  thee  shall  perish ;  yea,  those
nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted,"  The
day  of  spiritualizing  and  daubing
with  nn tempered  mortar  has  gone
by.  It  is  stubborn,  self-evident  facta
that  we  have  to  grapple  with,  and
■should  be  set  forth  in  a  light  that  all
may  understand.  Polygamy  is  a
principle  revealed  from  heaven  with
a  commandment  to  enter  into  it
practically.  The  principle  is  abun-
dantly corroborated  in  the  ancient
scriptures,  approved  of  God  and  sanc-
tioned by  all  righteous  men ;  and  he
who  labors  to  overthrow  this  prin-
ciple, fights  against  Jehovah  and
makes  himself  a  shining  target,  court-
ing the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  upon
his  head,  heart  and  country.  Would
to  God,  that  I  could,  conscientiously,
make  an  exception  here  of  our  wise
and  learned  judges,  attorneys,  juries
and  marshals  ;  but  conscience  forbids
it*  The  same  consequences  will  fol-
low against  the  fighting  against  any
commandment  that  God  has  given,  or
that  be  may  give.  The  consequences
of  the  judical  war  waged  against  the
late  Brigham  Young  are  not  yet  can-
celled ;  but  the  hand  of  the  destroyer
has  already  begun  his  work,  though
in  a  comparatively  mild  and  gentle
form.  Churches  of  various  denomi-
nations, that  have  always  been  bar-
red against  our  preachers,  are  being
opened  by  the  band  of  Providence,
as  the  cyclone  that  recently  passed


through  Pennsylvania  may  be  consi-
dered as  a  alight  reminder  ;  nop  has
Missouri  altogether  escaped.  We  are
now  living  in  the  days  of  a  "  marvel*
oua  work  and  a  wonder/'  Our  ene-
mies are  about  to  be  checked  up  in
their  career  of  burning  strange  fire
upon  the  altar  of  God.

The  Elders  of  thia.  Church,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  have  faithfully
labored  during  the  last  half  century
in  almost  every  nation  on  the  globe,
to  warn  the  inhabitants  of  their  duty
and  to  tell  them  the  consequences  of
their  not  complying  with  it  It  is
true,  that  by  the  help  of  the  Lord,
we  made  many  converts,  yet  few  in
comparison  to  the  numbers  who  re-
jected our  message.  We  can,  there-
fore, with  propriety  say,  we  are  un-
profitable servants;  yet  the  Lord
wishes  to  test  our  fidelity,  our  forti-
tude and  our  patience,  knowing  that
the  world  would  not  be  converted  by
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  hence
his  design  was  to  "send  forth  judg-
ment unto  victory and  when  the
judgments  of  God  wax  hot  in  the
land,  many  people  will  say,  "  Come,
let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the
Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of
Jacob,*1  and  sotbej  will  "come  like
clouds  and  like  doves  to  their  win-
dows,*' and  Z  ion's  gates  be  ever
open,  and  Zion  will  not  always  be
oppressed  for  their  kings  will  yet
"become  our  nursing  fathers  and
their  queens  our  nursing  mothers/1

We  shall  not  always,  my  hearers,
he  under  the  necessity  of  reasoning
with  the  sceptical  and  technical  un-
believer, to  persuade  him  to  be  saved;
for  a  power  will  be  manifested  in  the
land  more  potent  than  mans  reason-
ing.

I  wish  to  ask  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  two  important  ques-
tions :

1st. — Why  our  unprecedently  libe-
ral harvest  of  grain  this  year  ?


100


JOT7RNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


2nd. — WhydoeBthe  spirit  of  the
Lord  rest  down  upon  o*r  Elders,  di-
recting them  to  explore  the  eastern,
sooth-eastern  and  southern  countries
with  the  view  of  finding  suitable  places
for  new  locations  and  settlements  ?

Ans.  to  first  question — -That  we
may  be  prepared  to  lay  np  a  surplus
against  corning  troubles.

Ans.  to  second — To  open  the  way
to  receive  the  multitudes  flocking  to
Zion,  having  heard  that  God  is  with
U!%  and  desiring  to  escape  the  scour*
ges  by  enlisting  under  the  tegis  of
of  "Mormon  "  protection  ;  and  shall  |
we  escape  the  scourges  of  the  Al-
mighty if  we  foolishly  part  with  the
surplus  gifts  that  heaven  has  gran-
ted us  in  trust  for  other  purposes,
and  that  too,  before  the  time  ?  If
the  people  of  Utah  will  listen  to  wise
counsels,  there  will  be  no  famine
here  arising  from  the  refuial  of  the
soil  to  yield  her  fruits;  but  there
may  be  danger  of  famine  by  the  rapid
increase  of  population  from  abroad,
especially  if  the  stores  provided  by
the  hand  of  Providence  be  foolishly
parted  with  before  they  may  be  need-
<  i  to  meet  this  exigency.  A  word  of
caution  to  the  wise  virgins  is  sufficient;
but  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar,  and  he  is
a  fool  still  Under  the  profession  of
great  piety  and  deep  solicitude  for
the  redemption  of  our  children  from
the  influence  of  "Mormomim,"  many
alleged  charitable  enterprises  have
been  put  on  foot  in  the  shape  of  oppo-
sition schools,  to  decoy  them  into
their  traps.  They  ensnare  some  of
the  children  of  our  apostates,  and
some  apostates  who  claim  that  they
find  better  schools,  and  better  teach-
ers under  the  supervision  of  sectarian
priests, than  they  do  amongst  the  "Mor-
mons "  This  claim  is  made  through
a  disposition  to  depreciate  "Mormon"
institutions  and  to  elevate  sectarian-
ism. We  have  just  as  good  institu-
tions of  learning  and  as  competent


teachers  as  any  of  our  neighbors;  but
even  allowing  the  children  of  this
world  to  be  wiser  in  their  generation
than  the  children  of  light,  it  is  no
reason  that  I  should  adopt  them  as
my  instructors.  I  now  write  a  clum-
sy, illegible  hand.  Many  men  can
write  my  name  with  much  more  style
and  elegance  than  I  possibly  can  do;
yet,  if  they  should  attach  my  name
to  a  bond  or  promissory  note  for  any
amount,  it  would  not  be  my  signature
and  could  create  no  binding  obliga-
tion upon  me  ;  but  the  learned  and
accomplished  gentleman  who  attach-
ed my  name  to  the  instrument  might
be  proven  guilty  of  forgery  and  sub-
ject himself  to  punishment  Jesus
says:  "Every  plant  which  my  hea-
venly Father  hath  not  planted  shall
be  rooted  up."

There  is  another  important  feature,
my  friends,  connected  with  this  sub-
ject that  I  cannot  allow  myself  to
omit.  In  the  great  rush  of  people
to  the  Saints  in  the  last  days,  all
sorts,  sizes,  and  of  both  sexes,  will
rush  in  upon  us  to  escape  the  wrath
of  the  elements,  which  will  render  a
time  of  purification  and  cleansing,
actually  necessary.  The  chaff  must
be  blown  away,  and  they  who  laid  ug
waste  must  go  forth  from  us.  The
wicked  and  the  ungodly  must  be  far
away.  Now,  what  agencies  must  b©
employed  to  accomplish  this  import-
ant part  of  the  programme.  It  is
out  of  my  power  to  inform  you  as  to
what  means  may  be  called  into  requi-
sition to  effect  this  object.  We  know,
however,  that  wind  has  something  to
do  with  the  scattering  of  chaff.  The
departure  of  the  ungod  ly  from  a  mongsfc
the  Saints  may  be  voluntary  in  many
cases.  I  have  been  informed  by
those  who  claim  to  know,  that  a  cer-
tain lady  in  this  Territory  built  up  a
large  fire  in  the  room  where  she  lived,
fancied  that  that  fire  was  the  most
desirable  and  lovely  place  in  all  the


GOVERNMENT  OF  THE


UNITED  STATES,  ETC*


^world,  and  plastered  herself  with  tar
from  head  to  foot,  laid  herself  down
on  the  fire,  and  literally  roasted  her-
self to  a  chip.

She  was  said  to  be  an  aged  lady,
and  I  presume  that  God  can  make
even  hell  itself  or  any  intermediate
bad  place  look  as  inviting  to  a  wicked
person  as  a  bit  of  cheese  in  a  trap  to
a  hungry  mouse  outside,  but  the
majority  of  the  departures  will  be
involuntary.  But  suffice  it  to  say
that  something  will  occur,  in  a  provi-
dential way,  that  will  cause  sinners
in  Zion  to  tremble,  and  fearful oess
to  surprise  the  hypocrite.  It  will,
probably,  be  something  that  will
appear  terrible  to  "  the  unrighteous,
and  will  be  all  the  nerves  of  the  right-
eous can  endure.

In  conclusion,  I  will  here  say  to
you  my  brethren  and  sisters  and  to
the  Saints  generally :  Set  your
houses  in  order  and  know  that  a
right  spirit  has  dominion  ovtr  you
and  things  and  dwellings  and  over  all
things  under  your  jurisdiction.  Let
the  blood  of  the  covenant  be  freely
sprinkled  on  your  door  posts  and
lintels — a  deep  rooted  union  exist  in
your  hearts  and  practiced  in  your


lives — devote  yourselves  to  earnest
prayer  in  secret  and  iu  your  families
and  allow  not  the  cries  of  the  poor  to
reach  the  ears  of  J  ehovah  against  you.
Omit  not  the  duty  of  patronizing
every  institution  or  learning  among
the  Saints,  whether  day  or  evening
schools,  or  Sunday  schools.  Defeat
not  the  designs  of  the  Almighty  by
fooling  away  the  fruits  of  the  earth,
knowing  that  we  are  placed  here,
not  to  do  our  own  will,  but  thewillof
him  by  whose  goodness  we  live  ;  and
we  should  be  willing  to  be  used  in
doing  good,  buildiug  temples,  placed
of  education  and  in  learning  to  manu-
facture what  we  need.

Notwithstanding  all  the  alleged
improprieties  of  the  Saints,  and
charges  brought  against  us — the  er-
rors and  wrong-doings  of  any  of  its
members — the  entire  Church  is  a  re-
velation from  the  eternal  God  to  the
world  at  large,  and  is  their  standard
reared  in  the  mountains  and  he  who
fights  against  it  or  against  any  of  its
acknowledged  members,  fights  against
his  Maker  and  toucheth  the  apple  of
his  own  eye.  Now,  my  brethren
and  sisters  I  bless  you,  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  Amen.


102


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  Oode^, on  Sunday, December  8,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs,


THE  PERPETUAL  EMIGRATING  FUND — HOW  TO  SETTLE  DIFFICULTIES —
SHOULD  BE  GOVERNED  HY  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD — CO-OPERATION  AND
BROTHERLY  KINDNESS — THE  PROPER  TRAINING  OF  CHILDREN.


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-  |
nity  to  meet  with  the  Saints  here;
and  I  have  been  quite  interested  in
the  remarks  yon  have  heard  this
morning  from  Bro,  Joseph  I\  Smith
There  are  a  great  many  principles
associated  with  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God;  and  Bro.  Joseph  has  presented
some  things  that  are  quite  interesting
and  then  there  may  be  a  few  things
said  on  the  other  side  of  the  question
that  are  equally  true.  Those  doc-
trines he  has  taught  are  true;  they
are  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of
Gospel.  We  ought  always  to  live
with  reference  to  eternity,  feeling
full  of  kindness,  benevolence,  charity
and  long  suffering  to  all,  respecting
always  the  motives  and  circumstances
of  others.  Then  on  the  other  hand
while  we  do  that,  it  is  not  right  for
others  to  take  advantage  of  that
benevolence  because  a  man  is  a  good
man  and  an  honorable  man,  a  man  that
fears  God  and  who  is  lenient,  kind,
merciful  and  forgiving,  it  is  not  right
for  others  to  take  advantage  of  such
goodness  and  praiseworthy  actions ;
there  are  two  sides  to  all  these  mat-
ters, the  question  of  debtor  and  cre-
ditor is  not  all  on  one  side.  I  will
mention  a  thing  here  which  has  been


alluded  to  before,  and  which  will
serve  to  make  plain  my  meaning,  I  re-
fer to  the  operations  of  the  Perpetual
Emigrating  Fund.  There  has  been
a  very  large  amount  expended  for  the
gathering  of  the  poor  Saints  to  this
country.  Have  any  been  pressed  by
that  Fund  for  the  payment  of  what
they  owe  it?  No.  Yet  there  are
many  of  you  who  havo  gone  with
your  teams — if  you  have  not  gone,
you  have  sent  them — to  assist  this
people.  What  for?  Bt cause  you
felt  it  in  your  heart  to  do  it,  and  be-
cause you  were  called  upon  to  do  it,
and  because  you  were  doing  it  in
obedience  to  a  command  of  God*
You  not  only  furnished  teams,  but
you  furnished  provisions  for  the  emi-
grating Saints.  Now  they,  on  the
other  hand,  covenanted  and  gave
their  notes  for  the  payment  of  this
indebtedness,  which  if  paid  according
to  promise,  would  have  been  used  to
emigrate  other  Saints  similarly  situat-
ed. Was  it  right  for  you  to  bring
them  here  and  to  supply  them  with
food,  etc.  ?  Yes.  It  is  right  for  us
to  engage  in  such  enterprises  ?  Yes,
because  the  Gospel  requires  it  at  our
hands,  and  the  love  of  God  and  the
love  of  our  bretheen. This  was  done


THE  PERPETUAL  >  MIGRATION  FUND,  ETC.


103


in  good  faith. Should  not  this  be
met  ? There  are  a  million  of  dol-
lars due  to-day  on  this  account  Is
it  right  that  it  should  be  so  ?  No,
Have  these  debtors  been  pressed,  or
has  anybody seized  them by  the
throat,  saying,  Pay  me  what  thou
owest  ? Not  that  I  an  aware  of.
Have  they  been  dragged  before  courts
of  justice  ? No, But  still  the  debt
remains  unpaid ;  and  there  is  a  quest-
ion that  arises  in  my  mind. Will  it
remain  there,  until  it  removes  itself
or  not? This  is  a  little  on  the  other
side  of  the  question,  and  this  is  not  a
email  thing  either,  and  it  is  some-
thing we  are  all  familiar  with.  It
this  matter  has  not  been  pressed,  it
makes  the  obligation  none  the  less
sacred,  We  are  told  to  pay  our  debts,
to  meet  our  obligations,  to  deal  justly
and  righteously  one  with  another.
And  I  wish  we  had  no  debts  to  pay  ;
I  wish  we  could  so  Uveas  to  keep  out
of  debt  and  meet  our  obligations  day
by  day.  Bat  then  we  do  not  do  this;  if
we  did  we  should  be  much  better  and
more  pleasantly situated and  feel
more  comfortable  in  our  feelings  and
dispositions. And  if  people  do  not
do  these  things,  what  then  ?  There
is  a  way  appointed  by  the  LiH,  and
that  is  to  adjust  them  before  the
bishops'  courts. We  as  Litter*day
Saints  ought  to  be  governed  by  the
laws  of  this  church  and  not  by  the
laws  of  the  land,  until  the  law  of  God
is  complied  with. How  far  would
you  take  them  ? Just  as  far  as  the
law  of  God  prescribes If  a  man  sin
against  another  ia  it  good  and  charit-
able and  kind  to  forgive  him  ?  Yes.
Now,  I  will  speak  of  myself.  I  never
sued  a  man  either  before  our  own
courts  or  any  other  courts. Why  ?
Because  I  never  thonght  the  thing
worth  enough;  I  never  thought  money
and  property  worth  enough  to  go  to
law  about. I  think  so  yet^  I  think
it  rather  too  small  an  affair  to  break


up  those  fraternal  relations  that
should  exist between  brother  and
brother. Then  do  you  believe  in
owing  people  and  not  paying  them?
No,  I  do  not. I  believe  in  meeting
engagements  honorably  and  honestly
before  God. But  will  men  be  bles-
sed for  being  forgiving? Well,  I
think  so. And  I  think  that,  as
Latter-day  Saints,  we  will  have  a
good  chance  of  obtaining  quite  a
blessingon  account  of  our  forbearance
in  relation  to  those  having  obligations
before  referred  to;  for  there  is,  as  I
have  sa»d,  a  million  of  dollars  owing
among  the  people,  and  I  do  not  think
they  have  been  pressed  to  pay  it.
But  I  wish  people  would  do  nearly
right. I  wish  they  would  act  honor-
ably and  uprightly  and  consistently
and  properly,  and  all  meet  their  ob-
ligations and pursue an  upright
course. Bat  there  is  again  another
question  to  be  adjusted  in  this  mat-
ter. It  is  not  the  value  of  the  money
alone  nor  ho  v  it  will  affect  me  ;  but
how  are  others  affected  by  it  ?  A
perpetual  fund  was  established,  which
fund  contemplated  a  continual  help,
a  continual  return of  the  money
loaned  and  perpetual  fund  kept  al-
ways on  hand,  for  the  assistance  of
those  requiring  aid. Tins  fund  was
not  designed  as  a  gift,  but  as  a  loan;
but  now  it  happens  that  this  fund  is
crippled,  because  men  have  not  re-
turned their  loans. It  is  not  there-
fore a  matter  as  between  ourselves,
but  one  that  affects  hundreds  that
are  very  much  .worse  off  than  those
who  owe  these  debts. The  cry  is
continually  coming  to  onr  ears  for
help. The  poverty,  distress,  and
trouble  in  Europe  are  on  the  increase,
and  we  have  continually  to  bear  the
wails  of  the  poor;  they  look  to  us  for
help,  but  those  debtors  have  got  their
means  and  are  using  it. There  is
another  cry;  it  is  not  those  debtors
being  oppressed  by  ua  ;  but  the  un-


104  JOURNAL  OF

gathered  poor  being  defrauded  by  j
those  who  have  borrowed  money  and
do  not  return  it.  It  mav  become
quite  a  question  as  to  how  far  we  are
justified  in  permitting  those  who
have  been  assisted,  by  this  public
fund  by  withholding  what  they  justly
owe,  to  block  the  wheel b  of  the  in-
stitution and  deprive  others,  who
may  be  more  meritorious  than  them-
selves,  of  obtaining  that  relief  which  j
is  justly  their  duo.  But  do  you  j
believe  in  being  grasping?  Ntf.
Do  you  believe  in  covetousness?
No,  I  do  not.  I  think  that  as  Latter-
day  Saints  we  ought  to  have  our
minds  fixed  on  something  else —
something  more  elevating,  more  ex*
siting,  more  honorable,  and  more  in
accordance  with  the  position  we
occupy  and  the  principles  we  profess
to  believe  in.

As  this  subject  has  been  broached,
1  wish  now  to  apeak  a  little  in  regard
to  our  manner  of  doing  business.
"We  are  mixed  up  a  good  deal  at
present — you,  here  in  Ogden,  are  j
especially,  and  we  in  Salt  Lake  are  J
too — with  Gentile  institutions,  and
their  practice  is  strictly  upon  the
ground  referred  toby  brother  Joseph,
44  an  eye  for  au  eye,  and  a  tooth  for
a  tooth,  pay  me  that  thou  owest,"
eta,  which  in  one  sense  is  all  very
correct  ;  but  there  is  a  better  way
to  settle  difficulties,  which  is  by
mixing  up  with  it  a  little  charity
and  benevolence,  and  then  it  does
very  well  But  when  we  talk  about
"popping  men  through"  the  courts
who  do  not  do  thus  and  so,  as  has
been  referred  to,  I  tell  you  what  you
should  do,  whenever  a  man  would
attempt  to  M  pop**  you  through  the
courls  of  the  law  of  the  land,  you
eho  u  1  d  * '  pop' '  him  th  ro u g  1 1  the
courts  of  our  Church;  you  should
bring  him  up  for  violating  the  laws
of  the  Church,  for  going  to  law  be-
fore the  ungodly,  instead  of  owing


DISCOURSES.

the  means  that  God  has  appointed.
We  think,  as  La  tier- day  Saints,
that  the  laws  of  God  are  a  little  in
advance  of  the  laws  of  the  land  ;
and,  in  fact,  it  is  not  an  un frequent
tiling  for  men  not  belonging  to  our
Church  to  express  themselves  desi-
rous to  britii£  their  crises  tor  trial
before  our  High  Council,  believing
they  could  get  better  justice  than
they  could  before  the  courts  of  the
world ;  I  believe  it  with  all  my
heart.  Litter-day  Saints,  we  ought
to  be  coniroled  by  correct  principles  ;
and  if  aoybody  is  sinned  against,  we
have  our  remedy.  If  the  brother
that  Brother  Joseph  F,  Smith  has
referred  to,  instead  of  cherishing
and  harboring  those  unpleasant  feel-
ings, had  gone  to  his  brother  who
had  given  him  offence,  arid  told  him
that  his  feelings  were  hurt  at  some
word  he  had  spoken,  and  he  thought
he  would  come  and  talk  the  matter
squarely  to  him,  that  little  affair
would  have  been  settled,  and  good
feelings  would  have  existed  between
|  them.  But  then,  supposing  after
beintj  so  waited  on,  your  brother
would  not  hear  you,  it  would  then  be
proper  to  wait  on  him  again,  taking
with  you  another  brother ;  and  if
he  still  persisted  to  manifest  hard
feelings,  it  would  then  be  proper  to
report  him  to  the  Church,  and  let
the  matter  be  brought  to  the  notice
of  the  TVachers  or  the  Priests,  as
the  case  might  be.  If  he  refuse  to
hearken  to  their  counsel,  let  a  charge
bo  preferred  against  him  to  his
Bishop  who,  with  his  counselors,
should  hear  and  decide  the  case  ac-
cording to  the  evidence,  with  all
long-suffering  and  humility  and
jus  tie  9  and  prayer  before  God,  to
guide  him  in  his  decision.  And
when  they  operate  together  in  this
way,  such  things  will  be  disposed  of
aright.  And  if  either  party  should
[  be  dissatisfied  with  the  decision,  au


THE  PERPETUAL  EMIGRATION  FUND,  ETC


appeal  could  he  taken  to  a  higher
court — the  High  Council.  And
when  that  body  of  rnen  sit  upon  the
case  and  render  their  decision  in  the
matter,  and  if  the  brother  refuse  to
hear  the  no,  what  then  ?  He  is  cut
off  the  Church,  "  But  (a  man  may
say)  it  is  a  matter  of  dollars  and  .
cents,  and  if  a  man  owe  me  $,5,000,
I  cannot  afford  to  lose  it,  and  what
recourse  have  IT  Bring  him  up
before  the  Church,  and  if  he  will
not  listen  to  the  counsel  of  the
Church  authorities,  let  him  be  dealt
with  by  this  council.  And  what
will  be  the  result  ?  He  will  be
severed  from  the 'Church,  "And
arn  I  to  lose  my  money  ?"  No,  not
Yiecessarily  so  ;  he  is  outside  of  the
Church,  and  now  you  can  "  pop  him
through15  by  the  law,  if  that  be  the
term  you  uae.  And  this  is  why  we
take  such  pains  in  electing  our  re-
presentatives to  our  legislature.  We
try  to  select  good  men  in  order  that
we  may  have  good  laws  enacted,  and
then  we  try  to  get  good  Probate
Judges.  Brother  Richards  here  is  a
Probate  Judge,  and  is  he  a  good  man?
I  think  he  is.  Is  ho  on  Apostle  ?
Yes.  Wei!,  would  it  be  right  to
take  your  case  to  him  as  a  Probate
Judge  ?  No ;  if  you  were  to,  we
would  deal  with  you  for  your  fel tow-
ship.  You  say,  M  That's  a  curious
doctrine/'  You  have  agreed  to  be
governed  by  the  laws  of  the  Church,
and  I  mention  this  to^showyou  what
would  be  right  in  regard  to  princi-
ples of  that  kind.  And  if  after  sum-
monsing the  parties  referred  to  before
the  Bishop's  Court,  and  from  there
the  case  be  carried  before  the  High
Council,  and  then  he  would  not  do
right,  the  consequence  would  be  that
he  would  be  cut  off  from  the  Church,
and  then  you  would  be  at  liberty  to
summon  him  before  Brother  Rich-
ards, «s  a  Judge  of  Probate.  But
there  possibly  might  be  an  appeal


from  the  High  Council,  and  Brother
Richards,ina  Church  capacity,  might
be  one  to  consider  the  case,  then  that
would  be  all  right.

I  speak  of  these  things  to  show
what  our  duties  are,  and  the  position
we  occupy.  Do  you  remember  what
the  Apostle  Paul  said  when  talking
to  some  of  the  former-day  Saints  ou
this  subject  ?  The  people  to  whom
he  addressed  himself  were  doubtless
like  some  of  our  easy-going  brethren,
who  are  always  in  trouble  a  good
deal,  and  are  always  wanting  to
"  pop  *em  through."  Says  he,  in
the  6th  chapter  of  Corinthians,
44  Dire  any  of  you,  having  a  matter
against  a  brother,  go  to  law  before
the  unjust?  Do  you  uot  know  that
the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?
And  if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by
yon,  are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the
smallest  mat  tern  ?  Kdow  ye  not
that  we  shall  judge  angels  ?  how
much  more  things  lhat  pertain  to
this  life?  I  speak  to  your  shame.
Is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man
among  you?  No,  not  one  that  shall
be  able  to  judge  between  his  bre-
thren ?  But  brother  goeth  to  law
with  brother,  and  that  before  the
unbelievers.  Now,  therefore,  there
is  utterly  a  fault  among  you,  because
ye  go  to  law  one  with  another.  Why
do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong  ?  Why
do  ye  not  rather  suffer  yourselves  to
be  defrauded  Yf  etc.,  and  i*  it  not
said  too,  in  speaking  of  the  Twelve,
that  they  shall  sit  upon  twelve
thrones,  and  shall  judge  the  Twelve
Tribes  of  Israel  ?  And  does  not
the  Church  to-day  possess  the  same
officers  as  it  did  anciently,  and  are
they  not  set  apart  by  the  revelation
of  God,  and  ordained  by  the  holy
Priesthood  to  occupy  this  position  ?
Are  these  men  not  competent  to
judge  of  the  comparatively  trivial
things  associated  with  this  life?  and
yet  you  will  take  your  brother  before


106  JOURNAL  OF

ungodly  men  to  be  judged  of  them.
I  tell  you  the  hand  ot  God  will  follow
you  if  you  do  it  And  we  do  not
want  any  such  thing  done  by  any
calling  thorn  selves  Latter-day  Saints;
and  Israel  cannot  do  such  things
with  the  approbation  of  God,  or  the
councils  of  his  Church.  And  I  will
give  you  fair  warning,  and  I  call
upon  Brother  Peery  here,  who  is
President  af  this  Stake,  to  carry  it
out,  that  when  he  finds  any  L  itter
day  Saint  under  his  jurisdiction
going  to  law  with  his  brother  before
the  ungodly,  to  bring  him  up  and
deal  with  him  for  his  fellowship.
This  is  a  correct  principle  before
God;  and  as  Saints  of  God  we  should
be  governed  by  his  laws5  and  not  by
the  laws  of  the  world.  But  these
laws  are  made  and  provided  for  our
protection,  and  when  it  is  proper
and  right  we  can  make  use  of  them
in  common  with  other  citizens.  But 1
we  have  laws  among  ourselves,  and
all  honorable  men  among  us  will
submit  to  the  decisions  of  our  Church
authorities,  and  those  who  are  not
honorable  we  do  not  want,  and  we
will  cut  them  off.

I  attended  your  monthly  priest-
hood meeting  yesterday.  I  find
there  has  been  a  little  feeling  about
the  districting  of  your  city,  which
ought  not  to  exist.  We  sometimes
get  a  little  zealous  in  those  local
matters,  each  has  his  own  ideas,  and
is  dtsirous  of  carrying  them  oul,  I
do  not  know  that  I  have  any  idea  of
my  own  about  these  matters,  I  am
desirous  to  ascertain  the  will  of  God,
arid  if  I  know  that,  I  want  to  do  it
regardless  of  my  opinion,  that  does
not  amount  to  much.  But  if  we
can  know  the  will  ot  God  and  under-
stand the  principles  of  life,  and  then
abide  by  them,  all  will  be  well.  And
as  to  what  imaginary  line  or  district  ,
you  live  in,  I  do  not  think  it  makes
much  difference. We  want  a  little  j


DISCOURSES,

of  this  good  feeling  of  brotherhood
about  which  Brother  Joseph  has
been  speaking  so  pleasantly.  Jesus
says :  u  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for
they  shall  inherit  the  earth.  Bles-
sed are  they  which  do  hunger  and
thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they
shall  be  filled.  Blessed  are  the  pure
in  heart,  for  th^y  shall  see  God.,r
That  is  of  more  value  a  great  deal
than  dollars  and  cents,  if  you  could
but  understand  it.  It  is  worth  ten
thousand  million  times  more,  for
they  perish  with  their  using.  You
brought  nothing  into  the  world;  you
can  take  nothing  out.  By  and  by,
and  a  little  space  of  ground  six  feet
by  two  is  all  you  will  want,  and  your
money  and  your  property  you  will
leave  for  others  to  handle.  "  Blessed
are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst
after  righteousness,  for  they  shall  be
filled/'  Blessed  are  whom  ?  Tho
liar,  the  hypocrite,  the  thief,  the
rogue,  the  debauchee?  No;  but
'*  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for
they  shall  see  God."  Let  us  hunt
after  these  things,  and  seek  to  possess
more  of  these  principles  which  were
taught  and  inculcated  by  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,

We  have  introduced  among  m  the
kingdom  of  God.  What  is  meant
by  it?  The  law,  the  rule,  the  gov*
eminent  of  God.  Now,  the  Lord  has
laid  down  a  perfect  law  in  relation  to
our  temporal  affairs  and  we  would
not  see  so  much  squabling  among
us  if  we  could  carry  it  out.  I  refer
!  to  what  we  call  the  United  Order.
But  we  cannot  bear  it,  it  seems  too
much  for  us,  as  much  as  we  talk  and
boast  of  our  intelligence  we  c  innot
come  to  some  of  these  little  principles
ot  the  Gospel.  Snme  of  us  can  man-
age to  pay  our  tithing,  and  some  of
uscannut.  And  then  some  of  us  can
believe  a  little  in  co-operation,  and
we  think  that  it  is  a  terrible  stride;
to  me  that  is  one  of  the  least  things


THE  PERPETUAL  EMIGRATION  FUKD,  ETC.


107


that  God  ever  instituted  among  men
and  I  sometimes  think  if  we  cannot
do  that  we  had  better  quit.  Talk
about being  Gods  and  organizing
worlds;  why  if  we  fail  in  such  a
comparatively  small  undertakings  I
do  not  think  we  have  faith  enough
to  drag  a  sitting  hen  from  her  nest.
If  we  cannot  be  united  in  some  of
these  little  things,  how  can  we  in
greater  things? We  were  talking
about  the  principle  of  co-operation
in  our  priesthood  meeting;  and  I
thought  I  would  refer  to  it  here*  And
we  are  getting  up  County  or  rather
Stake  organizations  throughout  Zion.
And  we  want  in  all  of  our  temporal
affairs  to  deal  justly  one  with  an-
other. We  want  to  sustain  co-oper-
ation, and  then  we  want  co-operation
to  sustain  us. It  is  not  all  on  one
side ;  there  are  two  sides. If  we  su-
stain co-operation,  we  will  call  upon
co-operation  to  sustain  us;  and  all
the  settlements  throughout  the  Terri-
tory will  be  represented,  just  the
same  as  the  Saints  to-day  are  repre-
sented in  the  Church  through  the
Presidents  of  Stakes,  and  we  will  try
to  do  right  ourselves,  and  then  we
will  try  and  see  that  they  do  right.
We  will  sustain  them  with  good,
honest  efforts,  and  we  want  square
np and  down  operations  on  both
sides,  carrying  out  the  principles  of
co-operation  honestly  and  truthfully
before  God  and  man* This  is  what
we  expect  and  we  expect  it  from  your
President,  his  Counselors  and  also
from  the  Bishops  and  from  all  the
people. And  if  you  cannot  do  th  is
never  talk  about  making  worlds.  !

The  world  is  opposed  to  us.  They
say  they  are  not.  Well,  would  you
injure  them  ?  No ;  I  would  not  hurt
a  hair  of  their  heads  or  deprive  them
of  any  right  they  enjoy,  either  reli-
gious or  political.  We  want  to  treat
all  men  kindly  and  with  due  respect;
but  we  do  not  want  to  be  governed


by  their  religions  views,  nor  put  our
children  under  their  teachings.  We
want  to  look  after  the  education  of
our  children  and  see  that  they  are
placed  under  proper  teachers  and
receive  proper  training,  and  not  be
placed  in  the  hands  of  the  enemies
I  of  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God.

Now  brethren  if  we  are  Latter-
l  day  Saints,  let  us  be  consistent  with
our  belief  and  profession.  I  profess
to  be  a  Latter-day  Saint,  and  I  be-
lieve in  the  doctrines  that  the  Lord
has  revealed  to  us  with  all  my  heart  j
and  I  do  not  care  who  knows  it.  Now
I  am  told  in  the  revelations  to  briug
up  my  children  in  the  fear  of  God*
I  believe  that  this  kingdom  which
the  Lord  has  set  up  will  grow  and
increase  until  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  will  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ  And  this
yon  believe  as  well  as  I  do.  We  be-
lieve in  celestial  glory  ;  and  we  be-
lieve in  terrestrial  and  telesdal  glory;
or  in  other  words,  we  believe  there
will  be  a  separation  finally  of  the
good  from  the  bad.  Now  we  are  en-
gaged gathering  together,  or  separat-
ing ourselves  from  the  world  and
building  our  temples  and  administer-
ing in  them  for  the  living  and  the
dead,  and  we  spend  millions  of  dol-
lars in  the  accomplishment  of  this  ob-
ject, that  we  may  become  united
and  linked  together  by  eternal  cove-
nants that  shall  exist  in  all  time  and
throughout  eternity.  And  then,
when  we  have  done  all  this  go  and
deliberately  turn  our  children  over
to  whom?  To  men  who  do  not  be-
lieve the  Gospel,  to  men  who,  accord-
ing to  your  faith,  are  never  going  to
the  celestial  kingdom  of  God,  They
will  get  as  big  a  glory  as  they  are
prepared  for,  but  they  are  not  going
there.  And  you  will  turn  your
children  over  to  them.  And  you
call  yourselves  Latter-day  Saints,  do
you  ? I  will  suppose  a  case.  You


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


expect  to  be  saved  in  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God.  Well,  supposing
your  expectations  are  realized,  wlricli
I  sometimes  doubt,  and  you  look
down,  down  somewhere  in  a  terre-
strial or  telestial  kingdom,  as  the
case  may  be,  and  you  there  see  your
children,  the  offspring  that  God  had
given  you  to  train  up  in  his  fear,  to
honor  him  and  keep  his  command-
men  Is,  and  perceive  that  hot  ween
yon  and  them  there  is  a  great  gulf,
as  represented  by  the  Savior  in  the
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,
And  supposing  they  could  converse
with  you — which,  however,  they
could  not  do — but  if  such  were  the
case,  what  would  be  their  feelings
towards  y out  It  would  be,  Father,
mother,  you  are  to  blame  for  this.
I  would  have  been  with  you  if  you
had  not  tampered  with  the  principles
of  life  and  salvation  in  permitting
me  to  be  decoyed  away  by  false
teachers,  who  taught  incorrect  prin-
ciples. And  this  is  the  result  of  it.
But  then  I  very  much  question  men
and  women's  getting  inio  the  cele-
stial kingdom  of  God  who  have  no
more  knowledge  about  the  principles
of  life  and  salvation  than  to  go  and
tamper  with  the  sacred  offspring,
the  principle  of  life  which  God  in-
trusted to  your  care,  to  thus  shuffle
it  off  to  imbibe  the  spirit  of  unbelief,
which  leads  to  destruction  and  death,
I  very  much  doubt  in  my  mind  the
capability  of  such  people  getting
there.  We  had  better  look  after
ourselves  a  little,  God  has  given  us
light  and  he  expects  us  to  be  governed
by  it.  In  speaking  of  Abraham  he
says,  "  I  know  him,"  What  do  you
know  of  him  ?  That  he  will  fear  me.
What  else?  "That  he  will  com*
mand  his  children  after  him,  and
they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,
To  do  justice  and  judgment;  that
the  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham
that  which  he  hath  spoken  of  him.*'


Well,  the  time  is  passing,  but  be-
fore  closing,  I  wish  to  say  a  word  or
two  in  regard  to  this  co-operation  in
temporal  things.  They  are  very  little
things,  but  they  form  a  kind  of  step-
ping stone  towards  other  and  more
important  events*  A  closer  union
which  we  shall  expect  to  inaugurate
by-and.bye,  bat  which  we  are  not
prepared  to  yet.  But  for  the  time
being  it  is  expected  that  as  honorable
men  and  women,  we  will  honestly
and  truly  carry  out  our  covenants  in
regard  to  these  little  temporal  things  ;
and  let  us  bo  one,  for  the  Lord  has
plainly  told  us,  if  ye  are  not  one,  ye
are  not  mine.  If  ye  are  not  mine,
whose  are  ye  ?  You  can  figure  that
up  just  as  you  please.  These  are  the
facta  in  relation  to  this  matter,  we
are  desirous  to  bring  about  these
things.  What  for  ?  For  the  sake  of
making  money  ?  No.  Money  is  of
little  importance  where  truth  is  con-
cerned. I  would  not  care  if  all  the
money  was  out  of  existence,  but  I  do
care  about  the  principles,  and  the
laws  of  God,  about  men  being  what
what  they  profess  to  be,  and  not
hypocrites,  be  lying  their  profession*
We  expect  to  see  these  things  carried
out  in  honesty  and  truth,  because  it
is  t  he  order  which  God  has  introduced
as  a  stepping-stone  to  something  in
the  future.  We  build  temples  and
administer  in  them.  How?  Pre-
cisely according  to  the  revelations
which  God  has  given  to  us;  bat
when  it  comes  to  our  temporal  affairs,
wo  would  ride  over  and  almost  total-
ly ignore  the  laws  which  he  has  given
to  us  to  govern  them.  Jesus  says,
(£  In  vain  you  say  to  me  Lord,  Lord,
and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say/'
And  I  say,  In  vain  you  will  say,
Lord,  Lord,  if  you  cannot  attend  to
these  little  things;  and  those  who
will  not,  God  will  shake  out  from
among  his  people*  Now  hear  it,  ye
Latter-day  Saints !  and  be  not  de-


WE  SHOULD  N

ceived  s  God  is  not  mocked  ;  for
whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall
he  also  reap.  For  he  that  soweth  to
his  flesh,  shall  of  the  fle^h  reap  cor-
ruption ;  but  he  that  soweth  to  the
spirit,  shall  of  the  spirit  reap  life
everlasting.11  We  should  be  governed
by  correct  principles  in  the  fear  of
God;  and  should  righteously,  upright-
ly, and  virtuously  preserve  our  bodies
and  spirits  pure,  and  keep  all  the
laws  of  God  and  seek  to  comprehend
his  will  in  regard  to  all  things,  and


OT  BOAST,  ETC.  109

feel  that  we  are  here  to  build  up  the

kingdom  of  God  and  not  ourselves,  to
establish  the  principles  of  righteous-
ness and  of  truth  and  the  laws  of
heaven,  and  not  our  ideas  and  theo-
ries ;  for  through  the  ordinances  of
God  and  through  obedience  to  his
laws  come  the  blessings  of  God  to  Is-
rael in  time  and  through  all  eternity,
j  God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the
paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR.

Delivered  at  the  Quarterly  Conference  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of
Zion,  ix  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Jan.  6,  1879*


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gibbs.)


WE  SHOULD  NOT  BOAST  OF  SUPERIORITY  OVER  OUR  FELLOW  CREATURES
— GOD  IS  INTERESTED  IN  THE  WELFARE  OF  ALL  MANKIND — THE
RELATION  AND  AMENABILITY  OF  ALL  MEN  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD —
WE  SHOULD  BE  COURTEOUS  TO  THOSE  WHOSE  VIEWS  DIFFER  FROM
OURS — THE  SERVANTS  OF  GOD  ARE  MESSENGERS  OF  SALVATION — THE
RESTORATION  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD — THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  THE  Air
MIGHTY— ABSURD  THEORIES  OF  LEARNED  MEN — ONLY  THE  RIGHTE-
OUS AMONG  THE  SAINTS  WILL BE  SAVED  IN  THE KINGDOM  OF  GOD,


I  have  been  interested  in  listening
to  the  remarks  that  have  been  made
by  the  brethren  who  have  addressed
us  during  this  Conference  :  and  I
propose  myself  to  offer  a  few  reflec-
tions that  hare  passed  through  my
mind  while  listening  to  the  teaching


and  instruction  that  has  been  pre-
sented.

There  is  a  feeling  prevailing
more  or  less  among  all  the  branches
of  the  human  family,  thai  the  nation  or
people  to  which  they  belong  is  super*
ior  in  many  respects  to  others,  either


110


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


in  government,  in  morals,  in  science,
in  manufactures,  in  the  arts  or  in  re-
ligion, as  the  case  may  be,  and  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  not  without
this  sentiment.  We  feel  that  God
has  blessed  us  more  abundantly  with
wisdom  and  knowledge  regarding
himself,  his  ways,  his  laws  and  in
relation  to  eternal  things,  through
our  obedience  to  his  will  than  he  has
others,  and  that  we  are  moving  in  a
higher  plane  than  the  rest  of  thesona
and  daughters  of  Adam.  Admitting
this  to  be  correct,  there  is  nothing
whereof  we  as  individuals  or  as  a
people  ought  to  boast.  If  we  have
received  any  intelligence  or  know-
ledge pertaining  either  to  the  present
or  the  future,  it  has  been  solely
through  the  communications  that
God  has  been  pleased  to  make  known
to  us*  For  naturally  we  are  very
like  other  men — not  much  taller,  not
much  shorter,  not  much  more  intel-
ligent, not  much  more  ignorant,  than
they  are.  There  is  not  so  great  a
diversity  among  peoples  as  some
imagine,  other  things  being  equal ;
it  may  be  well  for  us  to  reflect  a
little  on  the  position  we  occupy  in
relation  to  others,  in  relation  to  our
God,  in  relation  to  the  world  in
which  we  live  and  the  peoples  by
which  we  are  surrounded ;  to  reflect
upon  the  past,  the  present,  and
the  future;  and  to  comprehend,  if
possible,  our  true  status  before  the
Almighty  and  before  all  men.

It  is  indeed  true  that  God  has
conferred  upon  us  many  great  and
peculiar  blessings  for  which  we  are
indebted  to  him ;  but  at  the  same
the  Lord  feels  interested  in  the
welfare  of  all  men,  and  all  peoples
of  all  nations,  of  all  creeds  and  all
religions — not  in  their  religions  as
religions,  but  in  the  people  who
profess  to  believe  in  them ;  and  he
is  acquainted  with  the  peculiar
ideas,  habits,  dispositions  and  feel-


ings of  men  everywhere.  One  of
the  old  apostles  in  speaking  upon
these  things,  says,  "  God  hath  made
of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for
to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the
earth;  and  hath  determined  the
times  before  appointed  and  the
bounds  of  their  habitations;  that
they  should  seek  the  Lord  it  haply
they  might  feel  after  him,  and  find
htm,  though  he  be  not  far  from
every  one  of  us.'1  It  is  further
said,  "  that  we  are  all  his  offspring/'
and  again  "  that  he  is  the  God  and
the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh;"
and  consequently  he  is  interested
in  the  welfare  of  all  the  human
family,  everywhere — among  all
peoples,  all  nations,  all  kindreds
and  all  tongues.

Now  if  this  be  the  case,  which
we  have  no  reason  to  doubt — then
he  is  interested  in  all  the  human
family,  and  will  try  to  promote  their
welfare  and  happiness  so  far  as  he  is
capable  of  doing,  according  to  cer-
tain laws  by  which  he  himself  is
governed,  as  well  as  all  things  in
creation,  and  the  learning  we  have
heard  so  much  about  is  simply  a
knowledge  of  some  principles  associa-
ted with  those  laws  which  are
generally  denominated  the  laws  of
nature.  In  relation  to  the  nations
or  peoples  the  Lord  will  do  as  will
by  them  as  they  will  let  him,  and  as
far  as  the  laws  by  which  he  is  gov.
erned  will  permit,  just  the  same  as
we  would  towards  our  children.  We
fathers  and  mothers,  have  children ;
they  do  not  always  do  as  we  would
like  to  have  them  do;  but  we  wish
to  look  over  their  frailties  and  im-
perfections as  much  as  possible;  but
when  it  comes  to  certain  points,
then  both  father  and  mother  have
to  stop.  If  our  children  violate  the
laws  of  the  land,  they  have  to  be
judged  by  those  laws  and  we  can
not  prevent  it,  neither  should  we  try


WE  SHOULD  NOT  BOAST,  ETC.


II


to,  Still  our  feelings  are  drawn
out  towards  our  families,  and  it  is
right  and  natural  they  should  be,  for
these  paternal  feelings  are  planted
in  the  human  breast  by  the  Almighty*
It  is  therefore  proper  that  we  should
have  affection  and  to  manifest  kind-
ness, forbearance  and  long  suffering
towards  all  our  children  and  all  those
with  whom  we  are  associated.  God
haa  this  kind  of  feeling  towards  his
children  ;  and  it  is  a  portion  of  the
spirit  that  emanates  from  him  that
prompts  this  affection  and  regard  for
our  offspring.

These  things  are  connected  also
with  other  matters.  We  try  to  look
after  the  welfare  of  our  children  ;  we
try — that  is,  those  who  are  not  ut-
terly depraved — to  lead  them  in  the
right  paths,  and  to  influence  their
minds  and  their  morals  and  to  teach
them  correetly  both  in  relation  to
religion,  education  and  morals,  as
well  as  secular  matters,  in  order  that
they  may  become  intelligent  men
and  women,  capable  of  sustaining
themselves,  that  they  may  improve
the  talents  God  h  is  given  them,  and
that  they  may  be  able  to  comprehend
some  few  of  the  laws,  at  least,  by
which  the  creations,  the  worlds  are
governed  and  the  principles  by  winch
we  are  surrounded  in  this  world,  as
also  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  life.
This  is  all  very  proper  ;  and  it  is  also
proper  that  men  should  cultivate
pleasant  relations  and  have  a  good
kind  feeling  towards  others.  One
of  the  greatest  evils  alluded  to  in
holy  writ  that,  it  is  said,  would  de-
velop itself  in  the  last  days  is  thus
delineated  :  "in  the  last  days  peril-
ous times  shall  come.  For  men  shall
be  lovers  of  their  own  selves "  in-
stead of  having  that  kind,  brotherly,
affectionate  feeling  towards  others,
they  shall  be  "  lovers  of  their  own
selves,  covetous,  boasters,  proud,
blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents,


unthankful,  unholy,  without  natural
affection,  truce-breakers,  false  accu-
sers, incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of
those  who  are  good,  traitors,  heady,
high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasure  more
than  lovers  of  God  ;  having  a  form
of  godliness  but  denying  the  power
thereof/'  This  is  spoken  of  as  being
one  of  the  greatest  evils  that  could
exist  among  men.

As  I  before  stated,  we  have  a  re-
gard for  our  children,  and  God  has
also  a  regard  for  us.  We  wish  to
train  our  children  in  the  way  we
wish  them  to  go ;  other  people  wish
to  do  the  same.  Talk  about  the
Catholics,  Methodists,  Presbyterians,
Baptists  and  other  denominations,
no  matter  what  their  ideas  or  feelings
may  be,  no  matter  how  inconsistent
and  foolish  we  may  regard  their
manner  of  worship,  yet  many  of  them
are  quite  sincere  in  trying  to  benefit
their  children*  And  God  is  sincere
in  trying  to  promote  their  happiness
and  welfare  as  well  as  he  is  ours,
both  in  regard  to  this  world  and  the
world  to  come.  And  hence  he  will
do  the  best  he  possibly  can  with  all
peoples.  But  as  I  stated  before,
being  governed  by  law,  he  can  only
treat  them  "  according  to  the  deeds
done  in  the  body,  whether  those
deeds  be  good  or  evil/'  And  when
that  judgment  takes  place  all  men
will  have  to  abide  its  award  ;  there
is  no  appeal  from  it.  No  court  to
which  they  can  have  access  where-
by they  can  change  the  decree  of  the
Almighty,  The  Lord  knows  this
and  he  has  prepared  certain  classes,
so  to  speak,  in  his  school  here  upon
the  earth  for  his  people  and  for  all
the  world.  And  he  has  provided  a
means  of  instruction  for  the  inhabit*
ants  of  the  earth,  looking  upon  them
as  eternal,  immortal  beings,  having
to  do  with  time  and  eternity.  But
all  things,  as  I  remarked,  are  under
the  influence,  control  and  government


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  law,  jast  as  much  as  the  planetary
system  with  which  we  are  connected
is  governed  by  law.  It  makes  no
difference  what  a  few  of  us  may  do,
or  how  the  world  may  act,  the  sun
rises  and  sets  regularly,  the  earth
revolves  upon  its  axis,  and  so  ir.  is
with  all  the  planetary  systems  ;  there
is  no  contusion,  no  disorder  in  any
of  the  movements  of  the  heavenly
bodies*  They  are  governed  by  a
science  and  intelligence  that  is  be-
yond the  reach  of  men  in  mor-
tality; yet  they  move  strictly  ac-
cording to  certain  laws  by  which
all  of  them  have  been,  are  and  will
be  governed,  And  these  laws  are
under  the  surveillance  and  control  of
the  great  law* giver,  who  manages,
controls  and  directs  all  these  worlds.
If  it  were  not  the  case  they  would
move  through  space  in  wild  confusion,
and  system  would  rush  against  sys-
tem, and  worlds  upon  worlds  would
be  destroyed,  together  with  their  in-
habitants. But  they  are  governed
by  a  superhuman  power,  by  a  spirit
and  intelligence  that  dwells  in  the
bosom  of  the  Gods,  about  which  man-
kind knows  but  very  little.  It  is  so
with  regard  to  all  the  forces  of  nature
~tti©  earth  on  which  we  stand,  the
elements  of  which  it  is  composed,  the
air  we  breathe,  the  water  we  drink,
and  everything  in  nature  is  governed
strictly  according  to  immutable,  eter-
nal, unchangeable  laws,  practical,
philosophical,  and  strictly  scientific,
if  these  terms  are  preferred  j  but  they
are,  nevertheless,  placed  there  by  the
Almighty,

Now,  in  regard  to  the  world,  and
the  position  we  occupy  in  it.  There
is  something  peculiar  about  the  rela-
tionship we  sustain  to  the  world  of
mankind  with  which  we  are  surroun-
ded. It  is  not  proper  for  us  to  be
censorious,  to  upbraid  people  fur
things  that  they  do  not  comprehend
and  that  are  beyond  their  ken ;  we


should  be  courteous  and  charitable  to
all,  and  not  find  fault  with  men  be-
cause they  do  not  comprehend  things
as  we  understand  them.  But  try  to
understand  our  true  position  and  the
relationship  we  sustain  to  our  heaven-
ly Father,  to  his  laws,  to  the  peoples
with  whom  we  associate,  and  to  the
world  in  which  we  live.

We  read  ot  many  prominent  men
who  have  existed  in  the  world  in  var-
ious ages.  For  instance,  there  was
Adam,  Seth,  Enoch,  Methusaleb,
Noah,  Abraham,  Mo«es,  the  Prophets,
Jesus  and  his  disciples,  the  people
who  came  to  this  continent,  Ether,
and  the  brother  of  Jared,  Lehi  and
Nephi,  Alma,  Moroni,  and  many
other  prominent  individuals  who  held
intercourse  with  the  Almighty,  who
were  placed  by  the  Lord  in  a  position
whereby  they  could  receive  comma*
nications  from  him,  could  learn  his
will  and  teach  it  to  others.  We  look
upon  these  men  as  great  men,  and
justly  too,  as  wise  men,  as  intelligent
and  ph  Han  trophic  men ;  as  men  who
were  interested  not  only  in  their
welfare,  but  in  the  welfare  of  the
peoples  by  whom  they  were  surroun-
ded and  the  world  in  which  they
lived.  These  men  did  not  come  as
the  censors  of  the  world  ;  they  did
not  come  to  aggrandize  themselves,
to  build  themselves  up,  nor  to  control
or  coerce  others.  What  was  the
great  blessing  conferred  upon  Abra-
ham *?  "  In  tbee  shall  all  the  families
of  the  earth  be  blessed  ;?*  not  cursed,
not  destroyed,  not  annihilated ;  but  as
a  messenger  of  God,  as  the  elect  of
heaven,  as  a  rann  whom  he  had
chosen  to  accomplish  his  work,  and
whom  he  would  use  through  those
principles  that  existed  in  eternity  to
pour  blessings  upon  fallen  humanity*
That  was  the  feeling  which  was  man-
ifested, as  I  understand  it.  It  is  true
that  Abraham,  when  a  parcel  of
thieves  came  along  in  the  shape  of  a


confederation  of  kings,  and  took
away  his  nephew  and  others,  and
despoiled  them  of  their  goods,  that
he  gathered  together  his  household,
pursued  them  and  smote  many  of
them,  and  delivered  those  they  de-
signed to  oppress  and  brought  the
captives  back  again  to  their  own
places.  And  when  he  had  done  it,
what  then  1  Why,  said  they,  Abra-
ham you  have  done  a  good  deed,  you  .
have  delivered  us  and  brought  back
this  spoil,  take  what  you  please.
But  he  told  them  that  he  did  not
want  any  of  it :  "  You  were  injured,
robbed  and  despoiled,  and  carried
captive  :  these  men  came  upon  you
and  fraudulently  despoiled  you  of  your
goods ;  and  here  is  my  nephew,  Lot,
who  is  an  honorable  man  and  one  in
whom  I  am  particularly  interested,
and  I  was  only  doing  for  you  what
one  man  ought  to  do  for  another ;  I
will  take  none  of  the  spoils.  Here
are  these  young  men  who  were  with
me,  you  may  give  them  what  you
like,  but  you  shall  not  have  cause
to  say  that  you  made  Abraham
rich*"

Prominent  men  who  were  the  de-
scendants of  Abraham  acted  in  the
same  way  ;  true  benevolence  makes  I
all  cosmopolitans.  It  has  been  the
feeling,  the  design  of  all  good  men
to  benefit  their  fellow-men  ;  and
even  the  philosophy  of  the  heathen
has  advocated  this  to  a  certain  ex-
tent. What  was  the  message  of ;
Moses  when  he  was  sent  :is  a  deliver-
er to  the  children  of  Israel,  whom
the  ungodly  Egyptians  had  oppressed
and  made  slaves  of?  He,  as  the  sent
of  God,  delivered  a  message,  Thus
saith  the  Lord,  let  my  people  Israel
go,  A  message  of  mercy  to  Israel,
and  not  even  injurious  to  the  Egyp-
tians, unless  opposed  by  them.  Did
he  deliver  them  by  any  inherent
wisdom  or  intelligence  in  him  ?  No,
but  by  the  power  of  the  Almighty,

No.  8.


by  the  revelations  of  God  and  by  the
intelligence  that  God  gave  to  him.
His  labor  was  especially  a  message
to  deliver  Israel  from  bondage  and
unjust  oppression.  He  brought
them  out,  and  God  worked  with  him.
And  when  their  enemies  pursued
|  them,  he  protected  them  ;  he  opened
the  sea  and  made  the  waves  stand
up  while  they  passed  over  dry  shod.
Some  of  these  philosophical  people
— I  do  not  call  them  scientists,  but
ignoramuses— say,  that  is  contrary
to  the  laws  of  nature.  But  it  is
not  contrary  to  the  laws  of  God,  nor
the  power  of  God,  for  he  can  do
things  just  as  he  pleases,  and  man-
age them  according  to  his  own  will
and  purposes,  and  he  is  acquainted
with  other  laws  in  nature,  of  which
men  are  ignorant,  Moses,  we  are
told,  was  a  stranger  in  a  strange
land,  where  he  saw  a  bush  that
burned  With  fire  and  the  bush  was
not  con  summed  (it  might  be  said
that  this  was  contrary  to  nature's
laws  also)  ;  and  a  voice  spoke  to  him
;  which  proceeded  from  the  bush,  tel-
I  ling  him  to  take  the  shoes  from  off
his  feet,  for  the  ground  whereon  he
j  stood  was  holy ;  also  telling  him
that  he  was  a  chosen  messenger  of
the  Lord  to  accomplish  a  certain
work.  And  the  Lord  taught  and
instructed  him.  And  Moses  vent
before  the  king  of  Egypt  and  the
powers  thereof,  and  delivered  the
message  that  God  had  given  unto
him.  It  was  not  a  very  agreeable
message  for  them  to  hear,  nor  a  very
|  pleasant  one  for  him  to  communicate.
But  he  was  a  man  of  God  and  had
the  fear  of  God  before  him  ;  the
Lord  had  selected  him  as  an  instru-
ment, and  although  comprehending
his  weaknesses  lie  shrank  not  from
the  responsibility,  but  went  forth  in
the  name  of  Israel's  God  to  perform
the  commission  committed  to  his
care,  and  he  delivered  the  Israelites

Vol.  XX,


114


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


It  is  true  they  were  rebellious  and
ignorant,  and  it  is  true  they  were
self- willed,  and  many  of  them  were
very  con  apt  ;  it  is  true  they  could
not  endure  the  light  of  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel ;  and  it  is  also  true
that  when  God  would  have  made  of
them  a  kingdom  of  priests  they
could  not  receive  that  priesthood,
nor  be  governed  by  its  influence.
He  then  took  from  them  the  Mel-
chisedec  Priesthood,  leaving  them
the  lesser  or  Aaronic  Priesthood,  !
because  they  would  not  and  were
not  competent  to  magnify  the  duties
of  the  greater,  and  of  that  they  were
necessarily  deprived.  What  then  ?
God  did  the  best  he  could  with  them  ■
as  he  has  done  with  every  nation  1
and  every  people  ;  he,  however,  sent
prophets  among  them  from  time  to  ,
time.

Now  we  will  pass  on.  What  was  |
the  message  that  Jesus  came  to  pro-
claim to  the  people,  a  message  of
destruction  1  A  message  of  death  %
A  message  of  condemnation  1  No,
no  ;  it  was  a  message  of  glad  tidings
and  great  joy  to  all  peoples.  And
what  did  he  tell  his  disciples  to  go
and  preachl  Destruction  to  all
people  1  No  ;  his  commission  to
them  was  :  **  Go  ye  into  all  the  world
and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea-
ture.11 Where  ]  Tu  all  the  world.
And  what  was  the  nature  of  that
Gospel  ?  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  repentance  and  baptism  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  laying
on  of  hands  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  which  would  place  men
in  a  position  whereby  they  could
have  communication  with  God  their
heavenly  Father,  having  a  hope
blooming  with  immortality  and  eter-
nal life  that  entered  within  the  vail,
whither  Christ  their  forerunner  had
gone,  Hence  it  was  a  message  of
mercy,  salvation  and  exaltation  to
jdl  people  who  would  receive  it.


'«  Go  ye  into  all  the  worhl  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature.  He
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall
be.  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  damned."  If  they  were
condemned,  if  they  suffered  the  wrath
of  God,  it  was  not  because  they  had
not  life  and  salvation  held  out  to
them  ;  it  was  because  they  rejected
that  life  and  salvation  through  the
preaching  of  his  word  and  the  atone-
ment of  his  only  begotten  Soil  Was
there  anything  injurious  in  this]
No,  nothing  of  the  kind.  It  was  in
the  interests  of  humanity  ;  it  was
for  the  welfare  of  the  world  ;  it  was
to  teach  man,  through  those  heaven-
ly principles  which  he  had  commu-
nicated, the  laws  of  God,  to  put
them  in  possession  of  those  rich
treasures  of  eternal  life,  opening  the
kingdom  of  heaven  to  the  believer
who  would  obey  his  laws  and  be
governed  by  them.  This  is  themes*
sage  that  God  has  always  proclaimed
to  the  people.

When  Joseph  Smith  came,  what
did  he  preach  l  Just  the  same  as
all  the  others  had  done.  Was  it
because  of  any  peculiar  philosophy,
or  auy  remarkable  intelligence  that
he  had  in  ami  of  himself  in  the  first
place  to  comprehend  those  princi-
ples that  he  revealed.  No.  It  is
true  that  he  was  a  chosen  instru-
ment of  the  Almighty  for  that  pur-
pose j  it  is  true  that  being  one  of  the
seed  of  Abraham,  that  peculiar
blessing  belonging  to  him.  It  is
true  that  Abraham  in  former  years
through  his  genealogy  was  made  ac-
quainted with  the  rights  pertaining
to  the  priesthood,  and  that  Joseph
Smith  had  those  rights  in  common
with  Abraham,  being  one  of  his
seed*  And  it  is  true  that  he  was
selected  for  this  purpose  ;  but  until
the  Lord  made  himself  known  unto
him  and  revealed  his  purposes,  he
knew  nothing  about  the  tilings  of


God  any  more  than  you  or  I  did
know  this  for  I  have  talked
him  upon  these  subjects.  Vi
what  was  the  nature  of  his  mission  I
It  was  to  restore  the  ancient  Gospel;
it  was  to  bring  forth  the  record  of
the  Gospel  upon  this  continent,
which  the  people  who  lived  here  in
former  years  had  forfeited,  because
of  their  transgressions  ;  it  was  that
the  stick  of  Joseph  in  the  hands  of
Ephraim  might  be  united  with  the
stick  of  Judah,  in  their  testimony
evidence,  prophecies,  doctrines  and
ordinances,  developing  correct  prin-
ciples, that  things  as  they  exist  in
the  heavens  might  be  made  more
plain  to  men  upon  the  earth,  and
that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three
witn esses  every  word  should  be  es-
tablished. Was  it  to  condemn  the
world  ? Not  unless  the  world  re-
jected it. What  was  the  Gospel
Jesus  taught  1 Just  the  same  as
that  which  Jesus  and  his  disciples
taught. He  called  upon  the  people
to  repent  and  be  baptized  in  the
name  of  Jesus  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  they  should  receive  the
Holy  Ghost, And  did  he  and  his
brethren  go  forth  and  preach  this
doctrine  ? They  did. And  was  the
promise  they  made  fulfilled  to  those
who  believed  and  obeyed? It  was  ;
ami  you  are  my  witnesses  to-day
that  these  things  are  true,  it  having
been  made  known  to  us  by  the  Holy
Spirit  of  promise,  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  takes  of  the  things  of  the
Father  and  reveals  them  unto  man.
And  is  anybody  harmed  by  this  1
What  is  injured  1 Whose  rights  are
interfered  with  1 Whose  principles
are  trampled  under  foot.  Nobody's  !
Is  anybody  forced  to  obey  this  Gos-
pel  1 No  ! Has  anybody  been  co-
erced into  any  measure  pertaining
to  these  matters  ? No  ! It  has  al-
ways been  proclaimed  and  is  to-day,
"It  is  all  free  grace,  it  is  all


free  will.'* Would  you  curtail  any-
with  j  body  in  their  religious  rights  *  Not
IVell,  j  by  any  means ;  I  would  leave  them
with  their  God. If  they  cannot
comprehend, or  comprehending
have  not  the  inclination  to  obey
correct  principle, I  would  leave
them  with  their  God, in  whose
hands  we  all  are,  and  in  whose
hands  are  the  issues  of  life  and
death. If  men  do  not  love  the
truth  we  cannot  help  it ;  if  men  be-
come corrupt  and  unrighteous  and
full  of  infidelity  we  cannot  help  it,
we  did  not  place  them  in  that  posi-
tion, it  is  their  own  act. Can  you
find  a  set  of  men  to-day  in  the  wide
world, men  who  are  filled  with
more philantrophy and  beneva*
lance, or greater  benefactors  to
mankind  than  these  Elders  who  are
around  me  ?  You  cannot  find  them
on  this  little  earth  ;  you  cannot  find
men  anywhere  that  have  and  will
make  the  sacrifices for  principle
that  the  Elders  of  this  Church  have
done, I  see  those  around  me  that
have  traveled  hundreds  and  thou-
sands of  miles  without  purse  or
scrip,  in  the  midst  of  persecution,
contumely  and  reproach,  to  deliver
the  message  of  life  to  the  people,  be-
cause God  had  commanded  it,  and
because  they  were  desirous  to  pro-
mote the  weal  and  happiness  of  the
human  family. How  have  they  been
treated  1 Just as Jesus  was
treated  ;  just  as  his  Apostles  and
just  as  the  prophets  of  old  were
treated. Men  have  always  killed
the  prophets  and  stoned  those  who
were  sent  to  them. But  then  what
of  that  ? That  is  all  the  worse  for
those  who  did  this  j  they  have  the
hardest  row  to  hoe,  for  they  as  well
as  we  have  yet  to  appear  before  the
Judge  of  the  whole  earth,  and  he
mil  say,  I  called  but  you  refused  ;  I
stretched  out my  hand  but  you
heeded  it  not;  hence,  "  I  will  lauuh


116  JOURNAL  OF

at  your  calamity,  and  will  mock  j
when  your  fear  conieth."  That  is
the  way  he  puts  it  I  offered  you
light  j  I  offered  you  truth  ;  I  offered
you  intelligence  ;  I  desited  to  pro-
mote your  happiness,  your  well  be-
ing, but  you  would  not  have  it,  and
therefore  you  are  left  without  ex-
cuse. Are  they  his  children  1  Yes,
Does  he  feel  sorry  to  see  them  act
that  way  ?  Yes ;  but  he  cannot  help
it,  lie  is  governed  by  law,  and  those
laws  are  inexorable  and  just  and
they  cannot  be  departed  from*

What  next?  As  eternal  beings
we  all  have  to  stand  before  him  to
be  judged ;  and  he  has  provided  dif-
ferent degrees  of  glory — the  celest  ial
the  terrestial,  and  the  telestial
glories — which  are  provided  accord-
ing to  certain  unchangeable  laws
which  cannot  be  controverted.
What  will  he  do  with  them  %  Fur
those  who  are  ready  to  listen  to  him
and  be  brought  under  the  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  be  led  by
the  principles  of  revelation  and  the
light  of  heaven,  and  who  are  will-
ing to  yield  obedience  to  his  com-
mands at  all  times  and  carry  out
his  purposes  upon  the  earth,  and
who  are  willing  to  abide  a  celestial
law,  he  has  prepared  for  them  a  ce-
lestial glory,  that  they  may  be  with
him  for  ever  and  ever.  And  what
about  the  others?  They  are  not
prepared  to  go  there  any  more  than
lead  is  prepared  to  stand  the  same
test  as  gold  or  silver ;  and  there  they
cannot  go.  And  there  is  a  great
gulf  between  them.  But  he  will
do  with  them  just  as  well  as
he  can.  A  great  many  of  these
people  in  the  world,  thousands  and
hundreds  of  millions  of  them,  will
be  a  great  deal  better  off  through
the  interposition  of  the  Almighty
than  they  have  any  idea  of.  But
they  cannot  enter  into  the  celestial
kingdom  of  God ;  where  God  and


DISCOURSES*

Christ  are  they  cannot  come.

God  has  made  use  of  various
means,  in  various  ages  of  the  world,
to  teach  and  lead  men  in  the  right
path.  He  sent  forth  his  servants  in
different  ages  into  the  vineyard,
and  gathered  a  few  here  and  a  few
there  who  would  obey  his  law,  that
they  might  be  saved  in  his  king-
dom. And  what,  let  me  ask,  have
the  other  people  of  the  world  to  do
with  it  I  They  would  not  listen  to
the  words  of  life ;  can  the  messen-
gers of  God  help  it  1  No,  they  can-
not. Theirs  is  not  a  very  enviable
position.  It  was  not  a  very  pleasant
thing  for  Moses  to  go  to  the  Egyptian
king  to  tell  him  the  message  he  had
to  bear,  nor  to  see  the  plagues  roll
on  one  after  another  But  God  set
him  to  work  at  it,  and  he  did  it.  It
was  the  Lord  that  managed  that
matter;  he  was  simply  the  instru-
ment. Who  was  it  that  inspired
the  prophets  to  predict  many  things
that  were  very  unpleasant  to  the
ear?  It  was  God.  Could  they  have
helped  it  ?  No.  And  when  Joseph
Smith  came,  for  instance,  could  he
help  being  horn?  No.  And  being
born,  could  he  help  being  called  by
the  Almighty  ?  No.  He  had  either
to  do  the  thing  that  God  required  at
his  hand,  or  not  do  it,  and  have  suf
fered  the  consequences ;  and  if  he
had  not  done  it  others  would,  for
God's  work  is  destined  to  be  per-
formed. But  he  did  his  part  of  it,
and  did  it  well  and  faithfully,  and
I  know  it,  for  I  was  there  when  he
was  killed  by  some  of  our  highly
reverend  Christian  brethren.

You  Elders  of  Israel  who  meet
together  in  the  capacity  of  a  Con-
ference, you  have  had  the  priest-
hood conferred  upon  you.  Where
did  it  come  from  ?  From  the  Lord,
.The  Aaronic  Priesthood  was  deli-
vered by  John  the  Baptist,  who
held  it  in  former  times  upon  the


WE  SHOULD  NOT  BOAST,  ETC


117


earth.  He  communicated  that  to
Joseph  Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  j
And  then  Peter,  James  and  John,
who  had  operated  in  the  Melchize-
<iek  Priesthood  in  their  day,  came
and  conferred  it  upon  them,  then  the
apostleship  was  organised,  and  then
the  order  of  the  priesthood  was
manifested  unto  us  as  it  exists  in
the  heavens.  Why?  That  we
might  be  put  in  possession  of  princi  j
pies  that  emanate  from  God,  and  ;
that  we  might  be  able  to  act  our
part  in  carrying  out  the  purposes
of  God ;  not  only  pertaining  to
ourselves,  but  more  especially  to
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  then
to  operate  for  the  dead  as  well  as
the  living.  Had  we  anything  to
do  with  it  particularly  I  I  did  not
introduce  it,  neither  did  Brigham
Young,  nor  Parley  R  Pratt,  nor
Orson  Hyde,  nor  Heber  C.  Kimball,
nor  Joseph  Smith  ;  no  man  intro-
duced it  only  as  God  gave  it
Joseph  Smith  was  made  use  of  as  an

T  instrument  in  introducing  it ;  and

'  then  having  organized  the  Church
in  all  its  various  branches,  with
Presidents,  Apostles,  Patriarchs,
High  Priests,  Seventies,  Elders,
Priests,  Teachers,  and  Deacons,  with  j
Bishops  and  High  Councils,  and
all  the  various  organizations  of  the
Church.  These  things  were  given
ns  for  what  ?  To  gratify  our  ambi-
tion 1  to  enable  us  to  ride  over  and
trample  under  foot  our  fellow  crea-

:  tares  ?  to  place  power  and  authority
upon  us  ?  No,  not  for  any  individual
affair,  not  for  any  man's  emolu-
ment or  aggrandizement.  Although
there  is  nothing  more  honorable,
nothing  more  dignified,  nothing  to
which  a  man  ought  so  much  to
aspire  to,  as  to  be  a  servant  of  the
living  God,  and  to  be  commissioned

,  by  him  to  do  his  work  upon  the
earth.  And  what  is  it  fori  To
spread  correct principles  among


men  ;  to  combat  priestcraft,  states-
craft,  oppression,  fraud  and  iniquity
of  all  kinds,  and  to  introduce  among
men  those  pure  and  holy  principles
by  which  the  Gods  are  governed  in
the  eternal  worlds.  It  is  not  for
you  and  me  particularly  ;  the  Lord
could  get  along  very  well  without
us,  if  we  could  without  him.  But
God,  and  the  holy  priesthood  be-
hind the  vail,  that  have  lived  and
operated  upon  the  earth,  and  who
operate  in  eternity,  felt  interested
in  regard  to  the  things  that  we  are
connected  with,  and  interested  in
the  welfare  of  the  world.  We  talk
about  the  wisdom  of  men.  What
true  wisdom  or  intelligence  has  man
that  he  receives  not  from  the  Al-
mighty 1  I  will  tell  you  what  the
wisdom  of  men  will  come  to  by  and
by,  and  it  is  not  so  far  in  the  future
as  many  people  think,  "  when  the
wisdom  of  the  wise  shall  fail,  and
the  understanding  of  the  prudent
shall  be  hid,"  their  power  and  glory
will  fade,  and  you  will  see  their
thrones  totter  to  their  base  ;  it  is
not  long  before  you  %vill  see  war,
desolation,  carnage  and  death  run
riot  through  the  nations,  plagues,
pestilence  and  famine  depopulating
the  earth.  And  then  where  will
their  wisdom,  philosophy  and  in-
telligence bel  Men  get  a  little
smattering  of  knowledge  and  philo-
sophy, and  of  some  of  the  lesser  laws
that  God  has  planted  in  nature,
and  they  give  glory  to  themselves,
as  did  the  Babylonish  monarch  who
said,  "is  not  this  great  Babylon
that  I  have  built  f  They  do  not
know  that  they  are  poor,  blind,
foolish,  ignorant,  naked,  destitute,
an  din  the  way  of  death.  The  nations
of  the  earth,  with  their  false  philo-
sophy, w  ith  their  wealth,  their  cor-
ruptions, their  power  and  might,
will  become,  by  and  by,  like  the
chaff  of  the  summer's  threshing-floor


118  JOURNAL  OK

before  the  wind,  as  represented  by
the  Prophet  Daniel  Why  ]  Because
eternal  justice  cries  to  the  great
God  in  relation  to  all  the  people  of
the  earth.  That  is  the  reason,  and
because  of  their  own  acts  and  of
their  own  corruptions.  Hear  what
the  Lord  has  coupled  with  his  com-
mission to  his  servants  in  this  our
day,  and,  when  he  said  it,  he  said
that  which  is  verily  true  ;  Go  forth
and  bear  your  testimony  to  the
world  ;  and  after  your  testimony
cometh  the  testimony  of  war  and  of
fire,  and  of  sword  and  bloodshed,
and  the  waves  of  the  sea  heaving
beyond  their  bounds,  etc.  He  gives
them  fair  warning,  and  they  heed
it  not ;  but  these  things  must  and
will  most  assuredly  come.

What  next?  Does  he  destroy
them  for  their  good  sometimes?
Yes.  After  Noah  had  preached  the
Gospel  to  the  antediluvian  world,
and  after  their  cup  of  iniquity  was
full,  and  Zion  and  her  cities  had
fled,  then  followed  the  judgments
of  God ;  then  came  desolation  and
destruction.  And  why  this  whole-
sale sweeping  out  of  existence  of
humanity !  To  stop  them  from  pro-
pagating a  corrupt  species.  Was
not  that  right  1  Yes  it  was.  He
said,  I  will  cut  them  off ;  I  will
prepare  a  prison  for  them,  in  which
they  shall  be  confined  for  genera-
tions, where  they  shall  not  have
power  to  propagate  their  species  j  for
these  pure  spirits  in  the  eternal
worlds  shall  not  be  contaminated
with  their  corruptions  :  I  will  take
them  off  the  earth,  and  I  will  raise
up  another  people.  And  He  did
do  it  What  then?  He  was  still
merciful  When  Jesus  was  put  to
death  in  the  flesh,  he  remembered
thent  "He  went,"  says  Peter,
"  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in
prison,  which  sometimes  were  dis-
obedient, when  once  the  long-suffer-


DISCOURSEA.

;  ing  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of
Noah,  etc," What  did  he  preach  I

i  The  Gospel  And  what  is  it  he  has
told  us  to  do  to-day  ?  Not  only  to
preach  the  Gospel  and  gather  the
people,  but  to  build  Temples.  What
for  1  To  administer  in  them.  Who-
fori  For  the  dead  who  have  died
without  a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,
that  they  might  participate  with
us  in  the  blessings  which  they  had
not  the  privilege  of  enjoying  on  the
earth.  We  are  doing  this  ;  hence
we  are  doing  more  than  preaching
the  Gospel  to  the  living ;  we  are
making  preparations  for  saving  the
dead,  accord iug  to  the  word  of  God.

Reference  was  made  this  morning
to  the  wisdom  and  learning  of  the
world.  I  don't  know  where  it  is.  I
have  traveled  quite  extensively  in
various  parts  of  the  earth,  and  I
must  say  that  I  have  not  met  with
their  intelligence,  I  tell  you  what
I  have  met  with  very  frequently  \
I  have  witnessed  a  great  deal  of
ignorance,  superstition  and  wicked-
ness, and  any  amount  of  corrupt

'  tion,  and  notwithstanding  the  little
advancement  that  some  few  have
made  in  the  true  principles  of
science,  what  do  they  know*  of
tilings  as  they  exist  before  God  %  I
told  a  few  scientific  gentlemen
whom  I  happened  to  meet  with  a
few  days  ago, a  few  things  that

\  Joseph  Smith,  that  unlettered,  ig-
norant boy  told  me  in  regard  to  the
heavenly  bodies  and  certain  things
associated  with  them,  and  when 'I
had  done  so,  one  of  them  said,  Mr.
Taylor,  those  are  some  of  the  most
comprehensive  ideas  I  ever  heard
iu  my  life. I  said  these  ideas  are

I  from  Joseph  Smith,  that  unlearned
man  ;  but  God  gave  them  to  him  by
revelation.  Another  remarked  :  I
have  read  a  good  deal  and  studied  a
good  deal ;  but  I  have  a  great  deal
to  learn  yet Was  it  anything  I


Wi<:  SHOULD  NOT  BOAST,  ETC


119


knew?  No,  I  simply  told  them
something  that  Joseph  Smith  told
me.  We  have  a  great  many  igno-
rant, learned  fools  ;  but  when  you
meet  sensible,  intelligent  men,  as
these  were,  they  will  aekuow sedge
principle  when  it  is  presented  to
them.  But  many  men  have  not  the
understanding  to  do  it  Talking
about  saving  themselves,  who  among
the  philosophers  can  save  themselves!
who  knows  anything  of  God  or
liea ven  ?  They  know  a  very  little
of  the  earth  whereon  we  dwell,
much  less  do  they  know  of  things
pertaining  to  the  heavens  or  of  God
or  of  eternity.  And  let  me  tell
them  furthermore*  that  no  man
knoweth  the  tilings  of  God,  save
by  the  spirit  of  God — or,  to  use  the
text  as  it  is  given  ;  "  For  what  man
knoweth  the  things  of  man,  save
by  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in
him  I  liven  so  the  things  of  God
knoweth  no  man,  but  the  spirit  of
God."  And  they  cannot  get  that
spirit  without  first  obeying  the  first
principles  of  the  Gospel  ot  Christ.
Talk  about  their  intelligence,  it  is
a  curious  sort  of  intelligence  to  me.
What  do  they  do  when  they  have
to  grapple  with  the  sting  of  death,
and  when  it  stares  them  in  the
face  ?  Why,  they  take  a  leap  in  the
dark.  And  this  darkness  is  the  end
of  all  their  philosophy  and  all  their
science.  And  the  little  they
do  know  in  divining  the  laws
or  God  is  only  with  regard  to
some  very  few  of  the  fundamen-
tal principles  of  those  laws  that
God  has  planted  everywhere
throughout  the  universe  ami
I  do  not  therefore  have  that
reverence  for  their  theories,
notions  and  vagaries,  nor  do  i  at-
tach that  importance  to  their  intel-
ligence that  some  people  do.

I  remember  on  a  certain  occasion,
while  in  Paris,  France, (I  have


referred  to  this  subject  before,  but  it
will  not  hurt  to  repeat  it  again)
quite  a  number  of  professed  philo-
sophers called  on  me  and  presented
so  many  foolish,  dreamy,  intangi-
ble, m ysterio u  s ,  i nconi pre h cnsihle
ideas  and  visionary  theories,  that  I
thought  of  all  the  ignoramuses  I
ever  met  with,  they  beat  all.  They
have  a  certain  kind  of  bread  in  that
city,  a  kind  of  light  cake,  which
they  make  there.  It  is  so  light
that  you  could  blow  it  away  with  a
breath,  and  you  might  eat  all  day
of  it  and  not  be  satisfied,  A  bro-
ther who  was  there  visiting  me
asked  if  1  knew  the  name  of  that
bread.  I  said  I  did  not  know  the
French  name  for  it,  but  could  give
it  a  name.  What  name  would  you
give  it,  he  asked  i  Well,  I  said,
you  may  call  it  philosophy  or  fried
froth,  just  as  you  please.

Professor  Huxley,  in  visiting
Niagara  Falls,  marie  some  remarks
which  1  remember  were  published
and  copied  extensively  in  the  papers,
to  the  effect  that  hen*  was  an-
other evidence  afforded  of  the
many  thousands  or  millions  of
years  (1  forget  the  number  now)
that  it  had  taken  to  wash
away  the  rocks  below  these  falls.
And  tliis  evidence  was  advanced  in
support  of  geological  ideas.  I
thought  to  myself  ;  yes,  professor
Huxley  is  a  very  learned  man.  I
wonder  if  he  knew  that  rock  was
once  in  a  friable,  plastic  condition,
when,  by  the  force  of  the  watery
element  the  soft  stratum  might  be
disintegrated,  excavated  and  re-
moved by  the  washing  process  in
perhaps  a  very  few  days.  We  have
seen  large  gaps  washed  away  out  of
some  of  our  ditches  in  a  tew  hours.
Such  are  common  occurrences  here.
If  a  change  were  to  take  place  in
the  elements  comprising  such
washouts,  which  might  very  easily


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


occur  here  as  elsewhere,  and  they  ,
become  petrified,  the  same  condi-
tion of  tilings  would  exist  as  may
be  seen  at  Niagara  Falls,  and  some
other  philosopher  hereafter  might
expatiate  on  the  years  it  took  to
remove  so  much  rock. If  *  e  have  ,
to  submit to their  theories,  we
should  really  be  in  a  sorry  con<ti-  |
tion, I,  for  one,  will  not  fall  down
and  worship  at  any  such  shrine*

We  talk  about  our  organizations;
are  they  right  according  to  the  or^
der  of  God  1  Yes.  Will  they  exist
in  the  heavens  ?  Yes,  Are  we  all
magnifying  our  calling]  No;  we
are  not.  We  have  indeed  a  sort  of
skeleton  fixed  up  ;  but  I  think  some- !
times  it  needs  flesh  on  the  bones
and  the  breath  of  life,  the  spirit
of  the  living  God  breathed  into  it
We  need  to  realize  the  po-  \
sition  we  occupy  and  the  du-
ties devolving  upon  us.  We  see
this  in  almost  everything  around
us  associated  with  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God,  While  many
men  are  diligent  and  their  whole
hearts  are  engaged  in  the  work  of
God,  there  are  a  great  many  astride
of  the  fence,  saying  Good  Lord  and
Good  Devil,  not  knowing  whose
hands  they  will  fall  into.  And  yet  j
they  are  High  Priests,  and  Seventies
and  Elders,  What  will  be  the  con-
dition of  such  !  We  are  told  that
"Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,
Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophe-
sied in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  name
have  cast  out  devils,  and  in  thy
name  done  many  wonderful
works  V  Yet  to  all  such  he  will  say,
"  I  never  knew  you;  depart  from
me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  You  i
say,  that  means  the  outsiders.  No,
it  does  not.  Do  they  do  many  won-
derful works  in  the  name  of  Jesus'!
No  ;  if  they  do  anything,  it  is  done
in  the  name  of  them  selves  or  of  the
Devil Sometimes  they  w^ill  do


things  in  the  name  of  God  ;  but  it
is  simply  an  act  of  blasphemy.  This
means  you,  Latter-day  Saints,  who
heal  the  sick,  cast  out  devils,  and
do  many  wonderful  tilings  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  And  yet  how  many
we  see  among  this  people  of  this
;  class,  that  become  careless,  and
treat  light] v  the  ordinances  of  God's
house  and  the  priesthood  of  the  Son
of  God  ;  yet  they  think  they  are  go-
ing, by  and  by,  to  slide  into  the
kingdom  uf  God,  But  I  tell  you  un-
less they  are  righteous  and  keep  their
covenants  they  will  never  go  there.
Hear  it,  ye  litter-day  Saints  :  Hear
itf  ye  Seventies  and  High  Priests !
"  Whatsoever  a  man  so  wet  h  that
shall  he  also  reap.  For  he  that
|  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh
reap  corruption  ;  but  he  that  soweth
to  the  spirit  shall  of  the  spirit  reap
life  everlasting/'  You  have  the
priesthood,  and  if  you  do  not  mag*
nil'y  that  priesthood  God  will  re*
quire  it  at  your  hands.  He  expects
us  all  to  be  alive  and  energetic,
honoring  our  calling,  our  priesthood
and  our  God,  for  he  expects  it  of  all
of  us.  Now  hear  it,  for  as  sure  as
God  lives  it  will  be  so.  It  will  not
be  "  how  we  apples  swim  I"  You
must  swim  yourselves  ;  for  every
man  6 £  will  be  judged  according  to
the  deeds  done  in  the  body.*'  If
you  aim  at  a  celestial  glory,  you
must  have  a  celestial  spirit  and  be
governed  by  it.  You  must  be  hon-
est, virtuous  and  benevolent ;  you
must  be  men  full  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  magnifying  your  calling,
and  honoring  your  priesthood,  if
you  would  obtain  an  entrance  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  And  so  in
regard  to  the  sisters,  they  stand
precisely  on  the  same  ground
What  are  we  to  do!  To  listen
to  and  be  guided  by  the  world!
No;  but  to  regulate  our  temporal
and  spiritual  affairs— things  per-


THE  PERPETUAL  EMIGRATION  FUND,  ETC*


taining  to  time  and  things  pertain-
ing to  eternity,  according  to  the
influence,  the  law,  and  direction  of
the  Almighty,

Let  us  come  again  to  this  intel-
ligence* Who  would  know  to-day
anywhere  in  the  world  how  to  build
a  temple  that  would  be  accepted  of
the  Lord?  Nobody.  Who  would
know  how  to  administer  in  them
acceptably  to  him  when  built?
Nobody*  Let  them  bring  forth
their  wise  men,  if  they  have  any,
and  tell  us  how  we  shall  obtain  an
inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
This  is  something  they  cannot  do.
Why  1  Because  they  have  not  the
Gospel  ;  and  it  is  the  Gospel  that
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,
and  this  is  the  kind  of  intelligence
we  are  after*  To  redeem  and  save
the  living  and  the  dead  ;  to  build
up  the  Zion  of  our  God,  that  a  peo-
ple may  be  prepared  who  shall  he
pure  in  heart,  and  prepared  to  as-
sociate with  the  intelligences  around
the  throne  of  God.

These  are  some  things  associated
with  our  duties  and  responsibilities.
Have  the  apostles  duties  to  perform  ?
Yes.  Does  God  require  it  at  their
hands  !  Yes.  If  they  do  not
do  it,  will  he  hold  them
guiltless  !  No.  Have  the  Seventies  I
Yes.  What  are  they  ?  To  go  to  the
nations  of  the  earth  as  bearers  of
the  Gospel  That  is  your  duty,  you
Seventies  ;  and  if  you  do  not  do  it
God  will  remove  your  candlestick
out  of  its  place.  Do  you  hear  it,  you
Seventies]  And  you  High  Priests
ant]  Elders,  God  has  not  conferred
the  priesthood  upon  you  to  dream
about,  to  trifle  or  tamper  with,  or
treat  it  witii  contempt  :  he  will
spew  you  out  of  his  mouth  unless
you  take  another  course,  many  of
you.  God  expects  his  message  to
go  to  all  nations,  and  the  priest-
hood ought  to  be  seeking  after  God


and  to  be  clothed  upon  with  the
power  of  God  and  with  the  light  of
revelation,  that  they  may  stand
forth  as  his  messengers  to  the  na-
tions ;  and  then  by  and  by,  after
having  cleared  their  garments  from
the  blood  of  this  generation,  to  go
and  administer  for  the  dead  in  the
temples  of  the  Lord,  and  keep  la-
boring and  doing  until  God  shall
have  accomplished  his  purposes.

What  else  are  you  going  to  do?
To  build  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven
upon  the  earth,  where  the  voice  of
God  shall  rule  and  where  the  law  of
God  shall  have  the  dominion,
and  where  men  shall  be  instructed
with  laws  of  heaven  aiid  be  taught
of  God.  A  great  many  reve-
lations and  changes  have  yet
to  take  place,  we  have  got  to  put
ourselves  in  a  position  to  be  guided
and  directed  of  the  Lord  in  tem-
poral as  well  as  spiritual  things,  or
we  will  never  obtain  that  glory  for
which  many  of  us  are  looking.

Well,  what  shall  we  do1  Do
right,  following  the  counsels  of
those  who  are  placed  over  us.  Fol-
low the  counsel  of  the  Twelve,  you
whose  business  it  is  to  do  it  ;  follow
the  counsel  of  your  bishops,  you
who  live  in  the  wards,  and  you
bishops  follow  the  counsel  of  the
presidents  of  Stakes,  and  you  pre-
si  dents  of  Stakes  seek  for  and  follow
the  counsel  of  the  Twelve,  And
you  people,  be  taught  of  your
teachers  ;  and  you  teachers,  get  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  that  you  may
teach  aright,  and  you  Seventies  and
Elders  prepare  yourselves  to  go  to
the  nations  of  the  earth.  Say,  here
am  I,  send  me  ;  I  am  on  hand,  I  am
ready  to  fulfil  my  duty  and  to  mag-
nify my  calling,  and  with  the  help
of  the  Lord  1  will  lift  up  a  warning
voice  to  my  fellow  men.  And  as
High  Councils  to  sit  in  judgment
with  honesty,  truth, fidelity  and


122  JOURNAL  OF

integrity,  without  fear  or  favor  of
any  man  to  act  and  administer  in
righteousness.  And  you  Bishops,
act  as  fathers  over  the  flock
of  Christ,  that  you  may  mag-
nify your  calling,  and  that  in
your  judgment  you  may  seek  for  the
inspiration  of  the  Almighty,  that
you  may  administer  justice  among
the  people  ;  that  righteousness  may
prevail  in  Zion,  and  that  it  may
spread  and  grow  and  increase,  that
the  glory  of  God  may  rest  upon  us,
and  that  we  may  rejoice  together
in  the  fullness  of  the  Gosj>el  of
peace.  And  will  it  go  on  I  It  will.
Will  the  kingdom  spread  ]  It  will,
"until  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
God  and  His  Christ,  and  He  will
reign  forever  and  ever."  And  about
the  wicked  and  the  ungodly,  protect
yourselves  against  them  as  well  as


DISCOURSES.

you  can  ;  unite  yourselves  together
and  be  one,  and  never  mind  their
ideas  and  feelings,  God  has  called
us  to  be  one,  to  be  united  ;  and  that
man  who  tampers  with  the  Gentiles
and  with  their  vices  and  follies  will
go  down  to  death.  We  are  sent  to
teach  the  principles  of  life,  not  to
be  taught  of  them  ;  and  we  are  re-
quired to  be  governed  by  the  prin-
ciples, laws,  intelligence  and  truth
that  come  from  God,  that  we  may
magnify  our  calling,  build  up  His
kingdom,  gather  together  the  elect,
save  the  living  and  redeem  the
dead,  and  then  when  we  get
through,  unite  with  the  assembled
throng  in  the  Celestial  kingdom  of
God  ;  and  honor  and  praise  and  glo-
ry and  power  and  majesty  and  domi-
nion be  ascribed  to  Him  that  sits
upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb,
forever  and  even  Amen,


REMARKS  ON  UNION,  MADE  BY  ELDER  C.  W.  PENROSE,

In  the  Ogdbn  Tabernacle,  January  19th,  1879,

(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gihbc.)


I  am  more  than  pleased  this  morning
to  have  the  privilege  of  assembling
with  you,  to  see  the  faces  of  so  many
of  my  old  friends,  and  to  enjoy  the
blessings  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and
the  instructions  of  this  Conference,
I  believe  we  realize  to  a  great  extent
the  importance  of  the  subject  that  I


has  been  presented  to  us  this  morn-
ing by  Brother  F.  M.  Lyman.  I
have  thought  upon  it  a  great  many
times  in  reflecting  upon  the  condi-
tion of  the  Latter  clay  Saints  and  the
prospects  that  He  before  them,  and
in  viewing  also  the  apathy  and  care-
j  lessness  of  a  great  many,  and  the


influx  of  the  people  amongst  us  who
are  not  of  our  faith.  I  have  some*
times  almost  dreaded  the  consequen-
ces that  may  ensue,  unless  we  become
more  united  in  our  feelings  and
efforts  to  build  up  the  Kingdom  of
God  and  to  maintain  the  liberties
that  God  has  bestowed  upon  us.
The  people  of  Ogden  are  peculiarly
situated.  A  great  many  people  have
come  here  who  are  not  of  our  faith ,
some  good  people  and  some  not  so
good.  But  their  sympathies  and
feelings  both  religious  and  political
are  dissimilar  to  ours  ;  they  are  not
of  us,  their  interests  are  not  iden-
tical with  ours,  and  although
they  may  seem  for  the  time  to  be
friendly  and  to  have  an  interest  with
us  in  our  local  affairs,  yet  our  expe-
rience has  demonstrated  to  us  the
truth  of  a  certain  saying  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  "He  that  is  not  with
me  is  against  me  ;  and  he  that  gath-
ereth  not  with  me  scattereth  abroad."
It  would  seem  in  our  history  that
sometimes  this  was  not  the  case,
some  people  having  come  among  us
"whose  feelings  appeared  to  be  in
consonance  with  ours  and  who  were
friendly  disposed  towards  us,  but
their  faith  not  being  our  faith,  al-
though their  views  to  some  extent
were  in  harmony  with  ours,  yet  we
have  found  in  our  experience  that
these  words  of  the  Savior  held  good
even  with  them.  Something  is  sure
to  arise  to  draw  the  dividing  line  ;
some  circumstance  transpires  which
places  them  where  they  belong,  and
they  then  occupy  their  true  position.
They  are  outside  the  covenant  of  the
Gospel,  and  their  sympathies  and  '
feelings  and  faith  cannot  be  identi-
fied with  ours.  They  are  of  the
world,  we  are  not ;  we  have  come
out  of  the  world  This  may  seem
strange  to  some  :  but  it  is  true  as
God  is  true,  Christ  laid  this  rule
down,  and  we  shall  find  that  it  is


perfectly  correct

The  great  necessity  for  m  as  Saints
of  God  is  to  become  really  and  truly
united,  not  only  in  thought,  but  in
our  faith  and  desires  and  sympathies
one  toward  another,  and  in  our  fel-
lowship as  brethren  and  sisters  in
Christ.  We  must  cherish  an  active,,
living  faith,  showing  our  faith  by
our  works  in  our  efforts  to  arrive  at
a  perfect  union.  I  see  the  necessi-
ty of  this  in  our  political  affairs.
When  I  look  back  at  the  last  elec-
tion, I  am  reminded  of  the  few  votes,
comparatively,  that  were  cast  in  this
city.  This  shows  something  wrong.
What  is  it?  There  is  a  carelessness
growing  upon  the  people,  and  we
perceive  it  to  some  extent  in  our
religious  affairs  and  public  meetings,,
but  we  see  it  more  clearly  when  it
comes  to  voting,  for  many  who  have
a  right  to  vote  stay  away  from  the
polls.  We  call  the  attention  of  our
brethren  and  sisters  to  the.se  matters,
and  say  to  every  Latter-day  Saint
who  has  the  right  of  franchise,  it  is
your  duty  to  vote.  The  franchise  is
not  given  to  us  as  an  ornament  or
plaything,  but  as  a  power  to  be  used
with  our  best  judgment  in  the  main
tenance  of  truth  ami  liberty.  The
spirit  of  the  Gospel  is  the  spirit  of
liberty,  the  Gospel  itself  is  the  per-
fect law  of  liberty  ;  and  every  move
that  may  be  made,  having  for  its
object  the  maintenance  of  liberty,,
we  ought  to  regard  in  the  light  of  the
Gospel,  in  the  light  of  duty*

There  is  a  great  deal  of  talk,  and
has  been  for  years  past,  of  separat-
ing religion  from  politics.  I  be-
lieve that  we  need  a  little  more  re-
ligion in  our  politics  than  we  al-
ready have,  and  I  believe  that  if
there  were  more  true  religion  in
politics  throughout  the  world  it
would  be  better  for  humanity.  I  am
certain  that  it  is  absolutely  neces-
sary for  us  who  have  come  here,.


124


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


*


having  seperated  ourselves  from
the  world,  for  the  purpose  of  build-
ing up  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  order
to  accomplish  this  to  permit  our  re-
ligion to  enter  into  our  lives  and
, govern  us  in  all  we  do,  whether  it
be  secular  or  religious.  We  cannot
act  separately,  singly  and  alone  ;  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the  spirit
of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  should
dictate  us  in  all  we  do  in  a  pub-
lic as  well  as  a  private  capacity,  and
when  we  are  so  influenced  we  will
act  with  a  due  regard  to  the  i ute-
res ts  of  our  brethren  and  sisters.
We  did  not  come  here  for  gold  and
silver,  no  matter  how  much  of
these  precious  metals  there  may  be
hid  up  in  the  mountains  around  us*
We  did  not  come  here  for  flocks
.  and  herds,  for  houses  and  lands,  for
orchards  and  vineyards  or  for  sub-
stance or  earthly  wealth  of  any
kind*  All  these  of  course  we  desire
to  obtain,  and  it  is  a  blessing  to
have  them,  for  with  them  we  can
the  better  assist  in  rolling  forth  the
kingdom  of  God  ;  but  the  acquiring
of  sucli  wealth  was  not  the  object
we  had  in  coming  here;  it  was  rather
to  build  up  a  better  system  of  socie-
ty and  establish  upon  the  earth  that
divine  order  that  exists  where
our  Father  dwells,  a  few  of  the
principles  of  which  have  been  re-
vealed to  us  through  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith.  We  came  here,  in
other  won  Is,  to  find  out  the  will  of
God,  and  then  do  it.  We  must  keep
that  object  before  us  all  the  time,
no  matter  in  what  capacity  we  act,
whether  as  members  of  the  Church
or  as  members  of  society,  whether
we  act  in  political  or  religious  mat-
ters, we  must  keep  the  fact  before  us
that  the  main  object  of  our  lives  is
to  establish  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  that  He  whose  right
it  is  to  reign  may  rule*  And  when
we  go  to  the  polls,  whether  it  be  to


vote  for  our  municipal  officers  or
otherwise,  we  must  go  there  as  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  to  be  true  to  our  re-
ligious covenants ;  we  cannot  say,
religion,  you  stand  aside,  I  am  a
politician  to-day.  We  must  be
Latter-day  Saints  all  the  time,  in
every  net  of  our  lives.  And  this
carelessness  in  regard  to  voting  we
must  get  rid  of;  we  must  understand
that  the  exercise  of  the  franchise  is
required  of  us,  and  knowing  this  we
should  have  the  manhood  to  use  it;
and  the  sisters  who  enjoy  the  pri-
vilege of  votinsr,  should  understand
that  the  same  obligation  rests  upon
them  as  well  as  upon  the  men.  This
blessing  is  given  to  them  to  be  used
for  the  good  6f  their  brethren  and
sisters,  for  the  benefit  of  the  com-
munity of  which  they  form  a  part.

It  is  necessary  that  we  be  as  one,
one  in  spirit  and  acts,  and  we  must
aim  all  the  day  long  for  the  accom-
plishment of  the  work  entrusted  to
us.  Every  member  must  be  alive
and  continue  to  be  alive.  The  sign
of  life  is  motion,  but  a  great  many
of  the  brethren  and  sisters  appear
to  be  either  dead  or  asleep  in  regard
to  these  matters.  We  must  do
better  if  we  would  preserve  our-
selves from  the  burdens  which  the
people  of  Tooele  county  have  had
to  bear  and  are  now  bearing ;  if  wto
would  maintain  our  liberty  and
keep  the  balance  of  power,  we  must
exercise  the  powers  conferred  upon
us,  and  if  we  do  not,  we  shall  have
to  reap  the  consequences*  This
union  we  talk  so  much  about,  and
which  we  say  is  essential  to  our
■  strength,  how  shall  we  increase  it  ?
For  we  need  an  increase  of  union,
particularly  in  some  places.  We
will  take  Ogden,  for  instance,  how
shall  we  establish  union  and  pre-
serve it  here  ?  I  have  thought  there
is  one  thing  that  needs  to  be  im-
pressed upon  us,  and  that  is  har-


REMARKS  ON

mony  of  feeling  and  of  thought  be- 1
tween  the  heads  and  the  body  of  the
people* In  order  to  establish  that
and  continue  it,  there  needs  to  be  an
in d  entity  of  interests  in  our  hearts,
It  will  not  do  for  our  brethren,
when  they  meet  each other,  to
shake  hands  and  enter  into  a  for-
mal conversation,  and  then,  when
they  separate,  have  something  evil
to  say  of  each  other. We  must
try  to  establish  real  harmony  ;  the
head  must  be  in  harmony  with  the
feet,  and  the  spirit  that  is  in  the
head  should  flow  to  the  extremities
of  the  body. We  must  try  to  esta-
blish an  essential  union*  Not  merely
a  grasp  of  hands  and  a  tying  toge-
ther by  rules,  but  the  binding  of
heart  to  heart,  that  the  spirit  may
have  free  course,  run,  and  be  dif-
fused among  the  people. And  in
order  to  establish  this, I  have
thought  that  we  have  need  to  be
frank  and  free, and  open  one  to
another, I  do  not  believe  in  that
kind  of  discussion  which  produces
contention,  which  comes  from  the
devil ; but  I  do  believe  in  that
free  speech  which  establishes  mutual
understanding,  tends  to  bind  men
together,  and  produces  true  affinity.
We  should  be  bound  together  by
essential  union — a  union  of  heart
and  soul How  can  this  be  brought
about  ? By  being  true  and  honest
one  towards  another, that  there
may  be  real  confidence  in  our  midst.
Because  one  man  may  differ  from
another,  even  though  with  one  called
to  preside  over  him,  is  that  to  say
that  such  a  man  is  rebellious  f  I
think  not. There  should  be  a  dis-
tinction between  honest  difference
and  stubbornness  and  contention.
We  cannot  all  see  alike  yet,  neither
is  it  expected  that  we  should  in
our  present  imperfect  condition.
As  there  is  a  difference  in  each
other  s  countenances,  so  there  is  in


UNION,  ETC.  125

each  other's  minds,  and  the  only
way  to  harmonize  the  difference  of"
opinion  that  may  exist  among  us,
is  to  so  live  that  the  light  of  the
Spirit  of  God  can  shine  in  our  hearts.
Some  men  are  quick  to  perceive  a
truth  ;  others  are  slow.  8ome  men
will  grasp  at  an  idea  and  compre-
hend it  in  a  moment,  while  it  takes
others  a  long  time,  simply  because
they  are  slower  of  intellect,  or  be-
cause they  do  not  happen  to  see
from  the  same  standpoint  as  we  do.
We  must  be  patient,  and  try  to  con-
vince one  another  when  we  happen
to  disagree.  How  1  By  threats  and
denunciations  1  No  ;  but  by  real
forbearance,  the  same  as  God  exer-
cises towards  us.  Do  we  ourselves
carry  out  His  purposes  as  He  has  re-
vealed them  ?  I  think  not.  I  con-
fess I  do  not  I  can  see  the  stan-
dard of  righteousness,  of  nobility,
and  purity  before  me,  but,  alas  !  I
know  I  have  not  reached  it ;  yet  I
want  to  keep  on  striving  until  I
get  up  to  that  standard,  and  I  be-
lieve these  desires  are  in  your
hearts.  God  exercises  patience  to-
wards us,  and  this  is  the  spirit  we
must  exercise  one  towards  another,
until  we  can  be  brought  to  see  eye
to  eye.  There  will  be  a  time  when
the  watchmen  upon  Mount  Zion
will  sing  together  with  perfect  har-
mony. "Thy  watchmen  shall  lift
up  their  voice  ;  with  the  voice  toge-
ther shall  they  sing;  for  they  shall
see  eye  to  eye,  when  the  Lord  shall
bring  again  Zion,"  But  the  Lord
will  never  bring  Zion  from  above
until  Zion  from  beneath  is  prepared
to  meet  it.

Then  I  would  say,  let  us  cheriih
forbearance  and  let  us  be  frank  and
encourage  frankness;  I  do  not  mean
contention,  that  is  a  very  different
thing  and  comes  from  a  different
source.  There  is  an  essential  union
and  there  is  an  apparent  union,  I


126


i

JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


would  not  give  a  fig  for  the  last,  but
the  first  is  worth  all  we  possess.  If
we  only  appear  to  be  united  and
bound  together  and  the  bands
should  once  be  broken,  separation
would  ensue,  all  would  be  confusion
and  the  strength  we  possess  would
!>e  wasted  ;  but  if  we  take  such  a
course  as  will  enable  us  to  see  alike
and  act  alike,  we  will  have  verita-
ble strength.  Then  let  us  try  to
establish  such  a  union  by  being
free  and  frank  with  and  true  to
each  other*  To  illustrate  my  idea:
A  lady  gets  a  new  bonnet,  and  she
meets  a  lady  friend  and  asks  how
she  looks,  ,  "  0  how  nice  V  says  the
latter,  it  suits  you  admirably  ;  it
becomes  you  so  much."  She  turns
around  when  her  friend  is  gone,
and  says  io  another  lady,  "What  a
fright  she  looks  in  that  poke  of  a
bonnet  f  So  men  will  be  friendly
to  each  other  s  faces  and  false  when
their  backs  are  turned-  We  should
be  free  and  frank  and  outspoken;  but
that  is  not  to  say  we  should  be  un-
wise and  abrupt  in  our  expressions,
because  we  are  very  sensitive  and
easily  get  offended.  We  may  even
drop  an  innocent  remark,  which  a
person  may  take  umbrage  at
and  feel  that  we  are  his  enemies
when  we  are  in  reality  Ids  friends,
and  the  same  feelings  are  likely  to
result  from  joking,  when  really  no
offence  is  intended.

But  the  greatest  cause  of  dis-
union is  promise-breaking.  One  of
the  evils  that  is  spoken  of  to
be  prevalent  in  the  last  days  is  that
men  should  become  "truce-break-
ers this  is,  they  should  be  guilty
of  making  promises  only  to  break
them.  I  believe  it  can  be
truthfully  said  of  some  who  call
themselves  Latter-day  Saints,  that
they  give  their  word  to  a  brother,
qnd  almost  before  the  breath  is  cold
they  falsify  their  promise:  they


make  contracts  in  writing,  and  al-
most before  the  ink  is  dry  they
break  them.  If  we  make  a  promise
to  perform  a  piece  of  work,  we
should  try  to  keep  it,  even  if  it  ap-
pears to  be  to  our  injury.  If  we
promise  to  pay  a  brother,  we  must
do  it  or  make  it  right  with  him,
and  not  try  to  excuse  ourselves  by
saying,  u  Oh,  it  is  only  a  brother  f
whereas,  if  it  were  a  "  gentile,' '  wo
would  very  likely  keep  our  pro*
mise.  We  must  be  true  to  our
words  under  all  circumstances
and  to  all  persons;  if  we  bor-
row, we  must  pay  our  debt ;  if  we
cannot  possibly  do  it,  we  must  give
our  creditor  the  best  satisfaction  we
can.  When  we  meet  with  one
another,  and  agree  to  carry  out  cer-
tain measures,  let  us  do  it,  or  not
promise  to  do  it  And  when  we
meet  together  in  our  meetings,  and
any  measures  are  brought  forward
in  which  the  public  are  interested,
or  nominations  are  to  be  made  for
any  of  our  public  officers,  and  we
feel  that  we  cannot  agree  with  the
measures  proposed,  or  have  just
cause  to  oppose  the  nominations,  do
not  sit  mum  in  the  meeting,  and  as
soon  as  it  is  over  commence  to  kin-
dle the  spirit  of  opposition  among
our  brethren.  In  all  our  political
matters,  if  the  elders  and  thr  people
get  together  and  come  to  a  clear
understanding  with  regard  to  the
men  who  are  to  occupy  certain  posi-
tions,  in  the  manner  that  I  have
alluded  to,  I  cannot  see  how  there
can  be  any  division,  or  how  those
who  are  not  of  us,  who  are  in  the
minority,  can  expect  to  succeed  in
electing  opposition  candidates  to
till  our  public  offices.  It  cannot  be
done.  We  have  the  majority  in
numbers,  and  if  we  have  a  thorough
union  of  power,  our  strength  will
be  preserved.  But  our  weakness  is
in  our  carelessness  and  apathy.  We


have  the  right  to  do  good,  the  right
to  vote,  but  do  not  exercise  it.

When  we  disapprove  of  any  man
put  up  to  occupy  any  position,  let
us  be  sure  in  our  minds  tiiat  what
causes  that  disapprobation  is  not
any  private  pique  against  him.  We
have  no  right  to  vote  against  a  man
from  our  private  feelings.  If  a  man
be  put  up  for  public  position,  and
we  have  a  private  pique  against
him,  that  should  not  weigh  a  fea-
ther. A  man  is  put  up  because  he
is  considered  fit  for  the  position,
and  when  the  majority  agree  upon
a  certain  person,  we  should  fall  into
line,  the  minority  should  give  way
to  the  majority.  And  when  we  dis-
agree with  our  brethren,  it  should
not  be  because  of  any  private  feel-
ings. One  may  say,  "  Oh,  I  do  not
want  that  man."  Why?  "Well,
he  said  so  and  so  against  me,  or  he
did  not  do  so  and  so  for  me."  It  is
not  a  matter  whether  you  like  a
man  personally  or  not.  The  ques-
tion is,  is  he  fit  for  the  position.  Is
he  the  right  man  for  the  place  ?  Do
the  majority  of  my  brethren  want
such  and  such  a  man  i  If  so,  I
will  wave  my  differences  and
vote  for  him  who  is  considered
best  fit  for  the  position.  These
things  are  of  far  more  importance
than  many  of  us  think  they  are.
In  times  past  we  have  had  the  bal-
ance of  power  in  our  elections,  and
all  things  have  gone  on  smoothly
whether  we  have  voted  or  not.  But
the  time  will  come  when  the  thing
will  be  more  evenly  divided,  and
we  must  get  in  the  habit  of  exer-
cising every  power  that  God  has
conferred  upon  us  for  the  building
up  of  his  kingdom  and  for  onr  mu-
tual benefit.  When  a  bishop  of  a
ward  calls  upon  a  man  to  perform
any  public  duty  lie  should  be  wil-
ling to  step  forward  to  do  his  part ;
and  ev6iy  woman  should  feel  that


she  would  like  to  see  her  husband
do  quite  as  much  as  any  other  wo*
man's  husband,  and  not  only  in
religious  matters  but  in  all  things
for  the  welfare  of  the  community
of  which  we  form  a  part.  Let  us
all  be  active  members  of  the  church
and  let  us  all  be  active  members  of
the  body  politic — let  us  be  real,  live
Latter-day  Saints,  and  let  the  spirit
of  the  Gospel  flow  to  every  part,
that  all  may  be  invigorated,  particle
clinging  to  particle,  for  when  each
particle  clings  to  the  other  particles
this  is  the  sign  of  life  in  a  man,
but  when  particles  seem  to  have  a
desire  to  separate,  that  is  indicative
of  dissolution,  that  mysterious
change  which  we  call  death  ;  when
we  pull  apart  that  is  a  sign  of  spirit-
ual death  in  the  midst  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.

I  desire  to  see  the  church  and
kingdom  of  God  alive  in  all  its
parts  ;  I  desire  to  see  every  member
imbued  with  the  spirit  of  God,  and
every  man  holding  the  holy  priest-
hood feeling  that  spirit  and  power
that  belong  to  it,  for  I  know  there
is  virtue,  and  power  and  strength
in  it  I  know  that  it  is  a  reality,
I  know  that  when  a  man  is  ordain-
ed to  the  holy  priest  hood,  if  he
seeks  for  the  spirit  of  his  calling,
he  can  draw  nearer  to  God  than  he
could  without  it ;  I  know  he  can  do
more  good  to  humanity  with  it
than  he  could  possibly  do  without
it  I  know  that  the  priesthood  of
God  is  efFective ;  that  there  is  life
and  vigor  in  it,  and  that  through  it
a  man  has  access  to  God  the  Eter-
nal Father,  and  has  power  to  help
his  fellowman.  We  should  be  a
nation  of  kings  and  priests  unto
God,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar
people  zealous  of  good  works.  This
is  what  we  should  be,  my  brethren
and  sisters.  And  here,  in  Weber
County  particularly,  where  the  out-


side  element  seems  to  be  gathering,
and  which  is  naturally  aggressi  ve,  al-
ways ready  to  try  and  wrest  from  us
our  vested  right;?,  it  behooves  you
to  be  earnest  and  sincere  and  united,
and  to  be  diligent  in  your  efforts  to  ,
hold  for  God  and  his  kingdom  those
rights  and  liberties  which  he  has
given  to  us.  God  intended  that  his
people  whom  he  has  gathered  to  this
land  should  possess  it,  and  that  they
should  not  be  ruled  over  by  their
enemies,  as  long,  at  least,  as  they
are  in  the  majority*  Then  shall  we
give  up  our  strength  to  the  minority  ,
who  desire  to  take  away  our  rights,  ,
and  who  have  tried  all  the  day  long  ,
to  flestrov  our  best  men  ?  1  tiiink
we  will  not  j  I  think  we  will  be
more  energetic  and  cling  to  one  ano-
ther, and,  if  we  have  differences  we
will  try  to  settle  them.  Brethren,
if  you  have  hard  feelings  against  a  11
brother,  go  to  him  like  a  man,  and
tell  him  that  he  has  done  so  and  so,
and  that  it  is  your  desire  to  have  I
the  thing  straightened  out  ;  and  if
you  cannot  make  it  right  yourselves
call  to  your  aid  the  services  of  a
teacher,  and  rather  let  us  sacrifice
our  feelings  than  allow  that  genial
spirit  w  hich  belongs  to  true  brother-
hood to  be  crushed  out  of  our  hearts.
Let  every  man  and  woman  in  this
congregation  to-day  feel  that  any
difficulties  they  may  have  had  with  '
their  brethren  or  sisters  shall  be
buried  from  to-day,  and  shall  not  be
harbored  any  longer.  Say  in  your
hearts,  before  I  will  have  anything
rankle  or  tarnish  my  feelings,  I  will
go  to  my  brother  or  to  my  sister  and
confess  my  weakness  and  thus  get
rid  of  it.  And  if  we  will  be  free  and  1
frank  and  honest,  and  say  what  is
in  our  hearts,  without  fear  or  favor,
there  will  be  more  union  in  our
midst,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  will
dwell  with  us,  and  we  will  see
new beauties in our  religion


every  day,  and  we  will  seek
the  society  of  our  brethren  rather
than  shun  them  ;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  if  we  harbor  hard  feelings  in
our  hearts  without  divulging  them
or  seeking  relief,  we  may  depend
upon  it  that  it  will,  if  allowed  to  go
,  unchecked,  result  in  a  separation
from  the  very  men  for  whom  we
to-day  profess  fellowship,  and  in
our  own  overthrow  and  death.  We
are  children  of  the  covenant,  and
should  be  bound  together  by  the
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose
ties  are  stronger  than  those  which
exist  between  man  and  wife  ;  that
influence  will  make  us  one,  even  as
the  earth  is  one,  though  composed
of  millions  of  atoms.  In  the  be*
ginning,  we  are  told,  God  spake*
chaos  heard,  and  worlds  came  into
order.  The  scattered  particles  came
together  and  they  were  solidified,
consolidated,  and  this  little  earth
now  rolling  in  space  shows  the
|  effects  of  this  real  essential  union  of
parts.  God  has  spoken  to  the  cha-
otic particles  of  humanity  ;  he  has
gathered  us  together  to  this  place  to
make  us  one;  and  we  should  live
together  and  work  together,  and
present  a  strong  phalanx  of  power,
as  real  brethren  and  sisters  in  very
deed,  that  the  spirit  of  union  may
be  in  our  hearts,  and  in  every  deed
and  act,  which  should  be  made  in
each  others  interest,  and  not  for
individualism  and  self.  The  spirit
of  individualism  is,  every  man  for
himself ;  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  is,
1  every  man  for  his  brother  ;  and  it
is  this  influence  that  prompts  a  man
|  to  say,  "  Let  me  love  the  Lord  my
God  with  all  my  heart,  and  with  all
my  soul,  and  with  all  my  strength,
and  let  me  love  my  neighbor  as  my-
self, and  seek  his  interests  as  well
as  my  own**1  This  is  the  Spirit  of
Got! ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  j  it  is  the  spirit  of


ALL  THINGS GOVERNED,  ETC.


1»


peace,  and  joy,  and  consolation  and
comfort,  and  there  is  real,  true  hap-
piness in  it*  What  a  miserable
feeling  it  is  not  to  be  able  to  me^t  a
man  frankly  ami  cordially*  How
different  when  friends  and  bre-
thren meet.  Their  countenances  at
once  brighten,  and  there  is  a  glow
and  warmth  which  bespeak  their
feelings  for  each  other  ;  it  is  a  feel-
ing of  joy  and  satisfaction,  and  those
who  possess  it  desire  to  bless  and
do  good  to  their  fellow-men.

I  feel  the  importance  of  these
simple  truths;  they  are  necessary
to  our  growth  as  a  community,  and
to  our  progress  as  individuals.  God
has  revealed  them  for  our  guidance
and  salvation,  both  temporally  and
spiritually.  Let  us  ponder  upon
them,  and  let  nothing  come  be-


tween us  and  the  Priesthood  of  God.
Let  us  be  united  in  all  things,  and

when  the  time  comes  for  us  to  vote
for  our  municipal  officers,  let  us
have  a  clear  understanding  before
hand,  and  then  unite  on  it;  and  I
will  promise  you  that  if  you  will  do
your  part,  God  will  do  his  part,  and
we  will  come  off  more  than  con-
querors. And  the  day  will  not  be
far  distant  when  the  Priesthood  of
God  will  have  the  balance  of  power,
and  the  rule  and  dominion  now  in
the  hands  of  the  wicked  upon  the
face  of  all  the  earth  will  be  taken
away  from  the  corrupt  and  the
wicked,  and  given  onto  the  hands  of
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God,
and  he  will  reign  for  ever  and  aver.
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BT  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DiLiviRfcD  at  Bountiful,  davis  commr,  oir  Suhsat  AFnmirOMr,

Deobmbsr  1,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibb*.)


ALL  THINGS  GOVERNED  BT  LAW — ALL  INTELLIGENCE  AND  BLESSINGS
HATE  EMANATED  FROM  GOD — MAN'S FREE AGENCT  SHOULD  NOT  BE
'  INTERFERED  WITH — THE  OPPONENTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  SHOULD
NOT  BE  ALLOWED  TO  TEACH OUB  CHILDREN — NECKSSITT  OF  ALL
BUNG  SUBJECT  TO  LEGITIMATE  AUTHORITY,

I  am  pleased  to  meet  with  the  I  remarks  that  hare  been  made  by
Saints  in  this  place ;  and  I  have  the  brethren  who  have  spoken  to
been  very  much  interested  in  the  j  us  this  morning  as  well  aa  thia

Me,  9.  ftfc  XX


130


journal  or  wscoitrses


afternoon.  1  think  they  have  laid
before  us  many  good  and  precious
principles  which  will  result  in  our
good,  if  we  can  only  appreciate
them  and  he  governed  by  them.

We  are  living  in  a  very  eventful
day,  in  a  time  that  is  pregnant  with
gmit  evMits  :  and  it  is  necessary
that  we  pivpare  ourselves  so  that  we
may  be  able  to  conform  ourselves

to  the  circumstances  with  which  we
are  surrounded,  and  to  fulfil  the
various  duties  that  devolve  upon  us
individually  and  collectively.

The  brethren  who  have  addressed
you  have  spoken  more  particularly
upon  temporal  things — a  subject
which  is  very  appropriate  and  im-
portant, because,  although  we  may
believe  it  is  right,  proper  and  profit-
able for  us  to  be  united  in  temporal
matters,  whatever  our  faith  may  he
we  do  not  quite  carry  it  out*  We
make  a  stagger  at  it,  but  we  do  not
seem  to  appreciate  fully  the  position
we  occupy,  and  it  is  very  difficult
for  men  to  comprehend  these
things.  We  have  established  or*
ganizations  in  the  several  Stakes,
which  are  all  very  well  so  far  as
they  go  ;  they  are  the  frame- work —
the  bones,  and  sinews  and  arteries
and  llesh  (comparing  them  with  the
human  body) ;  they  are  very
beautiful  ami  symmetrical  in  all
their  parts.  But  they  need  the
Spirit  of  God  to  breathe  upon  them
to  quicken  them  with  its  life-giving
vitality,  energy  and  po '  er,  that  they
may  fulfil  their  various  functions
as  living,  breathing  and  intelligent
powers,  that  we  may  truly  com-
prehend the  position  which  we
occupy  in  these  various  stakes,  both
officers  and  people,  and  we  all  of  us
m  ty  be  active  and  alive  and  ener-
getic in  the  pursuit  of  those  princi-
ples which  God  has  developed  as
necessary  for  our  present  and  eter-
nal happiness,


There  is  order  in  all  the  creations
of  God,  The  planetary  system  by
which  we  are  surrounded  and  with
which  we  are  associate"  1  is  governed
by  the  strictest  principles  of  law  ;
all  those  magnificent  bodies  move
in  their  several  orbits  in  the  midst
of  the  power  of  God,  sustained  and
directed  by  his  Almighty  hand.
And  everything  in  nature  is  also
governed  by  law.

To-day  we  can  talk  of  railroads
and  steamboats,  I  remember  the
time,  and  many  of  you  old  people
also  remember,  when  there  were  no
such  things  in  existence.  Well,
but  did  not  steam  possess  the  same
properties  five  thousand  years  ago
as  it  does  to  day  1  Yesf  it  did  ;  the
properties  were  precisely  the  same
but  we  did  not  understand  it,  that1*
all  The  principles  were  the  same,
and  there  is  an  eternal  law  by
which  all  these  things  are  governed.
The  same  thing  applies  to  electrici-
ty. You  remember  very  well  when
it  took  several  months  to  send  a
message  to  Washington  and  receive
an  answer ;  now  we  can  do  it  in  as
many  minutes.  But  did  not  that
principle  always  exist  ?  Yes  ;  but
man  did  not  know  how  to  avail
himself  of  it  I  remember  the
time,  too,  very  well  when  there
was  no  such  thing  as  gas,  when
whale  oil  was  used,  which  produced
a  light  that  just  about  made  dark-
ness visible.  We  knew  nothing
about  kerosene,  or  gasoline,  or  gas
or  any  of  these  superior  artificial
lights  ;  but  then  the  principles  ex-
isted then  as  they  do  now,  bat  we
did  not  understand  them.  We  did
not  comprehend  the  position  of
things  and  it  is  only  quite  recently
that  some  of  these  discoveries  have
been  brought  into  operation.  The
art  of  photography  has  not  been
Ion  tr  known.  When  I  was  a  boy
people  would  have  laughed  at  you


if  von  I kiiI  talked  of  taking  a  man's
likeness  in  a  minute's  time  ;  yet  it  is
dontt  Did  not  ttuht  always  posses>
the  same  properties  1  Yes,  hut
man  did  not  understand  it.  The
same  thing  applies  to  the  mineral
world,  the  vegetable  kinicuoin,  the
animal  creation,  and  all  the  works
of  God.  They  are  all  governed  by  '
certain  laws.  The  vegetables  which
you  grow  here,  how  were  they  or*
ganizedl  God  organized  them  and
placed  them  upon  the  earth,  and
gave  them  power  to  propagate  their
species  ;  so  also  with  regard  to  the
animal  creation,  as  well  as  birds,
fishes,  insects,  &c.

We  talk  sometimes  about  our
temporal  things.  If  we  could  un-
derstand things  as  God  does,  we
should  not  be  much  troubled  about
them.  If  for  a  moment  we  reflect
upon  all  creation  that  live  upon
this  little  globe — those  that  move
in  the  air,  the  waters  and  on  the
land,  we  find  there  is  a  wisdom,  an
intelligence  that  provides  for  all
There  is  a  prescient  and  an  omnipo-
tent power  that  governs,  controls
and  shapes  the  affairs  of  this  world
according  to  the  counsel  of  his  will,
and  especially  so  in  all  matters  per-
taining to  the  human  family.  As
one  nation  rises  up  and  another
falls,  it  is  by  his  power  that  it  is
done.  Nations  and  peoples  may  be
in  prosperity  for  a  short  time,  but
one  touch  of  the  finger  of  the  Al-
mighty and  they  wither,  crumble
and  decay.  Change  succeeds  change
in  human  affairs,  but  the  laws  of
God  in  everything  are  correct  and
true,  in  every  stage  and  phase  ot
nature,  everything  on  the  earth,  in
the  waters  and  in  the  atmosphere
is  governed  by  unchangeable,  eter-
nal laws.  There  are  some  bodies
th&t  will  unite ;  there  are  others
that  will  not  unite.  You  cannot,
for  instance,  mix  oil  and  water  j  you


may  shake  them  up  together,  but
soon  each  one  adheres  to  his  own
element. The sisters  sometimes
say  they  have  good  or  bad  luck,  as
the  ease  may  be.  in  the  making  of
si >;ip  ;  but  in  reality  there  is  no  luck
about  it,  tor  you  would  find  that  f
you  have  the  same  properties  equal
in  strength,  and  quantity,  using  the
B&me  process,  that  the  same  results
would  be  reached  ninety-nine  times
out of  every hundred, and  you
would  find  that  y<m  could  afford  to
throw  the  other  one  in  too — the
conditions  being  the  same.  And
so  it  is  with  the  various  minerals
in  all  their  organizations  and  con-
ditions. They  assume  certain  forms
and  they  are  known  by  geologists
by  their  shapes,  etc.,  and  they  are
always  true  to  them. And  so  it  is
with  all  the  elements  with  which
we  are  surrounded  in  the  atmos-
phere,  in the  earth  and  in  the
water. We  think  we  have  learned
a  great  deal,  but  if  we  did  but  know
i  it  we  are  oidy  at  the  foot  of  the  hill;
and  when  we  are  able  to  compre-
hend things  as  God  does  we  shall
comprehend  a  great  many  princi-
ples that  have  never  entered  into
our  hearts  to  conceive  of,  although
we  are  surrounded  with  those  ma-
terials and  are  even  treading  them
under  our  feet To  speak  of  these
laws,  God  himself  is  governed  by
law,  and  the  Priesthood  in  the  eter-
nal world  are  governed  by  law,  just
as  much  as  his  works  are.  Our
earth  rolls  upon  its  axis  and  we
have  day  and  night,  summer  and
winter, Feed-time and  harvest.
When men com  prebend  the  laws
by  which  the  planets  are  governed,
they  can  tell  you  to  a  quarter  of  a
second  when  an eclipse  will  take
place,  and  when  our  earth  will  be
in conjunction  with  other  planets.
Why  ? Because  they  are  governed
,  by-  eternal  laws. There  are  a  great


toany  tilings  by  which  we  are  gov-
erned of  which  we  know  very  Kttle
and  with  which  we  have  very  little
to  do.  For  instance,  1  will  men-
tion the  flowing  of  the  Wood  ;  What
has  man  to  tic  with  that!  Nothing  ;
still  it  flows  and  courses  through
the  body,  i  have  noticed  an  aged
person,  and  *een  his  pulse  begin  to
falter,  as  though  the  machinery  of
life  Were  about  to  standstill,  after
hwing  been  in  motion  for  perhaps
titty  or  one  hundred  years,  during
winnh  time  the  pulse  had  con-
tinued to  beat  without  any  action
on  his  part,  du~  and  night,  asleep
or  awake.  There  is  another  princi-
ple that  God  has  planted  within  us,
which  we  call  breathing.  We  con-
tinue  to  breathe,  and  what  effort
of  the  will  does  it  require  !  No  more
than  it  does  to  cause  the  blood  to
flow.  We  are  machines  ;  God  has
made  us  and  he  is  our  Father.  He
has  planted  within  us  the  breath  of
life  and  we  continue  to  inhale  and
breathe  day  after  day,  month  after
month,  and  year  after  year.  And
when  that  stops,  what  then  !  Just
the  same  as  when  the  blood  ceases
to  circulate  in  our  veins — we  pass
away.  And  yet  these  emanate
from  God,  and  they  are  planted
within  us  and  we  have  nothing
much  to  do  with  them-  We  have
organs,  and  it  seems  as  if  the  Lord
plays  in  them  ;  in  his  hands  is  the
breath  or  life,  and  in  him  we  live
and  move  from  day  to  day  and  from
year  to  year,  because  he  suffers  us
to.  He  once  said  to  his  disciples  :
"  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,
what  you  shall  eat ;  neither  for  your
body  what  you  shall  put  on.  The
life  is  more  than  meat,  and  the
body  is  more  than  raiment.  Con-
sider the  ravens  :  for  they  neither
sow  nor  reap  ;  which  neither  have
storehouse  nor  barn ;  and  God  feed-
eth  them  :  how  much  more  are  ye


better  than  the  fowl*  V  He
over  all,  he  cares  for  all,  he  u  inter-
ested in  all ;  and  in  him  we  five,
move  and  have  oar  being.

W  hat  next  t  Are  we  mortal  1  Yea-
Art?  we  immortal  t  Yes.  H  ave  we
to  >io  with  tiuie !  Ye*.  We  have
also  to  do  with  eternity.  We  are
the  offspring  of  God  ;  ami  God  in
tbM  last  days  has  seen  fit  to  place
ns  in  communication  with  himself.
He  has,  through  the  irritations  of
himself  and  ol  his  Son  J* sis  Christ,
by  the  ministry  of  holy  angels  and
by  the  restoration  of  the  holy  prir*t-
hood  which  emanates  from  Godr
and  by  which  he  himself  is  gov-
erned, placed  us  in  a  position  where-
by we  can  fulfil  the  object  of  our
creation-  The  world  generally  are
not  situated  as  we  are ;  they  do  not
comprehend  things  as  we  do,  and
hence  in  many  instances  l-hey  feel
very  bitter  and  acrimonious  to-
wards us.  What  is  the  matter  1
They  do  not  understand  oar  posi-
tion ;  and  we  did  not  understand
these  things  until  they  were  coin
municated  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  the
living  God,  and  we  could  not,  nor
can  any  man  obtain  a  knowledge
of  these  things  only  by  the  laws
which  God  has  laid  down.  TTiere
may  be  lightning  in  abundance,
but  it  cannot  be  used  for  the  con-
veying of  intelligence  from  place  to
place  only  as  it  is  governed  by
law.  If  you  communicate  to  any
part  of  the  world  through  this
means,  you  must  have  the  wires
laid  and  the  instruments  properly
connected  and  adjusted,  and  then
you  must  know  how  to  operate
them  ;  if  you  don't  know  how  to  do
this  your  labor  is  in  vain — the  wire,
the  instruments,  etc.,  are  useless.
You  might  possess  a  most  magnifi-
cent steam-engine,  but  unless
charged  with  steam  of  what  use
could  it  be  ? But  let  the  fire  and


be  pat  to  it,  and  have  a  good
engineer  to  manage  it,  and  you  may
then  timl  from  your  settlement
here  to  Salt  Lake  City  or  to  Ogden
quite  rapidly.  Bat  without  these
things  would  the  engine  be  of  any
use? None  whatever.

Thtte  an  certain  eternal  laws
that  have  existed  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  There
has  been  a  priesthood  also  in  ex-
istence alwaya,  and  hence  it  is  call-
ed the  everlasting  priesthood,  and
it  administers  in  lime  and  in  eter-
nity. Thai  priesthood  has  been
conferred  upon  man  together  with
the  right  of  the  (iospel ;  and  we
are  told  how  man  can  get  into  pos-
session of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,
and  how  he  can  be  placed  in  com-
munication with  God,  just  the  same
*<  yon  would  place  one  town  in  com-
munication with  another  by  means
of  the  electric  wire.  We  are  told
how  to  do  that,  and  that  is  by  faith
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  by  re-
pentance and  baptism  for  the  rem  is
sion  of  rin,  anil  by  having  hands
bid  upon  our  heads  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost  This  is
a  way  which  God  has  appointed
— an  eternal  law  which  man  can
not  gainsay  nor  depart  from  any
mote  than  they  can  from  any
other  law  of  God  He  has  given
us  other  views  in  relation  to  these
matters.  He  has  revealed  things
concerning  the  relationship  that
exsists  between  husband  and  wife
between  children  and  parents  and
between  the  various  quorum  or-
ganizations of  liis  church.  He  has
placed  in  our  power  certain  princi-
ples which  are  the  offspring  of  God,
which  have  emanated  from  him,
in  regard  to  endowments  and
anointings  and  other  intelligence
which  it  would  not  be  pro(>er  to
speak  of  at  the  present  time.  Where
did  ail  these  originate? In  the


first  place  in  the  one  great  princi-
ple that  God  had  revealed  himself
to  the  human  family  and  bad  res-
!  tored  the  everlasting  Gospel,  and
that  with  it  came  all  these  other
things — apostles  and  high  priests
and  elders  and  patriarchs  and  bish-
ops and  high  councilors  and  all  the
various  organizations  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  as  they  now
exist  upon  the  earth, all  occupying
their  own  peculiar  place  and  posi-
tion. What  for! For  the  build-
ing up  of  a  something  that  is
called Zion  or  the  pure  in  heart.
What  fori For  my  aggrandize-
ment! for  yours  1 for  my  indiv-
idual interests  or  for  yours  ?  No,
But  in  the  interest  of  God  and  of
Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New  Cov-
enant, of  Adam  and  of  all  the  an-
cient patriarchs  and  apostles  and
men  of  God  who  have  lived  before,
both  on  the  Asiatic  and  American
continent, with the powers  that
exist  in  the  heavens  that  may  be
revealed through the  medium
which  He  lias  appointed  to  men
who  dwell  upon  the  earth  ;  that  we
might  stand  in  and  occupy  our  true
position  before  God,  not  acting  and
operating  of  ourselves  or  by  our*
selves  or  by  anything  inherent  in
us  or  by  virtue  of  any  intelligence
with which we  individually  may
be  endowed, but  by  that  alone
which God communicates.  To
\ih<»m  are  we  indebted  for  the  light
we  have  to  day  1 Some  might  say
to  Joseph  Smith, Yes,  as  the  in-
strument, but  primarily  to  God  and
the Priesthood behind the  vail,
Gould  Joseph  Smith  have  revealed
anything  if  it  had  not  been  com-
municated to  himl No.  Could
Brigham  Young  1 So. Could  any-
body else  1 No  ;  no  man  can  reveal
anything  pertaining  to  these  mat
ters  only  as  it  is  given  to  him,  and
he  is  permitted  by  the  Lord}  who


JOURNAL  OF  DfSCOURSES.


is  the  Author  of  all  light,  intelli-
gence and  knowledge  which  we  J  j  is
children -possess.  And  he  has  wi-
thered uk  together  for  the  purpose
of  instructing  us  that  we  may  oper-
ate with  him  and  by  him  and
through  the  intelligence  winch  he
imparts,  in  building  up  his  Zhm  of
the  last  days.  The  world  say  we
are  exclusive.  We  cannot  help  that.
Are  we  exclusive?  To  a  certain
extent,  yes.  For  instance,  I
know  there  is  a  law  which  Ood
has  given.  Can  I  ignore  that  law
and  expect  blessings  from  God?
No.  Can  you  ?  No,  you  cannot
Can  men  climb  any  other  way  into
the  favor  of  God  than  that  which
he  has  appointed?  No,  they  can-
not.  What  will  you  do  ?  We  will
try  and  help  the  Lord  to  do  the
very  best  he  can  for  them;  and  we
will  do  the  best  we  can  for  them.
One  thing  we  can  do,  and  we  are
set  apart  many  of  us  for  that  pur*
pose,  and  that  is  to  go  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  Tins
the  Lord  requires  at  our  hands,  es-
pecially we  Seventies,  Elders  and
Apostles.  We  can  do  all  that  is  in
our  power  for  the  people  in  this
way.

And  what  n*xt  ?  Can  we  make
them  believe?  No*  Can  we  make
them  obey  the  Gospel?  No.  \\V
would  not  if  we  could,  because  if
there  was  any  force  made  use  of  for
the  accomplishment  of  that  object,
it  would  only  result  in  evil  instead
of  good.  We  are  told  by  Joseph
Smith  that  11  No  power  or  influence
can,  or  ought  to  he  maintained,  by
virtue  of  the  Priesthood  only  by
persuasion,  by  long  goffering,  by
gentleness  anil  neekne>s.  and  hv
love  unfeigned  ;  by  kindness  and
pure  knowledge.'1  They  are  not  to  be
exercised  by  force.  This  is  the  way
I  look  at  these  things,  and  1  take
the  same  view  of  our  temporal  af-


fairs of  which  we  have  heard  so
much  today.  Should  I  wish  to
control  anv  man? No.  would

*

si M»w  him  the  right  way.  Should  1
feel  indignant  at  the  follies  of  men
and  wish  to  destroy  people  ]  No.
David,  we  are  told,  prayed  to  the
Lord  that his  enemies  might  be


sent  to  hell  quickly;  Je^us  sai<
when  suffering  at  the  hands  of
cruel  men  all  that  human  nature  1
could  endure,  44  Father,  forgive
them,  for  tin  \  know  not  what  they
do."  1  like  the  latter  better  than
the  former.  Who  are  the  people
of  the  world  ?  They  are  the  child-
ren of  God.  If  thev  are  not  heirs
with  God  and  joint- heirs  with  Jesus
Christ,  they  are  all  his  offspring.
And  what  is  he  going  to  do  with
them  1 The very best  he

can  ; and we will iry  and

help  him.  do  it.  We  will
set  them  good  patterns;  we
will  teach  them  by  pfi&ept  and  ex-
ample beltri  ways,  and  seek  to  the
Lord  for  wisdom  to  govern  us,  a  d
then  try  and  benefit  them,  lint
shall  we  allow  them  to  destroy  us  t
No,  Shall  we  allow  our  children
to  be  taught  by  them  ?  No,  never
by  thrin.  for  they  know  not  the
way  of  life,  and  are  enemies  to  God
and  his  laws.  God  has  given  unto
us  children,  and  he  not  only  expects
obedience  from  us.  but  expects
us,  as  he  did  Abraham,  to  com-
mand our  children  after  us  to
obey  the  Lord  Then  do  not  let  us
give  them  over  to  the  powers  of
d:n-ki:e^  to  be  taught  by  the  ene-
mies of  God  and  His  people.  But
let  us  study  their  interestaiboth  for
time  and  eternity*  and  set  them
good  example,  aiM  keep  them
from  the  contamination  of  the
world.  I  heard  a  statement  of  a
circumstance  said  to  have  trans-
pired in  one  of  those  schools  in  Salt
Lake  City,  which  was  something


like  this  ;  A  teacher  interrogating
the  children  of  a  certain  school  ask-
ed— Who  is  the  great  false  prophet
of  the  19th  century  ]  In  answering,
a  child  mentioned  John  Taylor.  I
was  a  little  amused  at  it ;  although
I  suppose  it  was  intended  that  they
should  have  given  the  name  of  Jos-
eph Smith,  but  the  little  one  made
a  mistake.  But  what  of  the  idea
of  our  children  attending  the
schools  of  people  who  teach  and
catechise  thera  in  this  way  ?  Don't
you  think  it  rather  humiliating  ?  I
think  we  are  descending  very  low
when  we  can  submit  to  their  tui-
tion. We  do  not  want  to  partake
of  their  feelings  nor  contract  their
ways,  nor  to  be  degraded  with
either  their  social  or  religious  prin-
ciples, but  at  the  same  time  we
wish  to  do  them  all  the  good  we
can.  If  they  lie  about  us,  never
mind  that  ;  we  can  stand  all  they
can  say  about  us.  Would  we  want
to  injure  them  ]  I  hope  not  We
ought  to  deal  witli  and  treat  every-
body aright,  acting  justly  and  hon-
orably with  all.  But  then  we  do
not  want  them  to  be  our  teachers.
They  would  think  they  were  doing
God's  service  if  they  could  by  any
influence  lead  us  astray.  What  will
the  Lord  do  with  t hem  ?  He  will
put  the  more  worthy  of  them  in  a
terrestrial  kingdom,  and  the  other
class  will  inherit  a  telestial  king-
dom, hut  they  will  never
get  into  the  celestial  king-
dom, unless  it  ft  through
the  medium  of  that  priesthood  con-
ferred upon  us  by  the  Lord.  Then
do  we  wis]]  our  children  to  be
taught  by  those  whn  w  on  hi  seek  to
degrade  and  lead  them  to  another
and  a  lower  place  than  that  we
hope  to  enjoy]  Certainly  not
What  was  said  of  Abraham,  speak-
ing of  his  children  i  the  Lord  says,
"1 know Abraham." What  do


you  know  ]  "  That  lie  will  fear  me
and  command  his  children  and  his
household  after  him,  etc."  We
want  to  be  very  careful  about  train-
ing our  children,  we  should  act
honestly  before  them  ;  for  if  they
see  father  or  mother  act  dishonest-
ly, the  children  will  be  likely  to
follow  their  example.  We  should
be  careful  too  not  to  be  found
speaking  harshly  or  using  hard
words  in  their  presence.  But  rath-
er do  as  the  old  lady  used  to  do
when  teaching  school ;  when  the
children  would  come  to  a  word
they  could  not  pronounce,  she
would  tell  them  to  skip  it  and  call
it  "  hard-word/'  Let  our  lives  and
actions  and  conduct  bespeak  that
we  are  men  of  God,  that  we  are
acting  uprightly  and  righteously
and  performing  the  will  of  God
upon  the  earth.

Well,  now,  a  little  further  in  re-
lation to  the**  things.  Shall  we
benefit  1  Yes,  we  will  do  all  the
irood  we  can.  But  if  men  lie  and
become  fraudulent,  and  delight  in
abominations  and  are  void  of  prin-
ciple*then  we  will  say,  with  him
of  o'ft  "My  soul  enter  thou  not  in-
to their  secret,  and  mine  honor
with  him  he  not  thou  united."  We
are  gathered  here  for  the  express
purpose  of  carrying  out  the  purpos-
es of  God;  the  world,  however,  do
not  understand  it.  Hut  I  tell  you
what  they  will  do,  hv-and-bv.  You
will  see  them  flocking  to  Xion  hy
thousands  ami  tens  of  thousands;
and  they  will  say,  *'  We  don't  know
anything  about  your  religion,  we
don't  care  much  about  religious
matters,  but  vou  are  honest  and
honorable,  and  upright  and  just,
and  you  have  a  good,  just  and  se-
cure government,  and  we  want  to
put  ourselves  under  your  protec-
tion, for  we  cannot  feel  safe  any-
where else," There  is  a  scripture


-


which  says,  the  time  will  come
"when  he  that  will  not  take
op  his  sword  to  fight  against
his  neighbor,  must  needs  flee
to  Hon  for  safety/1  And  they
will  come.  But  we  must  prepare
ourselves ;  we  have  got  to  have  the
invigorating  influence  of  the  Spirit
of  God  to  permeate  all  of  our  or-
ganizations, all  feeling  that  we  are
under  the  guidance  and  protection
of  the  Almighty,  every  man  in  his
place,  and  every  man  according  to
the  order  of  the  priesthood  in  which
God  has  placed  him.  Does  a  bishop
expect  the  members  of  his  ward  to
be  subject  to  himt  Yes.  Should
they  be  t  Yes,  And  should  not  they
themselves  be  subject  to  the  Presi-
dent of  the  Stake  ?  Yes,  Then  if  the
President  of  a  Stake  expects  obe-
dience from  those  under  him  he
must  be  subject  to  those  over  him.
The  Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons
in  their  place,  the  Bishops  in  theirs;
the  Presidents  of  Stakes  in  theirs ;
the  High  Priests,  Seventies,  and  all
others,  magnifying  their  respective
callings,  filling  the  positions  they
occupy,  holding  themselves  as
minute  men,  clothed  upon  with  the
power  of  God  and  the  holy  priest
hood  which  rests  upon  them*  And
when  more  of  that  spirit  is  in  exist-
ence among  the  elders  of  Israel
they  will  feel  the  word  of  God  like
fire  in  their  bones,  and  they  will
desire  to  go  forth  carrying  the  word
of  life  and  salvation  to  their  fellow-
men  who  are  scattered  throughout
the  earth.  A  good  many  are  be-
ginning to  feel  like  that  now,  the  I
fire  is  beginning  to  burn  a  little  \
more,  and  if  we  continue  to  fulfil
our  duties — and  do  not  go  and  ask  i
people  to  believe  something  we  can
hardly  believe  ourselves;  but  go
full  of  faith,  seeking  all  the  while  j
unto  God  for  more  intelligence,  his
Holy  Spirit  will  beam  upon  the  altar  j


of  our  hearts;  the  revelations  of  God
will  be  unfolded  and  we  shall  feel
in  our  hearts  to  exclaim,  0,  God,
let  me  go  forth  to  lift  up  a  warning
voice  for  thy  judgments  are  ap-
proaching, the  nations  are  shaking,
thrones  art  tottering  and  will  be
cast  down,  and  wars  and  commo-
tions are  spreading  abroad,  and  I
want  to  go  and  snatch  those  who
are  honest  "  as  brands  from  the
burning  "  so  that  when  I  have  ac-
complished my  work  I  can  feel  that
my  garments  are  spotless  from  the
blood  of  all  men.  This  is  the  kind
of  feeling  we  should  have  and  be
governed  by.  As  for  these  other
matters  of  a  temporal  nature  before
referred  to,  it  we  cannot  co-operate
together  and  do  it  honestly  and  in
good  faith,  as  this  is  one  of  the  very
best  tilings  that  can  be  required  of
us,  it  is  very  little  that  we  can  do.
We  should  cultivate  the  Spirit  of
God  ourselves  ;  we  ought  to  drink
freely  of  that  water  which  the  Savior
told  the  woman  of  Samaria  that  he
!  was  able,  to  give  to  her,  even  that
water  that  would,  M  be  in  her  as  a
well  springing  up  to  everlasting  life."
We  have  drank  already  at  that  well;
it  remains  now  for  us  to  permit  it
|  to  bubble  and  burst  forth,  to  flow
and  spread  its  revivifying  influence
all  around.  We  ought  to  have  a
heaven  ti|K>n  earth — to  be  really  the
Zion  of  our  God,  the  pure  in  heart,
each  one  seeking  anothers  welfare.
4*  Thou  shah  love  the  Lord  thy  God
with  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy
might,  with  all  thy  soul,  with  all
thy  strength,  and  thy  neighbor  a«
thyself."  We  have  hardly  got  ta
that  yet  ;  but  supposing  Paul  were
to  come  along  and  say  a  little  fur-
ther— each  one  preferring  his  neigh*
bor.  That  part  of  it  we  will  let  alone
awhile.  But  if  we  could  feel  we  are
the  children  of  God,  all  animated  by
that  same  Holy  Spirit,  producing


peace  and  joy,  and  all  welded  to-
gether in  one  common  brotherhood  u
in  the  bonds  of  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, all  operating  with  God  and  the
holy  priesthood  who  have  lived  in
other  ages,  to  carry  out  his  purposes
upon  the  earth,  and  assisting  to  re-
deem the  earth  and  establish  his
kingdom,  never  more  to  be  thrown
down-  If  we  could  feel  like  this,  we
should  drop  our  individnality  and
self-esteem  a  little,  we  should  seek
to  do  not  our  own  will,  but  the  will
of  Him  who  sent  us.

I  find  that  the  time  is  passing.  In
conclusion  let  me  say,  brethren,  love
one  another,  be  kind  to  each  other  ;
if  you  have  difficulties,  settle  them
honorably.  I  do  not  know  a  man
upon  the  earth  that  I  have  a  solitary
feHin*;  against.  I  would  not  enter-
tain such  feelings,  because  they  make
one  teel  miserable.  Forgive  one  an-
other ;  bear  with  one  another's  in-
firmities. We  are  not  all  alike.  Our
faces  are  different,  our  habits  are
different,  although  made  of  the  same
material  and  possessing  the  same
kind  of  an  organization. So  disssi-


milar  are  we  that  you  can  hardly
find  two  people  alike.  I  do  not
want  everybody  to  think  as  I  do.  I
am  willing  to  grant  every  one  a  great
amount  of  leeway  in  regard  to  these
things;  but  I  would  like  to  see  every-
body do  right  and  cleave  to  God.
And  as  for  a  great  many  other  little
things  I  care  very  little  about  them.
Let  men  treat  their  wives  kindly  ;
and  then  you  wives  can  afford  to
treat  your  husbands  the  same,  can't
you  ]  Let  all  cultivate  charity  and
forbearance,  and  how  much  better  it
will  make  you  feel !  Children,  obey
your  parents;  and  parents  treat  your
children  kindly,  and  let  us  all  seek
to  do  the  will  of  God  upon  the  earth.
May  God  bless  you,  brethren  and
sisters,  and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life  ;  and  may  God  help  us  all  to  do
right,  an  1  may  the  fear  and  blessing
of  tiod  rest  upon  all  Israel  and  upon
all  that  love  the  truth  everywhere,
and  may  our  enemies  be  confound-
ed in  all  their  plottings  against
Zion,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.
Amen.


mm


138


Jul'  R  N  A  L  mF  lMS'*»rKSK*.


REMARKS  MADE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

At  the  Funeral  Services  <<f  Bkotiikk  Dimjck  H Hcnhngtun,  in  thi

10th  Ward  Mektiui  House  un  Sunday  Morning,

Februakv  2nd  1879


A-

(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Gibhs.)


There  are  a  cjreat  many  things  as-
sociated  with  human  existence  that
call  upon  people  tu  reflect.  We  came
into  the  world,  and  people  are  com-
ing into  it  in  a  continuous  stream —
children  are  being  born  as  all  of  us
were  in  our  turn  ;  and  whilst  some
are  coming  into  the  world  giving
pleasure  to  their  parents  and  friends,
there  are  trials,  anxieties,  cares  and
perplexities  attending  the  nurture  of
the  babe  and  the  care  of  youth  until
they  arrive  at  years  of  maturity*
Then  comes  the  struggles  of  life  with
all  its  attendant  cares  and  responsi-
bilities.

With  us  particularly  the  greatest
thing  that  we  think  of  associated
wit  h  the  welfare  of  our  yout  h  is  that
they  become  acquainted  with  the
principles  of  truth,  with  the  order
and  organization  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  that  they  comprehend  in  some
measure  the  laws  of  life  and  prepare
to  live  for  the  futuie  that  U  before
them.

Urother  Huntington  has  lived  a
great  length  of  time  associated  with
this  church  and  kingdom,  and  has
arr i ved  to  w ] i a t  i s  o ften  te rmed  * '  the
sere  and  yellow  leaf,"  when  it  is  ex-
pected, according  to  the  common
course  of  humanity,  that  people  must
leave  a; id  go  into  another  state  of


existepce.  For  quite  a  Ions:  time  it
has  been  known  by  his  more  inti-
mate friends  that  be  was  shortly  to
leave,  1  visiter!  him  not  long  ago
myself*  and  had  a  very  pleasant
intervfw  with  him,  and  since  then
I  never  thought  of  his  living  long  ;
in  fact  I  expected  to  attend  his
funeral  as  we  are  now  doing.  But
there  was  no  compunction  oj feeling
— no  desire  to  continue  to  live  ;  but
he  felt  avS  though  he  had  accomplish-
ed the  work  that  was  assigned  him.
Speaking  to  him,  as  1  sometimes  do
to  our  aired  brethren  on  some  occa-
sions,  I  said,  u  Well,  Brother  Dim-
ick,  you  are  about  leaving,  anyV when
you  goxany  my  best  respects  Do  our
friend/Nfho  are  already  there,  and
tell  them  1  will  continue  to  do  the
best  I  cati  in  the  hope  of  by  and  by
meeting  with  them,1'  And  that  is
about  the  way  that  I  look  at  these
things.  We  have  our  entries  into
the  world,  our  struggles  in  the  world,
and  when  weeret  through  with  these,
and  the  weary  wheels  of  life  stan<f
still  1 1  it- n  we  pass  into  another  state
of  existence.  The  Gospel  lias  re-
vealed to  us  so  nit1  of  the  most  glori-
ous, exalting,  ennobling  and  encou-
raging principles  ;  and  when  we  are
in  possession  of  these  principles  and
the  ladings  they  produce,  there  is  no


terror  in  the  approach  of  death.  I
have  seen  the  time  my  .-elf  when  I
could  have  died  jusr  as  ea>y  M  not
il  my  time  had  e*nue.  ami  would  ju>t
as  boon  have  done  so  as  not.  ami  1
do  not  feel  much  otherwise  to-day.

There  is  something  very  interest-
ing in  all  the  affairs  of  human  life,
especially  is  there  associated  with  us
as  a  people.  Brother  Huntington
ha*  been  with  us  for  a  great  many
years,  and  has  pas  set!  through  many
trying  scenes  with  the  church  in
Missouri  and  elsewhere,  and  while
they  are  not  of  the  most  pleasant
nature  to  contemplate,  at  the  same
time  they  serve  to  show  the  faithful-
ness and  integrity  of  these  wTho  have
been  associated  with  them.  I  see
around  me  a  good  many  of  the  bre-
thren whoby  experience #kuow  all
about  this*  things,  and  1  .see  too
that  their  hau,  like  mine,  is  getting
— I  will  not  call  i!*  gray,  but  a  little
w  hite.  Some  people  felt  sorry  for
us  when  enduring  these  things,  but
we  did  not  feel  sorry  for  ourselves,
nor  do  we  to  day.  Some  felt  as
though  it  was  impossible  to  bear  up
under  the  continued  struggles  that
we  had  to  pass  through  ;  but  the
Latter-day  Saints  had  no  such  feel-
ings.. They  reflected  upon  the  fu-
ture and  upon  those  grrat  principles
of  eternal  life  which  God  had  given
unto  them,  and  these  thoughts  stim-
ulate us  with  hope  and  joy  to-day  ;  j
and  its  the  effervescent  affairs  of
time  slide  and  pass  away  the  Saints
uf  God  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that
an  inheritance  w  hich  is  incorruptible,
utidefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,
IS  reserved  in  the  heavens  tor  them.
And  thev  feel  also  that  thev  have
been  called,  ami  chosen,  and  elected
by  the  Almighty  to  help  to  establish
his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  to  intro-
duce among  men  those  principles
that  exist  in  the  eternal  worlds  and
to  maintain  them  by  the  Spirit,  the


pnwer  and  strength  of  the  'ivh.uGod.
The!  I  eel  tl.at  thev  have  ;i  work*  to
perform,  ami  doing  that  w  ork  they
realize  that  (J oil  is  with  them  a. id
that  all  vnll  lie  right,  whether  it
relates  to  this  world  or  the  world  to
come  ;  that  is  the  feeling  which  the
I  ]  of  the  Son  of  God  inspires  in
the  hearts  of  those  who  live  up  to
its  requirements,  obey  its  demands,
and  fulfil  the  various  duties  devolv-
ing upon  them.

It  is  not  with  them  simply  a  per-
sonal matter.  The  Latter-day  Saints
feel  as  though  they  occupy  a  peculiar
position  in  t lie  world— that  God  has
selected  them  Irorn  among  the  na-
tions of  the  earth  and  gathered  them
together  that  he  might  place  his
name  among  them  ;  and  that  in  the
coming  struggle,  in  the  great  revolu-
tions that  shall  transpire  upon  the  face
of  the  earth,  it  will  he  for  them  to  man*
age,  to  direct,  to  control  and  adjust,
and  under  the  influence  and  guidance
of  the  Spirit  of  the  li  ving  God,  to  pro-
mulgatetlie  principlesuf  eternal  truth
to  ;ui  peoi  >h\  that  aU  mankind  may
have  the  opportunity  of  listening  to
the  great  and  glorious  principles
that  God  has  revealed  to  them,  that
they  may  he  inducted  into  the  laws
of  life  and  comprehend  the  principles
of  truth  as  thev  exist  in  the  bosom

w

of  I  Hid  :  mnl  holding  the  priesthood
in  all  its  various  forms,  organizations
an  I  powers,  they  feel  that  they  are
associate')  with  the  priesthood  on  the
other  side  of  the  vail,  who  are  inter
est+*.|  in  t :  eir  welfare,  in  I  he  progress
of  the  work  in  wltich  thev  are  en-
ga^ed,  add  in  the  accomplishment
of  the  purposes  which  dod  has  de-
signed from  before  the  commence-
ment of  the  world.  This  is  the
kind  of  feeling  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  inspired  with  who  com*
prebend  their  true  position.  And
hence  there  are  organizations  of
High  Priests,  Seventies,  Elder*  and


140


.TOriiNAl.  OK  IHseorRRRR.


others  whose  duty  it  is  to  go  to  the
nations  of  the  earth  to  proclaim  to
all  peoples  the  glad  tidings  of  salva-
tioiL  And  whilst  men  ignorautlyiy
ami  without  knowledge*  seek  M]
persecute,  prosed  be  amrXin  lerfere
with  the  rights  of  Israel,  the  God
of  Israel  stands  forth  as  their
defender  and  will  protect  them  un-
der all  circumstances,  and  every
arm  that  is  raised  against  them
will  fall,  and  every  power  that  is
marshalled  against  them  will  crumble
to  pieces,  for  he  will  assuredly  take
care  of  his  people,  and  protect  them
iu  every  emergency.

And  when  we  comprehend  these
things,  we  realize  that  we  are  here
not  to  do  our  will,  hut  the  will  of
the  Father  who  sent  us.  We  are
here  to  introduce  those  eternal  prin-
ciples t  hat  exist  in  the  bosom  of  the
Almighty  ;  we  are  here  to  build  up
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth,  and  to  form  a  nu-
cleus through  which  and  by  which
the  <  lod  of  heaven  can  work,  oper-
ate, lead,  dictate,  and  control  the
affairs  of  ail  men.  He  has  intn>
duced  a  little  leaven  which  will  by
and  by  leaven  the  whole  lump.
And  although  wars,  commotions,
trouble^  difflcu  I  ties,  bloodshed,
plagues,  pestilence  and  famine  will
stalk  over  the  earth,  the  nations
totter  ami  fall,  thrones  be  cast  down
and  the  powers  of  the  earth  be
shaken,  yet  God  will  protect  Israel,
he  will  maintain  his  people,  if  they
will  cleave  to  hirn  and  obey  his
laws  and  keep  his  commandments  ;
a; id  we  are  here  to  introduce  and
establish  these  heavenly  principles
that  exist  with  ( Jod,  and  to  teach
the  principles  of  life  to  the  people,
that  all  mankind  may  have  the  op-
portunity of  hearing  and  knowing
of  the  great  things  that  God  has
revealed  for  the  salvation  of  the
human  family. We  are  here,  then,


few  the  accomplishment  of  thest
things.  We  are  hen?  not  only  to
proclaim  salvation  to  the  living,  not
only  to  introduce  the  principles  of
law,  and  government,  and  religion,
and  everything  calculated  to  exalt
and  ennoble  man  upon  the  earth,
until  the  kingdoms  of  this  earth
shall  grow  and  increase,  and  become
the  kingdom!  of  our  God  and  his
Christ,  but  we  are  here  also  to  re-
deem the  dead,  to  build  temples
and  administer  therein  and  to  ac-
complish all  the  various  works  that
God  requires  us  as  his  servants  to
attend  to.  And  when  one  after  ano-
ther of  our  friends  passes  away,  what
of  it?  It  isonlv  the  ordinary  course
of  nature,  and  it  makes  very  little
difference  whether  a  man  be  on  this
side  of  the  vail  or  on  the  other.
Brother  Dimick  has  gone  where
paralysis  cannot  strike  him  any
more,  where  sorrow  and  sighing
with  him  are  passed,  and  where
everything  is  pleasant,  joyous  and
happifying,  and  where  he  can  re-
joice with  his  brethren  who  have
gone  before  him.  Do  we  feel  to
sorrow  because  of  the  change  1  Not
not  in  the  least.  We  feel  about  this
as  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  did
in  years  gone  by,  when  leaving  your
friends  and,  perhaps  families,  to
gather  to  Zion,  and  as  your  Iriends
did  in  seeing  you  take  your  depar-
ture. They  would  shake  you
heartily  by  the  hand  and  say :
"  Well,  I  am  sorry  you  are  going
and  yet  I  am  glad,  and  1  will  try  to
follow  you  as  soon  as  I  can  "  That
is  about  the  feeling,  It  is  an  ordeal
that  God  has  placed  upon  all  men,
and  we  have  got  to  meet  it,  and
having  met  it,  like  all  other  things,
we  are  prepared  for  what  follows.

But  let  us  speak  of  the  living,  for
it  is  with  those  actualities  we  have
now  to  do  in  relation  to  things  that
are  transpiring. Sometimes  people


will  say,  44  Don't  you  feel  a  little
scared  about  things  now?"  referring
to  inimical  legislation.  Not  ranch  ;
at  least  I  do  not.  I  do  not  know
that  it  makes  my  knees  tremble
much.  1  feel  as  pleasant,  joyuu*,
cumfortahle  and  happy  today  as  at
any  other  time  ;  all  is  right.  Men
cannot  do  as  they  please.  God  rules
in  the  heavens  ;  and  the  Prophet
has  said,  *' Surely  the  wrath  ul
man  shall  praise  thee,  and  the  re-
mainder of  wrath  shalt  thou  re-
ft train/1  It  is  His  duty  to  take  care
of  His  Saints,  and  why  need  we
trouble  much  about  it  1  We  have
children,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  take
care  of  them  ;  and  it  appears  that
they  are  not  much  concerned  where
their  dinner  or  their  clothes  come
from ;  they  believe  that  **  daddy"
will  take  care  of  that.  !

As  regards  brother  Dimick,  it  is
all  right  with  him.  I  would  say  to
him,  "  Peace  to  his  ashes,"  and  1
would  say  to  his  family  and  friends,
"  Be  comforted,  peace  be  multiplied
to  you,  and  have  confidence  in  God
and  all  will  be  right,1'  And  by  and
by  you  will  pass  along,  and  we  will
come  and  see  you  if  you  do  not
come  and  see  us ;  that  is,  we  will
bury  you  if  you  do  not  bury  us
first.  And  by  and  by  we  will  all
be  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  sing-
ing "  Hallelujah,  hallelujah,  the
Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth."

Let  us  seek  to  do  right  That  is
the  main  thing  for  us  Saints  to  do.
I  do  not  fear  the  world,  nor  any  of
its  affairs  or  influences,  or  powers,
or  any  of  its  intrigues,  nor  any-,
thing  it  can  devise  ;  for  God  will
take  care  of  his  pf  ople  if  they  do
right.  The  only  fear  that  I  have
is,  that  people  will  forsake  their
God,  and  lose  faith  in  him  and  his
promises,  and  be  found  serving  the
evil  one  instead  of  serving  the  Lord.
If  we  fear  God  and  keep  his  coin- :


mandnients,  live  our  religion,  and
pursue  a  proper  course,  all  will  be
well  with  us  in  time  and  through

eternity.

Brother  Huntington  for  many
yeais  was  assutriaf o t  with  the  Migti
Council  :  he  has  ^-one  now  toa^*oci
ate  with  the  councils  above,  and
with  the  various  organizations  of
priest  hood  that  are  eternal,  endless
and  everlasting.  Ami  we,  by  and
by.  will  follow  to  join  our  quorums,
our  friends  and  associates  who  have
gone  before.

I  am  reminded  of  an  item  in  Bro-
ther LHmick's  written  request,  de-
siring that  only  his  good  deeds
should  be  spoken  of  at  his  funeral,
and  also  of  a  remark  by  Brother
Taylor,  in  referring  to  it,  that  we
should  not  speak  anything  but  good
of  our  friends  whether  living  or
dead.  I  am  really  astonished  some-
times to  witness  the  hard  feelings
and  rancor  that  exist  among  men.
They  come — I  do  not  know  when
they  come  from  ;  yes,  I  do  too,
they  come  from  beneath.  The
fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  love,
peace,  joy,  gentleness,  long-suffering,
kindness,  affection,  and  everything
that  is  good  and  amiable.  The
fruits  of  the  spirit  of  the  devil  are
envy,  hatred,  malice,  irritableness,
everything  that  tends  to  destroy
mankind,  and  to  make  them  feel
uncomfortable  and  unhappy.  The
fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  love,
and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost ;  and  the  man  that  says  he
loves  God  and  hateth  his  brother,
is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him,
I  do  not  care  who  he  may  be,  or
what  his  name,  or  where  he  lives.
This  is  the  way  I  read  the  Scrip-
ture, and  the  way  ia^Gospel  teaches
me.  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know
that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have
love  one  to  another/1  Even  an  out-
side poet  has  sung :


142


Ji  'CRXAh  OF  DISCOURSES


*■  Th^n  »p  nk  no  ill.  a  kindly  word
Can  ncvei  I^ave  as  ing  fa-hind, "  etc.

L^t  ut>  be  irovornpil  by  these  princi-
pies,  And  cleave  to  eveiytlii nj;  that
is  ennobling,  that  we  may  be  asso-
ciate* 1  together  in  the  bonds  of
fraternity  love  anil  affection,  live

if  '  #

our  religion,  keep  God's  command-
ments, and  cultivate  his  holy  Spirit,
arid  the  spirit  of  kindness,  affection,
love  ami  fraternity  among  ourselves  J
so  that  when  we  grt  through  with
our  affairs  on  this  earth,  we  may
meet  with  joy  all  those  with  whom


we  have  associated  on  the  parlh
below.  *J -iXfW-' w jL '  %

God  bless  the  family  of  Brother
Huntington — his  wives  and  children
and  grandchildren,  and  all  pertain-
ing to  him.  To  his  children  I  would
Bay;  follow  the  example  of  your
father,  and  God  will  bless  you  and
save  you  ultimately  with  him  in  his
kingdom.  And  may  God  help  us
all  to  be  bumble  ami  diligent  in
keeping  his  commandments,  that  we
may  be  saved  in  his  kingdom,  in
the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

DeLIYEHK* IN TH8 NoRTH BRANCH MEETING RoOM, OF  TH  R  LONDOH

f

COf*TKRENCK, ON  S UN DAY KvKXLNO, MARCH  9TH,  1879,


(Reported  by  Joseph  May,  of  Sheffield.)


I


It  is  with  pleasure,  brethren  and
sisters,  that  1  rise  before  this  small
assembly  to  address  them  upon  such
subjects  as  may  be  put  into  my
heart  However  much  learning  and
information  may  be  in  the  possession
of  a  speaker  it  does  not  matter,  God
is  able,  by  his  Spirit,  to  make  use  of
the  most  unlearned,  if  they  will  but
seek  unto  him,  and  have  faith  in
him,  that  he  can  speak  through
them  to  the  edification  of  the  people
who  hear. We  have  a  vast  amount


of  information  which  the  Lord  has
revealed  from  on  high  in  different
peri  oils  of  the  world's  history,  as
well  as  in  our  own  day ;  informa-
tion that  is  of  the  greatest  import-
ance to  the  human  family  ;  informa-
tion that  has  relation  to  our  eternal
happiness  and  welfare  in  the  world
to  come,  if  we  can  but  obtain  enough
of  the  snirit  of  truth  to  impart  that
information  to  our  minds.

We,  Latter-day  Saints,  are  living
in  a  peculiar  age  of  the  world  ;  we


fttSCOURSE  BY  ELDER  O.  PRATT.


afre  called  by  the  Almighty,  by  new
revelation.  We  have  not  taken  this
name  upon  ourselves,  it  is  a  name
the  Lord  gave  by  direct  revelation  j
through  the  prophet  and  seer,  Joseph
Smith.  The  Lord  spoke  to  him*  as
he  always  did  to  tho^e  who  were
sent  forth  to  build  up  Ids  Church
on  the  earth  ■  hence,  this  Church
has  not  been  built  upon  the  opini-
ons of  men,  neither  upon  the  learn*
ing  of  men,  neither  upon  the  doc-
trines and  covenants  of  men  ;  but
in  the  very  beginning,  before  there
were  any  Latter-day  Saints,  or  true
Church,  the  Lord  gave  a  revelation
regarding  the  time  when  the  Church
should  be  organized,  A  few  had
believed,  a  few  had  repented,  a  few
had  been  baptized  for  the  remission
of  their  sins,  and  a  few  bad  been
confirmed,  by  the  laying  on  of
hands,  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  They  were  organized  into
a  Church  by  commandment,  and  on
the  same  day  that  they  were  thus
organized,  the  Lord  pointed  out  the
duties  of  the  members,  and  also  of
the  officers  of  the  Church.  It  was
ako  revealed  that  in  the  Church  of
the  living  God  there  should  be  in-
spir  d  a  >ostles.  We  did  not  assume
the  apustleship  ourselves,  we  did
not  pick  up  this  information  in  and
of  ourselves,  but  the  Lord  gave  re-
velation  respecting  it  Ami,  in-
deed, there  is  nut  one  doctrine  be-
lieved in  or  practiced  by  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  but  what  the  Lord  our
God  has  given  revelation  upon  that
subject  or  that  doctrine.  In  the
first  place,  before  the  establishment
of  the  Church,  the  Lord  intending
to  set  up  his  kingdom  again  on  the
earth,  made  preparation  for  it  by
raising  up  a  boy— a  young  man,  un-
learned in  the  schools  of  theology.
This  youth  was  inspired  from  on
high.  God  sent  his  holy  angels  to
minister  to  him,  and  gave  him  power


to  bring  forth  a  sacred  rem  id  nf  a
branch  of  the  hou*e  of  Israel,  a
record,  in  other  words,  of  a  remnant
of  Israel,  who  inhabited  the  ^reat
western  continent  Their  records
were  brought  forth  by  this  boy,
this  young,  unlearned,  uneducated
youth.  He  did  not  attempt  to
establish  the  Church  while  transla-
ting  those  records.  This  was  the
first  duty  required  at  his  hands —
namely,  to  translate  from  tlie  plates
i  of  gold,  which  he  discovered,  by
the  aid  of  an  instrument,  called  the
Urim  and  Thummim.  This  sacred
instrument  was  used  in  ancient
times  to  inquire  of  the  Lord.  This
young  man  continued  the  work  of
translation  from  the  autumn  of  the
year  1827,  until  1829,  as  time  and
circumstances  would  permit.  He
was  a  man  whose  father  was  in
poverty,  and  consequently  a  portion  i
of  his  time  had  to  be  occupied  by
himself  in  laboring  to  obtain  the
necessary  comforts  of  life  ;  but  he,
after  some  two  years  and  a  half,
succeeded  in  finishing  and  printing
the  record,  a  record  which  contains
about  600  pages.  After  this  record
was  translated,  and  the  manuscript
placed  in  the  hands  of  a  certain
printer  in  Palmyra,  State  of  New
York,  and  after  it  had  been  printed,
ami  the  Lord  had  prepared  all  things,
he  then  gave  commandment  to  this
young  man  to  organize  the  Church,
that  is,  to  establish  the  Latter-day
kingdom  spoken  of  by  Daniel,  the
prophet,  on  the  earth,  and  gave  the
name  by  which  the  same  should  be
called  —  namely,  "  The  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints."

In  regard  to  our  forms  of  Church
government,  we  are  also  guided  by
written  and  printed  revelations.  We
were  not  left  to  ourselves,  to  conjec-
ture, or  merely  to  base  our  opinion,
in  regard  to  what  the  various  duties
of  the  officers  of  the  Church  are,  but


144


JOCRNAL  OK  DISCOURSE*.


the  Lord  did  distinctly  point  out  the
duty  of  an  apostle,  telling  us  that
that  was  one  of  the  officers  of  the
Church,  that  it  is  his  duty  to  re-


ceive itneuUioa—  u  tcctnve  cominu

trtcatious  from  the  heavens,  as  the
apostle*  did  in  ancient  times,  and  to
a  Un truster  in  all  of  the  ordinances
ol  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
tii  regulate  the  Church  and  watch
over  the  same*  and  to  administer  in
all  spiritual  things*  The  Lord  also
pointed  out  the  duties  of  Elders,
and  of  the  lesser  priesthood.  Now
we  should  not  have  known  anything
about,  what  is  termed,  the  "lesser
priesthood,"  if  it  had  not  been  for
new  revelation.  We  read  about  two
priesthoods  in  the  Bible;  one  was
called,  the  44  higher  priesthood"  the
priesthood  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chizedek;  the  other  was  called,  the
u  lesser  priesthood,"  or  the  priest-
hood after  the  order  of  Aaron,  the
Levitical  priesthood,  some  would
term  it.  But  we  knew  nothing  about
these  things  only  so  far  as  the  Lord
revealed  them-  There  were  pone  to
take  us  by  the  hand,  and  say  to  us,
44  we  have  the  priesthood  of  the
Church,  we  can  teach  you  what
the  duties  of  the  respective  officers
are,"  but  these  things  had  to  be
learned  anew.

The  Lord  did  not  see  proper,  at
the  first,  to  give  us  the  fulness  of
the  authority  that  he  afterwards  re-
vealed. He  gave  us  the  lesser  priest-
hood And  how  did  he  doitl  It
was  not  on  the  earth.  You  might
have  searched  all  the  various  Chris-
tian churches,  built  up  among  all  the
nations,  and  you  could  not  have
found  among  any  of  them,  what  is
termed,  the  "  lesser  priesthood,"  af-
ter the  order  of  Aaron,  and  yet  we
are  told,  in  the  Jewish  record,  (the
Bible,)  that  the  priesthood  of  Aaron
is  an  u  everlasting  priesthood/1  that  it
was  intended  to  be  continued  while


the  sun  and  the  moon  should  endurs
— that  is,  when  men  were  acknowl
edged  sufficiently  worthy,  to  have
that  priesthood  on  the  earth.  It
lias  never  died  out.  It  lias  been  in
the  heavens  all  the  time,  Death
takes  no  authority  of  a  divine  na-
i  ure  from  ary  human  being,  when
it  is  once  conferred  upon  him,  if  he
is  faithful  until  death;  consequently
there  were  persons  in  the  heavens
who  lieh  1  that  priesthood,  but  no  one
upon  the  earth,  no  one  that  ever
pretended  to  have  it,  among  the
Christian  denominations.  And  the
Jewish  people,  who  pretend  to  have
the  Levitical  priesthood,  rejected
and  do  still  reject  the  true  Messiah,
consequently,  their  priesthood  is
null  and  without  authority,  and
they  could  not,  therefore,  administer
baptism,  for  the  remission  of  sing,  as
John  the  Baptist  did,  the  forerun-
ner of  Christ,  who  held  that  priest-
hood.

There  was  no  other  way,  there-
fore, for  this  priesthood  to  be  estab-
lished again  on  the  earth,  only  for  it
to  be  sent  down  from  heaven;  and
the  Lord  did  this.  Without  it,  all
of  our  ministrations  would  have
heen  in  vain.  We  could  not  have
officiated,  without  some  kind  of
authority,  or  priesthood*  How  did
the  Lord  restore  it  1  In  answer  to
humble,  solemn  prayer,  before  the
Church  arose,  the  Lord  sent  his
angel,  J  ohn  the  Baptist,  to  two  of
his  servants,  namely,  the  translator
of  the  work,  and  also  the  scribe  who
was  writing  from  his  mouth.  This
angel  came,  and  laid  his  hands  upon
their  heads,  and  ordained  them,  un-
to the  same  priesthood  which  he
himself  held*  They  were  also  in-
structed, by  that  angel,  concerning
the  nature  of  the  duties  of  that
priesthood.  They  were  told  that
they  should  baptize  the  people,  as
John  did  in  ancient  times,  for  the


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  0.  PRATT.


remission  of  sins,  but  they  had  no
power,  by  this  priesthood,  to  lay
their  hands  upon  baptized  believers,
that  they  might  receive  the  Holy
Ghost;  that  authority  did  not  belong
to  the  lesser  priesthood,  but  requir-
ed a  greater  power  than  the  Leviti-
cat  priesthood,  to  administer  that
divine  ordinance,  for  the  baptism  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  Therefore  these
persons  ootild,  as  yet,  only  baptize
in  water ;  but  they  sought  diligent-
ly, knowing  from  the  Bible,  and  al-
so from  the  Book  of  Mormon,  which
they  were  translating,  that  the  lay-
ing on  of  the  hands  for  the  uift  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  was  a  sacred  and
holy  ordinance,  and  that  without  it,
the  Church  could  not  be  organized
on  the  earth.  Knowing  this,  they
pleaded  before  the  heaven?,  that
God  would  condescend  to  give  them
a  higher  priesthood,  that  would  en-
able them  also  to  administer  in  those
higher  Gospel  ordinances*  The  Lord
heart!  their  prayers,  and  three
heavenly  personages  were  sent  to
them.  What  authority  did  these
three  angelic  personages  hohU  They
held  the  apostleship.  They  were
the  ancient  apostles,  Peter,  James
and  John,  three  of  the  most  con-
spicuous of  the  ancient  apostles.
They  were  sent  as  ministering  angels.
They  also  conferred  upon  them  the
apostleship.  The  apostleship  holds
this  higher  priesthood,  after  the  or-
der of  Melchizedek,  a  priesthood
greater  than  that  of  Aaron  ;  and
hence,  when  they  received  the
apostleship,  or  this  divine  authority,
they  were  commanded  to  call  the
baptized  believers  together,  and  lay
their  hands  upon  them,  and  con-
firm upon  them  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost.

In  this  way  the  Church  was  or-
ganized, on  the  6th  day  of  April,
1830,  in  Fayette,  Seneca  Co.,  New
York,  or  rather  began  to  be  organ-
No.  10.


ized,  for  there  are  many  things  be*

sides  these  first  principles  of  the
Gospel  I  have  named,  that  are  essen-
tial duties  necessary  to  be  practised
amongst  the  people  of  God.  After
they  were  thus  organized  and  con-
firmed by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands,
and  became  members  of  the  Church,
then  it  became  necessary,  that  there
should  be  other  officers,  as  leaders,
and  guides,  and  persons,  holding  dif-
ferent authority,  to  administer  in
their  respective  callings,  among  the
people  and  hence,  deacons,  teachers
and  elders  were  given,  and  after  a
white  bishops. Now,  j^ve  had  but


little  knowledge  of  the  duties  of
bishops. We  knew  what  the  sec*
tariau  religionists  expressed,  in  re-
gard to  bishops,  that  they  were  to
administer  principally  in  spiritual
things,  but  the  Lord  gave  us  alto-
gether a  different  view  of  this  sub-
ject, from  what  we  had  learned  from
sectarian  religion. H  e  gave  by  rev-
elation, the  duties  of  bishops,  that
they  were  to  hold  the  presidency  of
the  Aaronic  priesthood,  that  they
were  to  administer  in  all  temporal
things,  and  not  spiritual  things  only.
And  finally  other  officers  were  point-
ed out,  from  time  to  time,  as  the
Church  increased  and  among  these,
the  Lord  had  told  his  servants,  about
a  year  before  the  organization  of  the
Church,  that  there  would  be  Twelve
Apostles  appointed,  and  that  the
Lord  should  designate  to  them,  who
these  Twelve  Apostles  should  be.
These  Twelve,  in  due  time,  were
called  and  ordained,  by  the  com-
mandment of  the  Almighty,  and  they
also  had  their  duties  specified  by
revelation. Their  duties  were  more
particularly,  to  see  that  the  gospel
was  preached  to  every  nation,  and
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  up-
on the  face  of  our  globe;  first,  to
carry  it  to  the  Gentile  nations,  and
after  we  had  completed  our  mission

Vol.  XX


H6  JOURNAL  OF

to  the  Gentiles,  then  our  calling  and
duties  would  be  to  the  house  of  J  s-
rael  scattered  in  the  for  quarters  of
the  earth.

We  have  been  now  almost  one
half  a  century,  in  fulfilling  the  first
part  of  our  duty,  namely,  in  publish-
ing the  Gospel  to  the  gentile  nations.  |

"We  have  sought  diligently,  year
after  year,  to  publish  glad  tidings  of
great  joy,  to  all  the  different  peoples
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  so  far  as
the  governments,  and  the  laws  of  the
respective  governments,  of  these
nations  would  permit  the  Gospel  uf
the  Church  of  Christ,  to  be  estab-
lished amongst  them.  We  have
sought  diligently,  therefore,  to  per-
form our  mission  to  the  Gentiles*
We  have  not  gone  to  the  house  of
Israel,  because  that  was  not  the  com-
mandment We  were  commanded
of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  preach  to
the  Gentiles  first,  to  warn  them,
to  testify  to  them  that  their  times
are  nearly  fulfilled  ;  and  that  then
the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  should
be  turned  from  among  them,  and
transferred  over  to  the  house  of
Israel.  We  have  been  faithful,  I
believe,  in  England,  in  Wales,  in
Scotland,  in  Ireland,  and  upon  the
Continent,  among  the  European
nations,  so  far  as  their  laws  would
permit,  and  also  among  the  various
States  of  the  American  union,  and
in  the  British  dominions,  the  Cana-
das.  And  we  have  tried  to  be  faith-
ful, in  carrying  out  our  testimony
also  to  the  British  Colonies  in  India;
and  also  in  the  Southern  portions
of  Africa;  and  also  at  Gibraltar,  and
in  South  Australia,  and  New  Zea-
land and  in  all  those  various  coun-
tries, trying  to  warn  the  Gentile
-nations,  concerning  that  which  the
Lord  our  God  is  beginning  to  do
here  on  the  earth.  Having  estab-
lished his  kingdom,  he  offers  it  first
£p  these  Gentile  nations,  if  they  will


DISCOURSES.

receive  it ;  and  when  they  shall  ac-
count themselves  unworthy  of  the
kingdom,  unworthy  of  eternal  life,
unworthy  of  the  message  which  God
has  sent  to  them,  and  shall  perse-
cute his  servants  and  his  people  all
the  day  long,  and  shall  close  up
their  sanctuaries,  their  Churches,
their  chapels,  their  meeting  houses,
and  their  places  of  worship  against
this  message,  and  when  it  can  no
longer  tfnd  place  among  them,  so  as
to  bring  them  to  a  knowledge  and
understanding  of  the  truth,  the  Lord
I  will,  after  a  while,  designate  by  re-
velation, and  say  unto  his  servants,
"  It  is  enough.  You  have  been
faithful  in  laboring  in  my  vineyard,
for  the  last  time  "  for  it  was  the  de-
cree of  heaven,  that  this  shall  be  the
last  time,  that  he  will  labor  in  his
vineyard.  It  is  the  eleventh  hour,
the  last  warning  that  will  be  iriven
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  first  to
the  Gentiles,  and  then  to  the  House
of  Israel

When  they  shall  render  themsel-
ves unworthy  of  this  great  and  joy-
ful message,  that  lias  been  presented
j  to  them,  the  servants  of  God  will,
as  I  have  alreadv  stated,  have  it  re-
vealed  to  them,  to  confine  no  longer
their  mission  to  the  Gentiles  ;  but
they  will  receive  a  commission  from
the  Almighty  to  go  to  the  scattered
remnants  of  the  House  of  Israel,
wherever  they  may  be  located.

The  American  Indians  are  the  de-
scendants of  a  remnant  of  the  tribe
ot  Joseph  with  a  mixture  of  the  de-
scendants of  one  of  the  kings  of  Is-
rael of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ;  hence,
Judah  and  Joseph  are  mixed  to-
gether, and  God  will  send  his  ser-
vants among  them,  and  they  will  re-
ceive the  records  of  their  fathers.
They  will  believe  in  those  records,
which  their  forefathers  kept  by  in-
spiration, and  believe  in  the  revela-
tions that  are  contained  therein.  It


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  O.  PRATT.


H7


is  their  Bible,  the  same  as  the  Old
and  New  Testaments  are  the  Bible
of  the  Jews,  that  lived  at  Jerusalem.

They,  the  Indians,  will  not  reject
it,  but  obey  it,  and  practically  re-
ceive it,  and  become  a  powerful
branch  of  the  House  of  Israel.  The
servants  of  the  Lord  will  also  be
«ent  to  the  J ews,  some  of  whom  are
here  in  London. Some  are  mingled
with  the  various  nations  of  Europe.
Many  hundreds  of  thousands  of
them  are  in  Asia  and  among  all
nations. These  Jews must  be
warned,  when  we  get  through  with
the  Gentiles  ;  and  they  will  begin
to  believe  in  Christ,  according  to
the  prophecies,  that  are  contained
in  the  Stick  of  Joseph. They  will
begin  to  believe  in  the  true  Messiah
and  gather  unto  their  land,  the  land
of  Palestine;  and  there  will  be  many
of  the  people  of  Israel,  that  are  scat-
tered upon  the  Isles  of  the  sea, — on
the  Pacific  Isles, — who  will  receive
the  work  ;  and  the  Lord  will  per-
form in  their  midst,  miracles,  and
signs,  and  wonders,  and  make  bare
his  arm,  just  as  is  prophesied  by
Isaiah  in  bringing  about  his  cove-
nants to  the  House  of  Israel  And
he  will  make  bare  his  arm  very  dif-
ferently from  what  he  has  done
among  the  Gentiles  ;  for  among  the
Gentiles,  he  has,  it  is  true,  healed
the  sick  ;  he  has  opened  the  eyes  of
the  blind;  he  has  caused  the  tongue
of  the  dumb,  in  some  instances,  to
«sing ;  and  he  has  healed  them  of
various  diseases;  and  there  has  been
a  certain  degree  of  the  power  and
gifts  of  the  ancient  Gospel,  mani-
fested as  in  ancient  times,  among
the  ancient  Gentile  Churches.  But
I  do  not  call  this  the  making  bare  of
the  arm  of  the  Almighty  in  so  great
fulness  as  it  is  predicted  in  the
Jewish  record,  the  Bible* It  is
making  bare  his  arm  in  some  small
degree. And  we  'have  .great  reason  |


to  be  thankful,  when  he  does  hear
the  prayers  of  his  servants,  when
he  does  heal  those  who  are  sick,
when  he  does  show  forth  his  power
j  as  in  ancient  times,  in  these  spiri-
tual gifts  and  blessings,  which  he-
long  especially  to  the  Gospel  of  his
j  Son.  But  when  I  speak  of  the  Lord
making  bare  his  arm  in  the  eyes  of
all  the  nations,  I  have  reference  to
that  what  which  is  predicted  in  this
book,  called  the  Bible,  when  the  waters
will  again  be  divided,  and  Israel
will  go  through  dryshod,  as  they  did
in  ancient  times. When  the  great
deep  will  have  a  highway  cast  up
through  the  midst  of  it  and  Israel
will  pass  through  it  dryshod.  When
I  mention  about  the  Lord  making
bare  his  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all  the
nations,  I  have  reference  to  that  tre-
mendous power,  that  is  specified  by
the  Ancient  prophets,  w  hich  will  be
made  manifest  before  all  people,  all
governments,  nations  and  countries
upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.
Israel  will  return  with  power.  Will
God  be  with  them  when  they  re-
turn ? He  will. He  will  go  as
literally  before  their  Camp,  as  they
go  out  from  among  the  nations,  as
he  did  in  ancient  times*  when  he
brought  them  out  from  that  one
single  nation  of  the  Egyptians.  Then
there  was  a  display  of  great  power,
great  signs,  great  wonders.  The  Lord
condescended  to  talk  with  men  from
heaven.  He  descended  upon  Mount
Sinai  and  his  voice  was  heard,  like
the  voice  of  thunder,  by  the  numer-
ous multitudes  of  Israel  that  were
gathered  at  the  foot  of  the  mount.

Upon  that  mountain  he  manifest-
ed his  power  by  causing  it  to  trem-
ble exceedingly,  his  lightnings  and
thunders  were  seen  and  heard  and
therefore  this  was  making  bare  his
arm  in*  very  deed :  and  from  that
day  >to  this,  Israel  when  scattered
among  the  nations,  and  when  thtf


148


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES*


wish  to  speak  of  the  greatness  of
their  God  and  magnify  his  great
and  holy  name,  still  refer  to  the
siimsand  wonders  that  were  wrought

*****  *  ^

in  delivering  their  fathers  from  the
land  of  Egypt,  it*  dividing  the
waters  of  the  lied  Sea.  They  still
refer  to  the  cloud  they  saw  over
their  camp  by  day,  and  to  the  shin-
ing of  the  tlaming  fire  by  night.
They  still  refer  to  the  numerous
revelations,  given  to  them  while
they  so  sojourned  forty  years  in  the
wilderness.  They  still  refer  to  the
waters  of  Jordan  which  were  divid-
ed, as  they  went  into  the  land  of
Palestine.

But  that  was  only  a  display  of  the
power  of  the  Almighty  before  the
nations  that  were  in  that  immedi-
ate vicinity.  There  is  a  day  com-
ing when  this  will  be  manifested
over  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  when
the  Lord  God  shall  organize  the
camps  of  Israel  among  the  various
nations  and  bring  them  home  to
their  own  lands.

Ezekiel,  the  prophet,  being  filled
with  the  spirit  of  inspiration,  and
looking  forth  by  the  power  of  that
spirit  to  that  time  when  they  should
be  brought  back  and  assembled  into
one  body,  in  the  wilderness,  says
that  the  Lord  should  plead  with
them  face  to  face,  like  as  he  plead
with  their  fathers  in  the  wilderness
and  the  land  of  Egypt.  (See  Eze-
kiel  xx.)  So  we  see  there  is  a  day
of  power  coming,  and  day  of  won-
ders and  a  day  of  mighty  deeds,
when  the  power  of  the  Lord,  in
great  judgment,  will  be  upon  the
nations  of  the  wicked;  and  also
when  his  glory  shall  be  upon  his
covenant  people  who  shall  be  restor-
ed to  their  own  lands.  The  message
with  which  we  are  now  entrusted  is
a  part  of  the  great  and  last  warning
message  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,
first  to  the  Gentile*,  and  last  to  the


house  of  Israel.  And  when  we  get
through  warning  the  Gentiles,  the
proclamation  which  the  Lord  lias
given  us,  shall  be  delivered  to  Israel
in  the  islands  of  the  sea  and  among
the  various  nations;  and  they  shall
gather  home  to  the  land  of  their  in-
heritance. Then  Jerusalem  shall  be
redeemed  and  a  temple  established
upon  its  former  foundation  in  the
holy  land.  Then  the  nations  of  the
earth  will  see  a  fulfillment  of  our
words.  We  have  told  them  for  the
last  forty-nine  years  that  the  Lord
God  had  commenced  a  work  to  pr»
pare  the  way  before  the  face  of  l  is
coming,  to  prepare  a  people  to  en-
dure his  presence,  to  gather  his
people  from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth  into  one,  in  order  that  they
might  be  prepared,  against  the  day
when  the  veil  nf  eternity  shall  oe
rent,  and  the  voice  of  the  Lord  shall
be  heard  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.
Then  they  shall  behold  a  fulfillment
of  our  words,  they  shall  then  Know
of  a  surety,  if  they  do  not  before,
that  there  is  a  God  in  this  work,
that  he  has  commenced  a  proclama*
tion  and  message  for  the  last  time,
to  prepare  the  way  before  the  face  of
the  coming  of  his  Son  from  the
heavens.

But  before  that  great  day  shall
come,  let  me  foretell,  before  this
people,  that  which  they  may  look
for,  that  which  will  most  assuredly
come  to  pass,  and  that  which  will
eventually  cause  their  ears  to  tingle,
and  the  sound  thereof  will  caute
them  to  tremble  exceedingly,  name-
ly, the  judgments  that  are  decreed
by  the  Almighty,  to  be  poured  out
upon  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles,
that  do  not  repent

While  this  message  is  going  forth,
in  your  midst,  it  is  a  time  of  com-
parative peact,  it  is  a  time  when  the
Lord  our  God  is  granting  unto  yoa
the  proclamation  of  mercy,  and  haa


DISCOURSE  BT  ELDER  O.  PRATT.


149


given  you  peace  in  your  homes,  peace
among  yourselves;  no  civil  wars  are
raging  in  your  midst,  though  there
are  some  foreign  wars  that  occasion-
ally disturb  the  peace  of  the  people;
but  the  Lord  has  been  specially
favorable  to  the  people  of  this
island,  while  the  proclamation  has
been  sounding,  during  the  last  forty-
three  years  in  your  midst.  Bnt  this
will  not  always  continue.  You  may
be  assured,  that  there  is  a  change
coming  as  you  may  be  assured  of  the
fulfillment  of  anything  that  has  ever
been  spoken,  by  the  mouth  of  the
ancient  servants  of  God.  A  change
is  coming  over  the  political  affairs  of
these  nations.  Great  Britain  will
not  escai>e.  What  will  be  this
change?  There  will  be  various  causes
that  will  bring  it  about.  One  change
will  be  this,  which  you,  without
being  prophets,  can  by  a  little  re-
flection, understand  for  yourselves.
You  know  that  England,  for  many
3rears  past,  has  been  the  great  manu-
facturing nation  for  the  whole
world.  They  have  looked  to  you  for
your  manufactures  and  such  mer-
chandize has  been  carried  unto  all
parts  of  the  earth  ;  and  this  has
kept  your  workmen  and  poor  people
employed*  They  have  had  abun-
dance to  do  the  most  of  their  time.
You  have  sent  forth  a  vast  amount
of  your  manufactures  to  the  conti-
nent of  America,  to  the  people  of
the  United  States,  but  the  scene  is
changing;  for  any  person,  with  a
little  reflection,  can  see  that  the
change  is  already  beginning  to  come,
and  that  too  very  readily.  The  na-
tions, to  whom  you  have  exported
your  products,  are  beginning  to
manufacture  for  themselves.  This
cuts  off  the  trade  with  Great  Brit-
ain-

The  American  nation  is  beginning
to  manufacture  for  themselves,  and
not  only  themselves,  but  they  are


actually  sending  their  manufactures
to  this  little  island  ;  and  the  people
here  are  beginning  to  purchase
American  goods  and  manufacture  in
preference  to  their  own.  This  cuts
off  in  your  country  a  great  many
of  the  manufacturing  establish-
ments, and  you  have  a  surplus  popu-
lation, of  many  millions,  thrown  as
it  were  out  of  employment,  who  can
scarcely  get  sufficient  to  sustain
themselves  from  day  to  day.  Is
this  state  of  things  going  to  get
betterl  No,  it  will  not,  there  may
be  prosperous  times  for  a  short
season,  but  they  will  foon  pass
away;  and  such  times  are  coming,
such  as  this  nation  has  not  experi-
enced, neither  they,  nor  their  fore-
fathers for  many  generations.

I  might  go  on  and  tell  you  many
things,  in  relation  to  the  consequen-
ces of  people  being  thrown  out  of
employment.  I  might  portray  it,
but  I  do  not  wish  to  harrow  up  the
people,  in  regard  to  this  matter.
You  yourselves  can  see,  that  when
people  ire  pinched,  for  the  want  of
bread,  for  the  want  of  clothing,  for
the  want  of  the  necessary*  comforts
of  life,  and  are  driven  to  despera-
tion, you  can  judge  for  yourselves
what  must  be  the  state  of  things
that  will  ensue.  I  have  no  need  to  por-
tray them.  But  I  would  say  to  th  e  Lat-
ter day  Saints  who  have  been  taught
these  things  for  many  years,  gather
out  from  this  nation.  And  inasmuch
as  we  have  pointed  out  the  way  of
escape  and  shown  you  that  the  Lord
has  provided  in  regard  to  these  mat-
ters, for  all  that  will  believe  in  him,
and  repent  of  their  sins,  and  obey
the  gospel,  do  not  be  dilatory,  do
not  be  slack,  do  not  be  extravagant
in  your  expenditures,  but  strive  to
lay  up  means,  and  so  far  as  you
possibly  can,  by  being  faithful,  and
serving  the  Lord  your  God,  gather
out  from  these  countries  ;  for  a  day


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  great  tribulation  is  coming,  a  day
of  desolation,  a  day  wherein  the
country  will  be  revolutionized,  where-
in the  poor  and  the  afflicted,  and
the  needy,  will  contend  earnestly
for  the  lives  of  themselves,  and
their  little  ones,  instead  of  seeing
them  perish  by  hundreds  and  thou-
sands in  the  streets.  And  inasmuch
as  such  a  day  is  coming,  Latter-day
Saints,  it  would  be  far  better  for  you,
to  be  out  of  the  country,  than  in  it.
And  would  to  heaven  we  could
sound  this  message,  not  only  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  but  to  every
good,  upright,  honest- hearted  soul,
throughout  Great  Britain,  That
they  might  take  warning,  and  es-
cape, before  the  terrible  time  shall
come.

Now  let  me  point  out  some  other
things  which  will  occur,  before  the
coming  of  the  Sou  of  Man.  The
Lord  has  a  controversy  among  all
the  nations  of  the  Gentiles.  He
has  sent  to  them  a  warning.  He
has  sent  his  servants  to  prophesy  to
them.  He  lias  sent  them  to  preach
and  bear  record  of  the  truth.  He
has  sent  them  to  cull  upon  the  na-
tions to  repent,  both  high  and  low,
rich  and  poor,  religionist  and  non-
religionist,  priest  and  people,  for  all
of  tli em  to  repeilt  and  receive  the
Gospel  in  its  fullness,  and  not  only
to  do  this,  but  to  gather  out  from
these  nations.  Will  they  hear?  They
will  not.  We  know  they  will  not ;
but  this  does  not  justify  us  in  being
slack  in  delivering  our  message.  We
have  a  responsibility  placed  upon
us,  and  that  responsibility  we  must
fulfill,  whether  the  people  hear,  or
whether  they  forbear,  we  must  warn
them,  so  that  they  shall  not  have
any  excuse,  when  the  tribulations
shall  come  which  I  have  named.

The  Lord,  therefore  has  a  contro-
versy among  them,  the  same  as  he
had  with  the  Egyptian  nation,  with


this  difference,  that  the  Egyptians
did  not  have  the  same  length  of
time  to  consider  the  message  which
you  have.  They  only  had  a  few
days,  and  if  they  would  repent  and
receive  the  word  which  Moses  and
Aaron  delivered  to  them,  well  and
good  ;  and  only  a  short  time,  a  very
few  days  were  allowed  them  to
decide  this  matter.  You  have  had  a
portion  of  a  whole  generation.  Your
times  are  not  quite  yet  fulfilled,  and
hence  you  have  had  the  privilege  to
consider  it  from  your  childhood  up
to  middle  age,  and  some  of  you
from  middle  age  to  old  age,  to  see
whether  you  will  receive  the  fetter-
day  message  which  God  has  sent  or
not.  Now,  the  consequences  will  be,
if  you  receive  it,  you  will  save  your-
selves by  fleeing  out  from  the  midst
of  this  nation.  You  will  save  jour-
selves  and  your  children  temporally
speaking  as  well  as  spiritually.  On
the  other  hand,  if  you  do  not  re-
ceive it,  the  Lord,  who  is  long  suf-
fering, will,  after  he  has  borne  with
the  people  all  the  day  long,  with-
draw his  servants  from  your  midst.
When  that  day  shall  come  there
shall  be  wars,  not  such  wars  as  have
come  in  centuries  and  years  that  are
past  and  gone,  but  a  desolating  war.
When  I  say  desolating,  I  mean  that
it  will  lay  these  European  nations
in  waste.  Cities  will  be  left  vacated,
without  inhabitants.  The  people
will  be  destroyed  by  the  sword  of
their  own  hands.  Not  only  this  but
many  other  cities  will  be  burned ;  for
when  contending  armies  are  wrought
up  with  terrible  anger,  without  the
Spirit  of  God  upon  them,  when  they
have  not  that  spirit  of  humanity
that  now  characterizes  many  of  the
wars  amongst  the  nations,  when
they  are  left  to  themselves,  there
will  be  no  quarter  given,  no  prison-
ers taken,  but  a  war  of  destruction,
of  desolation,  of  the  burning  ©f  the


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  0.  PRATT,  151


cities  anil  villages,  until  the  land  is
laid  desolate.

That  is  another  thing  that  will
come  before  the  coming  of  the  Son
of  Man.

What  about  my  own  nation — the
American  nation  ?  What  can  I  say
more  than  I  have  said  in  times  that
are  past  1  They  have  had  a  great
desolating  Avar  :  a  war  between  the
North  and  the  South  in  which  many
hundreds  of  thousands  were  destroy-
ed. This  war  was  foretold  twenty-
eight  years  lirfure  it  took  place;
the  very  place  where  it  should  com-
mence was  marked  out  bv  the  Pro-
phet  Joseph  Smith,  that  young  man
of  whom  I  have  spoken.  By  him  it
was  designated  that  the  revolution
should  commence  in  South  Carolina,
and  it  did  so.  By  him  it  was  point-
er! out  that  this  war  would  be  great
and  terrible,  and  it  came  to  pass  al-
though twenty-eight  years  inter-
vened, before  it  commenced.  These
revelations  and  prophecies  have  benn
published  by  hundreds  nf  thousands
and  circulated  in  your  midst  here  in
Great  Britain,  The  people  are  not
altogether  ignorant  about  these  mat-
ters  ;  they  have  been  fore  warned.
But  what  about  the  American  na-
tion. That  war  that  destroyed  the
lives  of  some  fifteen  or  sixteen
hundred  thousand  people  was  no-
thing  compared  to  that  which  will
eventually  devastate  that  country.
The  time  is  not  vcrv  far  distant  in
the  future,  when  the  Lord  God  will
lay  his  hand  heavily  upon  that  na-
tion. "  How  do  you  know  this  1
inquires  one."  I  know  from  the
revelations  which  God  has  given
upon  this  subject,  I  read  these
revelations,  when  they  were  first
given.  I  waited  over  twenty-eight
years  and  saw  their  fulfilment  to  the
very  letter.  Should  I  not,  then,  ex-
pect that  the  balance  of  them  should
be  fulfilled? That  same  God  who


gave  the  revelations  to  his  servant
Joseph  Smith  in  regard  to  these
matters,  will  fulfil  every  jot  and
every  tittle  that  has  been  spoken,
concerning  that  nation.  What  then*
will  be  the  condition  of  that  peopler
when  this  great  and  terrible  war
shall  come  ?  It  will  be  very  differ-
ent from  the  war  between  the  North
and  the  South,  Do  you  wish  me  to
describe  it  ?  I  will  do  so.  It  will
be  a  war  of  neighborhood  against
neighborhood,  city  against  city,
town  against  town,  county  against
county,  state  against  state,  and  they
will  go  forth  destroying  and  being
destroyed  anrl  manufacturing  will,
in  a  great  measure,  cease,  for  a  time,
among  the  American  nation.  Why?
Because  in  these  terrible  wars,  they
will  not  be  privileged  to  manufac-
ture, there  will  be  too  much  blood-
shed — too  much  mobocracy  —  too
much  going  forth  in  bands  and  de-
stroying and  pillaging  the  land  to
suffer  people  to  pursue  any  local
vocation  with  any  degree  of  safety*
What  will  become  of  millions  of
the  farmers  upon  that  land  ?  They
will  leave  their  farms  and  they  will
remain  uncultivated,  and  they  will
Hee  before  the  ravaging  armies  from
place  to  place;  and  thus  will  they
go  forth  burning  and  pillaging  the
whole  country  ;  and  that  great  and
powerful  nation,  now  consisting  of
some  forty  millions  of  people,  will
be  wasted  away,  unless  they  repent.

Now  these  are  predictions  you
may  recortL  You  may  let  them  sink
down  into  your  hearts.  And  if  the
Lord  your  Got!  shall  permit  you  to
live,  you  will  see  my  words  fulfilled
to  the  very  letter.  They  are  not
my  words,  but  the  words  of  inspira-
tion— the  words  of  the  everlasting
God.  who  has  sent  forth  his  servants
with  this  message  to  warn  the  na-
tions of  the  earth*  The  Book  of
Mormon  contains  many  of  these


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


predictions. This  book  has  now
been  printed  forty -nine  years,  and
the  prophecies  contained  in  it  are
being  fulfilled  with  great  rapidity  j
and  every  prediction yet  in  the
future,  recorded  in  that  book,  will
be  fulfilled  literally,  according  to
the  words  that  are  spoken.  The
Lord  our  God  has  already  destroyed
two  great  and  powerful  nations  that
once  occupied the  western  hemi-
sphere, because  they  fell  into  wicked-
ness and  would  not  repent.  ^Ve
have  a  record  of  this. The  first
nation  he  brought  upon  that  hemi-
sphere, were  a  people from  the
Tower  of  Babel. They  were  led
by  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  They
were  located  upon  the  north  wing
of  that  continent,  and  they  became
a  great  and  powerful  nation.  They
inhabited  the  land  for  some  sixteen
or  seventeen  centuries  after  they
came  from  the  Tower  of  Babel
But  the  Lord  made  a  decree,  when
he  first  led  them  forth  to  that  laud,
that  if  they  or  their  descendants
should  fall  into  wickedness,  and
Mould  not  repent,  that  he  would
visit  them  with  utter  destruction.
He  did  so. About  GOO  years  before
Christ, that  great nation  were
entirely  swept  off  by  the  judgments
of  Almighty  God,  and  their  bones
were  left  bleaching  upon  the  plains
and  mountains  of  that  land — left
unburied  by  the  nu  me  runs  armies
that  went  1orth  slaying  ami  being
slain, and another colony  was
brought  from  Jerusalem  in  their
stead,  being  a  remnant  of  the  tribe
of  Joseph, The  same  decree  was
passed  respecting  one branch  of
that  colony,  that  was  made  regard-
ing the  first  nation. Said  the  Lord
to  them,  41  Inasmuch  as  you  keep
my  commandments,  you  shall  pros-
per in  the  land  ;  but  inasmuch  as
you  keep  not  my  commandments  in
the  land,  you  shall  be  destroyed


from  the  face  thereof "  That  was
literally  fulfilled.  After  living  upon
that  land  till  nearly  the  close  of  the
fourth  century  of  the  Christian  era,
they  fell  into  wickedness  and  were
destroyed,  with  the  exception  of  a
few  who  went  over  to  the  opposite
army.

And  the  Lord  also  made  a  similar
decree,  recorded,  too,  in  the  same
book,  in  regard  to  the  present  great
populous  nation  called  the  people  of
the  United  Stares,  They  must  perish,
unless  they  repent.  They  will  be
wasted  away,  and  the  fullness  of
t\\o.  wrath  of  Almighty  God  will  be
poured  out  upon  them,  unless  they
repent  Their  cities  will  be  left
desolate.  A  time  is  coming  when
the  great  and  populous  city  of  New
York — the  greatest  city  of  the
American  Republic,  will  be  left
without  inhabitants.  The  houses
will  stand,  Mime  of  them,  not  all.
They  will  stand  there,  but  unoccu-
pied, no  people  to  inherit  them.
It  will  be  the  same  in  regard  to
numerous  other  cities,  or,  in  the
words  of  the  Lord,  "  I  will  throw
down  all  their  strongholds,  and  I
will  execute  vengeance  and  fury
upon  them,  even  as  upon  the  hea-
then, such  as  they  have  not  heard."
It  will  all  be  fulfilled.  But  there
will  be  a  remnant  who  will  be
spared.  It  will  be  those  who  repent
ot  their  sins  :  it  will  be  those  who
believe  in  the  Lord  Je*us  Christ,
and  are  willing  to  obey  his  com
mandments,  willing  to  hearken  to
his  voice,  Willi  Jig  to  be  baptized  for
the  remission  of  their  sins,  willing
to  be  born  of  the  spirit;  or  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of
hands,  willing  to  walk  uprightly
and  honestly  with  all  men,  and
justly  one  with  another.

These  and  these  only  will  be
spared,  for  it  is  the  decree  of  Jeho-
vah ;  and  this  is  not  all. We  have


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  0.  PRATT


153


thus  far,  only  told  you  that  which
will  take  place  upon  the  people  of
Great  Britain,  upon  the  European
nations,  and  upon  the  people  in  the
United  States,  But  great  tribula
tions  will  also  be  among  all  cc  the
nations  of  the  earth,  who  will  not
repent  They  will  be  wasted  with
various  judgments;  but  the  heathen
will  be  spared  longer  than  these  Gen-
tile nations  who  have  had  the  scrip-
tures in  their  midst,  but  would  not
obey  them.

You  have  had  the  Bible  multi-
plied by  millions  of  copies,  and  cir-
culated in  almost  every  family.  Yon
can  read  it  at  your  leisure.  You
can  see  the  glorious  light  of  truth,
recorded  in  these  prophecies,  in
these  doctrines,  in  these  heavenly
and  holy  principles,  and  yet  in  the
face  of  all  this  light,  knowledge,
truth  and  divine  revelation,  you
reject  the  servants  of  God,  reject
the  ancient  Gospel,  when  it  is
preached  in  its  fulness,  refuse  to
repent  of  all  the  iniquities  ami
abominations  into  which  the  na-
tions are  fallen,

It  is  because  of  this,  of  the  light
that  the  nations  have  in  their
midst,  which  they  will  not  receive
that  the.  Lord  will  visit  them  first;
and  when  he  has  visited  and  over-
thrown them,  lie  will  lay  his  hand
heavily  upon  the  heathen  nations
in  Asia,  and  also  thos-e  who  art*
in  Africa,  and  they  will  be  visited
with  severe  judgment,  but  they
will  not  be  utterly  destroyed.  A
portion  of  the  heathen  nations  will
be  redeemed.  Why]  They  will
see  the  powtr  and  glory  of  God
that  will  he  manifested  among  the
tribes  of  Israel,  who  will  be  gathered
out  from  their  midst  and  return
to  their  own  land.  They  will  see
the  glory  of  God  manifested  as  in
ancient  times  and  they  will  say,
"surely  Juggernaut  is  no  longer


my  God/1  "  Surely  I  will  not  wor-
ship crocodiles,  nor  serpents;  neither
will  I  worship  the  sun,  or  the  moon,
for  there  is  a  God  manifested  among
that  people,  Israel,  who  is  worthy
of  the  natures  ami  attributes  of  a
God.  I  will  east  my  Gods  to  the
moles  and  bats,  and  I  will  wor-
ship the  God  of  Israel.  Then  will
be  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken
by  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  "  then  shall
the  heathen  know  that  I  the  Lord
am  God."  And  it  will  come  to
pass,  after  that  period,  when  Jesus
shall  have  raised  all  the  righteous
from  their  graves,  that  he  will  de-
scend with  all  the  hosts  of  heaven
accompanying  him,  and  will  stand
upon  the  Mount  of  Olive.s,  ami  he
will  go  out  of  Jerusalem,  ami  the
Jews  will  go  out  to  the  mount  to
meet  bini  aud  will  acknowledge  him
as  their  Messiah  and  King  ;  and
then  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  the
heathen  nations  will  also  more  fully
recognize  him  as  the  true  and  only
God  Then  will  be  fulfilled  that
which  is  written  in  the  last  chap-
ter of  Zachariah,  that  every  nation
round  about  Jerusalem,  shall  coma
up  from  year  to  year,  to  worship
the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  at
Jerusalem,  and  also  to  keep  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles.  There  will  be  a
great  many  of  those  solemn  assem-
bliesaml  feasts  t  hat  were  commanded
in  ancient  times,  that  will  be  re-
established in  the  midst  of  Israel
when  they  shall  return.  And  the  Lord
Jesus  will  be  there.  His  Twelve
Apostles  who  wandered  about
with  him,  while  he  was  in  the  flesh,
will  be  there ;  and  they  sit  upon
twelve  thrones,  and  assist  our  Lord
and  Savior  in  judging  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel  But  Jesus  will
have  a  throne  as  well  as  these
twelve  disciples.  Where  will  be
his  throne  1  A  temple  is  to  be
reared  in  ancient  Palestine  where  it


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


formerly  stood,  Ezekiel  saw  it  in
vision,  and  he  describes  the  building
of  that  house  when  it  shall  be  com-
plete, and  he  saw  the  glory  of  God
coming  by  the  way  of  the  East,  and
this  glorious  personage  entered
through  the  East  Gate  of  that  tem-
ple, and  entered  into  the  temple  ;
and  Ezekiel,  being  full  of  the  Spirit
of  God,  was  picked  up  and  carried
into  that  court,  where  Jesus  had
entered,  and  he  heard  a  voice  speak-
ing unto  him,  Behold,  the  peace  of
my  throne,  where  I  will  dwell  in
the  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel  ior
ever,  and  they  shall  no  more  defile
my  name,  but  I  will  dwell  will  them
for  ever.

This  will  be  a  glorious  period.  It
will  be  a  time  when  all  will  know
who  the  true  God  is,  and  who  is
commissioned  to  speak  in  his  name,
ami  to  declare  his  truths  among  the
people — if  we  do  not  find  it  out
before.  If  we  will  not  repent  of  our
sins ;  if  we  will  harden  our  hearts,
that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  no  place
within  us,  to  reveal  to  us  the  truth,
shall  know  then  who  it  is  that


will  be  saved.  We  shall  know  then,
that  there  is  a  Lord  God,  and  that
he  is  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  his
throne  is  among  them,  and  lie  will
reign  over  the  house  of  David,  and
all  Israel,  for  ever  and  ever.  Do
you  not  suppose  that  the  Twelve
Apostles,  who  were  with  him,  who
suffered  persecution,  and  finally  the
most  of  them  were  martyred — do
you  not  suppose  that  they  will  have
thrones  1  John  the  Revelator  saw
the  thrones  of  those  that  were
beheaded  for  tlie  witness  of  Jesus,
and  for  the  word  of  God  ;  and  lie
says,  they  will  sit  upon  these  thrones
as  judges.  So  there  will  be  twelve
thrones  built,  when  the  temple  of
God  is  built  in  Jerusalem,  besides
the  throne  of  the  Messiah,  for  these
twelve  men  to  sit  upon,  when  they


shall  come  forth  from  their  graves
to  reign  as  kings,  and  to  eat  and
drink  at  the  table  of  the  Lor.
41  What?"  some  might  exclaim,
"eat  and  drink  after  the  resurrec-
tion from  the  dead?  Yes,  did  not
Jesus  eat  and  d.iink  with  his  disciples
after  he  came  forth  from  the  tornht
He  did.  He  ate  the  broiled  fish
and  the  honeycomb,  in  their  pres-
ence. Immortal  beings  can  eat  if  they
choose  to  do  so.  Hence  it  is  written,
""You  that  have  followed  me  in
the  regeneration,"  meaning  these
twelve  disciples,  4£  inasmuch  as  you
have  followed  me  in  the  reijenera-
tiont  you  shall  sit  upon  twelve
thrones  and  shall  eat  and  drink  at
iny  table,  and  you  shall  judge  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel/'  That  will
be  butter  than  to  be  judged  by
imperfect  mortals.  Men  who  are
called  here  to  be  judges  are  not
always  perfect  in  their  judgment
They  err ;  the  best  of  them,  the
wisest  of  men  may  err  in  their
decisions.  But  not  so  with  these
great  judges  that  come  forth  out  of
tlie  tomb,  raised  to  immortality,
clothed  with  light  as  with  a  gar-
ment, purified  and  made  white
before  God.  Their  minds  are  full
of  intelligence,  and  it  beams  forth
from  their  countenances,  and  they
know  how  to  judge  by  the  Spirit
that  is  upon  them,  and  their  deci-
sions will  be  in  righteousness.

How  pleasant  it  would  be  to  walk
into  one  of  those  beautiful  rooms
that  will  be  constructed  in  the  tem-
ple of  our  God  at  Jerusalem,  and
behold  the  beautiful  table  spread,
on  which  the  luxuries  of  our  earth
shall  be  served  to  those  immortal
beings,  and  then  to  see  the  Master,
the  great  King,  the  Lord  of
Lords  and  King  of  Kings  rise  up
and  minister  to  his  disciples ;  wait
upon  them;  setting  them  an  ex-
ample. He  that  is  immortal  and  as


far  above  mortality  as  the  heavens
are  above  the  earth,  condescending
to  administer  to  their  happiness.
Would  not  this  be  delightful  1
Who,  that  has  any  desire  for  holi-
ness, and  purity,  and  honesty,  and
virtue  in  his  heart,  would  not  be
enraptured  at  the  thought  of  hav-
ing the  privilege  of  being  an  invit-
ed guest,  to  go  in,  even  if  you  did
not  sit  down  to  the  table;  to  see
them  when  they  were  partaking,
with  their  Savior,  of  this  feast]
And  these  will  be  the  men  that  will
be  with  Jesus  when  lie  descends
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  after  the
graves  of  the  just  have  been  open-
ed In  the  resurrection,  they  will
come  forth  immortal,  eternal,  cloth-
ed upon  with  the  fulness  of  that
glory  that  pertains  to  the  celestial
kingdom.  They  will  also  reign
as  kings  and  priests  here  on  the
earth.  To  some  of  the  raised
Saints  there  will  be  given  ten  cities
to  rule  over.  To  others  there  will
be  given  five  cities  to  rule  over,  ac-
cording to  their  works  here  in  this
life.  All  will  not  have  the  same
power.  All  will  not  have  the  same
rule.  The  Twelve  shall  have  twelve
thrones — one  throne  each,  to  judge
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  The
tribes  will  need  judging,  during  the
whole  thousand  years  they  live  on  the
earth ;  they  will  need  judges  in  their
midst,  to  make  manifest  unto  them
that  which  is  important  for  men,
and  women,  and  children,  to  know.
These  twelve  men  w  ho  are  ap-
pointed to  judge  these  twelve  tribes
of  Israel  cannot  be  as  it  were  the
judges  over  all  the  earth  at  the  same
time.  They  cannot  be  everywhere
present  at  the  same  moment,  and
hence  there  will  be  other  judges,
other  men  of  God,  those  who  are
accounted  worthy  in  the  sight  of
the  Most  High.  Hence  we  read  in
the  revelations  of  St,  John  that  he


heard  them  singing  a  new  song,  a
glorious  song.  About  whatt  Their
future  glory  and  their  future  happi-
ness and  their  future  home,  Where?
On  the  earth.  What!  People  in
heaven  singing  about  coming  to  the
earth?  Yes.  When  it  is  redeemed
it  will  be  a  glorious  mansion,  it  will
be  a  glorious  world,  it  will  be  worth
living  on  ;  and  it  will  be  sanctified,
and  the  knowledge  of  God  will  cover
the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the
deep.  All  beings  will  have  knowl-
edge. All  people  will  have  under-
standing. They  will  comprehend
the  things  of  God,  and  perform
them.  The.  Lord  will  make  this
earth  one  of  the  most  glorious  habi-
tations, inasmuch  as  the  people  will
prepare  themselves  for  it,  one  of  the
most  glorious  habitations  that  can
be  given  to  men.  It  will  be  peopled
by  immortal  beings  throughout  eter-
nity. But  before  that  it  will  have  to
die.  The  earth  will  have  to  pass
away  the  same  as  our  bodies  do,  and
the  dust  thereof  be  mingled  in  a
chaotic  form.  But  that  same  bring
who  organized  the  earth  will  again
speak,  and  eternity  will  again  hear
his  voice,  and  the  materials  of  our
earth  will  come  together  again,  and
when  it  unites  them  in  one,  and
forms  them  into  a  world,  it  will  be  a
glorious  world,  a  habitation  for  im-
mortal beings;  for  kings  and  for
priests,  and  for  those  that  have  been
faithful  to  the  end.  They  will  dwell
upon  it,  and  the  generations  of  their
children  will  dwell  upon  it,  till  they
become  sufficiently  numerous  to  need
another  creation.  What  generation?
Generations  do  you  say,  Mr.  Pratt  1
Do  you  mean  to  say  that  these  im-
mortal beings  are  going  to  have  pos-
terity 1  I  do.  1  mean  just  what  I
say.  Those  who  are  accounted
worthy  to  inherit  this  earth,  when
it  shall  made  heavenly,  celestial
beings  will  people  the  earth  with


156


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


their  own  offspring,  their  own  sons
and  their  own  daughters  ;  and  these
sons  and  these  daughters  which  will
be  born  to  these  immortal  beings,
will  be  the  same  as  you  and  I  were
before  we  took  these  mortal  taber-
nacles. Now  do  you  understand  it  t
How  were  we  then  1  Perhaps  some
stranger  present  may  ask,  "What
position  did  we  occupy  before  we
took  these  mortal  tabernacles]1  We
were  in  the  presence  of  God  the
Eternal  Father*  We  were  with  our
Elder  Brother.  Who  is  he?  The
scriptures  say  that  he  was  Christ
The  scriptures  say  that  he  was  our
Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  "the  first
born  of  every  creature/1  Indeed  !
Does  that  mean  his  birth  in  the
stable?  No,  Do  the  scriptures
really  say  that  1  Yes,  Who  are
the  others  that  were  bornl  It  was
all  the  human  family,  who  were  once
in  the  celestial  kingdom  from
whence  our  spirits  came,  when  they
took  possession  of  these  mortal  tab-
ernacles. As  Jesus  came  down  from
the  Father,  being  the  eldest  of  the
family,  and  took  upon  him  a  mortal
tabernacle,  even  so  have  his  brethren
and  sisters  come  from  the  same
region  of  glory,  and  have  taken  up-
on tli em  mortal  tabernacles  to  follow
in  his  footsteps,  if  they  will.  As  he
was  with  the  Father,  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  was  laid,
so  were  we,  and  all  the  rest  of  the
human  family.  1  don't  mean  this
flesh;  these  bone?,  I  do  not  mean
the  mortal  part  of  man,  but  I  mean
that  being  that  is  within  these  flesh,
and  bones,  I  mean  that  being  that
feels,  that  reflects,  that  thinks,
the  being  that  £g  godlike  in  its
nature,  inasmuch  as  it  keeps  the
commandments  of  God,  That  is  the
being  that  lived,  before  these  mortal
tabernacles  were  framed.  We  were
there  when  the  foundations  of  the
earth  were  laid. We  were  number-


ed among  those  sons  of  God,  whom
the  Lord  speaks  of  to  the  patriarch
Job.  "  Where  wast  thou,  speaking
to  Job,  when  I  laid  the  corner  stone
of  the  earth,  when  all  the  sous  of
God  shouted  for  joy,  and  the  morn-
ing stars  sang  together?"  Job
where  were  you  at  that  time  1  He
was  among  them;  he  was  there,
perhaps  he  did  not  remember  it,  any
more  than  we  do.  This  is  a  princi-
ple that  was  taught  in  ancient
times,  God  is  the  Father  of  our
spirits,  God  is  the  author  of  all  the
intelligences,  that  have  ever  come
into  this  world-  He  begat  them.
He  is  called  the  Father  ol  Spirits.
Have  we  to  become  like  him  ?  What
is  the  promise  Latter-day  faints!
What  is  the  great  promise  ina^lu  to
all  Saints,  ancient-day  Saints,  as
well  as  Latter-day  Saints  I  The
promise  is  that  they  shall  become
like  him.  In  what  respect  1  Like
him  with  an  immortal  body.  He
will  purify  those  vile  bodies  of  imrs
ami  fashion  them  after  his  own  bodyf
cleansed  from  sin  and  prepared  to
dwell  in  his  presence,  having  immor-
tal bodies  of  flesh  and  bones  as  our
Savior  has;  and  if  there  is  no  end
to  the  increase  of  our  Savior's  king-
dom, there  will  be  no  end  to  the  in-
crease of  tile  kingdom  of  his  vouiJirer
brethren.  Here  then,  we  see  the  pro-
priety of  what  1,  a  little  while  ago,
stated,  that  this  earth  will  become  a
habitation  of  immortal  beings  and
there  shall  be  no  more  death  nor
sorrow,  for  the  former  things  have
passed  away  and  all  things  have  be-
come new.  They  will  spread  forth
and  multiply  as  the  stats  in  voiuler
heavens  or  as  the  sand  on  the  sea
shore,  that  cannot  be  numbered  by
mortal  man.  These  offsprings  will
be  spirits,  not  bodies  with  flesh  and
bones,  till  they  have  proved  them-
selves as  we  have  done,  when  they
shall  be  sent  upon  a  new  earth,  and


DISCOURSE  BY  KLDER  0.  IRATT


157


receive  tabernacles  the  same  as  we
have  done,  awl  if  they  are  willing
to  keep  the  laws  of  God,  as  the
Saints  ccep  the  laws  of  God,  they
will  also  he  redeemed,  and  there
will  be  a  mansion  prepared  for  them,
namely,  the  world  that  is  erected
for  their  habitation.  Tims  creations
will  he  multiplied  upon  creations,  a
universe  of  worlds  will  be  construct-
ed for  the  kingdoms  of  otir  God,  all
becoming  or  being  subject  to  him
that  flits  upon  the  throne,  who  sways
his  sceptre  over  all  worlds  and  do-
minions, and  we  in  connection  with
him  will  reign  upon  thrones  and  in
our  mansions,  that  are  given  unto
us.  Hence,  says  the  Apostle  Paul,
the  man  is  not  without  the  woman
in  the  Lord,  neither  the  woman
without  the  man.  Ppeople  may  think

oey  can  get  a  fulness  of  celestial
glory,  without  having  a  wife.  They
may  think  so,  but  thpy  will  be  mis-
taken.  The  Lord  our  God  ordained
tlwit  the  male  and  female  should
oe  united  for  eternity.  A  marriage
covenant  for  time  alone,  is  not  the
order  of  heaven,  God  designed
that  man  and  woman,  being  immor-
tal beings,  should  be  each  others  com*
pauion,  husband  and  wife,  while
eternal  ages  shall  roll  around,  and
to  en  joy  all  that  is  intended  for  them
in  the  eternal  worlds.  This  is  the
object  that  the  Lord  had  in  view.
These  marriages  that  arc  celebrated
by  the  gentile  nations  are  well
enough  in  their  places*  They  do
very  well  for  those  who  have  no
knowledge  of  the  truth.  They  do
well  enough  for  those  who  have  no
knowledge  of  the  Gospel.  They  are

human  marriages,  or,  in  other  words,


marriages  performed  by  human
authority,  marriages  that  arc  neces-
sary in  human  governments,  or  gov-
ernments established  according  to
human  laws,  but  all  such  marriages,
and  institutions,  and  ordinances  will
crumble  away,  with  human  govern-
ments, and  after  the  resurrection
they  have  no  force.  But  that  which
is  of  God  will  endure  forever  and
ever.  Marriages  that  are  ordained
of  God  are  eternal.  What  he  has
joined  together  never  can  be  plucked
asunder,  if  the  two  persons  shall  re-
main faithful  to  their  covenants,  and
faithful  to  the  Lord  their  God.
Hence  eternal  marriage  was  ordain-
ed by  him  for  the  purpose  of  multi-
plying intelligent  beings  after  we
leave  this  world.  No  marriage  in
the  next  world  This  is  the  world
for  all  on  I  i  nances  as  well  as  ue  or-
dinance of  marriage.  If  you  want
to  be  baptized,  do  it  here.  No  such
thing  as  being  baptized  for  your-
selves in  that  world.  If  you  want
to  be  confirmed,  have  it  done  here,
for  there  is  no  confirming  there.  If
yon  want  to  partake  of  any  of  the
ordinances  of  the  Lord  our  God,
this  is  the  place  for  us  to  attend  to
them.  Hence  it  is  written,  that
they  neither  marry  nor  give  in
marriage  in  that  world.  Why  1  Be-
cause it  is  supposed  that  people  will
have  secured  to  them,  in  this  life,  all
that  pertains  to  their  future  exalta-
tion and  glory;  and  if  that  thing  be
neglected  here,  such  place  them-
selves in  a  condition  not  to  occupy
the  fullness  of  the  glory,  ordained
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
to  be  given  to  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  the  Most  High.  Amen.


158


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.

%


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  Kaysville,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,  March  2nd,  1873.


(Reported  by  Gee.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN — THE  NECESSITY  OF  CHARITY— THE
PURPOSE  FOR  WHICH  THE  GOSPEL  WAS  REVEALED—  THE  SPIRIT  THAT
SHOULD  PREVAIL  REGARDING  CO-OPERATIVE  INSTITUTIONS  —  THE
FOLLY  OF  DISSENSION,


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  meeting  with  the  Baints  in
this  place,  I  have  come  to  talk
with  you,  and  to  have  a  little  visit ;
to  tell  you  how  I  feel,  and  to  learn
how  you  feel,  and  how  things  are
moving  generally.

I  desire  to  talk  a  while  on  some
of  the  plain  principles  of  "  Mormon-
ismfn  as  we  used  to  understand
them  in  former  times,  and  as  we
understand  them  to-day  when  we
reflect  and  use  our  judgment  dis-
passionately. Our  feelings  and
ideas  are  not  much  different  from
what  they  used  to  be.  Many  of  us
started  in  this  work  many  years  ago,
and  we  entered  into  it  because  we
believed  it  was  true,  and  that  the
principles  taught  and  inculcated
were  from  God  ;  and  when  it  came
to  us,  we  received  it  as  a  message
from  God  to  us.  These  were  about
the  sentiments  that  we  entertained
some  twenty  and  thirty,  and  as  long
as  forty-five  years  ago  ;  and  I  sup-
pose the  majority  of  us  have  still
the  same  ideas  of  the  work  that  we
then  entertained.  Before  we  em-
braced the  Gospel,  we  were  beset
with  the  weaknesses  of  the  flesh,


and  after  we  embraced  it,  these  na-
tural infirmities  still  followed  us.
We  have  had  difficulties  and  trials,
and  have  passed  through  many  cir-
cumstances calculated to  perplex
and  annoy,  and  caused,  too,  many
times, by the unkind acts  of
others. And  then  we  ourselves  have
not  always  been  the  most  consider-
ate and  kind  one  towards  another.
And  then  we  have  not  always  done
exactly  right,  ourselves  being  the
judges,  and  other  people  were  of
the  same  opinion. And  hence  we
have  experienced,  to  no  inconsider-
able extent,  little  annoyances  and
difficulties,  for  which  we  have  no
one  to  blame  but  our  own  folly  and
weakness. And  this  too,  in  many
instances,  because  when  we  had
done  wrong,  we  failed  to  go  to  God
and  our  brother  whom  we  had  of-
fended, making  acknowledgements
and  asking  forgiveness. And  in
too  many  instances  difficulties  that
have  arisen  have  been  allowed  to
run  on  to  our  injury  and  annoy-
ance, and  we  have  been  sometimes
ready  to  ask,  (£  Is  this  Zion  T  u  Yes,
this  is  Zion." What,  with  all  of
our infirmities, weaknesses  and


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC.


159


follies]  Yes.  I  think  that  Jesus,
when  upon  the  earth,  sail  I  that 4i  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a
net,  tli at  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and
gathered  of  every  kind."  That  is
the  way  my  Bible  used  to  read;
how  does  your's  read?  Some  of
those  were  good  fish,  fit  for  any
market ;  others  rather  small,  poor
eating,  and  perhaps  a  little  bony
and  horny.  And  being  gathered
together  as  we  are  from  different
nations,  with  various  customs,  ha-
bits and  traditions,  with  all  our
peculiarities  and  odd  notions,  we,  as
a  matter  of  course,  do  not  agree  in
many  particulars,  and  hence  diffi-
culties sometimes  arise  in  our  midst.
Sometimes  some  of  us  keep  these
things  to  ourselves,  and  sometimes
they  leak  out ;  but  if  they  were  not
there,  they  could  not  come  out;
could  they)  When  there's  nothing
bail  in,  nothing  had  can  come  out.
And  1  believe  Jesus  will  bear  me
out  in  his  saying,  "Out  of  the
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth
speaketh.  A  good  man  out  of  the
good  treasure  of  the  heart  bringeth
forth  good  tilings  :  and  an  evil  man
out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart
bringeth  forth  evil  things."  Then
again,  there  is  another  curious
Scripture  which  J  Mines  makes  use
of  :  The  tongue  is  a  little  member,
and  boasteth  great  things.  Behold,
how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kind-
leth."  It  "  setteth  on  fire  the  course
of  nature  ;  and  it  is  set  on  fire  of
hell."  That  is  a  peculiar  expres-
sion. What  do  you  think  it  means?
"Therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the
Father ;  and  therewith  curse  we
men,  which  are  made  after  the
similitude  of  God.  Out  of  the  same
mouth  proccedeth  blessing  and  curs-
ing/1 And  then,  reasons  the  apos-
tle, "  Doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at
the  same  place  sweet  water  and
bitter  I Can  a  fig  tree,  my  brethren,


bear  olive  berries  ]  either  a  vine  figsl
So  can  no  fountain  both  yield  salt
water  and  fresh."  And  says  the
Savior,  in  speaking  of  men,  4i  Ye
shall  know  them  by  their  fruits.
Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or
figs  of  thistles  f  I  find  many  curi-
ous things,  and  you  must  excuse  me
if  1  do  not  preach  a  very  connected
sermon ;  we  will  talk  over  some
matters  of  fact,  as  we  would  in  a
fireside  chat.

We  all  of  us  want  to  be  good
Latter-day  Saints  ;  we  all  want  to
secure  the  favor  and  approbation  of
God,  and  when  we  get  through  with
this  life,  we  all  want  to  be  numbered
among  those  who  will  secure  a  celes-
tial inheritance,  This  is  the  gene-
ral feeling  of  the  people  I  am  talking
to  to-day.  We  sometimes  pray,
"Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  in
heaven."  And  then  we  sometimes
make  little  mistakes  in  our  inter-
course one  with  another,  and  we
sometimes  go  to  him  we  have  offend-
ed, asking  forgiveness  ;  and  then  we
pray  the  Father,  saying,  "  Forgive
our  sins  as  we  forgive  them  that  sin
against  us."  Is  not  this  so,  my
brethren?  And  would  you  like  to  be
measured  iti  that  half-bushel  1  But
if  when  yon  pray  after  this  manner,
you  do  not  forgive  your  neighbor
his  tri'sj>a^sivS  could  you  feel  as  our
red  brethren  say,  4*  honest  Injun T
Would  it  be  consistent  with  your
profession  to  ask  this  favor  of  God,
when  you  yourselves  are  not  willing
to  grant  the  same  to  one  another  1
I  believe  you  will  readily  agree  with
me  in  answering  that  in  the  nega-
tive; but  at  the  same  time,  if  any  of
you  have  any  doubt  concerning  it,
you  can  easily  reduce  it  to  a  mathe-
matical basis,  and  so  decide,  "But,"
says  one,  11  there  should  not  be  any
of  these  tilings  in  Zion,"  I  agree
with  you.  In  the  first  place,  you
should  not  do  wrong,  or  harbor  or


160


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


sustain  it  when  done ;  neither  should
your  neighbor  And  what  then  1
Is  this  Zion  ]  Yes,  so  we  say*  Have
I  got  a  treasure  t  Yes,  but  we  are
told  that  it  is  held  in  "earthen
vessels,"  which  are  subject  to  all  the
weaknesses,  infirmities  and  follies,
incident  to  humanity-  Now  this  is
the  fact,  and  God  would  exalt  us
and  place  us  on  high  among  men,
and  pour  upon  us  intelligence,  and
give  unto  us  knowledge  of  his  will
and  his  law,  and  he  would  like  to
prepare  us  as  a  people  that  would
acknowledge  his  hand  in  all  things,
and  be  submissive  to  his  will,  and
who  would  say,  both  by  precept  and
example,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on
earth,  as  in  heaven."  I  would  like
we  should  do  this,  but  then  we  hf,ve
not  done  it  And  we  feel  sometimes  as
nongti  we  cannot  dof.  t,  and  some-
times as  though  we  won't  do  it
But  if  we  could  submit  ourselves  to
the  law  of  God,  and  to  the  order  of
God,  and  to  the  priesthood  of  God,
and  that  Priesthood  submit  itself  to
the  law  of  God,  and  all  be  under
his  guidance  and  direction,  Zion
would  arise  and  shine,  and  the  glory
of  God  would  rest  upon  her,  and
the  power  of  God  would  be  mani-
fested in  our  midst,  and  we  would
see  and  comprehend  things  we  never
dreamed  of.

I  find,  in  examining  things,  that
we  are  human  in  every  sense  of  the
word,  I  look  at  myself,  for  instance.
Am  I  perfect  ]  No,  not  by  a  long
way  ;  neither  are  my  brethren  of
the  priesthood  of  the  various  quor-
ums. And  I  look  at  people,  male
and  female,  generally,  and  am  forced
to  the  same  conclusion  respecting
them.  We  do  not  come  up  to  the
standard,  we  fail  to  fulfil  the  re-
quirements which  God  makes  of  us.

We  have  had  an  idea,  which  is
quite  correct,  that  God  has  gathered
us  from  among  the  nations  that  he


might  place  his  name  among  us,  and
that  his  priesthood  might  be  organ-
ized, that  men  thus  ordained  might
be  prepared  to  establish  his  kingdom
and  reign  on  the  earth.  But  we
find  men  in  the  priesthood,  yes,  in
all  grades  of  the  priesthood,  who
are  weak.  Is  there  anything  aston-
ishing in  that]  Oh,  no.  Go  back,
for  instance,  to  the  days  of  Jesus,
and  you  will  read  of  some  men
who  were  rather  of  an  aspiring
turn,  and  one  of  them  got  his
mother  to  assist  him.  Said  she,
**  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may
sit,  the  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and
the  other  on  the  left,  in  thy  king-
dom.'* She  might  just  as  well  have
added,  that  she  herself  would  like
to  occupy  some  important  position.
But  the  Savior  told  her,  saying,
**  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask  such
a  position  "  is  not  mine  to  give,  but
it  shall  be  given  to  them  for  whom
it  is  prepared  of  my  Father."  Then
there  was  another  circumstance,  in
which  Peter  made  himself  conspi-
cuous. Jesus  was  telling  them  of
approaching  trouble,  and  intima-
ting what  would  take  place  the  ap-
proaching night,  against  which  Peter
boldly  demurred,  saying,  "  Though
all  men  shall  be  offended  because  of
thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended."
Whereupon  Jesus  said  unto  him,
"  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  that  this
night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou
shalt  deny  me  thrice."  Peter  could
not  believe  it ;  but  he  did  just  as
the  Savior  said  he  would  do.  Was
he  weak  ?  Yes,  after  the  manner  of
men.  If  he  had  said,  Lord,  though
all  men  be  offended  because  of  thee,,
I  will  not,  according  to  my  present
feelings,  nor  will  J  at  all  if  thou  wilt
give  me  power  to  carry  them  out,
!  But  he  felt  sure  that  he  could  stand
side  by  side  with  the  Savior  under
all  circumstances,  but  he  could  not
He  did  not  look  so  very  valiant


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC.


when  the  trial  came;  it  is  easy
enough  to  talk  about  it  in  the  dis-
nee,  at  least  much  easier  than  to
eet  it  and  overcome  it.  But  were
,hese  two  brothers,  whose  mother
nade  such  a  request  of  Jesus,  bad
men!  No;  but  she  had  a  notion
hat  she  would  like  to  see  her  sons
occupying  such  a  position,  and  prob-
ably they  would  not  have  objected
to  it  themselves  ;  this  we  are  not  in-
formed of.  Then  was  it  right  in
Peter  to  say  he  would  stand  by  his
Lord?  How  often  have  we  said  it]
I  will  not  condemn  anybody,  but
merely  speak  of  that  thing  to  bring
forth  for  good,  and  exhibit  men  as
they  were  and  as  they  are.  Was
Peter  a  weak  man?  No;  but  he
was  not  without  the  infirmities  of
human  nature,  and  when  the  trial
came  he  faltered  a  little.  After  all
I  do  not  think  the  mistake  so  griev-
ous, all  the  circumstances  considered,
for  he  was  surrounded  by,  and  speak-
ing to,  a  riotous,  corrupt  and  blood-
thirsty people,  only  he  had  said  lie
would  not  do  it,  but  he  did  it,  that's
alb  Was  Peter  valiant  for  the  truth  ?
He  was.  Was  he  imprisoned  for
the  truth  ?  Yes.  Did  he  proclaim
against  vice  and  advocate  virtue  1
lie  did.  And  did  he  go  forth  and
feed  the  lambs  and  Hock  of  God  ?
Yes ;  and  he  acted  every  way  be-
coming to  a  man  of  God,  ami  finally
suffered  a  martyrs  death.  Shall  we
find  fault  with  either  of  these  men?
No,  we  We  them  for  their  good
deeds,  and  for  their  fidelity  and  in-
tegrity, and  the  great  work  which
they  accomplished  in  their  day,  in
bringing  forth  the  truths  of  the
everlasting  Gospel*  Shall  we  con-
demn our  brethren  here  with  like
weakness?  No,  What  did  you
call  them?  Some  of  them  very
weak  sisters  ;  some  of  them  very
foolish  and  some  very  ignorant  We
won't  make  use  of  any  hard  words
No.  11.


at  all ;  but  I  would  rather  feel  like
saying  to  them,  as  the  old  lady  who
i  was  teaching  school  said  to  her
children — "  When  you  come  to  a
hard  word  and  you  cannot  spell  or
speak  it  right,  pass  over  it  and  call
it  a  hard  word,"  I  was  a  little
amused  this  morning,  you  know  I
have  heard  of  a  little  of  your  foolish-
ness, and  I  find  that  we  are  all  in
the  same  box,  all  tarred  with  the
same  stick.  And  when  listening  to
these  things,  one  of  the  brethren  re-
marked to  me  that  this  is  a  good
people.  What,  and  still  du  these
foolish  tilings  ?  Yes,  there  are  none
of  us  so  very  bad  after  all,  when
yon  come  to  shake  us  up,  we  do  not
mean  to  be  bad.  But  notwithstan-
I  ding,  many  foolish  things  have
existed  among  us.  The  Priesthood
sometimes  have  not  done  exactly
right ;  ami  then  the  people  have  not
been  without  blame,  and  conse-
;  quently  we  make  all  kinds  of  curious
errors,  Now,  I  would  like  if  we
could  go  at  it,  act  *4  honest  Injun"
and  get  right  to  the  bottom  of  things,
and  then  go  as  near  right  as  we  can,
being  guided  by  the  principles  of  the
Gospel,  and  not  influenced  by  the
follies  of  men.

The  fact  of  our  having  some
amongst  us  who  have  weaknesses,
does  not  make  untrue  any  of  the
laws  of  God  which  lie  has  revealed
1  unto  us,  neither  does  it  affect  our
belief  in  them.  We  still  believe
that  the  priesthood  emanated  from
God  ;  and  that  he  has  instituted  it
for  the  benefit,  salvation  and  exalta-
tion of  the  human  family.  And  as
a  proof  of  this  we  are  here  to-day,
and  the  reason  of  our  coming  herfe
is  that  God  raised  up  and  inspired
men  to  go  forth  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  nation,  and  we  heard
such  men  preach  and  believed  their
message.  Says  Jesus,  *'  My  sheep
hear  my  voice,  and  a  stranger  they

Vol.  XX


*  •

* »


162


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


will  not  follow,  but  flee  from  him
for  they  know  not  the  voice  of
strangers/  Was  it  the  Priesthood  I
that  did  it  then  1  Yes  and  no.  It
was  they  in  obedience  to  the  com-
maud  men  ts  of  God  that  went  forth,
but  it  was  the  power  of  God  in  them,
and  the  power  of  God  operating  upon
our  hearts  that  led  us  to  the  truth  ;
and  had  God  not  operated  with  them
they  could  have  done  nothing,  and
unless  God  had  revealed  from  the
heavens  the  principles  of  the  gather-
ing and  the  priesthood  and  power
thereof  and  sealed  that  upon  Joseph
Smith,  and  he  in  turn  conferred  the
same  upon  his  brethren,  they  never
could  have  got  this  people  here,  as
they  are  to-day.  Von  all  know  that
this  is  a  fact  when  you  give  the  '
matter  thought  and  reflect  ion.  We
learn  from  the  Doctrine  and  Cove*
nants  that  on  a  certain  occasion
Jesus  and  other  heavenly  messengers
appeared  to  Joseph  Smith  and
Oliver  Oowdery,  and  among  them
was  Moses,  who  conferred  upon
them  the  keys  of  the  gathering,
which  should  extend  to  all  Israel,
and  also  bring  back  the  ten  tribes.
And  my  brethren,  let  me  say  to  you,
that  if  the  Lord  had  not  sent  us
these  keys  in  the  manner  he  did,
you  would  not  be  here  to-day.  But
that  principle  was  unlocked,  and
when  you  received  the  Gospel  you
received  it,  because  it  is  a  part  of  the
Gospel,  and  the  consequence  was
you  wanted  to  gather  and  you  hard-
ly knew  why.  You  used  to  sing  the
songs  of  Zion  in  far  oft*  lands  with
much  earnestness,  and  the  gathering
was  the  theme  of  your  conversation
and  also  your  preaching,  and  in
your  dreams  you  have  many  times  |
seen  yourself  among  the  Saints  of
God,  long  before  you  managed  to
get  here.  The  Lord  as  we  well
know  has  an  object  in  thus  gathering
his  people  from  among  the  nations  |


of  the  earth,  but  it  wTould  take  mo
too  long  to  talk  about  that  this
morning  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  the
scripture  is  being  fulfilled,  which
says,  4<  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city
and  two  of  a  family,  and  1  will  bring
you  to  Zion  :  and  I  will  give  you
pastors  according  to  my  heart,  which
shall  feed  you  with  knowledge  and
understanding."  And  this  is  why
we  are  here.  He  designed  that  here
his  Priesthood  should  be  organized,
that  his  will  and  mind  should  he
made  known  here  and  his  power
made  manifest.  And  it  is  expected
that  we  will  not  barter  away  or
trample  under  our  feet  this  know-
ledge when  we  get  it,  but  use  it  in
a  proper  manner;  and  in  order  for
us  to  do  so  we  must  comprehend  our
position  and  understand  the  relation-

I  ship  that  exists  between  us  and  God
ami  his  kingdom.  It  is  true  our  or-
gat  i  iza  t  i  on  1 1  as  been  greatly  per  fee  ted
ot  late,  but  then  there  needs  to  be
a  great  many  other  developments
and  much  more  willing  obedience

i  and  submission  to  the  law  and
word  of  God.  It  is  "not  every
one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,
Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven  ;  but  he  that  doeth  the
will  of  my  Father  which  is  in
heaven."  Let  me  quote  a  little
further.  "Many  will  say  to  me
in  that  day  :  Lord,  Lord,  have  we
not  prophesied  in  thy  name?  and
in  thy  name  cast  out  devils]  and
in  thy  name  done  many  wonder-
ful works  ?  and  then  I  will  profess
unto  them,  I  never  knew  you ;  depart
from  me,  je  that  work  iniquity.1'
Or  in  other  words,  you  are  not  my
sheep, I  have  never  approved  of

|  your  actions.  Who  does  this
scripture  refer  to  %  Is  it  the  unbe-
lieving Gentiles i  I  think  not ;  I
don't  think  they  can  cast  out  many
devils,  at  least  I  never  heard  of

their  having  done  so,  I  have  never


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC


163


heard  of  their  having  prophesied
or  done  any  wonderfuf  thing  in  His
name. No,  it  does  not  mean  them
at  all  ;  it  refers  to  those  who  once
held  the  priesthood,  and  instead  of
honoring  it,  tampered  with  it,  losing
its  power  and  efficiency  ami  also  the
Holy  Spirit  by  treating  lightly  the
things  of  God  and  Violating  their
covenants  with  him.  Although  they
once  enjoyed  the  power  to  work
miracles  by  virtue  of  their  priest- ,
hood,  they  no  longer  posess  it ;  but
as  "  the  dog  is  turned  to  his  own
vomit  again,  and  the  sow  that  was  I
washed  to her 'wallowing  in  the
mire,"  so  have  they  turned  to  error  ;
and  wrong  doing ♦  and  to  such  men
the  Savior  will  thus  address  himself.

It  is  not  because  a  man  holds  the
priesthood  or  whether  he  be  or  may
have  been  an  apostle,  a  high  priest,
a  seventy,  an  elder,  a  president  or
bishop,  and  may  have  had  power
with  God  in  former  times,  doin<"
many  mighty  works  in  his  namej
but  it  is  they  who  not  only  are  thus
favored  and  blessed  but  who  endure
faithful  to  the  end,  that  shall  be
saved  and  owned  by  our  Lord.  1

There  are  some  things  that  strike
my  mind  that  I  will  rater  to.  I  do
not  know  of  a  time  when  there  was
a  more  perfect  organization  of  the  \
priesthood  on  the  earth  than  there  '
is  to-day.  There  may  have  been  in
the  days  of  Enoch,  and  there  may
have  been  upon  this  continent  in
those  days  when  there  were  no  rich
nor  poor,  but  when  they  hadall  things
common  among  them,  and  every
one  dealt  justly  one  with  another  ;
but  I  do  not  know,  because  there  is
not  among  us  any  record  of  the  fact
And  what  is  this  organization  for  ?
Is  it  for  my  individual  interests  ]  I
do  not  so  understand  it.  Is  it  in
the  interest  of  the  Twelve  ?  I  think
not.  Or  in  the  interest  of  the  presi-
dents of  Stakes  or  any  of  the


bishops,  or  any  induvidual  ?  No,
but  it  is  in  the  interest  of  God  and
humanity,  to  assist  in  establishing
righteousness  upon  the  earth,  ami
union  and  fellowship  one  with  an-
other, and  to  elevate  us  in  the  seal©
|  of  society,  and  that  we  may  stand
head  and  shoulders  in  all  other  mat-
|  ters,  as  we  now  do  in  regard  to  our
religious  sentiments,  that  Zion  may
be  the  head  and  not  the  tail,  and
that  God  may  be  honored  by  us  and
through  us  and  among  us,  and  that
we  may  in  very  deed  be  the  "Zton  of
God,"  which  means  the  pure  in
heart

Now  if  I  talk  a  little  plainly  upon
some  of  our  secular  affairs,  I  trust
you  will  not  be  offended,  you  surely
will  not  as  long  as  I  confine  myself
strictly  to  the  truth,  will  you?  Well,
we  have  talked  one  time  and  an-
other, a  good  deal  about  the  United
Order,  and  also  about  co-operative
institutions  ;  let  me  ask  the  good
people  of  Kaysville,  what  have  we
done  in  that  direction,  how  much
have  we  entered  into  them?  As
the  Indian  would  say,  describing  it
by  the  size  of  his  thumb-nail,  about
sd  much.  Do  we  believe  in  these
movements  ?  Some  of  us  do,  and
,  snme  do  not  know  whether  they  do
or  not.  Some  of  us  would  believe
in  them  much  more  readily  if  they
would  make  us  rich,  and  give  us
prominence  and  position  among  men.
1  will  tell  you,  Latter-day  faints,
that  unless  we  can  enter  into  our  co-
operative institutions  and  the
United  Order  with  singleness  of
heart  and  pure  motives,  as  the  Elders
do  when  they  go  forth  to  preach  the
Gospel,  because  it  is  God's  com-
mand, your  efforts  will  be  of  small
avail  We  do  not  want  to  stop  and
ask,  Is  there  money  in  it  ?  Is  it  his
will,  his  law  and  principle  f  When
we  combine  our  interests  on  this
principle,  and  work  to  it,  we  will


164


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


succeed  and  prosper.  But  in  too
many  instances  our  co-operative  in-
stitutions have  jumped  the  track.
What,  the  big  Co-op?  Yes,  and
little  Co-ops  too.  Have  you  got  a
Co  op  here  1  No,  you  have  not*  Do
you  know  of  any?  We  find  little  in-
stitutions they  call  Co-ops  in  most
of  our  settlements,  but  when  you
come  to  inquire  into  affairs  connec-
ted with  them  we  generally  find,
that,  instead  of  theft  being  run  in
the  interest  of  the  community,  and
with  a  view  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God,  a  few  individuals  represent
the  Co-op,  who  are  the  ones,  who
are  benefitted  by  it.  That  is  the
trouble.  But  is  the  principle  right  ?
Yes,  if  you  can  live  it,  dealing  honest-
ly one  with  another  ;  but  if  you  can-
not, you  need  not  try  it,  for  instead
of  giving  satisfaction,  it  will  only  be
a  disappointment  But  I  will  pro-
mise the  Latter-day  Saints  that  if
they  will  go  into  these  things  allow-
ing God  to  dictate  in  the  interests
of  Israel  and  the  building  up  of  his
Zion  on  the  earth,  and  take  them-
selves and  their  individual  interests
out  of  the  question,  feeling  they  are
acting  for  him  and  his  kingdom,
they  will  become  the  wealthiest  of
all  people,  and  God  will  bless  them
and  pour  out  wealth  and  intelligence
and  all  the  blessings  that  earth  can
afford  ;  but  if  you  will  not,  you  will
go  downward,  and  keep  going  the
downward  road  to  disappointment
and  poverty  in  things  spiritual  as
well  as  temporal  I  dare  prophecy
that,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  That
is  the  way  that  I  look  at  these
things,  and  that  is  the  way  I  figure
them  up,  and  not  in  the  light  of
every  man  looking  for  gain  from  his
own  quarter.  These  things  are
stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  the
people,  and  have  been  for  some  time.
Well,  what  shall  we  do  ?  Why,  do
the  best  we  can,  and  keep  on  trying


to  improve  upon  our  present  condi-
tion, always  keeping  in  view  the  ob-
ject to  be  gained,  dealing  honestly
upon  a  fair  basis  and  correct  prin-
ciples, then  we  will  succeed  and
things  will  move  on  pleasantly,  and
we  shall  be  a  united  people,  owned
and  blessed  of  the  Lord.  It  was  on
this  principle  that  the  Nephites  be-
came a  prosperous,  a  blessed  and
happy  people  ;  it  was  not  because
one  was  a  little  smarter  than  an*
other,  or  through  bis  smartness  tak-
ing advantage  of  his  neighbor  ;  it
was  not  that  a  n\an  was  a  good
financier,  that  he  should  "financier"
other  peoples'  property  into  his  own
pockets  and  leave  them  without,  I
will  relate  here  an  anecdote  which
comes  to  my  mind.  A  smart
young  man  had  just  returned  from
college,  and  at  table  he  wished  to
show  his  parents  what  extraor-
dinary advancements  he  had  made,
"  Why,  father,  says  he,  you  can  hard-
ly conceive  of  the  advance  I  have
made/'  "  Well,  my  son,"  says  the
father,  "I  am  sure  lam  glad  to  hear
you  say  so,  and  I  trust  you  will
make  a  great  man/1  There  happen-
ed to  be  two  ducks  on  the  table  for
dinner,  and  this  young  man  proposed
to  give  his  father  a  specimen  of  his
smartness*  "Now,"  he  says,  "you
see  there  are  only  two  ducks,  don't
you  f  "  Yes,"  answered  the  father.
"  Well,  I  can  prove  to  you  that  there
are  three  ducks."  "  Can  you,"  says
the  father,  "  that's  quite  extraordin-
ary really,  how  can  you  do  it?"
"Well,"  says  the  son,  "I  will  show
you.  That's  one  f  "Yes."  "And
that's  two  1"  "Yes,"  "Well,  two
and  one  makes  three,  don't  they?'
"  Quite  so,"  says  the  father,  "  it  is
very  extraordinary,  and  to  show
how  much  I  appreciate  it,  I  will  eat
one  of  these  ducks,  and  your  mother
will  eat  the  other,  and  and  we  will
leave  the  third  for  you." Some  of


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC.


our  "  financiers "  have  made  this
kind  of  discovery,  but  when  it
comes  to  the  practical  thing  they,
like  the  boy,  have  got  to  fall  back
on  fathers  due*  or  mother's  duck.
This  kind  of  proficiency  may  be  all
very  well  in  its  place,  but  then  we
have  no  place  for  it ;  we  want  to
act  honestly  and  begin  right,  and
then  carry  it  out  right.  Let  the  big
Co-op.  straighten  itself  out,  and
then  the  little  Co-ops,  do  the  same,
and  let  us  stick  to  one  another  and
all  act  one  with  another,  and  lay
aside  our  scheming  ;  ami  let  us  have
honest,  honorable  men,  Elders  of
Israel  who  have  at  heart  the  build-
ing up  of  God's  kingdom,  to  do  our
business,  who  will  act  for  the  wel-
fare  of  all.  That  is  my  doctrine  on
that  point  I  can  see  plenty  of
faults  in  these  thiugs,  but  we  will
let  them  go,  they  are  the  weaknesses
of  humanity,  and  they  carry  vith
them  their  own  reward.  If  people
do  right,  the  right  stands  by  them
and  sustains  them  ;  if  they  do  wrong
it  works  them  down,  down,  down.
Men  can  not  afford  to  do  wrong  if
they  could  but  understand  their  true
position.  A  few  dollars,  a  little  land,
a  few  houses,  a  few  of  the  comforts
of  this  short  life,  cannot  be  com-
pared to  the  glory  laid  up  for  those
who  are  true  and  faithful.  But  I
am  afraid  it  will  be  said  of  some  of
those,  as  was  said  of  the  rich  man,
t£  Thou  in  thy  lifetime  received  thy
good  tilings  and  likewise  Lazarus  I  lis
evil  things,  but  now  he  is  comforted
and  thou  art  tormented,**  We  do
not  want  anything  to  cling  to  us
but  what  is  right,  and  honest,  and
truthful,  and  whenever  we  can  act
for  the  benefit  of  all,  then  we  are
doing  right,  free  from  this  narrow
contracted  feeling  and  this  personal,
selfish,  aggrandizing  spirit.  Do  you
not  think  you  can  gat  up  some-
thing of  that  sort  if  you  try?  Do


not  be  in  a  big  hurry ;  do  not
break  your  necks  ;  go  at  it  quiet-
ly, and  start  one  industry  and
then  another,  and  make  your
leather,  and  your  harness  and
shoes,  and  prepare  to  raise  silk.
Brethren,  operate  together,  and
s inters  operate  together,  and  let  all
act  in  the  welfare  of  each  other,
that  all  may  be  encouraged  and
benefitted.  The  presidency  of  this
Stake  ought,  and  all  ought  to  unite
with  them,  in  producing  everything
as  far  as  possible,  and  as  fast  as
possible,  that  you  require  among
yourselves  ;  and  also  find  employ-
ment for  every  man  and  woman  and
child  within  this  Stake  that  wants
to  labor.  That  is  what  you  should
do,  Brother  Smith,  That  is
the  way  I  read  these  things.  And
then  we  should  not  try  to  hunt  up
anything  against  one  another,  and
our  little  weaknesses,  for  we  all
have  enough  of  them,  God  knows  ;
and  I  would  say  if  I  were  one  of
them,  Tom,  if  you  cry  quits,  I  will;
Mary,  if  you  will  forgive  me,  I  will
forgive  you  ;  and  Dick,  if  you  will
overlook  my  faults,  I  will  overlook
yours ;  Susan,  if  I  have  done  wrong
please  forgive  me.  Let  us  try,  one
and  all,  to  straighten  up,  and  get  up
a  good  common  surprise,  a  brother-
hood and  sisterhood,  that  we  may
be  one  ;  and  then  if  we  are  desirous
to  help  one  another,  and  pray  God
for  his  spirit  to  enlighten  us,  we  will
go  and  improve  in  these  tilings;
and  we  will  go  on  from  truth  to
truth,  from  wisdom  to  wisdom
and  from  intelligence  to  intelligence,
and  God  will  help  us,  if  we  will  help
ourselves  by  taking  a  course  to  ac-
complish these  objects.

There  is  another  tiling  I  want  to
talk  about,  and  that  is  the  ] driest-
hood.  What  is  your  idea  about  it  I
Don  t  you  think  that  the  priesthood
should  rule  in  spiritual  things,  and


166


JOURNAL  QY  DISCOURSES


the  other  "hood"  in  temporal  things,
or  how  do  you  fix  it  up?  Idoivt  know.
What  other  "hood*1  do  you  call  it1
It  is  not  brotherhood,  nor  sisterhood,
perhaps  you  may  call  it  division  hood.
Is  that  the  right  way,  do  you  think?
Let  me  talk  upon  some  of  the  first
principles  upon  this  subject.  To
whom  are  we  indebtedfor  the  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  truth  which
we  possess  to-day]  To  Joseph  Smith,
to  H)  rum  Smith,  to  Oliver  Cowdery,
to  Sidney  Kigdon,  Brigham  Young
or  the  Twelve  I  I  think  not  We
are  indebted  to  God  for  this  know-
ledge, from  the  fact  that  the  time
had  come,  in  the  councils  of  heaven,
that  it  was  necessary  to  start  the
latter-day  work,  and  to  prepare  a
people,  gathering  them  together  to
build  up  Zion  and  establish  the  king-
dom ot  God  upon  the  earth,  that
His  will  might  be  done  upon  the
ear  tit  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.  And
if  God  and  the  Priesthood  with  him
had  never  turned  the  key,  and  given
their  consent  tohave  these  things  done
we  would  have  been  in  the  dark,
every  one  of  us  ;  or  in  other  words,
we  would  have  been  where  we  came
from— on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,
or  somewhere  else.  At  any  rate,  we
would  not  have  been  here*  Do  you
not  think  it  would  have  been  well
for  the  Lord  to  have  come  down  to
consult  our  opinion  about  these
things  first  1  But  he  did  not  do  it,
and  we  knew  nothing  about  it  until
the  elders  brought  us  word.  Then
we  had  nothing  to  do  about  it,  did
we  f  We  knew  nothing  about  it  un-
til God  sent  the  messengers  among
us,  did  we  ?  I  think  not  Did  we
know  any  more  when  we  came  here]
Who  of  us  knew  how  to  build  tem-
ples or  thought  about  such  thing?
None.  Who  knew  how  to  admini-
ster in  them  !  None,  not  even  Jo-
seph or  any  other  man,  until  God
revealed  it We  talk  about  being


baptized  for  our  dead  ;  .what  avail
would  that  have  been  if  God  had
not  directed  it  ?  Do  you  think,  you
are  going  in  to  a  Tern  pie  to  accomplish
anything  except  God  direct  it  ?  No;
what  you  might  do  would  amount
to  nothing  at  all

God  has  established  his  Church,
and  we  sometimes  say  his  kingdom.
What  do  we  mean  by  "  the  kingdom
of  God?"  I  wish  somebody  would
tell  me  what  we  mean  by  using  that
term.  There  is  the  Church  of  God
and  the  kingdom  of  God.  The
Church,  of  course,  refers  more  par-
ticularly to  spiritual  things,  and  the
kingdom  to  temporal  rule  and  gov-
vernment  and  management  and  to
temporal  affairs.  If  it  does  not,
what  does  it  mean,  I  would  like
some  one  to  tell  me  ?  We  sometimes
preach  about  "  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  becoming  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,"  don't
wTe!  Will  the  kingdom  of  God
be  the  kingdom  of  men?  I
think  not  What  does  it  mean,
then,  where  it  says,  if  we  keep
the  laws  of  God,  we  need  not
break  the  laws  of  the  land?  Be-
cause the  laws  of  Gods  are  so
much  more  pure  and  elevated,  so
much  more  adapted  to  the  wants  and
situation  of  humanity,  that  we  walk
right  over  every  tiling  of  that  sort ;
and  it  is  nothing  comparatively  for
us  to  do  j  what  is  required  we  can
easily  do  it,  and  a  great  deal  on  the
back  of  it  But  when  the  will  of
God  shall  be  done  on  earth  as  iu
heaven,  and  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  his  Christ,  how  will  it
be  done  %  I  have  heard  lots  of  you
preach  this  :  "  Out  of  Zion  shall
go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of
the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.11  Shall
it  1  0,  yes.  Do  you  mean  to  say
that  is  in  the  Bible  ?  Yes,  and  what
is  the  meaning  of  that  scripture  I


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC


167


The  law  cannot  go  forth  from  Zion  j
unless  it  is  made  in  Zion,  can  it?
Who  is  going  to  make  that  law  ]
and  who  is  going  to  give  the  word
of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  ?  How
are  these  things  to  be  accomplished']
Are  we  to  have  a  lot  of  opposition
Tickets  to  do  it,  do  you  think  I  You
that  feel  yon  can  manage  things
without  the  priesthood,  try  it  and
see  how  far  you  will  go.  Go  back
to  your  ordination  and  baptism,  go
back  to  the  spreading  of  the  Gospel  I
through  the  land  and  the  pouring
out  of  intelligence  upon  the  priest-
hood, and  God  ruling  and  dictating,
and  k  The  Lord  shall  be  our  judge,
the  Lord  shall  he  our  king,  the
Lord  shall  be  our  law-giver,  said
Israel,  and  lie  si  vail  reign  over  us.*
Was  not  that  the  way  we  used  to

L

talk]  I  had  a  visit  from  some  of
your  folks  during  the  session  of  the
Legislature.  How  was  it,  and  which  '
was  right?  None  of  them  was  right,
just  as  it  was  when  the  Prophet
Joseph  asked  the  angel  which  of  the
sects  was  right  that  he  might  join  j
it.  The  answer  was  that  none  of
them  are  right  What,  none  of
them  !  No.  We  will  not  stop  to
argue that question  ; the  angel

merely  told  him  to  join  none  of  them
that  none  of  them  were  right.  Any-
thing wroni;  here  ]  Yes,  consider-
able.  There  wants  to  be  perfect
freedom  about  all  the.se  matters,
the  feelings  of  onr  brethren  should
be  consulted.  A  bishop  has  not  the
right  to  crowd  or  oppress,  tlie  priest-
hood is  not  given  to  him  for  that
purpose ;  but  everything  should
move  on  harmoniously,  and  tlie !
wishes  of  the  people  should  be
consul  led  and  respected.  I  under-
stand there  was  a  little  crow  ling
in  your  election  affairs,  you  were
not  more  than  ten  minutes  getting
through  your  business.  it  is  bet-
ter to  take  ten  days,  than  to  have


such  shameful  operations  as  you
had  here,  and  you  would  have
spent  your  time  much  better  doing
something  else.  What  next  %  Some
thought  there  was  a  little  pressure,
that  they  were  not  properly  repre-
sented. 1  do  not  know,  how  this
was,  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  it
was  a  little  hasty.  I  think  it
would  have  been  much  better  and
very  much  more  in  keeping  with
our  profession,  if  the  leaders  could
have  been  got  together,  and  acted  in
unanimity  and  good  feeling,  all  an-
xious to  sustain  the  principles  of
riiiht  and  to  select  for  office  those
who  are  good,  virtuous  and  com-
petent men,  and  men  who  are  cap-
able of  filling  offices  with  honor,
and  then  do  it  unanimously.  But
as  soon  as  a  feeling  to  crowd  is
manifested  on  one  side,  the  feeling
on  the  other  side,  when  expressed
is,  if  this  is  going  to  be  the  way,
we  will  buck  against  that,  and  if
we  cannot  get  our  rights  with  the
priesthood,  we  will  fall  back  upon
oftr  political  rights  as  men,  and  we
will  frustrate  you  in  your  operations
if  we  can.  Now  both  are  wrong.
There  should  have  been  a  free  and
full  consultation  on  the  one  hand,
the  right  of  all  respected,  and  on  the
other  i  would  rather  submit  myself
a  thousand  times,  even  to  an  im-
position than  to  act  as  you  did — to
speak  plainly,  if  a  bishop  wish  to
crowd  Oij  me,  I  would  let  him  crowd,
I  could  stand  it  if  he  could.  I  am  in-
structed to  be  obedient  to  the  priest-
hood, and  if  he  would  do  wrong  he
might  do  it,  but  I  would  not.  Two
wrongs  never  make  a  right.  I  will
not  say  how  far  you  were  wrong,
but  I  will  say  you  both  were
wronir,  and  that  another  course
would  have  been  much  better  and
more  satisfactory  and  praiseworthy.
What  is  the  result,  you  men  who
would  fall  back  on  your  reserved


168


JOUBNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


rights  1 The  first  thing  that  you  I
do  is  to  persuade  the  people  to  give
up  their  rights  and  franchise*  If
God  give  us  certain  rights,  and  we
trample  them  under  our  feet  and
throw  them  away  to  suit  some  little
ideas  of  our  own,  we  are  very  foolish
and  deserve  to  be  chastened. If  I
had  thought  the  bishop  was  wrong,
I  would  have  gone  to  him  and  talk-  .
ed  to  him  repect  fully,  and  see  if
things  could  not  be  modified.  But
you  take  the  other  way  and  brus-
quely say,  "I  will  show  you  :  Here,
Tom,  Bill,  Ned,  get  up  your  team
and  see  what  a  devil  of  a  fuss  we  (
can  kick  up." And  you  are  aiders
in  Israel,  and  you  are  engaged  in
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
are  you  1 Pretty  elders  you  are  !
pretty  kingdom-builders  you  are,
using  all  the  influence  and  power  of
your  priesthood  to  pull  down  and
destroy  the  kingdom  by  attacking
the  rights  of  the  people  and  barter*
ing  them  away,  sending  a  petition  to
the  Legislature  asking  that  body  to
take  away  your  rights,  for  you  do
not  want  them. And  this  done  by
Elders  in  Israel I  feel  a  little
ashamed  of  you,  and  when  I  heard
it,  said,  "  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  pub-
lish it  not  in  Askaloni."  What,  high
priests,  seventies  and  elders  conspir-
ing to  take  away  the  people's  rights?
That's  the  way  I  figure  it  up.  And
why  all  this? To  show  others  we
are  free  men. Are  we  free  ?  Yes,
free  to  do  right,  but  not  to  do  wrong.
Have  we  all  rights? Yes,  we  have
rights  to  do  right,  hut  we  have,
every  one  of  us,  covenanted  to  be
true  to  God  and  his  cause,  have  we
notl And  when  we  depart  from
that  we  do  wrong.  You  have  lots  of
sheep  here,  and  you  have  doubtless
seen  them  sometimes  make  a  break  :
one  will  start,  and  the  others  follow
and  away  they  go. Where  are  they
going  1 They  do  not  know.  Do


you  knowt  No.  But  the  sheep
perhaps  thought  they  were  in  bon-
dage and  wanted  to  get  out ;  the
lead  sheep  jumps,  perhaps  into  a
mire-hole,  it  does  not  matter,  they
all  follow  the  leader.

Let  us  operate  together  as  men,
as  Saints.  If  you  have  got  to  have
elections,  meet  together  honestly  and
consider  and  talk  plainly,  with  a
view  of  accomplishing  the  welfare
and  good  of  the  whole.  We  can-
not elect  everybody,  we  cannot  all
be  officers,  we  cannot  make  magis-
trates, mayors,  councillors  and  alder-
men of  you  all.  But  as  long  as  we
have  good  and  competent  men  for
office,  that  is  all  I  care  about,  an<?
we  have  plenty  of  them,  and  we
should  all  pull  one  way— a  long
pull,  and  a  strong  pull  and  a  pull  al-
together.

They  have  had  quite  enough  of
division  in  Tooele  County.  When
the  time  came  for  the  people  of  that
County  to  be  represented  in  the
Legislature,  their  representative  was
in  California,  and  when  matters  of
importance  pertaining  to  that  Coun-
ty were  pending,  they  had  no  one
to  represent  them.  Then  again,
they  elected  a  County  Superintend-
ent of  Common  Schools,  and  was  he
there  ?  No,  he  was  off  somewhere,
and  they  could  not  get  any  of  his
school  money.  Would  you  like  to
be  in  the  hands  of  such  men  ?  You
would  soon  want  to  get  back  again,
and  you  would  feel  a  little  like  Esau
did,  after  he  had  sold  his  birthright;
he  sought  to  get  it  back  with  tears,
but  could  not  regain  its  possession.
Our  strength  lies  in  our  union,  but
our  union  alone  would  not  accom-
plish much  unaided  by  God;  and  He
will  help  us  if  we  are  united  in  the
accomplishment  of  his  purposes.

I  will  now  refer  to  some  other
things.  We  have  Relief  Societies
here,  and  we  should  encourage  them.


THE  NATURAL  WEAKNESS  OF  MEN,  ETC,


169


We  brethren,  you  know,  should
assist  our  "  female  brethren/'  and
we  should  have  the  loyalty  and  pa-
triotism to  do  it  all  times  and  under
all  circumstances  ;  and  when  they  i
are  seeking  to  do  a  good  work,  help
them  all  we  can.  And  if  they  are
trying  to  get  together  a  little  wheat,
let  us  help  them,  it  will  not  do  us
much  harm,  and  possibly  we  may
find  it  by  and  by  of  advantage  to
us.  The  women  are  not  always
such  fools  as  we  men  sometimes  take
them  to  be,  I  am  reminded  of  a
circumstance  which  I  will  relate.
There  was  a  certain  lady  who  had  a
husband  who  was  very  free  and  gen-
erous, would  give  away  anything  he
had;  she  saw  that  he  was  a  little  too
liberal  and  careless,  and  that  there
evidently  would  come  a  time  when
he  would  be  in  a  pinch.  So  she  ask-
ed him  one  day  if  he  would  not
allow  her  a  certain  amount  to  keep
house,  "  0,  yes,  how  much  do  you
want  1 "  "  So  much  a  week/1  He
gave  her  quite  a  liberal  allowance,
so  much  that  she  could  manage  to
keep  house  and  put  away  a  certain
portion  every  week ;  she  put  her
savings  in  the  Bible,  until  by  and
by  it  amounted  to  quite  a  sum,  and
the  Bible  was  full  of  greenbacks.
Some  years  afterwards  there  came  a
financial  crisis,  and  the  husband
was  troubled.  The  wife  readily
perceived  the  change  in  her  hus-
band's countenance,  and  she  asked
him  to  tell  her  the  cause  of  his
trouble.  He  told  her  that  he  had  a
note  coming  due,  and  he  was  afraid
he  could  not  meet  it.  She  tried  to
encourage  him  by  telling  him  to
have  faith  in  God,  and  referred  him
to  the  good,  old  Book,  telling  him
to  read  it,  that  lie  might  get  some
comfort  from  it  She  handed  him
the  Bible,  and  as  he  opened  it  and
turned  over  the  leaves  the  bills  be-
gan to  drop  out. Why,  Susan,  says  I


he,  what  does  this  mean,  I  find  it
full  of  greenbacks  ?  She  quietly  an-
swered him  saying,  "  I  thought  you
you  were  very  generous  and  a  little
extravagant,  and  I  was  afraid  there
would  come  a  time  when  we  would
need  money  ;  so  I  put  away  much
a  week  in  the  Bible."  He  blessed
Ills  wife,  and  I  think  she  was  the
better  man  of  the  two,  and  perhaps
should  have  worn  the  breeches.
Now  we  may  find  a  time  when  we
may  need  this  wheat  that  our  sis-
ters are  storing  up;  let  us  not  be  too
confident  about  our  affairs,  and  do
what  we  can  by  way  of  helping
them.  I  am  pleased  to  witness  the
spirit  manifested  by  our  sisters  gen-
erally- I  hear  that  you  are  going
into  silk  culture,  and  am  glad  of  ft.
The  Legislature  appropriated  $1,500
to  help  our  sisters,  simply  because
they  were  our  sisters  and  because
they  were  trying  to  do  good.  You
go  to  work  and  help  them  here,  and
help  about  all  these  things,  and  do
all  you  can.  You  are  a  little  famous
in  some  of  these  parts — in  Farm-
ington  I  believe,  they  profess  to  be
in  advance  of  everything  in  the  silk
line.

And  then  with  regard  to  our  edu-
cational pursuits,  let  us  do  all  we
can  in  that  direction.  Some  people
talk  about  the  means  it  takes  ;  why
money  is  not  to  be  compared  with
intelligence.  I  wish  we  had  our
own  text  books,  published  by  our-
selves and  read  by  our  children.  I
think  such  things  are  indicated  in
the  Doctrine  ami  Covenants,  Then
let  us  have  our  high  schools,  that
our  children  may  be  taught  in  the
common  branches,  that  we  may  be
as  far  ahead  of  the  world  in  regard
to  literacy,  mechanism,  the  arts  and
sciences,  and  everything  else,  as  we
are  now  in  regard  to  to  religious
principles.

I  am  also  glad  to  see  our  Young


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Men's  and  Young  Ladies  Mutual
Improvement  Societies  doing  so
well-  It  will  be  well  for  you  to
come  together  as  conjoint  societies
once  in  a  while;  it  will  afford  an
agreeable  change,  as  well  as  do  much
good.  I  met  with  a  very  intelligent
gentleman  a  few  days  ago,  who  told
me  that  he  had  attended  one  of  the
Young  Men's  meetings,  and  was
astonished  at  the  intelligence  and
talent  displayed.  He  said  that  lie
had  not  seen  the  like  anywhere
among  young  people*

We  should  not  only  try  to  excel
in  literary  institutions,  but  in  mec-
hanism as  well.  We  must  unite
together  and  make  our  leather,  and
our  boots  and  shoes,  our  harness
and  our  implements  of  husbandry,
and  everything  we  need  for  our  use,
until  we  become  self-sustaining,  and
import  nothing  more  than  is  abso-
lutely necessary,  and  then  we  shall
find  full  i  m  ploy  men  t  for  all  our  peo-
ple.

I  have  perhaps  said  enough,  Hus-
bands, love  your  wives  j  treat  them
kindly  ;  bear  with  their  frailties  and
imperfections,  and  love  them  as  you
used  to  do  when  you  went  a  courting
them;  it  would  do  you  good,  many
of  you,  to  do  your  courting  over
again.  Wives,  treat  your  husbands
right ;  do  not  "nag"  with  them  and
find  fault,  but  be  full  of  kindness
and  try  to  make  your  homes  a  hea-
ven. Children,  ohey  your  parents,
and  treat  them  right.  And  parents,
you  that  have  servants,  treat  them
right,  pay  them  honest  wages,  and
deal  with  them  on  honorable  princi-
ples. And  in  your  deal  one  with
another,  be  honest  and  manly ;  do
not  seek  to  take  advantage  one  of
another.  Do  not  come  and  tell
what  a  splendid  bargain  you  have
made,  unless  the  other  party  made
as  good  a  bargain  as  you  did  ;  if  he
did,  it's  all  right,  but  if  he  did  not,


it's  not  all  right.

And  now  I  will  turn  teacher  be-
fore J  close.  Have  any  of  you  hard
feelings  against  your  neighbor]  If
you  have,  go  to  him,  not  in  a  capti-
ous, quarrelsome  way,  but  as  a
friend.  For  instance — "  Thomas,
you  and  1  have  had  a  little  difficul-
ty ;  I  thought  I  would  come  and
talk  the  matter  over  and  see  if  we
cannot  settle  it."  But  if  Thomas
will  not  be  reconciled,  then  take  a
third  party  with  you,  somebody
whom  you  think  would  have  more
influence  with  hi  in  than  yourself,
and  if  he  still  refuses  to  yield,  let
him  br  reported  to  his  bishop,  and
if  he  will  not  listen  to  the  Church,
let  him  be  considered  as  a  "heathen
man."  Mary,  Helen,  Susan,  how  is
it  with  you  *?  Any  little  unkind
feeling  existing  between  you  t  Do
you  feel  as  though  you  can  be  good
sisters,  and  treat  one  another  right  ?
Then  seek  one  another's  welfare,  as
the  Scripture's  says  :  il  Be  kindly
affectionate  one  with  another  with
brotherly  love  ;  in  honor  preferring
one  another."  You  say  that  is
rather  hard  ;  well,  but  you  had
better  do  it.  We  are  told  to  love
our  neighbor  as  ourselves.  If  we
can  do  this,  and  then  prefer  our
neighbors  to  ourselves,  and  if  there
is  a  little  advantage  put  it  on  their
side,  we  not  only  fulfill  the  law  and
the  prophets,  but  the  Gospel.  Let
us  cultivate  the  spirit  of  love  and
kindness,  and  let  every  little  un-
pleasantness be  buried,  let  us  for-
get the  election  difficulty  and  onr
neighbor's  difficulty,  and  be  one,
brethren  and  sisters  together,  united
in  building  up  Zion  and  establishing
the  Kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you  and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life,  and  God  help  you  to  do  right.
And  I  ask  an  interest  in  your  pray-


THE  GROWTH  OF  ZION,  ETC,


171


ers,  that  I  may  be  able  to  do  right,
and  be  guided  by  the  Lord  in  the
interests  of  Israel  ;  and  that  my
brethren  of  the  Twelve  and  the  pre-
sidency of  your  Stake,  together  with
all  of  the  brethren,  may  be  aided
and  blessed  of  the  Lord,  and  be  en-
abled to  sustain  God  and  His  king-
dom and  every  principle  of  right,
and  then  the  people  .sustain  them,


and  they  the  people,  and  everything
work  harmoniously  together,  and  all
of  us  do  right,  no  matter  where  it
cuts.  Do  right  and  pay  our  tithes
and  offerings  and  be  free  before
God,  angels  and  men.

Praying  God  to  bless  you  and
lead  you  in  the  paths  of  life,  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  BRIGHAM  YOUXG,

DELIVERED  AT  THE  GENERAL  CONFERENCE,  OU  TUESDAY  HOKNING,

APRIL  8,  1879.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


THE GROWTH OF ZION — B FN K FITS OF SEEKING COUNSEL FROM  THE

MORE  EXPERT  K N ( .'  LP.


The  privilege  that  we  enjoy  of
meeting  together  again  in  Confer-
ence 1  believe  is  highly  appreciated
by  the  Latter  day  Saints,  The  dry
details  of  our  reports  are  somewhat
tedious  I  am  aware;  but  no  doubt
many  are  interested  in  the  reports
of  their  several  Stakes,  for  there  is  a
feeling  in  the  hearts  of  this  people
that  causes  interest  to  be  felt  for  all
the  stakes  of  Zion,  and  I  believe  that
the  present  organization  together
with  the  reports  that  are  made  quar-
terly, semi-annually  and  annually
are  drawing  the  people  together  in
interests. We  are  better  ac-


quainted with  each  other  than  ever
before  vvil  Inn  my  iveollectinn.  Our
general  assemblies  bring  us  together,
and  pleasant  re  unions  are  made,
and  the  good  Spirit  of  God  being
disseminated  anion*/  us  makes  ius

O

feel  more  like  the  children  of  one
common  parent  than  when  we  are
widely  dispersed  and  seldom  behold
each  other's  faces.

Many  reflections  have  passed
through  my  mind  during  this  Con-
ference. 1  have  listened  with  in-
terest to  the  remarks  which  have
been  made,  and  to  the  reports  which
have  been  read. Zion  is  growing,


172  JOURNAL  or

financially  and  in  numbers.  It  is  I
wonderful !  I  was  astonished,  as
well  acquainted  as  I  have  been  with
this  people  for  the  number  of  years
that  they  have  inhabited  these  val-
leys, to  know  that  one-third  of  the
entire  population  of  this  Territory —
as  far  as  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
concerned— are  children  under  eight  <
years  of  age.  But  such  is  the  fact.
These  reports  do  not  take  in  the  en-
tire population  of  this  Territory,
There  is  quite  a  number  of  children
over  eight  years  of  age  who  have  not
been  baptized  and  consequently  they
are  not  represented  in  these  reports.
I  presume  that  there  are  hundreds,
if  not  thousands,  of  cases  in  the
midst  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  where
we  have  neglected  to  administer  the
ordinance  of  baptism  to  our  children,
who,  according  to  the  revelations  of
God,  ought  to  be  numbered  among
the  members  of  this  Church.  The
instructions  which  we  have  received
are  plain  and  pointed  ;  perhaps  I  j
may  not  be  a  competent  judge  for
all  mankind,  or  for  my  brethren,  yet
to  me  they  are  full  of  the  inspiration
of  the  Lord  and  are  calculated  to
lead  and  guide  his  children  in  the
path  of  everlasting  life.  And  it
does  seem  impossible  to  me  for
any  man,  or  any  set  of  men,  to
refute  the  testimonies  that  have
been  borne  to  this  Conference,

It  is  proper  and  consistent  that
we  look  for  counsel  to  those  who
are  advanced  in  the  knowledge  of
the  Gospel  We  should  do  the
same  in  regard  to  law  or  politics.
If  I  were  to  go  to  Washington
among  the  politicians  of  the  coun-
try and  set  myself  up  as  a  politi-
cian, pretending  to  understand  all
the  ins  and  outs  of  political  life  as,
say,  one  of  the  representatives  of
our  nation,  I  would  find  myself
greatly  deficient,  and  I  would
gladly  seek  some  experienced  man


DISCOURSES.

on  whom  I  could  rely  to  instruct
me  in  regard  to  these  thing.  It  is
true,  1  might  read  the  Congression-
al Record,  in  which  the  speeches
of  our  statesmen  are  published  ;  I
might  go  to  hear  them  delivered,
and  exert  myself  otherwise  to  in-
form myself ;  yet  though  through
diligence  and  perseverance  I  might
acquire  very  considerable  knowledge
of  this  kind  of  business,  yet  I  would
lack  a  most  important  part,  namely:
the  experience,  and  I  would  willingly
and  gladly  avail  myself  of  the  teach-
ing of  an  experienced  man.  If  I
were  to  start  in  the  business  of  law,
it  would  be  reasonable  to  suppose,
of  course,  that  I,  like  the  seventy
men  or  more  who  follow  that  busi-
ness in  this  city,  would  have  a
smattering  of  legal  knowledge  ;  but
like  them  too,  if  a  more  experienced
man  were  to  come  along,  and  espe-
cially if  he  were  a  genius  in  his  pro-
fession, I  would  gladly  learn  of  him
and  it  would  afford  me  pleasure  to
listen  to  him.  This  is  the  case  in
all  tilings.  Suppose  a  member  of
my  family  is  sick ;  I  am  at  once
prompted  with  a  desire  to  consult
some  experienced  nurse  who  is
more  competent  than  myself  in  ad-
ministering such  things  as  one  in
that  condition  ought  to  receive.
Perhaps  a  finger  of  one  of  my
children  may  need  amputating.  I
might  take  an  ax  and  cut  it  off  in
my  way,  but  I  could  not  do  it
like  our  Dr.  Anderson  for  instance,
a  man  who  is  a  skilled  surgeon.  I
would  naturally  yield  my  way  to
theirs  in  regard  to  these  things.
And  so  it  is  through  all  the  branches
of  business  transacted  in  this  life —
the  influence,  opinion  or  knowledge
of  somebody  else  controls  or  affects
that  of  ours*

To-day  we  maybe  acquainted  with
a  man  who  is  really  excellent  in
his  profession, but  another  man


THE  GROWTH  OF  ZION,  ETC


corner  along  who  can  surpass  him,
and  the  former  is  glad  to  learn  of
the  latter.  And  so  we  may  follow
it  through  until  we  come  to  the  sub
ject  of  religion.  But  the  moment
that  subject  is  touched  men  rise  up,
no  matter  how  ignorant  they  may
be  with  regard  to  the  principles
which  are  calculated  to  exalt  man
kind,  and  say,  "I  must  think  for
myself ;  no  man  must  be  trammeled
in  those  matters  ;  every  man  must
have  the  privilege  of  worshipping
God  according  to  the  dictates  of  his
conscience. *  So  say  I,  but  I  do
know,  and  we  have  indubitable  evi-
dence of  the  fact  that  the  men  who
stand  at  the  head  of  this  people  are
skilled  in  the  things  pertaining  to
the  building  up  of  the  kingdom  of
God  in  the  last  days.  This  fact  is
proven  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  to  those  at  least,
who  have  followed  them  the  last  15
to  30  years.  We  know  that  they
understand  more  about  these  things
than  we  do*  When  questions  arise,
whether  in  polities,  finance,  morals
or  law,  requiring  the  judgment  of
sound  and  experienced  men,  or  when
circumstances  arise  in  our  indivi-
dual lives  which  are  perplexing  and
of  such  a  nature  as  to  exhaust  our
ability,  we  naturally  seek  the  counsel
of  these  our  brethren;  and  our  ex-
perience has  proven  them  to  be
masters  of  the  situation  ;  that  they
are  skilled  in  their  profession  and
abundantly  able  to  direct  us.  Why
should  I  not  fellow  the  leaders  whom
God  lias  placed  over  me?  Why
should  not  this  privilege  be  granted
mel  Is  it  more  inconsistent  in
me  showing  my  principle  and  desire
for  right  in  following  these  men  than
in  acquiring  the  art  of  mechanics,
in  being  taught  by  a  more  experi-


enced mechanic?  or  in  politics  or  law
or  surgery,  by  men  who  are  farther
advanced  in  those  professions  than
myself  ?  Certainly  not  Ami  besides
this  the  Spirit  uf  God  which  I  have
received  which  is  an  unmistakeable
guide,  bears  witness  to  me  that  it  is
rig] it  for  me  to  be  taught  of  them
and  that  their  teachings  are  the
teachings  of  heaven  to  the  children
of  men,  and  that  they  are  calculated,
if  lived  up  to,  to  lead  men  back  into
the  presence  of  God  the  Father,  Yet
I,  in  connection  with  this  whole
people,  am  accused  of  yielding  my
own  will  and  free  ageucy  to  an  over-
bearing priesthood,  thus  becoming
their  dupes  and  slaves.  This  is  in
short,  the  judgment  generally  passed
on  the  Latter-day  Saints  by  the
American  nation.  A nd  while  they
say  this  of  us,  their  better  sense
would  tell  them  that  they  do  the
same  in  law,  in  morals,  in  mechan-
ism, in  politics,  etc,  directly,  and  in
religious  matters  they  do  the  same
indirectly*  Well,  for  one, — ami  in
saying  this  I  speak  the  sentiments
of  this  whole  people — I  intend  to
fullow  the  men  appointed  and  or-
dained of  God  to  lead  and  direct  his
Saints,  as  they  follow  Christ  "Know
ye  not,"  says  the  apostle,  u  that  to
whom  ye  yield  yourselves  to  obey,
his  servants  ye  are  whom  ye  obey;
whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of
obedience  unto  righteousness."

May  the  blessings  of  God  rest
upon  this  people  and  the  peace  of
heaven  be  with  them  in  all  of  their
locations  and  settlements,  and  give
unto  us  strength  to  continue  faith-
ful in  the  cause  of  truth,  that  we
may  do  our  part  towards  the  build*
ing  up  of  his  kingdom,  and  at  last  be
saved  with  the  faithful,  is  ray  prayer,
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


174


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Tuesday  afternoon,  i

April  8,  1879,  '  |

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gtbbs.)  \

OPENING  OF  THE  LAST  DISPENSATION — DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  WORK
OF  GOD — SENDING  FORTH  MISSIONARIES— USEFULNESS  UF  THE
SISTERS — IMPROVEMENT  ASSOCIATIONS — EDUCATION Co  OPERATION.


I  will  state  that  I  feel  very  much
obliged  to  my  brethren  for  the
generous  feeling  manifested  to  my-
self Permit  me,  however,  to
with  regard  to  some  of  these  ideas
presented  to  the  Conference  by
Brother  George  Q.  and  which  lie
has  said,  he  has  frequently  presented
to  me  and  others  of  the  Twelve,
that  while  I  duly  appreciate  the
feelings  and  views  of  my  brethren,
and  am  not  ignorant  of  the  proprie-
ties of  life,  individually  I  would  not
wish  to  change  my  position.  Per-
sonally I  care  nothing  about  the  out-
side show,  the  glitter  and  appearance
of  men  :  but  I  do  care  about  the
great  eternal  principles  associated
with  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth.  And  as  has
been  stated,  it  was  some  time  before
I  could  make  up  my  mind  to  accept
a  proposition  of  this  land.  And  I
accept  it  now  simply  in  the  capacity
of  your  servant  for  Christ's  sake  for
the  benefit  of  the  Kingdom  of  God
and  that  all  tilings  may  be  conducted
in  a  proper  manner,

>Tow  we  will  let  this  pass,  and
talk  about  something  else,

I  have  been  very  much  interested
in  the  remarks  that  have  been  made
at  this  Conference. It  is  now  forty-


nine  years  since  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  was  or-
ganized. There  were  then,  as  yon
heard  stated  and  as  we  very  well
know,  sixmembers  organized.  There  .
were  however,  more  than  six  persons  1
in  the  CI  lurch,  as  was  remarked  by
Brother  Snow,  the  organization  being
effected  for  the  purpose  of  legal  re-
cognition, still  there  were  only  a  very
few,  and  as  the  spirit  of  revelation
rested  down  upon  Gods  servant
Joseph  in  these  early  days,  who
like  Adam,  Moses,  Abraham,  Jesus,
Jared,  Nephi,  Moroni  and  others,
had  the  heavens  unfolded  to  his  view,
and  although  the  Church  was  so
few  in  number  the  principles  and
purposes  of  God  were  developed
fully  to  the  vision  of  his  mind,  and
he  gazed  upon  the  things  that  are
to  transpire  in  the  latter-days  asso-
ciated with  the  dispensation  that  he
was  called  upon  by  the  Almighty  to
introduce.  He  learned  by  commu-
nication from  the  heavens,  from  time
to  time,  of  the  great  events  that
should  transpire  in  the  latter  days.
He  understood  things  that  were
past,  and  comprehended  the  various
dispensations  and  the  designs  of
those  dispensations.  He  not  only
had  the  principles  developed,  but  he


OPENING  OF  THE  LAST  DISPENSATION,  ETC


175


was  conversant  with  the  parties  who
officiated  as  the  leading  men  of  those
dispensations,  and  from  a  number
of  them  he  received  authority  and
keys  and  priesthood  and  power  for
the  carrying  out  of  the  great  purpo-
ses of  the  Lord  in  the  last  days,  who
were  sent  and  commissioned  speci-
ally by  the  Almighty  to  confer  upon
him  those  keys  and  this  authority,
and  hence  he  introduced  what  was
spoken  of  by  all  the  prophets  since
the  world  was  ;  the  dispensation  in
which  we  live,  which  differs  from
all  other  dispensations  in  that  it  is
the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of
times,  embracing  all  other  dispensa-
tions, all  other  powers,  allotherkeys
and  all  other  privileges  and  immuni-
ties that  ever  existed  upon  the  face
of  the  earth*  At  that  time  lie  was
a  feeble  youth,  inexperienced,  with-
out a  knowledge  of  the  learning  of
the  day.  But  God  put  him  in  pos-
session of  that  kind  of  intelligence,
and  what  may  be  termed  a  scientific
knowledge  of  all  things  pertaining
to  this  earth,  and  the  heavens,  if
you  please,  which  was  altogether
alien d  of  all  the  intelligence  that
existed  in  the  world.  He  commen-
ced as  opportunity  presented  by  fol-
lowing the  education  he  had  received
from  the  Almighty,  by  teaching  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation,  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
by  conferring  upon  others  that  priest-
hood which  had  been  conferred
upon  him,  and  by  organizing  a  state
of  things  that  was  after  the  pattern
of  the  heavens,  that  was  calculated
to  live  and  grow  and  increase,  that
had  the  principle  of  life  and  vitality
within  itself,  and  that  was  calculated
to  draw  together  the  honest  in  heart
and  assimilate  them  in  their  ideas
and  views  and  feelings  and  faith,
and  empower  them  to  operate  with
him  and  with  the  Lord  and  with  the
holy  priesthood  that  had  existed  in


former  ages.  And  thus  he  commen-
ced to  organize  the  Church  with  all
its  various  offices  under  the  direct
inspiration,  guidance  and  revelation
of  the  Lord.  The  First  Presidency
was  pointed  out,  the  Twelve  were
also  pointed  out  and  designated,  and
these  quorums  were  ordained.  The
high  priesthood  was  organized  how-
ever before  these  other  q  uorums  took
shape.  Then  there  were  the  quo-
rums of  Seventies,  then  the  quorums
of  Elders,  then  the  Bishops,  then
the  quorum!  of  Priests,  Teachers
and  i)eacons,  together  with  the
High  Councils  and  all  that  we  know
about  these  things.  He  taught  us
all  that  we  know  about  them  ;  God
taught  hiim  Hence  in  the  various
organizations  of  the  several  quorums
of  priesthood  whether  it  relates  to
the  Melchizedek,  Aaron  ic  or  Levi  ti-
cal  priesthood,  all  of  these,  together
with  the  duties  devolving  upon  each,
were  given  by  the  Lord.  And  hence
the  church  that  we  arc  associated
with  is  called  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  Hence
Jesus  Christ  is  the  medium  through
whom  we  are  to  approach  the  Father,
calling  upon  him  in  the  name  of
Jesus ;  for  there  is  no  name  given
under  heaven,  nor  known  among
in  en,  whereby  we  can  be  saved  but
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  And  al-
though they  do  not  do  it  now,  yet
the  time  is  approaching  when  to
him  w  every  knee  will  bow  and  every
tongue  confess  that  he  is  the  Christ,
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father/'
And  hence  the  religion  we  profess
is  one  that  has  been  given  us  from
the  heavens.  We  cannot  dispense
with  it  ;  we  cannot  dispense  with
any  part  of  it.  It  is  not  of  man,  but
from  the  Lord  God,  our  Heavenly
Father,  through  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  making  use  of  his  servant
Joseph  and  those  whom  he  should
call  by  revelation  as  the  instruments


176


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  God
upon  the  earth.  The  priesthood  we
have  received  we  received  Mot  of
man  nor  by  man,  but  by.  revelation.
And  latter] v  President*  Young,  a
little  before  his  death,  organized  all
the  various  branches  of  the^Gfetffch
into  Stakes,  with  the  offices  there-
of, carrying  out  the  design  oftlodand
his  revelations  to  Joseph  ^tfciith  ;
and  placed  them  upon  the  founda-
tion that  was  first  laid*  by  Joseph
Smith  under  the  immediatptaevela-
tions  of  the  Lord,  And  God  ex-
pects it  at  our  hands  that  we  itoagnify
our  calling,  and  that  we  cleave  unto
him  as  his  servants  upon  whom  he
has  conferred  this  priesthood*  He
expects  it  at  our  hands  that  we  shall
magnify  it,  and  not  operate  accord-
ing to  our  peculiar  notions,  but
according  to  the  will  and  law  and
guidance  and  revelations  of  God  in
all  things  and  under  all  circumstan-
ces ;  for  we  are  here  as  Jesus  was
here — not  to  do  our  own  will,  but
the  will  of  our  Heavenly  Father  who
has  sent  us,  and  who  has  called  us
to  this  high  calling,  and  has  made
us  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places
in  Christ  Jesus.

In  accordance  with  the  order  of
God,  the  Twelve,  the  Seventies,  the
High  Priests  and  Elders  have  been
abroad  among  the  nations  of  the
earth,  deli  vering  the  test  imony  which
God  gave  to  them,.,  s*nd  the  Spirit
and  power  of  God  has  operated  with
us  in  our  ministrations ;  and  the
results  of  these  operations  and  these
labors,  and  the  faith  and  the  self-ab-
negation and  self-denial  and  the
desire  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  the
testimonies  that  have  been  borne,
are  manifested  in  the  Saints  gathered
to-day  as  we  are  in  the  valleys  of
the  mountains.  These  things  have
been  brought  about  by  the  interpo-
sition of  the  Almighty ;  we  are,  as
such  dependent  upon  him  to-day,


and  as  we  ever  were  in  all  the  d&ys
erf  our  lives,  for  guidance,  for  support,
for  revelation,  for  the  Spirit  of  God
to  guide  us  that  we  may  not  make
any  false  steps  ;  but  as  a  people  we
must  magnify  the  Lord  our  God  in
our  hearts  and  honor  him  and  ob-
serve his  laws  and  keep  his  command-
ments, There  has  quite  a  change
taken  place  since  this  Gospel  was  in-
troduced, as  the  thousands  of  people
who  inhabit  these  valleys  sufficiently
attest.  And  if  we  continue  to  pro-
gress in  faith,  in  union,  in  intelli-
gence, in  virtue,  in  purity,  in  know-
ledge, and  especially  in  the  know-
ledge of  God  and  in  the  observance
of  his  ordinances,  tike  work  of  the
Lord  will  continue  to  roll  with  ten-
fold rapidity.  We  are  just  com-
mencing our  labors,  and  are  just
getting  ready  to  perform  the  work
that  God  has  laid  upon  our
shoulders,  and  are  just  com-
mencing to  perform  the  work  that
God  intends  us  to  accomplish;  every-
thing that  has  been  prophesied  by
all  the  ancient  prophets,  as  contained
in  the  Bible  and  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  those  things  predicted  by
Joseph  Smith,  and  every  other
prophet  of  God,  will  as  surely  be
fulfilled  as  we  are  here  to-day,  with-
out any  faltering,  or  flagging,  or  he-
sitation.

We  go  on  and  attend  %o  fnany
things-  Our  organizations  are  very
good  ;  but  we  need,  I  think  some-
times, the  breath  of  life  froip  God
breathing  into  them  all  through  that
the  Spirit  and  power  of  th£  Most
High  tnay  he  in  our  midst,  and  that
the  power  and  blessings  of  God  that  *
come  through  the  ordinances  ipay  be
in  our  midst,  and  that  the  power
and  blessings  of  God,  that  come
through  the  ordinances  m&y  be  im-
parted to  us  ;  and  such  will  be  the*
case  if  we  are  faithful  in  the  per-
|  formance  of  the  duties  devolving


THE  GROWTH  OF  ZION,  ETC.


177


upon  us.  It  is  not  with  us  a
question  of  what  we  shall  eat,  or
what  we  shall  drink,  or  what  kind
of  houses  we  shall  live  in;  it  is
not  a  matter  of  so  much  importance
as  it  is  to  be  doing  the  will  of  God,
to  have  our  hearts  engaged  in  his
service,  to  feel  that  we  are  building
up  the  Zion  of  the  Lord  of  HostsJ  to
feel  that  we  are  recognized  of  the
heavens,  to  feel  that  we  are  associ-
ated with  the  priesthood  behind  the
vail  who  have  lived  and  operated  in
time  and  are  now  operating  in  eter-
nity ;  for  they  without  us  cannot  be
made  >erfect,  neither  can  we  with-
out them  be  marie  perfect.  We
need  their  assistance  from  the
heavens,  and  we  ought  to  seek  it  all
the  time,  » Js**

Let  me  speak  of  this  not  only  to
the  Twelve,  but  to  the  presidents  of
Stakes  and  their  counselors,  and
to  all  men  holding  authority,  to  seek
to  God,  seek  for  wisdom,  seek  for
faith,  and  learn  to  approach  God,
that  we  may  draw  down  blessings
from  heaven  and  partake  of  that
faith  which  was  once  delivered  to
the  Saints.  We  are  trying  to  do
some  things  and  are  doing  them
pretty  well.  Do  I  wish  to  find
fault?  No.  Or  to  censure  anybody  ?
No.  But  I  wish  everybody  would
so  live  and  act  that  they  would  not
censure  themselves,  that  their  minds
would  not  condemn  them  ;  for  if
your  own  hearts  condemn  you,  God
is  greater  than  your  hearts.

We  are  doing  pretty  well.  We
are  building  our  Temples,  and  there
is  a  laudable  spirit  manifested  in  re-
lation to  these  things  generally.  Do
all  do  it  1  No.  Have  all  this  spirit  ?
No.  I  wish  they  had  ;  but  then  we
would  be  expecting  too  much  per-
haps. But  there  is  a  growing  inter-
est in  these  things,  which  I  am  glad
to  give  the  Saints  credit  for.  And
in  speaking  of  our  Temples,  I  sup-
No*  12.


pose  there  are  no  less  than  500  men
engaged  to-day  in  building  Temples
in  this  Territory.  Some  people
would  consider  this  quite  a  tax  upon
them,  and,  I  may  say,  we  have  some
who  call  themselves  Latter-day
Saints  who  have  a  little  of  this  feel-
ing, not  much,  but  a  little  of  it.  But
men  who  feel  right,  they  feel  that
they  and  all  they  have  belong  to  the
Lord  ;  they  feel  that  they  are  on
hand  to  perform  the  work  of  God,  to
build  up  his  kingdom,  to  operate
with  him  and  with  the  holy  priest-
hood, and  to  prepare  Temples  to  ad-
minister for  the  living  and  for  the
dead  ;  that  we  may  indeed  he  not
poor  and  helpless  dolts  ;  but  feel
that  we  are  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion,
and  that  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's.

There  is  a  good  feeling  manifested
among  the  brethren  and  also  among
the  sisters,  who  are  quite  as  zealous
in  most  interests  as  the  brethren  are.
Notwithstanding  the  immense  labors
we  are  performing  in  our  building,
for  we  are  doing  a  good  deal,  we  are
not  unmindful  of  other  matters.
There  is  constant  labor  going  on  in
the  Temple  at  St.  George,  with  very
little  intermission,  and  a  corps  of
persons  steadily  engaged  administer-
ing in  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord's
House  there  ;  while  in  these  other
places,  as  you  have  heard  read  over,
according  to  the  financial  accounts
pertaining  to  the  Temple  beingbuilt
in  Man ti  and  Logan — there  has  been
expended  in  a  short  time  on  these
two  Temples  nearly  two  hundred
and  fifty  thousand  dollars.  The
brethren  have  taken  hold  of  it  with
a  will,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  feel-
ing among  many  of  them  to  see  who
shall  do  the  most,  instead  of  who
can  do  the  least.  And  notwith-
standing this  there  is  about  fifty
thousand,  I  think,  in  round  num-
bers, more  tithing  paid  this  last  year
than  there  was  before  these  thing!

Vol.  XX.


178


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


commenced.  I  speak  this  fur  the
credit  of  the  Latter- day  Saints.
Honor,  as  the  Scriptures  say,  to
whom  honor  is  due.  And  I  am
pleased  to  see  a  spirit  of  that  kind
grow  and  increase  among  the  breth-
ren.

There  has  been  a  good  deal  of
care  bestowed  on  the  sending  forth
of  missionaries  whom  we  have  sent
forth  among  the  different  nations
abroad  and  to  this  nation.  There  is
a  duty  devolving  upon  the  Twelve
and  the  Seventies  especially,  to  see
that  this  work  is  performed  ;  and
we  have  been  alive  to  this  matter,
and  have  aimed  to  call  men  that
would  not  be  embarrassed  or  per-
plexed in  their  minds,  but  such  as
would  go  forth  as  the  servants  of
the  Living  God,  w  ho  would  not,  when
they  got  about  two  hundred  miles
from  home,  commence  to  think  when
it  would  be  time  for  them  to  return;
and  the  fruits  are  fast  beginning  to
be  borne  in  the  European,  the
Scandinavian  and  other  missions,  and
also  in  the  United  States.  And  we
wish  it  to  be  understood  among  the
Elders  and  Seventies  that  we  do
not  want  men  to  go  on  missions
who  look  upon  it  as  a  painful  duty  for
them  to  fulfil ;  we  would  rather  such
men  stay  at  home.  But  he  that
hath  a  desire  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  world,  whose  life  is  upright,
pure  and  virtuous,  and  who  is  cap-
able of  presenting  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  to  the  world  ;  he  is  the
kind  of  man  we  are  desirous  to  send.
We  do  not  want  anybody  to  go
simply  because  it  might  be  thought
that  a  mission  would  do  him  good,
or  that  it  might  save  him  from  some
evil  he  might  be  likely  to  fall  into.
We  do  not  want  men  to  go  abroad
representing  the  Captain  of  our  sal-
vation to  reform  themselves;  let  the
work  of  reformation  be  done  at  home.
We  want  men  to  preach  the  Gospel


who  are  honorable  and  upright  men,
and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  an
when  such  men  go  they  go  with  ou
faith,  carrying  with  them  our  esteem
and  love  and  affection  ;  and  if  the
need  anything,  we  will  give  it
them. If  their  families  need  any-
thing,  we  will  have  them  looke
after,  we  will  feed  them  and  cloth
them  and  take  care  of  them,  an

—  ~  ^^^^^  u

consider  that  they  are  our  brethren
and  not  that  they  are  poor,  miser-
able paupers,  or  that  their  wives
and  families  are  a  trouble  to  us;
we  want  to  do  away  with  all  such
feelings.  Let  us  cultivate  the  spirit
of  magnanimity  and  kindness,  and
as  the  Lord  blesses  us,  let  us  bless
others;  and  that  is  all  the  things  of
the  earth  are  worth.  Uo  good  to
all  men,  especially  to  the  household
of  faith.  And  by  and  by,  as  was
the  case  formerly,  those  who  go
forth  weeping,  bearing  precious  seed,
will  return  rejoicing,  bringing  their
sheaves  with  them.

Furthermore,  we  have  an  auxili-
ary among  our  sisters  here/  Erotlie
Geo,  Q.  Cannon  represented  how  they
were  imposed  on  in  many  lands
and  how  they  had  been.  Why
should  they  be  ?  Are  they  not  our
mothers  ?  Are  they  not  our  wives  %
Are  they  not  our  sisters  1  Are  they
not  our  children?  Should  we  not
protect  them  ?  Do  we  profess  to
be  in  the  image  of  God,  holding  the
holy  priesthood  of  God,  and  then
would  we  treat  the  fair  daughters
of  Zion  with  contempt,  or  permit
them  to  be  injured  or  imposed
upon  in  any  way?  God  forbid.
They  are  flesh  of  our  flesh,  bone
of  our  bone ;  they  are  our  help-
meets, and  our  associations  and  our
relations  with  them  ought  to  be
pleasant  and  agreeable  and  with  all
long  suffering  and  fidelity.  And
(  then  the  sisters  should  turn  round
and  help  to  bless  one  another,  and


TIT  K  GROWTH

act  as  our  teachers  are  doing  in
other  respects — teaching  their  sisters,
looking  after  the  poor  and  assist-
ing the  bishops  in  the  performance
of  their  labors.  And  the  Relief
Societies  which  have  been  organized
have  been  of  very  great  benefit  to
the  Saints  of  God.  And  I  say,  God
bless  the  sisters,  and  inspire  them
with  more  of  that  heavenly  spirit,
that  they  may  assist  t  heir  husbands
and  their  brethren  and  their  children
— their  sons  and  their  daughters —
to  promote  correct  principles,  to  stem
the  tide  of  iniquity,  and  to  promul-
gate virtue,  truth  and  purity  among
the  Saints  of  God.  And  I  would
say,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  bishops
and  presidents  of  Stakes  to  assist
them  all  thry  can,  which  I  believe
they  generally  do,  to  carry  out
■everything  that  is  good  and  praise-
worthy.

There  is  another  class  of  people
Among  us  doing  a  great  deal  of  good;
that  is  our  Mutual  Improvement
Associations ;  both  Young  Men's
and  Young  Women's.  How  much
more  pleasant  it  is  to  see  our  youth
grow  up  in  the  fear  of  God,  trying
to  instruct  one  another  in  the  prin-
ciples of  life  and  salvation,  than  to
see  them  ignore  the  laws  of  God.
How  ph  asing  to  us!  How  pleasing  to
God  and  the  holy  angels !  Let  us
•encourage  these  things,  and  instruct
our  sons  and  daughters,  that  they
may  grow  up  in  intelligence,  virtue,
purity  and  holiness  before  the  Lord.

And  then  we  want  to  study  also
the  principles  of  education,  and  to
get  the  very  best  teachers  we  can  to
teach  our  children ;  see  that  they
are  men  and  women  who  fear  God
and  keep  his  commandments.  We
do  not  want  men  or  women  to  teach
the  children  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  who  are  not  Latter-day
Saints  themselves.  Hear  it,  you
Elders  of  Israel and  you  school-


OF  ZION,  ETC.  X  7i>

trustees  !  We  want  none  of  these
things.  Let  others  who  fear  not
God  take  their  course ;  but  it  is  for
us  to  train  our  children  up  in  th*s
fear  of  God.  God  will  hold  us  re-
sponsible for  this  trust.  Hear  it,
you  Elders  of  Israel  and  you  fathers
and  you  mothers!  Talking  about
education,  as  I  said  before,  Joseph
Smith  knew  more  in  regard  to  true
education  than  all  the  philosophers
and  scientists  of  the  earth  ;  and  he
knew  it  by  the  revelations  of  God
We  want  to  get  together  to  train
our  children  up  in  the  fear  of  God,
to  teach  them  correct  principles  our-
'  selves,  and  place  them  in  possesion
of  such  things  as  will  lead  them  in
the  paths  of  life,

I  find  it  is  time  for  me  to  quit.  I
feel  to  thank  you  for  your  attend-
ance at  this  Conference,  and  for  the
kind  of  spirit  that  has  been  mani-
fested here.  And  to  thank  the
members  of  our  choir  who  have  made
for  us  sweet  music  ;  and  I  would  say
that  our  choir  is  a  credit  to  our
Territory  and  to  our  people.  And
furthermore  they  are  meeting  to-
other for  thr  purpose  of  cultivating
the  art  of  music,  and  that  we  may  be
organized  and  be  more  perfect  in  re-
lation to  these  things.

I  would  like  to  have  said  some-
thing about  our  Sunday  Schools.  I
do  not  believe  we  are  behind  any
people  on  the  face  of  the  earth  in
relation  to  these  matters*  I  am  in-
formed by  the  general  Superintend-
ent that  we  have  29,000  children  at-
tending Sunday  Schools  ;  and  I
would  not  be  afraid  to  say  that  that
is  more  than  attend  the  Sunday
Schools  in  all  the  Territories  put  to*
gether,  outside  of  Utah,  (A  voice
from  the  stand — "  And  in  half  the
States.")  Some  one  remarks,  and  in
half  of  the  States,  I  do  not  know
how  that  is.  But  they  do  say  our
children  are  Utah's  surest  and  best


crop.  Let  us  try  to  train  them  up
In  the  fear  of  God,  that  we  may
have  his  blessing  to  be  with  us.  i
I  would  like  to  have  said  some-
thing, too,  about  our  co-operative
associations.  I  am  pleased  to  in-
form you  that  the  Co-operative  In-
stitution of  this  city  is  doing  remark-
ably well  j  it  is  on  a  solid  foundation
and  everything  is  moving  along
pleasantly  and  agreeably.  \Yq  have
organized  for  some  time  a  Trade's
Union  j  through  which  all  the  people
of  Utah  can  be  represented.  And
while  the  Co-op  calls  upon  us  to  .su-
stain them,  which  is  right  and  proper,
we  want  the  Co-op  to  sustain  us.
There  are  two  sides  to  this  question,
hence  we  have  an  organization  called


a  Board  of  Trade  in  a  number  of  the
Stakes,  and  ex}>ect  to  perfect  them
in  all  the  Stakes,  that  the  whol
people  may  be  represented  at  our
general  board.  Then  we  expect  to
spread  and  grow  in  manufactures  o
all  kinds,  that  we  may  become  a  self-
sustaining  people,  a  people  who  shall
be  independent,  under  God,  of  al
other  powers.

I  will  not  detain  you*  God  bles
Israel,  and  all  that  bless  Israel,  an
let  our  enemies  be  confounded.  And
God  grant  unto  us  power  to  serve
him  and  observe  his  laws  that  we
may  have  a  claim  upon  his  blessings,
and  at  last  obtain  eternal  life  in  his
kingdom,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ERASTUS  SNOW,

DELIVERED  AT  THE  GENERAL  CONFERENCE,  Oil  SUNDAY  MORNING,

APRIL  t)?  187a


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


PARABLE  OF  THE  FIG  TREE — THE  RISE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  WORK — OR-
GANIZATION OF  THE  CHURCH — ITS  SUBSEQUENT  PROGRESS  AND
DEVELOPMENT  — THE  MANNER  OF  CALLING  GOD'S  SERVANTS — DUTIES
OF  CHURCH  OFFICERS — THE  SAVING  POWER  OF  TRUTH — THE  DISOBE-
DIENT AND  IDLE  CONDEMNED — LIBERALITY  OF  THE  GOSPEL  PLAN.


In  the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew
our  Savior  uses  a  figure  in  speaking
to  his  disciples,  illustrating  the  signs
of  the  times  in  which  we  live.

"Now  learn  a  parable  of  the  fig
tree  ?  when  his  branch  is  yet  tender.


and  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know
that  summer  is  nigh  ;  so  likewise  ye,
when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things,
know  that  it  is  near,  even  at  the
doors,  verily  I  say  unto  you  this
generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all


these  things  be  fulfilled/'

The  rendering  of  this  24th  chapter
of  Matthew  is  somewhat  imperfect
in King  James1 translation;  the
events  connected  with  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  and  the  dispersion  of
the  Jews  seem  to  be  intermingled
with  the  events  that  were  to  precede
and  accompany  the  second  advent
of  the  Savior. In  the  new  transla-
tion of  this  chapter  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  which  may  be  found
in  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price,  the  dif-
ference is  made  very  plain,  and
the figure of  the  fig tree  and
the  second  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man  and the generation  refer-
red to  therein  is  made  applicable,
not  to  the  period  of  the  destruction
01  Jerusalem,  but  to  the  time  of  the
second  coming  of  the  Son  of  Math
And  the  new  translation  reads,  in
speaking  of  the  putting  forth  of  the
fig-tree  and  the  signs  that  should
precede  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  M  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  this
generation,  in  which  these  things
shall  be  shewn  forth,  shall  not  pass
away,  till  all  I  have  told  shall  be  ful-
filled*" From  the  reading  of  the
new  and  correct  rendering,  it  will
be  seen  that,  instead  of  the  things
spoken  of  being  fulfilled  in  the  ge-
neration in  which  the  prophecy  was
made — which  is  the  inference — the
application  is  transferred  at  once
from  the  generation  in  which  the
Savior  was  speaking  to  the  genera-
tion who  should  witness  the  signs
of  the  times  therein  set  forth.

It  is  now  more  than  5 1  years  since
the  plates  from  which  the  Bonk  of
Mormon  was  translated  were  com-
mitted by  the  angel  Moroni,  to  the
1  lands  of  Joseph  Smith,  who  was
raised  up  to  be  a  prophet,  seer  and
revelator  to  the  nineteenth  century,
and  to  lay  the  foundation  of  this
church  and  kingdom  upon  the
*arth. And  since  that  sacred  record,


which  contains  the  fulness  of  the
everlasting  Gospel,  was  first  revealed
to  him  in  the  Hill  Cumorah,  nearly
56  years  have  passed  away  ;  it  is  49
years  since  the  organization  of  the
Church  was  effected  in  conformity
with  the  laws  of  God,  and  in  accor-
dance with  the  laws  of  New  York;
that  is  to  say,  the  rule  established
by  the  laws  of  New  York  governing
the  organization  of  religious  bodies
and  to  comply  with  the  statutes  and
to  give  it  tangible  form. The  6th
day  of  April  was  selected  by  revela-
tion as  the  day  on  which  this  church
should  be  organized. The  question
is  asked  by  some,  were  there  only
six  believers  who  had  received  the
testimony  of  the  Prophet  and  been
baptized  for  the  remission  of  their
sins  on  that  day? I  answer,  there
were  many  more. Why,  then,  was
the  number  six  made  to  figure  in
the  organization] I  answer  in  this
respect :  the  same  as  under  the  sta-
tutes of  Utah  co-operative  associa-
tions must  have  at  least  six  to  unite
in  the  formation  of  any  such  associa-
tion before  it  can  incorporate.  But
any  number  not  less  than  six  might
unite  and  organize  themselves  into
a  religious  association  to  enjoy  the
rights  and  privileges  «>f  the  law  as
such  religious  bodies. Tins  number
was  selected,  however,  from  among
the  believers  on  this  occasion  to
conform  to  the  requisitions  of  the
statutes. This  is, therefore,  the
anniversary  of  the  day  on  which
the  organization  took  place,  or  com-
menced rather  to  develop  itself
And  from  that  time,  as  the  body  of
the  Church  increased,  the  Priesthood
in  its  various  branches  has  developed
itself  into  the  organization  as  we  now
behold  it  in  the  earth. There  were
no  twelve  Apostles  at  that  date  ;  the
material  from  which  to  draw  them
had  not  been  gathered. There  were
no  seventy  Elders;  the  material  from


182  JOURNAL  OF

which  to  make  them  was  not  yet  on
hand.  There  were  no  High  Coun-
cils, no  Bishops'  courts,  nor  quorums
of  High  Priests,  Elders;,  Priests,
Teachers  or  Deacons.  There  was  no
classification  of  the  organization  of
the  priesthood  as  there  is  to-day.
Neither  is  there  any  organization  of
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  for  there  was  no
material  of  which  to  make  them.  It
was  indeed  but  the  shooting  out  of
the  earth,  as  it  were,  of  the  plant,
like  the  mustard  seed,  which  is  a
small  plant  at  first,  having  hut  a  single
stalk ;  and  as  it  rises  and  receives
strength  and  sends  down  its  roots
and  spreads  forth  its  branches,  from
one  branch  another  grows  out  and
shoots  forth.  And  so  from  day  to
day,  and  from  month  to  month,  and
from  year  to  year  did  the  Lord  re-
veal through  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  line  upon  line,  precept  upon
precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a
little,  revealing  to  the  people  the
order  of  the  priesthood  and  the  order
of  Zion  and  her  government,  her  in-
stitutions and  the  classification  of
the  priesthood  under  the  two  great
heads — the  Melchisedek  and  the
Aaronic  or  Levitical  priesthood,  with
their  various  sub-divisions  and  quor-
ums. It  was  not  till  the  year  1835,
in  the  month  of  February,  that  the
quorum  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  and
the  quorums  of  the  Seventies  were
organized  in  this  Church.  These
were  drawn  principally  from  those
tried  men  who  composed  Zion's
camp.  There  was  a  revelation  given
in  this  same  year  sli owing  how  a
High  Council  should  be  organized
in  Kirtland,  and  shortly  after  an-
other was  organized  in  Missouri ;
audit  also  defined  the  laws  governing
the  High  Council  and  Stake  organi-
zations. At  first,  when  the  Church
was  organized  on  the  Gth  day  of
April,  the  general  duties  of  the
Elders,  Priests,  Teachers  and  Dea-


DLSCOUKSES.

cons  were  defined  in  that  revelationr
given  in  that  day,  known  as  the  ar-
ticles and  covenants  of  the  Church.
Elder  seemed  to  be  a  generic  name
embracing  all  the  brandies  of  the*
Melchisedek  priesthood,  from  the
Elder  proper  to  the  Apostle,  name-
ly the  Elders,  High  Priests,  (after
the  order  of  Melchisedek),  including
High  Counselors,  Seventies,  Apost-
les and  First  Presidency.  This  also
corresponds  with  the  language  of  the
Apostle  Peter,  in  his  exhortation  con-
tained in  his  first  general  epistle  :
"  The  Elders  who  are  among  you  I
exhort,  who  am  also  an  Elder."
Still  he  was  an  Apostle  and  was
ranked  as  the  chief  Apostle  in  his
day,  holding  the  keys  and  presidency
to  bind  on  the  earth  and  loose  in
heaven;  but  he  ranked  himself  among
the  Elders,  for  this  term  seemed  to
be  a  general  appellation  for  all  clas-
ses of  the  Melchisedek  priesthood.  In
a  similar  manner  also  the  term
"  priest "  was  used  among  the  Jews
under  the  operation  of  the  law  of
I  Moses,  and  subsequently  in  the
Christian  church  for  those  who  of-
ficiated in  the  lesser  or  Levitical
priesthood  ;  and  this  term  included
I  the  presiding  priest  or  Bishop  who
was  called  under  the  Jewish  dispen-
sation the  Chief  or  High  Priest.  But
there  were  lesser  organizations  or
sub-divisions  under  the  term  of
Priest,  Levite,  Nethcnims,  etc..

There  is  one  feature  through  all
the  organizations  of  the  Church  of
Christ  and  all  the  administrations  of
the  people  of  God,  and  that  is  ;  'No
man  taketh  this  honor  unto  himself,
but  lie  that  is  called  of  God  as
was  Aaron."  This  declaration  of
the  Apostle  Paul  is  borne  out
by  history  both  ancient  and  mo-
dern. And  the  same  writer
says  in  another  place,  speaking  of
those  who  are  called  to  preach  the
Gospel  and  of  the  faith  that  is  be-


PARABLE  OF  THE  FIG  TREE,  ETC.


gotten  in  the  hearts  of  the  people
through  hearing  the  word  of  God  :
"  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  hearing
by  the  word  of  God,"  But  in  the
new  translation  that  passage  reads  :
*  Faith  comes  by  hearing  the  word
of  God-"  Another  Scripture  reads  :
"  How  shall  they  believe  in  him  of
whom  they  have  not  heard  ?  and  bow
shall  they  hear  without  a  pivneher?
and  how  shall  they  preach  except
they  be  sent  i"  The  idea  I  wish  to
convey  is  this  :  That  all  the  various
offices  assigned  to  the  servants  of
God  in  his  Church  and  Kingdom
are  assigned  to  them  and  nut  in  and
of  themselves  and  of  their  own
choiee,  nor  at  their  own  instance,  hut
at  the  instance  of  the  Holy  Spirit
manifesting  itself  through  those  who
are  appointed  over  them  in  the  Lord,
as  Aaron  was  called  to  the  priest-
hood, receiving  his  appointment  by
the  manifestation  of  the  will  of  God
through  Moses,  his  brother.  There
U  another  principle  in  connection
with  this,  laid  down  in  the  revela-
tions of  God,  i tamely  :  that  all  t  hings
shall  he  done  by  common  consent.
And  therefore,  where  there  is  a  re-
gularly organized  branch  of  the
church,  ordinations  to  thepriesthood
shall  not  be  made  without  a  vote  of
approval  of  said  church.  Now  this
must  l>e  understood  ju  the  spirit  in
which  it  was  given,  to  apply  not
particularly  and  specially  to  every
individual  who  may  be  admitted  into
a  quorum  of  priests,  teachers  or
deacons,  so  mucli  as  those  who  may
be  called  to  preside  over  the  people
in  the  capacity  of  a  Presiding  Elder;
a  bishop  or  a  bishop's  counselor,
and  also  priests,  teachers  and  deacons,
whose  labors  and  duties  may  he  re-
quired in  that  particular  branch  of
the  Church,  they  must  be  sustained
by  the  votes  and  prayers  ■and  con-
fidence of  the  people  as  well  as  by
the  appointment  of  those  who  are


over  them  in  the  Lord.  And  for  the
same  reason  those  who  officiate  in
the  more  extended  spheres,  such  as
presidents  of  Stakes,  high  councilors
and  all  Stake  authorities,  are  put  be-
fore the  people  in  their  several
Stakes  in  conference  assembled,  for
their  approval,  their  confidence  and
support ;  otherwise  their  appoint-
ment has  not  the  same  force  and
effect  upon  the  people*  In  like
manner  those  who  may  be  selected
1  ty  1 1 1  e  work  in  #  i  >f  1 1 1  e  1 1  oly  S  pi  ri  t
through  the  proper  au thorites,  to
preside  over  quorums,  are  nominated

for  this  eallim;  mid  are  submitted
to  the  members  for  their  sanction
and  confidence.  And  then  come
the  gen  era!  authorities,  who  preside
over  and  minister  in  the  affairs  of
the  Churcfc  in  all  the  earth.  These
general  (jiiorums  are  not  local,  are
not  limited  to  any  particular  Stake
or  quorum.  Their  business  is  to  see
that  the  Gospel  is  preached  to  the
whole  world  ;  to  impart  counsel  by
the  spirit  of  revelation  according  to
the  spirit  of  their  apostleship  and
calling,  as  special  witnesses  and  mes-

senders  to  the  world  of  mankind.

These  are  the  First  Presidency,  and
the  Twelve  Apostles  and  the  Seven-
ties, whose  calling  and  duty  is  to  la-
bor under  the  direction  of  the  Twelve
and  bear  the  gospel  to  all  nations
and  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the
< 'Lurch  in  all  the  world.  These
general  authorities  are  therefore
brought  before  the  general  confer-
ence assembled,  for  their  approval
and  for  them  to  uphold  and  sustain
|  by  their  faith  and  prayers;  and  in
like  manner  are  they  presented  at
the  several  Stake  conferences  so  aa
to  reach  the  masses  of  the  people,
to  insure  the  confidence  and  prayers
of  the  whole  people,  for  whom  they
minister,  and  whose  eyes  are  upon
them,  who  are  criticising  their  teach-
ings, their  walk  and  conversation  be-


184


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


fore  God  and  man.  For  God  pro-
poses to  deal  with  His  Church  as  a
whole,  and  as  a  whole  to  hold  them
responsible  to  work  the  works  of
righteousness  and  to  defend  the
faith  of  the  everlasting  gospel  com-
mitted to  them,  and  to  purify  and
sanctify  the  whole  Church  and  see
that  evil  is  put  away  from  our  midst,
whether  it  be  in  the  family  circle  or
private  walks  of  life,  or  in  its  high
officials  and  those  who  minister  in
public  capacites;  in  like  manner  lie
requires  of  them  to  see  that  all  our
organizations  and  municipalities  are
in  a  wholesome  condition,  and  are
administered  with  integrity  and  up-
rightness before  God  and  the  people.
And  as  mouthpieces  of  the,  Almighty
and  as  watchmen  upon  the  walls  of
Zion,God  requires  of  us  his  servants,
the  Apostles,  the  Elders,  the  Presi-
dents of  Stakes,  and  tha  Bishops
everywhere,  not  only  to  minister  in
their  several  callings  in  a  church  ca-
pacity, but  also  to  instruct  officers  of
every  kind  intrusted  with  the  muni-
cipal affairs  of  life,  that  they  may  be
found  faithful  in  magnifying  the  law
and  discharging  the  trust  reposed  in
them  in  secular  affairs  as  well  as  eccle-
siastical; for  civil  organizations  and
powers  of  civil  government  are  also
appointed  and  ordained  uf  heaven
for  the  welfare  of  mankind,  for  the
protection  of  all  flesh.  Ami  those
children  of  men  who  may  not  accept
the  doctrines  of  Christ  and  the
priesthood,  its  adininistrations,coun-
sels  and  decisions  in  the  secular  af-
fairs of  life;  yet  if  they  are  disposed
to  obey  gooJ,  wholesome  rules  of
society  in  their  civil  capacity,as  such
are  entitled  to  protection.  And  it  is
more  especially  for  the  benefit  of
this  class  of  mankind  that  civil  gov-
ernments are  established  among  men
and  recognized  in  heaven.  It  was
with  this  view  that  Paul,  in  his
epistle  to  the  ancient  Saints,  told


them  that  they  should  respect  and
honor  the  civil  law,  and  governors  in
their  places,  and  judges  and  officers
in  their  condition  of  life,  whose  duty
it  is  to  preserve  order  and  maintain
peace  and  protect  the  rights  and
privileges  of  all  alike,  religious  or
irreligious,  believer  or  unbeliever,
saint  or  sinner;  for  religion  with  all
its  accompaniments  and  everything
pertaining  to  it  is  a  matter  of  con-
science between  man  and  his  Maker,
and  for  the  exercise  of  which  he  is
held  alone  i*esponsible  to  his  God
and  unto  his  co-religionists,  who
place  themselves  under  its  guidance
and  control  But  the  civil  power
extends  its  protection  to  all  alike.
One  of  the  great  evils  that  has  af-
flicted mankind  has  been  the  bigotry
of  religious  priests,  and  the  blind
superstition  of  religious  zealots,  who
seem  to  have  lost  sight  of  this  prin-
ciple, the  government  of  our  Heaven-
ly Father  over  his  children,  that  in
his  efforts  to  exalt  his  children  he
has  never  resorted  to  force  or  at-
tempted in  any  wise  to  coerce  the
human  mind.  The  light  of  truth,
like  the  glorious  light  of  the  sun,
chines  unobstructed,  free  to  all;  and
all  are  at  liberty  to  draw  a  veil  over
their  faces  if  they  choose,  or  shut
themselves  up  in  a  dungeon  and
lock  out  the  rays  of  the  sun,  or  they
may  walk  out  in  the  sun-light,  open
their  windows  and  let  it  into  their
dwellings;  so  is  the  free  light  of
ilea veu  imparted  to  all  the  sons  of
men.  The  Lord  has  reserved  to
himself,  however,  the  right  to  call
into  judgment  all  his  children  for
the  manner  in  which  they  make  use
of  the  opportunities  and  privileges
afforded  them.  ''This  is  the  con-
d  em  nation,"  says  the  Savior,  "  that
light  is  come  into  the  world,  and
men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,
because  their  deeds  are  evil/'  So
many  people  walk  in  darkness  at


PARABLE  OF  THE  FIG  TREE,.  ETC,


185


noonday,  when  the  light  of  heaven
shines  in  its  glory  and  effulgence
they  are  surrounded  in  darkness.
When  the  light  comes  to  the  right-
eous they  will  hail  it  gladly,  and
though  it  may  he  at  first  in  the  dis-
tance, they  will  mark  it  as  they
would  the  dawn  of  the  morning  star,
or  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place,
and  they  will  give  diligent  heed  to
it  as  it  approaches,  until  they  enter
into  its  effulgence  and  glory.  Such
is  the  experience  of  the  Latter-day
Saints;  such  is  experience  of  those
who  love  the  light  rather  than  dark-
ness and  who  are  waiting  for  the
salvation  of  Israel;  they  received  the
testimony  of  Jesus  when  it  was  first
sounded  in  their  ears.  Hundreds
and  thousands  in  different  parts  of
the  world  have  witnessed  the  dawn
of  this  light,  have  heard  the  sound
thereof  in  the  distance,  have  gone
in  search  of  it,  have  captured  the
first  ray  that  penetrated  their  minds
f*nd  followed  it  until  it  has  led  them
finally  to  the  possession  of  eternal
life.  These  are  they  whose  deeds
are  good-  Though  they  may  have
erred  in  many  things  because  of
false  doctrine  and  the  traditions  of
men  and  the  fog  that  beclouded  their
minds  and  the  minds  of  their
fathers,  yet  since  the  truth  made  its
way  to  their  hearts  they  embraced  it
gladly,  and  they  have  loved  and  fol-
lowed it  stilh  Wliile,  on  the  other
hand,  those  who  love  darkness
rather  than  light,bccause  their  deeds
are  evil,  are  fighting  against  the
light  and  will  shun  it  when  it  ap-
proaches, like  the  thief  at  the  ap-
pruaeh  of  the  officer  of  the  law,  and
conceals  himself  in  darkness.  So
with  those  who  love  evil,  who  have
abandoned  themselves  to  wicked
ness,  who  have  given  themselves  up
to  hypocrisy  ami  to  the  lust  of  the
flesh,  and  who  sell  themselves  to  the
enemy  of  all  righteousness  to  work


wickedness  for  gain;  darkness  reigns
in  their  hearts,  and  they  become  the
children  of  disobedience,  hating  the
light  because  their  deeds  are  evil*
Truth  needs  no  constraint;  it  ex-
ercises its  power  and  dominion
over  the  children  of  men  by  virtue
of  its  excellence,  its  beauties,  its  at-
tractions,its  loveliness, the  good  fruits
that  How  from  its  observance,  the
peace  and  happiness  that  attend  it ;
the  fruit  of  truth  and  righteousness  is
delicious  above  all  other  fruit.  The
strength  and  power  of  Jehovah  are
with  the  good  and  virtuous  of  all
His  children;  His  power  and  His
love  are  made  manifest  through  the
truth;  order  and  peace  are  the
fruits  of  the  laws  and  regulations
that  He  prescribes,  and  which  re-
commend themselves  to  the  intelli-
gent or  thoughtful  children  of  men,
and  the  results  thereof  are  n^ly
peace,  union,  fellowship  and  love.
Even  the  penalties  that  are  attach-
ed to  the  laws  of  heaven  prescribed
in  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  are
not  instruments  of  vengeance,  of
wrath  and  indignation,  with  a  view
to  the  utter  destruction  of  the  chil-
dren of  men.  But  rather  the  in-
struments of  restraint  upon  the
evil  deeds  of  the  wicked  and  un-
godly, to  deter  them  from  encroach-
ment upon  the  righteous,  in  their
evil  course  of  self-destruction,  Kyen
the  damnation  of  hell,  threatened
in  the  Scriptures  upon  those  who
continue  in  their  unbelief  and  dis-
obedience, is  but  the  natural  fruit
of  their  unbelief,  and  neglect  of  the
blessings  that  were  held  out  and
designed  to  be  bestowed  upon  them.
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  indo-
lent and  the  slothful  of  the  children
of  men  in  a  temporal  point  of  view;
When  the  Lord  says  to  his  people,
Here  is  a  beautiful  earth  I  have
formed  for  you,  and  here  are  the
elements  within  your  reach  —  the


186


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


grasses,  the  streams  of  water  which
flow  pure  as  the  breezes  of  heaven,
free  to  all  ;  here  are  the  animals,  I
place  them  under  your  control ;  and
here  are  the  trees  hearing  fruit,  and
the  grain  and  vegetables  containing
seed  in  themselves ;  go  forth  now
and  occupy  the  land,  cultivate,  im-
prove, embellish,  ornament  ami
gratify  your  eye,  your  taste,  and
satisfy  your  wants,  eat,  drink,  and
be  merry,  plow  the  ground,  cast  in
the  seed,  and  I  will  send  you  the
rains  to  water  the  earth,  and  make
it  fruitf  ul  to  reward  your  toil ;  and
this  covenant  I  make  with  you,
that  so  long  as  you  see  my  bow  in
the  heavens,  seed  time  and  harvest
shall  never  fail  you.  "But,"  says
the  sloth*  u  I  will  not  do  it.  I  wish
to  go  and  lay  me  down  under  the
shade  of  the  trees  in  the  hope  that
some  kind  soul  will  bring  me  a  little
water  to  quench  my  thirst,  and
then  bring  me  some  fruit,  and  put
it  into  my  mouth,  and  then  wag
my  jaws,  or  I  lay  me  down  and
die/'  Our  Father  says  :  6i  Then  die
like  a  fool ;  the  penalty  is  your
own,  and  the  eternal  mandate  of
heaven  shall  not  be  revoked  to  in- 1
dulge  your  idleness,"  And  the
same  may  be  said  of  all  those  who
disbelieve  in  Christ,  and  who  reject
the  words  of  life  when  they  are  pro-
claimed in  their  ears  without  money
and  without  price,  and  the  ordi-
nances of  heaven  made  free  to  all  '
Those  who  disbelieve,  they  perish,
and  what  is  the  condemnation  they  :
bring  upon  themselves?  The  con-
demnation of  the  sloth.  He  per-
ishes in  his  idleness  ;  they  in  their
ignorance  and  their  utter  disregard
of  the  means  of  grace,  losing  all  the
precious  tilings  that  others  enjoy  I
who  put  forth  their  hands  and  par-
take of  the  tree  of  life.  And  when
they  die  and  go  hence,  they  will
wake  up  in  the  spirit  world,  finding


themselves  as  dark  as  they  were  in
the  natural  world,  He  who  is  filthy,
then  will  be  filthy  still,  and  he  who
refused  to  be  enlightened,  will  be
found  to  be  in  darkness  still,  yea,
in  outer  darkness,  because  he  des-
pised the  light  and  fought  against  it,
because  his  deeds  were  svil ;  he
finds  association  with  kindred  spirits
who  like  himself  refused  to  obey,
refused  to  put  forth  their  hands  and
partake,  and  rejected  the  proffered
giits  of  heaven*  Their  punishment
is  that  of  ceaseless  remorse,  fully
conscious  of  blessings  cast  off  and
rejected,  which  blessings  others  are
permitted  to  enjoy,  but  which  they
are  not,  because  of  their  sins  and
transgressions,  and  their  own  neg-
lect of  the  means  of  grace.  Their
torment  is  the  torment  of  the  dam-
ned, and  it  is  like  the  smoke  that
ascends  up  forever  and  ever  ;  among
them  is  found  weeping  and  wailing
and  gnashing  of  teeth,  to  use  the
language  of  the  Scripture.  But  for
what  ?  For  blessings  lost,  for  op-
portunities gone,  fur  privileges  ig-
nored, for  the  means  of  grace,  for
glory  and  exaltation  once  within
their  reach,  which  they,  in  their
pride,  would  not  receive ;  for  being
deprived  of  the  presence  of  God
and  the  Lamb,  and  the  holy  angels
and  the  sanctified  ones,  and  of  the
keys  of  immortality  and  eternal
life  and  everlasting  increase  vouch-
safed to  the  obedient,  while  they
are  doomed  to  perpetual  darkness,
which  they  have  chosen  in  lieu  of
the  blessings  of  the  faithful,  and  in
which  condition  they  will  live  to
prey  upon  each  other  and  to  work
out  the  same  evil  passions  which
they  delighted  to  indulge  in  while
in  the  flesh  ;  the  devil,  who  deluded
them,  will  rejoice  over  their  down-
fall, and  will  reign  over  them  until,
perad  vent  lire,  the  time  shall  come
when  the  long-suffering  and  mercy


BLESSINGS  OF  THE  CIOSPEL,  ETC.


187


of  an  indulgent  Father  shall  cause
him  to  send  messengers  from  the
terrestrial  or  celestial  world,  as  the
ca>e  may  be,  to  see  if  there  are  any
among  them  who,  by  their  sad  ex-
perience, have  learned  to  appreciate
the  light,  and  are  yearning  tor  a
better  condition.  And  if  they  do,
the  offer  of  salvation  may  again  be
made  to  them,  and  they,  through
the  means  that  our  Savior  has
wrought  out  for  them,  and  through
the  ordinances  of  the  House  of  God,
and  the  servants  and  hand  maidens
of  God  who  may  be  called  priests
and  priestesses,  to  administer  for


and  in  their  behalf

Such  is  the  beauty  and  extent  of
the  plan  of  salvatiyn  which  God
has  revealed  to  his  children  on  the
earth.  And  truly  it  is  as  Paul  has
said  of  it — good  news,  glad  tidings
of  great  joy  revealed  to  all  people  ;
joy  to  the  righteous,  and  will  be  a
joy  to  all  people  who  appreciate  it,
henceforth  and  forever.  And  that
we  as  a  people  may  be  worthy  of  it,
walking  in  the  light,  and  that  our
pathway  may  grow  brighter  and
brighter  until  the  perfect  day,  i&
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus*
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Monday

Morning,  April  7th,  1879.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

BLESSINGS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  ONLY  OBTAINED  BY  COMPLIANCE  WITH

THE  LAW.


"And  when  Ahram  was  ninety
years  old  and  nine,  the  Lord  appear-
ed to  A  brain  and  said  unto  him,  I
am  the  Almighty  God;  walk  before
me  and  be  thou  perfect."

In  connection  with  this  I  will
quote  part  of  the  words  of  the  Sa-
vior in  liis  sermon  on  the  Mount,  as
contained  in  the  last  verse  of  the
5th  chapter  of  Matthew,


"  Be  ye  therefore  perfV-ct,  even  as
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is
perfect/'

In  occupying  a  short  time  this
morning,  I  desire  an  interest  in  your
faith  and,  prayers.

We  learn  that  the  Lord  appeared
to  Abraham  and  made  him  very
great  promises,  and  that  before  he
was  prepared  to  receive  them  a  cer-


188  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


tain  requirement  was  made  of  him,
that  he  should  become  perfect  before
th^Lord.  And  the  same  require-
ment was  made  by  the  Savior  of
his  disciples,  that  they  should  be
come  perfect,  even  as  he  and  his
Father  in  heaven  were  perfect.  This
I  conceive  to  be  a  subject  that  con-
cerns the  Latter-day  Saints;  and  I
wish  to  offer  a  few  remarks  by  way
of  suggestion,  for  the  reflection  of
those  whom  it  concerns.

The  Lord  proposes  to  confer  the
highest  blessings  upon  the  Latter-
day  Saints;  but,  like  Abraham,  we
must  prepare  ourselves  for  them,
and  to  do  this  the  same  law  that  was
given  to  him  of  the  Lord  has  been
given  to  us  for  our  observance.  We
also  are  required  to  arrive*  at  a  state
of  perfection  before  the  Lord;  and
the  Lord  in  this  case,  the  same  as  in
every  other,  has  not  made  a  require-
ment that  cannot  be  complied  with,
but  on  the  other  hand,  He  has
placed  for  the  use  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  the  means  by  which  they  can
conform  to  His  holy  order*  When
the  Lord  made  this  requirement  of
Abraham,  He  gave  him  the  means
by  which  he  could  become  qualified
to  obey  that  law  and  come  up  fully
to  the  requirement  He  had  the
privilege  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  we
are  told  the  Gospel  was  preached  to
Abraham,  and  through  that  Gospel
he  could  obtain  that  divine  aid
which  would  enable  him  to  under-
stand the  things  of  God,  and  with-
out it  no  man  could  arrive  at  a  state
of  perfection  before  the  Lord,  So
in  reference  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
they  could  not  possibly  come  up  to
such  a  moral  and  spiritual  standard
except  through  supernatural  aid  and
assistance.  Neither  do  we  expect
that  the  Latter-day  Saints,  at  once
will  or  can  conform  to  this  law
under  all  circumstances.  It  requires
time;  it  requires  much  patience  and


discipline  of  the  mind  and  heart  in
order  to  obey  this  commandment.
And  although  we  may  fail  at  first  in
our  attempts,  yet  this  should  not
discourage  the  Latter-day  Saints
from  endeavoring  to  exercise  a  de-
termination to  comply  with  the
great  requirement  Abraham,  al-
though he  might  have  had  faith  to
walk  before  the  Lord  according  to
this  divine  law,  yet  there  were
times  when  his  faith  was  sorely
tried,  but  still  he  was  not  discou-
raged because  he  exercised  a  deter-
mination to  comply  with  the  will  of
God*  We  may  think  that  we  can-
not live  up  to  the  perfect  law,  that
the  work  of  perfecting  ourselves  is
too  difficult.  This  may  be  true  in
part,  but  the  fact  still  remains  that
it  is  a  command  of  the  Almighty  to
us  and  we  cannot  ignore  it.  When
we  experience  trying  moments,  then
is  the  time  for  us  to  avail  ourselves
of  that  great  privilege  of  calling
upon  the  Lord  for  strength  and  un-
derstanding, intelligence  and  grace
by  which  we  can  overcome  the
weakness  of  the  flesh  against  which
we  have  to  make  a  continual  war-
fare, 1

Abraham  was  called  to  leave  his
kindred  and  country. Had  he  not
complied  with  this  requirement,  he
would  not  have  been  approved  of
the  Lord. Hut  he  did  comply  ;  and
while  lie  was  leaving  his  home,  he  "
no  doubt  was  living  in  obedience  to
this  divine  law  of  perfection. Had  1
he  failed  in  this,  he  certainly  could
not  have  obeyed  the  requirements
of  the  Almighty, And  while  he  •
was  leaving  his  father's  house,  while
he  was  subjecting  himself  to  this  ;
trial,  he  was  doing  that  w  hich  his
own  conscience  and  the  Spirit  of
God  justified  him  in  doing,  and  no-
body could  have  done  better,  pro-
viding he  was doing  no  wrong
when  he  was  performing  this  labor.


11LESSIN0B  OF  THE  (iOSPEL,  ETC*


189


When  the  Latter-day  Saints  re-
ceived the  Gospel  in  the  nations
afar,  and  when  the  voice  of  the  Al-
mighty to  them  was,  to  leave  the
lands  of  their  fathers,  to  leave
their  kindred  as  Abraham  did,  so
far  as  they  complied  with  this  re-
quirement, so  far  they  were  walk-
ing in  obedience  to  this  law  ;  and
they  were  as  perfect  as  men  could
be  under  the  circumstances,  and  in
the  sphere  in  which  they  were  act-
ing, not  that  they  were  perfect  in
knowledge  or  power,  etc. ;  but  in
their  feelings,  in  their  integrity,
motives  and  determination.  And
while  they  were  crossing  the  great
deep,  providing  they  did  not  mur-
mur nor  complain,  but  obeyed  the
counsels  which  were  given  them,
and  in  every  way  comported  them-
selves  in  a  becoming  manner,  they
were  as  perfect  as  God  required
them  to  be.

The  Lord  designs  to  bring  us  up
into  the  celestial  kingdom.  lie  has
made  known,  through  direct  revela-
tion, that  we  are  His  offspring,  be-
gotten in  the  eternal  worlds,  that
we  have  come  to  this  earth  for  the
special  purpose  of  preparing  our-
selves to  receive  a  fullness  of  our
Fathers  glory  when  we  shall  re-
turn into  his  presence.  Therefore,
we  must  seek  the  ability  to  keep
this  law,  to  sanctify  our  motives,
desires,  feelings  and  affections,  that
they  may  be  pure  and  holy,  and  our
will  in  all  things  be  subservient  to
the  will  of  God,  and  have  no  will  of
our  own  except  to  do  the  will  of
our  Father.  Such  a  man  in  his
sphere  is  perfect,  and  commands
the  blessing  of  God  in  all  that  he
does  and  wherever  he  goes.  But
we  are  subject  to  folly,  to  the  weak-
ness of  the  flesh,  and  we  are  more  or
less  ignorant,  thereby  liable  to  err.
Yes,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  we
should  not  feel  desirous  to  comply


with  this  command  of  God,  especi-
ally seeing  that  he  has  placed
within  our  reach  the  means  of
accomplishing  this  work.  This  I
understand  is  the  meaning  of  the
word  perfection,  as  expressed  Jby
our  Savior  and  by  the  Lord  to
Abraham.  A  person  may  be  per-
fect in  regard  to  some  things  and
not  others.  A  person  who  obeys
the  word  of  wisdom  faithfully,  is
perfect  as  far  as  that  law  is  con-
cerned. When  we  repented  of  our
sins  and  were  baptized  for  the  re-
mission of  them,  we  were  perfect  as
far  as  that  matter  was  concerned.
Now  we  are  told  by  the  Apostle
John,  that  "  we  are  the  sons  of  God,
but  it  does  not  appear  what  we
shall  be  :  but  we  know  that  when
he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like
him  ;  for  we  shall  sec  him  as  he  is."
u  And  every  man  that  hath  this
hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even
as  he,  Christ  is  pure."  The  Lat-
ter-day Saints  expect  to  arrive  at
this  state  of  perfection  ;  we  expect
to  become  as  our  Father  and  God,
fit  and  worthy  children  to  dwell  in
his  presence ;  we  expect  that  when
the  Son  of  God  shall  appear,  we
shall  receive  our  bodies  renewed
and  glorified,  and  that  <£  these  vilo
bodies  will  be  changed  and  become
like  unto  his  glorious  body."  These
are  our  expectations.  Now  let  all
present  put  this  question  to  them-
selves. Are  our  expectations  well
founded]  In  other  words,  are  we
seeking  to  purify  ourselves?  How
can  a  Latter-day  Saint  feel  justified
in  himself  unless  he  is  seeking
to  purify  himself  even  as  God  is
pure — unless  he  is  seeking  to  keep
his  conscience  void  of  offence  be-
fore God  and  man  every  day  of  his
life.  We  doubtless,  many  of  us,
walk  from  day  to  day  and  from
week  to  week,  and  from  month  to
month,  before  God, '  feeling  under


190  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


no  condemnation,  comporting  our-
selves properly,  and  seeking  earnest-
ly and  in  all  meekness  for  the  Sj>irit
of  God  to  dictate  our  daily  course;  ]
and  yet  there  may  be  a  certain  time
or  times  in  our  life,  when  we  are
greatly  tried  and  perhaps  overcome;
even  if  this  be  so,  that  is  no  reason
why  we  should  not  try  again,  and
that,  too,  with  redoubled  energy  and
determination  to  accomplish  our
object  Tli ere  was  the  Apostle
Peter,  for  instance,  a  man  valiant
for  the  t  ruth,  and  a  man  who  walked
before  God  in  a  manner  that  met
with  his  divine  approval;  he  told
the  Savior  on  a  certain  occasion
that  though  all  men  forsook  him  he
would  not.  But  the  Savior,  fore-
seeing what  would  happen,  told  him
that  on  that  same  night,  before  the
cock  crowed,  he  would  deny  him
thrice,  and  he  did  so.  He  proved
himself  unequal  for  the  trial ;  but
afterwards  he  gained  power,  and
his  mind  was  disciplined  to  that
extent  that  such  trials  could  not '
possibly  affect  him.  And  if  we '
could  read  in  detail  the  life  of
Abraham,  or  the  lives  of  other  great
and  holy  men,  we  would  doubtless
find  that  their  efforts  to  be  righteous  '
were  not  always  crowned  with  suc-
cess. Hence  we  should  not  be  dis-
couraged if  Ave  shoykl  be  overcome
in  a  weak  moment ;  but,  on  the
contrary,  straightway  repent  of  the  I
error  or  the  wrong  we  may  have
committed,  and  as  far  as  possible
repair  it,  and  then  seek  to  God  for
renewed  strength  to  go  on  and  do
better.  I
Abraham  could  walk  perfectly
before  God  day  after  day  when  he
was  leaving  his  father's  house,  and
he  showed  evidences  of  a  superior
and  well  disciplined  mind  in  the
course  he  suggested  when  his  herds-
men quarrelled  with  the  herdsmen
of  his  nephew,  Lot. There  came  a


time  in  Abraham's  life,  however,
which  must  have  been  very  trying;
in  fact  anything  more  severe  can
scarcely  be  conceived  of ;  that  was
when  the  Lord  called  upon  him  to
offer  as  a  sacrifice  his  beloved  and
only  son,  even  him  through  whom
he  expected  the  fulfillment  of  tin?
great  promise  made  him  by  the
Lord ;  but  through  manifesting  a
proper  disposition  he  was  enabled  to
surmount  the  trial,  and  prove  his
faith  and  integrity  to  God.  It  can
hard]}'  be  supposed  that  Abraham
inherited  such  a  state  of  mind  from
his  idolatrous  parents  ;  but  it  is  con-
sistent to  believe  that  under  the
blessing  of  God  he  was  enabled  to
acquire  it,  after  going  through  a
similar  warfare  with  the  flesh  as  we
are,  and  doubtless  being  overcome
at  times  and  then  overcoming  until
he  was  enabled  to  stand  so  severe  a
test.  "Let  this  same  mind  be  in  you,"
says  the  Apostle  Paul,  lc  which  was
also  in  Christ  Jesus :  who  being  in
the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God."
Now  every  man  that  has  this  object
before  him  will  purify  himself  as
God  is  pure,  and  try  to  walk  per-
fectly before  him.  We  have  our
little  follies  and  our  weaknesses  ;
we  should  try  to  overcome  them  as
fast  as  possible,  and  we  should  in-
culcate this  feeling  in  the  hearts  of
our  children,  that  the  fear  of  God
may  grow  up  with  them  from  their
very  youth,  and  that  they  may
learn  to  comport  themselves  proper-
ly before  him  under  all  circumstan-
ces. If  the  husband  can  live  with
his  wife  one  day  without  quarreling
or  without  treating  anyone  unkindly
or  without  grieving  the  Spirit  of
God  in  any  way,  that  is  well  so  far  ;
he  is  so  far  perfect.  Then  let  him
try  to  be  the  same  the  next  day*
But  supposing  he  should  fail  in  this
his  next  day's  attempt  %  That  is  no


BLESSINGS  OF

reason  why  he  should  not  succeed
in  doing  so  the  third  day,  If  the
Apostle  Peter  had  become  discour-
aged at  his  manifest  failure  to  main-
tain the  position  that  lie  had  taken
to  stand  by  the  Savior  under  all
circumstances,  he  would  have  lost
all ;  whereas,  by  repenting  and  per-
severing he  lost  nothing  but  gained
all,  leaving  us  too  to  profit  by  his
experience.  The  Latter-day  Saints
should  cultivate  this  ambition  con-
stantly which  was  so  clearly  set
forth  by  the  apostles  in  former  days.
We  should  try  to  walk  each  day  so
that  our  conscience  would  be  void
of  oflVnce  before  everybody.  And
God  has  placed  in  the  Church  cer-
tain means  by  which  we  can  be
assisted,  namely,  apostles,  and  pro-
phets, and  evangelists,  etc.,  "  for
the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,"  etc.
And  he  has  also  conferred  upon  us
his  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  an  uner-
ring guide,  standing,  as  an  angel  of
God,  at  our  side,  telling  us  what  to
do,  and  affording  us  strength  and
succor  when  adverse  circumstances
ariae  in  our  way.  We  must  not
allow  ourselves  to  be  discouraged
whenever  we  discover  our  weakness.
We  can  scarcely  find  an  instance  in
all  the  glorious  examples  set  us  by
the  prophets,  ancient  or  modern,
wherein  they  permitted  the  Evil
One  to  discourage  them ;  but  on
the  other  haml  they  constantly
sought  to  overcome,  to  win  the
prize,  and  thus  prepare  themselves
for  a  fulness  of  glory.  The  Prophet
Elijah  succeeded.  He  so  walked
before  God  that  be  was  worthy  to
be  translated.  And  Enoch  was
found  worthy  to  walk  with  God
some  300  years,  and  was  at  last,  with
his  people,  taken  up  to  heaven.

We  are  told  that  in  the  latter-
days  "there  shall  be  no  more  thence
an  infant-  of  days,  nor  an  old  man
that  hath  not  filled  his  days ;  for


THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  191

the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  years
old."  And  in  another  scripture
we  are  told  that  the  age  of  the
infant  shall  be  as  the  age
of  a  tree,  and  that  it  shall  not  (lie
until  it  shall  be  old,  and  then  it  shall
not  slumber  in  the  dust  but  be
changed  in  the  t  wink  liny  of  an  eye.
But  in  those  days  people  must  live
perfectly  before  the  Lord,  for  we  are
told  in  the  same  passage,  that  "the
sinner/1  instead  of  being  favored,
**  being  an  hundred  years  old,  shall
be  accursed."  When  we  once  get  it
into  our  minds  that  we  really  have
the  power  within  ourselves  through
the  gospel  we  have  received,  to  con-
quer our  passions,  our  appetites  and
in  all  things  submit  out  will  to  the
will  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  and,
instead  of  being  the  means  of  gene-
rating unpleasant  feeling  in  our  fam-
ily circle,  and  those  with  whom  w«
are  associated,  but  assisting  greatly
to  create  a  little  heaven  upon  earth,
til  en  the  battle  may  be  said
to  he  half  won.  One  of  the
chief  difficulties  that  many  suffer
from  is,  that  we  are  too  apt  to  for-
get the  great  object  of  life,  the  mo-
tive of  our  Heavenly  Father  in  send-
ing us  here  to  put  on  mortality,  as
well  as  the  holy  calling  with  which
j  we  have  been  called;  and  hence,  in-
I  stead  of  rising  above  the  little  tran-
sitory things  of  time,  we  too  oftea
allow  ourselves  to  come  down  to  the
level  of  the  world  without  availing
ourselves  of  the  divine  help  which
God  has  instituted,  which  alone  can
enable  us  to  overcome  them.  We
j  aiv  no  better  than  the  rest  of  the
world  if  we  do  not  cultivate  the
feeling  to  be  perfect,  even  as  our
Father  in  heaven  is  perfect.

This  was  the  exhortation  of  the
Savior  to  the  former-day  Saints,  who
were  a  people  of  like  passions  and
who  were  subject  to  the  same  temp-
tations as  ourselves,  and  he  knew


192


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


whether  the  people  could  conform  to
it  or  not;  the  Lord  never  has,  nor
will  h6  require  things  of  his  child-
ren which  it  is  impossible  for  them
to  perform.  The  Elders  of  Israel
who  expect  to  go  forth  to  preach  the
gospel  of  salvation  in  the  midst  of
a  crooked  and  per  verse  generation,
among  a  people  who  are  full  of  evil
and  corruption,  should  cultivate  this
spirit  especially.  And  not  only  they,
but  everybody,  every  young  man
and  woman  belonging  to  this  Church
who  is  worthy  to  be  called  a  Saint
should  cultivate  this  desire  to  live
up  to  this  requirement  that  their
consciences  may  be  clear  before  God.
It  is  a  beautiful  things  either  in
young  or  old>  to  have  this  object  in
view;  it  is  especially  delightful  to


see  our  young  people  take  a  course
that  the  light  and  intelligence  of
God  can  beam  in  their  countenances,
that  they  may  have  a  correct  under-
standing of  life,  and  be  able  to  live
above  the  follies  and  vanities  of  the
world  and  the  errors  and  wickedness
of  man.

May  God  bless  you,  brethren  and
sisters,  and  pour  out  His  Holy  Spirit
upon  you,  that  you  may  be  blessed
in  all  your  acts,  in  your  incomings
and  your  outgoings  and  in  the  per-
formance of  every  duty,  and  be  bles-
sed in  calling  upon  the  Almighty,
that  His  Spirit  may  be  in  you  as  a
well  of  water  springing  up  to  ever-
lasting life,  to  guide  you  in  His  fear
through  all  the  scenes  of  life,  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesust  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  MOSES  THATCHER,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Tuesday  afternoon,

Ajpril  8,  1879.


■


( Exported  hy  Geo,  JT,  Gibbs.).


MANIFEST  BLESSINGS  OF  <JM>  TO  THE  SAINTS— PROPER  EDUCATION  OF
THE  I OUNO— INFIDELITY  THE  RESULT  OF  IGNORANCE.


In  trying  to  address  so  large  an
audience,  I  earnestly  desire  an  inter-
est in  the  prayers  of  my  brethren
and  sisters,  that  the  few  remarks  I
may  offer  may  be  dictated  by  the
Spirit  of  God. There  are  mapy


tilings  that  we  as,  Elders  in  Israel,.

should  always  be  pleased  to  speak

of,  and  particularly  is  this  the  case

in  reference  to  the  kindness  of  our

Father  in  heaven  towards  us  as  a

people. We  are  permitted  to  dwell
I


in  peace,  surrounded  with  the  bless-
ings  of  life  and  liberty,  having  pleas-
ant homes  wherein  to  dwell,  and  God
to  be  our  Father  and  Friend.  When
I  look  around  upon  the  homes  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  and  see  how
the  elements  have  been  changed
and  made  so  propitious,  enabling
us  to  produce  food  and  clothing,
the  necessities  and  many  of  the
I&xuries  of  life,  my  heart  is  exceed-
ingly grateful,  for  I  must  confess
then1  is  no  land  with  which  I  am
familiar  where  the  blessings  of  God
are  so  abundantly  bestowed  as  in
our  own.  It  appears  to  me  that
every  bud  is  not  only  willing,  but
does  blossom,  and  where  seed  by
man  is  sown  broadcast  in  theground  it
comes  forth,  bearing  twenty,  thirty,
or  fifty  fold.  This,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  is  not  the  result  of  the
work  of  man  ;  but  it  is  the  blessings
of  our  Heavenly  Father.  And  how
any  human  being  can  look  upon  the
mountains  by  which  we  are  sur-
rounded, and  gaze  upon  the  beauti-
ful tields  and  smiling  natuiv  seen  on
every  hand,  and  not  be  able  to  ac-
knowledge God  in  all  these  things  is
bey  on  *  I  my  com  pre  1  ie  i  isio  t  l  In
speaking  to  the  young  people  parti-
cularly I  have  had  sometimes  pleasure
in  referring  to  the  works  of  man,
comparing  them  with  the  works  of
God.  And  while  1  believe  it  proper
for  us  to  look  with  pleasure  upon  the
accomplishments  of  art  and  science,
and  upon  the  skilled  workmanship
of  man,  yet  I  would  have  our  young
people  always  realize  that  God  is  the
originator ;  I  would  have  ^  them
understand,  as  the  arts  and  sciences
are  being  developed  and  new  dis-
coveries are  being  brought  out  by
what  we  call  the  genius  of  man,
that  God  understood  all  these  things
before  they  were  made  known  to  us.
And  while  having  them  admire  and
-wonder  at  the  grand  achievement  of
No.  13.


man  in  chaining  the  lightning,  thus
making  it  to  serve  his  purposes  ;  and
while  it  was  the  work  of  man  that
moulded  and  fashioned  the  metal
into  the  wire  over  which  intelligence
is  transmitted  by  the  power  of  elec-
tricity, I  would  help  to  lead  their
minds  beyond,  so  that  they  may  com-
prehend that  the  material  of  which
that  wire  is  composed  was  the  crea
tion  and  work  of  God,  and  that  the
electricity  itself  is  at  the  bidding
and  mandate  of  the  great  Jehovah*

1  believe,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
if  we  take  proper  pains  in  the  educa-
tion of  the  young,  employing  the
right  kind  of  men  and  women  to  be
their  preceptors,  that,  instead  of  the
seeds  of  in  fidelity  being  sown  in
their  minds  we  will  have  faith,  and
in  that  faith  we  will  have  the  mani-
festations of  power.

In  talking  with  the  learned  of  the
world  we  find  that  they  have  but  a
faint  conception  of  God  and  Godli-
ness. Were  you  to  tell  them  that
they  hate  God,  or  that  the  carnal
mind  is  at  enmity  against  God,  they
would  not  understand  you.  And
yet,  when  we  come  to  the  actual
facts,  we  find  that  the  learned  and
many  professors  of  Christianity  really
do  hate  God,  I  do  not  mean  to  say
they  hate  the  Gnd  they  themselves
picture  in  their  own  minds;" but  that
they  hatti  and  fight  against  him
whose  attributes  and  character  are
portrayed  within  the  lids  of  the
Bible.  Tlu?  Supreme  Ruler  of
the  universe,  the  Creator  of  the
heavens  ami  the  earth,  is  not  only
the  tender  and  loving  Being  that  the
!  pious  Christian  of  the  lUtli  century
pictures  him  to  be, — he  is  not  only
willing  to  love  and  cherish  and  save
I  the  human  family,  but  he  is  also  a
Being  of  justice  and  judgment,  hav-
ing always  power  enough  to  inflict
punishment  upon  the  breakers  of  his
laws. Yet  modern  divines  think

Vol.  XX,


194  JOURNAL  or

■

with  horror  of  a  God  who  would  in-
flict punishment,  on  the  plea  that
such  would  be  revengeful ;  and  yet,
neither  they  nor  any  of  our  pro-
fessed Christian  friends  would  for  a
moment  find  fault  with  the  judge  of
an  inferior  earthly  court  for  passing
judgment  on  a  criminal,  though  it
might  lead  even  to  the  loss  of  the
life  of  a  fellow  creature.

Having  but  a  very  short  time  to
occupy  this  afternoon  my  remarks
must  necessarily  be  brief  But  be-
fore closing  I  feel  to  bear  my  testi-
mony that  here  in  Utah  is  a  people
who  are  trying  to  serve  the  Lord*
And  I  testify  too,  that  Joseph  Smith
was  and  is  a  prophet  of  the  living
God,  chosen  of  Him  to  open  up  the
last  dispensation  to  man — the  dis-
pensation of  the  fulness  of  times  ;
aud  that  his  successor,  Brigham
Young,  was  an  apostle  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  and  a  prophet,  seer  and  reve-
lator.  And  I  feel  to  bear  my  testi-
mony that  this  same  power  and  re-
velation rests  upon  his  servant,
Brother  John  Taylor.  If  we  would
live  for  the  light  of  God's  Holy
Spirit  we  might  see  not  as  with  eyes
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  with
eyes  that  see  clearly  having  also  ears
capable  of  hearing,  and  hearts  full  to
understand*

It  is  our  duty,  as  young  men,  as
middle  aged  men  and  as  aged  men
to  bestow  great  care  and  attention
on  the  education  of  the  young.  It
is  not  particularly  the  duty  of  the
father,  as  I  understand  it,  to  place
in  the  hands  of  his  son  the  writings
of  Payne  and  other  infidel  authors
unless  they  follow  up  the  reading  of
such  works  with  good  sound  argu-
ment, and  then  place  the  Bible  and
the  Book  of  Mormon  in  their  hands
to  be  read  and  studied,  and  when
necessary  correctly  explained  show-
ing wherein  the  Lord  has  wrought
out  the  literal  fulfilment  of  many  of


DISCOURSES.

the  predictions  therein  recorded.  If
they  would  do  this  with  prayerful
hearts,  and  with  the  wisdom  God
may  give  them,  there  will  be  little  or
nothing  to  fear  from  the  readings  of
infidel  works,  I  take  the  broad
ground  that  in  infidelity  is  ignor-
ance* You  meet  the  infidel  and  you
will  find  him  as  a  general  thing,  ig-
norant in  regard  to  that  which  is
laid  down  in  the  Bible,  which  he
claims  to  disbelieve.  It  has  been  so
from  the  beginning.  It  is  a  truth
that  has  been  uttered  on  many  oc-
(  casions  by  the  servants  of  God,  that
it  is  easier  and  more  natural  for  man-
kind to  believe  a  hundred  falsehoods
than  to  accept  a  single  truth.  It
must  be  apparent  to  all,  that  it  is
more  in  harmony  with  our  fallen
nature  to  do  wrong  than  to  do  right-
Let  six  boys  be  taken,  for  instance,
and  be  carefully  taught  in  the  prin-
,  ciples  of  morality,  virtue  and  truth;
i  and  another  six  in  the  follies  and
I  wickedness  of  the  world  and  see
which  of  the  two  sets  will  make  the
most  rapid  progress,  those  in  the
,  right,  or  those  in  the  wrong  ]  All
will  readily  agree  with  me  that  im-
morality is  more  easily  acquired  than
the  virtues,  and  hence  we  may  con-
clude that  we  are  in  a  fallen  world,
and  that  we  have  the  battle  against
sin  to  fight.

May  "the  blessings  of  God  rest
domi  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints.
And  by  way  of  conclusion  I  will
say,  if  we  want  to  dream  dreams  or
see  visions,  it  is  our  privilege  to  do  so,
but  we  must  first  purify  our  hearts
and  seek  to  love  the  Lord  our  God
with  all  our  might,  mind  and  strength,
and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves  ;  and
to  do  unto  others  as  we  would  have
other  do  unto  us.  And  permit  me  to
say  that  in  all  my  experience  in  life
I  have  found  as  yet  but  one  thing  that
can  afford  true  happiness  and  true
enjoyment,  and  that  is  a  conscious-


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC


195


ness  of  keeping  the  commandments  i
of  God.  And  if  we,  Latter-day
Saints,  will  live  near  unto  him,  lie
will  be  near  unto  us.  And  instead
of  having  to  call  in  physicians  to  mi-
nister to  the  members  of  our  fami- ,
lies  when  sickness  makes  its  appear-
ance, the  power  of  God  will  be  upon
us  in  such  rich  abundance  as  to  en-
able us  to  rebuke  it  from  our  dwel-
lings, and  to  invoke  the  blessings  of


health  to  attend  us  and  ours,  which
was  the  case  years  ago  in  the  prime-
val days  of  the  Church.  If  we
have  lost  any  of  these  blessings  it  is  -
not  through  any  fault  in  the  Lord,
or  that  there  is  less  power  and  effi-
cacy in  the  priesthood  we  bear,  but
rather  in  our  own  lack  of  faith  in  the
promises  made  to  the  faithful.
Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q*  CANNON,

DELIVERED  AT  THE  GENERAL  roN  }■']•; i:  KNtT,  Ull  SUNDAY  AFTERNOON,

apeil  6,  1879.  f


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — THEIR MISSION — THE  MARRI-
AGE RELATION — ^CAPITAL  AND  LABOR — RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY.


In  some  respects  I  would  prefer
to  .sit  and  listen  to  my  brethren
speak,  and  to  partake  in  quietude  of
the -spirit  of  this  Conference,  than  I
would  to  speak  myself  But  there
is  a  duty  devolving  upon  me  I  pre-
sume, the  same  as  upon  my  brethren
and  I  desire  to  the  best  of  my  abili-
ty to  discharge  that  duty.  The
sight  of  so  many  people,  the  singing,
the  speaking  of  our  brethren  this
morning  and  the  spirit  that  I  felt
when  I  entered  this  building  to-day
almost  overpowered  me.  There  is
an  influence,  there  is  a  power,  there


is  a  spirit  connected  with  the  as-
sembling together  of  a  large  body  of
people,  such  as  we  witness  to-day,
that  must  affect  those  who  are  sen-
sitive to  impressions,  and  especially
when  one  has  been  absent  among
strangers,  to  feel  that  he  is  home
among  his  friends,  among  a  people
who  are  his  brethren  and  sisters,
whose  faith  is  his  faith,  and  who
are  laboring  and  struggling  to  ac-
complish the  same  objects  that  he
himself  has  in  his  heart.  I  rejoice
exceedingly,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
this  day  in  your  midst,  and  I  am


196  JOURNAL  OF

thankful  for  the  delightful  circum-
stances by  which  you  are  surround-
ed* I  am  thankful  that  the  pros-
pects before  you  are  so  promising,
go  full  of  hope  and  so  delightful  to
contemplate*  It  is  true  we  have  had
sickness,  we  have  had  many  deaths,
this  has  been  a  cause  of  regret*  But
death  is  unavoidable,  and  with  it  all
we  are  in  much  better  circumstances
and  more  favorably  situated  than
the  generality  of  the  children  of
men.  The  Latter-day  Saints  are
rapidly  becoming  a  great  and  im-
portant people.  The  influence  that
attends  us  is  being  more  widely
felt ;  our  power  for  good  is  increas-
ing, our  strength,  our  union  and  the
other  qualities  that  we  possess,  and
which  we  have  manifested  through
our  career,  are  being  more  recogniz-
ed every  day.  It  has  always  been  a
favorite  idea  of  mine,  that  no  single
human  being  who  chooses  to  exert
an  influence  for  good  among  his
fellow  men,  ever  spoke  or  ever  acted
in  vain- — without  making  his  influ-
ence, his  example,  his  words,  have
an  effect  upon  those  with  whom  he
has  been  brought  in  contact.  If
this  be  true  concerning  an  indivi-
dual, how  much  more  truth  is  there
in  it  when  applied  to  an  assemblage
of  individuals,  and  to  a  community,
to  hundreds  of  communities,  to  a
great  people  stretching  through  these
mountains  and  filling  these  vallies  ?
We  have  not  lived  in  vain.  We
have  not  sought  to  exhibit  lives  of
temperance,  of  industry,  of  frugali-
ty, of  self-denial,  lives  of  righteous-
ness with  the  fear  of  God  before
our  eyes,  nor  have  we  lived  these
lives  during  the  last  49  years,  with-
out the  effect  being  felt,  not  only
upon  those  by  whom  we  are  sur-
rounded, but  by  the  world  at  large.
There  is  something  connected  with
<the  example  of  such  a  people  that
elevates  men  and  women  from  the


DISCOURSES.

I  slime,  from  the  mire,  and  from  the
abject  ruin  into  which,  in  too  many
instances,  they  are  plunged,  to  con-

;  template  humanity  in  its  better  as-
pects, humanity  in  its  noble  appear-
ances, with  its  Godlike  attributes,
with  its  powers  for  good,  its  capa-
bility of  accomplishing  great  results*
There  is  something  in  the  very  fact
of  a  people  believing  in  God  in  these
days  of  atheism  and  utter  infidelity
that  brings  men  to  serious  contem-
plation. They  say  very  frequently
that  it  is  fanaticism,  but  there  is
something  about  fanaticism  that  is
liealthly,  refreshing,  invigorating  in
its  example,  for  no  man  ever  accom-
plished anything  on  this  earth,  with-
out exposing  himself  by  his
actions,  his  earnestness  and  enthu-
siasm and  zeal,  to  the  charge  of
fanaticism.  I  am  willing  we  should
be  called  fanatics.  I  have  a  right
to  be  a  fanatic  if  I  wish  to  be,  as
long  as  my  fanaticism  does  not

1  interfere  with  the  rights  of  my
fellow  man.  That  is  a  barrier  be-
yond which  my  fanaticism  should
not  be  allowed  to  go.

!  It  is  refreshing  to  see  a  people
who  not  only  believe  in  God,  but
who  are  willing  to  show  their  belief
by  suffering  for  his  cause — to  leave
their  friends,  to  leave  their  homes,
to  suffer  exile,  persecution,  priva-

!  tions,  hardships,  and  even  death  for
the  sake  of  God,  for  the  sake  of
religion,  for  the  sake  of  principle.
What  would  life  be  if  it  were  not
for  such  people  and  for  such  charac-

I  ters  1  Why,  their  peculiar  lives
illume  the  sombre  darkness  of  ages  ;
they  are  bright  spots  in  history.
When  we  look  back  and  recall  the
men  who  have  suffered  and  died  for
principle,  even  if  they  died  wrong-
fully, we  find  something  about  their
heroic  lives  that  is  glorious  to  con-
template. And  when  a  whole  peo-
ple can  be  found,  such  as  are  in


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC


197


these  mountains,  who  arc  capable  of
making  the  sacrifices  which  they
have  made,  there  is  something,  as  I
have  said,  in  their  example  and  in
their  lives  that  influences  men,  that
impresses  them,  and  that  causes
them,  whatever  their  feelings  may
be  respecting  the  belief  of  these
people,  to  feel  a  profound  and  heart-
felt respect  for  them  ;  for  no  man
or  woman  properly  constituted  ever
failed  to  respect  devotion  to  princi-
ple, moral  courage  and  the  qualities
that  are  exhibited  in  the  lives  of
the  Saints;  I  therefore  say,  we  have
not  lived  in  vain  ;  we  have  not
preached  in  vain  ;  we  have  not  suf-
fered in  vain  ;  we  have  not  protest
ed  in  vain.  The  fruits  of  these  la-
bors of  ours  which  apparently  have
been  so  long  in  coming,  will  be
reaped  in  the  great  harvest  yet  to  be
reaped  upon  the  earth.

I  feel  to  speak  these  words  of  en-
couragement to  my  brethren  and
sisters,  many  of  whom  feel  probably
that  their  obscure  lives  and  strug-
gles, their  contest  with  poverty,
their  humble  and  eventful  histories
are  sometimes  of  so  little  value  that
they  are  comparatively  worthless  in
the  earth.  1  say  to  the  humble
st ruggler,  to  the  man  or  woman  who
may  be  content  with  poverty,  whose
life  may  be  uneventful  in  his  own
estimation,  who  may  be  hidden
from  the  popular  sight  and  may  not
figure  on  the  world's  stage,  I  say  to
every  such  person,  as  a  Latter-day
Saint,  You  have  a  great  and  import-
ant mission  to  perform,  and  if  you
perform  the  duties  devolving  upon
you  properly,  your  influence  will  be
felt;  and  in  the  days  to  come,  in
that  great  (lay  of  God  Almighty,
your  worth  will  be  fully  recognized,
and  you  will  shine  as  a  jewel  in  the
kingdom  of  our  Redeemer.

There  is  one  thing  that  every
parent  can  do. He  can  endeavor  to


make  his  sons  and  daughters  better
qualified,  better  equipped  for  the
great  struggle  cf  life  and  better  able
to  perform  their  part  in  this  glori-
ous work  that  God  has  established,
than  himself  ;  that  is  one  thing  the
parents  of  the  rising  generation  of

!  these  mountains  can  do.  I  have
never  felt  as  I  do  to-day,  and  as  I
have  recently,  of  the  great  import-
ance of  our  training  and  educating
our  children  to  the  greatest  and  best
advantage,  that  nothing  shall  be
left  undone  on  our  part  to  prepare
them  tor  the  great  work  which  they
have  to  perform*  This  is  a  labor
that  we  can  accomplish.  It  does
not  depend  so  much  upon  the  know-
ledge of  books ;  a  great  many  people
imagine  that  only  books  are  neces-
sary for  education  ;  but  the  man  is
best  educated,  in  my  opinion,  who
has  thought  the  most,  and  that  cor-
rectly. So  far  as  theology  is  con-
cerned, we  have  been  able,  by  the
blessing  of  God,  the  light  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  power  of  truth,
to  go  forth  unlearned,  illiterate,  and
unprepared,  so  far  as  worldly  educa-
tion is  concerned,  and  by  virtue  of
the  knowledge  that  comes  down
from  above,  the  elders  of  this  Church
have  gone  forth  and  met  the  world
of  Christendom.  I  do  not  speak  in
vanity,  nor  in  the  spirit  of  boasting
when  I  say  they  have  never  been
vanquished. The  learned,  the  edu-

|  cated,  the  professed  theologians
when  they  have  met  the  elders  of
this  Church  with  the  Bible  in  their
hands,  have  been  compelled  to  re-
treat before  the  power  of  truth  pro-
claimed by  uneducated  but  inspired
men.  Is  our  mission  accomplished
by  having  done  this  1  I  feel  that
we  as  a  people  are  only  on  the
threshold  of  the  great  work  that  lies
before  us.  We  have  an  immense
field  of  labor  stretched  out  before
us. When  you  look  ahead  and  try


i


198


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


to  see  its  limits,  the  field  of  useful-
ness, which  stretches  out  before  this
people  called  Latter-day  Saints,  is
beyond  the  reach  of  human  vision  ;
it  is  illimitable*  stretching  out  in  the
far  distant  fnture.  Is  there  a  wrong
upon  the  earth  to  be  righted  t  If  so,
it  is  our  bounden  duty  to  attempt
its  correction.  Is  there  a  false  prin-
ciple extant?  It  is  our  bounden
duty  to  seek  its  eradication.  Is  there
tyranny  in  the  world,  tyranny  of
the  body,  tyranny  of  the  mind,  phy-
sical or  mental  tyranny  ?  It  devol-
ves upon  us  as  Latter-day  Saints  to
overthrow  it  Are  there  social
problems  to  be  solved  1  Who  shall
solve  them  ?  Who  can  do  so  1  Ke-
move  the  Latter-day  Saints  from  the
field,  and  who  can  solve  these  prob-
lems which  are  pressing  themselves
upon  the  attention  of  all  thinking
people  1  The  whole  earth  is  full  of
violence,  wrong,  oppression,  mis-
government,  and  a  thousand  other
evils  which  I  cannot  now  enumerate.
It  devolves  upon  us,  as  fast  as  we
can  reach  these  things,  to  correct
them,  to  remove  them.  In  the  first
place  we  have  got  to  correct  and  re-
move them  from  our  own  midst.  It
is  a  slow  labor  to  train  a  people,
brought  as  we  are  from  every  nation,
educated  in  every  creed,  speaking
almost  every  language  and  heirs  of
every  ira«lkion.  There  is,  false  or
true,  wedded  to  us  old  customs  and
the  evils  of  ages,  which  have  been
transmitted  from  generation  to  gen-
eration until  they  have  formed  a
strong  part  of  our  very  being.  It  is
a  slow  work,  I  say,  educating  a  people
such  as  we  are.  We  have  been  at
it  now  49  years,  and  we  can  scarcely
perceive,  that  is,  in  comparison  with
that  which  lies  before  us,  the  growth
and  the  development  which  have
been  made.  But  we  have  grown,
our  minds  have  been  enlarged,  we
have  become  emancipated  from  many


old  follies,  and  freedom  of  thought
has  taken  place  in  our  midst ;  but
the  great  labor  that  devolves  upoa
us  is  to  educate  ourselves,  and  then
we  can  soon  educate  the  rest  of
mankind,  for  as  I  have  said,  our
example  is  felt ;  the  influence  of  it
goes  forth  and  bears  its  fruit  among
other  people.  But  it  is  a  most  diffi-
cult thing  to  get  these  Latter-day
Saints  to  understand  the  principles
that  are  as  plain  as  the  noonday  sun
— that  they  should  receive  readily,
and  why  1  Because,  as  I  have  said,
they  are  heirs  of  the  traditions  of
centuries  that  have  come  down
through  the  dark  ages.  It  is  a  won-
derful thing  to  do  what  we  have
have  done  respecting  woman.  Look
at  w  hat  monogamy  has  done.  Look
at  its  effects  ;  trace  its  influence
from  the  death  of  the  Apostles,  or
soon  afterwards,  down  to  this  the
nineteenth  century,  and  what  do
we  behold  ?  Why,  in  every  genera-
tion a  large  percentage  of  our  sisters
has  been  consigned  either  to  that
namelesss  condition  of  which  it  is  a
shame  to  speak,  or  have  died  with-
out ever  knowing  the  joys  of  mater-
nity. When  I  think  of  it,  when  I
read  the  history  of  the  boasted  civi-
lization of  the  Greeks  and  the
Romans,  and  think  of  the  boasted
civilization  of  **ur  day,  inherited
from  these  nations,  ami  witness  its
effects,  I  wonder  how  man,  standing
up  in  the  face  of  heaven,  dare  look
at  woman  and  talk  about  being  her
protector.  Read  the  history  of  the
sex  aijd  of  the  frightful  evils  which
have  been  brought  upon  our  sisters
through  man's  accursed  traditions
and  evils.  If  it  were  to  be  told  to
another  people  differently  situated
to  us,  with  different  traditions  to  us,
they  could  not  believe  that  intelli-
gent man  would  entertain  for  one
moment,  or  that  women  themselves,
in  view  of  what  their  sex  has


■


4

INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC.


199


suffered,  would  cherish  and  cling  to
the  wretched  traditions  that  have
prevailed  in  Christendom  and  to  a
certain  extent  yet  prevail  in  our
midst  t;:  ,v,*,
I  know  I  am  touching  now  upon
what  many  people  consider  a  tender
spot.  Say  they,  4i  The  decision  of
the  Supreme  Court  ha^  arranged  all
this."  Yes,  but  it  will  not  stay  ar-
ranged. Let  me  tell  you,  that
wrong  may  prevail  and  right  may
apparently  be  crushed  ;  but  right
must  at  last  prevail  and  claim  its
own  in  spite  of  laws,  of  decisions,  of
mandates,  and  everything  that  man
can  utter.  I  am  talking  now  not
respecting  law ;  1  am  not  talking
respecting  tradition  ;  I  am  not  talk-
ing about  "Mormon  "  plural  marri-
age or  patriarchal  marriage;  I  am
talking  about  men  and  women,
brethren  and  sisters  as  such.  Come
let  us  reason  together  ;  let  us  talk
together,  not  as  religionists,  not  as
"Mormons,"  not  as  monogamists,
not  as  polygamists,  not  as  citizens
of  Christendom,  but  as  men  ami
women,  the  children  of  God,  as
brethren  and  sisters  of  the  one
fa  mil  v.  Let  us  talk  together  face  to
face,  in  plainness,  in  simplicity,
without  allowing  tradition  to  have
weight  with  us,  to  blind  our  under-
standings.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that
I  wish  to  talk  upon  this  subject-
Here  is  a  family,  a  family  com-
posed  of  men  and  women,  and  we
will  say  this  tabernacle  contains
this  entire  family  of  God  upon  the
earth,  for  the  sake  of  illustrating
the  point  Here  are  men  and  women
in  equal  numbers  and  equal  propor-
tions, one  sex  not  outnumbering  the
other — a  man  for  a  woman  and  a
woman  for  a  man,  no  surplus  of
women,  no  surplus  of  men  If  they
were  to  marry,  each  would  have  a
partner,  each  man  would  have  a
wife  and  each  woman  would  have  a


husband  ;  each  would  he  perfect,  for
the  man  is  not  perfect  without  the
woman,  nor  the  woman  without  the
man.  We  turn  in  and  make  a  law,
such  as  prevailed  at  one  time  in
Rome  that  every  man  shall  marry  a
wife.  Such  a  law  was  made  at
Home  at  one  time  ;  it  was  aimed  at
celibacy.  It  was  aimed  at  a  certain
class  as  the  law  of  1862  was  aimed
at  us.  One  was  enacted  to  prevent
marriage,  the  other  to  compel  marri-
age, that  no  class  of  men  should
grow  up  in  the  community  without
wives,  and  that  no  woman  should
be  allowed  to  forsake  man  and  be-
come a  nun.  We  have  such  a  law,
say  in  this  tabernacle.  That  answers
very  well  Every  woman  is  provided
with  a  husband,  and  every  man  with
a  wife.  But  after  a  while  somebody
comes  along  and  says,  Wj  do  not
like  this  law,  it  is  oppressive;  I
know,  for  instance,  where  it  works
very  badly;  I  know  men  who  do  not
want  to  have  wives."  They  prefer
a  single  life,  and  they  succeed  after
a  while  in  repealing  the  law,  as  they
did  in  Rome.  The  law  is  repealed
and  men  are  at  liberty  to  marry  or
not  as  they  please.  On  the  top  of
this  another  law  is  enacted,  in  effect
that  every  man  shall  have  but  one
wife,  and  shall  not  be  permitted  to
take  two  or  more  wives.  The
women,  of  course,  have  to  do  just  as
the  men  say,  they  can  not  compel  the
men  to  marry  them,  but  must  wait
until  they  are  invited  to  marry.
This  law  suits  a  great  many  indivi-
duals. Many  men  say,  "  I  prefer
not  to  have  a  wife  and  especially  if
you  will  only  make  a  law  confining
the  men  to  marry  hut  one  wife  each.
1  like  that  very  well,  because  I  will
not  then  be  under  the  necessity  of
keeping  a  wife.  I  f  1  want  a  partner,
an  associate,  1  can  have  one  without
being  at  the  trouble  or  expense  of
keeping  her  as  such. Because  if


200  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


you  confine  marriage  to  one  man
and  one  woman  there  will  necessarily
be  a  share  of  the  women  who  cannot
be  married  ;  that  is,  if  the  sexes  are
equal  in  numbers.  Then  I  can  do
as  I  please,  I  know  the  confiding
nature  of  woman  ;  I  know  how  she
loves,  how  she  clings  to  the  object
of  her  love.  This  will  be  my  op-
portunity/* But  what  shall  be  said
respect  big  the  women.  The  men
so  far  as  they  are  concerned,
have  the  right  to  marry  or  not
as  they  please.  But  here  is  a  large
percentage  of  the  women  whto  by
this  law  are  to  a  certain  extent  de-
prived from  marrying,  even  suppos-
ing the  sexes  to  be  equal.  A  civil
commotion  arises.  Men  go  to  Avar,
they  go  to  sea,  they  engage  in  com-
mercial pursuits,  they  leave  their
homes,  they  engage  in  hazardous
occupations.  The  result  is  that
though  in  the  beginning  the  men
and  women  were  equal  in  numbers',
by  the  effects  of  war,  and  of  engag-
ing in  hazardous  pursuits  which
women  do  not  follow,  the  men  die
and  are  killed,  ami  the  women
survive  and  outnumber  the  males.
The  operation  of  a  law  then,  such
as  I  have  described,  increases  the
hardship,  increases  the  percentage
of  those  who  are  not  married  and
who  have  no  opportunity  of  marry-
ing. Here  comes  along  a  man  after
witnessing  the  evils  that  have  grown
up  among  his  brothers  and  sisters,
and  says,  "I  have  a  plan  to  suggest
which  1  believe  will  cure  the'evils
that  exist  among  us.  I  see  that  a
dreadful  vice  called  prostitution  has
crept  into  our  midst,  and  arising
from  it  are  dreadful  diseases,  diseases
that  I  cannot  describe,  so  appalling
are  they  that  the  very  thought  of
them  makes  the  heart  recoil  with
horror  ;  they  have  appeared  in  our
family  circle  and  they  are  destroying
our  young  men  and  women.  And


now  then,  the  plan  that  I  have  to
propose  to  our  family  is  this,  that
every  man  shall  marry  until  all  the
women  are  married,  until  every
woman  that  wants  a  husband  shall
have  one,  so  that  the  men  who  will
not  marry  shall  not  have  a  class  of
unmarried  women,  to  prey  upon,  to
commit  violence  with,  or  to  prosti-
tute. "  Now,"  says  he,  "  if  you  let
all  these  men  and  women  marry,
there  will  be  some  women  who  will
not  want  to  marry,  but  that  propor-
tion will  be  very  small ;  and  by  this
means  you  will  arrest  this  dreadful
evil  that  is  growing  in  our  midst"

Now  let  me  put  this  to  you  ;  let
us  reason  upon  this,  face  to  face,  as
I  have  said*  'Which  will  be  the
better  plan  ?  According  to  my
judgment,  speaking  a*  one  of  this
family,  not  as  a  member  of  Congress,
not  a^  a  '*  Mormon,"  but  as  one  of
the  family  I  have  described.  The
latter  law  is  far  superior  to  the  other.
I  would  say,  as  a  father,  if  1  had  a
family  of  that  kind,  by  all  means  let
my  daughters  marry,  let  every
woman  have  a  husband  that  wants
one.  Then  if  every  man  marries  a
wife,  they  will  only  have  a  wife
apiece  ;  but  if  there  should  be  any
of  the  boys  that  do  not  want  wives,
the  girls  would  not  necessarily  go
without  husbands.

I  consider  our  false  tradition  upon
this  subject  one  of  the  greatest  evils
at  the  present  time  that  exists  upon
the  earth*  It  has  come  down  to
us  from  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
than  whom  a  more  abominable  lot
of  people  never  lived  upon  the  earth.
To  read  their  books  is  enough  to
make  a  man  with  the  least  feeling  of
modesty  blush  and  be  ashamed  of
his  race.  Yet  they  are  introduced
into  our  literature.  Whoever  reads
Horace,  Sallust,and  numbers  of  those
authors,  well  knows  how  full  of  cor-
ruption they  are. Not  only  crimes,


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC.


201


but  crimes  against  nature  were
justified  by  some  of  the  best  and
most  noted  of  Greek  philosophers,
and  were  practised  by  Sophocles,
Socrates,  and  others ;  and  yet  this
is  the  philosophy  that  has  come
down  to  us.  They  had  a  class  of
women  in  their  midst  who  were  re-
gularly compensated  and  sustained
as  courtesans;  they  were  maintained
in  order  that  the  purity  of  the  dome-
stic circle  might  be  unpolluted.  And
tliis  lias  come  down  to  us  in  Christen-
dom, in  Europe  and  America  to  the
present  time.  The  fairest  of  Earth's
daughters  fall  yearly  sarrifiees  to  the
abominable  lusts  of  men.  How  is
the  domestic  circle  preserved  in  mo-
nogamous countries  to-day?  It  is
only  preserved  at  the  expense  of  this
class  to  which  I  have  referred,  by
these  priestesses  of  humanity,  blasted
for  the  sinsof  the  people,  living  short
lives  and  carrying  with  them  the
effects  of  man's  abominable  lust.

Now  I  do  not  want  to  talk  to-day
about  law  ;  I  do  not  want  to  talk
to-day  about  its  effects  in  relation
to  this  subject — the  subject  of  "Mor-
mon" patriarchal  marriage;  I  do
not  want  to  talk  about  the  law  of
ltfG2,  nor  the  decision  of  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  United  States
affecting  it ;  but  I  want  to  deal  with
the  facts  that  stare  us  in  the  face.
Shall  we  correct  these  evils  I  "  O,1'
says  one,  M  they  always  existed/'
Out  upon  such  doctrine  ;  we  do  not
believe  it.  I  cannot  believe  that  the
Great  Creator,  he  who  formed  the
universe,  who  placed  the  sun  in  the
centre  of  our  solar  system  and  caused
those  planets  to  revolve  around  it ;
that  that  being  who  created  these
tilings,  and  produced  order  out  of
chaos  who  said,  "Let  there  be  light
and  there  was  light  j"  who  called
forth  out  of  chaos  the  elements
from  which  our  earth  is  formed
and created it as a  glorious


habitation  for  man;  that  He  pos-
sessing, as  we  knew  he  does,  in-
finite wisdom,  has  placed  men  and
women,  his  sons  and  daughters,
upon  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  evils
such  as  I  have  briefly  alluded  to,
and  provide* I  no  remedy  therefore,
I  could  no  more  believe  it  than  I
could  believe  this  light  to  be  dark-
ness. But  I  do  believe  that  in
the  bosom  of  the  Father  there  is
wisdom  to  create  all,  to  carry  out
all,  and  to  make  this  earth  a
heaven,  where  peace,  love,  joy
and  happiness  shall  prevail,  and
where  there  shall  be  no  sin,  no
sorrow,  no  heartrending  or  pain,
where  man  and  woman  will  dwell
together  in  perfect  peace,  love  and
harmony,  and  children  grow  up  in
purity  with  every  heavenly  sur-
rounding

I  have  said,  probably,  enough  on

this  subject.  I  merely  wish  to
point  out  and  to  show  that  cer-
tain evils  exist  and  that  they  need
correction.  How  shall  they  be  cor-
rected? Who  shall  point  out  the
remedy  !  I  believe  God  has  done
it,  and  he  will  continue  to  do  it;
he  will  bring  to  pa>s  in  his  own
way  and  in  his  own  due  time  all
the  corrections  necessary  to  change
all  this.  This  subject  of  itsrlf,
affecting  as  it  does  the  happiness
welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  human
family,  is  one  of  almost  overshadow-
ing importance.  But  there  are
other  evils  under  which  mankind
groan*  There  are  evils  in  regard  to
wealth  and  the  management  of
property,  the  organization  of  capital
and  the  organization  of  labor,  the
relations,  that  labor  shall  bear  to
capital,  and  capital  to  labor.  There
are  questions  of  this  kind  that  press
themselves  upon  the  attention  of
statesmen,  and  upon  the  attention
of  every  man  of  thought  and  reflec-
tion, and  he  sees  there  is  room  for


the  exercise  of  the  most  profound  1
wisdom,  and  the  greatest  talent  in
order  that  these  things  may  be  cor-  I
rectcd.  It  devolves  upon  us,  Latter-
day  Saints,  to  help  to  accomplish
this  work.  It  devolves  upon  us,
and  will  devolve  upon  us  more  par-
ticularly in  the  near  future,  to
maintain  upon  this  continent  and
through  this  broad  land  pun1  repub-
lican institutions,  constitutional  li-  |
berty  in  its  broadest  sense.  For  the  ;
day  is  not  far  distant  when  the
power  such  as  is  growing  up  in  the
mountains  will  be  needed.  Conflict
of  parties,  an  increase  of  party  feel-  '
ing,  an  increased  disposition  to  take
possession  of  power  by  any  means,
no  matter  what  it  might  be,  are  be-
coming general  in  the  United  States.
This  is  so  self  evident  that  no  man,  \
unless  completely  wedded  to  the
idea  that  this  nation  will  exist  in
perpetuity,  can  fail  to  see  for  himself
that  there  is  a  crisis  approaching  in
the  affairs  of  our  nation.  Already
the  feeling  prevails  that  in  order  to
accomplish  certain  things  fraud  is
justifiable.  Money  is  used  to  an  ex
tent  in  the  accomplishing  of  certain
results  in  government  affairs,  and  in
politics  that  you,  as  a  people  who
live  in  these  mountains,  havescarcely
any  conception  of.  And  this  is
increasing.  What  the  end  will  he
is  not  difficult  to  foretell  Repub-
licanism ceases  to  be  republicanism
whenever  fraud  enters  into  the  deci-
sion of  questions  and  the  will  of  the
people  cannot  be  properly  ascer-
tained.

So  far  as  religious  liberty  is  con-
cerned we  have  fought  that  battle
thus  far  with  tolerable  success ;  but
we  have  yet  to  contend  still  more
for  greater  liberty,  not  for  ourselves
alone,  but  for  every  human  being
that  dwells  upon  this  land,  from  the
east  to  the  west  and  from  the  north
to  the  south. The  principle  must


be  maintained,  the  principle,  that
actuated  the  founders  of  our  govern-
1  ment,  when  thev  laid  the  foundation
stone  thereof,  that  in  matters  of  re-
ligious concernment  no  man  has  a
right  to  step  between  his  felluw-
man  ami  his  God.  I  may  worship
idols  ;  I  may  burn  incense  to  idols  ;
I  may  worship  the  sun  and  pay
adoration  to  him,  the  great  luminary
of  day;  I  may  do  other  things  which
may  seem  equally  improper,  but  have
1  not  the  right  to  do  these  things
under  our  constitution  ?  Was  it  not
the  intention  of  the  framers  of  our
form  of  government  that  every  man
should  have  this  right  ?  Certainly
it  was  ;  and  it  can  be  clearly  proved
that  this  was  their  intention,  that
this  was  the  spirit  that  actuated  and
prompted  them.

In  Salt  Lake  City,  if  the  ''Mor-
mons" had  supreme  control — I  say
"  Mormons,"  I  ought  to  say  Latter-
day  Saints — it  they  had  supreme
control  from  our  northern  boundary
in  Idaho,  to  the  southern  boundary,
Arizona,  and  from  our  eastern
boundary,  Colorado,  to  our  western
boundary,  Nevada;  if  we  had  supreme
control  ami  undisputed  possession  of
this  land,  without  the  right  of  do-
minion over  us  being  questioned,  we
would  have  no  authority  under  the
constitution  under  winch  we  live  to
say  to  any  human  being  within  these
confines  how  he  should  worship,
what  he  should  or  should  not  do  in
order  to  please  the  Creator.  If  the
Chinaman  should  come  here  and
build  a  Joss  house  and  burn  incense
to  Joss,  if  he  prostrate  himself  in
adoration  before  the  images  that  he
thinks  represents  his  deity,  we  have
no  right  in  the  world  to  interfere
with  him.  If  an  Ingersall  should
come  here  and  say  that  he  did  not
believe  in  any  God  at  all,  and  he
could  carry  his  feelings  into  practice,
we  would  have  no  right  to  interfere


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC


20$


with  him. Under  the  circumstances
I  have  described,  he  would  have  a
perfect  right  to  believe  in  God  or
not. We  would  have  no  right  to
interfere  with  a  man  who,  belie  v
ing  his  priest  lias  power  to  remit
his  sins,  would  enter  the  confess-
ional  chamber  for  the  purpose  of
1  laving  them  forgiven ;  or  with  the
Episcopalian  who  may  choose  to
sprinkle bis in t ant,  or  the  Jew
because  lie  believed  in  circumcising
his  infant  child,  or  with  the  Baptist
because  he  believed  in  baptism  by
immersion- But  supposing  that  a
man  should  come  along  that  believes
it  his  right  and  in  accordance  with
his  religious  convictions  to  marry
more  than  one  wife,  and  he  takes
care  of  his  wives  and  provides  for
them  properly  according  to  his  re-
ligion, believing  that  in  the  eternity
to  come  he  will  dwell  with  them.
Some  of  us  may  think  that  Ins
ideas  of  heaven  are  very  materialis-
tic; we  'may  think  him  a  very  foolish
man  for  having  such  a  belief,  and
especially  for  going  to  the  expense
of  keeping  three  or  four  wives:  those
may  be  the  popular  ideas  about  him,
but  if  he  carries  out  his  belief  from
a  religious  standpoint,  he  has  a  per-
fect right  to  do  it  in  the  face  of
God  and  even  under  the  constitution
of  our  land. The  Parsee  and  fire-
worshipper  and  men  of  kindred  be-
lief may  yet  come  to  this  land  of
liberty  ;  and  1  tell  you  if  the  spirit
of  the  Constitution  be  maintained,
as  the  Latter-day  Saints  will  yet
maintain  it,  they  will  have  a  perfect
right  to  worship  their  God  according
to  the  dictates  of  their  own  con-
sciences without  any  to  molest  or
make  afraid. The  only  time  that
these  men  can  be  interfered  with
will  be  when  their  religious  acts
interfere  with  the  rights  and  liber-
ties of  their  fellowmem Hear  it,  ye
Latter-day  Saints ! When  John


Chinaman  comes  in  your  midst,
teach  your  children  to  respect  him*
When  any  other  man  of  any  other
creed,  race  or  color  takes  his  abode
among  you,  teach  your  children  to-
respect  his  form  of  worship.  And
if  they  go  to  the  church  of  the  Ca-
tholics or  that  of  thePresby  terians  or
of  any  other  sect,  teach  them  to  be-
have themselves  and  treat  everybody
with  civility  anil  kindness,  and  that
it  is  none  of  their  business  how
these  sects  worship,  teach  that  they
violate  good  order  and  good  law
when  they  in  any  way  make  light
of  religious  exercises,  I  would  w  hip
a  boy  for  it  quicker  than  for  any-
thing else.  That  is  the  freedom  I
believe  in  ;  that  is  the  freedom  I
mean  to  teach  to  my  children  and  to
all  men  so  far  as  my  voice  and  in-
fluence extend  j  that  is  the  freedom
I  mean  to  contend  fur  and,  as  I  have
said  hundreds  of  times  to  leading
men  of  this  nation,  I  will,  if  neces-
sary, take  my  sons  and  make  them
swear  that  they  will  stand  by  and
maintain  this  liberty  as  long  as  they
live  and  contend  for  it  and  teach
their  children  alter  them  to  contend
for  it  also,  I  believe  in  the  fullest
liberty  upon  these  points.  We  have
been  accused  of  exclusiveness.  Our
hearts  have  many  times  warmed  to-
wards  u  Gentiles,*1  as  they  are  called.
We  have  extended  the  arms  of  kind-
ness thousand  and  thousands  of
times  to  them,  as  our  history  has
proved.  We  have  been  full  of
that  disposition.  But  how  have
our  advances  been  met  t  Let  those
in  this  tabernacle  and  those  who  are
familiar  with  such  matters  read  the
newspapers.  1  have  bad  people
visit  me  at  my  house  where  every
attention  and  courtesy  would  be
shown  them,  and  they  would  leave
and  perhaps  through  reading  news-
paper articles  consisting  of  abomi-
nable lies,  would  go  away  and  betray


those  who  had  received  and  treated
them  kindly  and  hospitably  and  so
often  has  this  been  the  case  that  I
have  almost  sworn  I  will  never  do
it  again*  It  is  not  because  we  have
unkind  feelings.  The  time  will
come  when  we  will  have  power  ;  at
present  we  are  in  the  minority,  and
it  pays  for  scribblers  to  write  about
us  and  hold  us  up  to  ridicule.  But
suppose  the  Latter-day  Saints  had
control  ;  suppose  their  ideas  were
fulfilled,  that  is,  that  we,  as  it  is  de-
stined we  shall  be,  were  the  people
who  uphold  Constitutional  govern-
ment upon  this  continent,  who  re-
stored the  government  to  its  primi-
tive condition  when  all  the  political
parties  shall  have  fallen  into  chaos  ;
would  we  feel  at  liberty  to  say  that
none  but  the  Latter-day  Saints
should  be  elected  to  offices  of  trust
and  responsibility  1  No,  Joseph
Smith  set  tl>e  pattern  ;  he  taught
the  brethren  who  were  with  him
better  ideas;  you  well-informed
Latter-day  Saints  know  that  there
are  two  powers  which  God  has  re-
stored in  these  the  last  days.  One
is  the  Church  of  God,  the  other  the
Kingdom  of  God.  A  man  may  be-
long to  the  Kingdom  of  God  and
yet  not  be  a  member  of  the  Church
of  God.  In  the  Kingdom  of  God,
using  it  in  a  political  sense,  there
may  be  heathens  and  Pagans  and
Mahommedans  and  Latter-day  Saints
and  Presbyterians  and  Episcopalians
and  Catholics  and  men  of  every
■creed.  Will  they  legislate  for  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  alone  1  Will  the  laws
that  they  enact  protect  us  alone
and  not  protect  others  ?  No,  Why!
Because  God  is  the  Father  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  as  well  as  of  every
human  being  ;  God  is  the  father  of
all,  is  the  father  of  the  Chinaman,
the  Hindoo,  the  African,  the  Euro-
pean, the  American  ;  is  the  Father


of  all  the  races  of  men  and  of  every
creed  and  nationality.  When  he
establishes  his  kingdom  it  will  pro-
tect all  in  their  equal  rights ;  I  as
a  Latter-day  Saint,  will  not  have
power  to  trample  on  my  fellow- man
who  may  not  be  orthodox  in  my  opini-
on, because  I  am  a  Latter-day  Saint;
nor  will  my  fellow-man  to  whom  I
am  heterodox,  have  the  power  to
trample  upon  me.  Does  not  that
look  right?  That  is  the  kind  of
kingdom  we  have  to  contend  for;
that  is  the  kind  of  kingdom  we
have  to  establish,  and  it  is  already
provided  for  in  the  Constitution
given  unto  us  by  God,  and  through
the  glorious  labors  of  the  fathers
who  laid  the  foundation  of  this  gov-
ernment, who  were  inspired  and
raised  by  our  Almighty  Father  for
this  express  purpose.  There  is  no
liberty  that  a  human  being  can  de-
sire, neither  is  there  a  right  that
can  be  exercised  properly,  that  we
do  not  have  under  the  Constitution
of  our  land.  It  needs  no  amend-
ment about  it :  it  is  broad  enough,  if
interpreted  in  its  true  spirit,  to  cover
the  individual,  the  continent,  and
the  entire  globe  and  furnish  freedom
for  all

Now,  Latter-day  Saints,  if  you
have  had  narrow  views  I  will  tell
you  to  put  them  aside.  1  do  not
mean  by  this  you  must  take  every-
body into  your  houses.  There  is  the
difference.  1  have  seen  President
Young  scores  of  times  acting  upon
the  spirit  to  which  I  have  alluded.
He  has  invited  strangers  to  our  so-
cial parties  and  houses  and  extended
courtesies  to  them  because  it  was
wisdom  to  do  so.  But  a  great  many
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  so  ig-
norant upon  these  points  that  they
do  not  know  when  to  stop*  There
are  some  so  ignorant  that  they  would
in  the  spirit  of  kindness  let  a  man
come  into  their  homes  and  become


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS,  ETC


205


so  familiar  that  he  would  try  to  lead
astray  some  member  of  their  family;
Can  you  not  see  that  these  are  acts
of  folly,  that  we  are  not  required,
because  of  the  liberality  we  should
cherish  and  cultivate,  to  throw
down  every  barrier  and  allow  vice
to  stalk  through  our  cities  and  enter
into  our  family  circles  to  pollute  the
purity  that  should  prevail  there.
Can  you  not  see,  Latter-day  Saints,
however  young,  however  uninformed
you  may  be,  can  you  not  see  that
to  allow  this  liberty  would  be  wrong?
Therefore  we  ought  to  discriminate.
Nowhere  in  good  society  has  a  man
the  entree  without  proper  introduc-
tion. If  a  stranger  were  to  come  to
me  bearing  lines  of  introduction
from  a  friend  of  mine,  I  would,  if
necessary,  go  with  him  to  the  bank
and  endorse  a  note  for  him,  because
I  would  be  perfectly  secure  in  doing
so.  But  supposing  a  stranger  were
to  come  to  me  for  the  same  favor,
without  an  introduction,  I  would
not  be  under  the  slightest  obligation
to  do  as  he  wished,  though  I  might
do  so  as  an  act  of  charity,  but  of
course  under  such  circumstances
I  should  not  be  expected  to  do  more
than  this.  And  if  I  were  to  go
among  strangers  I  would  not  think


of  attempting  to  push  myself  among
the  people  without  proper  introduc-
tion. I  have  gone  in  their  midst
many  times,  but  have  never  been  a
sharer  of  their  kindness  and  confi-
dence only  as  such  confidence  was
established  by  acquaintance.  So  in
our  midst;  a  man  can  come  properly
recommended,  he  is  at  home.  He
can  have  time  enough  to  establish
his  name  and  to  show  to  the  people
what  kind  of  man  he  is.  Then  he
will  be  received  as  he  should  be,
having  that  respect  shown  to  him

that  is  due.

I  have  talked  *  a  great  deal  more
than  I  intended.  I  hope  what  I
have  said  may  be  bkssed  to  your
profit.  If  1  have  said  any  unwise
thing,  forget  it.  If  I  have  said  any
improper  thing,  I  hope  it  will  pass
from  your  minds,  and  that  which  is
good,  cling  to  you.  Cleave  to  vir-
tue, to  purity,  to  everything  that  is
good,  that  will  elevate  you  and
make  you  a  better  people.  Above
all  let  me  say  to  yon,  let  us  get  rid
of  old  traditions'  as  fast  as  we  can,
and  learn  from  the  Lord,  and  be
taught  by  his  holy  spirit.  That
God  may  grant  this  is  my  prayer,  in
the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen-


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  G W.  STAYNER,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  [Sunday  Afternoon*

May  25TH,  1879,

(Reported  by  <7e*.  F.  Gibb$.)

FATES  QF  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES- — WORSHIP  OF THE TRUE GOB — HIS

CREATIONS  AND  HANDIWORK — PROPHECY,


In  rising  to  address  the  consn-e-
gation  this  afternoon,  a  bnef  passage
of  Scripture  is  suggested  to  my
mind,  as  the  basis  for  such  remarks
as  I  may  make,  it  is  the  latter  part
of  tli  e  seventh  verse  of  the  fourteenth
chapter  of  the  Book  of  Revelation,
and  reads  as  follows :  "  and  wor-
ship him  that  made  heaven  and
earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains
of  waters."  Believing  with  the
ancient  Apostles  that  no  prophecy
of  scripture  is  of  any  private  inter-
pretation ;  but  holy  men  of  (jod
spoke  as  they  were  moved  by  the
Holy  Ghost,"  and  that  "  all  scrip-
tures were  written  for  our  profit  and
learning  that  we  through  faith  in
them,  might  have  hope."  I  am  firm-
ly convinced  that  the  words  of  the
text  have  a  profound  significance  ;
for  although  it  is  acknowledged  that
the  sacred  writings  contain  the  most
sublime  language,  and  furnish  the
most  poetic  quotations,  still  I  do
not  believe  that  those  holy  men
sought  to  round  off  their  sentences,
simply  for  the  sake  of  the  music  they
would  afford  to  the  ear  of  the  reader;
but  that  beneath  all  the  poetry  and
sublimity  of  the  language,  there  is
a  beautiful  meaning  to  every  sen-


tence recorded,  involving  the  most
important  truths  for  the  benefit  of
mankind.  In  order  to  reach  clearly
the  correct  significance  of  the  passage
we  have  read,  let  us  first  consider  by
whom  it  was  uttered,  and  inquire
into  the  circumstances  under  which
it  was  recorded.  History  tells  us
that  the  venerable  Apostle  John  who
wrote  the  Book  of  Revelation,  was
sentenced  by  the  Emperor  Domitian
of  the  Roman  Empire,  to  be  scalded
to  death  in  a  cauldron  of  boiling  oil;
that  this  cruel  sentence  was  carried
out  as  fully  as  it  was  in  the  power

|  of  men  to  execute  it.  The  cauldron
of  oil  was  heated  to  boiling  heat,
and  the  great  apostle  was  submerged
in  the  scalding  fluid,  but  through
Divine  interposition  he  was  delivered
like  Daniel  from  the  "lion's  den,"
and  Shadrach,  Meshack  and  Abed-
nego  from  the  "  fiery  furnace,"  by
the  power  of  that  God,  whom  he
served  and  obeved  ;  so  that  he  suf-
fered  no  harm  and  simply  looked
like  he  had  been  anointed.  The
cruel  Emperor  was  so  enraged  at  this
wonderful  deliverance,  that  he  in-
stantly sentenced  the  doomed
Apostle  to  banishment  on  the  Isle

!  of  Patmos. While  in  exile  in  accor-


FATES  OF  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES,  ETC.  207


dance  with  this  sentence,  St  John
was  made  the  happy  recipient  of  the
most  wonderful  visions  nf  things  to
come  to  pass  in  the  future  history
of  the  world.  Enwrapped  in  hea-
venly vision  he  beheld,  among  other
important  matters,  an  "angel  fly  in
the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the
everlasting  Gospel  to  preach  unto
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and
to  every  nation  and  kindred,  and
tongue  and  people,  saying  with  a
loud  voice,  "Fear  God,  and  give
glory  to  him,  for  the  hour  of  his
judgment  is  come,1'  and  then  the
words  of  our  text,  and  worship
him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth,
and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of
waters."  Thus  then  we  find  this
text  was  the  enunciation  of  an  angel;
and  as  the  time  when  this  angel
was  to  come  is  plainly  shown  to  be
at  a  most  important  crisis  of  the
world's  history,  "the  hour  of  God's
judgment/'  it  may  well  he  supposed
he  did  not  waste  time  in  poetic
fancy  or  simply  the  elegant  rounding
of  periods,  hut  that  every  word  he
uttered  carried  with  it  a  depth  of
meaning,  and  was  in  every  May  cal-
culated  to  impress  those  to  whom
he  was  sent,  with  the  importance  of
his  message-  What  then  was  his
reason  for  using  this  particular  lan-
guage 1  Why  did  he  not  close  with-
out uttering  the  bat  words]  Or
why  did  he  not  call  the  attention  of
earth's  inhabitants  to  some  other  pe-
culiarity of  the  Divine  greatness  t

■if  O

First  because  it  ia  customary  with
the  Lord  and  his  angelic  messengers
to  generally  give  some  reason  for  the
requirements  made  by  the  in  ;  God  is
ever  willing  to  show  his  children
why  we  should  obey  his  commands,
we  find  his  doctrines  reasonable;  his
requirements  reasonable,  and  his
revelations  reasonable  ;  hence  the
angel  added  by  way  of  reasonable
argument,  iJ  and  worship  him  that


made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the
sea  and  the  fountains  of  waters."
But  why  did  he  uot  call  attention  to
some  of  the  great  things  in  the  un-
seen world  ;  why  not  refer  to  the
hosts  of  heaven  or  the  majestic  glory
of  God,  as  he  sat  upon  his  throne;
or  any  others  of  the  numerous  exist-
ences that  create  joy  or  wonder  ''be-
hind the  vail  f  No  doubt,  because
the  angel  could  see  prophetically
that  wlren  the  time  should  arrive
for  him  to  deliver  his  heavenly  mes-
sage, at  the  hour  of  God's  judg-
ment, the  whole  world  would  have
reached  what  may  be  called  a  scien-
tific age,  an  epoch  of  "Materialism"
a  time  when  the  universal  scientific
thought  would  be  centered  on  that
which  was  material  in  its  character  ;
and  that  people  would  he  more  de-
voted to  searching  out  the  matters
of  the  visible  world,  than  the  hidden
mysteries  that  lay  beyond  the  vail.
Hence  he  called  attention  to  the
things  which  were  most  engrossing
their  thoughts.  lie  sa*  that  men
would  reach  as  they  have  done,  some
conclusions  concerning  the  planetary
bodies,  and  establish  some  theories,
the  correctness  of  which  lias  in  cer-
tain instances  been  proved,  as  par-
ticularly shonn  in  the  precision  with
which  eclipses  are  predicted,  that
frequently  occur  within  a  minute,
and  even  a  few  seconds  of  the  time
designated.  Although  men  have  dis-
covered comparatively  little  with
regard  to  such  matters,  and  even  in
our  own  solar  system  are  at  a  loss
in  some  things,  still  enough  hasbeen
discovered  to  create  wonderment
and  inquiry  as  to  the  origin  of  the
worlds  that  "  roll  upon  their  wings"
in  the  firmament,  and  I  believe  I
shall  be  endorse  !  by  the  highest
scientific  authorities  when  I  say
that  they  acknowledge  the  exist-
ence of  a  master  intelligence  that
organizes, sustains and  controls


the  universe.  But  who  or  what  that
power  and  intelligence  is,  they  do
not  comprehend,  neither  can  they
without  he  .should  reveal  himself
unto  them.  But  when  the  inquiry
arises  as  to  who  is  this  organizer  ?
the  voice  of  the  angels  comes
ringing  down  the  cycle  of  time,
"  Worship  God,  who  made  the
heavens,"  for,  as  the  Psalmist
gives  it,  "  The  heavens  declare  the
glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament
Bhoweth  his  handiwork/'  How
charming  it  is  to  contemplate  the
beauty  of  the  heavens,  and  then
think  of  the  discoveries  that  have
been  made ;  concerning  light,  for
instance-  How  wonderful  it  is  !  To
think  that  light,  traveling,  as  scien-
tists assert,  from  the  sun  to  the
earth  in  eleven  minutes,  a  distance
that  would  occupy  a  cannon  ball
twenty-five  years  in  transit ;  and
yet,  notwithstanding  its  velocity,  it
is  so  composed  as  not  to  harm  in  the
least  degree  the  tenderest  of  animal
or  vegetable  substances  ;  the  minut-
est plant — the  most  delicate  flower
is  blessed  by  its  influence,  and  not
in  the  least  injured  by  the  rapidity
of  its  motion.  How  is  this  accom-
plished ]  By  the  particles  of  which
it  is  composed  being  so  minute  as
not  to  offer  any  resistance  to  the
slightest  substance-  And  yet  a
single  sunbeam,  which  no  one  can
paint  or  define,  looking  so  innocent
and  colorless,  is  found  to  consist  of
seven  colors,  and  will  penetrate  the
deepest  darkness  and  reveal  all  ex-
isting objects  in  their  proper  and
actual  form  and  color.  The  benefi-
cial effects  of  the  sun's  light  cannot
be  too  highly  appreciated,  and,  in
contemplating  its  blessings  we  are
constrained  to  "  worship  God  who
made  the  heavens."  Let  us  now
consider  the  earth;  take  for  instance
the  atmosphere  which  we  breathe
and  by  which  we  are  sustained*  We


find  it  in  a  pure  condition  originally,
but  we  ascertain  that  it  is  rendered
impure  by  being  breathed*  Through
passing  through  the  lungs  it  be-
comes so  highly  carbonized  that  it  is
unfit  for  our  use  ;  the  large  infusion
of  carbonic  dioxide  it  receives  through
the  process  of  respiration,  renders  it
poisonous  to  men  and  animals  ;  but
strange  to  say  it  is  then  in  the  most
proper  condition  to  nourish  the  life
of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  Plants
thrive  on  it?  and  vegetation  general-
ly, receives  its  chief  nutriment  from
that  impurity  which  animals  could
not  endure.  Scientific  experiment
has  proved  that  a  sprig  of  mint
placed  in  a  bottle  of  air  rendered
impure  by  respiration  or  putrefac-
tion, will  so  absorb  the  impurity,
and  nourish  itself  on  the  unwhole-
some carbonic  acid  gas,  as  to  again
render  the  air  sufficiently  pure  to
sustain  human  and  animal  life.  Thus
we  find  that  the  atmosphere  which
would  otherwise  become  unfit  to
sustain  our  lives,  is  purified,  and  at
the  same  time  is  enriching  us  through
the  medium  of  the  vegetable  crea-
tion, from  which  we  derive  much  of
our  support  and  sustenance.
I  Then  think  of  the  richness  of  our
fields,  of  the  mineral  wealth  in  these
huge  mountains,  of  the  beauties  to
be  seen  and  studied  in  the  floral
creation,  of  the  grandeur  of  earth's
scenery,  and  the  capacity  of  the  soil
to  support  its  wonderful  population,
think  of  what  is  on  the  earth's  sur-
face, and  consider  what  is  discovered
in  its  deepest  recesses ;  and  when
the  inquiry  arises  as  to  the  origina-
tor of  these  blessings,  and  men  of
science  and  reflection  ask  who*  and
what  is  the  controlling  power  that
bestows  and  regulates  all  these
things,  the  loud  voice  of  the  angel
comes  down  through  the  ages,
¥  Worship  God  who  made  the
earth  P Then  there  is  the  mighty


FATES  OF  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES,  ETC.


209


ocean  that  covers  such  a  large  portion
of  our  globe.  Now,  some  people
have  thought  that  there  was  too
great  a  proportion  of  our  eartl  i  covered  j
by  water ;  but  scientific  men,  who  '
have  thought  deeply  on  this  subject,
declare  that  if  there  were  any  less,
there  would  not  be  sufficient  to  fur-
nish moisture  for  the  fertilization  of
the  land*  Here,  then,  is  an  element
prepared,  from  which,  through  the
action  of  the  atmosphere,  the  moist-
ure is  drawn  up  into  the  clouds,  and,
what  is  very  wonderful,  it  is  not
emptied  out  in  torrents,  to  ravage
and  destroy  by  its  furious  impetuo-
sity, our  fields  and  gardens,  but  is
carried  in  the  clouds  as  they  are
gently  wafted  by  the  wind,  and
beautifully  *  distributed  in  grateful
showers,  to  refresh  and  nourish  the
crops  of  the  husbandman.  Then,
again,  see  the  provision  for  preserv-
ing those  large  bodies  of  water,  called
seas,  so  that  they  may  not  become
putrid  and  malarious  ;  they  are
.strongly  supplied  with  salt,  and  thus
turned  into  brine,  which  preserves
the  water  in  a  wholesome  state.
Upon  the  surface  of  the  seas  are  the
vessels  of  the  commercial  world,
laden  with  treasure,  and  down  in
those  almost  unfathomable  depths

are  found  endless  varieties  of  the
finny  tribes,  that  delight  to  dwell
there,  and  are  so  useful  to  man.  The
sea  is  their  home,  from  the  smallest
specimen  that  floats  near  the  surface,
to  the  Inure  leviathan  that  lashes  the


ocean  in  his  fury.  They  are  per-
fectly adapted  to  live  there,  and  the
element  is  specially  fitted  to  supply
their  necessities.  Then,  too,  be-1
neath  its  surface  we  discover  beau-
teous and  precious  gems  for  the
adornment  of  the  person  ;  providing
even  for  the  pleasures  and  fashionable
tastes  of  £i  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth.1'  And  when  we  ask  what  in- ,
tclligence  and  beneficent  power  has
No.  14.


provided  for  our  happiness,  we  still
hear  the  voice  of  the  angel  as  he
cries,  u  worship  God  who  made  the
sea  !" There  is  still  another  branch
of  the  subject  to  which  we  must
briefly  refer,  and  that  is  the  H  foun-
tains of  waters."  What  can  be  more
delightful  than  a  fountain,  or  spring
of  pure  water  1 Up  in  these  glori-
ous mountains  which  have  inspired
the  Saints  with  a  love  of  liberty,  we
can  see  and  hear  the  rippling  brook
as  it  escapes  from  a  bright,  cold,
pure  spring  in  the  nook  of  a  canon
or  the  crevice  of  a  rock  ! How  is  it
formed  and  sustained! We  find
that  through  the  process  of  evapora-
tion before  alluded  to,  moisture  is
drawn  from  the  oceans  and  lakes  up
into  the  clouds;  some  of  these  clouds
pass  over  the  mountains,  and  deposit
sheets  of  snow,  and  showers  of  rain
in  the  canons  and  on  the  mountain
sides. These  sink  into  the  crevices
between  the  rocks,  and  here  and
there  burst  forth  in  bubbling  springs
of  fresh  water  which  feed  the  rivulets
and  streams,  and  form  the  creeks
that  descend  to  the  land  in  the  val-
leys, then  pass  into  rivers  and  finally
return  to  the  bosom  of  the  oceans
and  lakes  from  whence  they  came,
there  to  be  again  ["reserved  till  again
evaporated. But  one  peculiarity  we
should  notice  here,  and  that  U,  the
water  in  these  springs  is  fresh  and
sweet,  although  the  bodies  of  water
from  whence  it  is  evaporated  are
salt Mere  we  live  on  the  borders
■  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  yet  did  you
'  ever  notice  any  saline  flavor  to  the
springs  and  streams  sustained  by  the
evaporations  from  the  lake?  No,
and  yet  this  is  a  body  of  water  having
the  strongest  saline  character  in  the
world  ! What  a  glorious  provision
to  have  pure  fresh  water  in  constant
supply  ! And  how  beautiful  to  con-
template, is  the  present  fertility  of
these  valleys  ! When  we  look  back

Vol.  XX.


210  JOURNAL

to  the  time  when  those  grand  old
pioneers  set  their  feet  on  this
soil,  and  realize  its  past  barren,  arid
condition,  we  are  led  to  thank  God,
"who  made  the  fountains  of  waters  "
and  we  can  seethe  literal  fulfillment
of  his  word  through  the  ancient
prophets,  that  he  would  "turn  the
dry  ground  into  water  springs/*  and
"make  pools  in  the  desert;"  we  see
that  "fountains  of  water"  have
sprung  up  in  unexpected  places,  to
enable  this  dry  and  unpromising  soil
to  yield  an *equi table  return  for  the
toil  of  the  laborer;  and  we  can  now
say  that  indeed  the  "Desert  has  been
made  to  blossom  as  the  rose."  In  i
short  it  seems  that  "the  heavens  and
the  earth  and  the  sea  and  the  foun-
tains of  waters"  have  formed  a  grand
combination  to  introduce  their  uni-
ted evidences  of  the  Divine  exist-
ence,— and  the  rich  Divine  dealings
with  mankind.  Through  the  ages
that  are  past  every  method  consis-
tent with  the  perfection  of  omnipo-
tence, has  been  adopted  to  impress
man  with  reverence  for  the  Deity;
angels  from  the  heavens  declare  the
glory  of  God,  and  the  music  of  the  ,
spheres  as  they  perform  their  won-
derful course  in  the  firmament,
invite  our  attention  to  his  glorious
handiwork;  God  has  written  bis
being  on  the  imperishable  rocks,  has
recorded  the  existence  of  Deity  in
the  granite  mountains  and  among
" the  everlasting  hills;"  if  we  "go
down  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  he
is  there;"  and  at  his  bidding,
"fountains  of  wrater"  burst  forth
in  fertilizing  streams,  to  nourish  the  1
barren  sod  that  it  may  bring  forth
its  rich  fruit  for  the  sustenance  of
.the  Saints*  Thus  the  heavens  in
ttheir  glory,  the  earth  with  its  rich
blessings,  the  seas  upon  which  we
ride,  and  the  "fountains  of  waters  "
that  supply  us  with  an  element  with-
out which  we  could  not  live,  furnish


i  OF  DISCOURSES*

us  with  a  chain  of  material  evidences,
of  the  existence  and  goodness  of  the
Deity,  that  cannot  be  successfully
denied.  But  I  Mould  still  Jail  in
the  performance  of  my  duty  this
afternoon,  if  I  should  close  without
touching  upon  the  subject  of  spir-
itual evidences  that  are  furnished  in
such  rich  abundance  from  the  very
commencement  of  the  world's  his-
tory to  the  time  when  God  revealed
himself  to  Joseph  Smith,  a  young
boy  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of
age,  unskilled  in  the  sciences,  and
unlettered  in  the  learning  of  the

-

wnrld,  God  revealed  to  him  not
only  the  fact  of  Divine  existence,
but  even  how  he  became  Godj  that  it
was  through  living  up  to  correct
principles,  and  by  developing  within
himself  every  sublime  sentiment
j  that  had  its  origin  in  truth.  He
taught  him  how  the  people  "who
dwelt  on  the  earth "  might  also  be
thus  exalted  to  be  angels  of  God,
and  finally  Gods  themselves  ;  how
they  could  scale  t lie  ladder  of  intelli-
gence step  by  st^p,  till  they  finally
overcame  all  evil  and  sat  down  at
the  right  hand  of  the  "  majesty  on
high,  "  Read  and  consider  the
beautiful  prophecies  in  the  Book  of
Daniel!  liead  his  florid  account  of
the  wonderful  visions  given  to  him,
of  the  method  he  was  commanded
to  adopt  in  order  that  he  might  be
worthy  to  receive  them,  How  he
T^as  required  to  fast,  "to  eat  no
pleasant  food ;  *  to  subsist  on  flowers
and  other  innocent  kinds  of  vegeta-
tion ;  and  then  ponder  over  his
prophecies,  and  the  prophecies  of
angels  recorded  by  him,  especially
concerning  the  four  beasts,  which
represented  the  four  great  kiudoms
of  the  world,  Babylon,  the  kingdom
of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  the
Macedonian  Empire,  and  the  Ro-
man power.  Read  his  prophecies
concerning  the  last  days ;  and  com-


FATES  OF  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES,  ETC


pare  them  with  the  writings  of  Gib-
bon and  other  historians  whom
while  they  denounced  God  and  re-
ligion, and  declared  the  prophets
were  impostors,  actually  recorded
the  most  litw;d  fulfillment  of  their
glorious  predictions  ;  and  it  will  be  :
found  by  those  prophecies  and  their
recorded  full  till  ment,  that  Daniel  and
and  his  colleagues  were  not  simply  i
writers  of  poetry  for  the  amusement
of  themselves  and  their  neighbors,
but  that  they  were  ministers  of  God,
chosen  to  warn  mankind  of  the  great
things  that  should  come  to  pass
on  the  earth,  long  cent  u  res  after
those  prophets  should  be  called
behind  the  vail.  God  has  painted
the  history  ot  the  world  in  the
rich  colors  of  prophecy,  and  man-
kind, under  Divine  Providence
lias  sculptured  its  fulfillment  in
the  marble  of  history*  The  two
records  are  before  u>,  and  I  am
ashamed  of  the  intelligence  of  the


!  nineteenth  century  when  I  think
;  that  scientific  men,  and  learned
people  can  be  induced  to  impute
to  those  holy  servants  of  God
other  motives  than  the  advance-
ment of  God's  purposes  in  the
earth.  But  I  do  not  condemn  the
caviller  by  any  means,  or  consign
him  to  endless  torments ;  no,  I
regard  him  as  being  of  great  use
and  of  infinite  importance  to  so-
ciety ;  he,  acting  like  the  tempestu-
ous elements,  promotes  a  healthy
condition  of  the  atmosphere,  and
stirs  up  the  great  ocean  of
thought;  this  leads  us  to  reflect
and  consider,  and  while  investigat-
ing more  closely  the  works  of
'  God,  we  are  apt  to  come  to  right
conclusions  and  be  more  firmly
established  in  the  principles  of
truth.

May  God  add  his  blessing,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.
Amen,


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  C.  W.  PENROSE,

Dblivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon

May  25th,  1879.


(Reported  by  Gee.  F.  Gibbs.)


DEFINITE  IDEAS  CONCERNING  GOD — HOW  TO  WORSHIP  HIM  ACCEPTABLY
— RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL — ITS  PREPARATORY  MISSION.


I  have  listened  with  a  great  deal
of  pleasure,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
to  the  remarks  of  Elders  Starrier.
Tlere  are  a  great  many  arguments
which  might  be  adduced  from  the
material  universe  to  establish  the
fact  that  a  divine  hand  has  fonned
the  worlds  ;  and  I  think  there  are
few  people,  even  in  this  skeptical
age,  who  altogether  repudiate  the
idea  of  a  grand  Creator  of  the  uni-
verse. This  is  called  an  age  of  infi-
delity. It  is  a  fact  that  there  is
very  little  real  faith  in  God  upon  the
earth.  There  is  very  little  know-
ledge concerning  God  in  the  world,
and  there  are  some  people  who  alto-
gether repudiate  the  idea  of  the
existence  of  a  God ;  but  I  believe
they  are  in  number  very  few  indeed.
But  while  there  are  few  who  entirely
reject  the  existence  of  Deity,  there
are  a  great  number  of  people  in  the
world  who  have  no  definite  idea  con-
cerning God,  concerning  his  ways,
his  dealings  with  mankind,  or  con-
cerning the  right  manner  cf  wor-
shipping him  and  of  learning  from
him.

In  the  text  which  Elder  Stayner
has  read  this  afternoon,  and  from
which  he  has  made  some  very  ex-


cellent remarks,  the  command  is
given  u  to  worship  Him  that  made
heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and
the  fountains  of  water."  In  the  ex-
planation which  has  been  given  to
us  it  has  been  made  clear  that  the
words  which  have  been  read  in  our
hearing  were  to  be  uttered  by  an
angel  of  God ;  they  were  to  be
spoken  at  a  period  in  the  worlds
history,  some  time  in  the  future  of
the  day  in  which  the  Apostle  John
saw  the  vision  referred  to,  In  the
4th  chapter  of  the  same  book  (Reve-
lations), and  the  first  verse,  you  will
find  that  having  seen  a  number  of
events  portrayed  before  Ids  mind,
John  says  :  11  After  this  I  looked,
and  behold,  a  door  was  opened  in
heaven  :  and  the  first  voice  which  I
heard  was  as  it  were  of  a  trumpet
talking  with  me,  which  said,  Come
up  hither,  and  I  will  show  thee
things  which  must  be  hereafter/'
All  we  read  in  that  Book  of  Reve-
lations, after  the  first  verse  of  the
4th  chapter,  describes  events  to
transpire  after  these  things  were
seen.  And  if  we  take  the  trouble
to  read  the  whole  of  that  book,  we
will  find  that  John  was  shown  the
dealings  of  God  with  man,  age  after


■


DEFINITE  IDEAS  CONCERNING  GOD,  ETC,


213


age,  down  until  the  time  that  this
angel  should  come  to  the  earth.  Says
the  Apostle  :  u  And  I  saw  another
angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on
the  earth,  and  to  every  nation,  and
kindred  and  tongue,  and  people.
Saving  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear  God
and  give  glory  to  him  for  the  hour
of  his  judgment  is  come  ;  and  wor-
ship him  that  made  heaven  and
earth,  and  the  sea  and  the  foun-
tains of  waters."  (Rev.  xivM  6,  7.)
According  to  this  prediction,  just
before  the  hour  of  God's  judgment
— that  time  which  all  the  prophets
of  God  have  foreseen  and  prophe-
sied of,  just  before  the  grand  con-
summation, just  before  the  time
when  the  Lord  should  come  to
judge  the  quick  and  t lie  dead — this
angel  was  to  come  to  the  earth  with
the  everlasting  Gospel ;  and  that
Gospel  was  to  be  preached  to  every
nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue
ami  people.  Now,  what  does  that
pre-suppose?  To  every  reasonable
mind,  that  the  people  of  every  na-
tion, and  kindred,  and  tongue  upon
the  face  of  the  earth  were  destitute  of
that  Gospel.  For,  if  the  Gospel  was
already  there,  already  preached  by
any  nation,  kindred,  or  people,  there
would  be  no  need  for  the  angel  to
reveal  it  anew  to  mankind  And
further,  if  there  were  people  living
upon  the  earth  who  did  worship  God
aright — that  is,  the  true  and  living
God,  not  the  God  of  the  heathen,
not  the  God  of  men  s  imagination,
but  the  God  that  made  the  heaven
and  the  earth,  the  sea  and  the
fountains  of  waters — if  people  dwell-
ing upon  the  earth  were  already
worsliipping  that  God  aright,  there
would  be  no  need  of  a  heavenly
messenger  to  leave  the  courts  of

glory  to  come  to  the  earth  to  call
upon  them  to  do  so.


Now  this  may  be  a  rather  start-
ling declaration  to  make  in  the
face  of  all  Christendom,  in  the
face  of  the  hundreds  and  thou-
sands of  Christian  ministers  of  the
various  Christian  denominations,
who  spend  their  time,  their  talents
'  and  ability  in  preaching  what  they
call  and  perhaps  believe  to  be  the
everlasting  Gospel ;  and  in  the  face
of  the  millions  of  the  earth  who
think  they  do  worship  God  and
give  glory  to  that  Being  who  made
the  earth,  and  the  seas,  and  the
fountains  of  waters.  But  here  is
the  text,  here  is  the  is  the  language
of  Scripture  given  by  inspiration.
We  must  believe  the  declaration  to
be  divine,  or  not  believe  it  at  all.
The  Apostle  John  saw  in  the  vision
that  at  a  certain  time  the  angel
was  to  come  again  to  earth  and
reveal,  or  restore  anew  the  everlast-
ing  Gospel,  the  true  Gospel,  by  which
alone  man  can  receive  a  fulness  of
I  salvation  in  the  presence  of  God  the
Father.

.There  are  millions  of  people  living
to-day  upon  the  face  of  the  earth
who  believe  that  a  divine  hand
formed  this  world,  and  that  he  is
also  the  Creator  of  the  universe ;  but
they  know  nothing  certain  about
that  Being.  Notwithstanding  the
boasted  knowledge  and  intelligence
of  the  19th  century,  the  world  to-
day know  nothing  concerning  this
divine  Being,  While  most  of  them
admit  the  fact  of  his  existence,  yet
at  the  same  time  he  is  to  them  as
he  was  to  the  Ephesians  to  whom
Paul  p  read  led  on  a  certain  occasion
—an  "  unknown  God."  If  this  is
not  the  case,  who  is  there  that  can
tell  us  anything  about  him?  what  he
is  like?  where  he  dwells  1  what  are
his  purposes  with  regard  to  the
people  of  the  present  age  ?  which
is  the  right  way  to  approach  him  that
!  we  may  learn  to  know  him  far


214  JOURNAL  OK

ourselves  ?

We  read  in  the  Scriptures  that  in
olden  times  men  communed  with
this  divine  Being,  that  he  walked
and  talked  with  men  in  the  flesh,
and  revealed  himself  to  them.  But
he  is  neither  seen  nor  heard  of  men
to-day,  and  what  is  even  worse,  none
seem  to  know  how  to  approach  him
to  learn  of  him  as  his  servants  did  in
earlier  times.  But  some  will  say,
"  We  have  no  need  of  such  commu-
nications now,  for  we  have  the  writ-
ings of  these  men  ;  they  approached
him,  and  they  have  written  books
containing  his  words  which  have
been  handed  down  to  us  ;  we  have
no  need  to  approach  God  as  they
did."  But  who  can  tell  us  how  to
read  this  Bible  aright  ?  These  people
who  say  they  have  no  need  of  reve-
lation do  not  agree  as  to  what  those
prophets  meant  when  they  wrote
these  things.  Take  the  minister  of
one  Christian  denomination,  for  in-
stance, and  get  him  into  conversation
with  a  minister  from  another  Christ-
ian denomination,  each  of  these  men
of  course  professing  to  believe  that
the  Bible  is  a  divine  record  given  to
us  for  our  guidance  in  spiritual
things  ;  and  in  a  very  short  time  you
will  get  them  into  a  quarrel.  Take
half  a  dozen  men  from  half  a  dozen
Christian  denominations,  each  pro-
fessing to  be  called  of  God  to  ex-
plain his  word,  and  yon  will  find
that  all  of  them  have  different  views
and  ideas  concerning  that  which  the
prophets  wrote.  Ask  any  one  of
these  Christian  ministers  to  tell  you
anything  about  God,  and  after  ex
hau  sting  his  store  of  language  in  try-
ing to  do  so  he  will  wind  up  thus  :
<£God  is  incomprehensible."  There
is  an  attempt  to  describe  God  in  the
Episcopalian  prayer-book.  We  are
told  in  that  book,  which  contains
the  articles  of  the  faith  of  that  body
of  people,  that  God  is  three  and  yet


DISCOURSES.

lie  Is  only  one  ;  that  there  are  three
distinct  personages  in  the  Godhead,
yet  only  one  personage,  and  that  this
being  is  without  body,  without  parts
and  without  passions.  Here,  then,
we  have  an  imaginary  being  com-
posed of  three  parts,  who  yet  is  only
one  without  any  parts.  We  are  told
further  that  one  of  these  bodiless,
passionless  beings  without  parts  had
a  body,  and  that  he  was  a  man  in  all
points  as  we  are,  possessing  like  pas-
sions, but  that  he  sinned  not.  This
is  a  strange  attempt  at  description
of  a  divine  Being.  I  do  not  wish  to
take  up  the  time  in  further  reference
to  these  absurdities,  you  can  read
them  in  the  Athenasian  creed,  and
in  the  thirty-nine  articles  which  all
Episcopal  ministers  must  subscribe
to  before  they  can  receive  "holy
orders."

We  read  in  the  Bible :  "  For  a  man
indeed  ought  not  to  cover  his  head
(when  he  prayeth),  forasmuch  as  he
is  the  image  and  the  glory  of  God  :
but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the
man."  (1  Cor.,  xi,  7)  According  to
the  Scriptures,  when  you  see  a  per-
fect man,  as  far  as  man  can  be  per-
fect in  this  imperfect  condition  which
we  now  occupy,  we  see  a  being  in
the  image  of  Deity.  When  Jesus
Christ,  who  died  that  we  might  live,
appeared  on  the  earth,  we  are  told
that  In?  was  "the  image  of  the  in-
visible God, "  and  **  the  express
image  of  his  (the  Fathers)  person,"
So  much  indeed,  was  he  like  his
Father,  that  when  one  of  his  dis-
ciples asked  him  to  show  them  the
Father,  he  answered  him  saying,
"He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen
the  Father;"  giving  us  to  under-
stand that  the  Son  inherited  the
likeness  of  his  Father.  Some  read
it  to  signify  that  he  was  the  same
person  ;  but  the  Savior  says  again,
**My  Father  is  greater  than  I,"
The  words  of  Jesus  to  Mary  in  the


DEFINITE  IDEAS  CONCERNING  GOD,  ETC*


215


garden  are  significant  on  this  point  :
u  Go  to  ray  brethren  and  say  to
them,  I  ascend  unto  my  Father,  and
your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and
your  God."  And  at  the  baptism  of
the  Savior  we  find  that  the  Holy
Ghost  descended  upon  him,  and
that  the  voice  of  the  Fat  he*  was
heard  out  of  heaven,  saying,  **This
is  ray  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am
well  pleased  f  showing  that  there
were  three  distinct  substances — the
Son  coming  up  out  of  the  water,
the  Fatl i« r  speaking  from  heaven
and  the  Holy  Ghost  descending.

In  regard  to  this  divine  Being,
The  Son  is  the  first* born  in  the  spirit,
the  only  begotten  in  the  flesh,  sent
into  the  world  to  die  for  the  sins  of
the  world.  How  can  the  people  of
the  earth  learn  anything  concerning
liiin  ?  and  which  is  the  right  way  to
worship  him'!  Says  the  Catholic
minister,  "Here  is  the  way,  the  only
way."  "  No,"  says  the  Episcopal
minister,  "  here  is  the  way."  Says
the  Methodist,  "No,  you  are  both
wrong,  we  have  the  true  way."
Against  these  assertions  the  Baptist
minister  enters  his  protest,  saying
"All  these  are  ^  mug,  our>  i>  the  way.
And  so  with  all  the  various  sects
and  parties  that  exist  upon  the
earth.  Let  us  bear  in  mind  now
that  tho  angel  spoken  of  by  John
was  to  come  from  heaven  and  call
upon  every  nation  and  tongue  to
worship  this  Being,  the  true  and
living  God,  And  not  only  call  upon
them  to  do  so,  but  to  bring  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  by  which  man  can
learn  of  God  and  walk  in  his  ways.
And  it  is  very  evident  what  they
would  do,  from  the  predictions  of
other  prophets.  We  read  in  the
writings  of  Isaiah,  also  in  the  writ-
ings of  Micah,  that  in  the  last  days
there  should  come  a  people  from  all
the  nations  of  the  earth,  who  should
gather  together  in  the  tops  of  the


mountains  to  learn  of  the  ways  of
(jod  and  to  walk  in  his  paths.  It
seems,  then,  that  the  angel  was  not
to  bring  his  message  for  nought ;
there  was  to  be  a  people  among  all
these  nations  who  would  receive  the
message  and  who  w  ould  respond  to
it  ;  and  in  consequence  of  that  re-
sponse they  would  leave  their  homes
and  would  come  from  the  East  and
from  the  West,  and  God  would  ''say
to  the  North,  Give  up,  and  to  the
South,  Keep  not  back,  bring  my
sons  from  far,  and  my  daughters
from  the  ends  of  the  earth."  And
they  would  go  up  to  the  mountain
of  the  Lord  to  be  taught  in  Ids  ways
and  to  walk  in  his  paths  ;  that  they
might  be  prepare  !  for  the  day  when
the  **  law  of  Hod  would  go  forth
from  Zion  and  the  word  of  the  Lord
from  Jerusalem."  And  the  work
was  to  continue;  for  according  to  an-
other prophet,  the  time  shall  come
when  "they  shall  teach  no  more
every  man  his  neighbor,  saying,  Know
ye  the  Lord :  for  they  shad  all  know
me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the
greatest  of  them,sai tlx  the  Lord."  How
shall  this  be  brought  about  1  "And
they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God,"  The
Lord  is  to  teach  them;  they  are
not  to  be  taught  by  the  enticing
words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  as  God
<!»»!  spake  to  the  people  in  olden
times,  so  he  is  to  speak  to  them  in
the  latter  times.  He  said  he  would
raise  up  shepherds  after  his  own  heart,
who  should  "feed  them  with  know-
ledge and  understanding  f  not  with
speculative  ideas,  notions  springing
from  their  own  minds,  but  with  the
truth  from  the  true  and  living  God,
sent  down  from  on  high.  Jesus,
when  upon  the  earth,  made  a  remark
very  pertinent  to  this  point ;  said
he :  "And  no  man  knoweth  the
Son,  but  the  Father  ;  neither  know-
eth any  man  the  Father  but  the  Son,
and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will


216


JOURNAL  OF  JJISCULKSKS


reveal  him."  The  inhabitants  of
the  earth  will  never  come  to  a  know-
ledge of  the  true  God,  they  will  never
know  how  to  approach  him,  they
will  never  know  how  to  ob-
tain knowledge  and  intelligence
from  him,  unless  they  walk  in  the
way  his  Son  shall  point  out  "  He
stands  between  us  and  the  Father  ;
he  is  the  First-born,  the  Mediator,
chosen  from  the  creation  of  the
world.  He  performed  the  work  on
the  earth  which  he  was  sent  to  do.
"Thou  hast  loved  righteousness  and
hated  iniquity  ;  therefore  God,  even
thy  God, hath  anointed  thee  with  the
oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows,"
He  stands  as  a  Mediator  between
God  and  man.  When  we  approach
God  we  must  do  it  through  the  Son.
Who  can  tell  us  how  ?  We  hear  the
cry,  "Come  to  Jesus,"  in  every  camp
meeting.  We  are  told  by  the
preachers  of  every  Christian  deno-
mination to  "  come  to  Jesus,"  But
how  are  we  to  come?  The  ways
pointed  out  are  different  and  vari-
ous. I  am  reminded  right  here  of  a
saying  of  the  Prophet  Jeremiah  :
"Tims  saith  the  Lord,  stand  ye  in
the  ways,  and  see  and  ask  for  the
old  paths,  where  is  the  good  way,
and  walk  therein,  and  ye  "shall  find
rest  for  your  souls.  But  they  said,
We  will  not  walk  therein/'  "  The
old  path,"  what  is  thatl  The  ever-
lasting Gospel  which  the  angel  was
to  bring.  "Enter  ye  in  at  the  straight
gate/1  says  the  Savior  ;  "for  wide  is
the  gate,  and  broad  is  the  way,  that
leadest  to  destruction,  and  many
there  be  which  go  in  thereat:  because
straight  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is
the  way,  which  leadeth  unto  life,
and  few  there  be  that  find  it."
There  is  but  one  way  into  the  sheep-
fold  ;  he  that  climbs  up  any  other
way  will  be  accounted  as  4i  a  thief
and  a  robber."  The  angel  was  to
bring  the  old  way  ;  that  "those  who


walk  therein  might  find  rest  for
their  souls ;  but  it  appears  the  great
bulk  of  the  people  would  say,  "  We
will  not  walk  therein."

I  bear  my  testimony  to  this  con-
gregation, that  in  the  times  in  which
we  live,  which  are  just  preceding  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  the
clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and
great  glory,  to  accomplish  all  things
spoken  of,  God,  the  Eternal  Father,
has  spoken  from  the  heavens  by  his
own  voice,  revealing  his  Son,  and
has  sent  holy  angels  committing  the
everlasting  Gospel  to  men  who  have
been  commissioned  and  ordained  of
God  to  go  to  all  the  world  to  preach
it  as  a  witness  before  the  end  comes,
I  bear  my  testimony  that  as  soon  as
that  Gospel  reached  my  ears  in  a
distant  land,  1  received  it  and
obeyed  it.  That  is,  believing  in  the
truth  thereof,  I  repented  sincerely  of
my  sins  before  God,  and  went
humbly  and  submitted  to  the  or-
dinance of  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins,  receiving  that  ordinance  from
men  ordained  of  God  to  preach  this
Gospel.  That  having  been  burial
in  the  water  in  the  likeness  of  the
death  of  Christ,  and  raised  again
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection,  I
received  a  witness  from  God  that  my
sins  were  remitted.  I  bear  my  testi-
mony this  afternoon  before  God  and
angels,  and  before  this  congregation,
that  1  received  a  remission  of  my
sins,  through  the  atonement  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  obedience  to
his  ordinances.  The  hands  of  the
servants  of  God  were  laid  upon  my
head,  and  I  received  the  Holy  Ghost
—that  same  Spirit  which  God  gave
to  the  prop  I  lets/  that  same  Spirit
which  rested  upon  John  upon  the
Isle  of  Patmos,  that  same  Spirit  by
which  holy  men  of  old  wrote  and
spoke  as  they  were  moved  upon  by
the  Holy  Ghost;  and  that  Spirit  is
the  same  yesterday,  to-day  and  for-


*


DEFINITE  IDEAS  CONCERNING  GOD,  ETC


217


ever.  It  takes  of  the  things  of  the  J
Father  and  makes  them  plain  to  the
human  mind  ;  it  makes  tilings  past
clear  to  the  understanding  of  man,
and  it  lifts  up  the  curtain  of  futurity
and  shows  tilings  to  come.  It  is  the
Spirit  of  prophecy,  the  testimony  of
Jesus;  it  is  the  light  of  God  to  the
human  soul  And  as  natural  light
discloses  to  the  vision  of  men  the
objects  of  the  material  universe,
without  which  none  can  discern
them,  so  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  light
of  God  which  reveals  to  the  spirits
of  men  the  things  of  eternal  life,  and
without  which  men  cannot  under-
stand the  things  of  God.  It  is  be-
cause  of  the  absence  of  this  divine
lijjht  that  tin*  world  lies  in  darkness
in  regard  to  their  Father  and  God  ;
this  is  why  men,  notwithstanding
their  learning,  their  scientific  disco-
veries in  the  material  universe,  can-
not comprehend  the  things  of  God.
Man  by  searching  cannot  find  out
God.  He  can  reveal  him  sel  f  to  m  ai  i  -
kind,  but  must  do  it  through  the
Son,  and  obedience  to  the  <  lospel  of
his  Sou  is  the  only  way  of  .salvation.
There  is  no  other,  and  no  name
given  under  heaven  whereby  man
can  be  saved  but  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  A  mere  form  of  worship
avails  nothing ;  we  must  obey  the
commandments.  "Not  every  one
that  sayeth  to  me  Lord,  Lord,  shall
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my
Father  who  is  in  heaven,"  This
Gospel  is  restored  to  the  earth,  and
everybody  may  know  it  for  them-
selves. We  are  not  dependent
upon  the  words  of  Joseph  Smith  ;
we  need  not  depend  upon  the
Twelve  Apostles  who  received  their
ordination  under  his  hand.  Every
man  and  every  woman  and  every
child  who  have  come  to  years  of  ac-
countability can  receive  direct
from the  Lord, direct  from  the


fountain  of  their  being,  a  testimony
by  which  they  may  know  that  he
lives,  that  they  arc  walking  in  his
ways,  and  learn  how  they  can  ap-
proach him  acceptably.

Some  people  may  think  that  it
does  not  matter  how  people  worship,
that  God  will  accept  of  their  wor-
ship, anyhow.  But  from  what  we
read  of  His  dealings  in  the  Bible,
we  find  it  a  matter  of  the  greatest
importance,  Abel,  for  instance,
offered  to  the  Lord  that  which  God
!  commanded  j  Cain  offered  what  he
pleased  to  give.  Abel's  offering  was
accepted,  Cain's  was  rejected.  Cain
slew  Abel  in  consequence,  and  the
>[»ini  manifested  by  him  has  been
perpetuated  to  this  day.  God  has
marked  out  the  way  by  which  he
may  be  worshipped,  He  has  or-
dained certain  ordinances  through
which  certain  blessings  are  to  come;
aiul  the  blessings  of  God  will  not
come  except  by  means  of  the  ordi-
nance-^. Those  who  obey  these  in
the  way  that  God  has  ordained  in-
variably receive  the  blessings  ;  for
spiritual  laws  are  as  fixed  ami  un-
changeable as  are  the  laws  of  the
matt  rial  universe.  No  man  expects
to  reap  oats  from  sowing  wheat
That  whieh  a  man  soweth,  that  will
be  also  reap.  If  be  sow  to  the  flesh,
of  the  flesh  he  may  expect  to  reap
corruption  ;  if  tu  the  spirit,  of  the
.spirit  life  everlasting.  By  walking
in  the  way  that  God  has  ordained
every  man  can  know  and  receive  for
h  imself  the  testimony  promis  ed.  And
tins  people  who  are  1i*mv  inhabiting
these  valleys  of  the  mountains  knew

for  themselves  before  they  left  their
homes  in  the  old  world,  that  they
bad  received  and  obeyed  the  Gospel
brought  from  the  heavens  by  means
of  the  angel  dex'rihed  by  the  Apostle
John,  it  was  in  obedience  to  the  re-
quirements of  that  Gospel  that  they
left  their  homes  to  come  here  to


218  JOURNAL  OF

learn  more  of  hh  ways,  to  walk  more
perfectly  in  his  paths,  and  to  prepare
themselves  for  the  great  day  of  the
Lord  that  is  nigh  at  hand  This
Gospel  is  sent  to  prepare  the  way
before  his  coming,  to  be  preached
"as  a  witness  *  that  all  mankind  s
may  know  that  Ood  has  sent  it.
How  about  the  people  who  will  not
hearken  unto  it '?  They  fVel  as  Tain
did  when  he  learned  that  his  offering
was  not  acceptable — lie  desired  to
slay  Abel ;  and  this  is  the  feeling
that  has  been  manifested  towards  the
Latter-day  Saints  from  the  beginning*
We  have  come  out  of  the  world,  and
the  world  hates  us,  and  many  seek
to  destroy  us.  What  harm  are  we
doing  to  the  people  of  the  earth  ?
We  have  come  away  from  them  ;
we  have  sought  the  wilds  of  tins
once  desert  country  that  we  might
worship  God  according  to  the  dicta-
tes of  conscience,  and  we  are  here
trying  to  serve  him  with  all  our
hearts.  We  have  many  imperfec-
tions, but  we  are  trying  to  obey  the
Lord  in  his  appointed  way  ;  and  he-
cause  we  have  accepted  this  way,  the
way  ordained  of  God.  those  who  will
not  walk  therein  are  stirred  up  to
anger  against  us;  they  circulate  all
manner  of  evil  reports  concerning  us.
and  like  the  ancient  Saints  we  are
*  everywhere  spoken  against"  They
endeavor  to  stir  up  strife  in  our
midst,  and  failing  to  divide  us  thev
gnash  their  teeth  in  anger,  seeking
to  bring  all  kinds  of  evil  upon  us.
But  God  will  rule  and  over-rule  for
the  good  of  His  people,  and  accom-
plish His  ends  and  purpose*?.

In  the  midst  of  these  trials  we  re-
cognize the  hand  of  God,  as  we  see
it  in  relation  to  the  material  elements
which  have  been  referred  to  this
afternoon  ;  just  as  much  as  we  un-
derstand that  there  is  a  controlins
hand  which  guides  the  destinies  of
the  earth,  which  formed  the  planets.


DISCOURSES,

winch  put  them  in  motion  and  ar-
ranged them  in  such  perfect  order
that  one  world  should  not  rush
against  another,  and  causing  the
whole  universe  in  all  its  beautiful
variety  and  adaptation  to  move  in
perfect  order  and  harmony  ;  a*  we
;  recognize  the  Divine  hand  in  these
I  material  things,  the  physical  ob-
jects of  the  universe,  so  we  can
recognize  it  in  spiritual  things.  We
acknowledge  God  in  all  things  ;  we
know  that  lie  lives,  that  in  Li  in  we
move  and  have  our  being,  that
he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day  and
forever,  that  he  changeth  not ;  that
he  communes  with  his  children  to-
day as  he  did  five  or  six  thousand
years  ago.  The  God  of  Ah  rah  am  is
the  God  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  As
he  guided  and  directed  him  and  de-
livered him  from  his  enemies,  so  the
Almighty's  hand  has  been  and  is
over  us,  and  will  continue  to  guide
and  deliver  us,  inasmuch  as  we  con-
tinue to  carry  on  his  work.

Now  I  say  that  all  people  may  re-
reive  these  blessings  it  they  will  walk
in  the  narrow  way*  But  they  must
believe  in  Christ,  and  repent  of  their
|  sins  by  putting  them  away  ;  they
must,  be  baptized  in  a  proper  way  ;
they  must  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  by
the  laying  on  of  hands  of  men  or-
dained and  authorized  of  God,  which
Spirit  will  bring  them  en  rapport  wit  h
the  Lord;  and  th*n  if  they  will  seek
the  interests  of  his  kingdom  they
have  a  claim  upon  his  blessings,
and  in  proportion  to  their  righte-
ousness before  God,  so  shall  :heir
communion  be.  But  although  they
are  baptized  and  con  tinned  mem-
bers of  the  body  of  Christ,  yet,
unless  they  continue  to  walk
before  God,  continue  tc  be  taught
of  him,  continue  to  obey  the
divine  word,  they  will  not  enjoy
much  communion  with  the  Father.
:  But  if  they  strive to "live  by


*


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FROM  OOP,  ETC4.


every  word  that  comes  from  the
mouth  of  God,"  their  minds  will
become  more  eo lightened,  tin*  Holy
Ghofct  will  increase  within  them
and  their  path  will  grow  brighter
and  brighter,  even  to  the  perfect
day,  God  will  speak  bj  his  Spirit
direct  to  their  hearts ;  and  when
he  reveals  anything  through  his  ap-
pointed servants,  every  word  will
tind  au  echo  in  the  hearts  of  those
who  have  received  this  Spirit,  and
the  people  will  see  eye  to  eye,  for
they  will  become  united  as  one,  as
a  band  of  brethren  and  sisters,  to
roll  forth  the  purposes  of  God,  to
prepare  the  way  for  the  feet  of  the


!  Lord  Jesus,

I  bear  my  testimony  to  what
|  has  been  said  by  Brother  Stayner
|.  and  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  which
the  angel  has  brought,  and  pray  God
to  bless  this  congregation,  that  all
who  are  here,  may  be  able  to  learn
of  him  and  walk  in  the  good  old
way,  that  they  may  know  how  to
worship  and  obey  the  true  and  liv-
ipg  Uod,  even  him  who  made  the
heaven,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,
and  the  fountains  of  waters,  and
tin  ally  come  into  his  presence  and  be
crowned  will  a  fulness  of  his  glory*

I  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BT  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

MKLIVEUKI)  AT  Tli  K 1 7TH WARD  MEETING HOVSK,  ill  SUNDAY  AKTKKNuoN%

DECEMBER  15,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FROM  GOD — LIFE  AN1>  IMMORTALITY  BROIHT
TU  LIGHT  THROUGH  THE  GOSPEL — GATHERING — TEMPLE- BUILDING  —  THE
ELDERS  MESSENGERS  OF  SALVATION  TO  THE  NATIONS,

We  meet  together  from  time  to  our  religions  views  that  differs  mate-
time  to  attend  to  the  worship  of  the  rially  from  those  of  many  others.
Almighty,  because  we  think  it  is  The  Lord  has  revealed  unto  us  his
proper  for  ns  to  pay  due  respect  unto  will,  or  law ;  he  has  given  unto  us  a
the  Lord  God,  our  heavenly  Father  ;  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  truth
we  assemble  ourselves  for  the  pur-  and  righteousness  ;  and  he  is  seeking
pose  of  praying  to  him,  of  singing  i  by  the  means  he  has  appointed — the
his  praises,  of  speaking  of  principles,  medium  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  to
doctrines,  ordinances  and  other  mat-  prepare  ns  for  the  events  that  will
ters  in  which  we  are  individually  and  necessarily  take  place  in  a  .short  time,
collectively  interested,  all  of  which  and  to  enable  us  to  introduce  among
is  more  or  less  connected  with  the  men  those  pure,  holy  and  heavenly
worship  of  our  God-  principles  which  exist  with  the  Gods

There  is  something  associated  with  |  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  to  prepare-


220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


us,  through  the  medium  of  the  Gos-
pel, to  operate  with  him  and  with
the  holy  priesthood  that  has  existed
in  former  ages,  in  the  development
of  the  purposes  of  God  upon  the
earth. It  is  a  great  and  important
work  in  which  we  are  engaged,  and
we  need  continually  the  direction
and  the  guidance  of  the  Almighty ;
for  it  stands  to  reason,  when  we  re-
flect upon  it,  that  no  man,  as  is  spo-
ken of  in  the  Scriptures,  can  know
the  things  of  God  unless  they  are
revealed  to  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God.
We  talk  of  these  things  sometimes
rather  flippantly,  and  probably,  in
many  instances  without  due  reflec-
tion. But  when  we  look  upon  man
as  he  is  organized,  and  the  limit  and
bounds  of  his  intelligence,  and  then
reflect  upon  the  position  that  he
sustains  to  the  Almighty,  we  shall
find  that  there  is  nothing  very  my-
sterious in  these  remarks,  but  that
there  is  a  great  amount  of  truth  and
reason  associated  therewith*  For
instance,  men  know  very  little  about
themselves,  or  about  the  tilings  of
man  or  how  to  control  their  passions
and  habits  and  the  various  evils  with
which  they  are  surrounded  and  have
to  combat They  know  very  little
about  the  true  condition  of  man  and
hie  relation  to  God,  to  the  world,  to
the  past,  present,  or  future,  as  is
evidenced  by  the position  of  the
world  everywhere  wherever  we  turn
our  attention. We  are  beginning  to
find  out  some  few  things  in  relation
to  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  earth
on  which  we  dwell,  but  our  know-
ledge of  these  tilings  is  very  small
comparatively,  and  yet we  boast
sometimes  quite  freely  of  our  intelli-
gence. But  when  we  reflect  on  our
true  position,  we  know  very  little  in
reality  even  about  the  world  in  which
we  live,  or  about  the  properties  of
matter  or  the  elements  with  which
we  are  surrounded ;  and  yet  a  few


years  ago  the  world  knew  much  less
than  we  know  to-day, I  can  re-
member the  time  very  well  when
there  was  no  such  thing"  as  steam-
boats. I  remember  sailing  across
the Atlantic more times  than
one  when  no  such  thing  as, a  steam-
boat was  used  for  that  purpose.  I
remember  the  time,  too,  when  there
were  no  such  things  as  locomotives
or  railroads  ;  and  many  of  you  know
very  well  how  it  was  in  regard  to  the
telegraph,  the  photograph  and  a  great
many  other  things.  They  are  simply
certain  principles  that  exist  in  the
laws  of  nature  that  have  been  un-
varied to  us ;  but  there  are  thousands
of  other  things  that  we  know  very
little  about And  then  what  do  we
know  about  the  future  1 What  do
we  know  about  the  heavens  that  are
above  us  f We  can  get  some  scanty
ideas  and  wo  boast  very  much  of
them,  but  really  there  is  not  very
much  to  boast  of  when  we  reflect
upon  these  things.  These  things  are
simple  principles  that  we  have  be-
come aquainted  with  through  study
and  research  by  chemical  analysis
and  the  development  of  eternal  laws.
We  are  simply  becoming  acquainted
with  some  of  the  principles  that  exist
in  nature. The  question  necessarily
arises,  who  placed  those  principles
there? Who  organized  this  earth
on  which  we  dwell  and  man  upon  it
and  all  creation  as  it  exists  )  Some
superior  intelligence,  or  power — we
call  it  the  power  of  God. *'  By  faith
we  understand  that  the  worlds  were
made  by  the  power  of  God,  so  that
things  which  are  now  seen  were  nut
made  of  things that  do  appear/*
There  is  not  a  particle  of  the  human
system  but  what  is  full  of  intelligence
and  displays  forethought,  prescience,
design,  skill  and  creative  power  ;  and
everything  bespeaks  the  handiwork
of  a  wise,  intelligent,  omnipotent
'  Great  or,  or  God. When  a  little  boy


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FROM  GOD,  ETC,  221


I  used  to  ask  myself,  Who  am  I  ?
Where  did  I  come  from?  What  am
I  doing  here  I  And  why  am  I  herei
etc.  These  things  still  puzzle  us,  at
least  many  of  them  do,  yet  these  sure
thoughts  we  cannot  help  reflecting
upon.  We  see  children  born  into
the  world,  and  wo  see  spring  and
summer,  autumn  and  winter  follow
each  other  in  regular  succession,  and
we  ask  ourselves,  By  what  power
were  these  things  brought  about]
Why  are  we  here,  and  what  is  the
object  of  all  these  things  which  we
s<ie  around  us  ?  not  to  say  anything
about  the  worlds  with  which  we  are
environed.  For  speaking  of  ourselves,
we  are  only  a  speck  in  creation;  there
is  nothing  to  or  of  us  scarcely,  or  in
the  world  we  inhabit,  in  comparison
to  the  myriads  of  worlds  with  which
we  are  surrounded.

Now  we  frequently  want  to  know
the  object  of  our  existence  and  why
we  are  here  ;  and  the  Saints  will
still  go  a  little  further  by  asking.
Why  have  we  to  battle  with  tin*
affairs  of  this  world,  and  to  struggle,
to  be  tried  and  tempted  !  And  we
go  still  further  and  ask,  when  we  see
our  friends  pass  away  from  this  state
of  existence  one  after  another,  and
the  body  that  was  once  full  of  life,
animation  and  vitality  now  lying
helpless  and  void  of  life,  and  our
minds  reach  back  into  the  years  that
are  past  and  we  think  of  the  thou-
sands of  millions,  yea,  of  myriads
who  have  inhabited  this  earth  and
who  have  gone  into  another  state  of
existence,  and  we  are  led  to  ask  our-
selves,  Why  is  it  thus!  And  we
are  led  to  ask  ourselves  further,  Why
are  we  thus  situated!  And  why
should  we  thus  come  into  life,  have
an  existence  and  then  fade  and  decay)
And  it  is  proper  that  we  should  have
such  thoughts  and  such  reflections.
Who  can  unravel  these  things]  Who
can  tell  us  upon  natural  principles


the  meaning  of  this  strange  pheno-
mena, the  whvs  and  wherefores  in
relation  to  these  matters  ]  Nobody,
We  have  peculiar  feelings  and  sen-
sations in  common  with  all  men  in
regard  to  the  future.  Hut  what  are
the  views,  ideas  and  feelings  of  men
generally  in  relation  to  these  matters!
And  if  thev  have  views,  what  is  the

w

source  of  their  intelligence !  What
scientist  philosopher,  or  divine  can
unravel  to  us  many  of  t  hese  mysteri-
ous principles  which  we  see  every
day  exhibited  before  us  ?  It  is  very
difficult  for  man  to  comprehend,
and  nothing,  as  I  said  before,  but  the
Spirit  which  organized  the  creations
of  God  can  reveal  those  principles
and  give  us  a  knowledge  of  that  fit
ness  of  tilings  as  they  exist  in  the
mind  of  the  Creator,  of  our  relation-
ship to  God  and  to  each  other  and
the  world  in  which  we  exist  and  the
worlds  that  are  to  come.  Nothing
but  superhuman  intelligence,  even
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty,  can
reveal  these  things.  We  have  ten
thousand  ideas,  notions  and  feelings;
the  world  is  full  of  every  kind  of
theory  in  relation  to  these  matters.
But  what  does  it  amount  to)  We
may  theorize  as  much  as  we  please,
but  unless  we  receive  some  commu-
nication from  the  beings  possessing
intelligence  superior  to  anything
mortal,  that  are  associated  with  these
vast  creations  and  know  something
of  their  origin  and  object,  what  can
we  know?  Weneed  communication
with  and  revelation  from  God  en-
lightning  us  thereon,  or  we  shall  still
be  in  the  dark  and  know  nothing
concerning  the  future  and  many
things  of  the  present  and  past  Some
of  our  poets  in  rather  beautiful  me-
taphor point  us  to  some  place  "  be-
yond the  bounds  of  time  and  space,*1
where  we  are  to  look  forward  to  a
heavenly  place,  the  Saint's  secure
abode, There  is  something  very


222


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


pleasing  about  such  reflections,  but
at  the  same  time  there  is  something
very  foolish.  I  do  not  know  how
or  upon  what  principle  we  are  to  get
hey  unci  the  bounds  of  time  and  Space;
it  is  beyond  my  comprehension,  and
I  very  much  question  whether  the
person  who  wrote  it  could  ;  m  fact
I  know  he  could  not.  We  sing
sometimes,  too,  about  "  singing  our*
selves  away  to  everlasting  bits*.'1
What  is  tli is  and  were  is  itl  How
shall  we  enjoy  it  and  under  what
circumstances  1  Certainly  those  who
talk  aboutthese  tilings  display  no  in-
telligence* We  can  never  compre-
hend anything  about  these  things
but  by  the  revelations  of  God  either
made  directly  to  us  or  to  us  thiough
others.

Now  we  Latter-day  Saints  are  in-
debted—  1  was  going  to  say  to  Jo-
seph Smith,  for  what  knowledge  we
have;  but  this  would  not  be  strictly
true,  for  we  are  not  indebted  to  him
or  any  other  man  for  the  knowledge
we  possess  ;  we  are  indebted  to  the
Lord,  and  the  Prophet  Joseph  was
made  use  of  by  him  as  the  medium
to  reveal,  in  the  midst  of  the  chaotic
mass  that  existed  in  the  world,  the
principles  of  lite,  light  and  intelli-
gence and  the  laws  by  which  the
Gods  are  governed  in  the  eternal
worlds,  to  teach  us  what  course  wc
should  pursue,  that  we  might  act
wisely,  prudently  and  intelligent-
ly, and  comprehend  the  position
we  occupy  here  upon  the  earth,  and
the  relationship  that  subsists  between
man  and  his  Maker,  and  that  we
might  understand  things  pertaining
to  the  future  as  well  as  things  per-
taining to  the  present  And  the  re-
ligion we  have  had  unfolded  to  us  is
to  prepare  us  to  take  part  in  these
things  both  in  this  world  and  the
world  to  come  ;  to  teach  us  how  to
approach  our  Maker  and  to  get
further  knowledge  of  his  laws  and


the  principles  of  truth  that  have  been
revealed  to  us.  The  world  generally
treat  these  things  very  lightly.  The
reason  is  they  do  not  comprehend
them,  and  therein  lies  th<*  difficulty.
And  we  only  know  them  in  part  and
see  them  in  part  and  comprehend
them  in  part  ;  but  without  commu-
nion with  the  Almighty  we  certainly

j  should  not  have  understood  anything
at  all  about  these  tilings.  There  is
something  very  peculiar  in  the  world
and  we  as  well  as  others  are  some-
times  apt  to  be  quite  narrow  and
contracted  in  our  ideas  pertaining  to
the  world  in  which  we  live  and  the
people  with  whom  we  are  surrounded.
We  are  told  that  (  the  manifestation
of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to
profit  withal/'  And  I  would  state
farther  that  all  true  intelligence
which  men  possess  in  regard  to  the
laws,  nature  and  their  operations,
as  well  as  any  moral,  scientific  or  phi-
losophical ideas  w e  may  form  that  are
correct  proceed  from  the  same  source,
whether  acknowledged  by  men  or
not.  And  furthermore,  whatever
correct  religious  ideas  that  the
world  possess  in  relation to  the

I  future  state,  proceed  from  that  por-
tion of  the  Spirit  that  is  given  to
every  man  to  profit  withal— not
unto  us  only,  but  to  every  man,  and

1  to  the  influence  of  that  Spirit  all
men  are  indebted  for  the  degree  of
honor  and  integrity  that  exists
among  mem It  is  true  there  is

i  very  little  comparatively,  but  for
the  amount  there  is  they  are  in-
debted to  God  just,  as  much  as  we
are*  The  Apostle  Paul,  on  a  certain
occation,  said  that  God  had  not
left  himself  without  witness.  This
is  a  general  priucipale  that  exists
everywhere  and  among  all  mankind.
But  there  is  another  principle
which  is  separate  and  distinct  from
that,  and  that  is  the  principle  that
brings  men  into  closer  communion


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COlfES  FROM  GOD,  ETC.  223


with  the  Almighty.  And  what  is  that?
It  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lor  J  in  a  more
eminent  derive,  and  is  called  in  the
Scriptures  the  Holy  Ghost.  How
do  men  obtain  that  J  Through  a
certain  medium  that  God  has  ap-
pointed, viz.,  by  faith,  repen-
tance, baptism  administered  by
proper  authority  and  laving  on  of
hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Now  the  Lord  has  had  his  "witness"
upon  the  earth  in  different  ages  of
time.  Whi  n  he  lias  had  this  witness
the  Gospel  has  generally  been  asso-
ciated therewith  ;  it  is  a  part  and
parcel  of  the  great  programme.
There  is  a  veiy  foolish  idea  prevail-
ing in  the  world,  that  there  was  no
such  thing  as  the  Gospel  until  Jesus
came.  It  is  the  greatest  folly  in
creation.  No  Gospel  until  Jesus  in-
troduced it  1  Say  you,  "Do  not  the
Scriptures  say  that  lift*  a? id  immor-
tality are  brought  about  through  the
Gospel  1"  Yes.  "And  did  not  Jesus
introduce  the  Gospel  f  Yes.  "Well,
then,  if  he  came  and  introduced  the
( j os pel,  why  do  yon  say  that  they
had  the  Gospel  before  f  They  ah
ways  had  the  Gospel  whenever  men
had  a  knowledge  of  God.  It  is  the
Gospel  that  brings  life  and  immor-
tality to  light;  it  is  the  Gospel  that
places  man  in  a  position  to  obtain  a
ju>t  knowledge  of  God  and  of  the
eternities  to  come,  of  their  posi-
tion on  the  earth,  and  of  their
position  as  it  will  be  hereafter.  It  is
that  very  principle  that  brings,  as  we
are  told,  life  and  immortality  to  light
And  if  you  will  trace  out  the  records
of  either  the  Book  of  Mormon  or  the
Bible  or  those  of  any  people  that
have  lived  upon  the  earth,  and  find
anywhere  a  people  that  had  a  know-
lei  Ige  of  life  and  immortality,  then
1  will  point  you  out  a  people  that
had  the  Gospel.  It  was  through
that  principle  that  men  before  tip
flood  had  a  knowledge  of  God  and


had  communication  with  him.  It
was  through  that  that  Enoch  under-
stood the  principles  of  heaven,  and
applied  those  to  Ins  position,  and  it
was  by  that  power  and  through
that  principle  that  he,  with  the
cities  in  which  he  livi  d,  was  trans-
I.ttc-L  ;is  well  as  the  thousands  who
lived  then  and  also  after  that  time
were  translated  ;  it  was  through
the  principle  and  power  of  the  Gos-
pel that  brings  life  and  immortality
to  light.  It  was  through  the  same
principle  that  Noah  was  saved  ;  he
had  communication  with  God,  who
revealed  tu  him  what  was  coming  on
the  earth  and  the  results  of  it.  God
warned  him  and  prepared  him
and  told  him  what  to  do  ami
how  to  do  it,  and  he  pursued
the  course  given  him,  and  lie  received
his  reward.  It  was  through  that
principle  that  Abraham  compre-
hended God  ami  had  revelation  and
communication  with  htm,  for  with
out  it  he  would  have  known  nothing
about  God,  But  lie  understood,
through  the  records  of  his  fathers,
of  certain  privileges  that  are  men-
tioned in  his  history  ---certain  privi-
leges pertaining  to  himself  and  his
progenitors,  which  he  traced  clear
back  to  the  days  of  Adam,  by  which
he  learned  that  he  was  an  heir
to  the  holy  priesthood ;  and  when
lie  ascertained  this  he  sought  an  or-
dination from  the  Lord  And  when
he  was  persecuted  for  his  faith  he
left  the  land  in  which  he  lived,  and
he  did  so  at  the  instance  of  the  Lord:
"  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and
from  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy
father's  house,  unto  a  land  that  I
wdl  show  thee.*1  And  the  Lord
greatly  favored  htm  and  blessed  him,
and  said  unto  him  :  "I  will  bless
them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him
that  curse th  thee  \  and  in  thee  shall
ill  the  families  of  the  earth  be  bles-
sed. Was  that  so  ? Yes,  it  has


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSED


been  fulfilled.  Let  us  look  at  this
for  a  moment  and  see  whether  it  has
or  not.  Who  were  Isaac  and  Jacob!
DiJ  they  have  communication  with
God?  Yes.  How  diil  they  obtain  it?
Through  l lie  medium  of  the  Gospel
and  through  the  promises  made  to
theirfal  her  Abraham.  And  when  is
raelwas  in  Egypt  whodeliveredthein?
Moses,  And  wlm  was  Muses  f  A
descendant  of  Abraham.  l>id  lie
lead  the  people  out  of  Egyptian
bondage!  Yes  ;  God  manifested  his
power  in  their  behalf,  Hid  Mo*e>
have  the  Gospel  I  Yes,  and  so  did
Abraham.  The  A|*ostlo  Paul  says,
in  his  epistle  to  the  Ualatians,  "that
God  foreseeing  that  he  would  justify
the  heathen  through  faith,  pivavhed
before  the  Gospel  unto  Abraham,
paving  in  thee  sliall  all  nations  h#<
blessed,"  Tin1  Israelites  had  the
Gospel  preached  to  them  in  the
wilderness  ;  hut,  as  i  li ■  ■  Apostle
says  in  speaking  of  them,  "Hi
word  meaelied  did  not  profit  theui.
not  hein^  mixed  with  faith  in  tJiem
tha'  li.  List  it." Ihlt  Moses  did  lead

some  of  them  into  the  presence  of
God  those  who  were  pi  opal  ed  to
receive  it  :  the  others,  when  they
heard  the  thunders  and  saw  the
lightning  ami  heard  the  voice  of
God,  they  said  onto  Moses,  **  Sjieak
1 1n unto  us  ami  we  will  hear;  but
let  Hot  (iod  speak  with  us,  lest  \vo
tlie  : M  we  are  not  prepared  for  this
gtor}\  for  this  kind  of  tnatiilrsta
lion  which  has  been  given  unto  us.

Well,  they  were  foolish  :  they  de
parted  from  eorrccl  principles,  thry
violated  the  laws  id  God  and  there-
fi-ie  uivurird  his  dbph-uMire.  and
his  Spirit  was  withdrawn  froth
them,  and  the  Gospel  was  taken
from  them  and  I  hey  were  left  un-
der a  law  of  carnal  commandments,
and  the  law  was  given  them  as  a
schoolmaster,  we  me  told,  Until
Ghrisi  i  a  me. And  what  did  tiirist


do  J He  restored  the  fulness  of  the
Gospel  that  they  had  forfeited,  be-
cause of  their  former  transgressions.
What  next  ? We  go  to  the  promise
made  to  Abraham,  which  was  that
in  him  and  in  his  seed  all  the  fami-
lies thf  the  earth  should  be  blessed,
Moses,  as  [  have  said  was  of  his
seed,  and  he  was  thedcliverer  of  the
whole  of  that  nation.  Ami  who  were
the  prophet*  thai  existed  anions  an-
cient Israel  i Thev  were  deseeh
dants  of  Abraham;  and  to  themramo
the  wurd  of  God  and  the  light  of  re
relation* Who  was  Je*ua  1  After
thts  flesh  of  tiie  sen!  of  Abraham.
Who  were  his Twelve Apostles  ?
Of  tin'  seed  of  A 1  »ral  l an \. \Y  ho  w er< '
the  people  that  came  to  this  conli
neiifc — Lehi  and  his  family,  about
tjin>  years 11 (M Of  the  seed
of  Abraham Who  were  the  Apost
les  they  had  among  t hem  that  spread
forth  anions  the  millions  that  then
lived  upon  this  eoiitiuent  f 01  (  lie
seed  of  Abraham. Who  u:n  Jo
seph  Smith  f Of  the  seed  of  Ahra
ham  ;  and  he.  we  are  told,  was  to  he
(he  sou  of  Joseph,  ami  should  him
self called  Joseph. And  he  was
raised  up  for  what  purpose  '  To
injure  or  destroy  mankind!  No;
hut  to  bring  life  and  immortality
tit  light  through  the  Gospel.  He,
like  other  prominent  men  of  t!^d,
camr  in  the  fulness  of  times  to  do
the  work  which  tin1 Lord  had  up
pointed  nut vi  him. being  t  ailed  of
God  and  taught  o!  God  ;  and  being
thus  taught  he  possessed  itn  hit  el

hgence  second  to  none  on  the
earth.  He  introduced  principles,
that  no  philosopher,  or  sennit ist.  or
all  the  wisdom  of  tins  world  com-
bined was  rapable  of  developing ;
neither  was  it  possible  for  any  body
to  bring  to  light  such  principles^  un-
less through  the  revelations  of  t iod
— principles  of  truth,  principles  ol
intelligence,  principles  which  affect


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FROM  GOD,  ETC.  225


man  in  time  and  in  eternity  ;  prin-
ciples which  affect  the  world  in
which  we  live  j  principles  which  af-
fect thousands  and  myriads  that  have
lived  before  ;  principles  of  salvation
that  extend  to  all  nations  and  all
peoples  living  or  dead,  pertaining  to
time  and  pertaining  to  eternity.

In  what  manner  were  these  prin-
ciples to  be  made  known?  How
were  men  to  get  acquainted  wit  h
these  things  1  By  being  brought
into  communion  with  the  Lord.
And  how  was  this  to  be  done?  Je-
sus, when  upon  the  earth,  ordained
ami  set  apart  others  ami  told  them
to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach
the  Gospel.  What  Gospel?  That
Gospel  that  brings  life  and  immor-
tality to  light;  that  Gospel  that
1 1 lings  men  i n to  con i m u nica t io n
with  their  Maker;  that  Gospel  that
will  show  us  who  we  are  ami  what
we  are,  and  why  we  are  here,  and
the  object  of  our  existence,  and
what  lies  before  us.  Jesus  said  to
his  disciples  in  his  day,  "  Go  ye  into
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  every  creature.  He  that  be-
lieve th  and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  damned.  And  these  signs
shall  follow  them  that  believe  :  in
my  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils  ;
they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues  ;
they  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if
they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall
not  hurt  them  ;  they  shall  lay  hands
on  the  sick  and  they  shall  recover*
And  loj  I  am  with  you  always,  even
unto  the  end  of  the  world/'  Was
he  with  them?  Yes.  How  did
they  preach]  They  called  upon
the  people  to  repent  and  be  baptized
for  the  remission  of  their  sins,  Who
did?  Men  authorized  of  God  and
commissoned  of  him,  and  not  by
somebody  else.  And  what  then  ?
If  they  did  this,  they  should  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost And  what

No.  15.


should  that  do  for  them  1  It  should
take  of  the  things  of  God  and  show
them  unto  them  ;  it  should  bring
life  and  immortality  to  light ;  it
should  plat1**  them  in  communication
with  the  Lord  ;  it  should  enable
them  to  comprehend  principles  that

|  no  man  could  comprehend  nor
ever  ought  to  comprehend,  with-
out the  Spirit;  it  should  bring  to
their  remembrance  things  that  were
past  ;  it  should  lead  them  into  all
truth,  and  it  should  show  them
things  to  come,  Was  it  so?  Yes.
Did  they  have  tlmt  Spirit?  Yes.
The  spirit  of  prophecy  ?  Ye*,  The
spill t  of  revelation  i Yes.  Did

|  1 1  ley  1  lave  the  m  i  1 1  i  s  t  ry  of  ai  i  ^e  I  s  I
Yes.  Was  the  vision  of  all  truth
open  to  their  mind?  Yes.  They
compieheuded  the  manifestations
tiff  (rod  until  the  winding  up  scene,
and  until  the  dead  small  and  great
shall  stand  before  God,  and  until
this  earth  shall  not  only  be  re-
deemed  but  become  celestial ized,
and  celestial  beings  inhabit  it
They  understood  these  things  and
prophesied  and  wrote  about  them.
Is  itffco  with  oar  Gospel  i  Precisely
the  same.  Have  we  had  these
things  communicated  to  us]  We
have.  Have  the  Klders  been  called
upon  to  »o  forth  to  the  nations  of
the  earth  to  call  upon  people  t<>  re-
pent  and  be  baptized  as  in  former
times? Thev  have. Have  most  of

if

I  you  heard  this  Gospel  preached
among  the  different  nations  of  the
earth  1  You  have.  Have  you  re-
ceived it?  Have  you  obeyed  it?
Yes.  Did  you  receive  the  Holy
Ghost  accompanying  it  I  You  did,
and  you  know  and  can  bear  testi-
mony of  it.  It  is  the  self  same
Gospel ;  and  why  the  same  ?  He-
cause  it  is  the  everlasting  Gospel,
no  t  so  i  ne  t  h  Log  s  tar  ted  ei  ir  1 1  te  en
hundred  years  ago,  Say*  John,  I
saw  another  an^el  fly  in  the  midst

Vol  XX.


226


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


of  heaven,  having  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  preach  unto  them  that
dwell  on  the  earth  etc."  What
Gospel  ?  The  everlasting  Gospel  ;
the  Gospel  that  existed  with  the
Gods  before  this  world  rolled  into
existence  or  the  morning  stars  sang
together  for  joy;  the  Gospel  that
was  preached  to  Adam  and  which
he  }  treadled  to  his  posterity;  the
Gospel  that  was  preached  by  Enoch
and  Noah,  by  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  and  all  the  ancient  prophets  ;
the  Gospel  that  was  preached  by
Jesus  and  his  Disciples  when  he
commanded  them  to  go  and  preach
it  to  ail  nations ;  in  fine,  the  Gospel
that  brings  life  and  immortality
to  light.  It  can  be  said  of  us  as  of
them  of  whom  it  was  said,  "  Ye
have  been  baptized  into  one  ba]>
tism,  and  have  all  partaken  of  the
same  spirit."  Did  they  %  Yes.  It
was  not  many  baptisms,  it  was  not
many  faiths  and  many  ideas
and  many  notions  ;  but  it  was  i
"one  faith,  one  Lord  and  one  bap-
tism and  one  God  who  is  above
all  and  through  all  and  in  you
all"

There  are  a  great  many  things
associated  with  these  principles  in
which  the  children  of  men  are  very
deeply  interested  and  in  which
more  especially  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  very,  very  deeply  inter-
ested. The  Lord  has  gathered  us
from  among  the  nations  of  the
earth,  just  as  he  told  some  of  his
ancient  prophets,  who  wrote  it,  that
he  would  do.  And  one  of  them
while  wrapped  in  prophetic  vision  j
gazed  upon  the  purposes  of  Jehovah
in  delation  to  this  generation,  and
saw  the  people  of  God  gathering  to-
gether, exclaimed  :  "  Who  are  these
that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves
to  their  windows?"  and  another  says:
"  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you


to  Zion  :9  what  will  you  do  with
them  when  you  get  them  there?
H I  will  give  you  pastors  according
to  mine  own  heart,  which  shall  feed
you  with  knowledge  and  understand-
ing." "  Saviors  shall  come  upon
Mount  Zion,"  says  another,  "and  the
kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  Very
peculiar  expressions  and  very  signi-
ficant some  of  these  remarks  are.
Yet  they  were  made  by  men  when
under  the  influence  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  spirit  of  revelation  which
unfolded  to  their  view  things  that
should  transpire  in  the  Latter-days
which  is  emphatically,  what  is  called
in  the  Scriptures,  "The  dispensation
of  the  fulness  of  times,"  w  hen  he
would  "  gather  together  in  one  all
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in
heaven,  and  which  are  on  eartli ;
even  in  him."  He  would  gather
his  people  in  one  to  commence  with,
and  hence  our  position  to-day  in
these  valleys  of  the  mountains.  Why
are  we  here!  We  came  here  be-
cause it  was  according  to  the  eternal
purposes  of  God  that  we  should
gather  together ;  and  because  God
L  restored  this  principle  among
other  principles  through  the  mini-
stration of  holy  angels,  and  by  the
manifestation  of  his  power  by  the
revelation  of  his  will  through  the
ancient  priesthood  that  existed  upon
the  earth.  And  what  made  us
gather  together  ]  you  could  hardly
tell,  many  of  you,  if  I  were  to  ask
you.  I  know  very  well  that  when
you  received  this  Gospel  in  foreign
lands  you  could  not  rest  until  you
gathered  to  Zion  ;  and  there  was  a
correspondent  feeling  among  the
Saints  here  to  help  to  bring  about
these  things.  Before  the  railroad
across  the  plains  was  built,  you
used  to  send  out  your  teams  as
many  as  five  hundred  at  a  time.
What  made  you  do  it  ?  It  was  the
spirit  of  the  gathering  that  associated


ALL  INTELLIGENCE  COMES  FROM  GOD,  ETC.


227


itself  with  the  latter-day  dispensa- 1
tion,  if  there  were  time  I  might  tell
you  how  peculiarly  some  people  were
moved  upon.

The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and
■Oliver  Cowdery  baptized  each  other
why  ?  Because  John  the  Baptist  ap-
peared and  conferred  upon  them  this
priesthood,  and  they  went  and  ail-
ministered  in  it  Why  did  Joseph
Smith  and  others  lay  hands  upon
men  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost?  because  Peter,  James  and
John,  who  held  the  keys  of  the  priest-
hood and  of  this  Gospel  in  former
days  conferred  that  power  upon  them
and  they  operated  in  it  Why  did
the  people  feel  inclined  to  gather?
because  Moses  who  was  at  the  head
of  the  gathering  dispensation  and  to
whom  the  keys  of  this  dispensation
w  ere  given,  came  and  conferred  upon
them  the  power  to  gather  the  house
of  Israel  and  the  ten  tribes  from
their  dispersion  ;  and  when  you  re- :
ceived  this  Gospel  you  received  this
as  a  part.  This  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times  embraces  all  other
dispensations  that  have  ever  existed
upon  the  earth,  with  all  their  powers.
That  is  the  reason  you  desired  so  to
gather  together,  and  for  these  pecu-
liar impulses  which  many  of  you
could  not  account  for.

Why  do  we  build  temples?  because
Elijah  appeared  aTid  conferred  the
powers  of  his  priesthood  which  were
to  "  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to
the  children,  and  the  heart  of  the
children  to  their  fathers/'  And  why
do  you  expend  so  much — even  your
enemies  are  complaining  because  of
the  millions  of  dollars  that  are  used  ;
in  the  erection  of  temples.  Why  do
you  do  it?  Simply  because  God  has
commanded  us  to  do  it  and  we  know
it  and  because  the  spirit  attending  '
this  peculiar  work  rests  upon  us  un-
til we  feel  its  impulses  in  our  very
bones. And  is  it  a  trouble  to  do  it?


|  No, We  feel  a  pleasure  in  it.  And
then  when  we  build  our  temples  we
feel  a  pleasure  in  administering  in
,  them,  not  only  for  ourselves  but  for
our  fathers  and  mothers  and  those  of
our  progenitors  who  have  died  with-
out the  Gospel  and  then  to  help  to
save  all  that  have  been  worthy  of
salvation  that  have  ever  lived  upon
t  he  earth. And  we  have  got  to  con-
tinue our  labors  in  this  direction,  we
j  have  only  just  commenced  ;  and  if
1  this  little  thing  troubles  men  all  the
i  consolation  I  can  give  them  is  that
they  will  be  worse  troubled  yet  If
others  know  not  what  we  are  doing
we  do  ;  we  know  in  whom  we  have
believed,and  consequently  we  operate
in  these  things.

!  Now  then,  what  shall  we  do  1  Con-
tinue to  do  good ;  continue  to  live
our  religion  ;  continue  to  carry  out
the  purposes  of  God;  continue  to
1  humble  ourselves  before  the  Lord
and  cultivate  his  Holy  Spirit  that  we
may  comprehend  his  laws  and  know
his  will  concerning  us.  1  You  hare
received  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  I
will  tell  you  a  piece  of  instruction
that  Joseph  Smith  once  vcave  me,  and
it  wont  hurt  you.  Said  he,  "  Elder
Taylor,  you  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost:  now  follow  the  leadings  of
that  spirit;  and  if  you  do,  by-and-by
i  t  will  become  in  you  a  principle  of
revelation  that  you  will  know  all
things  as  they  come  along  and  un-
derstand what  is  right  and  what  is
wrong  in  relation  to  them."  That
is  just  as  applicable  to  you  if  you
can  receive  it  and  live  up  to  it  and
enjoy  it.  rirc
Well,  what  are  we  ?  We  ought  to
be  the  Saints  of  God  without  rebuke
in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  per-
;  verse  generation.  We  ought  to  be
full  of  charity,  of  brotherly  kindness
and  affection  and  love  one  towards
another  and  love  towards  all  men.
We  ought  to  feel  as  our  heavenly


228  JOURNAL  OF

Father  does. What  does  he  do  I
<(  He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the
evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth
rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust"
He  will  save  all  men  to  such  a  degree  j
of  salvation  and  exaltation  as  they
are  capable  of  receiving ; but  he
cannot  bestow  upon  people  what
they  are  not  prepared  to  receive.
There  is  a  celestial  glory  and  a  ter-
rest  rial  glory  and  a  telestial  glory ;
"  there  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and
another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  an-
other glory  of  the  stars ;  for  one  j
star  differeth  from  another  star  in
glory,  so  also  is  the  resurrection  of
the  dead/1 But  there  is,  we  must
bear  in  mind,  a  celestial  glory  which
is  one,  and  there  is  a  terrestrial  glory
which  is  one,  etc. And  we  want  as
Latter-day  Saints  to  comprehend  the
position  tin  occupy ;  and  while  God
has  conferred  many  great  and  preci-
ous privileges  upon  us,  we  want  to  .
appreciate  them  and  honor  them.
Are  we  Seventies  1  We  ought  to  be
full  of  light  and  life  and  the  power
and  spirit  of  the  Living  God  and  feel  '
that  we  ure  messengers  to  the  na- 1
tions  of  the  earth  ;  we  ought  to  feel
the  word  of  God  burning  like  fire  in
our  bones,  feeling  desirous  to  go
and  snatch  men  from  the  powers  of
darkness  and  the  chains  of  corruption
with  which  they  are  hound,  and  lead
them  in  the  paths  of  life.  We  ought
to  be  prepared  to  go  forth  weeping,
bearing  precious  seed  that  we  might
come  back  again  rejoicing  bringing
our  sheaves  with  us. If  we  are
High  Priests,  we  ought  to  magnify
our  calling  in  that  portion  of  the
priesthood  and  to  prepare  ourselves
for  the  duties  and  responsibilities
that  are  devolving  upon  us  associated
with  that  priesthood,  that  we  may  be
prepared  according  to  the  revelations
we  have  received  in  regard  to  these
subjects,  to  preside  over  and  among
the  different  Stakes  when  they  shall


DISCOURSES.

be  organized  and  to  be  prepared  to
operate  in  all  things  according  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God.  If  we  are
Elders  we  should  seek  to  magnify
our  calling  in  every  particular,  and
put  away  from  us  every  evil  and
satisfy  ourselves  that  we  are  accepted
of  God,  living  so  that  it  will  be  a
pleasure  as  well  a*  a  duty  to  carry
out  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  If
we  are  fathers,  we  should  treat  our
children  properly  and  train  them  in
the  fear  of  God;  we  should  treat  our
wives  with  mercy  and  tenderness  and
with  love  ;  we  ought  to  bear  with
their  infirmities  and  sustain  them  in
the  pathway  of  life,  pour  joy  and
happiness  into  their  bosoms,  and
help  them  to  bear  the  struggles  and
difficulties  that  they  have  to  cope
with.  If  we  are  wives,  we  should
try  to  make  a  heaven  of  our  homes.
And  as  children  and  as  parents  and
as  Latter-day  Saints  and  as  Elders  of
Israel,  we  should  seek  by  the  prayer
of  faith  to  fulfil  the  various  duties
tiiat  devolve  upon  us,  that  we  may
honor  our  God,  magnify  our  calling
and  fill  the  measure  of  our  creation
here  upon  the  earth,  and  purge  our-
selves from  all  unrighteousness,  and
be  full  of  love,  kindness,  generosity
and  philantrophy,  and  also  full  of
honesty, of  truthfulness  and  integrity,
feeling  in  our  hearts  to  say,  O  God,
search  me  and  try  me  and  prove  me,
and  if  there  is  any  evil  in  me,  help
me  to  purge  it  out  from  me,  and  help
me  to  honor  ami  magnify  my  priest-
hood and  every  duty  devolving  upon
me.  And  as  fathers  and  mothers
we  should  never  utter  a  word  or  do
an  act  that  we  should  be  ashamed  for
God,  or  angels,  or  our  children  to
hear  or  see.  And  if  we  will  do  right
and  cherish  and  cultivate  the  spirit
of  God  to  the  extent  that  it  can  pre-
vail and  predominate  in  our  midst,
we  will  see  Zion  arise  and  shine,  and
the  glory  of  God  will  rest  upon  her.


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


229


God  help  us  to  do  right  and  pre-
serve our  purity,  keep  this  laws  and
lead  us  in  the  paths  of  life,  that  while
we  live  upon  the  earth  we  may
operate  with  him  in  the  salvation  of


the  living  and  the  dead,  and  be  saved
ultimately  in  his  celestial  kingdom,
having  fought  the  good  fight,  finished
our  course,  and  kept  the  faith.  In
the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  AURELIUS  MINER,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  Sunday

May  lira,  1879.


(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST — ITS  OBJECT.  PKINCIPLES  AND  POWER.


The  young  brethren  who  have
spoken  this  afternoon,  and  who  have
so  recently  returned  from  missions
to  England,  have  told  us  something
about  the  Gospel  they  were  sent  to
preach.  By  way  of  a  continuation
of  the  remarks  which  have  already
been  made,  I  propose  to  ask  this
question:  "What  is  the  Gospel?*
The  Apostle  Paul  declares  the  an-
swer in  the  following  language:  "It
is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation
to  every  one  that  believeth.,f  Be-
lieveth  what  ]  Beheveth  that  (jo  I
is;  that  Jesus  Christ  died  and  rose
again,  and  opened  the  way,  provided
the  means  and  devised  the  plan
whereby  man  may  be  delivered
from  the  power  of  evil.  This  Gos-
pel, then,  being  the  power  of  God,
it  is  the  power  by  which  God  acts.
If  we  secure  salvation  we  shall  have


to  obtain  that  power  ourselves,  in
order  that  we  may  overcome  every
obstacle  which  stands  between  us
and  eternal  life.  Christ  said,  "  To
him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to
sit  down  with  me  on  my  throne."
Then  if  Christ  exercised  the  power
of  this  Gospel,  and  it  was  by  that
power  that  he  overcame  the  princi-
ple of  evil,  which  has  ever  existed
and  which  ever  will  exist  in  some
form  upon  some  of  the  creations  of
God,  we  must  in  like  manner  and
by  like  means  accomplish  for  our-
selves the  same  result.  In  this
struggle  lie  conquered  ;  in  obedience
to  certain  principles  he  acquired
power  by  which  he  overcame  and
attained  to  eternal  life,  This  prin-
ciple comes  to  us  as  the  same  means
to  gain  the  same  end.  But  what
are  these  principles  which,  if  we


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


adopt  them  and  practise  tliem  in
our  lives,  will  enable  us  to  attain  to
this  exalted  position  and  power  1
These  brethren  have  told  you  that
they  are  made  manifest  in  the  teach-
ings of  the  elders  of  Israel.  How
do  we  know  this?  Ministers  of
other  denominations  will  tell  us  that
they  have  the  truth,  the  way  and
the  life  ;  that  they  preach  the  Gos-
pel, the  word  of  God  to  the  people.
But  they  propose  different  plans,
teach  different  systems.  One  will
teach  us  one  system,  another  a  differ-
ent  one.  If  you  go  into  the  old
country  especially  you  will  hear  it
upon  the  streets,  u  Only  believe  in
Jesus  and  you  are  saved."  Other
systems  hold  that  it  is  all  free  will
and  all  free  grace  on  the  part  of
God  and  ourselves.  Another  sums
up  the  doctrine  in  this  form  :  "  You
will  and  you  won  t,  you  shall  and
you  shan't,  you  will  be  damned  if
you  do,  you  will  be  damned  if  you
don't.  It  makes  no  difference  on
the  part  of  the  individual  what  he
thinks  or  believes,  so  far  as  apper-
tains to  his  salvation,"

Why  this  difference  in  the  religi-
ous world  ?  God  is  not  the  author
of  confusion,  or  of  conflicting  doc-
trine and  principles.  Go  into  the
scientific  world,  if  you  please,  and
range  through  the  field  of  exact
sciences,  andvihat  do  you  find  there?
If  I  were  to  ask  the  enlightened
people  of  all  nations  what  is  the
product  of  2  multiplied  by  2,  they
would  all  tell  me  4.  Why?  Because
the  answer  is  understood  to  be  cor-
rect ;  they  have  been  taught  it  and
they  have  demonstrated  it  in  the
practical  operations  of  life*  There  is
no  dispute,  then,  that  2  and  2  are  4
the  world  over.  Why  this  universal
declaration  of  this  one  truth  ?  Is  it
not  because  all  have  been  taught  a
correct  principle  ?  That  they  have
all  been  taught  the  same  doctrine,


and  that  those  who  have  taught
them  have  been  inspired  by  the  same
sentiment,  the  same  truth?  But
suppose  I  should  find  some  who
were  teaching  that  2  and  2  are  3,  or
that  2  and  2  are  6;  I  would  at  once
say,  Some  of  you  are  wrong,  all  can-
not be  right,  certainly  not  What
would  be  the  conclusion  in  our
minds?  That  some  had  been  taught
imperfectly;  that  those  who  had
been  taught  that  2  and  2  were  3,  or
5,  had  been  instructed  by  teachers
who  did  not  understand  the  princi-
ples they  essayed  to  advance.  And
the  conclusion  would  be  correctly
drawn  that  there  were  systems  of
error  being  taught,  and  that  all
were  in  error  except  those  who  pro-
claimed the  doctrine  that  2  and  2
are  1  This  figure  of  2  and  2  are  4
— 3-6,  may  be  appropriately  applied
to  the  teachings  of  the  religious
world ;  for  we  find  one  class  who
profess  to  be  the  teachers  sent  of
God,  who  declare  to  us  one  set  of
principles,  another  class  who  declare
another  set  of  principles,  or  doctrine,
diametrically  opposed  to  the  first;
we  find  a  third  opposite  to  both  ;
and  continuing  our  research  until
we  traverse  the  entire  globe,,
we  find  that  there  are  several
hu  ndred  different  denominations
professing  to  worship  God  accord-
ing to  his  laws,  all  differing  more
or  less  in  their  doctrines,  discipline
and  forms  of  worship.  There  being
but  one  Lord,  one  faith,  and  one
baptism,  we  discover  that  some
have  been  and  are  teaching  a  doc-
trine that  2  and  2  are  some  num-
ber other  than  4.  That  some  are
preaching  something  that  is  not
M  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,"
but  a  system  embracing  the  doc-
trines and  precepts  of  men.  Such
a  system  is  devoid  of  the  power  of
God,  and  is  not  that  system  which
will  bring  salvation  to  the  human


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


231


soul-  It  is  not  that  system  which
will  impart  to  individuals  the  know-
ledge of  the  true  God,  and  of  his
Son  Jesus  Christ  It  is  not  that
system  which  will  bring  man  up
from  the  condition  of  sin  and  error
to  the  great  plan  of  righteousness
and  truth.  A  system  revealed  from
God  alone  can  accomplish  such  re-
sults. But  where  can  we  find  these
principles  of  the  Gospel,  this  power
of  God  revealed  to  mankind,  if  it
he  revealed  at  all,  that  men  may
know  that  2  and  2  are  4  for  them-
selves, that  they  may  know  that  the
power  of  God  is  unto  salvation  unto
all  that  believe  and  obey.  Jt  Is
written  in  this  Bible,  and  we  some-
times refer  to  it  as  authority  to
those  who  do  not  comprehend  the
higher  law,  or  rather  have  not  un-
derstood that  law  of  which  this  book
is  but  the  exponent.  Just  upon
the  same  principle  that  I  may  ask
an  individual  what  is  the  product  of
2  multiplied  by  2,  and  he  tells  rae
4.  But  if  I  were  to  ask  him  to
demonstrate  the  42nd  proposition
of  Euclid,  ho  would  answer  me  that
he  knew  nothing  at  all  about  it.
This  is  simply  a  higher  law.  an
advanced  principle  of  knowledge ;
the  plan  by  which  the  power  of
God  is  obtained  is  a  progressive  sys-
tem in  its  enunciated  principles  and
doctrines.  With  this  system  we
go  on  from  step  to  step,  as  Paul
declares  the  "  righteousness  of  God
is  revealed  from  faith  to  faith  ;tT  or
in  other  words,  that  the  power  of
God  was  and  is  increased  upon  him-
self by  his  obedience  to  an  eternal
law,  and  thus  became  the  King  of
kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Jesus
Christ  also,  in  obedience  to  this
eternal  law,  obtained  that  power  by
whieh  he  triumphed  over  sin  and
all  the  opposing  powers  of  evil,  and
attained  to  his  exalted  position  at


the  right  hand  of  God.  Prae


ing


these  same  principles  and  law,  we
obtain  salvation  and  poorer  to  be-
come Gods,  even  the  sous  of  God*
And  in  observing  these  principles
and  laws,  we  but  follow  the  advice  of
Paul  which  he  gave  to  the  Saints  in
his  day  :  u  Let  tills  mind  be  in  you,
which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,
who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,
thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God.1'  What,  humanity  attain
to  the  dignity  of  the  God  ?  Yes ;
if  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  whv  not
attain  to  something  of  the  honor
and  dignity  by  inheritance  with  our
Father?  But  how  >hall  we  do  this?
Tliis  Gospel,  which  these  brethren
have  been  teaching  in  distant  lands,
points  out  the  system  which  brings
to  us  this  power  of  God,  And  what
is  it?  It  is  said  that  to  those  who
believe  it  it  will  become  the  power  of
God  unto  salvation.  And  what  do
you  mean  by  salvation?  Deliver-
ance from  the  power  of  sin,  which
is  death,  and  thus  attain  to  eternal
life  How  shall  we  triumph  over
the  power  of  death  ]  By  believing
in  Jesus  Christ ;  believing  that  he
is,  and  that  he  is  the  re  warder  of  all
that  diligently  seek  him.  How  can
Vf€  bear  except  there  be  a  preacher,
and  bow  can  that  individual  preach
except  lie  be  sent  of  God  1  And  if
he  be  sent  uf  God,  will  he  not  pro-
claim unto  us  the  doctrine  of  G$d1
Will  he  not  proclaim  the  doetrines
of  Christ  if  he  be  sent  of  Christ,  and
is  taught  of  him1  But  if  he  be  not
sent  of  him  and  taught  of  him,  then
he  takes  the  honor  unto  h  i msel f ,  an  d
is  unworthy  to  be  called  an  Apostle
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  an  am-
ba»ailnr  of  heaven  bearing  the
words  of  eternal  truth.  But  how
may  we  know  these  things?  We
know  that  2  and  2  are  4,  this  fact  is
demonstrated  in  our  daily  transac-
tions, flow  may  we  obtain  this
power  of  God,  which  shall  be  unto


232


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


us  salvation  1 By  doing  the  will  of
the  Father,  by  following  diligently
the  instruction  of  the  Apostle  Peter,
given  on  the  clay  of  Pentecost :
"Repent  and  be  baptized,  every  one
of  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Cluist
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost :  for  the  pnmii.se  is  unto  you,
and  to  your  children,  and  to  all
that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  sis
the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  And
he  further  says,  "  Save  yourselves
from this  untoward  generation/
"What  did  lie  tell  them  to  do  I  To
repent. They  already  believed  in
Jesus,  for  he  had  preached  Christ
to  them,  and  they  were  pricked  in
their  hearts  and  they  cried  out,
*' Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we
do  f Peter  did  not  tell  them  to
come  to  an  anxious  seat  to  be  prayed
for. No,  there  was  a  work  for
themselves  to  do. What  do  you
mean  by  repentance  1  Forsaking
all  evil,  turning  away  from  all  un-
righteousness;  "Let  him  that  stole
steal  no  more ; "  let  him  that  was
drunken  drink  no  more.  etc.  ;  over-
come all  your  sins  by  righteousness
and  obedience  to  the  law  of  God
Repent,  then,  every  one  of  you.
What, all these good  men  who
had  come  up  to  Jerusalem?  Yes,
a  new  dispensation  had  now  been
ushered  in. "Repent."  What  else?
"And be baptized  every  one  of
you." What  for  i "  Fo/the  remis-
sion of  sins." Is  there  no  other
way,  Peter,  by  which  ue  can  get
our  sins  remitted? He  has  not  de-
clared any  other ;  if  there  were  he
ought  to  have  told  them,  for  they
asked  him  a  most  important  ques-
tion, and  he  preached  by  command
of  the Savior and was  taught
of  him  for  forty  day*  print-  tn  his
ascension,  and  it  is  to  be  presumed
that  Christ  gave  to  him,  in  connec-
tion with  Jus  fellow  Apostles,  every


jarticleof  instruction  they  needed,
*or  he  cannot  be  accused  directly  or
indirectly  of  leaving  his  work  half
done. For,  says  Christ,  what  more
could  I  have  done  that  I  have  not
done. He  gave  them  all  the  in-
struction  needed  to  go  forth  as
teachers  and  ministers  to  all  na-
tions and  peoples. After  Peter  told
these  people  what  to  do,  what  ful-
filment of  promise  was  to  follow
obedience  to  his  instructions  1  "And
ye shall  receive  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost." That  is  the  promise,
is  it  ? Peter,  have  you  not  made  a
mistake  f Have  you  been  telling  us
that  2  and  2  are  4,  or  that  2  and  2
are  6. He  has  'old  us  the  truth  pre
suniedly.  How  may  you  know?  Uh,
says  one,  the  promise  was  only  to  the
Apostles  and  those  to  whom  they
] ^reached. But  the  promise  was  not
confined  to  t  hem;  it  was  an  extended
promise,  "And  to  your  children,  and
to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  How
many  bus  the  Lord  called?  Read  the
1st  verse  of  the  50th  Psalm  :  "  The
mighty  God,  even  the  Lord,  hath
spoken  and  called  the  earth  from  the
rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going
down  thereof/' Read  also  the  17th
verse  of  the  last  chapter  of  Revela-
tions : "And  the  spirit  and  the
bride  say,  Come. And  let  him  that
heareth  say.  Come. And  let  him
that  is  athirst  come. And  whoso-
ever will,  let  him  take  the  water  of
life  freely/' Are  not  you,  my
hearers,  as  well  as  the  whole  of  man-
kind, included  in  this  general  call?
The  promise  is,  then,  to  you.  "But
supposing  I  do  come  in  obedience  to
the  testimony,  borne  by  these  young
men  this  afternoon,  how  shall  I  know
for  myself  that  I  shall  have  done  the
w ill  of  G od  f  * I  an s wer,  do  1 1 1 e
things  that  they  say  and  you  shall
know  whether  the  doctrine  they
preach  be  of  God  or  whether  they


■


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC


233


speak  of  themselves.  For  know  ye
that  if  the  promise  be  not  fulfilled  to
you,  the  Lord  speaks  not  by  them
or  by  anyone  else.  If  a  promise  hits
been  made  by  the  Great  Jehovah  to
the  children  ot  men  upon  certain  con-
ditions, and  those  conditions  be  per-
formed upon  their  part  and  the  pro-
mise be  not  realized,  then  know  ye
that  the  God  of  heaven  never  made
that  promise.  But  said  Christ,  they
did  not  believe  him  in  his  day.  And
they  asked  him  how  they  should
know  whether  tiie  things  he  taught
were  true  or  not  He  told  them  to
do  the  things  which  he  commanded.
And  you,  my  friends,  can  know  in  no
other  way.  This  is  a  practical  work.
Is  there  no  theory  about  the  Gospell
Yes  ;  but  the  theory  is  worth  no
more  than  the  theory  of  anything
else;  it  is  the  practical  part  we  want,
that  which  brings  benefit  and  bless-
ing ;  that  which  comes  like  the  old
Yankee  to  the  man  who  fell  from  his
horse  and  broke  his  leg.  Said  some
of  the  spectators  who  had  gathered
around,  I  am  very  sorry  for  this  man,
he  has  a  large  family  and  their  only
support  will  im  w  be  taken  away  from
them.  The  old  Yankee,  it  will  be
remembered,  said,  I  am  sorry  for  him
just  ten  dollars,  how  much  are  the
rest  of  you  sorry  ;  and  handed  over
the  money.  That  ten  dollars  was
worth  more  to  the  injured  man  than
all  the  sympathy  in  the  universe.
And  if  the  Gospel  does  not  come
with  blowing  and  benefit,  with  intel-
ligence, power  and  exaltation  to  the
human  family,  it  is  of  no  practical
benefit;  and  if  of  no  permanent
bene! it  it  is  not  worth  our  time  to
meddle  with.  Ho  the  Latter-day-
Saints  may  feel  sorry  for  the  poor
people  in  England,  whose  deplorable
condition  has  been  described  to  us
this  afternoon  by  the  brethren  who
have  just  returned  from  missions  to
that  country  ;  but  if  they  do  not


put  their  hands  in  their  pockets  and
assist  them  to  the  extent  bf  their
means  their  sympathy  will  not
amount  to  a  hill  of  beans.  The  Sa-
vior gave  and  observed  this  form  of
doctrine,  and  if  he  taught  not  a  cor
rect  system  let  us  do  away  with  it
altogether  ;  for  if  he  is  not  the  au-
thor of  our  salvation,  who  is  1  There
is  no  name  yiven  under  heaven
whereby  man  must  be  saved  but  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  if  we  do
not  preach  the  form  of  doctrine  he
taught  where  shall  w<-  find  it  ?

"What  is  the  promised  result  of
obedience  to  this  counsel  of  IVh  r  ?
"You  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost,"  What  shall  be  the
result  of  the  reception  of  that  spirit?
Christ  told  his  disciples  that  it  should
bring  all  things  whatsoever  lie  had
said  to  them  to  their  remembrance.
And  was  it  to  bring  to  memory  only
the  things  which  had  been  heard  1  or
M  as  it  to  reach  back  into  the  vista
of  the  past  and  unfold  to  us  some
knowledge  of  our  pre-exist ent  state?
Why  not,  since  the  spirit  compre-
hends from  the  beginning  to  the
end?  But  is  that  all  it  was  to  do?
He  also  said  that  it  should  lead  us
into  all  truth.  Then  we  have  the
great  teacher  who  teaches  by  the
spirit  ef  revelation  that  2  and  2  are  4
in  every  part  of  tin*  known  world,
and  to  all  people.  You  have  the
same  teacher  now  that  taughl  you  in
England  or  Russia  or  China  or  Ame-
rica, or  wherever  the  human  family
exists,  that  spirit  will  lead  you  into
all  truth;  and  if  we  are  in  possession
of  that  spirit  we  will  be  taught  the
same  doctrine  and  the  same  principle
and  will  all  tend  according  to  our
faithfulness  to  the  same  degree  of  ex-
altation. Thus  shall  you  know  that
God  lives,  thus  shall  you  know  that
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God*  And
this  by  the  revelation  of  that  spirit
which  shall  lead  and  guide  you  into


i


234


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


all  truth.  What  else  can  it  do?  It
shall  show  you  things  to  come  ;  and
if  you  were  perad venture  to  declare
any  of  these  tilings  you  would  become
a  prophet.  Ttiis  would  be  a  terrible
thing,  to  become  a  prophet !  But
Moses  said  when  Joshua  wanted  him
to  rebuke  certain  ones  and  forbid
them  from  prophesying  in  the  camp
of  Israel,  after  asking  him  if  he  was
jealous  for  his  sake,  u  I  would  that
all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets,"
because  it  would  imply  that  they
had  obeyed  this  form  of  doctrine,
that  they  were  living  in  constant
communion  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  it
would  be  to  argue  that  they  were
living  according  to  the  doctrine  of
John  when  he  said  "  Whosoever
transgresseth  and  abideth  not  in  the
doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God.
He  that  abideth  in  the  doctrine  of
Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Father  and
the  Son."  How  shall  they  know
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ]  Only  by
the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
For,  says  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  No
man  speaking  by  the  spirit  of  God
calleth  Jesus  accursed  :  and  that  no
man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,
but  by  the  Holy  Ghost/1  Did  Paul
tell  the  truth  or  not  1  No  man  can
say  knowingly  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ  but  by  the  power  and  revela-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  no  man
ever  obtained  this  knowledge  in  any
other  way ?  or  ever  will.  It  is  the
plan  God  has  designed,  and  if  we
would  come  unto  him  we  must  do
so  in  his  own  appointed  way.  We
must  run  the  race  that  is  set  before
us,  and  not  attempt  to  prescribe  the
rules  of  the  race  track  ourselves.  Let
us  therefore  so  run  that  we  may  gain
the  prize  at  the  end  of  the  race.  In
order  to  secure  this  we  must  con-
form to  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel
which  comprise  this  testimony  which
is  given  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy;


■  and  he  who  has  the  spirit  of  prophecy
has  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  Then
mankind  may  ridicule  the  idea  that
prophets  are  no  more  upon  the  earth;
it  is  tantamount  to  saying,  "  that  we
know  not  God  and  are  without  hope
in  the  world,"  And  who  can  know
the  Father  but  by  the  revelations  of
the  Son,  and  he  unto  whom  the  Son
may  reveal  him  1

|  It  seems  then  that  this  Holy
Ghost  is  full  of  intelligence,  full  of
knowledge,  full  of  power,  and  is  the
acting  minister  of  God  throughout
all  the  dominions  of  the  gn  at  Jeho-
vah. That  spirit  reveals  to  man
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  Christ
reveals  the  fact  of  the  existence,
power  and  glory  of  his  Father.  And
this  is  the  order.  And  how  shall  Ave
know  this  fact?  By  rendering  obe-
dience to  the  ordinances,  and  then
you  can  know  it  for  yourselves.  It
is  no  great  trouble ;  a  little  cold
water  will  not  hurt  any  of  you*  I
presume  there  are  many  in  this  con-
gregation who  have  been  buried  in
the  water  of  baptism  when  the  ire
has  had  to  be  cut,  and  they  will  tell
you  that  by  obeying  these  simple
forms  of  doctrine  they  have  received
for  themselves,  by  the  laying  on  of
hands  of  the  Elders,  this  Holy
Ghost,  and  that  it  has  borne  record
to  them  of  the  Father  and  the  Son?
Is  not  the  experiment  worth  trying?
Is  not  the  prize  of  sufficient  value
to  induce  you  to  sacrifice  the  follies
of  the  world  to  put  on  Christ  ?  Shall
we  not  run  the  race  that  is  set  be-
fore us  ?  Shall  we  not  do  and  per-
form the  acts  which  bring  unto  us
the  power  of  God  1

But  is  this  power  acquired  only
by  acts  or  words?  let  us  see  what  the
Savior  says.  You  remember  that  a
certain  man  brought  his  son  who
was  possessed  of  a  devil  to  the  Sa-
vior that  the  Savior  might  cast  the

•  devil  out  as  the  Apostles  had  failed


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST,  ETC.


235


to  do  so.  The  Savior,  it  will  be
remembered,  gave  them  a  severe  re-
buke upon  that  occasion  saying  in
substance.  How  long  shall  I  be  with
you  as  a  teacher  and  you  be  so  thick-
headed that  you  will  not  learn  these
principles  which  I  teach  from  day  to
day  ?  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you  to
be  my  disciples,  and  how  long  shall
I  have  to  be  with  you  as  your  teacher
before  you  learn  these  things  ?  Bring
the  boy  to  me.  The  father  obeyed
and  by  that  power  which  had  been
developed  in  Christ  by  obedience  to
law  he  commanded  the  unclean
spirit  to  come  out  of  the  tabernacle
of  the  boy  and  to  depart  from  liim
and  it  obeyed  him.  The  disciples
felt  the  rebuke,  and  when  opportu-
nity presented  itself  they  asked  t  he
Savior  why  they  could  not  cast  out
the  evil  spirit  And  Jesus  answered
and  said  unto  them,  "  because  of
your  unbelief :  for  verily,  I  say  unto
yuu,  if  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of
mustard  seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this
mountain,  remove  hence  to  yon  t  ier
place :  and  it  shall  remove  and  no-
thing shall  be  impossible  unto  you/'
What?  I  have  heard  ministers  say,
yes  you  can  remove  mountains  by
utilizing  a  lot  of  Chinamen,  But
shall  we  thus  curtail  the  power  of
faith,  for  it  is  a  principle  of  power
and  not  simply  a  volition  of  the  will.
It  was  by  the  po we  r  of  fa  i  t  h  t  h  a :  <  J  od
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth]
and  if  God  could  by  the  power  of
faith  organize  these  vast  planets
which  revolve  in  most  perfect  order
tlj rough  space,  ifj  I  say,  that  he  could
do  this  by  the  power  of  faith,  how
great  a  portion  of  that  power  would
it  take  to  remove  the  Wasatch  range?
Not  a  very  large  proportion.  Said
the  Savior  tohis^lisciples  in  answer  to
their  inquiry :  howl  ieit  this  kind  goeth
not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting.
Then  we  have  a  clue  from  the  de-
claration of  the  Savior  himself  as  to


how  this  power  is  obtained*  To  be-
lieve only  1  No,  Belief  only  would
be  wortldess  ;  belief  followed  by
works  under  the  direction  of  the
holy  spirit  which  is  the  power  of
God  brings  forth  the  pnwer  of  faith.
Have  you  Elders  of  Israel  found
yourselves  in  the  same  condition  as
these  disciples,  when  called  upon  to
perform  a  similar  act,  and  if  you
have  did  you  know  the  reason  why?
Learn  the  answer  from  the  lips  of
the  Savior.  Do  you  fast  and  pray
according  to  the  ordinances  of  this
system,  through  which  the  power
of  God  is  obtained?  If  you
have  not,  then  your  ministra-
tions were  in  vain  because  you  failed
to  comply  with  the  conditions.  Are
the  promises  to  men  in  an  individual
capacity  ?  In  one  sense,  yes,  in  an-
other, no.  When  theconditionspre-
scribed  are  complied  with,  then  the
fulfilment  of  the  promises  must  be
forthcoming,  for  God  cannot  lie.  Is
it  the  individual  that  acts  then?  No,
He  is  simply  the  representative  ;  it  is
the  ministering  servant  of  God  who
acts,  not  in  his  own  name  but  in  the
name  of  his  principal,  by  virtue  of
the  power  behind  the  throne.  Just
the  same  as  the  Judge  upon  the
bench  or  the  Police  upon  the  street
Do  they  act  in  their  own  name?  No,
but  are  representatives  of  a  power
from  whom  they  hold  their  commis-
sions. So  they  who  minister  in  the
holy  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  mini
sternot  in  their  own  name,  but  by
virtue  of  the  authority  of  their  com-
mission. For  how  can  men  preach
the  Gospel  except  they  be  sent,  and
sent  of  God  to  declare  his  Gospel,
so  that  their  words  may  he  t  he  words
of  God  to  the  people  ?  Then  the  ex-
hortation uf  the  Elders  of  Israel  is,
repent  every  one  of  you,  and  be  bap-
tized  for  the  remission  of  your  sins
and  the  promise  is  that  you  shall  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost,  which  will


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


236

lead  and  guide  you  into  all  truth  ;  it
will  bring  things  past  to  your  remem-
brance and  it  will  show  you  things
to  come.  It  will  enlighten  your
minds  and  will  lead  you  step  by  step,
giving  line  upon  line,  precept  upon
precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a
little.  But  owing  to  the  weakness
of  the  flesh  and  the  weaknesses  of
our  fallen  natures  that  are  ever  pre-
sent with  us,  we  learn  slowly.  But
by  perseverance  in  the  warfare
against  sin  we  continually  increase
this  power  within  us,  which  though  1
gradually  developing  will  ultimately
become  in  us  a  principle  of  revelation
and  prophecy,  sufficient  to  enable  us
to  hold  converse  with  God  and  to  re-
ceive wisdom  and  knowledge  from
the  great  fountain  of  intelligence.
The  Gospel  does  away  with  all  nar-
row contracted  feelings  ;  it  widens
the  range  of  thought  as  well  a*  en-
nobles the  mind  ;  it  makes  us  feel
that  God  is  our  father,  that  the  world
is  our  home  and  that  mankind  are
our  brethren,  all  the  .sons  and  daugh-
ters of  God;  and  I  am  not  benefitted
by  crushing  you  nor  you  by  crushing
me,  but  that  we  are  only  exalted  in
the  scale  of  being  by  acts  of  intelli-
gence and  goodness ;  and  that
as  we  increase  in  knowledge
so  do  we  increase  in  the  power  of
God.

The  government  of  God  upon  the
earth  is  denominated  as  his  priest-
hood,  as  is  declared  by  Paul  in
his  letter  to  the  Romans,  is  the
power  of  God  made  known  and
that  which  may  be  known  of  God
is  manifest  in  them  who  hold  this
priesthood,  for  God  hath  shewn  it
unto  them.  The  knowledge  of  God
comes  then  through  the  priesthood
which  has  been  established  upon
the  t.*;uth  ;  and  the  salvation  of  the
human  family  through  the  admini-
stration of  the  ordinances  of  this
Gospel  by  the  power  and  authority


thereof.  His  knowledge  comes  to
us  with  an  assurance  which  is
stronger  and  more  convincing  than
the  seeing  of*  the  eye,  the  hearing
of  the  ear  and  the  handling  of  the
hand  put  together.  For  it  is  as
Paul  says,  the  sure  word  of  pro-
phecy, which  is  more  satisfactory
evidence  to  the  human  mind  than
all  other  evidences  combined,  And
it  comes  to  us  with  such  convincing
power  that  it  cannot  be  gainsayed.
And  hence  these  young  Elders  stand
up  and  say  they  know  the  tilings
to  be  true  whereof  they  testify  by
the  gift  and  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  And  they  tell  us  that  they
have  obtained  this  knowledge  by
obeying  this  simple  form  of  doctrine,
which  is  so  plain  that  a  wayfaring
man  need  not  err  therein  if  he  set*
his  heart  to  do  the  will  of  God.  Are
they  narrow,  contracted  in  their  feel-
ings? If  so  why  do  they  spend  their
time  in  going  forth  to  labor  in  the
vineyard  of  the  Lord  without  com-
pensation, except  that  which  comes
from  God  and  the  satisfaction  of
knowing  that  they  are  doing  the
will  of  Heaven  ?  they  preach  not  for
hire  nor  divine  for  money  but  go
forth  and  preach  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  all,  calling  upon  the
people  everywhere  to  repent  and  be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  their
sins,  promising  them  in  the  name  of
him  who  commissioned  them,  that
when  these  requirements  are  com-
plied with  in  all  sincerity  they  shall
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  shall  give  them  to  understand
and  know  fur  themselves  that  2  and
2  are  4,  that  God  lives,  that  Jesus
is  the  Lord;  all  being  taught  by
this  Spirit  will  know  and  understand
alike.  Ignorance  will  depart  and
knowledge  will  increase  and  abound
and  to  all  there  will  be  but  one
Lord,  one  faith  and  one  baptism.
Amen.


THE  GOSPEL  AS  PREACHED  RY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


237


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEO.  G.  BY  WATER,


Delivered  in  the  Taberkacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  afternoon

June  29,  1879.


(lu'purlnl  bff  Geo.  I\  GUM  )


THE  GOSPEL  AS  PREACHED  HY  THK  SAINTS — OPPMSII ION  BT  THE  WOKLD

TO  THE  DIFFUSION OF  TRUTH.


Wa  are  assembled  here  this  after-
noon as  a  congregation  of  worship-
pers ;  we  have  come  together  to
worship  God  according  to  the  dic-
tates of  his  word  ;  according  to  the
revelations  of  his  divine  will,  as  it
has  been  made  known  to  the  people
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  We  re-
present a  faith,  a  spiritual  constitu-
tion, an  organization  of  ideas  which  j
incorporates  our  sense  of  duty,  our
duty  to  our  God  and  our  duty  to
our  fellowmen.  This  is  not  a  new
occasion;  this  is  not  a  new  announce-
ment. We  have  existed  as  a  people
in  the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the
earth  for  a  third  of  a  century.  Our
doctrines  are  not  new ;  our  principles
of  which  these  doctrines  are  compo-
sed, are  not  of  the  l!)th  century ;
they  are  not  the  outgrowth  of  the
intelligence  of  this  age  ;  they  are
not  the  products  of  that  intellectual!*
ty  which  is  by  many  regarded  as  the
highest  standard  of  advancement,  as
the  most  elevated  platform  of
thought.  Our  principles  are  from
eternity  to  eternity.  The  Gospel  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  the
name  commonly  applied  to  the  reli-
gion we  profess,  was  preached  afore-
time unto  Abraham  ;  was  revealed
unto  our  fathers,  the  ancients.  Many  j


of  its  fundamental  principles,  several
of  its  divine  ordinances  and  very
many  of  the  hopes  that  inspired  and
caused  to  heave  with  heavenly  emo-
tion, and  delight  the  bosoms  of  the
purest  men  and  women  of  this  age,
Ot  of  ages  preceding  this  of  ours,
were  principles  that  had  been  re*
revealed  in  ages  and  dispensations
gone  by.  But  we  claim  to  have  re-
ceived this  Gospel  in  the  dispensa-
tion in  which  we  live  as  a  new  reve-
lation ;  not  new  principles,  but  a  new
revelation  of  old  principles,  of  anci-
ent doctrines,  of  institutions  that  the
greatest  benefactors,  philanthropists
and  humanitarians  that  ever  graced
the  human  race,  were  more  or  less
made  familiar  with.  We  are  here
to-day,  beloved  friends,  as  the  result
of  the  operations  of  the  ministry  of
this  Gospel,  as  a  people  occupying
this  section  of  country  called  the
the  Territory  of  Utah,  We  are
fruits,  we  are  results  of  the  ministnr
of  reconciliation  br<  High  t  forth
through  the  mission  of  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  Christ  in  its  fulness  and
primitive  purity  in  the  day  and  a<:e
in  which  we  live,  and  to  ns  as  a
people  when  we  thus  address  each
other  and  reiterate  these  truths  in
each  other's  hearing,  we  are  not  an-


238


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


nouncing  that  which  we  do  not  un
derstand,  but  we  simply  do  so  to  re-
mind each  other,  to  stir  up  our
thoughts,  to  put  into  activity  our
reflective  powers  and  call  forth  those
intellectual  energies  which  arc  awa-
kened  by  the  revelation  of  these
principles  of  lite  and  immortality  in
the  development  of  our  faith,  and  to
stir  up  our  minds,  that  they  may  be-
come more  pure  and  to  bring  to  our
remembrance  things  that  are  past,
as  well  as  cause  to  pass  before  our
minds  the  circumstances,  the  duties
and  the  incidents  of  the  present*
and  thus  carry  with  us  the  history
we  are  creating,  and  produce  by  the
combined  action  of  our  past  and
present  labors  those  results  which
the  Gospel  in  its  entirety  and  its
power  and  influence  exercises  over
the  heart  of  man  in  bringing  to  pass
that  human  regeneration  so  long
spoken  of  by  the  prophets ;  so  long
ago  sung  of  by  the  inspired  psalmist
and  the  songsters  of  Israel,  which
should  characterize  the  features,
that  would  mark  the  development
of  God's  purposes  in  this  humanity,
in  this  great  mass  of  intelligence,
which  he  has  created  and  given  a
conscious  existence  to  upon  the
earth.

In  speaking  in  this  manner,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  I  desire  to  do
so  as  making  a  few  preparatory  re-
marks to  what  may  be  said  by  my
brethren  who  may  follow  after  me,
as  I  shall  not  occupy  your  atten-
tion but  for  a  limited  portion  of  time
this  afternoon.  I  wish  to  say,  how-
ever, in  addition  to  what  I  have  al-
ready said  with  reference  to  the  cha-
racter of  the  Gospel,  that  we  need
not  look  to  any  other  source  for  an
evidence  of  the  divinity  of  the  mis-
sion in  which  we  are  engaged,  the
divinity  of  the  revelations  which
have  been  intrusted  to  us  in  this  dis-
pensation of  the  fulness  of  times,  for


an  evidence  of  its  divine  character
and  heaven-born  nature,  or  for  the
proofs  of  its  practical  result  as  to  our-
selves. We  can,  my  friends,  exa^
mine  our  own  experience  ;  we  can
review,  each  individual  one  of  us,
the  several  chapters  which  each  day's
acts,  conversations  and  the  results
of  our  labors  as  individual  mem-
bers of  this  body  ecclesiastical  and
of  this  Church  militant,  and  see
what  have  been  the  fruits  which
these  principles  have  borne  in  our
lives,  and  moreover  see  how  far
we  have  conformed  to  those  condi-
tions upon  the  blessings  of  the
second  birth,  the  regeneration  of  the
human  heart  under  the  inspirations
of  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  have  been
vouchsafed,  and  see  whether  our
professions  are  professions  merely,
whether  they  *re  simply  wordy
acknowledgements  or  whether  we
preach  those  most  practical  of  ser-
mons in  the  actions  of  our  lives,
in  the  practices  of  our  everyday
conduct,  so  as  to  verify  the  cor-
rectness of  our  testimony  and  to
justify  our  friends  and  ourselves  in
the  conclusion  that  we  are  honest
and  sincere  in  the  worship  of  the
Lord  our  God  according  to  the  re-
velations of  his  will,

Bret  lire  n  and  sisters,  we  have
received  revelations  from  God,  the
unbelief  of  the  world  respecting
those  revelations  to  the  contrary,
notwithstanding.  We  have  received
those  glorious  truths  pertaining  to
the  regeneration  of  man,  pertaining
to  his  further  development  and  to
his  final  and  complete  redemption  ;
or,  in  other  words,  to  use,  per-
haps, language  more  familiar  to  some
minds,  the  more  perfect  develop-
ment of  man.  We  have  received
those  glorious  principles;  we  have
accepted  them  in  the  simplicity  of
our  hearts  as  truths  from  God,  and
we  have  realized  in  our  individual


THE  GOSPEL  AS  PREACHED  DY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


239


experiences  that  our  testimony  is
true  ;  that  the  principles  we  have
embraced  are  true  ;  that  they  have
verified  themselves  in  our  experien-
ces and  verified  the  promise  made  by
our  Redeemer  in  the  declaration  to
his  disciples :  "  And  ye  shall  know
the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make
you  free  "  "  If  the  Son,  therefore,
shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free
indeed,"  Our  principles  are  simple;
they  are  perspicuous  ;  they  are  clear;
they  are  self-evident ;  they  become
self-evident  to  every  mind  capable
of  perceiving  the  relation  which  these
principles  bear  to  our  conditions  of
life,  including  the  physical  aud
mental.

The  plan  of  human  redemption,
which  we  call  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  is  composed  of  principles  and
doctrines  that  are  pure,  that  are  in
perfect  harmony  with  every  want  of
our  natures,  with  every  rightful
desire,  with  every  legitimate  unfold-
ment  of  our  being,  physical  or  men-
tal, material  or  spiritual,  whichever
terms  we  choose  to  select  to  express
the  materiality  or  spirituality  of  our
being.  I  repeat,  that  the(!ospcl  of
the  Son  of  God  contains  every  j no-
vision  and  is  enriched  with  every
quality,  is  endowed  with  every  ele-
ment necessary  to  the  perfect  enjoy-
ment of  all  the  powers  of  man  and
of  all  the  capacity  with  which  lie
is  endowed  for  the  development  of
his  power  and  intelligence.

In  speaking  upon  this  subject,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  we  are  led  to  the
further  consideration  of  the  eternity
of  our  being;  we  are  conducted
thereby  into  premises  which  spread
out  on  the  right  and  on  the  left ;  we
are  guided  in  our  reflections  under
the  inspiration  of  principle — for  every
truth  possesses  its  own  principle  of
life,  its  own  quality  of  power,  its  own
characteristic  energy,  and  whenever
that  truth  is  received  by  a  sentient


being,  by  a  conscious  being,  by  a
being  possessed  of  consciousness  of
the  quality  of  the  ego  feeling,  and
when  the  complement  of  his  intel-
lectual faculties  are  not  impaired ;
when  they  are  awakened  to  a  health-
ful exercise  by  the  laws  of  thought,
by  the  force  of  principle,  by  the  im-
press of  objects,  and  when  the  man
is  awakened  as  a  thinking  intellec-
tual being,  he  is  unavoidably  open
to  receive  a  portion  of  the  inspira-
tion which  they  inherit  ;  and  the
more  advanced  he  is,  the  more
elevated  he  becomes  in  the  plane  of
intelligence,  the  greater  will  be  his
susceptibility  anil  capability  to  re-
ceive of  that  inspiration;  and  the
more  he  indulges  in  the  contempla-
tion of  tin*  higher  and  loftier  aims  of
life,  the  more  value  he  attaches  to
every  principle  of  morality  and  vir-
tue, to  every  principle  of  revelation
from  God,  to  truth  of  every  kind,
and  more  especially  those  truths
that  have  an  immediate  bearing
upon  his  present  condition,  as  well
as  those  truths  which  affect  his
future  state.

There  is  much  of  the  knowledge
that  has  been  conferred  upon  the
family  of  man,  there  is  much  of
that  i n t el  1  ige n c e  ai id  u n d e rs tand-
ing  which  man  has  been  brought
into  possession  of  that  we  can  not
use  immediately  in  regulating  our
all  airs  socially,  or  in  any  other  work
in  the  structure  of  society.  But
the  principles  to  which  I  am
now  directing  your  attention  ;  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  are  fundamental  principles  ;
they  are  cardinal  elements,  they
are  the  foundation  stones,  if  you
please,  of  the  great  superstructure
of  humanity  ;  they  reach  the  funda-
mental conditions  of  its  being ;  they
possess  the  virtue  of  delving  down
into  the  most  intricate  recesses  of  our
natures  aud  of  causing  to  well  up


240


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSED


from  our  inmost  natures  those  qual-
ities and  excellencies,  those  virtues,
those  deeds  which  are  praiseworthy
and  of  goad  report,  and  command
veneration,  those  deeds  which  have
adorned  the  lives  of  all  men  who
have  made  themselves  benefactors  to
their  race,  and  who  have  shone  as
the  reformers  and  regenerators  of
society*  No  matter  by  what  name
they  have  been  called,  if  they  have
done  good  in  any  capacity  or  sphere ;
if  society  to-day  owes  any  tiling  to
the  past,  to  the  grear  motor  force
that  lias  affected  the  interests  of  hu-
manity or  guarded  the  conditions  of
its  welfare,  or  has  directed  its  ener-
gies in  any  degree  to  produce  a  con-
dition that  is  desirable  in  the  his-
tory of  our  race,  we  owe  it  to  that
class  of  men,  we  owe  it  to  men  that
have  been  firm  and  true  to  their
convictions  of  what  was  right  ;  we
owe  it  to  men  who  have  stemmed
the  current  of  popular  prejudices  or
who  have  dared  to  row  against  the
stream  of  popular  opinion  ;  we  owe
it  to  men  who  have  sacrificed  the
good  will  of  those  who  were  floating
with  the  tide  of  popularity,  and  to
men  who  have  stood  firm  and  true
and  inflexible  to  their  convictions  of
right.  Have  there  been  such  men  ?
Yes,  my  brethren  and  sisters.  I
rejoice  that  through  the  sable  dark-
ness, that  through  the  almost  im-
penetrable clouds  that  intervene  be-
tween  us  to-day  and  the  ages  of  the
past  we  can  see  glimses,  scintillas  of
light  that  illumed  time,  and  I  revere
and  honor  the  memories  of  such
men  who  did  what  they  could  to
fulfil  the  purposes  of  their  Great
Creator,  the  Father  of  the  human
race,  and  the  Creator  of  all  things
that  are.  I  honor  their  memories.
If  they  were  not  in  the  possession  of
so  much  truth  as  those  who  follow-
ed them  ;  if  their  'philosophy  was
not  as  sound,  and  if  in  their  theo-


logy  there  were  greater  mcongrui-
ties,  yet  it  must  be  remembered  that
they  were  not  so  far  advanced  its
to  be  able  to  perceive  their  errors,
and  if  they  were  devoted  and  sin-
cere in  the  course  they  pursued,
living  up  to  the  best  light  they
possessed,  I,  fur  one,,  cherish  with
fond  remembrance  the  memories  of
such  people.

But  there  is  a  very  anomalous
mental  state  existing  in  the  midst
of  the  human  family,  which  is  not  a
new  one,  however.  It  is  the  con-
stant battle  that  is  being  waged  by
antiquated  theories  and  principles,
which  are  perhaps  established  in
the  hearts  of  the  majorities,  when-
ever a  new  truth  is  introduced  to
the  world ;  whenever  a  principle
that  has  not  been  recognized  dis-
tinctly as  such  has  not  entered  into
the  constitution  of  their  own  reli-
gion, philosophy,  politics  or  science.
Whenever'  a  new  truth  is  intro-
duced, the  stubborn  and  inflexible
conservators  of  antiquated  notions
and  ideas  are  unwilling  to  widen
the  area  of  their  thoughts,  and  ex-
tend the  boundary  of  their  reflec-
tions still  outward.  And  it  is  re-
freshing: when  we  discover  one  here
ai;d  \  ]]<  re  the  wodd  over  entertain-
ing the  sensible  views  expressed  in
the  language  of  Humboldt,  the  Ger-
man naturalist :  '*  Weak  minds  com-
placently believe  that  in  their  own
age  humanity  have  attained  to  the
culminating  point  of  intellectual
greatness,  forgetting  that  by  the  in-
ternal connection  existing  among  all
!  natural  phenomena,  in  proportion
as  we  advance,  the  field  to  be  tra-
versed  acquires  additional  extension,
and  that  it  is  bounded  by  a  horizon,
which  incessantly  recedes  before  the
eyes  of  the  inquirer.11  How  forci-
bly true,  how  substantially  correct
are  these  words  spoken  by  this  noble
man,  one  of  the  brightest  minds  of


THE  GOSPEL  AS  PREACHED  BY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


241


the  19th  century  '  Are  we  able  to
extricate  ourselves  from  these
thoughts,  from  this  dwarfed  con-
dition of  ideas  1  No,  I  fear  not
And  is  it  not  as  true  to-day  as  it
ever  has  been,  that  whenever  an
individual  or  a  community  of  indi-
viduals introduce  into  the  world
any  principle  or  doctrine  which  they
conceive  to  be  in  the  most  perfect
accord  with  the  principles  of  truth
already  revealed,  they  are  sure  to  be
met  with  the  same  old  cry;  the
same  weapons  of  warfare  that  are
strewn  around  over  the  battle
grounds  of  the  ages  are  eagerly
clutched  by  some  of  the  sturdy  vet-
erans who  will  grab  at  anything —
infidel,  sceptic,  heterodox,  fanatic,
immoral,  and  it  matters  not  what
the  odium  attached  to  such  words
may  be,  as  lung  as  they  think  they
can  be  used  to  arrest  the  progress  of
truth,  of  principle,  of  doctrine  which
has  not  been  incorporated  in  their
views.

We  talk  about  our  progressive  en-
lightenment; we  talk  of  our  advan-
cing intelligence;  we  speak  eloquent-
ly of  the  march  of  intellect,  and  yet
we  are  free  to  condemn  every  effort
that  is  made  by  the  world's  most
staunch  advocate  of  human  progress,
in  feeling  after  the  foundation  of
society,  in  feeling  after  the  founda-
tion of  faith,  in  seeking  to  determine
the  soundness  or  the  unsoundness
of  principles,  and  if  we  discover
that  our  fathers  ate  sour  grapes,  and
we  their  children  have  had  our  teeth
set  on  edge,  we  wish  to  administer
some  panacea  to  remove  the  difficulty,
to  change  the  elements  that  are  sap-
ping the  foundation  of  that  society
which  we  are  trying  to  build  up,
and  supply  its  place  with  elements
of  a  homogeneous  texture,  of  a
more  durable  fibre,  and  reconstruct
it  upon  the  basis  developed  by  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  gospel,

No,  16,


which  brings  life  and  immortality  to
light,  and  we  are  confronted  with
the  cry  of  "  fools,"  "fanatics"  and
a  very  great  number  of  uncompli-
mentary terms.  But  I  have  long
ago,  my  friends,  come  to  the  conclu-
sion that  there  is  a  great  deal  said
when  there  is  a  very  little  n leaning
to  he  drawn  from  what  has  been
said  in  relation  to  these  men*  They
are  "  as  sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling
cymbal."

We,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  have
embraced  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ.  What  is  that  Gospel  ?  It
is  faith  in  God;  it  is  an  avowed  con-
fession of  the  existence  of  a  Deity,
that  there  is  a  supreme  intelligence
that  not  only  governs,  but  built  the
universe,  the  great  architect  of  the
heavens.  We  believe  in  his  exist-
ence; that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  all
them  that  diligently  seek  him.  We
believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  his
only-begotten  son,  who  came  into
the  world  in  the  meridian  of  time  to
announce  the  message  of  mercy, who
proclaimed  principles  of  eternal
truth,  who  made  known  the  condi-
tions whereby  mankind  could  attain
salvation,  could  elevate  himself  by
the  means  provided  in  this  great
scheme  of  man's  redemption  from
his  lovr  estate,  that  he  miyht  ascend
the  ladder  that  Jacob  saw,  having
its  feet  placed  upon  the  earth  and  its
top  reaching  to  heaven,  whereby  lie
might  climb  round  after  round,  re-
ceiving line,  upon  line,  precept  upon
precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a  lit-
tle, until  he  shall  become  a  perfect
man  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  We
believe  then  in  Jesus  Christ  M  the
Savior  of  the  world.  We  believe  in
the  gospel  he  received  and  the
principles  of  that  gospel  which  have
been  handed  down  to  us  by
Matthew,  Mark,  Luke  and  John,
the  four  historians  who  compiled  the
!  history  of  his  ministry  and  recorded

Vol.  XX.


242


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  principles  he  taught.  We  be- r  that  they  have  the  message  of  life
lieve  them  to  be  eternal  truth;  we  J  and  salvation  revealed  from
believe  them  to  be  essential  to  the
salvation  of  mankind  We  believe
in  repentance  of  ail  past  sins;  a
genuine  and  sincere  repentance —
not  a  professed  repentance,  but  n
repentance  which  need  not  to  be  re-
pented of;  ;i  repentance  which
brings  forth  fruits  mete  fur  repent-
ance, namely  a  forsaking  of  *in,  a
forsaking  of  every  evil  habit  of
which  we  have  a  knowledge  of  their
being  evil,  turning  away  therefrom
and  seeking  to  the  Lord  our  God
with  full  purpose  of  heart,  adorning
our  lives  with  his  doctrine,  with  his
sacred  precepts  and  principle*,  be-
lieving that  ''the  fear  of  the  Lord
is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  ;  and
before  honor  is  humility/'  We  be-
lieve  in  baptism  for  the  remission  bf
sins  and  in  the  laying  on  uf  Iwnds
for  the  reception  of  the  liuly
Ghost*

Now,  we  believe  all  this  and  much
more.  Ou  r  doctrines  have  been  before
the  world  for  many  years.  Our
Church  works  contain  a  very  full
and  dear  exposition  of  our  views  in
relation  to  our  faith,  in  relation  to
our  principles  affecting  our  life  here
audhereafter,  and  yet  we  discover,  my
friends,  that  we  are  unpopular,  that
we  are  not  to  be  included  among  the
Christian  elements  of  society  ;  we
are  considered  Pagans,  heathens,
outlaws,  barbarians,  an  immoral  and
reprobate  race,  Anil  let  me  ask.
how  was  it  in  the  days  of  Jesus,  this


heavens,  which  is  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation  to  all  that  believe  and
obey,  and  ask  these  men  permission
to  preach  to  them  and  their  people
the  Gospel  of  the  meek  ami  lowly
Jesus,  this  same  once  despised  Xaza-
rene,  in  their  pulpits  or  lecture  plat-
forms, and  they  at  once  express  them-
selves fearful  least  we  should  inocu-
late the; a  with  this  dreadful  conta-
gion. What  do  we  preach  !  The
self-same  principles  that  Jesus
taught.  We  do  not  take  it  as  ex-
pressive  of  a  high  and  lofty  mind  to
be  combative,  to  court  discussion,
but  we  are  at  the  defiance  of  the  un-
believing world  to  prove  one  prin-
ciple of  our  fundamental  doctrines,
revealed  to  us  in  this  age  bjr  Joseph
Smith,  or  by  Jesus  Christ  as  the
Savior  of  the  world,  that  is  not  in
perfect  harmony  with  the  highest
conceptions  and  tht*  most  pure  na-
tures the  world  ever  had,  and  is  not
in  perfect  consonance  with  the  de-
clarations of  holv  writ.  We  have
had  men  contradict  us,  we  have  had
people  tell  us  that  we  are  duped  and
led  astray,  but  their  simple  assertions
are  of  no  weigh  tor  value  unsupported
by  legitimate  argument-  Our  doc-
nines  are  biblically  pure,  they  are
doctrinally  sound  according  to  the
embodyment  of  divinity  contained
in  this  most  ancient  of  books,  called
the  Bihle  ;  not  only  our  first  prin-
ciples, but  all  other  principles  per-
taining to  it,  including  our  social  in-


great  prototype  of  liu man  perfection,  stitutkms,  which  is  the  great  bone
tiasgreat  master-teacher  of  the  purest  of  contention  with  the  moralists  of
of  all  truth  1 Our  Christian  mini-


sters to-day  speak  eloquently  fruin
the  pulpit  to  their  congregations,
telling  them  that  there  is  no  name
given  under  heaven  whereby  man
can  be  saved  but  the  name  of  Jesus;
and  yet  when  men  go  forth  as  our
Elders  do,  declaring  in  all  soberness


our  day,  1  dare  not  permit  myself
to  talk  upon  this  question  at  the
present  time.  I  am  so  thoroughly
disgusted  with  the  rottenness  and
the  canting  hypocrisy  of  society,  and
with  the  infidelity  of  its  social  rela-
tions, and  with  the  entire  degeneracy
at  the  morality  of  our  age,  to  talk


r


THE  GOSPEL  AS  PREACHED  Br  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


243


upon  this  subject,  particularly  with
men  who  have  jumped  at  conclusions
and  who  have  readied  them  without

measuring  every  step  they  have
taken,  without  analyzing  the  ele-
ments of  the  doctrines  they  call  in
question  ;  but  we  can  say  in  meek-
ness of  heart  and  in  confidence,
without  hypocricy  and  without  a
zeal  that  is  not  in  accordance  with
knowledge,  1  nit  with  a  leal  that  is
being  fanned  into  a  glow  that  be-
comes honest  men,  that  we  know
our  doctrines  are  of  God  and  the
whole  world  who  oppose  its  prin-
ciples lie  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and
in  the  bonds  of  iniquity.
^  I  feel  grateful,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  that  we  have  a  religion  that
is  self-sustaining ;  that  we  have  a
faith  whose  foundations  are  God  and
heaven,  whose  bulwarks  are  immut-
able, in  destructible  truths.  We  may
fight  them  as  did  the  ancients;  our
enemies  may  fight  those  doctrines  as
did  the  unbelieving  Jews,  and  the
surrounding  unbelieving  Sadducees
ami  Pharisees,  and  the  various  dis-
cordant faiths,  during  the  ages  that
are  past ;  but  truth,  like  the  dia-
mond, is  unchangeable  in  its  nature,
it  is  unbedimmed  in  its  own  eternal
lustre.  You  may  heap  upon  it  the
odium  of  grosser  materials ;  you
may  endeavor  to  conceal  it  from  the
gaze  of  the  world  or  cover  it  up  in
reproach,  it  is  a  diamond  still,  and
like  truth,  it  will  one  day  triumph
and  conquer,  and  roll  forth  in  its
own,  naked  and  unborrowed  lustre
and  brightness  and  vindicate  its  own
claims,  80  it  will  be  with  the  truth
of  the  Gospel  we  have  embraced.  We
have  received  it  from  God,  and  we
have  but  one  thing  to  fear.  I  am
not  afraid  of  the  prejudice  of  the
world  j  I  am  not  afraid  of  the  influ-
ences that  arc  and  might  be  brought
to  bear  against  us  by  people  and
communities  or  the  universal  world


who  are  opposed  to  the  progress  of
humanity,  who  are  stereotyped  in
their  views,  who  make  no  advance-
ment in  that  path  of  the  righteous
which  shines  brighter  and  brighter
unto  the  perfect  day ;  but  I  fear
more  for  our  own  neglects,  our  own
selfishness,  our  own  yielding  to  the
depravities  of  human  nature,  our
own  backslidings  from  God  aud  tha
covenants  we  have  made,  than  any-
thing else. I  have  no  fear  of  the
final  triumph  of  truth  ; I  do  not
shake  or  tremble  while  contemplating
the  results  of  the  great  w  ork  which
the  Lord  has  recommenced  in  this
dispensation,  which  is  one  of  the
many  dispensations  which  have  pre-
ceded it,  for  God  will  so  conduct  the
issues  of  his  work,  the  labors  of  His
Priesthood,  the  operations  of  His
ministry  and  the  final  consummation
of  His  purposes  as  to  cause  to  be
torn  asunder  all  false  systems,  false
politics,  false  religions,  false  philo-
sophy and  false  bonds  and  obliga-
tions of  society ;  and  in  the  place
thereof he will fill the  earth
with  true  and  correct  knowledge.
Then  every  man  in  every  place  shall
meet  a  brother  and  a  friend ;  then
no  man  shall  have  need  lo  say  to  his
brother,  Know  ye  the  Lord,  for  all
shall  know  him,  from  the  least  to
the  greatest This  will  be  the  final
result ;  this  will  be  the  finish,  the
consummation  of  the  purposes  of  Je-
hovah in  perfecting  the  earth  and
the  sane tificat ion  of  his  children  who
dwell  thereon. They  shall  no  more
see  as  through  a  glass,  darkly,  but
face  to  face  ;  becoming  heirs  with
God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus
Christ  to  a  kingdom  and  govern-
ment in  which  dwelleth  righteous-
ness and  peace. This  will  be  th«
final  triumph,  fight  it  who  may.

I  will  conclude  my  remarks,  thank-
ing you  for  your  attention,  and  feel-
ing pleased  for  the  opportunity  of


244  JOURNAL  OF

expressing  my  feelings  with  regard
to  the  great  latter-day  work.  Let
us  carry  out  the  oft-repeated  precept
of  President  Young,  which  he  reite-
rated in  our  hearing:  "Brethren  and
sisters,  live  your  religion;"  "Fear
God  and  keep  His  commandments  ;
this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man/'


DISCOURSES.

And  then  we  shall  learn  one  day
that  all  things  work  together  for  the
good  of  them  that  love  God;  that
truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail.
And  that  this  may  be  the  result  of
the  experience  of  each  and  every  cne
of  us,  is  my  prayer,  through  Jesus
Christ  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEO.  Q,  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  Sunday

Morning,  August  3rd,  1879.

(Reported  hy  John  Irvine.)

SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS— FUNERAL  RITES  OF  JOSEPH

STANDING.


I  will  read  a  portion  of  the  23rd
chapter  of  St  Matthew,  commencing
at  the  34th  verse :

"And,  wherefore,  behold  I  send
unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men,
and  scribes  ■  and  some  of  them  ye
shall  kill  and  crucify,  and  some  of
them  shall  ye  scourge  in  your  syna-
gogues and  persecute  them  from  city
to  city  ;  that  upon  you  may  come  all
the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the
earth,  from  the  blood  of  righteous
Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zeeh arias,
son  of  Barachias,  whom  ye  slew  be-
tween the  temple  and  the  altar."

There  is  another  portion  of  Scrip-
ture which  I  will  read. It  will  be


found  in  the  Gth  chapter  of  the  Rev-
elations of  St  John :

N  And  when  he  had  opened  the
fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar  the
souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the
word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony
which  they  held.  And  they  cried
with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  How  long,
0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou
not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  f

Very  unexpectedly  I  have  been
called  upon  to  make  a  few  remarks
to  you  this  morning.  Naturally  I
Mould  prefer  to  sit  still  and  to  re-
flect upon  the  sad  event  that  has
called  us  together. It  is  plain  from


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS,  ETC


245


the  reading  of  these  passages  of
Scripture  that  you  have  heard,  that
innocent  blood — the  blood  of  the
servants  of  God,  of  the  prophets,  of
the  wise  men,  of  the  scribes,  all
those  who  have  the  testimony  of
Jesus,  who  are  the  bearers  of  the
word  of  God — when  shed  wickedly,
remains  as  a  heavy  debt  to  be  atoned
for  at  some  period  by  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth.  Also  that  in  the  days
of  John  the  Revelator,  one  of  the
apostles  of  the  Lord,  in  the  visions
which  lie  saw  it  was  made  manifest
that  there  were  yet  more  lives  to  be
offered  up  for  the  cause  of  truth  be-
fore the  blood  that  had  been  shed
could  be  avenged  upon  those  that
dwelt  upon  earth.  It  doubtless
seemed  strange  to  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem  when  Jesus  said  unto
them  that  all  the  righteous  blood
that  had  been  shed  in  past  genera-
tions from  the  blood  of  righteous
Abel  to  Zacharias,  son  of  ]I;irachias,
should  be  required  of  that  genera-
tion. There  were  reasons  for  this
which  he  well  understood.  There
are  reasons  existing  now  and  that
will  continue  to  exist  and  operate,
why  the  blood  of  those  who  have
been  slain  for  the  word  of  God  and
the  testimony  of  Jesus  in  ancient
days,  should  be  avenged  upon  some
generation  in  the  future,  from  the
time  that  John  spake  and  wrote  the
revelation  lie  had  received.  Jesus
said  when  he  was  upon  the  earth  :
"And  this  is  the  condemnation  ;
that  light  is  eoiue  into  the  world
and  men  love  darkness  rather  than
light."  They  were  held  to  a  strict
accountability  after  light  was  reveal-
ed. The  generation  in  which  lie
liveil  were  held  to  a  stricter  account*
ability  than  any  preceding  genera-
tion, because  he  himself,  the  Son  of
God,  was  in  their  midst,  performing
mighty  works,  preaching  the  Gospel
of  the  kingdom  in  its  purity  and  in


its  power,  and  communicating  unto
them  the  mind  and  will  of  heaven.
Every  generation  who  have  the
privilege  of  hearing  the  pure  Gospel
of  Jesus  preached  in  its  fulness  are
held  to  a  similar  accountability.
Their  position  is  different  to  that  of
the  generations  who  do  not  have
that  privilege.  The  generations  that
intervened  between  the  time  that
Zacharias  lived  and  the  coming  ^of
the  Son  of  Man  in  the  flesh,  were
not  held  to  the  same  strict  account-
ability as  the  co temporaries  of  the
Savior*  Why  was  this  I  Because
they  did  not  have  the  truth  in  its
fulness  revealed  unto  them  ;  they
did  not  have  the  prophets  and  apos-
tles and  righteous  men  in  their
midst  to  communicate  unto  them
the  will  of  heaven,  as  the  genera-
tions in  which  the  Savior  lived  had;
and  for  the  same  reason  the  genera-
tions that  have  lived  since  the  death
of  th*  Savior,  and  since  the  visions
that  John  the  Revelator  had,  are
not  held  to  the  same  accountability
as  this  generation,  unto  whom  the
fulness  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  has
been  revealed,  \\  hen  (j<>d  commu-
nicates his  mind  and  will  unto  his
children  by  the  medium  of  angels,
by  the  medium  of  prophets,  by  the
medium  of  holy  men  whom  lie  has
raised  up,  those  who  hrar  that  testi-
mony, those  unto  whom  that  message
is  communicated,  are  held  to  a  strict
accountability  to  obey  the  same  or
be  held  in  great  condemnation  for
their  rejection  of  it  If  you  will
read  the  history  of  God's  ways  of
dealing  with  the  children  of  men
throughout  all  ages,  you  will  tind
that  it  is  invariably  the  case  that
judgments  and  calamities,  I  he  fiery
indignation  of  the  Almighty  always
follow  the  rejection  of  his  truth,
when  that  truth  is  proclaimed  by
his  authorized  servants,  such  as  are
apostles  and  prophets. If  Nineveh


246


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


had  not  heard  the  voice  of  Jonah,
the  Ninevites  could  not  have  been
held  to  the  same  accountability  as
those  to  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord
had  been  proclaimed  ;  and  when
prophets  arose  in  the  midst  of  Israel,
prophets  whom  God  raised  up  to
declare  his  word,  when  the  children
of  Israel  repented  of  their  sins  and
obeyed  the  warning  voice  of  the
servants  of  God,  then  the  blessings
of  God  always  followed  their  obedi-
ence. Hut  on  the  other  hand,  when
the  children  of  Israel  rejected  the
testimony  of  the  servants  of  God,
when  the  prophets  preached  in  vain,
when  they  testified  and  warned  the
people  without  the  people  obeying
their  testimonies  or  their  warnings,
then  invariably  the  judgements  of
God  fallowed,  his  anger  and  indig-
nation were  kindled  against  that
people  or  generation,  it  rested  down
upon  them  and  in  many  instances  to
their  destruction.

This  is  our  position  to-day.  In
this  respect  the  Latter-day  Saints
occupy  a  unique  position  in  the
midst  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.
Men  wonder  very  frequently  at  the
testimonies  that  we  bear.  They  ex-
press surprise  that  a  people  so  few  in
number  as  we  are,  should  imagine
that  there  is  so  much  importance
attending  the  testimonies  that  we
bear,  or  the  Gospel  that  we  preach.
But  it  is  a  remarkable  fact,
abundantly  sustained  in  the
history  of  God's  dealings  with  the
children  of  men,  that  he  does  not
hold  mankind  guiltless  because  there
are  only  a  few  who  are  the  oracles
of  truth  in  their  midst  and  who
have  the  authority  to  proclaim  that
truth.  If  there  was  but  one  pro-
phet on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and
he  had  no  followers,  but  stood  alone
in  the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the
earth,  his  warnings  would  be  follow-
ed by  terrible  results  if  they  were


disregarded  by  those  who  heard
them.  The  Lord  does  not  look  up-
on men  according  to  their  numbers^
the  importance  of  his  work  and  his
dealings  with  the  children  of  men  is
not  to  be  measured  by  the  number
of  those  who  adhere  to  the  princi-
ples that  he  proclaims.  When  Jo*
seph  Smith  stood  alone,  when  he
had  only  two  or  three  followers,  and
he  declared  unto  those  by  whom  he
was  surrounded  that  God  had  spo-
ken to  him  from  the  heavens,  that
God  had  revealed  the  everlasting
gospel  in  its  ancient  purity  and
power,  that  God  had  sent  his  holy
angels  to  him,  and  that  those*  angels
had  laid  their  hands  upon  his  head,
and  upon  the  head  of  Oliver  Cow-
dt*ry,  and  ordained  them  to  the  ever-
lasting Priesthood,  his  testimony
was  as  binding  upon  those  who  heard
it  as  if  millions  of  men  had  testified
to  the  same  truths.  His  testimony
was  binding  from  the  moment  that
he  commenced  to  bear  i  t  to  those  by
whom  he  was  surrounded,  and  the
accountability  of  the  people  who
listened  to  him  and  heard  his  voice,
and  heard  his  testhnon)\  began  from
the  moment  that  he  opened  his
mouth  and  bore  testimony  of  these
things.  .And  so  it  has  been  from
that  day  unto  this,  wherever  the
Elders  of  this  Church  have  gone
and  have  borne  testimony  to  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  respecting
the  work  that  God  has  commenced
— from  that  very  moment  the  cuu
destination  of  the  generation  com-
menced if  they  did  not  obey  these
testimonies  and  warnings.  This
seems  to  some  minds  scarcely  what
it  ought  to  be,  that  is,  it  seems  to
many  that  we  attach  too  much  im-
portance to  what  one  or  two  men
might  say  say,  when  we  assert  that
condemnation  follows  their  testi-
mony ;  but  their  is  this  to  be  con-
sidered connected  with  the  testi*


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS,  E1C\


247


mony  of  God's  servants  in  ancient
clays,  m  in  tlie  days  in  which  we
live:  God  has  not  left  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  will  unit  a  witness,
God  has  not  left  them  without  Rome
testimony  which  they  can  obtain  to
assure  them  that  the  words  of  God's
servants — that  is  the  true  servants
of  God — which  they  hear  are  from
him.  When  he  called  Joseph  Smith
and  Oliver  Cowdery,  and  when  he
sent  his  angels  to  \:\y  their  hands
upon  their  heads  to  ordain  them  to
that  priesthood  which  had  been
withdrawn  from  the  earth,  he  also
sent  his  Holy  Spirit  to  accompany
their  words  and  to  sea!  the  testi-
mony with  power  upon  the  hearts  of
all  that  were  honest,  and  who  pray-
erfully sought  for  a  knowledge  from
God  concerning  the  truth  of  their

i_

wards.  When  Joseph  Smith  and
Oliver  Cowdery  laid  their  hands  up-
on other  men's  heads  and  ordained
them  to  the  same  priesthood  which
they  had  received  from  heaven,  God
confirmed  the  ordi nation  by  bestow-
ing the  Holy  Ghost  upon  them,  and
when  they  went  forth  and  proclaim-
ed the  truth,  the  Holy  Ghost  accom-
panied their  words,  and  those  who
were  desirous  of  knowing  from  Bod
respecting  the  truth  of  their  testi-
iiioi iy  had  the  opportunity  of  re-
ceiving a  knowledge  direct  from
heaven  that  it  was  of  God,  and  on
this  very  account  condemnation
commences  because  liirht  hath  come
into  the  world,  and  when  men  reject
it  they  reject  it  because  they  love
darkness  rather  than  light  God
does  not  hold  people  account-
able for  that  which  they  do  not
know,  or  that  which  they  have  not
had  an  opportunity  i>f  knowing
Where  there  is  no  law,  there  is  no
transgression.  Transgression  com-
mences when  the  law  is  received  and
men  reject  it.  What  is  the  duty  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  when


I  they  hear  a  man  stand  up  and  pro-
<  !aim  in  the  power  and  authority  of
the  priesthood,  and  in  all  solemnity,,
I  that  God  ha*  spoken  from  the  hea-
venSjthat  God  has  revealed  the  ever-
lasting gospel,  that  God  hns  estab-
lished his  church  in  its  ancient
power  and  i it  its  ancient  purity,  that
God  has  endowed  man  to  go  forth
and  administer  in  the  ordinances  of
life  and  solvation  as  in  ancient  flays.
What  is  the  duty  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  Under  such  circum-
stances'?

Situated  as  the  world  is  to-day,
there  is  no  voice  from  God*  You
travel  throughout  the  whole  of
Christendom  and  there  is  an  unbro-
ken silence  feijmini;  between  heaven
and  earth ;  no  voice  to  disturb  the
solemnity  of  eternity.  Go  visit  all
the  different  churches,  and  ;:lt  the
ministers  of  the  various  denomina-
tions, and  talk  to  them  who  profess
to  be  the  followers  of  Jesus  Christ;
ask  them,  '\Do  you  know  anything
iibiiut  God  I  Has  God  conns itiuica-
ted  his  mind  and  will  to  youl"  and
the  universal  answer  from  all  sects
is  t(  No,  revelation  lias  ceased,  God
no  longer  speaks  to  man;  we  depend
upon  his  written  word  in  the  Bible
fpr  on r  k it 0 w I ed ge  of  G od,  We  are
divided  into  sects,  we  are  split  up
into  parties,  we  have  all  our  own
way  ttf  worshipping  God,  but  there
is  no  voice  from  God,  thei  r  has  been
no  revelation  from  God  to  disturb
the  silence  of  ages,  since  the  death
of  the  Apostles,  and  our  knowledge
concerning  the  plans  and  purposes  of
God  is  derived  from  the  Bible."
This  being  the  case,  then,  what  is

the  duty  of  the  inhabitants  of  the

earth  when  a  man  comes  as  Joseph
Smith  did,  and  as  I  he  KMi-rs  of  this
Church  are  doing,  proclaiming  the
truths  which  I  have  alluded  to  I
^Vhv,  they  being  in  ignorant  of
God,  they  having  no  revelation  from


248  JOURNAL  OF

God,  they  riot  having  heard  the
voice  of  angels,  they  being  split  up
into  parties  and  sects,  and  divided
and  quarrelling  resj>ecting  the  points
of  doctrine  which  Christ  revealed —
they  being  in  this  position  should
humble  themselves  and  ask  God,  in
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  in  mighty
prayer  to  reveal  unto  them  whether
the  testimony  of  these  men  who
come  with  this  new  revelation  be
true  or  false.  That  is  the  duty  of
every  living  soul  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  who  hears  the  testimony
of  God's  servants  concerning  this
truth,  and  there  never  has  been,
from  the  time  that  Joseph  Smith
made  his  first  proclamation  until
this  day,  the  3rd  of  August,
1879,  a  time  when  a  man  who  took
this  course  did  not  receive  a  witness
from  on  high,  the  testimony  of  Je-
sus Christ,  that  these  truths,  pro-
claimed by  the  servants  of  God  are
divine  and  from  heaven.  Wherever
the  Elders  of  this  Church  have  gone
and  lifted  up  their  voices  in  humil-
ity, in  meekness,  calling  upon  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  repent —
and  they  have  gone  to  many  lands
and  spoken  in  many  languages— and
the  people  have  repented  and  sought
unto  God  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  for  a  testimony  of  the  truth,
there  has  never  been  a  single  in-
stance where  they  have  failed  to  re-
ceive that  testimony;  not  one.  Who
have  rejected  this  gospel]  The  in-
different, those  who  would  not  take
the  trouble  to  investigate  it,  those
who  would  not  take  the  trouble  to
bow  in  submission  before  the  Lord
and  ask  his  testimony  concerning  it,
those  who  thought  it  beneath  them,
those  who  have  been  too  proud,  or
too  rich  or  too  well  situated  or  who,
for  some  other  reason,  have  failed  to
take  any  interest  in  this  work;  these
are  they  who  are  not  members  of
this  Church  and  who  have  failed  to


DISCOURSES.

obey  this  gospel  when  they  heard  it
preached  in  its  simplicity  and  its
purity  amongst  the  nations  of  the
earth.  Well,  now,  will  this  genera-
tion escape  condemnation'?  I  say
unto  you,  nay.  There  will  be  a
heavy  condemnation  fall  upon  this
generation  because  of  their  inatten-
tion to  these  things.  Judgements
and  calamities  will  be  visited  upon
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in  con-
sequence of  neglecting  the  word  of
God  written  in  the  Scriptures,  and
also  the  word  of  God  to  his
servants  in  these  days.  The
The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  his
brother  Hyrum,  and  numbers  of
others  have  been  slain.  What  for?
Why,  said  the  mob  who  killed  him,
because  they  could  not  reach  them
by  law.  They  were  brought  before
courts,  Joseph  Smith  particularly,
as  you  all  know,  from  time  to  time,
but  they  failed  to  find  any  cause  of
condemnation  against  him,  and  at
last  his  blood  was  shed.  He  sealed
his  testimony  with  his  blood.  Like
other  apostles  and  prophets,  he  laid
down  his  life  as  as  a  witness  before
God  and  before  all  men  of  the
truth  of  the  testimony  that  he  bore.
Others  have  done  likewise.

We  have  met  here  to-day  on  this
mournful  occasion  to  pay  the  last
rites,  to  offer  the  last  testimony  of
respect  to  the  remains  of  one  who
has  in  like  manner  laid  down  his  life
for  the  truth,  one  of  the  many  who
have  been  slain  for  the  testimony  of
Jesus  and  for  the  word  of  God
which  he  bore.  Was  there  any  tiling
wrong  in  the  testimony  that  he  de-
clared when  he  lived?  Was  it  wrong
to  call  upon  men  to  repent  of  their
sins,  to  be  baptized  for  a  remission
of  them,  to  have  hands  laid  upon
them  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost  ?  Was  it  wrong  to  entreat
men  to  forsake  sin  and  to  lead  better
lives,  to  be  more  pure,  more  holy,  to


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JEsUS,  ETC


249


live  near  unto  the  Lord,  to  seek
knowledge  from  God,  to  contend  for
the  faith  that  was  once  delivered  to
the  Saints  1  If  these  things  were
wrong,  then  our  brother,  whose  re-
mains are  before  us,  was  guilty  of
wrong.  This  was  the  extent  of  his
offence  and  no  more.  He  endeavor-
ed to  persuade  men  to  lead  purer,
holier  lives,  and  proclaimed  that  the
days  of  God's  judgment  was  near  at
hand.  He  went  forth  to  declare
these  principles,  filled  with  zeal,
filled  with  good  desires,  exemplary
in  his  life,  pur*  in  his  conversation,
the  admiration  of  all  who  knew  him,
the  joy  of  his  father's  household,  an
example  to  all  his  associates  of  the
same  years,  and  even  to  those  older
than  himself1,  a  young  man  of  whom
we  all  had  great  hopes,  whose  fu-
ture we  thought  was  bright  In
reading  his  letters,  in  listening  to
the  acconnts  of  his  labors,  in  hearing
from  his  co-laborers,  we  could  not
help  feeling  gratified.  We  indulged
in  bright  anticipations  for  his  future,
not  because  of  his  birth,  not  because
his  parents  were  rich,  not  because  of
any  extraordinary  talent  which  he
possessed,  not  because  of  any  earthly
advantages,  but  because  in  his  youth
he  humbled  himself  before  God  and
attained  a  knowledge  concerning  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  burning
with  zeal,  he  had  a  heartfelt  desire
to  proclaim  the  great  truths  which
God  hail  revealed  to  him,  to  a  fallen
world  ami  tried  to  save  the  children
of  men  from  the  pit  into  which  they
were  likely  to  be  engulfed.  The
same  spirit  that  animated  the  breast  j
of  the  Savior,  animated  the  breast
of  Joseph  Standing,  that  is,  he  had  a
portion  of  that  same  spirit  He  did
not  count  bodily  fatigue  anything,
lie  did  not  count  toil  anything,  he
did  not  take  into  consideration  his
health,  the  feebleness  of  his  frame;
none  of  these  tilings  had  weight  with  |


him.  He  did  not  think  how,  by
staying  at  home  and  attending  to  his
business,  he  could  benefit  himself
and  receive  worldly  advantages ;
none  of  these  things  were  thought
of,  but  the  very  moment  he  was
called  to  go  from  home  he  dropped
everything,  although  in  somewhat
feeble  health  and  although  he  had
already  filled  an  honorable  mission,
he  felt  it  his  duty  to  go  when  he
was  called,  to  go  without  purse  ami
without  scrip,  without  hope  of  earth-
ly reward,  putting  his  trust  in  Go*],
laboring  with  unselfish  zeal  for  the
salvation  of  his  fellowmen,  and  thus
he  labored  until  he  fell  a  victim  to
the  ungodly  hate  of  those  who  knew
him  not,  who  understood  not  the  ob-
jects forwhieh  In*  lal  wed,  and  thepur-
pose  which  animated  his  noble  heart.

Who  shall  mourn  to-day  1  The
LatU-r-ihiy  Saints!  No.  Who  shall
mourn  today?  The  family  and
friends  of  Elder  Joseph  Standing  1

No,  It  would  be  difficult  and  it
would  not  be  right  that  we  should
repress  the  natural  emotions  of  our

hearts,  that  we  should  stifle  those
natural  affections ;  it  is  right  and
proper  that  we  should  shed  sympa-
thetic tears,  allow  the  heart's  affec-
tion to  flow  out  in  this  manner  and
receive  relief  by  the  tears  that  are
shed.  But  there  is  no  cause  for
grief  to-day  in  this  Tabernacle.  A
servant  of  God  who  lias  occupied  a
faithful  position,  who  has  been  tine,
who  has  been  upright,  who  hns  been
blameless,  hns  fallen  a  victim — a
victim  to  that  hate  that  tin*  adver-
sary of  souls  seeks  to  instil  into  the
hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men
who  will  be  led  and  guided  by  him,
and  the  men  who  have  to  mourn  to-
day are  those  who  have  been  guilty
of  this  foul  deed.  The  land  that
ought  to  mourn  is  the  hind  that  has
been  drenched  with  his  blood.  If
the  Governor,  the  Judges,  the  Legis-


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


laturo,  and  the  other  officials  of  t lie
State  of  Georgia  feel  as  they  should
they  will  not  rest  satisfied  until  there
shall  he  atonement  made,  and  the
guilty  wretches  who  took  part  in
this  great  crime  shall  have  been
brought  to  justice.  But  it  will  be  a
most  extraordinary  tiling  if  such
shall  be  the  result  Not  but  what
I  believe  the  Governor  is  an  upright
man,  ami,  so  far  as  I  am  acquainted
with  him,  would  do  everything  in
lis  power  to  punish  these  murderers;
but  there  are  other  influences  at
work  that  are  stronger  than  the  in-
Hueuce  o  the  Governor,  there  are
prejudices  harder  to  conquer  than
anything  else  that  can  be  met  with
and  there  art*  hundreds,  and  prob-
ably t  lion  sands  of  people  who  think
that  in  killing  the  " Mormons"  they
are  doing  God's  service.  Shall  we
hat*1  thnii  fur  this  I  No  ;  they  are
to  be  pitied.  Men  who  indulge  in
such  feelings  carry  with  them  in
their  own  breasts  their  punishment,
and  they  will  experience  a  still  more
severe  punishment  before  they  get
through.

My  brethren  and  listers,  when  we
embraced  this  Gospel,  those  of  you
who  were  old  enough  to  comprehend
it,  doubtless  took  into  consideration
all  the  consequences  that  might  fol-
low ;  chose  who  were  not  old  enough,
or  who  have  been  born  in  theChurch
have  had  experience  enough  upon
these  points  to  see  and  understand
what  the  results  of  the  espousal  of
the  truth  are  likely  to  be.  It  cost
the  Savior  his  life.  It  cost  the
greater  portion  of  his  apostles  their
lives.  It  cost  every  prophet  almost
that  has  lived  his  life  tor  proclaiming
the  truth.  It  has  cost  the  best  blood
of  this  Church  and  this  generation
to  lay  the  foundation  of  this  Church.
We  h  ave  been  mobbed,  we  have  been
driven,  we  have  been  persecuted,  we
have  been  hated,  our  names  have


been  cast  out  as  evil,  there  is  no
crime,  there  is  no  evil  of  which  men
could  be  guilty  that  we  have  not
been  accused  of,  and  we  all  know
how  falsely  and  with  how  littlefoun-
tlatiou  we  have  been  charged  with
these  things.  This  is  part  of  the
results  that  we  have  to  meet  in
espousing  the  truth.  The  man  that
holds  his  life  dear,  that  values  it
more  than  the  truth  is  unworthy  of
the  truth*  If  we  value  house,  if  we
value  lauds,  if  we  value  good  name,
if  we  value  property,  if  we  value  self,
if  we  value  even  life  itself  more  than
we  do  the  truth  we  are  unworthy  of
the  truth.  But  God  has  civen  unto
us  the  truth  ;  it  is  worth  more  than
all  else  beside.  He  lias  1  wealed
himself  to  us.  When  we  pray  to
him  we  know  that  he  hears  us.  When
we  ask  him  for  a  blessing  that  we
need  we  have  the  testimony  from  on
high  that  he  hears  our  prayers,
that  he  is  willing  to  answer  and
grant  unto  us  the  righteous  drsires
of  our  hearta*  These  things
compensate  for  the  loss  of  all  other
advantages;  we  have  this  conso-
lation which  our  persecutors  do  not
have.

The  Prophets  who  have  preceded
us  have  been  slain  generation  after
generation  ;  they  have  passed  away,
The  Savior  and  his  apostles  likewise
passed  away,  the  work,  the  founda-
tion of  which  they  laid,  having  been
overcome  and  destroyed  by  the  ad-
versary from  the  face  of  the  earth.
They  foresaw  that  for  a  long  time
ahead,  apostacy  would  follow  their
labors  and  administrations,  and  a
sorrowful  thing  it  was  for  them  to
contemplate  ;  but  in  our  case  it  is
different.  We  live  on  the  tlireshold
of  anew  era;  the  work  that  God  has
established  in  our  day  shall  never  be
given  to  another  people.  The
priesthood  which  God  has  restored,
the  authority  by  which  men  can  ad-


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS,  ETC.


251


minister  in  the  ordinances  of  God —
that  priesthood  shall  never  be  taken
from  the  earth.  Joseph  Smith,
Hyrum  Smith,  David  Patten  and
other  martyrs  may  fall,  Brother
Joseph  Standing  among  the  rest,
their  blood  may  be  shed,  and  the
blood  of  others  yet  living  may  yet
be  shed  to  confirm  the  testimony
that  has  been  home,  but  though
this  is  the  case,  there  is  this  to
console  ns  who  live,  to  console  us
in  contemplating  the  future  for
ourselves  and  our  posterity  after
us,  and  it  is  that  there  is  no
power  on  earth,  nor  in  hell  that
can  destroy  the  church  that  God
has  established,  nor  obliterate  the
priesthood  from  the  earth  again  as
it  was  obliterated  in  ancient  il-vs.
It  was  necessary  when  this  Church
was  started  that  angels  should
come  to  restore  that  which  was
taken  away,  the  everlasting  priest-
hood, but  there  will  be  no  future
necessity  for  this*  We  are  at  the
threshold  of  a  thousand  years  of
peace,  we  are  engaged  in  laying
the  foundation  of  that  work  which
shall  stand  forever,  not  only  the
the  thousand  years  but  as  long  as
time  shall  last  and  as  long  as  the
earth  itself  shall  endure.  This  is
the  consolation  we  have  that  our
predecessors  did  not  have,  and  we
can  rejoice  in  the  contemplation  of
the  glorious  future  of  this  work.
As  for  Brother  Standing,  no  hero
could  wish  to  die  a  more  glorious
death  than  his.  He  will  be  crowned
among  the  glorious  army  of  mar-
tyrs, as  one  who  was  willing  to
lay  down  his  life  tor  the  truth
without  shrinking,  without  fear,
-without  faltering  when  the  time
came.  He  has  borne  a  noble  and
untiring  testimony  all  the  time  to
the  truth  of  God,  and  there  is  in
store  for  him  a  glorious  crown
along  with  those  who  have  been


alike  faithful  in  this  work.

That  his  companion,  Elder  led-
ger Clawson  is  alive  and  in  our
muLst  to-day,  is  ilnn  to  the  wonder-
ful providence  of  God.  My  belief
has  been  that  had  the  mob  com-
menced their  whippi::;..  th»-y  would
both  have  been  killed.  The  death
of  Brother  Standing  doubtless  saved
Brother  Clawson's  life.

I  pray  God  the  Father  to  comfort
your  hearts,  to  pour  out  the  spirit
of  consolation  and  peace  upon  the
family  and  upon  all  the  friends  of
the  deceased.  I  pray  for  his  ene-
mies and  for  t.ho  -  w  ho  have  shed
his  blood,  1  woul!  not  do  them
any  harm  if  I  could.  There  is  not
in  my  bosom,  nor  should  there  be
in  the  bosoms  of  th<»  Latter-day
Saints  who  have  the  true  spirit  of
the  Gospel  resting  upon  them,  a
feeling  to  revenge.  We  ought  to
be  and  I  think  we  are,  far  uplifted
above  such  feelings*  and  if  we  do
not  have  we  should  have  the  feeling
which  Jesus  had  when  he  was  upon
the  cross  and  led  him  to  say,
11  Father,  forgive  them,  th^v  know
not  what  they  do/  They  had
treated  him  with  the  greatest
ignominy,  treated  him  as  if  he
had  committed  the  greatest  crime,
but  in  his  dying  hour  he  could
implore  the  bhvsing  df  his  Father
upon  them.  And  so  we  may
upon  those  who  seek  to  destroy
this  work.  They  think  they  are
doing  God  service  ;  they  are  actu-
ated by  a  spirit  of  which  they
know  nothing.  They  are  to  be
pitied,  they  "are  to  be,  mourned
over,  and  the  day  will  come  when,
as  we  comprehend  the  sufferings
of  those  who  did  these  deeds,  our
souls  will  swell  with  pity  and
compassion  and  sorrow  for  their
wretched  condition.  I  pray  that
the  Spirit  of  the  Gospel  may
rest down upon all of  us,


252


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  that  the  peace  of  heaven  may
be and  abide  in  all  our  hearts,


which  I  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus,

Amen.


—


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  mornixu,

Aug.  3,  1879.

(Reported  By  Geo.  F.  Gihbc.)

SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  UF  JKSUS — FUNERAL  RITES  OF  JOSEPH

STANDING.


I  wish  to  make  a  very  few  re-
marks on  the  present  occasion  ;  ami
I  desire  that  order  and  quietness
may  prevail.

We  are  met  to-day  on  what  may
he  termed  a  very  sorrow  fill  occasion.
We  Bee  before  us  the  body  ot  a  mur-
dered man,  cut  off  in  tin*  bloom  ami
flower  of  his  youth,  with  brilliant
prospects  before  him  of  a  useful  and
glorious  future.  It  is  sorrowful  to
reflect  that  men  in  a  land  of  liberty,
a  land  that  boasts  of  its  enlightment,
its  religious  liberty  and  its  liberal
institutions,  should  be  guilty  of  era-
bruing  their  hands  in  the  blood  of
an  upright  honorable  man  because
he  dared  to  worship  God  according
to  the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience,
and  to  teach  Ids  fellow  man  the  ways
of  life.  It  is  a  sorrow  ful  reflection
to  feel  that  liberty  is  only  a  name
and  that  protection  and  even  equal


rights,  is  only  a  figment,  an  exploded
theory  ;  and  we  may  say,  how  has
the  glory  of  this  nation  become  sul-
lied !  How  has  the  fine  gold  be-
come dim!  How  have  the  high
and  noble  principles  that  inspired  the
founders  of  this  nation,  in  whose
breasts  burned  the  spirit  of  freedom
been  desecrated,  and  those  glorious
principles  for  which  they  battled
been  trailed  in  the  dust  And  what
a  miserable  showing  we  have  before
us  of  the  efficacy  of  those  sacred
principles  for  which  the  founders  of
those  institutions  battled  and  died.
It  is  sorrowful  to  reflect  upon  it.
And  on  the  other  hand  it  is  a  mat-
ter of  pride  to  Latter-day  Saints  to
see  one  of  our  youth  firm  and  un-
shaken in  the  principles  of  our  holy
religion,  and  ready  to  maintain  them
in  the  midst  of  fanaticism  and  hate
even  unto  death. Pride,  indeed


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS,  ETC.


2a3


mingled  with  sorrow.  Pride  to  see
the  heroism  of  the  dying  martyr,
and  poignant  grief  for  his  loss,  and
more  especially  have  we  met  here  to
sympathise  with  his  parents,  the
family  and  friends,  and  to  mingle  our
tears  with  theirs,  and  to  reflect  that
although  he  died,  he  died  with  the
harness  on  ,  he  died  battling  for  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel ;
he  died  maintaining  those  eternal
truths*  as  they  have  emanated  from
God  our  heavenly  father  ;  and  that
having  died  he  still  lives  and  is
numbered  with  those  who  are  be-
neath the  altar,  crying,  how  long,  0
Lord,  holy,  just  and  true,  wilt  thou
not  avenge  us  of  our  adversaries  1
He  has  gone.  Peace  be  to  his  ashes,
I  would  rather  by  ten  thousand  mil-
lion times  be  lying  where  lie  is  than
be  in  the  position  of  those  who  im-
brued their  hands  in  his  blood,  who,
wherever  they  may  be  cannot  help
seeing  and  feeling  the  horror  of  their
fiendish  act— their  hellish  deed,  and
they  will  go  down  to  the  grave  exe-
crated as  murderers  and  men  who
have  no  friends  or  hope  either  in
time  or  in  eternity.

That  young  man  has  gone  where
others  have  gone  whom  I  have  seen
leave  this  earth  under  circumstances
of  a  very  similar  nature.  I  was  with
Joseph  ami  Hyrum  Smith  when  they
were  killed  ;  and  then,  their  mur-
derers tried  to  dispatch  me  too,  and
came  very  near  doing  so.  They  shot
at  me  and  hit  me  a  number  of  times.
TSut  I  ani  here  yet  ;  I  suppose  my
time  had  not  come.  That  is  all
right,  however.  They  have  gone,
and  this  our  brother  lias  followed,
and  that  is  all  right  too,  so  far  as
he  is  concerned.  His  father  here,  I
have  been  acquainted  with  for  up-
wards of  forty  years  ;  and  his  son,
whose  remains  now  lie  bet  ore  us,
was  born  in  this  City  ;  he  is  one  of
our  boys. He  received,  as  has  been


stated,  the  truths  of  the  everlasting
Gospel  ;  he  believed  them  with  all
his  heart  and  advocated  them,  going
forth  as  a  messenger  of  life  clothed
with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.
But  this  generation  does  not  like
the  truth,  and  indeed  the  generations
have  been  very  few  that  have  not  re-
jected the  truth  when  it  has  been
proclaimed  to  them.  Stephen  said
in  his  day,  "  Which  of  the  prophets
have  not  your  fathers  persecuted  1
and  they  have  slain  them,  which
showed  before  of  the  coming  of  the
just  one  of  whom  ye  have  been  now
t he  betrayers  and  mu iderers."  They
lauded  the  dead  prophets,  but  killed
the  living  ones.

Many  of  the  people  to-day  are
actuated  by  the  same  malignant
feelings,  not  knowing  what  spirit  it
is  that  incites  them  to  fight  against
and  feel  inimical  to  the  prin-
ciples of  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel. And  were  Jesus  here  to-day
appearing  as  he  did  before — meek
and  lowly  as  the  Savior  of  the  world,
preaching  the  same  doctrines,  there
would  be  as  loud  a  cry  by  the  pro-
fessed Christians  throughout  this
land  as  there  was  in  the  land  of  Judea
by  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  :  4 '  Cru-
cify him,  crucify  him  !  let  him
be  crucified,"  and  there  are  many  in
our  midst  to-day  who  would  imbrue
their  hands  in  our  blood,  as  those
murderers  in  Georgia  did  in  the
blood  of  this  young  martyr,  if  they
dared  do  it.

God  has  committed  to  us  the  prin-
ciples of  truth,  and  has  commanded
us  to  proclaim  them  to  the  ends  of
the  earth  ;  and  regardless  of  conse-
quences and  in  the  name  of  Israel's
God  we  will  do  it  and  let  all  Israel
say  Amen,  (The  vast  congregation,
as  with  one  voice,  responded,
"Amen.")  We  are  not  scared  of
bonds,  imprisonment  or  death.  A
few  days ago  they  were  talking


254


JUTKNAL  OF  DiSLUL  KSLS


about  patting  me  in  prison  because
I  chose  to  decline  to  betray  a  trust
committed  in  me  by  this  people,  and
turn  over  to  thorn  certain  properties
enti  usted  to  ray  care.  I  said,  You
may  take  me  to  prison,  gentlemen  ;
I  am  ready,  but  1  sun  not  ready  to
forsake  my  principles,  I  am  not  ready
to  betray  my  people,  I  am  not  going
to  barter  a\v;iy  my  honor  nor  the
things  that  God  has  communicated
to  me  and  that  his  people  have  vested
in  my  hands.  I  can  afford  to  go  to
prison  if  you  can  afford  to  send  me
there  ;  I  can  stand  it  if  you  can.
These  are  my  feelings.

The  same  feeling  exists  in  our
midst  tli at  laid  that  young  man  low;
Men  may  clamor  for  our  property  5
they  may  clamor  fur  our  blood  just
as  much  as  men  have  at  any  other
time:  but  in  the  name  of  Israels  God
Zion  will  go  on  ami  JfOsper;  the
principles  of  truth  will  prevail;  the
things  that  God  has  committed  to  us
We  will  bear  off  triumphantly,  God
being  our  helper,  and  there  is  no
power  in  tin*  land,  nor  in  any  other
land,  nor  on  this  side  of  hell  nor  in
hell  itself  that  can  prevent  it.  If
we  will  cleave  to  God  and  do  our
duty  and  purge  ourselves  from  un-
righteousness and  live  our  religion
and  keep  His  commandments,  Zion
will  arise  and  shine,  and  the  glory
of  God  will  rest  upon  her.  And
when  this  nation  and  oilier  nations
shall  crumble  to  pieces.  Zion  and  the
glory  thereof  will  extend  from  na-
tion to  nation,  and  it  will  continue
to  spread  and  grow  until  the  king-
doms of  this  world  shall  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his  Christ,
and  every  creature  in  heaven  and  on
the  ear  tli  will  be  heard  to  say,  Bles-
sing and  glory  and  honor  and  praise
and  power,  and  might  and  majesty
and  dominion  be  ascribed  to  Him
that  sits  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the
Lamb  for  ever. In  (J  od  is  our  trust.


He  will  sustain  his  Israel.  Our
course  is  onward ;  and  purity,  virtue,
truth,  integrity,  the  laws  of  God  and
equality  to  all  men  is  our  motto,  and
protection  to  every  honest  man  under
all  circumstances.  We  are  friends
of  God  and  the  friends  of  humanity.
Lik^  Brother  Cannon,  I  do  not
mourn  over  the  departed  dead,  Ho
has  gone  to  associate  among  an
honorable  band  who  dared  during
their  life-time  to  do  their  duty,  and
who  battled  valiantly  for  the  cause
of  truth.  Here  is  Brother  Kudger
Clawson,  who  was  with  Brother
Standing  when  lie  was  shot,  The
mob  threatened  his  life  and  leveled
their  guns  to  take  it.  He  calmly
folded  his  arms  and  looking  his  ad-
versaries in  the  face  told  them  to
shoot.  But  they  did  not  do  it.  God
preserved  him,  that's  all.  Here  is
Brother  John  Morgan,  who  has  la-
bored and  traveled  extensively  in
that  region  of  country.  He  and
Brother  Standing  as  one  of  his  co-
laborers  had  preached  the  Gospel
and  succeeded  in  baptizing  a  number
of  people.  This  had  aroused  the
feeling  of  opposition  in  the  hearts
of  some,  and  the  reason  they  were
opposed  to  these  things  was  because
people  believed  the  Gospel,  and  they
did  not  want  them  to.  That's  all.
Did  they  hurt  anybody?  No.  Are
they  honorable  men]  Yes.  Did
either  of  them  interfere  with  the
rights  or  privileges  of  any  one  ?  No*
For  what  then  was  this  young  man
killed  1  Because  he  dared  to  believe
in  God,  and  dared  to  proclaim  that
God  had  revealed  himself  in  these
latter  days  as  he  did  in  former  days.
Because  he  dared  to  tell  the  people
to  repent  of  their  sins  and  be  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  them,  pro-
mising all  that  would  do  so  that
they  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.
What  a  great  crime  for  him  to  die
for  ! That  is  what  I  am  sorry  for.


SLAIN  FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JESUS,  ETC.


255


I  am  sorry  to  see  that  vindictive  and
revengeful  spirit  existing  among
mankind.  We  have  very  different
feelings  from  tins,  as  our  history  from
the  beginning  abundantly  proves.
David,  you  know,  on  a  certain  occa-
sion, feeling  angry  with  the  people
by  whom  he  was  surrounded  because
of  their  wickedness,  prayed  that  God
would  send  them  to  hell  quickly.
Jesus,  while  sutlering  the  agonies  of
death,  exclaimed,  "  Father,  forgive
them,  they  know  not  what  they  do."
How  much  better  the  latter  is  than
the  former.  Let  us  cultivate  that
spirit.  But  while  we  do  that,  do  not
let  your  enemies  think  you  are  asleep;
but  woe  to  those  men  who  light
against  Israel.  In  the  name  of
Israel's  God,  they  shall  be  wasted
away,  and  you  may  write  it  down
and  see  whether  it  comes  to  pass  or
not  And  let  all  Israel  say  Amen.
(Again  the  congregation  responded,
u  Amen/1)  But.  Xion  will  arise  and
shine,  and  the  glory  of  God  will  rest
upon  her.

Brother  Standing  (the  speaker
turned  and  addressed  himself  to  the
father  of  the  deceased,  who  was
seated  uu  the  stand)  it  is  right  you
should  mourn  ;  it  is  right  that  you
and  your  family  and  friends  should
be  sorrowful  and  possess  those  feel-
ings of  sympathy  ;  but  your  sou  has
gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  you  that
where  he  is  you  may  be  also.

What  do  you  propose  to  do]  To
do  good  to  all  men  as  far  as  they
will  let  us  ;  hut  to  prevent  them
from  robbing  us  and  interfering  with
us,  as  God  gives  us  power;  and
maintain  our  rights,  the  rights  of
freemen,  the  rights  that  God  has
com  milted  to  us,  and  honor  our
priesthood  and  calling  and  still  go  to
the  ends  of  the  earth  and  proclaim
the  unsearchable  things  of  the  king-
dom \  gather  together  the  honest  iti
heart  from  among  all  nations,  build


temples  and  administer  in  them,
honor  the  Lord  our  God  and  keep
his  commandments  ;  and  by  and  by,
when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice
of  the  Son  of  God,  and  come  forth,
that  young  man,  with  Joseph  and
Hyruin  Smit  h,  whom  I  saw  butchered
by  a  mob,  while  under  the  protection
of  the  law—under  the  protection
of  the  Governor  of  tin-  State,  who
pledged  his  honor  and  the  faith  of
the  State  to  me  and  to  Dr.  Bernhisel,
that  i f  we  woul d  go  t !  1  ere  w i  1 1 1 o u  t
any  arms,  that  we  should  be  pro-
tected •  and  soon  after  we  had  com-
plied with  his  request,  these  men
were  murdered  in  cold  blood.  These
are  things  I  am  personally  conversant
with.  Well,  what  of  them  I  They
are  gone  to  mingle  with  the  Gods,
so  has  Brother  Joseph  Standing.
Brother  Standing,  (addressing  the
father  of  the  deceased)  do  not  he
troubled,  your  son  is  all  right.  I  am
glad  to  see  the  care  that  has  been
manifested  by  Brothers  Clawson  and
Morgan  in  regard  to  getting  the
body  of  their  fellow-laborer  here
that  we  might  have  an  opportunity
of  paying  the  last  tribute  of  respect
to  this  our  departed  brother,  who
was  faithful  to  the  end,  and  who
will  receive  a  crown  of  light  and
glory  among  the  Gods  in  the  eternal
worlds.

Brethren,  let  us  be  faithful  to
God,  let  us  live  our  religion,  keep
his  commandments,  treat  everybody
well  even  all  men  who  do  right ;
treat  them  well  and  be  kind  and
just  to  them  whether  of  your  faith
or  not ;  but  do  not  allow  those
miserable  miscreants  that  exist  in
our  midst  to  have  dominion  over
you.  We  must  maintain  our  rights
— rights  that  are  guaranteed  unto
us  by  the  constitution  of  ourcountry
and  which  God  has  given  to  us;  and
if  we  do  this  he  will  stand  by  us.
Amen.


256


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED  IN  THE  OGDEN  TABERNACLE,  ON  SUNDAY,  MARCH  2,  1879.

(Exported  by  Geo,  F,  Gibbs.)

THE  INTEREST  OF  HUMANITY  SHOUD  BE  OBSERVED,


I  thought  I  would  come  down  ami
talk  with  you  a  little  this  morning.
I  am  pleased  to  hear  the  remarks
made  by  Brother  Joseph  F.;  they  are
very  well  worthy  of  all  acceptation
by  all  good  men.  We  indeed,  as  he
said,  are  engaged  in  a  great  work
— the  ushering  in  of  the  dispensation
of  the  fulness  of  tunes,  wherein  it
has  been  decreed  thousands  of  years
ago,  that  God  would  "gather  to-
gether in  one  all  things  in  Christ,
both  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which
are  on  earth,  even  in  him."  And
for  this  purpose  he  has  manifested
himself;  for  this  purpose  the  Son  of
God  has  manifested  himself;  for
this  purpose  those  holy  prophets,
referred  to  in  the  revelation  read  to
you  by  Brother  Joseph,  manifested
themselves  ;  for  this  purpose  the
heavens  and  the  intelligences  around
the  throne  of  God  are  united ;  for
this  purpose  the  Holy  Priesthood
that  have  existed  in  the  various  dis-
pensations of  time  are  interested,
and  for  this  purpose  those  who  held
the  keys  of  the  several  dispensations
that  have  passed,  have  brought  those
keys  and  conferred  them  upon  the
Church  of  the  latter-days,  through


the  medium  of  Joseph  Smith.  The
work  that  we  are  engaged  in  is  as*
sociated  with  the  interest  of  all  huma-
nity— all  men  that  have  ever  lived,
those  that  now  live,  and  those  that
will  live,  and  the  salvation  of  the
living  and  the  dead  is  mixed  up  with
these  matters.

We  are  not  here  for  the  purpose
of  looking  after  our  own  individual
affairs  and  interests,  or  to  carry  out
our  own  peculiar  notions  or  feelings
associated  with  any  of  our  interests
or  the  interest  of  any  particular  party
or  clique,  or  anything  of  that  kind.
But  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of
God  lias  been  manifested  in  the  in-
terests of  God,  in  the  interests  of
the  heavens,  and  in  the  interest  of
all  humanity;  embracing  all  people
and  extending  to  all  nations  and
tongues.  The  Lord  has  gathered
us  together  for  the  express  purpose
of  forming  a  nucleus,  an  organism,  a
people  to  whom  lie  could  communi-
cate and  reveal  his  will,  and  to  whom
he  could  make  known  his  designs,

,  and  among  whom  he  could  establish
the  principles  of  eternal  truth  and
the  light,  intelligence,  rule  and  law

1  of  God,  as  they  exist  in  the  eternal


THE  INTEREST  OF  HUMANITY,  ETC


worlds.  This  is  why  we  are  gathered
here  to-day,  if  we  can  comprehend
it.

Jesus,  when  here  upon  the  earth,
had  a  people  and  called  them  his
sheep.  Said  he,  "  My  sheep  hear
my  voice  and  they  know  me  and
they  follow  me,  and  a  stranger  will
they  not  follow,  for  they  know  not
the  voice  of  a  stranger/'  And  again
he  says  while  supplicating  the  Father,
u  I  pray  for  them :  I  pray  not  for
the  world,  but  for  them  winch  thou
hast  given  me  ;  for  they  are  thine.
Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but
for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on
me  through  their  word  ;  that  they
all  may  be  one,  as  thou,  Father,  art
in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also
may  be  one  in  us:  that  the  world
may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me,"
that  they  may  have  evidence  of  a
union  that  exists  nowhere  else  in  the
world  of  the  love  and  affection  of
those  godly  principles  that  cement
and  bind  men  together,  which  no-
thing but  the  power  and  spirit  of
revelation  can  do  ;  that  they  may
have  evidence  of  something  more
exalting,  more  ennobling,  and  which
will  unite  and  associate  men  together
in  indissoluble  bonds  of  eternal  truth
according  to  the  laws  of  God  ;  that
there  may  be  evidence  in  existence
in  the  world  that  thou  hast  sent  me,
and  that  the  principles  that  thou  hast
given  me  have  been  revealed  to  them
and  that  they  are  to  be  governed
by  them  :  "  thine  they  were,  and
thou  hast  given  them  me/'

That  was  the  feeling  thai  existed
informer  times  among  the" Saints  of
God,  and  these  were  some  of  the
teachings  unto  them.  The  sheep
have  been  scattered  abroad  among
the  nations  of  the  earth  to  whom
this  communication  has  been  sent,
and  thousands  have  heard  and
obeyed  the  voice  of  the  good  Shep-
herd and  have  gathered  themselves

No,  17.


together,  as  we  are  here  and  as  they
are  over  this  Territory,  according  to
the  impulses  originating  from  the
Spirit  of  God,  which  has  operated
and  worked  upon  our  minds  and
brought  us  together  as  we  are  here
to-day.

Now  then,  what  was  this  for  ?  To
preach  first  the  Gospel  of  repentance
and  baptism  for  tin*  remission  of  sins,
and  the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be
followed  by  the  gathering  together,
etc.  And  what  was  it  for  ?  That
we  all  might  be  baptized  into  one
baptism,  that  we  all  might  partake
of  the  same  spirit,  that  we  all  might
be  brought  into  communication
with  the  Almighty  and  derive  wis-
dom and  intelligence  from  the  same
fountain,  having  "One  Lord,  one
faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and
Father  of  all,  through  all,  and  in  you
all/'  When  Jesus  sent  forth  his
servants  formerly  he  sent  them  to
preach  this  Gospel.  When  the
Father  and  the  Son  and  Moroni  and
others  came  to  Joseph  Smith,  he
had  a  priesthood  conferred  upon
him  which  he  conferred  upon  others
for  the  purpose  of  manifesting  the
laws  of  life,  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  by  direct  authority,  that
light  and  truth  might  be  spread  forth
among  all  nations.  There  was  a
number  of  men  selected  by  the  Sa-
vior anciently,  to  whom  he  said:
"  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I
have  chosen  you  and  ordained  you/'
What  to  do  ?  To  do  the  things  you
have  seen  me  do,  as  I  have  come  to
do  what  I  have  seen  my  Father  do.
The  words  which  I  speak,  I  speak
not  of  myself;  but  the  Father  who
dwells  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works.
|  Now  then,  we  have  got  a  priest-
hood organized  here  upon  the  earth,
as  there  was  one  organized  in  the
days  of  Jesus,  only  with  this  distinc-
tive difference, —that  that  was  a

Vol.  XX.


25S  JOURNAL  OF

dispensation  of  God  to  them ;  this
we  live  in  is  the  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times,  embracing  all  other
dispensations  and  times  and  powers
and  authorities  that  have  existed
upon  the  fare  of  the  earth,  in  the
various  ages,  from  the  commence-
ment to  the  present  time.  Herein
it  differs  from  others.  Hence  we
are  requested  to  gather  together,
something  which  they  were  not  com-
manded to  do.  We  are  told  to
build  Temples  :  they  were  not  We
are  told  to  administer  for  the  living
ami  the  dead,  which  ordinances  were
only  performed  then  to  a  very  li-
mited extent.  We  are  called  upon
to  build  up  not  only  the  Church,
but  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  in-
troduce the  rule  and  government  of
God  upon  the  earth.  We  are  here
just  as  Jesus  was,  not  to  do  our  own
will,  not  for  the  purpose  of  carry-
ing out  our  own  ideas  or  theories,
but  to  do  the  will  of  God  who  sent
us.  That  is  the  way  Jesus  preached  :
"For  I  came  down  from  heaven,
not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the
will  of  him  that  sent  me. Some-
times it  was  trying  and  perplexing,
sometimes  it  was  hard  to  endure;
but  he  did  endure  and  suffer  it,
and  he  accomplished  the  work  he
was  sent  to  do.  But  sometimes
when  struggling  with  the  powers
of  darkness,  and  environed  with
the  corrupt  and  ungodly,  he  gazed
upon  and  comprehended  the  gravity
of  the  situation  and  things  before
him,  it  so  operated  upon  him,  that
in  mortal  agony  he  sweat  great
drops  of  blood.  "For  it  became
him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and
by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing
many  sons  unto  glory,  to  make  the
Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect
through  sufferings,"  "For  we  have
not  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our
infirmities  ;  but  one  who  was  in


DISCOURSES.

all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,
yet  without  sin.*'  He  endured
everything  possible  for  mortal  to
endure  on  the  earth.  Finally,  when
the  last  struggle  came,  said  he,
"  Fat  her,"  if  thou  art  willing,  "  if  it
be  possible,  remove  this  cup  from  me:
nevertheless,  not  my  will,  but  thine,
be  done.11  What  were  his  feelings
in  the  midst  of  all  this  sorrow  1  Did
lie  give  railing  for  railing,  contumely
for  contumely  1  No,  he  did  not.
David,  you  know,  prayed  that  Goti
would  send  his  enemies  to  hell
quickly.  He  was  quite  in  a  hurry
about  it,  as  we  are  sometimes.
Jesus  said,  "Father,  forgive  them,
for  they  know  not  what  they  do
they  are  ignorant,  they  are  foolish,
and  blinded  through  superstition  ;
they  comprehend  not  thy  laws,
they  know  nothing  of  my  mission-
Father,  forgive  them.  I  admire  the
sentiments  and  feelings  of  the  Savior
under  such  circumstances,  very  much
more  than  those  of  David.

As  I  understand  it  Ave  are  called
upon  to  be  saviors.  And  as  saviors
of  men,  endowed  with  the  holy
priesthood,  we  should,  with  one  feel-
ing and  spirit,  operate  together  in
the  interests  of  Zion  ;  we  ought  to
humble  ourselves  before  God  and
seek  for  His  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  us  in
the  right  path,  that  all  may  compre-
hend His  law,  and  that  we  may
operate  together  in  the  interests  of
Israel,  and  in  the  building  up  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth  ;
and  every  other  feeling  and  idea
ought  to  be  esteemed  subservient  to
that,  and  that  ought  to  be  the  first,
leading,  guiding,  and  controling  sen-
timent of  all  the  elders  of  Israel,
and  especially  of  those  who  take  the
lead  in  Israel.

We  get  tried  sometimes,  and  we
sometimes  try  one  another  ;  and  we
sometimes  feel  as  David  did  on  a
certain  occasion,  when  he  exclaimed:


THE  INTEREST  OF  HUMANITY,  ETC


239


"For  it  was  not  an  enemy  that  re-
proud  it'll  me  ;  then  I  could  have
borne  it  ;  neither  was  it  ho  that
hated  me  that  did  magnify  himself
against  me ;  then  I  could  have  hid
myself  from  him.  But  it  was  tbou,
a  man  mine  equal,  my  guide,  and
my  acquaintance,"

Did  you  ever  know  it  is  necessary
that  we  should  he  tried  in  all
things?  If  you  do  not  you  will
find  it  out  before  you  get  through,
and  we  are  not  through  yet  quite.
In  this  connection,  I  am  reminded
of  what  I  heard  the  Prophet  Joseph
say,  speaking  more  particularly  with
reference  to  the  Twelve,  "The  Lord
will  feel  after  ymir  heart-string,
and  will  wrench  them  and  twist
them  around,  and  you  will  have  to
learn  to  rely  upon  God  and  upon
God  alone."  Has  he  done  it?  I
think  h*  has  pretty  thoroughly.  The
Prupliet  himself  was  tried  about  as
much  as  anybody  I  know  of,  and  his
Brother  Hyrum  had  his  full  share,
the  Twelve  also  have  been  tried  as
much  as  any  men  that  I  know  of.
and  a  great  deal  more  than  you
know  anything  about.  He  further-
more said,  "If  God  could  in  any
other  way  more  keenly  have  trunl
Abraham  than  by  calling  upon  him
to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac,  he  would
have  done  it,"  And  as  I  have  said,
Jesus  himself  sweat  great  drops  of
blood,  and  in  the  agony  ©f  his  suf-
fering cried  out,  '1  My  God,  my
God,  why  hast  than  forsaken  me  f
Arid  w  hy  is  it  thus  J  We  are  told
by  one  of  old,  6i  For  it  became  him,
for  whom  all  things,  and  by  whom
all  things,  in  bringing  many  things
unto  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of
their  salvation  perfect  through  suf-
ferings." **  For  we  have  not  an
High  Priest  which  cannot  be  touch-
ed with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;
but  was  in  all  points  tempted  like
<as  we  are,  yet  without  sin,"  Oh,


what  a  happy  thing  it  would  be  if
we  could  follow  in  his  footsteps  in
that  particular  !  But  we  have  our
weaknesses  and  infirmities  in  com-
mon with  all  men.  It  is  incident
to  humanity,  and  the  devourer  is  at
work  seeking  to  destroy,  to  conta-
minate, to  corrupt  and  defile,  and
to  lead  men  clown  to  perdition,  to
produce  discord  and  envy,  hatred
and  strife,  and  every  evil  that  pro-
ceeds from  that  source.  Shall  I  tell
you  its  fruits  ?  Envy  is  one ;  hatred
is  (mother ;  malice  is  another ;  un-
charitableness  is  another;  evil  speak-
ing is  another  ;  and  so  on  —  all
these  things  proceed  from  an  evil
spirit ;  and  it  is  said,  "  That  to
whom  ye  yield  yourselves  servants
to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom
ye  obey  ;  whether  of  sin  unto  death,
or  ohedience  unto  righteousness/'
Men  sometimes  falter?  Yes,  some-
times they  think  they  are  strong  ;
but  no  man  is  strong  unless  he  be
strong  in  the  Lord.  No  man  is
sustained  only  as  God  sustains  him;
and  if  he  do  not  sustain  him,  I
would  not  give  much  for  Iris;  ideas
or  position.  We  sometimes  think
we  are  strong  and  that  we  can  do  a
great  deal  So  thought  Peter  on  a
certain  occasion — at  the  time  when
Christ  said  to  his  disciples,  "  All  ye
shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this
night/'  But  Peter  answered  him,
saying,  "Though  all  men  shall  be
offended  because  of  thee,  yet  will  I
never  be  offended/'  The  Savior
doubtless  appreciated  his  feelings,
but  knowing  better  than  he  the
frailty  of  humanity,  he  said  unto
him,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  that
this  night,  before  the  cock  crow,
thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice.71  Did  he
do  it?  Yes  he  did  ;  but  Jesus  did
not  get  angry  with  him,  nor  begin
to  upbraid  him  and  speak  angry
words  to  him.  He  knew  too  well
the  weakness  of  mortal  man,  and  he


260  JOURNAL  OF

knew  it  before  that  time. But  he
says,  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest
thou  me  more  than  these?  He  saith
unto  him,  Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest
that  I  love  thee." If  you  love  me,
if  you  are  my  friend  and  my  disci-
ple, "  Feed  my  Lambs." That  was
not  very  hard  to  do ;  he  had  been
called  for  that  purpose. "  He  saith
to  him  again  the  second  t  ime,  Simon,
son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me  ?  He
saith  unto  him, Yea,  Lord,  thou
knowest  that  I  love  thee. He  said
unto  him,  Feed  my  Sheep/'  And
the  third  time  the  Savior  put  the
same  question  to  Peter,  and  which
on  being  answered  as  before,  he
said  to  him,  11  Feed  my  Sheep."
What  is  the  duty  <>f  thr  Apostles,
the  Presidents  of  Stakes,  the  High
Priests,  and  Seventies,  especially  of
those  that  are  generally  presiding  %
If  Jesus  was  here,  he  would  tell  you
to  lay  aside  your  nonsense,  your
follies  and weaknesses, and  act
more  like  men  and  Saints,  and  go
to  work  and  "  Feed  my  Sheep."
Said  he,  "If  I  be  lifted  up,  I  will
draw  all  men  to  me,"  not  that  I  will
rule  with  an  iron-hand,  not  that  I
will  trample  upon  them,  not  that  I
will  let  you  see  that  I  possess  power
and  authority  ;  but  "  I  will  draw  all
men  to  me." That  will  not  be  ac-
complished until  the  time  spoken  of
when  every  knee  shall  bow,  and
every  tongue  shall  be  heard  to  say,
"  Glory,  honor,  majesty  and  power,
be  unto  him  that  sits  upon  the
throne  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  ;"
but  it  will  be  done  through  the  in-
fluence of  the  Gospel,  through  its
cementing  and  harmonizing  influen-
ces, through  the  aid  of  the  Almighty
and  the  operations  of  t  he  holy  priest-
hood combined  together,  united  as
the  heart  of  one  man  in  the  accom-
plishment of  the  purposes  of  God ;
with  kindness  and  brother!  v  affec-
tions,  with  long  suffering  and  with


DISCOURSES.

every  principle  of  righteousness  that
is  calculated  to  draw  the  feeling*
and  affections  of  men,  that  they
i  may  see  the  truth  and  know  it  for
themselves,  and  that  they  may
know  also  that  we  are  their  friends,
acting  for  the  welfare  of  all  men,
living  and  dead,  and  in  the  interest
of  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.  And  where  this
principle  does  not  exist,  there  is
something  wrong,  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  are  not  lived  up  to.
For  God  is  love,  and  they  that
dwell  in  God,  dwell  in  love  ;  and
"If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and
hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar,"  so
said  the  word  or  God  formerly,  and
it  says  to-day.  God  is  love,  and
they  that  dwell  in  God,  dwell  in
love.  They  are  surrounded  by  that
element,  it  is  the  fountain  of  life
within  them.  Jesus  said  to  the
woman  of  Samaria,  whom  he  asked
to  give  him  drink,  "  Whosoever
drin keth  of  this  water  shall  thirst
again  ;  but  whosoever  drinketh  of
the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall
never  thirst ;  but  the  water  I  shall
give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of
water  springing  up  unto  everlasting
life."  If  we  will  live  so  as  to  b#
entitled  to  drink  of  the  well  streams
that  flow  from  the  fountain  of  all
light,  all  these  little,  narrow,  con-
tracted, by-gone  influences,  will  van-
ish like  the  dew  before  the  rising
sun,  and  the  light,  the  Spirit  and
revelations  of  God,  will  rest  upon
the  priesthood,  and  Israel  will  be
one  and  his  priesthood  one,  and  thej
will  fight  side  by  side  in  the  defence
of  truth,  and  in  the  maintenance  of
those  principles  calculated  to  exalt
men  through  all  time  and  all  eter-
nity.

These  things  referred  to  by  Bro-
ther Joseph  F.  are  too  small  for  men
to  have  anything  to  do  with.  It
might  be  excusable  in  babies,  but


THE  INTEREST  Or  HUMANITY,  ETC,


2G1


for  men  to  bo  engaged  in  such  things
is  a  shame  upon  the  priesthood,  and
an  outrage  upon  the  holy  principles
that  God  lias  been  pleased  to  reveal
to  us.  That  is  the  way  I  look  at
these  tilings.  And  it  is  a  trick  of
the  devil  to  decoy  and  destroy,  to
divide  and  disrupt,  and  to  lead  men
down  to  perdition.  What  would  be
the  result  if  these  things  are  carried
out  a  little  further?  The  whole  head
would  be  sick  and  the  whole  heart
faint.  I  say,  shame  on  the  Elders
-of  Israel  !  shame  on  men  holding  the
holy  priesthood  that  cannot  be
united  and  operate  together  in  the
interest  of  the  Church  and  the  King-
dom of  God,  but  must  drag  in  their
mean,  low,  contemptible  ideas  and
notions,  forgetting  the  high  calling
with  which  they  are  called.

What  shall  we  do  ?  Why,  lay
them  aside  and  repent  of  your  fool-
ishness, and  forgive  one  another  of
your  hard  speeches  and  words,  and
your  rash  and  hard  treatment  made
use  of  to  produce  stings,  trouble  and
Annoyance  among  men  ;  and  study
fmm  this  time  henceforth  one  an-
other's feelings,  and  act  the  part  of
a  brother  and  friend  one  towards  an-
other, live  your  religion  and  keep
t  he  command  me  u  t  s  of  G  o  d .  1 1  o  w
did  Jesus  teach  his  disciples  to  pray?
When  you  pray,  say,  "  Our  Father

-which  art  in  heaven."  Whatl  I
must  tell  a  little  story  here.  There
was  a  poor  man  once  called  upon  a
minister  for  assistance  ;  the  minister
tried  to  cheat  him,  and  would
not  give  him  what  he  had  agreed
ti>  for  some  labor  performed  by  him;
the  man  was  not  very  well  suited
About  it  The  minister,  it  would
seem,  was  one  of  those  fellows  who,
if  he  could  squeeze  a  little  out  of  the
poor  man,  was  quite  willing  to  do  it.
di  Well,"  said  the  man,  *'  I  will  take
what  you  offer  me,  although  it  is
jnot  what  you  agreed  to  give  me,


providing  you  will  teach  me  the
Lord's  prayer." To  this  the  min-
ister agreed  and  said,  a  Repeat  after
me  and  say,  '  Our  Father  which  art
in  heaven — '  " "  What !  "  says  the
man,  "  is  God  your  Father  and  my
Father,  too  1" You  must  repeat
what  I  say,"  said  the  minister,  "Our
Father," etc. "  What,"  said  the
man,  u  my  father  and  your  Father?'
"  Yes,  yes." "  Then,"  broke  in  the
man  again,  "is he  indeed  my  Father
as  well  as  your  Father!"  "Yes,"
replied  the  mil  lister,  but  yuu  must
repeat  my  words." "  Well,  what  a
rascal  you  must  be  to  try  to  cheat
your  poor  brother  in  this  way  V  We
should  all  feel  that  God  is  our
Father,  and  that  we  are  all  brethren
and  sisters. T  lie  re  are  none  of  us
very  big ;  in  fact  we  are  all  very
little  when  you  come  to  know  all
about  us. None  of  us  can  do  any-
thing except  the  Lord  helps  us,  and
if  he  does  not  help  us,  we,  as  a  cer-
tain lady  said,  are  "all  poor,  miser-
aide,  independent  sinners."  There
is  none  of  the  "  big  I  and  little  you"
amongst  us. We  should  have  a
common  sympathy  one  for  another,
and  feel  a  kindly  regard  for  the
lowest  of  God's  creations,  and  espe-
cially for  the  Saints  of  God,  no  mat-
ter what  position  they  occupy.  If
any  are  in error,  try  to  reclaim
them  by  kindness; if  they  have  a
a  bad  spirit,  show  them  a  better
one ;  if  any  do  not  do  right,  do  right
yourselves  and  say,  "Come  follow  me,
as  I  follow  Christ."  Would  not  that
be  the  right  course  to  pursue  1  I
think  it  would;  that  is  the  way  I  un-
derstand the  Gospel  We  do  not,  any
of  us,  have  the  priesthood  for  self  ag-
grandizement, or  to  be  used  to  opp  ress,
or  take  advantage  of  anybody,  or  to
use  improper  language ; but  with
all  kindness  and  long  suffering  and
forbearance  and  with  love  unfeigned.
I  will  read  from  the  Doctrine  and


2C2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Covenants  something  bearing  on
this,  from  page  386.

"  Behold,  there  are  many  called,
but  few  are  chosen.  And  why  are
they  not  chosen  ?  Because  their
hearts  are  set  so  much  upon  the
things  of  this  world,  and  aspire  to
the  honors  of  men,  and  they  do
not  learn  this  one  lesson — "  just
the  very  thing  I  have  been  talking
about — "That  the  rights  of  the
priesthood  are  inseparably  connect-
ed with  the  powers  of  heaven,  and
that  the  powers  of  heaven  cannot
be  controlled  nor  handled  only
upon  the  principles  of  righteous-
ness," Do  you  think  that  God  will
give  power  to  any  man  only  to
carry  out  his  own  contracted  or
selfish  purposes?  I  tell  you  lie
never  will,  never,  no  never-  "That
they  may  be  conferred  on  us  it  is
true  ;  but  when  we  undertake  to
cover  our  sins,  or  to  gratify  our
pride,  our  vain  ambition,  or  to  ex*
ercise  control,  or  dominion  or  com-
pulsion, upon  the  souls  of  the 'child-
ren of  men,  in  any  degree  (of  unrighte-
ousness, behold  the  heavens  with-
draw themselves,  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  is  grieved ;  and  when  it  is
withdrawn,  Amen  to  the  priesfh'.wt  ttf
tJmt  manJ1

We  think  sometimes,  we  are  stand-
ing in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus;
and  so  we  are.  But  there  is  no  priest-
hood of  the  Son  of  God  t  hat  author
izes  one  man  to  oppress  another  or  to
intrude  upon  his  rights  in  any  way*
There  is  no  such  thing  in  the  ca
tagory  ;  it  does  not  exist ;  as  it  is
said — "  Behold  !  ere  he  is  aware,  he
is  left  unto  himself,  to  kick  against
the  pricks  ;  to  persecute  the  Saints,
and  to  fight  against  God."  We
have  learned  by  sad  experience  that
it  is  the  nature  and  disposition  of
almost  all  men,  as  soon  as  they  get
a  little  authority,  as  they  suppose,
they  will  immediately  begin  to


exercise  unrighteous  dominion-
!  Hence  many  are  called,  but  few  are
chosen.  Xo  person  or  influence  can
or  ought  to  be  maintained  by  vir-
tue of  the  priesthood,  only  by  per-
suasion, by  long  suffering,  by  gentle-
ness, and  meekness,  and  by  love  un-
feigned, by  kindness,  and  pure  know-
ledge, which  shall  greatly  enlarge
the  soul  without  hypocrisy, and  with-
out guile,  reproving  by  times  with
sharpness,  when  mover!  upon  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  then  showing  forth
afterwards  an  increase  of  love  to-
ward him  whom  thou  hast  reproved,
lest  he  esteem  t  hee  to  be  his  enemy  ;

that  he  may  know  that  thy  faith-
fulness is  stronger  than  the  cords  of
death.  Let  thy  bowels  also  be  full
of  charity  towards  all  men,"  not  of
envy,  not  of  hate,  not  of  fault-finding,
but  "  be  full  of  charity  towards  all
men  and  to  the  household  of  faith  ;
and  let  virtue  garnish  thy  thoughts
unceasingly,  then  shall  thy  confidence
wax  strong  in  the  presence  of  God,
and  the  doctrine  of  the  priesthood
shall  distill  upon  thy  soul  as  the
dews  from  heaven."  Then  shall  you
feel  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost
resting  upon  you  and  its  influence
penetrating  your  soul,  and  then  it
will  grow  and  spread  until  its  influ-
ence extends  everywhere;  and  then
will  men  respect,  esteem,  and  vene-
rate you  for  your  fidelity  and  f<  >r  your
adherence  to  the  truth.  "  The  Holy
Ghost  shall  be  thy  constant  com-
panion, and  thy  scepter  an  un-
changing scepter  of  righteousness
and  truth,  and  thy  dominion  shall
be  an  everlasting  dominion,  and
without  compulsory  means  it  shall
flow  unto  thee  forever  and  ever."

Tli est'  are  great  truths  for  us  to
reflect  upon.  And  in  connection
with  this  I  wish  to  say,  we  not  only
need  to  have  confidence  in  men,  but
we  must  exhibit  that  confidence.
"Be  kindly  affectionate  one  to  an-


other  with  brotherly  love ;  in  honor
preferring  one  another/'  not  pre-
ferring ourselves,  but  "  in  honor  pre-
ferring one  another/'  This  may  be  a
hard  lesson  for  some  to  learn,  but  we
have  got  it  to  learn,  or  we  never
shall  be  fitted  to  hold  any  import-
ant position  in  carrying  out  the  de-
signs of  God,  in  building  up
His  Church  and  Kingdom  on  the
earth.  We  want  to  feel  a  free  in-
terchange of  that  union  out*  with
another,  not  for  one  man  to  stand
up  among  his  fellows  as  though  he
were  unapproachable,  and  say  to
others  -Stand  oil",  I  am  holier  than
thou,"  Nothing  of  this  kind  ;  but
entert  iin  a  kindnrss,  a  sympathy
and  a  desire  to  promote  the  happi-
ness and  welfare  of  all  men,  just  as
God  does.  He  causes  his  sun  to
rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,
and  he  sends  his  rain  on  the  just
and  on  the  unjust.

There  is  something  I  thought  I
would  refer  to  in  order  that  it  niii/ht
be  known  and  properly  understood.
There  is  a  feeling  generally  enter-
tained  that  President  Young,  in  his
lifetime,  got  possession  of  a  certain
square  fcnv  in  Ogdrm  wrongfully.
Certain  things  are  continually  be-
ing originated  by  certain  minds,
and  rumors  get  circulated,  and  it  is
too  often  the  case  that  people  do
not  stop  to  consider  as  to  their  truth-
fulness and  in  many  instances  con-
clusions are  formed,  and  I  would
venture  to  say  that  in  nine  cases  out
of  every  ten  such  conclusions  aw
wrong*  Brother  Lor  in  Farr  is  pre-
sent: he  was  Mayor  at  the  time  this
land  in  question  was  transferred  to
President  Young,  and  is  conversant
with  the  whole  transaction,  I  will
therefore  call  upon  Brother  Farr  to
come  forward  and  relate  the  same
fully,  yet  concisely,  that  you  may  be
apprized  of  the  facts.


Elder  Lorin  Farr  then  made  the
following  statement :

President  Young  spoke  to  me,  as
Mayor,  either  one*  or  twice — I  think
it  was  twice — wishing  16  know  if
Ogden  City  would  let  him  have  the
"  Union  Square  "  for  the  purpose  of
making  a  Utah  Central  Railroad
Passenger  Depot,  saying  that  if  he
could  obtain  it  for  this  purpose  he
would  also  make  of  it  an  ornamental
square,  suitable  for  a  summer  resort;
which  I  believe  he  fully  contemplated
doing,  and  would  have  done,  ur  have
made  the  necessary  provisions  for  it
to  be  done,  had  he  known  he  was
so  soon  to  leave  us.  I  have  no  doubt
i  in  my  mind  but  what  he  intended
'  to  make  a  very  nice  public  report  of
I  it,  and  believiiu  so/  I  laid  the  mat-
I  ter  before  the  City  Council,  inform-
ing that  body  that  President  Young
hail  a  claim  on  this  city  which  arose
in  this  way  :  when  he  located  Ogden
City,  between  the  forks  of  the  two
rivers,  there  was  then  a  very  desir-
able farm  hriv  which  was  owned  by
F;  1 1  Ik* r  I  !i  iiftl  i  am,  con t  ai  n  i  n  <r  1 60
anvs  m<»re  or  less.  The  President
intimated  to  Father  Bingham  his
design  of  locating  a  city  hereabouts,
and  that  he  knew  of  no  situation  so
good  and  suitable  as  that  com-
manded by  his  farm  and  proposed  to
purchase  his  farm  for  that  purpose-
Father  Bingham  consented  to  the
proposition,  the  purchase  was  affected,
President  Young  paying  for  the  land
out  of  his  own  pocket,  and  turned  it
over  to  the  city*  I  supposed,  as
one  of  the  members  of  the  City
Council,  that  that  pinv  of  land  be-
longed to  the  city  and  belonged  to
the  Church,  as  President  Young  be-
longed to  th«-  Church.  I  thought
so,  and  we  all  thought  so,  and  there
was  no  thought  given  to  it.  It
passed  along  for  about  twenty  years
in  that  way.  It  is  true,  I  sent  down
to  President  Young  at  one  time  the


2G4  JOURNAL  OF

sum  of  sixty  dollars  of  City  money
to  apply  on  the  interest  then  due  on
the  money  he  advanced  for  the  pur-
chase of  the  land,— the  money  we
sent  to  him  was  the  proceeds  of  City
lots  which  we  sold  at  five  dollars
each,  which  about  paid  the  expense
of  surveying  and  recording,  leaving
a  small  part  of  pay  for  President
You  ng.  It  was  u uderstood  tl \ at  1 1 e
was  to  have  his  pay  sometime.  I
think  I  sent  down  a  small  amount  of
money  another  time,  but  the  amount
I  do  not  now  remember.  I  laid  this
matter  before  the  City  Council,  stat
ing  to  that  body  how  President
Young  looked  at  it,  and  I  told  them
I  thought  it  quite  right  and  proper
that  President  Youn<r  should  haw
liis  pay,  but  that  1  disliked  very
much  to  give  up  the  square;  but,  I
said,  seeing  that  President  Younst
intended  to  make  of  it  an  ornamen-
tal square,  I  would  consent ;  without
the  other  consideration  I  was  in
favor  of  sending  a  committee  to  wait
on  President  Young  to  ascertain
how  much  he  paid  fur  the  land  pre-
viously owned  by  Father  Bingham,
and  refund  him  the  money  with  ten
per  cent  interest.  I  requested  the
Council  to  appoint  such  a  committee;
but  some  differed  from  me,  while  a
few,  I  believe,  favored  my  suggestion.
We  agreed,  however,  seeing  that
President  Young  had  advanced  the
means  to  buy  the  location  of  our
city,  and  actually  purchased  and
possessed  it,  which  probably  no  other
man  but  he  could  liave  done,  and
that  he  had  requested  the  City  to
deed  him  the  square  in  payment  of
his  claim,  and  that  he  had  proposed
to  beautify  it  for  t lie  benefit  of  the
public,  we  concluded  to  deed  him
the  square  ;  and  when  the  time  of
filing  the  land  came,  which  was
shortly  afterwards,  President  Young
filed  upon  the  square  and  got  his
deed  for  it.


DISCOURSES,

I  will  here  take  occasion  to  remark
that  when  I  gave  this  explanation  at
our  Caucus  meeting  lately  held  in
Ogden,  that  a  gentleman,  an  editor
from  the  East,  afterwards  spoke  to
me  about  it,  and  in  telling  you  what
he  thought  about  the  matter  will  il-
lustrate my  feelings  in  regard  to  it
He  said — that  is  before  this  land
jumping— I  think  that  you  did  no-
thing more  than  right,  I  think  Pre-
sident Young  has  done  enough  for
tit;-  people,  and  he  ruddy  deserved
that  square,  and  you  would  not
have  exceeded  fairness  to  have  given
him  more  than  that  ten  acres  for  the
1  (>0  acres  which  you  say  he  purchased
and  turned  over  to  the(  city  for  city
purposes*

President  Taylor  then  resumed,
the  stand.  Some  people  will  say
"  Oli,  don't  talk  about  it,"  I  think
a  full,  free  talk  is  frequently  of  great
use;  we  want  nothing  secret  nor
underhanded,  and  for  one  I  want  no
!  association  with  things  that  cannot
be  talked  about  and  will  not  bear
;  investigation*  I  wanted  to  hear
Brother  Farrs  statement  about  this
affair,  and  I  wanted  you  to  hear  it,
because  out  of  such  things,  unless
properly  understood,  a  great  many
misunderstandings  arise.  I  have
heard  it  stated  that  President  Young
had  exacted  too  much  in  getting
possession  of  this  ten  acre  square  ;  I
wonder  now  if  any  of  you  speculat-
ing men  had  owned  this  1 60  acres
of  land  in  this  locality  if  you  would
have  been  satisfied  to  take  ten  acres
of  this  swampy  land  for  it?  There
is  no  decent  man  any  when1  that
would  object  to  anything  of  that
kind,  neither  Jew,  Gentile,  or  Mor-
mon, and  such  unpleasantness  fre-
quently arises  from  a  miscomprehen-
sion of  affairs.  Had  President  Young,
because  he  was  President  of  the
Church,  no  right  to  have  pay  for
that  which  belonged  to  him  1  And


THE  INTEREST  OF  HUMANITY,  ETC.


265


if  he  furnished  160  acres  of  land
and  got  sixty  dollars  for  it,  I  think
nobody  was  injured  very  seriously
in  giving  him  ten  acres  in  lieu  of  it.
Some  of  you  would  have  thought
your  toes  were  trodden  on  pretty
heavily  had  you  been  required  to
trade  on  any  such  terms.  I  heard  a
man  say  not  long  ago,  when  some-
thing perplexing  occurred,  he  did
not  know  what  excuse  to  make
about  it.  I  said  to  him,  a  right  needs
no  excuse,  and  an  excuse  will  not
make  a  wrong  right  We  want  facts,
and  when  we  grt  them  let  us  ap-
preciate them,  and  lay  aside  our
nonsense  which  so  frequently  arises
from  our  misconception  of  tilings.

There  is  another  thing  I  wish  to
refer  to  pertaining  to  your  local  of-
ficers* I  have  heard  it  said  that  the
City  Council  was  in  trouble  about
the  land  on  which  the  Tabernacle
stands,  because  it  was  thought  the
Church  would  get  the  benefit  of  it
Why  1  Because  they  have  occupied
it  so  long.  Who  fori  For  the
Church  generally  ?  No  ;  but  for
the  local  cluireh  in  this  place.  The
Church,  as  a  ChnHi,  has  bought  a
part  of  that  square  above  referred  to,
and  has  paid  the  estate  for  it  Bro-
ther Joseph  F.Smith  and  Brother
R  Richards  here  are  cognizant  of
the  fact,  as  auditors.  I  refer  to  the
land  where  our  Tithing  Office  stands;
but  tins  other  matter  is  something
that  pertains  to  yourselves  and  not
to  the  Church.  You  have  had  this
for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  (Bro-
ther Joseph  FM  addressing  himself
to  President  Taylor,  said:  "This
place  was  designated  by  President
Young,  when  the  city  was  first  laid
out,  as  a  place  to  build  a  meeting
house/')  I  am  informed  that  this
place  was  designated  by  President
Youn>c,  when  the  city  was  laid  out,
as  a  place  for  Church  purposes.  (A
voice  from  the  stand — "  That's  cor-


rect, and  Brother  D.  H.  Wells  car-
ried the  flag  when  it  was  surveyed/')
Brother  Herrick  testifies  to  its  cor-
rectness. (Brother  Wells  said,  "  I
am  also  conversant  with  the  fact;
I  carried  the  flag-pole  when  this
square  was  laid  out."  Brother  Wells
also  bears  testimony  to  the  same
thing,  he  carried  the  flag-pole  when
the  Square  was  surveyed. I  want
these  matters  understood,  open  and
above  board  ; we  have  nothing  to
conceal  from  anybody. But  there
was  some  inattention  manifested  by
your  local  authorities — for  the  gen-
*  ral  authorities  of  the  Church  have
nothing  to  do  with  it ;  this  place
through  neglect,  was  not  entered  at
the  time  the  city  entries  were
made,  and  because  of  this  techni-
cality some  of  the  City  Councilors
seemed  to  object  to  the  Church  hav-
ing two-and-half  acres  of  the  ten
acres,  which  was  all  they  asked  for,
and  that,  too,  on  behalf  of  the  citizens
of  Ogden,  by  paying  fur  it  what  it
had  cost  the  city,  the  same  as  they
have  done  with  private  individuals,
I  believe  as  provided  by  law.  But
somebody  seems  to  think  that  some-
body is  injured. Who  is  injured  ?
If  the  Church  had  ten  acres  and
only  desired  two-and-half  acres,  or  if
they  desired  the  whole  of  it,  I  don't
think  it  any  great  stretch  of  liberali
ty  of  anybody,  and  I  do  not  see  why
any  one  should  be  at  all  exercised
about  it. They  will  say,  What  will
the  Gentiles  say] No  honorable;
Gentile  would  say  it  is  wrong,  or
take  any  exception  to  it,  and  as  for
those  who  are  not  so,  we  do  not
care  anything  at  all  about  them.
That  is  my  idea. Somebody  said
the  City  Council  had  given  two-and-
half  acres  to  some  outside  religious
sect. Well,  if  they  had  it  to  spare,
who  cares  1 We  do  not  want  to  be
pinched  up  in  a  nutshell.  But  then,
I  think  the  Latter-day  Saints  have


266


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


i


just  as  much  right  to  lands  surveyed
and  owned  by  them  upwards  of
twenty  years  ago,  as  the  Gentiles  to
receive  a  free  gift.  I  do  not  know
why  this  kind  of  feeling  should
exist,  and  therefore  I  speak  of  it.
We  are  all  one,  or  ought  to  be ;  and
therefore  I  speak  of  these  things  as
they  have  been  presented  to  me*  Is
there  anything  wrong  in  that?
Again,  here  the  Seventies,  I  under-
stand, have  given  a  large  hall  over
to  the  city.  Anything  wrong  in
thatl  No,  not  if  they  felt  able  to
do  so.  I  would  not  think  it  very
good  policy,  however,  to  give  such  a
hall  away  and  then  be  U- ft  without
any  place  to  meet  in.  But  then  it
belonged  to  them  and  they  have
done  it,  and  who  cares  ]  1  don't
■  But  if  the  city  has  got  things  of
that  kin  d  from  the  Seventies,  if  they
have  done  an  act  of  that  kind,  why
not  the  city  turn  around  and  be  a
little  generous  ?  Can't  the  city  be
as  generous  and  kind?  Who  are
the  city?  I  suppose  you  are,  along
with  a  few  outsiders.  Brother
Richards  mentioned  to  me,  as  Trus-
tee-in-Trust,  that  there  were  five
acres  of  land  here,  joining  the
school  house,  in  the  lane,  saying,
"  We  would  like  to  get  it,  for  we
wish  to  use  it  for  the  purposes  of  a
high  school  or  academy/1  I  said,
"  I  will  mention  it  to  the  brethren
of  the  Council."  We  have  since
turned  it  over.  Whose  business  is
it  ?  The  city  is  not  injured,  and
the  Church  is  not  I  mention  these
things  that  we  may  have  a  proper
understanding  of  them,  and  not  be
found  talking  about  things  we  do
not  understand.  I  feel  very  liberal
towards  the  liberal  class  of  Gentiles;
but  do  I  feel  liberal  in  my  feelings
to  everj^  miserable  "  unprincipled
man?"  No.  But  to  the  good,  and
virtuous,  and  upright  every  where.
What  was  our  message  to  the


world  ?  Salvation.  What  was  the
promise  to  Abraham?  "  In  thee  and
in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of
the  earth  be  blessed,"  not  cursed.
The  priesthood  ot  God  was  not  given
to  curse  men  or  destroy  them,  but  to
hi  ess  them.

Again,  Are  are  told  to  go  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature;
and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  pains
being  taken  to  do  this.  What  is  it?
The  Gospel  of  life  and  salvation,  Is
it  free  to  all  ?  Yes,  free  as  the
streams  that  pass  your  city,  and  all
are  invited.  Some  do  not  like  it
What  of  that?  We  cannot  help
that ;  we  are  going  to  perform  the
work  that  God  has  set  us  at,  and
we  will  treat  all  men  right.  When
they  come  here,  as  strangers  in  our
midst,  will  we  treat  them  right?
Yes.  Do  they  treat  us  right  ?  Not
quite.  Will  we  be  liberal  and  gene-
rous and  kind  ?  Yes ;  I  would  give
to  every  man  of  whatever  name,  or
creed,  or  color,  all  his  rights  without
his  ever  asking  for  them  ;  we  need
no  plot,  or  intrigue,  or  anything  of
that  kind.  We  expect  to  build  up
and  establish  the  kingdom  of  God,
that  will  contain  in  it,  admiration,
protection  of  the  virtuous  and  jjood
among  all  nations.  The  time  will
yet  come  when  he  that  will  not  take
up  his  sword  to  fight  against  his
neighbor,  must  needs  flee  to  Zion
for  safety.  All  those  who  are  not
fund  of  blood  and  carnage  and  deso-
lation, if  they  want  to  be  preserved
will  flee  to  Zion,  Have  we  not  got
to  have  a  Zion  for  them  to  flee  to  %
Yes,  And  what  is  Zion  ?  The  pure
in  heart  We  want  to  organize  in
inch  a  way.  and  advocate  and  main-
tain such  correct  principles,  that
they  will  become  the  admiration  of
all  honest  men,  who  will  feel  that
they  can  be  protected  and  find  safe-
ty and  an  asylum  in  Zion.  What
of  that? Are  we  going  to  follow


THE  INTEREST  OF  HUMANITY,  ETC


tliem  then  ?  No,  no,  no,  we  are
not*  Are  we  going  to  be  governed
by  their  notions  %  No,  we  are  not
Are  we  going  to  mix  up  with  their
Babylonish  ideas  1  No,  we  are  not j
we  are  going  in  for  Israel  and  for
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
but  we  will  protect  every  man  in
his  rights  so  tar  as  God  gives  us
power  to  do  so.  but  we  will  not
mix  up  with  their  iniquities,  their
frauds  and  corruptions,  that  they
are  seeking  in  manv  instances  to
crowd  in  upon  us  ;  we  want  to  be
free  from  these  evils,  and  put  our
trust  in  the  living  God  and  cleave  :
to  the  right  and  the  truth.  If  a
man  is  a  good  man,  won't  I  treat
him  right  1  Yes  ;  but  at  the  same  1
time,  our  moral  and  social  ideas  are
very  different,  and  while  I  accord  to
them  all  the  civil  liberties  that  any
reasonable  men  should  want,  I  do
not  wish  to  be  governed  by  his
standard  of  morality,  nor  do  I  wish
hit  ji  to  teach  my  children.  Why!
simply  because  I  do  nut  wish  them
perverted.  No  Gentile  or  reasonable
man  would  Hud  fault  with  me  for
that.  He  does  not  want  me  to
teach  his  children  my  faith.  All
right,  he  can  keep  them  away,  and
I  want  to  keep  mine  from  his  influ-
ences. Why?  Because  we  are  as-
sociated with  things  that  are  eternal
in their  consequences. We  are


aiming  at  the  celestial  glory.  We
believe  they  will  get  as  big  a  glory
as  they  are  looking  for,  but  it  will
not  be  that  which  we  anticipate ;
therefore  we  don't  want  them  to
train  our  children  and  lead  them
down  to  death.  We  want  to  man-
age these  things  ourselves,  but  in-
jure nobody.  Is  anybody  injured
by  it?  No,  u  I  cannot  see  as  you
see,"  say  some.  All  right,  we  can-
not help  that.  Would  I  find  fault
with  the  City  Council  because  they
give  a  burying  ground  to  some  who
I  prefer  to  have  their  dead  by  them-
selves f  No,  not  if  you  have  it  to
spare  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  don't
let  us  shut  out  our  own  people  and
our  own  interests,  but  maintain
every  right  wisely,  to  the  building
up  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  We
will  be  as  generous  as  the  world
|  dare  to  be ;  and  we  expect  the  prin-
ciples of  the  everlasting  Gospel  will
go  on  and  increase  until  the  king-
doms of  this  world  become  the  king-
doms of  our  God  and  his  Christ.
I  say  to  those  men  who  may  have
I  any  differences,  settle  them  like  men
and  don't  act  the  baby  any  more,
but  conduct  yourselves  as  servants
!  of  the  Most  High  God.  And  may
he  enable  you  to  do  so  and  bless  us
all  and  h-ad  m  in  the  paths  of  life,  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


2  OS


journal  ok  discouksks


t


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEO.  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  Sunday

Morning,  July  20th,  1879.

(Reported  bij  John  Irvine.)
necessity  of  revelation— evidences  of  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST

THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  SAINTS — PLURAL  MARRIAGE.


I  am  greatly  pleased  this  after-
noon at  having  the  opportunity  of
meeting  with  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  of  listening  to  the  testimonies
that  have  been  borne  by  Brother
Staines  in  relation  to  this  work.  I,
also,  have  been  absent  for  some
length  of  time.  Upwards  of  34
weeks  ago  I  left  this  city  to  go  east ;
I  have  been  back  twice  during  that
period  for  a  few  days,  and  it  is  a
great  pleasure  and  1  may  say  a  de-
light to  me  to  have  the  opportunity
of  being  here  to  listen  to  the  instruc-
tions, to  the  singing,  and  to  partake
of  the  Spirit  that  prevails  in  this
Tabernacle  ;  to  me  it  is  the  spirit  of
home,  it  is  the  spirit  of  peace,  and  I
have  more  delight  and  satisfaction
in  mingling  with  the  Latter-day
Saints  than  I  have  under  anv  other
circumstances.  They  are  my  people.
Their  religion  is  my  religion.  Their
God  is  my  God.  Their  future  is
the  future  in  which  I  hope  to  share.
If  they  be  prosperous  1  hope  to  be
prosperous.  If  they  have  adverse
circumstances  to  contend  with  I  ex-
pect to  share  in  them  ;  and  it  is  this
knowledge  of  which  Brother  Staines
has  spoken  that  prompts  these  feel*
ings  to  which  I  refer.


If  there  is  any  peculiarity  about
what  the  world  calls  Mormonism,  or
that  which  we  term  the  Gospel  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  taught  by
his  Church,  that  I  admire,  that  I
love,  that  causes  me  to  feel  thankful
unto  God  ;  it  is  the  peculiarity
which  reference  has  been  made  by
Brother  Staines,  namely,  that  Wil-
liam C,  Staines,  or  George  Q.  Can-
non, or  any  other  man  or  woman
however  humble,  who  is  connected
with  this  Church,  has  a  right,  ac-
cording to  the  promises  of  our  hear
venly  Father,  to  receive  revelation
from  him  when  needed.  I  would
not  give  much  for  a  religion,  the
revelations  of  which  were  confined
to  two,  three,  four,  or  perchance
twelve  men.  It  would  not  recom-
mend itself  as  the  religion  of  that
Being  who  is  the  Father  of  all,  who
lias  created  all,  and  who  lias  placed
us  all  It  ere  upon  the  earth  as  his
children.  This  feature  to  which  I
refer  is  one  of  the  most  delightful
characteristics  of  the  Gospel  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Brother  Staines
has  referred  to  the  Prophets  Joseph
Smith  and  Brigham  Young,  and  to
others  who  have  stood  in  prominent
places  in  this  Church,  who  have  re-


THE  NECESSITY  OF  REVEIJLTIOX,  ETC


269


ceived  revelations  from  God  ;  and
who  imparted  these  revelations  to
the  people.  Of  what  value,  of  what
special  value,  would  these  revelations
be  to  those  to  whom  they  were  im-
parted through  the  medium  of  these
men,  unless  they  had  some  means  of
testing  their  truthfulness?  What  a
terrible  condition  we  should  be  in  if
God,  in  his  providence,  were  to  con-
line  his  knowledge  in  that  way — if
we  were  required,  as  some  imagine
mankind  arc  required,  to  submit  to
the  teachings  of  their  fellow-men
and  to  accept  and  practise  them  be-
cause those  men  say  they  are  from
God  !  Imagine  the  condition  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  if  this  were  the
case  !  Imagine  the  condition  of  the
whole  world  if  one  man  stood  pro-
minent, or  three  men,  or  twelve
men,  or  fifteen  men,  stood  promi-
nent, receiving  revelations  from  di-
vinity and  conveying  these  revela-
tions to  the  children  of  men,  with
the  requirement  that  those  who  re-
ceived them  should  submit  to  them
as  the  voice  of  God,  and  the  people
themselves  be  destitute  of  any  means
of  testing  the  truthfulness  of  these
revelations,  except  so  far  as  they
might  appeal  to  their  reason  and  to
the  sense  of  right  that  is  begotten  in
them  !  Now,  a  great  many  people
who  are  not  acquainted  with  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints,  and  the  teachings  of  that
Church — and  I  do  not  know  but
some  who  are  members  of  that
Church — imagine  that  this  is  the
nature  of  the  organization  of  the
Church  of  Christ,  and  that  this  is
the  manner  in  which  knowledge  is
conveyed  to  the  people,  and  in  which
the  requirements  of  the  people  are
submitted  to  by  the  people*  Why
this  Church  could  not  stand,  could
not  have  endured  the  trials  and
afflictions  and  the  opposition  to
which  it  has  been  exposed,  one


hour  if  that  were  the  case.  It
would  fall  to  pieces,  there  would  be
no  power,  no  cohesive  power,  to  hold
it  together.  The  strength,  the
power,  the  cause  of  the  perpetuity
of  this  work,  the  marvelous  charac-
ter of  its  operations  throughout  the
nations  of  the  earth,  the  wonderful
attractiveness  of  this  Gospel,  the  se-
cret of  its  great  success  in  foreign
land,  preached  by  illiterate  men,
consists  in  the  fact  that  God  the
Eternal  Father,  reveals  his  mind  un-
to every  honest  soul  who  humbly
seeks  for  it.  Not  to  one  man,  not
to  three  men,  not  to  apostles,  not  to
bishops,  not  to  high  priests,  not  to
seventies,  not  to  elders  alone,  but  to
every  humble  soul  who  in  sincerity,
and  with  a  broken  heart  and  con-
trite spirit,  bows  himself  or  herself
in  secret  before  the  throne  of  the
great  Eternal,  and  m  humility  asks,
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  for  a  know-
ledge to  be  imparted  to  bim  or  to
her  whether  it  is  the  truth  he  or  she
has  heard.  Tins  is  the  secret  of  the
success  of  this  work.  This  is  the
cause  of  its  wonderful  power  and
the  attractiveness  it  has  for  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  mem  This
is  the  reason  that  illiterate  men,  go-
ing forth  bearing  testimony  of  these
things,  have  been  so  successful
throughout  all  the  nations  of.  the
earth  where  they  have  been,  and  it
is  this  that  draws  them,  as  we  have
been  told  this  afternoon  by  Brother
Staines,  by  thousands  from  foreign
lands  and  causes  them  to  come  to
this  land  and  to  assimilate  with
those  already  here  ;  until  we  have
in  this  Territory  of  ours,  throughout
these  valleys  running  north  and
south,  east  and  west,  a  people  unex-
ampled, and,  in  many  respects,  un-
like every  other  people  that  we  knew
anything  about.  Why,  in  this  last
company,  which  came  in  a  few  days
ago,  the  members  of  it  spoke  some


270


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


seven  huuniacjes.  I  remember  a
company  of  Saint  s  leaving  Liverpool
while  I  was  there,  tin*  members  of
which  spoke  nine  different  languages
They  were  Latter-day  Saints  gather-
ing ii] j  from  various  lands,  some
from  Switzerland,  from  France,  from
Great  Britain,  ami  from  the  various
nation?  of  Europe,  all  coming  togeth-
er, singing  the  songs  of  Zion  in  their
own  languages,  bearing  testimony
that  God  had  revealed  to  them  in
their  own  language  the  truth  of  this,
the  everlasting  Gospel  With  such  a
spirit  they  come  to  these  mountains,
they  scatter  among  the  people  alrea-
dy here,  they  become  homogeneous.
We  have  here  a  oneness  of  feeling
and  purpose,  a  oneness  of  spirit,
and  a  oneness  of  sentiment  and  of
heart,  that  you  may  look  for  in  vain
elsewhere  throughout  the  whole
earth.  I  sometimes  think  we  over-
look those  great  ami  glorious  bless-
ings that  God  has  given  to  us.  We
overlook  too  frequently  the  spirit  of
oneness  that  has  been  poured  out
upon  this  j^ople-  Men  ask  for  a
sign  ;  they  say,  "  Where  are  the
evidences  of  the  divinity  of  the  work
you  believe  in  ?  You  say  that  you
preach  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  ;  you  say
that  you  are  the  people  of  God/'
Why,  could  there  be  any  greater
evidence  given  of  the  divine  charac-
ter of  this  mission  than  is  witnessed
in  the  effects  of  this  Gospel  upon
the  people  who  embrace  it1?  We
are  kd  to  expect  that  heaven  is  a
place  of  unity,  a  place  of  love  ;  that
there  is  no  quarreling,  no  litigation,
no  strife  in  heaven  :  no  man  warring
against  his  fellow-men,  no  man  ex-
alting his  creed  and  his  ideas  as  su-
perior to  the  creed  and  the  ideas  of
his  neighbor  ;  all  dwelling  in  peace
ajud  in  love.  That  is  the  idea  of
heaven  that  has  been  taught  to  us
in  the  Bible  i  Anything  else  would
not  be  heaven ;  any  other  kind  of


place  could  not  be  heaven.  Is  it
not  reasonable  to  suppose,  then,  that
if  the  spirit  of  heaven  rests  down
upon  a  people,  that,  they  will  be
united,  that  they  will  love  one  an-
other, will  die  for  one  another,  if
necessary  t  Why,  certainly.  If  I
were  to  start  out  to-day  in  search  of
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  I  did
not  know  of  its  existence  upon  the
earth,  I  would  expert  to  find  a  people
united  together,  a  people  who  loved
one  another,  and  who  brought  forth
the  fruits  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  as
he  taught  it.  I  would  expect  to
find  a  people  who  gave  an  exhibition
in  their  lives  of  those  heavenly
truths  taught  by  Jesus  when  he  was
upon  the  earth.  And  until  I  found
such  a  people  I  would  despair  of
finding  the  Church  of  Christ.  Men
might  perform  miracles  before  me,
and  say  a  great  many  wonderful
things  unto  me,  but  unless  I  could
find  a  people  with  the  love  of  Christ
in  their  bosoms,  united  together  as
the  heart  of  one  man,  a  people  who
loved  one  another,  I  do  not  think  I
could,  with  the  knowledge  I  have,
recognize  them  as  the  people  of
Christ,  or  as  the  people  of  the  Church
of  Christ,  For  the  evidences  that
they  were  that  Church  it  would  not
be  in  profession  alone  I  would  seek.
It  would  not  be  in  their  Sunday
service  alone.  It  would  not  be  in
the  sermons  that  were  preached  in
their  tabernacles,  or  meetinghouses,
or  churches  alone.  It  would  not  be
in  any  of  these  things  alone  that  I
would  seek,  but  it  would  be  in  the
fruits  of  the  Gospel  as  I  found  them
exhibited  in  their  daily  life,  in  their
conversation,  in  their  associations,
one  with  another.  If  I  found  a
C[uarrelsome  people,  if  I  found  a
people  fighting  one  with  another  for
their  rights,  if  I  found  a  people  tak-
ing up  weapons  of  war  against  each
other,  no  matter  by  what  name  they


THE  NECESSITY  OF


REVELATION,  ETC.


were  called,  no  matter  how  high-
sounding  their  professions,  I  would
say,  these  cannot  be  the  people  of
Christ ;  these  are  not  the  fruits  which
the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
brings  forth.  But  if  I  found  a  people
who  were  humble,  meek,  lowly,  wil-
ling to  endure  wrong  rather  than  do
wrong  ;  if  I  found  a  people  perse-
cuted for  righteousness  sake  j  if  I
found  a  people  of  whom  all  men
spoke  evil,  though  their  lives  were
not  evil,  though  their  conduct  was
humble  and  pure  and  they  were  dis-
posed to  love  one  another  and  dwell
together  in  peace,  I  would  begin  to
say,  here  are  some  of  the  signs,  some
of  the  fruits  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  I  must  stop  here.  I  must
examine  into  this  matter,  I  must
look  after  these  people,  and  see
whether  they  are  the  people  of  whom
I  am  in  search.  If  I  were  to  come
into  this  valley  of  Salt  Lakeand  find
a  people  professing  to  belong  to  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints,  w  ere  I  trust  to  report  I  would
be  inclined  to  say  they  cannotbe  the
people  they  profess  to  be.  Why  1
Because  all  manner  of  evil  i.s  spoken
against  them.  Is  there  any  crime  ,
in  the  black  catalogue  of  crime  of
which  they  have  not  been  accused?
Is  there  any  evil  which  people  can
perpetrate  with  which  they  have  not
been  charged  and  declared  guilty  1
If  I  were  to  be  disheartened  by  re-
ports, I  need  only  stop  in  Salt  Lake
City,  or  in  Utah  Territory,  to  have >
that  feeling  ;  but  if  I  remembered
that  those  in  Christ  Jesus  are  sure
to  suffer  persecution,  and  that  "  if
they  have  called  the  Master  of  the
house  Beelzebub,  how  much  more  ,
.shall  they  call  them  of  his  household?'
— I  might,  if  I  bore  that  fact  in  mind,
stop  and  examine  further.  If  I ,
looked  around  me  and  inquired  con-
cerning the  Latter-day  Saints,  I
would  probably  find  that  they  did  not


drink  liquor,  did  not  get  drunk  ;  I
I  would  probably  find  they  did
not  take  the  name  of  the
'  Lord  in  vain,  did  not  go  to  law
one  with  another,  but  were  averse
to  it,  and  w  ere  in  favor  of  promoting
peace,  and  that  because  of  this  they
offended  lawyers,  judges  and  others.
If  I  were  to  look  at  the  material  as-
pects of  the  city,  I  would  find  a
beautiful  city,  laid  out  and  planned
with  wisdom,  laid  out  by  somebody
who  knew  something  of  life  ami
what  was  proper  for  society.  If  1
made  further  inquiry  I  would  learn
that  a  few  years  ago,  before  the  ad-
vent of  so-called  civilization  in  the
midst  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  that
from  the  Idaho  line  in  the  North  to
the  Arizona  line  in  the  South,  there
were  no  liquor  saloons,  no  drunken-
ness, and  profanity  was  punished  ;
but  iu  every  settlement  and  in  every
house,  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  the  land,  prayers  ascend-
ing morning  and  night  to  the  God
of  heaven,  on  behalf  of  themselves
and  their  children,  and  on  behalf  of
the  honest  in  heart  throughout!  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.  If  I  hap-
pened to  be  there  when  a  company
;  came  in,  and  in  mingling  with  that
company  asked  what  brought  them
to  this  land,  I  would  be  told  in  Nor-
wegian,  in  Swedish,  in  Danish,  iti
Genuai),  in  Italian,  in  Welsh,  in
English,  in  Polish,  in  Dutch,  in
French,  that  each  of  these  men  and
women  had  obeyed  the  Gospel  as  it
was  taught  to  them  by  the  Elders
who  had  been  sent  to  them,  and
that  in  answer  to  prayer  they  had
received  a  testimony  from  the  Al-
mighty for  themselves  that  they
knew  this  was  the  Gospel  of  Christ,
that  they  were  commanded  of  God
to  gather  out  from  the  various  na-
tions, and  that  in  response  to  that
commandment  they  had  come  out
and  were  here. These  would  be  th


tilings  tli at  would  be  told  to  me.  If
1  were  to  inquire  among  them  re-
specting other  matters,  I  would  find
that  they  believed  in  this  book  (the
Bible)  in  its  entirety,  not  a  part,
not  in  isolated  parts  of  this  book,
some  parts  of  this  book,  some  parts
separated  from  the  rest,  but  in  its
entirety,  in  its  doctrinal  parts.  I
would  find  that  they  believed  that
God  was  the  same  to-day  as  lie  was
yesterday,  that  lie  is  a  God  of  reve-
lation, a  God  of  truth,  a  God  who
could  hear  and  answer  prayer.  I
would  find  that  they  believed  in  the
the  organization  of  the  Church  as
it  was  in  ancient  days,  God  having
first  set  in  the  Church  apostles,
prophets,  teachers,  etc.  I  would
find  further  that  they  were  contend-
ing, as  James  commanded  the  Saints
to  do  in  his  day,  earnestly  for  the
faith  once  delivered  to  the  Saints,  a
faith  by  which  the  mighty  works
concerning  which  Paul  speaks  in  the
11th  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the
Hebrews  were  accomplished,  I
would  find  that  they  were  contend-
ing for  this  faith,  that  they  believed
in  the  signs  following  them  that  be-
lieve; that  they  were  contending  for
them,  contending  for  that  faith ;  and
teaching  their  children  to  exercise  it
to  the  greatest  possible  extent  Now,
where  else  upon  the  face  of  the  earth
could  I  find  a  community  teaching
and  practising  these  things !  I  have
been,  in  my  time,  a  somewhat  ex-
tensive traveler.  I  have  mingled
with  a  great  many  people,  in  a  good
many  lands,  and  I  confess  to  you  to-
day, I  have  never  seen  a  people  who
answered  this  description,  except
the  Latter-day  Saints.  I  do  not
say  this  out  of  vanity,  or  by  way  of
boasting,  because  this  Gospel  is  in-
tended for  every  person,  not  only
for  those  who  are  Latter-day  Saints
to-day,  but  for  every  honest  man
and  woman  throughout  the  face  of


the  whole  earth* This  Gospel  of
the  kingdom  has  to  be  preached  ta
all  nations,  and  then  will  the  end
come. It  is  not,  therefore,  with
any  feeling  of  pride  because  of  these
being  the  doctrines  believed  in  and
practised  by  the  Latter-day  Saints
that  I  allude  to  them  in  this  man-
ner, but  because  God,  in  his  infinite
mercy,  has  revealed  the  Gospel  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  because
it  is  taught  again  by  divine  autho-
rity. How  could  you  account  for  it
in  any  other  way? Tell  me,  if
there  be  philosophers  or  wise  men
here. Men  say  it  is  delusion,  men
say  it  is  imposture,  men  say  that
the  building  up  of  this  system  is
the  result  of  fraud. Most  extra
ordinary  results  of  fraud,  if  this  be
fraud  • Men  going  out  without
purse  or  scrip,  as  in  ancient  days,
and  preaching  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, baptizing  people,  and  the  spirit
of  unity  and  love  resting  down
upon  them, accompanied  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  which  testifies,  as  we
have  heard  this  afternoon  from  Bro-
ther Staines,  as  it  had  testified  to
|  him,  that  this  is  the  Church  of
Christ,  that  this  is  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  which  they  have  embraced.
People  may  think,  people  may  talk
about  the  delusion  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints. Why,  to  believe  that
these  results  which  we  see  are  the
product  of  fraud, or  imposture,
would  require  far  more  credulity
than  faith  to  believe  them  to  be
from  God, Where  is  there  a  pecu-
liarity of  the  ancient  Church  that
is  not  possessed  to-day  by  the
Latter-day  Saints  t Can  one  be
mentioned? Can  a  doctrine  or  a
principle  be  mentioned  that  was
contended  for  in  the  ancient  Church,
that  is  not  contended  for  and  sought
after  today  by the  Latter-day
Saints? Where  they  persecuted?
'  Then  it  is  [  quite  certain  we  can


THE  Si


*1TY  OF  RKVET.ATION,  ETC*


273


claim  a  blessing,  if  it  so  be  that  per-
mention  brings  blessings.  Were
their  name*  cast  out  as  evil?  Then
we  can  claim  with  them  tin?  same
results,  if  blessings  attend  any  such
tiling.  "  Oh,  hut,"  says  one,  "  they
were  good  people,  the  Apostles  in
ancient  days  were  good  people,  but
you  Mormons  are  a  very  wicked
people."  Why,  do  you  imagine  that
it  they  had  considered  Jesus  a  very
good  man,  a  very  holy  being  they
would  have  crucified  him  between
two  thieves  J  No.  The  populace,
when  Pilate  wanted  to  have  him  for-
given because  of  the  feast  of  the
passover,  cried  out :  "  No  ;  release
to  us  Barabbas,  the  murderer,  the
vile  person.  Let  him  be  released,
but  crucify  the  Christ;  let  his  blood
be  upon  us  and  our  children."  They
were  willing  to  risk  the  consequences,
because  they  believed  hi  in  to  be  a
vile  impostor.  Do  you  think  that
Peter  and  Paul,  one  of  whom  was
beheaded,  and  the  other  of  whom
was  crucified  with  his  head  down-
ward—do you  imagine  that  in  kill-
ing them  the  Romans  thought  they
were  killing  good,  innocent,  pure
men  1  Certainly  not.  They  were
hated  just  as  much  as  we  are  hated.
Of  course  they  thought  they  were
doing  God  service,  as  many  think
they  are  doing  God  service  to-day  in
persecuting  the  Latter-day  Saints,
They  thought  they  were  doing  the
world  some  good  by  ridding  the
earth  of  such  impostors  as  Peter  and
Paul.  Their  eyes  were  blinded  to
their  goodness  and  to  their  virtues.
Such  things  were  hidden  from  their
sight.  They  could  only  say  they
were  deluders  of  the  people,  that
they  led  people  astray,  and  as  im-
postors were  worthy  of  death.  And
so  it  is  throughout  this  Territory.
The  virtues  of  the  Latter  day  Saints
are  not  perceived.  Our  temperance,
our  frugality,  our  perseverance,  our
No.  18.


industry,  our  union,  and  all  the
qualities  that  have  made  this  wilder-
ness blossom  until  it  is  the  admira-
tion of  every  visitor,  the  joy  of  every
t ra vel er — al I  these  tint i l:s  are  ob~
soured,  and  with  many  people  lost
sight  of,  before  the  idea,  imagined
by  very  many,  that  Brother  Brigham
was  a  vile  impostor,  that  all  those
who  have  been  associated  with  him
are  no  better,  and  that  it  would  be
doing  God  service  to  destroy  them
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  that  the
people  who  are  deluded  by  them
might  be  free  from  the  influence
which  they  wield  over  them.  Oh,
generation  of  blind — I  was  going  to
say  fools,  but  shall  I  use  such  a
phrase f  But  is  there  not  evidence
sufficient  before  the  eyes  of  this
generation  of  what  has  been  done  in
the  past,  in  the  persecution  of
righteous  and  holy  men,  in  the  kill-
ing of  them,  in  the  shedding  of  their
blood,  that  men  cannot  learn  that
there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  man  being
a  good  man,  a  virtuous  man,  a  pure
man,  and  yet  be  maligned  by  the
enemies  of  purity  and  virtue,  as  in
the  days  of  Christ  1  This  generation
will  have  a  great  deal  to  answer  for
in  consequence  of  this  thing.  As
Latter-day  Saints,  we  have  been  ac-
cused of  every  crime.  It  has  been
told  of  us  that  we  were  ready  to
commit  murder  at  any  time,  in  order
to  serve  our  own  ends,  that  we  were
ready  to  shed  the  blood  of  the  in-
nocent, and  that  this  feeling  to  des-
troy life  existed  ;  mong  us,  when  at
the  same  time,  throughout  these
wild  mountains  and  secluded  valleys
life  has  been  more  safe,  property
more  secure,  than  in  the  streets  of
the  best  managed  cities  in  the  Union.
There  never  has  been  a  day  since  we
came  beyond  these  mountains  that
travelers  could  not  pa*s  from  the
North  to  the  Houth,  and  from  the
i  tiast  to  the  W  est,  ahd hr  u  h  ajl

Vol  XX


parts  with  perfect  security  There  1
never  was  a  day,  when  the  Latter
day  Saints  lived  alone  in  these  val-
leys, that  a  woman  would  be  insulted
either  hy  won!  or  by  gesture,  night
or  day,  whether  an  old  lady  or  a
young  lady,  in  traveling  from  one  end
of  our  Territ  ory  to  the  other.  Can
this  be  said  of  us  to-day  1  Certainly
not ;  but  it  was  the  case  a  few  years
ago  throughout  these  valleys,  and
let  me  say  to  you  it  will  yet  he  the

case.  I
I  sometimes  think  that  if  we  were
one-twentieth  part  as  bad  a*  we  are
accuser  I  of  being,  it  would  be  very
unhealthy  throughout  this  country
for  a  good  many  who  ar  e  now  un-
molested. I  know  this,  that  no
other  community  would  have  borne
one-twentieth  part  the  insult  and
in  jury  that  we  have  submitted  to  so
qhietly.  What  has  caused  us  to  do
it  1  u  it  because  we  are  incapable
of  feeling,  or  that  we  do  not  under-
stand our  rights,  or  that  we  do  not
want  them,  that  we  .suffer  ourselves
to  be  imposed  upon?  No,  it  has  not
been  because  of  these  things.  Our
bosoms  have  burned,  probably,  with
the  fire  of  indignation,  as  much  as
any  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth
could  under  such  circumstances.
What  has  retained  us  1  Simply  the
knowledge  that  these  men  are  igno-
rant, and  I  believe  that  the  Latter-
day  Saints  have  partaken  bf  that
spirit  which  Jesus  had  when  he
hung  upon  the  cross.  It  has  been
somewhat  in  that  spirit  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  have  acted.  It
would  have  been  easy  for  them  to
haveacted  otherwise  had  they  chosen
to  do  so.  It  may  be  said  they  were
restrained  by  fear.  It  has  not  been
through  the  fear  of  man,  but  the
fear  of  God  lias  restrained  this  people.
It  is  far  better  for  us  to  suffer  wrong
than  to  do  wrong ;  it  is  better  to  en-
dure evil,  ignominy,  shame  and  per-


secution than  to  turn  and  practise
any  of  these  things  ourselves.

1  am  looking  for  a  great  change
to  take  place  in  our  circumstances.
The  nation  of  which  we  form  a  jwirt
looks  with  more  interest  upon  us  as
a  people  than  upon  any  other  part
of  the  United  States.  There  is  no
; people,  no  community,  within  the
confines  of  our  Republic  concerning
which  there  is  »o  much  interest  felt
as  the  Latter-* lay  Saints.  Men's
eyes  are  directed  towards  us.  I  be-
lieve we  are  becoming  better  under-
stood. The  completion  of  this  rail-
road, which  was  supposed  to  be  the
death-knell  to  Mormonism,  the  disr-
co very  of  these  mines,  which  we
ourselves  rather  disliked,  those
!  things  that  many  supposed  would
be  the  means  of  destroying  this
people,  have  now  been  in  operation
for  years,  and  with  what  result?
With  this  result,  so  far  as  my  ob-
servation extends — a  better  know-
ledge concerning  this  people,  and  the
circumstances  which  surround  us ;  a
more  extended  knowledge  of  our
land,  and  all  the  difficulties  we  have
had  to  contend  with.  I  have  re-
marked this  in  Congress  myself,  that
whenever  I  want  to  accomplish  any-
thing in  connection  with  our  Terri-
tory, I  always  find  men  who  have  been
here  and  who  have  seen  for  them-
selves and  formed  their  opinions  ac-
cordingly, ready  to  do  anything  in
reason  that  I  ask.  Intercourse  has
had  the  effect  to  remove  prejudice.
There  are  people  in  this  country  who
fear  us.  The  very  fact  that  they  do
fear  us  by  their  rtfusing*  us  our
rights,  not  only  shows  that  they  do
not  understand  us,  but  it  is  a  recog-
nition on  their  part  of  our  power  ;
and  as  such  we  should  accept  the
denial  of  these  rights  to  which  we
are  fully  entitled.  Governors,  judges
and  other  officers  are  sent  here,  in
the  selection  of  whom  we  have  no


I


THK  NKCKSKITY  OF  REVELATION,  KT*'\


275


voice  whatever.  Kven  if  they  were
all  honest,  patriotic,  fair  and  just
men,  their  selection  without  our
voice  is  an  injustice  ;  but  which  no
people  can  War  better  than  we.
We  are,  however,  learning  lessons
which  will  be  of  immense  import-
ance to  us  in  days  to  come  \  for  as
sure  as  the  sun  shines,  as  sure  as
God  lives,  so  sure  will  this  people
■called  Latter-day  Saints  become  a
governing  people.  It  is  an  inevit-
able consequence  in  the  very  nature
of  things-  We  possess  all  the  ele-
ments te  make  a  strong,  mighty,
governing  people.  There  is  there-
fore  a  great  future  in  .store  lor  us,
and  to  prepare  us  for  that  future  it
is  necessary  that  we  should  pass
through  th«  furnace  of  affliction,
that  we  shouhl  feel  the  hand  of  op-
pression, and  that  we  shouhl  feel  the
effects  of  injustice,  so  that  when  it
shall  become  our  turn,  as  undoubt-
edly it  will  in  the  very  nature  of
things,  we  shall  know,  by  the  treat-
ment we  have  received,  how  to  tem-
per justice  with  mercy,  to  extend  to
others  that  which  lias  been  denied
unto  us,  and  the  value  of  which  we
have  well  known.  You  cannot  keep
down  a  people  like  this.  1  do  not
say  this  to  flatter  you,  because  you
have  many  faults.  We  know  them,
and  I  do  not  think  we  are  afraid  to
tell  you  your  faults,  ami  to  tell  our
own  faults.  But  a  people  posses-
sing the  qualities  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  must  grow  and  become  pow-
erful Union  is  strength.  Love
will  prevail,  it  is  a  great  power  on
the  earth,  and  added  to  this  there
are  integrity,  frugality,  temperance
and  virtue — for  there  is  virtue  in
this  land — there  is  chastity  here.  In
these  mountains,  amongst  this  peo-
ple called  Latter-day  Saints,  if  vir-
tue  is  not  cherished  next  to  human
life,  it  is  because  people  are  not  liv-
ing up  to  the  teachings  they  have


received.  It  man  is  not  as  virtuous
as  woman,  then  it  is  because  man
has  not  profited  by  what  he  has  been
taught.  Do  you  think  that  a  daugh-
ter should  be  exacted  to  be  more
virtuous  than  a  son  1  Do  you  think
that  the  girls  of  a  family  should  be
more  chaste  than  the  boys  %  Certain-
ly not  One  of  the  greatest  crimes,
the  greatest,  with  the  exception  of
the  shedding  of  innocent  blood —
and  it  is  a  doctrine  that  is  taught  by
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  should  be
taught  by  every  man  in  his  house-
hold— that  can  be  committed,  is  the
seduction  or  deti lenient  of  the  weak-
er sex.  There  can  be  no  greater
crime  committed,  except  the  shed-
ding of  innocent  blood,  and  peo-
ple thus  taught,  what  will  they  hel
Why,  if  they  observe  such  teach-
ings, they  will  be  strong,  vigorous
and  mighty,  (  an  you  repress  such
a  people  1  Will  the  sending  of  a
few  men  to  prison  for  breaking  the
law  of  \Si'r2  destroy  this  work?
Will  the  entering  of  a  suit  against
the  executors  of  the  estate  of  the
late  President  Young,  or  the  Trus-
tee-in-trust of  this  Church  destroy
this  work  1  Why,  the  men  who  say
so  have  failed  to  read  history.  They
do  not  understand  anything  connec-
ted with  human  progress  and  with
human  powers,  if  they  flatter  them*
selves  with  such  opinions  as  these.
All  these  things  intensify  the  peo-
ple, they  add  to  our  strength.

As  to  plural  marriage,  in  dealing:
with  that  great  question,  as  it  is
called,  if  I  had  been  anxious  to  ex-
tinguish or  repress  it,  I  would  never
have  allowed  it  to  have  received  the
attention  it  has  done.  There  has
been  a  complete  misconception  as  to
the  best  method  of  dealing  with  this
question.  Why,  this  ancient  \  rac-
tice,  practised  by  a  few  j>eople  in
these  mountains,  has  been  lifted  into
national  importance. Mormon  ism


JO  URN  Al»  OF  DISCOURSES.


has  become  famous,  because  of  the
practising*  by  a  portion  of  the  peo-
ple, of  this  doctrine,  until  the  whole  ;
earth  resounds  with  the  talk  of  *'the
Polygamy  of  the  Mormons,"  as
though  the  Mormons  were  half  the
pijop.e  of  the  United  States.  In
fact,  if  they  numbered  twenty-five
millions  instead  of  two  hundred
thousand,  they  could  not  have  re-
ceived more  attention.  This  is  a
grand  mistake  in  statesmanship  on
the  part  of  those  who  want  to  put
down  Mormon  doctrines.  If  men
understood  statesmanship  they
would  let  the  question  pass,  but  in-
stead of  that  they  are  determined  to
give  us  world  wide  notoriety,  to  up-
lift us  before  the  world,  and  by  their
foolish  acts  make  people  suffer  as
martyrs  for  that  principle.  Most
unwise.  It  reminds  me  of  an  inci-
dent mentioned  in  Macauley's  his*
tory  of  England,  He  drew  a  con-
trast between  the  policy  of  James
the  Second  and  his  successor,  Wil-
liam. You  all  know  that  James  was
looked  upon  as  an  old  impostor,  and
that  ultimately  he  was  expelled  from
the  throne.  There  was  a  Bishop  in
James'  day  who  seemed  very  anxious  :
to  attain  some  object,  and  he  annoy-
ed the  king  so  much  that  the  king
got  it  into  his  head  that  the  Bishop
waited  to  be  a  martyr,  and,  said
James,  "  I  am  determined  he  shall  1
be  one."  Macauley  contrasts  this  :
policy  with  that  of  William  under
similar  circumstances.  William  was
a  wise  ruler,  and  there  was  a  man
who  did  something  similar  to  him
in  his  day,  and  acted  offensively,
as  the  Bishop  did  to  James,  his
father-in-law.  He,  too,  seemed  an-
xious to  be  a  martyr,  and,  said  Wil-
liam, "  I  am  equally  determined  he
shall  not  be  gratified."  In  this  we
see  the  difference  between  the  states-
manship of  the  two  kings,  and  a
true  statesman,  dealing  with  the


question  of  polygamy,  would  let  it
alone  severely.  If  he  wanted  it  t*x
terminated  he  would  not  take  George
Reynolds  and  send  him  to  prisuii
and  make  him  a  hero,  instead  of  a
felon.  Such  a  proceeding  only  had
the  tendency  to  make  people  cling
to  their  faith  and  he  willing  tu  suf-
fer for  it.  If  plural  marriage  he
divine,  as  the  Latter-day  Saints  say
it  is,  no  power  on  earth  can  suppress
it,  unless  you  crush  and  destroy  the
entire  people.  But  supposing  it  is
not  divine,  as  many  people  say  it  is
not,  supposing  that  it  is  not  of  God,
do  you  not  think  the  forty  millions
can  afford  to  let  it  alone  1  If  their
position  be  true  do  you  not  think
they  are  safe  to  do  more  among  the
200,000  people  who  believe,  and  a
portion  of  them  practice  it,  by  moral
force  than  by  persecution  and  vio-
lence ?  I  think  so.  Now  we  will
see  which  is  the  best  policy.  I  do
not  believe  in  beinjj  defiant.  Men
that  marry  more  wives  than  one
should  be  able  to  bear  the  penalty  of
it  if  there  be  any  attached  thereto,
or  they  should  not  take  them.  A
man  that  enters  this  Church  ought
to  be  able  to  die  for  its  principles  if
necessary,  and  certainly  should  be
able  to  go  to  prison  for  them  with-
out crying  about  the  matter.  If  you
are  sentenced  to  prison  for  marrying
1  more  wives  than  one,  round  up  your
shoulders  and  bear  it  like  men  and
no  murmuring  about  it ;  prepare
yourselves  to  take  the  consequences.
We  know  tl^t  for  the  Gospel  in
ancient  days  many  laid  down  their
lives  with  joy,  that  the  great  Cap-
tain of  our  salvation  was  crucified,
and  that  nearly  all  the  prophets  per-
ished by  violence.  If  we  expect,
then,  to  be  one  with  them,  and  in-
herit the  same  glory  that  they  do
I  we  should  be  prepared  to  endure  the
consequence  of  adhesion  to,  and  our
advocacy  of  the  truth  ;  and  so  we


THE  RESTITUTION  OF  ALL  THINGS,  ETC.


ould  in  n^ard  to  every  doctrine
we  have  embrace.  1,  We  have  em-
braced certain  doctrines,  Th^y  are
unpopular.  Still  if  we  are  nit* n  we
will  be  prepared  to  endure  all  the
consequences,  whatever  they  may  be,
and  make  no  fuss  about  them.  But


I  am  trespassing  on  your  time.  May
the  Lord  bless  you,  till  you  with  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  keep  you  a  holy
people,  and  enable  you  to  overcome
all  evil,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus  CIi rist.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  MORGAN,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  Sunday

Afternoon,  Aug.  17th,  1879.

(Reported  btj  John  Irvine.)

RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS — PRE- EXISTENCE OF MAN— FIRST  PRIN

CI  PI- US  UF  THE  GOSPEL,


I  will  read  within  your  hearing
this  afternoon  the  19th,  20th  ami
2 1st  verses  of  the  3rd  chapter  of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  : —

<h  Repent  ye,  therefore,  and  be
converted,  that  your  sins  may  be
blotted  out  when  the  times  of  re-
freshing shall  come  from  the  presence
of  the  Lord,

44  And  he  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,
which  was  preached  unto  yon,

"Whom  the  heavens  must  receive
until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all
things  which  God  hath  spoken  by
the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets
since  the  world  began/1

In  endeavoring  to  address  those
who  are  present  this  afternoon,  I
desire  that  I  may  have  an  interest
in  the  faith  and  prayers of  my


hearers,  that  such  things  may  be
said,  such  principles  brought  forth,
as  will  be  for  our  mutual  good  and
benefit,  and  acceptable  to  our  Father
and  God-  I  have  often  thought  in
connection  with  our  services  here  in
the  Tabernacle,  that  it  should  be  a
testimony,  not  only  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  but  to  strangers  who
may  visit  us,  in  regard  to  the  work
in  which  we  are  engaged,  the  man-
ner in  which  our  preaching  is  done.
FJders  come  into  the  congregation
with  no  anticipation  whatever  of
being  called  upon  to  address  the
people.  During  the  week  they  have
possibly  been  engaged  in  their  vari-
ous avocations  as  farmers,  as  artisans,
as  mechanics  of  various  grades  and
kinds,  as  merchants,  and  in  the  dif


ferent  walks  of  life,  and  they  pos-
sibly come  to  the  meeting  and  into
the  congregation  with  their  minds
filled  with  the  business  of  the  pre-
vious week,  when  they  are  called
upon  to  stand  before  a  congregation
of  one,  two,  three,  five,  or  ten  thou-
sand people,  and  preach  to  them  the
words  of  eternal  life. A  congrega-
tion of  that  size  elsewhere  in  the
Christian  world,  to  edify,  to  instruct
them,  would  require  considerable
preparation  upon  the  part  of  the
minister. But  it  is  not  so  with  us
as  a  people, Elders  are  called  to
the  stand  without  a  moment's  warn-
ing, or  time  to  prepare  what  they
may  have  to  say,  or  what  they  may
be  expected  to  say  ;  and  it  looked
strange  to  me  when  I  first  entered  a
congregation  of  the  Saints  and  saw
this  maimer  of  procedure. It  doubt-
less looks  strange  to  many  to-day
who  visit  us. But  we  rely  on  the
promises  of  our  Savior,  though  made
many  hundreds  of  years  ago.  We
consider  these  promises  still  good
and  in  force,  and  that  in  the  hour
we  are  called  upon  to  proclaim  the
words  of  eternal  life  he  will  give
unto  us  words  to  speak  ; we  shall
speak  by  the  inspiration  of  that  spi-
rit which  leads,  guides  and  directs
us  unto  all  truth.

In  the  passages  that  I  have  just
read,  especially  in  the  21st  verse,  re-
ference is  made  to  Jesus  Christ  of
Nazareth,  who  had  come  forth  in  the
day  and  age  in  which  these  words
were  spoken,  in  a  lowly  manner,
from  the  city  of  Nazareth,  proclaim-
ing certain  principles,  certain  ideas,
and  certain  doctrines.  As  it  hap-
pened, these  principles,  ideas  and
doctrines  wer$  not  popular  in  the
section  of  country  in  which  he  was
preaching  at  that  particular  time.
He  taught  certain  doctrines  to  the
people,  which  the  mass  of  mankind
by  whom  he  was  surrounded  did  not


receive,  did  not  accept,  and  did  not
believe.  On  the  contrary,  they  used
every  means  in  their  power  to
thwart  the  carrying  out  of  the  de-
signs of  the  Savior,  the  bringing
forth  of  the  principles  and  the  pro-
mulgation of  the  ideas  and  doctrines
that  Jesus  and  those  by  whom  lie
was  immediately  surrounded  pro-
claimed. As  the  result  of  this  op-
position, which  lasted  a  consider-
able length  of  time,  this  man,  Jesus
of  Nazareth,  was  taken  by  the  popu-
lace, and  by  the  Scribes  and  Phari-
sees and  ministers  and  high  priests
of  that  clay,  and  crucified  ;  and  said
they,  "  Let  his  blood  be  upon  our
heads  and  the  heads  of  our  child-
ren considering  it  better  that  one
man  should  perish  than  that  the
whole  nation  should  be  led  an  ay.
They  considered  that  if  they  allow-
ed this  man  to  go  un,  the  whole
world  would  follow  after  him  ;
therefore,  this  heresy,  this  delusion,
this  gigantic  wrong,  that  had  sprung
up,  must  be  done  away  with,  and
the  only  way  to  do  it  was  to  kill
Jesus,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  an
impostor.  As  a  result  they  crucified
him,  doubtless  anticipating  t hat-
that  act  would  stop  the  work  that
he  had  started  ;  that  from  the  day
of  his  crucifixion,  his  followers
would  dwindle  and  fall  away,  and
that  the  delusion  he  had  been
preaching  would  no  1  anger  be  heard
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Well,  to
a  certain  extent  they  were  correct  in
thifi.  •  Peter,  doubtless,  as  prophet,
seer,  and  revelator,  saw  this  feature
in  the  future.  In  telling  them  that
they  had  crucified  the  Christ,  the
Savior  of  the  world,  he  reminded
them  that  the  heavens  must  receive
this  man.  He  could  no  longer  dwell
with  them  in  the  flesh.  He  had
come  forth  and  was  born  upon  the
earth  ;  was  baptized ;  the  Holy
Ghost  came  upon  him  in  the  bodily


THE  HKSTITI  TI.*N  nF  A  LI  -  THIMS,  KIT1


form  of  a  dove  :  he  was  crucified,
buried  and  resurrected,  and  had  as-
cended into  heaven.  Xaturalh  his
friends  htm  I  followers  would  a,sk  the
question,  How  long  is  he  to  remain
there,  throughout  all  the  aires  of
eternity  i  Oh,  no,  for  at  the  tune  of
his  ascension,  when  his  dUeiples
stood  looking  at  him  asrendiug  on
high,  there  stood  two  angels  hv  their
side,  who  said,  *'  Ye  men  of  Galilee,
wliy  stand  ye  gazing  up  into
heaven!  This  same  Jesus  which  is
taken  up  from  you  into  heaven  shall
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have
seen  him  go  into  heaven/'  They
had  the  promise  given  unto  them
from  the  lips  of  holy  angels,  that
i  )  like  manner  as  he  had  ascended
in  a  ho  ly  of  Hesti  ami  hone,  in  like
manner  should  lie  return  to  the
earth.  Peter  then  informs  us  how
1" niif  he  is*  going  to  remain  from  the
earth,  informs  m  what  length  of
time  he  is  to  a  hide  in  the  heavens,
4  \\  hum  the  heavens  must  receive
until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all
things."

It  must  he,  then,  that  something
Would  have  to  be  taken  from  the
earth  to  enable  the  bringing  about
of  a  restitution.  As,  tor  instance,  it
itould  he  impossible  for  a  man  to
restore  hack  to  me  something  1  had
never  been in possession  of  It

would  he  impossible  to  return  bark
to  the  earth  something  that  the
earth  had  never  possessed.  It  would
be  impossible  to  restore  hark  to  the
human  family  that  whie.h  ihev  had
never  possessed,  Then,  to  make  a
restitution,  it  must  he  that  there
would  be  restored  back  to  the  earth
certain  things,  certain  principles,
certain  doctrines,  certain  ideas,  that
had  once  been  extant  on  the  face
of  the  earth,  Others  of  the  apos-
tles and  prophets,  seers  and  revela-
tory of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in
their  day  and  age  looked  forward  to


this  time,  Isaiah  tells  ius  that  the
time  should  come  when  the  earth
should  mourn  and  fade  away  and
languish.  Why  ?  "  Because  they
have  transgressed  the  laws,  changed
the  ordinance  and  broken  the  ever-
lasting covenant."

Certain  principles  were  advanced
when  Je.Mis  was  upon  tile  earth.  They
were  advanced  by  him  and  by  his
followers,  the  disciples,  ami  those
who  believed  in  I  lis  mission.  Promi-
nent among  these  principles  that
were  advanced  was  the  principle
that  he  advanced  in  regard  to  him-
self He  spoke  of  his  having  come
from  the  Father  ;  and  Peter,  in
speaking  of  this  matter  in  one  of  his
epistles,  says  :  lfc  Who  verily  was
foreordained  before  the  foundation
of  the  world/1  Going  further  back
into  history,  as  we  have  it  here  in
holy  writ,  we  find  that  God  had  spo-
ken to  some  of  the  prophets  in
times  of  old  in  regard  to  the  same
principle.  Said  he  to  Jeremiah,
%*  lie  fore  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly
I  knew  thee,  and  before  thou  earnest
out  of  tlit-  womb  I  sanctified  thee,
and  i  ordained  thee  a  prophet  unto
the  nations*"  .  Again,  we  find  in  the
writings  of  Job,  speaking  of  the  or
ionization  of  the  world,  that  44  the"
sons  of  (rod  shouted  for  joy  when
the  foundation  of  the  earth  was
laid,"  Again,  one  of  the  writers  in
holy  writ,  in  speaking  on  this  sub-
ject, said  :  "  Then  shall  the  dust  re-
turn to  the  earth  as  it  was,  and  the
spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who
gave  it,"  I  take  it  as  a  logical  con-
sequence,  that  it  would  be  impossible
to  return  to  a  place  where  we  had
never  been  ;  that  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  return  to  God,  if  we  had  not
been  in  his  presence.

I  find  in  the  passages  that  I  have
quoted  an  allusion  to  the  pre-exist-
ence  we  have  had,  similar  to  that
which  Jesus  taught  of  himself  when


280


JOURNAL  OY  DISCOURSES


he  was  upon  the  earth. As  he  and
his  disciples  passed  along  the  road
they  found  a  man  who  had  been
blind  from  his  birth. The  disciples
referred  to  Jesus  and  asked,  "  Who
did  sin,  this  man,  or  his  parents,
that  he  was  born  blind  V If  the  re-
sult of  the  blindness  was  the  sin  of
the  man,  certainly  that  sin  must
have  been  committed  before  the
birth  in  the  flesh. It  is  scarcely
possible  that  a  man  would  have  to
be  punished  in  this  way  in  the  ex-
pectation of  his  committing  a  siru
That  idea  is  reserved  for  men  in  the
nineteenth  century.  We  as  a  people
know  that  men,  in  hundreds  and
thousands  of  cases  are  judged  and
condemned  before  they  are  proven
guilty. That  idea,  however,  is  not
promulgated  by  divine  authority.  I
find,  then,  in  these  passages,  a  proof
of  the  pre-existence  of  these  spirits
of  ours  which  inhabit  our  tabernacles,
those  that  I  see  before  me  this  after-
noon, as  well  as  my  own, I  find  in
all  parts  of  the  world  that  we  have
any  knowledge  of,  or  wherever  I
have  had  the  privilege  of  coming  in
contact  with  the  children  of  men,
that  there  is  what  we  call  death
comes  to  them;  and  I  find  that  they
almost  universally  agree — although
sadduceeism  does  to  a  certain  extern!
exist  in  the  Christian  world  to  day
—that  when  we  bring  this  body  of
flesh  and  bone,  this  outward  covering
of  the  spirit,  there  is  a  spirit  that
has  inhabited  that  body  that  goes
somewhere,  if  you  please  ;  that  when
it  leaves  this  earth  it  exists  as  a
spirit,  or  has  an  existence  outside  of
this  body  of  flesh  and  bone. And  1
also  find,  as  a  general  thing,  that
the  human  family  recognize  that
that  spirit  has  intelligence,  and  1
moreover  find  that  the  great  mass  of
the  Christian world  believe  that
that  spirit  has  not  only  intelligence,
but  that  it  can  suffer  pain,  and  can


enjoy  pleasure. As,  for  instance,
we  hear  people  speak  in  regard  to
those  of  their  household  who  have
passed  away  from  their  midst.  They
have  buried  the  body  of  flesh  and
bone,  and  it  may  moulder  away  in
the  grave,  yet  they  feel  to  say,  "  The
spirit  has  gone  behind  the  vail,  and
when  we  go  there  we  expect  to  meet."
We  also  find  that  the  so-called  fol-
lowers of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to-
day, in  talking  on  this  subject,  as-
sert that  the  spirit  has  gone  to  a
place  of  punishment,  where  it  is
punished,  or  that  it  has  gone  to  a
place  of  enjoyment  where  it  can  en-
joy, lu  other  words  that  this  spirit
within  us  is  something  that  is  tang-
ible,  something  that can  reason,
something  that  can  sense  at  id  feel
pain  or  enjoy  pleasure. In  other
words,  when  we  come  to  examine
this  matter,  when  we  come  to  as-
certain the  truth  in  relation  to  it,
we  find  that  the  spirit  that  inhabits
this  body,  the  spirits  that  inhabit  the
bodies  of  the  human  family,  is  the
intelligent  part  of  them — it  is  the
part  that  receives  light  and  know-
ledge ;  it  is  the  part  that  was  cre-
ated before  the  foundations  of  the
earth  were  laid,  and  which  lias  cume
upon  the  earth  to  tabernacle  in  the
flesh,  and  when  we  have  done  with
this  body  of  fl^sh  and  bone,  the
spirit,  as  far  as  light  and  knowledge
is  concerned,  retains  its  identity  and
its  knowledge. One  very  erroneous
idea  that  has  crept  into  the  minds
of  the  human  family,  and  one  that
we  find  traditioned  in  the  minds  of
our  children,  is  this : A  kind  of
vague, indistinct impression  that
when  we  lay  down  this  body  of
flesh  and  bone  we  lay  down  the  frail-
ties and  imperfections  oi  this  life.
Not  if  the  words  of  this  book  the
Bible,  are  true,  for  we  find  that
those  spirits,  after  having  gone  be-
hind the  vail,  according  to  the  Apostle


THK  KKSTHTTIDN  OF  ALL  THINfJS,  ETC,


Peter,  had  to  be  preached  to  :  "For
for  this  cause,"  says  he,  44  was  the
Gospel  preached  also  to  them  that
are  dead,  that  they  might  be  judged
according  to  men  in  the  ttash,  but
live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit.'*
They  needed  to  be  preached  to,  to
enable  them  to  live  according  tr  tn
Spirit  of  Und,  and  as  we  find  in
the  preceding  chapter,  Peter  says,
"  By  which  also  he  went  and  preached
unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which
sometime  were  disoiiedient,  when
once  tludong-sulfering  of  (iod  waited
in  the  days  of  Noah/'  And  1  often
think  that,  in  cnnueetion  with  this
matter,  it'  many  of  our  men  in  Israel
would  .stop  and  reflect  for  a  few
moments  in  regard  to  this  point  it
would  l*e  a  benefit  to  them  ;  that  if
they  would  but  understand  and  com-
prehend that  the  habits  and  the
weaknesses  in  which  they  indulge,
the  frailties  to  which  they  become
accustomed,  and  that  are  not  right,
that  they  go  with  them  into  the"

spirit  world,  there  to  be  repented  of,

or  turned  from,  they  would  hesitate
before  coining  addicted  to  many  of
the  tilings  they  do,  seeing  that  the
habits  they  have  contracted  will  re-
main  eternally  with  them,  unless
they  are  repented  of.  Bat  repen-
tance here  or  repentance  there  must
come  before  progress  or  exaltation
will  ever  reach  them,  worlds  without,
end.  All  the  thoughts  and  the  aets
we  indulge  in  here,  the  ideas  that
we  obtain,  the  principles  that  we
become  partakers  of,  are  eternal  in
their  nature,  and  they  will  stay  and
abide  with  us  throughout  the  eter-
nities  to  come,  for  good  or  for  evil
There  are  certain  laws,  certain  rules,
a  certain  system  of  order  which  con-
trols, leads  and  guides  all  this  great
plan.  These  principles  were  taught
by  the  Savior  when  he  was  upon  the
earth.  They  were  not  popular,  how-
ever, because  they  did  not  chime  in


281

with  the  it  leas  of  that  day  and  age
of  the  world.  Said  these  wise  men
of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,
$i  Why,  these  doctrines  clash  with
our  particular,  or  peculiar  ideas,  and
if  we  admit  them  for  one  moment,
the  fabric  we  have  built  up  here  will
tumble  to  the  ground  ;  we  cannot
stand  it.1'  It  is  true  they  could  not
contend  with  Jesus  and  his  apostles
in  argument;  and  I  have  always
said  that  any  man,  any  set  of  men,
any  govern  meat,  I  care  not  who
they  are,  or  w  hat  they  are,  who  re-
sort to  brutal  force  to  convince  their
opponents  that  they  are  wrong — I
say  that  those  who  do  so  are  almost
certain  to  be  in  error.  They  have
run  out  of  argument,  and  any  gov-
ernment that  will  force  men  in  re-
gard to  belief,  political  or  religious,

I  consider  that  that  government,  or
the  people  who  engage  in  such  a
thing,  are  Out  of  argument  on  their
side,  they  have  no  longer  any  argu-
n  nt  to  sustain  themselves,  and  re-
sort to  force  to  carry  their  point.  In
that  day  and  age  of  the  world,  those
men  vl:  *  opposed  Jesus  and  his
apostles  ran  out  of  argument,  and  as
a  result  they  say,  4*  We  will  take  the
life  of  this  man."

We  find  other  principles  that  were
taught  by  our  Savior  when  he  was
upon  the  earth.  One  of  these  was
faith,  a  very  important  principle  in
the  plan  of  salvation.  Another  was
the  principle  of  repentance,  and  I
have  often  thought,  in  coming  in
contact  with  the  human  family,  that
one  of  the  reasons  to-day  of  the  dis-
cord and  confusion  that  reign  in  the
midst  of  the  children  of  men  is  be-
cause they  have  not  truly  repented,

I I  is  true,  there  is  a  form  of  repen-
tance indulged  in  by  many  millions
of  the  human  family— a  kind  of  re-
pentance that  moans  and  groans  and
cries  and  laments  over  the  sins  that
they  have  committed,  but  they  go


and  do  the  same  tiling  to-morrow.
That  is  the  kind  of  repentance  that
Paul  meant  when  he  said  : 14  For
godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to
salvation  not  to  be  refuted  of;  hut
the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh
death," There  is  a  kind  of  sorrow
that  needs  not  to  be  repented  of,  and
which  consists  in  turning  awav  from
all  that  is  evil  from  all  that  is  wrong
or  incorrect  in  the  siidit  of  God  and
of  holy  angels  and  of  all  good  men,
Jesus  taught  also  the  principle  of
baptism,  and  1  have  no  doubt  in  my
own  mind  thac  he  foresaw  the  tact
that  the  time  would  come  when  the
principle  of  baptism  as  he  taught  it
would  be  perverted  and  changed.
Paul  undoubtedly  foresaw  that  time,
for  says  lie,  "The  time  will  come
when  tliev  will  not  endure  sound
doctrine  ;  but  after  their  own  lusts
shall they heap to  themselves
teachers,  having  itching  ears.  And
they  shall  turn  away  their  ears  from
the  truth,  and  shall  be  turned  unto
fables." We  find  many  fables  in  the
world  to-day  in  regard  to  the  prin-
ciple of  baptism. The  baptism  that
Peter  taught  was  widely  different
to  the  baptism  taught  by  the  Christ-
ian world  to-day. Said  he,  41  Repent
and  be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,"
What  fort "  For  the  remission  of
sins." To-day  baptism  is  not  prac-
tised with  that  object  in  view,  by
any  means,  by  those  who  profess  to
have  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  They
baptize  for  a  form,  for  the  answering
of  a  good  conscience. I  find  t^at
the  baptism  that  Peter  taught,  that
John  taught,  had  for  its  object  the
remission  of  sin,  and  another  very
important  principle  was  to  follow
this  baptism,  for  said  Peter  empha-
tically, 4 '  Ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost;1  And  for  fear  that
there  would  be  those  who  would  per-
vert and  change  and  turn  away  from
this  principle,  he  told  the  thousands


of  Judea  that  were  listening  to  him,
that  *>the  promise  is  unto  you,  and
to  vour  children*  and  to  ah  that  are
afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord
our  Ciod  shall  call-"  The  promise
was  unto  those  that  were  afar  off,
It  makes  no  difference  in  regard  to
nationally,  kindred,  or  race,  and
to-day,  it4  God  calls  any  man  to  obey
him  and  keep  hi>  i-oumiandnumt*  by
gomg  into  the  waters  of  baptism,
this  promise  is  just  as  good  as  it  was
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  when  the
Holy  Ghost  was  poured  out  so
mightily  upon  the  apostles.  Wv
find  an  instance  in  connection  with
this  ordinance  in  th^  Acts  of  the
Apostles.  The  Apostles,  when  at
Jerusalem,  heard  that  Samaria  had
received  the  word  of  Uod,  and  that
Philip  had  been  attending  to  the
ordinance  of  baptism,  after  the
people  had  repented  —but  by  re-
pentance they  did  not  receive  the
,  Holy  Ghost.  You  know  repentance
in  the  Christian  world  to-day
brings  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Peter  and  John  went  down  to  Sa-
maria and  prayed  that  they  mi- lit
receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  did
iraying  bring  it  ?  No.  **  Then
aid  they  their  hands  on  them,  and
they  received  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  This
was  an  ordinance  instituted  by  our
Lord  and  Master,  taught  and  preached
by  him  and  his  ajtostlcs,  for  the  re-
ception of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hut
that  ordinance  to-day,  in  the  midst
of  the  Christian  world,  is  obsolete;
it  is  no  longer  considered  necessary.
I  suppose  that  in  this  day  of  en-
lightenment of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury, with  their  wisdom  in  regard
to  mechanism,  in  regard  to  discovery,
in  regard  to  invention,  they  have
found  out  some  short-cut  method
whereby 'they  can  work  out  their  .sal-
vation without  the  help  of  the  Lord,
and  consequently  have  taken  upon
themselves  to  do  away  with  this


TIM;  K  KS'NTtTloN  uF  ALL  THINGS,  KTC.


283


principle  nf  the  <  lospel.

We  find  that  one  of  the  blessings
thsit  should  be  given  to  those  who
received  this  great  and  glorious  gift
should  be  the  gift  of  wisdom.  If,
however,  we  are  to  judge  the  so-
called  wise  men  of  the  present  day,
we  can  only  conclude  that  they  are
certainly  not  in  possession  of  it;  they
certainly  cannot  he  in  possesion  of
ir,  or  they  would  not  take  thr  enursr
that  many  of  them  do.  It  should
give  unto  them  wisdom,  In  it  you  do
not  find  wisdom  in  their  midst  and
no  faith  in  this  ordinance  of  the
Gospel  What  is  the  reason  to-day
that  this  nation,  for  instance,  does
not  go  into  the  waters  of  baptism  f
Because  they  have  no  faith  that  God
will  keep  his  promise  and  remit  their
sins  by  that  ordinance*  What  is  the
reason  that  the  sects  of  the  day
omit  the  ordinance  of  the  laying  on
of  hands  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost?  Because  they  do  not
believe  that  the  God  of  Israel  will
keep  his  promise  ;  they  have  got  no
faith  in  him.  What  is  the  reason
that,  in  the  midst  of  want  and
misery  that  is  brought  about  by
sickness,  they  do  not  administer  to
the  sick  by  the  laying  on  of  hands
as  commanded  I  Because  the  y  have
no  laith  to  believe  that  God  will
keep  his  promise.  Consequently,  I
am  led  to  believe  that  in  all  this
there  is  a  lack  of  wisdom  on  the
part  of  the  people ;  they  have  not
received  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
winch  leads,  guides  and  directs  them
into  all  truth.  That  it  does  not  do
this  to  the  wise  men  of  this  nation
and  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,
is  an  evident  fact  from  the  many
blunders  they  make  in  their  political
work,  in  their  financial  schemes,  for
to-day  one  scheme  is  raised  up
whereby  the  national  debt  is  to  be
paid  ;  to-morrow  another  man  comes
forth  with  his  ideas  ;  next  day  some-


thing else  turns  up,  and  so  they  are
tossed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  of
financial  doctrine; consequently  I  am
led  to  believe  that  they  have  not  re-
ceived this  gift

1  also  find  that  this  gift  will  show
unto  us  tilings  that  are  to  come.
Well,  it  is  true  we  do  find  people
talking  about  things  that  are  to
come  We  had  a  man  recently  who
published  a  little  book  in  regard  to
great  calamities  that  are  coming.
By  w  hat  authority  did  h  e  s  peak  1
By  what  privilege  did  he  enunciate
these  ideas,  and  where  did  heobtfiyi
them  ]  Did  he  get  credit  for  tbeni  1
Yes  ;  the  world  gives  him  credit
Hut  i lid  God  speak  through  that
man  }  1  should  judge  not  if  we  are
to  take  as  evidence  all  the  belief  and
the  doctrines  of  the  man.  Again,
when  we  go  abroad  in  the  midst  of
this  nation  and  the  nations  of  the
earth  we  ;^k,  '*  Have  von  wise  men
in  your  midst  who  can  foresee  and
foretell  events  that  are  to  come?
"  No,"  say  they,  tk  we  have  nothing
of  that  kind  ;  we  do  not  believe  to-
day in  any  man  having  that  gift/'
and  I  well  remember  the  startled
look  a  gentleman  gave  me  when,  in
conversation  on  this  principle,  I  told
him  that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
revealed  unto  mau  things  that  were
to  come.  He  at  first  seemed  very
pleasantly  struck  with  the  idea.  He
was  a  member  of  a  chuich  and  lived
in  a  Christian  community  in  -which
t  here  w.ere  thousands  of  good  Christ-
ian people.  While  talking  I  asked
him,  what  would  be  the  result  if  he
professed  such  a  thing*  "Why,"
said  he,  "  I  certainly  think  they
would  kill  me*  They  would  not  let
me  live  here  a  week  if  I  were  to  pro-
fess anything  of  the  kind."  "  Whatf
said  I,  "in  the  midst  of  this  Christ*
ian  community,  with  Bibles  all
around,  with  Bible  associations,  with
ministers  of  the  Gospel  calling  upon


people  to  be  saved,  and  with  the
fact  that  the  Savior  preached  this
doctrine,  and  yet  when  you  follow
his  instructions  they  would  take
your  lifef  4t  Yes,"  said  he,  "I
verily  believe  they  would."  Well,
1  can  also  believe  they  would,  too,
from  what  little  experience  I  have
had  in  the  Christian  world,  con-
sequently I  am  led  to  believe  that
they  lack  the  possession  of  this
principle,  that  they  have  not  re-
ceived this  gift.  And  1  sometimes
liken  it  in  this  way  in  my  medita-
tions in  regard  to  it  ;  said  John,
"That  was  true  light  which
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh
into  the  world."  I  understand
every  person  on  the  face  of  the
earth  has  this  lamp  in  his  pos-
session, but  I  ask  you  as  reason-
able beings  what  benefit  is  this
lamp  to  them  unless  it  is  lit  up  1
Would  a  lamp,  in  a  dark  room  be
of  any  benefit  to  a  man  if  he  had
no  means  of  lighting  it,  or  any
means  whereby  to  touch  the  light
to  cause  it  to  shine  %  None  what-
ever, he  would  be  just  as  well
without  the  lamp.  It  must  be  lit
up,  and  the  difficulty  with  the
world  to-day  is  they  may  be  in
possession  of  that  lamp  but  it  has
not  been  lit  up,  whereas  it  was  lit
up  within  the  prophets  of  the
living  God  in  days  gone  by.  and
as  Peter  could  tell  these  people,
comforting  them  in  regard  to  these
matters,  "  Whom  the  heavens  must
receive  until  the  time  of  the  restitu-
tion of  all  tilings  which  God  hath
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his
holy  prophets  since  the  world  began  "
It  was  by  the  lighting  up  of  that
lamp  within  Peter  that  taught  him
in  regard  to  this  great  event  that
was  to  come  at  the  restitution  of  all
things.  Well,  when  the  day  of  re-
stitution came,  what  was  the  result  ?
When  the  morning  sun  of  the  day


of  restitution  arose  and  began  to
make  its  influence  felt  on  the  earth
what  was  the  result? History  but
repeats  itself As  it  was  in  the  days
of  Noah  so  shall  it  be  in  the  coining
of  the  Son  of  Man.  in  the  days  of
the  restitution  of  all  things.  And
when  it  came  to  pass  that  God  raised
up  his  prophet on  the  face  of  the
earth  and  sent  his  angel  from  the
courts  of  heaven  to  restore  these
things  to  the  children  of  men,  these
great  and  glorious  principles  that
had  been  lost,  the  same  opposition,
the  same  character  of  opposition
came  forth, The  principle  of  faith,
to  a  great  extent,  had  been  lost  from
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  when  it
was  restored  back  it  had  to  be  a  re-
storation of  the  same  faith  precisely
that  was  had  in  times  of  old,  the
faith  that  would  cause  men  to  obe
the  principles of  the  everlasting
Gospel  despite  all  the  opposition  of
the  powers  of  darkness,  of  earth  and
hell  combined,  that  might  be  arrayed
against  them. There  was  restored
back  to  the  earth  the  correct  prin-
ciple of  repentance,  of  turning  away
from  wrong-doing. There  was  re-
stored back  to  the  earth  tht  correct
principle  of  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins, There  was  restored  back  to
the  earth  the  ohlinance  of  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost. There  was  restored
back  to  the  earth  the  authui  ity  to
act  in  these  different  offices,  and  as
John  the  Baptist  held  the  keys  of
the  office  of  baptism  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins  he  was  sent  back  to  the
earth  in  this  day  and  age  of  the
world  as  a  messenger  of  God  to  re-
store this  principle  to  the  earth.  But
says the  Christian  world, **  We
don't  believe  it." I  wonder  what
difference  that  makes  1 I  wonder  if
it  makes  any  difference  ? I  wonder
if  that  will  have  any  influence  upon
the  fact? If  John  did  really  come


THK  R  F.ST  NTT  fnN  UF  AU 1  JUNGS,  RTCX


285


thouidi every nian and  every
woman, every soul that  exist-
upon  face  of  the  whole  earth,  should
refuse to believe save the  one
to  whom  it  was  .sent,  yet  it  is  bind-
ing upon  them  so  far  as  the  proclar  i
mation  reaches  them. Believe  it  or
not,  it  still  remains  a  fact,  a  prin-
ciple of  truth  ;  aim  when  man*  vain
man.  stands  up  and  tells  what  he
beli  ves;  what  di  tie  re  nee  does  that
make? None  whatever,  with  all
due.  respect  to  their  belief  whatever
that  may  be ;  we  as  a  people  to-day
know  for  ourselves  that  the  authority
to  baptize  for  the  remission  of  sins
has  been  restored  to  the  earth  by
the  return  of  the  proper  personage,
and  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  well
versed  in  regard  to  these  matters.
"  How  do  you  know  these  things  ;
how  do  you  obtain  this  knowledge.1'
lhave  had  men  ask  me  in  coming  in
contact  with  strangers  to  our  belief
In  replying  to  that  question  let  us
turn  back  to  the  sayings  of  the  Sa-
vior. Said  he  u  If  any  man,"  (he
did  not  bind  it  to  a  dozen,  a  hun-
dred,  a  thousand  or  ten  million)
14  will  do  his  (the  father's)  will,  he
shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether
it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of
myself/1 The  Latter-day  Saints
have  gone  into  the  waters  of  bap-
tism, have  received  the  laying  on  of
hands,  and  they  know  for  themselves
that  these  principles  that  I  have  been
speaking  to  you  about  this  afternoon
are  true,  and  I  have  often  looked
on  the  matter  in  this  way  :  would
it  not  be  a  very  unheard  of  and  pe-
culiar proceeding  for  say  fifty,  or
lot),  or  500  wise  men  from  the  east
t©  come  here  and  try  and  convince
us  there  was  no  Lake  out  there,
never  had  been,  that  it  was  all  a
mistake  and  a  myth,  that  we  were
deceived  in  regard  to  it,  and  when
they  had  pushed  their  argument,  to
such  a  length  as  id  most  to  be  offen-


sive*  unpleasant  and  disagreeable,
without  convincing  us  ;  it  would  be
an  unheard  of  pn we  ling  if  they
wen1  to  say,  "Well,  we  will  put  you
in  prison  and  tine  you  if  you  do  not
acknowledge  that  there  is  no  lake."
But  juntas  unheard  of  is  the  pro
ceeding  made  against  us  to-day,  and
for  years  gone  by,  in  regard  to  the  e
principles  we  advocate  ; we  know
as  a  people,  as  well  as  we  know  Umi
Salt  Lake  exists,  that  God  has  spo-
ken from  the  heavens  in  these  the
last  days. Talk  about  convincing
men  to  the  contrary  in  regard  to
these  matters  ! I  am  sometimes  led
to  marvel  at  the  folly  of  men  in  rj£
gard  to  these  things,  and  it  looks
like  presumption  on  their  part  to
talk  and  act  as  they  do. I  am  will-
ing to  talk  kindly,  courteously,  and
agreeably  with  any  man  in  regard  to
these  principles,  and  when  he  tells
me  there  is  such  a  place  as  Omaha,
and  SMys  "  I  have  passed  through  it,
I  know  there  is  such  a  place,  or
that  there  are  certain  stations  on
the  railroad  here,"  T  am  willing  to
believe  him  ; I  do  not  contradict
him  and  when  I  tell  him  that  I
know  for  myself  of  the  truth  of  my
religion  I  expect  he  will  treat  me
courteously  in  regard  to  that  mat-
ter. But  our  expectations  in  that
respect  are  not  always  realized.  We
are  often  answered  very  peculiarly ;
we  are  often  met  with  very  pecu-
liar arguments,  I  take  it  for  granted,
however,  that  it  is  no  argument  to
disprove  a  principle  to  libel  the  cha-
racter of  believers  in  that  prin-
ciple. The after character  of
Judas  did not prove that  his
evidence  of  Christ  wras  incorrect
The  denial  of  Peter  did  not  prove
that  Jesus  was  not  the  Christ.  The
character  of  a  man  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  principle  that  may  be
advanced. I  do  not  care  where
truth  comes  from  j  I  do  not  care


JOTHNAL  OF  hlSCuriSSKS.


who  pmu-hes  it  ;  I  do  not  care  if
tlx*  devil  ijimseli enunciated  a  prin-
ciple of'tuth,  it  is  truth  all  the
sain*',  and  you  cannot  change  or
alter  it.  r  1  do  not  care  how  wise
the  man  is,  how  long  the  prayer
he  may  make,  or  how  reverend  he
may  look,  if  he  tells  a  lie.  it  is  a  lie,
and  you  cannot  change  or  alter  it
Tims  it  is  we  as  a  people  look  upon
the  principles  of  truth,  those  princi-
ples that  led  to  light  and  knowledge,
and  it  is  time  that  people  laid  down
the  foolish  idea  of  striving  against
such  things.  Let  us  sit  down  for  a
moment  and  examine  in  detail  prin-
ciple after  principle,  and  I  will  say
to  you  that  if  any  man  on  the  face
of  the  earth  will  show  me  that  I  am
in  error  on  any  principle,  I  will
leave  it  that  very  hour,  and  no
longer  claim  it  as  a  principle.  Will
every  man  do  as  much  to  met
Many  will,  and  many  will  not.
I  remember  the  case  of  a  minister
who  came  to  visit  me.  I  wished  to
be  fair  with  hur,  and  I  desired  that
he  should  be  equally  so  with  me,
I  said,  "  Now  we  are  alone  in  the
room,  there  are  no  witnesses  here  ;
but  I  will  make  a  contract  with
you*  Here  is  the  Bible )  we  will
hunt  for  truth,  and  wherever  I  find
truth  you  are  to  acknowledge  it,
and  wherever  you  find  truth  I  shall
do  the  same  "  "  No/*  said  he,  *'  I
won't"  "  Why  notf  said  L  "Oh,"
said  he,  "you  might  spring  some
trap.  We  have  a  certain  discipline
*°  g°  toy ;  we  have  got  a  creed  of
faith,  and  you  may  try  to  catch  me
in  soma  trap/'  "  But,"  said  I,  "  if
you  are  wrong  in  your  creed  or  faith,
don't  you  want  to  be  put  right  f
"  Oh,"  said  he,  "  it  is  the  faith  of
my  fathers,  ■  it  is  the  faith  they  died
by,  it  is  the  faith  of  my  grandfather,
my  great  grandfather;  for  genera-
tions back  they  have  lived  and  died
by  it,  and  I  cannot  afford  to  make  a


change,"  11  Well,"  said  I,  "there  is
no  use  you  and  1  talking  if  that  is
the  case,  that  ends  t i i e  vo 1 1 v e r sa tin i j . ' 1
Now,  1  consider  such  reasoning  as
the  height  of  foolishness-  Let
us,  as  honest  men  and  honest  women,
lay  down  all  prejudice  and  malice,
and  examine  the  principles  of  truth
and  righteousness  as  they  are  placed
before  us,  and  as  the  light  and  in-
telligence of  the  Holy  Spirit  will
show  them  unto  us,  for  they  will
lead  and  guide  us  back  to  the
presence  of  our  Father  and  God.
The  truth  will  hurt  no  man.  The
principles  of  tiuth  the  Latter-da
Saints  preach  to  the  nations  of  th
earth  ;  the  principles  that  the  El-
ders have  carried  to  the  nations,  are
the  principles  whereby  the  human
family  can  be  saved  if  they  will  but
hearken  to  them.  These  principles
are  not  for  a  few,  the  plan  God  has
revealed  is  for  all.  These  principles
are  revealed  that  God's  kingdom
may  be  established  on  the  earth  in
righteousness,  and  they  shall  lead,
guide,  and  control  untold  millions
of  the  human  family  that  have  dwelt
and  shall  yet  dwell  upon  the  earth.
We  as  Latter-day  Saints  should
have  broad  and  philanthropic  views
in  regard  to  these  things.  What
if  our  names  are  cast  out  as  evil  i
what  if  they  do  strike  ys,  or  contend
in  regard  to  these  matters  ?  Read
the  history  of  the  past,  and  what
has  been  the  result  1  Take  indivi
duals,  take  the  men  who  have  con-
tended against  the  kingdom  of  God
in  the  last  half  century,  and  what
has  been  the  result  1  Take  the
plans,  and  the  untold  thousands  of
plots  and  projects  that  have  been
brought  forth  for  the  overthrow  of
the  Church  of  Christ,  and  where
are  they  to-day  I  ;

u  Gone  glimmering  among  the  things  tha

were

A  school  boy's  tale  of  other  days
The  wonder  of  but  an  hour."


THK  IXTKIi  K>T HTM  AM  TV, KT<  \


2*7


Gone  im  lunger  tn  he  remembered  ;
forgotten  from  the  face  of  the  earth
and  their  projectors  with  them.
How  Ion"  will  men  continue  in  their
foolishness,  striving  against  the  buck-
lers of  Jehovah  ?  Why,  just  so  long
as  the  Loril  lets  them,  no  longer.
We  as  the  people  of  God,  recognize
the  hand  of  God  in  relat  on  to  these
things,  and  we  want  to  prepare  and
fit  our  minds  for  an  exalted  view  in
relation  to  the  workings  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  We  want  to  put
away  the  "  penny  wise  and  pound
foolish  "  ideas  that  many  of  us  have
in  regard  to  these  things  as  not  be-
coming us  as  Latter-day  San  its.  1
am  not  finding  fault ;  but  we  want
to  look  upon  thes©  principles  with
great  and  noble  minds  ;  u  we  want
to  shape  our  lives  in  connection  with


these  things,  and  as  was  said  in
times  of  old.  let  us  >eek  Hr>t  the
kingdom  of  God  a; id  his  righteous-
ness ami  all  these  things  shall  lie
added  unto  you."  We  want  to  set
our  faces  to  ihe  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  To  the  spreading
and  promulgation  of  the  principles
thereof  not  only  through-  ,,g  the  val-
lies  of  the  mountains,  1  lit  t  loudi-
out  the  nations  of  tin*  eaji,,.  And
will  the  opposition  we  have  to  meet
stop  it]  Not  by  any  means.  It
will  but  add  fuel  to  the  fire,  until
the  blaze  will  grow  higher  and
higher  until  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  shall  see  it,  and  Zkn  shall  be
set  upon  a  hill,  which  m  y  God
grant  in  the  name  of  Jeaus.
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

DELIVERED  IN  TBS  TABERNACLE,  SALT  LAKE  CITY,  JULY  27th,  1879.

( Reported  h{  Geo.  F,  Gihbs.)


PRACTICAL  NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


There  is  a  little  time  remaining,
which  I  am  requested  to  occupy.

The  theme  of  the  Gospel  is  one
that  can  be  dwelt  on  for  a  great
length  of  time  and  yet  not  be  ex-
hausted ;  for  according  to  the  views
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  the  Gospel
embraces  all  truth,  and  there  is  no


truth  of  any  nature  or  namef
whether  it  be  scientific,  or  moral,
or  religious,  that  is  not  comprehended
within  the  scope  of  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ  Therefore,  those  who
embrace  the  Gospel,  as  has  been
said,  start  upon  the  path  of  progress,
the  end  of  which  no  one  can  see ;  it


£88


JOL'KNAL  UK  OIS«  Ut'KSES.


is  not  given  to  human  being*  to
comprehend  ;  it  extends  into  eter-
nity, and  comprehends  the  wisdom
and  power  and  the  knowledge  of
eternity.  It  has  often  been  re*
marked  respecting  our  meetings  in  I
tliis  Tabernacle,  by  persons  who
have  not  been  accustomed  to  our
form  of  worship  and  our  method  of
instruction,  that  we  very  frequently
dwell  upon  a  great  many  subjects
that  other  people  do  not  deem  ap-
propriate to  the  Sabbath.  There  is
a  reason  for  this  ;  it  is  found  in  the
fact  which  I  have  stated — that  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  comprehends
all  truth  ;  and  therefore  everything
necessary  for  the  promotion  of  a
man's  happiness,  for  the  enlarge-
ment of  his  views  and  his  mind,  and
for  the  development  of  all  his  being,
physical  and  mental,  everything  of
this  kind  should  be  treated  upon
at  the  time  anil  the  season  when  it
is  needed.  I  do  not,  myself,  value
a  religion  that  confines  its  teachings
to  the  Sabbath,  that  does  not  enter
into  the  every  day  life  of  those  who
profess  it.  Such  a  religion  people
may  put  on  as  they  do  their  Sunday
apparel,  and  wear  to  the  meeting-
house ;  and  when  the  day  passes,
doff  it  as  they  do  their  apparel,  and
assume  their  every-day  practices.
But  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ
should  be  taught  and  practised  by
those  who  believe  it,  every  day  of
the  week  and  in  all  the  pursuits  of
life.  And  in  this  respect  1  some-
times think  that  we,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  come  short  of  doing  that
which  is  ineumbent  upon  us.  We
allow  our  religion  to  be  too  theore-
tical, and  do  not  practise  it  to  the
extent  that  is  required  by  the  teach-
ings of  the  Gospel  It  is  very  well
for  us  to  come  to-day  and  listen  to  the
discourse  we  have  heard,  and  rejoice
hi  the  spirit  of  it ;  but  if  we  do  not
lake  with  us  the  principles  which


are  taught,  and  apply  them  in  our
lives,  our  visit  to  day  to  this  Tab-
ernacle would  be  of  very  little  pro-
fit. It  is  for  this  purpose  that  the
Gospel  has  been  revealed,  it  is  for
this  purpose  that  it  is  taught,  it  is
for  this  purpose  that  the  Holy  (jhost
has  been  promised  and  poured  out,
that  those  who  receive  it  may  be-
come better  men,  may  become  better
women,  may  become  more  pure,
that  the  evil  that  ^eeius  to  be  natural
to  u&  in  consequence  of  our  fallen
condition,  may  be  overcome  and
uprooted,  and  put  away  from  us.
Will  those  who  believe  and  practise
the  Gospel  be  dishonest  ?  Certainly
not.  Will  they  take  advantage  of
their  neighbors?  Will  they  tell
falsehoods  concerning  their  neigh-
bors? Will  they  indulge  in  slander-
ing and  tattling  and  backbiting?
Will  they  be  envious,  or  filled  with
malice  or  jealousies  1  Not  if  they
practise  the  Gospel;  not  if  the  spirit
of  the  Gospel  rests  down  upon
them  will  they  do  any  of  these
things.  If  they  do,  they  will  be
checked  in  their  feelings,  the  Spirit
of  God  will  reprove  them,  and  if
they  live  as  they  should,  when  they
bow  down  at  night  to  ask  pardon
for  the  acts  of  the  day  that  have
been  improper  in  the  sight  of  God,
it  will  bring  to  their  remembrance,
and  show  to  them  in  plainness  where
they  have  come  short  on  these
points,  and  they  will  have  the  spirit
of  repentance,  and  will  seek  to  put
such  things  away  far  from  them.
In  this  way  they  will  progress.
Now,  this  is  not  required  of  us  on
this  day  alone — the  first  day  of  the
week,  the  day  of  worship  set  apart
for  us  to  come  together ;  but  it  is
required  on  Monday,  and  on  Tues-
day, and  so  on  until  Saturday*  Thii
work  of  self-improvement,  under  tin
influence  and  power  of  the  Gospe]
and  Spirit  of  God,  should  go  on


THE  PRACTICAL  NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC,


289


every  day  we  live,  and  it  should  In;
a  coDstaut  subject  of  thought  with
us  when  we  rise  in  the  morning
and  lit*  down  at  night :  Wherein
have  we  come  short  of  obeying  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  ]  Have  I
done  any  injury  to  my  fellow- man  1
Have  I  grieved  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  ?  Have  I  neglected  some  duty?  ,
Have  I  said  that  which  I  ought  not
to  have  said?  Have  I  done  that
which  I  ought  not  to  have  done  ?
Have  I  been  just,  have  I  been  merci-
ful, have  I  been  upright  ?  Have  I
allowed  any  thought,  any  feeling  to
enter  my  heart  concerning  my  i
neighbor,  concerning  some  of  my
associates  that  I  should  not  enter-
tain I  If  I  have,  then  it  is  my  duty,
if  I  believe  the  Gospel  and  desire  to
practise  its  principles,  to  repent  of
that,  to  confess  it,  :

There  was  a  time  when  God  re-
quired of  his  people  the  sacrifice  of
animals.  They  brought  their  ani-
mals and  they  were  offered  up  as
sacrifices,  and  they  obtained  the  re
mission  of  sins  by  that  method.  This
was  required  under  the  law  of  Moses:
it  was  required  until  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  God,  until  he  made  his
great  sacrifice  for  man.  But  what
does  God  require  of  us  1  Is  it  that
we  shall  bring  animals  and  offer
burnt  offerings  unto  him  ?  No,  he
does  not  make  that  requirement  of
us  to-day,  but  this  is  the  sacrifice
required  of  us  :  he  asks  us  that  we  ;
shall  come  to  him  with  broken  hearts
and  with  contrite  spirits.  If  we  do
he  will  accept  of  us,  our  offerings
will  be  like  the  offerings  of  Abel,
acceptable  in  his  sight ;  but  if  we
go  to  him  as  Cain  did,  our  offerings
will  not  be  acceptable  to  him,  and
he  will  reject  them.  But  if  you
and  I  and  all  who  profess  to  be  the
followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus  will  bow
down  before  him  with  humble  hearts,
each  of  us  with  a  broken  heart  and

No.  19.


contrite  spirit,  what  will  be  the
effect  ]  Why,  we  will  confess  our
faults  to  him,  because  they  will  be
plain  in  our  sight,  we  will  see  our-
selves in  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of
(rod,  and  the  spirit  of  repentance
wilt  rest  down  upon  us.  Suppose
we  bo w  down  before  hint  because  it
is  the  custom  to  do  so,  in  a  formal
manner,  worshipping  him  with  our
lips  while  our  hearts  are  far  from
him,  repeating  by  rote  certain  sen-
tences we  have  learned,  and  to  the
use  of  which  we  have  become  ac-
customed, will  such  an  offering  be
acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Cer*
t.aiuly  not.  He  desires  that  those
who  worship  him  shall  worship  him
in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  that  they
shall  confess  their  sins  not  only  to
him,  but,  where  they  have  wronged
each  other,  to  one  another.  It  is
my  duty,  if  I  have  wronged  my
brother,  to  go  to  my  brother  and
confess  and  ask  his  forgiveness.  If
T  wrong  my  sister,  it  is  my  duty  to
do  the  same.  If  I  do  wrung  to  my
God,  it  is  my  duty  to  bow  down  be-
fore him  in  humility  and  confess  in
contrition  of  spirit  the  wrong  1  have
done  and  beseech  him  in  the  name
of  Jesus  to  forgive  my  sins.  And
this  is  a  duty  that  rests  upon  us  as
Latter-day  Saints,

These  are  some  of  the  practical
parts  of  our  religion,  and,  as  1  have
said,  not  to  be  practised  today
alone,  to-day,  the  first  day  of  the
week,  the  Sabbath,  but  to  be  prac-
tised to-morrow,  and  to  be  carried
out  in  our  lives,  in  our  daily  inter-
course one  with  another;  to  be
meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  seeking
the  Spirit  of  Jesus,  willing  to  suffer
wrong  rather  than  do  wrong ;  not
to  be  rude,  not  to  be  harsh,  not  to
be  unfeeling,  or  unkind  in  our  inter-
course with  our  families,  but  to
cany  with  us  the  spirit  of  meekness
and  of  love,  that  when  we  enter  our

Vol.  XX,


290


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


homes  we  shall  be  welcomed  with
gladness,  our  children  shall  delight
in  our  visitations  as  they  would  in
the  visitation  of  an  angel  if  they
knew  one  was  coming. How  many
are  there  of  the  men  in  this  assem-
bly and  of  this  Church  who,  when
they  enter  their  houses,  enter  with
scowls  on  their  faces,  bringing  all
their  cares  with  them,  intruding !
vtpon  the  serenity  of  their  families,
making  their  presence  disagreeable
to  all,  instead  of  going  in  with  glad-
ness and  peace  and  carrying  with
them  the  consolation  that  should
attend  their  presence  always  1  Their
wives are  perhaps fretful  from
overwork,  their  nerves  affected  by
the  toils  of  the  day,  or  the  heat,
causing  them  to  be  in  an  irritable
mood,  and  when  the  two  come  to-
gether  under  such  circumstances
they  produce  friction,  bad  feeling
and  offences  follow. Is  it  a  man's
duty,  or  right, or privilege,  to
carry  his  cares  into  his  family  and
disturb  the  peace  and  serenity  ex-
isting there  by  relating  his  troubles?
Certainly not. When  his  foot
rests  upon  the  thrcshhold  of  his
door,  no  matter  what  his  difficul-
ties, or  perplexities  may  be,  he
should  enter  with the  spirit  of
peace  in  his  heart  and  with  the
love  of  God  burning  within  him.
If  there  is  irritability  existing,  his
presence should be  soothing  to
every  member  of  his  household,
and  particularly  in  talking  with  his
children,  they  should  feel  the  in-
fluence of  his  presence; and  if
there  should  be  any  improper  feel-
ings existing, they should  be
■calmed  as  disturbed  and  ruffled
water  is  by  pouring  oil  upon  it.
A  Latter-day  Saint ! Think  of  the
nature  of  the  name. A  Saint  of
God ! Why,  be  should  be  next  to
an  angel ;  the  most  perfect  of  the
human  family. He  should  be  per-


fect in  his  sphere,  as  God  is  perfect
in  his  sphere. He  should  be  free
from  fault. If  he  have  a  fault  he
should  seek  daily  and  hourly  to
correct  it,  and  not  rest  satisfied  as
long  as  he  is  aware  of  the  existence
of  a  fault  until  he  conquers  it,
pleading  with  the  Father  in  the
name  of  Jesus  for strength  to
overcome  his  weakness, for  power
to  put  it  away,  carrying  with  him
the  spirit  of  love,  the  spirit  of  sere-
nity, the  spirit  of  peace,  that  when
he  appears  in  society,  no  matter
where  he  may  be,  all  who  come  in
contact  with  him  may  feel  his  in-
fluence and feel purified  and
strengthened  by  his  example  and
by  his  words  and  by  his  very  pre-
sence. And  this  is  what  God  de-
signs we  should  be  as  Latter-day
Saints. Tattle  about  one  another ;
backbite,  slander  and  speak  evil  of
one  another  ;  are  such  things  proper
for  Latter-day  Saints  ? No.  They
should  be  banished  from  our  society
and  from  our  households.  Our
children  should  be  taught  better.
When  they  speak  evil  of  any  one
they  should  be  checked  and  told  if
they  cannot  say  something  good  con-
cerning their  fellows,  to  say  nothing.
Instead  of  finding  fault  there  should
be  charity,  which  covers  a  multitude
of  sins. Instead  of  looking  at  the
faults  of  others,  they  should  be
taught  to  look  at  their  own  faults.
And  they  are  numerous  enough  :  we
have  plenty  of  them  to  keep  us  oc-
cupied closely  all  our  time,  with  all
the  prayer  and  all  the  faith  we  can
exercise  before  God. Our  own
faults,  our  own  sins,  our  own  short-
comings are  sufficient  to  occupy  our
entire  attention,  without  thinking
about  those  of  our  neighbors,  or  ever
speaking  about  them. Those  who
bear  the  priesthood  have  the  right,
and  it  is  their  duty  to  administer  re-
proof and  to  point  out  faults;  but


it  is  for  the  members  of  the  Church
to  look  to  themselves.  Let  any
member  of  the  Church  who  thinks
lie  has  plenty  of  time  after  attend-
ing to  his  own  faults  to  attend  to
his  neighbor  s,  examine  himself  ;  let
him  bow  down  before  the  Lord  and
ask  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  poured
out  upon  him,  so  that  he  can  see
himself  in  his  tru»i  light;  and  if  he
does  not  arise  satisfied  that  it  will
take  all  his  time  to  correct  his  own
weaknesses  and  follies  it  will  be
very  strange.

Then,  are  we  honest  one  with  an-
other ]  Do  I  do  to  my  neighbor  in
my  dealing  with  him  as  1  wish
htm  to  do  to  me  ?  If  I  do  not,
then  I  do  not  carry  out  the  prin-
ciples of  my  religion.  If  I  take
advantage  of  his  ignorance,  of  his
inexperience  or  of  his  circum-
stances— it  may  be  he  is  in  a  strait
place,  and  he  is  compelled  to  do
something  that  he  would  not  do  if
his  necessities  did  not  press  him,
do  1  perform  my  duty  to  him  as
a  Latter-day  Saint !  If  I  take  ad-
vantage of  him,  then  I  do  not  treat
him  as  I  would  like  to  be  treated
if  our  positions  were  reversed.  Does
the  spirit  of  greed  enter  into  my
heart,  and  I  think  "Now,  here  is
an  opportunity  for  me  to  make
something,  or  getting  the  advan-
tage f  if  it  does,  then  I  am  not  a
Latter-day  Saint  in  that  respect  ;
I  do  not  carry  out  the  principles
of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  fail
in  being  that  which  I  profess  to  be,
and  I  have  cause  to  repent  truly
and  sincerely,  and  ask  forgiveness
of  the  Lord  and  my  brother.

This  work  of  self-improvement,
under  the  power  and  influence  of  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  work
given  to  each  of  us.  It  should  be
the  great  work  of  our  lives ;  it
should  be  the  chief  thought  of  our
hearts. There  is  nothing  greater.


Brother  Stayner  remarked  that  if
he  could  be  the  means  of  saving

,  only  one  soul,  how  great  his  joy
would  be.  Yes,  that  is  true.  And
if  that  soul  should  be  himself  alone,
his  joy  will  be  great  But  if  he
should  be  the  means  of  saving  an-
other  soul,  his  joy  would  be  still
great  en  But  the  greatest  work  we
can  do  is  to  so  live  that  we  ourselves
shall  be  saved,  that  our  own  acts
shall  be  correct,  and  our  will  and
desires  ami  passions  be  brought
into  subjection  to  the  will  of  God-
There  is  no  work  that  I  know  of  so
great  and  important  to  me  as  this*
A  man  may  perform  a  mission  ;  he
may  do  innumerable  good  works  ;
his  name  may  be  heralded  through-
out the  Church  and  to  the  nations
of  the  earth,  and  the  people  may
an vpt  it  as  that  of  a  great  and
mighty  man  ;  but  if  that  man  does
not  conquer  himself  and  live  in  strict
accordance  with  the  principles  of
the  Gospel,  his  position  will  only
increase  his  condemnation.  Far
better  is  the  condition  of  the  humble,
the  obscure  man,  the  man  unknown
out  of  the  limited  circle  of  his  im-
mediate associates,  who  is  without
fame,  but  who  does  live  his  religion,
who  practises  the  principles  of  the
<  lospel  as  they  are  taught  by  the
Lord.  Far  better  is  the  condition
of  that  man  than  the  other,  if  he
docs  that  and  the  other  man  neg-
lects to  do  it  This  Gospel  of  our's
is  a  practical  Gospel  It  is  not  like
our  Sunday  apparel,  to  be  put  on
to-day  and  put  off  to-morrow ;  it
ought  to  be  carried  with  us  in  al
the  transactions  of  life,  applied  to
everything  we  think,  we  say  and  do,
and  always  be  remembered  by  us.

i  And  then  what  sort  of  people  will
we  be  ]  We  will  be  a  people  whom
the  Lord  will  delight  to  bless  ;  and
who  will  have  his  Spirit  and  power
resting  down  upon  us. And  no


292


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


matter  how  much  we  may  he  ma-
ligned and  spoken  evil  about,  we
shall  have  the  consolation  of  know-
ing from  the  Lord  that  we  are  right,
that  we  have  done  that  which  lie
requires,  and  that  we  have  his  bless-
ing and  his approval This  is
worth  more  than  everything  else
that  can  be  brought  about.  With
the  experience  1  have  had  in  my
life  I  would  rather  have  the  grace
of  Goth  the  sweetness  and  happiness,
the  blessing  and  coin  fort  of  his  Spi-
rit and  be  in  poverty  as  great  as  that
of  the  wild  Indian  of  our  mountains
than  to  dwell  in  palaces  and  revel
in  luxury  and  ease  without  that
grace  and  Spirit, I  have  tested  this
to  my  entire  satisfaction,  tested  it
under  circumstances  when  I  have
proved  that  a  man  can  be  as  happy
as  an  angel — that  is,  as  happy  in
his  sphere,  in  doing  the  will  of  God
in  the  midst  of  poverty  and  difficul-
ties. It  is  not  these  external  cir-
cumstances that  are  the  sources  of
happiness. Of  course  it  is  right  and
proper  we  should  take  care  of  the
bodies  God  has  given  unto  us,  just
as  much  as  our  spirits,  that  they
should  be  kept  clean,  that  our  cloth-
ing should  be  comfortable  and  our
habitation  suitable. God  has  given
unto  us  wisdom  and  power  to  do
this,  and  he  has  placed  the  elements
around  us,  and  he  would  condemn
us  if  we  did  not  use  them  for  our
comfort  and  blessing. But  they
are  not  the  only  things  needful  You
may  pile  up  money  until  you  fill
this  Tabernacle  and  its  possession
would  not  make  a  man  happy.  You
may  give  men  carriages  and  horses,
houses  and  lands  and  everything  of
this  character,  but  unless  there  is
the  spirit  of  happiness  within  them


they  would  not  be  happy.  The  man
who  lives  near  to  God  who  has  the
Spirit  of  God,  be  he  ever  so  humble,
is  a  happy  man  ;  and  without  it
there  is  no  true  happiness.

It  should  be  our  constant  study
to  live  so  that  the  Holy  Spirit  will
always  dwell  with  us,  that  when  we
arise  in  the  morning  our  minds  and
our  hearts  may  be  as  clear  as  the
frky  when  there  is  no  cloud  in  it,
that  we  feel  at  peace  with  God  and
man. It  should  be  the  aim  of
every  one  professing  to  be  a  Latter-
day  Saint  not  to  leave  his  chamber
in  the  morning  until  he  conies  out
feeling  that  spirit  of  peace,  with  his
brow  unruffled  with  care,  with  a
consciousness  of  having  communed
with  God  aim  that  he  knows  his
standing with him. When  he
leaves  his  chamber  having  that  spi-
rit, he  will  diffuse  joy  and  gladness
throughout his entire  household*
Should  anything  occur  to  disturb
the  serenity  of  a  Latter-day  Saint
he  ought  to  step  aside  and  ask  God
in  the  name  of  Jesus  to  remove  it
and  to  pour  out  the  spirit  of  peace
and  consolation  upon  him  to  fill  his
heart. At  night  too, the  same
Spirit  of  peace  should  be  sought  for.
j  The  thoughts,  the  words  and  the
actions  of  t  he  day  should  be  reviewed,
and  forgiveness  of  wrong  should  be
sought  for,  then  a  man  can  retire  in
peace  ;  and  then  if  God  in  his  provi-
dence should  call  him  home  during
the  night  he  would  feel  at  peace
with  Him  and  with  all  men.  In
this  manner  we  should  live,  and  if
we  do  not  live  in  this  way  we  fail  to
be  what  we  profess  to  be.

That  God  may  help  us  so  to  live,
is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


THE  WORK  OF  THE  RESTITUTION,  ETC


293


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  C.  W.  PENROSE,

Delivered  in  thk  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  ox  Sunday

Afternoon,  Aug.  17th,  1879.


(Reported  hy  Geo.  R  Gihbs.)


THK  Wi  >i;k  OF  RESTITUTION  OF  ALL  THINGS — FUTILITY  OF  THE  EFFORTS
OF  ITS  OPPONENTS— SHOULD  NOT  CHERISH  ANIMOSITY  TO  EN  EM  IKS.


There  are  a  few  minutes  remain-
ing, which  I  am  requested  to  occu-
py; and  while  doing  so  I  earnestly
desire  that  I  may  be  inspired  by
the  spirit  that  gives  light  and  intel-
ligence to  the  human  mind  and
makes  plain  the  things  of  God,  so
that  what  I  may  say  to  you  may  be
profitable  and  edifying.

I  rejoice  very  much  that  I  have
the  privilege  of  living  upon  the  earth,
at  the  time  when  God  has  commen-
ced the  great  work  spoken  of  by  all
the  holy  prophets  since  the  world
began ;  when  the  times  of  restitu-
tion have  commenced ;  when  God
has  begun  to  restore  to  the  inhabit-
.ants  of  the  earth,  the  dm- trine  and
principles  which  were  revealed  to
the  people  anciently,  hy  winch  they
were  brought  into  communion  with
the  Father  ;  when  the  bojly  priest-
hood,  or  the  authority  given  from
God  to  man  to  act  in  his  stead,  has
been  restored  to  the  earth  ;  when
the  gifts  and  blessings  which  were
■enjoyed  by  the  ancient  Saints  have
also  been  restored  ;  when  the  know-
ledge possessed  by  the  ancients  of
the  manner  iu  which  God  could  he
approached  so  that  they  might  learn


of  him,  has  also  been  made  manifest
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  ;  in  the  day
when  the  great  work  which  will  pre-
pare the  earth  and  the  inhabitants
thereof  for  its  Prince,  its  rightful
lawgiver  and  King,  has  commenced
upon  the  earth,  1  rejoice  and  thank
God  with  all  my  heart  that  I  am
i  d  e  uti  f  u  -\  1  w  i  tl  i tli  is pi  m  >  pi  e 1 1 1  at

I  have  received  the  spirit  of  this
work ;  that  I  have  been  able  to
understand  these  principles  and  doc-
trines and  that  I  have  cast  in  my
lot  with  the  people  who  are  engaged
in  the  work  of  preparing  themselves
for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.

The  times  of  restitution  which
have  been  alluded  to  this  afternoon
by  Brother  Morgan,  and  which  the
Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  in  the  words
which  have  been  read  in  your  hear-
ing, are  of  the  very  greatest  impor-
tance to  all  people,  who  live  upon
the  ear  tli  to  understand.  Every
prophet  by  whom  God  has  spoken
since  the  world  besran  has  had  some
foresight  in  regard  to  this  work.
When  we  take  up  the  Bible  we  find
all  the  prophets  whose  words  are  re-
corded therein  speaking  of  the  great
work  of  God  in  the  latter  days  ;  of


294  JOURNAL  OF

the  great  day  of  the  Lord  ;  of  the
time  when  righteousness  should
prevail,  and  iniquity  should  cease  ;
of  the  time  when  misrule  should  be
cast  down,  when  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  that  have  ruled  in  un-
righteousness should  lose  their  grasp
upon  the  children  of  men,  and  in  the
place  thereof  the  kingdom  of  God
should  be  established ;  of  the  time
when  the  curse  which  was  placed
upon  the  earth  in  the  beginning
should  be  removed,  and  when  in-
stead of  the  thorn  and  the  brier
should  spring  up  the  fig  tree  and
the  myrtle  tree ;  of  the  day  when
the  animosity  between  man  and  man
and  between  mankind  and  the  brute
creation,  should  be  taken  away;
when  the  lion  and  the  lamb  should
dwell  together  j  when  the  spirit  of
destruction  should  cease  and  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God  prevail  over
the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  the
way  be  prepared  for  the  coming  of
its  rightful  ruler,  w  He  whose  right
it  is  to  reign  "  and  who  will  ride
"  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends  of  the
earth;"  of  the  time  when  that  wicked
one  M  who  tempted  our  first  parents
in  the  beginning,  who  introduced
evil  and  death  into  the  world,  and
who  lias  ever  since  made  it  his  aim
and  object  to  usurp  the  control  of
the  earth,  shall  be  bound,  and  with
all  his  hosts  be  banished  from  the
earth  and  this  whole  creation  be  rid
of  his  influence,  and  when  the  Spirit
of  God  will  be  poured  out  upon  all
flesh.  This  period  has  been  fore-
seen and  has  been  alluded  to  in  much
plainness  by  many  of  the  prophets
upon  the  eastern  hemisphere  and
also  upon  the  western  continent;
their  words  were  recorded  and  have
come  down  to  us  through  the  Bible
and  the  Book  of  Mormon*

The  spirit  which  God  has  been
pleased  to  pour  out  upon  us  in  some
degree  opens  our  minds  to  a  com- '


DISCOURSES,

prehension  of  these  same  things.
When  we  take  up  the  Bible  or  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  read  of  the
restitution  to  come,  we  can  see  it  as
the  prophets  saw  it ;  for  the  same
spirit  that  rested  upon  Isaiah  and
Jeremiah  and  upon  Nephi  and  Mo-
roni and  others  of  the  prophets  that
lived  upon  this  continent,  rests  upon
the  people  of  God  in  these  latter-
days.  The  same  evidences  are  open
to  our  vision,  and  we  know  as  sure
as  we  know  that  G<m1  lives  that  the
day  is  close  at  hand  when  those
events  spoken  of  will  transpire  upon
the  earth.

We  are  living  in  a  time  of  great
wickednesss,  of  great  corruption  and
evil  of  numerous  kinds ;  they  are
widespread  upon  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof
have  turned  from  the  Lord  in  a  great
degree,  according  to  the  Scripture
which  has  been  quoted  :  u  They
have  transgressed  the  laws,  changed
the  ordinance  and  broken  the  ever-
lasting covenant,"  God  has  with-
drawn himself  from  the  children
of  men.  Darkness  has  covered  the
earth  and  gross  darkness  the  people.
While  they  boast  of  living  in  an
age  of  Gospel  light,  they  are  really
and  truly  shut  out  from  commu-
nion with  the  Lord.  No  prophet's
voice  is  heard  in  their  midst ;  no
seer  discerns  the  things  of  God  j
no  angel  from  the  courts  of  glory
bears  a  message  of  glad  tidings  to
man.  The  heavens  are  as  brass
over  their  heads.  They  have  no
answer  when  they  pray,  or  rather
when  they  say  their  prayers,  for  it
may  be  truly  said  of  them  in  the
words  of  the  Lord  through  Isaiah,
they  "  draw  near  me  with  their
mouth,  and  with  their  lips  do
honor  me,  but  have  removed  their
hearts  far  from  me,  and  their  fear
toward  me  is  taught  by  the  precepts
of  men," "  Therefore,"  says  the


THE  WORK  OF  THE


RESTITUTION,  ETC


Lord,  "behold,  I  will  proceed  to
do  a  marvellous  work  among  this
people,  even  a  marvellous  work
and  a  wonder :  for  the  wisdom  of
their  wise  men  shall  perish,  and  the
understanding  of  their  prudent
men  shall  be  hid,"  while  to  the
weak  and  despised  and  poor  of  the
earth  whom  God  has  gathered  from
the  nations  he  has  revealed  his  will
and  the  precious  tilings  of  his
kingdom ;  and  they  are  preparing
themselves  for  the  great  events  that
are  to  transpire  in  the  near  future.

God  has  commenced  the  great
work  of  restitution  of  all  tilings  by
restoring  the  Gospel  in  its  primitive
simplicity,  and  every  principle  and
o n  liii  ai  \  c  e  1  *elc  mgi  ng  thereto  w  i  t  h
the  authority  and  power  to  admi-
nister therein.  Every  man  that
has  lived  upon  the  earth  in  past
ages,  who  has  held  the  keys  in  any
dispensation  oT  God's  mercy  to
man,  has  come  down  from  the  place
whence  he  has  gone,  and  restored
those  keys ;  they  have  all  brought
their  priesthood,  their  authority,
and  the  spirit  and  power  belonging
thereunto,  and  ordained  living  men
to  the  authority  which  they  them-
selves held.  And  the  reason  why
we  know  this  is  true,  is  because
God  Almighty  has  made  this  mani-
fest to  every  humble  soul  who  has
bowed  in  obedience  to  this  Gospel
Our  testimony  does  not  depend  upon
Joseph  Smith  ;  it  does  not  depend
upon  Brigham  Young  ;  it  does  not
depend  upon  John  Taylor,  or  upon
the  council  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,
which  is  now  the  presiding  quorum
in  the  Church.  I  pin  my  faith  to
no  man's  sleeve  ;  I  am  a  believer  in
the  Scripture  which  says,  44  Cursed
be  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,
and  maketh  flesh  his  arm/1  1
obeyed  this  Gospel  because  I  be-
lieved it  was  true,  through  reading
the  Scriptures,  which  I  was  taught


from  my  early  childhood  to  believe
in.  When  the  sound  of  the  Gospel
reached  my  ears  I  believed ;  and
having  bowed  in  obedience  to  its
ordinances,  I  received  a  testimony
for  myself  of  its  truthfulness,  and
that  testimony  has  never  departed
from  me-  I  know  by  the  power
and  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that
God  lives.  I  knowr  that  Jesus  is
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living
God.  I  know  by  the  same  Spirit
that  God  Almighty  has  sent  his
angels  in  these  the  last  days  to
Joseph  Smith  and  others,  for  the
purpose  of  commencing  this  work
of  the  restitution  of  all  tilings.  1
know  that  work  has  begun  to  be
ushered  in.  I  know  that  the  power
of  God  is  being  manifested  on  the
ear tli,  that  the  same  power  which
rested  upon  the  former-day  Saints,
rests  down  upon  the  Latter-day
Saints.  I  know  that  the  former-
day  ordinances  have  been  restored,
and  the  spirit  and  the  power  thereof,
I  know  it  for  myself,  because  I  have
experienced  it  and  realized  it  I
know  there  is  a  way  to  approach
the  Eternal  Father  and  learn  of  him.
I  know  that  those  who  seek  aright
in  the  way  appointed,  find  an  an-
swer to  their  prayers,  and  that  the
promise  made  by  the  Savior  is  true:
"  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto
you;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you,"
And  in  bearing  my  testimony  to  the
truth  of  these  things,  I  say  what
most  of  this  congregation  know,  and
what  the  great  majority  of  the  peo-
ple throughout  this  Territory  could
testify  to,  as  well  as  thousands  more
who  are  scattered  upon  the  face  of
the  earth,  who  are  longing  to  gather
to  these  mountain  vales,  W*  have
not  come  here  for  the  mere  purpose
of  enriching  ourselves  in  gold  and
silver,  in  Hocks  and  herds,  or  houses
and  lands,  things  which  perish  in


290


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


their  handling,  but  to  become  rich
in  the  imperishable  things  of  eter-
nity, which  we  can  obtain  here  in
the  way  appointed  of  God,  and
about  which  the  world  know  no-
thing.

People  wonder  why  it  is  that  the
leaders  of  this  people  are  still  upheld
by  the  unanimous  voice  and  vote  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  why  it
is  that  we  have  faith  in  them  and
cling  to  them,  in  spite  of  all  that  is
said  against  them.  They  do  not
understand  the  secret  spring  that
moves  this  work.  The  power  that
unites  and  guides  us  does  not  rest
in  any  man  or  any  set  of  men,
neither  in  this  wonderful  organiza-
tion,  but  in  this  eternal,  unerring
Spirit  which  God  has  shed  forth  in
our  hearts  through  obedience  to  the
Gospel,  by  which  we  can  approach
Him  and  learn  of  Him  for  our-
selves. t  9  kM'J*

We  have  gathered  to  these  moun-
tains til  at  we  may  aid  in  this  great
work  of  restitution.  We  at  e  build-
ing these  Temples  that  the  Lord
may  come  and  restore  further  powers
and  keys  and  knowledge  pertaining
to  the  holy  priesthood,  which  has
heeu  held  in  reserve,  for  we  have  as
yet  only  received  the  droppings  of
the  shower  to  come ;  we  have  but
received  a  few  things  compared  with
what  remains  to  be  revealed.  There
is  not  a  principle  nor  a  blessing  re*
fen  ed  to  in  these  Scriptures,  which
has  been  enjoyed  by  the  Saints  of
any  former  time,  but  what  the  Lord
our  God  will  restore  and  bestow
upon  his  people  of  the  latter  times,
the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all
things.  This  doctrine  of  celestial
marriage  that  creates  such  a  stir  in
the  world,  is  only  one  of  the  doc-
trines believed  in  and  practiced  by
the  ancients,  and  that,  too,  under
the  immediate  sanction  and  direction
of  the  Almighty,  that  God  has  com-


menced to  restore  in  the  latter  days.
The  Lord  has  restored  that  in  con-
nection with  other  principles,  and  it
is  a  truth  which  this  people  can
testify  to,  whether  others  believe  it
or  not.  God  is  the  author  of  it,
and  if  men  choose  to  fight  against
the  Lord,  Jet  them  fight;  it  is  God
and  them  for  it  I  bear  my  testi-
mony that  God  Almighty  has  re-
vealed this  doctrine  of  celestial
marriage,  or  marriage  for  eternity,
including  the  doctrine  of  plurality
of  wives.  He  made  this  manifest
to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and
has  revealed  it  to  thousands  by  the
gift  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost
But  these  are  only  the  beginnings
of  things.  We  have  come  here  to
learn  of  God's  ways  and  to  walk  in
his  paths.  "Our  fathers  have  in-
herited lies  and  vanity,  and  tilings
wherein  then1  is  no  profit"  They
have  been  fed  upon  husks,  while
the  kernel  was  not  with  them.
The}'  ha vi'  been  taught  by  the  tra-
ditions of  men  ;  they  have  been  led
bv  theologians  who  knew  not  God,
who  could  not  describe  him  or  ex-
plain his  laws  to  the  people,  for
they  knew  not  of  Him  themselves,
and  how  eon  Id  they,  when  accord-
ing to  their  own  admissions  the
voice  of  prophecy  had  ceased,  and
God  would  no  more  speak  to  the
children  of  men.

We  have  cormj  out  from  the  tra-
ditions and  false  theories  of  our
fathers,  and  gathered  here  that  we
may  learn  of  God.  And  God  has
organized  his  Church,  and  we  are
receiving  line  upon  line  and  precept
upon  precept  here  a  little  and  there
a  little,  for  our  profit,  to  prepare  us
for  the  things  to  be  manifested  in
the  future.  And  if  we  would  only
live  up  to  the  tilings  that  He  lias
revealed  to  us ;  if  we  would  be  as
pure  and  virtuous,  and  honest  and
upright, and conscientious  and


THE  WOllK  OF  THE  RESTITUTION  E'JC


297


patient,  and  long-suffering  and
charitable  as  we  are  commanded  to
"be  in  the  revelations  the  Lord  has
given  unto  us  in  these  latter  times,
we  would  he  better  prepared  for  the
great  tilings  yet  to  be  unfolded.  If
the  people  called  Latter-day  Saints
desire  to  receive  further  of  these
great  things  which  have  been  kept
hid  from  the  world  for  generations,
let  them  live  up  to  the  principles
already  revealed— let  them  be  Saints
in  very  deed. As  they  have  come

i mt  from  the  world  bodily,  let  them
be  separated  from  the  world  in  spirit
Let  them  be  temperate,  chaste  and
true ;  let  them  be  honest  and
honorable  with  all  men  ;  let  them
live  up  to  their  agreements  and
fail  not  to  keep  their  promises  one
with  another,  always  remembering,
with  due  regard,  their  sacred  cove-
nants and  solemn  obligations  to  the
Lord.  And  thus  they  will  come  up
near  to  Him,  and  as  a  natural  con-
sequence the  Lord  will  draw  near
to  them,  his  Spirit  will  be  upon
them,  and  God  will  fight  their
battles  and  overcome  their  enemies,
and  break  (ill" every  yoke.  For  the
Lord  is  nigh  at  hand  and  not  afar
off.  He  has  commenced  the  great
work  of  institution,  and  will  roll  it
on  to  its  consummation.  He  will
restore  every  power  and  every  gift
and  grace,  every  key,  revelation
and  inspiration  that  has  ever  been
enjoyed  by  the  ancient  Saints.  Is
that  all?  No,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  it  is  not  all;  for  after  God
has  restored  everything  that  has
been  lost,  He  will,  in  this  dispensa-
tion, reveal  things  kept  hidden  from
the  foundations  of  the  world.  He
will  reveal  them  "  to  babes  and
siu-klinns,"  to  the  children  born  in
Zion  who  are  heirs  to  the  holy
priesthood,  trained  up  in  the  way
they  should  go,  not  train ed  up  as
some  of  our  children  are,  hut  in  the


way  God  has  appointed.  As  we
are  living  in  these  momentous
times,  it  behooves  us  to  be  what  we
profess  to  be- — Saints,  We  are
called  to  be  Saints  ;  whether  we
are  Saints  or  not  is  another  thing.
Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen.
And  why  are  they  not  chosen?
Read  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants ;  find  out  your  own  weak-
nesses, your  own  failures,  your  own
omissions  as  well  as  commissions.
Find  out  wherein  you  have  ceased
to  do  that  which  you  ought  to  do,
and  have  done  that  which  you
ought  not  to  have  done,  and  repent.
Repentance  is  needed  tc  be  taught
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  as  well  as
to  the  world  ;  fur  we  are  called  with
a  holy  falling,  and  if  we  do  not  live
up  to  our  professions,  it  were  better
we  had  never  made  them.  Let  us
return  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
will  return  to  us  ;  his  Spirit  will  be
manifested  in  our  midst  to  a  still
greater  degree,  and  His  gifts  and
blessnms  will  abound.  Our  siek
will  lie  healed  as  in  times  past  We
have  seen  the  sick  healed  instanta-
neously. The  lame  have  been  made
to  walk,  the  dumb  to  speak,  the
blind  to  see  and  the  deaf  to  hear,
by  the  power  of  God  through  the
administrations  of  the  servants  of
God.  The  gifts  of  tongues,  pro-
pi]  ecy ,  d rea u i s,  faith,  d i £ cerumen t,
and  every  gift  ami  blessing  spoken
of  in  the  Bible  as  having  graced  the
primitive  Church,  have  been  enjoyed
by  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  this
latter-day  Church,  and  we  are  wit-
nesses thereof  God  has  been  near
to  us,  and  we  have  felt  his  presence
in  our  public assemblies  and  in  our
private  abodes.  Peace  has  reigned
in  our  hearts,  and  we  have  felt  like
praising  Him  with  all  our  souls  for
J  l  is  goodness.

Now  the  Lord  will  be  still  nearer
to  us  if  we  practise  our  religion  and


298  JOURNAL  ov

be  Saints  in  very  deed;  and  our
own  eyes  will  be  open  to  discern  the
work  of  (iod  among  the  nations*
We  have  already  begun  to  compre-
hend the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,
God's  hand  is  over  all,  and  he  will
smite  down  the  oppressor  and  1  i  ;>k
every  yoke.  He  will  destroy  the
the  tyranny  that  still  exists  in  the
world,  and  the  way  will  be  open
for  the  servants  of  the  living  God
to  go  to  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people,  as  messengers  of
the  truth  and  to  gather  out  the
sued  of  Israel,  and  the  work  of  God
will  roll  forth,  and  every  effort  of
our  enemies  will  only  tend  to  accele-
rate its  progress.  There  are  socie-
ties formed  here  to  oppose  this  work
and  to  bring  trouble  upon  us.  What
have  their  efforts  so  far  amounted
to?  Those  that  have  concocted  their
schemes  to  misrepresent  us  and  to
bear  false  witness  against  us  and  to
malign  us,  how  mucn  have  they  ac-
complished i  They  have  been  the
means  of  helping  to  kill  one  faithful
youth,  who,  in  common  with  many
of  his  brethren,  was  engaged  pub-
lishing to  the  world  the  principles  of
our  religion.  And  besides  this,  they
have  been  the  means  of  inciting
mobocrats  to  drag  a  few  inoffensive
aged  people  from  their  homes  and
beat  them  nearly  to  death,  because
of  their  belief.  Let  those  plutttTs
look  upon  their  work  and  see  what
they  have  accomplished  !  How  much
satisfaction  tht.*se  ladies,  these
"  Christian "  ladies  and  gentlemen
must  have  in  their  labors  !  How
much  will  this  do  to  stop  the  pro-
gress of  the  work  of  the  Almighty  1
Not  anything  at  all ;  it  will  only
tend  to  roll  it  on  to  its  consummation
and  final  triumph*  The  Lord  will
so  overrule  in  behalf  of  his  people  as
to  turn  the  intended  evil  into  good.
Their  efforts  to  overthrow  "Mor-
monism/1  as  they  term  it  will  simply


DISCOURSES.

advertise  our  cause  all  over  the
world  ;  attention  will  be  drawn  to
I  our  Elders  who  are  traveling  through*
out  the  world  preaching  the  Gospel,
and  they  will  be  the  better  able  to
bear  their  testimony  and  gather  out
the  honest.  They  may  fight  this
work  as  they  please ;  they  may
malign  and  stigmatize  tins  people,
and  heap  all  manner  of  reproach
upon  them  ;  they  may  imprison  and
even  kill  the  bodies  of  some  of  its
most  faithful  advocates,  but  the
facts  still  remain  that  we  are  engaged
in  the  work  of  restitution  ;  that  God
has  commenced  it ;  that  God  is  w  ith
us,  and  will  remain  with  us  as  long
as  we  are  true  to  him  as  his  servants;
and  no  power  on  earth  or  in  hell
will  stop  his  purposes.  The  nations
of  the  earth  are  in  his  hands  ;  the
governments  of  this  earth  he
considers  as  a  very  little  tiling,
and  by  ami  by  he  will  laugh  at  their
calamity  and  mock  when  their  fear
comet h.  The  kingdoms  of  this
world,  with  all  their  pomp  and  glory,
will,  in  the  own  due  time  of  the
Lord,  be  humbled  in  the  dust  and
be  broken  to  pieces  ;  and  then  will
come  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and
he  whose  rig  lit  it  is  to  reign  will
ride  from  pole  to  pole  and  from
shore  to  shore.

But  let  us  not  cherish  animosity
in  our  hearts  against  those  who  are
plotting  against  us.  While  we  stand
up  for  our  civil  rights  and  the  liberty
to  which  we  are  entitled  by  virtue  of
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,
and  stand  firm,  shoulder  to  shoulder,
in  vindication  of  our  religious  rights,
and  help  to  maintain  for  others  the
rights  which  we  claim  for  ourselves,
let  us  not  cherish  anger,  or  animosity,
or  revenge,  in  our  hearts.  But  let
us  take  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  for  our  guide,  and  try  to  be
patient  and  longsuffering,  even  as
Uod  is. And  the  Lord  will  fight


THE  WORK  OF  THE

our  battles,  and  those  who  fight
against  us  by  and  by  will  be  brought
to  shame  and  confusion  as  they  al-
ways have  been.  And  let  those  who
love  to  lie  about  the  Latter-day
Saints,  lie  on  j  there  is  a  place  pre-
pared for  them,  and  we  will  leave
them  in  his  hands.  Ye  who  wish  to
lie,  lie  on  !  Do  your  workt  fill  the
mission  you  are  engaged  in  as  did
Judas  of  old  ;  but  as  for  us,  we  will
serve  the  Lord  ;  we  will  keep  his
commandments  ;  we  will  battle  with
the  evils  in  our  natures,  entailed  upon
us  through  the  errors  of  our  fore-
fathers; we  will  learn  to  govern  our-
selves and  our  house! i olds  in  the  fear
of  God,  and  while  we  are  engaged  in
battling  with  evil  and  corruption  God
will  be  on  our  side,  and  who  shall  pre-
vail against  him?  UA  little  one  shall
become  a  thousand,  and  a  small  one
a  strong  nation  ;  the  Lord  will
hasten  it  in  his  time  "

Now,  we  are  here  in  the  valleys
of  these  mountains  to  aid  in  this
great  work  of  bringing  to  pass  the
restitution  of  all  things  ;  tat  us  take
hold  of  the  truths  revealed  to  us  and
practise  them  in  our  lives,  that  we
may  become  a  holy  people  unto  the
Lord,  faithful,  true,  honorable,  up-
right, chaste  and  pure,  fit  for  the
companionship  of  the  angels.  And
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  shall
have  free  course  among  us  and  the
gifts  of  the  Gospel  will  abound  ;


RESTITUTION,  ETC*  299

truth  will  prevail  and  our  enemies
will  be  confused.  The  time  is  not
far  distant  when  God  will  sweep  the
earth,  as  with  a  besom  of  destruc-
tion, of  all  that  rebel  wilfully  and
intentionally  against  him  and  his
work  ;he  will  cleanse  the  earth  from
pollution  and  establish  righteousness
thereon.  Men  shall  then  be  found
beating  their  swords  into  plowshares

1  and  their  spears  into  pruning  hooks;
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against
nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war
any  more,  but  every  man  in  every
place  shall  meet  a  brother  and  a
friend*  And  this  same  spirit  of
peace  will  also  produce  a  change
upon  the  brute  creation,  according
to  the  words  ot  prophets  who  lived
centuries  ago,  and  the  earth  itself

J  will  be  blessed,  the  curse  be  removed
therefrom,  and  he  whose  right  it  is
to  reign  will  come  and  rule  in  the
midst  of  his  people*

I  have  occupied  sufficient  time.  I
thank  God,  as  I  said  in  the  begin-
ning, for  the  privilege  of  being  a
Latter-day  Saint;  I  thank  God  for
the  privilege  of  being  here  in  the
valleys  of  these  mountains,  helping

j  to  bring  forth  this  great  work  of
restitution.  And  by  the  help  of  God

I  we  will  cleave  together  as  a  band  of
brethren  and  sisters,  to  serve  the
Lord  our  God  no  matter  what  may
come.  Amen


300


Jul  KNAL  VV  DlHVOl'1'.HE.S.


4


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED  IN  THE  TABERNACLE,  HALT  LAKE  CITY,  JULY  6th,  187!).


( Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.J

POWER AND EFFECTS OF  THE GOSPEL — ANTAGONISM  BETWEEN  LIGHT
AND  DAKKNESS — NECESSITY  OF  GOD\s  JUDGMENTS  FPON  THE  WICKED.


I  have  been  very  much  interested
in  listening  to  the  remarks  made  by
ray  brethren  both  this  morning  and
afternoon.  And  I  fee)  with  the  aid
of  the  Almighty,  like  making  a  few
remarks  myself.

We  are  living  in  a  peculiar  clay
and  age  of  the  world,  in  a  time  that
has  been  spoken  of  by  prophets,
seers,  revelators  and  apostles,  by
men  who  have  been  inspired  by  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God  and  who
comprehended  the  purposes  and  de-
signs of  God  in  relation  to  the  world
on  which  we  live  ;  in  relation  to  the
people  who  now  live  upon  it,  to
those  who  have  llYed  upon  it  in  the
various  ages  of  time  and  to  those
who  will  live  upon  it,  and  who  have
had  a  general  conception  and  mani-
festation of  the  various  events  that
should  transpire  associated  with
what  is  termed  in  scripture,  "  the
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times,"
in  which  God  would  gather  together
all  things  in  one,  whether  they  be
things  in  the  heavens  or  things  on
the  earth.  As  a  commencement  of
this  operation  he  has  communicated
his  will  again  to  man,  and  by  revela-
tion of  that  will,  by  the  opening  of
the  heavens,  by  the  ministering  of
holy  angels  and  by  the  voice  of  God


have  we  had  revealed  unto  us  those
great  and  eternal  principles  in  which
the  interests  of  a  world  are  con-
cerned, past,  present  and  future.

We  have  had  a  good  deal  spoken
unto  us  pertaining  to  the  Gospel
of  the  Sou  of  God  and  the  power
and  blessing  associated  therewith,  as
well  as  arguments  advanced  and
scriptures  quoted  to  show  the  vari-
ous manifestations  of  the  Spirit  of
God  in  other  ages.  But  the  Gospel
itself  is  a  principle  of  revelation,  and
without  revelation  we  can  have  no
Gospel;  for  we  are  emphatically  told
that  lite  and  immortality  are  brought
to  light  by  the  Gospel ;  that  through
its  influence  men  are  able  to  com-
prehend the  position  and  relation-
ship they  sustain  to  each  other,  and
to  God,  to  the  past,  to  the  present
and  to  the  future  and  can  alone  com-
prehend the  final  destinies  of  man.
The  Gospel  is  a  living,  abiding,  eter-
nal principle.  And  hence  when
John  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos  wrapped
in  prophetic  vision  gazing  upon  the
events  that  should  transpire  in  the
latter-days,  saw,  among  other  things,
"  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  uf
heaven,  having  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel to  preach  to  them  that  dwell
upon  the  earth,3'  not  a  new  Gospel,


POWER  AND  EFFECT  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


not  some  new  theory  or  principles
or  dogma  ;  but  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, as  it  had  existed  with  the  Gods
in  eternity- — the  medium  through
which  God  conveys  intelligence  to
the  human  mind  ;  the  principle  by
which  Gods  are  governed  and  all
nations  controlled,  the  everlasting
Gospel,

This  principle  has  been  referred
to  as  being  a  personal  thing  in  which
every  body  that  is  brought  in  con-
tact therewith  and  obeys  its  require-
ments is  made  a  participator  and
becomes  one  of  the  vast  multitude
that  has  existed,  dues  exist  and  will
exist  in  seeking  to  carry  out  the  pur-
poses and  designs  of  God  in  relation
to  the  welfare,  happiness  and  exal-
tation of  the  human  family.  There-
fore, the  relevancy  of  the  remarks
we  read,  such  as  we  have  heard  to-
day, calling  upon  the  people  to  repent
and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of
sins  and  they  should  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  Whol  those  whore-
pent,  those  who  believe,  those  who
obey,  those  who  are  governed  by
the  principles  contained  in  the  Gos-
pel of  the  Son  of  God-  And  what
should  that  do  for  them  ?  Take  of
the  things  of  God  and  show  them  to
them,  and  bring  them  into  commu-
nion with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and
with  the  Father  and  into  commu-
nion with  the  holy  angels  and  pro-
phets who  lived  before,  enjoying  the
same  Gospel,  the  same  light,  the
same  intelligence,  tin*  same  spirit
and  the  same  power ;  that  they
might  be  one  with  each  other,  one
with  the  ancient  apostles,  prophets,
patriarchs  and  men  of  God  who
have  lived  in  the  different  ages  ;  one
with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  oper-
ating together  for  the  one  great
purpose  of  Jehovah  pertaining  to  the
welfare,  happiness  and  exaltation
of  the  world  and  the  people  thereof.


And  hence,  say  the  scriptures,  you
have  all  been  baptized  into  one
baptism.  And  what  else  ?  You
have  all  partaken  of  the  same  spirit,
as  Jesus  says,  44  that  they  may  be
one,  even  as  we  are  one  :  I  in  them,
and  they  in  me,  that  they  may  be
made  perfect  in  one/'  And  hence
those  who  have  obeyed  tin*  Gospel
— although  in  many  instances  they
do  not  comprehend  it  in  all  its  bear-
ing, and  very  few  du,  in  fact  we
only  see  as  through  a  glass  darkly,
see  in  part,  know  in  part,  prophecy
in  part,  and  comprehend  in  part  un-
till  that  which  is  perfect  shall  come
and  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be
done  away,  that  we  may  all  then  see
as  we  are  seen,  and  know  as  we  are
known,  But  although  we  have  not
arrived  at  that  condition,  yet  all
who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost
through  obedience  to  the  laws  of
God  and  the  ordinances  thereof,  ad-
ministered by  men  holdingauthority,
know  for  themselves  not  only  that
this  is  the  work  of  God,  that  this  is
the  church  and  kingdom  of  God  and
that  we  are  engaged  in  establishing
and  bringing  to  pass  the  things  that
have  been  spoken  of  by  the  holy
prophets  since  the  world  was.  They
know  at  least  that  they  have  passed
from  death  into  life,  the  Holy  Ghost
bearing  witness  thereof  That  is
the  ease  of  every  individual  who  has
lived  his  religion,  keeping  the  com-
mandments of  God.  They  realize
this  and  know  it  for  themselves,
and  consequently  it  is,  as  has  been
refered  to,  with  everyone  a  personal
thing.  That  principle  is  not  for
somebody  else ;  it  is  for  ourselves,
and  if  we  follow  the  leading  of  that
spirit  and  grieve  not  the  Spirit  of
God,  whereby  we  are  sealed  to  the
day  of  redemption,  that  spirit  will
grow  and  increase  in  us,  and  we
shall  add  to  our  faith  virtue,  and  to
virtue  knowledge,  and  to  knowledge


302


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


brotherly  kindness,  to  brotherly
kindness  charity,  and  so  forth  ;  in-
creasing  in  every  good  word  and
work  until  we  shall  see  as  we  are
seen  and  know  as  we  are  known.
This  is  to  be  brought  by  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Cli  rist — the  everlasting  Gospel.

Now  this  is  a  personal  thing,  it  be-
longs to  each  one  individually  to
every  man,  to  every  woman,  to
every  boy,  to  every  girl  who  has  ar-
rived at  the  years  of  accountability.
If  they  are  living  their  religion  and
keeping  the  commandments  of  God
they  have  the  Spirit  of  God  within
them  that  bears  witness  unto  them
that  they  are  the  children  of
God,  even  heirs  of  God  and  joint
heirs  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

Now  then,  we  come  to  other
things.  This  eternal  principle  of
which  we  speak  is  not  to  be  confined
to  ourselves  alone.  It  reaches  out
and  seeks  to  bless,  and  while  being
blessed  it  seeks  to  communicate  the
same  to  others;  it  seeks  to  advance
and  promote  the  welfare  of  humanity
in  all  conditions  in  every  sphere
and  among  all  people,  just  as  God
does,  for  it  emanates  from  him,  and
he  is  the  God  and  Father  of  us  all,
not  only  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
but  all  other  people;  but  having
committed  to  us  the  true  riches  of
eternal  life,  he  expects  us  to  commu-
nicate the  same  to  others.  And
hence  in  former  times  he  said  unto
his  disciples,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the
world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every
-creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is
baptized  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  that
believeth  not  shall  be  damned/'
Also  "Let  your  light  so  shine  before
men  that  they  may  see  your  good
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which
is  in  heaven/'  But  he  has  prepared
men  for  the  accomplishment  of  this
work.  In  former  times,  both  on  this
continent  and  the  continent  of  Asia
and  other  places,  he  communicated


with  men  himself,  organized  his
church,  established  his  priesthood,
endowed  men  with  authority,  placed
them  in  positions  and  gave  them
power  to  act ;  and  they  became
priests  of  the  Most  High  God,  the
dispensers  of  salvation  to  a  fallen
world,  and  the  medium  through
which  he  communicated  intelligence
and  knowledge  of  himself,  his  laws,
and  of  his  eternal  purposes  pertain-
I  ing  to  the  human  family.  And  hence,
:  in  former  times,  he  said  to  his  di-
sciples, "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,
but  I  have  chosen  you;"  go  ye  forth
then  and  proclaim  these  tidings  to
all  people.  And  what  else  1  And
take  care  also  of  the  flock  of  Christ,
watch  over  my  sheep.  And  hence,
when  he  said  to  Peter  on  a  certain
occasion,  after  he  had  manifested
his  weakness  and  infirmity,  "  Simon,
son  of  Jonas,  loves t  thou  me  more
than  these  T  He  saith  unto  him,
"  Yea,  Lord  ■  thou  knowest  that  I
love  thee."  He  saith  unto  him,
"  Feed  my  sheep/1  A  second  and  a
third  time  he  asked  the  same
question.  A  second  and  a
third  time  he  was  answered  in  the
same  way.  One  thing  was  to  spread
forth  the  light  of  truth,  to  preach
the  Gospel,  to  unfold  the  principles
of  eternal  truth  ;  and  then  when
people  had  received  the  first  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel,  to  teach  them
and  more  fully  instruct  them  in  the
principles  of  eternal  life.  And
hence  the  necessity  of  the  priesthood.
And  what  is  that  ?  The  rule  and
government  of  God  through  the
medium  of  which  men  whom  he  se-
lects and  chooses,  which  he  has
done  in  the  different  ages  of  time,
are  duly  authorized  and  qualified  to
proclaim  his  will  and  administer  his
ordinances.  There  is  more  than  one
priesthood  spoken  of  in  the  scrip-
tures. There  is  one  especially  as-
sociated with  the  Gospel  which  Paul


POWER  AND  EFFECT


OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


303


speaks  of  as  being  without  begin-
ning of  days  or  end  of  years;  or,
rather,  bespeaks  of  a  man,  Melchi-
zedec  by  name,  who  was  without
beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years,
and  he  abides  a  priest  forever*  Some
people  have  thought  that  he  was  a
very  singular  kind  of  character,
without  fattier  and  without  mother.
However,  that  is  very  easily  compre-
hended when  you  are  made  ac-
quainted with  the  principle.  In  the
Levitical  priesthood,  they  had  to
prove  by  the  records  that  they  were
literal  descendants  of  Aaron  and  of  i
the  tribe  of  Levi,  before  they  could
be  admitted  to  the  priesthood.  But
speaking  of  this,  the  Melchizedec  i
priesthood,  he  said  it  was  without
father  and  mother.  It  is  an  organ-
ization independent  of  these  consi-  j
derations,  and  those  who  have  it
abide  priests  continually,  and  admi-
nister both  in  time  and  eternity.
What,  does  it  continue  so  long]'
Yes.  How  do  you  know?  By  the
revelations  of  Jesus  Christ.  For
your  information  I  will  take  the
scriptures  for  it,  and  examine  for  a
moment  some  principles  there  de-
veloped*

I  Hud  that  when  Jesus  was  upon
the  earth,  he,  on  a  certain  occasion,
took  Peter,  James  and  John  with
him  to  the  top  of  a  mountain  ;  and
he  was  transfigured  before  them,
and  Moses  and  Hlias  appeared  be-
fore them.  And  Peter  said  :  Master,
it  is  <mod  for  us  to  be  here  :  and  let
us  make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for
thee,  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for
Elias>"  For  whom]  "One  for
thee."  Who  else  ?  «'  One  for  Mo-
ses." What  was  Moses  doing  there  !
41  And  one  for  Elias."  What  was
Elias  doing  there  ?  Where  did
these  strangers  come  from,  both
having  existed  generations  before.
They  held  the  priesthood  in  time,
Moses  preached  the  Gospel  in  time,


and  Elias  did  the  same  thing  ;  both
|  of  them  held  the  priesthood,  and
now  they  come  to  administer  to
Jesus  ;  having  existed  in  the  eternal
world,  they  come  again  to  earth  and
administer  to  him  and  to  Peter,
James  and  John  on  the  mountain.
Why  1  Because  they  held  the  ever-
lasting priesthood,  that  administers
in  time  and  eternity,

I  ai;ain  turn  to  the  Bible,  and  find
in  the  Revelations  of  St.  John  there
was  a  great  and  mighty  personage
presented  himself  to  him,  arrayed  in
;  glory,  magnificence  and  power.
Ami  John  fell  down  to  worship  him.
Said  he,  **  See  thou  do  i  t  not."  Why?
Who  art  thou  )  " 1  am  thy  fellow-
servant,  and  of  thy  brethren  that
have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.,,  I
am  one  of  thy  fellow-servants,  the
prophets  that  lived  upon  the  earth,
that  ministered  in  time  and  operated
as  thou  art  now  doing,  seeking  to
carry  out  the  will  of  my  Father;
having  held  the  priesthood  and
ministering  therein  in  time,  I  am
now  continuing  to  administer  this
everlasting  priesthood,  w  hich  is  as-
sociated with  the  everlasting  Gospel.
Well,  so  much  for  this.  We  will  let
it  pass.

Now  then,  what  is  the  position  we
occupy  1  We  have  had  the  same
tliingi?  restored  to  us  through  Joseph
Smith,  by  the  revelations  of  God
the  Father  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,
and  Moroni  anil  Mormon,  and  Peter,
James  and  John,  and  John  tlx**  Bap-
tist and  others  who  communicated
the  same  and  revealed  things  per-
taining to  the  priesthood  they  held,
and  conferred  authority  upon  him,
and  he  upon  others,  to  administer  in
regard  to  these  great  and  eternal
principles.  And  hence  we  have  our
church  organized  upon  this  basis,  our
residency,  our  apostles,  our  seven-
ties, our  high  priests,  our  elders,  our
high  councils,  our  bishops  and  their


304


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


counselors,  our  priests,  teachers  and
deacons,  and  all  the  various  organi-
nations  of  the  church  and  kingdom
of  God.  What  else  f  The  edifying
of  the  body  of  Christ  Edifying  the
body  of  Christ  1  Yes.  Go  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  all  nations.  What  then?
Gather  them  together.  What  then?
Snys  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  "  I  will
take  you  one  of  a  city,  ami  two  of  a
family  and  bring  you  to  Zion  :  and
I  will  give  you  pastor*?  according  to
mine  heart,  which  shall  teed  you
with  knowledge  and  understanding/'
and  "edify  the  body  of  Christ/'  that
they  may  be  prepared  to  fulfill  their
destiny  and  magnify  their  calling  on
the  earth.  But  what  then  ?  We
go  to  work  to  build  temples.  Wliat
for  ?  That  we  may  administer
therein.  For  whom  1  For  the
living  and  for  the  dead,  that  as  the
scriptures  say,  "Saviors  may  coir e  up
on  Mount  Zion,  and  the  kingdom  be
the  Lord's."  And  that  by  gathering
together  a  nucleus  of  people  from
among  the  various  nations  of  the
earth,  we  may  be  under  the  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  united  to-
gether in  one  and  through  the  me-
dium of  the  holy  priesthood  and  our
union  and  communion  with  God,  we
may  go  to  work  and  operate  with
the  apostles,  prophets,  patriarchs  and
men  of  God  who  have  lived  in  the
different  ages  of  the  world,  and  with
God  and  with  Jesus,  the  Mediator
of  the  New  Covenant  that  we  may
operate  with  them  in  the  accom-
plishment of  the  purposes  of  God
pertaining  to  the  salvation  of  the
Jiving  and  the  redemption  of  the
dead.

These  are  some  of  the  works  that
we  are  engaged  in  and  expect  to  be
engaged  in,  and  expect  to  carry  out,
and  to  do  the  things  that  God
requires  at  our  hands,  and  wTe  expect
Gol  and  the  holy  angels  and  the
priesthood  behind  the  vaU  and  all


heaven  to  be  on  the  side  of  Israel,
j  and  all  hell  to  be  opposed  to  us  ;  and
we  will  risk  the  consequences  under
any  circumstances.

We  talk  about  the  Saints  ;  are
they  good  people  ?  Yes,  many  of
them  are  very  good  people.  And
the  balance  of  them  'I  Well,  some
of  them  are  sinners  ;  some  of  them
the  meanest  of  men  you  can  find
anywhere.  How  is  this  ?  It  is  ex*
actly  in  the  way  the  Scripture  says.
I  think  it  savs  :  "  The  kingdom  of
1  heaven  is  like  unto  a  net  that  was
cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of
ever)-  kind."  And  so  it  is  among
us,  and  so  it  has  been  and  so  it  will
l>e.  Jf  we  take  the  history  of  the
ages  past,  it  has  been  precisely  so.
The  very  first  start  we  read  that
Adam  had  two  sons,  one  Cain,  and
one  Abel,  Abel  was  a  man  that
feared  God,  but  Cain  did  not.  That
is  like  some  of  us  here.  Some  of
us  fear  God,  and  some  of  us  do  not;
and  those  who  do  not  always  con-
sider they  are  injured  or  oppressed,
or  there  is  always  something  wrong;
they  labor  under  an  immense
amount  of  difficulty ;  but  the  good
folks  sing,  Hallelujah,  hallelujah,
the  Lord  Uod  Omnipotent  reigneth,
and  will  reign  until  he  puts  all  ene-
mies under  His  feet ;  and  they  feel
peaceful  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  of
hosts.  Cain  thought  he  was  injured
because  the  Lord  did  not  accept  of
his  sacrifice,  and  he  thought  his
brother  had  something  to  do  with  it,
and  his  jealousy  prompted  him  to
slay  him,  and  he  did  so,  That  was
rather  a  bad  start  when  you  come  to
look  at  it  According  to  the  Bible,
there  were  only  two  of  them  ;  and
the  wicked  man  was  left  to  represent
what?  Outside  of  Adam,  God's
creation  on  the  earth,  for  at  least
one  hundred  and  thirty  years,  ex-
cept that  Adam  had  other  eontt
That,,  however, we  will  not  talk


t


POWER  AND  EFFECT  OF  THE  GOSPER  ETC


305


about  to -day.  Well,  the  Lord  came
along  after  a  while,  and,  says  he,
"  What  have  you  been  doing?  Where
is  thy  brother  Abel  f  He  replied,
"  I  do  not  know  anything  about  him,
I  ani  not  my  brother  s  keeper/1  Says
the  Lord,  "The  voice  of  thy  bro-
ther's blood  crieth  unto  me  from  the
ground  ;  and  because  thou  hast  done
this  thing,  I  will  set  a  mark  upon
thee,  and  thou  shalfc  he  a  vagabond
upon  the  earth  f  and  so  will  every
man  be  who  fights  against  Zion  ;  and
if  anybody  does  not  believe  it,  let
him  try  it,  and  he  will  find  out  be-
fore he  gets  through  that  there  is  a
God  that  rules  in  tin*  heavens,  and
that  he  is  all  tin*  day  long  crying,
"Touch  uot  mine  anointed,  and  do
my  prophets  no  harm/'  And  said
he  on  another  occasion,  **  Whoso
shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones
which  believe  in  me,  it  were  better
for  him  that  a  millstone  were  handed
about  his  neck,  and  that  he  were
drowned  in  the  depths  of  the  sea"
This  is  how  I  read  the  Bible.

I  find  in  tracing  out  the  scriptures,
that  from  the  beginning  there  have
existed  two  powers — the  powers  of
light  and  the  powers  of  darkness;
that  both  these  things  existed  in  the
heavens  before  they  came  here,  that
the  powers  of  darkness  were  east
out,  and  thus  became  the  devil  and
his  angels.  This  antagonism,  then,
existed  before,  and  it  is  necessary  it
should  exist  It  is  necessary  men
should  be  tried  and  purged  and  puri-
fied and  made  perfect  through  suffer-
ing. And  hence  we  find  men  in  the  dif-
ferent ages  that  have  passed  through
trials  and  afflictions  of  every  kind,  and
they  had  to  learn  to  put  their  faith
in  God,  and  in  God  alone*  Such
was  the  wickedness  and  corruptions
of  men  in  the  early  ages  that  it  was
necessary  that  God  should  sweep  the
face  of  the  earth  by  a  flood,  in  order
that men  might be  deprived  of

No,  20*


their  power  to  do  evil.

I  have  heard  some  people  say  that
they  thought  it  was  very  hard  for
God  to  do  such  a  thing.  I  think  it
would  have  been  very  cruel  on
his  part  if  he  had  not  done  it.  Why?
Because  man  is  a  dual  being,
associated  with  time  and  eter-
nity, being  in  possession  of  a  spirit
as  well  as  a  body ;  and  as  God  is  the
God  and  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all
flesh  that  ever  did  exist  or  will  have
a  being  on  the  earth,  it  was  necessary
under  certain  circumstances,  that  he
should  operate  in  his  judgment  upon
the  wicked  whenever  they  should
,  become  as  corrupt  as  they  did  at
that  time.  Why  so  f  For  God  is
the  God  and  Father  of  the  spirits  of
all  flesh,  and  all  flesh  at  that  time
had  corrupted  itself.  And  would  it
be  just  for  those  unborn  spirits  to
have  to  come  and  inhabit  bodies  of
those  unclean  and  corrupt  people  and
have  to  suffer  the  judgments  of  God?
No,  it  was  not  just  ;  and  it  would  be
very  reasonable  for  them  to  say,
'  'Father,  look  at  that  world  of  people;
see  their  crimes,  their  degradation,
their  iniquity,  their  theft  and  rob-
bery, their  murders  and  whoredoms
and  every  kind  of  evil ;  they  have
left  the  good  and  have  gone  to  the
bad,  and  the  imaginations  and
thoughts  of  their  hearts  are  evil  ;
Father,  is  it  proper  that  we  should
have  to  go  there  and  inhabit  such
low,  fallen,  degraded  bodies  as  they
possess,  and  thus  not  have  a  fair
chance  upon  the  earth T  "No/1
says  he,  "it  is  not;  and  I  will  de-
stroy them  and  raise  up  another
people.1'  And  hence,  he  destroyed
them.  But  was  the  spirit  of  anta-
gonism to  God  extinct  by  tins  act  J
No,  it  still  continued  to  operate.
We  find,  for  instance,  that  in  the
days  of  Job  the  sons  of  God  met  to-
gether before  the  Lord,  and  that
Satan  was  among  therm This  may

Vol.  XX.


30G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


seem  strange,  that  the  devil  should
be  permitted  to  move  among  the
sons  of  God,  but  nevertheless  it  was
so.  And  the  Lord  conversed  with
him,  asking  him  if  he  had  considered
his  servant  Job,  who  was  a  perfect
man,  etc,  **  0  yes/'  Satan  remarked,
"  I  know  all  about  him  ;  but  allow
me  to  have  a  rap  at  him.  Job  does
not  fear  God  for  nought  You  have
made  ahed^e  around  him  and  fenced
him  in  ;  under  those  circumstances
who  would  not  serve  God  ?  I  w  ould
if  you  would  serve  me  so."  "You
may  try  him/5  says  the  Lord.  The
devil  took  his  leave  ;  and  the  next
thing  we  hear  of  is  a  series  of  troubles
that  befell  this  good  man.  We  are
told  that  the  Sabiansand  Chaldeans,
as  they  do  here  sometimes,  fell  upon
his  oxen  and  camels  and  took  them
away,  and  that  they  spared  not  the
herdsmen,  but  slew  them  with  the
edge  of  the  sword.  This  report  had
no  sooner  been  made  to  him  when
another  followed,  representing  that
fire  had  fallen  from  heaven  and  de-
stroyed his  sheep  and  their  herds-
men, save  only  the  one  who  brought
the  intelligence.  And  while  he  was
speaking,  we  are  told  that  another
messenger  arrived,  informing  his
master,  Job,  that  while  his  sons
and  daughters  were  feasting  in
their  elder  brother's  house,  a  great
w  ind  from  the  wilderness  blew  up
and  smote  the  house  until  it  fell,
killing  the  young  men.  But  withal,
Job's  integrity  was  not  shaken.
"  Naked,"  said  he,  "  came  I  unto  the
earth,  and  naked  shall  I  return
thither :  the  Lord  gave,  and  the
Lord  hath  taken  away,  and  blessed
be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Again,
there  came  a  day  when  the  sons  of
God  assembled  together  before  the
Lord;  and  the  devil  also  presented
himself.  And  the  Lord  said  unto
Satan,  "  Hast  thou  considered  my
servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like


him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and  an
upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God
and  escheweth  evil?  and  still  he
holdeth  fast  his  integrity,  although
thou  movedest  me  against  him  to
destroy  him  without  cause.'5  And
Satan  auswered  the  Lord,  and  said,
"Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man
hath  will  he  give  for  his  life.  But
put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and
touch  his  backbone  and  his  flesh,
and  lie  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face."
And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Be-
hold, he  is  in  thine  hand  ;  but  save
his  life.1'  Then  Satan  smote  Job
with  boils,  from  the  crown  of  his
head  to  the  souls  of  his  feet ;  and  he
set  his  friends  upon  him,  and  they
accused  him,  and  ins  enemies  taunt-
ed him,  and  finally  his  wife  came
along  when  he  was  in  this  miserable
condition,  and  said,  "  Dost  thou
still  retain  thine  integrity  1  Curse
God  and  die."  But  Job  answered
and  said  unto  her,  "  Thou  speakest
as  one  of  the  foolish  women  speak-
eth.  What,  shall  we  receive  good
at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we
not  receive  evil]  The  Lord  gave
and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  bles-
sed be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  This
his  feel  ins: ;  and  it  is  pleasant


was


to  feel  that  way  after  all — much
better  than  the  other  way.  He  said
further  :  H  Though  he  slay  me,  yet
will  I  trust  in  him"  And  why?
Because  he  had  the  everlasting  gos-
pel What!  Job  had  the  Gospel?
Yes,  to  be  sure  he  had.  How  do  I
know!  Because  the  Gospel  brings
life  and  immortality  to  light :  and
he  had  a  knowledge  of  that.  And
hence  he  says,  "For  I  know  that
my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he
shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon
the  earth  :  and  though  after  my
skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet
in  ray  flesh  shall  I  see  God,  whom  I
shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes
shall  behold,  and  not  another;  though


FUTILITY  OF  THE  MACHINATIONS  OF  THE  WICKED,  ETC.  307


my  veins  he  consumed  within  me.5'

That  is  the  kind  of  fueling  he
had  ;  that  is  the  kind  of  feeling  we
want  to  possess,  and  feel  that  God  is
ours  and  we  are  his,  and  that  we  are
associated  with  his  Church  and  his
kingdom,  and  are  doing  his  will  and
carrying  out  his  purposes  upon  the
earth.  And  it  is  all  the  same  with
us  then,  whether  in  pfeace  or  war  ;
nobody  need  have  any  trembling  in
the  knees,  for  no  power  can  harm
the  Saints  of  God  if  they  continue
to  be  followers  of  that  which  is
good.  The  Psalmist  says/  "  Surely
the  wrath  of  men  shall  praise  thee  ;
the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou
restrain,"  He  will  turn  and  overturn,
until ultimately  the  kingdoms  uf


tliis  world  shall  become  the  kins-
doms  of  our  God  and  his  Christ ;
and  he  will  rule  for  ever  and  ever,
Whilst  those  that  set  themselves
and  run  against  the  bosses  of  Jeho-
vah's buckler,  shall  find  that  they
have  God  to  cope  with,  and  that
they  are  but  potsherds  of  the  earth,
and  that  they  will  wilt  and  wither
and  die  and  be  damned  There  is  no
power  on  earth  that  can  hurt  Israel
as  long  as  they  shall  be  found  doing
what  is  right,  obeying  the  command-
Often ts  of  God,  keeping  their  coven-
ants and  preserving  themselves  in
purity  and  honor  before  him.

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in
the  paths  of  lite,  in  the  name  of  Je-
sus. Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED IN  THE  TABERNACLE,  WALT  LAKE  CITY,  AUGUST  24TH,  1*79,

(Reported  by  John  Irvinr.)

FUTILITY  OF  THE  MACHINATIONS  OF  THE  WICKED — THE  WORK  OF  GOD

CANNOT  BE  STAYED.


I  have  listened  with  great  plea-
sure to  the  remarks  that  have  been
made  by  the  brethren  who  have
addressed  us,  and  I  thought  that  I
would  arise  and  add  a  few  remarks
myself  to  those  already  given.  It
gives  me  pleasure  always  to  meet
with  the  Latter-day  Saints,  to  talk
with  them  and  hear  them  talk  of


those  great  and  eternal  principles,
which  our  Father  in  heaven  has  re-
vealed for  the  salvation,  the  blessing
and  exaltation  of  the  human  family.
Men  comprehend  very  little  of  these
things.  And  further  they  know  very
little  about  us  and  our  faith,  our
practice  and  our  doings,

I  was  pleased  to  hear  Brother


-


Jolin  H.  Smith  make  the  remarks
he  did  concerning  himself,  as  regards
his  purity,  his  virtue,  singleness  of
heart,  and  his  desire  to  do  good.  I
wish  all  the  Latter-day  Saints  could
say  and  do  the  same.  I  wish  they
were  all  actuated  by  the  same  prin-
ciple of  honor,  of  truth,  of  integrity,
and  of  virtue  ;  and  I  would  say  that
if  there  are  those  who  are  not  they
are  hypocrites,  they  are  not  the  re-
presentatives of  the  principles  of
truth,  of  these  great  and  glorious
principles  which  God  has  revealed  to
us,  but  they  are  a  disgrace  to  their
profession,

God  expects  us,  at  least,  to  be
moral  He  expected  the  Jews  under
the  Mosaic  dispensation  to  be  moral.
They  were  also  to  have  faith  in  God,
as  we  propose  to  have  faith  in  him
when  living  under  the  law.  They
were  told  to  commit  no  murder,
they  were  told  not  to  covet  a  man's
house,  or  his  wife,  or  his  land,
or  his  ox,  or  his  ass,  or  any
thing  that  belonged  to  him.  I  wish
the  Latter-day  Saints  would  incor-
porate this  always  in  their  creed.  It
is  hopeless  to  suppose  the  Christians
will.  But  I  do  hope  to  see  the
Latter-day  Saints  governed  by  those
high  and  noble  principles  which  they
propose  to  have  faith  in.  But
as  regards  the  world  they  know
very  little  about  these  things.
They  talk  sometimes  about  the  im-
purity of  the  "Mormons.*'  What !
Men  wallowing  in  filth,  corrupt  inn,
rottenness  and  infamy  !  Men  and
women  who  are  the  murderers  of
their  own  infants  by  the  thousands
before  or  after  birth.  Who  violate
incessantly  their  marital  covenants,
who  do  not  know  the  difference  be-
tween right  and  wrong  !  Men  who
would  seek  to  despoil  other  men
of  their  goods,  their  property  and
possessions  and  women  of  their  vir-
tue, and  then  come  and  preach  mo-


rality to  us  !  Now,  we  can  talk  to
one  another,  I  can  talk  plainly  to

1  the  Saints,  because  we  profess  more,
but  it  does  not  do  for  such  charac-
ters to  come  and  preach  morality  to
us  ;  they  had  better  go  home  and
attend  to  their  own  affairs.

But  wc  are  expected  to  do  right
and  to  take  a  proper,  consistent^  up-
right, virtuous  and  honorable  course,
and  then  we  need  not  fear  any  eviL
Talk  about  persecution,  why,  yes.
Will  they  persecute  you  1  Yes,  Will
they  hate  you?  Yes.  Will  they
rob  you  ?  Yes,  and  thank  (rod  for
having  the  privilege.  And  What  will
we  do  %  Try  and  prevent  them,  God
being  our  helper.  Will  they  traduce
you?  Yes,  that  is,  if  their  words
are  of  any  account,  but  they  are  not
much  ;  these  low  degraded  infamous
characters  do  not  believe  oneanother,

|  and  we  do  not  believe  them.  Con-
sequently, we  have  very  little  odds
to  ask  of  this  class  of  people,  nor  in
fact  of  the  world,  or  anything  that
is  in  the  world.  We  fear  God  and
know  no  other  fear,  for  God  is  our
friend,  and  our  protector,  and  he  is
the  only  friend  that  we  know  any-
thing about  in  this  world.  He  will
take  care  of  us.  We  will  commit  our
cause  to  him,  and  ask  no  odds  of
this  world,  in  any  shape  they  can  fix
it*  They  may  fulminate  their  de-
crees, and  Mr.  Evarts  if  he  please

I  may  call  upon  a  number  of  European
nations  to  assist  the  United  States
to  regulate  the  morals  of  a  small
people  numbering  about  two  hund-
red thousand  here,  among  upwards
of  forty  millions  he  may  call  upon
these  European  nations  to  assist  the
United  States  to  regulate  the  morals
of  this  people  up  in  these  mountains,
if  it  pleases  him*  But  what  a  mag-
nificent spectacle  coming  from  such
a  source  as  it  does  !  Why,  there  is*
more  corruption  in  Washington  in
one  day  than  there  is  in  Salt  Lake


1*R CACHING  OF  JOHN*  THE  BAPTIST,  ETC.


City  in  twelve  months,  Gentiles
thrown  in  !  But  we  certainly  all  of
us  need  our  morals  more  or  less  cor-
recting.

In  relation  to  these  matters,  how-
ever,  we  care  very  little  about  them.
We  have  a  woik  to  perform  that
Goil  has  commanded  us  to  attend
to,  and  we  shall  do  it,  hear  it  all  ye
ends  of  the  earth  !  We  will  do  it  in
the  name  of  God,  nor  can  this  na-
tion, nor  any  other  nation  stop  it !
Hear  it !  publish  it  to  the  end.s  of
the  earth  !  Write  it  down  and  see
if  it  does  not  come  to  pass.  I  pro-
phecy it  in  the  name  of  Israel's  God, ,


let  all  Israel  say  Amen.  (The  whole
congregation  as  with  one  voice  re-
sponded "Amen"). We  know  what
we  are  doing,  whether  other  people
do  or  not. This  kingdom  that  has
been  spoken  of  will  roll  on.  The
word  of  the  Lord  has  spoken  it
thousands  of  years  ago. It  will  con-
tinue to  roll  on,  and  woe  unto  that
man  or  that  people  who  set  their
hands  to  light  against  Zion  for  God
will  be  after  them. That  people  or
nation  will  be  wasted  away.  He
will  maintain  the  rights  of  this
people,  if  they  will  fear  him  and
keep  his  commandments.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  F.  D.  RICHARDS,

Delivered  at  the  Genkral  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,

Salt  Lake  City,  October  (5,  18*19.

(llqxrrtrd  b;i  John  Irvine  J


PR  HACKING  OF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST  AND  RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL
COMPARE!)  OPPOSITION  To  REV ELATJ ON— GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT
—POLYGAMY— HUMAN  LAWS  FOUNDED  UPON  THE  REVEALED  LAW  OF
GOD— CELESTIAL MARRIAGE PROMINENT IN THE LAW AND  THE

rnovii  ets.


In  contemplating  the  condition  of
the  work  of  the  Lord  as  it  is  on  the
earth  to-day,  and  as  we  have  had  to
contemplate  it  from  the  light  of  hi-
story in  its  existence  in  former
periods  of  time,  we  find  a  very  strik-
ing analogy  exists,
^  I  scarcely  need  tell  my  congrega-
tion this  afternoon  that  we  as  a
people  bear  a  significant  relation  to


the  people  of  the  United  States  in  a
political  point  of  view,  and  without
Undertaking  to  review  the  various
periods  of  the  earth's  history,  and
the  relationship  which  the  work  of
God  at  different  times  has  sustained
to  its  inhabitants,  it  may  perhaps  be
enough  to  refer  to  one  circumstance
in  the  days  of  our  Savior.  "When
John  the  Baptist  had  gone  forth


«


310


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


among  the  people  of  Palestine,  tell-
ing them  that  the  kingdom  of
heaven  was  at  hand  and  calling  upon
all  who  entertained  faith  in  his  mis-
sion to  come  and  be  baptized — it
appears  that  he  created  quite  a  sen-
sation among  the  people,  insomuch
that  all  they  of  Jerusalem  and  J udea
and  the  regions  round  about  went
forth  and  were  baptized  by  him  in
great  multitudes,  as  recorded  in
Mark,  i,  &  This  had  a  political
effect  upon  the  rulers  of  that  day,
and  when  John  was  followed  by
Jesus  and  his  wonderful  works,  they
began  to  say — "If  we  let  him  thus
alone  all  men  will  believe  on  him,
and  the  Romans  will  come  and  take
away  our  place  and  nation. u  It  was
very  directly  a  matter  of  political
significance  and  importance.

I  recollect  that  some  fifty  years
ago,  in  the  days  of  my  youth,  and
in  the  land  of  the  Puritans,  I  used
to  hear  and  to  see  aged  matrons  as
well  as  reverund  ministers  wringing
their  hands  and  lifting  up  their
eyes  with  holy  horror,  because
there  was  a  great  evil  in  the  laud
called  slavery.  They  could  scarcely
eat  or  drink  in  peace,  or  worship
God  with  the  spirit  and  understand-
ing, by  reason  of  a  terrible  sense  of
condemnation  resting  on  their  con-
sciences— because  their  brethren  in
the  Southern  States  believed  in  sla-
very. This  came  to  be  worked  up
by  the  preachers  in  the  pulpits,  by
the  politicians  in  their  stump
speeches,  by  the  parents  of  house-
holds, and  fulminated  by  the  press,
until  in  nearly  every  class  of  society
tjjere  was  a  continual  stir  and  sensa-
tion about  slavery  in  the  Southern
States.  This  terrible  evil  had  be-
come one  of  such  vast  importance
that  it  must  some  day  bring  a  na-
tional scourge,  and  in  their  great
anxiety  and  horror  over  this,  and


they  stirred  up  the  fire  until  the
North  were  at  enmity  and  hostility
against  the  South,  and  the  South
were  at  enmity  and  hostility  against
the  North.  We  well  recollect  what
were  the  consequences  of  the  recent
terrible  conflict  that  devastated  and
demoralized  so  much  of  our  beloved
country*  While  this  fanaticism  was
raging  in  the  North,  and  silent  pre-
parations for  defence  were  going  on
in  the  South,  none  seemed  to  con-
sider the  cost  of  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  lives,  or  the  taxation  neces-
sary to  pay  a  few  hundred  millions
of  war  debt,  and  still  less  the  de-
moralizing influences  thereby  fasten-
ed upon  the  country.

About  the  same  time,  or  very
soon  after,  when  the  Elders  began
to  preach  the  Gospel  in  that  region,
I  recollect  that  there  arose  quite  a
sensation  about  this  people  that
professed  to  have  new  revelation.
It  seemed  to  strike  these  same  con-
scientious, religious  people  with  con-
sternation that  anybody  should  daru
to  say  that  God  would  now  reveal
himself  to  the  human  family  j  that
it  was  the  most  impious  blasphemy
to  preach  that  the  priesthood  had
been  restored,  or  to  assert  that  the
Holy  Ghost  was  given  in  the  latter
days,  or  that  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit
were  made  to  abound  among  the
children  of  men.  No  indeed  ;  it
was  not  to  be  tolerated  any  more
than  the  doctrine  of  slavery.  There
were  here  and  there  a  few,  though
but  very  few  in  proportion  to  the
general  population,  that  did  receive
this  very  alarming  doctrine  among
those  professing  religious  belief  in
the  mission  of  our  blessed  Redeemer.
It  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  at
the  time  I  now  speak  of,  the  doc-
trine of  plurality  of  wives  had
not  been  heard  of  as  a  doctrine  of
the  Church  in  the  last  dispensa-


their  determination  to  put  it  away,  !  tion  ; but  it  was  the  yifts  of  the.


PREACHING  OF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST,  ETC,


311


Spirit,  it  was  the  doctrine1  of  pre-
sent revelation,  it  was  the  terrible
repulsive  idea  that  there  could  be
a  mail  raised  up  iu  our  day  who
should  be  a  prophet  that  should  bring
again  the  word  of  the  Lord  and
speak  his  mind  and  will  to  the
people,  that  created  a  fresh  out-
burst of  pious  indignation  in  the
minds  of  those  who  were  so  de-
vout, and  who  claimed  to  occupy
the  "cradle  of  liberty/*

It  w:b  but  a  short  time  after
this — stepping  along  rather  rapidly
in  the  history  of  events- — till  the
doctrine  of  plurality  of  wives  was
revealed  to  the  Saints,  away  in  the
West,  on  tin*  banks  of  the  Mississ-
ippi, though  not  publicly  proclaimed
until  1852,  in  Utah.  But  the  sound
of  this  sacred  scriptural  doctrine,
when  it  came  to  be  made  known,
seemed  the  very  anne  of  all  I  hut
was  corrupt,  abominable  and  un-
godly, and  they  who  professed  to
bidieve  in  the  doctrine  of  polygamy
were  not  deemed  fit  to  live  on  the
ear tli.  Consequently,  if  I  were  to
take  a  text  to  preach  from,  I  would
take  11  Where  are  we  now  ?"

About  the  year  1854,  or  1856,  the
terrible  odium  of  these  two  principal
doctrines,  and  polygamy  especially,
had  attained  such  a  political  hold  uu
the  minds  of  the  religious  commu-
nity, that  they  were  prepared  to
place  these  as  two  planks  in  the
party  platform,  which  was  to  be
adopted  as  a  ground  upon  which  a
President  was  to  be  elected.  The
celebrated  fSrnatoi  Douglas,  after
we  had  come  out  from  the
midst  of  the  people  and  come  into
the  wilderness,  a  thousand  miles
from  any  settlement  of  civilization,
announced  to  the  country  that  if  he
were  made  a  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency of  the  United  States,  hi*
opinion  was  t  hat  u  the  loathesome
ulcer  must  be  cut  out  from  the  side


of  the  body  politic.11  That  was  his
political  faith  in  regard  to  this  one
of  the  twins. President  Buchanan

I  was  elected  with  a  clear  understand-
ing that  the  abolition  of  polygamy
was  one  of  the  jobs  he  was  under-
taking. He  tried  his  hand  at  this
first,  but  on  finding  that  it  took
two  years  for  his  army  to  reach  tin*
field  of  their  operations,  and  then  in
their  decimated  condition  were  de-
pendent upon  pedygamists  for  subsis-
tence, the  prestige  of  the  campaign
dwindled  down  towhat  was  common-
ly known  as  the  "contractor's  war  on
the  Treasury/1

When,  in  18GQ,  the  Republican
party  came  into  power,  it  assumed
the obligation which  President

!  Buchanan  had  failed  to  discharge
iu  regard  to  the  " twin  relics;"  and,
to  avoid  repeat i i ig  the  mistake  which
he  had  made,  turned  its  attention  to
the  other  twin.  This  soon  fur-
niched  occasion  for  a  recall  of  the
remaining  troops  in  Utah  to  the
other  field  of  conflict.

I  feel  more  interest  in  narrating
these  facts,  because  our  rising  gen-
eration, as  well  as  many  Saints  who
have  immigrated  to  our  midst  from
abroad,  are  not  familiar  with  the

i  circumstances,  which  have  brought
us  to  our  present  position.  A  little
patience  and  I  will  notice  some  of
the  circumstances  attendant  upon
what  has  been  done,  and  perhaps
we  may  judge  therefrom  what  has
to  be  done,  (/"  //  wr  fjste  dim*  ttf  ali
Formerly,  the  Representatives  and
Senators  from  New  England  went
to  Washington  laden  with  petitions

I  to  Congress  to  abolish  slavery  in  the
District  of  Columbia,  even  more
strongly  than  priest  and  people  have
recently  been  asking  Congress  to
abolish  polygamy.  Kx- President
John  Q.  Adam*  presented  lengthy
petitions  containing  thousands  of
names  on  many  yards  of  paper,  and


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


became  known  as  the  Member  who
manufactured  public  opinion  by  the
yard. These  applications  were  re-
peated year  after  year. Be  it  re-
membered that  the  District  of  Col-
umbia is  not  a  State,  but  is  governed
by  direct  legislation  of  Congress,
And  what  was  the  result  of  the
strenuous  and  powerful  efforts  of  the
most  brilliant  and  profound  states-
men of  the  North,  contested,  of
course,  by  the  best  statesmen  from
the  South  ] The  result  was  that
slavery  was  not  abolished  in  answer
to  the  petitions  of  the  Northern
people,  but  it  continued  a  political
question,  and  became  a  powerful
factor  in  the  politics  of  the  country.
If  an  anti-slavery  State  was  admitted
into  the  Union  from  the  North,  a
pro-slavery  State  was  admitted  from
the  South,  Compromises  were  made
between  parties  for  the  admission  of
certain  States,  until  some  of  the
Southern  States  declared  for  seces-
sion, and  on  the  question  of  their
right  tu  ih>  so  the  war  commenced,
and  not  on  the  direct  question  of
the  abolition  of  slavery.

From  the  firing  of  the  first  gun
the  demon  of  war  seemed  to  inspire
the  contending  parties  with  the  most
bitter  enmity  and  rancorous  hate
towards  each  other,  while  multitudes
met  their  near  kinsmen  in  mortal
combat  Year  after  year  the  war
raged,  till  the  Southern  armies  were
recruited  by  their  slaves  ;  the  Trea-
sury of  the  nation  was  rapidly  de-
pleting ;  fierce  engagements  and
wasting  disease  had  done  their  work ;
and  recruits  were  enlisted  for  three
years,  or  till  the  end  of  the  war,  and
President  Lincoln,  by  proclamation,
abolished  the  slavery  of  several  mil-
lions of  negroes,  not  as  a  political
measure,  but  as  a  measure  justified
by  the  exigencies  of  war.  I  state
these  facts  without  any  argument  as  ,
to  whether  slavery  should  be  justi- 1


fied,  or  condemned.  Their  great
ancestor  said  they  should  be  ser-
vants of  servants  among  their  bre-
thren, making  their  servitude  the
fulfilment  of  prophecy,  whether  ac-
cording to  the  will  of  God  or  not.

But  where  are  we  to-day  t  We
find  slavery  disposed  of,  but  what  of
polygamy  ]  This  question  is  assum-
ing proportions  which  seem  to  over-
shadow us  so  completely  that  even
John  Chinaman  gets  no  special  con-
sideration in  Utah,

About  the  time  of  the  "  Bull
Runs  tarn  pede,"  in  1862,  when  offi-
cers, raw  recruits,  and  congressmen
tied  from  the  battle  field  and  took
shelter  in  the  Capital,  Congress  pas-
sed a  law  making  plurality  of  wives,
bigamy,  or  polygamy  if  you  please,  a
penal  office.  Now  it  should  be  dis-
tinctly understood  that  this  offence
is  not  sinful  because  Congress  has
made  it  penal  There  is  no  ungod-
liness in  it,  because  God  lias  reveal-
ed it,  he  has  commanded  it.  Con-
gress of  the  United  States  says  that
it  must  not  be  permitted.  Well,
then,  "  Where  are  we  today]"
What  have  we  to  expect  ]  This
law  has  been  passed — although  we
had  hoped  that  Congress  and  the
nation  had  sufficient  virtue  enlight-
enment, liberty,  and  the  spirit  of
the  constitution  of  the  fathers  left
among  them,  that  they  could  see
that  this  was  not  a  sin  or  an  evil —
yet  we  find  they  have  closed  their
eyes  against  this,  and  have  deter-
mined that  it  is  sin,  while  corrup-
tions of  every  kind  are  permitted
to  be  carried  on  in  the  country,  such
as  prostitution,  foeticide,  infanticide,
etc.,  that  because  we  have  embraced
the  faith  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and
Jacob,  wTe  must  be  demolished  or
give  up  our  religious  faith.  The
highest  court  of  the  nation  has  de-
clared polygamy  unconstitutional,
yet  in  its  nature  it  is  the  only  potent


PREACHINU  UF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST,  ETC


emedy  by  which  to  eradicate  the
.so-called  social  evil,  with  all  its
concomitants,  from  the  land.  Yet  j
they  cannot  see  it  and  they  declare  ,
that  all  who  engage  in  polygamy
shall  suffer  from  two  to  five  yeans
imprisonment and  not  exceeding

$600,  fine.

Now  I  want  to  plai  n  it  clearly  be-
fore you,  my  hearers,  that  this  is  no
longer  the  business  of  a  party,  it  is
to-day  the  voice  of  a  nation*  Mr.
Secretary  Evarts  in  his  circular  letter
sent  to  ministers  in  foreign  coim- 1
tries,  says  in  the  last  clause  that
"  this  government  has  determined  to
prosecute  polygamy  to  the  extent
of  the  law  and  to  eradicate  the  in-
stitution  from  the  country."  These
are  his  words.  That  is  authority
so  far  as  authority  from  the  United
States  government  goes.  We  find
the  same  thing  reiterated  in  the
charge  to  the  grand  jury  in  this  city,
a  short  time  ago,  that  the  voice  of
forty  to  fifty  millions  of  people  must
have  its  rule  and  that  one  hundred
thousand  must  be  sacrificed  or  as
many  of  them  as  insist  on  the  doc-
trine of  polygamy.  That  is  about
where  we  are  to-day.  Now  I  ask
my  brethren  and  sisters — are  you
prepared  for  whatever  conies  on
this  question!  Did  you  when  you
entered  into  the  waters  ot  baptism
make  up  a  reckoning  what  the  (Jos-
pel  of  Jesus  Christ  was  worth  1  Have
we  considered  that  it  was  worth
fathers  and  mothers,  brothers  and  1
sisters,  houses  and  lands,  wives  and  j
children,  and  our  own  lives  also!
If  we  did  not  we  figured  up  wrong,
for  he  that  is  not  willing  to  forsake
all  things  and  make  them  secondary
to  a  whole-souled  belief  in  and  faith-
ful obedience  to  the  Gospel,  is  not
worthy  of  it  I  ask  my  brethren
and  sisters  who  have  come  from  the
.  antipodes  of  the  earth  to  this  place
for  the  Gospel's  sake,  if  you  came  '


prepared  and  having  made  such  a
reckoning  ]  Jesus  says  in  one  of  his
parables,  "  Which  of  yon,  intend-
ing to  build  a  tower  sitteth  not  down
first  and  counteth  the  cost  whether
he  have  sufficient  to  finish  it,  lest,
haply  after  he  hath  laid  the  founda-
tion and  is  not  able  to  finish  it,  all
that  behold  it  begin  to  mock  him
saying,  this  man  began  to  build,  and
was  not  able  to  finish."  Now  that
is  about  the  way  with  us.  There  is
no  use  our  laying  the  flattering
unction  to  our  souls  that  government
is  not  going  to  do  this.  We  have
got  an  example  of  what  they  have
done  to  the  Southern  States,  and
have  no  doubt  they  are  just  as  ready
and  willing  to  do  that  much  to
abolish  polygamy  amoug  us  if  God
inll  Id  t  lie  in.  They  have  come  to
that  point.  They  have  pronounced
against  polygamy  and  are  ready  to
invite,  hire  and  bribe  men's  wives  to
aid  in  the  conviction  of  their  hus-
bands, I  have  no  doubt  of  it ;  you
need  not  have.  They  are  here  tell-
ing us  plainly  that  this  is  their  busi-
ness, an*l  we  need  only  to  look
around  us  and  see  where  we  are
to-day.

Now,  as  regards  this  matter,  no-
body need  tremble  at  all  I  do  not
think  that  any  who  have  received
the  Holy  Spirit,  ami  learned  of  the
revelations  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
know  of  their  influence,  need  fear,  or
that  anybody's  heart  who  is  faith-
ful before  God,  need  be  any  heavier
than  it  is  in  the  habit  of  being,  or
that  their  laces  need  be  any  longer
than  they  are  used  to  be.  Not  at
all  :  we  must  look  upon  this  as  only
apart  of  the  "all  things"  we  agree
to  endure  for  the  Gospels  sake  and
our  salvation.  Now,  they  may  go
to  law,  and  fix  up,  as  we  see  already,
packed  juries,  just  such  as  they
want,  so  that  no  Latter-day  Saint
who  is  a  believer  in  the  Gospel  of


314  JOURNAL  OF

Jesus  Christ,  whether  he  believe
in  polygamy  or  not,  can  have  any
place  among  them,  or  any  say  as  to
who  are  innocent  or  who  are  guilty.  1
We  have  evidence  that  they  will
do  all  this,  and  having  done  this
much,  it  would  be  very  easy  for
them  next  winter  to  fix  up  such
laws  concerning  juries  and  testimony  j
as  will  enable  them  to  carry  out
what  they  have  undertaken.  We
give  them  credit  for  all  this,  and
we  have  evidence  they  will  do  it,
from  the  fact  that  the  Constitution
has  been  no  limit  to  their  former
enactment.  Indeed,  it  lias  virtu-
tally  been  cast  overboard,  and  lib-
erty taken  to  enact  any  such  laws
as  might  be  desirable  to  carry  favor-
ite measures,  ami  it  will  be  *just  as
consistent  for  them  to  do  anything
they  please  in  regard  to  polygamy  ;
and  thus  one  thing  after  another,
until  they  shall  have  attained  the
object  which  they  have  determined
to  accomplish.

The  true  issue  of  this  question  is
not  exactly  between  us  individually
and  the  courts,  or  the  government.
The  issue  is  between  the  two  gov-
ernments. If  they  who  make  us
offenders  are  at  a  loss  to  know
which  is  tlie  higher  law,  they  will
have  plenty  of  time  in  Jind  our.  It
is  a  violation  of  both  the  letter  and
the  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  and
of  gootl  and  true  government  of  i
this  nation,  that  there  should  be
any  law  made  that  should  restrict
our  belief  or  practice  of  any  religious
doctrine,  which  does  not  infringe
upon  the  rights  of  others.  The  Con-
stitution expressly  says  that  "  Con-
gress shall  make  no  law  respecting
an  establishment  of  religion,  or  pro-
hibiting the  free  exercise  thereof"
Neither  is  there  anything  in  the
Constitution  that  tells  Presidents,
Congressmen,  Judges  or  juries,  what
shall  bo  religion,  or  what  shall  not


DISCOURSES.

be  religion.

In  the  days  of  Jesus,  their  Senate
and  House  of  Representatives,  their
supreme  and  lesser  courts  were
comprehended  in  the  Sanhedrim,  •
or  Chief  Council,  which  was  an  in*
stitution  of  tha  Jewish  government
to  determine  all  matters,  secular  or
religious.  In  our  day,  although
there  is  no  law  except  the  law  of
God  that  determines  what  we  may
accept  as  religion,  and  what  we
shall  not,  there  is  a  principle  which
I  call  your  attention  to,  that  will
enable  us  to  understand  our  posi-
tion in  relation  to  each  other  and  to
our  fellowmen.  1  may  perhaps
illustrate  this  best  by  stating  a  cir-
cumstance which  took  place  a  few
years  ago,  while  I  was  in  Europe,
A  gentleman  from  one  of  the  Europ-
ean States  had  emigrated  to  this
country  and  had  become  an  Ameri-
can citizen.  He  returned  to  his
native  countrv  to  attend  to  some
business.  While  there  that  gov-
ernment undertook  to  enforce  from
him  some  act  of  subordination,  as
though  he  were  still  a  subject  of
that  government.  What  was  the
result?  The  government  of  the
United  States,  when  appealed  to,
informed  the  authorities  of  that
land  that  his  rights  as  an  American
citizen  must  be  respected.  We  see,
then,  that  when  a  difficulty  arose
that  abridged  this  man's  liberties,
the  responsibility  was  upon  the
parent  government  of  asserting  and
maintaining  the  rights  of  this  man's
citizenship.  The  authorities  of  Eu-
rope as  well  as  America  lam  led  the
wisdom  of  Daniel  Webster  in  this
case,  and  the  man  was  delivered.

Now,  in  our  case,  the  government
has  determined  that  polygamy  shall
be  abolished,  but  the  government
of  heaven  had  previously  determined
that  polygamy  should  be  established,
and  that  sin  and  wickedness  shall


PREACHING  OF  JOHN  THF  BAPTIST,  ETC*


be  rooted  up  ;  that  men  and  women  1
shall  have  the  right  to  obey  that
higher  law  in  their  marital  relations.

This  is  our  position,  this  is  where
we  are  to-day.  We  have  accepted
this  doctrine,  this  principle  of  faith
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  we,
or  some  of  us,  have  lived  it  more
than  thirty  years  in  this  Territory*
And  in  the  matter  of  our  appeal,
inasmuch  as  the  government  is  de-
termined to  eradicate  this  item  of
our  faith,  and  us  with  it,  of  course,
and  inasmuch  as  we  can  get  no
redress  therefrom,  our  appeal  must
be  to  the  government  of  heaven,  to
which  we  have  vowed  allegiance,
Jehovah  will  hold  a  contention  with
this  nation,  and  will  show  them
which  is  the  higher  and  eternal  law,
and  which  is  the  lesser  and  more
recent  law.  While  they  are  carry-
ing on  this  highdianded  proceeding,
regardless  of  life,  liberty,  or  the
pursuit  of  happiness,  the  (.Jod  of
heaven  and  earth  will  notify  the
earthly  government  that  the  rights
and  liberties  of  His  citizens  must  be
respected  and  maintained*

The  whole  procedure  is  inconsist-
ent, and  utterly  at  variance  with  the
fundamental  principles  of  law.  The
great  legal  apostle,  Blackstone,  has
plainly  stated,  and  every  lawyer
knows,  that  human  laws  and  gov-
ernments are  professedly  derived
from,  and  founded  upon  the  revealed
law  of  God,  which  lie  gave  to  Moses
on  Mount  Sinai,  and  every  man  of
them  who  rejects  the  revelations  of
Jesus  Christ,  must  know  that  he  is
condemning  himself  in  the  thing  he
professes  to  allow.  The  eternal  law
of  celestial  marriage  and  plurality  of
wives  stands  out  with  singular  pro-
minence in  all  the  law  and  prophets,
and  is  evidenced  in  the  personal
humanity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
Plurality,  as  believed  and  practised
by  the  Latter-day  Saints,  is  rto  crime


in  and  of  itself ;  it  presumes  no  de-
ception or  fraud  ;  it  infringes  upon
no  other  rights,  but  vests  additional
rights  in  him  who  accepts  the  hea-
venly doctrine,  whose  Author  has
said,  u  It  shall  be  visited  with  bles-
sings and  not  cursings,  and  writh  my
power,  saith  the  Lord/1  It  cannot
therefore  be  malum  ins?,  but  is  only
malum  prohibitum,  by  the  Act  of
Congress.

With  this  view  of  the  subject
before  us,  what  have  Ave  to  do?
What  is  our  privilege  and  our  duty
in  the  premises!  It  is  that  we  draw-
near  to  God,  the  Author  of  our
faith,  in  humility  and  in  obedience
to  all  his  requirements,  remember-
ing our  covenants  sacredly  before
Him,  that  our  cause  may  reach  Mis
ears,  and  when  He  sees  our  trouble
He  will  in  His  own  good  time  step
forth  and  deliver  us.  We  have
erred  ami  sinned  more  or  less,  some
of  our  children  may  have  departed
from  the  way  of  the  Lord,  If  we
have  violated  the  Sabbath,  taken
the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain,  or
violated  any  of  our  covenants,  it  is
time  for  us  to  turn  to  the  Lord  and
do  so  no  more.  If  we  do  this,  He
in  his  own  due  time  will  say,
"  Hitherto  shall  thou  come  but  no
further,  and  here  let  thy  proud
waves  be  stayed,"  While,  then,  we
see  all  the  blandishments  of  civili-
zation among  us,  while  we  see  all
the  troubles  that  human  govern-
ments can  make,  in  our  view  we
have  only  to  trust  in  God  as  Daniel
did.  Notwithstanding  the  edict  of
the  King,  he  worshipped  the  True
and  Living  God,  So  must  we.  And
;>eradventure  all  these  things  must
uippen  to  us.  There  are  a  great
many  among  us  who  say,  i%  Lord,
Lord,"  and  do  not  pretend  to  do  the
tilings  which  God  requires  of  us.
We  liave  to  keep  the  commandments
of  God,  we  have  to  sense  it,  and  to


310  JoUKNAL  UK

learn  the  lesson  in  all  sobriety.
Have  we  any  time  to  waste  with
these  outside  characters  ?  Have  we
any  time  to  dally  around  grog-shops
and  play  in  billiard  saloons  1  No,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  we  have
not  It  is  onr  duty  to  be  alive  to
our  work,  day  by  day,  knowing
that  the  eyes  of  God  are  upon  us,
It  is  He  that  will  do  all  things  mar-
vel ou  sly  well  for  us;  it  is  He  that
will  fight  our  battles  for  us.  Then
the  only  way  for  us  to  gain  deliver-
ance is  to  remain  devoted  to  his  ser-
vice, that  we  may  help  to  build  up
His  kingdom,  and  be  found  worthy
of  that  assistance  which  He  has
promised  to  rentier  us  in  the  time
of  need.

There  are  two  sides  to  this  ques-
tion, Perad venture  it  may  be  nec-
essary that  our  enemies  should
carry  out  the  works  of  their  father,


D  isooi:  USES.

the  devil,  that  they  may  show  sooner
or  more  fully  to  the  heavens  when
the  purpose  and  measure  of  their
wickedness  is  full.  As  to  the  ultimate
establishment  of  truth  on  the  earth,
there  is  no  question.  The  prophets
have  all  prophesied  of  it,  the  angels
have  looked  forward  to  it  with  glo-
rious anticipation,  and  we  have  the
testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that
this  work  shall  be  accomplished.
The  tiling  for  us  to  do  is  to  live  true
and  faithful  to  our  religion,  irre-
spective of  what  may  be  going  on
around  us.

That  the  Lord  may  inspire  us  by
his  Spirit  to  be  faithful  to  our  duty,
to  draw  near  to  him,  leave  the
wickedness  of  the  world  alone,  and
sanctify  ourselves  before  him,  is  my
earnest  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Held  in  the  Tabebnable

Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  6th,  1879,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  WORK  OF  GOD  CANNOT  BE  HINDERED — THE  UNITED  STATES  TO  BE
AFFLICTED  BY  JUDGMENT*

I  have  been  interested  in  listen-  to  find  that  good  old-fashoned
ing  to  the  remarks  of  the  brethren  Mormonism,  or  Latter-day  Sain tkm
this  afternoon,  and  I  am  thankful is  not  altogether  dead  yet — that


■


THE WORK  OF GOD,  ETC,


317


there  is  a  little  of  it  living  in  the
hosoins  of  the  Saints,  in  our  speakers,
and  in  those  who  hear.  The  Me-
thodists, you  know,  used  to  have  a
prayer  to  the  effect  that  "  His  Spirit
might  pass  from  heart  to  heart  as
oil  passes  from  vessel  to  vessel/'  and
I  have  thought  that  that  kind  of  a
spirit  has  been  exhibited  more  or  less
here  to-day,  whether  we  have  any
Methodists  among  us  or  not.

We  have  come  here,  as  has  been
stated,  to  worship  Almighty  God  in
accordance  with  his  commands.
Most  of  this  congregation  were  good
citizens  before  they  came  here.  Some
are  from  the  various  parts  of  Kurope.
and  from  other  parts  of  the  earth,
and  a  great  many  front  different
parts  of  the  United  States.  They
were  good  citizens  and  observed  the
laws  of  the  land  to  which  they  be-
longed. They  have  observed  every
law  of  the  United  States,  except  one
that  was  made  on  purpose  to  make
them  disobey  God,  and  therefore,  so
far  as  political  affairs  are  concerned,
and  the  duties  pertaining  to  citizens
of  the  United  States,  they  have
been  maintained  in  their  integrity
up  to  the  present  time.  I  remember
being  asked  in  a  court  here  some
three  or  four  years  ago — I  do  not
remember  the  time  precisely,  but  the
court  seemed  to  be  very  fond  of
interfering  with  religious  matters,  it
was  not  always  so  ;  but  1  suppose
civilization  has  extended — I  was
asked,  h'  Do  you  believe  in  obeying
the  laws  of  the  United  States  f
"  Yes  I  do,  in  all  except  one" — in
fact  I  had  not  broken  that  ''What
law  is  that  r  "The  law  in  relation
to  polygamy,"  "  Well,  why  do  you
except  that  one  T  "Because,"  I
replied  "it  is  at  variance  with  the
genius  and  spirit  of  our  institution  ;
because  it  is  at  variance  with  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States;
and  because  it  is  in  violation  of  the


law  of  God  to  me."  The  United
States  Supreme  Court,  however,
since  that  time  has  made  it  a  law  of
the  land,  that  is,  it  has  sanctioned  it;
it  was  not  sanctioned  at  that  time,
that  question  was  not  then  decided.
We  are  here  to-day,  gathered  to-
gether according  to  the  word  and
law  of  God  and  the  commandments
of  God  to  us,  "  Gather  my  Saints
together  unto  me,"  says  one  of  the

old  prophets,  "those  that  have  made
a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifice*"  "I
will  take  you,"  says  another,  "one
of  a  city  and  two  of  a  family,  and  I
will  bring  you  to  Zion,  and  I  will
give  yuu  pastors  according  to  mine
heart,  which  shall  feed  you
knowledge  and  understaudin
Now,  the  servants  of  God  in  these
last  days  have  been  sent  out  as  they
were  in  former  days  to  gather  the
people,  and  the  Lord  has  given  us
this  law — the  law  of  polygamy —
among  other  things,  and  I  know  it
before  God  and  can  bear  testimony
of  it,  if  nobody  else  knows  it.  I
know  that  it  came  from  God,  and
that  God  is  its  author.  But  there
are  hundreds  and  thousands  of
others  who  have  a  knowledge  of  the
same  thing  :  but  I  speak  of  it  in  this
wise  to  testily  before  God,  angels
and  men,  before  this  nation  and  all
other  nations  that  it  came  from  God.
That  is  the  reason  that  I  speak  of  it,
that  I  may  bear  my  testimony  to  you
and  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Now,
then,  about  the  result  of  it  ;  that  is
with  God  and  with  the  people.  _  It
is  for  us  to  do  the  will  of  God  5  it  is
for  the  Lord  to  bring  about  the  re-
sults in  his  own  way.  But  one
thing  I  can  assure  all  men,  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God,  that  neither
this  nation,  nor  any  other  nation,
can  do  anything  against  the  truth,
but  for  the  truth.  Do  their  very
best,  help  themselves  as  they  may,
they  cannot  help  themselves  in  re


318


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


^ard  to  these  matters,  for  the  Lord
will  say  unto  them,  as  he  did  unto
the  waves  of  the  mighty  ocean,
"  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come  but  no
further  :  and  here  shall  thy  proud
waves  be  stayed."  Now,  that  is
how  the  thing  is.  The  prophet  in
another  place  says,  *£  Surely  the
wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee  ;  the
remainder  of  wrath  shaft  thou  re-
strain." He  will  manage  the  other.
He  will  put  a  hook  in  the  jaws  of
men  aud  of  nations,  and  lead  them
just  as  he  pleases.  They  are  all  in
his  hands,  as  we  are  in  his  hands.

Need  we  be  surprised  that  people
should  feel  inimical  to  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ  1  No.  Need  we  be
surprised  that  men,  as  the  scriptures
say,  M  should  wax  worse  and  worse,
deceiving  and  being  deceived  f  No.
We  have  preached  it — I  lave
preached  it  upwards  of  forty  years
in  this  nation  and  in  other  nations.
Need  we  be  surprised  that  they
should  trample  under  foot  the  Con-
stitution of  the  United  States  1  No  ;
Joseph  Smith  told  us  that  they
would  do  it  Many  around  me  here
knewlongago  that  they  wonld  do  this
thing  and  further  knew  that  the  last
people  that  should  he  found  to  rally
around  that  sacred  instrument  and
save  it  from  the  grasp  of  unrighteous
men  would  be  the  Elders  of  Israel !
When,  therefore,  we  see  these  things
progressing  need  we  be  astonished?
I  do  not  think  we  need  be.  Some
of  our  people  you  know,  who  are
a  little  shaky  and  get  how?  Why
a  little  astride  of  the  fence,  and  say
"good  Lord  ami  good  devil/'  not
knowing  into  whose  hands  they  will
fall  j  when  they  see  some  of  these
things  transpiring  they  are  filled
with  amazement ;  but  men  who  un-
derstand themselves,  and  who  are
hi  possession  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  and  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God,  are  looking  for  such  things  and


they  are  not  at  all  surprised.  Were
we  surprised  when  the  last  terrible
war  took  place  here  in  the  United
States  1  No ;  good  Latter-day
Saints  were  not,  for  they  had  been
told  about  it.  Joseph  Smith  had  told
them  where  it  would  start,  that  it
should  be  a  terrible  time  of  blood-
shed and  that  it  should  start  in
South  Carolina.  But  I  tell  you  to-
day the  end  is  not  yet.  You  will  see
worse  things  than  that,  for  God  will
lay  his  hand  upon  this  nation,  and
they  will  feel  it  more  terribly  than
ever  they  have  done  before  ;  there
will  bo  more  bloodshed,  more  ruin,
more  devastation  than  ever  they
have  seen  before.  Write  it  down  !
You  will  see  it  come  to  pass  ;  it  is
only  just  starting  in.  And  would
you  feel  to  rejoice  ?  No  ;  I  would
feel  sorry.  I  knew  very  well  myse  lf
when  this  last  war  was  commencing,
and  coqld  have  wept  and  did  weep,
over  this  natiou  ;  but  there  is  yet  to
come  a  sound  of  war,  trouble  and
distress,  in  which  brother  will  be
arrayed  against  brother,  father
against  son,  son  against  father,  a
scene  of  desolation  and  destruction
that  will  permeate  our  land  until  it
will  be  a  vexation  to  hear  the  report
thereof  Would  you  help  to  bring
it  about  ?  No,  1  would  not ;  I  would
stop  it  if  I  could.  I  would  pour  in
the  oil  and  the  wine  and  balm  and
try  to  lead  people  in  tbe  right  path
that  will  be  governed  by  it,  but  they
won't  Our  Elders  would  do  the
same,  and  we  are  sending  them  forth
doing  all  that  we  can,  selecting  the
very  best  men  we  can  put  our  hands
upon — men  of  faith,  men  of  honor,
men  of  integrity — to  go  forth  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  this  nation  and
to  other  nations.  And  how  do  they
receive  them  ?  Not  long  ago  they
killed  one  and  mobbed  others.  Well,
we  cannot  help  that.  They  are  in
the  dark  ;  they  do  not  realize  the


THE  WO  UK  OF  GOD,  ETC,


319


position  they  occupy;  they  know  not  |
what  spirit  they  are  of* But  it  is
our  duty  to  have  our  bo  wells  full  of
compassion  extended  to  them, to  I
send  fortli  the  massage  of  life.  But
when  our  Elders  go  among  these
people  they  have  to  take  their  lives
in  their  hands  and  trust  in  the  liv-
ing God.  Nevertheless,  we  need  not
be  afraid, we  need  not  be  troubled
about  any  of  these  matters, **  Fear
not  them  which  kill  the  body,  but
are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul :  but
rather  fear  him  which  is  aide  to  de-  *
stroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell."
Yea,  1  say  unto  you  fear  Him  ;  and
we  feel  to-day,  while  we  wotild  sub-
mit to  every  ordinance  of  man  that
is  just,  equitable  ami  right,  observe
every  law  and  intei  fere  with  no  man's
rights,  we  are  not  ignorant  of  the
fact  that  it  is  unjust  for  legislatures
and  courts  to  make  and  enforce  laws
to  entrap  and  destroy  us  ;  that  a
magnanimous  and  just  government
would  protect  ail  its  citizens  ;  but
we  feel,  at  the  same  time,  that  the
Lord  is  our  God,  the  Lord  is  our
judge,  the  Lord  is  our  Law-giver,
the  Lord  is  our  King,  and  he  shall
rule  over  us ;  and  all  that  feel  like
saying  that  say  Amen. (The  vast
congregation  responded  **  Amen.")

It  is  an  historic  fact,  written  in
letters  as  of  living  fire,  that  neither
nations,  peoples,  emperors,  kings,  or
presidents,  nor  the  combined  powers  !
of  the  earth,  are  able  to  regulate  the
conscience  or  change the  faith  of
man. Noah  maintained  his  faith
alone,  as  against  that  of  a  world.
Abraham  could  not  be  swerved  by  1
the  most  unnatural  and  forbidding  ,
circumstances. Moses,  at  the  be-  j
best  of  God,  alone  withstood  the  j
power  of  Egypt's  king  and  nation,
Daniel  unflinchingly  bowed  his  knee
to  Israel's  God,  in  the  face  of  a  pro-
hibitory regal  decree,  passed  by  the
intrigues  of  the  combined  powers  of


the  kingdom  of  Babylon,  who  were
his  enemies.  Job,  when  tried,
maintained  hi*  integrity,  even  as
against  God,  and  said,  fc*  Though  he
slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him  ;"
and  lie  further  said,  *4I  know  that  my
Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  will
stand  at  the  Litter  day  upon  the
earth  ;  and  though  worms  destroy
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see
God."  The  three  Hebrew  children
could  not  be  made  to  bow  to  the
image  set  up  by  the  King  of  Babylon;
but  rather  than  deny  their  faith
chose  the  penalty  of  the  fiery  fur-
nace, in  which  they  walked  accom-
panied by  the  Son  of  God*  Jesus
came  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father,
and  though  in  doing  it  lie  sweat
great  drops  of  blood,  and  begged  of
his  Father  to  let  the  cup  pass  if  pos-
sible, yet  "not  my  will,"  he  said,
"but  thine  be  done;"  and  when
groaning  in  mortal  agony  he  cried,
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou
forsaken  ine."  And  though  he  could
have  commanded  twelve  legions  of
angels,  who  would  have  obeyed  him,
yet  in  obedience  to  the  mandate  of
his  Father,  he  quietly  said  *:  It  is
finished,"  and  gave  up  the  ghost

And  this  nation  may  yet  learn
that  under  no  fictitious  pleas,  as
used  by  the  Babylonish  nation
against  Daniel  and  others,  ran  they
pervert  or  overthrow  the  faith  and
religion  of  the  Latter-day  Saints;
and  that  no  legislative  enactment,
nor  judicial  rulings,  can  pluck  from
the  mind  of  man  his  undying  faith,
or  legislate  away  the  scrupulous  ex-
actions of  an  inexorable  conscience.
The  rack,  the  gibbet,  the  faggot,  and
death  in  all  its  horrid  forms  has
never  accomplished  this,  nor  never
will  And  in  free  America,  the  land
of  boasted  toleration,  it  will  be  as
impotent  under  the  guise  of  liberty
as  it  has  been  in  other  ages  under
the  name  of  despotism. And  Con-


320


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


gress  to  cover  their  shameless  in-
fract ion  of  ttw^Okifstitution  of  the
United  States,  which  guarantees  re
ligiou^liWty  to  all—iu  order
to  avcmlthe  odium  of  religious  per
sedition,  which  naturally  attaches
itself  to  them,  may  pervert  an  insti-
tution of  God  by  misnaming  poly-
gamy and  calling  it  bigamy  and  not
religion,  and  though  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  ITnite;l  States  may  con-
firm their  acts,  yet  there  are  more
than  one  hundred  thousand  persons
who  know  better  than  they  do,  who
will  declare  that  polygamy  is  a  part  of
their  reli<noii  and  a  command  and
lation  from  God,


These  are  our  feelings  and  we  will
try  to  acknowledge  the  Lord  in  all
tilings.  And  then,  on  the  other
hand,  we  do  not  wish  tc  treat  any-
body disrespectfully.  Have  we  any
quarrel  with  this  nation  1  No;  they
are  seeking  to  quarrel  with  us;  don't
let  us  give  them  the  opportunity.
They  are  like  the  hoy  strutting  along
the  street  with  a  chip  on  his  shoulder,
asking  us  to  knock  it  off.  But  we
won't  knock  it  off,  but  let  them
strut.  It  is  true  they  try  all  they
can  to  annoy  and  provoke  us — that
is,  a  few  mean  men  do,  although
that  is  not  generally  the  feeling  of
the  nation,  but  is  confined  in  great
measure  to  religious  fanatics  and
corrupt  politicians,  some  of  them
holding  positions  under  government,
are  trying  to  stir  up  strife.  What
for ;  Well,  they  want  to  get  a  cer-
tain "ticket"  elected.  "A  great
amount  of  this  11  fuss  and  feathers  "
that  Ave  have  to-day  is  simply  a  po-
litical ruse  in  the  interest  of  party
politics.  What  for?  Why,  the
brethren  have  told  you,  Mormon-
ism  is  very  unpopular,  and  if  they
can  only  do  something  that  will  be
in  opposition  to  Mormonism  it  will
satisfy  the  howling  priests  through-
out the  land,  and  a  great  many  of


their  flocks.  As  was  remarked  by
one  of  the  brethren,  when  Jesus  was
crucified,  Pilate  and  Herod  could  be
made  friends.  When  Mormonism
is  to  be  opposed,  all  men,  or  at  least
a  great  many  men,  can  unite  in  op-
posing it.  And  they  want  to  go  before
the  people  and  tell  them  that  they
have  rooted  out  slavery,  and  now
they  are  after  Mormonism,  and  wont
you  religious  fanatics  join  in  1  No.
excuse  me,  I  mean,  you  pura  and
holy  religious  people,  who  are  so
humble  and  possess  so  much  of  the
spirit  that  dwelt  in  the  lowly  Jesus,
wont  you  help  us  to  do  this  thing  —
wont  you  vote  for  us  because  we
are  doing  this  thing  1  Why,  bless
your  souls,  they  would  not  hesitate
to  sweep  us  off  the  face  of  the  earth
to  get  elected.  That  is  their  feeling.
They  care  nothing  about  human
rights,  liberty,  or  life,  if  they  can
bring  about  the  results  desired.  They
would  despoil,  destroy  and  overthrow
this  people  to  accomplish  their  own
end.  Well,  the  other  Jiarty,  it  is
true,  would  not  be  very  'well  suited
about  it,  but  they  would  not  care
to  see  it  politically.  However,  it  is
for  us  to  do  the  best  we  cau.  We
have  got  to  put  our  trust  in  the  liv-
ing God.  We  might  ask — Will
they  derive  any  benefit  from  any
course  taken  against  the  Latter* day
Saints  1  No!  a  thousand  times  no ! !
I  tell  you  that  the  hand  of  God  will
be  upon  them  for  it,  and  every
people,  be  it  this  nation,  or  any  other
nation,  that  shall  lift  up  their  hands
against  Zion  shall  be  wasted  away;
and  those  that  want  to  try  it  let
them  try  it,  and  it  is  them  and  their
God  for  it  But  it  is  for  us  to  fear
God,  to  keep  his  commandments ;
we  can  afford  to  do  right  whether
other  people  can  or  not.  Respect
all  men  in  their  rights,  in  their  posi-
tion, and  in  their  privileges,  politi-
cally and  socially,  and  protect  them


PROGRESS  OF  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC


in  the  same  ;  but  be  not  partakers  of
their  evil  deeds,  of  their  crimes,  nor
their  iniquities,  that  you  have  heard
spoken  about  here  to-day.  AVe  do
not  want  them  to  force  upon  us
their  drinking  saloons,  their  drunk-
enness, their  gambling,  their  de-
bauchery and  lasciviousiiess.  We  do
not  want  these  atljuncts  of  civiliza-
tion. We  do  not  want  them  to
force  upon  us  that  institution  of  mo-
n 014am v  called  the  social  evil  We
will  be  after  them ;  we  will  form
ourselves  into  police  and  hunt  them
them  out  and  drag  them  from  their


dens  of  infamy  and  expose  them  to
the  world*  We  wont  have  their
meanness,  with  their  foeticides  and
infanticides,  forced  upon  us.  And
you,  sisters,  don't  allow  yourselves  to
become  contaminated  by  rustling
against  their  polluted  skirts.  Keep
from  them  !  Let  them  wallow  in
their  infamy,  and  let  us  protect  the
right,  and  be  for  God  and  his  Christ,
for  honor,  for  truth,  for  virtue,
purity  and  chastity,  and  for  the
building  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER  ORSOtf  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  General  Confluence,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,

Salt  Lake  City,  October  fi,  1879,  r  1

> '  (Reported  hj  Geo,  F.  Gihhs.)

PROGRESS  OF  THK  WORK  OF  HOD— INTRODUCTION  OF  EVILS  BY  THE
WORLD —UNCONSTITUTIONAL  INI M If.' A 1  -  MEASU  KKS — PLURAL  MARRIAGE
NOT  CRIMINAL — INTuLKRANCE  DENOUNCED,

By  the  blessing  of  our  Heavenly  calculated  upon,  looking  at  the  sub-
Father,  we  are  permitted  once  more,  j  ject  naturally,  as  natural  men.  But
under  circumstances  of  peace,  to  !  contemplating  the  subject  spiritually,
assemble  ourselves  hero  in  this  large  we  might  have  expected  to  see  what
tabernacle,  in  the  capacity  of  a  semi-  we  now  behold— a  great  people  as-
annual  Conference,  in  the  50th  year  j  sembled  from  many  nation?,  occupy
of  the  history  of  this  Church.  A  ing  the  central  portion  of  this  great
few  months  more,  and  this  Church  north  wing  of  the  western  hemi-
will  have  seen  the  history  of  fifty  j  sphere.  We,  as  a  people  hatfe  made
years.  Great  and  wonderful  has  during  the  first  half  century,  or
been  the  progress?  of  the  Church  nearly  so,  of  our  existence,  great  and
during  this  period  of  time ;  far  be-  rapid  progress,  far  beyond  that  of
vond  anything  that  we  could  have  some  of  the  former  dispensations

No.  21.  Vol  XX.


322  JOURNAL  OK

which  have  been  introduced  into  our
world.  It  is  a  matter  of  astonish-
ment with  me,  that  so  many  people
have  received  the  divine  message
which  God  has  communicated  to  the
human  family  in  our  day,  when  we
consider  that  the  generation,  or
people,  who  should  live  just  prior  to
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  m  his
glory  were  described  as  a  people  such
as  did  exist  in  the  days  of  Noah.  It
will  be  remembered  that  the  message
of  that  good  man  did  not  receive
much  attention,  in  this  day ;  but  a
very  few,  in  fact,  believed  in  his  mes-
sage. I  have  oftentimes  thought
how  discouraging  it  must  have  been
to  that  good  old  prophet,  to  prophesy
to  that  generation — to  foretell  con-
cerning the  great  judgment  that  was
to  happen  to  them,  to  point  out  the
only  means  of  safety  for  thosp  who
desired  to  escape,  laboring  diligently
for  so  many  years,  and  then  to  find
only  seven  individuals  besides  him  self
righteous  enough  to  receive  the  mes-
sage. How  discouraging!  If  this
message  had  been  treated  with  the
same  indifference,  we  can  readily
imagine  how  discouraging  it  would
have  been  to  Joseph  Smith,  as  a
prophet  and  revelator,  to  labor  for
perhaps  a  hundred  years  and  only
make  seven  converts.  As  regards
numbers,  then,  those  who  have
obeyed  the  Gospel  message  in  our
day,  have  become  very  numerous,
compared  with  those  that  received
the  message  in  the  days  of  the  flood.
Not  merely  one  family  of  persons,
but  hundreds  of  thousands  have  been
gathered  into  this  latter-day  Church.
The  divinity  of  a  message  does  not,
however,  depend  upon  the  numbers
who  receive  it  Numbers  has  no-
thing to  do  with  the  subject  The
Lord  our  God  has  sent  forth  his  ser-
vants in  this  great  dispensation ;  he
sent  them  first  directly  to  our  own
nation ;  they,  as  a  people,  have  re-


DISCOURSES,

jected  it Individuals,  however,  in
all  the  States,  have  seen  proper  to
receive  the  divine  warning,  and  have
mostly  gathered  to  these  mountains,
and  are  located  among  these  ever-
lasting hills. Who  were  they  that
first  redeemed  this  desert  1  Were
t  hey  a  mixed  people,  those  belonging
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  and  those
unconnected  with  them  I  No;  it  was
the  united  efforts  of  a  poor  and
afflicted people,  who  had  already
been  driven  from  their  houses  five
times  while  they  dwelt  in  the  States.
They  came  here  almost  bare-handed,
so  far  as  property  was  concerned*
They  came  to  an  undesirable  coun-
try ;  they  came  to  a  location  that
was  marked  upon  our  maps  as  u  the
Great  American  Desert  f  a  country
that  had  scarcely  been  penetrated  by
white  men. We  began  anew  in  this
country,  and  it  was  by  the  labor  of
our  hands,  being  strengthened  by
the  Almighty,  that  we  opened  up
these  rugged  canons,  and  penetrated
into  these  mountains,  and  obtained
timber  to  build  our  houses  and  to
fence  our  fields  ;  it  was  by  the  united
labors  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  that
we  constructed water -ditches  and
,  canals  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating
the  land,  instead  of  depending  upon
the  rains  of  heaven,  and  thus  com-
menced a  new  system  of  farming,  at
least  as  far  as  our  experience  was
concerned. It  was  by  the  labor  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  alone,  and  not
by  the  labor  and  capital  of  Gentiles.
These  beautiful  ornamental  shade-
trees  were  placed  out  in  front  of  our
houses,  to  beautify  and  adorn  the
the  streets,  by  the  labor  of  the  hands
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  not  by
the  aid  of  Gentiles. It  was  the
Saints  who  established  these  beauti-
ful orchards  that  are  seen,  not  only
in  this  great  city,  which  well  might
be  termed  a  city  of  orchards,  but  in
almost  all  other  large  towns  and


PROGRESS  OF  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC*  323


cities  throughout  this  great  desert.
It  was  by  the  labor  of  our  own  hands
that  school  hou  ses  were  erected  in  all
rthe  countries  and  settlements  of  our
Territory ;  all  this  too,  at  an  early
stage  of  our  settlements  here,  the
education  of  our  youth,  being  among
the  most  prominent  and  important
steps  calculated  to  benefit  the  people.
It  was  by  the  labors  of  our  own  hands
that  academics  and  buildings  for  high
schools  were  established  in  various
portions  of  the  Territory,  as  well  as
«our  common  schoolhouses.  It  was
by  the  labor  of  our  own  hands  that
chapels  and  meeting-houses  were
located  in  all  our  settlements
.throughout  this  mountain  region.
It  was  by  the  labor  of  our  own
liands  that  the  desert  was  made  to
T>)ossom  as  the  rose.

By  and  by,  after  we  had  fulfilled
and  about  accomplished  this  work,
having  formed  numerous  settlements
and  built  numerous  dwelling- houses,
.and  planted  out  numerous  ornamen-
tal trees  and  established  extensive
gardens,  and  began  to  raise  grain,
fruits  and  vegetables  in  great  abun-
dance ;  after  we  had  done  all  these
things,  fairly  opening  up  the  Terri-
tory, that  outside  population  be^an
to  pour  in.  Who  was  it,  then,  that
opened  up  the  country  so  that  our
'Gentile  friends  might  come  into  it,
and  of  causing  prosperity  to  prevail
in  our  midst?  It  was  the  Latter-
-day Saints.  Who  was  it  that  made
feasible  the  grading  of  the  Union
Pacific  Railroad  through  these  rug-
ged  mountains — the  most  difficult
work  on  the  whole  of  its  construc-
tion 1  It  was  the  strong  anrs  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  our  mountain
rboys ;  they  continued  the  road  some
hundreds  of  miles;  tunnels  had  to  be
cut  through  huge  mountains,  and
rough  and  precipitous  places  were
made  smooth,  and  the  way  prepared
that  our  'Gentile  neighbors  might


come  among  us,  and  all  this  that
they  might  have  the  privilege  of
entering  on  record  that  they  were
the  great  unes  that  established  these
facilities,  and  that  made  the  desert
to  blossom  as  the  rose.

What,  let  me  ask,  have  our  Gentile
neighbors  that  have  come  among  us
done  ]  They  have  done  some  good
things  ;  they  have  introduced  some
very  bad  things.  I  speak  now  accord-
ing to  my  own  individual  feelings
upon  this  subject  Before  they  came
we  had  no  grog-shops  in  the  various
towns,  and  villages,  and  cities  in  our
Territory,  to  convert  a  temperate  peo-
ple into  con  firm  Oil  drunkards.  We
had  no  such  institutions ;  but  as  soon
as  they  came  this  product  of  what
they  call  civilization  was  intro-
duced into  our  midst,  wherever  they
could  obtain  a  foothold.  So  much
for  this  kind  of  civilization  that  has
been  introduced  into  the  midst  of
this  people.  What  else  ]  Years  and
years  passed  by,  before  the  Gentile
population  began  in  any  degree  to
come  into  our  Territory,  during
which  safety  attended  our  habitations.
We  could  leave  our  doors  open  at
night,  in  summer  time,  to  be  bene-
fitted by  the  mountain  breezes ;  now
we  have  to  lock  our  doors,  and  bolt
down  the  windows.  Why  1  Because
that  thing  called  civilization  hascome
into  our  midst,  which  renders  it  un-
safe for  our  habitations  to  be  thus
left  open.  What  else  ?  Formerly  we
could  wash  our  clothes,  as  we  do
weekly,  and  han«  them  out  upon  the
lines,  letting  them  remain  there  if
necessary  for  one  or  two  days  and
nights,  without  the  least  danger  of
their  being  taken  away.  Pare  we  do
these  tilings  now]  Can  we  expect
safety  now  ?  No.  Why  1  Because
Gentile  civilization  has  come  into  our
midst,  that  which  we  forsook,  when
we  left  the  lands  from  which  we
emigrated. It  has  come  to  us  ;  and


these  are  the  disagreeable  things
mduch  the  Latter-day  Saints  have  to
encounter.

But  it  lias  been  said,  and  even
published  that  it  was  nut  the  Latter-
day  Saints  that  introduced  the  bless-
ings that  are  enjoyed  to-day  by  the
inhabitants  of  this  Territory  ;  that  it
%vas  some  other  people.  I  am  trying
to  portray  these  things  precisely  as
they  are;

What  else?  Our  streets  are  filled,
not  only  with  drunkards,  by  intro-
ducing these  liquor  saloons  in  nearly  j
all  parts  of  our  Territory,  but  we  see
fightings,  blasphemy,  threatening  life,
etc.  iu  all  the  places  in  the  Territory,
wherever  this  outside  "civilization"
has  appeared*  There  maybe  some
few  exceptions  among  the  Gentile
elements-  We  dq  not  wish  .  to  pro-
nounce all  the  outsiders  who  have
taken  up  their  abode  among  us  being
of  this  character,  but  we  speak  of  these
things  in  general  terms.  There  are
good  men  and  women  who  were  not
among  the  early  settlers  of  this
country,  that  have  come  here  since
the  way  was  opened,  and  since  pros-
perity prevailed  over  this  desert ;  we
do  not  speak  against  them,  but
against,  that  -class  that  have  intro-
duced these  evils  in  to  our  mi  dst.  We
might  speak  of  other  things,  such  as
houses  of  ill-fame— some Qiing  that
was  not  kuo>yn  in  our  country,  and
fiomeUii/ig  that  the  youth  and  the
rising  generation  grew  up  to  man-
hood (  without  3  knowing  anything
about,'  only  as  they  happened
to  read  qt"  them  ,QCcasjoi\ally  in  some
of  the' J^tepu  papers.  Do  they  now
exist  ?  Xes-  Who  brought  them
lieov  and  who  sustains  them  after
thej^hflve  Qom,e  1  Undertake  to  put
these  things  down  by  law,  and  every
exertion  is  made  to  retain  these  sink-
hgles  ^f  c.f>Tj;i}ption  in  the  land.
,  Writs,foi  Jia^e$s  corpus  are  issued  in
order  to  free  those  bad  characters,


and  turn  tiiem  loose  upon  the  com-
munity. This  is  another  feature  of
what  they  term  "civilization."  We
might  go  on  and  name  Sabbath-
breaking,  lying,  misrepresenting,
quarreling,  stealing,  and  so  forth,  but
we  have  not  time  to  dwell  on  all
these  subjects.

We  came  here  as  a  religious  people*
We  had  a  civil  government,  and  a
religious  government  ;  we  had  civil
authority  and  ecclesiastical  author-
ity, before  the  Gentiles  came  here
in  any  great  numbers.  .  Both  of
these  principles  .<  of  government
were  in  existence  in  this  Territory  in
the  early  rise  thereof  The  religious,
in  tli is  Territory,  seemed  to  be  very
much  united,  with  a  very  few  excep-
tions. We  all  believed  in  the  same
doctrines.  But  says  one,  "Is  not
this  in  opposition  to  the  principles  of
our  government,  for  all  the  people  to
be  united  T  I  do  not  know  of  any-
thing in  any  of  the  principles  or-
dained by  the  revolutionary  Ait  hers
that  requires  division  in  a  represen-
tative form  of  government  They
make  provisions,  in  case  there  should
be  division  ;  but  never  founded  the
government  with  an  express  deter-
mination that  there  should  be  divi-
sion, either  in  their  religion  or  in
their  politics  ;  it  is  not  a  necessary
con-comitant  to  the  form  of  our  j£QY-
eminent.  Our  government  and  the
principles  thereof  could  be  sustained
without  any  violation  whatever,  if
the  forty  millions  of  people  were  all
of  one  faith.  If  they  were  all  de-
mocrats, or  any  other  political  faith,
still  the  government  would  not  be
violated.  But  they  made  provisions,
hi  case  there  should  be  divisions.
Thank  God,  that  in  this  Territory
we  have  supported  a  Republican
form  of  government,  without  being
under  the  necessity  of  impressing
upon  the  people,  that  they  should  be
divided. We  do  not  impress  any


such  thing  upon  their  mi  in  Is.  It  is
o  part  of  the  Republican  govern-
enfc  to  be  divided.  You  can  all
ote  the  same  way  at  the  polk  ;  you
on  can  all  believe  the  same  religion
nd  yet  be  good  citizens  of  the
United  States.  What]  can  they  all
e  Presbyterians  and  at  the  same
ime  be  good  American  citizens  1
es.  Can  they  all  be  Methodists,
nd  yet  be  good  American  citizens?
es.  Can  they  all  belohg  to  one
litical  party,  without  any  to  op-
se  them,  and  yet  be  good  Ameri-
an  citizens  ?  Yes.  Why  ?  Be-
use  there  is  nothing  in  the  ( 'mi-
stitutk)ii  of  our  government  that  re-
utres  the  population  to  believe  dif-
ferent doctrines,  according  to  their
religious  notions  and  ideas — nothing
that  requires  them  to  be  politically
divided,  in  their  feelings.  But  they
are  divided.  The  people  of  all  na-
tions are  divided  ;  and  good  whole-
some laws,  for  the  most  part,  have
been  established  by  Congress,  and
by  the  various  States  of  our  Union,
making  provisions  for  this  divided
state  of  society;  giving,  to  every  per-
son the  privilege  of  believing  as  he
or  she  may  see  proper  to  do  in  regard
to  their  religions  ideas,  and  to  carry
out  their  sentiments  by  practising
their  religion  also,  as  well  as  believ-
ing ;  and  th:\t  the  majority  should
not,  because  they  happen  to  be  the
majority,  oppress  the  minority.  Ar-
guments have  been  made  by  -states-
men, judges,  and  others  professing
great  intelligence  something  like
this  :  that  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
a  people  of  only  about  150,000;
while  the  United  States  area  people,
n u m beri  1 1  g  to r t y  or  ft  >rt y-  ti  ve  n  nil  ions.
Therefore,  say  they,  the  great  major-
ity— the  forty  or  forty-five  millions
OX  people — should,  or  they  have  a
perfect  right  to  oppress  you.  Latter-
day  Saints,  because  you  are  the
minority  in  your  religious  views.


Now,  I  do  not  believe  this  anti-re-
publican idea,  though  it  was  pub-
lished in  this  city  last  week,  from  a
person  in  high  authority— a  Federal
officer  of  our  Territory*  Supposing,
for  instance,  there  were  only  ten  re-
ligious men,  living  in  the  United
States  that  believed  a  certain  doc-
trine, according  to  Bible  precepts,
and  all  the  rest  believed  something
else,  differing  from  that ;  have  this
great  majority  a  right  to  oppress
these  ten  men  1  They  have  no  sfiieh
right.  The  Constitution  of  our
country  has  provided  for  that  minor-
ity, to  hi'lieve  as  they  choose  to,  so
long  as  they  injure  no  one  by  their
belief,  and  so  long  as  they  injure  no
person  by  practising  that  belief.
Supposing  that  the  Presbyterians
should  insist,  in  their  Church  capa-
city, that  sprinkling  with  water  was
to  li^  the  only  mode  of  baptism,  that
should  be  observed  by  the  members
of  their  denomination;  have  they  a
right  to  do  this  ]  Yes.  But  sup-
posing that  forty  millions  of  people,
who  were  not  Presbyterians,  should
denounce  that  system  as  criminal,
on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  in  ac-
cordance with  the  doctrines  of  the
Bible,  and  consequently  it  would  be
a  criminal  practice  to  blaspheme  the
name  of  Trinity  by  sprinkling  a  few
drops  of  water  and  call  that  baptism;
and  supposing  they  should  succeed
in  getting  Congress  to  pass  a  law
against  sprinkling,  because  it  was
criminal  according  to  their  ideas ;
and  supposing  that  the  persons  who
introduced  that  mode  of  baptism
should  be  brought  up  by  that  law
to  be  judged  by  it,  and  should  be
found  criminals,  according  to  that
law  of  Congress;  and  supposing  that
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States  were  to  confirm  the  action  of
the  lower  court,  on  this  matter;
ought  such  persons  to  be  condemned
as  criminals  f No. You  would  say


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  they  have  a  right  to  sprinkle  ;
I  would  say  the  same,  however  much
I  might  differ  from  the  Presbyterian
practice,  in  my  own  mind  ;  however
much  I  might  look  upon  that  act  as
abominable  in  the  sight  of  heaven;
however  much  I  might  consider  it  to
be  criminal  before  God,  yet  I  would
say  they  had  a  constitutional  right
to  sprinkle  ;  so  in  regard  to  all  other
divisions  so  far  as  religious  senti-
ments are  concerned*  Wherein
those  divisions  of  political  or  reli-
gious sentiments  do  not  harm  the
neighbor,  do  not  harm  society*  do
not  harm  families,  or  the  nation  at
large  ;  a  law,  passed  by  men,  has
nothing  to  do  with  it,  what  courts
might  decide  to  the  contrary  not-
withstanding.

These  are  my  views  as  an  indivi
dual  I  do  not  pretend  to  set  these
things  forth  as  your  views  or  the
views  of  the  people  generally,  but
my  own  individual  views  on  tikis
subject

Now  in  regard  to  plurality  of
wives,  why  is  that  a  crime  t  Only
because  Congress  passed  a  law  mak
ing  it  criminal Does  the  Bible
make  it  criminal  1 No, Does  the
Book  of  Mormon  make  it  criminal  ?
No, Does  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants make  it  criminal  t  No,  Why
is  it  criminal  J Is  there  a  law  of  our
nature  that  makes  it  criminal  ?  No,
There  are  some  things  that  are  cri-
minal in  and  of  themselves,  and  we
cannot  think  of  them  only  as  such,
and  as  we  by  our  own  consciences
know  them  to  be  criminal And  for
instance,  stealing  property  that  be-
longs to  our  neighbors. That  we
look  upon  as  being  criminal.  We
would  not  wish  our  neighbor  to  steal
our  property. Again  violence  done
to  another  person  to  rob  him  of  his
property,  that  is  something  which
18  criminal  in  itself. Taking  life  like
the  heathen, who  offer  up  their


human  sacrifices,  the  heathen  widow"
that  is  burned  upon  the  pile,  is  cri-
minal Why  I Because  it  is  some-
thing that  our  nature  at  once  de-
nounces to  be  criminal,  and  it  is  also
denounced  as  such  by  the  laws  of
heaven,  by  the  laws  of  God  j  but  not
so  in  regard  to  many  other  things,
For  instance,  one  day  out  of  seven
is  set  apart  as  a  day  of  rest ;  and
under  the  law  of  God,  in  ancient
times,  it  was  considered  criminal  to
ather  a  bundle  of  sticks  on  that  day,
or  the  purpose  of  making  afire;  and
the  person  who  was  found  doing  so
was  condemned  to  death. Now  if
there  had  been  no  law  concerning
that  matter,  all  Israel  would  have
made  no  distinction between  the
sacreduess  of  days. All  would  have
been  alike  to  them, Why?  Be-
cause there  was nothing  in  their
own  minds  or  consciences  that  would
perceive  such  an  act  to  be  criminal.
But  when  the  revealed  law  of  God
came,  making  it  criminal,  it  then  be-
came so. So  in  regard  to  many  of
these  religious  principles,  observed
among  the  heathen. They  are  cri-
minal, and  any  person  acquainted
with  the  law  of  God  is  compelled
to  pronounce  them  as  such.  But
then,  shall  we  condemn  anything
that  the  conscience  does  not  de-
nounce to  be  criminal,  that  the  law
of  God  does  not  denounce  as  crimi-
nal ;  shall  we  get  our  Congress  to
make  a  law  declaring  it  criminal,  so
that  those  that  break  that  law  shall
become  criminals  1 I  cannot  see  it*
I  am  so  obtuse  in  my  understanding
and  my  mind  is  so  blunted,  that  I
really  can  not  see  any  sense  in  a  law
of  that  kind,  whether  passed  by
Congress  or  a  congressional  power
of  all  nations  combined;  it  makes
no  difference,  so  far  as  my  mind  is
concerned,

I  have  read  the  speeches  of  mem-
bers of  Congress,  in  which  they  have


PROGRESS  OF  THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC.


327


made  the  contrast  of  Bible  polygamy
with  some  of  the  heathen  worship
which  is  denounced  by  the  Bible,
"Why  not  contrast  everything  els>-
pertaining  to  religion  in  the  same
way  ?  Why  not  pass  a  law,  prohi-
biting that  religious  people  called  1
Jews,  from  practising  the  Mosaic  law
of  circumcision,  inflicting  fine  and
imprisonment  if  they  persist  in  fol-
lowing the  Bible  custom?  Simply,
because  they  they  are  not  hated  as
the  ''Mormons'1  are.  We  must
have  a  bur  expressly  framed  for
these  Mormons ;  we  must  pass  a  law
that  will  catch  them.  But  in  order
to  make  the  people  think  we  are  not
unjust  we  will  make  it  general
throughout  all  the  Territories."

I  believe  in  the  great  principles
laid  down  in  the  American  Consti-
tution; I  believe  in  religious  freedom,
religious  belief,  religious  practice.  1
believe  in  every  principle  guaranteed
in  that  document.  Well,  supposing
then  that  they  should  send  me,  as
an  individual,  to  prison  because  of
my  belief  or  religious  practice  ;  would
that  alter  my  belief  I  No.  Would,
say.  five  years  in  the  penitentiary
change  my  belief]  No.  If  they
were  to  inflict  the  full  penalty  of  the
law  upon  me  in  every  respect  how
much  would  they  succeed  in  convert-
ing me  that  my  belief  and  practice
were  a  crime  in  the  sight  of  God  1
Not  one  iota,  forty- five  millions  of
people  to  the  contrary  notwithstand-
ing. Why?  Because  although  I
am  in  the  minority,  1  am  protected
by  the  (Constitution  just  as  much  as
though  I  were  in  the  majority ;  I  am
an  American  citizen  and  I  have  the
rights  of  an  American  just  as  much
as  though  1  belonged  to  the  majority.
Well,  then,  what  do  you  say,  shall  I
renounce  my  religion,  because  of  this
law?  No.  Shall  I  advise  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  (an  independent
people  to  do  as  they  please  so  far  as  |


their  religious  views  are  concerned)
to  renounce  any  part  of  their  doc-
trines because  Congress  has  denoun-
ced it  %  No.  I  can  do  no  such  thing
If  they  wish  to  renounce  them  or  for-
sake them,  they  are  at  liberty  so  to
do,  and  be  accountable  to  God,  and
be  disfellowshipped  from  the  Church,
because  of  their  disbelief.  u  Q,"  says
one,  u  you  would  disfellowship  your
;  members  and  thus  bear  upon  them?*
Certainly  we  would.  Have  we  not
the  right  to  do  so?  What  denomi-
nation is  there,  in  these  United
States,  but  has  the  right  to  dis-
fellowship their  members  for  any
tiling  they  please,  if  they  go  accord-
ing to  their  own  creed  and  docu-
merits  Ji  1  do  not  know  of  any  de-
nomination that  does  not  enjoy  this
right.  I  claim  no  more  for  myself,
nor  for  my  brethren,  in  regard  to
these  matters,  than  they  claim  for
themselves,  nor  any  more  than  the
Constitution  guarantees  to  all.

We  have  the  right,  therefore,  to
say,  that  if  a  man  denounces  any
part  or  portion  of  his  religion  that
we  will  disfellowship  him  ;  or  that  if
a  woman  shall  do  the  same,  that  we
deal  with  her  in  like  manner.  And
we  have  the  right  to  disfellowship
members  of  our  Church,  for  anv
transgression  of  the  laws  God,  And
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  great
principles  of  right  and  wrong  esta-
blished by  our  American  government,
ISnE  1  will  leave  this  subject

We  have  assembled  here  in  our
semi  annuual  conference,  what  for  i
To  take  into  consideration  any  sub-
ject that  may  be  for  the  advantage
and  vveilbeing  of  the  whole.  That
is  one  object.  To  give  advice  and
counsel  to  the  people  of  God,  that
may  be  under  the  sound  of  our  voices.
To  get  the  united  sanction  and  voice,
with  uplifted  hands  to  the  Most  High
God,  in  sending  forth  missionaries
to  the  various  nations  of  the  earth.


328


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


What  for?  To  convert  them  to  the  j
everlasting  gospel

We  have  been  told  by  a  circular  let-
ter, which  hits  been  issued  officially,
and  sent  to  various  nations,  that  be-
cause the  people  believe  in  the  doc-
trines of  the  Latter-Saints  in  Ger-
many, in  Scandinavia,  in  Great
Britain,  etc.,  that  the  United
States  are  very  anxious  to  get  all
these  governments  to  band  together
against  what  ? To  prevent  the  reli-


gious peo
doctrines :


>le  who  believe  in  these
rom  emigrating  from  t  heir
own  lands,  to  the  land  of  America.
Witt  these  governments  respond  ]
Will  they  aid  the  great  government
of  the  United  States,  to  persecute
religious  people  by  trying  to  prevent
them  from  emigrating  from  one  coun-
try to  another  ?  I  do  not  know  but
what  they  may  ;  it  is  very  doubtful,
in  my  mind,  whether  they  will  go
back  to  the  old  dark  ages  of  perse-
cution, and  be  united  as  Herod  and
Pilate  were,  in  preventing  religious
people  from  emigrating  to  other  na-
tions. It  would  be  difficult,  under
the  color  of  consistency,  to  hinder
it  How  are  they  going  to  know
whether  emigrants  are  Presbyterians,
Baptists,  Methodists  or  Latter-day
Saints,  when  they  embark  at  Euro-
pean ports  to  come  to  this  great  con-
tinent of  America!  or  how  are  they
going  to  know  what  religion  they  be-
long to  I  Are  they  going  to  have
their  ami lassadors,  their  consuls,  and
great  men,  appointed  on  purpose,
paying  them  large  salaries,  and  in-
structing them  to  be  at  every  port,
and  also  to  make  every  man  swear,
when  he  embarks  on  board  of  a  1
vessel,  that  he  is  not  a  Latter-day
Saint?

t  Now,  I  do  not  believe  they  are
;oing  that  far  j  and  if  they  do  not,
low  easy  a  matter  it  would  be  for
emigrants,  to  say  nothing  about
their religious sentiments,  while


sailing  across  the  great  ocean,  Or
could  we  not  keep  our  peace  so  long?
Would  it  be  difficult  for  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  shut  up  thfe  fire  of
truth  in  their  hearts,  so  that  no  one
would  know  them  to  be  Latter-day
Saints  for  ten  long  days?  I  expect
that  would  he  the  difficult  part  of
the  undertaking.  We  feel  to  rejoice
so  in  the  Gospel,  in  the  great  plan
of  salvation,  that  we  can  hardly  hold
our  peace  for  ten  days ;  though  if  it
were  really  necessary,  I  think  some
of  us  could  mauage  to  do  so.

Well,  supposing  we  lam  led  safely,
and  held  our  peace,  and  should  take
the  railroad  cars  for  Chicago,  say,
whose  business  is  it  ?  And  suppos-
ing \\v  eoueluded  then  to  take  the
cars  for  Omaha,  whose  business  is  itl
And  at  Omaha,  supposing  we  should
get  it  into  our  heads  to  come  further
West,  and  should  then  purchase  a
ticket  for  Ogden,  have  we  not  the
right  to  do  so  ?  Is  our  government
going  to  employ  runners  and  spies
to  find  out  every  man's  religious
views,  who  passes  over  the  various
railroads  ?  I  am  inclined  to  think
not ;  I  do  not  believe  they  have
reached  that  stage  yet.

But  now  concerning  the  justice
of  these  matters.  Supposing  that
we  do  preach  what  t::<  world  calls
"  Mormon  ism"  from  the  time  we
embark,  until  the  time  of  om  land-
ing, because  we  believe  in  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  because  we  believe  in
repenting  of  our  sins,  and  because  we
belie vo  in  baptism  by  immersion  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  because
we  belie  ve  in  the  plural  order  of  mar-
riage, as  taught  in  the  Bible,  have
they  the  rig  lit  to  shut  down  the  gate
against  us  1  When  I  say  a  right,  I
mean  a- Constitutional  right.  Is  not
this  country  open  to  all  nations  1  Is
it  not  called  by  every  people,  **  the
asylum  of  the  oppressed  ot  all  na-
tions?' They  have  not  yet  passed  a


THE  CHURCH  FOUNDED,  ETC


32$


law  forbidding  the  Chinaman  from  j
emigrating  to  this  country. Have  i
the  Latter-day  Saints  sunk  down  so
far  )  >e  neath  h  eat  hen  ism, that  we
must  have  the  gate  shut  down  upon
usf  and  heathens  by  tens  of  thou-


sands come  swarming  to  our  laud  ]
I  do  not,  I  cannot  believe  that  the
good  sense  of  the  American  people
can  tolerate  such  persecution.
Amen.


DISCOUKSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Held  in  the  Tabernacle

Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  6th,  1879.

■

(Repmled  by  Jvlm  Irvine.)


THIl  CHURCH  FOUNDED UPON THE ROCK OF REVELATION — FAITHFUL
SAINTS  CAN NOt  Bl  MOVED  BY  PERSECUTION.


I  have  been  very  much  interested
in  the  remarks  of  Brother  Orson
Pratt.

I  wish  during  the  short  time  that
I  occupy  tin*  stand  to  make  a  few
observations  in  reference  to  the
foundation  upon  which  we  have
established  our  faith  and  belief  in
the  principles  of  the  everlasting

Gospel  which  we  have  espoused,  and

to  see  what  means  the  elders  of  the
Church  ot  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  employ  in  establishing  these
principles  in  the  h  earts  of  the  people
in  the  various  nations  where  they
are  proclaiming  the  fulness  of  the
Gospel  It  is  well  perhaps  in  view
of  the  surrounding  circumstances,
and  in  consideration  of  the  difficul-
ties that  arise  in  our  midst — and
which  may  possibly  try  our  faith  -
to  examine  occasionally  more  closely


into  the  foundation  upon  which  we
ground  our  hopes — our  hopes  in  re-
gard to  our  property  and  in  regard
to  our  ability  tu  accomplish  the  com-
mandments of  God  and  withstand
the  temptations  {hat  will  be  pre-
sente  1  to  try  our  faith,  and  over-
come the  difficulties  that  may  come
in  our  way  in  the  path  of  our  pro-
gress* In  preaching  the  Gospel  in
the  days  of  the  apostles  there  were
certain  things  that  followed  their
labors,  that  inspired  individuals  that
received  the  doctrine  from  their  hands
that  filled  them  with  great  confi-
dence in  regard  to  those  principles
as  is  shown  on  a  certain  occasion
whew  one  of  the  Apostles  uses  Ian-
like  this  :  *'  Our  Gospel  came  not
unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
in  much  assurance." The  people


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


who  had  received  the  Gospel  were
reminded  of  the  peculiar  blessings
and  powers  that  attended  it  in  its
administration. When  the  disciples
were  ordained  by  the  Savior  and  sent
forth  to  proclaim  the  Gospel  to  the
world,  they  were  told  that  certain
blessings  and  assurances  should  fol-
low its  administration. On  another
occasion  it  was  said  by  the  Savior,
when  people  were  anxious  to  know
in  regard  to  the  divinity  of  his  mis-
sion, he  told  them  that  if  they  would
do  the  will  of  God  they  should  know
of  the  doctrine. And  again,  on  a
certain  time  when  his  disciples  came
together,  he  asked  them  what  the
people  said  in  relation  to  him,  the
character  that  they  gave  him,  and
the  feeling  he  had  produced  among
them  in  regard  to  the  divinity  of  his
character, He  was  informed  that
the  people  had  various  ideas  and
views  in  relation  to  it.  Some  thought
that  he  was  one  of  the  prophets  that
had  risen,  that  he  was  Elias  or  Jere-
miah, or  John  the  Baptist  that  had
been  beheaded* In  the  midst  of  this
confusion  of  ideas,  however,  there
was  one  individual  that  had  ob-
tained correct  information  on  the
subject,  and  from  a  quarter  that
every  person  that  receives  the  ful-
ness of  the  Gospel  is  privileged  to  ob-
tain a  perfect  knowledge  of  its  divinity.
Turning  to  the  disciples  he  said,  "But
whom  say  ye  that  I  am,"  and  Simon
Peter  answered  and  said,  ''Thou  art
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."
Now,  he  had  obtained  a  revelation
in  regard  to  the  character  of  the  Son
of  God. He  had  not  obtained  it
through  the  observance  of  the  mi-
racles that  Jesus  had  performed.  He
had  not  obtained  it  from  any  other
quarter  or  source  save  from  God  the
Eternal  Father.  Jesus  told  him  that
M  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed
it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is
in  heaven.  And  I  say  unto  thee  that


thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I
will  build  my  church,  and  the  gates
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.,f
That  is,  upon  the  rock  of  revelation,
for  the  nature  of  the  Gospel  is  such,
that  when  it  is  proclaimed  and  honest-
ly obeyed,  individuals  receive  a  testi-
mony in  regard  to  the  divinity  of  the
doctrine.  This  was  confirmed  on  the
day  of  Pentecost  Peter  in  preach-
ing to  the  people  said,  u  Repent  and
be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  this  pro-
mise is  unto  you  and  toy  our  children,
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall
call/'  This  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
is  a  different  principle  from  anything
that  we  see  manifested  in  the  secta-
rian world.  It  is  a  principle  of
intelligence,  and  revelation.  It  is  a
principle  that  reveals  things  past,
present  and  to  come,  and  these  gifts
of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  to  be  received
through  obedience  to  the  require-
ments of  the  Gospel  as  proclaimed
by  the  Elders  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  in  these
days.  It  was  upon  this  rock  that
their  faith  should  be  grounded  ;  from
this  quarter  they  should  receive  a
knowledge  of  the  doctrine  tliey  had
espoused,  and  we  are  told  by  the
Savior  "  that  the  gates  of  hell  should
not  prevail  against  them."  Thus  the
Church  was  organized  upon  the
principle  of  revelation.  In  it  were
placed  u  first  apostles,  secondarily
prophets,  thirdly  teachers,  after  that
miracles,  then  gifts  of  healings,  helps,
governments,  diversities  of  tongues/1
Thus  God  placed  in  his  kingdom
and  in  his  Church  those  things  that
were  according  to  the  mind  arid  will
of  heaven,  according  to  the  laws  of
the  celestial  world.  In  another  place
we  are  told  that  God  gave  gifts  unto
men. "And  he  gave  some  apostles


THE  CHURCH  FOUNDED,  ETC.


331


and  some  prophets,  and  some  evan-
gelists, and  some  pastors  and  teach*
ere,"  Now  for  what  purpose  were
they  given  1  We  are  told  that  they
were  given  "for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,
for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of
Christ"  How  long  were  these  gifts
to  continue?  We  are  told  they
were  to  continue  "  till  we  all  come
in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto
a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of
the  stilt u re  of  the  fullness  of  Christ/1
These  were  the  principles  taught  by
the  apostles,  and  when  they  went
forth  among  strangers  they  conld
say,  "We  have  authority  to  admi-
nisterin  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel;
but  you  cannot  know  these  tilings
except  you  receive  this  knowledge
from  the  eternal  world.  We  profess
to  have  this  authority,  but  you  are
not  acquainted  with  us,  you  do
not  know  our  character.  We  require
you  to  repent  of  your  sins  and  to  be
baptized  for  a  remission  of  the  same,
and  then  you  shall  have  a  knowledge
of  the  truth/1  These  are  the  decla-
rations of  our  Elders  in  these  days  j
it  is  by  this  means  that  the  people
are  gathered  here  from  the  various
nations  of  the  earth.  Here  we  have
a  people  from  England,  Denmark,
Sweden,  France  and  from  almost  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.  Why  are
we  gathered  into  these  mountain
valleys?  Why  have  we  left  our  homes
in  distant  lauds  ?  Because  we  rea-
lize the  truth  of  the  gospel  as  pro-
claimed by  the  Elders,  We  have
received  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  has  revealed  to  us  this  know-
ledge; and  it  is  because  of  this  know*
ledge  that  we  are  here  to-day.
Where  in  all  the  world  can  you  find
a  class  of  ministers  that  dare  take
the  position  our  elders  do?  Where
is  the  man  or  the  set  of  men  that
can  be  found  that  dare  to  present


themselves  before  the  world  and  say
that  they  have  been  authorized  of
God  to  administer  certain  ordinances
to  the  people  through  which  they
may  receive  revelation  from  God  1
Any  one  announcing  a  doctrine  of
this  kind  would  soon  be  found  out
if  he  were  an  impostor — he  would
place  himself  in  a  very  dangerous
position,  and  would  soon  be  dis-
covered if  he  held  no  such  authority.
Our  elders,  however,  dare  take  this
position.  We  have  taken  this  posi-
tion for  nearly  fifty  years.  God  has
sent  his  holy  angels  from  heaven  and
restored  the  authority  to  man  to
administer  the  ordinances  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  through  these  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost  now  confers  upon
man  a  knowledge  in  regard  to  the
divinity  of  this  work.  Now,  we
talk  about  people  succumbing  be-
cause of  their  inferiority  in  numbers
or  because  they  are  partly  in  the
minority.  That  may  be  all  very  well
providing  it  is  simply  man's  work.
We  can  very  well  see  that  in  such
case  150,000  could  not  expect  to
prosper  or  succeed  in  opposition,  or
in  holding  principles  that  are  in  con-
flict to  those  of  45,000,000  of  people.
Noah  could  not  expect  to  succeed
against  a  whole  generation  while  his
doctrine  was  accepted  only  by  seven
individuals,  providing  it  had  been
only  man's  work.  Neither  could
Moses  when  lie  proclaimed  his  mes-
sage expect  to  have  succeeded  against
the  Egyptian  government  and  its
influence  had  he  not  been  inspired
and  had  authority  from  God.  It  is
not  that  one  man  or  set  of  men  should
proclaim  principles  as  divine  and
demand  their  acceptance  unless  he
have  authority  beyond  that  of  man.
If,  therefore,  the  elders  of  Israel
have  been  authorized,  if  they  have
received  authority  from  the  Almighty
to  proclaim  these  principles,  then  it
will  be  very  easy  to  understand  who


will  succumb  in  the  end.  If  it  is  the
work  of  God  we  may  expect  very  well
what  will  be  result.  There  was  a
law  in  the  days  of  king  Nebuchad-
nezzar that  all  nations  should  bow
to  the  golden  image  winch  he  set  up ;
it  was  made  obligatory  upon  every
individual  that  he  should  not  offer
prayer  to  the  God  of  heaven.  Well,
what  were  the  results  1  It  is  very
easy  to  see ;  it  is  very  easy  to  see  i
what  will  be  the  results  at  all  times  1
when  God  has  a  work  to  accomplish
jn  the  midst  of  a  people.  When
men  of  integrity,  men  of  honesty,
receive  a  knowledge  of  any  principle,
divine  principle,  when  they  receive
a  manifestation  of  the  Almighty
concerning  the  truth  of  any  work  or
any  doctrine,  it  is  a  very  difficult
matter  to  destroy  or  force  that  know-
ledge from  them.  You  cannot  do
it  by  imprisonment,  you  cannot  by
any  method  of  torture.  So  in  re-
gard to  the  people  called  Latter-day
Saints.  Inasmuch  as  they  have  re-
ceived these  doctrines  in  various
nations  where  the  Gospel  has  been
proclaimed,  and  inasmuch  as  they
have  received  a  divine  manifestation
of  the  truth  of  these  principles,  we
do  not  expect  when  they  come  here
to  these  mountain  valleys  that  they
are  to  be  frightened  out  of  these
things,  because  a  man's  religion  is  I
more  dear  to  him  than  life.  Has
anybody  received  a  revelation  to  the
contrary  J  Has  anybody  received  a
revelation  that  Joseph  Smith  was
not  endowed  with  power  from  on
high,  or  that  the  Klders  of  Israel
have  not  been  authorized  to  preach
this  Gospel  J  No  ;  but  we  can  bring
thousands  of  individuals  that  have
received  revelation  that  these  things
are  true;  thousands  upon  thousands.
Well,  then,  the  foundation  upon
which  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints  is


built  is  the  rock  of  revelation — upon
the  rock  that  Jesus  said  He  would
build  His  church,  and  the  gates  of
hell  should  not  prevail  against  it
We  have  not  received  this  knowledge
through  flesh  and  blood,  we  have
not  received  this  testimony  from
man,  we  have  not  received  it  through
the  reading  of  the  Bible,  New  Testa-
ment or  Book  of  Mormon,  but  we
have  received  it  through  the  opera-
tions of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  teaches
of  the  things  of  God,  things  past,
present  and  to  come,  and  that  takes
of  the  things  of  God,  making  thera
clearly  manifest  unto  us.  You  can-
;  not  take  this  knowledge  from  us  by
imprisonment  or  any  kind  of  perse-
cution. We  will  stand  by  it  unto
death.

And  now  all  the  Latter-day  Sain  ts
have  to  do,  all  that  is  required  of  us
to  make  us  perfectly  safe  under  all
circumstances  of  trouble  or  persecu-
tion, is  to  do  the  will  of  God,  to  be
honest,  faithful  and  to  keep  ourselves
devoted  to  the  principles  that  we
have  received  ;  do  right  one  by  an-
other; trespass  upon  no  man's  rights;
live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth
from  the  mouth  of  God  and  his  Holy
Spirit  will  aid  and  assist  us  under
all  circumstances,  and  we  will  come
out  of  the  midst  of  it  all  abundantly
blessed  in  our  houses,  in  our  families,
in  our  flocks,  in  our  fields — and  in
every  way  God  will  bless  us.  He
will  give  us  knowledge  upon  know-
ledge, intelligence  upon  intelligence,
wisdom  upon  wisdom*

May  God  add  his  blessing  upon
this  people.  May  we  be  faithful  to
ourselves,  faithful  to  all  the  principles
we  have  received,  seeking  one  an-
other's interests  with  all  our  heart,
and  God  will  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon
us,  and  we  will  come  off  victorious
in  the  end,  which  I  ask  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Amen.


THE  RIGHTEOUS  SUFFER,  ETC.


333


DISCOURSE IiY ELDER GEO. Q.  CANNON.

DELIVERED TN  THE  TAREKNACLE,  SALT  LAKE  CITY,  OCTOBER  6TH,  1879,

i  '  (Reported  by  John  Irvine*)

THE  KIOHTEOUS  SUFFER  PERSECUTION — FA  LSE  TEACHERS  POPULAR —
SAINTS  SHOULD  NOT  RETALIATE  UPON Till  IK ENEMIES— THE  SAINTS

""WILL  HAVE  POWER  TO  ROOT  OUT  EVIL  —  APPROACHING  REVOLU-
TION IN  THE  EARTH.


T  have  bet  a  remolded,  while  lis-
tening to  Brother  Kudger  Clawson  s
remarks,  of  the  sayings  of  the  Savior,
recorded  in  the  6th  chapter  of  the
( ins  pel  according  to  St.  Luke,  2  2d
and  -3d  verses  :—

" Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall
hate  yon,  and  when  they  shall  sepa-
rate you  from  their  company,  and
shall  reproach  you  and  cast  out  your
name  as  evil,  for  the  Son  of  man's
sake;  ?*'m'1'  J

u  Rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap
for  joy:  for  behold,  your  reward  is
great  in  heaven  ;  for  in  the  like
manner  did  their  fathers  unto  the
j)rophets.n  1

It  is  frequently  remarked  con-
cerning the  Latter-day  Saints  that
there  being  so  many  stories  told
about  them,  there  must  be  some
truth  in  some  of  them  ;  in  other
words,  to  use  the  familiar  saying,
"AYhere  there  is  so  much  smoke
there  must  be  some  fire.'1  But  it
is  worthy  of  remark  that  from  the
beginning,  according  to  the  history
that  has  corne  down  to  us  of  the
dealing  of  God  with  the  children  of
men,  every  man  and  people  who  pro-


fessed to  have  a  knowledge  of  God,
and  who  really  did  have  that  know-
ledge, or  a  portion  of  it,  and  who
were  raised  up  by  hi  in,  or  called  by
him,  had  to  suffer  persecution.
Stephen,  the  martyr,  when  he  was
being  stoned  at  Jerusalem,  said  to
the  Jews  :  4i  Which  of  the  pro  [diets
have  not  your  fathers  persecuted?
and  they  have  slain  them  which
shewed  before  of  the  coming  of  the
Just  One" — scarcely  a  prophet  that
had  ever  lived  among  them  who  had
not  suffered  persecution.  Even
Muses  himself,  the  great  law


giver,


the  great  deliverer  of  the  Hebrew
nation,  who  had  led  them  out  by  the
exhibition  of  mighty  power,  several
times  during  his  career  came  very
near  bring  stoned  to  death,  or  killed
by  the  people.  It  is  an  evidence,  an
infallible  evidence,  of  truth  to  have
persecution  accompany  it.  It  is  not
that  every  one  who  is  reviled  and
who  is  persecuted  possesses  the  truth.
This  does  not  always  follow.  But
there  never  was  a  prophet  of  whom
we  have  any  account,  raised  up  in
the  midst  of  the  children  of  men  t«
proclaim  unto  them  divine  truths,


334


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


who  did  not  receive  in  his  life  and
experience  these  very  things  of  which
Jesus  has  spoken.  They  were  hated,
they  were  separated  from  the  com-
pany of  their  fellows,  they  were  re-
proached, their  names  were  cast  out
as  evil,  they  were  reviled,  their  lives
were  sought  ;  and  this  was  especially
the  case  with  the  Son  of  God  him-
self— a  Being  who  spoke  as  never
man  spoke,  whose  lite  was  an  ex-
emplification of  purity,  who  was
without  sin,  whose  doctrines  were
holy  and  pure,  who  performed
mighty  miracles  among  the  children
of  men,  whose  work  and  labors  were
accompanied  with  great  power  ;  and
notwithstanding  these  evidences  of
divinity  which  accompanied  him,  the
generation  in  which  he  lived,  and  by
which  he  was  surrounded,  were  not
satisfied  until  they  had  slain  him,  It
is  also  recorded  that  every  one  of  the
Twelve  Apostles,  excepting  John,
died  a  violent  death*  There  are
reasons  for  this  which  are  made  plain
in  the  Scriptures,  There  are  two
powers ;  there  is  God  and  there  is
Belial ;  or  in  other  words,  there  is
the  Spirit  of  God  and  there  is  the
spirit  of  Satan*  These  two  powers,
or  forces,  have  been  in  existence
since  man  was  expelled  from  the
garden  of  Eden.  Satan  has  opposed
God.  He  has  contended  against
goodness  and  purity.  Each  of  these
influences  has  been  operating  upon
the  hearts  of  the  children  ef  mem
When  the  adversary  has  succeeded
in  overpowering  the  truth,  in  slaying
the  servants  of  God,  in  shedding  the
blood  of  innocence,  and  the  extirpa-
tion of  the  power  and  authority
which  God  had  bestowed  upon  man
has  been  accomplished,  then  there
has  been  a  lull,  there  has  been  a  ces-
sation of  that  violence  which  has  at-
tended the  proclamation  of  the  truth.
The  extirpation  of  those  who  had
authority  to  proclaim  it  has  left  the


field  to  the  adversary  Then  he  had
his  own  way.  One  of  the  greatest
evidences  of  the  bad  condition  of
affairs  now  existing  in  Christendom
is  the  popularity  that  attends  what
is  called  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When-
ever a  preacher  is  popular  in  the
midst  of  a  wicked  generation,  or  a
man  is  popular  who  professes  to  be  a
minister  of  truth,  you  may  set  it
down  as  a  certain  fact  that  that  man
does  not  preach  the  truth  as  it  exists
in  Christ.  There  is  no  disputing
this,  if  this  book  (the  Bible)  be  true;
if  there  is  any  reliance  to  be  placed
in  the  word  of  God.  As  true  as
there  is  a  God,  and  as  true  as  there
is  a  devil,  the  man  that  preaches  the
truth  to  a  wicked  generation  will
bring  about  the  hatred  of  which  I
have  read  in  your  hearing.  This  is
just  as  true  as  that  God  lives  and
that  there  is  evil  to  combat,  or  that
Satan  has  power  over  the  hearts  of
the  children  of  men.  Satan  knows
very  well  that  his  time  is  short.  He
knows  very  well  that  if  the  truth  is
proclaimed  and  believed  in  and  prac-
tised by  mankind  his  kingdom  is
overthrown,  that  his  power  will  soon
cease.  Hence  it  is  that  he  has
aroused  in  every  age  and  at  all  times
the  children  of  men  to  rage  against
the  truth.

Whether  the  Latter-day  Saints
preach  the  truth  or  not  it  is  for  those
who  hear  them  and  examine  their
doctrines  to  decide ;  but  there  is  this
noted  fact  connected  with  the  preach-
ing of  this  truth,  as  imparted  in  this
system  which  we  call  the  Gospel  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  wher-
ever it  has  been  preached  it  has
raised  hatred,  it  has  stirred  up  ani-
mosity, it  has  enkindled  the  fires  of
persecution,  it  has  caused  blood  to
flow,  mobs  have  been  raised,  houses
have  been  burned,  fields  have  been
destroyed,  grain  has  been  burned,


THE  RIGHTEOUS  SUFFER,  ETC,


335


cattle  have  been  shot  clown,  men  and
women  have  been  expelled  from  their
homes  in  the  depths  of  winter,  the
blood  of  innocence  has  flowed,  and
all  because  men  and  women  chose  to
believe  a  system  of  religion  that  dif-
fered from  that  which  is  popularly
entertained-  And  there  is  this  re-
markable fact  connected  with  the
persecution  of  the  people  called  Lat-
ter-day Saints — and  it  is  the  .same
characteristic  that  attended  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God  by  himself  and  his  Apostles
the  chief  persecutors,  and  those  who
have  stirred  up  strife  in  the  hearts
of  the  people  have  been  popular
preachers — have  been  themselves,  in
too  many  instances,  the  professed
ministers  of  Jesus  Christ  It  was
the  High  Priests,  it  was  the  Phari-
sees, it  was  the  religious  people  in
the  days  of  the  Savior  who  were  his
chief  persecutors,  and  I  am  sorry  to
.say  the  chief  persecutions  which  we
its  a  people  have  had  to  endure  have
had  their  origin  with  the  same  class,
AVhy,  I  am  informed  that  one  or  two,
if  not  more,  of  those  men  who  formed
the  mob  that  shot  Elder  Joseph
Standing,  were  circuit  riders;  preach-
ers who  professed  to  have  great  zeal
for  holy  religion  and  pure  morality.
They  were  so  filled  with  zeal  that
they  could  not  let  two  young  men
travel  in  their  country  and  preach
from  the  Bible,  without  mobbing
them  !

As  Latter-day  Saints  this  ought
to  cause  us  to  rejoice.  We  should
not  be  angry,  we  should  not  indulge
in  the  spirit  of  revenge.  Such  a
spirit  is  foreign  to  the  Gospel  It  is
our  duty  to  endure  all  things  patient-
ly, uncomplainingly,  and  with  long
suffering,  putting  our  trust  in  God,
relying  upon  his  arm,  awaiting  the
deliverance  which  he  will  bring  to
pass  in  his  own  time  and  in  his  own
season. If  I  am  persecuted  and  I


turn  upon  my  persecutors  in  the
spirit  which  they  manifest,  do  I  ex-
hibit a  spirit  that  will  bring  down
the  blessing  of  God  upon  me]  Cer-
tainly not ;  I  would  be  no  better
than  my  persecutors. If  a  man
strike  me  on  the  one  cheek  and  I
turn  and  strike  him  again,  retaliate,
give  him  blow  for  blow,  do  I  by  so
doing  manifest  that  I  have  received
any  better  spirit  than  the  man  who
struck  mel I  think  not,  It  is  very
natural,  I  know,  when  we  are  reviled
to  turn  round  and  revile  again;  when
we  are  struck to  turn  round  and
strike  again  !  when  we  are  abused
to  turn  round  and  abuse  again.  This
is  the  natural prompting of  the
human  heart;  this  is  the  natural
feeling  of  every  man  of  spirit — not
to  submit  to  indignity,  but  to  resent
it  instantly. Our  codes  are  all  form-
ed upon  this. The  training  that  we
have  had  from  our  childhood  upward,
in  the  sueiety  of  the  world,  has  been
that  a  man  who  submits  to  an  out-
rage quietly  is  unworthy  of  the  name
of  man  ;  that  the  man  who  submits
to  be  called  a  liar,  or  to  rebukes,  or
to  abuse  quietly,  is  unworthy  of  the
name  of  man. Now,  that  is  certain-
ly not  the  teaching  of  the  Savior;
all  his  teachings  are  to  the  contrary.
His  people  are  to  be  a  meek  people.
His  people  are  to  be  peacemakers*
His  people  are  to  leave  the  results
with  him  ;  to  submit  to  these  things
quietly,  uncomplainingly,  that  is,  so
far  as  outward  manifestations  are
concerned;  to  pray  unto  him,  to  leave
it  with  him. He  has  given  unto  his
people  a  law  upon  this  subject.  If
our  enemies  come  upon  us,  or  our
families,  once,  we  an*  to  bear  it  pa-
tiently and  revile  not,  neither  seek
revenge,  and  we  shall  be  rewarded.
If  our  enemies  come  upon  us  the  se-
cond and  third  time&,  we  are  to  bear
it  patiently,  its  on  the  former  occa-
sion, and  great  rewards  are  promised.


836


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


If  they  come  the  fourth  time,  then
the  law  in  .ancient  days,  and  as  the
Lord  has  revealed  it  to  us,  is  that
they  are  in  our  hands  to  do  to  them
as  we  may  please;  but  if  we  then  will
spare  them,  we  shall  be  rewarded  for
our  righteousness,  I  speak  of  these
things  because  I  know  how  painful
it  is  to  submit  to  outrages  such  as
have  been  heaped  upon  us.  There
are  many  such  committed  that  are
almost  unbearable,  men  feel  as  if
they  could  not  submit  to  them  ;  but
as  1  understand  it,  it  is  far  better  for
us  to  submit  to  these  things  patient-
ly, and  without  retaliating,  and  leave
the  Lord  to  deal  with  them,  than
to  indulge  in  the  other  spirit  and
the  other  feeling.

There  is  a  great  anxiety  in  the
minds  of  many  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  respecting  the  future.  How
long-must  we  submit  to  such  wrongs
as  we  manv  times  have  to  endure  ?
is  a  question  that  arises  very  fre-
quently in  the  minds  of  the  people.
We  have  been  in  tnese  mountains
nearly  thirty-three  years — thirty-two
years  last  July,  \Ve  had  more  free-
dom  in  some  respects  the  first  few
years  we  were  here  than  we  have
to-day,  notwithstanding  our  growth,
notwithstanding  the  numbers  of  the
people  have  increased  to  so  great  an
extent,  notwithstanding  the  labors
that  have  been  performed  ;  and  there
is  a  natural  anxiety  in  the  minds  of
a  great  many  people  as  to  how  long
these  things  will  go  on  as  they  are,
and  some  are  almost  discouraged.
There  was  a  time  when  throughout
these  valleys,  from  one  end  to  the
other,  drunkenness  was  comparative-
ly unknown.  Drinking  saloons  were
not  permitted,  ■gamblingsaloons  were
not  licensed,  nor  did  they  exist;
other  places  which  I  need  not  name
had  no  foothold,  nor  existence,  in  our
midst,  and  from  one  end  of  the  Terri-
tory to  the  other  there  was  a  condi-


tion of  affairs  which  everybody  who
loved  good  order  and  peace  admired.
I  frequently  meet  with  gentlemen
who  knew  us  a  few  years  ago,  w  ho
speak  of  the  unfavorable  change
which  has  taken  place  in  our  affairs.
The  1  Latter-day  Saints  realize  very
fully  how  great  this  change  has  been .
Our  sons  and  daughters  are  now  ex-
posed to  temptations  of  which  they
knew  nothing  in  former  years.  We
had  the  power,  which  we  exercised,
to  control  these  affairs,  but  as  I  ex-
plained here  not  a  great  while  ago,
we  have  now  found  out  that  the
charter  of  this  city,  which  we  sup-
posed gave  unto  the  municipal  au-
thorities all  the  power  necessary  to
control,  regulate,  and,  if  necessary,
prohibit  the  institutions  and  prac-
tices to  which  I  have  alluded,  is
limited  in  its  power  to  stop  the  sale
of  liquor.  So  the  judiciary  have
ruled.  Monster  petitions  have  been
gotten  up  by  the  women  of  this  city
and  presented  to  the  City  Council,
asking  for  the  prohibition  of  liquor
saloons  ;  but  in  vain.  The  City
Council  are  powerless  in  the  matter,
because  of  judicial  ruling.  Natur-
ally the  inquiry  arises,  how  long
shall  these  things  continue  ?  Shall
all  the  hopes  respecting  the  future  of
this  country,  respecting  the  future  of
Israel,  be  blotted  out?  Are  we  to
be  disappointed,  and  a  condition  of
affairs  be  established  here  which
will  perpetuate  all  the  evils  existing
elsewhere,  from  which  we  have  fled  %
If  I  thought  this  would  be  the  case
I  should  be  discouraged.  If  I  thought
for  one  moment  that  we  should  not
have  power  in  the  future  as  we  have
had  in  the  past  to  maintain  righte-
ousness and  a  righteous  rule  and
good  order  in  this  country,  I  should
feel  exceedingly  discouraged.  But
I  do  not  look  for  a  perpetuation  of
these  evils.  I  expect  the  day  will
come  when  this  people,  if  they  will  be


THE  RIGHTEOUS  SUFFER,  ETC,


337


true  to  themselves  and  the  prin-
ciples which  we  have  espoused,
will  have  power  to  control  affairs
throughout  these  mountains.  Shall
we  do  this  by  violence  1  Not  at  all
By  overstepping  the  bounds  of  the
Constitution,  or  of  the  legal  rights
of  individuals  ?  Not  at  all  1  do
not  look  for  any  such  thing  ;  but  I
look  for  tlie  time  to  come  when
this  people  throughout  these  moun-
tains shall  have  the  power  they
ought  to  have — the  power  to  elect
their  own  officers,  enact  their  own
laws  and  to  enforce  them  ;  when
the  majority  of  the  people  shall  have
the  right  to  say  what  shall  be  the
rule  in  this  land,  a  right  that  has
been  denied  us  up  to  the  present
time.  Why  is  this  right  denied  usl
Partly  because  of  the  fears  of  peo-
ple who  live  in  our  midst — their
imaginary  fears,  or  their  pretended
fears.  There  is  a  class  of  people  in
these  valleys,  particularly  in  this
city  and  the  country  round  about,
who  are  using  every  influence  in
their  power  to  prevent  the  Latter-
day  Saints  having  the  power  that
citizens  of  the  United  States  have
elsewhere.  They  say  that  if  we  get
this  power  and  this  authority  it  will
be  impossible  fur  them  to  live  here,
that  they  will  have  to  leave  the
land  ;  that  there  will  be  such  a  reign
of  terror,  or  such  a  condition  of  affairs
that  no  one  will  be  able  to  endure  it,
except  the  Mormons,  or  Latter-day
Saints,  themselves  ;  and  by  t  he  publi-
cation of  such  stories  as  these,  by
magnifying  all  the  trifling  things
they  see  done,  by  calling  attention
to  plural  marriage,  and  by  giving  a
false  representation  of  the  power
that  is  welded  by  the  leaders  of  the
people,  and  by  the  circulation  of  the
most  infamous  falsehoods,  they
create  an  impression  abroad  that  is
unfavorable  to  us  and  to  our  rights.

In  the  providence  of  God  I  recog-

Na  22,


i  nize  all  these  things  as  likely  to
accomplish  much  good  for  us.  j
myself  feel  it  is  important  that  we
as  a  people  should  be  trained  ;  that
we  should  leani  those  lessons  that

:  are  necessary  to  enable  us  ,to  tem-
perately and  properly  exercise  power
when  we  gain  it ;  and  I  have  hoped
that,  by  submitting  to  these  things,

j  by  enduring  them— as  we  have  had

I  to  do  for  many  years — a  lesson  would
be  taught  us  that  neither  we  nor
our  posterity  should  ever  forget ;
and  that  when  the  time  should  come
for  us  to  exercise  our  full  rights  as
American  citizens,  we  might  be  able
to  administer  the  laws  and  govern
in  such  a  way  that  all  should  be
protected,  that  every  man  of  every
creed,  of  every  nation,  and  of  every
people,  should  enjoy  his  rights  in
our  midst  as  perfectly  as  if  he  were
in  full  faith  with  the  majority  of
the  people.  Not  the  right  to  do
wrong,  not  the  right  to  practise  ini-
quity, not  the  right  to  trample  upon
his  neighbour,  to  intrude  upon  his
rights,  but  the  right  to  do  that
which  may  seem  good  in  his  own
eyes,  so  long  as  he  should  not  there*
by  interfere  with  the  rights  of  others ;
the  right  to  worship  God  as  he
pleases,  to  call  upon  him  in  any  form
that  may  be  acceptable  to  him  or
his  conscience,  to  believe  in  God,  or
not  to  believe  him  if  he  choose,  go
long  as  the  belief,  practice  and  rights
of  his  neighbour  shall  not  be  inter-
rupted. Until  we  can  reach  this
condition  and  entertain  these  views

I  and  carry  them  out,  it  would  not
surprise  me  if  we  should  be  kept  in
subjection.

1  wish  to  say  for  the  encourage-
ment of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  be-
cause I  have  sometimes  thought
there  was  a  feeling  of  discourage-
ment creeping  over  some  of  the  peo-
ple, that  some  were  letting  down

,  bars  and  yielding  to  the  influences

Vol  XX  '


around  them  and  almost  giving  up
in  despair,  feeling  that  all  that  had
been  spoken  concerning  our  future
is  very  doubtful  or  not  likely  to  be
fulfilled — I  therefore  wish  to  say  for  i
the  encouragement  of  the  people  to-
day that  the  time  will  come,  as  sure
as  God  lives,  that  all  that  has  been
said  concerning  us  will  be  fulfilled*  j
There  is  a  great  destiny  in  store  for
this  people  called  Latter-day  Saints.
They  cannot  be  repressed.  Mr.
Evarts  may  issue  his  circular,  he  may
send  to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
the  ports  of  the  United  States  may
be  closed  against  our  emigration.
The  law  of  1802,  against  plural  mar- !
riage  may  be  enforced  with  rigor,
and  everything  be  done  that  can  be
by  those  who  are  determined  to
check  the  growth  and  development
of  this  people,  ,  and  yet  there  is  a
power  connected  with  them  that
cannot  be  unless  the  people  them-
selves  be extirpated.  Anything
short  of  this  will  fail,  will  fail  entire-
ly, in  accomplishing  the  stoppage  of
this  work. A  people  such  as  this, !
with  all  their  faults — and  our  faults
are  numerous — but  possessing  such
qualities  as  are being  developed
among  us,  must  rise  to  the  surface
and  become  a  governing  people.
Where  in  the  race  of  life,  as  you  wit-
ness it  among  private  individuals,  do
the  qualities  that  characterize  the
Latter-day  Saints  fail  to  win  success?
We have temperance,  frugality,
union,  true  love,  honesty,  industry
and  chastity. "No/*  says  one,  "not
chastity" Yes  chastity  !  for  among
no  other  people  upon  this  continent
is  chastity  respected  as  it  is  among
the  Latter-day  Saints. Where  will
you  find  these  qualities  fail  in  being
successful  ?  They  are  always  success-
ful in  private  life- If  you  want  a
man  to  succeed,  if  you  want  your
son  to  succeed,  you  say  to  him,  "my
son,  be  truthful,  be  honest,  be  indu-


strious,  be  frugal,  be  chaste,  avoid
drunkenness,  avoid  wicked  society,
avoid  taking  the  name  of  God  in
vain,  govern  your  speech,  be  temper-
ate in  all  things,  and  you  will  suc-
ceed," What  father  who  loves  his
children  does  not  impress  upon  them
the  importance  of  these  qualities?
And  these  are  the  qualities  that
dominate  among  the  Latter-day
Saints.

I  had  occasion  to  go  to  a  gentle-
man here,  within  a  week,  to  transact
some  business.  He  has  been  doing
business  here  for  some  years.  With-
out my  leading  him  on  at  all  he
said  to  me,  "  I  never  dealt  with  so
honest  a  people  as  the  Mormons.
They  pay  their  bills,  they  meet  their
engagements;  you  can  rely  upon
them.  Any  money  that  I  have  lost
I  have  not  lost  it  through  the  Mor-
mons.11 I  felt  thankful  that  this
man  could  say  this  about  us,  and
yet  we  are  not  near  so  honest  as  we
should  be,  but  there  is  this  to  be
said  in  our  favor,  we  are  struggling
in  this  direction,  struggling  to  be
honest,  struggling  to  be  truthful.
We  have  raised  a  standard  which  is
much  higher  than  we  have  attained
unto.  It  is  an  elevated  standard,
but  there  is  this  to  be  said  for  the
people,  if  their  standard  is  high  they
are  struggling  to  attain  to  it.  If  not
done  to  so  great  an  extent  as  we
ought  to  do,  still  it  can  be  said  we
are  struggling  to  be  truthful,  honest
and  temperate,  and  we  deplore  in-
temperance, profanity,  litigation  and
strife,  enmity  and  hard  feelings.  I
say  there  is  a  hope  for  a  people  who
have  a  standard  of  this  kind,  and
especially  so  when  they  have  men  in
their  midst — as  I  thank  God  we  have
— who  are  not  afraid  to  tell  the
people  when  they  do  wrong,  to  tell
them  their  faults  to  their  faces  and
say  unpleasant  things  to  them.
There  is  one  thing  about  the  leading


THE RIGHTEOUS SUFFER,  ETC


339


men  of  this  Church  they  do  not  de-
pend upon  the  people  for  their  sup-
port. It  is  not  necessary  for  them
to  tickle  their  ears  by  fine  speeches
and  pleasant  things.  They  can  say
rough  things,  unpleasant  truths,  be-
cause they  are  independent ;  they
can  live  without  the  aid  of  the  people
by  the  industry  of  their  own  hands,
and  they  are  not  afraid  of  some  of
their  deacons  or  some  of  the  conscre-
gat  ion  taking  exceptions  to  their
manner  of  speech  and  cutting  off
their  salary.  Why  if  such  unpleasant
truths  were  toM,  as  have  been  told
to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  by  mini-
sters of  different  denominations,  who
do  you  think  would  give  them  a
call  ]  Would  they  receive  a  call  to
some  other  places  and  be  paid  a
higher  salary?  No,  their  style  would
be  too  unpleasant  to  be  popular
Well  I  have  hope  for  this  people  |
while  this  is  the  case,  and  I  pray
that  we  shall  always  have  men  here
who  are  not  afraid  to  tell  you  and
me  our  faults  and  warn  us  of  them
and  reprove  us,  for  "  better  the  re-
proof of  a  friend  than  the  kiss  of  an
enemy."

It  is  not  going  to  be  a  great  while
— and  many  of  you  will  sec  it  too —
before  there  will  be  a  great  revolu-
tion in  the  earth.  Just  as  sure  as
the  Lord  lives  the  day  will  come
when  there  will  be  consternation  not
only  in  foreign  nations  but  in  our
own  nation.  The  people  of  this"  Re-
public are  actually  treading  upon  a
volcano  and  they  do  not  know  how
soon  the  fires  may  burst  forth,  how*
soon  the  governmental  fabric  of  this
nation,  the  most  glorious  the  sun
has  ever  shone  upon,  the  best  that
man  without  the  priesthood  has  had
upon  the  earth,  shall  tumble*  And
why?  Through  the  corruption  of
the  people.  The  best  government
becomes  the  worst  government  when
the  people  become  corrupt,  when


bribery  in  high  places  rules,  when
political  parties  condescend  to  pur-
chase votes.  The  power  of  a  gov-
ernment is  weakened  when  Senators,
Representatives,  and  Presidents  get
their  places  by  the  use  of  money*
Woe  to  a  nation  when  this  becomes
the  case.  It  is  doomed  and  sooner
or  later  it  must  fall  What  is  the
remark  respecting  the  election  of
United  States  Senators  in  many  of
the  States  1  It  is  that  a  man  cannot
get  that  position  except  he  be  wealthy
What  does  that  mean  ?  Every  one
can  draw  his  own  conclusion.  But
that  is  not  the  worst  feature  either.
There  is  disunion  and  animosity  and
the  fires  of  sectional  hatred  burn
fiercely.  They  may  smoulder  at
times.  They  may  not  always  appear
on  the  surface.  But  let  the  breeze
blow  and  quicken  £hem  into  life  and
how  fierce  the  fiame  burns.

It  may  be  asked  what  has  all  this
to  do  with  the  Gospel  ?  The  Lord
has  restored  the  everlasting  Gospel
for  the  express  purpose  of  raising  up
a  pure  people  upon  this  land.  This
American  continent  is  the  choicest
land  upon  the  lace  of  the  whole  earth.
God  kept  it  hidden  until  the  15th
century  that  it  might  not  to  be  over-
run by  the  people  of  Europe  or  of
the  rest  of  the  world.  He  kept  it
hidden  in  darkness  and  covered  with
clouds  until  the  set  time  had  come
when  he  could  accomplish  his  pur-
pose and  prepare  the  way  for  the
American  Repu blic,  under  wind*
his  kingdom  could  be  established.
Could  it  have  been  established  in
Asia,  in  Europe,  or  in  Africa?  No,
it  required  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence framed  by  men  inspired  of
God;  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States  framed  and  adopted  by  men
whom  he  had  raised  up ;  it  required
a  people  who  had  fought  for  their
liberty,  religious  and  civil,  and  who
by  his  divine  blessing  had  succeeded


340  JOURNAL  OF

in  gaining  it  and  in  establishing  a
free  form  of  government.  It  re-
quired such  a  republican  government
as  we  have,  to  permit  this  people
called  Latter-day  Saints  to  be  or-
ganized, to  grow  and  increase
and  become  a  mighty  power.
Is  there  any  thing  incompatible  with
true  republicanism  in  the  growth  of
such  a  people  organized  as  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  are!  Let  me  say  that
the  men  and  women  who  live  in  ac-
cordance with  the  Gospel  are  the
best  people  in  the  world.  They
make  the  best  members  of  society
and  live  above  all  earthly  law,  that
is  constitutional  law.  Now  I  take
issue,  you  know,  with  some  laws.
Some  laws  are  constitutional,  and
some  laws  are  unconstitutional,  but
a  man  who  believes  in  and  practices
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  will  live
so  far  above  every  constitutional  law
that  he  will  never  violate  it,  He
may  be  guilty  of  mistakes,  he  may
fall  into  error,  but  there  will  be  no-
thing culpable  in  his  conduct.

As  the  people  of  God,  we  must  be
meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  We
must  confess  our  sins  one  to  anoth-
er, help  the  poor,  clothe  the  naked
and  administer  sustenance  to  those
who  require  it  We  must  cease  our
backbiting,  our  strife,  our  faultfind-
ing, our  evil  speaking,  bearing  false
witness  and  all  other  practices  of
this  kind,  and  live  as  Latter-day
Saints  should  who  are  worthy  of
the  name,  then  we  will  be  the  best
citizens  of  the  country,  the  best  citi-
zens that  can  be  found,  citizens  of
whom  people  will  be  proud — that
is  all  good  and  honest  people — and
whom  God  will  bless.  These  are
duties  that  devolve  upon  every  one
4rf  us,  We  should  not  be  Saints  in
iiame  alone,  but  in  deed  and  in
truth,  striving  to  make  our  lives  an
exemplification  of  the  principles  we
profess,  and  then  if  men  revile  us


DISCOURSES.

and  cast  out  our  names  as  evil  we
can  leave  our  case  in  the  hands  of
God.  We  can  call  upon  him  and
ask  his  biasing,  and  then  what
difference  does  it  make  what  the
wicked  think  or  say  about  us  ?  None
in  the  least.  We  do  not  live  for
the  opinion  of  the  wicked  ;  but  if
we  live  as  we  should  do,  if  we  live
for  God  and  pursue a  straight-

!  forward  course,  and  then  if  our  ene-
mies malign  us,  God  will  be  our
friend  ;  he  will  deliver  us  and  it
will  be  all  right  with  us  in  the  end.
H  But,"  says  one,  H  how  do  you  know
God  is  your  friend  V  Pray  to  him
in  faith  and  you  will  find  out  Man
may  deride  and  say  there  is  no  God,
and  say  that  it  is  all  humbug.  But
I  know  for  mvself  that  God  lives,
I  know  that  when  I  pray  to  him  he
hears  and  answers  my  prayers.  If
I  pray  to  him  in  secret  and  he  re-
wards and  gives  me  the  desires  of
my  heart,  supposing  all  the  rest  of
the  world  should  say  that  God  does
not  live,  does  that  alter  my  position,
or  detract  from  any  of  the  blessings
I  enjoy  1  Not  in  the  least.  It  does
not  interfere  with  them.  It  is  my
right  to  believe  there  is  a  God,  and
if  another  man  chooses  to  believe
there  is  not  then  that  is  his  business*
shall  I  quarrel  with  a  man  because  I
think  my  religion  is  better  than  his?
Not  at  all.  If  my  religion  is  better
than  his,  why  I  will  show  it  in  my
life  and  not  descend  to  ridicule  and
violence.  When  people  take  up
pistols  and  use  violence  they  give  to

!  the  world  the  best  proof  that  their
religion  is  not  of  God,  But  that  is
the  way  we  have  been  treated.  For
believing  in  the  true  Gospel  we  must
be  mobbed,  we  must  have  our  houses
burned,  we  must  be  driven  from  our
homes,  our  children  and  aged  people
must  die  by  the  way  side,  our  track
being  marked  with  the  graves  of
them  that  fall,  all  because  we  have


a  religion  that  happens  to  differ  from
the  religion  of  others.  It  is  curious
that  men  will  do  such  things  in  the
name  of  religion  !  Now  if  you  have
true  religion — -as  I  know  we  ought
to  have — show  the  world  that  your
religion  is  what  it  is  proclaimed  to
be — the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;
show  the  world  that  it  is  a  pure,  a
better  and  a  loftier  religion  than  any
other,  and  not  with  our  lips  alone,
but  proclaim  it  to  all,  by  our  words,
and  by  our  deeds,  and  then  the
time  will  come  when  it  will  receive


its  proper  recognition.  Belial,  or
Satan,  is  not  going  to  rule  always.
His  end  draweth  near,  and  the  time
is  nigh  when  inisrale  and  wicked-
ness shall  be  banished  from  the  face
of  the  earth.

I  pray  that  the  blessing  of  God
may  rest  upon  us.  I  pray  God  to
fill  us  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  to
inspire  our  hearts  with  pure  desires,
that  we  may  serve  him  to  the  beat
of  our  ability  and  knowledge,  which
may  God  grant  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen,


■


i


DISCOURSE BY ELDER  JOSEPH F.  SMITH,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,

Salt  Lake  City,  April  8,  1879.


(Reported Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


duties  of  the  faints  in  temporalities — implicit
r  eq  u  is  it  e — ch  u  rch  i  nt  k  h  ests  c  a  r  efu  lly  guarded-
the  poor — home  industries.


OBEDIENCE
GATHERING


There  is  a  little  time  remaining,
and  as  1  have  been  requested  I  de-
sire to  make  such  remarks  as  may
occur  to  my  mind*  I  have  been
pleased  andeditied  during  t lie  Confer-
ence which  is  now  drawing  to  a  close.
It  has  been  very  gratifying  to  see
the  large  number  of  people  that
has  gat  lie  red  together  during  the
two  days  that  have  passed.  It  is
erident  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  interested  in  ihe  welfare  of
Zion,  and  are  prompted  to  attend  to
the  duties  which  devolve  upon  them,
to  take  that  part  which  belongs  to


them ;  in  adopting  and  sustaining
the  measures  proposed  for  effect-
ually carrying  out  the  purposes
of  tin*  Almighty  in  relation  to  the
great  Latter-day  work  in  which  we
are  engaged,  and  in  seconding  and
sustaining  those  who  are  appointed
to  take  the  oversight  of  alt  the  affairs
of  the  Church,  by  the  voice  of  the
people  and  by  the  voice  of  the  Lord,
In  doing  this  we  are  but  doing  our
duty,  still  it  is  ever  pleasant  to  see
the  people  willing  to  do  their  duty,
and  especially  so,  to  see  so  many
cheerfully  respond  to  their  duty  as


342  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


have  done  so  during  this  Conference*
It  is  certainly  encouraging  to  those
who  stand  at  our  head  to  see  the
people  rally  around  them,  manifest-
ing such  faith ,  good  feeling  and  love
for  the  work  of  God  and  for  those
whom  the  Lord  has  inspired  with
his  good  Spirit  to  lead  us.  It  is  an
evidence,  at  least,  that  in  a  great
measure,  our  desires  and  our  hearts
are  united.

JTiere  are  a  great  many  things
which  are  necessary  for  us  to  con-
sider and  so  far  as  possible  thoroughly
understand.  Not  much  has  been
said  during  this  Conference  in  rela-
tion to  our  temporal  affairs,  except
so  far  as  the  reports  which  have
been  read  have  shown  the  financial
and  statistical  condition  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  We  belong  to  a
temporal  as  well  as  a  spiritual  king-
dom, and  it  is  very  necessary  that
we  should  take  a  lively  interest  in
whatever  tends  to  build  up  the  king-
dom of  God,  temporal  as  well  as
spiritual,  and  spiritual  as  well  as  tem-
poral.

I  have  never  yet  found  any  one
who  can  draw  the  dividing  line  be-
tween our  spiritual  and  temporal
interests,  neither  do  I  expect  to.  I
believe  that  it  is  quite  as  necessary
that  we  should  attend  to  the  tempo-
ral, as  it  is  to  attend  to  the  spiritual
duties  which  devolve  upon  us,  and
vice  versa.  It  will  not  do  to  devote
all  our  time  to  the  spiritual  part,  nor
all  to  the  temporal  alone.  We  must
not  run  to  extremes,  but  we  should
carry  on  the  work  of  the  Lord  com-
mitted to  us,  in  all  its  parts,  or
bearings.  We  should  have  sufficient
of  the  good  Spirit  to  make  the  tem-
poral labors  light  and  easy  to  bear,
I  find  that  when  we  have  to  carry
«ro  the  temporal  labors  without  the
Spirit,  or  the  life,  light,  vigor  and
power  of  faith,  we  are  apt  to  feel
that  it  is  burdensome  and  hard,  or


difficult  to  bear ;  but  when  we  enjoy
the  companionship  of  the  Holy  Spi-
rit, we  can  and  do  joyfully  perform
all  the  temporal  duties  and  labors
which  may  be  righteously  required
of  us.  The  Lord  will  not  require  of
his  people  anything  which  they  are
unable  to  perform.  He  will  not  im-
pose burdens  upon  his  people  that
they  cann&t  bear ;  but  if  we  have
not  the  love  of  the  truth  and  the
light  of  the  good  Spirit  to  guide  us,
the  most  simple  duties  and  the
easiest  tasks  may  seem  burdens,  too
grievous  to  be  borne,  I  have  known
Elders,  who,  all  their  lives,  have
been  " minute  men;*'  they  have
never  stopped  a  moment  to  question
the  calls  that  have  been  made  upon
them,  neither  have  they  stopped  to
consider  their  own  temporal  inter-
ests, they  have  gone  and  come  at  the
request  of  their  brethren  in  the  ser.
vice  of  the  people  and  the  Lord-
They  have  had  their  carts  and  per-
sonal responsibilities,  which  have
not  always  been  of  the  lightest  cha-
racter, and  which  have  taxed  their
energies  to  the  utmost,  or  at  least
equal  to  many  of  those  brethren  who
have  enjoyed  their  leisure  at  home,
spending  largely  their  time  and  abi-
lity in  the  interests  of  themselves
and  families*  They  have  had  per-
haps as  many  in  family  to  look  after,
to  feed,  clothe,  and  otherwise  care
for  ;  yet  these  things  have  not  been
considered,  or  allowed  to  stand  iil
the  way,  when  duty  called  them  to
go  forth  in  the  interest  of  the  Church..
They  were  on  hand,  like  the  ready"
watchman,  scarcely  stopping  to  think
of  themselves  or  theirs.  This  thejr
have  done  with  all  their  hearts,  and
their  labors  have  never  been  regarded
as  burdensome ;  but  on  the  contrary,,
they  afforded  them  joy,  pleasure  and
constant  satisfaction.  They  have
not  grown  weary,  they  do  not  think
that  they  have  done  enough,  as  some-


DUTIES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ECT.


343


have  thought  who  have  performed  a
short  mission— that  it  is  now  time
they  were  beginning  to  do  some-
thing for  themselves ;  they  are  still
ready  and  willing  to  go  or  come,  or
do  whatever  may  be  required  of  them,
jeffardin*;,  at  all  times,  their  duties
in  the  priesthood  of  greater  moment
than  any  personal  considerations.
The  Lord  has  blessed  them  in  their
labors  ;  he  has  made  their  burdens
comparatively  easy  to  bear  :  they
have  not  felt  the  load,  but  they  have
gone  on  rejoicing  never  failing  to  ac-
complish the  work  assigned  them,  to
the  best  of  their  ability,  trusting  in
the  Lord,  at  the  same  time  doing  all
in  their  power,  for  the  maintenance
of  themselves  and  families.

This  is  but  a  sample  of  what  all
the  people  ought  tobr\  We  should
all  be  willing  to  labor  for  the  wel-
fare and  salvation  of  t  he  people — to
sacrifice  our  own  desires  and  feelings
for  the  good  of  the  whole,  being  per-
fectly willing  to  do  the  bidding  of
the  Almighty,  with  no  will  of  our
own  but  to  serve  the  purposes  of  the
Lord.  Is  this  not  consistent  with
the  pattern  set  us  by  the  Savior  1
Jesus  said,  "  Father,  not  my  will,
but  thy  will  be  done/'  This  was  the
doctrine  lie  inculcated  among  his  fol-
lowers, and  commanded  them  to
obey;  that  their  will  should  be  swal-
lowed up  in  the  will  and  pleasure  of
the  Almighty,  that  they  should  feel
in  their  hearts  that  they  are  willing
to  serve  God  even  to  the  sacrifice  of
everything,  though  it  should  be  life
itself,  "counting  all  things  but  dross
iii  comparison  to  the  excellency  of
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ/1
When  we  possess  the  spirit  of  the
Gospel  and  faith  in  (>o<l,  as  we  should,
we  will  have  no  burdens  that  will
be  difficult  to  bear  ;  on  the  contrary,
we  will  find  our  "yokes  easy  and  our
burdens  light,"  and  it  will  be  a
pleasure  to  do  our  duty,  whatever


that  may  be.  If  we  should  be  cal-
led  to  preach  the  Gospel,  we  will
find  it  a  pleasure  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel, we  will  find  it  a  pleasure  to  re-
spond, for  we  will  feel  that  we  are
.  enlisted  in  the  service  of  God,  for
.  the  salvation  of  souls,  including  our
own.  What  is  there  to  compare
with  this  labor  ?  Can  we  compare
houses  and  lands,  gold  or  silver,  or
the  wealth  of  the  earth,  to  the  sal-
vation of  the  souls  of  men  ?  What
will  a  man  not  give  for  his  own  life?
And  what  will  it  profit  a  man  though
he  gain  the  whole  world,  if  he  at  last
lose  his  own  soul  1  These  are  ques-
tions propounded  by  the  Savior  who,
is  "  the  author  and  finisher  of  our
faith/1  That  which  is  of  the  earth
is  earthy;  it  belongs  here,  we  cannot
carry  it  away  when  we  leave  this
state  of  existence,  we  cannot  possess
it  beyond  the  vail,  unless  we  live  so
while  here  that  eventually  we  shall
be  numbered  with  tire  Saints  of  the
Most  High  God — for  it  is  said  that
unto  them  shall  the  earth  he  given,
but  not  until  they  are  prepared  to
"  possess  it  for  ever  and  ever/1  And
then  they  must  receive  it  from  Him
who  has  the  right  to  give.  If  we  do
right,  therefore,  in  this  probation,
when  "the  earth  and  the  fulness
thereof  shall  be  given  to  the  Saints
of  the  Most  High,"  we  will  be  num-
bered among  those  who  will  inherit
it  But  that  time  has  not  yet  come*
The  earth  and  its  fulness  are  not
ours— if  they  were  we  might  remain
herein  peaceful  possession;  but  they
are  God's,  and  we  are  his,  what  we
have  being  committed  to  us,  as
stewards,  tor  a  little  season  ;  there-
fore, our  worldly  riches  and  posses-
sions are  but  dross  compared  with
our  eternal  salvation.  We  are  labor-
!  ing  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  we
should  feel  that  this  is  the  greatest
duty  devolving  upon  us.  Therefore,
we  should  feel  willing  to  sacrifice


3U


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


everything,  if  need  be,  for  the  love  of  I
God,  the  salvation  of  men,  and  the
triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  God  up«n
the  earth,  in  which  we  expect  to  re-
ceive our  reward,  our  exaltation  and
our  crown  of  life.  These  are  not
mere  suppositions,  the  chimera  of
men's  brains,  or  the  cunning  of  matv  a
devices;  but  things  which  have  been
revealed  to  us  from  God,  he  having
spoken  and  declared  these  truths
unto  man  in  our  day/'

I  can  testify  to  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  that  so  tar  as  the  Spirit
of  God  manifests  to  me,  all  is  well
in  Zion  to-day.  The  work  of  God
is  progressing.  The  interests  of  the
kingdom  are  carefully  and  jealously
guar  tied  hy  those  upon  whom  rests
this  responsibility,  Zion's  welfare  is
the  constant  theme,  meditation  and
prayer.  They  desi  re  that  no  interest
of  Zion  shall  be  allowed  to  fail,  or
flag,  for  the  want  of  proper  care  and
timely  attention.  The  finances  of
the  Church  are  guarded  carefully
by  the  Trustee  in  Trust  for  the
Church.  This  I  can  testify  to,  hav-
ing been  more  or  less  intimately
associated  with  him  for  the  last  six
months,  I  know  he  has  carefully
looked  after  the  financial  interest  of
the  Church,  as  well  as  the  temporal
and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  people,
that  the  Church  might  be  protected
in  its  rights  as  well  as  individuals,
and  that  individuals  might  also  be
protected  in  their  rights  as  well  as
the  Church,  that  justice  might  be
dealt  out  to  all.

There  have  been  some  circum-
stances developed  and  brought  to
the  notice  of  the  Trustee  in  Trust
and  the  Auditing  Committee,  which
have  been  of  a  very  trying  character,
both  to  their  feelings  and  to  the
feelings  of  the  other  members  of  the
council  of  Apostles,  and  no  doubt
also  very  trying  to  the  feelings  of
some  of  the  brethren  who  have  sup-


posed they  had  claims  upon  the
Trustee  in  Trust,  which  investigation
has  proved  they  did  not  have.  And
in  other  instances,  where  it  has  been
shown  that  the  Trustee  in  Trust  has
claims  upon  individuals  who  su  pposed
they  were  not  indebted  to  the
Church,  But  in  all  of  these  matters
even-handed  justice  has  been  sought
to  be  dealt  out  to  the  individual
and  to  the  Church  ;  but  while  the
Church  can  afford  to  be  liberal  in
its  alms  to  the  worthy  and  needy
poor,  and  to  pay  all  just  demands,
or  claims  upon  it,  it  cannot  afford  to
sanction  or  allow  claims  that  are  not
just.  And  further,  it  is  but  just
and  fair  that  individuals  should  be
as  prompt,  so  far  as  it  is  in  their
power,  to  meet  their  obligations  to
the  Church  as  ?t  is  expected  that
the  Church  will  be  in  meeting  its  ob-
ligations to  individuals.
!  We  do  not  expect  that  the  rights
of  the  Church  will  be  disregarded
l  in  any  particular.  We  do  not  ex-
pect that  any  person  will  indulge,  or
even  admit  the  feelflhg  that  the
Church  is  an  institution  only  to  be
preyed  upon  ;  but  we  expect  that
;  the  people  do  and  will  understand
that  we  cannot  afford  to  deal  in  any
other  manner  than  upon  the  princi-
ples of  the  strictest  justice,  righteous
ness  and  equity  between  man  and
man,  and  between  the  Church  and
individual  members  of  the  Church,
or  the  individual  members  and  the
Church.

We  have  had  a  very  excellent  dis-
course from  the  President  of  the
P.  E.  Fund  Company,  in  regard  to
the  duties  of  those  who  are  iudebted
to  the  company.  He  has  shown  the
vast  amount  that  is  now  owing  to
that  company  by  individuals  who  have
been  assisted  to  immigrate  to  this
goodly  land  by  its  means  ;  and  the
ingratitude,  want  of  charity  and  dis-
honor which  attaches  to  individuals


DUTIES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


345


who  ha  ve  been  so  generously  assisted
out  of  poverty  and  oppression,  and
placed  in  circumstances  to  become
free  and  independent,  and  then  neg-
lect or  fail  to  do  their  duty  in  these
matters.

In  some  instances  individuals  who
have  been  assisted  to  Zion  by  the
P.  E.  Fund,  have  gathered  around
them  of  this  world's  goods  until
they  have  become  rich,  and  still
their  indebtedness  to  the  "Fund"
remains  unsettled.

It  is  more  than  probable  that
these  same  individuals  would  always
have  remained  in  poverty  hail  they
not  been  gathered  to  Zion  by  the
P.  E.  Fund  :  thus,  we  see,  they  are
doubly  indebted  to  the  "  fund,"  first
for  their  deliverance  from  Babylon,
from  poverty  and  bondage  ;  and
secondly  for  the  wealth  and  liberty
which  they  now  possess.

And  again  they  are  manifoldly  more
guilty  of  ingratitude  to  God  and  man,
became  they  have  withheld  from
the  fund  its  just  dues — which  they
were  able  to  pay,  and  deprived  others
more  worthy  than  themselves  from
receiving  assistance  in  the  manner
they  had  been  assisted.

Every  man  that  owes  the  fund  a
dollar  should  realise  that  it  is  a  just
debt,  that  there  are  others  in
the  same  condition  that  they  were
in  when  picked  up  by  the  P.  E.
Fund  company  and  brought  to  this
blessed  land,  that  they  aTe  praying
and  pleading  for  deliverance  also,
and  that  perhaps  they  are  quite  as
worthy — if  not  more  so — than  many
who  have  been  helped  and  now  owe
the  "fund"  to  an  amount  which,  if
all  was  paid  up,  would  be  more  than
sufficient  to  immigrate  to  this  comi-
try  all  the  Saints  now  in  Europe.

Men  but  do  their  duty  when  they
pay  their  just  debts  and  to  do  so  in
this  case  they  discharge  a  triple  duty
— to  the  Fund,  themselves  and  to


the  ungathered,  worthy  poor.  What
honorable  person  can  refuse  or  neg-
lect to  do  such  a  duty  1

We  are  sending  large  numbers  of
Elders  from  time  to  time,  to  preach
the  Gospel  abroad.  It  is  the  duty
of  the  Latter  day  Saints  to  assist
those  EMers  on  their  missions
when  they  need  assistance,  or  when
they  are  unable  to  fit  themselves
out.  Their  families  too  should  be
cared  for  by  the  Church,  during  the
absence  of  the  husband  and  father,
so  far  as  they  are  needy  or  unable  to
provide  for  themselves.  Every  man
is  in  duty  bound  to  do  all  he  reason-
ably can  to  roll  on  the  work  of  God,
to  maintain  himself  and  family  and
assist  to  build  up  Zion.

Some  times  a  good  man  is  needed
to  fill  a  certain  mission,  he  is  well
adapted  to  the  position  he  is  called
to  fill,  or  the  duty  he  is  required  to
perform  ;  but  he  is  poor,  he  may
perl  nips  have  a  large  family  to  main-
tain, which  would  require  his  whole
time  if  devoted  wholly  to  that  end,
yet  his  ability,  faith,  integrity  and
other  qualifications  peculiarly  fit  him
for  the  duty  required,  and  he  is  the
most  available  man  to  be  found.
Now  what  is  to  be  donel  Are  we
to  excuse  him  because  his  family  is
large  and  require  his  services,  or  be-
cause of  his  poverty.  Certainly
not.

If  the  interest  of  Zion  requires  his
services,  in  that  direction  lies  his  lc-
gitimate  path  of  duty.  Then  it  he-
comes  the  duty  of  the  Saints  to  pro-
vide for  his  family  and  see  that
they  do  not  lack  the  necessaries
of  life ;  and  it  would  not  hurt  us  to
see  that  they  enjoyed  some  of  the
comforts.

If  there  is  no  excuse  for  the  poor,
certainly  there  can  be  none  for  the
wealthy,  nevertheless  the  rich  are
often  so  engrossed  in  their  business
so  bound  up  in  worldly  affairs,  that


they  are  but  poorly  qualified  for
missionary  service ;  the  greater  the
reason  why  they  should  freely  im-
part of  their  abundance  in  aid  of
those  who  are  better  fitted  for  the
ministry  when  such  are  called  into
the  missionary  field.  It  is  true  the
ti things  of  the  people  are  for  these
and  other  purposes,  and  no  doubt
when  all  the  rich  and  poor  with  one
accord  honestly  obey  the  law  of
tithing  there  will  be  plenty  in  the
store  house  of  the  Lord,  to  build
temples  and  houses  of  worship,  to
feed  and  clothe  the  hungry  and  naked
to  provide  for  the  aged,  infirm  and
poor,  to  gather  the  Saints,  to  send
the  Elders  to  the  nations  of  the
earth  and  maintain  their  families
while  they  are  gone,  and  also  to  pur-
chase the  land  of  Zion  and  redeem
the  center  Stake  and  obtain  posses-
sion of  our  inheritances,  or  do  any
other  thing  which  may  be  needed,
although  in  the  beginning  God  gave
a  more  perfect  law  than  that  of
tithing  by  which  to  accuinpli^h  all
these  things,  but  the  Saints  were
not  able  to  abide  the  higher  law —
and  it  was  temporarily  suspended,
therefore  until  we  know  how,  and
will  do  better  than  we  now  do,  our
tithings  and  our  offerings  are  neces-
sary to  carry  on  the  work  of  God,

These  duties  should  not  be  con-
sidered a  hardship  by  the  Saints.
The  law  of  tithing  is  a  command-
ment with  promise  of  reward  for
obedience.  No  man  ever  observed
this  law  but  he  was  blessed  in  so
doing,  for  God  is  both  able  and  will
ing  to  fulfill  all  his  promises  when
the  conditions  are  complied  with  on
our  part.  Those  duties  which  God
requires  may  seem  a  burden  to  the
disobedient  and  unfaithful,  but  to
the  willing  and  obedient  they  are
sources  of  blessing,  pleasure  and  de-
light and  are  no  burden  at  all.  Our
burdens  become  lighter  in  propor-


tion to  our  increasing  faithfulness.
Our  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  and  bles-
sings of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  increase
as  we  become  more  diligent  and  so
will  our  knowledge  extend  and  our
title  to  exaltation  and  eternal  life
become  more  and  more  sure.

The  sending  of  Elders  from  year
to  year,  and  thousands  of  dollars  an-
nually to  gather  the  poor  is  not  all
we  have  to  do.  We  have  home  in-
dustries to  look  after.  We  must
provide  employment  for  our  people,
that  when  they  are  gathered  home
they  may  not  be  idle  for  want  of  re-
munerative labor.  We  should  estab-
lish branches  of  industry  from  which
we  could  at  least  provide  for  our
own  necessities  and  as  soon  as  pos-
sible be  able  to  export  our  home  pro-
ductions,  and  thus  give  employment
to  every  faithful  Latter-day  Saint
who  is  gathered  to  Zion,  that  indi-
viduals may  not  only  become  self
sustaining  but  contribute  their  pro*
portion  to  the  general  good.

Our  manufiictories  should  be
fostered,  patronised  and  protected,
and  their  staple  wares  sought
after  and  preferred  by  the  people,
even  though  they  were  more  cnstly
at  first.  It  needs  no  argument  to
prove  to  the  sagacious  and  far  seeing
that  this  policy  will  pay  the  best  in
the  end.

While  we  continue  to  be  purchas-
ers and  importers  only,  we  will  re-
main dependent  to,  and  at  the  mercy
of  manufacturers  and  exporters  from
abroad ;  but  when  we  can  produce
what  we  need  by  our  own  industry
|  and  skill,  from  the  elements  which
so  abundantly  surround  us,  we  cease
to  import,  to  be  dependent  upon  ba-
bylon,  or  the  world,  we  approach  in-
dependence, and  begin  to  assume  the
position  in  the  earth  which  God  has
designed  we  should,  to  lead  and  not
be  led,  to  teach  and  not  be  taught,
to  be  the  M  head  and  not  the  tail."'


DUTIES  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


347


Every  Latter-day  Saint  should  be
proud  to  wear  home  made  clothes,
from  head  to  foot,  and  when  we  be-
gin to  study  our  best  interests,  and
the  interest  of  Zion  we  will  do  so
though  it  costs  us  more  now  than  to
wear  the  stuffed,  starched,  glossed
and  glittering  shoddy  of  the  world,
or  even  the  best  the  world  affords.
Money  spent  in  home  manufactures,
is  money  saved  to  the  community,  it
is  money  laid  up  for  future  use  and
benefit  at  home,  while  money  sent
abroad  builds  up  New  York,  Boston,
Philadelphia,  Lowell,  and  the  world
generally  all  of  whom  are  opposed
to  the  people  and  the  work  of  God
and  will  only  return  evil  to  us  for
the  patronage  we  bestow  upon  them.

We  should  be  prepared,  not  only
to  manufacture  our  own  wearing
apparel,  but  also  to  make  all  our
mechanical  and  agricultural  imple-
ments, our  house -hold  furniture,  our
building  materials,  our  wagons,
carriages  and  equipment,  with  all
that  is  necessary  for  the  righteous
and  legitimate  use  of  man,  that  when
Babylon  shall  fall  we  may  be  pre-
pared for  it,  and  not  be  found  among
those  who  shall  wail  and  lament  be-
cause u  no  man  buyeth  her  merchand-
ise any  more/1

I  see  some  of  the  sisters  wearing
fine  hats  trimmed  with  silk  ribbon,
also  silk  shawls,  dresses,  neckties,
etc.,  which  are  of  their  own  produc-
tion and  make.  This  is  as  it  should
be — "the  beauty  of  the  work  of
their  own  hands.11

Perhaps  no  country  in  the  world
abounds  more  profusely  than  ours,
with  the  real  elements  of  wealth,  and
none  better  adapted  to  the  raising  of


silk,  which  enters  so  largely  into,  and
is  so  eagerly  so ught  for  female  apparel,
and  there  are  thousands  of  men,
women  and  children  in  Utah,  who
could  as  well  as  not  devote  a  portion
of  their  time  to  its  culture,  say  a
month  or  six  weeks  in  the  proper
season  of  the  year,  both  to  their
pleasure  and  profit,  if  they  would,
and  the  result  would  be  the  produc-
tion in  vast  quantities  of  the  much
coveted  article  of  silk,  and  an  in-
crease of  profitable  labor.

Sister  Zina  Young,  Fat! icr  Graves
and  a  few  others  are  interesting
themselves  in  this  industry  and  are
trying  to  awaken  an  interest  therein
in  the  minds  of  the  industrial  classes,
that  silk  may  eventually  become  a
staple  product  of  Utah.  So  tar,  I
fear,  they  have  found  it  rather  up-
hill work.  The  people  seem  to  be
eager  for  immediate  profit,  for  present
gain,  which  in  too  many  cases  is  ex-
ceedingly detrimental  to  the  indivi-
dual as  well  as  to  the  public  good*
It  is  difficult  to  get  people  to  look
forward,  or  labor  for  the  future  ;  we
are  all  so  terribly  wrapped  up  and
engrossed  in  the  present  and  in
sel  f-  Bu t  tli e  cultu re  o f  si] k  is  grad u-
ally  being  extended,  I  am  told,  and
by  and  by  it  will,  unquestionably,
become  one  of  our  flourishing  indu-
stries. A  little  child  is  capable  of
at  tending  to  a  large  part  of  the  labor
involved  in  the  production  of  raw
silk,  and  children  a  little  farther
advanced  can  prepare  it  for  the  loom.

May  the  Lord  bless  the  people.
May  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  abide  in
the  hearts  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  lead  them  continually,  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


348  JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES,


DISCOUKSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED  IN  THE  TABKRNACLE  AT  PROVO,  NOVEMBER,  30TH,  1879.


(Reported  by  Geo*  P.  Gibbs.)


THE  TEMPLES  IX  COURSE  OF  ERECTION — POLITICAL  POSITION  OF  THE
SAINTS— OUR  POSITION  REGARDING  PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE— THE
CORRUPTIONS  OF  SO-CALLED  CHRISTENDOM— HOW  THE  SAINTS  SHOULD
LIVE— SUNDAY  SCHOOLS,  RELIEF  AND  MUTUAL  IMPROVEMENT  ASSO-
CIATIONS.


We  have  heard  a  good  many  great
and  important  truths  uttered  by
those  who  have  addressed  us  since
the  commencement  of  this  confer-
ence. We  have  these  conferences
appointed  for  the  purpose  of  adjust-
ing and  regulating  any  matters  that
may  arise  in  the  several  Stakes,  and
for  teaching  and  instructing  the  j
people  on  all  matters  pertaining  to
their  welfare  lelative  to  this  world
as  well  as  the  world  to  come.  I

My  brethren  of  the  Twelve  and
myself  have  been  traveling  around
considerably  lately  among  the  people.
We  have  visited  some  of  the  most
prominent  Stakes  and  attended  their
conferences ;  among  which  are  the
Stakes  of  Sanpete  and  Cache  Valley
—two  of  the  most  prominent  of  the
Territory — in  which  temples  are  be-
ing built.  We  thought  we  would  like
to  visit  them  and  see  the  condition
of  affairs;  how  they  were  progressing,'
what  advancement  they  were  mak-
ing in  these  important  labors,  and
then  if  they  needed  assistance  of
any  kind  we  could  render  it  intelli-
gently after enquiring  into  their


"position. We  found  in both  of
these  places  that  the  people  had  been
very  faithful,  diligent  and  liberal  in
the  prosecution  of  this  work,  that  is,
in  building  temples  to  the  name  of
the  Lord,  that  they  may  go  and  ad-
minister therein  and  attend  to  the
ordinances  of  God's  house  for  them-
selves, and  receive  those  blessings
which  God  has  to  confer  upon  His
people,  and  administer  not  only  for
themselves,  the  living,  but  also  for
the  dead. We  found  that  a  very
large  amount  of  means  had  been
used  in  both  of  these  valleys,  includ-
I  ing  the  districts  around,  appointed
to  assist  them  in  the  erection  of
these  temples,  and  they  are  building
up  splendid  edifices  in  both  places*
The  one  in  Cache  Valley  is  built  of
hard  rock,  a  species  of  marble,  that
will  make  a  very  strong  wall.  There
is,  however,  mixed  up  with  it  in  dif-
ferent places,  some  very  fine  sand-
stone, which  they  have  to  bring  from
quite  a  distance. They  have  raised
the  walls  of  that  Temple  about  fifty-
five  feet  and  are  still  persevering.
We  found  also  that  they  were  pro-


secuting  their  work  very  assiduously
iu  Sanpete.  They  have  beautiful
sandstone  there  of  alight  color,  easy
to  hew,  which  will  make  a  beautiful  I
structure  when  completed,  almost
equal  to  ours  in  Salt  Lake  City,  with
this  difference,  it  is  simply  dressed
outside.  Hence  things  are  progres-
sing rapidly,  which  evinces  a  good
desire  among  the  Saints  to  carry  out
the  purposes  which  Got!  has  designed
and  which  they  have  engaged  along
with  us  to  perform,  ,

In  visiting  these  places  we  iel  t  a
desire  to  see  the  people  that  lived
in  the  settlements  around.  We
made  an  attempt  to  this  end  before,
but  could  not  accomplish  it  because
of  the  pressure  of  circumstances  that
required  our  attention  in  the  city  ;
but  this  time,  being  at  liberty,  we,
visited  all  the  principal  .settlements
in  Sanpete  and  Cache  Valley,  which
are  quite  numerous.  We  thought
it  was  proper,  seeing  they  have  as
good  meeting  houses  as  you  have
here.  They  have  a  much  larger
meeting  house  in  Cache  valley  than
you  have  here,  and  I  think  the  one
in  Ephrairn.  Sanpete,  is  larger  than
this — yet  they  could  neither  accom-
odate all  the  people,  nor  get  them
together,  and  you  could  not  here*
We  could  take  some  of  the  houses
in  which  we  have  attended  meetings,
and  put  most  of  the  people  who  are
seated  in  the  body  of  this  tabernacle
into  them.  If  the  Saints  wanted  to
attend  conference  they  could  not
find  room,  and  consequently  we
thought  it  better  to  visit  them  at
their  homes,  see  how  they  were  situ-
ated, feel  after  their  spirits  and  let
them  feel  ours  ;  converse  with  them,
preach  to  them  and  see  what  they
were  doing.

We  found  that  in  these  temple
districts,  whilst  they  had  been  very
energetic  and  very  generous  in  their
feelings  in  contributing  to  the  work,


they  needed  some  considerable  assist-
ance,  and  we  felt  it  to  be  our  duty
to  assist  them  out  of  the  general
I  fund  of  the  Church,  the  same  as  we
do  in  Salt  Lake  City ;  but  of  course
not  to  the  same  extent.

They  were  working  in  union  in  a
kind  of  united  order  j  but  not  of
course  fixed  up  in  that  order.  But
as  we  are  operating  together  in  the
interests  of  the  Church  and  King-
dom of  God,  we  deemed  it  quite
proper  that  those  places  should  re-
ceive the  necessary  assistance  ;  and
we  though i  also  that  that  kind  of
feeling  and  spirit  would  also  be  satis-
factory to  our  brethren  of  the  priest*
hood  and  to  the  Saints  generally
I  throughout  the  Territory,  for  we  are
6ne,  or  ought  to  be  one  in  our  en-
deavors to  build  up  the  Church  and
Kingdom  of  God.  Having  enjoyed
ourselves  very  much  in  preaching
and  in  mingling  among  the  Saints  in
the  daces  where  we  have  visited,
we  thought  we  would  come  to  you
and  do  likewise — not  particularly  to
talk  to  you,  because  you  doubtless
have  enough  of  preaching,  and  per-
haps a  little  more  than  you  can  at-
tend to ;  but  in  Home  places  the
people  do  not  have  the  same  oppor-
tunity that  you  do  here  in  Provo,
for  we  sometimes  slide  by  many
li  settlements  on  the  roadt  and  it  ap-
pears in  some  instances  as  though  they
were  neglected.  We  thought  in
coming  among  you  we  would  bring
our  own  carriages  as  we  used  to  in
former  years,  and  go  by  the  highway
and  visit  the  folks  at  their  own
homes,  go  into  the  highways  and  by-
ways and  try  to  meet  with  all  the
Saints,  for  we  are  all  one,  all  having
been  baptized  into  the  one  baptism
and  ought  to  partake  of  the  same
spirit  and  be  governed  by  those
glorious  principles  which  God  has
revealed  for  the  teaching  and  exal-
tation of  the  human  family.  Be-


350  JOURNAL  OF

sides  there  are  a  great  many  circum-
stances, transpiring  from  time  to
time,  which  render  it  necessary  that
we  should  be  conversant  with  one
another's  feelings  ;  that  we  should
understand  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord,  and  that  we  should  be  prepared
to  operate  with  Him  in  the  interests
of  the  human  family,  in  the  establish-
ment of  Ziou  and  in  the  building
up  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  the
earth.  I  always  take  pleasure  in
preaching  the  Gospel — I  have  done
a  great  deal  of  it — nnd  my  brethren
of  the  Twelve  feel  the  same.  There
is  nothing  I  take  greater  pleasure
in  than  in  proclaiming  the  Gospel
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
in  mingling  among  and  preaching
to  the  Saints  of  God.  Although  I
cannot  now  go  abroad,  yet  I  can,
and  so  can  ray  brethren  of  the
Twelve,  associate  with  you — for
they  feel  as  I  do  in  relation  to
this  matter  ;  we  can  visit  the  Saints
at  home  and  talk  to  them  on  the
things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of
God.

There  are  a  great  many  things
associated  also  with  this  Kingdom
that  it  is  proper  should  be  presented
to  us  from  time  to  time,  that  we
may  be  enabled  to  act  and  to  operate
together  and  be  one  in  our  feelings
religious,  one  in  our  feelings  social,
and  one  in  our  feelings  political;  for
all  these  things  are  mixed  up  and
intimately  connected  with  the  posi-
tion we  occupy  as  the  Saints  of  the
Most  High  God  in  the  building  up
of  His  Zion  here  upon  the  earth.
There  are  things  spiritual,  there  are
things  denominated  temporal,  there
are  things  also  spoken  of  as  being
eternal  in  their  nature,  and  all  these
subjects,  in  all  their  various  ramifica-
tions, demand  more  or  less  of  our
attention.  For  instance,  we  are
gathered  together  here  as  a  peculiar


DISCOURSES.

people  in  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains. We  are  gathered  here  because
we  embraced  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  because  of  the  revealing
of  that  Gospel  to  Joseph  Smith,  and
because  after  having  embraced  it,
we  partook  of  its  spirit,  and  because
there  was  associated  therewith  the
principle  of  gathering* We  are

I  gathered  here  under  peculiar  circum-
stances. But  our  first  object  was
simple  obedience  to  the  Gospel
There  are  circumstances  growing

;  out  of  this,  over  which  we  seem  to
have  very  little  control,  by  being
gathered  together  in  the  position  we
now  occupy,  and  composing  part  of
this  nation,  there  are  certain  politi-
cal duties  that  seem  to  force  them-
selves upon  us.  We  came  here
simply  on  religious  principles  to

:  start  with,  because  we  had  faith  in
God,  because  we  had  faith  in  the
restoration  of  the  everlasting  Gospel;
because  we  had  faith  in  the  gather-
ing  together  of  the  people  ;  because
we  had  faith  in  the  ordinances  of
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  be-
cause we  had  faith  in  the  organiza-
tion  of  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of
God,  and  the  various  offices  pertain-
ing thereunto  throughout  all  the
ramifications  of  the  Church,  We
came  together  therefore  in  a  Church
capacity :  but  being  gathered  toge-
ther as  a  people,  we  brought  our
bodies  with  us,  that  is  we  brought
our  souls,  if  you  please,  for  the  spirit
and  the  body,  we  are  told,  is  the  soul
of  man.  We  brought  ourselves  here
and  being  here  we  naturally  form  an
intregal  part  of  the  United  States,
and  have  become  part  of  what  is
termed  the  body  politic  of  the  gov-
ernment But  we  conld  not  help
that,  and  I  do  not  know  that  we
want  to  help  it.

We  became  then  organized  in  a
territorial  capacity  and  part  and  par*


THE  TEMPLES  IN  COURSE  OF  ERECTION,  ETC.


eel  of  the  government  of  the  United
Stated  ;  this  follows  as  a  natural
consequence.

There  are  a  great  many  Saints
here  gathered  together,  I  do  not
know  the  number  ;  it  is  estimated
by  some  to  be  from  150,000  to  200,
000*  How  many  there  are  I  am
not  prepared  to  say.  No  matter,
however,  about  that :  but  we  have
gathered  ourselves  here.  Now,
then,  it  is  necessary  we  should  be
under  some  government  Being
here  in  the  United  States,  we,  of
course,  became  part  of  that  govern-
ment, and,  as  a  necessary  conse-
quence, according  to  the  customs
and  usages  of  this  government,  we
were  admitted  as  a  Territory.  Un-
der these  circumstances,  the  gov-
ernment send  out  certain  officers  j
for  instance,  a  governor  is  appoint-
ed and  selected  by  the  President  of
the  United  States,  and  then  sanc-
tioned by  the  Senate,  and  he  re-
ceives his  commission  from  the
administration  of  the  government
of  the  United  States,  and  he  comes
here  as  their  representative,  Then
we  have  U.S.  judges,  a  secretary,  a
marshal  and  civil  officers,  accord-
ing to  the  usages  that  exist  among
people  situated  as  we  are  in  the
Territories  of  the  United  States.
There  are  so  many  representatives
of  the  government  who  are  properly
appointed  and  authorized  according
to  the  form  ami  usage  that  obtain
generally  in  the  country  and  in  the
administration  of  the  affairs  of  this
nation.  We  therefore  come  under
this  government  and  are  subject  to
its  laws  and  receive  its  officers.
They  come  among  us,  which  is
very  right  they  should  do,  accord-
ing to  the  forms  and  usages  that
exist  in  the  United  States ;  and  it
is  our  duty  to  treat  them  properly,
as  it  is  their  duty  to  treat  us  pro-
perly; the  duty  in  this  regard


is  reciprocal  We  need  the  protec-
tion of  law  wherever  we  are,  or  un-
der whatsoever  circumstances  we
may  be  placed  ;  and  in  placing  our-
selves in  this  position  we  are  only
doing  just  the  same  as  others  of  our
fellow  citizens  similarly  situated  are
doing.  This  is  a  matter  which  has
grown  out  of  our  religious  ideas.
Our  religion  prompted  us  to  come
together  ;  and  being  together  wo
have  become  a  body  of  men,  and
being  on  territory  belonging  to  the
1  United  States,  it  becomes  necessary
that  we  should  be  subject  to  its
laws  and  usages,  according  to  tho
provisions  made  and  stipulations
entered  into  under  its?  jurisdiction
and  government.  These  things  are
all  plain  matters  of  fact,  there  is
nothing  extraneous  or  uncommon
about  them.  Further,  as  American
citizens  we  have  certain  rights,  and
others  have  certain  rights.  All  men
in  the  United  States  possess  certain
rights  which  are  guaranteed  to  them
by  its  Constitution.  Again  we  have
our  legislative  officers,  provided  for
by  act  of  Congress  and  passed  by  the
general  government  of  the  United
States.  We  have  our  probate  courts,
also  our  justices  of  the  peace,  our  se-
lectmen and  the  various  organizations
and  laws  pertaining  to  education,  to
public  schools,  and  all  things  as  they
exist  in  other  Territories,  But  not-
withstanding all  this  there  is  one
thing  wherein  we  are  very  unplea-
santly situated,  which  difficulty
arises  from  the  peculiar  position  we
occupy  in  regard  to  our  religion.
There  is  nothing  else  that  I  know
of,  I  have  been  in  this  Church  a
great  many  years,  anil  lived  in  this
nation  a  great  many  years,  and  have
been  a  citizen  for  a  great  many  years;
but  there  is  nothing  that  I  know  of
excepting  that  one  thing,  that  could
in  any  wise  be  considered  objection,
able,  and  that  is  in  relation  to  our


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


views  pertaining  to  plural  marriage ;
there  is  nothing  else  in  all  our  acts
that  any  man  in  any  part  of  world
can  or  would  attempt  to  find  fault
with.  No  man  can  justly  say  this
people  have  been  disloyal  to  the
Government  of  the  United  States,  if
they  say  so  they  say  something  that
is  not  true,  and  a  great  many  of
them  when  they  do  say  it  know  they
are  telling  falsehoods.  We  are  not
turbulent,  we  do  not  create  any  dif-
ficulty, we  do  not  get  up  mobs,  we
do  not  interfere  with  anybody's
rights,  socially,  religiously,  politic-
ally or  any  other  way.  We  do  not
interfere  with  a  man  because  his
religious  views  are  not  as  ours ;  but
on  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  we  have
the  authority  ire  -protect  all  men*
But  there  are  some  things  we  have
occasion  to  find  fault  with  because
of  men  wishing  to  trespass-upon  our
rights.  We  think  this  wrong,  con-
trary to  comity,  good  faith  and  cor-
rect principles,  and  consequently
we  speak  about  it,  and  that  is  right,
we  have  the  right  to  do  that  If
any  man,  either  in  a  religious,  po-
litical or  social  capacity,  trespass
upon  the  rights  of  common  humani-
ty, we  have  as  much  right  to  express
our  feelings  and  to  defend  our  rights
as  any  other  set  of  men  have  under
the  same  circumstances,  and  no  just
man  would  seek  to  deprive  us  of  this
liberty.

Now  then,  so  far  so  good.  While
we  would  respect  all  honorable  men,
and  would  treat  them  justly  and
equitably,  we  do  not,  we  cannot  re-
spect these  miserable  men  who  re-
spect no  man's  rights,  who  would
turn  and  give  you  evil  for  good,  tra-
duce your  character  and  circulate
falsehoods  about  you  and  seek  to
injure  you — we  cannot  look  upon
them  as  honorable  men.  They  are
not  so  treated  among  any  people  ;
especially  those  miserable  sneaks


who  would  go  round  our  houses  and
and  take  advantage  of  certain  cir-
cumstances and  become  informers
and  implicate  you  in  crime  under
guise  of  friendship.  All  «#nch  men
in  any  country  are  .despised,  and
would  be  looked  upon  as  scoundrels
not  fit  to  associate  with  honorable
people.  There  is  no  one  more  con-
temptible than  a  spy.  He  is  looked
upon  as  the  scum  of  society  and  the
filthiest  dregs  of  a  community  any-
where. We  do  not  want  to  associate
with  such,  we  cannot,  our  natural
feelings  revolt  at  it,  and  whileiye  re-
spect honorable  men  everywhere,  we
say  to  such  characters,  "0  myt  soul,
come  not  thou  into  their  secrefij  unto
their  assembly,  mine  honor  fcjte  not
thou  united  t  These  are  obrffelings
about  such  individuals. *v  *

In  regard  to  our  religious  patters
wherein  our  social  relations  are  con-
cerned— for  these  are  as  much  reli-
gious matters  with  us  as  anything
instituted  among  men.  Our  marri-
age system  is  one  of  the  greatest
principles  that  God  ever  developed
to  the  human  family,  whether  men
believe  it  or  not  But  there  are
many  who  are  not  acquainted  with
these  things  as  we  are  ;  they  do  not
understand  God  nor  his  revelations  ;
and  they  really,  if  it  came  to  the
point,  should  have  nothing  to  say
against  us  in  relation  to  these  mat-
tors.  But  they  do  not  undoMt
it,  neither  do  they  wish  to  understand
it ;  because  there  are  a  great  many
very  corrupt  men  devoid  of  principle,
and  they  care  not  what  becomes  of
their  future  if  they  can  only  accom-
plish their  present  objects.

Now  then,  did  we  seek  this  prin-
ciple t  No,  we  did  not.  Did  we
ask  God  that  we  might  have  a  plu-
rality of  wives?  No,  we  did  not.  Was
it  a  matter  of  our  choice  1  No.  The
same  God  that  revealed  to  Joseph
Smith  the  first  principles  of  the


THE  TEMPLES  IN  COURSE  OF  ERECTION,  ETC,


353


Goapel  also  revealed  unto  him  the
doctrine  of  plural  marriage  ;  it  was
presented  to  us  as  a  doctrine  to  be
believed  in  and  be  governed  by.
Could  we  help  it  1  What  had  we  to
do  with  it  I  It  is  a  command  of
God  ;  and  the  question  is,  Shall  I,
after  having  embraced  the  Gospel  of
the  Son  of  God,  and  entered  into
covenant  with  Him  to  observe  His
laws  and  be  governed  by  the  revela-
tions of  His  will;  shall  I,  because  of
something  that  is  distasteful  to  me
set  up  my  will  and  judgment
against  His,  and  say,  "  Why,  I
shall  be  despised,  I  shall  be  hated;1*
shall  I,  because  of  a  feeling  of  that
kind  violate  the  laws  of  God  ?  No,
I  cannot  do  it ;  neither  can  you
who  believe  in  the  revelation.  God
gave  it  to  His  servant  Joseph  Smith
and  lie  declared  it  unto  us.  Now,
how  was  it  ?  The  first  thing  that
was  done,  when  the  word  of  God
came  to  us  to  do  it — for  there  was  a
time  after  this  revelation  was  given
when  we  were  not  permitted  to
to  teach  this  doctrine  publicly  ;  but
as  soon  as  we  were  instructed  to  do
so,  Prof-  Orson  Pratt  was  sent  to
Washington  to  publish  a  paper,  at
the  seat  of  government,  and  there
proclaim  our  sentiments  on  plural
marriage  to  this  nation  and  to  the
world.  This  mission  he  fulfilled —
publishing  a  paper  called  the  Seer,
and  lecturing  in  a  hall  hired  for  that
purpose,  several  times  a  week.  Was
there  anything  under-handed  about
this,  or  low,  or  anything  an  tagouistic
to  the  interest  of  this  nation  or  any
other  nation  ?  It  was  merely  pro-
claiming certain  principles  pertaining
to  eternal  lives  and  covenants  that
should  exist  through  eternity,  in  our
sexual  relations  pertaining  to  our
association  in  this  world  and  the
world  to  come.  Did  we  interfere
with  the  rights  of  others  t  No  ;  and
if  we  had  any  revelations,  it  was  not
No,  23.


for  us  to  oppose  them.  Bat  others
do  not  know  anything  about  these
things,  consequently  they  cannot
comprehend  our  position.  Have  we
done  anything  covertly  I  Not  until
we  were  forced  to.  Some  few  years
ago,  I  remember  being  brought  be-
I  fore  a  court  to  give  evidence  in  a
case.  I  was  asked  if  I  believed  in
keeping  the  laws  of  the  United
States,  I  answered  Yes,  I  believe
in  keeping  them  ail  but  one.  What
one  is  that  ]  It  is  that  one  in  rela-
tion to  plurality  of  wives.  Why
don't  you  believe  in  keeping  that  %
Because  I  believe  it  is  at  variance
with  the  genius  and  spirit  of  our  in-
stitutious — it  is  a  violation  of  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States*,
and  it  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  God,
Now  this  is  plain.  You  could  not
tell  your  feelings  much  plainer.
This  was  before  the  Supreme  Court
affirmed  the  constitutionality  of  that
1  aw,  ' '  Well/'fsaid  a  man  to  me, 1  *  Are
you  prepared  to  abide  the  conse-
quences/' "Always,"  said  I,  "every-
where," That  is  straightforward,
and  in  saying  this,  I  only  expressed
the  feelings  of  thousands  of  my
brethren  and  sisters.  Well,  then,
whose  business  is  it  ?  If  I  do  a
thing  and  am  prepared  to  abide  the
penalty,  whose  business  is  it  ?  Do  I
interfere  with  the  friends  or  govern-
ment of  the  United  States  1  No,
They  have  passed  a  law  for  political
effect  which  is  really  intended  as  a
trap  for  us.  One  would  think  that
a  great  and  magnanimous  nation  of
fifty  millions,  could  afford  to  allow
a  few  thousand  people  to  work  out
a  social  problem,  without  fear  of
contamination.  They  do  not  un-
derstand us,  we  wish  them  no  harm.
Many  of  them  know  this  ;  but  they
cannot  always  control  circumstances^
and  many  of  the  members  of  Congress
who  were  not  willing  to  do  anything
i  of  this  sort,  were  crowded  on  by

Vol  XX


religious  bigotry  that  prevailed
among  their  people,  just  the  same
as  others  were  in  the  days  of  Jesus,
In  his  day  he  and  his  followers  were
maligned  as  we  are  ;  If  he  ever  did
any  good,  how  was  it  represented?
"Give  God  the  praise;  we  know  that
this  man  is  a  sinner/'  And  if  we  do
any  good  somebody  else  must  have
the  praise  instead  of  us  ;  but  if  there
is  any  harm  done,  as,  for  instance,
the  trouble  among  the  Indians,  "it
is  the  Mormons  that  do  it!"  I  sup-
pose if  there  are  any  storms,  ship-
wrecks, wan  or  bloodshed,  in  Tim-
buctoo,  among  the  Zulus,  Chinese,
Japanese,  or  Europeans,  the  Mormons
will  be  represented  as  having  had  a
hand  in  them.  What  position  does
this  place  us  in  1  Do  we  wish  to  be
governed  by  the  laws  of  the  United
States  and  sustain  its  institutions  1
Yes,  we  do.  But  while  we  are  doing
this,  many  infamous  men  are  misre-
presenting us.  But  there  are  many
honorable  men  who  have  other  feel-
ings. I  have  seen  many  of  them
not  only  in  this  nation  but  other
nations,  who  possess  more  liberal
and  generous  feelings,  men  of  posi-
tion and  of  all  conditions  in  life.
And  among  the  honorable  men  of
earth  I  find  there  are  a  great  many
who  look  upon  us  as  having  been
cruelly  treated  by  those  who  ought
to  be  our  friends.  Well,  now  what
shall  we  do  under  those  circumstancesl
Having  passed  a  law  on  purpose  to
entrap  us  they  would  now  complain
because  we  do  not  run  right  into  the
trap  and  say  "  take  us  and  put  us  in
prison."  We  are  not  such  big  fools
jet,  we  have  very  different  ideas  to
those.  If  they  are  ignoring  princi-
ples that  God  has  revealed  to  us  we
cannot  help  it.  If  they  do  not  be
lieve  our  statements  we  cannot  have
confidence  in  theirs  ;  but  one  thing
we  do  know  we  are  a  thousand  times
more  virtuous,  a  thousand  times


more  pure,  in  our  actions  than  they
are  in  theirs.  There  is  not  a  coun-
try in  the  world  to-day  where  virtue
and  the  rights,  privileges,  honor  and
chastity  of  the  female  portion  of  the
community  are  more  strongly  pro-
tected than  in  this  Territory-  Now,
that  is  a  fact

The  question  then  arises  what
shall  we  do?  We  are  under  the
painful  necessity  of  protecting  our-
selves as  best  we  may.  How  did
they  do  in  other  times — how  did
they  do  in  Rome  1  We  are  not  so
badly  of  as  some  people  were  in  for-
mer ages.  It  is  said  that  Christians
had  to  dwell  in  caves,  and  that  they
were  hunted  and  dragged  from  these
places  of  concealment  by  government
spies  and  put  into  the  arena,  where
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of
people  would  go  to  see  them  devoured
by  wild  beasts,  and  I  have  no  doubt
that  many  of  our  pious  Christ-
ians would  like  to  see  a  scene  of  that
kind.  What  shall  we  dol  God
has  given  unto  us  a  law.  Shall  we
obey  it !  We  are  placed — not  by
acts  of  our  own — in  a  position  where
we  cannot  help  ourselves.  We  are
between  the  hands  of  God  and  the
hands  of  the  Government  of  the
United  States.  God  has  laid  upon
us  a  command  for  us  to  keep,  He
has  commanded  us  to  enter  into
these  covenants  with  each  other  per-
taining to  time  and  eternity,  and  has
revealed  this  law  through  the  holy
priesthood  and  the  regularly  con-
stituted channels  which  He  has  ap-
pointed for  conveying  this  informa-
tion, and  we,  having  been  baptized
into  one  baptism  and  partaken  of
the  same  spirit,  know  for  our-
selves that  these  things  are  true.  I
know  they  are  true,  if  nobody  else
does.  I  know  it  myself,  I  cannot
help  knowing  it,  and  all  the  edicts
and  laws  of  Coagress  and  legislators
and  decisions  of  courts  could  not


THE  TEMPLES  IS  COURSE  OF  ERECTION,  ETC.


355


change  my  opinion.  I  know  that  it
is  from  God,  and  therefore  bear  testi-
mony of  it.  Now,  can  I  help  it?  No.
The  question  resolves  itself  into  this;
having  received  a  command  from  God
to  do  a  certain  tiling  and  a  command
from  the  State  not  to  do  it,  the  question
is  what  shall  we  do  ?  Daniel  had  a
political  trap  set  for  him,  as  we  have
had  for  us.  An  edict  was  passed
forbidding  him  to  pray  to  his  God
under  penalty  of  death ;  he  went
and  opened  his  window  and  prayed
in  the  sight  of  the  community,  hence
he  violated  that  decree  with  death
staring  him  in  the  face.  He  knew
this  law  was  irrevocable,  but  he  was
determined  to  obey  the  command-
ment of  God  and  he  did.  They  cast
him  into  a  den  of  lions,  and  he  played
with  them  as  a  child  would  play  with
kittens.  There  was  something  to
try  Daniel's  faith  in  this  but^God
took  care  of  him.

But  there  is  another  feature  mani-
fested in  this.  We  notice  that  King
Darius,  the  victim  of  a  political  plot,
was  very  solicitous  for  the  welfare
of  Daniel,  for  early  in  the  morning
he  went  to  the  lion's  cave  and  cried,
4i  0  Daniel,  is  the  God  in  whom  thou
trusteth  able  to  deliver  thee?"
When  Daniel  replied,  "OKing,  live
forever,  the  God  in  whom  I  trust
has  sent  his  angel  and  has  delivered
me  from  the  jaws  of  the  lions/*  etc.
I  do  not  think  from  the  reacting  of
the  President's  message,  that  if  any
of  us  were  cast  into  the  HotTs  den  or
into  prison,  that  Mr.  Hayes  would
manifest  the  interest  aboat  us  that
Darius  did  about  Daniel ;  but  then
we  must  remember  this  difference,
that  the  first  of  these  w  a  Christian;
the  latter  was  a  heaihtiL  But  outside
of  these  things,  I  feel  to  proclaim
against  the  vices  of  the  age,  whether
in  this  nation  or  others ;  for  we  as
a  natien  are  fast  descending  as  low
as  the  most  degenerate  and  corrupt


nations  of  Europe,  and  are  practising
infamies  which  have  been  the  ove£
throw  and  ruin  of  many  mighty  cities,
nations  and  empires,  and  which  are
now  the  loathsome,  unnatural,  dis-

gustiiig?damuingsiusofChristendom.
The  standing  law  of  God  is,  be  fruit-
ful and  multiply  ;  but  these  reform-
ers are  4<  swift  to  shed  blood,"  even
the  blood  of  innocence;  and  with  their
pre-natal  murders  and  other  crimes,
are  slaying  their  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands  with  impunity,  to  say
nothing  of  that  other  loathsome,
disgusting,  filthy  institution  of
modern  Christendom  "the  social
evil,"  as  well  as  other  infamous  prac-
tices. We  must  protest  against
foeticide,  infanticide,  and  other
abominable  practices  of  Christendom
being  forced  upon  us,  either  in  the
shape  of  legislative  enactment,  judi-
cial decision  or  any  other  adjunct  of
so-called  civilization.  We  are  Ameri-
can ci  tizen  s  an  d  are  n  o t  yet  deprived  of
the  inalienable  rights  of  life,  liberty
and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  Men  ex-
press surprise  sometimes  at  the
action  of  the  grand  jury  who  sat
upon,  as  I  am  informed,  about  200
cases  of  polygamy  and  only  found
bills  against  three.  Why,  human
nature  with  all  its  infirmities  is
not  sunk  so  low  as  at  the  bidding
of  an  official  satrap  to  find  indictments
to  order,  without  evidence  and  testi-
mony, and  there  are  very  few,  in
view  of  the  above  facts,  who  are
sunk  so  low  as  to  condemn  men  ibr
marrying  wives  and  supporting
their  children,  while  at  the  same
time  they  know  that  their  accusers
and  persecutors  are  violating  every
principle  of  chastity,  and  murdering
their  own  offspring.  Many  men  may
be  very  corrupt,  and  indulge  in  the
vices  and  crimes  of  the  age ;  but  all
are  not  hypocrites.  Despotic  laws
require  a  despot,  and  not  even  packed
juries  will  always  carry  them  out


3*5


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


Now,  it  becomes  a  question  for
us  to  decide  whether  we  shall  ob-
serve the  laws  of  God  or  the  com-
mands of  men.  If  I  had  to  answer
I  would  answer  as  I  did  before  the
court.  When  I  made  that  answer
this  question  had  not  then  been
decide^  by  the  Supreme  Court  of
the  United  States.  Since  then  they
have  sanctioned  that  law,  hence  wc
are  placed  in  a  position  a  good  deal
like  the  Christians  were  in  the  days
of  Romp,  and  the  Christians  now
assume  the  position  of  the  then  hea-
then.

What  shall  we  dot  Shall  we  trust '
in  Gad  or  in  the  arm  of  flesh?  Shall
we  give  up  our  religion  and  our  God
and  be  governed  by  the  practices
that  exist  in  the  nation  which  are
contrary  to  the  laws  of  God?  All
who  are  in  favor  of  abiding  by  the
laws  of  God  hold  up  their  right  hand
(The  congregation  voted  unamious-
ly).  We  find  the  same  feeling
throughout  the  Territory.

We  wish  no  disrespect  to  the  gov-
ernment, for  after  all  I  do  not  sup-
pose we  could  get  any  better  treat-
ment from  any  other  Christian
nation  than  we  do  from  our  own,
but  this  is  notsaying  much  for  them.
It  is  a  poor  thing  when  so  great  and
magnanimous  a  nation  cannot  afford
to  allow  200,000  people  to  worship
God  according  to  the  dictates  of
their  own  consciences.

But  have  we  resisted  anything
else  1  No.  Have  1 1  No.  Have
youl  I  presume  not  I  expect
these  kind  of  things — the  opposition
and  corruption  of  men  and  the  world,
under  the  instigation  of  the  devil,
who  is  the  enemy  of  the  Saints.
What  then  ?  Do  I  expect  to  give
up  my  religion  to  the  devil  I  I  think
nqt  What  shall  we  do  then  %  Shall .
we  abuse  the  people  of  the  United
States?  No.  Shall  we  abuse  the
President  of  the  United  States?  No.


Yet  I  am  sorry  that  he  is  not  a  little
more  magnanimous,  I  am  sorry  he
does  not  possess  a  little  more  of
those  feelings  that  actuated  the
founders  of  this  government ;  I  am
not  sorry  for  the  Saints,  for  it  ia
quite  necessary  that  we  should  have
to  pass  through  a  variety  of  things
in  order  that,  like  ancien  t  Saints,  we
may  be  made  perfect  through  suffer-
ing. "  For  it  became  him,  for  whom
are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons
unto  glory,  to  make  the  captain  of
their  salvation  perfect  through  suf-
ferings/' "He  was  in  all  points
tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without
sin."  Shall  we  forsake  the  institu-
tions of  this  country  because  of  tlie-
acts  of  those  men?  Not  we  will
cleave  to  them  and  sustain  them.
Shall  we  deprive  other  men  of  their
political  rights  ?  No,  we  will  not
Shall  we  deprive  any  man  of  his
social  rights?  No,  we  will  not.  Shall
we  deprive  any  men  of  their  religious
rights?  No,  we  will  not.  They
may  do  as  they  please  in  Washington
and  other  places  ;  but  we  will  do
right  towards  all  men.  Our  motto
is,  Freedom,  Liberty  and  Rights  of
Conscience  to  all  people  ;  as  Brother  ,
Parle v  P.  Pratt  has  it  in  one  of  his

■

poems  :

M  Indian,  Moslem,  Greek  or  Jew,
Freedom'i  burner  wave*  for  you  A

This  is  the  kind  of  feeling  we  en*
tertain  in  regard  to  this  subject
We  all  have  faults,  and  perhapfc
this  government  is  one  of  the  best
governments  we  could  have  in  the
world  ;  and  we  will  sustain  it.  And
then,  we  will  contend  for  our  rights
legally,  properly,  orderly  and  con-
stitutionally. And  then,  we  will
watch  those  miserable  hounds  that
come  sneaking  into  our  midst,  and
tell  them  to  leave  ;  we  da  not  want
a  lot  of  dogs  among  \w.  H^norahle
and  decent  men,  men  that  will  do


THE  TEMPLES  IX  COURSE  OF  ERECTION,  ECT,


357


righ  we  will  maintain  all  the  time.
But  this  nation  is  laying  the  axe  at
the  root  of  the  tree  and  they  then
will  crumble  to  pieces  by  and  by.  If
they  can  stand  it  we  can.  If  they  can
afford  to  treat  us  in  this  way,  they
will  soon  treat  others  in  the  same
way.  And  they  will  tear  away  one  J
plank  of  liberty  after  another,  until
the  whole  fabric  will  totter  and  fall ;
and  many  other  nations  will  be  cast
down  and  empires  destroyed;  and
this  nation  will  have  to  suffer  as
ethers  will.  And  it  will  be  as
Joseph  Smith  once  said,  "  When  all
'others  forsake  the  Constitution,  the
Elders  of  this  Church  will  rally
around  the  standard  aud  save  its
tattered  shreds/1  We  will  come  to
its  rescue  and  proclaim  liberty  to  all
men.

What  shall  we  do  about  many
other  things?  Let  them  alone  ;  "let
the  potsherds  of  the  earth  contend
with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth."
The  God  who  rules  in  the  heavens  is
watching  over  their  movements  as
well  as  ours,  they  are  in  his  hands  as
we  are — he  will  put  a  hook  in  their
jaws  and  lead  them  in  the  way  they
dreamed  not  of  He  will  say  to
the  in  as  he  did  to  the  proud  waves
of  the  surging  ocean — "  hither  slialt
thou  come,  and  no  farther  ;  and  here
shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed."
But  it  is  for  us  to  cleave  to  God  and
observe  his  laws  and  keep  his  com-
mand rn en ts  ;  and  then  we  need  fear
no  evil  that  may  come  upon  us,  "for
God  will  make  the  wrath  of  man  to
praise  him,  and  the  remainder  he
will  restrain."  And  God  will  bless
and  protect  Israel ;  he  will  lead  us
forth  in  the  paths  of  life — r#t  all  of
us,  for  as  we  have  heard,  we  are  not
all  of  us  doing  just  right  But  he
will  accomplish  his  purposes  and  roll
forth  his  work  and  build  up  his  king-
dom and  establish  Zion,  ami  bring  to
pass  all  the  things  spoken  of  by  the


holy  prophets  since  the  world  began.
Now  then,  having  talked  a  little
upon  this  principle,  I  will  speak
about  some  other  things  associated
with  our  affairs  here,  in  a  Stake  ca-
pacity, or  as  Saints,  say,  for  I  gener-
ally talk  more  to  the  whole  people
than  I  do  to  the  people  of  a  Stake.
There  are  a  few  things  that  I  wish
to  draw  your  attention  to.  You
have  got  a  Stake  organization,  you
have  a  president  and  Ids  counsellors,
who  stand  in  the  same  position  to
you  as  the  First  Presidency  to  the
Church,  I  think  you  heard  some-
thing about  that  this  morning.  Pray
for  them*  Have  they  weaknesses  i
Yes.  Have  you  ?  Yes.  Have  I  ?
Yes.  We  are  in  possession  of  a
rich  and  glorious  treasure  ;  but  it  is
contained  in  earthen  vessels.  We
all  have  our  weaknesses  and  infir-
mities ;  but  we  will  pray  for  those
that  are  appointed  to  preside  over  us,
that  God  may  bless  them.  And
when  we  bow  with  our  family,  with
our  wives  and  children  around  us
we  will  ask  God  to  bless  them  and
inspire  them  with  wisdom,  that  they
may  manage  well  all  things  com-
mitted to  their  care.  We  will  not
find  fault  with  them,  but  ask  God,  if
we  think  a  false  step  has  been  made,
to  lead  them  in  the  right  path.  And
we  will  make  things  right  if  we  do
this,  whether  they  want  them  or
not,  for  God  will  control  them  by
His  Spirit  for  our  good.

And  then,  we  have  bishops  among
us.  We  will  treat  them  courteously.
Have  they  weaknesses  ?  Yes,  they
are  men  just  like  we  are,  "  What,1*
say  you,  "have  you  weaknesses  T1
Yes,  lots  of  them.  I  wish  I  had  not
sometimes,  and  then  again  I  donrt
wish  so.  "  Do  you  ask  the  people
to  pray  for  you  1  Yes,  and  pray  als<>
for  my  brethren  of  the  Twelve  that
they  may  be  guided  by  the  inspira
tions  of  the  Most  High,  and  be  lid


358  JOURNAL  OF

and  that  they  may  lead  others  in  the  I
paths  of  life;  that  we  may  magnify

.  the  calling  God  has  given  unto  us
and  honor  it  and  do  good  among

]  men,  and  help  to  build  up  His  Zion.
This  work  devolves  upon  you  in  your
sphere  as  much  as  upon  President

■  Smoot  and  his  toun  sellers  and  the
several  bishops.  Every  one  has  his
duties  to  perform  ;  and  if  we  all  do
them  we  will  do  pretty  well  Listen,
then,  to  their  counsels.  You  have  a
High  Council,  sustain  them  in  like  ,
manner,  that  in  all  their  judgments
and  counsels  they  may  do  right.  And
I  would  say  both  to  the  Bishops  in
their  capacity,  as  common  judges  in
Israel,  and  to  the  High  Council  as  a
High  Council,  deal  justly  in  the  sight
of  God  ;  do  not  bring  into  delibera-
tions any  of  your  own  private  notions
or  feelings.  Do  not,  in  the  name  of  God,
seek  to  pervert  judgment  or  justice.
I  would  not  give  five  straws  for
a  man — he  is  not  fit  to  be  a  high
councilor — if  he  would  not  apply  the
same  judgment  to  his  own  brother
or  son  as  he  would  to  anybody  else,

.We  need  to  ask  God  to  give  us  wis-
dom in  the  management  and  direc-
tion of  these  affairs,  and  then  we
ought  to  have  another  principle  more
thoroughly  enforced  than  it  is  among
us.  We  have  people  going  to  law
one  with  another  sometimes,  and  that
before  the  ungodly,  and  the  Elders
of  Israel  sanction  it. God  will  hold

•  you  to  an  account,  I  tell  you,  and
He  will  bring  you  up  standing  when
you  don't  dream  of  it,  and  all  they
that  like  to  go  to  law,  in  the  name  of
God  they  shall  have  enough  of  it
until  they  are  sick  and  weary — for
it  will  bring  them  down  to  poverty,
ruin,  misery  and  death,  unless  they
turn  around  speedily  and  repent.
Let  us  honor  the  institutions  that
God  has  given  unto  us,  honor  the
Priesthood,  honor  our  own  courts  of

justice,  and  treat  all  men  everywhere


DISCOURSES.

with  proper  respect,  but  we  do  not
want  to  go  to  law  with  the  ungodly.

There  are  other  tilings  I  wish  to
speak  about  pertaining  to  the  inter-
ests of  this  community.  We  should
educate  our  children  properly.  I  am
very  glad  to  find  you  have  one  very
good  institution  in  this  place.  ^  You
have  got  those  at  the  head  of  it  that
know  God,  and  who  instil  into  the
minds  of  their  pupils  correct  prin-
ciples and  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and
teach  them  the  principles  of  life ;
that  they,  when  they  go  forth  to
teach  others,  may  teach  them  the
same  principles  that  these  our
brethren  teach  them — that  correct
principles  may  spread,  grow  and  in-
crease, and  that  while  they  are  ob-
taining an  education  in  regard  to
science  and  the  various  branches
of  secular  education,  they  may
always  have  before  their  minds  the
fear  of  God,  Well,  would  you  seek
for  knowledge  1  Yes,  as  I  would  for
a  hidden  treasure.  Would  you  like
the  people  to  be  acquainted  with
the  arts  and  sciences,  etc.!  Yes.
We  want  to  so  educate  our  children,
and  if  necessary  make  sacrifices  our-
selves for  that  purpose,  in  order  that
they  may  be  men  and  women  capable
of  coping  intellectually  with  any
persons  that  live  upon  the  earth.
We  are  seeking  after  these  things,
we  are  anxious  to  promote  the  wel-
fare of  all  people  in  regard  to  these
matters,  especially  those  associated
with  us,  that  our  children  may  grow
up  not  only  in  the  fear  of  God,  but
possess  intelligence  of  every  kind.
Now,  these  are  our  feelings  in  rela-
tion to  these  matters,  and  bye-and-
bye,  if  we  do  this  and  keep  doing  it
how  will  it  be  ]  It  will  not  be  long
before  we  will  be  as  far  ahead  of  the
world  in  regard  to  the  arts,  sciences,
mechanism  and  every  principle  of
intelligence  that  exists  upon  the  face
of  the  earth,  as  we  are  in  religious


THE  TEMPLES  IN  COURSE  OF  ERECTION,  ETC


359


matters  to-day. Some  of  our  little

boys  five  and  six,  seven  and  eight
years  old  know  very  well  how  to
cope  with  men  that  profess  generally
to  be  wise  men  on  religious  subjects.
Some  few  days  ago  I  attended  a
Sabbath  School  exhibition  in  the
17th  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and
witnessed  there  more  intelligence
displayed  by  the  children,  male  and
female,  in  regard  to  religious  matters,
than  I  have  ever  seen  exhibited  any-  |
where  in  the  whole  Gentile  world
wherever  I  have  traveled.  I  was
reminded  of  a  saying  of  the  Savior's
that  "out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and
sucklings  thou  hast  perfected  praise,"
Let  us  train  up  our  children  in  the
right  way.  That  reminds  mc  of
another  thing,  that  is  our  Sabbath
Schools.  You  have  them  here,  how
extensively  you  are  engaged  in  them
I  am  not  prepared  to  say,  but  it  is  a
good  institution  worthy  of  our  best
efforts,  and  I  would  say  let  us  en-  \
courage  them,  let  our  young  and
middle  aged  men  that  are  talented
engage  in  them,  that  our  children
may  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  of
God.  The  school  that  Brother
Maeser  and  Brother  Hardy  are  en*
gaged  in,  in  this  place,  I  consider  a
model  institution,  and  I  say  God
bless  them  and  let  the  blessing  and
Spirit  of  God  be  with  them.  Con-
tinue in  your  labors  as  you  are  doing,
and  your  names  will  be  known  in
Israel  and  be  handed  down  to  poste-
rity as  some  of  the  great  men  of
Zion.  Let  our  brethren,  too,  be
interested  in  these  Sunday  Schools,
and  let  us  get  men  that  fear  God —
you  young  men  and  Elders  of  Israel
who  have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord-
teach  the  children  and  instil  the  prin-
ciples of  life  and  salvation  into  their
minds.  And  then  there  are  other
things  that  are  very  praise* worthy
institutions,  one  of  which  is  the
Female  Relief  Societies. Our  Sisters


are  engaged  with  us  in  trying  to  do
a  good  work. Shall  we  despise  them
in  their  labors  ?  No. Who  are  they  ?
Part  of  ourselves. Do  they  hold
the  priesthood  1 Yes,  in  connection
1  with  their  husbands  and  they  are
one  with  their  husbands,  but  the
husband  is  the  head. And  women
are  so  constit  uted  that  they  are  much
•  better  prepared  to  feel  after  the  wel-
fare of  fiim ili es  than  men  are.  They
can  sympathize  with  the  sisters,  for
they  are  one  with  them, I  remem-
ber a  certain  lady  said  tQ  me  in  talk-
ing about  some  things,  "  You  never
was  a  grandmother/1  "  No."  said  I,
**  I  never  was?  I  never  had  that  ex-
perience/' "  Well,  then,  you  cannot
enter  into  the  feelings  of  a  grand-
mother/' No, and  I  never  was  a
wife,  and  therefore  I  could  not  enter
into  the  feelings  of  a  wife. But  a
wife  can  enter  into  a  wife's  feelings
and  into  a  mothers  feelings  and  they
can  sympathize  with  the  sisters,  and
pour  in  the  oil  and  wine  and  they
I  can  teach  the  sisters  correct  princi-
;  pies,  teach  them  cleanliness,  kind-
ness and  sisterly  sympathetic  feel-
ings. They  are  doing  this  to  a  great
extent,  therefore  I  say  God  bless  the
sisters. They  are  one  with  us  in
seeking  to  promote  the  welfare  of
Israel. They  tell  me  I  was  chair-
man when  the  first  Ladies'  Relief
Society  was  organized  in  Nauvoo  :
perhaps  I  was,  I  do  not  remember,
however,  but  I  am  pleased  to  co-
operate with  the  sisters. I  desire
to  see  them  prosecute  their  labors
and  tiy  to  train  up  young  women  to
be  good  mothers,  good  housekeepers
good  wives,  and  to  cultivate  the  fear
of  God  and  to  teach  their  own  child-
ren to  walk  in  the  paths  of  life.

Then  we  have  our  Young  Men
and  Young  Womens'  Mutual  Im-
provement  Associations.  These  are
very  good  institutions.  How  much
better  it  is  to  see  our  youth  engaged


360


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


I


in  the  fear  of  God,  meeting  to- 1
gethtr  and  talking  over  the  things
of  God,  mediating  upon  them,  teach-
ing one  another  good,  virtuous,  holy
principles,  than  to  see  them  associ-
ated with  corruptions  and  treading
in  the  paths  that  leads  down  to
death.  How  much  better  to  teach
purity,  holiness,  virtue,  and  intelli-  \
gence,  making  them  honorable  men
and  women,  than  to  see  them  take
a  different  course-  I  have  been
*$ked  sometimes  if  there  was  the
priesthood  associated  with  this.  No;
not  particularly ;  but  it  is  one  of
these  helps  spoken  of  in  the  Scrip-
tures, A  bishop  will  not  object  to
being  helped  by  the  Relief  Societies.
Will  he  object  to  them  visiting  the
poor  ]  will  he  object  to  any  man  or
any  woman  seeking  to  promote
peace,  order,  virtue,  and  righteous-
ness? No,  Who  are  they]  Some
are  Elders,  some-  are  Seventies,  some
High  Priests,  and  all  belong  to  the
several  quorums  of  the  priesthood.
These  associations  are  averycreditible
thing,  in  advance,  say  of  our  Sunday
school  operations.  It  is  leading  on
to  knowledge,  or  what  Ave  term
theology  and  science,  and  every  prin-
ciple of  intelligence.  We  have  a
great  many  good,  high  minded,  honor-
able young  men  and  women,  and  I
say  God  bless  you  in  your  labors*

You,  bishops,  I  say  to  you,  en-
courage all  these  tilings  among  you,
sanction  and  protect  them,  and  do
all  you  can  to  foster  them.

With  regard  to  our  political  orga-
nization, I  would  say,  we  must  be
united.  Who,  I  ask,  should  dictate
us  ?  If  I  was  here  in  Provo,  and
had  to  do  with  such  matters,  the
first  thing  I  would  do  would
be  to  confer  with  President
Smoot  to  ascertain  whom  he  would
recommend  for  such  and  such
offices,

"  But,"  say  some,  that  would  in-


terfere with  my  freedom.  I  think
Watts  says :

"  I  would  be  walking  with  the  wist,
That  I  may  wis#r  grow,"

Well  then,

I  would  not  be  walking  with  the  fooli t
Leit  I  a  fool  should  gr#w.

But  I  would  seek  from  men  of  ex-
perience and  judgment  advice  as  to
the  best  course  to  pursue.  And  as
to  your  freedom  have  as  much  as
you  please,  that  is,  freedom  to  do
right,  not  wrong.  It  is  Yery  neces-
sary that  we  be  united;  and  anybody
that  seeks  to  divide  the  people  is  not
the  friend  of  God  or  man,  neither  is
God  his  friend  ;  and  if  he  continue
to  interfere  with  the  happiness  and
union  of  the  people  of  God,  He  will
not  hold  him  guiltless  ;  but  he  will
remove  him  out  of  his  place.  There
is  a  providence  in  many  of  these
things.  People  wonder  sometimes
why  we  have  sickness  amongst  us*
The  Apostle  Paul  in  writing  to  the
Corinthians,  in  referring  to  divisions
that  existed  among  them,  together
with  their  un worthiness,  when  par-
taking of  the  Lord's  supper,  says,
"  For  this  cause  manv  are  weak  and
sickly  among  you,  and  mauy  sleep."
Do  you  believe  a  principle  of  that
kind?  I  do.  Let  us  fear  God  then,
honor  Him,  and  keep  His  command-
ments.

Another  thing,  we  want  the  breth-
ren to  do,  and  that  is  to  cultivate  a
right  feeling  towards  the  sisters,  and
towards  their  wives  especially*  God
has  given  them  to  us  ;  treat  them
well  and  kindly.  If  they  have  weak-
nesses— which  doubtless  they  have
— we  should  bear  with  them,  they
are  the  weaker  vessel,  and  we  ought
to  be  strong*  and  a  strong  man
ought  not  to  be  much  afraid  of  a
weak  woman.  We  ought  to  have
them  in  our  affections,  and  instead


E  PRINCIPLES  AND  SPIRIT  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER.


361


of  returning  evil  for  evil,  be  kind  to  I
them  ;  and  if  your  wives  chide  you,
render  to  them  kindness  in  return
and  love  them,  and  say,  this  is  not
exactly  right ;  let  us  be  friends.
And  they  will  turn  round  and  reci-
procate that  kind  of  feeling.  And
then  make  their  homes  as  comfort-
able as  you  can,  and  lighten  their
household  duties  as  far  as  it  may
be  in  youi  power  to  do  so  ;  and  do
all  you  can  to  unite  your  efforts  to-
gether as  families.  And  wives,  com-
fort your  husbands  ;  speak  kind
words,  and  make  their  homes  a
heaven.  And  neighbours,  don't  bite
and  devour  one  another,  don't  tear
in  pieces  one  another's  character,  but
be  united  in  all  things,

*'  Nay,  speak  no  ill,  a  kindly  world
Han  never  l«ave  a  sting  behind."

Let  us  learn  to  speak  kindly  of
each  other,  and  if  we  cannot  say
something  good  of  our  brother  or
our  sister,  let  us  hold  our  tongue.


And  if  our  brother  sin  agains  t  us,
tell  him  of  his  fault  when  you  and
he  are  alone ;  and  then  when  you
are  made  acquainted  with  your
wrong,  confess  it  and  repent,  and
try  to  do  better.  And  let  ns  live
together  as  brethren  and  sisters  and
as  Saints  of  God.  And  do  not  for-
get  to  call  upon  the  Lord  in  your
family  circles,  dedicating  yourselves
and  all  you  have  to  God  every  day
of  your  lives  ;  and  seek  to  do  right,
i  and  cultivate  the  spirit  of  union  and
love,  and  the  peace  and  blessing  of
the  Living  God  will  be  with  us,  and
He  will  lead  us  in  the  paths  of  life  ;
and  we  shall  be  sustained  and  up-
held by  all  the  holy  angels  and  the
ancient  patriarchs  and  men  of  God,
and  the  veil  will  become  thinner  be-
tween us  and  our  God,  and  we  will
approach  nearer  to  him,  and  our  souls
will  magnify  the  Lord  of  hosts.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  and  lead  you  in  the  pat! is  of
life,  in  the  name  of\T*sus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  Weber  Stake  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,

Ogden  City,  October  19,  1879.

(lU'l><irU>d  hff  James  Taylor.)

THE  SPIRIT  AND  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER.

As  a  foundation  for  a  few  remarks  '  "  Therefore,  if  any  man  shall  take
tins  morning,  I  will  read  the  18th  of  the  abundance  which  I  have  made,
verse  of  the  revelation  commencing  and  impart  not  his  portion,  accord-
on  paye  337,  Book  of  Doctrine  and.  ing  to  the  law  of  my  Gospel,  unto
Covenants :  '  the  poor  and  the  needy,  he  shall


362  JOURNAL  OF

with  the  wicked  lift  up  his  eyes  in
hell,  being  in  torment/*

Also  a  few  verses,  contained  in
the  same  hook,  on  page  234,  com-
mencing at  the  3rd  verse,  which
show  what  is  required  of  every  man
in  his  stewardship,

"3.  I,  the  Lord,  have  appointed
them,  and  ordained  them  to  be
stewards  over  the  revelations  and
commandments  which  I  have  given
unto  them,  and  which  I  shall  here-
after give  unto  them ;

?4  And  an  account  of  this
stewardship  will  I  require  of  them
in  the  day  of  judgment :

"5.  Wherefore  I  have  appointed
unto  them,  and  this  is  their  business
in  the  Church  of  God,  to  manage
them  and  the  concerns  thereof;  yea,
the  benefits  thereof.

"6.  Wherefore  a  commandment
I  give  unto  them,  that  they  shall
not  give  these  things  unto  the
Church,  neither  unto  the  world ;

"7.  Nevertheless,  inasmuch  as
they  receive  more  than  is  needful  for
their  necessities  and  their  wants,  it
shall  be  given  into  my  storehouse.

**8.  And  the  benefits  shall  be
consecrated  unto  the  inhabitants  of
Zion,  and  unto  their  generations,  in-
asmuch as  they  become  heirs  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,

"9.  Behold,  this  is  what  the
Lord  requires  of  every  man  in  his
stewardship,  even  as  I,  the  Lord,
have  appointed,  or  shall  hereafter
appoint  unto  any  man,

"10,  And,  behold,  none  are  ex-
empt from  this  law  who  belong  to
the  Church  of  the  living  God ;

"11.  Yea,  neither  the  bishop,
neither  the  agent  who  fceepeth  the
Lord's  storehouse,  neither  lie  who  is
appointed  in  a  stewardship  over  tem-
poral things/*

The  short  time  that  I  occupy  this
morning,  I  wish  to  speak  in  a  man-
ner that  will  be  for  our  edification


DISCOURSES.

jand  mutual  improvement  in  those
things  that  pertain  to  our  salvation.
For  this  purpose  I  desire  the  faith
and  prayers  of  all  those  who  believe
in  looking  to  the  Lord  for  instruction
and  intelligence.

!  We  should  realize  the  relationship
that  we  sustain  to  the  Lord  our  God,
and  the  peculiar  position  we  occupy-
To  properly  discharge  the  obliga  tions
devolving  upon  us,  we  require  super-
natural aid.  The  character  of  the
religion  that  we  have  espoused  de-
mands a  certain  course  of  conduct
that  no  other  religion  that  we  know
of  requires  of  its  adherents  j  and  the
nature  of  those  demands  upon  us  are
such  that  no  person  can  comply  with
them,  unless  by  assistance  from  the
Almighty,  It  is  necessary  that  we
comprehend,  at  least  in  part,  the
great  and  important  blessings  that
we  are  to  derive,  eventually,  by  com-
plying with  the  requirements  of  the
religion  or  Gospel  that  we  have  re-
ceived. The  sacrifices  that  are  re-
quired of  us  are  of  that  nature  that
no  man  nor  woman  could  make  them,
unless  aided  by  a  supernatural  power;
and  the  Lord,  in  proposing  these
conditions,  never  intended  that  his
people  should  ever  be  required  to
comply  with  them  unless  hy  super-
natural aid,  and  of  that  kind  that  is
uot  professed  by  any  other  class  of
religious  people.  He  has  promised
this  aid.  The  demands  upon  us  are
of  a  peculiar  nature,  and,  as  I  before
said,  no  man  or  woman  could  com-
ply with  them,  unless  enlightened
and  sustained  by  the  power  of  the
Almighty.

The  religion  we  have  received  is
not  a  chimera.  It  is  not  something
that  has  been  devised  by  the  cun-
ning of  man,  but  it  is  something
that  has  been  revealed  by  the  Al-
mighty. It  is  a  fact.  It  is  some-
thing that  truly  exists.  It  is  some-
thing that  is  tangible. It  is  some-


THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  SPIRIT  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER


thing  that  can  be  laid  hold  of  by  the
minds  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  It  is
something  that  can  be  directly  un-
derstood, andbe  fully  comprehended,
so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  in  the
mind  of  any  Latter-day  Saint  in  re-
gard to  the  nature  and  character  of
the  ultimate  outcome  of  the  course  |
that  he  proposes  to  pursue  in  com-
plying with  the  demands  of  the
Gospel  he  has  received.  But  those
demands  are  of  a  nature  that  perhaps
would  be  almost  appalling  to  the
minds  of  individuals  that  were
darkened,  that  had  no  light  or  un-
derstanding in  regard  to  the  out-
come that  is  expected  to  be  expe-
rienced by  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in-
asmuch as  they  continue  faithful  in
adhering  to  the  principles  which
they  have  espoused*

These  demamls  are  not  of  a  nature
that  have  no  parrallel  in  the  history
of  the  people  of  God.  They  w<<iv
required  in  every  age  and  period
when  God  called  a  people  to  serve
him,  and  to  receive  his  laws.  They
were  required  in  the  days  of  Israel,
in  the  beginning  of  that  people.  They
were  required  of  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob.  They  were  required  of
Moses,  and  of  the  people  that  he  led
from  Egyptian  bondage.  They  were
required  by  all  the  prophets  that
existed  from  the  days  of  Adam  to
the  present  period  of  time.  They
were  required  by  the  apostles  that
received  their  commission  by  the  lay-
ing on  of  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ,
the  Son  of  the  living  God,  and  by  the
adherents  of  the  religion  that  the
apostles  proclaimed  and  taught  to
the  people,  in  their  day  and  no  man
or  set  of  men  or  class  of  people  from
the  day  of  Adam  to  the  present  time,
could  comply  with  these  require-
ments, except  the  people  of  God,  as
they  were  endowed  with  power  from
on  high,  which  could  proceed  only


from  the  Lord  our  God, And  it
would  be  simply  foolish  indeed  to
expect  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  these
days  to  comply  with  the  celestial  law,
with  the  law  that  proceeds  from  God,
and  with  his  designs  to  elevate  the
people  into  his  presence,  except  they
were  sustained  by  a  supernatural
power. The  Gospel  promises  this
It  promises  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  is  divine  in  its  charac-
ter, and  which  is  not  enjoyed  by  any
other  people,  and  which  we  are  told
by  the  Savior,  should  lead  into  all
truth,  and  inspire  those  who  pos-
sessed it,  and  give  them  a  knowledge
of  Jesus,  a  knowledge  of  the  Father*
and  of  tilings  pertaining  to  the  celes-
tial world  ; that  it  should  inspire
those  who  possessed  it  with  a  know-
ledge nf  things  to  come,  and  things
that  wen*  past;  and  inspire  them  to  an
extent  that  they  should  enjoy  super-
natural gifts— the  gift  of  tongues
and  prophecy,  to  lay  hands  upon  the
sick,  by  which  they  should  be  healed.
Those  who  received  this  Gospel  were
promised  these  supernatural  powers
and  gifts,  and  a  knowledge  for  them-
selves, that  they  might  not  depend
upon  any  man  or  set  of  men,  in  re-
gard to  the  truth  of  the  religion  that
they  had  received  ;  but  that  they
should  receive  a  knowledge  from
the  Father  that  the  religion  came
from  him,  that  the  Gospel  came  from
him,  and  that  his  servants  had  the
right  and  authority  to  adnimister
those  ordinances,  so  that  no  wind  of
doctrine  should  shake*  thorn  or  re-
move them  from  the  path  in  which
they  were  walking ;  *o  that  they
might  be  prepared  for  the  glory  that
should  be  revealed,  and  be  made
participators  therein,  so  that  they
might  endure  any  trial  or  affliction
that  it  should  be  the  will  of  God  to
be  brought  upon  them,  to  prepare
them  more  fully  for  celestial  glory  ;


364  JOURNAL  OF

so  that  they  should  walk  not  in
darkness,  but  in  the  light  and  power
of  God,  and  be  raised  above  the
things  of  the  world,  and  be  superior  i
to  the  things  around  them;  so  that
they  might  walk  independently  be-
neath the  celestial  world,  and  in  the
sight  of  God  and  heaven,  as  free  j
men,  pursuing  that  course  that
should  be  marked  out  to  them  by
the  Holy  Ghost;  that  course  by
which  they  could  elevate  themselves
to  knowledge  and  power,  and  thus
prepare  themselves  to  receive  the
glory  that  God  proposed  to  confer
upon  them,  and  to  occupy  the  ex-
alted position  to  which  God  des-
igned to  raise  them.

In  view  of  this,  Jesus  told  the
young  man  who  came  to  him  and
wished  to  know  what  he  should  do
to  inherit  eternal  life,  to  "  keep  the
commandments."  The  young  man
replied  that  he  had  kept  these  com-
mandments referred  to  from  his
you tli  upward-  The  Savior,  looking
upon  him,  saw  there  was  still  some-
thing lacking*  The  young  man  had
kept  the  moral  law,  the  law  given
to  Moses,  and  for  this  Jesus
loved  him,  but  saw  that  there  was ;
one  thing  lacking.  He  was  a  rich
man,  and  held  influence  in  the  world
in  consequence  of  his  superior  weal  th.
Jesus  knew  that  before  he  could  ele-
vate him,  or  any  other  man,  to  the
celestial  world,  it  was  necessary  that
he  should  be  submissive  in  all  things,
and  view  obedience  to  the  celestial
law  of  the  utmost  importance.  Jesus
knew  what  was  required  of  every
man  to  gain  a  celestial  crown — that !
nothing  should  be  held  dearer  than
obedience  to  the  requirements  of
heaven.  The  Savior  saw  in  this
young  man  a  cleaving  to  something
that  was  not  in  accordance  with  the
law  of  the  celestial  kingdom.  He
saw  perad venture,  a  disposition  in
him  to  adhere  in  his  feelings  to  that


DISCOURSES.

which  was  injurious  to  him,  and
would  render  a  compliance  to  all  the
demands  of  the  Gospel  disagreeable
or  impossible,  therefore  he  told  him
that  he  should  go  and  sell  all  that
he  had,  "  and  give  to  the  poor,  and
follow  him"  This  commandment
made  the  young  man  feel  sad  and
sorrowful  He  looked  upon  riches
as  the  great  object  in  life,  as  bring-
ing him  the  influence  of  the  world,
and  all  things  that  were  desirable  ;
as  procuring  him  the  blessings  and
enjoyments  of  life,  and  as  the  means
of  lifting  him  to  high  positions  in
society.  He  could  not  conceive  the
idea  of  a  person's  securing  the  bless-
ings, enjoyments  and  privileges  of
life,  and  such  things  as  his  nature
craved,  independent  of  his  wealth.
But  the  Gospel  was  of  a  nature  that
provided  for  everything  that  was
necessary  to  fulfil  the  wants  and  re-
quirements of  man  and  to  make  him
happy.  Riches  were  not  so  calcu-
lated ;  and  the  Lord  desired  him  to
give  up  these  ideas,  and  to  dislodge
them  from  his  mind  and  feelings,  so
he  might  secure  him  as  his  servant
in  all  things.  He  desired  this  man
to  be  wholly  devoted  to  his  service,
and  to  go  into  his  work  with  full
purpose  of  heart,  and  follow  the  dic-
tates of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  prepare
himself  for  celestial  glory.  But  this
young  man  was  not  willing ;  it  was
too  great  a  sacrifice.  And  the
Savior  said  upon  this  occasion,
"  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have
riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to
go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  than
for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  God  "  The  disciples  "were
astonished  out  of  measure1  at  this,
"saying  among  themselves,  who  then
can  be  saved  V  They  thought  that
;  no  man  could  possess  riches  and  be
l  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  This
was  the  idea  they  received  from  the


THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  SPIRIT  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER*  365


remarks  of  the  Savior.  But  Jesus
answered,  "  With  men  it  is  impos-
sible, but  not  with  God  :  for  with
God  all  tilings  are  possible/'

Now,  we  want  to  look  and  see
how  this  is  possible.  I  have  read  in
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants
the  revelations  that  have  been  given
in  these  days  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  setting  forth  the  require-
ments of  God  in  relation  to  tem-
poral affairs.  Here  are  remarks  that
are  pretty  straight,  which  I  have
read,  on  page  337— * '  If  any  man
shall  take  of  the  abundance  which  I
have  made,  and  impart  not  his  por-
tion according  to  the  law  of  my
Gospel,  he  shall  lift  up  his  eyes  in
hell,  being  in  torment/1  Now  this
is  straight  language,  and  looks,  per-
haps, rather  severe*  When  the  Lord
revealed  his  Gospel  in  these  latter
times  to  the  world,  he  commenced
teaching  the  people  what  was  re-
quired of  them  in  their  temporal  af-
fairs, as  he  taught  the  young  man
and  as  he  taught  many  others,  and
as  the  apostles  were  taught  and
others  who  received  the  Gospel
under  their  administration.  The
greatest  trouble  that  has  ever
been,  probably  that  the  Lord  lias
had,  with  the  people  in  any  age,
has  been  in  reference  to  their  tem-
poral affairs,  their  financial  matters.
The  Latter-day  Saints  at  the  present
day,  are  very  united  in  reference  to
their  spiritual  principles  and  doc-
trines. We  see  ey  e  to  eye  in  re-
gard to  principles  that  pertain  to
the  doctrinal  portion  of  the  reli-
gion we  have  espoused  ;  but  when
it  comes  to  our  temporal,  our  earth-
ly possessions,  and  our  conduct  in
relation  to  them,  we  seem  to  be  a
Uttle  confused  in  reference  to  what
i§  right  and  wrong,  and  more  or  less,
wc  ieel  disposed  to  pursue  our  own
course  in  regard  to  these  matters


and,  as  in  the  days  of  judges,  "every
man  is  doing  what  seems  ridit  in
his  own  eyes,"  We  seem  to  forgot
that  the  Lord  has  distinctly  pointed
out  our  duties,  and  that  there  is  a
little  book,  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
that  God  has  given  by  direct  revela-
tion in  regard  to  these  matters,  by
which  we  should  be  governed ;  we
forget  these  things  as  it  is  natural
for  us  to  forget  the  things  of  God.
We  sometimes  think  of  the  many
good  things  that  we  do,  and  imagine,
perhaps,  that  because  of  these  good
acts,  we  are  excusable  in  not  bother-
ing ourselves  in  reference  to  some
other  things  that  we  do  not  perform.
In  giving  his  revelations  to  us  in
regard  to  these  matters  the  Lord
took  certain  individuals  and  made
them  examples  to  the  Saints,  and  he
wished  the  Saints  to  look  upon
these  individuals  and  follow  their
examples.  The  Lord  did  not  pro-
pose at  first  to  call  upon  all  the
people  at  once  and  tell  them  what
to  do  in  relation  to  these  temporal
matters,  because  they  were  very  ig
no  rant  and  more  or  less  covetous.
Ill  March  1830,  one  month  before
the  organization  of  this  Church,  tht
Lord  commenced  to  instruct,  or  lay
down  principles  which  should  govern
the  people  of  God  in  all  their  tem-
poral affairs.  The  foundation  was
raised  as  a  standard,  or  beacon  shin-
ing in  a  dark  place,  that  every  Lat-
ter-day Saint  might  look  at  and
judge  for  himself  what  would  be  re-
quired. The  first  revelation  that  I
recollect  of  that  was  given  in  regard
to  the  temporal  obligations  of  the
Saints,  or  what  should  be  required
of  them,  was  given  to  Martin  Harris.
You  will  find  it  on  page  111,  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  Martin
Harris  was  a  man  who  possessed  con-
siderable wealth,  or  at  least  was
tolerably  well  of. The  Lord  gave


36C


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


him  a  revelation  touching  temporal
affairs,  the  same  as  Jesus  gave  the
rich  young  man.  The  Lord  said  to
Martin  Harris,  "  Impart  a  portion
of  thy  property ;  yea,  even  part  of
thy  lands,  and  all  save  the  support
of  thy  family/1  This  revelation  ap*
plied  simply  to  Martin  Harris,  and
not  to  everybody,  only  as  you  con-
sider it  an  example  to  Latter-day
Saints,  But  on  page  Ifil,  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  there  is  a
general  commandment  in  connection
with  the  divine  law  which  was  given
in  this  revelation.  It  applies  to
everybody,  as,  for  instance,  "  Thou
shall  not  lie/*  is  a  general  command-
ment, and  applicable  to  every  Lat-
ter-day Saint.  Here  is  the  com-
mandment, verse  55 — "And  if  thou
obtainest  more  than  that  which
would  be  for  thy  support,  thou  shalt
give  it  into  my  storehouse,  that  all
things  may  be  done  according  to  .
to  that  which  I  have  said/1  In  con-
nection with  this  subject,  we  find  on
page  233  that  the  Lord  called  to-
gether six  of  his  Elders,  and  gave
th  em  commandments  and  revelation,
and  appointed  unto  them  a  steward-
ship :  "Behold,  and  hearken,  0  ye
inhabitants  of  Zion,  and  all  ye  people
of  my  Church."  Now  this  was  quite
extensive,  "  All  ye  people  of  my
Church."  The  Lord  was  going  to
speak,  here,  something  that  concern-
ed all  the  Saints,  wherever  they
might  be,  whether  in  New  York,
Ohio,  Missouri,  Indiana  or  any  ether
part  of  the  world.  "  Hearken,  0  ye
inhabitants  of  Zion,  and  all  ye
people  of  my  Church,  who  are  afar
off."  Now  here  is  something  which
concerned  all  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  which  the  Lord  considered  of
vast  importance  to  everybody  worthy
to  be  called  by  that  name.  He  wanted
all  the  inhabitants  of  Zion  to  pay
particular  attention  to  what  he  was
going  to  say  to  these  six  of  his


Elders.  It  concerned  everybody.
The  fact  in  the  case  was  that  he  took
these  six  Elders  and  made  them  an
example  to  all  the  Saints,  The  re-
velation continues  ;

"Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord
which  I  give  unto  my  servant  Joseph
Smith,  jnn.,  and  unto  my  servant
Martin  Harris,  and  also  unto  my
servant  Oliver  Cowdery,  and  also
unto  my  servant  John  Whitmer,
and  also  unto  my  servant  Sidney
Higdon,  and  also  unto  my  servant
William  W.  Phelps,  by  way  of  com-
mandment unto  them ;

"  I,  the  Lord,  have  appointed
them,  and  ordained  them  to  be
stewards  over  the  revelations  and
commandments  which  I  have  given
unto  them,  and  which  I  shall  here-
after give  unto  them."

Now  this  was  a  matter  of  some
importance,  especially  to  these  six
elders,  to  be  appointed  stewards  over
those  things  from  which  should  ac-
crue great  temporal  advantages.
Perhaps  some  people  might  be  jea-
lous, or  were  jealous  at  that  time,
and  supposed  that  they  had  reason-
able grounds  to  be  jealous,  that  the
Lord  should  bestow  such  great  ad-
vantages upon  these  elders,  which
they  might  use  to  the  great  disad-
vantage of  the  people  of  God*  But
we  will  discover  that  these  matters
wetre  strictly  guarded  of  the  Lord,
as  also  would  every  man  who  was
appointed  a  steward  in  the  kingdom
of  God  be  held  in  check.

u  And  an  account  of  this  steward-
ship will  I  require  of  them  in  the
day  of  judgment,"

Now,  perhaps  I  do  not  believe  as
some  do  in  regard  to  the  United  Or-
der— that  everybody  is  to  come  to-
gether and  throw  all  their  substance
into  a  heap,  and  then  come  and  take
of  it  as  they  please,  or  that  one  man
who  does  not  understand  temporal
affairs  at  all  should  be  placed  as  a


steward  over  extensive  concerns.  I
believe  that  there  is  an  order  in  these
things — a  pleasing  and  an  agreeable
order  —  and  that  these  things  are
arranged  by  the  Lord  in  such  a  way
that  when  people  properly  under- 1
stand  them  they  will  be  satisfied
and  admire  them.  It  is  because  we  '
do  not  get  to  understand  the  require-
ments of  God  that  we  are  dissatis-
fied, God  fixes  these  matters  up
ami  arranges  them  in  such  a  way  as
will  tend  to  the  exaltation  of  every
Latter-day  Saint  who  is  disposed  to
honor  them*  It  is  because  of  our
ignorance  that  we  are  displeased  with
the  requirements  of  the  Lord,

Now,  I  believe  in  the  independence
of  men  and  women,  I  believe  that
men  and  women  have  the  image  of
God  given  them — are  formed  after
the  image  of  God,  and  possess  Deity
in  their  nature  and  character,  and
that  their  spiritual  organization  pos-
sesses the  qualities  and  properties  of
God,  and  that  there  is  the  principle
of  God  in  every  individual.  It  is
designed  that  man  should  act  as
God,  and  not  be  constrained  and
controlled  in  everything,  but  have
an  independency,  an  agency,  and  the
power  to  spread  abroad  and  act  ac-
cording to  the  principle  of  godliness
that  is  in  him,  act  according  to  the
power  and  intelligence  and  enlighten-
ment of  God,  that  he  possesses,  and
not  that  he  should  be  watched  con-
tinually, and  be  controlled,  and  act
as  a  slave  in  these  matters.  But
that  the  law  of  God  should  proceed
forth  from  him,  and  the  constitution  ;
of  the  Most  High  God  should  be  in
him,  and  he  should  act  in  accordance
with  that.  And,  as  the  Lord  has
said — "I  will  write  my  name  in  the
hearts  of  the  people" — the  law  should  |
proceed  forth  from  their  hearts.

And  so  far  as  the  law  of  tithing  is
concerned,  there  is  about  it  some-
thing that  is  not  of  the  same  nature


and  character  as  the  law  of  the  Uni-
ted Order.  It  was  added  because
the  people  were  not  willing  to  com-
ply with  this  noble  and  high  celestial
law,  whereby  they  could  act  accord-
ing to  the  light  that  is  in  them,  and
the  power  of  the  Almighty,  by  which
they  should  be  inspired. I  read  on:

*' Wherefore  I  have  appointed  un~
to  them,  and  this  is  their  business
in  the  Church  of  God,  to  manage
them  and  the  concerns  thereof

^  "  Wherefore  a  commandment  I
give  unto  them,  that  they  shall  not
give  these  things  unto  the  Church,
neither  unto  the  world."

Now,  was  it  designed  that  these  six
men  should  go  and  build  fine  houses,
and  spread  abroad  and  obtain  im-
mense treasures  of  the  earth,  inde-
pendent (*f  the  obligations  devolving
upon  them  to  other  people  ?  There
was  great  latitude  given  them,  but
they  were  held  accountable  unto  the
Lord.  "  I  give  you  this  latitude  to
exercise,  but,  remember,  you  are
accountable  ;  and  an  account  of  your
stewardship  will  I  require  of  you  in
the  day  of  judgment."  Some  of
these  Elders  had  seen  God  and  talk-
ed with  him  face  to  face,  and  angels
had  laid  theirhands  upon  their  heads.
They  knew  that  there  was  a  God  in
heaven.  This  was  made  clear  to
them  by  the  power  of  the  Almighty,
and  by  angels  making  their  appear*
a  nee  unto  them,  and  talking  with
them  as  one  man  talks  with  another.
Now,  when  we  consider  what  the
Lord  said  to  these  men  that  were
thus  enlightened,  and  had  this  won-
derful experience,  we  see  that  it  re-
quired a  man  to  be  a  little  careful
how  he  acted  in  regard  to  these  tem-
poral affairs  that  were  given  to  him
in  charge.

<f  Nevertheless,  inasmuch  as  they
receive  more  than  is  needful  for
their  necessities  and  their  wants,  it
shall  be  given  into  my  storehouse."


368


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Now  here  was  wherein  they  were
limited,  But  yet  in  this  matter
they  were  left  to  their  own  judg-
ment and  philanthropy,  which  should
be  enlightened,  But  their  philan-
trophy  would  be  the  philan trophy  of
God,  and  their  intelligence,  the  intel-
ligence of  heaven.

"  And  the  benefits  shall  be  conse-
crated unto  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,
and  unto  their  generations,  inasmuch
as  they  become  heirs  according  to
the  laws  of  the  kingdom.

"Behold,  this  is  what  the  Lord  re-
quires of  every  man  in  his  steward-
ship, even  as  I,  the  Lord,  have  ap-
pointed, or  shall  hereafter  appoint
unto  any  man.

"  And,  behold,  none  are  exempt
from  this  law  who  belong  to  the
church  of  the  living  God,"

Now  this  law  should  continue  as
long  as  salvation  continued.  (See
page  337  1st  verse)  It  never  has
been  repealed-  The  law  of  tithing
could  not  repeal  this  law.  The  law
of  tithing  is  a  lower  law,  and  was
given  of  God  But  the  law  of
tithing  does  not  forbid  us  obeying  a
higher  law,  the  law  of  celestial  union
in  earthly  things*  And  the  fact
that  we  do  not  feel  satisfied  in  sim-
ply obeying  the  law  of  tithing  shows
that  it  is  a  lesser  law.  Do  you  feel
justified  simply  in  obeying  the  law
of  tithing  1  Why,  then,  do  you  con-
tribute to  our  temples  and  to  bring-
ing the  people  from  the  old  countries,
and  to  this  object,  and  that,  in  thou-
sands of  ways,  after  you  have  pro-
perly and  justly  complied  with  the
law  of  tithing  t  The  tact  that  you  do
these  things  shows  that  you  are  not
satisfied  in  merely  obeying  the  law
of  tithing.  In  these  contributions
you  are  acting  just  as  God  designed
you  should  act — by  the  light  of  the
Holy  Ghost  that  is  in  you,  Now,
this  law  is  very  distinctly  portrayed,
and  tltt  Lord  has  mode  it  so  plain


that  he  is  determined  that  no  man
shall  misunderstand  him.  When  he
speaks  he  speaks  in  spch  a  manner
that  there  can  be  no  dispute.  Be  is
not  satisfied  with  telling  it  over  once,
he  tells  it  the  second  and  the  third
time ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  mis-
understanding in  regard  to  the
mind  of  the  Lord  with  reference  to
this  law  of  a  man's  giving  all,  except
that  which  is  needed  for  his  support,
unto  the  Lord's  storehouse.  An
observance  of  this  law  is  what  he
says  is  required  of  every  man  in  his
stewardship.  So  that  if  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  appointed  unto
stewardships,  or  are  satisfied  to  act
as  stewards  before  the  Lord,  this
law  is  m  force,  and  this  law  they ,
should  observe.  I  believe  many  do
walk  in  the  spirit  of  this  law  to  a
certain  extent ;  and  have  complied
with  it,  no  doubt  in  a  manner  in
which  they  are  justified  before  God,
while  some,  perhaps,  have  paid  no
regard  to  it  whatever.  Some  so  far
ignore  these  principles  that  they  be-
come very  miserly  and  covetous,  and
gather  around  them  and  their  fami-
lies what  they  consider  they  need
now,  and  then  lay  up  for  future
generations,  when  there  is  distress
around  them,  and  thousands  of  Saints
in  Europe  and  other  parts  who  are
groaning  in  poverty,  under  the  iron
hand  of  tyranny,  not  knowing  from
day  to  day  where  they  are  going  to
obtain  a  meal  of  victuals.  Yet  here
are  men  among  us  who  call  them-
selves Latter-day  Saints,  who  do  not
impart  of  their  substance  according
to  the  law  of  the  Gospel.  I  say  God
is  displeased  with  such  covetousness,
and  he  will  never  prosper  the  latter-
day  Saints  who  are  guilty  of  such
miserly  conduct.

But  as  regards  tile  law  of  tithing,
it  is  in  force  upon  the  poor  as  well
as  the  rich,  and  it  seems  that  it  acts
almost  unequally  in  some  respects.


THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  SPIRIT  OF  THE  UNITED  ORDER,  3G9


There  is  a  widow,  whose  income  I
is  ten  dollars ;  she  pays  one  fur  j
tithing,  aucLjJien  has  to  appeal  to
the  Bishop  rer  support  Here  is  a
rich  man  who  has  an  income  of  one
hundred  thousand  dollars,  and  pays
ten  thousand  for  his  tithing.  There
remains  ninety  thousand,  and  he  does
not  need  it,  but  the  poor  widow  re-
quire s  mu  c  h  more  than  she  had  before
complying  with  the  law  of  tithing.

Now  what  would  be  the  operation
of  the  celestial  law  I  The  widow
has  not  enough  for  her  support,
therefore  nothing  is  required  of  her
by  the  celestial  law,  or  the  law  of
the  United  Order,  This  rich  man,
with  his  ninety  thousand  dollars,
continues  to  increase  his  riches,  pays
his  tithing  fully,  and  yet  wholly  dis-
regards the  law  of  stewardship,  or
the  law  of  temporal  union.  I  can-
not believe  that  a  Latter-day  Saint
is  justified  in  ignoring  the  higher
law,  For,  as  we  have  read,  li  Behold
none  are  exempt  from  this  law  who
belong  to  the  Church  of  the  living
God,"  There  is  not  a  man  within
the  sound  of  my  voice  who  is  exempt
from  this  law,  nor  will  he  ever  be  j
until  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  comes
in  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  set  all
things  right :  "  Yea,  neither  the
Bishop,  neither  the  agent  who
keepeth  the  Lord's  storehouse,
neither  he  Avho  is  appointed  in  a
stewardship  over  temporal  things."
This  will  apply  to  the  Bishops  who
reported  Miere  yesterday,  and  to
every  Latter-day  Saint.  We  are
under  this  law.  We  should  act  in
the  spirit  of  this  law  according  to
the  light  of  God  that  is  within  us.

Furthermore,  on  page  275,  weread:

"It  is  the  duty  of  the  Lord's  clerk,
whom  he  has  appointed,  to  keep  a
history  and  a  general  church  record
of  all  things  that  transpire  in  Zion,
and  of  all  those  who  consecrate  pro-
perties, and  receive  inheritances
legally  from  the  Bishop;  "And

No.  24


I  also  their  manner  of  life,  their  faith
and  works;  and  also  of  all  the
apostates  who  apostatize  after  receiv-
ing their  inheritances,

"  It  is  contrary  to  the  will  and
commandment  of  God  that  those
who  receive  not  their  inheritance
by  consecration,  agreeably  to  this
law  which  lie  has  given,  that  he  may
tithe  his  people,  to  prepare  them
against  the  day  of  vengeance  and
burning,  should  have  their  names,
enrolled  with  the  people  of  God."

Now,  this  might  be  /considered
rather  strong  language,  but  this  is  a
revelation  of  God  that  we  profess  to
I  believe.

"  Neither  is  their  genealogy  to  be
kept,  or  to  be  had  where  it  may  be
found  on  any  of  the  records  or
history  of  the  Church  ;

"  Their  names  shall  not  be  found,
neither  the  names  of  the  fathers,  nor
th  e  names  of  the  children  written  in
the  book  of  the  law  of  God,  saith
the  Lord  of  Hosts,"

That  is,  those  that  were  not  will-
ing to  abide  the  law  of  stewardship
and  consecration  should  be  debarred
of  these  blessings.  It  is  the  same  to-
day, and  it  has  been  so  since  the  days
of  Adam  in  relation  to  these  matters.
Now,  when  the  Lord  established
this  Church,  he  was  very  anxious  to
bring  the  people  to  this  order  of
things  ;  and  we  find  some  thirteen
revelations  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  that  are  given  to  ex-
plain these  principles  of  the  United
Order- — the  law  of  consecration  and
stewardship.  Men  were  to  have
their  stewardship — to  have  posses-
sion of  property — but  they  were  to
hold  it  as  servants  of  God,  not  as
their  own  individual  property,  par-
ticularly, but  they  were  to  be  made
stewards  aver  "that  property,  after
they  had  consecrated  to  the  Lord,
I  and  to  receive  according  to  their
abilities,  and  manage  according  to
the  gifts  of  God  that  were  within

Vol  XX,


370  JOURNAL  OF

them  in  regard  to  temporal  affairs.  I
If  a  man  was  capable  of  managing
merchandise  to  the  amount  of  one
hundred  thousand  dollars,  it  would
he  proper  that  he  should  be  made  a
steward  over  that  amount  If  a  man
was  not  capable  of  managing  exten-
sive concerns,  it  would  be  improper
to  make  him  steward  over  a  large
business.  But  every  man  would
receive  a  stewardship  in  proportion
to  his  capacity  to  oversee  it  for  the
general  good.

In  order  that  there  might  be  no
misunderstanding,  the  Lord  informs
us  further  in  regard  to  these  matters
on  page  237,  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants.  The  Lord  took  great
pains  to  manifest  his  pleasure  in
regard  to  these  principles*  He  called
some  seven,  eight  or  nine  elders,
and  made  them  stewards  over  pro-
perty and  various  departments  of
business,  and  then  told  them  how  to
act.  They  were  to  work  in  accord-
ance with  this  law,  which  will  be
found  on  page  343,  Book  *f  Doc-
trine and  Covenants  :

"  68.  And  all  monies  that  you  re-
ceive in  your  stewardships,  by  im-
proving upon  the  properties  which
I  have  appointed  unto  yon,  in  houses,
or  in  lands,  in  cattle,  or  in  all  things
save  it  be  the  holy  and  sacred  pur-
poses shall  be  cast  into  the  treasury
as  fast  as  you  receive  monies,  by
hundreds,  or  by  fifties,  or  by  twen-
ties, or  by  tens,  or  by  fives  \

"  69.  Or  in  other  words,  if  any
man  among  you  obtain  five  talents,
(dollars,)  let  him  cast  them  into  the
treasury  ;  or  if  any  man  obtain  ten,
or  twenty,  or  fifty,  or  an  hundred,
let  him  do  likewise  ;
-  "  70.  And  let  not  any  man  among
you  say  that  it  is  his  own,  for  it  shall
not  be  called  his,  not  any  part  of  it ;
s  "71.  And  there  shall  not  any
part  of  it  be  used,  or  taken  out  of
the  treasury,  only  by  the  voice  and
common  consent  of  the  Order/'


DISCOURSES.

Now  this  was  making  things  se-
cure— pretty  safe.  It  might  not,
perhaps,  be  as  agreeable,  unless  per-
sons could  conceive  the  whole  plan
of  this  scheme  or  Order  in  temporal
affairs  for  men  to  devote  their  sur-
plus in  this  way,  but  with  the  other
portion,  which  we  read  further  on,
they  would  be  perfectiy  satisfied.

Now,  we  can  easily  conceive,  that
with  a  vast  population  of  Saints  act-
ing under  this  celestial  law,  there
would  be  an  immense  treasury  filled
after  a  time  ;  and  that  there  might
not  be  any  misunderstanding  in  re-
gard to  this  property  and  its  use,
among  those  who  had  thus  subscribed
or  bestowed  their  means,  the  Lord
has  made  the  matter  plain  by  giving
the  following  instructions  :

"71-  And  there  shall  not  any
part  of  it  be  used,  or  taken  out  of
the  treasury,  only  by  the  voice  and
common  consent  of  the  Order*

"  72.  And  this  shall  be  the  voice
and  common  consent  of  the  Order  ;
that  any  man  among  you,  say  unto
the  treasurer,  1  have  need  of  this  to
help  me  in  my  stewardship ;

"  73.  If  it  be  five  talents,  (dollars),
or  if  it  be  ten  talents,  (dollars,)  or
twenty,  or  fifty,  or  an  hundred,  the
treasurer  shall  give  unto  him  the
sum  which  he  requires,  to  help  him
in  his  stewardship."

Now  a  whole  people,  enlightened
by  the  principles  of  High  Heaven  in
regard  to  these  matters— filled  with
the  Spirit  of  God,  with  the  spirit  of
understanding,  the  spirit  of  philan-
trophy,  every  man  seeking  the  inter-
est of  his  neighbour,  having  an  eye
single  to  the  glory  of  God,  putting
his  means  into  the  Lord's  treasury,
and  no  man  saying  that  anything  is
his,  except  as  a  steward  before  God
— would  be  a  pillar  of  financial
strength,  a  sublime  picture  of  holy
union  and  fraternity,  and  equal  to
the  most  extreme  emergencies.
Then  when  any  misfortune  befalls  a


■


THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  SPIRITOF  THE  UNITED  ORDER,


371


man,  such  as  the  burning  of  his  pro-
perty, or  failure  or  trouble  in  his
department  of  business,  he  could  go
to  the  treasurer  and  say,  "I  have
need  of  a  certain  amount  to  assist
me  in  my  stewardship.  Have  I  not
managed  the  affairs  of  my  steward-
ship in  a  wise  manner  1  Can  you  not
have  confidence  in  me  1  Have  I  ever
misused  the  means  put  into  my
hands  ]  Has  it  not  been  wisely  con-
trolled ?  If  so,  give  me  means  to  help
me  in  my  stewardship,  or  to  build
up  this  industry  that  is  needed  for
the  general  interests  of  the  whole."
Well,  it  is  to  be  given  to  him.
There  is  confidence  reposed  in  him
because  of  his  past  conduct,  and  the
course  which  he  has  pursued,  He
has  due  right  in  exercising  his
talents  according  to  the  light  of
the  spirit  that  is  within  him.  He
understands  fully  the  circumstances
in  which  lie  is  placed,  and  governs
himself  according  to  the  obligations
that  rest  upon  him.  He  is  found  to
be  a  wise,  economical  manager  ;  and
he  is  assisted  in  his  stewardship  to
the  extent  of  the  means  that  he
should  have.

Now,  were  the  Saints  all  acting  in
the  spirit  of  these  revelations,  what
a  happy  community  we  would  be!  We
would  all  be  safe,  and  no  man  would
need  remain  awake  at  night  think i n  -
what  he  should  do  for  his  family  to
keep  them  from  begging  their  bread,
or  going  to  the  Bishop,  which  per-
haps is  only  one  degree  better.
And  there  would  be  a  union  that
would  be  in  accordance  with  the
union  of  Enoch  and  his  people,  when
they  were  taken  to  the  world  above
— a  union  pleasing  to  the  Almighty,
and  according  to  the  principles  of
the  celestial  world.

But  now  how  is  it  with  us,  with
t\\H  people  of  Ogden  and  in  other
places  1  We  distrust  one  another.
Eveiy  man  feels  that  he  has  no  secu-
rity in  his  neighbour  in  time  of  mis-


fortune. We  distrust  our  neighbors,
because  neighbors  are  not  seeking
the  interest  of  one  another.  Every
man  is  seeking  how  he  can  best  help
himself  This  is  too  much  so  with
the  Latter-day  Saints.

Now,  this  law,  the  United  Order,
was  given  in  1831-2.  Men  were
commanded  consecration  of  property.
Bishop  Partridge,  seeing  there  was
some  misunderstanding,  wrote  to
Joseph  for  an  explanation  in  regard
to  the  matter.  Joseph  in  answer,
says  that  in  matters  of  consecration
it  should  be  left  to  the  judgment  of  the
consecrator  how  much  he  should  give
and  how  much  retain  for  the  sup-
port of  his  family,  and  not  exclusively
to  the  Bishop,  for,  if  so,  it  would
give  the  Bishop  more  power  than  a
king  possessed.  There  should  be  a
mutual  understanding  between  them,
otherwise  it  should  be  left  to  a
council  of  twelve  High  Priests.
Now  where  is  the  Latter-day  Saint,
that  cannot  see  a  liberality,  a  gen-
erosity, in  this  matter,  and  be  wilb
ing  to  submit  to  this  tribunal,  I
would  be  willing  to  submit  to  the
high  council  of  this  Stake  of  Zion,
or  the  high  council  of  any  other
Stake  of  Zion,  and  say,  u  Here  is
my  property,  say  how  much  I  ought
to  retain  for  my  wives  and  children,
and  how  much  shall  go  into  the  com-
mon property  of  the  Church  V  But
I  think  my  bishop  and  myself  could
settle  the  business  at  once.  Joseph
says  in  that  explanation,  "it  is  not
necessary  that  you  should  descend  to
particulars  in  regard  to  thesematters*

I  see  I  am  occupying  more  time
than  I  intended.  There  are  many
things  that  should  be  said  in  illa-
tion to  these  matters.  The  time  is
now  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
should  awake.  These  laws  were
given  to  govern  the  Saints.  The
Saints  in  misfortune  would  not
obey  them,  and  they  were  driven  out.

We  have  been  harassed  from  the


372


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


beginning  unto  this  day,  and  I  fear  I,
will  be,  until  we  conform  to  this  law,
and  are  willing  that  God  shall  rule  in
regard  to  these  temporal  matters.  |
I  will  now  say,  let  every  man
who  stands  in  an  official  station,
on  whom  God  has  bestowed  his  holy
and  divine  priesthood,  think  of  what
the  Savior  said  to  the  Twelve  Apos-
tles just  before  he  went  into  the  \
presence  of  his  Father — "Feed  my
sheep/1  And  he  continued  to  say
this  until  his  apostles  felt  sorrowful
that  he  should  continue  to  call  upon
them  in  this  manner.  But,  said  he
— »  Feed  my  sheep."  That  is  *  Go
forth  with  your  whole  heart,  be
devoted  wholly  to  my  cause.  These
people  in  the  world  are  my  brethren
and  sisters.  My  feelings  are  exer-
cised towards  them,  Take  care  of  my
people.  Feed  my  flock.  Go  forth  and
preach  the  Gospel  I  will  reward
you  for  all  your  sacrifices.  Do  not
think  that  you  can  make  too  great  a


sacrifice  in  accomplishing  this  work"
He  called  upon  them  in  the  fervor
of  his  heart  to  do  this  work.  And
now  I  call  upon  all  who  hold  this
priesthood,  the  presiding  officers  of
this  stake,  and  the  bishops,  and  the
high  council,  to  go  forth  and  feed
the  flock  Take  an  interest  in  th em-
Did  you  ever  lose  a  child,  and  the
parting  struck  keenly  into  your
souls  1  Transfer  a  little  of  this  deep
feeling  to  the  interests  of  the  Saints
over  whom  you  are  called  to  preside,
and  in  whose  interests  you  have  re-
ceived the  holy  priesthood.  Work
for  them,  and  do  not  confine  your
thoughts  and  feelings  to  your  per*
sonal  aggrandizement.  Then  God
will  give  you  revelation,  inspiration
upon  inspiration,  and  teach  you  how
to  secure  the  interests  of  the  Saints
in  matters  pertaining  to  their  tempo-
ral and  spiritual  welfare.

May  God  bless  you,  in  the  name
of  J  esus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY  ELDER ERASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Held  in  the  Tabernacle

Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  8th,  1879.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


CLEAVE  TO  LIGHT — COMING  OF  CHRIST— ABOMINATIONS  OF  THE  WICKED
— WELFARE  OF  THE  YOUNG.


The  prophet  Isaiah,  in  speaking  of
the  latter  day  Zi©n,  made  this  sin-
gular remark  :

u  Now  also  many  nations  are
gathered  against  thee,  that  say,  Let  i
her  he  defiled,  and  let  our  eye  look
upon  Zion.

u  But  they  know  not  the  thoughts
of  the  Lord,  neither  understand  they
his  counsel/*  etc,

Again,  it  has  been  said  concerning
the  disobedient  who  reject  and  set
at  nought  the  counsels  of  the  Al-
mighty, through  his  servants  who
are  sent  unto  them  :


"I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity;
I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh."

The  wicked  comprehend  not  the
things  of  God;  they  cannot-  know
them,  for  they  are  spiritually  dis-
cerned. "  The  things  of  God,"  says
the  Apostle  Paul,  "knowetk  no  man
only  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ; '  or,  in
other  words,  carnal  man  knows  not
the  things  of  God,  neither  can  he
understand  them.  The  unbelieving
world  cannot  see  as  the  Saints  see  ;
they  walk  in  darkness,  but  the  Saints
are  the  children  of  light,  even  as
many  as  keep  sacred  their  covenants


with  God,  The  wicked  love  darknes  I
rather  than  light,  localise  their  deeds
are  evil.  This  was  true  of  the  first
century  of  the  Christian  era,  when
the  Savior  uttered  it;  it  is  true  to-
day. As  the  light  shone  in  dark-
ness and  the  darkness  comprehended
it  not,  so  might  the  same  be  said  to-
day. AVe  are  called  to  he  the
children  of  light*  Blessed  are  they
who  eontinue  in  the  light,  for  the
ijtay  of  the  Lord  will  not  overtake
them  as  a  thief  in  the  night  ;  hut
woe  unto  them  that  depart  from,  or
reject  that  light  that  shines  in  the
midst  of  the  darkness,  for  the  day
cometh,  and  that  speedily,  when
they  will  ho  overtaken  as  by  a  whirl-
wind* The  command  of  the  Lord
to  the  Saints  is  to  watch,  for  we
know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when
the  Son  of  man  shall  come.  The
recise  time  of  his  coming  has  not
eea  revealed;  the  prophets  were  ig-
norant of  it;  it  could  not  be  declared
to  the  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  and,  in-
deed, the  Savior  said  that  not  the
angels,  nor  even  he  himself,  knew
the  day  or  the  hour  of  this  important
event.  And  on  taking  his  final
leave  of  the  Twelve,  on  the  Mount
of  Olives,  the  question  was  put  to
him— "  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  tins  time
restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  f
They,  it  seems,  were  wont  to  regard
the  Savior  as  that  Being  that  was  to
establish  himself  upon  the  throne  of
David,  and  bring  to  pass  all  that
they  had  been  so  anxiously  expecting;
but  he  told  them  it  was  not  for  them
to  know  the  times  and  the  seasons
which  the  Father  had  put  in  his
power.  These  things  have  been
spoken  that  the  Saints  should  watch
and  not  fall  asleep.  The  same  idea
is  also  set  forth  in  the  parable  of  the
ten  virgins,  who  were  represented  as
having  gone  forth  so  meet  the  bride-
groom, five  of  whom  were  wise  and
five  foolish.  The  wise  virgins  took
oil  in  their  vessels,  and  were  pre-


pared to  meet  the  bridegroom  and  to
go  with  him  into  the  marriage  feast;
the  foolish  virgins  took  no  oil,  they
were  unprepared,  and  were  conse-
quently shut  out  This  parable  is
expressly  applicable  to  the  time  of
the  second  comimr  of  the  Savior,
showing  us  that  however  reluctant
we  may  feel  to  admit  it,  we  are
plainly  given  to  understand  that  a
great  portion  of  those  who  are  counted
virgins,  of  the  Lord's  people,  who
believe  in  his  coming  and  who  go
forth  tri  inert  him,  will  slumber  and
sleep,  and  be  locked  out  when  he
shall  come.  And  it  behooves  all
Saints  to  ask  themselves  the  quest-
ion which  the  disciples  asked  the
Savior  when  he  told  them  the  start-
ling truth  that  one  of  them  should
betray  him — "Lord,  is  it  If  And
all  those  who  are  very  anxious  upon
tin*  point  will  be  likely  to  be  on  the
watch- tower,  and  not  slumbering  in
that  fatal  hour.

And  again,  in  the  24th  of  Matthew,
he  speaks  of  that  wicked  servant  who
shall  begin  to  s;iy,  "My  Lorddelayeth
his  coining.  And  .shall  begin  to  smite
his  f elluw-servants  and  eat  and  drink
with  the  drunken.  The  Lord  of  that
servant  shall  come  in  a  day  when  he
looketh  not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour
that  he  is  not  aware  uf,  and  shall  cut
him  asunder,  and  appoint  him  his  por-
tion with  the  hypocrites  ;  there  .shall
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."
1  le  expects  this  of  his  servants  whom
he  has  appointed  over  his  house,  to
give  his  children  meat  in  due  season*
It  becomes  the  apostles,  and  presi-
dents, and  bishops/  and  all  who  are
called  as  watchmen  upon  the  walls  of
Zion  to  read  the  24th  and  20th  of  Mat-
thew, giving  due  attention  thereto,
and  to  beware,  least  they  be  found
among  those  unfaithful  servants  who
have  been  appointed  to  minister  in  his
house  and  give  meat  in  due  season,
but  who  smite  their  fellow -servants,
and  who  eat  and  drink  with  the  drun-
kard, and  otherwise  neglect  their  high
and  holy  calling,  for  responsibility,
position  and  station  wdl  not  be
any  protection  or  safeguard  in  that


374


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


day*  But,  on  the  contrary  the  greater
the  responsibility  neglected,  the
greater  their  fall,  chagrin  and  disap-
pointment, and  woe  when  they  find
their  allotted  portion  among  the  hy-
pocrites and  unbelievers.

And  the  enemies  of  Zion  who  want
to  penetrate  our  sacred  and  holy  places,
and  who  say  in  their  hearts,  Let  her
temnles  be  defiled ;  let  adventurers,
profligates  and  libertines  mingle  in
their  family  circles,  and  break  them
asunder,  and  defile  the  daughters  of
Zion  and  break  up  the  holy  institution
of  sacred  and  holy  matrimony,  by
which  they  are  bound  together  in  the
newr  and  everlasting  covenant  for  time
and  eternity  ;  yes,  they  say,  let  this
covenant  be  broken,  let  all  who  be-
lieve and  will  not  deny  the  laws  and
commands  of  God,  be  excluded  from
the  jury-box,  from  the  ballot  box  and
from  official  station.  And  here  comes
another  wail  from  a  member  of  the
Cabinet,  in  the  form  of  a  decision  to
the  effect  that  all  plural  wives,  who
will  not  break  their  covenants  with
their  God  and  their  husband,  shall  be
excluded  from  the  right  of  homestead
and  pre  emption  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but
what  everything  will  be  done  that
Satan  can  put  into  their  hearts  to  do
to  block  the  wheel,  to  hedge  up  the
way,  in  order  to  test  the  faith  of  the
righteous  and  their  integrity  to  each
other  and  the  principles  of  truth.  But
it  must  be  remembered  that  God  per-
mits it,  that  they  may  fill  up  the  cup
of  their  iniquity,  that  the  righteous
may  bs  proven  and  tested,  even  to  the
chore.  For  God  will  have  a  tried
people,  and  those  only  who  will  abide
m  his  covenant,  even  to  the  death  if
necessary,  will  be  found  worthy  of
that  glory  and  exaltation  in  his  king-
dom which  we  seek  after.  It  it  a  day
of  warning,  not  of  many  words  :  it  is
also  a  day  of  sacrifice.  God  has  a
controversy  with  the  nations,  but  first
with  those  unto  whom  the  fullness  of
the  Gospel  has  been  sent  He  will
work  in  his  own  wondrous  way  his
purposes  to  perform.  It  becomes  us
to  be  very  humble,  that  we  may  be
worthy  to  be  his  instruments  in  ac-
complishing his  designs,

I  rejoice  in  the  testimony  of  the
Spirit  manifested  by  the  previous


i


speakers  during  this  Conference.  My
earnest  desire  is  that  the  Spirit  may
spread  abroad  among  all  people  and
take  deep  root  in  their  hearts,  not  only
throughout  the  Stakes  of  Zion.  but
throughout  the  earth.  Dark  clouds
may  gather  around  us  from  time  to
time ;  then  is  the  time  not  to  fear,  but
to  watch  and  pray  and  patiently  await
the  Lord  of  Hosts  to  dispel  them  and
cause  the  sun  to  shine  again  upon  us  ;
remembering  the  vision  of  Nephi,  in
which  he  saw  the  rod  of  iron  which  led
to  the  tree  of  life,  along  the  turbulent
stream  of  muddy  water,  and  through
mists  and  clouds  which  at  intervals  be-
set his  pathway  j  and  that  those  who
clung  to  it  were  led  safely  through
and  reached  the  tree  and  partook  of
the  fruit  thereof,  while  those  who
ceased  their  hold  to  the  rod  of  iron
wandered  off  and  were  lost.

I  have  felt  the  greatest  concern  for
the  rising  generation  among  us ;  they
are  far  more  numerous  than  our  for-
eign immigrants*  Secretary  Evarts
and  the  Cabinet  need  have  far  less
fear  concerning  our  foreign  immigrants
than  of  those  that  are  constantly  com-
ing from  the  spirit  world.  The  ene-
mies of  Zion  fear  this  doctrine  of  the
Saints,  that  "Children  are  an  heritage
of  the  Lord,  *  *  *  and  happy  is  the
man  that  hath  his  quiver  full  of  them."
This  doctrine  permits  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  fulfil  the  first,  great  com-
mand given  to  Father  Adam  and
Mother  Eve,  instead  of  adopting  that
abominable  and  soul-destroying  doc-
trine of  devils,  infanticide  and  foeti-
cide, which  is  practised  to  no  little  ex-
tent in  the  Christian  world,  which  is
in  open  violation  to  the  laws  of  nature
and  the  law  of  God  to  our  first  parents,
to  "  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth,"
And  the  practice  of  this  same  doctrine
is  fast  depopulating  some  of  our  older
States  ;  besides,  it  tends  to  encourage
prostitution  ;  and,  strange  as  it  may
appear,  a  future  day  will  yet  reveal
that  among  the  foremost  and  promi-
nent votaries  of  this  doctrine  of  devils
are  those  who  fight  against  Zion  and
her  institution  of  marriage,  under  the
hypocritical  cant  as  such  men  as
Schuyler  Colfax,  in  his  utterance  from
the  balcony  of  the  Townsend  House
in  this  city,  and  Attorney-General


CLEAVE  TO  LIGHT,  ETC.  375


Devens,  in  his  argument  in  the  j
Reynolds  case,  in  effect,  that  the
plural  marriage  of  thy  Mormons  can-
not be  tolerated,  because  the  burning
of  widows  upon  the  funeral  pile  of
their  husbands  was  wrong.  There  Is
about  as  much  relevancy  and  con-
sistency in  the  argument  as  there
would  be  to  say  that  the  prac-
tices of  the  multitudes  of  families  of
this  Christian  land,  who  are  destroy-'
ing  their  own  offspring  and  taking
villainous  compounds  to  induce  bar-
renness and  unfruitf ulness,  must  be
tolerated  and  encouraged,  because  the
practices  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
filling  these  mountains  with  a  thrifty
po ] vula t ion.  It  is  shown  by  the  sta-
tistics that  our  children  under  the  age
of  eight  years  are  already  nearly  as
numerous  as  the  lay  members  of  the
Church.  I  feel  that  too  much  atten-
tion cannot  be  bestowed  upon  the
r isi  ng  generation.  Our  young  peopled
Improvement  Associations,  our  Bab-
bath  Schools  and  quorum  meetings
are  all  so  many  aids  in  the  training
and  education  of  the  young  in  all  that
is  elevating  and  praiseworthy.  And
may  God  bless  them  in  their  earnest
efforts  to  improve  the  spirits  of  their
fellowmen.

There  is  one  thing  I  wish  to  call  the
attention  of  our  presiding  officers  to,
more  especially,  that  of  the  Presidents
of  Stakes  and  their  counsellors  and
the  Bishops  as  their  aids  and  assist-
ants, and  that  is  to  give  more  diligent
heed  to  the  temporal  condition  of  the
families  of  the  Saints  over  wfhom  they
preside,  seeing  to  it  that  they  are
suitably  and  profitably  employed.  It
is  an  old  adage  that  an  idle  brain  is  the
devil's  workshop  ;  and  we  all  know
that  the  lack  of  useful  and  proper  em-
ployment is  the  source  of  numerous
evils,  It  should  be  our  study  to  in-
troduce new  branches  of  business,  de-
vise means  of  employment,  that  none
may  be  idle.  This  is  an  important  duty
retuiired  of  the  leading  men  in  Israel ;
and  so  earnest  should  th«y  be  in  its
performance  that  they  make  it  a  mat-
ter of  faith  and  prayer,  using  their  ut-
most endeavors  to  seek  it  it  out  by
thoughtful  study,  and  by  consulting
each  other,  and  by  inviting  the  aid  of


inventive  minds.  It  is  important
that  our  school-teachers  should  not
merely  be  automatons  or  parrots  in  the
schoolroom  by  way  of  impressing  a
lesson  upon  the  minds  of  the  children,
but  strive,  in  an  eminent  degree,  to
direct  their  minds  in  a  moral  and  reli-
gious sense,  inculcating,  by  precept
and  example,  due  respect  for  virtue,
(id everything  that  is  pure  and  noble;
having  also,  jus  much  as  practicable  a
watchcare  over  them  out  of  school  as
in  school,  laboring  to  enforce  punctua*
litv  and  an  honest  report,  thereby
helping  their  parents  to  look  after
them,  so  that  they  may  not  squander
away  their  time  foolishly,  as  many  do
in  our  towns  and  cities,  lounging
around  stores  and  other  places,  ac-
quiring habits  that  are  calculated  to
lead  away  and  defile  the  mini  Is  of  the
youth.  The  school- teacher  who  is
alive  to  the  true  spirit  of  his  calling
becomes  a  valuable  auxiliary  in  im-
proving the  minds  and  conduct  of  our
children,  and  his  or  her  influence,
when  properly  excited,  might  be  of  in-
calculable good.

There  has  been  in  times  past,  and
still  is,  a  great  tendency  among  our
;  youth  to  seek  easy  berths  ;  and  some-
times the  acme  of  their  ambition  seems
to  be  realized  upon  a  high  stool  in  a
counting  room,  or  behind  a  counter ;
they  desire  to  shun  the  hardships
through  which  their  parents  passed
That  is  a  vain  delusion,  and  it  is  simply
foolishness  on  the  part  of  parent  or
child  who  indulges  in  it*  It  is  unwise
for  parents  to  entertain  tins  spirit,  to
be  anxious  to  shield  their  children  from
the  trials  of  life  through  which  they
themselves  have  passed  ;  no  really  sen-
sible man  or  woman  would  do  it.
There  is  no  sensible  man  or  woman  in
the  land  thatwould  exchange  their  ex-
perience for  all  the  wealth  of  the
world.  If  any  would  do  it,  they  have
failed  to  learn  their  lesson  and  profit
from  their  experience.  Adversity  is
good  for  all  ;  prosperity  few  can  fear
The  Presidents  of  Stakes,  with  their
Counselors,  and  the  Bishops  as  their
assistants,  should,  when  they  know  of
any  unoccupied  land  within  their  bor-
I  ders  that  ought  to  be  improved  and
1  possessed  by  the  Latter-day  Saints


?76


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


get  together  and  select  young  and
middle-aged  men  who  are  not  already
provided  with  good,  suitable  homes  or
means  of  sustenance,  organize  them
with  good  and  efficient  leaders,  and
send  the!  11  out  to  occupy  those  new
valleys,  teaching  them  -to  do  as  their
fathers  have  done— teach  them  to  take
out  the  mountain  streams,  build  grist-
mills, saw-mills  and  factories,  raise
breadstuff,  .sheep  and  cattle,  and  pre*
pare  to  live,  instead  of  craving  easy
berths,  and  be  all  the  days  of  their
lives  dependent  upon  the  will  of  an
employer  for  a  livelihood.
/  There  are  many  places  in  our  Ter-
ritory east  of  us,  on  both  sides  of
Green  river,  also  in  Sanpete,  Piute
and  Kane  counties,  and  in  the  adjoin-
ing States  and  Territories,  that  ought
to  be  f  occupied  ;  for  the  Latter-
day  Saints  cannot  be  confined  to  ( 'tab.
Everything  indicates  the  fulfilment  of
the  declaration  of  the  ancient  prophet,
who  said  :

"  Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent,  and
let  them  stretch  forth  the  curtains  of
thine  habitations  :  spare  not,  lengthen
thy  cords  and  strengthen  thy  stakes  ;

lfi  For  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the
right  hand  and  on  the  left,"  etc

In  the  very  nature  of  things  this  must
be  the  case  :  for  we  are  an  aggressive
people,  not  to  trample  on  the  rights  of
our  fellow-man,  but  to  fulfil  the  pur-
poses of  the  Almighty,  and  possess  and
make  fruitful  the  waste  places.  And
as  the  wicked  are  wasted  away
through  disease,  war  and  bloodshed,
murder,  infanticide,  foeticide  and  the
judgments  of  an  offended  God,  he  re-
quires his  people  to  go  forth  as  he
shall  prepare  the  way,  and  possess  the
land  and  hold  it  for  God  and  his  king-
dom, whose  it  is,  and  who  will  come
in  due  time  to  reign  over  it.

Fear  not  to  take  to  yourselves  wives
and  to  multiply  and  replenish  the
earth,  and  occupy  the  unoccupied  re-
gions, and  leave  it  not  to  your  enemies
while  you  are  clustering  around  these
mercantile  houses  and  saloons  and
places  of  ease  and  idleness  ;  but  break
out  and  face  the  realities  of  life.  And
let  no  father  or  mother  in  their  old
age  indulge  childish  fancies,  and
encourage  these  whinings  of  their
children ;  but  be  as  courageous  as  the


I


old  hen,  who,  after  scratching  for  her
ty;ood  until  they  are  ab]e  to  scratch
for  themselves,  sends  them  forth  to
get  their  own  living.

We  do  not  wish  to  be  compelled  to
call  men  to  this  work  of  .settling  up
the  country  ;  the  Twelve  and  the
( leneral  Conference  have  other  things
to  occupy  their  time  and  attention,
while  this  work  more  directly  belongs
to  the  Presidents  of  Stakes.  The
Twelve,  however,  are  ready  to  counsel
with  these  brethren  and  render  them
all  the  aid  we  can.  But  we  don't
want  the  Presidents  of  Stakes  to  think
that  they  can  do  nothing,  leaving  the
Twelve  to  attend  to  all  such  things  ;
that  is  part  of  their  calling,  as  fathers
in  Israel.  We  wish  the  country  bor-
dering on  that  occupied  by  the  Laman-
ites  settled  by  men  who  know*  how  to
behave  themselves,  and  who  will  be-
friend that  people,  and  not  shoot  them
down  as  we  would  the  wTi!d  beasts,
without  cause  or  provocation,  nor  give
them  occasion  to  be  our  enemies,  to
lay  in  w  ait  to  rob  and  kill ;  but  to
cultivate  their  love  and  good  will
which  is  a  common  duty  of  all  Saints
to  all  people,  but  especially  to  the
House  of  Israel :  ana  set  good  ex-
amples and  manifest  in  all  their  deal-
ings honesty  and  integrity,  thereby
sowing  good  seed  in  their  hearts,  that
shall  in  the  due  time  of  the  Lord  bring
forth  precious  fruit

We  want  many  earnest  upright
young  men  also  to  learn  the  languages
of  the  natives  of  the  American  Conti-
nent, and  also  the  Spanish  language,
which  is  extensively  used  in  Central
and  South  America  as  well  as  Mexico,
and  which  is  the  national  language  of
those  countries  and  of  the  educated
natives  who  exercise  dominion  over
the  ignorant  Indians  and  the  mixed
races  of  the  Continent.  We  expect  to
call  many  to  labor  among  these  people,
as  the  Lord  may  dictate,  and  we  want
them  to  be  prepared  to  respond  when
there  is  a  whisper  in  their  eais  to  that
effect.

May  God  bless  you,  and  help  us  all
to  be  truly  what  we  are  called  to  be,
Saints  of  the  last  days,  to  stand  before
the  Son  of  Man  when  ne  shall  appear,
is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.
