The Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali
========================================
William Q. Judge (trans.) (1889) — Judge's theosophical Patanjali — the translation that carried yoga philosophy into the Western occult revival. Source: https://archive.org/details/yogaaphorismspa00judggoog. Public domain.

YOGA APHORISMS

OF

PATANJALI

AN INTERPRETATION BY

WILLIAM Q. JUDGE

UNITED LODGE OF THEOSOPHISTS

LOS ANGELES. CALIFORNIA
1920

DEDICATION

L

THIS BOOK IS TAin UPON THE ALTAB

OF masters' cause,

AND IS DEDICATED TO THEIB SERVANT

ir. p. BLAVAT8KY.

ALT. CONCEBN FOE ITS FRUITS OE RESULTS

IS ABANDONED :

THEY ARE LEFT IN CHABQE OP KAMULA.

AND THE UEUBERS OP

THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY

i

PREFACE

TO THE FIEST EDITION

This edition of Patanjali'a Yoga Aphorisms ia
Tiot put forth as a new translation, nor as a lit-
eral renderiog into English of the original.

In the year 1885 an edition was printed at
Bombay by Mr, Tookeram Tatya, a Fellow of
tbe Theosophical Society, which has been since
widely circulated among its members in all parts
of the world. But it bas been of use only to those
who bad enough acquaintance with tbe Indian
Bjstem of philosophy to enable them to grasp
the real meaning of the Aphorisms notwithetand-
tng the great and peculiar obstacles due to the
umnberless brackets and interpolated sentences
with which not only are tlm Aphorisms crowded,
but the so-called explanatory notes as well. For
the greater number of readers these difficulties
have been an almost insurmountable barrier; and
such is the consideration that has led to the pre-
paration of this edition, which attempts to clear
up a work that is thought to be of great value to
earnest students-
It may be said by some captious critics that ,
liberties have been taken with the text, and if
this nere emitted as a textual translation tha

J

▼1 PREFACE.

charge would be true. Instead of this being a
translation, it is offered as an interpretation, as
the thought of Patanjali clothed in our language.
No liberties have been taken with the system of
the great Sage, but the endeavor has been faith-
fully to interpret it to Western minds unfamiliar
with the Hindu modes of expression, and equally
unaccustomed to their philosophy and logic.

About Patanjali 's life very little, if anything,
can be said. In the Budra Jamala, the Vrihan-
nan-dikeshwara and the Padma-Purana are some
meagre statements, more or less legendary, re-
lating to his birth. Illavrita-Yarsha is said to
have been his birthplace, his mother being Sati
the wife of Angira. The tradition runs that
upon his birth he made known things past, present
and future, showing the intellect and penetration
of a sage while yet an infant. He is said to have
married one Lolupa, whom he found in the hollow
of a tree on the north of Sumeru, and thereafter
to have lived to a great age. On one occasion,
being insulted by the inhabitants of Bhotabhandra
while he was engaged in religious austerities, he
reduced them to ashes by fire from his mouth.

That these accounts are legendary and sym-
bolical can be easily seen. niavrita-Yarsha is
no part of India, but is some celestial abode.
The name of India proper is Bharata Yarsha.
**Iii it and nowhere else do the four ages or

Tugas— Krita, Treta, Divapara and KaJi — exist.
Here devotees peiform austerities and priests
sacriflee. In thie respect Bbarata is the most
excellent diTision; for this is the land of works,
while the others are places of enjoyment." In
the Bhagavat-Purana it is said: "Of the Var-
shAS, Bbarata alone is tbe land of works; the
other eight (including Illavrita-Varsha) are
places where the celestials enjoy the remaining
rewards of their works." As Bharata-Varaha
is a division of Jambudwipa, and known as
India, and the other Varahas are for celestials,
it follows that the account of Patanjali'a birth-
place cannot be relied upon in a material sense.
It maj be the ancient method of showing how
great sages cow and then descend from other
spheres to aid and benefit man. But there is
also another Patanjali mentioned in the Indian
books. He was born tn India at Gonarda, in
the east, and from there he went to reside tem-
porarily in Kashmir. Prof. Goldstiiefaer has con-
eluded that this later Patanjali wrote about 140
B, C. His writings were commentaries upon the
great grammarian Panini, and it is in respect to
tbe Sanskrit language that he ia regarded as an
authority. He must not be confounded with Dur
Patanjali; of the latter all that we have is the
Philosophy set forth in the Aphorisms.

Id regard to the systems of Yoga, we cannot
do better than to quote

note some introductory ra- ^H

Vlil PREFACE.

marks made by Col. H. S. Olcott, President of
the Theosophical Society, in the Bombay edition
of these Aphorisms, in August, 1885. He said:

"The Yoga system is divided into two princi-
pal parts — Hatha and Raja Yoga. There are
many minor divisions which can be brought under
either of these heads. Hatha Yoga was pro-
moted and practised by Matsendra Nath and
Goraksh Nath and their followers, and by many
sects of ascetics in this country (India). This
system deals principally with the physiological
part of man with a view to establish his health
and train his will. The processes prescribed to
arrive at this end are so difficult that only a few
resolute souls go through all the stages of its
practice, while many have failed and died in
the attempt. It is therefore strongly denounced
by all the philosophers. The most illustrious
Sankarftchftrya has remarked in his treatise called
Aparokshanubhuti that Hhe system of Hatha
Yoga was intended for those whose worldly de-
sires are not pacified or uprooted.' He has
strongly spoken elsewhere against this practice.

"On the other hand, the Raja Yogis try to
control the mind itself by following the rules
laid down by the greatest of adepts."

Patanjali's rules compel the student not only
to acquire a right knowledge of what is and
what is not real, but also to practice all virtues,
And while results in the way of psychic develop-

ment are not so immediatelj seen as in tbe case
af tbe suefeaaful practitioner of Hatha Yoga,
it is itjfiDitelj safer and is certainly spiritual,
whicli Hatha Yoga is not. In Pataojali's Aphor-
isms there is some slight allusion to the prac-
tices of Hatha Yoga, .snch as "postures," eaeh
of which is more difficult than those preceding,
and "retentiOD of breath," but be distinctly Bays
that mortification and other practices are either
for the purpose of exteQuatLng certain mental
afBctions or for the more easy attaicmeat of
concentration of mind.

In Hatha Yoga practice, on the contrary, the
result is psychic deyelojimeiit at the delay or
expense of the spiritual nature. These last named
praeticee and results may allure the Western
student, but from our knowledge of inherent
racial difficulties there is not much fear that many
will persist in them.

This book is meant for sincere students, and
eepeciallj for those who have some glimmering
of what Krishna meant, irlien in Bbagavad-Oita
he said, that after a while spiritual knowledge
grows up within and illuminates with its rays
all subjects and objects. Students of the mere
forms of Sanscrit who look for new renderings
or laborious attempts at altering the meaning of
words and sentences will find nothing between

It should be ever borne in mind that Patau-

1

X PREFACE.

jali had no need to assert or enforce the doe-
trine of reincarnation. That is assumed all
through the Aphorisms. That it could be doubted,
or need any restatement, never occurred to him,
and by us it is alluded to, not because we have
the smallest doubt of its truth, but only because
we see about us those who never heard of such
a doctrine, who, educated under the frightful
dogmas of Christian priestcraft, imagine that
upon quitting this life they will enjoy heaven or
be damned eternally, and who not once pause to
ask where was their soul before it came into the
present body.

Without Beincarnation Patanjali's Aphorisms
are worthless. Take No. 18, Book III., which
declares that the ascetic can know what were
his previous incarnations with all their circum-
stances; or No. 13, Book II., that while there is
a root of works there is fructification in rank
and years and experience. Both of these infer
reincarnation. In Aphorism 8, Book IV., rein-
carnation is a necessity. The manifestation, in
any incarnation, of the effects of mental depos-
its made in previous lives, is declared to ensue
upon the obtaining of just the kind of bodily
and mental frame, constitution and environment
as will bring them out. Where were these de-
posits received if not in preceding lives on earth
—or even if on other planets, it is still reincar-
nation. And so on all through the Aphorisms this
Jaw is tacitly admitted.

PBETACS. II

Itt order to underatEund the ayatem expounded
in this book it is also necessary to admit the
exiateiiee of soul, and the comparative unimpor-
tauea of the boAj in which it dwells. For Patan-
jali holds that Nature esiBts for the aoul'a sake,
taMng it for granted that the student belie voa
in the esistence of soul. Hence lie does not go
into proof of that which in his day waa admitted
on every hand. And, aa he lays down that the
real esperieocer and knower is the soul and not
the mind, it follows that the Mind, deaignated
either as "internal organ," or "thinking prin-
ciple," while higher and more subtle than the
body, is yet only an instrument used by the Soul
in gaining experience, just m the same w&j u
an astronomer uses his telescope for acquiring
information respecting the heavens. But the Mind
ia a moat important factor in the pursuit of con-
centration; one indeed without which concentra-
tion cannot be obtained, and therefore we see in
the first book that to this aubjert Patanjali de-
votes attention. He shona that the mind is, as he
tenns it, "modified" by any object or aubject
brought before it, or to which it is directed. This
msy be well illustrated by quoting a passage from
the commentator, who says: "The internal organ
ia there "—in the Vedanta Faribliasha—' ' com-
pared to water in respect of its readiness to adapt
itself to the form of whatever mould it may
enter. 'As the water

i

9servoir, having ia- ■

ZU PREFACE.

sued from an aperture, having entered by a chan-
nel the basins, become four-cornered or otherwise
shaped, just like them; so the manifesting in-
ternal organ having gone through the sight, or
other channel, to where there is one object, for
instance a jar, becomes modified by the form of
the jar or other object. It is this altered state
of the internal organ — or mind — that is called
its modification.' " While the internal organ
thus moulds itself upon the object it at the same
time reflects it and its properties to the soul.
The channels by which the mind is held to go
out to an object or subject, are the organs of
sight, touch, taste, hearing and so on. Hence by
means of hearing it shapes itself into the form of
the idea which may be given in speech, or by
means of the eye in reading, it is moulded into the
form of that which is read; again, sensations
such as heat and cold modify it directly and in-
directly by association and by recollection, and
similarly in the case of all senses and sensations.
It is further held that this internal organ, while
having an innate disposition to assume some mod-
ification or other depending upon constantly re-
curring objects— whether directly present or only
such as arise from the power of reproducing
thoughts, whether by association or otherwise,
may be controlled and stilled into a state of ab-
solute calmness. This is what he means by '' hin-
dering the modifications." And just here it is

seen that the theory of the aoul'a being the ra
eiperieneer and knowei is nepessary. For if v
are but mind, or the slaves of mind, ^
attain real knowteijge because t
oraina of objects eternally modifies that mind
nhicb is uncontrolled by the soul, always pre-
venting real knovcledge from being acquired. But
as the Soul ig held to be superior to Mind, it has
the power to grasp and hold the latter if we bnt
nse the will to aid it in the work, find than only
the real end and purpose of mind is brought
about.

These propositions imply that tie will is not
whoOy dependent on the mind, but ia separable
from it; and, further, that knowledge exiBts us
an abstraction. The will and mind are only serv-
ants for the soul 'a use, but so long as we are
wrapped up in material life and do not admit
that the real knower and only eiperiencer is the
soul, just so long do these servauta remain usurp-
ers of the soul's sovereignty. Hence it is stated
in old Hindu works, that "the 8on! is the friend
of Self and also its enemy; and, tliat a man should
raise the self by the self."

In other words there is a conatftnt struggle
between the lower and the Higher Self, in which
the illusions of matter always wage war against
the Son], tending ever to draw downward the
inner principles which, lying midway between the
upper and the lower, are capable of reaching
either salvation or damnation.

XIV PREFACE.

There is no reference in the Aphorisms to the
will. It seems to be inf erred, either as well under-
stood and admitted, or as being one of the powers
of soul itself and not to be discussed. Many old
Hindu writers hold, and we incline to the same
view, that "Will is a spiritual power, function or
attribute constantly present in every portion of
the Universe. It is a colorless power, to which
no quality of goodness or badness is to be as-
signed, but which may be used in whatever way
man pleases. When considered as that which in
ordinary life is called "will," we see its oper-
ation only in connection with the material body
and mind guided by desire; looked at in respect to
the hold by man upon life it is more recondite,
because its operation is beyond the ken of the
mind; analyzed as connected with reincarnation
of man or with the persistence of the manifested
universe throughout a Manvantara, it is found to
be still more removed from our comprehension
and vast in its scope.

In ordinary life it is not man's servant, but,
being then guided solely by desire, it makes man
a slave to his desires. Hence the old cabalistic
maxim, "Behind Will stands Desire." The de-
sires always drawing the man hither and thither,
cause him to commit such actions and have such
thoughts as form the cause and mould for numer-
ous reincarnations, enslaving him to a destiny
is^ainst which he rebels, and that constantly de-

stroja and recreates his mortal body. It is an
error to aay of those who are known aa atrong-
willed men, that their willa are wholly their serv-
ants, for they are eo bound in dee ire that it,
being strong, moTea the will into action for the
consummation of wished for ends. Every day
we see good and evil men prevailing in their sev-
eral epberes. To say that in one there is good,
and in the other evil will is manifestly erroneons
and due to mistaking will, the instrument or force,
for desire that seta it in motion toward a good or
bad purpose. But Fatanjati and his school well
knew that the secret of directing the will viith ten
timea the ordinary force might be discovered if
they outlined the method, and then bad men whose
desires were strong aud conscience wanting, would
use it with impunity against their fellows; or
that even sincere students might be carried away
from spirituality when dazzled by the wonderfal
results flowing from a training of the will alone.
Patanjali is ailent upon the subject for this rea-
son among others.

The system postulates that ZjiAwara, the spirit
in man, is untouched by any troubles, works, fruit
of works, or desbes, and when a firm position ia
assumed with the end in view of reaching union
with spirit through concentration, He comes to the
aid of the lower self and raises it gradually to
higher planes. In this process the Will by degrees
is given a stronger and stronger tendency to act

i

ZVl PREFACE.

upon a different line from that indicated by pas-
sion and desire. Thus it is freed from the domi-
nation of desire and at last subdues the mind it-
self. But before the perfection of the practice
is arrived at the will still acts according to de-
sire, only that the desire is for higher things and
away from those of the material life. Book III
is for the purpose of defining the nature of the
perfected state, which is therein denominated
Isolation,

Isolation of the Soul in this philosophy does
not mean that a man is isolated from his fel-
lows, becoming cold and dead, but only that the
Soul is isolated or freed from the bondage of
matter and desire, being thereby able to act for
the accomplishing of the aim of Nature and Soul,
including all souls of all men. Such, in the Aphor-
isms, is clearly stated to be the purpose. It has
become the habit of many superficial readers
and thinkers, to say nothing of those who oppose
the Hindu philosophy, to assert that Jivanmuktas
or Adepts remove themselves from all life of men,
from all activity, and any participation in human
affairs, isolating themselves on inaccessible moun-
tains where no human cry can reach their ears.
Such a charge is directly contrary to the tenets
of the philosophy which prescribes the method
and means for reaching such a state. These Beings
are certainly removed from human observation,
but, as the philosophy clearly states, they have

PBETAOE. irii

the whole of nature for their ohjeet, and thia
will inelude all Uyiug men. They may not ap-
pear to take any mtereat in transitory improve-
ments or ameliorations, but they work behind the
Bceues of tme enlightenment untU sueb timea as
men Hhall be ablo to endure their appearance in
mortal guise.

The term "knowledge" as nsed here has a
greater meaning than we are accustomed to giv-
ing it. It implies full identification of the mind,
for any length of time, with whatever object or
Babject it is directed to. Modem science and
metaphysics do not admit that the mind can cog-
nize outside of certain given methods and dis-
tances, and in most quarters the existence of soul
is denied or ignored. It is held, for instance, that
one cannot know the constituents and properties
of B piece of stone without mechanical or chemical
aids applied directly to the object; and that noth-
ing can ho known of the thoughts or feelings of
another person unless they are expressed in nords
or acts. Where metaphysicians deal with soul
they are vague and appear to be afraid of science,
because it is not possible to analyze it and weigh
its parts in a balance. Soul and Mind ace re-
duced to the condition of limited instruments which
take note of certain physical facts spread before
them through mechanical aids. Or, in ethnological
investigation, it is held that we can know such
and such things about classes of men from oh-

ZVIU PREVACE.

servations made through sight, touch, sense of
smell and hearing, in which case mind and soul
are still mere recorders. But this system de-
clares that the practicer who has reached certain
stages, can direct his mind to a piece of stone,
whether at a distance or near by, or to a man or
class of men, and by means of concentration, cog-
nize all the inherent qualities of the objects as
well as accidental peculiarities, and know all about
the subject. Thus, in the instance of, say, one
of the Easter Islanders, the ascetic will cognize
not only that which is visible to the senses or to
be known from long observation, or that has been
recorded, but also deeply seated qualities, and the
exact line of descent and evolution of the partic-
ular human specimen under examination. Modem
science can know nothing of the Easter Islanders
and only makes wild guesses as to what they are;
nor can it with any certainty tell what is and
from what came a nation so long before the eye
of science as the Irish. In the case of the Yoga
practitioner he becomes, through the power of
concentration, completely identified with the thing
considered, and so in fact experiences in himself
all the phenomena exhibited by the object as well
as all its qualities.

To make it possible to admit all this, it is first

required that the existence, use and function of

an ethereal medium penetrating everywhere, called

Astral Jjight or Akasa by the Hindus, should be

admitted. The UBivereal distribution of this as
a fact in nature is metaphTSicallj expreBsed in
the terms "Univeraal Brotherhood" and "Spir-
itaal Identity." Iq it, through its aid, and by
its use, the qualities and motions of all objects
are unlvorsally cognizable. It la the surface, so
to say, upon which all human actiona and all
thiugs, thoughts and ciri^umstam^ea are fixed. The
Easter Islander comes of a, stock which has left
its imprint in this Astral Light, and carries with
him in indelible writing the history of his race.
The aacetic in concentration 6xea his atteutiou
upon this, and then reads the record lost to Science,
Every thought of Herbert Spencer, MOl, Bain,
or Huxley is fastened in the Astral Light together
with the reapective systems of Philosophy form-
ulated by them, and all that the aaretic has to do
is to obtain a single point of departure connected
with either of these tMnlcers, and then to read
in the Astral Light all that they have thought out.
By Patanjali and his school, snch feats as these
relate to matter and not to spirit, although to
Western ears they will sound either absurd, or if
believed in, as relating to spirit.

Iq the tbiaga of the spirit and of the mind, the
modern schools seem, to the sincere student of
this Philosophy, to be woefully ignorant. What
spirit may be is absolutely unknown, and indeed,
it cannot yet be stated what it is not. Equally
BO with mental phenomena. As to the latter there

PREFACE.

is nothing but a medley of systems. No one
knows what mind is. One says it is brain and
another denies it; another declares it to be a
function, which a fourth refuses to admit. As to
memory, its place, nature and essential property,
there is nothing offered but empiric deductions.
To explain the simple fact of a man remembering
a circumstance of his early youth, all that is said
is, that it made an impression on his mind or
brain, with no reasonable statement of what is
the mind nor how or where the brain retains sueh
vast quantities of impressions.

With such a chaos in modern psychological sy-
stems, the student of Patanjali feels justified in
adopting something which will, at least, explain
and embrace the greater number of facts, and it
is to be found in the doctrines again brought for-
ward by the Theosophical Society, relating to man
as a Spirit; to a Spirit in nature; to the identity
of all spiritual beings, and to all phenomena, pre-
sented for our consideration.

New Yoric, 1889. William Q. Judge.

THE YOGA APHORiTSMS

OP

PATANJALI.

BOOK I.

CONCENTBATION.

1. Assuredly, the exposition of Yoga,
or Concentration, is now to be
made.

The Sanscrit particle atha, which is trans-
lated "assuredly/' intimates to the disciple
that a distinct topic is to be expounded, demands
his attention, and also serves as a benediction.
Monier Williams says it is "an auspicious and
inceptive particle often not easily expressed in
English. ' '

2. Concentration, or Yoga, is the hin-
dering of the modifications of the
thinking prmciple.

In other words, the want of concentration
of thought is due to the fact that the mind —

2 TOGA APHORISMS

here called "the thinking principle"— is sub-
ject to constant modifications by reason of its
being diffused over a multiplicity of subjects.
So "concentration" is equivalent to the cor-
rection of a tendency to diffuseness, and to the
obtaining of what the Hindus call * ' one-pointed-
ness, ' ' or the power to apply the mind, at any
moment, to the consideration of a single point
of thought, to the exclusion of all else.

Upon this Aphorism the method of the sy-
stem hinges. The reason for the absence of
concentration at any time is, that the mind is
modified by every subject and object that comes
before it; it is, as it were, transformed into
that subject or object. The mind, therefore, is
not the supreme or highest power; it is only a
function, an instrument with which the soul
works, feels sublunary things, and experiences.
The brain, however, must not be confounded
with the mind, for the brain is in its turn but
an instrument for the mind. It therefore fol-
lows that the mind has a plane of its own, dis-
tinct from the soul and the brain, and what is
to be learned is, to use the will, which is also a
distinct power from the mind and brain, in
such a way that instead of permitting the mind
to turn from one subject or object to another
just as they may move it, we shall apply it as

OF PATANJALI. 3

a servant at any time and for as long a period
as we wish, to the consideration of whatever
we have decided upon.

3. At the time of concentration the
soul abides in the state of a spec-
tator without a spectacle.

This has reference to the perfection of con-
centration, and is that condition in which, by
the hindering of the modifications referred to
in Aph, 2f the soul is brought to a state of be-
ing wholly devoid of taint of, or impression by,
any subject. The "soul*' here referred to is
not Atma, which is spirit.

4. At other times than that of con-
centration, the soul is in the same
form as the modification of the
mind.

This has reference to the condition of the
soul in ordinary life, when concentration is not
practised, and means that, when the internal
organ, the mind, is through the senses affected
or modified by the form of some object, the soul
also— viewing the object through its organ, the
mind — is, as it were, altered into that form; as

4 TOGA APHORISMS

a marble statue of snowy whiteness, if seen
under a crimson light will seem to the beholder
crimson and so is, to the visual organs, so long
as that colored light shines upon it.

5. The modifications of the mind are
of five kinds, and they are either
painful or not painful ;

6. They are, Correct Cognition, Mis-
conception, Fancy, Sleep, and Mem-
ory.

7. Correct Cognition results from
Perception, Inference, and Testi-
mony.

8. Misconception is Erroneous No-
tion arisiag from lack of Correct
Cognition.

9. Fancy is a notion devoid of any
real basis and following upon
knowledge conveyed by words.

For instance, the terms "a hare's horns'*
and "the head of Eahu," neither of which has
anything in nature corresponding to the notion.

OF PATANJALI. 5

A person hearing the expression ''the head of
Bahu" naturally fancies that there is a Bahu
who owns the head, whereas Bahu— a mythical
monster who is said to cause eclipses by swallow-
ing the sun— is all head and has no body; and^
although the expression "a hare's horns" is
frequently used, it is well known that there is
no such thing in nature. Much in the same way
people continue to speak of the sun 's ' ' rising ' '
and "setting," although they hold to the op-
posite theory.

10. Sleep is that modification of the
mind which ensues upon the quit-
ting of all objects by the mind, by
reason of all the waking senses and
faculties sinking into abeyance.

11. Memory is the not letting go of an
object that one has been aware of.

12. The hindering of the modifications
of the mind already referred to, is
to be effected by means of Exercise
and Dispassion.

13. Exercise is the uninterrupted, or

6 YOGA APHORISMS

repeated, effort that the mind shall
remain in its unmoved state.

This is to say that in order to acquire con-
centration we must, again and again, make ef-
forts to obtain such control over the mind that
we can, at any time when it seems necessary,
so reduce it to an unmoved condition or apply
it to any one point to the exclusion of all others.

14. This exercise is a finn position
observed out of regard for the end
in view, and perseveringly adhered
to for a long time without intermis-
sion.

The student must not conclude from this that
he can never acquire concentration unless he de-
votes every moment of his life to it, for the
words * ' without intermission ' ' apply but to the
length of time that has been set apart for the
practice.

15. DispaSiSion is the having overcome
one's desires.

That is— the attainment of a state of be-
ing in which the consciousness is unaffected by

OF PATANJALI. 7

passions, desires, and ambitions, which aid in
causing modifications of the mind.

16. Dispassion, carried to the utmost,
is indifference regarding all else
than soul, and this indifference
arises from a knowledge of soul as
distinguished from all else.

17. There is a meditation of the kind
called 'Hhat in which there is dis-
tinct cognition, '* and which is of a
four-fold character because of Ar-
gumentation, Deliberation, Beati-
tude, Egoism.

The sort of meditation referred to is a pon-
dering wherein the nature of that which is to
be pondered upon is well known, without doubt
or error, and it is a distinct cognition which ex-
cludes every other modification of the mind than
that which is to be pondered upon.

(1) The Argumentative division of this medi-
tation is a pondering upon a subject with argu-
ment as to its nature in comparison with some-
thing else; as, for instance, the question whether

8 YOGA APHOKISMS

mind is the product of matter or precedes
matter.

(2) The Deliberative division is a ponder-
ing in regard to whence have come, and where
is the field of action, of the subtler senses and
the mind.

(^) The Beatific condition is that in which
the higher powers of the mind, together with
truth in the abstract, are pondered upon.

(*) The Egoistic division is one in which the
meditation has proceeded to such a height that
all lower subjects and objects are lost sight of,
and nothing remains but the cognition of the
self, which then becomes a stepping-stone to
higher degrees of meditation.

The result of reaching the fourth degree,
called Egoism, is that a distinct recognition of
the object or subject with which the meditation
began is lost, and self -consciousness alone re-
sults; but this self -consciousness does not in-
clude the consciousness of the Absolute or Su-
preme Soul.

18. The meditation just described is
preceded by the exercise of thought
without argumentation. Another
sort of meditation is in the shape

OF PATANJALI. 9

of the self reproduction of thought
after the departure of all objects
from the field of the mind.

19. The meditative state attained by
those whose discrimination does
not extend to pure spirit, depends
upon the phenomenal world.

20. In the practice of those who are,
or may be, able to discriminate as
to pure spirit, their meditation is
preceded by Faith, Energy, Intent-
ness (upon a single point), and
Discernment, or thorough discrim-
ination of that which is to be known.

It is remarked here by the commentator, that
**in him who has Faith there arises Energy, or
perseverance in meditation, and, thus persever-
ing, the memory of past subjects springs up, and
his mind becomes absorbed in Intentness, in
consequence of the recollection of the subject,
and he whose mind is absorbed in meditation

10 YOGA APHORISMS

arrives at a thorough discernment of the matter
pondered upon. ' *

21. The attainment of the state of ab-
stract meditation is speedy, in the
case of the hotly impetnons.

22. Because of the mild, the medium,
and the transcendent nature of the
methods adopted, there is a distinc-
tion to be made among those who
practise Yoga.

23. The state of abstract meditation
may be attained by profound de-
votedness toward the Supreme
Spirit considered in its comprehen-
sible manifestation as Ishwara.

It is said that this profound devotedness is
a pre-eminent means of attaining abstract medi-
tation and its fruits. ** Ishwara" is The Spirit
in the body.

24. Ishwara is a spirit, untouched by
troubles, Works, fruits of works, or
desires.

25. In Ishwara becomes infinite that

OF PATANJALI. 11

omniscience which in man exists but
as a germ.

26. Ishwara is the preceptor of all,
even of the earliest of created be-
ings, for He is not limited by time.

27. His name is OM.

28. The repetition of this name should
be made with reflection upon its
signification.

Om is the first letter of the Sanscrit alpha-
bet. Its utterance involves three sounds, those
of long au, short u, and the ''stoppage'' or
labial consonant m. To this tripartiteness is
attached deep mystical symbolic meaning. It
denotes, as distinct yet in union, Brahma, Vish-
nu, and Siva, or Creation, Preservation, and De-
struction. As a whole, it implies **the Uni-
verse. " In its application to man ; au, refers to
the spark of Divine Spirit that is in humanity;
u, to the body through which the Spirit mani-
fests itself; and m, to the death of the body, or
its resolvement to its material elements. With
regard to the cycles affecting any planetary sys-
tem, it implies the Spirit, represented by au

12 YOGA APHORISMS

as the basis of the manifested worlds; the body
or manifested matter, represented by u, through
which the spirit works; and, represented by m,
' ' the stoppage or return of sound to its source, ' '
the Pralaya or Dissolution of the worlds. In
practical occultism, through this word refer-
ence is made to Sound, or Vibration, in all its
properties and effects, this being one of the
greatest powers of nature. In the use of this
word as a practice, by means of the lungs and
throat, a distinct effect is produced upon the
human body. In Aph, 28 the name is used in
its highest sense, which will necessarily include
all the lower. All utterance of the word Om,
as a practice, has a potential reference to the
conscious separation of the soul from the body.

29. From this repetition and reflec-
tion on its significance, there come
a knowledge of the Spirit and the
absence of obstacles to the attain-
ment of the end in view.

30. The obstacles in the way of him
who desires to attain concentration
are Sickness, Languor, Doubt,
Carelessness, Laziness, Addiction

or PATANJALI. 13

to objects of sense, Erroneous Per-
ception, Failure to attain any stage
of abstraction, and Instability in
any state when attained.

31. These obstacles are accompanied
by grief, distress, trembling, and
sighing.

32. For the prevention of these, one
truth should be dwelt upon.

Any accepted truth which one approves, is
here meant.

33. Through the practicing of Benev-
olence, Tendetmess, Complacency,
and Disregard for objects of hap-
piness, grief, virtue, and vice, the
mind becomes purified.

The chief occasions for distraction of the
mind are Govetousness and Aversion, and what
the aphorism means is, not that virtue and vice
should be viewed with indifference by the stu-
dent, but that he should not fix his mind with
pleasure upon happiness or virtue, nor with aver-

14 YOGA APHORISMS

sion upon grief or vice, in others, but should
regard all with an equal mind; and the practice
of Benevolence, Tenderness, and Complacency
brings about cheerfulness of the mind, which
tends to strength and steadiness.

34. Distractions may be combatted by
a regulated control or management
of the breath in inspiration, reten-
tion, and exhalation.

35. A means of procurement of stead-
iness of the mind may be found in
an immediate sensuous cognition;

36. Or, an immediate cognition of a
spiritual subject being produced,
this may also serve to the same end ;

37. Or, the thought taking as its ob-
ject some one devoid of passion —
as, for instance, an ideally pure
character — may find what will
serve as a means ;

38. Or, by dwelling on knowledge that

L

or PATANJALt. 15

presents itself in a dream, steadi-
ness of mind may be procured;

39. Or, it may be effected by ponder-
ing upon anything that one ap-
proves.

40. The student whose mind is thus
steadied obtains a mastery which
extends from the Atomic to the In-
finite.

41. The mind that has been so trained
that the ordinary modifications of
its action are not present, but only
those which occur upon the con-
scious taking up of an object for
contemplation, is changed into the
likeness of that which is pondered
upon, and enters into full compre-
hension of the being thereof.

42. This change of the mind into the
likeness of what is pondered upon,
is technically called the Argumen-
tative condition, when there is any

16 YOGA APHORISMS

mixing-up of the title of the thing,
the significance and application of
that title, and the abstract knowl-
edge of the qualities and elements
of the thing per se.

43. On the disappearance, from the
plane of contemplation, of the title
and significance of the object se-
lected for meditation ; when the ab-
stract thing itself, free from dis-
tinction by designation, is present-
ed to the mind only as an entity,
that is what is called the Non-Ar-
gumentative condition of medita-
tion.

These two aphorisms (42-43) describe the
first and second stages of meditation, in the
mind properly intent upon objects of a gross or
material nature. The next aphorism has refer-
ence to the state when subtile, or higher, ob-
jects are selected for contemplative meditation.

44. The Argumentative and Non-Ar-
gumentative conditions of the mind,

or PATANJALI. 17

described in the preceding two
aphorisms, also obtain when the ob-
ject selected for meditation is sub-
tile, or of a higher nature than sen-
suous objects.

45. That meditation which has a sub-
tile object in view ends with the
indissoluble element called pri-
mordial matter.

46. The mental changes described in
the foregoing, constitute ''medita-
tion with its seed.'*

''Meditation with its seed" is that kind of
meditation in which there is still present be-
fore the mind a distinct object to be meditated
upon.

47. When Wisdom has been reached,
through acquirement of the non-de-
liberative mental state, there is
spiritual clearness.

48. In that case, then, there is that
Knowledge which is absolutely free
from Error.

18 YOGA APHORISMS

49. This kind of knowledge differs
from the knowledge due to testi-
mony and inference ; because, in the
pursuit of knowledge based upon
those, the mind has to consider
many particulars and is not en-
gaged with the general field of
knowledge itself.

50. The train of self-reproductive
thought resulting from this puts a
stop to all other trains of thought.

It is held that there are two main trains of
thought; (a) that which depends upon sugges-
tion made either by the words of another, or by
impression upon the senses or mind, or upon
association; (h) that which depends altogether
upon itself, and reproduces from itself the same
thought as before. And when the second sort
is attained, its effect is to act as an obstacle to
all other trains of thought, for it is of such a
nature that it repels or expels from the mind
any other kind of thought. As shown in Aph.
4S, the mental state called ''non-argumenta-
tive" is absolutely free from error, since it has

OF PATANJALl. 19

nothing to do with testimony or inference, but
is knowledge itself, and therefore from its in-
herent nature it puts a stop to all other trains
of thought.

51. This train of thought itself, with
but one object, may also be stopped,
in which case ''meditation without
a seed" is attained.

''Meditation without a seed" is that in
which the brooding of the mind has been pushed
to such a point that the object selected for medi-
tation has disappeared from the mental plane,
and there is no longer any recognition of it, but
consequent progressive thought upon a higher
plane.

END or THE riRST BOOK.

20 YOGA APHORISMS

BOOK n.

Means of Concentration.

1. The practical part of Concentra-
tion is, Mortification, Muttering,
and Eesignation to the Supreme
Soul.

What is here meant by "mortification" is
the practice laid down in other books, such as
the Dharma STuistra, which includes penances
and fastings; "muttering" is the semi-audible
repetition of formulae also laid down, preceded
by the mystic name of the Supreme Being given
in Aph, 27, Book I ; " resignation to the Supreme
Soul," is the consigning to the Divine, or the
Supreme Soul, all one's works, without interest
in their results.

2. This practical part of concentra-
tion is for the purpose of establish-
ing meditation and eliminating
aflBictions.

or PATANJALI. 21

3. The affictions which arise in the
disciple are Ignorance, Egoism,
Desire, Aversion, and a tenacious
wish for existence upon the earth.

4. Ignorance is the field of origin of
the others named, whether they be
dormant, extenuated, intercepted,
or simple.

5. Ignorance is the notion that the
non-eternal, the impure, the evil,
and that which is not soul are, sev-
erally, eternal, pure, good and soul.

6. Egoism is the identifying of the
power that sees with the power of
seeing.

t. e. It is the confounding of the soul, which
really sees, with the tool it uses to enable it to
see, viz., the mind, or — to a still greater degree
of error — with those organs of sense which "are
in turn the tools of the mind; as, for instance,
when an uncultured person thinks that it is his
eye which sees, when in fact it is his mind that
uses the eye as a tool for seeing.

22 YOGA APHORISMS

7. Desire is the dwelling upon pleas-
ure.

8. Aversion is the dwelling upon
pain.

9. The tenacious wish for existence
upon earth is inherent in all sen-
tient beings, and continues through
all incarnations, because it has self-
reproductive power. It is felt as
well by the wise as the unwise.

There is in the spirit a natural tendency,
throughout a Manvantara, to manifestation on
the material plane, on and through which only,
the spiritual monads can attain their develop-
ment; and this tendency, acting through the
physical basis common to all sentient beings,
is extremely powerful and continues through all
incarnations, helping to cause them, in fact, and
re-producing itself in each incarnation.

10. The foregoing five aflBictions, when
subtile, are. to be evaded by the pro-
duction of an antagonistic mental
state.

OP PATAHJALI. 23 ■

11. "When these afflictions modify the 1

1 mind by pressing themselves upon 1

the attention, they are to be got rid 1

of by meditation.

12. Sneh afflictions are the root of, and

produce, results in both physical

and mental actions or works, and

they, being our merits or demerits,

have their fruitage either in the vis-

ible state or that which is unseen.

13. Wliile that root of merit and de-

merit exists, there is a fructifica-

tion during each succeeding life

upon earth in rank, years, pleasure,

or pain.

14. Happiness or suffering results, as

the fruit of merit and demerit, ac-

cordingly as the cause is virtue or

; vice.

15. But to that man who has attained

i to the perfection of spiritual culti-

L

24 YOGA APHORISMS

vation, all mundane things are
alike vexatious, since the modifica-
tions of the mind due to the natural
qualities are adverse to the attain-
ment of the highest condition; be-
cause, until that is reached, the oc-
cupation of any form of body is a
hindrance, and anxiety and impres-
sions of various kinds ceaselessly
continue.

16. That which is to be shunned by
the disciple is pabi not yet come.

The past cannot be changed or amended;
that which belongs to the experiences of the
present cannot, and should not, be shunned; but
alike to be shunned are disturbing anticipations
or fears of the future, and every act or impulse
that may cause present or future pain to our-
selves or others.

17. From the fact that the soul is con-
joined in the body with the organ
of thought, and thus with the whole
of nature, lack of discrimination
follows, producing misconceptions

OV PATANJALI. 25

of duties and responsibilities. This
misconception leads to wrongful
acts, which will inevitably bring
about pain in the future.

18. The Universe, including the vis-
ible and the invisible, the essential
nature of which is compounded of
purity, action, and rest, and which
consists of the elements and the or-
gans of action, exists for the sake
of the soul's experience and eman-
cipation.

19. The divisions of the qualities are
the diverse, the non-diverse, those
which may be resolved once but no
farther, and the irresolvable.

The "diverse" are such as the gross ele-
ments and the organs of sense; the "non-di-
verse/' the subtile elements and the mind; the
"once resolvable," the intellect, which can be
resolved into undifferentiated matter but no
farther; and the "irresolvable," indiscrete
matter.

26 YOGA APHORISMS

20. Tihe soul is the Perceiver; is as-
suredly vision itself pure and sim-
ple ; unmodified ; and looks directly
upon ideas.

21. For the sake of the soul alone, the
Universe exists.

The commentator adds: "Nature in ener-
gizing does not do so with a view to any pur-
pose of her own, but with the design, as it were,
expressed in the words 'let me bring about the
soul's experience.' "

22. Although the .Universe in its ob-
jective state has ceased to be, in
respect to that man who has at-
tained to the perfection of spiritual
cultivation, it has not ceased in re-
spect to all others, because it is com-
mon to others besides him.

23. The conjuncture of the soul with
the organ of thought, and thus with
nature, is the cause of its appre-
hension of the actual condition of

OF PATANJALI. 27

the nature of the Undverse and of
the soul itself.

24. The cause of this conjuncture is
what is to be quitted, and that cause
is ignorance.

25. The quitting consists in the ceas-
ing of the conjuncture, upon which
ignorance disappears, and this is
the Isolation of the soul.

That which is meant in this and in the pre-
ceding two aphorisms is that the conjuncture
of soul and body, through repeated re-incarna-
tions, is due to its absence of discriminative
knowledge of the nature of the soul and its
environment, and when this discriminative
knowledge has been attained, the conjuncture,
which was due to the absence of discrimination,
ceases of its own accord.

26. The means of quitting the state of
bondiage to matter is perfect dis-
criminative knowledge, continu-
ously maintained.

The import of this— among other things— is

28 YOGA APHORISMS

that the man who has attained to the perfec-
tion of spiritual cultivation maintains his con-
sciousness, alike while in the body, at the mo-
ment of quitting it, and when he has passed
into higher spheres; and likewise when return-
ing continues it unbroken while quitting higher
spheres, when re-entering his body, and in re-
suming action on the material plane.

27. Tiiis perfect discriminative knowl-
edge possessed by the man who has
attained to the perfection of spir-
itual cultivation, is of seven kinds,
up to the limit of meditation.

28. Until this perfect discriminative
knowledge is attained, there results
from those practices which are con-
ducive to concentration, an illumi-
nation more or less brilliant which
is effective for the removal of im-
purity.

29. The practices which are conducive
to concentration are eight in num-
ber: Forbearance, Religious Ob-

or FATANJAU. 29

servancea, Postures, Suppreasion

of the breath, Kestraint, Attention,
Contemplation, and Meditation.

30. Forbearance consists in not kill-
ing, veracity, not stealing, conti-
nence, and not coveting.

31. These, without respect to rank,
place, time, or compact, are the uni-
versal great duties.

32. Religious Observances are purifi-
cation of both mind and body, con-
tentment, austerity, inaudible mut-
terings, and persevering devotion
to the Supreme Soul.

33. In order to exclude from the mind
questionable things, the mental
calling up of those things that are
opposite is efficacious for their re-
moval.

34. Questionable things, whether done,
caused to be done, or approved of;
whether resulting from covetous-

J

30 YOGA APHOBISMS

ness, anger, or delusion; whether

slight, or of intermediate character,

or beyond measure, are productive

- of very many fruits in the shape of

-i pain and ignorance; hence, the

* 'calling up of those things that are

f2f opposite ' * is in every way advisable.

•

35. When harmlessness and kindness

^. are fully developed in the Togee

(him who has attained to cultivat-

. ed enlightenment of the soul), there

•ip a complete absence of enmity,

both in men and animals, among all

jj^^^at are near to him.

QAadfflien veracity is complete, the
9iBTfegee becomes the focus for the
-oiHaerma resulting from all works,
good or bad.

'Sf.^iWfien abstinence from theft, in
' mm<i and act, is complete in the

f ......^ . \

i Yogee, he has the power to obtain ^

all material wealth.

38. When continence is complete,
there is a gain of strength, in body

I and mind.

It is Dot meaDt here that a. student prac-
ticing continence aolel?, and neglecting the
other practices enjoiaed, will gain Htieogth. All
parts of the system must be pursued concur-
rently, on the mental, moral, and physical
planes.

39. When covetousness is eliminated
there comes to the Yogee a knowl-
edge of everything relating to, or
that which baa taken place in, for-
mer states of existence.

" CovetouBnesa " here applies not only to
coveting any object, but also to the desire for
enjoyable conditions of mundane existenco, or
even mundane exlBtence itself.

i 40. From pnrifieation of the mind and

I body there arises in the Yogee a

thorough discernment of the cause
and nature of the body, whereupon

L

32 YOGA APH0SI8MS

he loses that regard which others

have for the bodUy form; and he

also ceases to feel the desire of, or

necessity for, association with ihis

fellow - beings that is common

among other men.

t : 41. From purification of the mind and

;: body also ensue to the Yogee a com-

Ji plete predominance of the quality

of goodness, complacency, intent-
mi ness, subjugation of the senses, and

i!^ fitness for contemplation and com-

!li prehension of the soul as distinct

*'* from nature.

42. From contentment in its perfec-
tion the Yogee acquires superlative
felicity.

43. When austerity is thoroughly
practiced by the Yogee, the result
thereof is a perfecting and height-
ening of the bodily senses by the
removal of impurity.

OF PATANJALI. 33

44. Through inaudible muttering there
is a meeting with one's favorite
Deity.

B7 properly uttered invocations— here re-
ferred to in the significant phrase ''inaudible
mutterings/ ' the higher powers in nature, or-
dinarily unseen by man, are caused to reveal
themselves to the sight of the Yogee ; and, inas-
much as all the powers in nature cannot be
evoked at once, the mind must be directed to
some particular force, or power in nature—
hence the use of the term ' ' with one 's favorite
Deity."

45. Perfection in meditation oomes
from persevering devotion to the
Supreme Soul.

46. A posture assumed by a Yogee
must be steady and pleasant.

For the clearing up of the mind of the stu-
dent it is to be observed that the "postures"
laid down in various systems of "Yoga" are
not absolutely essential to the successful pur-
suit of the practice of concentration and attain-
ment of its ultimate fruits. All such "pos-
tures," as prescribed by Hindu writers, are
based upon an accurate knowledge of the phy-

34 YOGA APHORISMS

Biological effects produced hj them, but at the
present day they are only possible for Hindus,
who from their earliest years are accustomed to
assuming them.

47. When cominand over the postures
has been thoroughly attained, the
effort to assume them is easy; and
when the mind has become thor-
oughly identified with the bound-
lessness of space, the jwsture be-
comes steady and pleasant.

48. When this condition has been at-
tained, the Yogee feels no assaults
from the pairs of opposites.

By ''pairs of opposites" reference is made
to the conjoined classification, all through the
Hindu philosophical and metaphysical systems,
of the opposite qualities, conditions, and states
of being, which are eternal sources of pleasure
or pain in mundane existence, such as cold and
heat, hunger and satiety, day and night, poverty
and riches, liberty and despotism.

49. Also, when this condition has been

or PATANJALI. 35

attained, there should succeed regu-
lation of the breath, in exhalation,
inhalation, and retention.

50. This regulation of the breath,
which is in exhalation, inhalation,
and retention, is further restricted
by conditions of time, place, and
number, each of which may be long
or short.

51. There is a special variety of breath
regulation which has reference to
both that described in the last pre-
ceding aphorism and the inner
sphere of breathing.

Aphorisms 49-50-51 allude to regulation of
the breath as a portion of the physical exercises
referred to in the note upon Aph. 46, acquaint-
ance with the rules and prescriptions for which,
on the part of the student, is inferred by Patan-
jalL Aph, 50 refers merely to the regulation of
the several periods, degrees of force, and num-
ber of alternating recurrences of the three divi-
sions of breathing,— exhalation, inhalation, and

36 YOOA APHORISMS

retention of the breath. But ApK 51 alludes to
another regulation of the breath, which is its
governance hj the mind so as to control its di-
rection to and consequent influence upon cer-
tain centres of nerve perception within the hu-
man body for the production of physiological,
followed by psychical effects.

52. By means of this regulation of the
breath, the obscuration of the mind
resulting from the influence of the
body is removed.

53. And thus the mind becomes pre-
pared for acts of attention.

54. Eestraint is the accommodation of
the senses to the nature of the mind,
with an absence on the part of the
senses of their sensibility to direct
impression from objects.

55. Therefrom results a complete sub-
jugation of the senses.

END OF SECOND BOOK.

OF PATANJALI. 37

BOOK m.

1. Fixing the mind on a place, ob-
ject, or subject is attention.

This is called DTiaranci.

2. The continuance of this attention
is contemplation.

This is called Dhyana,

3. This contemplation, when it is
practiced only in respect to a ma-
terial subject or object of sense, is
meditation.

This is called Samddi,

4. When this fixedness of attention,
contemplation, and meditation are
practiced with respect to one ob-
ject, they together constitute what
is called Sanyama.

We have no word in English corresponding
to Sanyama, The translators have used the
word restraint, but this is inadequate and mis-

\

38 YOGA APHORISMS

leading, although it is a correct translation.
When a Hindu says that an ascetic is practicing
restraint according to this system in respect
to any object, he means that he is performing
Sanyama, while in English it may indicate that
he is restraining himself from some particular
thing or act, and this is not the meaning of
Sanyama. We have used the language of the
i. * text, but the idea may perhaps be better con-

J3 veyed by "perfect concentration."

II 5. By rendering Sanyama^r the

"" operation of fixed attention, con-

Si templation, and meditation — ^nat-

J:: ural and easy, an accurate discem-

;ll ing power is developed.

'*' This "discerning power" is a distinct fa-

culty which this practice alone develops, and is
not possessed by ordinary persons who have not
pursued concentration.

6. Sanyama is to be used in proceed-
ing step by step in ovorcoming all
modifications of the mind, from the
more apparent to those the most
subtle.

r

OF PATANJAU. 39

(See note to Aph. 2, Book I.) The student
18 to know that after Le haa otercome the afflic-
tions and obstractioaB described in the preced-
ing books, there are other modifications of a
recondite character suffered by the mind, which
are to be gat rid of by means of Sanyama.
When be htis reached that stage the difficulties
will reveal themselves to him.

. The three practices — attention,
contemplation, and meditation — are
more efficacious for the attainment
of that kind of meditation called,
"that in which l^ere is distinct cog-
nition," than the first five means
heretofore described as "not kill-
ing, veracity, not -stealing, contin-
ence, and not coveting."

See Aph. 17, Book I.

, Attention, contemplation and med-
itation are anterior to and not im-
mediately productive of that kind
of meditation in which the distinct
cognition of the object is lost, which

40 YOGA APHORISMS

is called meditation without a seed.

9. There are two trains of self-re-
productive thought, the first of
which results from the mind being
modified and shifted by the object
or subject contemplated; the sec-
ond, when it is passing from that
modificiation and is becoming en-
gaged only with the truth itself;
at the moment when the first is
subdued and the mind is just be-
coming intent, it is concerned in
both of those two trains of self -re-
productive thought, and this state
is technically called Nirodha.

10. In that state of meditation which
has been called Nirodha, the mind
has an uniform flow.

11. When the mind has overcome and
fully controlled its natural inclina-
tion to consider diverse objects.

0? PATANJALI. 41

and begins to become intent upon a
single one, meditation is said to be
reached.

12. When the mind, after becoming
fixed upon a single object, has
ceased to be concerned in any
thought about the condition, quali-
ties, or relations of the thing
thought of, but is absolutely fast-
ened upon the object itself, it is
then said to be intent upon a single
point — ^a state teehnieally called
Ekagrata.

13. The three major classes of percep-
tion regarding the characteristic
property, distinctive mark or use,
and possible changes of use or rela-
tion of any object or organ of the
body contemplated by the mind,
have been sufficiently explained by
the foregoing exposition of the

1.

42 YOGA APHORISMS

manner in which the mind is modi-
fied.

It is very difficult to put this aphorism
into English. The three words translated as
** characteristic property, distinctive mark or
use, and possible change of use'' are Dharma,
LaJcahana, and Avastha, and may be thus
illustrated: Dharma, as, say, the clay of which
a jar is composed; Lakahana, the idea of a
jar thus constituted, and Avastha, the con-
sideration that the jar alters every moment,
in that it becomes old, or is otherwise affected.

14. The properties of an object pre-
sented to the mind are : first, those
which have been considered and
dismissed from view; second, those
under consideration; and third,
that which is incapable of denomi-
nation because it is not special, but
common to all matter.

The third class above spoken of has refer-
ence to a tenet of the philosophy which holds
that all objects may and will be finally ** re-
solved into nature" or one basic substance;
hence gold may be considered as mere matter.

OV PATANJALI. 43

and therefore not different— not to be separ-
ately denominated in final analTsis— from earth.

15. The alterations in the order of the
three-fold mental modifications be-
fore described, indicate to the
ascetic the variety of changes
which a characteristic property is
to undergo when contemplated.

16. A knowledge of past and future
events oomes to an ascetic from his
performing Sanyama in respect to
the three-fold mental modifications
just explained.

See Aphorism 4, where "Sanyama" is ex-
plained as the use or operation of attention,
contemplation, and meditation in respect to a
single object.

17. In the minds of those w^ho have
not attained to concentration, there
is a confusion as to uttered sounds,
terms, and Imowledge, which results
from comprehending these three in-

44 YOGA APHOBISMS

discriminately ; but when an ascetic
views these separately, by perform-
ing ''Sanyama*^ respecting them,
he attains the power of nnderstand-
ing the meaning of any sonnd
uttered by any sentient being.

18. A knowledge of the occurrences
experienced in former incarna-
tions arises in the ascetic from
holding before his mind the trains
of self-reproductive thought and
concentrating himself upon them.

19. The nature of the mind of another
person becomes known to the
ascetic when he concentrates his
own mind upon that other person.

20. Such concentration will not, how-
ever, reveal to the ascetic the fun-
damental basis of the other per-
son's mind, because he does not

"perform Sanyama" with that ob-
ject before him.
21. By perfbrmiiig concentration in
regard to the properties and essen-
tial nature of form, especially that
of the human body, the ascetic ac-
quires the power of causing the dia-
appearance of his oorporeal frame
from the sight of others, because
thereby its property of being appre-
hended by the eye is checked, and
that property of Satwa which ex-
hibits itself as luminousness is dis-
connected from the spectator's or-
gan of sight.

Aootlier great difference between thiB pliit-
OBOph}' and modern science is here indicated.
The achools of to-dtty la; down the rule that if
there is n healthy eje in line with the rajB of
light reflected from an object— such as a hu-
man body— the latter will be seen, and that no
action of the mind of the person looked at can
inhibit the functions of the optic nei

J

46 TOOA APHORISMS

retina of the onlooker. But the ancient Hindus
held that all things are seen by reason of that
differentiation of Satwa— one of the three great
qualities composing all things— which is mani-
fested as luminousnessy operating in conjunc-
tion with the eye, which is also a manifestation
of Satwa in another aspect. The two must con-
join; the absence of luminousness or its being
disconnected from the seer's eye will cause a
disappearance. And as the quality of luminous-
ness is completely under the control of the as-
cetic, he can, by the process laid down, check
it, and thus cut off from the eye of the other an
essential element in the seeing of any object.

22. In the same maimer, by perform-
ing Sanyama in regard to any par-
ticular organ of sense — such as that
of hearing, or of feeling, or of tast-
ing, or of smelling — the ascetic ac-
quires the power to cause cessation
of the functions of any of the organs
of another or of himself, at wall.

The ancient commentator differs from
others with regard to this aphorism, in that he

OF PATANJALl. 47

asserts that it is a portion of the original text,
while they affirm that it is not, but an interpola-
tion.

23. Action is of two kinds; first, that
accompanied by anticipation of con-
sequences; second, that which is
without any anticipation of conse-
quences. By performing concen-
tration with regard to these kinds
of action, a knowledge arises in the
ascetic as to the time of his death.

Karma, resultant from actions of both kinds
in present and in previous incarnations, pro-
duces and affects our present bodies, in which
we are performing similar actions. The ascetic,
by steadfastly contemplating all his actions in
this and in previous incarnations (see Aph, 18),
is able to know absolutely the consequences re-
sultant from actions he has performed, and
hence has the power to calculate correctly the
exact length of his life.

24. By performing concentration in
regard to benevolence, tenderness,
complacency, and disinterested-

48 TOGA APHORISMS

ness, the ascetic is able to acquire
the friendship of whomsoever he
may desire.

25. By performing concentration with
regard to the powers of the ele-
ments, or of the animal kingdom,
the ascetic is able to manifest those
in himself.

26. By concentrating his mind upon
minute, concealed or distant objects,
in every department of nature, the
ascetic acquires thorough knowl-
edge concerning them.

27. By concentrating his mind upon
the sun, a knowledge arises in the
ascetic concerning all spheres be-
tween the earth and the sun.

28. By concentrating his mind upon
the moon, there arises in the ascetic
a knowledge of the fixed stars.

29. By concentrating his mind upon
the polar star, the ascetic is able

to know the fixed time and motion
of every star in the Brahmanda of
which this earth is a part.

"Brahmanda" here meaoB the great ajBtom,
called by some "universe," in which this
world JB.

30. By concentrating his mind upon
the aolar plexus, the ascetic ac-
quires a knowledge of the structure
of the material body.

31. By concentrating his mind upon
the nerve center in the pit of the
throat, the ascetic is able to over-
come hunger and thirst.

32. By concentrating his mind upon
the nerve center below the pit of
the throat, the ascetic is able to pre-
vent his body being moved, without
any resistant exertion of his mus-
cles.

33. By concentrating his mind upon
the light in the head the ascetic

50 TOGA APHORISMS

acquires the power of seeing divine
beings.

There are two inferences here which have
nothing to correspond to them in modem
thought. One is, that there is a light in the
head; and the other, that there are divine be-
ings who may be seen by those who thus con-
centrate upon the ''light in the head.'' It is
held that a certain nerve, or psychic current,
called Brahmarandhra-nadi, passes out through
the brain near the top of the head. In this
there collects more of the luminous principle in
nature than elsewhere in the body and it is
called jyotis—the light in the head. And, as
every result is to be brought about by the use
of appropriate means, the seeing of divine be-
ings can be accomplished by concentration upon
that part of the body more nearly connected
with them. This point— the end of Brahma-
randhra-nadi— IB also the place where the con-
nection is made between man and the solar
forces.

34. The ascetic can, after long prac-
tice, disregard the various aids to
concentration hereinbefore recom-
mended for the easier acquirement

or PATA.V3AU. 61

of knowledge, and will be able to
possess any knowledge simply
through the desire therefor.

35. By concentrating his inind upon
the Hridaya, the ascetic acquires
penetration and knowledge of the
mental conditions, purposes, and
thoughts of others, as well as an
accurate comprehension of his own.

Sridaya is the heart. There is some dis-
agreement among niTSties aa to whether the
muBcular heart is meant, or some nervous cen-
ter to which it leads, as in the case of a aimilar
liiieetion for eoncentrating on the umbilicus,
when, in fact, the field of nerves tailed the aolar
pleiua is intended.

36. By concentrating his mind upon
the true nature of the soul as be-
ing entirely distinct from any ex-
periences, and disconnected from
all material thing.s, and dissociated

Lfrom the understanding, a knowl-
edge of the true nature of the soul
itself arises in the ascetic.

1

52 YOGA APHORISMS

37. From the particular kmd of con-
centration last described, there
arises in the ascetic, and remains
with him at all times, a knowledge
concerning all things, whether they
be those apprehended through the
organs of the body or otherwise
presented to his ccmtemplation.

38. The powers hereinbefore described
are liable to become obstacles in
the way of perfect concentration,
because of the possibility of won-
der and pleasure flowing from their
exercise, but are not obstacles for
the ascetic who is perfect in the
practice enjoined.

''Practice enjoined/' see Aph. 36-37.

39. The inner self of the ascetic may
be transferred to any other body
and there have complete control, be-
cause he has ceased to be mentally
attached to objects of sense, and

thraugh his acquisition of the
knowledge of the manner in and
means hy which the mind and body-
are connected.

Ah tbis philoBophj holds that the mind, not
being the result of brain, enters the body by a
certain road and ia connected witb it in a partic-
ular manner, this aphorism declares that, when
the ascetic acquires a knowledge of the exact
proeeBs of connecting mind and body, he can
connect his mind with any other body, and thus
transfer the power to use the organs of the
occupied frame in esperiencing effects from the
operations of the senses.

40. By concentrating his mind upon,
and becoming master of, that vital
energy called JJdana, the ascetic
acquires the power of arising from
beneath water, earth, or other
superincumbent matter.

Vdana is the name given to one of the so-
called "vital airs." These, in fact, are cer-
tain nervous functions for which our physiology
has DO name, and each one of which has its own
office. It may be said that by knowing them,

54 YOGA APHORISMS

and how to govern them, one can alter his
bodily polarity at will. The same remarks ap-
ply to the next aphorism.

41. By concentrating his mind upon
the vital energy called Samana, the
ascetic acquires the power to ap-
pear as if blazing with light.

[This effect has been seen by the interpreter
on several occasions when in company with one
who had acquired the power. The effect was
as if the person had a luminousness under the
skin.— W. Q. J.]

42. By concentrating his mind upon
the relations betw;een the ear and
Ahasa, the ascetic acquires the
power of hearing all sounds,
whether upon the earth or in the
aether, and whether far or near.

The word Akasa has been translated both
as ' ' asther ' ' and ' * astral light. ' ' In this aphor-
ism it is employed in the former sense. Sound,
it will be remembered, is the distinctive prop-
erty of this element.

43. By concentrating his mind upon

OF PATANJALI. 55

the human body, in its relations to
air and space, the ascetic is able to
change at will, the polarity of his
body, and consequently acquires
the power of freeing it from the
control of the law of gravitation.

44. When the ascetic has completely
mastered all the influences which
the body has upon the inner man,
and has laid aside all concern in
regard to it, and in no respect is
affected by it, the consequence is a
removal of all obscurations of the
intellect.

45. The ascetic acquires complete con-
trol over the elements by concen-
trating his mind upon the five
classes of properties in the mani-
fested universe; as, first, those of
gross or phenomenal character;
second, those of form; third, those
of subtle quality ; fourth, those sus-

56 YOGA APHORISMS

ceptible of distinction as to light,
action, and inertia ; fifth, those hav-
ing influence in their various de-
grees for the production of fruits
through their effects upon the
mind.
46. From the acquirement of such
power over the elements there re-
sults to the ascetic various perfec-
tions, to wit, the power to project
his inner-self into the smallest
atom, to expand his inner-self to
the size of the largest body, to ren-
der his material body light or heavy
at will, to give indefinite extension
to his astral body or its separate
members, to exercise an irresistible
will upon the minds of others, to ob-
tain the highest excellence of the
material body, and the ability to
preserve such excellence when ob-
tained.

47. Exeelleuee of the material body
oomsists in color, loveliness of form,
strength, and density.

48. The ascetic acquires complete con-
trol over the organs of sense from
having performed Sanyama (con-
centration) in regard to perception,
the nature of the organs, egoism,
the quality of the organs as being
in action or at rest, and their power
to produce merit or demerit from
the connection of the mind with
them.

49. Therefrom spring up in the ascetic
the powers ; to move his body from
one place to another with the quick-
ness of thought, to extend the oper-
ations of his senses beyond the
trammels of place or the obstruc-
tions of matter, and to alter any nat-
ural object from one form to an-
other.

1

«l

58 YOGA APHORISMS

50. In the ascetic who has acquired the
accurate discriminative knowledge
of the truth and of the nature of the
soul, there arises a knowledge of
all existences in their essential na-
tures and a mastery over them.

51. In the ascetic who acquires an in-
difference even to the last men-
tioned perfection, through having
destroyed the last germs of desire,
there comes a state of the soul that
is called Isolation.

[See note on Isolation in Book IV.]

52. The ascetic ought not to form as-
sociation with celestial beings who
may appear before him, nor exhibit
wonderment at their appearance,
since the result would be a renewal
of afiiictions of the mind.

53. A great and most subtile knowl-
edge springs from the discrimina-

OP PATANJALI. 59

tion that follows upon eoncentra-
tion of the mind performed with
regard to the relation between mo-
ments and their order.

In this Patanjali speaks of ultimate divi-
sions of time which cannot be further divided,
and of the order in which they precede and suc-
ceed each other. It is asserted that a percep-
tion of these minute periods can be acquired,
and the result will be that he who discriminates
thus goes on to greater and wider perception
of principles in nature which are so recondite
that modern philosophy does not even know of
their existence. We know that we can all dis-
tinguish such periods as days or hours, and there
are many persons, bom mathematicians, who
are able to perceive the succession of minutes
and can tell exactly without a watch how many
have elapsed between any two given points in
time. The minutes, so perceived by these mathe-
matical wonders, are, however, not the ultimate
divisions of time referred to in the Aphorism,
but are themselves composed of such ultimates.
No rules can be given for such concentration as
this, as it is so far on the road of progress
that the ascetic finds the rules himself, after
having mastered all the anterior processes.

60 TOGA APHORISMS

54. Therefrom results in the ascetic
a power to discern snbtile diflfer-
ences impossible to be known by
other means.

55. The knowledge that springs from
this perfection of discriminative
power is called ** knowledge that
saves from re-birth.'' It has all
things and the nature of all things
for its objects, and perceives all
that hath been and that is, without
limitations of time, place, or cir-
cumstance, as if all were in the
present and the presence of the oon-
templator.

Such an ascetic as is referred to in this and
next aphorism, is a Jivanmukta and is not sub-
ject to reincarnation. He, however, may live
yet upon earth but is not in any way subject to
his body, the soul being perfectly free at every
moment. And such is held to be the state of
those beings called, in theosophical literature,
Adepts, Mahatmas, Masters.

01* PATANJAiil. 61

56. Wlien the mind no longer con-
ceives itself to be the knower, or
experiencer, and has become one
with the soul — the real knower and
experiencer — Isolation takes place
and the soul is emancipated.

END OF THE THIRD BOOK.

62 YOGA APHOBISMS

BOOK IV.

The Essential Nature op Isolation.

1. Perfections of body, or superhu-
man powers, are produced by birth,
or by powerful herbs, or by incan-
tations, penances, or meditations.

The sole cause of pennanent perfections is
meditation perf onned in incamationB prior to
that in which the perfection appears, for per-
fection by birth, such as the power of birds to
fly, is impermanent, as also are those following
upon incantations, elixirs, and the like. But as
meditation reaches within, it affects each in-
carnation. It must also follow that evil medi-
tation will have the result of begetting perfec-
tion in evil.

2. The change of a man into another
class of being — such as that of a
celestial being — ^is effected by the
transfusion of natures.

This alludes to the possibility — admitted by
the Hindus— of a man's being altered into one

I bo.

L ily

I his

of the Devan, or celestial beinga, through tlie
force of penancee and meditation.

Certain merits, works, and prac-
tices are called "occasional" be-
cause they do not produce essential
modification of nature ; but they are
effective for the removal of obstruc-
tions in the way of former merit, as
in the case of the husbandman who
removes impediments in the course
of the irrigating stream, which
then flows forward.

Thia is intended to further explain Aphor-
ism 2 by showing, that in any incarnation cer-
tain practices [e. g. those previously laid down]
will clear away the obscurations of a man's
past Karma, upon which that Karma will mani-
fest itself, whereaa, if the practices were not
pnrmied, the result of past meditation might be
delayed until yet another life.

The minds acting in the various
bodies which the ascetic voluntar-
ily assumes are the production of
his egoism alone.

64 TOOA APHORISMS

5. And for the different activities of
thiose various minds, the ascetic's
mind is the moving cause.

6. Among the minds differently con-
stituted by reason of birth, herbs,
incantations, penances, and medi-
tation, that one alone which is due
to meditation is destitute of the
basis of mental deposits from
works.

The aphorism applies to all classes of men,
and not to bodies assumed by the ascetic; and
there must always be kept in view the doctrine
of the philosophy that each life leaves in the
Ego mental deposits which form the basis upon
which subsequent vicissitudes follow in other
lives.

7. The work of the ascetic is neither
pure nor dark, but is peculiar to
itself, while that of others is of
three kinds.

The three kinds of work alluded to are (1)
pure in action and motive; (2) dark, such as

tb&t of iafernat beings; (3) that of the general
run of men, pure-dark. The Wh is that of tba

. From these works there results,
in every incarnation, a manifesta-
tion of only those mental deposits
which can come to fructification in
the environment provided.

. Although the manifestation of
mental deposits may be intercept-
ed by unsmtable environments, dif-
fering as to class, place, and time,
there is an immediate relation be-
tween them, because the memory
and the train of self-reproductive
thought are identical.

This is to remove a doubt caused by Aphor-
ism 8, and is intended to show that memory ie
not due to mere brain matter, but is poMessed
by the incamatiog ego, which holds all the
mental deposits in a latent state, each one be-
coming manifest whenever the suitable bodily
(;ontititution and environment are provided

L

06 YOGA APHORISMS

10. The mental deposits are eternal
because of the force of the desire
which produced them.

In the Indian edition this reads that the
deposits remain because of the "benediction.''
And as that word is used in a special sense we
do not give it here. All mental deposits result
from a desire for enjoyment, whether it be from
a wish to avoid in the next life certain pain
suffered in this, or from the positive feeling
expressed in the desire, "may such and such
pleasure always be mine." This is called a
"benediction." And the word "eternal" has
also a special signification, meaning only that
period embraced by a " day of Brahma, ' ' which
lasts for a thousand ages.

11. As they are collected by cause,
effect, substratum, and support,
when those are removed, the result
is that there is a non-existence of
the mental deposits.

This aphorism supplements the preceding
one, and intends to show that, although the de-
posits will remain during "eternity" if left
to themselves— being always added to by new

or PATANJALI. 67

experiences and similar desires— yet they may
be removed by removing producing causes.

12. That which is past and that which
is to oome, are not reduced to non-
existence, for the relations of the
properties differ one from the
other.

13. Objects, whether subtile or not,
are made up of the three qualities.

The "three qualities" are Satwa, Baja,
Tamo, or Truth, Activity, and Darkness: Truth
corresponding to light and joy; Activity to
passion; and Darkness to evil, rest, indifference,
sloth, death. All manifested objects are com-
pounded of these three.

14. Unity of things results from unity
of modification.

15. Cognition is distinct from the ob-
ject, for there is diversity of
thoughts among observers of one
object.

16. An object is cognized or not cog-
nized by the mind accordingly as

68 TOOA APHORISMS

the mind is or is not tinted or af-
fected by the object.

17. Tlie moddfications of the mind are
always known to the presiding
spirit, because it is not subject to
modification.

Hence, through all the changes to which the
mind and soul are subject, the spiritual soul,
Ishwara, remains unmoved, ''the witness and
spectator. ' '

18. The mind is not self -illuminative,
because it is an instrument of the
soul, is colored and modified by ex-
periences and objects, and is cog-
nized by the soul.

19. Concentrated attention to two ob-
jects cannot take place simultane-
ously.

20. If one perception be cognizable by
another, then there would be the
further necessity for cognition of
cognition, and from that a confu-

r

OF PATANJILI. OS

sion of recollection would take
place.

21. When the understanding and the
soul are united, then self-knowl-
edge results,

Tbe Belf-knonledge spokea of bere jb that
interior illuminatioD desired b; all mysticB, and
is Dot merely a knowledge of self in ttie ordlu-
ary sense.

22. The mind, when united with the
sonl and fully conversant with
knowledge, embraces universally all
objects.

23. The mind, though assuming vari-
ous forms by reason of innumerable
mental deposits, exists for the pur-
pose of the soul's emancipation and
operates in co-operation therewith.

24. In him who knows the difference
between the nature of soul and
mind, the false notion regarding the
soul comes to an end.

70 YOGA APHORISMS

The mind is merely a tool, instmnieiiti or
meaiiBy by which the soul acquires experiences
and knowledge. In each incarnation the mind
is, as it were, new. It is a portion of the ap-
paratus furnished to the soul through innumer-
able lives for obtaining experience and reap-
ing the fruit of works performed. The notion
that the mind is either knower or experiencer is
a false one, which is to be removed before eman-
cipation can be reached by soul. It was there-
fore said that the mind operates or exists for
the carrying out of the soul's salvation, and
not the soul for the mind's sake. When this
is fully understood, the permanency of soul is
seen, and all the evils flowing from false ideas
begin to disappear.

25. Then the mind becomes deflected
toward discrimination and bowed
down before Isolation.

26. But in the intervals of meditation
other thoughts arise, in consequence
of the continuance of old impres-
sions not yet expunged.

27. The means to be adopted for the
avoidance and elimination of these

or PATANJALI. 71

are the same as before given for
obviating the afflictions.

28. If the ascetic is not desirous of
the fruits, even when perfect knowl-
edge has been attained, and is not
inactive, the meditation technically
called Dharma Megha — cloud of
virtue — ^takes place from his abso-
lutely perfect discriminative knowl-
edge.

The commentator explains that, when the
ascetic has reached the point described in
Aphorism 25, if he bends his concentration to-
ward the prevention of all other thoughts, and
is not desirous of attaining the powers result-
ing just at his wish, a further state of medita-
tion is reached which is called ''cloud of vir-
tue," because it is such as will, as it were,
furnish the spiritual rain for the bringing about
of the chief end of the soul— entire emancipa-
tion. And it contains a warning that, until
that chief end is obtained, the desire for fruits
is an obstacle.

29. Therefrom results the removal of
the afflictions and all works.

72 TOOA APHOmiSMS

30. Then, from infinity of knowledge
absolutely free from obscuration
and impurity, that which is know-
able appears small and easy to
grasp.

31. Thereupon, the alternation in the
modifications of the qualities, hav-
ing accomplished the soul's aim
— experience and emiancipation —
comes to an end.

32. It is then perceived that the mo-
ments and their order of precedence
and succession are the same.

This is a step further than Aphorism 53,
Book III., where it is stated that from discrim-
ination of ultimates of time a perception of
the very subtle and recondite principles of the
universe results. Here^ having arrived at Isola-
tion, the ascetic sees beyond even the ultimates,
and they, although capable of affecting the man
who has not reached this stage, are for the as-
cetic identical, because he is a master of them.
It is extremely difficult to interpret this aphor-

ism; and in the original it reads
order i« cowitetpart of (fte »«iineiit.
press it in anothBr way, it may be said that
the spocies of meditation adverted to in Aphoi
i*m 53, Book III,, a calculative cognition goes
foTwiu'd in the mind, during which, the con-
templator not yet being thoroughly niaater of
those divisiona of time, h compelled to observe
them as they pnsB before him.

33. The reabsorption of the qualities
which have consummated the aim
of the soul, or the abiding of the
soul united with imderstanding in
its own nature, is laolation.

This is a general statement of the nature
of Isolation, sometimes called Emancipation.
The qualities before apoken of, found in all
objects and which had hitherto affected and
delayed the soul, have ceased to be mistaken by
it for realities, and the consequence is that the
soul abides in its own nature unaffected by the
great "pairs of opposUea"— pleasure and pain,
good and evil, cold and beat, and so forth.

Yet it must not be deduced that the philos
sophj results in a negation, or in a coldnesfi,
sutb as our English word "Isolation" would

74 TOGA APHORISMS

seem to imply. The contrary is the case. Until
this state is reached, the souly continually af-
fected and deflected by objects, senses, suffering,
and pleasure, is unable to consciously partake
universally of the great life of the universe. To
do so, it must stand firmly ' ' in its own nature" ;
and then it proceeds further—- as is admitted
by the philosophy— to bring about the aim of
all other souls still struggling on the road« But
manifestly further aphorisms upon that would
be out of place, as well as being such as could
not be understood, to say nothing of the use-
lessness of giving them.

END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.

May Ishwara be near and help those who read

this book.
OM.

The United Lodge of
Theosophists

DECLARATION

The policy of this Lodge is independent devotion
lo the cause of Theosophy, without professing at-
tachment to any Theosophical organization. It is
loyal to the great Founders of the Theosophical
Movement, but does not concern itself with dissen-
sions or differences of individual opinion.

The work it has on hand and the end it keeps
in view are too absorbing and too lofty to leave it
the time or inclination to take part in side issues.
That work and that end is the dissemination of the
Fundamental Principles of the philosophy of The-
osophy, and the exemplifieation in practice of those
principles, through a truer realization of the Self;
a profounder conviction of Universal Brotherhood.

It holds that the unassailable Basis for Union among
Theosophists, wherever and howeier situated, is '•timir-
arity of aim, purpose and teaching," and therefore has
neither Coastiiution, By-Laws nor Officers, ihe sole Iwnd
hetwecD its associates being that basis. And it aims to
disseminate this idea amona: Theosophists in the further,
ance of Uniti.

It reaarda as Theosophiats all who are ensaBed m (he

appeal. Cards for aignature will he sen
d every possible assietani^e furnished Ass
Lidies and in efforts to form local Lodees.

GENERAL REGISTRAR, The United Lodge of
Theosophists. Los Angeles, California.

Mftropolilan BuildinR. Broadaay at Fifth Si

J

THEOSOPHY

A Magazine Devoted to The Theosophical

Movement, The Brotherhood of

Humanity, The Study of Occult

Science and Philosophy,

and Aryan Literature.

"THEOSOPHY" is published by The United I
Lodge of Theosophists. Like the Association of |
Free and Independent Theosophists which has spon-
sored it, this monthly magazine is devoted to the
promulgation of Theosophy a.s it was given by Thole
who brought it. Theosophy is reprinting in every
issue the wonderful magazine articles of H, P. Bla-
vatsfcy, and Wm. Q. Judge, first printed in Lucifer,
The TheosaphisI and The Path by these Teachers,
many years ago. Old workers for Theosophy have
tor the most part quite forgotten these articles,
which are of inestimable value to the sincere student.
To most Theosophists of later years they are quite
unknown. Other articles concerning the history of
the Theosophical Movement and related subjects
appear monthly ; but the writers for and editors of
the magazine remain anonymous, as it is the desire
of the publishers of "THEOSOPHY" that its
readers should judge the value of its original
matter from the inherent quality perceived in the •
articles themselves, and not from the naniet|
signed to them.

TUTrnonOUV METROPOLITAH Bipa.l
i Sl.Ili\JO\Jr n I LOS AnOELES, CALir,]

Students interested in obtaining a clear and
correct understanding of the actual Teaching^;
known under the name Theosophy should
have the following books. They can be ordered
of any local bookseller, or orders may be sent
direct to The United Lodge of Thoosc^hists.
The prices given include postage.

THE OCEAN OF THEOSOPHY - - tlM

A succinct presentation of the leachings, and
ihe best popular one. Really an epitome of
the Secret Doctrine. By William Q. Judge.

THE KEY TO THEOSOPHY - - - . S.M

A complete outline of the philosophy in the
form of questions and answers, by H. P.
Blavatsky.

ISIS UNVEILED {2 Volumes) - - - - lO.

A Master Key to Science and Theology, the
work that "broke the moulds of men's
minds." By H. P. Blavatsky.

THE SECRET DOCTRINE (S Volumet
and Index) IS.M

The Synthesis of Science, Religion and
Philosophy, containing "all that can be given
out in this century," By H. P. Blavatsky.

1
I

ABRIDGEMENT OF THE SECRET
DOCTRINE 18.00

A shorter, simpler and less expensive ver-
sion of the Secret Doctrine, with Sanscrit
terms in English. Excellent for reference
for Theosophists who already own the
Secret Doctrine, and recommended for stu-
dents who feel unable to purchase that work.

THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE - - - 1.85

Chosen Fragments from the Book of Golden
Precepts. By H. P. Blavatsky. Devotional
Book. Pocket size, with leather covers.

THE BHAGAVAD-GITA 1.25

The Book of Devotion, rendered by W. Q.
Judge. Pocket size, with leather covers.

NOTES ON THE BHAGAVAD-GITA - IM

The first Seven Chapters by Wm. Q. Judge ;
the remaining chapters by a Student taught
by Him. Leather binding, uniform in size
with the Bhagavad-Gita.

LIGHT ON THE PATH 1.95

Rules for Disciples, with Comments, and the
Treatise on Karma, writen down by M. C
Pocket size, with leather covers.

YOGA APHORISMS OF PATANJALI - IM

Rendered into English, with an Introduction
and Notes, by W. Q. Judge. Pocket size,
with leather covers.

LETTERS THAT HAVE HELPED HE

Volume 1 $1.00

Volume 2 1.00

Both VoIuiTiea, bound in one . - - - 1,60

Letters written by "Z. L. Z.," "Greatest
of the Exiles," to Jasper Niemand and
others. By W. Q. Judge.

CONVERSATIONS ON THEOSOPHY - .

A brief but clear slatement of principles, in
question and answer; p. 16. In quantities
for propaganda, 50 copies for $2.00.

REINCARNATION AND KARMA - - - .

Pamphlet of 34 pages. Assembling under
"Reincarnation" excerpts from Mr. Judge's
writings. Also contains reprints of articles
on Karma published by Mr. Judge in The

Path.

CULTURE OF CONCENTRATION - - .
By Wra. Q. Judge. A pamphlet of 32 pages,
which also includes Mr. Judge's article,
"Of Occult Powers and Their Acquire-
ment." Invaluable to students who are
attempting to follow the PATH.

SOME THEOSOPHICAL PROPHECIES .

Pamphlet of 32 pages, magazine si/e, made
up from the writings of H, P, Blavatsl^,
Wm, Q. Judge, and others, pointing to the
causes of present day sociological disturb-
ances, and indicating the inevitable results.

Orders should be addressed and all remit-
tances made payable to The United Lodge of
Theosophists, Metropolitan Building, Broad-
way at Fifth Street, Los Angeles, Ca.V\foTOa..

1 imliiiiiniiiii ^H

■ 3 bios DSS BID tSl ^^^^^H

^^HH^BH

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES

CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

(415) 723-1493

All books may be recalled after 7 days

^DATE DUE

DEC 09 2003

MAR^ 2005
%

__PB||^_
