THE WORKS OF THE EMPEROR JULIAN, VOL. III
With an English translation by Wilmer Cave Wright (Loeb Classical Library)
London: William Heinemann; New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1923. (Greek with facing English.)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/worksofemperorju03juli_0).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY

EDITED BY

E. CAPPS, pu.p., Lu.p. T. E. PAGE, urrt.p.
W. H. D. ROUSE, tirt.p.

THE WORKS OF THE EMPEROR
JULIAN

ΠῚ

THE WORKS OF THE
EMPEROR JULIAN

WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
WILMER CAVE WRIGHT, Pu.D.—

LATE OF GIRTON COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN BRYN MAWR COLLEGE,
PENNSYLVANIA

ὃ

IN THREE VOLUMES
ΠῚ

LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
MCMXXIII

Printed in Great Britain

Carne

Re mewtw SD2S σιν.

50!

Cj
ς-

CONTENTS

24 Mr 24 Smalley

INTRODUCTION TO THE LETYIERS

GIOGRA PHY. 24 eo ws vn cs. te

LETTERS 1-58 WITH DATES . . .

PETTERS yOO=/9 UNDATED: ὦ. τ ν.-
ΘΟΕ PHA: LETTERS. (4250. 5 6 τ...
THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS. .

EPIGRAMS oe eer cetne  Feons
INTRODUCTION TO ‘‘ AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS. .. .

ΕΟ ΟΝ ΤΗΣ Go. st eee,
PREBLE SOMONU MERE 25 προς a few a.
LE Xie a eg τιν, re ee τ

LY
-᾿
Υ̓

y im
eae hs
- F
a

ama BA? te
᾿ ῃ

i he 2
ons ne
ΟΣ

ee

ee
“ὦ ᾿ τ

INTRODUCTION

THe more important letters and edicts in this
volume are hardly intelligible to a reader unfamiliar
with the historical background. The following brief
summary of Julian’s career is intended to explain
the allusions in the text and to supplement the
Introduction in Vol. 1. In his more formal works,
especially the manifesto To the Athenians written in
361 as an apologia for his rebellion against the
Emperor Constantius, and the Misopogon written
in 362, a satire on his own austere habits addressed
to the citizens of Antioch, Julian himself relates the
main incidents of his childhood and youth, For
the last ten years of his life, 353-363, the best
authority is Ammianus Marcellinus, the Latin
historian, an eye-witness.

Flavius Claudius Julianus was born at Constanti-
-nople in 331, the only son of Julius Constantius,
half-brother of Constantine the Great, and Basilina,
a highly educated woman and devout Christian, who
died when Julian was a few months old. From his
father’s earlier marriage there survived a son, Gallus,
a daughter, probably named Galla, who married her
cousin the Emperor Constantius II, and another son
whose name is unknown. Soon after the death of
the Emperor Constantine in 337, the Emperor
Constantius removed possible rivals by the murder

Vil

INTRODUCTION

of certain relatives, among whom were Julian’s
father and half-brother. Gallus and Julian survived.
The latter was sent to Nicomedia in charge of a
relative, the Bishop Eusebius, and his education
was entrusted to the Christian eunuch Mardonius,
who had taught Basilina Greek literature. In
Misopogon 3538, Julian says that Mardonius was
“of all men most responsible ”’ for his literary tastes
and austere morals.! Julian also studied at Constanti-
nople with the Christian sophist Hecebolius.2 Dur-
ing this period he used to visit his grandmother’s
estate in Bithynia, which is described in Letier 25,
In 345, when Julian was fourteen, Constantius, who
in the twenty-four years of his reign that followed
the murder of Julius Constantius lived in appre-
hension of the vengeance of his sons, interned
Gallus and Julian in the lonely castle of Macellum
(Fundus Macelli) in Cappadocia. In his manifesto
To the Athenians 271c, p, Julian speaks of their six
years of solitary imprisonment at Macellum, and
says that the cruelty and harshness of Gallus, who
proved to be a sort of Christian Caligula, were
increased by his life there, while his own love of
philosophy saved him from being equally brutalised.
From Letter 23 we learn that he was able to borrow
books from George of Cappadocia, who later became
Bishop of Alexandria and was murdered by the
Alexandrian mob in 261. Julian at once wrote
Letter 23 to demand his library.

1 For the influence of Mardonius see Vol.2 Oration 8,
2410; To the Athenians 274D; Misopogon 352-353. Julian’s
knowledge of Latin was probably slight, though Ammianus,
16. 5. 7, describes it as ‘‘ sufficiens.”

2 For Hecebolius see Letter 63, and below, p. xlvii.

viil

INTRODUCTION ©

In 351 Constantius, who had once visited the
brothers at Macellum, released them, raised Gallus
to the rank of Caesar and gave him his sister
Constantia in marriage. Constantius had married
as his first wife Galla, the sister of Gallus; she had
lately died. Gallus was sent to Antioch to govern
the provinces of the East. There he and Constantia,
whose cruel and suspicious temper matched his own,
embarked on a four years’ reign of terror which is
described by Ammianus.t Constantius meanwhile,
at Arles, where he spent the winter of 353, and
later at Milan, was just as suspicious and ruthless,
but in Gallus Caesar tyrannical conduct seemed to
his cousin the prelude to usurpation. He was there-
fore recalled to Milan in 354. Constantia died of a
fever on the journey, and Gallus, escorted by the
Emperor’s agents as a virtual prisoner, was taken by
way of Constantinople to Pola (where in 326 Crispus,
the son of Constantine, had been put to death by
his father), and was there beheaded, towards the end
of 354. Julian later avenged himself on those whom
he believed to have been accessory to the death of
his brother.

Meanwhile he had devoted four years to study,
first at Pergamon with Aedesius and Chrysanthius,
the disciples of Iamblichus; but on hearing from
Aedesius of the marvels wrought by his pupil
Maximus of Ephesus the theurgist, he hastened to
Ephesus.2 Julian had been under Christian in-
fluences from his childhood, but he was an ardent
admirer of Greek literature and philosophy and

1 Book XIV.
2 See the account of his studies at Pergamon and Ephesus
in Kunapius, Lives, pp. 429-435, Wright.

ix

INTRODUCTION ἢ
naturally inclined to superstition. With Maximus , -
he studied the teachings of Iamblichus the Neopla-
tonist, and though he did not openly profess
paganism until 361, he says in Letter 47, written in
362, that for twelve years he has ceased to be a
Christian.

The Syrian Neoplatonism of the fourth Christian
century which followed the teachings of Iamblichus
was a religion rather than a philosophy, and was
well suited to his love of the mystical and marvellous;
for the rest of his life he was the devoted disciple
of Maximus. But his apostasy from Christianity
was carefully concealed, and his first panegyric on
Constantius, Oration 1, written in 355, is entirely
non-committal, refers vaguely to “the deity” and
“ providence,’ and might have been composed by
a Christian.

In the second panegyric, Oration 2, written in
Gaul at a safe distance, he frequently invokes Zeus,
and assumes the reality of the gods of Homer in
language that goes beyond what was allowed by
literary etiquette in rhetorical works of this sort.
It could not have been written by a Christian. His
brother Gallus, some time between 351 and 354,
heard rumours of his devotion to Maximus, and sent
his own spiritual adviser Aetius to remonstrate with
Julian. Letter 82 (Gallus to Julian), the earliest
letter in this volume that can be dated, expresses
the relief of Gallus at the reassuring report of
Aetius as to Julian’s adherence to the Christian
faith.

On the death of Gallus in 354 Julian was sum-
moned to the court at Milan, and on the way thither
visited Troy and had the interview with Pegasius

x

INTRODUCTION

which is described in Letter 19. Ammianus says 1
that Julian’s life was in danger at Milan from the
plots of enemies, who accused him to Constantius of
having met Gallus at Constantinople in 354, and of
having left Macellum without permission. Julian
denies the first of these charges in Oration 3. 121a,
and in 70 the Athenians 273 a. He was saved by the
intercession of the second wife of Constantius, the
Empress Eusebia, who, after seven months of
suspense, obtained for him his single audience with
the Emperor and permission to go to Athens to
study. We know little of his brief stay of about
two months in Athens in 355, but he was almost
certainly initiated into the Mysteries at Eleusis,?
and probably attended the lectures of the aged
Christian sophist Prohaeresius, to whom in 361 or
early in 362 he wrote Letter 14. Among his fellow-
students were two Cappadocians, Gregory Nazianzen,
who after Julian’s death wrote bitter invectives
against the apostate and an unflattering description
of his appearance and manners, and Basil the
Great, to whom Julian addressed Letter 26. From
Athens the Emperor recalled Julian? in September
to Milan, where after some delay he was raised to
the rank of Caesar on November 6, 355, given the
task of pacifying the Gallic provinces, and married
to Helena, the sister of Constantius. She was much
older than he, had little influence on his life, and
died in Gaul, without issue, not long after Julian

oun Hine

* The evidence for this is Eunapius, Lives, p. 437,
Wright.

8 For his grief. at leaving Athens see Vol. 2, 70 the
Athenians, 275 A.

ΧΙ

INTRODUCTION

had been proclaimed Augustus by the army. The
motives of Constantius in making Julian Caesar are
not clear. Eunapius says that he hoped his cousin
would be killed in Gaul. Eusebia may have per-
suaded the Emperor that their childlessness was a
punishment for his treatment of his relatives. The
Gallic provinces were overrun by barbarians, and
Constantius could not go there himself because he
was occupied on the Danube with the Sarmatians
and the Quadi, and by the threat of the Persians
in Mesopotamia. Julian set out for Gaul on
December 1, 355, with a small troop of 360 men
who “only knew how to pray,’ as he says in
Jrag. 5. Eusebia gave him a library of books which
he took with him. His task was to expel the hordes
of Germans who, having been invited by Constantius
to assist in suppressing the usurper Magnentius, had
remained to overrun and devastate the country, and
had destroyed the Roman forts on the Rhine. In
his five years of campaigning in Gaul, though he
was continually thwarted by the officers whom
Constantius had sent to watch his movements,
Julian pacified the provinces and restored their
prosperity, recovered 20,000 Gallic prisoners from
Germany, expelled the Germans, defeated the
Franks and Chamavi, restored the Roman forts, and
crossed the Rhine four times. In August 357 he
won the famous battle of Argentoratum (Strasbourg),
which was fought somewhere between Saverne and
_ Strasbourg, and sent Chnodomar, the king of the
Alemanni, captive to Constantius, He spent the
winter of 358-359 at Paris, whence he wrote to his
1 For the condition of Gaul and his achievements there see
Vol. 2, To the Athenians, 278-280.
xii

INTRODUCTION

friend the physician Oribasius, at Vienne, Letter 4,
of which the first part, with its dream,! is highly
sophistic but expresses vague fears that he and
Constantius may be involved in ruin together; the
second part describes his opposition to the pretorian
prefect Florentius, his persistent enemy, whom
he forbade to recommend to Constantius increased
taxes on the Gallic provincials. In this letter Julian
wishes that he may not be deprived of the society
of Sallust, his pagan friend and adviser, but Sallust
was recalled by the suspicious Constantius in 358.
While he was in Gaul, Julian continued his
studies, corresponded with sophists and philosophers
such as Maximus, Libanius and Priscus, wrote
Oration 2, a panegyric of Constantius; Oration 3,
a panegyric of Eusebia; Oration 8, to console him-
self for the loss of Sallust; an account of the battle
of Strasbourg which has perished; and perhaps the
treatise on logic which we know only from the
reference to it in Suidas.2. To some of these works
he refers at the end of Letter 2, To Priscus. That
he wrote commentaries on his Gallic campaigns has
been maintained by some scholars but cannot be
proved.
Constantius, who had already suppressed four
usurpers, either full-blown or suspected of ambition,
Magnentius, Vetranio, Silvanus and Gallus Caesar,
was alarmed at the military successes of his cousin,
who had left Milan an awkward student, ridiculed by
the court, and had transformed himself into a skilful
general and administrator, adored by the Gallic
1 Julian’s dream may be, as Asmus thinks, an echo of

Herodotus, 1. 108, but the parallel is not close.
2 s.v. ᾿Ιουλιανόξ.

Xili

INTRODUCTION

army and the provincials. ‘The Emperor was on the
eve of a campaign against Sapor, the Persian king,
and needed reinforcements. It was an opportune
moment for weakening Julian’s influence by with-
drawing the flower of his troops for service in the
East. Accordingly, in the winter of 359-360, Julian
received peremptory orders, brought by the tribune
Decentius, to send to the Emperor, under the com-
mand of Julian’s officers Lupicinus and Sintula, the
finest of his troops, in fact more than half his army
of 23,000 men. Many of these were barbarian
auxiliaries who had taken service with Julian on
condition that they should not serve outside Gaul,
and the Celtic troops, when the order became
known, were dismayed at the prospect of leaving
their lands and families at the mercy of renewed
invasions of barbarians. Florentius was at Vienne,
and refused to join Julian in Paris and discuss the
question of the safety of Gaul if the troops should
be withdrawn. Meanwhile two of the legions
requisitioned by Constantius were in Britain fighting
the Picts and Scots. But when the others reached
Paris from their winter quarters in February 360, on
their march eastwards, their discontent resulted in
open mutiny, and Julian, whose loyalty towards
Constantius up to this point is unquestioned, failed
to pacify them. They surrounded the palace! at
night, calling on Julian with the title of Augustus,
and when, after receiving a divine sign,” he came out

1 Julian was lodged in what is now the Musée des
Thermes.
\/? See To the Athenians, 284c, and cf. Letter 2, p. 5.
Ammianus 20. 4 gives a full account of the mutiny and of
Julian’s speeches to the army and letter to Constantius.

Xiv

INTRODUCTION

at dawn, he was raised on ashield and crowned witha
standard-bearer’s chain in default of adiadem. Julian
sent by Pentadius and the loyal eunuch Eutherius
a full account of these events to Constantius, who
replied that he must be content with the title of
Caesar. Constantius had already gone to Caesarea
to prepare for his Persian campaign, and decided to
meet the more pressing danger from the East before
he reckoned with Julian. The prefect Florentius
fled to the Emperor and was made consul for 361.
Constantius sent Nebridius the quaestor to succeed
Florentius in Gaul, and Julian accepted him as
prefect. Julian left Paris for Vienne by way of
Besancon, which town he describes in Letter 8.
Thence he led his troops to another victory, this
time over the Attuarii, who were raiding Gaul, and
on November 6, 360, he celebrated his quinquennalia
or fifth year as Caesar. He had not yet declared
his change of religion, and in January 361 at Vienne,
where he spent the winter, he took part in the
feast of the Epiphany. In July he set out for the
Fast, determined to win from Constantius recognition
of his rank as Augustus, either by persuasion or by
force. His troops were divided so as to march by
three different routes, and he led the strongest
division through the Black Forest (see frag. 2) and
along the Danube. Sirmium (Mitrovitz) welcomed
him with acclamation in October, and he went into
winter quarters at Naissa (Nish). Thence he
addressed to the Roman Senate, the Spartans,
Corinthians and Athenians manifestos justifying his
conduct towards Constantius and proclaiming his
design to restore the Hellenic religion. Of these
documents only the letter to the Athenians sur-

XV

INTRODUCTION

vives, and a brief fragment of the letter to the
Corinthians (frag. 3). Meanwhile, as he informs
Maximus in Letter 8, he and his soldiers openly
sacrificed to the gods. He now regarded himself
as conducting a war in the name of Hellenism.
Some time in 361 he wrote the Kronia (Saturnaha),
and says in Oration 4. 157c that he sent it to his
friend Sallust. Of this work Suidas has preserved
a few lines (frag. 4).1

Meanwhile Constantius, who had achieved nothing
conclusive against the Persians, had married, at
Antioch, his third wife Faustina. Their only child,
a daughter, was married later to the Emperor
Gratian, but died young. Constantius had now no
choice but to lead his army to defend Constantinople
against Julian. But at Tarsus he fell ill, and on
November 3, 361, died of a fever at Mopsucrene
in Cilicia. When Julian heard the news he wrote
Letters 8 and 13, in which he thanks the gods for
his escape from civil war. He entered Constanti-.
nople in triumph as Emperor on December 11,
90].

The greater number of the letters in this volume
that can be dated were written after Julian’s acces-
sion, in 362, from Constantinople and Antioch. He
lost no time in inviting to his court his friends
Maximus from Ephesus (Letter 8), Chrysanthius from
Sardis,2, Eutherius the eunuch, his trusted court
chamberlain (Letter 10), Eustathius (Letter 43),
Priscus,? and Basil (Letter 26). Chrysanthius and
Basil did not accept this invitation, and Julian, when

1 Suidas, s.v. Empedotimus.
2 See Hunapius, Lives, Ὁ. 441, Wright.
3 Ibid., p. 445.

ΧΥῚ

INTRODUCTION

he had failed to persuade Chrysanthius to follow the
example of Maximus and disregard the omens which
were unfavourable to their journey, appointed him
high priest of Lydia.

In contrast with the wholesale butchery with
which Constantius had begun his reign, Julian ap-
pointed a commission, partly composed of former
officers of Constantius, to sit at Chalcedon across
the Bosporus and try his enemies, especially those
who had abetted the cruelties of Constantius or
were accessory to the death of Gallus. Ammianus,
22. 3, describes the work of this commission, on
‘ which were Sallust, Mamertinus and Nevitta the
Goth. Among those condemned to death were the
notorious informer and agent of Constantius, Paul,
nicknamed “the Chain,’! the eunuch Eusebius,
chamberlain of Constantius (see Letter 4, p. 11), and
the ex-prefect, the consul Florentius, whose oppres-
sion of the Gallic provincials is described in the
same letter. Florentius managed to conceal himself
till after Julian’s death.

On February 4, 362, Julian proclaimed religious
freedom in the Empire, and ordered the restoration
of the temples. All who had used them as quarries
or bought portions of them for building houses were
to restore the stone and marble.? This often caused
great hardship to individuals, and even Libanius, a
devout pagan, more than once in his letters inter-
cedes with local officials on behalf of those affected
by Julian’s edict. ‘The Emperor recalled the ecclesi-
astics who had been exiled by the Arian Constantius,

1 See Leiter 53; Ammianus 14. 5.6; 19, 12.
2 See Letter 29, to Count Julian, p. 99.
3 e.g. Letter 724, Foerster.

XVli

INTRODUCTION

among them Aetius, to whom he wrote Letter 15,
and the famous orthodox prelate Athanasius, for
whom see Letters 24, 46, 47.1. It was perhaps easier
to restore the temples than the half-forgotten ritual
of the gods, but Julian enlisted the aid of a learned
pagan, the Roman antiquarian and senator, Vettius
Agorius Praetextatus, whom in 362 he appointed
Proconsul of Achaia, while for the rites appropriate
to the oriental cults he certainly consulted Maximus
of Ephesus, who initiated him into the Mysteries of
Mithras.

Constantius, fully occupied with the persecution
of non-Arian Christians, had not persecuted pagan
intellectuals such as Libanius and Themistius the
philosopher, while even pagan officials such as
Sallust had been promoted in his reign. But Julian
gave instructions that pagans should be preferred to
Christians for public offices (Letter 37), and, as the
progress of “ Hellenism” proved slower than he had
hoped, he grew more intolerant. For evidence of
definite persecution of the Christians in his brief
reign we depend on Gregory Nazianzen, Socrates,
Sozomen and other historians of the Church. But
certain administrative measures referred to in the
letters were aimed at the Christians. As a part
of Julian’s general policy of exacting service in
their local senates from all well-to-do citizens, he
deprived Christian clerics of their immunity from
such service;? funerals were no longer allowed to

1 Cf. the account of the life of Athanasius, p. xxxix.

2 See Letter 39, To the Byzacians. Libanius, Oration 18.
148, praises this reform. For Julian’s increase of the Senate
at Antioch ef. Misopogon 807 Ὁ. Codex Theodosianus 12. 1.
50-56.

XVill

INTRODUCTION

take place in the daytime according to the Christian
custom!; and one of his earliest reforms in connec-
tion with the use of the public post, the cursus
publicus, directly affected Christian ecclesiastics. The
privilege of free transport and the use of inns, horses
and mules at the expense of the State had been
granted to ecclesiastics by Constantine in 314; and
in the reign of Constantius, when the bishops were
summoned from all parts of the Empire to one
synod after another, the system of public transport
broke down under the burden.? In an edict pre-
served in Codex Theodosianus 8. 5. 12, dated February
22, 362, Julian reserves to himself, except in certain
cases, the right of granting evectio, or free transport.
In Letters 8, 15, and 26 he authorises his corre-
spondents to use State carriages and _ horses.
Libanius says that this reform was so thoroughly
carried out that often the animals and their drivers
had nothing to do.

But such withdrawals of privileges were pin-
pricks compared with the famous edict? in which
Julian reserved to himself the control of the appoint-
ments of teachers, and the rescript, Letter 36, in
which he forbade Christians to read the pagan authors
with their pupils. This meant that they must cease
to teach, since all education was based on the read-
ing of the poets, historians and philosophers. The
Christian sophist Victorinus, who was then lecturing
at Rome, and Prohaeresius at Athens, must resign
their chairs. Julian offered a special exemption to

1 See Letter 56, the edict on funerals.

2 See Libanius, Oration, 18. 143; Ammianus 21. 16. 18.

3 The Latin edict, dated June 17, 362, survives in Codex
Theodosianus 13. 8. 5.

x1x

INTRODUCTION

Prohaeresius, but the sophist, says Eunapius,! re-
fused the privilege. He could afford to wait in
patience, for, like many another distinguished
Christian, he consulted the omens through the
pagan hierophant of Greece, and learned indirectly,
but to his own reassurance, that Julian’s power
would be short-lived. Even Ammianus the pagan
historian deplored the bigotry and malice of Julian’s
attempt to suppress Christian educators. ‘It was,”
he says, “a harsh measure, aud had better be buried
in eternal silence.’ ? The Christians interpreted it
as excluding their children from education; Theo-
doret, 3. 4. 2, says as much, and quotes a saying οὗ
Julian’s (frag. 7), whose context is lost, to the effect
that the Christians arm their intellects to oppose
Hellenism by means of the Hellenic masterpieces.
Socrates, 3. 12. 7, quotes another saying of the same
sort (frag. 6). These two quotations perhaps belong
to lost rescripts aimed at Christian teachers, which
followed the extant edict and rescript. Well-
educated Christians can hardly have been consoled
by the enterprise of a father and son named
Apollinarius, who “within a very brief space of
time,” says Sozomen, 5. 18, converted the Bible
into epics, tragedies, comedies, odes and dialogues
for the education of Christian youths. But
Christian teachers did not suffer much inconveni-
ence, for Julian’s prohibition can hardly have been
enforced in the few months that preceded his

1 Lives, p. 513, Wright.

222. 10. 7: illud inclemens . . . obruendum perenni
silentio. He repeats this criticism in 25. 4. 20. _Libanius,
however, was delighted, and taunted Basil and Gregory as
‘* barbarians. ”

XX

INTRODUCTION

death. The edict was rescinded by the Emperor
Valentinian.

In his dealings with the Jews, Julian reversed the
policy of Constantius and Gallus Caesar, who had
treated them with extreme harshness.1 He freed
them from the taxes levied on them as Jews, and
invited them to renew their ancient sacrifices.
When they replied that this could be done only in
the Temple at Jerusalem he promised to rebuild the
Temple, and restore Jerusalem to the Jews. He
may almost be called a Zionist. The historians οἵ
the Church say that Julian desired to nullify the
prophecy of Christ, that not one stone of the Temple
should remain on another, and exult in the fact that
his project had to be abandoned, owing to the earth-
quakes that were experienced in the East in the
winter of 362-363. Julian himself speaks of his
plan of rebuilding the Temple,? and Ammianus says
that the work was entrusted to Alypius, the ex-
Governor of Britain, to whom Julian when in Gaul
wrote Letters 6 and 7, and that it was abandoned
owing to mysterious “balls of flame” which burned
the workmen. Almost the same account is given
by Philostorgius 7. 9, Theodoret 3. 15, and other
historians of the Church. Nevertheless, Lardner in
Jewish and Heathen Testimony 4. p. 47, and Adler
in the Jewish Quarterly Review, 1893, deny that the
work was ever undertaken, and assert that Ammia-
nus derived his account from Gregory Nazianzen’s

1 Sozomen 4. 7. 5.

2 Vol. 2, Fragment of a Letter 295 0; Letter 51. 398 a;
and Lydus, de Mensibus 4. 53, quotes Julian as saying
ἀνεγείρω. . . . τὸν ναὸν τοῦ ὑψίστου θεοῦ, ‘‘I am rebuilding

the Temple of the Most High God.”
xxi

INTRODUCTION

spiteful Invective against Julian, and that the Christian
historians were taken in by Gregory’s invention.
But Ammianus was with Julian at Antioch that
winter and on the march to Persia in 363, and must
have known the facts. He did not need to depend
on Gregory for information ;—Gregory does not, in
fact, mention the appointment of Alypius—nor
would Gregory have been likely to write his detailed
account of the zealous cooperation of the Jews in
the building if he could have been refuted by any
resident of Jerusalem. We may therefore believe
that the enterprise was begun but was given up
because of earthquakes, and possibly also because
Julian had withdrawn to Persia. ‘The rescript To
the Community of the Jews (Letter 51), though it is
cited by Sozomen 5. 22 and Socrates 3. 20 as Julian's,
has been condemned as a forgery by Schwarz, Klimek
and Geffcken, was considered “trés suspect” by
Bidez and Cumont in 1898 (Recherches) and is rejected
outright by them in their edition of 1922. Their
arguments are based on the general tone of the
document, and the strange reference to ‘ my
brother” the Jewish patriarch, but while the
rescript may have been rewritten or edited in a
bureau, it probably represents the sentiments of
Julian and is consistent with his attitude to the
Jews as expressed in the treatise Against the Gali-
laeans. It has therefore been placed with the
genuine letters in this volume.

The appeal On behalf of the Argives (Letter 28),
was accepted as genuine by all editors before Bidez
and Cumont, and by Schwarz, Geffeken and Asmus,
and was formerly assigned by Cumont to the year
355, when Julian was a student at Athens. Bidez

ΧΧΙ

INTRODUCTION

and Cumont (1922) now accept the theory of Keil?
that it is not by Julian, but was composed in the
first century a.p. as a letter of recommendation
(ἐπιστολὴ συστατική). Maas, however, maintains that
it was written by the high-priest Theodorus in
Julian’s reign, and that the proconsul’s rejection of
its appeal is referred to in Julian’s letter to Theodorus,
p. 37. But there is nothing in it that could not have
been written by Julian, and it would be natural for
him to defend ancient Argos, which had probably
remained Hellenic, and her sacred festivals against
Romanised and Christianised Corinth, the provincial
metropolis. Julian disliked beast shows? as much as
Constantius had loved them, and the tribute exacted
from Argos was used to pay for such shows (see p.
89). He asks a favour rather than gives orders as
an Emperor, but this was consistent with his custom
of referring such appeals as that of the Argives to
the governors of the provinces.2 We do not know
from other sources when the Argives began to pay
tribute to Corinth, though there is abundant evidence
that under the Empire the minor cities of Greece
did pay tribute to Corinth instead of to Rome. On
the whole I see no reason for suspecting the authenti-
city of this document, or for assigning it to Julian’s
student days at Athens.

In May or June 362 Julian left Constantinople for
Antioch, the capital of the provinces of the East,

1 In Nachrichten Ges. d. Wiss. zu Gottingen, 1913.

2 ¢.e. public exhibitions of combats of wild beasts, such
as were regularly given at the expense of the municipalities
at this period.

8 For this policy see Ammianus 16. 5. 13. Heyler’s
comment on Letter 28 is—cogit rogando.

XXlll

INTRODUCTION

and about this time he wrote Letter 35 to Aristoxenus,
asking him to meet him at Tyana, and Letter 29 to
his uncle at Antioch, whom he had appointed Count
of the East (Comes Orientis); he refers to their
approaching meeting at Antioch (p. 105). On the
way he visited and wept over Nicomedia, which had
been destroyed by an earthquake in 358,1 and Pes-
sinus, where he sacrificed to Cybele the Mother of
the Gods at her ancient shrine. From Letter 42 to
Callixeine it appears that as a consequence of his
visit he appointed her priestess of Cybele at Pessinus.
That the citizens of Pessinus had displeased him by
a lack of enthusiasm for the restoration of their
famous cult may be gathered from Letter 22, p. 73.
Julian also visited Tarsus, in whose suburb near
the river Cydnus he was destined to be buried in
the following year. He arrived at Antioch to-
wards the end of July, and wrote Letter 41, the
rescript to the citizens of Bostra, on August 1.5 In
January 363 he entered on the consulship (see
Letter 54).

In the Misopogon (Loeb Library, Vol. 2), Julian
has himself described his nine months’ stay at
Antioch. The city was predominantly Christian
and opposed to his restoration of paganism, so that
when the celebrated temple of Apollo in the beauti-
ful suburb of Daphne was burned in 362, he ascribed
it to the malice of the Christians. The citizens, who
were notoriously pleastire-loving and _ luxurious,
openly ridiculed his austere way of life and disliked
his reforms. During the winter he wrote the

1 Ammianns 22. 9. 3-5.
2 Julian’s first edict from Antioch in Codex Theodosianus
1. 16. 8 is dated July 28, 362.

XXiV

INTRODUCTION

treatise Against the Gallaeans. When he left Antioch
on March 5, 363, for his Persian campaign he
announced that he would spend the coming winter,
not at Antioch, but at Tarsus. This showed that
he expected a short campaign. In the extant letters
he does not mention his disappointment with his
reception at Antioch, though in Leiter 58, 399,
written on March 10 or 11 at Hierapolis, he alludes
to his interview with the delegates from the senate
of Antioch who had followed him as far as Litarbae
in the attempt to conciliate his displeasure. This
is his last extant letter.

For his brief and fatal campaign against Sapor in
363 we depend on Ammianus and Eutropius who
accompanied him, and on Zosimus. On the march
Julian avoided Edessa, which was_ stubbornly
Christian (see Letter 40). At Carrhae, notorious
for the defeat of the Romans under Crassus, he
assembled his troops. Procopius was sent towards
Nisibis with 18,000 men in order to distract the
attention of Sapor, and was ordered to meet the
Armenian auxiliaries whom Julian had requisitioned
in Letter 57, and later rejoin Julian. Meanwhile the
Emperor with 65,000 men proceeded to the Euphrates.
His fleet of a thousand boats of all kinds he trans-
ferred by means of a canal from the Euphrates to
the Tigris, and arrived under the walls of Ctesiphon, —
devastating the country and burning towns and
villages as he went. The omens from first to last
were unfavourable, his officers were inefficient, and
the troops whom he had brought from Gaul began

1 Cf. Libanius, Oration 16. 1, and his Letter 824,
Foerster, for his attempt to persuade Julian to forgive
Antioch.

XXV

INTRODUCTION

to suffer from the heat. Though before Ctesiphon
he won an important victory over the Persians, he
reluctantly decided not to besiege this stronghold,
but to try to effect a junction with the forces of
Procopius by marching northwards. He burnt his
ships rather than take them up the Tigris. But
Procopius and the Armenians failed to arrive, and
Sapor with his main army was at hand and began to
harass Julian’s forces from June 16. The Persians
were repulsed, but, after about ten days of almost
incessant fighting and marching, Julian was mortally
wounded in a rear attack on June 26, and’died at
midnight. On his death-bed he is said to have
discussed the immortality of the soul with Maximus
and Priscus.2. The exact name of the place where
he fell is not known, but Ammianus 25. 3. 9, says
that when Julian learned that the locality was called
Phrygia he gave up hope of recovery, because an
oracle had said that he would die in Phrygia. His
body was carried with the army on its retreat and
was later sent to Tarsus for burial in charge of
Proeopius. The Christian general Jovian was
elected Emperor by the troops.

1 On the lack of discipline among the Gallic troops,
both at Antioch and on the march, see Ammianus 22. 12;
25. ΤῸ

2 The numerous and varying accounts of Julian’s death
from Ammianus to the Byzantine chroniclers of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries have been collected by Reinhardt
Der Tod des Kaiser Julian, 1891. The legend that the dying
Emperor threw a handful of his own blood in the air and
cried νενίκηκας, Γαλιλαῖε, ‘* Thou hast conquered, O Galilaean !”
is found in Theodoret 3. 20, Sozomen 6. 2. Others said he
was reproaching the Sun, who had betrayed him, and that
his words were misunderstood ; cf. Philostorgius 7. 15.

XXVi

INTRODUCTION

The letters of Julian must have been collected
and published before the end of the fourth century,
since Eunapius (a.p. 346-414) used them as a source
for his Hzstory, and in his Lives mentions several
that are not extant. Libanius, not long after Julian’s
death, wrote to Aristophanes of Corinth that some
of Julian’s letters were safe to publish, others not,
and consoled himself for the Emperor’s loss with
“these his immortal children.” Zosimus the pagan
historian, who wrote 450-501, says that from Julian’s
letters one may best comprehend his activities,
“which extended over the whole world.” The
᾿ historians of the Church, notably Socrates of Con-
stantinople, who completed his History about a.p.
440, seem to have quoted from a mixed collection
of letters and edicts such as has come down to us.
Sozomen, a contemporary of Socrates, quotes nine ot
the extant letters and mentions fourteen that have
not survived. Such a collection would be entitled
Letters because any Imperial edict was called a
letter. Julian was an indefatigable letter-writer, and
we have only a fraction of his vast correspondence.
Many letters must have been suppressed by their
owners as dangerous to themselves after his death,
or by the Christians because of their disrespectful
allusions to Christianity ; of those that survive some
were mutilated by the Christians for the same
reason, while others, such as Letter 81, To Basil, are
suspected of being Christian forgeries designed to
display Julian in an unpleasant light. On the other
hand, documents which could be used as evidence
that Julian persecuted the Christians (e.g. Letter
37), or pastoral letters written in his character of
pontifex maximus to admonish pagan priests to

XXvil

INTRODUCTION

imitate the Christian virtues of asceticism and
charity to the poor (e. g. Letter 20 and the Fragment
of a Letter, Vol. 2), would not be allowed to perish.
Many letters survived in hand-books as models of
epistolary style, a fact which, as Cumont pointed
_ out, adds greatly to the difficulties of correct ascrip-

tion, because the compilers of such hand-books were
often careless about the authorship, form of address,
or completeness of such extracts.

The “ Letters” in this collection-are (1) edicts or
rescripts, the majority of which are concerned with
the Christians; these were certainly worked over by
the Imperial secretaries and are only indirectly
Julian’s; (2) pastoral or encyclical letters to priests ;
and (3) private correspondence. As a rule Julian
dictated to secretaries, and so fast that Libanius
says the “ tachygraphers”’ were unable to keep pace
with him, but certain postscripts are marked ‘ with
his own hand.” After his accession in 361 the plea
of lack of time or a shortage of secretaries is frequent, _
and some scholars have rejected certain purely con-
ventional and sophistic letters, such as 59 and 60, or
assigned them to his student days, on the ground
that Julian after 355 would not write in that strain,
and that his undoubtedly genuine letters always
have some definite content. They never reject a
letter in which pressure of business is mentioned,
though one may see from the correspondence of
Libanius that the plea of lack of time owing to
affairs is a regular sophistic excuse. The purely
sophistic letters have been placed last in the present -
volume in order that they may not interrupt the
sequence of those that can be dated with more or
less certainty. But I am not convinced that at any

XXVIll

INTRODUCTION

time in Julian’s career he had renounced writing
like a sophist and bandying quotations with his
friends. Nothing could be more sophistic than part
of his unquestionably genuine letter to Libanius,
in which he expresses his admiration for his friend’s
speech on behalf of Aristophanes.t There seems
to be only one safe criterion for rejecting letters
ascribed in the MS. tradition to Julian: when the
historical facts of his life cannot be reconciled with
the contents of a letter, or if he cannot have known
the person addressed, as is the case with the six
letters addressed to Iamblichus, or when the con-
᾿ tents are too foolish even for Julian in his sophistic
vein,? it has seemed better not to confuse the
reader by including them, as Hertlein did, with the
genuine letters. They are therefore grouped to-
gether as apocryphal. After the publication of
Hertlein’s edition, six letters, ascribed to Julian,
were discovered by Papadopoulos-Kerameus in a
convent, used as a school for Greek merchants, on
the island Chalce (Halki) near Constantinople ; they
are included in this edition. The text used in this
volume is, for the rest of the letters, that of Hertlein
(Leipzig, 1876), revised and rearranged in chrono-
logical order as far as possible. ‘The marginal num-
bers correspond to the pages of Spanheim, 1696.
The edition of Bidez and Cumont (1922) appeared
too late to be used in constructing the present text,
but is referred to in this Introduction. All references
to Bidez or Cumont in the critical notes refer to
their publications before 1922. Their edition includes
the Latin edicts of Julian preserved in the Codex

1 See Letter 53, 382 ἢ, p. 185.
2 Cf. Zetter 80, To Sarapion.

XX1X

INTRODUCTION

Theodosianus and the Imperial edict in Greek, De
auro coronario, published by Grenfell, Hunt and
Hogarth in Faytim towns and their Papyri, p. 116 foll.,
and assigned by those editors and by Wilcken to
Alexander Severus. Bidez and Cumont support
Dessau! in regarding this edict as by Julian, who,
as we know from an edict in Codex Theodosianus
12. 13. 1, remitted the aurum coronarium on April 29,
362. Ammianus? mentions this as an instance of
Julian’s generosity. |

The following biographical notices of Julian’s more
important correspondents or of persons mentioned
in the text, are in alphabetical order and are de-
signed to supplement the notes.

Aetius of Antioch, nicknamed “ Atheist” by his
Christian opponents, rose from extreme poverty and
obscurity to the position of leader of the faction of
the Arian sect called Anomoean because its members
held that “the substance of the Son is unlike the
substance of the Father.” The less radical of the
unorthodox, semi-Arians, like the Emperor Con-
stantius, persecuted the Anomoeans. But Gallus
Caesar, Julian’s half-brother, soon after his promotion
in 351 and his appointment to govern the East, came
under the influence of Aetius, who, for the next three
years while he resided at Antioch, was his spiritual
adviser. When Gallus heard that Julian, then study-
ing at Ephesus with Maximus the theurgist, was
inclined to '“ Hellenism,’ he more than once sent

1 In Revue de Philologie, 1901. 2 25. 4, 15.
XXX

INTRODUCTION

Aetius to admonish his younger brother, who con-
trived to reassure them both.! After the disgrace
and execution of Gallus by Constantius at the end of
354, Aetius was exiled to Phrygia by the Emperor,
partly because of his alarming influence and extreme
Arianism, partly because of his intimacy with Gallus.
Expelled from his office of deacon and repudiated by
the Arians, he was still in exile on Julian’s accession,
when he was recalled to Constantinople and treated
with peculiar favour. In spite of the title of Julian’s
letter of recall,? Aetius was not made a bishop until
the reign of Valens. After Julian’s death he retired
to an estate in Lesbos which had been given him by
Julian, but later he went to Constantinople, and in
spite of his heresy was made a bishop, though prob-
ably without a see. In the histories of the fourth-
century Church, such as those of Socrates, Sozomen
and Theodoret, he is the most important of all the
heretics and apparently the most dangerous to the
unity of the Church. Philostorgius gives a detailed
and fairly tolerant account of his varied life and great
influence, and praises his eloquence and learning,
whereas the others ridicule as superficial his study of
Aristotle, with whose logic this ex-goldsmith of
Antioch professed to have fitted himself to found a
heresy, and Newman, who intensely disliked his
heresy, calls him a mountebank.?

1 See Philostorgius 3. 27 and the letter of Gallus to Julian,
p. 288. Sozomen 5. 5 mentions Julian’s letter recalling
Aetlus.

2 Seé Letter 15 in which Julian refers to their friendship of
long standing, and Against the Galilaeans, 333D, p. 413,
where the reference may be to the Anomoean Aetius.

3 The Arians of the Fourth Century, 1833.

ΧΧΧῚ

INTRODUCTION

A.yptius, to whom Julian wrote Letters 6 and 7, was,
according to Ammianus 23. 1. 2,a native of Antioch.
In 358 Libanius in an extant letter (324 Foerster),
congratulates him on his success as governor of
Britain—his title was Vicarius Britanniarum, an
office subordinate to the prefect of the Gallic
provinces—and reports favourably of his young son
Hierocles, who had been left at Antioch in the
sophist’s charge. : Seeck and Cumont think that
Julian’s Letter 6 should be dated 355 or 356, and that
his summons to Alypius preceded the latter's appoint-
ment to Britain; but I agree with Geffcken that
Julian’s language implies that he had been for some
time in Gaul, and that he needed the assistance of
Alypius for his expedition against Constantius, so
that the letter should be dated 360. As there is
nothing in Letter 7 to indicate whether Alypius was
in Britain or what was the map which he had sent
to Julian, I have not altered the traditional order of
the two letters to Alypius. If, however, Alypius was
still in Britain, Let/er 7 will naturally antedate Letter
6 and will fall between 356 and 360. In that case
the illness from which Julian had lately recovered
may be the semi-asphyxiation which he himself de-
scribes in Misopogon 341 Ὁ as having occurred when
he was at Paris in the winter of 358-9. We know
that Alypius was appointed by Julian in 362-3 to
superintend the rebuilding of the Temple at Jeru-
salem (Ammianus 23. 1. 2). The project failed, and
Alypius returned to Antioch, where he is mentioned
in a letter from Libanius to Basil (1583 Wolf) as a
person of distinction. In 372, when the Emperor
Valens, in his panic terror of assassination, was per-
secuting right and left, Alypius was exiled on a false

ΧΧΧΙΪ

INTRODUCTION

charge of poisoning and his property confiscated
(Ammianus 29. 1. 44). Like Priscus and Libanius
he is addressed by Julian as “ brother,” possibly, as
Asmus thinks, because they were fellow-initiates in
the Mysteries of Mithras.! In the MSS. of Julian’s
Letters Alypius is entitled “ brother of Caesarius”’ to
distinguish him from the dwarf Alypius of Alexandria,
whose Life was written first by his friend Iamblichus
the philosopher and later by Eunapius. Caesarius
held several high offices in the fourth century, and in
the reign of Valens, when city prefect of Constantin-
ople, was imprisoned by the usurper Procopius
(Ammianus 26. 7. 4). Several letters from Libanius
to Caesarius are extant.

ARISTOPHANES of Corinth, about whose reinstate-
ment Julian wrote to Libanius when they were at
Antioch towards the end of 362 (Letter 53), was an
official of no great importance, but the detailed
- account of his life which Libanius addressed to
Julian at that time (Oration 14, Vol. 2, Foerster) is
a curious record of the vicissitudes of official life in
the fourth century. Aristophanes was the son of a
rich senator of Corinth and was educated in rhetoric
at Athens. He was involved in a ruinous lawsuit
and robbed of part of his patrimony by his brother-
in-law Eugenius, a favourite of the Emperor Constans,
and since, while Constans ruled Greece, it was useless
to oppose Eugenius, Aristophanes retired to Syria,
some time before 350. There he was appointed an
Agens in rebus, and, as a sort of Imperial courier,
travelled all over the Empire. In 3857 he was
sent to Egypt with the newly-appointed prefect

1 See Dieterich, Aithras-Liturgie, p. 149.
XXXill

INTRODUCTION

Parnassius. There they incautiously consulted an
astrologer. How dangerous was this proceeding
under the Empire, since it aroused suspicion of
treasonable interest in the length of the Emperor's
life or reign, may be seen from the accounts in
Ammianus of the reigns of Constantius and Valens
and their wholesale persecution of alleged conspira-
tors. After a trial at Scythopolis (Ammianus 19. 12.
10), conducted by the cruel agent of Constantius,
Paul, nicknamed “the Chain,” Parnassius was exiled
in 359 or 360, while Aristophanes was tortured and
_ barely escaped with his life. He was condemned to
travel throughout Egypt under the escort of a soldier
and a herald, who proclaimed wherever they went
that any Egyptian whom Aristophanes had defrauded
might come forward and denounce him. Libanius,
who, like all fourth-century writers, gives the Egyp-
tians a very bad character, argues that, if even the
Egyptians could not trump up a charge against Aris-
tophanes, he was at least innocent of the charges of
peculation that had been brought against him at
Scythopolis. He was released by the death of Con-
stantius in 361. No doubt the strongest argument
that Libanius used in favour of Aristophanes was the
fact that he was a devout pagan who at his trial had
openly sworn by the gods. Libanius asked for his
protégé some office that would rehabilitate him in the
eyes of the Corinthians, and in Letter 53 Julian says
that he will confer with Libanius as to what this shall
be, but we know only that Aristophanes did receive
some office and returned to Corinth. Julian was
more interested in the eloquence of Libanius than in
the fortunes of Aristophanes. Seeck, however, in
Die Briefe des Libanius states that Julian appointed

XXXiv

INTRODUCTION

Aristophanes to the highest office in Greece, the pro-
consulship of Achaea, and places him in the lists of
proconsuls for 362-3. But already in 362 Julian had
given that honour to a man of the highest character,
whom he greatly admired, Vettius Agorius Praetex-
tatus, and since we know from Zosimus 4. 3. 3 that
Praetextatus still held the office in September 364,
when he was able to persuade the Emperor Valen-
tinian not to enforce against the Greeks the edict
forbidding the nocturnal celebration of religious
rites, there is no room for Aristophanes as proconsul
of Achaea; nor is it likely that so strict a moralist
as Julian would have conceded so great a distinction
to a man for whose loose morals even Libanius felt
bound to apologise in his oration.t Libanius in a
letter (758) expresses his delight at Julian’s praise
of his speech and says that it shall be published
with the Emperor’s letter; they do occur together in
some MSS. In 364, after Julian’s death, Aristo-
_ phanes wrote to Libanius asking that he might see
the correspondence of Julian and Libanius. The
sophist replied (1350 Wolf) by reproaching him with
having soon forgotten “the divine Julian,” and says
that he can send only such letters as it would be safe
to publish. It was, in fact, a dangerous time for the
friends of Julian, who were regarded with suspicion
by the Christian Emperors Valens and Valentinian,
and, for the most part, lost their offices.

Arsaces, or Arsacius, to whom is addressed Letter
57, was king of Armenia in the reigns of Constantius
and Julian, and, since Armenia was the buffer state

1 Cumont in his edition, and Geffcken, Judianus, are silent
on this point.
XXXV

c 2

INTRODUCTION

between Rome and Persia, he was courted by Romans
and Persians alike, whenever they were at war. In
his Oration 1. 20p, Julian describes how in the
Eastern campaign of Constantius in 337 the Ar-
menians for a time went over to the Persians.
When in 361 Constantius was about to march
against Julian, leaving his Eastern frontier insecure,
he summoned Arsaces to Caesarea in Cappadocia
and strengthened the old alliance of Rome and
Armenia by giving him in marriage Olympias, the
daughter of the prefect Ablabius, who had been
betrothed when very young to the Emperor’s de-
ceased brother Constans (Ammianus 20. 11). Athan-
asius reckoned it among the impieties of the Arian
Constantius that he had “given over to the bar-
barians’”’ one who had been all but a Roman
Empress. Constantius immediately on his accession
had put to death the prefect Ablabius, the low-born
favourite of Constantine whose ambitious career and
violent end are related in the Lives of Eunapius ;
he now disposed of Ablabius’ daughter as he had
disposed of his own two sisters, giving one to
Gallus and the other to Julian in order to secure
their loyalty when they were promoted to the
Caesarship. Arsaces remained faithful to Rome and
so lost his kingdom and his life to the Persians
(Ammianus 27. 12), but his failure to arrive with
his auxiliaries to aid Julian at Ctesiphon contributed
to the breakdown of the campaign (Ammianus 24. 7).
Letter 57 is bracketed by Hertlein as spurious and
rejected, by all modern editors on account of its
bombastic style, and its authenticity is dubious. But
it was cited by Sozomen 6. 2, in the fifth century,
and, if a forgery, was forged early enough to take

ΧΧΧΥῚ

INTRODUCTION

him in. He criticises its “unbounded arrogance’”’
and speaks of its “blasphemies against Christ ” ;
since these are not in Letter 57 he may have seen a
somewhat different version. As for the style, since
Arsaces was a Christian and a barbarian, Julian may
have thought that threats would serve him better
than cajoleries, and in any case we cannot tell in
what language he or his secretaries might see fit to
address a ruler who owed his throne to the Romans
and might be suspected of intending treachery in
the coming campaign. Accordingly, though its
_authorship is doubtful, I have not placed this letter
with the apocrypha.

Artemtius, military governor of Egypt (Dux Aegypit)
in 361, is mentioned, though not named, by Julian
in. Letter 21, To the Alexandrians. He was in
high favour with the Emperor Constantius and
an ardent Christian. In Alexandria he was hated
by the pagans because he despoiled the temples,
especially the famous Serapeum, the shrine of
Serapis, and not less by the orthodox Christians
for his support of the Arian Bishop George. In
362 Julian summoned him to Antioch, deprived
him of his office, and had him beheaded on October
20, 362, a day that was consecrated by the Church
to his memory as a saint and martyr. There were
several reasons why Julian detested Artemius. He
was a friend of Constantius, had been foremost in
suppressing the pagan cults, and was supposed to
have been accessory to the murder of Gallus Caesar,
though this last charge Artemius denied. The
fullest account of his defiance of Julian at Antioch,
his religious controversy with the Emperor, his

XXXVil

_ INTRODUCTION

tortures and death, was preserved by the late
fourth-century historian of the Church, Philostor-
gius (pp. 151-176, Bidez). Ammianus is strangely
in error when he says (22, 11. 3) that the news of
the death of Artemius was the signa] at Alexandria
for the outbreak of the populace which resulted in
the murder of Bishop George, whose oppression of
the citizens Artemius had supported with his troops
(Sozomen 4, 30). Ammianus was at Antioch and
must have known the date of the death of Arte-
mius; he should also have known that George was
murdered nearly a year earlier, in December 361,
when the death of Constantius was announced.
Artemius, according to Philostorgius, was one of
those who resisted Julian’s blanda persecutio of bribes
and eloquent arguments to which so many suc-
cumbed, and this accounts for the fact that he was
not punished till some time after Julian’s accession.

Ararsivs! to whom the Emperor Julian wrote
Letter 37 telling him not to persecute the Gali-
laeans, but to prefer the god-fearing, z.e. the pagans,
was a native of Ancyra and himself a pagan. At
that time, 362, he was governing the province of
the Euphrates with the title Praeses Huphratensis.
The letter as we have it is abrupt and is probably
a fragment of a longer letter or edict, often quoted
no doubt by the Christians as evidence of their
persecution and exclusion from office in Julian’s
reign. On the general question of Julian’s treat-

1 Hertlein prefers Artabius; both forms occur in the MSS.,
and in Codex Justinianus 11. 70. 1, an edict of Julian on
buildings erected on state lands, is addressed to Atarbinus,
possibly the same official.

XXXVlil

INTRODUCTION

ment of Christian officials or candidates for office
the historians of the Church give divergent accounts,
but Socrates 3. 13. 2 and Sozomen 5. 18 say that
he would not appoint them to govern provinces, on
the ground that their law forbade them to inflict
capital punishment. Gregory Nazianzen, Oration 7,
says that Julian bribed the Christians to sacrifice
to the gods by promising them appointments, and
Jerome says that many could not resist this blanda
persecutio. In 362-363 Libanius wrote several letters,
which are extant, to Atarbius, and especially in Letter
14], Foerster, praised his mild administration of the
Kuphratensis. In 364, when Libanius wrote to him
Letter 1221 Wolf, Atarbius was Consularis Macedoniae.

Atuanasius, the saint and orthodox bishop of
Alexandria about whom Julian wrote Letiers 24, 46
and 47, is the most notable Christian with whom
on his accession Julian had to deal. He became
bishop of Alexandria in 326 and died in 373, But
of that time he spent about twenty years away from
his see, and went into exile or hiding five times,
once under Constantine, twice under Constantius,
who supported the Arian heresy of which Athana-
sius was the determined opponent, once under
Julian, and finally for four months under the Arian
Emperor Valens in 367. With the death of Valens
the Arians lost practically all their influence and
the orthodox prelate had won in the end. When,
in 362, Julian proclaimed an amnesty for the non-
Arian ecclesiastics who had been persecuted by
Constantius, Athanasius returned in February to his
see at Alexandria. His enemy, the Arian Bishop
George of Cappadocia, who then held the bishopric,

ΧΧΧΙΧ

INTRODUCTION

had been murdered on December 24, 361, when
the news of the death of Constantius became known
at Alexandria. George was obnoxious to pagans and
Athanasians alike, but though Philostorgius 7. 2
says that Athanasius incited the people to murder
George, the silence of Julian on this point and
the testimony of Socrates 3. 31 and Sozomen 3, 7
that Athanasius was innocent, indicate that the
charge was due to the malice of the Arians, Tumults
similar to that which resulted in the lynching of
George occurred elsewhere in the Empire, and the
Christian writers in their invectives against Julian
accuse him of having recalled the exiles in order
to foment the strife of the Christian sects, whose
quarrels were so bitter and unremitting that the
story of the reigns of Constantine, Constantius and
Valens is mainly that of a heated theological contro-
versy. Julian in Leéter 21 rebuked the Alexandrians,
though not as severely as they deserved, for the
murder of George, and with indecent haste de-
manded for himself in Letier 23 the books of the
dead bishop, whose library he had used in the past,
perhaps in his years of retirement at Macellum in
Cappadocia; he may have wished to use them again
for his tract Against the Galilaeans, which he com-
posed at Antioch in the following winter. When
Athanasius after his return proceeded to exercise
his functions, Julian in an edict addressed to the
Alexandrians, Lelter 24, banished him from Alex-
andria, and wrote a sharp rebuke to the prefect of
Egypt, Ecdicius Olympus, ordering Athanasius to
be expelled from Egypt before December 1. Ac-
cordingly, on October 23, 361, Athanasius left
Alexandria, saying, “It is but a little cloud and it

xl

INTRODUCTION

will pass” (Sozomen 5. 15). In the late autumn of
362 the Alexandrians sent to Julian at Antioch a
petition for the recall of Athanasius, but he refused
their request in a document (Letter 47) which is
partly an edict, partly a theological argument for
paganism, and contains the statement, useful for his
biographers, that he had finally renounced Chris-
tianity twelve years earlier, z.e. in 350. Athanasius
remained in hiding near Alexandria and at Memphis
until Julian’s death in 363, when he resumed his
bishopric.

Basit the Great, commonly called St. Basil, was a
native of Cappadocia. He and Julian were about the
same age, and were fellow-students in Athens in
355. Basil returned to Cappadocia in 356 and was
probably in retreat in a monastery near Caesarea,
the metropolis of Cappadocia, when Julian addressed
to him Letter 26 inviting him to the court at
Constantinople. The invitation was certainly not
accepted, but there is no proof that they did not
remain on good terms. Basil had other pagan
friends, especially the sophist Libanius, with whom
he corresponded and to whom he sent pupils from
Cappadocia. Basil became bishop of Caesarea in
370 and died in his fiftieth year in 379. There is
no good reason for doubting the genuineness of Letter
26, or for supposing that it was addressed to some
other Basil than the famous bishop. But Leiter 81,
in which Julian demands from Basil a large sum
of money as a fine on Caesarea, and threatens to
punish the citizens still more severely if he is not
obeyed, is generally regarded as spurious, and
equally spurious is Basil’s defiant answer, which

xli

INTRODUCTION

is extant among the saint’s correspondence as Letter
41. Even in Byzantine times both letters were
regarded as unskilful forgeries, alien to the char-
acter of the writers to whom they were ascribed.
The main argument against the authenticity of
Leiter 81 is the peculiar language, which is like
nothing that we know to be Julianic. A minor point
is that he regularly calls the Danube by the name
Ister, whereas the writer of the letter does not.
Further, the silence of Gregory Nazianzen as to
the demand of money from Basil is strange in one
who had been a fellow-student of the two men at
Athens, and in his invectives against Julian would
hardly have omitted this outrage if Basil had been
involved. Moreover, the last words of Letter 81 are
said by Sozomen 5.18 to have been addressed by
Julian “to the bishops,” and he says that the bishops
made the retort which appears at the end of Basil’s
alleged reply: ἀνέγνως GAN οὐκ ἔγνως" εἰ yap ἔγνως, οὐκ
ἂν κατέγνως. ““ΥΠαῦ you read you did not under-
stand. For if you had understood you would not
have condemned.” But Julian’s hostility to Caesarea
was a fact. Cappadocia as a whole was Christian,
and its capital was, as Sozomen 5. 4 says, “ Christian
to a man.” Under Constantius the citizens had
pulled down the temples of Zeus and Apollo, and
in Julian’s reign they invited martyrdom by de-
stroying the temple of Fortune, the only one that
remained. Sozomen relates their punishment by
Julian, which probably occurred while he was at
Antioch in 362-363. The city lost its complimentary
name of Caesarea, and was obliged to resume its old
name Mazaca; it was expunged from the catalogue
of cities, and its church treasures were confiscated.

xlii

INTRODUCTION

Libanius, Oration 16, describes its fate as a warning
to the recalcitrant. That Julian was displeased with
the Cappadocians in general may be seen from the
tone of Letter 35, To Aristoxenus, whom he asked
to meet him at Tyana on his way to Antioch; nor
did he visit Caesarea the metropolis, or Macellum,
where he had spent so much of his youth. His
death probably prevented the punishment of Caesa-
rea from being fully carried out.

Ecpicius, probably called also Olympus, to whom
Julian wrote Letlers 23, 45, 46, 49, was prefect of
Egypt 362-363. The letters all refer to the affairs
of Egypt. Julian commissions Ecdicius to secure
for him the library of Bishop George; scolds him
for not having taken instant action against Athan-
asius ; tells him the height of the Nile flood; and
orders him to encourage the study of music at
Alexandria. Ammianus 22. 14 says that in 362
Julian received from the prefect of Egypt a report
on the sacred bull Apis, but does not give his name.
In Codex Theodosianus 15. 1.8, Ecdicius appears by
name and receives rescripts from Julian. As the
name of the prefect at this time appears also as
Olympus, Seeck is probably right in assuming that
he had, as was not unusual, two names, and that
either could be used. This may be the Ecdicius
who studied in Athens with Libanius in 336-540,
later corresponded with him, and sent him pupils.
On August 20, 363, Ecdicius announced to the
Alexandrians the death of Julian in Persia. In
informing Ecdicius about the height of the Nile
flood Julian, who was at Antioch, wrote what
Ecdicius must have known. Julian took a special

xliii

INTRODUCTION

interest in the Nile flood because he had, on his
accession, ordered that the Nilometer, the measure
used to gauge its height, should be restored to the
temple of Serapis, whence it had been removed by
Constantine to a Christian church; Socrates 1. 18,
Sozomen 5. 3.

Exvpipius “the philosopher,” to whom is addressed
Letter 65, is not otherwise known, and the letter,
which is a purely formal type of excuse for the
brevity of the writer, was probably preserved on
that account in epistolary hand-books. It is placed
by Cumont with the spurious letters, though there
is nothing against it but its lack of content. Two
men named Elpidius attained to high office in the
fourth century, and one of them was a favourite
with Julian because he had renounced Christianity
and become a zealous pagan. He was with Julian
at Antioch in the winter of 362 as Comes rerum
privatarum, and Libanius, in Letter 33, written when
Julian was in Gaul in 358, says that Julian, though
younger than Elpidius, has exercised a good influence
on him, and that in his conversation Elpidius echoes
Julian’s ideas and is as anxious as Libanius himself
regarding Julian’s future. This probably alludes to
the renunciation of Christianity by Elpidius which
was to follow Julian’s accession (see, too, Libanius,
Oration 14. 35). It was to him that Libanius applied
when he grew anxious as to the fate of Aristophanes
(see Letter 758, Foerster). The other Elpidius, a
Christian, was prefect of the East in 360, and was
also at Antioch with Julian in 362. He is often
mentioned by Ammianus and Libanius. Neither of
these men could correctly be called a philosopher,

xliv

INTRODUCTION

but it is possible that Julian might so address the
former, who was among his intimates,

Eustatuius, to whom Julian addressed Letters
43 and 44, was a Neo-Platonic philosopher but
apparently not a miracle-worker of the type of
Maximus. He was a distinguished orator, and in
358 was sent by Constantius on an embassy to the
Persian king Sapor, having been chosen for this
mission, says Ammanius 17. 5, ut opifex suadendt.
His extraordinary, though short-lived, influence over
. Sapor is described by Eunapius (pp. 393-399, Wright).
He married Sosipatra the clairvoyant, whose mira-
culous childhood under the tutelage of Chaldaean
thaumaturgists is related by Eunapius. Eustathius
had poor health and died soon after Julian had
given him permission to return to his native Cappa-
docia. His widow continued her teaching, and
their son Antoninus had a distinguished career as
a priest and teacher in Egypt, where his prediction
of the destruction of the temples came to rank as
an oracle (Eunapius, Lives, pp. 415-425). The letter
of Eustathius, p. 291, in which he describes his
comfortable journey, appeared in the editions of
Martin, Estienne and Hertlein with the wrong title,
To Libanius. Cumont restored the correct title
from Parisinus 963. It has accordingly been placed
in this volume with the apocryphal letters. Eusta-
thius was a kinsman of the philosopher Aedesius,
and when the latter migrated to Pergamon he left
his interests in Cappadocia in charge of Eustathius.
Libanius and Basil corresponded with Eustathius,
and in Letter 123, written in 359, Libanius calls him
“the most renowned of philosophers.”

xlv

INTRODUCTION

Eutuerius, to whom Julian wrote Letter 10
announcing his safety and his desire that the other
should join him in Constantinople, is otherwise
known from the account of his life in Ammianus
16. 7. He was an Armenian, a eunuch of unusual
virtue and intellectual attainments, who had been
kidnapped and sold to some Roman merchants, rose
to a position at Court, became adviser to Constans,
and later high chamberlain to Julian when the
latter was made Caesar. Eutherius went with Julian
to Gaul as his trusted adviser, and had the courage
to reprove his master for that un-Roman levity of
character which Ammianus says he had acquired by
his residence in Asia, Eutherius was sent by Julian
to the Court at Milan in 356 to counteract the plots
of Marcellus, his late master of horse, and he suc-
cessfully defended the loyalty of Julian before
Constantius; again in 360 Julian sent him to Con-
stantius with the letters in which he sought to
justify bis action in accepting the title of Augustus
from the army in Gaul. After Julian’s death,
Eutherius, who was a pagan, retired to Rome, where
he spent his old age respected by all. Ammianus
says that though he has ransacked history he can
find no eunuch who in wisdom and accomplishments
can be compared with Eutherius. He must have
possessed extraordinary tact to have been loved by
Constantius, though he was a pagan, and by Julian,
though he was the favourite of Constantius.

Evacrius, the rhetorician to whom Julian wrote
Letter 25, making him the present of a small estate
in Bithynia, is otherwise unknown, though he is
possibly to be identified with the man of that name

xlvi

INTRODUCTION

who joined Julian at Nish in the autumn of 361
(Letter 8, To Maximus). Neither the Comes rerum
privatarum under Constantius, whom Julian banished
on his accession (Ammianus 22. 3. 7), nor the friend
of Libanius who appears in his correspondence and
in that of St. Basil, is likely to have received this
gift from Julian, but we know nothing definite on
this point. Julian tells us in his Lelter to the
Athenians, Vol. 2, 2733, that Constantius had kept
all his father’s property, so that he had the use only
of his mother’s estate before he was made Caesar.
-On the other hand we have the statement of
Eunapius (Lives, p. 428, Wright), that there was
at the disposal of Julian when a student, “ample
and abundant wealth from every source.” In his
fragmentary Letter to a Priest (Vol. 2, 290 pd), Julian
says that his grandmother’s estate was taken from
him for a time only, and boasts of his own generosity
in giving when he had little to spare. The date
when he gave the small country-place to Evagrius
cannot be precisely determined. In the absence of
direct evidence I have dated it shortly after his
accession ; so, too, Schwarz. Cumont places it first
in his edition and thinks that it was written from
Gaul before 358. In favour of his view is Libanius,
Letter 369 (Foerster), written to Julian in Gaul, in
which he praises his generosity in having given to
his friends houses, slaves, lands and money. On the
other hand, it is equally likely that the estate which
Julian’s uncle, Count Julian, asked for too late in
the summer of 362, was this very estate in Bithynia,
and that it had been recently given to Evagrius.

Hecesottius was a time-serving sophist who taught

xl vii

INTRODUCTION

Julian rhetoric when he was at Constantinople as
a boy in 342. In all editions earlier than Bidez and
Cumont, two letters are entitled 70 Hecebolius,
namely those numbered 40 and 63 in this volume.
The first of these is almost certainly not addressed
to Julian’s old teacher, who had now changed from
Christianity to Hellenism, but to some official at
Edessa. Cumont entitles it 710 the people of Edessa.
Letter 63, rejected by Schwarz, Cumont and Geffcken
because of its flowery style and lack of serious
content, contains Julianic phrases and is just such a
letter as one would expect an Imperial sophist to
write to a sophist. Socrates 3. 1 says that He-
cebolius taught Julian, and in ὃ. 13 describes his
shamelessness in changing his religion three times
in order to win Imperial favour. Libanius, Oration
18, calls Hecebolius a rascally sophist, but does not
mention his name, perhaps because he was writing ©
after Julian’s death, when it was not safe to attack
openly one who had just become reconverted to
Christianity. »

Himerius, to whom ,15 addressed Leiter 69, cannot
be identified with certainty ; but at any rate we may
be sure that he is not the famous Bithynian sophist
whom Julian invited to join him at Antioch in 362,
since the reference to the family of the widower
with whom the writer of Letter 69 condoles does not
suit what we know of the sophist’s private life from
his own extant works. Since two MSS. give Julian’s
correspondent the title “ Prefect of Egypt,’ Cumont
identifies him with the Himerius whom we know,
from the letters of Libanius, as the father of Iam-
blichus II; he was the son (or son-in-law ἢ) of the

xl viii

INTRODUCTION

more famous Iamblichus, the philosopher. From
Libanius we learn (Letter 573) that this Himerius
was an Official of some sort, and we know that he
died before 357. In that case Julian, if he wrote
this letter to him, did so in his student days or from
Gaul, after he became Caesar. Cumont suspects its
genuineness. The difficulty about this identification
of Himerius, son of Iamblichus, with the prefect of
the MS. tradition is that we know of no prefect of
Egypt of that name, and it does not occur in the
list of prefects from 328 a.p. Schenkl therefore
suggests (in heim. Mus. 72) that the real title may
be To Hierius, since there was an Egyptian prefect
of that name in 364, who succeeded Ecdicius Olympus.
Hierius was not appointed until after Julian’s death,
but the title may have been added to the letter
after he had received the office. The letter is in
Julian’s manner, and there are no good grounds for
rejecting it. The name of Julian’s correspondent
appears in the MSS. in various forms, as Amerius
(retained by Hertlein), Hemerius, and Himerius.
(See under Sopater. )

Iamsuiicuus of Chalcis in Coele-Syria, a pupil of
Porphyry, was the chief exponent of the Syrian
school of Neo-Platonism in the first half of the
fourth century. His Life was written by Eunapius
(pp. 363-373, Wright), who shows him performing
feats of magic, but reluctantly, at the instance of
his disciples. The six letters to him which were
ascribed to Julian in the MSS. tradition, namely
74-79 of this edition, cannot have been written by
the Emperor, who was a mere child when Iamblichus
died in the latter part of the reign of Constantine

xlix

d

INTRODUCTION

and was succeeded in his school by Aedesius. The
letters are therefore either forgeries or were written
by some other admirer of Iamblichus whose name
may have been Julian. Their writer seems to have
marched with the Emperor from Pannonia to the
Dardanelles in 323 when the Emperor was proceed-
ing to Nicomedia in pursuit of Licinius, and he
dwells on the hardships he had endured in war,
sieges, and other dangers. Cumont in his edition
(1922), asin 1889 (Sur Pauthenticité de quelques lettres de
Julien), though less confidently, ascribes these letters
to the sophist Julian of Caesarea, who taught rhetoric
at Athens down to 340 a.p., when he was succeeded
by Prohaeresius; but he fails to account for the
silence of Eunapius in his Life of Julian of Caesarea
(pp. 467-477, Wright) as to any such experiences as
are alluded to in these letters. Nor does Eunapius
indicate that Julian of Caesarea, who left no writings,
was interested in philosophy as well as rhetoric;
rather he shows us a typical teacher of rhetoric at
Athens whose glory was that he had trained the
famous Christian sophist Prohaeresius, and had
triumphed over the jealousies of his rivals, the other
Athenian sophists. The theory that this group of
letters was addressed by the Emperor Julian to
the younger Iamblichus, the famous philosopher’s
grandson, who with his father Himerius and _ his
uncle Sopater are known to us chiefly from the
correspondence of Libanius, is untenable. I[am-
blichus II, though he was a philosopher and is
mentioned with admiration by the Emperor Julian
in Letter 2, was not distinguished enough to account
for the servile flattery expressed in these letters;
and the writer, if he had been addressing the grand-

INTRODUCTION

son, would hardly have failed to mention his famous
grandfather. Moreover, the events alluded to are
irreconcilable with what we know of Julian’s life.
There are in these six letters certain parallels of
thought and language which favour the theory that
they are by one man; but there are also similarities
with the genuine works of Julian, and such parallels
cannot be safely counted as evidence either of
forgery or of Julianic authorship; they are more
probably the common epistolary mannerisms of the
fourth century.

Jutian, the Emperor Julian’s uncle, brother of
his mother Basilina, and son of Julius Julianus, to
whom are addressed Letlers 9 and 29, was persuaded
by his nephew, after the death of Constantius, to
renounce Christianity and to devote himself to the
restoration of the Hellenic religion. This he did
with such zeal that he became peculiarly odious
to the Christians, especially in the East, where he
resided at Antioch as Comes Orientis (Count of the
East). There he died of a painful illness during
Julian’s visit to Antioch in 362-3863. Sozomen 5. 8,
Theodoret 3. 12, and Philostorgius 7. 10 recount his
persecutions of the Christians and his terrible end.
In Letter 29 the Emperor Julian directs his uncle,
who had preceded him to Antioch, to restore the
columns of the famous temple of Apollo in the
suburb of Daphne; that this was done, and that
the sight of the colonnade irritated the Christians,
may be gathered from Ammianus 22. 13. The
temple was burned down on October 22, 362, while
the Emperor was in residence at Antioch, and the
Emperor suspected that this was Christian vengeance,

li
d 2

INTRODUCTION

partly for the removal of the bones of St. Babylas
from Daphne, partly for the rebuilding of the
colonnade. Count Julian’s nephew mentions his
death in Vol. 2, Misopogon 365c, and praises his
administration. He was a correspondent of Libanius,
and we have the letter of congratulation, 701,
Foerster, sent to him by the sophist when the
Emperor appointed him Count of the East in 362.

Linanius of Antioch, the famous teacher whose
speeches Julian studied at Nicomedia in 344-345,
and to whom he wrote many letters (of which only
three, 52, 53 and 58, survive), has left more works,
chiefly rhetorical, than any other sophist of his time.
His Life by Eunapius is in some respects disparaging
(see Eunapius, Lives, Wright, pp. 333-336), and we
can best judge of his career from his own letters,
more than 1600 of which are extant, and his numerous
orations. He was born in 314, and may have survived
as late as 395. From his works may be gathered
many details about the officials of the fourth century
and the conditions of education. He corresponded
with Christians and pagans alike, but the death of
Julian was a severe blow to his hopes for the future
of Hellenic studies, which he lived to see on the
decline, giving place to Latin and Roman law. He
himself knew no Latin, and was chagrined when a
school of Latin was founded at Antioch in order
that students might not have to go to Rome to
learn the language. Libanius was with Julian at
Antioch in the winter of 362-363, and two of the
extant letters to him from Julian were written at
that time; the third, 58, is Julian’s last extant letter
and was written when the Emperor was at Hierapolis

hii

INTRODUCTION

on his way to Persia, in March 363. Hertlein, like
all earlier editors, published four letters to Libanius,
but Cumont ([echerches) has shown that Hertlein 74
and 14 are one letter, and they are so arranged in
this volume as Letter 53. We have the answer of
Libanius (760, Foerster) to Letter 52, and his answer
(758, Foerster) to Letter 53.  Libanius’ Monody on
the temple of Apollo at Daphne, after it had been
destroyed in 362 by fire, and his Orations, namely
12, Zo Julian, delivered in January 363; 13, To
Julian, welcoming him to Antioch in 362; 14, For
Aristophanes; 15, To Julian, on behalf of Antioch,
᾿ after the Emperor had left the city in 363 declaring
that he would not return; 17, the Monody on Julian,
which was published almost two years after Julian’s
death ; 18, the Epitaph on Julian, published probably
in 364; and 24, On Avenging Julian, addressed to the
Emperor Theodosius, are invaluable documents for
the attitude of a cultured pagan to Julian’s restora-
tion of Hellenism, and for his life and reign. We
depend the more on these orations and the letters
of Libanius, because the History of Eunapius, which
was in great part devoted to Julian, exists only in
a few fragments. To the enthusiasm of Libanius
the Christian fathers, such as Socrates, Sozomen,
Philostorgius, Theodoret and, most embittered of
all, Julian’s fellow-student, Gregory Nazianzen,
opposed their accounts of his persecution of the
Church and their criticisms of his character and
motives. Both estimates of Julian may be corrected
by the moderate and impartial account of one who
was no sophist, and who, though a pagan, was
apparently little influenced by desire for a Hellenic
restoration, the Latin historian Ammianus Marcel-

liii

INTRODUCTION

linus. Socrates 3.1 is the authority for the state-
ment that Constantius, when he sent Julian, then
a boy, to Nicomedia, expressly forbade him _ to
attend the lectures of the pagan Libanius.

Maximus of Ephesus, whose Life was written by
Eunapius (Lives, pp. 431-461, 543-545, Wright), had
obtained great influence over Julian in the latter’s
student days, when he first, as Eunapius relates,
studied with Aedesius at Pergamon, but on hearing
of the miraculous communications with the unseen
powers of the theurgist Maximus, the pupil of
Aedesius, proceeded to join him at Ephesus. In
Letter 8, written soon after the death of Constantius,
Julian invited Maximus to his Court, and in spite
of the unfavourable omens described by Eunapius
in his Life of Maaximus, pp. 441-445, omens which
prevented the more cautious Chrysanthius from
obeying Julian’s summons, Maximus joined him at
Constantinople early in 362. This pseudo-philosopher
remained with Julian, and was present at his death-
bed. On his return from Persia, Maximus, who had
many enemies, paid the penalty of the arrogance
and display in which Julian had allowed him to
indulge, and after various ups and downs of fortune
was executed at Ephesus under the Emperor Valens
in 371 on the charge of having been concerned in
a conspiracy against the Emperor (Ammianus 29. 1 ;
Zosimus 4. 15). Maximus seems to have initiated
Julian into the Mysteries of Mithras, and Julian was
wholly in sympathy with the theurgy-of this clever
charlatan. , Of the three extant letters entitled
To Maximus, Letters 12 and 59 are rejected by
Geffcken for their sophistic style, and Cumont in

liv

INTRODUCTION

his edition places them with the “spurious or
doubtful” letters. But there is nothing in them
that Julian might not have written, and one rather
uncommon illustration in 59, the Celtic test of the
legitimacy of children, was used by Julian in
Oration 2, 81p, and is probably reflected from his
experience in Gaul. There is no evidence for the
date of Letter 59, but it is not unlikely that Julian
was writing to his teacher from Gaul, and there-
fore used this illustration while it was fresh in his
mind.

Nitus Dionysius, to whom Julian addressed Letter
50, is not otherwise known, unless he is to be
identified with the Roman senator of whom Libanius
says in Oration 18. 198 that Julian punished his
impudence by a letter, when he might have con-
fiseated his property. There is also ἃ possible
reference to Nilus in Libanius, Letter 758, Foerster,
To Julian, where Libanius says that while he and
Aristophanes were waiting for Julian’s decision (see
under Aristophanes), they feared that Julian might
inflict on Aristophanes τὸ Νείλου κακόν, ‘the punish-
ment of Nilus’’(?). Both these references are un-
certain, though Asmus, Geffeken and Cumont relate
them to Julian’s letter Zo Nilus. We know only
what can be gathered from Julian, namely, that
Nilus was a senator (4464) of dubious morals, who
had been recommended to the Emperor by one
Symmachus; Julian, in a lost letter, had invited
him to Court with the intention of giving him an
office, but Nilus, who was perhaps a Christian,
though Julian does not say so, held back until he
received a second and more peremptory summons,

lv

INTRODUCTION

which is also lost. Nilus certainly came to Antioch
and was snubbed by the Emperor (4468), and later
wrote to him to excuse himself for his silence (443 c)
and to say that he would come if again invited. In
his answer to this communication Julian descends
to personal invective of the sort that he used in his
Oration 7, Against the Cynic Heraclus, but there is
nothing to prove that Nilus himself was, as Asmus
thinks, a Cynic. Nilus had irritated Julian by
praising Alexander (a favourite commonplace of
Julian’s own, though in this case he found some-
thing disparaging to himself), had praised Constans
-and Magnentius (446), and had asked for a reply
(4468). Erudition is always in place in a Greek
or Roman invective, and so Julian’s innuendoes
against the character and career of Nilus are inter-
woven with allusions to the historians of Alexander,
to Phaedo of Elis (for whose Simon see Wilamowitz
in Hermes 14), Demosthenes, Philostratus, Babrius
and other authors, Asmus in Philologus 71 maintains
that in Letter 50 we have a contamination of two
letters, and that one was written in December 361,
the other at the end of 362. But though the
arrangement of the letter is strange (for example,
five paragraphs begin with the word ἀλλά), we can-
not, in our ignorance of the circumstances, and of
Julian’s real grievance, attempt to rewrite it. We
are not even sure as to the man’s name. Julian
calls him “ Dionysius” (444, 4458), and in some
MSS. alludes to him as “ Nilus” (444); Laurentianus
58 has the title Against Nilus, while the earliest
editor Rigalt and all others before Cumont entitled
the letter Zo Dionysius because of Julian’s use of
the name in the letter.

lvi

INTRODUCTION

Orisasius, the physician to whom is addressed
Letter 4, was, next to Galen, the most important
medical writer of the Graeco-Roman period. He is
the faithful friend of whom Julian speaks in his
Letter to the Athenians 277c, and he was with Julian
in Gaul and at Antioch. According to Eunapius,
who wrote his Life (pp. 5383-537, Wright), he was
suspected of having been Julian’s accomplice in
his rebellion against Constantius. Julian sent him
to Delphi to revive the oracle of Apollo there,
and received the famous response, preserved by

Cedrenus :

“Tell the king, on earth has fallen the glorious
dwelling,
And the water-springs that spake are quenched
and dead.
Not a cell is left the god, no roof, no cover,
In his hand the prophet laurel flowers no more.”’ +

Eunapius in his History, frag. 24, says that Oribasius
admonished Julian to use more. self-control when
he was angry, to which Julian replied that the
advice was good and would not be needed a second
time. When they were in Gaul Julian requested
him to compile an epitome of the works of Galen,
and later he expanded the work into an Encyclo-
paedia of Medicine in 70 Books, This also, as
Oribasius says in his Introduction, was done at

1 Swinburne’s translation, in The Last Oracle, of the Greek
text :
Εἴπατε τῷ βασιλῆι χαμαὶ πέσε Saldados αὐλά.
οὐκέτι Φοῖβος ἔχει καλύβαν, οὐ μάντιδα δάφνην,
οὐ παγὰν λαλέουσαν" ἀπέσβετο καὶ λάλον ὕδωρ.

Ivii

INTRODUCTION

Julian’s wish. This work, entitled ‘Iarpixat cvvayo-
yat, of which only about half survives, was published
in 1808 by Matthaei (Moscow) with considerable
omissions, and, complete as far as it survives, by
Bussemaker-Daremberg, Paris, 1851, with a French
translation. Oribasius was a pagan, but his son
Eustathius, to whom he bequeathed his medical
writings, was a Christian and a friend and corre-
spondent of St. Basil. Eunapius relates that after
Julian’s death Oribasius was exiled “ among the most
savage barbarians” by the Christian Emperors. At
the courts of “the barbarians” he rose to great
renown and was worshipped like a god because of
his wonderful cures. He was therefore permitted
to return, and recovered his fortune and position.
Suidas says that he was born at Sardis, but probably
Eunapius, who gives his birthplace as Pergamon, was
better informed. He was, showever, practising at
Sardis, no doubt after his exile, when Eunapius
wrote his Lzfe and described his skilful treatment
of the aged Chrysanthius.

Priscus, whom Eunapius calls “ the Thesprotian or
Molossian,” was born about 305 and died in 395 when
Alaric invaded Greece. His Life was written by
Eunapius (Lives, pp. 461-465, Wright). Julian made
his acquaintance when he studied at Pergamon, and
on his accession summoned him to his Court, and
he accompanied the Emperor to Persia. On his’
return to Antioch in 363, Priscus, like other friends
of Julian, fell under the suspicion of Valens and
Valentinian, but was acquitted and dismissed with
honour to Greece, where he continued to teach for
another thirty years. He was evidently not con-

lviii

INTRODUCTION

sidered as dangerous as Maximus by the Christian
Emperors, was probably not a theurgist, and was
therefore free from the charge of practising magic.
He was a correspondent of Libanius. Julian wrote
to him Letters 1, 2, and 5, all from Gaul, encouraging
Priscus to visit him there, but there is no evidence
that the visit was paid. Libanius, Oration 14, 32,
implies that towards the end of 362 Priscus was
with Julian and Maximus at Antioch, though in
Letter 52 Julian complains to Libanius that Priscus
has not yet arrived. As all three men were living
at Antioch at the time, we cannot lay any stress on
' this remark, which may refer to a temporary absence
of Priscus. Priscus had a wife Hippia, and children.
Eunapius says that his bearing was “deliberate
and lofty,’ and that he had secretive manners and
sneered at human weakness, in contrast with his
teacher, the expansive and democratic Aedesius.

Prouarresius, to whom is addressed Letter 14, was
an Armenian sophist who succeeded Julian of
Caesarea in the chair of rhetoric at Athens and
taught there for many years. Probably the Emperor
Julian studied with him at Athens in 355. When
Eunapius went to study at Athens in 362, Prohae-
resius was already eighty-seven and had overcome
his rivals, whose persecutions of this too successful
teacher Eunapius describes. Earlier in his career
he had been sent by the Emperor Constans to Rome
to display his eloquence and was there honoured
with a bronze statue. When Julian issued his
notorious decree forbidding Christians to teach the
classics, he made a special exception in favour of
Prohaeresius, who, however, refused to benefit by

lix

INTRODUCTION

the exemption. Eunapius tells a curious story to the
effect that this Christian sophist consulted the pagan
hierophant of Greece in order to find out indirectly
whether Julian’s reign would last much longer, and
when the hierophant’s answer implied that it would
not, “ Prohaeresius took courage.” This was the sort
of conduct that later under Valens cost Maximus of
Ephesus his head, but apparently under Julian one
could forecast the future with impunity. According
to Eunapius, Prohaeresius died in 367, at the age of
ninety-two, and he seems to have taught to the last,
for the edict of Julian can hardly have “shut him
out from the field of education”’ (Eunapius, p. 513,
Wright) for more than a few months, if at all.

SopaTeR (or Sosipater),1 to whom is addressed
Letter 61, cannot be identified with certainty, but,
if the letter is Julian’s, he is not the famous Sopater,
the disciple of Iamblichus I, whose violent death in
the reign of Constantine is related by Eunapius in
his Lives. If Schwarz, Geffeken and Cumont are
right in rejecting Letter 61, chiefly because of the
reference to the writer’s children (Julian was child-
less), it may belong to the same period as the six
letters to Iamblichus and have been written to
Sopater I before 337; but this is impossible to decide.
Sopater II, who is mentioned by Julian as his host at
Hierapolis in March 363 (Letter 58, 401 c, a corrupt
passage), and as having resisted the efforts of Gallus
and Constantius to convert him to Christianity, is

1 For the variation in the spelling of the name see Acts
20. 4; Sopater of Beroea, Paul’s kinsman, who accompanied
him to Asia, is called, in some MSS., Sosipater ; cf. Romans,
16. 21, '

Ix

INTRODUCTION

perhaps the son (or son-in-law?) of Sopater I, who
is mentioned by the writer of Letter 78, 418 a.
Julian, however, calls him a κηδεστὴς of Sopater I,
a vague word which may mean “son-in-law” or
even “relative”; the passage is mutilated.1

TuHeEoporus, to whom Julian wrote Letter 16
rejoicing in his safety, and 20 appointing him
high-priest “of all the temples in Asia,’ was not
necessarily a priest, as the office of high-priest was
often given to rich laymen; the high-priest presided
ex officio over the public games and the provincial
assemblies. We know of Theodorus only from these
letters of Julian. In Letter 20 he speaks of the
teacher they had had in common, probably Maximus
of Ephesus, and the word used, καθηγεμών, may
indicate that Maximus had initiated Theodorus as
well as Julian into the Mysteries of Mithras.
Theodorus was certainly a philosopher, and as Neo-
Platonism was, under Julian, the religion of the
State, he was doubtless a Neo-Platonist of the
Syrian school. Julian writes to him with great
deference, though he never forgets in a pastoral
letter that as Emperor he is Pontifex Maximus in-

1 The Sopater who is mentioned in the six spurious Letters
to Iamblichus is almost certainly Sopater I. Wilhelm, in
Rhein. Mus. 72, assigns to Sopater I the letter, partly pre-
served by Stobaeus 4, p. 212, to Hemerius (or Himerius)
from his brother Sopater, a typical sophistic sermon on the
ideal ruler to one in high office, a λόγος παραινετικός. Others
assign this work to Sopater II of Apamea, who, as we know
from the correspondence of Libanius, died about 264, and
is not known to have left any writings. In Letter 1448
Libanius tells Sopater II that he has shown the latter’s
letter to a friend, whose comment was that Sopater was
imitating his distinguished father.

Ἱχὶ

INTRODUCTION

structing a trusted subordinate in the duties of
priests. Letter 16 is one of the six letters discovered
on Chalce (Halki) in 1885 by Papadopoulos, [Ὁ
has been rejected by Schwarz and Geffcken on
account of the difficulty found by all commentators
in explaining the allusion in it to a quarrel between
Julian (reading ἡμᾶς with the MSS.) or Theodorus
(reading ὑμᾶς with Maas) and the proconsul of
Achaea, for which incident there is no other
evidence. We do not expect to find Theodorus
concerned with the affairs of Greece, as his interests
were evidently in Asia; nor do we know of any
trouble between Julian and the proconsul. Asmus,
by altering the text to read “ruler of the Helles-
pont ” ([ξλλησπόντου for “Ἑλλάδος), tries to localise in
Asia the quarrel referred to. The letter is decidedly
Julianic in manner, and its genuineness is defended
by Asmus in Philologus 72. Letter 20, together with
the fragment of a letter To a Priest (Vol. 2, pp. 297—
339), is important as evidence of Julian’s desire, at
which the Christian fathers scoffed, to introduce
among the pagans certain reforms in the lives of
the priests and in the treatment of the poor and of
strangers, based on his experience of the charities
and the aceticism of the Christian Church. Cumont,
following Asmus, regards Letter 20 (89 in his edition)
as an integral part of the fragment To a Priest
(Vol. 2, Wright), and accordingly includes that
fragment in his edition as 89 b. But the similarities
between Letter 20 and the fragment in Vol. 2
amount to unnecessary repetition if they occur in
one letter, and it is certainly implied in Letter 20
that Julian and Theodorus have not yet met, whereas
the fragment 710 a Priest, which mentions Julian’s

lxii

INTRODUCTION

design to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem, probably,
though not certainly, should be dated later, while
the Emperor was in residence at Antioch. That that
fragment is addressed to Theodorus, rather than to
some other priest whose aid Julian had enlisted in
his reforms, cannot be proved, and on the whole
seems to me unlikely in view of their very similar
contents and the tone of 2988, where καθηγεμὼν is
apparently used of a superior official or priest—
perhaps Theodorus, who had reported favourably to
Julian about the person addressed. On the other
hand, the reference may be to Maximus, as in

- Letter 20.

ZeNo, the physician and professor of medicine at
Alexandria, to whom Julian wrote Letter 17, was
driven from Alexandria by Bishop George in 360
for reasons unknown, and at the request of the
Alexandrians was recalled to his previous dignity
of chief physician or head of the medical faculty,
dpxiatpos, by Julian on his accession. He was
famous as a teacher. Libanius in Letter 171, written
359-360, condoles with him on his exile and hints
at a coming change for the better, by which he
must have meant the rise of Julian to power.
Libanius says that though they have never met he
owes much to the skill of Zeno’s pupils, some of
whom had evidently tried to cure his chronic head-
ache. Cumont, following Boissonade, identifies Zeno
of Alexandria with another famous teacher of
medicine, Zeno of Cyprus, the “healing sophist,”’
whose Life by Eunapius is extant.!. But Eunapius

1 See Eunapius, Lives of the Sophists, Wright, pp. 336,
529-531.
lxiii

INTRODUCTION

does not say that this Zeno practised at Alexandria.
He had been the teacher of Julian’s friend the
physician Oribasius, and Eunapius says that he lived
“down to the time of Julian the sophist,”’ 2. 6. Julian
of Caesarea, who died at Athens in 340. It appears,
therefore, that Zeno of Cyprus can hardly have been
alive in 3861. Moreover, Julian would not have
failed to mention Zeno’s oratorical talent if he had
been addressing the teacher of Oribasius. The
Alexandrian is, therefore, almost certainly another
and a younger man.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MANUSCRIPTS :

The Letters.—The oldest MS. of the Letlers is
Ambrosianus B 4 Milan, tenth century (23 letters) ;
Vossianus 77, Leyden, thirteenth century (27 letters),
though much mutilated and damaged, is the most
important ; Laurentianus 58, fifteenth century, has
the largest collection of letters; other MSS, are
Baroccianus, Oxford, fourteenth century, Varsaviensis,
Warsaw, fifteenth century, Monacensis 490, Munich,
fifteenth century, Ottobonianus, Rome, sixteenth
century, Harleianus 5610, British Museum, four-
teenth century. Six letters that occur in no other
MS. were discovered in fragments of two fifteenth-
century MSS. in a convent on the island Chalce
(Halki) near Constantinople in 1885 by Papado-
poulos-Kerameus, and were published in ὃ ἐν
Κωνσταντινουπόλει “Ἑλληνικὸς dtAoAoyuxds σύλλογος

16, Appendix, 1885, in Rheinisches Museum 42, 1887

lxiv

INTRODUCTION

(with Buecheler’s notes), and in Rivista Filologia 17,
1889 (by Largajolli e Parisio, with an Italian transla-
tion). The fragmentary MSS. in which alone these
letters have survived are known as Chalceni, or X
and Y, or X and Xa; they contain also 22 other
Julianic letters and the two fragg. have almost the
same contents. Studies in the text are: Klimek,
Conjectanea in Julianum, Wratislaw, 1883, and in
Hermes 1886; Zu Wirdigung der Handschriften Juli-
ant, 1891 ; Cobet in Mnemosyne 1882; Weil (on the
Papadopoulos letters) in Revue de Philologie, 1886 ;
Asmus in Philologus 61, 71, 72, and in Archiv fur
᾿ Gesch, d. Philosophie, 1902; in Zeitschrift f. Kirchen-
gesch. 16, 23, 31, and Iheinisches Museum, 1908; De
Vos in Revue de Philologie 1910; Schwarz in Philo-
logus 1892; Bidez in Bulletins de Vacadémie des
sciences de Bruxelles, 1904. An invaluable detailed
account of the MSS. of the Letters is that of Bidez
and Cumont, Itecherches sur la tradition manuscrite des
lettres de Tempereur Julien, Bruxelles, 1898. The
introduction to their critical edition of the Letters,
1922, contains a few additions to and corrections of
this monograph.

Against the Galilaeans.—For the MSS. of Cyril of
Alexandria from which Neumann reconstructed this
treatise, see Neumann, Prolegomenon to his edition,
1880. In Theologische Litteraturzeitung 10, 1899,
Neumann published a new frag. of this work.
Asmus, Julian’s Galiléerschrift, Freiburg, 1904, is a
useful concordance of the works of Julian with
relation to the treatise Against the Galilaeans, with
some textual criticism. Gollwitzer, Obdservationes
erilicae in Juliant imp. contra Christianos libros, Er-

langen, 1886.
Ixv

INTRODUCTION

Epitions.—See also the Bibliography in Julian,
Vol. 1, Loeb Library, Wright.

Editio princeps, Aldus, Venice, 1499 (48 letters),
Spanheim, Leipzig, 1696, contains all the other
works of Julian and 63 letters, the letter from
Gallus to Julian, and Cyril’s refutation of the treatise
Against the Galilaeans, edited by Aubert; Latin
translation, Hertlein’s and Neumann’s marginal
numbers correspond to the pages of Spanheim.
Muratorius, Anecdota Graeca, Padua, 1709 (Letters
64, 65, 66, Hertlein; fragg. 12, 13; Letter 57
(Wright), first published), LEpistolographt Graeci,
Hercher, Paris, 1873, pp. 3837-391. Juliant Imp.
librorum contra Christianos quae supersunt, Neumann,
Leipzig, 1880. Juliane Imperatoris epistulae, leges,
poematia, fragmenta varia, Bidez et Cumont, Paris,
1922 (too late to be used for the present text).

LiTerATuRE.—See also the Bibliography in Julian,
Vol. 1, Loeb Library, Wright.

The Letters—Codex Theodosianus, Leipzig, 1736-
45, Bonn, 1847. Sievers, Das Leben des Libanius,
Berlin, 1868. Rendall, Zhe Emperor Julian, Cam-
bridge, 1879. Vollert, Kaiser Julians religiose εἰ.
philos. Ueberzeugung, Giitersloh, 1899. Mau, Die
- Religionsphilosophie K. Julians, Leipzig, 1907. Glover,
Life and Letters in the Fourth Century, Cambridge,
1901. Chinnock, A Few Notes on Julian and a
Translation of his Public Letters, London, 1901.
Seeck, Geschichte des Untergangs der Antiken Welt,
Vol. 4, Berlin, 1911; Die Briefe des Libanius,
Leipzig, 1906, useful for the prosopography of the
Letters of Julian. Geffcken, Kaiser Julianus, Leipzig,
1914, has a good commentary. Libana Opera, Vol.

Ixvi

INTRODUCTION

10, Epistulae 1-839, Foerster, Leipzig, 1921. Euna-
pius, Lives of the Sophists and Philosophers, Wright’s
translation, Loeb Classical Library, 1922. Ammianus
Marcellinus, Res Gestae, is the best authority for
Julian’s career and his Persian campaign. Asmus in
Philologus 61, 71, 72, on the Letters. Cumont, Etudes
Syriennes, Paras 1917, La Marche de I. Empereur
Julien, is a good description, with maps and illus-
trations, of Julian’s route from Antioch to the
Euphrates. Bidez, Le philosophe Lamblique et son
école, Rev. d. Etudes Grecques 1919. Cumont in Revue
de Philologie 16.

_ Against the Galilaeans.—Warburton, On the Earth-
quake which prevented Julian from rebuilding the Temple
at Jerusalem, London, 1750. Adler, Thies and the
Jews in the Vewick Pe este a ly Review, 1893. Whittaker,
The Neoplatonists, Cambridge, 1901. Bidez, Vie ἣν
Porphyre, Gand, 1913. Harnack, Porphyrius, Gegen
die Christen, Berlin, 1916, cites passages in Julian
that may have been echoed from Porphyry.
Geffcken, Zwei Griechische Apologeten, Leipzig, 1907,
and in Neue Jahrbb. 1908.

TraNnsLaTions.—See also Vol. 1, Bibliography.
Talbot, Paris, 1863 (French; the complete works
so far as then known). Asmus, Kaiser Julians philo-
sophische Werke, Leipzig, 1908 (German, with notes ;
no letters). Nevins, Against the Christians, London,
1873. Neumann, Leipzig, 1880 (German; of his
text of Against the Galilaeans). Marquis d Argens,
Défense du paganisme par [empereur Julien en Grec et
en Francois, Berlin, 1764, 1767.

lxvii

THE WORKS OF
THE EMPEROR JULIAN
| Ill

VOL. III. B

Πρίσκῳ 1

᾿Εγὼ δεξάμενός σου τὰ γράμματα παραχρῆμα
τὸν ᾿Αρχέλαον ἀπέστειλα, δοὺς αὐτῷ φέρειν
ἐπιστολὰς πρὸς σέ, καὶ τὸ σύνθημα, ᾿καθάπερ
ἐκέλευσας, εἰς πλείονα χρόνον. ἱστορῆσαι δέ
σοι τὸν ὠκεανὸν ἐθέλοντι ὑπάρξει σὺν θεῷ πάντα
κατὰ γνώμην, εἰ μὴ τὴν τῶν Τ᾿αλατῶν ἀμουσίαν
καὶ τὸν χειμῶνα διευλαβηθείης. ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν
ὅπως ἂν ἢ τῷ θεῷ φίλον γενήσεται, ἐγὼ δὲ ὄμνυμί
σοι τὸν πάντων ἀγαθῶν ἐμοὶ αἴτιον καὶ σωτῆρα,
ὅτι διὰ τοῦτο ζῆν εὔχομαι, ἵν᾽ ὑμῖν τι χρήσιμος
γένωμαι. τὸ δὲ ὑμῖν ὅταν εἴπω, τοὺς ἀληθινούς
φημι φιλοσόφους, ὧν εἶναί σε πεισθεὶς οἶσθα πῶς
ἐφίλησα καὶ φιλῶ καὶ ὁρᾶν εὔχομαι. ἐρρωμένον
σε ἡ θεία πρόνοια διαφυλάξειε πολλοῖς χρόνοις,
ἀδελφὲ ποθεινότατε καὶ φιλικώτατε. τὴν ἱερὰν
Ἱππίαν καὶ τὰ παιδία ὑμῶν προσαγορεύω.

2
Πρίσκῳ 3
\ la) \ \ 3 , ig [2
Περὶ τοῦ τὴν σὴν ἀγαθότητα πρὸς με ἥκειν,
εἴπερ διανοῇ, νῦν σὺν τοῖς θεοῖς βούλευσαι καὶ
1 Hertlein 71

2 Papadopoulos 4*; not in Hertlein.

1 For another letter to Priscus, see p. 15.

2 Literally ‘‘token,” a synonym of τὸ σύμβολον. This,
like the Latin tessera, could be of various kinds, but here
Julian probably refers to a document, the equivalent of the

2

1
To Priscus 1

ΟΝ receiving your letter I at once despatched
Archelaus, and gave him letters to carry to you, and
the passport,? as you wished, for a longer time. If
you are inclined to explore the ocean, everything,
with the god’s help, will be provided for you as you
would wish, unless you dread the boorishness of the
Gauls and the winter climate. This, however, will
turn out as the god sees fit; but I swear to you by
-him who is the giver and preserver of all my good
fortune that I desire to live only that I may in
some degree be of use to you. When I say “you,”
I mean the true philosophers, and convinced as I am
that you are one of these, how much I have loved
and love you you well know, and how I desire to see
you. May Divine Providence preserve you in health
for many a year, my dearest and best beloved
brother! I salute the admirable Hippia and your
children.?

2
To the Same

As regards a visit to me from your good self,’ if
you have it in mind, make your plans now, with the

modern passport, which he had visaed for Priscus in order
that he might proceed to Gaul.

3 For the life of Priscus, cf. Eunapius, Lives of the Sophists
and Philosophers. He visited Julian in Gaul, was summoned
to Constantinople not long after Julian’s accession, and went
with him to Persia. See Introduction, under Priscus.

4 Lit. ‘‘ your goodness.” For Julian’s use of this and
similar abstract words, see p. 109.

3

359 A.D
From
Gaul

858-359
From
Gaul

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

/ \ \ 5 7 “ 3 ἢ ὦ Ν
προθυμήθητι" τυχὸν γὰρ ὀλίγον ὕστερον οὐδὲ ἐγὼ
σχολὴν ἄξω. τὰ ᾿Ἰαμβλίχου πάντα μοι τὰ εἰς
τὸν ὁμώνυμον ζήτει' δύνασαι δὲ μόνος" ἔχει γὰρ
ς n aA » an Ν 3 / 3 εἶ
ὁ τῆς σῆς ἀδελφῆς γαμβρὸς εὐδιόρθωτα. εἰ δὲ

a / e ἴω
μὴ σφάλλομαι, καὶ σημεῖόν τί μοι, ἡνίκα τοῦτο τὸ
μέρος ἔγραφον, ἐγένετο θαυμάσιον. ἱκετεύω σε,
μὴ διαθρυλείτωσαν οἱ Θεοδώρειοι καὶ τὰς σὰς
3 ΄ “ YA ’ ε a 3 a \
ἀκοάς, ὅτι apa φιλότιμος ὁ θεῖος ἀληθῶς καὶ
μετὰ Πυθαγόραν καὶ Ἰ]χάτωνα τρίτος ᾿Ιάμβλι-
χος" εἰ δὲ τολμηρὸν πρὸς σὲ τὴν αὑτοῦ διάνοιαν
φανερὰν ποιεῖν, ὡς ἕπεται τοῖς ἐνθουσιῶσιν, οὐ
παράλογος ἡ συγγνώμη: καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ περὶ μὲν
’ ip 9 / \ δὲ \ e , 2
Ιάμβλιχον ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ, περὶ δὲ τὸν ὁμώνυμον
ἐν θεοσοφίᾳ μέμηνας.3 καὶ νομίζω τοὺς ἄλλους,
κατὰ τὸν ᾿Απολλόδωρον, μηθὲν εἶναι πρὸς τού-
τους. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν ᾿Αριστοτέλους συναγωγῶν
ἃς ἐποιήσω, τοσοῦτόν σοι λέγω: πεποίηκάς με
ψευδεπίγραφον εἶναί σου μαθητήν: ὁ μὲν γὰρ
Τύριος Μάξιμος ἐξ βιβλίοις με τῆς Πλατωνικῆς
λογικῆς ὀλίγα μυεῖν εἶχε, σὺ δέ pe δι’ ἕνος
βιβλίου τῆς ᾿Αριστοτελικῆς φιλοσοφίας ἐποί-
» ὃ) \ ΄ 2 > =) 5
σας ἴσως δὴ καὶ βάκχον, ἀλλ᾽ οὖν γεῦ ναρθηκο-

, 9 \ 5 ἴον / Υ
φόρον. εἰ δὲ ἀληθῆ λέγω, παραγενομένῳ σοι

1 ἄξω Wright, ἄγω MSS.

2 Bidez ὁμώνυμόν μου to support his theory that Julian
refers to Julian the theurgist.

3 μέμηνας Weil, pevowa Bidez, μενοιᾷ MS. μενοινᾷς
Papadopoulos.

4 ἕξ. εἶχε Cumont; εἰς βιβλία μοι δυεῖν πλείονα τῆς λογικῆς
ὀλίγα εἶπε Papadopoulos; εἰς βιβλία μὲν πλείονα τῆς λογικῆς
ὀλίγα δυεῖν εἶπε MS. I accept Cumont’s bold and ingenious
version of this corrupt passage. Buecheler first suggested

that Plato’s name should be restored out of πλείονα τῆς.
5 Weil supplies γε; Cumont ἀλλ᾽ οὖν ; MS. ἀλλ᾽ οὔτι.

4

TO PRISCUS

help of the gods, and exert yourself; for perhaps a
little later I too shall have no time to spare. Hunt
up for me all the writings of Iamblichus to his!
namesake. Only you can do this, for your sister’s
son-in-law owns a thoroughly revised version. And,
if I am not mistaken, while I was writing this
sentence, a marvellous sign? was vouchsafed me. I
entreat you not to let Theodorus? and his followers
deafen you too by their assertions that Iamblichus,
that truly godlike man, who ranks next to Pythagoras
and Plato, was worldly and self-seeking. But if it
be rash to declare my own opinion to you, I may
reasonably expect you to excuse me, as one excuses
those who are carried away by a divine frenzy. Yo
are yourself an ardent admirer of Iamblichus for ni
philosophy and of his namesake for his theosophy.|
And I too think, like Apollodorus, that the rest are|
not worth mentioning compared with those two. As|
for your collection of the works of Aristotle, so much °
I will say, you have made me style myself your pupil,
though I have no right to the title. For while
Maximus of Tyre in six books was able to initiate
me to some little extent into Plato’s logic, you, with
one book, have made me, perhaps I may even say, a
complete initiate in the philosophy of Aristotle, but
at any rate a thyrsus-bearer.4 When you join me I

1 Bidez prefers ‘‘my namesake,” and makes the writer re-
fer to Julian the theurgist or Chaldean, whom we know from
Suidas. More probably the younger Iamblichus is meant.

* Cf. Vol. 2, 2840, for a similar sign of approval given to
Julian by Zeus.

3 Theodorus of Asine was a disciple of the great Iamblichus;
we know of no such polemics as are indicated here.

4 Plato, Phaedo 690, says that ‘‘many carry the thyrsus
of Dionysus, but few are really inspired.”

5

441

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πολλὰ πάνυ τοῦ πέρυσιν χειμῶνος ἐξελέγξει
πάρεργα.

3
b) ye \ at
Kvpevio καὶ Φαριανῷ

Ki τις ὑμᾶς πέπεικεν, ὅτι τοῦ φιλοσοφεῖν ἐπὶ
σχολῆς ἀπραγμόνως ἐστὶν ἥδιον ἢ ἢ λυσιτελέστερόν

τι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ἠπατημένος ἐξαπατᾷ" εἰ δὲ

μένει παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἡ πάλαι προθυμία καὶ μὴ καθάπερ
φλὸξ λαμπρὰ ταχέως ἀπέσβη, μακαρίους ἔγωγε
ὑμᾶς ὑπολαμβάνω. τέταρτος ἐνιαυτὸς ἤδη παρε-
λήλυθε καὶ μὴν οὑτοσὶ τρίτος ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ σχεδόν,
ἐξότε κεχωρίσμεθα͵ ἡμεῖς ἀλλήλων. ἡδέως δ᾽ ἂν
σκεψαίμην," ἐν τούτῳ πόσον τι προεληλύθατε.
τὰ δὲ ἐμά, εἰ καὶ φθεγγοίμην ᾿Ελληνιστί, θαυμά-
ζειν ἄξιον: οὕτως ἐσμὲν ἐκβεβαρβαρωμένοι διὰ
τὰ χωρία. μὴ καταφρονεῖτε τῶν "λογιδίων, μηδὲ
ἀμελεῖτε ῥητορικῆς μηδὲ τοῦ ποιήμασιν ὁμιλεῖν.
ἔστω δὲ τῶν μαθημάτων ἐπιμέλεια πλείων, ὁ
δὲ πᾶς πόνος τῶν ᾿Αριστοτέλους καὶ Ἰ]λάτωνος
δογμάτων ἐπιστήμη. τοῦτο ἔργον ἔστω, τοῦτο
κρηπίς, θεμέλιος, οἰκοδομία, στέγη" τἄλλα δὲ
πάρεργα, μετὰ μείζονος σπουδῆς παρ᾽ ὑμῶν ἐπι-
τελούμενα ἢ παρά τισι τὰ ἀληθῶς ἔργα. ἐγὼ νὴ
τὴν θείαν Δίκην ὑμᾶς ὡς ἀδελφοὺς φιλῶν ταῦτα

1 Hertlein 55.
2 Hertlein suggests ; ἐσκεψάμην MSS.

1 Julian went to Gaul in 355; he probably knew these
students in Athens, earlier in the same year.

6

TO EUMENIUS AND PHARIANUS

can prove the truth of my words by the great number
of works that I wrote in my spare time, during last
winter.

3
To Eumenius and Pharianus 1

Ir anyone has persuaded you that there is any-
thing more delightful or more profitable for the
human race than to pursue philosophy at one’s
leisure without interruptions, he is a deluded man
trying to delude you. But if your old-time zeal still
_abides in you and has not been swiftly quenched

like a brilliant flame, then I regard you as peculiarly
blest. Four years have already passed, yes and
almost three months besides, since we parted from
one another. It would give me pleasure to observe
how far you have progressed in this period. As for
my own progress, if I can still so much as speak
Greek it is surprising, such a barbarian have I become
because of the places I have lived in.2 Do not
despise the study of mere words or be careless of
rhetoric or fail to read poetry. But you must devote
still more attention to serious studies, and let your
whole effort be to acquire understanding of the
teachings of Aristotle and Plato. Let this be your
task, the base, the foundation, the edifice, the roof.
For all other studies are by the way, though they
are completed by you with greater zeal than some
bestow on really important tasks. I call sacred
Justice to witness that I give you this advice because

2 Like all the sophists Julian recognises only Greek
culture, and for him Latin literature or the culture of Gaul
did not exist,

7

859
From
Gaul

984

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὑμῖν συμβουλεύω' γεγόνατε “γάρ μοι συμφοιτηταὶ
καὶ πάνυ φίλοι. εἰ μὲν οὖν πεισθείητε, πλέον
στέρξω, ἀπειθοῦντας δὲ ὁρῶν λυπήσομαι. λύπη
δὲ συνεχὴς εἰς ὅ ποτε τελευτᾶν εἴωθεν, εἰπεῖν
παραιτοῦμαι οἰωνοῦ κρείττονος ἕνεκα.

4
᾿Οριβασίῳ 1

Τῶν ὀνειράτων δύο πύλας εἶναί φησιν ὁ θεῖος
Ὅμηρος, καὶ διάφορον εἶναι αὐτοῖς καὶ τὴν ὑπὲρ
τῶν ἀποβησομένων πίστιν. ἐγὼ δὲ νομίζω σε
νῦν, εἴπερ ποτὲ καὶ ἄλλοτε, σαφῶς ἑορακέναι
περὶ τῶν μελλόντων: ἐθεασάμην γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς
τοιοῦτον σήμερον. δένδρον γὰρ μην ὑψηλὸν ἔν
τινι τρικλίνῳ σφόδρα μεγάλῳ πεφυτευμένον εἰς
ἔδαφος ῥέπειν, τῇ ῥίζη παραπεφυκότος ἑτέρου
μικροῦ καὶ νεογενοῦς, ἀνθηροῦ λίαν. ἐγὼ δὲ “περὶ
τοῦ μικροῦ σφόδρα ἡ ἠγωνίων, μή τίς αὐτὸ μετὰ τοῦ
μεγάλου συναποσπάσῃ. καὶ τοίνυν ἐπειδὴ πλη-
σίον ἐγενόμην, ὁρῶ τὸ μέγα μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς
ἐκτεταμένον, τὸ μικρὸν δὲ ὀρθὸν μέν, μετέωρον
δὲ ἀπὸ γῆς. ὡς οὖν εἶδον, ἀγωνιάσας ἔφην"
““Οἵου δένδρου ! κίνδυνός ἐστι, μηδὲ τὴν παρα-
φυάδα σωθῆναι. καί τις ἀγνὼς ἐμοὶ παντελῶς

1 Hertlein 17. This letter exists in only one MS. of
importance, the Vossianus.

1 Oribasius was the physician, friend, and perhaps accom-
plice of Julian in his ambitions: cf. Letter to the Athenians
Vol. 2, p. 265; and for his career, Eunapius, Lives of the
Sophists and Philosophers. He was at Vienne when Julian
wrote this letter.

8

TO ORIBASIUS

I love you like brothers. For you were my fellow-
students and my very good friends. If therefore
you follow my advice I shall love you the more, but
if I see that you disregard it I shall grieve. And
grief, if it lasts, usually results in something that,
for the sake of a happier augury, I forbear to
mention.

4
To Oribasius !

Tue divinely inspired Homer says? that there are
two gates of dreams, and that with regard to future
events we cannot trust them both equally. But I
think that this time, if ever before, you have seen
clearly into the future ; for I too this very day saw a
vision of the same sort. I thought that in a certain
very spacious room a tall tree had been planted,
and that it was leaning down to the ground, while
at its root had sprouted another, small and young
and very flourishing. Now I was very anxious on
behalf of the small tree, lest someone in pulling up
the large one should pull it up as well. And in fact,
when I came close I saw that the tall tree was lying
at full length on the ground, while the small one
was still erect, but hung suspended away from the
earth. Now when I saw this I said, in great anxiety,
“ Alas for this tall tree! There is danger that not
even its offspring will be preserved.” Then one?

2 Odyssey 19. 562. Oribasius had evidently reported to
Julian some dream of his which augured well for their hopes.
In the dream that follows the tall tree is Constantius, the
sapling is Julian.

8 Hermes, who was Julian’s guide in the myth in Oration
7. 230c.

9

858-9
From
Paris

385

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

sf "Opa, ἔφησεν, ἀκριβῶς καὶ θάρρει" τῆς ῥίζης γὰρ
ἐν τῇ γῇ μενούσης τὸ μικρότερον ἀβλαβὲς διαμενεῖ
καὶ βεβαιότερον ἱδρυνθήσεται.᾽" τὰ μὲν δὴ τῶν
ὀνειράτων τοιαῦτα, θεὸς δὲ οἶδεν εἰς ὅτι φέρει.

περὶ δὲ τοῦ “μιαροῦ ἀνδρογύνου μάθοιμ᾽ ἂν
ἡδέως ἐκεῖνο, πότε διελέχθη περὶ ἐμοῦ ταῦτα,
πότερον πρὶν ἢ συντυχεῖν ἐμοὶ ἢ μετὰ τοῦτο.
δήλωσον οὖν ἡμῖν ὅ, τι ἂν οἷός τε ἧς.

ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἴσασιν οἱ θεοὶ ὅτι
πολλάκις, αὐτοῦ τοὺς ἐπαρχιώτας ἀδικήσαντος,
ἐσιώπησα͵ παρὰ τὸ πρέπον ἐμαυτῷ, τὰ μὲν οὐκ
ἀκούων, τὰ δὲ οὐ προσιέμενος, ἄλλοις δὲ ἀπιστῶν,
ἔνια δὲ εἰς τοὺς συνόντας αὐτῷ τρέπων. ὅτι δέ
μοι μεταδοῦναι τῆς τοιαύτης ἠξίωσεν αἰσχύνης,
ἀποστείλας τὰ μιαρὰ καὶ πάσης αἰσχύνης ἄξια
ὑπομνήματα, τί με πράττειν ἐχρῆν ; ἄρα σιωπᾶν
ἢ μάχεσθαι; τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶτον ἣν ἠλίθιον καὶ
δουλοπρεπὲς καὶ θεομίσητον, τὸ δεύτερον. δὲ
δίκαιον μὲν καὶ ἀνδρεῖον καὶ ἐλευθέριον, ὑπὸ δὲ
τῶν κατεχόντων ῳ ἡμᾶς πραγμάτων οὐ συγχωρού-
μενον. τί τοίνυν ἐποίησα ; πολλῶν παρόντων,
ods ἤδειν ἀναγγελοῦντας αὐτῷ “Πάντη καὶ
πάντως, εἶπον, διορθώσει τὰ ὑπομνήματα οὗτος 8

1 Hercher supplies of θεοί. 2 Cobet ; MS. ἐχόντων.
3 Hertlein brackets, Asmus defends.

1 Probably Eusebius the chamberlain of Constantius whose
intrigues against Julian are mentioned in Letter to the
Athenians 2744. The epithet is unsuitable to Florentius,
though some editors refer it to him.

2 In spite of the abruptness of the transition, I follow
Asmus in supposing that Julian here, partly for prudence
and partly because of his sophistic habit of avoiding names,
refers to Florentius, prefect of Gaul 357-3860 and consul

IO

TO ORIBASIUS

who was altogether a stranger to me said: “ Look
carefully and take courage. For since the root still
remains in the earth, the smaller tree will be un-
injured and will be established even more securely
than before.” So much then for my dreams. God
knows what they portend.

As for that abominable eunuch,' I should be glad
to learn when he said these things about me, whether
it was before he met me, or since. So tell me
whatever you can about this.

But with regard to my behaviour towards him,?
the gods know that often, when he wronged the
provincials, I kept silence, at the expense of my own
honour; to some charges I would not listen, others I
would not admit, others again I did not believe, while
in some cases I imputed the blame to his associates.
But when he thought fit to make me share in such
infamy by sending to me to sign those shameful and
wholly abominable reports? what was the right
thing for me to do? Was I to remain silent, or to
oppose him? The former course was foolish, servile
and odious to the gods, the latter was just, manly
and liberal, but was not open to me on account of the
affairs that engaged me. What then did Ido? In
the presence of many persons who I knew would
report it to him 1 said: “ Such-a-one will certainly
and by all means revise his reports, for they pass

361 A.D., who was at Vienne at this time. For his oppression
of the province, see Ammianus 17. 3. 2; Julian, Leiter to
the Athenians 282c. When Julian was proclaimed Augustus,
he fled to Constantius, and later, though condemned to
death by Julian, remained in hiding till the latter’s death,
Ammianus 22. 3. 6. .

8 For Julian’s refusal to sign or even read the prefect’s
orders for fresh taxes, see Ammianus 17. 3. 5.

II

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὁ δεῖνα, ἐπεὶ δεινῶς ἀσχημονεῖ." τοῦτο ἐκεῖνος
ἀκούσας τοσοῦτον ἐδέησε σωφρόνως τί πρᾶξαι,
ὥστε πεποίηκεν οἷα μὰ τὸν θεὸν οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἷς
μέτριος τύραννος, οὕτω μου πλησίον ὄντος. ἐν-
ταῦθα τί πράττειν ἐχρὴν ἄνδρα τῶν Ἰλάτωνος
καὶ ᾿Αριστοτέλους ζηλωτὴν δογμάτων ; ; apa
περιορᾶν ἀνθρώπους ἀθλίους τοῖς κλέπταις ΩΣ
δομένους, ἢ κατὰ δύναμιν αὐτοῖς ἀμύνειν, ὡς * 789
TO κύκνειον ἐξάδουσι͵ διὰ τὸ θεομισὲς ἐ ἐργαστήριον
τῶν τοιούτων ; ἐμοὶ μὲν οὗν αἰσχρὸν εἶναι δοκεῖ
τοὺς μὲν χιλιάρχους, ὅταν λείπωσι ΤῊΝ τάξιν,
καταδικάζειν' καίτοι χρῆν ἐκείνους 3 τεθνάναι
παραχρῆμα καὶ μηδὲ ταφῆς ἀξιοῦσθαι" τὴν δὲ
ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀθλίων ἀνθρώπων ἀπολείπειν τάξιν,
ὅταν δέῃ πρὸς κλέπτας ἀγωνίζεσθαι τοιούτους,
καὶ ταῦτα τοῦ θεοῦ συμμαχοῦντος ἡμῖν, ὅσπερ
οὖν ἔταξεν. εἰ δὲ καὶ παθεῖν τι συμβαίη, μετὰ
καλοῦ τοῦ συνειδότος οὐ μικρὰ παραμυθία πορευ-
θῆναι. τὸν δὲ χρηστὸν Σαλούστιον θεοὶ μέν μοι
χαρίσαιντο. κἂν συμβαίνῃ δὲ διὰ τοῦτο τυγ-
χάνειν διαδόχου, λυπήσει τυχὸν οὐδέν' ἄμεινον
γὰρ ὀλίγον ὀρθῶς ἢ πολὺν κακῶς πρᾶξαι χρόνον.
οὐκ ἔστιν, ὡς λέγουσί τινες, τὰ Περιπατητικὰ
δόγματα τῶν Στωικῶν ᾿ἀγεννέστερα, τοσούτῳ δὲ
μόνον ἀλλήλων, ὡς ἐγὼ κρίνω, διαφέρει" τὰ μὲν
γάρ ἐστιν ἀεὶ θερμότερα καὶ ἀβουλότερα, τὰ δὲ

1 Before ὡς Hercher deletes, Hertlein brackets, οἶμαι.
2 Boissonade, MS. ἱκανά.

1 Sallust, who accompanied Julian as civil adviser, was
recalled by Constantius in 358. Julian, Oration 8; Oration
4is dedicated to him. .

12

TO ORIBASIUS

the bounds of decency.’”’ When he heard this, he
was so far from behaving with discretion that he did
things which, by heaven, no tyrant with any modera-
tion would have done, and that too though I was so
near where he was. In such a case what was the
proper conduct for a man who is a zealous student of
the teachings of Plato and Aristotle? Ought 1 to
have looked on while the wretched people were
being betrayed to thieves, or to have aided them as
far as I could, for they were already singing their
swan-song because of the criminal artifices of men of
that sort? To me, at least, it seems a disgraceful
thing that, while I punish my military tribunes when
they desert their post—and indeed they ought to be
put to death at once, and not even granted burial—
I should myself desert my post which is for the
defence of such wretched people; whereas it is my
duty to fight against thieves of his sort, especially
when God is fighting on my side, for it was indeed
he who posted me here. And if any harm to myself
should result, it is no small consolation to have
proceeded with a good conscience. But I pray that
the gods may let me keep the excellent Sallust! 1
If, however, it turns out that because of this affair I
‘receive his successor,? perhaps it will not grieve me.
For it is better to do one’s duty for a brief time
honestly than for a long time dishonestly. The
Peripatetic teachings are not, as some say, less noble
than the Stoic. In my judgement, there is only
this difference between them; the former are always
more sanguine and not so much the result of
deliberate thought, while the latter have a greater

2 This strains the construction but seems more probable
than the rendering “If I should be superseded.”

13

425

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

φρονήσεως ἀξιώτερα καὶ τοῖς ἐγνωσμένοις μᾶλλον
ἐμμένει.1

5
Πρίσκῳ 3

Ἄρτι μοι παυσαμένῳ τῆς χαλεπῆς πάνυ καὶ
τραχείας νόσου τῇ τοῦ πάντα ἐφορῶντος προνοίᾳ
γράμματα εἰς χεῖρας ἦλθεν ὑμέτερα, καθ᾽ ἣν ἡμέ-
ραν πρῶτον ἐλουσάμην. δείλης ἤδη ταῦτα ἀνα-
γνοὺς οὐκ ἂν εἴποις ῥᾳδίως ὅπως ἐρρωννὕμην,
αἰσθανόμενος τῆς σῆς ἀκραιφνοῦς καὶ καθαρᾶς
εὐνοίας, ἧς εἴθε γενοίμην ἄξιος, ὡς ἂν μὴ καται-
σχύναιμι τὴν σὴν φιλίαν. τὰς μὲν οὖν ὑμετέρας
ἐπιστολὰς εὐθὺς a ἀνέγνων, καίπερ οὐ σφόδρα τοῦτο
ποιεῖν δυνάμενος, τὰς δὲ τοῦ ᾿Αντωνίου πρὸς τὸν
᾿Αλέξανδρον εἰς τὴν ὑστεραίαν ἐταμιευσάμην.
ἐκεῖθεν ἑβδόμῃ σοι ταῦτα ἔγραφον ἡμέρᾳ," κατὰ
λόγον μοι τῆς ῥώσεως προχωρούσης διὰ τὴν τοῦ
θεοῦ προμήθειαν. σώζοιό μοι, ποθεινότατε καὶ
φιλικώτατε ἀδελφέ, ὑ ὑπὸ τοῦ τὰ πάντα ἐφορῶντος
θεοῦ' ἴδοιμί σε, ἐμὸν ἀγαθόν. καὶ ἰδίᾳ χειρί" νὴ
τὴν σὴν σωτηρίαν καὶ τὴν ἐμήν, νὴ τὸν πάντα
ἐφορῶντα θεόν, ὡς φρονῶ γέγραφα. ἀγαθώτατε,

1 ἀξιώτερα καὶ τ. ε. μᾶλλον Asmus ; ἄξιά τ. ε. ἐμμένει Hertlein.

2 Hertlein 44. Λιβανίῳ Hertlein, Parisinus and all editions ;
Πρίσκῳ Baroccianus, Laurentianus lviii, Cumont.

3 Naber suggests ὥρᾳ.

1 1 translate the suggested reading of Asmus, but the
sense remains unsatisfactory.

14

TO PRISCUS

claim to practical wisdom, and are more rigidly con-
sistent with the rules of conduct that they have laid
down.!

5
To Priscus 2

I Hap only just recovered by the providence of the
All-Seeing One? from a very severe and sharp attack
of sickness, when your letters reached my hands, on
the very day when I took my first bath. It was
already evening when I read them, and it would be
‘hard for you to tell how my strength began to return
when I realised your pure and sincere affection. May
I become worthy of it, that I may not shame your
love for me! Your letters I read at once, though I
was not very well able to do so, but those of Antonius
to Alexander I stored up for the next day. On the
seventh day from their receipt I began to write this
to you, since my strength is improving reasonably
well, thanks to Divine Providence. May the All-
Seeing god preserve you, my dearest and best be-
loved brother. May I see you, my treasure! Added
with his own hand. I swear by your well-being and
my own, by the All-Seeing god, that I really feel as
I have written. Best of men, when can I see you

2 So Cumont, following the ascription of MS. Baroccianus.
Hertlein with hesitation addressed it to Libanius. So, too,
Schwarz, who accordingly gives the date as 362 a.p. But as
assigned to Priscus, it should be connected with the foregoing
invitation to that sophist to come to Gaul, and the illness to
which Julian refers is almost certainly his semi-asphyxiation
in Paris described in AMisopogon 340-342a.

3 ἡ. ὁ, Helios-Mithras.

rs)

858-359
Winter,
From
Paris

402

408

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

TOTE σε ἴδω Kal περιλάβωμαι ; νῦν γάρ σου καὶ
τοὔνομα καθάπερ οἱ δυσέρωτες φιλῶ.1

6
᾿Αλυπίῳ ἀδελφῷ Καισαρίου 3

Ὁ Συλοσῶν ἀνῆλθε, φασί, παρὰ τὸν “Δαρεῖον,
καὶ ὑπέμνησεν αὐτὸν τῆς χλανίδος, καὶ ἤτησεν
ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνης map αὐτοῦ τὴν Σάμον. εἶτα ἐπὶ
τούτῳ Δαρεῖος μὲν ἐμεγαλοφρονεῖτο, μεγάλα ἀντὶ
μικρῶν νομίζων ἀποδεδωκέναι" Συλοσῶν δὲ λυπη-
ρὰν ἐλάμβανε χάριν. σκόπει δὴ τὰ ἡμέτερα νῦν
πρὸς ἐκεῖνα. ἑνὶ μὲν δὴ τὸ πρῶτον οἶμαι κρεῖσ-
σον ἔργον ἡμέτερον' οὐδὲ yap ὑπεμείναμεν ὑπο-
μνησθῆναι map ἄλλου: τοσούτῳ δὲ χρόνῳ τὴν
μνήμην τῆς σῆς φιλίας διαφυλάξαντες ἀκέραιον,
ἐπειδὴ πρῶτον ἡμῖν ἔδωκεν ὁ θεός, οὐκ ἐν δευτέροις,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις σε μετεκαλέσαμεν. τὰ μὲν
οὖν πρῶτα τοιαῦτα' περὶ δὲ τῶν μελλόντων Apa
μοι δώσεις TL καὶ γάρ εἰμι μαντικὸς" Tpoaryo-
ρεῦσαι ; μακρῷ νομίξω κρείττονα ἐκείνων, ᾿Αδρά-
στεια δ᾽ εὐμενὴς εἴη. σύ τε γὰρ οὐδὲν dé συγκα-
ταστρεφομένου πόλιν βασιλέως, ἐγώ TE πολλῶν
δέομαι τῶν συνεπανορθούντων μοι τὰ πεπτωκότα

1 ὑπὸ (six lines above) to φιλῷ in Baroccianus only,

bracketed by Spanheim and Hertlein, Hercher rejects.
2 Hertlein 29.

1 For Alypius see Introduction.

2 The story of Syloson from Herodotus 3. 139, is told by
Julian, Vol. 1. Oration 3. 1178. The ‘‘cloak of Syloson”
became a proverb for the overpayment of a benefit.

3 i.e. to Susa.

16

TO ALYPIUS, BROTHER OF CAESARIUS

and embrace you? For already, like doting lovers,
I adore your very name.

6
To Alypius, brother of Caesarius +

SyLoson,? it is said, went up? to Darius, reminded
him of his cloak and asked him for Samos in return
for it. Then Darius prided himself greatly on this,
because he considered that he had given much for
little; though after all it proved a grievous gift for
Syloson.4 Now consider my conduct compared with
that of Darius. In the first place I think that I
have behaved better than he in one point at any
rate, I mean that I did not wait to be reminded by
another. But after preserving the memory of your
friendship so long undimmed, the first moment that
the god granted me power I summoned you, not
among the second but among the very first. So much
for the past. Now with reference to the future, will
you allow me—for I am a prophet >—to foretell
something? I think that it will be far more pros-
perous than in the case I spoke of, only let not
Adrasteia® take offence when I say so! For you
need no king to help you to conquer a city,’ while
I on the other hand need many to help me to raise
up again what has fallen on evil days. Thus does

4 The Persians devastated Samos before Syloson could
benefit by the gift.

5 An echo of Plato, Phaedrus 3435.

§ Another name for Nemesis, cf. Vol. 2. Misopogon 3708.

1 If the date assigned to the letter is correct this must be
Constantinople which Julian was preparing to occupy in his
march against Constantius.

17

VOL, III. C

861
Before
July
From
Gaul

404

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

κακῶς. ταῦτά σοι Ῥαλλικὴ καὶ | βάρβαρος Μοῦσα
προσπαίξει, σὺ δὲ ὑ ὑπὸ τῇ τῶν θεῶν πομπῇ χαίρων
ἀφίκοιο. καὶ τῇ αὑτοῦ χειρί' ληὶς ἐρίφων καὶ
τῆς ἐν τοῖς χειμαδίοις, θήρας τῶν προβατίων."
ἧκε πρὸς τὸν φίλον, ὅς σε τότε, καίπερ οὔπω
γινώσκειν οἷος 3 εἶ δυνάμενος, ὅμως περιεῖπον.

7

Τῷ αὐτῷ 3

Ἤδη μὲν ἐτύγχανον ἀνειμένος τῆς νόσου," τὴν
γεωγραφίαν ὅτε ἀπέστειλας" οὐ μὴν ἔλαττον διὰ
τοῦτο ἡδέως ἐδεξάμην τὸ παρὰ σοῦ πινάκιον ἀπο-
σταλέν. ἔχεν γὰρ καὶ τὰ διαγράμματα τῶν
πρόσθεν βελτίω, καὶ κατεμούσωσας αὐτὸ προσ-
θεὶς τοὺς ἰάμβους, οὐ μάχην ἀείδοντας τὴν Βου-
πάλειον κατὰ τὸν Κυρηναῖον. ποιητήν, ἀλλ᾽ οἵους
ἡ καλὴ Σαπφὼ βούλεται τοῖς νόμοις ἁρμόττειν.
καὶ τὸ μὲν δῶρον τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν, ὁποῖον ἴσως σοί
τε ἔπρεπε δοῦναι, ἐμοί τε ἥδιστον δέξασθαι. περὶ
δὲ τὴν διοίκησιν τῶν πραγμάτων ὅτι δραστηρίως
ἅμα καὶ πράως ἅπαντα περαίνειν προθυμῇ, συνη-
δόμεθα: μῖξαι “γὰρ πρᾳότητα καὶ σωφροσύνην
ἀνδρείᾳ καὶ ῥώμῃ, καὶ τῇ μὲν χρήσασθαι πρὸς

1 καί τις---θήρα Capps suggests.

2 Obscure and perhaps corrupt. Hertlein suggests mpoBa-
των τῶν ἀγρίων, ** wild sheep.”

3 Klimek ; ὅσος Hertlein. 4 Hertlein 30.
5 Hertlein suggests παρειμένος τῇ νόσῳ or ὑπὸ τῆς νύσου.

1 This is perhaps ἃ veiled allusion to Julian’s plot to defeat
the adherents of Constantius.

18

TO ALYPIUS, BROTHER OF CAESARIUS

my Gallic and barbarian Muse jest for your benefit.
But be of good cheer and come, and may the gods
attend you.

Added with his own hand. ‘There is good spoil of
deer and hunting of small sheep in the winter
quarters.1 Come to your friend who valued you
even when he could not yet Know your merit.

a
To the Same

Ir happened that when you sent me your map
I had just recovered from my illness, but I was none
the less glad on that account to receive the chart
that you sent. For not only does it contain diagrams
better than any hitherto made; but you have em-
bellished it by adding those iambic verses, not such as
«Sing the War of Bupalus,” 2 as the poet of Cyrene ὃ
expresses it, but such as beautiful Sappho is wont
to fashion for her songs. In fact the gift is such
as no doubt it well became you to give, while to
me it is most agreeable to receive. With regard
to your administration of affairs, inasmuch as you
study to act in all cases both energetically and
humanely, I am well pleased with it. For to blend
mildness and moderation with courage and force,
and to exercise the former towards the most virtuous,

2 For Bupalus cf. Horace, Hpodes 6. 14; Lucian, Pseudolo-
gist 2.

3 Callimachus, frag. 90, Ernesti.

4 Literally ‘‘nomes,” though Julian may only have meant
‘poetry’; in any case he refers to lyric iambics,

5 An echo of Isocrates, Nicocles 298.

19
c 2

414

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

TOUS ἐπιεικεστάτους, τῇ δὲ ἐ ἐπὶ τῶν πονηρῶν ἀπα-
ραιτήτως πρὸς ἐπανόρθωσιν οὐ μικρᾶς ἐστὶ φύσεως
οὐδ᾽ ἀρετῆς ἔργον, ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω. τούτων
εὐχόμεθά σε τῶν σκοπῶν ἐχόμενον ἄμφω πρὸς ἕν
τὸ καλὸν αὐτοὺς συναρμόσαι" τοῦτο γὰρ ἁπάσαις
προκεῖσθαι ταῖς ἀρεταῖς τέλος οὐκ εἰκῆ τῶν πα-
λαιῶν ἐπίστευον ot λογιώτατοι. ἐρρωμένος καὶ
εὐδαιμονῶν διατελοίης ἐπὶ μήκιστον, ἀδελφὲ
ποθεινότατε καὶ φιλικώτατε.

8
Μαξίμῳ φιλοσόφῳ !

, , , / ἊΝ

Πάντα ἀθρόα ἔπεισί μοι καὶ ἀποκλείει τὴν

\ ” BA nf > ἴω a

φωνὴν ἄλλο ἄλλῳ προελθεῖν οὐ συγχωροῦν τῶν

ἐμῶν διανοημάτων, εἴτε τῶν ψυχικῶν " παθῶν

\ a ?

εἴτε ὅπως φίλον κατονομάζειν τὰ τοιαῦτα. ἀλλ

A “3, ἃ ς / / fe

ἀποδῶμεν αὐτοῖς ἣν ὁ χρόνος ἀπέδωκε τάξιν,

an “ an a

εὐχαριστήσαντες τοῖς πάντα ἀγαθοῖς θεοῖς, οἱ

if : : / Ἂν a

τέως μὲν γράφειν ἐμοὶ συνεχώρησαν, ἴσως δὲ Hut

καὶ ἀλλήλους ἰδεῖν συγχωρήσουσιν. ὡς πρῶτον

αὐτοκράτωρ ἐγενόμην ἄκων," ὡς ἴσασιν οἱ θεοί,

ἃ “

καὶ τοῦτο αὐτόθι" καταφανὲς ὃν ἐνεδέχετο τρό-

πον ἐποίησα: στρατεύσας ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους,

Vf
ἐκείνης μοι γενομένης τριμήνου τῆς στρατείας,
1 Hertlein 38.

2 τῶν Bidez adds, ψυχρὸν τῶν MSS., Hertlein, who suspects

corruption ; ψυχικῶν παθῶν Papadopoulos MSS. XY.

3 ἄκων ἐγενόμην Hertlein, from Parisinus 2755.
4 αὐτοῖς ei MSS. ; αὐτοῖς Hertlein; αὐτόθι Capps.

1 Cf. Oration 1. 3p, Vol. 1.
20

TO MAXIMUS, THE PHILOSOPHER

and the latter implacably in the case of the wicked
for their regeneration, is, as 1 am convinced, a task
that calls for no slight natural endowment and
virtue. I pray that you may ever hold fast to
these ambitions and may adapt them both solely to
what is fair and honourable.! Not without reason
did the most eloquent of the ancient writers believe
that this is the end and aim set for all the virtues.
May you continue in health ‘and happiness as long
as possible, my well-beloved and most dear brother !

8
To Maximus, the philosopher ?

EvERYTHING crowds into my mind at once and

chokes my utterance, as one thought refuses to let »

another precede it, whether you please to class such
symptoms among psychic troubles, or to give them
some other name. But let me arrange what I have
to tell in chronological order, though not till I have
first offered thanks to the all-merciful gods, who at
this present have permitted me to write, and will
also perhaps permit us to see one another. Directly
after I had been made Emperor—against my will,
as the gods know; and this I made evident then and
there in every way possible,—I led the army against
the barbarians.2 That expedition lasted for three

2 The theurgist. His life was written by Eunapius, Lives
of the Sophists and Philosophers. Maximus was at Ephesus ;
Julian’s headquarters were at Naissa, where he had received
news of the death of Constantius, November 3rd, 361. Schwarz
dates this letter October or November.

8 2,6. when he recrossed the Rhine in 360. For this
campaign, see Ammianus 20. 10,

21

361
Novem-
er
From
Naissa
(Nish)

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

3 \ ,
C ἐπανιὼν εἰς τοὺς Taratixovs αἰγιαλοὺς 1 ἐπεσκό-

415

πουν Kal τῶν ἐκεῖθεν ἡκόντων ἀνεπυνθανόμην, μή
τίς φιλόσοφος, μή τις σχολαστικὸς ἢ τριβώνιον ἢ
χλανίδιον φορῶν κατῆρεν. ἐπεὶ δε περὶ τὸν Bu-
σεντίωνα 3 Hv" πολίχνη“ δὲ νῦν ἐστὶν * ἀνειλημμένη,
πάλαι δὲ μεγάλη τε ἣν καὶ πολυτελέσιν ἱεροῖς
ἐκεκόσμητο, καὶ τείχει καρτερῷ καὶ προσέτι τῇ
φύσει τοῦ χωρίου" περιθεῖ γὰρ αὐτὸ ὁ Δοῦβις
ποταμός" ἡ δὲ ὥσπερ ἐν θαλάττῃ πετρώδης ἄκρα
ἀνέστηκεν, ἄβατος ὀλίγου δέω φάναι καὶ αὐτοῖς
ὄρνισι, πλὴν ὅσα ὁ ποταμὸς αὐτὴν περιρρέων
ὥσπερ τινὰς αἰγιαλοὺς ἔχει προκειμένους" ταύτης
πλησίον τῆς πόλεως ἀπήντησε κυνικός τις ἀνήρ,
ἔχων τρίβωνα καὶ βακτηρίαν. τοῦτον πόρρωθεν
θεασάμενος οὐδὲν ἄχλο 5 ὑπέλαβον ἢ σέ, πλησίον
δὲ ἤδη προσιὼν παρὰ σοῦ πάντως ἥκειν αὐτὸν
ἐνόμιξον. οὗτος ὃ δ᾽ ἁνὴρ φίλος μέν, ἥττων * δὲ
τῆς προσδοκωμένης ἐλπίδος. ἕν μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτον
ὄναρ ἐγένετό μοι. μετὰ τοῦτο δὲ πάντως ὃ ὦμην
σε πολυπραγμονήσαντα τὰ KAT ἐμὲ τῆς Ἑλλάδος
ἐκτὸς οὐδαμῶς εὑρήσειν ἴστω Ζεύς, ἴστω μέγας
“Ἥλιος, ἴστω ᾿Αθηνᾶς κράτος καὶ πάντες θεοὶ καὶ
; ηνᾶς Kp ς
πᾶσαι, πῶς κατιὼν ἐπὶ τοὺς ᾿Ιλλυριοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν
Κελτῶν ἔτρεμον ὑπὲρ σοῦ. καὶ ἐπυνθανόμην τῶν

1 Schwarz suggests σταθμοὺς because οὗ the strange use of

αἰγιαλός, ‘““beach,” for the bank of a river.
2 Βισεντίωνα X, Bixevtiwva Parisinus, Hertlein. ἣν Schwarz

δΠάμ:
3 πολίχνη Cobet, πολίχνιον MSS., Hertlein.
δέ ἐστι νῦν Χ. δ, οὐδένα Χο XY) ὁ ἄφθη δὲ XY.
ἥττων MY, ἧττον Parisinus, Hertlein.
πάντως Parisinus omits, followed by Hertlein.
εὑρεθῆναι Hertlein.

oman >

22

TO MAXIMUS, THE PHILOSOPHER

months, and when I returned to the shores of Gaul, I
was ever on the watch and kept enquiring from all
who came from that quarter whether any philosopher
or any scholar wearing a philosopher's cloak or a
soldier’s tunic had arrived there. Then I approached
Besontio.! It is a little town that has lately been
restored, but in ancient times it was a large city
adorned with costly temples, and was fortified by a
strong wall and further by the nature of the place ;
for it is. encircled by the river Doubis.? It rises up
like a rocky cliff in the sea, inaccessible, I might
almost say, to the very birds, except in those places
- where the river as it flows round it throws out what
one may call beaches, that lie in front of it. Near
this city there came to meet me a certain man who
looked like a Cynic with his long cloak and staff.
When I first caught sight of him in the distance, I
imagined that he was none other than yourself.
And when I came nearer to him I thought that he
had surely come from you. The man was in fact
a friend of mine though he fell short of what I
hoped and expected. This then was one vain dream
Ihad! And afterwards I thought that, because you
were busied with my affairs, I should certainly find
you nowhere outside of Greece. Zeus be my witness
and great Helios, mighty Athene and all the gods and
goddesses, how on my way down to Illyricum from
Gaul? I trembled for your safety! Also I kept

1 Cf. Ammianus 20. 10, per Besontionem Viennam hie-
maturus abscessit. Besontio or Vesontio (Besancon), the
capital of the Sequani, is described in much the same language
by Caesar, Gallic War 1. 38.

2 Doubs.

§ Ammianus 21. 7, Zosimus 3. 10 describe this march.

29

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

θεῶν (αὐτὸς μὲν οὐ τολμῶν' οὐ γὰρ ὑπέμενον οὔτε
ἰδεῖν τοιοῦτον οὔτε ἀκοῦσαι οὐδέν, οἷον ἄν τις ὑπέ-
λαβε δύνασθαι τηνικαῦτα περὶ σὲ γίγνεσθαι, ἐπέ-
ἌΣ 30 e \ x A 4
τρεπον δὲ ἄλλοις), οἱ θεοὶ δὲ ταραχὰς μέν τινας
Μ θ Ν s A. 26 , δὲ 4
ἔσεσθαι περὶ σὲ περιφανῶς 1 ἐδήλουν, οὐδὲν μέντοι
δεινὸν οὐδὲ εἰς ἔργον τῶν ἀθέων 5 βουλευμάτων.
᾿Αλλ᾽ ὁρᾷς ὅτι μεγάλα καὶ πολλὰ παρέδραμον.
΄ ν᾽ Υ͂ ΒΝ lal \ > , na
μάλιστά σε πυθέσθαι ἄξιον, πῶς μὲν ἀθρόως τῆς
3 ’ὔ 5 ’ aA an , \ ’ ἈΝ
ἐπιφανείας ἠἡσθόμεθα τῶν θεῶν, τίνα δὲ τρόπον τὸ
A “ 3 7 a 7
τοσοῦτον τῶν ἐπιβούλων πλῆθος διαπεφεύγαμεν,
κτείναντες οὐδένα, χρήματα οὐδενὸς ἀφελόμενοι,
A \ , ἃ 3 7 3 ᾽ ᾽
φυλαξάμενοι δὲ μόνον ods ἐλαμβάνομεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτο-
φώρῳ. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἴσως οὐ γράφειν, ἀλλὰ
ne / ts ὃ , \ aN ὁ ὃ 7 4 εἶ
φράζειν χρή, οἶμαι δέ σε καὶ μάλα ἡδέως πεύσε
΄ \ U \ Ni
σθαι. θρησκεύομεν τοὺς θεοὺς ἀναφανδόν, καὶ TO
πλῆθος τοῦ συγκατελθόντος μοι στρατοπέδου θεο-
σεβές ἐστιν. ἡμεῖς φανερῶς βουθυτοῦμεν. ἀπε-
δώκαμεν τοῖς θεοῖς χαριστήρια 5 ἑκατόμβας πολ-
λάς. ἐμὲ κελεύουσιν οἱ θεοὶ τὰ πάντα ἁγνεύειν
εἰς δύναμιν, καὶ πείθομαί vel καὶ προθύμως αὐτοῖς"
μεγάλους γὰρ καρποὺς τῶν πόνων ἀποδώσειν
φασίν, ἢν μὴ ῥᾳθυμῶμεν. ἦλθε πρὸς ἡμᾶς Evd-
ryptos.4 e e e e . e e . e e e . τοῦ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν
τιμωμένου θεοῦ. . e © @ δ @ e
Πολλὰ γοῦν ἐπέρχεταί μοι πρὸς τούτοις, ἀλλὰ
χρὴ ταμιεύσασθαί τινα καὶ τῇ παρουσίᾳ τῇ σῇ.
1 φανερῶς XY. 2 ἀθέων Asmus, ἀθέσμων MSS., Hertlein.
3 After χαριστήρια XY have περὶ ἢ ἡμῶν.
* In Hertiein the letter ends at Εὐάγριος. In XY (Papado-

poulos) a lacuna of about 82 letters follows.
° A lacuna follows in XY.

24

TO MAXIMUS, THE PHILOSOPHER

enquiring of the gods—not that I ventured to do this
myself, for I could not endure to see or hear any-
thing so terrible as ‘one might have supposed would
be happening to you at that time, but I entrusted
the task to others; and the gods did indeed show
clearly that certain troubles would befal you, nothing
terrible however, nor to indicate that impious
counsels would be carried out.!

But you see that I have passed over many im-
portant events. Above all, it is right that you
should learn how I became all at once conscious of
the very presence of the gods, and in what manner
1 escaped the multitude of those who plotted against
me, though 1 put no man to death, deprived no man
of his property, and only imprisoned those whom I
caught red-handed. All this, however, I ought per-
haps to tell you rather than write it, but I think
you will be very glad to be informed of it. I
worship the gods openly, and the whole mass of the
troops who are returning with me worship the gods.”
I sacrifice oxen in public. I have offered to the
gods many hecatombs as thank-offerings. The gods
command me to restore their worship in its utmost
purity, and I obey them, yes, and with a good will.
For they promise me great rewards for my labours,
if only I am not remiss. Evagrius? has joined me.

. of the god whom we honour... .

Many things occur to my mind, besides what I
have written, but I must store up certain matters
to tell you when you are with me. Come here,

1 Julian’s friends in the East were in danger after his
quarrel with Constantius.

2 Cf. Libanius, Oration 18. 114.

3 Cf. Letter 25, To Hvagrius.

be

982

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

δεῦρο οὖν, τοὺς θεούς σοι, τὴν ταχίστην, εἴτε δύο
εἴτε πλείοσι χρησάμενος ὀχήμασιν. ἀπέστειλα
δὲ καὶ δύο τῶν πιστοτάτων ὑπηρετῶν, ὧν ὁ μὲν
εἷς ἄχρι τοῦ στρατοπέδου παραπέμψει σε" ἕτερος
δὲ ἐξεληλυθέναι σε καὶ ἥκειν ἤδη μηνύσει" πότε-
ρον δὲ ὑπὸ ποτέρου γενέσθαι θέλεις αὐτὸς τοῖς
νεανίσκοις σήμηνον.ἷ :

9

᾿Ιουλιανῷ θείῳ 5

Τρίτης ὥρας νυκτὸς ἀρχομένης, οὐκ ἔχων οὐδὲ
τὸν ὑπογράψοντα ὃ διὰ τὸ πάντας ἀσχόλους
εἶναι, μόλις ἴσχυσα πρὸς σὲ ταῦτα γράψαι.
ζῶμεν διὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ἐλευθερωθέντες τοῦ παθεῖν
XN ὃ aA ’ / / δὲ ς Ἥ ἃ
ἢ δρᾶσαι τὰ ἀνήκεστα' μάρτυς δὲ ὁ “ἥλιος, ὃν
ἄάλιστα πάντων ἱκέτευσα συνάρασθαί μοι, καὶ
id \ Τὰ e 3 / b) er 3 lal
ὁ βασιλεὺς Ζεύς, ὡς οὐπώποτε ηὐξάμην ἀποκτεῖ-
ναι ΚΚωνστάντιον, μᾶλλον δὲ ἀπηυξάμην. τί οὖν
ἦλθον ; ἐπειδή μοι οἱ θεοὶ διαρρήδην ἐκέλευσαν,
σωτηρίαν μὲν ἐπαγγελλόμενοι πειθομένῳ, μένοντι
δὲ ὃ μηδεὶς θεῶν ποιήσειεν: ἄλλως τε ὅτι καὶ

1 πολλὰ « « « «. . σήμηνον restored from XY, not in
Hertlein.

2 Hertlein 13; after θείῳ X adds αὐτοῦ.

8 Hertlein suggests, MSS. ὑπογράφοντα.

1 Maximus did not join Julian at Naissa, but, as Eunapius
relates in his Life of Chrysanthius, p. 554 (Wright), he
lingered at Ephesus in the vain attempt to secure favourable
omens for the journey, and finally joined Julian at Constanti-

26

TO HIS UNCLE JULIAN

then, in the name of the gods, as quickly as you
can, and use two or more public carriages. More-

over, I have sent two of my most trusted servants,

one of whom will escort you as far as my head-
quarters; the other will inform me that you have
set out and will forthwith arrive. Do you yourself
tell the youths which of them you wish to under-
take which of these tasks.1

9
To his Uncle Julian 2

Tue third hour of the night has just begun, and
as I have no secretary to dictate to because they
are all occupied, I have with difficulty made the
effort to write this to you myself. I am alive, by
the grace of the gods, and have been freed from the
necessity of either suffering or inflicting irreparable
11.8 But the Sun, whom of all the gods I besought
most earnestly to assist me, and sovereign Zeus also,
bear me witness that never for a moment did I wish
to slay Constantius, but rather I wished the contrary.
Why then did Icome? Because the gods expressly
ordered me,* and promised me safety if I obeyed
them, but if I stayed, what I pray no god may do to
me! Furthermore I came because, having been de-

nople early in 362; cf. Eunapius, Life of Aedesius, pp.
440 foll.

2 For Count Julian, see Introduction.

3 A proverbial phrase; cf. Letter to Nilus, p. 159. The
sudden death of Constantius had simplified Julian’s course.

4 Cf. Vol. 3, Letter to the Athenians 2843-285p, for Julian’s
own account of the mutiny against Constantius and the sign
given by the gods.

27

361
Late
Novem-
ber or
early
Decem-
ber
From
Naissa
(Nish)

989

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πολέμιος ἀποδειχθεὶς ὥμην φοβῆσαι “μόνον καὶ
εἰς ὁμιλίας ἥξειν ἐπιεικεστέρας τὰ πράγματα" εἰ
δὲ μάχῃ κριθείη, τῇ τύχῃ τὰ πάντα καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς
ἐπιτρέψας περιμένειν ὅπερ ἂν αὐτῶν τῇ φιλαν-
θρωπίᾳ δόξῃ.

10
᾿Ιουλιανὸς Εὐὐθηρίῳ 1

“Ζῶμεν ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν σωθέντες: ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ δὲ
αὐτοῖς θῦε τὰ χαριστήρια. θύσεις δὲ οὐχ ὑπὲρ
ἑνὸς ἀνδρός, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ τῶν ᾿Ελλήνων.
εἰ δέ σοι σχολὴ καὶ μέχρι τῆς Κωνσταντίνου
πόλεως διαβῆναι, τιμησαίμην ἂν οὐκ ὀλίγου τὴν
σὴν ἐντυχίαν.

1]
᾿Ιουλιανὸς Λεοντίῳ *

‘O λογοποιὸς 0 ᾿Θούριος ὦτα εἶπεν ἀνθρώποις
ὀφθαλμῶν ἀπιστότερα. τούτῳ δ᾽ ἐπὶ σοῦ τὴν
ἐναντίαν ἔχω γνώμην ἐγώ" πιστότερα γάρ ἐστί
μοι τὰ ὦτα τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν. οὐ γάρ, εἴποτε εἶδόν
σε δεκάκις, οὕτως ἂν ἐπίστευσα τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς,

1 Hertlein 69. 2 Hertlein 22.

1 An Armenian eunuch, a pagan who had been kidnapped,

sold into slavery, and finally attained to the office of court

chamberlain and confidential adviser to Constans and
Julian; see Ammianus 16. 7. 4. He was employed by
Julian in Gaul as a trusted messenger to Constantius at
Milan ; Ammianus 20. 8, 19.

28

TO LEONTIUS

clared a public enemy, I meant to frighten him
merely, and that our quarrel should result in inter-
course on more friendly terms; but if we should
have to decide the issue by battle, I meant to entrust
the whole to Fortune and to the gods, and so await
whatever their clemency might decide.

10
To Eutherius 1

I am alive, and have been saved by the gods.
Therefore offer sacrifices to them on my behalf, as
thank-offerings. Your sacrifice will be not for one
man only, but for the whole body of Hellenes.? If
you have time to travel as far as Constantinople I
shall feel myself highly honoured by your presence.

11
To Leontius

Tue Thurian historian? said that men’s ears are
less to be trusted than their eyes.4 But in your
case I hold the opposite opinion from this, since
here my ears are more trustworthy than my eyes.
For not if I had seen you ten times would I have
trusted my eyes as I now trust my ears, instructed

* In the fourth century this word has lost some of its
national meaning, and is used of pagans as opposed to
Christians, especially by Julian. The sophists of that period
called themselves and all students of rhetoric ‘‘ Hellenes.”

3 Herodotus. ;

4 Herodotus 1. 8; ef. Julian Oration 1. 370, and 4. 145p.

29

361
About
Decem-
ber Ist
From
Naissa
(Nish)

361
From
Naissa
(Nish)
or Con
stanti-
nople

989

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὡς νῦν ταῖς ἀκοαῖς πιστεύω ταῖς ἐμαυτοῦ, Tap
ἀνδρὸς οὐδαμῶς οἵου τε ψεύδεσθαι δεδιδαγμένος,
OTL πάντα ἀνὴρ ὧν αὐτὸς σεαυτοῦ κρείττων εἶ
περὶ τὸ ῥέξαι, φησὶν Ὅμηρος, χερσί τε καὶ ποσίν.
ἐπιτρέψαντες οὖν σοι τὴν τῶν ὅπλων χρῆσιν
ἀπεστείλαμέν τε πανοπλίαν, ἥτις 1 τοῖς πεζοῖς
ἁρμόττει" 5 ἐγκατελέξαμέν τέ σε τῷ τῶν οἰκείων
συντάγματι.3

12
Μαξίμῳ φιλοσόφῳ 2

᾿Αλέξανδρον μὲν τὸν Μακεδόνα τοῖς Ομήρου
ποιήμασιν ἐφυπνώττειν λόγος, ἵνα δὴ καὶ νύκτωρ
καὶ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν αὐτοῦ τοῖς πολεμικοῖς ὁμιλῇ
συνθήμασιν' ἡμεῖς δέ σου ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς ὥσπερ
παιωνίοις τισὶ φαρμάκοις συγκαθεύδομεν, καὶ οὐ
διαλείπομεν ἐντυγχάνοντες ἀεὶ καθάπερ νεαραῖς
ἔτι καὶ πρῶτον εἰς χεῖρας ἡκούσαις. εἴὔπερ οὖν
ἐθέλεις ἡμῖν εἰκόνα τῆς σῆς παρουσίας τὴν ἐν
τοῖς γράμμασιν ὁμιλίαν προξενεῖν, γράφε καὶ μὴ
λῆγε συνεχῶς τοῦτο πράττων' μᾶλλον δὲ ἧκε
σὺν θεοῖς, ἐνθυμούμενος ὡς ἡμῖν γ᾽ ἕως ἂν ἀπῆῇς

1 Hertlein suggests, MSS. ἢ τέως.

2 MSS. add κουφοτέρα δέ ἐστιν αὕτη τῆς τῶν ἱππέων deleted
by Wyttenbach, Hertlein brackets.

3 MSS. add γίνονται δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ὁπλοφορησάντων οὗτοι καὶ

στρατευσαμένων deleted by Wyttenbach, Hertlein brackets,
4 Hertlein 15.

1 An echo of Demosthenes, Olynthiac 2. 17.

30

TO THE PHILOSOPHER MAXIMUS

as I have been by a man who is in no wise capable
of speaking falsely,! that, while in all respects you
show yourself a man, you surpass yourself? in your
achievements ‘‘ with hand and foot,” as Homer says.®
I therefore entrust you with the employment of
arms, and have despatched to you a complete suit
of armour such as is adapted for the infantry. More-
over I have enrolled you in my household corps.4

12
To the philosopher Maximus

Tuere is a tradition® that Alexander of Macedon
used to sleep with Homer’s poems under his pillow,
in order that by night as well as by day he might
busy himself with his martial writings. But I sleep
with your letters as though they were healing drugs
of some sort, and I do not cease to read them con-
stantly as though they were newly written and had
only just come into my hands. Therefore if you are
willing to furnish me with intercourse by means of
letters, as a semblance of your own society, write,
and do not cease to do so continually. Or rather
come,® with heaven’s help, and consider that while

2 Cf. Julian, Oration 7. 2858, Lelter to Themistius 264p,
Caesars 309D, 8270.

3 Odyssey 8. 148; the phrase is there used of the athletic
sports of the Phaeacians.

4 7, 6. the protectores domestict ; cf. Symmachus, Letter 67.
In C.I.L. IIT. 56704 (Dessau 774), a Leontius is mentioned as
praepositus militum auxiliarium in 370 A.D.

5 Plutarch, Alexander 12.

§ Ammianus 22. 7. 3 describes Julian’s effusive greeting of
Maximus, for which he interrupted a meeting of the Senate.

31

End of
361 or
early in
362
From
Con-
stanti=
nople

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

δ oe A > Aas 3 \ ὦ a \

οὐδ᾽ ὅτι ζῶμεν εἰπεῖν ἔστιν, εἰ μὴ ὅσον τοῖς παρὰ
n f n

σοῦ γραφομένοις ἐντυχεῖν ἔξεστιν.

13
[4 oo
Eppoyéver ἀπούπάρχῳ Δἰγύπτου 1
/ Ν Ν a
389 δΔός μοί τι κατὰ τοὺς μελικτὰς * εἰπεῖν ῥήτορας,
3 Xx
D°*O, παρ᾽ ἐλπίδα σεσωσμένος ἐγώ, ὦ Tap ἐλπίδας 3
9 , e / \ / e
ἀκηκοώς, OTL διαπέφευγας THY τρικέφαλον ὕδραν,
7 \
οὔτι μὰ Δία τὸν ἀδελφόν φημι ἹΚωνστάντιον"
2 9 a \ 9 Ὁ oy 3 \ \ \ aN
ANN EKELVOS μὲν ἣν οἷος ἣν" ἀλλὰ TA περὶ αὑτὸν
/ a a a
θηρία πᾶσιν ἐποφθαλμιῶντα, ἃ κἀκεῖνον ἐποίει
Ν ε
χαλεπώτερον, οὐδὲ TO καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν παντάπασι
9 fal 2 \ ὅν lal fa) ? /
390 πρᾷον, εἰ καὶ ἐδόκει πολλοῖς τοιοῦτος. ἐκείνῳ
5 “ n
μὲν οὖν, ἐπειδὴ μακαρίτης ἐγένετο, κούφη γῆ,
/ 4 / V2 OV / a
καθάπερ λέγεται" τούτους δὲ ἀδίκως μέν TL παθεῖν
3 Ἃ τ A ” ig , 3 \ \ 3 lad
οὐκ ἂν ἐθέλοιμι, ἴστω Ζεύς" ἐπειδὴ δὲ αὐτοῖς
ἐπανίστανται πολλοὶ κατήγοροι, δικαστήριον
3 4 \ ΄ 3 7, / \ \
ἀποκεκλήρωται. σὺ δέ, ὦ φίλε, πάρει, καὶ παρὰ
Β δύναμιν ἐπείχθητι' θεάσασθαι γάρ σε πάλαι TE
εὔχομαι νὴ τοὺς θεούς, καὶ νῦν εὐμενέστατα ὅτι
, , [4
διεσώθης ἀκηκοώς, ἥκειν παρακελεύομαι.
1 Hertlein 23.

2 μειλιχίους ? Cumont suggests.
3 Asmus suggests ἐλπίδα σέ.

1 Hermogenes had been Prefect of Egypt before 328, since
his name does not occur in the list of prefects after that year,
which is extant complete.

32

TO ΗἩΒΕΜΟΘΕΈΝΕΒ.

you are away I cannot be said to be alive, except in
so far as 1 am able to read what you have written.

13
To Hermogenes, formerly Prefect of Egypt!

Suffer me to say, in the language of the poetical
rhetoricians, O how little hope had I of safety! O
how little hope had I of hearing that you had
escaped the three-headed hydra! Zeus be my wit-
-ness that I do not mean my brother Constantius 2—
nay, he was what he was—but the wild beasts who
surrounded him and cast their baleful eyes on all
men; for they made him even harsher than he was
by nature, though on his own account he was by no
means of a mild disposition, although he seemed so
to many. But since he is now one of the blessed
dead, may the earth lie lightly on him, as the saying
is! Nor should I wish, Zeus be my witness, that
these others should be punished unjustly; but since
many accusers are rising up against them, I have
appointed a court? to judge them. Do you, my
friend, come hither, and hasten, even if it task your
strength. For, by the gods, I have long desired to
see you, and, now that I have learned to my great
joy that you are safe and sound, I bid you come.

. 2 Cf. for Julian’s attitude to Constantius, Misopogon 5078.

8 The special commission appointed by Julian to try his
enemies sat at Chalcedon in Dec. 361. Its work is described
_ by Ammianus 22. 3; Libanius, Oration 18. 152. Among the
judges were Mamertinus the rhetorician and Nevitta the
Goth, who were the Consuls designate for 362, and Sallust.

33
VOL. III. D

361
Decem-
ber?
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

914

401

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN
f 14

TI poatpecio 1

Τί δὲ οὐκ ἔμελλον ἐγὼ Προαιρέσιον τὸν καλὸν
προσαγορεύειν, ἄνδρα ἐπαφιέντα τοῖς νέοις λόγους,
ὥσπερ οἱ ποταμοὶ τοῖς πεδίοις ἐπαφιᾶσι τὰ ῥεύ-
ματα, καὶ ζηλοῦντα τὸν Ἱ]ερικλέα κατὰ τοὺς
λόγους ἔξω τοῦ συνταράττειν καὶ ξυγκυκᾶν τὴν

Ἑλλάδα ; ; θαυμάζειν δ᾽ οὐ χρὴ τὴν Λακωνικὴν εἰ

πρὸς σὲ βραχυλογίαν ἐμιμησάμην. ὑμῖν γὰρ
πρέπει τοῖς σοφοῖς μακροὺς πάνυ καὶ μεγάλους
ποιεῖσθαι λόγους, ἡμῖν δὲ ἀρκεῖ καὶ τὰ βραχέα
πρὸς ὑμᾶς. ἴσθι δῆτά μοι πολλὰ πανταχόθεν
κύκλῳ πράγματα ἐπιρρεῖν. τῆς καθόδου τὰς
αἰτίας, εἰ μὲν ἱστορίαν γράψεις," ἀκριβέστατα
ἀπαγγελῶ σοι, δοὺς τὰς ἐπιστολὰς ἀποδείξεις
ἐγγράφους" εἰ δ᾽ ἔγνωκας ταῖς μελέταις καὶ τοῖς
γυμνάσμασιν εἰς πέλος ἄχρι γήρως προσκαρτερεῖν,
οὐδὲν ἴσως μου τὴν σιωπὴν μέμψη.

15
3 /
Aetio ἐπισκόπῳ 3
A x e a ξ an e N la)
Κοινῶς μὲν ἅπασι τοῖς οπωσοῦν ὑπὸ τοῦ μακα-
, / a 7 n
pitov ἹζΚωνσταντίου πεφυγαδευμένοις ἕνεκεν τῆς

1 Hertlein 2. 2 Cobet, γράφεις MSS. Hertlein.
3 Hertlein 31.

1 The Armenian sophist, a Christian, who taught at
Athens. For his Life see Eunapius, Lives of the Sophists and
Philosophers, pp. 477-515 (Wright). See Introduction.

2 Aristophanes, Acharnians 531, ξυνεκύκα τὴν Ἑλλάδα.

34

TO BISHOP AETIUS
14

To Prohaeresius 1

Wuy should I not address the excellent Pro-
haeresius, a man who has poured forth his eloquence
on the young as rivers pour their floods over the
plain; who rivals Pericles in his discourses, except
that he does not agitate and embroil Greece ??
But you must not be surprised that I have imitated
Spartan brevity in writing to you. For though it
becomes sages like you to compose very long and
impressive discourses, from me to you even a few
-words are enough. Moreover you must know that
from all quarters at once I am inundated by affairs.
As for the causes of my return,’® if you are going
to write an historical account I will make a very
precise report for you, and will hand over to you the
letters,4 as written evidence. But if you have re-
solved to devote your energies to the last, till old
age,°> to your rhetorical studies and exercises, you
will perhaps not reproach me for my silence.

15
To Bishop Aetius ὃ

I nave remitted their sentence ‘of exile for all in
common who were banished in whatever fashion by
Constantius of blessed memory, on account of the

3 ἡ ὁ. from Gaul, when he marched against the Emperor
Constantius, in 361. This letter was probably written after
his triumphal entry into Constantinople on December 11th.

4 For the correspondence between Julian and Constantius
cf. Ammianus Marcellinus 20. 8. 5.

5 Prohaeresius was already in the late eighties.

§ See Introduction under Aetius.

35
Dez

End of
361 (or
early
in 362)
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

362 Jan,
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

C τῶν Γαλιλαίων ἀπονοίας ἀνῆκα τὴν φυγήν, σοὶ 1
δὲ οὐκ ἀνίημι μόνον, ἀλλὰ γὰρ καὶ παλαιᾶς
γνώσεώς τε καὶ συνηθείας μεμνημένος ἀφικέσθαι
προτρέπω μέχρις ἡμῶν. χρήσῃ δὲ ὀχήματι δη-
μοσίῳ μέχρι τοῦ στρατοπέδου τοῦ ἐμοῦ καὶ ἑνὶ
παρίππῳ.

10
Θεοδώρῳ ἀρχιερεῖ.3

lA , \ 5 \ Ὁ / e

AcEdpevos σου τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἥσθην μέν, ὡς
εἰκός" τί γὰρ οὐκ ἔμελλον ἄνδρα ἑταῖρον ἐμοὶ καὶ
φίλων φίλτατον σῶν εἶναι πυνθανόμενος ; ; ὡς δὲ
καὶ ἀφελὼν τὸν “ἐπικείμενον δεσμὸν ἐπήειν πολ-
λάκις, οὐκ ἂν ἐγὼ παραστῆσαι τῷ λόγῳ δυναίμην,
τίς καὶ ὁποῖος ἐγενόμην" γαλήνης ἐμπιπλάμενος
καὶ θυμηδίας, ὥσπερ εἰκόνα τινὰ τοῦ γενναίου σου
καθορῶν τρόπου τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἠσπαξζόμην'
ὑπὲρ' ἧς τὰ μὲν καθέκαστα γράφειν μακρὸν
εἴη καὶ περιττῆς ἴσως ἀδολεσχίας οὐκ ἔξω.
δ᾽ οὖν ἐπήνεσα διαφερόντως, ταῦτα εἰπεῖν οὐκ ἂν
ὀκνήσαιμι' πρῶτον μέν, ὅτι τὴν 8 παροινίαν ἣν

2 ς olen: os rn € {ὃ 5 ς \ Ψ
εἰς ὑμᾶς “ὁ τῆς Βλλά OS ΟΝ Ὁ.
εἴ “γε τὸν τοιοῦτον ἡγεμόνα χρὴ καλεῖν ἀλλὰ μὴ
τύραννον, οὔπω βαρέως ὁ ἤνεγκας, οὐδὲν ἡγού-

1 σοὶ Hertlein suggests, σὲ MSS.

2 Papadopoulos 3* in Rheinisches Museum 42. 1887 ; not in
Hertlein.

3 χὴν παροινίαν-- Νέρων is quoted by Suidas, Musonius ; he
omits εἴ γε--τύραννον. Hertlein, who gives this extract as
frag. 3, follows Suidas.

4 ἡμᾶς MS., ὑμᾶς Maas, see Introduction under Theodorus.

5 Asmus suggests Ἑλλησπόντου, but this is too violent a
change.

36

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

folly of the Galilaeans.! But in your case, I not
only remit your exile, but also, since I am mindful
of our old acquaintance and intercourse, I invite you
to come tome. You will use a public conveyance 3
as far as my headquarters, and one extra horse.

16
To the High-priest Theodorus ?

Wuen I received your letter I was delighted, of
course. How could I feel otherwise on learning
᾿ that my comrade and dearest friend is safe? And
when I had removed the fastening from it and
perused it many times, I cannot convey to you in
words my feelings and state of mind. I was filled
with serenity and felicity and welcomed the letter
as though I beheld in it an image, so to speak, of
your noble disposition. To try to answer it point
by point would take too long and perhaps I could
not avoid excessive garrulity ; but at any rate I shall
not hesitate to say what it was that I especially
approved. In the first place, the fact that the
insolent behaviour to you of the Governor of Greece,
if indeed a man of that sort can be called a Governor
and not a tyrant, did not provoke your resentment,

1 Julian always scoffed at the disputes of the Arians with
the various other sects of the Church.

2 2,6. he was given the privilege of using δὴ official
carriage, provided by the state. .

8 For the question of the authenticity of this letter see
Introduction, on Theodorus.

6 MS. οὕτω βαθέως, Weil οὕτω σταθερῶς, Hercher, Hertlein
οὔτοι βαρέως, Papadopoulos οὔπω βαρέως.

37

862 Jan.
(or end
of 361)
From
Con-
stanti-
nople.

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

\ y , \ A
μενος τούτων εἰς σὲ γεγονέναι. TO γε μὴν TH
πόλει βοηθεῖν ἐκείνῃ βούλεσθαι καὶ προθυμεῖσθαι,

ἈΝ, 3 i Ν ὃ id 2 1 5
περὶ ἣν ἐποιήσω τὰς διατριβάς, ἐναργές 1 ἐστι
φιλοσόφου γνώμης 2 τεκμήριον' ὥστε μοι δοκεῖ

TO μὲν πρότερον Σωκράτει προσήκειν, TO δεύτερον
’ > Lae 3 a \ \ Μ᾿ Ὁ
δέ, οἶμαι, Μουσωνίῳ" ἐκεῖνος μὲν γὰρ ἔφη, ὅτι

x. ͵ a / a

μὴ θεμιτὸν ἄνδρα σπουδαῖον πρός του τῶν
na ς

χειρόνων καὶ φαύλων βλαβῆναι, ὁ δὲ ἐπεμέλετο

Γυάρων 8 ἡνίκα ὁ φεύγειν αὐτὸν ἐπέταττε Νέρων.

la Ν an an n A 3 ,
ταῦτα ἐγὼ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς τῆς σῆς ἐπαινέσας, τὸ

3 ε ,
τρίτον οὐκ οἶδα ὅντινα τρόπον ἀποδέξομαι"
γράφεις yap κελεύων σημαίνειν ὅ TL ἄν μοι παρὰ
/ ΄, ἀπ ὰ id , aie ae ae: ΤΩΝ ,
μέλος πράττειν αὐτὸς ἢ λέγειν δοκῇς" ἐγὼ δέ,
ὅτι μὲν πλέον ἐμαυτῷ νῦν ἢ σοὶ τῶν τοιούτων
aA ς 7 / \ 5)
δεῖν ὑπολαμβάνω παραινέσεων, πολλὰ ἔχων

a οὶ a \ 5

εἰπεῖν, ἐς αὖθις ἀναβαλοῦμαι. TO μὲν οὖν αἴτημα
τυχὸν οὐδὲ σοὶ προσήκει; περίεστι γάρ σοι
καὶ σχολή, καὶ φύσεως ἔχεις εὖ, καὶ φιλοσοφίας
LES Ta ” ” a , ,ὔ δὲ ῳ
ἐρᾶς, εἰπερ τις ἄλλος τῶν πώποτε. τρία OE ἅμα
la) A \ »

ταῦτα ξυνελθόντα ἤρκεσεν ἀποφῆναι τὸν ᾿Αμφί-
ονα τῆς παλαιᾶς μουσικῆς εὑρετήν, χρόνος,

1 ἐναργὲς is omitted by Suidas in his quotation of the
passage.

2 ψυχῆς Suidas.

3 βαρῶν Suidas, quoting from a faulty MS.

4 ἡνίκα Suidas ; MS. ὁπηνίκα, not Julianic.

5 περίεστι:--δεόμενοι quoted from a more complete text by

Suidas, Amphion; given by Hertlein as frag. 1; τὸ μὲν---
προσήκει omitted by Papadopoulos Y.

338

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

because you considered that none of these things
had to do with you. Then again, that you are
willing and eager to aid that city! in which you
had spent your time is a clear proof of the philo-
sophic mind; so that in my opinion the former
course is worthy of Socrates, the latter, I should say,
of Musonius. For Socrates declared? that heaven
would not permit a righteous man to be harmed by
anyone inferior to him and worthless, while Musonius
concerned himself with the welfare of Gyara 8 when
Nero decreed his exile. These two points in your
letter I approve, but I am at a loss how to take the
third. For you write to urge me to warn you when-
ever I think that you yourself do or say anything
out of tune. For my part I could give you many
proofs that I believe myself to be more in need than
you are of such advice at the present time, but I will
put that off till later. However the request is
perhaps not even suitable for you to make; for
you have abundant leisure, excellent natural gifts,
and you love philosophy as much as any man who
ever lived. And these three things combined
sufficed to make Amphion known as the inventor
of ancient music, namely, leisure, divine inspiration

1 We cannot identify this city. Theodorus may have
improved its water supply, which would give point to the
allusion to Musonius at Gyara below.

2 Plato, Apology 30D, Julian, Oration 2. 698.

3 The Emperors banished offenders to this barren island,
one of the Cyclades. For the discovery of water there by
Musonius see Philostratus, Life of Apollonius 7. 16. The
Nero of Philostratus is an imaginary dialogue with Musonius
at Corinth, where he is supposed to have been set by Nero to
dig the Corinthian canal ; Julian praises Musonius in Vol. 2,
Lo Thenvristius 265c, Ὁ.

39

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

a A 1 / 9 ¢ bt 4 ἠδὲ 8 \ e
θεοῦ πνεῦμα, ἔρως TE? ὑμνωδίας: οὐδὲ yap ἡ
la) la) i
TOV ὀργάνων ἔνδεια πρὸς ταῦτα πέφυκεν ἀντι-
, 3 LS Ν a € OL Ἃ ς A
τάττεσθαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ταῦτα ῥᾳδίως ἂν ὁ τῶν
lal if is / Ἃ \ 3 \
τριῶν τούτων μέτοχος ἐξεύροι. ἢ γὰρ οὐχὶ
a an / > \
τοῦτον αὐτὸν ἀκοῇ παραδεδέγμεθα οὐ Tas
’ A an Ν,
ἁρμονίας μόνον, αὐτὴν δὲ ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς ἐξευρεῖν τὴν
/ 7 /
λύραν, εἴτε δαιμονιωτέρᾳ χρησάμενον ἐπινοίᾳ,
/ , Ζ / b) /
εἴτε τινὶ θεία δόσει διά τινα συμμαχίαν ἀμήχανον;
Cn a € an n \ “4
καὶ τῶν παλαιῶν οἱ πλεῖστοι τοῖς τρισὶ τούτοις
/ A
ἐοίκασι μάλιστα προσσχόντες οὔτι πλαστῶς
lal » Ν 5 , \ 9
φιλοσοφῆσαι, οὐδενὸς ἄλλου δεόμενοι. χρὴ οὖν
/ lal A
σε παρίστασθαι καὶ διὰ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν τὰ
\ A i) 9
πρακτέα καὶ τὰ μὴ παραινεῖν ἡμῖν προθύμως
n \ R
ὁρῶμεν yap Kal τῶν στρατευομένων οὐ τοὺς
εἰρηνεύοντας συμμαχίας δεομένους, τοὺς πονου-
tA a a A
μένους δέ, οἶμαι, τῷ πολέμῳ, Kal τῶν κυβερνητῶν
οὐχ οἱ μὴ πλέοντες τοὺς πλέοντας παρακαλοῦσιν,
\ \ 7
οἱ ναυτιλλόμενοι δὲ τοὺς σχολὴν ἄγοντας. οὕτως
ἐξ ἀρχῆς δίκαιον ἐφάνη τοὺς σχολὴν ἄγοντας
τοῖς ἐπὶ τῶν ἔργων ἀμύνειν καὶ παρεστάναι καὶ
τὸ πρακτέον ὑφηγεῖσθαι, ἐπειδάν, οἶμαι, τὰ αὐτὰ.
lal 7 , 7
πρεσβεύωσι. ταῦτα διανοούμενόν σε προσήκει
a “ an “ /
τοῦθ᾽ ὅπερ ἀξιοῖς παρ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰς σὲ γίνεσθαι,
an \ 7 7, \ , Ὁ... Ν
δρᾶν, καὶ εἴ σοι φίλον, ταυτὶ ξυνθώμεθα, ἵν᾽ ἐγὼ
, \ a lal
μέν, ὅ TL ἄν μοι φαίνηται περὶ τῶν σῶν ἁπάντων,

1 θεοῦ πνεῦμα Suidas, Hertlein; πνεῦμα θεῶν MSS. The
former is more Julianic.

* re Suidas omits. After ὑμνωδίας Suidas gives eight verses
not found in the MSS.

3 οὐδὲ---δεόμενοι Suidas quotes; omitted by Papadopoulos
MSS. 4 ἡμῖν Buecheler adds.

40

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

and a love of minstrelsy.t_ For not even the lack of
instruments avails to offset these gifts, but one who
had these three for his portion could easily invent
instruments also. Indeed, have we not received the
tradition by hearsay that this very Amphion invented
not only harmonies, but besides these the lyre itself,
by employing either an almost godlike intelligence
or some gift? of the gods in a sort of extraordinary
co-operation with them? And most of the great
ones of old seem to have attained to genuine philo-
sophy ὃ by setting their hearts on these three things
above all, and not to have needed anything else.
-Therefore it is you who ought to stand by me and
in your letters show your willingness to advise me
what I ought to do and what not. For we observe
in the case of soldiers that it is not those of them
who are at peace who need allies, but, I should say,
those who are hard pressed in war, and in the case
of pilots those who are not at sea do not call to their
aid those who are at sea, but those who are navigating
call on those who are at leisure. Thus it has from
the very first seemed right that men who are at
leisure should help and stand by those who are
occupied with tasks, and should suggest the right
course of action, that is whenever they represent
the same interests. It is well, then, that you should
bear this in mind and act towards me as you think I
should act towards you, and, if you like, let us make

1 Possibly an echo of the lost play of Euripides, Amphion

JSrag. 192 Nauck; cf. Philostratus, Life of Apollonius 7. 34,
for a similar passage.

2 Apollo son of Zeus is said to have given the lyre to
Amphion.

3 An echo of Plato, Sophist 216c and Laws 6420; cf. Julian,
Vol. 1, Oration 2. 828, 92,

41

420

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πρὸς σὲ σημαίνω, σὺ δὲ αὖθις πρὸς ἐμέ περὶ τῶν
ἐμῶν λόγων καὶ πράξεων᾽ ταύτης γάρ, οἶμαι, τῆς
ἀμοιβῆς οὐδὲν ἃἂ ἂν ἡμῖν γένοιτο κάλλιον. ἐρρωμένον
σε ἡ θεία πρόνοια διαφυλάξαι πολλοῖς χρόνοις
ἀδελφὲ ποθεινότατε. ἴδοιμί σε διὰ ταχέων, ὡς

εὔχομαι.

17

Ζήνωνι.3

Πολλὰ μὲν καὶ adra σοι μαρτυρεῖ καὶ τῆς
ἰατρικῆς τέχνης εἰς τὰ πρῶτα ἀνήκειν, καὶ ἤθους
καὶ ἐπιεικείας καὶ βίου σωφροσύνης συμφώνως
πρὸς τὴν τέχνην ἔχειν, νῦν δὲ προσῆλθε τὸ
κεφάλαιον. τῆς μαρτυρίας" τὴν τῶν ᾿Αλεξανδρέων
πόλιν ἀπὼν ἐπιστρέφεις εἰς σεαυτόν' τοσοῦτον
αὐτῇ κέντρον ὥσπερ μέλιττα ἐγκαταλέλοιπας.3
εἰκότως" καλῶς γὰρ εἰρῆσθαι καὶ ‘Ounpw δοκεῖ τὸ

Εἷς ἰητρὸς ἀνὴρ πολλῶν ἀντάξιος ἄλλων.

σὺ δὲ οὐκ ἰατρὸς ἁπλῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ διδάσκαλος
τοῖς βουλομένοις τῆς τέχνης, ὥστε σχεδὸν ὃ πρὸς
τοὺς πολλούς εἰσιν οἱ ἰατροί, τοῦτο ἐκείνοις σύ.
λύει δέ σοι τὴν φυγὴν καὶ ἡ πρόφασις αὐτή, καὶ
μάλα λαμπρῶς. εἰ γὰρ διὰ ]εώργιον μετέστης

1 Weil; MS. ἐμμένω.
2 Hertlein 45 ; ἀρχιητρῶ is added to the title in x.
8 Wyttenbach, καταλέλοιπας MSS. Hertlein.

1 Zeno had been exiled by George, the Arian bishop of
Alexandria, in 360. He was a friend and correspondent of

42

‘TO ZENO

this compact, that I am to point out to you what are
my views concerning all your affairs, and you in
return are to do the same for me concerning my
sayings and doings. Nothing, in my opinion, could
be more valuable for us than this reciprocity. May
divine Providence keep you in good health for long
to come, my well-beloved brother! May I see you
soon, as I pray to do!

17
To Zeno!

Tuer: is indeed abundant evidence of other kinds
that you have attained to the first rank in the art of
medicine and that your morals, uprightness and tem-
perate life are in harmony with your professional skill,
But now has been added the crowning evidence.
Though absent, you are winning to your cause the
whole city of Alexandria. So keen a sting, like a
bee’s, have you left in her.2 This is natural ; for I
think that Homer was right when he said “One
physician is worth many other men.” 2 And you are
not simply a physician, but also a teacher of that art
for those who desire to learn, so that I might almost
say that what physicians are as compared with the
mass of men, you are, compared with other physicians.
This is the reason for putting an end to your exile,
and with very great distinction for yourself. For if
it was owing to George that you were removed

Libanius. George had been murdered by the mob on
December 24th, 361.

2 For this echo of Eupolis, a sophistic commonplace, cf.
Vol. 1. Oration 1. 33a.-

8 Iliad 11. 514; in our texts the line begins ἰητρὸς yap.

43

362
early
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

450

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

a /
τῆς ᾿Αλεξανδρείας, οὐ δικαίως μετέστης, καὶ
3 7 /

δικαιότατα av ὀπίσω κατέλθοις. κάτιθι τοίνυν
ἐπίτιμος καὶ τὸ πρότερον ἔχων ἀξίωμα, καὶ
ἡμῖν κοινὴ Tap ἀμφοτέροις χάρις ἀποκείσθω,
3 nr \ i Am \ \ >’ n \
Αλεξανδρεῦσι μὲν Ζήνωνα, σοὶ δὲ ἀποδοῦσα τὴν
᾿Αλεξάνδρειαν.

[81

1.4 « τοῦθ᾽ ὅπερ ὑπάρχει τοῖς ξύλοις, οὐκ ἄξιόν
ἐστι νέμειν ἀνθρώποις; ὑποκείσθω γὰρ ἄνθρωπον
ἱερωσύνης ἀντειλῆφθαι τυχὸν οὐκ ἄξιον" οὐ “χρὴ
φείδεσθαι μέχρι τοσούτου, μέχρις ἂν ἐπιγνόντ ες
ὡς πονηρός ἐστι καὶ τῆς λειτουργίας αὐτὸν
εἴρξαντες τὸ προπετῶς ἴσως προστεθὲν ὄνομα
τοῦ ἱερέως ὑπεύθυνον ἀποδείξωμεν. ὕβρει καὶ
κολάσει καὶ ζημίᾳ; ταῦτα εἰ μὲν ἀγνοεῖς, οὐδὲ
τῶν ἄλλων ἔοικας εἰδέναι τι τῶν μετρίων. ἐπεὶ
σοὶ ποῦ μέτεστιν ἐμπειρίας ὅλως τῶν δικαίων,
ὃς οὐκ οἶσθα τί μὲν ἱερεύς, τί δὲ ἰδιώτης ; ποῦ δέ
σοι μέτεστι σωφροσύνης, ὅσπερ" ἠκίσω τοῦτον,
ᾧ καὶ θώκων ἐχρῆν ἐξανίστασθαι; ὃ αἴσχιστον ὃ

1 Hertlein 62. The title is lost.

2 ὅσπερ for εἴπερ Reiske, Hertlein.

3% αἴσχιστον Hertlein suggests; MSS., Hertlein τὸ
αἰσχρόν. ᾽

1 Julian writes as supreme pontiff, to whom ἃ high-priest,
perhaps Theodorus, had appealed for protection for a priest
who had been assaulted. There is no evidence that this
priest was the Pegasius of Letter 19, as Asmus thinks.

2 The first part of the letter with the title is lost.

44

TO AN OFFICIAL

from Alexandria, you were removed unjustly, and
it would be most just that you should return from
exile. Do you, therefore, return in all honour, and
in possession of your former dignity. And let the
favour that I bestow be credited to me by both
parties in common, since it restores Zeno to the
Alexandrians and Alexandria to you.

18
To an Official 1

. -% is it not right to pay to human beings
this respect that we feel for things made of wood ?8
For let us suppose that a man who has obtained the
office of priest is perhaps unworthy of it. Ought
we not to show forbearance until we have actually
decided that he is wicked, and only then by ex-
cluding him from his official functions show that it
was the overhasty bestowal of the title of “ priest”’
that was subject to punishment by obloquy and
chastisement and a fine? If you do not know this
you are not likely to have any proper sense at all of
what is fitting. What experience can you have of
the rights of men in general if you do not know the
difference between a priest and a layman? And
what sort of self-control can you have when you
maltreated one at whose approach you ought to
have risen from your seat? For this is the most

3 7.¢e. images of the gods. In Vol. 2, Fragment of a Letter
2974, Julian says that we must respect priests no less than
the stones of which altars are made. There are several close
resemblances between these two pastoral letters. Reiske
translated ξύλοις *‘ trees,” 0. 6. we allow them time to recover
before cutting them down.

45

45]

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

, , 7 Ν \
ἁπάντων καί σοι μάλιστα μήτε πρὸς θεοὺς
7 a \ aA
μήτε πρὸς ἀνθρώπους ἔχον καλῶς. οἱ μὲν τῶν
a) , » δε 4 \ /
Γαλιλαίων ἴσως ἐπίσκοποι καὶ πρεσβύτεροι
Che , \ > \ ὃ goog | Aig pe ey:
συγκαθίζουσί σοι, καὶ εἰ μὴ δημοσίᾳ du ἐμε,
/ ees la Ὑ A δὴ Ν \ / ς
λάθρᾳ καὶ ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ" διὰ σὲ δὲ τέτυπται ὁ
ς ΄, > \ A > , EN 7, ς Seu ee
ἱερεύς: ov yap av ἦλθεν ἐπὶ ταύτην ὁ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν
» \ Ἂν, / \ , }] 3 3 /
ἀρχιερεὺς μὰ Δία τὴν δέησιν. adr ἐπειδή σοι
a 7 \ 3ς 7] A aA 3
πέφηνε μυθώδη τὰ Tap .Ομήρῳ, τῶν τοῦ Διδυμαίου
/ A “4
δεσπότου χρησμῶν ἐπάκουσον, εἴ σοι φανείη
\ y / a NC
πάλαι μὲν ἔργῳ νουθετήσας καλῶς TOS” EAANVas,
\ A ra
ὕστερον δὲ τοὺς οὐ  σωφρονοῦντας διδάσκων τοῖς
4
λογοις"

¢/ 9 3 A 3 ha ἕ
Οσσοι ἐς ἀρητῆρας ἀτασθαλίῃσι νόοιο
᾿Αθανάτων ῥέζουσ᾽ ἀποφώλια, καὶ γεράεσσιν
᾿Αντία βουλεύουσιν ἀδεισιθέοισι λογισμοῖς,
3 ,

Οὐκέθ᾽ ὅλην βιότοιο διεκπερόωσιν ἀταρπόν,
Ὅ79) / 9 7, a

σσοι TEP μακάρεσσιν ἐλωβήσαντο θεοῖσιν
Ὃν κεῖνοι θεόσεπτον ἕλον θεραπηίδα τιμήν.

7)

e δ. ων \ > \ / 2O\ \ ιν ’
ὁ μὲν οὖν θεὸς οὐ τοὺς τύπτοντας οὐδὲ τοὺς ὑβρίζ-
οντας, ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἀποστεροῦντας τῶν τιμῶν εἶναι
LS OATS Mn ates: δ᾽ δὲ , ἘΠ Ἂ
φησί θεοῖς ἐχθρούς" ὁ δὲ τυπτήσας ἱερόσυλος ἂν
Ν
εἴη. ἐγὼ τοίνυν, ἐπειδήπερ εἰμὶ κατὰ μὲν τὰ πάτρια
μέγας ἀρχιερεύς, ἔλαχον δὲ νῦν καὶ τοῦ Διδυμαίου
7 a μ᾿
προφητεύειν, ἀπαγορεύω TOL τρεῖς περιόδους σε-
1 δημοσίᾳ Cobet, δημοσίως Hertlein, MSS.

2 ov Cobet adds.
3 For the lacuna after εἶναι Spanheim suggests φησί.

46

TO AN OFFICIAL

disgraceful thing of all, and for it in the eyes of
gods and men alike you are peculiarly to blame.
Perhaps the bishops and elders of the Galilaeans sit
with you, though not in public because of me, yet
secretly and in the house; and the priest has actually
been beaten by your order, for otherwise your high-
priest would not, by Zeus, have come to make this
appeal, But since what happened in Homer +! seems
to you merely mythical, listen to the oracular words
of the Lord of Didymus,? that you may see clearly
that, even as in bygone days he nobly exhorted the
Hellenes in very deed, so too in later times he
admonished the intemperate in these words : ‘* Who-
soever with reckless mind works wickedness against
the priests of the deathless gods and plots against
their honours with plans that fear not the gods,
never shall he travel life’s path to the end, seeing
that he has sinned against the blessed gods whose
honour and holy service those priests have in charge.”
Thus, then, the god declares that those who even
deprive priests of their honours are detested by the
gods, not to mention those who beat and _ insult
them! But a man who strikes a priest has com-
mitted sacrilege. Wherefore, since by the laws of
our fathers I am supreme pontiff, and moreover have
but now received the function of prophecy from the
god of Didymus,? I forbid you for three revolutions

1 Probably Julian refers to the wrong done to the priest
Chryses which was avenged by Apollo in Jiiad 1.

2 Apollo. For this oracle cf. Vol. 2, Fragment of a Letter
297cp, where it is also quoted.

3 The oracle of the Didymaean Apollo was at Didyma,
Miletus, where an inscription on a column in honour of
Julian has been discovered; cf. Bulletin de correspondance
hellénique, 1877.

47

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

λήνης μὴ τοι τῶν εἰς ἱερέα μηδὲν ἐνοχλεῖν" εἰ δὲ
ἐν τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ φανείης ἄξιος, ἐπιστείλαντός
μοι. τοῦ τῆς πόλεως ἀρχιερέως, εἰ παραδεκτὸς
εἴης ἡμῖν, ἐσαῦθις μετὰ τῶν θεῶν βουλεύσομαι.
ταύτην eyo σοι τῆς προπετείας ἐπιτίθημι ζημίαν.
τὰς δὲ ἐκ τῶν θεῶν ἀρὰς πάλαι μὲν εἰώθεσαν οἱ
παλαιοὶ λέγειν καὶ γράφειν, οὐ μὴν ἔμοιγε φαί-
νεται καλῶς ἔχειν" οὐδαμοῦ “γὰρ αὐτοὶ πεποιηκότες
οἱ θεοὶ φαίνονται. καὶ ἄλλως εὐχῶν εἶναι δεῖ
διακόνους ἡμᾶς. ὅθεν οἶμαι καὶ συνεύχομαί σοι
πολλὰ λιπαρήσαντι τοὺς θεοὺς ἀδείας τυχεῖν ὧν
ἐπλημμέλησας.

τι

[Πηγάσιον ἡ ἡμεῖς οὔποτ᾽ ἂν προσήκαμεν ῥᾳδίως,
εἰ μὴ σαφώς ἐπεπείσμεθα, ὅτι καὶ πρότερον εἶναι
δοκῶν τῶν Γαλιλαίων ἐπίσκοπος ἠπίστατο σέ-

n \
βεσθαι καὶ τιμᾶν τοὺς θεούς. οὐκ ἀκοὴν ἐγώ σοι

n ’ / a \ ” Ν
ταῦτα ἀπαγγέλλω τῶν πρὸς ἔχθραν καὶ φιλίαν

ξ΄ >) iP 5 “ἃ Na \ » 7.
λέγειν εἰωθότων, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἐμοὶ πάνυ διετεθρύλητο

\ a na \ \ \
τὰ τοιαῦτα περὶ αὐτοῦ, καὶ ναὶ μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς
ὠμὴν οὕτω χρῆναι μισεῖν αὐτὸν ὡς οὐδένα τῶν
πονηροτάτων. ἐπεὶ δὲ κληθεὶς εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον

1 Hertlein 78; first published from Harletanus 5610 by
Henning in Hermes, 1875. The title is lost.

1 We do not know the name of this city and cannot identify
the official who is in disgrace.

48

TO A PRIEST

of the moon to meddle in anything that concerns a
priest. But if during this period you appear to be
worthy, and the high-priest of the city? so writes to
me, I will thereupon take counsel with the gods
whether you may be received by us once more.
This is the penalty that I award for your rash con-
duct. As for curses from the gods, men of old in
days of old used to utter them and write them, but
I do not think that this was well done; for there
is no evidence at all that the gods themselves devised
those curses. And besides, we ought to be the
ministers of prayers, not curses. Therefore I believe
and join my prayers to yours that after earnest
supplication to the gods you may obtain pardon for
your errors.

19
To a Priest 2

I snoutp never have favoured Pegasius unhesi-
tatingly if I had not had clear proofs that even in
former days, when he had the title of Bishop of the
Galilaeans, he was wise enough to revere and honour
the gods. This I do not report to you on hearsay
from men whose words are always adapted to their
personal dislikes and friendships, for much current
gossip of this sort about him has reached me, and
the gods know that I once thought I ought to detest
him above all other depraved persons. But when I

2 Asmus is positive that this is the high-priest Theodorus,
but there is no evidence for this. He dates the letter from
Constantinople early in 362. Pegasius is otherwise unknown.

Ὁ ὦ, ὁ. Christians, whom Julian often calls πονηροί, ‘de-
praved,”’

49
VOL. III. E

802 or
early
in 303

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὑπὸ τοῦ μακαρίτου Κωνσταντίου ταύτην ἐπο-
ρευόμην τὴν ὁδόν, ἀπὸ τῆς Τρῳάδος ὄρθρου βαθέος
διαναστὰς ἦλθον εἰς τὸ Ἴλιον περὶ πλήθουσαν
ἀγοράν. ὁ δὲ ὑπήντησέ μοι Kal βουλομένῳ τὴν
πόλιν ἱστορεῖν---ἣν γάρ μοι τοῦτο πρόσχημα τοῦ
φοιτᾶν εἰς τὰ ἱερά---περιηγητής τε ἐγένετο καὶ
ἐξενάγησέ με πανταχοῦ. ἄκουε τοίνυν ἔργα καὶ
λόγους, ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἂν τις εἰκάσειεν οὐκ ἀγνώμονα TA
πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς αὐτόν.

“Hp@ov ἐστιν “Extopos, ὅπου χαλκοῦς ἕστηκεν
ἀνδριὰς ἐν ναΐσκῳ βραχεῖ. τούτῳ τὸν μέγαν
ἀντέστησαν ᾿Αχιλλέα κατὰ τὸ ὕπαιθρον. εἰ τὸν
τόπον ἐθεάσω, γνωρίζεις δήπουθεν ὃ λέγω. τὴν
μὲν οὖν ἱστορίαν, δι’ ἣν ὁ μέγας ᾿Αχιλλεὺς ἀντι-
τεταγμένος αὐτῷ πᾶν τὸ ὕπαιθρον κατείληφεν,
ἔξεστί σοι τῶν περιηγητῶν ἀκούειν. ἐγὼ δὲ
καταλαβὼν ἐμπύρους ἔτι, μικροῦ δέω φάναι
λαμπροὺς ἔτι τοὺς βωμοὺς καὶ λιπαρῶς ἀληλιμ-
μένην τὴν τοῦ “Ἑκτορος εἰκόνα, πρὸς Ἰ]Πηγάσιον
ἀπιδὼν “Τί ταῦτα"; εἶπον, ““᾿Ιλιεῖς θύουσιν";
ἀποπειρώμενος ἠρέμα, πῶς ἔχει γνώμης: ὁ δὲ
“Kal τί τοῦτο ἄτοπον, ἄνδρα ἀγαθὸν ἑαυτῶν
πολίτην, ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς, ἔφη, “τοὺς μάρτυρας, εἰ
θεραπεύουσιν᾽᾽; ἡ μὲν οὖν εἰκὼν οὐχ ὑγιής" ἡ δὲ
προαίρεσις ἐν ἐκείνοις ἐξεταζομένη τοῖς καιροῖς
ἀστεία. τί δὴ τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο; “Βαδίσωμεν,"
ἔφην, “ἐπὶ τὸ τῆς ᾿Ιλιάδος ᾿Αθηνᾶς τέμενος."

1 μοι Hertlein would add.

5°

ΤΟ Α PRIEST

was summoned 1 to his headquarters by Constantius
of blessed memory I was travelling by this route,
and after rising at early dawn I came from Troas
to [lios about the middle of the morning. Pegasius
came to meet me, as I wished to explore the city,—
this was my excuse for visiting the temples,—and
he was my guide and showed me all the sights. So
now let me tell you what he did and said, and from
it one may guess that he was not lacking in right
sentiments towards the gods.

Hector has a hero’s shrine there and his bronze
statue stands in a tiny little temple. Opposite this
they have set up a figure of the great Achilles in the
unroofed court. If you have seen the spot you will
certainly recognise my description of it. You can
learn from the guides the story that accounts for the
fact that great Achilles was set up opposite to him
and takes up the whole of the unroofed court. Now I
found that the altars were still alight, 1 might almost
say still blazing, and that the statue of Hector had
been anointed till it shone. So I looked at Pegasius
and said: “ What does this mean? Do the people
of Ilios offer sacrifices?’’ This was to test him
cautiously to find out his own views. He replied:
“15 it not natural that they should worship a brave
man who was their own citizen, just as we worship
the martyrs?” Now the analogy was far from
sound; but his point of view and intentions were
those of a man of culture, if you consider the times
in which we then lived. Observe what followed.
“Let us go,” said he, “to the shrine of Athene of

1 In the winter of 354, when he was on his way from
Nicomedia to the court at Milan, after the death of Gallus ;
first he came to Alexandria Troas, and then to New Liios.

51

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

e \ Ν / Ne 9 7, ’ \ > vf.
ὁ δὲ Kal μάλα προθύμως ἀπήγαγέ με καὶ ἀνέῳξε
TOV νεών, Kal ὥσπερ μαρτυρόμενος ἐπέδειξέ μοι
la a A ͵
πάντα ἀκριβῶς σῶα τὰ ἀγάλματα, καὶ ἔπραξεν
a an /
οὐδὲν ὧν εἰώθασιν οἱ δυσσεβεῖς ἐκεῖνοι πράττειν,
a a a \ e /
ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου τοῦ δυσσεβοῦς TO ὑπόμνημα
a / 4 2 lal
σκιωγραφοῦντες, οὐδὲ ἐσύριττεν, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνοι,
Ν ᾽
αὐτὸς καθ᾽ ἑαυτόν: ἡ γὰρ ἄκρα θεολογία παρ
a A rg οἷ \
αὐτοῖς ἐστι δύο ταῦτα, συρίττειν TE πρὸς TOUS
/ A ἴω , μὲ
δαίμονας καὶ σκιωγραφεῖν ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου τὸν
σταυρόν.
is A A Is
Avo ταῦτα ἐπηγγειλάμην εἰπεῖν σοι" τρίτον
\ x ἴω 3 an nn
δὲ ἐλθὸν ἐπὶ νοῦν οὐκ οἶμαι χρῆναι σιωπᾶν.
5 ΄ , \ \ A ,ὔ € ed ,
ἠκολούθησέ μοι καὶ πρὸς τὸ ᾿Αχίλλειον ὁ αὐτός,
Noe / \ 7 na 3 / x \
καὶ ἀπέδειξε τὸν τάφον σῶον" ἐπεπύσμην δὲ Kal
an e 5 3 n 7 φ \ Ν /
τοῦτον ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διεσκάφθαι. ὁ δὲ καὶ para
/ a / an Φ ’ /
σεβόμενος αὐτῷ προσήει. ταῦτα εἶδον αὐτος.
n a lal \
ἀκήκοα δὲ παρὰ τῶν νῦν ἐχθρῶς ἐχόντων πρὸς
> / e/- , /
αὐτόν, OTL Kal προσεύχοιτο λάθρᾳ Kal προσκυνοίη
\ ¢/ 3 3 XA > ha Le: 4
τὸν Ἥλιον. apa οὐκ ἂν ἐδέξω με καὶ ἰδιώτην
ἴω a f
μαρτυροῦντα; τῆς περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς διαθέσεως
4 3 5
ἑκάστου τίνες av εἶεν ἀξιοπιστότεροι μάρτυρες
A a A . an 3 e 4 /
αὐτῶν τῶν θεῶν; ἡμεῖς ἂν ἱερέα Ἰ]ηγάσιον
a - \
ἐποιοῦμεν, EL συνεγνώκειμεν αὐτῷ τι περὶ TOUS
\ , }] / an /
θεοὺς duvaceBés; εἰ δὲ ἐν ἐκείνοις τοῖς χρόνοις
, 24 / e lal
εἴτε δυναστείας ὀρεγόμενος, εἴθ᾽, ὅπερ πρὸς ἡμᾶς
Ε ᾽ὔ δ \ lal an A A \ “
ἔφη πολλάκις, ὑπὲρ τοῦ σῶσαι τῶν θεῶν τὰ ἕδη
N / a / /
τὰ ῥάκια ταῦτα TeplauTécyeTo! Kal τὴν ἀσέβειαν

1 περιημπίσχετο ἢ Hertlein.

52

TO A PRIEST

Ilios.”’ Thereupon with the greatest eagerness he
led me there and opened the temple, and as though
he were producing evidence he showed me all the
statues in perfect preservation, nor did he behave
at all as those impious men do usually, I mean when
they make the sign on their impious foreheads, nor
did he hiss+ to himself as they do. For these two
things are the quintessence of their theology, to hiss
at demons and make the sign of the cross on their
foreheads.

These are the two things that I promised to tell
you. But a third occurs to me which I think I
must not fail to mention. This same Pegasius went
with me to the temple of Achilles as well and
showed me the tomb in good repair; yet I had been
informed that this also had been pulled to pieces
by him. But he approached it with great reverence ;
I saw this with my own eyes. And I have heard
from those who are now his enemies that he also
used to offer prayers to Helios and worship him
in secret. Would you not have accepted me as
a witness even if I had been merely a private
citizen? Of each man’s attitude towards the gods
who could be more trustworthy witnesses than the
gods themselves? Should I have appointed Pegasius
a priest if I had any evidence of impiety towards
the gods on his part? And if in those past days,
whether because he was ambitious for power, or, as
he has often asserted to me, he clad himself in those
rags in order to save the temples of the gods, and
only pretended to be irreligious so far as the name

1 Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie, pp. 40, 221, discusses the
practice in magic, and especially in the ritual of Mithras,
of hissing and whistling.

53

452

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μέχρις ὀνόματος ὑπεκρίνατο' πέφηνε γὰρ οὐδὲν

οὐδαμοῦ τῶν ἱερῶν ἠδικηκὼς ΧΙ ὀλίγων παντά-

πασι λίθων ἐκ καλύμματος, ἵνα αὐτῷ σώξειν
ἐξῇ τὰ λοιπά: τοῦτο ἐν λόγῳ ποιούμεθα καὶ
οὐκ αἰσχυνόμεθα ταῦτα περὶ αὐτὸν πράττοντες
ὅσαπερ ᾿Αφόβιος ἐποίει καὶ οἱ Γαλιλαῖοι πάντες
προσεύχονται πάσχοντα ἰδεῖν αὐτόν ; εἴ τί μοι
προσέχεις, οὐ τοῦτον μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους, οὗ μετατέθεινται, τιμήσεις, ἵν οἱ μὲν
ῥᾷον ὑπακούσωσιν ἡμῖν ἐπὶ τὰ καλὰ προ-
καλουμένοις, οἱ δ᾽ ἧττον χαίρωσιν. εἰ δὲ τοὺς
αὐτομάτους ἰόντας ἀπελαύνοιμεν, οὐδεὶς ὑπακού-
σεται ῥᾳδίως παρακαλοῦσιν.

20
3 a
Ἰουλιανὸς Θεοδώρῳ ἀρχιερεῖ."
᾿Εμοὶ πρὸς σὲ πεποίηται παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους
ἰδιαίτερον. ἐπιστολῆς εἶδος, ὅτε σοι καὶ πλέον
μέτεστι τῆς πρὸς ἐμὲ φιλίας ἤπερ οἶμαι τοῖς an-
λοις" ἔστι γὰρ ἡμῖν ὁ κοινὸς καθηγεμὼν οὐ μικρά,
καὶ μέμνησαι δήπου. χρόνος δὲ οὐ βραχὺς ὅτε
διατρίβων ἔτι κατὰ τὴν ἑσπέραν, ἐπειδή σε λίαν
ἀρέσκειν ἐπυθόμην αὐτῷ, φίλον ἐνόμισα" καΐτοι
δοκεῖν 5 ἔχον ἐκεῖνο καλῶς εἴωθεν ἐμοὶ διὰ περιτ-
τὴν εὐλάβειαν τὸ οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε ἤντησ᾽ οὐδὲ ἴδον, καὶ
1 For καταλύματος MSS. Hertlein suggests καλύμματος.
2. Hertlein 63. Before Θεοδώρῳ Hertlein, following Heyler,

brackets Καίσαρ the reading of Vossianus.
3 δοκεῖν so Capps for a lacuna here ; Spanheim συμβαίνειν.

1 See Introduction. Those who date this letter early in
363, following Reiske, regard it as part of the Letter to a
Priest, Vol. 2, written after the burning of the temple of

54

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

of the thing went—indeed it is clear that he never
injured any temple anywhere except for what
amounted to a few stones, and that was as a blind,
that he might be able to save the rest—well then
we are taking this into account and are we not
ashamed to behave to him as Aphobius did, and as
the Galilaeans all pray to see him treated? If you
care at all for my wishes you will honour not him
only but any others who are converted, in order
that they may the more readily heed me when I
summon them to good works, and those others may
have less cause to rejoice. But if we drive away
those who come to us of their own free will, no one
will be ready to heed when we summon.

20
To the High-priest Theodorus?

I HAVE written you a more familiar sort of letter
than to the others, because you, I believe, have
more friendly feelings than others towards me. For
it means much that we had the same guide,” and I
am sure you remember him. A long time ago, when
I was still living in the west,? I learned that he
had the highest regard for you, and for that reason
I counted you my friend, and yet because of their
excessive caution, I have usually thought these
words well said, )

“For I never met or saw him” ;4

Apollo at Daphne in October 362. It seems more likely that
that fragment contains the general instructions for priests
promised by Julian in this letter.

2 Maximus of Ephesus, who had initiated Julian and
perhaps Theodorus also into the Mysteries of Mithras.

3 7.e. in Gaul. 4 Iliad 4. 374; Odyssey 4, 200.

35

453

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

A fal , \ lal ee
καλῶς 1 ἡγεῖσθαι χρὴ φιλίας μὲν γνῶσιν, γνώσεως
\ A > > ® e ” ᾽ σι ἢ)
δὲ πεῖραν. ἀλλ᾽ ἣν τις, ὡς ἔοικεν, οὐκ ἐλάχιστος
3459 \ , \ an > \ SA / 3 \
Tap ἐμοὶ λόγος Kal τοῦ Αὐτὸς ἔφα. διόπερ ἐγὼ
, a 7 a /
καὶ τότε σε τοῖς γνωρίμοις ὥμην δεῖν ἐγκαταλέγειν,
a aA lal \ 7 i
Kal νῦν ἐπιτρέπω πρᾶγμα ἐμοὶ μὲν φίλον, ἀνθρώ-
a A 7 \
Tow δὲ πᾶσι πανταχοῦ λυσιτελέστατον. σὺ δὲ
>’ A 2 - » 5 if. » \
εἰ καλῶς, ὥσπερ οὗν ἄξιον ἐλπίζειν, αὐτὸ μετα-
χειρίσαιο, ἴσθι πολλὴν μὲν εὐφροσύνην ἐνταῦθα
παρέξων, ἐλπίδα δὲ ἀγαθὴν “μείζονα τὴν εἰς τὸ
μέλλον. οὐ γὰρ δὴ καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν τῶν πεπει-
σμένων τὰς ψυχὰς ἤτοι προαπόλλυσθαι τῶν σω-
μάτων ἢ συναπόλλυσθαι, πειθόμεθα δὲ τῶν μὲν
3 / 3 F, a a \ / ἃ \ \
ἀνθρώπων οὐδενί, τοῖς θεοῖς δὲ μόνον, ous δὴ καὶ
μάλιστα. ταῦτα εἰκὸς εἰδέναι μόνους, εἴ γε χρὴ
καλεῖν εἰκὸς τὸ ἀναγκαῖον' ὡς τοῖς μὲν ἀνθρώποις
ἁρμόζει περὶ τῶν τοιούτων εἰκάζειν, ἐπίστασθαι
δὲ αὐτὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ἀνάγκη.
Τί τοῦτο οὖν ἐστιν ὅ φημί, σοι νῦν ἐπιτρέπειν ; :
ἄρχειν τῶν περὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν ἱ ἱερῶν ἁπάντων αἱρου-
VA
peeve * τοὺς Kae ἑκάστην πόλιν ,ἱερέας καὶ ἀπο-
νέμοντι τὸ πρέπον ἑκάστῳ. πρέπει. δὲ ἐπιείκεια
μὲν πρῶτον ἄρχοντι χρηστότης τε ἐπ᾿ αὐτῇ καὶ
/ ἴω
φιλανθρωπία πρὸς τοὺς ἀξίους αὐτῶν τυγχάνειν.
ὡς ὅστις γε ἀδικεῖ μὲν ἀνθρώπους, ἀνόσιος δ᾽ ἐστὶ
πρὸς θεούς, θρασὺς δὲ πρὸς πάντας, ἢ διδακτέος
μετὰ παρρησίας ἐστὶν ἢ μετ ᾿ἐμβριθείας κολαστέος.
ὅσα μὲν οὖν χρὴ κοινῇ συντάξαι περὶ τῶν ἱερέων 8

1 καὶ καλῶς Capps; ὡς MSS., Hertlein.
°? . . . duuevw Vossianus ; ἐπισκοπουμένῳ Hertlein ; αἱρουμένῳ
Cobet.
3 Hertlein, MSS. ἱερῶν,

56

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

and well said is “ Before we love we must know, and
before we can know we must test by experience.”’
But it seems that after all a certain other saying
has most weight with me, namely, “ The Master has
spoken.” 1 That is why I thought even then that
I ought to count you among my friends, and now I
entrust to you a task that is dear to my heart, while
to all men everywhere it is of the greatest benefit.
And if, as I have the right to expect, you administer
the office well, be assured that you will rejoice me
greatly now and give me still greater good hope for
the future life. For I certainly am not one of those
who believe that the soul perishes before the body
or along with it, nor do I believe any human being
but only the gods; since it is likely that they alone
have the most perfect knowledge of these matters,
if indeed we ought to use the word “likely” of
what is inevitably true; since it is fitting for men
to conjecture about such matters, but the gods must
have complete knowledge.

What then is this office which I say I now entrust
to you? Itis the government of all the temples in
Asia, with power to appoint the priests in every city
and to assign to each what is fitting. Now the
qualities that befit one in this high office are, in the
first place, fairness, and next, goodness and bene- |
volence towards those who deserve to be treated
thus. For any priest who behaves unjustly to his
fellow men and impiously towards the gods, or is
overbearing to all, must either be admonished with
plain speaking or chastised with great severity. As
for the regulations which I must make more com-
plete for the guidance of priests in general, you

+ This Pythagorean phrase is the original of Zpse diavt.
57

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἁπάντων ἐντελέστερον, αὐτίκα μάλα σὺν τοῖς ad-
λοις εἴσει, μικρὰ δὲ τέως ὑποθέσθαι σοι βούλομαι.
δίκαιος δὲ εἶ πείθεσθαί μοι τὰ τοιαῦτα. καὶ γὰρ
οὐδὲ ἀποσχεδιάξω τὰ πολλὰ τῶν τοιούτων, ὡς
ἴσασιν οἱ θεοὶ πάντες, ἀλλά, εἴπερ, τις ἄλλος,
εὐλαβής εἰμι καὶ φεύγω τὴν καινοτομίαν ἐν ἅπασι
μέν, ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν, ἰδίᾳ δὲ ἐν τοῖς πρὸς τοὺς
θεούς, οἰόμενος ,»χρῆναι τοὺς πατρίους ἐξ ἀρχῆς
φυλάττεσθαι νόμους, οὺς ὅτι μὲν ἔδοσαν οἱ θεοί,
φανερόν' οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἧσαν οὕτω καλοὶ παρὰ ἀνθρώ-
πων ἁπλῶς γενόμενοι. συμβὰν δὲ αὐτοὺς ἀμε-
ληθῆναι καὶ διαφθαρῆναι πλούτου καὶ τρυφῆς
ἐπικρατησάντων, οἶμαι δεῖν ὥσπερ ἀφ᾽ ἑστίας ἐπι-
μεληθῆναι τῶν τοιούτων. ὁρῶν οὖν πολλὴν μὲν
ὀλυγωρίαν οὖσαν ἡμῖν πρὸς τοὺς θεούς, ἅπασαν
δὲ εὐλάβειαν τὴν εἰς τοὺς Beton ἀπεληλα-
μένην ὑπὸ τῆς ἀκαθάρτου καὶ χυδαίας 1 τρυφῆς, ἀεὶ
μὲν ὠδυράμην ἐγὼ KAT ἐμαυτὸν τὰ τοιαῦτα, τοὺς
μὲν τῇ ᾿Ιουδαίων 5 εὐσεβείας σχολῇ προσέχοντας
οὕτω διαπύρους, ὡς αἱρεῖσθαι μὲν ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς
θάνατον, ἀνέχεσθαι δὲ πᾶσαν ἔνδειαν καὶ λιμόν,
ὑείων ὅπως μὴ γεύσαιντο μηδὲ πνικτοῦ 5 μηδ᾽ ἄρα
τοῦ ἀποθλιβέντος" ἡμᾶς δὲ οὕτω ῥᾳθύμως τὰ
πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς διακειμένους, ὥστε ἐπιλελῆσθαι
μὲν τῶν πατρίων, ἀγνοεῖν δὲ λοιπόν, εἰ καὶ ἐτάχθη

1 καὶ χυδαίας Hertlein suggests for lacuna ; ταύτης Cobet.
2 τῇ Ιουδαίων Hertlein suggests for lacuna wey . . . wy.
3... τοῦ MS. πνικτοῦ Spanheim.

1 Literally “from the hearth,” 1.6. from their origin, a
proverb. ,

* For Julian’s tolerant attitude to the Jewish religion, cf,
To the Jews, p. 177.

58

TO THE HIGH-PRIEST THEODORUS

as well as the others will soon learn them from
me, but meanwhile I wish to make a few sugges-
tions to you. You have good reason to obey me
in such matters. Indeed in such a case I very
seldom act offhand, as all the gods know, and
no one could be more circumspect; and I avoid
innovations in all things, so to speak, but more
peculiarly in what concerns the gods. For I hold
that we ought to observe the laws that we have
inherited from our forefathers, since it is evident
that the gods gave them to us. For they would not
be as perfect as they are if they had been derived
.from mere men. Now since it has come to pass that
they have been neglected and. corrupted, and wealth
and luxury have become supreme, I think that I
ought to consider them carefully as though from
their cradle. Therefore, when I saw that there is
among us great indifference about the gods and that
all reverence for the heavenly powers has been
driven out by impure and vulgar luxury, I always
secretly lamented this state of things. For I saw
that those whose minds were turned to the doctrines
of the Jewish feligion? are so ardent in their belief
that they would choose to die for it, and to endure
utter want and starvation rather than taste pork or
any animal that has been strangled 35 or had the life
squeezed out of it; whereas we are in such a state
of apathy about religious matters that we have for-
gotten the customs of our forefathers, and therefore
we actually do not know whether any such rule has

3 This is not directly prohibited in the Old Testament, but
cf. Deuteronomy 12. 23, where it is implied; and, for the
New Testament, Acts 15. 29 ‘‘That ye abstain from things
strangled.”

99

454

378

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πώποτέ TL τοιοῦτον. ἀλλ᾽ οὗτοι μὲν ἐν μέρει
θεοσεβεῖς ὄντες, ἐπείπερ θεὸν! τιμῶσι τὸν ὡς"
ἀληθῶς ὄντα δυνατώτατον καὶ ἀγαθώτατον, ὃς
ἐπιτροπεύει τὸν αἰσθητὸν κόσμον, ὃν εὖ οἶδ᾽ ὅτι
καὶ ἡμεῖς ἄλλοις θεραπεύομεν ὀνόμασιν, εἰκότα
μοι δοκοῦσι ποιεῖν, τοὺς vomors > μὴ παραβαίνοντες,
ἐκεῖνο δὲ μόνον. ἁμαρτάνειν, ὅτι μὴ καὶ τοὺς
ἄλλους θεοὺς, ἀρέσκοντες τούτῳ μάλιστα τῷ θεῷ,
θεραπεύουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡμῖν οἴονται τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ἀπο-
κεκληρῶσθαι. μόνοις αὐτούς, ἀλαζονείᾳ βαρβαρικῇ
πρὸς ταυτηνὶ τὴν ἀπόνοιαν ἐπαρθέντες" οἱ δὲ ἐκ
τῆς Γαλιλαίας 4 δυσσεβείας ὥσπερ τι νόσημα TO
βίῳ τὴν ἑαυτῶν...

21

Αὐτοκράτωρ Καῖσαρ ᾿Ιουλιανὸς Μέγιστος
Σεβαστὸς ᾿Αλεξανδρέων τῷ δήμῳ 5

Ei μὴ TOV ᾿Αλέξανδρον τὸν “οἰκιστὴν ὑμῶν καὶ
πρό γε τούτου τὸν θεὸν τὸν μέγαν τὸν ἁγιώτατον
Σάραπιν. αἰδεῖσθε, τοῦ κοινοῦ γοῦν ὑμᾶς καὶ ἀνθρω-
πίνου καὶ πρέποντος πῶς οὐκ εἰσῆλθε λόγος οὐδείς;
προσθήσω δὲ ὅτι καὶ ἡμῶν, ods οἱ θεοὶ πάντες, ἐν

1 θεὸν Cobet suggests, ὃν MSS.

2 τὸν ὡς Cobet suggests τιμῶσι. . . ἀλλ᾽ Μ55, οὐ νεκρὸν
ἀλλ᾽ Heyler suggests.
3 δὲ Reiske adds. 4 TadtAaiwy Hercher.

5 Hertlein 10. Asmus thinks that before Μέγιστος the
word *Apx:épevs, ‘‘high priest,” has fallen out; cf, Vol. 2,
Fragment of a Letter, 298 D. The phrase would then mean
« Pontifex Maximus.”

6 Hertlein suggests ἔτι,

60

TO THE PEOPLE OF ALEXANDRIA

ever been prescribed. But these Jews are in part
god-fearing, seeing that they revere a god who is
truly most powerful and most good and governs this
world of sense, and, as I well know, is worshipped by
us also under other names.! They act as is right and
seemly, in my opinion, if they do not transgress the
laws; but in this ond thing they err in that, while
reserving their deepest devotion for their own god,
they do not conciliate the other gods also; but the
other gods they think have been allotted to us
Gentiles only, to such a pitch of folly have they
been brought by their barbaric conceit. But those
who belong to the impious sect of the Galilaeans,
as if some disease . . .?

21

The Emperor Julian Caesar, most Mighty Augustus,
to the People of Alexandria ὃ

Ir you do not revere the memory of Alexander,
your founder, and yet more than him the great god,
the most holy Serapis, how is it that you took no
thought at least for the welfare of your community,
for humanity, for decency? Furthermore, I will add
that you took no thought for me either, though all

1 Cf. Against the Galilaeans 3548, where Julian says that
he always worships the God of Abraham, who is gracious to
those that do him reverence μέγας τε ὥν πάνυ καὶ δυνατός,
““10} he is very great and powerful.”

* The conclusion of the sentence is lost, and was probably
deleted by a Christian because of some disrespectful reference
to Christ.

3 Quoted entire by Socrates, History of the Church 3. 3;
cited by Sozomen, 5. 7. 9; for the murder of Bishop George
to which it refers, see Introduction, under Athanasius.

61

362
January
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

919

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πρώτοις δὲ ὁ μέγας Σάραπις ἄρχειν ἐδικαίωσαν
τῆς οἰκου μένης" οἷς πρέπον ἣν τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἦδι-
κηκότων ὑμᾶς φυλάξαι διάγνωσιν. ἀλλ᾽ ὀργὴ
τυχὸν ἴσως ὑμᾶς ἐξηπάτησε καὶ θυμός, ὁ ὅσπερ οὖν
oe τὰ δεινὰ πράττειν, τὰς φρένας μετοικίσας,"

οἱ Ta} τῆς ὁρμῆς ἀναστείχαντες τοῖς παραχρῆμα
βεβουλευμένοις καλῶς ὕστερον ἐπηγάγετε τὴν
παρανομίαν, οὐδὲ ἡσχύνθητε δῆμος ὄντες τολμῆ-
σαι ταὐτά, ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἐκείνους ἐμισήσατε δικαίως.
εἴπατε γάρ μοι πρὸς τοῦ Σαράπιδος, ὑπὲρ ποίων
ἀδικημάτων ἐχαλεπήνατε Γεωργίῳ ; τὸν μακαρί-
την ᾿ Κωνστάώντιον, ἐ ἐρεῖτε δήπουθεν, ὅ ὅτι καθ᾽ ὑμῶν
παρώξυνεν, εἶτα εἰσήγαγεν εἰς τὴν ἱερὰν πόλιν
στρατόπεδον, καὶ κατέλαβεν ὁ στρατηγὸς τῆς
Αἰγύπτου τὸ ἁγιώτατον τοῦ θεοῦ τέμενος, ἀποσυ-
λήσας ἐκεῖθεν εἰκόνας καὶ ἀναθήματα καὶ τὸν ἐν
τοῖς ἱεροῖς κόσμον. ὑμῶν δὲ ἀγανακτούντων εἰκό-
τως καὶ πειρωμένων ἀμύνειν τῷ θεῷ, μᾶλλον δὲ
τοῖς τοῦ θεοῦ κτήμασιν, ὁ δὲ ἐτόλμησεν ὑμῖν
ἐπιπέμψαι τοὺς ὁπλίτας ἀδίκως καὶ παρανόμως
καὶ ἀσεβῶς, ἴσως Γεώργιον μᾶλλον ἢ ἢ τὸν Κωνστάν-
τιον δεδοικώς, ὃς αὐτὸν παρεφύλαττεν, εἰ μετριώ-
τερον ὑμῖν καὶ πολιτικώτερον, ἀλλὰ μὴ τυραννι-
κώτερον πόρρωθεν προσφέροιτος τούτων οὗν
ἕνεκεν ὀργιζόμενοι τῷ θεοῖς ἐχθρῷ Γεωργίῳ τὴν

1 οἱ τὰ Hertlein suggests ; ; εἰ τὰ Heyler; εἶτα MSS.
a Cobet μακαριώτατον MSS., Hertlein.

1 Plutarch, On the Restraint of Anger 453; quoted from
Melanthius the tragic poet; frag. 1, Nauck. ‘This is the
only extant fragment of Metanthius and is often quoted.

2 Artemius, military prefect of Egypt; he was executed

62

TO THE PEOPLE OF ALEXANDRIA

the gods, and, above all, the great Serapis, judged it
right that I should rule over the world. The proper
course was for you to reserve for me the decision
concerning the offenders. But perhaps your anger
and rage led you astray, since it often “ turns reason
out of doors and then does terrible things” 1; for
after you had restrained your original impulse, you
later introduced lawlessness to mar the wise resolu-
tions which you had at the first adopted, and were
not ashamed, as a community, to commit the same
rash acts as those for which you rightly detested
your adversaries. For tell me, in the name of
Serapis, what were the crimes for which you were
incensed against George? You will doubtless
answer: He exasperated against you Constantius
of blessed memory; then he brought an army into
the holy city, and the general? in command of
Egypt seized the most sacred shrine of the god and
stripped it of its statues and offerings and of all the
ornaments in the temples. And when you were
justly provoked and tried to succour the god, or
rather the treasures of the god,? Artemius dared to
send his soldiers against you, unjustly, illegally and
impiously, perhaps because he was more afraid of
George than of Constantius; for the former was
keeping a close watch on him to prevent his behaving
to you too moderately and constitutionally, but not
to prevent his acting far more like a tyrant. Accord-
ingly you will say it was because you were angered
for these reasons against George, the enemy of the
by Julian at the request of the Alexandrians, in the summer
of 362; Ammianus 22. 11].

3 Serapis; the Serapeum according to Ammianus 22. 16,

was, next to the Capitol at Rome, the most splendid temple
in the world. For this incident see Sozomen 4. 30. 2.

63

980

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἱερὰν αὖθις ἐμιάνατε πόλιν, ἐξὸν ὑποβάλλειν av-
τὸν ταῖς τῶν δικαστῶν ψήφοις" οὕτω γὰρ ἐγένετο
ἂν οὐ φόνος οὐδὲ “παρανομία τὸ πρᾶγμα, δίκη δὲ
ἐμμελής, ὑμᾶς μὲν ἀθῴους πάντη φυλάττουσα,
τιμωρουμένη μεὺ 1 τὸν ἀνίατα δυσσεβήσαντα, σω-
φρονίζουσά δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους πάντας ὅσοι τῶν
θεῶν ὀλιγωροῦσι καὶ προσέτι τὰς τοιαύτας πόλεις
καὶ τοὺς ἀνθοῦντας δήμους ἐν οὐδενὶ τίθενται, τῆς
ἑαυτῶν δὲ ποιοῦνται πάρεργον δυναστείας τὴν
κατ᾽ ἐκείνων ὠμότητα.

Παραβάλλετε τοίνυν ταύτην μου τὴν ἐπιστο-
λὴν ἣ μικρῷ πρῴην ἐπέστειλα, καὶ τὸ διάφορον

κατανοήσατε. πόσους μὲν ὑμῶν ἐπαίνους ἔγρα-
φον τότε; νυνὶ δὲ μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ἐθέλων ὑμᾶς
ἐπαινεῖν οὐ δύναμαι διὰ τὴν παρανομίαν. τολμᾷ
δῆμος ὥσπερ οἱ κύνες λύκον 3 ἄνθρωπον σπαράτ-
τειν, εἶτα οὐκ αἰσχύνεται τὰς χεῖρας προσάγειν
τοῖς θεοῖς αἵματι ῥεούσας. ἀλλὰ Lewpytos ἄξιος
ἣν τοῦ τοιαῦτα παθεῖν. καὶ τούτων ἴσως ἐγὼ
φαίην ἂν χείρονα καὶ πικρότερα. καὶ δι᾽ ὑμᾶς,
ἐρεῖτε. σύμφημι καὶ αὐτός" παρ᾽ ὑμῶν δὲ εἰ
λέγοιτε, τοῦτο οὐκέτι συγχωρῶ. νόμοι γὰρ ὑμῖν
εἰσίν, οὺς χρὴ τιμᾶσθαι μάλιστα μὲν ὑπὸ πάντων
ἰδίᾳ καὶ στέργεσθαι. πλὴν ἐπειδὴ συμβαίνει τῶν
καθ᾽ ἕκαστόν τινας παρανομεῖν, ἀλλὰ τὰ κοινὰ
γοῦν εὐνομεῖσθαι χρὴ καὶ πειθαρχεῖν τοῖς νόμοις

1 Hertlein suggests δὲ from correction in margin.
2 Hertlein suggests τε.
> Asmus supplies ; cf. Vol. 1, Oration 1. 48c.

1 On the turbulence of the Alexandrians cf. Ammianus
11 ἢ:

64

TO ΤΗΕ ΡῬΕΟΡΙῈ OF ALEXANDRIA

gods, that you once more? desecrated the holy city,
when you might have subjected him to the votes of
the judges. For in that case the affair would not have
resulted in murder ? and lawlessness but in a lawsuit
in due form, which would have kept you wholly free
from guilt, while it would have punished that
impious man for his inexpiable crimes, and would
have checked all others who neglect the gods, and who
moreover lightly esteem cities like yours and flourish-
ing communities, since they think that crue] behaviour
towards these is a perquisite of their own power.

᾿ Now compare this letter of mine with the one 9 that
I wrote to you a short time ago, and mark the
difference well. What words of praise for you did I
write then! But now, by the gods, though I wish
to praise you, I cannot, because you have broken the
law. Your citizens dare to tear a human being in
pieces as dogs tear a wolf, and then are not ashamed
to lift to the gods those hands still dripping with
blood! But, you will say, George deserved to be
treated in this fashion. Granted, and I might even
admit that he deserved even worse and more cruel
treatment. Yes, you will say, and on your account.
To this I too agree; but if you say by your hands, 1
no longer agree. For you have laws which ought
by all means to be honoured and cherished by you
all, individually. Sometimes, no doubt, it happens
that certain persons break one or other of these
laws; but nevertheless the state as a whole ought
to be well governed and you ought to obey the laws

2. Ammianus 22, 11. 8 describes the murder by the mob
of Bishop George and two officials of the Emperor Con-
stantius on December 24th, 361,

3 This letter is not extant.

65

VOL, III, F

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὑμᾶς, καὶ μὴ παραβαίνειν ὅσαπερ ef ἀρχῆς ἐνο-
μίσθη καλῶς. ᾿υὐτύχημα γέγονεν ὑμῖν, ἄνδρες
᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς, ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ πλημμελῆσαι τοιοῦτό TL
ὑμᾶς, ὃς αἰδοῖ τῇ πρὸς τὸν θεὸν καὶ διὰ τὸν θεῖον
τὸν ἐμὸν καὶ ὁμώνυμον, ὃς ἦρξεν αὐτῆς τε Αὐγύ-
πτου καὶ τῆς ὑμετέρας πόλεως, ἀδελφικὴν εὔνοιαν
ὑμῖν ἀποσώζω. τὸ γὰρ τῆς ἐξουσίας ἀκαταφρόνη-
τον καὶ τὸ ἀπηνέστερον καὶ καθαρὸν τῆς ἀρχῆς
οὔποτε ἂν δήμου περιίδοι τόλμημα μὴ οὐ καθάπερ
νόσημα χαλεπὸν πικροτέρῳ διακαθῆραι φαρμάκῳ.
προσφέρω δ᾽ ἐγὼ ὑμῖν bv ἅσπερ ἔναγχος ἔφην
αἰτίας τὸ -“προσηνέστατον, παραίνεσιν καὶ λόγους,
ὑφ᾽ ὧν εὖ οἶδ᾽ ὅτι πείσεσθε “μᾶλλον, εἶπερ ἐστέ,
καθάπερ ἀκούω, τό Te ἀρχαῖον ἽΒλληνες. καὶ τὰ
νῦν ἔτι τῆς εὐγενείας ἐκείνης ὕπεστιν ὑμῖν ἀξιό-
λογος καὶ γενναῖος ἐν τῇ διανοίᾳ καὶ τοῖς ἐπιτηδεύ-
μασιν ὁ χαρακτήρ.
Προτεθήτω τοῖς ἐμοῖς πολίταις ᾿Αλεξανδρεῦσιν.

ag
, A ,
᾿Αρσακίῳ ἀρχιερεῖ Γαλατίας.
ς \ ἢ
ὋὉ ᾿Ελληνισμὸς οὔπω πράττει κατὰ λόγον
ἡμῶν ἕνεκα τῶν μετιόντων αὐτόν' τὰ γὰρ τῶν
n \ ΄ὔ :
θεῶν λαμπρὰ καὶ μεγάλα, κρείττονα πάσης μὲν
3 a ΄, \ 2 f “ A) dof a
εὐχῆς, πάσης δὲ ἐλπίδος. ἵλεως δὲ ἔστω τοῖς
Xx / a ς n "AO / ΕἾ \ 3 AX ia
όγοις ἡμῶν ᾿Αδράστεια' τὴν yap ἐν ὀλίγῳ τοιαύ-

1 Hertlein 49, This letter is quoted in full by Sozomen
5. 16, and is not extant in any MS. of Julian.

(6

TO ARSACIUS, HIGH-PRIEST OF GALATIA

and not transgress those that from the beginning
were wisely established.

It is a fortunate thing for you, men of Alexandria,
that this transgression of yours occurred in my reign,
since by reason of my reverence for the god and out
of regard for my uncle! and namesake, who governed
the whole of Egypt and your city also, I preserve for
you the affection of a brother. For power that would
be respected and a really strict and unswerving govern-
ment would never overlook an outrageous action of
a people, but would rather purge it away by bitter
medicine, like a serious disease. But, for the reasons
I have just mentioned, I administer to you the very
mildest remedy, namely admonition and arguments,
by which I am very sure that you will be the more
convinced if you really are, as I am told, originally
Greeks, and even to this day there remains in your
dispositions and habits a notable and honourable
impress of that illustrious descent.

Let this be publicly proclaimed to my citizens of
Alexandria,

22
To Arsacius, High-priest of Galatia

Tue Hellenic religion does not yet prosper as I
desire, and it is the fault of those who profess it;
for the worship of the gods is on a splendid and
magnificent scale, surpassing every prayer and every
hope. May Adrasteia? pardon my words, for indeed

1 Julian, Count of the East; cf. Misopogon 365c; he had
held some high office in Egypt, under Constantius.

2 The goddess ‘‘whom none may escape” is a variant of
Nemesis, often invoked in a saving clause, cf. To Alypius,

Dp: 17
67

362

On his
way to
Antioch
in June?

480

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

την Kal τηλικαύτην μεταβολὴν οὐδ᾽ ἂν εὔξασθαί
τις ὀλίγῳ πρότερον ἐτόλμα. τί οὖν ἡμεῖς οἰόμεθα
ταῦτα ἀρκεῖν, οὐδὲ ἀποβλέπομεν, ὡς μάλιστα τὴν
ἀθεότητα συνηύξησεν ἡ περὶ τοὺς ξένους φιλαν-
θρωπία καὶ ἡ περὶ τὰς ταφὰς τῶν νεκρῶν προ-
μήθεια καὶ ἡ πεπλασμένη σεμνότης κατὰ τὸν
βίον ; ὧν ἕκαστον οἴομαι χρῆναι παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀλη-
θῶς ἐπιτηδεύεσθαι. καὶ οὐκ ἀπόχρη τὸ σὲ μόνον
εἶναι τοιοῦτον, ἀλλὰ πάντας ἁπαξαπλῶς ὅσοι
περὶ τὴν Γαλατίαν εἰσὶν ἱερεῖς" obs ἢ δυσώπησον
ἢ πεῖσον εἶναι σπουδαίους, ἢ τῆς ἱερατικῆς λει-
τουργίας ἀποστῆσον, εἰ μὴ προσέρχοιντο μετὰ γυ-
ναικῶν. καὶ παίδων καὶ θεραπόντων τοῖς θεοῖς,
ἀλλὰ ἀνέχοιντο τῶν οἰκετῶν ἢ υἱέων ἢ τῶν γαμε-
τῶν ἀσεβούντων μὲν εἰς τοὺς θεούς, ἀθεότητα δὲ
θεοσεβείας προτιμώντων. ἔπειτα παραίνεσον ἱερέα
μήτε θεάτρῳ παραβάλλειν μήτε ἐν καπηλείῳ πί-
νειν ἢ τέχνης τινὸς καὶ ἐργασίας αἰσχρᾶς καὶ
ἐπονειδίστου προΐστασθαι" καὶ τοὺς μὲν πειθομέ-.
νους τίμα, τοὺς δὲ ἀπειθοῦντας ἐξώθει. ἕενοδο-
κεῖα καθ᾽ ἑκάστην πόλιν κατάστησον πυκνά, ἵν᾽
ἀπολαύσωσιν οἱ ξένοι τῆς Tap ἡμῶν φιλανθρω-
πίας, οὐ τῶν nT ee μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄλλων
ὅστις ἂν δεηθῇ" χρημάτων. ὅθεν δὲ εὐπορήσεις,
ἐπινενόηταί μοι τέως. ἑκάστου γὰρ ἐνιαυτοῦ τρισ-
μυρίους μοδίους κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν Τ᾿ αλατίαν ἐκέ-.
λευσα δοθῆναι σίτου καὶ ἑξακισμυρίους οἴνου

1 ἐνδεηθϑῇ Hertlein, not necessary.

1 Julian often calls Christianity ‘‘ atheism.” ᾿

2 In the Fragment of a Letter, Vol. 2, Julian admonishes
priests to imitate Christian virtues, cf. especially 289-290 ;
1t is the favourite theme of his pastoral letters; for a fuller

68

TO ARSACIUS, HIGH-PRIEST OF GALATIA

no one, a little while ago, would have ventured even
to pray for a change of such a sort or so complete
within so short a time.” Why, then, do we think
that this is enough, why do we not observe that it
is their benevolence to strangers, their care for the
-graves of the dead and the pretended holiness of
their lives that have done most to increase atheism ὃ 1
I believe that we ought really and truly to practise
every one of these virtues.2¥ And it is not enough
foy you alone to practise them, but so must all the
priests in Galatia, without exception. Either shame
or persuade them into righteousness or else remove
them from their priestly office, if they do not,
together with their wives, children and servants,
attend the worship of the gods but allow their
servants or sons or wives to-show.-impiety.towards
the gods and honour atheism more than piety. In
the second place, admonish them that no priest
may enter a theatre or drink in a tavern or control
- any craft or trade that is base and not respectable.
Honour those who obey you, but those who disobey,
expel from office. In every city establish frequent
hostels in order that strangers may profit by our
benevolence; I do not mean for our own people
only, but for others also who are in need of money.
I have but now made a plan by which you may be
well provided for this; for I have given directions
that 30,000 modii of corn shall be assigned every
year for the whole of Galatia, and 60,000 pints? of

account of his attempt to graft Christian discipline on
paganism, see Gregory Nazianzen, Against Julian, Oration 3,
and Sozomen 5. 16.
8 Modius, ‘‘ peck,” and sextarius, ‘‘ pint,” are Latin words ;
ef. use in the Letters of πριβάτοις, privatis, βρέβια, brevia,
σκρινίοις, scriniis.

69

431

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ξέστας" ὧν TO μὲν πέμπτον εἰς τοὺς πένητας TOUS
τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ὑπηρετουμένους ἀναλίσκεσθαί φημι
χρῆναι, τὰ δὲ ἄλλα τοῖς ξένοις καὶ τοῖς μεταιτοῦ-
σιν ἐπινέμεσθαι Tap ἡμῶν. αἰσχρὸν γάρ, εἰ τῶν
μὲν ᾿Ιουδαίων οὐδεὶς μεταιτεῖ, τρέφουσι δὲ οἱ
δυσσεβεῖς ᾿αλιλαῖοι πρὸς τοῖς ἑαυτῶν καὶ τοὺς
ἡμετέρους, οἱ δὲ ἡμέτεροι τῆς παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐπικου-
ρίας ἐνδεεῖς φαίνονται. δίδασκε δὲ καὶ συνεισφέ-
ρειν τοὺς “Βλληνιστὰς εἰς τὰς τοιαύτας λειτουργίας
καὶ τὰς Ἑλληνικὰς κώμας ἀπάρχεσθαι τοῖς θεοῖς
τῶν καρπῶν, καὶ τοὺς ᾿Ελληνικοὺς ταῖς τοιαύταις
εὐποιίαις προσέθιξε, διδάσκων αὐτούς, ὡς τοῦτο
πάλαι ἣν ἡμέτερον ἔργον. Ὅμηρος γοῦν τοῦτοϊ
πεποίηκεν Εὔμαιον λέγοντα"

ξεῖν᾽, οὔ μοι θέμις ἔστ᾽, οὐδ᾽ εἰ κακίων σέθεν
ἔλθοι,
A \ \ , 3 Φ
ξεῖνον ἀτιμῆσαι" πρὸς γὰρ Atos εἰσιν ἅπαντες
ξεῖνοί Te πτωχοί τε. δόσις δ᾽ ὀλίγη τε φίλη τε.

μὴ δὴ τὰ Tap ἡμῖν ἀγαθὰ παραζηλοῦν ἄλλοις
συγχωροῦντες αὐτοὶ τῇ ῥᾳθυμίᾳ καταισχύνωμεν,
μᾶλλον δὲ καταπροώμεθα τὴν εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς εὐλά-
βΒειαν. εἰ ταῦτα πυθοίμην ἐγώ σε πράττοντα,
μεστὸς εὐφροσύνης ἔσομαι.

Τοὺς ἡ ἡγεμόνας. ὀλιγάκις ἐπὶ τῆς οἰκίας ὅρα, τὰ
πλεῖστα δὲ αὐτοῖς ἐπίστελλε. εἰσιοῦσι δὲ εἰς τὴν
πόλιν ὑπαντάτω μηδεὶς αὐτοῖς ἱερέων, ἀλλ᾽, ὅταν
εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ φοιτῶσι τῶν θεῶν, εἴσω. τῶν προθύρων.
ἡγείσθω δὲ μηδεὶς αὐτῶν εἰσω ᾿ στρατιώτης, ἑπέσθω
δὲ ὁ βουλόμενος: ἅμα γὰρ εἰς τὸν οὐδὸν ἦλθε τοῦ

1 Klimek ; αὐτὸ MSS., Hertlein.
79

TO ARSACIUS, HIGH-PRIEST OF ΟΑΙΝΑΤΙΑ᾽

wine. I order that one-fifth of this be used for the
poor who serve the priests, and the remainder be
distributed by us to strangers and beggars. For it
is disgraceful that, when no Jew ever has to beg,
and the impious Galilaeans support not only their
own poor but ours as well, all men see that our
people lack aid from us. Teach those of the
Hellenic faith to contribute to public service of
this sort, and the Hellenic villages to offer their
first fruits to the gods; and accustom those who
love the Hellenic religion to these good works by
teaching them that this was our practice of old.
At any rate Homer makes Eumaeus say: “ Stranger,
it is not lawful for me, not even though a baser
man than you should come, to dishonour a stranger.
For from Zeus come all strangers and beggars. And
a gift, though small, is precious.” 2 Then let us not,
by allowing others to outdo us in good works, dis-
grace by such remissness, or rather, utterly abandon,
the reverence due to the gods. If I hear that you
are carrying out these orders I shall be filled with
oy.

Ps for the government officials, do not interview
them often at their homes, but write to them
frequently. And when they enter the city no priest
must go to meet them, but only meet them within the
vestibule when they visit the temples of the gods.
Let no soldier march before them into the temple, but
any who will may follow them; for the moment that
one of them passes over the threshold of the sacred

1 For a comparison of the charity of the Galilaeans with
Pagan illiberality, cf. Vol. 2, Misopogon 363A, B.
* Odyssey 14. 56 ; ef. Fragment of a Letter 2918, where it is
quoted in a similar context.

71

D

432

5.71
D

378

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

τεμένους καὶ γέγονεν ἰδιώτης. ἄρχεις γὰρ αὐτός,
ὡς οἶσθα, τῶν ἔνδον, ἐπεὶ καὶ ὁ θεῖος ταῦτα ἀπαι-
τεῖ θεσμός. καὶ οἱ μὲν πειθόμενοι κατὰ ἀλήθειάν
εἰσι θεοσεβεῖς, οἱ δὲ ἀντεχόμενοι τοῦ τύφου δοξο-
κόποι καὶ κενόδοξοι.

Τῇ Πεσσινοῦντι βοηθεῖν ἕτοιμός εἶμι, εἰ τὴν
μητέρα τῶν θεῶν ἵλεων καταστήσουσιν ἑαυτοῖς"
ἀμελοῦντες δὲ αὐτῆς οὐκ ἄμεμπτοι μόνον, ἀλλὰ, μὴ
πικρὸν εἰπεῖν, μὴ καὶ τῆς παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀπολαύσωσι
δυσμενείας.

οὐ γάρ μοι θέμις ἐστὶ κομιζέμεν οὐδ᾽ ἐλεαίρειν

ἀνέρας, οἵ κε θεοῖσιν ἀπέχθωντ᾽ ἀθανάτοισιν.
πεῖθε τοίνυν αὐτούς, εἰ τῆς παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ κηδεμονίας
ἀντέχονται, πανδημεὶ τῆς μητρὸς τῶν θεῶν ἱκέτας
γενέσθαι.

29
᾿Εκδικίῳ ἐπάρχῳ Αἰγύπτου 1

Λλλοι μὲν ἵππων, ἄλλοι δὲ ὀρνέων, ἄλλοι δὲ 3
θηρίων ἐρῶσιν' ἐμοὶ δὲ βιβλίων κτήσεως ἐκ παι-
δαρίου δεινὸς ἐντέτηκε πόθος. ἄτοπον οὗν, εἰ
ταῦτα περιίδοιμι σφετερισαμένους ἀνθρώπους, οἷς
οὐκ ἀρκεῖ τὸ χρυσίον μόνον ἀποπλῆσαι τὸν πολὺν
ἔρωτα τοῦ πλούτου, πρὸς δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ὑφαι-

1 Hertlein 9.
2 Doehner suggests ; Hertlein suggests ἄλλων.

1 This letter was probably written after Julian’s visit to
Pessinus on his way to Antioch. The probable date for his
arrival at Antioch is the first half of July.

72

TO ECDICIUS, PREFECT OF EGYPT

precinct he becomes a private citizen. For you
yourself, as you are aware, have authority over what
is within, since this is the bidding of the divine
ordinance. Those who obey it are in very truth
god-fearing, while those who oppose it with arrogance
are vainglorious and empty-headed.

I am ready to assist Pessinus+ if her people suc-
ceed in winning the favour of the Mother of the
Gods. But, if they neglect her, they are not only
not free from blame, but, not to speak harshly,
let them beware of reaping my enmity also. ‘For
it is not lawful for me to cherish or to pity men
who are the enemies of the immortal gods.” ?
Therefore persuade them, if they claim my
patronage, that the whole community must become
suppliants of the Mother of the Gods.

23
To Ecdicius, Prefect of Egypt ὃ

Some men have a passion for horses, others for
birds, others, again, for wild beasts; but I, from
childhood, have been penetrated by ἃ passionate
longing 4 to acquire books. It would therefore be
absurd if I should suffer these to be appropriated by
men whose inordinate desire for wealth gold alone

2 Odyssey 10. 73; Julian alters the original which is said
by Aeolus to Odysseus:
ov γάρ μοι θέμις ἐστὶ κομιζέμεν οὐδ᾽ ἀποπέμπειν
ἄνδρα τὸν ὅς κε θεοῖσιν ἀπέχθηται μακάρεσσιν.
3 See Introduction, under Ecdicius.
4 A proverbial phrase; cf. Vol. 1, Oration 4. 1300, Vol. 2,
Oration 8. 251p; Plato, Menexenus 245p. For Julian's love
of books, Vol. 1, Oration 3. 1238p. foll.

73

862

End of
January
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

998

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ρεῖσθαι ῥᾳδίως διανοουμένους. ταύτην οὖν ἰδιωτι-
κήν μοι δὸς τὴν χάριν, ὅπως “ἀνευρεθῇ πάντα τὰ
Γεωργίου βιβλία. πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἣν φιλόσοφα
παρ᾽ αὐτῷ, πολλὰ δὲ ῥητορικά, πολλὰ δὲ ἦν καὶ
τῆς τῶν δυσσεβῶν Ταλιλαίων διδασκαλίας" ἃ
βουλοίμην μὲν ἠφανίσθαι πάντη, τοῦ δὲ μὴ σὺν
τούτοις ὑφαιρεθῆναι τὰ “χρησιμώτερα, Entec
κἀκεῖνα μετ᾽ ἀκριβείας, ἅπαντα. ἡγεμὼν δὲ τῆς
ξητήσεως ἔστω σοι ταύτης 0 νοτάριος Πεωργίου,
ὃς μετὰ πίστεως μὲν ἀνιχνεύσας αὐτὰ γέρως ἴστω
τευξόμενος ἐλευθερίας, εἰ δ᾽ ἁμωσγέπως γένοιτο
κακοῦργος περὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα, βασάνων εἰς πεῖραν
ἥξων. ἐπίσταμαι δὲ ἐγὼ τὰ Tewpryiou βιβλία,
καὶ εἰ μὴ πάντα, πολλὰ μέντοι" μετέδωκε γάρ μοι
περὶ τὴν Καππαδοκίαν ὄντι πρὸς μεταγραφήν
τινα, καὶ ταῦτα ἔλαβε πάλιν.

24,
᾿Αλεξανδρεῦσι διάταγμα

Ἐχρῆν τὸν ἐξελαθέντα βασιλικοῖς πολλοῖς
πάνυ καὶ πολλῶν αὐτοκρατόρων προστάγμασιν
ἕν γοῦν ἐπίταγμα περιμεῖναι βασιλικόν, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως
εἰς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ κατιέναι, ἀλλὰ μὴ τόλμῃ μηδ᾽ ἀπο-
νοίᾳ χρησάμενον ὡς οὐκ οὖσιν ἐνυβρίζειν τοῖς
νόμοις, ἐπεί τοι καὶ τὸ νῦν τοῖς Γαλιλαίοις τοῖς

1 Hertlein 26.

1 Perhaps to be identified with Porphyrius, to whom Julian
wrote the threatening Letter 38, p. 123.
2 7.e. when he was interned for six years by Constantius at

74

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS, AN EDICT

cannot satiate, and who unscrupulously design to steal
these also. Do you therefore grant me this per-
sonal favour, that all the books which belonged to
George be sought out. For there were in his house
many on philosophy, and many on rhetoric; many
also on the teachings of the impious Galilaeans.
These latter I should wish to be utterly annihilated,
but for fear that along with them more useful works
may be destroyed by mistake, let all these also be
sought for with the greatest care. Let George’s
secretary 1 take charge of this search for you, and if
he hunts for them faithfully let him know that he will
obtain his freedom as a reward, but that if he prove
in any way whatever dishonest in the business he
will be put to the test of torture. And I know
what books George had, many of them, at any
rate, if not all; for he lent me some of them to
copy, when I was in Cappadocia,? and these he
received back.

24
To the Alexandrians, an Edict ὃ

One who had been banished by so many imperial
decrees issued by many Emperors ought to have
waited for at least one imperial edict, and then on
the strength of that returned to his own country,
and not displayed rashness and folly, and insulted
the laws as though they did not exist. For we
have not, even now, granted to the Galilaeans who

_ Macellum in Cappadocia. George was then at Caesarea near
᾿ς Macellum. °

3 See Introduction, under Athanasius.

75

362
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

999

427

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

φυγαδευθεῖσιν ὑπὸ τοῦ μακαρίτου Κωνσταντίου
οὐ κάθοδον εἰς τὰς ἐκκλησίας αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ τὴν
εἰς τὰς πατρίδας συνεχωρήσαμεν. ᾿Αθανάσιον δὲ
πυνθάνομαι τὸν τολμηρότατον ὑπὸ τοῦ συνήθους
ἐπαρθέντα θράσους ἀντιλαβέσθαι τοῦ λεγομένου
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐπισκοπῆς θρόνου, τοῦτο δὲ εἶναι καὶ
τῷ θεοσεβεῖ τῶν ᾿Αλεξανδρέων δήμῳ οὐ μετρίως
ἀηδές. ὅθεν αὐτῷ “προαγορεύομεν ἀπιέναι τῆς πό-
λεως, ἐξ ἧς ἂν ἡμέρας τὰ τῆς ἡμετέρας ἡμερότη.-
τος γράμματα δέξηται παραχρῆμα' μένοντι
αὐτῷ THS πόλεως εἴσω μείζους πολὺ καὶ χαλεπω-
τέρας προαγορεύομεν τιμωρίας.

25
Evaypto }

Συγκτησείδιον μικρὸν ἀγρῶν “τεττάρων δοθέν-
των μοι παρὰ τῆς τήθης ἐν τῇ Βιθυνίᾳ τῇ σῇ
διαθέσει δῶρον δίδωμι, ἔλαττον μὲν ἢ ὥστε ἄνδρα
εἰς περιουσίαν ὀνῆσαί τι μέγα καὶ ἀποφῆναι ὄλ-
βιον, ἔχον δὲ οὐδὲ ὡς παντάπασιν ἀτερπῆ τὴν
δόσιν, εἴ σοι τὰ καθ᾽ ἕκαστα περὶ αὐτοῦ διέλθοι-
μι. παίξειν δὲ οὐδὲν κωλύει πρὸς σὲ χαρίτων
γέμοντα καὶ εὐμουσίας. ATWKLOTAL μὲν τῆς θα-

1 Hertlein 40. In the codex found at Chalke, ῥήτορι is
added to the title.

1 Constantius was an Arian and had appointed Bishop
George of Cappadocia to the see of Alexandria. Athanasius
was then in exile by the decree of Constantius.

2 Athanasius had installed himself in his church on
February 21st, 362.

76

TO EVAGRIUS

were exiled by Constantius! of blessed memory
to return to their churches, but only to their own
countries. Yet I learn that the most audacious
Athanasius, elated by his accustomed insolence, has
again seized what is called among them the episcopal
throne,” and that this is not a little displeasing to the
God-fearing citizens 5 of Alexandria. Wherefore we
publicly warn him to depart from the city forthwith,
on the very day that he shall receive this letter of
our clemency. But if he remain within the city, we
publicly warn him that he will receive a much greater
and more severe punishment.

25
To Evagrius®

A smaLt estate of four fields, in Bithynia, was given
to me by my grandmother,® and this I give as an
offering to your affection for me. It is too small
to bring a man any great benefit on the score of
wealth or to make him appear opulent, but even so
it is a gift that cannot wholly fail to please you, as
you will see if I describe its features to you one by
one. And there is no reason why I should not write
in a light vein to you who are so full of the graces
and amenities of culture. It is situated not more

8.2. 6. the Pagans.
4 Athanasius withdrew from Alexandria, but not from
Egypt, in consequence of this edict. For a second edict
banishing him from Egypt, see p. 151.

5 For Evagrius see above, p. 25.

6 Cf. Vol. 2. 290p; and 25l1p for his childhood’s associ-
ations with this coast.

77

362
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

428

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

, 5
λάττης σταδίους οὐ πλέον εἴκοσι, καὶ οὔτε ἔμπορος
οὔτε ναύτης ἐνοχλεῖ λάλος καὶ ὑβριστὴς τῷ χωρίῳ.
οὐ μὴν ἀφήρηται τὰς παρὰ τοῦ Νηρέως χάριτας
παντελῶς, ἔχει δὲ ἐχθὺν πρόσφατον ἀεὶ καὶ ἀσπαί-
ροντα, καὶ ἐπί τινος ἀπὸ τῶν δωμάτων προελθὼν
γηλόφου ὄψει τὴν θάλατταν τὴν Προποντίδα καὶ
τὰς νήσους τήν τε ἐπώνυμον πόλιν τοῦ γενναίου
βασιλέως, οὐ φυκίοις ἐφεστὼς καὶ βρύοις,. οὐδὲ ἐ ἐνο-
χλούμενος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκβαλλομένων εἰς τοὺς αἰγια-
λοὺς καὶ τὰς ψάμμους ἀτερπῶν πάνυ καὶ οὐδὲ
ὀνομάζειν ἐπιτηδείων λυμάτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ σμίλακος
Ν 7 x ’ Ce kd ς 4 \ x
καὶ θύμου καὶ πόας εὐώδους. ἡσυχία δὲ πολλὴ
/ \ ” 1 t 3 n bg
κατακλινομένῳ Kal εἴς TL? βιβλιον ἀφορῶντι, εἶτα
διαναπαύοντι τὴν ὄψιν ἥδιστον ἀπιδεῖν εἰς τὰς
ναῦς καὶ τὴν θάλατταν. τοῦτο ἐμοὶ μειρακίῳ
a 7 / 2O/ / 54 \ \
κομιδῇ νέῳ θερίδιον ἐδόκει φίλτατον" ἔχει yap καὶ
πηγὰς οὐ φαύλας καὶ λουτρὸν οὐκ ἀναφρόδιτον
a \ es
καὶ κῆπον Kal δένδρα. ἀνὴρ δ᾽ ὧν ἤδη THY Ta-
λαιὰν ἐκείνην ἐπόθουν δίαιταν, καὶ ἦλθον πολλά-
Κις, καὶ γέγονεν ἡμῖν οὐκ ἔξω λόγων ἡ σύνοδος.
ἔστι δ᾽ ἐνταῦθα καὶ γεωργίας ἐμῆς μικρὸν ὑπό-
μνημα; φυταλία βραχεῖα, φέρουσα οἶνον εὐώδη τε
καὶ ἡδύν, οὐκ ἀναμένοντά τι παρὰ τοῦ χρόνου
προσλαβεῖν. τὸν Διόνυσον ὄψει καὶ τὰς Χάριτας.
ς , \ 3 Ν n > 7 \ 3 \ A n
ὁ βότρυς δὲ ἐπὶ THs ἀμπέλου καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ληνοῦ
θλιβόμενος ἀπόξει τῶν ῥόδων, τὸ γλεῦκος δὲ ἐν
a / 3, » /
τοῖς πίθοις ἤδη véxTapos ἐστιν ἀπορρὼξ “Ομήρῳ
πιστεύοντι. τί δῆτα οὐ πολλὴ 3 γέγονεν οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ
‘4 . / \ Ὁ ΄ὔ 5 3 μι
πλεῦρα πάνυ πολλὰ ἡ τοιαύτη ἄμπελος ; 5 τυχὸν
1 Hertlein suggests; MSS. εἰς τό.

2 Hercher suggests; πολὺ MSS, Hertlein.
3 Hercher suggests ; τοιούτων ἀμπέλων MSS., Hertlein.

78

TO EVAGRIUS

than twenty stades from the sea, so that no trader
or sailor with his chatter and insolence disturbs the
place. Yet it is not wholly deprived of the favours
of Nereus, for it has a constant supply of fish, fresh
and still gasping; and if you walk up on to a sort of
-hill away from the house, you will see the sea, the
Propontis and the islands, and the city that bears
the name of the noble Emperor ; 1 nor will you have
to stand meanwhile on seaweed and brambles, or be
annoyed by the filth that is always thrown out on to
seabeaches and sands, which is so very unpleasant
and even unmentionable; but you will stand on
smilax and thyme and fragrant herbage. Very peace-
ful it is to lie down there and glance into some book,
and then, while resting one’s eyes, it is very agree-
able to gaze at the ships and the sea. When I was
still hardly more than a boy I thought that this was.
the most delightful summer place, for it has, more-
over, excellent springs and a charming bath and
garden and trees. When I had grown to manhood
I used to long for my old manner of life there and
visited it often, and our meetings there did not lack
talks about literature. Moreover there is there, as
a humble monument of my husbandry, a small vine-
yard that produces a fragrant, sweet wine, which
does not have to wait for time to improve its flavour.
You will have a vision of Dionysus and the Graces.
The grapes on the vine, and when they are being
crushed in the press, smell of roses, and the new-
made wine in the jars is a “rill of nectar,” if one
may trust Homer.? Then why is not such a vine as
this abundant and growing over very many acres?

1 Constantinople, named after Constantine.
* Odyssey 9. 359 νέκταρός ἐστιν ἀπορρώξ.

79

381

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μὲν. οὐδὲ ἐγὼ γεωργὸς γέγονα πρόθυμος" ἀλλὰ
ἐπεὶ ἐμοὶ νηφάλιος ὁ τοῦ Διονύσου κρατὴρ καὶ
ἐπὶ πολὺ τῶν νυμφῶν δεῖται, ὃ ὅσον εἰς ἐμαυτὸν καὶ
τοὺς φίλους" “ὀλίγον δέ ἐστι τὸ χρῆματῶν ἀνδρῶν'
παρεσκευασάμην. νῦν δή σοι δῶρον, ὦ φίλη
κεφαλή, δίδωμι μικρὸν μὲν ὅπερ ἐστί, χαρίεν δὲ
φίλῳ παρὰ φίλου, οἴκοθεν οἴκαδε, κατὰ τὸν σοφὸν
ποιητὴν Πίνδαρον. τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἐ ἐπισύρων πρὸς
λύχνον shi atiar ὥστε, εἴ τι ἡμάρτηται, μὴ
πικρῶς ἐξέταζε μηδ᾽ ὡς ῥήτωρ ῥήτορα.

926.
Βασιλείῳ 1

ἫἩ μὲν παροιμία φησὶν Οὐ πόλεμον “ἀγγέλλεις,
ἐγὼ δὲ προσθείην ἐκ τὴ κωμῳδίας hy χρυσὸν
ἀγγεΐλας ἐπῶν. ἴθι οὖν ἔργοις αὐτὸ δεῖξον, καὶ
σπεῦδε παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς" ἀφίξῃ γὰρ φίλος παρὰ φίλον.
ἡ δὲ περὴ τὰ πράγματα κοινὴ καὶ συνεχὴς ἀσχολία
δοκεῖ μὲν εἶναί πως τοῖς μὴ πάρεργον αὐτὰ ποιοῦ-
σιν ἐπαχθής, οἱ δὲ τῆς “ἐπιμελείας κοινωνοῦντές
εἰσιν ἐπιεικεῖς, ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω, καὶ συνετοὶ καὶ
πάντως ἱκανοὶ πρὸς πάντα. διδοῦσιν οὖν μοι
ῥᾳστώνην, ὥστε ἐξεῖναι μηδὲν ὀλιγωροῦντι καὶ
ἀναπαύεσθαι: σύνεσμεν γὰρ ,“ἀχλήλοις οὐ μετὰ
τῆς αὐλικῆς ὑποκρίσεως, ἧς μόνης οἶμαί σε μέχρι

1 Hertlein 12.

1 4.¢e. of water.
2 Olympian Ode 6. 99; 7. 5.
3 For Basil, see Introduction.

80

TO BASIL

Perhaps I was not a very industrious gardener.
But since my mixing bowl of Dionysus is inclined to
soberness and calls for a large proportion of the
nymphs,! I only provided enough for myself and my
friends—and they are very few. Well then, I now
give this to you as a present, dear heart, and though
it be small, as indeed it is, yet it is precious as coming
from a friend to a friend, “from home, homeward
bound,” in the words of the wise poet Pindar.”
I have written this letter in haste, by lamplight, so
that, if I have made any mistakes, do not criticise
_ them severely or as one rhetorician would another.

26
To Basil 3

“ Not of war is thy report,’ 4 says the proverb,
but I would add, from comedy, “Ὁ thou whose
_ words bring tidings of gold!’’® Come then, show it
by your deeds and hasten to me, for you will come
as friend to friend.6 It is true that continuous
attention to public business is thought to be a heavy
‘burden on men who pursue it with all their energy ;
but those who share the task of administration with
me are, I am convinced, honest and reasonable
men, intelligent and entirely capable for all they
have to do. So they give me leisure and the
opportunity of resting without neglecting anything.
For our intercourse with one another is free from
that hypocrisy of courts of which alone you have

4 Plato, Phaedrus 2428, Laws 102p, cf. paroles de paix.
5 Aristophanes, Plutus 268. 6 Plato, Menexenus 9478.

SI
VOL. III. G

Early
in 362
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

C

382

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

τοῦ δεῦρο πεπειρᾶσθαι, καθ᾽ ἣν ἐπαινοῦντες μι-
σοῦσι τηλικοῦτον μῖσος ἡλίκον οὐδὲ τοὺς πολεμιω-

Ψ > \ \ ia) ΄ ) /
τάτους, ἀλλὰ META τῆς προσηκούσης adrANXOLS
3 / 2 / / er / Ν >
ἐλευθερίας ἐξελέγχοντές τε ὅταν δέῃ καὶ ἐπιτι-
μῶντες οὐκ ἔλαττον᾽ φιλοῦμεν ἀλλήλους τῶν
σφόδρα ἑταίρων' ἔνθεν ἔξεστιν ἡμῖν: ἀπείη δὲ
φθόνος" ἀνειμένοις τε σπουδάζειν καὶ σπουδά-
Covet μὴ ταλαιπωρεῖσθαι, καθεύδειν δὲ ἀδεῶς.
ἐπεὶ καὶ ἐγρηγορὼς οὐχ ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ μᾶλλον
ἢ καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπάντων, ὡς εἰκός,
3 7
ἐγρήγορα.

T a oy 7 ὃ λέ , \ Ν Ae

avta ἴσως κατηδολέσχησά σου Kal κατελή

pyoa, παθῶν τι βλακῶδες' ἐπήνεσα γὰρ ἐμαυτὸν
ὥσπερ ᾿Αστυδάμας. ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα σε πείσω προὔργου
τι μᾶλλον ἡμῖν τὴν σὴν παρουσίαν ἅτε ἀνδρὸς ἔ ἔμ-
φρονος ποιήσειν ἢ παραιρήσεσθαί TL τοῦ καιροῦ,
ταῦτα ἐπέστειλα. σπεῦδε οὖν, ὅπερ ἔφην, δημοσίῳ
χρησάμενος δρόμῳ" συνδιατρίψας δὲ ἡμῖν ἐφ᾽
ὅσον σοι φίλον, οἷπερ ἂν ἬΝ, ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν πεμπό-
μενος, ὡς προσῆκόν ἐστι, βαδιεῖ.

Θὰ
Opakiv?

Βασιλεῖ μὲν πρὸς κέρδος ὁρῶντι χαλεπὸν ἂν.

ὑμῶν ἐφάνη τὸ αἴτημα, καὶ οὐκ ἂν φήθη δεῖν τὴν
ἡμοσίαν εὐπορίαν βλάπτειν τῇ πρός τινας ἰδίᾳ

1 Hertlein 47.

1 A proverb derived from ‘Philemon, frag. 190; for the
whole verse, see below, p. 159.
2 de. the cursus publicus ; οἷ. To Hustathius, Ὁ. 139.

82

TO THE THRACIANS

hitherto, I think, had experience, that hypocrisy
which leads men to praise one another even while
they hate with a hatred more deadly than they feel
for their worst enemies in war. But we, though we
refute and criticise one another with appropriate
frankness, whenever it is necessary, love one another
as much as the most devoted friends. Hence it is
that I am able—if I may say so without odium—
to work and yet enjoy relaxation, and when at
work to be free from strain and sleep securely. For
when I have kept vigil it was less on my own behalf
probably than on behalf of all my subjects.

But perhaps I have been wearying you with my
chatter and nonsense, displaying stupid conceit, for
I have praised myself, like Astydamas.1_ However, I
have despatched this letter to you to convince you
that your presence, wise man that you are, will be
serviceable to me rather than any waste of my time.
Make haste then, as I said, and use the state post.?
And when you have stayed with me as long as you
desire you shall go your way whithersoever you
please, with an escort furnished by me, as is proper.

De
To the Thracians 8

To an Emperor who had an eye solely to gain,
your request would have appeared hard to grant,
and he would not have thought that he ought to
injure the public prosperity by granting a particular

8 An answer to a petition. For Julian’s remission of
arrears, ἐλλείματα, Latin reliqua, of taxes at Antioch, cf.

| Miscpogon, 3658. For his popularity with the provincials
due to this liberality, cf. Ammianus 25. 4. 15.

83

stanti-
nople

429

407

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

VuplTe ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡμεῖς οὐχ 0, TL πλεῖστα παρὰ τῶν
ὑπηκόων ἀθροίζειν πεποιήμεθα σκοπόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι
πλείστων ἀγαθῶν αὐτοῖς αἴτιοι γίγνεσθαι, τοῦτο
καὶ ὑμῖν ἀπολύσει τὰ ὀφλήματα. ἀπολύσει δὲ
οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἅπαντα, ἀχλὰ μερισθήσεται τὸ πρᾶγ-
μα, τὸ μὲν εἰς ὑμᾶς, τὸ δὲ εἰς τὴν τῶν στρατιω-
τῶν χρείαν, ἐξ ἡ ἧς οὐκ ἐλάχιστα καὶ αὐτοὶ δήπου
φέρεσθε, τὴν εἰρήνην καὶ τὴν ἀσφάλειαν. τοιγαρ-
οῦν μέχρι μὲν τῆς τρίτης ἐπινεμήσεως ἀφίεμεν
ὑμῖν πάντα, ὅσα ἐκ τοῦ φθάνοντος ἐλλείπει χρό-
νου" μετὰ ταῦτα δὲ εἰσοίσετε κατὰ τὸ ἔθος. ὑμῖν
τε γὰρ τὰ ἀφιέμενα χάρις ἱκανή, καὶ ἡμῖν τῶν
κοινῶν οὐκ ἀμελητέον. περὶ τούτου καὶ τοῖς
ἐπάρχοις ἐπέσταλκα, ἵν᾽ ἡ χάρις ὑμῖν εἰς ἔργον
προχωρήσῃ. ἐρρωμένους ὑμᾶς οἱ θεοὶ σώζοιεν
ΐ ᾿
τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον.

28
᾿Ανεπίγραφος ὑπὲρ ᾿Αργείων ἷ
Ὑπὲρ τῆς ᾿Αργείων πόλεως πολλὰ μὲν ἄν τις

εἰπεῖν ἔχοι, σεμνύνειν αὐτὴν ἐθέλων, παλαιὰ καὶ
νέα πράγματα. τοῦ τε γὰρ Τρωικοῦ, καθάπερ.

1 Hertlein 35.

1 Apparently he means that the arrears are remitted down
to the year 359, but they must pay what is due from that date.

2 Ifthe date is correct, this was probably a private com-
munication to the newly- appointed Proconsul of Achaia, ὦ
Praetextatus. Under the Roman dominion, Greek cities to
settle their disputes had recourse to lawsuits which were
often long and tedious. Seven years before Julian’s accession,
Corinth had successfully claimed the right to tax Argos.

84

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

indulgence to any. But since I have not made it
my aim to collect the greatest possible sums from
my subjects, but rather to be the source of the
greatest possible blessings to them, this fact shall for
you too cancel your debts. Nevertheless it will not
cancel the whole sum absolutely, but there shall be
a division of the amount, and part shall be remitted
to you, part shall be used for the needs of the army ;
since from it you yourselves assuredly gain no slight
advantages, namely, peace and security. Accordingly
I remit for you, down to the third assessment,! the
whole sum that is in arrears for the period preceding.
But thereafter you will contribute as usual. For the
amount remitted is sufficient indulgence for you,
while for my part I must not neglect the public
interest. Concerning this I have sent orders to the
prefects also, in order that your indulgence may be
carried into effect. May the gods keep you prosper-
ous for all time!

28
On behalf of the Argives; unaddressed 2

On behalf of the city of Argos, if one wished to
recount her honours, many are the glorious deeds
both old and new that one might relate. For
instance, in the achievements of the Trojan War

The money was spent on wild beast shows and similar enter-
_tainments at Corinth. The Argives appealed to Julian for
a revision of the case, and he now writes to the Proconsul of
Achaia, leaving the decision to him, but strongly supporting
the claim of Argos. Ag this letter is the only evidence for
the Corinthian exaction or the Argive appeal, we do not
know the result. Nor can we determine whether Julian is
writing in 362 or 363. It seems unlikely that the Argives
appealed to him when he was a student at Athens in 355,
as some scholars have maintained. See Introduction.

85

362
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

C ὕστερον ᾿Αθηναίοις καὶ Λακεδαιμονίοις τοῦ ἹΤερσι-

408

al 7 \ / 5 / y ὃ a \
KOU, προσήκει TO πλέον ἐκείνοις ἔργου. δοκεῖ μὲν
\ ” lal θῇ \ a Ἕ 10 3
yap ἄμφω κοινῇ πραχθῆναι παρὰ τῆς KNAAaOoS
lal an /
ἄξιον δὲ ὥσπερ τῶν ἔργων καὶ THs φροντίδος,
¢ A / \ 4 \ /
οὕτω Kal τῶν ἐπαίνων τοὺς ἡγεμόνας TO πλέον
μετέχειν. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἀρχαῖώ πως εἶναι δο-
an \ \ 5 \ 7 ee ς [οἱ /
Kel, Ta δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοις, ἥ Te Πρακλειδῶν κάθοδος
A / , v
Kal ὡς τῷ πρεσβυτάτῳ γέρας ἐξηρέθη, ἥ τε εἰς
3 A 3 / \ ἣν
Μακεδόνας ἐκεῖθεν ἀποικία, καὶ τὸ Λακεδαιμο-
/ if a /
viols οὕτω πλησίον παροικοῦντας ἀδούλωτον ἀεὶ
’ \ / n
καὶ ἐλευθέραν φυλάξαι τὴν πόλιν, οὐ μικρᾶς οὐδὲ
a / 3 id τὰ 3 \ N \ \
τῆς τυχούσης ἀνδρείας ἣν. ἀλλὰ δὴ Kal τὰ TO-
A \ / \ a n
σαῦτα περὶ τοὺς Llépcas ὑπὸ τῶν Μακεδόνων
/ , a ,
γενόμενα ταύτῃ προσήκειν τῇ πόλει δικαίως ἂν
6 / \ 3.1.9 Ἶ
Tis ὑπολάβοι" Φιλίππου τε γὰρ καὶ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου
tal A y \ ον “ «ς
τῶν πάνυ τῶν προγόνων πατρὶς ἣν αὕτη. Ρω-
,ὔ Nee? 3 ς a a x \
μαίοις δὲ ὕστερον οὐχ ἁλοῦσα μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ
iZ / \ / 3 a
ξυμμαχίαν ὑπήκουσε, καὶ ὥσπερ οἶμαι μετεῖχε
\ > \ ,ὕ e \ A ᾽ , \
καὶ αὐτὴ καθάπερ αἱ λοιπαὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας Kal
aA / € / 7 a
TOV ἄλλων δικαίων, ὁπόσα νέμουσι ταῖς περὶ τὴν
la) /
“Ελλάδα πόλεσιν οἱ κρατοῦντες ἀεί.
\ lel \ , A
Κορίνθιοι δὲ viv αὐτὴν προσνεμομένην 3 αὐτοῖς"
> a if \ an
οὕτω γὰρ εἰπεῖν εὐπρεπέστερον' ὑπὸ τῆς βασι-

2

1 Duebner suggests; lacuna Hertlein, MSS.
2 Hertlein suggests ; MSS. προσγενομένην.
8. Hertlein suggests ; ἀπὸ MSS.

1 Temenus the Heraclid received Argos as his share; his
descendants were expelled and colonised Macedonia; cf.
Julian, Oration 8. 106D ; Herodotus 8. 137.

86

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

they may claim to have played the chief part even
as did the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, in later
times, in the Persian War. For though both wars
are held to have been waged by all Greece in
common, yet it is fitting that the leaders, just as
they had the larger share of toils and anxiety, should
have also a larger share of the praise. These events,
however, may seem somewhat antiquated. But
those that followed, I mean the return of the Hera-
cleidae, the taking of his birthright from the eldest,
the sending from Argos of the colony to Mace-
donia, and the fact that; though they were such
near neighbours. to the Lacedaemonians, they always
preserved their city unenslaved and free, are proofs
of no slight or common fortitude. But, further-
more, all those great deeds accomplished by the
Macedonians against the Persians might with justice
be considered to belong to this city; for this was
the native land of the ancestors of Philip and Alex-
ander,” those illustrious men. And in later days
Argos obeyed the Romans, not so much because she
was conquered as in the character of an ally, and,
as I think, she too, like the other states, shared in
the independence and the other rights which our
rulers always bestow on the cities of Greece.

But now the Corinthians, since Argos has been
assigned to their territory—for this is the less in-
vidious way of expressing it—by the sovereign city,®

2 Alexander claimed to be an Argive. For the colonisation
of Macedonia cf. Herodotus 5, 22.

3 Rome, cf. Oration 4. 1310. Corinth had been made
a Roman colony by Augustus, and claimed authority over
certain other cities that were not colonies; the Roman
Proconsul regularly resided at Corinth.

87

409

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

λευούσης πόλεως εἰς κακίαν ἐπαρθέντες συντελεῖν
αὑτοῖς ἀναγκάζουσι, καὶ ταύτης ἦρξαν, ὥς φασι,
τῆς καινοτομίας ἕβδομος οὗτος ἐνιαυτός, οὔτε τὴν
Δελφῶν οὔτε τὴν ᾿Ηλείων ἀτέλειαν, ἧς ἠξιώθησαν
ἐπὶ τῷ διατιθέναι τοὺς παρὰ σφίσιν ἱεροὺς ἀγῶνας,
αἰδεσθέντες. τεττάρων γὰρ ὄντων, ὡς ἴσμεν, τῶν
μεγίστων καὶ λαωπροτάτων ἀγώνων περὶ τὴν “EX-
λάδα, ᾿Ηλεῖοι μὲν ᾿Ολύμπια, Δελφοὶ δὲ Πύθια,
καὶ τὰ ἐν ᾿Ισθμῷ Κορίνθιοι, ᾿Αργεῖοι δὲ τὴν τῶν
Νεμέων συγκροτοῦσι πανήγυριν. πῶς οὖν εὔλο-
γον ἐκείνοις μὲν ὑπάρχειν τὴν ἀτέλειαν τὴν πάλαι
δοθεῖσαν, τοὺς δὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὁμοίοις δαπανήμασιν
ἀφεθέντας πάλαι, τυχὸν δὲ οὐδὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν ὑπα-
χθέντας νῦν ἀφῃρῆσθαι τὴν προνομίαν ἧς ἠξιώ-
θησαν; πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ᾿Ηλεῖοι μὲν καὶ Δελφοὶ
διὰ τῆς πολυθρυλήτου πενταετηρίδος ἅπαξ ἐπι-
τελεῖν εἰώθασι, διττὰ δ᾽ ἐστὶ Νέμεα παρὰ τοῖς
᾿Αργείοις, καθάπερ᾽ Ἴσθμια παρὰ Κορινθίοις. ἐν
μέντοι τούτῳ τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ δύο πρόκεινται παρὰ
τοῖς ᾿Αργείοις ἀγῶνες ἕτεροι τοιοίδε, ὥστε εἶναι
τέσσαρας τοὺς πάντας ἐν ἐνιαυτοῖς τέσσαρσι. πῶς
οὗν εἰκὸς ἐκείνους μὲν ἀπράγμονας εἶναι λειτουρ-
γοῦντας ἅπαξ, τούτους δὲ ὑπάγεσθαι καὶ πρὸς ἑτέ-
ρων συντέλειαν ἐπὶ τετραπλασίοις τοῖς οἴκοι λει-
τουργήμασιν, ἄλλως τε οὐδὲ πρὸς “Ἑλληνικὴν οὐδὲ
παλαιὰν πανήγυριν ; οὐ γὰρ ἐς χορηγίαν ἀγώνων
γυμνικῶν ἢ μουσικῶν οἱ ἹΚορίνθιοι τῶν πολλῶν
δέονται χρημάτων, ἐπὶ δὲ τὰ κυνηγέσια τὰ πολ-

1 ὦ. ὁ. the Corinthians ought to have allowed similar
immunity to Argos.
2 One of these festivals was the Heraean games.

88

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

have grown insolent in ill-doing and are compelling
the Argives to pay them tribute ; it is seven years,
as I am told, since they began this innovation, and
they were not abashed by the immunity of Delphi
or of the Eleans,! which was granted to them so that
they might administer their sacred games. For
there are, as we know, four very important and
splendid games in Greece; the Eleans celebrate the
Olympian games, the Delphians the Pythian, the
Corinthians those at the Isthmus, and the Argives
the Nemean festival. How then can it be reason-
able that those others should retain the immunity
that was granted to them in the past, whereas the
Argives, whoo in consideration of a similar outlay, had
their tribute remitted in the past, or perhaps were
not even subject to tribute originally, should now be
deprived of the privilege of which they were deemed
worthy? Moreover, Elis and Delphi are accustomed
to contribute only once in the course of their far-
famed four-year cycles, but in that period there
are two celebrations of the Nemean games among
the Argives, and likewise of the Isthmian among the
Corinthians. And besides, in these days two other
games? of this sort have been established among
the Argives, so that there are in all in four years
four games. How then is it reasonable that those
others who bear the burden of this function only
once should be left free from the tax, whereas
the Argives are obliged to contribute to yet other
games in addition to their fourfold expenditure at
home; especially as the contribution is for a festival
that is neither Hellenic nor of ancient date? For
it is not to furnish gymnastic or musical contests
that the Corinthians need so much money, but they

89

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

3 a , ΡΣ he ” \
λακις ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις ἐπιτελούμενα ἄρκτους Kal
, a
παρδάλεις ὠνοῦνται. ἀτὰρ αὐτοὶ μὲν εἰκότως φέ-
\ \ A na
ρουσι διὰ τὸν πλοῦτον τῶν ἀναλωμάτων TO μέγε-
7 la ,
os, ἄλλως TE καὶ πολλῶν πόλεων, OS εἰκός,
a 5 la , 14 fal
αὐτοῖς ELS τοῦτο συναιρομένων, WATE ὠνοῦνται τὴν
7 a Υ̓ 1 fey a δὲ /
τέρψιν τοῦ φρονήματος. ργεῖοι δὲ χρημάτων τε
Μ 3 ὃ ld \ A θέ Ν .Δ[
ἔχοντες ἐνδεέστερον καὶ ξενικῇ θέᾳ καὶ Tap ἄλλοις
,’ὔ , lal
ἐπιδουλεύειν ἀναγκαζόμενοι πῶς οὐκ ἄδικα μὲν
an x 4 / /
Kal παράνομα, Ths δὲ περὶ τὴν πόλιν ἀρχαίας
\ ig 3 / ,
δυνάμεώς τε Kal δόξης ἀνάξια πείσονται, ὄντες
? - / ἃ an δ᾽
γ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἀστυγείτονες, ods προσῆκον ἣν ἀγα-
- lal 5 A \ 3 aA
πᾶσθαι μᾶλλον, εἴπερ ὀρθῶς ἔχει τὸ “οὐδ᾽ ἂν Bods
5 / 3 is \ F / 3» op lal
ἀπόλοιτο, εἰ μὴ διὰ κακίαν γειτόνων “" ᾿Αργεῖοι
Ν ἰρ ῖς ἢ
δὲ ἐοίκασιν οὐχ ὑπὲρ ἑνὸς πολυπραγμονούμενοι
/ a s , > a 3 τ
βοιδίου ταῦτα τοὺς Κορινθίους αἰτιᾶσθαι, ἀλλ
e \ A ss / bd ro e ’
ὑπὲρ TOAAWY καὶ μεγάλων ἀναλωμάτων, οἷς οὐ
Bf
δικαίως εἰσὶν ὑπεύθυνοι.
,ὔ X st , 3 , Μ, \
Kairos πρὸς τοὺς Κορινθίους εἰκότως ἄν τις καὶ
a » 7 A A a
τοῦτο προσθείη, πότερον αὐτοῖς δοκεῖ καλῶς ἔχειν
A A A ς My “ 3
τοῖς τῆς παλαιᾶς ᾿Ελλάδος ἕπεσθαι νομίμοις ἢ
nan 7 A Ν. lal
μᾶλλον ols ἔναγχος δοκοῦσι Tapa τῆς βασιλευ-
ovans προσειληφέναι πόλεως ; εἰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν
a A ig A
TOV παλαιῶν νομίμων ἀγαπῶσι σεμνότητα, οὐκ
A 2 /
᾿Αργείοις μᾶλλον eis Κόρινθον ἢ ἹΚορινθίοις εἰς
» ᾽ Ψ Ν na A
"Apyos συντελεῖν προσήκει" εἰ δὲ τοῖς νῦν ὑπάρ-
1 ὥστε Bidez suggests; ὧν Reiske; ὠνοῦνται---φρόνηματος

Hertlein, following Horkel. would delete; ὠνοῦνται οὖν
Capps suggests; ὠνουμένων Keil. .

I follow Heyler in interpreting φρόνημα as the pleasure-
go

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

buy bears and panthers for the hunting shows which
they often exhibit in their theatres. And they
themselves by reason of their wealth are naturally
able to support these great expenses,—especially as
many other cities, as is to be expected, help by con-
tributing for this purpose,—so that they purchase the
pleasure of indulging their temperaments.! But the
Argives are not so well off for money, and com-
pelled' as they are to slave for a foreign spectacle
held in the country of others, will they not be
suffering unjust and illegal treatment and moreover
unworthy of the ancient power and renown of their
city being, as they are, near neighbours of Corinth,
who therefore ought to be the more kindly treated,
if indeed the saying is true, ‘“‘ Not so much as an ox
would perish? except through the wrongdoing of
one’s neighbours’? But it appears that when the
Argives bring these charges against the Corinthians
they are not raising a dispute about a single paltry
ox, but about many heavy expenses to which they
are not fairly liable.

And yet one might put this question also to the
Corinthians, whether they think it right to abide
by the laws and customs of ancient Greece, or rather
by those which it seems they recently took over
from the sovereign city? For if they respect the
high authority of ancient laws and customs, it is no
more fitting for the Argives to pay tribute to Corinth
than for the Corinthians to pay it to Argos. If, on

loving ‘‘temperament,” genius, of the Corinthians. Others
translate ‘‘ pride.” -

2 A paraphrase of Hesiod, Works and Days 348, οὐδ᾽
ἂν Bots ἀπόλοιτ, εἰ μὴ γείτων κακὸς εἴη ; cf, Plautus, Mercator
4. 4, 31.

Ol

D

410

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

A / “
ἕασι τῇ πόλει, ἐπειδὴ τὴν Ῥωμαϊκὴν ἀποικίαν
δέ 3 / / Μ > fal
ἐδέξαντο, ἰσχυριζόμενοι πλέον ἔχειν ἀξιοῦσι, Tap-
/ / A
αἰτησόμεθα μετρίως αὐτοὺς μὴ τῶν πατέρων
a A \ δ al A
φρονεῖν μεῖζον, μηδὲ ὅσα καλῶς ἐκεῖνοι κρίναντες
a \ \ ς /
ταῖς περὶ τὴν λλάδα διεφύλαξαν πόλεσιν ἔθιμα,
“-“ re \ ἴω 3 \ / \
ταῦτα καταλύειν καὶ καινοτομεῖν ἐπὶ βλάβῃ Kal
λύμῃ τῶν ἀστυγειτόνων, ἄλλως τε καὶ νεωτέρᾳ
/ a / \ A
χρωμένους TH ψήφῳ καὶ τὴν ἀπραγμοσύνην τοῦ
fA na id
λαχόντος ὑπὲρ τῆς ᾿Αργείων πόλεως THY δίκην
> aA fe! "Δ
εἰσελθεῖν ἕρμαιον ἔχοντας τῆς πλεονεξίας. εἰ γὰρ
a An ¢ ’
ἐφῆκεν ἔξω τῆς “Ελλάδος ἀπάγων τὴν δίκην, οἱ
7 /
Κορίνθιοι ἔλαττόν τε ἰσχύειν ἔμελλον καὶ τὸ δί-
᾿ A 7 A “
καιον ἐξεταζόμενον κακῶς φαίνεσθαι πρὸς τῶν
a ie / ’ e
πυλλῶν καὶ γενναίων τούτων συνηγόρων, ὑφ᾽ ὧν
ΕΒ , \ “-
εἰκός ἐστι τὸν δικαστήν, προστιθεμένου καὶ τοῦ
͵ὔ 7
κατὰ τὴν πόλιν ἀξιώματος, δυσωπούμενον ταύτην
τὴν ψῆφον ἐξενεγκεῖν.
fel U / la
᾿Αλλὰ τὰ μὲν ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως δίκαια Kal τῶν
ε , 3 “ > ἊΝ 3 / εἾ 7 » a
ῥητόρων, εἰ μόνον ἀκούειν ἐθέλοις Kal λέγειν αὐτοῖς
ἐπιτραπείη τὴν δίκην, ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς πεύσῃ, Kal TO
a ae a
παραστὰν ἐκ τῶν λεγομένων ὀρθῶς κριθήσεται.
ε = \
ὅτι δὲ χρὴ καὶ τοῖς THY πρεσβείαν ταύτην προσά-
a A \ a
γουσι δι’ ἡμῶν πεισθῆναι, μικρὰ προσθεῖναι χρὴ
ων / Ve
περὶ αὐτῶν. Διογένης μέν τοι καὶ Λαμπρίας φι-
A / " BY a θ᾽ Ch. 7.
λοσοφοῦσι μέν, εἴπερ τις ἄλλος τῶν KAU ἡμᾶς,
1 Hertlein suggests ; εἰς τὴν πόλιν Reiske ; τὴν πόλιν MSS.
1 i.e. the present embassy led by Diogenes and Lamprias ;

see below, 410s.
2 Julian now addresses the Proconsul directly. If 355 is the

Q2

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

the other hand, in reliance on the laws they
now have, they claim that their city has gained
advantages since they received the colony from
Rome, then we will exhort them in moderate lan-
guage not to be more arrogant than their fathers
and not to break up the customs which their fathers
with sound judgment maintained for the cities of
Greece, or remodel them to the injury and detri-
ment of their neighbours; especially since they are
relying on a recent decision, and, in their avarice,
_ regard as a piece of luck the inefficiency of the man
who was appointed to represent the case of the city
of Argos. For if he had appealed and taken the
suit outside of the jurisdiction of Greece, the Corin-
thians would have had less influence; their rights,
would have been shown to be weak, when investigated
by these numerous and upright advocates,! and,
swayed by these, it is likely that the judge would
have been awed into giving the proper decision,
especially as the renown of Argos would also have
had weight.

But as for the rights of the case with respect to
the city you? will learn them from the beginning
from the orators if only you will consent to hear
them and they are permitted to present their case,
and then the situation will be correctly judged from
their arguments. But in order to show that we
ought to place confidence in those who have come
on this embassy, I must add a few words concerning
them. Diogenes and Lamprias? are indeed philo-
sophers equal to any in our time, and they have
correct date the Proconsul may be the insolent person referred

to in To Theodorus, p. 37, as baving slighted Julian’s wishes.
3 These men are otherwise unknown.

93

411

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

τῆς πολιτείας δὲ TA μὲν ἔντιμα ἢ καὶ κερδαλέα
διαπεφεύγασι' τῇ πατρίδι δὲ ἐπαρκεῖν ἀεὶ κατὰ
δύναμιν προθυμούμενοι, ὅταν a πόλις ἐν χρείᾳ
μεγάλῃ γένηται, τότε ῥητορεύουσι καὶ πολιτεύ-
ovTat καὶ πρεσβεύουσι καὶ δαπανῶσιν ἐκ τῶν
ὑπαρχόντων προθύμως, ἔργοις ἀπολογούμενοι τὰ
φιλοσοφίας ὀνείδη καὶ τὸ δοκεῖν ἀχρήστους εἶναι
ταῖς πόλεσι τοὺς μετιόντας φιλοσοφίαν ψεῦδος
ἐλέγχοντες" χρῆται γὰρ αὐτοῖς Ἵ τε πατρὶς εἰς
ταῦτα, καὶ “πειρῶνται βοηθεῖν αὐτῇ τὸ δίκαιον δι᾽
ἡμῶν, ἡμεῖς δ᾽ αὖθις διὰ σοῦ. τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ
μόνον λείπεται τοῖς ἀδικουμένοις εἰς τὸ σωθῆναι,
τὸ τυχεῖν δικαστοῦ κρίνειν τε ἐθέλοντος καὶ δυνα-
μένου καλῶς" ὁπότερον ὅ γὰρ ἂν ἀπῇ τούτων,
ἐξαπατηθέντος ἢ ἢ καταπροδόντος αὐτοῦ τὸ δίκαιον
οἱ ἴχεσθαι πάντως ἀνάγκη. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ νῦν ἡμῖν
τὰ μὲν τῶν δικαστῶν ὑ ὑπάρχει κατ᾽ εὐχάς, λέγειν
δ᾽ οὐκ ἔνι μὴ τότε ἐφέντας, ἀξιοῦσι τοῦτο πρῶτον
αὐτοῖς ἀνεθῆναι, καὶ μὴ τὴν ἀπραγμοσύνην τοῦ
τότε συνειπόντος τῇ πόλει καὶ τὴν δίκην ἐπιτρο-
πεύσαντος αἰτίαν αὐτῇ γενέσθαι εἰς τὸν ἔπειτα
αἰῶνα BraBns τοσαύτης.

Ἄτοπον δὲ οὐ χρὴ νομίζειν τὸ τὴν δίκην αὖθις
ἀνάδικον ποιεῖν' τοῖς μὲν γὰρ ἰδιώταις ξυμφέρει
τὸ κρεῖττον καὶ λυσιτελέστερον ὀλίγον παριδεῖν,
τὴν εἰς τὸν ἔπειτα χρόνον ἀσφάλειαν ὠνουμένοις"
ὄντος γὰρ αὐτοῖς ὀλίγου βίου, ἡδὺ μὲν καὶ τὸ ἐπ᾽
ὀλίγον ἡσυχίας ἀπολαῦσαι, φοβερὸν δὲ "καὶ τὸ

1 Hertlein suggests; MSS., Hertlein @vvoua.
2 ὅ τι Hertlein suggests for lacuna, cf. τίς for πότερος

Caesars 320C; ὁπότερον Aldine.

94

ON BEHALF OF THE ARGIVES

avoided the honours and lucrative offices of the
state; but they are ever zealous to serve their
country to the best of their ability, and whenever
the city is in any great emergency, then they plead
causes, assist in the government, go on embassies,
and spend generously from their own resources.
Thus by their actions they refute the reproaches
brought against philosophy, and disprove the com-
mon opinion that those who pursue philosophy are
useless to the state. For their country employs
them for these tasks and they are now endeavouring
‘to aid her to obtain justice by my assistance, as I
in turn by yours. For this is indeed the only hope
of safety left for the oppressed, that they may
obtain a judge who has both the will and ability
to. give a fair decision. For if either of these
qualities be lacking, so that he is either imposed on
or faithless to his trust, then there is no help for
it—the right must perish. But now, since we have
judges who are all that we could wish, and yet are
not able to plead because they did not appeal at the
time, they beg that this disability may first of all be
removed for them, and that the lack of energy of
the man who at that time was the city’s advocate
and had the suit in charge may not be the cause of
so great detriment to her for all time to come.

And we ought not to think it irregular that the
case should again be brought to trial. For, though
in the affairs of private persons it is expedient to
forego a little one’s advantage and the more profit-
able course, and thereby purchase security for the
future—since in their little life it is pleasant, even
for a little, to enjoy peace and quiet; moreover it

1 Cf. Plato, Republic 489a.
95

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πρὸς TOV δικαστηρίων ἀπολέσθαι κρινόμενον, καὶ
παισὶ παραπέμψαι τὴν δίκην ἀτελῆ' ὥστε κινδυ-
νεύει κρεῖσσον εἶναι τὸ καὶ ὁπωσοῦν προσλαβεῖν
ἥμισυ ἢ περὶ τοῦ παντὸς ἀγωνιζόμενον ἀποθανεῖν"
τὼς πόλεις δὲ ἀθανάτους οὔσας εἰ μή τις δικαίως
κρίνας τῆς πρὸς ἀχλήλας φιλονεικίας ἀπαλλάξει,
ἀθάνατον ἔχειν τὴν δύσνοιαν πάντως ἀναγκαῖον,
καὶ τὸ μῖσος δὲ é ἰσχυρὸν τῷ χρόνῳ κρατυνόμενον.
εἴρηται, φασὶν οἱ ῥήτορες, ὅ γ᾽ ἐμὸς λόγος,
κρίνοις δ᾽ ἂν αὐτὸς τὰ δέοντα.

29
᾿Ιουλιανῷ θείῳ :

Ν a A
Ei tas σὰς ἐπιστολὰς ἐγὼ παρὰ φαῦλον ποιοῦ-
μαι,
/ , ᾽ὔ
ἐξ epg δή μοι ἔπειτα θεοὶ φρένας ὥλεσαν αὐτοί.

τί γὰρ οὐκ ἔνεστιν ἐν τοῖς σοῖς καλόν; εὔνοια,
πίστις, ἀλήθεια, καὶ τὸ πρὸ τούτων, οὗ “χωρὶς
οὐδέν ἐστι τἄλλα, φρόνησις ἅπασι τοῖς ἑαυτῆς
μέρεσιν, ἀγχινοίᾳ, συνέσει, εὐβουλίᾳ διαδεικνυ-
μένη. ὅτι δὲ οὐκ ἀντιγράφω, τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ
κατεμέμψω, σχολὴν οὐκ ἄγω, μὰ τοὺς θεούς, καὶ
μὴ νομίσῃς ἀκκισμὸν εἶναι μηδὲ παιδιὰν τὸ
πρᾶγμα. μαρτύρομαι τοὺς λογίους θεούς, ὅτι
πλὴν Ὅμηρου καὶ Πλάτωνος οὐκ ἀκολουθεῖ μοι
πυκτίον οὔτε φιλόσοφον οὔτε ῥητορικὸν οὔτε
γραμματικὸν οὔθ᾽ ἱστορία τις τῶν ἐν κοινῇ χρείᾳ'
1 Papadopoulos 1*; not in Hertlein.

οὔ

TO HIS UNCLE JULIAN

is a terrible thought that one may die while one’s
case is on trial before the courts and hand down
the lawsuit to one’s heirs unsettled, so that it seems
better to secure the half by any possible means than
to die while struggling to gain the whole,—cities on
the other hand do not die, and unless there be
found someone to give a just decision that will free
them from their quarrels with one another, they
must inevitably maintain undying ill-will, and their
hatred moreover is deep-rooted and gains strength
with time.

I have said my say, as the orators express it. You
must yourselves determine what is proper to do.

29
To his Uncle Julian

Ir I set small store by your letters, “Then the
gods themselves have destroyed my wits.”’! For
all the virtues are displayed in them: goodwill,
loyalty, truth, and what is more than all these, since
without it the rest are nought, wisdom, displayed by
you in all her several kinds, shrewdness, intelligence
and good judgement. You reproached me for not
answering them, but I have no time, heaven knows,
and pray do not suppose that this is affectation or
a jest. The gods of eloquence bear me witness
that, except for Homer and Plato, I have with me
᾿ not so much as a pamphlet? on philosophy, rhetoric,
or grammar, or any historical work of the sort that is
in general use. And even these that I have are

1 Tliad 7. 360.
2 Lit. ‘‘ folding tablet ;” the more usual form is πτυκτίον.

97
VOL, III. | iz

362
April
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

an \ A ,
καὶ ταῦτα δὲ αὐτὰ τοῖς περιάώάπτοις ἔοικε καὶ
es / \ Sead 3 7 Ν
φυλακτηρίοις: δέδεται γὰρ ἀεί. ὀλίγα λοιπὸν
> / , , ἧς
καὶ εὔχομαι καίτοι δεόμενος, ὡς εἰκός, εἴ πέρ ποτε
ἄλλοτε καὶ νῦν εὐχῶν πολλῶν πάνυ, καὶ μεγάλων.
ἀλλ᾽ ἄγχει πάντοθεν 1 περιεχόμενα τὰ πράγ-
ματα, ὄψει δὲ ἴσως καὶ αὐτός, ὅταν εἰς τὴν Συρίαν
ie
γένωμαι.
\ \ δ > / / 14 9 a
Περὶ δὲ ὧν ἐπέστειλάς μοι, πάντα ἐπαινῶ,
ἃ } a / 4
πάντα θαυμάζω ἃ évvoets,2 οὐδέν ἐστιν ἀπο-
3 3 / 3 ” θ lo Ὁ Ἂ ΄
βλητον ἐξ ἐκείνων ἴσθι οὖν ὅτι καὶ πάντα
πράξω σὺν θεοῖς.
\ Id \ 7 fal \ A
τοὺς κίονας τοὺς Aadvaiovs θοῦ πρὸ τῶν
” \ > / a a \
ἄλλων: τοὺς ἐκ βασιλείων TOY πανταχοῦ λαβὼν
Γ / \
ἀποκόμισον, ὑπόστησον δὲ εἰς τὰς ἐκείνων χώρας
τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ἔναγχος κατείλημμένων οἰκιῶν' εἰ δὲ
“κἀκεῖθεν ἐπιλείποιεν, ὀπτῆς; πλίνθου καὶ κόνεως
τέως ὁ ἔξωθεν μαρμαρώσαντες εὐτελεστέροις χρη-
/ \ Xo e tg ie aA
σώμεθα: τὸ δὲ ὅσιονϑ OTL πολυτελείας ἐστὶ κρεῖττον
Ἂν a i ἴω Ἂμ /
καὶ τοῖς εὖ φρονοῦσιν ἡδονὴν ἐν βίῳ καὶ τῇ χρήσει
/ \ ic}
ἔχον πολλήν, AUTOS οἶδας.
1 Weil, πάντοτε MS.
2 MS. ἐν οἷς ; ἅ ἐννοεῖς Weil.
3 πάντα ἐπαινῶ- ἐκείνων Weil regards as quotation from
the elder Julian’s letter.

4 Capps; MS. ap. Biicheler deletes.
> Asmus, cf. Vol. 2, 2138p; MS. αἴσιον.

1 For the use of such amulets in the Mithraic ritual to
which Asmus here sees an allusion, see Alithrasliturgie, p. 20,
Dieterich.

2 Julian left Constantinople soon after May 12th for
Antioch, where his uncle then was.

3 The temple of Apollo at Daphne, the suburb of Antioch,
which was burned on October 22nd during Julian’s visit,

98

ΤῸ HISTUNCLE JULIAN

like personal ornaments or amulets,! for they are
always tied fast to me. For the rest I do not even
offer up many prayers, though naturally I need now
more than ever to pray very often and very long.
But I am hemmed in and choked by public business,
as you will perhaps see for yourself when I arrive in
Syria.?

As for the business mentioned in your letter, I
approve of everything and admire everything you
propose, nothing of that must be rejected. Be
assured, then, that with the aid of the gods I shall
leave nothing undone.

First of all set up the pillars of the temple of
Daphne ;3 take those that are in any palace anywhere,
and convey them thence; then set up in their places
others taken from the recently occupied houses.‘
And if there are not enough even from that source,
let us use cheaper ones meanwhile, of baked brick
and plaster, casing them with marble,® for you are
well aware that piety is to be preferred to splendour,
and, when put in practice, secures much pleasure for
the righteous in this life. Concerning the affair

had fallen into disrepair in the reign of Constantius, and
columns had been removed by the Christians; cf. Zonaras
13. 12, who relates that at Tarsus, on his way to Persia,
Julian learned that the Christians had robbed the temple of
Asclepius at Aegae, on the coast, of its columns and used
them to build a church. Julian ordered the columns to be
restored to the temple at the expense of the Christians.

4 Perhaps he means the Christian church dedicated to St.
Babylas, which his half-brother Gallus had erected opposite
the temple.
᾿ δ 2,6. a coat of stucco made with marble dust.

99

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

Περὶ δὲ τῶν πρὸς Λαυρίκιον 1 οὐθὲν οἶμαι δεῖν
ἐπιστέλλειν σοι, πλὴν τοσοῦτον παραινῶ, πᾶσαν
ὀργὴν ἄφες, ἐπίτρεψον ὁ ἅπαντα τῇ δίκῃ, τὰς ἀκοὰς
ὑφέξων αὐτοῦ τοῖς λόγοις μετὰ πάσης πίστεως
τῆς πρὸς τὸ δίκαιον. καὶ οὔ φημι τοῦτο, ὡς οὐκ
ἐπαχθῆ τὰ πρὸς σὲ γραφέντα καὶ πλήρη πάσης
ὕβρεως καὶ ὑπεροψίας, ἀλλὰ χρὴ φέρειν" ἀνδρὸς
γώρ ἐστιν ἀγαθοῦ καὶ μεγαλοψύχου ἀκούειν μὲν
κακῶς, λέγειν δὲ μὴ κακῶς. ὥσπερ γὰρ τὰ βαλλό-
μενα πρὸς τοὺς στερεοὺς καὶ γενναίους τοίχους
ἐκείνοις μὲν οὐ προσιζάνει, οὐδὲ πλήττει, οὐδὲ
ἐγκάθηται, σφοδρότερον δὲ ἐπὶ τοὺς βάλλοντας
ἀνακλᾶται, οὕτω πᾶσα λοιδορία καὶ βλασφημία
καὶ ὕβρις ἄδικος ἀνδρὸς ἀγαθοῦ καταχυθεῖσα
θιγγάνει μὲν οὐδαμῶς ἐκείνου, τρέπεται δὲ ἐπὶ
τὸν καταχέοντα. ταῦτά σοι παραινῶ, τὰ δὲ ἑξῆς
ἔσται τῆς κρίσεις. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν ἐμῶν ἐπιστολῶν
ὥς φησί σε λαβόντα map ἐμοῦ δημοσιεῦσαι,
γελοῖον. εἶναί μοι φαίνεται φέρειν εἰς κρίσιν" οὐθὲν
γὰρ ἐγώ, μὰ τοὺς θεούς, πρός σε πώποτε γέγραφα
οὔτε πρὸς ἄλλον ἄνθρωπον οὐδένα, ὃ ὃ μὴ δημοσίᾳ
τοῖς πᾶσι προκεῖσθαι βούλομαι: τίς γὰρ ἀσέλγεια,
τίς ὕβρις, τίς “προπηλακισμός, τίς λοιδορία, τίς
αἰσχρορρημοσύνη ταῖς ἐμαῖς ἐπιστολαῖς ἐνεγράφη
ποτέ; ὅς γε, καὶ εἰ πρός τινα τραχύτερον εἶχον,"
διδούσης μοι τῆς ὑποθέσεως ὥσπερ ἐξ ἁμάξης

1 Λαυράκιον MS., Λαυρίκιον Geffcken, to identify him with
the correspondent of Libanius.

2 Biicheler; MS. εἰ καὶ----ἔχων ; καίπερ---ἔχων Papadopoulos
suggests.

1 Possibly to be identified with Bassidius Lauricius,
governor of the province of Isauria in 359, a Christian

I0o

TO HIS UNCLE JULIAN

of Lauricius,' I do not think I need write you any
instructions; but U give you just this word of advice :
renounce all feeling of anger, trust all to justice,
submitting your ears to his words with complete
confidence in the right. Yet I do not deny that
what he wrote to you was annoying and full of every
kind of insolence and arrogance; but you must put
up with it. For it becomes a good and great-souled
man to make no counter charge when he is maligned.
For, just as missiles that are hurled against hard,
well-built walls, do not settle on them, or penetrate
them, or stay where they strike, but rebound with
increased force against the hand that throws them,
just so every aspersion directed against an upright
man, slander, calumny, or unmerited insolence,
touches him not at all, but recoils on the head of
him who made the aspersion. ‘This is my advice to
you, but the sequel will be for the law to decide,
With regard, however, to the letters which he asserts
you made public after receiving them from me, it
seems to me ridiculous to bring them into court.
For I call the gods to witness, I have never written
to you or any other man a word that I am not willing
to publish for all to see. Have I ever in my letters
employed brutality or insolence, or abuse or slander,
or said anything for which I need to blush? On the
contrary, even when I have felt resentment against
someone and my subject gave me a chance to use
ribald language like a woman from a cart,? the sort

correspondent of Libanius; Ammianus 19. 13.2; Libanius,
Letter 585, Foerster. The little that we know about Lauricius
gives no clue to what follows.

2 A proverbial reference to the scurrilous language per-
mitted to the women who rode in wagons in the Eleusinian
processions ; cf. Aristophanes, Plutus 1014.

TOE

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

εἰπεῖν, ola ψευδῶς ἐπὶ τοῦ Λυκάμβου 1 ᾿Αρχί-
λοχος, σεμνότερον αὐτὰ καὶ σωφρονέστερον
ἐφθεγξάμην ἤ Tes 8 ἱερὰν ὑπόθεσιν μετῇει. εἰ
δὲ τῆς ὑπαρχούσης ἡμῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους εὐνοίας
ἔμφασιν εἶχε τὰ γράμματα, ipa eyo λανθάνειν
ἡ ουλόμην ἢ ἀποκρύπτεσθαι ; * Τα ΎΤΟΣ μάρτυρας
ἔχω τοὺς θεοὺς πάντας τε καὶ πάσας, ὅτι, καὶ
ὅσα μοι πρὸς τὴν γαμετήν, οὐκ av ἠχθέσθην, εἴ τις
ἐδημοσίευσεν' οὕτως ἦν πάντα σωφροσύνης πλήρη.
εἰ δέ, ἃ πρὸς τὸν ἐμαυτοῦ θεῖον ἐπέστειλα, ταῦτα
καὶ ἄλλος τις ἀνέγνω καὶ δεύτερος, ὁ πικρῶς
οὕτως ἀνιχνεύσας αὐτὰ δικαιοτέραν ἄν ὑπόσχοι
μέμψιν ἢ ὁ γράψας ἐγὼ ἢ σὺ ἢ καὶ ἄλλος ἀνα-
γνούς. “πλὴν ἀλλὰ τοῦτο συγχώρει καὶ μὴ
ταραττέτω σε, σκόπει δὲ ἐκεῖνο μόνον" πονηρός
ἐστι Λαυρίκιος, “ὑπέξελθε γενναίως αὐτόν. εἰ δὲ
ἐπιεικὴς, καὶ μέτριός ἐστι, καὶ ἥμαρτε περὶ σέ,
δὸς αὐτῷ συγγνώμην' τοὺς γὰρ ἀγαθοὺς δημοσίᾳ,
κἂν ἰδίᾳ περὶ ἡμᾶς οὐ καθήκοντες γένωνται,
φιλεῖν χρή. τοὺς πονηροὺς δὲ ἐν τοῖς κοινοῖς, κἂν
ἡμῖν κεχαρισμένοι διὰ χειρὸς ἔχειν, οὐ μισεῖν οὐδὲ
ἐκτρέπεσθαί φημι, φυλακὴν δὲ προβεβλῆσθαί °

τίνα, ὅπως μὴ λήσωσι κακουργοῦντες, εἰ δὲ
δυσφύλακτοι λίαν εἶεν, χρῆσθαι πρὸς μηδὲν αὐτοῖς.
ὑπὲρ οὗ γέγραφας καὶ αὐτός, ὅτι θρυλούμενος ἐπὶ
πονηρίᾳ τὴν ἰατρικὴν ὑποκρίνεται, ἐκλήθη μὲν
παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ὡς σπουδαῖος, πρὶν δὲ εἰς ὄψιν ἐλθεῖν

1 Weil, MS. Λαυδακίδου.

Bidez, MS. αὐτόν.

Bidez, ἤ τις Weil, ὡς εἴτις Papadopoulos, . . εἴτις MS.
; Weil adds ; Papadopoulos inserts μὴ before λανθάνειν.
Biicheler ; MS. προβέβλησό.

σι me Ὁ τῷ

TO HIS UNCLE JULIAN

of libels that Archilochus launched against Lycambes,!
I have always expressed myself with more dignity
and reserve than one observes even on a sacred sub-
ject. And if my letters did give emphatic proof of
the kindly feeling that you and I have towards one
another, did I wish this to be unknown or concealed ?
For what purpose? I call all the gods and goddesses
to witness that I should not have resented it, even if
someone had published abroad all that I ever wrote
to my wife, so temperate was it in every respect.
And if this or that person has read what I wrote to
my own uncle, it would be fairer to blame the man who
ferreted it out with such malevolence, rather than
me, the writer, or you, or any other who read it.
Nevertheless, concede this to me, do not let it disturb
your peace of mind, only look at the matter thus—if
Lauricius is really dishonest get rid of him in a dig-
nified way. But if he is a well-meaning person of
average honesty, and has treated you badly, forgive
him. For when men are horiest in public life we
must be on good terms with them, even though they
do not behave properly to us in their private capacity.
On the other hand, when men are dishonest in public
affairs, even though they have won our favour, we
must keep them under control; I do not mean that
we must hate or avoid them, but keep careful watch
on them, so that we may not fail to detect them
when they misbehave, though if they are too hard to
control in this way, we must not employ them at all.
As for what you, as well as others, have written, that
though notorious for bad conduct he masquerades as
a physician, I did send for him, thinking that he was
trustworthy, but before he had an interview with me

1 Cf. Horace, Hpode 6. 13.
103

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

φωραθεὶς ὅστις ἣν, μᾶλλον δὲ καταμηνυθείς" τὸ
δὲ ὑπὸ τίνος αὐτὸς ἐντυχὼν φράσω σοι" κατεφρο-
νήθη" σοὶ δὲ καὶ ὑπὲρ τούτου χάριν οἶδα.

Τῶν αἰτηθέντων a ἀγρῶν ἐπειδήπερ ἔφθην € ἐκείνους
δεδωκώς" εἰσί δέ μοι μάρτυρες ὁμόγνιοι καὶ φίλιοι 1
θεοί: δώσω μακρῷ λυσιτελεστέρους, αἰσθήσῃ δὲ
καὶ αὐτός.

90

᾿Ιουλιανὸς Φιλίππῳ 3

᾿Εγὼ νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς ἔτι καῖσαρ ὧν ἐπέστειλά
σοι, καὶ νομίξω πλέον ἢ ἅπαξ. ὥρμησα μέντοι
πολλάκις, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκώλυσαν ἄλλοτε ἄλλαι προφά-
σεις, εἶτα ἡ γενομένη διὰ τὴν ἀνάρρησιν ἐμοί τε
καὶ τῷ μακαρίτῃ ΚΚωνσταντίῳ λυκοφιλία" παντά-
πᾶσι γὰρ ἐφυλαττόμην ὑπὲρ τὰς ἼΑλπεις ἐπιστεῖ-
λαί τινι, μὴ πραγμάτων αὐτῷ χαλεπῶν αἴτιος
γένωμαι. τεκμήριον δέ μοι ὃ ποιοῦ τῆς εὐνοίας
τὸ μὴ γράφειν' οὐ γὰρ ἐθέλει πολλάκις ὁμολογεῖν
ἡ γλῶττα τῇ διανοίᾳ. καὶ ἴσως ἔχει μέν τι πρὸς
τὸ γαυριᾶν καὶ ἀλαζονεύεσθαι τοῖς ἰδιώταις ἡ
τῶν βασιλικῶν ἐπιστολῶν ἐπίδειξις, ὅταν πρὸς
τοὺς ἀσυνήθεις, ὥσπερ δακτύλιοί τινες ὑπὸ τῶν
ἀπειροκάλων φερόμενοι, κομίζωνται. φιλία δὲ

1 φίλοι MS., φίλιοι Weil. 2 Hertlein 68.
3 μοι ποιοῦ τοῦτο---γράφειν MSS.; μὴ---γράφειν Reiske, Hert-
lein ; μοι---μκμὴ γράφειν Cobet.

1 Schwarz wrongly suspects this letter on stylistic grounds.
Philip was perhaps the Cappadocian to whom Libanius wrote
several extant letters, ¢.g. Letter 1190. For his zeal in aiding

104

TO PHILIP

his true character was detected, or rather he was
denounced to me—when I meet you I will tell you
by whom—and he was treated with contempt. For
this too I have to thank you.

Instead of the estates that you asked for, since I
have already given those away—I call to witness the
gods of our family and of friendship—I will give
you some that pay far better, as you shall yourself
discover.

30
To Philip!

I cat the gods to witness that, when I was still

Caesar I wrote to you, and 1 think it was more than Ὁ

once. However, [ started to do so many times, but
there were reasons that prevented me, now of one
kind, now another, and then followed that wolf’s
friendship that arose between myself and Constantius
of blessed memory, in consequence of the proclama-
tion.2 I was exceedingly careful not to write to
anyone beyond the Alps for fear of getting him into
serious trouble. So consider the fact that I did not
write a proof of my goodwill. For it is often impractic-
able to make one’s language harmonise with one’s
real sentiments. Then, too, letters from the Emperor
to private persons might well lead to their display
for bragging and making false pretences when they
come into the hands of persons with no sense of pro-
priety, who carry them about like seal-rings and
show them to the inexperienced. Nay, genuine

Julian to restore paganism he suffered persecution after the
Emperor’s death.

2 2,6. of himself as Augustus by the army in Gaul, early in
360; cf. Vol. 2, Letter to the Athenians 283-286; he was
Caesar 355-360,

105

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

9 \ ἢ , \ > ¢ ’ e
ἀληθινὴ γίνεται μάλιστα μὲν δι’ ὁμοιότητος, ἡ
/ Leth 3 lal > x AX a
δευτέρα δέ, ὅταν τις ἀληθῶς, ἀλλὰ μη TAATTOS
θαυμάξῃ, καὶ παρὰ TOD τύχῃ καὶ συνέσει κρείτ-
τονος ὁ πρᾷος καὶ μέτριος καὶ σώφρων ἀγαπηθῇ.
τὰ γραμματεῖα δὲ ταῦτα πολλοῦ τύφου καὶ
πολλῆς φλυαρίας ἐστὶ μεστά, καὶ ἔγωγε πολλάκις
,ὔ
ἐμαυτῷ μέμφομαι μακρότερα ποιούμενος αὐτὰ
καὶ λαλίστερος ὦν, ἐξὸν Πυθαγόρειον διδάσκειν
τὴν γλῶτταν.

Ὑπεδεξάμην μέντοι τὰ σύμβολα, φιάλην ἀργυ-
pav, ἕλκουσαν μίαν μνᾶν, καὶ χρυσοῦ νόμισμα.
καλέσαι δέ σε πρὸς ἐμαυτόν, ἁ ὥσπερ ἐπέστειλας,
ἐβουλόμην. ἤδη δὲ ἔαρ ὑποφαίνει καὶ τὰ δένδρα
βλαστάνει, χελιδόνες δὲ ὅσον οὔπω “προσδοκώ-
μεναι τοὺς συστρατευομένους ἡμᾶς, ὅταν ἐπεισ-
7 93 7 lal ’ n ’ὔ fo
έλθωσιν, ἐξελαύνουσι τῶν οἰκιῶν, καί φασι δεῖν
ὑπερορίους εἶναι. πορευσόμεθα δὲ δι’ ὑμῶν,
Ὁ 4 Δ 5 ΄ 2 U an
ὥστε pot βέλτιον ἂν ἐντύχοις, ἐθελόντων θεῶν,
ἐν τοῖς σαυτοῦ. τοῦτο δὲ οἶμαι ταχέως ἔσεσθαι,
πλὴν εἰ μή τι δαιμόνιον γένοιτο κώλυμα. καὶ
τοῦτο δὲ αὐτὸ τοῖς θεοῖς εὐχόμεθα.

91
’ A τὰ \ lal 5 a 1
Ἰουλιανοῦ vomos περὶ τῶν ἰατρῶν.
Τὴν ἰατρικὴν ἐπιστήμην σωτηριώδη τοῖς
ἀνθρώποις τυγχάνειν τὸ ἐναργὲς τῆς χρείας

1 Hertlein 250. . In the MSS. this document has no
title; it was placed by Hertlein after Letter 25 in his
edition.

1 Such tokens were often sent tofriends; cf. To Hecebolius,
peed YE

106

A DECREE CONCERNING PHYSICIANS

friendship is produced first and foremost by similarity
of disposition, but a second kind is, when one feels
true and not pretended admiration, and a humane,
moderate and virtuous man is cherished by one who
is his superior in fortune and intelligence. Moreover
letters of this sort are full of conceit and nonsense,
and, for my part, I often blame myself for making
mine too long, and for being too loquacious when I
might discipline my tongue “to Pythagorean silence.

Yes, I received the tokens, namely, a silver bowl
. weighing one mina and a gold coin.! [1 should be
very glad to invite you to visit me as you suggest
in your letter. But the first signs of spring are here
already, the trees are in bud, and the swallows, which
are expected almost immediately, as soon as they
come drive our band of campaigners out of doors,
and remind us that we ought to be over the border.
We shall travel through your part of the country,?
so that you would have a better chance of seeing
me, if the gods so will it, in yourown home. This
will, I think, be soon, unless some sign from heaven
should forbid it. For this same meeting I am
praying to the gods.

A decree concerning Physicians?

Tuar the science of medicine is salutary for man-
kind is plainly testified by experience. Hence the

2 Julian set out for Antioch about May 12th, 362, and ex-
pected to see Philip in Cappadocia.

3 This edict, preserved more briefly in Codex Theodosianus
13. 3. 4, was Julian’s last known legislative act before he left
Constantinople. It confirmed the immunity granted to phy-
sicians by Constantine, and was probably meant to apply
only to the heads of the medical faculties, archiatri, since
the Latin edict is addressed to them,

107

362
May
12th
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μαρτυρεῖ. διὸ καὶ ταύτην ἐξ οὐρανοῦ πεφοιτη-
κέναι δικαίως φιλοσόφων παῖδες κηρύττουσι.
τὸ γὰρ ἀσθενὲς τῆς ἡμετέρας φύσεως καὶ τὰ
τῶν ἐπισυμβαινόντων ἀρρωστημάτων ἐπανορ-
θοῦται διὰ ταύτης. ὅθεν κατὰ τὸν τοῦ δικαίου
λογισμὸν συνῳδὰ τοῖς ἄνωθεν βασιλεῦσι θεσπί-
ζοντες ἡμετέρᾳ φιλανθρωπίᾳ κελεύομεν τῶν
βουλευτικῶν λειτουργημάτων ἀνενοχλήτους ὑμᾶς
τοὺς λοιποὺς χρόνους διάγειν.

92
Ocodapa.'

To βιβλίον, ὅπερ ἀπέστειλας διὰ Μυγδονίου,
δεδέγμεθα, καὶ προσέτι πάντα ὅσα σύμβολα διὰ
τῆς ἑορτῆς ἡμῖν ἐπέμπετο. ἔστι μὲν οὖν μοι καὶ
τούτων ἕκαστον ἡδὺ," παντὸς δὲ ἥδιον, εὖ ἴσθι, τὸ
πεπύσθαι με περὶ τῆς σῆς ἀγαθότητος, ὅ ὅτι σὺν θεοῖς
ἔρρωταί σοι τὸ “σῶμα, καὶ τὰ περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς
ἐπιμελέστερον ἅμα καὶ συντονώτερον σπουδά-
ζεται παρὰ σοῦ. περὶ δὲ ὧν πρὸς τὸν φιλόσοφον
Μάξιμον ἔγραψας, ὡς τοῦ φίλου μου Σελεύκου
διαφόρως ἔ ἔχοντος πρὸς σέ, πέπεισο μηθὲν αὐτὸν
Tap ἐμοὶ τοιοῦτον πράττειν ἢ λέγειν, ἐξ ὧν ἄν σε

1 Papadopoulos 2* ; not in Hertlein.
2 Weil; MS. ἰδεῖν.

* For Mygdonius ef. Letter 33, and Libanius, Zet/ers 47],
518 written in 357.

2 Literally ‘‘tokens,” tesserae, probably the same as the
συνθήματα mentioned by Sozomen 5. 16; they were letters of
recommendation for the use of Christian travellers ; Sozomen
says that Julian wished to establish this custom among the
pagans.

108

TO THE PRIESTESS THEODORA

sons of the philosophers are right in proclaiming that
this science also is descended from heaven. For by
its means the infirmity of our nature and the dis-
orders that attack us are corrected. Therefore, in
accordance with reason and justice, we decree what
is in harmony with the acts of former Emperors, and
of our benevolence ordain that for the future ye may
live free from the burdens attaching to senators.

ὦ
To the priestess Theodora

I wave received through Mygdonius! the books
that you sent me, and ‘besides, all the letters of
recommendation? that you forwar ded to me through-
out the festival. Every one of these gives me pleasure,
but you may be sure that more pleasant than anything
else is the news about your excellent self,® that by
the grace of the gods you are in goed physical health,
and are devoting yourself to the service of the gods
more earnestly and energetically. As regards what
you wrote to the philosopher Maximus, that my
friend Seleucus‘ is ill-disposed towards you, believe
me that he neither does nor says in my pres-
ence anything that he could possibly intend as

3 Literally “your Goodness”; with this use of ἀγαθότης cf.
Oribasius, Introduction to his ἰατρικαὶ συναγωγαὶ 1. παρὰ τῆς
σῆς Ἔσο αὐτόκρατορ ᾿Ιουλιανὲ = “by your god-like self,”
literally ‘‘ your Divinity” ; see above, p. 3.

4 Of Cilicia. He was an old friend of the Emperor’s and
accompanied him on the Persian campaign. From the letters
of Libanius it seems that Julian had appointed Seleucus to
some high priestly office in 362.

109

362
Jan-
May?
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

or from
Antioch
in the
Autumn

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μάλιστα διαβάλλοι: τοὐναντίον δὲ πάντα εὔφημα
διεξέρχεται περὶ σοῦ, καὶ οὔπω λέγω τοῦθ᾽ ὅτι
καὶ διάκειται περὶ σὲ καλῶς" ἐκεῖνο μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸς
ἂν εἰδείη καὶ οἱ πάντα ὁρῶντες θεοί; τὸ δὲ ὅτι
πάντων ἀπέχεται τῶν τοιούτων ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, λίαν
ἀληθεύων φημί. γελοῖον οὖν εἶναί μοι φαίνεται,
μὴ τὰ πραττόμενα παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ σκοπεῖν ἀλλὰ
τὰ κρυπτόμενα, καὶ ὧν οὐδέν ἐστί μοι φανερὸν
τεκμήριον. ἐξετάζειν. ἐπεὶ δὲ κατέδραμες αὐτοῦ
πολλὰ πάνυ, καὶ περὶ αὑτῆς ἐδηλωσάς τινα, τὴν
αἰτίαν μοι τῆς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπεχθείας φανερὰν
ποιοῦσα, τοσοῦτον ἔγώ φημι πρός σε διαρρήδην,
ὡς, εἴ τινα ἀνδρῶν ἢ γυναικῶν ἢ ἐλευθέρων ἢ
δούλων ἀγαπᾷς οὔτε νῦν σέβοντα θεοὺς οὔτε
ἐν ἐλπίδι τοῦ πείσειν αὐτὸν ἔχουσα, ἁμαρτάνεις.
ἐννόησον γὰρ ὡς ἐπὶ σαυτῆς πρῶτον, εἴ τις οἰκετῶν
τῶν φιλουμένων ὑπὸ σοῦ τοῖς λοιδορουμένοις καὶ
βλασφημοῦσί σε συμπράττοι καὶ θεραπεύοι
πλέον ἐκείνους, ἀποστρέφοιτο δὲ καὶ βδελύττοιτο
τοὺς σοὺς φίλους ἡμᾶς, ap οὐ τοῦτον αὐτίκα
ἂν ἀπολέσθαι ἐθέλοις, 1 μᾶλλον. δὲ καὶ αὐτὴ
τιμωρήσαιο; TL οὖν; οἱ θεοὶ τῶν φίλων εἰσὶν
ἀτιμότεροι; λόγισαι καὶ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν τοῦτο,
δεσπότας μὲν ἐκείνους ὑπολαβοῦσα, δούλους
δὲ ἡμᾶς. εἴ τις οὖν ἡμῶν, οἵ φαμεν εἶναι θερά-
ποντες θεῶν, οἰκέτην στέργοι τὸν βδελυττόμενον
αὐτοὺς καὶ ἀποστρεφόμενον αὐτῶν τὴν θρησκείαν,
ap οὐ δίκαιον ἢ πείθειν αὐτὸν καὶ σώζειν, ἢ τῆς
οἰκίας ἀποπέμπεσθαι καὶ πιπράσκειν, εἴ τῳ μὴ

1 Weil; MS. ἐθέλεις.

TO THE PRIESTESS THEODORA

slandering. On the contrary, all that he tells me
about you is favourable ; and while I do not go so far
as to say that he actually feels friendly to you—only
he himself and the all-seeing gods can know the
truth as to that—still I can say with perfect sincerity
that he does refrain from any such calumny in my
presence. Therefore it seems absurd to scrutinise
what is thus concealed rather than what he actually
does, and to search for proof of actions of which I
have no shred of evidence. But since you have
made so many accusations against him, and have
- plainly revealed to me a definite cause for your own
hostility towards him, I do say this much to you
frankly; if you are showing favour to any person,
man or woman, slave or free, who neither worships
the gods as yet, nor inspires in you any hope that you
may persuade him to do so, you are wrong. For do
but consider first how you would feel about your, own
household. Suppose that some slave for whom you
feel affection should conspire with those who slan-
dered and spoke ill of you, and showed deference to
them, but abhorred and detested us who are your
friends, wouid you not wish for his speedy destruc-
tion, or rather would you not punish him yourself?!
Well then, are the gods to be less honoured than our
friends? You must use the same argument with
reference to them, you must consider that they are
our masters and we their slaves. It follows, does it
not, that if one of us who call ourselves servants of
the gods has a favourite slave who abominates the
gods and turns from their worship, we must in justice
either convert him and keep him, or dismiss him from
the house and sell him, in case some one does not

1 An echo of Plato, Zuthyphro 13p; cf. Vol. 2, 2898.
ἘΠῚ

THE LETTERS ΟΕ JULIAN

ΠΡΌΣ ὑπερορᾶν οἰκέτου κτήσεως ; ἐγὼ δὲ οὐκ ἂν

δεξαίμην ὑπὸ τῶν μὴ φιλούντων θεοὺς ἀγα-
πᾶσθαι: ὃ δὴ καὶ σὲ καὶ πάντας φημὶ δεῖν τοὺς
ἱερατικῶν ἀντιποιουμένους ἐντεῦθεν ἤδη διανοη-
θέντας ἅψασθαι συντονώτερον τῆς εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς
ἁγιστείας" ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκίας δὲ σεβασμὸν " εὔλογον
παρέχεσθαι τῆς ἑαυτοῦ τὸν ἱερέα, Kal πρώτην
αὐτὴν ὅλην δι ὅλης ἀποφῆναι καθαρὰν τῶν
τηλικούτων νοσημάτων.

393
Ocodwpa τῇ αἰδεσιμωτάτῃ."

οἷ id \ a /
Ta πεμφθέντα παρὰ σοῦ βιβλία πάντα
ὑπεδεξάμην Kal Tas ἐπιστολὰς ἄσμενος διὰ
An /
τοῦ βελτίστου Μυγδονίου. καὶ μόγις ἄγων
΄ δι ἡ ς ,ὔ ᾽ ἢ ͵ ΝΣ 4
σχολήν, ὡς ἴσασιν οἱ θεοῖ, οὐκ ἀκκιζόμενος λέγω,
A , / \ >
ταῦτα ἀντέγραψα πρός σε. σὺ δὲ εὖ πράττοις
καὶ γράφοις ἀεὶ τοιαῦτα.

94

᾿Εδεξώμην" ὅσα ἐπέστειλεν ἡ σὴ φρόνησις
ἀγαθὰ καὶ καλὰ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν ἡμῖν ἐπαγ-
\ a \ \ εξ us
γέλματα καὶ δῶρα' Kal πολλὴν ὁμολογήσας

1 Biicheler, Weil; Papadopoulos ἱερατικῆς (λειτουργία) ;
MS. ἱερατικῶς.

2 Weil ἢ MS. ἕκαστον. 3 Hertlein 5.

4 Cobet; οὐ κακιζομένην λόγω MSS., Hertlein ; οὐκ ἀκκιζο-
μένην Reiske.

Ὁ Papadopoulos 6*. Not in Hertlein,

112

TO THEODORA

find it easy to dispense with owning a slave? For
my part I would not consent to be loved by those
who do not love the gods; wherefore I now say
plainly that you and all who aspire to priestly offices
must bear this in mind, and engage with greater
energy in the temple worship of the gods. And it is
reasonable to expect that a priest should begin with
his own household in showing reverence, and first of
all prove that it is wholly and throughout pure of
such grave distempers.

Sa
To the most reverend Theodora }

I was glad to receive all the books that you
sent me, and your letters through the excellent
Mygdonius.? And since I have hardly any leisure,—
as the gods know, I speak without affectation,—I
have written you these few lines. And now fare-
well, and may you always write me letters of the
same sort!

34
To Theodora ? 2

I nAvE received from you who are wisdom itself
your letter telling me of the fair and_ blessed
promises and gifts of the gods to us. First I

1 The epithet as well as the preceding letter show that she
was a priestess. .

* Mygdonius protected Libanius in Constantinople in 343.
There is nothing to show whether Julian was at Antioch or
Constantinople when he wrote these letters to Theodora.

3 This unaddressed letter must have been written to a
priestess, who was almost certainly Theodora.

τ

VOL, III. I

362
About,
the
same
date as
Lettez
32

315

B

THE LETTERS OF JOLIAN

χάριν τοῖς οὐρανίοις θεοῖς ἐν δευτέρῳ τῇ σῇ
μεγαλοψυχίᾳ άριν ἔσχον, ὅτι καὶ προσλιπαρεῖν
ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν τοὺς θεοὺς ἐν τοῖς μάλιστα προθυμῇ
καὶ τὰ φανέντα παρ᾽ αὑτῇ ἀγαθὰ διὰ ταχέων
ἡμῖν καταμηνύειν σπουδάζξεις.

3D
᾿Αριστοξένῳ φιλοσόφῳ.

“Apa γε χρὴ περιμένειν. κλῆσιν, καὶ τὸ ἀκλητὶ
προτιμᾶν μηδαμοῦ ; ἀλλ᾽ ὅρα μὴ χαλεπὴν ταύτην
εἰσαγάγωμεν νομοθεσίαν, εἰ ταὐτὰ χρὴ παρὰ τῶν
φίλων περιμένειν, ὅσα καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἁπλῶς καὶ
ὡς ἔτυχε γνωρίμων. ἀπορήσει τις ἐνταῦθα, πὼς
οὐκ ἰδόντες " ἀλλήλους ἐσμὲν φίλοι; πῶς δὲ τοῖς
πρὸ χιλίων ἐτῶν γεγονόσι καὶ ναὶ μὰ Δία
δισχιλίων; ὅτι σπουδαῖοι πάντες ἧσαν καὶ τὸν
τρόπον καλοί τε κἀγαθοί. ἐπιθυμοῦμεν δὲ καὶ ἡμεῖς
εἶναι τοιοῦτοι, εἰ καὶ τοῦ εἶναι, τό ye εἰς ἐμέ,
πάμπληθες ἀπολειπόμεθα. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ H γε ἐπι-
θυμία τάττει πως ἡμᾶς εἰς τὴν αὐτὴν ἐκείνοις
μερίδα. καὶ τί ταῦτα ἐγὼ ληρῶ μακρότερον;
εἴτε γὰρ ἄκλητον ἰέναι χρή, ἥξεις δήπουθεν" εἴὔτε
καὶ κλῆσιν περιμένεις, ἰδού σοι καὶ παράκλησις
ἥκει TAP ἡμῶν. ἔντυχε οὖν ἡμῖν περὶ τὰ Τύανα.
πρὸς Διὸς φιλίου, καὶ δεῖξον ἡμῖν ἄνδρα ἐν Καπ-

1 Hertlein 4.

2 Wyttenbach, Cobet from Parisinus; εἰδότες MSS.,
Hertlein.

114

TO ARISTOXENUS, A PHILOSOPHER

acknowledged the great gratitude that I owed to
the heavenly gods, and in the second place I ren-
dered thanks to your generosity of soul, in that you
are zealous, no one more so, in entreating the gods
on my behalf, and moreover you lose no time but
inform me without delay of the blessings that have
been revealed where you are.

35
To Aristoxenus, a Philosopher !

Must youthen really wait for an invitation and never
prefer to come uninvited? Nay, see to it that you
and I do not introduce this tiresome convention
of expecting the same ceremony from our friends
as from mere chance acquaintances. At this point
will somebody or other raise the question how we
come to be triends when we have never seen one
another? I answer: How are we the friends of
those who lived a thousand, or, by Zeus, even two
thousand years ago? It is because they were all
virtuous, of upright and noble character. _ And we,
likewise, desire to be such as they, even though, to
speak for myself, we completely fail in that aspira-
tion. But, at any rate, this ambition does in some
degree rank us in the same category as_ those
persons. But why do I talk at length about these
triles? For if it is right that you should come
without an invitation you will certainly come; if,
on the other hand, you are really waiting for an
invitation, herewith you have from me an urgent
summons. Therefore meet me at Tyana, in the
name of Zeus the god of friendship, and show me

1 This Hellenised Cappadocian is otherwise unknown.

115

τὸν

802
June
On the
way to
Antioch

4

od

2

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

παδόκαις καθαρῶς “ Ἑλληνα. τέως γὰρ τοὺς μεν
οὐ βουλομένους, ὀλίγους δέ τινας ἐθέλοντας μέν,
οὐκ εἰδότας δὲ θύειν ὁρῶ.

90

Παιδείαν ὀρθὴν εἶναι νομίζομεν οὐ τὴν ἐν
τοῖς ῥήμασι καὶ τῇ γλώττῃ πραγματευομένην *
εὐρυθμίαν, ἀλλὰ διάθεσιν ὑγιῆ νοῦν ἐχούσης
διανοίας καὶ ἀληθεῖς δόξας ὑπέρ τε ἀγαθῶν καὶ
κακῶν, ἐσθλῶν τε καὶ αἰσχρῶν. ὅστις οὖν ἕτερα
μὲν φρονεῖ, διδάσκει δὲ ἕτερα τοὺς πλησιάζοντας,
οὗτος ἀπολελεῖφθαι τοσούτῳ δοκεῖ τῆς παιδείας,
ὅσῳ καὶ τοῦ χρηστὸς ἀνὴρ εἶναι. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἐπὶ
σμικροῖς εἴη τὸ διάφορον τῆς γνώμης πρὸς τὴν
γλῶτταν, κακὸν μὲν οἰστὸν δὲ ὅμως ὁπωσοῦν
γίνεται" εἰ δὲ ἐν τοῖς μεγίστοις ἄλλα μὲν φρονοίη
τις, ἐπ᾿ ἐναντίον δὲ ὧν φρονεῖ διδάσκοι, πῶς οὐ
τοῦτο ἐκεῖνο καπήλων ἐστίν, οὔτι χρηστῶν, ἀλλὰ
παμπονήρων ἀνθρώπων, οἱ μάλιστα 3 ἐπαινοῦσιν *
ὅσα μάλιστα φαῦλα νομίζουσιν, ἐξαπατῶντες καὶ
δελεάζοντες τοῖς ἐπαίνοις εἰς οὺς μετατιθέναι τὰ
σφέτερα ἐθέλουσιν, οἶμαι, κακά. πάντας μὲν οὗν
χρὴ τοὺς καὶ ὁτιοῦν διδάσκειν ἐπαγγελλομένους
εἶναι τὸν τρόπον ἐπιεικεῖς καὶ μὴ μαχόμενα οἷς

1 Hertlein 42. Suidas quotes the first three sentences.

2 πραγματευομένην Asmus ; πολιτευομένην Suidas, Hertlein ;
πολυτελῆ MSS. (‘‘ expensive”) may be defended.

3 μάλιστα Klimek would delete.

4 ἐπαινοῦσιν Naber because of ἐπαίνοις below; παιδεύουσιν
Hertlein, MSS. ὅ διατίθεσθαι Σ Hertlein.

116

RESCRIPT ON CHRISTIAN TEACHERS

a genuine Hellene among the Cappadocians.! For
I observe that, as yet, some refuse to sacrifice, and
that, though some few are zealous, they lack
knowledge.

36
Rescript on Christian Teachers 3

I notp that a proper education results, not in
laboriously acquired symmetry of phrases and langu-
age, but in a healthy condition of mind, I mean a
mind that has understanding and true opinions about
things good and evil, honourable and base. There-
fore, when a man thinks one thing and teaches his
pupils another, in my opinion he fails to educate
exactly in proportion as he fails to be an honest man.
And if the divergence between a man’s convictions
_and his utterances is merely in trivial matters, that
can be tolerated somehow, though it is wrong. But
if in matters of the greatest importance a man has
certain opinions and teaches the contrary, what is
that but the conduct of hucksters, and not honest
but thoroughly dissolute men in that they praise
most highly the things that they believe to be most
worthless, thus cheating and enticing by their praises
those to whom they desire to transfer their worthless
wares. Now all who profess to teach anything what-
ever ought to be men of upright character, and ought

1 The Cappadocians were, for the most part, Christians ;
Julian visited Tyana in June on his way to Antioch.

2 For this law see Introduction; Zonaras 13. 12; Sozo-
men 5. 18; Socrates 3. 16. 1; Theodoret 3, 8. This version
is, no doubt, incomplete.

117

362
After
June
17th
From
Antioch

423

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

δημοσίᾳ μεταχειρίξονται ἷ τὰ ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ φέρειν
δοξάσματα, πολὺ δὲ πλέον ἁπάντων οἶμαι δεῖν
εἶναι τοιούτους ὅσοι ἐπὶ λόγοις τοῖς νέοις συγ-
’ὔ a A
γίγνονται, τῶν παλαιῶν ἐξηγηταὶ γιγνόμενοι
συγγραμμάτων, εἴτε ῥήτορες εἴτε γραμματικοί,
καὶ ἔτι πλέον οἱ σοφισταί. βούλονται γὰρ πρὸς
τοῖς ἄλλοις οὐ λέξεων μόνον, ἠθῶν δὲ εἶναι διδά-.
\ \ a “5 / \
σκαλοι, Kal? κατὰ σφᾶς εἰναι φασι τὴν πολιτικὴν
φιλοσοφίαν. εἰ μὲν οὖν ἀληθὲς ἢ μή, τοῦτο
Υ a lal ¢
ἀφείσθω τὰ 8 νῦν. ἐπαινῶν δὲ αὐτοὺς οὕτως
ἐπαγγελμάτων καλῶν ὀρεγομένους ἐπαινέσαιμ᾽
ΕΝ " f 3 \ “ὃ δ᾽ 2 7.
ἂν ἔτι πλέον, εἰ μὴ ψεύδοιντο μηδ᾽ ἐξελέγχοιεν
αὑτοὺς ἕτερα μὲν φρονοῦντας, διδάσκοντας δὲ
TOUS πλησιάζοντας ἕτερα. TL οὖν ; Ὁμήρῳ
VA
μέντοι καὶ ᾿Ησιόδῳ καὶ Δημοσθένει καὶ Ἡροδότῳ
καὶ Θουκυδίδ᾽ καὶ ᾿Ισοκράτει καὶ Λυσίᾳ θεοὶ
πάσης ἡγοῦνται παιδείας. οὐχ οἱ μὲν Ἕρμοῦ
σφᾶς ἱερούς, οἱ δὲ Μουσῶν ἐνόμιζον; ἄτοπον μὲν
5 5 \ f \ 4
οὖν οἶμαι τοὺς ἐξηγουμένους τὰ τούτων ἀτιμάζειν
A / 4 \
Tous ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν τιμηθέντας θεούς. οὐ μὴν ἐπειδὴ
A \ a
τοῦτο ἄτοπον οἶμαι, φημὶ δεῖν αὐτοὺς peTa-
θεμένους τοῖς νέοις συνεῖναι; δίδωμι δὲ αἵρεσιν
\ 7 ἃ \ / an
μὴ διδάσκειν ἃ μὴ νομίζουσι σπουδαῖα, βουλο-
/ n γ
μένους δὲ διδάσκειν ἔργῳ πρῶτον πείθειν τοὺς
Ν e ” “ / ς V4 ὃ ”
μαθητὰς ὡς οὔτε “Ὅμηρος οὔτε Ἡσίοδος οὔτε
/ a 3 a \ ἽΝ "ἢ
τούτων τις, οὃς ἐξηγοῦνται καὶ ὧν κατεγνωκότες
1 οἷς-- -μεταχειρίζονται Bidez; τοῖς δημοσίᾳ [μεταχαρακτη-
ρίζοντας] Hertlein.
2 καὶ τὸ κατὰ Hertlein MSS; τὸ Asmus deletes.
3 σὰ Asmus adds.
4 μὲν MSS., Hertlein; μέντοι Reiske; μὲν οὖν Hertlein
suggests.
° καὶ after πρῶτον MSS. ; Hertlein would delete.

11g

RESCRIPT ON CHRISTIAN TEACHERS

not to harbour in their souls opinions irreconcilable
with what they publicly profess; and, above all, I
believe it is necessary that those who associate with
the young and teach them rhetoric should be of that
upright character ; for they expound the writings of
the ancients, whether they be rhetoricians or gram-
marians, and still more if they are sophists. For
these claim to teach, in addition to other things, not
only the use of words, but morals also, and they
assert that political philosophy is their peculiar field.
Let us leave aside, for the moment, the question
whether this is true or not. But while I applaud
them for aspiring to such high pretensions, I should
applaud them still more if they did not utter false-
hoods and convict themselves of thinking one thing
and teaching their pupils another. What! Was it
not the gods who revealed all their learning to
Homer, Hesiod, Demosthenes, Herodotus, Thucy-
dides, Isocrates and Lysias?? Did not these men
think that they were consecrated, some to Hermes,?
others to the Muses? I think it is absurd that men
who expound the works of these writers should
dishonour the gods whom they used to honour.
Yet, though I think this absurd, I do not say that
they ought to change their opinions and then instruct
the young. But | give them this choice; either not
to teach what they do not think admirable, or, if
they wish to teach, let them first really persuade
their pupils that neither Homer nor Hesiod nor
any of these writers whom they expound and have

1 So too in Oration 7. 236-2370. Julian compares the impiety
of the Cynics, who in his opinion had much in common with
the Christians, with Plato’s and Aristotle’s reverence for
religion, * Hermes was the god of eloquence.

110

424

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

εἰσὶν ἀσέβειαν ἄνοιάν τε καὶ πλάνην εἰς τοὺς
θεούς, τοιοῦτός ἐστιν. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἐξ ὧν ἐκεῖνοι
γεγράφασι παρατρέφονται ΠΣ οι εἶναι
ὁμολογοῦσιν αἰσχροκερδέστατοι καὶ δραχμῶν
ὀλίγων ἕνεκα πάντα ὑπομένειν. ἕως μὲν οὖν
τούτου πολλὰ ἣν τὰ αἴτια τοῦ μὴ φοιτᾶν εἰς τὰ
ἱερά, καὶ ὁ πανταχόθεν ἐπικρεμάμενος φόβος
ἐδίδου συγγνώμην ἀποκρύπτεσθαι τὰς ἀλη-
εστάτας ὑπὲρ τῶν θεῶν δόξας" ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἡμῖν
οἱ θεοὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἔδοσαν, ἄτοπον εἶναί μοι
φαίνεται διδάσκειν ἐκεῖνα τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, ὅσα
μὴ νομίζουσιν εὖ ἔχειν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν οἴονται
σοφοὺς ὧν εἰσιν ἐξηγηταὶ καὶ ὧν ὥσπερ προφῆται
κάθηνται, ζηλούντων αὐτῶν πρῶτοι" τὴν εἰς
τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσέβειαν" εἰ δε εἰς τοὺς τιμιωτάτους
ὑπολαμβάνουσι πεπλανῆσθαι, βαδιζόντων εἰς
τὰς τῶν Γαλιλαίων ἐκκλησίας ἐξηγησόμενοι
Ματθαῖον καὶ Λουκᾶν, οἷς πεισθέντες ἱερείων
ὑμεῖς ἀπέχεσθαι. νομοθετεῖτε. βούλομαι ὑμῶν
ἐγὼ καὶ τὰς ἀκοὰς ἐξαναγεννηθῆναι," ὡς ἂν ὑμεῖς
εἴποιτε, καὶ τὴν γλῶτταν τούτων, ὧν ἔμοιγε εἴη
μετέχειν ἀεὶ καὶ ὅστις ἐμοὶ φίλα νοεῖ τε καὶ
πράττει. τοῖς μὲν καθηγεμόσι καὶ διδασκάλοις
οὑτωσὶ κοινὸς κεῖται νόμος" ὁ βουλόμενος δὲ
τῶν νέων φοιτᾶν οὐκ ἀποκέκλεισται. οὐδὲ γὰρ
οὐδὲ εὔλογον ἀγνοοῦντας ἔτι τοὺς παῖδας, ἐφ᾽

1 πρῶτοι Hertlein suggests for πρῶτον MSS.

2 ἐξαναγεννηθῆναι follows γλῶτταν in MSS. Hertlein ; trans-
posed by Cobet as a peculiarly Christian word.

1 ὦ, 6. under the Christian Emperors Constantine and
Constantius it was dangerous to worship the gods openly.
2 ὁ, 6. the heliefs of the poets about the gods,

120

RESCRIPT ON CHRISTIAN TEACHERS

declared to be guilty of impiety, folly and error in
regard tothe gods, is such as they declare. For since
they make a livelihood and receive pay from the
works of those writers, they thereby confess that
they are most shamefully greedy of gain, and that,
for the sake of a few drachmae, they would put up
with anything. It is true that, until now, there were
many excuses for not attending the temples, and the
terror that threatened on all sides absolved men for
concealing the truest beliefs about the gods.1 But
since the gods have granted us liberty, it seems to
me absurd that men should teach what they do not
believe to be sound. But if they believe that those
whose interpreters they are and for whom they sit,
so to speak, in the seat of the prophets, were wise
men, let them be the first to emulate their piety
towards the gods. If, however, they think that
those writers were in error with respect to the most
honoured gods, then let them betake themselves to
the churches of the Galilaeans to expound Matthew
and Luke, since you Galilaeans are obeying them
when you ordain that men shall refrain from temple-
worship. For my part, I wish that your ears and
your tongues might be “born anew,’ as you would
say, as regards these things? in which may I ever
have part, and all who think and act as is pleasing
to me.

For religious 5 and secular teachers let there be a
general ordinance to this effect: Any youth who
wishes to attend the schools is not excluded; nor
indeed would it be reasonable to shut out from the
best way 4 boys who are still too ignorant to know

ἢ Καθηγεμὼν in Julian has this implication ; cf. 70 Theodorus,
p. 55. 4 Cf. Tothe Alexandrians, p. 149.

121

376 C

4116

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

TL τρέπωνται, τῆς βελτίστης ἀποκλείειν ὁδοῦ,
φόβῳ δὲ καὶ ἄκοντας ἄγειν ἐπὶ τὰ πάτρια.
καίτοι δίκαιον ἣν, ὥσπερ τοὺς φρενιτίξζοντας,
οὕτω καὶ τούτους ἄκοντας ἰᾶσθαι, πλὴν ἀλλὰ.
συγγνώμην ὑπάρχειν ἅπασι τῆς “τοιαύτης νόσου.
καὶ γὰρ, οἶμαι, διδάσκειν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ κολάζειν χρὴ
τοὺς ἀνοήτους. .

37
᾿Αταρβίῳ !

᾿Εγὼ μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς οὔτε κτείνεσθαι τοὺς ΤΓαλι-
λαίους οὔτε τύπτεσθαι παρὰ τὸ δίκαιον οὔτε ἄλλο
τι πάσχειν κακὸν βούλομαι, προτιμᾶσθαι μέντοι
τοὺς θεοσεβεῖς καὶ πάνυ φημὶ δεῖν: διὰ μὲν γὰρ
τὴν Γαλιλαίων μωρίαν ὀλίγου δεῖν ἅπαντα ἀνε-
τράπη, διὰ δὲ τὴν τῶν θεῶν εὐμένειαν σωζόμεθα
πάντες. ὅθεν χρὴ τιμᾶν τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ τοὺς
θεοσεβεῖς ἄνδρας τε καὶ πόλεις.

98

Ἰουλιανοῦ τοῦ παραβάτου πρὸς Πορφύριον 3
Πολλή τις ἣν πάνυ καὶ μεγάλη βιβλιοθήκη

Γεωργίου παντοδαπῶν μὲν φιλοσόφων, πολλῶν

1 Hertlein 7. According to Cumont, ἰδιόγραφον should be
added to the title, and this was one of the few letters that
Julian wrote with his own hand.

2 Hertlein 36. This is the title in Suidas, from whose
Lexicon the letter was copied into the MSS. καθολικόν,
ἐς revenue official” is added in Suidas, but is almost certainly
an error. ‘Hertlein’s title Ἰουλιανὸς αὐτοκράτωρ Πορφυρίῳ
χαίρειν is derived from /arisinus 2131; Hertlein deleted
Γεωργίῳ before Πορφυρίῳ.

1 For Christianity a disease cf. To Libanius, p. 207; for
I22

TO ATARBIUS

which way to turn, and to overawe them into being
led against their will to the beliefs of their ancestors.
Though indeed it might be proper to cure these,
even against their will, as one cures the insane,
except that we concede indulgence to all for this
sort of disease.1 For we ought, I think, to teach,
but not punish, the demented.

on
To Atarbius 2

I arrinm by the gods that I do not wish the
Galilaeans to be either put to death or unjustly
beaten, or to suffer any other injury; but never-

theless I do assert absolutely that the god-fearing ὁ

must be preferred to them. For through the folly
-of the Galilaeans almost everything has been over-
turned, whereas through the grace of the gods are
we all preserved. Wherefore we ought to honour
the gods and the god-fearing, both men and cities.®

38
Julian the Apostate to Porphyrius 4

Tue library of George was very large and complete
and contained philosophers of every school and many

indulgence to be shown to persons so afflicted, cf. Zo the
Citizens of Bostra 4383, p. 135.

2 This is probably Atarbius (so spelled in the Letters of
Libanius) a native of Ancyra and at this time administra-
tor of the district of the Euphrates. In 364 he held high
office in Macedonia.

3 For other letters on the same subject cf. To the Citizens of
Byzaciwmn, p. 125, and To Hecebolius, p. 127.

4 Perhaps this is George’s secretary mentioned in the Letter
to Ecdicius, p. 73. Geffcken thinks this letter was a Christian
forgery because it seems to ignore the earlier order to Kcdicius.
Probably the books had not arrived, and Julian became
impatient.

123

362
From
Con-
stanti-
nople

r
Antioch

362
After
the
middle
of July
From
Antioch

980 D

981

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

\ & / ᾽ 3 / 29 2 “
δὲ ὑπομνηματογράφων, οὐκ ἐλάχιστα δ᾽ ἐν αὐτοῖς
\ \ lal / \ \ \
καὶ τὰ τῶν Γαλιλαίων πολλὰ Kal παντοδαπὰ
/ aA δ 3 t , \
βιβλία. πᾶσαν οὖν ἀθρόως ταύτην τὴν βιβλιο-
/ , 3 f
θήκην ἀναζητήσας φρόντισον εἰς ᾿Αντιόχειαν
ἀποστεῖλαι, γινώσκων ὅτι μεγίστῃ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς
περιβχηθήσῃ ζημίᾳ, εἰ μὴ μετὰ πάσης ἐπιμελείας
ἀνιχνεύσειας, καὶ τοὺς ὁπωσοῦν ὑπονοίας ἔχοντας
ὑφηρῆσθαι τῶν βιβλίων πᾶσι μὲν ἐλέγχοις,
παντοδαποῖς δὲ ὅρκοις, πλείονι δὲ τῶν οἰκετῶν
βασάνῳ, πείθειν εἰ μὴ δύναιο, καταναγκάσειας εἰς
/ a 7
μέσον πάντα προκομίσαι. ἔρρωσο.

99
Πυζακίοις }

Τοὺς βουλευτὰς πάντας ὑμῖν ἀποδεδώκαμεν καὶ
\ / 2 ” a A ΓΤ / e
Tous πατροβούλους," εἴτε TH TOV Γαλιλαίων ἑαυ-
τοὺς ἔδοσαν δεισιδαιμονίᾳ, εἴτε πως ἄλλως πραγ-
Ψ an / lal
ματεύσαιντο διαδρᾶναι τὸ βουλευτήριον, ἔξω τῶν
n U /
ἐν TH μητροπόλει λελειτουργηκότων.

1 Hertlein 11. Βυζαντίνοις MSS., Hertlein ; Βισανθηνοῖς
Gibbon. For the Byzacians see Codex Theodosianus 12. 1. 59.

* πατροβόλους Parisinus; πατροβούλους X, Ducange; πατροκό-
λους edd. ; προβούλους Cobet. See Cumont, Revue de Philologie,
1902.

1 Cumont thinks that a scribe added this inappropriate
greeting.

2 Byzacium was in the district of Tunis. This is Cumont’s
conjecture for MS. title Τοῖς Βυζαντίνοις, To the Byzantines.
Julian never calls Constantinople Byzantium, Gibbon sus-
pected the title and conjectured that it was addressed to the
town Bisanthe (Redosto) in Thrace.

3 The meaning of this word is not clear ; Cumont translates

124 3

TO THE CITIZENS OF BYZACIUM

historians, especially, among these, numerous books of
all kinds by the Galilaeans. Do you therefore make
a thorough search for the whole library without
exception and take care to send it to Antioch. You
may be sure that you will yourself incur the severest
penalty if you do not trace it with all diligence, and
do not by every kind of enquiry, by every kind of
sworn testimony and, further, by torture of the slaves,
compel, if you cannot persuade, those who are in any
way suspected of having stolen any of the books to
bring them all forth. Farewell.!

39
To the citizens of Byzacium 3

I wave restored to you all your senators and
councillors? whether they have abandoned them-
selves to the superstition of the Galilaeans or have
devised some other method of escaping from the
senate,4 and have excepted only those who have filled
public offices in the capital.

‘‘patroni’’ 1... protectors, but we cannot be certain as to the
function# of these local dignitaries in Africa.

4 On the burden of being a Senator cf. Libanius, Oration 2;
Ammianus 21. 12. 23; Julian, Misopogon 367p. It was one
of Julian’s most widespread reforms to enrol all wealthy
men in the senates of their cities. By an edict of March 362
he deprived the Christian clerics of their immunities from
such public offices which had been conferred on them by
Constantine (cf. Sozomen 5. 5) and in the present case his
edict is directed mainly against those who had become
clerics in order to escape municipal service, Philostorgius
7. 4 says that this was part of Julian’s malignant policy.
The Emperor Valentinian restored their privileges to the
clerics in 364.

125

362
Prob-
ably
from
Antioch

424 (

425

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

40
‘ExnBorLo 1

᾿γὼ μὲν κέχρημαι τοῖς Παλιλαίοις ἅπασιν οὕτω
πράως καὶ ,»φιλανθρώπως, ὥστε μηδένα μηδαμοῦ
βίαν ὑπομένειν μηδὲ εἰς ἱερὸν ἕλκεσθαι μηδ᾽ εἰς
ἄλλο τι τοιοῦτον ἐπηρεάζεσθαι παρὰ τὴν οἰκείαν
πρόθεσιν. οἱ δὲ τῆς ᾿Αρειανικῆς ἐκκλησίας ὑπὸ
τοῦ πλούτου τρυφῶντες ἐπεχείρησαν τοῖς ἀπὸ
τοῦ Οὐαλεντίνου καὶ τετολμήκασι τοιαῦτα κατὰ
τὴν "Ἔδεσσαν, οἷα οὐδέποτε ἐν εὐνομουμένῃ πόλει
γένοιτ᾽ ἄν. οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ αὐτοῖς ὑπὸ τοῦ θαυμα-
σιωτάτου νόμου προείρηται “πωλῆσαι τὰ ὑπάρ-
χοντα καὶ δοῦναι πτωχοῖς 5 ἵν᾽ εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν
τῶν οὐρανῶν εὐκοπώτερον. Z πορευθῶσι, πρὸς τοῦτο
συναγωνιξόμενοι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις αὐτῶν τὰ χρή-
ματα τῆς ᾿Εδεσσηνῶν ἐκκλησίας ἅπαντα ἐκελεύ-
σαμεν ἀναληφθῆναι δοθησόμενα τοῖς στρατιώταις,
καὶ τὰ κτήματα, τοῖς ἡμετέροις προστεθῆναι πρι-
βάτοις, Ἱ ἵνα πενόμενοι σωφρονῶσι καὶ μὴ στερη-
θῶσιν ἧς ἔτι ἐλπίζουσιν οὐρανίου βασιλείας. τοῖς

1 Hertlein 43.

> πωλῆσαι---πτωχοῖς Asmus supplies from Luke 12. 33 for
lacuna in MSS.; Thomas suggests τὰ ὑπάρχοντα ἀφιέναι

Matthew 19. 27. Hertlein suggests πένεσθαι ‘‘to embrace

poverty.”
3 Asmus suggests, from Matthew 19.24; εὐοδώτερον Hertlein,

MSS.

1 This can hardly be the sophist to whom Julian
addressed one of his most flowery and sophistic letters, for
which see p. 217. Probably he was some leading official of
Edessa, the capital of Osroene in Northern Mesopotamia.
Constantius had favoured the Arians there and encouraged
their fanatical sectarianism by handing over to them the great

126

TO HECEBOLIUS
40

To Hecebolius 4

I wave behaved to all the Galilaeans with such
kindness and benevolence that none of them has
suffered violence anywhere or been dragged into a
temple or threatened into anything else of the sort
against his own will. But the followers of the Arian
church, in the insolence bred by their wealth, have
. attacked the followers of Valentine 2 and have com-
mitted in Edessa such rash acts as could never occur
ina well-ordered city. Therefore, since by their most
admirable law they are bidden to sell all they have
and give to the poor that so they may attain more
easily to the kingdom of the skies, in order to aid
' those persons in that effort, I have ordered that all
their funds, namely, that belong to the church of
the people of Edessa, are to be taken over that they
may be given to the soldiers, and that its property ὃ
be confiscated to my private purse.* This is in order
that poverty may teach them to behave properly and
that they may not be deprived of that heavenly
kingdom for which they still hope. And I publicly

basilica of St. Thomas. Sozomen 6. 1, says that on his way
to Persia Julian hurried past Edessa because the city re-
mained obstinately Christian ; later he relates, 6. 18, that
the Emperor Valens visited Edessa and persecuted the non-
Arian Christians ; cf. Socrates 4. 18.

2 Valentine founded one of the sects of the Gnostics in the
first century a.p.; by the fourth century the Valentinian
heresy had very few adherents.

3 Probably Julian means the valuables such as Church
‘plate belonging to the various churches in Edessa; for his
spoliation of the churches cf. Gregory Nazianzen, Against
Julian 3. 86D, and Sozomen 5. 5.

4 rpiBdtos=privatis ; or ‘‘ to lay uses.”

127

End of
362 or
early

in 363
From
Antioch

196

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

οἰκοῦσι δὲ τὴν ἔδεσσαν προαγορεύομεν ἀπέχεσθαι
πάσης στάσεως καὶ φιλονεικίας, i ἵνα μή, τὴν ἡμετέ-
ραν φιλανθρωπίαν κινήσαντες, καθ᾽ ὑμῶν αὐτῶνς.
ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν κοινῶν ἀταξίας 1 δίκην τίσητε, ξίφει
καὶ φυγῇ καὶ πυρὶ ζημιωθέντες.

41
Βοστρηνοῖς 3

[Ὦιμην ἐγὼ τοὺς τῶν Γαλιλαίων προστάτας
ἕξειν μοι μείζονα χάριν ἢ τῷ φθάσαντι πρὸ “ἐμοῦ
τὴν ἀρχὴν. ἐπιτροπεῦσαι. συνέβη γὰρ ἐπὶ μὲν
ἐκείνου τοὺς πολλοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ φυγαδευθῆναι
καὶ διωχθῆναι καὶ δεσμευθῆναι, πολλὰ δὲ ἤδη καὶ
σφαγῆναι πλήθη τῶν λεγομένων αἱρετικῶν, ὡς ἐν

αμοσάτοις καὶ Κυζίκῳ καὶ Παφλάγον καὶ
Βιθυνίᾳ καὶ [᾿αλατίᾳ, καὶ ἐν ὃ πολλοῖς ἄλλοις
ἔθνεσιν ἄρδην a ἀνατραπῆναι “πορθηθείσας κώμας,"
ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δὲ τοὐναντίον. οἵ τε γὰρ ἐξορισθέντες
ἀφείθησαν, καὶ οἱ δημευθέντες ἀπολαμβάνειν ἢ
τὰ σφέτερα ἅπαντα νόμῳ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἔλαβον. οἱ
δ᾽ εἰς τοσοῦτον λυσσομανίας ἥκουσι καὶ ἀπονοίας,
ὥστε, ὅτι μὴ τυραννεῖν ἔξεστιν αὐτοῖς μηδὲ ἅ
ποτε ἔπραττον KaT ἀλλήλων, ἔπειτα καὶ ἡμᾶς
τοὺς θεοσεβεῖς εἰργάζοντο, διατιθέναι, παροξυνό-

1 Hertlein suggests εὐταξίας or ὑπὲρ τῶν κοινῶν τῆς
atatias.

5. Hertlein 52. The only MS. that contains this edict is
Parisiivus 2964.

3 Hertlein adds.

4 For κώμας Cobet suggests ἐκκλησίας.

5 Hertlein would delete ἀπολαμβάνει and read ἀπέλα3ον for
ἔλαβον.

128

TO THE CITIZENS OF BOSTRA

command you citizens of Edessa to abstain from all
feuds and rivalries, else will you provoke even my
benevolence against yourselves, and being sentenced
to the sword and to exile and to fire pay the penalty
for disturbing the good order of the commonwealth.

4]
To the citizens of Bostra 1

I tuoueutr that the leaders of the Galilaeans
- would be more grateful to me than to my pre-
decessor in the administration of the Empire. For
in his reign it happened to the majority of them to
be sent into exile, prosecuted, and cast into prison,
and moreover, many whole communities of those who
are called “ heretics” 2 were actually butchered, as at
Samosata and Cyzicus, in Paphlagonia, Bithynia, and
Galatia, and among many other tribes also villages
were sacked and completely devastated ; whereas,
during my reign, the contrary has happened. For
those who had been exiled have had their exile
remitted, and those whose property was confiscated
have, by a law of mine received permission to
recover all their possessions. Yet they have reached
such a pitch of raving madness and folly that they
are exasperated because they are not allowed to
behave like tyrants or to persist in the conduct in
which they at one time indulged against one another,
and afterwards carried on towards us who revered

1 This edict is cited by Sozomen 5.15. Bostra, or Bosra,
was one of the largest fortified cities in Arabia and is described
by Ammianus 14. 8. 13 as murorum firmitate cautissima.

2 Constantius persecuted Christians who did not belong to
the Arian sect. 3 For this see Sozomen 5. 5.

129
VOL, III. K

362
August
Ist

From
Antioch

437

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μενοι πάντα κινοῦσι λίθον Kal συνταράττειν TOA-
μῶσι τὰ πλήθη καὶ στασιάζειν, ἀσεβοῦντες μὲν
εἰς τοὺς θεούς, ἀπειθοῦντες δὲ τοῖς ἡμετέροις
προστάγμασι, καίπερ οὕτως οὖσι φιλανθρώποις.
οὐδένα γοῦν αὐτῶν ἄκοντα πρὸς βωμοὺς ἐῶμεν
ἕλκεσθαι, διαρρήδην δὲ αὐτοῖς προαγορεύομεν, εἴ
τις ἑκὼν χερνίβων καὶ σπονδῶν ἡμῖν ἐθέλει κοινω-
νεῖν, καθάρσια προσφέρεσθαι πρῶτον καὶ τοὺς
ἀποτροπαίους ἱκετεύειν θεούς. οὕτω πόρρω τυγ-
χάνομεν τοῦ Twa! τῶν δυσσεβῶν ἐθελῆσαί ποτε
ἢ διανοηθῆναι τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν εὐαγῶν μετασχεῖν
θυσιῶν, πρὶν τὴν μὲν ψυχὴν ταῖς λιτανείαις πρὸς
τοὺς θεούς, τὸ δὲ σῶμα τοῖς νομίμοις καθαρσίοις
καθήρασθαι.

Τὰ γοῦν πλήθη τὰ παρὰ τῶν λεγομένων κληρι-
κῶν ἐξηπατημένα πρόδηλον ὅτι ταύτης ἀφαιρε-
θείσης στασιάζει τῆς ἀδείας. οἱ γὰρ εἰς τοῦτο
τετυραννηκότες οὐκ ἀγαπῶσιν ὅτι μὴ τίνουσι
δίκην t ὑπὲρ ὧν ἔπραξαν κακῶν, ποθοῦντες δὲ τὴν
προτέραν δυναστείαν, ὅτε μὴ δικάξειν ἔξεστιν
αὐτοῖς καὶ γράφειν διαθήκας καὶ ἀλλοτρίους
σφετερίζεσθαι κλήρους καὶ τὰ πάντα ἑαυτοῖς
προσνέμειν, πάντα κινοῦσιν ἀκοσμίας κάλων καὶ,
τὸ λεγόμενον, πῦρ ἐπὶ πῦρ ὀχετεύουσι καὶ τοῖς
προτέροις κακοῖς μείζονα ἐπιθεῖναι τολμῶσιν, εἰς
διάστασιν ἄγοντες τὰ πλήθη. ἔδοξεν οὖν μοι

1 So Reiske for MS. τοῦ διά τινα ; Hertlein suggests νὴ Ala
τοῦ twas βίᾳ Heyler suggests.

1 4. e. for others. Julian no longer allowed legacies to be
left. to churches ; cf. Codex Theodos. 3. 1.3. The clergy and
especially the bishops had exercised certain civil functions of

130

΄

TO THE CITIZENS OF BOSTRA

the gods. They therefore leave no stone unturned,
and have the audacity to incite the populace to
disorder and revolt, whereby they both act with
impiety towards the gods and disobey my edicts,
humane though these are. At least I do not allow
a single one of them to be dragged against his
will to worship at the altars; nay, I proclaim in so
many words that, if any man of his own free will
choose to take part in our lustral rites and libations,
he ought first of all to offer sacrifices of purification
and supplicate the gods that avert evil. So far am
I from ever having wished or intended that anyone
of those sacrilegious men should partake in the
sacrifices that we most revere, until he has purified
his soul by supplications to the gods, and his body
by the purifications that are customary.

It is, at any rate, evident that the populace who
have been led into error by those who are called
‘clerics,’ are in revolt because this license has been
taken from them. For those who have till now
behaved like tyrants are not content that they are
not punished for their former crimes, but, longing for
the power they had before, because they are no
longer allowed to sit as judges and draw up wills !
and appropriate the inheritances of other men and
assign everything to themselves, they pull every
string ? of disorder, and, as the proverb says, lead
fire through a pipe to ἥτε," and dare to add even
ereater crimes to their former wickedness by lead-
ing on the populace to disunion. Therefore I have

which Julian deprived them, and they lost the immunity from
taxation that had been granted by Christian emperors. For
this cf. Sozomen 5. 5. al

2 Literally ‘“‘cable,” a proverb. * Cf. ‘‘add fuel to fire.”

131

κι

Β

438

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πᾶσι τοῖς δήμοις προαγορεῦσαι διὰ τοῦδε τοῦ δια-
τάγματος καὶ φανερὸν καταστῆσαι, μῆ συστα-
oud Sew τοῖς κληρικοῖς μηδὲ ἀναπείθεσθαι παρ᾽
αὐτῶν λίθους αἴρειν μηδὲ ἀπιστεῖν τοῖς ἄρχουσιν,
ἀλλὰ συνιέναι μὲν ἕως ἂν ἐθέλωσιν, εὔχεσθαι δὲ
ἃς νομίζουσιν εὐχὰς ὑπὲρ ἑαυτῶν: εἰ δὲ ἀναπεί-
θοιεν ὑπὲρ ἑαυτῶν στασιάζειν, μηκέτι συνάδειν,
ἵνα μὴ δίκην δῶσι.

Ταῦτα δέ μοι παρέστη τῇ Βοστρηνῶν ἰδίᾳ προ-
αγορεῦσαι πόλει διὰ τὸ τὸν ἐπίσκοπον Τίτον καὶ
τοὺς κληρικοὺς ἐξ ὧν ἐπέδοσαν βιβλίων τοῦ μετὰ
σφῶν πλήθους κατηγορηκέναι, ὡς αὐτῶν μὲν
παραινούντων τῷ πλήθει μὴ στασιάζειν, ὁρμω-
μένου δὲ τοῦ πλήθους πρὸς ἀταξίαν. ἐν γοῦν
τοῖς βιβλίοις καὶ αὐτὴν ἣν ἐτόλμησεν ἐγγράψαι
τὴν φωνὴν ὑπέταξά μου τῷδε τῷ διατάγματι.
“ Καίτοι Χριστιανῶν ὁ ὄντων ἐφαμίλλων τῷ πλήθει
τῶν “Ἑλλήνων, κατεχομένων δὲ τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ παρ-
αινέσει μηδένα μηδαμοῦ ἀτακτεῖν. Ἢ ταῦτα γάρ
ἐστιν ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν τοῦ ἐπισκόπου τὰ ῥήματα. ὁρᾶτε
ὅπως τὴν ὑμετέραν εὐταξίαν οὐκ ἀπὸ τῆς ὑμε-
τέρας εἶναί φησι γνώμης, οἵ ye ἄκοντες, ὥς ὙῈ
εἶπε, κατέχεσθε διὰ τὰς απο παραινέσεις. ὡς
οὖν κατήγορον ὑμῶν ἑκόντες 1 τῆς πόλεως διώξατε,
τὰ πλήθη δὲ ὁμονοεῖτε πρὸς ἀλλήλους, καὶ μηδεὶς
ἐναντιούσθω μηδὲ ἀδικείτω" μήθ᾽ οἱ πεπλανημένοι

1 Klimek suggests ἑλόντες.

1 So tar the edict has a general character and may have
been sent out broadcast. The last paragraph is apparently
added as a special instruction to the citizens of Bostra, and
especially to the Christians, whom he incites against their
bishop.

132

TO THE CITIZENS OF BOSTRA

decided to proclaim to all communities of citizens,
by means of this edict, and to make known to all,
that they must not join in the feuds of the clerics or
be induced by them to take stones in their hands or
disobey those in authority; but they may hold
meetings for as long as they please and may offer on
their own behalf the prayers to which they are
accustomed ; that, on the other hand, if the clerics
try to induce them to take sides on their behalf in
quarrels, they must no longer consent to do so, if
~ they would escape punishment.!

I have been led to make this proclamation to the
city of Bostra in particular, because their bishop
Titus and the clerics, in the reports that they have
issued, have made accusations against their own
adherents, giving the impression that, when the popu-
lace were on the point of breaking the peace, they
themselves admonished them not to cause sedition.
Indeed, I have subjoined to this my decree the
very words which he dared to write in his report:
* Although the Christians are a match for the Hel-
lenes in numbers, they are restrained by our admoni-
tion that no one disturb the peace in any place.” For
these are the very words of the bishop about you.
You see how he says that your good behaviour was
not of your own choice, since, as he at any rate
alleged, you were restrained against your will by his
admonitions! Therefore, of your own free will, seize
your accuser and expel him from the city,” but do you,
the populace, live in agreement with one another, and
let no man be quarrelsome or act unjustly. Neither

2 Julian’s advice was not followed, since Socrates, History
of the Church 3.25, mentions Titus as bishop of Bostra under
the Emperor Jovian in 363.

9

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἴω 9 A \ / \ \ ig
τοῖς ὀρθῶς καὶ δικαίως τοὺς θεοὺς θεραπεύουσι
κατὰ τὰ ἐξ αἰῶνος ἡμῖν παραδεδομένα, μήθ᾽ οἱ
θεραπευταὶ τῶν θεῶν λυμαίνεσθε ταῖς οἰκίαις ἢ
διαρπάξετε τῶν ἀγνοίᾳ μᾶλλον ἢ ἢ γνώμῃ πεπλανη-
μένων. λόγῳ δὲ πείθεσθαι χρὴ καὶ διδάσκεσθαι
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, οὐ πληγαῖς οὐδὲ ὕβρεσιν οὐδὲ
αἰκισμῷ τοῦ σώματος. αὖθις δὲ καὶ πολλάκις
παραινῶ τοῖς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀληθῆ θεοσέβειαν ὁρμω-

, \ 3 an A , \ 7
μένοις μηδὲν ἀδικεῖν τῶν Γαλιλαίων τὰ πλήθη,

Ye. / Ke / > > ΓΑ > al

μηδὲ ἐπιτίθεσθαι μηδὲ ὑβρίξειν εἰς αὐτούς. ἐλεεῖν
δὲ χρὴ μᾶλλον ἢ μισεῖν τοὺς ἐν 1 τοῖς μεγίστοις
πράττοντας κακῶς" μέγιστον γὰρ τῶν καλῶν ὡς
ἀληθῶς ἡ θεοσέβεια, καὶ τοὐναντίον τῶν κακῶν
ς 7 / XN \ 3 \ A b) \
ἡ δυσσέβεια. συμβαίνει δὲ τοὺς ἀπὸ θεῶν ἐπὶ
τοὺς νεκροὺς καὶ τὰ λείψανα μετατετραμμένους
ταύτην ἀποτῖσαι τὴν ζημίαν" ὡς τοῖς μὲν ἐ ἐνεχο-
μένοις νόσῳ ὃ τινὶ συναλγοῦμεν, τοῖς δὲ ἀπο-
λυομένοις καὶ ἀφιεμένοις ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν συνηδό-
μεθα.

᾿᾿δόθη τῇ τῶν Καλανδῶν Αὐγούστων ἐν
3
Αντιοχείᾳ.

42
Καλλιξείνῃ 4
r 7 ig ,
Χρόνος δίκαιον ἄνδρα δείκνυσιν μόνος,

e \ A ” » 2. \ > oN ,

ὡς Tapa τῶν ἔμπροσθεν ἔγνωμεν" ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἂν φαίην

ἐπὶ MSS. ἐν Hertlein suggests.

After ζημίαν. Hertlein thinks some words are lost.
νόσῳ Hertlein would add ; Heyler κακῷ understood.
Hertlein 21.

mem © 1 "ὸ

1 Sozomen 5.5 and 15 seems to be an echo of Julian.

134

TO CALLIXEINE

let those of you who have strayed from the truth
outrage those who worship the gods duly and justly,
according to the beliefs that have been handed down
to us from time immemorial; nor let those of you
who worship the gods outrage or plunder the houses
of those who have strayed rather from ignorance than
of set purpose. It is by reason that we ought to
persuade and instruct men, not by blows, or insults,
or bodily violence. Wherefore, again and often I ad-
monish those who are zealous for the true religion not
_ to injure the communities of the Galilaeans or attack
or insult them. Nay, we ought to pity rather than
hate men who in matters of the greatest importance
are in such evil case, (For in very truth the greatest
of all blessings is reverence for the gods, as, on the
other hand, irreverence is the greatest of all evils.
It follows that those who have turned aside from the
gods to corpses ? and relics pay this as their penalty.) 3
Since we suffer in sympathy with those who are
afflicted by disease,* but rejoice with those who are
being released and set free by the aid of the gods.
Given at Antioch on the First of August.

49
To Callixeine 5

‘‘Time alone proves the just man,’ ® as we learn
from men of old; but I would add the god-fearing

2 So Julian styles Christ and the martyrs; cf. Against the
Galilaeans 335B ; Vol. 2, Misopogon 3618.

3 7. 6, that they are in evil case.

4 For Christianity a disease cf. Vol. 2, 229p, and below,
p. 207.

5 Otherwise unknown. Julian visited Pessinus in Phrygia

on his way to Antioch. See Introduction.
® Sophocles, Oedipus Rex 614,

13)

389

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

OTL Kal τὸν εὐσεβῆ καὶ τὸν φιλόθεον. ἀλλ᾽
ἐμαρτυρήθη, φής, καὶ ἡ Πηνελόπη φίλανδρος.
εἶτα μετὰ τὸ φίλανδρον᾿ τὸ φιλόθεον τίς ἐν
γυναικὶ δεύτερον τίθησι, καὶ οὐ φαίνεται 3 πολὺν
πάνυ τὸν μανδραγόραν ἐκπεπωκώς ; εἰ δὲ καὶ τοὺς
καιρούς τις ἐν νῷ λάβοι καὶ τὴν μὲν “Πηνελόπην
ἐπαινουμένην σχεδὸν ὑπὸ πάντων ἐπὶ τῇ φιλαν-
δρίᾳ, κινδυνευούσας δὲ τὰς εὐσεβεῖς ὀλίγῳ πρό-
τερον γυναῖκας, καὶ προσθήκην δὲ τῶν κακῶν,
ὅτι καὶ διπλάσιος ὁ χρόνος, ap’ ἔστι σοὶ τὴν
Πηνελόπην ἀξίως παραβάλλειν; ἀλλὰ μὴ μικροὺς
ποιοῦ τοὺς ἐπαίνους" ἀνθ' ὧν ἀμείψονται μέν σε
πάντες οἱ θεοί, τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν δὲ διπλῇ σε τιμή-
σομεν τῇ ἱερωσύνῃ. πρὸς ἣ γὰρ πρότερον εἶχες
τῆς ἁγιωτάτης θεοῦ Δήμητρος, καὶ τῆς μεγίστης
Μητρὸς θεῶν THS “Φρυγίας ἐν τῇ θεοφιλεῖ Ἰ]εσσι-
νοῦντι τὴν ἱερωσύνην ἐπιτρέπομέν σοι.

48
Εὐσταθίῳ φιλοσόφῳ ὃ

Μὴ λίαν ἢ κοινὸν τὸ προοίμιον Τὸν ἐσθλὸν
ἄνδρα. τὰ δὲ ἐφεξῆς οἶσθα δήπουθεν. ἀλλὰ καὶ

ι9. μὰ

Reiske suggests ; Hertlein, MSS. τοῦ φιλάνδρου.

Klimek ; φανεῖται Hertlein, MSS.

Hertlein 76. This letter is preserved in Vaticanws 1353
only.

[1]

1 ΤῸ drink mandragora (mandrake), is a proverb for
sluggish wits; but mandrake was used also as a stimulus
to love.

136

TO EUSTATHIUS THE PHILOSOPHER

and pious man also. However, you say, the love
of Penelope for her husband was also witnessed
to by time. Now who would rank a woman’s piety
second to her love for her husband without appearing
to have drunk a very deep draught of mandragora ἢ 1
And if one takes into account the conditions of
the times and compares Penelope, who is almost
universally praised for loving her husband, with pious
women who not long ago hazarded their lives; and
if one considers also that the period was twice as long,
which was an aggravation of their sufferings; then, I
ask, is it possible to make any fair comparison between
you and Penelope? Nay, do not belittle my praises.
All the gods will requite you for your sufferings
and for my part I shall honour you with a double
priesthood. For besides that which you held before
of priestess to the most venerable goddess Demeter,
I entrust to you the office of priestess to the most
mighty Mother of the gods in Phrygia at Pessinus,
beloved of the gods.

48
To Eustathius the Philosopher 3

Preruaprs the proverb * An honest man ’’ ?—is too
hackneyed. I am sure you know the rest. More

2 See Introduction under Eustathius. He evidently ac-
cepted this invitation ; see the next letter. He was a pagan
and a friend of Libanius ; cf. Ammianus 17. 5. 15; Kunapius,
Lives, pp. 392 foll. (Wright).

3 Kuripides frag. 902, Nauck :

Τὸν ἐσθλὺν ἄνδρα, κἂν ἑκὰς valn χθονός,
Κἂν μήποτ᾽ ὔὕσσοις εἰσίδω, κρίνω φίλον.

‘*An honest man, though he dwell far away and I never

see him with my eyes, him I count a friend.”

137

362
From
Antioch

416

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἔχεις. οἶσθα μὲν γὰρ ἅτε “λόγιος ὧν καὶ φιλό-
σοῴος τὸ ἑπόμενον αὐτῷ, ἐμὲ δὲ ἔ ἔχεις φίλον, εἴπερ
γοῦν 1 ἄμφω ἐσθλοί ἐ ἐσμεν. ὑπὲρ γὰρ σοῦ τοῦτο
κἂν διατειναίμην, ὃ ὅτι τοιοῦτος εἶ, περὶ δὲ ἐ ἐμαυτοῦ
σιωπῶ" γένουτο δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους αἰσθέσθαι καὶ
ἐμοῦ τοιούτου. τί οὖν ὥσπερ ἄτοπόν τι λέξων 3
κύκλῳ περίειμι δέον ὃ εἰπεῖν ; ἧκε καὶ σπεῦδε
καί, τὸ λεγόμενον, | ἵπτασο. πορεύσει δέ σε θεὸς
εὐμενὴς μετὰ τῆς ᾿Βνοδίας παρθένου, καὶ ὑπουρ-

γήσει δρόμος δημόσιος ὀχήματι βουλομένῳ χρή-
σασθαι, καὶ παρίπποις δυσίν.

44
Εὐσταθίῳ φιλοσόφῳ *

"αἱ a) , Pi
Χρὴ ξεῖνον παρεόντα φιλεῖν, ἐθέλοντα δὲ πέμ-
πειν

10) e \ 5 ie Ὁ an δὲ e /
μηρος ὁ σοφὸς ἐνομοθέτησεν: ἡμῖν δὲ ὑπάρ-
\ > / fal / » 7 e
χει πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἕενικῆς φιλίας ἀμείνων H TE
διὰ τῆς ἐνδεχομένης παιδείας καὶ τῆς περὶ τοὺς
θεοὺς εὐσεβείας, ὥστ᾽ οὐκ ἂν μέ τις ἐγράψατο
δικαίως ὡς τὸν .“Ομήρου παραβαίνοντα νόμον, εἰ

1 γοῦν Hertlein suggests ; οὖν MSS., Hertlein.

2 χέξων Hertlein suggests ; λέγων MSS., Hertlein.

8. After δέον Thomas “would add ἁπλῶς.

4 Hertlein 39. Cumont restores Εὐσταθίῳ from X (Papa-
dopoulos); Hertlein, following Martin, τῷ αὐτῷ 1.6. Maximus,
to whom the preceding letter in Hertlein’s edition is
addressed ; Hstienne Matiu» φιλοσόφῳ. The Aldine has no
title.

138

TO EUSTATHIUS

than this, you possess it; for, rhetorician and_philo-
sopher as you are, you know the words that come
next, and you possess me for a friend, at least if
we are both honest men. On your behalf I would
strenuously maintain that you are in that category,
but about myself I say nothing. I only pray that
others may find by experience that I also am
honest! You ask why I go round in a circle as
though I were going to say something extraordinary
when I ought to speak out? Come, then, lose no
time; fly hither, as we say. A kindly god will speed
you on your way with the aid of the Maiden of the
Cross Roads and the state post! will be at your
disposal if you wish to use a carriage; and two
extra horses,

44
To Eustathius 2

“Enrreat kindly the guest in your house, but
speed him when he would be gone.’ 3

Thus did wise Homer decree. But the friendship
that exists between us two is stronger than that be-
tween guest and host, because it is inspired by the
best education attainable and by our pious devotion
to the gods. So that no one could have fairly
indicted me for transgressing the law of Homer if

1 The cursus publicus was the system of posting stations
where horses were kept ready for the use of the Emperor or
his friends; cf. above, p. 83 70 Basil, end.

2 Hertlein, following an error in the editions of Martin and
Estienne, makes Julian address this letter to Maximus. For
the answer of Eustathius see p. 291.

3 Odyssey 15. 74; this had become a proverb, cf. Libanius,
Letter 130.

129

362
From
Antioch

910

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖόν σε μένειν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἠξίωσα. ἀλλὰ
σοι τὸ σωμάτιον ἰδὼν ἐπιμελείας πλείονος δεόμενον
ἐπέτρεψα βαδίζειν εἰς τὴν πατρίδα, καὶ ῥᾳστώνης
ἐπεμελήθην τῆς πορείας. ὀχήματι γοῦν ἔξεστί. :
σοι δημοσίῳ χρήσασθαι, πορεύοιεν δέ σε σὺν
᾿Ασκληπιῷ πάντες οἱ θεοί, καὶ πάλιν ἡμῖν συντυ-
χεῖν δοῖεν.

45

᾿Εκδικίῳ ἐπάρχῳ Λίἰγύπτου 1

c \ / , ’ \ ὃ “ \ 2 >

H μὲν παροιμία φησίν “ ἐμοὶ διηγοῦ σὺ 3 τοὐ-

μὸν ὄναρ," ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἔοικα σοὶ τὸ σὸν ὕπαρ ἀφηγεῖ-

7 id e a > \

σθαι. πολύς φασίν, ὁ Νεῖλος ἀρθεὶς μετέωρος
a A Ἂ

τοῖς πήχεσιν ἐπλήρωσε πᾶσαν τὴν Αἴγυπτον" εἰ

δὲ καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἀκοῦσαι ποθεῖς, εἰς τὴν εἰκάδα
fa) / 7 ω

τοῦ Σεπτεμβρίου τρὶς πέντε. μηνύει δὲ ταῦτα

, om
Θεόφιλος ὁ στρατοπεδάρχης. εἰ τοίνυν ἠγνόησας
fe > a /
αὐτὸ, TAP ἡμῶν ἀκούων εὐφραίνου.

(ςς

40

᾿Εκδικίῳ ἐπάρχῳ Αἰγύπτου ὃ

Ei καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕνεκα μὴ γράφεις ἡμῖν, ἀλλ᾽
ὑπέρ γε τοῦ θεοῖς ἐχθροῦ χρῆν σε γράφειν ᾿Αθανα-

1 Hertlein 50.

2 This is the reading of Suidas, who quotes ἐμοὶ---ἀφηγε-

ἴσθαι ; Ambrosianus σὺ διηγοῦ ; Hertlein, following Vossianus,
διηγεῖ. : 3 Hertlein 6.

1 Cappadocia.
2 The premature death of Julian prevented the fulfilment
of this wish.

140

TO ECDICIUS, PREFECT OF EGYPT

I had insisted that you should remain still longer
with us. But I see that your feeble frame needs
more care, and I have therefore given you permis-
sion to go to your own country,! and have provided
for your comfort on the journey. That is to say,
you are allowed to use a state carriage, and may
Asclepius and all the gods escort you on your way
and grant that we may see you again ! 3

45
To Ecdicius, Prefect of Egypt ?

As the proverb says, “You told me my own
dream.” * And I fancy that Iam relating to you
your own waking vision. ‘The Nile, they tell me,
had risen in full flood, cubits high, and has inundated
the whole of Egypt. If you want to hear the
figures, it had risen fifteen cubits ® on the twentieth
of September. Theophilus, the military prefect,
informs me of this. So, if you did not know it, hear
it from me, and let it rejoice your heart.

46
To Ecdicius, Prefect of Egypt

Even though you do not write to me® on other
matters, you ought at least to have written about

3 For Eedicius see p. 155.

4 Cf. ‘‘Queen Anne is dead.” Ecdicius presumably knew
what Julian tells him.

5 Pliny, Natural History 5. 9, says that a rise of 15 cubits
gives Egypt security, 16 is luxury ; Ammianus 22. 15 says
that cultivators fear a rise of more than 16 cubits. The
Egyptian cubit was about 22 inches.

ὁ Kgypt was the peculiar property of the Roman Emperors
and reports were made by the prefect to them,

141

362
October
From
Antioch

362
About
October
From
Antioch

452

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

σίου, καὶ ταῦτα πρὸ πλείονος ἤδη χρόνου τὰ καλῶς
iets ἐγνωσμένα πεπυσμένον: ὄμνυμι δὲ τὸν μέγαν
Σάραπιν, ὡς εἰ μὴ πρὸ τῶν Δεκεμβρίων Καλανδῶν
ὁ θεοῖς ἐχθρὸς ᾿Αθανάσιος ἐξέλθοι ἐ ἐκείνης τῆς πό-
hews,! μᾶλλον͵ δὲ καὶ πάσης τῆς Αἰγύπτου, τῇ
ὑπακουούσῃ σοι τάξει προστιμήσομαι Psa
λίτρας ἑκατόν. οἶσθα δὲ ὅπως εἰμὶ βραδὺς μὲν
εἰς τὸ καταγνῶναι, πολλῷ δὲ ἔτι βραδύτερος εἰς
τὸ ἅπαξ καταγνοὺς ἀνεῖναι. καὶ τῇ αὑτοῦ χειρί:
πάνυ με λυπεῖ τὸ καταφρονεῖσθαι. μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς
πάντας οὐδὲν οὕτως ἂν ἴδοιμι, μᾶλλον δὲ ἀκούσαιμι
ἡδέως παρὰ σοῦ πραχθέν, ὡς ᾿Αθανάσιον ἐξελη-
λαμένον τῶν τῆς Αἰγύπτου ὅρων, τὸν μιαρόν, ὃς
ἐτόλμησεν ᾿Ιλληνίδας ἐπ᾽ ἐμοῦ γυναῖκας τῶν ἐπι-
σήμων βαπτίσαι. διωκέσθω.

47
᾿Αλεξανδρεῦσιν ®

Εἰ μέν τις τῶν Τ᾿ αλιλαίων ἣν ὑμῶν οἰκιστής,
οἵ τὸν ἑαυτῶν παραβάντες νόμον ἀπέτισαν ὁποίας
ἣν εἰκὸς δίκας, ἑλόμενοι μὲν ζῆν παρανόμως, εἰσα-
γαγόντες δὲ κήρυγμα καινὸν ὅ καὶ διδασκαλίαν

τῆς πόλεως Hertlein suggests.

ὅρων Asmus, τότων Hertlein, MSS.

Hertlein 51. 4 Asmus; ἄλλων Hertlein, MSS.
καινὸν Asmus adds; see below 4538.

no =

a ὦ

1 Athanasius had disregarded the order to leave Alexandria,
but he now, on October 24th, went into exile in Upper
Egypt; Socrates 3. 14; Sozomen 5, 15; see p. 75.

142

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

that enemy of the gods, Athanasius,! especially since,
for a long time past, you have known my just decrees.
I swear by mighty Serapis that, if Athanasius the
enemy of the gods does not depart from that city, or
rather from all Egypt, before the December Kalends,
I shall fine the cohort which you command a hundred
pounds? of gold. And you know that, though I am
slow to condemn, I am even much slower to remit
when I have once condemned. Added nith his own
hand.2 It vexes me greatly that my orders are
neglected. By all the gods there is nothing I should
be so glad to see, or rather hear reported as achieved
by you, as that Athanasius has been expelled beyond
the frontiers of Egypt. Infamous man! He has
had the audacity to baptise Greek women of rank 4
during my reign! Let him be driven forth ! °

47
To the Alexandrians

Ir your founder had been one of the Galilaeans,
men who have transgressed their own law ὁ and have
paid the penalties they deserved, since they elected
to live in defiance of the law and have introduced a
new doctrine and newfangled teaching, even then

2 The Greek word used is the equivalent of the Latin
libra = 12 ounces.

3 For similar postscripts see pp. 15, 19.

4 Or ‘‘ wives of distinguished men.”

5. In the Neapolitanus MS. the following has been added by
a Christian : μακάριος οὗτος, κυὼν μιαρὲ καὶ τρισκατάρατε παρά-
Bara καὶ τρισάθλιε.---““ This man is a blessed saint, O vile dog
of an apostate, thrice accursed and thrice miserable !”

δ ὦ, ὁ. the Hebraic law; cf. Against the Galilacans, 2388, foll.,
3058, foll.

143

802
Nov. or
Dec.
From
Antioch

488

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

veapay, λόγον ἂν εἶχεν οὐδ᾽ ὡς ᾿Αθανάσιον ὑφ᾽
ὑμῶν ἐπιξητεῖσθαι'" νυνὶ δὲ κτίστου μὲν ὄντος
᾿Αλεξάνδρου τῆς πόλεως, ὑπάρχοντος δὲ ὑμῖν
πολιούχου θεοῦ τοῦ βασιλέως Σαράπιδος ἅμα τῇ
παρέδρῳ κόρῃ καὶ τῇ βασιλίδι τῆς Αἰγύπτου
πάσης Tobe . . . . τὴν ὑγιαίνουσαν οὐ ζηλοῦν-
τες πόλιν: ἀλλὰ τὸ νοσοῦν μέρος ἐπιφημίζειν
ἑαυτῷ τολμᾷ τὸ τῆς πόλεως ὄνομα.

Λίαν αἰσχύνομαι νὴ τοὺς θεούς, ἄνδρες ᾿Αλεξαν-
δρεῖς, εἴ τις ὅλως ᾿Αλεξανδρέων ὁμολογεῖ [αλι-
λαῖος εἶναι. τῶν ὡς ἀληθῶς Ἑβραίων οἱ πατέρες
Αἰγυπτίοις ἐδούλευον πάλαι, νυνὶ δὲ ὑ ὑμεῖς, ἄνδρες
᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς, Αἰγυπτίων κρατήσαντες" ἐκράτησε
γὰρ ὁ κτίστης ὑμῶν τῆς Αἰγύπτου" τοῖς κατωλι-
γωρηκύσι τῶν πατρίων δογμάτων δουλείαν ἐθελού-
σιον ἄντικρυς τῶν παλαιῶν θεσμῶν ὑφίστασθε.
καὶ οὐκ εἰσέρχεται μνήμη τῆς παλαιᾶς ὑμᾶς ἐκεί-
νης εὐδαιμονίας, ἡ ἡνίκα ἣν κοινωνία μὲν πρὸς τοὺς "
θεοὺς Αἰγύπτῳ τῇ πάσῃ, πολλῶν δὲ ἀπελαύομεν
ἀγαθῶν. ἀλλ᾽ οἱ νῦν εἰσαγαγόντες ὑμῖν τὸ καινὸν
τοῦτο κήρυγμα τίνος αἴτιοι γεγόνασιν ἀγαθοῦ τῇ
πόλει, φράσατέ μοι. κτίστης ὑμῖν ἣν ἀνὴρ θεοσε-
βὴς ᾿Αλέξανδρος ὁ Μακεδών, οὔτι μὰ Δία κατά
τινα τούτων ὧν οὐδὲ κατὰ πάντας Ἕ βραίους
μακρῷ γεγονότας αὐτῶν κρείττονας. ἐκείνων μὲν
οὖν καὶ ὁ τοῦ Λάγου Ἰ]τολεμαῖος ἣν ἀμείνων,

1 Some words, 6. g. οὐχ ὑγιαίνετε (Capps) have dropped out;
lacuna Hertlein, following Petavius,
2 τοὺς Asmus adds.

1 Athanasius had left Alexandria on October 24th, 362,
and, not long after, the Alexandrians petitioned Julian for

144

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

it would have been unreasonable for you to demand
back Athanasius.t But as it is, though Alexander
founded your city and the lord Serapis is the city’s
patron god, together with his consort the Maiden,
the Queen of all Egypt, Isis . . .2 not emulating
the healthy part of the city; but the part that is
diseased has the audacity to arrogate to itself the
name of the whole.

I am overwhelmed with shame, I affirm it by the
gods, O men of Alexandria, to think that even a
single Alexandrian can admit that he is a Galilaean.
The forefathers of the genuine Hebrews were the
slaves of the Egyptians long ago, but in these days,
men of Alexandria, you who conquered the Egyptians
—for your founder was the conqueror of Egypt—
submit yourselves, despite your sacred traditions,
in willing slavery to men who have set at naught the
teachings of their ancestors. You have then no re-
collection of thuse happy days of old when all Egypt
held communion with the gods and we enjoyed
many benefits therefrom. But those who have but
yesterday introduced among you this new doctrine,
tell me of what benefit have they been to the city?
Your founder was a god-fearing man, Alexander of
Macedon, in no way, by Zeus, like any of these
persons, nor again did he resemble any Hebrews,
though the latter have shown themselves far superior
to the Galilaeans. Nay, Ptolemy? son of Lagus

his return. This is his answer to them. After this edict
Athanasius remained in hiding in Egypt and the Sudan till
Julian’s death in 363, when he recovered his see.

2 After “" Isis” some words are missing.

3 Ptolemy the First took Jerusalem and led many Jews
captive into Egypt, Josephus 1. 12. 1.

145
VOL. III. L

434

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

᾿Αλέξανδρος δὲ κὰν “Ῥωμαίοις εἰς, ἅμιλλαν ἰὼν
ἀγῶνα παρεῖχε. τί οὖν μετὰ τὸν κτίστην οἱ
ΠΠτολεμαῖοι, τὴν πόλιν ὑμῶν ὥσπερ γνησίαν θυγα-
a ae an /
τέρα παιδοτροφήσαντες; οὔτι τοῖς ᾿Ιησοῦ λόγοις
n la ων 2 3
ηὔξησαν αὐτήν, οὐδὲ τῇ τῶν θεοῖς ἐχθίστων
/ 4 / a /
Γαλιλαίων διδασκαλίᾳ τὴν οἰκονομίαν αὐτῇ Tav-
e a 7
την, Up ἧς νῦν ἐστιν εὐδαίμων, ἐξειργάσαντο.
/ ¢ na , a
τρίτον, ἐπειδὴ “Ῥωμαῖοι κύριοι γεγόναμεν αὐτῆς,
> if \ » 3 ἴω y
ἀφελόμενοι τοὺς ΠΠτολεμαίους οὐ καλῶς ἄρχοντας,
ς \ a A I 2"
ὁ Σεβαστὸς ἐπιδημήσας ὑμῶν TH πόλει Kal πρὸς
N; / ὔ 7
τοὺς ὑμετέρους πολίτας διαλεχθεὶς, ““Ανδρες,
3 n ,
εἶπεν, ᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς, ἀφίημι τὴν πόλιν αἰτίας
πάσης αἰδοῖ τοῦ μεγάλου θεοῦ Σαράπιδος αὐτοῦ
δ κ΄ Qn an t
Te ἕνεκα TOD δήμου καὶ TOD μεγέθους τῆς πόλεως"
an an e
αἰτία δέ μοι τρίτη τῆς εἰς ὑμᾶς εὐνοίας ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ
ς “Ὁ Μ 3%) 9S δὲ cy / Ὁ 74
ἑταῖρος "Αρειος." ἣν δὲ 0” Apetos οὗτος πολίτης
\ ς / K , δὲ ἴω Ss n is
μὲν ὑμέτερος, Καίσαρος δὲ τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ συμβιω
τής, ἀνὴρ φιλόσοφος.
m\ N > O/ \ \ ‘A δ a e /
Ta μὲν οὖν ἰδίᾳ περὶ τὴν πόλιν ὑμῶν ὑπάρξαντα
lal al e 5 ων /
Tapa τῶν ᾿Ολυμπίων θεῶν, ὡς ἐν βραχεῖ φράσαι,
a na δὲ ὃ \ \ n \ Le x δὲ
τοιαῦτα, σιωπῶ OE OLA τὸ μῆκος τὰ πολλά" TA ὃὲ
A 7a: / 2 >’ / ’ / WY; CN
κοινῇ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν οὐκ ἀνθρώποις ὀλίγοις οὐδὲ ἑνὶ
a id ς nan A /
γένει οὐδὲ μιᾷ πόλει, παντὶ δὲ ὁμοῦ TO κόσμῳ
παρὰ τῶν ἐμφανῶν 2 θεῶν διδόμενα πῶς ὑμεῖς οὐκ
1 θεοῖς Asmus adds.
2 ᾿ἐμφανῶν Asmus ; ἐπιφανῶν Hertlein, MSS.

1 For the Alexandrine Stoic, Areius, cf. Julian, Caesars,
Vol. 2, 8208 ; Letterto Themistius, Vol. 2, 265c, where Areius
is said to have refused the prefecture of Egypt; and Philo-

146

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

proved stronger than the Jews, while Alexander, if
he had had to match himself with the Romans,
would have made even them fight hard for
supremacy. And- what about the Ptolemies who
succeeded your founder and nurtured your city from
her earliest years as though she were their own
daughter? It was certainly not by the preachings
of Jesus that they increased her renown, nor by the
teaching of the Galilaeans, detested of the gods,
did they perfect this administration which she
enjoys and to which she owes her present good
fortune. Thirdly, when we Romans became her
masters and took her out of the hands of the
Ptolemies who misgoverned her, Augustus visited
your city and made the following speech to your
‘citizens: ‘* Men of Alexandria, I absolve the city of
all blame, because of my reverence for the mighty
god Serapis, and further for the sake of the people
themselves and the great renown of the city. But
there is a third reason for my goodwill towards you,
and that is my comrade Areius.’’! Now this Areius
was a fellow-citizen of yours and a familiar friend of
Caesar Augustus, by profession a philosopher.

These, then, to sum them up briefly, are the
blessings bestowed by the Olympian gods on your
city in peculiar, though I pass over very many
because they would take too long to describe. But
the blessings that are vouchsafed by the visible gods
to all in common, every day, not merely to a few
persons or a single race, or to one city, but to the
whole world at the same time, how can you fail to

stratus, Lives of the Sophists, Introduction, p. xxiii (Loeb
Library Edition). See Seneca, Dialogues 6. 4, where Areius
consoles and exhorts the Empress Livia.

147

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN ς

" 4 a 3 ς , / > A ᾽
ἰστε; μόνοι τῆς ἐξ «Ἡλίου κατιούσης αὐγῆς ἀναι-
/ , ΄ “
σθήτως ἔχετε; μόνοι θέρος οὐκ ἴστε καὶ χειμῶνα

’ 5 a 4 ft
Tap αὐτοῦ γινόμενον ; μόνοι Cwoyovovpeva Kal
φυόμενα Tap αὐτοῦ τὰ πάντα; τὴν δὲ ἐξ αὐτοῦ
\ 2 bf a \ A Ὁ“ /
καὶ Tap αὐτοῦ δημιουργὸν τῶν ὅλων Σελήνην
5) / a 7 fal
οὖσαν οὐκ αἰσθάνεσθε πόσων ἀγαθῶν αἰτία TH
Ul / » \ a lal
πόλει γίνεται ; Kal τούτων μὲν τῶν θεῶν οὐδένα
προσκυνεῖν τολμᾶτε: ὃν δὲ οὔτε ὑμεῖς οὔτε οἱ
/ a A A
πατέρες ὑμῶν ἑοράκασιν ᾿Ιησοῦν οἴεσθε χρῆναι
6 \ , ih οἷς / a δὲ ᾽ IA Ψ
eov λογον ὑπάρχειν. ὃν δὲ ἐξ αἰῶνος ἅπαν
«ς A \ lal ,
ὁρᾷ τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος Kal βλέπει καὶ

/ \ , 9 Ἂς /
D σέβεται καὶ σεβόμενον εὖ πράττει, τὸν μέγαν

9

Ἥλιον λέγω, τὸ ζῶν ἄγαλμα καὶ ἔμψυχον καὶ
ἔννουν καὶ ἀγαθοεργὸν τοῦ νοητοῦ πατρός," Vien
Te μοι πείθεσθε παραινοῦντι, καὶ μικρὰ ὑμᾶς
αὐτοὺς ἐπαναγάώγετε πρὸς τήν ἀλήθειαν. οὐχ
ἁμαρτήσεσθε γὰρ τῆς ὀρθῆς ὁδοῦ πειθόμενοι τῷ
πορευθέντι κἀκείνην τὴν ὁδὸν ἄχρις ἐτῶν εἴκοσι
καὶ ταύτην ἤδη σὺν θεοῖς πορευομένῳ δωδέκατον
ἔτος.

Ei μὲν οὖν φίλον ὑμῖν πείθεσθαι, μειζόνως

1 Cobet omits λόγον as a theologian’s gloss, but Julian is
thinking of the beginning of 8. John’s Gospel; cf. Against
the Galilaeans, 3278, 5338, c for his attack on the doctrine
of Christ the Word.

* Here some words are lost, probably omitted by Christian
copyists a8 blasphemous. Asmus rightly restores πατρός ;
Hertlein, following Osann, παντός.

1 For Selene as the artificer of the visible world cf. Vol. 1,
Oration 4, 150A.

148

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

know what they are? Are you alone insensible
to the beams that descend from Helios? Are you
alone ignorant that summer and winter are from
him? Or that all kinds of animal and plant life
proceed from him? And do you not perceive what
great blessings the city derives from her who is
generated from and by him, even Selene who is the
creator of the whole universe?1 Yet you have the
audacity not to adore any one of these gods; and
you think that one whom neither you nor your
fathers have ever seen, even Jesus, ought to rank
as God the Word. But the god whom from time
immemorial the whole race of mankind has beheld
and looked up to and worshipped, and from that
worship prospered, I mean mighty Helios, his intelli-
gible father’s living image,? endowed with soul and
intelligence, cause of all good .. . if you heed my
admonition, do ye lead yourselves even a little
towards the truth. For you will not stray from the
right road? if you heed one who till his twentieth
year walked in that road of yours, but for twelve
years now has walked in this road I speak of, by the
grace of the gods.* ~

Therefore, if it please you to obey me, you will

2 Cf. Fragment of a Letter toa Priest, Vol. 2, 295A, where
the stars are called ‘‘living images.”’ Julian here refers not
to the visible sun, but to the ‘‘ intellectual” (voepis) Helios
who is in the likeness of his ‘‘intelligible” (νοητὸς) father,
the transcendental Helios, for whom cf. Oration 4, Vol. 1, 1380,
note.

3 For Julian’ssreproach against the Christians that they
had taken ‘‘ their own road” and abandoned the teaching of
Moses, cf. Against the Galilaeans 434.

4 Cf. Vol. 1, Oration 4, 1314 where he also refers to the
time when he was a Christian and desires that it may be
forgotten.

149

ζ

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

εὐφρανεῖτε' τῇ δεισιδαιμονίᾳ δὲ καὶ κατηχήσει
τῶν πανούργων ἀνθρώπων ἐ ἐμμένειν εἴπερ ἐθέλοιτε,
τὰ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὁμονοεῖτε καὶ τὸν ᾿Αθανάσιον
μὴ ποθεῖτε. πολλοὶ πάντως εἰσὶ τῶν αὐτοῦ μα-
θητῶν δυνάμενοι τὰς ἀκοὰς ὑμῶν κνησιώσας καὶ
δεομένας ἀσεβῶν ῥημάτων ἱκανῶς παραμυθήσα-
σθαι. ὥφελε yap Αθανασίῳ ὁμοῦ ἡ τοῦ δυσσε-
βοῦς αὐτοῦ διδασκαλείου κατακεκλεῖσθαι μοχθη-
ρία. νῦν δέ ἐστι πλῆθος ὑμῖν οὐκ ἀγεννές, καὶ
πρᾶγμά oe? οὐδέν. ὃν γὰρ ἂν ἕλησθε τοῦ πλή-
θους, ὅσα γε εἰς τὴν τῶν γραφῶν διδασκαλίαν
ἥκει, χείρων οὐδὲν ἔσται τοῦ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν ποθου-
μένου. εἰ δὲ τῆς ἄλλης ἐντρεχείας ἐρῶντες ᾿Αθα-
vactov' πανοῦργον γὰρ εἶναι τὸν ἄνδρα πυνθάνο-
μαι" ταὔτας ἐποιήσασθε τὰς δεήσεις, ἴστε δι’ αὐτὸ
τοῦτο" αὐτὸν ἀπεληλαμένον τῆς πόλεως" ἀνεπι-
τήδειος γὰρ φύσει προστατεύειν. δήμου πολυπράγ-
μων ἀνήρ. εἰ δὲ μηδὲ ἀνήρ, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνθρωπίσκος
εὐτελής, καθάπερ οὗτος ὁ μέγας οἰόμενος περὶ τῆς
κεφαλῆς κινδυνεύειν, τοῦτο δὲ ὁ δίδωσιν ἀταξίας
ἀρχήν. ὅθεν, ἵνα μὴ γένηται τοιοῦτο περὶ ὑμᾶς
μηδέν, ἀπελθεῖν αὐτῷ προηγορεύσαμεν τῆς πόλεως
πάλαι, νυνὶ δὲ καὶ Αἰγύπτου πάσης.

Προτεθήτω τοῖς ἡμετέροις πολίταις ᾿Αλεξαν-
δρεῦσιν.

1 Asmus ὁμοῦ or ἅμα; Sintenis μόνον; Hertlein, MSS.
μόνῳ; Hertlein suggests μόνῳ γε.

2 τε Hertlein, MSS. ; δὲ Hertlein suggests ; Hercher would
delete τε. *

3 MSS. διὰ τοῦτο; Reiske διὰ τοῦτο αὐτό; Hertlein suggests
δι᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο.

4 Sintenis deletes δέ; Hercher lacuna after ἀρχήν ; Capps
suggests δή.

150

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

rejoice me the more. Butif you choose to persevere
in the superstition and instruction of wicked men, at
least agree among yourselves and do not crave for
Athanasius. In any case there are many of his
pupils who can comfort well enough those itching
ears of yours that yearn to hear impious words. 1
only wish that, along with Athanasius, the wicked-
ness of his impious school had been suppressed. But
as it is you have a fine crowd of them and need have
no trouble. For any man whom you elect from the
crowd will be in no way inferior to him for whom
you crave, at any rate for the teaching of the scrip-
‘tures. But if you have made these requests because
you are so fond of the general subtlety of Athanasius
—for I am informed that the man is a clever rascal
—then you must know that for this very reason he
has been banished from the city. For a meddlesome
man is unfit by nature to be leader of the people.
But if this leader is not even a man but only a
contemptible puppet, like this great personage who
thinks he is risking his head, this surely gives the
signal for disorder. Wherefore, that nothing of the
sort may occur in your case, as I long ago gave
orders! that he depart from the city, I now say, let
him depart from the whole of Egypt.

Let this be publicly proclaimed to my citizens of
Alexandria.

1 See above, 70 the Alexandrians, Ὁ. 75.

151

448
Β

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

48
᾿Αλεξανδρεῦσιν 1

᾿Οβελὸν εἶναι παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἀκούω λίθινον εἰς ὕψος
ἱκανὸν ἐπηρμένον, ἐπὶ τῆς ἠόνος ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι
τῶν ἀτιμοτάτων ἐρριμμένον. ἐπὶ τοῦτον ἐναυπηγή-
σατο σκάφος ὁ μακαρίτης Κωνστάντιος, ὡς μετά-
ἕων αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν ἐμὴν πατρίδα Κωνσταντίνου
πόλιν. ἐπεὶ be ἐκείνῳ συνέβη θεῶν ἐθελόντων
ἐνθένδε ἐκεῖσε πορευθῆναι τὴν εἱμαρμένην πορείαν,
ἡ πόλις ἀπαιτεῖ παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ τὸ ἀνάθημα, πατρὶς
οὖσά μου καὶ προσήκουσα πλέον ἤπερ ἐκείνῳ.
ὁ μὲν γὰρ αὐτὴν ὡς “ἀδελφήν, ἐγὼ “δὲ ὡς μητέρα
φιλῶ' καὶ γὰρ ἐγενόμην παρ᾽ αὐτῇ καὶ ἐτράφην
ἐκεῖσε, καὶ οὐ δύναμαι περὶ αὐτὴν ἀγνωμονῆσαι.
τί οὖν ; ἐπειδὴ καὶ ὑμᾶς οὐδὲν ἔλαττον τῆς πατρί-
δος φιλῶ, δίδωμι καὶ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἀναστῆσαι τὴν
χαλκῆν εἰκόνα. πεποίηται δὲ ἔναγχος ἀνδριὰς
τῷ μεγέθει κολοσσικός, ὃν ἀναστήσαντες ἕξετε
ἀντὶ ἀναθήματος λιθίνου χαλκοῦν, ἀνδρός, οὗ
φατε ποθεῖν, εἰκόνα καὶ μορφὴν ἀντὶ τετραγώνου 3
λίθου χαράγματα ἔχοντος Αἰγύπτια. καὶ τὸ λε-
γόμενον δέ, ὥς τινές εἰσιν οἱ θεραπεύοντες καὶ

1 Hertlein 58; the first part of this letter was published
by Rigaltius, Paris, 1601, the whole letter by Muratorius,
Padua, 1709.

2 Hertlein suggests μοι.

3 χριγώνου Hertlein, MSS. ; τετραγώνου La Bléterie, as the
obelisk is four-sided.

1 This granite monolith, which stands in the At Meiddn
(the hippodrome) in Constantinople, was originally erected
by Thothmes III. (about 1515 B.c.), probably at Heliopolis.

152

TO THE ALEXANDRIANS

48
To the Alexandrians

I am informed that there is in your neighbourhood

a granite obelisk! which, when it stood erect, ἢ

reached a considerable height, but has been thrown
down and lies on the beach as though it were some-
thing entirely worthless. For this obelisk Con-
stantius of blessed memory had a freight-boat built,
because he intended to convey it to my native place,
Constantinople. But since by the will of heaven he
has departed from this life to the next on that journey
to which we are fated,? the city claims the monument
from me because it is the place of my birth and more
closely connected with me than with the late
Emperor. For though he loved the place as a sister
Ilove itasmy mother. And I was in fact born there
and brought up in the place, and I cannot ignore its
claims. Well then, since I love you also, no less than
my native city, I grant to you also permission to
set up the bronze statue? in your city. A statue has
lately been made of colossal size. If you set this up
you will have, instead of a stone monument, a bronze
statue of aman whom you say you love and long for,
and a human shape instead of a quadrangular block
of granite with Egyptian characters on it. Moreover
the news has reached me that there are certain

The Alexandrians obeyed Julian’s orders, but the boat con-
taining the obelisk was driven by a storm to Athens, where
it remained till the Emperor Theodosius (379-395 a.D.)
conveyed it to Constantinople. There, as an inscription on
its base records, it took 32 days to erect; see Palatine
Anthology 9. 682. 2 Plato, Phaedo, 1176.

3 Of himself (2) or of Constantius. The Emperor’s permis-
sion was necessary for the erection of a statue by a city.

τὸ

From
Antioch

bo

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

προσκαθεύδοντες αὐτοῦ τῇ κορυφῇ, πάνυ με πείθει
χρῆναι τῆς δεισιδαιμονίας ἕνεκα ταύτης ἀπάγειν
αὐτόν. οἱ γὰρ θεώμενοι τοὺς καθεύδοντας ἐκεῖ,
πολλοῦ μὲν ῥύπου, πολλῆς δὲ ἀσελγείας περὶ τὸν
τόπον ὡς ἔτυχεν οὔσης, οὔτε πιστεύουσιν αὐτὸν
θεῖον εἶναι, καὶ διὰ τὴν τῶν προσεχόντων αὐτῷ
δεισιδαιμονίαν ἀπιστότεροι περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς καθί-
στανται. δι᾽ αὐτὸ δὴ οὖν τοῦτο καὶ μᾶλλον ὑμῖν
προσήκει συνεπιλαβέσθαι καὶ πέμψαι τῇ ἐμῇ πα-
τρίδι τῇ ξενοδοκούσῃ καλῶς ὑμᾶς, ὅτε εἰς τὸν Πόν-
τον εἰσπλεῖτε, καὶ ὥσπερ εἰς τὰς τροφὰς καὶ εἰς
τὸν ἐκτὸς κόσμον συμβάλλεσθαι. πάντως οὐκ
ἄχαρι καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἑστάναι τι τῶν ὑμετέρων,
εἰς ὃ προσπλέοντες τῇ πόλει μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης
ἀποβλέψετε.

49
᾿Εκδικίῳ 1

» L > y YA / \ A e a
Αξιὸν ἐστιν, εἴπερ ἄλλου τινος, καὶ τῆς ιερᾶς
ἐπιμεληθῆναι μουσικῆς. ἐπιλεξάμενος οὖν ἐκ τοῦ
δήμου τῶν ᾿Αλεξανδρέων εὖ γεγονότας μειρακί-
/ la}

σκους ἀρτάβας ἑκάστῳ σίτου" κέλευσον δύο τοῦ

1 Hertlein 56.
2 σίτου Hertlein adds,

1 Possibly there was a martyr’s grave near, at which the
Christians worshipped ; more probably, Christian or Jewish
ascetics who flourished at Alexandria and were called thera-
peuts,” ‘‘ worshippers,” had settled near the obelisk. Sozo-

154

TO ECDICIUS, PREFECT OF EGYPT

persons who worship there and sleep! at its very
apex, and that convinces me beyond doubt that on
account of these superstitious practices I ought to
take it away. For men who see those persons
sleeping there and so much filthy rubbish and care-
less and licentious behaviour in that place, not only
do not believe that it? is sacred, but by the influence
of the superstition of those who dwell there come to
have less faith in the gods. Therefore, for this very
reason it is the more proper for you to assist in this
business and to send it to my native city, which
always receives you hospitably when you sail into
the Pontus, and to contribute to its external adorn-
ment, even as you contribute to its sustenance. It
cannot fail to give you pleasure to have something
that has belonged to you standing in their city, and
as you sail towards that > you will delight in
gazing at it.

49
To Ecdicius, Prefect of Egypt

Ir there is anything that deserves our fostering
care, it is the sacred art of music. Do you therefore
select from the citizens of Alexandria 8 boys of good
birth, and give orders that two artabae# of corn are

men 6. 29 says that about 2000 ascetic monks lived in the
neighbourhood of Alexandria. See also Sozomen 1. 12.

2 ὦ. 6. the obelisk, which was originally dedicated to the
Sun.

3 For the study of music at Alexandria cf. Ammianus
Marcellinus 22. 16. 17, nondumque apud eos penitus exaruit
musica, nec harmonia conticuit.

4 The artaba, an Egyptian dry measure, was equivalent to
about nine gallons.

55

362 or
early

in 363
From
Antioch

443

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μηνὸς χορηγεῖσθαι, ἔλαιόν τε ἐπ αὐτῷ 1 καὶ οἶνον"
ἐσθῆτα δὲ παρέξουσιν οἱ τοῦ ταμιείου προεστῶτες.
οὗτοι δὲ τέως ἐκ φωνῆς καταλεγέσθωσαν. εἰ δέ
τινες δύναιντο καὶ τῆς ἐπιστήμης αὐτῆς εἰς ἄκρον
μετασχεῖν, ἴστωσαν ἀποκείμενα πάνυ μεγάλα
τοῦ πόνου τὰ ἔπαθλα καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν. ὅτι γὰρ πρὸ
ἡμῶν αὐτοὶ τὰς ψυχὰς ὑπὸ τῆς θείας μουσικῆς
καθαρθέντες ὀνήσονται, πιστευτέον τοῖς προαπο-
φαινομένοις ὀρθῶς ὑπὲρ τούτων. ὑπὲρ μὲν οὖν
τῶν παίδων τοσαῦτα. τοὺς δὲ νῦν ἀκροωμένους
τοῦ μουσικοῦ Διοσκόρου ποίησον ἀντιλαβέσθαι
τῆς τέχνης προθυμότερον, ὡς ἡμῶν ἑτοίμων ἐπὶ
ὅπερ ἂν ἐθέλωσιν αὐτοῖς συνάρασθαι.

50

Διονυσίῳ ὃ

᾽ ᾽ὔ 9 a d x a 3
Αμείνων ἦσθα σιωπῶν πρότερον ἢ νῦν ἀπο-

. la) , /
λογούμενος: οὐδὲ yap ἐλοιδοροῦ τότε, καίτοι

Mh ” 2, 4 \ \ Ψ 2 /
διανοούμενος ἴσως αὐτό' νυνὶ δὲ ὥσπερ ὠδίνων
\ cx a ὃ / 10 / ef x \
τὴν καθ᾽ ἡμῶν λοιδορίαν ἀθρόαν ἐξέχεας. ἢ yap
2 ΄ \ / Epa . Ψ
οὐ χρή με καὶ λοιδορίαν αὐτὸ καὶ βλασφημίαν

! ef “ la) 7 ς /
νομίζειν, OTL με τοῖς σεαυτοῦ φίλοις ὑπελάμβανες
Ω χ Ἵ
εἶναι προσόμοιον, ὧν ἑκατέρῳ δέδωκας σεαυτὸν
1 After αὐτῷ Hertlein brackets καὶ σῖτον.
2 ἴστων Hertlein suggests.
3 Hertlein59. In Laurentianus LVIII the title is Ιουλιανὸς

κατὰ τοῦ Νείλου; Διονυσίῳ first appears in the Paris edition,
1630.

156

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

to be furnished every month to each of them, with
olive oil also, and wine. The overseers of the
Treasury will provide them with clothing. For the
present let these boys be chosen for their voices,
but if any of them should prove capable of attaining
to the higher study of the science of music, let them
be informed that very considerable rewards for their
work have been set aside at my court also. For
they must believe those who have expressed right
opinions on these matters that they themselves
rather than we will be purified in soul by divinely
inspired! music, and benefit thereby. So much,
then, for the boys. As for those who are now the
pupils of Dioscorus the musician, do you urge them
to apply themselves to the art with still more zeal,
for I am ready to assist them to whatever they may
wish, !

50
To Nilus, surnamed Dionysius 2

Your earlier silence was more creditable than
your present defence; for then you did not utter
abuse, though perhaps it was in your mind. But
now, as though you were in travail, you have poured
out your abuse of me wholesale. For must I not
regard it as abuse and slander that you supposed me
to be like your own friends, to each of whom you
offered yourself uninvited; or rather, by the first?

1 Julian does not mean sacred music in particular; cf.
Vol. 1, Oration 3. 1llc, where θεία is used of secular music.

* For the name and personality of Nilus see Introduction,
under Nilus.

3 Constans; cf. Vol. 1, Oration 1. 9p.

157

362-363
Winter
From
Antioch

444

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἄκλητον, μᾶλλον δὲ τῷ μὲν ἄκλητον, τῷ προτέρῳ,
τῷ δευτέρῳ δὲ ἐνδειξαμένῳ μόνον, ὅτι σε “συνεργὸν
ἐθέλει προσλαβεῖν, ὑπήκουσας. ἀλλ' εἰ μὲν ἐγὼ
προσόμοιός εἰμι Κώνσταντι καὶ Μαγνεντίῳ, τὸ
πρᾶγμα αὐτό, φασί, δείξει: σὺ δ᾽ ὅτι κατὰ τὸν
κωμικὸν

\ 3 an e/ 3 / ᾽
σαυτὴν ἐπαινεῖς WATTED Αστυδάμας, γύναι,

πρόδηλόν ἐ ἐστιν ἐξ ὧν ἐπέστειλας. ἡ γὰρ ἀφοβία
καὶ τὸ μέγα θάρσος καὶ τὸ εἴθε με γνοίης ὅσος καὶ
οἷός εἰμι, καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα, βαβαΐ,
πηλίκου κτύπου καὶ κόμπου ῥημάτων ἐστίν.
ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τῶν Χαρίτων καὶ τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης,
εἰ τολμηρὸς οὕτως εἰ 1 καὶ γενναῖος, τί καὶ τρίτον
ηὐλαβήθης, ἂν δέῃ, προσκρούειν ; οἱ γὰρ τοῖς
κρατοῦσιν ἀπεχθανόμενοι, τὸ μὲν κουφότατον
καί, ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις, ἥδιστον᾽ τῷ γε νοῦν ἔχοντι,
τοῦ “πράγματα ἔχειν ταχέως ἀπαλλάττονται,
μικρὰ δὲ εἰ χρὴ προσζημιωθῆναι, περὶ τὰ xen
ματα πταίουσι' τὸ δὲ κεφάλαιόν ἐστι τῆς ὀργῆς
καὶ τὸ παθεῖν, φασί, τὰ ἀνήκεστα, τὸ ζῆν
προέσθαι. τούτων δὴ πάντων ὑπερορῶν, ὅτι καὶ
τὸν ἰδίως ἄνδρα 3 ἐπέγνωκας" καὶ τὸν κοινῶς καὶ
γενικῶς ἄνθρωπον ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν τῶν ὀψυμαθῶν
ἀγνοούμενον, ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου, πρὸς τῶν θεῶν, εὐλα-

1 οὕτως εἶ Hertlein suggests; Fabricius οὕτωσί; MSS.
οὑτοσί, or εἰ καὶ τ. οὕτω.

2. Lacuna Hertlein, MSS.; ἄνδρα Asmus.

1 Magnentius; cf. Oration 1 for the defeat of this usurper
by Constantius. Magnentius had murdered Constans, see
Oration 1. 208, 2. 55D. 2 Cf. Vol. 2, Caesars. 3074.

158

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

you were not invited, and you obeyed the second ἦ
on his merely indicating that he wished to enlist
you to help him. However, whether I am like
Constans and Magnentius the event itself, as they
say, will prove.? But as for you, from what you
wrote it is very plain that, in the words of the comic
poet,?
“You are praising yourself, lady, like Astydamas.”
For when you write about your “ fearlessness’’ and
“great courage,’ and say “ Would that you knew
my real value and my true character!” and, in a
word, all that sort of thing,—for shame! What an
empty noise and display of words is this! Nay, by
the Graces and Aphrodite, if you are so brave and
noble, why were you “so careful to avoid incurring
displeasure,” if need be, “for the third time” ?* For
when men fall under the displeasure of princes, the
lightest consequence—and, as one might say, the
most agreeable to a man of sense—is that they are
at once relieved from the cares of business; and if
they have to pay a small fine as well, their stumbling
block is merely money; while the culmination of the
prince’s wrath, and the “fate beyond all remedy”
as the saying is, is to lose their lives. Disregarding
all these dangers, because, as you say, “you had
come to know me in my private capacity for the man
I am” 5—and in my common and generic capacity
for the human being I am, though unknown to
myself, late learner that I am !—why, in heaven's
name, did you say that you were careful to avoid
3 Philemon frag. 190; cf. Letéer to Basil, p. 83; this had
become a proverb.

4 i.e. after his experiences with Constans aud Magnentius.
5 A quotation from the other’s letter.

159

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

Beta Pat ἔφης, μὴ τρίτον προσκρούσῃς; οὐ γὰρ
δὴ “πονηρὸν ἐκ χρηστοῦ σε ποιήσω χαλεπήνας
eyo ζηλωτὸς γὰρ ἂν ἦν ἐν δίκῃ τοῦτο δυνάμενος"
ἣ γάρ, ὥς φησι Ἰ]λάτων, καὶ τοὐναντίον οἷός
τε ἣν ἄν. ἀδεσπότου δὲ τῆς ἀρετῆς οὔσης ἐχρῆν
ὑπολογίζεσθαι μηδὲν τῶν τοιούτων. ἀλλ᾿ οἴει
/ \ / x “ ἴω \ ig “
μέγα τὸ πάντας μὲν βλασφημεῖν, πᾶσι δὲ ἁπλῶς
λοιδορεῖσθαι, καὶ τὸ τῆς εἰρήνης τέμενος ἀπο-
/ 3 an 7
φαίνειν ἐργαστήριον πολέμου. ἢ τοῦτο νομίζεις
ὑπὲρ τῶν παλαιῶν ἁμαρτημάτων ἀπολογεῖσθαι
ἊΝ e/ a / la
πρὸς ἅπαντας, Kal τῆς πάλαι ποτὲ μαλακίας
παραπέτασμα τὴν νῦν ἀνδρείαν εἶναί σου; τὸν
μῦθον ἀκήκοας τὸν Βαβρίου “Ταλῆ ποτ᾽ ἀνδρὸς
εὐπρεποῦς ἐρασθεῖσα ᾽" τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἐκ τοῦ
ud
βιβλίου μάνθανε. πολλὰ εἰπὼν οὐδένα ἂν πεί-
‘ ο /
σειας ἀνθρώπων, ὡς ov γέγονας ὅπερ οὖν γέγονας
καὶ οἷον πολλοὶ πάλαι σε ἠπίσταντο. τὴν νῦν
‘PS 7 \ Ni / 2 Ἔ / \
δὲ ἀμαθίαν καὶ τὸ θάρσος οὐχ ἡ φιλοσοφία μὰ
\ \ / if \ n
τοὺς θεοὺς ἐνεποίησέ σοι, τοὐναντίον δὲ ἡ διπλῆ
\ TI , YA 1 ὃ ΄ A δέ
κατὰ ἸΙΪλάτωνα ἄγνοια. κινδυνεύων γὰρ εἰδέναι
μηδέν, ὡς οὐδὲ ἡμεῖς, οἴει δὴ 3 πάντων εἶναι
7 an n , \ \
σοφώτατος, οὐ τῶν νῦν ὄντων μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
A i an / “
τῶν γεγονότων, ἴσως δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐσομένων. οὕτω
\ \ / SN an ae!
σοι πρὸς ὑπερβολὴν ἀμαθίας Ta τῆς οἰήσεως
ἐπιδέδωκεν.

1

γένη.
2 δὴ Asmus adds.

ἄνοια Schwarz, cf. Plato, Timacus 86s, δύο δ᾽ ἀνοίας

i Crito 440. 2 Piato, Republic 6178.
8 The Senate; for the phrase ἐργαστήριον πολέμου cf.
Xenophon, Hellenica 3. 4, 17.

160

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

incurring displeasure for the third time? For surely
my anger will not change you from a good man into
a bad. I should be enviable indeed, and with justice,
if I had the power to do that; for then, as Plato says,}
I could do the converse as well. But since virtue
owns no master,? you ought not to have taken into
account anything of the sort. However, you think
it is a fine thing to speak ill of all men, and to abuse
all without exception, and to convert the shrine of
peace? into a workshop of war. Or do you think
in this way to excuse yourself in the sight of all for
your past sins, and that your courage now is a
screen to hide your cowardice of old? You have
heard the fable of Babrius:4+ “Once upon a time a
weasel fell in love with a handsome youth.” The
rest of the fable you nay learn from the book. How-
ever much you may say, you will never convince
any human being that you were not what you were,
and such as many knew you to be in the past. As
for your ignorance and audacity now, it was not
philosophy that implanted them in you, no, by
heaven! On the contrary, it was what Plato®
calls a twofold lack of knowledge. For though you
really know nothing, just as I know nothing, you
think forsooth that you are the wisest of all men,
not only of those who are alive now, but also of
those who have ever been, and perhaps of those
who ever will be. To such a pitch of ignorance
has your self-conceit grown !

4 Fable 32, the weasel or cat, transformed into a woman,
could not resist chasing a mouse.

5 Cf. Proclus on Cratylus 65 for this Neo-Platonic phrase ;
and Plato, Apology 21p. In Sophist 2298 Plato defines the
ignorance of those who do not even know that they are
ignorant, as τῶν κακῶν αἰτία, καὶ 7 ἐπονείδιστος ἀμαθία.

: 161
VOL. III. M

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

9 \ lal AN [2 \ a rn ¢ “-“

Αλλὼ σοῦ μὲν ἕνεκα καὶ ταῦτα τῶν ἱκανῶν
” / / lal Nes) > vf \
εἰρηταί μοι πλείω, δεῖ δὲ ἴσως ἀπολογήσασθαι διὰ
σὲ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις, OTL προχείρως ἐπὶ κοινωνίαν
σε παρεκάλεσα πραγμάτων. τοῦτ᾽ οὐ πρῶτος
οὐδὲ μόνος ἔπαθον, ὧ Διονύσιε. ἐξηπάτησε καὶ
Πλάτωνα τὸν μέγαν ὁ σὸς ὁμώνυμος, ἀλλὰ καὶ :
id 9 a / Ξ:
ὃ ᾿Αθηναῖος ἢ ΠΝ ΠΟ) εἰδέναι μὲν γὰρ αὐτόν
φησι πονηρὸν ὄντα,3 τηλικαύτην δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ

id

μέγεθος κακίαν οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐλπίσαι πώποτε. Kal
/ x / “ a
τί χρὴ λέγειν ὑπὲρ τούτων, ὅπου Kal τῶν
᾽ “ >
Ασκληπιαδῶν ὁ ἄριστος Ἱπποκράτης ἔφη"
Ἔσφηλαν δέ μου τὴν γνώμην αἱ ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ
ῥαφαί; εἶτ᾽ ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ὑπὲρ ὧν ἢ εσαν ἐξηπα-
τῶντο, καὶ τὸ τεχνικὸν ἐλάνθανε τὸν ἰατρὸν
θεώρημα, θαυμαστὸν δέ, εἴπερ ᾿Ιουλιανὸς ἀκούσας
ἐξαίφνης ἀνδρίζεσθαι τὸν Netrov* Διονύσιον
bl] / 2 ΄ 2 a \ 3 n f
ἐξηπατήθη; ἀκούεις ἐκεῖνον τὸν ᾿Ηλεῖον Φαίδωνα,
καὶ τὴν ἱστορίαν ἐπίστασαι" εἰ δὲ ἀγνοεῖς, ἐπι-

/ 4 AN 9 n
μελέστερον πολυπραγμόνησον, ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὖν ἐρῶ

a n / nA
TOUTO. ἐκεῖνος ἐνόμιζεν οὐδὲν ἀνίατον εἶναι τῇ
φιλοσοφίᾳ, πάντας δὲ ἐκ πάντων ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς
καθαίρεσθαι βίων, ἐπιτηδευμάτων, ἐπιθυμιῶν,

1 Δίωνα Hertlein adds. 2 ὄντα Cobet adds.
3 οὐδὲ Hertlein, MSS. ; οὐδ᾽ ἂν Hertlein suggests.

4 Hertlein, following Hercher, [τὸν NetAgov ἢ]; Laurenti-
anus Asmus. τὸν Νεῖλον ; Wilamowitz τὸν δειλὸν omitting
Διονύσιον ; Heyler regards ἢ Διονύσιον as a gloss.

5 δ᾽ οὖν Wright; δὲ οὐκ MSS., Hertlein; μόνον Hertlein
suggests; Asmus retains οὐκ.

1 The tyrant of Syracuse.

2 Callippus, who assassinated Dio in 353 B.c., was himself
put to death by the Syracusans after he had usurped the
government.

162

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

However, as far as you are concerned, this that
I have said is more than enough; but perhaps I
ought to apologise on your account to the others
because I too hastily summoned you to take part
in public affairs. I am not the first or the only one,
Dionysius, who has had this experience. Your
namesake! deceived even great Plato; and Cal-
lippus? the Athenian also deceived Dio. For
Plato says? that Dio knew he was a bad man but
that he would never have expected in him such a
degree of baseness. Why need I quote the experi-
ence of these men, when even Hippocrates,* the
most distinguished of the sons of Asclepius, said:
«The sutures of the head bathed my judgement.”
Now if those famous men were deceived about
persons whom they knew, and the physician was
mistaken in a professional diagnosis, is it surprising
that Julian was deceived when he heard that Nilus
Dionysius had suddenly become brave? You have
heard tell of the famous Phaedo of Elis,° and you
know his story. However, if you do not know it,
study it more carefully, but at any rate I will
tell you this part. He thought that there is
nothing that cannot be cured by philosophy, and
that by her all men can be purified from all their
modes of life, their habits, desires, in a word from

3 Plato, Epistle 7. 851}, ΠΕ.

4 Hippocrates, 5. 3. 561 Kiihn. This candid statement of
Hippocrates, who had failed to find a wound in a patient’s
head, was often cited as a proof of a great mind; cf.
Plutarch, De profectu in virtute, 820.

5 For the reformation of Phaedo by philosophy, see
Aulus Gellius 2.18 and Julian, Vol. 2, 264p (Wright). He
was a disciple of Socrates and wrote several dialogues ; for
his Life see Diogenes Laertius, 2, 105; οἵ, Wilamowitz in
Hermes 14,

163
μ 2

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πάντων ἁπαξαπλῶς τῶν τοιούτων. εἰ γὰρ τοῖς
εὖ πεφυκόσι καὶ “καλῶς τεθραμμένοις “ἐπήρκει
μόνον, οὐδὲν ἂν ἣν. θαυμαστὸν τὸ κατ᾽ αὐτήν'
εἰ δὲ καὶ τοὺς οὕτω διακειμένους ἀνάγει πρὸς
τὸ φῶς, δοκεῖ μοι διαφερόντως εἶναι θαυμάσιον.
ἐκ τούτων ἡ ἡ περὶ σέ μοι, κατ᾽ ὀλίγον γνώμη, ὡς
ἴσασιν οἱ θεοὶ πάντες, ἔρρεπεν ἐπὶ τὸ βέλτιον.
οὔτοι γοῦν οὔτε ἐν πρώτοις οὔτε ἐν δευτέροις
τῶν κρατίστων ἐθέμην ἀνδρῶν τὸ κατὰ σέ.
ἐπίστασαι ἴσως αὐτός" εἰ δὲ ἀγνοεῖς, τοῦ καλοῦ
Συμμάχον πυνθάνου. πέπεισμαι γάρ, ἐκεῖνος
ὅτι οὔποτ᾽ ἂν ἑκὼν εἶναι ψεύσαιτο, τὰ πάντα
ἀληθίξεσθαι πεφυκώς. εἰ δὲ ἀγανακτεῖς, ὅτι μὴ
πάντων σε ᾿προυτιμήσαμεν, ἐγὼ μὲν ἐμαυτῷ, ὅτι
σε καὶ ἐν ἐσχάτοις ἔταξα, μέμφομαι, καὶ χάριν
οἶδα τοῖς θεοῖς πᾶσί τε καὶ πάσαις, οἱ κοινωνῆσαί
σε πραγμάτων καὶ φίλους ἡμᾶς γενέσθαι διε-
κώλυσαν. . .. καὶ γὰρ εἰ πολλὰ περὶ τῆς φήμης
οἱ ποιηταί φασιν ὡς ἔστι θεός, ἔστω δέ, εἰ βούλει,
δαιμόνιόν ye! τὸ τῆς φήμης, οὐ πάνυ TL” προσ-
εκτέον αὐτῇ, διότι πέφυκε τὸ δαιμόνιον οὐ
πάντα καθαρὸν οὐδὲ ἀγαθὸν τελείως ὡς τὸ τῶν
θεών εἶναι γένος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπικοινωνεῖ Tas καὶ πρὸς
θάτερον. εἰ δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἄλλων δαιμόνων οὐ

1 δαιμόνιόν ye Asmus; δαιμόνιον, καὶ MSS., Hertlein; τὸ
Tis φήμης Asmus rejects as a gloss. Thomas reads ἔστω---

φήμης as a parenthesis ; so too Asmus.
2 πάνυ τι ASmus; πάντη MSS., Hertlein.

1 ὦ, 6. as Phaedo. Wilamowitz thinks that this sentence
and the preceding are quoted or paraphrased from Phaedo.

2 This was probably L. Aurelius Avianius Symmachus
the Roman senator, prefect of the city in 364-5, father of
the orator Quintus Aurelius Symmachus; Ammianus 21.

164

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

everything of the sort. If indeed she only availed
those who are well born and well bred there would
be nothing marvellous about philosophy; but if she
can lead up to the light men so greatly depraved,!}
then I consider her marvellous beyond anything.
For these reasons my estimate of you, as all the
gods know, inclined little by little to be more favour-
able; but even so I did not count your sort in
the first or the second class of the most virtuous.
Perhaps you yourself know this; but if you do
not know it, enquire of the worthy Symmachus.?
For I am convinced that he would never willingly
tell a lie, since he is naturally disposed to be
truthful in all things. And if you are aggrieved
that I did not honour you before all others, I for
my part reproach myself for having ranked you
even among the last in merit, and I thank all
the gods and goddesses who hindered us from
becoming associated in public affairs and from
being intimate... 2% And indeed, though the
poets have often said of Rumour that she is a
goddess,* and let us grant, if you will, that she at
least has demonic power, yet not very much attention
ought to be paid to her, because a demon is not
altogether pure or perfectly good, like the race of
the gods, but has some share of the opposite quality.
And even though it be not permissible to say this

12. 24, describes the meeting of the elder Symmachus and
Julian in 361 at Nish.

3 The lack of connection indicates a lacuna though there
is none in the MSS. Probably Julian said that their
intimacy existed only as a rumour.

4 Hesiod, Works and Days 763

φήμη δ᾽ οὔτις πάμπαν ἀπόλλυται, ἥν τινα πολλοὶ
λαοὶ φημίξωσι: θεός νύ τίς ἐστι καὶ αὐτή.

165

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

θέμις τοῦτο φάναι, περὶ τῆς φήμης οἶδ᾽ ὅτε λέγων
ὡς πολλὰ μὲν ψευδῶς, πολλὰ δὲ ἀληθῶς ἀγγέλλει,
οὔποτ᾽ ἂν αὐτὸς ἁλοίην ψευδομαρτυριῶν.

᾿Αλλὰ τὴν παρρησίαν τὴν σὴν οἴει τεττάρων
εἶναι ὀβολῶν, τὸ λεγόμενον, ἀξίαν; οὐκ οἶσθ᾽ ὅτι
nat Θερσίτης ἐν τοῖς “Ἕλλησιν ἐπαρρησιάξετο,
κα ᾽Οδυσσεὺς μὲν αὐτὸν ὁ συνετώτατος ἔπαιε
a5 σκήπτρῳ, τῷ δὲ ᾿Αγαμέμνονι τῆς Θερσίτου
παροινίας ἔλαττον ἔμελεν ἢ χελώνῃ μυιῶν,
τὸ τῆς παροιμίας; πλὴν οὐ μέγα ἔργον ἐστὶν
ἐπιτιμᾶν ἄλλοις, ἑαυτὸν δὲ ἀνεπιτίμητον παρα-
σχεῖν. εἰ δέ σοι ταύτης μέτεστι τῆς μερίδος,
ἐπίδειξον ἡμῖν. ap ὅτε νέος ἦσθα, καλὰς ἔδωκας
ὑπὲρ σαυτοῦ τοῖς πρεσβυτέροις ὁμιλίας ; ἀλλ᾽
ἐγὼ κατὰ τὴν Εὐριπίδειον Hrextpav τὰς τοιαύτας
συγῷ τύχας. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀνὴρ γέγονας καὶ στρατο-
πέδῳ παρέβαλες, ἔπραξας πῶς πρὸς τοῦ Διός ;
ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀληθείας φὴς προσκρούσας ἀπηλλάχθαι.
ἐκ τίνων τοῦτο ἔχων δεῖξαι, ὥσπερ οὐ πολλῶν
καὶ πονηροτάτων, ὑφ᾽ ὧνπερ καὶ αὐτὸς ἀπηλάθης,
ἐκτοπισθέντων ; οὐ τοῦτό ἐστιν, ὦ συνετώτατε
Διονύσιε, σπουδαίου καὶ σώφρονος ἀνδρός, ἀπεχ-
θανόμενον ἀπελθεῖν τοῖς κρατοῦσιν. ἦσθα δὲ
ἂν βελτίων, εἰ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐκ τῆς πρὸς
σεαυτὸν συνουσίας ἀπέφηνας ἡμῖν μετριωτέρους.
ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν οὐ κατὰ σέ, μὰ τοὺς θεούς, οὐδὲ
κατὰ μυρίους ἄλλους, ὅσοι ζηλοῦσι τὸν σὸν τρόπον"

1 Cf. Julian’s reverence for φήμη in Vol. 1, pp. 409, 428 ;
Vol. 2, p. 347, Wright.

2 Iliad 2. 265.

3 Orestes 16; τὰς yap ἐν μέσῳ σιγῶ τύχας. Cf. Vol. 2, To
Themistius, 2548, p. 204, Wright.

166

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

concerning the other demons, I know that when I
say of Rumour that she reports many things falsely
as weil as many truthfully, I shall never myself be
convicted of bearing false witness.?

But as for your “freedom of speech,’ do you
think that it is worth four obols, as the saying
is? Do you not know that Thersites also spoke his
mind freely among the Greeks, whereupon the most
wise Odysseus beat him with his staff,? while Aga-
memnon paid less heed to the drunken brawling of
Thersites than a tortoise does to flies, as the proverb
goes? For that matter it is no great achievement
to criticise others, but rather to place oneself beyond
the reach of criticism. Now if you can claim to be
_ in this category, prove it tome. Did you not, when
you were young, furnish to your elders fine themes
for gossip about you? However, like Electra in
Euripides,? I keep silence about happenings of this
sort. But when you came to man’s estate and be-
took yourself to the camp,* how, in the name of
Zeus, did you behave? You say that you left it
because you gave offence in the cause of truth.
From what evidence can you prove this, as though
many men® and of the basest sort had not been
exiled by the very persons by whom you yourself
were driven away? O most wise Dionysius, it does
not happen to a virtuous and temperate man to go
away obnoxious to those in power! You would have
done better if you had proved to us that men from
their intercourse with you were better behaved. But
this was not in your power, no, by the gods, nor is
it in the power of tens of ἘΠ ΠΣ τῆς πὸ emulate

4 7.¢. of Constans.
5 We do not know to whom Julian refers,

167

4:

0

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πέτραι γὰρ πέτραις καὶ λίθοι λίθοις _Tpooapar-
TOMEVOL OUK ὠφελοῦσι μὲν ἀλλήλους, ὁ δ᾽ ἰσχυρό-
TEPOS τὸν ἥττονα εὐχερῶς “συντρίβει.

"Apa μὴ Λακωνικῶς ταῦτα καὶ συντόμως λέγω;
ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ μέν οἶμαι λαλίστερος διὰ σὲ καὶ τῶν
᾿Αττικῶν ἀποπεφάνθαι τεττίγων. ὑπὲρ δὲ ὧν
εἰς ἐμὲ πεπαρῴνηκας, ἐπιθήσω σοι δίκην τὴν
πρέπουσαν, ἐθελόντων θεῶν καὶ τῆς δεσποίνης
᾿Αδραστείας. τίς οὖν ἡ δίκη καὶ τί μάλιστα τὸ
δυνάμενόν σου τὴν γλῶτταν καὶ τὴν διάνοιαν
ὀδυνῆσαι ; ; ὡς ἐλάχιστα πειράσομαι διά τε τῶν
λόγων καὶ διὰ τῶν ἔργων ἐξαμαρτὼν μὴ παρα-
σχέσθαι σου τῇ κακηγόρῳ γλώττῃ πολλὴν
φλυαρίαν. καίτοι με οὐ λέληθεν, ὅτι καὶ τῆς
᾿Αφροδίτης φασὶν ὑπὸ τοῦ Μώμου ἐσκῶφθαι
τὸ σάνδαλον. ἀλλ᾽ ὁρᾷς ὅτι πολλὰ καὶ ὁ Μῶμος
ἐρρήγνυτο, καὶ μόλις ἐλαμβάνετο τοῦ σανδάλου.
εἴη δὲ καὶ σὲ περὶ ταῦτα τριβόμενον καταγηρᾶσαι
καὶ τοῦ Τιθωνοῦ βαθύτερον καὶ τοῦ Κινύρου
πλουσιώτερον καὶ τοῦ Σαρδαναπάλου τρυφη-
λότερον, ὅπως τὸ τῆς ,παροιμίας ἐπὶ σοῦ
πληρωθῇ Δὶς παῖδες οἱ γέροντες.

᾿Αλλ᾽ ὁ θεσπέσιος ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἐκ τίνων ἐφάνη
σοι τηλικοῦτος ; ap ὅτι μιμητὴς αὐτοῦ γενόμενος
ἐζήλωσας ὅσα ἐκείνῳ τὸ μειράκιον ὁ ᾿ϑρμόλαος
ὠνείδισεν; ἢ τοῦτο μὲν οὐδεὶς οὕτως ἐστὶν

1 See the,similar passage on p. 101. Asmus thinks that
the Lauricius there mentioned and Nilus were both Cynics
and therefore obnoxious to Julian.

2 A reference to the letter of Nilus, who had perhaps
asked for a brief answer.

3 Cf. Misopogon 5708, vol. 2, p. 508, Wright.

168

ΤῸ NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

your way of life. For when rocks grind against
rocks and stones against stones they do not benefit
one another, and the stronger easily wears down
the weaker.!

I am not saying this in Laconic fashion? and con-
cisely,am I? Nay, I think that on your account I
have shown myself even more talkative than Attic
grasshoppers. However, in return for your drunken
abuse of myself, I will inflict on you the appropriate
punishment, by the grace of the gods and our lady
Adrasteia.2 What, then, is this punishment, and
what has the greatest power to hurt your tongue
and your mind? It is this: I will try, by erring as
little as may be in word and deed, not to provide
your slanderous tongue with so much foolish tall.
And yet I am well aware that it is said that even
the sandal of Aphrodite was satirised by Momus.
But you observe that though Momus poured forth
floods 4 of criticism he could barely find anything to
criticise in her sandal.» Even so may you grow old
fretting yourself over things of this sort, more
decrepit than Tithonus, richer than Cinyras, more
luxurious than Sardanapalus, so that in you may be
fulfilled the proverb, “Old men are twice children.”

But why does the divine Alexander seem to you
so pre-eminent? Is it because you took to imitating
him and aspired to that for which the youth
Hermolaus® reproached him? Or rather, no one is

4 Or ‘‘ burst with the effort,” cf. rumpi invidia.

5 Philostratus, Epistle 37; Momus complained that
Aphrodite wore a sandal that squeaked.

6° For the plot of Hermolaus and Callisthenes against
Alexander, cf. Quintus Curtius 8. 6; Arrian, Anabasis 4.
13. 14; Plutarch, Alexander 55.

169

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἀνόητος ὡς ὑπονοῆσαι περὶ σοῦ" τοὐναντίον δὲ
f ,
καὶ ὅπερ ἀπωδύρετο παθὼν ᾿Ἑρμόλαος, καὶ διόπερ
a \ / / al
διενοεῖτο Tov ᾿Αλέξανδρον, ὥς φασιν, ἀποκτεῖναι,
ἴω \ ry
τοῦτο δὲ οὐδεὶς ὅστις πεπεισμένος οὐκ ἔστι περὶ
a a \ 3 \ \ \ \ \ /
σοῦ; πολλῶν δὲ ἐγὼ νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς Kal σφόδρα
, lal ’ ΄ὔ ο ς Ν 7
σε φαμένων φιλεῖν ἀκήκοα πολλὰ ὑπὲρ ταύτης
/ aA /
ἀπολογουμένων τῆς ἁμαρτίας, ἤδη δέ τινος Kal
ἀπιστοῦντος. ἀλλ᾽ οὗτός ἐστιν ἡ μία χελιδών,
οὐ ποιεῖ τὸ ἔαρ. ἀλλ᾽ ἴσως ἐκεῖθεν ᾿Αλέξανδρος
” / ae / \ > ΄
apn σοι μέγας, ὅτι Καλλισθένη μὲν ἀπέκτεινε
πικρῶς, Κλεῖτος δὲ αὐτοῦ τῆς παροινίας ἔργον
ἐγένετο, Φιλώτας τε καὶ Παρμενίων καὶ τὸ
Παρμενίωνος παιδίον. ἐπεὶ τὰ περὶ τὸν “Ἕκτορα
τὸν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ 3 τοῦ Νείλου ταῖς δίναις ἢ ταῖς
Εὐφράτου" λέγεται yap ἑκάτερον" ἐναποπνιγέντα
“ “ A
Kal τὰς ἄλλας αὐτοῦ παιδιὰς σιωπῶ, μὴ βλασ-
a / / \ n
φημεῖν ἄνδρα δόξω τὸ κατωρθωμένον μὲν οὐδαμῶς
Ν
ἔχοντα, κράτιστον μέντοι τὰ πολεμικὰ στρατηγόν ὃ
Υ͂
ὧν σὺ κατὰ τὴν προαίρεσιν καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀνδρείαν
ἔλαττον μετέχεις ἢ τριχῶν ἰχθύες. ἄκουε δὴ τῆς
\ fA
παραινέσεως μὴ λίαν ὀργίλως,

οὔ τοι, τέκνον ἐμόν, δέδοται πολεμήια ἔργα,
\ \ € A ’ tf > 7 \
τὸ δὲ ἑξῆς οὐ παραγράφω σοι, αἰσχύνομαι yap

1 καὶ---παιδίον Heyler and Hertlein would delete as a gloss,
Asmus retains and reads ἐπεὶ τὰ for ἔπειτα τά.

2 ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ Hertlein would delete, Asmus retains, seeing
in the phrase some sneer, the point of which is not now
clear,

3 στρατηγὸν Hertlein would delete, Asmus retains.

1 The historian who accompanied Alexander to the East.

2 Cf. Vol. 2, Caesars 3810, p. 403, note, Wright.
170

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

so foolish as to suspect you of that. But the very
opposite, that which Hermolaus lamented that he
had endured, and which was the reason for his
plotting, as they say, to kill Alexander—everyone
believes this about you also, do they not? I call
the gods to witness that I have heard many persons
assert that they were very fond of you and who made
many excuses for this offence of yours, but I have found
just one person who did not believe it. However he
is that one swallow who does not make a spring. But
perhaps the reason why Alexander seemed in your
eyes a great man was that he cruelly murdered
Callisthenes,! that Cleitus? fell a victim to his
drunken fury, and. Philotas too, and Parmenio® and
~Parmenio’s son; for that affair of Hector,* who was
smothered in the whirlpools of the Nile in Egypt
or the Euphrates—the story isstold of both rivers—
I say nothing about, or of his other follies, lest I
should seem to speak ill of a man who by no means
maintained the ideal of rectitude but nevertheless
excelled as a general in the works of war. Whereas
you are less endowed with both these, namely,
good principles and courage, than a fish with hair.
Now listen to my advice and do not resent it too much.

“ Not to thee, my child, have been given the works
of war.” 5

The verse that follows ® I do not write out for you,

3 The general Parmenio and his son Philotas were executed
for treason; Arrian, Anabasis 3. 26.

4 Cf. Quintus Curtius 5. 8. 7; Hector, a son of Parmenio,
was, according to Curtius, accidentally drowned, though
Julian ascribes his death to Alexander,

5 Iliad 5. 428, Zeus to Aphrodite.

6 ἀλλὰ σύ γ᾽ ἱμερόεντα μετέρχεο ἔργα γαμοῖο.

Ἧι

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

νὴ τοὺς θεούς. ἀξιῶ μέντοι σε προσυπακούειν
αὐτό" καὶ γὰρ εὔλογον ἕπεσθαι τοῖς ἔργοις τοὺς
λόγους, ἀλλὰ μὴ φεύγειν τὰ ῥήματα τὸν μηδαμῶς
διαπεφευγότα τὰ ἔργα.

᾿Αλλ᾽ ὁ τὴν Μαγνεντίου καὶ ΚΚώνσταντος ὁσίαν
αἰσχυνόμενος, ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου τοῖς ζῶσι πολεμεῖς καὶ
τοῖς ὁπωσοῦν βελτίστοις λοιδορῇ ; πότερον ὅτι
μᾶλλον ἐκεῖνοι δύνανται τῶν ζώντων ἀμύνεσθαι
τοὺς λυποῦντας ; ἀλλὰ σοὶ τοῦτο οὐ προσήκει
λεγειν" εἶ γάρ, ὡς γράφεις, θαρραλεώτατος. ἀλλ᾽
εἰ “μὴ τοῦτο, τυχὸν ἕτερον" ὡς γὰρ οὐκ αἰσθανο-
μένους ἐπισκώπτειν ἴσως οὐ βούλει. τῶν ζώντων
δὲ dpa τις οὕτως εὐήθης ἐστὶ ν ἢ μικρόψυχος, | ὃς
ἀξιώσειεν ἂν αὑτοῦ παρὰ col λόγον εἶναί τινα,
καὶ οὐ βουλήσεται μάλιστα μὲν ἀγνοεῖσθαι παρὰ
σοῦ παντάπασιν, εἰ δ᾽ ἀδύνατον εἴη, λοιδορεῖσθαι
παρὰ σοῦ μᾶλλον, καθώπερ ἐγὼ νῦν," ἢ τιμᾶσθαι;
μήποτε οὕτω κακῶς φρονήσαιμι, μήποτε τῶν παρὰ
σοῦ μᾶλλον ἐπαίνων ἢ ψόγων ἀντιποιησαίμην.

᾿Αλλ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο τὸ γράφειν πρός σε δακνομένου
τυχὸν. ἴσως ἐστίν ; οὐ μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς τοὺς σωτῆρας,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπικόπτοντος τὴν ἄγαν αὐθάδειαν καὶ τὴν
θρασύτητα καὶ τὴν ἀκολασίαν τὴν τῆς γλώττης
καὶ τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ἄγριον καὶ τὸ μαινόμενον τῶν
φρενῶν καὶ τὸ παρακεκινὴκὸς ἐν πᾶσιν. ἐξῆν
γοῦν, εἴπερ ἐδεδήγμην, ἐ ἔργοις ἀλλὰ μὴ λόγοις σε
σφόδρα νομίμως κολάσαι. πολίτης γὰρ ὧν καὶ

1 καθάπερ---νῦν Cobet would delete as a gloss.

1 Julian seems to anticipate the criticism of Nilus that he
is not showing himself superior to Alexander.

2 For Julian’s mildness in such cases, see Ammianus. 25.4.
9. Constat eum in apertos aliquos inimicos insidiatores suos

172

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

because, by the gods, I am ashamed to do so,
However I ask you to understand it as said. For
it is only fair that words should follow on deeds,
and that he who has never avoided deeds should
not avoid the phrases that describe them.

Nay, if you revere the pious memory of Magnentius
and Constans, why do you wage war against the
living and abuse those who excel in any way? Is
it because the dead are better able than the living
to avenge themselves on those who vex them? Yet
it does not become you to say this. For you are, as
your letter says, ‘“‘ Very brave indeed.” But if this
is not the reason, perhaps there is a different one.
Perhaps you do not wish to satirise them because
they cannot feel it. But among the living is there
anyone so foolish or so cowardly as to demand that
you should take any notice of him at all, and who
will not prefer if possible to be altogether ignored
by you; but if that should be impossible, to be
abused by you, as indeed I am now abused rather than
honoured? May I never be so ill-advised—may I
never aspire to win praise rather than blame from you !

But perhaps you will say that the very fact that
I am writing to you is a proof that I am stung?!
No, I call the Saviour Gods to witness that I am but
trying to check your excessive audacity and bold-
ness, the license of your tongue and the ferocity of
your soul, the madness of your wits and your per-
verse fury on all occasions. In any case it was in
my power, if I had been stung, to chastise you with
deeds and not merely with words,?and I should have
been entirely within the law. For you are a citizen

ita consurrexisse mitissime, ut poenarum asperitatem genuina
lenitudine castigaret.

173

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

A 4 /
τῆς γερουσίας μετέχων αὐτοκράτορος ἐπίταγμα
» n \ A A
παρῃτήσω" τοῦτο δὲ οὐκ ἐξῆν δήπουθεν τῷ μὴ
/ > if ." >
μεγάλην ἀνάγκην προϊσχομένῳ. οὔκουν ἐξήρκει
ς \ a /
μοι ὑπὲρ τούτου ζημιῶσαΐ σε παντοίαν ζημίαν,
ΝΑ. 3 10 ὃ a 7 ῇ a /
arr φήθην δεῖν γράψαι πρὸς σε πρῶτον, νομίζων
rly a
ἰάσιμον ἐπιστολίῳ βραχεῖ. ws δέ σ᾽ ἐμμένοντα
a an A Ν \ a
τοῖς αὐτοῖς, μᾶλλον δὲ TO λεληθὸς τέως τῆς
μανίας ἐφώρασα, .. .' μή τι Kal νομισθείης
5 Υ̓͂ \ 3, ͵7ὔ ᾽
ἀνήρ, οὐκ ἀνὴρ ὦν, καὶ παρρησίας μεστὸς,
3 , 3 ig
ἐμβροντησίας ὧν πλήρης, Kal παιδείας μετε-
΄ > \ \ / δ / a ’ /
TXNKWS, οὐδὲ γρὺ λόγων ἁψάμενος, ὅσα YE εἰκὸς
3 na nr \
ἐστι Tals ἐπιστολαῖς σου τεκμήρασθαι. τὸ yap
A 5 ἴω 7 an
φροῦδον οὐδεὶς εἶπε TOV ἀρχαίων ἐπὶ τοῦ προ-
nan - \ a nr
φανοῦς, ὥσπερ σὺ νῦν, ἐπεὶ τὰς ἄλλας σου τῆς
2 “Ὁ ¢ , 3 \ Xx 3 A >
ἐπιστολῆς ἁμαρτίας οὐδεὶς ἂν ἐπεξελθεῖν ἐν
A / / \ \ \ 3 n
μακρῷ βιβλίῳ δυνηθείη Kal TO μαστροπὸν ἐκεῖνο
\ \ 9 ey? - \ ΄
καὶ βδελυρὸν ἦθος, ὑφ᾽ οὗ σεαυτὸν προαγωγεύεις.
> \ \ 3 e , \ Ὁ“ 7O\ \
ov yap τοὺς ἐξ ἑτοίμου φὴς ἥκοντας οὐδὲ τοὺς
a a \ /
ἐφεδρεύοντας ταῖς ἀρχαῖς, ἀλλὰ τοὺς βεβαίᾳ
/ Ψ Xx an / ς
κρίσει χρωμένους καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ δέον αἱρου-
/ 7 - > 3 3 \ e id
μένους τούτους δεῖν, GAN οὐ TOUS ἑτοίμως
ς 7 ξ a 4 e a) 3 4
ὑπακούοντας, αἱρεῖσθαι. καλάς γε ἡμῖν ἐλπίδας
e ,ὔ ..ῸΝ ¥ e c / x “27
ὑποφαίνεις οὐδὲν δεομένοις ὡς ὑπείξων, ἢν αὖθίς
an \ \
σε καλῶμεν ἐπὶ κοινωνίαν 5 πραγμάτων. ἐμοὶ δὲ
n ν᾽ , / Α a
τοσοῦτον μέρος τούτου περίεστιν, ὥστε σε, τῶν
1 Lacuna. Some reference to the letters written by

Nilus is needed here.
2 κοινωνίαν Asmus cf. 4440; κοινωνίᾳ Hertlein, MSS.

174

TO NILUS, SURNAMED DIONYSIUS

and of senatorial rank and you disobeyed a command
of your Emperor; and such behaviour was certainly
not permissible to anyone who could not furnish the
excuse of real necessity. Therefore I was not satis-
fied with inflicting on you any sort of penalty for
this conduct, but I thought I ought to write to you
first, thinking that you might be cured by a short
letter. But since I have discovered that you per-
sist in the same errors, or rather how great your
frenzy is which I previously did not know . . .1 lest
you should be thought to be a man, when that
you are not, or brimful of freedom of speech, when
you are only full of insanity, or that you have had
the advantage of education when you have not the
smallest acquaintance with literature, as far, at any
rate, as one may reasonably judge from your letters.
For instance, no one of the ancients ever used
φροῦδος 2 to mean “manifest’’ as you do here,—for,
as for the other blunders displayed in your letter,
no one could describe them even in a long book,
or that obscene and abominable character of yours
that leads you to prostitute yourself. You tell me
indeed that it is not those who arrive offhand or
those who are hunting for public office whom we
ought to choose, but those who use sound judge-
ment and in accordance with this prefer to do their
duty rather than those who are ready and eager to
obey. Fair, truly, are the hopes you hold out to me
though I made no appeal to you, implying that you
will yield if [ again summon you to take part in
public business. But I am so far from doing that,

1 Some words have fallen out.
2 In Attic the word means ‘‘ vanished.”

175

THE LETTERS OF ΑΝ

ἄλλων εἰσιεμένων, οὐδὲ προσείρηκα πώποτε.
καίτοι γε πρὸς πολλοὺς ἔγωγε τοῦτο ἐποίησα
γνωρίμων τε καὶ ἀγνοουμένων ἐμοὶ κατὰ τὴν
θεοφιλῆ “Ῥώμην διατρίβοντας. οὕτω σου τῆς
φιλίας ἀντεποιούμην, οὕτω σε σπουδῆς ἄξιον
ῳόμην. εἰκὸς οὗν ὅτι καὶ τὰ μέλλοντα πρός
σε τοιαῦτα ἔσται. καὶ γὰρ νῦν ἔγραψα TAUT ηνὶ
τὴν ἐπιστολήν, οὐ σοὶ μόνον ἀνάγνωσμα, ἐπεὶ
καὶ ἀναγκαίαν πολλοῖς αὐτὴν ἤδειν, καὶ δώσω
γε πᾶσιν οὐκ ἄκουσιν, ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω,
ληψομένοις" σεμνότερον γὰρ ὁρῶντές σε καὶ
ὀγκωδέστερον τῶν ἔμπροσθέν σοι βεβιωμένων
ἄχθονται.

Τελείαν ἔχεις Tap ἡμῶν τὴν ἀπόκρισιν, ὥστε
σε μηδὲν ἐπιποθεῖν. οὔκουν οὐδὲ ἡμεῖς παρὰ
Τὴ τι πλέον ᾿ἀπαιτοῦμεν' ἀλλ᾽ ἐντυχών, εἰς ὅ

te βούλει τοῖς γράμμασι χρῆσαι: Ta γὰρ τῆς
ἡμετέρας φιλίας πεπέρανταί" σοι. ἔρρωσο τρυφῶν
καὶ λοιδορούμενος ἐμοὶ παραπλησίως.

51

᾿Ιουδαίων τῷ κοινῷ 4

Ilavu ὑμῖν φορτικώτατον γεγένηται ἐπὶ τῶν
παρῳχηκότων καιρῶν τῶν ζυγῶν τῆς δουλείας
τὸ διαγραφαῖς ἀκηρύκτοις ὑποτάττεσθαι ὑμᾶς

καὶ χρυσίου πλῆθος ἄφατον εἰσκομίξειν τοῖς
τοῦ ταμιείου λόγοις: ὧν πολλὰ μὲν αὐτοψεὶ

1 Asmus suggests μετ᾽ ἄλλων εἰσιέμενον to improve the sense,

2 εἰς ὅ τι Asmus ; ὅτε Hertlein, MSS.

“pee -πεπέρανταί Cobet, πέπραταί Hercher, Hertlein ; ; ἐπέπραται

MSS., ἐπείραται A. Asmus suggests ἐζπέπραται = ‘‘ sold
out,” ‘* ruined.” .

176

TO THE COMMUNITY OF THE JEWS

that, when the others were admitted, I never even
addressed you at any time. And yet [ did address
many who were known and unknown to me and
dwell in Rome, beloved of the gods. Such was my
desire for your friendship, so worthy of consideration
did I think you! Therefore it is likely that my
future conduct towards you will be much the same.
And indeed I have written this letter now, not for
your perusal alone, since I knew it was needed by
- many besides yourself, and I will give it to ali, since
all, I am convinced, will be glad to receive it. For
when men see you more haughty and more insolent
than befits your past life, they resent it.

You have here a complete answer from me, so
that you can desire nothing more. Nor do I ask
for any further communication from you. But when
you have read my letters use them for whatever
purpose you please. For our friendship is at an end.
Farewell, and divide your time between luxurious
living and abuse of me!

51
To the community of the Jews!

In times past, by far the most burdensome thing
in the yoke of your slavery has been the fact that
you were subjected to unauthorised ordinances and
had to contribute an untold amount of money to
the accounts of the treasury. Of this I used to

1 For this rescript see Introduction.

4 Hertlein 25,

177
VOL, LI. N

Late
362 or
early
363
From
Antioch

D

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἐθεώρουν, πλείονα δὲ τούτων ἔμαθον εὑρὼν τὰ
βρέβια τὰ καθ᾽ ὑμῶν φυλαττόμενα" ἔτι δὲ καὶ
μέλλουσαν πάλιν εἰσφορὰν καθ᾽ ὑμῶν προστάτ-
τεσθαι εἶρξα, καὶ τὸ τῆς τοιαύτης δυσφημίας
ἀσέβημα ἐνταῦθα ἐβιασάμην στῆσαι, καὶ πυρὶ
παρέδωκα τὰ βρέβια τὰ καθ᾽ ὑμῶν ἐν τοῖς ἐμοῖς
σκρινίοις ἀποκείμενα, ὡς μηκέτι δύνασθαι καθ᾽
ὑμῶν τινὰ τοιαύτην ἀκοντίζειν ἀσεβείας φήμην.
καὶ τούτων μὲν ὑμῖν οὐ τοσοῦτον αἴτιος κατέστη
ὁ τῆς μνήμης ἄξιος Κωνστάντιος ὁ ἀδελφός, ὅσον
οἱ τὴν γνώμην βάρβαροι καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν ἄθεοι, οἱ
τὴν τούτου τράπεζαν ἑστιώμενοι, ous ἐγὼ μὲν ἐν
χερσὶν ἐμαῖς λαβόμενος εἰς βόθρον ὦσας ὥλεσα,
ὡς μηδὲ μνήμην ἔ ἔτι φέρεσθαι παρ᾽ ἡμῖν τῆς αὐτῶν
ἀπωλείας. ἐπὶ πλέον δὲ ὑμᾶς εὐωχεῖσθαι βουλό-
μενος, τὸν ἀδελφὸν Ἴουλον, τὸν αἰδεσιμώτατον
πατριάρχην, παρήνεσα᾽ καὶ τὴν λεγομένην εἶναι
Tap ὑμῖν ἀποστολὴν κωλυθῆναι, καὶ μηκέτι
δύνασθαι τὰ πλήθη ὑμῶν τινὰ ἀδικεῖν τοιαύταις
φόρων εἰσπράξεσιν, ὡς πανταχόθεν t ὑμῖν τὸ ἀμέρι-
μνον ὑπάρχειν ἐπὶ τῆς ἐμῆς βασιλείας, | ἵνα ἀπο-
λαύοντες εἰρήνης 5 ἔτι μείζονας εὐχὰς ποιῆσθε
ὑπὲρ ὃ τῆς ἐμῆς βασιλείας τῷ πάντων κρείττονι
καὶ δημιουργῷ θεῷ, τῷ καταξιώσαντι στέψαι με
τῇ ἀχράντῳ αὐτοῦ δεξιᾷ. πέφυκε γὰρ τοὺς ἔν
τινι μερίμνῃ ἐξεταζομένους περιδεῖσθαι τὴν διά-

1 Reiske ἐπὶ τῆς ; τῆς Hertlein, MSS.

5. εἰρήνης Reiske supplies for lacuna after ἀπολαύοντες,
Hertlein lacuna ; ἡσυχίας Thomas.

3 Reiske ὑπὲρ τῆς ; Hertlein, MSS. τῆς.

1 Or ἀπωλεία may be active = ““ their wickedness. ”

178

TO THE COMMUNITY OF THE JEWS

see many instances with my own eyes, and I have
learned of more, by finding the records which are
preserved against you. Moreover, when a tax was
about to be levied on you again I prevented it, and
compelled the impiety of such obloquy to cease here ;
and 1 threw into the fire the records against you
that were stored in my desks; so that it is no longer
possible for anyone to aim at you such a reproach
of impiety. My brother Constantius of honoured
memory was not so much responsible for these
wrongs of yours as were the men who used to
frequent his table, barbarians in mind, godless in
soul. These I seized with my own hands and put
them to death by thrusting them into the pit, that
not even any memory of their destruction! might
still linger amongst us. And since I wish that
you should prosper yet more, I have admonished
my brother lulus,? your most venerable patriarch,
that the levy? which is said to exist among you
should be prohibited, and that no one is any longer
to have the power to oppress the masses of your
people by such exactions; so that everywhere, dur-
ing my reign, you may have security of mind, and
in the enjoyment of peace may offer more fervid
prayers? for my reign to the Most High God, the
_ Creator, who has deigned to crown me with his own
immaculate right hand. For it is natural that men
who are distracted by any anxiety should be hampered

2 The Patriarch Hillel II. was at this time about seventy.

3 Literally ‘‘the apostole,” paid by the Jews to maintain
the Patriarchate. It was later suppressed by the Emperor
Theodosius 11].

4 Sozomen 5. 22 says that Julian wrote to the community
of the Jews asking them to pray for him: εὔχεσθαι ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ
καὶ τῆς αὐτοῦ βασιλείας.

179

398

914

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

νοιαν καὶ μὴ τοσοῦτον εἰς τὴν προσευχὴν τὰς
χεῖρας ἀνατείνειν τολμᾶν, τοὺς δὲ πανταχόθεν
ἔχοντας | τὸ ἀμέριμνον ὁλοκλήρῳ ψυχῇ χαίροντας
ὑπὲρ τοῦ βασιλείου ἱ ἱκετηρίους λατρείας ποιεῖσθαι
τῷ μείζονι, τῷ δυναμένῳ κατευθῦναι τὴν βασιλείαν
ἡμῶν ἐπὶ τὰ κάλλιστα, καθάπερ, προαιρούμεθα.
ὅπερ χρὴ ποιεῖν ὑμᾶς, ἵνα κἀγὼ τὸν τῶν “Περσῶν
πόλεμον διορθωσάμενος ' τὴν ἐκ πολλῶν € ἐτῶν ἐπι-
θυμουμένην Tap ὑμῶν ἰδεῖν οἰκουμένην πόλιν
ἁγίαν Ἱερουσαλὴμ ἐμοῖς καμάτοις ἀνοικοδομήσας
an an y an n
οἰκίσω Kal ἐν αὐτῇ δόξαν δῷ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν TO κρείτ-
TOVL.

52
AtBavio *

᾿Βπειδὴ τῆς ὑποσχέσεως ἐπελάθου" τρίτη γοῦν
ἐστὶ σήμερον, καὶ ὸ φιλόσοφος Πρίσκος αὐτὸς
μὲν οὐχ ἧκε, γράμματα δ᾽ ἀπέστειλεν ὡς ἔτι
χρονίζων" ὃ ὑπομιμνήσκω σε τὸ “χρέος ἀπαιτῶν.
ὄφλημα δέ ἐστιν, ὡς οἶσθα, σοὶ μὲν ἀποδοῦναι
ῥάδιον, ἐ ἐμοὶ δὲ ἥδιστον πάνυ κομίσασθαι. πέμπε
δὴ τὸν λόγον καὶ τὴν ἱερὰν συμβουλήν, ἀλλὰ
πρὸς Ἑρμοῦ καὶ Μουσῶν ταχέως, ἐπεὶ καὶ τούτων
με τῶν τριῶν ἡμερῶν ἴσθι συντρίψας, εἴπερ
ἀληθῆ φησιν ὁ Σικελιώτης ποιητής, ἐν ἤματι
φάσκων τοὺς ποθοῦντας γηράσκειν. εἰ δὲ ταῦτα

1 Asmus would read κατορθωσάμενος.

* Hertlein 8. σοφιστῇ καὶ κοιαίστωρ! (quaestor) is added to
the title in one MS., X; cf. p. 201. 3 Cobet χρονιῶν.

1 For Julian’s project of rebuilding the Temple, see
Introduction.

180

TO LIBANIUS

in spirit, and should not have so much confidence in
raising their hands to pray; but that those who are
in all respects free from care should rejoice with
their whole hearts and offer their suppliant prayers
on behalf of my imperial office to Mighty God, even
to him who is able to direct my reign to the noblest
ends, according to my purpose. This you ought to
do, in order that, when I have successfully con-
cluded the war with Persia, I may rebuild by my
- own efforts the sacred city of Jerusalem,! which for
50 many years you have longed to see inhabited,
and may bring settlers there, and, together with
you, may glorify the Most High God therein.

52
To Libanius?

Since you have forgotten your promise—at any
rate three days have gone by and the philosopher
Priscus® has not come himself but has sent a letter
to say that he still delays—I remind you of your
debt by demanding payment. The thing you owe
is, as you know, easy for you to pay and very pleasant
for me to receive. So send your discourse and your
“divine counsel,” and do it promptly, in the name
of Hermes and the Muses, for I assure you, in these
three days you have worn me out, if indeed the
Sicilian poet 4 speaks the truth when he says, “ Those
who long grow old inaday.” And if this be true,

2 Both Libanius and Julian were at this time at Antioch.
We have the answer to this letter, Libanius, Letter 760
Foerster ; Libanius had promised to send Julian his speech,
Four Aristophanes, Oration 14, for which see below, p. 183.

3 For Priscus, see above, pp. 3, 15.

4 Theocritus, 12. 2 of δὲ ποθεῦντες ἐν ἤματι γηράσκουσιν.

181

862
Winter
At

Antioch

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

4 9 \ A a
ἔστιν, ὥσπερ οὖν ἔστι, TO γῆρας ἡμῖν ἐτριπλα-
σίασας, ὦ γενναῖε. ταῦτα μεταξὺ τοῦ ᾿πράττειν
ὑπηγόρευσά σοι" γράφειν γὰρ οὐχ οἷός τε ἣν,
ἀργοτέραν ἔχων τῆς γλώττης τὴν χεῖρα. καίτοι
μοι καὶ τὴν γλῶτταν εἶναι συμβέβηκεν ὑπὸ τῆς
ἀνασκησίας ἀργοτέραν καὶ ἀδιάρθρωτον. ἔρρωσό
9 \ / \ /
μοι, ἀδελφὲ ποθεινότατε καὶ προσφιλέστατε.

53
ἜΝ
Διβανίῳ

᾿Αποδέδωκας ᾿Αριστοφάνει τὰς ἀμοιβὰς τῆς
τε περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσεβείας καὶ τῆς περὶ σεαυτὸν
προθυμίας, ἀμείψας αὐτῷ καὶ μεταθεὶς τὰ πρόσθεν
ἐπονείδιστα πρὸς εὔκλειαν, οὐ Tay. νῦν μόνον,
ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς τὸν ἔπειτα χρόνον, ὡς οὐχ ὅμοιόν γε
ἡ Παύλου συκοφαντία καὶ ἡ τοῦ δεῖνος κρίσις
τοῖς ὑπὸ σοῦ “γραφομένοις λόγοις: ἐκεῖνα μὲν γὰρ
ἀνθοῦντά τε ἐμισεῖτο καὶ συναπέσβη τοῖς δράσα-
σιν, οἱ δὲ σοὶ λόγοι καὶ νῦν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀληθῶς
“ΒῬλλήνων ἀγαπῶνται, καὶ εἰς τὸν ἔπειτα χρόνον,
εἰ μή τι σφάλλομαι κρίσεως ὀρθῆς, ἀγαπήσονται.
πεύσῃ δὴ λοιπὸν εἰ πέπεικάς με, μᾶλλον δὲ
μεταπέπεικας ὑπὲρ ᾿Αριστοφάνους. μὴ νομίζειν
αὐτὸν ἡδονών ἥττονα καὶ χρημάτων ὁμολογώ. τί
δὲ οὐ μέλλω τῷ φιλοσοφωτάτῳ καὶ φιλαληθε-

1 Hertlein 74 -- 14; Cumont, following Vaticanus 941 and
certain other MSS., restored Hertlein 14 to its proper place
as postscript to Hertlein 74.

1 Plato, Phacdrus 2428 εἰ δ᾽ ἐστίν, ὥσπερ οὖν ἐστί, θεός. . ..
5. Sophocles, Philoctetes 97 γλῶσσαν μὲν ἀργόν, χείρα δ᾽ εἶχον
ἐργάτιν.

182

TO LIBANIUS

as in fact it 15,1 you have trebled my age, my good
friend. I have dictated this to you in the midst of
public business. For I was not able to write myself
because my hand is lazier than my tongue.2, Though
indeed my tongue also has come to be somewhat
lazy and inarticulate from lack of exercise. Fare-
well, brother, most dear and most beloved !

53
To Libanius

You have requited Aristophanes? for his piety
towards the gods and his devotion to yourself by ὁ
changing and transforming what was formerly a
reproach against him so that it redounds to his
honour, and not for to-day only but for the future
also, ἘΠΕ the malicious charges of Paul* and the
verdict of So-and-so® have no force compared with
words written by you. For their calumnies were
detested even while they flourished, and perished
along with their perpetrators, whereas your speeches
are not only prized by genuine Hellenes to-day but
will still be prized in future times, unless I am mis-
taken in my verdict. For the rest, you shall judge
whether you have convinced, or rather converted,
me on behalf of Aristophanes. I now agree not to
believe that he is too weak to resist pleasure and
money. What point would I not yield to the most

3 For Aristophanes of Corinth and for the answer of
Libanius, Zetter 758, Foerster, see Introduction, Aristophanes.

4 Paul, the notary nicknamed Catena, ‘‘ the chain,” a tool
of Constantius, was burned alive on Julian’s accession, by
order of the Chalcedon Commission ; Ammianus 14. 5. 6; 22.
3. 11. He was a Spaniard, malevolent and inquisitorial.

5 The real name is suppressed, probably by a cautious
editor when the letter was first published,

183

862
Winter
At

Antioch

ne
7S

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

στάτῳ τῶν" “ῥητόρων εἴκειν ; ἕπεται καὶ τὸ ἐπὶ
τούτοις παρὰ σοῦ προσανερωτᾶσθαι: τί οὖν οὐ
μετατίθεμεν αὐτῷ τὰς συμφορὰς εἰς ἀμείνω τύχην
καὶ ἀφανίζομεν τὰ κατασχόντα διὰ τὰς δυσπρα-
γίας ὀνείδη ; σύν τε δύ᾽ ἐρχομένω, φασίν, ἐγὼ
καὶ σὺ βουλευσώμεθα. δίκαιος δὲ εἶ μὴ συμ-
βουλεύειν μόνον, ὅτι χρὴ βοηθεῖν ἀνδρὶ τοὺς θεοὺς
ἀδόλως τετιμηκότι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὃν χρὴ τρόπον.
καίτοι καὶ " τοῦτο ἠνίξω τρόπον τινά. βέλτιον
δὲ ἴσως ὑπὲρ τῶν τοιούτων οὐ γράφειν, ἀλλὰ
διαλέγεσθαι πρὸς ἀλλήλους. ἔρρωσό μοι, ἀδελφὲ
ποθεινότατε καὶ προσφιλέστατε.

᾿Ανέγνων δὲ 5 χθὲς τὸν λόγον πρὸ ἀρίστου

᾽ χθὲς γον πρὸ ἀρ

σχεδόν, ἀριστήσας δὲ, πρὶν ἀναπαύσασθαι, τὸ
λοιπὸν προσαπέδωκα τῆς ἀναγνώσεως. μακάριος
εἶ λέγειν οὕτω, μᾶλλον δὲ φρονεῖν οὕτω δυνάμενος.
ὦ λόγος, ὦ φρένες, ὦ σύνεσις," ὦ διαίρεσις, ὦ ἐπι-
χειρήματα, ὦ τάξις, ὦ ἀφορμαί, ὦ λέξις, ὦ ἁρμο-
νία, ὦ συνθήκη.

rt

54
Εὐστοχίῳ °
c Ν a al fal an
Ησιόδῳ μὲν δοκεῖ τῷ σοφῷ καλεῖν ἐπὶ τὰς
Ν \ /
ἑορτὰς TOUS γείτονας ὡς συνησθησομένους, ἐπειδὴ

1 τῶν Hercher supplies, Cumont omits.

2 Before τοῦτο Cumont restores καὶ omitted by Hertlein
and some MSS.

3 δὲ Cumont restores, omitted by Hertlein following MSS.,
which make this section a separate letter. After xes
Hercher supplied σοῦ unnecessarily.

4 σύνεσις Asmus following Monacensis, σύνθεσις Hertlein
following Vossianus, but cf. συνθήκη at end of letter with
same meaning. Both readings have good MS. authority.

5 Hertlein 20,

184

TO EUSTOCHIUS

philosophic and truth-loving of orators? Naturally
you will proceed to ask me why, in that case, I do
not alter his unhappy lot for the better and blot out
the disgrace that attaches to him on account of his
ill fortune. “Two walking together,”! as the
proverb says, namely, you and IJ, must take counsel.
And you have the right, not only to advise that we
ought to assist a man who has honoured the gods so
straightforwardly, but also as to how it ought to be
done. Indeed, you did hint at this in an obscure
way. But it is perhaps better not to write about
such matters, but to talk it over together. Farewell,
brother, most dear and most beloved !

I read yesterday almost all your speech before
breakfast, and after breakfast, before resting, I gave
myself up to reading the remainder. Happy man
to be able to speak so well, or rather to have such
ideas! O what a discourse! what wit! what
wisdom! what analysis! what logic! what method!
what openings! what diction! what symmetry!
what structure ! ?

54.
To Eustochius 2

Tue wise Hesiod# thinks that we ought to invite
our neighbours to our feasts that they may rejoice

1 Iliad 10. 224 σύν τε δύ᾽ ἐρχομένω, καί τε πρὸ ὁ τοῦ ἐνόησεν,
cf. Plato, ϑιυηυροδίινην 1740.

2 Julian may have read Marcus Aurelius, ΤῸ Fronto:
O ἐπιχειρήματα ' Ο τάξις ! O argutiae ! O ἄσκησις ! O omnia !

3 This is either Eustochius of Palestine, whose knowledge
of law and eloquence is praised by Libanius, Letter 699 (789
Foerster), or a sophist of Cappadocia of the same name.
We do not know which of these men it was to whom Gregory
Nazianzen addressed his Letters 189-191.

ὁ τὸν δὲ μάλιστα καλεῖν bs τις σεθεν ἐγγύθι ναίει; Works and
Days 313, a favourite quotation,

185

Late in
362
From
Antioch

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

καὶ συναλγοῦσι καὶ συναγωνιῶσιν, ὅταν τις
ἀπροσδόκητος ἐμπέσῃ ταραχή. ἐγὼ δέ φημί
τοὺς φίλους δεῖν καλεῖν, οὐχὶ τοὺς γείτονας" τὸ
αἴτιον δέ, ὅτι γείτονα μὲν ἔνεστιν ἐχθρὸν ἔχειν,
φίλον δὲ ἐχθρὸν οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ λευκὸν μέλαν
εἶναι καὶ τὸ θερμὸν ψυχρόν. ὅτι, δὲ ἡμῖν οὐ νῦν
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ πάλαι φίλος εἶ καὶ διετέλεσας
εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχων, εἰ καὶ μηδὲν ὑπῆρχεν ἄλλο τεκ-
μήριον, ἀλλὰ τό γε ἡμᾶς οὕτω διατεθεῖσθαι καὶ
διακεῖσθαι! περὶ σὲ μέγα ἂν εἴη τούτου σημεῖον.
ἧκε τοίνυν μεθέξων τῆς ὑπατείας αὐτός. ἄξει δέ
σε ὁ δημόσιος δρόμος ὀχήματι χρώμενον ἑνὶ καὶ
παρίππῳ." εἰ δὲ χρή τι καὶ ἐπεύξασθαι, τὴν
᾿Ενοδίαν εὐμενῆ σοι καὶ τὸν ᾿Ενόδιον παρα-
κεκλήκαμεν.

δῦ

Iuttanus® etenim Christo perfidus Imperator sic
Photino haeresiarchae adversus Diodorum - scribit :

1 καὶ διακεῖσθαι bracketed by Hertlein, Cobet deletes.

2 ἑνὶ παρίππῳ Hercher ; some MSS. ἑνὶ καὶ παρίππῳ, others,
followed by Hertlein, omit ἑνί.

3 Hertlein79. These fragments of a lost letter are preserved
only in the Latin version of Facundus Hermianensis, who
wrote at Constantinople about 546 A.p. For a partial recon-
struction of the original see Neumann, Contra Christianos,
Leipzig, 1880, p. 5.

1 Julian, with Sallustius as colleague, entered on the
consulship January Ist, 363.

2 Hecate, Latin Trivia. 3 Hermes.

4 This letter may have been written at any time between

186

TO PHOTINUS

with us, since they sorrow and mourn with us when
any unexpected misfortune befals us. But I say
that it is our friends that we ought to invite, rather
than our neighbours; and for this reason, that it is
possible to have a neighbour who is one’s enemy,
but that a friend should be an enemy is no more
possible than for white to be black, or hot cold.
And if there were no other proof that you are my
friend not now only, but for a long time past, and
that you have steadily maintained your regard for
me, nevertheless the fact that my feeling for you
has been and is what it is, would be strong evidence
of that friendship. Come, therefore, that you may
in person share my consulship.!. The state post
will bring you, and you may use one carriage and
an extra horse. And in case we ought to pray for
further aid, I have invoked for you the blessing of the
goddess of the Crossroads? and the god of the
Ways.®

δῦ
To Photinus 4

Moreover the Emperor Julkian, faithless to Christ, in
his attack on Diodorus ® writes as follows to Photinus the

Julian’s arrival at Antioch in July 362 and his departure
thence, in March 363. The Greek original is represented
by curious and sometimes untranslatable Latin. Photinus,
bishop of Sirmium, where Constantius resided in 351, was
tried, deposed and banished by a synod convened there hy
Constantius. According to Sozomen 4. 6, he wrote many
Greek and Latin works in support of his heretical views on
the divinity of Christ, which were opposed by both Arians and
Nicaeans. He is mentioned by Julian, Against the Galilacans
2020.

5 Bishop of Tarsus, ἃ celebrated teacher ; he was at Antioch
in 362.

187

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

Tu quidem, o Photine, verisimilis videris, et proximus
salvari,! benefaciens nequaquam in utero inducere
quem credidisti deum. Diodorus autem Nazaraei
magus, eius pigmentalibus manganis? .acuens irra-
tionabilitatem, acutus apparuit sophista religionis
agrestis. Et post paululum: Quod si nobis opitulati
fuerint dii et deae et musae omnes et fortuna,
ostendemus infirmum et corruptorem legum et
rationum et mysteriorum paganorum et deorum
infernorum ? et illum novum eius deum Galilaeum,
quem aeternum fabulose praedicat,4 indigna morte
et sepultura denudatum confictae a Diodoro deitatis.
Stcut autem solent errantes convicti jfingere, quod arte
magis quam veritate vincantur, sequitur dicens: Iste
enim malo communis utilitatis Athenas navigans et
philosophans imprudenter musicarum participatus
est rationum, et rhetoricis confictionibus°® odibilem
adarmavit linguam adversus caelestes deos, usque
adeo ignorans paganorum mysteria, omnemque mise-
rabiliter imbibens, ut aiunt, degenerum et impe-
ritorum ejus theologorum  piscatorum  errorem.
Propter quod iam diu est quod ab ipsis punitur
diis. Jam enim per multos annos in periculum
conversus et in corruptionem thoracis incidens, ad

1 salvari Neumann ; salvare Facundus, Hertlein.

2 manganis Neumann ; manyanes Facundus, Hertlein.

° infernorum, Hertlein, comma deleted by Neumann.

4 praedicat, sepultura Neumann;  pracdicat—sepultura

Facundus, Hertlein. Before indigna Asmus supplies et.

° rhetoricis confictionibus Asmus; rhetoris confectionibus
Facundus, Hertlein,

188

TO PHOTINUS

herestarch: + QO Photinus, you at any rate seem to
maintain what is probably true, and come nearest to
being saved, and do well to believe that he whom
one holds to be a god can by no means be brought
into the womb. But Diodorus, ἃ charlatan priest of the
Nazarene, when he tries to give point to that nonsen-
sical theory about the womb by artifices and juggler’s

tricks, is clearly a sharp-witted sophist of that creed
of the country-folk. A little further on he says: But
if only the gods and goddesses and all the Muses
and Fortune will lend me their aid, I hope to show 2
that he is feeble and a corrupter of laws and customs,
of pagan 8 Mysteries and Mysteries of the gods of the
underworld, and that that new-fangled Galilaean
god of his, whom he by a false myth styles eternal, has
een str ipped by his humiliating death and pace of
the divinity falsely ascribed to him by Diodorus. Then,
just as people who are convicted of error always begin to
invent, being the slaves of artifice rather than of truth, he
goes on to say: For the fellow sailed to Athens to the
injury of the general welfare, then rashly took to
philosophy nee engaged in the study of literature,
and by the devices τὴ rhetoric armed his hateful
tongue against the heavenly gods, and being utterly
ignorant of the Mysteries of the pagans he so to speak
imbibed most deplorably the whole mistaken folly of
the base and ignorant creed-making fishermen. For
this conduct he has long ago been punished by the
gods themselves. For, for many years past, he has
been in danger, having contracted a wasting disease

1 The italicised passages are the words of Facundus.

2 This isa forecast of Julian’s treatise Against the Galilacans.

3 Twice in this letter Facundus translates Julian’s
‘‘Hellenic” as ‘‘ pagan.”

189

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

summum pervenit supplicium. Omne cius corpus
consumptum est. Nam malae eius conciderunt,
rugae vero in altitudinem corporis descenderunt:
Quod non est philosophicae conversationis indicio,
sicut videri vult a se deceptis, sed iustitiae pro certo
deorumque poenae, qua percutitur competenti ratione,
usque ad novissimum vitae suae finem asperam et
amaram vitam vivens et faciem pallore confectam.

56

Χρῆν μὲν οἴκοθεν διανοηθέντα ὃ δὴ νῦν ἔδοξε
κρατῦναι τῷ νόμῳ, τὸ παλαιὸν ἔθος ἀναλαβεῖν, ὃ
διανοούμενοι μὲν οἱ πάλαι καλῶς θέμενοι τοὺς
νόμους, εἶναι πλεῖστον ὑπέλαβον € ἐν μέσῳ ζωῆς τε
καὶ θανάτου, ἰδίᾳ δὲ ἑκατέρῳ πρέπειν ἐνόμισαν
τὰ ἐπιτηδεύματα. τῶν ἔργων. εἶναι μὲν γὰρ τὸν
θάνατον ἡσυχίαν διηνεκῆ---καὶ τοῦτο ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ
χαλκοῦς ὕπνος ὁ ὑπὸ τῶν ποιητῶν ὑμνούμενος---.
ἀπεναντίας δὲ τὴν ζωὴν ἐ ἔχειν πολλὰ μὲν ἀλγεινὰ
πολλὰ δὲ ἡδέα, καὶ τὸ πράττειν νῦν μὲν ἑτέρως,

αὖθις δὲ ἄμεινον. ὃ δὴ διανοηθέντες ἔταξαν ἰδίᾳ
1 Hertlein 77. This edict, which has no Greek title, does

not appear in any MS. collection of the Letters and was first
published by Hertlein (from Afarcianus 366) in Hernves 8.

1 Here and in the last sentence 1 give what seems to be
the general meanin

* This is probably the earlier form of the Latin Edict in
Codex Theodosianus 9. 17.5 dated February 12th, 363. It is
not clear whether it was aimed at the Christians, but of course

1g0

EDICT ON FUNERALS

of the chest, and he now suffers extreme torture.
His whole body has wasted away. For his cheeks
have fallen in and his body is deeply: lined with
wrinkles.! But this is no sign of philosophic habits, as
he wishes it to seem to those who are deceived by him,

but most certainly a sign of justice done and of

punishment from the gods which has stricken him
down in suitable proportion to his crime, since he
must live out to the very end his painful and bitter
life, his appearance that of a man pale and wasted.

56
Edict on Funerals 2

Ir was my duty, after considering with myself, to
restore the ancient custom which I have now decided
to confirm by a law. For when they considered the
matter, the men of old, who made wise laws, believed
that there is the greatest possible difference between
life and death and thought that each of these two
states has customs and practices peculiarly appropriate
toit. For they thought that death is an unbroken rest,
—and this is surely that “brazen sleep” of which
the poets sing,?—but that life, on the contrary, brings
many pains and many pleasures, and now adversity,
now greater prosperity. Considering thus, they en-
they had to observe it. They buried their dead by day, and
did not share the pagan fear of pollution by a corpse, for
which cf. Eunapius, Life of Jamblichus, Ὁ. 367, Wright.
Julian desired to suppress the Christian demonstrations at
public funerals such as that of the bones of St. Babylas, at
Antioch, for which see Philostorgius 7. 8, Sozomen 5. 19,
Julian, Aisopogon 3618, note, p. 485, Wright.

3 Iliad 11. 241, χάλκεον ὕπνον ; Vergil, Aeneid 10. 745
ferreus Somnus.

IQ

363
About
Febru-
ary 12th
From
Antioch

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μὲν ἀφοσιοῦσθαι τὰ πρὸς τοὺς κατοιχομένους,
ἰδίᾳ δὲ τὰ πρὸς τὸν Kad ἡμέραν οἰκονομεῖσθαι
βίον. ἔτι δὲ πάντων ὑπελάμβανον ἀρχὴν εἶναι
καὶ τέλος τοὺς θεούς, ζῶντάς τε ἡμᾶς ἐνόμισαν
ὑπὸ θεοῖς εἶναι καὶ ἀπιόντας πάλιν πρὸς τοὺς
θεοὺς πορεύεσθαι. τὸ μὲν οὗν ὑπὲρ. τούτων λέγειν,
εἴτε τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἀμφότερα προσήκει θεοῖς, εἴτε
ἕτεροι μὲν ἐπιτροπεύουσι τοὺς ζῶντας, ἕτεροι δὲ
τοὺς τεθνεῶτας, οὐδ᾽ ἄξιον ἴσως δημοσιεύειν. εἴ
γε μὴν καθάπερ ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτὸς αἴτιος ἥλιος
καὶ χειμῶνος καὶ θέρους ἀπιὼν καὶ προσιών,
οὕτω δὲ καὶ αὐτῶν τῶν θεῶν ὁ πρεσβύτατος, εἰς
ὃν πάντα καὶ ἐξ οὗ πάντα, ζῶσί τε ἔταξεν ἄρχον-
Tas καὶ τελευτήσασιν ἀπεκλήρωσε κυρίους,
ἑκατέρῳ τὰ πρέποντα χρὴ νέμειν ἐν μέρει, καὶ
μιμεῖσθαι διὰ τοῦ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν βίου τὴν ἐν τοῖς
οὖσι τῶν θεῶν διακόσμησιν.

Οὐκοῦν ἡσυχία μὲν ὁ θάνατός ἐστιν, ἡσυχίᾳ δὲ
ἡ νὺξ ἁ ἁρμόττει. διόπερ οἶμαι πρέπειν ἐν αὐτῇ τὰ
περὶ τὰς ταφὰς πραγματεύεσθαι τῶν τελευτη-
σάντων, ἐπεὶ τό γε ἐν ἡμέρᾳ πράττειν TL τοιοῦτο
πολλῶν ἕνεκα παραιτητέον. ἄλλος ἐπ᾿ ἄλλῃ
πράξει στρέφεται κατὰ τὴν πόλιν, καὶ μεστὰ
πάντα ἐστὶ τῶν μὲν εἰς δικαστήρια πορευομένων
τῶν δὲ εἰς ἀγορὰν καὶ ἐξ ἀγορᾶς, τῶν δὲ ταῖς
τέχναις προσκαθημένων, τῶν δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ ἱερὰ
φοιτώντων, ὅπως τὰς ἀγαθὰς ἐλπίδας παρὰ τῶν
θεών βεβαιώσαιντο' εἶτα οὐκ οἶδα οἵτινες ἀνα-
θέντες ἐν κλίνῃ νεκρὸν διὰ μέσων ὠθοῦνται τῶν
ταῦτα σπουδαζόντων. καὶ τὸ πρᾶγμά ἐστι πάντα
τρόπον οὐκ ἀνεκτόν. ἀναπίμπλανται γὰρ οἱ

102

EDICT ON FUNERALS

joined that expiations connected with the departed
should be conducted apart, and that apart from them
the daily business of life should be carried on. More-
over, they held that the gods are the beginning and end
of all things, and believed that while we live we are
subject to the gods, and when we depart from this life
we travel back tothe gods. But perhaps it is not right
to speak openly about these matters or to divulge
whether both are in the hands of the same gods or
one set of gods has charge of the living and another
set the dead. However, if, as the Sun is the cause
of day and night and winter and summer by his
departure and arrival, so also the most venerable one
of the gods themselves, unto whom are all things and
from whom all things proceed, has appointed rulers
over the living and allotted lords over the dead, then
we ought to assign to both of these classes in turn
what is fitting for them, and to imitate in our daily
life the orderly arrangement of the gods in things
which exist.

As I have said, death is rest ; and night harmonises
with rest. Therefore I think it is fitting that business
connected with the burials of the dead should be
performed at night, since for many reasons we ought
to forbid anything of the sort to go on by day.
Throughout the city men are going to and fro each
on his own business, and all the streets are full of
men going to the lawcourts, or to or from the
market, or sitting at work at their crafts, or visiting
the temples to confirm the good hopes that the gods
have vouchsafed. And then some persons or other,
having laid a corpse on the bier, push their way into
the midst of those who are busy about such matters. .
The thing is in every way intolerable. For those

3

VOL, III. ο

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

προστυχόντες πολλάκις ἀηδίας, οἱ μὲν οἰόμενοι
πονηρὸν τὸ οἰώνισμα, τοῖς δὲ εἰς ἱερὰ βαδίζουσιν
οὐ θέμις προσελθεῖν ἐστι πρὶν ἀπολούσασθαι.
τοῖς γὰρ αἰτίοις τοῦ ζῆν θεοῖς καὶ μάλιστα πάντων
ἀλλοτριώτατα πρὸς φθορὰν διακειμένοις οὐ θέμις
προσελθεῖν ἀπὸ τοιαύτης ὄψεως. καὶ οὔπω τὰ
μείζω κατηγόρηκα τοῦ γιγνομένου. τίνα δὲ ταῦτά
ἐστιν; ; ἱεροὶ περίβολοι καὶ θεῶν ναοὶ ἀνεῴγασι:"
καὶ πολλάκις θύει τις ἔνδον καὶ σπένδει καὶ
εὔχεται, οἱ δὲ παρέρχονται παρ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ ἱερὸν
νεκρὸν κομίζοντες, καὶ ἡ τῶν ὀδυρμῶν φωνὴ καὶ
δυσφημία ἀ ἄχρι τῶν βωμῶν φέρεται.

Οὐκ ἴστε ὅτι πρὸ πάντων τῶν ἄλλων τὰ 7S
ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ τῆς νυκτὸς ἔργα διήρηται; οὕτως ἷ
οὖν εἰκότως τῆς μὲν ἀφῃρέθη, τῇ δὲ Av? ἀνακέοιτο.
οὐ γὰρ δὴ τῆς ἐσθῆτος τὴν λευκὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς
πένθεσιν ὀρθῶς ἔχον ἐστὶ παραιτεῖσθαι, θάπτειν
δὲ τοὺς τελευτήσαντας ἐν ἡμέρᾳ καὶ φωτί. βέλτιον
ἣν ἐκεῖνο, εἴ ye εἰς οὐδένα τῶν θεῶν ἐπλημμελεῖτο,
τοῦτο δὲ οὐκ ἐκφεύγει τὸ μὴ εἰς ἅπαντας τοὺς
θεοὺς εἶναι δυσσέβειαν. τοῖς τε γὰρ Ὀλυμπίοις
οὐ δέον αὐτὸ προσνέμουσι, καὶ τῶν ,χθονίων, ἢ
ὁπωσοῦν ἄχλως οἱ τῶν ψυχῶν ἐπίτροποι καὶ
κύριοι χαίρουσιν ὀνομαζόμενοι, παρὰ τὸ δέον
ἀχλοτριοῦσιν. ἐγὼ δὲ οἶδα καὶ τοὺς περιττοὺς
καὶ ἀκριβεῖς τὰ θεῖα θεοῖς τοῖς κάτω Ψψύκτωρ ἢ
πάντως μετὰ δεκάτην ἡμέρας ὥραν ἱερὰ δρᾶν
ἀξιοῦντας. εἰ δὲ τῆς ἐκείνων θεραπείας οὗτος

1 οὕτως---τῆς Hertlein suggests for corrupt οὗτοο--- τοῖς.
* ἂν Hertlein suggests; τῇ δὲ ἀνήκει τοῦτο ‘‘appertains
to,” Capps suggests. ‘The sentence remains unsatisfactory.

194

EDICT ON FUNERALS

who meet the funeral are often filled with disgust,
some because they regard it as an evil omen, while
for others who are on the way to the temples it is
not permitted to approach for worship till they have
cleansed themselves from the pollution. For after
such a sight it is not permitted to approach the gods
who are the cause of life and of all things least akin
to decay. And I have still to mention what is worse
than this. And what is that? The sacred precincts
. and temples of the gods lie open; and it often
happens that in one of them someone is sacrificing
or pouring libations or praying, at the moment
when men carrying a corpse are passing close
by the temple itself, and the voice of lamenta-
tions and speech of ill omen is carried even to the
altars.

Do you not understand that the functions belong-
ing to the day and the night have been separated
more than all other things? With good reason,
therefore, has burial been taken out of the day and
would be reserved for the night. For it is not right
to deprecate the wearing of white for mourning and
yet to bury the dead in the daytime and sunlight.
The former was better, at least if it was not offensive
to any of the gods, but the latter cannot escape being
an act of impiety towards all the gods. For thereby
men wrongly assign burial to the Olympian gods and
wrongly alienate it from the gods of the underworld,
or whatever else the guardians and lords of souls
prefer to be called. And I know that those who are
thoroughly versed and punctilious in sacred rites
think it right to perform at night the ritual to the
gods below or in any case not till after the tenth
hour of the day. But if this is the better time for

195

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἀμείνων ὁ καιρός, οὐδὲ τῇ θεραπείᾳ πάντως τῶν
τεθνεώτων ὃ ἕτερον ἀποδώσομεν.

Tots μὲν οὖν ἑκοῦσι πειθομένοις ἐξαρκεῖ ταῦτα.
ἃ γὰρ ἡμάρτανον μαθόντες, μετατιθέσθων πρὸς
τὸ βέλτιον. εἰ δέ τις τοιοῦτός ἐστιν οἷος ἀπειλῆς.
καὶ ζημίας δεῖσθαι, ἴστω τὴν μεγίστην ὑφέξων
δίκην, εἰ πρὸ δεκάτης ἡμερινῆς ὥρας τολμήσει τε
τῶν ἀπογινομένων τινὸς κηδεῦσαι σῶμα καὶ διὰ
τῆς πόλεως ἐνεγκεῖν: ἀλλὰ δύντος ἡλίου καὶ αὖ
πρὶν ἀνίσχειν ταῦτα γενέσθω, ἡ δὲ ἡμέρα καθαρὰ
καθαροῖς τοῖς τε ἔργοις καὶ τοῖς ᾿Ολυμπίοις
ἀνακείσθω θεοῖς.

57
᾿Αρσάκῃ ᾿Αρμενίων σατράπῃ 3

᾿᾿πείχθητι πρὸς τὴν τῶν πολεμίων παράταξιν,
᾿Αρσάκιε, θᾶττον ἢ λόγος, τὴν δεξιὰν κατὰ τῆς
Tlepaovens μανίας ὁπλίσας. ἡ γὰρ ἡμετέρα παρα-
σκευή TE καὶ προθυμία δυοῖν θάτερον βεβούλευται,
ἢ τὸ χρεὼν. ἀποδοῦναι ἐπὶ τῆς Ἰ]Παρθναίων ἐνο-
ρίας 8 τὰ μέγιστα διαπραξαμένους καὶ τὰ δεινό-
Tata διαθεμένους τοὺς ἀντιπάλους, ἢ τούτους
χειρωσαμένους, πρυτανευόντων ἡμῖν τῶν θεῶν,

1 For τοῖς τε ἔργοις Hercher conjectures τοῖς ἱεροῖς. Before
τοῖς ᾿Ολυμπίοις Hertlein suspects the loss of τοῖς λόγοι.

* Hertlein 66; he regards the letter as spurious, and
brackets the title. Schwarz, Geffcken, and Cumont also
reject it.

3 evoplas Ambrosianus ; ἐνορίας Monacensis; evodias Mura-
torius ; ἐφορίας Reiske.

196

TO ARSACES, SATRAP OF ARMENIA

the worship of these gods, we will certainly not
assign another time for the service of the dead.

What I have said suffices for those who are willing
to obey. For now that they have learned what
errors they used to commit, let them change to the
better way. But if there be any man of such a
character that he needs threat and penalty, let him
know that he will incur the severest punishment if,
before the tenth hour of the day, he shall venture to
perform the offices for the corpse of any dead person
and to carry it through the city. But let these
things be done at sunset and before sunrise, and let
the pure day be consecrated for pure deeds and the
pure gods of Olympus.

57
To Arsaces, Satrap of Armenia 4

Make haste, Arsacius,? to meet the enemy’s battle
line and quicker than I tell? you arm your right hand
against the madness of the Persians. For my
military preparations and my set purpose are for
one of two things; either to pay the debt of nature
within the Parthian‘ frontier, after I have won the
most glorious victories and inflicted on my foes the
most terrible reverses, or to defeat them under the
leadership of the gods and return to my native land

1 See Introduction, under Arsaces.

* This form is given also by Sozomen 6. 1. who gives the
general contents of the letter. The correct form Arsaces
occurs in Ammianus.

2 Of. 700 Hermogenes, Ὁ. 32, 390 B παρὰ δύναμιν ἐπείχθητι.

4 The writer seems to confuse the Persians and the
Parthians: Julian, however, distinguishes them in Oration 2.
634, Vol. 1, p. 169, Wright; Ammianus sometimes confuses
them.

197

At
Antioch
Just
before
Julian’s
Persian
cam-
paign

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

καλλινίκους ἐπανελθεῖν ἐπὶ τὴν ἐνεγκαμένην,
τρόπαια κατὰ τῶν “πολεμίων ἐγείραντας. πᾶσαν
οὖν ῥᾳστώνην καὶ φενακισμὸν ᾿ἀποθέμερος, καὶ
τὸν μακαρίτην Κωνσταντῖνον ἷ καὶ τὰς τῶν
εὖ γεγονότων περιουσίας τὰς εἰς, σέ τε καὶ
τοὺς ὁμοτρόπους σοι βαρβάρους ὑ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἁβροτά-
του καὶ πολυτελοῦς " Κωνσταντίου κενωθείσας,
νῦν μοι τὸν ᾿Ιουλιανόν, τὸν ἀρχιερέα, τὸν καίσαρα,
τὸν αὔγουστον, τὸν θεῶν τε cal” Apews θεραπευ-
τὴν ἐννόησον, τὸν Φραγκῶν ὁ τεῦ καὶ βαρβάρων
ὀλετῆρα, τὸν άλλων τε καὶ ᾿Ιταλῶν ἐλευθερωτήν.
εἰ δὲ ἕτερόν τι βουλεύσαιο' πυνθάνομαι “γὰρ εἶναί
σε πανοῦργον καὶ κακὸν ᾿στρατιώτην καὶ ἀλαζόνα,
ὡς τὰ παρόντα μοι πράγματα δείκνυσιν" ἐχθρὸν
γάρ τινα τῆς κοινῆς λυσιτελείας λανθάνοντα
ἀποκρύπτειν παρὰ σοὶ πειρᾶσθαι" τέως μὲν τοῦτο
ὑπερτίθεμαι διὰ τὴν τοῦ πολέμου τύχην" ἀρκεῖ
γὰρ ἡμῖν ἡ τῶν θεῶν συμμαχία πρὸς τὴν τῶν
πολεμίων καθαίρεσιν. εἰ δέ τι τὰ τῆς εἱμαρμένης
κρίνειε' θεῶν yap βούλησις ἡ ταύτης ἐξουσία:
ἀδεώς καὶ γενναίως οἴσω τοῦτο. ἴσθι δὲ ὡς σὺ
μὲν πάρεργον ἔσῃ τῆς Περσικῆς χειρός, συναφ-
θείσης σοι παγγενεὶ τῆς ἑστίας καὶ τῆς ᾿Αρμενίων
ἀρχῆς" κοινωνήσει δέ σοι τῆς δυστυχίας καὶ ἡ

1 Wright restores Κωνσταντῖνον from Lawrentianus ; ἐκεῖνον
Hertlein foliowing Monacensis.

2 πολυετοῦς MSS. (Constantius died aged about 45);
Teuffel ἀσεβοῦς, cf. Sozomen 6. 1, who says that Julian in this
letter reviled Constantius ὡς ἀνάνδρῳ καὶ ἀσεβεῖ. Hertlein
πολυτελοῦς following Sintenis.

3 εὐνόησον Ambrosianus; εὐνόϊσον Muratorius.

4 Julian uses the form Φράγγοι in Oration 1. 34 D.

198

TO ARSACES, SATRAP OF ARMENIA

as a conquering hero, after I have set up trophies of
the enemy’s defeat. Accordingly you must discard
all sloth and cheating, and the Emperor Constantine
of blessed memory, and the wealth of the nobles
which was lavished in vain on you and on barbarians
of your character by the most luxurious and extra-
vagant Constantius, and now I warn you, take heed
of me, Julian, supreme pontiff, Caesar, Augustus, the
servant of the gods and of Ares, the destroyer of
the Franks and barbarians,! the liberator of the
Gauls and of Italy. But if you form some other
design,—for I learn that you are a rascal? and
a coward in war and a boaster, as the present
condition of affairs proves; indeed I have heard
that you are secretly trying to conceal at your court
a certain enemy of the public welfare,—for the
present 1 postpone this matter because of the
fortune of war; for my alliance with the gods is
enough to secure the destruction of the enemy.
But if Destiny should also play some part in the
decision,—for the purpose of the gods is her
opportunity,—I will endure it fearlessly and like a
brave man. Be assured that you will be an easy
victim 3 of the power of Persia when your hearth and
home, your whole race and the kingdom of Armenia
all blaze together. And the city of Nisibis? also will

1 Cf. Ammianus 22. 5, of Julian: saepeque dictitabat
‘‘audite me quem Alemanni audierunt et Franci.”

2 Arsaces was almost certainly a Christian ; cf. Sozomen
6. 1.

3 For this phrase cf. Vol. 2. Caesars 326A mdpepyov .. .
τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ στρατηγίας.

4 After Julian’s death Nisibis reverted to the Persians ;
their king Sapor captured and killed Arsaces; Ammiantts
rv a

τ.

399

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

Νισιβίων πόλις, τῶν οὐρανίων θεῶν τοῦτο πάλαι
ἡμῖν προαγορευσάντων.

58
Λιβανίῳ σοφιστῇ καὶ κοιαίστωρι

Μέχρι τῶν AvrapBov ἦλθον: ἔστι δὲ κώμη
Χαλκίδος: καὶ ἐνέτυχον ὁδῷ λείψανα ἐχούσῃ
χειμαδίων ᾿Αντιοχικῶν. ἣν δὲ αὐτῆς, οἶμαι, τὸ
μὲν τέλμα τὸ δὲ ὄρος, τραχεῖα δὲ πᾶσα, καὶ ἐνέ-
KELVTO τῷ τέλματι λίθοι ὥσπερ ἐπίτηδες ἐρριμ-
μένοις ἐοικότες, ὑπ᾽ οὐδεμιᾶς τέχνης συγκείμενοι,
ὃν τρόπον εἰώθασιν ἐν ταῖς ἄλλαις 5 πόλεσι τὰς
λεωφόρους οἱ ἐξοικοδομοῦντες ποιεῖν, ἀντὶ μὲν τῆς
κονίας πολὺν τὸν χοῦν ἐποικοδομοῦντες,5 πυκνοὺς
δὲ ὥσπερ ἐν τοίχῳ τιθέντες τοὺς λίθους. ἐπεὶ δὲ
διαβὰς μόλις ἦλθον εἰς τὸν πρῶτον σταθμόν,
ἐννέα που σχεδὸν ἦσαν ὧραι, καὶ ἐδεξάμην εἴσω
τῆς αὐλῆς τὸ πλεῖστον τῆς παρ᾽ ὑμῖν βουλῆς. ἃ
δὲ διελέχθημεν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, ἴσως ἐπύθου"
μάθοις δ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἡμῶν ἀκούσας, εἰ θεοὶ θέλοιεν.

᾿Απὸ τῶν Λιτάρβων εἰς τὴν Βέρροιαν ἐπορευό-
μὴν, καὶ ὁ Ζεὺς αἴσια πάντα ἐσήμηνεν, ἐναργῆ
δείξας τὴν διοσημείαν. ἐπιμείνας δὲ ἡμέραν ἐκεῖ

1 Hertlein 27.

2 ἄλλαις Hertlein suspects.

3 ὑποσκεδάννυντες Cumont, aS more suitable in connection
with χοῦς = loose soil.

4 διοσημείαν Asmus ; διοσημίαν Hertlein, MSS.

1 Julian’s march is described by Ammianus 23. 2, to the
ee of 24; he wasa member of the expedition ; cf. Zosimus 3.
2-28 ; Cumont, Etudes Syriennes, Paris, 1917.

200

TO LIBANIUS, SOPHIST AND QUAESTOR

share in your misfortune, for this the heavenly gods
long since foretold to me.

58
To Libanius, Sophist and Quaestor 1

I rrRAvELLED as far as Litarbae,—it is a village of
Chalcis,—and came on a road that still had the
remains of a winter camp of Antioch. The road, I
"may say, was partly swamp, partly hill, but the
whole of it was rough, and in the swamp lay stones
which looked as though they had been thrown there
purposely, as they lay together without any art, after
the fashion followed also by those who build public
highways in cities and instead of cement make a
deep layer of soil and then lay the stones close
together as though they were making a boundary-
wall. When 1 had passed over this with some difficulty
and arrived at my first halting-place it was about the
ninth hour, and then I received at my headquarters
the greater part of your senate.2, You have perhaps
learned already what we said to one another, and, if
it be the will of heaven, you shall know it from my
own lips.

From Litarbae I proceeded to Beroea,’ and there
Zeus by showing a manifest sign from heaven
declared all things to be auspicious.* I stayed there

2 The Senators of Antioch followed Julian to plead for
the city, which had offended him; see Libanius, Oration 16. 1.

3 Aleppo.

4 Ammianus 23. 2 records certain fatal accidents at Hiera-
polis and Batnae which were regarded as of ill omen for the
campaign.

201

363
March
10th
From
Hiera-
polis

400

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

τὴν ἀκρόπολιν εἶδον, καὶ ἔθυσα τῷ Διὶ βασιλικῶς
ταῦρον λευκόν, διελέχθην δὲ ὀλίγα τῇ βουλῇ περὺ
θεοσεβείας. ἀλλὰ τοὺς λόγους ἐπήνουν μὲν
ἅπαντες, ἐπείσθησαν δὲ αὐτοῖς ὀλίγοι πάνυ, καὶ
οὗτοι οἱ καὶ πρὸ. τῶν ἐμῶν λόγων ἐδόκουν ἔχειν
ὑγιῶς. εὐλαβοῦντο! δὲ ὥσπερ παρρησίας ἀποτρί-
ψασθαι τὴν αἰδῶ καὶ ἀποθέσθαι" περίεστι γάρ,
ὦ θεοί, τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐπὶ μὲν τοῖς καλοῖς ἐρυ-
nye ἀνδρείᾳ ψυχῆς καὶ εὐσεβείᾳ, καλλωπί-
ζεσθαι δὲ ὥσπερ τοῖς χειρίστοις, ἱεροσυλίᾳ καὶ
μαλακίᾳ γνώμης καὶ σώματος.

Ἔνθεν ὑποδέχονταί με Βάτναι, χωρίον οἷον
παρ᾽ ὑμῖν οὐκ εἶδον ἔξω τῆς Δάφνης, ἣ νῦν ἔοικε
ταῖς Batvats: ὡς τά γε πρὸ μικροῦ, σωζομένου
τοῦ νεὼ καὶ τοῦ ἀγάλματος, "Οσσῃ καὶ Inrio
καὶ ταῖς ᾽Ολύμπου κορυφαῖς καὶ τοῖς Θετταλικοῖς
Τέμπεσιν ἄγων ἐπίσης ἢ καὶ προτιμῶν ἁπάντων
ὁμοῦ τὴν Δάφνην οὐκ ἂν αἰσχυνοίμην." ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ
μὲν τῇ Δάφνῃ γέγραπταί σοι λόγος, ὁποῖον ἄλλος
οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἷς τῶν οἱ νῦν βροτοί εἰσι καὶ μάλα ἐπι-
χειρήσας καμεῖν ἐργάσαιτο, νομίζω δὲ καὶ τῶν
ἔμπροσθεν οὐ πολλοὺς πάνυ. τί οὖν ἐγὼ νῦν
ἐπιχειρῶ περὶ αὐτῆς γράφειν, οὕτω λαμπρᾶς
μονῳδίας ὃ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ συγγεγραμμένης ; ὡς μήποτε

1 Gobet ; Hertlein, MSS. ἐλάβοντο.
2 ἱερὸν Διὸς ᾽᾿Ολυμπίου καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος Πυθίου τὸ χωρίον follows
in MSS., bracketed by Hertlein as a gloss ; Heyler retains.

% Lacuna Hercher, Hertlein ; μονῳδίας Heyler.

1 The Emperors sacrificed white victims; cf. Ammianus
25. 4. 17.

* Julian was at Batnae March 8th; a few days later he
halted at another Batnae, in Osroéne, beyond the Euphrates,

202

TO LIBANIUS, SOPHIST AND QUAESTOR

for a day and saw the Acropolis and sacrificed to Zeus
in imperial fashion’ a white bull.t Also I conversed
briefly with the senate about the worship of the
gods. But though they all applauded my arguments
very few were converted by them, and these few were
men who even before I spoke seemed to me to hold
sound views. But they were cautious and would not
strip off and lay aside their modest reserve, as though
afraid of too frank speech. For it is the prevailing
habit of mankind, O ye gods, to blush for their noble
qualities, manliness of soul and piety, and to plume
themselves, as it were, on what is most depraved,
sacrilege and weakness of mind and body.

Next, Batnae 2 entertained me, a place like nothing
that I have ever seen in your country, except
Daphne? ; but that is now very like Batnae, though
not long ago, while the temple and statue were still
unharmed,? I should not have hesitated to compare
Daphne with Ossa and Pelion or the peaks of
Olympus, or Thessalian Tempe, or even to have
preferred it to all of them put together. But you
have composed an oration® on Daphne such as no
other man “of such sort as mortals now are’ ®
could achieve, even though he used his utmost
energies on the task, yes, and I think not very
many of the ancient writers either. . Why then
should I try to write about it now, when so brilliant
a monody has been composed in its honour? Would

3 A suburb of Antioch; cf. AWisopogon 361; Ammianus
19. 12,19. The temple of Apollo was burned October 22nd,
362.

4 Cf. Misopogon 3468 ; Vol. 2, Wright.

5 We have the monody of Libanius, On the Temple of Apollo
at Daphne, Oration 60; cf. his Oration 11. 235.

ὁ Iliad 5. 304; Julian, Oration 6. 1914.

203

491

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ὦφελε τοιοῦτον. αἵ γε μὴν Βάτναι" βαρβαρικὸν
ὄνομα τοῦτο" χωρίον ἐστὶν Ἑλληνικόν, πρῶτον
μὲν ὅτι διὰ πάσης τῆς πέριξ χώρας ἀτμοὶ λιβανω-
τοῦ πανταχόθεν ἢ ἦσαν, ἱερεῖά τε ἐβλέπομεν εὐτρεπῆ
πανταχοῦ. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν εἰ καὶ λίαν ηὔφραινέ
με, θερμότερον ὅμως ἐδόκει. καὶ τῆς εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς
εὐσεβείας, ἀλλότριον. ἐκτὸς πάτου γὰρ εἶναι χρὴ
καὶ δρᾶσθαι καθ᾽ ἡσυχίαν, ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο πορευο-
μένων, οὐκ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλο τι βαδιζόντων, τὰ πρὸς τοὺς
θεοὺς ἱερά τε καὶ ὅσια. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἴσως τεύξε-
ται τῆς ἁρμοζούσης ἐπιμελείας αὐτίκα.

Τὰς Βάτνας δὲ ἑώρων πεδίον λάσιον ἄλση κυπα-
ρίττων ἔχον νέων" καὶ ἣν ἐν ταύταις οὐδὲν γεράν-
δρυον οὐδὲ σαπρόν, ἀλλὰ ἐξ ἴσης ἅπαντα θάλλοντα
τῇ κόμῃ" καὶ τὰ βασίλεια πολυτελῆ μὲν ἥκιστα"
πηλοῦ γὰρ ἣν μόνον καὶ ξύλων οὐδὲν ποικίλον
ἔχοντα" κῆπον δὲ τοῦ μὲν ᾿Αλκίνου καταδεέστερον,
παραπλήσιον δὲ τῷ Λαέρτου, καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ μικρὸν
ἄλσος πάνυ, κυπαρίττων μεστόν, καὶ τῷ θρυγκίῳ
δὲ πολλὰ τοιαῦτα παραπεφυτευμένα δένδρα στίχῳ
καὶ ἐφεξῆς. εἶτα τὸ μέσον Tpactal, καὶ ἐν ταύταις
λάχανα καὶ δένδρα παντοίαν ὀπώραν φέροντα.
τί οὖν ἐνταῦθα ; ἔθυσα δείλης, εἶτ᾽ ὄρθρου βαθέος,
ὅπερ εἴωθα ποιεῖν ἐπιεικῶς ἑκάστης ἡμέρας. ἐπεὶ
δὲ ἦν καλὰ τὰ ἱερά, τῆς “lepas πόλεως εἰχόμεθα,
καὶ ὑπαντῶσιν ἡμῖν οἱ πολῖται, καὶ ὑποδέχεταί

1 7,e. it maintained the pagan cults.
2 Odyssey 7. 112 foll., a favourite commonplace; cf. Jfiso-
pegs BO2A.
3 Odyssey 24. 245 foll.
4 Hierapolis is now Membej; Julian wees there about
March 10th; it was the rendezvous for the Roman troops

204

TO LIBANIUS, SOPHIST AND QUAESTOR

that none had been needed! However, to return
to Batnae. Its name is barbarous but the place is
Hellenic ; I say so because through all the country
round about the fumes of frankincense arose on all
sides, and I saw everywhere victims ready for
sacrifice. But though this gave me very great
pleasure, nevertheless it looked to me like over-
heated zeal, and alien to proper reverence for the
gods. For things that are sacred to the gods and
holy ought to be away from the beaten track and
performed in peace and quiet, so that men may
resort thither to that end alone and not on the way
to some other business. But this matter will perhaps
before long receive the attention that is appropriate.

Batnae I saw to be a thickly wooded plain contain-
ing groves of young cypresses; and among these
there was no old or decaying trunk, but all alike
were in vigorous leafage. The imperial lodging was
by no means sumptuous, for it was made only of
clay and logs and had no decorations; but its
garden, though inferior to that of Alcinous,? was
comparable to the garden of Laertes.? In it was a
quite small grove full of cypresses and along the
wall many trees of this sort have been planted in a
row one after the other. Then in the middle were
beds, and in these, vegetables and trees bearing
fruits of all sorts. What did I do there, you ask?
I sacrificed in the evening and again at early dawn,
as I am in the habit of doing practically every day.
And since the omens were favourable, we kept on
to Hierapolis* where the inhabitants came to meet

for this campaign; and was about twenty miles west of the
Kuphrates. Julian stayed there three days; Ammianus 23.
28:

205

‘THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

pe Eévos, ὀφθεὶς μὲν ἄρτι, φιλούμενος δὲ ὑ ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ
πάλαι. τὴν δὲ αἰτίαν αὐτὸς μὲν εὖ οἶδα ὅτι
συνήδεις,1 ἐ ἐμοὶ δὲ ἡδὺ καὶ ἄλλως φράσαι: τὸ γὰρ
ἀεὶ περὶ αὐτῶν ἀκούειν καὶ λέγειν ἐ ἐστί μοι νέκταρ.
᾿Ιαμβλίχου τοῦ θειοτάτου τὸ θρέμμα Σώπατρος
ἐγένετο 5 ὁ τούτου κηδεστής" ἐξίσου ἐ ἐμοὶ 38 γὰρ τὸ
μὴ πάντα ἐκείνων τῶν ἀνδρῶν a ἀγάπα ἀδικημάτων
οὐδενὸς τῶν φαυλοτάτων ἔλαττον * εἶναι δοκεῖ.
πρόσεστι ταύτης αἰτία μείζων. ὑποδεξάμενος
γὰρ πολλάκις τόν τε ἀνεψιὸν τὸν ἐμὸν καὶ τὸν
ὁμοπάτριον ἀδελφὸν καὶ προτραπεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν,
οἷα εἰκὸς, πολλάκις ἀποστῆναι τῆς εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς
εὐσεβείας, ὃ χαλεπόν ἐστιν, οὐκ ἐλήφθη τῇ νόσῳ.

Ταῦτα εἶχον ἀπὸ τῆς lepas πόλεώς σοι γράφειν
ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ. τὰς δὲ στρατιωτικὰς ἢ πολι-
τικὰς οἰκονομίας αὐτὸν ἐχρῆν οἶμαι παρόντα
ἐφορᾶν καὶ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι: μεῖζον γάρ ἐστιν ἢ κατ᾽
ἐπιστολήν, εὖ ἴσθι, καὶ τοσοῦτον ὅσον οὐ ῥάδιον
οὐδὲ τριπλασίᾳ ταύτης περιλαβεῖν σκοποῦντι
τἀκριβές. ἐπὶ κεφαλαίου 5. δέ σοι καὶ ταῦτα
φράσω ou ὀλίγων. πρὸς τοὺς Σαρακηνοὺς ἔπεμψα

1 συνήδεις Reiske, συνείδεις MSS. εὖ οἶδ᾽ ὅτι συνείρεις Bidez,
ef. αἰτίαν αἰτίᾳ συνείρων Ξε make the connection. Hertlein
omits ed by an oversight. 2 ἐγένετο Bidez adds.

3 κηδεστής: ἐξίσου ἐμοὶ Bidez; κηδεστὴς ἐξ ὅσου: MSS.,
Hertlein ; Reiske thinks ἐξ ὅσου conceals a proper name or a
lacuna.

4 οὐδενὸς τῶν φαυλοτάτων ἔλαττον Wright (cf. Oration
3. 102 B); οὐδενὸς ἧττον τῶν φαυλοτάτων Reiske ; οὐδὲν οὕτω
φαυλότατον MSS., Hertlein.

5 Frederich, MSS. ἐπεὶ καὶ φαίην.

1 This elder Sopater was put to death by Constantine.
206

TO LIBANIUS, SOPHIST AND QUAESTOR

us. Here I am being entertained by a friend who,
though I have only lately met him for the first
time has long been dear to me. I know that you
yourself are well aware of the reason, but for all
that it gives me pleasure to tell you. For it is like
nectar to me to hear and to speak of these things
continually. Sopater,! the pupil of the god-like
Iamblichus, was a relative by marriage of this
Sopater.2_ Not to love even as myself all that be-

longed to those men is in my opinion equivalent to
_ the lowest baseness. But there is another more
powerful reason than this. Though he often enter-
tained my cousin and my half-brother? and was
often urged by them, naturally enough, to abandon
his piety towards the gods, and though this is hard
to withstand, he was not infected with this disease.*

Thus much, then, I was able to write to you from
Hierapolis about my own affairs. But as regards
the military or political arrangements, you ought, 1
think, to have been present to observe and pay
attention to them yourself. For, as you well know,
the matter is too long for a letter, in fact so vast
that if one considered it in detail it would not be
easy to confine it to a letter even three times as
long as this. But I will tell you of these matters
also, summarily, and in a very few words. I sent
an embassy to the Saracens® and suggested that

* For the younger Sopater, see Introduction.

3 Constantius and Gallus ; cf. Iisopogon 340A.

4 For Christianity a disease, cf. Oration 7. 229p and
Against the Galilaeans 5278.

5 According to Ammianus 23. 3. 8, the Saracens offered
themselves to Julian as allies, but they apparently deserted
later to the Persians, cf. Zosimus 3. 27. 3; Ammianus 25.
6. 10.

207

402

989

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

πρέσβεις, ὑπομιμνήσκων αὐτοὺς ἥκειν, εἰ βού-
λοιντο. ἕν μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτον" ἕτερον δέ, λίαν
ἐγρηγορότας ὡς ἐνεδέχετο τοὺς παραφυλάξοντας
ἐξέπεμψα, μή τίς ἐνθένδε πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους
ἐξέλθῃ λαθών, ἐσόμενος αὐτοῖς ὡς κεκινήμεθα
μηνυτής. ἐκεῖθεν ἐδίκασα δίκην στρατιωτικήν,
ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω, πρᾳότατα καὶ δικαιότατα.
ἵππους. περιττοὺς καὶ ἡμιόνους παρεσκεύασα, τὸ
στρατόπεδον εἰς ταὐτὸ συναγαγών. ναῦς πλη-
ροῦνται ποτάμιαι πυροῦ, μᾶλλον δὲ ἄρτων ξηρῶν
καὶ ὄξους. καὶ τούτων ἕκαστον ὅπως ἐπράχθη
καὶ τίνες ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ γεγόνασι λόγοι, πόσου
μήκους ἐστὶ συγγράφειν ἐννοεῖς. ἐπιστολαῖς δὲ
ὅσαις ὑπέγραψα καὶ βίβλοις' ἑπόμενα γὰρ
ὡσπερεὶ σκιά! μοι καὶ ταῦτα συμπερινοστεῖ
πανταχοῦ" τί δεῖ νῦν πράγματα ἔχειν ἀπαριθμού-
μενον ;

594
Makino φιλοσόφῳ 3

ς \ a a \ 2 3 \ \ /
Ο μὲν μῦθος ποιεῖ τὸν ἀετὸν, ἐπειδὰν τὰ γνήσια
la) / / f
τῶν κυημάτων βασανίξζῃ, φέρειν ἄπτιλα πρὸς TOV

1 ὥσπερ σκιά Cobet; ὥσπερ αἴσια MSS.; ὡσπερεὶ σκιά
Hertlein.
* Letters 59-73 cannot be dated, even approximately, from

their contents.
9 Hertlein 16; the preceding letter, Hertlein 15, was

addressed to Maximus, hence his title τῷ αὐτῷ.

1 This is Julian’s last extant letter. On leaving Hierapolis
he marched to Carrhae, which place he left on March 25th.
He crossed the Tigris in May, declined the siege of Ctesiphon,

208

TO MAXIMUS THE PHILOSOPHER

they could come if they wished. That is one affair
of the sort I have mentioned. For another, I des-
patched men as wide-awake as I could obtain that
they might guard against anyone’s leaving here
secretly to go to the enemy and inform them that
we are on the move. After that I held a court
martial and, I am convinced, showed in my decision
the utmost clemency and justice. I have procured
excellent horses and mules and have mustered all
my forces together. The boats to be used on the
river are laden with corn, or rather with baked bread
and sour wine. You can understand at what length
I should have to write in order to describe how every
detail of this business was worked out and what
discussions arose over every one of them. As for the
number of letters I have signed, and papers,—for
these too follow me everywhere like my shadow,—
why should I take the trouble to enumerate them
now ?!

59
To Maximus the Philosopher ?

We are told in the myth that the eagle,? when
he would test which of his brood are genuine, carries

the Persian capital, burnt his fleet on the Tigris early in
June, and was killed in a skirmish on June 26th, somewhere
between Ctesiphon and Samarra on the Tigris. His body
was carried back and buried at Tarsus in Cilicia, where he
had told the people of Antioch he should spend the winter ;
Ammianus 25. 10. 5.

* Cumont and Geffcken reject, without good grounds,
Schwarz defends, the authenticity of this sophistic letter,
which was probably written from Gaul.

* A rhetorical commonplace; cf. Zo Jamblichus, p. 259,
note ; Lucian, The Fisherman 46.

209
VOL, III. P

384.

980

THE’ LETTERS OF JULIAN

αἰθέρα, καὶ ταῖς ἡλίου προσάγειν ἀκτῖσιν, ὥσπερ
ὑπὸ μάρτυρι τῷ θεῴ πατέρα τε ἀληθοῦς νεοττοῦ
γινόμενον καὶ νόθου γονῆς ἀλλοτριούμενον' ἡμεῖς
δέ σοι καθάπερ Ἑρμῇ λογίῳ τοὺς ἡμετέρους λό-
γους ἐγχειρίζομεν. κἂν μὲν ὑπομείνωσι τὴν ἀκοὴν
τὴν σήν, ἐπὶ σοὶ τὸ κρῖναι περὶ αὐτῶν, εἰ καὶ pes
τοὺς ἄλλους εἰσὶ πτήσιμοι: εἰ δὲ μή, ῥῖψον εἰκῆ 1

καθάπερ Μουσῶν ἀλλοτρίους, ἢ ποταμῷ κλύσον
ὡς νόθους. πάντως οὐδὲ ὁ Ῥῆνος ἀδικεῖ τοὺς
Κελτούς, ὃ ὃς τὰ μὲν νόθα τῶν βρεφῶν ὑποβρύχια
ταῖς δίναις ποιεῖ, καθάπερ ἀκολάστου λέχους
τιμωρὸς πρέπων' ὅσα δ᾽ ἂν ἐπιγνῷ “καθαροῦ σπέρ-
ματος, ὑπεράνω τοῦ ὕδατος αἰωρεῖ, καὶ τῇ μητρὶ
τρεμούσῃ πάλιν εἰς χεῖρας δίδωσιν, ὥσπερ, ἀδέκα-
στόν τινα μαρτυρίαν αὐτῇ κα θαρῶν καὶ ἀμέμπτων
γάμων τὴν τοῦ παιδὸς σωτηρίαν ἀντιδωρούμενος.

60
Evyevio φιλοσόφῳ 3
Δαίδαλον μὲν Ἰκάρῳ ὃ φασὶν ἐκ κηροῦ πτερὰ
συμπλάσαντα τολμῆσαι τὴν φύσιν βιάσασθαι τῇ
τέχνῃ. ἐγὼ δὲ ἐκεῖνον μὲν εἰ καὶ τῆς τέχνης
1 εἰκῇ Ambrosianus L 73, ἐκεῖ Vosstanus, Hertlein ; Hercher
regards as dittography of εἰ καὶ above.

2 Hertlein 18.
3 Ἰκάρῳ Hertlein suggests, Ἰκαρίῳ MSS.

1 The allusion to Julian’s writings is too vague to be used
to date this letter.

2 A commonplace of rhetoric; ef. Julian, Vol. 1, Oration
2. 8lp; Claudian, Jn Rufinum 2. 112, et quos nascentes

210

TO EUGENIUS THE PHILOSOPHER

them still unfledged into the upper air and exposes
them to the rays of the sun, to the end that he may
become, by the testimony of the god, the sire of a
true nursling and disown any spurious offspring.
Even so I submit my speeches! to you as though
to Hermes the god of eloquence; and, if they can
bear the test of being heard by you, it rests with
you to decide concerning them whether they are fit
to take flight to other men also. But if they are not,
then fling them away as though disowned by the
Muses, or plunge them in a river as . bastards.
Certainly the Rhine does not mislead the Celts,?
for it sinks deep in its eddies their bastard infants,
like a fitting avenger of an adulterous bed; but all
those that it recognises to be of pure descent it
supports on the surface of the water and gives them
back to the arms of the trembling mother, thus
rewarding her with the safety of her child as in-
corruptible evidence that her marriage is pure and
without reproach.

60
To Eugenius 8 the Philosopher

We are told that Daedalus dared to do violence
to nature by his art, and moulded wings of wax
for Icarus. But for my part, though I applaud him

explorat gurgite Rhenus; Galen 6.51 Kiihn, says that the
ordeal was to strengthen their bodies as well as to test their
legitimacy ; cf. Voltaire, Hssai sur les meurs 146.

3 A philosopher named Eugenius was the father of the
sophist and philosopher Themistius, an older contemporary
of Julian, but this letter with its familiar tone cannot have
been addressed to a man of advanced age. Schwarz, Cumont
and Geffcken reject it on the ground of its sophistic manner-
isms, but see Introduction.

21Ὶ

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

ἐπαινῶ, τῆς γνώμης οὐκ ἄγαμαι" μόνος γὰρ κηρῷ
λυσίμῳ τοῦ παιδὸς ὑπέμεινε τὴν σωτηρίαν πιστεῦ-
σαι. εἰ δέ μοι θέμις ἣν κατὰ τὸν ήιον ἐκεῖνον
μελοποιὸν τὴν τῶν ὀρνίθων ἀλλάξασθαι φύσιν,
οὐκ ἂν δήπου πρὸς Ὄλυμπον οὐδὲ ὑ ὑπὲρ μέμψεως
ἐρωτικῆς, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς αὐτοὺς ἂν τῶν ὑμετέρων ὀρῶν
τοὺς m pomrodds & ἔπτην, ἵνα σὲ TO μέλημα τοὐμόν,
ὥς φησιν ἡ Σαπφώ, περιπτύξωμαι. ἐπεὶ δέ με
ἀνθρωπίνου σώματος δεσμῷ κατακλείσασα ἡ φύ-
σις οὐκ ἐθέλει πρὸς τὸ μετέωρον ἁπλῶσαι, τῶν
λόγων οἷς ἔχω σε πτεροῖς μετέρχομαι, καὶ γράφω,
καὶ σύνειμι. τὸν δυνατὸν τρόπον. πάντως. που καὶ
“Ὅμηρος αὐτοὺς οὐκ ἄλλου του χάριν ἢ τούτου
TTEPOEVTAS ovomater, διότι δύνανται πανταχοῦ
φοιτᾶν ὥσπερ οἱ ταχύτατοι τῶν ὀρνίθων 7H ἂν
ἐθέλωσιν ἄττοντες. γράφε δὲ καὶ αὐτός, ὦ φίλος"
ἴση yap δήπου σοι τῶν λόγων, εἰ μὴ καὶ μείζων,
ὑπάρχει πτέρωσις, ἡ τοὺς éraipous μεταβῆναι 1
δύνασαι καὶ πανταχόθεν ὡς παρὼν εὐφραίνειν.

61
Σωπάτρῳ 5
ὠπάτρῳ
“Ὁ / A
Ἔστι τις ἡδονῆς ἀφορμὴ πλείων, ὅταν ἐξῆ Ov
7 fal

ἀνδρὸς οἰκείου τοὺς φίλους προσφωνεῖν; ov yap

1 μεταβῆναϊ Ambrosianus 1,78 ; μεταθεῖν Wyttenbach, Hert-
lein ; μεταθεῖναι Vossianus.

* Hertlein 67. Σωσιπάτρῳ Hertlein, but prefers Swrdarpy
Fabricius. See Introduction, under Sopater.

1 Anacreon frag. 22, Bergk ᾿Αναπέτομαι δὴ πρὸς "Ολυμπον
πτερύγεσσι κουφαῖς διὰ τὸν ΓΕρωτ᾽. 2 Frag. 126, Bergk.

212

TO SOPATER

for his art, I cannot admire his judgement. For
he is the only man who ever had the courage to
entrust the safety of his son to soluble wax. But if
it were granted me, in the words of the famous lyric
poet of Teos,t to change my nature to a bird’s, I
should certainly not “fly to Olympus for Love,”
—no, not even to lodge a comp!aint against him—
but I should fly to the very foothills of your moun-
tains to embrace “thee, my darling,” as Sappho 3
says. But since nature has confined me in the prison
of a human body 3 and refuses to lighten and raise me
aloft, I approach you with such wings as I possess,*
the wings of words, and I write to you, and am with
you in such fashion as I can. Surely for this reason
and this only Homer calls words ‘ winged,” that
they are able to go to and fro in every direction,
darting where they will, like the swiftest of birds.
But do you for your part write to me too, my friend !
For you possess an equal if not a larger share of the
plumage of words, with which you are able to travel
to your friends and from wherever you may be, just
as though you were present, to cheer them.

61
To Sopater ὅ

Ir is an occasion to rejoice the more when one
has the chance to address friends through an
intimate friend. For then it is not only by what

8 A Platonic commonplace; cf. Julian, Oration 6. 1988 ;
7. 206B. 4 Cf. Letter 76. 449p, p. 244, note.

5 This letter is rejected by Schwarz, Cumont and Geffcken ;
Schwarz on the slender evidence of style classes it with the
apocryphal letters to Iamblichus; Cumont also places it in
that series, and thinks that this Sopater is the friend of
the elder Jamblichus executed by Constantine.

212

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μόνον. οἷς γράφεις τὸ τῆς σεαυτοῦ ψυχῆς ἰνδαλμα
τοῖς ἐντυγχάνουσι ξυναρμόττῃ. ὃ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς
ποιῶ. τὸν γὰρ τροφέα τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ παίδων Αντί-
οχον ὡς ὑμᾶς ἐκπέμπων, ἀπρόσρητόν σε κατα-
λιπεῖν οὐκ ἠνεσχόμην" ὥστε, εἴ τι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς
ποθεῖς, ἔχοις ἂν οἰκειότερον Tap αὐτοῦ γνῶναι.
εἰ δέ τι καὶ σοὶ μέλει τῶν σῶν ἐραστῶν, ὡς ἔγωγε
ὅτι μέλει πιστεύω, δείξεις Ews! ἂν ἐξῇ γράφειν
μηδαμῶς ἐλλείπων.

62
Εὐκλείδῃ φιλοσόφῳ *

Πότε ἃρ ἡμῶν ἀπελείφθης, ἵνα καὶ γράφω εν,
) 1)
ἢ πότε οὐχὶ τοῖς τῆς “Ψυχῆς ὀφθαλμοῖς ὡς παρόν-
τὰ σε θεωροῦμεν ; οἵ γε οὐ μόνον ἀεί σοι συνεῖναι
καὶ συνομιλεῖν δοκοῦμεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν γε νῦν
Vi Ν Ng A a \
προσηκόντων WS ὑπὸ παρουσίᾳ TH σῇ τὰ εἰκότα
/ 3, \ \ / / Se a e
κηδόμεθα. εἰ δὲ καὶ γράφεσθαί cot Tap ἡμῶν ὡς
/ “ Ν δ ‘ \ -
ἀπόντι θέλεις, ὅρα μὲν ὅπως μὴ αὐτὸς τὸ δοκεῖν
ἡμῶν ἀπεῖναι μᾶλλον αὐτῷ τῷ γράφειν ἐθέλειν
> / \ 3 3 yy / 2 Ψ.. \ \
ἐκφήνῃς" πλὴν ἀλλ, εἰ γε σοι φίλον ἐστί, καὶ πρὸς
a ς \ an
τοῦτο ἑκόντες ὑπακούομεν. πάντως γε, TO TOU

1 ἕως Hertlein suggests ; MSS., Hertlein ἐν οἷς.

* Hertlein 73.
1 No forger would have referred to children of Julian’s
body ; but the phrase may refer to his Writings. Libanius,
Epitaphius, says of Julian’s letters παῖδας τούτους ἀθανάτους
καταλέλοιπεν. See also 70 Jamblichus, p. 255.

2 Libanius often mentions a certain Kucleides, a native of

Constantinople, to whom this letter may be addressed; the

214.

TO EUCLEIDES THE PHILOSOPHER

you write that you unite the image of your own soul
with your readers. And this is what I myself am
doing. For when I despatched the custodian of my
children,t Antiochus, to you, I could not bear to
leave you without a word of greeting. So that if
you want to have news of me, you can have from
him information of a more intimate sort. And if
you care at all for your admirers, as I believe you
do care, you will prove it by never missing an
opportunity while you are able to write.

62
To Eucleides the Philosopher 3

Nay, when did you ever leave me, so that I need
to write, or when do I not behold you with the eyes
of the soul as though you were here with me? For
not only do I seem to be with you continually and
to converse with you, but I pay attention to my
duties now just as zealously as when you were here
to guide me. But if you do wish me to write to you,
just as though you were not here, then take care
that you do not yourself create the impression of
not being with me all the more by your very wish
that I should write. However, if you do really find
pleasure in it I am willing to obey you in this also.
At any rate, by your request, you will, as the proverb

reference to public affairs may imply that Julian was already
Kimpercr, but it cannot be dated with certainty. Schwarz
rejects the letter on stylistic grounds, and Cumont for the same
reason attributed it to the sophist Julian of Caesarea, for
whom see Introduction under lamblichus ; but, though it 15
conventional and sophistic, there is nothing in it that the
Emperor Julian might not have written,

215

987

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

λόγου, θέοντα τῇ παρακελεύσει τὸν ἵππον εἰς
πεδίον ἄξεις. ἄγε οὖν ὅπως ἀντιδώσεις! τὰ ἴσα, καὶ
πρὸς τὴν ἀντίκλησιν ἐν τῇ τῶν ἀμοιβαίων συνε-
χείᾳ μὴ κατοκνήσεις." καίτοι ἔγωγε εἰς τὴν ὑπὲρ
τοῦ κοινοῦ σοι γινομένην amrouliy οὐκ ἐθέλω
διοχλεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ daw? σε φυλάττω * τῇ θήρᾳ TOV
καλῶν, οὐ μόνον οὐκ ἀδικεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ξύμπαν
ὁμοῦ τὸ Ἑλληνικὸν ὠφελεῖν ἂν δοκοίην, ὥσπερ
σκύλακα γενναῖον, ἀόχλητον ἀφιεὶς “ἐσχολακέναι
σε τοῖς περὶ τοὺς λόγους ἴχνεσιν ὁλοκλήρῳ τῷ
λήματι: εἰ δέ σοι τοσοῦτον τάχος περίεστιν, ὡς
μήτε τῶν φίλων ἀμελεῖν μήτ᾽ ἐκείνοις ἐνδεῖν, ἴθι
χρῆσαι παρ᾽ ὃ ἄμφω τῷ δρόμῳ.

63
“Βκηβολίῳ ὃ

Πινδάρῳ μὲν ἀργυρέας εἶναι δοκεῖ τὰς Μούσας,
οἱονεὶ τὸ ἔκδηλον αὐτῶν καὶ περιφανὲς τῆς τέχνης
ἐς τὸ τῆς ὕλης λαμπρότερον ἀπεικάξοντι" * Ὅμηρος
δὲ ὁ σοφὸς τόν τε ἄργυρον αἰγλήεντα λέγει καὶ τὸ
ὕδωρ a ἀργύρεον ὀνομάξει, καθάπερ ἡλίου καθαραῖς
ἀκτῖσιν αὐτῷ τῷ τῆς εἰκόνος φαιδρῷ μαρμαρύσ-
σον" Σαπφὼ §° ἡ καλὴ τὴν σελήνην ἀργυρέαν
φησὶ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τῶν ἄχλων ἀστέρων ἀποκρύ-
Trew τὴν: ὄψιν. οὕτω καὶ θεοῖς τὸν ἄργυρον

1 ἀντιδώσεις Cobet ; ἀντιδίδως Hertlein, MSS.

κατοκνήσει5 Cobet ; κατοκνήσῃς Hertlein, MSS,
ὅλον Χ.
Hertlein suggests ἀλλὰ τῷ σε φυλάττειν,

Hertlein suggests πρός.
Hertlein 19.

a 7 Sp ὦ ιῷ

ΤῸ HECEBOLIUS

says, lead a galloping horse into the plain. Come
then, see that you return like for like, and in answer
to my counter-summons do not grow weary of the
unbroken series of letters exchanged between us.
And yet I have no wish to hinder the zeal that
you display on behalf of the public welfare, never-
theless, in proportion as I keep you free for the
pursuit of noble studies, I shall be thought, far from
injuring it, to benefit the whole body of Hellenes
_at once, that is to say, if I leave you like a young
and well-bred dog without interference, free to give
all your time to tracking down, with a mind wholly
free from all else, the art of writing discourses; but
if you possess such swiftness that you need neither
neglect your friends nor slacken in those other
pursuits, come, take both courses and run at full
speed!
63

To Hecebolius 1

Pinpar? thinks that the Muses are “ silvery,’
and it is as though he likened the clearness and
splendour of their art to the substance that shines
most brilliantly. And the wise Homer? calls silver
“shining,” and gives to water the epithet “silvery ”’
because it gleams with the very brightness of the
reflected image of the sun, as though under its
direct rays. And Sappho‘ the fair says that the
moon is “ silvery,’ and that because of this it dims
the radiance of the other stars. Similarly one might

1 See Introduction, under Hecebolius.
2 Frag. 272, Bergk.; cf. Pythian 9. 65, Isthmian 2. 13.
3 These epithets for silver and water are not in our
Homer.
4 Frag. 3, Bergk.; ef. Julian, Oration 3. 1090, note, Wright.
21%

404

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

μᾶλλον ἢ TOV ρυσὸν εἰκάσειεν ἄν τις πρέπειν"
ἀνθρώποις γε μὴν ὅτι πρὸς τὴν χρείαν ἐστὶν ὁ
ἄργυρος τοῦ χρυσοῦ τιμιώτερος καὶ σύνεστι μᾶλ-
λον αὐτοῖς, οὐχ ὥσπερ ὃ “χρυσὸς ὑπὸ γῆς κρυπτό-
μενος ἢ φεύγων αὐτῶν τὴν ὄψιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὀφθῆ-
ναι καλὸς Kal. ἐν διαιτήματι κρείττων, οὐκ ἐμὸς
ἴδιος, ἀλλὰ παλαιῶν ἀνδρῶν ὸ λόγος ἐστίν. εἰ
δέ σοι τοῦ “πεμφθέντος ὑπὸ σοῦ χρυσοῦ νομίσ-
΄ὔ
ματος εἰς τὸ ἴσον τῆς τιμῆς ἕτερον ἀργύρεον ἀντι-
δίδομεν, μὴ κρίνῃς, ἥττω τὴν χάριν, μηδὲ ὥσπερ
TO Dravew πρὸς τὸ ἔλαττον οἰηθῇς εἶ εἶναι τὴν a ἀντί-
δοσιν, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ὁ 0 Διομήδης ἴσως “ἀργυρᾶ χρυσῶν
ἀντέδωκεν ἄν," ἅτε δὴ πολλῷ τῶν ἑτέρων ὄντα
χρησιμώτερα καὶ τὰς αἰχμὰς οἱονεὶ 35 μολίβδου
ίκην ἐκτρέπειν εἰδότα. ταῦτά σοι προσπαίζο-
μεν, ἀφ᾽ ὧν αὐτὸς γράφεις τὸ ἐνδόσιμον εἰς σὲ τῆς
παρρησίας λαμβάνοντες. σὺ δὲ εἰ τῷ ὄντι χρυσοῦ
τιμιώτερα ἡμῖν δῶρα ἐθέλεις ἐκπέμπειν, γράφε,
καὶ μὴ AYE συνεχῶς τοῦτο πράττων" ἐμοὶ γὰρ
ΡΜ

καὶ γράμμα παρὰ σοῦ μικρὸν ὅτου περ ἂν εἴπῃ τις
ἀγαθοῦ κάλλιον εἶναι κρίνεται.

64
Λουκιανῷ σοφιστῇ "
\ / \ ᾽ “Ὁ 3 a A 57 ’
Kat γράφω καὶ ἀντιτυχεῖν ἀξιῶ τῶν ἴσων. εἰ

1 ἂν Cobet adds. ͵

2 οἱονεὶ Hercher deletes, Hertlein brackets, but the con-
struction ofovel—Sixny occurs in letters not certainly Julian’s ;
cf. 8980, p. 274, 440p, p. 222. 3 Hertlein 32.

1 For this Julianic commonplace cf. Oration 6. 1978, note.
2 A sophistic commonplace; cf. Vol. 2, Letter to Themistius
260a, note. He exchanged bronze armour for golden; Iliad
6.. 236. i
218

TO LUCIAN THE SOPHIST

imagine silver to be more appropriate to the gods
than gold; but that to man, at any rate, silver
is more precious than gold and more familiar to
them because it is not, like gold, hidden under the
earth and does not avoid their eyes, but is both beau-
tiful to the eye and more serviceable in daily life,—
this, I say, is not my own theory! but was held by
men of old. If, therefore, in return for the gold coin
sent by you I give you a piece of silver of equal
value, think not that the favour is less and do not
imagine that, as with Glaucus,? the exchange is to
your disadvantage; for perhaps not even Diomede
would have exchanged silver armour for golden,
seeing that the former is far more serviceable than
the latter, and like lead well fitted to turn the points
of spears.® All this I am saying in jest, and I take
the cue * for my freedom of speech to you from what
you write yourself. But if you really wish to send
me gifts more precious than gold, write, and keep
on writing regularly. For even a short letter from
you I hold to be more precious than any other
blessing that one could name.

64
To Lucian the Sophist ὃ

Not only do I write to you but I demand to
receive payment in kind. And if I treat you ill by

3 Tliad 11. 237 ἀργύρῳ ἀντομένη, μόλιβος ὥς, ἐτράπετ᾽ αἰχμή.

4 Literally ‘‘ keynote” ; cf. Zo Jamblichus 421, p. 238.

5 A merely sophistic letter of compliment such as this
is a conventional ‘‘type” of the sort recommended in the
contemporary handbooks on epistolary style. Gesner thinks
it was addressed to the Lucian who wrote the dialogue
Philopatris, preserved with the works of his illustrious
namesake, but. there is no evidence of this.

219

442
D

443

440

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

δὲ ἀδικῶ συνεχῶς ἐπιστέλλων, ἀνταδικηθῆναι δέο-
μαι τὰ ὅμοια παθών.

65
᾿Ελπιδίῳ φιλοσόφῳ 1

Ἔστι καὶ μικροῦ γράμματος ἡδονὴ μείζων, ὅταν
ἡ τοῦ γράφοντος. εὔνοια μὴ τῇ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς σμι-
κρότητι μᾶλλον ἢ ἢ τῷ τῆς ψυχῆς μεγέθει μετρῆται:
εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ νῦν βραχέα Ta τῆς προσρήσεως ὑφ᾽
ἡμῶν γεγένηται, μηδ᾽ οὕτω 3 τὸν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς πόθον
τεκμηριώσῃ, ἀλλ᾽ εἰδώς, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ὁ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν
ἔρως ἐπὶ σοὶ τέταται, Th μὲν τοῦ γράμματος βρα-
ΠΥ ΩΣ συγγνώμην νέμε, τοῖς ἴσοις ὲ ἡμᾶς ἀμεί-
Bea αι μὴ κατόκνει. πᾶν γὰρ ὅ τι ἂν διδῷς, κἂν
μικρὸν ἢ, παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ γνώρισμα παρ᾽ ἡμῖν
σώζει.
00
Γεωργίῳ Ἰζαθολικῷ 5
Ἢ μὲν ἠχὼ θεὸς ἔστω κατὰ σὲ καὶ λάλος, εἰ δὲ
βούλει, καὶ Πανὶ σύζυγος" οὐ γὰρ διοίσομαι. κἂν
γὰρ ἐθέλῃ με διδάσκειν ἡ φύσις ὅτι ἐστὶν ἠχὼ
φωνῆς ἐς ἀέρος πλῆξιν ἀντίτυπος ἠχὴ πρὸς τοὔμ-
1 Hertlein 57.

2 μὴ τούτῳ Hertlein suggests.
3 Hertlein 54.

1 We know from Libanius, Letter 758 Foerster, 70 Julian,
that towards the end of 362 Elpidius was at Antioch and in
Julian’s confidence. This letter is purely formal and may
have been written then, or earlier, ‘There are several letters
extant from Libanius to Elpidius, Cumont ascribed this
letter to Julian of Caesarea.

220

TO GEORGE, A REVENUE OFFICIAL

writing continually, then I beg you to illtreat me in
return and make me suffer in the same way.

65
To Elpidius, a Philosopher 4

Even a short letter gives more pleasure when the
writer's affection can be measured by the greatness
of his soul rather than by the meagre proportions
of what he writes. So that if I now address you
briefly, do not even so conclude that the accompany-
ing affection is equally slight, but since you know
the full extent of my love for you, forgive the brevity
of my letter and do not hesitate to answer me in
one equally short. For whatever you send me, how-
ever trifling, keeps alive in my mind a remembrance
of all that is good.

66
To George, a Revenue Official 3

We tt, let us grant that Echo is a goddess, as
you say she is, and a chatterbox, and, if you like,
the wife of Pan® also; for I shall not object. And
even though nature would fain inform me that Echo
is only the sound of the voice answering back when
the air is struck, and bent back upon that which is

2 Otherwise unknown. The title Catholicus (cf. our
**General”’) was used of officials in charge of the collection
of tribute, especially in Africa; it is equivalent to procurator
fisct. George was probably asophist. This and the following
letter are rejected by Schwarz, Cumont and Geffcken, because
of their sophistic mannerisms,

3 Moschus, Jdyl 6.

221

411]

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

παλιν τῆς ἀκοῆς ἀντανακλωμένη, ὅμως, παλαιῶν
ἀνδρῶν ἔτι καὶ νέων οὐκ ἔλαττον ἢ τῷ σῷ πειθό-
μενος λόγῳ, θεὸν εἶναι τὴν ἠχὼ δυσωποῦμαι. τί
γοῦν ἂν εἴη τοῦτο πρὸς ἡμᾶς, εἰ πολλῷ τῷ μέτρῳ
τοῖς πρὸς σὲ φιλικοῖς τὴν ἠχὼ νικῶμεν ; ἡ μὲν
γὰρ οὐ “πρὸς ἅπαντα, ὅ τι ἂν ἀκούσῃ, μᾶλλον ἢ
πρὸς τὰ ἔσχατα τῆς φωνῆς ἀντιφθέγγεται, καθά-
περ ἐρωμένη φειδωλὸς ἄκροις ἀντιφιλοῦσα τὸν
ἐραστὴν τοῖς χείλεσιν" ἡμεῖς δὲ καὶ τῶν πρὸς σὲ
κατάρχομεν ἧδέως͵ καὶ αὖθις εἰς τὴν παρὰ σοῦ
πρόκλησιν οἱονεὶ * “σφαίρας δίκην τὸ ἴσον ἀντιπέμ-
πομεν. ὥστε οὐκ ἂν φθάνοις αὐτὸς ἔνοχος ὧν οἷς
γράφεις, καὶ σαυτόν, ἀφ᾽ ὧν πλέον λαμβάνων ἐλ:
χίστον ἀντιδίδως, οὐχ ἡμᾶς, ἐν οἷς ἐπ᾽ ἄμφω πλεο-
νεκτεῖν σπεύδομεν, ἐ ἐς τὸ ὅμοιον τῆς εἰκόνος ἐγκρί-
νων! πλὴν ἄν τε ἴσῳ τῷ μέτρῳ διδῷς ᾧπερ ἂν
λάβῃς, ἄν τε μή, ἡμῖν ὅ τι ἂν ἐξῇ παρὰ σοῦ
λαβεῖν ἡδὺ καὶ πρὸς τὸ ὅλον ἀρκεῖν πιστεύεται.

67
Γεωργίῳ ἸΚαθολικῷ 5

Ἦλθες, Τηλέμαχε, φησὶ τὸ ἔπος" ἐγὼ δέ σε καὶ
εἶδον ἤδη τοῖς γράμμασι, καὶ τῆς ἱερᾶς σοῦ ψυχῆς
1 δὲ Hertlein suggests, but cf. Letter 71, p. 234.
2 See note to Letter 63, 387c.

3 Hertlein 8. Following Vossianus he omits καθολικϑ,
which is preserved in Ambrosianus L73.

1 For this conventional phrase, often used by Julian, cf.
To Hecebolius, Ὁ. 219, and 70 Sarapion, pp. 271, 277.

2.22

TO GEORGE, A REVENUE OFFICIAL

opposite the ear that hears it, nevertheless, since
I put my faith in the account given by men both
ancient and modern,! and in your own account no
less, I am abashed into admitting that Echo is a
goddess.2_ What, in any case, would that matter to
me, if only, in my expressions of friendship towards
you, I excel Echo in a considerable degree? For she
does not reply to all the sounds that she hears, but
rather to the last syllables uttered by the voice,
like a grudging sweetheart who returns her lover's
kisses with the merest touch of her lips. I, on the
other hand, in my correspondence with you, lead off
sweetly, and then again, in reply to your challenge,
I return you like for like as though I threw back a
ball. Therefore you cannot be too quick in recog-
nising that your letters put you in default, and that
it is yourself, since you receive more and give back
very little, whom you consign to the similitude of
the figure, and not me, since I am eager to score off
you in both ways. However, whether you give in
just the same degree as you receive, or not, whatever
[ am permitted to receive from you is a boon, and is
credited as sufficient to balance the whole.

67
To George, a Revenue Official ὅ

* THou hast come, Telemachus!’’® as the verse
says, but in your letters I have already seen you and

* George had evidently used the figure of Echo, and
accused Julian of imitating her.

3 7, 6, both in sending and receiving letters.

4 Perhaps the last two sentences are a playful allusion to
George’s profession as a financier.

5 Geficken and Cumont reject this letter.

8 Odyssey 16. 23.

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

317 τὴν εἰκόνα καθάπερ ὀλίγῃ σφραγῖδι μεγάλου χα-
ρακτῆρος τύπον ἀνεμαξάμην. ἔστι γὰρ ἐν ὀλίγῳ
πολλὰ δειχθῆναι" ἐπεὶ καὶ Φειδίας ὁ σοφὸς οὐκ
ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ολυμπίασι μόνον ἢ ᾿Αθήνησιν εἰκόνος
ἐγνωρίξετο, ἀλλ᾽ ἤδει καὶ μικρῷ γλύμματι “μεγά-
Ans τέχνης ἔργον ἐγκλεῖσαι, οἷον δὴ τὸν τέττεγά

Β φασιν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν μέλιτταν, εἰ δὲ βούλει, καὶ
τὴν μυῖαν εἶναι: ὧν ἕκαστον, εἰ καὶ τῇ φύσει κε-
χάλκωται, τῇ τέχνῃ Me ἐψύχωται. ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἐκεί-
vols μὲν ἴσως αὐτῷ καὶ ἡ σμικρότης τῶν ζῴων. εἰς
τὴν κατὰ λόγον τέχνην τὸ εἰκὸς ἐχαρίξετο' σὺ δ᾽
ἀλλὰ τὸν ap ἵππου θηρῶντα ᾿Αλέξανδρον, εἰ
δοκεῖ, σκόπει, οὗ τὸ _ HET pov ἐστὶ πᾶν. ὄνυχος οὐ
μεῖζον. οὕτω δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τὸ θαῦμα τῆς τέχνης
κέχυται, ὥστε ὁ μὲν ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἤδη τὸ θηρίον

G βάλλει καὶ τὸν θεατὴν φοβεῖ, δι᾿ ὅλου δυσωπῶν
τοῦ σχήματος, ὁ δὲ ἵππος, ἐν ἄκρᾳ τῶν ποδῶν Th
βάσει τὴν στάσιν φεύγων, ἐν τῇ τῆς ἐνεργείας
κλοπῇ τῇ τέχνῃ κινεῖται" ὃ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν, ὦ
γενναῖε, ποιεῖς. ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐν “Ἑρμοῦ λογίου
σταδίοις δι’ ὅλου πολλάκις τοῦ δρόμου στεφανω-
θεὶς ἤδη, δι᾿ ὧν ἐν ὀλίγοις γράφεις τῆς ἀρετῆς τὸ
ἄκρον ἐμφαίνεις, καὶ τῷ ὄντι τὸν ᾽Οδυσσέα τὸν

D ὋὉμήρου ζηλοῖς, ὃς καὶ μόνον εἰπὼν ὅστις ἣν ἤρκει

1 The ascription to Pheidias the sculptor of works in the
‘microtechnique’ described here, is sometimes due to the
confusion, in the Roman period, of the fifth century Pheidias
with a gem-cutter of the same name who lived in the third
century B.c. In the Jahrbuch d.k.d. Arch. Instituts, 1889,
p. 210, Furtwiingler, who does not quote this letter, re-
produces a gem from the British Museum collection signed
by this later Pheidias; it is an Alexander on foot. The
anachronism here makes the letter suspect.

224

TO GEORGE, A REVENUE OFFICIAL

the image of your noble soul, and have received the
impression thereof as of an imposing device on a
small seal. For it is possible for much to be re-
vealed in little. Nay even Pheidias the wise artist
not only became famous for his statue at Olympia or
at Athens, but he knew also how to confine a work
of great art within the limits of a small piece of
sculpture ; for instance, they say that his grasshopper
and bee, and, if you please, his fly also, were of this
sort; for every one of these, though naturally com-
_-posed of bronze, through his artistic skill became a
living thing. In those works, however, the very
smallness of the living models perhaps contributed
the appearance of reality to his skilful art; and do
you, please, look at his Alexander! hunting on horse-
back, for its whole measurement is no larger than
a fingernail. Yet the marvellous skill of the work-
manship is so lavished on every detail that Alexander
at one and the same time strikes his quarry and
intimidates the spectator, scaring him by his whole
bearing, while the horse, reared on the very tips of
his hoofs, is about to take a step and leave the
pedestal, and by creating the illusion of vigorous
action is endowed with movement by the artist's
skill. This is exactly the effect that you have on me,
my excellent friend. For after having been crowned
often, already, as victor over the whole course, so to
speak, in the lists of Hermes, the God of Eloquence,
you now display the highest pitch of excellence in a
few written words. And in very truth you imitate
Homer's Odysseus,? who, by merely saying who he
* See Vol. 1, Oration 3, 1124 for a reference to this kind of

carving.

3 Odyssey 9. 19.

225

VOL. III. Q

405

412

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

TOUS Φαίακας ἐκπλῆξαι. εἰ δέ τι καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν
τοῦ κατὰ σὲ φιλικοῦ καπνοῦ δέει," φθόνος οὐδείς.
πάντως που καὶ παρὰ τῶν ἡττόνων εἶναί τι χρη-
στὸν ὁ μῦς τὸν λέοντα ἐν τῷ μύθῳ σώσας ἀρκούν-
τως δείκνυσιν.

68
Δοσιθέῳ *

Μικροῦ μοι ἐπῆλθε δακρῦσαι" καίτοι γε ἐχρῆν
εὐφημεῖν τοὔνομα τὸ σὸν φθεγξάμενον" ἀνεμνήσθην
γὰρ τοῦ γενναίου καὶ πάντα θαυμασίου πατρὸς

ἡμῶν, ὃ ὃν εἰ μὲν ζηλώσεις, αὐτός τε εὐδαίμων ἔ ἔσῃ,
καὶ τῷ βίῳ δώσεις, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος, ἐφ᾽ ὅτῳ φιλο-
τιμήσεται" ῥᾳθυμήσας δὲ λυπήσεις ἐμέ, σαυτῷ δὲ
ὅτε μηδὲν ὄφελος μέμψῃ.

609
“Twepio 4

3 3 Ψ, \ 3 \ 3 / ἃ

Οὐκ ἀδακρυτί σου τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἀνέγνων, ἣν
ἐπὶ τῷ τῆς συνοικούσης θανάτῳ πεποίησαι, τοῦ
πάθους τὴν ὑπερβολὴν ἀγγείλας. πρὸς γὰρ τῷ

1 δέῃ, Parisinas 2964, Heyler, cf. Letter 6, 4038.

2 Hertlein 33. 3 ὑμῶν Reiske.

4 Hertlein 87. Varsaviensis, Y, ‘Iuepio Cumont accepts ;
Baroccianus Ἱμερίῳ ἐπάρχῳ Αἰγύπτου ἐπὶ τῇ γυναικὶ according to
Hertlein, Ἡμερίῳ «.7.A. Cumont. Parisinus, Hertlein ᾿Αμερίῳ.

1 George had perhaps in his letter referred to the longing
of Odysseus to see even the smoke of his native land, and
had compared his friend’s letters to that smoke.

226

TO HIMERIUS

was, was able to dazzle the Phaeacians. But if even
from me you require some of what you call “ friendly
smoke,’ ! 1 shall not begrudge it. Surely the mouse
who saved the lion in “the fable? is proof enough
that something useful may come even from one’s
inferiors.

68
To Dositheus 2

I am almost in tears—and yet the very utterance of
your name ought to have been an auspicious sound,
—for I recall to mind our noble and wholly admirable
father.4. If you make it your aim to imitate him,
not only will you yourself be happy but also you will
give to human life, as he did, an example of which it
will be proud. But if you are indolent you will
grieve me, and you will blame yourself when blaming
will not avail.

69
To Himerius ®

I coutp not read without tears the letter which
you wrote after your wife’s death, in which you told
me of your surpassing grief. For not only does the

* Babrius, Fable 107; Aesop, Fable 256.

3 Otherwise unknown.

4 If the MS. reading is retained, Julian must be referring
to someone who had taught them both. This was a regular
usage and the teacher of one’s own teacher could be referred
to as ‘*‘ grandfather,”

5 Of Hertlein’s ‘‘ Amerius” we know nothing. See Intro-
duction, under Himerius.

227

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

\ ᾿] Ν ΄ὔ \
καὶ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ λύπης TO ξυμβὰν ἄξιον εἶναι,
n td A
γυναῖκα νέαν καὶ σώφρονα καὶ θυμήρη TO γή-
x \ \ AN Ce Sas
μαντι, πρὸς δὲ Kal παίδων ἱερῶν pntépa, πρὸ
e/ » an / A A ς
ὥρας ἀναρπασθῆναι καθάπερ δᾷδα λαμπρῶς ἡμ-
/ 5 3 3 i a NN /
μένην, εἶτα ἐν ὀλίγῳ καταβαλοῦσαν τὴν φλόγα,
7 \ \ \ la) 3 Ὁ
ἔτι καὶ τὸ τὰ τοῦ πάθους εἰς σὲ τείνειν οὐχ ἧττόν
A Ν 5 \
μοι δοκεῖ λυπηρὸν εἶναι. ἥκιστα yap δὴ πάντων
3) ὯΝ ς Ν στιν ον δ᾽ ΄ 5). 00) a \ 5
ἄξιος ἣν ο καλὸς ἡμῖν “Ἱμέριος " ἀλγεινοῦ τινὸς εἰς
a 3 al \ \ / ‘ -
πεῖραν ἐλθεῖν, ἀνὴρ καὶ λόγῳ χρηστὸς καὶ ἡμῖν
> \ 7 n / id ,
εἰς Ta μάλιστα τῶν φίλων ὁ ποθεινότατος. οὐ
\ 3 2 ’ \ (v4 9 Φ / x 7
μὴν ἀλλ εἰ μὲν ETEPOS ἣν, ᾧ γράφειν περὶ τούτων
ἐχρῆν, πάντως ἂν ἔδει μοι πλειόνων εἰς τοῦτο
, , \ ¢ 9 , \ \ /
λόγων, TO TE συμβὰν ws ἀνθρώπινον Kal TO φέρειν
e an \ A an lad
ὡς ἀναγκαῖον Kal TO μηδὲν ἐκ τοῦ μᾶλλον ἀλγεῖν
¢ Σ \ Ἢ
ἔχειν πλέον, καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἐδόκει πρὸς τὴν τοῦ
7, / if an
πάθους παραμυθίαν ἁρμόττειν ὡς ἀγνοοῦντα διδά-
\ a \ 7 \
σκοντι. ἐπεὶ δὲ αἰσχρὸν ἡγοῦμαι πρὸς ἄνδρα καὶ
\ ” lal >) / a ié
τοὺς ἄλλους νουθετεῖν εἰδότα ποιεῖσθαι λόγους,
@ \ \ \ 3 / an 7 ,
ols χρὴ τοὺς μὴ εἰδότας σωφρονεῖν παιδεύειν, φέρε
ΧΉΡΑΝ \ > \ Ὁ 9. > = 9/, c a
σοι τὰ ἄλλα παρεὶς ἀνδρὸς εἴτ᾽ εἴπω σοφοῦ μῦθον
” \ / 3 a \ N x 3 7 a
εἴτε δὴ λόγον ἀληθῆ, σοὶ μὲν ἴσως ov ἕένον, τοῖς
7] / e 3 / » ὡς ἢ \ /
πλείοσι δέ, WS εἰκός, ἄγνωστον, ᾧ δὴ καὶ μόνῳ χρη-
4 a / XN δ
σάμενος ὥσπερ φαρμάκῳ νηπενθεῖ λύσιν ἂν εὕροις
a ἧς > 5 ΄ a / ἃ e ,
τοῦ πάθους οὐκ ἐλάττω τῆς κύλικος, ἣν ἡ Λάκαινα
A \ \ \ n , SS
τῷ Τηλεμάχῳ πρὸς TO ἴσον τῆς χρείας ὀρέξαι πι-

1 νεαρῶν Thomas suggests, but ἱερὸς is Julianic in the sense
of ‘* precious.” 2 "Auépios, Parisinus 2750.

228

TO HIMERIUS

event in itself call for sorrow, when a young and
virtuous wife, the joy of her husband's heart,! and
moreover the mother of precious children, is prema-
turely snatched away like a torch that has been
kindled and shines brightly, and in a little while its
flame dies down, but over and above this, the fact
that it is you to whom this sorrow has come seems to
me to make it still more grievous. For least of all
men did our good Himerius deserve to experience
any afHiction, excellent orator that he is, and of all
my friends the best beloved. Moreover, if it were
any other man to whom 1 had to write about this,
I should certainly have had to use more words in
dealing with it; for instance, I should have said that
such an event is the common lot, that we must needs
submit, that nothing is gained by excessive grief, and
I should have uttered all the other commonplaces
considered appropriate for the alleviation of suffering,
that is if I were exhorting one who did not know them.
But since 1 think it unbecoming to offer to a man
who well knows how to instruct others the sort of
argument by which one must school those who are
too ignorant for self-control, see now, I will forbear
all such phrases; but I will relate to you a fable, or
it may be a true story, of a certain wise man, which
perhaps is not new to you, though it is probably
unfamiliar to most people; and if you will use this
and this alone, as though it were a drug to relieve
pain, you will find release from your sorrow, as surely as
from that cup which the Spartan woman ? is believed
to have offered to Telemachus when his need was as

1 An echo of Jliad 9. 336 ἄλοχον θυμαρέα.

2 Helen, Odyssey 4. 220, a rhetorical commonplace; cf.
Vol. 2, Oration 8. 2408, p. 167, note.

229

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

413 στεύεται. φασὶ yap Δημόκριτον τὸν ᾿Αβδηρίτην,

D

2 \ / \ a 5) la ΄
ἐπειδὴ Δαρείῳ γυναικὸς καλῆς ἀλγοῦντι θάνατον
53 “ XN ’ \ » £ 3 /
οὐκ εἶχεν ὅ TL ἂν εἰπὼν εἰς παραμυθίαν ἀρκέσειεν,

ς , e \ 2 a ’ “ ’ /
ὑποσχέσθαι οἱ THY ἀπελθοῦσαν εἰς φῶς ἀνάξειν,
x / lal 3 \ , / ig A
ἢν ἐθελήσῃ τῶν ELS τὴν χρείαν ἡκόντων ὑποστῆναι
Ἁ , , ͵ Ν
τὴν χορηγίαν. κελεύσαντος δ᾽ ἐκείνου μηδενὸς
la ee δ γ sy. 2 A , Ν δ /
φείσασθαι, 6 τι δ᾽ av ἐξῇ λαβόντα τὴν ὑπόσχεσιν
“ \ 3 , > - “
ἐμπεδῶσαι, μικρὸν ἐπισχόντα χρόνον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι
\ \ Ul > a \ Ἧ aA 7 eS
τὰ μὲν ἀλλα αὐτῷ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ ἔργου πρᾶξιν
, / \ / ἃ
συμπορισθείη, μόνου δὲ ἑνὸς προσδέοιτο, ὃ δὴ
ΔΝ \ ᾽ " e XN ΄, A \
αὐτὸν μὲν οὐκ ἔχειν ὅπως ἂν λάβοι, Δαρεῖον δὲ
c / “ a ’ , ᾽ a Ἃ ”
ὡς βασιλέα ὅλης THs ᾿Ασίας ov χαλεπῶς ἂν ἴσως
“ ἐς ’ , Ta ° A
εὑρεῖν. ἐρομένου δ᾽ ἐκείνου, τί ἂν εἴη τοσοῦτον ὃ
, aA lal a
μόνῳ βασιλεῖ γνωσθῆναι συγχωρεῖται, ὑπολα-
΄ \ XN , “ Tad
βόντα φασὶ tov Δημόκριτον εἰπεῖν, εἰ τριῶν ἀπεν-
2 , an / nan \ /
θήτων ὀνόματα τῷ τάφῳ τῆς γυναικὸς ἐπιγρά-
\ \ 3 ,ὔ an an A
Wevev, εὐθὺς αὐτὴν ἀναβιώσεσθαι τῷ τῆς τελετῆς
΄ / b) , \ la) /
νόμῳ δυσωπουμένην. ἀπορήσαντος δὲ τοῦ Δαρείου
ab / 4 - Ὁ“ x
καὶ μηδένα apa δυνηθέντος εὑρεῖν ὅτῳ μὴ Kal
A / /
παθεῖν λυπηρόν TL συνηνέχθη, γελάσαντα συνή-
Ν / 3 a 3 ΄,
θως τὸν Δημόκριτον εἰπεῖν “Τί οὖν, ὦ πάντων
’ , a 3 / / la
ἀτοπώτατε, θρηνεῖς ἀνέδην ws μόνος ἀλγεινῷ TO-
΄ / f \ ὧς a "ἢ
σούτῳ συμπλακείς, ὁ μηδὲ ἕνα τῶν πώποτε γεγο-
, ” ’ 7 / » ¢ a 3» » \
νότων ἄμοιρον οἰκείου πάθους ἔχων εὑρεῖν. ἀλλὰ
A \ ᾽ / Μ n By ΄ὔ
ταῦτα μὲν ἀκούειν ἔδει Δαρεῖον, ἄνδρα βάρβαρον

1 The Atomistic philosopher, cf. Diels, Die Fragmente der
Vorsokratiker 2. 16. 41. This is a traditional anecdote, told
of Herodes Atticus and Demonax by Lucian, Demonax 25,
and only here of Darius and Democritus.

230

TO HIMERIUS

great as your own. Now the story is that when
Darius was in great grief for the death of a beauti-
ful wife, Democritus! of Abdera could not by any
argument succeed in consoling him; and so he
promised him that he would bring back the departed
to life, if Darius were willing to undertake to supply
him with everything necessary for the purpose. Darius
bade him spare no expense but take whatever he
needed and make good his promise. After waiting
a little, Democritus said that he was provided with
everything else for carrying out his task, but still
needed one thing only, which he himself did not
know how to obtain; Darius, however, as King of all
Asia, would perhaps find it without difficulty. And
when the King asked him what it might be, this
great thing which it was possible for only a king to
know of, they say that Democritus in reply declared
that if he would inscribe on his wife’s tomb the
names of three persons who had never mourned for
anyone, she would straightway come to life again,
since she could not disobey the authority of this
mystic rite. Then Darius was in a dilemma, and
could not find any man who had not had to bear
some great sorrow, whereupon Democritus burst out
laughing,? as was his wont, and said: “ Why, then,
O most absurd of men, do you mourn without ceas-
ing, as though you were the only man who had ever
been involved in so great a grief, you who cannot
discover a single person of all who have ever lived
who was without his share of personal sorrow?”’
But though it was necessary to say these things to
Darius, a barbarian and a man of no education, the slave

2 Democritus was known as ‘‘the laughing Philosopher
ef. Oration 6. 186c, Vol. 2, p. 20, Wright.

231

402

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

καὶ ἀπαίδευτον, ἔκδοτον ἡδονῇ καὶ πάθει: σὲ δέ,
ὃ "EXX δεί

ἄν Opa nva Kal παιδείαν ἀληθῆ “πρεσβεύοντα,

καὶ παρὰ σαυτοῦ τὸ ἄκος ἐχρῆν ἔχειν, ἐπεὶ καὶ

ἄλλως αἰσχύνη τῷ , λογισμῷ γένοιτ᾽ ἄν, εἰ μὴ

ταὐτὸν σθένοι τῷ χρόνῳ.

70
Διογένει

Διογένης ὁ ὁ σὸς υἱὸς ὀφθείς μοι, μετὰ τὴν ἔξοδον
τὴν σὴν καὶ φήσας ὠργίσθαι σέ τι πρὸς αὐτόν,
οἷον ἂν πατὴρ πρὸς παῖδα χαλεπήνειεν, ἐδεήθη
μέσον με τῶν πρὸς αὐτὸν καταλλαγῶν παρὰ σοὶ
γενέσθαι. εἰ μὲν οὖν μέτρια καὶ οἷα δύνασθαι
φέρειν ἥμαρτεν, εἶξον τῇ φύσει καὶ τὸ “πατὴρ εἶναι
γνοὺς ἐπάνελθε πρὸς τὸν παῖδα τῇ γνώμῃ: εἰ
δέ τι μεῖξον ἔπταικεν ἢ οἷον πρὸς συγγνώμην
ἐλθεῖν, αὐτὸς ἂν εἴης δικαιότερος κριτής, εἴτε δεῖ
καὶ τοῦτο γενναίως ἐνεγκόντα νικῆσαι τοῦ παιδὸς
τὴν βουλὴν γνώμῃ κρείττονι, εἴτε καὶ πλείονος
χρόνου σωφρονισμῷ τὴν ἐπὶ τῷ πταισθέντι βάσα-
νον πιστεῦσαι.

71
He ἡγεμόνι 3
᾿Εμοὶ καὶ γράμμα παρὰ σοῦ μικρὸν ἀρκεῖ μεγά-
λης ἡδονῆς πρόφασιν μνηστεῦσαι. καὶ τοίνυν,
1 Hertlein 70. 2 Hertlein 28.

1 Diogenes is otherwise unknown. Schwarz places this
letter between January and June 362, when Julian was at
Constantinople. The tone seems to imply that he was already

232

TO COMMANDER GREGORY

both of pleasure and of grief, you, on the other hand,
are a Greek, and honour true learning, and you must
find your remedy from within; for surely it would
be a disgrace to the reasoning faculty if it had not
the same potency as time.

70
To Diogenes 1

Your son Diogenes, whom I saw after you went
away, told me that you had been much irritated with
him for some reason that would naturally make a
father feel vexed with his child, and he implored me
to act as mediator in a reconciliation between him
and yourself. Now, if he has committed some error
of a mild and not intolerable kind, do you yield to
nature, recognise that you are a father, and again
turn your thoughts to your child. But if his offence
is too serious to admit of immediate forgiveness, it is
right for you yourself rather than for me to decide
whether you ought to bear even that with a generous
spirit and overcome your son’s purpose by wiser
thoughts, or to entrust the offender’s probation to
a longer period of discipline.

71
To Commander Gregory 2

Even a short letter from you is enough to provide
me with grounds for feeling greatly pleased. Ac-

Emperor, but the note is purely conventional, a ‘‘ type” of
the letter of intervention.

2 A Gregorius Dux was pretorian prefect in 336, accord-
ing to Codex Theodosianus 3. 1.2, but this purely formal letter
of the type that survived in epistolary handbooks is probably
addressed to a younger man.

200

429.

THE LETTERS OF JULIAN

(al » x 3 \ ᾽ ; / \ 3 \
ois ἔγραψας ἄγαν ἡσθεὶς, ἀντιδίδωμι καὶ αὐτὸς
\ a An a a 3
THY ἴσην, οὐ τῷ TOV ἐπιστολῶν μήκει μᾶλλον ἢ
“ n b] / 7 \ nan / Id
τῷ τῆς εὐνοίας μεγέθει τὰς τῶν ἑταίρων φιλίας

ἐκτίνεσθαι δεῖν κρίνων.

72
ΠΠλουτάρχῳ 4

Πάντων μὲν ἕνεκά μοι τὸ σῶμα διάκειται με-
τρίως, οὐ “μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ τῆς γνώμης ἔχει καλῶς.
οἶμαι δ᾽ ἐγὼ τούτου προοίμιον εἶναι μηδὲν κρεῖττον
ἐπιστολῇ φίλῳ παρὰ φίλου πεμπομένῃ. τίνος
οὖν ἐστι τὸ προοίμιον ; αἰτήσεως, οἶμαι. τίς δὲ
ἡ αἴτησις ; ἐπιστολῶν ἀμοιβαίων, ἃς εἴη γε καὶ
κατὰ διάνοιαν ὁμολογῆσαι ταῖς ἐμαῖς, αἴσια παρὰ
σοῦ ταὐτὰ πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἐξαγγελλούσας.

7:
Μαξιμίνῳ 3

Ναῦς ἐπέταξα γενέσθαι περὶ τὰς ἹΚεγχρέας" τὸ
μὲν οὖν ὅσας ὁ τῶν ᾿λλήνων ἡγούμενος φράσει,
τὸ δὲ ὅπας χρὴ ποιεῖσθαι τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ἄκουε
παρ᾽ ἡμῶν" ἀδωροδοκήτως καὶ ταχέως. ὅπως δὲ
μὴ “μεταμελήσει, σοι τῆς τοιαύτης ὑπουργίας,
αὐτὸς σὺν θεοῖς ἐπιμελήσομαι.

1 Hertlein 48, Ζήνωνι, To Zeno; I follow Cumont in re-
jecting this title, which does not appear in any MS. and was
introduced by Heyler, who derived it from the Paris edition

1605. Πλουτάρχῳ is the title in the Papadopoulos (Chalce)
MSS. 2 Papadopoulos 5*

1 This may be the ohscure Athenian philosopher, a con-
temporary of Julian; cf. Marinus, Proclus 12,

234

TO MAXIMINUS

cordingly, since I was exceedingly pleased with what
you wrote to me, I in turn send you a letter of the
same length, because in my judgement the friendly
greetings of comrades ought to be rewarded not by
length of letter so much as by magnitude of goodwill.

7
To Plutarch 1

In all respects my bodily health is fairly good, and
‘indeed my state of mind is no less satisfactory. 1
fancy there can be no better prelude than this toa
letter sent from one friend to another. And to what
is this the prelude? Toa request, of course! And
what is the request? It is for letters in return, and
in their sentiments may they harmonise with my
own letters and bring me similar news from you, and
equally auspicious.

ΤΣ
To Maximinus 2

I wave given orders that there shall be ships at
Cenchreae.2 The number of these you will learn
from the governor of the Hellenes,4 but as to how
you are to discharge your commission you may now
hear from me. It must be without bribery and with-
out delay. I will myself, with the help of the gods,
see that you do not repent of having done your duty
as I have indicated.

2 Nothing is known of Maximinus or the circumstances ; if
the letter is genuine, as is probable, it may refer to Julian’s
preparations for his march against Constantius in 361.

3 A coast town 8.W. of the Isthmus of Corinth.

4 7.e. the proconsul of Achaia who resided at Corinth.

235

420

14

Ιαμβλίχῳ 1

᾿Ε χρῆν μὲν ἡμᾶς τῷ γράμματι πειθομένους τῷ
Δελφικῷ γιγνώσκειν ἑαυτοὺς καὶ μὴ τολμᾶν ἀνδρὸς
ἀκοῆς τοσούτου καταθαρρεῖν, ᾧ καὶ ὀφθέντι μόνον
ἀντιβλέψαι δυσχερές, 1 ἤ που τὴν πάνσοφον ἄρμο-
νίαν κινοῦντι πρὸς τὸ ἴσον ἐλθεῖν, ἐπεὶ κἂν "Πανὶ
μέλος λιγυρὸν ἠχοῦντι πᾶς ὅστις ἐκσταίη, κἂν
᾿Αρισταῖος 7, καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνι πρὸς κιθάραν ψάλ-
λοντι πᾶς ὅστις ἠρεμοίη, κἂν τὴν ᾿Ορφέως μου-.
σικὴν εἰδῇ. τὸ “γὰρ ἧττον τῷ κρείττονι, καθ᾽ ὅσον
ἧττόν ἐστιν, εἶκοι ἂν δικαίως, εἰ μέλλοι τό τε
οἰκεῖον καὶ τὸ μὴ τί ἐστι γιγνώσκειν. ὅστις δ᾽
ἐνθέῳ μουσικῇ θνητὸν ἀνθαρμόσαι μέλος ἤλπισεν,
οὐκ ἔμαθέ που τὸ Μαρσύου τοῦ Φρυγὸς πάθος,
οὐδὲ τὸν ὁμώνυμον ἐκείνῳ ποταμόν, ὃς “μανέντος
αὐλητοῦ τιμωρίαν μαρτυρεῖ, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὴν Θαμύ-
ριδος τοῦ Θρᾳκὸς τελευτὴν ἤκουσεν, ὃς ταῖς
Μούσαις οὐκ εὐτυχῶς ἀντεφθέγξατο. τί γὰρ δεῖ
τὰς Σειρῆνας λέγειν, ὧν ἔτι τὸ πτερὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ

1 Hertlein 41, τῷ αὐτῷ, as his Letter 40 is to Iamblichus.

1 Letters 74-83, with the possible exception of 81, are
certainly not by Julian.

236

THE APOCRYPHAL ΤΠ.

74
To Iamblichus

I ovent indeed to have obeyed the Delphic
inscription “ Know Thyself,’ and not have ventured
to affront the ears of so great a man as yourself; for
only to look you in the face, when one meets your
eye, is no easy matter, and it is much less easy to
try to rival you when you wake the harmony of your
unfailing wisdom, seeing that if Pan roused the
echoes with his shrill song everyone would yield him
place, yes, even though it were Aristaeus? himself,
and when Apollo played the lyre everyone would
keep silence, even though he knew the music of
Orpheus. For it is right that the inferior, in so far
as it is inferior, should yield to the superior, that is
if it is to know what is appropriate to itself and
what is not. But he who has conceived the hope of
matching his mortal song with inspired music has
surely never heard of the sad fate of Marsyas the
Phrygian, or of the river which is named _ after
him and bears witness to the punishment of that
insane flute-player, nor has he heard of the end of
Thamyrtis, the Thracian who, in an evil hour, strove in
song against the Muses. Need I mention the Sirens,
whose feathers the victorious Muses still wear on

2 For Aristaeus see Vergil, Georgics 4; he is a vegetation
deity not usually associated with music.

237

421

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

μετώπου φέρουσιν αἱ νικήσασαι; ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνων
μὲν ἕκαστος ἀμούσου τόλμης ἀρκοῦσαν ἔτι καὶ
νῦν ἐκτίνει τῇ μνήμῃ δίκην, ἡμᾶς δὲ ἔδει μέν, ὡς
ἔφην, εἴσω τῶν οἰκείων ὅρων ἑστάναι καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ
σοῦ μουσικῆς ἐμφορουμένους ἠρεμεῖν, ὥσπερ οἱ
τὴν ᾿Απόλλωνος μαντείαν ἐξ ἀδύτων ἱ ἱερῶν. ™ poi-
ovoay ἡσυχῇ δέχονται" ἐπεὶ δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν τοῦ
μέλους τὸ ἐνδόσιμον μνηστεύεις καὶ οἷον Ἑρμοῦ
ῥάβδῳ τῷ παρὰ σαυτοῦ λόγῳ κινεῖς καὶ διεγείρεις
καθεύδοντας, φέρε σοι, καθάπερ οἱ τῷ Διονύσῳ
τὸν θύρσον κρούσαντι πρὸς τὴν χορείαν ἄνετοι
φέρονται, οὕτω καὶ ἡμεῖς ὑπὸ τῷ σῷ πλήκτρῳ τὸ
εἰκὸς ἀντηχήσωμεν, ὥσπερ οἱ τῷ χοροστάτῃ πρὸς
τὸ “ἀνάκλημα τοῦ pu μοῦ συνομαρτοῦντες. καὶ
πρῶτόν σοι τῶν λόγων, ods βασιλεῖ κελεύσαντι
πρὸς τὴν ἀοίδιμον τοῦ πορθμοῦ ζεῦξιν ἔναγχος
ἐξειργασάμεθα, ἐπειδὴ τοῦτό ἐστί σοι δοκοῦν,
ἀπαρξώμεθα, μικρὰ μὲν ἀντὶ μεγάλων καὶ τῷ ὄντι
χαλκᾶ χρυσῶν ἀντιδιδόντες, οἷς δὲ ἐ ἔχομεν ξενίοις
τὸν Βρμῆν τὸν ἡ ἡμέτερον ἑστιῶντες. πάντως οὐδὲ
τῆς .-Εκάλης ὁ Θησεὺς τοῦ δείπνου τὸ λιτὸν ἀπη-
ξίωσεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἤδει καὶ μικροῖς ἐς τὸ ἀναγκαῖον
ἀρκεῖσθαι. ὁ Πὰν δὲ ὁ νόμιος τοῦ παιδὸς τοῦ
βουκόλου τὴν σύριγγα προσαρμόσαι τοῖς χείλεσιν

1 Cumont would read ποταμοῦ.

i The Muses, having defeated the Sirens in a singing
competition, tore out their feathers and wore them as a
symbol of victory.

* Geffcken tries to connect this passage with the order of
Constantius to*Julian to send his troops across the Bosporus
en route to Persia. Cumont’s reading ποταμοῦ ‘‘ of the river”
supposes that Constantine’s bridge over the Danube in 328 is

238

TO IAMBLICHUS

their brows?! But each one of those that I have
named is still even now paying in the tradition the
fitting penalty for his boorishness and temerity, and
T7nas a said, ought to have stayed within my own

boundaries and ‘held my peace while I enjoyed my
fill of the music uttered by you, like those who
receive in silence the oracle of Apollo when it issues
from the sacred shrine. But since you yourself
furnish me with the keynote of my song, and by your
_words, as though with the wand of Hermes, arouse
and wake me from sleep, lo now, even as when
Dionysus strikes his thyrsus his followers rush
riotous to the dance, so let me too in response to
your plectron make answering music, like those who
accompany the choirmaster, keeping time to the call
of the rhythm. And in the first place let me make a
first-offering to you, since this is your pleasure, of the
speeches which I recently composed at the Emperor's
command in honour of the glorious bridging of the
strait,2 though what I offer you is returning small for
great and in very truth bronze for gold; yet Iam
entertaining our Hermes with angi fare as I have.
Surely Theseus did not disdain the plain meal that
Hecale * provided, but knew how to content himself
with humble fare when the need arose. Nor was Pan,
the god of shepherds, too proud to set to his lips the
pipe of the boy neat-herd.® Then do you also in your

meant; cf. Aurelius Victor 41. 18, pons per Danubium
ductus. In my opinion the sophist who wrote this letter
had composed speeches on the stock theme of Xerxes and the
Hellespont. 3 See Ὁ. 218.

4 The tale is told in the brief epic of Callimachus, the
Hecale, of which we have fragments; also in Plutarch,
Theseus.

5 Theocritus 1. 128.

239

438
D

439

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

οὐκ ἠτίμασε. προσοῦ δὴ Kal αὐτὸς τὸν λόγον
εὐμενεῖ νεύματι, καὶ μὴ ἀποκνήσης ὀλίγῳ μέλει
μεγάλην ἀκοὴν ἐνδοῦναι. ἀλλ᾽ ἐὰν μὲν ἔχῃ τί
δεξιόν, αὐτός τε ὁ λόγος εὐτυχεῖ καὶ ὁ ποιητὴς
αὐτοῦ τῆς παρὰ τῆς ᾿Αθηνᾶς ψήφου τὴν μαρτυρίαν
προσλαβών. εἰ δ᾽ ἔτι χειρὸς ἐντελοῦς εἰς τὸ τοῦ

ὅλου πλήρωμα προσδεῖται, μὴ ἀπαξιώσῃς αὐτὸς

τὸ ἐνδέον προσθεῖναι. ἤδη που καὶ ἀνδρὶ τοξότῃ

\ € \ A \ / “
κληθεὶς ὁ θεὸς παρέστη καὶ συνεφήψατο τοῦ
βέλους, καὶ κιθαρῳδῷ τὸν ὄρθιον ἄδοντι πρὸς τὸ
ἐλλεῖπον τῆς χορδῆς ὑπὸ τῷ τέττιγι τὸ ἴσον ὁ
Πύθιος ἀντεφθέγξατο.

75

τῷ αὐτῷ 1

Ὦ Ζεῦ, πῶς ἔχει καλῶς ἡμᾶς μὲν ἐν Θρᾷκῃ δι-
ἄγειν μέσῃ καὶ τοῖς ἐνταῦθα σιροῖς ἐγχειμάζειν,
παρ᾽ ἸΙαμβλίχου δὲ τοῦ καλοῦ καθάπερ ἑῴου τινὸς
ἔαρος ἡμῖν τὰς ἐπιστολὰς ἀντὶ χελιδόνων πέμπε-
σθαι, καὶ μήτε ἡμῖν εἶναι μηδέπω παρ᾽ αὐτὸν
ἐλθεῖν μήτ αὐτῷ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἥκειν ἐξεῖναι 5 ; τίς ἂν
ἑκὼν εἶναι ταῦτα δέξαιτο, ἐὰν μὴ Θρᾳξ τις th καὶ
Tnpéws ἀντάξιος ;

Ζεῦ ἄνα, ἀλλὰ σὺ ῥῦσαι ἀπὸ Θρῴκηθεν

᾿Αχαιούς:
ποίησον δ᾽ αἴθρην, δὸς δ᾽ ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἰδέσθαι
1 Hertlein 53, entitled Ἰαμβλίχῳ φιλοσόφῳ.

2 ἥξειν ἐξεῖναι MSS., Horkel would delete; Hertlein ἥκειν
or delete.

240

TO IAMBLICHUS

turn accept my discourse in a gracious spirit and do
not refuse to lend your mighty ear to my humble
strain. But if it has any cleverness at all, then not
only is my discourse itself fortunate but so too is its
author, in that he has obtained the testimony of
Athene’s vote.t And if it still needs a finishing
touch to complete it as a whole, do not refuse to add
to it yourself what it needs. Before now the god in
answer to prayer has stood by the side of a bow-
man and set his hand to the arrow, and again, when
a bard was playing the cithara and singing a high
and stirring strain, the Pythian god, when.the string
failed, assumed the guise of a cicada and uttered a
note of the same tone.

70
To the Same

O Zeus, how can it be right that I should spend
my time in the middle of Thrace and winter in the
grain-pits 2 here, while from charming Iamblichus, as
though from a sort of spring inthe East, letters come
to me like swallows and I cannot yet go to him nor
can he come to me? Who would be willing to put
up with this unless he were some Thracian and as
bad as Tereus ?3

“Lord Zeus do thou rescue the Achaeans from
Thrace and make clear weather and grant us to see

1 The suffragium Minervae; the proverb is derived from
Aeschylus, Hwmenides, where Athene, by breaking a tie vote,
saved Orestes.

* The phrase is borrowed from Demosthenes, On the
Chersonese 45. 3 Tereus was king of Thrace.

241
VOL. III. R

Β

C

D

s)
THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

\ \ / € an \ ,
ποτὲ Tov ἡμέτερον Epuny καὶ τά Te ἀνάκτορα
αὐτοῦ προσειπεῖν καὶ τοῖς ἕδεσιν ἐμφῦναι, καθάπερ
\ uy / “ > a yA x 2 ΄
τὸν Οδυσσέα φασίν, ὅτε ἐκ τῆς ἄλης τὴν ᾿Ιθάκην
53 > » We 4. “Ὁ xX e [4 / /
εἶδεν. ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνον μὲν οἱ Φαίακες ἔτι καθεύδοντα
/ an \ >
ὥσπερ τι φορτίον ἐκθέμενοι τῆς νεὼς ὠχοντο'
an a / \ 7 \ Υ
ἡμᾶς δὲ οὐδὲ ὕπνος αἱρεῖ, μέχρις ἂν σέ, τὸ μέγα
a £ 3 a / ,ὔἅ
τῆς οἰκουμένης ὄφελος, ἰδεῖν ἐγγένηται. καίτοι
σὺ μὲν τὴν ἑῴαν ὅλην ἐμέ τε καὶ τὸν ἑταῖρον
Σώπατρον εἰς τὴν Θράκην μετεὶ ηνοχέναι προσπαί-
Geist ἡμῖν δέ, εἰ χρὴ τἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, ἕως ἂν ᾿Ιάμ-
\ an / fal
βλιχος μὴ παρῇ, Κιμμερίων ἀχλὺς συνοικεῖ.
καὶ σὺ μὲν δυοῖν θάτερον αἰτεῖς, ἢ ἡμᾶς παρὰ
σὲ ἥκειν ἢ αὐτόν σε παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς. ἡμῖν δὲ
τὸ μὲν ἕτερον εὐκταῖόν τε ὁμοῦ καὶ σύμφορον,
αὐτοὺς ἐπανελθεῖν ὡς σὲ καὶ τῶν παρὰ σοὶ
lal a \ an
καλῶν ἀπολαῦσαι: TO δὲ ἕτερον εὐχῆς μὲν ἁπάσης
an ss / 7 ΄ Ν i? /
κρεῖττον. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀδύνατόν σοί γε Kal ἀξύμφορόν
x
ἐστι, σὺ MEV οἴκοι μένειν καὶ χαίρειν καὶ τὴν ἡσυ-
/ ἃ BA ’ ς lal κὸν XN \ lal
χίαν ἣν ἔχεις σώζειν, ἡμεῖς δὲ ὅ,τι Av θεὸς διδῷ
/ a N a 5
γενναίως οἴσομεν. ἀνδρῶν γὰρ ἀγαθῶν εἶναί φασι

\ a
440 τὸ μὲν εὔελπι κεκτῆσθαι Kal τὰ δέοντα πράττειν,

448

2 \ an > 7 an /
ἕπεσθαι δὲ τοις AVaYKALOLS TOV δαίμοτος.

76
To αὐτῷ]
‘Tkavnv ὁμολογῶ τῆς σῆς ἀπολείψεως ἐκτετι-
κέναι δίκην οὐ μόνον οἷς παρὰ τὴν ἀποδημίαν

1 Hertlein 61.

i Julian paraphrases Jliad 17. 645.
242

TO IAMBLICHUS

with our eyes”! our own Hermes some day, and
salute his shrine and embrace his statue as they tell
us Odysseus did when after his wandering he beheld
Ithaca.2 Nay, but he was still asleep when the
Phaeacians unloaded him from their ship like a
piece of freight and went their way; but as for me
sleep can never lay hold on me till it be my lot to
see you that are the benefactor of the whole world.
And yet you say in jest that I and my friend
Sopater have transported the whole East into Thrace.
Yet, if I must speak the truth, Cimmerian gloom
abides with me so long as Jamblichus is not here.
And you demand one of two things, that I should
go to you or that you yourself should come to me.
To my mind one of these. alternatives is both
desirable and expedient, I mean that I should go
to you and benefit by the blessings that you bestow,
while the other surpasses all my prayers. But since
this is impossible for you and inexpedient, do you
remain at home and prosper and preserve the
tranquillity that you enjoy, while I will endure with
a brave spirit whatever God may send. For we are
told that it is the proof of a good man to keep
hoping for the best, to do his duty and follow his
fate and the will of God.

76
To the Same

I conress that I had paid a full and sufficient
penalty for leaving you, not only in the annoyances

2 Odyssey 13. 354.
3 Cf. Oration 8. 2430 for the same phrase, derived from
Demosthenes, On the Crown 97.
243
R 2

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

410 συνηνέχθην ἀνιαροῖς, ἀλλὰ γὰρ καὶ αὐτῷ τούτῳ
πλέον, ὅτι σου τὸν τοσοῦτον ἀπελείφθην. χρόνον,
καίτοι πολλαῖς καὶ ποικίλαις ,πανταχοῦ χρησά-
μενος τύχαις, ὡς μηδὲν ἀπείρατον καταλιπεῖν.
ἀλλὰ καὶ πολέμων θορύβους καὶ πολιορκίας avay-
κην καὶ φυγῆς πλάνην καὶ φόβους παντοίους, ἔτι
δὲ χειμώνων ὑπερβολὰς καὶ νόσων κινδύνους καὶ
τὰς ἐκ Ἰ]αννονίας τῆς ἄνω μέχρι τοῦ κατὰ τὸν
Καλχηδόνιον πορθμὸν διάπλου μυρίας δὴ καὶ πολυ-

Β τρόπους συμφορὰς ὑ ὑπομείνας οὐδὲν οὕτω λυπηρὸν
οὐδὲ δυσχερὲς ἐμαυτῷ συμβεβηκέναι φαίην ἂν ὡς
ὅτι σὲ τὸ κοινὸν τῶν ᾿Ιλλήνων ἀγαθὸν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον
χρόνον τὴν ἑῴαν ἀπολιπὼν οὐκ εἶδον: ὥστ᾽ εἴπερ
ἀχλύν τινα τοῖς ἐμοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς καὶ νέφος πολὺ
περικεῖσθαι λέγοιμι, μὴ θαυμάσῃς. τότε γὰρ δή
με καὶ ἀὴρ εὔδιος καὶ φέγγος ἡλίου λαμπρότατον
καὶ οἷον ἔαρ ἀληθῶς τοῦ βίου περιέξει κάλλιστον,

C ὅταν σὲ τὸ μέγα τῆς οἰκουμένης ἄγαλμα περιπτύ-
ξωμαι καὶ, καθάπερ ἀγαθῷ πατρὶ παῖς γνήσιος ἐκ
πολέμου τινὸς ἢ διαποντίου κλύδωνος ἀνελπίστως
ὀφθεὶς, εἶτα ὅσα ἔπαθον καὶ Ov ὅσων ἦλθον κινδύ-
νων εἰπὼν καὶ οἷον ἐπ᾽ ἀγκύρας ἱερᾶς ὁρμιξόμενος
ἀρκοῦσαν ἤδη παραψυχὴν τῶν ἀλγεινῶν εὕρωμαι.
παραμυθεῖται γάρ, ὡς εἰκός, καὶ ἐπικουφίξει τὰς
συμφοράς, ὅταν τις ἃ πέπονθεν εἰς τοὺς ἄλλους

D ἔκφορα καθιστὰς διανείμῃ τοῦ πάθους τὴν γνῶσιν
év! τῇ κοινωνίᾳ τοῦ λόγου. τέως γε μὴν οἷς ἔχω 5

1 Hertlein would delete ἐν, but see 449p, p. 246.
2 Brambs would insert πτέροις after ἔχω ; cf. Letter 60.
9500.

1 The reference is probably to Constantine’s march in 323
from Pannonia to Nicomedia by way of the Dardanelles.

244

ΤῸ IAMBLICHUS

that I encountered on my journey, but far more in
the very fact that I have been away from you for so
long, though I have indeed endured so many and
various fortunes everywhere, that I have left nothing
untried. But though I have undergone the alarms
of war, the rigour of a siege, the wandering of exile
and all sorts of terrors, and moreover the extreme
cold of winter, the dangers of disease and countless
mischances of many kinds in my journey from Upper
Pannonia till I crossed the Chalcedonian straits,! I
may say that nothing so painful or so distressing has
happened to me as the fact that after I left the East
I have not, for so long a time, seen you, the universal
blessing of the Hellenes. So do not be surprised if
I say that a sort of mist and thick cloud overshadows
-my eyes. For only then will a clear atmosphere and
the brilliant light of the sun, and, so to speak, the
fairest and truest springtime of my life, encompass
me when I can embrace you, the delight and glory
of the whole world, and, like the true son of a noble
father who when hope is given up is seen returning
from war, it may be, or from the stormy billows of the
568,2 can proceed to recount to you all that I have
suffered and what dangers I have been through, and
as I, so to speak, ride safely on a sacred anchor,? can
find at last a sufficient consolation for my misfortunes.
For naturally it is a consolation and lightens the
weight of sorrow when one unburdens one’s ex-
periences to others and shares with them the know-
᾿ ledge of one’s sufferings in the intercourse of speech.
Meanwhile, however, with what means 1 have 1 will,

2 For a similar idea cf. Julian, 70 the Athenians, Vol. 2,
Wright, 285c, p. 285.

8 Cf. ancoram sacram (or ultimam) solvere, a proverb
implying the use of what has been kept in reserve.

245

440

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

σε κατὰ δύναμιν τὴν ἐμὴν μέτειμι: καὶ γὰρ οὐ
παύσομαι τὸν ἐν μέσῳ τῆς ἀπολείψεως χρόνον ἐν
τῷ τῶν γραμμάτων θεραπεύων συνθήματι. εἰ i δὲ δὴ
καὶ ἀντιτύχοιμι παρὰ σοῦ τῶν ἴσων, ὑφήσω τί καὶ
μικρόν, οἷον ἀντὶ σωτηρίου τινὸς συμϑόλου" τοῖς
σοῖς ὁμιλῶν. γράμμασι. σὺ δὲ δέχοιο μὲν εὐμενῶς
τὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν, παρέχοις. δὲ καὶ σεαυτὸν εἰς ἀμοι-
βὴν εὐμενέστερον, ὡς ὅ τι ἄν σημήνῃς καλὸν
ἢ γράψῆῇς, τοῦτο ἀντὶ τῆς Ἑρμοῦ λογίου φωνῆς
ἢ τῆς ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ χειρὸς παρ᾽ ἡμῶν κρίνεται.

Τῷ αὐτῷ"

4

5 3 ‘

Ηλθες Kan ἐπόησας" ἦλθες yap δὴ Kal ἀπὼν

@ ΄ τ ἋᾺ Be , N δ᾽ »
οις γράφεις" EY@ O€ σὲ μαάομαᾶν, AV epreEas
ἐμὰν φρένα καιομέναν πόθῳ. οὔκουν οὔτε
ἀρνοῦμαι τὸ φίλτρον οὔτε ἀπολείπω σε κατ᾽ οὐδέν
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς παρόντα τῇ “ψυχῇ θεωρὼ καὶ ἀπόντι
σύνειμι, καὶ οὐδὲν ἱκανόν ἐστί "μοι πρὸς κόρον
ἀρκέσαι. καΐτοι σύ γε οὐκ ἀνίης καὶ παρόντας
εὖ ποιῶν ἀεὶ καὶ ἀπόντας οὐκ εὐφραίνων μόνον

ua / 2 Ν \ , ee la) > /
οἷς γράφεις, ἀλλὰ καὶ σωζων. OTE γοῦν ἀπήγ-

1 Hertlein, following Reiske, συμβούλου but the reading of
the MS&S., συμβόλου echoes συνθήματι above and should be
retained.

* Hertlein 60, with title Ἰαμβλίχῳ.

3 Reiske, first recognized this quotation from Sappho not
found elsewhere: MSS., Hertlein καὶ ἐποίησας---ἐγὼ δέ σε
μὰ ἐμὰν ἄν δὲ φύλαξας ; Reiske ἐγὼ δέ σ᾽ ἐματεύμαν (for
ἐματευόμην), τὺ δ᾽ ἐψάλαξας ἐμὰν φρένα ; Wesseling ἄν δ᾽
ἔφλεξας ; Spanheim ἐμὰν ἄν δ᾽ ἐφύλαξας ; Petavius ἔμαν ἄν δὲ

246

TO IAMBLICHUS

so far as I can approach you; and indeed I shall not
cease, for the whole period of our separation, to con-
ciliate you with letters by way of a token. And if I
only receive the like from you, I shall be somewhat
more submissive and shall hold converse with your
letters, regarding them as a sort of symbol that you
are safe and well. Do you, then, graciously accept
what arrives from me, and show yourself still more
gracious in making requital, since every noble utter-
ance of yours, every written word, is reckoned by
me as equivalent to the voice of Hermes the god of
eloquence, or to the hand of Asclepius.!

Ge
To the Same

“Tuou hast come! well hast thou done!” You
have indeed come, even though absent, by means of
your letter—“ And I was yearning for thee, and
thou didst set ablaze my heart, already aflame with
longing for thee.” 2. Nay, I neither refuse the love-
philtre nor do I ever leave you at all, but with my
soul I behold you as though you were present, and
am with you when absent, and nothing is enough to
quench my insatiate desire. Moreover, you also
never slacken, but without ceasing you benefit those
who are present with you and by your letters not
only cheer but even heal those who are absent. At

τ See Letter 79. 400}.
2 The quotations are from an ode of Sappho and perhaps
run through the whole letter ; see critical note.

φύλαξας. I give the version of Bidez. For ἔφλεξας Wila-
mowitz épavias, cf. Isyllus 120; ἂν δ᾽ ἔψυξας Thomas. |

247

447

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

γειλέ μοί, τις ἔναγχος, ὡς παρὰ σοῦ γράμματα
κομίσας ἑταῖρος ἥκοι, ἐτύγχανον μὲν ἐν ἀηδίᾳ
τοῦ στομάχου τριταῖος ἤδη καθεστὼς Kai TL
Kal περιαλγῶς ἔχων τοῦ σώματος, ὡς μηδὲ ἔξω
πυρετοῦ μεῖναι" σημανθὲν δέ, ὡς ἔφην, ὅτι μοι
πρὸς ταῖς θύραις ὁ τὰ γράμματα ἔχων εἴη, ἐγὼ
μὲν ὥσπερ τις ἀκρατὴς ἑαυτοῦ καὶ κάτοχος
ἀναπηδήσας ἦξα πρὶν ὅ τι δέοι παρεῖναι. ἐπεὶ
δὲ καὶ ἔλαβον εἰς χεῖρας τὴν ἐπιστολὴν μόνον,
ὀμνύω ποὺς θεοὺς αὐτοὺς καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ σοί με
ἀνάψαντα πόθον, ὡς ἅμα τε ἔφυγον οἱ πόνοι καί
με καὶ ὁ πυρετὸς ἀνῆκεν εὐθύς, ὥσπερ τινὶ τοῦ
σωτῆρος ἐναργεῖ παρουσίᾳ δυσωπούμενος. ὡς δὲ
καὶ λύσας ἀνέγνων, τίνα με ἡγῇ ψυχὴν ἐσχη-
κέναι τότε ἢ πόσης ἡδονῆς ἀνάπλεων γεγενῆσθαι,
τὸν φίλτατον, ὡς φής, ἀνέμων, τὸν ἐρωτικὸν
ἀληθῶς, τὸν διάκονον τῶν καλῶν ὑπερεπαινοῦντά
τε καὶ φιλοῦντα δικαίως, ὅτι μοι τῶν παρὰ σοῦ
γραμμάτων ὑπηρέτης γέγονεν, οἱονεὶ + πτηνοῦ
δίκην ἡ ἡμῖν τὴν ἐπιστολὴν διευθύνας “οὐρίῳ τε καὶ
πομπίμῳ πνεύματι, δι’ ἧς οὐ μόνον ὑπῆρξεν
ἡσθῆναί μοι τὰ εἰκότα περὶ σοῦ γνόντι, ἀλλὰ
καὶ αὐτῷ κάμνοντι παρὰ σοῦ σωθῆναι; τά γε
μὴν ἄλλα πῶς ἃ πρῶτον" πρὸς τὴν ἐπιστολὴν

BY4 7 2 tof Ἃ lal x > ’ 3 an \
ἔπαθον ELTTOLLL ὧν, ἢ TTWS ὧν APKOVVTWS EMAUTOV TOV

if /
ἔρωτα καταμηνύσαιμι; ποσάκις ἀνέδραμον εἰς
\ / ΄
ἀρχὴν ἐκ μέσου ; ποσάκις ἔδεισα μὴ πληρώσας
λάθω; ποσάκις ὥσπερ ἐν κύκλῳ τινὶ καὶ

' Hertlein following Hercher would delete οἱονεί, but it
occurs with δίκην too often to be an oversight ; see p 218, note.

2 For ἃ πρῶτον Hertlein suggests ἅπερ, Hercher would
delete πρῶτον.

248

TO IAMBLICHUS

any rate, when someone not long ago gave me the
news that a friend had come and brought letters
from you, it happened that for three days 1 had
been suffering from a disorder of the stomach, and
in fact I was in acute physical pain, so that I was
not even free from fever. But, as I said, when I was
told that the person who had the letters was at my
door I jumped up like one possessed, who has lost
control of himself, and rushed out before what I
wanted could arrive. And the moment that I
merely took the letter in my hands, I swear by the
very gods and by the love that burns in me for you,
that instant my pains forsook me and at once the
fever let me go, as though it were abashed by some
manifest saving presence. But when I broke the seal
and read the letter, can you imagine what feelings
took possession of my soul at that moment or with
what delight I was filled, or how I praised to the
skies that dearest of winds,! to quote your words,
the lover’s wind in very truth, the messenger of
glad tidings—and loved it with good reason, since it
had done me this service of bringing a letter from
you, and like a winged thing had guided straight to
me, with a fair and hurrying blast, that letter which
brought me not only the pleasure of hearing good
news of you but also salvation at your hands in my
own illness? But how could I describe my other
sensations when first I read the letter, or how could
I find adequate words to betray my own passion?
How often did I hark back from the middle to the
beginning? How often did I fear that I should finish
it before I was aware? How often, as though I

1 An echo of Sophocles, Philoctetes 237 τίς προσήγαγεν ;
. τίς ἀνέμων ὁ φίλτατος ;

249

418

ie)

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

στροφῆς περιόδῳ τοῦ συμπεράσματος τὸ πλή-
ρωμα πρὸς τὴν ἀρχὴν ἀνεῖλκον, οἷον ἐν ἄσματι
μουσικῷ ταὐτὸν τοῦ ῥυθμοῦ τῷ τέλει τὸ πρὸς τὴν
ἀρχὴν ἡγούμενον μέλος ἀντιδιδούς: ἢ καὶ νὴ Δία
τὼ ἑξῆς τούτων, ὁσάκις μὲν τῷ “στόματι τὴν
ἐπιστολὴν προσήγαγον, ὥσπερ αἱ μητέρες τὰ
παιδία περιπλέκονται, ὁσάκις δὲ ἐνέφυν τῷ
στόματι καθάπερ ἐρωμένην ἐμαυτοῦ φιλτάτην
ἀσπαζόμενος, ὁσάκις δὲ τὴν ἐπιγραφὴν αὐτήν, ἣ
χειρὶ σῇ καθάπερ ἐναργεῖ σφραγῖδι ἐσεσήμαντο,
προσειπὼν καὶ φιλήσας, εἶτα ἐπέβαλον τοῖς
ὀφθαλμοῖς, οἱονεὶ τοῖς τῆς ἱερᾶς ἐκείνης δεξιᾶς
δακτύλοις τῷ τῶν γραμμάτων ἴχνει προσπεφυκώς.
χαῖρε δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν πολλά, καθάπερ ἡ καλὴ
Σαπῴφώ φησι, καὶ οὐκ ἰσάριθμα μόνον τῷ χρόνῳ,
ὃν ἀλλήλων ἀπελείφθημεν," ἀλλὰ γὰρ καὶ ἀεὶ
χαῖρε, καὶ γράφε καὶ μέμνησο ἡμῶν τὰ εἰκότα.
ὡς ἡ μᾶς γε οὐκ ἐπιλείψει χρόνος, ἐν ᾧ σε μὴ
πάντη 5 καὶ ἐν παντὶ “καιρῷ καὶ λόγῳ διὰ μνήμης
ἕξομεν. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμῖν εἴ * ποθι Ζεὺς δοίη ἱκέσθαι ἐς
πατρίδα γαῖαν, καί σου τὴν ἱερὰν ἐκείνην ἑστίαν
αὖθις ὑπέλθοιμεν, μὴ φείσῃ λοιπὸν ὡς φυγάδος,
ἀλλὰ δῆσον, εἰ δοκεῖ, πρὸς τοῖς σεαυτοῦ θώκοις
τοῖς φιλτάτοις, ὥσπερ τινὰ Μουσῶν λιποτάκτην
ἑλών, εἶτα τοῖς εἰς τιμωρίαν ἀρκοῦσι παιδεύων.
πάντως οὐδὲ ἄκων ὑποστήσομαι τὴν δίκην, ἀλλ᾽
ἑκὼν δὴ καὶ χαίρων, ὥσπερ ἀγαθοῦ πατρὸς

1 περιπλέκονται Hertlein suggests, προσπλέκονται MSS.

2 Blass in Cl. Philology I. p. 253 reconstructs a fragment

of Sappho, as follows: χαῖρε πολλά τέ μοι καὶ ἰσάριθμα τῷ
χρόνῳ, ὃν σεθεν. . . ἀπελειπόμαν.

250

TO IAMBLICHUS

were going round in a circle in the evolutions of a
strophe,! did I try to connect the contents of the
last paragraph with the first, just as though in a
song set to music I were making the leading note
of the beginning the same as the closing bars of the
measure? Or how describe what I did next—how
often I held the letter to my lips, as mothers
embrace their children, how often I kissed it with
those lips as though I were embracing my dearest
sweetheart, how often I invoked and kissed and held
to my eyes even the superscription which had been
signed by your own hand as though by a clear cut
seal, and how I clung to the imprint of the letters
as I should to the fingers of that sacred right hand of
yours! I too “ wish thee joy in full measure,’’? as fair
Sappho says, and not only “ for just so long as we have
been parted from one another,’ but may you rejoice
evermore, and write to me and remember me with
kindly thoughts. For no time shall ever pass by me
in which I shall forget you, in any place, at any hour,
in any word I speak. “ But if ever Zeus permits
me to return to my native land,’ 5. and once more
I humbly approach that sacred hearth of yours, do
not spare me hereafter as you would a runaway, but
fetter me, if you will, to your own beloved dwelling,
making me captive like a deserter from the Muses,
and then discipline me with such penalties as suffice
for my. punishment. Assuredly I shall submit to your
jurisdiction not unwillingly, but with a good will and

1 eg. in the chorus of the drama.
2 Frag. 85, Bergk. 3 Odyssey 4. 475.

3 πάντη Hercher suggests, πάντα Hertlein, MSS.
4 ἀλλ᾽ ἡμῖν et Hertlein suggests ; ἀλλήλων δὲ MSS.

251

410

OQ

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

5 / A θῇ Ν / x δὲ ὃ ,
ἐπανόρθωσιν προμηθῆ καὶ σωτήριον. εἰ δὲ δὴ
\ > a
μοι Kal κατ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ τὴν κρίσιν ἐθέλοις πισ-
a \ / a ἃ 7
τεῦσαι καὶ διδοίης ἐνεγκεῖν ἣν βούλομαι, ἐμαυτόν,
69 a A lal / δὴ
ὦ γενναῖε, τῷ σῷ χιτωνίσκῳ προσάψαιμι ἂν
“δέ ~ \ \ > ἢ > \
HOSOS, HEMT OU κατα μηδὲν ἀπολειποίμην, ἀλλὰ
συνείην ἀεὶ καὶ πανταχῆ προσφεροίμην, ὥσπερ
οὗς οἱ μῦθοι διφυεῖς ἀνθρώπους πλάττουσιν. εἰ
μὴ κἀκεῖνο οἱ μῦθοι λέγουσι μὲν ὡς παίζοντες,
Neg! \ > \ a , > , 5 ων
αἰνίττονται δὲ εἰς τὸ τῆς φιλίας ἐξαίρετον, ἐν τῷ
“ / “ e a a
τῆς κοινωνίας δεσμῷ TO OL ἑκατέρου τῆς ψυχῆς
e \ /
ομογενὲς ἐμφαίνοντες.

78
Τῷ αὐτῷ"
/ A A / /
Αἰσθάνομαί σου τῆς ἐν TH μέμψει γλυκύτητος,
Ν κῷ
καὶ ὡς ἑκάτερον ἐξ ἴσου πράττεις, καὶ οἷς γράφεις
An - a 1h /
τιμῶν καὶ οἷς ἐγκαλεῖς παιδεύων. ἐγὼ δὲ εἰ μέν
n A ὃς \ /
TL συνήδειν ἐμαυτῷ τοῦ πρὸς σὲ γυγνομένου καὶ
κατὰ μικρὸν ἐλλιπόντι, πάντως ἢ προφάσεις
/ \ 3 Χ /
εὐλόγους εἰπὼν ἐπειρώμην ἂν τὴν μέμψιν
/ \ 3,8 ἢ 5)
ἐκκλίνειν, ἢ συγγνώμην ἁμαρτὼν αἰτεῖν οὐκ
? / 2 \ \ ” > / 4 s
ἠρνούμην, ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ἄλλως ἀσύγγνωστον οἶδά
\ a ‘\ \ “
σε πρὸς τοὺς σούς, εἴ τι τῶν πρὸς σὲ φιλικῶν
ῇ lal 9 "ἃ Ἵν
ἐξήμαρτον ἄκοντες. νῦν δέ' οὐ γὰρ ἣν οὔτε σὲ
rn / ” ς a ’ n ivf "ἢ
παροφθῆναι θέμις οὔτε ἡμᾶς ἀμελεῖν, ἵνα τύ-

1 Hertlein 40, with title ᾿Ιαμβλίχῳ.

252

TO IAMBLICHUS

gladly, as to a kind father’s provident and salutary
correction. Moreover, if you would consent to trust
me to sentence myself and allow me to suffer the
penalty that I prefer, I would gladly fasten myself
to your tunic, my noble friend, so that I might never
for a moment leave your side but be with you always
and closely attached to you wherever you are, like
those two-bodied beings invented in the myths.
Unless, indeed, in this case also the myths, though
they tell us the story in jest, are describing in
enigmatical words an extraordinary sort of friend-
ship and by that close tie of a common being
express the kinship of soul in both beings.

78
To the Same.

I am sensible of the sweet-tempered manner in
which you reproach me, and that you achieve two
things with equal success, for you do me honour by
what you write and instruct me by your criticisms.
And for my part, if I were conscious of even the least
failure in the attention due to you, I should certainly
try by making reasonable excuses to parry your
criticism, or if I were in fault I should not hesitate
to ask your forgiveness, especially as I know that you
are not implacable towards your friends when they
have involuntarily failed in some friendly office to
you. But as it is—since it was not right either for
you to be neglected or for me to be careless if we

1 For Julian’s allegorising interpretation of myths see
Oration, 5. 170; 7. 216c, 222c; and for the illustration here
Lucian, Joxaris 62.

253

417

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

χοιμεν ὧν ἀεὶ ζητοῦντες ποθοῦμεν" φέρε σοι
καθάπερ ἐ ἐν ὅρῳ γραφῆς ἀπολογήσωμαι, καὶ δείξω
μηδὲν ἐμαυτὸν ὧν ἐχρῆν εἰς σὲ παριδεῖν, ἀλλὰ
μηδὲ μελλῆσαι τολμήσαντα.

“Ἦλθον ἐκ ἸΠαννονίας ἤδη τρίτον ἔτος τουτί,
μόλις ἀφ᾽ ὧν οἶσθα κινδύνων καὶ πόνων σωθείς.
ὑπερβὰς δὲ τὸν Καλχηδόνιον πορθμὸν καὶ ἐπιστὰς
τῇ Νικομήδους πόλει σοὶ πρώτῳ καθάπερ πατρίῳ
θεῷ τὰ πρωτόλεια τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ σώστρων ἀπέ-
δωκα, σύμβολον. τῆς ἀφί ξεως τῆς. ἐμῆς οἷον ἀντ᾽
ἀναθήματος ἱ ἱεροῦ τὴν εἰς σὲ πρόσρησιν ἐκπέμπων.
καὶ ἣν ὁ κομίξων τὰ γράμματα τῶν βασιλείων
ὑπασπιστῶν εἷς, “lovAtavos ὄνομα, Βακχύλου
παῖς, ᾿Απαμεὺς τὸ γένος, ᾧ διὰ τοῦτο μάλιστα
τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἐνεχείριζον, ὅτι καὶ πρὸς ὑμᾶς
ἥξειν καί σε ἀκριβῶς εἰδέναι καθυπισχνεῖτο.
μετὰ ταῦτά μοι καθάπερ ἐξ: ᾿Απόλλωνος ἱερὸν
ἐφοίτα παρὰ σοῦ γράμμα, τὴν ἄφιξιν τὴν ἡμε-
τέραν “ἀσμένως σε ἀκηκοέναι δηλοῦν' ἣν δὲ
τοῦτο ἐμοὶ δεξιὸν οἰώνισμα καὶ χρηστῶν ἐλπίδων
ἀρχή, ᾿Ἰάμβλιχος ὁ σοφὸς καὶ τὰ ᾿Ιαμβλίχου
πρὸς ἡμᾶς γράμματα. τί με δεῖ λέγειν ὅπως
ηὐφράνθην ἢ ἃ περὶ τὴν ἐπιστολὴν ἔπαθον
σημαίνειν; εἰ γὰρ ἐδέξω τὰ Tap ἡμῶν ἕνεκα
τούτων γραφέντα" ἣν δὲ OL ἡμεροδρόμου τῶν
ἐκεῖθεν ἡκόντων ὡς σὲ πεμφθ évTa: πάντως ἂν
ὁπόσην ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἡδονὴν ἔσχον ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἐδήλουν
ἐγίνωσκες. πάλιν ἐπανιόντος οἴκαδε τοῦ τροφέως

1 Constantine marched from Pannonia to Nicomedia in 323,
so perhaps this letter can be dated 326. In Julian’s authentic
writings we always find Paeonia for Pannonia ; see Letter 76,
p. 244, for a reference to this journey.

has

TO IAMBLICHUS

were to attain that which we ever seek after and
desire—come, I will plead my case before you as
though by the rules of a lawsuit, and I will prove
that far from having neglected any of my duties
towards you I have never even ventured to post-
pone them.

It is now three years since I arrived from Pannonia,!
with difficulty escaping safely from the dangers and
troubles that you know of. When I had crossed the
Chalcedonian strait and approacbed the city of
Nicomedia, to you first as though to the god of my
fathers I paid vows as the first thank-offering for my
deliverance, by sending you as a token of my arrival
my salutation in place of a sacred offering. ‘The man
who took charge of my letter was one of the imperial
guard named Julian, the son of Bacchylus, a native of
Apamea, and to him I all the more readily entrusted
the letter because he asserted that he was going in
your direction and that he knew you very well.
Afterwards, as though from Apollo, a sacred letter
came to me from you, in which you declared that
you had been pleased to hear of my arrival. This
was to my mind an auspicious omen and a fount of
fairest hopes,—Iamblichus the wise and the letter of
Iamblichus to me. Need I say how I rejoiced or
assure you how deeply I was moved by your letter?
For if you had received what I wrote to you with
no other purpose—and it was sent to you by one of
the couriers who came from where you are,—you
would certainly know from what I then said how great
was the pleasure that I felt on receiving it. Again,
when the custodian of my children? was returning

2 This phrase is perhaps metaphorical ; see p. 214, note 1.

255

D

418

THE APOCRYPHAL GETEERS

τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ παιδίων, ἑτέρων ἦρχον πρὸς σὲ
γραμμάτων, ὁμοῦ καὶ τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς φθάνουσι
χάριν ὁμολογῶν καὶ πρὸς τὸ ἑξῆς ἐν ἴσῳ παρὰ
σοῦ τὴν ἀντίδοσιν BUDE J μετὰ ταῦτα ἐπρέο-
βευσεν ὡς ἡμᾶς ὁ καλὸς Σώπατρος" ἐγὼ δὲ ὡς
ἔγνων, εὐθὺς ἀναπηδήσας ἦξα καὶ περιπλακεὶς
ἐδάκρυον ὑφ᾽ ἡδονῆς, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ σὲ καὶ τὰ
παρὰ σοῦ πρὸς ἡμᾶς ὀνειροπολῶν γράμματα.
ὡς δὲ ἔλαβον, ἐφίλουν καὶ τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς προσῆ-
γον, καὶ ἀπρὶξ εἰχόμην, ὥσπερ δεδιὼς μὴ λάθῃ
με ἀποπτὰν ἐν τῇ τῶν γραμμάτων ἀναγνώσει τὸ
τῆς σῆς εἰκόνος ἴνδαλμα. καὶ δὴ καὶ “ἀντέγραφον
εὐθύς, οὐ πρὸς σὲ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τὸν ἱερὸν
Σώπατρον, τὸν ἐκείνου παῖδα, καθάπερ θρυπτό-
μενος ὅτι τὸν κοινὸν ἑταῖρον ἐκ τῆς ᾿Απαμείας
οἷον ἐνέχυρον τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀπουσίας ἀντειληφότες
εἴημεν. ἐξ ἐκείνου τρίτην ἤδη πρὸς σὲ γεγραφώς,
αὐτὸς οὐδεμίαν ἄλλην ἢ τὴν ἐν ἣ μέμφεσθαι δοκεῖς
ἐπιστολὴν ἐδεξάμην.

Ki μὲν δὴ διὰ τοῦτο ἐγκαλεῖς, ἵνα τῷ τῆς αἰτίας
σχήματι πλείονας ἡμῖν ἀφορμὰς τοῦ γράφειν προ-
ξενῇς, δέχομαι τὴν μέμψιν ἄσμενος πάνυ, καὶ ἐν
οἷς λαμβάνω τὸ πᾶν τῆς χάριτος εἰς ἐμαυτὸν
οἰκειοῦμαι" εἰ δὲ ὡς ἀληθῶς ἐλλιπόντα TL τοῦ
πρὸς σὲ καθήκοντος αἰτιᾷ, τίς ἂν ἐμοῦ γένοιτ᾽ ἂν
ἀθλιώτερος ῖ διὰ γραμματοφόρων ἀδικίαν ἢ ῥᾳ-

1 Nauck, 7ragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta, *Adespota 280
suggests τίς ap; Schmidt τίς ἀντ. The verse does not occur
elsewhere, but cf. Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus 815 tis τοῦ-
de νῦν ἔστ᾽ ἀνδρὸς ἀθλιώτερος ;

1 This may be the Sopater whom Julian mentions in Leiter

256

TO IAMBLICHUS

home, I began another letter to you in which I at the
same time spoke to you of my gratitude for your
previous favours and begged for a like return from
you for the immediate future. After this the
excellent Sopater! came on an embassy to our city.
When I recognised him I at once started up and
flew to him and when 1 had embraced him I wept
for joy, dreaming of nothing else but you and a letter
from you tome. And when I received it I kissed it
and held it to my eyes and kept tight hold of it as
though I were afraid that while I was in the act of
reading your letter the phantom of your image might
elude me and fly away. And, moreover, I at once
wrote an answer, not to you only but also to the
revered Sopater, that great man’s son, telling him,
as though giving myself airs, that I ‘accepted our
mutual friend from Apamea as a sort of hostage for
your absence. This is the third letter that I have
written to you since that time, but I have myself
received no other letter from you save that in which
you seem to reproach me.

Now if you are accusing me merely for the purpose
of providing me with further motives for writing to
you, and only pretend to reproach me, then I am
very glad to receive your criticism, and in this very
letter that has now come I take to myself the whole
of the kindness implied. But if you really accuse me
of being in any way remiss in my duty to you, “ who
could be more wretched than 1 2? through the wrong-

doing or negligence of letter-carriers, when I, least

58 To Libanius, p. 207. But he is more probably the elder
Sopater who was executed by Constantine.

2 An iambic trimeter whose source is not known; see
critical note.

25

VOL, III. 5

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

C @ / / ef 9 es 4 ,
υμιᾶν πάντων NKLOTA ἀξίου τουτου τυγχανεῖιν

1)

419

ὄντος ; 1 καίτοι ἐγὼ μέν, κἂν μὴ πλεονάκις γράφω,
δίκαιός εἶμι συγγνώμης παρὰ σοῦ τυγχάνειν" οὐ
τῆς ἀσχολίας ἣν ἐν χερσὶν ἔχω φαίην ἄν' μὴ
γὰρ οὕτω πράξαιμι κακῶς, ὡς μὴ καὶ ἀσχολίας
ἁπάσης, καθά φησι Ἰ]ίνδαρος, τὸ κατὰ σὲ κρεῖτ-
Tov ἡγεῖσθαι: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι πρὸς ἄνδρα τηλικοῦτον,
οὗ καὶ μνησθῆναι φόβος, ὁ καὶ γράφειν κατοκνῶν
τοῦ πλέον ἢ προσήκει θαρροῦντός ἐστι σωφρονέ-
στερος. ὥσπερ γὰρ οἱ ταῖς “Ἡλίου μαρμαρυγαῖς
ἀντιβλέπειν συνεχῶς τολμῶντες, ἂν μὴ θεῖοί τινες
ὦσι καὶ τῶν ἀκτίνων αὐτοῦ καθώπερ οἱ τῶν
ἀετῶν γνήσιοι καταθαρρῶσιν, οὔτε ἃ μὴ θέμις
ὀφθῆναι θεωρεῖν ἔχουσι, καὶ ὅσῳπερ μᾶλλον
φιλονεικοῦσι, τοσούτῳ πλέον ὅτι μὴ δύνανται
τυχεῖν ἐμφαίνουσιν, οὕτω καὶ ὁ πρὸς σὲ γράφειν
τολμῶν, ὅσῳπερ ἂν ἐθέλῃ θαρρεῖν, τοσούτῳ
μᾶλλον ὅτι χρὴ δεδιέναι καθαρῶς δείκνυσι. σοί
γε μήν, ὦ γενναῖε, παντὸς ws εἰπεῖν τοῦ “EX-
ληνικοῦ σωτῆρι καθεστῶτι, πρέπον ἣν ἀφθόνως
τε ἡμῖν γράφειν καὶ τὸν Tap ἡμῖν ὄκνον ἐφ᾽ ὅσον
ἐξῆν καταστέλλειν. ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ Ηλιος" ἵνα δὴ
πάλιν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ πρός σε τὴν εἰκόνα λάβῃ ὁ
λόγος" ὁ δ᾽ οὖν “Ἥλιος ὥσπερ, ὅταν ἀκτῖσι κα-
θαραῖς ὅλος λάμπῃ, οὐδὲν ἀποκρίνει τοῦ πρὸς
τὴν αἴγλην ἐλθόμτος, ἀλλὰ τὸ οἰκεῖον ἐργάζεται,
1 ἀξίου τούτου τυγχάνειν ὄντος Hertlein suggests; τούτου
τυγχάνοντος MSS., τυγχάνειν Reiske.
258

TO IAMBLICHUS

of all men, deserve the reproach? And yet even if I
do not write oftener I may well claim indulgence
from you—I do not mean because of the many affairs
which I have on my hands—for may I never sink so
low as not to count you more important than any
business whatever, as Pindar! says!—but because
there is more wisdom in hesitating to write more
than is fitting to so great a man as yourself, whom
one cannot so much as think of without awe, than in
being too presumptuous. For even as those who
venture to gaze steadily at the bright beams of
Helios, unless indeed they be in some sort divine
and like the genuine offspring of eagles? can brave
his rays, are unable to behold what is not lawful for
their eyes to see, and the more they strive for this
the more do they show that they have not the
power to attain it, even so, I say, he who ventures to
write to you shows clearly. that the more he allows
himself to presume the more he ought to be afraid.
For you, however, my noble friend, who have been
appointed as the saviour, so to speak, of the whole
Hellenic world, it would have been becoming not
only to write to me without stint, but also to allay
as far as you could the scruples felt by me. For as
Helios—if my argument may again employ in reference
to you a simile from the god,—even as Helios, I say,
when he shines in full splendour with his brilliant
rays rejects naught of what encounters his beams,

1 [sthnvian Odes 1. 1 τὸ τεόν. . . πρᾶγμα καὶ ἀσχολίας
ὑπέρτερον θήσομαι.

2 For this allusion to the eagle’s test of its offspring see
Letter 59, To Maximus; Themistius 240c; Lucian, Jcaro-
menippus 14; Claudian, On the Third Consulship of Honorius,
Preface 1-14.

259

B

420

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

ev \ \ \ an 9 if a a a
οὕτω δὲ καὶ σὲ χρῆν ἀφθόνως TOV Tapa σοῦ
an e \ c
καλῶν οἷον φωτὸς TO ᾿ΙΥλλληνικὸν ἐπαρδεύοντα μὴ
5 A 3 fal 3 / e n \
ἀποκνεῖν, εἴ τις ἢ αἰδοῦς ἢ δέους ἕνεκα τοῦ πρὸς
\ Ἁ 3 7 nA ’ ἢ 4 €.)D:
σὲ τὴν ἀντίδοσιν δυσωπεῖται. οὐδὲ yap ὁ ᾿Ασ-
\ ame 5 i) 3 / \ 2 A
κληπιὸς ἐπ᾽ ἀμοιβῆς ἐλπίδι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
IA A A
ἰᾶται, ἀλλὰ τὸ οἰκεῖον αὐτῷ φιλανθρώπευμα
lo) a ἃ \ x a
πανταχοῦ πληροῖ. ὃ δὴ καὶ σὲ χρῆν ὡσπερεὶ
“ \ 9 -“ “Ὁ
ψυχῶν ἐλλογίμων ἰατρὸν ὄντα ποιεῖν καὶ TO τῆς
fe \ / , -
ἀρετῆς παράγγελμα διὰ πάντων σώζειν, οἷον
2 Ne “ Ἃ \ \ 3 , ”
ἀγαθὸν τοξότην, ὅς, κἂν μὴ τὸν ἀντίπαλον ἔχῃ,
Ν , x a
πάντως ἐς TO καίριον ἀεὶ τὴν χεῖρα γυμνάζει.
ς , ς a
ἐπεὶ μηδὲ ὁ σκοπὸς ἑκατέροις ὁ αὐτός, ἡμῖν
δὲ τῶν παρὰ σοῦ δεξιῶν τυχεῖν καὶ σοὶ τοῖς
3 ε n 7] > an 3 3 e an XN
παρ᾽ ἡμῶν διδομένοις ἐντυχεῖν. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς, κἂν
a ξ a \
μυριάκις γράφωμεν, ἴσα τοῖς Opnptxots παισὶ
/ € \ A - δ 3 A
παίζομεν, of παρὰ tas θῖνας ὅτι ἂν ἐκ πηλοῦ
n / x fa)
πλάσωσιν ἀφιᾶσιν κλύζεσθαι; παρὰ cov δὲ καὶ
\ / , / ᾿ς
μικρὸν γράμμα παντός ἔστι γονίμου ῥεύματος
fa) \ ,ὔ A ” > /
κρεῖττον, καὶ δεξαίμην ἂν ἔγωγε ᾿Ιαμβλίχου
a 3 Ν 7 x \ 3 , \
μᾶλλον ἐπιστολὴν μίαν ἢ τὸν ἐκ Λυδίας χρυσὸν
A / a la) Qn
κεκτῆσθαι. εἰ δὲ μέλει TL σοι τῶν ἐραστῶν τῶν
an 7 2 \ -
σῶν' μέλει δέ, εἰ μὴ ohddropat’ μὴ περιίδῃς
[τ ἴω \ aA x aA a
ὥσπερ νεοττοὺς ἡμᾶς ἀεὶ TOV παρὰ σοῦ τροφῶν
/ x a
ἐν χρείᾳ τυγχώνοντας, ἀλλὰ Kal γράφε συνεχῶς
καὶ τοῖς: παρὰ σαυτοῦ καλοῖς ἑστιᾶν μὴ κατόκνει.
3 \ Υ / ἴω
κἂν ἐχλλίπωμεν, αὐτὸς ἑκατέρου τὴν χρείαν οἰκειοῦ,
VE ΄ \ #& b) ie 4 3 lal Na RS? a
καὶ ὧν δίδως Kal ὧν ἀνθ᾽ ἡμῶν τὸ ἴσον πρεσβεύεις.
Ἢ rn , / \ μ“
πρέπει δὲ “Ἑρμοῦ λογίου μαθητήν, εἰ δὲ βούλει
260

TO IAMBLICHUS

but ever performs his function, so ought you also not
to shrink from bountifully pouring forth the flood of
your blessings like light over the Hellenic world even
when, whether from modesty, or fear of you, one is
too bashful to make any return. Asclepius, again,
does not heal mankind in the hope of repayment, but
everywhere fulfils his own function of beneficence to
mankind. This, then, you ought to do also, as
though you were the physician of souls endowed
with eloquence, and you ought to keep up on all
occasions the preaching of virtue, like a skilled
archer who, even though he have no opponent, keeps
training his hand by every means in view of future
need. For in truth we two have not the same
ambition, since mine is to secure the wise teachings
that flow from you and yours is to read letters sent
by me. But as for me, though 1 should write ten
thousand times, mine is still mere child’s play, and
I am like the boys in Homer who on the sea-shores
model something in wet sand and then abandon it
all for the sea to wash away; whereas even a short
letter from you is more potent than any fertilising
flood, and for my part I would rather receive one
letter from Iamblichus than possess all the gold of
Lydia. If, then, you care at all for your fond ad-
mirers—and you do care if I am not mistaken—do not
neglect me who am like a fledgling constantly in
need of sustenance from you, but write regularly,
and moreover do not be reluctant to feast me on the
good things that come from you. And if I prove to
be remiss, do you take on yourself to provide both
things, not only what you yourself give but equally
what you furnish in my place. For it befits you as a
pupil of Hermes, the god of eloquence, or, if you

261

405

406

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

καὶ τρόφιμον ὄντα σε, τὴν ἐκείνου ῥάβδον οὐκ
ἐν τῷ καθεύδειν ποιεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ κινεῖν καὶ
διεγείρειν μᾶλλον ἐθέλειν μιμεῖσθαι.

19

A 3 a Al
To αὐτῷ
L &

᾿Οδυσσεῖ μὲν ἐξήρκει τοῦ παιδὸς τὴν ἐφ᾽ αὑτῷ
φαντασίαν ἀναστέλλοντι λέγειν

οὔτις τοι θεός εἰμι" τί μ᾽ ἀθανάτοισιν ἐίσκεις ;
ἐγὼ δὲ οὐδ᾽ ἐν ἀνθρώποις εἶναι φαίην ἂν ὅλως,
ἕως ἂν ᾿Ιαμβλίχῳ μὴ συνῶ. ἀλλ᾽ ἐραστὴς μὲν
εἶναι σὸς ὁμολογῶ, καθάπερ ἐκεῖνος τοῦ Τηλε-
μάχου πατήρ. κἂν γὰρ ἀνάξιόν με λέγῃ τις
εἶναι, οὐδὲ οὕτω τοῦ ποθεῖν ἀφαιρήσεται" ἐπεὶ
καὶ ἀγαλμάτων καλῶν ἀκούω πολλοὺς ἐραστὰς
γενέσθαι μὴ μόνον τοῦ δημιουργοῦ τὴν “τέχνην
μὴ βλάπτοντας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ περὶ αὐτὰ πάθει
τὴν ἔμψυχον ἡδονὴν τῷ ἔργῳ προστιθέντας. τῶν
γέ μὴν παλαιῶν καὶ σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν, οἷς ἡμᾶς
ἐγκρίνειν ἐθέλεις παίζων, τοσοῦτον ἀπέχειν. ἂν
φαίην, ὁπόσον αὐτῷ σοι τῶν ἀνδρῶν “μετεῖναι
πιστεύω. καίτοι σύ γε οὐ Πίνδαρον μόνον οὐδὲ
Δημόκριτον ἢ ᾿Ορφέα τὸν παλαιότατον, ἀλλὰ
καὶ ξύμπαν ὁμοῦ τὸ Ἑλληνικόν, ὁ ὁπόσον εἰς ἄκρον
φιλοσοφίας ἐλθεῖν μνημονεύεται, “καθάπερ, ἐν
λύρᾳ ποικίλων φθόγγων ἐναρμονίῳ συστάσει
πρὸς TO, ἐντελὲς τῆς μουσικῆς κεράσας ἔχεις.
καὶ ὥσπερ Apyov τὸν φύλακα τῆς ᾿Ιοῦς οἱ μῦθοι

1 Hertlein 34, with title Ἰαμβλίχῳ φιλοσόφῳ.
262

TO IAMBLICHUS

prefer, his nursling, to desire to imitate his use of
the wand, not by putting men to sleep, but by
rousing and awakening them.

79
To the Same

Wuen Odysseus was trying to remove his son’s
illusion about him, it was enough for him to say:
“No God am I. Why then do you liken me to the
immortals?’’4 But I might say that I do not exist
at all among men so long as I am not with Iam-
blichus. Nay, I admit that I am your lover, even as
Odysseus that he was the father of Telemachus. For
even though someone should say that I am un-
worthy, not even so shall he deprive me of my long-
ing. For I have heard that many men have fallen in
love with beautiful statues? and far from injuring the
art of the craftsman they have by their passion for
them imparted to the workmanship the added delight:
in what lives and breathes. But as for the wise men
of old among whom you are pleased to reckon me in
jest, I should say that I fall as far short of them as
I believe that you are to be ranked among them.
And indeed you have succeeded in combining with
yourself not only Pindar or Democritus or most ancient
Orpheus, but also that whole genius of the Hellenes
which is on record as having attained to the summit
of philosophy, even as in a “lyre by the harmonious
combination of various notes the perfection of
music is achieved. And just as the myths give
Argus, Io’s guardian, an encircling ring of ever-

1 Odyssey 16. 187.
2 For such cases cf. Aelian, Varia Historia 9. 39.

263

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

ff / lal \ an
πρόνοιαν ἔχοντα τῶν Διὸς παιδικῶν ἀκοιμήτοις
πανταχόθεν ὀμμάτων βολαῖς περιφράττουσιν,
¢ n /
οὕτω Kal σὲ γνήσιον ἀρετῆς φύλακα μυρίοις
an e / /
παιδεύσεως ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁ λόγος φωτίζει. ἸἹΙρωτέα
Ν \ \ > 7, / / a c
μὲν δὴ TOV Αἰγύπτιόν φασι ποικίλαις μορφαῖς ἑαυ-
if \ “
τὸν ἐξαλλάττειν, ὥσπερ δεδιότα μὴ λάθῃ τοῖς δε-
e > \ ee \ 9)
OMEVOLS ὡς ἣν σοφὸς ἐκφήνας" ἐγὼ δὲ εἴπερ ἣν ὄντως
Ν «ς \ a - 1 \ a 4
σοφὸς ὁ Iipwrevs καὶ οἷος πολλὰ τῶν ὄντων
, ς [7 7 a \ /
γινώσκειν, ὡς “Ὅμηρος λέγει, THs μὲν φύσεως
\ a an / ? 2 , fs
αὐτὸν ἐπαινῶ, τῆς γνώμης δ᾽ οὐκ ἄγαμαι, διότι
\ vA if >’ > 2 “ ”
μὴ φιλανθρώπου τινὸς, ἀλλ᾿ ἀπατεῶνος ἔργον
“ ἰώ \ /
ἐποίει κρύπτων ἑαυτὸν, ἵνα μὴ χρήσιμος ἀνθρώ.
=» > “ » 3 ἴω
ποις ἢ. σὲ δέ, ὦ γενναῖε, τίς οὐκ ἂν ἀληθῶς
/ σι A rn
θαυμάσειεν, ws οὐδέν τι τοῦ ἸΪρωτέως τοῦ σοφοῦ
5 ¢ \ la) 5)
μείων el,” εἰ μὴ καὶ μᾶλλον εἰς ἀρετὴν ἄκραν
\ Φ Μ al “4 a ’ ΄,
τελεσθεὶς ὧν ἔχεις καλῶν οὐ φθονεῖς ἀνθρώποις,
3 θυ / a / ’ -“ 7] 9
ἀλλ᾽ ἡλίου καθαροῦ δίκην ἀκτῖνας σοφίας ἀκραι-
n / Μ 3 , n
φνοῦς ἐπὶ πάντας ἄγεις, οὐ μόνον παροῦσι
\ ’ / 4 » A: AG » / 3 ’ «“
τὰ εἰκότα ξυνών, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπόντας ἐφ᾽ ὅσον
fal \ fa
ἔξεστι τοῖς παρὰ σαυτοῦ σεμνύνων. νικῴης δ᾽
Ἂ “ \ \ 2 lg Ν Ν - 7
ἂν οὕτω καὶ τὸν Opdéa τὸν καλὸν οἷς πράττεις,
, \ lal
εἴγε ὁ μὲν τὴν οἰκείαν μουσικὴν εἰς τὰς τῶν
λ
θηρίων ἀκοὰς κατανάλισκε, σὺ δ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐπὶ
/ “ a a 3 ΄ /
σωτηρίᾳ TOD κοινοῦ τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένους τεχ-
θείς, τὴν ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ χεῖρα πανταχοῦ ζηλῶν,
ο / / \ / ΄
ἅπαντα ἐπέρχῃ λογίῳ τε καὶ σωτηρίῳ νεύματι.3
1 οἷός τε ἢ Hertlein.

2 εἶ, εἰ μὴ καὶ Baroccianus; εἶ καὶ μὴ Vossianus, εἰ μὴ καὶ
Hertlein. 3 πνεύματι ““ breath,” Martin.

264

TO IAMBLICHUS

wakeful eyes as he keeps watch over the darling
of Zeus, so too does true report endow you, the
trusted guardian of virtue, with the light of the
countless eyes of culture. They say that Proteus
the Egyptian used to change himself into various
shapes! as though he feared being taken unawares
and showing those who needed his aid that he was
wise. But for my part, if Proteus was really wise
and the sort of man to know the truth about many
things, as Homer says, I applaud him for his talent,
but I cannot admire his attitude of mind, since he
played the part, not of one who loves mankind, but
of an impostor by concealing himself in order to
avoid being of service to mankind. But who, my
noble friend, would not genuinely admire you, since
though you are inferior in no way to wise Proteus if
not even more fully initiated than he in con-
summate virtues, you do not begrudge mankind the
blessings that you possess, but, like the bright sun,
you cause the rays of your pure wisdom to shine on
all men, not only by associating, as is natural, with
those near you, but also as far as possible by making
the absent proud through your writings. And in
this way by your achievements you surpass even
charming Orpheus; for he squandered on the ears of
wild beasts his own peculiar musical gift, but you, as
though you had been born to save the whole human
race, emulate everywhere the hand of Asclepius and
pervade all things with the saving power of your

1 Odyssey 4. 363 foll. ; Vergil, Georgics 4. 388 foil,
265

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

Ud > + a / 2 n

ὥστ᾽ ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ καὶ Ὅμηρος, εἰ aveBiw, πολλῷ
/ 3 \ if

δικαιότερον av ἐπὶ aol τὸ ἔπος αἰνίξασθαι τὸ

- 7” \ Za Ley ’
εἷς δ᾽ Ett που ζωὸς KATEPUKETAL εὐρέι κόσμῳ.

τῷ γὰρ ὄντι τοῦ παλαιοῦ κόμματος ἡμῖν οἱονεὶ
n of.
σπινθήρ τις ἱερὸς ἀληθοῦς Kal yovipou παιδεύσεως
ὑπὸ σοὶ μόνῳ ζωπυρεῖται. καὶ εἴη γε, Zev σῶτερ
407 καὶ “Ἑρμῆ λόγιε, τὸ κοινὸν ἁπάσης τῆς οἰκουμένης
/ > 7 ον , δ αν ΄
ὄφελος, TauBryov τὸν καλον, ἐπὶ μήκιστον
χρόνου τηρεῖσθαι. πάντως που καὶ ἐφ᾽ Ὁμήρῳ
καὶ ἸΪλάτωνι καὶ Σωκράτειϊ καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος
ἄξιος τοῦ χοροῦ τούτου, δικαίας εὐχῆς ἐπίτευγμα
τοῖς πρότερον εὐτυχηθὲν οὕτω τοὺς ἐκείνων
καιροὺς ἐπὶ μεῖζον ηὔξησεν. οὐδὲν δὴ κωλύει
x ΕΣ ᾽ ς aA »Μ \ ἴω \ ’ a
καὶ ἐφ ἡμῶν ἄνδρα καὶ λογῷ καὶ βιῳ τῶν
ἀνδρῶν ἐκείνων ἀντάξιον ὑφ᾽ ὁμοίαις εὐχαῖς ἐς
τὸ ἀκρότατον τοῦ γήρως ἐπ᾽ εὐδαιμονίᾳ τῶν
ἀνθρώπων παραπεμφθῆναι.

80
330 Σαραπίωνι TO λαμπροτάτῳ

Αλλοι μὲν ἄλλως τὰς πανηγύρεις νομίζουσιν,

2 Ν Ny τῷ a. 4 e an ΄ a 9
ἐγὼ δὲ ἡδύ σοι γλυκείας ἑορτῆς σύνθημα τῶν ἐπι-

1 "Ἰσοκράτει Cumont, since Socrates was only seventy when
he died.

2 Hertlein 24.

1 Odyssey 4. 498. The original verse ends with πόντῳ,

266

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

eloquence. Wherefore I think that Homer, too, if
he were to return to life, would with far more justice
allude to you in the verse:

“One is still alive and is detained in the wide
world.’’ 1

For, in very truth, for those of us who are of the
antique mould, a sacred spark, so to speak, of true
and life-giving culture is kindled by your aid alone.
And grant, O Zeus the saviour, and Hermes, god of
eloquence, that this blessing which is the common
property of the whole world, even the charming
Iamblichus, may be preserved for the longest possible
period of time! Indeed, there is no doubt that in the
case of Homer and Plato and Socrates? and others
who were worthy to be of that company, the prayers
of the just were successful and did avail men of old,
and thus increased and prolonged the natural term
of those great men’s lives. So there is no reason
why in our day, also, a man who in his eloquence and
virtuous life is the peer of those famous men, should
not by means of similar prayers be conducted to the
extreme limit of old age for the happiness of
mankind.

80
To the most illustrious Sarapion 3

PeorLe observe the public festivals in various
ways. But I am sending you a hundred long-stalked,
dried, homegrown figs as a sweet token of this

‘fon the sea”; the verse was a rhetorical commonplace and
the ending is often altered to suit the context.

* There would be more point in the reading ‘‘ Isocrates”
(Cumont) since he lived to be nearly one hundred.

3 Sarapion is otherwise unknown.

267

C

D

991

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

χωρίων ἰσχάδων μακροκέντρους ἑκατὸν ἐκπέμπω,
τῷ μὲν τοῦ δώρου μεγέθει μικράν, τῷ κάλλει δὲ
ἴσως ἀρκοῦσαν ἡδονὴν μνηστεύων. ᾿Αριστοφάνει
μὲν οὖν δοκεῖ εἶναι πλὴν μέλιτος τῶν ἄλλων γλυ-
κύτερον τὰς ἰσχάδας, καὶ οὐδὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἀνέχεται τῶν
ἰσχάδων εἶναι γλυκύτερον, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐπικρίνας
λέγει" Ἡροδότῳ δὲ ἄρα τῷ συγγραφεῖ πρὸς ἐπί-
δειξιν ἐρημίας “ἀληθοῦς ἤρκεσεν εἰπόντι “" Hap’
οἷς οὔτε σῦκα ἐστιν οὔτε ἄλλο ἀγαθὸν οὐδέν," ὡς
ἄρ᾽ οὔτε ἄλλου τινὸς ἐν καρποῖς ἀγαθοῦ προτέρου
τῶν σύκων ὄντος, οὔτε ἔτι πάντως ἀγαθοῦ δέον
tots! παρ᾽ οἷς ἂν ἢ τὸ σῦκον. “Ὅμηρος δὲ ὁ σοφὸς
τὰ μὲν ἄλλα τῶν καρπῶν εἰς μέγεθος ἢ χρόαν ἢ
κάλλος ἐπαινεῖ, μόνῳ δὲ TO σύκῳ τὴν τῆς γλυκύ-
TNTOS ἐπωνυμίαν συγχωρεῖ. καὶ τὸ μέλι χλωρὸν
καλεῖ, δεδιὼς μὴ λάθῃ γλυκὺ προσειπών, ὃ καὶ
πικρὸν εἶναι πολλαχοῦ συμβαίνει: τῷ σύκῳ δὲ
ἄρα μόνῳ ἀποδίδωσι τὴν οἰκείαν εὐφημίαν, ὥσπερ
τῷ νέκταρι, διότι καὶ μόνον γλυκὺ τῶν ἄλλων ἐστί.
καὶ μέλι μὲν Ἱπποκράτης φησὶ γλυκὺ μὲν εἶναι
τὴν αἴσθησιν, πικρὸν δὲ πάντως τὴν ἀνάδοσιν, καὶ
οὐκ ἀπιστῶ τῷ λόγῳ' χολῆς γὰρ αὐτὸ ποιητικὸν
εἶναι ξύμπαντες ὁμολογοῦσι καὶ τρέπειν τοὺς
χυμοὺς εἰς τοὐναντίον τῆς γεύσεως. ὃ δὴ καὶ
μᾶλλον. τῆς ἐκ φύσεως αὐτοῦ πικρότητος: κατη-
γορεῖ τὴν γένεσιν" οὐ γὰρ ἂν εἰς τοῦτο μετέβαλλεν
ὃ πικρόν ἐστιν, εἰ μὴ καὶ πάντως αὐτῷ προσῆν
ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοῦτο, ἀφ᾽ οὗ πρὸς τὸ ἕτερον μετέπιπτε.

1 δέον rots Hertlein suggests ; δέοντος MSS.

1 Quoted in Athenaeus, Detipnosophists 652¥; Fragg. Licert.
Fab. οὐδὲν yap ὄντως γλυκύτερον τῶν ἰσχάδων.

268

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

pleasant festal season, If you measure the gift by
its size, the pleasure I offer you is trifling, but if
measured by its beauty it will perhaps suffice. Itis the
opinion of Aristophanes! that figs are sweeter than
anything else except honey, and on second thoughts
he does not allow that even honey is sweeter than
figs. Herodotus? the historian also, in order to
describe a really barren desert thought it enough to
say: “They have no figs or anything else that is
good ’’; as though to say that among the fruits of the
earth there is none to be ranked above figs, and that
where men had figs they did not wholly lack some-
thing good. Again, the wise Homer praises other
fruits for their size or colour or beauty, but to the fig
alone he allows the epithet ‘‘sweet.’’? And he calls
honey “ yellow,’ * for fear he should inadvertently
eall “sweet” what is in fact often bitter; accord-
ingly, to the fig alone® he assigns this epithet for its
own, just as he does to nectar, because alone of all
things it is sweet. Indeed Hippocrates® says that
honey, though it is sweet to the taste, is quite bitter
to the digestion, and I can believe his statement; for
all agree that it produces bile and turns the juices
to the very opposite of its original flavour, which fact
even more surely convicts it of being in its origin
naturally bitter.? For it would not change to this
bitterness if in the beginning this quality had not
belonged to it, from which it changed to the

ΘᾺ]; 3 Odyssey 7. 116. 4 Odyssey 10. 234.

5 Homer does however call honey ‘‘ sweet’ in Odyssey
20. 69 μέλιτι γλυκερῷ.

§ De internis affectionibus 844 ; Hippocrates is speaking of
honey that has been cooked.

7 Oration 8. 241A, Julian says that honey is made from
the bitterest herbs.

269

992

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

σῦκον δὲ οὐκ αἰσθήσει μόνον ἡδύ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀνα-
δόσει κρεῖττόν ἐστιν. οὕτω δέ ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις
ὠφέλιμον, ὥστε καὶ ἀλεξιφάρμακον αὐτὸ παντὸς
ὀλεθρίου φαρμάκου φησὶν ᾿Αριστοτέλης εἶναι, κἀν
τοῖς δείπνοις οὐκ ἄλλου τινὸς ἢ τούτου χάριν" τῶν
ἐδεσμάτων προπαρατίθεσθαί ΤΕ καὶ ἐπιτραγημα-
τίξεσθαι, καθάπερ ἀντ᾽ ἄλλης τινὸς ἀλεξήσεως
ἱερᾶς ταῖς τῶν βρωμάτων ἀδικίαις περιπτυσσό-
μενον. καὶ μὴν ὅτι καὶ θεοῖς τὸ σῦκον ἀνάκειται,
καὶ θυσίας ἐστὶν ἁπάσης ἐμβώμιον, καὶ ὅτι παν-
τὸς λιβανωτοῦ κρεῖττον ἐς θυμιάματος σκευασίαν
ἐστίν, οὐκ ἐμὸς ἴδιος οὗτος ὁ λόγος, GAN ὅστις τὴν
χρείαν αὐτοῦ ἔμαθεν, οἶδεν ὡς ἀνδρὸς σοφοῦ καὶ
ἱεροφάντου λόγος ἐστί. Θεόφραστος δὲ ὁ καλὸς
ἐν γεωργίας παραγγέλμασι τὰς τῶν ἑτεροφύτων
δένδρων γενέσεις ἐκτιθεὶς καὶ ὅσα ἀχληλούχοις
ἐγκεντρίσεσιν εἴκει, πάντων, οἶμαι, τῶν φυτῶν
μᾶλλον ἐπαινεῖ τῆς συκῆς τὸ δένδρον ὡς ἂν ποι-
κίλης καὶ διαφόρου γενέσεως δεκτικὸν καὶ μόνον
τῶν ἄλλων εὔκολον παντοίου γένους ἐνεγκεῖν βλά-
στην, εἴ τις αὐτοῦ τῶν κλάδων ἐκτεμὼν ἕκαστον,
εἶτα ἐκρήξας ἄλλην ἐς ἄλλο τῶν πρέμνων ἐμφυῆ
γονὴν ἐναρμόσειεν, ὡς ἀρκεῖν ἤδη πολλάκις αὐτοῦ
καὶ ἀνθ᾽ ὁλοκλήρου κήπου τὴν ὄψιν, οἷον ἐν λει-
μῶνι χαριεστάτῳ ποικίλην τινὰ καὶ πολυειδῆ τῶν
καρπῶν ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τὴν ἀγλαΐαν. ἀντιπεπομφότος.
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα τῶν ἀκροδρύων ἐ ἐστὶν ὀλιγοχρόνια
καὶ τὴν μονὴν οὐκ ἀνέχεται, μόνῳ ἐ τῷ σύκῳ
καὶ ὑπερενιαυτίζειν ἔξεστι καὶ τῇ τοῦ μέλλοντος

1 Aristotle, Frag. 105, Rose.

270

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

reverse. But the fig is not only sweet to taste but
it is still better for digestion. And it is so beneficial
to mankind that Aristotle! even says that it is an
antidote for every deadly poison, and that for no
other reason than this is it served before other
food as a first course at meals and then at the end
for dessert, as though we embraced it in prefer-
ence to any other sacred means of averting the
injury caused by the things we eat. Moreover, that
the fig is offered to the gods also, and is set on the
altar in every sacrifice, and that it is better than
any frankincense for making fragrant fumes, this
is a statement not made by me alone,? but who-
ever is acquainted with its use knows that it is the
statement of a wise man, a hierophant. Again, the
admirable Theophrastus? in his precepts of agri-
culture, when he is describing the kinds of grafted
trees and what sorts admit of being grafted on one
another, commends the fig tree above all other
plants, if I am not mistaken, as being able to receive
various and different kinds, and as the only one of
them all that easily bears a growth of any other sort,
if you cut out every one of its boughs and then break
off and insert a different engrafted stock into each of
the cleft stumps; hence to look at it is often equi-
valent to a complete garden, since it returns you the
variegated and manifold splendours of other fruits,
as happens in the loveliest orchard. And whereas
the fruits of other fruit-bearing trees are short-lived
and cannot last for any time, the fig alone can
survive beyond the year, and is present at the birth

2 A Julianic commonplace, cf. note on Vol. 2 Fragment of
a Letter 2000, and above, p. 222.
3 Enquiry into Plants 2. 5. 6.

271

D

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

a J a x
καρποῦ γενέσει συνενεχθῆναι. ὥστε φησὶ Kal

Ὅμηρος ἐν ᾿Αλκίνου κήπῳ τοὺς καρποὺς ἀλλήλοις
5 / Ss lal > >
ἐπιγηράσκειν. ἐπὶ μὲν οὖν TOV ἄλλων ἴσως ἂν
μῦθος ποιητικὸς εἶναι δόξειε: μόνῳ δὲ τῷ σύκῳ
\ \ a 5) » > Neat 7 i
πρὸς τὸ τῆς ἀληθείας ἐναργὲς Av συμφέροιτο, διότι
Ν , a la) 7
καὶ μόνον τῶν ἄλλων καρπῶν ἐστὶ μονιμώτερον.
Us \: oF 3 \ ral \ 7 -
τοιαύτην δὲ ἔχον, οἶμαι, τὸ σῦκον τὴν φύσιν, πολλῷ
A ; 3 ς lal . id 5 an
κρεῖττὸν ἐστι TAP ἡμῖν τὴν γένεσιν, WS εἶναι TOV
\ » a la) a
μὲν ἄλλων φυτῶν αὐτὸ τιμιώτερον, αὐτοῦ δὲ TOD
7 \ fn lal
σύκου τὸ Tap ἡμῖν θαυμασιώτερον, Kal νικᾶν μὲν
3 \ a + \ / i , ς Ν an
αὐτὸ τῶν ἄλλων τὴν γένεσιν, αὖθις δ᾽ ὑπὸ τοῦ
>] na a A
Tap ἡμῖν ἡττᾶσθαι καὶ TH πρὸς ἑκάτερον ἐγκρίσει
/ ἡ an 7 95
πάλιν σώζεσθαι, κρατοῦντι μὲν ἐοικός, ols δ᾽ αὖ

A an Ν , la}
κρατεῖσθαι δοκεῖ, πάλιν ἐς τὸ καθόλου νικῶντι.

a - /
καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἀπεικότως παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μόνοις συμ-

, y \ 53 \ \ , ᾽ nA \
βαίνει: ἔδει yap, οἶμαι, τὴν Διὸς πόλιν ἀληθῶς Kal
Ν n er ς ’ὔ 3 / \ e \ \
τὸν τῆς ἑῴας ἁπάσης ὀφθαλμόν' τὴν ἱερὰν Kal
/ \ i? a ” ‘ih
μεγίστην Δαμασκὸν λέγω" τοῖς τε ἄλλοις σύμπα-
e A x n 7 nr
σιν, οἷον ἱερῶν κάλλει καὶ νεῶν μεγέθει καὶ ὡρῶν
εὐκρασίᾳ" καὶ πηγῶν ἀγλαΐᾳ, καὶ ποταμῶν πλη-

\ aA 3 / an / ” \ n

θει καὶ γῆς evpopia νικῶσαν μόνην apa καὶ TO
a \ \ la) / \
τοιούτῳ φυτῷ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ θαύματος ὑπεροχὴν
5 7] n
ἀρκέσαι. οὐδὲν οὖν ἀνέχεται μεταβολῆς TO δέν-
δρὸν, οὐδὲ ὑπερβαίνει τοὺς ἐπιχωρίους ὅρους τῆς
βλάστης, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτόχθονος φυτοῦ νόμῳ τὴν ἐξ

τ ; id ἢ x \ \ Be 7

5 “Ὁ 5
ἀποικίας γένεσιν ἀρνεῖται. καὶ χρυσὸς μὲν, οἶμαι,

1 εὐκρασίᾳ Cobet cf. Zimacus 24 C, εὐκαιρίᾳ Hertlein, MSS.

1 Odyssey 7. 120.
272

ΤῸ THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

of the fruit that is to follow it. Hence Homer! also
says that in the garden of Alcinous the fruits “ wax
old on” one another. Now in the case of other
fruits this might perhaps seem to be a poetic fiction,
but for the fig alone it would be consistent with the
plain fact, because alone of all fruits it lasts for some
time. Such, I think, is the nature of the fig in
general, but the kind that grows with us is much
better than others; so that in proportion as the fig
is more valuable than other plants, our fig is more
admirable than the fig in general; and while the
_ latter in its kind‘surpasses all other fruits, it is in its
turn excelled by ours, and again holds its own by
comparison in both respects, first in being plainly
superior, and secondly, in points where it seems to
be inferior it wins on the general count. And it is
quite natural that this should be so in our country
alone. For it was fitting, I think, that the city
which in very truth belongs to Zeus and is the eye
of the whole East,—I mean sacred and most mighty
Damascus,—* which in all other respects bears the
palm, for instance, for the beauty of its shrines and
the size of its temples and for its exquisitely
tempered climate and the splendour of its fountains,
the number of its rivers and the fertility of its soil—
I say it is fitting that she alone should keep up her
reputation by the possession of a plant of this ex-
cellence and thus excite an excess of admiration.
Accordingly our tree does not brook transplanting,
nor does it overstep the natural boundaries of its
growth, but as though by a law that governs the
indigenous plant refuses to grow in colonies abroad.
The same sorts of gold and silver are, I believe,

2 Julian, as far as we know, never visited Damascus.

273

VOL. III. T

999

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

καὶ ἄργυρος ὁ αὐτὸς πολλαχοῦ φύεται, μόνη δὲ ἡ
παρ᾽ ἡμῖν χώρα τίκτει φυτὸν ἀλλαχοῦ φῦναι μὴ
δυνάμενον. ὥσπερ δὲ τὰ ἐξ Ἰνδῶν ἀγώγιμα καὶ
οἱ Περσικοὶ σῆρες ἢ ὅσα ἐν τῇ Αἰθιόπων γῇ τίκτε-
ται μὲν καὶ λέγεται, τῷ δὲ Tis ἐμπορίας. νόμῳ
πανταχοῦ διαβαίνει" οὕτω δὴ" καὶ τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν
σῦκον, ἀλλαχοῦ τῆς γῆς οὐ γινόμενον, πανταχοῦ
map ἡμῶν στέλλεται, καὶ οὔτε πόλις οὔτε νῆσός
ἐστιν, ἣν οὐκ ἐπέρχεται τῷ τῆς ἡδονῆς θαύματι.
ἀλλὰ καὶ τράπεζαν βασιλικὴν κοσμεῖ, καὶ παντὸς
δείπνου σεμνόν ἐστιν ἐγκαλλώπισμα, καὶ οὔτ᾽
ἔνθρυπτον οὔτε στρεπτὸν οὔτε νεήλατον οὔτε ἄλλο
καρυκείας γένος ἥδυσμα ἴσον ἣ ἂν ἀφίκηται" 5 το-
σοῦτον αὐτῷ τῶν τε ἄλλων ἐδεσμάτων καὶ δὴ καὶ
TOY ἑκασταχοῦ σύκων ἢ περίεστι τοῦ θαύματος.
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα τῶν σύκων ἢ ὀπωρινὴν ἔχει τὴν
βρῶσιν ἢ ἢ τερσαινόμενα ἐς τὸ ταμεῖον" ἔρχεται, τὸ
δὲ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μόνον ἀμφοτερίζει τ ela, καὶ καλὸν
We fist inne: εἶν ΠΡ ΕΣ
τὴν τερσιὰν ἔλθοι. εἰ δὲ καὶ τὴν ὥραν αὐτοῦ τὴν
ἐν τοῖς δένδροις ὀφθαλμῷ λάβοις, καὶ ὅπως ἑκά-
στου τῶν πρέμνων ἐπιμήκεσι, τοῖς κέντροις οἱονεὶ
καλύκων δίκην ἀπήρτηται, ἢ ὅπως ἐν κύκλῳ περι-
θεῖ τῷ ap Tp τὸ δένδρον, ἄλλας ἐπ᾽ ἄλλαις ἐν
στόϊχῳν περιφερεῖ πολυειδεῖς ἀγλαΐας μηχανᾶ-
σθαι φαίης ἂν αὐτὸ καθάπερ ἐν ὅρμῳ δέρης. αἱ

1 χέγεται MSS., Bidez would retain = colliguntur, Hertlein

τρέφεται.

2 οὕτω δὲ Hertlein in error for MSS., δή, restored by Bidez.

2 Hercher and Hertlein οὔτ᾽ ἄν-- οὐδὲν ἐς τὸ ἴσον ἀφίκοιτο;
MSS. οὔτ᾽ ---ἔσται ἥδυσμα ἴσον 4; Bidez οὔτ᾽ --- ἥδυσμα ἴσον ἣ
(ef Thucydides 2.1100 = Ὁ where”) & ἄν ἀφίκηται.

4 After ἑκασταχοῦ Hertlein suggests σύκων.

274

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

produced in many places, but our country alone
gives birth to a plant that cannot be grown any-
where else. And just like the wares of India, or
Persian silks, or all that is produced and collected
in the country of the Ethiopians but travels every-
where by the law of commerce, so, too, our native fig
dues not grow anywhere else on earth, but is exported
by us to all parts, and there is no city or island to
which it does not travel, because it is so much
admired for its sweet flavour. Moreover it even
adorns the imperial table and is the boast and orna-
ment of every feast; and there is no cake or roll or
pastry ! or any kind of confectionery to match it as
a sweetmeat wherever it comes; so far does it surpass
in admirable qualities all other dainties, and more-
over all figs from any other place. Again, other
figs are either eaten in autumn, or are dried and go to
the store-room, but the fig of our country alone can
be used in both ways, and though it is good while on
the tree it is far better when it has been dried.
And should you see with your own eyes their beauty
while they are still on the trees, and how from each
one of the branches they hang by long stalks like
flower-buds, so to speak, or again, how with their fruit
they completely encircle the tree, then you would say
that by this circular series one above another they
compose a splendid and varied picture even as a
neck in its necklace. Then again, the manner in

1 An echo of Demosthenes, On the Crown 260 ἔνλρυπτα καὶ
στρεπτοὺς καὶ νεήλατα.

5 Thomas; ὅμοιον MSS.
ὁ στοίχῳ MSS., Bidez; τοίχῳ Vossianus, Hertlein.
7 μηχανώμενον, pains Hertlein, MSS. ; μηχανᾶσθαι pains Bidez.

275
he

994

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

δὲ 1 n δέ ὃ 5 / 3 a? \ e \
εἰ τῶν δένδρων ἐξαιρέσεις αὐτοῦ" καὶ ἡ πρὸς
χρονίαν “μονὴν ἐπιτέχνησις οὐκ ἐλάττονα τῆς ἐς
τὴν χρείαν ἡδονῆς ἔχει τὴν φιλοτιμίαν' οὐ γὰρ
ὥσπερ τὰ ἄλλα τῶν σύκων ὁμοῦ καὶ κατὰ ταὐτὸν
ἔρριπται, ὁ οὐδὲ σωρηδὸν ἢ ἢ χύδην ἡλίῳ τερσαίνεται,
ἀχλὰ πρῶτον μὲν ἠρέμα τῶν δένδρων αὐτὰ ταῖς
χερσὶν ἀποδρέπουσιν, ἔπειτα ὅρπηξιν ἢ ῥάβδοις
ἀκανθώδεσι τῶν τοίχων ἀπαρτῶσιν, ἵνα λευκαί-
UNTAL μὲν ἡλίῳ καθαρῷ προσομιλοῦντα, μένῃ δ᾽
ἀνεπιβούλευτα τῶν ζῴων καὶ τῶν ὀρνιθίων, οἱονεὶ
τῶν κέντρων τῇ ἀλεξήσει δορυφορούμενα. καὶ
περὶ μὲν γενέσεως αὐτῶν καὶ γλυκύτητος καὶ
ὥρας καὶ ποιήσεως καὶ χρείας ταῦτά σοι παρ᾽
ἡμῶν ἡ ἐπιστολὴ προσπαίζει.

"O γε μὴν τῶν ἑκατὸν ἀριθμὸς ὡς ἔστι τῶν
ἄλλων τιμιώτερος καὶ τὸ τέλεον ἐν αὑτῷ τῶν ἀρι-
θμῶν περιγράφων, μάθοι av τις θεωρῶν τῇδε. καὶ
οὐκ ἀγνοῶ μὲν ὡς παλαιῶν καὶ σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν ὁ
λόγος, τοῦ ἀρτίου τὸν περιττὸν προκεῖσθαι, οὐδὲ
ὡς ἀρχήν φασιν αὐξήσεως εἶναι τὸ μὴ συνδυάξον'
τὸ γὰρ ὅμοιον θατέρῳ μένειν ὁποῖον καὶ τὸ ἕτερον,
δυοῖν δὲ γενομένοιν τὸν τρίτον εἶναι τὴν περιτ-
τότητα. ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἄν, εἰ καὶ τολμηρότερος ὁ λόγος
ἐστί, φαίην ὅμως" ἀρχῆς μὲν εἰσιν οἱ ἀριθμοὶ
πάντως ἐξηρτημένοι, καὶ τὸ προσεχὲς τῆς αὐξή-
σεως διὰ παντὸς ἂν κομίξοιντο. πολλῷ γε μὴν.
οἶμαι δικαιότερον τῷ ἀρτίῳ μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ περιττῷ
τὴν τῆς αὐξήσεως αἰτίαν προσκεῖσθαι. ὁ μὲν

1 αὐτὸ---δέρης. αἱ δὲ Bidez; αὐτῷ---δέρης τὰς Hertlein,
MSS.

2 αὐτοῦ Pane ἢ Bidez; αὐτοῦ. καὶ ἡ Hertlein, MSS..

276

ΤΟ THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

which they are taken from the tree and the means
employed for preserving them for a long time
involve quite as much outlay as the pleasure
derived from their use. For they are not, like
other kinds of figs, thrown together in one place,
nor are they dried in the sun in heaps or promis-
cuously; but first they are gathered carefully by
hand from the trees, then they are hung on walls by
means of sticks or thorny twigs, so that they may
be bleached by exposure to the direct rays of the
sun while they are also safe from the attacks of
animals and small birds, since the protection of the
prickles furnishes them with a sort of bodyguard.
So far my letter to you deals with their origin,
sweetness, beauty, confection, and use, and is in
lighter vein.

Now to consider the number one hundred,! which
is more honourable than any other and contains in
itself the perfection of all numbers, as one may learn
from the following considerations. I am indeed
well aware that there is a saying of wise men of old
that an odd number is to be preferred to an even,
and they declare that the source of increase is
that which does not couple. For in a pair the one
term being equal to the other remains of the same
quality, but when there are two numbers the third
produces oddness. But for my part, even though
the statement is somewhat bold, I would neverthe-
less say this: Numbers surely depend on a genera-
tive principle, and can carry on consecutive increase
through the whole series. But I hold that it is far
more just to assign the cause of that increase to the
even than to the odd number. For the number one

1 He was sending one hundred figs.

277

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

C γὰρ εἷς ἀριθμὸς οὐκ ἂν εἴη περιττός, οὐκ ἔχων

Ὁ

ὅτου περιττὸς. γένοιτο" ἡ δὲ τῆς δυάδος συξυγία
τίκτει διπλῆν τὴν περιττότητα, κἀκ τῶν δυοῖν
ἀριθμῶν ὁ τρίτος εἰκότως εἰς αὔξησιν ἔρχεται.
πάλιν τε ἐν τῇ τῆς ἑτέρας δυάδος μίξει τῆς τετρά-
δος τὴν ὑπεροχὴν. λαμβάνει, καὶ ὅλως ἡ πρὸς
ἄλληλα κοινωνία τὴν ἐξἑκατέρου περιττότητα φαί-
νουσα εἰς τὸν τῆς δυάδος ἀριθμὸν περικλείεται.
δεδομένου δὴ τούτου, φαίην ἂν, οἶμαι, τῆς πρώτης
δεκάδος τὴν εἰς αὑτὴν περιφέρειαν ἀνακυκλούσης
εἰς τὸν τῆς ἑκατοντάδος ἀριθμὸν τὸ ὅλον δια-
βαίνειν, ὡς τῷ μὲν evi τὴν αὔξησιν ἂν εἰς δέκα
συντείνειν, πάλιν δ᾽ αὖ τὴν δεκάδα δι᾿ αὑτῆς ἀνι-
οὔσαν εἰς τὸν τῶν ἑκατὸν ἀριθμὸν συντελεῖσθαι.
κἀντεῦθεν αὖ πάλιν ἐξ ἑκατοντάδων τὸ ὅλον τῶν
ἀριθμῶν τὴν δύναμιν καρποῦσθαι, μήτε τοῦ ἑνὸς
ἠρεμοῦντος, εἰ μή τι τῆς δυάδος ἐν τῇ μίξει τὸ
περιττὸν ἀεὶ τικτούσης τε καὶ εἰς ἑαυτὴν αὖθις
ἀνακαλουμένης, ἄχρις ἂν ἑτέρᾳ πάλιν ἑκατοντάδι
τῶν ἀριθμῶν τὸ συναγόμενον κατακλείσῃ, καὶ τὸ
τέλεον αὐτῷ προσάπτουσα πάλιν ἐξ αὐτοῦ πρὸς
τὸ ἕτερον ἑρπύσῃ, ταῖς τῶν ἑκατοντάδων ἐπηγο-
ρίαις ἀεὶ τὸ ὅλον εἰς τὸ τῆς καταλήψεως ἄπειρον
ἀναφέρουσα. δοκεῖ δέ μοι καὶ Ὅμηρος οὐχ ἁπλῶς
οὐδὲ ἀργῶς ἐν τοῖς ἔπεσι τὴν ἑκατονταθύσανον
αἰγίδα τῷ Διὶ περιθεῖναι, ἀλλά τινι κρείττονι καὶ
ἀπορρήτῳ λόγῳ τοῦτο αἰνίττεσθαι λέγων, ὡς ἄρα

1 ἡ, 6. 1 is now odd in relation to 2, and their combination
results in 3, an odd number.

2 7.6. when ten is multiplied by ten.

278

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

is not odd, when it has no number in respect to
which it were odd. But its coupling with two pro-
duces twofold odduness,! and the number three,
coming from the two, naturally proceeds as increase.
Then again when we add two to two, the result is the
higher stage of the number four, and, in a word,
their conjunction, while making oddness clear in
each of their two elements, is constituted in the
number two. This being granted, I should say, of
course, that when the first decad is revolving on
itself in a circle,” the whole series progresses to the
number one hundred, so that by the number one
the increase amounts to ten, and the decad in turn
is added each time to itself, and the total is
reached in the number one hundred. And start-
ing again from this point, with the hundreds, the
whole series of numbers derive their power, by
the activity of the number one, except that it is
the number two? when combined with it that ever
produces the odd and again recalls it to itself,
until again it concludes with a second hundred the
sum of all the numbers, and, making it complete,
proceeds again from it to another and under the
denomination of hundreds continually carries forward
the sum to the conception of infinity. So I think
that Homer too in his poems does not lightly or
idly assign to Zeus the hundred-tasselled egis,4 but
in a lofty and obscure saying he hinted at this

8 The writer, who probably could not have explained his
cryptic language, insists on the superiority of the dyad,
even and feminine, to the odd number 1, regarded as the
male principle.

4 The epithet is not used in our Homer of the egis of
Zeus, but of the egis of Athene and the girdle of Hera.

279

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

a / A \ ΄ 5 \ /
τῷ τελεωτάτῳ θεῷ τὸν τελεώτατον ἀριθμὸν περιά-
ἈΦ id \ \ » ΕΥ ,
Were καὶ ᾧ μόνῳ παρὰ TOUS ἄλλους ἂν δικαιότερον
ce Ἃ 7 \ /
κοσμοῖτο, ἢ ὅτι τὸν ξύμπαντα κόσμον, OV εἰς alyi-
A la a 3 άπ a ,ὔ
δος σχῆμα τῷ τῆς εἰκόνος περιφερεῖ ξυνείληφεν,
3 "7 Av ¢ a ς Χ 3 Ν 7
οὐκ ἄλλος πως ἢ ὁ τῶν ἑκατὸν ἀριθμὸς περιγράφει,
a \ rh ς ΄ Ν 3 \ Ὡ a
τῇ κατὰ κύκλον ἑκατοντάδι τὴν ἐς TO ὅλον TOU
A ( 39 i id ᾽ 3 Ν ,
νοητοῦ κατανόησιν ἐφαρμόττων. ὁ δ᾽ αὐτὸς λόγος
Φ \ / N ὃ ΄ /
οὗτος Kal τὸν ἑκατοντάχειρα, τὸν Βριάρεω, καθίζει
΄, a ’ \ \ \ A e
πάρεδρον τῷ Διί, Kal πρὸς τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς ἁμιλ-
ἴω “ ᾽ - 5 a lal 5 A
λᾶσθαι συγχωρεῖ δύναμιν, οἷον ἐν τῷ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ
/ Ἂς , 3 A A > / 5 / \
TENEW TO τέλεον αὐτῷ τῆς ἰσχύος ἀποδιδούς. Kal
\ \ / ¢ an My > 7] \
μὴν καὶ Uivdapos ὁ Θηβαῖος τὴν ἀναίρεσιν τὴν
’ὔ, A
Tudwéws ἐν ἐπινικίοις κηρύττων καὶ TO τοῦ μεγί-
/ A / A
στου τούτου γίγαντος κράτος τῷ μεγίστῳ βασιλεῖ
n A \ 3 e / > A an »
τῶν θεῶν περιτιθεὶς οὐχ ἑτέρωθεν αὐτῷ τῆς εὐφη-
/ ὧν, Ν € x Ἃ e \ 7ὔ
μίας κρατύνει τὴν ὑπερβολὴν ἢ ὅτι τὸν γίγαντα
\ , \ wn
Tov ἑκατοντακέφαλον ἑνὶ βλήματι καθελεῖν ἤρκε-
ς ” ἣν bY 2 a “ \ > a
σεν, WS οὔτε τινὸς ἄλλου εἰς χεῖρα TOD Διὸς ἐλθεῖν
/ bY ©
ἀντιμάχου γίγαντος νομισθέντος ἢ ὃν ἡ μήτηρ
, lal » e δ a Ὁ ”
μονον τῶν ἄλλων ExaTOV κεφαλαῖς ὡπλισεν, οὔτε
ς 7 \ a Ἃ (4 \ 2 ’ὔ Ν
ἑτέρου τινὸς θεῶν ἢ μόνου Διὸς ἀξιονικοτέρου πρὸς
\ a / Vf i /
τὴν τοῦ τοσούτου γίγαντος καθαίρεσιν ὄντος.
x 7 A n \ \ /
Σεμωνίδῃ δὲ ἄρα τῷ μελικῷ πρὸς τὴν ᾿Απόλλωνος
ae , 3 a \ \ νά 4 \
εὐφημίαν ἀρκεῖ τὸν Oeov" Exatov προσειπόντι Kal
3 ws lal ,
καθάπερ ἀντ᾽ ἄλλου τινὸς ἱεροῦ γνωρίσματος
a \ / aA , Ν Ψ
αὐτοῦ τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν κοσμῆσαι, διότι τὸν Πύθωνα,
\ / ΄ e , e/ 3 ,
τὸν δράκοντα, βέλεσιν ἑκατὸν, ὡς φησιν, ἐχειρώ-
280

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

that to the most perfect god he attached the most
perfect number, that number by which alone beyond
all the others he would most fittingly be adorned,
or because the whole universe which he has com-
prehended in the shape of an #gis, by reason of
the. roundness of that image, no other number
than the hundred describes, and so with the round
number one hundred he harmonises the conception
of the intelligible world as a whole. Again, on the
same principle he makes Briareus with his hundred
hands the assessor of Zeus and allows him to rival his
father’s might, as though he expressed the perfec-
tion of his strength by means of the perfect number.
Again, Pindar! the Theban, when he celebrates the
destruction of Typhoeus in his odes of victory, and
ascribes to the most mighty ruler of the gods power
over this most mighty giant, rises to the highest
pitch of praise simply because with one blow he
was able to lay low the hundred-headed giant, as
though no other giant was held worthy “to fight
hand to hand with Zeus than he whom, alone of all
the rest, his mother had armed with a hundred
heads ; and as though no other of the gods save
Zeus only were worthy to win a victory by the
destruction of so great a giant. Simonides? also,
the lyric poet, thinks it enough for his praise of
Apollo that he should call the god “ Hekatos’”’ 3
and adorn him with this title rather than with any
other sacred symbol; for this reason, that he over-
came the Python, the serpent, with a hundred

1 Pindar, Olympian Ode 4.7; Pythian 1. 16.

2 Simonides, frag. 26, Bergk.

8 This epithet means ‘‘ Far-Darter” and is misinterpreted
by the writer of this letter to mean ‘‘ Hundredth.”

28]

396

C

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

σατο, Kal μᾶλλον αὐτὸν Exatov ἢ Πύθιον χαίρειν
προσαγορευόμενον, οἷον ὁλοκλήρου τινὸς ἐπωνυ-
μίας συμβόλῳ προσφωνούμενον. ἢ γε μὴν τὸν
Δία θρεψαμένη νῆσος, ἡ ἹΚρήτη, καθάπερ τροφεῖα
τῆς Διὸς ὑποδοχῆς ἀντιλαβοῦσα τῷ τῶν ἑκατὸν
πόλεων ἀριθμῷ τετίμηται. καὶ Θήβας δὲ ἄρα τὰς
ἑκατονταπύλους οὐκ ἄλλου τινὸς ἢ τούτου χάριν
ἐπαινεῖ Ὅμηρος, διότι ταῖς πύλαις ταῖς ἑκατὸν
κάλλος ἣν θαυμαστόν. καὶ σιωπῶ θεῶν ἑκατόμ-
βας καὶ νεὼς ἑκατονταπέδους καὶ βωμοὺς ἑκατον-
τακρήπιδας καὶ τοὺς ἑκατονταδόχους ἀνδρῶνας
καὶ τὰς ἀρούρας δὲ τὰς ἑκατονταπλέθρους καὶ ὅσα
ἄλλα θεῖά τε καὶ ἀνθρώπινα τῇ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ τοῦδε
προσηγορίᾳ συνείληπται. ὅ γε μὲν ἀριθμὸς οὗτος
οἷδε καὶ στρατιωτικὴν ὁμοῦ καὶ εἰρηνικὴν τάξιν
κοσμῆσαι, καὶ “φαιδρύνει μὲν τὴν ἑκατόντανδρον
λοχαγίαν, τιμᾷ δὲ ἥδε καὶ δικαστῶν ἐς τὸ ἴσον
ἥκουσαν ἐπωνυμίαν. καί με καὶ πλείω τούτων
ἔχοντα λέγειν ὁ τῆς ἐπιστολῆς ἐπιστρέφει νόμος"
σὺ δὲ ἀλλὰ συγγνώμην ἔχειν τῷ λόγῳ, διότι καὶ
ταῦτα πλείω τῶν ἱκανῶν εἴρηται. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἔχει
μέτριον. ἐπὶ σοὶ κριτῇ κάλλος τὸ ἐγχείρημα, πάν-
τως καὶ “πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους ἔκφορον ἔσται, ΤῊΣ
παρὰ σοῦ λρήφου τὴν μαρτυρίαν δεξάμενον' εἰ δὲ
χειρὸς ἑτέρας προσδεῖται πρὸς τὸ τοῦ σκοποῦ
συμπλήρωμα, τίς ἂν σοῦ κάλλιον εἰδείη τὴν γραφὴν
εἰς κάλλος ἀκριβώσας πρὸς τὴν τῆς θέας ἡδονὴν
ἀπολεᾶναι ; +

1 ἀκριβώσαΞ---ἀπολεᾶναι (cf. ἐπιλεαίνων vol. 1, Oration 3. 111
D in same sense) Hertlein suggests. Hercher ἀκριβῶσαι.
deleting the last six words. MSS. ἀκριβώσαντος--- ἀπολαῦσαι
retained in Hertlein’s text.

282

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SARAPION

shafts, as he says, and the god himself took more
pleasure in being addressed as “ Hekatos” than as
“the Pythian,” as if he were thus invoked by the
symbolic expression of his complete title. Then
again, the island Crete which nurtured Zeus, has
received as her reward, as though it were her fee
for sheltering Zeus, the honour of cities to the
number of one hundred. Homer? too _ praises
Thebes the hundred-gated for no other reason than
this that there was a marvellous beauty in her
hundred gates. I say nothing of the hecatombs of
the gods and temples a hundred feet long, altars
with a hundred steps, rooms that hold a hundred
men, fields of a hundred acres and other things
divine and human which are classed together
_because they have this number for their epithet.
It is a number, moreover, that has the power to
adorn official rank both for war and peace, and while
it lends brilliance to a company of a hundred soldiers
it also confers distinction on the title of judges?
when their number is one hundred. And I could say
more than this, but the etiquette of letter-writing
deters me. But do you be indulgent to my dis-
course, for what I have said already is more than
enough. And if my essay has in your judgement
even a mediocre elegance it shall surely go forth for
others to read, after receiving the testimonial of
your vote; but if it need another hand to make
it fulfil its aim, who better than you should know
how to polish the manuscript to the point of
elegance and make it smooth so as to give pleasure
to the eye?

1 Tliad 9. 383; Acneid 3. 106,
2 The centumviri.

283

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS
81

7
Βασιλείῳ !

Τὸ ἔμφυτόν μοι ἐκ παιδόθεν γαληνὸν καὶ φιλάν-
θρωπον μέχρι γε τοῦ παρόντος ἐπιδεικνύμενος,

/ e / 3 yf ’ aA \
πάντας ὑπηκόους ἐκομισάμην τοὺς οἰκοῦντας THY
ὑφ᾽ ἥλιον. ἰδοὺ γὰρ πᾶν γένος βαρβάρων μέχρις
ὁρίων ὠκεανοῦ ποταμοῦ "δῶρά μοι κομίξον ἧκε
παρὰ ποσὶ τοῖς ἐμοῖς, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Σαγάδαρες οἱ
παρὰ τὸν Δάνουβιν ἐκτραφέντες καὶ Τόττοι ποικι-
λοκαρόμορφοι, οἷς οὐκ ἔστι θέα ὁμοιοειδὴς ἀνθρώ-
ποις, ἀλλὰ μορφὴ ἀγριαίνουσα. οὗτοι κατὰ τὴν
ἐνεστῶσαν προκαλινδοῦνται ἴχνεσι τοῖς ἐμοῖς,
ὑπισχνούμενοι ποιεῖν ἐκεῖν α, ἅπερ τῇ ἐμῇ ἁρμόζει
βασιλείᾳ. οὐχὶ δὲ ἐν τούτῳ μόνον ἕλκομαι, ἀλλὰ
δεῖ με σὺν πολλῷ τῷ τάχει καταλαβεῖν τὴν ΠΕερ-
σῶν καὶ τροπώσασθαι τὸν Σάπωριν ἐκεῖνον τὸν
ἀπόγονον Δαρείου γεγονότα, ἄχρις οὗ ὑπόφορος
καὶ ὑποτελής μοι γένηται' ἐντεῦθεν δὲ καὶ τὴν
᾿Ινδῶν καὶ τὴν Σαρακηνῶν περιοικίδα ἐκπορθῆσαι,
ἄχρις οὗ καὶ αὐτοὶ πάντες ἐν δευτέρᾳ τάξει βασι-
λείας γένωνται τῆς ἐμῆς ὑπόφοροι καὶ ὑποτελεῖς.
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐπέκεινα τῆς τούτων δυνάμεως πεφρό-
νηκας, εὐλάβειαν μὲν λέγων ἐνδεδύσθαι, ἀναίδειαν
δὲ προβαλλόμενος, καὶ πανταχοῦ διαφημίζων

1 Hertlein 75. It occurs in a great number οὗ MSS., some-
times with the reply of Basil, also apocryphal, and in Basil,
Ivtters 3. Ὁ. 122. The text is very corrupt.

2 ποικιλοκανθαρόμορφοι, ‘‘shaped like variegated beetles,’’

Reiske, from εὐμορφοποικιλοκανθαρόμορφοι, the reading of
Palatinus 146.

1 This letter, generally recognised as spurious, is perhaps
a Christian forgery, since it gives an unfavourable impression

284

10 BASIE

81
To Basil 4

Up to the present I have displayed the innately
mild and humane temper that I have shown since
childhood, and have brought under my sway all
who dwell on the earth beneath the sun. For lo,
every tribe of barbarians as far as the boundaries of
the river of Ocean has come bringing gifts to lay
at my feet! And likewise the Sagadares2 who are
bred on the banks of the Danube, and the Cotti
with headdresses of many shapes and colours, who
are not like the rest of mankind to look at, but have
a fierce and wild appearance. These at the present
time are grovelling in my footprints and promise to
_do whatever suits my majesty’s pleasure. And not
only am I distracted by this, but I must with all
speed occupy the country of the Persians and put
to flight the great Sapor, who is the descendant
of Darius, until he consents to pay me tribute and
taxes. Afterwards I must also sack the settlements
of the Indians and Saracens, until they too shall
all take second place in my Empire and consent to
pay tribute and taxes. But you have in your own
person displayed a pride far exceeding the power
of all these, when you say that you are clothed in
pious reserve, but in fact flaunt your impudence, and
spread a rumour on all sides that I am not worthy

of Julian. The writer knew nothing of Julian’s style and
mannerisms. Julian was no boaster and avoided outlandish
words. It was probably read by Sozomen, 5. 18. 7, and is
of early date. Julian was in frequent correspondence with
Basil, and for their friendly relations οἵ. To Basil, p. 81.

2 This tribe cannot be identified. Julian himself always
calls the Danube ‘‘ Ister.”

285

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

’ en , a lal ς , , ,
ἀνάξιον με τῆς TOV Ρωμαίων βασιλείας yeyove-
x ς ΄ A κα
ναι. ἢ οὐκ οἶσθα αὐτός, ὡς Kwvota τοῦ κρατί-
Υ͂ ΄ 7
στου γέγονα ἀπόγονος ; Kal τούτων οὕτω γνωσ-
n ν \ a A 4
θέντων ἡμῖν cov ἕνεκα οὐδὲ τῆς προτέρας ἐξέστη-
vd oe v7 / s/ “Ὁ ς ὦ 5 ’
μεν διαθέσεως, ἧσπερ ἔτι νέοι ὄντες τῇ ἡλικίᾳ ἐγώ
\ \ a n
TE καὶ σὺ μετεσχήκαμεν. ἀλλὰ γαληνῷ TO Hpo-
/ id te e v4 rg lal
νήματι θεσπίζω δέκα ἑκατοντάδας χρυσίου λιτρῶν
an \ n a ὦ
ἐξαποσταλῆναί μοι παρὰ σοῦ ἐν τῇ παρόδῳ μου
an \ \ ᾽ὔ “ \ \ ,
τῇ κατὰ τὴν Katoapos, ἔτι μου κατὰ τὴν λεωφό-
e uf \ a A / 7 ,
pov ὑπάρχοντος, συν πολλῷ τῷ τάχει μέλλοντος
: , X \ ,
μου βαδίζειν ἐπὶ τὸν ἸΠερσικὸν πόλεμον, ἑτοίμου
5 2 \ “ 7 /
ὄντος μου, εἰ μὴ τοῦτο ποιήσεις, πάντα τόπον
ἀνασκευάσαι τῆς Καίσαρος, καὶ τὰ πάλαι αὐτῆς
ἐγηγερμένα καλλιουργήματα κατασκάψαι κατὰ
a \ 3 an nf
τόπον, ναούς TE καὶ ἀγάλματα ἀναστῆσαι, ὥστε
an 14 ” Aye » \ \
με πεῖσαι πάντας εἴκειν βασιλεῖ Ρωμαίων καὶ μὴ
ς ’ \ i 5 \ ὁ 2
ὑπεραίρεσθαι. τὸ οὖν ἐξονομασθὲν χρυσίον ἐξ
a A la) VA J /
ἀριθμοῦ ζυγῷ ἹΚαμπανῷ πρυτανίσας καὶ διαμετρή-
3 “Ὁ 5 / 3 > if a
σας ἀσφαλῶς ἐξαπόστειλόν μοι δι᾽ οἰκείου πιστοῦ
, aA rn ‘A
σοι ὄντος, δακτυλίῳ τῷ σῷ σφραγισάμενος, ὥστε
ΡῚ / 3 3 / aA A \
με ἐπεγνωκότι, κἂν ὀψέ ποτε, τοῦ καιροῦ TO ἀπα-
, , 4 \
ραίτητον γαληνὸν σοι γενέσθαι περὶ Ta ἐπταισ-
/ a \ , \ ,ὔ
μένα. ἃ γὰρ ἀνέγνων, ἔγνων καὶ κατέγνων.1
1 This last sentence was probably not in the original letter
but was quoted as Julian’s by Sozomen 5. 18 and added to
this letter in some MSS. It occurs separately in one MS.,

Ambrosianus B 4, with the title πρὸς ἐπισκόπους (Cumont,
Recherches, p. 47).

286

TO BASIL

to be Emperor of the Romans. What! Do you not
yourself know that I am a descendant of the most
mighty Constans? And although this your conduct
has come to my knowledge I have not, as concerns
you, departed from my former attitude—I mean that
mutual regard which you and I had when we
were young men of the same age. But with no
harshness of temper I decree that you shall despatch
to me one thousand pounds weight of gold, as I
march by Caesarea, to be paid without my leaving
the high-road, since I purpose to march with all
speed to carry on the war with Persia, and I am
prepared, if you do not do this, to lay waste the
whole district of Caesarea,! to tear down on the
spot those fine buildings erected long ago, and to
set up instead temples and images, that so I may
persuade all men to submit to the Emperor of Rome
and not be inflated with conceit. Accordingly,
weigh the above-mentioned gold to that amount on
Campanian scales, oversee it yourself and measure
it carefully and despatch it safely to me by some-
one of your household in whom you have confidence,
and first seal it with your own seal-ring, so that, if
you have recognised, late though it be, that the
occasion admits of no evasion, I may deal mildly
with your errors of the past. For what I read, I
understood and condemned.?

1 Caesarea had had three fine temples destroyed by the
Christians. Julian ordered their restoration, confiscated the
estates of the Church, and imposed a fine of 300 lbs. of gold,
cf. Sozomen 5. 9. 7, Julian’s death may have prevented
the enforcement of the penalty.

2 See below, frag. 14, p. 308.

287

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS
82
Γάλλος καῖσαρ ᾿Ιουλιανῷ ἀδελφῷ χαίρειν |

454 Ἡ γειτνίασις τῆς χώρας, λέγω δὲ τὴς Ἰωνίας,
C πλεῖστον ὅσον κέρδος εἰς ἡμᾶς ἤνεγκεν. ἀνιω-
μένους γὰρ ἡμᾶς καὶ δυσχεραίνοντας ἐπὶ ταῖς
πρώταις φήμαις παρεμυθήσατο. τί δὲ ἔστιν ὃ
λέγω, γνώσῃ. ἧκεν εἰς ἡμετέρας ἀκοὰς ἀποστῆς-
vat μέν σε τῆς προτέρας θρησκείας τῆς ἐκ προγό-
νων παραδοθείσης, ἐπὶ δὲ τὴν μάταιον δεισιδαι-
μονίαν ἐληλακέναι, οἴστρῳ τινὶ κακῷ συμβούλῳ
εἰς τοῦτο ἐλαθέντα. καὶ τί οὐκ ἔμελλον πάσχειν
δυσχεραίνων ; ὡς yap” εἰ μέν τι τῶν ἐν σοὶ καλῶν

D διαβοώμενον γνοίην, κέρδος οἰκεῖον ἡγοῦμαι, οὕτω ὃ
δέ τι τῶν δυσχερῶν, ὃ ὅπερ οὐκ οἶμαι, ἐξίσης ξημίω-
μα μᾶλλον € ἐμὸν νομίζω. ἐπὶ τούτοις οὖν ἀνιώμενόν

με ἡ παρουσία τοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν ᾿Αετίου ηὔφραι-
νεν, ἀπαγγέλλοντος μὲν ἐναντία, ἡμῖν δὲ εὐκτά'
καὶ γὰρ σπουδάζειν σε ἔφη εἰς οἴκους εὐχῶν, καὶ
μὴ πόρρω τῆς μνείας τῶν ἀθλητῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀπο-
σπᾶσθαι, ὅλως δὲ ἔχεσθαι διεβεβαιοῦτο τῆς θεοσε-

1 No number in Hertlein. First published by Vulcanius,
Leyden, 1597; found only in Palatinus 209, Barberinus 132.

2 yap Hertlein would add.

3 οὕτω δὲ Hertlein suggests; εἰ δὲ Reiske ; οὐ δὲ MSS.

* Nearly all the critics reject this letter as a Christian
forgery, but it is defended by Seeck, Geschichte d. Unter-
gangs d. Antiken Welt, 1V. 124,440, 6. Philostorgius 3. 27. 53,
Bidez, says that Gallus, Julian’s half-brother, who was a
Christian, frequently sent Aetius to instruct Jnlian in
Christian doctrine in order to counteract the influences

288

GALLUS CAESAR TO HIS BROTHER JULIAN

82
Letter from Gallus Caesar to his brother Julian !
Gattus Cagsar to his brother Julian, Greeting.

My nearness to the country, I mean to I[onia,?
has brought me the greatest possible gain. For it
gave me comfort when I was troubled and pained
at the first reports that came to me. You will
understand what I mean. It came to my ears that
you had abandoned your former mode of worship
which was handed down by our ancestors, and goaded
by some evil kind of madness that incited you to
this, had betaken yourself to that vain superstition.
What pain should I not have suffered? For just as
whenever I learn by public rumour of any noble
quality in you I regard it as a personal gain, so too
if I hear of anything disturbing, which, however, I
do not think I shall, in the same way I consider it
even more my personal loss. ‘Therefore when I was
troubled about these matters, the presence of our
father Aetius® cheered me, for he reported the
very contrary, which was what I prayed to hear.
Moreover he said that you were zealous in attend-
ance at the houses of prayer, and that you are not
being drawn away from pious remembrance of the
martyrs, and he affirmed that you entirely adhere to

that inclined him to paganism. If genuine it must be
dated between 351, when Gallus was made Cesar, and
354, as Gallus was put to death by Constantius in the
latter year.

* Gallus Caesar resided at Antioch till 354 when he went
to Constantinople. Julian, meanwhile, was studying at
Pergamon and Ephesus. For his relations with Gallus,
see Vol. 2, To the Athenians 273 A.

3 For Aetius see Introduction and Letter 15.

289

VOL. ΠῚ, U

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

455 Betas τῶν ἡμετέρων. ἐγὼ δέ σοι τοῦτ᾽ ἂν εἴποιμι
κατὰ 3 τὸ , Ὁμηρικὸν Barr’ οὕτως, καὶ ἐπὶ τοιαύ-
ταῖς μνείαις εὔφραινε τοὺς ἀγαπῶντας, μεμνη-
μένος ὡς οὐκ ἔστι Τί θεοσεβείας ἀνώτερον. ἡ γὰρ
εἰς ἄκρον ἀρετὴ παιδεύει τὸ μὲν ψεῦδος ἁ ὡς ἀπατη-
λὸν μισεῖν, τοῦ δὲ ἀληθοῦς ἔχεσθαι, ὃ ὅπερ μάλιστα
ἐν τῇ περὶ τὸ θεῖον φαίνεται θρησκείᾳ. ὄχλος γὰρ
πάντως φιλόνεικον καὶ ἄστατον" τὸ δὲ μόνον σὺν

Β ἑνὶ 35 ὑπουργὸν ὃν βασιλεύει τοῦ παντός, οὐκ ἐκ
δασμοῦ καὶ κλήρου, καθάπερ οἱ ἹΚρόνου παῖδες,
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοαρχὴ ὄν, καὶ eae TOV ἁπάντων, οὐδὲ
δεξάμενον βίᾳ παρ᾽ ἑτέρου, ἀλλὰ πρὸ πάντων ὄν.
τοῦτο ὄντως θεός, ὅ ὅνπερ σὺν τῷ ὀφειλομένῳ σεβάσ-
ματι προσκυνεῖν χρή. ἔρρωσο.

83
Ἰουλιανῷ ὐστάθιος φιλόσοφος *

Ὥς ὥνησέ γε τὸ σύνθημα ἡμῖν μελλῆσαν" ἀντὶ
γὰρ τοῦ τρέμειν καὶ δεδιέναι φερόμενον ἐπὶ τῆς
δημοσίας a ἀπήνης καὶ περιπίπτοντα κραιπαλῶσιν
ὀρεωκόμοις καὶ ἡμιόνοις ἀκοστήσασι καθ᾽ “ Ὅμηρον
δι’ ἀργίαν καὶ πλησμονὴν dvéyer Oar κονιορτοῦ Kal

1 Reiske deletes κατά.

2 Heyler suggests that οὐδενὶ ὑπουργὸν ‘* subservient to
none” would be more appropriate to Gallus, who was an
Arian. In any case, Heyler’s reading gives a better sense
to ὑπουργόν.

3 παρ᾽ ἑτέρου Reiske suggests; ἕτερον MSS., Hertlein.

4 Hertlein 72. The above is the correct title preserved in
Parisinus 963 after the incorrect Λιβανίῳ σοφιστῇ καὶ κοιαίστωρι
retained in brackets by Hertlein.

290

EUSTATHIUS TO JULIAN

the religion of our family. So I would say to you
in the words of Homer,! “Shoot on in this wise,”
and rejoice those who love you by being spoken of
in such terms, remembering that nothing is higher
than religion. For supreme virtue teaches us to
hate a lie as treachery and to cling to the truth,
which truth is most clearly made manifest in the-
worship of the Divine Being. For a crowd? is
wholly contentious and unstable; but the Deity,
ministering alone with but one other,? rules the
universe, not by division or lot, like the sons of
Cronos,‘ but existing from the beginning and having
power over all things, not having received it from
another by violence, but existing before all. This is
verily God, whom we must adore with the reverence
that we owe to him. Farewell!

83
Eustathius ὅ the Philosopher to Julian

Wuat an advantage it was for me that the token ®
came late! For instead of riding, in fear and
trembling, in the public? carriage and, in encounters
with drunken mule-drivers and mules made restive,
as Homer® says, from idleness and overfeeding,

1 Tliad ὃ. 282; Agamemnon to Teucer the archer.

2 2,6, of the gods.

2 i.e. God the Word; but see critical note.

‘ i.e. Zeus, Poseidon and Hades, whose separate realms
are defined in J/iad 15. 187 foll.

5 See Introduction, under Eustathius.

6. The ‘‘ tessera,” whether ring, coin or document, served
as a passport.

7 The epithet δημόσιος is used (1) of the public carriage,
(2) of the ‘‘state,” or reserved, carriage. The first is meant
here. 8 Iliad 6. 506.

201

THE APOCRYPHAL LETTERS

φωνῆς ἀλλοκότου Kal ψόφου μαστίγων, βαδίζειν
ἐπὶ σχολῆς περιέστη μοι δι’ ὁδοῦ συνηρεφοῦς καὶ
ἐπισκίου, πολλὰς μὲν κρήνας, πολλὰς δὲ ἐχούσης
καταγωγὰς ἐπιτηδείους τῇ ὥρᾳ μεταξὺ τὸν κόπον
διαναπαύοντι, ἵνα μοι φανείη κατάλυσις εὔπνους
τε καὶ ἀμφιλαφὴς ὑπὸ πλατάνοις τισὶν ἢ κυπαρίτ-
τοῖς, τὸν Φαῖδρον ἔχοντι ἐν χερσὶ ἢ ἕτερόν τινα
τῶν Πλάτωνος λόγων. ταῦτά τοι, ὦ φίλη κεφαλή,
ἀπολαύων τῆς ἐλευθέρας ὁδοιπορίας, ἄτοπον ὑπέ-
λαβον τὸ μὴ καὶ τοῦτο κοινώσασθαί σοι καὶ
ἀποσημῆγναι.

1 After χερσὶ MSS add τὸν Μυρρινούσιον which Hertlein would
delete as inappropriate to the title of Plato’s dialogue,

292

EUSTATHIUS TO JULIAN

having to endure clouds of dust and a strange
dialect and the cracking of whips, it was my lot
to travel at leisure by a road arched over with trees
and well-shaded, a road that had numerous springs
and resting-places suitable to the summer season
for a traveller who seeks relief from his weariness
on the way; and where I always found a good place
to stop, airy and shaded by plane trees or cypresses,
while in my hand I held the Phaedrus or some other
of Plato’s dialogues. Now all this profit, O beloved,
I gained from the freedom with which I travelled ;
therefore 1 considered that it would be unnatural not
to communicate this also to you, and announce it.!

1 The journey of Eustathius is probably that for which
Julian gave his permission in Letter 44.

293

FRAGMENTA BREVIORA*

Tis οὖν ἀγνοεῖ τὸν Αἰθιόπων ὑπὲρ τοῦ παρ'
ἡμῖν τροφιμωτάτου σιτίου λόγον ; ; ἁψάμενοι γὰρ
τῆς μάζης θαυμάξειν ἔφασαν, ὅπως κόπρια σιτού-
μενοι ζῶμεν, εἴ τῳ πιστὸς ὁ Θούριος εἶναι λογο-
ποιὸς δοκεῖ. ἰχθυοφάγων δὲ καὶ σαρκοφάγων
ἀνθρώπων γένη μηδ᾽ ὄναρ ἰδόντα τὴν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν
δίαιταν οἱ τὴν οἰκουμένην περιηγούμενοι γῆν
ἱστοροῦσιν. ὧν εἴ τις παρ᾽ “ἡμῖν ζηλῶσαι τὴν
δίαιταν ἐπιχειρήσει, οὐδὲν ἄμεινον διακείσεται

τῶν TO κώνειον προσενεγκαμένων ἢ τὴν ἀκόνιτον
ἢ τὸν ἑλλέβορον."

2

Πρὸς τὴν ᾿Βρκυνίαν ὕλην ἐθέομεν, καὶ εἶδον
ἐγὼ χρῆμα ἐξαίσιον. ἰδοὺ γοῦν σοι θαρρῶν ἐγὼ
ἐγγυῶμαι, μήποτε ὦφθαι τοιοῦτον μηδέν, ὅσα γε
ἡμεῖς ἴσμεν, ἐν τῇ Ῥωμαίων. arr εἴτε τὰ
Θετταλικὰ Τέμπη δύσβατα νομίζει τις, εἴτε τὰς

1 Hertlein ΖΦ γαρηιοηΐβ 1 and 3 have been restored to their
proper context in Letter 16, pp. 38 and 36.

2 Hertlein frag. 2. Quoted by Suidas under Ἡρόδοτος and
ὧν. . » ἑλλέβορον again under Ζηλῶσαι.

1 Herodotus 3. 22 describes the amazement of the Ethio-
pians, who lived on boiled meat, at the diet of the Persians.

294

THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS

THEN who does not know the saying of the
Ethiopians about the food that with us is held to
be most nutritious? For when they first handled
bread they said they wondered how we manage to
live on a diet of dung, that is if one may believe the
Thurian chronicler.t And those who write des-
criptions of the world relate that there are races of
--men who live on fish and flesh? and have never
even dreamed of our kind of diet. But if anyone
in our country tries to adopt their diet, he will be
no better off than those who take a dose of hemlock
or aconite or hellebore.

2

We hastened to the Hercynian forest and it was
a strange and monstrous thing that I beheld. At
any rate I do not hesitate to engage that nothing
of the sort has ever been seen in the Roman
Empire, at least as far as we know. But if anyone
considers Thessalian Tempe or Thermopylae or the

They said they were not surprised that men who lived on
such food attained to a maximum of only eighty years. For
the different temperaments and customs of different peoples
ef. Against the Galilaeans, 1438.

2 Cf. vol. 2, Oration 6. 1910 for Julian’s remarks on diet.

295

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

Θερμοπύλας, εἴτε τὸν μέγαν καὶ διωλύγιον Ταῦρον,
ἐλάχιστα ἴστω χαλεπότητος ἕνεκα πρὸς τὸ
‘Epxtviov ὄντα."

3
Ἰουλιανὸς ον νος

+ πατρῴα μοι πρὸς ὑμᾶς ὑπάρχει. φιλία:
καὶ γὰρ @Knoe παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ὁ ἐμὸς πατήρ, καὶ
ἀναχθεὶς ἔνθεν, ὥσπερ ἐκ Φαιάκων Ὀδυσσεύς,
τῆς πολυχρονίου πλάνης ἀπηλλάγη . .. ἐνταῦθα
ὁ πατὴρ ἀνεπαύσατο.3

4

... Kal o KAewos* nyiy ἔδειξε ἱεροφάντης
Ἰάμβλιχος . .. ἡμεῖς δὲ ᾿Εμπεδοτίμῳ καὶ
1Πϑαγόρᾳ πιστεύοντες οἷς τε ἐκεῖθεν λαβὼν
Ἡρακλείδης ὁ Ποντικὸς ἔφη.". . .

1 Hertlein 4. Quoted by Suidas under Χρῆμα.

* ἐνθένδε Hertlein.

3 Hertlein 5. Quoted by Libanius, Oration 14, 29, 30. For
Aristophanes (of Corinth). 4 ἥρως Asmus adds. ᾿

5 Hertlein 6. Quoted by Suidas from the Kronia, under
Ἐμπεδότιμος and ᾿Ιουλιανός. This fragment is all that survives
of Julian’s Kronia or Saturnalia, written in 361; see Vol. 1,
Oration 4. 1570. We know nothing more as to its contents.

1 Julian, Oration 2.101 Ὁ. The Greek word is Platonic,
cf. Theaetetus 161 D.

2 For Julian’s knowledge of the Hercynian forest, which
in ancient Germany extended from the Black Forest on the
north-east to the Hartz Mountains, cf. Vol. 2, AMisopogon
3598; Ammianus, 17. 1. 8 Cum prope silvam venisset
squalore tenebrarum horrendam... 2.6. in his German
campaign in 357; Zosimus, 3. 4. 3 ἄχρι τῶν ἙἝἭρκινίων δρυμῶν
τοὺς φεύγοντας ὁ Καῖσαρ ἐπιδιώξας.

296

THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS

great and far-flung! Taurus to be impassable, let me
tell him that for difficulty of approach they are trivial
indeed compared with the Hercynian forest.”

3
To the Corinthians 3

. . . My friendship with you dates from my
father’s time. For indeed my father lived in your
city, and embarking thence, like Odysseus from the
land of the Phaeacians, had respite from his long-
protracted wanderings®. . . there my father found
repose.

4

. and the famous hierophant Iamblichus showed
it tous . .. and we, since we believed the account
of Empedotimus ® and Pythagoras, as well as that of
Heracleides of Pontus who derived it from them.’ .. .

3 This is all that remains of the manifesto sent to the
Corinthians by Julian in 361, when he sought to justify his
defection from Constantius.

4 Julius Constantius was murdered by his nephew, the
Emperor Constantius, in 337.

5 Libanius says that Julian here spoke briefly about the
“* wicked stepmother” of Julius, the Empress Helena, mother
of Constantine, see Zosimus 2. 8 and 9.

6 For this famous Syracusan, who claimed to be immortal,
see Vol. 2, 295s.

1 Geffcken points out that Julian’s statement is derived
.from a commentary on Plato and quotes Proclus, On Plato’s
Republic 2. 119. 18. ‘* The human soul may learn the sacred
truth about the affairs of the underworld and report them
to mankind. This is shown by the account of Empedotimus,
which Heracleides of Pontus relates.” Then follows the
vision of Empedotimus in Hades; cf. Rohde, Psyche,
p. 389,

297

THE EMPEROR JULIAN
5

.. . μόνον εὔχεσθαι ndecav.'

6

‘ iva 2 μὴ ἀκονώμενοι τὴν γλῶτταν ἑτοίμως
sats Tous διαλεκτικὸυς τῶν ᾿Ελλήνων ἀπαντῶσιν.

Bis

7

. . + τοῖς οἰκείοις γὰρ πτεροῖς κατὰ τὴν παροι-
μίαν βαλλόμεθα. ἐκ γὰρ τῶν ἡμετέρων συγ-
γραμμάτων καθοπλιζόμενοι τὸν καθ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀνα-
δέχονται πόλεμον."

ὃ

oo x 4
To μὴ προϊδέσθαι τό τε δυνατὸν καὶ TO ἀδύ-
νατον ἐν πράγμασι τῆς ἐσχάτης ἀπονοίας ἐστὶ
σημεῖον.

1 Hertlein 1. Quoted by Zosimus 3. 3. 2 of δὲ παρὰ
Κωνσταντίου δοθέντες αὐτῷ .. . μόνον εὔχεσθαι, καθάπερ αὐτός
πού φησιν, ἤδεσαν, οἵ. Vol. 9 2, 277, p. 267, Wright.

2 Hertlein 8. Quoted by Socrates, History of the Church
3. 12; cf. Suidas under Maps. Socrates Ἧ quoting from
an edict forbidding Christians to teach the classics; but in
the extant edict, Letter 36, these words do not occur.

3 Cf. Libanius, Leticr 1588, Jo Julian, αὐτὴν (Se. τὴν
γλῶτταν)Ὶ ἂκοι ὧν.

4 Hertlein 9. Quoted by Theodoret, History of the Church,
3. 4. Theodoret, like Socrates frag. 6, quotes Julian on the
Christian, teachers of the classics.

5 Hertlein 10. Quoted by Suidas under ᾿Απόνοια.

1 Julian said this of the soldiers who were assigned to him
by Constantius when he went to Gaul in 355; ef. Libanius

298

THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS
5

Tury only knew how to pray !

6

. . that they? may not, by sharpening their
tongues,? be prepared to meet their Hellenic
opponents in debate.

i!

. . . forin the words of the proverb, we are stricken
by our own arrows.4 For from our own writings
they ὅ take the weapons wherewith they engage in
the war against us.

8

Not to see beforehand what is possible and what
impossible in practical affairs is a sign of the utmost
foolishness.®

18. 94 ἕως αὐτῷ κατέλιπον ὅπλίτας εὔξασθαι μόνον δυναμένους,
said of the soldiers who were to be left with Julian when
Constantius summoned the best of the Gallic army to the
East in 360,

2 2,6. the Christians.

3 i.e. by the study of rhetoric.

4 2,6. the arrows are feathered from our plumage; cf.
Aristophanes, Birds 808 τάδ᾽ οὐχ bm ἄλλων ἀλλὰ τοῖς αὑτῶν
πτέροις. The figure is used by Byron, Waller and Moore of
a wounded eagle ‘‘ Which on the shaft that made him die,
espied a feather of his own.” ‘The original is Aeschylus,
Myrmidons, frag. 139.

5“7.¢. the Christians.

6 This is apparently a criticism of that lack of political
instinct in the Christians of which Julian speaks in his
treatise Against the Galilacans, fragment 5. Hence Neumann
regards the above fragment as derived from a lost part of
the treatise.

mae

THE EMPEROR JULIAN
9

Λέγει (sc. ὁ ᾿Τουλιανὸς) οὖν ἐπιστέλλων" Σκύθαι
δὲ νῦν μὲν ἀτρεμοῦσι, ἴσως δὲ οὐκ ἀτρεμήσουσιν.

10
Πρὸς τριβοῦνον Ἰυὐθυμέλην 3
Ἡδονὴ βασιλεῖ πόλεμος.

11

» , \ \ ΄ , N Ν
Ανεγείρω γὰρ μετὰ πάσης προθυμίας τὸν ναὸν
A 77 a

Tov ὑψίστου θεοῦ.3

12
Πρὸς δῆμον εὐφημήσαντα ἐν τῷ Τυχαίῳ 4

Ed μὲν εἰς τὸ θέατρον λαθὼν εἰσῆλθον, εὐφη-
a N
petite εἰ δὲ εἰς TA ἱερά, ἡσυχίαν ἄγετε, Kal

1 Not in Hertlein. Preserved by Eunapius, frag. 22, p.
226, 15, Dindorf.

* Not in Hertlein. It occurs in Ambrosianus, B 4, with
other sayings of the Emperor; Cumont, Recherches, p. 47,
thinks that they are derived from some lost historical work.

3 Not in Hertlein. Preserved by Lydus, De Mensibus.
See Cumont, Recherches, p. 17, note 1.

4 Hertlein, Letter 64. First published by Muratori in
Anecdota Graeca, Padua, 1709.

1 In 360 Constantius bribed the Scythians to aid him in
his campaign against the Persians (Ammianus 20. 8. 1), and
in 363 Julian employed Scythian auxiliaries for the same
purpose (Ammianus 23, 2. 7). It is uncertain to which of
these dates the fragment refers ; Eunapius quotes this remark
as evidence of Julian’s foresight.

300

THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS
9

AccorDINcLy he says in a letter: At present the
Scythians! are not restless, but perhaps they will
become restless.

10
To Euthymeles the Tribune

A KING delights in war.

11

For I am rebuilding with all zeal the temple of the
Most High God.?

12

To the citizens who acclaimed him in the temple
of Fortune?

WueEN I enter the theatre unannounced,’ acclaim
me, but when [1 enter the temples be silent® and

2 Lydus says that Julian wrote this to the Jews. The
letter is lost. For Julian’s design of rebuilding the Temple
see Letter 51 and Introduction.

3 At Constantinople there was a temple of Fortune (Τυχή)
with a statue of the Goddess, cf. Socrates 3. 11. It was when
Julian was sacrificing in this temple that he was denounced
by the blind Bishop Maris of Chalcedon, as related by
Sozomen 5. 4. Butas Julian in the Wisopogon 3408 speaks
twice of sacrificing at Antioch in the temple of Fortune, this
admonition may have been addressed to the citizens of
Antioch, late in 362 or early in 363.

4 For Julian’s rare visits to the theatre, see A/isopogon 3990,
368c. For his love of applause, Ammianus 25. 4. 18 volgi
plausibus laetus.

> Cf. Vol. 2. Misopogon 344B,c, where Julian reproves the
citizens of Antioch for applauding him in the temples.

201

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

HETEvEeYKaTE ὑμῶν τὰς εὐφημίας εἰς τοὺς θεούς"
μᾶλλον δὲ οἱ θεοὶ τῶν εὐφημιῶν οὐ χρήξζουσιν.

13

A ζωγράφον 1
Εὐ μὲν μὴ εἶχον " καὶ ἐχαρίσω μοι, συγγνώμης
ἦσθα ἄξιος" εἰ δὲ εἶχον μέν, οὐκ ἐχρησάμην δέ,
τοὺς θεοὺς ἔφερον, μᾶλλον δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν
ἐφερόμην. σύ μοι ἀλλότριον σχῆμα πῶς ἐδίδους,
ἑταῖρε ; οἷόν με εἶδες, τοιοῦτον καὶ γράψον.

14
if
II pos ἐπισκόπους 3
ἔγνων, ἀνέγνων κατέγνων.

1 Hertlein, Letter 65.

2 eixay? Muratori.

3 Not in Hertlein. Quoted by Sozomen 5. 18. In some
MSS. it occurs at the end of Letter 81, 710 Basil.

1 This and the following fragment, wrongly placed among
the letters by Hertlein and earlier editors, are, as Cumont
saw, isolated mots historiques probably quoted from some
historical work. They may have occurred in an edict.

2 Sozomen 5. 17. says that Julian had himself painted ‘‘ on
the public pictures” in juxtaposition with Zeus or Ares or
Hermes in order that the people might be compelled when they
saluted the Emperor to salute the gods also, and that few

302

THE SHORTER FRAGMENTS

transfer your acclamations to the gods; or rather the
gods do not need acclamations.+

13
To a Painter 2

Ir I did not possess it? and you had bestowed it on
me, you would have deserved to be forgiven ; but if
I possessed it and did not use it, I carried the gods,
or rather was carried by them. Why, my friend, did
you give me a form other than my own? Paint me
exactly as you saw me.

14
To the Bishops

I rEcoGniseED, I read, 1 condemned.*

had the courage to refuse to conform with this established
custom ; cf. Gregory Nazianzen, Oration 4. 81.

3 Whether because of mutilation or lack of context, the
two first sentences are unintelligible ; we do not know the
object of the verbs or what is meant by the reference to
the gods ; but evidently Julian did not like his portrait.

4 Sozomen 5. 18 says that Julian, in order to ridicule the
Christian substitutes for the Greek classics, composed chiefly
by Apollinaris, after Julian had forbidden Christians to teach
the originals, wrote these words to the Bishops. Their answer
was as follows: ‘‘ You have read, but you have not understood ;
for, had you understood, you would not have condemned.”’
See Letter 81, To Basil, p. 286.

393

EPIGRAMMATA

1
Els οἶνον ἀπὸ κριθῆς

τίς πόθεν eis, Διόνυσε; pa yap τὸν ἀλαθέα

“Βάκχον
οὔ σ᾽ ἐπιγιγνώσκω" τὸν Διὸς οἶδα ὅν Ὁ,
κεῖνος νέκταρ ὄδωδε, σὺ δὲ τράγον. 1) ῥά σε
Κελτοὶ

TH πενίῃ βοτρύων τεῦξαν ἀπ᾽ ἀσταχύων.
τῷ σε χρὴ καλέειν Δημήτριον, οὐ Διόνυσον,
πυρογενῆ μᾶλλον καὶ Βρόμον, οὐ Βρόμιον.ἷ

2
Kis τὸ ὄργανον 3

ἀλλοίην ὁρόω δονάκων φύσιν. ἥπου ἀπ᾽ ἄλλης
χαλκείης τάχα μᾶλλον SUE aaa ἀρούρης
ἄγριοι: οὐδ᾽ ἀνέμοισιν ὑφ᾽ ἡμετέροις ἢ δονέονται,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀπὸ ταυρείης προθορὼν σπήλυγγος ἀήτης
νέρθεν ἐ ἐὐτρήτων καλάμων ὑπὸ ῥίζαν ὁ ὁδεύει.
Rta 1. Palatine Anthology 9. 365, and in several

2 Hertlein 2; The Greek Anthology vol. 3, 365, Paton; it is
found in Parisinus 690. 3 jeptors Cumont.

1 7. 6. beer, which Julian met with in Gaul and Germany.

304

EPIGRAMS
1

On wine made from barley 1

Wuo art thou and whence, O Dionysus? By the
true Bacchus 1 recognise thee not; I know only the
son of Zeus. He smells of nectar, but you smell of
goat. Truly it was in their lack of grapes that the
Celts brewed thee from corn-ears. So we should call
thee Demetrius,? not Dionysus, wheat-born ὃ not fire-
born, barley god not boisterous god.4 :

2

On the Organ

A STRANGE growth of reeds do I behold. Surely
they sprang on a sudden from ancther brazen field,
so wild are they. The winds that wave them are
none of ours, but a blast leaps forth from a cavern of
bull’s hide and beneath the well-bored pipes travels
to their roots. And a dignified person, with swift

2 ἃ, 6. son of Demeter goddess of corn.

3 πῦρογενῆ, not πὕρογενῆ, a play on words. See The Greek
Anthology, Vol. 3. 368, Paton.

4 βρόμος means ‘‘oats”; Bromius ‘‘ boisterous” was an
epithet of Dionysus ; it is impossible to represent the play on
the words,

395

VOL, III. Χ

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

/ Eta 3. 7 Ν :
καί τις ἀνὴρ ἀγέρωχος, ἔχων θοὰ δάκτυλα
χείρος,
“ 3 , , /
ἵσταται ἀμφαφόων κανόνας συμφράδμονας
αὐλῶν,
οἱ δ᾽ ἁπαλὸν σκιρτῶντες ἀποθλίβουσιν ἀοιδήν.

9
AZ. > / 1
ἴνιγμα εἰς KOVTOTALKT NV
” , a ᾽ , /
ἔστιν τι δένδρον TOV ἀνακτόρων μέσον,
ΜΒ er \ A \ a n Ψ 5

οὗ ῥιζα καὶ ζῇ καὶ λαλεῖ καρποῖς ἅμα

a af 9 ee \ ie ie
μιᾷ δ᾽ ἐν ὥρᾳ Kai φυτεύεται ξένως

\ \ lal
Kal καρπὸν αὔξει καὶ τρυγᾶται ῥιζόθεν.

4
2 \ , e \ ao a /
εἰς TOV TapovTa 'Ομηρικὸν στίχον ἕξ πόδας
ἔχοντα ὧν οἱ τρεῖς εἰσι δάκτυλοι 3

κούρη ᾿Ικαρίοιο περίφρων ἸΤηνελόπεια
ἕξ ποσὶν ἐμβεβαυῖα τριδάκτυλος ἐξεφαάνθη.

1 Hertlein 3. Palatine Anthology vol. 2. p. 769.
* Hertlein 4. Anthology 2. 659.

1 A note in the MS. (Parisinus 690) explains that Julian
composed this poem during a procession, when he was leaving
the church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople. He was

306

EPIGRAMS

moving fingers of the hand, stands there and handles
the keys that pass the word to the pipes; then the
keys leap lightly, and press forth the melody.!

3
Riddle on a performer with a pole

THERE is a tree between the lords, whose root has
life and talks, and the fruits likewise. And in a
single hour it grows in strange fashion, and ripens its
fruit, and gets its harvest at the roots.?

4

On the Homeric hexameter which contains six
feet of which three are dactyls

“Tue daughter of Icarius, prudent Penelope,’
appears with three fingers ὃ and walks on six feet.

then a mere boy, pursuing his education in Constantinople,
before he was interned in Cappadocia.

2 The performer balances on his forehead, between his
temples, a pole at the end of which is a cage or bar, supporting
a child or children.

8 There is a play of words on δάκτυλος = ‘ finger” and
‘*dactyl,” a metrical foot. In the title, ““ foot ” and ‘‘ dactyl”
are metrical terms, in the riddle they are used in the original,
physical sense. The hexameter quoted has three dactyls.

3°7

x 2

THE EMPEROR JULIAN
5

Eis ἱπποκένταυρον 1

ἀνδρόθεν ἐκκέχυθ᾽ ἵππος, ἀνέδραμε δ᾽ ἱππόθεν

3 /
avnp,
Mee 3 / A a ’ / af
ἀνὴρ νόσφι ποδῶν, κεφαλῆς δ᾽ ἄτερ αἰόλος
ἵππος"
ἊΣ > {a 5 ὃ > \ δ᾽ > , ὃ
ἱππος ἐρεύγεται ἀνὸρα, ἀνὴρ ὠποπέρδεται
da
ἵππον.

6

Τουλιανοῦ τοῦ παραβάτου 3

Ἔ 2 t Ἵ \ /
ὡς ἐθέλει TO φέρον σε
Υ͂ , Ἃ a: ,
φέρειν, φέρου: ἢν δ᾽ ἀπιθήσῃς,
καὶ σαυτὸν βλάψεις, καὶ TO
Ψ /
φέρον σε φέρει.

1 Hertlein 6. Assigned to Julian by Tzetzes Chiliades
959; Anthology, vol. 2, p. 659.

308

EPIGRAMS

5
To a Hippocentaur

A uorse has been poured from a man’s mould, a
man springs up from a horse. The man has no feet,
the swift moving horse has no head. The horse
belches forth as a man, the man breaks wind as a
horse.

6
By Julian the Apostate
Even as Fate the Sweeper wills to sweep thee

on, be thou swept. But if thou rebel, thou wilt but
harm thyself, and Fate still sweeps thee on.!

1 Perhaps there is a similar meaning in the phrase ὑπὸ τῶν
θεῶν ἐφερόμην in the puzzling frag. 13, p. 303.

2 Not in Hertlein. First ascribed to Julian, from Baroc-
cianus 133, by Cumont, Revue de Philologie, 1892. Also
ascribed to St. Basil; cf. a similar epigram in Palatine
Anthology 10. 73, ascribed to Palladas.

3°9

ΟΣ

“web %

7 sae! Νὴ

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

ῥ

2 γν ’ ran
᾽ν Υ

of

INTRODUCTION

Juuian, like Epictetus, always calls the Christians
Galilaeans ! because he wishes to emphasise that this
was a local creed, “the creed of fishermen,’ and
perhaps to remind his readers that “out of Galilee
ariseth no prophet” ;? with the same intention he
calls Christ “the Nazarene.’* His chief aim in the
treatise was to show that there is no evidence in the
Old Testament for the idea of Christianity, so that
the Christians have no right to regard their teaching
as a development of Judaism. His attitude through-
out is that of a philosopher who rejects the claims of
one small sect to have set up a universal religion.
He speaks with respect of the God of the Hebrews,
admires the Jewish discipline, their sacrifices and
their prohibition of certain foods, plays off the Jews
against the Christians, and reproaches the latter for
having abandoned the Mosaic law; but he contrasts
the jealous, exclusive “ particular” (wepixds) Hebraic
God with the universal Hellenic gods who do not
confine their attentions to a small and unimportant
portion of the world. Throughout Julian’s works

1 Cf. Gregory Nazianzen, First Invective Against Julian 76
(115), Γαλιλαίους ἀντὶ Χριστιανῶν ὀνομάσας καὶ καλεῖσθαι νομο-
θετήσας᾽ This was ignored by Neumann in his reconstruction
of the work, which heentitled Kara Χριστιανῶν. Cf. Socrates
3. 12.

2 John 7. 52.

5. In the fragmentary Letter 55, To Photinus, p. 189.

343

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

there are scattered references, nearly always dis-
dainful, to the Galilaeans, but his formal attack on
their creed and on the inconsistencies of the
Scriptures, which he had promised in Letter 55,
To Photinus, the heretic, was not given to the general
public, for whom he says he intends it, till he had
left Antioch on his march to Persia in the early
spring of 363. He probably compiled it at Antioch
in the preceding winter.t Perhaps it was never
completed, for at the time Julian had many things
on his mind. It was written in three Books, but the
fragments preserved are almost entirely from Book I.
In the fifth century Cyril of Alexandria regarded the
treatise as peculiarly dangerous, and said that it had
shaken many believers. He undertook to refute it
in a polemic of which about half survives, and from
the quotations of Julian in Cyril’s work Neumann
has skilfully reconstructed considerable portions of ὦ
the treatise. Cyril had rearranged Julian’s hurriedly
written polemic, in order to avoid repetitions and to
bring similar subjects together. Moreover, he says
that he omitted invectives against Christ and such
matter as might contaminate the minds of Christians.
We have seen that a similar mutilation of the letters
occurred for similar reasons. 7

Julian’s arguments against the Christian doctrine ©
do not greatly differ from those used in the second
century by Celsus, and by Porphyry in the third; but

1 Libanius, in his Monody on Julian, says that at Antioch
there were composed by the Emperor βιβλίων συγγραφαὶ
βοηθούντων θεοῖς ; in the Epitaph on Julian, that the attack
on Christian doctrines was composed in the long nights of
winter, 7. 6. 362-363, at Antioch, where he spent the winter
with Julian.

314

INTRODUCTION

his tone is more like that of Celsus, for he and Celsus
were alike in being embittered opponents of the
Christian religion, which Porphyry was not. Those
engaged in this sort of controversy use the same
weapons over and over again ; Origen refutes Celsus,
Cyril refutes Julian,in much the same terms. Both
sides have had the education of sophists, possess the
learning of their time, borrow freely from Plato,
attack the rules or lack of rules of diet of the oppo-
nents’ party, point. out the inconsistencies in the
rival creed, and ignore the weaknesses of their own.!

For his task Julian had been well equipped by his
Christian teachers when he was interned at Macellum
in Cappadocia, and he here repays them for the
enforced studies of his boyhood, when his naturally
' pagan soul rebelled against the Christian ritual in
which he had to take part. In spite of his insistence
on the inconsistency of the Christians in setting up
a Trinity in place of the monotheism of Moses and
the prophets, he feels the need of some figure in his
own pantheon to balance that of Christ the Saviour,
and uses, both in this treatise and in Oration 4, about
Asclepius or Dionysus or Heracles almost the
language of the Christians about Christ, setting these
pagan figures up one after another as mani-
festations of the divine beneficence in making a link
between the gods and mankind.

Though Julian borrowed from Porphyry’s lost
polemic in fifteen Books,2 he does not discuss

1 Geffcken, Zwei Griechische Apologeten, p. 259, speaks of a
Chinese polemic against Christianity, composed according to
the regular conventions of this type.

2 On Julian’s debt to Porphyry, and his lack of sympathy

with Porphyry’s attitude to religion, see Harnack, Porphyrius,
Berlin, 1916; Bidez, Vie de Porphyre, Gand, 1913.

315

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

questions of the chronology and authorship of the
Scriptures as Porphyry is known to have done.
Libanius, always a blind admirer of Julian, says? that
in this treatise the Emperor made the doctrines of
the Christians look ridiculous, and that he was
“ wiser than the Tyrian old man,’ that is, Porphyry.
But apparently the Christians of the next two
centuries did not agree with Cyril as to the pecu-
liarly dangerous character of Julian’s invective. At
any rate, the Council of Ephesus, in a decree dated
431, sentenced Porphyry’s books to be burned, but
did not mention Julian’s; and again in a law of
Theodosius II. in 448, Julian was ignored while
Porphyry was condemned. When in 529 Justinian
decreed that anti-Christian books were to be burned,
Porphyry alone was named, though probably Julian
was meant to be included.. Not long after Julian’s
death his fellow-student at Athens, Gregory Nazian-
zen, wrote a long invective against him, in which he
attacked the treatise Against the Galilaeans without
making a formal refutation of Julian’s arguments.
Others in the fifth century, such as Theodorus of
Mopsuestia and Philip Sideta, wrote refutations
which are lost. Butit was reserved for Cyril, Bishop
of Alexandria, writing between 429 and 441, to
compose a long and formal refutation of Julian’s
treatise; the latter seems to have been no longer in
circulation, or was at least neglected, and Neumann
thinks that the bishop was urged to write his polemic
by his dislike of the heretical views of other and
earlier antagonists of Julian, especially Theodorus ot
Mopsuestia. This refutation, which was dedicated to
the Emperor Theodosius II, was in at least twenty

1 Oration 18. 178.
316

INTRODUCTION

Books. But for Cyril’s quotations we should have
a very vague idea of Julian’s treatise, and as it
is we are compelled to see it through the eyes of a
hostile apologist. Cyril’s own comments, and _ his
summaries of portions of the treatise have been
omitted from the following translation,! but the
substance of the summaries has been given in the
footnotes. The marginal numbers in the Greek
text correspond with the pages of Spanheim’s (1696)
edition of Cyril’s polemic Pro Christiana Religione,
from which Neumann extracted and strung together
Cyril’s quotations of Julian. There is, therefore, an
occasional lack of connection in Julian’s arguments,
taken apart from their context in Cyril’s treatise.

1 For a full discussion of the work of Cyril and the other
Christian apologists who attempted to refute Julian, and for
an explanation of Neumann’s method of reconstruction, the
reader is referred to the Latin Prolegomena to Neumann’s
Edition of Julian’s polemic.

The numerous passages or expressions in this treatise
that can be paralleled in Julian’s other works have been
collected by Asmus in his Concordance, Julian’s Galilder-
schrift, 1904.

39 A

39 B

41 i

42 A

42 Τὰ

IOTAIANOT ATTOKPATOPOS KATA
TAAIAAION AOTOS ΑἹ

Καλῶς ἔχειν ἔμοιγε φαίνεται τὰς αἰτίας ἐκθέσ-
θαι πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις, ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἐπείσθην ὅτι τῶν
Γαλιλαίων ἡ σκευωρία πλάσμα ἐστὶν ἀνθρώπων
ὑπὸ κακουργίας συντεθέν. ἔχουσα μὲν οὐδὲν θεῖον,
ἀποχρησαμένη δὲ τῷ φιλομύθῳ καὶ παιδαριώδει
καὶ ἀνοήτῳ τῆς ψυχῆς μορίῳ, τὴν τερατολογίαν
εἰς πίστιν ἤγαγεν. ἀληθείας.

Μέλλων δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν πρώτων λεγομένων
δογμάτων ἁπάντων ποιεῖσθαι τὸν λόγον, ἐκεῖνο
βούλομαι, πρῶτον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι χρὴ τοὺς ἐντυγχά-
vovTas, εἴπερ ἀντιλέγειν ἐθέλοιεν, ὥσπερ ἐν ικα-
στηρίῳ μηδὲν ἔξωθεν πολυπραγμονεῖν “μηδέ, τὸ
λεγόμενον, ἀντικατηγορεῖν, ἕως ἂν ὑπὲρ τῶν map
αὐτοῖς " ἀπολογήσωνται. ἄμεινον μὲν γὰρ οὕτω,
καὶ σαφέστερον. ἰδίαν μὲν ἐνστήσασθαι πραγμα-
τείαν, ὅταν τι τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν εὐθύνειν θέλωσιν, ἐν
οἷς δὲ πρὸς τὰς παρ᾿ ἡμῶν εὐθύνας ἀπολογοῦνται,

μηδὲν ἀντικατηγορεῖν.

Μικρὸν δὲ ἀναλαβεῖν ἄξιον, ὅθεν ἡμῖν ἥκει καὶ
ὅπως ἔννοια θεοῦ τὸ πρῶτον, εἶτα παραθεῖναι τὰ
παρὰ τοῖς “Ελλησι καὶ παρὰ τοῖς ᾿βραίοις ὑπὲρ

1 The mar ginal numbers in Neumann’s text represent the
paging of the edition of Cyril by Spanheim, 1696, as rearranged

318

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

Book I

Ir is, I think, expedient to set forth to all man-
kind the reasons by which I was convinced that
the fabrication of the Galilaeans is a fiction of men
composed by wickedness. Though it has in it nothing
divine, by making full use of that part of the soul
which loves fable and is childish and foolish, it has
induced men to believe that the monstrous tale is
truth. Now since 1 intend to treat of all their first
dogmas, as they call them, I wish to say in the first
place that if my readers desire to try to refute me
they must proceed as if they were in a court of law
and not drag in irrelevant matter, or, as the saying is,
bring counter-charges until they have defended their
own views. For thus it will be better and clearer
if, when they wish to censure any views of mine,
they undertake that as a separate task, but when
they are defending themselves against my censure,
they bring no counter-charges.

It is worth while to recall in a few words whence
and how we first arrived at a conception of God;
next to compare what is said about the divine
among the Hellenes and Hebrews; and _ finally

by Neumann. In the Introduction to his edition he defends
his rearrangement of the text of Aubert 1638, given by
Spanheim.

2 τῶν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς Neumann; MS. τῶν πρώτων Gollwitzer
would retain, taking ὑπὲρ τῶν πρώτων = πρὸς τὰ πρῶτα.

510

43 A

43 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τοῦ θείου λεγόμενα, καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο ἐπανερέσθαι
τοὺς οὔτε “ENAnvas οὔτε ᾿Ιουδαίους, ἀλλὰ τῆς
Γαλιλαίων ὄντας αἱρέσεως, ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου πρὸ τῶν
ἡμετέρων εἵλοντο τὰ παρ᾽ ἐκείνοις, καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ,
τί On ποτε μηδ᾽ ἐκείνοις ἐμμένουσιν, ἀλλὰ κἀκεί-
νων ἀποστάντες ἰδίαν ὁδὸν ἐτράποντο. ὁμολο-
γήσαντες μὲν οὐδὲν τῶν καλῶν οὐδὲ τῶν σπουδαίων
οὔτε τῶν Tap ἡμῖν τοῖς “λλησιν οὔτε τῶν παρὰ
τοῖς ἀπὸ Μωυσέως ᾿Εἰββραίοις, ἀπ᾽ ἀμφοῖν δὲ τὰς
παραπεπηγυίας τούτοις τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ὥσπερ τινὰς
Κῆρας δρεπόμενοι, τὴν ἀθεότητα μὲν ἐκ τῆς
᾿Ιουδαϊκῆς ῥᾳδιουργίας, φαῦλον δὲ καὶ ἐπισεσυρ-
μένον βίον ἐκ τῆς map ἡμῖν ῥᾳθυμίας Kal yudato-
τητος, τοῦτο τὴν ἀρίστην θεοσέβειαν ἠθέλησαν
ὀνομάζεσθαι.

Ὅτι δὲ οὐ διδακτόν, ἀλλὰ φύσει τὸ εἰδέναι
θεὸν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὑπάρχει, τεκμήριον ἡμῖν
ἔστω πρῶτον ἡ κοινὴ πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἰδίᾳ καὶ
δημοσίᾳ καὶ κατ᾽ ἄνδρα καὶ ἔθνη περὶ τὸ θεῖον
προθυμία. ἅπαντες γὰρ ἀδιδάκτως θεῖόν τι πεπι-
στεύκαμεν, ὑπὲρ οὗ τὸ μὲν ἀκριβὲς: οὔτε πᾶσι ῥᾷδιον
γινώσκειν οὔτε τοῖς ἐγνωκόσιν εἰπεῖν εἰς πάντας
δυνατόν τ ταύτη δὴ τῇ κοινῇ πάντων ἀνθρώπων
ἐννοίᾳ πρόσεστι καὶ ἄλλη. πάντες γὰρ οὐρανῷ
καὶ τοῖς ἐν αὐτῷ φαινομένοις θεοῖς οὕτω δή TL
φυσικῶς προσηρτήμεθα, ὡς καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλον
ὑπέλαβε παρ᾽ αὐτοὺς τὸν θεόν, οἰκητήριον αὐτῷ
πάντως τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀπένειμεν, οὐκ ἀποστήσας
αὐτὸν τῆς γῆς, ἀλλ᾽ οἷον ὡς εἰς τιμιώτερον τοῦ

1 Klimek would delete ‘EBpatfois as a gloss.

1 Some words are lost.
320

AGAINST. THE GALILAEANS

to enquire of those who are neither Hellenes nor
Jews, but belong to the sect of the Galilaeans, why
they preferred the belief of the Jews to ours; and
what, further, can be the reason why they do not even
adhere to the Jewish beliefs but have abandoned
them also and followed a way of theirown. For they
have not accepted a single admirable or important
doctrine of those that are held either by us Hellenes
or by the Hebrews who derived them from Moses ;
but from both religions they have gathered what has
been engrafted like powers of evil, as it were, on
these nations—atheism from the Jewish levity,
and a sordid and slovenly way of living from our
indolence and vulgarity; and they desire that
this should be called the noblest worship of the
gods.

Now that the human race possesses its knowledge
of God by nature and not from teaching is proved
to us first of all by the universal yearning for the
divine that is in all men whether private persons
or communities, whether considered as individuals
orasraces. Forall of us, without being taught, have
attained to a belief in some sort of divinity, though
it is not easy for all men to know the precise
truth about it, nor is it possible for those who do
know it to tell it to all men... .! Surely, besides
this conception which is common to all men, there
is another also. I mean that we are all by nature
so closely dependent on the heavens and the gods
that are visible therein, that even if any man con-
ceives of another god besides these, he in every
case assigns to him the heavens as his dwelling-
place; not that he thereby separates him from the
earth, but he so to speak establishes the King of

321
VOL, HI. Y

69 B

69 C

69 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

παντὸς ἐκεῖνο τὸν βασιλέα καθίσας τῶν ὅλων
ἐφορᾶν oy ὑπολαμβάνων τὰ τῇδε.

Te dez jou? καλεῖν “ἕλληνας καὶ “Ἑβραίους
ἐνταῦθα μάρτυρας ; ; οὐδεὶς ἐ ἔστιν, ὃς οὐκ ἀνατείνει
μὲν εἰς οὐρανὸν τὰς χεῖρας εὐχόμενος, ὀμνύων δὲ
θεὸν ἤτοι θεούς, ἐ ἔννοιαν ὅλως τοῦ θείου λαμβάνων,
ἐκεῖσε φέρεται. καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἀπεικότως ἔπαθον.
ὁρῶντες γὰρ οὔτε πληθυνόμενον * οὔτε ἐλαττού-
μενόν τι τῶν περὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν οὔτε τρεπόμενον
οὔτε πάθος ὑπομένον τι τῶν ἀτάκτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐναρ-
μόνιον μὲν αὐτοῦ τὴν κίνησιν, ἐμμελῆ δὲ THY τάξιν,
ὡρισμένους δὲ φωτισμοὺς σελήνης, ἡλίου δὲ ἀνα-
τολὰς καὶ δύσεις ὡρισμένας ἐν ὡρισμένοις ἀεὶ
καιροῖς, εἰκότως θεὸν καὶ θεοῦ θρόνον ὑπέλαβον.
τὸ γὰρ τοιοῦτον, ἅτε μηδεμιᾷ προσθήκῃ πληθυνό-
μενον μηδὲ ἐλαττούμενον ἀφαιρέσει, τῆς τε κατ᾽
ἀλλοίωσιν καὶ τροπὴν ἐκτὸς ἱστάμενον μεταβολῆς
πάσης καθαρεύει φθορᾶς καὶ γενέσεως, ἀθάνατον
δὲ ὃν φύσει καὶ ἀνώλεθρον παντοίας ἐστὶ καθαρὸν
κηλῖδος" ἀΐδιον δὲ καὶ ἀεικίνητον, ὡς ὁρῶμεν, ἤτοι
παρὰ ψυχῆς κρείττονος κα καὶ θειοτέρας ἐνοικούσης
αὐτῷ, ὥσπερ, οἶμαι, τὰ ἡμέτερα σώματα παρὰ
τῆς ἐν ἡμῖν ψυχῆς, φέρεται κύκλῳ περὶ τὸν μέγαν
δημιουργόν, ἢ πρὸς αὐτοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ τὴν κίνησιν
παραδεξάμενον τὸν ἄπειρον ἐξελίττει κύκλον ἀπαύ-
στῳ καὶ αἰωνίῳ φορᾷ.

1 Gollwitzer deletes μοι.
2 οὔτε πληθυνόμενον Klimek adds, ef. 69 C.

1 Cf. Oration 6. 183c, Vol. 2.

[Ὁ
ἰὼ

Gr

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

the All in the heavens! as in the most honourable
place of all, and conceives of him as overseeing from
there the affairs of this world.

What need have I tosummon Hellenes and Hebrews
as witnesses of this? ‘There exists no man who does
not stretch out his hands towards the heavens when
he prays; and whether he swears by one god or
several, if he has any notion at all of the divine, he
turns heavenward. And it was very natural that
men should feel thus. For since they observed that
in what concerns the heavenly bodies there is no
increase or diminution or mutability, and that they
do not suffer any unregulated influence, but their
movement is harmonious and their arrangement in
concert; and that the illuminations of the moon are
regulated, and that the risings and settings of the
sun are regularly defined, and always at regularly
defined seasons, they naturally conceived that the
heaven is a god and the throne of a god.? Fora
being of that sort, since it is not subject to increase
by addition, or to diminution by subtraction, and is
stationed beyond all change due to alteration and
mutability, is free from decay and generation, and
inasmuch as it is immortal by nature and indestruc-
tible, it is pure from every sort of stain. Eternal
and ever in movement, as we see, it travels in a
circuit about the great Creator, whether it be im-
pelled by a nobler and more divine soul that dwells
therein, just as, I mean, our bodies are by the soul
in us, or having received its motion from God Him-
self, it wheels in its boundless circuit, in an unceasing
and eternal career,

2 Cyril 70a ridicules Julian for confusing here a god with
a throne; but καὶ can be interpreted ‘‘or.”
323
Υ 2

44 A
44 B

75 A

86 A

89 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

Οὐκοῦν" Βλληνες μὲν τοὺς μύθους ἔπλασαν ὑ ὑπὲρ
τῶν θεῶν ἀπίστους καὶ τερατώδεις. καταπιεῖν
γὰρ ἔφασαν τὸν Kpovov τοὺς παῖδας 1 εἶτ᾽ αὖθις
ἐμέσαι. καὶ γάμους ἤδη παρανόμους" μητρὶ γὰρ
ὁ Ζεὺς ἐμίχθη καὶ παιδοποιησάμενος ἐξ αὐτῆς
ἔγημε, μὲν αὐτὸς τὴν αὑτοῦ θυγατέρα, μᾶλλον δὲ
οὐδὲ ἔγημεν, ἀλλὰ μιχθεὶς ἁπλῶς ἄλλῳ παραδέ-
δωκεν 2 αὐτήν. εἶτα οἱ Διονύσου σπαραγμοὶ καὶ
μελῶν κολλήσεις. τοιαῦτα οἱ μῦθοι τῶν ᾿Ελλήνων
φασίν. τούτοις παράβαλλε τὴν Ιουδαϊκὴν διδασ-
καλίαν, καὶ τὸν φυτευόμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ παρά-
δεισον καὶ τὸν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πλαττόμενον ᾿Αδάμ, εἶτα
τὴν γινομένην αὐτῷ γυναῖκα. λέγει γὰρ ὁ θεός
. Οὐ καλὸν εἷναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον μόνον" ποιήσωμεν
αὐτῷ βοηθὸν κατ᾽ αὐτόν, πρὸς οὐδὲν μὲν αὐτῷ
τῶν ὅλων βοηθήσασαν, ἐξαπατήσασαν δὲ καὶ
γενομένην παραίτιον αὐτῷ τε ἐκείνῳ καὶ ἑαυτῇ
τοῦ πεσεῖν ἔξω τῆς τοῦ παραδείσου τρυφῆς.

Ταῦτα γάρ ἐστι μυθώδη παντελῶς. ἐπεὶ πῶς
εὔλογον ἀγνοεῖν τὸν θεόν, OTL τὸ γινόμενον ὑπ᾽
αὐτοῦ πρὸς βοήθειαν οὐ πρὸς καλοῦ μᾶλλον, ἀλλὰ
πρὸς κακοῦ τῷ λαβόντι γενήσεται; τὸν γὰρ ὄφιν
τὸν διαλεγόμενον πρὸς τὴν Evay ποδαπῇ τινι
ὙρΊΓυΣ φήσομεν διαλέκτῳ ; ; ἄρα ἀνθρωπείᾳ; καὶ
TL διαφέρει τῶν παρὰ τοῖς "Edna πεπλασμένων
μύθων Ta τοιαῦτα ; τὸ δὲ καὶ τὸν θεὸν a ἀπαγορεύειν
τὴν διάγνωσιν καλοῦ τε καὶ , Φαύλου τοῖς ὑπ᾽
αὐτοῦ πλασθεῖσιν ἀνθρώποις ap’ οὐχ ὑπερβολὴν

1 Before εἶτ᾽ Neumann adds καί, but this is not necessary.
2 παρέδωκεν Klimek.

1 Persephone, * Hades,
324

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

Now it is true that the Hellenes invented their
myths about the gods, incredible and monstrous
stories. For they said that Kronos swallowed his
children and then vomited them forth; and they
even told of lawless unions, how Zeus had inter-
course with his mother, and after having a child by
her, married his own daughter,! or rather did not
even marry her, but simply had intercourse with
her and then handed her over to another.2 Then
too there is the legend that Dionysus was rent
asunder and his limbs joined together again. This
is the sort of thing described in the myths of the
Hellenes. Compare with them the Jewish doctrine,
how the garden was planted by God and Adam was
fashioned by Him, and next, for Adam, woman
came to be. For God said, “It is not good that
the man should be alone. Let us make him an
help meet like him.’”’? Yet so far was she from help- °
ing him at all that she deceived him, and was in
part the cause of his and her own fall from their
life of ease in the garden.

This is wholly fabulous. For is it probable
that God did not know that the being he was.
creating as a help meet would prove to be not
so much a blessing as a misfortune to him who
received her? Again, what sort of language are
we to say that the serpent used when he talked
with Eve? Was it the language of human beings?
And in what do such legends as these differ from
the myths that were invented by the Hellenes?
Moreover, is it not excessively strange that God
should deny to the human beings whom he had
fashioned the power to distinguish between good

3 Genesis Ὁ. 18.

325

89 Β

93 D
95"

94 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἀτοπίας ἔχει ; TL yap ἂν ἠλιθιώτερον γένοιτο τοῦ
μὴ δυναμένου διαγινώσκειν καλὸν καὶ πονηρόν ;
δῆλον γάρ, ὅτι τὰ μὲν οὐ φεύξεται, λέγω δὲ τὰ
κακά, τὰ δὲ οὐ μεταδιώξει, λέγω δὲ τὰ καλά.
κεφάλαιον δέ, φρονήσεως ἀπηγόρευσεν ὁ θεὸς
ἀνθρώπῳ γεύσασθαι, ἧς οὐδὲν ἂν εἴη τιμιώτερον
ἀνθρώπῳ. ὅτι γὰρ ἡ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ τοῦ χείρονος
διάγνωσις οἰκεῖόν ἐστιν ἔργον φρονήσεως, πρόδηλόν
ἐστί που καὶ τοῖς ἀνοήτοις" ὥστε τὸν ὄφιν εὐερ-
γέτην μᾶλλον, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ λυμεῶνα τῆς ἀνθρωπίνη
γενέσεως εἶναι. ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ θεὸς δεῖ λέγεσθαι 5

βάσκανος. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ εἶδε μετασχόντα τῆς φρο-
νήσεως τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἵνα μή, φησί, γεύσηται τοῦ
ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς, ἐξέβαλεν αὐτὸν τοῦ παραδείσου
διαρρήδην εἰπών' “Ἰδού, ᾿Αδὰμ γέγονεν ὡς εἷς τ
ἡμῶν τοῦ γινώσκειν καλὸν καὶ πονηρόν. καὶ νῦν
μήποτε ἐκτείνῃ τὴν χεῖρα καὶ λάβῃ ἀπὸ τοῦ ξύλου
τῆς ζωῆς καὶ φάγῃ καὶ ζήσεται εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα."
τούτων τοίνυν ὃ ἕκαστον εἰ μὴ μῦθος ἔχων θεωρίαν
ἀπόρρητον εἴη, ὅπερ ἐγὼ νενόμικα, πολλῆς γέ-
μουσιν οἱ “λόγοι περὶ τοῦ θεοῦ βλασφημίας. τὸ
γὰρ ἀγνοῆσαι μέν, ὡς ἡ γινομένη βοηθὸς αἰτία
τοῦ πτώματος ἔσται καὶ τὸ ἀπαγορεῦσαι καλοῦ
καὶ πονηροῦ γνῶσιν, ὃ μόνον ἔοικε συνέχειν τὸν

i

lal Ge } \ / \ A
νοῦν τὸν ἀνθρώπινον, Kal πρόσετι TO ζηλοτυπῆσαι,

1 αὐτῷ Neumann, ἀνθρώπῳ MSS. ; Klimek would delete
ἀνθρώπῳ ; Gollwitzer rightly retains as characteristic Julianic
tautology.

* δεῖ λέγεσθαι Neumann ; λέγοιτ᾽ ἂν Klimek ; λέγεται MSS. ;
Gollwitzer deletes ἐπί.

3 Gollwitzer adds λαβεῖν ; Asmus ἀναλαβεῖν, cf. Vol. 2, 2654.

1 Genesis 3. 22.

326

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

and evil? What could be more foolish than a
being unable to distinguish good from bad? For
it is evident that he would not avoid the latter, I
mean things evil, nor would he strive after the
former, I mean things good. And, in short, God
refused to let man taste of wisdom, than which there
could be nothing of more value for man. For that
the power to distinguish between good and less good
is the property of wisdom is evident surely even to
the witless; so that the serpent was a benefactor
rather than a destroyer of the human race. Further-
more, their God must be called envious. For when
he saw that man had attained to a share of wisdom,
that he might not, God said, taste of the tree of
life, he cast him out of the garden, saying in so
many words, “ Behold, Adam has become as one of
us, because he knows good from bad; and now let
him not put forth his hand and take also of the tree
of life and eat and thus live forever.’”’! Accord-
ingly, unless every one of these legends is a myth
that involves some secret interpretation, as I indeed
believe,? they are filled with many blasphemous
sayings about God. For in the first place to be
ignorant that she who was created as a help meet
would be the cause of the fall; secondly to refuse
the knowledge of good and bad, which knowledge
alone seems to give coherence to the mind of man;
and lastly to be jealous lest man should take of the

2 For Julian’s belief that myths need allegorical interpre-
tation cf. Oration 5. 169-170, Vol. 1, p. 475, note ; see also
Caesars 306C, Oration 7. 2060, 220, for myths as emblematic
of the truth. This is the regular method of Neo-Platonic
writers, such as Sallustius, in dealing with the unpleasant or
incongruous elements in Greek mythology.

327

960

96 D

96 αὶ

49 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

μὴ τοῦ ξύλου τῆς ζωῆς μεταλαβὼν ἄνθρωπος
ἀθάνατος ἐκ θνητοῦ γένηται, φθονεροῦ καὶ βασκά-
νου λίαν ἐστίν.

‘Trrép δὲ ὧν ἐκεῖνοί τε ἀληθῶς δοξάξουσιν ἡμῖν
τε ἐξ a ἀρχῆς οἱ πατέρες παρέδοσαν, ὁ 0 μὲν ἡμέτερος
ἔχει λόγος ὡδὶ } τὸν προσεχῆ τοῦ κόσμου τούτου

ημιουργόν.... ὑπὲρ yap θεῶν3 τῶν ἀνωτέρω τούτου

Μωυσῆς μὲν εἴρηκεν οὐδὲν ὅλως, ὅς γε οὐδὲ ὑπὲρ
τῆς τῶν ἀγγέλων ἐτόλμησέ Te φύσεως" ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι
μὲν λειτουργοῦσι τῷ θεῷ πολλαχῶς καὶ πολλάκις
εἶπεν, εἴτε δὲ γεγονότες, εἴτε ἀγένητοι, εἴτε ὑπ᾽
ἄλλου μὲν γεγονότες, ἄλλῳ δὲ λειτουργεῖν τεταγ-
μένοι, εἴτε ἄλλως πως, οὐδαμόθεν διώρισται.
περὺ δὲ οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ τίνα
τρόπον διεκοσμήθη διέξεισι. καὶ τὰ μέν φησι
κελεῦσαι τὸν θεὸν γενέσθαι, ὥσπερ φῶς καὶ στε-
ρέωμα, τὰ δὲ ποιῆσαι, ὥσπερ οὐρανὸν καὶ γῆν,
ἥλιόν τε καὶ σελήνην, τὰ δὲ ὄντα, κρυπτόμενα δὲ
Téws,® διακρῖναι, καθάπερ ὕδωρ, οἶμαι, καὶ τὴν
ξηράν. πρὸς τούτοις δὲ οὐδὲ περὶ γενέσεως ἢ
περὶ ποιήσεως τοῦ πνεύματος εἰπεῖν ἐτόλμησεν,
ἀλλὰ μόνον “Καὶ πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω
τοῦ ὕδατος "" πότερον δὲ ἀγένητόν ἐστιν ἢ γέγονεν,
οὐδὲν διασαφεῖ.

᾿Ενταῦθα παραβάλωμεν, εἰ βούλεσθε, τὴν
Πλάτωνος φωνήν. τί τοίνυν οὗτος ὑπὲρ τοῦ
δημιουργοῦ λέγει καὶ τίνας περιτίθησιν αὐτῷ

1 ὡδὶ Asmus restores from MSS. ; οὐδὲ Neumann.

2 Asmus deletes as superfluous θεῶν added by Neumann.
3 δέ, τέως Neumann; δὲ τέως, Asmus.

1 The pagan theory is missing and also part of the Jewish,
according to Asmus.

328

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

tree of life and from mortal become immortal,—
this is to be grudging and envious overmuch.

Next to consider the views that are correctly held
by the Jews, and also those that our fathers handed
down to us from the beginning. Our account has
in it the immediate creator of this universe, as the
following shows. . . .t Moses indeed has said no-
thing whatsoever about the gods who are superior
to this creator, nay, he has not even ventured to
say anything about the nature of the angels. But
that they serve God he has asserted in many ways
and often; but whether they were generated or un-
generated, or whether they were generated by one
god and appointed to serve another, or in some other
way, he has nowhere said definitely. But he de-
scribes fully in what manner the heavens and the
earth and all that therein is were set in order. In
part, he says, God ordered them to be, such as light
and the firmament, and in part, he says, God made
them, such as the heavens and the earth, the sun
and moon, and that all things which already existed
but were hidden away for the time being, he
separated, such as water, 1 mean, and dry land.
But apart from these he did not venture to say a
word about the generation or the making of the
Spirit, but only this, “ And the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters.” But whether that
spirit was ungenerated or had been generated he
does not make at all clear.

Now, if you please, we will compare the utter-
ance of Plato.2. Observe then what he says about
the creator, and what words he makes him speak

2 In his Letter toa Priest 292, Vol. 2, Julian contrasts the
Platonic account of the Creation with the Mosaic.

329

49 Β

49 C

49 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

\ 2 a , ΄
φωνὰς ἐν τῇ κοσμογενείᾳ σκόπησον, ἵνα τὴν
Πλάτωνος καὶ Μωυσέως κοσμογένειαν ἀντιπαρα-
΄ 2 / e/ \ xX 4 / ς
βάλωμεν ἀλλήλαις. οὕτω γὰρ ἂν φανείη, τίς ὁ
7 \ 4 » n ἴω a m3 6 n
κρείττων καὶ τίς ἄξιος τοῦ θεοῦ μᾶλλον, ap ὁ τοῖς
3 , \ X
εἰδώλοις λελατρευκὼς Πλάτων ἢ περὶ οὗ φησιν ἡ
/ Ψ , \ id e Ἂς 3 /
γραφή, OTL στόμα κατὰ στόμα ὁ θεὸς ἐλάλησεν
}] A ’ an 4 ς Ν ,
αὐτῷ. “᾿Εν apyn ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ
τὴν γῆν. ἡ δὲ γῆ ἣν ἀόρατος καὶ ἀκατασκεύαστος,
΄ “3 A an
καὶ σκότος ἐπάνω τῆς ἀβύσσου, Kal πνεῦμα θεοῦ
» a \ = ς
ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω τοῦ ὕδατος. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεὸς
7 n \ > / a \ > ig
Γενηθήτω φῶς, καὶ ἐγένετο φῶς. καὶ εἶδεν ὁ
Ν XN A ὩΨ , \ ? id \
θεὸς TO φῶς, ὅτι καλόν. Kal διεχώρισεν ὁ θεὸς
2 Ν / an Ν \ n ,
ava μέσον τοῦ φωτὸς Kal ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ σκότους.
\ Ἂν / ς \ Ἂς A e 4 \ \ /
Kal ἐκάλεσεν ὁ θεὸς TO φῶς ἡμέραν καὶ TO σκότος
7
ἐκάλεσε νύκτα. καὶ ἐγένετο ἑσπέρα καὶ ἐγένετο
, , 5 7,
πρωΐ, ἡμέρα μία. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός: Τενηθήτω
/ / “ ¢ ΄ e
στερέωμα EV μέσῳ τοῦ ὕδατος. Kal ἐκάλεσεν ὁ
Ἀ \ e /
θεὸς τὸ στερέωμα οὐρανόν. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ Geos:
Ν δ “Ὁ ἴω >
Συναχθήτω τὸ ὕδωρ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς
συναγωγὴν μίαν καὶ ὀφθήτω ἡ ξηρά. καὶ ἐγένετο
Ν 7 Ὁ , a
οὕτως. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός: Βλαστησάτω ἡ γῆ Bo-
, 4 / L €
τάνην χόρτου καὶ ξύλον κάρπιμον. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ
/ An A /
θεός" Τενηθήτωσαν φωστῆρες ἐν TH στερεώματι
A A 9 ἃ fa \ a a
τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, iva wow εἰς φαῦσιν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
\ A A a
καὶ ἔθετο αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῷ στερεώματι TOU
ἴω (od A ἕ Ν qn , 99
οὐρᾳνοῦ, WATE ἄρχειν τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τῆς νυκτὸς.
Ε] \ 4 a BA \ v
Ev δὴ τούτοις Μωυσῆς οὔτε τὴν ἄβυσσον πε-
aA a an ͵ Ν id
ποιῆσθαί φησιν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ οὔτε TO σκότος
¢ a Ψ' 3 f \
οὔτε TO ὕδωρ' καίτοι χρῆν δήπουθεν εἰπόντα περὶ

33°

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

at the time of the generation of the universe, in order
that we may compare Plato’s account of that gener-
ation with that of Moses. For in this way it will ap-
pear who was the nobler and who was more worthy
of intercourse with God, Plato who paid homage to
images, or he of whom the Scripture says that
God spake with him mouth to mouth.! “In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

And the earth was invisible and without form, and —

darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the
spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
And God said, Let there be light; and there was
light. And God saw the light that it was good;
and God divided the light from the darkness.
And God called the light Day, and the darkness
he called Night. And the evening and the morn-
ing were the first day. And God said, Let there
be a firmament in the midst of the waters. And
God called the firmament Heaven. And God said,
Let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry land
appear; and it was so. And God said, Let the
earth bring forth grass for fodder, and the fruit
tree yielding fruit. And God said, Let there be
lights in the firmament of the heaven that they may
be for a light upon the earth. And God set them
in the firmament of the heaven to rule over the day
and over the night.” 2

In all this, you observe, Moses does not say that
the deep _was created by God, or the darkness or
the waters. And yet, after saying concerning light

1 Numbers 12. 8: ‘*With him will I speak mouth to
mouth.”’
2 Genesis 1-17, with certain omissions.

331

40 E

σι Ol

aj 5
Gyo

57D
57 τὶ

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τοῦ φωτός, OTL προστάξαντος θεοῦ γέγονεν, εἰπεῖν
ἔτι καὶ περὶ τῆς νυκτὸς καὶ περὶ τῆς ἀβύσσου καὶ
περὶ τοῦ ὕδατος. ὁ δὲ οὐδὲν εἶπεν ὡς περὶ ov}
γεγονότων ὅλως, καίτοι πολλάκις ἐπιμνησθεὶς
αὐτῶν. πρὸς τούτοις οὔτε τῆς τῶν ἀγγέλων μέ-
μνηται γενέσεως ἢ ποιήσεως οὐδ᾽ ὅντινα τρόπον
παρήχθησαν, ἀλλὰ τῶν περὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν μόνον
καὶ περὶ τὴν γῆν σωμάτων, ὡς εἶναι τὸν θεὸν
κατὰ τὸν Μωυσέα ἀσωμάτων μὲν οὐδενὸς ποιητήν,
ὕλης δὲ ὑποκειμένης κοσμήτορα. τὸ γὰρ “Ἢ δὲ
γῆ ἣν ἀόρατος. καὶ AKATATKEVATTOS ” οὐδὲν ἕτερόν
ἐστιν ἢ τὴν μὲν ὑγρὰν καὶ ξηρὰν οὐσίαν ὕλην ποι-
οῦντος, κοσμήτορα δὲ αὐτῆς τὸν θεὸν εἰσάγοντος.

"O γε μὴν Πλάτων ἄκουε περὶ τοῦ κόσμου τί
φησιν. “(Ὁ δὴ πᾶς οὐρανὸς ἢ κόσμος ---ἢ καὶ ἄλλο,
ὅ τί ποτε ὀνομαζόμενος μάλιστα ἂν δέχοιτο, τοῦτο
ἡμῖν ὠνομάσθω---πότερον ἣ ἦν ἀεί, γενέσεως ἀρχὴν
ἔχων οὐδεμίαν, ἢ γέγονεν, ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς τίνος ἀρξά-
μενος ; γέγονεν" ὁρατὸς γὰρ ἅπτος τέ ἐστι καὶ
σῶμα ἔχων. πάντα δὲ τὰ τοιαῦτα αἰσθητά, τὰ
δὲ αἰσθητά, δόξῃ περιληπτὰ μετὰ αἰσθήσεως,
γιγνόμενα καὶ γεννητὰ ἐφάνη. .. οὕτως οὖν κατὰ
τὸν λόγον τὸν εἰκότα δεῖ λέγειν τόνδε τὸν κόσμον
ζῷον ἔμψυχον ἔννουν τε τῇ ἀληθείᾳ διὰ τὴν τοῦ
θεοῦ γενέσθαι πρόνοιαν.

"Ep δὲ ἑνὶ παραβάλωμεν μόνον' τίνα καὶ ποδα-

1 Klimek ὡς περὶ οὐ; Neumann ὡς περί.
2. Neumann σκηνωμώτων from Marcianus 123; σωμάτων
Wright from MJarcianus 122

1 Timaeus 288, C.

332

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

that God ordered it to be, and it was, surely he
ought to have gone on to speak of night also, and
the deep and the waters. But of them he says not
a word to imply that they were not already existing
at all, though he often mentions them. Further-
more, he does not mention the birth or creation of
the angels or in what manner they were brought
into being, but deals only with the heavenly and
earthly bodies. It follows that, according to Moses,
God is the creator of nothing _that_is incorporeal,
but is only the disposer of matter that already
existed. For the words, ‘And the earth was in-
visible and without form” can only mean that he
regards the wet and dry substance as the original
matter and that he introduces God as the disposer
of this matter.

Now on the other hand hear what Plato says
about the universe: “ Now the whole heaven or the
universe,—or whatever other name would be most
acceptable to it, so let it be named by us,—did it
exist eternally, having no beginning of generation,
or has it come into being starting from some begin-
ning? It has come into being. For it can be seen
and handled and has a body; and all such things
are the objects of sensation, and such objects of
sensation, being apprehensible by opinion with the
aid of sensation are things that came into being, as
we saw, and have been generated. . . .1 It follows,
therefore, according to the reasonable theory, that
we ought to affirm that this universe came into being
as a living creature possessing soul and intelligence
in very truth, both by the providence of God.” ?

Let us but compare them, point by point. What

2 Timaeus 508 ; cf. Julian, Oration 5, 170D.

333

58 A

58 B

58 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

πὴν ποιεῖται δημηγορίαν ὁ ὁ θεὸς ὁ παρὰ Μωυσῇ
καὶ ποδαπὴν ὁ ὁ παρὰ []λάτωνι ; :

“ Καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός' Ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον κατ᾽
εἰκόνα ἡμετέραν καὶ καθ᾽ ὁμοίωσιν. καὶ ἀρχέ-
τωσαν τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τῶν πετει-

A al ᾽ a \ “ “ Ν 7 A
νῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ TOV κτηνῶν Kal πάσης τῆς
γῆς καὶ πάντων τῶν ἑρπετῶν TOV ἑρπόντων ἐπὶ
τῆς γῆς. καὶ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον, κατ
εἰκόνα θεοῦ ἐ ἐποίησεν αὐτόν" ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ ἐποί-
ησεν αὐτοὺς λέγων' Αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε
καὶ πληρώσατε τῆν γῆν καὶ κατακυριεύσατε av-
τῆς. καὶ ἀρχέτωσαν τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θαλάσσης

\ A a a ᾽ a \ ΄ a
καὶ τῶν πετεινῶν τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ πάντων τῶν
κτηνῶν καὶ πάσης τῆς As.

"A Kove δὴ οὗν Kal τῆς Πλατωνικῆς δημηγορίας,
ἣν τῷ τῶν ὅλων περιτίθησι δημιουργῷ.

A Θεοὶ θεῶν, ὦ ὧν ἐγὼ δημιουργὸς πατήρ τε ἔργων
ἄλυτα ἔσται ἐμοῦ γε ἐθέλοντος. τὸ μὲν δὴ δεθὲν
πᾶν λυτόν, τό γε μὴν καλῶς ἁρμοσθὲν καὶ ἔχον εὖ
λύειν ἐθέλειν κακοῦ. διὸ ἐπείπερ γεγένησθε, οὐκ
ἀθάνατοι μέν ἐστε οὐδὲ ἄλυτοι τὸ πάμπαν, οὔτι
γέ μὴν λυθήσεσθε οὐδὲ τεύξεσθε θανάτου μοίρας,
τῆς ἐμῆς βουλήσεως μείξονος ἔτι δεσμοῦ καὶ
κυριωτέρου λαχόντες ἐκείνων, οἷς ὅτε ἐγίνεσθε
ξυνεδεῖσθε. νῦν οὖν ὃ λέγω πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐνδεικνύ-
μενος μάθετε. θνητὰ ἔτι γένη λοιπὰ τρία ἀγέν-
νητα, τούτων. δὲ μὴ γενομένων οὐρανὸς ἀτελὴς
ἔσται. τὰ γὰρ πάντα ἐν αὑτῷ γένη ζῴων οὐχ
ἕξει: ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δὲ ταῦτα γενόμενα καὶ βίου μετα-

1 Genesis 90. 27. 28.

334

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

and what sort of speech does the god make in the
account of Moses, and what the god in the account
of Plato? —

«“ And God said, Let us make man in our image,
and our likeness; and let them have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth. So God created man, in the image of
God created he him; male and female created
he them, and said, Be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have
dominion over the fish of the sea,and over the
fowl of the air, and over all the cattle and over all
the earth.’

Now, I say, hear also the speech which Plato
puts in the mouth of the Artificer of the All.

‘Gods of Gods! Those works whose artificer and
father I am will abide indissoluble, so long as it is my
will. Lo, all that hath been fastened may be loosed,
yet to will to loose that which is harmonious and in
good case were the act of an evil being. Wherefore,
since ye have come into being, ye are not immortal
or indissoluble altogether, nevertheless ye shall by
no means be loosed or meet with the doom of death,
since ye have found in my will a bond more mighty
and more potent than those wherewith ye were
bound when ye came into being. Now therefore
hearken to the saying which I proclaim unto you:
Three kinds of mortal beings still remain unborn,
and unless these have birth the heaven will be
incomplete. For it will not have within itself all
the kinds of living things. Yet if these should
come into being and receive a share of life at

335

58 D

65 A
65 B

65 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

σχόντα θεοῖς ἰσάξοιτο ἄν. iy οὖν θνητά τε ἢ τό τε
πᾶν τόδε ὄντως ἅπαν ἢ, τρέπεσθε κατὰ φύσιν
ὑμεῖς ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ζῴων δημιουργίαν, μιμούμενοι
τὴν ἐμὴν δύναμιν περὶ τὴν ὑμετέραν γένεσιν. καὶ
καθ᾽ ὅσον μὲν αὐτῶν ἀθανάτοις ὁμώνυμον εἶναι
προσήκει, θεῖον λεγόμενον ἡγεμονοῦν τε ἐν αὐτοῖς
τῶν ἀεὶ δίκῃ καὶ ὑμῖν ἐθελόντων ἕπεσθαι, σπείρας
καὶ ὑπαρξάμενος ἐγὼ παραδώσω. τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν
ὑμεῖς, ἀθανάτῳ θνητὸν προσυφαίνοντες ἀπεργά-
ζεσθε ζῴα καὶ γεννᾶτε τροφήν. τε διδόντες αὐξάνετε
καὶ φθίνοντα πάλιν δέχεσθε."

“ARN apa μὴ τοῦτο ὄναρ ἐστὶν ἐννοήσοντες
αὐτὸ μαθέτε. θεοὺς ὀνομάζει ἸΪλάτων τοὺς ἐμ-
φανεῖς, ἥλιον καὶ σελήνην, ἄστρα καὶ οὐρανόν,
ἀλλ᾽ οὗτοι τῶν ἀφανῶν εἰσιν εἰκόνες" ὁ φαινόμενος
τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν ἥλιος τοῦ νοητοῦ καὶ μὴ
φαινομένου, καὶ πάλιν ἡ φαινομένη τοῖς ὀφθαλ-
μοῖς ἡμῶν σελήνη καὶ τῶν ἄστρων ἕκαστον εἰκόνες
εἰσὶ τῶν νοητῶν. ἐκείνους οὖν τοὺς νοητοὺς καὶ
ἀφανεῖς θεοὺς ἐνυπάρχοντας καὶ συνυπάρχοντας
καὶ ἐξ αὐτοῦ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ γεννηθέντας καὶ
προελθόντας ὁ 0 Πλάτων οἶδεν. εἰκότως οὖν φησιν
ὁ δημιουργὸς ὁ παρ᾽ αὐτῷ “θεοί, πρὸς τοὺς
ἀφανεῖς λέγων, “θεῶν, τῶν ἐμφανῶν δηλονότι.
κοινὸς δὲ ἀμφοτέρων δημιουργὸς οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ
τεχνησάμενος οὐρανὸν καὶ γῆν καὶ θάλασσαν καὶ

1 Timaeus 41A,B,c. Julian may have been quoting from
memory, as there are omissions and slight variations from
our text of the Temacus.

2 Cf. Julian, Vol. 1, Oration 4. 1494, 156p.

8 Julian’s Fourth Oration, Vol. 1. is an exposition of this
theory held by the late Neo-Platonists; in the present
treatise he does not, as in the Fourth and Fifth Orations,

336

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

my hands they would become equal to gods.
Therefore in order that they may be mortal, and
that this All may be eAll in very truth, turn ye
according to your nature to the contriving of living
things, imitating my power even as I showed it in
generating you. And such part of them as is fitted
to receive the same name as the immortals, which
is called divine and the power in them that governs
all who are willing ever to follow justice and you,
this part I, having sowed it and originated the
- same, will deliver to you. For the rest, do you,
weaving the mortal with the immortal, contrive living
beings and bring them to birth; then by giving
them sustenance increase them, and when they
perish receive them back again.” 1

But since ye are about to consider whether this
is only a dream, do ye learn the meaning thereof.
Plato gives the name gods to those that are visible,
the sun and moon, the stars and the heavens, but
these are only the likenesses of the invisible gods.
The sun which is visible to our eyes is the likeness
of the intelligible and invisible sun,? and again the
moon which is visible to our eyes and every one of
the stars are likenesses of the intelligible.2 Accord-
ingly Plato knows of those intelligible and invisible
gods which are immanent in and coexist with the
creator himself and were begotten and proceeded
from him. Naturally, therefore, the creator in Plato’s
account says “gods” when he is addressing the
invisible beings, and ‘of gods,” meaning by this,
evidently, the visible gods. And the common creator
of both these is he who fashioned the heavens and

distinguish the intelligible (νοητοῦ gods from the intellectual
(νοεροῖ).
337
VOL. III. , Ζ

65 D

65 EK

66 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἄστρα καὶ γεννήσας ἐν τοῖς νοητοῖς τὰ τούτων
ἀρ ετυ τα.

Σκόπει οὖν, ὅτι καὶ τὰ ἐπὶ τούτοις καλῶς.
τ “ΔΛείπει " γάρ φησι “ τρία θνητὰ γένη, ᾿ δηλονότι
τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ τὸ τῶν pov καὶ TO TOV
φυτῶν" τούτων γὰρ ἕκαστον ἰδίοις. ὥρισται λόγοις.
“Ἐπ μὲν οὖν φησι “ καὶ τούτων ἕκαστον vr’ ἐμοῦ
γένοιτο, παντάπασιν ἀναγκαῖον ἀθάνατον αὐτὸ
γενέσθαι." καὶ γὰρ τοῖς νοητοῖς θεοῖς οὐδὲν ἄλλο
τῆς ἀθανασίας αἴτιον καὶ τῷ φαινομένῳ κόσμῳ ἢ
τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ γενέσθαι. ὅτι οὖν φησιν
“«““Οπόσον ἐστὶν ἀθάνατον, ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστι τούτοις
παρὰ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ δεδόσθαι," τοῦτο δέ ἐστιν ἡ
λογικὴ ψυχή. ‘To δὲ λοιπόν" φησιν “ὑμεῖς
ἀθανάτῳ θνητὸν “προσυφαίνετε." δῆλον οὖν ὅτι
παραλαβόντες οἱ δημιουργικοὶ " θεοὶ παρὰ τοῦ
σφῶν πατρὸς τὴν on ημιουργικὴν δύναμιν, ἀπεγέν-
νῆσαν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς τὰ θνητὰ τῶν ζῴων. εἰ γὰρ

μηδὲν ἔμελλε διαφέρειν οὐρανὸς ἀνθρώπου καὶ
ναὶ μὰ Δία θηρίου καὶ τελευταῖον αὐτῶν τῶν
ἑρπετῶν καὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ θαλάσσῃ νηχομένων ἰχθυ-
δίων, ἔδει τὸν δημιουργὸν ἕ ἕνα καὶ τὸν αὐτὸν εἶναι
πάντων. εἰ δὲ πολὺ τὸ μέσον ἐστὶν ἀθανάτων καὶ
θνητῶν, οὐδεμιᾷ προσθήκῃ μεῖζον οὐδὲ ἀφαιρέσει
μειούμενον οὐδὲ μιγνύμενον πρὸς τὰ θνητὰ καὶ
ἐπίκηρα ὃ αἴτιον εἶναι προσήκει τούτων μὲν ἄλ-
λους, ἑτέρων δὲ ἑτέρους.

Οὐκοῦν ἐπειδήπερ οὐδὲ περὶ τοῦ να το τοῦ

1 οὖν ἔτι Klimek suggests.
2. δημιουργικοὶ Asmus ; δημιουργοὶ Neumann.
3 Asmus adds οὐδὲ μιγνύμενον retains πρὸς--ἐπίκηρα; Neu-

338

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

the earth and the sea and the stars, and begat in the
intelligible world the archetypes of these.

Observe then that what follows is well said also.
“For,” he says, “there remain three kinds of mortal
things,’ meaning, evidently, human beings, animals
and plants; for each one of these has been defined
by its own peculiar definition. ‘“ Now,” he goes on
to say, “if each one of these also should come to
exist by me, it would of necessity become immortal.”’
And indeed, in the case of the intelligible gods and
the visible universe, no other cause for their im-
mortality exists than that they came into existence
by the act of the creator. When, therefore, he says,
“Such part of them as is immortal must needs be
given to these by the creator,” he means the reasoning
soul. “For the rest,” he says, “do ye weave. mortal
with immortal.” It is therefore clear that the
creative gods received from their father their creative
power and so begat on earth all living things that
are mortal. For if there were to be no difference
between the heavens and mankind and animals too,
by Zeus, and all the way down to the very tribe of
creeping things and the little fish that swim in the
sea, then there would have had to be one and the
same creator for them all. But if there is a great
gulf fixed between immortals and mortals, and this
cannot become greater by addition or less by sub-
traction, nor can it be mixed with what is mortal
and subject to fate, it follows that one set of gods
were the creative cause of mortals, and another of
immortals.

Accordingly, since Moses, as it seems, has failed

mann deletes mpds—éemixnpa; Gollwitzer μειούμενον ὥσπερ τὰ
θνητὰ καὶ ἐπίκηρα. ;
999
paw

99 E

100 A

100 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

i a 4
κόσμου τούτου δημιουργοῦ πάντα διειλεγμένος
A / ¢ / \ \ an
Μωυσῆς φαίνεται, τήν τε “EBpaiwy καὶ τὴν τῶν
,ὔ / a /
ἡμετέρων πατέρων δόξαν ὑπὲρ ἐθνῶν τούτων ἀντι-
παραθῶμεν ἀλλήλαις.
[4 n οὗ A / \
O Μωυσῆς φησι τὸν τοῦ κόσμου δημιουργὸν
5 ia \ fal ς / 7 \
ἐκλέξασθαι τὸ τῶν EBpatiwy ἔθνος καὶ προσέχειν
Ζ / if
ἐκείνῳ μόνῳ Kal ἐκείνου φροντίσαι καὶ δίδωσιν
᾽ aA Ἂς Ἂ / 9 lal / a SW Ἂν,
αὐτῷ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν αὐτοῦ μόνου. τῶν δὲ ἄλλων
> a “ Ce A, SE χε, - a " IND
ἐθνῶν, ὅπως ἢ Up οἵστισι διοικοῦνται θεοῖς, οὐδ
fal / vA a
ἡντινοῦν μνείαν πεποίηται: πλὴν εἰ μή τις ἐκεῖνα
x δ aA ,
συγχωρήσειεν, OTL TOV ἥλιον αὐτοῖς καὶ τὴν σελή-
4 5
νην ἀπένειμεν. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων καὶ μικρὸν
“ » «“ ἊΝ ΕΣ \ > \ / \
ὕστερον. πλὴν ὅτι τοῦ ᾿Ισραὴλ αὐτὸν μόνου θεὸν
\ a \ 7
καὶ τῆς ᾿Ιουδαίας καὶ τούτους ἐκλεκτούς φησιν
/ na a 3 na
αὐτός TE καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον προφῆται καὶ Inaods
e a ΄ \ \ ΠΡ ΝΝ
ὁ Ναζωραῖος ἐπιδείξω, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸν πάντας
la) \ v ἴω
πανταχοῦ τοὺς πώποτε γόητας καὶ ἀπατεῶνας
ὑπερβαλλόμενον Παῦλον. ἀκούετε δὲ τῶν λέξεων
> fa) \ a \ la) M / cSt δὲ
αὐτῶν, καὶ πρῶτον μὲν τῶν Μωυσέως" v δὲ
A A n , / 7
ἐρεῖς τῷ Φαραῷ" υἱὸς πρωτότοκός μου ᾿Ισραήλ.
53 ᾽ 3 / Ν / “
εἶπον δέ: ἐξαπόστειλον τὸν λαόν μου, ἵνα μοι
λατρεύσῃ. σὺ δὲ οὐκ ἐβούλου ἐξαποστεῖλαι
3.0. P93 \ \ WA 6c \ »
αὐτόν. καὶ μικρὸν ὕστερον “Καὶ λέγουσιν
> a e \ la ς , / Ἑ a
αὐτῷ" ὁ θεὸς τῶν ᾿Εβραίων προσκέκληται ἡμᾶς.
, 3 \ CINE n
πορευσόμεθα οὖν εἰς THY ἔρημον ὁδὸν ἡμερῶν
a Y Va aA la) a 3) s\
τριῶν, ὅπως θύσωμεν κυρίῳ τῷ θεῷ ἡμῶν." καὶ
3 5 / 7 e / ςς ὩΣ ig θ Ν an
μετ᾽ ὀλίγα πάλιν ὁμοίως" “Κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῶν
ΒΕ βραίων ἐξαπέσταλκέ με πρὸς σὲ λέγων' ἐξαπο-
340

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

also to give a complete account of the immediate
creator of this universe, let us go on and set one
against another the opinion of the Hebrews and
that of our fathers about these nations.

Moses says that the creator of the universe chose
out the Hebrew nation, that to that nation alone did
he pay heed and cared for it, and he gives him
charge of it alone. But how and by what sort of
gods the other nations are governed he has said not
a word,—unless indeed one should concede that he
did assign to them the sun and moon.! However
of this I shall speak a little Jater. Now I will only
point out that Moses himself and the prophets who
came after him and Jesus the Nazarene, yes and.
Paul also, who surpassed all the magicians and char-
latans of every place and every time, assert that he
is the God of Israel alone and of Judaea, and that
the Jews are his chosen people. Listen to their
own words, and first to the words of Moses: “ And
thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Israel is my son, my
firstborn. And I have said to thee, Let my people
go that they may serve me. But thou didst refuse
to let them go.”? And a little later, “And they
say unto him, The God of the Hebrews hath sum-
moned us; we will go therefore three days’ journey
into the desert, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord
our God.” 8. And soon he speaks again in the same
way, “The Lord the Géd of the Hebrews hath sent

1 Deuteronomy 4.19: ‘*Andlest . . . when thou seest the
sun and the moon and the stars, even all the host of heaven,
thou be drawn away and worship them, and serve them,
which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all the peoples
under the whole heaven.”

2 Hxodus 4. 22. 3 Fxodus 4. 23.

341

106 A
106 B

106 C

106 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

\ / “4 / 9 a
στείλον Tov λαὸν μου, iva λατρεύσωσιν ἐν TH
> / 33
ἐρήμῳ.
> 3 e/ iN 3 , , ΣῊ ΤΥ, a
ANA ὅτι μὲν ᾿Ιουδαίων μόνων ἐμέλησε TO
a 3 n \ - 3 an 7] -
θεῷ τὸ ἐξ ἀρχῆς καὶ κλῆρος αὐτοῦ “γέγονεν οὗτος
a] , ’ ra , eo) nr > \
ἐξαίρετος, ov Μωυσῆς μόνον καὶ ᾿Ιησοῦς, ἀλλὰ
\ a 2 \ , / A ”
καὶ Παῦλος εἰρηκὼς φαίνεται" καίτοι τοῦτο ἄξιον
9 a "A
θαυμάσαι περὶ tov IlavAov. πρὸς yap τύχας,
Ψ fa /
ὥσπερ χρῶτα OL πολύποδες πρὸς τὰς πέτρας,
9 ΄, \ \ an , \ τ ᾽
ἀλλάττει τὰ περὶ θεοῦ δόγματα, ποτὲ μὲν ᾿Ιου-
, i a a Ἂν
δαίους μόνον τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ κληρονομίαν εἶναι
ῇ / \ \ vA 3 /
διατεινόμενος, πάλιν δὲ τοὺς EXAnvas ἀναπείθων
A / € \
αὑτῷ προστίθεσθαι, λέγων" “Μὴ ᾿Ιουδαίων ὁ θεὸς
4 ᾽ Ν pers a Ν Vols ioe 39 ,ὔ
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐθνῶν" ναὶ καὶ ἐθνῶν." δίκαιον
95 a ἡ \ la) 3 \ A ? / 3
οὖν ἐρέσθαι τὸν Ἰϊαῦλον, εἰ μὴ τῶν ᾿Ιουδαίων ἣν
< Ἅ ’ 3 Ἂν Ν A 3 a lal /
ὁ θεὸς μόνον, ἀλλὰ Kal τῶν ἐθνῶν, τοῦ χάριν
\ \ 2 \ ’ / » \ x
πολὺ μὲν εἰς τοὺς ᾿Ιουδαίους ἔπεμπε TO προφητικὸν
χάρισμα καὶ τὸν Μωυσέα καὶ τὸ χρῖσμα καὶ τοὺς
δ \
προφήτας καὶ τὸν νόμον Kal τὰ παράδοξα Kal τὰ
la lal ,
τεράστια TOV μύθων ; ἀκούεις γὰρ αὐτῶν βοών-
co » / ” ” 37 “ΟΝ
tov: “"Aptov ἀγγέλων ἔφαγεν ἄνθρωπος. ἐπὶ
A \ \ \ 2 ‘ale Mild > , e Ὁ
τέλους δὲ καὶ τὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ἔπεμψεν ἐκείνοις, ἡμῖν
7: a /
δὲ ov προφήτην, ov χρῖσμα, ov διδάσκαλον, οὐ
κήρυκα περὶ τῆς μελλούσης ὀψέ ποτε γοῦν ἔσεσ-
\ > ς a » 3 3 a / 2 \
θαι καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ φιλανθρωπίας. ἀλλὰ
\ ἱρὴ > n / 3 NE A /
καὶ περιεῖδεν ἐτῶν μυριάδας, εἰ δὲ ὑμεῖς βούλεσθε,
4 2 3 7 / an > / Ὁ“
χιλιάδας. ἐν ἀγνωσίᾳ τοιαύτῃ τοῖς εἰδώλοις, WS
/ i
pate, λατρεύοντας τοὺς ἀπὸ ἀνίσχοντος ἡλίου
/ an /
μέχρι δυομένου καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν ἄρκτων ἄχρι
, aA \
μεσημβρίας ἔξω καὶ μικροῦ γένους οὐδὲ πρὸ δισ-
342

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

me unto thee, saying, Let my people go that they
may serve me in the wilderness,” }

But that from the beginning God cared only for
the Jews and that He chose them out as his portion,
has been clearly asserted not only by Moses and
Jesus but by Paul as well; though in Paul’s case this
is strange. For according to circumstances he keeps
changing his views about God, as the polypus changes
its colours to match the rocks,? and now he insists
that the Jews alone are God’s portion, and then
again, when he is trying to persuade the Hellenes to
take sides with him, he says: “ Do not think that he
is the God of Jews only, but also of Gentiles: yea of
Gentiles also.”* Therefore it is fair to ask of Paul
why God, if he was not the God of the Jews only
but also of the Gentiles, sent the blessed gift of
prophecy to the Jews in abundance and gave them
Moses and the oil of anointing, and the prophets and
the law and the incredible and monstrous elements
in their myths? For you hear them crying aloud:
‘“* Man did eat angels’ food.” 4 And finally God sent
unto them Jesus also, but unto us no prophet, no oil
of anointing, no teacher, no herald to announce his
love for man which should one day, though late, reach
even unto us also. Nay he even looked on for
myriads, or if you prefer, for thousands of years,
while men in extreme ignorance served idols, as you
call them, from where the sun rises to where he
sets, yes and from North to South, save only that

1 Fxodus 5. 3: the sayings of Jesus and the prophets,
which Julian said he would quote, are missing.

2 For this proverb, derived from Theognis, cf. Misopogon
349p, Vol. 2.

3 Romans 3. 29; Galatians 3. 28. 4 Psalms 78. 25.

343

Ι00 C

106
D, ἃ

115 D

115 Τὶ

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

χιλίων ὅλων ἐτῶν ἐν] ἑνὶ μέρει συνοικισθέντος
τῆς Παλαιστίνης. εἰ γὰρ πάντων ἡμῶν ἐστι
θεὸς καὶ πάντων δημιουργὸς ὁμοίως, τί περιεῖδεν
ἡμᾶς ; προσήκει τοίνυν τὸν τῶν Ἑβραίων θεὸν
οὐχὶ δὴ παντὸς κόσμου γενεσιουργὸν ὑπάρχειν
οἴεσθαι καὶ κατεξουσιάζειν τῶν ὅλων, συνεστάλ-
θαι δέ, ὡς ἔφην, καὶ πεπερασμένην ἔχοντα τὴν
ἀρχὴν ἀναμὶξ τοῖς ἄλλοις νοεῖσθαι θεοῖς. ἔτι
προσέξομεν ὑμῖν, ὅτι τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν ἄχρι
ψιλῆς γοῦν ἐννοίας ὑμεῖς ἢ "τῆς ὑμετέρας TLS
ἐφαντάσθη ῥίξης ; Tou μερικὰ πάντα ταῦτά ἐστι; ;
θεὸς ζηλωτής" ζηλοῖ γὰρ διὰ τί καὶ ἁμαρτίας
ἐκδικῶν πατέρων ἐπὶ τέκνα ; ;

᾿Αλλὰ δὴ σκοπεῖτε πρὸς ταῦτα πάλιν τὰ παρ᾽
ἡμῶν. οἱ γὰρ ἡμέτεροι τὸν δημιουργόν φασιν
ἁπάντων μὲν εἶναι κοινὸν πατέρα καὶ βασιλέα,
νενεμῆσθαι δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν
ἐθνάρχαις καὶ πολιούχοις θεοῖς, ὧν ἕκαστος ἐπι-
τροπεύει τὴν ἑαυτοῦ λῆξιν οἰκείως ἑαυτῷ. ἐπειδὴ
γὰρ ἐν μὲν τῴ πατρὶ πάντα τέλεια καὶ ἕν πάντα,
ἐν δὲ τοῖς μεριστοῖς ἄλλη Tap ἄλλῳ κρατεῖ
δύναμις, Apns μὲν ἐπιτροπεύει τὰ πολεμικὰ τῶν
ἐθνῶν, ᾿Αθηνᾶ δὲ τὰ μετὰ φρονήσεως πολεμικά,
“Ἑρμῆς δὲ τὰ συνετώτερα μᾶλλον ἢ τολμηρότερα,
καὶ Kad ἑκάστην οὐσίαν τῶν οἰκείων θεῶν ἕπεται
καὶ τὰ ἐπιτροπευόμενα παρὰ σφῶν ἔθνη. εἰ μὲν
οὖν οὐ μαρτυρεῖ τοῖς ἡμετέροις λόγοις ἡ πεῖρα,
πλάσμα μὲν ἔστω τὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν καὶ πιθανότης

1 ἐν Klimek supplies.

1 Exodus 90. 5.
344 ‘

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

little tribe which less than two thousand years before
had settled in one part of Palestine. For if he is
the God of all of us alike, and the creator of all, why
did he neglect us? Wherefore it is natural to think
that the God of the Hebrews was not the begetter
of the whole universe with lordship over the whole,
but rather, as I said before, that he is confined within
limits, and that since his empire has bounds we must
conceive of him as only one of the crowd of other, ——
gods. Then are we to pay further heed to you
ΟΣ: you or one of your stock imagined the God
of the universe, though in any case you attained
only to a bare conception of Him? Is not all this
partiality ἢ God, you say, is a jealous God. But why
is he so jealous, even avenging the sins of the fathers
on the children?! ‘

But now consider our teaching in comparison
with this of yours. Our writers say that the creator
is the common father and king of all things, but that
the other functions have hen assigned by him to.
national gods of the peoples and gods that protect
the cities; every one of whom administers his own
department in accordance with his own nature. For
since in the father all things are complete and all
things are one, while in the separate deities one
quality or another predominates, therefore Ares
rules over the warlike nations, Athene over those
that are wise as well as warlike, Hermes over
those that are more shrewd than adventurous; and
in short the nations over which the gods preside
follow each the essential character of their proper
god. Now if experience does not bear witness
to the truth of our teachings, let us grant that
our traditions are a figment and ἃ misplaced

345

116A

116 B

131 B

1510

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἄκαιρος, TA παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ᾿δὲ ἐπαινείσθω" εἰ δὲ πᾶν
τοὐναντίον οἷς μὲν ἡμεῖς λέγομεν, ἐξ αἰῶνος ἡ
πεῖρα μαρτυρεῖ, τοῖς ὑμετέροις δὲ λόγοις οὐδὲν
οὐδαμοῦ φαίνεται σύμφωνον, τί τοσαύτης τῆς
φιλονεικίας ἀντέχεσθε ; ;

Λεγέσθω γώρ μοι, τίς αἰτία τοῦ Κελτοὺς μὲν
εἶναι καὶ Teppavovs θρασεῖς, “ ᾿Ελληνας δὲ καὶ
“Ῥωμαίους ὡς ἐπίπαν πολιτικοὺς καὶ φιλανθρώ-
πους μετὰ τοῦ στερροῦ τε καὶ πολεμικοῦ, συνε-
τωτέρους δὲ καὶ τεχνικωτέρους Αἰγυπτίους,
ἀπολέμους δὲ καὶ τρυφηλοὺς Σύρους μετὰ τοῦ
συνετοῦ καὶ θερμοῦ καὶ κούφου καὶ εὐμαθοῦς.
ταύτης γὰρ τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσι διαφορᾶς εἰ μὲν
οὐδεμίαν τις αἰτίαν συνορῴη, μᾶλλον δὲ αὐτά
φησι καὶ ἐκ τοῦ αὐτομάτου συμπεσεῖν, πῶς ἔτι
προνοίᾳ διοικεῖσθαι τὸν κόσμον οἴεται; εἰ δὲ
τούτων αἰτίας εἶναί τις τίθεται, λεγέτω μοι πρὸς
αὐτοῦ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ καὶ διδασκέτω. τοὺς μὲν
γὰρ νόμους εὔδηλον, ὡς ἡ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἔθετο
φύσις οἰκείους ἑαυτῇ, πολιτικοὺς μὲν καὶ φιλαν-
θρώπους, οἷς ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἐντέθραπτο τὸ φιλάν-
θρωπον, ἀγρίους δὲ καὶ ᾿ἀπανθρώπους, οἷς ἐναντία
φύσις ὑπῆν καὶ ἐνυπῆρχε τῶν ἠθῶν. οἱ γὰρ
νομοθέται μικρὰ ταῖς φύσεσι καὶ ταῖς ἐπιτηδειό-
τησι διὰ τῆς ἀγωγῆς προσέθεσαν. οὔκουν ᾿Ανά-
χαρσιν οἱ Σκύθαι βακχεύοντα παρεδέξαντο" οὐδὲ

1 In Misopogon 3598 Julian speaks of the fierceness of the
Celts compared with the Romans.

2 A Scythian prince who travelled in search of knowledge
and was counted by some among the seven sages. On his
return to Thrace he is said to have been killed while cele-
brating the rites of Cybele, which were new to the
Scythians ; Herodotus 4. 76, tells the tale to illustrate the

346

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

attempt to convince, and then we ought to
approve the doctrines held by you. If, however,
quite the contrary is true, and from the remotest
past experience bears witness to our account and in
no case does anything appear to harmonise with your
teachings, why do you persist in maintaining a pre-
tension so enormous?

Come, tell me why it is that the Celts and the
Germans are fierce,! while the Hellenes and Romans
are, generally speaking, inclined to political life and
humane, though at the same time unyielding and
warlike? Why the Egyptians are more intelligent
and more given to crafts, and the Syrians unwarlike
and effeminate, but at the same time intelligent,
hot-tempered, vain and quick to learn? For if there
is anyone who does not discern a reason for these
differences among the nations, but rather declares
that all this so befell spontaneously, how, I ask, can
he still believe that the universe is administered by
a providence? But if there isany man who maintains
that there are reasons for these differences, let him
tell me them, in the name of the creator himself,
andinstructme. As for men’s laws, it is evident that
men have established them to correspond with their
own natural dispositions ; that is to say, constitutional
and humane laws were established by those in whom
a humane disposition had been fostered above all
else, savage and inhuman laws by those in whom
there lurked and was inherent the contrary dis-
position. For lawgivers have succeeded in adding
but little by their discipline to the natural characters
and aptitudes of men. Accordingly the Scythians
would not receive Anacharsis 2 among them when he

Scythian hatred of foreign, and especially of Greek, customs ;
ef. Lucian, Anacharsis.

347

131 Ὁ

134 D

134 αὶ

135 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τῶν ‘Komepiov ἐθνῶν εὕροις ἄν τινας εὐκόλως
πλὴν ὀλίγων σφόδρα ἐπὶ τὸ φιλοσοφεῖν ἢ γεω-
μετρεῖν ἢ τι τῶν τοιούτων ηὐτρεπισμένους, καίτοι
κρατούσης ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἤδη τῆς “Ρωμαίων ἡγεμο-
pias. ἀλλ᾽ ἀπολαύουσι μόνον τῆς διαλέξεως καὶ
τῆς ῥητορείας οἱ λίαν εὐφυεῖς, ἄλλου δὲ οὐδενὸς
μεταλαμβάνουσι μαθήματος. οὕτως ἴσχυρον
ἔοικεν ἡ φύσις εἶναι. τίς οὖν ἡ διαφορὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν
ἐν τοῖς ἤθεσι καὶ τοῖς νόμοις ; ;

‘O μὲν. γὰρ Μωυσῆς αἰτίαν ἀποδέδωκε κομιδῇ
μυθώδη τῆς περὶ τὰς διαλέκτους ἀνομοιότητος.
ἔφη γὰρ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων συνελθόντας
πόλιν ἐθέλειν οἰκοδομεῖν καὶ πύργον ἐν αὐτῇ μέγαν,
φάναι δὲ τὸν θεόν, ὅτι χρὴ κατελθεῖν καὶ τὰς
διαλέκτους αὐτῶν συγχέαι. καὶ ὅπως μή τίς με
νομίσῃ ταῦτα συκοφαντεῖν, καὶ ἐκ τῶν Μωυσέως
ἀναγνωσόμεθα τὰ ἐφεξῆς. “Καὶ εἶπον: δεῦτε,
οἰκοδομήσωμεν ἑαυτοῖς πόλιν καὶ πύργον, οὗ
ἔσται ἡ κεφαλὴ ἕως τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, καὶ ποιήσωμεν
ἑαυτοῖς ὄνομα πρὸ τοῦ διασπαρῆναι ἐπὶ προσώπου
πάσης τῆς γῆς. καὶ “κατέβη κύριος ἰδεῖν τὴν
πόλιν καὶ τὸν πύργον, ὃν ὠκοδόμησαν οἱ viol τῶν
ἀνθρώπων. καὶ εἶπε κύριος" ἰδού, γένος. ἕν καὶ
χεῖλος ἕν πάντων, καὶ τοῦτο ἤρξαντο ποιῆσαι
καὶ νῦν οὐκ ἐκλείψει ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν πάντα, ὅσα ἂν
ἐπίθωνται ποιεῖν. δεῦτε, καταβάντες ἐκεῖ συγ-
χέωμεν αὐτῶν τὴν γλῶσσαν, ἵνα μὴ ἀκούωσιν
ἕκαστος τῆς φωνῆς τοῦ πλησίον. καὶ διέσπειρεν
αὐτοὺς κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἐπὶ πρόσωπον πάσης τῆς
γῆς καὶ ἐπαύσαντο οἰκοδομοῦντες τὴν πόλιν καὶ
τὸν πύργον." εἶτα τούτοις ἀξιοῦτε πιστεύειν

348

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

was inspired by a religious frenzy, and with very
few exceptions you will not find that any men of the
Western nations! have any great inclination for
philosophy or geometry or studies of that sort,
although the Roman Empire has now so long been
paramount. But those who are unusually talented
delight only in debate and the art of rhetoric, and
do not adopt any other study ; so strong, it seems,
is the force of nature. Whence then come these
differences of character and laws among the nations?

Now of the dissimilarity of language Moses has
- given a wholly fabulous explanation. For he said
that the sons of men came together intending to
build a city, and a great tower therein, but that God
said that he must go down and confound their
languages. And that no one may think I am falsely
accusing him of this, I will read from the book of |
Moses what follows: “ And they said, Go to, let us
build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach
unto heaven; and let us make us a name, before we
be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And the Lord came down to see the city and the
tower, which the children of men had builded. And
the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they
have all one language; and this they have begun to
do; and now nothing will be withholden from them
which they purpose to do. Go to, let us go down,
τ and there confound their language, that no man may
understand the speech of his neighbour. So the
Lord God scattered them abroad upon the face of
all the earth: and they left off to build the city and
the tower.” 2? And then you demand that we should

1 He means the Gauls and Iberians, since the Germans at

that time were distinguished only in warfare.
2 Genesis 11. 4-8.

349

135 B

135 Ὁ

135 Ὁ

137 H

138 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

e A 3 a Ἄν δ a lal e > we. /
ἡμᾶς, ἀπιστεῖτε δὲ ὑμεῖς τοῖς ὑφ᾽ Ὃμήρου λεγο-
μένοις ὑπὲρ τῶν ᾿Αλωαδῶν, ὡς ἄρα τρία ἐπ᾽
ἀλλήλοις ὄρη θεῖναι διενοοῦντο, “ty οὐρανὸς
ἀμβατὸς εἴη." φημὶ μὲν γὰρ ἐγὼ καὶ τοῦτο παρα-
πλησίως ἐκείνῳ μυθῶδες εἶναι. ὑμεῖς δέ, ἀποδε-
χόμενοι τὸ πρότερον, ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου πρὸς θεῶν ἀποδο-
κιμάξετε τὸν Ὁμήρου μῦθον ; ἐκεῖνο γὰρ οἶμαι
δεῖν σιωπᾶν πρὸς ἄνδρας ἀμαθεῖς, ὅτι κἂν μιᾷ
φωνῇ καὶ γλώσσῃ πάντες οἱ κατὰ πᾶσαν τὴν
οἰκουμένην ἄνθρωποι χρήσωνται, πύργον οἰκοδο-
μεῖν οὐ δυνήσονται πρὸς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀφικνού-
μενον, κἂν ἐκπλινθεύσωσι τὴν γῆν πᾶσαν"
ἀπείρων γὰρ δεήσει πλίνθων ἰσομεγεθῶν τῇ γῇ
ξυμπάσῃ τῶν δυνησομένων ἄχρι τῶν σελήνης
ἐφικέσθαι κύκλων. ὑποκείσθω γὰρ πάντας μὲν
ἀνθρώπους συνεληλυθέναι γλώσσῃ καὶ φωνῇ μιᾷ
κεχρημένους, πᾶσαν δὲ ἐκπλινθεῦσαι τὴν γῆν καὶ
ἐκλατομῆσαι, πότε ἂν μέχρις οὐρανοῦ φθάσειεν,
εἰ καὶ λεπτότερον ἁρπεδόνος ἐκμηρυομένων αὐτῶν
ἐκταθείη ; τοῦτον οὖν οὕτω φαιερὸν ὄντα τὸν
μῦθον ἀληθῆ νενομικότες καὶ περὶ τοῦ θεοῦ δοξά-
ζοντες, ὅτι πεφόβηται τῶν ἀνθρώπων τὴν μιαι-
φονίαν τούτου τε χάριν “καταπεφοίτηκεν αὐτῶν
συγχέαι τὰς διαλέκτους, ἔτι τολμᾶτε θεοῦ γνῶσιν
αὐχεῖν ;

᾿πάνειμι, δὲ αὖθις πρὸς ἐκεῖνο, τὰς μὲν γὰρ
διαλέκτους ὅπως ὁ θεὸς συνέχεεν. εἴρηκεν ὁ
Μωυσῆς τὴν μὲν αἰτίαν, ὅτι φοβηθεὶς μή τι κατ᾽
αὐτοῦ πράξωσι προσβατὸν ἑαυτοῖς τὸν οὐρανὸν
κατεργασάμενοι, ὁμόγλωττοι ὄντες καὶ ὁμόφρονες

1 ἐφικνούμενον Klimek.

350

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

believe this account, while you yourselves disbelieve
Homer’s narrative of the Aloadae, namely that they
planned to set three mountains one on another,
“that so the heavens might be scaled.” For my
part I say that this tale is almost as fabulous as the
other. But if you accept the former, why in the
name of the gods do you discredit Homer’s fable?
For I suppose that to men so ignorant as you I must
say nothing about the fact that, even if all men
throughout the inhabited world ever employ one
speech and one language, they will not be able to
build a tower that will reach to the heavens, even
though they should turn the whole earth into bricks.
For such a tower will need countless bricks each
one as large as the whole earth, if they are to
succeed in reaching to the orbit of the moon. For
let us assume that all mankind met together, em-
ploying but one language and speech, and that they
made the whole earth into bricks and hewed out
stones, when would it reach as high as the heavens, |.
even though they spun it out and stretched it till ΙΝ oo
was finer than a thread? ‘Then do you, who believe
that this so obvio le is true, and moreover think
that God was afraid of the brutal violence of men,
and for this reason came down to earth to confound
their languages, do you, I say, still venture to boast
of your knowledge of God ?

But I will go back again to the question how God
confounded their languages. The reason why he
did so Moses has declared: namely, that God was
afraid that if they should have one language and
were of one mind, they would first construct for
themselves a path to the heavens and then do some

1 Odyssey 11. 316.
351

138 B

138 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

’ 7 \ \ “ ef /
ἀλλήλοις: TO δὲ πρᾶγμα ὅπως ἐποίησεν ovda-
lal » N / “ \ 2 ᾽ A \
HOS, ἀλλὰ μόνον, OTL κατελθὼν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ---μὴ
/ , \ aA > \
δυνάμενος ἄνωθεν αὐτὸ ποιεῖν, ὡς ἔοικεν, εἰ μὴ
n plan’ n a ς \ \ na \ \ 57
κατῆλθεν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς κατὰ τὰ ἤθη
\ \ / a or an 7 bY
καὶ Ta νόμιμα διαφορᾶς οὔτε Μωυσῆς οὔτε ἄλλος
/ ᾿ς lal \ if
ἀπεσάφησέ τις. καίτοι τῷ παντὶ μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ
, \ \ \ A a a
περὶ TA νόμιμα Kal TA πολιτικὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν ἐν τοῖς
3 ΄ a \ A Ih a ia
ἀνθρώποις τῆς περὶ τὰς διαλέκτους διαφορᾶς. Tis
Ἂν φ 9 “ If \ 7ὔ ,
yap EAAjnvev ἀδελφῇ, tis δὲ θυγατρί, τίς δὲ μητρί
A / n ues ae ,ὕ
φησι δεῖν μίγνυσθαι ; τοῦτο δὲ ἀγαθὸν ἐν Ἰ]έρσαις
/ a ’ “ /
κρίνεται. τί με χρῆ καθ ἕκαστον ἐπιέναι, TO
΄ / Py / n ee ey
pirerevOepov Te καί ἀνυπότακτον Tepuavev ἐπέξ-
/ \ lf θ \ θ \ Ss fr \
ἰόντα, TO χειρόηθες καὶ τιθασὸν Σύρων καὶ ΠΕερ-
a ᾿ 4 fal an ¢
σῶν καὶ ἸΠάρθων καὶ πάντων ἁπλῶς TOV πρὸς ἕω
, 7 / “ ἣν
καὶ πρὸς μεσημβρίαν βαρβάρων καὶ ὅσα καὶ τὰς
a / /
βασιλείας ἀγαπᾷ κεκτημένα δεσποτικωτέρας ; εἰ
Ν 9 7 7 , NN J
μὲν οὖν ἄνευ προνοίας μείζονος καὶ θειοτέρας
fa) / \ / \ iA /
ταῦτα συνηνέχθη τὰ μείζω καὶ τιμιώτερα, τί
μάτην περιεργαζόμεθα καὶ θεραπεύομεν τὸν μηδὲν
ἴω ᾿ \ wv 7 / nan >
προνοοῦντα ; ᾧ yap οὔτε βίων οὔτε ἠθῶν οὔτε
, > fe ” a Uf
τρόπων οὔτε εὐνομίας οὔτε πολιτικῆς ἐμέλησε
Mite? Ἢ 7 5 an
καταστάσεως, Ap ETL προσήκει μεταποιεῖσθαι
la} Bi. it lal a 3 a € a 5 ee
τῆς Tap ἡμῶν τιμῆς; οὐδαμῶς. ὁρᾶτε, εἰς ὅσην
Ta) ig ig f- yA n \ a
ὑμῖν ἀτοπίαν ὁ λόγος ἔρχεται. τῶν yap ἀγαθῶν
" 7 lal ΄ -
ὅσα περὶ τὸν ἀνθρώπινον θεωρεῖται βίον, ἡγεῖται
a na , x \ ω ,
μὲν τὰ τῆς ψυχῆς, ἕπεται δὲ TA TOD σώματος.
ν - ς n ’ aA ; ,
εἰ τοίνυν τῶν ψυχικῶν ἡμῶν ἀγαθῶν κατωλιγώ-
Ni aA a ς Ὁ an
pnoev, οὐδὲ τῆς φυσικῆς ἡμῶν κατασκευῆς προ-
1 ὑμῖν Klimek ; ὑμῶν Neumann.

352

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

mischief against him. But how he carried this out
Moses does not say at all, but only that he first came
down from heaven,—because he could not, as it
seems, do it from on high, without coming down to
earth. But with respect to the existing differences
in characters and customs, neither Moses nor any-
one else has enlightened us. And yet among man-
kind the difference between the customs and the
political constitutions of the nations is in every way
greater than the difference in their language. What
Hellene, for instance, ever tells us that a man ought
᾿ἴο marry his sister or his daughter or his mother ?
Yet in Persia this is accounted virtuous. But why
need I go over their several characteristics, or describe
the love of liberty and lack of discipline of the
Germans, the docility and tameness of the Syrians,
the Persians, the Parthians, and in short of all the
barbarians in the East and the South, and of all
nations who possess and are contented with a some-
what despotic form of government? Now if these
differences that are greater and more important came
about without the aid of a greater and more divine
providence, why do we vainly trouble ourselves about
and worship one who takes no thought for us? For
is it fitting that he who cared nothing for our lives,
our characters, our manners, our good government,
our political constitution, should still claim to receive
honour at our hands? Certainly not. You see to
what an absurdity your doctrine comes. For of all
the blessings that we behold in the life of man, those
that relate to the soul come first, and those that
relate to the body are secondary. If, therefore, he
paid no heed to our spiritual blessings, neither took
thought for our physical conditions, and moreover,

353

ΟἹ ΤῊΣ AA

138 D

141 C

141 D

145 A

143 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

/ » ΓΝ μὴ ” ΄, Ἃ
νοησάμενος, οὔτε ἡμῖν ἔπεμψε διδασκάλους ἢ
Υ͂ “ τοὺ ΠΣ [ἐν κι: / \ \ /
νομοθέτας ὥσπερ τοῖς ‘EBpatois κατὰ τὸν Μωυσέα
καὶ τοὺς ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνῳ προφήτας, ὑπὲρ τίνος ἕξομεν
αὐτῷ καλῶς εὐχαριστεῖν ;
3 CARA a
AX’ ὁρᾶτε, μή ποτε Kal ἡμῖν ἔδωκεν ὁ θεὸς
obs ὑμεῖς ἠγνοήκατε θεούς τε καὶ προστάτας
> 7 b) \ 3 / aA \ a id ,
ἀγαθούς, οὐδὲν ἐλάττονας τοῦ Tapa τοῖς ‘EBpaios
[9] an 3 a an
ἐξ ἀρχῆς τιμωμένου τῆς lovdatas, ἧσπερ ἐκεῖνος
an 7 / Θ c na 4 \
προνοεῖν ἔλαχε μόνης, ὥσπερ ὁ Μωυσῆς ἔφη καὶ
3 a lal
οἱ μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον ἄχρις ἡμῶν. εἰ δὲ ὁ προσεχὴς
a f \ A € /
εἴη τοῦ κόσμου δημιουργὸς ὁ Tapa Tots KPpaios
τιμώμενος, ἔτι καὶ βέλτιον ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ διενοήθη-
μεν ἡμεῖς ἀγαθά τε ἡμῖν ἔδωκεν ἐκείνων μείζονα
τά τε περὶ ψυχὴν καὶ τὰ ἐκτός, ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐροῦμεν
5 , “ 2 , Ne Sei eee: a /
ὀλίγου ὕστερον, ETTELAE TE Kal ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς νομοθέτας
b] \ / f 2 \ \ \
οὐδὲν Μωυσέως χείρονας, εἰ μὴ τοὺς πολλοὺς
A ,
μακρῷ κρείττονας.
“ 9 3 / 3 εἶ θ᾽ “ ea
Οπερ οὖν ἐλέγομεν, εἰ μὴ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἔθνος
ἐθνάρχης τις θεὸς ἐπιτροπεύων ἄγγελός τε ὑπ᾽
3. Ins \ ὃ "ἦ Ἀς δ 1 \ a 8 7,
αὐτῷ καὶ δαίμων καὶ ἥρως 1 καὶ ψυχῶν ἰδιάζον
SS A
γένος ὑπηρετικὸν καὶ ὑπουργικὸν τοῖς κρείττοσιν
a a /
ἔθετο THY ἐν τοῖς νόμοις καὶ τοῖς ἤθεσι διαφορό-
τητα, δεικνύσθω, παρ᾽ ἄλλου πῶς γέγονε ταῦτα.
\ \ ἡδὲ 3 / wid ἐξ ἣν» € θ \ \
καὶ yap οὐδὲ ἀπόχρη λέγειν' “Εἶπεν ὁ θεὸς καὶ
> n \ A /
ἐγένετο. ὁμολογεῖν yap χρὴ τοῖς ἐπιτάγμασι
an la) las ΄ \ ἃ /
τοῦ θεοῦ τῶν γινομένων τὰς φύσεις. ὃ δὲ λέγω,
nd > lal 2 / ς \ ” ,
σαφέστερον ἐρῶ. ἐκέλευσεν ὁ θεὸς ἄνω φέρεσθαι

1 Asmus adds καὶ ἥρως from Oration, 4. 145C ἀγγέλοις,
δαίμοσιν, ἥρωσι, ψυχαῖς τε μερισταῖς.

53.554

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

did not send to us teachers or lawgivers as he did for
the Hebrews, such as Moses and the prophets who
followed him, for what shall we properly feel
gratitude to him?

But consider whether God has not given to us also
gods! and kindly guardians of whom you have no
knowledge, gods in no way inferior to him who from
the beginning has been held in honour among the
_.Hebrews of Judaea, the only land that he chose to
take thought for, as Moses declared and those who
came after him, down to ourowntime. Butevenifhe
who is honoured among the Hebrews really was the
immediate creator of the universe, our beliefs about
him are higher than theirs, and he has bestowed on
us greater blessings than on them, with respect both
to the soul and to externals. Of these, however, I
shall speak a little later. Moreover, he sent to us
also lawgivers not inferior to Moses, if indeed many
of them were not far superior.

Therefore, as I said, unless for every._nation
Separately. some-presiding. national god (and under
him an_angel,? a demon, a hero, and a peculiar order
of spirits ἘΠΒΗΣ obey ear work τ “the higher powers)
established the differences in our laws ctr characters,
‘you must demonstrate. to. mehow.these.differences
“arose_by-some-other-agency. Moreover, it is not
sufficient to say, “God spake and it was so.” For
the natures of things that are created ought to
harmonise with the commands of God. I will say
more clearly what I mean. Did God ordain that ,
fire should mount upwards by chance and earth |

1 Cf. Oration 4, 140A, Vol. 1, on the creative gods.
ΠΣ Cf. Oration 4. 1418, note, and 145c, note; Plato, Laws

D.

355

143 D

143 ἡ

146 A
146 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ν la 5 ΄ὔ / Ν A “ 5 7 Ἂν
τὸ πῦρ, εἰ τύχοι, κάτω δὲ τὴν γῆν; οὐχ ἵνα τὸ
΄ / a a \ n te
προσταγμα γένηται τοῦ θεοῦ, TO μὲν ἐχρῆν εἶναι
a Ν \ / «Ψ \ > x la) ‘ tee ὦ
κοῦφον, τὸ δὲ βρίθειν ; οὕτω καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἑτέρων
¢ / \ \ id \ fx
OM“OLWS ... TOV αὗτον τρόπον Kal él TOV
le 7 / δ \ x lal ’, 7
θείων. αἴτιον δέ, ὅτι τὸ μὲν τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐπί-

\ \ , , 3 9 aA
κηρὸν ἐστι καὶ φθαρτὸν γένος. εἰκότως οὖν αὐτοῦ
\ \ \ 7 \
φθαρτὰ καὶ Ta ἔργα Kal μεταβλητὰ Kal παντο-
nan Υ ΓΟ fa > a! 1 7ὕ 5...ΟἋἡ
δαπῶς τρεπόμενα" τοῦ θεοῦ δὲ ὑπάρχοντος ἀϊδίου,
\ \ / nm? πῇ 7
καὶ τὰ προστάγματα τοιαῦτ᾽ εἶναι προσήκει.
a \ 7 SN n an
τοιαῦτα δὲ ὄντα ἤτοι φύσεις εἰσὶ τῶν ὄντων ἢ TH
Ψ “Ὁ ͵ τ ra la) \ ἢ
φύσει τῶν ὄντων ὁμολογούμενα. πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἡ
/ an 4 an la fal
φύσις τῷ προστάγματι μάχοιτο τοῦ θεοῦ ; πῶς
f 7 “ ς ,ὔ lal > Ν
δ᾽ ἂν ἔξω πίπτοι τῆς ὁμολογίας ; οὐκοῦν εἰ καὶ
ῇ ἢ \ “ a \
προσέταξεν ὥσπερ TAS γλώσσας συγχυθῆναι καὶ
\ a > , “ \ \ \ \
μὴ συμφωνεῖν ἀλλήλαις, οὕτω δὲ Kal TA πολιτικὰ
an lal 4 4 7
τῶν ἐθνῶν, οὐκ ἐπιτάγματι δὲ μόνον ἐποίησε
a / »O\ ca \ ,
τοιαῦτα Kal πεφυκέναι, οὐδὲ ἡμᾶς πρὸς ταύτην
/ / an \ n
κατεσκεύασε τὴν διαφωνίαν. ἐχρῆν yap πρῶτον
Υ lal a a ij
διαφόρους ὑπεῖναι φύσεις τοῖς ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσι δια-
7 ς a fal n \ a
φόρως ἐσομένοις. ὁρᾶται γοῦν τοῦτο, καὶ τοῖς
τ y alg \ x /
σώμασιν εἴ tis ἀπίδοι Τερμανοὶ καὶ Σκύθαι
jaf \ 2 / id , , 5
Λιβύων καὶ Αἰθιόπων ὁπόσον διαφέρουσιν. apa
\ A #93) \ 3 te \ +Q\ ξ 5.
καὶ τοῦτό ἐστι ψιλὸν ἐπίταγμα, καὶ οὐδὲν ὁ ἀὴρ
lal an / αἱ an a
οὐδὲ ἡ χώρα τῷ πῶς ἔχειν πρὸς TO χρῶμα θεοῖς
συμπράττει;
vw be AP KE M a 5 / x A
ἔτι δὲ καὶ ο Μωυσῆς ἐπεκάλυπτε TO τοιοῦτον
ΟΝ 5 \ \ a / if > f
εἰδὼς οὐδὲ τὴν τῶν διαλέκτων σύγχυσιν ἀνατέ-

1 A few words are lost.

356

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

sink down? Was it not necessary, in order that the
ordinance of God should be fulfilled, for the former
to be light and the latter to weigh heavy? And in
the case of other things also this is equally true. . . .1
Likewise with respect to things divine. But the
reason is that the race of men is doomed to death
and perishable. Therefore men’s works also are
naturally perishable and mutable and subject to
every kind of alteration. But since God is eternal,
it follows that of such sort are his ordinances also.
_ And since they are such, they are either the natures
of things or are accordant with the nature of things.
For how could nature be at variance with the ordi-
nance of God? How could it fall out of harmony
therewith? Therefore, if he did ordain that even as
our languages are confounded and do not harmonise
with one another, so too should it be with the
political constitutions of the nations, then it was not
by a special, isolated decree that he gave these con-
titutions their essential characteristics, or framed us
also to match this lack of agreement.? For different
natures must first have existed in all those things that
among the nations were to be differentiated. This at
any rate is seen if one observes how very different in
their bodies are the Germans and Scythians from the
Libyans and Ethiopians. Can_this also-be-due-toa—.—___
bare_decree, and does not the climate or the
country have a joint influence with the gods in
determining what sort of complexion they have?
Furthermore, Moses also consciously drew a veil
over this sort of enquiry, and did not assign the

2 i.e. if there were to be differences of speech and political
constitution, they must have been adapted to pre-existing
differences of nature in human beings.

357

148 Β

1480

102 Β

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

θεικε τῷ θεῷ μόνῳ. φησὶ yap αὐτὸν οὐ μόνον
κατελθεῖν οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ ἕνα συγκατελθεῖν αὐτῷ,
πλείονας δέ, καὶ τούτους οἵτινές εἰσιν οὐκ εἶπεν"
εὔδηλον δέ, ὅτι παραπλησίους αὐτῷ τοὺς συγκατ-
ἰόντας ὑπελάμβανεν. εἰ τοίνυν πρὸς τὴν σύγ-
χυσιν τῶν διαλέκτων οὐχ ὁ κύριος μόνος, ἀλλὰ

καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ κατέρχονται, πρόδηλον, ὃ ὅτι καὶ

πρὸς τὴν σύγχυσιν τῶν ἠθῶν οὐχ ὁ κύριος μόνος,
ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ τὰς διαλέκτους συγχέοντες
εἰκότως ἂν ὑπολαμβάνοιντο ταύτης εἶναι τῆς
διαστάσεως αἵὕτιοι.

Τί οὖν, οὐκ ἐν μακροῖς εἰπεῖν βουλόμενος,
τοσαῦτα ἐπεξῆλθον ; ὡς, εἰ μὲν ὁ προσεχὴς εἴη
τοῦ κόσμου δημιουργὸς ὁ ὑπὸ τοῦ Μωυσέως
κηρυττόμενος, ἡμεῖς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ βελτίους ἔχομεν
δόξας οἱ κοινὸν μὲν ἐκεῖνον ὑπολαμβάνοντες ἡ ἁπάν-
των δεσπότην, ἐθνάρχας δὲ ἄλλους, οἵ τυγχά-
νουσι μὲν ὑπ᾽ ἐκεῖνον, εἰσὶ δὲ ὥσπερ ὕπαρχοι
βασιλέως, ἕκαστος τὴν ἑαυτοῦ διαφερόντως ἐπαν-
ορθούμενος φροντίδα" καὶ οὐ καθίσταμεν αὐτὸν
οὐδὲ ἀντιμερίτην τῶν ὑπ᾽ αὐτὸν θεῶν καθιστα-
μένων. εἰ δὲ μερικόν τινα τιμήσας ἐκεῖνος ἀντιτί-
θησιν αὐτῷ τὴν τοῦ παντὸς ἡγεμονίαν, ἄμεινον
τὸν τῶν ὅλων θεὸν ἡμῖν πειθομένους ἐπιγνῶμαι
μετὰ τοῦ μηδὲ ἐκεῖνον ἀγνοῆσαι, ἢ τὸν τοῦ ἐλαχί-
στου μέρους εἰληχότα τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἀντὶ τοῦ
πάντων τιμᾶν δημιουργοῦ.

‘O νόμος ἐστὶν ὁ τοῦ Μωυσέως θαυμαστός, ἡ

1 Genesis 11. 7. ‘‘Go to, let us go down, and there
confound their language.” . . . The word ‘‘us” has been
variously interpreted.

358

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

confusion of dialects to God alone. For he says}
that God did not descend alone, but that there
descended with him not one but several, and he did
not say who these wete. But it is evident that he

assumed that the beings who descended with God/~

resembled him. If, therefore, it was not the Lord
alone but his associates with him who descended
for the purpose of confounding the dialects, it is
very evident that for the confusion of men’s char-
acters, also, not the Lord alone but also those
who together with him confounded the dialects
would reasonably be considered responsible for this
division.

Now why have I discussed this matter at such
length, though it was my intention to speak briefly?
For this reason: If the immediate creator of the
universe be he who is proclaimed by Moses, then
we hold nobler beliefs concerning him, inasmuch
as we consider him to be the master of all things in
general, but that there are besides national gods
who are subordinate to him and are like viceroys
of a king, each administering separately his own
province ; and, moreover, we do not make him the
_ sectional rival of the gods whose station is subordinate
to his. But if Moses first pays honour to a sectional
god, and then makes the lordship of the whole

universe contrast with his power, then it is bette cts

to believe as we do, and to recognise the God of
the All, though not without apprehending also the
God of Moses; this is better, I say, than to honour
one who has been assigned the lordship over a
very small portion, instead of the creator of all
things.

That is a surprising law of Moses, I mean the

50

δ᾽ » “i
fo

152C

152 D

155 C

155 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

δεκάλογος ἐκείνη" “Οὐ κλέψεις, οὐ φονεύσεις, ov
ψευδομαρτυρήσεις." γεγράφθω δὲ αὐτοῖς τοῖς 1
ῥήμασιν ἑκάστη τῶν ἐντολῶν, ἃς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ φησι
γεγράφθαι τοῦ θεοῦ.

“Kye εἰμι κύριος ὁ θεός σου, ὃς ἐξήγαγέ σε ἐκ

γῆς Αἰγύπτου." δευτέρα μετὰ τοῦτο' “Οὐκ ἔσον-
ae σοι θεοὶ ἕτεροι πλὴν ἐμοῦ. οὐ ποιήσεις σεαυτῷ
εἴδωλον." καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν προστίθησιν" Ἢ Ἐγὼ
γάρ εἰμι κύριος ὁ θεός σου, θεὸς ζηλωτής, ἀποδι-
δοὺς πατέρων ἁμαρτίας ἐπὶ τέκνα. ἕως τρίτης
γενεᾶς.᾽ “Οὐ λήψῃ τὸ ὄνομα κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ
σου ἐπὶ ματαίῳ. i Μνήσθητι τὴν ἡμέραν τῶν
σα ΒΘ ΤΣ ΕἾ Τίμα σου τὸν πατέρα καὶ τὴν
μητέρα." “Οὐ μοιχεύσεις." “Οὐ φονεύσεις." ioe
κλέψεις." “Οὐ ψευδομαρτυρήσεις." “Οὐκ ἐπι-
θυμήσεις τὰ τοῦ πλησίον σου.

Ποῖον ἔθνος ἐστί, πρὸς τῶν θεῶν, ἔξω τοῦ “Οὐ
προσκυνήσεις θεοῖς ἑτέροις ᾿ καὶ τοῦ “ Μνήσθητι
τῆς ἡμέρας τῶν σαββάτων," ὃ μὴ τὰς ἄχλας
οἴεται χρῆναι φυλάττειν ἐντολάς, ὡς καὶ τιμωρίας
κεῖσθαι τοῖς παραβαίνουσιν, ἐνιαχοῦ μὲν σφο-
δροτέρας, ἐνιαχοῦ δὲ παραπλησίας ταῖς παρὰ
Μωυσέως νομοθετείσαις, ἔστι δὲ ὅπου καὶ φιλαν-
θρωποτέρας ;

᾿Αλλὰ τὸ “Οὐ προσκυνήσεις θεοῖς ἑτέροις ".--
ὃ δὴ μετὰ μεγάλης περὶ τὸν θεόν φησι διαβολῆς.
“Θεὸς γὰρ ζηλωτής ᾿ φησι" καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις πάλιν"
«Ὁ θεὸς ἡ ἡμῶν πῦρ καταναλίσκον.᾽" εἶτα ἄνθρωπος
ζηλωτὴς καὶ βάσκανος ἄξιος εἶναί σοι φαίνεται

1 rots Klimek adds.

1 Hxodus 20. 2-3. 2 Exodus 20. 4. 3 Exodus 20. 13-17.
360

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

famous decalogue! “Thou shalt not steal.” “Thou
shalt not kill.” “Thou shalt not bear false witness.”
But let me write out word for word every one of
the commandments which he says were written by
God himself.

“IT am the Lord thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt.” Then follows the
second: “Thou shalt have no other gods but me. ‘J
«Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image.”’ 3
And then he adds the reason: “For I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
- fathers upon the children unto the third generation.”
“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain.” “ Remember the sabbath day.” ‘ Honour
thy father and thy mother.” “ Thou shalt not commit
adultery.” “Thou shalt not kill.” “Thou shalt not
steal.” “Thou shalt not bear false witness.” “Thou
shalt not covet anything that is thy neighbour's,” 8

Now except for the command ‘Thou shalt not
worship other gods,’ and “ Remember the sabbath
day,’ what nation is there, I ask in the name of the
gods, which does not think that it ought to keep
the other commandments? So much so that penal-
ties have been ordained against those who transgress
them, sometimes more severe, and sometimes similar
to those enacted by Moses, though they are
sometimes more humane.

But as for the commandment “Thou shalt not
worship other gods,’ to this surely he adds a
terrible libel upon God. “For I am a jealous God,”
he says, and in another place again, “Our God is a
consuming fire.’* Then if a man is jealous and
envious you think him blameworthy, whereas if God

4 Deuteronomy 4. 24; Hebrews 12. 29.
361

155 1

160 D

THE EMPEROR eat

μέμψεως, ἐκθειάζξεις ΘΈΡΕΙ ζηλότυπος ὁ 0 beds λέγε-
ται; καίτοι πῶς εὔλογον οὕτω φανερὸν πρᾶγμα
τοῦ θεοῦ καταψεύδεσθαι ; καὶ γὰρ εἰ ζηλότυπος,
ἄκοντος αὐτοῦ πάντες οἱ θεοὶ προσκυνοῦνται καὶ
πάντα τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν τοὺς θεοὺς προσκυνεῖ.
εἶτα πῶς οὐκ ἀνέστειλεν αὐτὸς ζηλῶν οὕτω καὶ
μὴ βουλόμενος προσκυνεῖσθαι τοὺς ἄλλους, ἀλλὰ
μόνον ἑαυτόν ; ἄρ᾽ οὖν οὐχ οἷός τε ἣν ἢ οὐδὲ τὴν
ἀρχὴν ἠβουλήθη κωλῦσαι μὴ προσκυνεῖσθαι καὶ
τοὺς ἄλλους θεούς ; ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον ἀσεβές,
τὸ δὴ λέγειν ὡς οὐκ ἠδύνατο' τὸ δεύτερον δὲ τοῖς
ἡμετέροις ἔργοις ὁμολογεῖ. ἄφετε τοῦτον τὸν
λῆρον καὶ μὴ τηλικαύτην ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς αὐτοὺς ἕλκετε
βλασφημίαν. εἰ γὰρ οὐδένα θέλει προσκυνεῖσθαι,
τοῦ χάριν αὐτοῦ τὸν νόθον υἱὸν τοῦτον προσκυ-
νεῖτε καὶ ὃν ἐκεῖνος ἴδιον οὔτε ἐνόμισεν ov? ἡγή-
σατο πώποτε. καὶ δείξω γε τοῦτο ῥᾳδίως. ὑμεῖς
δέ, οὐκ οἷδ᾽ ὅθεν, ὑπόβλητον. αὐτῷ προστίθετε ἐκ τς

Οὐδαμοῦ χαλεπαίνων ὁ θεὸς φαίνεται οὐδὲ
ἀγανακτῶν οὐδὲ ὀργιζόμενος οὐδὲ ὀμνύων οὐδ᾽ ἐπ᾽
ἀμφότερα ταχέως ῥέπων οὐδὲ στρεπτός, ὡς ὁ
Μωυσῆς φησιν ἐπὶ τοῦ Φινεές. εἴ τις ὑμῶν ἀνέγνω
τοὺς ἀριθμούς, οἶδεν ὃ λέγω. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ Φινεὲς τὸν
τελεσθέντα τῷ Βεελφεγὼρ μετὰ τῆς ἀναπεισάσης
αὐτὸν γυναικὸς αὐτοχειρίᾳ λαβὼν ἀπέκτεινεν
αἰσχρῷ καὶ ὀδυνηροτάτῳ τραύματι, διὰ τῆς μή-

1 Neumann suggests οὐδὲ στρεπτὸς or οὐδὲ μεταβλητὸς to

represent neque mutabilis esse, the translation of one MS.,
Oecolampadius.

1 According to Cyril’s summary, Julian next reproaches
the Christians for having forsaken the Greek doctrines about
God.

362

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

is called jealous you think it a divine quality? And
yet how is it reasonable to speak falsely of God in a
matter that is so evident? For if he is indeed
jealous, then against his will are all other gods
worshipped, and against his will do all the remaining
nations worship their gods. Then how is it that he
did not himself restrain them, if he is so jealous and
does not wish that the others should be worshipped,
but only himself? Can it be that he was not able
to do so, or did he not wish even from the beginning
to prevent the other gods also from being worshipped ?
However, the «first explanation is impious, to say, I
mean, that he was unable; and the second is in
accordance with what we do ourselves. Lay aside
this nonsense and do not draw down on yourselves
such terrible blasphemy. For if it is God’s will that
none other should be worshipped, why do you
worship this spurious son of his whom he has never
yet recognised or considered as his own? This I
shall easily prove. You, however, 1 know not why,
foist on him a counterfeit son... . .1

Nowhere ? is God shown as angry, or resentful, or
wroth, or taking an oath, or inclining first to this
side, then suddenly to that, or as turned from his
purpose, as Moses tells us happened in the case of
Phinehas. If any of you has read the Book of
Numbers he knows what I mean. For when Phine-
has had seized with his own hand and slain the man
who had dedicated himself to Baal-peor, and with
him the woman who had persuaded him, striking
her with a shameful and most painful wound through

2 7, e. in the Greek accounts of the gods; probably Julian ἢ
refers to Plato and a phrase to this effect may have dropped
out at the beginning of the sentence.

363

160 E

161 A

168 B

168 C
171 D

171 Τὶ

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

Tpas, φησί, παίσας τὴν γυναῖκα, πεποίηται λέγων
ὁ θεός" “Φινεὲς υἱὸς ᾿Ελεάξαρ υἱοῦ ᾿Ααρὼν
τοῦ ἱερέως κατέπαυσε τὸν θυμόν μου ἀπὸ υἱῶν
Ἰσραὴλ ἐν τῷ ζηλῶσαί μου τὸν ζῆλον ἐν αὐτοῖς.

ραὴλ ἐν τῷ ξη μ ἢ
καὶ οὐκ ἐξανήλωσα τοὺς υἱοὺς ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐν τῷ
ζήλῳ μου." τί κουφότερον. τῆς αἰτίας, δι’ ἣν θεὸς
ὀργισθεὶς οὐκ ἀληθῶς ὑπὸ τοῦ γράψαντος ταῦτα
πεποίηται; τί δὲ ἀλογώτερον, εἰ δέκα ἢ πεντε-
καίδεκα, κείσθω δὲ καὶ ἑκατόν, οὐ γὰρ δὴ χιλίους
ἐροῦσι---ΗΑὥμεν δὲ ἡμεῖς καὶ τοσούτους τολμή-
σαντάς τι τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ τεταγμένων νόμων
παραβῆναι' ἑξακοσίας ἐχρῆν διὰ τοὺς ἅπαξ
χιλίους “ἀναλωθῆναι, χιλιάδας ; ὡς ἔμοιγε κρεῖττον
εἶναι τῷ παντὶ φαίνεται χιλίοις ἀνδράσι βελτί-
στοις ἕνα συνδιασῶσαι πονηρὸν ἢ συνδιαφθεῖραι
τοὺς χιλίους ἑνί. Aaa

Ei yap καὶ ἑνὸς ἡρώων καὶ οὐκ ἐπισήμου
δαίμονος δύσοιστος ἡ ἡ ὀργὴ χώραις τε καὶ πόλεσιν
ὁλοκλήροις, τίς ἂν ὑπέστη τοσούτου θεοῦ δαίμοσιν
ἢ ἀγγέλοις ἢ καὶ ἀνθρώποις ἐπιμηνίσαντος ; ἄξιόν
γέ ἐστι παραβαλεῖν αὐτὸν τῇ Λυκούργου πραότητι
καὶ τῇ Σόλωνος ἀνεξικακίᾳ ἢ ἢ τῇ Ῥωμαίων πρὸς
τοὺς ἠδικηκότας ἐ ἐπιεικείᾳ καὶ χρηστότητι. πόσῳ
δὲ δὴ τὰ Tap ἡμῖν τῶν Tap αὐτοῖς κρείττονα,
καὶ ἐκ τῶνδε σκοπεῖτε. μιμεῖσθαι κελεύουσιν
ἡμᾶς οἱ φιλόσοφοι κατὰ δύναμιν τοὺς θεούς, εἶναι
δὲ ταύτην τὴν μίμησιν. ἐν θεωρίᾳ τῶν ὄντων. ὅτι
δὲ τοῦτο δίχα πάθους ἐστὶ καὶ ἐν ἀπαθείᾳ κεῖται,

1 Numbers 25. 11.

* According to Cyril, Julian then argued that the Creator
ought not to have given way so often to violent anger against
and even wished to destroy, the whole Jewish people.

304

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

the belly, as Moses tells us, then God is made to say:
* Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the
priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children
of Israel, in that he was jealous with my jealousy
among them; and I consumed not the children of
Israel in my jealousy.”! What could be more
trivial than the reason for which God was falsely
represented as angry by the writer of this passage ἢ
What could be more irrational, even if ten or fifteen
persons, or even, let us suppose, a hundred, for
they certainly will not say that there were a
thousand,—however, let us assume that even as
many persons as that ventured to transgress some
one of the laws laid down by God; was it right
that on account of this one thousand, six hundred
thousand should be utterly destroyed? Tor my
part I think it would be better in every way to
preserve one bad man along with a thousand virtuous
men than to destroy the thousand together with
thatwone. ον τ

For if the anger of even one hero or unimportant
demon is hard to bear for whole countries and cities,
who could have endured the wrath of so mighty a
God, whether it were directed against demons or
angels or mankind? It is worth while to compare
his behaviour with the mildness of Lycurgus and
the forbearance of Solon, or the kindness and bene-
volence of the Romans towards transgressors. But
observe also from what follows how far superior are
our teachings to theirs, The philosophers bid us
imitate the gods so far as we can, and they teach us
that this imitation consists in the contemplation of
realities. And that this sort of study is remote from
passion and is indeed based on freedom from passion,

365

172 A

176
AB

176 C

aS

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

πρόδηλόν ἐστί που, κἂν ἐγὼ μὴ λέγω" καθ᾽ ὅσον
ἄρα ἐν ἀπαθείᾳ γινόμεθα, τεταγμένοι περὶ τῶν
ὄντων τὴν 1 "θεωρίαν, κατὰ τοσοῦτον ἐξομοιούμεθα
τῷ θεῷ. τίς δὲ ἡ παρ᾽ Ἑβραίοις ὑμνουμένη τοῦ
θεοῦ μίμησις ; ; ὀργὴ καὶ θυμὸς καὶ ζῆλος ἄγριος.
“ Puvees” ap φησι " "κατέπαυσε τὸν θυμόν μου
ἀπὸ υἱῶν ᾿Ισραὴλ ἐν τῷ ζηλῶσαι τὸν ζῆλόν μοῦ
ἐν αὐτοῖς. εὑρὼν γὰρ ὁ θεὸς τὸν συναγανα-
κτοῦντα καὶ συναλγοῦντα ἀφεὶς τὴν ἀγανάκτησιν
φαίνεται. ταῦτα καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα περὶ θεοῦ ἕτερα
πεποίηται λέγων ὁ Μωυσῆς οὐκ ὀλιγαχοῦ τῆς
γραφῆς.

Οτι δὲ οὐχ ᾿Εβραίων μόνον ἐμέλησε, τῷ θεῷ,
πάντων δὲ ἐθνῶν κηδόμενος ἔδωκεν ἐκείνοις μὲν
οὐδὲν σπουδαῖον ἢ μέγα, ἡμῖν δὲ μακρῷ κρείττονα
καὶ διαφέροντα, σκοπεῖτε λοιπὸν τὸ ἐντεῦθεν.
ἔχουσι μὲν εἰπεῖν καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι, παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς
ἀπαριθμούμενοι σοφῶν οὐκ ὀλίγων ὀνόματα, πολ-
λοὺς ἐσχηκέναι τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑρμοῦ διαδοχῆς,
Ῥρμοῦ δέ φημι τοῦ τρίτου ἐπιφοιτήσαντος τῇ
Αἰγύπτῳ, Χαλδαῖοι δὲ καὶ ᾿Ασσύριοι τοὺς ἀπ᾽
᾿Ωάννου καὶ Βήλου, μυρίους δὲ“ Βλληνες τοὺς ἀπὸ
Χείρωνος. ἐκ τούτου γὰρ πάντες ἐγένοντο τελε-
στικοὶ φύσει καὶ "θεολογικοί, καθὸ 6n δοκοῦσι
μόνον “Ἑβραῖοι τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἀποσεμνύνειν . .. ..

1 τὴν Klimek adds.

1 A reference to Hermes Trismegistus, ‘‘thrice greatest
Hermes,” whom the Greeks identified with the Egyptian
god Thoth. The Neo-Platonists ascribed certain mystic
writings to this legendary being and regarded him as a sage.

* A Babylonian fish-god described by Berosus in his History
of Babylonia. He was supposed to have taught the Chal-
daeans the arts of civilisation and has some analogy with the
serpent of Genesis.

366

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

is, I suppose, evident, even without my saying it.
In proportion then as we, having been assigned to
the contemplation of realities, attain to freedom
from passion, in so far do we become like God. But
what sort of imitation of God is praised among the
Hebrews? Anger and wrath and fierce jealousy.
For God says: ‘ Phinehas hath turned away my
wrath from the children of Israel, in that he was
jealous with my jealousy among them.” For God,
on finding one who shared his resentment and his
grief, thereupon, as it appears, laid aside his resent-
- ment. These words and others like them about God
Moses is frequently made to utter in the Scripture.
Furthermore observe from what follows that God
did not take thought for the Hebrews alone, but
though he cared fot all nations, he ‘bestowed.on the
Hebrews. nothing considerable or of great value,
whereas on us he bestowed gifts far higher and
surpassing theirs. For instance the Egyptians, as
they reckon up the names of not a few wise nua ὙΠ
among themselves, can boast that they possess many‘
successors of Hermes, I mean of Hermes who in his
third manifestation visited Egypt ;1 while the Chal-
daeans and Assyrians can boast of the successors of
Oannes2 and Belos;? the Hellenes can boast of count-
less successors of Cheiron.4 For thenceforth all
Hellenes were born with an aptitude for the mysteries
and theologians, in the very way, you observe, which
the Hebrews claim as their own peculiar boast... 2 —

8 This is the Greek version of the Assyrian bil, ‘‘lord” o
‘‘ood,” the Baal of the Bible.

4 The Centaur who taught Achilles.

5 According to Cyril’s summary, Julian then ridicules
David and Samson and says that they were not really brave
warriors, but far inferior to the Hellenes and Egyptians, and
their dominion was very limited.

367

178 A

178 B

184 B

1840

1000

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

"ANN ἀρχὴν ἔδωκεν ὑμῖν ἐπιστήμης ἢ μάθημα
φιλόσοφον ; καὶ ποῖον ; ἡ μὲν γὰρ περὶ τὰ φαι-
νόμενα θεωρία παρὰ τοῖς “Ἕλλησιν ἐτελειώθη, τῶν
πρώτων τηρήσεων παρὰ τοῖς βαρβάροις € ἐν BaBv-
AOVL γενομένων" ἡ δὲ περὶ τὴν γεωμετρίαν ἀπὸ
τῆς γεωδαισίας τῆς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ τὴν ἀρχὴν λα-
βοῦσα πρὸς τοσοῦτον “μέγεθος ηὐξήθη: τὸ δὲ
περὶ τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς ἀπὸ τῶν Φοινίκων ἐμπόρων
ἀρξάμενον τέως εἰς ἐπιστήμης παρὰ τοῖς ᾿Ελλησί
κατέστη πρόσχημα. ταῦτα 1 δὴ τρία μετὰ 5 τῆς
συναρίθμου * μουσικῆς Ἕλληνες εἰς ἕν συνῆψαν,
ἀστρονομίαν γεωμετρίᾳ προσυφήναντες, ἀμφοῖν
δὲ προσαρμόσαντες τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς καὶ τὸ ἐν τού-
τοις ἐναρμόνιον κατανοήσαντες. ἐντεῦθεν ἔθεντο
τῇ παρὰ σφίσι μουσικῇ τοὺς ὅρους, εὑρόντες τῶν
ἁρμονικῶν λόγων πρὸς τὴν αἴσθησιν τῆς ἀκοῆς
ἄπταιστον ὁμολογίαν ἢ ὅτι τούτου μάλιστα ἐγγύς.

Πότερον οὖν χρή με κατ᾽ ἄνδρα ὀνομάξειν ἢ
KAT ἐπιτηδεύματα ; ἢ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, οἷον 1λά-
τωνα, Σωκράτην, ᾿Αριστείδην, Κίμωνα, Θαλῆν,
Λυκοῦργον, ᾿Αγησίλαον, ᾿Αρχίδαμον---ἢ μᾶλλον
τὸ τῶν φιλοσόφων γένος, τὸ τῶν στρατηγῶν, τὸ
τῶν δημιουργῶν, τὸ TOV νομοθετῶν ; - εὑρεθήσονται
γὰρ οἱ μοχθηρότατοι καὶ βδελυρώτατοι τῶν στρα-
τηγῶν ἐπιεικέστερον χρησάμενοι τοῖς ἡδικηκόσι τὰ
μέγιστα ἢ “Μωυσῆς τοῖς οὐδὲν ἐξημαρτηκόσιν.
τίνα οὗν ὑμῖν ἀπαγγείλω βασιλείαν ; ; πότερα τὴν
Περσέως ἢ τὴν Αἰακοῦ ἢ Μίνω τοῦ ἸΚρητός, ὃς
ἐκάθηρε, μὲν λῃστευομένην τὴν θάλασσαν, ἐκβα-

1 ταῦτα Klimek, τὰ Neumann.

* Klimek defends werd, Neumann suggests μαθήματα.
3 For συμαωίθμου corrupt, Neumann suggests εὐρύθμου.

368

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

But has God granted to you to originate any science
or any philosophical study? Why, what is it? For
the theory of the heavenly bodies was perfected
among the Hellenes, after the first observations had
been made among the barbarians in Babylon.1 And
the study of geometry took its rise in the measure-
ment of the land in Egypt, and from this grew to
its present importance. Arithmetic began with the
Phoenician merchants, and among the Hellenes in
course of time acquired the aspect of a regular
science. These three the Hellenes combined with
music into one science, for they connected astronomy
with geometry and adapted arithmetic to both, and
perceived the principle of harmony in it. Hence
they laid down the rules for their music, since they
had discovered for the laws of harmony with refer-
ence to the sense of hearing an agreement that was
infallible, or something very near to it.”

Need I tell over their names man by man, or
under their professions? I mean, either the indi-
vidual men, as for instance Plato, Socrates, Aris-
teides, Cimon, Thales, Lycurgus, Agesilaus, Archi-
damus,—or should I rather speak of the class of
philosophers, of generals, of artificers, of lawgivers?
For it will be found that even the most wicked and
most brutal of the generals behaved more mildly to
the greatest offenders than Moses did to those who
had done no wrong. And now of what monarchy
shall I report to you? Shall it be that of Perseus,
or Aeacus, or Minos of Crete, who purified the sea

1 Cf. Oration 4. 156c, the Hellenes perfected the astronomy
of the Chaldaeans and Egyptians.
2 They had discovered the laws of musical intervals.

369

VOL, III. ΒΒ

193 C

193 D

194 B

194 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

x \ 3 / \ id
λὼν Kal ἐξελάσας τοὺς βαρβάρους ἄχρι Συρίας
- \ a nan a
καὶ Σικελίας, ἐφ᾽ ἑκάτερα προβὰς τοῖς τῆς ἀρχῆς
eo? , A \ A
ὁρίοις, οὐ μόνων δὲ τῶν νήσων, ἀλλὰ Kal τῶν

/ > , \ if x \ 3
παραλίων ἐκράτει ; καὶ διελόμενος πρὸς τὸν ἀδελ-

NY € / ” \ A 2 \ \ b] if
φὸν ῬΡαδάμανθυν, οὔτι τὴν γῆν, ἀλλὰ THY ἐπιμέ-

ἴω \ 7 x n
λείαν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, αὐτὸς μὲν ἐτίθει παρὰ τοῦ

Διὸς λαμβάνων τοὺς νόμους, ἐκείνῳ δὲ TO δικαστι-

Ν / / a
κὸν ἠφίει μέρος ἀναπληροῦν. . ..

3 3 > \ a Ser N \ \

Αλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ κτισθεῖσαν αὐτὴν πολλοὶ μὲν
/ U
περιέστησαν πόλεμοι, πάντων δὲ ἐκράτει καὶ
/ / ’ \ A
κατηγωνίζετο Kal, παρ᾽ αὐτὰ μᾶλλον αὐξανομένη

\ ‘al an =
Ta δεινά, τῆς ἀσφαλείας ἐδεῖτο μείζονος, αὖθις
ς \ \ / 3. δ ag la) 5.
ὁ Ζεὺς τὸν φιλοσοφώτατον αὐτῇ Νουμᾶν ἐφί-

se 5 e \ ‘ ς

στησιν. οὗτος ἦν ὁ καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς ὁ

a f , \

Νουμᾶς, ἄλσεσιν ἐρήμοις ἐνδιατρίβων καὶ συνὼν

lal “Ὁ \ \ n a

ἀεὶ τοῖς θεοῖς κατὰ Tas ἀκραιφνεῖς αὐτοῦ
/ «ἢ \ / a €

νοήσεις. » » » « οὗτος τοὺς πλείστους τῶν ἱερα-

lal / A

τικῶν κατέστησε νόμους. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἐκ

κατοχῆς καὶ ἐπιπνοίας θείας ἔκ τε τῶν τῆς Σιβύλ-
fal 7 A 2 a

Ans Kal TOV ἄλλων, οἱ δὴ γεγόνασι κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνον

Ν 4 Ν x / /

TOV χρόνον KATA τὴν πάτριον φωνὴν χρησμολόγοι,
, \ e \ a /
φαίνεται δοὺς ὁ Ζεὺς τῇ πόλει. THY δὲ ἐξ ἀέρος

aA 3 hg \ x 5 A , \
πεσοῦσαν ἀσπίδα Kal τὴν ἐν TO λόφῳ κεφαλὴν
φανεῖσαν, ὅθεν, οἶμαι, καὶ τοὔνομα προσέλαβεν ἡ

1 According to Cyril, Julian then related stories about
Minos, and the myth of Dardanus, the account of the flight
of Aeneas, his emigration to Italy and the founding of
Rome. 2 2, 6. Rome. .

3 Numa Pompilius, a legendary king who is supposed to
have succeeded Romulus; various portents manifested the
favour of the gods towards Numa. Cf. Julian, Oration 4.
1554, note, Vol. 1.

4 A few words are missing.

579

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

of pirates, and expelled and drove out the barbarians
as far as Syria and Sicily, advancing in both direc- .
ticns the frontiers of his realm, and ruled not
only over the islands but also over the dwellers
along the coasts? And dividing with his brother
Rhadamanthus, not indeed the earth, but the care
of mankind, he himself laid down the laws as he
received them from Zeus, but left to Rhadamanthus
to fill the part of judge... .?

But when after her 2 foundation many wars encom-
passed her, she won and prevailed in them all;
and since she ever increased in size in proportion to
her very dangers and needed greater security, then
Zeus set over her the great philosopher Numa.®
This then was the excellent and upright Numa who
dwelt in deserted groves and ever communed with
the gods in the pure thoughts of his own heart. . . .4
It was he who established most of the laws con-
cerning temple worship. Now these blessings, derived
from a divine possession and inspiration which pro-
ceeded both from the Sibyl and others who at that
time uttered oracles in their native tongue, were
manifestly bestowed on the city by Zeus. And the,
shield which fell from the clouds> and the head \
which appeared on the hill,® from which, 1 suppose,

5 A small shield, ancile, on whose preservation the power
of Rome was supposed to depend, was said to have fallen
from the sky in Numa’s reign. Livy 1. 20 refers to it in the
plural, caelestia arma quae anicilia appellantur; cf. also
Aeneid 8. 664, lapsa ancilia coelo.

6 When the foundations were dug for the temple of Jupiter
a human head, caput, was found; this was regarded as an
omen, and hence the Capitoline Hill received its name ; cf.
Livy 1.55. For Julian’s belief.in such traditions cf. Oration 5.

Vol. 1, 1618 on the legend of Claudia and the image of
Cybele.

371

194 D

198 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τοῦ μεγάλου Διὸς ἕδρα, πότερον ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις ἢ
τοῖς δευτέροις ἀριθμήσωμεν τῶν δώρων ; ; εἶτα, ὧ
δυστυχεῖς ἄνθρωποι, σωζομένου τοῦ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ὅπ-
λου διοπετοῦς, ὃ ὃ κατέπεμψεν. ὃ μέγας Ζεὺς ἤτοι
πατὴρ “Apns, ἐ ἐνέχυρον διδοὺς οὐ λόγον, ἐ ἔργον δέ, ὅτι
τῆς πόλεως ἡμῶν εἰς τὸ διηνεκὲς προασπίσει, προσ-
κυνεῖν ἀφέιτες καὶ σέβεσθαι, τὸ τοῦ σταυροῦ προσ-
κυνεῖτε ξύλον, εἰκόνας αὐτοῦ σκιαγραφοῦντες ἐν
τῷ μετώπῳ καὶ πρὸ τῶν οἰκημάτων ἐγγράφοντες.

“Apa ἀξίως ἄν τις τοὺς συνετωτέρους ὑμῶν
μισήσειεν ἢ τοὺς ἀφρονεστέρους ἐλεήσειεν, οἱ κατα-
κολουθοῦντες ὑμῖν, εἰς τοσοῦτον ἦλθον ὀλέθρου,
ὥστε τοὺς αἰωνίους ἀφέντες θεοὺς ἐπὶ τὸν ᾿Ιου-
δαίων μεταβῆναι νεκρόν; . . . παρίημι γὰρ τὰ τῆς
μητρὸς τῶν θεῶν μυστήρια καὶ ζηλῶ τὸν Μάριον.
4 τὸ γὰρ ἐκ θεῶν εἰς ἀνθρώπους ἀφικνούνενον
πνεῦμα σπανιάκις μὲν καὶ ἐν ὀλίγοις γίνεται καὶ
οὔτε πάντα ἄνδρα τούτου μετασχεῖν ῥάδιον οὔτε
ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ. ταύτῃ τοι καὶ τὸ map’ Ἑβραίοις
προφητικὸν πνεῦμα ἐπέλιπεν, οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ παρ᾽
Αἰγυπτίοις εἰς τοῦτο σώξεται. φαίνεται δὲ καὶ
τὰ αὐτοφυῆ χρηστήρια σιγῆσαι παῖς τῶν χρόνων
εἴκοντα περιόδοις. ὃ δὴ φιλάνθρωπος ἡμῶν
δεσπότης καὶ πατὴρ Ζεὺς ἐννοήσας, ὡς ἂν μὴ
παντάπασι τῆς πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ἀποστερηθῶμεν
κοινωνίας, δέδωκεν ἡμῖν διὰ τῶν ἱερῶν τεχνῶν
ἐπίσκεψιν, ὑφ᾽ ἧς πρὸς τὰς χρείας ἕξομεν τὴν
ἀποχρῶσαν βοήθειαν.

1 Here Cyril retorts that Julian admired what others
condemn, ¢.g. the cruel and superstitious Marius, who, said
he, was given to the Romans by the gods. The worship of
Cybele was another gift from heaven to Rome. Julian then
referred to various kinds of divination.

372

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

the seat of mighty Zeus received its name, are we to
reckon these among the very highest or among
secondary gifts? And yet, ye misguided men, though

there is preserved among-us- that. weapon. which flew °

down from heaven, which mighty Zeus or father
Ares sent down to give us a warrant, not in word
but in deed, that he will forever ord his shield
before our city, you have ceased to adore and rever-
ence it, but you adore the wood of the cross and
draw its likeness on your foreheads and engrave it
on your housefronts.

Would not any man be justified in detesting the
more intelligent among you, or pitying the more
foolish, who, by following you, have sunk to such
depths of ruin that they have abandoned the ever-
living gods and have gone over to the corpse of the
Jew... . For I say nothing about the Mysteries
of the Mother of the Gods, and I admire Marius. . .
For the spirit that comes to men from the gods is
present but seldom and in few, and it is not easy
for every man to share in it or at every time. Thus
it is that the prophetic spirit has ceased among the
Hebrews also, nor is it maintained among the
Egyptians, either, down to the present. And we
see that the indigenous oracles? of Greece have also
fallen silent and yielded to the course oftime. Then
lo, our gracious lord and father Zeus took thought
of this, and that we might not be wholly deprived
of communion with the gods has granted us through
the sacred arts* a means of enquiry by which we
may obtain the aid that suffices for our needs.

2 Julian is thinking of the oracle of Delphi which he had
in vain endeavoured to restore.
3 7, 6, of divination by entrails and other omens.

373

200 A

200 B

201 Τὶ

202 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

᾿Ελαθέ pe μικροῦ τὸ μέγιστον τῶν ᾿Πλίου καὶ
Διὸς δώρων. εἰκότως δὲ αὐτὸ ἐφύλαξα ἐν τῷ
τέλει. καὶ γὰρ οὐκ ἴδιόν ἐστιν ἡμῶν μόνον, ἀλλ᾽,
οἶμαι, κοινὸν πρὸς Ελληνας, τοὺς ἡμετέρους συγ-
γενεῖς. ὁ γάρ τοι Ζεὺς ἐν μὲν τοῖς νοητοῖς ἐξ
ἑαυτοῦ τὸν ᾿Ασκληπιὸν ἐγέννησεν, εἰς δὲ τὴν γῆν
διὰ τῆς Ηλίου γονίμου ζωῆς ἐξέφηνεν. οὗτος ἐπὶ
γῆς ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ποιησάμενος τὴν πρόοδον, ἑνοειδῶς
μὲν ἐν ἀνθρώπου μορφῇ περὶ τὴν ᾿Επίδαυρον
ἀνεφάνη, πληθυνόμενος ὃ δὲ ἐντεῦθεν ταῖς προόδοις
ἐπὶ πᾶσαν wpete τὴν γῆν τὴν σωτήριον ἑαυτοῦ
δεξιάν. ἦλθεν εἰς ἸΠέργαμον, εἰς ᾿Ιωνίαν, εἰς
Τάραντα μετὰ ταῦθ᾽, ὕστερον ἦλθεν εἰς τὴν
“Ῥώμην. @XETO δὲ εἰς Κῶ, ἐνθένδε εἰς Αἰὐγάς.
εἶτα πανταχοῦ γῆς ἐστι καὶ θαλάσσης. οὐ καθ᾽
ἕκαστον ἡμῶν ἐπιφοιτᾷ, καὶ ὅμως ἐπανορθοῦται
ψυχὰς πλημμελῶς διακειμένας καὶ τὰ σώματα
ἀσθενῶς ἐ ἔχοντα.

Τί δὲ τοιοῦτον ἑαυτοῖς “Ἑβραῖοι καυχῶνται
παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ δεδόσθαι, πρὸς ovs ὑμεῖς ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν
αὐτομολήσαντες πείθεσθε; εἰ τοῖς ἐκείνων γοῦν
προσείχετε λόγοις, οὐκ ἂν παντάπασιν ἐπεπρά-
γειτε δυστυχῶς, ἀλλὰ χεῖρον μὲν ἢ πρότερον,
ὁπότε σὺν ἡμῖν ἦτε, οἰστὰ δὲ ὅμως ἐπεπόνθειτε
ἂν καὶ φορητά. ἕνα γὰρ ἀντὶ πολλῶν θεὸν 3 ἐσέ-
βεσθε ἂν οὐκ ἄνθρωπον, μᾶλλον δὲ πολλοὺς ἀν-
θρώπους δυστυχεῖς. καὶ νόμῳ σκληρῷ μὲν καὶ
τραχεῖ καὶ TONY τ τὸ ἄγριον ἔχοντι καὶ βάρβαρον
ἀντὶ τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐπιεικῶν καὶ φιλανθρώπων

1 Klimek would omit ἐν.
2 βεὸν Klimek ; θεῶν MSS., Neumann.

374

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

I had almost forgotten the greatest of the gifts of
Helios and Zeus. But naturally I kept it for the
last. And indeed it is not peculiar to us Romans
only, but we share it, I think, with the Hellenes our
kinsmen. I mean to: say that Zeus engendered
Asclepius from himself among the intelligible gods,!
and through the life of generative Helios he
revealed him to the earth. Asclepius, having made
his visitation to earth from the sky, appeared at
Epidaurus singly, in the shape of a man; but after-
wards he multiplied himself, and by his visitations
stretched out over the whole earth his saving right
hand. He came to Pergamon, to Ionia, to Tarentum
afterwards; and later he came to Rome. And he
travelled to Cos and thence to Aegae. Next he is
present everywhere on land and sea. He visits no
one of us separately, and yet he raises up souls that
are sinful and bodies that are sick.

But what great gift of this sort do the Hebrews
boast of as bestowed on them by God, the Hebrews
who have persuaded you to desert to them? If
you had at any rate paid heed to their teachings, you
would not have fared altogether ill, and though worse
than you did before, when you were with us, still
your condition would have been bearable and support-
able. For you would be worshipping one god instead
of many, not a man, or rather many wretched men.?
And though you would be following a law that is
harsh and stern and contains much that is savage
and barbarous, instead of our mild and humane laws,

1 See Vol. 1, Introduction to Oration 4, p. 349; and for
Asclepius, Oration 4, 1448, where Julian, as here, opposes
Asclepius to Christ ; and 1698 for Asclepius the saviour.

2 The martyrs.

ἄγ)

191 Ὁ
191 ἡ

205 αὶ

206 A

206 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

χρώμενοι τὼ μὲν ἄλλα “χείρονες ἂν ἦτε, ἁγνότεροι
δὲ καὶ καθαρώτεροι τὰς ἁγιστείας. νῦν δὲ ὑ ὑμῖν
συμβέβηκεν ὥσπερ ταῖς βδέλλαις τὸ χείριστον
ἕλκειν αἷμα ἐκεῖθεν, ἀφεῖναι δὲ τὸ καθαρώτερον.
ὁ δὲ Ἰησοῦς ἀναπείσας τὸ χείριστον τῶν map
ὑμῖν, ὀλίγους πρὸς τοῖς τριακοσίοις ἐνιαυτοῖς
ὀνομάξεται, ἐργασάμενος παρ᾽ ὃν ἔξη χρόνον οὐδὲν
ἀκοῆς ἄξιον, εἰ μή τις οἴεται τοὺς κυλλοὺς καὶ
τυφλοὺς ἰάσασθαι καὶ δαιμονῶντας ἐξορκίξειν ἐν
Βηθσαιδᾷ καὶ ἐν Βηθανίᾳ ταῖς κώμαις τῶν μεγί-
στων ἔργων εἶναι. ἁγνείας μὲν οὐδὲ γὰρ εἰ πεποίη-
ται μνήμην ἐπίστασθε: ζηλοῦτε δὲ ᾿Ιουδαίων τοὺς
θυμοὺς καὶ τὴν πικρίαν, ἀνατρέποντες ἱερὰ καὶ
βωμοὺς καὶ ἀπεσφάξατε οὐχ ἡμῶν μόνον τοὺς
τοῖς πατρῴοις } ἐμμένοντας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐξ ἴσης
ὑμῶν πεπλανημένων αἱρετικοὺς TOUS ὠωὴ τὸν αὐτὸν
τρόπον ὑμῶν τὸν νεκρὸν θρηνοῦντας. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα
ὑμέτερα μᾶλλόν ἐστιν" οὐδαμοῦ γὰρ οὔτε Ἰησοῦς
αὐτὰ παραδέδωκε κελεύων ὑμῖν οὔτε Παῦλος.
αἴτιον δέ, ὅτι μηδὲ ἤλπισαν εἰς τοῦτο ἀφίξεσθαί
ποτε δυνάμεως ὑμᾶς" ἠγάπων γάρ, εἰ θεραπαίνας
ἐξαπατήσουσι καὶ δούλους καὶ διὰ τούτων τὰς
γυναῖκας ἄνδρας τε, οἵους Κορνήλιος καὶ Σέργιος.
ὧν εἷς ἐὰν φανῇ τῶν τηνικαῦτα, γνωριζομένων
ἐπιμνηθεὶς ---ἐπὶ Τιβερίου γὰρ ἤτοι Κλαυδίου
ταῦτα ἐγίνετο---, περὶ πάντων ὅτι ψεύδομαι
νομίζετε.
1 πατρίοις Asmus, but Julian uses both forms.

1 Cf. Misopogen 3618, Vol. 2.

2 For the massacres of heretics by the Christians cf.
Julian’s letter 70 the Citizens of Bostra, p. 129.

3 Jesus Christ; cf. above, 194}.

376

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

and would in other respects be inferior to us, yet
you would be more holy and purer than now in your
forms of worship. But now it has come to pass that
like leeches you have sucked the worst blood from
that source and left the purer. Yet Jesus, who won
over the least worthy of you, has been known by
name for but little more than three hundred years:
and during his lifetime he accomplished nothing
worth hearing of, unless anyone thinks that to heal
crooked and blind men and to exorcise those who
were possessed by evil demons in the villages of
Bethsaida and Bethany can be classed as a mighty
achievement. As for purity of life you do not know’
whether he so much as mentioned it; but you
emulate the rages and the bitterness of the Jews,
overturning temples and altars,! and you slaughtered
not only those of us who remained true to the
teachings of their fathers, but also men who were as
much astray as yourselves, heretics,? because they did
not wail over the corpse 3 in the same fashion as
yourselves. But these are rather your own doings;
for nowhere did either Jesus or Paul hand down to
you such commands. The reason for this is that they
never even hoped that you would one day attain to
such power as you have; for they were content if they
could delude maidservants and slaves, and through
them the women, and men like Cornelius* and
Sergius.5 But if you can show me that one of these
men is mentioned by the well-known writers of
that time,—these events happened in the reign of
Tiberius or Claudius,—then you may consider that
I speak falsely about all matters.

4 Acts 10, the story of Cornelius the centurion,
> Acts 13. 6-12; Sergius was the proconsul.

377

209 D

209

210 A

213 A

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ 010 ὅθεν ὥσπερ ἐπιπνεόμε-
νος ἐφθεγξάμην, ὅθεν δὲ ἐξέβην, ὅτι “Πρὸς τοὺς Ἴου-
αἴίους ηὐτομολήσατε, τί τοῖς ἡμετέροις ἀχαριστή-
σαντες θεοῖς ; 3 ” ap: OTe βασιλεύειν ἔδοσαν οἱ θεοὶ
τῇ “Ῥώμῃ, τοῖς Ιουδαίοις ὀλίγον μὲν χρόνον ἐλευ-
θέρους εἶναι, δουλεῦσαι δὲ ἀεὶ καὶ παροικῆσαι ;
σκόπει τὸν “ABpaap- οὐχὶ πάροικος ἣν ἐν ἀλλο-
τρίᾳ ; τὸν ᾿Ιακώβ' οὐ πρότερον μὲν Σύροις, ἑξῆς
δὲ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἸΤαλαιστινοῖς, ἐ ἐν γήρᾳ δὲ Αὐἰγυπ-
τίοις ἐδούλευσεν ; οὐκ ἐξ οἴκου δουλείας ἐξαγα-
γεῖν αὐτοὺς ὁ Μωυσῆς φησιν ἐξ Αἰγύπτου ἐν
βραχίονι ὑψηλῷ ; ; κατοικήσαντες δὲ τὴν Παλαι-
στίνην, οὐ πυκνότερον ἤμειψαν τὰς τύχας ἢ τὸ
χρῶμά φασιν οἱ τεθεαμένοι τὸν χαμαιλέοντα, νῦν
μὲν ὑπακούοντες τοῖς κριταῖς, νῦν δὲ τοῖς ἀλλο-
φύλοις δουλεύοντες ; ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἐβασιλεύθησαν---
ἀφείσθω δὲ νῦν ὅπως" οὔτε γὰρ ὁ θεὸς ἑκὼν αὐτοῖς
τὸ βασιλεύεσθαι συνεχώρησεν, ὡς ἡ γραφὴ φησιν,
ada, βιασθεὶς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ προδιᾳστειλάμενος,
ὅτι ἄρα φαύλως βασιλευθήσονται. πλὴν ἀλλ᾽
ὥκησαν “γοῦν τὴν ἑαυτῶν καὶ ἐγεώργησαν ὀλίγα
πρὸς τοῖς τριακοσίοις ἔτεσιν. ἐξ ἐκείνου πρῶτον
᾿Ασσυρίοις, εἶτα Μήδοις, ὕστερον Πέρσαις ἐδού-
λευσαν, εἶτα νῦν ἡμῖν «αὐτοῖς. καὶ ὁ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν
κηρυττόμενος Ἰησοῦς εἷς ἣν τῶν Καίσαρος ὑπη-
κόων. εἰ δὲ ἀπιστεῖτε, μικρὸν ὕστερον ἀποδείξω"
μᾶλλον δὲ ἤδη λεγέσθω. φατὲ μέντοι μετὰ τοῦ
πατρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπογράψασθαι καὶ τῆς μητρὸς ἐπὶ
Kupnviov.

1 See above 2015. 2 Exodus 6. 6.
3 Judges 2. 16.

378

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

But I know not whence I wasas it were inspired to
utter these remarks. However, to return to the point
at which I digressed,! when I asked, “ Why were you
so ungrateful to our gods as to desert them for the
Jews?” Was it because the gods granted the sovereign
power to Rome, permitting the Jews to be free for a
short time only, and then forever to be enslaved and
aliens? Look at Abraham: was he not an alien in a
strange land? And Jacob: was he not a slave, first
in Syria, then after that in Palestine, and in his old
age in Egypt? Does not Moses say that he led them
forth from the house of bondage out of Egypt “ with a
stretched out arm” ?? And after their sojourn in
Palestine did they not change their fortunes more fre-
quently than observers say the chameleon changes its
colour, now subject to the judges,? now enslaved to
foreign races? And when they began to be governed
by kings,—but let me for the present postpone asking
how they were governed: for as the Scripture tells
us,* God did not willingly allow them to have kings,
but only when constrained by them, and after pro-
testing to them beforehand that they would thus be
governed ill,—still they did at any rate inhabit their
own countryand tilled it for a little over three hundred
years. After that they were enslaved first to the
Assyrians, then to the Medes, later to the Persians,
and now at last to ourselves. Even Jesus, who was
proclaimed among you, was one of Caesar’s subjects.
And if you do not believe me I will prove it a little
later, or rather let me simply assert it now. How-
ever, you admit that with his father and mother
he registered his name in the governorship of
Cyrenius.®

4 1 Samuel 8. δ᾽ Luke Ὁ, 2
379

213 B

213 C

218 A

218 B

218 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

᾿Αλλὰ γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος τίνων ἀγαθῶν
αἴτιος κατέστη τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ συγγενέσιν ; οὐ γὰρ
ἠθέλησαν, φασίν, ὑπακοῦσαι τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ. τί δέ;
ὁ σκληροκάρδιος καὶ λιθοτράχηλος ἐκεῖνος λαὸς
πῶς ὑπήκουσε τοῦ Μωυσέως: ᾿Ιησοῦς δέ, ὁ τοῖς
πνεύμασιν ἐπιτάττων καὶ βαδίζων ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσ-
σης καὶ τὰ δαιμόνια ἐξελαύνων, ὡς δὲ ὑμεῖς λέγετε,
τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν ἀπεργασάμενος---οὐ γὰρ
δὴ ταῦτα τετόλμηκέ τις εἰπεῖν περὶ αὐτοῦ τῶν
μαθητῶν, εἰ μὴ μόνος ᾿Ιωάννης οὐδὲ αὐτὸς σαφῶς
οὐδὲ τρανῶς" ἀλλ᾽ εἰρηκέναι γε συγκεχωρήσθω---
οὐκ ἠδύνατο τὰς προαιρέσεις ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ τῶν
ἑαυτοῦ φίλων καὶ συγγενῶν μεταστῆσαι;

Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν καὶ μικρὸν ὕστερον, ὅταν ἰδίᾳ
περὶ τῆς τῶν εὐαγγελίων τερατουργίας καὶ σκευω-
ρίας ἐξετάζειν ἀρξώμεθα. νυνὶ δὲ ἀποκρίνεσθέ
μοι πρὸς ἐκεῖνο. πότερον ἄμεινον τὸ διηνεκῶς μὲν
ἐλεύθερον εἶναι, ἐν δισχιλίοις δὲ ὅλοις ἐνιαυτοῖς
ἄρξαι τὸ πλεῖον γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης, ἢ τὸ δουλεύειν
καὶ πρὸς ἐπίταγμα ζῆν ἀλλότριον ; οὐδεὶς οὕτως
ἐστὶν ἀναίσχυντος, ὡς ἑλέσθαι | μᾶλλον τὸ δεύτερον.
ἀλλὰ τὸ πολέμῳ κρατεῖν οἰήσεταί τις τοῦ κρα-
τεῖσθαι χεῖρον ; οὕτω τίς ἐστιν ἀναίσθητος ; εἰ δὲ
ταῦτα ἀληθῆ φαμεν, ἕνα μοι κατὰ ᾿Αλέξανδρον
δείξατε στρατηγόν, ἕνα κατὰ Καίσαρα παρὰ τοῖς
Ἑβραίοις. οὐ “γὰρ δὴ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν. καίτοι, μὰ τοὺς
θεούς, εὖ 010 ὅτι περιυβρίξω τοὺς ἄνδρας, ἐ ἐμνη-
μόνευσα δὲ αὐτῶν ὡς γνωρίμων. οἱ γὰρ δὴ τούτων
ἐλάττους ὑπὸ τῶν πολλῶν ἀγνοοῦνται, ὧν ἕκαστος

1 ἄνθρωπος Neumann would add.

1 Ezekiel 3. 7,
380

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

But when he became man what benefits did he
confer on his own kinsfolk? Nay, the Galilaeans
answer, they refused to hearken unto Jesus. What?
How was it then that this hardhearted! and stubborn-
necked people hearkened unto Moses; but Jesus,
who commanded the spirits ? and walked on the sea,
and drove out demons, and as you yourselves assert
made the heavens and the earth,—for no one of his
disciples ventured to say this concerning him, save
only John, and he did not say it clearly or distinctly ;
still let us at any rate admit that he said it—could
not this Jesus change the dispositions of his own
friends and kinsfolk to the end that he might save -
them?

However, I will consider this again a little later
- when I begin to examine particularly into the miracle-
working and the fabrication of the gospels. But
now answer me this. Is it better to be free con-
tinuously and during two thousand whole years to
rule over the greater part of the earth and the sea,
or to be enslaved and to live in obedience to the will
of others? No man is so lacking in self-respect as to
choose the latter by preference. Again, will anyone
think that victory in war is less desirable than defeat ?
Who is so stupid? But if this that I assert is the
truth, point out to me among the Hebrews a single
general like Alexander or Caesar! You have no such
man, And indeed, by the gods, I am well aware
that I am insulting these heroes by the question, but
I mentioned them because they are well known. For
the generals who are inferior to them are unknown
to the multitude, and yet every one of them deserves

& Mark \, 27.
381

221 ᾿ὶ

222 A

224 C

224 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

πάντων ὁμοῦ τῶν Tap ᾿Ὡβραίοις γεγονότων ἐστὶ
θαυμαστότερος.

"AAN ὁ τῆς πολιτείας θεσμὸς καὶ τύπος τῶν
δικαστηρίων, ἡ δὲ περὶ τὰς πόλεις οἰκονομία καὶ
τῶν νόμων] τὸ κάλλος, ἡ δὲ ἐν τοῖς μαθήμασιν
ἐπίδοσις, ἡ δὲ ἐν ταῖς ἐλευθερίοις τέχναις ἄσκησις
οὐχ ᾿βραίων μὲν ἣν ἀθλία καὶ βαρβαρική; ; καί-
τοι βούλεται ὁ 0 μοχθηρὸς ᾿ὐσέβιος εἶναί τινα καὶ
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἑξάμετρα, καὶ φιλοτιμεῖται λογικὴν
εἶναι πραγματείαν παρὰ τοῖς “Ἑβραίοις, ἧς τοὔ-
νομα ἀκήκοε παρὰ τοῖς “ἄλλησι. ποῖον ἰατρικῆς
εἶδος ἀνεφάνη παρὰ τοῖς ᾿Ὡβραίοις, ὥσπερ ἐν

“Ἕλλησι τῆς Ἱπποκράτους καί rire ἄλλων μετ᾽

ἐκεῖνον αἱρέσεων ; ὁ σοφώτατος Σολομῶν παρό-
μοιός ἐστι τῷ Tap “Ἕλλησι Φωκυλίδῃ ἢ ἢ Θεόγνιδι
ἢ Ἰσοκράτει ; πόθεν ; εἰ γοῦν παραβάλοις τὰς
᾿Ισοκράτους παραινέσεις ταῖς ἐκείνου παροιμίαις,
εὕροις ἄν, εὖ οἶδα, τὸν τοῦ Θεοδώρου κρείττονα τοῦ
σοφωτάτου βασιλέως. ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνος, φασί, καὶ
περὶ θεουργίαν ἤσκητο. τί οὖν ; οὐχὶ καὶ ὁ
Σολομῶν οὗτος τοῖς ἡμετέροις ἐλάτρευσε θεοῖς,
ὑπὸ τῆς γυναικός, ὡς λέγουσιν, ἐξαπατηθείς ; ὦ
μέγεθος ἀρετῆς. ὦ σοφίας πλοῦτος. οὐ περιγέ-
γονεν ἡδονῆς, καὶ γυναικὸς λόγοι τοῦτον παρή-
γαγον. εἴπερ οὖν ὑπὸ γυναικὸς ἠπατήθη, τοῦτον
σοφὸν μὴ λέγετε. εἰ δὲ πεπιστεύκατε σοφόν, μή
TOL παρὰ γυναικὸς αὐτὸν ἐξηπατῆσθαι νομίζετε,

1 After καὶ a lacuna; Gollwitzer, followed by Asmus,
suggests τῶν νόμων ; Neumann τῶν πολιτῶν,

1 Kusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica 11. 5. 5 says that Mose
and David wrote in ‘‘ the heroic metre.”

382

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

more admiration than all the generals put together
whom the Jews have had.

Further, as regards the constitution of the state
and the fashion of the law-courts, the administration
of cities and the excellence of the laws, progress in
learning and the cultivation of the liberal arts, were
not all these things in 4 miserable and barbarous state
among the Hebrews? And yet the wretched Eusebius +
will have it that poems in hexameters are to be found
even among them, and sets up a claim that the study
of logic exists among the Hebrews, since he has
heard among the Hellenes the word they use for logic.
What kind of healing art has ever appeared among
the Hebrews, like that of Hippocrates among the
Hellenes, and of certain other schools that came
after him? Is their “ wisest’ man Solomon at all
comparable with Phocylides or Theognis or Isocrates
among the Hellenes? Certainly not. At least, if one
were to compare the exhortations of Isocrates with
Solomon’s proverbs, you would, I am very sure, find
that the son of Theodorus is superior to their
“wisest” king. “But,” they answer, “Solomon was
also proficient in the secret cult of God.” What
then? Did not this Solomon serve our gods also,
deluded by his wife, as they assert? ? What great
virtue! What wealth of wisdom! He could not
rise superior to pleasure, and the arguments of a
woman led him astray! Then if he was deluded
by a woman, do not call this man wise. But if you
are convinced that he was wise, do not believe that
he was deluded by a woman, but that, trusting to his

2 1 Kings 11. 4: ‘‘His wives turned away his heart after
other gods.”” Julian may allude to Pharaoh’s daughter, see
1 Kings, 3. 1.

383

224 Τ᾿

229 C

229 D

229 Hi

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

κρίσει δὲ οἰκείᾳ καὶ συνέσει καὶ τῇ παρὰ τοῦ
φανέντος αὐτῷ θεοῦ διδασκαλίᾳ πειθόμενον. λελα-
τρευκέναι καὶ τοῖς ἄχλοις θεοῖς. φθόνος γὰρ καὶ
ζῆλος οὐδὲ ἄχοι τῶν ἀρίστων ἀνθρώπων ἀφικνεῖ-
ται, τοσοῦτον ἄπεστιν ἀγγέλων καὶ θεῶν. ὑμεῖς
δὲ ἄρα περὶ τὰ μέρη τῶν δυνάμεων στρέφεσθε, ἃ
δὴ δαιμόνιά τις εἰπὼν οὐκ ἐξαμαρτάνει. τὸ γὰρ
φιλότιμον ἐνταῦθα καὶ κενόδοξον, ἐν δὲ τοῖς θεοῖς
οὐδὲν ὑπάρχει καὶ τοιοῦτον.

Τοῦ χάριν ὑμεῖς τῶν παρ᾽ “Ελλησι παρεσθίετε
μαθημάτων, εἴπερ αὐτάρκης ὑμῖν ἐστιν ἡ τῶν
ὑμετέρων γραφῶν ἀνάγνωσις ; καίτοι κρεῖττον
ἐκείνων εἴργειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἢ τῆς τῶν ἱεροθύ-
των ἐδωδῆς. ἐκ μὲν γὰρ ἐκείνης, καθὰ καὶ ὁ
Παῦλος λέγει, βλάπτεται μὲν οὐδὲν ὁ προσφερό-
μενος, ἡ δὲ συνείδησις τοῦ βλέποντος ἀδελφοῦ
σκανδαλισθείη av καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς, ὦ σοφώτατοι καὶ
ὑπερήφανοι." διὰ δὲ τῶν μαθημάτων. τούτων ἀπέ-
στη τῆς ἀθεότητος πᾶν ὅτι περ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἡ φύσις
ἤνεγκε γενναῖον. ὅτῳ οὖν ὑπῆρξεν εὐφυΐας κἂν
μικρὸν μόριον, τούτῳ τάχιστα συνέβη τῆς παρ᾽
ὑμῖν ἀθεότητος ἀποστῆναι. βέλτιον οὖν εἴργειν
μαθημάτων, οὐχ ἱερείων τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. ἀλλ᾽
ἴστε καὶ ὑμεῖς, ὡς ἐμοὶ φαίνεται, τὸ διάφορον εἰς
σύνεσιν τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν γραφῶν πρὸς τὰς ἡμετέρας,"
καὶ ὡς ἐκ τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν οὐδεὶς ἂν γένοιτο γενναῖος
ἀνήρ, μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδὲ ἐπιεικής, ἐκ δὲ τῶν παρ᾽
ἡμῖν αὐτὸς αὑτοῦ πᾶς ἂν γένοιτο καλλίων, εἰ καὶ
παντάπασιν ἀφυής τις εἴη. φύσεως δὲ ἔχων εὖ

1 After σοφώτατοι lacuna, for which Neumann suggests καὶ

ὑπεοή φανοι.
2 After ἡμετέρας Neumann suggests κακόν, unnecessary.

384

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

own judgement and intelligence and the teaching that
he received from the God who had been revealed to
him, he served the other gods also. For envy and
jealousy do not come even near the most virtuous
men, much more are they remote from angels and
gods. But you concern yourselves with incomplete
and partial powers,! which if anyone call daemonic
he does not err. For in them are pride and vanity,
but in the gods there is nothing of the sort.

If the reading of your own scriptures is sufficient
for you, why do you nibble at the learning of the
Hellenes? And yet it were better to keep men away
from that learning than from the eating of sacrificial
meat. For by that, as even Paul says,” he who eats
thereof is not harmed, but the conscience of the
brother who sees him might be offended according
to you, O most wise and arrogant men! But this
learning of ours has caused every noble being
that nature has produced among you to abandon
impiety. Accordingly everyone who possessed even
a small fraction of innate virtue has speedily aban-
doned your impiety. It were therefore better for
you to keep men from learning rather than from
sacrificial meats. But you yourselves know, it seems
to me, the very different effect on the intelligence of
your writings as compared with ours; and that from
studying yours no man could attain to excellence or
even to ordinary goodness, whereas from studying
ours every man would become better than before, even
though he were altogether without natural fitness.
But when a man is naturally well endowed, and

1 Julian seems to refer to the saints
2 1 Corinthians 8. 7-138.

385

VOL, III. cc

229 "αὶ

230 A

235 B

235 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

Kal τὰς ἐκ τούτων προσλαχὼν παιδείας ἀτεχνῶς
γίνεται τῶν θεῶν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις δῶρον, ἤτοι φῶς
ἀνάψας ἐπιστήμης ἢ πολιτείας γένος ὑφηγησά-
μενος ἢ πολεμίους πολλοὺς τρεψάμενος ἢ καὶ
πολλὴν μὲν γῆν, πολλὴν δὲ ἐπελθὼν θάλασσαν
καὶ τούτῳ φανεὶς ἡρωικός. ...

Τεκμήριον δὲ τοῦτο σαφές' ἐκ πάντων ὑμῶν
ἐπιλεξάμενοι παιδία ταῖς γραφαῖς ἐμμελετῆσαι
παρασκευάσατε. κἂν φανῇ τῶν ἀνδραπόδων εἰς
ἄνδρας " τελέσαντα σπουδαιότερα, ληρεῖν ἐμὲ
καὶ μελαγχολᾶν νομίζετε. εἶτα οὕτως ἐστὲ δυ-
στυχεῖς καὶ ἀνόητοι, ὥστε νομίζειν θείους μὲν
ἐκείνους τοὺς λόγους, Ud ὧν οὐδεὶς ἂν γένοιτο
φρονιμώτερος οὐδὲ ἀνδρειότερος οὐδ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ
κρείττων: ὑφ᾽ ὧν δὲ ἔνεστιν ἀνδρείαν, φρόνη-
σιν, δικαιοσύνην προσλαβεῖν, τούτους ἀποδίδοτε
τῷ σατανᾷ καὶ τοῖς TO σατανᾷ λατρεύουσιν.

"Tatas ᾿Ασκληπιὸς ἡμῶν 1 τὰ σώματα, παιδεύου-
σιν ἡμῶν αἱ Μοῦσαι σὺν ᾿Ασκληπιῷ καὶ ᾿Απόλ-
λωνι καὶ Ἑρμῇ λογίῳ τὰς ψυχάς, "Αρης ὃ δὲ καὶ
᾿Ενυὼ τὰ πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον συναγωνίξεται, τὰ δὲ
εἰς τέχνας “ἤφαιστος ἀποκληροῖ καὶ διανέμει,
ταῦτα δὲ πάντα ᾿Αθηνᾶ μετὰ τοῦ Διὸς παρθένος
ἀμήτωρ πρυτανεύει. σκοπεῖτε οὗν, εἰ μὴ καθ᾽
ἕκαστον τούτων ὑμῶν ἐσμεν κρείττους, λέγω δὲ τὰ
περὶ τὰς τέχνας καὶ σοφίαν καὶ σύνεσιν' εἴτε γὰρ
τὰς πρὸς τὴν χρείαν σκοπήσειας, εἴτε τὰς τοῦ
καλοῦ χάριν μιμητικάς, οἷον ἀγαλματοποιητικήν,

1 For lacuna after γένος Neumann suggests tonynodmevos.

2 ἄνδρας Asmus, cf. Misopogon 3560. ; ἄνδρα Neumann.

3 “Ape Neumann because verb in singular, but no change
is necessary.

386

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

moreover receives the education of our literature, he
becomes actually a gift of the gods to mankind,
either by kindling the light of knowledge, or by
founding some kind of political constitution, or by
routing numbers of his country’s foes, or even
by travelling far over the earth and far by sea, and
thus proving himself a man of heroic mould. . . .1

Nowthis would be a clear proof: Choose out children ~
from among you all and train and educate them
in your scriptures, and if when they come to man-
hood they prove to have nobler qualities than slaves,
then you may believe that I am talking nonsense and
am suffering from spleen. Yet you are so misguided
and foolish that you regard those chronicles of yours
as: divinely inspired, though by their help no man
could ever become wiser or braver or better than he
was before; while, on the other hand, writings by
whose aid men can acquire courage, wisdom and
justice, these you ascribe to Satan and to those who
serve Satan !

Asclepius heals our bodies, and the Muses with the
aid of Asclepius and Apollo and Hermes, the god of
eloquence, train our souls; Ares fights for us in war
and Enyo also ; Hephaistus apportions and administers
the crafts, and Athene the Motherless Maiden with
the aid of Zeus presides over them all. Consider
therefore whether we are not superior to you in
every single one of these things, I mean in the arts
and in wisdom and intelligence; and this is true,
whether you consider the useful arts or the imitative
arts whose end is beauty, such as the statuary’s art,

1 Some words are missing. The summary of Cyril shows
that Julian next attacked the Old Testament and ridiculed it
because it is written in Hebrew.

387

(2)
Ω
bo

290 D

238 A
238 B

238 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

γραφικήν, ἢ οἰκονομικήν, ἰατρικὴν τὴν ἐξ ᾿Ασκλη-
πιοῦ, οὗ πανταχοῦ γῆς ἐστι χρηστήρια, ἃ δίδωσιν
ἡμῖν ὁ θεὸς μεταλαγχάνειν διηνεκῶς. ἐμὲ γοῦν
ἰάσατο πολλάκις ᾿Ασκληπιὸς κάμνοντα ὑπαγορεύ-
σας φάρμακα" καὶ τούτων μάρτυς ἐστὶ Ζεύς. εἰ
τοίνυν ov" 7 poor’ είμαντες ἑαυτοὺς τῷ τῆς ἀποστα-
σίας πνεύματι τὰ περὶ ψυχὴν ἄμεινον ἔχομεν καὶ
περὶ σῶμα καὶ τὰ ἐκτός, τίνος ἕνεκεν ἀφέντες
ταῦτα ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα βαδίξετε ;

᾿Ανθ᾽ ὅτου δὲ μηδὲ τοῖς “Εβραϊκοῖς λόγοις ἐμ-
μένετε μήτε ἀγαπᾶτε τὸν νόμον, ὃν δέδωκεν ὁ θεὸς
ἐκείνοις, ἀπολιπόντες δὲ τὰ πάτρια καὶ δόντες
ἑαυτοὺς οἷς ἐκήρυξαν οἱ προφῆται, πλέον ἐκείνων
ἢ τῶν map ἡμῖν, ἀπέστητε; ; τὸ γὰρ ἀχηθὲς εἴ TLS
ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν ἐθέλοι σκοπεῖν, εὑρήσει τὴν ὑμετέραν
ἀσέβειαν, ἔκ τε τῆς ᾿Ιουδαϊκῆς τόλμης καὶ τῆς
παρὰ τοῖς ἔθνεσιν ἀδιαφορίας καὶ χυδαιότητος
συγκειμένην. ἐξ ἀμφοῖν γὰρ οὔτι τὸ κάλλιστον,
ἀλλὰ τὸ χεῖρον ἑλκύσαντες παρυφὴν κακῶν εἰργά-
σασθε. τοῖς μὲν “γὰρ Ἑβραίοις ἀκριβῆ τὰ περὶ
θρησκείαν ἐστὶ νόμιμα καὶ τὰ σεβάσματα καὶ
φυλάγματα μυρία καὶ δεόμενα βίου καὶ προαι-
ρέσεως ἱερατικῆς. ἀπαγορεύσαντος δὲ τοῦ νομο-
θέτου τὸ πᾶσι μὴ δουλεύειν τοῖς θεοῖς, ἑνὶ δὲ
μόνον, οὗ “μερίς ἐστιν ᾿Ιακὼβ καὶ σχοίνισμα κλη-
ρονομίας ᾿Ισραήλ,᾽ οὐ τοῦτο δὲ μόνον εἰπόντος,
ἀλλὰ γάρ, οἶμαι, καὶ προσθέντος “Οὐ κακολογήσεις

1 οὐ Klimek; of Neumann, who regards προσνείμαντεΞ---
πνεύματι asa quotation from a Christian polemic against the
Pagans.

388

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

painting, or household management, and the art of
healing derived from Asclepius whose oracles are
found everywhere on earth, and the god grants to us
a share in them perpetually. At any rate, when
I have been sick, Asclepius has often cured me by
prescribing remedies; and of this Zeus is witness.
Therefore, if we who have not given ourselves over
to the spirit of apostasy, fare better than you in
soul and body and external affairs, why do you
abandon these teachings of ours and go over to those
others?

And why is it that you do not abide even by the
traditions of the Hebrews or accept the law which
God has given to them? Nay, you have forsaken
their teaching even more than ours, abandoning the
- religion of your forefathers and giving yourselves
over to the predictions of the prophets? For if any
man should wish to examine into the truth concern-
ing you, he will find that your impiety is compounded
of the rashness of the Jews and the indifference and
vulgarity of the Gentiles! For from both sides you
have drawn what is by no means their best but their
inferior teaching, and so have made for yourselves a
border? of wickedness. For the Hebrews have precise
laws concerning religious worship, and countless
sacred things and observances which demand the.
priestly life and profession. But though their law-
giver forbade them to serve all the gods save only that
one, whose “ portion is Jacob, and Israel an allotment
of his inheritance’; 8 though he did not say this only,
but methinks added also “ Thou shalt not revile the

1 Cf. 43s.

2 παρυφή, Latin clavus, is the woven border of a garment.

3 Cf. Deuteronomy 32. 9.

389

298 D

298 EH

245 A

245 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

θεούς," ἡ τῶν ἐπιγινομένων βδελυρία τε Kal τόλμα,
βουλομένη πᾶσαν εὐλάβειαν ἐξελεῖν τοῦ πλήθους,
ἀκολουθεῖν ἐ ἐνόμισε τῷ μὴ θεραπεύειν τὸ βλασφη-
μεῖν, ὃ δὴ καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐντεῦθεν εἱλκύσατε μόνον" ὡς
τῶν γε ἄλλων οὐθὲν ὑ ὑμῖν τέ ἐστι κἀκείνοις παρα-
πλήσιον. ἀπὸ μὲν οὖν τῆς Ἑβραίων καινοτομίας
τὸ βλασφημεῖν τοὺς παρ᾽ ἡμῖν τιμωμένους θεοὺς
ἡρπάσατε. ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς map ἡμῖν θρησκείας τὸ
μὲν εὐσεβές τε ὁμοῦ πρὸς ἅπασαν τὴν κρείττονα
φύσιν καὶ τῶν πατρίων ἀγαπητικὸν ἀπολελοί-
TATE, μόνον & ἐκτήσασθε τὸ πάντα ἐσθίειν ὡς
λάχανα χόρτου. καὶ εἰ χρὴ τἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, ἐπι-
τεῖναι τὴν map ἡμῖν ἐφιλοτιμήθητε χυδαιότητα' :
τοῦτο δέ, οἶμαι, καὶ MAN εἰκότως, συμβαίνει πᾶσιν
ἔθνεσιν: καὶ βίοις ἀνθρώπων εὐτελῶν, καπήλων,
τελωνῶν, ὀρχηστῶν, ἑταιροτρόφων καὶ ἁρμόττειν
φήθητε τὰ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν.

Ὅτι δὲ οὐχ οἱ νῦν, ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ ἐξ ἀρχῆς, οἱ
πρῶτοι παραδεξάμενοι τὸν λόγον παρὰ τοῦ Ilav-
λου τοιοῦτοί τινες γεγόνασιν, εὔδηλον ἐξ ὧν αὐτὸς
ὁ Παῦλος μαρτυρεῖ πρὸς αὐτοὺς γράφων. οὐ γὰρ
ἣν οὕτως ἀναίσχυντος, οἶμαι, ὡς μὴ συνειδὼς αὐ-
τοῖς ὀνείδη τοσαῦτα πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἐκείνους ὑπὲρ
αὐτῶν γράφειν, ἐξ ὧν, εἰ καὶ ἐπαίνους ἔγραψε το-
σούτους αὐτῶν, εἰ καὶ ἀληθεῖς ἐτύγχανον, ἐρυθριᾶν

1 χυδαιότητα"---καὶ Klimek; χυδαιότητα, καὶ «γὰρ;» Neu-
mann, failing to see the parenthesis.

2 Asmus; ἑτέρων MSS., Neumann; Asmus πᾶσι yap τοῖς
ἔθεσιν καὶ---εὐτελῶν--Ἐἠὠήθητε χρῆναι: ‘‘For you thought you

must adapt your ways to all the customs and lives of
worthless men.’’

1 EHxodus 22. 28,

399

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

gods”’;! yet the shamelessness and audacity of later
generations, desiring to root out all reverence from
the mass of the people, has thought that blasphemy
accompanies the neglect of worship. This, in fact, is
the only thing that you have drawn from this source;
for in all other respects you and the Jews have
nothing incommon. Nay, it is from the new-fangled
teaching of the Hebrews that you have seized upon
this blasphemy of the gods who are honoured among
us; but the reverence for every higher nature,
characteristic of our religious worship, combined with
the love of the traditions of our forefathers, you have
cast off, and have acquired only the habit of eating all
things, ‘even as the green herb.” 2 But to tell the
truth, you have taken pride in outdoing our vulgarity,
(this, I think, is a thing that happens to all nations,
and very naturally) and you thought that you must
adapt your ways to the lives of the baser sort, shop-
keepers,® tax-gatherers, dancers and libertines. -

But that not only the Galilaeans of our day but
also those of the earliest time, those who were the
first to receive the teaching from Paul, were men of
this sort, is evident from the testimony of Paul
himself in a letter addressed tothem. For unless he
actually knew that they had committed all these
disgraceful acts, he was not, I think, so impudent as
to write to those men themselves concerning their
conduct, in language for which, even though in the
same letter he included as many eulogies of them,
he ought to have blushed, yes, even if those

2 Cf. 314c and Oration 6. 1920, Vol. 2, where he quotes with
a sneer ‘‘ these words of the Galilaeans,” from Genesis 9. 3.

3 Cf. Letter 36 for Julian’s reproach against the Christian
rhetoricians that they behave like hucksters,

39!

245 C

245 D

253 A

253 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἣν, εἰ δὲ ψευδεῖς καὶ πεπλασμένοι, καταδύεσθαι
φεύγοντα τὸ μετὰ θωπείας λάγνου καὶ ἀνελευ-
θέρου κολακείας ἐντυγχάνειν δοκεῖν. ἃ δὲ γράφει
περὶ τῶν ἀκροασαμένων αὐτοῦ ἸΙαῦλος πρὸς av-
a \ An
τοὺς ἐκείνους, ἐστὶ ταῦτα: “Μὴ πλανᾶσθε" οὔτε
’ id /
εἰδωλολάτραι, οὔτε μοιχοί, οὔτε μαλακοί, οὔτε
ἀρσενοκοῖται, οὔτε κλέπται, οὔτε πλεονέκται, οὐ
μέθυσοι, οὐ λοίδοροι, οὐχ ἅρπαγες βασιλείαν θεοῦ
κληρονομήσουσι. καὶ παῦτα οὐκ ἀγνοεῖτε, ἀδελ-
φοί, ὅτι καὶ ὑμεῖς τοιοῦτοι TE. ἀλλ᾽ ἀπελού-
b) Ι ς / od lal 2 / 3 A
σασθε, ἀλλ ἡγιάσθητε ἐν τῷ ὀνόματι “Incov
Χριστοῦ. ὁρᾷς, ὅτι καὶ τούτους γενέσθαι φησὶ
τοιούτους, ἁγιασθῆναι δὲ καὶ ἀπολούσασθαι, ῥύ-
πτειν ἱκανοῦ καὶ διακαθαίρειν ὕδατος εὐπορή-
σαντος, ὃ μέχρι ψυχῆς εἰσδύσεται ; καὶ τοῦ μὲν
λεπροῦ τὴν λέπραν οὐκ ἀφαιρεῖται τὸ βάπτισμα,
RIA a SSN > x A > la
οὐδὲ λειχῆνας οὐδὲ ἀλφοὺς οὔτε ἀκροχορδῶνας
οὐδὲ ποδάγραν οὐδὲ δυσεντερίαν, οὐχ ὕδερον, οὐ
παρωνυχίαν, οὐ μικρόν, οὐ μέγα τῶν τοῦ σώματος
Χ
ἁμαρτημάτων, μοιχείας δὲ καὶ ἁρπαγὰς καὶ πάσας
ἁπλῶς τῆς ψυχῆς παρανομίας ἐξελεῖ; ....
3 \ \ X \ ᾿ Np 2 /
Επειδὴ δὲ πρὸς μὲν τοὺς νυνὶ ᾿Ιουδαίους δια-
1)
/ iA 3 \ 3 lal 3 a
φέρεσθαί φασιν, εἰναι δὲ ἀκριβῶς Ισραηλῖται
Ν \ a la! a
κατὰ τοὺς προφήτας αὐτῶν, καὶ τῷ Μωυσῇ
μάλιστα πείθεσθαι καὶ τοῖς ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου περὶ τὴν
Ιουδαίαν ἐπιγενομένοις προφήταις, ἴδωμεν, κατὰ
e A A a)
τί μάλιστα ὁμολογοῦσιν αὐτοῖς. ἀρκτέον δὲ ἡμῖν
lal VA a N ΄
ἀπὸ τῶν Μωυσέως, ὃν δὴ καὶ αὐτόν φασι προκη-

11 Corinthians 6. 9-11.
2 In Cyril’s summary, Julian next compares the Christian
converts with slaves who run away from their masters in the

392

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

eulogies were deserved, while if they were false and
fabricated, then he ought to have sunk into the
ground to escape seeming to behave with wanton
flattery and slavish adulation. But the following are
the very words that Paul wrote concerning those who
had heard his teaching, and were addressed to the
men themselves: ‘‘ Be not deceived: neither idol-
aters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with men, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit
the kingdom of God. And of this ye are not
ignorant, brethren, that such were you also; but ye
washed yourselves, but ye were sanctified in the
name of Jesus Christ.’”’! Do you see that he says
that these men too had been of such sort, but that
they “had been sanctified ” and “ had been washed,”
water being able to cleanse and winning power to
purify when it shall go down into the soul? And
baptism does not take away his leprosy from the
leper, or scabs, or pimples, or warts, or gout, or
dysentery, or dropsy, or a whitlow, in fact no dis-
order of the body, great or small, then shall it do
away with adultery and theft and in short all the
transgressions of the soul? .. .?

Now since the Galilaeans say that, though they
are different from the Jews, they are still, precisely
speaking, Israelites in accordance with their prophets,
and that they obey Moses above all and the prophets
who in Judaea succeeded him, let us see in what
respect they chiefly agree with those prophets.
And let us begin with the teaching of Moses, who
himself also, as they claim, foretold the birth of

belief that, evenif they do not succeed in escaping, their state
will be no worse than before.

293

253 C

253 D

253 EH

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ρύξαι τὴν ἐσομένην ᾿Ιησοῦ γέννησιν. ὁ τοίνυν
Μωυσῆς οὐχ ἅπαξ οὐδὲ δὶς οὐδὲ τρίς, ἀλλὰ
πλειστάκις ἕνα θεὸν μόνον ἀξιοῖ τιμᾶν, ὃν δὴ
καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ὀνομάζει, θεὸν δὲ ἕτερον οὐδαμοῦ"
ἀγγέλους δὲ ὀνομάζει καὶ κυρίους καὶ μέντοι καὶ
θεοὺς πλείονας, ἐξαίρετον δὲ τὸν πρῶτον, ἄλλον
δὲ οὐχ ὑπείληφε δεύτερον οὔτε ὅμοιον οὔτε ἀνό-
μοιον, καθάπερ, ὑμεῖς ἐπεξείργασθε. εἰ δέ ἐστί
που παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ὑπὲρ τούτων μία Μωυσέως ῥῆσις,
ταύτην ἐστὲ δίκαιοι προφέρειν. τὸ “γὰρ “1Προ-
φήτην ὑμῖν ἀναστήσει κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν ἐκ τῶν
ἀδελφῶν ὑμῶν ὡς ἐμέ: αὐτοῦ ἀκούσεσθε μάλιστα
μὲν οὖν οὐκ εἴρηται περὶ τοῦ γεννηθέντος ἐκ
Μαρίας. εἰ δέ τις ὑμῶν ἕνεκα συγχωρήσειεν,
Ὁ a > \ “ / > a
ἑαυτῷ φησιν αὐτὸν ὅμοιον γενήσεσθαι καὶ οὐ τῷ
θεῷ, προφήτην ὥσπερ ἑαυτὸν καὶ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων,
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐκ θεοῦ. καὶ τὸ “Οὐκ ἐκλείψει ἄρχων
ἐξ ᾿Ιούδα οὐδὲ ἡγούμενος ἐκ τῶν μηρῶν αὐτοῦ
μάλιστα μὲν οὐκ εἴρηται περὶ τούτου, ἀλλὰ περὶ
τῆς τοῦ Δαβὶδ βασιλείας, ἣ δὴ κατέληξεν εἰς
Σεδεκίαν τὸν βασιλέα. καὶ δὴ ἡ γραφὴ διπλῶς
πως ἔχει “ ἕως ἔλθῃ τὰ ; ἀποκείμενα αὐτῷ," παρα-
πεποιήκωτε δὲ ὑμεῖς “ἕως ἔλθῃ ᾧ ἀπόκειται.
ὅτε δὲ τούτων οὐδὲν τῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ προσήκει, πρό-
δηλον" οὐδὲ γάρ ἐστιν ἐξ ᾿Ιούδα. πῶς γὰρ ὁ καθ᾽
ὑμᾶς οὐκ ἐξ ᾿Ιωσήφ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἁγίου πνεύματος
γεγονώς ; τὸν ᾿Ιωσὴφ yap γενεαλογοῦντες εἰς
τὸν ᾿Ιούδαν ἀναφέρετε καὶ οὐδὲ τοῦτο ἐδυνήθητε

1 Acts 3. 22; Deuter ery 18. 18. Genesis 49. 10.

3 Or ‘‘ whose it is” ; Julian follows the Septuagint. The

version ‘until Shiloh come ” was not then current ; cf.
Skinner, Genesis, Ὁ. 522. It is still debated whether these

394

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

Jesus that was to be. Moses, then, not once or
twice or thrice but very many times says that men
ought to honour one God only, and in fact names him
the Highest; but that they ought to honour any
other god he nowhere says. He speaks of angels and
lords and moreover of several gods, but from these
he chooses out the first and does not assume any god
as second, either like or unlike him, such as you have
invented. And if among you perchance you possess a
single utterance of Moses with respect to this, you are
bound to produce it. For the words “A prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren,
like unto me ; to him shall ye hearken,’’! were certain-
ly not said of the son of Mary. And even though, to
please you, one should concede that they were said of
-him, Moses says that the prophet will be like him
and not like God, a prophet like himself and born
of men, not of a god. And the words “ The sceptre
shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader from his
loins,’ 2 were most certainly not said of the son of
Mary, but of the royal house of David, which, you ob-
serve, came to an end with King Zedekiah. And cer-
tainly the Scripture can be interpreted in two ways
when it says “until there comes what is reserved for
him”; but you have wrongly interpreted it “ until he
comes for whom it is reserved.” ? But it is very clear
that not one of these sayings relates to Jesus; for he
is not even from Judah. How could he be when
according to you he was not born of Joseph but of
the Holy Spirit? For though in your genealogies
you trace Joseph back to Judah, you could not invent

words refer to the Davidic kingdom or to a future Messiah,
and there is no universally accepted rendering of the Hebrew
original.

395

261 Ια

202 Β

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

πλάσαι καλῶς. ἐλέγχονται yap Ματθαῖος καὶ
Λουκᾶς περὶ τῆς γενεαλογίας αὐτοῦ διαφωνοῦντες
πρὸς ἀλλήλους. ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τοῦτου μέλλοντες
ἐν τῷ δευτέρῳ συγγράμματι τὸ ἀληθὲς ἀκριβῶς
ἐξετάξειν, ὑπερτιθέμεθα. συγκεχωρήσθω δὲ καὶ
ἄρχων ἐξ ᾿Ιούδα, οὐ “θεὸς é ἐκ θεοῦ" κατὰ τὰ παρ᾽
ὑμῶν λεγόμενα οὐδὲ “ Τὰ πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο
καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἕν." ἀλλ᾽ εἴρηται
καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς" a ἸΑνατελεῖ ἄστρον ἐξ Ἰακὼβ
καὶ ἄνθρωπος ἐξ ᾿Ισραήλ." τοῦθ᾽ ὅτι τῷ Δαβὶδ
προσήκει, καὶ τοῖς ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου, πρόδηλόν ἐστί
που τοῦ γὰρ ᾿Ιεσσαὶ παῖς ἣν ὁ Δαβίδ.

Kimep οὖν ἐκ τούτων ἐπιχειρεῖτε συμβιβάξειν,
ἐπιδείξατε “μίαν ἐκεῖθεν ἑλκύσαντες ῥῆσιν, ὅποι
πολλὰς πάνυ ἐγώ. ὅτι δὲ θεὸν τὸν ἕνα τὸν τοῦ
Ἰσραὴλ νενόμικεν, ἐν τῷ Δευτερονομίῳ φησίν'
“Ὥστε εἰδέναι σε, ὅτι κύριος ὁ θεός σου, οὗτος
θεὸς εἷς ἐστι, καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλος πλὴν αὐτοῦ."
καὶ ἔτι πρὸς τούτῳ" “ Καὶ ἐπιστραφήσῃ τῇ διανοίᾳ
σου, ὅτι κύριος ὃ θεός σου οὗτος θεὸς ἐν τῷ
οὐρανῷ ἄνω καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς κάτω καὶ οὐκ ἔστι
πλὴν αὐτοῦ." καὶ STAND? oy ol Ἄκουε, Ἰσραήλ,
κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν κύριος εἷς ἐστι." καὶ πάλιν'
"TSete, ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι καὶ οὐκ ἔστι θεὸς πλὴν ἐμοῦ."
ταῦτα μὲν ovv ὁ Μωυσῆς ἕνα διατεινόμενος
μόνον εἶναι θεόν. ἀλλ᾽ οὗτοι τυχὸν ἐροῦσιν'
οὐδὲ ἡμεῖς δύο λέγομεν οὐδὲ τρεῖς. ἐγὼ δὲ
λέγοντας μὲν αὐτοὺς καὶ τοῦτο δείξω, μαρτυ-

1 Neumann in view of the next two sentences would read
Ἴεσσαί, ““ Jesse.”

1 Cf. Matthew 1. 1-17 with Lake 3. 23-38.
396

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

even this plausibly. For Matthew and Luke are
refuted by the fact that they disagree concerning his
genealogy.! However, as I intend to examine closely
into the truth of this matter in my Second Book, I
leave it till then.2 But granted that he really is “a
sceptre from Judah,’ then he is not “God born of
God,” as you are in the habit of saying, nor is it true
that “ All things were made by him; and without him
was not any thing made.’? But, say you, we are
told in the Book of Numbers also: ‘There shall arise
a star out of Jacob, and a man out of Israel.’ * It is
certainly clear that this relates to David and to his
descendants; for David was a son of Jesse.

If therefore you try to prove anything from these
writings, show me a single saying that you have
drawn from that source whence I have drawn very
many. But that Moses believed in one God, the
God of Israel, he says in Deuteronomy: ‘So that
thou mightest know that the Lord thy God he is one
God; and there is none else beside him.” *® And
moreover he says besides, “ And lay it to thine heart
that this the Lord thy God is God in the heaven
above and upon the earth beneath, and there is none
else.”’® And again, “ Hear, O Israel: the Lord our
God is one Lord.” * And again, “See that I am and
there is no God save me.’ 8 These then are the
words of Moses when he insists that there is only
one God. But perhaps the Galilaeans will reply:
« But we do not assert that there are two gods or
three.” But I will show that they do assert this

2 Cyril’s reply to this part of Julian’s Second Book is lost,
so that the Emperor’s more detailed discussion cannot be

reconstructed. peer (a 8 ies 4 Numbers 24. 17.
5 Deuteronomy 4. 35. δ Deuteronomy 4. 39.
7 Deuteronomy 6. 4. 8 Deuteronomy 32. 39.

392

2620

202 D

962 E

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

popevos Ἰωάννην λέγοντα" Ἶ ‘Ey ἀρχῇ ἣν ὁ λόγος
καὶ ὁ λόγος ἣν πρὸς τὸν θεὸν καὶ θεὸς ἣν ὁ "λόγος."
ὁρᾷς, ὅτι πρὸς τὸν θεὸν εἶναι λέγεται ; εἴτε ὁ ἐκ
Μαρίας γεννηθεὶς εἴτε ἄλλος τίς ἐστιν-- ἵν᾽ ὁμοῦ
καὶ πρὸς Φωτεινὸν ἀποκρίνωμαι---, διαφέρει τοῦτο
νῦν οὐδέν' ἀφίημι δῆτα τὴν μάχην ὑμῖν. ὅτι
μέντοι φησὶ “πρὸς Oeov” καὶ “ἐν ἀρχῆ,᾽ τοῦτο
ἀπόχρη μαρτύρασθαι. πῶς οὖν ὁμολογεῖ ταῦτα
τοῖς Μωυσέως ; ;

᾿Αλλὰ τοῖς Ἡσαΐου, φασίμ, ὁμολογεῖ. λέγει
γὰρ Ἡσαΐας" ““᾿Ιδοὺ ἡ παρθένος ἐν γαστρὶ ἕξει
καὶ τέξεται υἱόν." ἔστω δὴ καὶ τοῦτο λεγόμενον
ὑπὲρ θεοῦ, καίτοι μηδαμῶς εἰρημένον" οὐ γὰρ ἣν
παρθένος ἡ γεγαμημένη καὶ πρὶν ἀποκυῆσαι
συγκατακλιθεῖσα τῷ γήμαντι. δεδόσθω δὲ λέγε-
σθαι περὶ ταύτης---μή τι θεόν φησιν ἐκ τῆς
παρθένου τεχθήσεσθαι; θεοτόκον δὲ ὑμεῖς οὐ
παύεσθε Μαρίαν καλοῦντες, εἰ μή πού φησι τὸν
ἐκ τῆς παρθένου γεννώμενον ‘ “υἱὸν θεοῦ μονογενῆ"
Kal ‘ “πρωτότοκον πάσης κτίσεως" ;1 ἀλλὰ τὸ
λεγόμενον ὑπὸ ᾿Ιωάννου “Πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο
καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ὃ ἕν᾽ ᾿ ἔχει τις ἐν ταῖς
προφητικαῖς δεῖξαι φωναῖς ; Ἢ ἃ δὲ ἡμεῖς δείκνυμεν,
ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐκείνων ἑξῆς ἀκούετε: “Κύριε, ὁ θεὸς
ἡμῶν, κτῆσαι ἡμᾶς, ἐκτὸς σοῦ ἄλλον οὐκ οἴδαμεν ᾽"
πεποίηται δὲ Tap αὐτῶν καὶ ‘Efexias ὁ βασιλεὺς

1 κτίσεως ; Neumann, κτίσεως. MSS.

1 John 1. 1.
2 The heretical bishop Photinus of Sirmium was tried
under Constantius before the synod at Milan in 351 for

denying the divinity of Christ; see Julian’s letter to
him, p. 187.

398

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

also, and I call John to witness, who says: “Inthe
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God and the Word was God.”’! You see that the
Word is said to be with God? Now whether this is
he who was born of Mary or someone else,—that I
may answer Photinus? at the same time,—this now
makes no difference; indeed I leave the dispute to
you; but it is enough to bring forward the evidence
that he says “with God,” and “in the beginning.”
How then does this agree with the teachings of
Moses?

“ But,’ say the Galilaeans, “it agrees with the
teachings of Isaiah. For Isaiah says, ‘ Behold the
virgin shall conceive and bear ἃ son.’”? Now granted
that this is said about a god, though it is by no
means so stated; for a married woman who before
her conception had lain with her husband was no
virgin,—but let us admit that it is said about her,—
does Isaiah anywhere say that a god will be born of
the virgin? But why do you not cease to call Mary
the mother of God, if Isaiah nowhere says that he
that is born of the virgin is the “only begotten
Son of God’’# and “the firstborn of all creation” ? >
But as for the saying of John, “ All things were made
by him; and without him was not any thing made
that was made,’ ® can anyone point this out among
the utterances of the prophets? But now listen to
the sayings that I point out to you from those same
prophets, one after another. “0 Lord our God,
make us thine; we know none other beside thee.’ Τ

And Hezekiah the king has been represented by

3 Isaiah 7. 14. 4 John 1. 18.
5 Colossians 1. 15. eC Johnnl. 3.
7 A paraphrase of Isaiah 26. 13.

399

276 αὶ

ἌΤΤΟΝ
200 Β
290 Ὁ

290 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

εὐχόμενος" ἐΐ Κύριε, ὁ θεὸς ᾿Ισραήλ, ὁ καθήμενος
ἐπὶ τῶν Χερουβίμ, σὺ εἶ ὁ θεὸς μόνος. μή τί
τῷ δευτέρῳ καταλείπει χώραν ; ἀλλ᾽ εἰ θεὸς ἐκ
θεοῦ καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς ὁ λόγος ἐστὶ καὶ τῆς οὐσίας ἐξέφυ
τοῦ πατρός, θεοτόκον ὑμεῖς ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου τὴν παρθένον
εἶναί φατε; πῶς γὰρ ἂν τέκοι θεὸν ἄνθρωπος
οὖσα καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς ; καὶ πρός γε τούτῳ λέγοντος
ἐναργῶς θεοῦ “Eye εἰμι καὶ οὐκ ἔστι πάρεξ ἐ ἐμοῦ
σώζων," ὑμεῖς σωτῆρα τὸν ἐξ αὐτῆς -εἰπεῖν
τετολμήκατε;

"Ore δὲ Μωυσῆς ὀνομάζει θεοὺς τοὺς ἀγγέλους,
ἐκ τῶν ἐκείνου λόγων ἀκούσατε" ““᾿Ιδόντες δὲ οἱ
υἱοὶ τοῦ θεοῦ τὰς θυγατέρας τῶν ἀνθρώπων ὅτι
Karat εἰσιν, ἔλαβον ἑαυτοῖς γυναῖκας ἀπὸ πασῶν
ὧν ἐξελέξαντο." καὶ μικρὸν ὑποβάς" “Kat μετ᾽
ἐκεῖνο ὡς ἂν εἰσεπορεύοντο οἱ υἱοὶ τοῦ θεοῦ πρὸς
τὰς θυγατέρας τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ ἐγεννῶσαν
ἑαυτοῖς" ἐκεῖνοι ἦσαν οἱ γίγαντες οἱ ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος
οἱ ὀνομαστοί." ὅτι τοίνυν τοὺς ἀγγέλους φησίν,

εὔδηλόν ἐστι καὶ ἔξωθεν οὐ προσπαρακείμενον,"
ἀλλὰ καὶ δῆλον ἐκ τοῦ φάναι, οὐκ ἀνθρώπους,
ἀχλὰ γύγαντας γεγονέναι παρ᾽ ἐκείνων. δῆλον
γάρ, ὡς, εἴπερ ἀνθρώπους ἐνόμιζεν αὐτῶν εἶναι
τοὺς πατέρας, ἀλλὰ μὴ κρείττονος καὶ ἰσχυρο-
τέρας τινὸς φύσεως, οὐκ ἂν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν εἶπε
γεννηθῆναι τοὺς γίγαντας" ἐκ yap θνητοῦ καὶ
ἀθανάτου μίξεως. ἀποφήνασθαι μοι δοκεῖ τὸ τῶν
γιγάντων ὑποστῆναι γένος. ὁ δὴ πολλοὺς υἱοὺς
ὀνομάζων θεοῦ καὶ τούτους οὐκ ἀνθρώπους, ἀγγέ-
λους δέ, τὸν μονογενῆ λόγον θεὸν ἢ υἱὸν θεοῦ ἢ

1 After προσπαρατείμενον Klimek adds μόνον.
400 |

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

them as praying as follows: “O Lord God of
Israel, that sittest upon the Cherubim, thou art God,
even thou alone.’ ! Does he leave any place for
the second god? But if, as you believe, the Word
is God born of God and proceeded from the sub-
stance of the Father, why do you say that the virgin
‘is the mother of God? For how could she bear a
god since she is, according to you, a human being?
And moreover, when God declares plainly “I am he,
and there is none that can deliver beside me,” ?
do you dare to call her son Saviour ?

And that Moses calls the angels gods you may
hear from his own words, “ The sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair ; and they took
them wives of all which they chose.” 3 And a little
further on: ‘And also after that, when the sons of
God came in unto the daughters of men, and they
bare children to them, the same became the giants
which were of old, the men of renown.” + Now that
he means the angels is evident, and this has not
been foisted on him from without, but it is clear also
from his saying that not men but giants were born
from them. For it is clear that if he had thought
that men and not beings of some higher and more
powerful nature were their fathers, he would not have
said that the giants were their offspring. For it seems
to me that he declared that the race of giants arose
from the mixture of mortal and immortal. Again,
when Moses speaks of many sons of God and calls
them not men but angels, would he not then have
revealed to mankind, if he had known thereof, God

1 Tsaiah 37. 16.
2 Apparently a paraphrase of Deuteronomy 32. 39.
3 Genesis 6. 2. 4 Genesis 6. 4.

4οι
VOL, III. DD

290 E

291 A

299 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ὅπως ἂν αὐτὸν καλῆτε, εἴπερ ἐγίνωσκεν, οὐκ ἂν
εἰς ἀνθρώπους ἐμήνυσεν ; ὅτι δὲ οὐ μέγα τοῦτο
ἐνόμιζεν, ὑπὲρ τοῦ Ἰσραήλ φησιν" “ υἱὸς ΄πρωτό-
τοκός μου Iopanr” ; τί οὐχὶ καὶ περὶ τοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ
ταῦτ᾽ ἔφη Μωυσῆς; ; ἕνα καὶ μόνον ἐδίδασκε θεόν,
υἱοὺς δὲ αὐτοῦ πολλοὺς τοὺς κατανειμαμένους τὰ
ἔθνη. πρωτότοκον δὲ υἱὸν θεοῦ 5 ἢ θεὸν λόγον ἢ
τι τῶν ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν ὕστερον ψευδῶς συντεθέντων
οὔτε ἤδει κατ᾿ ἀρχὴν οὔτε ἐδίδασκε φανερῶς.
αὐτοῦ τε Μωυσέως καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπηκούσατε
προφητῶν. ὁ OUD Μωυσῆς πολλὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ
πολλαχοῦ λέγει" A Κύριον τὸν θεόν σου φοβηθήσῃ
καὶ αὐτῷ μόνῳ λατρεύσεις." πῶς οὖν ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς
ἐν τοῖς εὐαγγελίοις παραδέδοται προστάττων
“ Πορευθέντες μαθητεύσατε πάντα τὰ ἔθνη, βαπτί-
ἕοντες αὐτοὺς εἰς τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ “πατρὸς καὶ τοῦ
υἱοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος," εἴπερ μὴ 3 καὶ
αὐτῷ λατρεύειν ἔμελλον ; ἀκόλουθα δὲ τούτοις
καὶ ὑμεῖς διανοούμενοι μετὰ τοῦ πατρὸς θεολο-
γεῖτε τὸν υἱόν. ..

Ὑπὲρ δὲ ἀποτροπαίων ἐπάκουσον πάλιν
ὅσα λέγει' “ Καὶ λήψεται δύο ,“τράγους ἐξ
αἰγῶν περὶ ἁμαρτίας καὶ κριὸν ἕνα εἰς ὁλο-
καύτωμα. καὶ προσάξει ὃ ᾿Ααρὼν τὸν μόσχον

a € \ e a \
τὸν περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας τὸν περὶ ἑαυτοῦ καὶ

1 καλῆτε Klimek ; καλεῖτε Neumann.

2 θεοῦ Neumann adds.

3 Neumann εἴπερ καὶ αὐτῷ, referring αὐτῷ to Moses; Goll-
witzer adds μὴ to improve sense; αὐτῷ refers to Jesus.

1 Exodus 4, 22. 2 Deuteronomy 6. 13.
3 Matthew 28. 19.

402

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

the “only begotten Word,” or a son of God or how-
ever you call him? But is it because he did not
think this of great importance that he says concerning
Israel, “ Israel is my firstborn son?”’?! Why did not
Moses say this about Jesus also? He taught that
there was only one God, but that he had many sons
who divided the nations among themselves. But
the Word as firstborn son of God or as a God, or any
of those fictions which have been invented by you
later, he neither knew at all nor taught openly
thereof. You have now heard Moses himself and
the other prophets. Moses, therefore, utters many
sayings to the following effect and in many places:
“Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and him only
shalt thou serve.” 2 How then has it been handed
down in the Gospels that Jesus commanded: “Go
ye therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost,’ ? if they were not intended to serve
him also? And your beliefs also are in harmony
with these commands, when along with the Father
you pay divine honours to the son. . . .4

And now observe again how much Moses says
about the deities that avert evil: “ And he shall take
two he-goats of the goats for a sin-offering, and one
ram for a burnt offering. And Aaron shall bring.
also his bullock of the sin-offering, which is for him-

4Ἃ According to Cyril’s summary, Julian says that the
Hellenes, unlike the Christians, observe the same laws and
customs as the Jews, except that they worship more than
one god and practise soothsaying. Circumcision is approved
by the temple priests of Egypt, the Chaldaeans and Saracens.
All alike offer the various sorts of sacrifice, including those
for atonement and purification. Moses sacrificed to the

abominable deities who avert evil, the di averrunct.
403

p 2

299 C

305 B

305 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἐξιλάσεται περὶ αὐτοῦ Kal τοῦ οἴκου αὐτοῦ.
καὶ λήψεται τοὺς δύο τράγους καὶ στήσει αὐτοὺς
ἔναντι κυρίου παρὰ τὴν θύραν τῆς σκηνῆς τοῦ
μαρτυρίου. καὶ ἐπιθήσει ᾿Ααρὼν ἐπὶ τοὺς δύο
τράγους κλῆρον ἕνα τῷ κυρίῳ καὶ κλῆρον ἕνα
τῷ ἀποπομπαί,,᾽ ὥστε ἐκπέμψαι αὐτόν, φησίν,
ἀποπομπήν, Kall ἀφεῖναι αὐτὸν εἰς τὴν ἔρημον.
ὁ μὲν οὖν τῷ ἀποπομπαίῳ πεμπόμενος οὕτως
ἐκπέμπεται. τὸν δέ γε ἕτερον τράγον φησί: “ Καὶ
σφάξει τὸν τράγον τὸν περὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας τοῦ
λαοῦ ἔναντι κυρίου, καὶ εἰσοίσει τοῦ αἵματος
αὐτοῦ ἐσώτερον τοῦ καταπετάσματος, καὶ ῥανεῖ
τὸ αἷμα ἐπὶ τὴν βάσιν τοῦ. θυσιαστηρίου, καὶ
ἐξιλάσεται ἐπὶ τῶν ἁγίων ἀπὸ τῶν ἀκαθαρσιῶν
τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Ισραὴλ καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀδικημάτων αὐτῶν
περὶ πασῶν τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν αὐτῶν." ὡς μὲν οὖν
τοὺς τῶν θυσιῶν ἠπίστατο τρόπους Μωυσῆς,
εὔδηλόν ἐστί που διὰ τῶν ῥηθέντων. ὅτι δὲ οὐχ
ὡς ὑμεῖς ἀκάθαρτα ἐνόμισεν αὐτά, πάλιν ἐκ τῶν
ἐκείνου ῥημάτων ἐπακούσατε' “Ἢ δὲ ψυχή, ἥτις
ἐὰν φάγῃ ἀπὸ τῶν κρεῶν τῆς θυσίας τοῦ σωτη-
ρίου, ὅ ἐστι κυρίου, καὶ ἡ ἀκαθαρσία αὐτοῦ ἐπ᾽
αὐτῷ, ἀπολεῖται ἡ ψυχὴ ἐκείνη ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ

> a 32} 3 \ “ > \ ε na x
αὐτῆς. αὐτὸς οὕτως εὐλαβὴς ὁ Μωυσῆς περὶ
τὴν τῶν ἱερῶν ἐδωδήν.

Προσήκει δὴ λοιπὸν ἀναμνησθῆναι τῶν ἔμπρο-
σθεν, ὧν ἕνεκεν ἐρρήθη καὶ TAaUTA. Ol& TL
yap ἀποστάντες ἡμῶν οὐχὶ τὸν τῶν Ιουδαίων
ἀγαπᾶτε νόμον οὐδὲ ἐμμένετε τοῖς ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου
λεγομένοις ; ἐρεῖ πάντως τις ὀξὺ βλέπων: οὐδὲ

1 καὶ Neumann adds.

404

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

self, and make an atonement for himself and for
his house. And he shall take the two goats and
present them before the Lord at the door of the
tabernacle of the covenant. And Aaron shall cast
lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord and
the other lot for the scape-goat’’! so as to send him
forth, says Moses, as a scape-goat, and let him loose
into the wilderness. Thus then is sent forth the goat
that is sent for a scape-goat. And of the second
goat Moses says: ‘Then shall he kill the goat of
the sin-offering that is for the people before the
Lord, and bring his blood within the vail, and shall
sprinkle the blood upon the altar-step,? and shall
make an atonement for the holy place, because of
the uncleanness of the children of Israel and because
of their transgressions in all their sins.” ? Accord-
ingly it is evident from what has been said, that
Moses knew the various methods of sacrifice. And
to show that he did not think them impure as you
do, listen again to his own words. ‘“ But the soul that
eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings
that pertain unto the Lord, having his uncleanness
upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.” 4 So cautious is Moses himself with regard
to the eating of the flesh of sacrifice.

But now I had better remind you of what I said
earlier,> since on account of that 1 have said this
also. Why is it, I repeat, that after deserting us
you do not accept the law of the Jews or abide by
the sayings of Moses? No doubt some sharp-sighted

1 A paraphrase of Leviticus 16. 5-8.
2 “Mercy-seat”’ is the usual version.
3 Leviticus 16. 15. 4 Leviticus 7. 20. 5 Cf. 434.

405

806 A

806 B

314C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

yap Ιουδαῖοι θύουσιν. ἀλλ᾽ ἔγωγε ἀμβλυώττοντα
δεινῶς αὐτὸν ἀπελέγξω, πρῶτον μέν, ὅτι μηδὲ
τῶν ἄλλων τι τῶν παρὰ τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις νενομι-
σμένων ἐστὶ καὶ ὑμῖν ἐν φυλακῇ" δεύτερον δέ, ὅτι
θύουσι μὲν ἐν ἀδράκτοις * ᾿Ιουδαῖοι καὶ νῦν ἔτι
πάντα ἐσθίουσιν ἱερὰ καὶ κατεύχονται πρὸ τοῦ
θῦσαι καὶ τὸν δεξιὸν ὦ ὦμον διδόασιν ἀ ἀπαρχὰς τοῖς
ἱερεῦσιν, ἀπεστερημένοι δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ, ἤ, ὡς αὐτοῖς
ἔθος λέγειν, τοῦ ἁγιάσματος, ἀπαρχὰς τῷ θεῷ
τῶν ἱερείων εἴργονται προσφέρειν. ὑμεῖς δὲ οἱ
τὴν καινὴν θυσίαν εὑρόντες, οὐδὲν δεόμενοι τῆς
“Ἱερουσαλήμ, ἀντὶ τίνος οὐ θύετε; καίτοι τοῦτο
μὲν ἐγὼ πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐκ περιουσίας εἶπον, ἐπεί μοι
τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐρρέθη βουλομένῳ δεῖξαι τοῖς ἔθνεσιν
ὁμολογοῦντας Ιουδαίους ἔξω τοῦ νομίζειν ἕνα θεὸν
μόνον. ἐκεῖνο γὰρ αὐτῶν μὲν ἴδιον, ἡμῶν δὲ
ἀλλότριον, ἐπεὶ τά γε ἄλλα κοινά πως ἡμῖν ἐστι,
vaol, τεμένη, θυσιαστήρια, ἁγνεῖαι, φυλάγματά
τινα, περὶ ὧν ἢ τὸ παράπαν οὐδαμῶς ἢ μικρὰ
διαφερόμεθα πρὸς ἀλλήλους ana

"Ave ὅτου περὶ τὴν δίαιταν οὐχὶ τοῖς ᾿Ιουδαίοις
ὁμοίως ἐ ἐστὲ καθαροί, πάντα δὲ ἐσθίειν « ὡς λάχανα
χόρτου δεῖν φατε Πέτρῳ πιστεύσαντες, ὅτι,
φασίν, εἶπεν ἐκεῖνος" SoA. ὁ θεὸς ἐκαθάρισε, σὺ
μὴ KoLVOU” ; τί τούτου τεκμήριον, OTL πάλαι μὲν

1 Cf. Hesychius 8.0. ἄδρακτον: ἴδιον. Not in L. and §S.
The Latin version Oecolampadius translates in propriis.

1 Sozomen 5. 22, Socrates 3. 20 and Theodoret 3. 15 relate
that Julian summoned the leading Jews and exhorted them
to resume their sacrifices. Their reply that they could law-
fully sacrifice only in the Temple led him to order its
restoration.

406

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

person will answer, ‘“ The Jews too do not sacrifice.”
But I will convict him of being terribly dull-sighted,
for in the first place I reply that neither do you also
observe any one of the other customs observed by the
Jews; and, secondly, that the Jews do sacrifice in
their own houses, and even to this day everything
that they eat is consecrated; and they pray before
sacrificing, and give the right shoulder to the priests
as the firstfruits; but since they have been deprived
of their temple, or, as they are accustomed to call it,
their holy place, they are prevented from offering
the firstfruits of the sacrifice to God.t But why do
you not sacrifice, since you have invented your new
kind of sacrifice and do not need Jerusalem at all?
And yet it was superfluous to ask you this question,
since I said the same thing at the beginning, when
I wished to show that the Jews agree with the
Gentiles, except that they believe in only one God.
That is indeed peculiar to them and strange to us;
since all the rest we have in a manner in common
with them—temples, sanctuaries, altars, purifications,
and certain precepts. For as to these we differ
from one another either not at all or in trivial]
matters...

Why in your diet are you not as pure as the Jews,
and why do you say that we ought to eat everything
“even as the green herb,’® putting your faith in
Peter, because, as the Galilaeans say, he declared,
‘«¢What God hath cleansed, that make not thou com-
mon”?* What proof is there of this, that of old

2 According to Cyril, Julian then says that the Christians
in worshipping not one or many gods, but three, have strayed
from both Jewish and Hellenic teaching.

3 Cf, 238p, note. 4 Acts 10. 15.

404

314 D

314

319 D

319 H

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

ἄττα ἐνόμιζεν ὁ θεὸς μιαρά, νυνὶ δὲ καθαρὰ
πεποίηκεν αὐτά; Μωυσῆς μὲν γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν
τετραπόδων ἐπισημαινόμενος πᾶν τὸ διχηλοῦν,
φησίν, ὁπλὴν καὶ ἀναμαρυκίζον μαρυκισμὸν κα-
θαρὸν εἶναι, τὸ δὲ μὴ τοιοῦτον ἀκάθαρτον εἶναι.
εἰ μὲν οὖν ὁ χοῖρος ἀπὸ τῆς φαντασίας Ilétpov
νῦν προσέλαβε τὸ μαρυκᾶσθαι, πεισθῶμεν αὐτῷ"
τεράστιον γὰρ ὡς ἀληθῶς, εἰ μετὰ τὴν φαντασίαν
Πέτρου προσέλαβεν αὐτό. εἰ δὲ ἐ ἐκεῖνος ἐψεύσατο
ταύτην ἑωρακέναι, iy εἴπω καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς, τὴν ἀποκά-
λυψὶν ἐπὶ τοῦ βυρσοδεψίου, τί ἐπὶ τηλικούτων
οὕτω ταχέως πιστεύσομεν ; τί γὰρ 0 Μωυσῆς
ὑμῖν ἐπέταξε τῶν χαλεπῶν, εἰ ἀπηγόρευσεν
ἐσθίειν πρὸς τοῖς ὑείοις τὰ τε πτηνὰ καὶ τὰ
θαλάττια, ἀποφηνάμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ
ταῦτα πρὸς ἐκείνοις ἐκβεβλῆσθαι καὶ ἀκάθαρτα
πεφηνέναι ;

᾿Αλλὰ τί ταῦτα ἐγὼ μακρολογῶ λεγόμενα Tap
αὐτῶν, ἐξὸν ἰδεῖν, εἴ τινα ἰσχὺν ἔχει; λέγουσι
γὰρ τὸν θεὸν ἐπὶ τῷ προτέρῳ νόμῳ θεῖναι τὸν
δεύτερον. ἐκεῖνον μὲν γὰρ γενέσθαι πρὸς καιρὸν
περιγεγραμμένον χρόνοις ὡρισμένοις, ὕστερον δὲ
τοῦτον ἀναφανῆναι. διὰ τὸ τὸν Μωυσέως χρόνῳ
τε καὶ τόπῳ περιγεγράφθαι. τοῦτο ὅτι ψευδῶς
λέγουσιν, ἀποδείξω σαφώς, ἐκ μὲν τῶν Μωυσέως
οὐ δέκα “μόνας, ἀλλὰ μυρίας παρεχόμενος μαρ-
τυρίας, ὅπου τὸν νόμον αἰώνιόν φησιν. ἀκούετε
δὲ νῦν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐξόδου. “Καὶ ἔσται ἡ ἡμέρα
αὕτη ὑμῖν μνημόσυνον, καὶ ἑορτάσατε αὐτὴν

1 ἄττα Klimek; αὐτὰ Neumann.

408

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

God held certain things abominable, but now has
made them pure? For Moses, when he is laying
down the law concerning four-footed things, says
that whatsoever parteth the hoof and is cloven-footed
and cheweth the cud! is pure, but that which is not
of this sort is impure. Now if, after the vision of
Peter, the pig has now taken to chewing the cud,
then let us obey Peter; for it is in very truth a
miracle if, after the vision of Peter, it has taken to
that habit. But if he spoke falsely when he said
that he saw this revelation,—to use your own way of
speaking,—in the house of the tanner, why are we
so ready to believe him in such important matters?
Was it so hard a thing that Moses enjoined on
you when, besides the flesh of swine, he forbade
you to eat winged things and things that dwell in
the sea, and declared to you that besides the flesh
of swine these also had been cast out by God and
shown to be impure?

But why do I discuss at length these teachings of
theirs,? when we may easily see whether they have
any force? For they assert that God, after the
earlier law, appointed the second. For, say they,
the former arose with a view to a certain occasion
and was circumscribed by definite periods of time,
but this later law was revealed because the law of
Moses was circumscribed by time and place. That
they say this falsely I will clearly show by quoting
from the books of Moses not merely ten but ten
thousand passages as evidence, where he says that
the law is for all time. . Now listen to a passage
from Exodus: “And this day shall be unto you for a
memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord

1 Leviticus 11. 3. 2 7.e. of the Galilaeans.

409

320 B

9200

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

e \ , \ \ a /
ἑορτὴν κυρίῳ εἰς τὰς γενεὰς ὑμῶν. νόμιμον
/ \ A
αἰώνιον ἑορτάσατε αὐτήν. ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἡμέρας
a , a Hs lal n
τῆς πρώτης ἀφανιεῖτε ζύμην ἐκ τῶν οἰκιῶν
e Ae 59 1 lal ov /
ὑμῶν. .. .ἡ πολλῶν ETL τοιούτων παραλελειμ-
7 3 a / A
μένων, ἀφ ὧν τὸν νόμον τοῦ Μωνσέως αἰώνιον
ἐγὼ μὲν εἰπεῖν διὰ τὸ πλῆθος παρῃτησάμην'
ὑμεῖς δὲ ἐπιδείξατε, ποῦ τὸ παρὰ τοῦ ἸΙαύλου
μετὰ τοῦτο τολμηθὲν εἴρηται, ὅτε δὴ “τέλος
νόμου Χριστός." ποῦ τοῖς “Ἑβραίοις ὁ θεὸς
ἐπηγγείλατο νόμον ἕτερον παρὰ τὸν κείμενον ;
> a a , /
οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδαμοῦ, οὐδὲ τοῦ κειμένου διόρθωσις.3
7 \ Lal , ¥ ἐξ 3 /
ἄκουε yap τοῦ Μωυσέως πάλιν: “Οὐ προσθήσετε
ἐπὶ τὸ ῥῆμα, ὃ ἐγὼ ἐντέλλομαι ὑμῖν, καὶ οὐκ
3 A b] » 3 “Ὁ / \ 2 \
ἀφελεῖτε at αὐτοῦ. φυλάξασθε tas ἐντολὰς
aA an lal UA a
κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ ὑμῶν, ὅσα ἐγὼ ἐντέλλομαι ὑμῖν
> a ἃ
σήμερον᾽ ᾿ καὶ ““᾿Εαπικατάρατος πᾶς ὃς οὐκ ἐμμένει
a Ν \ a \ a
πᾶσιν." ὑμεῖς δὲ TO μὲν ἀφελεῖν καὶ προσθεῖναι
τοῖς γεγραμμένοις ἐν τῷ νόμῳ. μικρὸν ἐνομίσατε,
TO δὲ παραβῆναι τελείως αὐτὸν ἀνδρειότερον τῷ
παντὶ καὶ μεγαλοψυχότερον, οὐ πρὸς ἀλήθειαν,
ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ πᾶσι πιθανὸν βλέποντες. ..

1 Lacuna. Before πολλῶν Neumann would insert, in order
to connect, ἱκανὰς δὲ δοκῶ μοι χρήσεις ἤδη παρατεθεῖσθαι, ** But
I think I have now cited enough passages.”

2 διόρθωσις Klimek ; διόρθωσιν MSS., Neumann, with a verb,
e.g. ‘‘ promises,” understood.

1 Fxodus 12. 14-15; Julian went on to quote several
similar passages from the Old Testament, but these are
missing. 2 Romans 10. 4.

3 «The gods, not being ignorant of their future intentions,
do not haye to correct their errors,” ae Julian, Oration
5. 170A. 4. Deuteronomy 4.

419

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordinance forever; the first day shall ye
put away leaven out of your houses.” ...! Many
passages to the same effect are still left, but on
account of their number I refrain from citing them
to prove that the law of Moses was to last for all
time. But do you point out to me where there is
any statement by Moses of what was later on rashly
uttered by Paul, I mean that “Christ is the end
of the law.” 2 Where does God announce to the
Hebrews a second law besides that which was
established? Nowhere does it occur, not even a
revision of the established law.? For listen again
to the words of Moses: “ Ye shall not add unto the
word which I command you, neither shall ye dim-
inish aught from it. Keep the commandments of
the Lord your God which I command you this day.” 4
And ‘Cursed be every man who does not abide
by them all.”5 But you have thought it a slight
thing to diminish and to add to the things which
were written in the law; and to transgress it com-
pletely you have thought to be in every way more
manly and more high-spirited, because you do not
look to the truth but to that which will persuade all Ὁ
Wee

5 Deuteronomy 27, 26, ‘‘Cursed be he that confirmeth not
all the words of this law to do them.” Cf. Galatians 3. 10.

ὁ According to Cyril, Julian next discussed the letter of
the Apostles to the Christian converts, and, quoting Acts 15.
28, 29, which forbid the eating of meats offered to idols and
things strangled, says that this does not mean that the Holy
Ghost willed that the Mosaic law should be disregarded.
He ridicules Peter and calls him a hypocrite, convicted
by Paul of living now according to Greek, now Hebrew,
customs,

411

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

327 A Οὕτω δέ ἐστε δυστυχεῖς, ὥστε οὐδὲ τοῖς ὑπὸ

327 B

327 C

333 B

333 C

TOV ἀποστόλων ὑμῖν παραδεδομένοις. ἐμμενενή-
KATE καὶ ταῦτα δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον καὶ δυσσεβέ-
στερον ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιγινομένων ἐξειργάσθη. τὸν
γοῦν ᾿Ιησοῦν οὔτε ἸΤαῦλος ἐτόλμησεν εἰπεῖν θεὸν
οὔτε Ματθαῖος οὔτε Λουκᾶς οὔτε Μάρκος. ἀλλ᾽
ὁ χρηστὸς ᾿Ιωάννης, αἰσθόμενος ἤδη πολὺ πλῆθος
ἑαλωκὸς ἐν πολλαῖς τῶν ᾿ἰλληνίδων καὶ ᾿Ιταλιω-
τίδων πόλεων ὑπὸ ταύτης τῆς νόσου, ἀκούων δέ,
οἶμαι, καὶ τὰ μνήματα Πέτρου καὶ Ἰαύλου λάθρᾳ
μέν, ἀκούων δὲ ὅμως αὐτὰ θεραπευόμενα πρῶτος
ἐτόλμησεν εἰπεῖν. μικρὰ δὲ εἰπὼν περὶ ᾿Ιωάννου
τοῦ βαπτιστοῦ, πάλιν ἐπανάγων ἐπὶ τὸν ὑπ᾽
αὐτοῦ κηρυττόμενον λόγον “Καὶ ὁ λόγος ᾿ φησὶ
“σάρξ ἐγένετο καὶ ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν, τὸ δὲ
ὅπως οὐ λέγει αἰσχυνόμενος. οὐδαμοῦ δὲ αὐτὸν
οὔτε ᾿Ιησοῦν οὔτε Χριστόν, ἄχρις οὗ θεὸν καὶ
λόγον ἀποκαλεῖ, κλέπτων δὲ ὥσπερ ἠρέμα καὶ
λάθρᾳ τὰς ἀκοὰς ἡμῶν, ᾿Ιωάννην φησὶ τὸν βαπτι-
στὴν ὑπὲρ Χριστοῦ ᾿Ιησοῦ ταύτην ἐκθέσθαι τὴν
μαρτυρίαν, ὅτι ἄρ᾽ οὗτός ἐστιν, ὃν χρὴ πεπιστευ-
κέναι θεὸν εἶναι λόγον. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν τοῦτο περὶ
Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ φησιν ᾿Ιωάννης, οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἀντι-
λέγω. καίτοι δοκεῖ τισι τῶν δυσσεβῶν ἄλλον
μὲν ᾿Ιησοῦν εἶναι Χριστόν, ἄλλον δὲ τὸν ὑπὸ
᾿Ιωάννου κηρυττόμενον λόγον. οὐ μὴν οὕτως
ἔχει. ὃν γὰρ αὐτὸς εἶναί φησι θεὸν λόγον,
τοῦτον ὑπὸ ᾿Ιωάννου φησὶν ἐπιγνωσθῆναι τοῦ
βαπτιστοῦ" Χριστὸν ᾿Ιησοῦν ὄντα. σκοπεῖτε οὗν,
ὅπως εὐλαβῶς, ἠρέμα καὶ λεληθότως ἐπεισάγει

412

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

But you are so misguided that you have not even
remained faithful to the teachings that were handed
down to you by the apostles. And these also have
been altered, so as to be worse and more impious, by
those who came after. At any rate neither Paul nor
Matthew nor Luke nor Mark ventured to call Jesus
God. But the worthy John, since he perceived that
a great number of people in many of the towns of
Greece and Italy had already been infected by this
disease,t and because he heard, I suppose, that even
the tombs of Peter and Paul were being worshipped
—secretly, it is true, but still he did hear this,—he,
I say, was the first to venture to call Jesus God.
And after he had spoken briefly about John the
Baptist he referred again to the Word which he was
proclaiming, and said, “ And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us.” ? But how, he does not
say, because he was ashamed. Nowhere, however,
does he call him either Jesus or Christ, so long as he
calls him God and the Word, but as it were insen-
sibly and secretly he steals away our ears, and says
that John the Baptist bore this witness on behalf of
Jesus Christ, that in very truth he it is whom we
must believe to be God the Word. But that John
says this concerning Jesus Christ I for my part do
not deny. And yet certain of the impious think
that Jesus Christ is quite distinct from the Word
that was proclaimed by John. That however is not
the case. For he whom John himself calls God the
Word, this is he who, says he, was recognised by
John the Baptist to be Jesus Christ. Observe
accordingly how cautiously, how quietly and in-

1 For Christianity a disease cf. Oration 7. 229D, and Letter 58
To Libanius 4016. 2 John 1. 14.

413

333 Ὁ

990 Β

335 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τῷ δράματι τὸν κολοφῶνα τῆς ἀσεβείας οὕτω τέ
ἐστι πανοῦργος καὶ ἀπατεών, ὥστε αὖθις ἀνα-
δύεται προστιθείς: “Θεὸν οὐδεὶς é ἑώρακε πώποτε'
ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός, ὁ ὧν ἐν τοῖς κόλποις τοῦ πατρύς,
ἐκεῖνος ἐξηγήσατο." πότερον οὗν οὗτός ἐστιν ὃ
θεὸς λόγος σάρξ γενόμενος, ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός, ὁ
ὧν ἐν τοῖς κόλποις τοῦ πατρός ; καὶ εἰ μὲν αὐτός,
ὅνπερ οἶμαι, ἐθεάσασθε δήπουθεν καὶ ὑμεῖς θεόν.
“ἐσκήνωσε᾽᾽ γὰρ “ἐν ὑμῖν καὶ ἐθεάσασθε τὴν δόξαν
αὐτοῦ." τί οὖν ἐπιλέγεις, ὅτι θεὸν οὐδεὶς ἑώρακε
πώποτε; ἐθεάσασθε γὰρ ὑμεῖς εἰ καὶ μὴ τὸν
πατέρα θεόν, ἀλλὰ τὸν θεὸν λόγον. εἰ δὲ ἄλλος
ἐστὶν ὁ μονογενὴς υἱός, ἕτερος δὲ ὁ θεὸς λόγος, ὡς
ἐγώ τινων ἀκήκοα τῆς ὑμετέρας αἱρέσεως, ἔοικεν
οὐδὲ 0 Τωάννης αὐτὸ τολμᾶν ἔτι.

᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν τὸ κακὸν ἔλαβε παρὰ ᾿Τωάννου
τὴν ἀρχήν" ὅσα δὲ ὑμεῖς ἑξῆς προσευρήκατε, TOA-
λοὺς ἐπεισάγοντες τῷ πάλαι νεκρῷ τοὺς προσφά-
τους νεκρούς, τίς ἂν πρὸς ἀξίαν βδελύξαιτο; πάντα
ἐπληρώσατε τάφων καὶ μνημάτων, καίτοι οὐκ
εἴρηται παρ᾽ ὑμῖν οὐδαμοῦ τοῖς τάφοις προσκα-
λινδεῖσθαι καὶ περιέπειν αὐτούς. εἰς τοῦτο δὲ
προεληλύθατε μοχθηρίας, ὥστε οἴεσθαι δεῖν ὑπὲρ
τούτου μηδὲ τῶν γε ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ Ναζωραίου ῥημά-

1 John 1. 18. 2 Jon 1:10.

3 Yet in Letter 47. 434c, Julian reproaches the Alexan-
drians with worshipping as God the Word ‘‘one whom
neither you nor your fathers have ever seen, even Jesus,”

4 2,6. that Jesus was God.

5 For the collection of the ‘‘ bones and skulls of criminals,”
and the apotheosis of the martyrs as it struck a contemporary
pagan, see Eunapius, Lives p. 424 (Loeb edition). Julian, in

414

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

sensibly he introduces into the drama the crowning
word of his impiety; and he is so rascally and
deceitful that he rears his head once more to add,
‘““No man hath seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father,
he hath declared him.” ! Then is this only begotten
Son which is in the bosom of the Father the God
who is the Word and became flesh? And if, as I
think, it is indeed he, you also have certainly beheld
God. For “He dwelt among you, and ye beheld
his glory.”? Why then do you add to this that
“No man hath seen God at any time’? For ye
have indeed seen, if not God the Father, still God
who is the Word.? But if the only begotten Son is
one person and the God who is the Word another,
as 1 have heard from certain of your sect, then
it appears that not even John made that rash
statement.4

However this evil doctrine did originate with
John; but who could detest as they deserve all
those doctrines that you have invented as a sequel,
while you keep adding many corpses newly dead to
the corpse of long ago?® You have filled the whole
world with tombs and sepulchres, and yet in your
scriptures it is nowhere said that you must grovel
among tombs® and paythem honour. But you have
gone so far in iniquity that you think you need not
listen even to the words of Jesus of Nazareth on this

Letter 22. 429d, commends the Christian care of graves; here
he ridicules the veneration of the relics of the martyrs,
which was peculiarly Christian and offensive to pagans.

6 For this phrase, derived from Plato, Phaedo 81p, cf.
Misopogon 344A. Eunapius, Lives Ὁ. 424 προσεκαλινδοῦντο
τοῖς μνήμασι, of the Christian worship at the graves of the
martyrs.

415

990 D

309 αὶ

340 A

343 C

343 D

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

των ἀκούειν. ἀκούετε οὖν, ἅ φησιν ἐκεῖνος περὶ
τῶν μνημάτων' τ Οὐαὶ ὑμῖν, γραμματεῖς καὶ Φαρι-
σαῖοι ὑποκριταί, ὅτι παρομοιάζετε τάφοις κεκονι-
αμένοις" ἔξωθεν ὁ ὸ τάφος φαίνεται ὡραῖος, ἔσωθεν
δὲ γέμει ὀστέων νεκρῶν καὶ πάσης ἀκαθαρσίας."
εἰ τοίνυν ἀκαθαρσίας ᾿Ιησοῦς ἔφη πλήρεις εἶναι
τοὺς τάφους, πῶς ὑμεῖς ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐπικαλεῖσθε
TOV θεν . fe.

Τούτων οὖν οὕτως ἐχόντων, ὑμεῖς ὑπὲρ τίνος
προσκαλινδεῖσθε τοῖς μνήμασι ; ἀκοῦσαι βούλεσθε
τὴν αἰτίαν ; οὐκ ἐγὼ φαίην ἄν, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Ησαΐας ὃ
προφήτης. “ἢν τοῖς μνήμασι καὶ ἐν τοῖς σπηλαί-
ols κοιμῶνται δι’ ἐνύπνια." σκοπεῖτε οὗν, ὅπως
παλαιὸν ἣν τοῦτο τοῖς Ιουδαίοις "τῆς μαγγανείας
τὸ ἔργον, ἐγκαθεύδειν τοῖς μνήμασιν ἐνυπνίων
χάριν. ὃ δὴ καὶ τοὺς ἀποστόλους ὑμῶν εἰκός
ἐστι μετὰ τὴν τοῦ διδασκάλου τελευτὴν ἐπιτηδεύ-
σαντας ὑμῖν τε ἐξ ἀρχῆς παραδοῦναι τοῖς πρώ-
τοις πεπιστευκόσι, καὶ τεχυ"κώτερον ὑμῶν αὐτοὺς
μαγγανεῦσαι, τοῖς δὲ μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς ἀποδεῖξαι
δημοσίᾳ τῆς μαγγανείας ταύτης καὶ βδελυρίας
τὰ OURO PE:

Ὑμεῖς δέ, ἃ μὲν 0 θεὸς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐβδελύξατο
καὶ διὰ Μωυσέως καὶ τῶν προφητῶν; ἐπιτηδεύετε,"
προσάγειν δὲ ἱερεῖα βωμῷ καὶ θύειν παρῃτήσασθε.
πῦρ γάρ, φασίν, οὐ κάτεισιν, ὥσπερ ἐπὶ Μωυσέως
τὰς θυσίας ἀναλίσκον. ἅπαξ τοῦτο ἐπὶ Μωυσέως

1 Matthew 23. 27.
* According to Cyril, Julian quoted Matthew 8. 21, 22:
‘Let the dead bury their dead,” to prove that Christ had no
respect for graves.

416

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

matter. Listen then to what he says about sepul-
chres: ‘*Woe unto you, scribes and _ Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres ;
outward the tomb appears beautiful, but within it is
full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness.” 1
If, then, Jesus said that sepulchres are full of unclean-
ness, how can you invoke God at them? . . .3

_Therefore, since this is so, why do you grovel
among tombs? Do you wish to hear the reason?
It is not I who will tell you, but the prophet Isaiah :
They lodge among tombs and in caves for the sake
of dream visions.” ὃ. You observe, then, how ancient
among the Jews was this work of witchcraft, namely,
sleeping among tombs for the sake of dream visions.
And indeed it is likely that your apostles, after their
teacher's death, practised this and handed it down
to you from the beginning, I mean to those who first
adopted your faith, and that they themselves per-
formed their spells more skilfully than you do, and
displayed openly to those who came after them the
places in which they performed this witchcraft and
abomination.

But you, though you practise that which God
from the first abhorred, as he showed through Moses
and the prophets, have refused nevertheless to offer
victims at the altar, and to sacrifice. ‘Yes,’ say
the Galilaeans, “because fire will not descend to
consume the sacrifices as in the case of Moses.”
Only once, I answer, did this happen in the case of

3 In part from Isaiah 65. 4; the literal meaning of the
Hebrew is ‘‘that sit in graves and pass the night in secret
places,” a reference to incubation for the sake of dream
oracles, a Hellenic custom. Julian professes to believe that
this practice, which Isaiah abhorred, was kept up by the
Christians.

417

VOL, ΤΙ], EE

940"

347 A

347 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

¢€ na
ἐγένετο καὶ ἐπὶ Ἡλίου τοῦ Θεσβίτου πάλιν
\ / la)
μετὰ πολλοὺς χρόνους. ἐπεί, ὅτι ye πῦρ ἐπείσ-
ακτον αὐτὸς 0 Μωυσῆς εἰσφέρειν οἴεται χρῆναι καὶ
᾿Αβραὰμ ὁ πατριάρχης ἔτι πρὸ τούτου, δηλώσω
διὰ βραχέων. ..
Καὶ οὐ τοῦτο μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν υἱῶν ᾿Αδὰμ
τὰ Ν n θ an ὃ ὃ 4 ςς Ἢ Lo e θ \ 39
ἀπαρχὰς τῷ θεῴ διδόντων, πεῖδεν ὁ θεὸς
\ ic 2 NOES. XD \ an , 3 A 3 \
φησὶν “émi”ABer καὶ ἐπὶ τοῖς δώροις αὐτοῦ. ἐπὶ
δὲ Κάιν καὶ ἐπὶ ταῖς θυσίαις αὐτοῦ οὐ προσέσχε.
\ iA /
καὶ ἐλύπησε τὸν Kaw λίαν, καὶ συνέπεσε τὸ πρό-
rn 5 id a
σωπον αὐτοῦ. Kal εἶπε κύριος ὁ θεὸς τῷ Kary

“ 7 / > 7 Ν “4 / 7
Iva Ti περίλυπος ἐγένου, καὶ WA TL συνέπεσε

τὸ πρόσωπόν σου; οὐκ ἐὰν ὀρθῶς προσενέγκῃς,
ὀρθῶς δὲ μὴ διέλῃς, ἥμαρτες ; ; ” ἀκοῦσαι οὖν ἐπι-
ποθεῖτε, τίνες ἦσαν αὐτῶν αἱ προσφοραί; ; “Kai
ἐγένετο μεθ’ ἡμέρας, ἀνήνεγκε Kaw ἀπὸ τῶν
καρπῶν τῆς γῆς θυσίαν τῷ κυρίῳ. καὶ "Αβελ
"7 \ 3 Ν > Ν nN / A

ἤνεγκε καὶ αὐτὸς ATO τῶν πρωτοτόκων τῶν προ-
βάτων καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν στεάτων αὐτῶν. vai, φασίν,
οὐ τὴν θυσίαν, ἀλλὰ τὴν διαίρεσιν ἐμέμψατο
πρὸς Kau εἰπών" “Οὐκ ἐὰν ὀρθῶς προσενέγκῃς,
ὀρθῶς δὲ μὴ διέλῃς, ἥμαρτες ; Ἴ τοῦτο ἔφη τις
πρὸς ἐμὲ τῶν πάνυ σοφῶν ἐ ἐπισκόπων'᾽ ὁ δὲ ἡ ἠπάτα
μὲν εαυτὸν πρῶτον, ELTA καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους. ἢ γὰρ
διαίρεσις μεμπτὴ κατὰ τίνα τρόπον ἦν, ἀπαιτού-
μενος, οὐκ εἶχεν ὅπως διεξέλθῃη, οὐδέ ὅπως πρὸς
ἐμὲ ψυχρολογήσῃ.: βλέπων δὲ αὐτὸν ἐξαπορού-

1 ψυχρολογήσῃ Klimek ; ψυχρολογήσειε Neumann.

1 Leviticus 9. 24. 51 Kings 18. 38.
8 Cyril says that Julian told the story of the interrupted
sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham from Crenesis 22.

418

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

Moses ;+ and again after many years in the case of
Elijah the Tishbite.2 For I will prove in afew words
that Moses himself thought that it was necessary to
bring fire from outside for the sacrifice, and even
before him, Abraham the patriarch as well... 3

And this is not the only instance, but when the
sons of Adam also offered firstfruits to God, the
Scripture says, ‘And the Lord had respect unto
Abel and to his offerings; but unto Cain and to his
offerings he had not respect. And Cain was very
wroth, and his countenance fell. And the Lord
God said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and
why is thy countenance fallen? Is it not so—if
thou offerest rightly, but dost not cut in pieces
rightly, thou hast sinned?”’4 Do you then desire
to hear also what were their offerings? “And at
the end of days it came to pass that Cain brought
of the fruits of the ground an offering unto the Lord.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his
flock and of the fat thereof.” ° You see, say the
Galilaeans, it was not the sacrifice but the division
thereof that God disapproved when he said to Cain,
“If thou offerest rightly, but dost not cut in pieces
rightly, hast thou not sinned?” . This is what one
of your most learned bishops ® told me. But in the
first place he was deceiving himself and then other
men also. For when I asked him in what way the
division was blameworthy he did not know how to
get out of it, or how to make me even a frigid
explanation. And when I saw that he was greatly

4 Genesis 4. 4-7. The Hebrew text of the last sentence is
corrupt, and its meaning isdisputed. Skinner, ('enesis, Ὁ. 106,
calls the Septuagint version, followed by Julian, fantastic.

5 Genesis 4. 3-4.

6 This was, perhaps, Aetius, for whom see p. 289.

419
EE 2

347 Ὁ

351 A

351 B

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

μενον, “ Αὐτὸ τοῦτο," εἶπον “O σὺ λέγεις, ὁ θεὸς
ὀρθῶς ἐ ἐμέμψατο. τὸ μὲν γὰρ τῆς προθυμίας ἴ ἴσον
ἣν ἀπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων, ὅ ὅτι δῶρα ὑπέλαβον χρῆναι καὶ
θυσίας ἀναφέρειν ἀμφότεροι τῷ θεῷ. περὶ δὲ τὴν
διαίρεσιν ὁ μὲν ἔτυχεν, ὁ ὁ δὲ ἥμαρτε τοῦ σκοποῦ.
πῶς καὶ τίνα τρόπον; ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς
ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ἔμψυχα, τὰ δὲ ἄψυχα, τιμιώ-
τερα δὲ τῶν ἀψύχων ἐστὶ τὰ ἔμψυχα τῷ ζῶντι
καὶ ζωῆς αἰτίῳ θεῷ, καθὸ καὶ ζωῆς μετείληφε καὶ
ψυχῆς οἰκειοτέρας 1---διὰ τοῦτο τῷ τελείαν προσ-
άγοντι θυσίαν ὁ θεὸς ἐπηυφράνθη.᾽

Νυνὶ δὲ ἐπαναληπτέον ἐστί μοι πρὸς αὐτούς"
διὰ τί γὰρ οὐχὶ περιτέμνεσθε ; ike Παῦλος," φασίν,

“εἶπε περιτομὴν καρδίας, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ τῆς σαρκὸς
τ πιστεύσαντι © τῷ ᾿Αβραάμ. οὐ μὴν ἔτι
τὰ κατὰ σάρκα ἔφη, καὶ δεῖ πιστεῦσαι τοῖς
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ Uérpou κηρυττομένοις λόγοις οὐκ
ἀσεβέσιν." ἄκουε δὲ πάλιν, ὅτι τὴν κατὰ σάρκα
περιτομὴν εἰς διαθήκην ὁ θεὸς λέγεται δοῦναι καὶ
εἰς σημεῖον τῷ ᾿Αβραάμ' “Καὶ αὕτη ἡ διαθήκη,
ἣν διατηρήσεις ἀ ἀνὰ μέσον ἐμοῦ καὶ σοῦ ὃ καὶ ἀνὰ
μέσον τοῦ σπέρματός σου εἰς τὰς γενεὰς ὑμῶν.
καὶ ᾿ περιτμηθήσεσθε τὴν σάρκα τῆς ἀκροβυστίας
ὑμῶν, καὶ ἔσται ἐν σημείῳ διαθήκης ἀνὰ μέσον
ἐμοῦ καὶ σοῦ καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον ἐμοῦ καὶ τοῦ σπέρ-
ματός σου." . .. ὅτε τοίνυν, ὅτι προσήκει τηρεῖν

f οἰκειοτέρας Asmus ; οἰκειότερα Neumann.
2 πιστεύσαντι Neumann suggests ; καὶ τοῦτο εἶναι MSS.
3 gov Wright ; ὑμῶν Neumann.

1 An allusion to Romans 4. 11-12 and 2. 29.

420

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

embarrassed, I said, “God rightly disapproved the
thing you speak of. For the zeal of the two men
was equal, in that they both thought that they
ought to offer up gifts and sacrifices to God. But
in the matter of their division one of them hit the
mark and the other fell short of it. How, and in
what manner? Why, since of things on the earth
some have life and others are lifeless, and those that
have life are more precious than those that are life-
less to the living God who is also the cause of life,
inasmuch as they also have a share of life and have
a soul more akin to his—for this reason God was
more graciously inclined to him who offered a perfect
sacrifice.”

Now i must take up this other point and ask
them, Why, pray, do you not practise circumcision ?
* Paul,” they answer, “said that circumcision of the
heart but not of the flesh was granted unto Abraham
because he believed.t_ Nay it was not now of the flesh
that he spoke, and we ought to believe the pious
words that were proclaimed by him and by Peter.”
On the other hand hear again that God is said to
have given circumcision of the flesh to Abraham
for a covenant and a sign: “ This is my covenant
which ye shall keep, between me and thee and
thy seed after thee in their generations. Ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall
be in token of a covenant betwixt me and thee
and betwixt me and thy seed.” ...% Therefore
when He® has undoubtedly taught that it is proper

2 A paraphrase of Genesis 17. 10-11; according to Cyril,
Julian quoted Matthew 5. 17, 19, to prove that Christ did not
come to destroy the law.

$07, δὲ Christ:

A421

351 D
354 A

354 Ὁ
356 C

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

TOV νόμον, ἀναμφισβητήτως προστέταχε καὶ τοῖς
μίαν παραβαίνουσιν ἐντολὴν ἐπήρτησε δίκας,
ὑμεῖς, οἱ συλλήβδην ἁπάσας παραβεβηκότες,
ὁποῖον εὑρήσετε τῆς ἀπολογίας τὸν τρόπον; ἢ
γὰρ ψευδοεπήσει ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, ἤγουν ὑμεῖς πάντη
καὶ πάντως οὐ νομοφύλακες. “Ἢ περιτομὴ ἔσται
περὶ τὴν σάρκα σου," ὁ Μωυσῆς φησι. παρα-
κούσαντες τούτου “Tas καρδίας" pact " Tept-

τεμνόμεθα.᾽" πάνυ γε; οὐδεὶς γὰρ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν
κακοῦργος, οὐδεὶς μοχθηρός" οὕτω περιτέμνεσθε
τὰς καρδίας. ““Τηρεῖν ἄξυμα καὶ ποιεῖν τὸ πάσχα

> / ” ἧς roe \ [4 n \ “
οὐ δυνάμεθα᾽᾽ φασίν: “ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν γὰρ ἅπαξ
’ 7 γ Ἢ 9 n 5 5 3 / b} fe
ἐτύθη Χριστός. καλῶς" εἶτα ἐκώλυσεν ἐσθίειν
7 / \ \ ΄ὔ i n
atuua; καίτοι, μὰ τοὺς θεούς, εἷς εἰμι. τῶν
/ 2 / \ \
ἐκτρεπομένων συνεορτάζειν Lovdatois, ἀεὶ δὲ προσ-
ἴω x \ ¢ \ Neo & A 2 /
κυνῶν τὸν θεὸν ABpaay καὶ ᾿Ισαὰκ καὶ ᾿Ιακώβ,
Ἃ an / ς fa
οἱ ὄντες αὐτοὶ Χαλδαῖοι, γένους ἱεροῦ καὶ θεουρ-
aA \ \ 5 5 if
γικοῦ, τὴν μὲν περιτομὴν ἔμαθον Αἰγυπτίοις
2 / 2 / \ / A 3 \ \
ἐπιξενωθέντες, ἐσεβάσθησαν δὲ θεόν, ὃς ἐμοὶ καὶ
τοῖς αὐτόν, ὥσπερ ᾿Α βραὰμ ἔσεβε, σεβομένοις
εὐμενὴς ἣν, μέγας τε ὧν πάνυ καὶ δυνατός, ὑμῖν
δὲ οὐδὲν προσήκων. οὐδὲ γὰρ τὸν ᾿Αβραὰμ
a / / nN
μιμεῖσθε, βωμούς τε ἐγείροντες αὐτῷ καὶ οἰκοδο-
lal e ἡ
μοῦντες θυσιαστήρια καὶ θεραπεύοντες ὥσπερ
Tal a /
ἐκεῖνος ταῖς ἱερουργίαις. ἔθυε μὲν γὰρ ᾿Αβραάμ,
ὥσπερ καὶ ἡμεῖς, ἀεὶ καὶ συνεχῶς. ἐχρῆτο δὲ
μαντικῇ τῇ τῶν διᾳαττόντων ἄστρων" ᾿ὡλληνικὸν
ἴσως καὶ τοῦτο. οἰωνίζετο δὲ μειζόνως. ἀλλὰ

1 Cf. Genests 17. 18.

2 This is a sneer rather than an argument.

3 Cf. Letter 20, To Theodorus, 4544, where Julian says that
the Jewish god ‘‘is worshipped by us under other names.”

422

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

to observe the law, and threatened with punish-
ment those who transgress one commandment, what
manner of defending yourselves will you devise,
you who have transgressed them all without ex-
ception? For either Jesus will be found to speak
falsely, or rather you will be found in all respects
and in every way to have failed to preserve the law.
“The circumcision shall be of thy flesh,’ says Moses. !
But the Galilaeans do not heed him, and they say:
‘‘We circumcise our hearts.”’ By all means. For there
is among you no evildoer, no sinner; so thoroughly
do you circumcise your hearts.2 They say: “We
cannot observe the rule of unleavened bread or keep
the Passover; for on our behalf Christ was sacrificed
once and for all.” Very well! Then did he forbid
you to eat unleavened bread? And yet, I call
the gods to witness, | am one of those who avoid
keeping their festivals with the Jews; but neverthe-
less I revere always the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob;* who being themselves Chaldaeans, of a
sacred race, skilled in theurgy, had learned the
practice of circumcision while they sojourned as
strangers with the Egyptians. And they revered a
God who was ever gracious to me and to those who
worshipped him as Abraham did, for he is a very
great and powerful God, but he has nothing to do
with you. For you do not imitate Abraham by
erecting altars to him, or building altars of sacrifice
and worshipping him as Abraham did, with sacrificial
offerings. For Abraham used to sacrifice even as we
Hellenes do, always and continually. And he used
the method of divination from shooting stars. -
Probably this also is an Hellenic custom. But for
higher things he augured from the flight of birds.

423

356 D

357 A

358 ©

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

\ \ Pend nA et - i
Kal τὸν ἐπίτροπον τῆς οἰκίας εἶχε συμβολικόν.
>] δὲ 5 “-“ ς a 2 \ ὃ aS 1 na \
εἰ δὲ ἀπιστεῖ τις ὑμῶν, αὐτὰ δείξει: σαφῶς τὰ
ΙΝ Y » / A. te \ \ Ne ata
ὑπερ τούτων εἰρημένα Μωυσῇ" “μετὰ δὲ τὰ ῥή-
A 5 7 / / \ ς \
ματα ταῦτα ἐγενήθη κυρίου λόγος πρὸς ᾿Αβραὰμ
/ 3 «ς » an / \ Lot 3 /
λέγων ἐν οράματι τῆς νυκτός" μὴ φοβοῦ," ABpadp,
Ν ¢ / € J
ἐγὼ ὑπερασπίξω cov. ὁ μισθός σου πολὺς ἔσται
id / Ν ς » / /
σφόδρα. λέγει δὲ “Αβραάμ' δέσποτα, Ti μοι
, ON nee 3 Ἄϊῳ " ε \: ἐν
δώσεις; ἐγὼ δὲ ἀπολύομαι ἄτεκνος, ὁ δὲ. υἱὸς
\ aA 3 A 7
Μασὲκ τῆς οἰκογενοῦς μου 5 κληρονομήσει με. καὶ
»2Ὰ \ a he at 4 \ 248 “ A
εὐθὺς φωνὴ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐγένετο πρὸς αὐτὸν λέγοντος
> if δ 3 39 AN 3 /
οὐ κληρονομῆσει σε οὗτος, ANN ὃς ἐξελεύσεται
A e HX
ἐκ σοῦ, οὗτος κληρονομήσει ae. ἐξήγαγε δὲ
b ) \ \ ἊΝ 3." On, 3 7 3 Ἂς > \
αὐτὸν καὶ εἶπεν αὐτῷ" ἀνάβλεψον εἰς TOV οὐρανὸν
vi / \ /
καὶ ἀρίθμησον τοὺς ἀστέρας, εἰ δυνήσῃ ἐξαριθ-
- 9 ΄ ἵν “ / \ /
μῆσαι αὐτούς. καὶ εἶπεν" οὕτως ἔσται TO σπέρμα
Ν 3 if ε \ aA n \ 5)
σου. καὶ ἐπίστευσεν ᾿Αβραὰμ τῷ θεῷ καὶ ἐλο-
/ n 3
γίσθη αὐτῷ εἰς δικαιοσύνην."
/ la) A
Εἴπατε ἐνταῦθα μοι τοῦ χάριν ἐξήγαγεν αὐτὸν
\ \ » / ΄ ς / 7
καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας ἐδείκνυεν ὁ χρηματίζων ἄγγελος
xX / > \ , / J
ἢ θεός ; ov yap ἐγίνωσκεν ἔνδον ὦν, ὅσον TL TO
A Ui lal 7
πλῆθός ἐστι τῶν νύκτωρ ἀεὶ φαινομένων Kal
/ 3 J ’ 5S Tad
μαρμαρυσσόντων ἀστέρων; ἀλλ᾽, οἶμαι, δεῖξαι
\ / la! , ¢/ la
τοὺς διάττοντας αὐτῷ βουλόμενος, ἵνα τῶν ῥη-
an 7 \ ie
μάτων ἐναργῆ πίστιν παράσχηται τὴν πάντα
7 Ν lal A lal
Kpalvovoav Kal ἐπικυροῦσαν οὐρανοῦ ψῆφον.
Ὡ \ / e / id 3 \ /
ὅπως δὲ μή TLS ὑπολάβῃ βίαιον εἶναι THY τοιαύ-

1 δείξει Klimek ; δείξω Neumann.
2 οὗτος Δαμασκὸς ᾿λίεζερ which follow now in the Septua-

gint are omitted by Julian, who seems to have quoted this
passage from memory.

424

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

And he possessed also a steward of his house who set
signs for himself. And if one of you doubts this, the
very words which were uttered by Moses concerning
it will show him clearly: “ After these sayings the
word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision of
the night, saying, Fear not, Abraham: I am thy
shield. Thy reward shall be exceeding great. And
Abraham said, Lord God what wilt thou give me?
For I go childless, and the son of Masek the slave
woman will be my heir. And straightway the word
of the Lord came unto him saying, This man shall
not be thine heir: but he that shall come forth
from thee shall be thine heir. And he brought him
forth and said unto him, Look now toward heaven,
and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them:
and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And
Abraham believed in the Lord: and it was counted
to him for righteousness.” ?

Tell me now why he who dealt with him, whether
angel or God, brought him forth and showed him
the stars? For while still within the house did he
not know how great is the multitude of the stars
that at night are always visible and shining? But
I think it was because he wished to show him the
shooting stars, so that as a visible pledge of his
words he might offer to Abraham the decision of the
heavens that fulfills and sanctions all things. And
lest any man should think that such an interpre-

1 Genesis 24. 2, 10, 43, foll. This was Eleazar. Maimonides
the Jewish jurist, writing in the twelfth century, says, ‘‘One
who sets signs for himself . . . like Eleazar the servant of
Abraham,” with reference to Genesis 24. 14. The epithet
συμβολικὸς is probably a translation of the Hebrew. Iam
indebted for this note to Professor Margoliouth.

2 Partly paraphrased from Genesis 15. 1-6.

425

358 D

358 Th

THE EMPEROR JULIAN

τὴν ἐξήγησιν, ἐφεξῆς ὅσα πρόσκειται παραθεὶς
αὐτῷ πιστώσομαι. γέγραπται γὰρ ἑξῆς: ‘ Kime
δὲ “πρὸς αὐτόν" ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ θεὸς ὁ ἐξαγαγών σε ἐκ
χώρας Χαλδαίων, ἃ ὥστε δοῦναί σοι τὴν γῆν ταύτην
κληρονομῆσαι αὐτήν. εἶπε δέ" δέσποτα κύριε,
κατὰ τί γνώσομαι, ὅτι κληρονομήσω αὐτήν ; εἶπε
δὲ αὐτῷ: λάβε μοι δάμαλιν τριετίζουσαν καὶ
αἶγα τριετίζουσαν καὶ κριὸν τριετίζοντα καὶ
τρυγόνα καὶ περιστεράν. ἔλαβε δὲ αὐτῷ πάντα
ταῦτα καὶ διεῖλεν αὐτὰ μέσα' καὶ ἔθηκεν αὐτὰ
ἀντιπρόσωπα ἀλλήλοις" τὰ δὲ ὄρνεα οὐ διεῖλε.
κατέβη δὲ ὄρνεα ἐπὶ τὰ διχοτομήματα καὶ συνε-
κάθισεν αὐτοῖς ᾿Αβραάμ.

Τὴν τοῦ φανέντος ἀγγέλου πρόρρησιν ἤτοι
θεοῦ διὰ τῆς οἰωνιστικῆς ὁρᾶτε κρατυνομένην,
οὐχ, ὥσπερ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν, ἐκ παρέργου, μετὰ θυσιῶν
δὲ τῆς μαντείας “ἐπιτελουμένης ; φησὶ δέ, ὅτι
τῇ τῶν οἰωνῶν ἐπιπτήσει βεβαίαν ἔδειξε τὴν
ἐπαγγελίαν. ἀποδέχεται δὲ τὴν πίστιν ᾿Αβραὰμ
προσεπάγων, ὅτι ἀληθείας ἄνευ πίστις ἠλιθιότης
ἔοικέ τις εἶναι καὶ ἐμβροντησία. τὴν δὲ ἀλήθειαν
οὐκ ἔνεστιν ἰδεῖν ἐκ ψιλοῦ ῥήματος, ἀλλὰ χρή τι
καὶ παρακολουθῆσαι τοῖς λόγοις ἐναργὲς σημεῖον,
ὃ πιστώσεται γενόμενον τὴν εἰς τὸ μέλλον πε-
ποιημένην προαγόρευσιν. i

I] ρόφασις v ὑμῖν τῆς ἔν γε τούτῳ ῥᾳστώνης περιλέ-
λειπται μία, τὸ μὴ ἐξεῖναι θύειν ἔξω γεγονόσι
τῶν ᾿ΙἹεροσολύμων, καίτοι “ΗΠλίου τεθυκότος ἐν τῷ
Καρμηλίῳ, καὶ οὐκ ἔν γε τῇ ἁγίᾳ πόλει.

1 Cyril says that Julian then asserted that he himself had

- been instructed by omens from birds that he would sit on the

throne.

426

AGAINST THE GALILAEANS

tation is forced, I will convince him by adding what
comes next to the above passage. For it is written
next: “And he said unto him, [ am the Lord that
brought thee out of the land of the Chaldees, to give
thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord God,
whereby shall I know that [ shall inherit it? And
he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years
old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of
three years old, and a turtle-dove and a pigeon.
And he took unto him all these, and divided them
in the midst, and laid each piece one against another ;
but the birds divided he not. And the fowls came
down upon the divided carcases, and Abraham sat
down among them.”

You see how the announcement of the angel or
god who had appeared was strengthened by means
of the augury from birds, and how the prophecy was
completed, not at haphazard as happens with you,
but with the accompaniment of sacrifices? More-
over he says that by the flocking together of the
birds he showed that his message was true. And
Abraham accepted the pledge, and moreover declared
that a pledge that lacked truth seemed to be mere
folly and imbecility. But it is not possible to behold
the truth from speech alone, but some clear sign
must follow on what has been said, a sign that by
its appearance shall guarantee the prophecy that
has been made concerning the future. .. .!

However, for your indolence in this matter there
remains for you one single excuse, namely, that you
are not permitted to sacrifice if you are outside
Jerusalem, though for that matter Elijah sacrificed
on Mount Carmel, and not in the holy city.?

21 Kings 18, 19.
427

FRAGMENTA!

1

a ἣν Qn
τοιαῦτα πολλάκις ἐγίνετο καὶ γίνεται, καὶ TOS
“ / an
ταῦτα συντελείας σημεῖα ; 3

2

Μωυσῆς ἡμέρας τεσσαράκοντα νηστεύσας ἔλαβε
τὸν νόμον, Ἡλίας δὲ τοσαύτας νηστεύσας θείων
αὐτοψιῶν ἔτυχεν. ᾿Ιησοῦς δὲ τί μετὰ τοσαύτην
νηστείαν ἔλαβεν ; ὃ

3

a \ / na € nr \ .} a
καὶ πῶς εἰς TO πτερύγιον τοῦ ἱεροῦ τὸν Ἰησοῦν
a 2 ‘2
ἀνήγαγεν ὄντα ἐν TH ἐρήμῳ ;

1 Only the fragments which preserve the actual words of
Julian are here given; several of Neumann’s are therefore
omitted.

2 Neumann frag. 3; from Julian, Book 2, derived from
Cyril, Book 12. Quoted by Theodorus, bishop of Mopsuestia,
in his Commentary on the New Testament. Neumann
thinks that Theodorus probably wrote a refutation of Julian
at Antioch about 378 a.p.

428

FRAGMENTS

1

Such things! have often happened and _ still
happen, and how can these be signs of the end of
the world ? 2

2

Moses after fasting forty days received the law,?
and Elijah, after fasting for the same period, was
granted to see God face to face.4 But what did
Jesus receive, after a fast of the same length? ὅ

9

And how could he lead Jesus to the pinnacle of
the Temple when Jesus was in the wilderness ἢ ®

1 2,0, wars, famines, etc.

2 Cf. Matthew 24, 3-14.
3 Kxodus 31. 18. * VT Kings 19. Θὲ
5 Matthew 4. 2, foll. 8 Matthew 4. 5.

3 Neumann frag. 4; from the same source as 1.
4 Neumann frag. 6. From the same source as 1 and 2.

429

THE EMPEROR JULIAN
4

᾿Αλλὰ καὶ τοιαῦτα προσεύχεται ὁ ᾿Ιησοῦς, οἷα
ἄνθρωπος ἄθλιος συμφορὰν φέρειν εὐκόλως οὐ
δυνάμενος, καὶ ὑπ᾽ ἀγγέλου θεὸς ὧν ἐνισχύεται. τίς
δὲ καὶ ἀνήγγειλέ σοι, Λουκᾶ, περὶ τοῦ ἀγγέλου,
εἰ καὶ γέγονε τοῦτο ; οὐδὲ οἱ τότε παρόντες εὐχο-
μένῳ κατιδεῖν οἷοί τε ἦσαν" ἐκοιμῶντο γάρ. διὸ
καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς προσευχῆς ἐλθὼν εὗρεν αὐτοὺς κοι-
μωμένους ἀπὸ τῆς λύπης καὶ εἶπε' “Τ καθεύδετε ;
ἀναστάντες προσεύχεσθε" καὶ τὰ ἑξῆς" εἶτα" “ Καὶ
ἔτι αὐτοῦ τοῦτο λαλοῦντος, ἰδοὺ ὄχλος πολὺς καὶ
᾿Ιούδας.᾽ διὸ οὐδὲ ἔγραψεν ᾿Ιωάννης, οὐδὲ γὰρ
εἶδε.1

5

᾿Ακούσατε καλοῦ Kal πολιτικοῦ παραγγέλματος.
““Ἰ]ωλήσατε τὰ ὑπάρχοντα καὶ δότε πτωχοῖς"
ποιήσατε ἑαυτοῖς βαλάντια μὴ παλαιούμενα."
ταύτης τίς εἰπεῖν ἔχει πολιτικωτέραν τῆς ἐντο-
λῆς ; εἰ γὰρ πάντες σοι πεισθεῖεν, τίς ὁ ὠνησόμε-
νος; ἐπαινεῖ τίς ταύτην τὴν διδασκαλίαν, ἧς
κρατυνθείσης οὐ πόλις, οὐκ ἔθνος, οὐκ οἰκία μία
συστήσεται; πῶς γὰρ πραθέντων ἁπάντων οἶκος
ἔντιμος εἶναι δύναταί τις ἢ οἰκία ; τὸ δέ, ὅτι
πάντων ὁμοῦ τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει πιπρασκομένων,
οὐκ ἂν εὑρεθεῖεν οἱ ἀγοράζοντες, φανερόν ἐστι
καὶ σιωττώμενον.

1 Neumann frag. 7. From the same source as 3.
2 Neumann, frag. 12. From Cyril, Book 18, quoted by
Photius.

430

FRAGMENTS
4

Furthermore, Jesus prays in such language as
would be used by a pitiful wretch who cannot bear
misfortune with serenity, and though he is a god
is reassured by an angel. And who told you, Luke,
the story of the angel, if indeed this ever happened ?
For those who were there when he prayed could
not see the angel; for they were asleep. Therefore
when Jesus came from his prayer he found them
fallen asleep from their grief and he said: “ Why
do yesleep? Arise and pray,” and so forth. And
then, “And while he was yet speaking, behold a
multitude and «1685. That is why John did not
write about the angel, for neither did he see it.

5

Listen to a fine statesmanlike piece of advice:
“Sell that ye have and give to the poor; provide
yourselves with bags which wax not old.’? Can
anyone quote a more statesmanlike ordinance
than this? For if all men were to obey you who
would there be to buy? Can anyone praise this
teaching when, if it be carried out, no city, no
nation, not a single family will hold together? For,
if everything has been sold, how can any house or
family be of any value? Moreover the fact that
if everything in the city were being sold at once
there would be no one to trade is obvious, without
being mentioned.

1 Luke 22. 42-47.
2 Luke 12. 33.

431

THE EMPEROR JULIAN
6

Il és 2pe τὴν ἁμαρτίαν ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος αἴτιος
πολλοῖς μὲν πατροκτονίας, πολλοῖς δὲ παιδο-
κτονίας γενόμενος, ἀναγκαζομένων τῶν ἀνθρώπων
ἢ τοῖς πατρίοις βοηθεῖν καὶ τῆς ἐξ αἰῶνος αὐτοῖς
εὐσεβείας παραδεδομένης ἀντέχεσθαι ἢ τὴν και-
νοτομίαν ταύτην προσίεσθαι; διὰ τί γὰρ οὐχὶ
καὶ Μωυσῆς, ὃς ἀναιρέτης ἐλθὼν τῆς ἁμαρτίας
πλειστηριάσας ταύτην κατείληπται; ἷ

7

Quod de Israel scriptum est, Matthaeus evange-
lista ad Christum transtulit, ut simplicitati eorum
qui de gentibus crediderant illuderet.?

1 Not in Neumann; reconstructed by him from the polemical
writings of Archbishop Arethas of Caesarea who wrote in
refutation of Julian inthe tenthcentury. First published by
Cumont, Recherches sur la tradition manuscrite de Vemperewr
Julien, Brussels, 1898. Neumann’s reconstruction is in
Theologische Litteraturzettung, 10. 1899.

* Neumann frag. 15. Preserved by the fifth century
writer Hieronymus in his Latin Cummentary on Hosca ὃ. 11.

1 Julian is criticising St. John’s Gospel, as he criticised
its prologue in Against the Galilaeans, Book 1. He attacks
Jonn-1.°29'3 ci; John 1.3, 5.

432

FRAGMENTS

6

How did the Word of God take away sin,! when
it caused many to commit the sin of killing their
fathers, and many their children? ? And mankind
are compelled either to uphold their ancestral
customs and to cling to the pious tradition that
they have inherited from the ages? or to accept
this innovation. Is not this true of Moses also, who
came to take away sin, but has been detected
increasing the number of sins? 4

7

The words that were written concerning [5186] ὅ
Matthew the Evangelist transferred to Christ,® that
he might mock the simplicity of those of the
Gentiles who believed.

2 Matthew 10. 21. ‘‘ And the brother shall deliver up the
brother to death, and the father the child ; and the children
rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to
death.”

3 He means that in this case too their sins have not been
taken away by the Word, since they remain heathens.

4 In Leviticus 16. Aaron is to make atonement for the sins of
Israel, but the severe Mosaic law increased the opportunities
for transgression.

5 Hosea 11. 1. ‘‘ When Israel was a child, then I loved
him and called my son out of Egypt.”

8 Matthew 2. 15. ‘‘That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, ‘Out of Egypt

have I called my son.’”’

433

VOL, ITI. BE

JHE LIBRARY
OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

TABLE OF NUMBERS

Hertlein. Wright. ΡΤ
Lerrers 1.! -- ae
2. To Prohaeresius . : 14 31
3. To Libanius . : : 52 96
4. To Aristoxenus . 5 35 78
5. To Theodora. 3 : 99 85
6. To Eedicius . ‘ , 46 112
7. To Atarbius? : ᾿ 37 83
8.. ToGeorge . : ‘ 67 188
9. To Ecdicius . : : 23 107
10. Tothe Alexandrians . 21 60
11. To the Byzacians 3 : 39 δ4
12.. To Basil : : : 26 9.
135 To Count Julian. . : 9 28
14 To Libanius . : 3 53 97
15. To Maximus. : ; 12 190
16. To Maximus. : Ἴ 59 191
17. To Oribasius . ᾿ : 4 14
18. To Eugenius . : : 00 193
19. To Hecebolius ‘ P 63 194
20. To Eustochius : ; 54. 41
92]. To Callixeine ς ᾿ 49 8]
22 To Leontius . : : 1 152
23. To Hermogenes . ‘ 13 33
24. To Sarapion . : ξ 80 180
25. Το {86 Jews. i : δ] 204

95 Ὁ. Concerning Physicians . 31 75b
26. Το ὑπὸ Alexandrians . 24 110

1 Hertlein 1 is by the sophist Procopius of Gaza and is not reprinted
here.
2 Hertlein, To Artabius. 3 Hertlein, 70 the Byzantines.

435

FF 2

LETTERS 27.

436

Hertlein. Wright. eee,
To Libanius . 58 98
28. To Gregory 71 196
29. Τὸ Alypius 6 9
90. To Alypius 7 10
31. To Aetius 15 46
32. To Lucian 64 197
33. To Dositheus 68 200
34.. To Iamblichus 79 187
95, For the Argives 28 198
36. To Porphyrius 38 106
37. To Himerius 1 69 201
38. Τὸ Maximus. 8 26
39. To Eustathius 44 ay
40. To Iamblichus 78 184
41. To Iamblichus : 74 186

42. On Christian Teachers 2 36 6le
43. To Hecebolius 40 115
44, To Priscus 5 11
45. To Zeno 17 58
46. To Evagrius . 25 4
47. Tothe Thracians . 27 15
48. To Plutarch? ΤᾺ 153

49. To Arsacius . oo S4a
50. To Kedieius . 45 108
51. To the ss le 47 111
52. To the Bostrenians 41 114
53. Τὸ Iamblichus 70 185
54. Τὸ George Ν 66 189
Do) LO Eumenius and Phar 5: 8

anus

56. To Eedicius , 49 109
57 To Elpidius . ; 65 195
58. To the Alexandrians 48 59
ὅθ, To Nilus-Dionysius 4 50 82
60. To Iamblichus i 183

1 Hertlein, To Amerius.
3 Hertlein, 70 Zeno.

TABLE OF NUMBERS

2 Hertlein no title.
4 Hertlein, To Dionysius,

TABLE OF NUMBERS
Hertlein. Wrightsleouee.
Letters 61. To Iamblichus 76 18]
62. To an Official 1 18 88
63. To Theodorus 20 89a
64. Το the People fia 110) 176
65. To a Painter. fr. 13 177
66. Το Arsaces 57 202
67. To Sopater?. 61 182
68. To Philip 30 40)
69. To Eutherius 10 29
70. To Diogenes . 70 199
71. To Priscus 1 13
12." lo Julien}. 83 36
73. To Eucleides 62 192
74, To Libanius . 53 97
75. To Basil 81 205
76. To Eustathius : 48 34
77. Concerning Funerals? . 56 136 b
78. -Toa. Priest δ. 19 79
79. To Photinus ὃ 55 90
p oe Bidez-
apadopoulos-Kerameus. Wright. ἘΞ ΕΙΣ
Lerters 1.* To Count Julian 29 80
2.* To Theodora on 86
3.* To Theodorus 16 30
4.* To Priscus 7 12
5.* To Maximinus 73 19
6.* To Theodora? 34 87

1 Hertlein no title.

3 By Eustathius.

Hertlein, Jo Libanius.

5 Hertlein no title.

2 Hertlein, To Sosipater.
4 Hertlein no title.
6 Hertlein no title.

437

TABLE OF NUMBERS

Hertlein. Wright. Bidez-Cumont.

FRAGMENTS

5 ὦ
W orgs
«τῷ

Ρ
Ῥ.

Ξ΄ἑ( Φο-τσ οι WNW
O OWT οι Go Dt 8
—_—
=p)

—_

LETTER 64 pe 176
LETTER 65 13 177

Hertlein. Wright. Bidez-Cumont.

EPIGRAMS 168
166
1
109
174
170

| amore
Doe oboe

438

INDEX

AARON, 365, 403, 405, 433

Abel, 419

Ablabius, the prefect, xxxvi

Abraham, 61, 379, 418, 419, 421, 423,
425, 427

Achaea, the proconsul of, xviii, xxxv,
37, 84, 87, 93, 235

Achilles, shrine of, 51, 53

Acts of the Apostles, cited, 394, 411

Adam, 325, 327, 419

Adrasteia invoked, 17, 67, 169

Aeacus, 369

Aedesius, the philosopher, ix, xl, xly,
liv, lix

Aegae, Asclepius at, 99, 375

Aelian, the historian, 263

Aeneas, 370

Aeschylus, cited, 241, 299

Aesop, Fables, 227

Aetius, the heretic, Letter 15 to, 85;
biography of, x, xviii, xxx, 288, 419

Africa, 125, 221

Agamemnon, 167

Agesilaus, 369

Alaric in Greece, lviii

Alcinous, garden of, 205, 273

Alemanni, the, xii, 199

Aleppo (Beroea), 201

Alexander of Macedon, lvi, 31, 61, 87,
145, 147, 169, 170, 172, 224, 381

Alexander ‘Severus, decree ΟΓΧΧΣ

Alexandria, viii, xxxvii, xxxix, 76, 142
ascetics at, 154; Athanasius at, το:
Bishop George’ at, 42; music at,
155; Zeno the physician at, 43

Alexandrians, the, Letter 21 to, 61;
Letter 24 to,'75, cited, 151; Letter 47
to, 148, cited, 121; Letter 48 to, 158;
turbulence of, 63, 64, xl, 144, 414

Alexandria Troas, Julian at, 51

Aloadae, the, 351

Alps, the, 105

Alypius, Governor of Britain, Letters
6 and 7 to, 16-21; biography of,

en 67

Alypius, the dwarf, of Alexandria,
xxxiii

Amerius (Himerius), xlix, 227

Ammianus Marcellinus, cited, Intro-
duction, passim, 11, 21, 23, 28, 31,
33, 35, 41, 63, 98, 101, 125, 129, 137,
141, 155,'164, 172, 183, 197, 199, 200,
203, 205, 207, 209, 296, 300, 301

Amphion of Thebes, 39

Anacharsis, the Scythian, 347

Anacreon, cited, 212

Ancyra, xxxvili, 123

Angels, the, 401

Anthology Greek, the, 153, 304, 305, 309

Antioch, Alypius at, xxxii, St. Babylas
at, 191; Constantius at, xvi; Gallus
at, ix, 289; Julian at, vii, xxiii, xxv,
live (2,955 107: 117, U2, 8. 1915
314; Senate of, xxv, 201; temple of
Fortune at, 301; winter camp of, at
Litarbae, 201, 209, 428

Antiochus, "015

Apamea, Julian of, 255;
Ixi

Aphobius, consularis of Palestine, 55

Aphrodite, 159; sandal of, 169

Apis the sacred bull, xliii

Apollinaris (Apollinarius), the Syrian,
xx, 303

Apollo, 237, 239, 255, 387; in
Simonides, 281; Didymus, 47;
temple of, at Daphne, xxiv, li, 55,
98, 203

Apollodorus in Plato, Sympostum, 5

Apostles, the, 411

Arabia, 129

Archidamus, 369

Archilochus, 103

Areius, the Stoic, 146, 147

Sopater of,

439

INDEX

Ares, 199, 802, 345, 373, 387
Arethas of Caesarea, 432
ae oe (Strasbourg), battle of,

ΠΡ ΩΣ the, concerning, Letter 28, 85;
discussion of, Letter 28, xxii

Argos, xxiii, 84, 85

Argus, Io’s guardian, 263

Arians, the, xxx, xxxix, 37, 126, 127,
187; persecution of orthodox Chris-
tians by, 129; Gallus, an Arian, 290

Aristaeus, 237

Aristeides the Just, 369

Aristophanes, Acharnians, 34; Birds,
299; Plutus, 81, 101; on figs, 269

Aristophanes of Gorinth, xxvii, xliv,
Ivy, 181, 183, 296; biography of,

XXxili

Aristotle, xxxi, 5, 7, 12, 119, 270, 271

Aristoxenus, Letter 35 to, 115, xxiv,
xliii

Arles, Constantius at, ix

Armenia, xxx, 199, auxiliaries from,
xxv, Letter 57 to King of, 197

Arrian, the historian, 169, ‘171

Arsaces (Arsacius) King ‘of Armenia,
Letter 57 to, 197 ; biography of, xxxv

Arsacius, high priest of Galatia, 67

Artemius of the Crossroads, 139

Artemius, dux Aegypti, biography of,
XXXvVii, 62, 63

Asclepius, 99, 141, 163, 247, 261, 265,
315, 375, 387, 389

Asia, temples in, 57

Assyrians, the, 367, 379

Astydamas in Philemon, 83, 159

Atarbius, Letter 37 to, 128; biography
of, xxxviii

Athanasius, 8t., biography of, xxxix,
61, 75, 142, 144, 151; return of, to
Alexandria, xviii

Athenaeus, cited, 268

Athene, 51, 241, 279, 345, 387

Athenians, the, xv, 87

Athens, xxxili xliii, 1, 153, 225, 316;
Diodorus of Tarsus at, 189; Julian
at, xi, xxii, lix, 6, 85; Prohaeresius
at, xix, 34 St. Basil at, xi

Attuarii, ‘the, XV

Augustus, Emperor, 87, 147

Aulus Gellius, 163

Aurelius Victor, 239

Baal, 367
Baal-peor, 363

440

Babel, tower of, 349

cee a Fable 33, 161; Fable 107,
227 .

Babylas, St., church of, at Antioch,
99; translation of bones of, lii, 191

Babylon, 369

Babylonia, History of, 366

Basil, St., Letter 26 to, 81, cited, 139,
159; Letter 81 to, 285, cited 302,
303; Letters of, 284; Julian’s
relations With, xi) νι ocx xauxals
xlvii, 80, 285; biography of, xli

ae mother of Julian, vii, viii,
i

ae (Tell-Batnan), 201, 202, 203,
2

Batnae in Osroene, 202

Beer Hpigram 1 on, 805

Belos (Baal), 367

Beroea (Aleppo), 201

Berosus, the historian, 366

Besontio (Besancon), 23

Bethany, 377

Bethsaida, 377

Bisanthe (Rodosto) in Thrace, 124

Bithynia, viii, xlvi, 77, 129

Bosporus, the, 238

Bostra, Letter 41 to, 129, cited, xxiv,
123, 133, 376

Briareus, 281

Britain, Alypius in, xxxii_ .

Bromius, epithet of Dionysus, 305

Bupalus in Callimachus, 19

Byron, 299

Byzacians, the, Letier 39 to, 125, cited,
xviii

Byzantium, 124

Caesar, Julius, Gallic War, 23
Caesarea (Mazaca), xlii, 75, 287, 432;
Constantius at, xv, xxxvi; birth place
of Julian, the Sophist, Ἶ lix, ἱχὶν
Sook brother of Alypius, xxxiii,

Cain, 419

Callimachus, 19; the Hecale of, 239
Callippus, the Athenian, 162, 163
Callisthenes, the historian, 169, 171
ea the priestess, Letter 42 to,

Capitol, the, at Rome, 63; the Capito-
line, 371

Cappadocia, xl, xliii, xlv, 75, 107, 140;
Eustochius of, 185; Macellum in,
viii, 315

INDEX

Cappadocians, the, Christians, 117

Carmel, Mt., 427

Oarrhae, Julian at, xxv, 208

Cedrenus, the historian, lvii

Celsus, the pagan apologist, 314, 315

Celts, the, 211, 305, 346, 347

Cenchreae near Corinth, 235

Chalce (Halki), the island, xxix, Lxii

Chalcedon, the commission at, xvii,
33, 183; Maris, bishop of, 301;
straits of, 245, 255

Chalcis in Syria, xlix

Chaldaeans, the, xly,
403, 423, 427

Chamavi, the, xii

Cherubim, the, 401

Chiron, the Centaur, 367

Chnodomar, King of the Alemanni,

366, 367, 369,

Christ the Word, 148,189, 313, 315, 411
Christianity called atheism, 68; a
disease, 135, 207, 413; J ulian’s
apostasy from, τα
Christians (Galilaeans), oxy
pared with Cynics, 119;
temples, 99, 287; compared with
pagans, 29: treatment of, by
Julian, xviii, ἘΣ ΤΗΣ. 190, 299.
362, 372, 388, 991. 392; by Valens,
127; at Bostra, 132, 133; called
Galilaeans, 313; Christian teachers
prohibited from teaching the classics,
lix, 117, 303
Chrysanthius, ix, xv
Cimon, 369
Cinyras, wealth of, 169
Circumcision, 421, 423
Claudia, legend of, 371
Claudian, the poet, 210, 259
Claudius, Emperor, 377
Cleitus and Alexander, 171
Codex Justinianus, XXXviil;
anus, xviii, xix, xxiv, ΧΗ
Constans, Emperor, xxxili, xxxvi, lvi,
ix 28, 157, 159, 166, 173
Constantia, wife of Gallus, ix
Constantine, Emperor, vii, xix, xliv,
xlix, Ix, 79, 120, 125, 199, 206, 213,
238, 244, 254, 257, 297
Constantinople, Gallus at, ix, xi, 289;
Julian at, viil, xvi, 26, 29, 31, 35, 43,
61, 79, 232, 306, 307; Julian leaves,
xxiii, 98,107; monolith at, 152, 153;
temple of Fortune at, 301; view of,
79, 186, 214

com-
destroy

Theodosi-

Constantius, Emperor, ix, xlvi, 9, 18,
25, 33, 51, 63, 74, 99, 120, 153, 158,
199, 207, 238, 299, 300, 398; Arian-
ism of, xxxix, 76, 126,129; cruelty
of, 183; marries Galla, vii; marries
Husebia, xi; marries Faustina, xvi;
death of, xvi, 21; Julian’s march
against, 17, 235; panegyrics on, x;
war with Sapor, xiv; murders
Gallus, 289; recalls Sallust, xiii, 12 5
treatment of Jews by, xxi, 179

Constantius, Julius, father of J ulian,
vii, viii

Corinth, Aristophanes of, xxxiii, 183;
canal, -39; Colony of Rome, 87;
Isthmus of, 235; Museum at, 39;
pro-consular residence, 87, 235;
relations with Argos, xxiii, 84, 91;
wild beast shows at, 85

Corinthians, To the, fra Ge ὃ. 2975 ΣῪ
xvi, xxxiv, 89

Corinthians, Epistle to the, 385

Cornelius, the centurion, 377

Cos, 375

Cotti, the, 285

Crassus, the Roman general, xxv

Crete, 283, 369

Crispus, son of Constantine, ix

Cronos, 291, 325

Ctesiphon (Lak-i-Kesra), xxv ;
at, xxxvi, 208, 209

Cybele at Pessinus, xxiv, 13
372

Cyclades, the, 39

Cydnus, the river, xxiv

Cynics, the, 119, 168

Cyrene, 19

Cyrenius, the Governor, 379

Cyril of Alexandria, 314, 315, 323, 562,
364, 367, 370, 387, 403, 407, 416,
421, 426, 430

Cyzicus, 129

Julian

, 046, 371,

Daedalus, 211

Damascus, praise of, 273

Danube (Ister), xii, xv, xlii, 238, 285

Daphne, suburb of Antioch, xxiv, li,
55, 98, 203

Dardanelles, the, 1, 244

Dardanus, 370

Darius, 17, 230, 285

David, King, 367, 382, 395, 397

Decentius, the tribune, xiv

Delphi, last oracle at, lvii, 89; in-
scription at, 287, 373

441

INDEX

Demeter, 137, 305

Democritus of Abdera, 230, 231, 263

Demonax, the Cynic, 230

Demosthenes, cited, 30, 241, 243, 275;
praise of, 119

Deuteronomy, Book of, 341, 394, 397,
401, 402, 410, 411

Didymus (Apollo), 47

Dio of Syracuse, 162

Diodorus of Tarsus, 187, 189

Diogenes, Letter 70 to, 283

Diogenes of Argos, 92

Diogenes Laertius, 16

Diomede, 219

Dionysius (Nilus), Letter 50 to, 157, 27;
biography of, lv

Deerute. tyrant of Syracuse, 162,

63

Dionysus, 5, 79, 239, 305, 315, 325
Doubis (Doubs), the river, 23
Dositheus, Letter 68 to, 227

Ecdicius (Olympus), prefect of Egypt,
xl; biography of, xliii; Letter 23 to,
78, cited, 123; Letter 45 to, 141;
Letter 46 to, 141; Letter 49 to, 155

Echo, a goddess, 221

Edessa, xxv, xlviii 126; Valens at,
127

Egypt, xxxiii, xxxvii, xliii; prefects of,
xlix, 67, 141, 143; Proteus of, 265,
361, 367, 369, 403, 433

Egyptians, bad character of, xxxiv,
145, 347, 367, 369, 373, 423

Hleazar, 365, 425

Electra in Huripides, 167

Eleusis, mysteries of, xi; procession
to, 101

Elijah, the Prophet, 419, 427, 429

Hlis, games at, 89

Elpidius, the philosopher, biography
of, xliv, 220; Letter 65 to, 221

Elpidius, prefect of the Hast, xliv

Empedotimus of. Syracuse, xvi, 297

Enyo, 387

Ephesus, Council of, 816; Julian at,
ix, xxx, ; Maximus at, 21, 26

Epictetus, 313

Epidaurus, 375

Hthiopians, the, 275, 294, 295, 357

Eucleides, the philosopher, Letter 62
to, 215

Eugenius, the philosopher, Letter 60
to, 211

Eugenius, father of Themistius, 211

442

Eumenius, fellow student of Julian,
Letter ὃ to,'7; at Athens, 6

Kunapius, the sophist, evidence of,
xii; History of, cited, xxvii, ΠΗ, lvii,
300; Lives of, cited, ix, xi, xvi, xix,
XML, KV ΣΕΥ; ΠΟΥ mies lie taxes
Ixili, 8, 21, 26, 27, 34, 187, 191, 414,
415

Euphrates, the district, xxxviii, 123;
the river; Julian’s march to, xxv,
171, 202, 205

Eupolis, echo of, 43

Kuripides, Amphion, 41, frag. 137;
Orestes, 166

Eusebia, Empress, xi, xii, xiii

Eusebius, the chamberlain, xvii, 10

Eusebius, Bishop, viii

Kusebius Praep. Evang., cited, 382,
383

Eustathius, the philosopher, bio-
graphy of, xlv; Letter 43 to, 187;
Letter 44 to, 189; Letter 63 to
Julian, 291

Eustathius, son of Oribasius, lviii

Eustochius, of Cappadocia, Letter 54
to, 185

Eutherius, the eunuch, biography of,
xlvi; Letter 10 to, 29, xv, xvi

Euthymeles, the tribune, frag. 10 to,
301

Eutropius, the historian, xxv
Evagrius, the rhetorician, biography
of, xlvi; at Nish, 25; Letter 25 to,

77

Eve, 325, 327

Exodus, cited, 341, 343, 344, 360, 378,
402, 409, 410

Ezekiel, cited, 380

Facundus Hermianensis, 186, 189

Florentius, the prefect and consul,
ΧΗ, Kivy XV, Val 10. 1

Fortune, temple of, 301

Franks, the, xii, 199

Fronto, the sophist, 185

Funerals, Edict concerning, xviii, 191

Galatia, 69, 129

Galatians, Epistle to the, 343, 411

Galen, the physician, lvii, 211

Galilaeans, Against the, xxii, xxv, 295,
299, 316, 319; Introduction to, 313

Galilaeans, the (Christians), 37, 47, 49,
53, 61, 71, 75, 121, 123, 125, 129,
135, 143, 147, 381, 391, 397, 399,

INDEX

417, 419, 423; Julian’s use of the
word, 313, 319, 321

Galilee, 313

Galla, wife of Constantius, vii

Gallus Caesar, half- brother of Julian,
VELA oa Talk Zeal, 96.04, Soca nil; [bee
Letter 82 ‘from, 288, 81.999: 207, 289,
29

Gaul, 7, 35, 199, 209; Julian goes to,
xi, xii; condition of, xii; Julian in,
Xx, XV, Xe, KI Vil, Iv, 65 23, 55, 105,
298, 304; Letters 1-7 from, 2-21:
Priscus invited to, 15

Gauls, the warlike disposition of, 349

Genesis, the Book of, cited, 325, 326,
331, 334, 358, 366, 394, 401, 418,
419, 421, 422, 425, 427

Gentiles, the, 61, 343, 389, 407, 433

“George, bishop, the Cappadocian, viii,
XXXVH, Xxxix, xliii, lxiii, 42, 63, 76;
library of, 75, 123; murdered, 43,
61, 65

George, the financier, Letter 66 to, 221;
Letter 67 to, 228, 226

Germans, the, xii, 349, 353, 357;
fierceness of, 347

Germany, 296; Julian in, 304

Giants, the, 401

Gibbon, the historian, 124

Glaucus, in the /liad, 219

Gnosties, the, 127

Gospels, the, 79, 159

Graces, the, 79, 159

Gratian, Emperor, xvi

Gregory Nazianzen, xi, xviii, xx, xxi,
xxii, xxxix, xlii; Letters of, cited,
185; Orations, cited, 69, 127, 303,
818. 316

Gregory, the Commander, Letter 71 to,
233

Gyara, Musonius at, 39

Hades, Empedotimus in, 297, 325

Hebrews, the, 145, 318, 319, 321, 323,
341, 355, 367, 373, 375, 381, 383,
391, 411

Hecale in Callimachus, 239

Hecate (Trivia), 186

Hecebolius, an official of Edessa,
xlviii; Letter 40 to, 127, cited, 123

Hecebolius, the sophist, viii; bio-
graphy of, aus Letter 63 to, 217,
106, 126, 22

Hector, shrine of, 51

Hector, son of Parmenio, 171

Hekatos, epithet of Apollo, 281, 283

Helen in the ee ee 229

Helena, Empress, 297

Helena, wife of Julian, xi

Heliopolis, 152

Helios (Mithras), 15, 53, 149, 259, 375

Hellenes, the, 29, 117, 133, 183, 245,
818. SLO 320, 9528. 8548: 547. 9013
369, 375; Hellene synonym for
pagan, 71, 189

Hemerius (HWimerius), xlix, Ixi

Hephaestus, 387

Hera, girdle of,
at Argos, 88

Heracleidae, the, 87

Heracleides of Pontus, 297

Heracles, 315

Hercynian forest, the, 295, 296, 297

Hermes, 9, 181, 187, 239, 243, 302,
345; god of eloquence, 119, 211,
225, 247, 261, 267, 387; Trismegis-
tus, 366, 367

Hermogenes, prefect of Heypt, Letter
13 to, 38, 32, 197

Hermolaus, 169, 171

Herodes Atticus, 230

Herodotus, cited, xiii, 16, 29, 86, 87,
119, 269, 294, 346

Hesiod, 91, 119, 165, 185

Hesychius, 406

Hezekiah, king, 399

Hierapolis (Membe}j), Julian at, xxv,
lii, Lx, 201, 205, 207, 208

Hierius, prefect of Egypt, xlix

Hierocles, son of Alypius, xxxii

Hieronymus, 432

Hierophant, the, of Greece, lx

Hillel (Tulus) the Patriarch, 179

Himerius, biography of, xlviii; Letter
69 to, 227

Himerius, father of Iamblichus II,
Sdinakit

Himerius, the SORES of Bithynia,
xviii

Hippia, wife Ge Priscus, lix

Hippocentaur, Hpi gram
309

Hippocrates of Cos, 163, 269, 383

Homer x,, 110. 217, 201: 267. 2195
Iliad, cited, 48, 47, 55, 97,166, 171,
185, 191, 203, 219, 229, 242, 283,
291; Odyssey, cited, 9, 31, 55, 71,
73, 79, 120, 139, 205, 223, 225, 226,
229, 243, 251, 263, 265, 267, 269,
272, 307, 351

279; Heraean games

5 on the,

443

INDEX

Horace, cited, 19, 103
Hosea, cited, 433

Iamblichus I, the philosopher, ix, x,
xxix, xxxili, lx; biography of, xlix,
5, 207, 213, 236, 297; Letters 74—
79 to, 037-263, Letter "78, cited, 209

IJamblichus IT, 1, 5.

Tlios (New), 51

Illyricum, Julian in, 23

India, wares of, 275; Indians, the, 285

Io, 263

Tonia, Julian in, 289, 875

Isaac, 418, 423

Isaiah, cited, 358, 399, 417

Isauria, province of, 100

Tsis, 145

Isocrates, 119, 267, 383; Nicocles of,
19

Israel, 341, 365, 367, 389, 393, 397,
403, 405, 418, 433

Ister (Danube), 285

Isyllus, 247

Italy, 199, 370, 413

Tulus (Hillel), Jewish Patriarch, 179

Jacob, 379, 389, 397, 423

Jehovah, 325, 327, 329, 331, 333, 341,
345

Jerome, cited, xxxix

Jerusalem, Temple at, xxxii, xiii, 180,
181, 303; taken by Ptolemy, 145,
407, 427

Jesse, 396, 397

Jesus Christ, 147, 341, 3438, 373, 375,
376, 377, 879, 381, 3938, 395, 402,
408, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 421,
423, 429, 431, 433

Jews, the, treatment of, xxi; Letter
51 to, 177, 58, 59, 61, 71; Jewish
ascetics, 154; 301, 313, 321, 329,
341, 343, 377, 379, 383, 389, 391,
393, 403, 405, 407, 417, 423

John, St., 381, 397, 398, 399, 413, 415,
431

John, St.,
414, 432

Joseph, St., 395

Josephus, cited, 145

Jovian, Emperor, xxvi, 133

Judaea, 341, 355, 393

Judah, 397

Judas, 431

Judges, Book of, 378

Julian, Count of the Hast, xlvii;

444

Gospel according to, 313,

biography of, li; Letter 9 to, 27, 67;
Letter 29 to, 97

Julian, Emperor, biography of, vii
foll.; apostasy of, LX EK studies of,
1K xiii ; at Troy, x Ἐξ αὖ Milan, x;
appointed Caesar, xi; marriage of,
xi; sent to Gaul, x, xi; crosses the
Rhine, xii; proclaimed Augustus,
xii, xiv, 11; at Athens, xi, lix;, at
Naissa, xv, 165; at Constantinople,
xvi; at Antioch, xxiii, xxv, 187;
at Pessinus, xxiv; at Tarsus, xxiv;
at Carrhae, xxv; at Litarbae, xxv;
at Hierapolis, xxv, lii; death of,
xxvi; Pontifex Maximus, xxvil,
lxi, 44; policy towards the Church,
xviii, 130; Letter of Gallus to, 288;
Caesars of, cited, 31, 94, 158, 170,
199; Kronia, xvi, 296; MJisopogon,
xxiv, 1, 11, 38. ἽΙΣ 88, 125, 135,
168, 191, 203, 205, 296, 301; To
the "Athenians, 8, 10, 27. 105, 245,
289; To Themistius, 31, 39, 146,
166, 218; Fragment of a Letter,
lxii, 45, 47, 60, 68, 71, 149

Julian of. Caesarea, the sophist, } lie
lxiv, 215, 220

J ulian, son of Bacchylus, 255

Julius Constantius, father of Emperor
Julian, vii, 297

Julius Julianus,
Julian, li

father of Count

Kings, the Book of, 383, 418, 427, 429

Lacedaemonians, the, 87

Laertes, garden of, 205

Lamprias, the Argive, 92

Latin, Julian’s knowledge of, viii;
the study of, lii; use of, in the
Letters, 69

Lauricius, Bassidius, 100, 101, 103,
168

Leontius, Letter 11 to, 29

Lesbos, Aetius in, xxxi

Leviticus, 405, 409, 418, 433

Libanius, the sophist, biography of,
lii, xviii, xix, xx, xxxiii; friend of
Basil, xlii; Letter 52 to, 181; Letter
53 to, 183; Letter 58 to, 901, cited,
122, 257, 413; Letter 5 wrongly
addressed to, 15; correspondent of
Lauricius, 100, "101; friend of
Zeno, 42; protected by Mygdonius,
113; Letters of, cited, xxii, xxvii,

INDEX

xXvill,..xxxil, xxxy, xxxix, xliv,
xlv, 101, 104, 108, 109, 123, 137,
199; USL; > 183,185... 220. 298:
Orations of, cited, xviii, xix, Xxv,
xxxiii, xlviii, liii, "95, $3, 125, 181,
201, 203, 214, 296, 297, 298, 314, 316

Libyans, the, 357

Licinius, the usurper, 1

Litarbae (Hl-Terib) in Syria, Julian
at, xxv, 201

Livia, Empress, 147

Livy, cited, 371

Lucian, the-satirist, 19,
259, 347 ©

Lucian, author of Philopatris, 219

Lucian, the sophist, Letter 64 to, 219

Luke, Gospel of, cited, 121, 379, 396,
397, 413, 431

‘Lupicinus, officer of Julian, xiv

Lycurgus, the lawgiver, 365, 369

Lydia, gold of, 261; Chrysanthius,
high priest of, xvii

Lydus, De Mensibus, quotes Julian,
xx yrag. 11.

Lysias praised by Julian, 119

209, 230, 253,

Macedonia, colonised by Temenids,
86, 87; Atarbius in, 123

Macellum in Cappadocia, Julian in-
terned at, viii, xi, xl, xliii, 75, 315

Magnentius, the usurper, xii, xiii, lvi,
158, 159, 173

Maimonides, the jurist, 425

Mamertinus, the consul, xvii, 33

Mandragora, a proverb, 136

Marcellus, master of horse, xlvi

Marcus Aurelius, 185

Mardonius, the eunuch, viii

Maris, Bishop, 301

Marius, piety of, 372, 373

Mark, St., 413; Gospel of, 381

Marsyas, 237

Martyrs, the, 414, 415

Mary, the Virgin, 395, 399

Masek, the slave, 425

Matthew, St., 121, 396, 397, 402, 415,
416, 429, 483; Gospel of, 126, 421,
433

Maximinus, Letter 73 to, 235

Maximus, of Ephesus, the theurgist,
biography of, liv; teacher of J ulian,
pb ay a0 xvi, xviii; in Persia, xxvi,
lix, lxi; Letter 8 to, 21; Letter 12
to, 31; etter 59 to, 209, 55, 109,
139, 208, 259

Maximus of Tyre, the philosopher, 5

Mazaca (Caesarea), xlii

Medes, the, 379

Melanthius, the poet, 62

Memphis, Athanasius at, xli

Mesopotamia, xii, 126

Messiah, the, 395

Milan, Constantius at, ix; Julian at,
x, xi; the court at, xlvi, 51, 398

Miletus, inscription at, 47

Minos of Crete, 369, 370

Mithras (Helios), the god, mysteries
of, xviii, xxxiii, liv, 15, 53, 55, 98

Momus, the god of criticism, 169

Moore, Thomas, 299

Mopsucrene in Cilicia, death of Con-
stantius at, xvi

Moschus, 221

Moses, 149, 313, 315, 321, 329, 333,
339, 343, 349, 353, 355, 359, 363,
381, 382, 389, 393, 397, 401, 402,
411. 419, 423, 425, 433

Muses, the, 119, 181, 211, 217, 237,
238, 251, 387

Musonius, 36, 39

Mygdonius, 108, 109, 113

Myths, Julian’s attitude to, 327

Naissa (Nish), Julian at, xv, xlvii, 21,
26, 27, 29, 165

Nazarene, the, 189, 341

Nazareth, 415

Nebridius, quaestor and prefect, xv

Nemean games, the, 89

Nemesis (Adrasteia), 17, 67

Neoplatonism, Syrian, x, xlix, lxi,
336, 366

Nero, Emperor, 39

Nevitta, the Goth, consul, xvii, 33

Newman, Cardinal, on Aetius, ἘΧΧΙ

Nicaeans the, 187

Nicomedia, earthquake at, xxiv, 1,
lii, 51, 244, 254, 255

Nile, the, measurement of, xliii, 141,

egal

Nilus (Dionysius), biography of, ly,
Letter 50 to, 157, 27

Nisibis, city of, xxv, 190

Numa, Pompilius, 370, 371

Numbers, the Book of, 331, 363, 364,
397

Oannes, the Babylonian god, 367
Odysseus, 167, 225, 243, 263, 297

445

INDEX

Olympia, Zeus of Pheidias at, 225;
games at, 89

Olympias, daughter of Ablabius the
prefect, xxxvi

Olympus, Mt., 203, 213

Orestes, 241

Organ, the, epigram 2 on, 805

Oribasius, the physician, biography
of, lvii; pupil of Zeno of Cyprus,
lxiv; Letter 4 to, 8, cited, xiii, 100

Origen, 315

Orpheus, 237, 263, 265

Osroene, 126

Ossa, Mt., 208

Paeonia (Pannonia), 254

Pagans, the, 388

Palestine, 345, 379;
185

Pan, the god, 237, 239;
221, 223

Pannonia, 1, 244, 245, 254, 255

Paphlagonia, 129

ῬΒΡΙΒ, Πα δ. mle σῖνν ΧΥΣ ΧΑΧΙ:
his illness at, 15; Letter 5 from, 15

Parnassius, prefect of Egypt, xxxiv

Parthia, 197; Parthians confused with
Persians, 197, 353

Paul,** the Chain,” the informer, xvii,
xxxiv, 183

Paul, St., 341, 343, 377, 385, 391, 393,
411, 413, 421

Pegasius, the priest, at Troy x, 44,
49, 51, 53

Pelion, Mt., 203

Penelope in Homer, 137, 307

Pentadius, xv

Pergamon, Julian at, ix, xlv, liv,
lviii, 289, 375

Pericles, 35

Perseus, 369

Persephone, 325

Persia, xxxvi, 127, 181, 199, 238, 275,
289, 314, 353; the Persians, xii, xvi;
at Samos, 17; confused with Par-
thians, 197; diet οἵ, 207, 285, 294,
300, 353, 379

Pessinus, Julian at, xxiv, 72, 137;
Cybele at, 73, 133

Peter, St., 407, 409, 411, 421

Phaeacians, the, 31, 227, 243, 297

Phaedo of Hlis, Ivi, 163, 164

Pharaoh, 341; daughter of, 383

Pheidias, the sculptor, 224, 225

Pheidias, the gem-cutter, 224, 225

446

Eustochius of,

Echo and,

Philemon, the comic poet, 83, 159

Philip of Macedon, 81

Philip, Letter 30 to, 105

Philostorgius, the Church historian,
ΧΑ ΧΧΥΙ ΧΤΕΙ yi O.0.9;stbl, Sadly tity W075),
191, 288

Philostratus, Letters of, cited, 169;
Life of Apollonius, cited, 39, 41;
Lives of, cited, 147; Nero, 39

Philotas, 171 . -

Phinehas, 808, 365, 367

Phocylides, 383

Phoenicians, the, 369

Photinus, the heretic, Letter 55 {to,
187; cited, 313, 314, 398, 399

Photius, 430

Phrygia, 135, 137; in Persia, xxi

Physicians, decree concerning, 107

Picts, the, xiv

Pindar, 81, 163, 217; 259, 263, 281

Plato, 4, 5, 7, 12, 97, 110. 2607: 515.
Proclus on, 297, 363, 369; Apology,
39, 161; Cratylus, 161; Crito, 160;
Euthyphro, 111; Laws, 41, 81, 355;
Letter 7 163; Menerenus, 73, 81;
Phaedo 5, 415; Phaedrus, 17, 81,
182, 292, 293; Republic, 95; Sophist,
41, 161; Theaetetus, 296; Timaeus,
160, 829, 331, 332, 335, 339

Plautus, Mercator, 91

Pliny, Nat. History, 141

Plutarch of Chaeronea, 31, 62, 163,
169, 239, 372

Plutarch, a philosopher, Letter 72 to,.
235

Pola, Gallus executed at, ix

Pontus, the, 155

Porphyrius, Letter 38 to, 128, 74

Post, the State, reform of, xix

Praetextatus, Vettius Agorius, pro-
consul of Achaia, xviii, xxxv, 84

Priscus, biography of, xiii, xvi, xxvi,
Xxxili, lyiii; Letter 1 to, 8; Letter 2
to, 3; Letter 5 to, 14, 181

Proclus on Plato, Cratylus, 161; on
Republic, 297

Procopius, the general, xxv, xxxiii

Prohaeresius, the sophist, xi, xix, 13.
age of, lix; Letter 14 to,
5

Propontis, the, 79

Proteus of Egypt, 265

Psalins, the, 343

et the, 147; Ptolemy Lagus,
45

INDEX

Pythagoras, 5, 297; Pythagorean
phrase, 57; silence, 107

Pythian games, 89

Python, the, 281

Quadi, the, xii
Quintus, Curtius, cited, 169, 171
Quirinius, the governor, 379

Rhadamanthus of Crete, 371

Sle the Roman ports on, xii, 21,

Rodosto in Thrace, 124

Romans, Epistle of Paul to, 385, 420

Romans, the, at Carrhae, xxv, xxxvii,
87, 147, 287, 343, 346, 347, 365, 375,
410; at Corinth, 93

_ Rome, xxiii, xxxvi, 87, 287, 370, 371,

375, 379; the Capitol at, 63
Romulus, 370

Sagadares, the, 285

Sallustius, of Gaul, xiii, xvi, xvii,
MV 2 ld, 33, 186. 5917

Samos, Persians at, 17

Samosata, 129

Samson, 367

Sapor, King of Persia, xiv, xxv, xlv,
199, 285

Sappho, cited, 213, 217, 247, 250, 251

Saracens, the, 207, 285, 403

Sarapion, xxix; Letter 80 to, 267;
cited, 222

Sardanapalus, 169

Sardis, lviii

Sarmatians, the, xii

Satan, 387

Saverne, xii

Scots, the, xiv

Scriptures, the, 313, 314, 316

Scythians, the, 300, 301, 346, 357

Scythopolis, trial at, xxxiv

Selene as demiurge, 148, 149

Seleucus of Cilicia, 109

Seneca, Dialogues, 147

Septuagint, the, 394, 419, 424

Sequani, the, 23

Serapis, the god, at Alexandria,
xxxvii, xliv, 61, 63, 143, 145, 147;
the Serapeum, xxxvii, 63

Seraphim, the, 358

Sergius, the proconsul, 377

Shiloh, 394

Sibyl, the, 371

Sicily, 371, 372

Sideta, Philip, 316

Silvanus, the usurper, xiii

Simonides, cited, 281

Sintula, officer of Julian, xiv

Sirens, the, 237, 238

Sirmium, (Mitrovitz), xv; Constantius
at, 187; Synod at, 187; Photinus of,
187, 398

Socrates, the Church historian, cited,
RP POR, SCI FOG κα ΤΣ πὶ,
MIS χίν, αν 1.99. 01}. 10. lal
133, 142, 266, 267, 298, 301, 406

Solomon, 383

Solon, 365

Sopater, the Elder, Ix, 206, 207, 213,
243, 257

Sopater, the Younger, Ix, lxi, 207, 257

Sopater (Sosipater), Letter 61 to,
213

Sopater of Beroea, lx

Sophocles, Philoctetes, 182, 249; O. 7.
135, 256

Sosipatra, the wife of Hustathius, xlv

Sozomen, the Church historian, cited,
SAR oo, LOC BOG pL ΣΑΣ 266.976,
xxxix, xl, xli, xlii, xliv, li, 61, 63, 67,
69, 75, 108, 117, 125, 127, 129, 131,
BY sight, 70. 18755101 0} Tees
199, 285, 286, 287, 301, 302, 303,
406

Spartans, the, xv

Stobaeus, Lxi

Strasbourg (Argentoratum), battle of,
2GbL. bab

Suidas, xii, xvi, lviii, 36, 38, 40, 116,
122, 294, 296, 298

Susa, 16

Swinburne, Zhe Last Oracle of, lvii

Syloson in Herodotus, proverbial, 16

Symmachus, the Elder, the Senator,
lv, 164, 165

Symmachus, the Younger, the orator,
164, cited, 31

Syracuse, Dionysius of, 162

Syria, xxxiii; Julian in, 99, 371, 379;
the Syrians effeminate, 347, 353

Tarentum, 375

Tarsus, Constantius at, xvi; Julian at,
xxiv; Julian buried at, xxvi, 99,
209

Taurus, the range, 297

Telemachus, 263

Temenus at Argos, 86, 87

Tempe, Valley of, 203, 295

447

INDEX

Temple, the, at Jerusalem, restora-
tion of, xvii, xxi, xxxii, lxiii, 406,
429

Temples, destruction of the, xlv

Teos, Anacreon of, 213

Tereus, king of Thrace, 241 :

Testament, the New, 59, 428; the Old,
59, 379, 387, 410 .

Thales, the philosopher, 369

Thamyris, the bard, 237

Thebes in Egypt, 283

Themistius, the philosopher,
259

Theocritus, 181, 239

Theodora, the priestess, Letters 32-
34 to, 109

Theodoret, the Church historian, cited,
πα 0.0.0 Nr o.qphe 6.0.0 nba 7 79.1.17.
406, frag. 7 in, 298

Theodorus, the high priest, xxiii,
lxi, 36, 44, 49; Letter 16 to, 37, 93;
Letter 20 to, 58, 121, 422

Theodorus of Asine, 5

Theodorus, father of Socrates, 383

Theodorus of Mopsuestia, 316, 428

Theodosius, Emperor, liii, 153, 179,
316

Theognis, the poet, 343, 383

Theophilus, military prefect, 141

Theophrastus, 271

Thermopylae, 295

Thersites, 167

Theseus in the Hecale, 239

xviii,

Thomas, St., Church of, at Mdessa, 127

Thoth, the god, 366

Thotmes ITT, of Heypt, 152

Thrace, Anacharsis in, 846, winter in,
241, 243

Thracians, the, Letter 27 to, 88

Thucydides, praise of, 119

MaDE AND PRINTED IN Great BRITAIN,

Tiberius, Emperor, 377

Tigris, the river, xxv, 208, 209
Tithonus, age of, 169

Titus, bishop of Bostra, 132, 133
Trivia (Hecate), 186

Troas (Alexandria), Julian at, x, 51
Tunis, 124

Tyana, Julian at, xxiv, xliii, 115, 117
Typhoeus in Pindar, 281

Tzetzes, Hpigram 5, quoted by, 809

Valens, Emperor, xxxi, xxxii, xxxix,
liv, lviii, lx; at Edessa, 127

Valentine, the heresiarch, 127; the
Valentinian sect, 127

Valentinian, Emperor, xxi,
lviii, 125

Vergil, Aeneid, 191,283, 371; Georgics,
237, 265

Vetranio, the usurper, xiii

Victorinus, the sophist, xix

Vienne, Oribasius at, xiii, 8; Floren-
tius at, xiv, 11; Julian at, xv

Voltaire, cited, 211

XXXY,

Waller, the poet, 299
Word, God the, 399, 403, 413, 414,
415, 433

Xenophon, Hellenica, 160
Xerxes, a theme, 239

Zedekiah, king, 395

Zeno of Cyprus, the physician, lxiii

Zeno of Alexandria, the physician,
biography of, Ixiii; Letter 17 to,
43, 42

Zonaras, cited, 99

Zosimus, cited, xxv, xxvii, xxxy, liv,
23, 200, 207, 296, 297, 298
