The Extant Fragments of the Five Books of the Chronography of Julius Africanus (Julius Africanus)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf06.v.v.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 The Extant Fragments of the Five Books of the Chronography of Julius
 Africanus /ccel/schaff/anf06.v.v.html

  The Extant Fragments of the Five Books of the Chronography of Julius Africanus

 III.--The Extant Fragments of the Five Books of the Chronography of
 Julius Africanus.

 ------------------------

 I. [1079]

 On the Mythical Chronology of the Egyptians and Chaldeans.

 The Egyptians, indeed, with their boastful notions of their own
 antiquity, have put forth a sort of account of it by the hand of their
 astrologers in cycles and myriads of years; which some of those who
 have had the repute of studying such subjects profoundly have in a
 summary way called lunar years; and inclining no less than others to
 the mythical, they think they fall in with the eight or nine thousands
 of years which the Egyptian priests in Plato falsely reckon up to
 Solon. [1080]

 (And after some other matter:)

 For why should I speak of the three myriad years of the Phoenicians, or
 of the follies of the Chaldeans, their forty-eight myriads? For the
 Jews, deriving their origin from them as descendants of Abraham, having
 been taught a modest mind, and one such as becomes men, together with
 the truth by the spirit of Moses, have handed down to us, by their
 extant Hebrew histories, the number of 5500 years as the period up to
 the advent of the Word of salvation, that was announced to the world in
 the time of the sway of the Cæsars.

 [1079] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 17, ed. Paris, 14 Venet.

 [1080] The text is:...sumpiptousi tais okto kai ennea chiliasin heton,
 has Aiguption oi para Platoni hiereis eis Solona katarithmoutes ouk
 aletheuousi.

 II. [1081]

 When men multiplied on the earth, the angels of heaven came together
 with the daughters of men. In some copies I found "the sons of God."
 What is meant by the Spirit, in my opinion, is that the descendants of
 Seth are called the sons of God on account of the righteous men and
 patriarchs who have sprung from him, even down to the Saviour Himself;
 but that the descendants of Cain are named the seed of men, as having
 nothing divine in them, on account of the wickedness of their race and
 the inequality of their nature, being a mixed people, and having
 stirred the indignation of God. [1082] But if it is thought that these
 refer to angels, we must take them to be those who deal with magic and
 jugglery, who taught the women the motions of the stars and the
 knowledge of things celestial, by whose power they conceived the giants
 as their children, by whom wickedness came to its height on the earth,
 until God decreed that the whole race of the living should perish in
 their impiety by the deluge.

 [1081] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 19, al. 15.

 [1082] The text here is manifestly corrupt: epimichthenton auton, ten
 aganaktesin poiesasthai ton Theon.

 III. [1083]

 Adam, when 230 years old, begets Seth; and after living other 700 years
 he died, that is, a second death.

 Seth, when 205 years old, begot Enos; from Adam therefore to the birth
 of Enos there are 435 years in all.

 Enos, when 190 years old, begets Cainan.

 Cainan again, when 170 years old, begets Malaleel;

 And Malaleel, when 165 years old; begets Jared;

 And Jared, when 162 years old, begets Enoch;

 And Enoch, when 165 years old, begets Mathusala; and having pleased
 God, after a life of other 200 years, he was not found.

 Mathusala, when 187 years old, begot Lamech.

 Lamech, when 188 years old, begets Noe.

 [1083] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 81, al. 65.

 IV. [1084]

 On the Deluge.

 God decreed to destroy the whole race of the living by a flood, having
 threatened that men should not survive beyond 120 years. Nor let it be
 deemed a matter of difficulty, because some lived afterwards a longer
 period than that. For the space of time meant was 100 years up to the
 flood in the case of the sinners of that time; for they were 20 years
 old. God instructed Noe, who pleased him on account of his
 righteousness, to prepare an ark; and when it was finished, there
 entered it Noe himself and his sons, his wife and his daughters-in-law,
 and firstlings of every living creature, with a view to the duration of
 the race. And Noe was 600 years old when the flood came on. And when
 the water abated, the ark settled on the mountains of Ararat, which we
 know to be in Parthia; [1085] but some say that they are at Celænæ
 [1086] of Phrygia, and I have seen both places. And the flood prevailed
 for a year, and then the earth became dry. And they came out of the ark
 in pairs, as may be found, and not in the manner in which they had
 entered, viz., distinguished according to their species, and were
 blessed by God. And each of these things indicates something useful to
 us.

 [1084] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 21, al. 17.

 [1085] That is, in Armenia.

 [1086] For there was a hill Ararat in Phrygia, from which the Marsyas
 issued, and the ark was declared to have rested there by the Sibylline
 oracles. [But see vol. v. p. 149.]

 V. [1087]

 Noe was 600 years old when the flood came on. From Adam, therefore, to
 Noe and the flood, are 2262 years.

 [1087] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 83, al. 67.

 VI. [1088]

 And after the flood, Sem begot Arphaxad.

 Arphaxad, when 135 years old, begets Sala in the year 2397.

 Sala, when 130 years old, begets Heber in the year 2527.

 Heber, when 134 years old, begets Phalec in the year 2661, so called
 because the earth was divided in his days.

 Phalec, when 130 years old, begot Ragan, and after living other 209
 years died.

 [1088] In the same, p. 86, al. 68.

 VII. [1089]

 In the year of the world 3277, Abraham entered the promised land of
 Canaan.

 [1089] In the same, p. 93, al. 74. [Compare vol. v. p. 148.]

 VIII. [1090]

 Of Abraham.

 From this rises the appellation of the Hebrews. For the word Hebrews is
 interpreted to mean those who migrate across, viz., who crossed the
 Euphrates with Abraham; and it is not derived, as some think, from the
 fore-mentioned Heber. From the flood and Noe, therefore, to Abraham's
 entrance into the promised land, there are in all 1015 years; and from
 Adam, in 20 generations 3277 years.

 [1090] In the same, p. 99, al. 79. [rv is the verb.]

 IX. [1091]

 Of Abraham and Lot.

 When a famine pressed the land of Canaan, Abraham came down to Egypt;
 and fearing lest he should be put out of the way on account of the
 beauty of his wife, he pretended that he was her brother. But Pharaoh
 took her to himself when she was commended to him; for this is the name
 the Egyptians give their kings. And he was punished by God; and
 Abraham, along with all pertaining to him, was dismissed enriched. In
 Canaan, Abraham's shepherds and Lot's contended with each other; and
 with mutual consent they separated, Lot choosing to dwell in Sodom on
 account of the fertility and beauty of the land, which had five cities,
 Sodom, Gomorrah, Adama, Seboim, Segor, and as many kings. On these
 their neighbours the four Syrian kings made war, whose leader was
 Chodollogomor king of Ælam. And they met by the Salt Sea, which is now
 called the Dead Sea. In it I have seen very many wonderful things. For
 that water sustains no living thing, and dead bodies are carried
 beneath its depths, while the living do not readily even dip under it.
 Lighted torches are borne upon it, but when extinguished they sink. And
 there are the springs of bitumen; and it yields alum and salt a little
 different from the common kinds, for they are pungent and transparent.
 And wherever fruit is found about it, it is found full of a thick, foul
 smoke. And the water acts as a cure to those who use it, and it is
 drained in a manner contrary to any other water. [1092] And if it had
 not the river Jordan feeding it like a shell, [1093] and to a great
 extent withstanding its tendency, it would have failed more rapidly
 than appears. There is also by it a great quantity of the balsam plant;
 but it is supposed to have been destroyed by God on account of the
 impiety of the neighbouring people.

 [1091] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 100, al. 80.

 [1092] legei te panti hudati paschon taenantia.

 [1093] hos porphuran.

 X. [1094]

 Of the Patriarch Jacob.

 1. The shepherd's tent belonging to Jacob, which was preserved at
 Edessa to the time of Antonine Emperor of the Romans, was destroyed by
 a thunderbolt. [1095]

 2. Jacob, being displeased at what had been done by Symeon and Levi at
 Shecem against the people of the country, on account of the violation
 of their sister, buried at Shecem the gods which he had with him near a
 rock under the wonderful terebinth, [1096] which up to this day is
 reverenced by the neighbouring people in honour of the patriarchs, and
 removed thence to Bethel. By the trunk of this terebinth there was an
 altar on which the inhabitants of the country offered ectenæ [1097] in
 their general assemblies; and though it seemed to be burned, it was not
 consumed. Near it is the tomb of Abraham and Isaac. And some say that
 the staff of one of the angels who were entertained by Abraham was
 planted there.

 [1094] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 107, al. 86.

 [1095] Heliogabalus is probably intended, in whose time Africanus
 flourished. At least so thinks Syncellus.

 [1096] On this terebinth, see Scaliger (ad Græca Euseb., p. 414);
 Franciscus Quaresimus, in Elucid. terræ sanctæ; Eugenius Rogerius,
 etc.; and also Valesius, ad Euseb. De Vit. Constant., iii. 53, notes 3
 and 5.

 [1097] Scaliger acknowledges himself ignorant of this word ektenas. In
 the Eastern Church it is used to denote protracted prayers (preces
 protensiores) offered by the deacon on behalf of all classes of men,
 and the various necessities of human life. See Suicer, sub voce.
 Allatius thinks the text corrupt, and would read, eph' hon ta
 holokautomata kai tas hekatombas anepheron = on which they offered both
 holocausts and hecatombs. [Littledale, Eastern Offices, p. 253.]

 XI. [1098]

 From Adam, therefore, to the death of Joseph, according to this book,
 are 23 generations, and 3563 years.

 [1098] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 106, al 85.

 XII. [1099]

 From this record, [1100] therefore, we affirm that Ogygus, [1101] from
 whom the first flood (in Attica) derived its name, [1102] and who was
 saved when many perished, lived at the time of the exodus of the people
 from Egypt along with Moses. [1103] (After a break): And after Ogygus,
 on account of the vast destruction caused by the flood, the present
 land of Attica remained without a king till the time of Cecrops, 189
 years. [1104] Philochorus, however, affirms that Ogygus, Actæus, or
 whatever other fictitious name is adduced, never existed. (After
 another break): From Ogygus to Cyrus, as from Moses to his time, are
 1235 years.

 [1099] In the same, p. 148, al. 118, from the Third Book of the Chron.
 of Africanus.

 [1100] suntagmatos.

 [1101] Others write Ogyges. Josephus (in Apionem), Euseb. (de Præpar.).
 Tatian [vol. ii. p. 81], Clemens [not so, vol. ii. p. 324], and others
 write Ogygus.

 [1102] The text is, hos tou protou kataklusmou gegonen heponumos. The
 word heponumos is susceptible of two meanings, either "taking the name
 from" or "giving the name to." 'Ogugia kaka was a proverbial expression
 for primeval ills.

 [1103] The text is here, kata ten Aigupton tou laou meta Mouseos exodon
 genesthai, for which we may read kata ten hex Haiguptou, etc.

 [1104] Ogugon 'Aktaion e ta plassomena ton onomaton. Compare xiii. 6,
 where we have ton gar meta Ogugon 'Aktaion, etc.

 XIII. [1105]

 1. Up to the time of the Olympiads there is no certain history among
 the Greeks, all things before that date being confused, and in no way
 consistent with each other. But these Olympiads were thoroughly
 investigated [1106] by many, as the Greeks made up the records of their
 history not according to long spaces, but in periods of four years. For
 which reason I shall select the most remarkable of the mythical
 narratives before the time of the first Olympiad, and rapidly run over
 them. But those after that period, at least those that are notable, I
 shall take together, Hebrew events in connection with Greek, according
 to their dates, examining carefully the affairs of the Hebrews, and
 touching more cursorily on those of the Greeks; and my plan will be as
 follows: Taking up some single event in Hebrew history synchronous with
 another in Greek history, and keeping by it as the main subject,
 subtracting or adding as may seem needful in the narrative, I shall
 note what Greek or Persian of note, or remarkable personage of any
 other nationality, flourished at the date of that event in Hebrew
 history; and thus I may perhaps attain the object which I propose to
 myself.

 2. The most famous exile that befell the Hebrews, then--to wit, when
 they were led captive by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon--lasted 70
 years, as Jeremias had prophesied. Berosus the Babylonian, moreover,
 makes mention of Nabuchodonosor. And after the 70 years of captivity,
 Cyrus became king of the Persians at the time of the 55th Olympiad, as
 may be ascertained from the Bibliothecæ of Diodorus and the histories
 of Thallus and Castor, and also from Polybius and Phlegon, and others
 besides these, who have made the Olympiads a subject of study. For the
 date is a matter of agreement among them all. And Cyrus then, in the
 first year of his reign, which was the first year of the 55th Olympiad,
 effected the first partial restoration of the people by the hand of
 Zorobabel, with whom also was Jesus the son of Josedec, since the
 period of 70 years was now fulfilled, as is narrated in Esdra the
 Hebrew historian. The narratives of the beginning of the sovereignty of
 Cyrus and the end of the captivity accordingly coincide. And thus,
 according to the reckoning of the Olympiads, there will be found a like
 harmony of events even to our time. And by following this, we shall
 also make the other narratives fit in with each other in the same
 manner.

 3. But if the Attic time-reckoning is taken as the standard for affairs
 prior to these, then from Ogygus, who was believed by them to be an
 autochthon, in whose time also the first great flood took place in
 Attica, while Phoroneus reigned over the Argives, as Acusilaus relates,
 up to the date of the first Olympiad, from which period the Greeks
 thought they could fix dates accurately, there are altogether 1020
 years; which number both coincides with the above-mentioned, and will
 be established by what follows. For these things are also recorded by
 the Athenian [1107] historians Hellanicus and Philochorus, who record
 Attic affairs; and by Castor and Thallus, who record Syrian affairs;
 and by Diodorus, who writes a universal history in his Bibliothecæ; and
 by Alexander Polyhistor, and by some of our own time, yet more
 carefully, and [1108] by all the Attic writers. Whatever narrative of
 note, therefore, meets us in these 1020 years, shall be given in its
 proper place.

 4. In accordance with this writing, therefore, we affirm that Ogygus,
 who gave his name to the first flood, and was saved when many perished,
 lived at the time of the exodus of the people from Egypt along with
 Moses. [1109] And this we make out in the following manner. From Ogygus
 up to the first Olympiad already mentioned, it will be shown that there
 are 1020 years; and from the first Olympiad to the first year of the
 55th, that is the first year of King Cyrus, which was also the end of
 the captivity, are 217 years. From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus are
 1237. And if one carries the calculation backwards from the end of the
 captivity, there are 1237 years. Thus, by analysis, the same period is
 found to the first year of the exodus of Israel under Moses from Egypt,
 as from the 55th Olympiad to Ogygus, who founded Eleusis. And from this
 point we get a more notable beginning for Attic chronography.

 5. So much, then, for the period prior to Ogygus. And at his time Moses
 left Egypt. And we demonstrate in the following manner how reliable is
 the statement that this happened at that date. From the exodus of Moses
 up to Cyrus, who reigned after the captivity, are 1237 years. For the
 remaining years of Moses are 40. The years of Jesus, who led the people
 after him, are 25; those of the elders, who were judges after Jesus,
 are 30; those of the judges, whose history is given in the book of
 Judges, are 490; those of the priests Eli and Samuel are 90; those of
 the successive kings of the Hebrews are 490. Then come the 70 years of
 the captivity, [1110] the last year of which was the first year of the
 reign of Cyrus, as we have already said.

 6. And from Moses, then, to the first Olympiad there are 1020 years, as
 to the first year of the 55th Olympiad from the same are 1237, in which
 enumeration the reckoning of the Greeks coincides with us. And after
 Ogygus, by reason of the vast destruction caused by the flood, the
 present land of Attica remained without a king up to Cecrops, a period
 of 189 years. For Philochorus asserts that the Actæus who is said to
 have succeeded Ogygus, or whatever other fictitious names are adduced,
 never existed. And again: From Ogygus, therefore, to Cyrus, says he,
 the same period is reckoned as from Moses to the same date, viz., 1237
 years; and some of the Greeks also record that Moses lived at that same
 time. Polemo, for instance, in the first book of his Greek History,
 says: In the time of Apis, son of Phoroneus, a division of the army of
 the Egyptians left Egypt, and settled in the Palestine called Syrian,
 not far from Arabia: these are evidently those who were with Moses. And
 Apion the son of Poseidonius, the most laborious of grammarians, in his
 book Against the Jews, and in the fourth book of his History, says that
 in the time of Inachus king of Argos, when Amosis reigned over Egypt,
 the Jews revolted under the leadership of Moses. And Herodotus also
 makes mention of this revolt, and of Amosis, in his second book, and in
 a certain way also of the Jews themselves, reckoning them among the
 circumcised, and calling them the Assyrians of Palestine, perhaps
 through Abraham. And Ptolemy the Mendesian, who narrates the history of
 the Egyptians from the earliest times, gives the same account of all
 these things; so that among them in general there is no difference
 worth notice in the chronology.

 7. It should be observed, further, that all the legendary accounts
 which are deemed specially remarkable by the Greeks by reason of their
 antiquity, are found to belong to a period posterior to Moses; such as
 their floods and conflagrations, Prometheus, Io, Europa, the Sparti,
 the abduction of Proserpine, their mysteries, their legislations, the
 deeds of Dionysus, Perseus, the Argonauts, the Centaurs, the Minotaur,
 the affairs of Troy, the labours of Hercules, the return of the
 Heraclidæ, the Ionian migration and the Olympiads. And it seemed good
 to me to give an account especially of the before-noted period of the
 Attic sovereignty, as I intend to narrate the history of the Greeks
 side by side with that of the Hebrews. For any one will be able, if he
 only start from my position, to make out the reckoning equally well
 with me. Now, in the first year of that period of 1020 years,
 stretching from Moses and Ogygus to the first Olympiad, the passover
 and the exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt took place, and also in Attica
 the flood of Ogygus. And that is according to reason. For when the
 Egyptians were being smitten in the anger of God with hail and storms,
 it was only to be expected that certain parts of the earth should
 suffer with them; and, in especial, it was but to be expected that the
 Athenians should participate in such calamity with the Egyptians, since
 they were supposed to be a colony from them, as Theopompus alleges in
 his Tricarenus, and others besides him. The intervening period has been
 passed by, as no remarkable event is recorded during it among the
 Greeks. But after 94 years Prometheus arose, according to some, who was
 fabulously reported to have formed men; for being a wise man, he
 transformed them from the state of extreme rudeness to culture.

 [1105] From Georgius Syncellus, Chron., Third Book. In Euseb., Præpar.,
 x. 40. [Compare vol. ii. pp. 324-334.]

 [1106] ekribonto.

 [1107] There is a difficulty in the text; Viger omits "Athenian."

 [1108] The Latin translator expunges the "and" (kai), and makes it =
 more careful than all the Attic writers.

 [1109] The original here, as in the same passage above, is corrupt. It
 gives kata ten Aigupton, which Migne would either omit entirely or
 replace by ap' Aiguptou.

 [1110] These words are inserted according to Viger's proposal, as there
 is a manifest omission in the text.

 XIV. [1111]

 Æschylus, the son of Agamestor, ruled the Athenians twenty-three years,
 in whose time Joatham reigned in Jerusalem.

 And our canon brings Joatham king of Juda within the first Olympiad.

 [1111] From Georgius Syncellus, Third Book. In the Chron. Paschal., p.
 104, ed. Paris, 84 Venet.

 XV. [1112]

 And Africanus, in the third book of his History, writes: Now the first
 Olympiad recorded--which, however, was really the fourteenth--was the
 period when Coroebus was victor; [1113] at that time Ahaz was in the
 first year of his reign in Jerusalem. Then in the fourth book he says:
 It is therefore with the first year of the reign of Ahaz that we have
 shown the first Olympiad to fall in.

 [1112] From the same, Book III., and from Book IV. In Syncellus p. 197,
 al. 158.

 [1113] The text is, anagraphenai de proten ten tessareskaidekaten, etc.

 XVI. [1114]

 On the Seventy Weeks of Daniel.

 1. This passage, therefore, as it stands thus, touches on many
 marvellous things. At present, however, I shall speak only of those
 things in it which bear upon chronology, and matters connected
 therewith. That the passage speaks then of the advent of Christ, who
 was to manifest Himself after seventy weeks, is evident. For in the
 Saviour's time, or from Him, are transgressions abrogated, and sins
 brought to an end. And through remission, moreover, are iniquities,
 along with offences, blotted out by expiation; and an everlasting
 righteousness is preached, different from that which is by the law, and
 visions and prophecies (are) until John, and the Most Holy is anointed.
 For before the advent of the Saviour these things were not yet, and
 were therefore only looked for. And the beginning of the numbers, that
 is, of the seventy weeks which make up 490 years, the angel instructs
 us to take from the going forth of the commandment to answer and to
 build Jerusalem. And this happened in the twentieth year of the reign
 of Artaxerxes king of Persia. For Nehemiah his cup-bearer besought him,
 and received the answer that Jerusalem should be built. And the word
 went forth commanding these things; for up to that time the city was
 desolate. For when Cyrus, after the seventy years' captivity, gave free
 permission to all to return who desired it, some of them under the
 leadership of Jesus the high priest and Zorobabel, and others after
 these under the leadership of Esdra, returned, but were prevented at
 first from building the temple, and from surrounding the city with a
 wall, on the plea that that had not been commanded.

 2. It remained in this position, accordingly, until Nehemiah and the
 reign of Artaxerxes, and the 115th year of the sovereignty of the
 Persians. And from the capture of Jerusalem that makes 185 years. And
 at that time King Artaxerxes gave order that the city should be built;
 and Nehemiah being despatched, superintended the work, and the street
 and the surrounding wall were built, as had been prophesied. And
 reckoning from that point, we make up seventy weeks to the time of
 Christ. For if we begin to reckon from any other point, and not from
 this, the periods will not correspond, and very many odd results will
 meet us. For if we begin the calculation of the seventy weeks from
 Cyrus and the first restoration, there will be upwards of one hundred
 years too many, and there will be a larger number if we begin from the
 day on which the angel gave the prophecy to Daniel, and a much larger
 number still if we begin from the commencement of the captivity. For we
 find the sovereignty of the Persians comprising a period of 230 years,
 and that of the Macedonians extending over 370 years, and from that to
 the 16th [1115] year of Tiberius Cæsar is a period of about 60 years.

 3. It is by calculating from Artaxerxes, therefore, up to the time of
 Christ that the seventy weeks are made up, according to the numeration
 of the Jews. For from Nehemiah, who was despatched by Artaxerxes to
 build Jerusalem in the 115th year of the Persian empire, and the 4th
 year of the 83d Olympiad, and the 20th year of the reign of Artaxerxes
 himself, up to this date, which was the second year of the 202d
 Olympiad, and the 16th year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, there are
 reckoned 475 years, which make 490 according to the Hebrew numeration,
 as they measure the years by the course of the moon; so that, as is
 easy to show, their year consists of 354 days, while the solar year has
 365¼ days. For the latter exceeds the period of twelve months,
 according to the moon's course, by 11¼ days. Hence the Greeks and the
 Jews insert three intercalary months every 8 years. For 8 times 11¼
 days makes up 3 months. Therefore 475 years make 59 periods of 8 years
 each, and 3 months besides. But since thus there are 3 intercalary
 months every 8 years, we get thus 15 years minus a few days; and these
 being added to the 475 years, make up in all the 70 weeks.

 [1114] From Book v. In Eusebius, Demonst. Evang., Book VIII. ch. ii. p.
 389, etc. The Latin version of this section is by Bernardinus Donatus
 of Verona. There is also a version by Jerome given in his commentary on
 Dan. ix. 24.

 [1115] Jerome in his version gives the 15th (quintum decimum).

 XVII. [1116]

 On the Fortunes of Hyrcanus and Antigonus, and on Herod, Augustus,
 Antony, and Cleopatra, in Abstract.

 1. Octavius Sebastus, or, as the Romans call him, Augustus, the adopted
 son of Caius, on returning to Rome from Apollonias in Epirus, where he
 was educated, possessed himself of the first place in the government.
 And Antony afterwards obtained the rule of Asia and the districts
 beyond. In his time the Jews accused Herod; but he put the deputies to
 death, and restored Herod to his government. Afterwards, however, along
 with Hyrcanus and Phasælus his brother, he was driven out, and betook
 himself in flight to Antony. And as the Jews would not receive him, an
 obstinate battle took place; and in a short time after, as he had
 conquered in battle, he also drove out Antigonus, who had returned. And
 Antigonus fled to Herod the Parthian king, and was restored by the help
 of his son Pacorus, which help was given on his promising to pay 1000
 talents of gold. And Herod then in his turn had to flee, while Phasælus
 was slain in battle, and Hyrcanus was surrendered alive to Antigonus.
 And after cutting off his ears, that he might be disqualified for the
 priesthood, he gave him to the Parthians to lead into captivity; for he
 scrupled to put him to death, as he was a relation of his own. And
 Herod, on his expulsion, betook himself first to Malichus king of the
 Arabians; and when he did not receive him, through fear of the
 Parthians, he went away to Alexandria to Cleopatra. That was the 185th
 Olympiad. Cleopatra having put to death her brother, who was her
 consort in the government, and being then summoned by Antony to Cilicia
 to make her defence, committed the care of the sovereignty to Herod;
 and as he requested that he should not be entrusted with anything until
 he was restored to his own government, [1117] she took him with her and
 went to Antony. And as he was smitten with love for the princess, they
 despatched Herod to Rome to Octavius Augustus, who, on behalf of
 Antipater, Herod's father, and on behalf of Herod himself, and also
 because Antigonus was established as king by the help of the Parthians,
 gave a commission to the generals in Palestine and Syria to restore him
 to his government. And in concert with Sosius he waged war against
 Antigonus for a long time, and in manifold engagements. At that time
 also, Josephus, Herod's brother, died in his command. And Herod coming
 to Antony [1118] ...

 2. For three years they besieged Antigonus, and then brought him alive
 to Antony. And Antony himself also proclaimed Herod as king, and gave
 him, in addition, the cities Hippus, Gadara, Gaza, Joppa, Anthedon, and
 a part of Arabia, Trachonitis, and Auranitis, and Sacia, and
 Gaulanitis; [1119] and besides these, also the procuratorship of Syria.
 Herod was declared king of the Jews by the senate and Octavius
 Augustus, and reigned 34 years. Antony, when about to go on an
 expedition against the Parthians, slew Antigonus the king of the Jews,
 and gave Arabia to Cleopatra; and passing over into the territory of
 the Parthians, sustained a severe defeat, losing the greater part of
 his army. That was in the 186th Olympiad. Octavius Augustus led the
 forces of Italy and all the West against Antony, who refused to return
 to Rome through fear, on account of his failure in Parthia, and through
 his love for Cleopatra. And Antony met him with the forces of Asia.
 Herod, however, like a shrewd fellow, and one who waits upon the
 powerful, sent a double set of letters, and despatched his army to sea,
 charging his generals to watch the issue of events. And when the
 victory was decided, and when Antony, after sustaining two naval
 defeats, had fled to Egypt along with Cleopatra, they who bore the
 letters delivered to Augustus those which they had been keeping
 secretly for Antony. And on Herod falls [1120] ...

 3. Cleopatra shut herself up in a mausoleum, [1121] and made away with
 herself, employing the wild asp as the instrument of death. At that
 time Augustus captured Cleopatra's sons, Helios and Selene, [1122] on
 their flight to the Thebaid. Nicopolis was founded opposite Actium, and
 the games called Actia were instituted. On the capture of Alexandria,
 Cornelius Gallus was sent as first governor of Egypt, and he destroyed
 the cities of the Egyptians that refused obedience. Up to this time the
 Lagidæ ruled; and the whole duration of the Macedonian empire after the
 subversion of the Persian power was 298 years. Thus is made up the
 whole period from the foundation of the Macedonian empire to its
 subversion in the time of the Ptolemies, and under Cleopatra, the last
 of these, the date of which event is the 11th year of the monarchy and
 empire of the Romans, and the 4th year of the 187th Olympiad.
 Altogether, from Adam 5472 years are reckoned.

 4. After the taking of Alexandria the 188th Olympiad began. Herod
 founded anew the city of the Gabinii, [1123] the ancient Samaria, and
 called it Sebaste; and having erected its seaport, the tower of Strato,
 into a city, he named it Cæsarea after the same, and raised in each a
 temple in honour of Octavius. And afterwards he founded Antipatris in
 the Lydian plain, so naming it after his father, and settled in it the
 people about Sebaste, whom he had dispossessed of their land. He
 founded also other cities; and to the Jews he was severe, but to other
 nations most urbane.

 It was now the 189th Olympiad, which (Olympiad) in the year that had
 the bissextile day, the 6th day before the Calends of March,--i.e., the
 24th of February,--corresponded with the 24th year of the era of
 Antioch, whereby the year was determined in its proper limits. [1124]

 [1116] In Syncellus, p. 307, al. 244.

 [1117] The sense is doubtful here: kai hos ouden exiou pisteuesthai
 est' an katachthe eis ten heautou archen, etc.

 [1118] There is a break here in the original.

 [1119] This is according to the rendering of the Latin version.

 [1120] Here again there is a blank in the original.

 [1121] The text is corrupt here. It gives, en to mesaiolio, a word
 unknown in Greek. Scaliger reads Maisaiolion. Goarus proposes
 Mausolaion, which we adopt in the translation.

 [1122] i.e., sun and moon.

 [1123] Samaria was so named in reference to its restoration by
 Gabinius, the proconsul of Syria. See Josephus (Antiq., book xiv. ch.
 x.), who states that Gabinius traversed Judea, and gave orders for the
 rebuilding of such towns as he found destroyed; and that in this way
 Samaria, Azotus, Scythopolis, Antedon, Raphia, Dora, Marissa, and not a
 few others, were restored.

 [1124] The text is: en 'Olumpias rpth', hetis pro * kalandon Martion
 kata 'Antiocheis kd' etei echthe, di' hes epi ton idion horion este ho
 eniautos. In every fourth year the 24th day of February ( = vi. Cal.
 Mart.) was reckoned twice. There were three different eras of Antioch,
 of which the one most commonly used began in November 49 b.c. Migne
 refers the reader to the notes of Goarus on the passage, which we have
 not seen. The sense of this obscure passage seems to be, that that
 period formed another fixed point in chronology.

 XVIII. [1125]

 On the Circumstances Connected with Our Saviour's Passion and His
 Life-Giving Resurrection.

 1. As to His works severally, and His cures effected upon body and
 soul, and the mysteries of His doctrine, and the resurrection from the
 dead, these have been most authoritatively set forth by His disciples
 and apostles before us. On the whole world there pressed a most fearful
 darkness; and the rocks were rent by an earthquake, and many places in
 Judea and other districts were thrown down. This darkness Thallus, in
 the third book of his History, calls, as appears to me without reason,
 an eclipse of the sun. For the Hebrews celebrate the passover on the
 14th day according to the moon, and the passion of our Saviour falls on
 the day before the passover; but an eclipse of the sun takes place only
 when the moon comes under the sun. And it cannot happen at any other
 time but in the interval between the first day of the new moon and the
 last of the old, that is, at their junction: how then should an eclipse
 be supposed to happen when the moon is almost diametrically opposite
 the sun? Let that opinion pass however; let it carry the majority with
 it; and let this portent of the world be deemed an eclipse of the sun,
 like others a portent only to the eye. [1126] Phlegon records that, in
 the time of Tiberius Cæsar, at full moon, there was a full eclipse of
 the sun from the sixth hour to the ninth--manifestly that one of which
 we speak. But what has an eclipse in common with an earthquake, the
 rending rocks, and the resurrection of the dead, and so great a
 perturbation throughout the universe? Surely no such event as this is
 recorded for a long period. But it was a darkness induced by God,
 because the Lord happened then to suffer. And calculation makes out
 that the period of 70 weeks, as noted in Daniel, is completed at this
 time.

 2. From Artaxerxes, moreover, 70 weeks are reckoned up to the time of
 Christ, according to the numeration of the Jews. For from Nehemiah, who
 was sent by Artaxerxes to people Jerusalem, about the 120th year of the
 Persian empire, and in the 20th year of Artaxerxes himself, and the 4th
 year of the 83d Olympiad, up to this time, which was the 2d year of the
 102d Olympiad, and the 16th year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, there
 are given 475 years, which make 490 Hebrew years, since they measure
 the years by the lunar month of 29½ days, as may easily be explained,
 the annual period according to the sun consisting of 365¼ days, while
 the lunar period of 12 months has 11¼ days less. For which reason the
 Greeks and the Jews insert three intercalary months every eight years.
 For 8 times 11¼ days make 3 months. The 475 years, therefore, contain
 59 periods of 8 years and three months over: thus, the three
 intercalary months for every 8 years being added, we get 15 years, and
 these together with the 475 years make 70 weeks. Let no one now think
 us unskilled in the calculations of astronomy, when we fix without
 further ado the number of days at 365¼. For it is not in ignorance of
 the truth, but rather by reason of exact study, [1127] that we have
 stated our opinion so shortly. But let what follows also be presented
 as in outline [1128] to those who endeavour to inquire minutely into
 all things.

 3. Each year in the general consists of 365 days; and the space of a
 day and night being divided into nineteen parts, we have also five of
 these. And in saying that the year consists of 365¼ days, and there
 being the five nineteenth parts...to the 475 there are 6¼ days.
 Furthermore, we find, according to exact computation, that the lunar
 month has 29½ days.... [1129] And these come to [1130] a little time.
 Now it happens that from the 20th year of the reign of Artaxerxes (as
 it is given in Ezra among the Hebrews), which, according to the Greeks,
 was the 4th year of the 80th Olympiad, to the 16th year of Tiberius
 Cæsar, which was the second year of the 102d Olympiad, there are in all
 the 475 years already noted, which in the Hebrew system make 490 years,
 as has been previously stated, that is, 70 weeks, by which period the
 time of Christ's advent was measured in the announcement made to Daniel
 by Gabriel. And if any one thinks that the 15 Hebrew years added to the
 others involve us in an error of 10, nothing at least which cannot be
 accounted for has been introduced. And the 1½ week which we suppose
 must be added to make the whole number, meets the question about the 15
 years, and removes the difficulty about the time; and that the
 prophecies are usually put forth in a somewhat symbolic form, is quite
 evident.

 4. As far, then, as is in our power, we have taken the Scripture, I
 think, correctly; especially seeing that the preceding section about
 the vision seems to state the whole matter shortly, its first words
 being, "In the third year of the reign of Belshazzar," [1131] where he
 prophesies of the subversion of the Persian power by the Greeks, which
 empires are symbolized in the prophecy under the figures of the ram and
 the goat respectively. [1132] "The sacrifice," he says, "shall be
 abolished, and the holy places shall be made desolate, so as to be
 trodden under foot; which things shall be determined within 2300 days."
 [1133] For if we take the day as a month, just as elsewhere in prophecy
 days are taken as years, and in different places are used in different
 ways, reducing the period in the same way as has been done above to
 Hebrew months, we shall find the period fully made out to the 20th year
 of the reign of Artaxerxes, from the capture of Jerusalem. For there
 are given thus 185 years, and one year falls to be added to these--the
 year in which Nehemiah built the wall of the city. In 186 years,
 therefore, we find 2300 Hebrew months, as 8 years have in addition 3
 intercalary months. From Artaxerxes, again, in whose time the command
 went forth that Jerusalem should be built, there are 70 weeks. These
 matters, however, we have discussed by themselves, and with greater
 exactness, in our book On the Weeks and this Prophecy. But I am amazed
 that the Jews deny that the Lord has yet come, and that the followers
 of Marcion refuse to admit that His coming was predicted in the
 prophecies when the Scriptures display the matter so openly to our
 view. And after something else: The period, then, to the advent of the
 Lord from Adam and the creation is 5531 years, from which epoch to the
 250th Olympiad there are 192 years, as has been shown above.

 [1125] In Georgius Syncellus, Chron., p. 322 or 256.

 [1126] hen ti kata ten opsin. [Vol. iii. p. 58, Elucid. V., this
 series.]

 [1127] dia ten leptologian.

 [1128] Or, on a table; hos en graphe.

 [1129] The text in the beginning of this section is hopelessly corrupt.
 Scaliger declares that neither could he follow these things, nor did
 the man that dreamt them understand them. We may subjoin the Greek text
 as it stands in Migne: Metaxu de tou legein ton eniauton hemeron txe,
 kai tetramoriou, kai ton apo ith' tes nuchthemerou, meron e...eis ta
 uoe, hemerai to parallelon eisi *, kai tetramorion.  Eti ge men ton tes
 selenes mena kata ten akribe leptologian heuriskomen kth', kai
 hemiseias hemeras kai nuktos diairetheises eis mere se, touton ta o',
 kai hemisu...ha ginetai ennenekostotetarta tria.

 [1130] kataginetai.

 [1131] Dan. viii. 1.

 [1132] Dan. viii. 13, 14.

 [1133] Dan. viii. 13, 14.

 XIX. [1134]

 For we who both know the measure of those words, [1135] and are not
 ignorant of the grace of faith, give thanks to the Father, [1136] who
 has bestowed on us His creatures Jesus Christ the Saviour of all, and
 our Lord; [1137] to whom be glory and majesty, with the Holy Spirit,
 for ever.

 [1134] In Basil, De Spiritu Sancto, ch. xxix. § 73; Works, vol. iii. p.
 61, edit. Paris. [Elucidation II.]

 [1135] For rhematon, words, three mss. give rheton, sayings.

 [1136] For hemin Patri there is another reading, hemon patrasi = to Him
 who gave to our fathers.

 [1137] These words, "and our Lord," are wanting in three mss.

 IV.--The Passion of St. Symphorosa and Her Seven Sons. [1138]

 ------------------------

 The text is given from the edition of Ruinart. His preface, which Migne
 also cites, is as follows: "The narrative of the martyrdom of St.
 Symphorosa and her seven sons, which we here publish, is ascribed in
 the mss. to Julius Africanus, a writer of the highest repute. And it
 may perhaps have been inserted in his books on Chronography,--a work
 which Eusebius (Hist. Eccles., vi. 31) testifies to have been written
 with the greatest care, since in these he detailed the chief events in
 history from the foundation of the world to the times of the Emperor
 Heliogabalus. As that work, however, is lost, that this narrative is
 really to be ascribed to Africanus, I would not venture positively to
 assert, although at the same time there seems no ground for doubting
 its genuineness. We print it, moreover, from the editions of
 Mombritius, Surius, and Cardulus, collated with two Colbert mss. and
 one in the library of the Sorbonne. The occasion for the death of these
 saints was found in the vicinity of that most famous palace which was
 built by Adrian at his country seat at Tiber, according to Spartianus.
 For when the emperor gave orders that this palace, which he had built
 for his pleasure, should be purified by some piacular ceremonies, the
 priests seized this opportunity for accusing Symphorosa, alleging that
 the gods would not be satisfied until Symphorosa should either
 sacrifice to them or be herself sacrificed; which last thing was done
 by Hadrian, whom, from many others of his deeds, we know to have been
 exceedingly superstitious, about the year of Christ 120, that is, about
 the beginning of his reign, at which period indeed, as Dio Cassius
 observes, that emperor put a great number to death. The memory of these
 martyrs, moreover, is celebrated in all the most ancient martyrologies,
 although they assign different days for it. The Roman, along with
 Notker, fixes their festival for the 18th July, Rabanus for the 21st of
 the same month, Usuardus and Ado for the 21st June. In the Tiburtine
 road there still exists the rubbish of an old church, as Aringhi states
 (Rom. Subter., iv. 17), which was consecrated to God under their name,
 and which still retains the title, To the Seven Brothers. I have no
 doubt that it was built in that place to which the pontiffs in the
 Acta, sec. iv., gave the name, To the Seven Biothanati, i.e., those cut
 off by a violent death, as Baronius remarks, at the year 138." So far
 Ruinart: see also Tillemont, Mém. Eccles., ii. pp. 241 and 595; and the
 Bollandists, Act. S.S. Junii, vol. iv. p. 350.

 1. When Adrian had built a palace, and wished to dedicate it by that
 wicked ceremonial, and began to seek responses by sacrifices to idols,
 and to the demons that dwell in idols, they replied, [1139] and said:
 "The widow Symphorosa, with her seven sons, wounds us day by day in
 invoking her God. If she therefore, together with her sons, shall offer
 sacrifice, we promise to make good all that you ask." Then Adrian
 ordered her to be seized, along with her sons, and advised them in
 courteous terms to consent to offer sacrifice to the idols. To him,
 however, the blessed Symphorosa answered: "My husband Getulius, [1140]
 together with his brother Amantius, when they were tribunes in thy
 service, suffered different punishments for the name of Christ, rather
 than consent to sacrifice to idols, and, like good athletes, they
 overcame thy demons in death. For, rather than be prevailed on, they
 chose to be beheaded, and suffered death: which death, being endured
 for the name of Christ, gained them temporal ignominy indeed among men
 of this earth, but everlasting honour and glory among the angels; and
 moving now among them, and exhibiting [1141] trophies of their
 sufferings, they enjoy eternal life with the King eternal in the
 heavens."

 2. The Emperor Adrian said to the holy Symphorosa: "Either sacrifice
 thou along with thy sons to the omnipotent gods, or else I shall cause
 thee to be sacrificed thyself, together with thy sons." The blessed
 Symphorosa answered: "And whence is this great good to me, that I
 should be deemed worthy along with my sons to be offered as an oblation
 to God?" [1142] The Emperor Adrian said: "I shall cause thee to be
 sacrificed to my gods." The blessed Symphorosa replied: "Thy gods
 cannot take me in sacrifice; but if I am burned for the name of Christ,
 my God, I shall rather consume those demons of thine." The Emperor
 Adrian said: "Choose thou one of these alternatives: either sacrifice
 to my gods, or perish by an evil death." The blessed Symphorosa
 replied: "Thou thinkest that my mind can be altered by some kind of
 terror; whereas I long to rest with my husband Getulius, [1143] whom
 thou didst put to death for Christ's name." Then the Emperor Adrian
 ordered her to be led away to the temple of Hercules, and there first
 to be beaten with blows on the cheek, and afterwards to be suspended by
 the hair. But when by no argument and by no terror could he divert her
 from her good resolution, he ordered her to be thrown into the river
 with a large stone fastened to her neck. And her brother Eugenius,
 principal of the district of Tiber, picked up her body, and buried it
 in a suburb of the same city.

 3. Then, on another day, the Emperor Adrian ordered all her seven sons
 to be brought before him in company; and when he had challenged them to
 sacrifice to idols, and perceived that they yielded by no means to his
 threats and terrors, he ordered seven stakes to be fixed around the
 temple of Hercules, and commanded them to be stretched on the blocks
 there. And he ordered Crescens, the first, to be transfixed in the
 throat; and Julian, the second, to be stabbed in the breast; and
 Nemesius, the third, to be struck through the heart; and Primitivus,
 the fourth, to be wounded in the navel; and Justin, the fifth, to be
 struck through in the back with a sword; and Stracteus, [1144] the
 sixth, to be wounded in the side; and Eugenius, the seventh, to be
 cleft in twain from the head downwards.

 4. The next day again the Emperor Adrian came to the temple of
 Hercules, and ordered their bodies to be carried off together, and cast
 into a deep pit; and the pontiffs gave to that place the name, To the
 Seven Biothanati. [1145] After these things the persecution ceased for
 a year and a half, in which period the holy bodies of all the martyrs
 were honoured, and consigned with all care to tumuli erected for that
 purpose, and their names are written in the book of life. The natal
 day, moreover, of the holy martyrs of Christ, the blessed Symphorosa
 and her seven sons, Crescens, Julian, Nemesius, Primitivus, Justin,
 Stracteus, and Eugenius, is held on the 18th July. Their bodies rest on
 the Tiburtine road, at the eighth mile-stone from the city, under the
 kingship of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom is honour and glory for ever
 and ever. Amen.

 [1138] Gallandi, Bibl. Patrum, vol. i. Proleg. p. lxxi. and p. 329.

 [1139] See Eusebius, Life of Constantine, ii. 50.

 [1140] The Martyrologies celebrate their memory on the 10th June: one
 of the Colbert mss. gives Zoticus for Getulius.

 [1141] A Colbert ms. gives "laudantes" = praising.

 [1142] This response, along with the next interrogation, is wanting in
 the Colbert manuscript.

 [1143] Sur., Card., and the Colbert Codex give "Zoticus."

 [1144] The Colbert Codex reads "Extacteus;" Cardulus gives "Stacteus,"
 by which name he is designated beneath by them all.

 [1145] In one of the Colbert codices, and in another from the Sorbonne,
 there is a passage inserted here about the death of Adrian, which is
 said to have happened a little after that of these martyrs.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Joseph the son of both, p. 127.)

 The opinion that Luke's genealogy is that of Mary was unknown to
 Christian antiquity. In the fifteenth century it was first propounded
 by Latin divines to do honour (as they supposed) to the Blessed Virgin.
 It was first broached by Annius of Viterbo, a.d. 1502. Christian
 antiquity is agreed that:--

 1. Both genealogies are those of Joseph.

 2. That Joseph was the son of Jacob or of Heli, either by adoption, or
 because Jacob and Heli were either own brothers or half-brothers; so
 that,--

 3. On the death of one of the brothers, without issue, the surviving
 brother married his widow, who became the mother of Joseph by this
 marriage; so that Joseph was reckoned the son of Jacob and the son of
 Heli. [1146]

 4. Joseph and Mary were of the same lineage, but the Hebrews did not
 reckon descent from the side of the woman. For them St. Luke's
 genealogy is the sufficient register of Christ's royal descent and
 official claim. St. Luke gives his personal pedigree, ascending to
 Adam, and identifying Him with the whole human race.

 II.

 (Conclusion, cap. xix. p. 138.)

 On Jewish genealogies, note Dean Prideaux, [1147] vol. i. p. 296, and
 compare Lardner, vol. ii. 129, et alibi. Stillingfleet [1148] should
 not be overlooked in what he says of the uncertainties of heathen
 chronology.

 Lardner repeatedly calls our author a "great man;" and his most
 valuable account, [1149] digested from divers ancient and modern
 writers, must be consulted by the student. Let us observe the books of
 Scripture which his citations attest, and the great value of his
 attestation of the two genealogies of our Lord. Lardner dates the
 Letter to Origen [1150] a.d. 228 or 240, according to divers
 conjectures of the learned. He concludes with this beautiful tribute:
 "We may glory in Africanus as a Christian" among those "whose shining
 abilities rendered them the ornament of the age in which they
 lived,--men of unspotted characters, giving evident proofs of honesty
 and integrity."

 ------------------------

 Note.

 ------------------------

 The valuable works of Africanus are found in vol. ix. of the Edinburgh
 edition, mixed up with the spurious Decretals and remnants of preceding
 volumes. I am unable to make out very clearly who is the translator,
 but infer that Drs. Roberts and Donaldson should be credited with this
 work.

 [1146] Routh, Reliqu. Sacræ, vol. ii. pp. 233, 339, 341, 355. Compare
 also vol. ii. 334 and 346, this series.

 [1147] Also on the Seventy Weeks (p. 134, supra), vol. i. pp. 227-240
 and 322.

 [1148] Origines Sacræ, vol. i. pp. 64-120.

 [1149] Works, vol. ii. pp. 457-468.

 [1150] See Introductory Notice, p. 123, note 4, supra.

  Anatolius and Minor Writers

 Anatolius and Minor WRiters.

 [Translated by the Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M.A.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Anatolius and Minor Writers.

 ------------------------

 Instead of reprinting a disjointed mass of "Fragments," I have thought
 it desirable to present them in a group, illustrative of the
 Alexandrian school. I give to Anatolius the deserved place of
 prominence, marking him as the meet successor of Africanus in ability
 if not in the nature of his pursuits. His writing and the testimony of
 Eusebius prove him to have been a star of no inferior magnitude, even
 in the brilliant constellation of faith and genius of which he is part.

 These minor writers I have arranged, not with exclusive reference to
 minute chronology, but with some respect to their material, as
 follows:--

 I. Anatolius, a.d. 270.

 II. Alexander of Cappadocia, a.d. 250.

 III. Theognostus, a.d. 265.

 IV. Pierius, a.d. 300.

 V. Theonas, a.d. 300.

 VI. Phileas, a.d. 307.

 VII. Pamphilus, a.d. 309.

 Anatolius and Minor Writers.

 ------------------------

 Anatolius of Alexandria.

 ------------------------

 Translator's Biographical Notice.

 [a.d. 230-270-280.] From Jerome [1151] we learn that Anatolius
 flourished in the reign of Probus and Carus, that he was a native of
 Alexandria, and that he became bishop of Laodicea. Eusebius gives a
 somewhat lengthened account of him, [1152] and speaks of him in terms
 of the strongest laudation, as one surpassing all the men of his time
 in learning and science. He tells us that he attained the highest
 eminence in arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy, besides being a great
 proficient also in dialectics, physics, and rhetoric. His reputation
 was so great among the Alexandrians that they are said to have
 requested him to open a school for teaching the Aristotelian philosophy
 in their city. [1153] He did great service to his fellow-citizens in
 Alexandria on their being besieged by the Romans in a.d. 262, and was
 the means of saving the lives of numbers of them. After this he is said
 to have passed into Syria, where Theotecnus, the bishop of Cæsareia,
 ordained him, destining him to be his own successor in the bishopric.
 After this, however, having occasion to travel to Antioch to attend the
 synod convened to deal with the case of Paul of Samosata, as he passed
 through the city of Laodicea, he was detained by the people and made
 bishop of the place, in succession to Eusebius. [1154] This must have
 been about the year 270 a.d. How long he held that dignity, however, we
 do not know. Eusebius tells us that he did not write many books, but
 yet enough to show us at once his eloquence and his erudition. Among
 these was a treatise on the Chronology of Easter; of which a
 considerable extract is preserved in Eusebius. The book itself exists
 now only in a Latin version, which is generally ascribed to Rufinus,
 and which was published by Ægidius Bucherius in his Doctrina Temporum,
 which was issued at Antwerp in 1634. Another work of his was the
 Institutes of Arithmetic, of which we have some fragments in the
 theologoumena tes arithmetikes, which was published in Paris in 1543.
 Some small fragments of his mathematical works, which have also come
 down to us, were published by Fabricius in his Bibliotheca Græca, iii.
 p. 462.

 [1151] De illustr. viris., ch. 73. [The dates which are known suggest
 conjectural dates of our author's birth and death.]

 [1152] In the 32d chapter of the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical
 History.

 [1153] ["There were giants in those days." How gloriously, even in the
 poverty and distress of the martyr-ages, the cultivation of learning
 was established by Christianity!]

 [1154] [This Eusebius was a learned man, born at Alexandria.]

 The Paschal Canon of Anatolius of Alexandria. [1155]

 ------------------------

 I.

 As we are about to speak on the subject of the order of the times and
 alternations of the world, we shall first dispose of the positions of
 diverse calculators; who, by reckoning only by the course of the moon,
 and leaving out of account the ascent and descent of the sun, with the
 addition of certain problems, have constructed diverse periods, [1156]
 self-contradictory, and such as are never found in the reckoning of a
 true computation; since it is certain that no mode of computation is to
 be approved, in which these two measures are not found together. For
 even in the ancient exemplars, that is, in the books of the Hebrews and
 Greeks, we find not only the course of the moon, but also that of the
 sun, and, indeed, not simply its course in the general, [1157] but even
 the separate and minutest moments of its hours all calculated, as we
 shall show at the proper time, when the matter in hand demands it. Of
 these Hippolytus made up a period of sixteen years with certain unknown
 courses of the moon. Others have reckoned by a period of twenty-five
 years, others by thirty, and some by eighty-four years, without,
 however, teaching thereby an exact method of calculating Easter. But
 our predecessors, men most learned in the books of the Hebrews and
 Greeks,--I mean Isidore and Jerome and Clement,--although they have
 noted similar beginnings for the months just as they differ also in
 language, have, nevertheless, come harmoniously to one and the same
 most exact reckoning of Easter, day and month and season meeting in
 accord with the highest honour for the Lord's resurrection. [1158] But
 Origen also, the most erudite of all, and the acutest in making
 calculations,--a man, too, to whom the epithet chalkeutes [1159] is
 given,--has published in a very elegant manner a little book on Easter.
 And in this book, while declaring, with respect to the day of Easter,
 that attention must be given not only to the course of the moon and the
 transit of the equinox, but also to the passage (transcensum) of the
 sun, which removes every foul ambush and offence of all darkness, and
 brings on the advent of light and the power and inspiration of the
 elements of the whole world, he speaks thus: In the (matter of the) day
 of Easter, he remarks, I do not say that it is to be observed that the
 Lord's day should be found, and the seven [1160] days of the moon which
 are to elapse, but that the sun should pass that division, to wit,
 between light and darkness, constituted in an equality by the
 dispensation of the Lord at the beginning of the world; and that, from
 one hour to two hours, from two to three, from three to four, from four
 to five, from five to six hours, while the light is increasing in the
 ascent of the sun, the darkness should decrease. [1161] ...and the
 addition of the twentieth number being completed, twelve parts should
 be supplied in one and the same day. But if I should have attempted to
 add any little drop of mine [1162] after the exuberant streams of the
 eloquence and science of some, what else should there be to believe but
 that it should be ascribed by all to ostentation, and, to speak more
 truly, to madness, did not the assistance of your promised prayers
 animate us for a little? For we believe that nothing is impossible to
 your power of prayer, and to your faith. Strengthened, therefore, by
 this confidence, we shall set bashfulness aside, and shall enter this
 most deep and unforeseen sea of the obscurest calculation, in which
 swelling questions and problems surge around us on all sides.

 [1155] First edited from ancient manuscript by Ægidius Bucherius, of
 the Society of Jesus.

 [1156] Circulos. [Note the reference to Hippolytus.]

 [1157] Gressus. Vol. v. p. 3; also Bunsen, i. pp. 13, 281.]

 [1158] [It seems probable that the hegemony which Alexandria had
 established in all matters of learning led to that full recognition of
 it, by the Council of Nicæa, which made its bishop the dictator to the
 whole Church in the annual calculation of Easter. Vol. ii. 343.]

 [1159] i.e., "smith" or "brasier," probably from his assiduity.

 [1160] Lunæ vii. Perhaps, as Bucher conjectures, Lunæ xiv., fourteen
 days, &c.

 [1161] The text is doubtful and corrupt here.

 [1162] Aliquid stillicidii.

 II.

 There is, then, in the first year, the new moon of the first month,
 which is the beginning of every cycle of nineteen years, on the six and
 twentieth day of the month called by the Egyptians Phamenoth. [1163]
 But, according to the months of the Macedonians, it is on the
 two-and-twentieth day of Dystrus. And, as the Romans would say, it is
 on the eleventh day before the Kalends of April. Now the sun is found
 on the said six-and-twentieth day of Phamenoth, not only as having
 mounted to the first segment, but as already passing the fourth day in
 it. And this segment they are accustomed to call the first
 dodecatemorion (twelfth part), and the equinox, and the beginning of
 months, and the head of the cycle, and the starting-point [1164] of the
 course of the planets. And the segment before this they call the last
 of the months, and the twelfth segment, and the last dodecatemorion,
 and the end of the circuit [1165] of the planets. And for this reason,
 also, we maintain that those who place the first month in it, and who
 determine the fourteenth day of the Paschal season by it, make no
 trivial or common blunder.

 [1163] [The Church's Easter-calculations created modern astronomy,
 which passed to the Arabians from the Church. (See Whewell's Inductive
 Sciences.) They preserved it, but did not improve it, in Spain.
 Christianity re-adopted it, and the presbyter Copernicus new-created
 it. The court of Rome (not the Church Catholic) persecuted Galileo; but
 it did so under the lead of professional "Science,'" which had darkened
 the human mind, from the days of Pythagoras, respecting his more
 enlightened system.]

 [1164] The word is aphesis, which Valesius makes equivalent to
 apheteria, the rope or post from which the chariots started in the
 race, and so = starting-point.--Tr.

 [1165] periodou.

 III.

 Nor is this an opinion confined to ourselves alone. For it was also
 known to the Jews of old and before Christ, and it was most carefully
 observed by them. [1166] And this may be learned from what Philo, and
 Josephus, and Musæus have written; and not only from these, but indeed
 from others still more ancient, namely, the two Agathobuli, [1167] who
 were surnamed the Masters, and the eminent Aristobulus, [1168] who was
 one of the Seventy who translated the sacred and holy Scriptures of the
 Hebrews for Ptolemy Philadelphus and his father, and dedicated his
 exegetical books on the law of Moses to the same kings. These writers,
 in solving some questions which are raised with respect to Exodus, say
 that all alike ought to sacrifice the Passover [1169] after the vernal
 equinox in the middle of the first month. And that is found to be when
 the sun passes through the first segment of the solar, or, as some
 among them have named it, the zodiacal circle.

 [1166] pros auton--others read pro, before them.

 [1167] Anatolius writes that there were two Agathobuli with the surname
 Masters; but I fear that he is wrong in his opinion that they were more
 ancient than Philo and Josephus. For Agathobulus, the philosopher,
 flourished in the times of Adrian, as Eusebius writes in his Chronicon,
 and after him Georgius Syncellus.--Vales.

 [1168] 'Aristoboulou tou panu--Rufinus erroneously renders it
 Aristobulum ex Paneade, Aristobulus of Paneas. Scaliger also, in his
 Animadversiones Eusebianæ, p. 130, strangely thinks that the text
 should be corrected from the version of Rufinus. And Bede, in his De
 Ratione Computi, also follows the faulty rendering of Rufinus, and
 writes Aristobulus et Paniada, as though the latter word were the
 proper name of a Jewish writer, finding probably in the Codex of
 Rufinus, which he possessed, the reading Aristobulus et Paneada, which
 indeed is found in a very ancient Paris manuscript, and also in the
 Codex Corbeiensis. But that that Aristobulus was not one of the seventy
 translators, as Anatolius writes, is proved by Scaliger in the work
 cited above. This Aristobulus was also surnamed didaskalos, or Master,
 as we see from the Maccabees ii. 1. For I do not agree with Scaliger in
 distinguishing this Aristobulus, of whom mention is made in the
 Maccabees, from the Peripatetic philosopher who dedicated his
 Commentaries on the Law of Moses to Ptolemy Philometor--Vales. [See
 vol. ii. p. 487, and Elucidation II. p. 520, same volume, this series.]

 [1169] ta diabeteria thoein.

 IV.

 But this Aristobulus also adds, that for the feast of the Passover it
 was necessary not only that the sun should pass the equinoctial
 segment, but the moon also. For as there are two equinoctial segments,
 the vernal and the autumnal, and these diametrically opposite to each
 other, and since the day of the Passover is fixed for the fourteenth
 day of the month, in the evening, the moon will have the position
 diametrically opposite the sun; as is to be seen in full moons. And the
 sun will thus be in the segment of the vernal equinox, and the moon
 necessarily will be at the autumnal equinox.

 V.

 I am aware that very many other matters were discussed by them, some of
 them with considerable probability, and others of them as matters of
 the clearest demonstration, [1170] by which they endeavour to prove
 that the festival of the Passover and unleavened bread ought by all
 means to be kept after the equinox. But I shall pass on without
 demanding such copious demonstrations (on subjects [1171] ) from which
 the veil of the Mosaic law has been removed; for now it remains for us
 with unveiled face to behold ever as in a glass Christ Himself and the
 doctrines and sufferings of Christ. But that the first month among the
 Hebrews is about the equinox, is clearly shown also by what is taught
 in the book of Enoch. [1172]

 [1170] kuriakas apodeixeis--Christophorsonus renders it ratas; Rufinus
 gives validissimas assertiones. The Greeks use kurios in this sense,
 kuriai dikai, doxai, &c., decisive, valid, judgments, opinions, &c.

 [1171] The text gives apaiton hon perieretai, &c.; various codices read
 ap' auton, &c. Valesius now proposes hulas apaiton; ho peri heretai, I
 shall pass on without...for the veil is removed from me.

 [1172] An apocryphal book of some antiquity, which professes to proceed
 from the patriarch of that name, but of whose existence prior to the
 Christian era there is no real evidence. The first author who clearly
 refers to it by name is Tertullian. [Vol. iii. p. 62, and iv. 380.]

 VI.

 And, therefore, in this concurrence of the sun and moon, the Paschal
 festival is not to be celebrated, because as long as they are found in
 this course the power of darkness is not overcome; and as long as
 equality between light and darkness endures, and is not diminished by
 the light, it is shown that the Paschal festival is not to be
 celebrated. Accordingly, it is enjoined that that festival be kept
 after the equinox, because the moon of the fourteenth, [1173] if before
 the equinox or at the equinox, does not fill the whole night. But after
 the equinox, the moon of the fourteenth, with one day being added
 because of the passing of the equinox, although it does not extend to
 the true light, that is, the rising of the sun and the beginning of
 day, will nevertheless leave no darkness behind it. And, in accordance
 with this, Moses is charged by the Lord to keep seven days of
 unleavened bread for the celebration of the Passover, that in them no
 power of darkness should be found to surpass the light. And although
 the outset of four nights begins to be dark, that is, the 17th and 18th
 and 19th and 20th, yet the moon of the 20th, which rises before that,
 does not permit the darkness to extend on even to midnight.

 [1173] xiv. luna. The Romans used the phrase luna prima, secunda, &c.,
 as meaning, the first, second day, &c., after new moon.--Tr.

 VII.

 To us, however, with whom it is impossible for all these things to come
 aptly at one and the same time, namely, the moon's fourteenth, and the
 Lord's day, and the passing of the equinox, and whom the obligation of
 the Lord's resurrection binds to keep the Paschal festival on the
 Lord's day, it is granted that we may extend the beginning of our
 celebration even to the moon's twentieth. For although the moon of the
 20th does not fill the whole night, yet, rising as it does in the
 second watch, it illumines the greater part of the night. Certainly if
 the rising of the moon should be delayed on to the end of two watches,
 that is to say, to midnight, the light would not then exceed the
 darkness, but the darkness the light. But it is clear that in the
 Paschal feast it is not possible that any part of the darkness should
 surpass the light; for the festival of the Lord's resurrection is one
 of light, and there is no fellowship between light and darkness. And if
 the moon should rise in the third watch, it is clear that the 22d or
 23d of the moon would then be reached, in which it is not possible that
 there can be a true celebration of Easter. For those who determine that
 the festival may be kept at this age of the moon, are not only unable
 to make that good by the authority of Scripture, but turn also into the
 crime of sacrilege and contumacy, and incur the peril of their souls;
 inasmuch as they affirm that the true light may be celebrated along
 with something of that power of darkness which dominates all.

 VIII.

 Accordingly, it is not the case, as certain calculators of Gaul allege,
 that this assertion is opposed by that passage in Exodus, [1174] where
 we read: "In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the first month,
 at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread until the one-and-twentieth day
 of the month at even. Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your
 houses." From this they maintain that it is quite permissible to
 celebrate the Passover on the twenty-first day of the moon;
 understanding that if the twenty-second day were added, there would be
 found eight days of unleavened bread. A thing which cannot be found
 with any probability, indeed, in the Old Testament, as the Lord,
 through Moses, gives this charge: "Seven days ye shall eat unleavened
 bread." [1175] Unless perchance the fourteenth day is not reckoned by
 them among the days of unleavened bread with the celebration of the
 feast; which, however, is contrary to the Word of the Gospel which
 says: "Moreover, on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples
 came to Jesus." [1176] And there is no doubt as to its being the
 fourteenth day on which the disciples asked the Lord, in accordance
 with the custom established for them of old, "Where wilt Thou that we
 prepare for Thee to eat the Passover?" But they who are deceived with
 this error maintain this addition, because they do not know that the
 13th and 14th, the 14th and 15th, the 15th and 16th, the 16th and 17th,
 the 17th and 18th, the 18th and 19th, the 19th and 20th, the 20th and
 21st days of the moon are each found, as may be most surely proved,
 within a single day. For every day in the reckoning of the moon does
 not end in the evening as the same day in respect of number, as it is
 at its beginning in the morning. For the day which in the morning, that
 is up to the sixth hour and half, is numbered the 13th day of the
 month, is found at even to be the 14th. Wherefore, also, the Passover
 is enjoined to be extended on to the 21st day at even; which day,
 without doubt, in the morning, that is, up to that term of hours which
 we have mentioned, was reckoned the 20th. Calculate, then, from the end
 of the 13th [1177] day of the moon, which marks the beginning of the
 14th, on to the end of the 20th, at which the 21st day also begins, and
 you will have only seven days of unleavened bread, in which, by the
 guidance of the Lord, it has been determined before that the most true
 feast of the Passover ought to be celebrated.

 [1174] Exod. xii. 18, 19.

 [1175] Exod. xii. 15; Levit. xxiii. 6.

 [1176] Matt. xxvi. 17; Mark xiv. 12; Luke xxii. 7.

 [1177] But the text gives 12th.

 IX.

 But what wonder is it that they should have erred in the matter of the
 21st day of the moon who have added three days before the equinox, in
 which they hold that the Passover may be celebrated? An assertion which
 certainly must be considered altogether absurd, since, by the
 best-known historiographers of the Jews, and by the Seventy Elders, it
 has been clearly determined that the Paschal festival cannot be
 celebrated at the equinox.

 X.

 But nothing was difficult to them with whom it was lawful to celebrate
 the Passover on any day when the fourteenth of the moon happened after
 the equinox. Following their example up to the present time all the
 bishops of Asia--as themselves also receiving the rule from an
 unimpeachable authority, to wit, the evangelist John, who leant on the
 Lord's breast, and drank in instructions spiritual without doubt--were
 in the way of celebrating the Paschal feast, without question, every
 year, whenever the fourteenth day of the moon had come, and the lamb
 was sacrificed by the Jews after the equinox was past; not acquiescing,
 so far as regards this matter, with the authority of some, namely, the
 successors of Peter and Paul, who have taught all the churches in which
 they sowed the spiritual seeds of the Gospel, that the solemn festival
 of the resurrection of the Lord can be celebrated only on the Lord's
 day. Whence, also, a certain contention broke out between the
 successors of these, namely, Victor, at that time bishop of the city of
 Rome, and Polycrates, who then appeared to hold the primacy among the
 bishops of Asia. And this contention was adjusted most rightfully by
 Irenæus, [1178] at that time president of a part of Gaul, so that both
 parties kept by their own order, and did not decline from the original
 custom of antiquity. The one party, indeed, kept the Paschal day on the
 fourteenth day of the first month, according to the Gospel, as they
 thought, adding nothing of an extraneous kind, but keeping through all
 things the rule of faith. And the other party, passing the day of the
 Lord's Passion as one replete with sadness and grief, hold that it
 should not be lawful to celebrate the Lord's mystery of the Passover at
 any other time but on the Lord's day, on which the resurrection of the
 Lord from death took place, and on which rose also for us the cause of
 everlasting joy. For it is one thing to act in accordance with the
 precept given by the apostle, yea, by the Lord Himself, and be sad with
 the sad, and suffer with him that suffers by the cross, His own word
 being: "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death;" [1179] and it
 is another thing to rejoice with the victor as he triumphs over an
 ancient enemy, and exults with the highest triumph over a conquered
 adversary, as He Himself also says: "Rejoice with Me; for I have found
 the sheep which I had lost." [1180]

 [1178] [Vol. iii. p. 630. The convenire ad of Irenæus is thus shown to
 be geographical, not ecclesiastical. Vol. i. pp. 415, 569.]

 [1179] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [1180] Luke xv. 6.

 XI.

 Moreover, the allegation which they sometimes make against us, that if
 we pass the moon's fourteenth we cannot celebrate the beginning of the
 Paschal feast in light, [1181] neither moves nor disturbs us. For,
 although they lay it down as a thing unlawful, that the beginning of
 the Paschal festival should be extended so far as to the moon's
 twentieth; yet they cannot deny that it ought to be extended to the
 sixteenth and seventeenth, which coincide with the day on which the
 Lord rose from the dead. But we decide that it is better that it should
 be extended even on to the twentieth day, on account of the Lord's day,
 than that we should anticipate the Lord's day on account of the
 fourteenth day; for on the Lord's day was it that light was shown to us
 in the beginning, and now also in the end, the comforts of all present
 and the tokens of all future blessings. For the Lord ascribes no less
 praise to the twentieth day than to the fourteenth. For in the book of
 Leviticus [1182] the injunction is expressed thus: "In the first month,
 on the fourteenth day of this month, at even, is the Lord's Passover.
 And on the fifteenth day of this month is the feast of unleavened bread
 unto the Lord. Seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread. The first day
 shall be to you one most diligently attended [1183] and holy. Ye shall
 do no servile work thereon. And the seventh day shall be to you more
 diligently attended [1184] and holier; ye shall do no servile work
 thereon." And hence we maintain that those have contracted no guilt
 [1185] before the tribunal of Christ, who have held that the beginning
 of the Paschal festival ought to be extended to this day. And this,
 too, the most especially, as we are pressed by three difficulties,
 namely, that we should keep the solemn festival of the Passover on the
 Lord's day, and after the equinox, and yet not beyond the limit of the
 moon's twentieth day.

 [1181] Lucidum.

 [1182] Levit. xxiii. 5-7.

 [1183] Celeberrimus, honoured, solemn.

 [1184] Solemn.

 [1185] [The sanctification of the Lord's Day is thus shown to be a
 Christian principle. The feast of Easter was the Great Lord's Day, but
 the rule was common to the weekly Easter.]

 XII.

 But this again is held by other wise and most acute men to be an
 impossibility, because within that narrow and most contracted limit of
 a cycle of nineteen years, a thoroughly genuine Paschal time, that is
 to say, one held on the Lord's day and yet after the equinox, cannot
 occur. But, in order that we may set in a clearer light the difficulty
 which causes their incredulity, we shall set down, along with the
 courses of the moon, that cycle of years which we have mentioned; the
 days being computed before in which the year rolls on in its
 alternating courses, by Kalends and Ides and Nones, and by the sun's
 ascent and descent.

 XIII.

 The moon's age set forth in the Julian Calendar.

 January, on the Kalends, one day, the moon's first (day); on the Nones,
 the 5th day, the moon's 5th; on the Ides, the 13th day, the moon's
 13th. On the day before the Kalends of February, the 31st day, the
 moon's 1st; on the Kalends of February, the 32d day, the moon's 2d; on
 the Nones, the 36th day, the moon's 6th; on the Ides, the 44th day, the
 moon's 14th. On the day before the Kalends of March, the 59th day, the
 moon's 29th; on the Kalends of March, the 60th day, the moon's 1st; on
 the Nones, the 66th day, the moon's 7th; on the Ides, the 74th day, the
 moon's 15th. On the day before the Kalends of April, the 90th day, the
 moon's 2d; on the Kalends of April, the 91st day, the moon's 3d; on the
 Nones, the 95th day, the moon's 7th; on the Ides, the 103d day, the
 moon's 15th. On the day before the Kalends of May, the 120th day, the
 moon's 3d; on the Kalends of May, the 121st day, the moon's 4th; on the
 Nones, the 127th day, the moon's 10th; on the Ides, the 135th day, the
 moon's 18th. On the day before the Kalends of June, the 151st day, the
 moon's 3d; on the Kalends of June, the 152d day, the moon's 5th; on the
 Nones, the 153d day, the moon's 9th; on the Ides, the 164th day, the
 moon's 17th. On the day before the Kalends of July, the 181st day, the
 moon's 5th; on the Kalends of July, the 182d day, the moon's 6th; on
 the Nones, the 188th day, the moon's 12th; on the Ides, the 196th day,
 the moon's 20th. On the day before the Kalends of August, the 212th
 day, the moon's 5th; on the Kalends of August, the 213th day, the
 moon's 7th; on the Nones, the 217th day, the moon's 12th; on the Ides,
 the 225th day, the moon's 19th. On the day before the Kalends of
 September, the 243d day, the moon's 7th; on the Kalends of September,
 the 244th day, the moon's 8th; on the Nones, the 248th day, the moon's
 12th; on the Ides, the 256th day, the moon's 20th. On the day before
 the Kalends of October, the 273d day, the moon's 8th; on the Kalends of
 October, the 247th day, the moon's 9th; on the Nones, the 280th day,
 the moon's 15th; on the Ides, the 288th day, the moon's 23d. On the day
 before the Kalends of November, the 304th day, the moon's 9th; on the
 Kalends of November, the 305th day, the moon's 10th; on the Nones, the
 309th day, the moon's 14th; on the Ides, the 317th day, the moon's 22d.
 On the day before the Kalends of December, the 334th day, the moon's
 10th; on the Kalends of December, the 335th day, the moon's 11th; on
 the Nones, the 339th day, the moon's 15th; on the Ides, the 347th day,
 the moon's 23d. On the day before the Kalends of January, the 365th
 day, the moon's 11th; on the Kalends of January, the 366th day, the
 moon's 12th.

 XIV.

 The Paschal or Easter Table of Anatolius.

 Now, then, after the reckoning of the days and the exposition of the
 course of the moon, whereon the whole revolves on to its end, the cycle
 of the years may be set forth from the commencement. [1186] This makes
 the Passover (Easter season) circulate between the 6th day before the
 Kalends of April and the 9th before the Kalends of May, according to
 the following table:

 Equinox / Moon / Easter / Moon

 1. Sabbath / XXVI. / XVth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 17th April /
 XVIII.

 2. Lord's Day / VII. / Kalends of April, i.e., 1st April / XIV.

 3. IId Day (ferial) / XVIII. / XIth before the Kalends of May, i.e.,
 21st April / XVI.

 4. IIId Day / XXIX. / Ides of April, i.e., 13th April / XIX.

 5. IVth Day / X. / IVth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 29th March /
 XIV.

 6. Vth Day / XXI. / XIVth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 18th April /
 XVI.

 7. Sabbath [1187] / II. / VIth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 27th
 March / XVII.

 8. Lord's Day / XIII. / Kalends of April, i.e., 1st of April / XX.

 9. IId Day / XXIV. / XVIIIth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 14th
 March / XV.

 10. IIId Day / V. / VIIIth before the Ides of April, i.e., 6th April /
 XV.

 11. IVth Day / XVI. / IVth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 29th
 March / XX.

 12. Vth Day / XXVII. / IIId before the Ides of April, i.e., 11th April
 / XV.

 13. VIth Day / VIII. / IIId before the Nones of April, i.e., 3rd April
 / XVII.

 14. Sabbath / XX. / IXth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 23rd April /
 XX.

 15. Lord's Day / I. / VIth before the Ides of April, i.e., 8th April /
 XV.

 16. IId Day / XII. / IId before the Kalends of April, i.e., 31st March
 / XVIII.

 17. IVth Day [1188] / XXIII. / XIVth before the Kalends of May, i.e.,
 18th April / XIX.

 18. Vth Day / IV. / IId before the Nones of April, i.e., 4th April /
 XIV.

 19. VIth Day / XV. / VIth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 27th March
 / XVII.

 [1186] Annorum circuli principium inchoandum est.

 [1187] Bissextile reckoning. [Compare note 2, p. 110, supra.]

 [1188] Bissextile reckoning. [Compare note 2, p. 110, supra.]

 XV.

 This cycle of nineteen years is not approved of by certain African
 investigators who have drawn up larger cycles, because it seems to be
 somewhat opposed to their surmises and opinions. For these make up the
 best proved accounts according to their calculation, and determine a
 certain beginning or certain end for the Easter season, so as that the
 Paschal festival shall not be celebrated before the eleventh day before
 the Kalends of April, i.e., 24th March, nor after the moon's
 twenty-first, and the eleventh day before the Kalends of May, i.e.,
 21st April. But we hold that these are limits not only not to be
 followed, but to be detested and overturned. For even in the ancient
 law it is laid down that this is to be seen to, viz., that the Passover
 be not celebrated before the transit of the vernal equinox, at which
 the last of the autumnal term is overtaken, [1189] on the fourteenth
 day of the first month, which is one calculated not by the beginnings
 of the day, but by those of the moon. [1190] And as this has been
 sanctioned by the charge of the Lord, and is in all things accordant
 with the Catholic faith, it cannot be doubtful to any wise man that to
 anticipate it must be a thing unlawful and perilous. And, accordingly,
 this only is it sufficient for all the saints and Catholics to observe,
 namely, that giving no heed to the diverse opinions of very many, they
 should keep the solemn festival of the Lord's resurrection within the
 limits which we have set forth.

 [1189] In quo autumnalis novissima pars vincitur.

 [1190] Lunæ orsibus.

 XVI.

 Furthermore, as to the proposal subjoined to your epistle, that I
 should attempt to introduce into this little book some notice of the
 ascent and descent of the sun, which is made out in the distribution of
 days and nights. The matter proceeds thus: In fifteen days and half an
 hour, the sun ascending by so many minutes, that is, by four in one
 day, from the eighth day before the Kalends of January, i.e., 25th
 December, to the eighth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 25th March,
 an hour is taken up; [1191] at which date there are twelve hours and a
 twelfth. On this day, towards evening, if it happen also to be the
 moon's fourteenth, the lamb was sacrificed among the Jews. But if the
 number went beyond that, so that it was the moon's fifteenth or
 sixteenth on the evening of the same day, on the fourteenth day of the
 second moon, in the same month, the Passover was celebrated; and the
 people ate unleavened bread for seven days, up to the twenty-first day
 at evening. Hence, if it happens in like manner to us, that the seventh
 day before the Kalends of April, 26th March, proves to be both the
 Lord's day and the moon's fourteenth, Easter is to be celebrated on the
 fourteenth. But if it proves to be the moon's fifteenth or sixteenth,
 or any day up to the twentieth, then our regard for the Lord's
 resurrection, which took place on the Lord's day, will lead us to
 celebrate it on the same principle; yet this should be done so as that
 the beginning of Easter may not pass beyond the close of their
 festival, that is to say, the moon's twentieth. And therefore we have
 said that those parties have committed no trivial offence who have
 ventured either on anticipating or on going beyond this number, which
 is given us in the divine Scriptures themselves. And from the eighth
 day before the Kalends of April, 25th March, to the eighth before the
 Kalends of July, 24th June, in fifteen days an hour is taken up: the
 sun ascending every day by two minutes and a half, and the sixth part
 of a minute. And from the eighth day before the Kalends of July, 24th
 June, to the eighth before the Kalends of October, 24th September, in
 like manner, in fifteen days and four hours, an hour is taken up: the
 sun descending every day by the same number of minutes. And the space
 remaining on to the eighth day before the Kalends of January, 25th
 December, is determined in a similar number of hours and minutes. So
 that thus on the eighth day before the Kalends of January, for the hour
 there is the hour and half. For up to that day and night are
 distributed. And the twelve hours which were established at the vernal
 equinox in the beginning by the Lord's dispensation, being distributed
 over the night on the eighth before the Kalends of July, the sun
 ascending through those eighteen several degrees which we have noted,
 shall be found conjoined with the longer space in the twelfth. And,
 again, the twelve hours which should be fulfilled at the autumnal
 equinox in the sun's descent, should be found disjoined on the sixth
 before the Kalends of January as six hours divided into twelve, the
 night holding eighteen divided into twelve. And on the eighth before
 the Kalends of July, in like manner, it held six divided into twelve.

 [1191] Diminuitur. [This year (1886) we have the lowest possible
 Easter.]

 XVII.

 Be not ignorant of this, however, that those four determining periods,
 [1192] which we have mentioned, although they are approximated to the
 Kalends of the following months, yet hold each the middle of a season,
 viz., of spring and summer, and autumn and winter. And the beginnings
 of the seasons are not to be fixed at that point at which the Kalends
 of the month begin. But each season is to be begun in such way that the
 equinox divides the season of spring from its first day; and the season
 of summer is divided by the eighth day before the Kalends of July, and
 that of autumn by the eighth before the Kalends of October, and that of
 winter by the eighth before the Kalends of January in like manner.
 [1193]

 [1192] Temporum confinia.

 [1193] [Compare what is said of Hippolytus, vol. v. p. 3, this series.
 See the valuable work of Professor Seabury on the Calendar, ed. 1872.]

 Fragments of the Books on Arithmetic. [1194]

 ------------------------

 What is mathematics?

 Aristotle thinks that all philosophy consisted of theory and practice,
 [1195] and divides the practical into ethical and political, and the
 theoretic again into the theological, the physical, and the
 mathematical. And thus very clearly and skilfully he shows that
 mathematics is (a branch of) philosophy.

 The Chaldæans were the originators of astronomy, and the Egyptians of
 geometry and arithmetic....

 And whence did mathematics derive its name?

 Those of the Peripatetic school affirmed that in rhetoric and poetry,
 and in the popular music, any one may be an adept though he has gone
 through no process of study; but that in those pursuits properly called
 studies, [1196] none can have any real knowledge unless he has first
 become a student of them. Hence they supposed that the theory of these
 things was called Mathematics, from mathema, study, science. And the
 followers of Pythagoras are said to have given this more distinctive
 name of mathematics to geometry, and arithmetic alone. For of old these
 had each its own separate name; and they had up till then no name
 common to both. And he (Archytas) gave them this name, because he found
 science [1197] in them, and that in a manner suitable to man's study.
 [1198] For they (the Pythagoreans) perceived that these studies dealt
 with things eternal and immutable and perfect, [1199] in which things
 alone they considered that science consisted. But the more recent
 philosophers have given a more extensive application to this name, so
 that, in their opinion, the mathematician deals not only with
 substances [1200] incorporeal, and falling simply within the province
 of the understanding, [1201] but also with that which touches upon
 corporeal and sensible matter. For he ought to be cognisant of [1202]
 the course of the stars, and their velocity, and their magnitudes, and
 forms, and distances. And, besides, he ought to investigate their
 dispositions to vision, examining into the causes, why they are not
 seen as of the same form and of the same size from every distance,
 retaining, indeed, as we know them to do, their dispositions relative
 to each other, [1203] but producing, at the same time, deceptive
 appearances, both in respect of order and position. And these are so,
 either as determined by the state of the heavens and the air, or as
 seen in reflecting and all polished surfaces and in transparent bodies,
 and in all similar kinds. In addition to this, they thought that the
 man ought to be versed in mechanics and geometry and dialectics. And
 still further, that he should engage himself with the causes of the
 harmonious combination of sounds, and with the composition of music;
 which things are bodies, [1204] or at least are to be ultimately
 referred to sensible matter.

 What is mathematics?

 Mathematics is a theoretic science [1205] of things apprehensible by
 perception and sensation for communication to others. [1206] And before
 this a certain person indulging in a joke, while hitting his mark, said
 that mathematics is that science to which Homer's description of
 Discord may be applied.--

 "Small at her birth, but rising every hour,

 While scarce the skies her horrid (mighty) head can bound,

 She stalks on earth and shakes the world around." [1207]

 For it begins with a point and a line, [1208] and forthwith it takes
 heaven itself and all things within its compass.

 How many divisions are there of mathematics?

 Of the more notable and the earliest mathematics there are two
 principal divisions, viz., arithmetic and geometry. And of the
 mathematics which deals with things sensible there are six divisions,
 viz., computation (practical arithmetic), geodesy, optics, theoretical
 music, mechanics, and astronomy. But that neither the so-called tactics
 nor architecture, [1209] nor the popular music, nor physics, nor the
 art which is called equivocally the mechanical, constitutes, as some
 think, a branch of mathematics, we shall prove, as the discourse
 proceeds, clearly and systematically.

 As to the circle having eight solids and six superficies and four
 angles....What branches of arithmetic have closest affinity with each
 other? Computation and theoretical music have a closer affinity than
 others with arithmetic; for this department, being one also of quantity
 and ratio, approaches it in number and proportion. [1210] Optics and
 geodesy, again, are more in affinity with geometry. And mechanics and
 astrology are in general affinity with both.

 As to mathematics having its principles [1211] in hypothesis and about
 hypothesis. Now, the term hypothesis is used in three ways, or indeed
 in many ways. For according to one usage of the term we have the
 dramatic revolution; [1212] and in this sense there are said to be
 hypotheses in the dramas of Euripides. According to a second meaning,
 we have the investigation of matters in the special in rhetoric; and in
 this sense the Sophists say that a hypothesis must be proposed. And,
 according to a third signification, the beginning of a proof is called
 a hypothesis, as being the begging of certain matters with a view to
 the establishment of another in question. Thus it is said that
 Democritus [1213] used a hypothesis, namely, that of atoms and a
 vacuum; and Asclepiades [1214] that of atoms [1215] and pores. Now,
 when applied to mathematics, the term hypothesis is to be taken in the
 third sense.

 That Pythagoras was not the only one who duly honoured arithmetic, but
 that his best known disciples did so too, being wont to say that "all
 things fit number." [1216]

 That arithmetic has as its immediate end chiefly the theory of science,
 [1217] than which there is no end either greater or nobler. And its
 second end is to bring together in one all that is found in determinate
 substance. [1218]

 Who among the mathematicians has made any discovery?

 Eudemus [1219] relates in his Astrologies that OEnopides [1220] found
 out the circle of the zodiac and the cycle [1221] of the great year.
 And Thales [1222] discovered the eclipse of the sun and its period in
 the tropics in its constant inequality. And Anaximander [1223]
 discovered that the earth is poised in space, [1224] and moves round
 the axis of the universe. And Anaximenes [1225] discovered that the
 moon has her light from the sun, and found out also the way in which
 she suffers eclipse. And the rest of the mathematicians have also made
 additions to these discoveries. We may instance the facts--that the
 fixed stars move round the axis passing through the poles, while the
 planets remove from each other [1226] round the perpendicular axis of
 the zodiac; and that the axis of the fixed stars and the planets is the
 side of a pentedecagon with four-and-twenty parts.

 ------------------------

 [1194] Fabricius, Biblioth. Græca, ed. Harles, vol. iii. p. 462.
 Hamburg, 1793.

 [1195] theorias kai praxeos.

 [1196] mathemata.

 [1197] to epistemonikon.

 [1198] mathesin.

 [1199] eilikrine, absolute.

 [1200] hulen.

 [1201] noeten.

 [1202] theoretikos.

 [1203] tous pros allela logous.

 [1204] somata, substances.

 [1205] episteme theoretike.

 [1206] pros ten ton hupopiptonton dosin.

 [1207] Iliad, iv. 442-443 (Pope).

 [1208] semeiou kai grammes.

 [1209] to architektonikon.

 [1210] analogias.

 [1211] archas, beginnings.

 [1212] peripeteia, reversal of circumstances on which the plot of a
 tragedy hinges.

 [1213] A native of Abdera, in Thrace, born about 460 b.c., and, along
 with Leucippus, the founder of the philosophical theory of atoms,
 according to which the creation of all things was explained as being
 due to the fortuitous combination of an infinite number of atoms
 floating in infinite space.

 [1214] A famous physician, a native of Bithynia, but long resident in
 great repute at Rome in the middle of the first century b.c. He adopted
 the Epicurean doctrine of atoms and pores, and tried to form a new
 theory of disease, on the principle that it might be in all cases
 reduced to obstruction of the pores and irregular distribution of the
 atoms.

 [1215] onkois.

 [1216] [Wisd. xi. 20; Ecclus. xxxviii. 29 and xlii. 7.]

 [1217] ten epistemoniken theorian.

 [1218] sullebden katalabein posa te horismene ousia sumbebeken.

 [1219] A native of Rhodes, a disciple of Aristotle, and editor of his
 works.

 [1220] A native of Chios, mentioned by Plato in connection with
 Anaxagoras, and therefore supposed by some to have been a contemporary
 of the latter sage.

 [1221] peristasin, revolution.

 [1222] Of Miletus, one of the sages, and founder of the Ionic school.

 [1223] Of Miletus, born 610 b.c., the immediate successor of Thales in
 the Ionic school of philosophy.

 [1224] meteoros.

 [1225] Of Miletus, the third in the series of Ionic philosophers.

 [1226] apechousin allelon.
