Other Fragments from the Lost Writings of Justin (Justin Martyr, trans. A. Roberts)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf01.viii.ix.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 Fragments from the Lost Writings of Justin
 http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf01.viii.ix.html

Other Fragments from the Lost Writings of Justin

 [Translated by the Rev. A. Roberts, D.D.]

  I.

 The most admirable Justin rightly declared that the aforesaid demons
 [2636] resembled robbers.--Tatian's Address to the Greeks, chap. xviii.

 [2636] [See, on the Resurrection, cap. vi.; and compare, --

 "And of those demons that are found

 In fire, air, flood, or under ground," etc.
 Milton, Pens., line 93.]

  II.

 And Justin well said in his book against Marcion, that he would not
 have believed the Lord Himself, if He had announced any other God than
 the Fashioner and Maker [of the world], and our Nourisher. But since,
 from the one God, who both made this world and formed us, and contains
 as well as administers all things, there came to us the only-begotten
 Son, summing up His own workmanship in Himself, my faith in Him is
 stedfast, and my love towards the Father is immoveable, God bestowing
 both upon us.--Irenæus: Heresies, iv. 6.

  III.

 Justin well said: Before the advent of the Lord, Satan never ventured
 to blaspheme God, inasmuch as he was not yet sure of his own damnation,
 since that was announced concerning him by the prophets only in
 parables and allegories. But after the advent of the Lord, learning
 plainly from the discourses of Christ and His apostles that eternal
 fire was prepared for him who voluntarily departed from Godi, and for
 all who, without repentance, persevere in apostasy, then, by means of a
 man of this sort, he, as if already condemned, blasphemes that God who
 inflicts judgment upon him, and imputes the sin of his apostasy to his
 Maker, instead of to his own will and predilection.--Irenæus: Heresies,
 v. 26.

  IV.

 Expounding the reason of the incessant plotting of the devil against
 us, he declares: Before the advent of the Lord, the devil did not so
 plainly know the measure of his own punishment, inasmuch as the divine
 prophets had but enigmatically announced it; as, for instance, Isaiah,
 who in the person of the Assyrian tragically revealed the course to be
 followed against the devil. But when the Lord appeared, and the devil
 clearly understood that eternal fire was laid up and prepared for him
 and his angels, he then began to plot without ceasing against the
 faithful, being desirous to have many companions in his apostasy, that
 he might not by himself endure the shame of condemnation, comforting
 himself by this cold and malicious consolation.--From the writings of
 John of Antioch.

  V.

 And Justin of Neapolis, a man who was not far separated from the
 apostles either in age or excellence, says that that which is mortal is
 inherited, but that which is immortal inherits; and that the flesh
 indeed dies, but the kingdom of heaven lives.--From Methodius On the
 Resurrection, in Photius.

  VI.

 Neither is there straitness with God, nor anything that is not
 absolutely perfect.--From manuscript of the writings of Justin.

  VII.

 We shall not injure God by remaining ignorant of Him, but shall deprive
 ourselves of His friendship.

  VIII.

 The unskilfulness of the teacher proves destructive to his disciples,
 and the carelessness of the disciples entails danger on the teacher,
 and especially should they owe their negligence to his want of
 knowledge.

  IX.

 The soul can with difficulty be recalled to those good things from
 which it has fallen, and is with difficulty dragged away from those
 evils to which it has become accustomed. If at any time thou showest a
 disposition to blame thyself, then perhaps, through the medicine of
 repentance, I should cherish good hopes regarding thee. But when thou
 altogether despisest fear, and rejectest with scorn the very faith of
 Christ, it were better for thee that thou hadst never been born from
 the womb.--From the writings of John of Damascus.

  X.

 By the two birds [2637] Christ is denoted, both dead as man, and living
 as God. He is likened to a bird, because He is understood and declared
 to be from above, and from heaven. And the living bird, having been
 dipped in the blood of the dead one, was afterwards let go. For the
 living and divine Word was in the crucified and dead temple [of the
 body], as being a partaker of the passion, and yet impassible to God.

 By that which took place in the running [2638] water, in which the wood
 and the hyssop and the scarlet were dipped, is set forth the bloody
 passion of Christ on the cross for the salvation of those who are
 sprinkled with the Spirit, and the water, and the blood. Wherefore the
 material for purification was not provided chiefly with reference to
 leprosy, but with regard to the forgiveness of sins, that both leprosy
 might be understood to be an emblem of sin, and the things which were
 sacrificed an emblem of Him who was to be sacrificed for sins.

 For this reason, consequently, he ordered that the scarlet should be
 dipped at the same time in the water, thus predicting that the flesh
 should no longer possess its natural [evil] properties. For this
 reason, also, were there the two birds, the one being sacrificed in the
 water, and the other dipped both in the blood and in the water and then
 sent away, just as is narrated also respecting the goats.

 The goat that was sent away presented a type of Him who taketh away the
 sins of men. But the two contained a representation of the one economy
 of God incarnate. For He was wounded for our transgressions, and He
 bare the sins of many, and He was delivered for our iniquities.--From
 manuscript of writings of Justin.

 [2637] See Lev. xiv. 49-53.

 [2638] Literally, "living."

  XI.

 When God formed man at the beginning, He suspended the things of nature
 on his will, and made an experiment by means of one commandment. For He
 ordained that, if he kept this, he should partake of immortal
 existence; but if he transgressed it, the contrary should be his lot.
 Man having been thus made, and immediately looking towards
 transgression, naturally became subject to corruption. Corruption then
 becoming inherent in nature, it was necessary that He who wished to
 save should be one who destroyed the efficient cause of corruption. And
 this could not otherwise be done than by the life which is according to
 nature being united to that which had received the corruption, and so
 destroying the corruption, while preserving as immortal for the future
 that which had received it. It was therefore necessary that the Word
 should become possessed of a body, that He might deliver us from the
 death of natural corruption. For if, as ye [2639] say, He had simply by
 a nod warded off death from us, death indeed would not have approached
 us on account of the expression of His will; but none the less would we
 again have become corruptible, inasmuch as we carried about in
 ourselves that natural corruption.--Leontius against Eutychians, etc.,
 book ii.

 [2639] The Gentiles are here referred to, who saw no necessity for the
 incarnation.

  XII.

 As it is inherent in all bodies formed by God to have a shadow, so it
 is fitting that God, who is just, should render to those who choose
 what is good, and to those who prefer what is evil, to every one
 according to his deserts.--From the writings of John of Damascus.

  XIII.

 He speaks not of the Gentiles in foreign lands, but concerning [the
 people] who agree with the Gentiles, according to that which is spoken
 by Jeremiah: "It is a bitter thing for thee, that thou hast forsaken
 me, saith the Lord thy God, that of old thou hast broken thy yoke, and
 torn asunder thy bands, and said, I will not serve Thee, but will go to
 every high hill, and underneath every tree, and there shall I become
 dissolute in my fornication." [2640] --From manuscript of the writings
 of Justin.

 [2640] Jer. ii. 19, etc. (LXX.)

  XIV.

 Neither shall light ever be darkness as long as light exists, nor shall
 the truth of the things pertaining to us be controverted. For truth is
 that than which nothing is more powerful. Every one who might speak the
 truth, and speaks it not, shall be judged by God.--Manuscript and works
 of John of Damascus.

  XV.

 And the fact that it was not said of the seventh day equally with the
 other days, "And there was evening, and there was morning," is a
 distinct indication of the consummation which is to take place in it
 before it is finished, as the fathers declare, especially St. Clement,
 and Irenæus, and Justin the martyr and philosopher, who, commenting
 with exceeding wisdom on the number six of the sixth day, affirms that
 the intelligent soul of man and his five susceptible senses were the
 six works of the sixth day. Whence also, having discoursed at length on
 the number six, he declares that all things which have been framed by
 God are divided into six classes,--viz., into things intelligent and
 immortal, such as are the angels; into things reasonable and mortal,
 such as mankind; into things sensitive and irrational, such as cattle,
 and birds, and fishes; into things that can advance, and move, and are
 insensible, such as the winds, and the clouds, and the waters, and the
 stars; into things which increase and are immoveable, such as the
 trees; and into things which are insensible and immoveable, such as the
 mountains, the earth, and such like. For all the creatures of God, in
 heaven and on earth, fall under one or other of these divisions, and
 are circumscribed by them.-- From the writings of Anastasius.

  XVI.

 Sound doctrine does not enter into the hard and disobedient heart; but,
 as if beaten back, enters anew into itself.

  XVII.

 As the good of the body is health, so the good of the soul is
 knowledge, which is indeed a kind of health of soul, by which a
 likeness to God is attained.--From the writings of John of Damascus.

  XVIII.

 To yield and give way to our passions is the lowest slavery, even as to
 rule over them is the only liberty.

 The greatest of all good is to be free from sin, the next is to be
 justified; but he must be reckoned the most unfortunate of men, who,
 while living unrighteously, remains for a long time unpunished.

 Animals in harness cannot but be carried over a precipice by the
 inexperience and badness of their driver, even as by his skilfulness
 and excellence they will be saved.

 The end contemplated by a philosopher is likeness to God, so far as
 that is possible.--From the writings of Antonius Melissa.

  XIX.

 [The words] of St. Justin, philosopher and martyr, from the fifth part
 of his Apology: [2641] --I reckon prosperity, O men, to consist in
 nothing else than in living according to truth. But we do not live
 properly, or according to truth, unless we understand the nature of
 things.

 It escapes them apparently, that he who has by a true faith come forth
 from error to the truth, has truly known himself, not, as they say, as
 being in a state of frenzy, but as free from the unstable and (as to
 every variety of error) changeable corruption, by the simple and ever
 identical truth.--From the writings of John of Damascus.

 [2641] It is doubtful if these words are really Justin's, or, if so,
 from which, or what part, of his Apologies they are derived.

Introductory Note to the Martyrdom of Justin Martyr

 Crescens, a cynic, has the ill-renown of stirring up the persecution in
 which Justin and his friends suffered for Christ. The story that he
 died by the hemlock seems to have originated among the Greeks, who
 naturally gave this turn to the sufferings of a philosopher. The
 following Introductory Notice of the translator supplies all that need
 be added.

 Though nothing is known as to the date or authorship of the following
 narrative, it is generally reckoned among the most trustworthy of the
 Martyria. An absurd addition was in some copies made to it, to the
 effect that Justin died by means of hemlock. Some have thought it
 necessary, on account of this story, to conceive of two Justins, one of
 whom, the celebrated defender of the Christian faith whose writings are
 given in this volume, died through poison, while the other suffered in
 the way here described, along with several of his friends. But the
 description of Justin given in the following account, is evidently such
 as compels us to refer it to the famous apologist and martyr of the
 second century. [2642]

 [2642] [See Cave, Lives of the Fathers, i. 243. Epiphanius, by fixing
 the martyrdom under the prefecture of Rusticus, seems to identify this
 history; but, then, he also connects it with the reign of Hadrian. Ed.
 Oehler, tom ii. 709. Berlin, 1859.]

 justin_martyr martyrdom_of_justin_martyr anf01
 justin_martyr-martyrdom_of_justin_martyr The First Apology
 http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf01.viii.xi.html

The Martyrdom of the Holy Martyrs Justin, Chariton, Charites, Pæon, and
Liberianus, who Suffered at Rome

 [Translated by the Rev. M. Dods, M.A.]

  Chapter I.--Examination of Justin by the prefect.

 In the time of the lawless partisans of idolatry, wicked decrees were
 passed against the godly Christians in town and country, to force them
 to offer libations to vain idols; and accordingly the holy men, having
 been apprehended, were brought before the prefect of Rome, Rusticus by
 name. And when they had been brought before his judgment-seat, Rusticus
 the prefect said to Justin, "Obey the gods at once, and submit to the
 kings." [2643] Justin said, "To obey the commandments of our Saviour
 Jesus Christ is worthy neither of blame nor of condemnation." Rusticus
 the prefect said, "What kind of doctrines do you profess?" Justin said,
 "I have endeavoured to learn all doctrines; but I have acquiesced at
 last in the true doctrines, those namely of the Christians, even though
 they do not please those who hold false opinions." Rusticus the prefect
 said, "Are those the doctrines that please you, you utterly wretched
 man?" Justin said, "Yes, since I adhere to them with right dogma."
 [2644] Rusticus the prefect said, "What is the dogma?" Justin said,
 "That according to which we worship the God of the Christians, whom we
 reckon to be one from the beginning, the maker and fashioner of the
 whole creation, visible and invisible; and the Lord Jesus Christ, the
 Son of God, who had also been preached beforehand by the prophets as
 about to be present with the race of men, the herald of salvation and
 teacher of good disciples. And I, being a man, think that what I can
 say is insignificant in comparison with His boundless divinity,
 acknowledging a certain prophetic power, [2645] since it was prophesied
 concerning Him of whom now I say that He is the Son of God. For I know
 that of old the prophets foretold His appearance among men."

 [2643] i.e., the emperors.

 [2644] Meta dogmatos orthou, orthodoxy.

 [2645] That is, that a prophetic inspiration is required to speak
 worthily of Christ.

  Chapter II.--Examination of Justin continued.

 Rusticus the prefect said, "Where do you assemble?" Justin said, "Where
 each one chooses and can: for do you fancy that we all meet in the very
 same place? Not so; because the God of the Christians is not
 circumscribed by place; but being invisible, fills heaven and earth,
 and everywhere is worshipped and glorified by the faithful." Rusticus
 the prefect said, "Tell me where you assemble, or into what place do
 you collect your followers?" Justin said, "I live above one Martinus,
 at the Timiotinian Bath; and during the whole time (and I am now living
 in Rome for the second time) I am unaware of any other meeting than
 his. And if any one wished to come to me, I communicated to him the
 doctrines of truth." Rusticus said, "Are you not, then, a Christian?"
 Justin said, "Yes, I am a Christian."

  Chapter III.--Examination of Chariton and others.

 Then said the prefect Rusticus to Chariton, "Tell me further, Chariton,
 are you also a Christian?" Chariton said, "I am a Christian by the
 command of God." Rusticus the prefect asked the woman Charito, "What
 say you, Charito?" Charito said, "I am a Christian by the grace of
 God." Rusticus said to Euelpistus, "And what are you?" Euelpistus, a
 servant of Cæsar, answered, "I too am a Christian, having been freed by
 Christ; and by the grace of Christ I partake of the same hope."
 Rusticus the prefect said to Hierax, "And you, are you a Christian?"
 Hierax said, "Yes, I am a Christian, for I revere and worship the same
 God." Rusticus the prefect said, "Did Justin make you Christians?"
 Hierax said, "I was a Christian, and will be a Christian." And Pæon
 stood up and said, "I too am a Christian." Rusticus the prefect said,
 "Who taught you?" Pæon said, "From our parents we received this good
 confession." Euelpistus said, "I willingly heard the words of Justin.
 But from my parents also I learned to be a Christian." Rusticus the
 prefect said, "Where are your parents?" Euelpistus said, "In
 Cappadocia." Rusticus says to Hierax, "Where are your parents?" And he
 answered, and said, "Christ is our true father, and faith in Him is our
 mother; and my earthly parents died; and I, when I was driven from
 Iconium in Phrygia, came here." Rusticus the prefect said to
 Liberianus, "And what say you? Are you a Christian, and unwilling to
 worship [the gods]?" Liberianus said, "I too am a Christian, for I
 worship and reverence the only true God."

  Chapter IV.--Rusticus threatens the Christians with death.

 The prefect says to Justin, "Hearken, you who are called learned, and
 think that you know true doctrines; if you are scourged and beheaded,
 do you believe you will ascend into heaven?" Justin said, "I hope that,
 if I endure these things, I shall have His gifts. [2646] For I know
 that, to all who have thus lived, there abides the divine favour until
 the completion of the whole world." Rusticus the prefect said, "Do you
 suppose, then, that you will ascend into heaven to receive some
 recompense?" Justin said, "I do not suppose it, but I know and am fully
 persuaded of it." Rusticus the prefect said, "Let us, then, now come to
 the matter in hand, and which presses. Having come together, offer
 sacrifice with one accord to the gods." Justin said, "No right-thinking
 person falls away from piety to impiety." Rusticus the prefect said,
 "Unless ye obey, ye shall be mercilessly punished." Justin said,
 "Through prayer we can be saved on account of our Lord Jesus Christ,
 even when we have been punished, [2647] because this shall become to us
 salvation and confidence at the more fearful and universal
 judgment-seat of our Lord and Saviour." Thus also said the other
 martyrs: "Do what you will, for we are Christians, and do not sacrifice
 to idols."

 [2646] Another reading is dogmata, which may be translated, "I shall
 have what He teaches [us to expect]."

 [2647] This passage admits of another rendering. Lord Hailes, following
 the common Latin version, thus translates: "It was our chief wish to
 endure tortures for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so to be
 saved."

  Chapter V.--Sentence pronounced and executed.

 Rusticus the prefect pronounced sentence, saying, "Let those who have
 refused to sacrifice to the gods and to yield to the command of the
 emperor be scourged, [2648] and led away to suffer the punishment of
 decapitation, according to the laws." The holy martyrs having glorified
 God, and having gone forth to the accustomed place, were beheaded, and
 perfected their testimony in the confession of the Saviour. And some of
 the faithful having secretly removed their bodies, laid them in a
 suitable place, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ having wrought along
 with them, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

 [2648] [This wholesale sentence implies a great indifference to the
 probable Roman citizenship of some of them, if not our heroic martyr
 himself; but Acts xxii. 25-29 seems to allow that the condemned were
 not protected by the law.]

 Irenæus

Introductory Note to Irenæus Against Heresies

 [a.d. 120-202.] This history introduces us to the Church in her Western
 outposts. We reach the banks of the Rhone, where for nearly a century
 Christian missions have flourished. Between Marseilles and Smyrna there
 seems to have been a brisk trade, and Polycarp had sent Pothinus into
 Celtic Gaul at an early date as its evangelist. He had fixed his see at
 Lyons, when Irenæus joined him as a presbyter, having been his
 fellow-pupil under Polycarp. There, under the "good Aurelius," as he is
 miscalled (a.d. 177), arose the terrible persecution which made "the
 martyrs of Lyons and Vienne" so memorable. It was during this
 persecution that Irenæus was sent to Rome with letters of remonstrance
 against the rising pestilence of heresy; and he was probably the author
 of the account of the sufferings of the martyrs which is appended to
 their testimony. [2649] But he had the mortification of finding the
 Montanist heresy patronized by Eleutherus the Bishop of Rome; and there
 he met an old friend from the school of Polycarp, who had embraced the
 Valentinian heresy. We cannot doubt that to this visit we owe the
 lifelong struggle of Irenæus against the heresies that now came in,
 like locusts, to devour the harvests of the Gospel. But let it be noted
 here, that, so far from being "the mother and mistress" of even the
 Western Churches, Rome herself is a mission of the Greeks; [2650]
 Southern Gaul is evangelized from Asia Minor, and Lyons checks the
 heretical tendencies of the Bishop at Rome. Ante-Nicene Christianity,
 and indeed the Church herself, appears in Greek costume which lasts
 through the synodical period; and Latin Christianity, when it begins to
 appear, is African, and not Roman. It is strange that those who have
 recorded this great historical fact have so little perceived its
 bearings upon Roman pretensions in the Middle Ages and modern times.

 Returning to Lyons, our author found that the venerable Pothinus had
 closed his holy career by a martyr's death; and naturally Irenæus
 became his successor. When the emissaries of heresy followed him, and
 began to disseminate their licentious practices and foolish doctrines
 by the aid of "silly women," the great work of his life began. He
 condescended to study these diseases of the human mind like a wise
 physician; and, sickening as was the process of classifying and
 describing them, he made this also his laborious task, that he might
 enable others to withstand and to overcome them. The works he has left
 us are monuments of his fidelity to Christ, and to the charges of St.
 Paul, St. Peter, and St. Jude, whose solemn warnings now proved to be
 prophecies. No marvel that the great apostle, "night and day with
 tears," had forewarned the churches of "the grievous wolves" which were
 to make havoc of the fold.

 If it shocks the young student of the virgin years of Christianity to
 find such a state of things, let him reflect that it was all foretold
 by Christ himself, and demonstrates the malice and power of the
 adversary. "An enemy hath done this," said the Master. The spirit that
 was then working "in the children of disobedience," now manifested
 itself. The awful visions of the Apocalypse began to be realized. It
 was now evident in what sense "the Prince of peace" had pronounced His
 mission, "not peace, but a sword." In short, it became a conspicuous
 fact, that the Church here on earth is "militant;" while, at the same
 time, there was seen to be a profound philosophy in the apostolic
 comment, [2651] "There must be also heresies among you, that they which
 are approved may be made manifest." In the divine economy of Providence
 it was permitted that every form of heresy which was ever to infest the
 Church should now exhibit its essential principle, and attract the
 censures of the faithful. Thus testimony to primitive truth was secured
 and recorded: the language of catholic orthodoxy was developed and
 defined, and landmarks of faith were set up for perpetual memorial to
 all generations. It is a striking example of this divine economy, that
 the see of Rome was allowed to exhibit its fallibility very
 conspicuously at this time, and not only to receive the rebukes of
 Irenæus, but to accept them as wholesome and necessary; so that the
 heresy of Eleutherus, and the spirit of Diotrephes in Victor, have
 enabled reformers ever since, and even in the darkest days of
 pontifical despotism, to testify against the manifold errors patronized
 by Rome. Hilary and other Gallicans have been strengthened by the
 example of Irenæus, and by his faithful words of reproof and
 exhortation, to resist Rome, even down to our own times.

 That the intolerable absurdities of Gnosticism should have gained so
 many disciples, and proved itself an adversary to be grappled with and
 not despised, throws light on the condition of the human mind under
 heathenism, even when it professed "knowledge" and "philosophy." The
 task of Irenæus was twofold: (1) to render it impossible for any one to
 confound Gnosticism with Christianity, and (2) to make it impossible
 for such a monstrous system to survive, or ever to rise again. His task
 was a nauseous one; but never was the spirit enjoined by Scripture more
 patiently exhibited, nor with more entire success. [2652] If Julian had
 found Gnosticism just made to his hand, and powerful enough to suit his
 purposes, the whole history of his attempt to revive Paganism would
 have been widely different. Irenæus demonstrated its essential unity
 with the old mythology, and with heathen systems of philosophy. If the
 fog and malaria that rose with the Day-star, and obscured it, were
 speedily dispersed, our author is largely to be identified with the
 radiance which flowed from the Sun of righteousness, and with the
 breath of the Spirit that banished them for ever.

 The Episcopate of Irenæus was distinguished by labours, "in season and
 out of season," for the evangelization of Southern Gaul; and he seems
 to have sent missionaries into other regions of what we now call
 France. In spite of Paganism and heresy, he rendered Lyons a Christian
 city; and Marcus seems to have retreated before his terrible
 castigation, taking himself off to regions beyond the Pyrenees. [2653]
 But the pacific name he bears, was rendered yet more illustrious by his
 interposition to compose the Easter Controversy, then threatening to
 impair, if not to destroy, the unity of the Church. The beautiful
 concordat between East and West, in which Polycarp and Anicetus had
 left the question, was now disturbed by Victor, Bishop of Rome, whose
 turbulent spirit would not accept the compromise of his predecessor.
 Irenæus remonstrates with him in a catholic spirit, and overrules his
 impetuous temper. At the Council of Nice, the rule for the observance
 of Easter was finally settled by the whole Church; and the forbearing
 example of Irenæus, no doubt contributed greatly to this happy result.
 The blessed peacemaker survived this great triumph, for a short time
 only, closing his life, like a true shepherd, with thousands of his
 flock, in the massacre (a.d. 202) stimulated by the wolfish Emperor
 Severus.

 The Introductory Notice of the learned translators [2654] is as
 follows:--

 The work of Irenæus Against Heresies is one of the most precious
 remains of early Christian antiquity. It is devoted, on the one hand,
 to an account and refutation of those multiform Gnostic heresies which
 prevailed in the latter half of the second century; and, on the other
 hand, to an exposition and defence of the Catholic faith.

 In the prosecution of this plan, the author divides his work into five
 books. The first of these contains a minute description of the tenets
 of the various heretical sects, with occasional brief remarks in
 illustration of their absurdity, and in confirmation of the truth to
 which they were opposed. In his second book, Irenæus proceeds to a more
 complete demolition of those heresies which he has already explained,
 and argues at great length against them, on grounds principally of
 reason. The three remaining books set forth more directly the true
 doctrines of revelation, as being in utter antagonism to the views held
 by the Gnostic teachers. In the course of this argument, many passages
 of Scripture are quoted and commented on; many interesting statements
 are made, bearing on the rule of faith; and much important light is
 shed on the doctrines, held, as well as the practices observed, by the
 Church of the second century.

 It may be made matter of regret, that so large a portion of the work of
 Irenæus is given to an exposition of the manifold Gnostic speculations.
 Nothing more absurd than these has probably ever been imagined by
 rational beings. Some ingenious and learned men have indeed endeavoured
 to reconcile the wild theories of these heretics with the principles of
 reason; but, as Bishop Kaye remarks (Eccl. Hist. of the Second and
 Third Centuries, p. 524), "a more arduous or unpromising undertaking
 cannot well be conceived." The fundamental object of the Gnostic
 speculations was doubtless to solve the two grand problems of all
 religious philosophy, viz., How to account for the existence of evil;
 and, How to reconcile the finite with the infinite. But these ancient
 theorists were not more successful in grappling with such questions
 than have been their successors in modern times. And by giving loose
 reins to their imagination, they built up the most incongruous and
 ridiculous systems; while, by deserting the guidance of Scripture they
 were betrayed into the most pernicious and extravagant errors.

 Accordingly, the patience of the reader is sorely tried, in following
 our author through those mazes of absurdity which he treads, in
 explaining and refuting these Gnostic speculations. This is especially
 felt in the perusal of the first two books, which, as has been said,
 are principally devoted to an exposition and subversion of the various
 heretical systems. But the vagaries of the human mind, however
 melancholy in themselves, are never altogether destitute of
 instruction. And in dealing with those set before us in this work, we
 have not only the satisfaction of becoming acquainted with the currents
 of thought prevalent in these early times, but we obtain much valuable
 information regarding the primitive Church, which, had it not been for
 these heretical schemes, might never have reached our day.

 Not a little of what is contained in the following pages will seem
 almost unintelligible to the English reader. And it is scarcely more
 comprehensible to those who have pondered long on the original. We have
 inserted brief notes of explanation where these seemed specially
 necessary. But we have not thought it worth while to devote a great
 deal of space to the elucidation of those obscure Gnostic views which,
 in so many varying forms, are set forth in this work. For the same
 reason, we give here no account of the origin, history, and successive
 phases of Gnosticism. Those who wish to know the views of the learned
 on these points, may consult the writings of Neander, Baur, and others,
 among the Germans, or the lectures of Dr. Burton in English; while a
 succinct description of the whole matter will be found in the
 "Preliminary Observations on the Gnostic System," prefixed to Harvey's
 edition of Irenæus.

 The great work of Irenæus, now for the first time translated into
 English, is unfortunately no longer extant in the original. It has come
 down to us only in an ancient Latin version, with the exception of the
 greater part of the first book, which has been preserved in the
 original Greek, through means of copious quotations made by Hippolytus
 and Epiphanius. The text, both Latin and Greek, is often most
 uncertain. Only three mss. of the work Against Heresies are at present
 known to exist. Others, however, were used in the earliest printed
 editions put forth by Erasmus. And as these codices were more ancient
 than any now available, it is greatly to be regretted that they have
 disappeared or perished. One of our difficulties throughout, has been
 to fix the readings we should adopt, especially in the first book.
 Varieties of reading, actual or conjectural, have been noted only when
 some point of special importance seemed to be involved.

 After the text has been settled, according to the best judgment which
 can be formed, the work of translation remains; and that is, in this
 case, a matter of no small difficulty. Irenæus, even in the original
 Greek, is often a very obscure writer. At times he expresses himself
 with remarkable clearness and terseness; but, upon the whole, his style
 is very involved and prolix. And the Latin version adds to these
 difficulties of the original, by being itself of the most barbarous
 character. In fact, it is often necessary to make a conjectural
 re-translation of it into Greek, in order to obtain some inkling of
 what the author wrote. Dodwell supposes this Latin version to have been
 made about the end of the fourth century; but as Tertullian seems to
 have used it, we must rather place it in the beginning of the third.
 Its author is unknown, but he was certainly little qualified for his
 task. We have endeavoured to give as close and accurate a translation
 of the work as possible, but there are not a few passages in which a
 guess can only be made as to the probable meaning.

 Irenæus had manifestly taken great pains to make himself acquainted
 with the various heretical systems which he describes. His mode of
 exposing and refuting these is generally very effective. It is plain
 that he possessed a good share of learning, and that he had a firm
 grasp of the doctrines of Scripture. Not unfrequently he indulges in a
 kind of sarcastic humour, while inveighing against the folly and
 impiety of the heretics. But at times he gives expression to very
 strange opinions. He is, for example, quite peculiar in imagining that
 our Lord lived to be an old man, and that His public ministry embraced
 at least ten years. But though, on these and some other points, the
 judgment of Irenæus is clearly at fault, his work contains a vast deal
 of sound and valuable exposition of Scripture, in opposition to the
 fanciful systems of interpretation which prevailed in his day.

 We possess only very scanty accounts of the personal history of
 Irenæus. It has been generally supposed that he was a native of Smyrna,
 or some neighbouring city, in Asia Minor. Harvey, however, thinks that
 he was probably born in Syria, and removed in boyhood to Smyrna. He
 himself tells us (iii. 3, 4) that he was in early youth acquainted with
 Polycarp, the illustrious bishop of that city. A sort of clue is thus
 furnished as to the date of his birth. Dodwell supposes that he was
 born so early as a.d. 97, but this is clearly a mistake; and the
 general date assigned to his birth is somewhere between a.d. 120 and
 a.d. 140.

 It is certain that Irenæus was bishop of Lyons, in France, during the
 latter quarter of the second century. The exact period or circumstances
 of his ordination cannot be determined. Eusebius states (Hist. Eccl.,
 v. 4) that he was, while yet a presbyter, sent with a letter, from
 certain members of the Church of Lyons awaiting martyrdom, to
 Eleutherus, bishop of Rome; and that (v. 5) he succeeded Pothinus as
 bishop of Lyons, probably about a.d. 177. His great work Against
 Heresies was, we learn, written during the episcopate of Eleutherus,
 that is, between a.d. 182 and a.d. 188, for Victor succeeded to the
 bishopric of Rome in a.d. 189. This new bishop of Rome took very harsh
 measures for enforcing uniformity throughout the Church as to the
 observance of the paschal solemnities. On account of the severity thus
 evinced, Irenæus addressed to him a letter (only a fragment of which
 remains), warning him that if he persisted in the course on which he
 had entered, the effect would be to rend the Catholic Church in pieces.
 This letter had the desired result; and the question was more
 temperately debated, until finally settled by the Council of Nice.

 The full title of the principal work of Irenæus, as given by Eusebius
 (Hist. Eccl., v. 7), and indicated frequently by the author himself,
 was A Refutation and Subversion of Knowledge falsely so called, but it
 is generally referred to under the shorter title, Against Heresies.
 Several other smaller treatises are ascribed to Irenæus; viz., An
 Epistle to Florinus, of which a small fragment has been preserved by
 Eusebius; a treatise On the Valentinian Ogdoad; a work called forth by
 the paschal controversy, entitled On Schism, and another On Science;
 all of which that remain will be found in our next volume of his
 writings. Irenæus is supposed to have died about a.d. 202; but there is
 probably no real ground for the statement of Jerome, repeated by
 subsequent writers, that he suffered martyrdom, since neither
 Tertullian nor Eusebius, nor other early authorities, make any mention
 of such a fact.

 As has been already stated, the first printed copy of our author was
 given to the world by Erasmus. This was in the year 1526. Between that
 date and 1571, a number of reprints were produced in both folio and
 octavo. All these contained merely the ancient barbarous Latin version,
 and were deficient towards the end by five entire chapters. These
 latter were supplied by the edition of Feuardent, Professor of Divinity
 at Paris, which was published in 1575, and went through six subsequent
 editions. Previously to this, however, another had been set forth by
 Gallasius, a minister of Geneva, which contained the first portions of
 the Greek text from Epiphanius. Then, in 1702, came the edition of
 Grabe, a learned Prussian, who had settled in England. It was published
 at Oxford, and contained considerable additions to the Greek text, with
 fragments. Ten years after this there appeared the important Paris
 edition by the Benedictine monk Massuet. This was reprinted at Venice
 in the year 1724, in two thin folio volumes, and again at Paris in a
 large octavo, by the Abbé Migne, in 1857. A German edition was
 published by Stieren in 1853. In the year 1857 there was also brought
 out a Cambridge edition, by the Rev. Wigan Harvey, in two octavo
 volumes. The two principal features of this edition are: the additions
 which have been made to the Greek text from the recently discovered
 Philosophoumena of Hippolytus; and the further addition of thirty-two
 fragments of a Syriac version of the Greek text of Irenæus, culled from
 the Nitrian collection of Syriac mss. in the British Museum. These
 fragments are of considerable interest, and in some instances rectify
 the readings of the barbarous Latin version, where, without such aid,
 it would have been unintelligible. The edition of Harvey will be found
 constantly referred to in the notes appended to our translation.

 [2649] Eusebius, book v. to the twenty-seventh chapter, should be read
 as an introduction to this author.

 [2650] Milman, Hist. Latin Christianity, b. i. pp. 27, 28, and the
 notes.

 [2651] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [2652] 2 Tim. ii. 24, 25, 26.

 [2653] On the authority of St. Jerome. See Guettée, De l'église de
 France, vol. 1. p. 27.

 [2654] The first two books of Irenæus Against Heresies have been
 translated by Dr. Roberts. The groundwork of the translation of the
 third book, and that portion of the fourth book which is continued in
 this volume, has been furnished by the Rev. W. H. Rambaut. An attempt
 has been made, in rendering this important author into English, to
 adhere as closely as possible to the original. It would have been far
 easier to give a loose and flowing translation of the obscure and
 involved sentences of Irenæus; but the object has been studiously kept
 in view, to place the English reader, as much as possible, in the
 position of one who has immediate access to the Greek or Latin text.
